^^=5ec=<s:cic:^c»d£SKCt!;i£?R£; 


iii.j'M:!!!lMlM'K!;M'M'i!f'-.''M'|lfl'./' 


5664 


— S5T 


Hi chard son- 


Southern  Branch 
of  the 

University  of  California 

Los  Angeles 


Form  L  1 


SGl 

v. -3 


This  book  is  DUE  on  the  last  date  stamped  belt 


APR  1  9  1934 


''M 


Um  APR  3  01369 

'    BEiro  to-uRL 

RENEWAL   I^V^^S 


THE 

BRITISH     NOVELISTS; 

■WITH   AN 

ESSAY,  AND   PREFACES 

BIOGRAPHICAL    AND    CRITICAL, 

BY 

MRS.  BARBAULD, 


^  |5eio  (JfHitton. 


,  VOL.  XL 

LONDON : 

PRINTED  FOR  F.  C.  AND  J.  RIVINOTON;  W.  lOWNDF-S;  SCATCHERD 
AND  I.ErrERMAN;  J.  NUNN;  J.  CUTHEr.LJ  JEFfERY  AND  SON; 
LONGMAN,  HURST,  REES,  ORME  AND  CO.  j  T.  WII.KIK  ;  CADELL 
AND  PAVIES  ;    J.   AND  W.  T.  CLARKE;    J.  OTRIDCE  ;     LACKINGTON 

AND  CO.;    s.  bagster;   j.  murray;  j.  booker;  j.  black; 

BLACK  ANDCO.;    J.  RICHARDSON  ;    J.M.RICHARDSON;     R.  SCHO- 

ley  ;  J.  mawman;  r.  h.  evans;  a.  k.  newman  and  co.  ; 
J.  asperne;  J.  carpenter;  j.  booth;  w. ginger;   Baldwin, 

CRADOCK  AND  JOY;  T.  HODGSON;  J.  BOHN  ;  J.  EBERS;  SHER- 
WOOD, NEELY  and  JONES  ;  G.  AND  W.  B.  WHITTAKER  ;  8ETCH- 
ELL   AND   son;    WHITMORB   AND    FENN ;     R.   HUNTER;    G.  COW  IE 

and  co.;  r.  saunders;  t.  and  j.  allman  j  t.  boone;  c. 
brown;  j.  brumby;  edwards  and  co. ;  t.  Hamilton; 
J.  lepard  ;  G.  mackie;  w.  mason;  j.  miller;  ogle,  duncan 
and  CO.;  rodwell  AND  martin  ;  hurst,  uobinson  and  co.; 
WILSON  and  sons,  York;  sterling  and  si^de  ;    and  faik- 

BAIHN    and   ANDERSON,    EDINBURGH. 

1820. 


C.  Baldwin,  Printer,  Bridge  Street,  Bfackfriars,  London. 


THE 

HISTORY 

OF  '  'f 

SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON; 

IN  A 

SERIES  OF  LETTERS.     , 


BY  MR.  SAMUEL  RICHARDSON, 

AUTHOR  OF  PAMEXA  AND  CtARISSA. 


IN  SEVEN  VOLUMES, 

VOL.  III. 


A  NEW  EDITION, 

WITH  THE  LAST  CORRECTIONS  BY  THE  AIH'HOR. 


THE 


HISTORY 


OF 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON,BART. 


LETTER  I. 

MISS  HARRIET  BYRON  TO  MISS  LUCY  SELBT. 

Saturday,  March  18. 
Self,  my  dear  Lucy,  is  a  very  wicked  thing ;  a 
sanctifier,  if  one  would  give  way  to  its  partialities, 
of  actions,  which,  in  others,  we  should  have  no  doubt 
to  condemn.  Delicacy,  too,  is  often  a  misleader; 
an  idol,  at  whose  shrine  we  sometimes  offer  up  our 
sincerity ;  but,  in  that  case,  it  should  be  called  in- 
delicnci/. 

Nothing,  surely,  can  be  delicate,  that  is  not  true, 
or  that  gives  birth  to  equivocation :  yet  how  was  I 
pleased  with  Lord  and  Lady  L.  and  Miss  Grandison, 
for  endeavouring  to  pass  me  off  to  good  Dr.  Bartlett 
in  the  light  I  had  no  title  to  appear  in ! — As  if  my 
mind,  in  a  certain  point,  remained  to  be  known; 
and  would  so  remain,  till  the  gentleman  had  dis- 
covered his. 

VOL.  XI.  B 


2  THE    HISTORY   OF 

And  are  there  some  situations,  in  which  a  woman 
must  conceal  her  true  sentiments?  In  which  it  would 
be  thought  immodesty  to  speak  out  ? — Why  was  I 
born  with  a  heart  so  open  and  sincere  ?  But  why, 
indeed,  as  Sir  Charles  has  said  in  his  letter  relating 
to  the  Danbys,  should  women  be  blamed,  for  owning 
modestly  a  passion  for  a  worthy  and  suitable  object? 
Is  it,  that  they  will  not  speak  out,  lest,  if  their  wishes 
should  not  be  crowned  with  success  by  one  man,  tliey 
should  deprive  themselves  of  a  chance  to  succeed 
with  another?  Do  they  not  propose  to  make  the  man 
they  love,  happy  ? — And  is  it  a  crime  to  acknow- 
ledge, that  they  are  so  well  disposed  to  a  ■worthy  ob- 
ject ?  A  worthy  object,  I  repeat ;  for  that  is  what 
will  warrant  the  open  heart.  What  a  littleness  is 
there  in  the  custom  that  compels  us  to  be  insincere? 
And  suppose  we  do  not  succeed  with  a  first  object, 
shall  we  cheat  a  future  lover  with  the  notion  that 
he  was  the  first  ? 

Hitherto  I  had  acted  with  some  self-approbation : 
I  told  Mr.  Greville,  Mr.  Fenwick,  Mr.  Orme,  Mr. 
Fowler,  that  I  had  not  seen  the  man  to  whom  I 
could  wish  to  give  my  hand  at  the  altar :  but  when  I 
found  my  heart  engaged,  I  was  desirous  Lady  D. 
should  know  that  it  was.  But  yet,  misled  by  this 
same  notion  of  delicacy,  I  could  think  myself  obliged 
to  the  two  sisters,  and  my  lord,  that  they  endeavour- 
ed to  throw  a  blind  over  the  eyes  of  good  Dr.  Bart- 
lett :  when  the  right  measure,  I  now  think,  would 
have  been,  not  to  have  endeavoured  to  obtain  lights 
from  him,  that  we  all  thought  he  was  not  commis- 
sioned to  give :  or,  if  we  had,  to  have  related  to  him 
the  whole  truth,  and  not  have  put  on  disguises  to 
him ;  but  to  have  left  him  wholly  a  judge  of  the  fit, 
and  the  unfit. 

And  this  is  love,  is  it  ?  that  puts  an  honest  girl 
upon  approving  of  such  tricks  ? — Begone,  love !    I 


SIR    CHARLEii    GRANDISON.  3 

banish  thee,  if  thou  wouldst  corrupt  the  simplicity 
of  that  heart,  which  was  taught  to  glory  in  truth. 

And  yet,  I  had  like  to  have  been  drawn  into  a 
greater  fault ;  for,  what  do  you  tliink  ? — Miss  Gran- 
dison  had  (by  some  means  or  other ;  she  would  not 
tell  me  how)  in  Dr.  Bartlett's  absence  on  a  visit  to 
one  of  the  canons  of  Windsor,  got  at  a  letter  brought 
early  this  morning  from  her  brother  to  that  good 
man,  and  which  he  had  left  opened  on  his  desk. 

Here,  Harriet,  said  she,  is  the  letter  so  lately 
brought,  not  perhaps  quite  honestly  come  at,  from 
my  brother  to  Dr.  Bartlett  (holding  it  out  to  me). 
You  are  warmly  mentioned  in  it.  Shall  I  put  it 
where  1  had  it  ?  Or  will  you  so  far  partake  of  my 
fault  as  to  read  it  first  ? 

O,  Miss  Grandison !  said  I :  and  am  1  warmly 
mentioned  in  it  ?  Pray  oblige  me  with  the  perusal  of 
it.  And  1  held  out  my  more  than  half  guilty  hand, 
and  took  it :  but  (immediately  recollecting  myself) 
did  you  not  hint  that  you  came  at  it  by  means  not 
honest  ? — Take  it  again  ;  I  will  not  partake  of  your 
fault. — But,  cruel  Charlotte !  how  could  you  tempt 
me  so  ?     And  I  laid  it  on  a  chair.' 

Read  the  first  paragraph,  Harriet.  She  took  it 
up,  unfolded  it,  and  pointed  to  the  first  paragraph. 
Tempter !  said  I,  how  can  you  wish  me  to  imi- 
tate our  first  pattern!  And  down  I  sat,  and  put  both 
my  hands  before  my  eyes.  Take  it  away,  take  it 
away,  while  yet  1  am  mnocent! — Dear  Miss  Gran- 
dison, don't  give  me  cause  for  self  reproach.  I  will 
not  partake  of  your  ackn^ivlec/gcd  fault. 

She  read  a  line  or  two ;  and  then  said,  Shall  I 
read  farther,  Harriet  ?  The  very  next  word  is  your 

name.     1  will 

No,  no,  no,  said  I,  putting  my  fingers  to  my  ears. 
— Yet,  had  you  come  honestly  by  it,  I  should  have 

longed  to  read  it — By  what  means 

b2 


4  THE   HISTORY  OF 

Why,  if  people  will  leave  their  closet-doors  open, 
let  them  take  the  consequence. 

If  people  will  do  so — But  was  it  so  ? — And  yet, 
if  it  was,  would  you  be  willing  to  have  your  letters 
looked  into  ? 

Well  then,  I  will  carry  it  back — Shall  I  ?  (holding 
it  out  to  me)  Shall  I,  Harriet? — I  will  put  it  where 
I  had  it — Shall  I  ?  And  twice  or  thrice  went  from 
me,  and  came  back  to  me,  with  a  provoking 
archness  in  her  looks. 

Only  tell  me,  Miss  Grandison,  is  there  any -thing 
in  it  that  you  think  your  brother  would  not  have  us 
see? — But  I  am  sure,  there  is,  or  the  obliging  Dr. 
Bartlett,  who  has  shewn  us  others,  would  have  fa- 
voured us  with  communicating  the  contents  of 
this. 

I  would  not  but  have  seen  this  letter  for  half  I  am 
worth  !  O  Harriet !  there  are  huch  things  in  it — Bo- 
logna !  Paris !  Grandison-hall ! 

Begone,  Siren :  letters  are  sacred  things.  Re- 
place it — Don't  you  own,  that  you  came  not  honestly 

by  it  ? — And  yet 

Ah  !  Lucy,  I  was  ready  to  yield  to  the  curiosity 

she  had  raised :  but,  recollecting  myself.  Begone, 

said  I :  carry  back  the  letter :  I  am  afraid  of  myself. 

Why,  Harriet,  here  is  one  passage,  the  contents 

of  which  you  must  be  acquainted  with  in  a  very  little 

while 

I  will  not  be  tempted.  Miss  Grandison.  I  will 
stay  till  it  is  communicated  to  me,  be  it  what  it  will. 
But  you  may  be  surprised,  Harriet,  at  the  time, 
and  know  not  what  answer  to  give  to  it. — You  had  as 
good  read  it — Here,  take  it — Was  there  ever  such  a 
scrupulous  creature? — It  is  about  you  and  Emily — - 
About  me  and  Emily !  O  Miss  Grandison,  what 
can  there  be  about  me  and  Emily  ? 

And  where's  the  difference,  Harriet,  between  ask- 


SIK  CHARLES  (iRANDISOV.  5 

ing  rae  about  the  contents,  and  reading  them  ? — But 
I'll  tell  you 

No,  you  shall  not :  I  will  not  hear  the  contents. 
I  never  will  ask  you.  Can  nobody  act  greatly  but 
your  brother  ?  Let  you  and  me,  Charlotte,  be  the 
better  for  his  example.  You  shall  neither  read 
them,  nor  tell  me  of  them.  I  would  not  be  so  used 
myself. 

Such  praises  did  1  never  hear  of  woman! — Oh, 
Harriet ! Such  praises  ■ 

Praises,  Charlotte ! — From  your  brother ! — O  this 
curiosity  !  the  first  fault  of  our  first  parent !  But  I 
will  not  be  tempted.  If  you  provoke  me  to  ask 
questions,  laugh  at  rae,  and  welcome:  but  I  beseech 
you,  answer  me  not.  Dear  creature,  if  you  love 
me,  replace  the  letter ;  and  do  not  seek  to  make  me 
mean  in  my  own  eyes. 

How  you  reflect  upon  me,  Harriet ! — But  let  me 
ask  you.  Are  you  willing,  as  a  third  sister,  to  take 
Emily  into  your  guardianship,  and  carry  her  down 
with  you  into  Northamptonshire? — Answer  me  that. 

Ah !  Miss  Grandison !  And  is  there  such  a  pro- 
posal as  that  mentioned ! — But  answer  me  not,  I 
beseech  you  Whatever  proposal  is  intended  to 
be  made  me,  let  it  be  made :  it  will  be  too  soon, 
whenever  that  is,  if  it  be  a  disagreeable  one. 

But  let  me  say,  madam  (and  tears  were  in  my 
eyes)  that  I  will  not  be  treated  with  indignity  by 
the  best  man  on  earth.  And  while  I  can  refuse  to 
yield  to  a  thing  that  I  think  unworthy  of  myself 
(you  are  a  sister,  madam,  and  have  nothing  either 
to  hope  or  fear)  I  have  a  title  to  act  with  spirit,  when 
occasions  call  for  it. 

My  drar,  you  are  serious — Twice  madam,  in  one 
breath  !  1  will  not  for^:ve  you.     You  ought  now  to 
hear  that  passage  read  which  relates  to  you  and 
Emily,  if  you  will  not  read  it  yourself. 
B  3 


6  THE   HISTORY  OF 

And  she  was  looking  for  it ;  I  suppose,  intending 
to  read  it  to  me. 

No,  Miss  Grandison,  said  I,  laying  my  spread 
hand  upon  the  letter ;  I  will  neither  read  it,  nor  hear 
it  read.  I  begin  to  apprehend,  that  there  will  be 
occasion  for  me  to  exert  all  my  fortitude ;  and  while 
it  is  yet  in  my  power  to  do  a  right  or  a  wrong  thing, 
I  will  not  deprive  myself  of  the  consciousness  of 
having  merited  well,  whatever  may  be  my  lot — Ex- 
cuse me,  madam. 

I  went  to  the  door,  and  was  opening  it — when  she 
ran  to  me — Dear  creature!  you  are  angry  with  me; 
but  how  that  pride  becomes  you !  There  is  a  dignity 
in  it  that  awes  me.  O  Harriet !  how  infinitely  does 
it  become  the  only  woman  in  the  world,  that  is  wor- 
thy of  the  best  man  in  it !  Only  say,  you  are  not  an- 
gry with  me.     Say  that  you  can  and  do  forgive  me. 

Forgive  you,  my  Charlotte ! — I  do.  But  can  you 
say,  that  you  came  not  honestly  by  that  letter,  and 
yet  forgive  yourself?  But,  my  dear  Miss  Grandison, 
instantly  replace  it ;  and  do  you  watch  over  me,  like 
a  true  friend,  if  in  a  future  hour  of  weakness  you 
shoqld  find  me  desirous  to  know  any  of  the  contents 
of  a. paper  so  naughtily  come  at.  I  own  that  I  had 
like  to  have  been  overcome  :  and  if  I  had,  all  the 
information  it  would  have  given  me,  could  never 
have  recompensed  me  for  what  I  should  have  suf- 
fered in  my  own  opinion,  when  1  reflected  on  the 
means  by  which  I  had  obtained  it. 

Superior  creature !  how  you  shame  me !  I  will  re- 
place the  letter.  And  I  promise  you,  that  if  I  can- 
not forget  the  contents  of  it  myself  (and  yet  they 
are  glorious  to  my  brother)  I  will  never  mention 
any  of  them  to  you ;  unless  the  letter  be  fairly  com- 
municated to  you,  and  to  us  all. 

I  threw  my  arms  about  her  neck.  She  fervently 
teturned  the  sisterly  embrace.    We  separated ;  she 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  7 

retiring  at  one  door,  in  order  to  go  up  to  replace 
the  letter ;  1  at  the  other,  to  re-consider  all  that  had 
passed  on  the  occasion.  And  I  hope  1  shall  love 
her  the  better  for  taking  so  kindly  a  behaviour  so 
contrary  to  what  her  own  had  been. 

Well,  but,  don't  you  congratulate  me,  my  dear, 
on  my  escape  from  my  curiosity  ?  I  am  sure  my 
grandmamma,  and  my  aunt,  will  be  pleased  with 
their  girl.  Yet  it  was  a  hard  struggle,  I  own :  in 
the  suspense  I  am  in ;  a  very  hard  struggle.  But 
though  wishes  will  play  about  my  heart,  that  I  knew 
such  of  the  contents  as  it  might  concern  me  to  know ; 
yet  I  am  infinitely  better  pleased  that  I  yielded  not 
to  the  temptation,  than  I  should  have  been  if  1  had. 
And  then,  methinks,  my  pride  is  gratified  in  the 
superiority  this  lady  ascribes  to  me  over  herself, 
whom  so  lately  I  thought  greatly  my  superior. 

Yet  what  merit  have  I  in  this  ?  Since  if  I  had 
considered  only  rules  of  policy,  I  should  have  been 
utterly  wrong,  had  I  yielded  to  the  temptation  :  for 
what  use  could  I  have  made  of  any  knowledge  I 
might  have  obtained  by  this  means  ?  If  any  pro- 
posal is  to  be  made  me,  of  what  nature  soever,  it 
must,  in  that  case,  have  appeared  to  be  quite  new 
to  me:  and  what  an  affectation  must  that  have  oc- 
casioned, what  dissimulation,  in  your  Harriet  ? — 
And  how  would  a  creature,  educated  as  I  have 
been,  have  behaved  under  such  trials  as  might  have 
arisen  from  a  knowledge  so  faultily  obtained  ? 

And  had  I  been  discovered ;  had  1  given  cause 
of  suspicion,  either  to  Dr.  Bartlett,  or  Sir  Charles ; 
I  should  have  appeared  as  the  principal  in  the  fact: 
it  would  have  been  mean  to  accuse  MissGrandison, 
as  the  tempter,  in  a  temptation  yielded  to  with  my 
eyes  open.  And  should  I  not  have  cast  a  slur  upon 
that  curiosity  which  Dr.  Bartlett  before  had  not  re- 


-^1 


8  THE    HISTORY   OF 

fused  to  gratify,  as  well  as  shut  myself  out  from  all 
future  communications  and  confidence  ? 

It  is  very  possible,  besides,  that,  unused  as  I  have 
been  to  artifice  and  disguise,  I  should  have  betrayed 
myself;  especially  had  I  found  any  of  tlie  contents 
of  the  letter  very  affecting. 

Thus  you  see,  Lucy,  that  policy,  as  well  as  rec- 
titude of  manners,  justifies  me:  and  in  this  parti- 
cular I  am  an  happy  girl. 

MissGrandison  has  just  now  told  her  sister  what 
passed  between  us.  Lady  L.  says,  she  would  not 
have  been  Miss  Grandison,  in  taking  the  letter,  by 
what  means  soever  come  at ;  for  how,  said  she,  did 
I  know  what  secrets  there  might  be  in  it,  before  I 
read  it  ?  But  I  think  verily,  when  it  kad  been  got  at, 
and  oflPered  me,  I  could  not  have  been  Miss  Hyron. 

And  she  threw  her  arms  about  me ;  Dear  creature, 
aid  she,  you  vmst  be  Lady  Grandison 

Must!  said  MissGrandison:  she  shall. 

Miss  Grandison  talked  to  L^dy  L.  of  its  being 
likely  that  her  brother  would  go  to  Bologna :  of  a 
visit  he  is  soon  to  make  to  Grandison-hall ;  and  she 
to  go  with  him :  of  his  going  to  Paris,  in  order  to 
settle  some  matters  relating  to  the  will  of  his  late 
friend  Mr.  Danby 

Well,  Lucy,  my  time  in  town  is  hastening  to  its 
period.  Why  am  I  not  reminded,  that  my  three 
allotted  months  are  near  expired  ?  Will  you  receive 
the  poor  girl,  who  perhaps  will  not  be  able  to  carry 
down  with  her  the  heart  she  brought  up  ?  And  yet, 
to  go  down  to  such  dear  friends  without  it,  what  an 
ungrateful  sound  has  that ! 

Miss  Grandison  began  to  talk  of  other  subjects 
relating  to  her  brother,  and  that  greatly  to  his 
praise.  I  could  have  heard  all  she  had  to  say  with 
infinite  pleasure.     I  do  love  to  hear  him  praised. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  9 

But,  as  I  doubted  not  but  these  subjects  arose  from 
the  letter  so  surreptitiously  obtained,  I  restrained 
myself,  and  withdrew. 

*     « 

Of  what  a  happy  temper  is  Miss  Grandison  !  She 
was  much  affected  with  the  scene  that  passed  be- 
tween us ;  but  all  is  over  with  her  already.  One 
lesson  upon  hei  harpsichord  sets  every-lhing  right 
with  her.  She  has  been  railiying  Lord  L  with  as 
much  life  and  spirit,  as  if  she  had  done  nothing  to 
be  vexed  at.  Had  I  been  induced  by  her  to  read 
the  letter  which  she  got  at  dishonestly,  as  she  owned, 
what  a  poor  figure  should  I  have  made  in  my  own 
eyes,  for  a  month  to  come ! 

But  did  she  not  as  soon  overcome  the  mortifica- 
tion given  her  by  her  brother,  on  the  detection  of 
Captain  Anderson's  affair?  How  unmercifully  did 
she  railly  me,  within  a  few  hours  after! — Vet,  she 
has  fine  quahties.  One  cannot  help  loving  her  I 
do  love  her.  But  is  it  not  a  weakness  to  look  M-ith- 
out  abatement  of  affection  on  those  faults  in  one 
person  which  we  should  hold  utterly  inexcusable  in 
another?  In  Miss  Grandison's  case,  however,  don't 
say  it  is,  Lucy.  O  what  a  partiality  !  Yet  she  has 
within  these  few  minutes  owned,  that  she  thought 
the  step  she  had  taken  a  faulty  one,  before  she  came 
to  me  with  the  letter ;  and  hoped  to  induce  me  to 
countenance  her  in  what  she  had  done. 

I  called  her  a  little  Satan  on  this  occasion.  But, 
after  all,  what  if  the  dear  Charlotte's  curiosity  wa» 
more  for  my  sake  than  her  own  ?  No  motive  of 
friendship,  you  will  say,  can  justify  a  wrong  action 
■ — Why  no,  Lucy:  that  is  very  true;  but  if  you 
knew  Miss  Grandison,  you  would  love  her  dearly. 


10  THE    HISTORY    OF 

LETTER  II. 

SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON  TO  DR.  BARTLETT. 

[JTie  letter  which  Miss  Byron  refused  to  read,  or  hear  read."] 

Friday  night,  March  17. 
I  HOPE  my  Lord  L.  and  my  sisters  will  be  able  to 
make  Colnebrook  so  agreeable  to  Miss  Byron,  that 
I  may  have  the  pleasure  of  jSnding  her  there  in  the 
beginning  of  the  week. 

My  Lord  W.  is  in  town.  He  has  invited  me  to 
dine  with  him  to-morrow  ;  and  must  not  be  denied, 
was  a  part  of  his  message,  brought  me  by  Halden 
his  steward,  who  says,  That  his  lordship  has  some- 
thing of  consequence  to  consult  me  upon. 

When,  my  dear  friend,  shall  I  find  time  for  my- 
self? Pray  make  my  compliments  to  my  Lord  L. 
and  to  my  three  sisters ;  and  tell  them  from  me,  that 
when  I  have  the  happiness  of  being  in  their  com- 
pany, then  it  is  that  I  think  I  give  time  to  myself. 

1  have  a  letter  from  Bologna :  from  the  faithful 
Camilla.  The  contents  of  it  give  me  great  concern. 
She  urges  me  to  make  one  more  visit  there.  She 
tells  me,  that  the  bishop  said  in  her  hearing,  it 
would  be  kind,  if  I  would.  Were  such  a  visit  to 
be  requested  generally ;  and  it  were  likely  to  be  of 
service ;  you  may  believe  that  I  would  cheerfully 
make  it. 

I  should  go,  for  a  fortnight  at  least,  to  Grandison- 
hall.  Burgess  has  let  me  know,  that  the  workmen 
have  gone  almost  as  far  as  they  can  go  without  my 
farther  orders.  And  the  churchwardens  have  sig- 
nified to  me,  that  the  church  is  completely  beau- 
tified, according  to  my  directions ;  so  that  it  will  be 
ready  to  be  opened  on  the  Sunday  after  next,  at 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISOK.  11 

farthest ;  and  entreat  my  presence,  both  as  patron, 
and  benefactor.  I  will  now  hasten  my  designed 
alterations  at  the  Hall. 

I  had  rather  not  be  present  at  the  opening.  Yet 
the  propriety  of  my  being  there  will  probably  pre- 
vail upon  me  to  comply  with  the  entreaties  of  the 
churchwardens ;  who  in  their  letter  signify  the  ex- 
pectations of  Sir  Samuel  Clarke,  Sir  William  Turner, 
and  Mr.  Barnham,  of  seeing  me,  and  my  sister 
Charlotte.  You  will  be  pleased  to  mention  this  to 
her. 

I  wish,  without  putting  a  slight  upon  good  Mr. 
Dobson,  that  you^  my  dear  friend,  could  oblige  us 
with  the  first  sermon.  All  then  would  be  decent, 
and  worthy  of  the  occasion  ;  and  the  praise  would 
be  given  properly,  and  not  to  the  agent.  But  as  it 
would  be  a  little  mortifying  to  Mr.  Dobson  (of 
whose  praise  only  I  am  apprehensive)  so  much  as 
to  hint  such  a  wish,  I  will  write  to  him,  that  he  will 
oblige  me  if  he  say  not  one  word,  that  shall  carry 
the  eyes  of  the  audience  to  my  seat. 

The  execution  of  the  orders  I  gave,  that  five 
other  pews  should  be  equally  distinguished  and  or- 
namented with  mine,  carries  not  with  it  the  appear- 
ance of  affectation ;  does  it,  my  good  Dr.  Bartlett? 
especially  as  so  many  considerable  families  have 
seats  there  ?  I  would  not  seem  guilty  of  a  false  mo- 
desty, which,  breaking  out  into  singularity,  would 
give  the  suspicion  of  a  wrong  direction,  in  cases 
where  it  may  be  of  use  to  suppose  a  right  one. 

What  can  I  do  in  relation  to  my  Emily  ?  She  is 
of  the  stature  of  woman.  She  ought,  according  to 
the  present  taste,  to  be  introduced  into  public  life. 
I  am  not  fond  of  that  life :  and  what  knowledge  she 
will  gain  by  the  introduction,  she  had  better  be 
without.  Yet  I  think  we  should  conform  something 
to  the  taste  of  the  times  in  which  we  live.    Women's 


12  THE    HISTORY   OF 

minds  have  generally  a  lighter  turn  than  those  of 
men.  They  should  be  innocently  indulged.  And 
on  this  principle  it  was,  that  last  winter  I  attended 
her,  and  my  sisters,  very  often  to  the  places  of 
public  entertainment ;  that  she,  having  seen  every 
thing  that  was  the  general  subject  of  polite  con- 
versation, might  judge  of  such  entertainments  as 
they  deserve ;  and  not  add  expectation  (which  runs 
very  high  in  young  minds,  and  is  seldom  answered) 
to  the  ideal  scenes.  This  indulgence  answered  as  I 
wish.  Emily  can  now  hear  talk  of  the  emulation  of 
actors,  and  managers,  and  of  the  other  public  di- 
versions, with  tranquillity ;  and  be  satisfied,  as  she 
reads,  with  representing  over  again  to  herself  the 
parts  in  which  the  particular  actors  excelled.  And 
thus  a  boundary  is  set  to  her  imagination  :  and  that 
by  her  own  choice ;  for  she  thinks  lightly  of  them, 
when  she  can  be  obliged  by  the  company  of  my 
two  sisters  and  Lord  L. 

But  new  scenes  will  arise,  in  an  age  so  studious 
as  this,  to  gratify  the  eye  and  the  ear.  From  these 
a  young  woman  of  fortune  must  not  be  totally  ex- 
cluded. I  am  a  young  man ;  and  as  Emily  is  so 
well  grown  for  her  years,  I  think  I  cannot  so  pro- 
perly be  her  introducer  to  them,  as  1  might,  were 
1  fifteen  or  twenty  years  olden 

I  live  to  my  own  heart ;  and  I  know  (I  think  I 
do)  that  it  is  not  a  bad  one :  but  as  I  cannot  intend 
any-thing  with  regard  to  my  Emily,  I  must,  for  her 
sake,  be  more  observant  of  the  world's  opinion,  than 
1  hope  1  need  to  be  for  my  own.  You  have  taught 
me,  that  it  is  not  good  manners  to  despise  the 
world's  opinion,  though  we  should  regard  it  only 
in  the  second  place. 

Emily  has  too  large  a  fortune.  I  have  a  high 
opinion  of  her  discretion.  But  she  is  but  a  girl. 
Women's  eyes  are  wanderers ;  and  too  often  bring 


SIR    CHARLES    GUANDISON.  13 

home  guests  that  are  very  troublesome  to  them, 
and  whom,  once  introduced,  they  cannot  get  out  of 
the  house. 

I  wish  she  had  only  ten  thousand  pounds.  She 
would  then  stand  a  better  chance  for  happiness, 
than  she  can  do,  I  doubt,  with  five  times  ten ;  and 
would  have  five  persons,  to  one  that  she  has  now, 
to  choose  out  of:  for  how  few  are  there  who  can 
make  proposals  to  the  father  or  guardian  of  a  girl 
who  has  50,0001  ? 

Indeed  there  are  not  wanting  in  our  sex  forward 
spirits,  who  will  think  that  sum  not  too  much  for 
their  merits,  though  they  may  not  deserve  5,0001. 
nor  even  one.  And  hence  arises  the  danger  of  a 
woman  of  great  fortune  from  those  who  will  not 
dare  to  make  proposals  to  a  guardian.  After  an  in- 
troduction (and  how  easy  is  that  now  made,  at 
public  places !)  a  woman  of  the  greatest  fortune  is 
6ut  a  woman,  and  is  to  be  attacked,  and  prevailed 
upon,  by  the  same  methods  which  succeed  with  a 
person  of  the  slenderest ;  and  perhaps  is  won  with 
equal,  if  not  with  greater  ease;  since,  if  the  lady 
has  a  little  romance  in  her  head,  and  her  lover  a 
great  deal  of  art  and  flattery,  she  will  call  that 
romantic  turn  generosity,  and,  thinking  she  can  lay 
the  man  who  has  obtained  her  attention,  under  obli- 
gation, she  will  meet  him  her  full  half-way. 

Emily  is  desirous  to  be  constantly  with  us.  My 
sister  is  very  obliging.  I  know  she  will  comply  with 
whatever  I  shall  request  of  her  in  relation  to  Emily. 
But  where  the  reputation  of  a  lady  is  concerned,  a 
man  should  not  depend  too  much  upon  his  own 
character,  especially  a  young  man,  be  it  ever  so  un- 
exceptionable. Her  mother  has  already  given  out 
foolish  hints.  She  demands  her  daughter  The 
unhappy  woman  has  no  regard  to  truth.  Her  own 
character  lost,  and  so  deservedly,  will  she  have  any 


14,  THE    HISTORY    OF 

tenderness  for  that  of  Emily  ?  Who  will  scruple  to 
believe,  what  a  mother,  though  ever  so  wicked,  will 
report  of  her  daughter  under  twenty,  and  her  guar- 
dian under  thirty,  if  they  live  constantly  together  ? 
Her  guardian,  at  the  same  time,  carrying  his  heart 
in  his  countenance,  and  loving  the  girl ;  though  with 
as  much  innocence,  as  if  she  were  his  sister.  Once  I 
had  thoughts  of  craving  the  assistance  of  the  court 
of  Chancery  for  the  protection  of  her  person  and 
fortune  :  but  a  hint  of  this  nature  distressed  her  for 
many  days,  unknown  to  me.  Had  I  been  acquainted 
that  she  took  it  so  heavily,  I  would  not  have  made 
her  unhappy  for  one  day. 

I  have  looked  out  among  the  quality  for  a  future 
husband  for  her :  but,  where  can  I  find  one  with 
whom  I  think  she  will  be  happy  ?  There  are  many 
who  would  be  glad  of  her  fortune.  As  I  said,  her 
fortune  is  too  large.  It  is  enough  to  render  every 
man's  address  to  her  suspected ;  and  to  make  a 
guardian  apprehensive,  that  her  person,  agreeable 
as  it  is,  and  every  day  improving,  and  her  mind 
opening  to  advantage  every  hour  of  her  life,  would 
be  but  the  second,  I/' the  second,  view  of  a  man  pro- 
fessing to  love  her.  And  were  she  to  marry,  what 
a  damp  would  the  slights  of  a  husband  give  to  the 
genius  of  a  young  woman,  whose  native  modesty 
would  always  make  her  want  encouragement ! 

I  have  also  cast  an  eye  over  the  gentry  within  ray 
knowledge :  but  have  not  met  with  one  whom  I 
could  wish  to  be  the  husband  of  my  Emily.  So 
tender,  so  gentle,  so  ductile,  as  she  is,  a  fierce,  a 
rash,  an  indelicate,  even  a  careless  or  indifferent 
man,  would  either  harden  her  heart,  or  shorten  her 
life:  and  as  the  latter  would  be  much  more  easy  to 
be  effected  than  the  former,  what  must  she  suffer 
before  she  could  return  indifference  for  disrespect ; 
and  reach  the  quiet  end  of  it ! 


SIR  CHARLES  GRAN0ISON.  15 

See  what  a  man  Sir  Walter  Watkyns  is !  My 
sister  only  could  deal  with  such  an  one.  A  supe- 
riority in  her  so  visible,  he  must  fear  her :  yet  a 
generosity  so  great,  and  a  dignity  so  conspicuous, 
in  her  whole  behaviour,  as  well  as  countenance,  he 
must  love  her  :  every  body's  respect  to  her,  would 
oblige  love  and  reverence  from  him.  But  my 
weak-hearted,  diffident  Emily,  what  would  she  do 
with  such  a  man? 

What  would  she  do  with  a  Sir  Hargrave  Pol- 
lexfen?  What  with  such  a  man,  as  Mr,  Greville, 
as  Sir  Hargrave  describes  him  ?  I  mention  these 
men ;  for  are  there  not  many  such  ? 

I  am  not  apt  to  run  into  grave  declamations 
against  the  times ;  and  yet,  by  what  I  have  seen 
abroad,  and  now  lately  since  my  arrival,  at  home, 
and  have  heard  from  men  of  greater  observation, 
and  who  have  lived  longer  in  the  world,  than  I  have, 
I  cannot  but  think,  that  Englishmen  are  not  what 
they  were.  A  wretched  effeminacy  seems  to  pre- 
vail among  them.  Marriage  itself  is  every  day 
more  and  more  out  of  fashion ;  and  even  virtuous 
women  give  not  the  institution  so  much  of  their 
countenance,  as  to  discourage  by  their  contempt 
the  free  livers.  A  good  woman,  as  such,  has  there- 
fore but  few  chances  for  happiness  in  marriage. 
Yet  shall  1  not  endeavour,  the  more  endeavour,  to 
save  and  serve  my  Emily  ? 

I  have  one  encouragement,  since  my  happy  ac- 
quaintance with  Miss  Byron,  to  think  that  the  age 
is  not  entirely  lost  to  a  sense  of  virtue  and  goodness. 
See  we  not  how  every-body  reveres-Zierf  Even  a  Sir 
Hargrave  PoUexfen,  a  Greville,  a  Fenwick,  men  of 
free  lives,  adore  her.  And  at  the  same  time  she 
meets  with  the  love  of  all  good  men,  and  the  respect 
of  women,  whether  gay  or  serious.  But  1  am  afraid, 
^at  the  first  attraction  with  men,  is  her  beauty.  I 
c  2 


16  THK  HISTORY  OF 

am  afraid,  that  few  see  in  that  admirable  j'oung  lady 
what  1  see  in  her:  a  mind  great  and  noble:  a  sin- 
cerity beyond  that  of  women :  a  goodness  unaf- 
fected, and  which  shews  itself  in  action,  and  not 
merely  in  words,  and  outward  appearance:  a  wit 
lively  and  inoffensive :  and  an  understanding  solid 
and  useful :  all  which  render  her  a  fit  companion, 
either  in  the  social  or  contemplative  hour :  and  yet 
she  thinks  herself  not  above  the  knowledge  of  those 
duties,  the  performance  of  which  makes  an  essential 
of  the  female  character. 

But  I  am  not  giving  a  character  of  Miss  Byron 
to  you,  my  good  Dr.  Bartlett,  who  admire  her  as 
much  as  I  do. 

Do  you  think  it  impossible  for  me  to  procure  for 
my  Emily  such  a  guardian  and  companion  as  Miss 
Byron,  on  her  return  to  Northamptonshire,  would 
make  her? — Such  worthy  relations  as  she  would 
introduce  her  tO;  would  be  a  further  happiness  to 
my  ward. 

I  am  far  from  undervaluing  my  sister's  good 
qualities:  but  if  Emily  lives  with  her,  she  must  live 
also  with  me.  Indeed  the  affairs  in  which  I  am  en- 
gaged for  other  people  ( if  I  may  call  those  who 
have  a  claim  upon  me  for  every  instance  of  my 
friendship,  other  people)  will  occasion  me  to  be 
often  absent.  But  still,  while  Grandison-hall,  and 
St  James's  Square,  are  the  visible  places  of  resi- 
dence equally  of  the  guardian  and  ward,  Emily's 
mother  will  tell  the  world,  that  we  live  together. 

Miss  Jervois  does  not  choose  to  return  to  Mrs. 
Lane;  and  indeed  I  don't  think  she  would  be  safe 
there  in  a  family  of  women,  though  very  worthy 
ones,  from  the  attempts  of  one  of  the  sex,  who, 
having  brought  her  into  the  world,  calls  herself  her 
mother;  and  especially  now  that  the  unhappy  woman 
has  begun  to  be  troublesome  there.    1  beg  of  you, 


SIH    CHARLES    GRANUISON.  17 

therefore,  my  dear  Dr.  IJartlett,  who  know  more  of 
my  heart  and  situation  than  any  one  Hving  (my 
dear  Beauchamp  excepted)  to  consider  what  I  have 
written,  and  give  me  your  opinion  of  that  part  of 
it,  which  relates  to  Miss  Byron  and  Emily. 

I  was  insensibly  drawing  myself  in  to  enumerate 
the  engagements,  which  at  present  press  most  upon 
me.  Let  me  add  to  the  subject — I  must  soon  go  to 
Paris,  in  order  finally  to  settle  such  of  the  affairs  of 
my  late  worthy  friend,  as  cannot  be  so  well  done  by 
any  other  hand.  The  three  thousand  pounds,  which 
he  has  directed  to  be  disposed  of  to  charitable  uses, 
in  France  as  well  as  in  England,  at  the  discretion  of 
his  executor,  is  one  of  them. 

Perhaps  equity  will  allow  me  to  add  to  this  limited 
sum  from  what  will  remain  in  my  hands  after  the 
establishment  of  the  nephews  and  niece.  As  fliey 
are  young,  and  brought  up  with  the  hope  that  they 
will  make  a  figure  in  the  world  by  their  diligence,  1 
would  not,  by  any  means,  make  them  independent 
on  that.  The  whole  estate,  divided  among  them, 
would  not  be  sufficient  to  answer  that  purpose  hap- 
pily, though  it  might  be  enough  to  abate  the  edge 
of  their  industry. 

The  charity  that  I  am  most  intent  upon  pro- 
moting in  France,  and  in  England  too,  is,  that  of 
giving  little  fortunes  to  young  maidens  in  marriage 
with  honest  men  of  their  own  degree,  who  might, 
from  such  an  outsetting,  begin  the  world,  as  it  is 
called,  with  some  hope  of  success. 

By  this  time,  my  dear  Dr.  Bartlett,  you  will  guess 
that  1  have  a  design  upon  you.  It  is,  that  you  will 
assist  me  in  executing  the  will  of  my  late  friend. 
Make  enquiries  after,  and  recommend  to  me,  objects 
worthy  of  relief  You  were  very  desirous,  some 
time  ago,  to  retire  to  the  Hall :  but  I  knew  not  how 
to  spare  you ;  and  I  hoped  to  attend  you  thither. 
c3 


18  ITHE    HISTORY     OF 

You  shall  now  set  out  for  that  place  as  soon  as  you 
please.  And  that  neither  may  be  (or  as  little  as 
possible)  losers  by  the  separation,  every  thing  that 
we  would  say  to  each  other,  were  we  together,  thnt^ 
as  we  used  to  do,  we  will  say  by  pen  and  ink.  We 
will  be  joint  executors,  in  the  first  place,  for  this 
sum  of  30001. 

Make  enquiries  then,  as  soon  as  you  get  down, 
for  worthy  objects — The  industrious  poor,  of  all 
persuasions,  reduced  either  by  age,  infirmity,  or  ac- 
cident ;  those  who  labour  under  incurable  maladies ; 
youth,  of  either  sex,  capable  of  beginning  the  world 
to  advantage,  but  destitute  of  the  means;  these,  in 
particular,  are  the  objects  we  both  think  worthy  of 
assistance.  You  shall  take  5001.  down  with  you,  for 
a  beginning. 

It  is  my  pride,  it  is  my  glory,  that  I  can  say,  Dr. 
Bartlett  and  Charles  Grandison,  on  all  benevolent 
occasions,  are  actuated  by  one  soul.  My  dear 
friend,  adieu. 


LETTER  III. 

MISS    BYRON    TO    MISS    SELBY. 

Saturday  night,  March  18. 
I  HAVE  furnished  the  ladies,  and  my  lord,  with  more 
letters.  And  so  they  have  all  my  heart  before 
them! — I  don't  care.  The  man  is  Sir  Charles 
Grandison ;  and  they  railly  me  not  so  much  as  be- 
fore, while  they  thought  I  affected  reserves  to  them. 
Indeed  it  would  be  cruel,  if  they  did;  and  I  should 
have  run  away  from  them. 

I  am  glad  you  all  think,  that  the  two  sisters  used 
me  severely.     They  really  did.    But  I  have  this 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  19 

j»rati$cation  of  my  pride  in  reflecting  upon  their 
treatment  of  me  — 1  would  not  have  done  so  by  them, 
had  situations  been  exchanged:  and  I  think  myself 
nearer  an  equality  with  them,  than  I  had  thought 
myself  before. — But  they  arc  good  women,  and  my 
sincere  friends  and  well-wishers;  and  I  forgive 
them:  and  so  mitst  my  grandmamma. 

I  am  sorry,  methinks,  that  her  delicacy  has  been 
offended  on  the  occasion.  And  did  she  weep  at  the 
hearing  read  my  account  of  that  attack  made  upon 
her  girl  by  the  over-lively  Charlotte  ? — O  the  dear, 
the  indulgent  ,parent !  How  tender  was  it  of  my 
aunt  too,  to  be  concerned  for  the  poor  Harriet's 
delicacy,  so  hard  put  to  it  as  she  was!  It  did  indeed 
(as  she  distinguishes  in  her  usual  charming  manner) 
look,  as  if  they  put  a  great  price  upon  their  in- 
tended friendship  to  me,  with  regard  to  my  interest 
in  their  brother's  heart:  as  if  the  favour  done  to  the 
humbled  girl,  if  they  could  jointly  procure  for  her 
their  brother's  countenance,  might  well  allow  of 
their  raillery — Don't,  pray  don't,  mj^  dear  grand- 
mamma, call  it  by  a  severer  name.  They  did  not, 
I  am  sure  they  did  not,  mean  to  hurt  me  so  much,  as 
I  really  was  hurt.  So  let  it  pass.  Humour  and 
raillery  are  very  difficult  things  to  rein  in.  They 
are  ever  curveting  like  a  prancing  horse  ;  and  they 
will  often  throw  the  rider  who  depends  more  upon 
his  skill  in  managing  them,  than  he  has  reason  to  do. 

My  uncle  was  charmed  with  the  scene:  and  thiqks 
the  two  ladies  did  just  as  he  would  have  done.  He 
means  it  a  compliment  to  their  delicacy ^  I  presume: 
but  I  am  of  my  aunt  Selby's  opinion,  that  their  o-^we- 
roua  brother  would  not  have  given  them  thanks  for 
their  raillery  to  the  poor  frighted  Harriet.  I  am  very 
happy,  however,  that  my  behaviour  and  frankness 
on  the  occasion  are  not  disapproved  at  Selby -house, 


20  THE   HISTORY   OF 

and  Shirley-manor,  and  by  you,  my  Lucy.  And 
here  let  that  matter  rest. 

Should  I  not  begin  to  think  of  going  back  to  you 
all,  my  Lucy?  I  believe  I  blush  ten  times  a  day, 
when  alone,  to  find  myself  waiting  and  waiting  as  if 
for  the  gracious  motion  ;  yet  apprehending  that  it 
never  imll^  never  can,  be  made ;  and  all  you,  my 
friends,  indulging  an  absence,  that  your  goodness 
makes  painful  to  you,  in  the  same  hope.  It  looks — 
Don't  it,  Lucy  ? — so  like  a  design  upon — I  don't 
know  how  it  looks ! — But  at  times,  1  can't  endure 
myself.  And  yet  while  the  love  of  virtue  (perhaps 
a  little  too  personal )  is  the  foundation  of  these  de- 
signs, these  waitings,  these  emotions,  I  think,  I  am 
not  wholly  inexcusable. 

I  am  sure  I  should  not  esteem  him,  were  he  not 
the  good  man  he  is — Pray  let  me  ask  you — Do  you 
think  he  can  always  go  on  thus  triumphantly  ? — So 
young  a  man — So  admired,  so  applauded  —  Will  lie 
'never  be  led  into  doing  something  unworthy  of 
his  character  ? — If  he  could,  do  you  think  I  should 
then  be  partial  to  him — O  no!  1  am  sure  1  should 
not! — 1  should  disdain  him — I  might  grieve,  I 
might  pity — But  what  a  multitude  of  foolish  notions 
come  into  the  head  of  a  silly  girl,  who,  little  as  she 
knows,  knows  more  of  any  thing,  or  of  any  body, 

than  she  knows  of  herself! 
*     • 

I  wish  my  godfather  had  not  put  it  in  my  head, 
that  Emily  is  cherishing  (perhaps  unknown  to  her- 
self) a  flame  that  will  devour  her  peace.  For,  to  be 
sure,  this  young  creature  can  have  no  hope  that — 
Yet  50,0001.  is  a  vast  fortune. — But  it  can  never 
buy  her  guardian.  Do  you  think  such  a  man  as 
Sir  Charles  Grandison  has  a  price? — I  am  sure  he 
iias  not. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  21 

I  watch  the  countenance,  the  words,  the  air  of  the 
girl,  when  he  is  spoken  of:  and  with  pity  I  see,  that 
he  cannot  be  named,  but  her  eyes  sparkle.  Her  eye 
is  taken  off  her  work  or  book,  as  she  happens  to  be 
engaged  in  either,  and  she  seems  as  if  she  would 
look  the  person  through  who  is  praising  her  guar- 
dian. For  the  life  of  her  she  cannot  work  and  hear. 
And  then  she  sighs — Upon  my  word,  Lucy,  there  is 
no  such  thing  as  proceeding  with  his  praises  before 
her — the  girl  so  sighs — So  young  a  creature! — 
Yet  how  can  one  caution  the  poor  thing  ? 

But  what  makes  me  a  little  more  observant  of 
her,  than  I  should  otherwise  perhaps  have  been 
(additional  to  Mr.  Dean's  observation)  is  a  hint 
given  me  by  Lady  L.  which  perhaps  she  has  from 
Miss  Grandison,  and  she  not  unlikely  from  the  stolen 
letter:  for  Miss  Grandison  hinted  at  it,  but  I  thought 
it  was  only  to  excite  my  curiosity  [when  one  is 
not  in  good  humour,  hoAv  one's  very  stile  is  encum- 
bered!]: the  hint  is  this,  that  it  is  more  than  pro- 
bable, it  will  be  actually  proposed  to  me,  to  take 
down  with  me  to  Northamptonshire  this  young  lady 
—•I,  who  want  a  governess  myself,  to  be — Mwilet  it 
be  proposed. 

In  a  conversation  that  passed  just  now,  between 
us  women,  on  the  subject  of  love  (a  favourite  topic 
with  all  girls),  this  poor  thing  gave  her  opinion  un- 
asked; and,  for  a  young  girl,  was  quite  alert,  I 
thought.  She  used  to  be  more  attentive  than 
talkative. 

I  whispered  Miss  Grandison  once,  Don't  you 
think  Miss  Jervois  talks  more  than  she  used  to  do, 
madam  ? 

I  think  she  does,  madam,  re-whispered  the  arch 
lady. 

1  begyour  pardon — Charlotte,  then. 


22  THE    HISTOUY    OF 

You  have  it,  Harriett  then. — But  let  her  prate. 
She  is  not  often  in  the  humour. 

Nay,  with  all  my  heart;  I  love  Miss  Jervois  :  but 
I  can't  but  watch  when  habits  begin  to  change. 
And  I  am  always  afraid  of  young  creatures  ex- 
posing themselves  when  they  are  between  girls  and 
women. 

I  don't  love  whispering,  said  Miss  Jervois,  more 
pertly  than  ever:  but  my  guardian  loves  me;  and 
you,  ladies,  love  me ;  and  so  my  heart  is  easy. 

Her  heart  easy!— Who  thought  of  her  heart? 
Her  guardian  loves  her! — Emily  shan't  go  down 
with  me,  Lucy, 

,  Sunday  morning,  March  19. 

0  but,  Lucy,  we  are  alarmed  here  on  Miss  Jer- 
vois's  account,  by  a  letter  which  Dr.  Bartlett  re- 
ceived a  little  late  last  night  from  Sir  Charles ;  so 
shewed  it  us  not  till  this  morning  as  we  were  at 
breakfast.  The  unhappy  woman,  her  mother,  has 
made  him  a  visit.  Poor  Emily!  Dear  child!  what 
a  mother  she  has! 

1  have  so  much  obliged  the  doctor  by  delivering 
into  his  hands  the  papers  that  our  other  friends  have 
just  perused  (and,  let  me  say,  with  high  appro- 
bation) that  he  made  no  scruple  of  allowing  me  to 
send  this  letter  to  you.  I  asked  the  favour,  as  I 
know  you  will  all  now  be  very  attentive  to  whatever 
relates  to  Emily.  Return  every  thing  the  doctor 
shall  entrust  me  with  by  the  first  opportunity. 

By  the  latter  part  of  this  letter  you  will  find,  that 
the  doctor  has  acquainted  Sir  Charles  with  his  sis- 
ter's wishes  of  a  correspondence  with  him  by  letter. 
He  consents  to  it,  you  will  all  see ;  but  upon  terms 
that  are  not  likely  to  be  complied  with  by  any  of 
his  three  sisters;  for  he  puts  me  in.     Three  sisters ! 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  23 

His  third  sister! — The  repetition  has  such  an  offici- 
ousness  in  it.  He  is  a  good  man  ;  but  he  can  be 
severe  upon  our  sex — It  u  not  in  woman  to  be  unre- 
served—  You'll  find  that  one  of  the  reflections  upon 
us:  he  adds;  And,  to  be  impartial, perhaps  they  shoidd 
not.  Why  so? — But  is  not  this  a  piece  of  advice 
given  to  myself,  to  make  me  more  reserved  than  I 
am?  But  he  gives  not  himself  opportunity  to  see 
whether  I  am  or  am  not  reserved.  I  won't  be  mean, 
Lucy,  I  repeat  for  the  twentieth  time.  I  won't  de- 
serve to  be  despised  by  him — No  !  though  he  were 
the  sovereign  of  the  greatest  empire  on  earth.  In 
this  believe  your 

HARRIET  BYRON. 


LETTER  IV. 

SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON  TO  DR.  BARTLETT. 

[inc/osed  in  the  preceding,'^ 

March  18. 
I  HAVE  had  a  visit,  my  dear  and  reverend  friend, 
from  Emily's  mother.  She  will  very  probably  make 
one  also  at  Colnebrook,  before  I  can  be  so  happy  as 
to  get  thither,  I  dispatch  this  therefore,  to  apprise 
you  and  Lord  L.  of  such  a  probability ;  which  is  the 
greater,  as  she  knows  Emily  to  be  there,  through 
the  inadvertence  of  Saunders,  and  finds  me  to  be  in 
town.  I  will  give  you  the  particulars  of  what  passed 
between  us,  for  your  better  information,  if  she  goes 
to  Colnebrook. 

I  was  preparing  to  attend  Lord  W.  as  by  appoint- 
ment, when  she  sent  in  her  name  to  me. 

I  received  her  civilly.     She  had  the  assurance  to 
make  up  to  me  with  a  full  expectation  that  I  would 


24  THE   HISTORY  OF 

salute  her ;  but  I  took,  or  rather  received,  her  ready 
hand,  and  led  her  to  a  chair  by  the  fireside.  You 
have  never  seen  her.  She  thinks  herself  still  haiKi- 
some;  and,  did  not  her  vices  make  her  odious,  and 
her  whole  aspect  shew  her  heart,  she  would  not  be 
much  mistaken. 

How  does  Emily,  Sir  ?  gallanting  her  fan :  Is  the 
girl  here  ?  Bid  her  come  to  me.     1  mil  see  her. 

She  is  not  here,  madam. 

"Where  is  she  then  ?  She  has  not  been  at  Mrs. 
Lane's  for  some  time. 

She  is  in  the  best  protection:  she  is  with  my  two 
sisters. 

And  pray,  Sir  Charles  Grandison,  what  do  you 
intend  to  do  with  her  ?  Tlie  girl  begins  to  be  wo- 
manly. 

She  laughed ;  and  her  heart  spoke  out  at  her  eyes. 

Tell  me  what  you  propose  to  do  with  her  ?  You 
know,  added  she,  affecting  a  serious  air,  that  she  is 
my  child. 

If,  madam,  you  deserve  to  be  thought  her  mother, 
you  will  be  satisfied  with  the  hands  she  is  in. 

Pish ! — I  never  loved  you  good  men :  where  a  fine 
girl  comes  in  their  way,  1  know  what  I  know^ — 

She  looked  wantonly,  and  laughed  again. 

I  am  not  to  talk  seriously  with  you,  Mrs.  Jervois; 
but  what  have  you  to  say  to  my  ward  ? 

Hay! — Why,  you  know,  Sir,  I  am  her  mother: 
and  1  have  a  mind  to  have  the  care  of  her  person 
myself.  You  must  (so  her  father  directed)  have  the 
care  of  her  fortune:  but  I  have  a  mind,  for  her  repu- 
tation-sake, to  take  the  girl  out  of  the  hands  of  so 
voung  a  guardian.    I  hope  you  will  not  oppose  me  ? 

If  this  be  all  your  business,  madam,  I  must  be  ex- 
cused.    I  am  preparing,  as  you  see,  to  dress. 

Where  is  Emily?  I  ivill  see  the  girl. 

If  your  motive  be  motherly  love,  httle,  madam, 


sin  CHARLES    GRANDISON.  25 

as  you  have  acted  the  mother  by  her,  you  shall  see 
her  when  she  is  in  town.  But  her  person,  and  repu- 
tation,  as  well  as  fortune,  must  be  ray  care. 

I  am  married,  Sir:  and  my  husband  is  a  man  of 
honour. 

Your  marriage,  madam,  gives  a  new  reason  why 
Emily  must  not  be  in  your  care. 

Let  me  tell  you,  Sir,  that  my  husband  is  a  man 
of  honour,  and  as  brave  a  man  as  yourself;  and  he 
will  see  me  righted. 

Be  he  who  he  will,  he  can  have  no  business  with 
Emily.  Did  you  come  to  tell  me  you  are  married, 
madam  ? 

I  did,  Sir.     Don't  you  wish  me  joy  ? 

Joy,  madam !  I  wish  you  to  deserve  joy,  and 
you  will  then  perhaps  have  it.  You'll  excuse  me 
— I  shall  make  my  friends  wait. 

I  could  not  restrain  my  indignation.  This  woman 
marries,  as  she  calls  it,  twice  or  thrice  a  year. 

Well,  Sir,  then  you  will  find  time,  perhaps,  to 
talk  with  Major  O'Hara.  He  is  of  one  of  the  best 
families  in  Ireland.  And  he  will  not  let  me  be  rob- 
bed of  my  daucrhter. 

Major  O'Hara,  madam,  has  nothingto  do  with  the 
daughter  of  my  late  unhappy  friend.  Nor  have  I  any- 
thing to  say  to  him.  Emily  is  in  my  protection ;  and 
I  am  sorry  to  say,  that  she  never  had  been  so,  were 
not  the  woman  who  calls  herself  her  mother,  the  per- 
son least  fit  to  be  entrusted  with  her  daughter.  Per- 
mit me  the  favour  of  leading  you  to  your  chair. 

She  then  broke  out  into  the  language  in  which  she 
always  concludes  these  visits.  She  threatened  me 
with  the  resentments  of  Major  O'Hara;  and  told  me, 
he  had  been  a  conqueror  in  half  a  dozen  duels. 

I  offered  my  hand.  She  refused  it  not.  I  led  her 
to  her  chair. 

1  will  call  again  to-morrow  afternoon,  said  she 

D 


ao  THE    HISTORY    (U' 

(threatening  with  her  head) ;  perhaps  with  the  ma- 
jor, Sir.  And  I  expect  you  will  produce  the  little 
harlotry. 

I  left  her  in  silent  contempt. — Vile  woman ! 

But  let  nothing  of  this  escape  you  to  my  Emily. 
I  think  she  should  not  see  her  but  in  my  presence. 
The  poor  girl  will  be  terrified  into  fits,  as  she  was 
the  last  time  she  saw  her,  if  she  comes,  and  I  am  not 
there.  But  possibly  I  may  hear  no  more  of  this 
wicked  woman  for  a  month  or  two.  Having  a  power 
to  make  her  annuity  either  one  or  two  hundred 
pounds,  according  to  her  behaviour,  at  my  own  dis- 
cretion, the  man  she  has  married,  who  could  have  no 
inducement,  but  the  annuity,  if  he  has  married  her, 
will  not  suffer  her  to  incur  such  a  reduction  of  it ; 
for,  you  know,  I  have  always  hitherto  paid  her  two 
hundred  pounds  a  year.  Her  threatening  to  see  me 
to-morrow  may  be  to  amuse  me  while  she  goes.  The 
woman  is  a  foolish  woman ;  hut,  being  accustomed 
to  intrigue,  she  aims  at  cunning  and  contrivance. 

I  am  now  hastening  to  Lord  W.  I  hope  his  wo- 
man will  not  be  admitted  to  his  table,  as  she  ge- 
nerally is,  let  who  will  be  present ;  yet,  it  seems, 
knows  not  how  to  be  silent,  whatever  be  the  sub- 
ject. I  have  never  chosen  either  to  dine  or  sup 
with  my  lord,  that  I  might  not  be  under  a  necessity 
of  objecting  to  her  company ;  and  were  I  not  to 
object  to  it,  as  I  am  a  near  kinsman  to  my  lord,  and 
know  the  situation  she  is  in  with  him,  my  complais- 
ance might  be  imputed  to  motives  altogether  un- 
worthy of  a  man  of  spirit. 

Yours  of  this  morning  was  brought  to  me,  just  as 
I  was  concluding.  I  am  greatly  interested  in  one 
paragraph  in  it. 

You  hint  to  me  that  my  sisters,  though  my  ab- 
sences are  short,  would  be  glad  to  receive  now-and- 
then  a  letter  from  me.     You,  my  dear  friend,  have 


SIH    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  2? 

engaged  me  into  a  kind  of  habit,  which  makes  me 
write  to  you  with  ease  and  pleasure. — To  you,  and  to 
our  Heauchamp,  methinks,  I  can  write  any-thing. 
Use,  it  is  true,  would  make  it  equally  agreeable  to' 
me  to  write  to  my  sisters.  I  would  not  have  them 
think  that  there  is  a  brother  in  the  world,  that  better 
loves  his  sisters  than  I  do  mine:  and  now,  you  know, 
I  have  three.  But  why  have  they  not  signified  as 
much  to  me  ?  Could  I  give  pleasure  to  any  whom  I 
love,  without  giving  great  pain  to  myself,  it  would 
be  unpardonable  not  to  do  it. 

I  could  easily  carry  on  a  correspondence  with  my 
sisters,  were  they  to  be  very  earnest  about  it :  but 
then  it  must  be  a  correspondence  :  the  writing  must 
not  be  all  of  one  side.  Do  they  think  I  should  not 
be  equally  pleased  to  hear  what  they  are  about,  from 
time  to  time ;  and  what,  occasionally,  their  senti- 
ments are  upon  persons  and  things?  If  it  fall  in  your 
way,  and  you  think  it  not  a  mere  temporary  wish 
(for  young  ladies  often  wish  and  think  no  more  of 
the  matter);  then  propose  the  condition — But,  cau- 
tion them,  that  the  moment  I  discover,  that  they  are 
less  frank,  and  more  reserved  than  I  am,  there  will 
be  an  end  of  the  correspondence.  My  three  sisters 
are  most  amiably  frank,  for  women — But  thus  chal- 
lenged, dare  they  enter  the  lists,  upon  honour,  with 
a  man,  abrother,  upon  equal  terms? — ()  no!  They 
dare  not.  It  is  not  in  women  to  be  unreserved  in 
some  points;  and  (to  be  impartial)  perhaps  they 
should  not :  yet,  surely,  there  is  now-and-then  a 
man,  a  brother,  to  be  met  with,  who  would  be  the 
more  grateful  for  the  confidence  reposed  in  him. 

Were  this  proposal  to  be  accepted,  I  could  write 
to  them  many  of  the  things  that  I  communicate  to 
you.  I  have  but  few  secrets.  I  only  wish  to  keep 
from  relations  so  dear  to  me,  things  that  could  not 
possibly  yield  them  pleasure.     I  am  sure  1  could 


28  THE    HISTORY  OF 

trust  to  your  judgment,  the  passages  that  might  be 
read  to  them  from  my  letters  to  you. 

Sometimes,  indeed,  I  love  to  divert  myself  with 
Charlotte's  humorous  curiosity ;  for  she  seems,  as  I 
told  her  lately,  to  love  to  suppose  secrets,  where 
there  are  none,  for  a  compliment  to  her  own  sagacity, 
when  she  thinks  she  has  found  them  out;  and  I  love 
at  such  times  to  see  her  puzzled,  and  at  a  fault,  as 
a  punishment  for  her  declining  to  speak  out. 

You  have  told  me  heretofore,  in  excuse  for  the 
distance,  which  my  txvo  elder  sisters  observe  to  their 
brother,  when  1  have  complained  of  it  to  you,  that 
it  proceeded  from  awe,  from  reverence  for  him.  But 
why  should  there  be  that  awe,  that  reverence?  Sure- 
ly, my  dear  friend,  if  this  is  spontaneous,  and  invin- 
cible, in  them,  there  must  be  some  fault  in  ray  be- 
haviour, some  seeming  want  of  freedom  in  my  man- 
ner, with  which  you  will  not  acquaint  me:  it  is 
otherwise  impossible,  that  between  brothers  and  sis- 
ters, where  the  love  is  not  doubted  on  either  side, 
Euch  a  distance  should  subsist.  You  must  consult 
them  upon  it,  and  get  them  to  explain  themselves  on 
this  subject  to  you;  and  when  they  have  done  so, 
tell  rrie  of  my  fault,  and  I  will  endeavour  to  render 
myself  more  agreeable  (more  familiar,  shall  I  say  ?) 
to  them.  But  I  will  not  by  any  means  excuse  them, 
if  they  give  me  cause  to  think,  that  the  distance  is 
owing  to  the  will  and  the  power  I  have  been  blessed 
with  to  do  my  duty  by  them.  What  would  this  be, 
but  indirectly  to  declare,  that  once  they  expected 
not  justice  from  their  brother?  But  no  more  of  this 
subject  at  present.  I  am  impatient  to  be  with  you 
all  at  Colnebrook ;  you  cannot  think  hovo  impatient. 
Self-denial  is  a  very  hard  doctrine  to  be  learned, 
my  good  Dr.  Bartlett.  So,  in  some  cases,  is  it  found 
to  be,  by  your 

CHARLES  GRANDISON. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  29 

LETTER   V. 

MISS    BYRON    TO    MISS    SELBY. 

Colnebrook,  Sunday  eveniii^t 
Poor  Emily  !  her  heart  is  almost  broken.  This  ig- 
noble passion,  what  a  mean  spirited  creature  had  it 
like  to  have  made  me  ! — Be  quiet,  be  quiet,  Lucy ! — 
I  will  call  it  ignoble.  Did  you  ever  know  me  before 
so  little?  And  had  it  not  like  to  have  put  me  upon 
being  hard-hearted,  envious,  and  I  can't  tell  what, 
to  a  poor  fatherless  girl,  just  starting  into  woman, 
and  therefore  into  more  danger  than  she  ever  was  in 
before;  wantingtobeprotected — from  whom?  From 
a  mother. — Dreadful  circumstance!  Yet  1  was  ready 
to  grudge  the  poor  girl  her  guardian,  and  her  inno- 
cent prattle ! — But  let  me  be  despised  by  the  man  I 
love,  if  I  do  not  conquer  this  new-discovered  envy, 
jealousy,  littleness,  at  least  with  regard  to  this  un- 
happy girl,  whose  calamity  endears  her  to  me. 

Dear  child,  sweet  Emily  ;  you  shall  go  down  with 
me,  if  it  be  proposed.  My  grandmamma,  and  uncle, 
and  aunt,  will  permit  me  to  carry  you  with  me. 
They  are  generous ;  they  have  no  little  passion  to 
mislead  their  beneficence :  they  are  what  I  hope  to 
be,  now  I  have  found  myself  out— And  what  if  her 
gratitude  should  make  her  heart  overflow  into  love, 
has  she  not  excuse  for  it,  if  Harriet  has  any  ? 

Well,  but  to  the  occasion  of  the  poor  Emily's 
distress.—  About  twelve  this  day,  soon  after  Lord  L. 
and  the  two  sisters  and  I,  came  from  church  (for 
Emily  happened  not  to  go)  a  coach  and  four  stopped 
at  the  gate,  and  a  servant  in  a  sorry  livery,  alighting 
from  behind  it,  enquired  for  Lord  L.  Two  gentle- 
men, who  by  their  dress  and  appearance  were  mili- 
tary men,  and  one  lady,  were  in  it. 
d3 


so  THE    HISTORY    OF 

My  lord  ordered  them  to  be  invited  to  alight,  and 
received  them  w^ith  his  usual  politeness. 

Don't  let  me  call  this  unhappy  woman  Emily's 
mother;  O'Hara  is  the  name  she  owns. 

She  addressed  herself  to  my  lord :  I  am  the  mo- 
ther of  Emily  Jervois,  my  lord:  this  gentleman, 
Major  O'Hara,  is  my  husband. 

"The  major  bowed,  strutted,  and  acknowledged 
her  for  his  wife :  And  this  gentleman,  my  lord,  is 
Captain  Salmonet,  a  very  brave  man :  he  is  in  fo- 
reign service.     His  lady  is  my  own  sister. 

My  lord  took  notice  of  each. 

I  understand,  my  lord,  that  my  daughter  is  here. 
I  desire  to  see  her. 

One  of  my  lord's  servants,  at  that  time  passing  by 
the  door  which  was  open.  Pray,  Sir,  said  she  to 
him,  let  Miss  Jervois  know,  that  her  mamma  is 
come  to  see  her.     Desire  her  to  come  to  me. 

Major.  I  long  to  see  my  new  daughter ;  I  hear 
ghe  is  a  charming  young  lady,  she  may  depend 
upon  the  kindness  of  a  father  from  me. 

Capt.  De  man  of  honour  and  good  nature  be  my 
broder's  general  cha-rac^-er,  I  do  assure  your 
lordship. 

He  spoke  English  as  a  Frenchman,  my  lord  says ; 
but  pronounced  the  word  character  as  an  Irishman. 

Major  (bowing).  No  need  of  this,  my  dear  friend. 
My  lord  has  the  cha-ract-er  of  a  fine  gentleman  him- 
self, and  knows  how  to  receive  a  gentleman  who 
waits  upon  him  with  due  respect. 

Lord  L.  I  hope  I  do.  But,  madam,  you  know 
whose  protection  the  lady  is  in. 

Mrs.  O'Hara.  I  do,  my  lord.  Sir  Charles  Gran- 
dison  is  a  very  fine  gentleman. 

Capt.  De  vinest  cha-roc^-er  in  de  vorld.  By  my 
salvation,  every  body  say  so. 

Mrs.  O^Hara.  But  Sir  Charles,  my  lord,  is  a  very 


sill   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  31 

young  gentleman  to  be  a  guardian  to  so  young  a 
creature ;  especially  now  that  she  is  growing  into 
woman.  I  have  had  some  few  faults,  I  own.  Who 
lives,  that  has  not  ?  But  I  have  been  basely  scanda- 
lized. My  first  husband  had /<m;  and  much  greater 
than  I  had.  He  was  set  against  me  by  some  of  his 
own  relations:  vile  creatures! — He  left  me,  and 
went  abroad ;  but  he  has  answered  for  all  by  this 
time ;  and  for  the  scanty  allowance  he  made  me, 
his  great  fortune  considered :  but  as  long  as  my 
child  will  be  the  better  for  it,  that  I  can  forgive. — 
Emily,  my  dear ! 

She  stepped  to  the  door  on  hearing  the  rustling 
of  silks,  supposing  her  at  hand ;  but  it  was  Miss 
Grandison,  followed  by  a  servant  with  chocolate,  to 
afford  her  a  pretence  to  see  the  visiters  ;  and  at  the 
same  time  having  a  mind  to  hint  to  them,  that  they 
were  not  to  expect  to  be  asked  to  stay  to  dinner. 

It  is  to  Miss  Grandison  that  I  owe  the  description 
of  each,  the  account  of  what  passed,  and  the  broken 
dialect. 

Mrs.  O'Hara  has  been  a  handsome  woman  ;  but 
well  might  Sir  Charles  be  disgusted  with  her  aspect. 
She  has  a  leering,  sly,  yet  confident  eye ;  and  a  very 
bold  countenance.  She  is  not  ungenteel ;  yet  her 
very  dress  denotes  her  turn  of  mind.  Her  com- 
plexion, sallowish,  streaked  with  red,  makes  her  face 
(which  is  not  so  plump  as  it  once  has  been)  look  like 
a  withering  John-apple  that  never  ripened  kindly. 

Miss  Grandison  has  a  way  of  saying  ill-natured 
things,  in  such  a  good-natured  manner,  that  one  can- 
not forbear  smiling,  though  one  should  not  altogether 
approve  of  them ;  and  yet  sometimes  one  would  be 
ready  to  wonder  how  she  came  by  her  images. 

The  major  is  pert,  bold,  vain,  and  seemed  parti- 
cularly fond  of  his  new  scarlet  coat,  and  laced  waist- 
coat.    He  is  ctNTtainly,  Miss  Giandison  says,  a  low 


32  THE    HISTORY   OF 

man,  though  a  soldier.  Anderson,  added  she,  i» 
worth  fifty  of  him.  His  face,  fiery  and  highly  pim- 
pled, is  set  off  to  advantage  by  an  enormous  solitaire. 
His  bad  and  straggling  teeth  are  shewn  continually 
by  an  affected  laugh,  and  his  empty  discourse  is  in- 
terlarded with  oaths,  which,  with  my  uncle's  leave, 
I  shall  omit. 

Captain  Salmonet,  she  says,  appeared  to  her  in  a 
middle  way  between  a  French  beau  and  a  Dutch 
boor  ;  aiming  at  gentility  with  a  person  and  shape 
uncommonly  clumsy. 

They  both  assumed  military  airs,  which  not  sitting 
naturally,  gave  them  what  Miss  Grandison  called 
the  swagger  of  soldierly  importance. 

Emily  was  in  her  own  apartment,  almost  fainting 
with  terror ;  for  the  servant,  to  whom  Mrs.  O'Hara 
had  spoken,  to  bid  her  daughter  come  to  her,  had 
officiously  carried  up  the  message. 

To  what  Mrs.  O'Hara  had  said  in  defence  of  her 
own  character,  my  lord  answered,  Mr,  Jervois  had 
a  right,  madam,  to  do  what  he  pleased  with  a  for- 
tune acquired  by  his  own  industry.  A  disagree- 
ment in  marriage  is  very  unhappy  ;  but  in  this  case, 
as  in  a  duel,  the  survivor  is  hardly  ever  in  fault.  I 
have  nothing  to  do  in  this  matter.  Miss  Jervois  is  ig 
very  happy  in  Sir  Charles  Grandison's  protection. 
She  thinks  so ;  and  so  does  every  body  that  knows 
her.     It  is  your  misfortune  if  you  do  not. 

Mrs.  O'Hara.  My  lord,  I  make  no  dispute  of  Sir 
Charles's  being  the  guardian  of  her  fortune  ;  but  no 
father  can  give  away  the  authority  a  mother  has,  as 
well  as  himself,  over  her  child. 

Major.  That  child  a  daughter  too,  my  lord. 

Lo7-d  L.  To  all  this  I  have  nothing  to  say.  You 
will  not  be  able,  I  believe,  to  persuade  my  brother 
Grandison  to  give  up  his  ward's  person  to  you,  ma- 
dam. 


SIR  CHARLES   GRANDISOIf.  33 

Mrs.  O^Hara.  Chancery  may,  my  lord — — 

Lord  L.  I  have  nothing  to  say  to  this,  madam. 
No  man  in  England  knows  better  what  is  to  be  done, 
in  this  case,  than  Sir  Charles  Grandison;  and  no 
man  will  be  readier  to  do  what  is  just  and  fitting, 
without  law;  but  I  enter  not  into  the  case;  you  must 
not  talk  to  me  on  this  subject. 

Miss  Gr.  Do  you  think,  madam,  that  your  mar- 
riage intitles  you  the  rather  to  have  the  care  of  Miss 
Jervois  ? 

Major  (with  great  quickness).  I  hope,  madam, 
that  my  honour,  and  my  cha-rac^-er 

Miss  Gr.  Be  they  ever  so  unquestionable,  will  not 
intitle  you,  Sir,  to  the  guardianship  of  Miss  Jervois's 
person. 

Major.  I  do  not  pretend  to  it,  madam.  But  I 
hope  that  no  father's  will,  no  guardian's  power,  is 
to  set  aside  the  natural  authority  which  a  mother 
has  over  her  child. 

Lord  L.  This  is  not  my  affair.  I  am  not  inclined 
to  enter  into  a  dispute  with  you,  madam,  on  this 
subject. 

Mrs.  0*Hara.  Let  Emily  be  called  down  to  her 
mother.  I  hope  I  may  see  my  child.  She  is  in  this 
house,  my  lord.     I  hope  I  may  see  my  child. 

Major.  Your  lordship,  and  you,  madam,  will 
allow,  that  it  would  be  the  greatest  hardship  in  the 
world,  to  deny  to  a  mother  the  sight  of  her  child. 

Capt.  De  very  greatest  hardship  of  all  hardships. 
Your  lordship  will  not  refuse  bo  let  de  daughter 
come  to  her  moder. 

Lord  L.  Her  guardian  perhaps  will  not  deny  it. 
You  must  apply  to  him.  He  is  in  town.  Miss  Jer- 
yois  is  here  but  as  a  guest.  She  will  be  soon  in 
town.  I  must  not  have  her  alarmed.  She  has  very 
ireak  spirits. 

Mrs,  O^Hara.  Weak  spirits,  my  lord ! — A  child 
3 


34  THE    HISTORY    OF 

to  have  spirits  too  weak  to  see  her  mother! — And 
she  felt  for  her  handkerchief. 

Miss  Gr.  It  sounds  a  Httle  harshly,  I  own,  to 
deny  to  a  mother  the  sight  of  her  daughter ;  but 
unless  my  brother  wpre  present,  I  think,  my  lord, 
it  cannot  be  allowed. 

Major.  Not  allowed,  madam  ! 

Capt.  A  moder  to  be  denied  to  see  her  daughter ! 
Jesu  !   and  he  crossed  himself. 

Mrs.  O'Hara  (putting  her  handkerchief  to  hide 
her  eyes,  for  it  seems  she  wept  not).  I  am  a  very 
unhappy  mother  indeed 

Major  (embracing  her).  My  dearest  honey !  My 
love  !  I  must  not  bear  these  tears — Would  to  God 
Sir  Charles  was  here,  and  thought  fit— But  I  came 
not  here  to  threaten — You,  my  lord,  are  a  man  of 
the  greatest  honour ;  so  is  Sir  Charles. — But  what- 
ever were  the  misunderstandings  between  husband 
and  wife,  they  should  not  be  kept  up  and  propa- 
gated between  mother  and  child.  My  wife  at  pre- 
sent desires  only  to  see  her  child :  that's  all  my  lord. 
Were  your  brother  present,  madam,  he  would  not 
deny  her  this.  Then  again  embracing  his  wife,  My 
dear  soul,  be  comforted.  You  will  be  allowed  to 
see  your  daughter;  no  doubt  of  it.  I  am  able  to 
protect  and  right  you    My  dear  soul,  be  comforted. 

She  sobbed.  Miss  Grandison  says ;  and  the  good- 
natured  Lord  L.  was  moved — Let  Miss  Jervois  be 
asked,  said  he,  if  she  chooses  to  come  down. 

I  will  go  to  her  myself,  said  Miss  Grandison. 

She  came  down  presently  again 

Miss  Byron  and  Miss  Jervois,  said  she,  are  gone 
out  together  in  the  chariot. 

Major.   Nay,  madam 

Capt.  Upon  my  salvation  this  must  not  pass— 
And  he  swaggered  about  the  room. 

Mrs.  O'Hara  looked  with  an  air  of  incredulity. 


SIK    CIIAULES    GRANDrSON. 


It  was  true,  however;  for  the  poor  girl  being 
ready  to  faint,  I  was  called  in  to  her.  Lady  L.  had 
been  making  a  visit  in  the  chariot ;  and  it  had  just 
brought  her  back.  O  save  me,  save  me,  dear  madam, 
said  Miss  Emily  to  me,  wringing  her  hands.  I  can- 
not, I  cannot  see  my  mother  out  of  my  guardian's 
presence.  And  she  will  make  me  own  her  new  hus- 
band.    I  beseech  you,  save  me ;  hide  me. 

I  saw  the  chariot  from  the  window,  and,  without 
asking  any  questions,  I  hurried  Miss  Emily  down 
stairs,  and  conducted  the  trembling  dear  into  it ; 
and  stepping  in  after  her,  ordered  the  coachman  to 
drive  any  where  except  towards  London  :  and  then 
the  poor  girl  threw  her  arms  about  my  neck,  smo- 
thering me  with  her  kisses,  and  calling  me  by  all 
the  tender  names  that  terror  and  mingled  gratitude 
could  suggest  to  her. 

Miss  Grandison  told  the  circumstances  pretty 
near  as  above ;  adding,  I  think,  my  lord,  that  Miss 
Emily  wants  not  apology  for  her  terror  on  this  oc- 
casion. That  lady,  in  her  own  heart,  knows  that 
the  poor  girl  has  reason  for  it. 

Madam,  said  tlie  major,  my  wife  is  cruelly  used. 
Your  brother — But  I  shall  talk  to  him  upon  the  sub- 
ject. He  is  said  to  be  a  man  of  conscience  and 
honour :  I  hope  I  shall  find  him  so.  I  know  how 
to  protect  and  right  my  wife. 

And  /  will  stand  by  my  broder  and  his  lady,  said 
the  captain,  to  de  very  last  drop  of  my  blood. — He 
looked  fierce,  and  put  his  hand  on  his  sword. 

Lord  L.  You  don't  by  these  airs  mean  to  insult 
me,  gentlemen — If  you  do 

Major.  No,  no,  my  lord.  But  we  must  seek  our 
remedy  elsewhere.  Surprising!  that  a  mother  is 
denied  the  sight  of  her  daughter !   Veri/  surprising! 

Capt.  Very  surprising,  indeed !  Ver  dis  to  be 
done  in  my  country — in  France English  liberty! 


S6  THE  HISTORY  OF 

Begar  ver  pretty  liberty ! — A  daughter  to  be  sup- 
ported against  her  moder — Whew !  Ver  pretty  li- 
berty, by  my  salvation ! 

Mrs.  O'Hara.  And  is  indeed  my  vile  child  run 
away  to  avoid  seeing  her  mother  ? — Strange !  Does 
she  always  intend  to  do  thus  ? — She  must  see  me— 
And  dearly  shall  she  repent  it ! 

And  she  looked  fierce,  and  particularly  spiteful ; 
and  then  declared,  that  she  would  stay  there  till 
Emily  came  back,  were  it  midnight. 

Lord  L.  You  will  have  my  leave  for  that,  madam  ? 

Major.  Had  we  not  best  go  into  our  coach,  and 
let  that  drive  in  quest  of  her  ? — She  cannot  be  far 
off.     It  will  be  easy  to  trace  a  chariot. 

Lord  L.  Since  this  matter  is  carried  so  far,  let  me 
tell  you,  that,  in  the  absence  of  her  guardian,  I  will 
protect  her.  Since  Miss  Jervois  is  thus  averse,  she 
shall  be  indulged  in  it.  If  you  see  her,  madam,  it 
must  be  by  the  consent,  and  in  the  presence,  of 
her  guardian. 

Major.  Well,  my  dear,  since  the  matter  stands 
thus  ;  since  your  child  is  taught  to  shun  you  thus ; 
let  us  see  what  Sir  Charles  Grandison  will  say  to  it. 
He  is  the  principal  in  this  affair,  and  is  not  privileged, 
li'he  thinks  fit — and  there  he  stopped,  and  blustered; 
and  offered  his  hand  to  his  bride — I  am  able  both 
to  protect  and  right  you,  madam ;  and  I  rvill.  But 
you  have  a  letter  for  the  girl,  written  on  a  supposi- 
tion that  she  was  not  here.  Little  did  you,  or  I, 
think,  that  she  was  in  the  house  when  we  came ;  and 
that  she  should  be  spirited  away  to  avoid  paying 
her  duty  to  her  mother. 

Very  true.  And,  very  true,  said  each ;  and  Mrs. 
O'Hara  pulled  out  the  letter,  laying  it  on  one  of 
the  chairs ;  and  desired  it  might  be  given  to  her 
daughter.  And  then  they  all  went  away,  very  much 
dissatisfied;  the  two  men  muttering  and  threatening, 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  37 

and  resolving,  as  they  said,  to  make  a  visit  to  Sir 

Charles. 

I  hope  we  shall  see  him  here  very  soon.    I  hope 

these  wretches  will  not  insult  him,  or  endanger  a  life 

so  precious.    Poor  Emily !  I  pity  her  from  my  heart. 

She  is  as  much  grieved  on  this  occasion,  as  I  was,  in 

dread  of  the  resentment  of  Sir  Hargrave  Pollexfen. 
Let  me  give  you  some  account  of  what  passed 

between  Emily  and  me :  you  will  be  charmed  with 

her  beautiful  simplicity. 

When  we  were  in  the  chariot,  she  told  me,  that 

the  last  time  she  saw  her  mother,  it  was  at  Mrs. 
Lane's.    The  bad  woman  made  a  pretence  of  private 

business  with  her  daughter,  and  withdrew  with  her 

into  another  room,  and  then  insisted  that  she  should 
go  oflP  with  her,  unknown  to  any  body.  And  because 
I  desired  to  be  excused,  said  she,  my  mother  laid  her 
hands  upon  me,  and  said  she  would  trample  me  under 

her  foot.    It  is  true  (unhappy  woman!)  she  was 

[Then  the  dear  girl  whispered  me,  though  nobody 
was  near  us — sweet  modest  creature,  loth  to  reveal 
this  part  of  her  mother's  shame  even  to  me  aloud, 
and  blushed  as  she  spoke — ]  she  was  in  her  cups.— 
My  mamma  is  as  naughty  as  some  men  in  that  re- 
spect :  and  I  believe  she  would  have  been  as  good  as 
her  word ;  but  on  my  screaming  (for  I  was  very  much 
frighted)  Mrs.  Lane,  who  had  an  eye  upon  us,  ran 
in  with  two  servants,  and  one  of  her  daughters,  and 
rescued  me.  She  had  torn  my  cap — Yet  it  was  a 
sad  thing,  you  know,  madam,  to  see  one's  mother 
put  out  of  the  house  against  her  will.  And  then  she 
raised  the  neighbourhood.  Lord  bless  me,  I  thawght 
I  should  have  died.  I  did  fail  into  tits.  Then  was 
Mrs.  Lane  forced  to  tell  every  one  what  a  sad  woman 
my  mother  was!  It  was  such  a  disgrace  to  me  I  It  was 
a  month  before  I  could  go  to  church,  or  look  any 
body  in  the  face.     But  Mrs.  Lane's  character  was 

VOL.  XI.  E 


4461''^ 


0 


98  THE    HISTORY    OF 

of  her  side ;  and  my  guardian's  goodness  was  a  help 
— Shall  I  say  a  help  against  my  mother? — Poor 
woman !  we  heard  afterwards,  she  was  dead ;  but 
my  guardian  would  not  believe  it.  If  it  would 
please  God  to  take  me,  I  should  rejoice.  Many  a 
tear  does  my  poor  mother,  and  the  trouble  I  give  to 
the  best  of  men,  cost  me,  when  nobody  sees  me ; 
and  many  a  time  do  1  cry  myself  to  sleep,  when  I 
think  it  impossible  I  should  get  such  a  kind  relief. 

I  was  moved  at  the  dear  girl's  melancholy  tale. 
I  clasped  my  arms  about  her,  and  wept  on  her  gentle 
bosom.  Her  calamity,  which  was  the  greatest  that 
could  happen  to  a  good  child,  I  told  her,  had  en- 
deared her  to  me :  I  would  love  her  as  my  sister. 

And  so  I  will :  dear  child,  I  will  for  ever  love  her. 
And  I  am  ready  to  hate  myself  for  some  passages  in 
my  last  letter,  O  how  deceitful  is  the  heart!  1  could 
not  have  thought  it  possible  that  mine  could  have 
been  so  narrow. 

-The  dear  girl  rejoiced  in  my  assurances,  and  pro- 
mised grateful  love  to  the  latest  hour  of  her  life. 

Indeed,  madam,  I  have  a  grateful  heart,  said  she, 
for  all  I  am  so  unhappy  in  a  certain  relation.  I  have 
none  of  those  sort  of  faults  that  give  me  a  resemblance 
in  any  way  to  my  poor  mother.  But  how  shall  I 
make  out  what  I  say  ?  you  will  mistrust  me,  I  fear : 
you  will  be  apt  to  doubt  my  principles.  But  will 
you  promise  to  take  my  heartrin  your  hand,  and  guide 
it  as  you  please  ? — Indeed  it  is  an  honest  one.  I  wish 
you  saw  it  through  and  through. — If  ever  I  do  a 
wrong  thing,  mistrust  my  head,  if  you  please,  but  not 
my  heart.  But  in  every  thing  I  will  be  directed  by 
you  ;  and  then  my  head  will  be  as  right  as  my  heart. 

I  told  her  that  good  often  resulted  from  evil.  It 
was  a  happy  thing  perhaps  for  both,  that  her  mo- 
ther's visit  had  been  made.  Look  upon  me,  my  dear 
Emily,  as  your  entire  friend.  We  will  have  but  one 
heart  between  us. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  39 

Let  me  add,  Lucy,  that  if  you  find  me  capable  of 
drawing  this  sweet  girl  into  confessions  of  her  infant 
love,  and  of  making  ungenerous  advantage  of  them, 
though  the  event  were  to  be  fatal  to  my  peace  if  I 
did  not ;  I  now  call  upon  all  you,  my  dear  friends, 
to  despise  and  renounce  the  treacherous  friend  in 
Harriet  Byron. 

She  besought  me  to  let  her  write  to  me ;  to  let 
her  come  to  me  for  advice,  as  often  as  she  wanted 
it,  whether  here,  in  my  dressing-room,  or  chamber, 
or  at  Mr.  Reeves's,  when  I  went  from  Colnebrook. 

I  consented  very  cheerfully,  and  at  her  request, 
(for  indeed,  said  she,  I  would  not  be  an  intruder  for 
the  world)  promised,  by  a  nod  at  her  entrance,  to 
let  her  know,  if  she  came  when  I  was  busy,  that 
she  must  retire,  and  come  another  time. 

You  are  too  young  a  lady,  added  she,  to  be  called 

my  mamma Alas !  I  have  never  a  mamma,  you 

know :  but  I  will  love  you,  and  obey  you,  on  the 
holding  up  of  your  finger,  as  I  would  my  mother, 
were  she  as  good  as  you. 

Does  not  the  beautiful  simplicity  of  this  charm- 
ing girl  affect  you,  Lucy  ?  But  her  eyes  swimming 
in  tears,  her  earnest  looks,  her  throbbing  bosom, 
her  hands  now  clasped  about  me,  now  in  one  ano- 
ther, added  such  graces  to  what  she  said,  that  it  is 
impossible  to  do  justice  to  it :  and  yet  I  am  affected 
as  I  write. 

Indeed,  her  calamity  has  given  her  an  absolute 
possession  of  my  heart.  I,  who  had  such  good  pa- 
rents, and  have  had  my  loss  of  them  so  happily  al- 
leviated, and  even  supplied,  by  a  grandmamma  and 
an  aunt  so  truly  maternal,  as  well  as  by  the  love  of 
every  one  to  whom  1  have  the  happiness  to  be  re- 
lated ;  how  unworthy  of  such  blessings  should  I  be, 
if  I  did  not  know  how  to  pity  a  poor  girl,  who  must 
reckon  a  living  mother  as  her  heaviest  misfortune ! 
k2 


40  THE   HISTORY   Of 

Sir  Charles,  from  the  time  of  the  disturbance 
which  this  mihappy  woman  made  in  Mrs.  Lane's 
neighbourhood,  and  of  her  violence  to  his  Emily, 
not  only  threatened  to  take  from  her  that  moiety  of 
the  annuity  which  he  is  at  liberty  to  withdraw  ;  but 
gave  orders  that  she  should  never  again  be  allowed 
to  see  his  ward,  but  in  his  presence :  and  she  has 
been  quiet  till  of  late,  only  threatening  and  demand- 
ing. But  now  she  seems,  on  this  her  marriage  with 
Major  O'Hara,  to  have  meditated  new  schemes,  or 
is  aiming,  perhaps,  at  new  methods  to  bring  to  bear 
an  old  one ;  of  which  Sir  Charles  had  private  inti- 
mation given  him  by  one  of  the  persons  to  whom, 
in  her  cups,  she  once  boasted  of  it :  which  was,  that 
as  soon  as  Miss  Emily  was  marriageable,  she  would 
endeavour,  either  by  fair  means,  or  foul,  to  get  her 
into  her  hands :  and  if  she  did,  but  for  one  week, 
she  should  the  next  come  out  the  wife  of  a  man  she 
had  in  view,  who  would  think  half  the  fortune  more 
than  sufficient  for  himself,  and  make  over  the  other 
half  to  her;  and  then  she  should  come  into  her 
right,  which  she  deems  to  be  half  of  the  fortune  of 
which  her  husband  died  possessed. 

This  that  follows  is  a  copy  of  the  letter  left  for 
Emily  by  this  mother  ;  which,  though  not  well 
spelled,  might  have  been  written  by  a  better  wo- 
man, who  had  hardships  to  complain  of  which  might 
have  intitled  her  to  pity. 

MY  DEAR    EMILT, 

If  you  have  any  love,  any  duty  left,  for  an  un- 
happy mother,  whose  faults  have  been  barbarously 
aggravated,  to  justify  the  ill  usage  of  a  husband  who 
was  not  faultless ;  1  conjure  you  to  insist  upon 
making  me  a  visit,  either  at  my  new  lodgings  in 
Dean  Street,  Soho ;  or  that  you  will  send  me  word 
where  I  pan  see  you,  supposing  I  am  not  permitted 


SIR  CHifiRLES  GRANDISON.  4<1 

to  see  you  as  this  day,  or  that  you  should  not  be  at 
Colnebroolc,  where,  it  seems,  you  have  been  some 
days.  I  cannot  believe  that  your  guardian,  for  his 
own  reputation-sake,  as  well  as  for  justice-sake,  as 
he  is  supposed  to  be  a  good  man,  will  deny  you  if 
you  insist  upon  it;  as  you  ought  to  do,  if  you  have 
half  the  love  for  me,  that  I  have  for  you. 

Can  1  doubt  that  you  mil  insist  upon  it  ?  I  cannot. 
I  long  to  see  you :  I  long  to  lay  you  in  my  bosom. 
And  1  have  given  hopes  to  Major  O'Hara,  a  man 
of  one  of  the  best  families  in  Ireland,  and  a  very 
worthy  man,  and  a  brave  man  too,  who  knows  how 
to  right  an  injured  wife,  if  he  is  put  to  it,  but  who 
wishes  to  proceed  amicably,  that  you  will  not  scru- 
ple, as  my  husband,  to  call  him  father. 

I  hear  a  very  good  account  of  your  improvements, 
Emily ;  and  I  am  told  that  you  are  grown  very  tall 
and  pretty,  O  my  Emily ! — Wliat  a  grievous  thing 
is  it  to  say,  that  1  am  told  these  things ;  and  not  to 
have  been  allowed  to  see  you ;  and  to  behold  your 
growth,  and  those  improvements,  which  must  re- 
joice my  heart,  and  do,  though  I  am  so  basely  belied 
as  I  have  been !  Do  not  you,  Emily,  despise  her  that 
bore  you.  It  is  a  dreadful  thing,  with  such  fortunes 
as  your  father  left,  that  I  must  be  made  poor  and 
dependent ;  and  then  be  despised  for  being  so. 

But  if  you,  my  child,  are  taught  to  be,  and  will 
be,  one  of  those :  what,  though  I  have  such  happy 
prospects  in  my  present  marriage,  will  be  my  me, 
but  a  bitter  death,  which  your  want  of  duty  will 
hasten  ?  For  what  mother  can  bear  the  contempts  of 
her  child  ?  And  in  that  case  your  great  fortune  will 
not  set  you  above  God's  judgments.  But  better 
things  are  hoped  of  my  Emily,  by  her 

Indulgent,  though  heretofore 

Saturday,  March  18.         unhappy  mother, 

HELEN  O'HARA. 
e3 


42  THE   HISTORY  OF 

My  lord  thought  fit  to  open  this  letter:  he  is  sorry 
that  he  did ;  because  the  poor  girl  is  so  low-spirited, 
that  he  does  not  choose  to  let  her  see  it ;  but  will 
leave  it  to  her  guardian  to  give  it  to  her,  or  not,  as 
he  pleases. 

Miss  Grandison  lifted  up  her  hands  and  eyes  as 
she  read  it.  Such  a  wretch  as  this,  said  she,  to  re- 
mind Emily  of  God's  judgments ;  and  that  line  writ- 
ten as  even  as  the  rest !  How  was  it  possible,  if  her 
wicked  heart  could  suggest  such  words,  that  her 
fingers  could  steadily  write  them  ?  But  indeed  she 
verifies  the  words  of  the  wise  man ;  There  is  no 
txjickedness  like  the  wickedness  of  a  woman. 

We  all  long  to  see  Sir  Charles.  Poor  Emily,  in 
particular,  will  be  unhappy  till  he  comes. 

While  we  expect  a  favoured  person,  though  rich 
in  the  company  of  the  friends  we  are  with,  what  a 
diminution  does  it  give  to  enjoyments  that  would 
be  complete,  were  it  not  for  that  expectation  ?  The 
mind  is  uneasy,  not  content  with  itself,  and  always 
looking  out  for  the  person  wanted. 

Emily  was  told,  that  her  mother  left  a  letter  for 
her ;  but  is  advised  not  to  be  solicitous  to  see  it  till 
her  guardian  comes.  My  lord  owned  to  her,  that  he 
had  opened  it ;  and  pleaded  tenderness,  as  he  justly 
might,  in  excuse  of  having  taken  that  liberty.  She 
thanked  his  lordship,  and  said,  it  was  for  such  girls 
as  she  to  be  directed  by  such  good  and  kind  friends. 

She  has  just  now  left  me.  I  was  writing,  and 
wanted  to  close.  I  gave  her  a  nod,  with  a  smile, 
as  agreed  upon  a  little  before.  Thank  you,  thank 
you,  dear  madam,  said  she,  for  this  freedom.  She 
stopped  at  the  door,  and,  with  it  in  her  hand,  in  a 
whispering  accent,  bending  forwards.  Only  tell  me, 
that  you  love  me  as  well  as  you  did  in  the  chariot. 

Indeed,  my  dear,  I  do ;  and  better,  I  think,  if  pos- 
sible ;  because  I  have  been  putting  part  of  our  con- 
3 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  43 

versation  upon  paper,  and  so  have  fastened  your 
merits  on  my  memory. 

God  bless  you,  madam,  I  am  gone ;  and  away 
she  tript. 

But  I  will  make  her  amends,  before  I  go  to  rest ; 
and  confirm  all  that  I  said  to  her  in  the  chariot ; 
for  most  cordially  I  can. 

I  am,  my  dear  Lucy,  and  will  be, 
Ever  yours, 

HARRIET  BYRON. 


LETTER   VL 

MR.  DEANE  TO  MRS.  SELBY. 

London,  Friday  nij;ht,  March  17, 
You  wished  me,  my  dear  Mrs  Selby,  as  I  was 
obliged  to  go  to  London  on  my  own  affairs,  to  call  at 
Colnebrook,  and  to  give  you  my  observations  on  the 
state  of  matters  there  ;  and  whether  there  were  any 
likelihood  of  the  event  we  are  all  so  desirous  should 
be  brought  about ;  and  particularly,  if  an  opportunity 
offered,  that  I  would  at  distance  sound  Sir  Charles 
himself  on  the  subject.  I  told  you,  that  you  need  not 
be  afraid  of  my  regard  to  our  dear  child's  delicacy  ; 
and  that  she  herself  should  not  have  reason  to  mis- 
trust me  on  this  nice  subject. 

It  seems  his  great  engagements  in  town,  and  some 
he  has  had  in  Kent,  have  hindered  him  from  giving 
LordL.and  hissisters,muchof  his  company,  though 
our  Harriet  is  there;  which  they  all  extremely  regret. 

I  dined  at  Colnebrpt)k.  Lord  L.  is  a  very  worthy 
and  agreeable  man.  Lady  L.  and  Miss  Grandison 
are  charming  women.  Miss  Jervois  is  a  pretty  young 
lady. — But  more  of  her  bye-and-bye. The  cou- 
sin Grandison  you  spoke  of,  is  gone  down  to  Gran- 


4^  THE    HISTORY    OF 

dison-hall,  whither  Sir  Charles  himself  thinks  short- 
ly of  going — But  this  and  other  distant  matters  I 
refer  to  our  Harriet's  own  account. 

My  visit  to  Sir  Charles  is  most  in  my  head,  and 
I  will  mention  that,  and  give  place  to  other  obser- 
vations afterwards. 

After  dinner  I  pursued  my  journey  to  London. 
As  my  own  business  was  likely  to  engage  me  for  the 
whole  time  I  had  to  stay  in  town,  I  alighted  at  his 
house  in  St.  James's  Square ;  and  was  immediately, 
on  sending  in  my  name,  introduced  to  him. 

Let  me  stop  to  say,  he  is  indeed  a  very  fine  gen- 
tleman. Majesty  and  sweetness  are  mingled  in  every 
feature  of  his  face ;  and  the  latter,  rather  than  the 
former,  predominates  in  his  whole  behaviour.  Well 
may  Harriet  love  him. 

1  told  him,  that  I  hoped  on  my  coming  to  town 
on  particular  affairs,  he  would  excuse  the  intrusion 
of  a  man  who  was  personally  a  stranger  to  him ;  but 
who  had  long  wished  for  an  opportunity  to  thank 
him  for  the  relief  he  had  given  to  a  young  lady,  in 
whom  I  claimed  an  interest  that  was  truly  paternal. 
At  the  same  time  I  congratulated  him  on  the  noble 
manner  in  which  he  had  extricated  himself  to  the 
confusion  of  men,  whom  he  had  taught  to  find  out, 
and  to  be  ashamed,  that  they  were  savages. 

He  received  my  compliments  as  a  man  might  be 
supposed  to  do,  to  whom  praise  is  not  a  new  thing  ; 
and  made  me  very  handsome  ones,  declaring  himself 
acquainted  with  my  character,  with  my  connections 
with  your  family,  and  with  one  of  the  most  excellent 
of  young  ladies.  This  naturally  introduced  the 
praises  of  our  Harriet;  in  which  he  joined  in  so  high 
and  so  just  a  strain,  that  I  saw  his  heart  was  touch- 
ed. I  am  sure  it  is :  so  set  yours  at  rest.  It  must 
do.  E very-thing  is  moving,  and  that  not  slowly,  to 
the  event  so  desirable.    I  led  to  the  graces  of  her 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  45 

person  :  he  to  those  of  her  mind.  He  allowed  her 
to  be,  for  both,  one  of  the  most  perfect  beauties  he 
had  ever  seen.  In  short,  Mrs.  Selby,  I  am  con- 
vinced, that  the  important  affair  will  ripen  of  itself. 
His  sisters.  Lord  L.  Dr.  Bartlett,  all  avowedly  in  our 
lovely  girl's  favour,  and  her  merit  so  extraordinary  ; 
it  must  do.  Don't  you  remember  what  the  old 
song  says  ? 

When  Phoebus  doM  his  beams  display. 
To  tell  men  gravely  ti>at  'lis  day. 
Is,  to  suppose  tliem  blind. 

All  I  want,  methinks,  is,  to  have  them  oftener  to- 
gether. Idleness,  I  believe,  is  a  great  friend  to  love. 
I  wish  his  affairs  would  let  him  be  a  little  idle.  They 
must  be  dispatched  soon,  be  they  what  they  will ; 
for  Lord  L.  said,  that  when  he  is  master  of  a  subject, 
his  execution  is  as  swift  as  thought.  Sir  Chai'les 
hinted,  that  he  should  soon  be  obliged  to  go  to 
France.  Seas  are  nothing  to  him  Dr.  Bartlett 
said,  that  he  considers  all  nations  as  joined  on  the 
same  continent,  and  doubted  not  but  if  he  had  a  call, 
he  would  undertake  a  journey  to  Constantinople  or 
Pekin,  with  as  little  difficulty  as  some  others  would 
(he  might  have  named  me  for  one)  to  the  Land's- 
end.  Indeed  he  appears  to  be  just  that  kind  of 
man.  Yet  he  seems  not  to  have  any  of  that  sort  of 
fire  in  his  constitution,  that  goes  off  with  a  bounce, 
and  leaves  nothing  but  vapour  and  smoke  behind  it. 

You  are  in  doubt  about  our  girl'ti  fortune.  It  is 
not  a  despicable  one.  He  may,  no  question,  have  a 
woman  with  a  much  greater :  and  so  may  she  a  man. 
— What  say  you  to  Lady  D  's  proposal,  rejected  for 
his  sake ;  at  hap-hazard  too,  as  the  saying  is  ?  But 
let  it  once  come  to  that  question,  and  leave  it  to 
me  to  answer  it. 

You  bid  me  to  remark  how  Harriet  looks.     She  is 


46  THE   HISTORY   OF 

as  lovely  as  ever ;  but,  I  think,  not  quite  so  lively, 
and  somewhat  paler ;  but  it  is  a  clear  and  healthy, 
not  a  sickly  paleness ;  and  there  is  a  languor  in  her 
fine  eyes,  that  I  never  saw  in  them  before.  She 
never  was  a  pert  girl ;  but  she  has  more  meekness 
and  humility  in  her  countenance,  than,  methinks, 
I  could  wish  her  to  have  ;  because  it  gives  to  Miss 
Grandison,  who  has  fine  spirits,  some  advantages,  in 
conversation,  over  Harriet,  that,  if  she  had,  me- 
thinks she  should  not  take.  But  they  perifectly 
understand  one  another. 

But  now  for  a  word  or  two  about  Miss  Jervois.  I 
could  not  but  take  notice  to  our  Miss  Byron,  of  the 
greediness  with  which  she  eats  and  drinks  the  praises 
given  her  guardian ;  of  the  glow  that  overspreads  her 
cheeks,  and  of  a  sigh  that  now-and-then  seems  to 
escape  even  her  own  observation,  when  he  is  spoken 
of  [so  like  a  niece  of  mine,  who  drew  herself  in, 
and  was  afterwards  unhappy]  ;  and  by  these  symp- 
toms I  conclude,  that  this  young  creature  is  certainly 
giving  way  to  love.  She  has  a  very  great  fortune, 
is  a  pretty  girl,  and  an  improving  beauty.  She  is 
tall  and  womanly.  I  thought  her  sixteen  or  seven- 
teen; but  it  seems  she  is  hardly  fourteen.  There  is 
as  much  difference  in  girls  as  in  fruits,  as  to  their 
maturing  as  I  may  say.  My  mother,  I  remember, 
once  said  of  an  early  bloom  in  a  niece  of  hers,  that 
such  were  born  to  woe.  I  hope  it  won't  be  so  with 
this;  for  she  certainly  is  a  good  young  creature,  but 
has  not  had  great  opportunities  of  knowing  either 
the  world,  or  herself.  Brought  up  in  a  confined  man- 
ner in  her  father's  house  at  Leghorn,  till  twelve  or 
thirteen  ;  what  opportunities  could  she  have  ?  No 
mother's  wings  to  be  sheltered  under ;  her  mother's 
wickedness  giving  occasion  the  more  to  straighten 
her  education,  and  at  a  time  of  life  so  young,  and  in 
so  restraining  a  country  as  Italy,  for  girls  and  young 


SIU    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  47 

maidens;  and,  since  brought  over,  put  to  board 
with  a  retired  country  gentlewoman — What  can 
she  know,  poor  thing  ?  She  has  been  but  a  little 
while  with  Miss  Grandison,  and  that  but  as  a  guest : 
so  that  the  world  before  her  is  all  new  to  her  : 
and,  indeed,  there  seems  to  be  in  her  pretty  wonder, 
and  honest  declarations  of  her  whole  heart,  a  sim- 
plicity that  sometimes  borders  upon  childishness, 
though  at  other  times  a  kind  of  womanly  prudence. 
I  am  not  afraid  of  her  on  our  Harriet's  account ; 
and  yet  Harriet  (lover-like,  perhaps)  was  alarmed 
at  my  hinting  it  to. her:  but  I  am  on  her  oxun.  I 
wish,  as  I  said  before.  Sir  Charles  was  more  among 
them  :  he  would  soon  discover  whose  love  is  fit  to 
be  discountenanced,  and  whose  to  be  encouraged ; 
and,  by  that  means,  give  ease  to  twenty  hearts. 
For  I  cannot  believe,  that  such  a  man  as  this  would 
he  guilt  1/  (1  will  call  it)  of  reserve  to  such  a  young 
lady  as  ours,  were  he  but  to  have  the  shadow  of  a 
thought  that  he  has  an  interest  in  her  heart. 

My  affairs  are  more  untoward  than  I  expected  : 
but  on  my  return  to  Peterborough  I  will  call  at 
Shirley-manor  and  Selby-house — and  then  (as  I  hope 
to  see  Sir  Charles  again,  either  in  London,  or  at 
Colnebrook)  I  will  talk  to  you  of  all  these  matters. 
Mean  time  believe  me  to  be 

Your  affectionate  and  faithful  humble  servant, 
THOMAS  DEANE. 


48  THE   HISTORY   OP 

LETTER  VII. 

MISS    BYRON    TO    MISS    SELBY. 

Monday,  March  20. 
After  we  had  taken  leave  of  one  another  for  the 
night,  I  tapt  at  Emily's  chamber-  door ;  which  being 
immediately  opened  by  her  maid,  Is  it  you,  my 
dear  Miss  Byron,  said  she,  running  to  me  ?  How 
good  this  is  ! 

I  am  come,  my  dear,  late  as  it  is,  to  pass  an  agree- 
able half-hour  with  you,  if  it  will  not  be  unseasonable. 

That  it  can  never  be. 

You  must  then  let  your  Anne  go  to  bed,  said  I : 
else,  as  her  time  is  not  her  own,  1  shall  shorten  my 
visit.  1  will  assist  you  in  any  little  services  myself. 
I  have  dismissed  Jenny. 

God  bless  you,  madam,  said  she  ;  you  consider 
every-body.  Anne  tells  me,  that  the  servants, 
throughout  the  house,  adore  you :  and  I  am  sure 
their  principals  do — Anne,  youmay  go  to  your  rest. 

Jenny,  who  attends  me  here,  has  more  than  once 
hinted  to  me,  that  Miss  Jervois  loves  to  sit  up  late, 
either  reading,  or  being  read  to  by  Anne ;  who, 
though  she  reads  well,  is  not  fond  of  the  task. 

Servants,  said  I,  are  as  sensible  as  their  masters 
and  mistresses-  They  speak  to  their  feelings.  I 
question  not  but  they  love  Miss  Jervois  as  well  as 
they  do  me.  1  should  as  soon  choose  to  take  my 
measures  of  the  goodness  of  principals  by  their  ser- 
vants' love  of  them,  as  by  any  other  rule.  Don't 
you  see,  by  the  silent  veneration  and  assiduities  of 
the  servants  of  Sir  Charles  Grandison,  how  much 
they  adore  their  master  ? 

I  am  very  fond  of  being  esteemed  by  servants,  said 
she,  from  that  very  observation  of  my  guardian's 


SIR   CHAKI/ES   GKANDISON,  49 

goodness,  and  his  servants'  worthiness,  as  well  as 
from  what  my  maid  tells  me  all  of  them  say  of  you. 
But  you  and  my  guardian  are  so  much  alike  in  every- 
thing, that  you  seem  to  be  born  for  one  another. 

And  then  she  sighed  involuntarily;  yet  seemed 
not  to  endeavour  to  restrain  or  recal  her  sigh. 

Why  sighs  my  dear  young  friend  ?  Why  sighs 
my  Emily? 

That's  good  of  you,  to  call  me  your  Emily.  My 
guardian  calls  me  his  Emily.  I  am  always  proud 
when  he  calls  me  so — I  don't  know  why  I  sigh:  but 
I  have  lately  got  a  trick  of  sighing,  1  think.  Will  it 
do  me  harm  ?  Anne  tells  me  it  will ;  and  says,  I 
must  bnak  myself  of  it.  She  says,  it  is  not  pretty 
in  a  young  lady  to  sigh  :  but  where  is  the  unpretti- 
ness  of  it  ? 

Sighing  is  said  to  be  a  sign  of  bqjng  in  love ;  and 
young  ladies 

Ah !  madam  !  and  yet  you  sigh  very  often 

I  felt  myself  blush. 

I  often  catch  myself  sighing,  my  dear,  said  I.  It 
fs  a  tricky  as  you  call  it,  which  I  would  not  have  you 
learn. 

But  I  have  reason  for  sighing,  madam  ;  which  you 
have  not — Such  a  mother !  A  mother  that  I  wanted 
to  be  good,  not  so  much  to  me,  as  to  herself:  a  mo- 
ther so  unhappy,  that  one  must  be  glad  to  run  away 
from  her.  My  poor  papa !  so  good  as  he  was  to 
every-body,  and  even  to  her,  yet  had  his  heart 
broken — O  madam  !  (flinging  her  arms  about  me, 
and  hiding  her  face  in  my  bosom)  have  1  not  cause 
to  sigh  ? 

I  was  greatly  moved  :  so  dutifully  sensible  of  her 
calamity  !  ami  for  such  a  calamity,  who  would  not? 

Such  a  disgrace  too !  said  she,  raising  her  head. 
Poor  woman  ! — Yet  sht  has  the  worst  of  it.  Do  you 
think  that  that  is  not  enough  to  make  one  sigh  ? 


50  THE    HISTORY   OF 

Amiable  goodness !  (kissing  her  cheek)  I  shall 
love  you  too  well. 

You  are  too  good  to  me :  you  must  not  be  so  good 
to  me :  that,  even  that  will  make  me  sigh.  My  guar- 
dians goodness  to  me  gives  me  pain  ;  and  I  think 
verily,  I  sigh  more  since  last  I  left  Mrs.  Lane,  and 
have  seen  more  of  his  goodness,  and  how  every  body 
admires,  and  owns  obligation  to,  him,  than  I  did  be- 
fore.— To  have  a  stranger,  as  one  may  say,  and  so 
very  fine  a  gentleman,  to  be  so  good  to  one,  and  to 
have  such  an  unhappy  mother,  who  gives  Am  so  much 
trouble— how  can  one  help  sighing  for  both  reasons? 

Dear  girl !  said  I,  my  heart  overflowing  with 
compassion  for  her,  you  and  I  are  bound  equallj , 
by  the  tie  of  gratitude,  to  esteem  him. 

Ah,  madam,  you  will  one  day  be  the  happiest  of 
all  women — and.  so  you  deserve  to  be.  ^ 

What  means  my  Emily  ? 

Don't  I  see,  don't  I  hear,  what  is  designed  to  be 
brought  about  by  Lord  and  Lady  L.  and  Miss  Gran- 
dison?  And  don't  I  hear  from  my  Anne,  what  every- 
body expects  and  wishes  for  ? 

Axvdidoes  everybody  expect  and  wish, my  Emily — 

I  stopped.  She  went  on. — And  don't  I  see  that 
my  guardian  himself  loves  you  ? 

Do  you  think  so,  Emily  ? 

O  how  he  dwells  upon  your  words  when  you 
speak  ! 

You  fancy  so,  my  dear. 

You  have  not  observed  his  eyes  so  much  as  I  have 
done,  when  he  is  in  your  company.  I  have  watched 
your  eyes,  too  ;  but  have  not  seen  that  you  mind 
him  quite  so  much  as  he  does  j^ou — Indeed  he  loves 
you  dearly.— And  then  she  sighed  again. 

But  why  that  sigh,  my  Emily  ?  Were  I  so  happy 
as  you  think,  in  the  esteem  of  this  good  man,  would 
you  envy  me,  my  dear? 
5 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  51 

Envy  you  ! — I,  such  a  simple  girl  as  I,  envy  you  ? 
No,  indeed.  Why  should  I  envy  you  ?  But  tell  me 
now ;  dear  madam,  tell  me ;  Don't  you  love  my 
guardian  ? 

Every-body  does.     You,  my  Emily,  love  him. 

And  so  1  do  :  but  you  love  him,  madam,  with  a 
hope  that  no  one  else  will  have  reason  to  entertain — 
Dear,  now  place  a  little  confidence  in  your  Emily  : 
my  guardian  shall  never  know  it  from  me,  by  the 
least  hint.  I  beg  you  will  own  it.  You  can't  think 
how  you  will  oblige  me.  Your  confidence  in  me 
will  give  me  importance  with  myself. 

Will  you,  Emily,  be  as  frank-hearted  with  me,  as 
you  would  have  me  be  with  you  ? 

Indeed  I  will.  • 

I  do,  my  dear,  greatly  esteem  your  guardian. 

Esteem !  Is  that  the  word  ?  Is  that  the  ladies' 
word  for  love?  And  is  not  the  word  love  a  pretty 
word  for  women  ?  I  mean  no  harm  by  it,  I  am  sure. 

And  I  am  sure  you  cannot  mean  harm  :  I  will  be 
sincere  with  my  Emily.  But  you  must  not  let  any 
one  living  know  what  I  say  to  you  of  this  nature.  I 
would  prefer  your  guardian,  my  dear,  to  a  king,  in 
all  his  glory. 

And  so,  madam,  would  I,  if  I  were  you.  I  should 
be  glad  to  be  thought  like  you  in  every  thing. 

Amiable  innocence  !  But  tell  me,  Miss  Jervois, 
Would  you  not  have  me  esteem  your  guardian  ? 
You  know  he  was  my  guardian  too,  and  that  at  an 
exigence  when  I  most  wanted  one. 

Indeed  I  would.  Would  you  have  me  wish  such 
a  good  young  lady  as  Miss  Byron  to  be  ungrateful  ? 
No,  indeed. — And  again  she  sighed. 

Why  then  sighed  my  Emily?  You  said  you  would 
be  frank -hearted. 

So  I  will,  madam.  But  I  really  can't  tell  why  I 
sighed  then.  I  wish  my  guardian  to  be  the  happiest 
f2 


52  THE   HISTORY  OF 

man  in  the  world:  I  wish  you,  madam,  to  be  the 
happiest  woman :  and  how  can  either  be  so,  but  in 
one  another? — But  I  am  grieved,  I  believe,  that  there 
seems  to  be  something  in  the  way  of  your  mutual 
happiness — 1  don't  know  whether  that  is  all,  neither 
— I  don't  know  what  it  is — If  I  did,  I  would  tell 
you — But  I  have  such  throbs  sometimes  at  my  heart, 
as  make  me  fetch  my  breath  hard — I  don't  know 
what  it  is — Such  a  weight  here,  as  makes  me  sigh  ; 
and  I  have  a  pleasure,  I  think,  because  I  have  an 
ease  in  sighing — What  can  it  be? — 

Go  on,  my  dear :  you  are  a  pretty  describer. 

Why  now,  if  any-body,  as  Anne  did  last  time  my 
guardian  came  hither,  were  to  run  up  stairs,  in  an 
hurry ;  and  to  say  Miss,  miss,  miss,  your  guardian 
is  come !  I  should  be  in  such  a  flutter — my  heart 
would  seem  to  be  too  big  for  my  bosom.  1  should 
sit  down  as  much  out  of  breath,  as  if  1  had  run  down 
a  high  hill. — And,  for  half  an  hour,  may  be,  so  trem- 
ble, that  I  should  not  be  able  to  see  the  dear  guar- 
dian that  perhaps  I  had  wanted  to  see.  And  to  hear 
him  with  a  voice  of  gentleness,  as  if  he  pitied  me  for 
having  so  unhappy  a  mother,  call  me  his  Emily.— 
Don't  you  think  he  has  a  sweet  voice? — And  your 
voice,  too,  madam,  is  also  so  sweet — Every  body  says, 
that  even  in  your  common  speech  your  voice  is  me- 
lody.— Now  Anne  says — 

0  my  agreeable  little  flatterer! 

1  don't  flatter,  madam.  Don't  call  me  a  flatterer. 
I  am  a  very  sincere  girl :  indeed  1  am. 

I  dare  say  you  are;  but  you  raise  my  vanity,  my 
dear.  It  is  not  your  fault  to  tell  me  what  people  say 
of  me;  but  it  is  mine  io  be  proud  of  their  commend- 
ations— But  you  were  going  to  tell  me  what  Anne 
says,  on  your  being  so  much  affected,  when  she  tells 
you  in  a  hurry  that  your  guardian  is  come  ? 

Why  Anne  says,  that  all  those  are  signs  of  love. 


SIR  CHARLES  ORANDISON.  53 

Foolish  creature! — And  yet  so  they  may:  but  riot  of 
such  love  as  she  means — Such  a  love  as  she  as  good 
as  owns  she  had  in  her  days  o£  Jlutteration,  as  she 
whimsically  calls  them ;  which,  as  she  explains  it, 
were  when  she  was  two  or  three  years  older  than  I 
am.  In  the  first  place,  I  am  very  young,  you  know, 
madam ;  a  mere  girl :  and  such  a  simple  thing ! — I 
never  had  a  mother,  nor  sister  neither ;  nor  a  com- 
panion of  my  own  sex. — Mrs.  Lane's  daughters, 
what  were  they  ?  They  looked  upon  me  as  a  child, 
as  I  was.  In  the  next  place,  I  do  love  my  guardian, 
that's  true ;  but  with  as  much  reverence,  as  if  he 
were  my  father.  I  never  had  a  thought  that  had  not 
that  deep,  that  profound  reverence  for  him,  as  I  re- 
member I  had  for  my  father. 

But  you  had  not,  my  dear,  any  of  those  flutters, 
those  throbs,  that  you  spoke  of,  on  any  returns  of 
your  father,  after  little  absences  i 

Why,  no ;  I  can't  say  I  had.  Nor,  though  I  al- 
ways rejoiced  when  my  guardian  came  to  see  me  at 
Mrs.  Lane's,  had  I,  as  I  remember,  any  such  violent 
emotions  as  I  have  had  of  late.  I  don't  know  how 
it  is — Can  you  tell  me  ? 

Do  you  not,  Lucy,  both  love  and  pity  this  sweet 
girl  ?      . 

My  dear  Emily, — These  nre  symptoms,  I  doubt — 

Symptoms  of  what,  madam? — Pray  tell  me  sin- 
cerely. I  wish  not  to  hide  a  thought  of  my  heart 
from  you. 

If  encouraged,  my  dear — 

What  then,  madam  ? — 

It  would  be  love,  I  doubt. — That  sort  of  love  that 
would  make  you  uneasy — 

No ;  that  cannot  be,  surely.  Why,  madam,  at 
that  rate,  I  should  never  dare  to  stand  in  your  pre- 
sence. Upon  my  word,  I  wish  no.  one  in  tlie  world, 
f3 


54  THE    HISTORY   OF 

but  you,  to  be  Lady  Grandison.  I  have  but  one 
fear. 

And  what's  that  ? 

That  my  guardian  won't  love  me  so  well,  when 
he  marries,  as  he  does  now. 

Are  you  afraid  that  the  woman  he  marries  will  en- 
deavour to  narrow  so  large  a  heart  as  his? 

No  :  not  if  that  woman  were  you. — But,  forgive 
my  folly!  (and  she  looked  down)  he  would  not  take 
my  hand  so  kindly  as  now  he  does:  he  would  not 
look  in  my  face  with  pleasure,  and  with  pity  on  my 
mother's  account,  as  he  does  now  :  he  would  not  call 
me  hh  Emily:  he  would  not  bespeak  every  one's  re- 
gard for  his  ward. 

My  dear,  you  are  now  almost  a  woman.  He  will, 
if  he  remains  a  single  man,  soon  draw  back  into  his 
heart  that  kindness  and  love  for  you,  which,  while 
you  are  a  girl,  he  suffers  to  dwell  upon  his  lips.  You 
must  expect  this  change  of  behaviour  soon,  from  his 
prudence.  You,  yourself,  my  love,  will  set  him  the 
example:  you  will  grow  more  reserved  in  your  out- 
ward behaviour,  than  hitherto  there  was  reason  to 
be. 

O,  madam!  never  tell  me  that!  I  should  break  my 
heart,  were  I  twenty,  and  he  did  not  treat  me  with 
the  tenderness  that  he  has  always  treated  me  with. 
If,  indeed,  he  find  me  an  incroacher:  if  he  find 
me  forward,  and  indiscreet,  and  troublesome ;  then 
let  him  call  me  awy-body's  Emily,  rather  than  Jm. 

You  will  have  different  notions,  my  dear,  before 
that  time — 

Then,  I  think,  I  shan't  desire  to  live  to  see  the 
time.  Why,  madam,  all  the  comfort  I  have  to  set 
against  my  unhappiness  from  my  mother,  is,  that  so 
good,  so  virtuous,  and  so  prudent  a  man  as  Sir  Charles 
Grandison,  calls  me  his  Emily,  and  loves  me  as  his 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISOX.  53 

child.  Would  you,  madam,  were  you  Lady  Gran- 
dison  (now,  tell  me,  would  you)  grudge  me  these 
instances  of  his  favour  and  affection  ? 

Indeed,  my  dear,  I  would  not:  if  I  know  my  own 
heart,  I  would  not. 

And  would  you  permit  me  to  live  with  you? — 
Now  it  is  out — Will  you  permit  me  to  live  with  my 
guardian  and  you? — This  is  a  question  1  wanted  to 
put  to  you ;  but  was  both  ashamed  and  afraid,  till 
you  thus  kindly  emboldened  me. 

Indeed  I  would,  if  your  guardian  had  no  objec- 
tion. 

That  don't  satisfy  me,  madam.  Would  you  be 
my  earnest,  my  sincere  advocate,  and  plead  for  me? 
He  would  not  deny  you  any  thing.  And  would  you 
(come,  madam,  I  will  put  you  to  it)  would  you  say, 
'  Look  you  here.  Sir  Charles  Grandison  ;  this  girl, 
this  Emily,  is  a  good  sort  cf  girl :  she  has  a  great 
fortune.  Snares  may  be  laid  for  her ;  she  has  no 
papa  but  you:  she  has,  poor  thing!  [I  hope  you 
would  call  me  by  names  of  pity  to  move  him]  '  no 
mamma ;  or  is  more  unhappy  than  if  she  had  none. 
Where  can  you  dispose  of  her  so  properly,  as  to  let 
her  be  with  us  ?  I  will  be  her  protectress,  her  friend, 
her  manmia;'  [Yes,  do,  madam,  let  me  choose  a 
mamma!  Don't  let  the  poor  girl  be  without  a  mam- 
ma, if  ^ow  can  give  her  one.  1  am  sure  1  will  study 
to  give  you  pleasure,  and  not  pain] — <  I  insist  upon 
it,  Sir  Charles,  it  will  make  the  poor  girl's  heart 
easy.  She  is  told  of  the  arts  and  tricks  of  men, 
where  girls  have  great  fortunes ;  and  she  is  always 
in  dread  about  them,  and  about  her  unhappy  mother. 
Who  will  form  plots  against  her,  if  she  is  with  us?' 
— Dear,  dear  madam!  you  are  movedin  my  favour— 
[Who,  Lucy,  could  have  forborn  being  affected  by 
her  tender  prattle  ?]  She  threw  her  arms  about  me ; 
I  see  you  are  moved  ia  my  favour! — And  I  will  be 


56  THE    HISTORY   OF 

your  attendant :  I  will  be  your  waiting-maid  ;  I  wi 
help  to  adorn  you,  and  to  make  you  more  and  mor 
lovely  in  the  eyes  of  my  guardian. 

I  could  not  bear  this — No  more,  no  more,  my 
lovely  girl,  my  innocent,  my  generous,  my  irresistible 
girl ! — Were  it  come  to  that,  [it  became  me  to  be 
unreserved,  for  more  reasons  than  one,  to  this  sweet 
child] — not  one  request  should. my  Emily  make, 
that  in  heart  and  mind  I  would  not  comply  with : 
not  one  wish  that  I  would  not  endeavour  to  promote 
and  accomplish  for  her. 

I  folded  her  to  my  heart,  as  she  hung  about  my 
neck. 

I  grieve  you — 1  would  not,  for  the  world,  grieve 
my  young  mamma,  said  she — Henceforth  let  me  call 
you  my  mamma. — Mamma,  as  1  have  heard  the  word 
explained,  is  a  more  tender  name  even  than  mother 
— The  unhappy  Mrs.  Jervois  shall  be  Mrs.  O'Hara, 
if  she  pleases,  and  only  mother:  a  child  must  not  re- 
nounce her  mother,  though  the  mother  should  re- 
nounce, or  worse  than  renounce,  her  child. 

I  must  leave  you,  Emily. 

Say  then  my  Emily. 

I  must  leave  you,  my  and  more  than  my  Emily— 
You  have  cured  me  of  sleepiness  for  this  night! 
■    O  then  I  am  sorry. 

No,  don't  be  sorry.  You  have  given  me  pain,  'tis 
true ;  but  I  think  it  is  the  sweetest  pain  that  ever 
entered  into  a  human  heart.  Such  goodness!  such 
innocence !  such  generosity !  — I  thank  God,  my  love, 
that  there  is  in  my  knowledge  so  worthy  a  young 
heart  as  yours. 

Now,  how  good  this  is!  (and  again  she  wrapped 
her  arms  about  me)  And  will  you  go? 

I  must,  I  must,  my  dear! — I  can  stay  no  longer. — 
But  take  this  assurance,  that  my  Emily  shall  have  a 
first  place  in  my  heart  for  ever.     I  will  study  to  pro- 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDTSON.  57 

mote  your  happiness ;  and  your  wishes  shall  be  the 
leaders  of  mine. 

Then  1  am  sure  I  shall  live  with  my  guardian  and 
you  for  ever,  as  I  may  say :  and  God  grant,  and  down 
on  her  knees  she  dropped,  with  her  arms  wrapped 
about  mine,  that  you  may  be  the  happiest  of  women, 
and  that  soon,  for  my  sake,  as  well  as  your  own,  in 
marriage  with  the  best  of  men,  my  guardian !  (ex- 
ultingly,  said  she):  and  say,  Amen — Do,  God  bless 
you,  madam,  say  Amen  to  my  prayer. 

I  struggled  from  her. — O  my  sweet  girl !  I  cannot* 
bear  you! — 1  hastened  out  at  the  door,  to  go  to  my 
chamber. 

You  are  not  angry,  madam  ?  following  me,  and 
taking  my  hand,  and  kissing  it  with  eagerness.  Say 
you  are  not  displeased  with  me.  1  will  not  leave 
you  till  you  do. 

Angrj'!  my  love!  who  can  be  angry?  How  you 
have  distressed  me  by  your  sweet  goodness  of  heart ! 

Thank  God,  I  have  not  offended  you.  And  now 
say  once  more  my  Emily — Say,  Good  rest  to  you,  my 
Emily — my  love — and  all  those  tender  names — and 
say,  God  bless  you,  my  child,  as  if  you  were  my 
mamma;  and  1  will  leave  you,  and  1  shall  in  fancy 
go  to  sleep  with  angels. 

Angels  only  are  fit  company  for  my  Emily — God 
bless  my  Emily!  Good  night!  Be  your  slumbers 
happy ! 

I  kissed  her  once,  twice,  thrice,  with  fervor;  and 
away  she  tript :  but  stopt  at  the  door,  courtesying 
low,  as  1  delighted,  yet  painfully  delighted,  looked 
after  her. 

Ruminating,  in  my  retirement,  on  all  the  dear  girl 
had  said,  and  on  what  might  be  my  fate ;  so  many 
difterent  thoughts  came  into  my  head,  that  1  could 
not  close  my  eyes:  I  tlierefore  arose  before  day;  and 


58  THE  HISTORY  OF 

while  my  thoughts  were  agitated  with  the  affecting 
subject,  had  recourse  to  my  pen. 

Do,  my  Lucy,  and  do  you,  my  grandmamma,  my 
aunt,  my  uncle,  more  than  give  me  leave,  bid  me, 
command  me,  if  it  shall  be  proposed,  to  bring  down 
with  me  my  Emily :  and  yet  she  shall  not  come,  if 
you  don't  all  promise  to  love  her  as  well  as  you  do 
Your  for  ever  obliged 

HARRIET  BYRON. 


LETTER  Vin. 

MISS    BYRON    TO    MISS    SELBY. 

Monday,  March  20. 
The  active,  the  restless  goodness,  of  this  Sir  Charles 
Grandison,  absolutely  dazzles  me,  Lucy! 

The  good  Dr.  Bartlett  has  obliged  us  all  with  the 
sight  of  two  letters,  which  give  an  account  of  what 
he  has  done  for  Lord  W.  his  uncle.  He  has  been 
more  than  a  father  to  his  uncle:  does  not  that  sound 
strange  ?  But  he  is  to  be  the  obligor  of  every  body. 

The  doctor  said,  that  since  Miss  Grandison  had 
claimed  the  benefit  of  her  brother's  permission  for 
him  to  use  his  own  discretion  in  communicating  to 
us  such  of  the  letters  as  he  was  favoured  with  by  Sir 
Charles,  he  believed  he  could  not  more  unexception- 
ably  oblige  Lord  L.  and  the  sisters,  than  by  reading 
to  them  those  two  letters,  as  they  were  a  kind  of 
family  subject. 

After  the  doctor  had  done  reading,  he  withdrew 
to  his  closet.  I  stole  up  after  him,  and  obtained  his 
leave  to  transmit  them  to  you. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  59 

Lucy,  be  careful  of  them,  and  return  them  when 
perused. 

There  is  no  such  thing  as  pointing  out  particular 
passages  of  generosity,  justice,  prudence,  disinter- 
estedness, beneficence,  that  strike  one  in  those 
letters,  without  transcribing  every  paragraph  in 
them.  And  ah,  Lucy!  there  are  other  observations 
to  be  made  :  mortifying  ones,  I  fear. 

Only  let  me  say,  that  I  think,  if  Sir  Charles 
Grandison  could  and  would  tender  himself  to  my 
acceptance,  I  ought  to  decline  his  hand.  Do  you 
think,  if  1  were  his,  I  should  not  live  in  continual 
dread  of  a  separation  from  him,  even  by  that  inevi- 
table stroke  which,  alone,  could  be  the  means  of 
completing  his  existence  ? 


LETTER  IX. 

SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON  TO  DR.  BARTLETT. 

Saturday  night,  March  18. 
As  soon  as  I  had  seen  Mrs.  Jervois  to  her  chair,  I 
went  to  attend  Lord  W. 

He  received  me  with  great  expressions  of  esteem 
and  affection. 

He  commanded  his  attendants  to  withdraw,  and 
told  me,  taking  my  hand,  that  my  character  rose 
upon  him  from  every  mouth.  He  was  in  love  with 
me,  he  said.     I  was  my  mother's  son. 

He  commended  me  for  my  oeconomy,  and  com- 
plimented into  generosity  the  justice  I  had  done  to 
some  of  my  Jriends. 

I  frankly  own,  said  he,  that  at  your  first  arrival 
and  even  till  now  (that  I  am  determined  to  be  the 
man  you,    cousin,   would  wish  me  to  be)    I   had 


60  THE    HISTORY   OF 

thought  it  but  prudent  to  hold  back :  for  I  imagined, 
that  your  father  had  lived  at  such  a  rate,  that  you 
would  have  applied  to  me,  to  extricate  you  from  dif- 
ficulties; and  particularly,  for  money,  to  marry  your 
eldest  sister,  at  least.  1  took  notice,  young  man, 
proceeded  he,  and  I  heard  others  observe,  that  you 
had  not  eyes  to  see  any  of  your  father's  faults ;  either 
when  he  was  living,  or  departed;  and  this  gave  me 
reason  to  apprehend,  that  you  had  your  father's  ex- 
travagant turn :  and  I  was  resolved,  if  1  were  applied 
to,  to  xorap  nii/self  close  about  in  a  general  deniaL 
Else,  all  I  had  been  gathering  together  for  so  many 
years  past,  might  soon  have  been  dissipated ;  and  £ 
sliould  only  have  taken  a  thorn  out  of  the  foot  of 
another,  and  put  it  into  my  own. 

And  then  he  threw  out  some  disagreeable  reflec- 
tions on  my  father's  spirit. 

■  To  those  I  answered,  that  every  man  had  a  right 
to  judge  for  himself,  in  those  articles  for  which  he 
himself  is  only  accountable.  My  father,  and  your 
lordship,  continued  I,  had  very  different  ways  of 
thinking.  Magnificence  was  his  taste :  prudence  (so 
your  lordship  must  account  it)  is  yours.  There  are 
people  in  the  world,  who  would  give  different  names 

to  both  tastes  :  but  would  not  your  lordship  think  it 
very  presumptuous  in  any  man  to  arraign  you  at  the 

bar  of  his  judgment,  as  mistaken  in  the  measures  of 

your  prudence  ? 

Look  you,  nephew,  I  don't  well  know  what  to 

make  of  your  speech ;  but  I  judge  that  you  mean 

not  to  affront  me. 

I  do  not,  my  lord.    While  you  were  apprehensive, 

that  you  raiglit  be  a  sufferer  by  me,  you  acted  with 

your  usual  prudence  to  discourage  an  application. 

My  father  had,  in  your  lordship's  judgment,  but  one 

fault ;  and  he  was  the  principal  sufferer  by  it  himself: 

had  he  looked  into  his  affairs,  he  would  have  avoid- 


sin  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  61 

ed  the  necessity  of  doing  several  things  that  were 
disagreeable  to  him,  and  must  ever  be,  to  a  man  of 
spirit.  His  very  timber,  that  required,  as  I  may 
say,  the  a\,  would  have  furnished  him  with  all  he 
wanted :  and  he  paid  interest  for  a  less  sum  of 
money  than  actually  was  in  the  hands  of  his  stew- 
ards, unaccounted  for. 

But  what  a  glory  to  you,  cousin — 

No  compliment  to  me,  my  lord,  I  pray  you,  to 
the  discredit  of  my  father's  memory.  He  had  a  right 
to  do  what  he  did.  Your  lordship  does  what  you 
think  fit.  I  too,  now  I  am  my  own  master,  do  as  I 
please.  My  taste  is  different  from  both.  I  pursue 
mine,  as  he  did  his.  If  I  should  happen  to  be  more 
right  than  my  father  in  some  things,  he  might  have 
the  advantage  of  me  in  others ;  and  in  those  I  happen 
to  do,  that  are  generally  thought  laudable,  what  merit 
have  1  ?  Since  all  this  time  (directed  by  a  natural 
bias)  I  am  pursuing  my  own  predominant  passion ; 
and  that,  perhaps,  with  as  much  ardor,  and  as  little 
power  to  resist  it,  as  my  father  had  to  restrain  his. 

Bravo !  bravo  !  said  my  lord — Let  me  ask  you, 
nephew — May  all  young  men,  if  they  will,  improve 
by  travelling,  as  you  have  done  ? — If  they  may,  by 
my  troth,  nine  parts  in  ten  of  those  who  go  abroad, 
ought  to  be  hanged  up  at  their  fatiiers  doors  on  their 
return. 

Very  severe,  my  lord.  But  thinking  minds  will 
be  thoughtful,  whether  abroad  or  at  home :  unthink- 
ing ones  call  for  our  pity. 

Well,  Sir,  I  do  assure  you,  that  I  am  proud  of  my 
nephew,  whatever  you  are  of  your  uncle:  and  there 
are  two  or  three  things  that  I  want  to  talk  to  you 
about ;  and  one  or  two  that  I  would  consult  you 
upon. 

He  rang,  and  asked,  what  time  dinner  would  be 
ready  ? 

G 


62  THE    HISTORY    OF 

In  half  an  hour  was  the  answer. 

Mrs.  Giffard  came  in.  Her  face  glowed  with  pas- 
sion. My  lord  seemed  affected  at  her  entrance.  It 
was  easy  to  see,  that  they  were  upon  ill  terms  with 
each  other;  and  that  my  lord  was  more  afraid  of  her, 
than  she  was  of  him. 

She  endeavoured  to  assume  a  complaisant  air  to 
me ;  but  it  was  so  visibly  struggled  for,  that  it  sat 
very  awkwardly  on  her  countenance ;  and  her  lips 
trembled  when  she  broke  silence,  to  ask  officiously, 
as  she  did,  after  the  health  of  my  sister  Charlotte. 

I  would  be  alone  with  my  nephew,  said  my  lord, 
in  a  passionate  tone. 

You  shall  be  alone,  my  lord,  impertinently  replied 
she,  with  an  air  that  looked  as  if  they  had  quarrelled 
more  than  once  before,  and  that  she  had  made  itf  up 
on  her  own  terms.  She  pulled  the  door  after  her 
with  a  rudeness  that  he  only  could  take,  and  deserve, 
who  was  conscious  of  having  degraded  himself. 

Foolish  woman  !  Why  came  she  in  when  I  was 
there,  except  to  shew  her  supposed  consequence,  at 
the  expence  of  his  honour  ?  She  knew  my  opinion 
of  her.  She  would,  by  a  third  hand,  once  have  made 
overtures  to  me  of  her  interest  with  my  lord  ;  but  I 
should  have  thought  meanly  of  myself,  had  I  not, 
with  disdain,  rejected  the  tender  of  her  services. 

A  damn'd  woman,  said  my  lord;  but  looked  first, 
as  if  he  would  be  sure  she  was  out  of  hearing. 

This  woman,  nephew,  and  her  behaviour,  is  one 
of  the  subjects  I  wanted  to  consult  you  upon. 

Defer  this  subject,  my  lord,  till  you  have  recover- 
ed your  temper.  You  did  not  design  to  begin  with 
it.     You  are  discomposed. 

And  so  I  am :  and  he  puffed  and  panted,  as  if  out 
of  breath.  * 

I  asked  him  some  indifferent  questions  :  to  have 
followed  him  upon  the  subject  at  that  time,  whatever 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  63 

resolutions  he  had  taken,  they  would  probably  have 
gone  ofF,  when  the  passion  to  which  they  would  have 
owed  their  vigour,  had  subsided. 

When  he  had  answered  them,  his  colour  and  his 
wrath  went  down  together. 

He  then  ran  out  into  my  praises  again,  and  par- 
ticularly, for  my  behaviour  to  Mrs.  Oldham ;  who, 
he  said,  lived  now  very  happily,  and  very  exempla- 
rily ;  and  never  opened  her  lips,  when  she  was  led 
to  mention  me,  but  with  blessings  heaped  upon  me. 

That  woman,  my  lord,  said  I,  was  once  good.  A 
recovery,  where  a  person  is  not  totally  abandoned,  is 
more  to  be  hoped  for,  than  the  reformation  of  one 
who  never  was  well-principled.  All  that  is  wished 
for,  in  the  latter,  is,  that  she  may  be  made  unhurtful. 
Her  highest  good  was  never  more  than  harmlessness. 
She  that  was  once  good,  cannot  be  easy,  when  she  is 
in  a  state  of  true  penitence,  till  she  is  restored  to 
that  from  which  she  was  induced  to  depart. 

You  understand  these  matters,  cousin  :  I  don't. 
But  if  you' will  favour  me  with  more  of  your  com- 
pany, I  shall,  I  believe,  bethebetter  for  your  notions. 
But  I  must  talk  about  this  woman,  nephew.  I  am 
calm  now.  I  must  talk  of  this  woman,  now — I  am 
resolved  to  part  with  her  ;  I  can  bear  her  no  longer. 
Did  you  not  mind  how  she  pulled  the  door  after 
her,  though  you  were  present  ? 

I  did,  my  lord.  But  it  was  plain,  that  something 
disagreeable  had  passed  before ;  or  she  could  not  so 
totally  have  forgotten  herself.  But,  my  lord,  we  will 
postpone  this  subject,  if  you  please.  If  you  your- 
self lead  to  it  after  dinner,  I  will  attend  to  it  with 
all  my  heart. 

Well,  then,  be  it  so.  But  now  tell  me,  Have  you, 
nephew,  any  thoughts  of  marriage? 

I  have  great  honour  for  the  state,  and  hope  to  be 
one  day  happy  in  it. 

g2 


6't  THE  HISTORY  OF 

Well  said — -And  are  you  at  liberty,  kinsman,  to 
receive  a  proposal  of  that  nature  ? 

And  then,  without  waiting  for  my  answer,  he 
proposed  Lady  Frances  N.  and  said,  he  had  been 
spoken  to  on  that  subject. 

Lady  Frances,  answered  I,  is  a  very  deserving 
young  lady.  My  father  set  on  foot  a  treaty  witli 
her  family :  but  it  has  long  been  broken  off :  it  can- 
not be  resumed. 

Well,  what  think  you  of  Lady  Anne  S.?  I  am  told, 
that  she  is  hkely  to  be  the  lady.  She  has  a  noble  for- 
tune. Your  sisters,  I  hear,  are  friends  to  Lady  Anne. 

My  sisters  wish  me  happily  married.  I  have  such 
an  opinion  of  both  those  ladies,  that  it  woulil  give 
me  some  little  pain,  to  imagine  each  would  not,  in 
her  turn,  refuse  me,  were  I  offered  to  her,  as  1  can- 
not, myself,  make  the  offer.  I  cannot  bear,  my  lord, 
to  think  of  returning  slight  for  respect,  to  my  ovon 
sex  :  but  as  to  ladies ;  how  can  we  expect  that  de- 
licacy and  dignity  from  them,  which  are  the  bulwarks 
of  their  virtue,  if  we  do  not  treat  them  with  dignity? 

Charming  notions !  If  you  had  them  not  abroad, 
you  had  them  from  your  mother :  she  was  all  that 
was  excellent  in  woman. 

Indeed  she  was.  Excellent  woman !  She  is  always 
before  my  eyes. 

And  excellent  kinsman  too  !  Now  I  know  your 
reverence  for  your  mother,  I  will  allow  of  all  you 
say  of  your  father,  because  I  see  it  is  all  from  prin- 
ciple. I  have  known  some  men  who  have  spoken 
with  reverence  of  their  mothers,  to  give  themselves 
dignity  ;  that  is  to  say,  for  bringing  creatures  so 
important  as  themselves  into  the  world ;  and  who 
have  exacted  respect  to  the  good  old  women,  who 
were  merely  good  old  women,  as  we  call  them,  in 
order  to  take  the  incense  offered  the  parent,  into 
their  own  nostrils.     This  was  duty  in  parade. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  65 

The  observation,  my  good  Dr.  Bartlett,  I  thought 
above  my  Lord  W.  I  think  I  have  heard  one  Hke 
it,  made  by  my  father,  who  saw  very  far  into  men  ; 
but  was  sometimes  led,  by  his  wit,  into  saying  a  se- 
vere thing :  and  yet,  whenever  I  hear  a  man  praised 
highly  for  the  performance  of  common  duties ;  as  for 
being  a  good  husband,  a  good  son,  or  a  kind  father ; 
though  each  is  comparatively  praise-worthy,  I  con- 
clude, that  there  is  nothing  extraordinary  to  be  said 
of  him.  To  call  a  man  a  good  friend,  is  indeed 
comprising  all  the  duties  in  one  word :  for  friendship  _ 
is  the  balm,  as  well  as  seasoning,  of  life :  and  a  man 
cannot  be  defective  in  amj  of  the  social  duties,  who  is 
capable  of  it,  when  the  term  is  rightly  understood. 

Well,  cousin,  since  you  cannot  think  of  either  of 
those  ladies,  how  should  you  like  the  rich  and  beau- 
tiful Countess  of  R.?  You  know  what  an  excellent 
character  she  bears. 

I  do.  But,  my  lord,  I  should  not  choose  to  marry 
a  widow :  and  yet,  generally,  I  do  not  disrespect 
widows,  nor  imagine  those  men  to  blame  who 
marry  them.  But  as  my  circumstances  are  not 
unhappy,  and  as  riches  will  never  be  my  principal 
inducement  in  the  choice  of  a  wife,  I  may  be  al- 
lowed to  indulge  my  peculiarities ;  especially  as  I 
shall  hope  (and  I  should  not  deserve  a  good  wife 
if  I  did  not)  that,  when  once  married,  1  shall  be 
married  for  my  whole  life. 

The  countess  once  declared,  said  my  lord,  before 
half  a  score  in  company,  two  of  them  her  particular 
admirers,  that  she  never  would  marry  any  man  in 
the  world,  except  he  were  just  such  another,  in 
mind  and  manners,  as  Sir  Charles  Grandison. 

Ladies,  my  lord,  who  in  absence  speak  favourably 
of  a  man  who  forms  not  pretensions  upon  them,  nor 
is  likely  to  be  troublesome  to  them,  would  soon  con- 
<i  3 


66  THE   HISTORY   OF 

vince  that  man  of  his  mistake,  were  his  presumption 
to  rise  upon  their  declared  good  opinion  of  him. 

I  wonder,  proceeded  my  lord,  that  every  young 
man  is  not  good.  I  have  heard  you,  cousin,  praised 
in  all  the  circles  where  you  have  been  mentioned. 
It  was  certainly  an  advantage  to  you  to  come  back 
to  us  a  stranger,  as  I  may  say.  Many  youthful  follies 
may  perhaps  be  over-passed,  that  we  shall  never 
know  any  thing  of:  but,  be  that  as  it  will,  I  can  tell 
you,  sir,  that  1  have  heard  such  praises  of  you,  as 
have  made  my  eyes  glisten,  because  of  my  relation  to 
you.  I  was  told,  within  this  month  past,  that  no 
fewer  than  five  ladies,  out  of  one  circle,  declared, 
that  they  would  stand  out  by  consent,  and  let  you 
pick  and  choose  a  wife  from  among  them. 

What  your  lordship  has  heard  of  this  nature,  let 
me  say,  without  affecting  to  disclaim  a  compliment 
apparently  too  high  for  my  merits,  is  much  more  to 
the  honour  of  the  one  sex  than  of  the  other.  I  should 
be  glad,  that  poUcy,  if  not  principle  (principle  might 
take  root,  and  grow  from  it)  would  mend  us  men. 

So  should  I,  nephew :  but  I  [poor  man  I  he  hung 
down  his  head !]  have  not  been  a  better  man  than  1 
ought  to  be.  Do  you  not  despise  me.  in  your  heart, 
cousin  ? — You  nmst  have  heard — That  cursed  wo- 
man— But  I  begin  to  repent !  And  the  truly  good,  I 
believe,  cannot  be  either  censorious  or  uncharita- 
ble.    Tell  me,  however,  Do  you  not  despise  me  ? 

Despise  my  mother's  brother!  No,  my  lord.  Yet 
were  a  sovereign  to  warrant  my  freedom,  and  there 
were  a  likelihood  that  he  would  be  the  better  for  it; 
I  would,  with  decency,  tell  him  my  whole  mind.  I 
am  sorry  to  say  it :  but  your  lordship,  if  you  have 
not  had  virtue  to  make  you  worthy  of  being  imitated, 
have  too  many  examples  among  the  great,  as  well  as 
among  the  middling,  to  cause  you  to  be  censured  for 


SIR  CHARLES   GRANDISON".  67 

$in(rularity.  But  your  lordship  adds,  to  a  confession 
tliat  is  not  an  ungenerous  one,  that  you  begin  to 
repent. 

Indeed  I  do.  And  your  character,  cousin,  has 
made  me  half-ashamed  of  myself. 
■  1  am  not  accustomed,  my  lord,  to  harangue  on 
these  subjects  to  men  who  know  their  duty ;  but  let 
me  say,  that  your  lordship's  good  resolutions,  to  be 
efficacious,  must  be  built  upon  a  better  foundation 
than  occasional  disgust  or  disobligation.  But  here, 
again,  we  are  verging  to  a  subject  that  we  are  both 
agreed  to  defer  till  after  dinner. 

I  am  charmed  with  your  treatment  of  me,  cousin. 
I  shall,  for  my  own  sake,  adore  my  sister's  son.  Had 
I  consulted  my  chaplain,  who  is  a  good  man  too,  he 
would  have  too  roughly  treated  me. 

Divines,  my  lord,  must  do  their  duty. 

He  then  introduced  the  affair  between  Sir  Har- 
grave  Pollexfen  and  me,  of  which,  I  found,  he  was 
more  particularly  informed,  than  I  could  have  ima- 
gined-: and  after  he  had  launched  out  upon  that,  and 
upon  my  refusal  of  a  duel,  he,  by  a  transition  that  was 
very  natural,  mentioned  the  rescuedlac/i/,  as  he  called 
her.  I  have  heard,  cousin,  said  he,  that  she  is  the 
most  beautiful  woman  in  England. 

I  think  her  so,  my  lord,  replied  I ;  and  she  has 
one  excellence,  that  I  never  before  met  with  in  a 
beauty :  she  is  not  proud  of  it. 

I  then  gave  my  opinion  of  Miss  Byron  in  such 
terms,  as  njade  my  lord  challenge  me,  as  my  sisters 
once  did,  on  the  warmth  of  my  description  and 
praises  of  her. 

4.nd  does  your  lordship  think,  that  I  cannot  do 
justice  to  the  merits  of  such  a  lady  as  Miss  Byron, 
but  with  an  interested  view  ?  I  do  assure  you,  that 
what  1  have  said,  is  short  of  what  I  think  of  her. 
But  I  can  praise  a  lady  without  meaning  a  compli< 


68  THE   HISTORY   OF 

ment  to  myself.  I  look  upon  it,  however,  as  one  o? 
the  most  fortunate  accidents  of  my  life,  that  I  have 
been  able  to  serve  her,  and  save  her  from  a  forced 
marriage  with  a  man  whom  she  disliked,  and  who 
could  not  deserve  her.  There  is  hardly  any  thing 
gives  me  more  pain,  than  when  I  see  a  worthy  wo- 
man very  unequally  yoked,  if  her  own  choice  has  not 
been  at  first  consulted ;  and  who  yet,  though  deeply 
sensible  of  her  misfortune,  irreproachably  supports 
her  part  of  the  yoke. 

You  are  a  great  friend  to  the  sex,  kinsman. 
I  am.  I  think  the  man  who  is  not,  must  have 
fallen  into  bad  company ;  and  deserves  not  to  have 
been  favoured  with  better.  Yet,  to  unwomanly 
faults,  to  want  of  morals,  and  even  to  want  of  deli- 
cacy, no  man  is  iiiore  quick-sighted. 

I  don't  know  how  it  is ;  but  I  have  not,  at  this 
rate,  fallen  into  the  best  company :  but  perhaps  it  is 
for  want  of  that  delicacy,  in  my  own  mind,  which 
you  are  speaking  of. 

Were  we  men,  my  lord,  to  value  women  (and 
to  let  it  be  known  that  we  do)  for  those  qualities 
which  are  principally  valuable  in  the  sex  ;  the  less 
estimable,  if  they  would  not  be  reformed,  would 
shrink  out  of  our  company,  into  company  more  suit- 
able to  their  taste;  and  we  should  never  want  objects 
worthy  of  our  knowledge,  and  even  of  our  admira- 
tion, to  associate  with.  There  is  a  kind  of  magnetism 
in  goodness.  Bad  people  will  indeed  find  out  bad 
people,  to  accompany  with,  in  order  to  keep  one 
another  in  countenance ;  but  they  are  bound  toge- 
ther by  a  rope  of  sand;  while  trust,  confidence,  love, 
sympathy,  twist  a  cord,  by  a  reciprocation  of  bene- 
ficent offices,  which  ties  good  men  to  good  men,  and 
cannot  be  easily  broken. 

I  have  never  had  these  notions,  cousin ;  and  yet 
they  are  good  ones.   I  took  people  as  I  found  them ; 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  69 

and,  to  own  the  truth,  meaning  to  serve  myself,  ra- 
ther than  any  body  else;  I  never  took  pains  to  look 
out  for  worthy  attachments.  The  people  I  had  to 
do  with,  had  the  same  views  upon  me,  as  I  had  upon 
them;  and  thus  I  went  on  in  a  state  of  hostility  with 
all  men ;  mistrusting  and  guarding,  as  well  as  I  could, 
and  not  doubting  that  every  man  I  had  to  do  with 
would  impose  upon  me,  if  I  placed  a  confidence  in 
him. — But  as  to  this  Miss  Byron,  nephew,  1  shall 
never  rest  till  I  see  her — Pray,  what  is  her  fortune? 
They  tell  me,  it  is  not  above  15,0001. — What  is  that 
to  the  offers  you  have  had  made  you  ? 

Just  then  we  were  told,  dinner  was  on  the  table. 

I  am  wishing  for  an  inclination  to  rest :  but  it  flies 
me.  The  last  letter  from  Beauchamp,  dated  from 
Bologna,  as  well  as  those  from  the  bishop,  afflict 
me.  Why  have  I  such  a  feeUng  heart  ?  Were  the 
unhappy  situation  of  affairs  there  owing  to  my  own 
enterprising  spirit,  I  should  deserve  the  pain  it  gives 
me.  But  I  should  be  too  happy,  had  I  not  these 
mthout-door  perplexities,  as  I  may  call  them,  to  tor- 
ment me.  Thank  God  that  they  arise  not  from 
toithin,  though  they  make  themselves  too  easy  a 
passage  to  my  heart ! 

My  paper  is  written  out.  If  I  am  likely  to  find  a 
drowsy  moment,  I  shall  welcome  its  approacli ;  if 
not,  1  will  rise,  and  continue  my  subject. 


LETTER  X. 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON  TO  DR,  BARTLETT. 

Sunday,  March  19. 
I  HAVE  had  two  happy  hours  of  forgetfulness ;  I 
could  not,  thougli  I  tried  for  it,  prevail  for  more : 
and  I  will  continue  my  subject. 


70  THE    HISTOKY    OF 

After  dinner,  every  attendant  being  dismissed, 
my  lord,  making  me  first  see  that  nobody  was  lis- 
tening in  the  passages,  began  as  follows  : 

I  am  determined,  nephew,  to  part  with  this  Gif- 
fard.  She  is  the  plague  of  my  life,  I  would  have 
done  it  half  a  year  ago,  on  an  occasion  that  I  will 
not  mention  to  you,  because  you  would  despise  me, 
if  I  did,  for  my  weakness  :  and  now  she  wants  to 
bring  in  upon  me  a  sister  of  hers,  and  her  husband, 
and  to  part  with  two  other  worthy  folks,  that  I  know 
love  me ;  but  of  whom,  for  that  reason,  she  is  jea- 
lous ;  and  then  they  would  divide  me  among  them : 
for  this  man  and  his  wife  have  six  children ;  all  of 
whom,  of  late,  make  an  appearance  that  cannot  be 
honestly  supported. 

And  have  you  any  difficulty,  my  lord,  in  parting 
with  her,  but  what  arises  from  your  own  want  of  re- 
solution ? 

The  most  insolent  devil  that  ever  was  about  a  man 
at  one  time,  and  the  most  whining  at  another.  Don't 
despise  me,  nephew,  you  know  I  have  taken  her  as 
— You  know  what  I  mean— • 
1  understand  you,  my  lord. 
But  say,  you  don't  despise  me,  Sir  Charles  Gran- 
dison.     As  I  hope  to  live,  I  am  half  afraid  of  you. 

My  pity,  my  lord,  where  1  see  compunction,  is 
stronger  than  my  censure. 

That  is  well  said — Now  I  agreed  with  this  woman, 
in  a  weak  moment,  and  she  has  held  me  to  it,  to  give 
her  an  annuity  of  1501.  for  life;  which  was  to  be 
made  up  2501.  if  I  parted  with  her,  without  her  con- 
sent ;  and  here  we  have  been  for  several  months, 
plaguing  one  another,  whether  I  shall  turn  her 
out  of  the  house,  or  she  will  leave  me  ;  for  she 
has  told  me,  that  she  will  not  stay,  unless  I  take  in 
her  sister  and  brother ;  yet  will  not  go,  because  she 
will  then  have  no  more  than  the  1501  a  year:  and 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON,  71 

that  is  too  much  for  her  deserts  for  these  two  years 
past. 

Your  lordship  sees  the  inconveniences  of  this  way 
of  life ;  and  I  need  not  mention  to  you,  how  much 
happier  that  state  is,  which  binds  a  man  and  woman 
togethet  by  interest,  as  well  as  by  affection,  if  dis- 
cretion be  not  forgotten  in  the  choice.  But  let  me 
express  ray  surprise,  that  your  lordship,  who  has  so 
ample  an  estate,  and  no  child,  should  seem  to  value 
your  peace  of  mind  at  so  low  a  rate  as  lOOl.  a  year. 

I  will  not  let  her  go  away  with  such  a  triumph. 
She  has  not  deserved  from  me — 

Pray,  my  lord,  was  she  of  reputation  when  you 
took  her  ? 

She  was  a  widow — 

But  was  her  character  tolerable  in  the  eye  of  the 
world  ?  She  might  be  a  greater  object  of  pity  for 
being  a  widow. 

My  gouty  disorders  made  me  want  a  woman  about 
me.     I  hated  fellows — 

Well,  my  lord,  this  regards  your  motive.  But 
have  you  any  previous  or  later  incontinence  to 
charge  her  with  ? 

I  can't  say  I  have.  Her  cursed  temper  would 
frighten,  rather  than  invite,  lovers.  I  heard  it  was 
no  good  one ;  but  it  broke  out  not  to  me,  till  within 
these  two  years. 

Your  lordship,  surely,  must  not  dispute  the  mat- 
ter with  her.  If  you  are  determined  to  part  with  her, 
give  her  the  2.501.  a  year,  and  let  her  go. 

To  reward  a  cursed  woman  for  misbehaviour ! — I 
cannot  do  it. 

Give  me  leave  to  say,  that  your  lordship  has  de- 
served some  punishment :  give  her  the  annuity,  not 
as  a  reward  to  her,  but  as  a  punishment  to  yourself. 

You  hurt  my  sore  place,  nephew. 

Consider,  my  lord,  that  2501.  a  year  for  life,  or 


72  THE    HISTORY   OP 

even  for  ever,  is  a  poor  price,  for  the  reputation  of  a 
woman  with  whom  a  man  of  your  quality  and  fortune 
condescended  to  enter  into  treaty.  Every  quarterly 
payment  must  strike  her  to  the  heart,  if  she  live  to 
have  compunction  seize  her,  when  she  thinks  that 
she  is  receiving,  for  subsistence,  the  wages  of  her 
shame.  Be  that  her  punishment.  You  intimate, 
that  she  has  so  behaved  herself,  that  she  has  but  few 
friends  :  part  with  her,  without  giving  her  cause  of 
complaint,  that  may  engage  pity  for  her,  if  not  friends, 
at  your  expence.  A  woman  who  has  lost  her  repu- 
tation, will  not  be  regardful  oi yours.  Suppose  she 
sue  you  for  non-performance  of  covenants :  would 
your  lordship  appear  to  such  a  prosecution  ?  You 
cannot  be  capable  of  pleading  your  privilege  on  a 
prosecution  that  would  otherwise  go  against  you. 
You  cannot  be  in  earnest  to  part  with  this  woman, 
she  cannot  have  offended  you  beyond  forgiveness, 
if  you  scruple  1001.  a  year  to  get  rid  of  her. 

He  fervently  swore,  that  he  was  in  earnest ;  and 
added,  I  am  resolved,  nephew,  to  marry,  and  live 
honest. 

He  looked  at  me,  as  if  he  expected  I  should  be 
surprised. 

I  believe  1  could  not  change  countenance,  on  such 
a  hint  as  this.  You  have  come  to  a  good  resolution, 
my  lord ;  and  if  you  marry  a  prudent  woman,  your 
lordship  will  find  the  difference  in  your  own  reflec- 
tions, as  well  as  in  your  reputation  and  interest. 
And  shall  the  difference  of  lOOl.  a  year — Don't  let 
me  say,  that  I  am  ashamed  for  my  Lord  W. 

I  knew  that  you  would  despise  me.  Sir  Charles. 

I  know  that  1  should  despise  myself,  were  I  not  to 
deal  freely  with  your  lordship  in  this  respect-  In- 
deed, my  lord,  you  have  not  had  so  good  reason 
(forgive  me !)  to  think  hardly  of  my  father's  spirit, 
as  you  had  to  correct  your  own. 


SIR  CHARLES   GRANBtSON.  73 

I  cannot  bear  this,  nephew.  He  looked  displeased. 

You  must  not  be  angry,  my  lord.  I  will  not  bear 
anger  from  any  man  breathing,  and  keep  him  com- 
pany, who,  consulting  me,  shall  be  displeased  with 
me  for  speaking  my  mind  with  freedom  and  sin- 
cerity. 

What  a  man  am  I  talking  to  ! — Well,  rid  me  of 
this  torment!  [you  have  spirit,  nephew;  and  no- 
body can  reproach  you  with  acting  contrary  to  your 
own  principles]  and  I  will  for  ever  love  you.  But 
talk  to  her :  I  hardly  dare.  She  whimpers  and  sobs, 
and  threatens  by  turns,  and  I  cannot  bare  it. — Once 
she  was  going  to  tie  herself  up — Would  to  God  I 
had  not  prevented  her — And  then  (O  my  folly !)  we 
went  on  again. 

My  good  Dr.  Bartlett,  I  was  ashamed  of  my  un- 
cle. But  you  see  what  an  artful,  as  well  as  insolent 
woman,  this  is.  What  folli/  is  there  in  wickedness  ! 
Folly  encounters  with  folly,  or  how  could  it  succeed 
so  often  as  it  does  ? — Yet  my  mother's  brother  to 
wish  he  had  suffered  a  creature  with  whom  he  had 
been  familiar,  to  destroy  herself!  I  could  hardly 
bear  him.  Only  that  I  thought  it  would  be  serving 
both  wretches,  and  giving  both  a  chance  for  repent- 
ance ;  or  I  should  not  have  kept  my  seat — But  we 
see  in  my  mother,  and  in  her  brother,  how  habitual 
wickedness  debases,  and  how  habitual  goodness  ex- 
alts the  human  mind.  In  their  youth  they  were 
supposed  nearer  an  equality  in  their  understandings 
and  attainments,  than  in  their  maturity,  when  occa- 
sion called  out  into  action  their  respective  talents. 
Bui  perhaps  the  brother  was  not  the  better  man  for 
the  uninterrupted  prosperity  that  attended  him,  and 
for  having  never  met  with  check  or  controul ; 
whereas  the  most  happily  married  woman  in  the 
world  must  have  a  will  to  which  she  must  sometimes 
resign  her  own.     What  a  glory  to  a  good  woman 

VOL.  XI,  H 


74  THE   HISTORY  OF 

must  it  be,  who  can  not  only  resign  her  will,  but 
make  so  happy  an  use  of  her  resignation,  as  my  mo- 
ther did. 

My  lord  repeated  his  request,  that  I  would  talk 
with  the  woman  ;  and  that  directly. 

I  withdrew,  and  sent  for  her  accordingly. 

She  came  to  me  out  of  breath  with  passion  ;  and, 
as  I  thought,  partly  with  apprehension  for  what  her 
own  behaviour  might  be  before  me. 

I  see,  Mrs.  Giftard,  said  I,  that  you  are  in  great 
emotion.  I  am  desired  to  talk  with  you ;  a  task  I  am 
not  very  fond  of:  but  you  will  find  nothing  but  civi- 
lity, such  as  is  due  to  you  for  your  sex's  sake,  from 
me.  Calm  therefore  your  mind :  1  will  see  you  again 
in  a  few  moments. 

I  took  a  turn,  and  soon  came  back.  Her  face 
looked  not  quite  so  bloated ;  and  she  burst  into  tears. 
She  began  to  make  a  merit  of  her  services;  her  care; 
her  honesty;  and  then  inveighed  against  my  lord  for 
the  narrowness  of  his  spirit.  She  paid  some  comjili- 
ments  to  me;  and  talked  of  being  ashamed  to  appear 
before  me  as  a  guilty  creature ;  introductory  to  what 
she  was  prepared  to  say  of  her  sacrifices,  the  loss  of 
her  good  name,  and  the  like ;  on  which,  with  respect 
to  my  lord,  and  his  ingratitude  to  her,  as  she  called 
it,  she  laid  great  stress. 

I  am  never  displeased,  my  dear  friend,  with  the 
testimony  which  the  most  profligate  women  bear  to 
the  honour  of  virtue,  when  they  come  to  set  a  value 
upon  their  departure  from  it. 

You  have  it  not  to  say,  Mrs.  Giffard,  that  my 
lord  betfayed,  seduced,  or  deceived  you.  I  say  not 
this  so  much  for  reproach,  as  for  justice-sake ;  and 
not  to  suffer  you  to  deceive  yourself,  and  to  load  him 
with  greater  faults  than  he  has  been  guilty  of  You 
were  your  own  mistress:  you  had  no  father,  mother, 
husband,  to  question  you,  or  to  be  offended  with 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  75 

you.  You  knew  your  duty.  You  were  treated  with 
as  a  sole  and  independent  person.  One  hundred  and 
fifty  pounds  a  year,  Mrs.  GifFard,  though  a  small 
price  for  the  virtue  of  a  good  woman,  which  is  in- 
deed above  all  price,  is,  nevertheless,  greatly  above 
the  price  of  common  service.  I  never  seek  to  pal- 
liate faults  of  a  flagrant  nature ;  though  it  is  not  my 
meaning  to  affront,  a  woman  especially,  and  one  who 
supposes  herself  in  distress.  You  must  knoiv,  ma- 
dam, the  frail  tenure  by  which  you  were  likely  to 
hold :  you  stipulated,  therefore,  for  a  provision,  ac- 
cordingly. The  woman  who  never  hoped  to  be  a 
wife,  can  have  no  hardship,  to  take  the  stipulation, 
and  once  more  give  herself  the  opportunity  to  re- 
cover her  lost  fame.  This  independence  my  lord  is 
desirous  to  give  you — 

What  independence,  Sir  ? 

One  hundred  and  fifty — 

Two  hundred  and  fifty.  Sir,  if  you  please — If  my 
lord  thinks  fit  to  dismiss  me. 

My  lord  has  told  me,  that  that  was  indeed  the 
stipulation  ;  but  he  pleads  misbehaviour. 

I  was  willing  to  make  a  little  difficulty  of  the 
lOOl.  a  year,  though  I  thought  my  lord  ought  not — 
And  as  to  misbehaviour.  Dr.  Dartlett,  I  hardly  know 
how  to  punish  a  woman  for  that,  to  her  keeper. 
Does  she  not  first  misbehave  to  herself,  and  to  the 
laws  of  God  and  man  ?  And  ought  a  man,  that  brings 
her  to  violate  her  first  duties,  to  expect  from  her  a 
regard  to  a  mere  discretionary  obligation  ?  I  would 
have  all  these  moralists,  as  they  affect  to  call  them- 
selves, suffer  by  such  libertine  principles  as  cannot 
be  pursued,  but  in  violation  of  the  very  first  laws  of 
morality. 

Misbehaviour  !  Sir.  He  makes  this  plea  to  cover 
his  own  baseness  of  heart.  I  never  misbehaved,  as 
he  calls  it,  till  I  saw — 

H  2 


76  THE  HISTORY  OF 

Well,  madam,  this  may  lead  to  a  debate  that  can 
answer  no  end.  I  presume,  )'ou  are  as  willing  to 
leave  my  lord,  as  he  is  to  part  with  you.  It  must 
be  a  wretchedness  beyond  what  I  can  well  imagine, 
to  live  a  life  of  guilt  (1  must  not  palliate  in  this 
case)  and  yet  of  hatred  and  animosity,  with  the 
person  who  is  a  partaker  in  that  guilt. 

I  am  put  upon  a  very  unequal  task,  Sir,  to  talk 
with  you  on  this  subject.  My  lord  will  not  refuse 
to  see  me,  I  hope.     I  know  what  to  say  to  him. 

He  has  requested  me  to  talk  with  you,  madam. 
As  I  told  you,  I  am  not  fond  of  the  task.  We  have 
all  our  faults.  God  knows  what  he  will  pardon, 
and  what  he  will  punish.  His  pardon,  however,  in 
a  great  measure  depends  upon  yourself.  You  have 
health  and  time,  to  all  appearance,  before  you : 
your  future  life  may  be  a  life  of  penitence.  I  am  no 
divine,  madam ;  I  would  not  be  thought  to  preach  to 
you  •  but  you  have  now  a  prospect  opened  of  future 
happiness,  through  your  mutual  misunderstandings, 
that  you  never  otherwise  might  have  had.  And  let 
me  make  an  observation  to  you ;  That  where  hatred 
or  dislike  have  once  taken  place  of  liking,  the  first 
separation  in  such  a  case  as  this,  is  always  the  best. 
Affection  or  esteem  between  man  and  woman,  once 
forfeited,  hardly  ever  is  recovered.  Tell  me  truth — 
Don't  you  as  heartily  dislike  my  lord,  as  he  does  you? 

I  do,  Sir He  is 

I  will  not  hear  vohat  he  is,  from  the  mouth  of  de- 
clared prejudice.  He  has  his  faults.  One  .great  fault 
is,  that  in  which  you  have  been  joint  partakers — 
But  if  you  might,  would  you  choose  to  live  togie- 
ther  to  be  torments  to  each  other  ? 

1  can  torment  him  more  than  he  can  me — 
Diabolical  temper ! — Woman  !  (and  I  stood  up, 
^nd  looked  sternly)  can  you  forget  to  whom  you 
gay  this — and  o/^whom — Is  not  I-iord  W.  my  uncle  ? 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  77 

This  (as  I  intended  it  should)  startled  her.  She 
asked  my  pardon. 

What  a  fine  hand,  proceeded  I,  has  a  peer  of  the 
realm  made  of  it !  to  have  this  said  of  him,  and  per- 
haps, had  you  been  in  his  presence,  to  him,  by  a 
woman  whose  courage  is  founded  in  his  weakness  ? 
Let  me  tell  you,  madam 

She  held  up  her  clasped  hands — For  God's  sake, 
forgive  me,  Sir !  and  stand  my  friend. 

A  hundred  and  fifty  pounds  a  year,  madam,  is  rich 
payment  for  ani/  consideration  that  a  woman  could 
give,  who  has  more  spirit  than  virtue.  Had  you 
kept  that,  madam,  you  would,  though  the  daughter 
of  cottagers,  have  been  superior  to  the  greatest  man 
on  earth,  who  wanted  to  corrupt  you. — But  thus  far, 
and  as  a  punishment  to  my  lord  for  his  wilful  weak- 
ness, I  will  be  your  friend — Retire  from  my  lord : 
you  shall  have  250/.  a  year :  and  as  you  were  not 
brought  up  to  the  expectation  of  one  half  of  the  for- 
tune, bestow  the  hundred  a  year,  that  was  in  debate, 
upon  young  creatures  of  your  sex,  as  an  encourage- 
ment to  them  to  preserve  that  chastity,  which  you, 
with  your  eyes  open,  gave  up  ;  and,  with  the  rest, 
live  a  life  suitable  to  that  disposition ;  and  then,  as 
my  fellow-creature,  I  will  wish  you  happy. 

She  begged  leave  to  withdraw :  she  could  not, 
she  said,  stand  in  my  presence. 

I  had,  indeed,  spoken  with  warmth.  She  with- 
drew, trembling,  courtesying,  mortified :  and  I  re- 
turned to  my  lord. 

He  was  very  earnest  to  hear  my  report.  I  again 
put  it  to  him.  Whether  he  adherea  to  his  resolution 
of  parting  with  his  woman  ?  He  declared  in  the  af- 
firmative with  greater  earnestness  than  before ;  and 
begged  to  know,  if  I  could  manage  it  that  she  should 
go,  and  that  without  seeing  him  ?  I  cannot  bear  to 
see  her,  said  he. 

H  3 


78  THE    HISTORY   OF 

Bravoes  of  the  law,  cowards  and  cullies  to  their 
paramours,  are  these  keepers,  generally.  I  have 
ever  suspected  the  courage  (to  magnanimity  they 
must  be  strangers)  of  men  who  can  defy  the  laws 
of  society.  I  pitied  him :  and  believing  that  it  would, 
not  be  difficult  to  manage  this  heroine,  who  had 
made  her  weak  lord  afraid  of  her ;  I  said,  Have  you 
a  mind,  my  lord,  that  she  shall  quit  the  house  this 
night,  and  before  I  leave  it  ?  If  you  have,  I  think  I 
can  undertake  that  she  shall. 

And  can  you  do  this  for  me?  If  you  can,  you 
shall  be  my  great  Apollo.  That  will,  indeed,  make 
me  happy :  for  the  moment  you  are  gone,  she  will 
force  herself  into  my  presence,  and  will  throw  the 
gout,  perhaps,  into  my  stomach.  She  reproaches  me, 
as  if  she  had  been  an  innocent  woman,  and  I  the 
most  ungrateful  of  men.  For  God's  sake,  nephew, 
release  me  from  her,  and  I  shall  be  happy.  I  would 
have  left  her  behind  me  in  the  country,  proceeded 
he  ;  but  she  would  come  with  me.  She  was  afraid 
that  I  would  appeal  to  you :  she  stands  in  awe  of 
nobody  else.  You  will  be  my  guardian  angel,  if 
you  will  rid  me  of  this  plague. 

Well,  then,  my  lord,  you  will  leave  it  to  me  to 
do  the  best  I  can  with  her:  but  it  cannot  be  the 
best  on  your  side,  for  your  honour's  sake,  if  we  do 
her  not  that  justice  that  the  law  would,  or  ought  to 
do  her.  In  a  word,  my  lord,  you  must  forgive  me 
for  saying,  that  you  shall  not  resume  that  dignity 
to  distress  this  woman,  which  you  laid  aside,  when 
jou  entered  into  treaty  with  her. 

Well,  well,  I  refer  myself  to  your  management : 
only  this  100/.  a  year — Once  again,  I  say,  it  would 
hurt  me  to  reward  a  woman  for  plaguing  me :  and 
150/.  a  year  is  two-thirds  more  than  ever  she,  or  any 
^f  her  family,  were  intitled  to. 

"jPhe  worst  and  meanest  are  intitled  to  justice,  my 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  79 

lord ;  and  I  hope  your  lordship  will  not  refuse  to 
perform  engagements  that  you  entered  into  with 
your  eyes  open  :  you  must  noty  if  i  take  any  con- 
cern in  this  affair. 

Just  then  the  woman  sent  in,  to  beg  the  favour 
of  an  audience,  as  she  called  it,  of  me. 

She  addressed  me  in  terms  above  her  education. 
There  is  something,  said  she,  in  your  countenance, 
Sir,  so  terrible,  and  yet  so  sweet,  that  one  must  fear 
your  anger,  and  yet  hope  for  your  forgiveness,  when 
one  has  offended.  I  was  too  free  in  speaking  of  my 
lord  to  his  nephew — And  then  she  made  a  compli- 
ment to  my  character,  and  told  me,  she  would  be 
determined  by  my  pleasure,  be  it  what  it  would. 

How  seldom  are  violent  spirits,  true  spirits ! 
When  over-awed,  how  tame  are  they,  generally,  in 
their  submission !  Yet  this  woman  was  not  without 
art  in  hers.  She  saw,  that,  displeased  as  she  ap- 
prehended I  was  with  her,  I  had  given  her  hopes  of 
the  payment  of  the  hundred  pounds  a  year  penalty; 
and  this  made  her  so  acquiescent. 

I  was  indeed  displeased  with  you,  Mrs.  Giffard ; 
and  could  not,  from  what  you  said,  but  conclude  in 
your  disfavour,  in  justification  of  my  lord's  com- 
plaints against  you. 

Will  you  give  me  leave.  Sir,  to  lay  before  you  the 
true  state  of  every  thing  between  my  lord  and  me  ? 
Indeed,  Sir,  you  don't  know 

When  two  persons,  who  have  lived  in  familiarity, 
differ,  the  fault  is  seldom  wholly  on  one  side :  but 
thus  far  I  judge  between  you,  and  desire  not  to  hear 
particulars :  the  man  who  dispenses  with  a  ki.own 
duty,  in  such'a  case  as  this  before  us,  must  render 
himself  despicable  in  the  eyes  of  the  very  person 
whom  he  raises  into  consequence  by  sinking  his  own. 
Chastity  is  the  crown  and  glory  of  a  woman.  The 
^Obt  pro^igate  of  men  love  modesty  in  the  sex, 


80  THE    HISTORY   OF 

at  the  very  time  they  are  forming  plots  to  destroy 
it  in  a  particular  object.  When  a  woman  has  sub- 
mitted to  put  a  price  upon  her  honour,  she  must  ap- 
pear, at  times,  despicable  in  the  eyes  even  of  her 
seducer ;  and  when  these  two  break  out  into  ani- 
mosity, ought  either  to  wish  to  live  with  the  other? 

Indeed,  indeed,  Sir,  I  am  struck  with  remorse :  I 
see  my  error.  And  she  put  her  handkerchief  to  her 
eyes,  and  seemed  to  weep. 

I  proceeded;  You,  Mrs.  Giffard,  doubted  the  con- 
tinuance of  my  lord's  passion :  you  made  your  terms, 
therefore,  and  proposed  a  penalty  besides.  My  lord 
submitted  to  the  terms,  and  by  that  means  secured 
his  right  of  dismissing  you,  at  his  pleasure  ;  the  only 
conveniency  that  a  man  dishonouring  himself  by 
despising  marriage,  can  think  he  has.  Between 
him  and  you,  what  remains  to  be  said  (though  you 
are  both  answerable  at  a  tribunal  higher  than  your 
own)  but  that  you  should  have  separated  long  ago? 
Yet  you  would  not  consent  to  it :  you  would  not 
leave  him  at  liberty  to  assert  the  right  he  had  re- 
served to  himself.  Strange  weakness  in  him,  that 
he  would  suffer  that  to  depend  upon  you ! — But  one 
weakness  is  the  parent  of  another. 

She  then  visibly  wept. 

You  found  it  out,  that  you  could  torment  your  lord 
in  a  higher  degree  than  he  could  torment  you;  and 
how,  acting  upon  such  principles,  you  have  lived  to- 
gether for  some  time  past,  yon  have  let  every  one  see. 

She,  on  her  knees,  besought  my  pardon  for  the 
freedom  of  that  expression ; — not  from  motives  of 
contrition,  as  I  apprehend ;  but  from  those  of  policy. 

She  was  strong  enough  to  raise  herself,  without 
my  assistance.  She  did,  unbidden,  on  seeing  me  step 
backward  a  pace  or  two,  to  give  her  an  opportunity 
to  do  so ;  and  looked  very  silly  ;  and  the  more,  for 
having  missed  my  assisting  hand  :  by  which  I  sup- 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  81 

posed  that  she  had  usually  better  success  with  my 
lord,  whenever  she  had  prevailed  on  herself  to  kneel 
to  him. 

It  is  easy,  my  good  Dr.  Bartlett,  from  small  era- 
vices,  to  discover  day  in  an  artful  woman's  heart. 
Nothing  can  be  weaker,  in  the  eye  of  an  observer, 
who  himself  disdains  artifice,  than  a  woman  who 
makes  artifice  her  study.  In  a  departure  from  honest 
nature,  there  will  be  such  curvings,  as  that  the  eyes, 
the  countenance,  will  generally  betray  the  heart : 
and  if  she  either  breaks  out  into  uncalled  for  apolo- 
gies, or  affects  undue  reserve,  she  gives  room  to  con- 
firm the  suspicion,  that  all  is  not  right  in  her  mind. 

I  excuse  you,  Mrs.  Giflard,  said  1 ;  my  lord  has 
deservedly  brought  much  of  what  has  distressed 
him,  upon  himself:  but  now  it  is  best  for  you  to 
part.  My  lord  chooses  not  to  see  you.  I  would 
advise  you  to  remove  this  very  afternoon. 

What,  t^ir,  and  not  have  my  250/.  a  year ! 

Will  you  leave  the  house  this  night,  if  I  give  you 
my  word — 

For  the  whole  sum,  Sir  ? — Two  hundred  and  fifty 
pounds  a  year,  Sir? 

Yes,  for  the  whole  sua. 

I  will,  Sir,  with  all  my  heart  and  soul.  Most  of 
my  things  are  in  the  country.  My  lord  came  up  in 
a  passion,  to  talk  with  you.  Sir.  Two  or  three  band- 
boxes are  all  I  have  here.  Mr  Halden  (he  is  my 
lord's  favourite)  shall  go  down,  and  see  I  take  no- 
thing but  my  own — 1  will  trust  to  your  word  of 
honour.  Sir — and  leave,  for  ever,  the  most  un- 
grateful— 

Hush,  Mrs.  GifFard,  these  tears  are  tears  of  pas- 
sion. There  is  not  a  fen)ale  feature,  at  this  instant, 
in  your  face — [What  a  command  of  countenance  ! 
It  cleared  up  in  a  moment.    I  expected  it  from  her] 


82  THE    HISTORY   OF 

t, 

A  penitent  spirit  is  an  humble,  a  broken  spirit :  you 
shew,  at  present,  no  sign  of  it. 

She  dropt  me  a  courtesy,  with  such  an  air  (though 
not  designed,  I  beheve)  as  shewed  that  the  benefit 
she  was  to  reap  from  the  advice,  would  not  be  sud- 
den, if  ever ;  and  immediately  repeated  her  ques- 
tion, if  she  had  my  honour  for  the  payment  of  the 
entire  sum — And  you  don't  insist.  Sir  (I  have  poor 
relations)  that  I  shall  pay  out  the  hundred  a  year, 
as  you  mentioned? 

You  are  to  do  with  the  whole  annuity  as  you 
please.  If  your  relations  are  worthy,  you  cannot  do 
better  than  to  relieve  their  necessities.  But  remem- 
ber, Mrs.  Giffard,  that  every  quarter  brings  you  the 
wages  of  iniquity,  and  endeavour  at  some  atonement. 

The  woman  could  too  well  bear  this  severity. 
Had  a  finger  been  sufficient  to  have  made  her  feel, 
I  would  not  have  laid  upon  her  the  weight  of  my 
whole  hand. 

She  assured  me,  that  she  would  leave  the  house 
in  two  hours  time.  I  returned  to  my  lord,  and  told 
him  so. 

He  arose  from  his  seat,  embraced  me,  and  called 
me  his  good  angel.  I  advised  him  to  give  his  orders 
to  Halden,  or  to  whom  he  thought  fit,  to  do  her  and 
himself  justice,  as  to  what  belonged  to  her  in  the 
country. 

But  the  terms  !  the  terms !  cried  my  lord.  If  you 
have  brought  me  off  for  150/.  I  will  adore  you. 

These  are  the  terms  (you  promised  to  leave  them 
to  me):  you  pay  no  more  than  150/.  a  year  for  her 
life,  till  you  assure  me,  upon  your  honour,  that  you 
cheerfully,  and  on  mature  consideration,  make  it 
up  250/. 

How  is  that !  How  is  that,  nephew  ? — Then  I 
never  shall  pay  more,  depend  upon  it. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  83 

Nor  will  I  ever  ask  you. 

He  rubbed  his  hands,  forgetting  the  gout ;  but 
was  remembered  by  the  pain,  and  cried  Oh! — 

But  how  did  you  manage  it? — I  never  should 
have  brought  her  to  any  thing — How  did  you  ma- 
nage it  ? 

Your  lordship  does  not  repent  her  going  ? 

He  swore,  that  it  was  the  happiest  event  that 
could  have  befallen  him.  I  hope,  said  he,  she  will 
go  without  wishing  to  see  me — Whether  she  would 
whine  or  curse,  it  would  be  impossible  for  me  to  see 
her,  and  be  myself. 

I  believe  she  will  go  without  desiring  to  see  you; 
perhaps  while  I  am  here. 

Thank  God !  a  fair  riddance !  Thank  God !  ■  ■ 
But  is  it  possible,  nephew,  that  you  could  bring  me 
off  for  150/.  a  year?  Tell  me  truly. 

It  is :  and  I  tell  your  lordship,  that  it  shall  cost 
you  no  more,  till  you  shall  know  how  to  value  the 
comfort  and  happiness  of  your  future  life  at  more 
than  100/.  a  year:  till  then,  the  respect  I  pay  to 
my  mother's  brother,  and  the  regard  I  have  for  his 
honour,  will  make  me  cheerfully  pay  the  100/.  a 
year  in  dispute,  out  of  my  own  pocket. 

He  looked  around  him,  his  head  turning  as  if  on 
a  pivot;  and  at  last,  bursting  out  into  tears  and 
speech  together — And  is  it  thus,  is  it  thus,  you  sub- 
due me?  is  it  thus  you  convince  me  of  my  shameful 
littleness  ?  I  cannot  bear  it :  all  that  this  woman  has 
done  to  me,  is  nothing  to  this.  I  can  neither  leave 
you,  nor  stay  in  your  presence.  Leave  me,  leave 
me,  for  six  minutes  only — Jesus !  how  shall  I  bear 
my  own  littleness  ? 

I  arose.  One  word,  only,  my  lord.  When  I  re- 
enter, say  not  a  syllable  more  on  this  subject :  let  it 
pass  as  I  put  it.  I  would  part  with  a  greater  sum 
than  a  hundred  a  year,  for  the  satisfaction  of  giving 


84  THE    HISTORY   OF 

to  my  uncle  the  tranquillity  he  has  so  long  wanted 
in  his  own  house,  rather  than  that  a  person  who  has 
had  a  dependence  upon  him,  should  think  herself 
intitled  to  complain  of  injustice  from  him. 

He  caught  my  hand,  and  would  have  met  it  with 
his  lips.  1  withdrew  it  hastily,  and  retired ;  leaving 
him  to  recollect  himself. 

When  I  returned,  he  thrust  into  my  hand  a  paper, 
and  held  it  there,  and  swore  that  1  should  take  it. 
If  the  wretch  live  ten  years,  nephew,  said  he,  that 
will  reimburse  you;  if  she  dies  sooner,  the  difference 
is  yours :  and,  for  God's  sake,  for  the  sake  of  your 
mother's  memory,  don't  despise  me  ;  that  is  all  the 
favour  I  ask  of  you ;  no  man  on  earth  was  ever  so 
nobly  overcome.  By  all  that's  good,  you  shall  chalk 
me  out  my  path.  Blessed  be  my  sister's  memory, 
for  giving  me  such  a  nephew !  The  name  of  Grandi- 
son,  chat  i  ever  disliked  till  now,  is  the  first  of  names: 
and  may  it  be  perpetuated  to  the  end  of  time ! 

He  held  the  paper  in  my  hand  till  he  had  done 
speaking.  I  then  opened  it,  and  found  it  to  be  a  bank 
note  of  1000^.  I  was  earnest  to  return  it ;  but  he 
swore  so  vehemently,  that  he  would  have  it  so,  that 
I  at  last  acquiesced ;  but  declared,  that  I  would  pay 
the  vohole  annuity,  as  far  as  the  sum  went ;  and  this, 
as  well  in  justice  to  him,  as  to  save  him  the  pain  of 
attending  to  an  affair  that  must  be  grievous  to  him: 
and  I  insisted  upon  giving  him  an  acknowledgment 
under  my  hand,  for  that  sum ;  and  to  be  accountable 
to  him  for  it,  as  his  banker  would,  in  the  like  case. 

And  thus  ended  this  affair.  The  woman  went  away 
before  me.  She  begged  the  favour,  at  the  door,  of 
one  word  with  me.  My  lord  started  up  at  her  voice: 
his  complexion  varied :  he  whipt  as  nimbly  behind 
the  door,  as  if  he  had  no  gout  in  his  foot.  1  will  not 
see  her,  said  he. 

I  stepped  out.     She  complimented,  thanked  me, 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  85 

and  wept ;  yet,  in  the  height  of  her  concern,  would 
have  uttered  bitter  things  against  my  lord :  but  I 
stopped  her  mouth,  by  telling  her,  that  I  was  to  be 
her  paymaster,  quarterly,  of  the  250/.  a  year;  and 
she  turned  her  execrations  against  her  lord,  into 
blessings  on  me :  but,  after  all,  departed  with  re- 
luctance. 

Pride,  and  not  tenderness,,  was  visibly  the  occa- 
sion. Could  she  have  secured  her  whole  annuity,  I 
have  no  doubt  but  she  would  have  gratified  that 
pride,  by  leaving  her  lord  in  triumph  while  she 
thought  her  departure  would  have  given  him  re- 
gret: but  to  be  dismissed,  was  a  disgrace  that  affected 
her,  and  gave  bitterness  to  her  insolent  spirit. 


LETTER  XI. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON    TO   DR.   BARTLETT. 
IN    CONTINUATION. 

My  lord,  though  he  had  acquitted  himself  on  the 
occasion  in  such  a  manner  as  darted  into  my  mind 
a  little  ray  of  my  beloved  mother's  spirit,  could  not 
forbear  giving  way  to  his  habitual  littleness,  when 
he  was  assured  Giffard  was  out  of  the  house.  He 
called  Halden  to  him,  who  entered  with  joy  in  his 
countenance,  arising  (as  it  came  out)  from  the  same 
occasion ;  and  ordered  him  to  make  all  his  domestics 
happy  on  his  deliverance,  as  he  meanly  called  it :  ask- 
ing. If  there  were  any  body  in  the  house  who  loved 
her  ?  Not  a  single  soul,  said  Halden;  and  I  am  sure, 
that  I  may  venture  to  congratulate  your  lordship, 
in  the  names  of  all  your  servants :  for  she  was  proud, 
imperious,  and  indeed  a  tyranness,  to  all  beneath  her. 
I 


86  THE   HISTORY   OF 

I  then,  for  the  first  time,  pitied  the  woman ;  and 
should  have  pitied  her  still  more  (true  as  this  might, 
in  some  measure,  be)  had  she  not  gone  away  so  am- 
ply rewarded :  for,  in  this  little  family  I  looked  for- 
ward to  the  family  of  the  state ;  the  sovereign  and 
his  ministers.  How  often  has  a  minister,  who  has 
made  a  tyrannical  use  of  power  (and  even  some  who 
have  not)  experienced,  on  his  dismission,  the  like 
treatment  from  those  who,  had  they  had  his  power, 
would  perhaps  have  made  as -bad  an  use  of  it;  who, 
in  its  plenitude,  were  fawning,  creeping  slaves,  as 
these  servants  might  be  to  this  mistress  of  their  lord ! 
We  read  but  of  one  grateful  Cromwell,  in  all  the 
superb  train  of  Wolsey,  when-  he  had  fallen  into 
disgrace  ;  and  yet  he  had  in  it  hundreds,  some  not 
ignobly  born,  and  all  of  them  less  meanly  descended 
than  their  magnificent  master. 

Halden  addressed  himself  to  me,  as  having  been 
the  means  of  making  his  lord,  and  his  whole  house- 
hold, happy.  Let  the  joy  be  moderate,  Halden, 
said  I :  the  poor  woman  might,  possibly,  have  num- 
bered among  her  well-wishers  (she  could  not  have 
disobliged  every  body)  some  of  those,  who  now  will 
be  most  forward  to  load  her  with  obloquy.  You 
must  not  make  her  too  considerable :  it  is  best  for 
my  lord,  as  well  as  for  those  who  loved  her  not,  to 
forget  there  ever  was  such  a  woman ;  except  to  avoid 
her  faults,  and  to  imitate  her  in  what  was  commend- 
able. She  boasts  of  her  honesty  and  management : 
my  lord  charges  her  not  with  infidelity  of  any  kind. 

Halden  bowed,  and  withdrew. 

My  lord  swore,  by  his  soul,  that  I  had  not  my 
good  name  for  nothing.  Blessed,  said  he,  be  the 
name  of  the  Grandisons !  This  last  plaudit  gratified 
my  pride  [I  need  not  tell  my  Dr.  Bartlett,  that  I 
have  pride] ;  the  more  gratified  it,  as  Lord  W.'s 
animosity  to  my  father  made  him  not  pleased  with 
his  name. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  87 

I  did  not  think,  when  my  lord  began  his  story  to 
me,  that  I  should  so  soon  have  brought  about  a  sepa- 
ration of  guilt  from  guilt:  but  their  mutual  disgusts 
had  prepared  the  way  ;  resentment  and  pride,  min- 
gled with  avarice  on  one  side,  and  self-interested- 
ness,  founded  (reasonably)  on  a  stipulation  made, 
and  not  complied  with,  on  the  other ;  were  all  that 
hindered  it  from  taking  place  as  from  themselves. 
A  mediator  had  nothing  then  to  do,  but  to  advise 
an  act  of  justice,  and  so  to  gild  it  by  a  precedent  of 
disinterestedness  in  himself,  as  should  excite  an 
emulation  in  a  proud  spirit,  which,  if  not  then, 
must,  when  passion  had  subsided,  tiave  arisen,  to 
make  all  end  as  it  ought. 

When  I  found  my  lord's  joy  a  little  moderated,  I 
drew  my  chair  near  him.  Well,  my  lord,  and  now 
as  to  your  hints  of  marriage — 

Blessed  God ! — Why,  nephew,  you  overUtrn  me 
with  your  generosity.  Are  you  not  my  next  of  kin  ? 
And  can  you  give  your  consent,  were  I  to  ask  it, 
that  I  should  marry  ? 

I  give  you  not  only  my  consent,  as  you  conde- 
scendingly phrase  it,  but  my  advice,  to  marry. 

Good  God !  /  could  not  in  the  like  case,  do  thus. 
But,  nephiew,  I  am  not  a  young  man. 

The  more  need  of  a  prudent,  a  discreet,  a  tender 
assistant.  Your  lordship  hinted,  that  you  liked  not 
men-servants  about  your  person,  in  your  illness. 
You  are  often  indisposed  with  the  gout:  servants  will 
not  always  be  servants,  when  they  find  themselves 
of  use.  Infirmity  requires  indulgence  :  in  the  very 
nature  of  the  word  and  thing,  indulgence  cannot 
exist  with  servility  •,  between  man  and  wife  it  may : 
the  same  interest  unites  them.  Mutual  confidence  ! 
who  can  enough  value  the  joy,  the  tranquillity  at 
least,  that  results  from  mutual  confidence  ?  A  man 
gives  his  own  consequence  to  the  woman  he  marries ; 
i2 


S8  THE    HISTOnY    OF 

and  he  sees  himself  respected  in  the  respect  paid 
her :  she  extends  his  dignity,  and  confirms  it.  There 
is  such  a  tenderness,  such  a  helpfulness,  such  a  sym- 
pathy in  suffering,  in  a  good  woman,  that  I  am  al- 
ways for  excusing  men  in  years,  who  marry  pru- 
dently ;  while  I  censure,  for  the  same  reason,  women 
in  years.  Male  nurses  are  unnatural  creatures! 
[There  is  not  such  a  character  that  can  be  respect- 
able] Womens'  sphere  is  the  house,  and  their  shining 
place  the  sick  chamber,  in  which  they  can  exert  all 
their  amiable,  and,  shall  I  say,  lenient  qualities! 
Marry,  my  lord,  by  all  means.  You  are  not  much 
more  than  fifty;  but  were  you  seventy,  and  so  often 
indisposed  ;  so  wealthy ;  no  children  to  rejjine  at  a 
mother-in-law,  aud  to  render  your  life  or  hers  un- 
comfortable by  their  little  jealousies :  I  would  advise 
you  to  marry.  The  man  or  woman  deserves  not  to 
be  benefited  in  the  disposition  of  your  affairs,  that 
would  wish  you  to  continue  in  the  hands  of  mean 
people,  and  to  rob  you  of  the  joys  of  confidence,  and 
the  comfort  of  tender  help,  from  an  equal,  or  from 
one  who  deserves  to  be  made  your  equal  in  degree. 
Only,  my  lord,  marry  so,  as  not  to  defeat  your  own 
end :  marry  not  a  gay  creature,  who  will  be  flutter- 
ing about  in  public,  while  you  are  groaning  in  your 
chamber,  and  wishing  for  her  presence. 

Blessings  on  your  heart,  my  nephew  1  Best  of 
men !  I  can  hold  no  longer.  There  was  no  bearing, 
before,  your  generosity:  what  can  I  say  now?  But 
you  must  be  in  earnest. 

Have  you,  my  lord,  asked  I,  any  lady  in  your 
eye? 

No,  said  he ;  indeed  I  have  not. 

I  was  the  better  pleased  with  him,  that  he  had 
not ;  because  I  was  afraid,  that  like  our  Vlllth  Hen- 
ry, he  had  some  other  woman  in  view,  which  might 
have  made  him  more  uneasy  than  he  would  other- 
3 


SIR   CHARLES   6RANDISON.  89 

wise  have  been  with  GiiFard :  for  tliough  it  were 
better  that  he  should  marry,  than  Hve  in  scandal ; 
and  a  woman  of  untainted  character,  rather  than 
one  who  had  let  the  world  see  that  she  could  take  a 
price  for  her  honour ;  yet  I  thought  him  better  jus- 
tified in  his  complaints  of  that  woman's  misbeha- 
viour, than  in  the  other  case  he  would  have  been : 
and  that  it  was  a  happiness  to  both  (if  a  right  use 
were  made  of  the  event)  that  they  had  been  unable 
to  live  on,  as  they  had  set  out. 

He  told  me,  that  he  should  think  himself  the  hap- 
piest of  men,  if  I  could  find  out,  and  recommend 
to  him,  a  Woman,  that  I  thought  worthy  of  his  ad- 
dresses ;  and  even  would  court  her  for  him. 

Your  lordship  ought  not  to  expect  fortune. 

I  do  not. 

She  should  be  a  gentlewoman  by  birth  and  edu- 
cation ;  a  woman  of  a  serious  turn ;  such  a  one  is 
not  likely  in  affluence  to  run  into  those  scenes  of 
life,  from  which,  perhaps,  only  want  of  fortune  has 
restrained  the  gayer  creature.  I  would  not  have 
your  lordship  fix  an  age,  though  I  think  you  should 
not  marry  a  girl.  Some  women  at  thirty  are  more 
discreet  than  others  at  forty :  and  if  your  lordship 
should  be  blessed  with  a  child  or  two  to  inherit 
your  great  estate,  that  happy  event  would  domesti- 
cate the  lady,  and  make  your  latter  years  more 
happy  than  your  former. 

My  lord  held  up  his  hands  and  eyes,  and  tears 
seemed  to  make  themselves  furrows  on  his  cheeks. 

He  made  me  look  at  him,  by  what  he  said  on  this 
occasion,  and  with  anger,  till  he  explained  himself. 

By  my  soul,  said  he,  and  clapped  his  two  lifted  up 
hands  together,  I  hate  your  father :  I  never  heartily 
loved  him  ;  but  now  I  hate  him  more  than  ever  I  did 
in  my  life. 

My  lord ! 

I  3 


90  THE    HISTORY   OF 

Don't  be  surprised.  I  hate  him  for  keeping  so  long 
abroad  a  son,  who  would  have  converted  us  both. 
Lessons  of"  morality,  given  in  so  noble  a  manner,  by 
regular  practice,  rather  than  by  preaching  theory 
(those  were  his  words)  not  only  where  there  is  no 
interest  proposed  to  be  served,  but  arrainst  interest, 
must  have  subdued  us  both ;  and  that  by  our  own 
consents.  O  my  sister!  and  he  clasped  his  hands, 
and  lifted  up  his  eyes,  as  if  he  had  the  dear  object 
of  his  brotherly  address  before  him ;  how  have  you 
blessed  me,  in  your  son! — 

This  apostrophe  to  my  mother  affected  me. 
What  a  mixture  is  there  in  the  character  of  Lord 
W. !  What  a  good  man  might  he  have  made,  had 
he  been  later  his  own  master ! — His  father  died  be- 
fore he  was  of  age. 

He  declared,  that  I  had  described  the  very  wife 
he  wished  to  have.  Find  out  such  a  one  for  me, 
my  dear  nephew,  said  he ;  and  I  give  you  carte 
blanche :  but  let  her  not  be  younger  than  between 
forty  and  fifty.  Make  the  settlements  for  me :  I  am 
very  rich :  I  will  sign  them  blindfold.  If  the  lady 
be  such  a  one  as  you  s,2Ly  I  oufrht  to  love,  I  voill  love 
her :  only  let  her  say,  she  can  be  grateful  for  my  love, 
and  for  the  provision  you  shall  direct  me  to  make 
for  her;  and  nry  first  interview  with  her  shall  be 
at  the  altar. 

I  think,  my  friend,  I  have  in  my  eye  such  a  woman 
as  my  lord  ought  to  do  very  handsome  things  for,  if 
she  condescend  to  have  him.  I  will  not  tell  you,  not 
even  yoti,  whom  I  mean,  till  I  know  she  will  encou- 
rage such  a  proposal ;  and,  for  her  own  fortune's 
sake,  I  think  she  should :  but  1  had  her  not  in  my 
thoughts  when  I  proposed  to  my  lord  the  character 
of  the  woman  he  should  wish  for. 

Adieu,  ray  dear  friend. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  91 

LETTER  XII. 

MISS    BYRON    TO    MISS    SELBY. 

Tuesday,  March  21. 
Dr.  Bartlett  went  to  town  yesterday.  He  returned 
early  enough  to  breakfast  with  us.  He  found  at 
dinner  with  his  patron,  the  whole  Danby  family,  and 
Mr.  Sylvester ;  as  also,  the  two  masters  of  the  young 
gentlemen,  with  Mr.  Galliard,  whose  son  is  in  love 
with  Miss  Danby,  and  she  with  him.  There  all  the 
parties  had  confirmed  to  them  the  generous  good- 
ness of  Sir  Charles,  of  which  he  had  assured  Mr. 
Sylvester  and  the  two  brothers  and  sister  before. 

I  am  sorry,  methinks,  the  doctor  went  to  town : 
we  should  otherwise,  perhaps,  have  had  the  parti- 
culars of  all,  from  the  pen  of  the  benevolent  man. 
Such  joy,  such  admiration,  such  gratitude,  the  doctor 
says,  were  expressed  from  every  mouth,  that  his  own 
eyes, .  as  well  as  Mr.  Sylvester's,  and  most  of  those 
present,  more  than  once,  were  ready  to  overflow. 

Every  thing  was  there  settled,  and  even  a  match 
proposed  by  Sir  Charles,  and  the  proposal  received 
with  approbation  on  both  sides,  between  the  elder 
Miss  Galliard,  and  that  audacious  young  man,  the 
drug-merchant ;  who  recovered,  by  his  behaviour 
in  this  meeting,  his  reputation  witli  Sir  Charles, 
and  every  body. 

The  doctor  says,  that  Mr.  Hervey  and  Mr.  Pous- 
sin,  the  two  masters  of  the  young  gentlemen,  are 
very  worthy  men ;  so  is  Mr.  Galliard :  and  they  be- 
haved so  handsomely  on  the  occasion,  that  Sir  Charles 
expressed  himself  highly  pleased  with  them  all.  For 
Mr.  Hervey  and  Mr  Galliard  offered  to  accept  of 
less  money  than  Sir  Charles  made  the  young  people 
worth ;  the  one  for  a  portion  with  Miss  Danby ;  the 


92  THE   HISTORY   OF 

Other  for  admitting  the  elder  Danby  into  a  partner- 
ship with  him  on  his  marriage  with  his  niece  :  but 
Sir  Charles  had  no  notion,  he  said,  of  putting  young 
men,  of  good  characters  and  abilities,  to  difficulties 
at  their  entrance  into  the  world :  the  greatest  ex- 
pences,  he  observed,  were  then  incurred.  In  slight 
or  scanty  beginnings,  scanty  plans  must  be  laid, 
and  pursued.  Mr.  Galliard  then  declared,  that  the 
younger  Danby  should  have  the  handsomer  for- 
tune with  his  daughter,  if  she  approved  of  him,  for 
the  very  handsome  one  Miss  Danby  would  carry  to 
his  son. 

Sir  Charles's  example,  in  short,  fired  every  one 
with  emulation;  and  three  marriages,  with  the  hap- 
piest prospects,  are  likely  very  soon  to  follow  these 
noble  instances  of  generosity.  Mr.  Sylvester  proposed 
the  celebration  on  one  day :  in  that  case,  the  gentle- 
men joined  to  hope  Sir  Charles  would  honour  them 
with  his  presence.  He  assentingly  bowed.  How 
many  families  are  here,  at  once,  made  happy  ! 

Dr.  Bartlett,  after  he  had  given  us  this  relation, 
said,  on  our  joining  in  one  general  blessing  of  his 
patron,  You  know  not,  ladies,  you  know  not,  my 
lord,  what  a  general  philanthropist  your  brother  is : 
his  whole  delight  is  in  doing  good.  It  has  always 
been  so :  and  to  mend  the  hearts,  as  well  as  for- 
tunes of  men,  is  his  glory. 

We  could  not  but  congratulate  the  doctor  on  his 
having  so  considerable  a  hand  (as  Sir  Charles  always. 
Lord  L.  said,  delighted  to  own)  in  cultivating  his 
innate  good  principles,  at  so  critical  a  time  of  life, 
as  that  was,  in  which  they  became  acquainted. 

The  doctor  very  modestly  received  the  compli- 
ment, and,  to  wave  our  praises,  gave  us  another 
instance  of  the  great  manner  in  which  Sir  Charles 
conferred  benefits  ;  as  follows  : 

He  once,  said  the  doctor,  when  his  fortune  was 
5 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  93 

not  what  it  now  is,  lent  a  very  honest  man,  a  mer- 
chant of  Leghorn,  when  he  resided  there  (as  he  did 
sometimes  for  a  month  or  two  together,  for  the  con- 
veniency  of  the  EngHsh  chapel)  a  considerable  sum ; 
and  took  his  bond  for  it:  after  a  while,  things  not 
answering  to  the  poor  man's  expectation,  Mr. 
Grandison  took  notice  to  me,  said  the  doctor,  that 
he  appeared  greatly  depressed  and  dejected,  and 
occasionally  came  into  his  company  with  such  a 
sense  of  obligation  in  his  countenance  and  beha- 
viour, that  he  could  not  bear  it :  And  why,  said  he, 
should  I  keep  it  in  my  power  to  distress  a  man, 
whose  modesty  and  diffidence  shew,  that  he  deserves 
to  be  made  easy  ? — I  may  die  suddenly :  my  exe- 
cutors may  think  it  but  justice  to  exact  payment : 
and  that  exaction  may  involve  him  in  as  great  diffi- 
culties as  those  were,  from  which  the  loan  delivered 
Jiim. — I  will  make  his  heart  light.  Instead  of  suf- 
fering him  to  sigh  over  his  uncertain  prospects  at 
his  board,  or  in  his  bed,  I  will  make  both  his  board 
and  his  bed  easy  to  him.  His  wife  and  his  five 
children  shall  rejoice  with  him  ;  they  shall  see  the 
good  man's  countenance,  as  it  used  to  do,  shine 
upon  them ;  and  occasionally  meet  mine  with  grate- 
ful comfort. 

He  then  cancelled  the  bond :  and,  at  the  same 
time,  fearing  the  man's  distress  might  be  deeper 
than  he  owned,  offered  him  the  loan  of  a  further 
sum.  But,  by  his  behaviour  upon  it,  I  found,  said 
Mr.  Grandison,  that  the  sum  he  owed,  and  the 
doubt  he  had  of  being  able  to  pay  it  in  time, 
were  the  whole  of  the  honest  man's  grievance.  He 
declined,  with  gratitude,  the  additional  offer,  and 
walked,  ever  after,  erect. 

He  is  now  living,  and  happy,  proceeded  the  doc- 
tor; and  just  before  Mr.  Grandison  left  Italy,  would 
have  made  him  some  part  of  payment,  from  the  bap- 


94"  THE    HISTORY   OF 

pier  turn  in  his  affairs ;  which  probably  was  owing 
to  hie  revived  spirits  :  but  Mr.  Grandison  asked, 
What  he  thought  he  meant,  when  he  cancelled  the 
obligation  ?  Yet  he  told  him,  that  it  was  not  wrong 
in  him  to  make  the  tender :  for  free  minds,  he  said, 
loved  not  to  be  ungenerously  dealt  with. 

What  a  man  is  this,  Lucy ! 

No  wonder,  thus  gloriously  employed,  with  my 
Lord  W.  and  the  Danbys,  said  Lord  L.  and  per- 
haps in  other  acts  of  goodness  that  we  know  nothing 
of,  besides  the  duties  of  his  executorship,  that  we 
are  deprived  of  his  company  !  But  some  of  these,  as 
he  has  so  good  a  friend  as  Dr.  Bartlett,  he  might 
transfer  to  him — and  oblige  us  more  with  his  pre- 
sence ;  and  the  rather,  as  he  declares  it  would  be 
obliging  himself. 

Ah,  my  lord!  said  the  doctor,  and  looked  round 
him,  his  eyes  dwelling  longest  on  me — You  don't 
know — He  stopped.  We  all  were  silent.  He  pro- 
ceeded— Sir  Charles  Grandison  does  nothing  with- 
out reason :  a  good  man  must  have  difficulties  to 
encounter  with,  that  a  mere  man  of  the  world 
would  not  be  embarrassed  by. — But  how  I  engage 
your  attention,  ladies ! 

The  doctor  arose  ;  for  breakfast  was  over — Dear 
doctor,  said  Miss  Grandison,  don't  leave  us — As  to 
that  Bologna,  that  Camilla,  that  bishop — Tell  us 
more  of  them,  dear  doctor. 

Excuse  me,  ladies ;  excuse  me,  my  lord.  He 
bowed,  and  withdrew. 

How  we  looked  at  one  another !  How  the  fool,  in 
particular,  blushed !  How  her  heart  throbbed ! — 
At  what  ? 

But,  Lucy,  give  me  your  opinion — Dr.  Bartlett 
guesses,  that  1  an*  far  from  being  indifferent  to  Sir 
Charles  Grandison :  he  must  be  assured,  that  my  own 
heart  must  be  absolutely  void  oi  benevolence,  if  I  did 


SIR    CHARLES    GRAMDISON.  95 

not  more  and  more  esteem  Sir  Charles,  for  his  :  and 
would  Dr.  Bartlett  be  so  cruel,  as  to  contribute  to  . 
a  flame  that,  perhaps,  is  with  difficulty  kept  from 
blazing  out,  as  one  hears  new  instances  of  his  gene- 
rous goodness,  if  he  knevo  that  Sir  Charles  Grandi- 
son  was  so  engaged,  as  to  render  it  impossible — What 
shall  I  say  ? — O  this  cruel,  cruel  suspense ! — What 
hopes,  what  fears,  what  contradictory  conjectures ! 
But  all  will  too  soon  perhaps — Here  he  is  come — 
Sir  Charles  Grandison  is  come 

0  no  ! — A  false  alarm  ! — He  is  not  come  :  it  is 
only  my  Lord  L.  returned  from  an  airing. 

1  could  beat  this  girl !  this  Emily  ! — It  was  owing 
to  her  ! — A  chit ! — How  we  have  fluttered  each 
other ! — Butsendfor  me  down  to  Northamptonshire, 

my  dear  friends,  before  I  am  quite  a  fool. 

*     « 

Pray — Do  you  know,  Lucy,  what  is  the  business 
that  calls  Mr.  Deane  to  town,  at  this  season  of  the 
year  ?  H  e  has  made  a  visit  to  Sir  Charles  Grandison : 
for  Dr.  Bartlett  told  me,  as  a  grateful  compliment, 
that  Sir  Charles  was  much  pleased  with  him ;  yet 
Mr.  Deane  did  not  tell  me,  that  he  designed  it.  I 
beseech  you,  my  dear  friends — Do  not — But  you 
would  not ;  you  could  not ! — I  would  be  torn  in 
pieces :  I  would  not  accept  of — I  don't  know  what 
I  would  say.  Only  add  not  disgrace  to  distress. — 
But  I  am  safe,  if  nothing  be  done  but  at  the  motion 
of  my  grandmamma  and  aunt  Selby.  They  would 
not  permit  Mr.  Deane,  or  any  body,  to  make  impro- 
per visits. — But  don't  you  think,  that  it  must  look 
particular  to  Sir  Charles,  to  have  a  visit  paid  him  by 
a  man  expressing  for  me  so  much  undeserved  ten- 
derness and  affection,  so  long  after  the  affair  was 
over  which  afforded  him  a  motive  for  it? — I  dread, 
as  much  for  Mr.  Deane's  sake  as  my  own,  every 
thing  that  may  be  construed  into  officiousness  or 


96  THE    HISTORY    OB^ 

particularity,  by  so  nice  a  discerner.  Does  he  not 
say,  that  no  man  is  more  quick-sighted  than  himself, 
to  those  faults  in  women  wliich  are  owing  to  want 
of  delicacy  ? 

I  have  been  very  earnest  with  Lord  and  Lady  L. 
and  Miss  Grandison,  that  they  do  not  suffer  their 
friendship  for  me  to  lay  me  under  any  difficulties  with 
their  brother.  They  all  took  my  meaning,  and  pro- 
mised to  consult  my  punctilio,  as  well  as  my  inclina- 
tion. Miss  Grandison  was  more  kindly  in  earnest, 
in  her  assurances  of  this  nature,  than  I  was  afraid 
she  would  be :  and  my  lord  said,  It  was  fit  that  I 
should  find  even  niceness  gratified  in  this  particular. 

[I  absolutely  confide  in  you,  Lucy,  to  place  hooks 
where  I  forget  to  put  them ;  and  where,  in  your  de- 
licate mind,  you  think  1  ought  to  put  them:  that  they 
may  direct  your  eye  (when  you  come  to  read  out  be- 
fore my  uncle)  to  omit  those  passages  which  very 
few  men  have  delicacy  or  seriousness  enough  to  be 
trusted  with.  Yet,  a  mighty  piece  of  sagacity,  to 
find  out  a  girl  of  little  more  than  twenty,  in  love, 
as  it  is  called !  and  to  make  a  jest  of  her  for  it !] — 
[But  I  am  peevish,  as  well  as  saucy. — This  also 
goes  between  hooks.] 

Adieu,  my  dear. 


LETTER  XIIL 

SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON  TO  DR.  BARTLETT. 

Monday  night,  March  20. 
I  AM  very  much  dissatisfied  with  myself,  my  dear 
Dr.  Bartlett.     What  pains  have  I  taken,  to  conquer 
those  sudden  gusts  of  passion,  to  which,  from  my 
early  youth,  I  have  been  subject,  as  you  have  often 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  97 

heard  me  confess  !  yet  to  find,  at  times,  that  I  am 
unequal — to  myself,  shall  I  say  ? — To  myself!  will 
say ;  since  I  have  been  so  much  artiended  by  your 
precepts  and  example.  But  I  will  give  you  the 
occasion. 

My  guests,  and  you,  had  but  just  left  me,  when 
the  wretched  Jervois,  and  her  O'Hara,  and  another 
bullying  man,  desired  to  speak  with  me. 

I  bade  the  servant  shew  the  woman  into  the  draw- 
ing-room next  my  study,  and  the  men  into  the  ad- 
joining parlour  ;  but  they  both  followed  her  into  the 
drawing-room.  I  went  to  her,  and,  after  a  little 
stiff  civility  (I  could  not  help  it)  asked,  If  these 
gentlemen  had  business  with  me  ? 

That  gentleman  is  Major  O'Hara,  Sir :  he  is  my 
husband.  That  gentleman  is  Captain  Salmonet : 
he  is  the  Major's  brother-in-law.  He  is  an  officer 
of  equal  worth  and  bravery. 

They  gave  themselves  airs  of  importance  and  fa- 
miliarity ;  and  the  major  motioned,  as  if  he  would 
have  taken  my  hand. 

I  encouraged  not  the  motion.  Will  you,  gentle- 
men, walk  this  way  ? 

I  led  the  way  to  my  study.  "The  woman  arose» 
and  would  have  come  with  them. 

If  you  please  to  stay  where  you  are,  madam,  I 
will  attend  you  presently. 

They  entered ;  and,  as  if  they  would  have  me 
think  them  connoisseurs,  began  to  admire  the 
globes,  the  orrery,  the  pictures,  and  busts. 

I  took  off  that  sort  of  attention — Pray,  gentlemen, 
what  are  your  commands  with  me  ? 

I  am  called  Major  O'Hara,  Sir;  I  am  the  hus- 
band of  the  lady  in  the  next  room,  as  she  told  you. 

And  what,  pray.  Sir,  have  I  to  do,  either  with  you, 
or  your  marriage  ?  I  pay  that  lady,  as  the  widow  of 
Mr.  Jervois,  2001.  a  year :  1  am  not  obliged  to  pay 

K 


98  THE    HISTORY    OF 

her  more  than  one.  She  has  no  demands  upon  me  ; 
much  less  has  her  husband. 

The  men  had  so  much  the  air  of  bullies,  and 
the  woman  is  so  very  wicked,  that  my  departed 
friend,  and  the  name  by  which  she  so  lately  called 
the  poor  Emily,  were  in  my  head,  and  I  had  too 
little  command  of  my  temper. 

Look  ye,  Sir  Charles  Grandison,  I  would  have 
you  to  know — 

And  he  put  his  left  hand  upon  his  sword-handle, 
pressing  it  down,  which  tilted  up  the  point  with  an 
air  extremely  insolent. 

What  am  I  to  understand  by  that  motion.  Sir  ? 

Nothing  at  all,  Sir  Charles — D — nme,  if  I  mean 
any  thing  by  it 

You  are  called  major,  you  say.  Sir — Do  you  bear 
the  king's  commission.  Sir  ? 

I  have  borne  it.  Sir,  if  I  do  not  now. 

That,  and  the  house  you  are  in,  give  you  a  title  to 
civility.  But,  Sir,  I  cannot  allow,  that  your  mar- 
riage with  the  lady  in  the  next  room  gives  you 
pretence  to  business  with  me.  If  you  have,  on  any 
other  account,  pray  let  me  know  what  it  is  ? 

The  man  seemed  at  a  loss  what  to  say  ;  but  not 
from  bashfulness.  He  looked  about  him,  as  if  for  his 
woman ;  set  his  teeth  ;  bit  his  lip  ;  and  took  snuff, 
with  an  air  so  like  defiance,  that,  for  fear  I  should 
not  be  able  to  forbear  taking  notice  of  it,  I  turned 
to  the  other:  Pray,  Captain  Salmonet,  said  I, 
what  are  your  commands  with  me  ? 

He  spoke  in  broken  English  ;  and  said.  He  had 
the  honour  to  be  Major  O'Hara's  brother  :  he  had 
married  the  major's  sister. 

And  why.  Sir,  might  you  not  have  favoured  me 
with  the  company  of  all  your  relations  ? — Have  you 
any  business  with  me.  Sir,  on  your  own  account  ? 

I  come,  I  come,  said  he,  to  see  my  brother 
righted,  Sir — 


SIR   CHARLES    GUANDISON.  99 

Who  has  wronged  him  ? — Take  care,  gentlemen, 
l)Ow — But,  Mr.  O'Hara,  what  are  your  pretensions  ? 

Why,  look  ye,  Sir  Charles  Grandison  (tlixowing 
open  his  coat,  and  sticking  one  hand  in  his  side,  the 
other  thrown  out  with  a  flourish)  Look  ye,  Sir,  re- 
peated he — 

I  found  my  choler  rising.     I  was  afraid  of  myself. 

When  I  treat  you  familiarly.  Sir,  then  treat  me 
so  ;  till  when,  please  to  withdraw — 

I  rang :  Frederick  came  in. 

Shew  these  gentlemen  into  the  little  parlour — 
You  will  excuse  me.  Sirs ;  I  attend  the  lady. 

They  muttered,  and  gave  themselves  brisk  and 
angry  airs ;  nodding  their  heads  at  each  other ;  but 
followed  the  servant  into  that  parlour. 

I  went  to  Mrs.  O'Hara,  as  she  calls  herself. 

Well,  madam,  what  is  your  business  with  me, 
ywx)  ? 

Where  are  the  gentlemen,  Sir  ?  Where  is  my 
husband  ? 

They  are  both  in  the  next  room,  and  within  hear-^ 
ing  of  all  that  shall  pass  between  you  and  me. 

And  do  you  hold  them  unworthy  of  your  pre- 
sence, Sir  ? 

Not,  madam,  while  you  are  before  me,  and  if 
they  had  any  business  with  me,  or  I  with  them. 

Has  not  a  husband  business  where  his  wife  is  ? 

Neither  wife  nor  husband  has  business  with  me. 

Yes,  Sir,  I  am  come  to  demand  my  daughter.  I 
come  to  demand  a  mother's  right. 

I  answer  not  to  such  a  demand :  you  know  you 
have  no  right  to  make  it. 

I  have  been  at  Colnebrook ;  she  was  kept  from 
me  :  my  child  was  carried  out  of  the  house,  that  I 
miglit  not  see  her. 

And  have  you  then  terrified  the  poor  girl  ? 

I  have  left  a  letter  for  her ;  and  I  expect  to  see 
K  2 


100  THE  HISTORY  OF 

her  upon  it. — Her  new  father,  as  worthy  and  ais; 
brave  a  man  as  yourself,  Sir,  longs  to  see  her — 

Her  new  father  !  madam. — You  expect  to  see  her  ! 
madam — What  was  your  behaviour  to  her,  unnatural 
woman !  the  last  time  you  saw  her  ?  But  if  you 
do  see  her,  it  must  be  in  my  presence,  and  without ' 
your  man,  if  he  form  pretensions,  on  your  account^ 
that  may  give  either  her  or  me  disturbance. 

You  are  only.  Sir,  to  take  care  of  her  fortune ;  so 
I  am  advised :  I,  as  her  mother,  have  the  natural 
right  over  her  person.  The  Chancery  will  give  it 
to  me. 

Then  seek  your  remedy  in  Chancery  :  let  me 
never  hear  of  you  again,  but  by  the  officers  of  that 
court. 

I  opened  the  door  leading  into  the  room  where 
the  two  men  were. 

They  are  not  officers,  I  dare  say :  common  men 
of  the  town,  I  doubt  not,  new-dressed  for  the  occa- 
sion. O'Hara,  as  she  calls  him,  is,  probably,  one 
of  her  temporary  husbands  only. 

Pray  walk  in,  gentlemen,  said  I,  This  lad}'  inti- 
mates to  me,  that  she  will  apply  to  Chancery  against 
me.  The  Chancery,  if  she  has  any  grievance,  will 
be  a  proper  recourse.  She  can  have  no  business 
with  me,  after  such  a  declaration — Much  less  can 
either  of  you. 

And  opening  the  drawing-room  door  that  led  to 
the  hall,  Frederick,  said  I,  attend  the  lady  and  the 
gentlemen  to  their  coach. 

I  turned  from  them,  to  go  into  my  study. 
The  major,  as  he  was  called,  asked  me,  with  a 
fierce  air,  his  hand  on  his  sword,  If  this  were  treat- 
ment due  to  Gentlemen  ? 

This  house,  in  which,  however,  you  are  an  in- 
truder. Sir,  is  your  protection  ;  or  that  motion,  and 
that  air,  if  you  mean  any  thing  by  either,  would 
cost  you  dear. 


StR  CHARLES   GRANDISON.  lOl 

1  am,  Sir,  the  protector  of  my  wife :  you  have  in- 
sulted her,  Sir. 

Have  I  insulted  your  wife.  Sir  ? — And  I  stepped 
up  to  him  ;  but  just  in  time  recovered  myself,  re- 
membering where  I  was — Take  care,  Sir — But  you 
are  safe  here — Frederick,  wait  upon  the  gentlemen 
to  the  door — 

Frederick  was  not  in  hearing  ;  the  well-meaning 
man,  apprehending  consequences,  went,  it  seems,- 
into  the  offices,  to  get  together' some  of  his  fellow- 
servants. 

Salmonet  putting  himself  into  violent  motion, 
swore,  that  he  would  stand  by  his  friend,  his  brother, 
to  the  last  drop  of  his  blood  ;  and,  in  a  posture  of 
offence,  drew  his  sword  half-way. 

I  wish,  friend,  said  I  (but  could  hardly  contain 
myself)  that  I  were  in  your  house,  instead  of  your 
being  in  mine — But  if  you  would  have  your  sword 
broken  over  your  head,  draw  it  quite. 

He  did,  with  a  vapour.  D — n  him,  he  said,  if  he 
bore  that !  My  own  house,  on  sucli  an  insult  as  this, 
should  not  be  my  protection  ;  and,  retreating,  he 
put  himself  into  a  posture  of  defence. 

A^otc,  major  !  A^ow,  major  !  said  the  wicked  wo- 
man. 

Her  major  also  drew,  making  wretched  grimaces. 

I  was  dressed.  I  knew  not  but  the  men  were 
assassins.  I  drew,  put  by  Salmonet's  sword, 
closed  with  him,  disarmed  him,  and,  by  the  same 
effort,  laid  him  on  the  floor. 

O'Hara  skipping  about,  as  if  he  watched  for  an 
opportunity  to  make  a  push  with  safety  to  himself, 
lost  his  sword,  by  the  usual  trick  whereby  a  man, 
any-thing  skilled  in  his  weapons,  knows  how  some- 
times to  disarm  a  less  skilful  adversary. 

The  woman  screamed,  and  ran  into  the  hall. 

I  turned  the  two  men,  first  one,  then  the  other,  out 
K  3 


102  THE   HISTORY   OF 

of  the  room,  with  a  contempt  that  they  deserved ; 
and  Frederick,  Richard,  and  Jerry,  who  by  that 
time,  were  got  together  in  the  hall,  a  little  too 
roughly  perhaps,  turned  them  into  the  square. 

They  limped  into  the  coach  they  came  in  :  the 
woman,  in  terror,  was  already  in  it.  They  cursed, 
swore,  and  threatened. 

The  pretended  captain,  putting  his  body  half-way 
eut  of  the  coach,  bid  my  servants  tell  me,  That  I 
was — That  1  was — And  avoiding  a  worse  name,  as 
it  seemed — No  gentleman  ;  and  that  he  would  find 
an  opportunity  to  make  me  repent  the  treatment  I 
had  given  to  men  of  honour,  and  to  a  lady. 

The  major,  in  eagerness  to  say  something,  by  way 
of  resentment  and  menace  likewise — (beginning  with 
damning  his  blood) — had  his  intended  threatening 
cut  short,  by  meeting  the  captain's  head  with  his, 
as  the  other,  in  a  rage,  withdrew  it,  after  his  speech 
to  the  servant :  and  each  cursing  the  other,  one 
rubbing  his  forehead,  the  other  putting  his  hand  to 
his  head,  away  drove  the  coach. 

They  forgot  to  ask  for  their  swords ;  and  one  of 
them  left  his  hat  behind  him. 

You  cannot  imagine,  my  dear  Dr.  Bartlett,  how 
much  this  idle  affair  has  disturbed  me :  I  cannot  for- 
give myself — To  be  provoked  by  two  such  men,  to 
violate  the  sanction  of  my  own  house.  Yet  they 
came,  no  doubt,  to  bully  and  provoke  me ;  or  to 
lay  a  foundation  for  a  demand,  that  they  knew,  if 
personally  made,  must  do  it. 

My  only  excuse  to  myself  is,  that  there  were  two 
of  them ;  and  that  though  1  drew,  yet  I  had  the 
command  of  myself  so  far  as  only  to  defend  myself, 
when  I  might  have  done  any  thing  with  them.  I 
have  generally  found,  that  those  that  are  the  readiest 
to  give  offence,  are  the  unfittest,  when  brought  to 
the  test,  to  support  their  own  insolence. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISOK.  103 

But  my  Emily  !  my  poor  Emily  !  How  must  she 
be  terrified  ! — I  will  be  with  you  very  soon.  Let 
not  her  know  any  thing  of  this  idle  affair  ;  nor  any 
body  but  Lord  L. 

Tuesday  morning. 

I  have  just  parted  with  one  Blagrave,  an  attorney, 
who  already  had  been  ordered  to  proceed  against 
me  :  but,  out  of  regard  to  my  character,  and  hav- 
ing, as  he  owned,  no  great  opinion  of  his  clients,  he 
thought  fit  to  come  to  me  in  person,  to  acquaint 
me  of  it,  and  to  inform  himself,  from  me,  of  the 
whole  affair. 

The  gentleman's  civility  intitled  him  to  expect 
an  account  of  it :  I  gave  it  him. 

He  told  me.  That  if  I  pleased  to  restore  theswords, 
and  the  hat,  by  him,  and  would  promise  not  to  stop 
the  future  quarterly  payments  of  the  2001.  a  year, 
about  which  they  were  very  apprehensive ;  he  dared 
to  say,  that,  after  such  an  exertion  of  spirit,  as  he 
called  a  choleric  excess,  I  should  not  hear  any  more 
of  them  for  one  while  ;  since  he  believed,  they  had 
only  been  trying  an  experiment :  which  had  been 
carried  farther,  he  dared  to  say,  than  they  had  de- 
signed it  should. 

He  hinted  his  opinion,  that  the  men  were  common 
men  of  the  town ;  and  that  they  had  never  been 
honoured  with  commissions  in  any  service. 

The  woman  (I  know  not  by  what  name  to  call 
her,  since  it  is  very  probable,  that  she  has  not  a  real 
title  to  that  of  O'Hara)  was  taken  out  of  the  coach 
in  violent  hysterics,  as  O'Hara  told  him  ;  who,  in 
consulting  Mr.  Blagrave,  may  be  supposed  to  ag- 
gravate matters,  in  order  to  lay  a  foundation  for  ao 
action  of  damages. 

She  accused  the  men  of  cowardice,  before  Mr 
Blagrave  ;  and  that  in  very  opprobrious  terms. 


104<  THE    HISTORY   OF 

They  excused  themselves,  as  being  loth  to  hurt 
me  ;  which,  they  said,  they  easily  could  have  done  ; 
especially  before  I  drew. 

They  both  pretended  to  Mr.  Blagrave,  personal 
damages ;  but  I  hope  their  hurts  are  magnified. 

I  am  (however  that  be)  most  hurt ;  for  I  am  not 
at  all  pleased  with  myself.  They,  possibly,  though 
they  have  no  cause  to  be  satisfied  with  their  parts  in 
the  fray,  have  been  more  accustomed  to  such  scuf- 
fles, than  I ;  and  are  above,  or  rather  beneath,  all 
punctilio. 

Mr.  Blagrave  took  the  swords  and  the  hat  with 
him  in  the  coach  that  waited  for  him. 

If  I  thought  it  would  not  have  looked  like  a  com- 
promise, and  encouraged  their  insolence,  I  could 
freely  have  sent  them  more  than  what  belonged  to 
them.  I  am  really  greatly  hurt  by  the  part  1  acted 
to  such  men. 

As  to  the  annuity ;  I  bid  Mr.  Blagrave  tell  the 
woman,  that  the  payment  of  that  depended  upon 
her  future  good  behaviour ;  and  yet,  that  I  was  not 
sure,  that  she  was  intitled  to  it,  but  as  the  voidovo  of 
my  friend. 

However,  I  told  this  gentleman,  that  no  provo- 
cation should  hinder  me  from  doing  strict  justice, 
though  I  were  sure  that  they  would  go  to  law  with 
the  money  I  should  cause  to  be  paid  to  them  quar- 
terly. You  will,  therefore,  know.  Sir,  added  I,  that 
the  fund  which  they  have  to  depend  upon,  to  sup- 
port a  law-suit,  should  they  commence  one,  and 
think  fit  to  employ  in  it  so  honest  a  man  as  you 
seem  to  be,  is  1001.  a  year.  It  would  be  madness, 
if  not  injustice,  to  pay  the  other  lOOl.  for  such  a 
purpose,  when  it  w  as  left  to  my  discretion  to  pay  it, 
or  not,  with  a  view  to  discourage  that  litigious 
spirit,  which  is  one,  of  an  hundred,  of  this  poor 
woman's  bad  qualities. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  105 

And  thus,  for  the  present,  stands  this  affair.  I  look 
upon  my  trouble  from  this  woman  as  over,  till  some 
new  scheme  arises,  either  among  these  people,  or 
from  others  whom  she  may  consult  or  employ.  You 
and  I,  when  I  have  the  happiness  to  attend  you  and 
my  other  friends,  will  not  renew  the  subject. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER  XIV. 

MISS  BYRON  TO  MISS  SELBY. 

Colnebrook,  Wednesday,  March  22. 
Sir  Charles  arrived  this  morning,  just  as  we  had  as- 
sembled to  breakfast ;  for  Lady  L.  is  not  an  early- 
riser.     The  moment  he  entered,  sunshine  broke  out 
in  the  countenance  of  every  one. 

He  apologized  to  all,  but  me,  for  his  long  absence, 
especially  when  theybadsuch  a  guest,  were  his  words, 
bowing  to  me ;  and  I  thought  he  sighed,  and  looked 
with  tender  regard  upon  me ;  but  I  dared  not  sisk 
Miss  Grandison  whether  she  saw  any  thing  particu- 
lar in  his  devoirs  to  me. 

It  was  owing  to  his  politeness,  I  presume,  that  he 
did  not  include  me  in  his  apologies ;  because  that 
would  have  been  to  suppose,  that  1  had  expect,'d  him. 
Indeed  I  was  not  displeased,  in  the  main,  that  he  did 
not  compliment  me,  as  a  third  sister.  See,  Lucy, 
what  little  circumstances  a  doubtful  mind  will  some- 
times dwell  upon. 

I  was  not  pleased  that  he  had  been  so  long  absent, 
and  had  my  thoughts  to  myself  upon  it ;  inclining 
once  to  have  gone  back  to  London  ;  and  perhaps 
should,  could  I  have  fancied  myself  of  importaiice 
enough  to  make  him  uneasy  by  it  [The  sex !  the  sex  J 


106  THE    HISTORY   OF 

Lucy,  will  my  uncle  say ;  but  I  pretend  not  to  be 
above  its  little  foibles]  :  but  the  moment  I  saw  him, 
all  my  disgusts  were  over.  After  the  Anderson,  the 
Danby,  the  Lord  W.  affairs,  he  appeared  to  me  in  a 
much  more  shining  light  than  an  hero  would  have 
done,  returning  in  a  triumphal  car  covered  with  lau- 
rels, and  dragging  captive  princes  at  his  wheels. 
How  much  more  glorious  a  character  is  that  of  The 
friend  of  mankind,  than  that  of  The  conqueror  of  na- 
tions ! 

He  told  me,  that  he  paid  his  compliments  yester- 
day to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Reeves.  He  mentioned  Mr. 
Deane's  visit  to  him;  and  said  very  kind,  but  just 
things  in  his  praise.  I  read  not  any  thing  in  big 
eyes,  or  manner,  that  gave  me  uneasiness  on  the 
visit  that  other  good  man  made  him. 

My  dear  Emily  sat  generously  uneasy,  I  saw,  for 
the  trouble  she  had  been  the  cause  of  giving  to  her 
best  friend,  though  she  knew  not  of  a  visit,  that  her 
mother,  and  O'Hara,  and  Salmonet,  made  her  guar- 
dian on  Monday,  as  the  doctor  had  hinted  to  us, 
without  giving  us  particulars. 

Sir  Charles  thanked  me  for  my  goodness,  as  he 
called  it,  in  getting  the  good  girl  so  happily  out  of 
her  mother's  way,  as  his  Emily  would  have  been 
too  much  terrified  to  see  her :  and  he  thanked  Lord 
L.  for  his  tenderness  to  his  ward  on  that  occasion. 

My  lord  gave  him  the  letter  which  Mrs.  Jervois 
had  left  for  her  daughter.  Sir  Charles  presented  it 
to  the  young  lady,  without  looking  into  it :  she  in- 
stantly returned  it  to  him,  in  a  very  graceful  man- 
ner. We  will  read  it  together  by-and-by,  my  Emily, 
said  he.  Dr.  Bartlett  tells  me,  there  is  tenderness 
in  it. 

The  doctor  made  apologies  to  him,  for  having 
communicated  to  us  some  of  his  letters — Whatever 
Dr.  Bartlett  does,  said  Sir  Charles,  must  be  right. 


SJR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  107 

But  what  say  my  sisters  to  my  proposal  of  corre- 
spondence with  them  ? 

We  should  be  glad,  replied  Lady  L.  to  see  all  you 
write  to  Dr.  Bartlett;  but  could  not  undertake  to 
write  you  letter  for  letter. 
Why  so  ? 

Miss  Byron,  said  Miss  Grandison,  has  put  us  quite 
out  of  heart,  as  to  the  talent  of  narrative  letter- 
writing. 

I  should  be  greatly  honoured  with  a  sight  of  such 
letters  of  Miss  Byron  as  you,  my  lord,  have  seen. 
Will  Miss  Byron,  applying  to  me,  favour  one  bro- 
ther, and  exclude  anotlier? 

Brother !  Lucy ;  I  thought  he  was  not,  at  that 
time,  quite  so  handsome  a  man  as  when  he  first  en- 
tered the  room. 

I  was  silent,  and  blushed.  I  knew  not  what  an- 
swer to  make ;  yet  thought  I  should  say  something. 
May  we.  Sir  Charles,  said  Miss  Grandison,  hope 
for  a  perusal  of  your  letters  to  Dr.  Bartlett  for  the 
same  number  of  weeks  past,  letter  for  letter,  if  we 
could  prevail  on  Miss  Byron  to  consent  to  the  pro- 
posal ? 

Would  Miss  Byron  consent  upon  that  condition? 

What  say  you,  Miss  Byron  ?  said  my  lord. 

I  answered,  that  I  could  not  presume  to  think, 

that  the  little  chit-chat,  which  I  wrote  to  please  my 

partial  friends  in  the  country,  could  appear  tolerable 

in  the  eye  of  Sir  Charles  Grandison. 

They  all  answered  with  high  encomiums  on  my 
pen ;  and  Sir  Charles,  in  the  most  respectful  manner, 
insisting  upon  not  being  denied  to  see  what  Lord  L. 
had  perused ;  and  Miss  Grandison  having  said,  that  I 
had,  to  oblige  them,  been  favoured  with  the  return 
of  my  letters  from  the  country ;  I  thought  it  would 
look  like  a  too  meaning  particularity,  if  I  refused  to 
oblige  him,  in  the  light  (though  not  a  very  agreeable 


108  THE   HISTORY    OF 

one,  I  own,  to  you,  Lucy)  of  awo^A^r  brother :  I  told 
him,  that  I  would  shew  him  very  willingly,  and 
without  condition,  all  the  letters  1  had  written,  of 
the  narrative  kind,  from  my  first  coming  to  London, 
to  the  dreadful  masquerade  affair,  and  even  Sir  Har- 
grave's  barbarous  treatment  of  me,  down  to  the  de- 
liverance he  had  so  generously  given  me. 

How  did  he  extol  me,  for  what  he  called  my  noble 
frankness  of  heart !  In  that  grace,  he  said,  I  excelled 
all  the  women  he  had  ever  conversed  with.  He  as- 
sured me,  that  he  would  not  wish  to  see  a  line  that 
I  was  not  willing  he  should  see ;  and  that,  if  he  came 
to  a  word  or  passage  that  he  could  suppose  would 
be  of  that  nature,  it  should  have  no  place  in  his  me- 
mory. 

Miss  Grandison  called  out — But  the  conditiouy 
Sir  Charles — 

Is  only  this,  replied  I  (I  am  sure  of  your  candor, 
Sir) ;  that  you  will  correct  me,  where  I  am  wrong, 
in  any  of  my  notions  or  sentiments.  I  have  been 
very  pert  and  forward  in  some  of  my  letters ;  parti- 
cularly in  a  dispute  that  was  carried  on  in  relation 
to  learning  and  languages.  If  I  could  not,  for  im- 
provement-sake,  more  heartily  bespeak  your  correc- 
tion than  your  approbation,  I  should  be  afraid  of 
your  eye  there. 

Excellent  Miss  Byron !  Beauty  shall  not  bribe  me 
on  your  side,  if  I  think  you  wrong  in  any  point  that 
you  submit  to  my  judgment :  and  if  I  am  beauty- 
proof,  I  am  sure  nothing  on  earth  can  bias  me. 

Miss  Grandison  said,  she  would  number  the  let- 
ters according  to  their  dates,  and  then  would  give 
them  to  me,  that  I  might  make  such  conditions  with 
her  brother,  on  the  loan,  as  every  one  might  be  the 
better  for. 

Breakfast  being  over.  Miss  Grandison  renewed 


sin  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  109 

the  talk  of  the  visit  made  here  by  Mrs.  O'Hara  oa 
Sunday  last.  Miss  Jervois  very  prettily  expressed 
her  grief  for  the  trouble  given  her  guardian  by  her 
unhappy  mother.  He  drew  her  to  him,  as  he  sat, 
with  looks  of  tenderness;  called  her  his  dear  Emily ; 
and  told  her,  she  was  the  child  of  his  compassion.  Yoa 
are  called  upon,  my  dear,  said  he,  young  as  you  are, 
to  a  glorious  trial ;  and  hitherto  you  have  shone  in 
it :  I  wish  the  poor  woman  would  be  but  half  as 
much  the  mother,  as  you  would  be  the  child !  But 
let  us  read  her  letter. 

His  goodness  overwhelmed  her.  He  took  her  mo- 
ther's letter  out  of  his  pocket :  she  stood  before  him, 
drying  her  eyes,  and  endeavouring  to  suppress  her 
emotion  :  and  when  he  had  unfolded  the  letter,  he 
put  his  arm  round  her  waist.  Surely,  Lucy,  he  is 
the  tenderest,  as  well  as  bravest  of  men !  What 
would  I  give  for  a  picture  drawn  but  with  half 
the  life  and  love  which  shone  out  in  his  looks,  as  he 
cast  his  eyes,  now  on  the  letter,  and  now  up  to  his 
Emily! — Poor  woman !  said  he,  two  or  three  times, 
as  he  read ;  and,  when  he  had  done,  You  must  read 
it,  my  dear,  said  he ;  there  is  the  mother  in  it ;  we 
will  acknowledge  the  mother,  wherever  we  can  find 
her. 

Why  did  not  the  dear  girl  throw  her  arms  about 
his  neck,  just  then? — She  was  ready  to  do  so.  O 
my  best  of  guardians !  said  she  ;  and,  it  was  plain, 
was  but  just  restrained,  by  virgin  modesty,  from  do- 
ing 80 ;  her  hands  caught  back,  as  it  were,  and  rest- 
ing for  a  moment  on  his  shoulder :  and  she  looked 
as  much  abashed,  as  if  she  had  not  checked  herself. 

I  took  more  notice  of  this  her  grateful  motion, 
than  any  body  else.  I  was  affected  with  the  beau- 
tiful check,  and  admired  her  for  it. 

And  must  I,  Sir,  would  you  have  me,  read  it?  I 
will  retire  to  my  chamber  with  it. 

VOL.  XI,  L 


110  THE    HISTORY   OF 

He  rose,  took  her  hand,  and,  coming  with  her  to 
me,  put  it  into  mine :  Be  so  good,  madam,  to  for- 
tifV  this  worthy  child's  heart,  by  your  prudence  and 
judgment,  while  she  reads  the  mother^  in  the  only 
instance  that  I  have  ever  known  it  visible  in  this  un- 
happy woman. 

Emily  and  I  withdrew  into  the  next  room ;  and 
there  the  good  girl  read  the  letter ;  but  it  was  long 
in  reading;  her  tears  often  interrupted  her:  and 
more  than  once,  as  wanting  a  refuge,  she  threw  her 
arms  about  my  neck,  in  silent  grief. 

I  called  her  twenty  tender  names;  but  I  could  not 
say  much :  what  could  I  ?  The  letter  in  some  places 
affected  me.  It  was  the  letter  of  a  mother  who 
seemed  extremely  sensible  of  hardships.  Her  guar- 
dian had  promised  observations  upon  it :  I  knew  not 
then  all  the  unhappy  woman's  wickedness :  I  knew 
not  but  the  husband  might  be  in  some  fault. — What 
could  I  say  ?  I  could  not  think  of  giving  comfort  to 
a  daughter  at  the  expence  of  even  a  bad  mother. 

Miss  Grandison  came  to  us :  she  kissed  the  sob- 
bing girl,  and  with  tenderness,  calling  us  her  two 
loves,  led  us  into  the  next  room. 

Sir  Charles,  it  seems,  had  owned,  in  our  absence, 
that  Mr.  and  Mrs.  O'Hara,  and  Captain  Salmonet, 
had  made  him  a  visit  in  town,  on  their  return  from 
Colnebrook,  and  expressed  himself  to  be  vexed  at 
his  own  behaviour  to  them. 

Miss  Jervois  gave  the  letter  to  her  guardian,  and 
went  behind  his  chair,  on  the  back  of  which  she 
leaned,  while  he  looked  into  the  letter,  and  made 
observations  upon  what  he  read,  as  nearly  in  the 
following  words  as  I  can  remember. 

An  unhappy  mother,  ivhose  faults  have  been  bar- 
barously aggravated — My  Emily's  father  was  an  in- 
dulgent husband!  He  forgave  this  unhappy  woman 
crimes,  which  very  few  men  would  have  forgiven : 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISOK.  Ill 

she  was.  the  wife  of  his  choice  :  he  doted  on  her* 
his  first  forgiveness  of  an  atrocious  crime  hardened 
her. 

When  he  could  not  live  with  her,  he  removed  from 
place  to  place,  to  avoid  her :  at  last,  afraid  of  her 
private  machinations,  which  were  of  the  blackest 
nature,  he  went  abroad,  in  order  to  pursue  that 
traffic  in  person,  which  he  managed  to  great  advan- 
tage by  his  agents  and  factors;  having  first,  however, 
made  an  handsome  provision  for  his  wife. 

Thither,  after  some  time  passed  in  riot  and  extra- 
vagance, she  followed  him. 

1  became  acquainted  with  him  at  Florence.  I 
found  him  to  be  a  sensible  and  honest  man ;  and 
every  one  whom  he  could  serve,  or  assist,  expe- 
rienced his  benevolence.  Not  a  single  soul  who 
knew  him,  but  loved  him,  this  wife  excepted. 

She  at  that  time  insisted  upon  his  giving  up  to  her 
management,  his  beloved  Emily;  and  solemnly  pro- 
mised reformation,  on  his  compliance.  She  knew 
that  the  child  would  be  a  great  fortune. 

I  was  with  Mr.  Jervois,  on  her  first  visit  to  him  at 
Leghorn;  and,  though  I  had  heard  her  character  to 
be  very  bad,  was  inclined  to  befriend  her.  She  was 
specious.  I  hoped  that  a  mother,  whatever  wife  she 
made,  could  not  but  be  a  mother ;  and  poor  Mr. 
Jervois  had  not  been  forward  to  say  the  worst  of  her. 
But  she  did  not  long  save  appearances.  The  whole 
English  factory  at  Leghorn  were  witnesses  of  her 
flagrant  enormities.  She  was  addicted  to  an  excess 
that  left  her  no  guard,  and  made  her  a  stranger  to 
that  grace  which  is  the  glory  of  a  woman. 

I  am  told,  that  she  is  less  frequently  intoxicated 
than  heretofore.  I  should  be  glad  of  the  least  sha- 
dow of  reformation  in  her.  That  odious  vice  led  her 
into  every  other,  and  hardened  her  to  a  sense  of 
shame.  Other  vices,  perhaps,  at  first,-  wanted  thai 
1.2 


112  THE   HISTORY   OF 

to  introduce  them ;  but  the  most  flagitious  have  been 
long  habitual  to  her. 

Nothing  but  the  justice  due  to  the  character  of  my 
departed  friend,  could  have  induced  me  to  say  what 
I  have  said  of  this  unhappy  woman.  Forgive  me,  my 
Emily :  but  shall  1  not  defend  your  father? — 1  have 
not  said  the  worst  I  could  say  of  his  wife. 

Yet  she  writes,  That  her  J'aults  have  been  barba- 
rousli/  ngvT}  avated,  in  order  to  justify  the  ill  unage  of 
a  husband,  vclm,  she  says,  was  yiotjaultless.  Ill  usage 
of  a  husband !  Wretched  woman  !  She  knew  I 
must  see  this  letter :  how  could  she  write  thus  ?  She 
knows  tliat  1  have  authentic  proofs  in  ray  custody,  of 
his  unexceptionable  goodness  to  her;  and  confes- 
sions, under  her.ownhand,  of  her  guilt,  and  ingra- 
titude to  him. 

But,  my  Emily — and  he  arose,  and  took  her  hand, 
her  face  overwhelmed  with  tears.  You  may  rejoice  in 
your  father's  character:  he  was  a  good  man,  m  every 
sense  of  the  word.  With  regard  to  her,  he  had  but 
one  fault;  and  that  was,  his  indulgence — Shall  I  say, 
that  after  repeated  elopements,  after  other  men  had 
cast  her  oflF,  he  took  her  back  ?  When  she  had  for- 
feited his  love,  hi?,  pity  operated  in  her  favour;  and 
she  was  hardened  enough  to  despise  the  man  who 
could  much  more  easily  forgive  than  punish  her.  I 
am  grieved  to  be  obliged  to  say  this ;  but  repeat, 
that  the  memory  of  my  friend  must  not  be  unjustly 
loaded.  Would  to  heaven  that  I  could  suggest  the 
shadow  of  a  plea  that  would  extenuate  any  part  of 
her  vileness,  either  respecting  him  or  herself;  let 
whose-soever  character  suffer  by  it,  I  would  suggest 
it.  How  often  has  this  worthy  husband  wept  to  me, 
for  those  faults  of  his  wife,  for  which  she  could  not 
be  sorry. 

i  discourage  not  these  tears,  my  Emily,  on  what 
you  have  heard  me  say ;  but  let  me  now  dry  them  up. 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  113 

He  took  her  own  handkerchief,  and  tenderly  wiped 
her  cheeks :  it  is  unnecessary,  proceeded  he,  to  say 
any  thing  further,  at  this  time,  in  defence  of  your 
father's  character ;  we  come  now  to  other  parts  of 
the  letter,  that  will  not,  I  hope,  be  so  affecting  to 
the  heart  of  a  good  child. 

She  insists  upon  your  making  her  a  visit,  or  re- 
ceiving one  from  her ;  she  longs,  she  says,  to  see 
you ;  to  lay  yoa  in  her  bosom.  She  congratulates 
you,  on  your  improvements  :  she  very  pathetically 
calls  upon  you  not  to  despise  her — 

My  dear  girl !  You  shall  receive  her  visit :  she 
shall  name  her  place  for  it,  provided  I  am  present. 
I  shall  think  it  a  sign  of  her  amendment,  if  she  is 
really  capable  of  rejoicing  in  your  improvements.  I 
have  always  told  you,  that  you  must  distinguish  be- 
tween the  crime  and  the  mother :  the  one  is  intitled 
to  your  pity ;  the  other  calls  for  your  abhorrence — 
Do  you  choose,  my  dear,  to  see  your  mother  ? — I 
hope  you  do.  Let  not  even  the  faulty  have  cause 
to  complain  of  unkindness  from  us.  There  are  faults 
that  must  be  left  to  heaven  to  punish  ;  and  against 
the  consequences  of  which  it  behoves  us  only  to 
guard,  for  our  own  sakes.  I  hope  you  are  in  a  safe 
protection,  and  have  nothing  to  fear  from  her :  you 
are  guarded,  therefore.  Can  my  Emily  forget  the 
terrors  of  the  last  interview,  and  calmly,  in  my  pre- 
sence, kneel  to  her  mother  ? 

Whatever  you  command  me  to  do,  I  will  do. 

I  would  have  you  answer  this  letter.  Invite  her 
to  the  house  of  your  guardian — I  think  you  should 
not  go  to  her  lodgings:  yet,  if  you  incline  to  see  her 
there,  and  she  insists  upon  it,  I  will  attend  you. 

But,  Sir,  must  I  own  her  husband  for  my  father  ? 

Leave  that  to  me,  my  dear :  little  things,  puncti- 
lios, are  not  to  be  stood  upon  :  pride  shall  have  no 
concern  with  u&.     But  I  must  first  be  satisfied,  that 
L  3 


114  THE    HISTORY   OF 

the  man  and  she  are  actually  married.  Who  knows, 
if  they  are,  but  his  dependence  on  her  annuity,  and 
the  protection  she  may  hope  for  from  him,  may  make 
it  convenient  to  both,  to  live  in  a  more  creditable 
manner  than  hitherto  she  has  aimed  to  do  ?  If  she 
save  but  appearances,  for  the  future,  it  will  be  a 
point  gained. 

1  will  in  every  thing,  Sir,  do  as  you  would  have 
me. 

One  thing,  my  dear,  I  think  I  will  advise  :  if  they 
are  really  married;  if  there  be  any  prospect  of  their 
living  tolerably  together;  you  shall,  if  you  please, 
(your  fortune  is  very  large)  make  them  a  handsome 
present;  and  give  hope,  that  it  will  be  an  annual 
one,  if  the  man  behave  with  civility  to  your  mother. 
She  complains,  that  she  is  made  poor  and  dependent. 
Poor  if  she  be,  it  is  her  own  fault:  she  brought  not 
20{)1.  to  your  father.  Ungrateful  woman!  he  mar- 
ried her,  as  1  hinted,  for  love.  With  2001.  a  year, 
well  paid,  she  ought  not  to  be  poor ;  but  dependent 
she  must  be.  Your  father  would  have  given  her  a 
larger  annuity,  had  he  not  known,  by  experience, 
that  it  was  but  strengthening  her  hands  to  do  mis- 
chief; and  to  enable  her  to  be  more  riotous.  1  found 
a  declaration  of  this  kind  among  his  papers,  after 
his  death.  This  his  intention,  if  there  could  have 
been  any  hope  of  a  good  use  to  be  made  of  it,  jus- 
tifies my  advice  to  you,  to  enlarge  her  stipend:  I  will 
put  it  in  such  a  way,  that  you,  my  dear,  shall  have 
the  credit  of  it;  and  J  will  take  upon  myself  the  ad- 
vice of  restraining  it  to  good  behaviour,  for  their 
own  sakes,  and  for  yours. 

O  Sir !  how  good  you  are !  You  now  give  me 
courage  to  wish  to  see  my  poor  mother,  in  hopes  that 
it  will  be  in  my  power  to  do  her  good:  continue  to 
your  Emily  the  blessing  of  your  direction,  and  1  shall 
be  a  happy  girl  indeed.    O  that  my  mother  may  be 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  115 

married!  that  so  she  may  be  intitledto  the  best  you 
shall  advise  me  to  do  for  her. 

I  doubt  her  man  is  a  man  of  the  town,  added  he ; 
but  he  may  have  lived  long  enough  to  see  his  follies. 
She  may  be  tired  of  the  life  she  has  led.  I  have 
made  several  efforts  to  do  her  service ;  but  have  no 
hope  to  reclaim  her.  I  wish  she  may  now  be  a  wife 
in  earnest.  But  this,  I  think,  shall  be  my  last  effort 
— Write,  my  dear ;  but  nothing  of  your  intention. 
If  she  is  not  married,  things  must  remain  as  they 
are. 

She  hastened  up  stairs,  and  very  soon  returned, 
with  the  following  lines : 

MADAM, 

I  beseech  you  to  believe,  that  I  am  not  wanting 
in  duty  to  my  mother.  You  rejoice  my  heart,  when 
you  tell  me,  that  you  love  me.  My  guardian  was 
so  good,  before  1  could  have  time  to  ask  him,  as 
to  bid  me  write  to  you,  and  to  let  you  know,  that  he 
will  himself  present  me  to  you,  whenever  you  please 
to  favour  nie  with  an  opportunity  to  pay  my  duty  to 
you,  at  his  house  in  St.  James's  Square. 

Let  me  hope,  my  dear  mamma,  that  you  will  not 
be  so  angry  with  your  ])oor  girl,  as  you  was  last  time 
I  saw  you  at  Mrs.  Lane's ;  and  then  I  will  see  you 
with  all  the  duty  that  a  child  owes  to  her  mother. 
For  I  am,  and  ever  will  be, 

Your  dutiful  daughter, 

EMILIA  JERVOIS. 

Sir  Charles  generously  scrupled  thelast  paragraph. 
We  will  not,  1  think,  Emily,  said  he,  remind  a 
mother,  who  has  written  such  a  letter  as  that  before 
us,  of  a  behaviour  that  she  should  be  glad  to  forget. 

Miss  Grandison  desired  it  might  stand.     Who 


116  THE   HISTORY    OF 

knows,  said  she,  but  it  may  make  her  ashamed  of  her 
outrageous  behaviour  at  that  time? 

She  deserves  not  generous  usage,  said  Lady  L.; 
she  cannot  feel  it. 

Perhaps  not,  replied  Sir  Charles ;  but  we  should 
do  proper  things^or  our  own  sokes,  whether  the  per- 
sons are  capable  of  feeling  them  as  they  ought,  or 
not.  What  say  i/ou,  Miss  Byron,  to  this  last 
paragraph  ? 

I  was  entirely  in  his  way  of  thinking,  and  for  the 
reason  he  gave ;  but  the  two  ladies  having  given  their 
opinion  in  a  pretty  earnest  manner,  and  my  lord  say- 
ing, he  thought  it  might  pass,  I  was  afraid  it  would 
look  like  bespeaking  his  favour  at  their  expence,  if 
I  adopted  his  sentiments :  I  therefore  declined  giving 
my  opinion.  But  being  willing  to  keep  Emily  in 
countenance,  who  sat  suspended  in  her  judgment,  as 
one  who  feared  she  had  done  a  wrong  thing ;  I  said. 
It  was  a  very  natural  paragraph,  I  thought,  from 
Miss  Jervois's  pen,  as  it  was  written,  I  dared  to  say, 
rather  in  apprehension  of  hard  treatment,  from  what 
she  remembered  of  the  last,  than  in  a  spirit  of  re- 
crimination or  resentment. 

The  good  girl  declared  it  was.  Both  ladies,  and 
my  lord,  said,  I  had  distinguished  well :  but  Sir 
Charles,  though  he  said  no  more  upon  the  subject, 
looked  upon  each  sister  with  meaning ;  which  I  won- 
dered they  did  not  observe.  Dr.  Bartlett  was  with- 
drawn, or  I  believe  he  would  have  had  the  honesty  to 
speak  out,  which  I  had  not :  but  the  point  was  a 
point  of  delicacy  and  generosity ;  and  I  thought  I 
should  not  seem  to  imagine,  that  I  understood  it 
better  than  they :  nor  did  I  think,  that  Sir  Charles 
would  have  acquiesced  with  their  opinion. 

Miss  Jervois  retired,  to  transcribe  her  letter.  We 
all  separated,  to  dress ;  and  I,  having  soon  made  an 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  117 

alteration  in  mine,  dropt  in  upon  Dr.  Bartlett  in  his 
closet. 

1  am  stealing  from  this  good  man  a  little  improve- 
ment in  my  geography :  1  am  delighted  with  my 
tutor,  and  he  professes  to  be  pleased  with  his  scholar ; 
but  sometimes  more  interesting  articles  slide  in:  but 
now  he  had  just  begun  to  talk  of  Miss  Jervois,  as  if 
he  would  have  led,  1  thought,  to  the  proposal  hinted 
at  by  Miss  Grandison,  from  the  letter  she  had  so 
clandestinely  seen,,  of  my  taking  her  under  my  care, 
when  Sir  Charles  entered  the  doctor's  apartment. 
He  would  have  withdrawn,  when  he  saw  me ;  but 
the  doctor,  rising  from  his  chair,  besought  him  to 
oblige  us  with  his  company. 

I  was  silly  :  I  did  not  expect  to  be  caught  there. 
But  why  was  I  silly  on  being  found  with  Dr.  Bart- 
lett?— But  let  me  tell  you,  that  I  thought  Sir  Charles 
himself,  at  first  addressing  me,  seemed  a  little  un- 
prepared. You  invited  me  in,  doctor :  here  I  am. 
But  if  you  were  upon  a  subject  that  you  do  not  pur- 
sue, 1  shall  look  upon  myself  as  an  intruder,  and 
will  withdraw.  o 

We  had  concluded  one  subject.  Sir,  and  were  be- 
ginning another — 1  had  just  mentioned  Miss  Jer- 
vois. 

Is  not  Emily  a  good  child,  Miss  Byron  ?  said  Sir 
Charles. 

Indeed,  Sir,  she  is. 

We  then  had  some  general  talk  of  the  unhappy 
situation  she  is  in  from  such  a  mother;  and  I  thought 
some  hints  would  have  been  given  of  his  desire  that 
she  should  accompany  me  down  to  Northampton- 
shire; and  my  heart  throbbed,  to  think  how  it  would 
be  brought  in,  and  how  I  should  behave  upon  it: 
and  the  more,  as  I  was  not  to  be  supposed  to  have  so 
much  as  heard  of  such  a  designed  proposal.  What 
would  it  have  done,  had  I  been  prevailed  upon  to 

3 


118  THE   HISTORY   OF 

read  the  letter?  but  not  one  word  passed,  leading  to 
that  subject. 

I  now  begin  to^^ar,  that  he  has  changed  his  mind, 
if  that  was  his  mind.  Methinks  I  am  more  fond  of 
having  the  good  girl  with  us,  than  I  imagined  it  was 
possible  I  ever  could  have  been.  What  a  different 
appearance  have  things  to  us,  when  they  are  out  of 
our  power,  to  what  they  had  when  we  beHcved  they 
were  in  it? 

But  I  see  not,  that  there  is  the  least  Hkelihood  that 
any  thing,  on  which  you  had  all  set  your  hearts,  can 
happen — I  can't  help  it. 

Emily,  flattering  girl !  told  me,  she  saw  great  signs 
of  attachment  to  me  in  his  eyes  and  behaviour ;  but 
I  see  no  grounds  for  such  a  surmise :  his  affections 
are  certainly  engaged.  God  bless  him,  whatever  his 
engagements  are ! — When  he  was  absent,  encourag- 
ed by  his  sisters  and  Lord  L.  I  thought  pretty  well 
of  myself;  but,  now  he  is  present,  I  see  so  many  ex- 
cellencies shining  out  in  his  mind,  in  his  air  and 
address,  that  my  humility  gets  the  better  of  my 
ambition. 

Ambition !  did  I  say?  Yes,  ambition,  Lucy.  Is  it 
not  the  nature  of  the  passion  we  are  so  foolishly  apt 
to  call  nobUy  to  exalt  the  object,  and  to  lower,  if  not 
to  debase,  one's  self?  [You  see  how  Lord  W.  de- 
preciates me  on  the  score  of  fortune.  I  was  loth  to 
take  notice  of  that  before,  because  I  knew,  that  were 
slenderness  of  fortune  the  only  difficulty,  the  par- 
tiality of  all  my  friends  for  their  Harriet  would  put 
them  upon  making  efforts  that  I  would  sooner  die 
than  suffer  to  be  made.  This,  Lucy,  observe,  is 
between  hooks.] 

I  forget  the  manner  in  which  Lord  W.'s  objection 
was  permitted  to  go  off — but  I  remember.  Sir  Charles 
made  no  attempt  to  answer  it:  and  yet  he  tells  my 
lord,  that  fortune  is  not  a  principal  article  with  him; 


SIR   CHAULES    GRANDISON.  119 

and  that  he  has  an  ample  estate  of  his  own.  No 
question  but  a  man's  duties  will  rise  with  his  oppor- 
tunities. A  man,  therefore,  may  be  as  good  with  a 
less  estate,  as  with  a  larger ;  and  is  not  goodness  the 
essential  part  of  happiness  ?  Be  our  station  what  it 
will,  have  we  any  concern  but  humbly  to  acquiesce 
in  it, and  fulfil  the  duties  belonging  to  that  station? 

But  who,  for  selfish  considerations,  can  wish  to 
circumscribe  the  power  of  this  good  man?  The  greater 
opportunities  he  has  of  doing  good,  the  higher  must 
be  his  enjoyment.  No,  Lucy,  do  not  let  us  flatter 
ourselves. 

Sir  Charles  rejoices,  on  Sir  Hargrave's  having  just 
now,  by  letter,  suspended  the  appointment  till  next 
week,  of  his  dining  with  him  at  his  house  on  the 
forest. 


LETTER  XV. 

MISS   BYRON.      IN   CONTINUATION. 

I  LEFT  Sir  Charles  with  Dr.  Bartlett.  They  would 
have  both  engaged  me  to  stay  longer;  but  I  thought 
the  ladies  would  miss  me,  and  think  it  particular  to 
find  me  with  him  in  the  doctor's  closet. 

My  lord  and  the  two  sisters  were  together  in  the 
drawing-room  adjoining  to  the  library :  on  my  en- 
trance. Well,  Harriet,  said  Miss  Grandison,  we  will 
now  endeavour  to  find  out  my  brother:  you  must  be 
present  to  yourself,  and  put  in  a  word  now-and-then. 
We  shall  see  if  Dr.  Bartlett  is  right,  when  he  says, 
that  my  brother  is  the  most  unreserved  of  men. 

Just  then  came  in  Dr.  Bartlett — I  think,  doctor, 
said  Lady  L.  we  will  take  your  advice,  and  ask  my 
brother  all  the  questions  in  relation  to  his  engage- 
ments abroad,  that  come  into  our  heads. 


120  THE    HISTORY   OF 

She  had  not  done  speaking,  when  Sir  Charles  en- 
tered, and  drew  his  chair  next  me  ;  and  just  then  1 
thought  myself  he  looked  upon  me  with  equal  be- 
nignity and  respect. 

Miss  Grandison  began  with  taking  notice  of  the 
letter,  from  which  Dr.  Bartlett,  she  said,  had  read 
some  passages,  of  the  happiness  he  had  procured  to 
Lord  W.  in  ridding  him  of  his  woman.  She  wished, 
she  told  him,  that  she  knew  who  was  the  lady  he  had 
in  his  thoughts  to  commend  to  my  lord  for  a  wife. 

I  will  have  a  little  talk  with  her  before  I  name  her, 
6ven  to  you,  my  lord,  and  my  sisters.  I  am  sure 
my  sisters  will  approve  of  their  aunt,  if  she  accept 
of  my  lord  for  ahusband:  I  shall  pay  my  compliments 
to  her,  in  my  return  from  Grandison-hall." — Do  you, 
Charlotte,  choose  to  accompany  me  thither?  I  must, 
I  think,  be  present  at  the  opening  of  the  church.  I 
don't  ask  you,  my  lord,  nor  you,  Lady  L.  so  short 
as  my  stay  will  be  there  I  purpose  to  go  down  on 
Friday  next,  and  return  the  Tuesday  following. 

Miss  Gr.  I  think,  brother,  I  should  wish  to  be  ex- 
cused. If,  indeed,  you  would  stay  there  a  week  or 
fortnight,  I  could  like  to  attend  you;  and  so,  I  dare 
say,  would  Lord  and  Lady  L. 

Sir  Ch.  I  must  be  in  town  on  Wednesday  next 
week  ;  but  you  may  stay  the  time  you  mention :  you 
cannot  pass  it  disagreeably  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
the  hall;  and  there  you  will  find  your  cousin  Gran- 
dison :  he  will  gallant  you  from  one  neighbour  to 
another:  and,  if  1  judge  by  your  freedoms  with  him, 
you  have  a  greater  regard  for  him,  than  perhaps  you 
know  you  have. 

Miss  Gr.  Your  servant,  Sir,  bowing — But  I  will 
take  my  revenge — Pray,  Sir  Charles,  may  1  ask  (we 
are  all  brothers  and  sisters) — 

Sir  Ch.  Stop,  Charlotte  {pleasantly):  if  you  are 
going  to  ask  any  questions  by  way  of  revenge,  I 
answer  them  not. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  121 

Miss  Gr.  Revenge  !  Not  revenge,  neither— But 
when  my  Lord  W.  as  by  the  passages  Dr.  Bartlett 
was  so  good  as  to  read  to  us,  proposed  to  you  this 
lady  for  a  wife,  and  that  lady ;  your  answers  gave  us 
apprehension  that  you  are  not  inclined  to  marry — 

Ladi/  L.  You  are  very  unceremonious,  Charlotte. 

Indeed,  Lucy,  she  made  me  tremble.  .Sure  he 
can  have  no  notion  that  I  have  seen  the  iv/iole  let- 
ter— seen  myself  named  in  it. 

Miss  Gr.  What  signifies  ceremony  among  rela- 
tions ? 

Sir  Ch.  Let  Charlotte  have  her  way. 

Miss  Gr.  Why  then,  Sir,  I  would  ask — Don't  you 
intend  one  day  to  marry  ? 

Sir  Ch.  I  do,  Charlotte.  I  shall  not  think  myself 
happy  till  I  can  obtain  the  hand  of  a  worthy  woman. 

I  was,  I  am  afraid,  Lucy,  visibly  affected:  I  knew 
not  how  to  stay;  yet  it  would  have  looked  worse  to 
go. 

Miss  Gr.  Very  well,  Sir — And  pray,  Have  you 
not,  either  abroad  or  at  home,  seen  the  woman  you 
could  wish  to  call  yours  ? — Don't  think  me  imper- 
tinent, brother. 

Sir  Ch.  You  cannot  be  impertinent,  Charlotte. 
If  you  want  to  know  any  thing  of  me,  it  pleases  me 
best,  when  you  come  directly  to  the  point. 

Miss  Gr.  Well,  then,  if  I  cannot  be  impertinent : 
if  you  are  best  pleased  when  you  are  most  freely 
treated;  and  if  you  are  inclined  to  marry;  pray  why 
did  you  decline  the  proposals  mentioned  by  Lord  VV. 
in  behalf  of  Lady  Frances  N.  of  Lady  Anne  S.  and 
I  cannot  tell  how  many  more? 

Sir  Ch.  The  friends  of  the  first-named  lady  pro- 
ceeded not  generously  with  my  father,  in  that  affair. 
The  whole  family  builds  too  much  on  the  interest 
and  quality  of  her  father.  I  wanted  not  to  depend 
upon  any  public  man;  I  chose,  as  much  as  possible, 

M 


122  THE    HISTORY    OF 

to  fix  my  happiness  within  my  own  little  circle.  I 
have  strong  passions:  I  am  not  without  ambition. 
Had  I  loosened  the  reins  to  the  latter,  young  man 
as  I  am,  my  tranquillity  would  have  been  pinned 
to  the  feather  in  another  man's  cap.  Does  this  sa- 
tisfy you,  Charlotte,  as  to  Lady  Frances  ? 

Miss  Gr.  Why,  yes ;  and  the  easier,  because 
there  is  a  lady  whom  I  could  have  preferred  to 
Lady  Frances. 

I  should  not,  thought  I,  have  been  present  at 
this  conversation.  Lord  L.  looked  at  me.  Lord 
L.  should  not  have  looked  at  me :  the  ladies  did  not. 

SirCh.  Who  is  she? 

Miss  Gr.  Lady  Anne  S.  you  know,.  Sir— Pray, 
may  I  ask.  Why  that  cotild  not  be  ? 

Sir  Ch.  Lady  Anne  is,  I  believe,  a  deserving 
woman ;  but  her  fortune  must  have  been  my  prin- 
cipal inducement,  had  I  made  my  addresses  to  her. 
I  never  yet  went  so  low  as  that  alone,  for  an  in- 
ducement to  see  a  lady  three  times. 

Miss  Gr.  Then,  Sir,  you  have  made  your  ad- 
dresses to  ladies — abroad,  I  suppose  ? 

Sir  Ch.  I  thought,  Charlotte,  your  curiosity  ex- 
tended only  to  the  ladies  in  England. 

Miss  Gr.  Yes,  Sir,  it  extends  to  ladies  in  Eng- 
land, and  out  of  England,  if  any  there  be  that  have 
kept  my  brother  a  single  man,  when  such  offers 
have  been  made  him  as  we  think  ivould  have  been 
unexceptionable.  But  you  hint  then,  Sir,  that 
there  are  ladies  abroad — 

Sir  Ch.  Take  care,  Charlotte,  that  you  make  as 
free  a  respondent,  when  it  comes  to  your  turn,  as 
you  are  a  questioner. 

Miss  Gr.  By  your  answers  to  my  questions.  Sir, 
teach  me  how  I  am  to  answer  yours,  if  you  have  any 
to  ask. 

Sir  Ch,  Very  well,  Charlotte.    Have  I  not  an- 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  123 

swered  satisfactorily  your  questions  about  the  ladies 
you  named  ? 

Miss  Gr.  Pretty  well.  But,  Sir,  have  you  not 
seen  ladies  abroad  whom  you  like  better  than  either 
of  those  I  have  named  ? — Answer  me  to  that. 

Sir  Ch.  I  have,  Charlotte,  and  at  home  too. 

Miss  Gr.  I  don't  know  what  to  say  to  you — But, 

{)ray,  Sir,  have  you  not  seen  ladies  abroad  whom  you 
lave  liked  better  than  any  you  ever  saw  at  home  ? 

Sir  Ch.  No.  But  tell  me,  Charlotte,  to  what  does 
all  this  tend? 

Miss  Gr.  Only,  brother,  that  we  long  to  have  you 
happily  married;  and  we  are  afraid,  that  your  de- 
clining this  proposal  and  that,  is  owing  to  some  pre- 
vious attachment — and  now  all  is  out. 

Lord  L.  And  now,  my  dear  brother,  all  is  out. — 

Lady  L.  If  our  brother  will  gratify  our  curiosity 
—Had  I  ever  before,  Lucy,  so  great  a  call  upon 
me  as  now,  for  presence  ox  mind  ? 

Sir  Charles  sighed:  he  paused:  and  at  last  said 
— You  are  very  generous,  very  kind,  in  your  wishes 
to  see  me  married.  I  have  seen  the  lady,  with 
whom,  of  all  the  women  in  the  world,  I  think,  I 
could  be  happy. 

A  fine  blush  overspread  his  face,  and  he  looked 
down.  Why,  Sir  Charles,  did  you  blush  ?  Why  did 
you  look  down  ?  The  happy,  thrice  happy  woman, 
was  not  present,  was  she  ? — Ah,  No !  no !  no ! — 

SirCh.  And  now,  Charlotte,  what  other  questions 
have  you  to  ask,  before  it  comes  to  your  turn  to 
answer  some  that  I  have  to  put  to  you  ? 

Miss  Gr.  Only  one — Is  the  lady  a  foreign  lady  ? 

How  every  body  but  I  looked  at  him,  expecting 
his  answer! — ^He  really  hesitated.  At  last,  I  think, 
Charlotte,  you  will  excuse  me,  if  I  say,  that  this 
question  gives  me  some  pain — Because  it  leads  to 
another,  thatj/made,  I  cannot  at  present  myself  ansvoer 
M  2 


1^  THE    HISTORY    OF 

[But  why  SO,  Sir?  thought  I]:  and  if  not  made,  it 
cannot  be  of  any  signification  to  speak  to  this. 

LordL.  We  would  not  give  you  pain,  ISir  Charles: 
and  yet— 

Sir  Ch.  What  yet,  my  dear  Lord  L.? 

LnrdL.  When  I  was  at  Florence,  there  was 
much  talk — 

Sir  Ch.  Of  a  lady  of  that  city — Olivia,  my  lord! 
—There  was.  She  has  fine  qualities,  but  unhappily 
blended  with  others  less  approveable. — But  1  have 
nothing  to  wish  for  from  Olivia.  She  has  done  me 
too  much  honour.  I  should  not  so  readily  have 
named  her  now,  had  she  herself  beeij  more  solicitous 
to  conceal  the  distinction  she  honoured  me  with. 
But  your  lordship,  I  dare  hope,  never  heard  even  ill- 
Kvill  open  its  mouth  to  her  disreputation,  only  that 
she  descended  too  much  in  her  regard  for  one  object. 

Lord  L.  Your  character,  Sir  Charles,  was  as  much 
to  the  reputation  of  her  favour,  as — 

Sir  Ch.  {interrupting)  O  my  lord,  how  brotherly 
partial !  But  this  lady  out  of  the  question,  my  peace 
has  been  bi'oken  by  a  tender  fault  in  my  constitution 
— And  yet  I  would  not  be  without  it. 

The  sweet  Emily  arose,  and,  in  tearSjVent  to  the 
window.  A  sob,  endeavoured  to  be  suppressed, 
called  our  attention  to  her. 

Sir  Charles  went,  and  took  her  hand :  Wliy 
weeps  my  Emily  ? 

Because  you,  who  so  well  deserve  to  be  happy, 
seem  not  to  be  so. 

Tender  examples,  Lucy,  are  catching:  I  had 
much  ado  to  restrain  my  tears. 

He  kindly  consoled  her.  My  unhappiness,  my 
dear,  said  he,  arises  chiefly  from  that  of  other  people. 
I  should  but  for  that  be  happy  in  myself,  because  I 
endeavour  to  accommodate  my  mind  to  bear  inevita- 
ble evils,  and  to  make,  if  possible,  a  virtue  of  neces- 


SIR   CHARLES  GRANDISON.  12b 

sity:  but,  Charlotte,  see  how  grave  you  have  made 
us  all !  and  yet  I  must  enter  with  you  upon  a  sub- 
ject that  possibly  may  be  thought  as  serious  by 
you,  as  that  which,  at  present,  I  wish  to  quit. 
"  Wish  to  quit !"  "  The  question  gave  him  some 

Eain,  because  it  led  to  another,  which  he  cannot 
imself  at  present  answer!" — What,  Lucy,  let 
me  ask  you  before  1  follow  him  to  his  next  subject, 
can  you  gather  from  what  passed  in  that,  already 
recited  ?  If  he  is  himself  at  an  uncertainty,  he  may 
deserve  to  be  pitied,  and  not  blamed:  but  dont 
you  think  he  might  have  answered,  whether  the  lady 
IS  a  foreigner  or  not? — How  could  he  hioxu  what 
the  next  question  would  have  been  ? 

I  had  the  assurance  to  ask  Miss  Grandison  after- 
wards, aside,  Whether  any  thing  could  be  made 
out,  or  guessed  at,  by  his  eyes,  when  he  spoke  of 
having  seen  the  woman  he  could  prefer  to  all  others  ? 
For  he  sat  next  me ;  she  over  against  him, 

I  know  not  what  to  make  of  him,  said  she :  but 
be  the  lady  native  or  foreigner,  it  is  my  humble 
opinion,  that  my  brother  is  in  love.  He  has  all  the 
symptoms  of  it  that  I  can  guess  by. 

I  am  of  Charlotte's  opinion,  Lucy.  Such  tender 
sentiments :  such  sweetness  of  manners :  such  gen- 
tleness of  voice! — Love  has  certainly  done  all  this 
for  him :  and  the  lady,  to  be  sure,  is  a  foreigner. 
It  would  be  strange  if  such  a  man  should  not  have 
engaged  his  heart  in  the  seven  or  eight  years  past ; 
and  those  from  eighteen  to  twenty-six  or  seven,  the 
most  susceptible  of  a  man's  life. 

But  what  means  he,  by  saying,  "  His'peace  has 
been  broken  by  a  tender  mult  in  his  constitution  ?" — 
Compassion,  I  suppose,  for  some  unhappy  object. — I 
will  soon  return  to  town,  and  there  prepare  to  throw 
myself  into  the  arms  of  my  dearest  relations  in  North- 
amptonshire: I  shall  otherwise,  perhaps,  add  to  the 
m3 


126  THE    HISTORY    OF 

number  of  those  who  have  broken  his  peace.  But  it 
is  strange,  methinks,  that  he  could  not  have  answer- 
ed, Whether  the  lady  is  a  foreigner  or  not. 

Dr.  Bartlett,  you  are  mistaken;  ijir  Charles 
Grandison  is  not  so  very  wn-reserved  a  man,  as  you 
said  he  was. 

But  Oh !  my  dear  little  flattering  Emily,  how 
could  you  tell  me,  that  you  watched  his  eyes,  and 
saw  them  always  kindly  bent  on  me  ? — Yes,  per- 
haps, when  you  thought  so,  he  was  drawing  com- 
parisons to  the  advantage  of  his  fair  foreigner,  from 
my  less  agreeable  features  ! — 

But  this  Olivia!  Lucy.  I  want  to  know  some- 
thing more  of //er.  "  Nothing,"  he  says,  "  to  wish 
for  from  Olivia." — Poor  lady  !  Methinks  I  am  very 
much  inclined  to  pity  her, 

f-  Well,  but  I  will  proceed  now  to  his  next  subject. 
I  wish  I  could  find  some  faults  in  him.  It  is  a  cruel 
thing  to  be  under  a  kind  of  necessity  to  be  angry 
with  a  man  whom  we  cannot  blame ;  and  yet,  in 
the  next  conversation,  you  will  see  him  angry. 
Don't  you  long,  Lucy,  to  see  how  Sir  Charles 
Grandison  will  behave  when  he  is  angry  ? 


LIPTTER  XVL 

MJSS   B*YRON.      IN    CONTINUATION. 

• 

Now,  Charlotte,  said  he,  (as  if  he  had  fully  answer- 
ed the  questions  put  to  him — O  these  men !)  let  me 
ask  you  a  question  or  two — I  had  a  visit  made  me 
yesterday,  by  Lord  G.  What,  my  dear,  do  you  in- 
tend to  do  with  regard  to  him  ?— But,  perhaps,  you 
would  choose  to  withdraw  with  me,  on  this  question. 
Miss  Gr.  1  wish  1  had  made  to  you  the  same 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  127 

overture  of  withdrawing  Sir  Charles,  on  the  ques- 
tions I  put  to  you :  If  1  had,  I  should  have  received 
more  satisfaction,  I  fancy,  than  I  can  now  boast  of. 

Sir  Ch.  I  will  withdraw  with  you,  if  you  please, 
and  hear  any  other  questions  you  have  to  put  to  me. 

Miss  Gr.  You  can  put  no  questions  to  me.  Sir, 
that  I  shall  have  any  objection  to  answer  before 
this  company. 

Sir  Ch.  You  know  my  question,  Charlotte.    ' 

Miss  Gr.  What  would  i/ou  advise  me  to  do  in 
that  affair,  brother? 

Sir  Ch.  1  have  only  one  piece  of  advice  to  give 
you : — it  is,  that  you  will  either  encourage  or  dis- 
courage his  address — if  you  know  your  own  mind. 

Miss  Gr.  I  believe,  brother,  you  want  to  get  rid 
of  me. 

Sir  Ch.  Then  you  intend  to  encourage  Lord  G.  ? 

Mm  Gr.  Does  that  follow,  Sir  ? 

Sir  Ch.  Or  you  could  not  have  supposed,  that  I 
w;anted  to  part  with  you.  But  come,  Charlotte,  let 
us  retire.  It  is  very  difficult  to  get  a  direct  answer 
to  such  questions  as  these,  from  ladies,  before  com- 
pany, though  the  company  be  ever  so  nearly  re- 
lated to  them. 

Miss  Gr.  I  can  answer,  before  this  company, 
any  questions  that  relate  to  Lord  G. 

Sir  Ch.  Then  you  don^t  intend  to  encourage  him  ? 

Miss  Gr.  1  don't  see  how  that  follows,  neither, 
from  what  I  said. 

Sir  Ch.  It  does,  very  clearly.    I  am  not  an  abso- 
lute stranger  to  the  language  of  women,  Charlotte. 
Miss  Gr.   1  thought  my  brother  too  polite  to  re- 
flect upon  the  sex. 

Sir  Ch.  Is  it  to  reflect  upon  the  sex  to  say,  that  I 
am  not  an  absolute  stranger  to  their  language  ? 

Miss  Gr.  I  protest,  I  think  so,  in  the  way  you 
spoke  it 


128  THE  HISTORY  OF 

Sir  Ch.  Well  then,  try  if  you  cannot  find  a  lan- 
guage to  speak  in,  that  may  not  be  capable  of  such 
an  interpretation. 

Miss  Gr.  I  am  afraid  you  are  displeased  with 
me,  brother.    I  will  answer  more  directly. 

Sir  Ch.  Do,  my  Charlotte:  I  have  promised  Lord 
G.  to  procure  him  an  answer. 

Miss  Gr.  Is  the  question  he  puts,  Sir,  a  brief  one 
— On  or  offl 

Sir  Ch.  Trust  me,  Charlotte !  you  may,  even  with 
your  punctilio. 

Miss  Gr.  Will  you  not  advise  me,  Sir? 

Sir  Ch.  I  will — To  pursue  your  inclination. 

Miss  Gr.  Suppose,  if  I  knew  yours,  that  that 
would  turn  the  scale  ? 

Sir  Ch.  Is  the  balance  even? 

Miss  Gr.  I  can't  say  that,  neither. 

Sir  Ch.  Then  dismiss  my  Lord  G. 

Miss  Gr.  Indeed,  brother,  you  are  angry  with  me. 

Sir  Ch.  {addressing  himself  to  me)  I  am  sure,  Miss 
Byron,  that  I  shall  find,  in  such  points  as  this,  a  very 
different  sister  in  you,  when  I  come  to  be  favoured 
with  the  perusal  of  your  letters.  Your  cousin  Reeves 
once  said.  That  when  you  knew  your  own  mind,  you 
nearer  kept  any  one  in  suspense. 

Miss  Gr.  But  I,  brother,  can't  say  that  I  know 
my  mind  absolutely. 

Sir  Ch.  That  is  another  thing ;  I  am  silent.  Only 
when  you  do,  I  shall  take  it  for  a  favour,  if  you  will 
communicate  it  to  me,  for  your  service. 

Miss  Gr.  I  am  among  my  best  friends — Lord  L. 
what  is  your  advice  ?  Sir  Charles  does  not  incline 
to  give  me  his? 

Sir  Ch.  It  is  owing  to  my  regard  to  your  own  in- 
clinations, and  not  to  displeasure  or  petulance,  that 
I  do  not. 

Lord  L.  I  have  a  very  good  opinion  of  Lord  G. 
What  is  yours,  my  dear  ?  to  Lady  L.  ' 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  l^y 

-  Ladif  L.  I  really  think  very  well  of  my  Lord  G. 
What  is  yours,  Miss  Byron? 

Harriet.  I  believe  Miss  Grandison  must  be  the 
sole  determiner,  on  this  occasion.  If  she  has  no 
objection,  I  presume  to  think,  that  no  one  else  can 
have  any. 

Miss  Gr.  Explain,  explain,  Harriet — 

Sir  Ch.  Miss  Byron  answers  as  she  always  does  x- 
penetration  and  prudence,  with  her,  never  quit  com- 
pany. \i  I  have  the  honour  to  explain  her  sentiments 
in  giving  mine,  take  both  as  follow  :  My  Lord  G.  is 
a  good-natured,  mild  man :  he  will  make  a  woman 
happy,  who  has  some  share  of  prudence,  though  slie 
has  a  still  greater  share  of  will.  Charlotte  is  very 
lively :  she  loves  her  jest  almost  as  well  as  she  loves 
her  friend — 

Miss  Gr.  How,  brother  } 

Sir  Ch .  And  Lord  G.  will  not  stand  in  competi- 
tion with  her,  in  that  respect :  there  should  not  be 
a  rivalry  in  particular  qualities,  in  marriage.  I  have 
known  a  poet  commence  a  hatred  to  his  wife,  on  her 
being  complimented  with  making  better  verses  than 
he.  Let  Charlotte  agree  upon  those  qualities  in 
which  she  will  allow  her  husband  to  excel ;  and  he 
allow,  in  her,  those  she  has  a  desire  to  monopolize : 
and  all  may  do  well. 

Miss  Gr.  Then  Lord  G.  must  not  be  disputed 
with,  I  presume,  were  I  to  be  his  wife,  on  the  sub- 
ject of  moths  and  'butterflies. 

Sir  Ch.  Yet  Lord  G.  may  give  them  up,  when  he 
has  a  more  considerable  trifle  to  amuse  himself  with. 
Pardon  me,  Charlotte — Are  you  not,  as  far  as  we 
have  gone  in  this  conversation,  a  pretty  trifler.^ 

Miss  Gr.  {bovoi.ig)  Thank  you,  brother.  Tlie 
epithets  pretti/,  and  young,  and  little,  are  great  qua- 
lifiers of  harsh  words. 

Sir  Ch.  But  do  you  like  Sir  Walter  Watkyns 
better  than  Lord  G.  ? 


130  THE    HISTORY   OF 

Mist  Gr.  I  think  not.  He  is  not,  I  believe,  so 
good  natured  a  man  as  the  other. 

Sir  Ch.  I  am  glad  you  make  that  distinction, 
Charlotte. 

Miss  Gr.  You  think  it  a  necessary  one  in  my 
case,  I  suppose,  Sir? 

<S7V  Ch.  I  have  a  letter  of  his  to  answer.  He  is 
very  urgent  with  me  for  my  interest  with  you.  I  am 
to  answer  it.  Will  you  tell  me,  my  sister,  (giving 
her  the  letter)  what  I  shall  say  ? 

Miss  Gr.  {after  perusing  it)  Why,  ay,  poor 
man !  he  is  very  much  in  love :  but  I  should  have 
some  trouble  to  teach  him  to  spell :  and  yet,  they 
say,  he  has  both  French  and  Italian  at  his  fingers 
ends. 

She  then  began  to  pull  in  pieces  the  letter. 

Sir  Ch.  I  will  not  permit  that,  Charlotte.  Pray 
return  me  the  letter.  A  woman  is  least  of  all  intitled 
to  ridicule  a  lover  whom  she  does  not  intend  to  en- 
courage. If  she  has  a  good  opinion  of  herself,  she 
will  pity  him.  Whether  she  has  or  not,  if  she 
wounds,  she  should  heal.  Sir  Walter  may  address 
himself  to  a  hundred  women,  who  for  the  sake  of 
his  gay  appearance  and  good  estate,  will  forgive  him 
his  indiflferent  spelling. 

Miss  Gr.  The  fluttering  season  is  approaching. 
One  wants  now-and-then  a  dangling  fellow  or  two 
after  one  in  public :  perhaps  I  have  not  seen  enough 
oi either  of  these  to  determine  which  to  choose.  Will 
you  not  allow  one,  since  neither  of  them  have  very 
striking  merits,  to  behold  them  in  different  lights,  in 
order  to  enable  one's  self  to  judge  which  is  the  most 
tolerable  of  the  two?  Or,  whether  a  still  wore  toler- 
able wretch  may  not  oflFer. 

She  spoke  this  in  her  very  archest  manner,  serious 
as  the  subject  was ;  aiid  seriously  as  her  brother 
wished  to  know  her  inclinations. 

Sir  Charles  turned  to  Lord  L.  and  gravely  said,  I 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISO}^.  131 

wonder  how  -our  cousin  Everard  is  amusing  himself 
at  this  instant,  at  the  hall. 

She  was  sensible  of  the  intended  rebuke,  and 
asked  him  to  forgive  her. 

Wit,  niy  lord,  continued  he,  inattentive  to  the 
pardon  she  asked,  is  a  dangerous  weapon :  but  that 
species  of  it  which  cannot  shine  without  a  foil,  is 
not  a  wit  to  be  proud  of.  The  lady  before  me 
(what  is  her  name  ?)  and  I,  have  been  both  under 
a  mistake :  I  took  her  for  my  sister  Charlotte :  she 
took  me  for  our  cousin  Everard. 

Every  one  felt  the  severity.  It  seemed  to  pierce 
me,  as  if  directed  to  me.  So  unusually  severe  from 
Sir  Charles  Grandison;  and  delivered  with  such 
serious  unconcern  in  the  manner ;  I  would  not,  at 
that  moment,  have  been  Miss  Grandison  for  the 
world. 

She  did  not  know  which  way  to  look.  Lady  L. 
(amiable  woman  !)  felt  it  for  her  sister :  tears  were 
in  the  eyes  of  both. 

At  last  Miss  Grandison  arose.  I  will  take  away 
the  impostor.  Sir ;  and  when  I  can  rectify  my  mis- 
take, and  bring  you  back  your  sister,  I  hope  you 
will  receive  her  with  your  usual  goodness. 

My  Charlotte!  my  sister!  (taking  her  hand)  you 
must  not  be  very  angry  with  me.  I  love  to  feel  the 
^ner  edge  of  your  wit :  but  when  I  was  bespeaking 
your  attention  upon  a  very  serious  subject;  a  sub- 
ject that  concerned  the  happiness  of  your  future  life, 
and  if  yours,  mine ;  and  you  could  be  able  to  say 
something  that  became  only  the  mouth  of  an  un- 
principled woman  to  say ;  now  could  I  forbear  to 
wish  that  some  other  woman,  and  not  my  sister, 
had  said  it? — Times  and  occasions,  my  dear  Char- 
lotte ! 

No  more,  I  beseech  you,  Sir:  I  am  sensible  of 
my  folly.     Let  me  retire. 

I,  Charlotte,  will  retire ;  don't  i/ou  ;  but  take  the 


132  THE  HISTORY  OF 

comfort  your  friends  are  disposed  to  give  you. 
Emily,  one  word  with  you,  my  dear.  She  flew  to 
him,  and  they  went  out  together. 

There,  said  Miss  Grandison,  has  he  taken  the 
girl  with  hira,  to  warn  her  against  falling  into  my^ 
folly. 

Dr.  Bartlett  retired  in  silence. 

Lady  L.  expressed  her  concern  for  her  sister ;  but 
said,  Indeed,  Chai'lotte,  I  was  afraid  you  would 
carry  the  matter  too  far. 

Lord  L.  blamed  her.  Indeed,  sister,  he  bore 
with  you  a  great  while ;  and  the  affair  was  a  serious 
one.  He  had  engaged  very  seriously,  and  even  from 
principle,  in  it.  O  Miss  Byron!  he  will  be  de- 
lighted with  you,  when  he  comes  to  read  your  pa- 
pers, and  sees  your  treatment  of  the  humble  ser- 
vants you  resolved  not  to  encourage. 

Yes,  yes,  Harriet  will  shine,  at  my  expence:  but 
may  she  1 — Since  I  have  lost  my  brother's  favour,  I 
pray  to  heaven,  that  she  may  gain  it.  But  he  shall 
never  again  have  reason  to  say  I  take  him  for  my 
cousin  Everard.  But  was  I  very  wicked,  Harriet  ? 
— Deal  fairly  with  me.     Was  I  very  wicked  ? 

I  thought  you  wrong  all  the  way :  I  was  afraid 
for  you.  But,  for  what  you  last  said,  about  en- 
couraging men  to  dangle  after  you,  and  seeming  to 
aim  at  making  new  conquests,  I  could  have  chidden 
you,  had  you  not  had  your  brother  to  hear  it.  Will 
you  forgive  me  ?  (whispering  her)  They  were  the 
words  of, a  very  coquet;  and  the  air  was  so  arch!— 
Indeed,  my  Charlotte,  you  were  very  much  out  of 
the  way. 

So! — Everybody  against  me! — I  must  have  been 
wrong  indeed — 

The/iTwe,  the  occasion,  was  wrong,  sister  Charlotte, 
said  Lord  L.  Had  the  subject  been  of  less  weight, 
your  brother  would  have  passed  it  off  as  pleasantly 
as  he  has  always  before  done  your  vivacities. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  153 

Very  happy,  replied  she,  to  have  such  a  character, 
that  every-body  must  be  in  fault  who  differs  from 
him  or  offends  him. 

In  the  midst  of  his  displeasure,  Charlotte,  said 
Lady  L.  he  forgot  not  the  brother.  The  subject, 
he  told  you,  concerned  the  happiness  of  your  future 
life;  and,  if  yowrs,  his. 

One  remark,  resumed  Lord  L'.  I  must  make,  to 
Sir  Charles's  honour  (take  it  not  amiss,  sister  Char- 
lotte) :  not  the  least  hint  did  he  give  of  your  error 
relating  to  a  certain  affair ;  and  yet  he  must  think  of 
it,  so  lately  as  he  has  extricated  you  from  it.  His 
aim,  evidently,  is,  to  amend,  not  to  wound. 

I  think,  my  lord,  retorted  Miss  Grandison,  with 
a  glow  in  her  cheeks,  you  might  have  spared  your 
remark.  If  the  one  brother  did  not  recriminate, 
the  other  needed  not  to  remind.  My  lord,  you 
have  not  my  thanks  for  your  remark. 

This  affected  good  Lady  L.  Pray,  sister,  blame 
not  my  lord:  you  will  lose  my  p/^^,  if  you  do.  Are 
not  we  Jour  united  in  one  cause  ?  Surely,  Charlotte, 
we  are  to  speak  our  whole  hearts  to  each  other ! 

So ! — I  have  brought  man  and  wife  upon  me  now. 
Please  the  Lord  I  will  be  married,  in  hopes  to  have 
somebody  on  my  side.  But,  Harriet,  say,  am  I 
wrong  again  ? 

1  hope,  my  dear  Miss  Grandison,  replied  I,  that 
what  you  said  to  my  lord,  was  in  pleasantry :  and 
if  so,  the  fault  was,  that  you  spoke  it  with  too  grave 
an  air. 

Well,  well,  let  me  take  hold  of  your  hand,  my 
dear,  to  help  me  out  of  this  new  difficulty.  I  am 
dreadfully  out  of  luck  to-day,  I  am  sorry  I  spoke 
not  my  pleasantry  with  a  pleasant  air — Yet  were  not 
you  likewise  guilty  of  the  same  fault.  Lady  L.?  Did 
not  you  correct  me  with  too  grave  an  air  ? 

N 


134  THE    HISTORY   OF 

I  am  very  willing,  returned  Lady  L.  it  should  pass 
so :  but,  my  dear,  you  must  not,  by  your  petulance, 
rob  yourself  of  the  sincerity  of  one  of  the  best  hearts 
in  the  world;  looking  with  complacency  at  her  lord. 

He  bowed  to  her  with  an  affectionate  air. — Happy 
couple ! 

As  I  hope  to  live,  said  Miss  Grandison,  I  thought 
you  all  pitied  me,  when  Sir  Charles  laid  so  heavy  a 
hand  upon  me :  and  so  he  seemed  to  think,  by  what 
he  said  at  going  out.  How  did  you  deceive  me,  all 
of  you,  by  your  eyes  ! 

I  do  assure  you,  said  my  lord,  I  did  pity  you ; 
but  had  I  not  thought  my  sister  in  fault,  I  should 
not. 

Your  servant,  my  lord.  You  are  a  nice  distin- 
guisher. 

And  B,just  one,  Charlotte,  rejoined  Lady  L. 

No  doubt  of  it,  LadyL.  and  that  was  your  motive 
too.  I  beseech  you,  let  me  not  be  deprived  of  your 
pity.  I  have  yours  also,  Harriet,  upon  the  same 
kind  consideration. 

Why  now  this  archness  becomes  you,  Charlotte, 
said  I  [I  was  wilHng  it  should  pass  so,  Lucy]:  this 
is  pretty  pleasantry. 

It  is  a  pretty  specimen  of  Charlotte's  penitence, 
said  Lady  L. 

I  was  glad  Lady  L.  spoke  this  with  an  air  of 
good  humour ;  but  Miss  Grandison  withdrew  upon 
it,  not  well  pleased. 

We  heard  her  at  her  harpsicord,  and  we  all  joined 
her.  Emily  also  was  drawn  to  us,  by  the  music. 
Tell  me,  my  dear,  said  Miss  Grandison  to  her 
(stopping)  Have  you  not  had  all  my  faults  laid 
before  you,  for  your  caution  ? 

Indeed,  madam,  my  guardian  said  but  one  word 
about  you ;  and  this  was  it :  I  love  my  sister:  she 


SIR   CHARLES   GRAMDISON.  135 

has  amiable  qualities :  we  are  none  of  us  right  at 
all  times.  You  see,  Emily,  that  I,  in  chiding  her, 
spoke  with  a  little  too  much  petulance. 

God  for  ever  bless  my  brother  !  said  Miss  Gran- 
dison,  in  a  kind  of  rapture  :  but  now  his  goodness 
makes  my  flippancy  odious  to  myself — Sit  down, 
my  child,  and  play  your  Italian  air. 

This  brought  in  Sir  Charles.  He  entered  with  a 
look  of  serenity,  as  if  nothing  had  passed  to  disturb 
him. 

When  Emily  had  done  playing  and  singing,  Miss 
Grandison  began  to  make  apologies:  but  he  said, 
Let  us  forget  each  other's  failings,  Charlotte. 

Notice  being  given  of  dinner,  Sir  Charles  cora- 
plaisantly  led  his  sister  Charlotte  to  her  seat  at  the 
table. 

A  most  intolerable  superiority  ! — I  wish  he  would 
do  something  wrong;  something  cruel:  if  he  would 
but  bear  malice,  would  but  stiffen  his  air  by  resent- 
ment, it  would  be  something.  As  a  man,  cannot  he 
be  lordly,  and  assuming,  and  where  he  is  so  much 
regarded,  I  may  say  feared,  nod  his  imperial  signifi- 
cance to  his  vassals  about  him  ? — Cannot  he  be  im- 
perious to  servants,  to  shew  his  displeasure  with 
principals? — No !  it  is  natural  to  him  to  be  good  and 
just.  His  whole  aim,  as  my  lord  observed,  is  "  to 
convince  and  amend;  and  not  to  wound  or  hnrt." 

After  dinner,  Miss  Grandison  put  into  my  hands 
the  parcel  of  my  letters  which  I  had  consent«d  Sir 
Charles  should  see.  Miss  Byron,  Sir,  said  she,  will 
oblige  you  with  the  perusal  of  some  of  her  letters. 
You  will  in  them  see  another  sort  of  woman  than 
your  Charlotte.  May  I  amend,  and  be  but  half  as 
good! — When  you  have  read  them,  you  will  say, 
Amen;  and,  if  your  prayer  take  place,  will  be 
satisfied  with  your  sister. 

He  received  them  from  me,  standing  up,  bowing ; 
n2 


136  THE    HISTORY   OF 

and' kissed  the  papers,  with  an  air  of  gallantry  that 
I  thought  greatly  became  him  [O  the  vanity  of 
the  girl !  methinks  my  uncle  says,  at  this  place.] 
He  put  them  in  his  pocket. 

Without  conditions,  Harriet?  said  Miss  Grandi- 
son.  Except  those  of  candor,  yet  correction,  an- 
swered I.     Again  he  bowed  to  me. 

I  don't  know  what  to  say  to  it,  Lucy;  but  I  think 
Sir  Charles  looks  highly  pleased  to  hear  me  praised ; 
and  the  ladies  and  my  lord  miss  no  opportunity  to 
say  kind  things  of  me.  But  could  he  not  have  an- 
swered Miss  Grandison's  question,  whether  his  fa- 
vourite was  a.  foreigner,  or  not? — Had  any  other 
question  arisen  afterwards,  that  he  had  not  cared 
to  answer,  he  could  but  have  declined  answering  it, 
as  he  did  that. 

What  a  great  deal  of  writing  does  the  reciting  of 
half  an  hour  or  an  hour's  conversation  make,  when 
there  are  three  or  four  speakers  in  company;  and 
one  attempts  to  write  what  each  says  in  the  Jirst 
person  !  I  am  amazed  at  the  quantity,  on  looking 
back.  But  it  iioill  be  so  in  narrative  letter- writing. 
Did  not  you,  Lucy,  write  as  long  letters,  when  you 
went  with  your  brother  to  Paris? — I  forget.  Only 
this  I  remember,  that  I  always  was  sorry  when  I 
came  to  the  end  of  them.  1  am  afraid  it  is  quite 
otherwise  with  mine. 

By  the  way,  I  am  concerned  that  Lady  D.  is 
angry  with  me:  yet,  methinks,  she  shews,  by  her 
anger,  that  she  had  a  value  for  me.  As  to  what  you 
tell  me  of  Lord  D's  setting  his  heart  on  the  pro- 
posed alliance,  I  am  not  so  much  concerned  at  that, 
because  he  never  saw  me  :  and  had  the  affair  been 
in  his  own  power,  'tis  likely  he  would  not  have  been 
very  solicitous  about  his  success.  Many  a  one, 
Lucy,  I  believe,  has  found  an  ardour,  when  repuls-- 
ed,  which  they  would  never  have  known,  had  they 
succeeded. 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  137 

Lady  Betty,  and  Miss  Clements,  were  so  good  as 
to  make  me  a  visit,  this  afternoon,  in  their  way  to 
Windsor,  where  they  are  to  pass  two  or  three  days. 
They  lamented  my  long  absence  from  town ;  and 
Lady  Betty  kindly  regretted  for  me,  the  many  fine 
entertainments  I  had  lost,  both  public  and  private, 
by  my  country  excursion  at  this  unpropitious  season 
of  the  year,  as  she  called  it;  shrugging  her  shoulders, 
as  if  in  compassion  for  my  rustic  taste. 

Good  lady  !  she  knew  not  that  I  am  in  company 
that  want  not  entertainments  out  of  themselves. 
They  have  no  time  to  kill,  or  to  delude :  on  the 
contrary,  our  constant  complaint  is,  that  time  flies 
too  fast :  and  I  am  sure,'  for  my  part,  I  am  forced  to 
be  a  manager  of  it ;  since,  between  conversation 
and  writing,  I  have  not  a  moment  to  spare:  and  I 
never  in  my  life  devoted  so  few  hours  to  rest. 

Sir  Charles  spoke  very  handsomely  of  Miss  Cle- 
ments, on  occasion  of  Miss  Grandison's  saying,  she 
was  a  plain,  but  good  young  woman.  She  is  not  a 
beauty,  said  he ;  but  she  has  qualities  that  are  more 
to  be  admired  than  mere  beauty. 

Would  she  not,  asked  Lady  L.  make  a  good  wife 
for  Lord  W.?  There  is,  said  Sir  Charles,  too  great 
a  disparity  in  years.  She  has,  and  must  have,  too 
many  hopes.  My  Lord  W.'s  wife  will,  probably, 
be  confined  six  months,  out  of  twelve,  to  a  gouty 
man's  chamber.  She  must  therefore  be  one  who  has 
outlived  half  her  hopes  :  she  must  have  been  ac- 
quainted with  aflSiction,  and  known  disappointment. 
She  must  consider  her  marriage  with  him,  though 
as  an  act  of  condescension,  yet  partly  as  a  prefer- 
ment. Her  tenderness  will,  by  this  means,  be 
engaged  ;  yet  her  dignity  supported :  and  if  she  is 
not  too  much  in  years  to  bring  my  lord  an  heir,  he 
will  then  be  the  most  grateful  of  men  to  her. 

My  dear  brother,  said  Miss  Grandison,  forgive 
N  3 


138  THE   HISTORY   OF 

me  all  my  faults :  your  actions,  your  sentiments, 
sliall  be  the  rule  of  mine! — But  who  can  come  up 
to  you  ?    The  Danbys — Lord  W. — 

Any-body  may,  Charlotte,  interrupted  Sir 
Charles,  who  will  be  guided  by  the  well-known  rule 
of  Doinir  to  ot/icrs,  ns  you  vcould  they  should  do  unto 
you  Were  you  in  the  situation  of  the  Danbys,  of 
Lord  W.  would  you  not  wish  to  be  done  by,  as  I 
have  done,  and  intend  to  do,  by  them?  What  must 
be  those  who,  with  hungry  eyes,  wait  and  wish  for 
the  death  of  a  relation  ?  May  they  not  be  compared 
to  savages  on  the  sea-shore,  who  look  out  impa- 
tiently for  a  wreck,  in  order  to  plunder  and  prey 
upon  the  spoils  of  the  miserable  \  Lord  W.  has 
been  long  an  unhappy  man,  from  want  of  princi- 
ples :  I  shall  rejoice,  if  1  can  be  a  means  of  con- 
vincing him,  by  his  own  experience,  that  he  was  in 
a  wrong  course,  and  of  making  his  latter  days 
happy.  Would  I  not,  in  my  decline,  wish  for  a 
nephew  that  had  the  same  notions  ?  And  can  I 
expect  such  a  one,  if  1  set  not  the  example  ? 

Pretty  soon  after  supper,  Sir  Charles  left  us;  an4 
.Miss  Grandison  seeing  me  in  a  reverie,  said,  I  will 
lay  my  life,  Harriet,  you  fancy  my  brother  is  gone 
up  to  read  your  letters. — Nay,  you  are  in  the  right; 
for  he  whispered  as  much  to  me,  before  he  with- 
drew. But  do  not  be  apprehensive,  Harriet  (for 
she  saw  me  concerned) ;  you  have  nothing  to  fear, 
I  am  sure. 

Lady  L.  said,  that  her  brother's  notions  and  mine 
were  exactly  alike,  on  every  subject:  but  yet,  Lucy, 
when  one  knows  one's  cause  to  be  under  actual  ex- 
amination, one  cannot  but  have  some  heart-akes. — 
Yet  why  ?— If  his  favourite  woman  is  di  fareignevy 
what  signifies  his  opinion  of  my  letters  ? — And  yet 
it  does :  one  would  be  willing  to  be  well  thought 
of  by  the  worthy. 


SIR  CHARLES   GRANDISOy.  139 

LETTER  XVIL 

MISS   BYRON.      IN   CONTINUATION. 

Thursday,  March  23. 
We  sat  down  early  to  breakfast  this  morning:  Miss 
Grandison  dismissed  the  attendants,  as  soon  as  Sir 
Charles  entered  the  room 

He  addressed  himself  to  me,  the  moment  he  saw 
me :  Admirable  Miss  Byron,  said  he,  what  an  enter- 
tainment have  your  letters  given  me,  down  to  a 
certain  period ! — How,  at  and  after  that,  have  they 
distressed  me,  for  your  sufferings  from  a  savage !— • 
It  is  well  for  him,  and  perhaps  for  me,  that  I  saw 
not  sooner  this  latter  part  of  your  affecting  story : 
I  have  read  through  the  whole  parcel. 

He  took  it  from  his  bosom,  and,  with  a  respectful 
air,  presented  it  to  me— Ten  thousand  thanks  for 
the  favour — I  dare  not  hope  for  further  indulgence 
— Yet  not  to  say,  how  desirous  1  am — But  forgive 
me — Think  me  not  too  great  an  encroacher — 
I  took  them. 

Surely,  brother,  said  Miss  Grandison,  you  cannot 
already  have  read  the  whole ! 

1  have — I  could  not  leave  them — I  sat  up  late-^ 
And  so,  thought  1,  did  your  sinter  Harriet,  Sir. 
Well,  brother,  said  Miss  Grandison,  and  what  are 
thejaults? 

Faults !  Charlotte. — Such  a  noble  heart !  such  an 
amiable  frankness!  No  prudery!  No  coquetry! 
Yet  so  much,  and  so  justly,  admired  by  as  many  as 
have  had  the  happiness  to  approach  her!— Then, 
turning  to  me,  1  honour  you,  madam,  for  the  good- 
ness, the  greatness  of  your  heart. 

How  1  blushed!  how  I  trembled!  How,  though 
so  greatly  flattered,  was  I  dehghted  1 


14-0  THE    HISTORY   OF 

Is  Miss  Byron,  in  those  letters,  all  perfect,  all 
faultless,  all  excellence,  Sir  Charles  ?  asked  Miss 
Grandison:  is  there  no — But  I  am  sensible  (though 
you  have  raised  my  envy,  I  assure  you)  that  Mis& 
Byron's  is  another  sort  of  heart  than  your  poor 
Charlotte's. 

But  I  hope,  Sir,  said  I,  that  you  will  correct — 

You  called  upon  me  yesterday,  interrupted  he,  to 
attend  to  the  debate  between  you  and  Mr.  Walden : 
I  think  I  have  something  to  observe  upon  that  sub- 
ject. I  told  you,  that  beauty  should  not  bribe  me. 
I  have  very  few  observations  to  make  upon  it. 

Lady  L.  Will  you  give  us,  brother,  your  opinion, 
in  writing,  of  what  you  have  read*? 

Sir  Ch.  That  would  fill  a  volume  :  and  it  would 
be  almost  all  panegyric. 

How  flattering ! — But  this  foreign  lady,  Lucy? — 

Lady  L.  began  another  subject. — 

Pray,  brother,  said  she,  let  me  revive  one  of  the 
topics  of  yesterday — Concerning  Lord  G.  and  Sir 
Walter  Watkyns — And  I  hope  you,  Charlotte,  will 
excuse  me. 

Miss  Gr.  If  it  can  be  revived,  withoilt  reviving 
the  memory  of  my  flippant  folly — Not  else  will  I 
excuse  you.  Lady  L.  And  casting  her  eye  bash- 
fully round  her.  Dr.  Bartlett  withdrew ;  but  as  if 
he  had  business  to  do. 

Lady  L.  Then  let  me  manage  this  article  for  my 
sister.  You  said,  brother,  that  you  have  engaged 
to  give  Lord  G.  either  hope,  or  otherwise — 

Sir  Ch.  Lord  G.  was  very  earnest  with  me  for  my 
interest  with  my  sister.  I,  supposing  that  she  is 
now  absolutely  disengaged,  did  undertake  to  let  him 
know  what  room  he  had  for  hope,  or  if  any  ;  but 
told  him,  that  I  would  not,  by  any  means,  endea- 
vour to  influence  her. 

Lady  L.  Charlotte  is  afraid,  that  you  would  not, 
*  This  subject  is  spoken  to  l>y  Sir  Charles,  vol.  xiv. 


SIR  CHARLES   GRANDISOV.  141 

of  yourself,  from  displeasure,  have  revived  the  sub- 
ject— Not  that  she  values — 

There  she  stopt. 

Sir  Ch.  I  might,  at  the  time,  be  a  little  petulant : 
but  I  should  have  revived  the  subject,  because  I  had 
engaged  to  procure  an  answer  for  an  absent  person, 
to  a  question  that  was  of  the  highest  importance  to 
him  :  but,  perliaps,  I  should  have  entered  into  the 
(Bubject  with  Charlotte  when  we  were  alone. 

Lad^  L.  She  can  have  no  objection,  1  believe,  to 
let  all  of  us,  who  are  present,  know  her  mind,  on 
this  occasion. 

Miss  Gr.  To  be  sure  I  have  not. 

Ladi/  L.  What  signifies  mincing  the  matter  ?  I 
undertook,  at  her  desire,  to  recal  the  subject,  be- 
cause you  had  seemed  to  interest  yourself  in  it. 

Sir  Ch.  I  think  I  know  as  much  of  Charlotte's 
mind  already,  from  what  you  have  hinted,  Lady  L. 
as  I  ought  to  be  inquisitive  about. 

Lady  L.  How  so,  brother !  What  have  I  said  ? 

Sir  Ch.  What  meant  the  words  you  stopt  at — Not 
that  she  values  ? — Now,  though  I  will  not  endeavour 
to  lead  her  choice  in  behalf  of  a  prince  ;  yet  would 
I  be  earnest  to  oppose  her  marriage  with  a  man  for 
whom  she  declaredly  has  no  value. 

Lady  L.  You  are  a  little  sudden  upon  me.  Sir 
Charles. 

Sir  Ch.  You  must  not  think  the  words  you  stopt 
at,  LadyL  slight  words: principle,  and  Charlotte's 
future  happiness,  and  that  of  a  worthy  man,  are  con- 
cerned here.  But  perhaps  vou  mean  no  more,  than 
to  give  a  little  specimen  of  lady-like  pride  in  those 
words.  It  is  a  very  hard  matter  for  women,  on  such 
occa.sions  as  these,  to  be  absolutely  right. — Dear 
Mis^  Byron,  bowing  to  me,  excuse  me. — There  is 
one  lady  in  the  world  that  ought  not,  from  what  I 
kaye  had  the  honour  to  see,  on  her  own  account,  to 


14-2  THE  HISTORY  OF 

take  amiss  my  freedom  with  her  gex,  though  she 
perhaps  will  on  that  of  those  she  loves.  But  have  I 
not  some  reason  for  what  I  say,  when  even  Lady 
L.  speaking  for  her  sister  on  this  concerning  sub- 
ject, cannot  help  throwing  in  a  salvo  for  the  pride 
of  her  sex  ? 

Harriet.  I  doubt  not,  Sir,  but  Lady  L.  and  Miss 
Grandison  will  explain  themselves  to  your  satisfac- 
tion. 

Lady  L.  then  called  upon  her  sister. 

Miss  Gr.  Why,  as  to  value — and  all  that — To  be 
sure — Lord  G. — is  not  a  man,  that — (and  she  look- 
ed round  her  on  each  person) — that  a  woman- 
Hem  ! — that  a  woman — But,  brother,  I  think  you 
are  a  little  too  ready — to — to — A  word  and  a  blow, 
as  the  saying  is,  are  two  things. — Not  that — And 
there  she  stopt. 

Sir  Ch.  {smiling)  O  my  dear  Lord  L  !  What 
shall  we  say  to  these  Not  that's  ?  Were  I  my  cousin 
Everard,  I  am  not  sure  but  I  should  suppose,  when 
ladies  were  suspending  unnecessarily,  or  with  af- 
fectation, the  happiness  of  the  man  they  resolve 
to  marry,  that  they  were  reflecting  on  themselves 
by  an  indirect  acknowledgment  of  self-denial—- 

Miss  Gr.  Good  God !  brother. 

I  was  angry  at  him,  in  my  mind.  How  came  this 
good  man,  thought  I,  by  such  thoughts  as  these,  of 
our  sex  ?  What,  Lucy,  could  a  woman  do  with  such 
a  man,  were  he  to  apply  to  her  in  courtship,  whe- 
ther she  denied  or  accepted  of  him  ? 

Sir  Ch.  You  will  consider,  Lady  L.  that  you  and 
Charlotte  have  brought  this  upon  yourselves.  That  I 
call  female  pride,  which  distinguishes  not  either  time, 
company,  or  occasion.  You  will  remember,  that 
Lord  G.  is  not  here  ;  we  are  all  brothers  and  sisters : 
and  why ,  Charlotte,  do  you  approve  of  entering  upon 
the  subject  in  this  company ;  yet  come  with  your 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  143 

exceptions,  as  if  Lord  G.  had  his  father  present,  or 
pleading  for  him  ?  These  Not  that  she  values,  and  so- 
forth,  are  so  Uke  the  deaUngs  between  petty  chap- 
men and  common  buyers  and  sellers,  that  I  love 
properly  (observe  that  I  say  properly)  to  discourage 
them  among  persons  of  sense  and  honour.  But 
come,  Charlotte,  enter  into  your  own  cause :  you 
are  an  excellent  pleader,  on  occasion.  You  know, 
or  at  least  you  ought  to  know,  your  own  mind.  I 
never  am  for  encouraging  agency  (Lady  L.  excuse 
roe — Will  you  give  up  yours  ?)  where  principals  can 
be  present  ? 

Lady  L.  With  all  my  heart.  I  stumbled  at  the 
very  threshold.  E'en,  Charlotte,  be  your  own  ad- 
vocate.    The  cause  is  on. 

Miss  Gr.  Why,  I  don't  know  what  to  say. — My 
brother  will  be  so  peremptory,  perhaps — 

Sir  Ch.  A  good  sign  for  somebody — Don't  you 
think  so,  madam?  to  me. — But  the  snail  will  draw  in 
its  horns,  if  the  finger  hastily  touch  it — Come,  no 
good  sign,  perhaps,  Charlotte.— I  will  not  be  pe- 
remptory. You  shall  be  indulged,  if  you  have  not 
already  been  indulged  enough,  in  all  the  pretty  aV- 
cumambages  customary  on  these  occasions. 

Miss  Gr.  This  is  charming ! — But  pray,  Sir, 
what  is  your  advice,  on  this  subject  ? 

Sir  Ch.  In  our  former  conversation  upon  it,  I  told 
you  what  I  thought  of  my  lord's  good  humour : 
whatofyour  vivacity — Can  you,  Charlotte,  were  you 
the  wife  of  Lord  G.  content  yourself  now-and-then 
to  makehim  start,  by  the  lancet-Hke  delicacy  of  your 
wit,  without  going  deeper  than  the  skin  ?  Without 
exposing  him  (and  yourself  for  doing  so)  to  tlie  ri- 
dicule of  others  ?  Can  you  bear  with  his  foibles,  if 
he  can  bear  with  yours  ?  And  if  the  forbearance  is 
greater  on  his  side,  than  on  yours,  can  you  value 
Kim  for  it,  and  for  his  good  humour  ? 
5 


144<  THE    HISTORY    OF 

Miss  Gr.  Finely  run  off,  upon  my  word  ! 

Sir  Ch.  I  am  afraid  only,  that  you  will  be  able, 
Charlotte,  to  do  what  you  will  with  him.  I  am  sorry 
to  have  cause  to  say,  that  I  have  seen  very  good  wo- 
men who  have  not  known  how  to  bear  indulgence  ! 
—Waller  was  not  absolutely  wrong,  as  to  stick,  when 
he  said,  "  that  women  were  born  to  be  controuled." 
If  controul  is  likely  to  be  necessary,  it  will  be  with 
women  of  such  charming  spirits  as  you  know  whose, 
Charlotte,  who  will  not  confine  to  time  and  place 
their  otherwise  agreeable  vivacities. 

Miss  Gr.  Well,  but.  Sir,  if  it  should  chance  to 
be  so,  and  I  were  Lord  G. 'supper  servant ;  for  con- 
troul implies  dominion  ;  what  a  fine  advantage  would 
he  have  in  a  brother,  who  could  direct  him  so  well 
(though  he  might  still,  perhaps,  be  a  batchelor)  how 
to  manage  a  wife  so  flippant ! 

Sir  Ch.  Batchelors,  Charlotte, are  close  observers. 
It  is  not  every  married  couple,if  they  were  solicitous 
to  have  a  batchelor  marry,  that  should  admit  him 
into  a  very  close  intimacy  with  themselves. 

Miss  Gr.  [archly)  Pray,  Lord  L.  did  we  not  once 
hear  our  cousin  Everard  make  an  observation  of  this 
nature  ? 

Sir  Ch.  Fairly  retorted,  Charlotte! — But  how 
came  your  cousin  Everard  to  make  this  observation  ? 
I  once  heard  you  say,  that  he  was  but  a  common  ob- 
server. Every  married  pair  is  not  Lord  and  Lady  L. 

Miss  Gr.  Well,  well,  I  believe  married  people 
must  do  as  well  as  they  can.  But  may  I  ask  you, 
brother.  Is  it  owing  to  such  observations  as  those  you 
have  been  making,  that  you  are  now  a  single  man  ? 

Sir  Ch.  A  fair  question  from  you,  Charlotte.  I 
answer,  It  is  not. 

Miss  Gr.  1  should  be  glad,  with  all  my  heart,  to 
know  what  is. 

Sir  Ch.  When  the  subject  comes  fairly  on  the 


srR  CHARLES   GRAKCISOy.  145 

carpet,  your  curiosity  may  perhaps  be  gratified.  But 
tell  me,  Do  you  intend  that  the  subject  you  had 
engaged  Lady  L.  to  introduce,  in  relation  to  Lord 
G.  and  Sir  Walter  Watkyns,  should  be  dismissed, 
at  present?  1  mean  not  to  be  peremptory,  Charlotte: 
be  not  afraid  to  answer. 

Miss  Gr.  Why  that's  kind.  No,  I  can't  say,  that 
I  do :  and  yet  1  frankly  confess,  that  1  had  much 
rather  ask,  than  answer  questions.  You  knoto,  Sir, 
that  I  have  a  wicked  curiosity. 

Sir  Ch.  Well,  Charlotte,  you  will  find  me,  wicked 
as  you  call  it,  very  ready,  at  a  proper  time,  to  gratify 
it.  To  some  things  that  you  may  want  to  know,  in 
relation  to  my  situation,  you  needed  not  now  to  have 
been  a  stranger,  had  1  had  the  pleasure  of  being 
more  with  you,  and  had  you  yourself  been  as  explicit 
as  I  would  have  wished  you  to  be.  But  the  crisis  is 
at  hand.  When  I  am  certain  myself,  you  shall  not 
be  in  doubt.  I  would  not  suppose  that  my  happiness 
is  a  matter  of  indifference  to  my  sisters  ;  and  if  it  be 
not,  I  should  be  ungrateful  not  to  let  them  know 
every-thing  I  know,  that  is  likely  to  affect  it. 

See  !  Lucy.  What  can  be  gathered  from  all  this? 
But  yet  this  speech  has  a  noble  sound  with  it :  don  t 
you  think  it  has?  It  is,  I  think,  worthy  of  Sir 
Charles  Grandison.  But  by  what  clouds  does  this 
sun  seem  to  be  obscured  ?  He  says,  howevef,  that 
the  crisis  is  at  hand — Solemn  words,  as  they  strike 
me.  Ah,  Lucy  ! — But  this  is  my  prayer — May  the 
crisis  produce  happiness  to  him,  let  who  will  be 
unhappy. 

Miss  Gr.  You  are  always  good,  noble,  uniform — 
Curiosity,  get  thee  behind  me,  and  lie  still ! — And 
yet,  brother,  like  a  favoured  squirrel  repulsed,  I 
am  afraid  it  will  be  soon  upon  my  shoulder,  if  the 
crisis  be  suspended. 

VOL.  XI.  o 


14:6  THE   HISTORY  OF 

*'  Crisis  is  at  hand,"  Lucy ! — I  cannot  get  (wrer 
these  words  ;  and  yet  they  make  my  heart  ake. 

Sir  Ch.  But  now,  Charlotte,  as  to  your  two  ad- 
mirers— 

Miss  Gr.  Why,  Sir,  methinks  I  would  not  be  a 
petty-chapwoman,  if  I  could  help  it :  and  yet,  what 
can  I  say  ? — I  don't  think  highly  of  either  of  the 
men  :  but,  pray  now,  ivhat — Lady  L,  (affecting  an 
audible  whisper)  Will  you  ask  a  question  for  nie  !— 

Ladi/  L.  What  is  it,  Charlotte  ? 

Miss  Gr.  ( Whispering,  but  still  loud  enough  for 
every  one  to  hear.)  What  sort  of  a  man  is  Beau- 
champ  ? 

Lad]/  L.  Mad  girl! — You  heard  the  question^ 
brother. 

Miss  Gr.  No  1 — You  did  7iot  hear  it.  Sir,  if  it  will 
displease  you.  The  whispers  in  conversation  are 
no  more  to  be  heard,  than  the  asides  in  a  play. 

Sir  Ch.  Both  the  one  and  the  other  are  wTong, 
C  arlotte.  Whisperings  in  conversation  are  cen- 
surable, to  a  proverb  :  the  asides,  as  you  call  tlieni, 
and  the  soliloquies,  in  a  play,  however  frequent,  are 
very  poor  (because  unnatiiral)  shifts  of  bungling 
authors  to  make  their  performances  intelligible  to 
the  audience.  But  am  I  to  have  heard  your  whisper^ 
Charlotte,  or  not? 

Miss  Gr.  I  think  the  man  my  brother  so  much 
esteems,  must  be  worth  a  hundred  of  such  as  those 
we  have  just  now  heard  named. 

Sir  Ch.  Well,then,Iam  supposed  to  beanswered, 
I  presume,  as  to  the  two  gentlemen.  I  will  shew 
you  the  letter,  when  written,  that  I  shall  send  to  Sir 
Walter  Watkyns.  I  shall  see  Lord  G.  I  suppose, 
the  moment  he  knows  I  am  in  town. 

Miss  Gr.  The  Lord  bless  me,  brother ! — Did  you 
flot  say,  you  would  not  he  iieremptory  ? 


SIR  CHARLES   GRANDISON.  14-7 

Lord  L.  Very  right.  Pray,  Sir  Charles,  don't 
let  my  sister  part  with  the  ttw^  without  being  sure 
of  a  third. 

Miss  Gr.  Pray,  Lord  L.  do  you  be  quiet :  your 
sister  is  in  no  hurry,  I  do  assure  you. 

Sir  Ch.  The  female  drawback  again,  Lady  L.— 
Not  that  she  values. 

Harriet.  Well,  but,  Sir  Charles,  may  I,  without 
ofFence,  repeat  Miss  Grandison's  question  in  relation 
to  Mr.  Beauchamp  ? 

Miss  Gr.  That's  my  dear  creature  1 

Sir  Ch.  It  is  impossible  that  Miss  Byron  can  give 
offence. — Mr.  Beauchamp  is  an  excellent  young 
man;  about  five-and-twenty,  not  more:  he  is  brave, 
learned,  sincere,  cheerful :  gentle  in  his  manners, 
agreeable  in  his  person.  Has  my  good  Miss  Byron 
any  further  questions  to  ask  ?  Your  frankness  of 
heart,  madam,  intitles  you  to  equal  frankness.  Not 
a  question  you  can  ask,  but  the  answer  shall  be  ready 
upon  my  lips. 

Is  the  lady,  Sir,  whom  you  could  prefer  to  all 
others,  a  foreign  or  an  English  Lady  ? — Ah,  Lucy ! 
And  do  you  think  I  asked  him  this  question — O  no ! 
but  I  had  a  mind  to  startle  you.  I  coidd  have  asked 
it,  I  can  tell  you :  and,  if  it  had  been  proper,  it 
would  have  been  the  first  of  questions  with  me  :  yet 
had  not  the  answer  been  such  as  I  had  liked,  perhaps 
I  should  not  have  been  able  to  stay  in  company. 

I  only  bowed,  and  I  believe  blushed  with  com- 
placency, at  the  kind  manner,  in  which  he  spoke  to 
me :  every  one,  by  their  eyes,  took  notice  of  it 
with  pleasure. 

Lady  L.  Well,  brother,  and  what  think  you  of 
the  purport  of  Charlotte's  question  ?  Charlotte  says, 
That  she  does  not  think  highly  of  either  of  tb.e  other 
men. 

Sir  Ch.  That,  at  present,  is  all  that  concerns  me 
o2 


148  THE    HISTORY  0» 

to  know.  I  will  write  to  Sir  Walter :  I  will  let  Lord 
G.  know,  that  there  is  a  man  in  the  clouds  that 
Charlotte  waits  for :  that  ladies  must  not  be  easily 
won.  Milton  justifies  you,  in  his  account  of  the 
behaviour  of  your  common  grandmother,  on  the  first 
interview  between  her  and  the  man  for  whom  she 
was  created.  Charming  copiers !  You,  Miss  Byron, 
are  an  exception.  You  know  nothing  of  affectation. 
You— 

Miss  Gr.  {unseasonably  interrupting  him)  Pray, 
Sir,  be  pleased,  since  we  are  such  fine  copiers  of 
the  old  lady  you  mentioned,  to  repeat  the  lines :  I 
have  no  remembrance  of  them. 

Sir  Ch.  She  heard  me  thus;  and,  though  divinely  brought, 
Her  virtue,  and  the  conscience  of  her  worth. 
That  wou'd  be  woo'd,  and  not  unsought  be  won, 
Wrought  in  her  so,  that,  seeing  me,  she  turn'd. 
I  foilow'd  her.     She  wiiat  was  honour  knew, 
And  with  obsequious  majesty  approved 
My  pleaded  reason 

I  have  looked  for  the  passage,  since,  Lucy.  He 
missed  several  lines. 

Now,  Charlotte,  said  Sir  Charles,  though  these 
lines  are  a  palpable  accommodation  to  the  future 
practice  of  the  daughters  of  the  old  lady,  as  you  call 
her,  and  perhaps  intended  for  an  instruction  to  thenty 
since  it  could  not  be  a  natural  behaviour  in  Eve, 
who  was  divinely  brought  to  be  the  wife  of  Adam,  and 
it  beii'g  in  the  state  of  innocence,  could  not  be  con- 
scious of  dishonour  in  receiving  his  address ;  yet,  if 
you  know  what  is  meant  by  obsequious  majesty,  you 
nad  as  good  try  for  it :  and  as  you  are Jbltoiued,  and 
should  not  follow,  approve  of  the  pleaded  reason  of 
one  or  other  of  your  admirers. 

Miss  Gr.  After  hearing  the  pleaded  reason  of  both, 
should  you  not  say  ?  /  have  the  choice  of  two ;  that 
bad  not  Eve.    But,  hold'  I  had  like  to  have  beea 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  liD 

•Arawn  m  to  be  flippant,  again :  and  then  you  would 
have  enquired  after  my  cousin  Everard,  and-so-Jorthf 
and  been  angry. 

&ir  Ch,  Not  noivi,  Charlotte:  we  are  now  at  play 
together.  I  see  there  is  constitution  in  j^our  foult. 
The  subjects  we  are  upon,  courtship  and  inarriage, 
cannot,  I  find,  be  talked  seriously  of  by  a  lady,  be- 
fore company.  Shall  I  retire  with  you  to  solitude  ? 
Make  a  lover's  camera  obscura  for  you  ?  Or,  could  I 
place  you  upon  the  mossy  bank  of  a  purling  stream, 
gliding  through  an  enamelled  mead;  in  such  a  scene, 
a  now  despised  Lord  G.  or  a  Sir  Walter,  might  find 
his  account,  sighing  at  your  feet.  No  witnesses  but 
the  grazing  herd,  lowing  love  around  you :  the  fea- 
thered songsters  from  an  adjacent  grove,  contribut- 
ing to  harmonize  and  fan  the  lambent  flame — 

Miss  Gr.  (interrupting)  Upon  my  word,  brother,  I 
knew  you  had  travelled  through  Greece,  but  dreamt 
not  that  you  had  dwelt  long  in  the  fields  o^Ar-ca-dy! 
—But  one  question  let  me  ask  you,  concerning  your 
friend  Beauchamp — We  women  don't  love  to  be 
slighted — Whether  do  you  think  him  too  good,  or 
not  good  enough,  for  your  sister  ? 

Sir  Ch,  The  friendship,  Charlotte,  that  has  for 
some  years  subsisted,  and  I  hope  will  for  ever  sub- 
sist, between  Mr.  Beauchamp  and  me,  wants  not  the 
tie  of  relation  to  strengthen  it. 

Lord  L.  Happy  Beauchamp  ! 

Sir  Ch.  Lord  L.  himself  is  not  dearer  to  me,  brO' 
ther  as  I  have  the  honour  to  call  him,  than  my  Beau- 
champ. It  is  one  of  my  pleasures,  my  Lord,  that  1 
am  assured  you  will  love  him,  and  he  you. 

Lord  L.  bowed,  delighted ;  and  if  he  did,  his  good 
lady,  you  may  be  sure,  partook  of  her  lord's  delight. 
They  are  a  happy  pair !  They  want  not  sense ;  they 
have  both  fine  understandings !  But,  O !  my  Lucy, 
they  are  not  the  striking,  dazzling  qualities  in  men 
o  3 


i50  THE   HISTORY  OF 

and  women,  that  make  happy.  Good  sense,  and 
solid  judgment,  a  natural  complacency  of  temper,  a 
desire  of  obliging,  and  an  easiness  to  be  obliged, 
procure  the  silent,  the  serene  happiness,  to  which 
the  fluttering,  tumultuous,  impetuous,  fervors  of 
passion  can  never  contribute.  Nothing  violent  can 
be  lasting. 

Miss  Gr.  Not  that  I  value — There,  brother — You 
see,  I  am  a  borrower  of  Lady  L. — 

Ladi/  L.  Upon  my  honour,  Charlotte,  I  believe 
you  led  me  into  those  words ;  so  don't  say  you  bor- 
rowed them. 

Sir  Ch.  Far  be  it  from  me  to  endeavour  to  cure 
women  of  affectation  on  such  subjects  as  that  which 
lately  was  before  us — I  don't  know  what  is  become 
of  it  (looking  humorously  round,  as  if  he  had  lost 
something  which  he  wanted  to  recover) ;  but  that, 
permit  me,  ladies,  to  say,  may  be  an  affectation  in 
one  company,. that  is  but  a  necessary  reserve  in  an- 
other.— Charlotte  has  genius  enough,  I  am  sure,  to 
vary  her  humour  to  the  occasion ;  and,  if  she  would 
give  herself  time  for  reflection,  to  know  when  to  be 
grave,  when  to  be  airy. 

Miss  Gr.  I  don't  know  thaty  brother  :  but  let  me 
say  for  Charlotte,  that  I  believe  you  sometimes  think 
better  of  her  (as  in  the  present  case)  sometimes 
worse,  than  she  deserves.  Charlotte  has  not  much 
reflection ;  she  is  apt  to  speak  as  the  humour  comes 
upon  her,  without  considering  much  about  the  fit, 
or  the  unfit.  It  is  constitution,  you  know,  brother; 
and  she  cannot  easily  cure  it :  but  she  will  try. — 
Only,  8ir,  be  so  good  as  to  let  me  have  an  answer 
to  my  last  question.  Whether  you  think  your  friend 
too  good,  or  not  good  enough  ?  Because  the  answer 
will  let  me  know  what  my  brother  thinks  of  me ;  and 
that,  let  me  tell  you,  is  of  very  high  importance  with 
me. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  151 

S/r  Ch.  You  have  no  reason,  Charlotte,  to  endea- 
Tour  to  come  at  this  your  end,  by  indirect  or  com- 
parative means.     Your  brother  loves  you — 

Miss  Gr.  With  all  my  faults,  Sir  ? — 

Sir  Ch.  With  all  your  faults,  my  dear  ;  and  I  had 
Inmost  said,  ^;r  some  of  them.  I  love  you  for  the 
pretty  playfulness,  on  serious  subjects,  with  which 
you  puzzle  yourself,  and  bewilder  me :  you  see  E 
follow  your  lead.  As  to  the  other  part  of  your  ques- 
tion (for  I  would  always  answer  directly  when  I 
can) ;  my  friend  Beauchamp  deserves  the  best  of 
women.  You  are  excellent  in  my  eyes ;  but  I  have 
known  two  very  worthy  persons,  who,  taken  sepa- 
rately, have  been  admired  by  every  one  who  knew 
them,  and  who  admired  each  other  before  marriage, 
yet  not  happy  in  it. 

Miss  Gr.  Is  it  possible  ?  To  what  could  their  un- 
happiness  be  owing  ?  Both,  I  suppose,  continuing 
good  ? 

Sir  Ch.  To  a  hundred  almost  nameless  reasons— 
Too  little  consideration  on  one  side ;  too  much  on 
the  other :  diversions  different:  too  much  abroad  the 
man — too  much  at  home  will  sometimes  have  the 
same  effect :  acquaintance  approved  by  the  one- 
disapproved  by  the  other :  one  liking  the  town  ;  the 
other  the  country :  or  either  preferring  town  or 
country  in  different  humours,  or  at  different  times  of 
the  year.     Human  nature,  Charlotte — 

Miss  Gr.  No  more,  no  more,  I  beseech  you,  bro- 
ther— Why  this  human  nature,  1  believe,  is  a  very 
vile  thing ;  I  think,  Lady  L.  I  won't  marry  at  all. 

Sir  Ch.  Some  such  trifles,  as  these  I  have  enume- 
rated, will  be  likely  to  make  you,  Charlotte,  with  all 
your  excellencies,  not  so  happy  as  I  wish  you  to  be. 
If  you  cannot  have  a  man  of  whose  understanding 
you  have  a  higher  opinion  than  you  bttre  of  jour 


152  THE   HISTORY  OF 

own,  you  should  tliink  of  one  who  is  hkely  to  allow 
to  yours  a  superiority.     If — 

Miss  Grandison  interrupted  him  again  :  I  wished 
she  would  not  so  often  interrupt  him :  1  wanted  to 
find  out  his  notions  of  our  sex.  I  am  afraid,  with  all 
his  politeness,  he  thinks  us  poor  creatures.  But  why 
should  not  the  character  of  a  good,  a  prudent  wo- 
man, be  as  great  as  that  of  a  good,  a  prudent  man  ? 

Miss  Gr.  Well,  but,  ISir ;  I  suppose  the  gentleman 
abroad  has  more  understanding  than  I  have. 

Sir  Ch.  A  good  deal  will  depend  upon  what  t/omVZ 
think  of  that:  not  what  I,  or  the  world,  will  judge. 

Miss  Gr.  But  the  judgment  of  us  women  gene-, 
rally  goes  with  the  world. 

Sir  Ch.  Not  generally,  in  matrimonial  instances. 
A  wife,  in  general,  may  allow  of  a  husband's  superior 
judgment ;  but  in  particular  cases,  and  as  they  fall 
out  one  by  one,  the  man  may  find  it  difficult,  to  have 
it  allowed  in  any  one  instance. 

Miss  Gr.  I  think  you  said,  Sir,  that  bachelors 
were  close  observers. 

Sir  Ch.  We  may  in  the  sister,  sometimes,  see  the 
laife.  I  admire  you,  myself,  for  your  vivacity  ;  but 
I  am  not  sure  that  a  husband  would  not  think  himself 
hurt  by  it,  especially  if  it  be  true,  as  you  say,  "  that 
Charlotte  has  not  much  reflection,  and  is  apt  to 
speak  as  the  humour  comes  upon  her,  without  trou- 
bling herself  about  the  fit  or  the  unfit." 

Miss  Gr.  O,  Sir,  what  a  memory  you  have !  I 
hope  that  the  man  who  is  to  call  me  his  (that's  the 
dialect,  isn't  it  ?)  will  not  have  half  your  memory. 

Sir  Ch.  For  his  sake,  or  your  own,  do  you  hope 
this,  Charlotte? 

Miss  Gr.  Let  me  see — Why  for  both  our  sakes,  I 
believe. 

air  CJi.  You'll  tell  the  man,  in  courtship,  I  hope 


SIR    CHARLES    CRANDISON.  ISS 

that  all  this  liveliness  is  "  constitution ;"  and  "  that 
you  know  not  how  to  cure  it." 

Miss  Gr.  No,  by  no  means,  Sir :  let  him  in  the 
mistress,  as  somebody  else  in  the  sistevy  guess  at  the 
"voife,  and  take  warning. 

Sir  Ch.  Very  well  answered,  Charlotte,  in  the  play 
we  are  at ;  but  I  am  willing  to  think  highly  of  my 
sister's  prudence  ;  and  that  she  will  be  happy,  and 
make  the  man  so,  to  whom  she  may  think  fit  to  give 
her  hand  at  the  altar.  And  now  the  question  recurs, 
What  shall  I  say  to  Lord  G.  ?  What  to  Sir  Walter  ? 

Miss  Gr.  Why  I  think  you  must  make  my  com- 
pliments to  Sir  Walter,  if  you  will  be  so  good  ;  and, 
after  the  example  of  qay  sister  Harriet  to  the  men  she 
sends  a  grazing,  very  civilly  tell  him,  he  may  break 
his  heart  as  soon  as  he  pleases ;  for  that  1  cannot 
be  his. 

Sir  Ch.  Strange  girl !  But  I  wish  not  to  lower 
this  lively  spirit — You  will  put  your  determination 
into  English. 

Miss  Gr.  In  plain  English,  then,  I  can  by  no 
means  think  of  encouraging  the  address  of  Sir 
Walter  Watkyns. 

Sir  Ch.  Well,  and  what  shall  I  say  to  Lord  G.? 

Miss  Gr.  Why  that's  the  thing — I  was  afraid  it 
would  come  to  this — Why,  Sir,  you  must  tell  him,  I 
think — I  profess  I  can't  tell  what — But,  Sir,  will  you 
let  me  know  what  you  would  have  me  tell  him  ? 

Sir  Ch,  I  will  follow  your  lead  as  far  as  I  can — 
Can  you,  do  you  think,  love  Lord  G.  ? 

Miss  Gr.  Love  him !  love  Lord  G.  ?  what  a  ques- 
tion is  that! — Why  no !  I  verUy  believe,  I  can't  say 
that. 

Sir  Ch.  Can  you  esteem  him  ? 

Miss  Gr.  Esteem ! — Why  that's  a  quaint  word, 
though  z.Jemale  one.  I  believe,  if  1  were  to  marry 
the  honest  man,  I  could  be  civil  to  hira,  if  he  would 


1554i  THE   HISTORY  OF 

be  very  complaisant,  very  observant,  and  all  that— 
Pray,  brother,  don't,  however,  be  angry  with  me.    . 

Sir  Ch.  I  will  not,  Charlotte,  smiling.  It  is  con- 
stitution, you  say. — But  \i  you  cannot  be  more  than 
civil ;  and  if  he  is  to  be  very  observant;  you'll  make 
it  your  agreement  with  him,  before  you  meet  him 
at  the  altar,  that  he  shall  subscribe  to  the  woman's 
part  of  the  vow ;  and  that  you  shall  answer  to  the 
man's. 

Miss  Gr.  A  good  thought^I  believe !  I'll  consider 
of  it.  If  I  find,  in  courtship,  the  man  will  bear  it,  I 
may  make  the  proposaL — Yet  I  don't  know,  but  it 
will  be  as  well  to  suppose  the  vow  changed,  without 
conditioning  for  it,  as  other  good  women  do;  and 
act  accordmgl}'.  One  would  not  begin  with  a  sin- 
gularity, for  fear  of  putting  the  parson  out.  I  heard 
an  excellent  lady  once  advise  a  good  wife,  who, 
however,  very  little  wanted  it,  to  give  the  man  a 
hearing,  and  never  do  any  thing  that  he  would  wish 
to  be  done,  except  she  chose  to  do  it.  If  the  man 
loves  quiet,  he'll  be  glad  to  compound. 

Harriet.  Nay  now,  Miss  Grandison,  you  are  much 
more  severe  upon  your  sex,  and  upon  matrimony, 
than  Sir  Charles. 

Sir  Ch.  Have  I  been  severe  upon  either,  my  dear 
Miss  Byron? 

Harriet.  Indeed  I  think  so. 

Sir  Ch.  I  am  sorry  for  it;  I  only  intended  to  be 
just.  See,  Charlotte,  what  a  censure,  from  goodness 
itself,  you  draw  upon  me! — But  I  am  to  give  en- 
couragement {am  I?)  to  Lord  G.  ? 

Miss  Gr.  Do  as  you  please.  Sir. 

Sir  Ch.  That  is  saying  nothing.  Is  there  a  man 
in  the  world  you  prefer  to  Lord  G.  ? 

Miss  Gr.  In  the  world,  Sir ! — A  very  wide  place, 
I  profess. 

Sir  Ch.  You  \axQW  what  I  mean  by  it. 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  155 

Miss  Gr.  Why  No — Yes — No— What  can  I  say 
to  such  a  question? 

Sir  Ch.  Help  me,  Lady  L.  You  know,  better  than 
I,  Charlotte's  language:  help  me  to  understand  it. 

Ladj/  L.  I  believe,  brother,  you  may  let  Lord  G, 
know,  that  he  will  not  be  denied  an  audience,  if  he 
come — 

Sir  Ch.  "  Will  not  be  denied  an  audience,  if  he 
come!"  And  this  to  Charlotte's  brother!  Women! 
Women !  Women ! —  You,  Miss  Byron,  I  repeat  with 
pleasure,  are  an  exception — In  your  letters  and  be- 
haviour we  see  what  a  woman  is,  and  what  she  ought 
to  be — Yet,  I  know,  you  have  too  much  greatness  of 
mind  to  accept  (as  you  once  told  Sir  Rowland  Me- 
redith) of  a  compliment  made  you  at  the  expence 
of  your  sex — But  my  heart  does  you  justice. 

Lord  L.  See,  however,  brother  Grandison,  this 
excellence  in  the  two  sisters!  You  say,  indeed,  but 
just  things  in  praise  of  Miss  Byron ;  but  they  are 
more  than  women:  for  they  enjotj  that  praise,  and 
the  acknowledged  superiority  of  the  only  woman  in 
Britain  to  whom  they  can  be  inferior. 

Do  you  think  I  did  not  thank  them  both  for  com- 
pliments so  high?  I  did. 

You  DID,  Harriet? 

Ah,  Lucy !  I  had  a  mind  to  surprise  you  again. 
I  did  thank  them;  but  it  was  in  downcast  silence, 
and  by  a  glow  in  my  cheeks,  that  was  even  painful 
to  me  to  feel. 

The  sisters  have  since  observed  to  me  (flattering 
ladies!)  tliat  their  brother's  eyes — But  is  it  not 
strange,  Lucy,  that  they  did  not  ask  him,  in  this 
long  conversation.  Whether  his  favourite  of  our  sex 
is  ajoreigner,  or  not?  If  she  be,  what  signifies  the 
eye  of  pleasure  cast  upon  your  Harriet? 

But  what  do  you  think  was  Miss  (irandison's  ad- 
dress to  me,  on  this  agreeable  occasion  ?  You,  my 


156  THE    HISTORY    OF 

grandmamma,  will  love  her  again,  I  am  sure,  though 
she  so  lately  incurred  your  displeasure. 

Sweet  and  ever  amiable  Harriet!  said  she:  Sister! 
friend!  enjoy  the  just  praises  of  two  of  the  best  of 
men ! — You  can  enjoy  them  with  equal  modesty  and 
dignity;  and  we  can  (What  say  you.  Lady  L.?)  find 
our  praise  in  the  honour  you  do  our  sex,  and  in 
being  allowed  to  be  seconds  to  you. 

And  what  do  you  think  was  the  answer  of  Lady 
L.  (generous  woman!)  to  this  call  of  her  sister? 

I  can  cheerfully,  said  she,  subscribe  to  the  visible 
superiority  of  my  Harriet,  as  shewn  in  all  her  letters, 
as  well  as  in  her  whole  conduct:  but  then  you,  my 
lord,  and  you,  my  brother,  who  in  my  eye  are  the 
first  of  men,  must  not  let  me  have  cause  to  dread, 
that  your  Caroline  is  sunk  in  yours. 

I  had  hardly  power  to  sit,  yet  had  less  to  retire ; 
as  I  had,  for  a  moment,  a  thought  to  do.  I  am  glad 
I  did  not  attempt  it:  my  return  to  company  must 
have  been  awkward,  and  made  me  look  particular. 
But,  Lucy,  what  is  in  my  letters,  do  deserve  all  these 
fine  speeches?  — But  my  lord  and  his  sisters  are  my 
true  friends,  and  zealous  well-wishers.  No  fear  that 
I  shall  be  too  proud,  on  this  occasion;  it  is  humbling 
enough  to  reflect,  that  the  worthy  three  thought  it 
all  no  more  than  necessary  to  establisti  me  with 
somebody ;  and  yet,  after  all,  if  there  be  di  foreign 
lady,  what  signify  all  these  fine, things? 

But  how  (you  will  ask)  did  the  brother  acknow- 
ledge these  generops  speeches  of  his  sisters  and 
Lord  L.  ? —  H  ow  ?  W  ny  as  he  ought  to  do.  He  gave 
them  for  their  generous  goodness  to  their  Harriet, 
in  preference  to  themselves,  such  due  praises,  as 
more  than  restored  them,  in  my  eye,  to  the  supe- 
riority they  had  so  nobly  given  up. 

Sir  Charles  afi,erwards  addressed  himself  to  me 
jointly  with  hi:>  ssters;  I  see,  with  great  pleasure, 


SIR  CHARLES   GRANDISON.  157 

said  he,  the  happy  understanding  that  there  is  be- 
tween you  three  ladies:  it  is  a  demonstration,  to 
me,  of  surpassing  goodness  in  you  all.  To  express 
myself  in  the  words  of  an  ingenious  man,  to  whose 
works  your  sex,  and  i^ yours,  ours,  are  more  obliged, 
than  to  those  of  any  single  man  in  the  British  world, 

Great  souls  by  instinct  to  each  other  turn, 
Demand  alliance,  and  in  friendship  burn.* 

The  two  sisters  and  your  Harriet  bowed  as  they 
sat. 

Encouraged  by  this  happy  understanding  among 
you,  let  me  hope,  proceeded  he,  that  you,  Miss 
Byron,  will  be  so  good  as  to  inform  yourself,  and  let 
me  know,  what  I  may  certainly  depend  upon  to  be 
our  Charlotte's  inclinations  with  respect  to  the  two 
gentlemen  who  court  her  favour;  and  whether  there 
is  any  man  that  she  can  or  does  prefer  to  the  most 
favoured  of  either  of  them.     From  you  I  shall  not 
meet  with  the  "  Not  that  she  values" — The  depre* 
ciating  indifferences,  the  affected  slights,  thejiemale 
circumambages,  if  I  may  be  allowed  the  words;  the 
coldly-expressed  consent  to  visits  not  deserving  to 
be  discouraged,  and  perhaps  not  intended  to  be  so ; 
that  I  have  had  to  encounter  with  in  the  past  conver- 
sation.    I  have  been  exceedingly  diverted  with  my 
sister's  vivacity :  but  as  the  affair  is  of  a  very  serious 
nature;  as  I  would  be  extremely  tender  in  my  in- 
terposition, having  really  no  choice  but  hers ;  and 
wanting  only  to  know  on  whom  that  choice  will  fall, 
or  whether  on  any  man,  at  present;  on  your  noble 
frankness  I  can  rely;  and  Charlotte  will  open  her 
mind  to  you:  if  not,  she  has  very  little  profited  by 
the  example  you  have  set  her  in  the  letters  you  have 
permitted  her  to  read. 

He  arose,  bowed,  and  withdrew :  Miss  Grandison 
*  Aooisun's  Campaign, 
2 


158  THE   HISTORT  OF 

called  after  him,  Brother,  brother,  brother — One 
word — Don't  leave  us — But  he  only  kissed  his  hand 
to  us  at  the  door ;  and  bowing,  with  a  smiling  air» 
left  us  looking  at  each  other  in  a  silence  that  held 
a  few  moments. 


LETTER  XVIII. 

MISS  BYRON.      IN  CONTINUATION. 

Lord  L.  broke  the  silence.  You  are  a  delightful 
girl,  Charlotte ;  but  your  brother  has  had  a  great 
deal  of  patience  with  you. 

O  my  lord,  said  she,  if  we  women  play  our  cards 
right,  we  shall  be  able  to  manage  the  best  and  wisest 
of  you  all,  as  we  please.  It  is  but  persevering,  and 
you  men,  if  not  owt-argued,  may  be  o\ii-teazed. — 
But,  Harriet — upon  my  word — The  game  seems  to 
be  all  in  your  own  hands. 

We  want  but  my  brother  to  be  among  us,  said 
Lady  L,  Beauty  would  soon  find  its  power :  and 
such  a  mind — And  then  they  complimented  me,  that 
their  brother  and  I  were  born  for  each  other. 

Miss  Grandison  told  us  all  three  her  thoughts,  in 
relation  to  the  alliance  with  Lord  G.  She  said,  she 
was  glad  that  her  brother  had  proposed  to  know  her 
mind  from  me.  Something,  Harriet,  said  she,  may 
rise  in  the  tete-a-tete  conversation,  that  may  let 
us  into  a  little  of  his  own. 

But  shall  I  trust  myself  with  him  alone,  Lucy  ? 
Indeed  I  am  afraid  of  him,  o^  my -self,  rather.  My 
own  concerns  so  much  in  my  head,  I  wish  I  don't 
confound  them  with  Miss  Grandison's.  A  fine  piece 
of  work  shall  I  make  of  it,  if  I  do.  If  I  get  it  so 
happily  over,  as  not  to  be  dissatisfied  with  myscli'. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISOW.  159 

fcr  my  part  in  it,  I  shall  think  I  have  had  a  deliver- 
ance. 

But,  Lucy,  if  all  these  distinctions  paid  me  in  this 
conversation,  and  all  tliis  confidence  placed  in  me, 
produce  nothing — If — Why,  what  if? — In  one  word, 
Sliould  this  //be  more  than  //^— Why  then  it  will  go 
the  harder,  diat's  all,  with  your  Harriet,  than  if  she 
had  not  been  so  much  distinguished. 

At  afternoon-tea,  the  Danbys  being  mentioned. 
Lord  L.  asked  Sir  Charles,  What  was  the  danger 
from  which  he  relieved  their  uncle  ?  And  we  all 
joining  in  requesting  particulars,  he  gave  the  follow- 
ing, which  I  will  endeavour  to  repeat,  as  near  as  pos- 
sible, in  his  own  words.  My  heart  interested  itself 
in  thje  relation. 

*  Mr.  Danby,  said  he,  was  a  merchant  erf"  equal 
eminence  and  integrity :  he  was  settled  at  Cambray : 
he  hiid  great  dealings  in  the  manufactures  of  cam- 
brics and  lace.  His  brother  Jolm,  a  very  profligate 
man,  liad  demanded  of  him,  and  took  it  ill  that  he 
denied  him,  a  thousand  guineas;  for  no  better  rea- 
son, but  because  he  had  generously  given  that  sura 
to  each  of  the  wicked  man's  children.  Surely,  he 
pleaded,  he  was  as  nearly  related  to  his  brother  as 
were  those  his  children.  No  plea  is  too  weak  for 
folly  and  self-interest  to  insist  upon.  Yet  my  Mr. 
Danby  had  often  given  this  brotlier  large  sums, 
wliich  he  squandered  away  almost  as  soon  as  he 
received  them. 

'  My  fatlier  used  to  make  remittances  to  Mr. 
Danby  for  my  use;  for  his  dealings  in  other  branches 
of  commerce  extended  to  the  south  of  France  and 
Italy:  this  brought  me  acquainted  with  him. 

'  He  took  a  great  liking  to  me.     I  saw  him  first  at 
Lyons;  and  he  engaged  me  to  visit  him  at  Cambray, 
vhenever  I  should  go  to  Paris  or  Flanders. 
p  2 


160  THE    HISTORY   OF 

*  A  ccompanying  a  friend,  soon  after,  to  Paris,  I 
performed  my  promise. 

'  He  had  a  vdla  in  the  Cambresis,  at  a  small  dis- 
tance from  the  city,  which  he  sometimes  called  his 
cottage,  at  others  his  dormitory.  It  was  a  little  lone 
house :  he  valued  it  for  its  elegance.  Thither,  after 
I  had  passed  two  days  with  him  at  his  house  in  the 
city,  he  carried  me. 

'  His  brother,  enraged  at  being  refused  the  sum 
he  had  so  unreasonably  demanded,  formed  a  plot  to 
get  possession  of  his  whole  fortune.  My  Mr.  Danby 
was  a  bachelor,  and  it  was  known,  had,  to  that  time, 
an  aversion  to  the  thought  of  making  his  will. 

'  The  wretch,  in  short,  hired  three  ruffians  to 
murder  him.  The  attempt  was  to  be  made  in  this 
little  house,  that  the  fact  might  have  the  appearance 
of  being  committed  by  robbers;  and  the  cabintts  in 
the  bed-chamber,  if  there  were  time  for  it,  after  the 
horrid  fact  was  perpetrated,  were  to  be  broke  open 
and  rifled,  in  order  to  give  credit  to  that  appear- 
ance. The  villains  were  each  to  be  rewarded  with 
a  thousand  crowns,  payable  on  the  wicked  man's 
getting  possession  of  his  brother's  fortune;  and  they 
had  fifty  crowns  a  piece  paid  them  in  hand. 

'  Their  unnatural  employer  waited  the  event  at 
Calais,  though  he  told  them  he  should  be  at  Dunkirk. 

*  1  had  one  servant  with  me,  who  lay  with  a  ser- 
vant of  Mr.  Danby  in  a  little  room  over  the  stable, 
about  an  hundred  yards  from  the  house  There 
were  only  conveniences  in  the  house  for  Mr  Danby 
and  a  friend,  besides  two  women-servants  in  the 
upper  part  of  it. 

•  About  midnight  I  was  alarmed  by  a  noise,  as  of 
violence  used  at  the  window  of  Mr.  Danby 's  room. 
Mine  communicated  with  his.  The  fastening  of 
the  door  was  a  spring-lock,  the  key  of  which  was  on 
my  side. 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  161 

*  I  slipt  on  my  clothes  in  an  instant, and,  drawing 
my  sword,  rushed  into  the  next  room,  just  as  one 
villain,  with  a  large  knife  in  his  hand,  had  seized 
the  throat  of  Mr.  Danby,  who,  till  then,  was  in  a 
sound  sleep.  The  skin  of  his  neck,  and  one  hand 
lifted  up  to  defend  himself,  were  slightly  wounded 
before  1  ran  the  ruffian  into  the  shoulder,  as  1  did 
with  my  sword,  and  in  the  same  moment  disarmed 
him,  and  threw  him,  witfi  violence  from  the  bed, 
against  the  door.  He  roared  out,  that  he  was  a 
dead  man. 

'  A  second  fellow  had  got  up  to  the  window,  and 
was  half  in:  he  called  out,  to  a  third  below,  to  has- 
ten up  after  him  on  a  ladder,  which  was  generally 
left  in  an  outhouse  near  the  little  garden, 

*  I  hastened  to  this  second  fellow,  who  then  fired 
a  pistol,  but  happily  missed  me;  and  who,  feeling  my 
sword's  point  in  his  arm,  threw  himself,  with  a  little 
of  ray  help,  out  of  the  window,  upon  the  third  fel- 
low, who  was  mounting  the  ladder,  and  knocked 
him  off:  and  then  both  made  their  escape  by  the 
way  they  came. 

*  The  fellow  within  had  fainted,  and  lay  weltering 
in  his  blood. 

*  By  this  time  the  two  women-servants  had  let  in 
our  men,  who  had  been  alarmed  by  the  report  of  the 
pistol,  and  by  the  screams  of  the  women  from  their 
window ;  for  they  ventured  not  out  of  their  chamber 
till  they  were  called  upon  for  entrance,  by  their 
fellow-servant  from  below. 

*  The  two  footmen,  by  my  direction, bound  up  the 
ruffian's  shoulder:  they  dragged  him  down  into  the 
hall :  he  soon  came  to  himself,  and  offered  to  make 
an  ample  confession. 

'  Poor  Mr.  Danby  had  crept  into  my  room,  and 
in  a  corner  of  it  had  fainted  away.  We  recovered 
him  with  difficulty. 

p3 


162  THE    HISTORY   OF 

'  The  fellow  confessed,  before  a  magistrate,  the 
whole  villainy,  and  who  set  him  at  work :  the  other 
two,  being  disabled  by  their  bruises  from  flying  far, 
were  apprehended  next  day.  The  vile  brother  was 
sent  after  to  Dunkirk,  according  to  the  intelligence 
given  of  him  by  the  fellows ;  but  he  having  informed 
himself  of  what  had  happened,  got  over  from  Calais 
to  Dover. 

*  The  wounded  man,  having  lost  much  blood,  re- 
covered not.  They  were  all  three  ordered  to  be 
executed ;  but,  being  interceded  for,  the  surviving 
villains  were  sent  to  the  galleys. 

'  It  seems  they  knew  nothing  of  Mr.  Dan  by 's 
■having  a  guest  with  him :  if  they  had,  they  owned 
they  would  have  made  their  attempt  another  night.' 

We  were  about  to  deliver  our  sentiments  on  this 
extraordinary  event,  when  Sir  Charles,  turning  to 
Lady  L.  Let  me  ask  you,  said  he  (the  servant 
being  withdrawn)  Has  Charlotte  found  out  her  own 
mind? 

Yes,  yes,  Sir ;  I  believe  she  has  opened  all  her 
heart  to  Miss  Byron. 

Then  I  shall  know  more  of  it  in  ten  minutes,  than 
Charlotte  would  let  me  know  in  as  many  hours. 

Stand  by,  every -body,  said  the  humorous  lady — 
Let  me  get  up,  and  make  my  brother  one  of  my  best 
courtesies. 

Sir  Charles  was  just  then  called  out  to  a  messen- 
ger, who  brought  him  letters  from  town.  He  re- 
turned to  us,  his  complexion  heightened,  and  a  little 
discomposed. 

I  intended,  madam,  said  he,  to  me,  to  have  re- 
quested the  honour  of  your  company  for  half  an  hour 
in  my  lord's  library,  on  the  subject  we  were  talking 
of:  but  these  letters  require  my  immediate  attention. 
The  messenger  must  return  with  my  answers  to  two 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  165 

of  them,  early  in  the  morning.  You  will  have  the 
goodness,  looking  round  him,  to  dispense  with  my 
attendance  on  you  at  supper.  But,  perhaps,  madam, 
t»me,  you  will  be  so  good,  as,  in  one  word,  to  say, 
N»,  or  Yes,  for  C'harlotte. 

Miss  Gr.  What,  Sir,  to  heghen  up  without  a  pre- 
face!— I  beg  your  pardon.  Less  than  ten  xvords  shall 
not  da,  I  assure  you,  though  from  my  sister  Harriet. 

SirCh.  Who  given  up,  Charlotte?  yourself?  If 
so,  I  have  my  answer. 

Miss  Gr.  Or  Lord  G. — I  have  not  said  which. 
Would  you  have  my  poor  lord  rejected  by  a  slight- 
ing monosyllable  only  ? 

Ladj/  L.  Mad  girl ! 

Miss  Gr.  Why,  Lady  L.  don't  you  see  that  Sir 
Charles  wants  to  take  me  by  implication  ?  But  my 
Lord  G.  is  neither  so  soon  lost,  nor  Charlotte  so 
easily  won.  Harriet,  if  i/oic  would  give  up  yourself 
at  a  first  question,  then  I  will  excuse  you  if  you  give 
(q)  me  as  easily :  but  not  else. 

Harriet.  If  Sir  Charles  thinks  a  conference  upon 
the  subject  unnecessary — pray  don't  let  us  give  him 
the  trouble  of  holding  one.  His  time,  you  see,  is 
very  precious. 

Can  you  guess,  Lucy,  at  the  humour  I  was  in 
when  1  said  this? — If  you  think  it  was  a  very  good 
one,  you  are  mistaken ;  yet  I  was  sorry  for  it  after- 
wards Foolish  self-betrayer!  W^hy  should  I  seem 
to  wish  for  a  conference  with  him?  But  that  was  not 
all — To  be  petulant  with  such  a  one,  when  his  heart 
was  distressed ;  for  so  it  proved :  but  he  was  too 
polite,  too  great,  shall  I  say?  to  take  notice  of  my 
petulance.  How  little  does  it  make  me  in  my 
own  eyes ! 

Had  I,  said  he,  ever  so  easily  obtained  a  knowledge 
of  my  sister's  mind,  I  should  not  have  known  how  to 
depend  upon  it,  were  it  not  strengthened,  madam, 


164  THE   HISTORY  OP 

from  your  lips.  The  conference,  therefore,  which  you 
gave  me  hopes  you  would  favour  me  with,  would 
have  been  absolutely  necessary.  I  hope  Miss  Byron 
will  allow  me  to  invite  her  to  it  to-morrow  morning. 
The  intended  subject  of  it  is  a  very  serious  one  with 
me.  My  sister's  happiness,  and  that  of  a  man  not 
unworthy,  are  concerned  in  it,  lightly  as  Charlotte 
has  hitherto  treated  it.     He  bowed,  and  was  going. 

Miss  Gr.  Nay,  pray,  brother — You  must  not  leave 
me  in  anger. 

Sir  Ch,  I  do  not,  Charlotte.  I  had  rather  bear 
with  you,  than  you  should  with  me.  I  see  you  can- 
not help  it.  A  lively  heart  is  a  great  blessing.  In- 
dulge it.     Now  is  your  time. 

Dear  doctor,  said  Miss  Grandison,  when  Sir 
Charles  was  gone  out,  What  can  be  the  meaning  of 
my  brother's  gravity?     It  alarms  me. 

Dr.  B.  If  goodness,  madam,  would  make  a  heart 
lively.  Sir  Charles's  would  be  as  lively  as  your  own ; 
but  you  might  have  perceived  by  his  air,  when  he 
entered,  that  the  letters  brought  him  affected  him 
too  much  to  permit  him  to  laugh  off  a  light  answer 
to  a  serious  question. 

Miss  Gr.  Dear  doctor! — But  I  do  now.  recollect, 
that  he  entered  with  some  little  discomposure  on  his 
countenance.     How  could  I  be  so  inattentive? 

Harriet.  And  I,  too,  I  doubt,  was  a  little  captious. 

Dr.  D.  A  very  little.     Pardon  me,  madam. 

Just  then  came  in  the  excellent  man. 

Dr.  Bartlett,  I  would  wish  to  ask  you  one  ques- 
tion, said  he. 

Miss  Gr.  You  are  angry  with  me,  brother. 

Sir  Ch.  No,  my  dear ! — But  I  am  afraid  I  with- 
drew with  too  grave  an  air.  I  have  been  a  thousand 
,  times  pleased  with  you,  Charlotte,  to  one  time  dis- 
pleased ;  and  when  1  have  been  the  latter,  you  have 
^ivays  known  it ;  I  had  something  in  my  hand  Uiat 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  165 

rniffecl  me  a  little.  But  how  could  patience  be  pa- 
tience, if  it  were  not  tried?  1  wanted  to  say  a  few- 
words  to  my  good  Dr.  Bartlett ;  and,  to  say  truth, 
being  conscious  that  I  had  departed  a  little  abruptly, 
1  could  not  be  easy  till  I  apologized  in  person  for 
it :  therefore  came  to  ask  the  favour  of  the  doctor'^s 
advice,  rather  than  request  it  by  message. 

The  doctor  and  he  withdrew  together. 

In  these  small  instances,  said  my  lord,  are  the 
characters  of  tlie  heart  displayed,  far  more  than  in 
greater.  What  excellence  shines  out  in  full  lustre, 
on  this  unaffected  and  seemingly  little  occasion! 
Fear  of  offending  ;  of  giving  uneasiness ;  solicitude 
to  remove  doubts ;  patience  recommended  in  one 
short  sentence,  more  forcibly  than  some  would  have 
done  it  in  a  long  discourse,  as  well  as  by  example; 
censuring  himself,  not  from  a  consciousness  of  being 
wrong,  but  of  being  taken  wrong.  Ah  t  my  dear 
sister  Charlotte,  we  should  all  edify  by  such  an  ex- 
ample— But  I  say  no  more. 

Miss  Or.  And  baveyow  nothing  to  say,  Harriet? 

Harriet.  Very  httle,  since  I  have  been  much  to 
blame  myself:  yet  let  me  remind  my  Charlotte,  that 
her  brotfter  was  displeased  with  her  yesterday,  for 
treating  too  lightly  a  subject  he  had  engaged  in 
seriously ;  and  that  he  has  been  forced  to  refer  to 
iier  friend,  rather  than  to  herself,  to  help  him  to  the 
knowledge  ol' her  mind.  O  Charlotte!  regret  you 
not  the  occasion  given  for  the  expedient  ?  And  do 
you  not  [ves,  1  see  you  do]  blush  for  giving  it? 
Yet  to  see  him  come  voluntarily  back,  when  he  had 
left  us  in  a  grave  humour,  for  fear  the  babies  should 
think  him  angry  with  them ;  O  how  great  is  he!  and 
Low  little  are  we! 

Miss  Gr.  \\,ur  servantjSisterHarriet! — You  have 
made  a  daiuty  speech,  1  think:  but,  great  and  good 
as  my  brother  is,  we  know  how  it  comes  to  pass 


166  THE   HISTORY  OF 

that  your  pretty  imagination  is  always  at  work  to 
aggrandize  the  man,  and  to  lower  the  babies ! 

Harriet.  I  will  not  say  another  word  on  the  sub- 
ject.    You  are  not  generous,  Charlotte. 

She  took  my  hand:  Forgive  me,  my  dear — I 
touched  too  tender  a  string.  Then  turning  to  Miss 
Jervois,  and  with  the  other  hand  taking  hers,  Why 
twinkles  thus  my  girl  ?■ — I  charge  you,  Emily,  tell 
me  all  you  think. 

I  am  thinking,  said  she,  that  my  guardian  is  not 
happy.  To  see  him  bear  with  every-body ;  to  have 
him  keep  all  his  troubles  to  himself,  because  he 
would  not  afflict  any-body,  and  yet  studj'^  to 
lighten  and  remove  the  troubles  of  every-body  else 
—Did  he  not  say,  that  he  should  be  happy,  but  for 
the  unhappiness  of  other  people  ? 

Excellent  young  creature!  said  Miss  Grandison:  I 
love  you  every  day  better  and  better.  For  the  future, 
my  dear,  do  not  retire,  whatever  subjects  we  talk  of. 
I  see  that  we  may  confide  in  your  discretion.  But, 
well  as  you  love  your  guardian,  say  nothing  to  him 
of  what  women  talk  to  women.  My  Lord  L.  is  aa 
exception,  in  this  case :  he  is  one  of  us. 

Harriet.  O  Miss  Grandison!  what  a  mixt  cha- 
racter is  yours  !  how  good  you  can  be,  when  you 
please!  and  how  naughty! 

Miss  Gr.  Well,  and  you  like  me,  just  now? — . 
That's  the  beauty  of  it ;  to  offend  and  make  up,  at 
pleasure.  Old  Terence  was  a  shrewd  man  :  The  fall- 
ing out  of  lovers,  says  he  (as  Lord  L.  once  quoted 
him)  is  the  renewal  of  love.  Are  we  not  now  bet- 
ter friends,  tlian  if  we  had  never  differed?  And  do 
you  think  that  I  will  not,  if  I  marry,  exercise  my 
husband's  patience  now-and-then  for  this  very  pur- 
pose?— Let  me  alone,  Harriet:  now  a  quarrel ;  now 
ia  reconciliation ;  I  warrant  I  shall  be  happier  than 
any  of  the  yawning  see-saws  in  the  kingdom.  Ever* 
pasting  summers  would  be  a  grievance. 


SIR  GHARLES  GRAMDISON.  167 

Harriet.  You  may  be  right,  if  you  are  exceeding 
discreet  in  your  perversenesses,  Charlotte ;  and  yet  if 
you  are,  you  will  not  lay  out  for  a  quarrel,  I  fancy. 
The  world,  or  you  will  have  better  luck  than  your 
brother  seems  to  have  had,  will  find  you  opportu- 
nities enow,  for  exercising  the  tempers  of  both, 
without  your  needing  to  study  for  occasions. 

Miss  Gr.  Study  for  them  Harriet !  I  shan't  study 
for  them,  neither :  they  will  come  of  course. 

Harriet.  I  was  about  to  ask  a  question — But  'tis 
better  left  alone. 

Miss  Gr.  I  voill  have  it.  What  was  your  question  ? 
Don't  you  see  what  a  good-natured  fool  I  am  ?  You 
may  say  any-thing  to  me:  I  won't  be  angry. 

Harriet.  I  was  going  to  ask  you,  if  you  were 
ever  concerned  two  hours  together,  for  any  fault 
you  ever  committed  in  your  life  ? 

Miss  Gr.  Yes,  yes,  yes ;  and  for  two-and- twenty 
hours  :  for  sometimes  the  inconveniencies  that  fol- 
lowed my  errors,  were  not  presently  over,  as  in  a 
certain  case,  which  I'll  be  hanged  if  you  have  not  in 
your  head,  with  that  sly  leer  that  shews  the  rogue 
m  your  heart ;  but  when  I  got  rid  of  consequences, 
no  bird  in  spring  was  ever  more  blithe.  I  carolled 
away  every  care  at  my  harpsichord. — But  Emily  will 
think  me  mad — Remember,  child,  that  Miss  Byron 
is  the  woman  by  whose  mind  you  are  to  form  yours : 
never  regard  me,  when  she  is  in  company. — But  now 
(and  she  whimsically  arose,  and  opened  the  door, 
and  saying  Begone,  shut  it,  and  coming  to  her 
place)  1  have  turned  my  folly  out  of  door. 

Friday  morning,  seven  o'clock, 
I  have  written  for  these  two  days  past  at  every 
opportunity  ;  and,  for  the  two  nights  (hardly  know- 
ing what  sleepiness  was)  two  hours,  each  night,  have 
contented  me.    I  wonder  whether  I  shall  be  sum- 


168  THE   HISTORY   OF 

tnoned  by-and-by  to  the  proposed  conference:  but  I 
am  equally  sorry  and  apprehensive,  on  occasion  of 
the  letters  which  have  given  Sir  Charles  Grandisoa 
so  much  anxiety  :  foreign  letters,  1  doubt  not ! — I 
wish  this  ugly  wordjbreign  were  blotted  out  of  my 
vocabulary ;  out  of  my  memory,  rather.  1  never, 
till  of  late,  was  so  narrow-hearted — But  that  I  have 
said  before,  twenty  times. 

I  have  written — How  many  sheets  of  paper — A 
monstrous  letter — Pacquet  rather.  I  will  begin  a 
new  one,  with  what  shall  offer  this  day.  Adieu,  till 
by-and-by,  my  Lucy  J 


LETTER  XIX. 

MISS   BYRON.      IN  CONTINUATION. 

Friday,  March  24. 
The  conference,  the  impatientlj'^  expected  confer- 
ence, my  Lucy,  is  over;  and  what  is  the  result? — 
Take  the  account  of  it  as  it  was  brought  on,  pro- 
ceeded with,  and  concluded.  Miss  Grandison  and 
her  lovers  were  not  our  only  subjects.  I  will  soon 
be  with  you,  my  dear:  but  I'll  try  to  be  as  minute 
as  I  used  to  be,  notwithstanding. 

Notwithstanding  what  ? 

You  shall  hear,  Lucy. 

Sir  Charles  gave  us  his  company  at  breakfast. 
He  entered  with  a  kind  of  benign  solemnity  in  his 
countenance;  but  the  benignity  increased,  and  the 
solemnity  went  off,  after  a  little  while. 

My  lord  said,  he  was  very  sorry  that  he  had  met 
with  any-thing  to  disturb  him,  in  the  letters  that 
were  brought  him  yesterday.  Emily  joined  by  her 
eyes,  though  not  in  speech,  her  concern  with  his 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  169 

lordship's:  Miss  Grandison  was  sedately  serious: 
Lady  L.  had  expectation  in  her  fine  face;  and  Dr. 
Bartlett  sat  like  a  man  that  was  determined  to  be 
silent.  I  had  apprehension,  and  hope,  I  suppose, 
struggling  in  mine,  as  I  knew  not  whether  to  wish 
for  the  expected  conference,  or  not. 

Let  us  think  of  nothing,  my  lord,  in  this  com- 
pany, said  he,  but  what  is  agreeable. 

He  enquired  kindly  of  my  health,  and  last  night's 
rest,  because  of  a  slight  cold  that  had  affected  my 
voice:  of  Emily,  Why  she  was  so  sad?  Of  Lady 
L.  and  my  lord,  When  they  went  to  town  ?  Of  Miss 
Grandison,  Why  she  looked  so  meditatingly?  that 
was  his  word. — Don't  you  see,  Miss  Byron,  said  he, 
that  Charlotte  looks  as  if  she  had  not  quite  settled 
the  humour  she  intends  to  be  in  for  the  next  half- 
hour? 

Charlotte  looks,  I  believe.  Sir,  replied^she,  as  if 
she  were  determined  to  take  her  humour  for  the  next 
half-hour  from  yours,  whether  grave  or  airy. 

Then  returned  he,  I  will  not  be  grave,  because 
I  will  not  have  you  so. — May  I  hope,  madam,  by- 
and-by,  addressing  himself  to  me,  for  the  honour 
of  your  hand,  to  my  lord's  library? 

Sir,  I  will — I  will — attend  you — hesitated  the 
simpleton ;  but  she  can't  tell  how  she  looked. 

Thus,  Lucy,  was  the  matter  brought  on : 

He  conducted  me  to  my  lord's  library. — How 
did  I  struggle  with  myself  for  presence  of  mind ! 
What  a  mixture  was  there  of  tenderness  and  respect 
in  his  countenance  and  air ! 

He  seated  me;  then  took  his  place  over-against 
me.  I  believe  I  looked  down,  and  conscious,  and 
silly;  but  there  was  such  a  respectful  modesty  in  his 
looks,  that  one  could  not  be  uneasy  at  being  now- 
and-then,  with  an  air  of  languor,  as  I  thought,  con- 
templated by  him :  especially  as,  whenever  I  reared 
Q 


170  THE    HISTORY   OF 

my  eye-lids  to  cast  a  momentary  look  at  him  as  he 
spoke,  I  was  always  sure  to  see  his  eye  withdrawn: 
this  gave  more  freedom  to  mine,  than  it  possibly 
otherwise  could  have  had.  What  a  bold  creature, 
Lucy,  ought  she  to  be  who  prefers  a  bold  man!  If 
she  be  not  bold,  how  silly  must  she  look  under  his 
staring  confident  eye !  How  must  her  want  of  cour- 
age add  to  his  self-consequence  ! 

Thus  he  began  the  subject  we  were  to  talk  of. 

I  will  make  no  apology  for  requesting  the  favour 
of  this  conference  with  one  of  the  most  frank  and 
open-hearted  young  ladies  in  the  world:  I  shall  have 
the  honour,  perhaps,  of  detaining  your  ear  on  more 
than  one  subject  [how  my  heart  throbbed]  :  but 
that  which  I  shall  begin  with,  relates  to  my  Lord  G. 
and  our  sister  Charlotte.  I  observe  from  hints 
thrown  out  by  herself,  as  well  as  from  what  Lady 
L.  said,  that  she  intends  to  encourage  his  addresses; 
but  it  is  easy  to  see,  that  she  thinks  but  slightly  of 
him.  I  am  indeed  apprehensive,  that  she  is  rather 
induced  to  favour  my  lord,  from  an  opinion  that  he 
has  my  interest  and  good  wishes,  than  from  her 
own  inclination.  I  have  told  her,  more  than  once, 
that  hers  are,  and  shall  be,  mine  :  but  such  is  her 
vivacity,  that  it  is  very  difficult  for  me  to  know  her 
real  mind.  1  take  it  for  granted,  that  she  prefers 
my  lord  to  Sir  Walter, 

I  believe,  Sir — But  why  should  I  say  believe, 
when  Miss  Grandison  has  commissioned  me  to  own, 
that  Lord  G,  is  a  man  whom  she  greatly  prefers  to 
Sir  Walter  Watkyns  ? 

Does  she,  can  she,  do  you  think,  madam,  prefer 
Lord  G,  not  only  to  Sir  Walter,  but  to  all  the  men 
whom  she  at  present  knows?  In  other  words,  Is  there 
anij  man  that  you  think  she  would  prefer  to  LordG.? 
I  am  extremely  solicitous  for  my  sister's  happiness ; 
and  the  more,  because  of  her  vivacity,  which,  I  am 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  171 

afraid,  will  be  thought  less  to  become  the  wife* 
than  the  single  woman. 

I  dare  say,  Sir,  that  if  Miss  Grandison  thought  of 
any  other  man  in  preference  to  Lord  G.  she  would 
not  encourage  his  addresses,  upon  any  account. 

I  don't  expect,  madam,  that  a  woman  of  Char-f 
iotte's  spirit  and  vivacity,  who  has  been  disappointed 
by  a  failure  of  supposed  merit  in  her  first  love  (if  we 
may  so  call  it)  should  be  deeply  in  love  with  a 
man  that  has  not  very  striking  qualities.  She  can 
play  with  a  flame  now,  and  not  burn  her  fingers. 
Lord  G.  is  a  worthy,  though  not  a  very  brilliant  man. 
Ladies  have  eyes;  and  the  eye  expects  to  be  gratir 
fied.  Hence  men  of  appearance  succeed  often, 
where  men  of  intrinsic  merit  fail.  Were  Charlotte 
to  consult  her  happiness,  possibly  she  would  have  no 
objection  to  Lord  G.  She  cannot,  in  the  same  man, 
have  every  thing.  But  if  Lord  G.  consulted  hisy  I 
don't  know  whether  he  would  wish  for  Charlotte. 
Excuse  me,  madam ;  you  have  heard,  as  well  as  she, 
my  opinion  of  both  men.  Sir  Walter,  you  say,  has 
no  part  in  the  question ;  Lord  G.  wants  not  underr 
standing:  he  is  a  man  of  probity ;  he  is  a  virtuous 
man,  a  quality  not  to  be  despised  in  a  young  noble- 
man :  he  is  also  a  mild  man  ;  he  will  bear  a  great 
deal.  But  contempt,  or  such  a  behaviour  as  should 
look  like  contempt,  in  a  wife,  what  husband  can 
bear  ?  I  should  much  more  dread,  for  her  sake,  the 
exasperated  spirit  of  a  meek  man,  than  the  sudden 
gusts  of  anger  of  a  passionate  one. 

Miss  Grandison,  Sir,  has  authorized  me  to  say, 
that  if  you  approve  of  Lord  G.'s  addresses,  and  will 
be  so  good  as  to  take  upon  yourself  the  direction  of 
every  thing  relating  to  settlements,  she  will  be  enr 
tirely  governed  by  you.  Miss  Grandison,  Sir,  has 
known  Lord  G.  sometime:  his  good  character  is 
well  known ;  and  I  dare  answer,  that  she  will  acquit 
q2 


172  THE    HISTORY   OF 

herself  with  honour  and  prudence,  in  everij  engage- 
ment, but  more  especially  in  that  which  is  the  highest 
of  all  worldly  ones. 

Pray,  madam,  may  I  ask,  if  you  know  what  she 
could  mean  by  the  questions  she  put  in  relation  to 
Mr.  Beauchamp?  I  think  she  has  never  seen  him. 
Does  she  suppose,  from  his  character,  that  she  could 
perfer  him  to  Lord  G.? 

I  believe,  Sir,  what  she  said  in  relation  to  that 
gentleman  was  purely  the  effect  of  her  vivacity, 
and  which  she  never  thought  of  before,  and,  proba- 
bly, never  will  again.  Had  she  meant  any-thing  by 
it,  I  dare  say,  she  would  not  have  put  the  questions 
about  him  in  the  manner  she  did. 

I  believe  so;  Hove  my  sister,  and  Hove  my  friend. 
Mr.  Beauchamp  has  delicacy.  I  could  not  bear,  for 
her  sake,  that  were  she  to  behold  him  in  the  light 
hinted  at,  he  should  imagine  he  had  reason  to  think 
slightly  of  my  sister,  for  the  correspondence  she  car- 
ried on,  in  so  private  a  manner,  with  a  man  absolutely 
unworthy  of  her.  But  I  hope  she  meant  nothing, 
but  to  give  way  to  that  vein  of  raillery,  which,  when 
opened,  she  knows  not  always  how  to  stop. 

My  spirits  were  not  high :  I  was  forced  to  take 
out  my  handkerchief — O  my  dear  Miss  Grandison  I 
said  I,  I  was  afraid  she  had  forfeited,  partly,  at 
least,  what  she  holds  most  dear,  that  good  opinion 
of  her  brother ! 

Forgive  me,  madam,  'tis  a  generous  pain  that  I 
have  made  you  suffer:  I  admire  you  for  it.  But  I 
think  I  can  reveal  all  the  secrets  of  my  heart  to  you. 
Your  noble  frankness  calls  for  equal  frankness ;  you 
would  inspire  it,  where  it  is  not.  My  sister,  as  I  told 
her  more  than  once  in  your  hearing,  has  not  lost  any 
of  my  love.  I  love  her,  with  all  her  faults ;  but  must 
not  be  blind  to  them.  Shall  not  praise  and  dispraise 
be  justly  given?  I  have  faults,  great  faults,  myself; 
3 


SIR   CHARLES    GUANDISON.  173 

wliat  should  I  think  of  the  man  who  called  them 
virtues?  How  dangerous  would  it  be  to  me,  in  that 
case,  were  my  opinion  of  his  judgment,  joined  to 
self-partiality,  to  leave  me  to  believe  him,  and  ac-' 
quit  myself? 

This,  Sir,  is  a  manner  of  thinking  worthy  of  Sir 
Charles  Grandison. 

It  is  worthy  of  every  man,  my  good  Miss  Byron. 

But,  Sir,  it  would  be  very  hard,  that  an  indiscre-^ 
tion  (I  viust  own  it  to  be  such)  should  fasten  re- 
proach upon  awomanwho  recovered  herself  so  soon, 
and  whose  virtue  was  never  sullied,  or  in  danger. 

Indeed  it  would  :  and  therefore  it  was  in  tender- 
ness to  her  that  I  intimated,  that  I  never  could  think 
of  promoting  an  alliance  with  a  man  of  Mr.  Beau'^ 
champ's  nice  notions,  were  both  to  incline  to  it. 

I  hope.  Sir,  that  my  dear  Miss  Grandison  will  run 
no  risque  of  being  slighted,  by  any  other  man,  from 
a  step  which  has  cost  her  so  dear  in  her  peace  of 
mind — I  hesitated,  and  looked  down. 

I  know,  madam,  what  you  mean.  Although  I  love 
my  friend  Beauchamp  above  all  men,  yet  would  1  do 
Lord  G.  or  any  other  man,  as  much  justice,  as  I 
would  do  him.  I  was  so  apprehensive  of  my  sister's 
indifference  to  Lord  G.  and  of  the  difference  in  their 
tempers,  though  both  good,  that  I  did  my  utmost  to 
dissuade  him  from  thinking  of  her ;  and  when  I  found 
that  his  love  was  fixed  beyond  the  power  of  dissuai- 
sion,  I  told  him  of  the  affair  between  her  and  Cap- 
tain Anderson ;  and  how  lately  I  had  put  an  end  to 
it.  He  flattered  himself,  that  the  indifference,  with 
which  she  had  hitherto  received  his  addresses,  was 
principally  owing  to  the  difficulty  of  her  situation ; 
which  being  now  so  happily  removed,  he  had  hopes 
pf  meeting  with  encouragement :  and  doubted  not, 
if  he  did,  of  making  a  merit  with  her,  by  his  affec- 
tion and  gratitude.  And  now,  madam,  give  ra§ 
q3 


174«  THE    HISTORY   OF 

your  opinion — Do  you  think  Charlotte  can  be  won 
(I  hope  she  can)  by  indulgence,  by  love  ?  Let  me 
caution  her  by  you,  madam,  that  it  is  fit  she  should 
still  be  more  careful  to  restrain  her  vivacity  if  she 
marry  a  man  to  whom  she  thinks  she  has  superior 
talents,  than  she  need  to  be  if  the  difference  were  in 
his  favour. 

Permit  me  to  add,  that  if  she  should  shew  herself 
capable  of  returning  slight  for  tenderness ;  of  taking 
such  liberties  with  a  man  who  loves  her,  after  she 
had  given  him  her  vows,  as  should  depreciate  him, 
and,  of  consequence,  herself,  in  the  eye  of  the  world; 
I  should  be  apt  to  forget  that  1  had  more  than  one 
sister :  for,  in  cases  of  right  and  wrong,  we  ought 
not  to  know  either  relation  or  friend. 

Does  not  this  man,  Lucy,  shew  us  that  goodness 
and  greatness  are  synonymous  words ! 

I  think.  Sir,  replied  I,  that  if  Lord  G.  prove  the 
good-natured  man  he  seems  to  be ;  if  he  dislike  not 
that  brilliancy  of  temper  in  his  lady,  which  he  seems 
not  to  value  himself  xv^on,  though  he  may  have  qua- 
lities, at  least,  equally  valuable ;  I  have  no  doubt 
but  Miss  Grandison  will  make  him  very  happy :  for 
has  she  not  great  and  good  qualities  ?  Is  she  not  ge- 
nerous, and  perfectly  good-natured?  You  know, 
Sir,  that  she  is.  And  can  it  be  supposed,  that  her 
charming  vivacity  will  ever  carry  her  so  far  beyond 
the  bounds  of  prudence  and  discretion,  as  to  make 
her  forget  what  the  nature  of  the  obligation  she  will 
have  entered  into  requires  of  her  ? 

Well,  madam,  then  I  may  rejoice  the  heart  of 
Lord  G.  by  telling  him,  that  he  is  at  liberty  to  visit 
my  sister,  at  her  coming  to  town ;  or,  if  she  come 
not  soon  (for  he  will  be  impatient  to  wait  on  her)  at 
Colnebrook  ? 

I  dare  say  you  may.  Sir. 

As  to  articles  and  settlements,  I  will  undertake 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  175 

for  all  those  things ;  but  be  pleased  to  tell  her,  that 
she  is  absolutely  at  her  own  liberty,  for  me.  If  she 
shall  think,  when  she  sees  further  of  Lord  G.'s  tem- 
per and  behaviour,  that  she  cannot  esteem  him  as 
a  wife  ought  to  esteem  her  husband ;  I  shall  not  be 
concerned,  if  she  dismiss  him ;  provided  that  she 
keeps  him  not  on  in  suspense,  after  she  knows  her 
own  mind ;  but  behaves  to  him  according  to  the 
example  set  her  by  the  best  of  women. 

I  could  not  but  know  to  whom  he  designed  this 
compliment ;  and  had  like  to  have  bowed ;  but  was 
glad  I  did  not. 

Well,  madam,  and  now  I  think  this  subject  is  con- 
cluded. I  have  already  written  a  letter  to  Sir  Wal- 
ter, as  at  the  request  of  my  sister,  to  put  an  end,  in 
the  civilest  terms,  to  his  hopes.  My  Lord  G.  will 
be  impatient  for  ray  return  to  town.  1  shall  go  with 
the  more  pleasure,  because  of  the  joy  I  shall  be 
able  to  give  him. 

You  must  be  very  happy.  Sir :  since,  besides  the 
pleasure  you  take  in  doing  good  for  its  own  sake, 
you  are  intitled  to  partake,  in  a  very  high  manner, 
of  the  pleasures  of  every  one  you  know. 

He  was  so  nobly  modest,  Lucy,  that  I  could  talk 
to  him  with  more  confidence  than  I  believed,  at  my 
entrance  into  my  lord's  study,  would  fall  to  my 
share :  and  I  had,  besides,  been  led  into  a  presence 
of  mind,  by  being  made  a  person  of  some  conse- 
quence in  the  love-case  of  another :  but  I  was  soon 
to  have  my  whole  attention  engaged  in  a  subject 
still  nearer  to  my  heart ;  as  you  shall  hear. 

Indeed,  madam,  said  he,  1  am  not  very  happy  in 
myself.  Is  it  not  right,  then,  to  endeavour,  by  pro- 
moting the  happiness  of  others,  to  entitle  myself  to 
a  share  of  theirs  ? 

If  ^ou  are  not  happy,  Sir— and  I  stopt.  1  believe 


176  THE    HISTORY   OP 

I  sighed ;  I  looked  down :  I  took  out  my  handker* 
chief,  for  fear  I  should  want  it. 

There  seems,  said  he,  to  be  a  mixture  of  generous 
poncern,  and  kind  curiosity,  in  one  of  the  loveliest 
and  most  intelligent  faces  in  the  world.  My  sisters 
have,  in  your  presence,  expressed  a  great  deal  of  the 
latter,  Had  I  not  been  myself  in  a  manner  uncertain 
as  to  the  event  that  must,  in  some  measure,  govern 
my  future  destiny,  I  would  have  gratified  it ;  espcr 
pially,  as  my  Lord  L.  has,  of  late,  joined  in  it.  The 
crisis,  I  told  them,  however,  as  perhaps  you  rememr 
ber,  was  at  hand. 

I  do  remember  you  said  so,  Sir,  And  indeed, 
l.ucy,  it  >vas  more  than  perhaps.  I  had  not  thought 
of  any  words  lialf  so  often,  since  he  spoke  them. 

The  crisis,  madam,  is  at  hand :  and  I  had  not  m- 
^ended  to  open  my  lips  upon  the  subject  till  it  was 
over,  ejfcept  to  Dr,  Bartlett,  who  knows  the  whole 
affair,  and  indeed  every  affair  of  my  life :  but,  as  I 
hinted  before,  my  heart  is  opened  by  the  frankness 
pf  yours.  If  you  will  be  so  good  as  to  indulge  me, 
I  will  briefly  lay  before  you  a  few  of  the  difficulties 
of  my  situation ;  and  leave  it  to  you  to  communicate 
pr  pot,  at  your  pleasure,  what  I  shall  relate,  to  my 
pKo  sisters  and  Lord  L,  You  four  seem  to  be  anir 
piated  by  one  soul. 

I  am  extremely  concerned,  Sir — I  am  very  much 
concerned — repeated  the  trembling  simpleton  [one 
cheek  feeling  to  myself  very  cold,  the  other  glowr 
Jngly  wafm,  by  turns ;  and  now  pale,  now  crimson, 
perhaps  to  the  eye]  that  any-thing  should  make 
you  unhappy.  But,  Sir,  I  shall  think  myself  favoured 
\>y  your  confidence, 

I  am  interrupted  in  my  recital  of  his  affecting 
parration.  Don't  be  impatient,  Lucy :  I  almost 
\(\^\i  I  liad  not  heard  it  myself. 


SIR  CHARLES  GRASDISOlf.  177 

LETTER  XX. 

MISS    BYRON.      IN   CONTINUATION. 

I  DO  not  intend,  madam,  to  trouble  you  with  a  hisi 
tory  of  all  that  part  of  my  life  which  I  was  obliged 
to  pass  abroad  from  about  the  seventeenth  to  near 
the  twenty-fifth  year  of  my  age ;  though  perhaps  it 
has  been  as  busy  a  period  as  could  well  be,  in  the 
life  of  a  man  so  young,  and  who  never  sought  to 
tread  in  oblique  or  crooked  paths.  After  this  en- 
trance into  it,  Dr.  Bartlett  shall  be  at  liberty  to  sa-  ■ 
tify  your  curiosity  in  a  more  particular  manner;  for 
he  and  I  have  corresponded  for  years  with  an  inti- 
macy that  has  few  examples  between  a  youth  and  a 
man  in  advanced  life.  And  here  let  me  own  the 
advantages  I  have  received  from  his  condescension; 
for  I  found  the  following  questions  often  occur  to 
me,  and  to  be  of  the  highest  service  in  the  conduct 
of  my  life — '  What  account  shall  I  give  of  this  to 
Dr.  Bartlett?'  'How,  were  I  to  give  way  to  this 
temptation,  shall  1  report  it  to  Dr.  Bartlett?' — Or, 
*  Shall  I  be  a  hypocrite,  and  only  inform  him  of  the 
best,  and  meanly  conceal  from  him  the  worst?* 

Thus,  madam,  was  Dr.  Bartlett  in  the  place  of  a 
second  conscience  to  me :  and  many  a  good  thing 
did  I  do,  many  a  bad  one  avoid,  for  having  set  up 
such  a  monitor  over  my  conduct.  And  it  was  the 
more  necessary  that  I  should,  as  I  am  naturally  pas- 
sionate, proud,  ambitious ;  and  as  I  had  the  honour 
of  being  early  distinguished  (pardon,  madam,  the 
seeming  vanity)  by  a  sex,  of  which  no  man  was  ever 
a  greater  admirer;  and,  possibly,  the  wore  distin- 
guished, as,  for  my  safety-sake,  1  was  as  studious  to 
decline  intimacy  with  the  gay  ones  of  it,  however 


178  THE  HisTony  of 

dignified  by  rank,  or  celebrated  for  beauty,  as  most 
young  men  are  to  cultivate  their  favour. 

Nor  is  it  so  much  to  be  wondered  at,  that  I  had 
advantages  which  every  one  who  travels,  has  not. 
Jlesiding  for  some  time  at  the  principal  courts,  and 
often  visiting  the  same  places,  in  the  length  of  time 
I  was  abroad,  I  was  considered,  in  a  manner,  as  a 
native,  at  the  same  time,  that  I  was  treated  with  the 
respect  that  is  generally  paid  to  travellers  of  figure, 
as  well  in  France,  as  Italy.  I  was  very  genteelly 
supported :  I  stood  in  high  credit  with  my  country- 
men, to  whom  I  had  many  ways  of  being  service- 
able. They  made  known  to  every-body  my  father's 
affection  for  me ;  his  magnificent  spirit ;  the  antient 
families,  on  both  sides,  from  which  I  was  descended. 
I  kept  the  best  company ;  avoided  intrigues ;  made 
not  myself  obnoxious  to  serious  or  pious  people, 
though  I  scrupled  not  to  avow,  M'hen  called  upon, 
my  own  principles.  From  all  these  advantages,  I 
was  respected  beyond  my  degree. 

I  should  not,  madam,  have  been  thus  lavish  in  my 
own  praise,  but  to  account  to  you  for  the  favour  I 
stood  in  with  several  families  of  the  first  rank  ;  and 
to  suggest  an  excuse  for  more  than  one  of  them, 
which  thought  it  no  disgrace  to  wish  me  to  be  allied 
with  them. 

Lord  L.  mentioned  to  you,  madam,  and  my  sis- 
ters, a  Florentine  lady,  by  the  name  of  Olivia.  She 
is,  indeed,  a  woman  of  high  qualities,  nobly  born, 
generous,  amiable  in  her  features,  genteer  in  her 
person,  and  mistress  of  a  great  fortune  in  possession, 
which  is  entirely  at  her  own  disposal;  having  not 
father,  mother,  brother,  or  other  near  relations. 
1'he  first  time  I  saw  her  was  at  the  opera.  An  op- 
portunity offered  in  her  sight,  where  a  lady,  insulted 
by  a  lover  made  despjerate  by  her  just  refusal  of 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  179 

him,  claimed  and  received  my  protection.  What 
I  did,  on  the  occasion,  was  generally  applauded ; 
Olivia,  in  particular,  spoke  highly  ot'  it.  Twice, 
afterwards,  I  saw  her  in  company  where  I  was  a  vi- 
siter: I  had  not  the  presumption  to  look  up  t(j  her 
with  hope;  but  my  countryman  Mr.  Jervois  gave  me 
to  understand,  that  I  might  be  master  of  my  own 
fortune  with  Lady  Olivia.  I  pleaded  difference  of 
religion :  he  believed,  he  said,  that  matter  might  be 
made  easy — But  could  I  be  pleased  with  the  change, 
would  she  have  made  it,  when  passion,  not  convic- 
tion, was  likely  to  be  the  motive  ? — There  could  be 
no  objection  to  her  person :  no  bpdy  questioned 
her  virtue ;  but  she  was  violent  and  imperious  in  her 
temper.  I  had  never  left  mind  out  of  my  notions 
of  love :  I  could  not  have  been  happy  with  her,  had 
she  been  queen  of  the  globe.  I  had  the  mortifica- 
tion of  being  obliged  to  declare  myself  to  the  lady's 
face  :  it  tvas  a  mortification  to  me,  as  much  for  her 
sake  as  my  own.  I  was  obliged  to  leave  Florence 
upon  it,  for  some  time ;  having  been  apprised,  that 
the  spirit  of  revenge  had  taken  place  of  a  gentler 
passion,  and  that  1  was  in  danger  from  it. 

How  often  did  I  lament  the  want  of  that  refuge 
in  a  father's  arms,  and  in  my  native  country,  which 
subjected  me  to  evils  that  were  more  than  a  match 
for  my  tender  years,  and  to  all  the  inconveniencies 
that  can  attend  a  banished  man  !  Indeed  I  often 
considered  myself  in  this  light ;  and,  as  the  incon- 
veniencies happened,  was  ready  to  repine ;  and  the 
more  ready,  as  1  could  not  afflict  myself  with  the 
thought  of  having  forfeited  my  father's  love :  on  the 
contrary,  as  the  constant  instances  which  I  received 
of  his  paternal  goodness,  made  me  still  more  earnest 
to  acknowledge  it  at  his  feet. 

Ought  I  to  have  forborn,  Lucy,  shewing  a  sensi- 
bility at  my  eyes  on  this  affecting  iiistaace  of  filial 


180  THE   HISTOR-??  OF 

gratitude  ?  If  I  ought,  I  wish  I  had  more  com- 
mand of  myself :  but  consider,  my  dear,  the  affect- 
ing subject  we  were  upon.  I  was  going  to  apologize 
for  the  trickling  tear,  and  to  have  said,  as  I  truly 
might.  Your  filial  goodness,  Sir,  affects  me :  but, 
with  the  consciousness  that  must  have  accompanied 
the  words,  would  not  that,  to  so  nice  a  discerner, 
have  been  to  own,  that  I  thought  the  tender  emotion 
wanted  an  apology  ?  These  little  tricks  of  ours, 
Lucy,  may  satisfy  our  own  punctilio,  and  serve  to 
keep  us  in  countenance  with  ourselves  (and  that, 
indeed,  is  doing  something) ;  but,  to  a  penetrating 
eye,  they  tend  only  to  shew,  that  we  imagined  a 
cover,  a  veil,  wanting  ;  and  what  is  that  veil,  but  a 
veil  of  gauze  ? 

What  makes  me  so  much  afraid  of  this  man's  dis- 
cernment ?     Am  I  not  an  honest  girl,  Lucy  ? 

He  proceeded. 

From  this  violent  lady  I  had  great  trouble ;  and  to 
this  day — But  this  part  of  my  story  I  leave  to  Dr. 
Bartlett  to  acquaint  you  with.  I  mention  it  as  a  mat- 
ter that  yet  gives  me  concern,  for  her  sake,  and  as 
what  I  find  has  given  some  amusement  to  my  sister 
Charlotte's  curiosity. 

But  I  hasten  to  the  affair  which,  of  all  others,  has 
most  embarrassed  me ;  and  which,  engaging  my 
compassion,  though  my  honour  is  free,  gives  torture 
to  my  very  soul. 

I  found  myself  not  well — I  thought  I  should  have 
fainted. — The  apprehension  of  his  taking  it  as  I 
wished  him  not  to  take  it  (for  indeed,  Lucy,  I  don't 
think  it  was  that)  made  me  worse.  Had  I  been  by 
myself,  this  faintishness  might  have  come  over  my 
heart.  I  am  sure  it  was  not  that :  but  it  seized  me 
at  a  very  unlucky  moment,  you'll  say. 

With  a  countenance  full  of  tender  concern,  he 
caught  my  hand,  and  rang.   In  ran  his  Emily.  My 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANEWSON.  181 

dear  Miss  Jervois,  said  I,  leaning  upon  her — Excuse 
me,  Sir — And  I  withdrew  to  the  door ;  and,  when 
there,  finding  my  faintishncss  going  off,  I  turned  to 
him,  who  attended  me  thither :  1  am  better,  Sir, 
already  ;  I  will  return  instantly.  I  must  beg  of  you 
to  proceed  with  your  interesting  story. 

I  was  well  the  moment  I  was  out  of  the  study.  It 
was  kept  too  warm,  I  believe ;  and  I  sat  too  near  the 
fire :  that  was  it,  to  be  sure  ;  and  I  said  so,  on  my 
return ;  which  was  the  moment  1  had  drank  a  glass 
of  cold  water. 

How  tender  was  his  regard  for  me !  He  did  not 
abash  me  by  causelesly  laying  my  disorder  on  his 
story,  and  by  offering  to  discontinue  or  postpone  it. 
Indeed,  Lucy,  it  was  not  owing  to  that !  I  should 
easily  have  distinguished  it,  if  it  had:  on  the  con- 
trary, as  I  am  not  generally  so  much  affected  at  the 
moment  when  any  thing  unhappy  befals  me,  as  I 
am  upon  reflection,  when  I  extend,  compare,  and 
weigh  consequences,  I  was  quite  brave  in  my  heart. 
Any-thing,  thought  I,  is  better  than  suspense.  Now 
will  my  fortitude  have  a  call  to  exert  itself;  and  I 
warrant  I  bear,  as  well  as  he,  an  evil  that  is  inevita- 
ble. At  this  instant,  this  trying  instant,  however, 
I  found  myself  thus  brave  :  so,  my  dear,  it  was  no- 
thing but  the  too  great  warmth  of  the  room  which 
overcame  me. 

I  endeavoured  to  assume  all  my  courage ;  and  de- 
sired him  to  proceed ;  but  held  by  the  arm  of  my 
chair  to  steady  me,  lest  my  little  tremblings  should 
increase.  The  faintness  had  left  some  Uttle  trem- 
blings upon  me,  Lucy :  and  one  would  not  care,  you 
know,  to  be  thought  affected  by  any  thing  in  his 
story.    He  proceeded. 

At  Bologna,  and  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Urbino, 
are  seated  two  branches  of  a  noble  family,  marquises 

VOL.  XI.  R 


182  THE   HISTORY   OP 

and  counts  of  Porretta,  which  boasts  its  pedigree 
from  Roman  princes,  and  has  given  to  the  church 
two  cardinals;  one  in  the  latter  age,  the  other 
in  the  beginning  of  this. 

The  Marchesse  della  Porretta,  who  resides  in 
Bologna,  is  a  nobleman  of  great  merit :  his  lady  is 
illustrious  by  descent,  and  still  more  so  for  her  good- 
ness of  heart,  sweetness  of  temper,  and  prudence. 
They  have  three  sons,  and  a  daughter — 

[Ah,  that  daughter  !  thought!.] 

The  eldest  of  the  sons  is  a  general  officer,  in  the 
service  of  the  King  of  the  two  Sicilies  ;  a  man  of 
equal  honour  and  bravery,  but  passionate  and  haugh- 
ty, valuing  himself  on  his  descent.  The  second  is 
devoted  to  the  church,  and  is  already  a  bishop.  The 
interest  of  his  family,  and  his  own  merits,  it  is  not 
doubted,  will  one  day,  if  he  lives,  give  him  a  place 
in  the  Sacred  College.  The  third,  Signor  Jeronymo 
(or  as  he  is  sometimes  called,  the  Barone)  della 
Porretta,  has  a  regiment  in  the  service  of  the  King 
'  of  Sardinia.  The  sister  is  the  favourite  of  them  all. 
She  is  lovely  in  her  person,  gentle  in  her  manners, 
and  has  high,  but  just,  notions  of  the  nobili^Kofher 
descent,  of  the  honour  of  her  sex,  and  of  what  is 
due  to  her  own  character.  She  is  pious,  charitable, 
beneficent.  Her  three  brothers  preferred  her  inter- 
ests to  their  own.  Her  father  used  to  call  her, 
The  pride  of  his  life  ;  her  mother,  Her  other  self; 
her  oxun  Clementina  i 

[Clementina  ! — Ah!  Lucy,  what  a  pretty  name 
is  Clementina!] 

I  became  intimate  with  Signor  Jeronymo  at  Rome, 
near  two  years  before  I  had  the  honour  to  be  known 
to  the  rest  of  his  family,  except  by  his  report,  which 
he  made  run  very  high  in  my  favour.  He  was  master 
of  many  fine  qualities ;  but  had  contracted  friendship 
^ith  a  set  of  dissolute  young  men  of  rank,  lyith  whom 
S 


SIR  CHARLES   GRANDI80N.  183 

he  was  very  earnest  to  make  me  acquainted.  I  allow- 
ed myself  to  be  often  in  their  company ;  but,  as  they 
were  totally  abandoned  in  their  morals,  it  was  in 
hopes,  by  degrees,  to  draw  him  from  them :  but  a 
love  of  pleasure  hadgotfastholdof  him;  andhisother 
companions  prevailed  over  his  good-nature.  H  e  had 
courage,  but  not  enough  to  resist  their  libertine  at- 
tacks upon  his  morals. 

Such  a  friendship  could  not  hold,  while  each  stood 
his  ground;  and  neither  would  advance  to  meet  the 
other.  In  short,  we  parted,  nor  held  a  correspond- 
ence in  absence:  but  afterwards  meeting,  by  acci- 
dent, at  Padua,  and  Jeronymo  having,  in  the  interim, 
been  led  into  inconveniences,  he  avowed  a  change 
of  principles,  and  the  friendship  was  renewed. 

It  however  held  not  many  months  :  a  lady,  less 
celebrated  for  virtue  than  beauty,  obtained  an  influ- 
ence over  him,  against  warning,  against  promise. 

On  being  expostulated  with,  and  his  promise 
claimed,  he  resented  the  friendly  freedom.  He  was 
passionate  ;  and,  on  this  occasion,  less  polite  than  it 
was  natural  for  him  to  be :  he  even  defied  his  friend. 
My  dear  Jeronymo !  how  generously  has  he  acknow- 
ledged since,  the  part  his  friend  at  that  time  acted  ! 
But  the  result  was,  they  parted,  resolving  never 
more  to  see  each  other. 

Jeronymo  pursued  the  adventure  which  had  oc- 
casioned the  difference ;  and  one  of  the  lady's  ad- 
mirers, envying  him  his  supposed  3ucce^s,  hired 
Brescian  bravoes  to  assassinate  him. 

The  attempt  was  made  in  the  Cremonese.  They 
had  got  him  into  their  toils  in  a  little  thicket  at  some 
distance  from  the  road.  I,  attended  by  two  servants, 
happened  to  be  passing,  when  a  frig;:ted  horse  ran 
cross  the  way,  his  bridle  broken,  and  his  saddle 
bloody :  this  making  me  apprehend  some  mischief 
a  2 


IS*  THE   HISTORY  OF 

to  the  rider,  I  drove  down  the  opening  he  came  from, 
and  soon  beheld  a  man  struggling  on  the  ground 
with  two  ruffians  ;  one  of  whom  was  just  stopping  his 
mouth,  the  other  stabbing  him.  I  leapt  out  of  the 
post-chaise,  and  drew  my  sword,  running  towards 
them  as  fast  as  I  could ;  and  calling  to  my  servants 
to  follow  me,  indeed  calling  as  if  I  had  a  number  with 
me,  in  order  to  alarm  them.  On  this,  they  fled ;  and 
I  heard  them  say.  Let  us  make  off:  we  have  done  his 
business.  Incensed  at  the  villainy,  I  piwrsued  and 
came  up  with  one  of  them,  who  turned  upon  me.  I 
beat  down  his  trombone^  a  kind  of  blunderbuss,  just 
as  he  presented  it  at  me,  and  had  wounded  and 
thrown  him  on  the  ground ;  but  seeing  the  other 
ruffian  turning  back  to  help  his  fellow,  and  on  a  sud- 
den, two  othersappearing  with  their  horses,  I  thought 
it  best  to  retreat,  though  I  fain  would  have  secured 
one  of  them.  My  servants  then  seeing  my  danger, 
hastened,  shouting  towards  me.  The  bravoes  (per- 
haps apprehending  there  were  more  than  two) 
seemed  as  glad  to  get  off  with  their  rescued  compa- 
nion as  I  was  to  retire.  I  hastened  then  to  the 
unhappy  man  :  but  how  much  was  I  surprised,  when 
I  found  him  to  be  the  Barone  della  Porretta,  who, 
in  disguise,  had  been  actually  pursuing  his  amour ! 
He  gave  signs  of  life.  I  instantly  dispatched  one  of 
my  servants  to  Cremona,  for  a  surgeon :  I  bound  up, 
mean  time,  as  well  as  I  could,  two  of  his  wounds, 
one  in  his  shoulder,  the  other  in  his  breast.  He  had 
one  in  his  hip-joint,  which  disabled  him  from  helping 
himself,  and  which  I  found  beyond  my  skill  to  do  any 
thing  with ;  only  endeavouring,  with  my  handker- 
chief, to  stop  its  bleeding.  1  helped  him  into  my 
chaise,  stept  in  with  him,  and  held  him  up  in  it,  till 
one  of  my  men  told  me,  they  had,  in  another  part  of 
the  thicket,  found  his  servant  bound  and  wounded, 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  185 

his  horse  lying  dead  by  his  side.  I  then  alighted,  and 
put  the  poor  fellow  into  the  chaise,  he  being  stiff 
with  his  hurts,  and  unable  to  stand. 

I  walked  by  the  side  of  it ;  and  in  this  manner 
moved  towards  Cremona,  in  order  to  shorten  the 
way  of  the  expected  surgeon. 

My  servant  soon  returned  with  one.  Jeronymo 
had  fainted  away.  The  surgeon  dressed  him,  and 
proceeded  with  him  to  Cremona.  Then  it  was,  that, 
opening  his  eyes,  he  beheld,  and  knew  me :  and 
being  told  by  the  surgeon,  that  he  owed  his  preser- 
vation to  me,  O  Grandison !  said  he,  that  I  had  fol- 
lowed your  advice !  that  1  had  kept  my  promise  with 
you ! — How  did  I  insult  you ! — Can  my  deliverer 
forgive  me  ?  You  shall  be  the  director  of  my  future ; 
life,  if  it  please  God  to  restore  me. 

His  wounds  proved  not  mortal ;  but  he  never  will 
be  the  man  he  was :  partly  from  his  having  been  un- 
skilfully treated  by  this  his  first  surgeon ;  and  partly 
from  his  own  impatience,  and  the  difficulty  of  curing 
the  wound  in  his  hip-joint.  Excuse  this  particularity, 
madam.  The  subject  requires  it ;  and  Signor  Jero- 
nymo now  deserves  it,  and  all  your  pity. 

I  attended  him  at  Cremona,  till  he  was  able  to  re- 
move. He  was  visited  there  by  his  whole  family  from 
Bologna.  Therenever  was  a  family  more  affectionate 
to  one  another :  the  suffering  of  one,  is  the  suffering 
of  every  one.  The  barone  was  exceedingly  beloved 
by  his  father,  mother,  sister,  for  the  sweetness  of  his 
manners,  his  affectionate  heart,  and  a  wit  so  de- 
lightfully gay  and  lively,  that  his  company  was 
sought  by  every-body. 

You  will  easily  believe,  madam,  from  what  I  have 
said,  how  acceptable  to  the  whole  family  the  service 
was  which  I  had  been  so  happy  as  to  render  their 
Jeronymo.  They  all  joined  to  bless  me ;  and  the 
more  when  they  came  to  know  that  I  was  the  per« 
R  3 


186  THE  HISTORY  OF 

son  whom  their  Jeronymo,  in  the  clays  of  our  inti- 
macy, had  higlily  extolled  in  his  letters  to  his  sister, 
and  to  both  brothers  ;  and  who  now  related  to  them, 
by  word  of  mouth,  the  occasion  of  the  coldness  that 
had  passed  between  us,  with  circumstances  as  ho- 
nourable for  me,  as  the  contrary  for  himself:  such 
were  his  penitential  confessions  in  the  desperate 
condition  to  which  he  found  himself  reduced. 

He  now,  as  I  attended  by  his  bed  or  his  couch-side, 
frequently  called  for  a  repetition  of  those  arguments 
which  he  had,  till  noiv,  derided.  He  besought  me 
to  forgive  him  for  treating  them  before  with  levity, 
and  me  with  disrespect,  next,  as  he  said,  to  insult : 
and  he  begged  his  family  to  consider  me  not  only 
as  the  preserver  of  his  life,  but  as  the  restorer  of  his 
morals.  This  gave  the  whole  family  the  highest 
opinion  of  mine  ;  and  still  more  to  strengthen  it,  the 
generous  youth  produced  to  them,  though,  as  I  may 
say,  at  his  own  expence  (for  his  reformation  was 
sincere,)  a  letter  which  I  wrote  to  lie  by  him,  in 
hopes  to  enforce  his  temporary  convictions ;  for  he 
had  a  noble  nature,  and  a  lively  sense  of  what  was 
due  to  his  character,  and  to  the  love  and  piety  of 
■his  parents,  the  bishop,  and  his  sister ;  though  he 
was  loth  to  think  he  could  be  wrong  in  those  pur- 
suits in  which  he  was  willing  to  indulge  himself. 

Never  was  there  a  more  grateful  family.  The  no- 
YAeJhther  was  uneasy,  because  he  knew  not  how  to 
acknowledge,  according  to  the  largeness  of  his  heart, 
to  a  man  in  genteel  circumstances,  the  obligation 
laid  upon  them  all.  The  mother,  with  a  freedom 
more  amiably  great  than  the  Italian  ladies  are  accus- 
tomed to  express,  bid  her  Clementina  regard  as  her 
fourth  brother,  the  preserver  of  the  third.  The  ba^ 
rone  declared,  that  he  should  never  rest,  nor  recovery 
till  he  had  got  me  rewarded  in  such  manner  as  all 
•the  world  should  think  I  had  honour  done  me  m  it 


SIR    CHARLES   GRANDISON.  187 

When  the  barone  was  removed  to  Bologna,  the 
whole  family  were  studious  to  make  occasions  to  get 
me  among  them.  The  general  made  me  promise, 
when,rw5/  relations,  as  he  was  pleased  to  express  him- 
self, at  Bologna,  could  part  with  me,  to  give  him  my 
company  at  Naples.  The  bishop,  who  passed  all 
the  time  he  had  to  spare  from  his  diocese,  at  Bolog- 
na, and  who  is  a  learned  man,  in  compliment  to  his 
Jburth  brother,  would  have  me  initiate  him  into  tlie 
knowledge  of  the  English  tongue. 

Our  Milton  has  deservedly  a  name  among  them. 
The  friendship  that  subsisted  between  him  and  a 
learned  nobleman  of  their  country,  endeared  his  me- 
mory to  them.  Milton,  therefore,  was  a  principal 
author  with  us.  Our  lectures  were  usually  held  in 
the  chamber  of  the  wounded  brother,  in  order  to  di- 
vert him  :  he  also  became  my  scholar.  The  father 
and  mother  were  often  present ;  and  at  such  times 
their  Clementina  was  seldom  absent.  She  also  called 
me  her  tutor ;  and  though  she  was  not  half  so  often 
present  at  the  lectures  as  her  brothers  were,  made 
a  greater  proficiency  than  either  of  tlaem. 

[Do  you  doubt  it,  Lucy  ?1 

The  father,  as  well  as  the  bishop,  is  learned ;  the 
mother  well  read.  She  had  had  the  benefit  of  a 
French  education ;  being  brought  up  by  her  uncle, 
who  resided  many  years  at  Paris  in  a  public  charac- 
ter: and  her  daughter  had,  under  her  own  eye, 
advantages  in  her  education  which  are  hardly  ever 
allowed  or  sought  after  by  the  Italian  ladies.  In 
such  company,  you  may  believe,  madam,  that  I,  who 
was  kept  abroad  against  my  wishes,  passed  my  time 
very  agreeably.  I  was  particularly  honoured  with 
the  confidence  of  the  marchioness,  who  opened  her 
heart  to  me,  and  consulted  me  on  every  material 
occurrence.  Her  lord,  who  is  one  of  tlic  politest  of 
muD,  was  never  better  pleased  than  when  he  fouml 


188  THE   HISTORY   OF 

US  together  ;  and  not  geldom,  though  we  were  not 
engaged  in  lectures,  the  fair  Clementina  claimed  a 
right  to  be  where  her  mother  was. 

About  this  time,  the  young  Count  of  Belvedere 
returned  to  Parma,  in  order  to  settle  in  his  native 
country.  His  father  was  a  favourite  in  the  court  of 
the  Princess  of  Parma,  and  attended  that  lady  to 
Madrid,  on  her  marriage  with  the  late  King  of  Spain, 
where  he  held  a  very  considerable  post,  and  lately 
died  there  immensely  rich.  On  a  visit  to  this  noble 
family,  the  young  lord  saw,  and  loved  Clementina. 

The  Count  of  Belvedere  is  a  handsome,  a  gallant, 
a  sensible  man ;  his  fortune  is  very  great:  such  an  al- 
liance was  not  to  be  slighted.  The  marquis  gave  his 
countenance  to  it :  the  marchioness  favoured  me 
with  several  conversations  upon  the  subject.  She 
was  of  opinion,  perhaps,  that  it  was  necessary  to  know 
my  thoughts,  on  this  occasion ;  for  the  younger  bro- 
ther, unknown  to  me,  declared,  that  he  thought 
there  was  no  way  of  rewarding  my  merits  to  the  fa- 
mily, but  by  giving  me  a  relation  to  it.  Dr.  Bartlett, 
madam,  can  shew  you,  from  my  letters  to  him, 
some  conversations,  which  will  convince  you,  that 
in  Italy,  as  well  as  in  other  countries,  there  are  per- 
sons of  honour,  of  goodness,  of  generosity;  and 
who  are  above  reserve,  vindictiveness,  jealousy, 
and  those  other  bad  passions  by  which  some  mark 
indiscriminately  a  whole  nation. 

For  my  own  part,  it  was  impossible  (distinguished 
as  I  was  by  every  individual  of  this  noble  family,  and 
lovely  as  is  this  daughter  of  it,  mistress  of  a  thousand 
good  qualities,  and  myself  absolutely  disengaged  in 
my  affections)  that  my  vanit)-  should  not  sometimes 
be  awakened,  and  a  wish  arise,  that  there  might  be  a 
possibility  of  obtaining  such  a  prize  :  but  1  checked 
the  vanity,  the  moment  I  could  find  it  begin  to  play 
about  and  warm  my  heart.    To  h?.ve  attempted  to 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  189 

recommend  myselfto  the  young  lady's  favour,  though 
but  by  looks,  by  assiduities,  I  should  have  thought 
an  infamous  breach  of  the  trust  and  confidence  they 
all  reposed  in  me. 

The  pride  of  a  family  so  illustrious  in  its  descent ; 
their  fortunes  unusually  high  for  the  country  which, 
by  the  goodness  of  their  hearts,  they  adorned ;  the 
relation  they  bore  to  the  church ;  my  foreign  extrac- 
tion and  interest ;  the  lady's  exalted  merits,  which 
made  her  of  consequence  to  the  hearts  of  several  il- 
lustrious youths,  before  the  Count  of  Belvedere 
made  known  his  passion  for  her ;  none  of  which  the 
fond  family  thought  worthy  of  their  Clementina,  nor 
any  of  whom  could  engage  her  heart;  but,  above  all, 
the  difference  in  religion ;  the  young  lady  so  remark- 
ably stedfaft  in  hers,  that  it  was  with  the  utmost 
difficulty  they  could  restrain  her  from  assuming  the 
veil ;  and  who  once  declared,  in  anger,  on  hearing 
me,  when  called  upon,  avow  my  principles,  that  she 
grudged  to  a  heretic  the  glorj-^  of  having  saved  the 
Barone  della  Porretta ;  all  these  considerations  out- 
weighed any  hopes  that  might  otherwise  have  arisen 
in  a  bosom  so  sensible  of  the  favours  they  were 
continually  heaping  upon  me. 

About  the  same  time,  the  troubles,  now  so  happily 
appeased,  broke  out  in  Scotland :  hardly  any-thing 
else  was  talked  of,  in  Italy,  but  the  progress,  and 
supposed  certainty  of  success,  of  the  young  invader. 
I  was  often  obliged  to  stand  the  triumphs  and  ex- 
ultations of  persons  of  rank  and  figure;  being  known 
to  be  warm  in  the  interest  of  my  country.  I  had 
a  good  deal  of  this  kind  of  spirit  to  contend  with, 
even  in  this  more  moderate  Italian  family ;  and  this 
frequently  brought  on  debates  which  I  would  gladly 
have  avoided  holding :  but  it  was  impossible.  Every 
new  advice  from  England  revived  the  disagreeable 
subject ;  for  the  success  of  the  rebels,  it  was  not 


190  THE    HISTORY   OF 

doubted,  would  be  attended  with  the  restoration  of 
what  they  called  the  Catholic  rcligion:  and  Clemen- 
tina particularly  pleased  herself,  that  then  her  heretic 
tutor  would  take  refuge  in  the  bosom  of  his  holy 
mother,  the  church:  and  she  delighted  to  say  things 
of  this  nature  in  the  language  I  was  teaching  her, 
and  which,  by  this  time,  she  spoke  very  intelligibly. 

1  took  a  resolution,  hereupon,  to  leave  Italy  for  a 
while,  and  to  retire  to  Vienna,  or  to  some  one  of  the 
German  courts  that  was  less  interested  than  they 
were  in  Italy,  in  the  success  of  the  chevalier's  un- 
dertaking ;  and  I  was  the  more  desirous  to  do  so,  as 
the  displeasure  of  Olivia  against  me  began  to  grow 
serious,  and  to  be  talked  of,  even  by  herself,  with 
less  discretion  than  was  consistent  with  her  high 
spirit,  her  noble  birth,  and  ample  fortune. 

I  communicated  my  intention  to  the  marchioness 
first :  the  noble  lady  e- pressed  her  concern  at  the 
thoughts  of  my  quitting  Italy,  and  engaged  me  to  put 
off  my  departure  for  some  weeks  ;  but,  at  the  same 
time,  hinted  to  me,  with  an  explicitness  that  is  pe- 
culiar to  her,  her  apprehensions,  and  her  lord's,  that 
I  was  in  love  with  her  Cleuientina.  I  convinced  her 
of  my  honour,  in  this  particular ;  and  she  so  well  sa- 
tisfied the  marquis,  in  this  respect,  that,  on  their 
daughter's  absolute  refusal  of  the  Count  of  Bel- 
vedere, they  confided  in  me  to  talk  to  her  in  favour 
of  that  nobleman.  The  young  lady  and  I  had  a 
conference  upon  the  subject ;  Dr.  Bartlett  can  give 
you  the  particulars.  The  father  and  mother,  un- 
known to  us  both,  had  placed  themselves  in  a  closet 
adjoining  to  the  room  we  were  in,  and  which  com- 
municated to  another,  as  well  as  to  that :  they  had 
no  reason  to  be  dissatisfied  with  what  they  heard 
me  say  to  their  daughter. 

The  time  of  my  departure  from  Italy  drawing  near, 
and  the  young  lady  repeatedly  refusing  the  Count  of 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON,  191 

Belvedere,  the  younger  brother  (still  unknown  to 
me,  for  he  doubted  not  but  I  should  rejoice  at  the 
honour  he  hoped  to  prevail  upon  them  to  do  me) 
declared  in  my  favour.  They  objected  the  more 
obvious  difficulties  in  relation  to  religion,  and  my 
country  :  he  desired  to  be  commissioned  to  talk  to 
me  on  those  subjects,  and  to  his  sister  on  her  mo- 
tives for  refusing  the  Count  of  Belvedere ;  but  they 
would  not  hear  of  his  speaking  to  me  on  this  subject; 
the  marchioness  giving  generous  reasons,  on  my 
behalf,  for  her  joining  in  the  refusal ;  and  undertak- 
ing herself  to  talk  to  her  daughter,  and  to  demand 
of  her  her  reasons  for  rejecting  every  proposal  that 
had  been  made  her. 

She  accordingly  closetted  her  Clementina.  She 
could  get  nothing  from  her,  but  tears  :  a  silence, 
without  the  least  appearance  of  sullenness,  had  for 
some  days  before  shewn,  that  a  deep  melancholy  had 
begun  to  lay  hold  of  her  heart :  she  was,  however, 
offended  when  love  was  attributed  to  her ;  yet  her 
mother  told  me,  that  she  could  not  but  suspect,  that 
she  was  under  the  dominion  of  that  passion  without 
knowing  it ;  and  the  rather,  as  she  was  never  cheer- 
ful but  when  she  was  taking  lessons  for  learning  a 
tongue,  which  never,  as  the  marchioness  said,  was 
likely  to  be  of  use  to  her.  • 

['  As  the  marchioness  said' — Ah  my  Lucy!] 
The  melancholy  increased.  Her  tutor,  as  he 
was  called,  was  desired  to  talk  to  her.  He  did. 
It  was  a  task  put  upon  him,  that  had  its  difficulties. 
It  was  observed,  that  she  generally  assumed  a  cheer- 
ful air  while  she  was  with  him,  but  said  little  ;  yet 
seemed  pleased  with  every  thing  he  said  to  her ; 
and  the  little  she  did  answer,  though  he  spoke  in 
Italian  or  French,  was  in  her  newly-acquired  lan- 
guage :  but  the  moment  he  was  gone,  her  counte- 


192  THE    HISTORY    OF 

nance  fell,  and  she  was  studious  to  find  opportunities 
to  get  from  company. 

[What  think  you  of  my  fortitude,  Lucy  ?  Was  I 
not  a  good  girl  ?  But  my  curiosity  kept  up  my  spi- 
rits. When  I  come  to  reflect,  thought  I,  I  shall 
have  it  all  upon  my  pillow.] 

Her  parents  were  in  the  deepest  affliction.  They 
consulted  physicians,  who  all  pronounced  her  malady 
to  be  love.  She  was  taxed  with  it ;  and  all  the  in- 
dulgence promised  her  that  her  heart  could  wish,  as 
to  the  object,  but  still  she  could  not,  with  patience, 
bear  the  imputation.  Once  she  asked  her  woman, 
who  told  her  that  she  was  certainly  in  love,  Would 
you  have  me  hate  myself? — Her  mother  talked  to 
her  of  the  passion  in  favourable  terms,  and  as  laud- 
able :  she  heard  her  with  attention,  but  made  no 
answer. 

The  evening  before  the  day  I  was  to  set  out  for 
Germany,  the  family  made  a  sumptuous  entertain- 
ment, in  honour  of  a  guest  on  whom  they  had  con- 
ferred so  many  favours.  They  had  brought  them- 
selves to  approve  of  his  departure  the  more  readily, 
as  they  were  willing  to  see,  whether  his  absence 
would  affect  their  Clementina ;  and,  if  it  did,  in 
what  manner. 

They  left  it  to  her  choice,  whether  she  would 
appear  at  table,  or  not.  She  chose  to  be  there.  They 
ail  rejoiced  at  her  recovered  spirits.  She  was  ex- 
ceeding cheerful :  she  supported  her  part  of  the  con- 
versation during  the  whole  evening,  with  her  usual 
vivacity  and  good  sense,  insomuch  that  I  wished  to 
myself,  I  had  departed  sooner.  Yet  it  is  surprising, 
thought  I,  that  this  young  lady,  who  seemed  always 
to  be  pleased,  and  even  since  these  reveries  have  had 
power  over  her,  to  be  most  cheerful  in  my  company, 
should  rejoice  in  my  departure;  should  seem  to  owe 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  193 

her  recovery  to  it ;  a  departure  which  every  one  else 
kindly  regrets ;  and  yet  there  was  nothing  in  her 
behaviour  or  looks  that  appeared  in  the  least  affected. 
When  acknowledgments  were  made  to  me  of  the 
pleasure  I  had  given  to  the  whole  family,  she  joined 
in  them:  when  my  health  and  happiness  were  wished, 
she  added  her  wishes  by  cheerful  bows,  as  she  sat : 
when  they  wished  to  see  me  again,  before  I  went  to 
England,  she  did  the  same.  So  that  my  heart  was 
dilated :  I  was  overjoyed  to  see  such  a  happy  altera- 
tion. When  I  took  leave  of  them,  she  stood  forward 
to  receive  my  compliments,  with  a  polite  French 
freedom.  I  offered  to  press  her  hand  with  my  lips : 
My  brother's  deliverer,  said  she,  must  not  affect  this 
distance,  and,  in  a  manner,  offered  her  cheek ;  add- 
ing, God  preserve  my  tutor  wherever  he  sets  his 
foot  (and  in  English,  God  convert  you  too,  cheva- 
lier ! )  May  you  never  want  such  an  agreeable  friend 
as  you  have  been  to  us ! 

Signor  Jeronymo  was  not  able  to  be  with  us.  I 
went  up  to  take  leave  of  him :  O  my  Grandison  ! 
said  he,  and  flung  his  arms  about  my  neck ;  and  will 
you  go  ? — Blessings  attend  you ! — But  what  will 
become  of  a  brother  and  sister,  when  they  have 
lost  you  ? 

You  will  rejoice  me,  replied  I,  if  you  will  favour 
me  with  a  few  lines,  by  a  servant  whom  I  shall  leave 
behind  me  for  three  or  four  days,  and  who  will  find 
me  at  Inspruck,  to  let  me  know  how  you  all  do;  and 
whether  your  sister's  health  continues. 

She  must,  she  shall  be  yours,  said  he,  if  I  can 
manage  it.     Why,  why,  will  you  leave  us? 

1  was  surprised  to  hear  him  say  this :  he  had  never 
before  been  so  particular. 

That  cannot,  cannot  be,  said  I.     There  are  a 
thousand  obstacles — 
'  All  of  which,  rejoined  he,  tliat  depend  upon  us,  I 


194  THE    HISTORY   OF 

doubt  not  to  overcome.  Your  heart  is  not  with 
Olivia? 

They  all  knew,  from  that  lady's  indiscretion,  of 
the  proposals  that  had  been  made  me,  relating  to 
her;  and  of  my  declining  them.  I  assured  him 
that  my  heart  was  free. 

We  agreed  upon  a  correspondence,  and  I  took 
leave  of  one  of  the  most  grateful  of  men. 

But  how  much  was  I  afflicted  when  I  received  at 
Inspruck  the  expected  letter,  which  acquainted  me, 
that  this  sunshine  lasted  no  longer  than  the  next  day ! 
The  young  lady's  malady  returned,  with  redoubled 
force.  Shall  I,  madam,  briefly  relate  to  you  the 
manner  in  which,  as  her  brother  wrote,  it  operated 
upon  her? 

She  shut  herself  up  in  her  chamber,  not  seeming  to 
regard  or  know  that  her  woman  was  in  it ;  nor  did 
she  answer  to  two  or  three  questions  that  her  woman 
asked  her ;  but,  setting  her  chair  with  its  back  to- 
wards her,  over-against  a  closet  in  the  room,  after  a 
profound  silence,  she  bent  forwards,  and,  in  a  low 
voice,  seemed  to  be  communing  with  a  person  in  the 
closet. — '  And  you  say  he  is  actually  gone  ?  Gone 
for  ever  ?     No,  not  for  ever ! ' 

Who  gone,  madam  ?  said  her  woman.  To  whom 
do  you  direct  your  discourse  ? 

*  We  were  all  obliged  to  him,  no  doubt.  So 
bravely  to  rescue  my  brother,  and  to  pursue  the 
bravoes  ;  and  as  my  brother  says,  to  put  him  in  his 
own  chaise,  and  walk  on  foot  by  the  side  of  it — 
Why,  as  you  say,  assassins  might  have  murdered 
him:  the  horses  might  have  trampled  him  under 
their  feet.'  Still  looking  as  if  she  were  speaking 
to  somebody  in  the  closet. 

Her  woman  stept  to  the  closet,  and  opened  the 
door,  and  left  it  open,  to  take  off  her  attention  to 
the  place,  and  to  turn  the  course  of  her  ideas;  but 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANUISON.  195 

Still  she  bent  forward*  towards  it,  and  talked  calmly, 
as  if  to  somebody  in  it :  then  breaking  into  a  faint 
laugh,  '  In  love! — that  is  such  a  silly  notion:  ai.d 
yet  I  love  every -body  better  than  1  love  myself.' 

Her  mother  came  into  the  room  just  then.  The 
young  lady  arose  in  haste,  and  shut  the  closet  door, 
as  if  she  had  somebody  hid  there,  and,  throwing  her- 
self at  her  mother's  feet,  My  dear,  my  ever-honoured 
mamma,  said  she,  forgive  me  for  all  the  trouble  I 
have  caused  you — But  I  will,  I  must,  you  can't  deny 
me  ;  I  will  be  God's  child,  as  well  as  yours.  1  will 
go  into  a  nunnery. 

It  came  out  afterwards,  that  her  confessor,  taking 
advantage  of  confessions  extorted  from  her  of  re- 
gard for  her  tutor,  though  only  such  as  a  sister  might 
bear  to  a  brother,  but  which  he  had  suspected  might 
'come  to  be  of  consequence,  had  filled  her  tender 
mind  with  terrors,  that  had  thus  affected  her  head. 
She  is,  as  1  have  told  you,  madam,  a  young  lady  of 
exemplary  piety. 

I  will  not  dwell  on  a  scene  so  melancholy.  How 
1  afflict  your  tender  heart,  my  good  Miss  Byron  ! 

[Do  you  think,  Lucy,  1  did  not  weep  ?  Indeed  I 
did—Poor  young  lady ! — But  my  mind  was Jitted  for 
the  indulging  of  scenes  so  melancholy,]  Pray,  Sir, 
proceed,  said  I :  what  a  heart  must  that  be,  which 
bleeds  not  for  such  a  distress  !  Pray,  Sir,  proceed. 
Be  it  Dr.  Bartlett's  task  to  give  you  further  pro- 
ticulars.  I  will  be  briefer — I  will  not  indulge  my 
own  grief. 

All  that  medicine  could  do,  was  tried :  but  her 
confessor,  who,  however,  is  an  honest,  a  worthy 
man,  kept  up  her  fears  and  terrors.  He  saw  the 
favour  her  tutor  was  in  with  the  whole  family :  he 
knew  that  the  younger  brother  had  declared  for  re- 
warding him  in  a  very  high  manner  :  he  had  more 
than  once  put  this  favoured  man  upon  an  avowal  of 
s2 


196  THE  HISTORY  OF 

his  principles  ;  and,  betwixt  her  piety  and  her  gra- 
titude, had  raised  such  a  conflict  in  her  mind,  as 
her  tender  nature  could  not  bear. 

At  Florence  lives  a  family  of  high  rank  and  ho- 
nour, the  ladies  of  which  have  with  them  a  friend 
noted  for  the  excellency  of  her  heart,  and  her  genius : 
and  who,  having  been  robbed  of  her  fortune  early 
in  life,  by  an  uncle,  to  whose  care  she  was  commit- 
ted by  her  dying  father,  was  received  both  as  a  com- 
panion and  a  blessing,  by  the  ladies  of  the  family 
she  has  now  for  many  years  lived  with.  She  is  an  En- 
glish woman  and  a  Protestant ;  but  so  very  discreet, 
that  her  being  so,  though  at  first  they  hoped  to 
proselyte  her,  gives  them  not  a  less  value  for  her ; 
and  yet  they  are  all  zealous  Roman-Catholics.  These 
two  ladies,  and  this  their  companion,  were  visiting 
one  day  at  the  Marchese  della  Poretta's ;  and  there 
the  distressed  mother  told  them  the  mournful  tale : 
the  ladies,  who  think  nothing  that  is  within  the  com- 
pass of  human  prudence  impossible  to  their  Mrs. 
Beaumont,  wished  that  the  young  lady  might  be 
entrusted  for  a  week  to  her  care,  at  their  own  house 
at  Florence. 

It  was  consented  to,  as  soon  as  proposed ;  and 
Signora  Clementina  was  as  willing  to  go ;  there 
having  always  been  an  intimacy  between  the  fami- 
lies ;  and  she  (as  every-body  else)  having  a  high 
opinion  of  Mrs.  Beaumont.  They  took  her  with 
them  on  the  day  they  set  out  for  Florence. 

Here,  again,  for  shortening  my  story,  I  will  refer 
to  Dr.  Bartlett.  Mrs.  Beaumont  went  to  the  bot- 
tom of  the  malady :  she  gave  her  advice  to  the  fa- 
mily upon  it.  They  were  resolved  (Signer  Jeronymo 
supporting  her  advice)  to  be  governed  by  it.  The 
young  lady  was  told,  that  she  should  be  indulged  in 
all  her  wishes.  She  then  acknowledged  what  those 
were ;  and  was  the  easier  for  the  acknowledgment, 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  197 

and  for  the  advice  of  such  a  prudent  friend ;  and  re- 
turned to  Bologna  much  more  composed  than  when 
she  left  it.  The  tutor  was  sent  for,  by  common  con- 
sent ;  for  there  had  been  a  convention  of  the  whole 
family  ;  the  Urbino  branch,  as  well  as  the  general, 
being  present.  In  that,  the  terms  to  be  proposed  to 
the  supposed  happy  man,  were  settled ;  but  they 
were  not  to  be  mentioned  to  him,  till  after  he  had 
seen  the  lady  :  a  wrong  policy,  surely. 

He  was  then  at  Vienna.  Signer  Jeronymo,  in  his 
letter,  congratulated  him  in  high  terms ;  as  a  man, 
whom  he  had  it  now,  at  last,  in  his  power  to  re- 
ward :  and  he  hinted,  in  general,  that  the  conditions 
would  be  such,  as  it  was  impossible  but  he  must  find 
liis  very  great  advantage  in  them :  as  to  fortune,  to 
be  sure,  he  meant. 

The  friend  so  highly  valued  could  not  but  be  af- 
fected with  the  news  :  yet,  knowing  the  lady,  and 
the  family,  he  was  afraid  that  the  articles  of  resi- 
dence and  religion  would  not  be  easily  compromised 
between  them.  He  therefore  summoned  up  all  his 
prudence  to  keep  his  fears  alive,  and  his  hope  hi 
suspense.  • 

He  arrived  at  Bologna.  He  was  permitted  to  pay 
his  compliments  to  Lady  Clementina  in  her  mother  s 
presence.  How  agreeable,  how  nobly  frank,  was  the 
reception  from  both  mother  and  daughter !  How 
Jiigh  ran  the  congratulations  of  Jeronymo!  He  called 
the  supposed  happy  man  brother.  The  marquis  was 
ready  to  recognize  the Jotirfh  son  in  him.  A  great 
fortune  additional  to  an  estate  bequeathed  her  by 
her  two  grandfathers,  was  proposed.  My  father  was 
to  be  invited  over,  to  grace  the  nuptials  by  his  pre- 
sence. 

But  let  me  cut  short  the  rest.  The  terms  could 
not  be  complied  with.  For  I  was  to  make  a  formal 
renunciation  of  my  religion,  and  to  settle  in  Italy ; 
s3 


198  THE    HISTORY   OF 

only  once,  in  two  or  three  years,  was  allowed,  if  I 
pleased,  for  two  or  three  months,  to  go  to  England ; 
and,  as  a  visit  of  curiosity,  once  in  her  life,  if  their 
daughter  desired  it,  to  carry  her  thither,  for  a  time 
to  be  limited  by  them. 

What  must  be  my  grief,  to  be  obliged  to  disappoint 
such  expectations  as  were  raised  by  persons  who  had 
so  sincere  a  value  for  me !  You  cannot,  madam,  ima- 
gine my  distress  :  so  little  as  could  be  expected  to 
be  allowed  by  them  to  the  principles  of  a  man  whom 
they  supposed  to  be  in  an  error  that  would  inevitably 
cast  him  into  perdition  !  But  when  the  friendly  bro- 
ther implored  my  compliance ;  when  the  excellent 
mother,  in  effect,  besought  me  to  have  pity  on  her 
heart,  and  on  her  child's  head;  and  when  the  tender, 
the  amiable  Clementina,  putting  herself  out  of  the 
question,  urged  me,  for  my  soul's  sake,  to  embrace 
the  doctrines  of  her  holy  mother,  the  church — 
What,  madam — But  how  I  grieve  you ! 

[He  stopt — His  handkerchief  was  of  use  to  him, 
as  mine  was  to  me — ^What  a  distress  was  here  !] 

And  what,  and  what?,  Sir,  sobbing,  was  the  re- 
sult ?    Could  you,  could  you  resist  ? 

Satisfied  in  my  own  faith;  entirely  satisfied!  Hav- 
ing insuperable  objections  to  that  I  was  wished  to 
embrace! — A  lover  of  my  native  country  too — Were 
not  my  God  and  my  country  to  be  the  sacrifice,  if  I 
complied !  but  I  laboured,  I  studied,  for  a  compro- 
mise. I  must  have  been  unjust  to  Clementina's 
merit,  and  to  my  own  character,  had  she  not  been 
dear  to  me.  And  indeed  I  beheld  graces  in  her  then, 
that  I  had  before  resolved  to  shut  my  eyes  against ; 
her  rank  next  to  princely ;  her  fortune  high  as  her 
rank ;  obstacles  from  religion,  country,  that  had  ap- 
peared to  me  insuperable,  removed  by  themselves ; 
and  no  apprehension  left  of  a  breach  of  the  laws  of 
hospitality,  which  had,  till  now,  made  me  struggle 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  199 

to  behold  one  of  the  most  amiable  and  noble-minded 
of  women  with  indifference. — I  offered  to  live  one 
year  in  Italy,  one  in  England,  by  turns,  if  their 
dear  Clementina  would  live  with  me  there ;  if  not, 
I  would  content  myself  with  passing  only  three 
months,  in  every  year,  in  my  native  country.  I 
proposed  to  leave  her  entirely  at  her  liberty,  in  the 
article  of  religion ;  and,  in  case  of  children  by  the 
marriage,  the  daughters  to  be  educated  by  her,  the 
sons  by  me ;  a  condition  to  which  his  holiness  him- 
self, it  was  presumed,  would  not  refuse  his  sanction, 
as  there  were  precedents  for  it.  This,  madam,  was 
a  great  sacrifice  to  compassion,  to  love — What  could 
I  more ! 

And  would  not,  Sir,  would  not  Clementina  con- 
sent to  this  compromise  ? 

Ah  the  unhappy  lady !  It  is  this  reflection  that 
strengthens  my  grief.  She  xvould  have  consented  ; 
she  was  earnest  to  procure  the  consent  of  her  friends 
upon  these  terms.  This  her  earnestness  in  my  fa- 
vour, devoted  as  she  was  to  her  religion,  excites  my 
compassion,  and  calls  for  my  gratitude. 

What  scenes,  what  distressful  scenes,  followed! — 
The  noble  father  forgot  his  promised  indulgence ; 
the  mother  indeed  seemed,  in  a  manner,  neutral ; 
the  youngest  brother  was  still,  however,  firm  in  my 
cause,  but  the  marquis,  the  general,  the  bishop,  and 
the  whole  Urbino  branch  of  the  family,  were  not  to 
be  moved;  and  the  less,  because  they  considered  the 
alliance  as  derogatory  to  their  own  honour  in  the  same 
proportion  as  they  thought  it  honourable  to  me ;  a 
private,  an  obscure  man,  as  now  they  began  to  call 
me.  In  short,  I  w  as  allowed,  I  was  desired,  to  depart 
from  Bologna ;  and  not  suffered  to  take  leave  of  the 
unhappy  Clementina,  though  on  her  knees  she  beg- 
ged to  be  allowed  a  parting  interview— And  wliat 
was  the  consequence  ?— Dr.  Bartlett  must  tell  the 

4 


200  THE    HISTORY    OF 

rest.— -Unhappy  Clementina! — Now  they  wish  me 
to  make  them  one  more  visit  at  Bologna! — Un- 
happy Clementina ! — To  what  purpose  ? 

1  saw  his  noble  heart  was  too  much  affected,  to 
answer  questions,  had  I  had  voice  to  ask  any. 

But,  O  my  friends!  you  see  how  it  is!  Can  I  be 
60  unhappy  as  he  is  ?  As  his  Clementina  is  ?  Well 
might  Dr.  Bartlett  say,  that  this  excellent  man  is  not 
happy.  VV  ell  might  he  himself  say,  that  he  has 
suffered  greatly,  even  from  good  women.  Well 
might  he  complain  of  sleepless  nights.  Unhappy 
Clementina !  let  me  repeat  after  him ,  and  not  happy 
Sir  Charles  Grandison !  — And  who,  my  dear,  is 
happy  ?  Not,  I  am  sure,  your 

HARRIET  BYRON. 


LETTER  XXI. 

MISS   BYRON.      IN   CONTINUATION. 

I  vik^  forced  to  lay  down  my  pen.  I  begin  a  new 
letter.  I  did  not  think  of  concluding  my  former 
where  I  did. 

Sir  Charles  saw  me  in  grief,  and  forgot  his  own, 
to  applaud  my  humanity,  as  he  called  ii,  and  sooth 
me.  I  have  often,  said  he,  referred  you,  in  my  nar- 
rative, to  Dr.  Bartlett.  I  will  beg  of  him  to  let  you 
see  any-thing  you  shall  wish  to  see,  in  the  free  and 
unreserved  correspondence  we  have  held.  You, 
that  love  to  entertain  your  friends  with  your  narra- 
tions, will  find  something,  perhaps,  in  a  story  like 
this,  to  engage  their  curiosity  On  their  honour 
and  candor,  I  am  sure,  1  may  depend.  Are  they 
not  yonr  friends  ?  Would  to  heaven  it  were  in  ray 
jpower  to  contribute  to  their  pleasure  and  yours  ! 


SIR  CHARLES    GRANDISON.  201 

I  only  bowed.     I  could  only  bow, 

I  told  you,  madam,  that  my  compassion  was  en- 
gaged; but  that  my  honour  was  free :  I  think  it  is  so. 
But  when  you  have  seen  all  that  Dr.  Bartlett  will 
shew  you,  you  will  be  the  better  able  to  judge  o/"me, 
andyorme.  I  had  rather  be  thought  favourably  of 
hy  Miss  Byron,  than  by  any  woman  in  the  world. 

Who,  Sir,  said  I,  knowing  only  so  far  as  I  know 
of  the  unhappy  Clementina,  but  must  wish  her  to 
be — 

Ah  Lucy !  there  I  stopt — I  had  like  to  have  been 
a  false  girl ! — And  yet  ought  I  not,  from  my  heart, 
to  have  been  able  to  say  what  I  was  going  to  say  ? — 
I  do  aver,  Lucy,  upon  repeated  experience,  that 
love  is  a  narrower  of  the  heart.  Did  1  not  use  to  be 
thought  generous  and  benevolent,  and  to  be  above 
all  selfishness?  But  am  I  so  now? 

And  now,  madam,  said  he  [and  he  was  going  to 
take  my  hand,  but  with  an  air,  as  if  he  thought  the 
freedom  would  be  too  great — A  tenderness  so  speak- 
ing in  his  eyes ;  a  respectfulness  so  solemn  in  his 
countenance  ;  he  just  touched  it,  and  withdrew  his 
band]  What  shall  I  say — I  cannot  tell  what  I  should 
say — But  you,  I  see,  can  pity  me — You  can  pity  the 
noble  Clementina — Honour  forbids  me !  Yet  honour 
bids  n>e — But  I  cannot  be  unjust,  ungenerous- 
selfish  ! — 

He  arose  from  his  seat — Allow  me,  madam,  to 
thank  you  for  the  favour  of  your  ear — Pardon  me 
for  the  trouble  I  see  I  have  given  to  a  heart  that  is 
capable  of  a  sympathy  so  tender. 

And,  bowing  low,  he  withdrew  with  precipitation, 
as  if  he  would  not  let  me  see  his  emotion.  He  left 
me  looking  here,  looking  there,  as  if  for  my  heart ; 
and  then,  as  giving  it  up  for  irrecoverable,  I  became 
for  a  few  moments  motionless,  and  a  statue. 

A  violent  burst  of  tears  recovered  roe  to  sense  and 


202  THE    HISTORY   OF 

motion ;  and  just  then  Miss  Grandison  (who,  having 
heard  her  brother  withdraw,  forbore  for  a  few  mi- 
nutes to  enter,  supposing  he  would  return)  hearing 
me  sob,  rushed  in. — O  my  Harriet !  said  she,  clasp- 
ing her  arms  about  me.  What  is  done  ? — Do  I,  or  do 
I  not,  embrace  my  sister,  my  rent  sister,  my  sister 
Grandison  ? 

Ah  my  Charlotte  !  No  flattering  hope  is  now  left 
me — No  sister !  It  must  not,  it  cannot  be !  The  lady 
is — But  leaf!  me,  lead  me  out  of  this  room ! — I  don't 
love  it!  spreading  one  hand  before  my  eyes,  my 
tears  trickling  between  my  fingers— Tears  that 
flowed  not  only  for  myself,  but  for  Sir  Charles  Gran- 
dison and  the  unhappy  Clementina:  for,  gather  you 
not,  from  what  he  said,  that  something  disastrous 
has  befallen  the  poor  lady?  And  then,  supporting 
myself  with  her  arm,  I  hurried  out  of  Lord  L.'s  study, 
and  up  stairs  into  my  own  chamber ;  she  following 
me — Leave  me,  leave  me  here,  dear  creature,  said 
I,  for  six  minutes  :  1  will  attend  you  then,  in  your 
own  dressing-room. 

She  kindly  retired ;  I  threw  myself  into  a  chair, 
indulged  my  tears  for  a  few  moments,  and  was  the 
fitter  to  receive  the  two  sisters,  who  came  into  my 
room  to  comfort  me. 

But  I  could  not  relate  what  had  passed  imme- 
diately with  any  connexion:  I  told  them  only,  that 
all  was  over;  that  their  brother  was  to  be  pitied,  not 
blamed :  and  that  if  they  would  allow  me  to  recol- 
lect some  things  that  were  most  aifecting,  I  would 
attend  them;  and  they  should  have  my  narrative  the 
more  exact,  for  the  indulgence. 

They  staid  no  longer  with  me  than  to  see  me  a 
little  composed. 

Sir  Charles  and  Dr.  Bartlett  went  out  together  in 
his  chariot :  he  enquired  more  than  once  of  my 
health ;  saying  to  his  sister  Charlotte,  That  he  was 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  203 

afraid  he  had  affected  me  too  much,  by  the  melan- 
choly tale  he  had  been  telling  me. 

He  excused  himself  from  dining  with  us.  Poor 
man  !  What  must  be  his  distress ! — Not  able  to  see 
us,  to  sit  with  us! 

I  would  have  excused  myself  also,  being  not  very 
fit  to  appear ;  but  was  not  permitted. 

I  sat,  however,  but  a  very  little  while  at  table  after 
dinner ;  yet  how  tedious  did  the  dinner-time  appear ! 
The  servants'  eyes  were  irksome  to  me  ;  so  were 
Emily's  (dear  girl!)  glistening  as  they  did,  though 
she  knew  not  for  what,  but  sympathetically,  as  I  may 
say ;  she  supposing,  that  all  was  not  as  she  would 
have  it. 

She  came  up  soon  after  to  me — One  word,  my 
dearest  madam  (the  door  in  her  hand,  and  her  head 
only  within  it:)  Tell  me  only  that  there  is  no  mis- 
understanding between  my  guardian  and  you  !— 
Tell  me  only  that — 

None,  my  dear ! — None  at  all,  my  Emily ! 

Thank  God!  clasping  her  hands  together;  thank 
God !  If  there  were,  I  should  not  have  known  whose 
part  to  take ! — But  I  won't  disturb  you — And  was 
going. 

Stay,  stay  my  precious  young  friend!  Stay,  my 
Emily !  I  arose ;  took  her  hand :  My  sweet  girl !  say, 
Will  you  live  with  me  ? 

God  for  ever  bless  you,  dearest  madam ! — Willi? 
It  is  the  wish  next  my  heart. 

Will  you  go  down  with  me  to  Northamptonshire, 
my  love  ? 

To  the  world's  end  I  will  attend  you,  madam  :  I 
will  be  your  handmaid;  and  I  will  love  you  better 
than  I  love  my  guardian,  if  possible. 

Ah  my  dear !  but  how  will  you  live  without  seeing 
your  guardian  now  and  then  ? 

Why,  he  will  live  with  us,  won't  he? 


204<  THE    HISTORY   OF 

No,  no,  my  dear ! — And  you  would  choose,  then, 
to  live  with  him,  not  with  me;  would  you? — 

Indeed  but  I  won't — Indeed  I  will  live  and  die 
with  you,  if  you  will  let  me;  and  I  warrant  his  kind 
heart  will  often  lead  him  to  us.  But  tell  me,  Why 
these  tears,  madam  ?  Why  this  grief? — Why  do  you 
speak  so  quick  and  short  ?  And  why  do  you  seem  to 
be  in  such  a  hurry  ? 

Do  I  speak  quick  and  short  ?  Do  I  seem  to  be  in 
a  hurry? — Thank  you,  my  love,  for  your  observation. 
And  now  leave  me :  I  will  profit  by  it. 

The  amiable  girl  withdrew  on  tiptoe ;  and  I  set 
about  composing  myself. 

I  was  obliged  to  her  for  her  observation :  it  was 
really  of  use  to  me.  But  you  must  think,  Lucy, 
that  I  must  be  fluttered. — His  manner  of  leavinfr 
me — Was  it  not  particular? — To  break  from  me  so 
abruptly,  2&  I  may  say — And  what  he  said  with  looks 
so  earnest !  Looks  that  seemed  to  carry  more  mean- 
ing than  his  words :  and  withdrawing  without  con- 
ducting me  out,  as  he  had  led  me  in — and  as  if — I 
don't  know  how  as  if — But  you  will  give  me  your 
opinion  of  all  these  things.  I  can't  say  but  I  think 
my  suspense  is  over ;  and  in  a  way  not  very  desir- 
able— Yet — But  why  should  I  puzzle  myself? 
What  must  be,  must. 

At  afternoon-tea,  the  gentlemen  not  being  re- 
turned, and  Emily  undertaking  the  waiter's  office,  I 
gave  my  lord  and  the  two  ladies,  though  she  was 
present,  some  account  of  what  had  passed,  but 
briefly;  and  I  had  just  finished,  and  was  quitting  the 
room,  as  the  two  gentlemen  entered  the  door. 

Sir  Charles  instantly  addressed  me  with  apologies 
for  the  concern  he  had  given  me.  His  emotion  was 
visible  as  he  spoke  to  me.  He  hesitated :  he  trem* 
bled.     Why  did  he  hesitate  ?  Why  did  he  tremble  ? 

I  told  him,  I  was  not  ashamed  to  own,  that  I  was 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  205 

very  much  affected  by  the  melancholy  story.  The 
poor  lady,  said  I,  is  greatly  to  be  pitied — But  re- 
member, Sir,  what  you  promised  Dr.  Bartlett  should 
do  for  me. 

I  have  been  requesting  the  doctor  to  fulfil  my  en- 
gagements. 

And  I  am  ready  to  obey,  said  the  good  man.  My 
agreeable  task  shall  soon  be  performed. 

As  I  was  at  the  door,  going  up  stairs  to  my  closet, 
I  courtesied,  and  pursued  my  intention. 

He  bowed,  said  nothing,  and  looked,  I  thought, 
as  if  he  were  disappointed,  that  I  did  not  return  to 
company. — No,  indeed ! 

Yet  I  pity  him,  at  my  heart :  how  odd  is  it,  then, 
to  be  angry  with  him? — So  much  goodness,  so  much 
sensibility,  so  much  compassion  (whence  all  his  woes, 
I  believe)  never  met  together,  in  a  heart  so  manly. 

Tell  me,  tell  me,  my  dear  Lucy — Yet  tell  me  no- 
thing till  I  am  favoured  with,  and  you  have  read, 
the  account  that  will  be  given  me  by  Dr.  Bartlett : 
then,  I  hope,  we  shall  have  every-thing  before  us. 

Saturday,  March  25. 
He  [Yet  why  that  disrespectful  word  ? — Fie  upon 
me,  for  my  narrowness  of  heart !]  Sir  Charles  is  setting 
out  for  town.  He  cannot  be  happy,  himself:  he  is 
therefore  giving  himself  the  pleasure  of  endeavouring 
to  make  his  friend  so.  He  can  enjo^/  the  happiness 
ofhis  friends !  O  the  blessing  of  a  benevolent  heart ! 
Let  the  world  frown  as  it  will  upon  such  a  one,  it 
cannot  possibly  bereave  it  of  all  delight. — Fortune, 
do  thy  worst !  If  Sir  Charles  Grandison  cannot  be 
Jiappy  with  his  Clementina,  he  will  make  himself  a 
partaker  of  Lord  G.'s  happiness ;  and  as  that  will 
secure,  if  not  her  own  fault,  the  happiness  of  his 
sister,  he  will  not  be  destitutt^  of  felicity.  And  let 
me,  after  his  example — Ah,  Lucy !  that  I  could ! — 

T 


205  THE   HISTORY   OF 

But  in  time,  I  hope,  I  shall  deserve,  as  well  as  be 
esteemed,  to  be  the  girl  of  my  grandmamma  and 
aunt :  and  then,  of  course,  be  worthy  to  be  called, 
my  dear  Lucy,  your 

HARRIET  BYRON. 

Saturday  noon. 

Sir  Charles  is  gone  ;  and  I  have  talked  over  the 
matter  again  with  the  ladies  and  Lord  L. 

What  do  you  think  ? — They  all  will  have  it — and 
it  is  a  faithful  account,  to  the  very  best  of  my  recol- 
lection—  They  all  will  have  it.  That  Sir  Charles's 
great  struggle,  his  great  grief,  is  owing — His  great 
struggle  (1  don't  know  what  I  write,  I  think — But 
let  it  go)  is  between  his  compassion  for  the  unhappy 
Clementina,  and  his  love — for — somebody  else. 

But  who,  my  dear,  large  as  his  heart  is,  can  be 
contented  with  half  a  heart?  Compassion,  Lucy  1 — ■ 
The  compassion  of  such  a  heart — It  must  be  love — 
And  ought  it  not  to  be  so  to  such  a  woman  ? — Tell 
me — Don't  you,  Lucy,  with  all  yours,  pity  the  un- 
happy Clementina;  who  loves,  against  the  principles 
of  her  religion  ;  and,  in  that  respect,  against  her  in- 
clination, a  man  who  cannot  be  hers,  but  by  a  viola- 
tion of  his  honour  and  conscience  ?  What  lai  fatality 
in  a  love  so  circumstanced! — To  love  against  inclina- 
tion !  What  a  sound  has  that !  But  what  an  absurdity 
is  this  passion  called  love  ?  Or,  rather  of  what  ab- 
surd things  does  it  make  its  votaries  guilty  ?  Let 
mine  be  evermore  circumscribed  by  the  laws  of 
reason,  of  duty;  and  then  my  recollections,  my 
reflections,  will  never  give  me  lasting  disturbance ! 
*      * 

Dr.  Bartlett  has  desired  me  to  let  him  know  what 
the  particular  passages  are,  of  which  1  more  imme- 
diately wish  to  be  informed,  for  our  better  under- 
standing the  unhappy  Clementina's  story,  and  has 
promised  to  transcribe  them,    1  have  given  him  a 


SIR   CHARLES    GKAKDISON.  207 

list  in  writing.  I  have  been  half  guilty  of  affecta- 
tion. I  have  asked  for  some  particulars  that  Sir 
Charles  referred  to,  which  are  not  so  immediately 
interesting :  the  history  of  Olivia,  of  Mrs.  Beau- 
mont ;  the  debates  Sir  Charles  mentioned  between 
himself  and  Signor  Jeronymo:  but,  Lucy,  the  par- 
ticulars I  am  most  impatient  for,  are  these  : 

His  first  conference  with  Lady  Clementina  on  the 
subject  of  the  Count  of  Belvedere ;  which  her  father 
and  mother  overheard. 

The  conference  he  was  desired  to  hold  with  her, 
on  her  being  first  seized  with  melancholy. 

Whether  her  particularly  cheerful  behaviour,  on 
his  departure  from  Bologna,  is  any-where  accounted 
for. 

By  what  means  Mrs,  Beaumont  prevailed  on  her 
to  acknowledge  a  passion  so  studiously  concealed 
from  the  tenderest  of  parents. 

Sir  Charles's  reception,  on  his  return  from  Vienna. 

What  regard  his  proposals  of  compromise,  as  to 
religion  and  residence,  met  with,  as  well  from  the 
family,  as  from  Clementina. 

The  most  important  of  all,  Lucy — The  .last  dis- 
tressful parting :  what  made  it  necessary ;  what 
happened  at  Bologna  afterwards;  and  what  the 
poor  ('lementina's  situation  now  is. 

If  the  doctor  is  explicit,  with  regard  to  this  article, 
we  shall  be  able  to  account  for  their  desiring  him  to 
revisit  them  at  Bologna,  after  so  long  an  absence, 
and  for  his  seeming  to  think  it  will  be  to  no  purpose 
to  oblige  them.  O  Lucy !  what  a  great  deal  depends 
upon  the  answer  to  this  article,  as  it  may  happen  !— 
But  no  more  suspense,  I  beseech  you.  Sir  Charles 
Grandison  !  No  more  suspense,  I  pray  you,  Dr. 
Bartlett  I  My  heart  sickens  at  the  thought  of  fur- 
ther suspense.     I  cannot  bear  itl 

Adieu,  Lucy !  Lengthening  my  letter  would  be 
T  2 


208  THE  HISTORY   OF 

only  dwelling  longer  (for  I  know  not  how  to  change 
my  subject)  on  weaknesses  and  follies  that  have  al- 
ready given  you  too  much  pain  for  your 

HARRIET  BYRON. 


LETTER  XXII. 

MISS  BYRON.      IN  CONTINUATION. 

Colnebrook,  Monday,  March  27. 
Dr.  Bartlett,  seeing  our  impatience,  asked  leave  to 
take  the  assistance  of  his  nephew  in  transcribing 
from  Sir  Charles's  letters  the  passages  that  will 
enable  him  to  perform  the  task  he  has  so  kindly  un- 
dertaken. By  this  means,  he  has  already  presented 
us  with  the  following  transcripts.  We  have  eagerly 
perused  them.  When  i/ou  have  done  so,  be  pleased 
to  hasten  them  up,  that  my  cousin  Reeves's  may 
have  the  same  opportunity.  Thei/  are  so  good  as 
to  give  cheerfully  the  preference  to  the  venerable 
circle,  as  my  cousin,  who  dined  with  us  yesterday, 
bid  me  tell  you.  O  my  Lucy!  what  a  glorious 
young  man  is  Sir  Charles  Grandison  !  But  he  had 
the  happiness  of  a  Dr.  Bartlett,  as  he  is  fond  of 
owning,  to  improve  upon  a  foundation  that  was  so 
pobly  laid  by  the  best  and  wisest  of  mothers. 

DR.   BARTLETt's   first   LETTER. 

My  task,  my  good  Miss  Byron,  will  be  easy,  by 
the  assistance  you  have  allowed  me  i  for  what  is  it, 
but  to  transcribe  parts  of  Sir  Charles's  letters,  ad- 
ding a  few  lines  here  and  there,  by  way  of  con- 
nexion ?  And  I  am  delighted  with  it,  as  it  will 
make  known  the  heart  of  my  beloved  patron  in  all 
the  lights  which  the  most  interesting  circumstances 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  209 

can  throw  upon  it,  to  so  many  worthy  persons  as 
are  permitted  a  share  in  this  confidence. 
The  first  of  your  commands  runs  thus: 

I  should  imagine,  say  you,  that  the  debate  Sir 
Charles  mentions,  betiveen  himself  and  Signor 
Jeronymo,  and  his  companions,  at  their  Jirst 
acquaintance,  must  be  not  only  curious,  but 
edifying. 

They  are,  my  good  Miss  Byron;  but  as  I  presume 
that  you  ladies  are  more  intent  upon  being  obeyed 
in  the  o^Aer  articles  [See,  Lucy,  I  had  better  not 
have  dissembled!]  I  will  only  at  present  transcribe 
for  you,  with  some  short  connexions,  two  letters;  by 
which  you  will  see  how  generously  Mr.  Grandison 
sought  to  recover  his  friend  to  the  paths  of  virtue 
and  honour,  when  he  had  formed  schemes,  in  con- 
junction with,  and  by  the  instigation  of,  other  gay 
young  men  of  rank,  to  draw  him  in  to  be  a  partaker 
in  their  guilt,  and  an  abettor  of  their  enterprizes. 

You  will  judge  from  these  letters,  madam  (with- 
out shocking  you  by  the  recital)  what  were  the 
common-place  pleas  of  those  libertines,  despisersof 
marriage,  of  the  laws  of  society,  and  of  women, 
but  as  they  were  subservient  to  their  pleasures. 

TO    THE   BARONE    DELLA    PORRETTA. 

Will  my  Jeronymo  allow  his  friei)d,  his  Grandison, 
the  liberty  he  is  going  to  take  with  him  ?  If  the 
•friendship  he  professes  for  him  be  such  a  one,  as  a 
great  mind  can,  on  reflection,  glory  in,  he  mil.  And 
what  is  this -liberty,  but  such  as  constitutes  the  es- 
sence of  true  friendship?  AUdwme,  on  thisoccasion, 
to  say,  that  your  Grandison  has  seen  more  of  the 
world  than  most  men,  who  have  lived  no  longer  in 
it,  have  had  an  opportunity  to  see.  I  was  sent 
abroad  for  iiuprovement,  under  the  care  pf  a  maa 
t3 


210  THE   HISTORY   OF 

who  came  out  to  be  the  most  intriguing  and  profli- 
gate of  those  to  whom  a  youth  was  ever  entrusted. 
I  saw  in  him,  the  inconvenience,  the  odiousness,  of 
libertinism ;  and,  by  the  assistance  of  an  excellent 
monitor,  with  whom  I  happily  became  acquainted, 
and  (would  it  not  be  false  shame,  and  cowardice,  if 
I  did  not  say)  by  the  Divfne  assistance,  1  escaped 
snares  that  were  laid  to  corrupt  my  morals :  hence 
my  dearest  friend  will  the  more  readily  allow  me 
to  impart  to  him  some  of  the  lessons  that  were  of 
so  much  use  to  myself. 

I  am  the  rather  encouraged  to  take  this  liberty, 
as  I  have  often  flattered  myself,  that  I  have  seen 
my  Jeronymo  affected  by  the  arguments  urged  in 
the  course  of  the  conversations  that  have  been  held 
in  our  select  meetings  at  Padua,  and  at  Rome ;  in 
which  the  cause  of  virtue  and  true  honour  has  been 
discussed  and  pleaded, 

I  have  now  no  hopes  of  influencing  any  one  of  the 
noble  youths,  whom,  at  your  request,  I  have  of  late 
60  often  met :  but  oi  you  I  still  have  hopes,  because 
you  continue  to  declare,  that  you  prefer  my  friend- 
ship to  theirs.  You  think  that  I  was  disgusted  at 
the  ridicule  with  which  they  generally  treated  the 
arguments  they  could  not  answer :  but,  as  far  as  I 
innocently  could,  I  followed  them  in  their  levity.  I 
returned  raillery  for  ridicule,  and  not  always,  as 
you  know,  unsuccessfully;  but  still  they  renewed 
the  charge,  and  we  had  the  same  arguments  one 
day  to  refute,  that  the  preceding  were  given  up. 
They  could  not  convince  me,  nor  I  them, 

I  quit  therefore  (yet  not  without  regret)  the  so- 
ciety I  cannot  meet  with  pleasure :  but  let  not  my 
Jeronymo  renounce  me.  In  his  opinion  I  had  the 
honour  to  stand  high,  before  I  was  prevailed  upon  to 
be  introduced  to  them  ;  we  cultivated,  with  mutual 
"pleasure,  each  other's  acquaintance,  independent  of 


SIR  CHAllLES  GRANDISON.  211 

this  association.  Let  us  be  to  each  other,  what  we 
were  for  the  first  month  of  our  intimacy.  You  have 
noble  quaUties;  but  are  diffident,  and  too  often 
suffer  yourself  to  be  influenced  by  men  of  talents 
inferior  to  your  own. 

The  ridicule  they  have  aimed  at,  has  weakened, 
perhaps,  the  force  of  the  arguments  that  I  wished  to 
have  a  more  than  temporary  effect  on  your  heart. 
Permit  me  to  remind  you  on  paper,  of  some  of  them, 
and  urge  to  you  others :  the  end  I  have  in  view  is 
your  good,  in  hopes  to  confirm,  by  the  efficacy  they 
may  have  on  you,  my  own  principles  :  nor  think  me 
too  serious.  The  occasion,  the  call  that  true  friend- 
ship makes  upon  you,  is  weighty. 

You  have  shewed  me  letters  fro;n  your  noble  fa- 
ther, from  your  mother,  from  the  pious  prelate  your 
brother,  and  others  from  your  uncle,  and  still,  if 
possible,  more  admirable  ones,  from  your  sister — 
All  filled  with  concern  for  your  present  and  future 
welfare !  How  dearly  is  my  Jeronymo  beloved  by  his 
whole  family  !  and  by  such  a  family !  And  how  ten- 
derly does  he  love  them  all — What  ought  to  be  the 
result?  Jeronymo  cannot  be  ungrateful.  He  knows 
so  well  what  belongs  to  the  character  of  a  dutiful 
son,  an  affectionate  brother,  that  I  will  not  attempt 
to  enforce  their  arguments  upon  him. 

By  the  endeavours  of  my  friend  to  find  excuses 
for  some  of  the  liberties  in  which  he  allows  himself, 
I  infer,  that  if  he  thought  them  criminal,  he  has  too 
much  honour  to  be  guilty  of  them.  He  cannot  say, 
with  the  mad  Medea, 

Video  meliora,  proboque; 


Deteriora  sequor.  • 


No !  His  judgment  must  be  misled,  before  he  can 
alloxo  himself  in  a  deviation.  But  let  him  beware ; 
for  has  not  every  faulty  inclination  something  to 


212  THE    HISTORY   OF 

plead  in  its  own  behalf? — Excuses,  my  dear  friend, 
are  more  than  tacit  confessions :  and  the  health  of 
the  mind,  as  of  the  body,  is  impaired  by  almost 
imperceptible  degrees. 

My  Jeronymo  has  pleaded,  and  justly  may  he 
boast  of,  a  disposition  to  benevolence,  charity,  ge- 
nerosity— What  pity,  that  he  cannot  be  still  more 
perfect  ? — that  he  resolves  not  against  meditated 
injuries  to  others  of  his  fellow  creatures !  But  re- 
member, my  lord,  that  true  goodness  is  an  uniform 
thing,  and  will  alike  influence  every  part  of  a  man's 
conduct  •  and  that  true  generosity  will  not  be  con- 
fined to  obligations,  either  written  or  verbal. 

Besides,  who,  though  in  the  least  guilty  instance, 
and  where  some  false  virtue  may  hold  out  colours  to 
palliate  an  excess,  can  promise  himself  to  stop,  when 
once  he  has  thrown  the  reins  on  the  neck  of  lawless 
appetite  ?  And  may  I  not  add,  that  my  Jeronymo  is 
not  in  his  own  power  ?  He  suffers  himself  to  be  a  led 
man  ! — O  that  he  would  choose  his  company  anew, 
and  be  a  leader  !  Every  virtue,  t^en,  that  warms  his 
heart,  would  have  a  sister-virtue  to  encourage  the 
noble  flame,  instead  of  a  vice  to  damp  it. 

Justly  do  you  boast  of  the  nobility  of  your  des- 
cent ;  of  the  excellency  of  every  branch  of  your 
family  :  bear  with  my  question,  my  lord  ;  Are  you 
determined  to  sit  down  satisfied  with  the  honour  of 
your  ancestors  ?  Your  progenitors,  and  every  one 
of  your  family,  have  given  you  reason  to  applaud 
their  worthiness :  will  you  not  give  them  cause  to 
boast  oi yours? 

In  answer  to  the  earnest  entreaties  of  all  your 
friends,  that  you  will  marry,  you  have  said,  that, 
were  women  angels,  you  would  with  joy  enter  into 
the  state — But  what  ought  the  men  to  be,  who  form 
upon  women  such  expectations  ? 

Can  you,  my  dear  lord,  despise  matrimony,  yet 


SIR  CHARLES   GRANDISON.  213 

hold  it  to  be  a  sacrament  ?  Can  you,  defying  the 
maxims  of  your  family,  and  wishing  to  have  the 
sister  I  have  heard  you  mention  with  such  high  de- 
light and  admiration,  strengthen  your  family-inte- 
rest in  the  female  hne,  determine  against  adding  to 
its  strength  in  the  male  ? 

You  have  suffered  yourself  to  speak  with  con- 
tempt of  the  generality  of  the  Italian  women,  for 
their  illiterateness  :  let  not  their  misfortune  be  im- 
puted to  them,  my  noble  friend,  as  their  fault.  They 
have  the  same  natural  genius's  that  used  to  distin- 
guish the  men  and  women  of  your  happy  climate. 
Let  not  the  want  of  cultivation  induce  you,  a 
learned  man,  to  hold  them  cheap.  The  cause  of 
virtue,  and  of  the  sex,  can  hardly  be  separated. 

But,  O  my  friend,  my  Jeronymo,  have  I  not  too 
much  reason  to  fear,  that  guilty  attachments  have 
been  the  cause  of  your  slighting  a  legal  one? — That 
you  are  studying  for  pretences  to  justify  the  way  of 
life  into  which  you  have  fallen  ? 

Let  us  consider  the  objects  of  your  pursuit — Alas! 
there  have  been  more  than  one ! — Are  they  women 
seduced  from  the  path  of  virtue  by  yourself? — Who 
otherwise  perhaps  would  have  married,  and  made 
useful  members  of  society  ? — Consider,  my  friend, 
what  a  capital  crime  is  a  seduction  of  this  kind  !— 
Can  you  glory  in  the  virtue  of  a  sister  of  your  own, 
and  allow  yourself  in  attempts  upon  the  daughter, 
the  sister,  of  another  ?  And,  let  me  ask,  How  can 
that  crime  be  thought  pardonable  in  a  man,  which 
renders  a  woman  infamous  ? 

A  good  heart,  a  delicate  mind,  cannot  associate 
with  a  corrupt  one.  What  tie  can  bind  a  woman 
who  has  parted  with  her  honour  ?  What,  in  such  a 
guilty  attachment,  must  be  a  man's  alternative,  but 
either  to  be  the  tyrant  of  a  wretch  who  has  given 
Uim  reason  to  despise  her,  or  the  dupe  of  one  who 
despises  him  ? 


214  THE  HISTORY  OF 

It  is  the  important  lesson  of  life  (allow  me  to  be 
serious  on  a  subject  so  serious)  in  this  union  of  soul 
and  body,  to  restrain  the  unruly  appetites  of  the 
latter,  and  to  improve  the  faculties  of  the  former — • 
Can  this  end  be  attained  by  licentious  indulgences, 
and  profligate  associations  ? 

Men,  in  the  pride  of  their  hearts,  are  apt  to  sup- 
pose, that  nature  has  designed  them  to  be  superior 
to  women.  The  highest  proof  that  can  be  given,  of 
such  superiority,  is,  in  the  protection  afforded  by  the 
stronger  to  the  weaker.  What  can  that  man  say  for 
himself,  or  for  his  proud  pretension,  who  employs  all 
his  arts  to  seduce,  betray,  and  ruin,  the  creature  whom 
he  should  guide  and*  protect—  Sedulous  to  save  her, 
perhaps,  from  every  foe,  but  the  devil  and  himself  i 

It  is  unworthy  of  a  man  of  spirit  to  be  solicitous 
to  keep  himself  within  the  boundaries  of  human  laws, 
on  no  other  motive  than  to  avoid  the  temporal  incon- 
veniences attending  the  breach  of  them.  The  laws 
were  not  made  so  much  for  the  direction  of  good 
men,  as  to  circumscribe  the  bad.  Would  a  man  of 
honour  wish  to  be  considered  as  one  of  the  latter, 
rather  than  as  one  of  those  who  would  have  distin- 
guished the  fit  from  the  unfit,  had  they  not  been  dis- 
criminated by  human  sanctions?  Men  are  to  approve 
themselves  at  an  higher  tribunal  than  at  that  of  men. 

Uhall  not  public  spirit,  virtue,  and  a  sense  of  duty, 
have  as  much  influence  on  a  manly  heart,  as  a  new 
face?  How  contemptibly  low  is  that  commerce  in 
which  mind  has  no  share ! 

Virtuous  love,  my  dear  Jeron)TTio,  looks  beyond 
this  temponiry  scene ;  while  guilty  attachments  usu- 
ally find  a  much  earlier  period  than  that  of  human 
life.  Inconstancy,  on  one  side  or  the  other,  seldom 
fails  to  put  a  disgraceful  end  to  them.  But  were 
,  they  to  endure  for  life,  what  can  the  reflections 
upon  them  do  towards  softening  the  agonies  of  the 
inevitable  hour  ? 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON".  215 

Remember,  my  Jeronymo,  that  you  are  a  man, 
a  rational  and  immortal  agent ;  and  act  up  to  the 
dignity  of  your  nature.  Can  sensual  pleasure  be 
the  great  end  of  an  immortal  spirit  in  this  life  ? 

That  pleasure  cannot  be  lasting,  and  it  nmst  be 
followed  by  remorse,  which  is  obtained  either  by 
doing  injustice  to,  or  degrading  a  fellow-creature. 
And  does  not  a  woman,  when  she  forfeits  her  honour, 
degrade  herself,  not  only  in  the  sight  of  the  world, 
but  in  the  secret  thoughts  of  even  a  profligate  lover, 
destroying  her  own  consequence  with  him  ? 

Build  not,  my  noble  friend,  upon  penances  and 
absolutions :  I  enter  not  into  those  subjects  on  which 
we  differ  as  Catholics  and  Protestants:  but  if  we 
would  be  thought  men  of  true  greatness  of  mind, 
let  us  endeavour  so  to  act,  as  not,  in  essential  ar- 
ticles, and  with  our  eyes  open,  either  to  want  abso- 
lution, or  incur  penances.  Surely,  my  lord,  it  is 
pobler  not  to  offend,  than  to  be  obliged  to  atone. 

Are  there  not,  let  me  ask,  innocent  delights  enow 
to  fill  with  joy  every  vacant  hour  ?  Believe  me,  Je- 
ronymo, there  are.  Let  you  and  me  seek  for  such, 
and  make  them  the  cement  of  our  friendship. 

Religion  out  of  the  question,  consider  what  mo- 
rals and  good  policy  will  oblige  you  to  do,  as  a  man 
born  to  act  a  part  in  public  life.  What,  were  the 
examples  set  by  you  and  your  acquaintance  to  be 
generally  followed,  would  become  of  public  order 
and  decorum  ?  What  of  national  honours  ?  How 
will  a  regular  succession  in  families  be  kept,up? 
You,  my  lord,  boast  of  your  descent,  both  by  fa- 
ther's and  mother's  side :  why  will  you  deprive  your 
children  of  a  distinction  in  which  you  glory  ? 

Good  children,  what  a  blessing  to  their  parents ! 
But  what  comfort  can  the  parent  have  in  children 
born  into  the  world  heirs  of  disgrace,  and  who,  owing 
their  very  being  to  profligate  principles,  have  no  fa- 


216  THE  HISTORY  OF 

mily  honour  to  support,  no  fair  example  to  imitate^ 
but  must  be  warned  by  their  father,  when  bitter  ex- 
perience has  convinced  him  of  his  errors,  to  avoid 
the  paths  in  which  he  has  trod  ? 

How  delightful  the  domestic  connexion !  Tobring 
to  the  paternal  and  fraternal  dwellings,  a  daughter, 
a  sister,  that  shall  be  received  there  with  tender  love ; 
to  strengthen  your  own  interest  in  the  world  by  al- 
liance with  some  noble  and  worthy  family,  who  shall 
rejoice  to  trust  to  the  Barone  della  Porretta  the 
darling  of  their  hopes — This  would,  to  a  generous 
heart,  like  yours,  be  the  source  of  infinite  delights. 
But  could  you  now  think  of  introducing  to  the 
friends  you  revere,  the  unhappy  objects  of  a  vagrant 
affection  ?  Must  not  my  Jeronymo  even  estrange 
himself  from  his  home,  to  conceal  from  his  father, 
from  his  mother,  from  his  sister,  persons  shut  out  by 
all  the  laws  of  honour  from  their  society  ?  The  per- 
sons, so  shut  out,  must  hate  the  family  to  whose 
interests  theirs  are  so  contrary.  What  sincere  union 
then,  what  sameness  of  affection,  between  Jeronymo 
and  the  objects  of  his  passion  ? 

But  the  present  hour  dances  delightfully  away,  and 
my  friend  will  not  look  beyond  it.  His  gay  com- 
panions applaud  and  compliment  him  on  his  triumphs. 
In  general,  perhaps,  he  allows,  '  that  the  welfare  and 
order  of  society  ought  to  be  maintained  by  submission 
to  divine  and  human  laws ;  but  his  single  exception 
for  himself  can  be  of  no  importance.'  Of  what,  then, 
is  general  practice  made  up  ? — If  every  one  excepts 
himself  and  offends  in  the  instance  that  best  suits 
his  inclination,  what  a  scene  of  horror  will  this  world 
become  !  Affluence  and  a  gay  disposition  tempt  to 
licentious  pleasures ;  penury  and  a  gloomy  one  to 
robbery,  revenge,  and  murder.  Not  one  enormity 
will  be  without  its  plea,  if  once  the  boundar.es  of 
duty  are  thrown  down.    But,  even  in  this  universal 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  217 

depravity,  would  not  his  crime  be  much  worse,  who 
robbed  me  of  my  child  from  riot  and  licentiousness^ 
and  under  the  guise  of  love  and  trust,  than  his  who 
despoiled  me  of  my  substance,  and  had  necessity  to 
plead  in  extenuation  of  his  guilt  ? 

I  cannot  doubt,  my  dear  friend,  but  you  will  take, 
at  least,  kindly,  these  expostulations,  though  some 
of  them  are  upon  subjects  on  which  our  conversations 
have  been  hitherto  ineffectual.  I  submit  them  to 
your  consideration.  I  can  have  no  interest  in  mak- 
ing them,  nor  motive,  but  what  proceeds  from  that 
true  friendship  with  which  I  desire  to  be  thought 
Most  affectionately  yours. 

You  have  heard,  my  good  Miss  Byron,  that  the 
friendship  between  Mr.  Grandison  and  Signor  Je- 
ronymo  was  twice  broken  off:  once  it  was,  by  the 
unkindly-taken  freedom  of  the  expostulatory  letter. 
Jeronymo,  at  that  time  of  his  life,  ill-brooked  oppo- 
sition in  any  pursuit  his  heart  was  engaged  in.  When 
pushed,  he  was  vehement;  and  Mr.  Grandison  could 
not  be  over-solicitous  to  keep  up  a  friendship  with  a 
young  man  who  was  under  the  dominion  of  his  dis- 
solute companions ;  and  who  would  not  allow  of  re- 
monstrances, in  cases  that  concerned  his  morals. 

Jeronymo,  having  afterwards  been  drawn  into 
great  inconveniences  by  his  libertine  friends,  broke 
with  them ;  and  Mr.  Grandison  and  he  meeting  by 
accident  at  Padua,  their  friendship,  at  the  pressing 
instances  of  Jeronymo,  was  again  renewed. 

Jeronymo  thought  himself  reformed ;  Mr.  Gran- 
dison hoped  he  was :  but,  soon  after,  a  temptation 
fell  in  his  way,  which  he  could  not  resist.  It  was 
from  a  lady  who  was  more  noted  for  her  birth,beauty, 
and  fortune,  than  for  her  virtue.  She  had  spread  her 
snares  for  Mr.  Grandison  before  Jeronymo  became 
acquainted  with  her ;  and  revenge,  for  her  slighted 

VOL.  XI.  u 


218  THE    HISTORY   OF 

advances,  taking  possession  of  her  heart,  she  hoped 
an  opportunity  would  be  afforded  her  of  wreaking" 
it  upon  him. 

The  occasion  was  given  by  the  following  letter, 
which  Mr.  Grandison  thought  himself  obliged,  in 
honour,  to  write  to  his  friend,  on  his  attaclnnent ; 
the  one  being  then  at  Padua,  the  other  at  Cremona. 

I  am  extremely  concerned,  my  dear  Jeronymo,  at 
your  new  engagement  with  a  lady,  who,  though  of 
family  and  fortune,  has  shewn  but  little  regard  to  her 
character.     How  frail  are  the  resolutions  of  men  • 
How  much  in  the  power  of  women !   But  I  will  not 
reproach — Yet  I  cannot  but  regret,  that  I  must  lose 
your  company  in  our  projected  visits  to  the  German 
courts :  this,  however,  more  for  your  sake  than  my 
own ;  since  to  the  principal  of  them  I  am  no  stranger. 
You  have  excused  yourself  to  me :  I  wish  you  had 
a  better  motive :  but  I  write  rather  to  warn,  than  to 
upbraid  you.    This  lady  is  mistress  of  all  the  arts  of 
woman.   She  may  glory  in  her  conquest ;  you  ought 
not  to  be  proud  oi yours.     You  mill  not,  when  you 
know  her  better.  I  have  had  a  singular  opportunity 
of  being  acquainted  with  her  character.    I  never 
judged  of  characters,  of  womens  especially,  hy  report. 
Had  the  Barone  della  Porretta  been  the  first  for 
whom  this  lady  spread  her  blandishments,  a  man  so 
amiable  as. he  i;§,  might  the  more  assuredly  have  de- 
pended on  tbeciove  she  professes  for  him.    She  has 
two  admirers,  men  of  violence,  who,  unknown  to 
each  other,  have  equal  reason  to  look  upon  her  as 
their  own.     You  propose  not  to  marry  her.     I  am 
silent  on  this  subject.     Would  to  heaven  you  xuere 
married  to  a  woman  of  virtue !     Why  will  you  not 
oblige  all  your  friends  ?  Thus  liable  as  you  are — But 
neither  do  I  expostulate.    Well  do  I  know  the  ve- 
hemence with  which  you  are  wont  to  pursue  a  new 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  219 

adventure.  Yet  I  had  hoped — But  again  I  restrain 
myself.  Only  let  me  add,  that  the  man  who  shall 
boast  of  his  success  with  this  lady,  may  have  more 
to  apprehend  from  the  competition  in  which  he  will 
find  himself  engaged,  than  he  can  be  aware  of.  Be 
prudent,  my  Jeronymo,  in  this  pi^rsuit,  for  your  own 
sake.  The  heart  that  dictates  this  advice  is  wholly 
yours :  but,  alas !  it  boasts  no  further  interest  in  that 
of  its  Jeronymo.  With  infinite  regret  I  subscribe 
to  the  latter  part  of  the  sentence  the  once  better- 
regarded  name  of  GRANDISON. 

And  what  was  the  consequence  ?  The  unhappy 
youth,  by  the  instigation  of  the  revengeful  woman, 
defied  his  friend,  in  her  behalf.  Mr,  Grandison,  with 
a  noble  disdain,  appealed  to  Jeronymo's  cooler  deli- 
beration ;  and  told  him,  that  he  never  would  meet, 
as  a  foe,  the  man  he  had  ever  been  desirous  to  con- 
sider as  his  friend.  You  know,  my  lord,  said  he, 
that  I  am  under  a  disadvantage  in  having  once  been 
obhged  to  assert  myself,  in  a  country  where  I  have 
po  natural  connexions ;  and  where  you,  Jeronymo, 
have  many.  If  we  meet  again,  I  do  assure  you,  it 
must  be  by  accident ;  and  if  that  happens,  we  shall 
then  find  it  time  enough  to  discuss  the  occasion  of 
our  present  misunderstanding. 

Their  next  meeting  was  indeed  by  accident.  It 
was  in  the  Cremonese ;  when  Mr.  Grandison  saved 
his  life. 

*    * 

And  now,  madam,  let  me  give  you,  in  answer 
to  your  second  enquiry, 

The  particulars  of  the  conference  "which  Sir 
Charles  xuas  put  upon  holding  with  Clemen- 
Una,  in  favour  of  the  Count  of  Belvedere  ; 
.and  vihich  her  father  and  mother^  unknown  to 
either  qfthemy  overhear d» 
p2 


220  THE    HISTORY   OF 

You  must  suppose  them  seated ;  a  Milton's  Para- 
dise Lost  before  them :  and  that,  at  this  time,  Mr. 
Grandison  did  not  presume  that  the  young  lady  had 
any  particular  regard  for  him, 

Clementina.  You  have  taught  the  prelate,  and 
you  have  taught  the  soldier,  to  be  in  love  with  your 
Milton,  Sir:  but  I  shall  never  admire  him,  I  doubt. 
Don't  you  reckon  the  language  hard  and  crabbed  ? 
Grandison.  I  did  not  propose  him  to  you,  madam : 
your  brother  chose  him.  We  should  not  have  made 
the  proficiency  we  have,  had  I  not  begun  with  you 
by  easier  authors.  But  you  have  heard  me  often 
call  him  a  sublime  poet,  and  your  ambition  (it  is  a 
laudable  one)  leads  you  to  make  him  your  own  too 
soon.  Has  not  your  tutor  taken  the  liberty  to  chide 
you  for  your  impatience ;  for  your  desire  of  being 
every-thing  at  once  ? 

Clem.  You  have  ;  and  I  own  my  fault. — But  to 
have  done,  for  the  present,  with  Milton ;  What  shall 
I  do  to  acquit  myself  of  the  addresses  of  this  Count 
of  Belvedere  ? 

Gr.  Why  ivould  youacquityourself  of  the  count's 
addresses  ? 

Clem.  He  is  not  the  man  I  can  like :  I  have  told 
my  father  as  much,  and  he  is  angry  with  me. 

Gr.  I  think,  madam,  your  father  ma^  be  a  little 
displeased  with  you ;  though  he  loves  you  too  ten- 
derly to  be  angry  with  you.  You  reject  the  count, 
without  assigning  a  reason. 

Clem.  Is  it  not  reason  enough,  that  1  don't  like 
him  ? 

Gr.  Give  me  leave  to  say,  that  the  count  is  a 
handsome  man.  He  is  young;  gallant;  sensible; 
of  a  family  antient  and  noble ;  a  grace  to  it.  He  is 
learned,  good-natured :  he  adores  you — 

Clem.  And  so  let  him,  if  he  will;  1  never  can 
like  him. 


SIR  CHARLES   GRANDISON.  221 

Gr.  Dear  Lady  Clementina!  You  must  not  be 
•capricious.  You  will  give  the  most  indulgent  pa- 
rents in  the  world  apprehension  that  you  have  cast 
your  thoughts  on  some  other  object.  Young  ladies, 
except  in  a  case  of  prepossession,  do  not  often  re- 
ject a  person  who  has  so  many  great  and  good  qua- 
lities as  shine  in  this  gentleman ;  and  where  equality 
of  degree,  and  a  father's  and  mother's  high  appro- 
bation, add  to  his  merit. 

Clem.  I  suppose  you  have  been  spoken  to,  to  talk 
with  me  on  this  subject — It  is  a  subject  I  don't  like. 
Gr.  You  began  it,  madam. 
Clem.  I  did  so ;  because  it  is  uppermost  with  me. 
I  am  grieved  at  my  heart,  that  1  cannot  see  the 
count  with  my  father's  eyes:  my  father  deserves 
from  me  every  instance  of  duty,  and  love,  and  ve- 
neration ;  but  I  cannot  think  of  the  Count  of  Bel- 
vedere for  a  husband. 

Gr.  One  reason,  madam  ?  One  objection  ? 
Clem.  He  is  a  man  that  is  not  to  my  mind :  a  , 
fawning,  cringing  man,  I  think. — And  a  spirit  that 
can  fawn,  and  cringe,  and  kneel,  will  be  a  tyrant  in 
power. 

Gr.'  Dear  madam,  to  whom  is  he  this  obsequious 
man,  but  to  you  ? — Is  there  a  man  in  the  world  that 
behaves  with  a  more  proper  dignity  to  every  one 
else  ?  Nay,  to  you,  the  lover  shines  out  in  him,  but 
the  man  is  not  forgot.  Is  the  tenderness  shewn  in 
a  well-placed  love,  the  veneration  paid  to  a  deser- 
vedly beloved  object,  any  derogation  to  the  manly 
character  ?  Far  from  it :  and  shall  you  think  the 
less  of  your  lover,  for  being  the  most  ardent,  and, 
I  have  no  knowledge  of  the  man,  if  he  is  not  the 
most  sincere,  of  men  ? 

Clem.  An  excellent  advocate! — I  am  sure  you 
Jiave  been  spoken  to — Have  you  not  ?  Tell  me  truly; 
perhaps  by  the  Count  of  Belvedere  ? 
u3 


222  THE  HISTORY  OF 

Gr.  I  should  not  thijih,  and,  of  consequence,  not 
speak,  so  highly  as  I  do,  of  the  count,  if  he  were 
capable  of  asking  any  man,  your  father  and  bro- 
thers excepted,  to  plead  his  cause  with  you. 

Clem.  I  can't  bear  to  be  children,  chevalier.  Now 
you  are  going  to  be  angry  with  me  too.  But  has  not 
my  mamma  spoken  to  you  ? — Tell  me  ? 

Gr.  Dear  lady,  consider,  if  she  had,  what  you  owe 
to  a  mother,  who,  deserving,  for  her  tenderness  to 
her  child,  the  utmost  observance  and  duty,  would 
condescend  to  put  her  authority  into  a  mediation. 
And  yet,  let  me  declare,  that  no  person  breathing 
should  make  me  say  what  I  do  not-  think,  whetlier 
in  favour  or  disfavour  of  any  man. 

Clem.  That  is  no  answer.  I  owe  implicit,  yes,  I  will 
say  implicit,  duty  to  my  mamma,  for  her  indulgence 
to  me :  but  what  you  have  said  is  no  direct  answer. 
Gr.  For  the  honour  of  that  indulgence,  madam^ 
1  own  to  you,  that  your  mamma,  and  my  lord  too, 
have  wished  that  their  Clementina  could  or  would 
give  one  substantial  reason  why  she  cannot  like  the 
Count  of  Belvedere ;  that  they  might  prepare  them- 
selves to  acquiesce  with  it,  and  the  count  be  induced 
to  submit  to  his  evil  destiny. 

Clem.  And  they  have  wished  this  to  you,  Sir  ? 
And  you  have  taken  upon  you  to  answer  their 
wishes — I  protest,  you  are  a  man  of  prodigious  con- 
sequence, with  us  all ;  and  by  your  readiness  to  take 
up  the  cause  of  a  man  you  have  so  lately  known,  you 
seem  to  know  it,  too  well. 

Gr.  I  am  sorry  I  have  incurred  your  displeasure, 
madam. 

Clem.  You  have.  I  never  was  more  angry  with 
you,  than  I  now  am. 

Gr.  I  hope  you  never  were  angry  with  me  before. 
I  never  gave  you  reason.  And  if  I  have  now,  I 
beg  your  pardon. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  223 

I  arose  to  go. 

Clem.  Very  humble,  Sir  ! — And  are  for  going  be- 
fore you  have  it.     Now  call  me  capricious,  again  ! 

Gj:  I  did  not  know  that  you  could  be  so  easily 
displeased,  madam. 

bhe  wept. 

Ciem.  I  am  a  very  weak  creature :  I  believe  I  am 
wrong :  but  I  never  knew  what  it  was  to  give  offence 
to  any-body  till  within  these  few  months.  I  love 
my  father,  I  love  my  mother,  beyond  my  own  life ; 
and  to  think  that  now,  when  I  wish  most  for  the 
continuance  of  their  goodness  to  me,  I  am  in  dan- 
ger of  forfeiting  it ! — 1  can't  bear  it ! — Do  ijou  for- 
give me,  however.  I  believe  I  have  been  too  petu- 
lant to  you.  Your  behaviour  is  noble,  frank,  dis- 
interested. It  has  been  a  happiness  that  we  have 
known  you.  You  are  every-body's  friend.  But  yet 
I  think  it  is  a  little  officious  in  you  to  plead  so  very 
warmly  for  a  man  of  whom  you  know  so  little ;  and 
when  I  told  you,  more  than  once,  I  could  not  like 
him. 

Gr.  Honoured  as  I  am,  by  your  whole  family, 
with  the  appellation  of  a  fourth  son,  a  fourth  bro- 
ther ;  was  I,  dear  madam,  to  blame  to  act  up  to  the 
character  ?  I  know  my  own  heart ;  and  if  I  have 
consequence  given  me,  I  will  act  so,  as  to  deserve 
it ;  at  least,  my  own  heart  shall  give  it  to  me. 

Clem.  Well,  Sir,  you  may  be  right :  I  am  sure 
you  viean  to  be  right.  But  as  it  would  be  a  diminu- 
tion of  the  count's  dignity,  to  apply  to  you  for  a  sup- 
posed interest  in  me,  which  he  cannot  have,  it  woujd 
be  much  more  so,  to  have  you  interfere  where  a  father, 
mother,  and  other  brothers  [you  see,  Sir,  I  allow 
your  claim  of  fourth  brotherhood]  are  supposed  to 
nave  less  weight :  so  no  more  of  the  Count  of  Bel- 
vedere, I  beseech  you,  from  your  mouth. 

Gr.  One  word  more,  only — Don't  let  the  good- 


224  THE    HISTORY   OP 

ness  of  your  father  and  mother  be  construed  to  the 
disadvantage  of  the  parental  character  in  them. 
They  have  not  been  positive :  they  have  given  their 
wishes,  rather  than  their  commands.  Their  tender- 
ness for  you,  in  a  point  so  very  tender,  has  made 
them  unable  to  tell  their  own  wishes  to  you,  for  fear 
they  should  not  meet  with  yours ;  yet  would  be, 
perhaps,  glad  to  hear  one  solid  objection  to  their 
proposal — And  why  ?  That  they  might  admit  of  it 
— Impute,  therefore,  to  my  officiousness,  what  you 
please ;  and  yet  I  would  not  wish  to  disoblige  or 
offend  you ;  but  let  their  indulgence  (they  never  will 
use  their  authority)  have  its  full  merit  with  you. 

Clem.  Your  servant,  Sir.  I  never  yet  had  a  slight 
notion  of  their  indulgence ;  and  I  hope  I  never  shall. 
If  you  imll  go,  go  :  but.  Sir,  next  time  I  am  favoured 
with  your  lectures,  it  shall  be  upon  languages,  if 
you  please;  and  not  upon  lovers. 

I  withdrew,  profoundly  bowing.  But  surely, 
thought  I,  the  lovely  Clementina  is  capricious. 

Thus  far  my  patron. — Let  me  add,  that  the  mar- 
chioness, having  acquainted  Mr.  Grandison,  that 
her  lord  and  she  had  heard  every  word  that  had 
passed,  expressed  her  displeasure  at  her  daughter's 
petulance ;  and,  thanking  him  in  her  lord's  name, 
as  well  as  for  herself,  for  the  generous  part  he  had 
taken,  told  him,  that  Clementina  shguld  ask  his 
pardon.  He  begged  that,  for  the  sake  of  their  own 
weight  with  her  on  the  same  subject,  she  might  not 
know  that  they  had  heard  what  had  passed. 

I  believe  that's  best,  chevalier,  answered  the 
marchioness ;  that  I  am  apt  to  think,  that  the  poor 
girl  will  be  more  ready  than  perhaps  one  would 
wish,  to  make  it  up  with  you,  were  she  to  find  you 
offended  with  her  in  earnest ;  as  you  have  reason 
to  be,  as  a  disinterested  man. 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  225 

You  see,  chevalier,  I  know  to  whom  I  am  speak- 
ing ;  but  both  my  lord,  and  self,  hope  to  see  her  of 
another  mind ;  and  that  she  will  soon  be  Countess 
of  Belvedere.  My  lord's  heart  is  in  this  alliance ; 
so  is  that  of  my  son  Giacomo. 

I  come  now,  madam,  to  your  third  command: 
which  is.  To  give  you, 

The  conference  xuhich  Sir  Charles  ivas  put  upon 
holding  with  the  unhappy  Clementina,  on  her 
being  seized  laith  melancholy.  [Mr.  Grandison 
still  not  presuming  on  any  particular  favour 
from  Clementina]. 

The  young  lady  was  walking  in  one  alley  of  the 
garden ;  Mr.  Grandison,  and  the  marquis  and  mar- 
chioness, in  another.  She  was  attended  by  her  wo- 
man, who  walked  behind  her  ;  and  with  whom  she 
was  displeased  for  endeavouring  to  divert  her ;  but 
who,  however,  seemed  to  be  talking  on,  though 
without  being  answered. 

The  dear  creature !  said  the  marquis,  tears  in  his 
eyes — See  her  there,  now  walking  slow,  now  with 
quicker  steps  as  if  she  would  shake  off  her  Camilla. 
She  hates  the  poor  woman  for  her  love  to  her :  but 
who  is  it  that  she  sees  with  pleasure  ?  Did  I  think 
that  I  should  ever  behold  the  pride  of  my  heart, 
with  the  pain  that  I  now  feel  for  her  ?  Yet  she  is 
lovely  in  my  eye,  in  all  she  does,  in  all  she  says — 
But,  my  dear  Grandison,  we  cannot  now  make  her 
speak,  more  than  Yes,  or  No.  We  cannot  engage 
her  in  a  conversation,  no  not  on  the  subject  of  her 
newly-acquired  language.  See  if  you  can,  on  any 
subject. 

Ay,  chevalier,  said  the  marchioness,  do  you  try 
to  engage  her.    We  have  told  her,  that  we  will  not 


226  THE    HISTORY   OP 

talk  of  marriage  to  her  at  all,  till  she  is  herself  in- 
clined to  receive  proposals.  Her  weeping  eyes  thank 
us  for  our  indulgence.  She  prays  for  us  with  lifted- 
up  hands :  she  courtesies  her  thanks,  if  she  stands 
before  us  :  she  bows,  in  acknowledged  gratitude  for 
our  goodness  to  her,  if  she  sits ;  but  she  cares  not 
to  speak.  She  is  not  easy  while  we  are  talking  to 
her.  See !  she  is  stepping  into  the  Greek  temple  ; 
her  poor  woman,  unanswered,  talking  to  her.  She 
has  not  seen  us.  By  that  winding  walk  we  can, 
unseen,  place  ourselves  in  the  myrtle-grove,  and 
hear  what  passes. 

The  marchioness,  as  we  walked,  hinted,  that  in 
their  last  visit  to  the  general  at  Naples,  there  was  a 
Count  MaruUi,  a  young  nobleman  of  merit,  but  a 
soldier  of  fortune,  who  would  have  clandestinely 
obtained  the  attention  of  their  Clementina.  They 
knew  nothing  of  it  till  last  night,  she  said  ;  when 
herself  and  Camilla,  puzzling  to  whpt  to  attribute 
the  sudden  melancholy  turn  of  her  daughter,  and 
Camilla  mentioning  what  was  unlikely,  as  well  as 
likely  ;  told  her,  that  the  count  would  have  bribed 
her  to  deliver  a  letter  to  the  young  lady  ;  but  that 
she  repulsed  him  with  indignation :  he  besought  her 
then  to  take  no  notice  of  his  offer,  to  the  general, 
on  whom  all  his  fortunes  depended.  She  did  not, 
for  that  reason,  to  any-body  ;  but,  a  few  days  since, 
she  heard  her  young  lady  (talking  of  the  gentlemen 
she  had  seen  at  Naples)  mention  the  young  count 
favourably — Now  it  is  impossible  there  can  be  any- 
thing in  it,  said  the  marchioness :  but  do  you,  how- 
ever, chevalier,  lead  to  the  subject  of  love,  but  at 
distance  ;  nor  name  Marulli,  because  she  will  think 
you  have  been  talking  with  Camilla.  The  dear  girl 
has  pride :  she  would  not  endure  you,  if  she  thought 
jou  imagined  her  to  be  in  love,  especially  with  ^ 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  22? 

man  of  inferior  degree,  or  dependent  fortunes.  But 
on  your  prudence  we  wholly  rely ;  mention  it,  or 
not,  as  matters  fall  in.    . 

There  can  be  no  room  for  this  surmise,  my  dear, 
iSaid  the  marquis  ;  and  yet  Marulli  was  lately  in  Bo- 
logna :  but  Clementina's  spirit  will  not  permit  her 
to  encourage  a  clandestine  address. 

By  this  time  we  had  got  to  the  myrtle-grove, 
behind  the  temple,  and  over-heard  them  talk,  as  fol- 
lows: 

Camilla.  And  why,  why  must  I  leave  you,  ma>- 
dam  ? — From  infancy  you  know  how  I  have  loved 
you.  You  used  to  love  to  hold  converse  with  your 
Camilla.  How  have  I  offended  you  ?  I  will  not  enter 
this  temple  till  you  give  me  leave ;  but  indeed,  in- 
deed, I  must  not,  I  cannot,  leave  you. 

Clem.  Officious  love ! — Can  there  be  a  greater 
torment  than  an  officious  prating  love ! — if  you 
loved  me,  you  would  wish,  to  oblige  me. 

Ca7n.  I  tvill  oblige  you,  my  dear  young  lady,  in 
every-thing  I  can — 

Clem.  Then  leave  me,  Camilla.  I  am  best  when  I 
am  alone.:  I  am  cheerfullest  when  I  am  alone.  You 
haunt  me,  Camilla;  like  a  ghost,  you  haunt  me,  Ca- 
milla. Indeed  you  are  but  the  ghost  of  my  once 
obliging  Camilla. 

Cam.  My  dearest  young  lady,  let  me  beseech 
you— 

Clem.  Ay,  now  you  come  with  your  beseeches 
again  :  but  if  you  love  me,  Camilla,  leave  me.  Am 
I  not  to  be  trusted  with  myself?  Were  I  a  vile 
young  creature,  suspected  to  be  run  away  with 
some  base-born  man,  you  could  not  be  more  watch- 
ful of  my  steps. 

.  Camilla  would  have  entered  into  farther  talk  with 
her ;  but  she  absolutely  forbad  her. 

Talk  till  dooms-day,  I  will  not  say  one  word  more 


228  THE   HISTOUY   OF 

to  you,  Camilla.  I  will  be  silent.  I  will  stop  my 
ears. 

They  were  both  silent.    Camilla  seemed  to  weep. 

Now,  my  dear  chevalierj  whispered  the  marquis, 
put  yourself  in  her  sight;  engage  her  into  talk  about 
England,  or  any-thing  :  you  will  have  an  hour  good 
before  dinner.  I  hope  she  will  be  cheerful  at  table  : 
shemust  bepresent;  our  guests  will  enquire  after  her. 
Reports  have  gone  out,  as  if  her  head  were  hurt. 

I  am  afraid,  my  lord,  that  this  is  an  unseasonable 
moment.  She  seems  to  be  out  of  humour  ;  and  par- 
don me  if  I  say,  that  Camilla,  good  woman  as  she  is, 
and  well  meaning,  had  better  give  way  to  her  young 
lady's  humour,  at  such  times. 

Then,  said  the  marchioness,  will  her  malady  get 
head ;  then  will  it  become  habit.  But  my  lord  and 
I  will  remain  where  we  are,  for  a  few  minutes,  and 
do  you  try  to  engage  her  in  conversation  1  would 
have  her  be  cheerful  before  the  patriarch,  however; 
he  will  expect  to  see  her.  She  is  as  much  his  de- 
light as  she  is  ours. 

I  took  a  little  turn;  and,  entering  the  walk,  which 
led  to  the  temple,  appeared  in  her  sight;  but  bowed, 
on  seeing  her  sitting  in  it.  Her  woman  stood  silent, 
with  her  handkei'chief  at  her  eyes,  at  the  entrance. 
I  quickened  my  steps,  as  if  I  would  not  break  into 
her  retirement,  and  passed  by ;  but,  by  means  of 
the  winding  walk,  could  hear  what  she  said. 

She  arose ;  and  stepping  forward,  looking  after 
me.  He  is  gone,  said  she.  Learn,  Camilla,  of  the 
Chevalier  Grandison — 

Shall  I  call  him  back,  madam  ? 

No.  Yes.  No.  Let  him  go.  I  will  walk.  You 
may  now  leave  me,  Camilla  ;  there  is  somebody  in 
the  garden  who  will  watch  me :  or,  you  may  stay, 
Camilla ;  I  don't  care  which  :  only  don't  talk  to  me 
when  I  wish  you  to  be  silent. 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  229 

She  went  into  an  alley  which  crossed  that  in  which 
I  was,  but  took  the  walk  that  led  from  me.  When 
we  came  to  the  centre  of  both,  and  were  very  near 
each  other,  I  bowed:  she  courtesied;  but  not  seeming 
to  encourage  my  nearer  approach,  I  made  a  motion, 
as  if  I  would  take  another  walk.  She  stopt.  Learn 
of  the  Chevalier  Grandison,  Camilla — repeated  she. 

May.  I  presume,  madam  ?     Do  I  not  invade — 

Camilla  is  a  little  officious  to-day  :  Camilla  has 
teazed  me  Are  the  poets  of  your  country  as  severe 
upon  women's  tongues,  as  the  poets  of  ours  ? 

Poets,  madam,  of  all  countries,  boast  the  same 
inspiration:  poets  write,  as  other  men  speak,  to 
the  ir  feeling. 

So,  Sir ! — You  make  a  pretty  compliment  to  us 
poor  women. 

Poets  have  finer  imaginations,  madam,  than  other 
men  ;  they  therefore  feel  quicker  :  but  as  they  are 
not  often  intitled  to  boast  of  judgment  (for  imagina- 
tion and  judgment  seldom  go  together)  they  may, 
perhaps,  give  the  cause,  and  then  break  out  into 
satire  upon  the  effects. 

Don't  I  see  before  me,  in  the  orange-grove,  my 
father  and  mother  ? — I  do.  I  have  not  kneeled  to 
them  to-day. — Don't  go,  chevalier. 

She  hastened  towards  them.  They  stopt.  She 
bent  her  knee  to  each,  and  received  their  tender 
blessings.  They  led  her  towards  me.  You  seemed 
engaged  in  talk  with  the  chevalier,  my  dear,  said 
the  marquis.  Your  mamma  and  I  were  walking  in. 
We  leave  you. — They  did. 

The  best  of  parents  !  said  she.  O  that  I  were 
a  more  worthy  child ! — Have  you  not  seen  them, 
Sir,  before  to-day  ? 

I  have,  madam.  They  think  you  the  worthiest  of 
daughters  :  but  they  lament  your  thoughtful  turn. 

They  are  very  good.    I  am  grieved  to  give  them 

X 


530  tHE    HISTORY   OP 

trouble.  Have  they  expressed  their  concern  to  you. 
Sir  ? — I  will  not  be  so  petulant  as  I  was  once  before, 
provided  you  keep  clear  of  the  same  subject.  You 
are  the  confident  of  us  all ;  and  your  noble  and  dis- 
interested behaviour  deservedly  endears  you  to 
every-body. 

They  have  been,  this  very  morning,  lamenting 
the  melancholy  turn  you  seem  to  have  taken.  With 
tears,  madam,  they  have  been  lamenting  it. 

Camilla,  you  may  draw  near :  you  will  hear  your 
own  cause  supported.  The  rather  draw  near,  and 
hear  all  the  chevalier  seems  to  be,  going  to  say ; 
because  it  may  save  you  and  me  too  a  great  deal 
of  trouble. 

Madam,  I  have  done,  said  I. 

But  you  must  not  have  done.  If  you  are  com- 
missioned, Sir,  by  my  father  and  mother,  I  am,  I 
ought  to  be,  prepared  to  hear  all  you  have  to  say. 

Camilla  came  up. 

^Vhat,  madam,  can  I  say  ?  .  My  wishes  for  your 
happiness  may  make  me  appear  importunate  :  but 
what  hope  have  I  of  obtaining  your  confidence, 
when  your  mother  fails  ? 

What,  Sir,  is  aimed  at  ?  What  is  sought  to  be  ob- 
tained ?  I  am  not  very  well :  I  used  to  be  a  very 
sprightly  creature :  I  used  to  talk,  to  sing,  to  dance, 
to  play  ;  to  visit,  to  receive  visits :  and  I  don't  like 
to  do  any  of  these  things  now.  I  love  to  be  alone : 
I  am  contented  with  my  own  company.  Other 
company  is,  at  times,  irksome  to  me  ;  and  I  can't 
help  it. 

But  whence  this  sudden  turn,  madam,  in  a  lady 
so  young,  so  blooming  ?     Your  father,  mother,  bro- 
thers, cannot  account  for  it ;  and  this  disturbs  them. 
I  see  it  does,  and  am  sorry  for  it. 

No  other  favourite  diversion  takes  place  in  your 
mind.    You  are  a  young  lady  of  exemplary  piety : 


Mtt   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  231 

you  cannot  pay  a  greater  observance  than  you  al- 
ways paid,  to  the  duties  of  religion. 

You,  Sir,  an  Englishman,  an  heretic,  give  me 
leave  to  call  you  ;  for  are  you  not  so  ? — Do  you  talk 
of  piety,  of  religion? 

We  will  not  enter  into  this  subject,  madam:  what 
I  meant — 

Yes,  Sir,  I  know  what  you  meant — And  I  will 
own,  that  I  am,  at  times,  a  very  melancholy  strange 
creature.  I  know  not  whence  the  alteration  ;  but 
so  it  is  ;  and  I  am  a  greater  trouble  to  myself  than 
I  can  be  to  any-body  else. 

But,  madam,  there  must  be  some  cause — And  for 
you  to  answer  the  best  and  most  indulgent  of  mothers 
with  sighs  and  tears  only ;  yet  no  obstinacy,  no  sul- 
lenness,  no  petulance,  appearing:  all  the  same  sweet- 
ness, gentleness,  observance,  that  she  ever  rejoiced 
to  find  in  her  Clementina,  still  shining  out  in  her 
mind.  She  cannot  urge  her  silent  daughter  ;  her  ten- 
derness will  not  permit  her  to  urge  her :  and  how 
can  you,  my  sister  (allow  of  my  claim,  madam) 
how  can  you  still  silently  withdraw  from  such  a 
mother  ?  How  can  you,  at  other  times,  suffer  her 
to  withdraw,  her  heart  full,  her  eyes  running  over, 
unable  to  stay,  yet  hardly  knowing  how  to  go,  be- 
cause of  the  ineffectual  reports  she  must  make  to  your 
sorrowing  father  ;  yet  the  cause  of  this  very  great 
alteration  (which  they  dread  is  growing  into  habit, 
at  a  time  of  life  when  you  were  to  crown  all  their 
hopes)  a  secret  fast  locked  up  in  your  own  heart. 

She  wept,  and  turned  from  me,  and  leaned  upon 
the  arm  of  her  Camilla ;  and  then  quitting  her  arm, 
and  joining  me,  How  you  paint  my  obstuiacy,  and 
my  mamma's  goodness  !  1  only  wish— with  all  my 
soul  1  wish — that  I  was  added  to  the  dust  of  ray 
ancestors.  I  who  was  their  comfort,  1  see,  novy, 
must  be  their  torment. 

x2 


232  THE    HISTORY   OF 

Fie,  fie,  my  sister  I 

Blame  me  not :  I  am  by  no  means  satisfied  with 
myself.  What  a  miserable  being  must  she  be,  who 
is  at  variance  with  herself? 

I  do  not  hope,  madam,  that  you  should  place  so 
much  confidence  in  your  fourth  brother  as  to  open 
your  mind  to  him  :  all  I  beg  is,  that  you  will  relieve 
the  anxious,  the  apprehensive  heart  of  the  best  of 
mothers ;  and,  by  so  doing,.enable  her  to  relieve  the 
equally-anxious  heart  of  the  best  of  fathers. 

She  paused,  stood  still,  turned  away  her  face,  and 
wept ;  as  if  half  overcome. 

Let  your  faithful  Camilla,  madam,  be  commission- 
ed to  acquaint  your  mamma — 

But  hold.  Sir !  (seeming  to  recollect  herself)  not 
so  fast — Open  my  mind — What,  whether  I  have  any- 
thing to  reveal,  or  not  ? — Insinuating  man  1  You  had 
almost  persuaded  me  to  think  I  had  a  secret  that  lay 
heavy  at  my  heart :  and  when,  to  oblige  you,  I  be- 
gan to  look  for  it,  1  could  not  find  it.  Pray,  Sir — 
she  stopt. 

And  pray,  madam  (taking  her  hand)  do  not  think 
of  receding  thus — 

You  are  too  free.  Sir.  Yet  she  withdrew  not  her 
hand. 

For  a  brother,  madam  ?  Too  free  for  a  brother  ? 
And  I  quitted  it. 

Well,  and  what  further  would  my  brother  ? 

Only  to  implore,  to  beseech  you,  to  reveal  to 
your  mamma,  to  your  excellent,  your  indulgent — 

Stop,  Sir,  I  beseech  you — What!  Whether  I  have 
any-thing  to  reveal,  or  not  ? — Pray,  Sir,  tell  me, 
invent  for  me,  a  secret  that  is  fit  for  me  to  own ; 
and  then,  perhaps,  if  it  will  save  the  trouble  of 
enquiries,  I  may  make,  at  least,  my  four  brothers 
'easy. 

I  am  pleased,  however,  madam,  with  your  agree- 


SIR  CHARLES    GHAND150N.  25S 

able  raillery.  Continue  but  in  this  temper,  and  the 
secret  is  revealed:  enquiry  will  be  at  an  end. 

Camilla,  here,  is  continually  teazing  me  with  her 
persuasions  to  be  in  love,  as  she  calls  it.  That  is  the 
silly  thing,  in  our  sex,  which  gives  importance  to 
yours :  a  young  creature  cannot  be  grave,  cannot 
indulge  a  contemplative  humour,  but  she  must  be  in 
love.  I  should  hate  myself,  were  I  to  put  it  in  the 
power  of  any  man  breathing  to  give  me  uneasiness. 
I  hope,  Sir,  I  hope,  that  you,  my  brother,  have  not 
so  poor,  so  low,  so  mean  a  thought  of  me. 

It  is  neither^oor,  nor  loiu;  it  is  not  mean,  to  be  in 
love,  madam. 

What !  not  with  an  improper  object  ? 

Madam ! 

What  have  I  said?  You  want  to — But  what  I  have 
now  said,  was  to  introduce  what  I  am  going  to  tell 
you ;  that  I  saw  your  insinuation,  and  what  it  tended 
to,  when  you  read  to  me  thos6  lines  of  your  Shake- 
speare ;  which  in  your  heart,  I  suppose,  you  had  the 
goodness,  or  what  shall  I  call  it  ?  to  apply  to  me.  Let 
me  see  if  I  can  repeat  them  to  you  in  their  original 
English. 

With  the  accent  of  her  country,  she  very  prettily 
repeated  those  lines : 

— — She  never  told  li*r  love; 
But  let  concealment,  like  a  worm  i'  th'  bud. 
Feed  on  her  damask  cheek  :  she  pin'd  in  thought; 
And,  with  a  green  and  yellow  melancholy, 
She  sat,  like  I'atience  on  a  monument, 
Smiling  at  grief. 

Now,  chevalier,  if  you  had  any  design  in  your 
pointing  to  these  very  pretty  lines,  I  will  only  say, 
you  are  mistaken  ;  and  so  are  all  those  who  affront 
and  afflict  me,  with  attributing  my  malady  to  so  great 
a  weakness. 

X  3 


234)  THE    HISTORY   OF 

I  meant  not  at  the  time,  madam — 

Nor  now,  I  hope,  Sir — 

Any  such  apphcation  of  the  lines.  How  could  I? 
Your  refusal  of  many  lovers ;  your  declining  the 
proposals  of  a  man  of  the  Count  of  Belvedere's  con- 
sequence and  merit ;  though  approved  of  by  every 
one  of  your  friends  ;  are  convictions — 

See,  Camilla!  interrupting  me  with  quickness,  the 
chevalier  is  convinced! — Pray  let  me  have  no  more 
o^ your  affronting  questions  and  conjectures  on  this 
subject.  I  tell  you,  Camilla,  I  would  not  be  in  love 
for  the  world,  and  all  its  glory. 

But,  madam,  if  you  will  be  pleased  to  assign  one 
cause,  to  your  mamma,  for  the  melancholy  turn  your 
lively  temper  has  taken,  you  will  free  yourself  from 
asuspicion  that  gives  you  pain,  as  well  as  displeasure. 
Perhaps  you  are  grieved,  that  you  cannot  comply 
with  your  father's  views — Perhaps — 

Assign  one  cause,  again  interrupted  she — Assign 
one  cause  ! — Why,  Sir — I  am  not  well — I  am  not 
pleased  with  myself — as  I  told  you. 

If  it  were  any-thing  that  lay  upon  your  mind, 
your  conscience,  madam  :  your  confessor — 

Would  not  make  me  easy.  He  is  a  good,  but 
[turning  aside,  and  speaking  low)  a  severe  man.  Ca- 
milla hears  not  what  I  say  [_she  had  dropt  behind'] . 
He  is  more  afraid  of  me,  in  some  cases,  than  he  need 
to  be.  And  why  ?  Because  you  have  almost  per- 
suaded me  to  think  charitably  of  people  of  different 
persuasions,  by  your  noble  charity  for  all  mankind  : 
which  I  think,  heretic  as  you  are,  forgive  me,  Sir, 
carries  an  appearance  of  true  Christian  goodness  in 
it :  though  Protestants,  it  seems,  will  persecute  one 
another  ;  but  you  would  not  be  one  of  those,  except 
you  are  one  man  in  Italy,  another  in  England. 

Your  mother,  madam,  will  ask.  If  you  have  ho- 
noured me  with  any  part  of  your  confidence  ?    Her 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDrsON.  235 

communicative  goodness  makes  her  think  every- 
body should  be  as  unreserved  as  herself.  Your  fa- 
ther is  so  good  as  to  allovo  you  to  explain  yourself 
to  me,  when  he  wishes  that  I  could  prevail  upon 
you  to  open  your  mind  to  me  in  the  character  of  a 
fourth  brother.     My  lord  the  bishop — 

Yes,  yes,  Sir,  interrupted  she,  all  our  family  wor- 
ships you  almost.  I  have  myself  a  very  great  regard 
for  you,  as  the  fourth  brother  who  has  been  the  deli- 
verer and  preserver  of  my  third.  But,  Sir,  who  can 
prevail  upon  you,  in  anything  you  are  determined 
upon  ? — Had  I  any-thing  upon  my  heart,  1  would 
not  tell  it  to  one,  who,  brought  up  in  error,  shuts 
his  eyes  against  conviction,  in  an  article  in  which 
his  everlasting  good  is  concerned.  Let  me  call  you 
a  Catholic,  Sir,  and  I  will  not  keep  a  thought  of  my 
heart  from  you.  You  shall  indeed  be  my  brother ; 
and  I  shall  free  one  of  the  holiest  of  men  from  his 
apprehensions  on  my  conversing  with  so  determined 
a  heretic  as  he  thinks  you.  Then  shall  you,  as  my 
brother,  command  those  secrets,  if  any  I  have,  from 
that  heart  in  which  you  think  them  locked  up. 

Why,  then,  madam,  will  you  not  declare  them  to 
your  mamma,  to  your  confessor,  to  my  lord  bishop  ? 
Did  I  not  say.  If  any  I  have? 
And  is  your  reverend  confessor  uneasy  at  the  fa- 
vour of  the  family  to  me  ! — How  causeless! — Have 
I  ever,  madam,  talked  with  you  on  the  subject  of 
religion? 

Well  but,  Sir,  are  you  so  obstinately  determined 
in  your  errors,  that  there  is  no  hope  of  convincing 
you  ?  I  really  look  upon  you,  as  my  father  and  mo- 
ther first  bid  me  do,  as  my  fourth  brother:  I  should 
be  glad  that  all  my  brothers  were  of  one  religion. 
Will  you  allow  Father  Marescotti  and  Father  Geral- 
dino  to  enter  into  a  conference  with  you  on  tliis 


236  THE    HISTORY   OF 

subject?  And  if  they  answer  all  your  objections, 
will  you  act  according  to  your  convictions  ? 

I  will  not,  by  any  means,  madam,  enter  upon  this 
subject. 

I  have  long  intended,  Sir,  to  propose  this  matter 
to  you. 

You  have  often  intimated  as  much,  madam,  though 
not  so  directly  as  now ;  but  the  religion  of  my  coun- 
try is  the  religion  of  my  choice.  I  have  a  great  deal 
to  say  for  it.  It  will  not  be  heard  with  patience  by 
such  strict  professors  as  either  of  those  you  have 
named.  Were  I  to  be  questioned  on  this  subject 
before  the  Pope,  and  the  whole  Sacred  College,  I 
would  not  prevaricate:  but  good  manners  will  make 
me  shew  respect  to  the  religion  of  the  country  I 
happen  to  be  in,  were  it  the  Mahometan,  or  even  the 
Pagan ;  and  to  venerate  the  good  men  of  it :  but  I 
never  will  enter  into  debate  upon  the  subject  as  a 
traveller,  a  sojourner;  that  is  a  rule  with  me. 

Well,  Sir,  you  are  an  obstinate  man,  that's  all  1 
will  say.  I  pity  you  ;  with  all  my  soul  I  pity  you : 
you  have  great  and  good  qualities.  As  I  have  sat  at 
table  with  you,  and  heard  you  converse  on  subjects 
that  every  one  has  in  silence  admired  you  for,  1  have 
often  thought  to  myself,  surely  this  man  was  not 
designed  for  perdition ! — But  begone,  chevalier  ; 
leave  me.  You  are  an  obstinate  man.  Yours  is  the 
tvorst  of  obstinacy ;  for  you  will  not  give  yourself  a 
chance  for  conviction. 

We  have  so  far  departed  from  the  subject  we  be- 
gan upon,  that  it  is  proper  to  obey  you,  madam.  I 
only  beg  that  my  sister — 

Not  so  far  departed  from  it,  perhaps,  as  you 
imagine,  inten-upted  she;  and  turned  a  blushing 
cheek  from  me — But  ivhat  do  you  beg  of  your  sis- 
ter? 


i 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  237 

That  she  will  rejoice  the  most  indulgent  of  pa- 
rents and  the  most  affectionate  of  brothers,  with  a 
cheerful  aspect  at  table,  especially  before  the  pa- 
triarch.    Do  not,  madam,  in  silence — 

You  find,  Sir,  I  have  been  talkative  enough  with 
ou. — Shall  we  go  throughyour  Shakespeare's Ham- 
et  to-night  ? — Farewell,  chevalier.  I  will  try  to  be 
cheerful  at  table :  but,  if  I  am  not,  let  not  your  eye 
reproach  me — She  took  another  walk. 

I  was  loth,  my  dear  Dr.  Bartlett,  to  impute  to  my- 
self the  consequence  with  this  amiable  lady,  which 
might  but  naturally  be  inferred  from  the  turn  which 
the  conversation  took ;  but  1  thought  it  no  more 
than  justice  to  the  whole  family,  to  hasten  my  de- 
parture :  and  when  I  hinted  to  Clementina,  that  I 
should  soon  take  leave  of  them,  I  was  rejoiced  to 
find  her  unconcerned. 

This,  my  good  Miss  Byron,  is  what  I  find  in  my 
patron's  letters  relating  to  this  conference.  He 
takes  notice,  that  the  young  lady  behaved  herself 
at  table  as  she  was  wished  to  do. 

Mr.  Grandison  was  prevailed  upon,  by  the  en- 
treaties of  the  whole  family,  to  suspend  his  depar- 
ture for  a  few  days. 

The  young  lady's  melancholy,  to  the  inexpressible 
affliction  of  her  friends,  increased ;  yet  she  behaved 
with  so  much  greatness  of  mind,  that  neither  her 
mother  nor  her  Camilla  could  persuade  themselves 
that  love  was  the  cause.  They  sometimes  imagined, 
that  the  earnestness  with  which  they  solicited  the 
interest  of  the  Count  of  Belvedere  with  her,  had 
hurried  and  affected  her  delicate  spirits ;  and  there- 
fore they  were  resolved  to  say  little  more  on  that 
subject  till  they  should  see  her  disposed  to  lend  a 
more  favourable  ear  to  it :  and  the  count  retired  to 
his  own  palace  in  Parma,  expecting  and  hoping  for 


238  THE   HISTORY  OF 

such  a  turn  in  his  favour  :  for  he  declared,  that  it 
was  impossible  for  him  to  think  of  any  other  woman 
for  a  wife. 

But  Signor  Jeronymo  doubted  not,  all  this  time, 
of  the  cause  ;  and,  without  letting  any-body  into  his 
opinion,  not  even  Mr.  Grandison,  for  fear  a  disap- 
pointment should  affect  him,  resolved  to  make  use  of 
every  opportunity  that  should  offer,  in  favour  of  the 
man  he  loved,  from  a  principle  of  gratitude,  that 
reigned  with  exemplary  force  in  the  breast  of  every 
one  of  this  noble  family :  a  principle  which  took  the 
firmer  root  in  their  hearts,  as  the  prudence,  genero- 
sity, magnanimity,  and  other  great  and  equally 
amiable  qualities  of  Mr.  Grandison,  appeared  every 
day  more  and  more  conspicuous  to  them  all. 

1  will  soon,  madam,  present  you  with  further  ex- 
tracts from  the  letters  in  my  possession,  in  pursuance 
of  the  articles  you  have  given  me  in  writing.  I  am 
not  a  little  proud  of  my  task. 

CONTINUATION  OF  MISS  BYROn's  LETTER, 
BEGUN   P.   208. 

Can  you  not,  Lucy, .  gather  from  the  setting-out 
of  this  story,  and  the  short  account  of  it  given  by 
Sir  Charles  in  the  library-conference,  that  I  shall 
soon  pay  my  duty  to  you  all  in  Northamptonshire  ? 
I  shall,  indeed. 

Is  it  not  strange,  my  dear,  that  a  father  and  mo- 
ther, and  brother,  so  jealous,  as  Italians,  in  general, 
are  said  to  be,  of  their  women ;  and  so  proud  as  this 
Bologna  family  is  represented  to  be  of  their  rank  ; 
should  all  agree  to  give  so  fine  a  man,  as  this  is,  in 
mind,  person,  and  address,  such  free  access^to  their 
daughter,  a  young  lady  of  eighteen  ? 

Teach  her  English ! — Very  discreet  in  the  father 
and  mother,  surely !  And  to  commission  him  to  talk_ 


SIR   CHAKLES    GRANDISON.  239 

with  the  poor  girl  in  ftivour  of  a  man  whom  they 
wished  her  to  marry! — Indeed  you  will  say,  perhaps, 
that  by  the  honourable  expedient  they  fell  upon,  un- 
known to  either  tutor  or  pupil,  of  listening  to  all  that 
was  to  pass  in  the  conference,  they  found  a  method  to 
prove  his  integrity ;  and  that,  finding  it  proof,  they 
were  justified  to  prudence  in  their  future  confidence. 

With  allmy  heart,  Lucy:  if  you  will  excuse  these 
parents,  you  may.  But  I  say,  that  a??^-body,  though 
not  of  Italy,  might  have  thought  such  a  tutor  as  this 
was  dangerous  to  a  young  lady ;  and  the  more,  for 
being  a  man  of  honour  and  family.  In  every  case, 
the  teacher  is  the  obliger.  He  is  called  7naster,  you 
know ;  and  where  there  is  a  master,  a  servant  is  im- 
plied. Who  is  it  that  seeks  not  out  for  a  married 
man,  among  the  common  tribe  of  tutors,  whether 
professing  music,  dancing,  languages,  science  of 
any  kind?  But  a  tutor  such  a  one  as  this — 

Well,  but  I  will  leave  them  to  pay  the  price  of 
their  indiscretion. 


I  am  this  moment  come  from  the  doctor,  I  in- 
sinuated to  him,  as  artfully  as  I  could,  some  of  the 
above  observations.  He  reminded  me,  that  the 
marchioness  herself  had  her  education  at  Paris;  and 
says,  that  the  manners  of  the  Italians  are  very  much 
altered  of  late  years  ;  and  that  the  French  freedom 
begins  to  take  place  among  the  people  of  condition, 
in  a  very  visible  manner,  of  the  Italian  reserve.  The 
women  of  the  family  of  Porretta,  particularly,  he 
says,  because  of  their  learning,  freedom,  and  con- 
versableness,  have  been  called,  by  their  enemies, 
French-women. 

But  you  will  see,  that  honour,  and  the  laws  of 
hospitality,  were  INIr.  Grandison's  guard  :   and  I 


240  THE    HISTORY    OF 

believe  a  young  flame  may  be  easily  kept  under.  Sir 
Charles  Grandison,  Lucy,  is  used  to  do  only  what 
he  ought.  Dr.  Bartlett  once  said,  that  the  life  of  a 
good  man  was  a  continual  warfare  with  his  passions. 
You  will  see,  in  the  second  conference  between 
Mr.  Grandison  and  the  lady,  upon  the  melancholy 
'  way  she  was  in,  how  artfully,  yet,  I  must  own,  ho- 
nourably, he  reminds  her  of  the  brotherly  character 
which  he  passes  under  to  her!  Kow  officiously  he  . 
sisters  her ! 

Ah,  Lucy !  your  Harriet  is  his  sister  too,  you 
know !  He  has  been  iLsed  to  this  dialect,  and  to  check 
the  passions  of  us  forward  girls;  and  yet  I  have  gone 
on  confessing  mine  to  the  whole  venerable  circle, 
and  have  almost  gloried  in  it  to  them.  Have  not 
also  his  sisters  detected  me  ?  While  the  noble  Cle- 
mentina, as  in  that  admirable  passage  cited  by  her 

Never  told  her  love. 


But  let  concealment,  like  a  worm  i'  th'  bud, 
Feed  on  her  damask  cheek. 

How  do  I  admire  her  for  her  silence !  But  yet, 
had  she  been  circumstanced  as  your  Harriet  was, 
would  Clementina  have  been  so  very  reserved  ? 

Shall  I  run  a  parallel  between  our  two  cases  ? 

Clementina's  relations  Harriet's  relations  were 
were  all  solicitous  for  all  solicitous,  from  the 
hermatryingtheCount  first,  for  an  alliance 
of  Belvedere,  a  man  of  with  their  child's  deli- 
unexceptionable  cha-  verer.  They  never  had 
racter,  of  family,  of  encouraged  any  man's 
fortune;  and  who  is  address;  nor  had  sAc 
said  to  be  a  gallant  and  and  all  his  nearest  and 
a  handsome  man,  and  dearest  friends  were 
who  adores  her,  and  is  partial  to  her,  and  soon 
of  her  own  feith  and  grew  ardent  in  her  fa- 
country,  vour. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON. 


241 


What  difficulties  had 
Clementina  to  con- 
tend with!  It  was 
great  in  her  to  endea- 
vour to  conquer  a 
love,  which  she  could 
not,  either  in  duty,  or 
with  her  judgment 
and  conscience,  ac- 
knowledge. 


No  wonder,  then,  that  so 
excellent  a  young  la- 
dy suffered  conceal- 
ment, like  a  worm  in 
the  bud,  tnjeed  on  her 
damask  cheeks 


Harriet,  not  knowing  of 
any  engagement  he 
had,  could  have  no 
difficulties  to  contend 
with ;  except  inferiori- 
ty of  fortune  were  one. 
She  had  therefore  no 
reason  to  endeavour  to 
conquer  a  passion  not 
ignobly  founded;  and 
of  which  duty,  judg- 
ment, and  conscience, 
approved. 

Suspense  therefore,  only, 
and  not  concealment 
(since  every  one  called 
upon  Harriet  to  ac- 
knowledge her  love) 
could  feed  on  her  cheek. 


And  is  not  suspense  enough  to  make  it  pale, 
though  it  has  not  yet  given  it  a  green  and  yelloto  cast? 
O  what  tortures  has  suspense  given  me !  But  cer- 
taintj'  is  now  taking  place. 

What  a  right  method,  Lucy,  did  Clementina,  so 
much  in  earnest  in  her  own  persuasion,  take,  in  this 
second  conference,  could  she  have  succeeded,  in 
her  solicitude  for  his  change  of  religion!— Could 
that  have  been  effected,  I  dare  say  she  would  have 
been  less  reserved,  as  to  the  cause  of  her  melan- 
choly; especially  as  her  friends  were  all  as  indulgent 
to  her  as  mine  are  to  me. 

But  my  pity  for  the  noble  Clementina  begins  to 
take  great  hold  of  my  heart.  I  long  to  have  the 
whole  before  me. 

Adieu,  Lucy :  if  I  write  more,  it  will  be  all  a  re- 
capitulation of  the  doctor's  letter.  I  can  think  of 
nothing  else. 


24f2  THE    HISTORY   OF      , 

LETTER    XXIII. 

MISS    BYRON.       IN   CONTINUATION, 

Tuesday,  March  28. 
Let  me  now  give  you  a  brief  account  of  what  we 
are  doing  here.  Sir  Charles  so  much  rejoiced  the 
heart  of  Lord  G.  who  waited  on  him  the  moment 
he  knew  he  was  in  town,  that  he  could  not  defer  his 
attendance  on  Miss  Grandison,  till  she  left  Colne- 
brook :  and  got  hither  by  our  breakfast-time  this 
morning. 

He  met  with  a  very  kind  reception  from  Lord  and 
Lady  L.  and  a  civil  one  from  Miss  Grandison  ;  but 
she  is  already  beginning  to  play  her  tricks  with  him. 

O  Lucy,  where  is  the  sense  of  parading  it  with  a 
worthy  man,  of  whose  affection  we  have  no  reason 
to  doubt,  and  whose  visits  we  allow? 

Silly  men  in  love,  or  pretending  to  be  in  love, 
generally  say  hyperbolical  things,  all,  in  short,  that 
could  be  said  to  a  creature  of  superior  order  (to  an 
angel) :  because  they  know  not  how  to  say  polite, 
proper,  or  sensible  things.  In  like  manner,  from  the 
same  defects  in  understanding,  some  of  us  women 
act  as  if  we  thought  coyness  and  modesty  the  same 
thing  ;  and  others,  as  if  they  were  sensible,  that  if 
they  were  not  insolent,  they  must  drop  into  the  arms 
of  a  lover  upon  his  first  question. 

But  Miss  Grandison,  in  her  behaviour  to  Lord  G. 
is  governed  by  motives  of  archness,  and,  I  may  say, 
downright  roguery  of  temper.  Courtship  is  play  to 
her.  She  has  a  talent  for  raillery,  and  in  no  instance 
is  so  successful,  yet  so  improper,  as  on  that  subject. 
She  could  not  spare  her  brother  upon  it,  though  she 
suffered  by  it. 

Yet  had  she  a  respect  for  Lord  G.  she  could  not 
3 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON,  243 

treat  him  ludicrously.  Cannot  a  witty  woman  find\ 
her  own  consequence,  but  by  putting  a  fool's  coat 
on  the  back  of  a  friend? — Sterling  wit,  I  imagine, 
requires  not  a  foil  to  set  it  off. 

She  is  indeed  good-natured ;  and  this  is  all  LordG. 
has  to  depend  upon — Saving  a  little  reliance  that  he 
may  make  upon  the  influence  her  brother  has  over 
her.  1  told  her,  just  now,  that  were  I  Lord  G.  I 
would  not  wish  to  have  her  mine,  on  any  considera- 
tion. She  called  me  silly  creature,  and  asked  me, 
If  it  were  not  one  of  the  truest  signs  of  love,  when 
men  were  most  fond  of  the  women  who  were  least 
fit  for  them,  and  used  them  worst?  These  men,  my 
dear,  said  she,  are  very  sorry  creatures,  and  know 
no  medium.  They  will  either,  spaniel-like,  fawn  at 
your  feet,  or  be  ready  to  leap  into  your  lap. 

She  has  charming  spirits :  I  wish  I  could  borrow 
some  of  them.  But  I  tell  her,  that  I  would  not  have 
a  single  drachm  of  those  over-lively  ones  which  I  see 
she  will  plaij  off  upon  Lord  G.  Yet  he  will  be 
pleased,  at  present,  with  any  treatment  from  her ; 
though  he  wants  not  feeling,  as  I  can  see  already — 
Don't,  Charlotte,  said  I  to  her,  within  this  half-hour, 
let  him  find  his  own  weight  in  your  levity.  He  ad- 
mires your  wit ;  but  don't  let  it  wound  him. 

But  perhaps  she  is  the  sprightlier,  in  order  to  give 
me,  and  Lord  and  Lady  L.  spirits.  They  are  very 
good  to  me,  and  greatly  apprehensive  of  the  story, 
which  takes  up,  in  a  manner,  my  whole  attention : 
so  is  Miss  Grandison :  and  my  sweet  Emily,  as  often 
as  she  may,  comes  up  to  me  when  I  am  alone,  and 
hangs  upon  my  arm,  my  shoulder ;  and  watches,  with 
looks  of  love,  every  turn  of  my  eyes. 

I  have  opened  my  whole  heart  to  her,  for  the  bet- 
ter guarding  of  hers;  and  this  history  of  Clementina 
affords  an  excellent  lesson  for  the  good  girl.     She 
bjesses  me  for  the  lectures  I  read  her  on  this  subject, 
y2 


V 


24<4«  THE    HISTORY    OF 

and  says,  that  she  sees  love  is  a  very  subtile  thing, 
and,  like  water,  will  work  its  way  through  the  banks 
that  are  set  up  to  confine  it,  if  it  be  not  watched, 
and  dammed  out  in  time. 

She  pities  Clementina;  and  prettily  asked  my 
leave  to  do  so.  I  think,  said  she,  my  heart  loves 
her;  but  not  so  well  as  it  does  you.  I  long  to  know 
what  my  guardian  will  do  about  her.  How  good  is 
it  in  her  father  and  mother  to  love  her  so  dearly ! 
Her  two  elder  brothers  one  cannot  dislike;  but 
Jeronymo  is  my  favourite.  He  is  a  man  worth  sav- 
ing ;  isn't  he,  madam  ?  But  I  pity  her  father  and 
mother,  as  well  as  Clementina. 

Charming  young  creature  1  What  an  excellent 
heart  she  has ! 

Sir  Charles  is  to  dine  with  Sir  Hargrave  and  his 
friends  to-morrow,  on  the  forest,  in  his  way  to 
Grandison-hall.  The  doctor  says,  he  expects  to  hear 
from  him,  when  there.  What!  will  he  go  by  this 
house,  and  not  call  in? — With  all  my  heart. — We 
are ow/y  sisters!  MissGrandison  says,  sne'll  be  hanged 
(that  is  her  word)  if  he  is  not  afraid  of  me.  Afraid 
of  me !  A  sign,  if  he  is,  he  knows  not  what  a  poor 
forward  creature  I  am.  But  as  he  seems  to  be  pre- 
engaged— Well,  but  I  shall  soon  know  every-thing, 
as  to  that.     But  sure  he  might  call  in  as  he  went  by. 

The  doctor  says,  he  longs  to  know  how  he  ap- 
proves of  the  decorations  of  his  church,  and  of  the 
alterations  that  are  made  and  making,  by  his  di- 
rection, at  the  hall. 

He  has  a  great  taste,  the  doctor  tells  us,  yet  not 
an  expensive  one;  for  he  studies  situation  and  conve- 
nience, and  pretends  not  to  level  hills,  or  to  force 
and  distort  nature ;  but  to  help  it,  as  he  finds  it, 
without  letting  art  be  seen  in  his  works,  where  he 
can  possibly  avoid  it.  For  he  says,  He  would  rather 
let  a  stranger  be  pleased  with  what  he  sees,  as  if  it 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON,  245 

were  always  so;  than  to  obtain  comparative  praise  by 
informing  him  what  it  was  in  its  former  situation. 

As  he  is  to  be  a  suitor  for  Lord  W.  before  he  re- 
turns, he  will  not,  perhaps,  be  with  us,  while  I  am 
here.  He  may  court  for  others  :  he  has  had  very 
little  trouble  of  that  sort  for  himself,  I  find. 

A  very  disturbing  thought  is  just  come  into  my 
head:  Sir  Charles  being  himself  in  suspense,  as  to 
the  catastrophe  of  this  knotty  affair,  did  not  intend 
to  let  us  know  it  till  all  was  over — As  sure  as  you 
are  alive,  Lucy,  he  had  seen  my  regard  for  him     ■. 
through  the  thin  veil  that  covered  it;  and  began  tonJ' 
be  apprehensive  ( generousli/  apprehensive)  for  the  ' 
heart  of  the  poor  fool ;  and  so  has  suffered  Dr. 
Bartlett  to  transcribe  the  particulars  of  the  story, 
that  they  may  serve  for  a  check  to  the  over-forward   1 
passion  of  your  Harriet. 

This  thought  excites  my  pride;  and  that  my  con- 
tempt of  myself:  near  borderers,  Lucy ! — Wliat  a 
little  creature  does  it  make  me,  in  my  own  eyes  1 
— O  Dr.  Bartlett,  your  kindly-intended  transcripts 
shall  cure  me:  indeed  they  shall. 

But  now  this  subject  has  got  uppermost  again. 
What,  Lucy,  can  I  do  with  it? 

Miss  Grandison  says,  that  I  shall  be  with  her 
every  day  when  I  go  to  town:  I  can  have  no  ex- 
ception, she  says,  when  her  brother  is  absent — Nor 
when  he  is  present,  I  begin  now  to  think. 

Lord  help  me,  my  dear!  I  must  be  so  very  careful 
of  my  punctilio! — No,  thought  I,  in  the  true  spirit 
of  prudery,  I  will  not  go  to  Sir  Charles's  house  for 
the  world:  and  why?  Because  he  is  a  single  man; 
and  because  I  think  of  something — that  he  perhaps 
has  no  notion  of.  But  now  I  may  go  and  visit  his 
sister  without  scruple,  may  I  not  ?  For  he  perhaps 
thinks  only  of  his  Clementina — And  is  not  this  ^ 
y3 


246  THE    HISTORY   OK 

charming  difficulty  got  over,  Lucy? — But  as  I  said, 
I  will  soon  be  with  you. 

I  told  Miss  Grandison  that  I  tvould,  just  now — 
Lovers,  said  she,  are  the  weakest  people  in  the 
world ;  and  people  of  punctilio  the  most  wn-punctili- 
ous — You  have  not  talked  till  now  of  going  in  such 
a  hurry.  Would  you  have  it  thought  that  you  staid 
in  town  for  a  particular  reason  ? — and,  when  that 
ceased,  valued  nobody  else? — She  held  up  her  finger 
— Consider!  said  she. 

There  is  something  in  this,  Lucy.  Yet  what  can 
I  do? 

But  Dr.  Bartlett  says,  he  shall  soon  give  me  an- 
other letter. 

Farewell,  my  dear. 


LETTER  XXIV. 

MISS  BYRON.     IN  CONTINUATION. 

Wednesday,  March  29. 
Sir  Charles  came  hither  this  morning,  time  enough 
to  breakfast  with  us. 

Lady  L.  is  not  an  early  riser.  I  am  sure  this  bro- 
ther of  hers  is :  so  is  Miss  Grandison.  If  I  say  /  am, 
my  Lucy,  I  will  not  allow  you  to  call  it  boasting, 
because  you  will,  by  so  calling  it,  acknowledge  early 
rising  to  be  a  virtue;  and  if  you  thought  it  such,  I 
am  sure  you  would  distinguish  it  by  your  practice. 
Forgive  me,  ray  dear ;  this  is  the  only  point  in 
which  you  and  I  have  differed — And  why  have  I  In 
the  main  so  patiently  suffered  this  difference,  and  not 
tried  to  teaze  you  out  of  it  ?  Because  my  Lucy  al- 
ways so  well  employs  her  time  when  she  is  alive. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISOK.  247 

But  would  not  one  the  more  wish  that  well-employed 
life  to  be  made  as  long  as  possible? 

I  endeavoured  to  be  very  cheerful  at  breakfast ; 
but  1  believemybehaviourwasawkward  and  affected. 
After  Sir  Charles  was  gone,  on  my  putting  the  ques- 
tion to  the  two  sisters,  Whether  it  was  not  so?  they 
acquitted  me — Yet  my  heart,  when  in  his  company, 
laboured  with  a  sense  of  constraint. 

My  pride  made  me  want  to  find  out  pity  for  me 
in  his  looks  and  behaviour,  on  purpose  to  quarrel 
with  him  in  my  mind ;  for  I  could  not  get  out  of  my 
head  that  degrading  surmise,  that  he  had  permitted 
Dr.  Bartlett  to  hasten  to  me  the  history  of  Clemen- 
tina, in  order  generously  to  check  any  hopes  that  I 
might  entertain,  before  they  had  too  strongly  taken 
hold  of  my  foolish  heart. 

But  nothing  of  this  was  discoverable.  Respect, 
tender  respect,  appeared,  as  the  ladies  afterwards 
took  notice,  in  every  word,  when  he  addressed  him- 
self to  me ;  in  every  look  that  he  cast  upon  me. 

He  studiously  avoided  speaking  of  the  Bologna 
family.  We  were  not  indeed  any  of  us  fond  of 
leading  to  the  subject. 

I  am  sure,  1  pitied  him. 

Pity,  my  dear,  is  a  softer  passion,  I  dare  say,  in 
the  bosom  of  a  woman,  than  in  that  of  a  man. 
There  is,  there  vmst  be,  I  should  fancy,  more  gene- 
rosity, more  tenderness,  in  the  pity  of  the  one,  than 
in  that  of  the  other.  In  a  man's  pity  [I  write  in  the 
first  case  from  my  own  sensibilities,  in  the  other  from 
my  apprehensions]  there  is,  too  probably,  a  mixture 
of  insult  or  contempt.  Unhappy,  indeed,  must  the 
woman  be,  who  has  drawn  upon  her  the  helpless 
pity  of  the  man  she  loves ! 

The  ladies  and  lord  L.  will  have  it,  that  Sir 
Charles's  love,  however,  is  not  so  much  engaged  for 
Clementina  as  his  compassion.  They  are  my  sincere 
5 


248  THE    HISTORY   OF 

friends:  they  see  that  I  am  pretty  dehcate  in  my  no- 
tions of  a  first  love;  and  they  generously  endeavour 
to  inculcate  this  distinction  upon  me:  but  to  what 
purpose,  when  we  evidently  see,  from  what  we  al- 
ready know  of  this  stor}^,  that  his  engagements,  be 
the  motive  what  it  will,  are  of  such  a  nature,  that 
they  cannot  be  dispensed  with  while  this  lady's  des- 
tiny is  undetermined  ? 

Poor  Lady  Clementina!  From  my  heart  I  pity 
her :  and  tenderness,  I  am  sure,  is  the  sole  motive 
of  my  compassion  for  this  fair  unfortunate. 

Sir  Charles  set  out,  immediately  after  breakfast, 
for  Sir  Hargrave's.     He  will  dine  with  him,  and 
intends  to  pass  the  evening  with  Lord  W.    We 
phall  all  go  to  town  to-morrow. 
*     * 

With  this  I  send  the  doctor's  second  pacquet.  O 
my  dear!  What  a  noble  young  lady  is  Clementina ! 
What  a  purity  is  there  in  her  passion!  A  letter  of 
Mrs.  Beaumont  (Mrs.  Beaumont  herself  an  excellent 
woman)  will  shew  you,  that  Clementina  deserves 
every  good  wish..  Such  a  noble  struggle  did  I  never 
hear  of,  between  religion  and  love.  O  Lucy !  you 
will  be  delighted  with  Clementina:  you  will  even, 
for  awhile,  forget  your  Harriet;  or,  if  you  are  just, 
will  think  of  her  but  next  after  Clementina!  Never 
did  a  young  lady  do  more  honour  to  her  sex,  than 
is  done  it  by  Clementina!  A  flame  the  most  vehe- 
ment, suppressed  from  motives  of  piety,  till,  poor 
lady!  it  has  devoured  her  intellects! 

Read  the  letter,  and  be  lost,  as  I  was,  for  half  an 
hour  after  I  had  read  it,  in  silent  admiration  of  her 
fortitude!  O  my  dear!  she  must  be  rewarded  with 
a  Sir  Charles  Grandison  !  My  reason,  my  justice, 
compel  from  me  my  vote  in  her  favour. 

My  Lord  L.  and  the  two  ladies  admire  her  as  much 
as  T  do.    They  look  at  me  with  eyes  of  tender  con- 


SIR  CHARLES    GRANDISON.  249' 

cern.  They  say  little.  What  crtw  they  say  ? — But 
they  kindly  applaud  me  for  my  unfeigned  admiration 
of  this  extraordinary  young  lady.  But  where  is  my 
merit  ?     Who  can  forbear  admiring  her  ? 

DR.  BARTLETt's  second  LETTER. 

Your  fourth  enquiry,  madam,  is, 

Whether  the  particularly  cheerful  behaviour  of 
the  young  lady,  on  the  departure  of  Mr.  Grnn- 
disonjrom  Bologna,  after  a  course  of  melan- 
choly, is  any  xohere  accounted  for? 

And  your  fifth  is,  What  tvere  the  particulars  of 

Mrs.  Beaumonfs  management  of  the  lady,  at 

Florence,  by  tuhich  she  brought  her  to  own  her 

love,  after  she  had  so  long  kept  it  a  secret 

from  her  mother,  and  all  her  family  ? 

What  I  shall  transcribe,  in  order  to  satisfy  you, 
madam,  with  regard  to  the  fifth  article,  will  include 
all  that  you  can  wish  to  be  informed  of,  respecting 
the  fourth. 

But  let  me  premise,  that  Mrs.  Beaumont,  at  the 
request  of  the  marchioness,  undertook  to  give  an  ac- 
count of  the  health  of  the  young  lady,  and  what 
effect  the  change  of  air,  of  place,  and  her  advice, 
had  upon  her  mind,  after  she  had  been  at  Florence, 
for  two  or  three  days.  She,  on  the  fourth  day  of 
their  being  together,  wrote  to  that  lady  the  desired 

{)articulars.  The  following  is  a  translation  of  her 
etter : 

Your  ladyship  will  excuse  me  for  not  writing  till 
now,  when  you  are  acquainted,  that  it  was  not  be- 
fore last  night  that  I  could  give  you  any  tolerable 


^SO  THE   HISTORY   OP 

satisfaction  on  the  subject  upon  which  I  had  en- 
gaged to  do  myself  that  honour. 

1  have  made  myself  mistress  of  the  dear  young 
lady's  secret.  Your  ladyship  guessed  it,  perhaps, 
too  well.  Love,  but  a  pure  and  laudable  love,  is 
the  malady  that  has  robbed  her  of  her  tranquillity  for 
so  long  a  space,  and  your  splendid  family  of  all 
comfort :  but  such  a  magnanimity  shewn,  or  endea- 
voured at,  that  she  deserves  to  be  equally  pitied 
and  admired.  What  is  it  that  the  dear  young  lady 
has  not  suffered  in  a  conflict  between  her  duty,  her 
religion,  and  her  love  ? 

The  discovery,  I  am  afraid,  will  not  give  pleasure 
to  your  family ;  yet  certainty,  in  what  must  be,  is 
better  than  suspense.  You  will  think  me  a  managing 
person,  perhaps,  from  the  relation  I  have  to  give 
you :  but  it  was  the  task  prescribed  me ;  and  you 
commanded  me  to  be  very  minute  in  the  account 
of  all  my  dealings  with  her,  that  you  might  know 
how  to  conduct  yourselves  to  her  for  the  cure  of 
the  unhappy  malady.     I  obey. 

The  first  and  second  days,  after  oiir  return  to  Flo- 
rence, were  passed  in  endeavouring  to  divert  her,  as 
our  guest,  in  all  the  ways  we  could  think  of:  but 
finding,  that  company  was  irksome  to  her,  and  that 
she  only  bore  with  it  for  politeness-sake ;  I  told  the 
ladies,  that  I  would  take  her  entirely  into  ray  own 
care,  and  devote  my  whole  time  to  her  service. 
They  acquiesced :  and  when  I  told  Lady  Clemen- 
tina of  my  intention,  she  rejoiced  at  it,  and  did  me 
the  honour  to  assure  me,  that  my  conversation  would 
be  balm  to  her  heart,  if  she  could  enjoy  it  without 
mixt  company. 

Your  ladyship  will  see,  however,  from  what  I  have 
mentioned  of  her  regard  for  me,  that  I  had  made  use 
of  my  time  in  the  two  past  days  to  ingratiate  myself 
into  the  favour  of  your  Clementina.    She  will  have 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  251 

me  call  her  nothing  but  Clementina :  excuse  there- 
fore, madam,  the  freedom  of  my  stile. 

She  engaged  me  last  night  to  give  her  a  lesson,  as 
she  called  it,  in  an  English  author.  1  was  surprised 
at  her  proficiency  in  my  native  tongue.  Ah,  my 
dear !  said  I,  what  an  admirable  manner  of  teaching 
must  your  tutor  have  had,  if  I  am  to  judge  by  the 
greac  progress  you  have  made  in  so  short  a  time,  ia 
the  acquiring  of  a  tongue  that  has  not  the  sweetness 
of  your  own,  though  it  has  a  force  and  expressive- 
ness that  is  more  than  equal,  I  think,  to  any  of  the 
modern  languages ! 

She  blushed — Do  you  think  so?  said  she — And  I 
saw,  by  the  turn  of  her  eye,  and  her  consciousness, 
that  I  had  no  need  to  hint  to  her  Count  MaruUi,  nor 
any  other  man. 

1  took  upon  me,  without  pushing  her,  just  then, 
upon  the  supposed  light  dropt  in  from  this  little  in- 
cident, to  mention  the  Count  of  Belvedere,  with  dis- 
tinction, as  the  marquis  desired  I  would. 

She  said,  she  could  not  by  any  means  think  of 
him. 

I  told  her,  that  as  all  her  family  approved  highly 
of  the  count,  I  thought  they  were  intitled  to  know 
her  objections  ;  and  to  judge  of  the  reasonableness 
or  unreasonableness  of  them.  Indeed,  my  dear,- 
said  I,  you  do  not,  in  this  point,  treat  your  father 
and  mother  with  the  dutifulness  that  tlieir  indul- 
gence deserves.  I 

She  started.  That  is  severely  said ;  is  it  not, 
madam  ? 

Consider  of  it,  my  dear,  and  if  you  pronounce  it 
80,  after  an  hour's  reflection,  I  will  call  it  so,  and 
ask  your  pardon. 

I  am  afraid,  said  she,  I  am  iu  fault.  I  have  the 
best  and  most  indulgent  of  parents.  There  are  some 
things,  some  secrets,  that  one  cannot  be  forward  to 


252  THE  HISTORY    OT 

divulge.  One  should  perhaps  be  commanded  out 
of  them  with  a  high  hand. 

Your  acknowledgment,  ray  dear,  said  I,  is  more 
generous  than  the  occasion  given  for  it :  but  if  you 
will  not  think  me  impertinent — 

Don't,  don't,  ask  me  too  close  questions,  madam, 
interrupted  she ;  I  am  afraid  I  can  deny  you  no- 
thing. 

I  am  persuaded,  my  dear  Clementina,  that  the 
mutual  unbosoming  of  secrets  is  the  cement  of  faith- 
ful friendship,  and  true  love.  Whenever  any  new 
turn  in  one's  affairs  happens,  whenever  any  new 
lights  open,  the  friendly  heart  rests  not,  till  it  has 
communicated  to  its  fellow-heart  the  new  lights,  the 
interesting  events ;  and  this  communicativeness  knits 
the  true  lover's  knot  still  closer.  But  what  a  solita- 
riness, what  a  gloom,  what  a  darkness,  must  possess 
that  mind  which  can  trust  no  friend  with  its  inmost 
thoughts !  The  big  secret,  when  it  is  of  an  interest- 
ing nature,  will  swell  the  heart  till  it  is  ready  to  burst. 
Deep  melancholy  must  follow- — I  would  not  for  the 
world  have  it  so  much  as  thought,  that  1  had  not  a 
soul  large  enough  for  friendship.  And  is  not  the 
essence  of  friendship  communication,  mingling  of 
hearts,  and  emptying  our  very  soul  into  that  of  a 
■  true  friend  ? 

Why,  that's  true.  But,  madam,  a  young  creature 
maybe  so  circumstanced  as  not  to  have  a  true  friend; 
or,  if  she  has  near  her  a  person  to  whom  she  might 
communicate  her  whole  mind  without  doubt  of  her 
Jidelity,  yet  there  may  be  a  forbiddingness  in  the 
person ;  a  difference  in  years ;  in  degree ;  as  in  my 
Camilla,  who  is,  however,  a  very  good  woman — We 
people  of  condition,  madam,  have  more  courtiers 
about  us  than  friends:  but  Camilla's  fault  is  teazing, 
and  always  harping  upon  one  string,  and  that  by 
my  friends  commands :  it  would  be  therefore  more 


SIR    CHARLES   GRANDISON.  253 

laudable  to  open  my  mind  to  my  mother,  than  to 
her;  as  it  would  be  the  same  thmg. 

Very  true,  my  dear  :  and  as  you  have  a  mother, 
who  is  less  of  the  mother  than  she  would  be  of  the 
sister,  the  friend;  it  is  amazing  to  me,  that  you  have 
kept  such  a  mother  in  the  dark  so  long. 

What  can  I  say? — Ah,  madam ! — There  she  stopt. 
At  last  said,  But  my  mother  is  in  the  interest  of  the 
man  I  cannot  love. 

The  question  recurs — Are  not  your  parents  in- 
titled  to  know  your  objections  to  the  man  whose 
interest  they  so  warmly  espouse  ? 

I  have  no  particular  objections.  The  Count  of 
Belvidere  deserves  a  better  wife  than  I  can  make 
him.  I  should  respect  him  very  much,  had  I  a  sis- 
ter, and  he  made  his  addresses  to  her. 

Well  then,  my  dear  Clementina,  if  I  guess  the 
reason  why  you  cannot  approve  of  the  Count  of  Bel- 
vedere, will  you  tell  me,  with  that  candour,  with  that 
friendship,  of  the  requisites  of  which  we  have  been 
speaking,  whether  I  am  right  or  not  ? 

She  hesitated.     I  was  silent  in  expectation. 

She  then  spoke — I  am  afraid  of  you,  madam. 

You  have  reason  to  be  so,  if  you  think  me  un- 
worthy of  your  friendship. 

What  is  your  guess,  Mrs.  Beaumont  ? 

That  you  are  prejudiced  in  favour  of  some  other 
man ;  or  you  could  not,  if  you  had  a  sister,  wish  her 
a  husband  that  you  thought  unworthy  of  yourself. 

I  don't  think  the  Count  of  Belvedere  unworthy 
neither,  madam. 

Then  my  conjecture  has  received  additional 
strength. 

O  Mrs.  Beaumont !     How  you  press  upon  me. 

If  impertinently,  say  so  ;  and  I  have  done. 

No,  no,  not  impertinently,  neither ;  yet  you  dis- 
tress me. 

VOL.  XI.  z 


254  THB    HISTORY    OF 

That  could  not  be,  if  I  were  not  right;  and  if  the 

{)erson  were  not  too  unworthy  of  you,  to  be  acknow- 
edged. 

0  Mrs.  Beaumont !  how  closely  you  urge  me ! 
What  can  I  say  ? 

If  you  have  any  confidence  in  me — If  you  think 
me  capable  of  advising  you — 

1  have  confidence  :  your  known  prudence — And 
then  she  made  me  compliments,  that  I  could  not  de^ 
serve. 

Come,  my  dear  Clementina,  I  will  guess  again — 
Shall  I? 

What  would  you  guess  ? 

That  there  is  a  man  of  low  degree — Of  low  for- 
tunes— Of  inferior  sense- 
Hold,  hold,  hold^-And  do  you  think  that  the 
Clementina  before  you  is  sunk  so  low  ? — If  you  do, 
why  don't  you  cast  the  abject  creature  from  you  ? 

Well,  then,  I  will  guess  again — That  there  is  a 
man  of  a  royal  house ;  of  superior  understanding;  of 
whom  you  can  have  no  hope. 

0  Mrs.  Beaumont !  And  cannot  you  guess  that 
this  prince  is  a  Mahometan,  when  your  hand  is  in  ? 

Then,  madam,  and  from  the  hints  your  ladyship 
had  given,  I  had  little  doubt  that  Clementina  was  in 
love ;  and  that  religion  was  the  apprehended  diffi- 
culty. Zealous  Catholics  think  not  better  of  Pro- 
testants, than  of  Mahometans :  nor,  indeed,  are 
zealous  Protestants  without  their  prejudices.  Zeal 
will  be  zeal,  in  persons  of  whatever  denomination. 

1  would  not,  however,  madam,  like  a  sudden  frost, 
nip  the  opening  bud. 

There  is,  said  I,  a  young  soldier  of  fortune,  who 
has  breathed  forth  passionate  wishes  for  Clementina. 

A  soldier  of  fortune,  madam !  with  an  air  of  dis- 
dain. There  cannot  be  such  a  man  living,  that  can 
have  his  wishes  answered. 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  255 

Well,  then,  to  say  nothing  of  him ;  there  is  a 
Roman  nobleman — a  younger  brother — Of  the  Bor- 
ghese  house — Permit  me  to  suppose  him  the  man. 
With  all  my  heart,  madam. 
She  was  easy,  while  I  was  at  a  distance. 
But  if  the  Chevalier  Grandison  [she  coloured  at 
his  name] — has  done  him  ill  offices — 

The  Chevalier  Grandison,  madam,  is  incapable  of 
doing  miy  man  ill  offices. 

Are  you  sure,  madam,  that  the  chevalier  has  not 
art  ? — He  has  great  abilities.  Men  of  great  abilities 
are  not  always  to  be  trusted.  They  don't  strike  till 
they  are  sure. 

He  has  no  art,  madam.  He  is  aiove  art.  'Hewan^s 
it  not.  He  is  beloved  wherever  he  goes.  He  is 
equally  noted  for  his  prudence  and  freedom  of  heart. 
He  is  above  art,  repeated  she,  with  warmth. 

I  own,  that  he  deserves  every -thing  from  your  fa- 
mily. I  don't  wonder  that  he  is  caressed  by  you  all : 
but  it  is  amazing  to  me,  that,  in  contradiction  to  all 
the  prudent  maxims  and  cautions  of  your  country, 
such  a  young  gentleman  should  have  been  admitted 
— I  stopt. 

Why,  now,  you  don't  imagine,  that  I — that  I— 
She  stopt,  and  hesitated. 

A  prudent  woman  would  not  put  it  in  any  man's 
power  to  give  her  a  prejudice  to  persons  of  unex- 
ceptionable honour ;  and  to  manage — 

Nay,  madam,  now  has  somebody  prejudiced  you 
against  your  countryman — He  is  the  most  disinter- 
ested of  men. 

I  have  heard  young  ladies,  when  he  was  here, 
«peak  of  him  as  a  handsome  man. 

A  handsome  man !  And  is  not  Mr.  Grandison  an 
handsome  man  ?  Where  will  you  see  a  man  so  hand- 
some ? 

And  do  you  think  he  is  so  very  extraordinary  a 
z2 


256  THE   HISTORY   OF 

man,  as  to  sense,  as  I  have  heard  him  reported  to  be? 
I  was  twice  in  his  company — I  thought,  indeed,  he 
looked  upon  himself  as  a  man  of  consequence. 

Nay,  madam,  don't  say  he  is  not  a  modest  man. 
It  is  true,  he  knows  when  to  speak,  and  when  to  be 
silent :  but  he  is  not  a  confident  man ;  nor  is  he,  in 
the  least,  conceited. 

Was  there  so  much  bravery  in  his  relieving  your 
brother,  as  some  people  attribute  to  him  in  that  hap- 
py event  ?  Two  servants  and  himself,  well  armed ; 
the  chance  of  passengers  on  the  same  road :  the  as- 
sassins that  appeared  but  two ;  their  own  guilt  to 
encounter  with — 

Dear,  dear,  Mrs.  Beaumont,  with  what  prejudiced 
people  have  you  conversed  ?  The  Scripture  says,  A 
prophet  has  no  honour  in  his  oxvn  country  ;  but  Mr. 
Grandison  has  not  much  from  his  own  country- 
woman. 

Well,  but  did  Mr.  Grandison  ever  speak  to  you  of 
any  one  man,  as  a  man  worthy  of  your  favour  ? 

Did  he ! — Yes,  of  the  Count  of  Belvedere.  He 
was  more  earnest  in  his  favour  than — 

Really? 

Yes,  really — than  I  thought  he  ought  to  be. 

Why  so  ? 

Why  so  ? — Why  because — because — Why  what 
was  it  to  him — you  know  ? 

I  suppose  he  was  put  upon  it — 

I  believe  so. 

Or  he  would  not — 

I  believe,  if  the  truth  were  known,  you,  Mrs. 
Beaumont,  hate  Mr.  Grandison.  You  are  the  only 
person  that  I  ever  in  my  life  heard  speak  of  him, 
even  with  indifference. 

Tell  me,  my  dear  Clementina,  What  are  your 
sincere  thoughts  of  Mr.  Grandison,  person  and 
mind? 


«IR  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  257 

You  may  gather  them  from  what  I  have  said. 

That  he  is  a  handsome  man ;  a  generous,  a  pru- 
dent, a  brave,  a  poHte  man. 

Indeed  I  think  him  to  be  all  you  have  said ;  and 
I  am  not  singular. 

But  he  is  a  Mahometan — 

A  Mahometan  !  madam. — Ah,  Mrs.  Beaumont ! 

And  ah,  my  dear  Clementina! — And  do  you  think 
I  have  not  found  you  out  ? — Had  you  never  known 
Mr.  Grandison,  you  would  not  have  scrupled  to 
have  been  Countess  of  Belvedere. 

And  can  you  think,  madam — 

Yes,  yes,  my  dear  young  lady,  I  can. 

My  good  Mrs.  Beaumont,  you  don't  know  what  I 
was  going  to  say. 

Be  sincere,  my  dear.  Cannot  a  lover,  talking  to 
a  second  person,  be  sincere  ? 

What!  madam,  a  man  of  another  religion!  A  man 
obstinate  in  his  errors !  A  man  who  has  never  pro- 
fessed love  to  me !  A  man  of  inferior  degree !  A 
man  who  owns  himself  absolutely  dependent  upon 
his  father's  bounty !  His  father  living  to  the  height 
of  his  estate !  — Forbid  it  pride,  dignity  of  birth,  duty, 
religion — 

Well,  then,  I  may  safely  take  up  the  praises  of  Mr. 
Grandison :  you  have  imputed  to  me,  slight,  injus- 
tice, prejudice  against  him :  let  me  now  show  you, 
that  the  Prophet  has  honour  xjoith  his  country-tuoman. 
Let  me  collect  his  character  from  the  mouth  of 
every  man  who  has  spoken  of  him  in  my  hearing  or 
knowledge — His  country  has  not  in  this  age  sent 
abroad  a  private  man  who  has  done  it  more  credit. 
He  is  a  man  of  honour  in  every  sense  of  the  word. 
If  moral  rectitude,  if  practical  religion  (your  brother 
the  barone  testifies  this  on  his  own  experience)  were 
lost  in  the  rest  of  the  world,  it  would,  without  glare 
or  ostentation,  be  found  in  him.  He  is  courted  by 
z  3 


258  THE   HISTORY  OF 

the  best,  the  wisest,  the  most  eminent  men,  where- 
ever  he  goes ;  and  he  does  good  without  distinction 
of  reHgion,  sects,  or  nation :  his  own  countrymen 
boast  of  him,  and  apply  to  him  for  credentials  to  the 
best  and  most  considerable  men  in  their  travels 
through  more  countries  than  one:  in  France,  parti- 
cularly, he  is  as  much  respected  as  in  Italy.  He  is 
descended  from  the  best  families  in  England,  both 
by  father  and  mother ;  and  can  be  a  senator  of  it, 
whenever  he  pleases.  He  is  heir  to  a  very  consi- 
derable estate ;  and  is,  as  I  am  informed,  courted  to 
ally  with  some  of  the  greatest  families  in  it.  Were 
he  not  born  to  a  fortune,  he  would  make  one.  You 
own  him  to  be  generous,  brave,  handsome — 

O  my  dear,  dear  Mrs.  Beaumont !  All  this  is  too 
much,  too  much! — Yet  all  this  I  think  him  to  be! — 
I  can  no  longer  resist  you.  I  own,  I  own,  that  I 
have  no  heart  but  for  Mr.  Grandison.  And  now,  as 
I  don't  doubt  but  my  friends  set  you  to  find  out  the 
love-sick  girl,  how  shall  I,  who  cannot  disown  a 
secret  you  have  so  fairly,  and  without  condition, 
come  at,  ever  look  them  in  the  face  ?  Yet  let  them 
know  (I  will  enable  you  to  tell  them)  how  all  this 
came  about,  and  how  much  I  have  struggled  against 
a  passion  so  evidently  improper  to  be  encouraged 
by  a  daughter  of  their  house. 

He  was,  in  the  first  place,  as  well  you  know,  the 
preserver  of  a  beloved  brother's  life ;  and  thatbrother 
afterwards  owned,  that  had  he  followed  his  friendly 
advice,  he  never  would  have  fallen  into  the  danger 
from  which  he  rescued  him. 

My  father  and  mother  presented  him  to  me,  and 
bid  me  regard  him  as  a  fourth  brother ;  and  it  was 
not  immediately  that  I  found  out,  that  I  could  have 
but  three  brothers. 

My  brother's  deliverer  proved  to  be  the  most 
amiable  and  humane,  and  yet  bravest  of  men. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISOM.  259 

All  my  friends  caressed  him.  Neither  family  forms, 
nor  national  forms,  were  stood  upon.  He  had  free 
access  to  us  all,  as  one  of  us. 

My  younger  brother  was  continually  hinting  to 
me  his  wishes  that  I  were  his.  Mr.  Grandison  was 
above  all  other  reward;  and  my  brother  considered 
me  in  a  kind  light,  as  able  to  reward  him. 

My  confessor,  by  his  fears  and  invectives,  rather 
confirmed  than  lessened  my  esteem  for  a  man  whom 
I  thought  injured  by  them. 

His  own  respectful  and  disinterested  behaviour  to 
me  contributed  to  my  attachment.  He  always  ad- 
dressed me  as  his  sister,  when  he  put  on  the  familiar 
friend,  in  the  guise  of  a  tutor ;  I  could  not  therefore 
arm  against  a  man  I  had  no  reason  to  suspect. 

But  still  I  knew  not  the  strength  of  my  passion 
for  him,  till  the  Count  of  Belvedere  was  proposed  to 
me  with  an  earnestness  that  alarmed  me :  then  I 
considered  the  count  as  the  interrupter  of  my  hopes; 
and  yet  I  could  not  give  my  friends  the  reason  ivhy 
I  rejected  him.  How  could  I,  when  I  had  none  to 
give  but  my  prepossession  in  favour  of  another 
man  ?  A  prepossession  entirely  hidden  in  my  own 
heart. 

But  still  I  thought  I  would  sooner  die,  than  be  the 
wife  of  a  man  of  a  religion  contrary  to  my  own,  I 
am  a  zealous  Catholic  myself:  all  my  relations  are 
zealous  Catholics.  How  angry  have  I  been  at  this 
obstinate  heretic,  as  I  have  often  called  him;  the  first 
heretic,  my  dear  Mrs.  Beaumont  (for  once  I  did  not 
loveyow)  that  my  soul  detested  not!  For  he  is  as  te- 
nacious a  Protestant  as  ever  came  out  of  England. 
What  had  he  to  do  in  Italy  ?  Why  did  he  not  stay 
at  home  ?  Or  why,  if  he  must  come  abroad,  did  he 
stay  so  long  among  us ;  yet  hold  his  obstinacy,  as  if 
in  defiance  of  the  people  by  whom  he  was  so  well 
received  ? 


260  THE    HISTORY   OF 

These  were  the  reproaches  that  my  heart  in  si- 
lence often  cast  upon  him. 

I  was  at  first  concerned  only  for  his  souVs  sake : 
but  afterwards,  finding  him  essential  to  my  earthly 
happiness,  and  yet  resolving  never  to  think  of  him  if 
he  became  not  a  Catholic,  I  was  earnest  for  his  con- 
version for  my  own  sake ;  hoping  that  my  friends 
indulgence  to  mewould  make  my  wishes  practicable ; 
for  on  his  part,  I  doubted  not,  if  that  point  were  got 
over,  he  would  think  an  alliance  with  our  family  an 
honour  to  him. 

But  when  I  found  him  invincible  on  this  article, 
I  was  resolved  either  to  conquer  my  passion,  or  die. 
What  did  I  not  undergo  in  my  endeavours  to  gain 
this  victory  over  myself!  My  confessor  hurt  me,  by 
terrors;  mywomanteazedme;  my  parents,  and  two 
elder  brothers,  and  all  my  more  distant  relations, 
urged  me  to  determine  in  favour  of  the  Count  of 
Belvedere.  The  count  was  importunate :  the  cheva- 
lier was  importunate  in  the  count's  behalf — Good 
Heaven!  What  could  I  do?— I  was  hurried,  as  I  may 
say :  I  had  not  time  given  me  to  weigh,  ponder,  re- 
collect. How  could  I  make  my  mother,  how  could 
I  make  any-body,  my  confident  ?  My  judgment  was 
at  war  with  my  passion ;  and  I  hoped  it  would  over- 
come. I  struggled ;  yet  every  day  the  object  ap- 
pearing more  worthy,  the  struggle  was  too  hard  for 
me.  O  that  I  had  had  a  Mrs.  Beaumont  to  consult 
— Well  might  melancholy  seize  me — Silent  melan- 
choly ! 

At  last  the  chevalier  was  resolved  to  leave  us. 
What  pain,  yet  what  pleasure,  did  this  his  resolution 
give  me !  Most  sincerely  I  hoped,  that  his  absence 
wonld  restore  my  tranquillity. 

What  a  secret  triumph  did  I  give  myself,  on  my 
behaviour  to  him,  before  all  my  friends,  on  the  part- 
ing evening !— My  whole  deportment  was  uniform. 
3 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  261 

I  was  'cheerful,  serene,  happy  in  myself,  and  I 
made  all  my  friends  so.  I  wished  him  happy 
wherever  he  set  his  foot,  and  whatsoever  he  engaged 
in.  I  thanked  him,  with  the  rest  of  my  friends, 
for  the  benefits  we  had  received  from  him,  and  the. 
pleasure  he  had  given  us,  in  the  time  he  had  be- 
stowed upon  us  ;  and  I  wished  that  he  might  never 
want  a  friend  so  agreeable  and  entertaining  as  he 
had  been  to  us  all. 

I  was  the  more  pleased  with  myself,  as  I  was  not 
under  a  necessity  of  putting  on  stiffness  or  reserve 
to  hide  a  heart  too  much  affected,  I  thought  my- 
self secure,  and  stood  out  forwarder  than  he  seemed 
to  hope  for,  and  with  more  than  my  offered  hand, 
at  the  moment  of  his  departure.  I  thought  I  read 
in  his  eyes  a  concern,  for  the  first  time,  that  called 
for  a  pity  which  1  imagined  I  myself  wanted  not. 
Yet  I  had  a  pang  at  parting — When  the  door  shut 
out  the  agreeable  man,  never  again,  thought  I,  to 
be  opened  to  give  him  entrance  !  I  sighed  at  the 
reflection  :  but  who  perceived  it?  I  never  could  be 
insensible  in  a  parting  scene,  with  less  agreeable 
friends :  it  was  the  easier  for  me  to  attribute  to  the 
gentleness  of  my  heart,  the  instant  sensibility.  My 
father  clasped  me  to  his  bosom :  my  mother  em- 
braced me,  without  mortifying  me  by  saying  for 
what:  my  brother  the  bishop  called  me  twenty 
fond  names  :  all  my  friends  complimented  me,  but 
only  on  my  cheerfulness ;  and  said,  I  was  once 
more  their  own  Clementina.  I  went  to  rest,  pleased 
that  I  had  so  happily  acquitted  myself;  and  that 
possibly  I  contributed  to  the  repose  of  dear  friends, 
whose  repose  I  had  been  the  cause  of  disturbing. 

But,  alas !  this  conduct  was  too  great  for  the  poor 
Clementina  to  maintain :  my  soul  was  too  high-set— 
You  know  the  rest ;  and  I  am  lost  to  the  joys  of  this 
life :  for  I  never,  never,  will  be  the  wife  of  a  man, 


262  THE    HISTORY   OF 

if  I  viight,  who  by  his  religion  is  an  enemy  to  the 
faith  I  never  wavered  in  ;  nor  would  ever  change, 
were  an  earthly  crown  on  the  head  of  the  man  I 
love  to  be  the  reward ;  and  a  painful  death,  in  the 
prime  of  my  life,  the  contrary. 

A  flood  of  tears  prevented  farther  speech.  She 
hid  her  face  in  my  bosom.  She  sighed — Dear  lady ! 
How  she  sighed ! 

This,  madam,  is  the  account  I  have  to  give  of 
what  has  passed  between  your  beloved  Clementina 
and  me.  Never  was  there  a  more  noble  struggle 
between  duty  and  affection ;  though  her  heart  was 
too  tender,  and,  in  short,  the  man's  merits  too  daz- 
zling, to  allow  it  to  be  effectual.  She  is  unwilling 
that  I  should  send  you  the  particulars  :  she  shall  be 
ashamed,  she  says,  to  look  her  father,  her  mother, 
in  the  face  ;  and  she  dreads  still  more,  if  possible, 
her  confessor's  being  made  acquainted  with  the 
state  of  her  heart,  and  the  cause  of  her  disorder. 
But  I  tell  her,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  for  her 
mother  to  know  every-thing  that  I  know,  in  order 
to  attempt  a  cure. 

This  cure,  madam,  I  am  afraid  will  never  be 
effected,  but  by  giving  her  in  marriage  to  the  happy 
man.  I  must  think  hm  so.  who  will  be  intitled,  by 
general  consent,  to  so  great  a  blessing. 

You,  madam,  will  act  in  this  affa!ir  as  you  judge 
proper:  but  if  you  can  at  Bologna,  at  Urbino,  and 
Naples,  get  over  your  family  objections,  you  will 
perfiaps  find  youtselves  obliged,  such  are  the  young 
lady's  otvn  scruples,  on  the  score  of  religion,  to  take 
pains  to  persuade  her  to  pursue  her  inclination,  and 
accept  Mr.  Grandison  for  a  husband. 

Be  this  as  it  may,  I  would  humbly  recommend  a 
gentle  and  soothing  treatment  of  her.  She  never 
knew  yet  what ,  the  contrary  was ;  and  were  she  to 
experience  that  contrary  now,  upon  an  occasion  so 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  263 

very  delicate,  and  in  which  her  judgment  and  her 
love  are,  as  she  hints,  at  variance,  I  verily  think, 
she  would  not  be  able  to  bear  it. — That  God  direct 
you  for  the  best,  whom  you  and  yours  have  always 
served  with  signal  devotion ! 

I  will  only  add.  That  since  the  secret  which  had 
so  long  preyed  upon  her  fine  spirits,  is  revealed, 
she  appears  to  be  much  more  easy  than  before;  but 
yet  she  dreads  the  reception  she  shall  meet  witli  on 
her  return  to  Bologna.  She  begs  of  me,  when  that 
return  shall  be  ordered,  to  accompany  her,  in  order 
to  enable  her,  as  she  says,  to  support  her  spirits. 
She  is  very  desirous  to  enter  into  a  nunnery.  She 
says,  she  never  can  be  the  wife  of  any  other  man ; 
and  she  thinks  she  ought  not  to  be  his,  on  whom 
her  heart  is  fixed. 

A  word  of  comfort  on  paper,  from  your  honoured 
hand,  1  know,  madam,  would  do  a  great  deal  towards 
healing  her  wounded  heart. 

I  am,  madam,  with  the  greatest  veneration  and 
respect, 

Your  ladyship's  most  faithful  humble  servant, 
HORTENSIA  BEAUMONT. 

Let  me  add,  my  good  Miss  Byron,  that  the  mar- 
chioness sent  an  answer  to  this  letter,  expressing  the 
highest  obligation  and  gratitude  to  Mrs.  Beaumont; 
and  inclosed  a  letter  to  her  daughter,  filled  with 
tender  and  truly-motherly  consolation  ;  inviting  her 
back  to  Bologna,  and  her  amiable  friend  with  her : 
promising,  in  the  name  of  her  father  and  brothers, 
a  most  indulgent  welcome ;  and  assuring  her,  that 
every-thing  should  be  done  that  could  be  done,  to 
make  her  happy  in  her  own  way. 


264  THE    HISTORY    OP 

LETTER  XXV. 

MISS    BYRON    TO   MISS    SELBY. 

Wednesday  night,  March  29. 
I  INCLOSE,  ray  Lucy,  the  doctor's  third  pacquet. 
From  its  contents  you  will  pity  Sir  Charles,  as  well 
as  Clementina ;  and  if  you  enter  impartially  into  the 
situation  of  the  family,  and  allow  as  much  to  their 
zeal  for  a  religion  they  are  satisfied  with,  as  you 
will  do  for  Sir  Charles's  steadiness  in  his,  you  will 
also  pity  them.  They  are  all  good ;  they  are  all 
considerate.  A  great  deal  is  to  be  said  for  them  ; 
though  much  more  for  Sir  Charles,  who  insisted  not 
upon  that  change  of  religion  in  the  lady,  which 
they  demanded  from  him. 

How  great  does  he  appear  in  my  eyes !  A  con- 
fessor, though  not  a  martyr,  one  may  call  him,  for 
his  religion  and  country. — How  deep  was  his  dis- 
tress !  A  mind  so  delicate  as  his,  and  wishing  for  the 
sake  of  the  sex,  and  the  lady  and  family,  as  he  did, 
rather  to  be  repulsed  by  them,  than  to  be  obliged 
himself  to  decline  their  intended  favour. 

You  will  admire  the  lady  in  her  sweetly-modest 
behaviour,  on  his  first  visit  before  her  mother ;  but 
more,  for  the  noble  spirit  she  endeavoured  to  resume 
in  her  conversation  with  him  in  the  garden. 

But  how  great  will  he  appear  in  your  eyes,  in  the 
eyes  of  my  grandmother,  and  aunt  Selby,  for  that 
noble  apostrophe ! — '  But,  O  my  religion  and  my 
country !  I  cannot,  cannot,  renounce  you !  What 
can  this  short  life  give,  what  can  it  promise,  to 
warrant  such  a  sacrifice ! ' 

Yet  her  conduct,  you  will  find,  is  not  inferior  to 
his ;  firmly  persuaded,  as  she  is,  of  the  truth  of  her 
religion,  and  loving  him  with  an  ardor  that  he  had 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDlSON.  265 

from  the  first  restrained  in  himself  from  hopeless- 
ness. 

But  to  admire  her  as  she  deserves,  I  should  tran- 
scribe all  she  says,  and  his  account  of  her  whole 
behaviour. 

0  my  dear !  Who  could  have  acted  as  Clementina 
acted  ! — Not,  I  fear,  your 

HARRIET  BYRON. 

DR.    BARTLETT's    third    LETTER. 

The  next  thing  you  injoin  me  in,  madam,  is, 
To  give  you  the  particulars  of  Mr.  Grandisons 
reception  from  the  marchioness  and  her  Cle- 
mentina    on    his   return    to    Bologna  from 
Vienna,  at  the  invitation  of  Signor  Jeronymo. 
Mr.  Grandison  was  received  at  his  arrival  with 
great  tokens  of  esteem  and  friendship,  by  the  mar- 
quis himself,  and  by  the  bishop. 

Signor  Jeronymo,  who  still  kept  his  chamber,  the 
introducer  being  withdrawn,  embraced  him :  and 
now,  said  he,  is  the  affair,  that  I  have  had  so  long  in 
view,  determined  upon.  O  chevalier!  you  will  be 
a  happy  man.  Clementina  will  be  yours;  you  will  be 
Clementina's :  and  now  indeed  do  I  embrace  my 
brother — But  I  detain  you  not :  go  to  the  happy 
girl :  she  is  with  her  mother,  and  both  are  ready  to 
receive  and  welcome  you.  Allow  for  the  gentle 
spirit :  she  will  not  be  able  to  say  half  she  thinks. 

Camilla  then  appeared,  to  conduct  me,  says  Mr. 
Grandison,  to  her  ladies,  in  the  marchioness's  draw- 
ing-room. She  whispered  me  in  the  passage ; 
Welcome,  thrice  welcome,  best  of  men !  Now  will 
you  be  rewarded  for  all  your  goodness  ! 

1  found  the  marchioness  sitting  at  her  toilette, 
richly  dressed,  as  in  ceremony ;  but  without  attend- 
ants; even  Camilla  retired,  as  soon  as  she  had 
opened  the  door  for  me. 

A  A 


266  THE   HISTORY   OF 

The  lovely  Clementina  stood  at  the  back  of  her 
mother's  chair.  She  was  elegantly  dressed :  but  her 
natural  modesty,  heightened  b}'  a  glowing  con- 
sciousness, that  seemed  to  arise  from  the  occasion, 
^ave  her  advantages  that  her  richest  jewels  could 
not  have  given  her. 

The  marchioness  stood  up.  I  kissed  her  hand — 
You  are  welcome,  chevalier,  said  she.  The  only 
man  on  earth  that  I  could  thus  welcome,  or  is  fit  to 
be  so  welcomed  ! — Clementina,  my  dear  ! — turning 
round,  and  taking  her  hand. 

The  young  lady  had  shrunk  back,  her  com- 
plexion varying ;  now  glowing,  now  pale — Excuse 
her  voice,  said  the  condescending  mother ;  her 
heart  bids  you  welcome. 

Judge  for  me,  my  dear  Dr.  !§artlett,  how  I  must 
be  affected  at  this  gracious  reception :  I,  who  knew 
not  the  terms  that  were  to  be  prescribed  to  me. 
'  Spare  me,  dear  lady,  thought  I,  spare  me  niy  con- 
science, and  take  all  the  world's  wealth  and  glory  to 
yourselves:  I  shall  be  rich  enough  with  Clementina.' 

The  marchioness  seated  her  in  her  own  chair.  I 
approached  her :  but  how  could  I  with  that  grateful 
ardor,  that,  but  for  my  doubts,  would  have  sprung 
to  my  lips  ?  Modest  love,  however,  was  attributed 
to  me ;  and  I  had  the  praise  •voholly  for  that  which 
was  but  partly  due  to  it.  , 

1  drew  a  chair  for  the  marchioness,  and,  at  her 
command,  another  for  myself.  The  mother  took  one 
hand  of  her  bashful  daughter :  I  presumed  to  take  the 
other :  the  amiable  lady  held  down  her  blusJiing 
face,  and  reproved  me  not,  as  she  did  once  before, 
on  the  like  freedom,  for  being  too  free.  Her  mother 
asked  me  questions  of  an  indifferent  nature ;  as  of  my 
journey ;  of  the  courts  I  had  visited  since  I  left  them ; 
when  I  heard  from  England;  after  my  father;  my 
sisters :  the  latter  questions  in  a  kind  way,  as  if 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDlSON.  267 

she  were  asking  after  relations  that  were  to  be  her 
awn. 

What  a  mixture  of  pain  had  I  with  the  favour 
shewn  me,  and /or  the  favour  shewn  me!  Fori 
questioned  not  but  a  change  of  religion  would  be 
proposed,  and  insisted  on ;  and  I  had  no  doubt  in 
my  mind  about  my  own. 

After  a  short  conversation  the  amiable  daughter 
arose ;  courtesied  low  to  her  mother,  with  dignity 
to  me  ;  and  withdrew. 

Ah,  chevalier !  said  the  marchiones?,  as  soon  as 
she  was  gone,  little  did  I  think,  when  you  left  us, 
that  we  should  so  soon  see  you  again ;  and  on  the 
account  we  see  you :  but  you  know  how  to  receive 
your  good  fortune  with  gratitude.  Your  modesty 
keeps  in  countenance  our  forwardness. 

1  bowed — What  could  I  say  ? 

I  shall  leave,  so  will  my  lord,  particular  subjects 
to  be  talked  of  between  the  bishop  and  you.  You 
will,  if  it  be  not  your  own  fault,  have  a  treasure  in 
Clementina;  and  a  treasure  with  her.  We  shall  do 
the  same  things  for  her,  as  if  she  had  married  the 
man  we  wished  her  to  have  when  we  thought  her 
affections  disengaged.  You  may  believe  we  love 
our  daughter — Else — 

I  applauded  their  indulgent  goodness. 

I  can-  have  no  doubt,  iVJr.  Grandison,  that  you 
love  Clementina  above  all  women. 

[I  had  never  seen  the  woman.  Dr.  Bartlett,  that  I 
coiddhave  loved  so  well,  had  I  not  restrained  myself, 
at  first,  from  the  high  notion  I  knew  they  had  of 
their  quality  and  rank  ;  from  considerations  of  the 
difference  in  religion ;  of  the  trust  and  confidence 
the  family  placed  in  me;  and  by  the  resolution  I 
had  made,  as  a  guard  to  myself  from  the  time  of  my 
entering  upon  my  travels,  of  never  aiming  to  marry 
a  foreigner.] 

A  a2 


268  THE    HISTORY    OF 

I  assured  the  marchioness,  that  I  was  absolutely 
disengaged  in  my  affections  :  that,  not  having  pre- 
sumed to  encourage  hopes  of  the  good  fortune  that 
seemed  to  await  me,  I  could  hardly  yet  flatter  my- 
self that  so  great  a  happiness  was  reserved  for  me. 

She  answered.  That  I  deserved  it  all :  that  1  knew 
the  value  they  had  for  me:  that  Clementina's  regard 
was  founded  in  virtue  :  that  my  character  was  my 
happiness:  that,  however,  what  the  world  would 
say,  had  been  no  small  point  with  them ;  but  that 
was  as  good  as  got  over ;  and  she  doubted  not  but 
all  that  depended  upon  me,  would,  as  well  from 
generosity  as  gratitude,  be  complied  with. 

[Here,  thought  I,  is  couched  the  expectation: 
and  if  so,  would  to  heaven  I  had  never  seen  Italy !] 

The  marquis  joined  his  lady  and  me  soon  after, 
,  His  features  had  a  melancholy  cast.  This  dear  girl, 
said  he,  has  fastened  upon  me  part  of  her  malady. 
Parents,  chevalier,  who  are  blessed  with  even  hope- 
Jul  children,  are  not  always  happy.  This  girl — But 
no  more:  she  is  a  good  child.  In  the  general  eco- 
nomy of  Providence,  none  of  the  sons  of  men  are 
unhappy,  but  some  others  are  the  happier  for  it. 
Our  son  the  bishop  will  talk  to  you  upon  terms. 

I  have  hinted  to  the  chevalier,  my  lord,  said  the 
marchioness,  the  happiness  that  awaits  him. 

How  doe^  the  poor  girl? — Bashful  enough,  I 
suppose ! 

Indeed,  my  lord,  she  cannot  look  up,  answered 
the  lady. 

Poor  thing!  I  supposed  it  would  be  so. 

Why,  why,  thought  I,  was  I  suffered  to  see  this 
mother,  this  daughter,  before  their  conditions  were 
proposed  to  me ! 

But  what  indulgent  parents  are  these,  Dr.  Bart- 
lett  ?  What  an  excellent  daughter  ?  Yet  not  to  be 
happy ! — But  how  much  more  unhappily  circum- 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDlSON.  269 

stanc6d  did  I  think  myself? — I,  who  had  rather 
have  been  rejected  with  disdain  by  twenty  women 
in  turn,  than  to  be  obHged  to  decline  the  honour 
intended  me  by  a  family  I  reverenced } 

Thus  far  Mr.  Grandison.  This,  madam,  will 
answer  your  question,  as  to  the  Vlth  article;  but  I 
believe  a  few  more  particulars  will  be  acceptable. 

The.  marquis  led  me,  proceeds  Mr.  Grandison, 
into  the  chamber  of  Signor  Jeronymo.  Your  good 
fortune,  chevalier,  said  he,  as  we  entered  it,  is 
owing  to  Jeronymo,  who  owes  his  life  to  you.  I 
bless  God,  we  are  a  family  that  know  not  what 
ingratitude  means. 

1  made  my  acknowledgments  both  to  father  and 
son. 

The  marquis  then  went  into  public  affairs  ;  and 
soon  after  left  us  together. 

I  was  considering,  whether  I  had  best  tell  that 
sincere  friend  my  apprehensions  in  relation  to  the 
articles  of  religion  and  residence  ;  for  he  had  with 
an  air  of  humour  congratulated  me  on  the  philoso- 
phical manner  in  which  I  bore  my  good  fortune ; 
when  Camilla  entered,  and  whispered  me  of  her 
own  head,  as  she  said,  That  her  young  lady  was 
just  gone  into  the  garden. 

I  dare  say,  it  toas  of  her  own  head :  for  Camilla 
has  a  great  deal  of  good-nature,  and  is  constantly 
desirous  of  obliging,  where  she  thinks  she  shall  not 
offend  any  body. 

Follow  her  then,  said  Jeronymo,  who  heard  what 
Camilla  said :  Clementina  perhaps  expects  you. 

Camilla  waited  for  me  at  the  entrance  into  tlie 

garden.     One  word.  Sir,  if  you  please.    I  am  afraid 

of  the  return  of  my  young  lady's  thoughtfulness. 

She  says,  she  is  ashamed  of  the  poor  figure  she  made 

A  A  3 


270  THE    HISTORY   OF 

before  her  mother :  she  is  sure  she  must  look  mean 
in  your  eyes.  A  man  to  be  sent  for,  Camilla,  said 
she,  in  compliment  to  my  weakness !  Why  did  not 
my  too  indulgent  father  bid  me  conquer  my  folly, 
or  die !  O  that  I  had  not  owned  my  attachment ! 
♦  Naughty  Mrs.  Beaumont!  Had  it  not  been  for  you, 
my  own  bosom  had  contained  the  secret;  till  shame, 
and  indignation  against  myself,  had  burst  my  heart!* 
She  is  resolved  to  resume  a  spirit  becoming  her 
birth  and  quality ;  and  I  am  afraid  of  her  elevations. 
Her  great  apprehensions  are,  that,  with  all  this  con- 
descension of  her  parents,  obstacles  will  arise  on  ^oMr 
part.  If  so,  she  says,  she  shall  not  be  able  to  bear 
her  own  reflections,  nor  look  her  friends  in  the  face. 

My  dear  Dr.  Bartlett,  how  have  I,  who  have  hi- 
therto so  happily  escaped  the  snares  by  which  the 
feet  of  unreflecting  youth  are  often  entangled  by 
women  of  light  fame,  been  embarrassed  by  perverse 
accidents  that  have  arisen  from  my  friendships  with 
the  worthy  of  the  sex !  Was  there  ever  a  more  excel- 
lent family  than  this  ? — Every  individual  of  it  is 
excellent.  And  is  not  their  worthiness,  and  even 
their  piety,  the  cause  to  which  our  mutual  difficul- 
ties are  owing  ? 

But,  O  my  religion  and  my  country !  I  cannot, 
cannot  renounce  you !  What  can  this  short  life  give, 
what  can  it  promise,  to  warrant  such  a  sacrifice  ! 

I  said  nothing  to  Camilla,  you  may  believe,  of 
what  I  could  or  could  not  do ;  yet  she  saw  my  distress : 
she  took  notice  of  it.  Being  firmly  persuaded  of  the 
excellency  of  her  own  religion,  she  wondered  that  a 
man  of  reflection  and  reading  could  be  of  a  contrary 
one.  Her  heart,  she  said,  as  well  as  the  heart  of  her 
young  lady,  boded  an  unhappy  issue  to  our  loves: 
Heaven  avert  it!  said  the  honest  woman  :  but  what 
may  we  not  fear  by  way  of  judgment,  where  a  young 
lady — Forgive  me,  Sir — prefers  a  man  slie  thinks  she 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  271 

ought  not  to  prefer ;  and  where  a  gentleman  will 
not  be  convinced  of  errors  which  the  church  con- 
demns ? 

She  again  begged  I  would  forgive  her.  I  praised 
her  good  intention,  and  sincere  dealing ;  and,  leav- 
ing her,  went  into  the  garden. 

I  found  the  young  lady  in  the  orange-grove.  You 
have  been  in  that  garden.  Dr.  Bartlett. 

She  turned  her  face  towards  me,  as  I  drew  near 
her;  and,  seeing  who  it  was,  stopt. 

Clementina,  armed  with  conscious  worthiness,  as 
if  she  had  resumed  the  same  spirit  which  had  ani- 
mated her  on  the  eve  of  my  departure  from  Bo- 
logna, condescended  to  advance  two  or  three 
paces  towards  me. 

Lovely  woman,  thought  I,  encourage  the  true 
dignity  that  shines  in  that  noble  aspect! — Who 
knows  what  may  be  our  destiny  ? 

I  bowed.  Veneration,  esteem,  and  concern,  from 
the  thought  of  what  that  might  be,  all  joined  to 
make  my  obeisance  profound. 

I  was  going  to  speak.  She  prevented  me.  Her 
air  and  manner  were  great. 

You  are  welcome.  Sir,  said  she.  My  mamma 
bid  me  say  welcome.  I  could  not  then  speak :  and 
she  was  so  good  to  you,  as  to  answer  for  my  heart. 
My  voice  is  now  found :  but  tell  me — Do  1  see  the 
same  generous,  the  same  noble  Grandison,  that  I 
have  heretofore  seen? — Or,  do  I  see  a  man  inclined 
to  slight  the  creature  whom  her  indulgent  parents 
are  determined  to  oblige,  even  to  the  sacrifice  of 
all  their  views? 

You  see,  madam,  the  same  Grandison,  his  heart 
only  oppressed  with  the  honour  done  him ;  and  with 
the  fear  that  the  happiness  designed  for  him  may 
yet  be  frustrated.  If  it  should,  how  shall  I  be  able 
to  support  myself? 

[What  a  difficult  situation  ,my  dear  Dr.  Bartlett, 


272  THE   HISTORT  OF 

was  mine  ! — Equally  afraid  to  urge  my  suit  with 
ardor,  or  to  be  imagined  capable  of  being  indif- 
ferent to  her  favour,] 

What  do  you  fear,  Sir? — You  have  grounds  in 
your  own  heart,  perhaps,  for  your  fear.  If  you 
havcy  let  me  know  them.  I  am  not  afraid  to  know 
them.  Let  me  tell  you,  that  1  opposed  the  step 
taken.  I  declared  that  I  would  sooner  die,  than  it 
should  be  taken.  It  was  to  you,  they  said  ;  and 
you  would  know  how  to  receive  as  j'^ou  ought  the 
distinction  paid  you.  I  have  a  soul.  Sir,  not  unwor- 
thy of  the  spirit  of  my  ancestors:  tell  me  what  you 
fear? — I  only  fear  one  thing;  and  that  is,  that  I 
should  be  thought  to  be  more  in  your  power 
than  in  my  own. 

Noble  lady  !  And  think  you,  that  while  my  hap- 
piness is  not  yet  absolutely  resolved  upon,  I  have 
not  reason  to  fear  i — You  will  always,  madam,  be 
in  your  own  power :  you  will  be  most  so  when  in 
mine.  My  gratitude  will  ever  prompt  me  to  acknow- 
ledge your  goodness  to  me  as  a  condescension. 

But  say;  tell  me.  Sir;  Did  you  not,  at  first  re- 
ceiving the  invitation,  despise,  in  absence,  the 
Clementina,  that  now  perhaps,  in  presence,  you 
have  the  goodness  to  pity  ? 

O  that  the  high-souled  Clementina  would  not 
think  so  contemptibly  of  the  man  before  her,  as 
she  must  think,  when  she  puts  a  question  that  would 
intitle  him  to  infamy,  could  he  presume  to  imagine 
an  ansxver  to  it  necessary ! 

Well,  Sir ;  I  shall  see  how  far  the  advances  made 
on  the  tvrong  side  will  be  justified,  or  rather  counte- 
nanced, by  the  advances,  or,  shall  I  say  (I  will  if 
you  please)  condescensions  to  be  made  on  yours. 

[What  a  petulance,  thought  I ! — But  can  the  ge- 
nerous, the  noble  Clementina,  knowing  that  terms  will 
be  proposed,  with  which  in  honour  and  conscience 
I  cannot  comply,  put  my  regard  for  her  on  such  a 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  273 

test  as  this? — I  will  not  suppose  that  she  is  capable 
of  mingling  art  with  her  magnanimity.] 

Is  this,  madam,  said  I,  a  generous  anticipation  ? 
Forgive  me ;  but  when  your  friends  are  so  good  as  to 
think  me  incapable  of  returning  ingratitude  for  obli- 
gation, I  hope  I  shall  not  be  classed,  by  their  beloved 
daughter,  among  the  lowest  of  mankind. 

Excuse  me,  Sir ;  the  woman  who  has  been  once 
wrong,  has  reason  to  be  always  afraid  of  herself  If 
you  do  not  think  meanly  of  me,  I  will  endeavour  to 
think  well  of  myself !  and  then,  Sir,  I  shall  think 
better  oi you,  if  better  I  can  think  :  for,  after  all, 
did  I  not  more  mistrust  myself  ihoxi  I  doyow,  I  should 
not  perhaps  be  so  capricious  as,  I  am  afraid,  I  some- 
times am. 

The  marquis  has  hinted  to  me,  madam,  that 
your  brother  the  bishop  is  to  discourse  with  me  on 
the  subject  now  the  nearest  to  my  heart  of  all  others; 
may  I  presume  to  address  myself  to  their  beloved 
daughter  upon  it,  without  being  thought  capable  of 
endeavouring  to  prepossess  her  in  my  favour  before 
my  lord  and  I  meet  ? 

I  will  answer  you  frankly,  Sir :  there  are  preli- 
minaries to  be  settled;  and,  till  they  are,  I  that  knovo 
there  are,  do  not  think  myself  at  liberty  to  hear  you 
upon  any  subject  that  may  tend  to  prepossession. 

I  acquiesce,  madam :  I  would  not  for  the  world  be 
thought  to  wish  for  the  honour  of  your  attention, 
while  it  is  improper  for  you  to  favour  me  with  it. 

[1  did  not  know.  Dr.  Bartlett,  but  upon  a  suppo- 
sition of  a  mutual  interest  between  us,  as  I  had  hoped 
she  would  allow,  Clementina  might  wish  that  I  would 
lead  to  some  particular  discourse.  Though  modesty 
becomes  ours  as  well  as  the  other  sex,  yet  it  would 
be  an  indelicacy  not  to  prevent  a  lady,  m  some  cer- 
tain cases.  But  thus  discouraged,]  Perhaps,  madam, 


2'74«  THE    HISTORY   OF 

said  I,  the  attendance  I  do  myself  the  honour  to  pay 
you  here,  may  not  be  agreeable  to  the  marquis. 

Then,  Sir,  you  will  choose,  perhaps,  to  withdraw. 
But  don't — Yes,  do. 

I  respectfully  withdrew;  but  she  taking  a  winding 
alley,  which  led  into  that  in  which  I  slowly  walked, 
we  met  again.  I  am  afraid,  said  she,  I  have  been  a 
little  petulant :  indeed,  Sir,  I  am  not  satisfied  with 
myself.     I  wish — And  there  she  stopt. 

What,  madam,  do  you  wish  ?  Favour  me  with 
your  wishes.     If  it  be  in  mt/  power — - 

It  is  not,  interrupted  she — I  wish  I  had  not  been 
at  Florence*,.  The  lady  I  was  with,  is  a  good  woman  ; 
but  she  was  too  hard  for  me.  Perhaps  (and  she 
sighed)  had  I  not  been  with  her,  I  had  been  at  rest, 
and  happy,  before  now ;  but  if  I  had  not,  there  is  a 
pleasure,  as  well  as  pain,  in  melancholy.  But  now 
1  am  so  fretful ! — If  I  hated  the  bitterest  enemy  I 
have,  as  mtich  as  at  times  I  hate  myself,  I  should  be 
a  very  bad  creature. 

This  was  spoken  with  an  air  so  melancholy,  as 
greatly  disturbed  me,  God  gi-ant,  thought  I,  that 
the  articles  of  religion  and  residence  may  be  agreed 
upon  between  the  bishop  and  me ! 

Here,  my  good  Miss  Byron,  I  close  this  letter. 
Sir  Charles  has  told  you,  briefly,  the  event  of  the 
conference  between  the  bishop  and  him ;  and  I 
hasten  to  obey  you  in  your  next  article. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  275 

LETTER  XXVI. 

MISS    BYRON    TO    MISS    SELBY. 

Thursday  morning,  Marcli  SO. 
I  SEND  you  now  inclosed  the  doctor's  fourth  letter. 
I  believe  I  must  desire  my  grandmamma  and  my 
aunt  Selby  to  send  for  me  down. 

We  shall  all  be  in  London  this  evening. 

Would  to  Heaven  I  had  never  come  to  it ! — What 
of  pleasure  have  I  had  in  it  ? — This  abominable  Sir 
Hargrave  PoUexfen ! — But  for  him  I  had  been  easy 
and  happy ;  since  but  for  him  I  had  never  wanted  the 
relief  of  Sir  Charles  Grandison  ;  never  had  known 
him.  Fame  might  perhaps  have  brought  to  my  ears, 
in  general  conversation,  as  other  persons  of  distinc- 
tion are  talked  of,  some  of  his  benevolent  actions : 
and  he  would  have  attracted  my  admiration  without 
costing  me  one  sigh.  And  yet,  had  it  been  so,  I 
should  then  have  known  none  of  those  lively  sensi- 
bilities that  have  mingled  pleasure  with  my  pain,  on 
tlie  pride  I  have  had  in  being  distinguished  as  a  sis- 
ter to  the  sisters  of  so  extraordinary  a  man.  O  that 
I  had  kept  my  foolish  heart  free !  I  should  then  have 
had  enough  to  boast  of  for  my  whole  life ;  enough 
to  talk  of  to  every  one :  and  when  I  had  been  asked 
by  my  companions  and  intimates,  What  diversions, 
what  entertainments,  I  had  been  at  ?  I  should  have 
said,  '  I  have  been  in  company  and  conversed  with 
Sir  Charles  Grandison;  and  been  favoured  and 
distinguished  by  all  his  family:'  and  I  should  have 
passed  many  a  happy  winter  evening,  when  my  com- 
panions came  to  work  and  read  with  me  at  Selby- 
house,  in  answering  their  questions  about  all  these; 
and  Sir  Charles  would  have  been  known  among  us 
principally  by  the  name  of  Thejine  gentleman  }  and 


276  THE    HISTORY    OF 

my  young  friends  would  have  come  about  me,  and 
asked  me  to  tell  them  something  more  of  The  excel- 
lent man. 

But  now  my  ambition  has  overthrown  me  :  aim- 
ing, wishing,  to  be  every  thing,  I  am  nothing.  If 
I  am  asked  about  him,  or  his  sisters,  I  shall  seek  to 
evade  the  subject:  and  yet,  what  other  subject  can 
I  talk  of?  For  what  have  I  seen,  what  have  1  known, 
since  I  left  Northamptonshire,  but  him  and  them ; 
and  what  else,  indeed,  since  I  have  known  this  fa- 
mily, have  I  wished  to  see,  and  to  know  ? 

On  reviewing  the  above,  how  have  I,  as  I  see, 
suffered  my  childish  fancies  to  delude  me  into  a 
short  forgetfulness  oi his,  oievery-hoAys,  distresses! 
— But,  O  my  Lucy,  my  heart  is  torn  in  pieces ;  and, 
I  verily  think,  more  for  the  unhappy  Clementina's 
sake,  than  for  my  own !  How  severely  do  I  pay  for 
my  curiosity !  Yet  it  was  necessary  that  I  should 
know  the  worst.  So  Sir  Charles  seems  to  have 
thought,  by  the  permission  he  has  given  to  Dr. 
Bartlett,  to  oblige  me. 

Your  pity  will  be  more  raised  on  reading  the 
letter  I  inclose,  not  only  for  Clementina  and  Sir 
Charles,  but  for  the  whole  family ;  none  of  whom, 
though  they  are  all  unhappy,  are  to  be  blamed. 
You  will  dearly  love  the  noble  Jeronymo,  and  be 
pleased  with  the  young  lady's  faithful  Camilla: 
but,  my  dear,  there  is  so  much  tenderness  in  Sir 
Charles's  woe — It  must  be  love — But  he  ought  to 
love  Clementina:  she  is  a  glorious,  though  unhappy 
young  creature.  I  must  not  have  one  spark  of  ge- 
nerosity left  in  my.  heart,  I  must  be  lost  wholly  in 
self,  if  I  did  not  equally  admire  and  love  her. 

DR.  BARTLETT's   fourth    LETTER, 

As  I  remember,  madam,  Sir  Charles  mentions  to 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  277 

you,  in  a  very  pathetic  manner,  the  distress  he  was 
in  when  the  terms  and  conditions,  on  which  he  was 
to  be  allowed  to  call  the  noble  Clementina  his,  were 

Kroposed  to  him  ;  as  they  were  by  the  bishop.  He 
as  briefly  told  you  the  terms,  and  his  grief  to  be 
obliged  to  disappoint  the  expectation  of"  persons  so 
deservedly  dear  to  him.  But  you  will  not,  I  believe, 
be  displeased,  if  I  dwell  a  little  more  on  these  par- 
ticulars, though  they  are  not  commanded  from  me. 
The  bishop,  when  he  had  acquainted  Mr.  Gran- 
dison  with  the  terms,  said,  You  are  silent,  my  dear 
Grandison :  you  hesitate.  What,  Sir !  Is  a  proposal 
of  a  daughter  of  one  of  the  noblest  families  in  Italy ; 
that  daughter  a  Clementina  ;  to  be  slighted  by  a  man 
of  a  private  family  ;  a  foreigner  ;  of  dependent  for- 
tunes ;  her  dowry  not  unworthy  of  a  prince's  ac- 
ceptance ?  Do  you  hesitate  upon  such  a  proposal 
as  this,  Sir  ? 

My  lord,  I  am  grieved,  rather  than  surprised,  at 
the  proposal :  I  was  apprehensive  it  would  be  made. 
My  joy  at  receiving  the  condescending  invitation, 
and  at  the  honours  done  me,  on  my  arrival,  other- 
wise would  have  been  immoderate. 

A  debate  then  followed,  upon  some  articles  in 
which  the  church  of  Rome  and  the  Protestant 
churches  differ.  Mr.  Grandison  would  fain  have 
avoided  it;  but  the  bishop,  supposing  he  should 
•  have  some  advantages  in  the  argument,  which 
he  met  not  with,  would  not  permit  him.  He 
was  very  warm  with  Mr.  Grandison  more  than 
once,  which  did  not  help  his  cause. 
The  particulars  of  this  debate  I  will  not  at  this 
time  give  you :  they  would  carry  me  into  great 
length ;  and  I  have  much  to  transcribe,  that  I 
believe,  from  what  Sir  Charles  has  let  me  see 
of  your  manner  of  writing  to  your  friends,  you 
would  prefer.    To  that  1  will  proceed ;  after  a 

B  B 


278  THE   HISTORY   OF 

passage  or  two,  which  will  shew  you  how  that 
debate,  about  the  difference  in  religion,  went 
off. 

You  will  call  to  mind,  chevalier,  said  the  bishop, 
that  your  church  allows  of  a  possibility  of  salvation 
out  of  its  pale — Ours  does  not. 

My  lord,  our  church  allows  not  of  its  members 
indulging  themselves  in  capital  errors,  against  con- 
viction :  but  I  hope  that  no  more  need  to  be  said 
on  this  subject. 

I  think,  replied  the  bishop,  we  will  quit  it.  I  did 
not  expect  that  you  were  so  firmly  rooted  in  error, 
as  I  find  you :  but  to  the  point  on  which  we  began : 
I. should  think  it  an  extraordinary  misfortune,  were 
we  to  find  ourselves  reduced  to  the  necessity  of 
reasoning  a  private  man  into  the  acceptance  of  our 
sister  Clementina.  Let  me  tell  you,  Sir,  that  were 
she  to  know  that  you  but  hesitate — He  spoke  with 
earnestness,  and  reddened. 

Pardon  an  interruption,  my  lord :  you  are  disposed 
to  be  warm.  I  will  not  so  much  as  offer  to  defend 
myself  from  any  imputations  that  may,  in  displeasure, 
be  cast  upon  me,  as  if  I  were  capable  of  slighting 
the  honour  intended  me  of  a  lady  who  is  worthy  of 
a  prince.  I  am  persuaded  that  your  lordship  cannot 
think  such  a  defence  necessary.  I  am  indeed  a  pri- 
vate man,  but  not  inconsiderable  ;  if  the  being  able 
to  enumerate  a  long  race  of  ancestors,  whom  hitherto 
I  have  not  disgraced,  will  give  me  consideration. 
But  what,  my  lord,  is  ancestry.  I  live  to  my  own 
heart.  My  principles  were  known  before  I  had  the  con- 
descending invitation.  Your  lordship  would  not  per- 
suade me  to  change  them,  when  I  cannot  think  them 
wrong;  and  since,  as  you  have  heard,  1  have  some- 
thing to  offer,  when  called  upon,  in  support  of  them. 

You  will  consider  this  matter,  my  dear  chevalier. 
It  is  you,  I  think,  that  are  disposed  to  be  warm  ;  but 


SIR  CHARLES  GRAKDISON.  279 

you  are  a  valuable  man.  We,  as  well  as  our  sister, 
wish  to  have  you  among  us :  our  church  would  wish 
it.  Such  a  proselyte  will  justify  us  to  every  other 
consideration,  and  to  all  our  friends.  Consider  of 
it,  Grandison  ;  but  let  it  not  be  known  to  the  prin- 
cipals of  our  family,  that  you  think  consideration 
necessary  :  the  dear  Clementina,  particularly,  must 
not  know  it.  Your  person,  chevalier,  is  not  so  dear 
to  the  excellent  creature,  as  your  soul.  Hence  it  is, 
that  we  are  all  willing  to  encourage  in  her  a  flame 
so  pure,  and  so  bright. 

My  distress,  my  lord,  is  beyond  the  power  of 
words  to  describe.  I  revere,  1  honour,  and  will  to 
my  last  hour,  the  Marquis  and  Marchioness  of  Por- 
retta,  and  on  better  motives  than  for  their  grandeur 
or  nobility.  Their  sons — You  know  not,  my  lord, 
the  pride  I  have  always  had  to  be  distinguished  even 
by  a  nominal  relation  to  them :  and  give  me  your 
Clementina,  without  the  hard  conditions  you  pre- 
scribe, and  I  shall  be  happy  beyond  my  highest 
wish.  I  desire  not  dowry  with  her.  I  have  a  father 
on  whose  generosity  and  affection  F  can  rely.  But  I 
must  repeat,  my  lord,  that  my  principles  are  so  well 
known,  that  I  hoped  a  compromise  would  be  accept- 
ed. I  would  not  for  the  world  compel  your  sister. 
The  same  liberty  that  I  crave,  I  would  allow. 

And  will  you  not  take  time.  Sir,  to  consider !  Are 
you  absolutely  determined  ? 

If  your  lordship  knew  the  pain  it  gives  me  to  say 
that  /  am,  you  would  pity  me. 

Well,  Sir,  I  am  sorry  for  it.  Let  us  go  in  to 
Signor  Jeronymo.  He  has  been  your  advocate  ever 
since  he  knew  you.  Jeronymo  has  gratitude ;  but 
you,  chevalier,  have  no  affections. 

I  thank  God,  said  I,  that  your  lordship  does  not 
do  me  justice. 

He  led  me  into  his  brother's  apartment. 
Pb2 


280  THE    HISTORY    OF 

There,  what  did  I  not  suft'er,  from  the  friendship, 
from  the  love  of  that  brother,  and  from  the  urgency 
of  the  bishop !     But  what  was  the  result  ? 

The  bishop  asked  me,  If  he  were  to  conduct  me 
to  his  father,  to  his  mother,  to  his  sister  ?  Or  to 
allow  me  to  depart  without  seeing  them? — This 
was  the  alternative.  My  compliance  or  non-compli- 
ance was  to  be  thus  indicated.  I  respectfully  bowed. 
I  recommended  myself  to  the  favour  of  the  two  bro- 
thers, and  through  them  to  that  of  the  three  truly- 
respectable  persons  they  had  named ;  and  withdrew 
to  my  lodgings  with  a  heart  sorely  distressed. 

I  was  unable  to  stir  out  for  the  remainder  of  the 
day.  The  same  chair  into  which  I  threw  myself, 
upon  my  first  coming  in,  held  me  for  hours. 

In  the  evening  Camilla,  in  disguise,  made  me  a 
visit.  On  my  servant's  withdrawing,  revealing  her- 
self, O  Sir,  said  she,  what  a  distracted  family  have 
I  left !  They  know  not  of  my  coming  hither ;  but 
I  could  not  forbear  this  officiousness :  I  cannot  stay. 
But  let  me  just  tell  you  how  unhappy  we  are ;  and 
your  own  generosity  will  suggest  to  you,  what  is 
best  to  be  done. 

As  soon  as  you  were  gone,  my  lord  bishop  ac- 
quainted my  lady  marchioness  with  what  had  passed 
between  you.  O  Sir !  you  have  an  affectionate  friend 
in  Signer  Jeronymo.  He  endeavoured  to  soften 
every-thing.  My  lady  marchioness  acquainted  my 
lord  with  the  bishop's  report.  1  never  saw  that  good 
nobleman  in  such  a  passion.  It  is  not  necessary  to 
tell  you  what  he  said — 

In  a  passion  with  me,  Camilla  1 

Yes.  He  thought  the  whole  family  dishonoured, 
Sir. 

The  Marquis  della  Porretta  is  the  worthiest  of 
men,  Camilla,  said  I.    I  honour  him — But  proceed. 

The  marchioness,  in  the  tenderest  manner,  broke 
5 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDI80N.  281 

the  matter  to  my  young  lady :  I  was  present.  She 
apprehended,  that  there  might  be  occasion  for  my 
attendance,  and  commanded  me  to  stay. 

Before  she  could  speak  all  she  had  to  say,  my 
young  lady  threw  herself  on  her  knees  to  her  mamma, 
and  blessing  her  for  her  goodness  to  her,  begged  her 
to  spare  the  rest.  I  see,  said  she,  that  I,  a  daugh- 
ter  of  the  Porretta  family,  your  daughter,  madam, ' 
am  refused.  Palliate  not,  I  beseech  you,  the  indigo 
nity.  You  need  not.  It  is  enough,  that  I  am  re- 
fused. Surely,  madam,  your  Clementina  is  not  so 
base  in  spirit,  as  to  need  your  maternal  consolation 
on  such  a  contempt  as  this.  I  feel  for  my  father, 
for  you,  madam,  and  for  my  brothers,  I  feel  the  in^- 
dignity.  Blessings  follow  the  man  wherever  he 
goes !  It  would  be  mean  to  be  angry  with  him. 
He  is  his  own  master ;  and  now  he  has  made  me  my 
own  mistress.  Never  fear,  madam,  but  this  affair 
now  will  sit  as  light  upon  me,  as  it  ought.  His  hu- 
mility will  allow  him  to  be  satisfied  with  a  meaner 
wife.  You,  madam,  my  father,  my  brothers,  shall 
not  find  me  mean. 

The  marchioness  embraced,  with  tears  of  joy,  her 
beloved  daughter.  She  brought  my  lord  to  her,  and 
reported  what  her  daughter  had  said :  he  also  ten- 
derly embraced  the  dear  young  lady,  and  rejoiced 
in  her  assurances,  that  now  the  cure  was  effected. 

But,  unseasonably,  as  the  event  shewed.  Father 
Marescotti,  being  talked  with,  was  earnest  to  be  al- 
lowed to  visit  her :  Then,  he  said,  was  the  proper 
time,  the  very  crisis,  to  urge  her  to  accept  of  the 
Count  of  Belvedere. 

I  was  bid  to  tell  her,  that  his  reverence  desired 
to  attend  her. 

O  let  me  go,  said  she,  to  Florence ;  to  my  dear 
IMrs.  Beaumont !— To-morrow  morning  let  me  go : 

BBS 


282  THE  HISTORY  OF 

and  not  see  Father  Marescotti,  till  I  can  see  him  as 
1  wish  to  see  him ! 

But  the  good  father  prevailed:  he  meant  the  best. 

He  was  with  her  half  an  hour.  He  left  her  in  a 
melancholy  way.  When  the  marchioness  went  to 
her,  she  found  her  spiritless,  her  eyes  fixed,  and  as 
gloomy  as  ever.  She  was  silent  to  two  or  three  of 
her  mother's  questions  ;  and  when  she  did  speak,  it 
was  with  wildness ;  but  declaring,  without  being  so- 
licited in  the  Count  of  Belvedere's  favour,  against 
marrying  him,  or  any  man  in  the  world. 

Her  mother  told  her,  she  should  go  to  Florence, 
as  soon  as  she  pleased :  but  then  the  humour  was 
off.  Would  to  Heaven  she  had  gone  before  she 
saw  his  reverence !     So  they  all  now  wish. 

Camilla,  said  she  to  me,  when  we  were  alone, 
Was  it  necessary  to  load  the  Chevalier  Grandison? 
Was  it  necessary  to  inveigh  against  him  ? — It  was 
ungenerous  to  do  so.  Was  the  man  obliged  to  have 
the  creature  whose  forwardness  had  rendered  her 
contemptible  in  his  eyes  ?  I  could  not  bear  to  hear 
him  inveighed  against.  But  never,  never,  let  me 
hear  his  name  mentioned.  Yet,  Camilla,  I  cannot 
bear  being  despised,  neither. 

She  arose  from  her  seat,  and  from  that  moment 
her  humour  took  a  different  turn.  She  now  talks : 
she  raves :  she  starts :  she  neither  sits  nor  stands  with 
quietness — She  walks  up  and  down  her  room,  at 
other  times,  with  passion  and  hurry;  yet  weeps 
not,  though  she  makes  every-body  else  weep.  She 
speaks  to  herself,  and  answers  herself;  and,  as  I 
guess,  repeats  part  of  the  talk  that  passed  between 
Father  Marescotti  and  her:  but  still.  To  be  despised! 
are  the  words  she  oftenest  repeats. — Jesu!  once, 
said  she — To  be  despised! — And  by  an  English  Pro- 
testant !    Who  can  bear  that  ? 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON,  283 

In  this  way,  Sir,  is  Lady  Clementina.  The  sweet- 
est creature  ! — I  see,  1  see,  you  have  compassion, 
Sir !  You  never  wanted  humanity !  Generosity  is 
a  part  of  your  nature !  I  am  sure  you  love  her — I 
see  you  love  her — I  pain  your  noble  heart!— In- 
deed, indeed,  Sir,  Lady  Clementina's  love  extended 
beyond  the  limits  of  this  world :  she  hoped  to  be 
yours  to  all  eternity. 

Well  might  Camilla,  the  sensible,  the  faithful,  the 
affectionate  Camilla,  the  attendant  from  infant  years 
of  her  beloved  Clementina,  thus  run  on,  without  in- 
terruption. I  could  not  speak.  And  had  I  been 
able,  to  what  purpose  should  I  have  pleaded  to  Ca- 
milla the  superior  attachment  which  occasioned  an 
anguish  that  words  cannot  describe  ? 

What  can  I  say,  but  thank  you,  my  good  Camilla, 
for  your  intention  ?  I  hope  you  have  eased  your  own 
heart ;  but  you  have  loaded  mine — Nevertheless,  I 
thank  you.  W^ould  to  Heaven  that  your  lady's  own 
wishes  had  been  complied  with ;  that  she  had  been 
encouraged  to  go  to  the  excellent  Mrs.  Beaumont! 
The  first  natural  impulses  of  the  distressed  heart  often 
point  out  the  best  alleviation.  Would  to  Heaven 
they  had  been  pursued !  I  have  great  dependence 
on  the  generous  friendship  of  Signor  Jeronymo. 
All  that  is  in  my  power  to  do,  I  will  do.  I  honour, 
I  venerate,  every  one  of  the  truly-noble  family :  I 
never  can  deserve  their  favour.  On  all  occasions, 
Camilla,  let  them  know  my  devotion  to  them. 

I  beg  of  God,  said  she,  to  put  it  into  your  heart 
to  restore  the  tranquillity  of  a  family  which  was,  till 
lately,  the  happiest  in  Bologna.  It  may  not  be  yet 
too  late.  I  beg  of  you  to  excuse  my  officiousness. 
Pray  take  no  notice  that  I  have  waited  on  you.  I 
shall  be  wanted. 

She  was  hastening  away.  Good  Camilla,  said  I, 
taking  a  ring  of  some  value  from  my  finger,  and 


284  THE   HISTORY   OF 

forcing  it  upon  hers  (she  is  above  accepting  of  pc-^ 
cuniary  presents,  and  struggled  against  this)  Accept 
this  as  a  remembrance,  not  acknowledgment.  I  may 
be  forbid  the  palace  of  the  Marquis  della  Porretta, 
and  so  have  no  opportunity  again  to  see  the  equally 
faithful  and  obliging  Camilla. 

What  other  conditions  could  have  been  prescribe 
ed,  Dr.  Bartlett,  that  I  should  have  refused  to  com- 
ply with?  How  was  I  anew  distressed,  at  the  account 
Camilla  gave  me !  But  my  great  consolation  in  the 
whole  transaction  is,  that  my  own  heart,  on  the 
maturest  deliberation,  acquits  me  :  and  the  rather, 
as  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  practise  a  greater  piece 
of  self-denial :  for  can  there  be  on  earth  a  nobler 
woman  than  Clementina? 

The  next  morning,  early,  Mr.  Grandison  received 
the  following  letter  from  his  friend  Signor  Jeronymo. 
1  translated  it,  my  good  Miss  Byron,  at  the  time  I 
received  it.     1  will  send  you  the  translation,  only. 

MT  DEAR  CHEVALIER  ! 

Shall  I  blame  you  ? — I  cannot.  Shall  I  bfeme  my 
father,  my  mother  ? — They  blame  themselves,  for 
the  free  access  you  were  allowed  to  have  to  their 
Clementina ;  yet  they  own,  that  you  acted  nobly. 
But  they  had  forgot  that  Clementma  had  eyes.  Yet 
who  knew  not  her  discernment?  Who  knew  not  her 
regard  for  merit,  wherever  she  found  it  ?  Can  I 
therefore  blame  my  sister? — Indeed*  no.  Has 
she  a  brother  whom  I  can  blame  ? — No.  But  ought 
I  not  to  blame  myself?  The  dear  creature  owned, 
it  seems,  to  Mi-s.  Beaumont,  that  my  declaration 
in  your  favour,  which  Avas  made  long  before  you 
knew  it,  was  one  of  her  influences.  Must  I  there- 
fore accuse  myself? — If  I  regard  my  intention, 
gratitude,  for  a  life  preserved  by  you,  and  for  a  sense 
of  my  social  duties  (soul  as  well  as  body  indebted  to 


SIR   CHARLES    ORANDISON.  285 

you,  though  a  Protestant  yourself)  will  not  suffer  it. 
Is  there  then  nobody  whom  we  can  blame  for  the 
calamity  befallen  us  ? — How  strangely  is  that  cala- 
mity circumstanced ! 

But  is  there  so  irreconcileable  a  difference  between 
the  two  religions  ? — There  is :  the  bishop  says  there 
is  :  Clementina  thinks  there  is :  my  father,  my  mo- 
ther, think  there  is. 

But  does  your  father  think  so  ?  Will  you  put  the 
whole  matter  on  that  issue,  chevalier  ? 

O  no,  you  will  not.  You  are  as  determined  as  we 
are  :  yet,  surely,  with  less  reason. 

But  I  debate  not  the  matter  with  you.  I  know 
you  are  a  master  of  the  question. 

But  what  is  to  be  done?  Shall  Clementina  perish? 
Will  not  the  gallant  youth  who  ventured  his  life  so 
successfully  to  save  a  brother,  exert  himself  to  pre- 
serve a  sister  ? 

Come,  and  see  the  way  she  is  in — Yet  they  will 
not  admit  you  into  her  presence  while  she  is  in  that 
way. 

The  sense  she  has  of  her  dignity  debased,  and  the 
perpetual  expostulations  and  apprehensions  of  her 
zealous  confessor — Can  the  good  man  think  it  his 
duty  to  wound  and  tear  in  pieces  a  mind  tenacious 
of  its  honour,  and  of  that  of  her  sex  ?  At  last,  you 
see,  I  have  found  somebody  to  accuse. — But  I  come 
to  my  motive  for  giving  you  this  trouble. 

It  is  to  request  you  to  make  me  a  visit.  Breakfast 
with  me,  my  dear  chevalier,  this  morning.  You 
will  perhaps  see  nobody  else. 

Camilla  has  told  me,  and  only  me,  that  she  attend- 
ed you  last  night :  she  tells  me  how  greatly  you  are 
grieved.  I  should  renounce  your  friendship,  were 
you  not.  At  my  soul,  I  pity  you,  because  I  knew, 
long  since,  your  firm  attachment  to  your  religion ; 
and  because  you  love  Clementina. 


286  THE    HISTORY   0¥ 

I  wish  I  were  able  to  attend  i/ou ;  I  would  save 
you  the  pain  of  this  visit ;  for  1  know  it  must  pain 
you  :  but  come,  nevertheless. 

You  hinted  to  my  brother,  that  you  thought,  as 
your  principles  were  so  well  known,  a  compromise 
would  be  accepted — Explain  yourself  to  me  upon 
this  compromise.  If  I  can  smooth  the  way  between 
you — Yet  I  despair  that  any  thing  will  do  but  your 
conversion.  They  love  your  soul ;  thei/  think  they 
love  it  better  than  you  do  yourself.  Is  there  not  a 
merit  in  them,  which  you  cannot  boast  in  return  ? 

The  general,  I  hear,  came  to  town  last  night : 
we  have  not  seen  him  yet.  He  had  business  with 
the  gonfalionere.  I  think  you  must  not  meet.  He  is 
warm.  He  adores  Clementina.  He  knew  not,  till 
last  night,  that  the  bishop  broke  it  to  him  at  that 
magistrate's,  our  unhappy  situation.  What  a  disap- 
pointment !  One  of  the  principal  views  he  had  in 
coming  was,  to  do  you  honour,  and  to  give  his  sis- 
ter pleasure.  Ah,  Sir!  he  came  to  be  present  at  two 
solemn  acts  :  the  one  your  nuptials,  in  consequence 
of  the  other. — You  must  not  meet.  It  would  go  to 
my  heart,  to  have  offence  given  you  by  any  of  my 
family,  especially  in  our  own  house. 

Come,  however ;  I  long  to  see  you,  and  to  com- 
fort you,  whether  your  hard  heart  (I  did  not  use  to 
think  it  a  hard  one)  vvill  allow  you,  or  not,  to  give 
comfort  to 

Your  ever-affectionate  and  faithful  friend, 
JERONYMO  DELLA  PORRETTA. 

I  accepted  of  the  invitation.  My  heart  was  in 
this  family  :  I  longed,  before  this  letter  came,  to  see 
and  to  hear  from  it.  The  face  of  the  meanest  ser- 
vant belonging  to  it  would  have  been  more  than  wel- 
come to  me.  What,  however,  were  my  hopes  ?  Yet, 
do  you  think,  Dr.  Bartlett,  that  I  had  not  pain  in 


sift   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  287 

going  ;  a  pain  that  took  more  than  its  turn,  with 
the  desire  I  had  once  more  to  enter  doors  that  used 
to  be  opened  to  me  with  so  much  pleasure  on  both 

kiides  ? 

DR.  BARTLETT's  fifth  LETTER. 

Mr.  Grandison  thus  proceeds  :  I  was  introduced 
to  Signer  Jeronymo.  He  sat  expecting  me.  He 
bowed  more  stiffly  than  usual,  in  return  to  my  com- 
pliment, 

I  see,  said  I,  that  I  have  lost  my  friend. 

Impossible,  said  he.     It  cannot  be. 

Then  speaking  of  his  sister,  Dear  creature  !  said 
he.  A  very  bad  night.  My  poor  mother  has  been 
up  with  her  ever  since  three  o'clock :  nobody  else 
has  any  influence  with  her.  These  talking  fits  are 
worse  than  her  silent  ones. 

What  could  I  say  ?  My  soul  was  vexed.  My 
friend  saw  it,  and  was  grieved  for  me.  He  talked 
of  indifferent  things.  I  could  not  follow  him  in 
them. 

He  then  entered  upon  the  subject  that  would  not 
long  allow  of  any  other.  I  expect  the  general,  said 
he.  I  will  not,  I  think,  have  you  see  each  other.  I 
have  ordered  notice  to  be  given  me  before  any  one 
of  the  family  is  admitted  while  you  are  with  me. 
If  you  choose  not  to  see  the  general,  or  my  father 
or  mother,  should  they  step  in  to  make  their  morn- 
ing compliments,  you  can  walk  down  the  back-stairs 
into  the  garden,  or  into  the  next  chamber. 

I  am  not  the  least  sufferer  in  this  distress,  replied 
I.  You  have  invited  me.  If  on  your  own  account 
you  would  have  me  withdraw,  I  will;  but  else  I 
cannot  conceal  myself. 

This  is  like  you.    It  is  you  yourself.    O  Grandi- 


288  THE    HISTORY   OF 

son !  that  we  could  be  real  brothers  ? — In  soul  we  are 
so.     But  what  is  the  compromise  you  hinted  at  ? 

I  then  told  him,  That  I  would  reside  one  year  in 
Italy,  another  in  England,  by  turns,  if  the  dear  Cle- 
mentina would  accompany  me ;  if  not,  but  three 
months  in  England,  in  every  year.  As  to  religion, 
she  should  keep  her  own ;  her  confessor  only  to  be 
a  man  of  known  discretion. 

He  shook  his  head.  I'll  propose  it  as  from  yourself, 
if  you  would  have  me  do  so,  chevalier.  It  would  do 
with  me  ;  but  will  not  with  any-body  else.  I  have 
undertaken  for  more  than  that  already ;  but  it  will 
not  be  heard  of.  Would  to  God,  chevalier,  that 
you,  for  my  sake,  for  all  our  sakes — But  I  know  you 
have  a  great  deal  to  say  on  this  subject,  as  you  told 
my  brother.  New  converts,  added  he,  may  be  zeal- 
ous; but  you  old  Protestants,  Protestants  by  descent, 
as  I  may  say,  'tis  strange  you  should  be  so  very  sted- 
fast.  You  have  not  many  young  gentlemen,  I  be- 
lieve, who  would  be  so  very  tenacious  ;  such  offers, 
such  advantages — And  surely  you  must  love  my 
sister.  All  our  family,  you  surely  love.  I  will  pre- 
sume to  say,  they  deserve  your  love ;  and  they  give 
the  strongest  proofs  that  can  be  given  of  their  regard 
for  you. 

Signor  Jeronymo  expected  not  an  argumentative 
answer  to  what  he  said.  My  stedfastness  was  best 
expressed,  and  surely  it  was  sufficiently  expressed 
(the  circumstances  of  the  case  so  interesting)  by 
silence. 

Just  then  came  in  Camilla.  The  marchioness, 
Sir,  knows  you  are  here.  She  desires  you  will  not 
go  till  she  sees  you.  She  will  attend  you  here,  I 
believe. 

She  is  persuading  Lady  Clementina  to  be  blood- 
ed.    She  has  an  aversion  to  that  operation.     She 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  289 

hegs  it  may  not  be  clone.  She  has  been  hitlierto, 
on  that  account,  bled  by  leeches.  The  marquis  and 
the  bishop  are  both  gone  out.  They  could  not  bear 
her  solicitations  to  them  to  save  her,  as  she  called 
k. 

The  marchioness  soon  after  entered — Care,  me- 
lancholy, yet  tenderness,  was  in  her  aspect ; — grief 
for  her  daughter's  malady  seemed  fixed  in  the  lines 
of  her  fine  face.  Keep  your  seat,  chevalier.  She 
sat  down,  sighed,  wept ;  but  would  not  have  had 
her  tears  seen. 

Had  I  not  been  so  deeply  concerned  in  the  cause 
of  her  grief,  I  could  have  endeavoured  to  comfort 
her.  But  what  could  I  say?  I  turned  my  head  aside. 
I  would  also  have  concealed  mi/  emotion ;  but  Signer 
Jeronymo  took  notice  of  it. 

The  poor  chevalier,  kindly  said  he,  with  an  accent 
of  compassion 

I  don't  doubt  it,  answered  she,  as  kindly,  though 
he  spoke  not  out  what  he  had  to  say.  He  may  be 
obdurate  ;  but  not  ungrateful. 

Excellent  woman  !  How  was  I  affected  by  her 
generosity !  This  was  taking  the  direct  road  to  my 
heart.  You  know  that  heart,  Dr.  Bartlett,  and  what 
a  task  it  had. 

Jeronymo  enquired  after  his  sister's  health  ;  I  was 
afraid  to  enquire. 

Not  worse,  I  hope  ;  but  so  talkative !  poor  thing  ! 
She  burst  into  tears. 

I  presumed  to  take  her  hand — O  madam  !  Will 
BO  compromise  !  Will  no 

It  ought  not,  chevalier.  I  cannot  urge  it.  We 
know  your  power,  too  ivell  we  know  your  power, 
over  the  dear  creature.  She  will  not  be  long  a  C  a 
tholic,  if  she  be  yours;  and  you  know  what  we  then 
should  think  of  her  precious  soul !— Better  to  part 

VOL.  XI.  C  c 


290  THE   HISTORY   OF 

with  her  for  ever — Yet,  how  can  a  mother — ^Her 
tears  spoke  what  her  lips  could  not  utter. 

Recovering  her  voice,  I  have  left  her,  said  she, 
contending  with  the  doctors  against  being  let  blood. 
She  wasso  earnest  with  me  to  prevent  it,  that  I  could 
not  stay.     It  is  over  by  this  time — She  rang. 

At  that  moment,  to  the  astonishment  of  all  three, 
in  ran  the  dear  Clementina  herself. — A  happy  es- 
cape !  Thank  God  !  said  she — Her  arm  bound  up. 

She  had  felt  the  lancet ;  but  did  not  bleed  more 
than  two  or  three  drops. 

O  my  mamma !  And  you  would  have  run  away 
from  me  too,  would  you  ! — You  don't  use  to  be  so 
cruel;  and  to  leave  me  with  these  doctors — See!  see! 
and  she  held  out  her  lovely  arm  a  little  bloody,  re- 
garding nobody  but  her  mother;  who,  as  well  as  we, 
was  speechless  with  surprise — They  did  attempt  to 
wound;  but  they  could  not  obtain  their  cruel  ends — 
And  I  ran  for  shelter  to  my  mamma's  arms  (throw- 
ing hers  about  her  neck) — Dearest,  dearest  madam^ 
don't  let  me  be  sacrificed — What  has  your  poor 
child  done,  to  be  thus  treated  ? 

O  my  Clementina ! 

And  O  my  mapma,  too !  Have  I  not  suffered 
enough ! 

The  door  opened.  She  cast  her  fearful  eye  to  it, 
clinging  faster  to  her  mother. — They  are  come  to 
take  me ! — Begone,  Camilla  [it  was  she]  ;  begone, 
when  I  bid  you !  They  sha'n't  take  me — My  mamma 
will  save  me  from  them — Won't  you,  my  mamma  ? 
clasping  more  fervently  her  arms  about  her  neck, 
and  hiding  her  face  in  her  bosom.  Then  lifting 
up  her  face,  Begone,  I  tell  you,  Camilla.  They 
sha'n't  have  me — Camilla  withdrew. 

Brother !  my  dear  brother !  you  will  protect  me : 
won't  you  ? 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  291 

I  arose.  I  was  unable  to  bear  this  affecting  scene 
— She  saw  me. 

Good  God!  said  she. — Then  in  English  breaking 
out  into  that  line  of  Hamlet,  which  she  had  taken 
great  notice  of,  when  we  read  that  play  together — 

Angels,  and  ministersof  grace,  defend  us ! 

She  left  her  mother,  and  stept  gently  towards  me, 
looking  earnestly  with  her  face  held  out,  as  if  she 
were  doubtful  whether  it  were  I,  or  not. 

I  snatched  her  hand,  and  pressed  it  with  my  lips 
— O  madam! — Dearest  lady! — I  could  say  no  more. 

It  is  he!  It  is  he,  indeed,  madam!  turning  her 
head  to  her  mother,  one  hand  held  up,  as  in  sur- 
prise, as  I  detained  the  other. 

The  son's  arms  supported  the  almost  fainting 
mother ;  his  tears  mingling  with  hers. 

For  God's  sake !  for  my  sake,  dear  Grandison  ! 
said  he,  and  stopt. 

I  quitted  Clementina's  hand;  Jeronymo's  un- 
healed wounds  had  weakened  him,  and  1  hastened 
to  support  the  marchioness. 

O  chevalier!  spare  your  concern  for  me,  said 
«he.  My  child's  head  is  of  more  consequence  to 
me,  than  my  own  heart. 

What  was  it  of  distress  that  1  did  not  at  that  mo- 
ment feel ! 

The  young  lady  turning  to  us — Well,  Sir,  said 
she,  here  is  sad  work !  Sad  work,  to  be  sure!  Some- 
body is  wrong:  I  won't  say  who. — But  you  will 
not  let  these  doctors  use  me  ill — Will  you  ? — See 
here !  shewing  her  bound-up  arm  to  me — what  they 
would  have  done! — See!  They  did  get  a  drop  or 
two ;  but  no  more.  And  I  sprung  from  them,  and 
ran  for  it. 

Her  mother  then  taking  her  attention,  My  dear- 
est mamma !  How  do  you ! 
cc2 


292  THE    HISTORY   OF 

O  my  child !  and  slie  clasped  her  arms  about  her 
Clementina. 

Camilla  came  in.  She  added  by  her  grief  to  the 
distressful  scene.  She  threw  her  arms,  kneeling 
about  the  marchioness:  O  my  dearest  lady !  said 
she. — The  marchioness  feeling  for  her  salts^  and 
taking  them  out  of  her  pocket,  and  smelling  to 
them ;  Unclasp  me,  Camilla,  said  she :  I  am  bet- 
ter.    Are  the  doctors  gone  ? 

No,  madam,  whispered  Camilla ;  but  they  say,  it 
is  highly  proper;  and  they  talk  of  blistering ! — 

Not  her  head,  I  hope! — The  dear  creature,  when 
she  used  to  value  herself  upon  any  thing,  took 
pride,  as  well  she  might,  in  her  hair. 

Now  you  are  whispering,  my  mamma — And  this 
impertinent  Camilla  is  come — Camilla,  they  shall 
not  have  me,  /  tell  you ! — See,  barbarous  wretches! 
what  they  have  done  to  me  already!  again  holding 
up  her  arm,  and  then  with  indignation  tearing  off 
the  fillet.  ♦ 

Her  brother  begged  of  her  to  submit  to  the  ope- 
ration. Her  mother  joined  her  gentle  command — 
Well,  I  won't  love  you,  brother,  said  she:  you  are 
in  the  plot  against  me — But  here  is  one  who  mil 
protect  me;  laying  her  hand  upon  my  arm,  and 
looking  earnestly  in  my  face,  with  such  a  mixture 
of  woe  and  tenderness  in  her  eye,  as  pierced  ray 
very  soul. 

Persuade  her,  chevalier,  said  the  marchioness. 

My  good  young  lady,  will  you  not  obey  your 
mamma  ?  You  are  not  well.  Will  you  not  be  well? 
See  how  you  distress  your  noble  brother! 

She  stroked  her  brother's  cheek  (it  was  wet  with 
his  tears)  with  a  motion  inimitably  tender,  her  voice 
as  inimitably  soothing — Poor  Jeronymo !  My  dear- 
est brother! 'And  have  you  not  suffered  enough 
from  vile  assassins?  Poor  dear  brother ! — and  again 
Stroked  his  cheek — How  was  I  affected ! 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  295 

A  fresh  gush  of  tears  broke  from  his  eyes — Ah, 
Grandison!  said  he. 

0  why,  why,  said  I,  did  I  accept  of  your  kind 
invitation  ?  This  distress  could  not  have  been  so 
deep,  had  not  I  been  present. 

See !  see !  chevalier,  holding  out  her  spread  hand 
to  me,  Jeronymo  weeps — He  weeps  for  his  sister,  I 
believe. — These — Look,  my  hand  is  wet  with  them ! 
are  the  tears  of  my  dear  Jeronymo !  My  hand — See ! 
is  wet  with  a  brother's  tears ! — And  t/ou,  madam,  are 
affected  too  !  turning  to  her  mother.  It  is  a  griev- 
ous thing  to  see  men  weep !  What  ail  they  ? — Yet  I 
cannot  weep — Have  they  softer  hearts  than  mine? — • 
Don't  weep,  chevalier. — See,  Jeronymo  has  done! 
— I  would  stroke  your  cheek  too,  if  it  would  stop 
your  tears. — But  what  is  all  this  for? — It  is  because 
of  these  doctors,  I  believe.  But,  Camilla,  bid  them 
begone :  they  sha'n't  have  me. 

Dearest  madam,  said  I,  submit  to  your  mamma's 
advice.  Your  mamma  wishes  you  to  suifer  them  to 
breathe  a  vein — It  is  no  more — Your  Jeronymo  also 
beseeches  you  to  permit  them. 

And  Aoyou  wish  it  too,  chevalier? — Do  t/ou  wish 
to  see  me  wounded? — To  see  my  heart  bleeding  at 
my  arm,  I  warrant.  Say,  can  i/ou  be  so  hard-hearted? 

Let  me  join  with  your  mamma,  with  ^owr  brother, 
to  entreat  it :  for  your  father's  sake,  r  or — 

For  I/our  sake,  chevalier  ? — Well  •  will  it  do  you 
good  to  see  me  bleed  ? 

1  withdrew  to  the  window.  I  could  not  stand 
this  question ;  put  with  an  air  of  tenderness  for  me, 
and  in  an  accent  equally  tender. 

The  irresistible  lady  (O  what  eloquence  in  her 
disorder !)  followed  me;  and  laying  her  hand  on  my 
arm,  looking  earnestly  after  my  averted  face,  as  if 
she  would  not  suffer  me  to  hide  it  from  her — Will 
it,  will  it,  comfort  you  to  see  me  bleed? — Come 
cc3 


294;  THE    HISTORY    OF 

then,  he  comforted;  I  xvilL  bleed:  but  you  shall  not 
leave  me.  You  shall  see  that  these  doctors  shall 
not  kill  me  quite. 

O  Dr.  Bartlett!  How  did  this  address  to  me  tor- 
ture my  very  soul! 

Camilla,  proceeded  she,  I  mil  bleed.  Madam,  to 
her  mother,  Will  it  please  you  to  have  me  bleed  i* 
"Will  it  please  7/ow,  my  Jerony mo?  turning  to  him — 
And,  Sir,  Sir,  stepping  to  me  with  quickness,  Will 
it  please  you  ? — Why  then,  Camilla,  bid  the  doctors 
come  in. — What  would  I  not  do  to  please  such  kind 
friends  ?  You  grudge  not  your  tears :  and  as  I  can- 
not give  you  tears  for  tears,  from  my  eyes,  shall 
not  my  arm  weep?. — But  do  you  stand  by  me,  che- 
valier, while  it  is  done.  You  will  ?  Won't  you  ? — 
seeking  again  with  her  eye  my  averted  face. 

O  that  my  life,  thought  I,  would  be  an  effectual 
offering  for  the  restoring  the  peace  of  mind  of  this 
dear  lady,  and  her  family!  and  that  it  might  be 
taken  by  any  hand  but  my  own ! — But  my  con- 
science!— Prepossessed  as  I  am  in  favour  of  my 
own  religion,  and  in  disfavour  of  that  I  am  wished 
to  embrace ;  how,  thought  I,  can  I  make  a  sacrifice 
of  my  conscience ! 

The  dear  lady  was  then  as  earnest  for  the  opera- 
tion, as  before  she  had  been  averse  to  it :  but  she 
did  and  said  every  thing  in  a  hurry. 

The  marchioness  and  my  friend  were  comforted, 
in  hopes  that  some  relief  would  follow  it.  The  doc- 
tors were  invited  in. 

Do  you  stand  by  me,  Sir,  said  she  to  me. — Come, 
make  haste.  But  it  sha'n't  be  the  same  arm — Ca- 
milla, see,  I  can  bare  my  own  arm — It  will  bleed  at 
this  arm,  I  warrant — I  will  bid  it  flow. — Come, 
make  haste — Are  you  always  so  tedious? — The 
preparation  in  all  these  things,  I  believe,  is  woree 
than  the  act. — Pray,  pray,  make  haste. 

They  did ;  though  she  thought  they  did  not. 


SIR      CHAHLES    GI\ANDISON.  295 

Turn  your  face  another  way,  madam,  said  the 
doctor. 

Now  methinks  lam  Iphigenia,  chevalier,  going  to 
be  offered — looking  at  me,  and  from  the  doctors. 

And  is  this  all  ? — The  puncture  being  made,  and 
she  bleeding  freely. 

The  doctors  were  not  satisfied  with  a  small  quan- 
tity. She  fainted,  however,  before  they  had  taken 
quite  so  much  as  they  intended  ;  and  her  women 
carried  her  out  of  her  brother's  apartment  into  her 
own,  in  the  chair  she  sat  in. 

Dear  Clementina ! — My  compassion  and  my  best 
wishes  followed  her. 

You  see  your  power  over  the  dear  girl,  Grandi- 
son,  said  her  brother. 

The  marchioness  sighed ;  and  looking  at  me 
with  kind  and  earnest  meaning,  withdrew  to  attend 
her  daughter's  recovery. 


LETTER  XXVII. 

MISS   BYRON.      IN   CONTINUATION. 

Receive,  my  Lucy,  the  doctor's  sixth  letter.   The 
fifth  has  almost  broken  the  hearts  of  us  all. 

DR.   BARTLETt's   sixth   LETTER. 

A  scene  of  another  nature  took  place  of  this, 
proceeds  Mr.  Grandison. 

Camilla  stept  in,  and  said,  the  general  was  come; 
and  was  at  that  moment  lamenting  with  the  mar- 
chioness the  disordered  state  of  mind  of  his  beloved 
sister ;  who  had  again  fainted  away ;  but  was  quiet 
when  Camilla  came  in. 
4- 


296  THE    HISTORY    OF 

The  general  will  be  here  presently,  said  Jerony- 
mo.     Do  you  choose  to  see  him  ? 

As,  perhaps,  he  has  been  told  I  am  here,  it  would 
look  too  particular  to  depart  instantly.  If  he  comes 
not  in  soon,  I  will  take  my  leave  of  you. 

I  had  hardly  done  speaking,  when  the  general 
entered,  drying  his  eyes. 

Your  servant,  Mr.  Grandison,  said  he.  Brother, 
How  do  you  ?  Not  the  better,  I  dare  say,  for  the 
present  affliction.  Who  the  devil  would  have  thought 
the  girl  had  been  so  deeply  aftected  ? — Well,  Sir, 
you  have  a  glorious  triumph  ? — Clementina's  heart 
is  not  a  vulgar  one.    Her  family — 

My  lord,  I  hope  I  do  not  deserve  this  address ! — 
Triumph,  my  lord  ! — Not  a  heart  in  this  family  can 
be  more  distressed  than  mine. 

And  is  religion,  is  conscience,  really  of  such 
force,  chevalier? 

Let  me  ask  that  question,  my  lord,  of  your  own 
heart ;  let  me  ask  it  of  your  brother  the  bishop ;  of 
the  other  principals  of  your  noble  family :  and  the 
answer  given  will  be  an  answer  for  me. 

He  seemed  displeased.  Explain  yourself,  che- 
valier. 

If,  my  lord,  said  I,  you  think  there  is  so  great, 
so  essential,  a  difference  in  the  two  religions,  that 
you  cannot  consent  that  I  should  keep  my  own ; 
what  must  I  be,  who  think  as  highly  of  my  own  as 
you  can  of  yours,  to  give  it  up,  though  on  the 
highest  temporal  consideration?  Make  the  case 
your  own,  my  lord. 

I  can.  And  were  I  in  your  situation,  such  a  wo- 
man as  ray  sister ;  such  a  family  as  ours ;  such  a 
splendid  fortune  as  she  will  have ;  I  believe,  I 
should  not  make  the  scruples  you  do.  My  brother 
the  bishop  indeed  might  not  have  given  the  same 
answer ;  he  might  have  been  more  tenacious. 


sill   CHARLES    GUANDISON.  29T 

The  bishop  cannot  be  better  satisfied  with  Ais reli- 
gion than  I  am  witli  mirie.  But  I  hope,  my  lord, 
Jrom  tohatyou  have  said,  that  I  may  claim  the  honour 
of  your  friendship  in  this  great  article.  It  is  pro- 
posed to  me,  that  I  renounce  my  religion :  I  make 
no  such  proposal  to  your  family  :  on  the  contrary,  I 
consent  that  Lady  Clementina  should  keep  hers ; 
and  I  am  ready  to  allow  a  very  handsome  provision 
for  a  discreet  man,  her  confessor,  to  attend  her,  in 
order  to  secure  her  in  it.  As  to  residence ;  I  will 
consent  to  reside  one  year  in  Italy,  one  in  England; 
and  even,  if  she  choose  not  to  go  to  England  at  all, 
I  will  acquiesce ;  and  visit  England  myeelf  but  for 
three  months  in  every  year. 

As  to  the  children,  Mr.  Grandison  ?  said  Signor 
Jeronymo ;  desirous  of  promoting  the  compromise. 

I  will  consent  that  daughters  shall  be  the  mother's 
care;  the  education  of  sons  must  be  left  to  me. 

What  will  the  poor  daughters  have  done,  cheva- 
lier, sneeringly  spoke  the  general,  that  they  should 
be  left  to  perdition? 

Your  lordship,  without  my  entering  into  the  opi- 
nion of  the  professors  of  both  religions  on  this  sub- 
ject, will  consider  my  proposal  as  a  compromise.  I 
would  not  have  begun  an  address  upon  these  terms 
with  a  princess.  I  do  assure  you,  that  mere  fortune 
has  no  bias  with  me.  Prescribe  not  to  me  in  the 
article  of  religion,  and  I  will,  with  all  my  soul,  give 
up  every  ducat  of  your  sister's  fortune. 

Then  what  will  you  have  to  support— 

My  lord,  leave  that  to  your  sister  and  me.  I  will 
deal  honourably  with  her.  If  she  renounce  me  on 
that  article,  you  will  have  reason  to  congratulate 
yourselves. 

^  our  fortune,  Sir,  by  marriage,  will  be  much 
more  considerable  than  it  can  be  by  patrimony,  if 
Clementina  be  yours :  why  then  should  you  not  look 


298  THE    HISTORY   OF 

forward  to  your  posterity  as  Italians  ?  And  in  thai 
case — 

He  stopt  there. — It  was  easy  to  guess  at  liis  in- 
ference. 

I  would  no  more  renounce  my  country  than  my 
religion:  I  would  leave  posterity  free ;  but  would 
not  deprive  them  of  an  attachment  that  I  value  my- 
self upon :  nor  yet  my  country,  of  a  family  that 
never  gave  it  cause  to  be  ashamed  of  it. 

The  general  took  snuff,  and  looked  on  me,  and 
off  me,  with  an  air  too  supercilious.  I  could  not 
but  be  sensible  of  it. 

I  have  no  small  difficulty,  my  lord,  said  I,  to  bear 
the  hardships  of  my  situation,  added  to  the  distress 
which  that  situation  gives  me,  to  be  looked  upon  in 
this  family  as  a  delinquent,  without  having  done  any 
thing  to  reproach  myself  with,  either  in  thought, 
word,  or  deed — My  lord,  it  is  extremely  hard. 

It  is,  my  lord,  said  Signor  Jeronymo.  The  great 
misfortune  in  the  case  before  us,  is,  that  the  Che- 
valier Grandison  has  merit  superior  to  that  of  most 
men;  and  that  our  sister,  who  was  not  to  be  at- 
tached by  common  merit,  could  not  be  insensible 
to  his. 

Whatever  were  my  sister's  attachments,  Signor 
Jeronymo,  weknow^owr*;  and  generous  ones  they 
are :  but  we  all  know  how  handsome  men  may  at- 
tach young  ladies,  without  needing  to  say  a  smgle 
word.  The  poison  once  taken  in  at  the  eye,  it  will 
soon  diffuse  itself  through  the  whole  mass. 

My  honour,  yet,  my  lord,  was  never  called  in 
question,  either  by  man  or  woman. 

Your  character  is  well  known,  chevalier — Had  it 
not  been  unexceptionable,  we  should  not  have  en- 
tered into  treaty  with  you  on  this  subject,  I  do  assure 
you;  and  it  piques  us  not  a  little  to  have  a  daughter 
of  our  house  refused.     You  don't  know  the  conse* 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  299 

ijuence,  I  can  tell  you,  of  such  an  indignity  offered 
in  this  country. 

Refused  !  my  lord ! — To  endeavour  to  obviate  this 
charge,  would  be  to  put  an  affront  upon  your  lord- 
ship's justice,  as  well  as  an  indignity  offered  to  your 
truly  noble  house. 

He  arose  in  anger,  and  swore  that  he  would  not 
be  treated  with  contempt. 

I  stood  up  too ;  And  if  I  am,  my  lord,  with  in- 
dignity, it  is  not  what  I  have  been  used  to  bear. 

Signor  Jeronymo  was  disturbed.  He  said,  he  had 
opposed  our  seeing  each  other.  He  knew  his  bro- 
ther's warmth ;  and  I,  he  said,  from  the  scenes  that 
had  before  passed,  ought  perhaps  to  have  shewn 
more  pity  than  resentment. 

It  was  owing  to  my  regard  for  the  delicacy  of  your 
sister,  Signor  Jeronymo,  said  1  (for  whom  I  have 
the  tenderest  sentiments)  as  well  as  to  do  justice  to 
my  own  conduct  towards  her,  rfiat  I  could  not  help 
shewing  myself  affected  by  the  word  refused. 

Affected  by  the  tvord  refused  !  Sir,  said  the  general 
—Yes,  you  have  soft  words  for  hard  meanings.  But 
I,  who  have  not  your  choice  of  words,  make  use  of 
those  that  are  explained  by  actions. 

I  was  in  hopes,  my  lord,  that  I  might  rather  have 
been  favoured  with  your  weight  in  the  proposed 
compromise,  than  to  have  met  with  your  displeasure. 

Consider,  chevalier,  coolly  consider  this  matter ; 
How  shall  we  answer  it  to  our  country  (we  are  pub- 
lic people,  Sir)  to  the  church,  to  v/hich  we  stand  re- 
lated ;  to  our  own  character ;  to  marry  a  daughter  of 
our  house  to  a  Protestant  ?  You  say  you  are  con- 
cerned for  her  honour :  what  must  we,  what  can  we 
say  in  her  behalf,  if  she  be  reflected  upon  as  a  love- 
sick girl,  who,  though  stedfast  in  her  religion,  could 
refuse  men  of  the  first  consideration,  all  of  her  own 


300  THE   HISTORY   OF 

religion  and  country,  and  let  a  foreigner,  an  English- 
man, carry  her  oif  ? — 

Preserving  nevertheless  by  slipulntinn,  you  will 
remember,  my  lord,  her  religion. — If  you  shall  have 
so  much  to  answer  for  to  the  world  with  such  a  sti- 
pulation in  the  lady's  favour,  what  shall  I  be  thought 
of,  who,  though  1  am  not,  nor  wish  to  be,  a  public 
man,  am  not  of  a  low  or  inconsiderable  family,  if  I, 
against  my  conscience,  renounce  my  religion  and 
my  country,  for  a  consideration,  that,  though  the 
highest  in  private  life,  is  a  partial  and  selfish  consi- 
deration ? 

No  more,  no  more,  Sir — If  you  can  despise  worldly 
grandeur ;  if  you  can  set  light  by  riches,  honours, 
love ;  my  sister  has  this  to  be  said  in  her  praise,  that 
she  is  the  first  woman,  that  ever  I  heard  of,  who  fell 
in  love  with  a  philosopher :  and  she  must,  I  think, 
take  the  consequence  of  such  a  peculiarity.  Her 
example  will  not  have  many  followers. 

Yes,  my  lord,  it  will,  said  Jeronymo,  if  Mr. 
Grandison  be  the  philosopher.  If  women  were  to 
be  regimented,  he  would  carry  an  army  into  the  field 
without  beat  of  drum. 

I  was  vexed  to  find  an  affair  that  had  penetrated 
my  heart,  go  off  so  lightly ;  but  the  levity  shewn  by 
the  general  was  followed  by  Jeronymo,  in  order  to 
make  the  past  warmth  between  us  forgotten. 

I  left  the  brothers  together.  As  I  passed  through 
the  saloon,  I  had  the  pleasure  of  hearing,  by  a  whis- 
per from  Camilla,  that  her  young  lady  was  somewhat 
more  composed  for  the  operation  she  had  yielded  to. 

In  the  afternoon,  the  general  made  me  a  visit  at 
my  lodgings.  He  told  me,  he  had  taken  amiss  some 
things  that  had  fallen  from  my  mouth. 

I  owned  that  I  was  at  one  time  warm ;  but  excused 
myself  by  his  example. 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON,  301 

I  urged  him  to  promote  my  interest  as  to  the  pro- 
posed compromise.  He  gave  me  no  encouragement; 
but  took  down  my  proposals  in  writing. 

He  asked  me,  if  my  father  were  as  tenacious  in 
the  article  of  religion  as  I  was. 

I  told  him,  that  I  had  forborn  to  write  any-thing 
of  the  affair  to  my  father. 

That^  he  said,  was  surprising.  He  had  always 
apprehended,  that  a  man  who  pretended  to  be  strict 
in  religion,  be  it  what  religion  it  would,  should  be 
uniform.  He  who  could  dispense  with  one  duty, 
might  with  another. 

I  answered,  That  having  no  view  to  address  Lady 
Clementina,  I  had  only  given  my  father  general  ac- 
counts of  the  favour  I  had  met  with  from  a  family  so 
considerable :  that  it  was  but  very  lately  that  I  had 
entertained  any  hopes  at  all,  as  he  must  know :  that 
those  hopes  were  allayed  by  my  fears  that  the  articles 
of  religion  and  residence  would  be  an  insuperable 
obstacle :  but  that  it  was  my  resolution,  in  the  same 
hour  that  I  could  have  any  prospect  of  succeeding, 
to  lay  all  before  him  ;  and  I  was  sure  of  his  appro- 
bation and  consent  to  an  alliance  so  answerable  to 
the  magnificence  of  his  own  spirit. 

The  general,  at  parting,  with  a  haughty  air,  said, 
I  take  my  leave,  chevalier:  I  suppose  you  will  not  be 
in  haste  to  leave  Bologna.  I  am  extremely  sensible 
of  the  indignity  you  have  cast  upon  us  all.  I  arw,  and 
swore — We  shall  not  disgrace  our  sister  and  our- 
selves, by  courting  your  acceptance  of  her.  I  under- 
stand, that  Olivia  is  in  love  with  you  too.  These 
contentions  for  you  may  give  you  consequence  with 
yourself:  but  Olivia  is  not  a  C/em<?nij/:a.  You  are  in 
a  country  jealous  of  family-honour.  Ours  is  a  first 
family  in  it..  You  know  not  what  you  have  done.  Sir. 

What  you  have  said,  my  lord,  I  have  not  deserved 
of  you.    It  can  nof  be  answered,  at  least  by  me.    I 

D    D 


302  THE   HISTORY   OF 

shall  not  leave  Bologna  till  I  apprise  you  of  it,  and 
till  I  have  the  misfortune  to  be  assured,  that  I  cannot 
have  any  hope  of  the  honour  once  designed  me.  I 
will  only  add,  that  my  principles  were  well  knowu 
before  I  was  written  to  at  Vienna, 

And  do  you  reproach  us  with  that  step?  It  was 
a  base  one  :  it  had  not  mi/  concurrence.  He  went 
from  me  in  a  passion. 

I  had  enough  at  my  heart,  Dr.  Bartlett,  had  I  been 
spared  this  insult  from  a  brother  of  Clementina.  It 
went  very  hard  with  me  to  be  threatened.  But  I 
thank  God,  I  do  not  deserve  the  treatment. 


LETTER  XXVIII. 

MISS  BYRON.     IN  CONTINUATION. 

London,  Friday  morning,  March  31. 
Here,  my  Lucy,  once  more  I  am.     We  arrived 
yesterday  in  the  afternoon. 

Lady  Betty  Williams  and  Miss  Clements  have 
been  already  to  welcome  me  on  my  return.  My 
cousin  says,  they  are  inseparable.  I  am  glad  of  it, 
for  Lady  Betty's  sake. 

Dr.  Bartlett  is  extremely  obliging.  One  would 
think,  that  he  and  his  kinsman  give  up  all  their  time 
in  transcribing  for  us.  1  send  you  now  his  seventh, 
eighth,  and  ninth  letters.  In  reading  the  two  latter, 
we  were  struck  (for  the  two  sistens  and  my  lord  were 
with  us)  with  the  nobleness  of  Clementina.  Her  mo- 
tive, through  her  whole  delirium,  is  so  apparently 
owing  to  her  concern  for  the  soul  of  the  man  she 
loved  (entirely  regardless  of  any  interest.of  her  own) 
that  we  all  forgot  what  had  been  so  long  our  wishes, 
and  joined  in  giving  preference  to  her. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  305 


DR.   BARTLETT  S    SEVENTH    LETTER. 

I  had  another  visit  paid  me,  proceeds  Mr.  Gran- 
dison,  two  hours  after  the  general  left  me,  by  the 
kind-hearted  Camilla,  disguised  as  before. 

1  come  now,  chevalier,  said  she,  with  the  mar- 
chioness's connivance,  and,  I  may  say,  by  her  com- 
mand ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  by  the  command  of 
Signer  Jeronymo,  who  knows  of  my  last  attendance 
upon  you,  though  no  one  else  does,  not  even  the 
marchioness.     He  gave  me  this  letter  for  you. 

But  how  does  the  noblest  young  lady  in  Italy, 
Camilla?     How  does  Lady  Clementina? 

More  composed  than  we  could  have  hoped  for 
from  the  height  of  her  delirium.  It  tvas  high ;  for 
«he  has  but  a  very  faint  idea  of  having  seen  you  this 
morning. 

The  marchioness  had  bid  her  say,  that  although 
1  had  now  given  her  despair  instead  of  hope,  yet  that 
she  owed  it  to  my  merit,  and  to  the  sense  she  had  of 
the  benefits  they  had  actually  receiveu  at  my  hands, 
to  let  me  know,  that  it  was  but  too  likely  that  resent- 
ments might  be  carried  to  an  unhappy  length  ;  and 
that  therefore  she  wished  I  would  leave  Bologna  for 
the  present.  If  happier  prospects  presented,  she 
would  be  the  first  to  congratulate  me  upon  them. 

I  opened  the  letter  of  my  kind  Jeronymo.  These 
were  the  contents : 

I  am  infinitely  concerned,  my  dear  Grandison,  to 
find  a  man  equally  generous  and  brave  as  my  brother 
is,  hurried  away  by  passion.  You  mai/  have  acted 
with  your  usual  magnanimity  in  preferring  your  re- 
ligion to  your  love,  and  to  your  glory.  I,  for  my 
part,  think  you  to  be  a  distressed  man.  If  you  are 
not,  you  must  be  very  insensible  to  the  merits  of  an 
D  D   2 


304<  THE    HISTORY  OF 

excellent  woman,  and  very  ungrateful  to  the  distinc- 
tion she  honours  you  with.  I  must  write  in  this 
stile,  and  think  she  does  honour  by  it  even  to  my 
Grandison.  But  should  the  consequences  of  this 
affair  be  unhappy  for  either  of  you ;  if,  in  particular, 
for  my  brother  ;  what  cause  of  regret  would  our  fa- 
mily have,  that  o.  younger  brother  was  saved  by  the 
hand  which  deprived  them  of  a  more  worthy  elder? 
If  for  you,  how  deplorable  would  be  the  reflection, 
that  you  saved  one  brother,  and  perished  by  the 
hand  of  another !  Would  to  God  that  his  passion, 
and  your  spirit,  were  more  moderate !  But  let  me 
request  this  favour  of  you ;  that  you  retire  to  Flo- 
rence, for  a  few  days,  at  least. 

How  unhappy  am  I,  that  I  am  disabled  from  taking 
part  in  a  more  active  mediation ! — Yet  the  general 
admires  you.  But  how  can  we  blame  in  him  a  zeal 
for  the  honour  of  his  family,  in  which  he  would  be 
glad  at  his  soul  to  include  a  zeal  for  yours  ? 

For  God's  sake  quit  Bologna  for  a  few  days  only. 
Clementina  is  more  sedate.  I  have  carried  it  that 
her  confessor  shall  not  at  present  visit  her ;  yet  he  is 
an  honest  and  a  pious  man. 

What  a  fatality !  Every  one  to  mean  well,  yet 
every  one  to  be  miserable !  And  can  religion  be  the 
cause  of  so  much  unh  appiness  ?  1  cann  ot  act,  I  can  only 
reflect.  My  dear  friend,  let  me  know  by  a  line,  that 
you  will  depart  from  Bologna  to-morrow ;  and  you 
will  then  a  little  lighten  the  heart  of  your 

JERONYMO. 

I  senl  my  grateful  compliments  to  the  marchioness 
by  Camilla.  I  besought  her  to  believe,  that  my  con- 
duct on  this  occasion  should  be  such  as  should  merit 
her  approbation.  I  expressed  my  grief  for  the  ap- 
prehended resentments.  I  was  sure  that  a  man  so 
noble,  so  generous,  so  brave,  as  was  the  man  from 


SIR    CHAIILES    GRANDISON.  305 

whom  the  resentments  might  be  supposed  to  arise, 
would  better  consider  of"  every-thing:  but  it  was  im- 
possible for  me,  I  bid  Camilla  say,  to  be  far  distant 
from  Bologna ;  because  I  still  presumed  to  hope  for 
a  happy  turn  in  my  favour. 

I  wrote  to  Signer  Jeronymo  to  the  same  effect. 
I  assured  him  of  my  high  regard  for  his  gallant  bro- 
ther; I  deplored  the  occasion  which  bad  subjected 
me  to  the  general's  displeasure;  bid  him  depend 
upon  my  moderation.  I  referred  to  my  known  re- 
solution of  long  standing,  to  avoid  a  meditated 
rencounter  with  any  man ;  urging  that  he  might,  for 
that  reason,  the  more  securely  rely  upon  my  care  to 
shun  any  acts  of  offence  either  to  or  from  a  son  of 
the  Marquis  della  Porretta ;  a  brother  of  my  dear 
friend  Jeronymo,  and  of  the  most  excellent  and 
beloved  of  sisters ! 

Neither  the  marchioness  nor  Jeronymo  were  sa- 
tisfied with  the  answers  I  returned ;  but  what  could 
I  do  ?  I  had  promised  the  general  that  I  would  not 
leave  Bologna  till  I  had  apprised  him  of  my  intention 
to  do  so ;  and  I  still  was  willing,  as  I  bid  Camilla 
tell  the  marchioness,  to  indulge  my  hopes  of  some 
happy  turn. 

The  marquis,  the  bishop,  and  general,  went  to 
Urbino ;  and  there,  as  I  learnt  from  ray  Jeronymo,  it 
was  determined,  in  full  assembly,  that  Grandison,  as 
well  from  difference  in  religion,  as  from  inferiority  in 
degree  and  fortune,  was  unworthy  of  their  alliance : 
and  it  was  hinted  to  the  general,  that  he  was  equally 
unworthy  of  his  resentment. 

While  the  father  and  two  brothers  were  at  Urbino, 
Lady  Clementina  gave  hopes  of  a  sedate  mind.  She 
desired  her  mother  to  allow  her  to  see  me :  but  the 
marchioness,  believing  there  were  no  hopes  of  my 
complying  with  their  terms,  and  being  afraid  of  the 
consequences,  and  of  incurring  blame  from  tlie  rest 
D  D  3 


306  THE  HiSTony  of 

of  her  family,  now  especially  that  they  were  absent, 
and  consulting  together  on  what  was  proper  to  be 
done,  desired  she  would  not  think  of  it. 

This  refusal  made  Clementina  the  more  earnest 
for  an  interview.  Signor  Jeronymo  gave  his  advice 
in  favour  of  it.  The  misfortune  he  had  met  with, 
had  added  to  his  weight  with  the  family.  It  is  a  fa- 
mily of  harmony  and  love.  They  were  hardly  more 
particularly  fond  of  Clementina  than  they  were  of 
one  another,  throughout'  the  several  branches  of  it ; 
this  harmony  among  them  added  greatly  to  the  fa- 
mily-consequence, as  well  in  public  as  private.  Till 
the  attempt  that  was  made  upon  their  Jeronymo, 
they  had  not  known  calamity. 

But  the  confessor  strengthening  the  marchioness's 
apprehensions  of  what  the  consequence  of  indulging 
the  young  lady  might  be,  all  Jeronymo's  weight 
would  have  failed  to  carry  this  point  had  it  not  been 
for  an  enterprize  of  Clementina,  which  extremely 
alarmed  them,  and  made  them  give  into  their  wishes. 

Camilla  has  enabled  me  to  give  the  following  me- 
lancholy account  of  it,  to  the  only  man  on  earth  to 
whom  I  could  communicate  particulars,  the  very  re- 
collection of  which  tears  my  heart  in  pieces. 

The  young  lady's  malady,  after  some  favourable 
symptoms  which  went  off,  returning  in  another  shape; 
her  talkativeness  continued:  butthehurrywithwhich 
she  spoke  and  acted,  gave  place  to  a  sedateness  that 
she  seemed  very  fond  of.  They  did  not  suffer  her  to 
go  out  of  her  chamber ;  which  she  took  not  well : 
but  Camilla,  being  absent  about  an  hour,  on  her  re- 
turn missed  her,  and  alarmed  the  whole  house  upon 
it.  Every  part  of  it,  and  of  the  garden,  was  searched. 
From  an  apprehension  that  they  dared  not  so  much 
as  whisper  to  one  another,  they  dreaded  to  find  her 
whom  they  so  carefully  sought  after. 

At  last,  Camilla  seeing,  as  she  supposed,  one  oi 


Sm   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  307 

the  maid-servants  coming  down  stairs  with  remarka- 
ble tranquillity,  as  she  thought,  in  her  air  and  man- 
ner ;  Wretch !  said  she,  how  composed  do  you  seem 
to  be  in  a  storm  that  agitates  every  body  else ! 

Don't  be  angry  with  me,  Camilla,  returned  the 
supposed  servant. 

O  my  lady !  my  very  Lady  Clementina,  in  Laura's 
clothes !  "Whither  are  you  going,  madam  ? — But  let 
the  marchioness  know  (said  she,  to  one  of  the  wo- 
men-servants who  then  appeared  in  sight)  that  we 
have  found  my  young  lady — What,  dear  madam,  is 
the  meaning  of  this? — Go,  Martina  (to  another  wo- 
man-servant) go  this  instant  to  my  lady ! — Dear  Lady 
Clementina,  what  concern  have  you  given  us ! 

And  thus  she  went  on,  asking  questions  of  her 
young  lady,  and  giving  orders,  almost  in  the  same 
breath,  till  the  marchioness  came  to  them  in  a  joyful 
hurry,  from  one  of  the  pavilions  in  the  garden,  into 
which  she  had  thrown  herself;  tortured  by  her  fears, 
and  dreading  the  approach  of  every  servant,  with 
fatal  tidings. 

The  young  lady  stood  still,  but  with  great  com- 
posure. I  Moill  go,  Camilla,  said  she ;  indeed  I  will. 
You  disturb  me  by  your  frantic  ways,  Camilla,  I 
wish  you  would  be  as  sedate  and  calm  as. I  am: 
What's  the  matter  with  the  woman  ? 

Her  mother  folding  her  arms  about  her — O  my 
sweet  girl !  said  she,  How  could  you  terrify  us  thus  ? 
What's  the  meaning  of  this  disguise?  Whither  were 
you  going? 

Why,  madam,  I  was  going  on  God's  errand ;  not 
on  my  own. — What  is  come  to  Camilla  ?  The  poor 
creature  is  beside  herself! 

O  my  dear !  said  her  mother,  taking  her  hand, 
and  leading  her  into  her  own  apartment  (Camilla  fol- 
lowing, weeping  with  joy  for  having  found  her)  Tell 
me,  said  she,  tell  me,  has  Laura  furnished  you  with 
this  dress  ? 


308  THE    HISTORY   OF 

Why  no,  madam:  I'll  tell  you  the  whole  truth. 
I  went  and  hid  myself  in  Laura's  room,  while  she 
changed  her  clothes ;  I  saw  where  she  put  those  she 
took  off;  and  when  she  had  left  her  room,  I  put  them 
on.  • 

And  for  what  ?  For  what,  my  dear  ?  Tell  me  what 
you  designed  ? 

I  am  neither  afraid  nor  ashamed  to  tell.  -  It  wais 
God's  errand  I  was  going  upon. 

What  tvas  the  errand  ? 

Don't  weep  then,  my  dear  mamma,  and  I'll  tell 
you.  Do,  let  me  kiss  away  these  tears. — And  she 
tenderly  embraced  her  mother. 

Why,  I  have  a  great  mind  to  talk  to  the  Chevalier 
Grandison.  I  had  many  fine  thoughts  upon  my  pil- 
low ;  and  I  believed  I  could  say  a  great  deal  to  the 
purpose  to  him;  and  you  told  me  I  must  not  see  him: 
60  I  thought  I  would  not.  But  then  I  had  other  no- 
tions come  into  my  head ;  and  I  believed,  if  I  could 
talk  freely  to  him,  I  should  convince  him  of  his  er- 
rors. Now,  thought  I,  I  know  he  will  mind  what  I 
say  to  him,  more  than  perhaps  he  will  my  brother 
the  bishop,  or  Father  Marescotti.  I  am  a  simple 
girl,  and  can  have  no  interest  in  his  conversion ;  for 
he  has  refused  me,  you  know:  so  there  is  an  end  of 
all  matters  between  him  and  me.  I  never  was  refused 
before :  'IFas  I,  my  mamma  ?  I  never  will  be  twice 
i-efused.  Yet  I  owe  him  no  ill-will.  And  if  one  can 
save  a  soul,  you  know,  madam,  there  is  no  harm  in 
that.  So  it  is  God's  errand  I  go  upon,  and  not  my 
own.  And  shall  I  not  go  ?  Yes,  I  shall.  I  know 
you  will  give  me  leave. — She  courtesied.  Silence 
IS  permission !  Thank  you,  madam — And  seemed 
to  be  going. 

Well  might  her  mother  be  silent.  She  could  not 
speak ;  but  rising,  went  after  her  to  the  door,  and 
taking  her  hand,  sobbed  over  it  her  denial  (as  Ca- 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  309 

nulla  described  it) ;  and  brought  her  back,  and  mo- 
tioned to  her  to  sit  down. 

She  whispered  Camilla,  What  ails  my  mamma  ? 
Can  you  tell  ? — But  see  how  calm,  how  composed, 
lam!  This  world,  Camilla !  what  a  vain  thing  is  this 
world !  and  she  looked  up.  And  so  I  shall  tell  the 
chevalier.  I  shall  tell  him  not  to  refuse  heaven, 
though  he  has  refused  a  simple  girl,  who  was  no 
enemy  to  him,  and  might  have  been  a  faithful  guide 
to  him  thither,  for  what  he  knew.  Now  all  these 
things  I  wanted  to  say  to  him,  and  a  vast  deal  more; 
and  when  I  have  told  him  my  mind,  I  shall  be  easy. 

Will  my  precious  girl  be  easy,  broke  out  into 
speech  her  weeping  mother,  when  you  have  told 
the  chevalier  yourmind?  You  shall  tell  him  your 
mind,  my  dear ;  and  God  restore  my  child  to  peace, 
and  to  me! 

Well  now,  my  mamma,  this  is  a  good  sign — For 
if  I  have  moved  you  to  oblige  me,  why  may  I  not 
move  him  to  oblige  himself? — That's  all  I  have  in 
view.  He  has  been  my  tutor,  and  I  want,  methinks, 
to  return  the  favour,  and  be  his  tutress ;  and  so  you 
will  let  me  go — Won't  you  ? 

No,  my  dear,  we  will  send  for  him. 

Well,  that  may  do  as  well,  provided  you  will  let 
us  be  alone  together :  for  these  proud  men  may  be 
ashamed,  before  company,  to  own  themselves  con- 
vinced by  a  simple  girl. 

But,  my  dearest  love,  whither  would  you  have 
gone  ?  Do  you  know  where  the  chevalier's  lodgings 
are? 

iShe  paused. — She  does  not,  surely,  Camilla ! 

Camilla  repeated  the  question,  that  the  young 
lady  might  herself  answer  it. 

She  looked  as  if  considering — Then,  Why  no, 
truly,  said  she  ;  I  did  not  think  of  that :  but  every- 
body in  Bologna  knows  where  the  Chevalier  Gran- 


310  THE   HISTOUY  OF 

dison  lives — Don't  you  think  so  ? — But  when  shall 
he  come  ?     That  will  be  better ;  much  better. 

You  shall  go,  Camilla,  disguised  as  before.  Pro- 
bably he  has  not  quitted  Bologna  yet.  And  let  him 
know,  to  a  tittle,  all  that  has  passed,  on  this  attempt 
of  the  dear  soul — If  he  can  bring  his  mind  to  comply 
with  our  terms,  it  may  not  yet  be  too  late  :  though 
it  ixiiU  be  so  after  my  lord  and  my  two  sons  return 
from  Urbino.  But  small  are  my  hopes  from  him. 
If  the  interview  makes  my  poor  child  easy,  that 
will  be  a  blessed  event :  we  shall  all  rejoice  in  that. 
Mean  time,  come  with  me,  my  dear — But  first  re- 
sume your  own  dress— And  then  we  will  tell  Jero- 
nymo  what  we  have  determined  upon.  He  will  be 
pleased  with  it,  I  know. 

You  tell  me,  my  good  Miss  Byron,  that  I  cannot 
be  too  particular ;  yet  the  melancholy  tale,  I  see, 
affects  you  too  sensibly :  as  it  also  does  my  Lord 
and  Lady  L.  and  Miss  Grandison.  No  wonder,  when 
the  transcribing  of  them  has  the  same  effect  upon 
me,  as  the  reading  had  at  my  first  being  favoured 
with  the  letters  that  give  the  moving  particulars. 

DR.  BARTLETt's  eighth  LETTER. 

I  proceed  now  to  give  an  account  of  Mr,  Grandi- 
son's  interview  with  Lady  Clementina. 

He  had  no  sooner  heard  the  proceeding  particu- 
lars, than  he  hastened  to  her,  though  with  a  tor- 
tured heart. 

He  was  introduced  to  the  marchioness  and  Sig- 
ner Jei'onymo,  in  the  apartment  of  the  latter. 

I  suppose,  said  the  marchioness,  after  first  civili- 
ties, Camilla  has  told  you  the  way  we  are  now  in. 
The  dear  creature  has  a  great  desire  to  talk  with 
you.  Who  knows,  but  she  may  be  easier  after  she 
has  been  humoured  ? — She  is  more  composed  than 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  311 

ghe  was,  since  she  knows  she  may  expect  to  see 
you.  Poor  thing!  she  has  hopes  of  converting  you. 

Would  to  heaven,  said  Jeronymo,  that  compas- 
sion for  her  disordered  mind  may  have  that  effect 
upon  my  Grandison,  which  argument  has  not  had! — 
Poor  Grandison!  I  can  pity  you  at  my  heart.  These 
are  hard  trials  to  your  humanity!  Your  distress  is 
written  in  your  countenance ! 

It  is  deeper  written  in  my  heart,  said  I. 

Indeed,  Dr.  Bartlett,  it  was. 

The  marchioness  rang.  Camilla  came  in.  See, 
said  she,  if  Clementina  is  disposed  now  to  admit  of 
the  chevalier's  visit ;  and  ask  her,  if  she  will  have 
her  mamma  introduce  him  to  her. 

By  all  means,  was  the  answer  returned. 

Clementina  at  our  entrance  was  sitting  at  the  win- 
dow, a  book  in  her  hand.  She  stood  up.  A  great, 
but  solemn  composure  appeared  in  her  air  and  aspect. 

The  marchioness  went  to  the  window,  holding  her 
handkerchief  at  her  eyes.  I  approached  with  pro- 
found respect  her  Clementina*  but  my  heart  was 
too  full  to  speak  first — She  could  speak.  She  did, 
without  hesitation— 

You  are  nothing  to  me  now,  chevalier :  you  have 
refused  me,  you  know ;  and  I  thank  you :  you  are 
in  the  right,  I  believe.  I  am  a  very  proud  creature. 
And  you  saw  what  trouble  I  gave  to  the  best  of  pa- 
rents and  friends.  You  are  certainly  in  the  right. 
She  that  can  give  so  much  concern  to  them,  must 
make  any  man  afraid  of  her.  But  religion,  it  seems, 
is  your  pretence.  TjTow  I  am  sorry  that  you  are  an 
obstinate  man.  You  knoio  better,  chevalier.  I 
think  you  should  know  better.  But  you  have  been 
my  tutor.     Shall  I  be  yours  ? 

I  shall  attend  to  every  instruction  that  you  will 
tionour  me  with. 

But  let  me,  Sir,  comfort  my  marama. 


312  THE    HISTORY   OP 

She  went  to  her,  and  kneeled :  Why  weeps  ray 
mamma  ?  taking  a  hand  in  each  of  hers,  and  kissing 
first  one,  then  the  other.  Be  comforted,  my  mamma. 
You  see  I  am  quite  well.  You  see  I  am  sedate. — 
Bless  your  Clementina ! 

God  bless  my  child ! 

She  arose  from  her  knees ;  and  stepping  towards 
me — You  are  very  silent,  Sir ;  and  very  sad — But  I 
don't  want  you  to  be  sad. — Silent  I  will  allow  you 
to  be ;  because  the  tutored  should  be  all  ear.  So 
1  used  to  be  to  you. 

She  then  turned  her  face  from  me,  putting  her 
hand  to  her  forehead — I  had  a  great  deal  to  say  to 
you ;  but  I  have  forgot  it  all — Why  do  you  look  so 
melancholy,  chevaHer?  You  know  your  own  mind; 
and  you  did  what  you  thought  just  and  fit — Did  you 
not  ?     Tell  me,  Sir. 

Then  turning  to  her  weeping  mother — The  poor 
chevalier  cannot  speak,  madam — Yet  had  nobody  to 
bid  him  do  this,  or  bid  him  do  that — He  is  sorry, 
to  be  sure ! — Well,  but,  Sir,  turning  to  me,  don't  be 
sorry. — And  yet  the  man  who  once  refused  me — 
Ah,  chevalier!  I  thought  that  was  very  cruel  of 
you  :  but  I  soon  got  over  it.  You  see  how  sedate 
I  am  now.     Cannot  you  be  as  sedate  as  I  am? 

What  could  I  say  ?  I  could  not  sooth  her :  she 
boasted  of  her  sedateness.  I  could  not  argue  with 
her.  Could  I  have  been  hers,,  could  my  compromise 
have  been  allowed  of,  I  could  have  been  unreserved 
in  my  declarations.  Was  ever  man  so  unhappily 
circumstanced.^ — Why  did  not  the  family  forbid 
me  to  come  near  them?  Why  did  not  my  Jerony- 
mo  renounce  friendship  with  me  ?  Why  did  this 
excellent  mother  bind  me  to  her,  by  the  sweet  ties 
of  kindness  and  esteem ;  engaging  all  my  reverence 
and  gratitude  ? 

But  let  rae  ask  you,  chevalier.  How  could  you  be 


SIR  CHARLES   GRANDISON.  313 

80  unreasonable  as  to  expect,  that  I  should  change 
my  religion,  when  you  were  so  very  tenacious  of 
yours  ?  Were  you  not  very  unreasonable  to  expect 
this  ? — Upon  my  word,  I  believe,  you  men  think,  it 
is  no  matter  for  us  women  to  have  any  consciences, 
so  as  we  do  but  study  your  wills,  and  do  our  duty 
by  you.  Men  look  upon  themselves  as  gods  of  the 
earth,  and  on  us  women  but  as  their  ministering  ser- 
vants ! — But  I  did  not  expect  that  you  would  be  so 
unreasonable.  You  used  to  speak  highly  of  our  sex. 
Good  women,  you  used  to  say,were  angels.  And  many 
a  time  have  you  made  me  proud  that  I  luas  a  wo- 
man. How  could_yoM,  chevalier,  be  so  unreasonable. 

May  I,  madam,  to  her  mother,  acquaint  her  with 
the  proposals  I  made? — She  seems  to  think,  that  I 
insisted  upon  her  change  of  religion. 

It  was  not  designed  she  should  think  so :  but  I 
remember  now,  that  she  would  not  let  me  tell  all  I 
had  to  say,  when  I  was  making  my  report  to  her  of 
what  had  passed  between  the  bishop  and  you.  It 
was  enough,  she  said,  that  she  had  been  refused ;  she 
besought  me  to  spare  the  rest :  and  since  that,  she 
has  not  been  in  such  a  way  that  we  could  talk  to  her 
on  that  part  of  the  subject.  We  took  it  for  granted, 
that  she  knew  it  all,  because  tve  did.  Could  we  have 
yielded  to  your  proposals,  we  should  have  enforced 
them  upon  her. — If  you  acquaint  her  with  what  you 
had  proposed,  it  may  make  her  think  she  has  not 
been  despised,  as  she  calls  it ;  the  notion  of  which 
changed  her  temper,  from  over-thoughtful  to  over- 
lively. 

No  need  of  speaking  low  to  each  other,  said  the 
young  lady.  After  your  slight,  Sir,  you  may  let  me 
hear  any-thing. — Madam !  you  see  how  sedate  I  am. 
I  have  quite  overcome  myself.  Don't  be  afraid  of 
saying  any-thing  before  me. 

alight,  my  dearest  Lady  Clementina !  Heaven  is 


S14«  THE  HISTORY  OF 

my  witness,  your  honoured  mamma  is  my  witness, 
that  I  have  not  slighted  you! — The  conditions  I  had 
proposed,  could  they  have  been  complied  with,  would 
have  made  me  the  happiest  of  men ! 

Yes,  and  me  the  unhappiest  of  women.  Why 
you  refused  me,  did  you  not  ?  And  putting  both  her 
hands  spread  before  her  face ;  Don't  let  it  be  told 
abroad,  that  a  daughter  of  that  best  of  mothers  was 
refused  by  any  man  less  than  a  prince ! — Fie  upon 
that  daughter !  To  be  able  to  stand  before  the  proud 
refuser!  [She  walked  from  me.]  I  am  ashamed' of 
myself! — O  Mrs.  Beaumont !  but  for  7/ou! — My  se- 
cret had  been  buried  here,  putting  one  hand  on  her 
bosom,  holding  still  the  other  before  her  face. — But 
Sir,  Sir,  coming  towards  me,  don't  speak !  Let  me 
have  all  my  talk  out — And  then — everlasting  silence 
be  my  portion ! 

How  her  mother  wept !     How  was  I  affected ! 

I  had  a  great  deal  to  say  to  you,  I  thought :  I 
wanted  to  convince  you  of  your  errors.  1  wanted 
no  favour  of  you,  Sir :  mine  was  a  pure,  disinterested 
esteem.  A  voice  from  heaven,  I  thought,  bid  me 
convert  you.  I  was  setting  out  to  convert  you.  I 
should  have  been  enabled  to  do  it,  I  doubt  not : 
Out  of  the  mouths  of  babes  and  sucklings ;  Do  you 
remember  that  text.  Sir? — Could  I  have  gone,  when 
I  would  have  gone — I  had  it  all  in  my  head  then — 
But  now  I  have  lost  it — O  that  impertinent  Camilla! 
— She  must  question  me — The  woman  addressed 
me  in  a  quite  frantic  way.  She  was  vexed  to  see 
me  so  sedate. 

I  was  going  to  speak — Hush,  hush,  when  I  bid 
you !  and  she  put  her  hand  before  my  mouth.  With 
both  my  hands  I  held  it  there  for  a  moment,  and 
kissed  it. 

Ah,  chevalier  I  said  she,  not  withdrawing  it,  I 
believe  you  are  a  flattering  man !  How  can  you,  to 
a  poor  despised  girl 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISOV.  315 

Let  me  now  speak,  madam — Use  not  a  word  that 
I  cannot  repeat  after  you.  Let  me  beg  of  you  to 
hear  the  proposals  I  made—' — 

I  mentioned  them;  and  added,  Heaven  only  knows 
the  anguish  of  my  soul — Hush,  said  she,  interrupt- 
ing, and  turning  to  her  mother — I  know  nothing  of 
these  men,  madam !  Do  you  think,  my  mamma,  I 
may  believe  him  ?  He  looks  as  if  one  might ! — Do 
you  think  I  may  believe  him  ? 

Her  mother  was  silent,  through  grief. 
Ah,  Sir !  My  m.amma,  though  she  is  not  your 
enemy,  cannot  vouch  for  you ! — But  I  will  have  you 
bound  by  your  own  hand.  She  stept  to  her  closet 
in  a  hurry,  and  brought  out  pen,  ink,  and  paper. — 
Come,  Sir,  you  must  not  play  tricks  with  me.  Give 
me  under  your  hand  what  you  have  now  said — But 
I  will  write  it,  and  you  shall  sign  it. 
She  wrote,  in  an  instant,  as  follows : 

The  Chevalier  Grandison  solemnly  declares, 
that  he  did,  in  the  most  earnest  manner,  of 
his  own  accord,  propose,  that  he  would  allow 
a  certain  young  creature,  if  she  might  be  al' 
lowed  to  be  his  wife,  the  free  use  of  her  re- 
ligion ;  and  to  have  a  discreet  man,  at  her 
choice,  for  her  confessor :  and  that  he  would 
never  oblige  her  to  go  to  England  with  him : 
and  that  he  would  live  in  Italy  with  her  every' 
other  year. 
Will  you  sign  this,  Sir  ?— 
Most  willingly. — 
Do  then. — 
I  did. 

And  you  did  propose  this  ? — Did  he,  madam  ? 
My  dear,  he  did.   And  I  would  have  told  you  so ; 
but  that  you  were  affected  at  his  supposed  refusal. 
Why,  to  be  sure,  madam,  interrupted  she,  it  was 
a  shocking  thing  to  be  refused. 
£  £  2 


316  THE  HISTORY  OF 

Would  you  have  wished  us,  my  dear,  to  comply 
with  these  terms  ?  Would  you  have  chosen  to  marry 
a  Protestant  ?  A  daughter  of  the  house  of  Porretta, 
and  of  the  house  I  sprung  from,  to  marry  an  English 
Protestant  ? 

Clementina  took  her  mother  aside;  but  spoke  loud 
enough  to  be  heard : 

To  be  sure,  madam,  that  would  have  been  wrong; 
but  I  am  glad  I  was  not  refused  with  contempt :  that 
my  tutor,  and  the  preserver  of  my  Jeronymo,  did 
not  despise  me.  To  say  truth,  I  was  afraid  he  liked 
Olivia ;  and  so  made  a  pretence. 

Don't  you  think,  my  dear,  that  you  would  have 
run  too  great  a  hazard  of  your  own  faith,  had  you 
complied  with  the  chevalier's  proposals  ? 

Why  no,  surely,  madam ! — Might  I  not  have  had 
as  great  a  chance  of  converting  him,  as  he  could 
have  had  of  perverting  me  ?  I  glory  in  my  religion, 
madam. 

So  does  he,  my  love,  in  his. 

That  is  his  Jault,  madam.  Chevalier,  stepping 
towards  me,  I  think  you  a  very  obstinate  man.  I 
hope  you  have  not  heard  our  discourse. 

Yes,  my  dear,  he  has :  and  I  desire  not  but  he 
should. 

Would  to  God,  madam,  said  I  to  the  marchioness, 
that  I  had  yours  and  my  lord's  interest !  From  what 
the  dear  Lady  Clementina  has  hinted,  I  might  pre- 
sume— 

But,  Sir,  you  are  wiwifflieM,  perhaps,  said  the  young 
lady.  Though  I  answer  for  answering's  sake,  and 
to  shew  that  I  have  no  doubt  of  my  stedfastness  in 
an  article  in  which  my  soul  is  concerned ;  yet  that 
is  no  proof  of  my  attachment  to  an  obstinate — I 
know  what ! — Heretic  was,  no  doubt,  in  her  head. 

I  took  her  mother  aside :  For  God's  sake,  madam, 
encourage  my  presumptuous  hopes.    Do  you  not 


sin   CHARLES    GRANDISON,  317 

observe  already,  an  alteration  in  the  dear  lady's 
mind  ?  Is  she  not  more  unaffectedly  sedate  than  she 
was  before  ?  Is  not  her  mind  quieter,  now  she  knows 
that  every  thing  was  yielded  up  that  honour  and 
conscience  would  permit  to  be  yielded  up?  See  that 
sweet  serenity  almost  restored  to  those  eyes,  tAat 
within  these  few  moments  had  a  wilder  turn ! 

Ah,  chevalier!  this  depends  not  on  me.  And  if  it 
did,  I  cannot  allow  of  my  daughter's  marrying  a  man 
so  bigotted  to  his  errors.  Excuse  me,  Sir !  But  if 
you  were  more  indifferent  in  your  religion,  I  should 
have  more  hopes  of  you,  and  less  objection. 

If,  madam,  I  could  be  indifferent  in  my  religion, 
the  temptation  would  have  been  too  great  to  be  re- 
sisted. Lady  Clementina,  and  an  alliance  with  such 
a  family — 

Ah  chevalier !  I  can  give  you  no  hope. 

Look  at  the  sweet  lady,  madam !  Behold  her,  as 
now,  perhaps,  balancing  in  my  favour !  Think  of 
what  she  was,  the  joy  of  every  heart ;  and  what  she 
may  be !  Which,  whatever  becomes  of  me,  Heaven 
avert ! — And  shall  not  the  noble  Clementina  have 
her  mother  for  her  advocate  ?  God  is  my  witness, 
that  your  Clementina's  happiness  is,  more  than  my 
own,  the  object  of  my  vows.  Once  more,  for  your 
Clementina's  sake  (what,  alas !  is  my  sake  to  that) 
on  my  knee,  let  me  request  your  interest :  that, 
joined  to  my  Jeronymo's,  and  if  the  dear  lady  recede 
not,  if  she  blast  not  these  budding  hopes,  will,  I 
doubt  not,  succeed. 

The  young  lady  ran  to  me,  and  offering  to  raise 
me  with  both  her  hands.  Rise,  chevalier : — Shall  I 
raise  the  chevalier,  madam  ? — I  don't  love  to  see 
him  kneel.  Poor  chevalier  ! — See  hjs  tears ! — What 
is  the  matter  with  every  body?  Why  do  you  weep  ? 
— My  mamma  weeps  too  ! — What  ails  every  body? 

Rise,  chevalier,  said  the  marcliioncss.     O  tliis 
E  e3 


318  THE   HISTORY   OF 

sweet  prattler !  she  will  burst  my  heart  asunder  !— 
You  cannot,  Sir,  prevail  (I  cannot  ivish  that  you 
should)  but  upon  our  own  terms.  And  will  not  this 
sweet  soul  move  you? — Hard-hearted  Grandison  ! 

What  a  fate  is  mine !  rising :  with  a  soul  pene- 
tAted  by  the  disorder  of  this  most  excellent  of  wo- 
men, and  by  the  distress  given  by  it  to  a  family, 
every  single  person  of  which  I  both  love  and  reve- 
rence, to  be  called  hard-hearted !  What  is  it  I  desire, 
but  that  I  may  not  renounce  a  religion  in  which  my 
conscience  is  satisfied,  and  be  obliged  to  embrace  for 
it,  one,  to  which,  though  I  can  love  and  honour  every 
worthy  member  of  it,  I  have  scruples,  more  than  scru- 
ples, that  my  heart  can  justify,  and  my  reason  de- 
fend !  You  have  not,  madam,  yourself,  with  a  heart 
all  mother  and  friend,  a  deeper  affliction  than  mine. 

Clementina,  all  this  time,  looked  with  great  ear- 
nestness, now  on  me,  now  on  her  weeping  mother— 
And  at  last,  breaking  silence  [her  mother  could  not 
speak]  and  taking  her  hand,  and  kissing  it,  I  don't, 
said  she,  comprehend  the  reason  of  all  this.  This 
house  is  not  the  house  it  was :  who,  but  I,  is  the 
same  person  in  it?  My  father  is  not  the  same.  My 
brothers  neither:  my  mamma  never  has  a  dry  eye,  I 
think:  but  I  don't  weep.  I  am  to  be  the  comforter 
of  you  all !  And  I  mil.  Don't  weep !  Why  now  you 
weep  the  more  for  my  comfortings! — O  my  mamma! 
What  would  you  say  to  your  girl,  if  she  refused  com- 
fort? Then  kneeling  down  and  kissing  her  hand  with 
eagerness,  1  beseech  you,  my  dear  mamma,  I  beseech 
you,  be  comforted ;  or  lend  me  some  of  your  tears— 
What  ails  me  that  I  cannot  weep  for  you!  but  turn- 
ing to  me,  See,  the  chevalier  weeps  too ! — Then 
rising,  and  coming  to  me,  her  hand  pressing  my 
arm — Don't  weep,  chevalier,  my  tutor,  my  friend, 
my  brother's  preserver!  What  ails  you! — Be  com- 
forted 1— Then  taking  her  handkerchief  out  of  he  r 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  319 

pocket  with  one  hand,  still  pressing  my  arm  with  the 
other,  and  putting  it  to  her  eyes,  and  looking  upon  it — 
No! — I  thought  1  co7</rfhave  wept  for  you! — But  why 
is  all  this! — You  see  what  an  example  I,  a  silly  girl, 
can  set  you — Affecting  a  still  sedater  countenance. 

O  chevalier !  said  the  weeping  mother,  and  do 
you  say  your  heart  is  penetrated? — Sweet  creature ! 
wrapping  her  arms  about  her;  my  own  Clementina! 
would  to  Heaven  it  were  given  me  to  restore  my 
child! — O  chevalier!  if  complying  with  your  terms 
would  do  it — But  you  are  immoveable ! 

How  can  that  be  said,  madam,  when  I  have  made 
concessions,  that  a  princely  family  should  not,  on  a 
beginning  address,  have  brought  me  to  make  ?  May 
I  repeat,  before  Lady  Clementina — 

What  would  he  repeat  to  me  ?  interrupted  she. 
Do,  madam,  let  him  say  all  he  has  a  mind  to  say. 
If  it  will  make  his  poor  heart  easy,  why  let  him  say 
all  he  would  say — Chevalier,  speak.  Can  I  be  any 
comfort  to  you  ?  I  would  make  you  all  happy,  if  I 
could. 

This,  madam,  said  I  to  her  mother,  is  too  much ! 
Excellent  young  lady! — Who  can  bear  such  tran- 
scendent goodness  of  heart,  shining  through  intel- 
lects so  disturbed! — And  think  you,  madam, that  on 
earth  there  can  be  a  man  more  unhappily  circum- 
stanced than  I  am  ? 

O  my  Clementina!  said  her  mother,  dear  child  of 
my  heart !  And  could  you  consent  to  be  the  wife  of 
a  man  of  a  contrary  religion  to  your  own?  A  man  of 
another  country?  You  see,  chevalier,  I  will  put  your 
questions  to  her.  A  man  tliat  is  an  enemy  to  the 
faith  of  his  own  ancestors,  as  well  as  to  your  faith  ? 

WTiy,  no,  madam! — I  hope  he  does  not  expect 
that  I  would. 

May  I  presume,  madam,  to  put  the  question  in 
my  own  way  ? — But  yet  I  think  it  may  dibtress  tiie 


320  THE    HISTORY    OF 

dear  lady,  and  not.  answer  the  desirable  end,  if  I  may 
not  have  hope  oi your  interest  in  my  favour  ;  and  of 
the  acquiescence  of  the  marquis  and  your  sons  with 
my  proposals. 

They  will  never  comply. 

Let  me  then  be  made  to  appear  insolent,  unrea- 
sonable, and  even  ungrateful,  in  the  eyes  of  your 
Clementina,  if  her  mind  can  be  made  the  easier  by 
such  a  representation.  If  I  have  no  hopes  oiyour 
favour,  madam,  I  must  indeed  despair. 

Had  I  any  hope  of  carrying  your  cause,  I  know 
not  what  might  be.  done  :  but  1  must  not  separate 
myself  from  my  family,  in  this  great  article. — My 
dear !  to  Clementina,  you  said  you  should  be  easier 
in  your  mind,  if  you  were  to  talk  to  the  chevalier 
alone.  This  is  the  only  time  you  can  have  for  it. 
Your  father  and  brothers  will  be  here  to-morrow — 
And  then,  chevalier,  all  will  be  over. 

Why,  madam,  I  did  think  I  had  a  great  deal  to 
say  to  him.  And,  as  I  thought  I  had  no  interest  in 
what  I  had  to  say — 

Would  you  wish,  my  dear,  to  be  left  alone  with 
the  chevalier  ?  Can  you.  recollect  any-thing  that 
you  had  intended  to  say  to  him,  had  you  made  him 
the  visit  you  designed  to  make  him  ? 

I  don't  know. 

Then  I  will  withdraw.     Shall  I,  my  dear  ? 

Ought  I,  Sir  (You  have  been  my  tutor,  and  many 
excellent  lessons  have  you  taught  me — though  I 
don't  know  what  is  become  of  them ! — Ought  1)  to 
wish  my  mamma  to  withdraw?  Ought  I  to  have  any- 
thing to  say  to  you,  that  I  could  not  say  before 
her? — I  think  not. 

The  marchioness  was  retiring.  I  beg  of  you, 
madam,  said  I,  to  slip  unobserved  into  that  closet. 
You  must  hear  all  that  passes.  The  occasion  may 
be  critical.    Let  me  have  the  opportunity  of  being 


SIR  CHARLES   GRANDISON.  321 

either  approved  or  censured,  as  I  shall  appear  to 
deserve,  in  the  conversation  that  may  pass  between 
the  dear  lady  and  me,  if  you  do  withdraw. 

0  chevalier!  You  are  equally  prudent  and  gene- 
rous !  Why  won't  you  be  one  of  us  ?  Why  won't 
you  be  a  Catholic  ? 

She  went  out  at  the  door,  Clementina  courtesled 
to  her.  I  led  her  eye  from  the  door,  and  the  mar- 
chioness re-entered,  and  slipt  into  the  closet. 

1  conducted  the  young  lady  to  a  chair,  which  I 
placed  with  its  back  to  the  closet-door,  that  her 
mother  might  hear  all  that  passed. — She  sat  down, 
and  bid  me  sit  by  her. 

I  was  willing  she  should  lead  the  subject,  that  the 
marchioness  might  observe  I  intended  not  to  pre- 
possess her. 

We  were  silent  for  a  few  moments.  She  seemed 
perplexed ;  looked  up,  looked  down ;  then  on  one 
side,  then  on  the  other — At  last,  O  chevalier !  said 
she,  they  were  happy  times  when  I  was  your  pupil, 
and  you  were  teaching  me  English ! 

They  were  indeed  happy  times,  madam. 

Mrs.  Beaumont  was  too  hard  for  me,  chevalier  !— 
Do  you  know  Mrs.  Beaumont  ? 

I  do.     She  is  one  of  the  best  of  women. 

Why  so  I  think.  But  she  turned  and  winded  me 
about  most  strangely.    I  think  I  was  in  a  great  fault. 

How  so,  madam  ? 

How  so!  Why  to  let  her  get  out  of  me  a  secret 
that  I  had  kept  from  my  mother.  And  yet  there 
never  was  a  more  indulgent  mother. — Now  you  look, 
chevalier:  but  I  sha'n't  tell  you  what  the  secret  was. 

1  do  not  ask  you,  madam. 

If  you  did,  I  would  not  tell  you.  Well,  but  I  had 
a  great  deal  to  say  to  you,  1  thought.  I  wish  that 
frantic  Camilla  had  not  stopt  mc  when  I  was  going 
to  you.    I  had  a  great  deal  to  say  to  you. 


322  THE  HISTORY  OF 

Cannot  you  recollect,  madam,  any  part  of  it  ? 

Let  me  consider — Why,  in  the  first  place,  I 
thought  you  despised  me.  1  was  not  sorry  for  thatr 
I  do  assure  you:  that  did  me  good.  At  first  it  vexed 
me — You  can't  think  how  much.  I  have  a  great 
deal  of  pride.  Sir — But,  well,  I  got  over  that;  and 
I  grew  sedate — You  see  how  sedate  I  am.  Yet  this 
poor  man,  thought  I,  whether  he  thinks  so  or  not  (I 
will  tell  you  all  my  thoughts,  Sir)  But  don't  be 
grieved. — You  see  how  sedate  /  am.  Yet  1  am  a 
silly  girl ;  you  are  thought  to  be  a  wise  man :  don't 
disgrace  your  wisdom.  Fie !  a  wise  man  to  be  weaker 
than  a  simple  girl ! — Don't  let  it  be  said— What  wa& 
I  saying  ? 

Yet  this  poor  man,  ivhether  he  thinks  so,  or  not,  yoxi 
said,  madam. 

True ! — has  a  soul  to  be  saved.  He  has  taken 
great  pains  with  me,  to  teach  me  the  language  of 
England  :  shall  I  not  take  some  with  him,  to  teaclv 
him  the  language  of  Heaven ! — No  heretic  can  leara 
that,  Sir! — And  I  had  collected  abundance  of  fin© 
thoughts  in  my  mind,  and  many  pertinent  things 
from  the  fathers  ;  and  they  were  all  in  my  head — 
But  that  impertinent  Camilla — And  so  they  are  all 
gone — But  this  one  thing  1  have  to  say — I  designed 
to  say  something  like  it,  at  the  conclusion  of  my 
discourse  with  you — So  it  is  premeditated,  you  will 
say  :  and  so  it  is.  But  let  me  whisper  it — No  I  won't 
neitlier — But  turn  your  face  another  way — I  find 
my  blushes  come  already — But  (and  she  put  her 
spread  hand  before  her  face,  as  if  to  hide  her  blushes) 
Don't  look  at  me,  I  tell  you — Look  at  the  window^ 
[I  did] .  Why,  chevalier,  I  did  intend  to  say — But 
stay — I  have  wrote  it  down  somewhere  [She  pulled 
out  her  pocket-book]  Here  it  is.  Look  anothei* 
way,  when  I  bid  you — She  read — *  Let  me  beseech 
you,  Sir  (1  was  very  earnest,  you  see)  to  hate,  to 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  323 

despise,  to  detest  (Now  don't  look  this  way)  the 
unhappy  Clementina,  with  all  my  heart;  but,  for  the 
sake  of  your  immortal  soul,  let  me  conjure  you  to  be 
reconciled  to  our  holy  mother  church! — '  Will 
you,  Sir? — following  my  indeed  averted  face  with 
her  sweet  face ;  for  I  could  not  look  towards  her. 
iSay  you  will.  I  heard  you  once  called  an  angel  of 
a  man:  and  is  it  not  better  to  be  an  angel  in  heaven? 
— Tender-hearted  man !  1  always  thought  you  had 
sensibility — Say  you  will-r-Not  for  ray  sake — 1  told 
you,  that  I  would  content  myself  to  be  still  despised. 
It  shall  not  be  said,  that  you  did  this  for  a  wife ! — 
No,  Sir,  your  conscience  shall  have  all  the  merit  of 
it ! — And  I'll  tell  you  what ;  I  will  lay  me  down  in 
peace — She  stood  up  with  a  dignity  that  was  aug- 
mented by  her  piety ;  And  1  will  say,  '  Now  do 
thou,  O  beckoning  angel  (for  an  angel  will  be  on 
the  other  side  of  the  river — The  river  shall  be  death, 
Sir! — Now  do  thou)  reach  out  thy  divine  hand,  O 
minister  of  peace  !  I  will  wade  through  these  sepa- 
rating waters ;  and  I  will  bespeak  a  place  for  the 
man,  who,  many,  many  years  hence,  may  fill  it! — 
And  I  will  sit  next  you  Ibf  ever  and  ever!' — And 
this.  Sir,  shall  satisfy  the  poor  Clementina ;  who  will 
then  be  richer  than  the  richest !  So  you  see.  Sir,  as 
I  told  my  mother,  I  was  setting  out  on  God's  er- 
rand ;  not  on  my  own  ! 

For  hours  might  the  dear  lady  have  talked  on, 
without  interruption  from  me  ! — -iVIy  dear  Dr.  Bart- 
lett !  what  did  1  not  suffer  ? 

The  marchioness  was  too  near  for  herself:  she 
could  not  bear  this  spiu'ch  of  her  pious,  generous, 
noble  daughter.     She  sobbed  ;  she  groaned. 

Clementina  started — She  looked  ;it  me.  She  look- 
ed round  her.  Whence  came  these  groans?  Didyott 
groan,  Sir? — You  are  not  a  hard-hearted  man, 
though  they  say  you  are.  But  will  you  be  a  Catliolig^ 


SSI"  THE   HISTORY  OF 

Sir?  Say  you  will.  I  won't  be  denied.  And  I  will 
tell  you  what — If  I  don't  resign  to  ray  destiny  in  a 
few,  a  very  few  weeks,  why  then  I  will  go  into  a 
nunnery;  and  then  I  shall  be  God's  child,  you 
know,  even  in  this  life. 

What  could  I  say  to  her? — Dear  soul ! — Her  mind 
was  raised  above  an  earthly  love.  Circumstanced 
as  we  were,  how  could  I  express  the  tenderness  for 
her  which  overflowed  my  heart  ?  Compassion  is  a 
motive  that  a  woman  of  spirit  will  reject :  and  how- 
could  love  be  here  ^/earferf,  when  the  parties  believed 
it  to  be  in  my  own  power  to  exert  it?  Could  I  en- 
deavour to  replace  myself  in  her  affection,  when  I 
refused  to  comply  with  their  terms,  and  they  with 
mine  ?  To  have  argued  against  her  religion,  and  in 
defence  of  my  own,  her  mind  so  disturbed,  could  not 
be  done :  and  ought  I,  in  generosity,  in  justice  to 
her  family,  to  have  attempted  to  unsettle  her  in  a 
faith  in  which  she,  and  all  her  family,  were  so  well 
satisfied  ? 

I  could  only,  when  I  could  speak,  applaud  her 
piety,  and  pronounce  her  an  angel  of  a  woman,  an 
ornament  ot  her  sex,  and  an  honour  to  her  religion; 
and  endeavour  to  wave  the  subject. 

Ah,  chevalier  !  said  she,  after  a  silence  of  some 
minutes ! — You  are  an  obstinate  man !  Indeed  you 
are — Yet,  I  think,  you  do  not  despise  me. — But 
what  says  your  paper  ? 

She  took  it  out  of  her  bosom,  and  read  it.  She 
seemed  affected  by  it,  as  if  she  had  not  before  con- 
sidered it:  and  you  rert%  proposed  these  terms,  Sir? 
And  would  you  have  allowed  me  the  full  exercise  of 
my  religion  ?  And  should  I  have  had  my  confessor? 
And  would  you  have  allowed  me  to  convert  you,  if  I 
could?  And  would  you  have  treated  my  confessor 
kindly?  And  would  you  have  been  dutiful  to  my  papa 
and  mamma?     And  would  you  have  loved  my  two 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  S25 

Other  brothers  as  well  as  you  do  Jeronyrao  ? — And 
would  you  have  let  me  live  at  Bologna  ? — You  don't 
say,  Yes. — But  do  you  say,  No? 

To  these  terras,  madam,  most  willingly  would  I 
have  subscribed:  and  if,  my  dearest  lady,  they 
could  have  had  the  wished-for  elFect,  how  happy 
had  I  been  ? 

Well! — She  then  paused;  and  resuming.  What 
shall  we  say  to  all  these  things? 

I  thought  her  mother  would  take  it  well,  to  have 
an  opportunity  given  her  to  quit  the  closet,  now  her 
Clementina  had  changed  her  subject  to  one  so  con- 
cerning to  the  whole  family.  I  favoured  her  doing 
so.  She  slipt  out,  her  face  bathed  in  tears,  and  soon 
after  came  in  at  the  drawing-room  door. 

Ah,  madam !  said  Clementina,  paying  obeisance 
to  her,  I  have  been  arguing  and  pleading  with  the 
chevalier. 

Then,  speaking  low,  I  believe  he  may,  in  time, 
be  convinced:  he  has  a  tender  heart.  But  hush, 
putting  her  finger  to  her  mouth,  and  then  speaking 
louder.     I  have  been  reading  this  paper  again 

She  was  going  on  too  favourably  for  me,  as  it  was 
evident  the  marchioness  apprehended  (the  first  time 
that  I  had  reason  to  think  she  was  disinclined  to  the 
alliance) :  for  she  stopt  her:  My  love,  said  she,  you 
and  I  will  talk  of  this  matter  by  ourselves. 

She  rang.  Camilla  came  in.  She  made  a  motion 
for  Camilla  to  attend  her  daughter ;  and  withdrew, 
inviting  me  out  with  her. 

When  we  were  in  another  room,  Ah,  chevalier  I 
said  she,  how  was  it  possible  that  you  Could  with- 
stand such  aheavenly  pleader  ?  ^ou  cannot  love  her 
as  she  deserves  to  be  loved;  you  cannot  but  act 
nobly,  generously ;  but  indeed  you  are  an  invinci- 
ble man. 

Not  love  her,  madam !  Your  ladyship  adds  distresi 

VOL.  XI.  V  St 


326  THE    HISTORY   OF 

to  my  very  great  distress! — Am  I,  in  your  opinion, 
an  ungrateful  man ! — But  must  I  lose  i/our  favour, 
1/our  interest  ?  On  that,  and  on  my  dear  Jeronymo's, 
did  I  build  my  hopes,  and  all  my  hopes. 

I  know  your  terms  can  never  be  accepted,  cheva- 
lier :  and  I  have  now  no  hopes  of  you.  After  this 
last  conversation  between  you  and  the  dear  girl,  I 
can  have  no  hopes  of  you.  Poor  soul!  She  began  to 
waver.  O  how  she  loves  you !  I  see  you  are  not  to 
be  united:  it  is  impossible.  And  I  did  not  care  to 
permit  a  daughter  of  mine  further  to  expose  her- 
self, as  it  must  have  been  to  no  manner  of  purpose. 
— You  are  concerned- — I  should  pity  you,  Sir,  if 
you  had  it  not  in  your  potver  to  make  yourself 
happy,  and  us,  and  ours  too. 

Little  did  I  expect  such  a  turn  in  my  disfavour 
from  the  marchioness. 

May  I,  madam,  be  permitted  to  take  leave  of  the 
dear  lady,  to  whose  piety  and  admirable  heart  I  am 
so  much  indebted  ? 

I  believe  it  may  as  well  be  deferred,  chevalier. 

Deferred,  madam ! — The  marquis  and  the  general 
come ;  and  my  heart  tells  me,  that  I  may  never  be 
allowed  to  see  her  again. 

At  this  time  it  had  better  be  deferred.  Sir. 

If  it  must,  I  submit — God  for  ever  bless  you,  ma- 
dam, for  all  your  goodness!  God  restore  to  you  your 
Clementina!  May  you  all  be  happy ! — Time  may  do 
much  for  me!  Time,  and  my  own  not  disapproving 
conscience,  may — But  a  more  unhappy  man  never 
passed  your  gates ! 

I  took  the  liberty  to  kiss  her  hand,  and  withdrew, 
with  great  emotion. 

Camilla  hastened  after  me.  Chevalier,  says  she, 
my  lady  asks  if  you  will  not  visit  Signor  Jero- 
nymo  ? 

Blessings  attend  my  ever- valued  friend !  I  cannot 


SIR   CHARLES   GIIANSISON.  527 

gee  him.  I  shall  complain  to  hm.  My  heart  will 
burst  before  him.  Commend  me  to  that  true  friend, 
lilessings  attend  every  one  of  this  excellent  family ! 
Camilla,  obliging  Camilla,  adieu! 

O  Ur.  Bartlett! — But  the  mother  was  right.  She 
was  to  account  for  her  conduct  in  the  absence  of 
her  lord.  She  knew  the  determination  of  the 
family ;  and  her  Clementina  was  on  the  point  of 
shewing  more  favour  to  me,  than,  as  things  were 
circumstanced,  it  was  proper  she  should  shew  me: 
yet  they  had  found  out  that  Clementina,  in  the  way 
she  was  in,  was  not  easily  diverted  from  any-thing 
she  took  strongly  into  her  head ;  and  they  never 
had  accustomed  her  to  contradiction. 

Well,  Lucy,  now  you  have  read  this  letter,  do 
you  not  own,  that  this  man,  and  this  woman,  can 
only  deserve  each  other  ? — Your  Harriet,  my  dear, 
is  not  worthy  to  be  the  handmaid  of  either.  This  is 
not  an  aflfectation  of  humility.  You  will  be  all  of 
the  same  opinion,  I  am  sure :  and  this  letter  will 
convince  you,  that  more  than  his  compassion,  that 
his  love  for  Clementina,  was  engaged.  And  so  itought. 
And  what  is  the  inference  but  this — That  your 
Harriet,  were  this  great  difficulty  to  be  vincible, 
could  pretend  to  hope  but  for  half  a  heart?  There 
cannot  be  that  fervor,  my  dear,  in  a  second  love, 
that  was  in  a  first.    Do  you  think  there  can  i 

DR.  BARTLETt's  ninth  LETTER. 

The  young  lady,  proceeds  Mr.  Grandison,  after 
I  had  left  her,  went  to  her  brother  Jeronymo. 
There  I  should  have  found  her,  had  I,  as  her  mo- 
ther motioned  by  Camilla,  visited  my  friend :  but 
when  I  found  he  was  likely  to  stand  alone  in  his  fa- 
vour to  me ;  when  the  marchioness  had  so  unex- 
ff2 


328  THE   HISTORY  OF 

pectedly  declared  herself  against  the  compromise ;  I 
was  afraid  of  disturbing  his  worthy  heart,  by  the 
grief  which  at  the  instant  overwhelmed  mine. 

The  following  particulars  Jeronynio  sent  me, 
within  three  hours  after  I  left  their  palace. 

His  sister,  making  Camilla  retire,  shewed  him 
the  paper  which  she  had  written,  and  made  me  sign, 
and  asked  him  what  he  knew  of  the  contents. 

He  knew  not  what  had  passed  between  his  mo- 
ther and  me ;  uor  did  Clementina. 

He  told  her,  that  I  had  actually  made  those  pro- 
posals. He  assured  her,  that  1  loved  her  above  all 
women.    He  acquainted  her  with  my  distress. 

She  pitied  me.  She  thought,  she  said,  that  I  had 
not  -made  any  overtures,  any  concessions :  that  I 
despised  her ;  and  sensibly  asked.  Why  the  cheva- 
lier was  sent  for  from  Vienna  ?  We  all  knew  his 
mind  as  to  religion,  said  she. 

Then,  after  a  pause.  He  never  could  have  per- 
verted me :  he  would  have  allowed  me  a  confessor, 
would  he  not? 

He  would,  answered  Jeronymo — 

And  he  would  have  left  me  among  my  friends 
in  Italy  ? 

He  would,  replied  he. 

Well,  brother,  and  I  should  have  been  glad  per- 
haps to  have  seen  England  once ;  and  he  would  per- 
haps have  brought  over  his  sisters  and  his  father  to 
visit  us :  and  he  praises  them  highly,  i/ou  know.  And 
if  I  were  their  sister,  I  could  have  gone  over  with 
them,  ^ou  knoiv.  Do  you  think  if  I  had  loved  them 
they  would  not  have  loved  me?  I  am  not  an  ill-na- 
tured creature,  i/ou  knoxu  ;  and  they  must  be  courte- 
ous: Are  they  not  ^?s  sisters?  And  don't  you  think 
his  father  would  love  me  ?  I  should  have  brought  no 
dishonour  into  his  family,  you  know. — Well,  but  I'll 
tell  you  what,  Jeronymo;  he  is  really  a  tender- 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  329 

hearted  man.  I  talked  to  him  of  his  soul:  and  upon 
my  honour,  I  believe  I  could  have  prevailed,  in 
time.  Father  Marescotti  is  a  severe  man,  you  knotu  ; 
and  he  has  been  always  so  much  consulted,  and  don't 
love  the  chevalier,  1  believe  :  so  that  I  fancy,  if  I 
were  to  have  a  venerable  sweet-tempered  man  for 
my  confessor,  between  my  love  and  my  confessor's 
prudence,  we  should  gain  a  soul. — Don't  you  think 
so,  Jeronymo? — And  that  would  cover  a  great 
many  sins.  And  all  his  family  might  be  converted 
too,  you  know! 

He  encouraged  her  in  this  way  of  thinking.  She 
beheved,  she  said,  that  I  was  not  yet  gone.  He  is 
so  tender-hearted,  brother!  that  is  my  dependence: 
and  you  say,  he  loves  me.  Are  you  sure  of  that? — 
But  I  have  reason  to  think  he  does.  He  shed  tears, 
as  I  talked  to  him,  more  than  once ;  while  my  eyes 
were  as  dry  as  they  are  now.  I  did  not  shed  one 
tear.    Well,  I'll  go  to  him,  and  talk  with  him. 

She  went  to  the  door;  but  came  back  on  tiptoe; 
and  in  a  whispering  accent — My  mammals  coming; 
Hush,  Jeronymo  !  let  Hush  be  the  word ! — 

The  door  opened — Here,  madam,  is  your  girl ! — 
But  it  is  not  my  mamma:  the  impertinent  Camilla. 
She  follows  me  as  my  shadow ! 

My  lady  desires  to  see  you,  Lady  Clementina, 
in  her  dressing-room. 

I  obey.     But  where  is  the  chevalier  ? 

Gone,  madam,  gone  some  time. 

Ah,  brother!  said  she,  and  her  countenance  fell. 

What,  gone!  said  Jeronymo,  without  seeing  me! 
Unkind  Grandison !  He  did  not  use  to  be  so  un- 
kind. 

This  was  the  substance  of  the  advices  sent  me 
by  my  friend  Jeronymo. 

I  acquainted  him,  in  return,  by  pen  and  ink,  with 
all  that  had  passed  between  the  marchioness  and 


330  THE   HISTORY   OF 

mej  that  he  might  not,  by  his  friendship  for  me,  in- 
volve himself  in  difficulties. 

In  the  morning  I  had  a  visit  from  Camilla,  by  her 
lady's  command;  with  excuses  for  refusing  to  allow 
me  to  take  leave  of  Clementina.  She  hoped  I  was 
not  displeased  with  her  on  that  account.  It  was  the 
effiect  of  prudence,  and  not  disrespect.  She  should 
ever  regard  me,  even  in  a  tender  manner,  as  if  the 
desired  relation  could  have  taken  place.  Her  lord, 
and  her  brother  the  Conte  della  Porretta  (as  he  is 
called)  with  the  general  and  the  bishop,  arrived  the 
night  before,  accompanied  by  the  count's  eldest  son, 
Signor  Sebastiano.  She  had  been  much  blamed 
for  permitting  the  interview;  but  regretted  it  the 
less,  as  her  beloved  daughter  was  more  composed 
than  before,  and  gave  sedate  answers  to  all  the 
questions  put  to  her.  But,  nevertheless,  she  wished 
that  I  would  retire  from  Bologna,  for  Clementina's 
sake,  as  well  as  for  my  own. 

Camilla  added  from  Signor  Jeronymo,  that  he 
wished  to  hear  from  me  from  the  Trentine,  or  Ve- 
nice :  and  as  from  herself,  and  in  confidence,  that 
her  young  lady  was  greatly  concerned,  that  I  did 
not  wait  on  her  again  before  I  went  away:  that  she 
fell  into  a  silent  fit  upon  it ;  and  that  her  mamma, 
on  her  not  answering  to  her  questions,  for  the  first 
time,  chid  her:  that  this  gave  her  great  distress, 
but  produced  what  they  had  so  much  wished  for,  a 
flood  of  tears  ;  and  that  now  she  frequently  wept, 
and  lamented  to  her,  What  should  she  do  ?  Her 
mamma  did  not  love  her,  and  her  mamma  talked 
against  the  chevalier.  She  wished  to  be  allowed  to 
see  him.  Nobody  now  would  love  her  but  the  che- 
valier and  Jeronymo !  It  would  be  better  for  her  to 
be  in  England,  or  any-where,  than  to  be  in  the 
sweetest  country  in  the  world,  and  hated. 

Camilla  told  me,  that  the  mai-quis,  the  count  his 
3 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  331 

brother,  and  the  general,  had  indeed  blamed  the 
marchioness  for  permitting  the  interview  ;  but  were 
pleased  that  I  was  refused  taking  leave  of  the  young 
lady,  when  she  seemed  disposed  to  dwell  on  the  conr- 
tents  of  the  note  she  had  made  me  sign :  they 
seemed  now  all  of  a  mind,  she  said  :  that  were  I  to 
comply  with  their  terms,  the  alliance  would  not,  by 
any  means,  be  a  proper  one.  Their  rank,  their  de- 
gree, their  alliances,  were  dwelt  upon:  I  found 
that  their  advantages,  in  all  these  respects  were 
heightened  ;  my  degree,  my  consequence,  lowered, 
in  order  to  make  the  difference  greater,  and  the- 
difficulties  insuperable. 

Clementina's  uncle,  and  his  eldest  son,  both  men 
of  sense  and  honour,  who  used  to  be  high  in  her 
esteem,  had  talked  to  her :  but  could  get  nothing 
from  her  but  No,  and  Yes.  Her  father  had  talked 
to  her  alone;  but  they  melted  each  other,  and  no- 
thing resulted  of  comfort  to  either.  Her  mother 
joined  him;  but  she  threw  herself  at  her  mother's 
feet,  besought  her  to  forgive  her,  and  not  to  chide 
her  again.  They  had  intended  to  discourage  her 
from  thinking  of  me  upon  any  terms.  The  general 
and  the  bishop  were  to  talk  to  her  that  morning. 
They  had  expressed  displeasure  at  Signor  Jeron}^- 
mo,  for  his  continued  warmth  in  my  favour.  Fa- 
ther Marescotti  was  now  consulted  as  an  oracle ; 
and  1  found,  that,  by  an  indelicacy  of  thinking,  he 
imagined,  that  the  husband  would  set  all  right:  and 
was  for  encouraging  the  Count  of  Belvedere,  and 
getting  me  at  a  distance. 

Camilla  obligingly  offered  to  acquaint  me,  from 
time  to  time,  with  what  occurred;  but  I  thought  it 
was  not  right  to  accept  of  a  servant's  intelligence 
out  of  the  family  she  belonged  to,  unless  some  one 
of  it  authorized  her  to  give  it  me.  Yet,  you  must 
believe,  I  wanted  not  anxious  curiosity  on  a  subject 


333  THE  HISTORY  OF 

SO  interesting.  I  thanked  her;  but  said,  that  it 
might,  if  discovered,  lay  her  under  inconveniences 
which  would  grieve  me  for  her  sake.  She  had  the 
good  sense  to  approve  of  my  declining  her  offer. 

In  the  morning  of  the  same  day,  I  had  a  visit  made 
me  which  I  little  expected :  it  was  from  Father  Ma- 
rescotti.  It  is  a  common  thing  to  load  an  enemy, 
especially  if  he  be  in  holy  orders,  and  comes  to  us 
in  the  guise  of  friendship,  with  the  charge  of  hypo- 
crisy :  but  partiality  may  be  at  the  bottom  of  the 
accusation.  Father  Marescotti  is  a  zealous  Roman- 
catholic:  I  could  not  hope  either  for  his  interest,  or 
affection :  he  could  not  but  wish  to  frustrate  my 
hopes.  As  a  man  in  earnest  in  his  own  principles, 
and  who  knew  how  stedfast  I  was  in  mine,  it  was  his 
duty  to  oppose  this  alliance.  He  is,  perhaps,  the 
honesterman  for  knowing  but  little  of  human  nature, 
and  of  the  tender  passions.  As  to  that  of  love,  he 
seemed  to  have  drawn  his  conclusions  from  general 
observations;  he  knew  not  how  to  allow  for  particu- 
lar constitutions,  nor  to  account  for  the  delicacy  of 
such  a  heart  as  Clementina's.  Love  he  thought  was 
always  a  poor  blind  boy,  led  in  a  string,  either  by 
folly,  or  fancy ;  and  that  once  the  impetus  got  over, 
and  the  lady  settled  into  the  common  offices  of  life, 
she  would  domesticate  herself,  and  be  as  happy 
with  the  Count  of  Belvedere,  especially  as  he  is  a 
very  worthy  man,  as  if  she  had  married  the  man 
once  most  favoured.  On  this  presumption,  it  was 
a  condescension  in  such  a  man,  to  come  to  me,  and 
to  declare  himself  my  friend ;  and  advise  me  what  to 
do  for  promoting  the  peace  of  a  family  which  I  pro- 
fessed to  venerate  ;  and  you  will  hear  that  his  con- 
descension was  owing  to  a  real  greatness  of  mind. 

I  was,  from  the  moment  of  his  entrance,  very 
open,  very  frank ;  more  go  than  he  expected,  as  he 
owned.    He  told  me,  that  he  was  afraid  I  had  con- 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  335 

ceived  prejudices  against  him.  The  kinder  then  in 
him,  I  said,  that  he  condescended  to  make  me  so 
friendly  a  visit.  I  assured  him,  that  I  regarded  him 
as  a  good  man.  I  had  indeed  sometimes  thought 
him  severe;  but  that  convinced  me  that  he  was  very 
ipuch  in  earnest  in  his  rehgion.  I  was  sensible,  I 
said,  that  we  ought  always  to  look  to  the  intention  ; 
to  put  ourselves  in  the  situation  of  the  persons  of 
whose  actions  we  presumed  to  judge ;  and  even  to 
think  well  of  austerities,  which  had  their  founda- 
tion in  virtue,  in  whatever  manner  they  affected 
ourselves. 

He  applauded  me ;  and  said,  I  wanted  so  little  to 
be  a  Catholic,  that  it  was  a  thousand  pities  I  was 
not  one  :  and  he  was  persuaded,  that  I  should  one 
day  be  a  proselyte. 

This  father's  business  was,  to  convince  me  of  the 
unfitness  of  an  alliance  between  families  so  very  op- 
posite in  their  religious  sentiments.  He  went  into 
history  upon  it.  You  may  believe,  that  the  un- 
happy consequences  which  followed  the  marriage 
between  our  Charles  I.  and  the  Princess  Henrietta 
of  France,  were  not  forgotten.  He  expatiated  upon 
them:  but  I  observed  to  him,  That  the  monarch  was 
the  sufferer,  by  the  zeal  of  the  queen  for  her  reli- 
gion, and  not  the  queen,  any  otherwise  than  as  she 
was  involved  in  the  consequences  of  those  sufferings 
which  she  had  brought  upon  him.  In  short,  father, 
said  I,  we  Protestants,  some  of  us,  have  zeal ;  but 
let  us  alone,  and  it  is  not  a  persecuting  one.  Your 
doctrine  of  merits  makes  the  zeal  of  your  devotees 
altogether  active,  and  perhaps  the  more  flaming,  in 
proportion  as  the  person  is  more  honest  and  worthy. 

I  lamented,  that  I  was  sent  fbr  from  Vienna,  upon 
hopes,  though  my  principles  were  well  known,  that 
otherwise  I  had  never  presumed  to  entertain. 

He  owned  that  that  was  a  wrong  step :  and  valued 


334  THE  HISTORY  OF 

himself  that  he  had  not  been  consulted  upon  it;  and 
that  when  he  knew  it  had  been  taken,  he  inveighed 
against  it. 

And  I  am  afraid,  father,  said  I — 

He  interrupted  me — Why,  I  believe  so  ! — You 
have  made  such  generous  distinctions  in  favour  of 
the  duty  of  a  man  acting  in  my  function,  that,  I 
must  oxKii,  1  have  not  been  an  idle  observer  on  this 
occasion. 

He  advised  me  to  quit  Bologna.  He  was  profuse 
in  his  offers  of  service  in  any  other  affair ;  and,  I 
dare  say,  was  in  earnest. 

I  told  him,  That  I  chose  not  to  leave  it  precipi- 
tately, and  as  if  I  had  done  something  blame-worthy. 
I  had  some  hopes  of  being  recalled  to  my  father's 
arms.  I  should  set  out,  when  I  left  Bologna,  directly 
for  Paris,  to  be  in  the  way  of  such  a  long-wished-for 
call :  and  then,  said  I,  adieu  to  travelling  !  Adieu  to 
Italy,  for  ever !  I  should  have  been  happy,  had  I 
never  seen  it,  but  in  the  way  for  which  1  have  been 
accustomed  to  censure  the  generality  of  my  coun- 
trymen. 

His  behaviour  at  parting  was  such,  as  will  make 
me  for  ever  revere  him :  and  will  enlarge  a  charity 
for  all  good  men  of  his  religion ;  which  yet,  before, 
was  not  a  narrow  one.  For,  begging  my  excuse,  he 
kneeled  down  at  the  door  of  my  antechamber,  and 
offered  up,  in  a  very  fervent  manner,  a  prayer  for  my 
conversion.  He  could  not  have  given  me,  any  other 
way,  so  high  an  opinion  of  him :  no,  not,  had  he 
offered  me  his  interest  with  Clementina,  and  her  fa- 
mily. I  embraced  him ;  as  he  did  me :  tears  were 
in  his  eyes.  I  thanked  him  for  the  favour  of  this 
visit;  and,  recommending  myself  to  his  frequent  pray- 
ers, told  him,  That  he  might  be  assured  of  all  the 
respectful  services  he  should  put  it  in  my  power  to 
render  him.    I  longed,  Dr.  Bartlett,  to  make  him  a 


SIR    CHARLES   GRANDISON.  335 

present  worthy  of  his  acceptance,  had  I  known  what 
would  have  been  acceptable,  and  had  1  not  been 
afraid  of  affronting  him.  I  accompanied  him  to  the 
outward  door.  1  never,  said  he,  saw  a  Protestant 
that  1  loved,  before.  Your  mind  is  still  more 
amiable  than  your  person.  Lady  Clementina,  1  see, 
might  have  been  happy  with  you :  but  it  was  not 
fit,  on  cur  side.  He  snatched  my  hand,  before  I  was 
aware,  and  honoured  it  with  his  lips  ;  and  hajstened 
from  me,  leaving  me  at  a  loss,  and  looking  after 
him,  and  for  him,  when  he  was  out  of  sight; 
my  mind  labouring  as  under  a  high  sense  of  obli- 
gation to  his  goodness. 

Religion  and  love.  Dr.  Bartlett,  which  heighten 
our  relish  for  the  things  of  both  worlds,  what  pity  is 
it,  that  they  should  ever  run  the  human  heart  either 
into  enthusiasm,  or  superstition;  and  thereby  debase 
the  minds  they  are  both  so  well  fitted  to  exalt ! 

I  am  equally  surprised  and  affected  by  the  con- 
tents of  the  following  letter  directed  to  me.  It  was 
put  within  the  door;  nobody  saw  by  whom.  The 
daughter  of  the  lady  at  whose  house  I  lodge,  found 
it,  and  gave  it  to  one  of  my  servants  for  me. 

Don't  be  surprised,  chevalier ;  don't  think  amiss 
of  me  for  my  forwardness,  I  heard  some  words 
drop  (so  did  Camilla,  but  she  can't  go  out  to  tell 
you  of  them)  as  if  Somebody's  life  was  in  danger. 
This  distracts  me.  I  am  not  treated  as  I  was  ac- 
customed to  be  treated.  They  don't  love  me  now— 
They  don't  love  their  poor  Clementina !  Very  true, 
chevalier!  You,  who  are  always  telling  me  how 
dearly  they  all  loved  me,  will  hardly  believe  it,  I 
suppose.  Nothing  now  is  said,  but  You  shall,  Cle- 
mentina — from  those  who  used  to  call  me  sister,  and 
dear  sister,  at  every  word. 

Tliey  t>aid,  I  was  well,  and  quite  well,  and  ought 


336  THE   HISTORY   OP 

to  be  treated  with  a  high  hand — I  know  from  whom 
they  have  that.  From  myself.  I  said  so  to  Mrs. 
Beaumont ;  but  she  need  not  to  have  told  them.  I 
won't  go  to  her  again,  for  that.  They  say  1  shall. 
God  help  me,  I  don't  know  where  to  go  for  a  quiet 
mind.  A  high  hand  won't  do,  chevalier:  I  wish  I 
knew  what  would;  I  would  tell  it  to  them.  I  once 
thought  it  would ;  else  I  had  not  said  it  to  Mrs. 
Beaumont:  but  let  them  go  on  with  their  high  hands, 
with  all  my  heart :  that  heart  will  not  hold  always. 
It  had  been  gone  before  now,  had  not  Mrs.  Beau- 
mont got  out  of  me — Something — 1  won't  tell  you 
what — And  then  they  sent  for  Somebody — And 
Somebody  came — And  what  then  ? — They  need  not 
threaten  me  so — Somebody  is  not  so  much  to  blame 
as  they  will  have  it  he  is :  and  that  Somebody  did 
make  proposals — Did  you  not,  chevalier  ? — I  had 
like  to  have  betrayed  myself — I  stopt  just  in  time. 
But,  chevalier,  I'll  tell  you  a  secret — Don't  speak 
of  it  to  any-body — May  I  depend  upon  you  ? — I 
know  I  may.  Why,  Camilla  tells  me,  that  the  Count 
of  Belvedere  is  to  come  again. — Are  you  not  sorry 
for  your  poor  pupil  ?  But  I'll  tell  you  another  secret 
—And  that  is,  what  I  intend  to  say  to  him — '  Look 
you  here,  my  lord,  you  are  a  very  good  sort  of  man ; 
and  you  have  great  estates :  you  are  very  rich : 
you  are,  in  short,  a  very  good  sort  of  man :  but 
there  is,  however,  a  man  in  the  world  with  whom  I 
had  rather  live  in  the  poorest  hermitage  in  a  wilder- 
ness, than  with  you  in  the  richest  palace  in  the 
world.'  After  this,  if  he  be  not  the  creeping  mean 
man  you  said  he  was  not,  he  will  be  answered— 
Every-thing  you  said  to  me  in  former  happy  tiriies, 
I  remember.  You  always  said  things  to  me,  that 
were  fit  to  be  remembered.  Yet  I  don't  tell  you 
who  my  hermit  is,  that  I  had  rather  live  with.  Per- 
haps there  is  no  such  man.    But  this,  you  know, 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  337 

will  be  a  sufficient  answer  to  the  Count  of  Belve- 
dere.    Don't  you  think  so  ? 

Here  I  have  been  tormented  again ! — Would  you 
think  it?  I  have  been  pleading  for  Somebody,  boldly, 
confidently.  I  said  1  could  depend  upon  his  honour! 
Ah,  chevalier !  Don't  you  think  I  might  ? — I  am  to 
be  locked  up,  and  I  can't  tell  what ! — They  won't 
let  me  see  Somebody — They  won't  let  me  see  my 
poor  Jeronymo ! — Yoii,  and  I,  and  Jeronymo,  are 
all  put  together ! — I  don't  care,  as  I  tell  Camilla :  I 
don't  care.     They  will  quite  harden  me. 

But  just  now  my  mamma — O  she  is  the  best  of 
mothers ! — My  mamma  tells  me,  she  will  not  per- 
suade me,  if  I  will  be  patient,  if  I  will  be  good.  My 
dear  mamma,  as  I  told  her,  I  will  be  patient,  and 
good :  but  don't  let  them  inveigh  against  the  che- 
valier, then.  What  harm  has  he  done  ? — Was  he 
not — Ah  !  Sir,  now  I  blush ! — Was  he  not  sent  for? 
— And  did  he  not  weep  over  me  ? — Yet  is  he  none 
df  your  bold  men,  who  look  as  proudly  as  if  they 
were  sure  of  your  approbation ! — Well,  but  what  do 
you  think  my  mamma  said — Ah,  Clementina  !  said 
she,  would  to  God  the  chevalier  for  his  own  sake 
(yes,  she  said  for  his  oum  sake ;  and  that  made  a 
great  impression  upon  me ;  it  was  so  good,  you 
know,  of  my  mamma)  that  the  chevalier  was  in 
England,  or  a  thousand  miles  off.  So,  Sir,  this  is 
my  advice — Pray  take  it ;  for  I  and  Camilla  heard 
some  words,  and  Camilla,  as  well  as  I,  is  much  trou- 
bled about  them — Get  away  to  England  as  soon  as 
you  can — Be  sure  do  ! — And  some  months  hence, 
bring  your  two  sisters  over  with  you ;  and  by  that 
time  all  our  feuds  will  be  ended,  you  know :  and 
you  shall  take  a  house,  and  then  I  can  go  and  visit 
your  sisters,  you  know,  and  your  sisters  will  visit  us. 
You  will  come  sometimes  with  them ;  Won't  you  ? 
Well,  and  I'll  tell  you  how  we  will  pass  part  of  our 

G  G 


SS8  THE    HISTORY   OF 

time :  they  shall  perfect  me  in  my  English  :  I  will 
perfect  them  in  Italian.  They  know  as  much  of 
that,  I  suppose,  at  least,  as  I  do  of  English :  and  we 
will  visit  every  court,  and  every  city.  So,  God  bless 
you,  Sir,  and  get  away,  as  soon  as  you  can.  I  put 
no  name ;  for  fear  this  should  miscarry,  and  I  should 
be  found  out — Ah,  Sir !  they  are  very  severe  with 
me!  Pity  me:  but  I  know  you  will;  for  you  have 
a  tender  heart.     It  is  all  for  You  ! 

Theselastfive  words  were  intended  to  be  scratched 
out ;  and  are  but  just  legible. 

How  the  contents  of  this  letter  afflict  me !  Words 
cannot  express  what  I  feel !  I  see,  evidently,  that 
they  are  taking  wrong  measures  with  the  tenderest 
heart  in  the  world;  a  heart  that  never  once  has 
swerved  from  its  duty ;  and  which  is  filled  with  re- 
verence and  love  for  all  that  boast  a  relation  to  it. 
Harsh  treatment,  and  which  is  besides  new  to  it,  is 
not  the  method  to  be  taken  with  such  a  heart.  Shill 
I,  thought  I,  when  I  had  perused  it,  ask  for  an 
audience  of  a  mother  so  indulgent,  and  give  her  my 
disinterested  advice  upon  it  ?  Once  I  could  have 
done  so ;  and  even,  in  confidence,  have  shewn  her 
this  very  letter :  but  now  she  is  one  with  the  angry 
part  of  her  family,  and  1  dare  not  do  it,  for  Clemen- 
tina's sake.  Talk  of  locking  her  up !  Talk  of  bring- 
ing a  lover  to  her! — Threatening  her  with  going  to 
Mrs.  Beaumont,  when  they  should  court  her  to  go 
thither ! — Not  suffer  her  to  see  her  beloved  Jerony- 
mo ! — He  in  disgrace  too ! — How  hard,  how  wrong,  is 
all  this  conduct!  I  could  have  written  to  Jeronymo, 
thought  I,  and  advised  gentle  measures,  were  he 
not  out  of  their  consultations — As  to  the  threatened 
resentments,  they  are  as  nothing  to  me.  Clementina's 
sufferings  are  every-thing !  My  soul  disdains  the 
thought  of  fastening  myself  upon  a  proud  family, 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  339 

that  now  looks  upon  me  in  a  mean  light.  A  proud 
heart  undervalued,  will  swell.  It  will  be  put  upon 
orer-valuing  itself.  You  know,  Dr.  Bartlett,  that  I 
have  a  very  proud  heart :  but  when  1  am  trampled 
upon,  or  despised,  then  it  is  most  proud.  I  would 
call  myself  a  man,  to  a  prince,  who  should  unjustly 
hold  me  in  contempt ;  and  let  him  know  that  1  look- 
ed upon  him  to  be  no  more.  My  pride  is  raised : 
yet  against  whom !  Not  Clementina !  She  has  all  my 
pity !  She  has  seen,  and  I  have  found,  that  her  un- 
happy delirium,  though  not  caused  by  me  (I  bless 
God  for  that !)  has  made  me  tender  as  a  chidden 
infant.  And  can  I  think  of  quitting  Bologna,  and 
not  see  if  it  be  possible  for  me  to  gratify  myself,  and 
serve  them  in  her  restoration  ?  Setting  quite  out  of 
the  question  the  general's  causeless  resentments, 
and  the  engagement  I  have  laid  myself  under  not 
to  leave  it  without  apprising  him  of  my  intention. 

Upon  the  whole,  1  resolved  to  wait  the  issue  of 
the  new  measures  they  have  fallen  upon.  The  dear 
lady  has  declared  herself  in  my  favour.  Such  a 
frank  declaration  must  soon  be  followed  by  import- 
ant consequences. 

The  third  day  after  the  arrival  of  her  father  and 
brothers  from  Urbino,  I  received  the  following  billet 
from  the  marquis  himself: 

CHBTAUER   GRANDISON, 

We  are  in  the  utmost  distress.  We  cannot  take 
upon  us  to  forbid  your  stay  at  Bologna ;  but  shall 
be  obliged  to  you,  if  you  will  enable  us  to  acquaint 
our  daughter,  that  you  are  gone  to  England,  or 
some  far  distant  part  of  Italy.  Wishing  you  happy, 
1  am,  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant. 
G  G  2 


S40  THE    HISTORY   0» 

To  this  I  wrote  as  follows : 

MY  LORD, 

I  am  excessively  grieved  for  your  distress.  I 
make  no  hesitation  to  obey  you.  But  as  I  am  not 
conscious  of  having,  in  word  or  deed,  offended  you, 
or  any  one  of  a  family  to  whom  I  owe  infinite  obli- 
gations ;  let  me  hope,  that  I  may  be  allowed  a  fare- 
well visit  to  your  lordship,  to  your  lady,  and  to  your 
three  sons ;  that  my  departure  may  not  appear  like 
that  of  a  criminal,  instead  of  the  parting,  which, 
from  the  knowledge  I  have  of  my  own  heart,  as  well 
as  of  your  experienced  goodness,  may  be  claimed 
by  your  lordship's 

Ever  obliged,  and  affectionate  humble  servant, 

GRANDISON. 

This  request,  I  understood,occasioned  warm  de- 
bates. It  was  said  to  be  a  very  bold  one  :  but  my 
dear  Jeronymo  insisted,  that  it  was  worthy  of  his 
friend,  his  deliverer,  as  he  called  me ;  and  of  an  in- 
nocent man. 

The  result  was,  that  I  should  be  invited  in  form, 
to  visit  and  take  leave  of  the  family :  and  two  days 
were  taken,  that  some  others  of  the  Urbino  family 
might  be  present,  to  see  a  man  for  the  last  time 
(and  some  of  them  for  the  first)  who  was  thought 
by  his  request,  to  have  shewn  a  very  extraordinary 
degree  of  intrepidity ;  and  who,  though  a  Protest- 
ant, was  honoured  with  so  great  an  interest  in  the 
heart  of  their  Clementina. 

The  day  before  I  was  to  make  this  formal  visit 
(for  such  it  was  to  be)  I  received  the  following  let- 
ter from  my  friend  Jeronymo  : 


SIR   CHARLES   GRAMDISON.  941 

MY    DEAREST   GRANDISON, 

Take  the  particulars  of  the  situation  we  are  in 
here,  that  you  may  know  what  to  expect,  and  how 
to  act  and  comport  yourself,  to-morrow  evening. 

Your  reception  will  be,  I  am  afraid,  cold;  but 
civil. 

You  will  be  looked  upon  by  the  Urbino  family, 
who  have  heard  more  of  you  than  they  have  seen, 
as  a  curiosity;  but  with  more  wonder  than  affection. 

Of  them  will  be  present,  the  count  my  father's 
brother,  and  his  sons  Sebastiano  and  Juliano,  my 
aunt  Signora  Juliana  de  Sforza,  a  widow  lady,  as 
you  know,  and  her  daughter  Signora  Laurana,  a 
young  woman  of  my  sister's  age,  between  whom  and 
my  sister  used  to  be,  as  you  have  heard,  the  stricter 
friendship  and  correspondence ;  and  who  insisted 
on  being  present  on  this  occasion.  They  are  all 
good-natured  people ;  but  love  not  either  your  coun- 
try or  religion. 

Father  Marescotti  will  be  present.  He  is  become 
your  very  great  admirer. 

My  father  thinks  to  make  you  his  compliments ; 
but  if  he  withdraws  the  moment  he  has  made  them, 
you  must  not  be  surprised. 

My  mother  says,  that  as  it  is  the  last  time  that 
she  may  ever  see  you,  and  as  she  really  greatly  re- 
spects you,  she  shall  not  be  able  to  leave  you  while 
you  stay. 

The  general,  I  hope,  will  behave  with  politeness. 

The  bishop  loves  you ;  but  will  not,  however, 
perhaps,  be  in  high  good  humour  with  you. 

Your  Jeronymo  will  be  wheeled  into  the  same 
room.  If  he  be  more  silent  than  usual  on  the  so- 
lemn occasion,  you  will  not  do  him  injustice,  per- 
haps, if  you  attribute  it  to  his  prudenpe ;  but  much 
more  to  his  grief. 

GG  3 


342  THE    HISTORY    OF 

And  now  let  me  tell  you,  as  briefly  as  I  can,  the 
situation  of  the  dear  creature  who  must  not  appear, 
but  who  is  more  interested  in  the  occasion  of  the 
congress  than  any  person  who  will  be  present  at  it. 

What  passed  between  you  and  her  at  the  last  in- 
terview, has  greatly  impressed  her  in  your  favour. 
The  bishop,  the  general,  and  my  father,  soon  after 
their  return  from  Urbino,  made  her  a  visit  in  her 
dressing-room.  They  talked  to  her  of  the  excel- 
lency of  her  own  religion,  and  of  the  errors  of  the 
pretended  reformed,  which  they  called,  and  I  sup- 
pose are,  damnable.  They  found  her  steady  in  her 
abhorrence  of  the  one,  and  adherence  to  the  other. 
They  were  delighted  with  her  rational  answers,  and 
composed  behaviour :  they  all  three  retired  in  rap- 
tures, to  congratulate  each  other  upon  it ;  and  re- 
turned with  pleasure,  to  enter  into  farther  talk  with 
her :  but  when  they  mentioned  you  to  her,  she,  led 
by  their  affectionate  behaviour  to  her  on  their  re- 
turn, said.  It  had  given  her  great  pleasure,  and-ease 
of  mind,  to  find  that  she  was  not  despised  by  a  man 
whom  every  one  of  the  family  regarded  for  his  merit 
and  great  qualities.  The  general  had  hardly  pati- 
ence ;  he  walked  to  the  farther  end  of  the  room : 
my  father  was  in  tears :  the  bishop  soothed  her,  in 
order  to  induce  her  to  speak  her  whole  mind. 

He  praised  you.  She  seemed  pleased.  He  led 
her  to  believe,  that  the  whole  family  were  willing 
to  oblige  her,  if  she  would  declare  herself;  and 
asked  her  questions,  the  answers  to  which  must 
either  be  an  avowal  or  a  denial  of  her  love ;  and 
then  she  owned,  That  she  preferred  the  Chevalier 
Grandison  to  all  the  men  in  the  world ;  she  would 
not,  against  the  opinion  of  her  friends,  wish  to  be 
his ;  but  never  would  be  the  wife  of  any  other  man. 

What,  said  the  general,  though  he  continue  a 
heretic .'' 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  343 

He  inight  be  converted,  she  said.     And  he  was 
a  sweet-tempered  and  compassionate  man :  and  a 
man  of  sense  as  he  was,  must  see  his  errors. 
Would  she  run  the  risque  of  her  own  salvation? 
She  was  sure  she  should  never  give  up  her  faith. 
It  was  tempting  God  to  abandon  her  to  her  own 
perverseness. 

Her  reliance  on  his  goodness  to  enable  her  to  be 
stedfast,  was  humble,  and  not  presumptuous,  and 
with  a  pious  view  to  gain  a  proselyte ;  and  God 
would  not  forsake  a  person  so  well  intending.  Was 
she  not  to  be  allowed  her  confessor  ?  Her  confessor 
should  be  appointed  by  themselves.  She  did  not 
doubt  but  the  chevalier  would  consent  to  that. 

The  bishop,  you  know,  can  be  cool  when  he 
pleases.  He  bore  to  talk  further  with  her. 
My  father  was  still  in  tears. 
The  general  had  no  longer  patience.  He  with- 
drew, and  came  to  me,  and  vented  on  me  his  dis- 
pleasure. It  is  true,  Grandison,  when  it  was  pro- 
posed to  send  for  you  from  Vienna,  I,  sanguine  in 
my  hopes,  had  expressed  myself  as  void  of  all  doubt 
but  you  would  become  a  Catholic — Your  love,  your 
compassion,  your  honour,  as  I  thought,  engaged  by 
such  a  step  taken  on  our  side — I  had  no  notion  that 
on  such  a  surprise,  with  such  motives  to  urge  your 
compliance,  a  young  man  like  myself,  and  with  a 
heart  so  sensible,  could  have  been  so  firm :  but  these 
thoughts  are  all  over — This,  however,  exposes  me 
to  the  more  reproaches. 

We  were  high ;  and  my  mother  and  uncle  came 
in  to  mediate  between  us. 

I  would  not,  I  could  not,  renounce  my  friend ; 
the  friend  of  my  soul,  as  in  our  first  acquaintance; 
and  the  preserver  of  my  life — Miserable  as  that  has 
been,  the  preserver  of  it,  at  a  time  when  I  was  en- 


344  THE   HISTORY   OF 

gaged  in  an  unlaxvftd  pursuit,  in  which  had  I  pe- 
rished, what  might  I  have  now  been,  and  where  ? 

I  ventured  to  give  my  opinion  in  favour  of  my 
sister's  marriage  with  you,  as  the  only  method  that 
could  be  taken  to  restore  her ;  who,  I  said,  loved 
you  because  you  were  a  virtuous  man ;  and  that  her 
love  was  not  only  founded  in  virtue,  but  was  virtue 
itself. 

My  brother  told  me,  that  I  was  as  much  beside 
myself  with  my  notions  of  gratitude,  as  my  sister 
was  with  a  passion  less  excusable. 

1  bade  him  forbear  wounding  a  wounded  man. 
Thus  high  ran  words  between  us. 
The  bishop,  mean  time,  went  on  with  a  true 
church  subtlety,  to  get  out  of  the  innocent  girl  her 
whole  mind. 

He  boasted  afterwards  of  his  art.  But  what  was 
there  in  it  to  boast  of  ?  A  mind  so  pure  and  so  sim- 
ple as  Clementina's  ever  was,  and  which  only  the 
pride  of  her  sex,  and  motives  of  religion,  had  per- 
haps hindered  her  from  declaring  to  all  the  world. 

He  asked  her.  If  she  were  willing  to  leave  her 
father,  mother,  brothers,  and  country,  to  go  to  a 
strange  land ;  to  live  among  a  hated  people  ? 

No,  she  said ;  you  would  not  wish  her  to  go  out 
of  Italy.  You  would  live  nine  months  out  of  twelve 
in  Italy. 

He  told  her,  That  she  must,  when  married,  do  as 
her  husband  would  have  her. 
She  could  trust  to  your  honour. 
Would  she  consent  that  her  children  should  be 
trained  up  heretics  ? 

She  was  silent  to  this  question.     He  repeated  it. 

Well,  my  lord,  if  I  must  not  be  allowed  to  choose 

for  myself;    only  let  me  not  hear  the  chevalier 

spoken  of  disrespectfully :  he  does  not  deserve  it. 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  545 

He  has  acted  by  me  with  as  much  honour,  as  he 
did  by  my  brother.  He  is  an  uniformly  good  man, 
and  as  generous  as  good — And  don't  let  me  have 
other  proposals  made  me ;  and  I  will  be  contented. 
I  had  never  so  much  distinguished  him,  if  every- 
body had  not  as  well  as  1. 

He  was  pleased  to  find  her  answers  so  rational : 
he  pronounced  her  quite  well ;  and  gave  it  as  his 
opinion,  that  you  should  be  desired  to  quit  Bologna: 
and  your  absence,  and  a  little  time,  he  was  sure, 
would  secure  her  health  of  mind. 

But  when  her  aunt  Sforza  and  her  cousin  Laurana 
talked  with  her  next  morning,  they  found  her,  on 
putting  questions  about  you,  absolutely  determined 
in  your  favour. 

fehe  answered  the  objections  they  made  against 
you  witli  equal  warmth  and  clearness.  She  seemed 
sensible  of  the  unhappy  way  she  had  been  in,  and 
would  have  it,  that  the  last  interview  she  had  with 
you,  had  helped  to  calm  and  restore  her  :  and  she 
hoped  that  she  should  be  better  every  day.  She 
praised  your  behaviour  to  her :  she  expatiated  upon, 
and  pitied,  your  distress  of  mind. 

They  let  her  run  on  till  they  too  had  obtained 
from  her  a  confirmation  of  all  that  the  bishop  had 
reported ;  and,  upon  repeating  the  conversation, 
would  have  it,  upon  experience,  that  soothing  such 
a  passion  was  not  the  way  to  be  taken  ;  but  that  a 
high  hand  was  to  be  used,  and  that  she  was  to  be 
shamed  out  of  a  love  so  improper,  so  irreligious,  so 
scandalous,  to  be  encouraged  in  a  daughter  of  their 
house  with  a  heretic ;  and  who  had  shewn  himself 
to  be  a  determined  one. 

They  accordingly  entered  upon  their  new  mea- 
sures. They  forbad  her  to  think  of  you :  they  told 
her.  That  she  should  not  upon  any  terms  be  yours ; 
not  now,  even  if  you  would  change  your  religion 


34<5  THE    HISTORY    OF 

for  her.  They  depreciated  your  family,  your  for- 
tune, and  even  your  understanding;  and  brought  to 
prove  what  they  said  against  the  latter,  your  obsti- 
nate adherence  to  your  mushroom  religion,  so  they 
called  it ;  a  religion  that  was  founded  in  the  wicked- 
ness of  your  Vlllth  Henry  ;  in  the  superstition  of  a 
child  his  successor ;  and  in  the  arts  of  a  vile  woman 
who  had  martyred  a  sister  queen,  a  better  woman 
than  herself.  They  insisted  upon  her  encouraging 
the  Count  of  Belvedere's  addresses,  as  a  mark  of 
her  obedience. 

They  condemned,  in  terms  wounding  to  her  mo- 
desty, her  passion  for  a  foreigner,  and  enemy  to  her 
faith ;  and  on  her  earnest  request  to  see  her  father, 
he  was  prevailed  upon  to  refuse  her  that  favour. 

Lady  Juliana  Sforza  and  her  daughter  Laurana, 
the  companion  of  her  better  hours,  never  see  her, 
but  they  inveigh  against  you  as  an  artful,  and  inte- 
rested man. 

Her  uncle  treats  her  with  authority ;  Signor  Se- 
bastiano  with  a  pity  bordering  on  contempt. 

My  mother  shuns  her ;  and  indeed  avoids  me : 
but  as  she  has  been  blamed  for  permitting  the  inter- 
view, which  they  suppose  the  wrongest  step  that 
could  have  been  taken ;  she  declares  herself  neutral, 
and  resigns  to  whatever  shall  be  done  by  her  lord, 
by  his  brother,  her  two  sons,  and  Lady  Juliana  de 
Sforza :  but  1  am  sure,  in  her  heart,  that  she  ap- 
proves not  of  the  new  measures ;  and  which  are  also, 
as  I  have  reminded  the  bishop,  so  contrary  to  the 
advice  of  the  worthy  Mrs.  Beaumont ;  to  whom  they 
begin  to  think  of  once  more  sending  my  sister,  or 
of  prevailing  on  her  to  come  hither :  but  Clementina 
seems  not  to  be  desirous  of  going  again  to  her ;  we 
know  not  why ;  since  she  used  to  speak  of  her  with 
the  highest  respect. 

The  dear  soul  rushed  in  to  me  yesterday.    Ah, 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  347 

ray  Jeronymo !  said  she,  they  will  drive  me  into  de- 
spair. They  hate  me,  Jeronymo — But  I  have  writ- 
ten to  Somebody ! — Hush !  for  your  Ufe,  hush. 

She  was  immediately  followed  in  by  her  aunt 
Sforza,  and  her  cousin  Laurana,  and  the  general ; 
who,  though  he  heard  not  what  she  said,  insisted  on 
her  returning  to  her  own  apartment. 

What!  said  she,  must  I  not  speak  to  Jeronymo? 
Ah,  Jeronymo  I — I  had  a  great  deal  to  say  to  you ! 

I  raved ;  but  they  hurried  her  out,  and  have  for- 
bid her  to  visit  me :  they,  however,  have  had  the  ci- 
vility to  desire  my  excuse.  They  are  sure,  they  say, 
they  are  in  the  right  way :  and  if  I  will  have  pati- 
ence with  them  for  a  week,  they  will  change  their 
measures,  if  they  find  these  new  ones  ineffectual. 
But  my  sister  will  be  lost,  irrecoverably  lost;  I 
foresee  that. 

Ah  Grandison  !  And  can  you  still — But  now  they 
will  not  accept  of  your  change  of  religion.  Poor 
Clementina !  Unhappy  Jeronymo !  Unhappy  Gran' 
dison  !  I  will  say.  If  you  are  not  so,  you  cannot 
deserve  the  affection  of  a  Clementina. 

But  are  you  the  Somebody  to  whom  she  has 
written  ?  Has  she  written  to  you  ?  Perhaps  you  will 
find  some  opportunity  to-morrow  to  let  me  know 
whether  she  has,  or  not.  Camilla  is  forbidden  to 
stir  out  of  the  house,  or  to  write. 

The  general  told  me,  just  now,  that  my  gratitude 
to  you  shewed  neither  more  nor  less,  than  the  high 
value  I  put  upon  my  own  life. 

I  answered ;  That  his  observation  convinced  me, 
that  he  put  a  much  less  upon  mine,  than  I,  in  the 
same  case,  should  have  put  upon  his. 

He  reconciled  himself  to  me  by  an  endearment. 
He  embraced  me.  Don't  say  convinced,  Jeronymo. 
I  love  not  myself  better  than  I  love  my  Jeronymo. 

What  can  one  do  with  such  a  man  I  He  does  love 
me. 


31-8  THE    HISTORY   OF 

My  mother,  as  I  said,  is  resolved  to  be  neutral : 
but,  it  seems,  she  is  always  in  tears. 

My  mother  stept  in  just  now — To  my  question 
after  my  sister's  health ;  Ah,  Jeronymo !  said  she. 
All  is  wrong !  The  dear  creature  has  been  bad  ever 
since  yesterday.  They  are  all  wrong ! — But  patience 
and  silence,  child!  You  and  1  have  nothing  to  an- 
swer for. — Yet  my  Clementina,  said  she — Oh! — and 
left  me. 

I  have  no  heart  to  write  on.  You  will  see,  fi"om 
the  above,  the  way  we  are  in.  O  my  Grandison  ! 
What  will  you  do  among  us  ? — I  wish  you  would 
not  come.  Yet  what  hope,  if  you  do  not,  shall  I  ever 
have  of  seeing  again  my  beloved  friend,  who  has 
behaved  so  unexceptionably  in  a  case  so  critical  ? 

You  must  not  think  of  the  dear  creature:  her  head 
is  ruined :  for  your  own  sake,  you  must  not.  We  are 
all  unworthy  of  you:  yet,  not  all:  all,  however,  but 
Clementina,  and  (if  true  friendship  will  justify  my 
claim  to  another  exception) 

Your  afflicted 

JEROx\YMO. 


LETTER  XXIX. 

MISS  BYRON  TO  MISS  SELBY. 

O  MY  Lucy!  What  think  you  ! — But  it  is  easy  to 
guess  what  you  must  think.  I  will,  without  saying 
one  word  more,  inclose 

DR.  BARTLETT's  tenth  LETTER. 

The  next  day  (proceeds  my  patron)  I  went  to 
make  my  visit  to  the  family.    I  had  nothing  to  re- 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  349 

proach  myself  with ;  and  therefore  had  no  other 
concern  upon  me  but  what  arose  from  the  unhappi- 
ness  of  the  noble  Clementina :  that  indeed  was 
enough.  I  thought  I  should  have  some  difficulty  to 
manage  my  own  spirit,  if  I  were  to  find  myself  in- 
sulted, especially  by  the  general.  Soldiers  are  so 
apt  to  value  themselves  on  their  knowledge  of  what, 
after  all,  one  may  call  but  their  trade,  that  a  private 
gentleman  is  often  thought  too  slightly  of  by  them. 
Insolence  in  a  great  man,  a  rich  man,  or  a  soldier, 
is  a  call  upon  a  man  of  spirit  to  exert  himself.  But 
I  hope,  thought  I,  I  shall  not  have  this  call  from  anj 
one  of  a  family  I  so  greatly  respect. 

I  was  received  by  the  bishop  ;  who  politely,  after 
I  had  paid  my  compliments  to  the  marquis  and  his 
lady,  presented  me  to  those  of  the  Urbino  family  to 
whom  I  was  a  stranger.  Every  one  of  those  named 
by  Signor  Jeronymo,  in  his  last  letter,  was  present. 

The  marquis,  after  he  had  returned  my  compli- 
ment, looked  another  way,  to  hide  his  emotion  :  the 
marchioness  put  her  handkerchief  to  her  eyes ;  but 
withdrawing  it  again,  looked  upon  me  with  tender- 
ness ;  and  1  read  in  them  her  concern  for  her  Cle- 
mentina. 

I  paid  my  respects  to  the  general  with  an  air  of 
freedom,  yet  of  regard ;  to  my  Jeronymo,  with  the 
tenderness  due  to  our  friendship ;  and  congratulated 
him  on  seeing  him  out  of  his  chamber.  His  kind 
eyes  glistened  with  pleasure ;  yet  it  was  easy  to  read 
a  mixture  of  pain  in  them ;  which  grew  stronger  as 
the  first  emotions  on  seeing  me  enter,  gave  way  to 
reflection. 

The  Conte  della  Porretta  seemed  to  measure  me 
with  his  eye. 

I  addressed  myself  to  Father  Marescotti,  and  made 
my  particular  acknowledgments  to  him  for  the  fa- 
vour of  his  visit,  and  what  had  passed  in  it.    He 

H   U 


350  THE    HISTORY    OF 

looked  upon  me  with  pleasure ;  probably  with  the 
more,  as  this  was  a  farewell  visit. 

The  two  ladies  whispered,  and  looked  upon  me, 
and  seemed  to  bespeak  each  other's  attention  to 
what  passed. 

Signer  Sebastiano  placed  himself  next  to  Jerony- 
mo,  and  often  whispered  him,  and  as  often  cast  his 
eye  upon  me.  He  was  partial  to  me,  I  believe,  be- 
cause my  generous  friend  seemed  pleased  with  what 
he  said. 

His  brother,  Signor  Juliano,  sat  on  the  other  hand 
of  me.     They  are  agreeable  and  polite  young  men. 

A  profound  silence  succeeded  the  general  com- 
pliments. 

I  addressed  myself  to  the  marquis:  Your  lordship, 
and  you,  madam,  turning  to  the  marchioness,  I  hope 
will  excuse  me  for  having  requested  the  favour  of 
being  once  more  admitted  to  your  presence,  and  to 
that  of  three  brothers,  for  whom  1  shall  ever  retain 
the  most  respectful  affection.  I  could  not  think  of 
leaving  a  city,  where  one  of  the  first  families  in  it  has 
done  me  the  highest  honour,  without  taking  such  a 
leave  as  might  shew  my  gratitude — Accept,  my 
lords,  bowing;  Accept,  madam,  more  profoundly 
bowing  to  the  marchioness,  my  respectful  thanks  for 
all  your  goodness  to  me.  I  shall,  to  the  end  of  my 
life,  number  most  of  the  days  that  I  have  passed  at 
Bologna  among  its  happiest,  even  were  the  remain- 
der to  be  as  happy  as  man  ever  knew. 

The  marquis  said,  We  wish  you,  chevalier,  very 
happy ;  happier  than — He  sighed,  and  was  silent. 

His  lady  only  bowed.  Her  face  spoke  distress. 
Her  voice  was  lost  in  sighs,  though  she  struggled 
to  suppress  them. 

Chevalier,  said  the  bishop,  with  an  air  of  solemni-- 
ty,  you  have  given  us  many  happy  hours :  for  them 
we  thank  you.  Jeronymo,  for  himself,  will  say  more : 
5 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  351 

he  is  the  most  grateful  of  men.    We  thank  you  also 
for  what  you  have  done  for  him. 

I  cannot,  said  Jeronymo,  express  suitably  my 
gratitude  :  my  prayers,  my  vows,  shall  follow  you 
whithersoever  you  go,  best  of  friends,  and  best  of 
men ! 

The  general,  with  an  air  and  a  smile  that  might 
have  been  dispensed  with,  oddly  said.  High  pleasure 
and  high  pain  are  very  near  neighbours :  they  are 
often  guilty  of  excesses,  and  then  are  apt  to  mistake 
each  other's  house.  1  am  one  of  those  who  think 
ouf  whole  house  obliged  to  the  chevalier  for  the 
seasonable  assistance  he  gave  to  our  Jeronymo. 
But- 
Dear  general,  said  Lady  Juliana,  bear  with  an  in- 
terruption :  the  intent  of  this  meeting  is  amicable. 
The  chevalier  is  a  man  of  honour.  Things  may 
have  fallen  out  unhappily;  yet  nobody  to  blame. 

As  to  blame,  or  otherwise,  said  the  Conte  della 
Porretta,  that  is  not  now  to  be  talked  of;  else,  I  know 
where  it  lies :  in  short,  among  ourselves.  The  che- 
valier acted  greatly  by  Signer  Jeronymo :  we  were 
all  obliged  to  him :  but  to  let  such  a  man  as  this  have 
free  admission  to  our  daughter — She  ought  to  have 
had  no  eyes. 

Pray,  my  lord,  pray,  brother,  said  the  marquis, 
are  we^not  enough  sufferers? 

The  chevalier,  said  the  general,  cannot  but  be 
gratified  by  so  high  a  compliment ;  and  smiled  in- 
dignantly. 

My  lord,  replied  I  to  the  general,  you  know  very 
little  of  the  man  before  you,  if  you  don't  believe  him 
to  be  the  most  afflicted  man  present. 

Impossible!  said  the  marquis,  with  a  sigh. 

The  marchioness  arose  from  her  seat,  motioning 
to  go ;  and  turning  round  to  the  two  ladies,  and  the 
count,  I  have  resigned  my  will  to  the  will  of  you  all, 
H  h2 


552  THE  HISTOnY  OP 

my  dearest  friends,  and  shall  be  permitted  to  with- 
draw. This  testimony,  however,  before  I  go,  I  can- 
not but  bear :  Wherever  the  fault  lay,  it  lay  not  with 
the  chevalier.  He  has,  from  the  first  to  the  last, 
acted  with  the  nicest  honour.  He  is  entitled  to  our 
respect.  The  unhappiness  lies  no-where  but  in  the 
difference  of  religion. 

Well,  and  that  now  is  absolutely  out  of  the  ques- 
tion, said  the  general:  it  is  indeed,  chevalier. 

I  hope,  my  lord,  from  a  descendant  of  a  family  so 
illustrious,  to  find  an  equal  exemption  from  wound- 
ing words,  and  wounding  looks  ;  and  that,  Sii^  as 
well  from  your  generosity,  as  from  yowc  justice. 

My  looks  give  you  offence,  chevalier! — Do  they  ? 

I  attended  to  the  marchioness.  She  came  towards 
me.  I  arose,  and  respectfully  took  her  hand. — 
Chevalier,  said  she,  I  could  not  withdraw  without 
bearing  the  testimony  I  have  borne  to  your  merits. 
I  wish  you  happy. — God  protect  you,  whithersoever 
you  go.     Adieu. 

She  wept.  I  bowed  on  her  hand  with  profound 
respect.  She  retired  with  precipitation.  It  was  with 
difSculty  that  I  suppressed  the  rising  tear.  I  took 
my  seat. 

1  made  nd  answer  to  the  general's  last  question, 
though  it  was  spoken  in  such  a  way  (I  saw  by  their 
eyes)  as  took  every  other  person's  notice.    * 

Lady  Sforza,  when  her  sister  was  retired,  hinted, 
that  the  last  interview  between  the  young  lady  and 
me  was  an  unadvised  permission,  though  intended 
for  the  best. 

I  then  took  upon  me  to  defend  that  step.  Lady 
Clementina,  said  I,  had  declared,  That  if  she  were 
allowed  to  speak  her  whole  mind  to  me,  she  should 
be  easy.  I  had  for  some  time  given  myself  up  to 
absolute  despair.  The  marchioness  intended  not 
favour  to  me  in  allowing  of  the  interview :  it  was  the 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  353 

most  affecting  one  to  me  I  had  ever  known.  But  let 
me  say,  That,  far  from  having  bad  effects  on  the 
young  lady's  mind,  it  had  good  ones.  I  hardly  know 
how  to  talk  upon  a  subject  so  very  interesting  to 
every  one  present,  but  not  more  so  to  any  one  than  to 
myself.  1  thought  of  avoiding  it ;  and  have  been  led 
into  it,  but  did  not  lead.  And  since  it  is  before  us, 
let  me  recommend,  as  the  most  effectual  way  to  re- 
store every  one  to  peace  and  happiness,  gentle  treat' 
tnent.  The  most  generous,  the  meekest,  the  most  du- 
tiful of  human  minds,  requires  not  harsh  treatment. 

How  do  you  know.  Sir,  said  the  general,  and  look- 
ed at  Jeronymo,  the  methods  now  taken — 
And  are  they  then  harsh,  my  lord  ?  said  I. 
He  was  offended. 

I  had  heard,  proceeded  I,  that  a  change  of  mea- 
sures was  resolved  on.  I  knew  that  the  treatment 
before  hadbeen  all  gentle,  condescending,  indulgent. 
1  received  but  yesterday  letters  from  my  father,  sig- 
nifying his  intention  of  speedily  recalling  me  to  my 
native  country.  I  shall  set  out  very  soon  for  Paris, 
where  I  hope  to  meet  with  his  more  direct  com- 
mands for  this  long-desired  end.  What  may  be  my 
destiny,  I  know  not;  but  I  shall  carry  with  me  a 
heart  burdened  with  the  woee  of  this  family,  and 
distressed  for  the  beloved  daughter  of  it.  But  let 
me  beseech  you  all,  for  your  own  sakes  (mine  is  out 
of  the  question  :  I  presume  not  upon  any  hope  on 
my  own  account)  that  you  will  treat  this  angelic- 
minded  lady  with  tenderness.  I  pretend  to  say,  that 
I  know  that  harsh  or  severe  methods  will  not  do. 

The  general  arose  from  his  seat,  and,  with  a 
countenance  of  fervor,  next  to  fierceness — Let  me 
tell  you,  Grandison,  said  he — 

I  arose  from  mine,  and  going  to  Lady  Sforza,  who 
sat  next  him,  he  stopt,  supposing  me  going  to  him, 
and  seemed  surprised,  and  attentive  to  my  motions : 

H  H  3 


354  THE   HISTORY   OF 

but,  disregarding  him,  I  addressed  myself  to  that 
lady.  You,  madam,  are  the  aunt  of  Lady  Clemen- 
tina :  the  tender,  the  indulgent  mother  is  absent,  and 
has  declared,  that  she  resigns  her  will  to  the  will  of 
jjier  friends  present — Allow  me  to  supplicate,  that 
former  measures  may  not  be  changed  with  her. 
Great  dawnings  of  returning  reason  did  I  discover 
in  our  last  interview.  Her  delicacy  (never  was 
there  a  more  delicate  mind)  wanted  but  to  be  satis- 
fied. It  tons  satisfied,  and  she  began  to  be  easy. 
Were  her  mind  but  once  composed,  the  sense  she 
has  of  her  duty,  and  what  she  owes  to  her  religion, 
would  restore  her  to  your  wishes :  but  if  she  should 
be  treated  harshly  (though  I  am  sure,  if  she  should, 
it  would  be  with  the  best  intention)  Clementina  will 
be  lost. 

The  general  sat  down.  They  all  looked  upon  one 
another.  The  two  ladies  dried  their  eyes.  The 
starting  tear  would  accompany  my  fervor.  And 
then  stepping  to  Jeronymo,  who  was  extremely  af- 
fected; My  dear  Jeronymo,  said  I,  my  friend,  ray 
beloved  friend,  cherish  in  your  noble  heart  the  me- 
mory of  your  Grandison.  Would  to  God  1  could 
attend  you  to  England !  We  have  baths  there  of  so- 
vereign efficacy,  "fte  balm  of  a  friendly  and  grate- 
ful heart  would  promote  the  cure.  1  have  urged  it 
before.     Consider  of  it. 

My  Grandison,  my  dear  Grandison,  my  friend, 
my  preserver !  You  are  not  going ! — 

I  am,  my  Jeronymo  ;  and  embraced  him.  Love 
me  in  absence,  as  I  shall  you. 

Chevalier,  said  the  bishop,  you  don't  go  ?  We 
hope  for  your  company  at  a  small  collation. — We 
must  not  part  with  you  yet. 

I  cannot,  my  lord,  accept  the  favour.  Although 
I  had  given  myself  up  to  despair  of  obtaining  the 
happiness  to  which  1  once  aspired  ;  yet  I  was  not- 
willing  to  quit  a  city  that  this  family  had  made  dear 


SIR  CHARLES  GRAKDISON.  355 

to  me,  with  the  precipitation  of  a  man  conscious  of 
misbehaviour.  I  thank  you  for  the  permission  I  had 
to  attend  you  all  in  full  assembly.  May  God  prosper 
youy  my  lord;  and  may  you  be  invested  with  the  first 
honours  of  that  church  which  must  be  adorned  by  so 
worthy  a  heart!  It  will  be  my  glory,  when  I  am  in 
my  native  place,  or  wherever  1  am,  to  remember 
that  I  was  once  thought  not  unworthy  of  a  rank  in 
a  family  so  respectable.  Let  me,  my  lord,  be  in- 
titled  to  your  kind  remembrance. 

He  pulled  out  his  handkerchief.  My  lord,  said  he, 
to  his  father ;  My  lord,  to  the  general ;  Grandison 
must  not  go  ! — and  sat  down  with  emotion. 

Lady  Sforza  wept :  Laurana  seemed  moved  :  the 
two  young  lords,  Sebastiano  and  Juliano,  were  great- 
ly affected. 

I  then  addressed  myself  to  the  marquis,  who  sat 
undetermined,  as  to  speech :  My  venerable  lord,  for- 
give me,  that  my  address  was  not  first  paid  here. 
My  heart  overflows  with  gratitude  for  your  goodness 
in  permitting  me  to  throw  myself  at  your  feet,  before 
I  took  a  last  farewell  of  a  city  favoured  with  your  re- 
sidence. Best  of  fathers,  of  friends,  of  men,  let  me 
entreat  the  continuance  of  your  paternal  indulgence 
to  the  child  nearest,  and  deserving  to  be  nearest,  to 
your  heart.  She  is  ail  you  and  her  mother.  Restore 
her  to  yourself,  and  to  her,  by  your  indulgence : 
that  alone,  and  a  blessing  on  your  prayers,  caji  re- 
store her.  Adieu,  my  good  lord :  repeated  thanks 
for  all  your  hospitable  goodness  to  a  man  that  will 
ever  retain  a  grateful  sense  of  your  favour. 

You  will  not  yet  go,  was  all  he  said — He  seemed 
in  agitation.     He  could  not  say  more. 

I  then,  turning  to  the  count  his  brother,  who  sat 
next  him,  said,  I  have  not  the  honour  to  be  fully 
known  to  your  lordship :  some  prejudices  from  dif- 
ferences in  opinion  may  have  been  conceived :  but 


356  THE    HISTORY    OF 

if  you  ever  hear  any  thing  of  the  man  before  you 
unworthy  of  his  name,  and  of  the  favour  once  de- 
signed him;  then,  my  lord,  blame,  as  well  as  wonder 
at,  the  condescension  of  your  noble  brother  and 
sister  in  my  favour. 

Who,  I !  Who,  I !  said  that  lord,  in  some  hurry. — 
I  think  very  well  of  you.  I  never  saw  a  man,  in  my 
life,  that  I  liked  so  well ! 

Your  lordship  does  me  honour.  I  say  this  the 
rather,  as  I  may,  on  this  solemn  occasion,  taking 
leave  of  such  honourable  friends,  charge  my  future 
life  with  resolutions  to  behave  worthy  of  the  favour 
I  have  met  with  in  this  family. 

I  passed  from  him  to  the  general — Forgive,  my 
lord,  said  I,  the  seeming  formality  of  my  behaviour 
in  this  parting  scene  :  it  is  a  very  solemn  one  to  me. 
You  have  expressed  yourself  of  me,  and  to  me,  my 
lord,  with  more  passion  (forgive  me,  I  mean  not  to 
offend  you)  than  perhaps  you  will  approve  in  your- 
self when  I  am  far  removed  from  Italy.  For  have 
you  not  a  noble  mind  ?  And  are  you  not  a  son  of  the 
Marquis  della  Porretta?  Permit  me  to  observe,  that 
passion  will  make  a  man  exalt  himself,  and  degrade 
another ;  and  the  just  medium  will  be  then  forgot. 
J.  am  afraid  I  have  been  thought  more  lightly  of, 
than  I  ought  to  be,  either  in  justice,  or  for  the 
honour  of  a  person  who  is  dear  to  every  one  present. 
My  country  was  once  mentioned  with  disdain:  think  > 
not  my  vanity  so  much  concerned  in  what  I  am  going 
to  say,  as  my  honour:  I  am  proud  to  be  thought  an 
Englishman:  yet  I  think  as  highly  of  every  worthy 
man  of  every  nation  under  the  sun,  as  I  do  of  the 
worthy  men  of  my  own.  I  am  not  of  a  contemptible 
race  in  my  own  country.  My  father  lives  in  it  with 
the  magnificence  of  a  prince.  He  loves  his  son; 
yet  I  presume  to  add,  that  that  son  deems  his  good 
name  his  riches;  his  integrity  his  grandeur.  Princes, 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  357 

n 

though  they  are  intitled  by  their  rank  to  respect,  are 

princes  only  to  him  as  they  act. 
A  few  words  more,  my  lord. 
I  have  been  of  the  hearing,  not  of  the  speaking 
side  of  the  question,  in  the  two  last  conferences  I 
had  the  honour  to  hold  with  your  lordship.  Once 
you  unkindly  mentioned  the  word  triumph.  The 
word  at  the  time  went  to  my  heart.  When  I  can 
subdue  the  natural  warmth  of  my  temper,  then,  and 
then  only,  I  have  a  triumph.  I  should  not  have  re- 
membered this,  had  1  not  now,  my  lord,  on  this 
solemn  occasion,  been  received  by  you  with  an  in- 
dignant eye.  I  respect  your  lordship  too  much,  not 
to  take  notice  of  this  angry  reception.  My  silence 
upon  it,  perhaps,  would  look  like  subscribing  before 
this  illustrious  company  to  the  justice  of  your  con- 
tempt :  yet  I  mean  no  other  notice  than  this :  and 
this,  to  demonstrate  that  1  was  not,  in  my  own 
opinion  at  least,  absolutely  unworthy  of  the  favour 
I  met  with  from  the  father,  the  mother,  the  brothers, 
you  so  justly  honour,  and  which  I  wished  to  stand 
in  with  1/ou. 

And  now,  my  lord,  allow  me  the  honour  of  your 
hand ;  and,  as  1  have  given  you  no  cause  for  displea- 
sure, say,  that  you  will  remember  me  with  kindness, 
as  1  shall  honour  you  and  your  whole  family  to  the 
last  day  of  my  life. 

The  general  heard  me  out ;  but  it  was  with  great 
emotion.  He  accepted  not  my  hand :  he  returned 
not  my  answer :  the  bishop  arose,  and,  taking  him 
aside,  endeavoured  to  calm  him. 

I  addressed  myself  to  the  two  young  lords,  and 
said.  That  if  ever  their  curiosity  led  them  to  visit 
England,  where  I  hoped  to  be  in  a  few  months,  I 
should  be  extremely  glad  of  cultivating  their  esteem 
and  favour,  by  the  best  offices  I  could  do  them. 
They  received  my  civility  with  politeness. 


358  THE    HISTORY   OF 

I  addressed  myself  next  to  Lady  Laurana — May 
you,  madam,  the  friend,  the  intimate,  the  chosen 
companion  of  Lady  Clementina,  never  know  the 
hundredth  part  of  the  woe  that  fills  the  breast  of  the 
man  before  you,  for  the  calamity  that  has  befallen 
your  admirable  cousin,  and  because  of  that,  a  whole 
excellent  family.  Let  me  recommend  to  you,  that 
tender  and  soothing  treatment  to  her,  which  her 
tender  heart  would  shew  to  you,  in  any  calamity  that 
should  befall  you.  I  am  not  a  bad  man,  madam, 
though  of  a  different  communion  from  yours.  Think 
but  half  so  charitably  of  me,  as  I  do  of  every  one 
of  your  religion  who  lives  up  to  his  professions,  and 
I  shall  be  happy  in  your  favourable  thoughts  when 
you  hear  me  spoken  of. 

It  is  easy  to  imagine.  Dr.  Bartlett,  that  1  address- 
ed myself  in  this  manner  to  this  lady,  whom  1  had 
never  before  seen,  that  she  might  not  think  the 
harder  of  her  cousin's  prepossessions  in  favour  of  a 
Protestant. 

I  recommended  myself  to  the  favour  of  Father 
Marescotti.  He  assured  me  of  his  esteem,  in  very 
warm  terms. 

And  just  as  I  was  again  applying  to  my  Jeronymo, 
the  general  came  to  me:  You  cannot  think,  Sir,  said 
he,  nor  did  you  design  it,  I  suppose,  that  I  should  be 
pleased  with  your  address  to  me.  I  have  only  this 
question  to  ask.  When  do  you  quit  Bologna  ? 

Let  me  ask  your  lordship,  said  I,  When  do  you 
return  to  Naples  ? 

Why  that  question.  Sir  ?  haughtily. 

I  will  answer  you  frankly.  Your  lordship,  at  the 
first  of  my  acquaintance  with  you,  invited  me  to 
Naples.  1  promised  to  pay  my  respects  to  you  there. 
If  you  think  of  being  there  in  a  week,  I  will  attend 
you  at  your  own  palace  in  that  city;  and  there,  my 
lord,  I  hope,  no  cause  to  the  contrary  having  arisen 


SIK  CHARLES  CRANDISON.  85f) 

from  me,  to  be  received  by  you  with  the  same  kind- 
ness and  favour  that  you  shewed  when  you  gave  nfte 
the  invitation.    I  think  to  leave  Bologna  to-morrow. 

0  brother,  said  the  bishop,  are  you  not  now 
overcome? 

And  are  you  in  earnest?  said  the  general. 

1  am,  ray  lord.  I  have  many  valuable  friends,  at 
different  courts  and  cities  in  Italy,  to  take  leave  of. 
I  never  intend  to  see  it  again.  I  would  look  upon 
your  lordship  as  One  of  those  friends:  but  you  seem 
still  displeased  with  me.  You  accepted  not  my  of- 
fered hand  before :  once  more  I  tender  it.  A  man  of 
spirit  cannot  be  offended  at  a  man  of  spirit,  without 
lessening  himself.  I  call  upon  your  dignity,  my  lord. 

He  held  out  his  hand,  just  as  I  was  withdrawing 
mine.  I  have  pride,  you  know.  Dr.  Bartlett;  and  I 
was  conscious  of  a  superiority  in  Mi's  witonce;  I  took 
his  hand,  however,  at  his  offer;  yet  pitied  him,  that 
his  motion  was  made  at  all,  as' it  wanted  that  grace 
which  generally  accompanies  all  he  does  and  says. 

The  bishop  embraced  me. — Your  moderation, 
thus  exerted,  said  he,  must  ever  make  you  triumph. 

0  Grandison !  you  are  a  prince  of  the  Almighty's 
creation. 

The  noble  Jeronymo  dried  his  eyes,  and  held 
out  his  arms  to  embrace  me. 

The  general  said,  I  shall  certainly  be  at  Naples 
in  a  week.  I  am  too  much  affected  by  the  woes  of 
my  family,  to  behave  as  perhaps  I  ought  on  this  occa- 
sion. Indeed,  Grandison,  it  is  difficult  for  sufferers 
to  act  with  spirit  and  temper  at  the  same  time. 

It  is,  my  lord :  I  have  found  it  so.  My  hopes 
raised,  as  once  they  were,  now  sunk,  and  absolute 
despair  having  taken  place  of  them — Would  to  God 

1  had  never  returned  to  Italy ! — But  I  reproach  not 
any-body. 

Yet,  said  Jeronymo,  you  have  some  reason — To 
be  sent  for  as  you  were — 


360  THE   HISTORY   01* 

He  was  going  on — Pray,  brother,  said  the  gene- 
rA — And  turning  to  me,  I  may  expect  you,  Sir,  at 
Naples  ? 

You  may,  my  lord.  But  one  favour  I  have  to 
beg  of  you  mean  time.  It  is,  That  you  will  not  treat 
harshly  your  dear  Clementina.  Would  to  Heaven 
I  might  have  had  the  honour  to  say,  mi/  Clementina ! 
And  permit  me  to  make  one  other  request  on  my 
own  account :  and  that  is.  That  you  will  tell  her, 
that  I  took  my  leave  of  your  whole  family  by  their 
kind  permission;  and  that,  at  my  departure,  I  wished 
her,  from  my  soul,  all  the  happiness  that  the  best 
and  tenderest  of  her  friends  can  wish  her !  I  make 
this  request  to  you,  my  lord,  rather  than  to  Signor 
Jeronymo,  because  the  tenderness  which  he  has  for 
me  might  induce  him  to  mention  me  to  her  in  a 
manner  which  might,  at  this  time,  affect  her  too 
sensibly  for  her  peace. 

Be  pleased,  my  dear  Signor  Jeronymo,  to  make 
my  devotion  known  to  the  marchioness.  Would  to 
Heaven — But  adieu,  and  once  more  adieu,  my  Jero- 
nymo. I  shall  hear  from  you  when  I  get  to  Naples, 
if  not  before. — God  restore  your  sister,  and  heal  you! 

I  bowed  to  the  marquis,  to  the  ladies,  to  the  ge- 
neral, to  the  bishop,  particularly;  to  the  rest  in  ge- 
neral; and  was  obliged,  in  order  to  conceal  my 
emotion,  to  hurry  out  at  the  door.  The  servants 
had  planted  themselves  in  a  row;  not  for  selfish 
motives,  as  in  England :  they  bowed  to  the  ground, 
and  blessed  me,  as  I  went  through  them.  I  had  ready 
a  purse  of  ducats.  One  hand  and  another  declined 
it:  1  dropt  it  in  their  sight.  God  be  with  you, 
my  honest  friends !  said  I;  and  departed — O,  Dr. 
Bartlett,  with  a  heart  how  much  distressed ! 

And  now,  my  good  Miss  Byron,  have  I  not  rea- 
iSon,  from  the  deep  concern  which  you  take  in  the 
woes  of  Lady  Clementina,  to  regret  the  task  you 


.  SIR   CHARLES   GUANDISON.  361 

have  put  me  upon  ?  And  do  you,  my  good  Lord 
and  Lady  L.  and  Miss  Grandison,  now  wonder  that 
your  brother  has  not  been  forward  to  give  you  the 
particulars  of  this  melancholy  tale  ?  Yet  you  all 
say,  I  must  proceed. 

See,  Lucy,  the  greatness  of  this  man's  behaviour! 
What  a  presumption  was  it  in  your  Harriet,  ever  to 
aspire  to  call  such  a  one  hers  ! 


LETTER  XXX. 

MISS    BYRON    TO    MISS    SELBY. 

This  Lady  Olivia,  Lucy,  what  can  she  pretend  to 
— But  I  will  not  puzzle  myself  about  her.    Yet  she 
pretend  to  give  disturbance  to  such  a  man!  You  will 
Hnd  her  mentioned  in  Dr.  Bartlett's  next  letter;  or' 
she  would  not  have  been  named  by  me. 

DR.  bartlett's  eleventh  LETTER. 

Mr.  Grandison,  on  his  return  to  his  lodgings,  found 
there,  in  disgUise,  Lady  Olivia.  He  wanted  not  any 
new  disturbance.    But  I  will  not  mix  the  stories. 

The  next  morning  he  received  a  letter  from  Sig- 
ner Jeronymo.    The  following  is  a  translation  of  it : 

MY  DEARB8T  GRANDISON, 

How  do  you  ? — Ever-amiable  friend !  What  tri- 
umphs did  your  behaviour  of  last  night  obtain  for 
you  !    Not  a  soul  here  but  admires  you ! 

Even  Lauranadecla'-  ,d,  That  were  you  a  Catholic, 
it  would  be  a  merit  to  love  you.  Yet  she  reluctantly 
praised  you,  and  once  said-  What,  but  splendid  sins, 
are  the  virtues  of  a  heretic  ? 

VOL.  XI.  I 


362  THE  HISTORY  OF 

Our  two  cousins,  with  the  good-nature  of  youths 
lamented  that  you  could  not  be  ours  in  the  way  you 
wish.  My  father  wept  like  a  child,  when  you  were 
gone;  and  seemed  to  enjoy  the  praises  given  you 
by  every  one.  The  count  said,  he  never  saw  a  no- 
bler behaviour  in  man.  Your  free,  your  manly, 
your  polite  air  and  address,  and  your  calmness  and 
intrepidity,  were  applauded  by  every  one. 

What  joy  did  this  give  to  your  Jeronymo !  I  thought 
I  wanted  neither  ciutches,  helps,  nor  wheeled  chair ; 
nd  several  times  forgot  that  I  ailed  any-thing. 

I  begin  to  love  Father  Marescotti.  He  was  with 
the  foremost  in  praising  you. 

The  general  owned,  that  he  once  was  resolved  to 
quarrel  with  you.  But  will  he,  do  you  think,  Jero- 
nymo, said  he,  make  me  a  visit  at  Naples? — 

You  may  depend  upon  it,  he  will,  answered  I. — 

I  will  be  there  to  receive  him,  replied  he. 

They  admired  you  particularly  for  your  address  to 
my  sister,  by  the  general,  rather  than  by  me :  and 
Lady  Sforza  said.  It  was  a  thousand  pities  that  you 
and  Clementina  could  not  be  one.  They  applauded, 
all  of  them,  what  they  had  not,  any  of  them,  the 
power  to  imitate  that  largeness  of  heart  which  makes 
you  think  so  well,  and  speak  so  tenderly,  of  those 
of  communions  different  from  your  own.  So  much 
steadiness  in  your  own  religion,  yet  so  much  pru- 
dence, in  a  man  so  young,  they  said  was  astonishing ! 
No  wonder  that  your  character  ran  so  high,  in  every 
court  you  had  visited. 

My  mother  came  in  soon  after  you  had  left  us. 
She  was  equally  surprised  and  grieved  to  find  you 
gone.  She  thought  she  was  sure  of  your  staying 
supper;  and,  not  satisfied  with  the  slight  leave  she 
had  taken,  she  had  been  strengthening  her  mind  to 
pass  an  hour  in  your  company,  in  order  to  take  a 
more  solemn  one. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  36S 

My  father  asked  her  after  her  daughter. 

Poor  soul !  said  she,  she  has  heard  that  the  che- 
valier was  to  be  here,  to  take  leave  of  us. 

By  whom?  By  whom?  said  my  father. 

I  cannot  tell :  but  the  poor  creature  is  half-raving 
to  be  admitted  among  us.  She  has  dressed  herself 
in  one  of  her  best  suits ;  and  I  found  her  sitting  in  a 
kind  of  form,  expecting  to  be  called  down.  Indeed, 
Lady  Sforza,  the  method  we  are  in,  does  not  do. 

So  the  chevalier  said,  replied  that  lady.  Well,  let 
us  change  it  with  all  my  heart.  It  is  no  pleasure  to 
treat  the  dear  girl  harshly — O  sister !  this  is  a  most 
extraordinary  man ! 

That  momentinbolted  Camilla — LadyClementina 
is  just  at  the  door.    I  could  not  prevail  upon  her— 

We  all  looked  upon  one  another. 

Three  soft  taps  at  the  door,  and  a  hem,  let  us 
know  she  was  there. 

Let  her  come  in,  dear  girl,  let  her  come  in,  said 
the  count :  the  chevalier  is  not  here. 

Laurana  arose,  and  ran  to  the  door,  and  led  her  in. 

Dear  creature,  how  wild  she  looked! — Tears  ran 
down  my  cheeks:  I  had  not  seen  her  for  two  days 
before.  O  hovv  earnestly  did  she  look  round  her ! 
withdrawing  her  hand  from  her  cousin,  who  would 
have  led  her  to  a  chair,  and  standing  quite  still. 

Come  and  sit  by  me,  my  sweet  love,  said  her 
weeping  mother. — She  stept  towards  her. 

Sit  down,  my  dear  girl. 

No :  you  beat  me,  remember. 

Who  beat  you,  my  dear? — Sure  nobody  would 
beat  my  child ! — Who  beat  you,  Clementina  ? 

I  don't  know — Still  looking  round  her,  as  wanting 
Somebody. 

Again  her  mother  courted  her  to  sit  down. 

No,  madam,  you  don't  love  me. 

Indeed,  my  dear,  I  do. 

II  2 


36^  THE    HISTORY    OF 

So  you  say. 

Her  father  held  out  his  open  arms  to  her.  Tear* 
ran  down  his  cheeks.  He  could  not  speak. — Ah,  my 
father !  said  she,  stepping  towards  him. 

He  caught  her  in  his  arms — Don't,  don't,  Sir, 
faintly  struggling,  with  averted  face — You  love  me 
not — You  refused  to  see  your  child,  when  she  want- 
ed to  claim  your  protection! — I  was  used  cruelly. 

By  whom,  my  dear  ?  by  whom  ? 

By  every-body.  I  complained  to  one,  and  to 
another;  but  all  were  in  a  tone:  and  so  I  thought  I 
would  be  contented.  My  mamma  too ! — But  it  is  no 
matter.    I  saw  it  was  to  be  so ;  and  I  did  not  care. 

By  my  soul,  said  I,  this  is  not  the  way  with  her, 
Lady  Sforza.  The  chevalier  is  in  the  right.  You 
see  how  sensible  she  is  of  harsh  treatment. 

Well,  well,  said  the  general,  let  us  change  our 
measures. 

Still  the  dear  girl  looked  out  earnestly,  as  for 
Somebody. 

She  loosed  herself  from  the  arms  of  her  sorrow- 
ing father. 

Let  us  in  silence,  said  the  count,  observe  her 
motions. 

She  went  to  him  on  tip-toe,  ana  looking  in  his 
face  over  his  shoulder,  as  he  sat  with  his  back  to- 
wards her,  passed  him ;  then  to  the  general ;  then  to 
Signor  Sebastiano;  and  to  every  one  round,  till  she 
came  to  me;  looking  at  each  over  his  shoulder  in  the 
same  manner:  then  folding  her  fingers,  her  hands 
open,  and  her  arms  hanging  down  to  their  full  ex- 
tent, she  held  up  her  face  meditating,  with  such  a 
significant  woe,  that  I  thought  my  heart  would  have 
burst. — Not  a  soul  in  the  company  had  a  dry  eye. 

Lady  Sforza  arose,  took  her  two  hands,  the  fingers 
still  clasped;  and  would  have  spoken  to  her,  but 
could  not;  and  hastily  retired  to  her  seat. 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  365 

Tears,  at  last,  began  to  trickle  down  her  cheeks, 
as  she  stood  fixedly  looking  up.  She  started,  looked 
about  her,  and,  hastening  to  her  mother,  threw  her 
arms  about  her  neck ;  and,  hiding  her  face  in  her 
bosom,  broke  out  into  a  flood  of  tears,  mingled 
with  sobs  that  penetrated  every  heart. 

The  first  words  she  said,  were.  Love  me,  my 
mamma  !  Love  your  child !  your  poor  child !  your 
Clementina  !  Then  raising  her  head,  and  again  lay- 
ing it  in  her  mother's  bosom — If  ever  you  loved 
me,  love  me  now,  my  mamma ! — I  have  need  of 
your  love ! 

My  father  was  forced  to  withdraw.  He  was  led 
out  by  his  two  sons. 

Your  poor  Jeronymo  was  unable  to  help  himself. 
He  wanted  as  much  comfort  as  his  father.  What 
were  the  wounds  of  his  body,  at  that  time,  to  those 
of  his  mind? 

My  two  brothers  returned.  This  dear  girl,  said 
the  bishop,  will  break  all  our  hearts. 

Her  tears  had  seemed  to  relieve  her.  She  held 
up  her  head.  My  mother's  bosom  seemed  wet  with 
her  child's  tears  and  her  own.  Still  she  looked 
round  her. 

Suppose,  said  I,  somebody  were  to  name  the 
man  she  seems  to  look  for  ?  It  may  divert  this  wild- 
ness. 

Did  she  come  down,  said  Laurana  to  Camilla, 
with  the  expectation  of  seeing  him? 

She  did. 

Let  7ne,  said  the  bishop,  speak  to  her.  He  arose, 
and,  taking  her  hand,  walked  with  her  about  the 
room.  You  look  pretty,  my  dear  Clementina!  Your 
ornaments  are  charmingly  fancied.  What  made 
you  dress  yourself  so  prettily  ? 

She  looked  earnestly  at  hun,  in  silence.    He  re- 
II  3 


S6d  THE  HISTORY  OF 

peated  his  question— I  speak,  said  she,  all  my  heart ; 
and  then  I  suffer  for  it.    Every -body  is  against  me. 
You  shall  not  suffer  for  it:  every -body  is  for  you, 
T  confessed  to  Mrs.  Beaumont;  I  confessed  to 
you,  brother:  but  what  did  I  get  by  it? — Let  go 
my  hand.     I  don't  love  you,  1  believe. 

I  am  sorry  for  it.  I  love  you,  Clementina,  as  I 
love  ray  own  soul ! 

He  turned  his  face  from  her  to  us.  She  must 
not  be  treated  harshly,  said  he.  He  soothed  her 
in  a  truly  brotherly  manner. 

Tell  me,  added  he  to  his  soothings.  Did  you 
expect  any-body  here,  that  you  find  not? 

Did  I  ?  Yes,  I  did. — Camilla,  come  hither. — Let 
go  my  hand,  brother. 

He  did.  She  took  Camilla  under  the  arm — Don't 
you  know,  Camilla,  said  she,  what  you  heard  said 
of  Somebody's  threatening  Somebody? — Don't  let 
any-body  hear  us ;  drawing  her  to  one  end  of  the 
room. — I  want  to  take  a  walk  with  you  into  the 
garden,  Camilla. 

It  is  a  dark  night,  madam. 

No  matter.    If  you  are  afraid,  I  will  go  by  myself. 

Seem  to  humour  her  in  talk,  Camilla,  said  the 
count;  but  don't  go  out  of  the  room  with  her. 

Be  pleased  to  tell  me,  madam,  what  we  are  to 
walk  in  the  garden  for  ? 

Why,  Camilla,  I  had  a  horrid  dream  last  night ; 
and  I  cannot  be  easy  till  I  go  into  the  garden. 

What,  madam,  was  your  dream  ? 

In  the  orange  grove,  I  thought  1  stumbled  over 
the  body  of  a  dead  man ! 

And  who  was  it,  madam  ? 

Don't  you  know  who  was  threatened?  And  was 
not  Somebody  here  to-night  ?  And  was  not  Some- 
body to  sup  here  ?  And  is  he  here  ? 


SIR   CHARLES    CRANDISON.  367 

The  general  then  went  to  her.  My  dearest  Cle- 
mentina ;  my  beloved  sister  ;  set  your  heart  at  rest. 
Somebody  is  safe  :  shall  be  safe. 

She  took  first  one  of  his  hands,  then  the  other ; 
and,  looking  in  the  palms  of  them,  They  are  not 
bloody,  said  she. — What  have  you  done  with  him, 
then  ?  Where  is  he  ? 

Where  is  who  ? — 

You  know  whom  I  ask  after ;  but  you  want  some- 
thing against  me. 

Then  stepping  quick  up  to  me :  My  Jeronymo  ! — 
Did  I  see  you  before  ?  and  stroked  my  cheek. — Now 
tell  me,  Jeronymo — Don't  come  near  me,  Camilla. 
Pray,  Sir,  to  the  general,  do  you  sit  down.  She 
leaned  her  arm  upon  my  shoulder :  I  don't  hurt  you 
Jeronymo  :  Do  I  ? 

No,  my  dearest  Clementina. 

That's  my  best  brother. — Cruel  assassins  ! — But 
the  brave  man  came  just  in  time  to  save  you. — But 
do  you  know  what  is  become  of  him  ? 

He  is  safe,  my  dear.     He  could  not  stay. 

Did  any-body  affront  him  ? 

No,  my  love. 

Are  you  sure  nobody  did  ? —  Very  sure  ?  Father 
Marescotti,  said  she,  turning  to  him  (who  wept  from 
the  time  she  entered)  you  don't  love  him :  but  you 
are  a  good  man,  and  will  tell  me  truth.  Where  is 
he  ?     Did  nobody  affront  him  ? 

No,  madam. 

Because,  said  she,  he  never  did  any-thing  but 
good  to  any  one. 

Father  Marescotti,  said  I,  admires  him  as  much 
as  any-body. 

Admire  him !  Father  Marescotti  admire  him  ! — 
But  he  does  not  love  him.  And  I  never  heai'd  him 
say  one  word  against  Father  Marescotti  in  my  life. 


368  THE    HISTORY    OP 

— Well,  but,  Jeronymo,  What  made  him  go  away, 
then  ?     Was  he  not  to  stay  to  supper  ? 

He  was  desired  to  stay  ;  but  would  not. 

Jeronymo,  let  me  whisper  you — Did  he  tell  you 
that  I  wrote  him  a  letter  ? 

I  guessed  you  did,  whispered  I. 

You  are  a  strange  guesser  :  but  you  can't  q:ues8 
how  1  sent  it  to  him — But  hush,  Jeronymo — Well, 
but,  Jeronymo,  Did  he  say  nothing  of  me,  when 
he  went  away  ? 

He  left  his  compliments  for  you  with  the  general. 

With  the  general !  The  general  won't  tell  me ! 

Yes,  he  will, — Brother,  pray  tell  my  sister  what 
the  chevalier  said  to  you,  at  parting. 

He  repeated,  exactly,  what  you  had  desired  him 
to  say  to  her. 

Why  would  they  not  let  me  see  him  ?  said  she. 
Am  I  never  to  see  him  more  ? 

I  hope  you  will,  replied  the  bishop. 

If,  resumed  she,  we  could  have  done  any-thing 
that  might  have  looked  like  a  return  to  his  goodness 
to  us  (and  to  you,  my  Jeronymo,  in  particular)  I 
believe  I  should  have  been  easy.—- And  so  you  say 
he  is  gone? — And  gone  for  ever!  lifting  up  her 
hand  from  her  wrist,  as  it  lay  over  my  shoulder ! 
Poor  chevalier  ! — But  hush,  hush,  pray  hush,  Jero- 
-ymo. 

She  went  from  me  to  her  aunt,  and  cousin  Lau- 
rana.  Love  me  again,  madam,  said  she,  to  the 
former.     You  loved  me  once. 

I  never  loved  you  better  than  now,  my  dear. 

Did  you,  Laurana,  see  the  Chevalier  Grandison .'' 

I  did. 

And  did  he  go  away  safe,  and  unhurt  ? 

Indeed  he  did. 

A  man  who  had  preserved  the  life  of  our  dear  Je- 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISOW.  369 

ronymo,  said  she,  to  have  been  hurt  by  us,  would 
have  been  dreadful,  you  know.  I  wanted  to  say  a 
few  words  to  him.  I  was  astonished  to  find  him  not 
here  :  and  then  my  dream  came  into  my  head.  It 
was  a  sad  dream,  indeed! — But,  cousin,  be  good  to 
me  :  pray  do.  You  did  not  use  to  be  cruel.  You 
used  to  say,  you  loved  me.  I  am  in  calamity,  my 
dear.  I  know  I  am  miserable:  at  times  I  know  1 
am ;  and  then  I  am  grieved  at  my  heart,  and  think 
how  happy  every  one  is,  but  me :  but  then,  again,  I 
ail  nothing,  and  am  well.  But  do,  love  me,  Lau- 
rana  :  I  am  in  calamity,  my  dear.  I  would  love  you, 
if  you  were  in  calamity :  indeed  I  would. — Ah,  Lau- 
rana !  What  is  become  of  all  your  fine  promises  ? 
But  then  every -body  loved  me,  and  I  was  happy! — 
Yet  you  tell  me,  It  is  all  for  my  good.  Naughty 
Laurana,  to  wound  my  heart  by  your  crossness, 
and  then  say.  It  is  for  my  good  ! — Do  you  think  I 
should  have  served  you  so  ? 

Laurana  blushed,  and  wept.  Her  aunt  promised 
her,  that  every-body  would  love  her,  and  comfort 
her,  and  not  be  angry  with  her,  if  she  would  make 
her  heart  easy. 

I  am  very  particular,  my  dear  Grandison.  I  know 
you  love  I  should  be  so.  From  this  minuteness  you 
will  judge  of  the  workings  of  her  mind.  They  are 
resolved  to  take  your  advice  (it  was  very  season- 
able) and  treat  her  with  indulgence.  The  count  is 
earnest  to  have  it  so. 

*     * 

Camilla  has  just  left  me.  She  says,  that  her 
young  lady  had  a  tolerable  night.  She  thinks  it 
owing,  in  a  great  measure,  to  her  being  indulged  in 
asking  the  servants,  who  saw  you  depart,  how  you 
looked ;  and  being  satisfied  that  you  went  away 
unhurt,  and  un-atfronted. 

Adieu,  my  dearest,  my  best  friend.  Let  me  hear 
from  you,  as  often  as  you  can. 


370  THE    HISTORY    OP 

*     ♦ 

I  just  now  understand  from  Camilla,  that  the  dear 
girl  has  made  an  earnest  request  to  my  father,  mo- 
ther, and  aunt;  and  been  refused.  She  came  back 
from  them  deeply  afflicted,  and,  as  Camilla  fears,  is 
going  into  one  of  her  gloomy  fits  again.  I  hope  to 
write  again,  if  you  depart  not  from  Bologna  before 
to-morrow ;  but  I  must,  for  my  own  sake,  write 
shorter  letters.  Yet  how  can  I  ?  Since,  however 
melancholy  the  sjjbject,  when  I  am  writing  to  you, 
I  am  conversing  with  you.  My  dear  Grandison, 
once  more,  adieu. 

O  Lucy,  my  dear!  Whence  come  all  the  tears 
this  melancholy  story  has  cost  me  ?  1  cannot  dwell 
upon  the  scenes ! — Begone,  all  those  wishes  that 
would  interfere  with  the  interest  of  that  sweet  dis- 
tressed saint  at  Bologna! 

How  impolitic,  Lucy,  was  it  in  them,  not  to  gra- 
tify her  impatience  to  see  him!  She  would,  most 
probably,  have  been  quieted  in  her  mind,  if  she  had 
been  obliged  by  one  other  interview. 

What  a  delicacy,  my  dear,  what  a  generosity,  is 
there  in  her  love' 

Sir  Charles,  in  Lord  L.'s  study,  said  to  me,  that 
his  compassion  was  engaged,  but  his  honour  was 
free:  and  so  it  seems  to  be:  but  a  generosity,  in 
return  for  her  generosity,  must  bind  such  a  mind 
as  his. 


SIR  chari;bs  gramdison.  371 

LETTER  XXXI. 

MISS    BYRON    TO    MISS    SELBY. 

In  the  doctor's  next  letter,  inclosed,  you  will  find 
mention  made  of  Sir  Charles's  literary  journal ;  I 
fancy,  my  dear,  it  must  be  a  charming  thing.  I  wish 
we  could  have  before  us  every  line  he  wrote  while 
he  was  in  Italy.  Once  the  presumptuous  Harriet 
had  hopes,  that  she  might  have  been  entitled — But 
no  more  of  these  hopes — It  can't  be  helped,  Lucy. 

DR.  BARTLETt's  twelfth  LETTER. 

Mr.  Grandison  proceeds  thus  : 

The  next  morning  I  employed  myself  in  visiting 
and  taking  leave  of  several  worthy  members  of  the 
university,  with  whom  I  had  passed  many  very 
agreeable  and  improving  hours,  during  my  resi- 
dence in  this  noble  city.  In  my  literary  journal 
you  have  an  account  of  those  worthy  persons,  and  of 
some  of  our  conversations.  I  paid  my  duty  to  the 
cardinal  legate,  and  the  gonfaloniere,  and  to  three 
of  his  counsellors,  by  whom,  you  know,  I  had  been 
likewise  greatly  honoured.  My  mind  was  not  free 
enough  to  enjoy  their  conversation :  such  a  weight 
upon  my  heart,  how  could  it  ?  But  the  debt  of  gra- 
titude and  civility  was  not  to  be  left  unpaid. 

On  my  return  to  my  lodgings,  which  was  not  till 
the  evening,  I  found,  the  general  had  been  there  to 
enquire  after  me. 

1  sent  one  of  my  servants  to  the  palace  of  Porretta, 
with  my  compliments  to  the  general,  to  the  bishop, 
and  Jeronymo;  and  with  particular  enquiries  after 
the  health  of  the  ladies,  and  the  marquis ;  but  had 


S72  THE    HISTORY   OF 

only  a  general  answer,  That  they  were  much  as  I 
left  them. 

The  two  young  lords,  Sebastiano  and  Juliano, 
made  me  a  visit  of  ceremony.  They  talked  of  visit- 
ing England  in  a  year  or  two.  I  assured  them  of 
my  best  services,  and  urged  them  to  go  thither.  I 
asked  them  after  the  healths  of  the  marquis,  the 
marchioness,  and  their  beloved  cousin  Clementina. 
Signer  Sebastiano  shook  his  head  :  Very,  verif  in- 
dilferent,  were  his  words.  We  parted  with  great 
civilities. 

I  will  now  turn  my  thoughts  to  Florence,  and  to 
the  affairs  there  that  have  lain  upon  me,  from  the 
death  of  my  good  friend  Mr.  Jervois,  and  from  my 
wardship.  I  told  you  in  their  course,  the  steps  I 
took  in  those  affairs  ;  and  how  happy  I  had  been  in 
some  parts  of  management.  There  1  hope  soon  to 
see  you,  my  dear  Dr.  Bartlett,  from  the  Levant,  to 
whose  care  I  can  so  safely  consign  my  precious  trust, 
while  I  go  to  Paris,  and  attend  the  wished-for  call 
of  my  father  to  my  native  country,  from  which  I  have 
been  for  so  many  years  an  exile. 

There  also  I  hope  to  have  some  opportunities  of 
conversing  with  my  good  Mrs.  Beaumont ;  resolving 
to  make  another  effort  to  get  so  valuable  a  person  to 
restore  herself  to  her  beloved  England. 

Thus,  my  dear  Dr.  Bartlett,  do  I  endeavour  to 
console  myself,  in  order  to  lighten  that  load  of  grief 
which  I  labour  under  on  the  distresses  of  the  dear 
Clementina.  If  I  can  leave  her  happy,  I  shall  be 
sooner  so,  than  I  could  have  been  in  the  same  cir- 
cumstances, had  I,  from  the  first  of  my  acquaint- 
ance with  the  family  (to  the  breach  of  all  the  laws 
of  hospitality)  indulged  a  passion  for  her. 

Yet  is  the  unhappy  Olivia  a  damp  upon  my  en- 
deavours after  consolation.     When  she  made  her 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  S73 

unseasonable  visit  to  me  at  Bologna,  she  refused  to 
return  to  Florence  without  me,  till  I  assured  her, 
that  as  my  affairs  would  soon  call  me  thither,  I  would 
visit  her  at  her  own  palace,  as  often  as  those  affairs 
would  permit.  Her  pretence  for  coming  to  Bolog- 
na was,  to  induce  me  to  place  Emily  with  her,  till  I 
had  settled  every-thing  for  my  carrying  the  child  to 
England ;  but  I  was  obliged  to  be  peremptory  in 
my  denial,  though  she  had  wrought  so  with  Emily, 
as  to  induce  her  to  be  an  earnest  petitioner  to  me, 
to  permit  her  to  live  with  Lady  Olivia,  whose 
equipages,  and  the  glare  in  which  she  hves,  had 

dazzled  the  eyes  of  the  young  lady, 

*    « 

I  was  impatient  to  hear  again  from  Jeronymo ; 
and  just  as  I  was  setting  out  for  Florence,  in  despair 
of  that  favour,  it  being  the  second  day  after  my  fare- 
well visit,  1  had  the  following  letter  from  him : 

I  have  not  been  well,  my  dear  Grandison.  I  am 
afraid  the  wound  in  my  shoulder  must  be  laid  open 
again.  God  give  me  patience !  But  my  life  is  a 
burden  to  me. 

We  are  driving  here  at  a  strange  rate.  They  pro- 
mised to  keep  measures  with  the  dear  creature ; 
but  she  has  heard  that  you  are  leaving  Bologna, 
and  raves  to  see  you. 

Poor  soul !  She  endeavoured  to  prevail  upon  her 
father,  mother,  aunt,  to  permit  her  to  see  you,  but 
for  //v^  minutes :  that  was  the  petition  which  was 
denied  her,  as  I  mentioned  in  my  last. 

Camilla  was  afraid  she  would  go  into  a  gloomy 
fit  upon  it,  as  I  told  you — She  did;  but  it  lasted  not 
long :  for  she  made  an  effort,  soon  after,  to  go  out  of 
the  house  by  way  of  the  garden.  The  gardener  re- 
fused his  key,  and  brought  Camilla  to  her,  whom 

K  K 


374"  THE    HISTORY    OF^ 

the  had,  bv  an  innocent  piece  of  art,  but  just  before, 
sent  to  bring  her  something  from  her  toilette. 

The  general  went  with  Camilla  to  her.  They  found 
her  just  setting  a  ladder  against  the  wall.  She  heard 
them,  and  screamed,  and,  leaving  the  ladder,  ran, 
to  avoid  them,  till  she  came  in  sight  of  the  great 
cascade ;  into  which,  had  she  not  by  a  cross  alley 
been  intercepted  by  the  general,  it  is  feared  she 
would  have  thrown  herself. 

This  has  terrified  us  all :  she  begs  but  for  one  in- 
terview; one  parting  interview;  and  she  promises  to 
make  herself  easy :  but  it  is  not  thought  adviseable. 
Yet  Father  Marescotti  himself  thought  it  best  to  in- 
dulge her.  Had  my  mother  been  earnest,  I  believe 
it  had  been  granted:  but  she  is  so  much  concerned 
at  the  blame  she  met  with  on  permitting  the  Fast 
interview,  that  she  will  not  contend,  though  she  has 
let  them  know,  that  she  did  not  oppose  the  request. 

The  unhappy  girl  ran  into  my  chamber  this  morn- 
ing— Jeronymo!  He  will  be  gone,  said  she  ^  I  knotv 
he  will.  All  I  want  is,  but  to  see  him !  To  wish  him 
happy  !  And  to  know,  If  he  will  remember  me  when 
he  is  gone,  as  I  shall  him ! — Have  i/ou  no  interest, 
Jeronymo?     Cannot  I  once  see  him .'*     Not  once? 

The  bishop,  before  I  could  answer,  came  in  quest 
of  her,  followed  by  Laurana,  from  whom  she  had 
forcibly  disengaged  herself,  to  come  to  me. 

Let  me  have  but  one  parting  interview,  my  lord, 
said  she,  looking  to  him,  and  clinging  about  my  neck. 
He  will  be  gone :  gone  for  ever.  Is  there  so  much 
in  being  allowed  to  say.  Farewell,  and  be  happy, 
Grandison !  and  excuse  all  the  trouble  I  have  given 
you  ? — What  has  my  brother's  preserver  done,  what 
have  I  done,  that  I  must  not  see  him,  nor  he  me, 
for  one  quarter  of  an  hour  only. 

Indeed,  my  lord,  said  I,  she  should  be  complied 
with.    Indeed  she  should. 


SIR    CHAKLES    GRANDISON.  375 

My  father  thinks  otherwise,  said  the  bishop :  the 
eount  thinks  otherwise  :  /  think  otherwise.  Were 
the  chevalier  a  common  man,  she  might.  But  she 
dwells  upon  what  passed  in  the  last  interview,  and 
his  behaviour  to  her.    That,  it  is  plain,  did  her  harm. 

The  next  may  drive  the  thoughts  of  that  out  of 
her  head,  returned  I. 

Dear  Jeronymo,  replied  he,  a  little  peevishly,  you 
will  always  think  differently  from  every-body  else  ! 
Mrs.  Beaumont  comes  to-morrow. 

What  do  I  care  for  Mrs.  Beaumont  ?  said  she. — I 
don't  love  her :  she  tells  every-thing  I  say. 

Come,  my  dear  love,  said  Laurana,  you  afflict 
your  brother  Jeronymo.  Let  us  go  up  to  your  own 
chamber. 

I  afflict  every-body,  and  every-body  afflicts  me ; 
and  you  are  all  cruel.  Why,  he  will  he  f^one,  I  tell 
you !  That  makes  me  so  impatient :  and  I  have 
something  to  say  to  him.  My  father  won't  see  me : 
my  mother  renounces  me.  I  have  been  looking  for 
her,  and  she  hides  herself  from  me  ! — And  I  am  a 
prisoner,  and  watched,  and  used  ill ! 

Here  comes  my  mother !  said  Laurana.  You  now 
must  go  up  to  your  chamber,  cousin  Clementina. 

So  she  does,  said  she :  now  I  must  go,  indeed  !— 
Ah,  Jeronymo !  Now  there  is  no  saying  nay ! — But 
it  is  hard !  Very  hard ! — And  she  burst  into  tears.  I 
won't  speak  though,  said  she,  to  my  aunt.  Remem- 
ber, I  will  be  silent,  madam ! — Then  whispering  me, 
My  aunt,  brother,  is  not  the  aunt  she  used  to  be  to 
me ! — But  hush,  I  don't  complain,  you  know  ! 

By  this  I  saw  that  Lady  Sforza  was  severe  with 
her. 

She  addressed  herself  to  her  aunt :  You  are  not 
my  mamma,  are  you,  madam  ? 

No,  child. 

No,  child,  indeed!  I  know  that /oo  well.  Butmj 
K  K  2 


376  THE    HISTORY   OF 

brother  Giacomo  is  as  cruel  to  me  as  any-body.  But 
hush,  Jeronyrao! — Don't  you  betray  me ! — Now  my 
aunt  is  come,  I  must  go  ! — I  wish  1  could  run  away 
from  you  all ! 

She  was  yesterday  detected  writing  a  letter  to  you. 
My  mother  was  shewn  what  she  had  written,  and 
wept  over  it.  My  aunt  took  it  out  of  my  sister's 
bosom,  where  she  had  thrust  it,  on  her  coming  in. 
This  she  resented  highly. 

When  she  was  led  into  her  own  chamber,  she  re- 
fused to  speak;  but  in  great  hurry  went  to  her  closet, 
and,  taking  down  her  Bible,  turned  over  one  leaf  and 
another  very  quick.  Lady  Sforza  had  a  book  in  her 
hand,  and  sat  over-against  the  closet  door  to  observe 
her  motions.  She  came  to  a  place — Pretty !  said  she. 

The  bishop  had  formerly  given  her  a  smattering  of 
Latin — She  took  pen  and  ink,  and  wrote.  You'll 
see,  chevalier,  the  very  great  purity  of  her  thoughts, 
by  what  she  omitted,  and  what  she  chose,  from  the 
Canticles,  Velut  unguentum  diffunditur  nomen  tuum, 
&c. 

[In  the  English  translation,  thus :  Thy  name  is  as 
ointment  poured  forth  ;  therefore  do  the  virgins  love 
thee.  Draw  me  /  tve  ivill  run  after  thee  :  the  wpright 
love  thee. 

Look  not  upon  me  because  I  am  blacky  because  the 
sun  hath  looked  upon  me.  My  mother's  children  toere 
angry  with  me  :  they  made  me  the  keeper  of  the  vine- 
yards,  but  mine  oum  vineyard  have  I  not  kept. 

Tell  me,  0  thou  whom  my  soul  loveth  !  where  thou 
Jeedesty  where  thou  makest  thyjiock  to  rest  at  noon  :for 
why  should  I  be  as  one  that  turneth  aside  by  the  flocks 
of  thy  companions?'] 

She  laid  down  her  pen,  and  was  thoughtful ;  her 
elbow  resting  on  the  escrotoire  she  wrote  upon,  her 
hand  supporting  her  head. 

May  I  look  over  you,  my  dear  ?  said  her  aunt> 
stepping  to  her ;  and,  taking  up  the  paper,  read  it. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  377 

and  took  it  out  of  the  closet  with  her,  unopposed; 
her  gentle  bosom  only  heaving  with  sighs. 

I  will  write  no  more,  so  minutely,  on  this  affect- 
ing subject,  my  Grandison, 

They  are  all  of  opinion  that  she  will  be  easy, 
when  she  knows  that  you  have  actually  left  Bolog- 
na; and  they  strengthen  their  opinion  by  these  words 
of  hers,  above-recited :  '  Why  he  will  be  gone,  I 
tell  you;  and  this  makes  me  so  impatient.' — At 
least,  they  are  resolved  to  try  the  experiment.  And 
so,  my  dear  Grandison,  you  must  be  permitted  to 
leave  us ! 

God  be  your  director  and  comforter,  as  well  as 
ours!  prays 

Your  ever-affectionate 

JERONYMO. 

Mr.  Grandison,  having  no  hopes  of  being  allowed 
to  see  the  unhappy  lady,  set  out  with  an  afflicted 
heart  for  Florence.  He  gave  orders  there,  and  at 
Leghorn,  that  the  clerks  and  agents  of  his  late 
friend  Mr.  Jervois  should  prepare  every-thing  for 
his  inspection  against  his  return  from  Naples ;  and 
then  he  set  out  for  that  city  to  attend  the  general. 

He  had  other  friends  to  whom  he  had  endeared 
himself  at  Sienna,  Ancona,  and  particularly  at  Rome, 
as  he  had  also  some  at  Naples ;  of  whom  he  intended 
to  take  leave,  before  he  set  out  for  Paris :  and  there- 
fore went  to  attend  the  general  with  the  greater 
pleasure. 

Within  the  appointed  time  he  arrived  at  Naples. 

The  general  received  me,  said  Mr.  Grandison, 
with  greater  tokens  of  politeness  than  affection. 
You  are  the  happiest  man  in  the  world,  chevalier, 
said  he,  after  the  first  compliments,  in  escaping 
dangers  by  braving  them.  I  do  assure  you,  that  I 
had  great  difficulties  to  deny  myself  the  favour  of 
K  K  3 


378  THE    HISTORY   OF 

paying  you  a  visit  in  my  own  way  at  Bologna.  I  had 
indeed  resolved  to  do  it,  till  you  proposed  this  visit 
to  me  here. 

I  should  have  been  very  sorry,  replied  I,  to  have 
seen  a  brother  of  Lady  Clementina  in  any  way  that 
should  not  have  made  me  consider  him  as  her  bro- 
ther. But,  before  I  say  another  word,  let  me  ask 
after,  her  health.  How  does  the  most  excellent  of 
women  ? 

You  have  not  heard,  then  ? 

I  have  not,  my  lord  :  but  it  is  not  for  want 
of  solicitude.  1  have  sent  three  several  messengers; 
but  can  hear  nothing  to  my  satisfaction.     • 

Nor  can  you  hear  any-thing  from  me  that  will 
give  you  any. 

I  am  grieved  at  my  soul,  that  I  cannot.  How,  my 
lord,  do  the  marquis  and  marchioness  ? 

Don't  ask.     They  are  extremely  unhappy. 

1  hear  that  my  dear  friend,  Signer  Jeronymo, 
has  undergone — 

A  dreadful  operation,  interrupted  the  general.— 
He  has.  Poor  Jeronymo !  He  could  ?jo^  write  to  you. 
God  preserve  my  brother !  But,  chevalier,  you  did 
not  save  half  a  life,  though  we  thank  you  for  that, 
when  you  restored  him  to  our  arms . 

I  had  no  reason  to  boast,  my  lord,  of  the  accident. 
I  never  made  a  merit  of  it.  It  was  a  mere  accident, 
and  cost  me  nothing.  The  service  was  greatly  over- 
rated. 

Would  to  God,  chevalier,  it  had  been  rendered 
by  any  other  man  in  the  world ! 

As  it  has  proved,  I  am  sure,  my  lord,  I  have  rea- 
son to  join  in  the  wish. 

He  shewed  me  his  pictures,  statues,  and  cabinet 
of  curiosities,  while  dinner  was  preparing;  but  rather 
for  the  ostentation  of  his  magnificence  and  taste, 
than  to  do  me  pleasure.    I  even  observed  an  increas- 


SIR    CHAltLES    GRANDISON.  379 

*ng  coldness  in  his  behaviour;  and  his  eye  was  too 
often  cast  upon  me  with  a  fierceness  that  shewed 
resentment ;  and  not  with  the  hospitable  frankness 
that  became  him  to  a  visiter  and  guest  who  had  un- 
dertaken a  journey  of  above  two  hundred  miles, 
principally  to  attend  him,  and  to  shew  hira  the  con- 
fidence he  had  in  his  honour.  This,  as  it  was  more 
to  his  discredit  than  mine,  I  pitied  him  for.  But 
what  most  of  all  disturbed  me,  was,  that  I  could  not 
obtain  from  him  any  particular  intelligence  relating 
to  the  health  of  one  person,  whose  distresses  lay 
heavy  upon  my  heart. 

There  were  several  persons  of  distinction  at  din- 
ner ;  the  discourse  could  therefore  be  only  general. 
He  paid  me  great  respect  at  his  table;  but  it  was  a 
solemn  one.  I  was  the  more  uneasy  at  it,  as  I  ap- 
prehended, that  the  situation  of  the  Bologna  family 
was  more  unhappy  than  when  I  left  that  city. 

He  retired  with  me  into  his  garden.  You  stay  with 
me  at  least  the  week  out,  chevalier? 

No,  my  lord :  I  have  affairs  of  a  deceased  friend 
at  Florence  and  at  Leghorn  to  settle.  To-morrow, 
as  early  as  I  can,  I  shall  set  out  for  Rome,  in  my 
way  to  Tuscany. 

I  am  surprised,  chevalier.  You  take  something 
amiss  in  my  behaviour. 

I  cannot  say  that  your  lordship's  countenance  (I 
am  a  very  free  speaker)  has  that  benignity  in  it, 
that  complacency,  which  I  have  had  the  pleasure  to 
see  in  it. 

By  G.  chevalier,  I  could  have  loved  you  better 
than  any  man  in  the  world,  next  to  the  men  of  my 
own  family ;  but  I  own  1  see  you  not  here  with  so 
much  love  as  admiration. 

The  word  ndmiration,  my  lord,  may  require  ex- 
planation. You  may  admire  at  my  confidence ;  but 
I  thank  you  for  the  manly  freedom  of  your  acknow- 
ledgment in  general. 


S80  THE   HISTORY    OF 

By  admiration  I  mean  all  that  may  do  you  honour. 
Your  bravery  in  coming  hither,  particularly ;  and 
your  greatness  of  mind  on  your  taking  leave  of  us 
all.     But  did  you  not  then  mean  to  insult  me  ? 

I  meant  to  observe  to  you  then,  as  I  now  do  in 
your  own  palace,  that  you  had  not  treated  me  as  my 
heart  told  me  I  deserved  to  be  treated :  but  when  1 
thought  your  warmth  was  rising  to  the  uneasiness  of 
your  assembled  friends,  instead  of  answering  your 
question  about  my  stay  at  Bologna,  as  you  seemed 
to  mean  it,  I  invited  myself  to  an  attendance  upon 
you  here,  at  Naples,  in  such  a  manner  as  surely 
could  not  be  construed  an  insult, 

I  own,  Grandison,  you  disconcerted  me.  I  had 
intended  to  save  you  that  journey. 

Was  that  your  lordship's  meaning,  when,  in  my 
absence,  you  called  at  my  lodgings,  the  day  after  the 
farewell-visit  ? 

Not  absolutely:  I  was  uneasy  with  myself.  I  in- 
tended to  talk  with  you.  What  that  talk  might  have 
produced,  I  know  not :  but  had  I  invited  you  out,  if 
1  had  found  you  at  home,  would  you  have  answered 
my  demands  ? 

According  as  you  had  put  them. 

Will  you  answer  me  now  if  I  attend  you  as  far 
as  Rome,  on  your  return  to  Florence  ? 

If  they  are  demands  fit  to  be  answered. 

Do  you  expect  I  will  make  any  that  are  not  fit  to 
be  answered  ? 

My  lord,  I  will  explain  myself.  You  had  con- 
ceived causeless  prejudices  against  me:  you  seemed 
inclined  to  impute  to  me  a  misfortune  that  was  not, 
could  not  be,  greater  to  you  than  it  was  to  me,  I 
knew  my  own  innocence:  I  knew  that  I  was  rathei» 
an  injured  man,  in  having  iiopes  given  me,  in  which 
I  was  disappointed,  not  by  my  own  fault :  whom 
shall  an  innocent  and  an  injured  man  fear  ? — Had  I 
feared,  my  fear  might  have  been  my  destruction. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  381 

For  was  I  not  in  the  midst  of  your  friends  ?  A  fo- 
reigner ?  If  I  xvould  have  avoided  you,  could  I,  had 
you  been  determined  to  seek  me  ? — I  would  choose 
to  meet  even  an  enemy  as  a  man  of  honour,  rather 
than  to  avoid  him  as  a  malefactor.  In  my  country, 
the  law  supposes  flight  a  confession  of  guilt :  had 
you  made  demands  upon  me  that  I  had  not  chosen 
to  answer,  I  would  have  expostulated  with  you.  I 
could  perhaps  have  done  so  as  calmly  as  I  now  speak. 
If  you  would  not  have  been  expostulated  with,  I 
would  have  stood  upon  my  defence  :  but  for  the 
world  I  would  not  have  hurt  a  brother  of  Clemen- 
tina and  Jeronymo,  a  son  of  the  Marquis  and  Mar- 
chioness of  Porretta,  could  I  have  avoided  it.  Had 
your  passion  given  me  any  advantage  over  you,  and 
I  had  obtained  your  sword  (a  pistol,  had  the  choice 
been  left  to  me,  I  had  refused  for  both  our  sakes), 
I  would  have  presented  both  swords  to  you,  and 
bared  my  breast :  it  was  before  penetrated  by  the 
distresses  of  the  dear  Clementina,  and  of  all  your 
family — Perhaps  I  should  only  have  said,  '  If  your 
lordship  thinks  I  have  injured  you,  take  your  re- 
venge.' 

And  now,  that  I  am  at  Naples,  let  me  say,  that 
if  you  are  determined,  contrary  to  all  my  hopes,  to 
accompany  me  to  Rome,  or  elsewhere,  on  my  re- 
turn, with  an  unfriendly  purpose ;  such,  and  no 
other,  shall  be  my  behaviour  to  you  if  the  power 
be  given  me  to  shew  it.  I  will  rely  on  my  own  in- 
nocence, and  hope  by  generosity  to  overcome  a 
generous  man.  Let  the  guilty  secure  themselves  by 
violence  and  murder. 

Superlative  pride;  angrily  said  he,  and  stood  still, 
measuring  me  with  his  eye  ;  And  could  you  hope  for 
such  an  advantage  ? 

While  I,  my  lord,  was  calm,  and  determined 
only  upon  self-defence  ;  while  you  were  passionate 


382  THE    HISTORY    OF 

and  perhaps  rash,  as  aggressors  generally  are;  I 
did  not  doubt  it :  but  could  I  have  avoided  drawing, 
and  preserved  your  good  opinion,  I  would  not  have 
drawn.  Your  lordship  cannot  but  know  my  prin- 
ciples. 

Grandison,  I  do  know  them ;  and  also  the  general 
report  in  your  favour  for  skill  and  courage.  Do 
you  think  I  would  have  heard  with  patience  of  the 
once  proposed  alliance,  had  not  your  character — 
And  then  he  was  pleased  to  say  many  things  in  my 
favour,  from  the  report  of  persons  who  had  weight 
•with  him ;  some  of  whom  he  named. 

But  still,  Grandison,  said  he,  this  poor  girl  !— 
She  could  not  have  beto  so  deeply  affected,  had 
not  some  lover-like  arts — 

Let  me,  my  lord,  interrupt  you — .1  cannot  bear 
an  imputation  of  this  kind.  Had  such  arts  been 
used,  the  lady  could  7iot  have  been  so  much  affect- 
ed. Cannot  you  think  of  your  noble  sister,  as  a 
daughter  of  the  two  houses  from  which  you  sprang  ? 
Cannot  you  see  her,  as  by  Mrs.  Beaumont's  means 
we  now  so  lately  have  been  able  to  see  her,  strug- 
gling nobly  with  her  own  heart  [Why  am  I  put 
upon  this  tender  subject  ?]  because  of  her  duty  and 
her  religion ;  and  resolved  to  die  rather  than  en- 
courage a  wish  that  was  not  warranted  by  both  ? — 
I  cannot,  my  lord,  urge  this  subject ;  but  there  never 
was  a  passion  so  nobly  contended  with.  There 
never  was  a  man  more  disinterested,  and  so  circum- 
stanced. Remember  only,  my  voluntary  departure 
from  Bologna,  against  persuasion;  and  the  great 
behaviour  of  your  sister  on  that  occasion,  great,  as 
it  came  out  to  be,  when  Mrs.  Beaumont  brought 
her  to  acknowledge  what  would  have  been  my  glory 
to  have  known,  could  it  have  been  encouraged ;  but 
is  now  made  my  heaviest  concern. 

Indeed,  Grandison,  she  ever  was  a  noble  girl! 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  383 

We  are  too  apt  perhaps  to  govern  ourselves  by 
events  without  looking  into  causes :  but  the  access 
you  had  to  her;  such  a  man !  and  who  became  known 
to  us  from  circumstances  so  much  in  his  favour, 
both  as  a  man  of  principle  and  bravery — 

This,  my  lord,  interrupted  I,  is  still  judging  from 
events.  You  have  seen  Mrs.  Beaumont's  letter. 
Surely  you  cannot  have  a  nobler  monument  of 
magnanimity  in  woman !  And  to  that  I  refer,  for  a 
proof  of  my  own  integrity. 

.  I  have  that  letter :  Jeronymo  gave  it  me,  at  my 
taking  leave  of  him ;  and  with  these  words  :  *  Gran- 
dison  will  certainly  visit  you  at  Naples.  I  am  afraid 
of  your  warmth.  His  spirit  is  well  known.  All 
my  dependence  is  upon  his  principles.  He  will  not 
draw  but  in  his  own  defence.  Cherish  the  noble 
visiter.  Surely,  brother,  I  may  depend  upon  your 
hospitable  temper.  Read  over  again  this  letter, 
before  you  see  him.' — I  have  not  yet  read  it,  pro- 
ceeded the  general ;  but  I  will,  and  that,  if  you  will 
allow  me,  now. 

He  took  it  out  of  his  pocket,  walked  from  me, 
and  read  it ;  and  then  came  to  me,  and  took  my 
hand — I  am  half-ashamed  of  myself,  my  dear  Gran- 
dison :  I  own  I  wanted  magnanimity.  All  the  dis- 
tresses of  our  family,  on  this  unhappy  girl's  account, 
were  before  my  eyes,  and  I  received  you,  I  behaved 
to  you,  as  the  author  of  them.  I  was  contriving  to 
be  dissatisfied  with  you :  forgive  me,  and  command 
my  best  services.  I  will  let  our  Jeronymo  know 
how  greatly  you  subdued  me  before  I  had  recourse 
to  the  letter ;  but  that  I  have  since  read  that  part 
of  it  which  accounts  for  my  sister's  passion,  and 
wish  I  had  read  it  with  equal  attention  before.  I 
acquit  you :  I  am  proud  of  my  sister.  Yet  I  observe 
from  this  very  letter,  that  Jeronymo's  gratitude  has 
contributed  to  the  evil  we  deplore.     But — Let  us 


SS4  THE   HISTORY   OF 

not  say  one  word  more  of  the  unhappy  girl :  it  is 
painful  to  me  to  talk  of  her. 

Not  ask  a  question,  my  lord  ? — 

Don't,  Grandison,  don't ! — Jeronymo  and  Cle- 
mentina are  my  soul's  woe — But  they  are  not  worse 
than  might  be  apprehended.  You  go  to  court  with 
me  to-morrow :  I  will  present  you  to  the  king. 

I  have  had  that  honour  formerly.  I  must  depart 
to-morrow  morning  early.  I  have  already  taken 
leave  of  several  of  my  friends  here :  I  have  some  to 
make  my  compliments  to  at  Rome,  which  I  reserved 
for  my  return. 

You  stay  with  me  to-night  ? 

I  intend  it,  my  lord. 

Well,  we  will  return  to  company.  I  must  make 
my  excuses  to  my  friends.  Your  departure  to-mor- 
row must  be  one.  They  all  admire  you.  They  are 
acquainted  with  your  character.  They  will  join 
with  me  to  engage  you,  if  possible,  to  stay  longer. 

We  returned  to  the  company. 


LETTER  XXXII. 

MISS   BYRON    TO    MISS    SELBY. 

Receive  now,  my  dear,  the  doctor's  thirteenth 
letter,  and  the  last  he  intends  to  favour  us  with,  till 
he  entertains  us  with  the  histories  of  Mrs.  Beau- 
mont, and  Lady  Olivia. 

DR.  BARTLETT's    thirteenth    LETTER. 

Mr.  Grandison  set  out  next  morning.  The  gene- 
ral's behaviour  to  him  at  his  departure,  was  much 
more  open  and  free  than  it  was  at  receiving  him. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  385 

Mr.  Grandison,  on  his  return  to  Florence,  entered 
into  the  affairs  of  his  late  friend  Mr.  Jervois,  with 
the  spirit,  and  yet  with  the  temper,  for  which  he  is 
noted,  when  he  engages  in  any  business.  He  put 
every- thing  in  a  happy  train  in  fewer  days  than  it 
would  have  cost  some  other  persons  months ;  for  he 
was  present  himself  on  every  occasion,  and  in  every 
business  where  his  presence  would  accelerate  it : 
yet  he  had  embarrassments  from  Olivia. 

He  found,  before  he  set  out  for  Naples,  that  Mrs. 
Beaumont,  at  the  earnest  request  of  the  marchioness, 
was  gone  to  Bologna.  At  his  return,  not  hearing 
any-thing  from  Signor  Jeronymo,  he  wrote  to  Mrs. 
Beaumont,  requesting  her  to  inform  him  of  the  state 
of  things  in  that  family,  as  far  as  she  thought  pro- 
per ;  and,  particularly,  of  the  health  of  that  dear 
friend,  on  whose  silence  to  three  letters  he  had 
written,  he  had  the  most  melancholy  aj)prehensions. 
He  let  that  lady  know,  that  he  should  set  out  in  a 
very  few  days  for  Paris,  if  he  had  no  probability  of 
being  of  service  to  the  family  she  favoured  with  her 
company. 

To  this  letter  Mrs.  Beaumont  returned  the  fol- 
lowing answer : 


I  have  the  favour  of  yours.  We  are  very  miser- 
able here.  The  servants  are  forbidden  to  aiiswer 
any  enquiries,  but  generally ;  and  that  not  truly. 

Your  friend,  Signor  Jeronymo,  has  gone  through 
a  severe  operation.  He  has  been  given  over ;  but 
hopes  are  now  entertained,  not  of  his  absolute  re- 
covery, but  that  he  will  be  no  worse  than  he  was 
before  the  necessity  for  the  operation  arose.  Poor 
man  !  He  forgot  not,  however,  his  sister  and  you, 
when  he  was  out  of  the  power  of  the  opiates  that 
were  administered  to  him. 

L  L 


386  THE    HISTORY   OF 

On  my  coming  hither,  I  found  Lady  Clementina 
in  a  deplorable  way :  sometimes  raving,  sometimes 
gloomy ;  and  in  bonds — Twice  had  she  given  them 
apprehensions  of  fatal  attempts :  they  therefore  con- 
fined her  hands. 

They  have  been  excessively  wrong  in  their  ma- 
nagement of  her :  now  soothing,  now  severe  ;  ob- 
serving no  method. 

She  was  extremely  earnest  to  see  you  before  you 
left  Bologna.  On  her  knees  repeatedly  she  besought 
this  favour,  and  promised  to  be  easy  if  they  would 
comply ;  but  they  imagined  that  their  compliance 
would  aggravate  the  symptoms. 

I  very  freely  blamed  them  for  not  complying  at 
the  time  when  she  was  so  desirous  of  seeing  you.  I 
told  them,  that  soothing  her  would  probably  then 
have  done  good. 

When  they  knew  you  were  actually  gone  from 
Bologna,  they  told  her  so.  Camilla  shocked  me 
with  the  description  of  her  rage  and  despair,  on  the 
communication.  This  was  followed  by  fits  of  silence, 
and  the  deepest  melancholy. 

They  had  hopes  on  my  arrival,  that  my  company 
would  have  been  of  service  to  her :  but  for  two  days 
together  she  regarded  me  not,  nor  any-thing  I  could 
say  to  her.  On  the  third  of  my  arrival,  finding  her 
confinement  extremely  uneasy  to  her,  I  prevailed, 
but  with  great  difficulty,  to  have  her  restored  to  the 
use  of  her  hands ;  and  to  be  allowed  to  walk  with 
me  in  the  garden.  They  had  hinted  to  me  their 
apprehensions  about  a  piece  of  water. 

Her  woman  being  near  us,  if  there  had  been  oc- 
casion for  assistance,  I  insensibly  led  that  way.  She 
sat  down  on  a  seat  over-against  the  great  cascade ; 
but  she  made  no  motion  that  gave  me  apprehen- 
sions. From  this  time  she  has  been  fonder  of  me 
than  before.    The  day  I  obtained  this  liberty  for 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  387 

her,  she  often  clasped  her  arms  about  me,  and  laid 
her  face  in  my  bosom ;  and  I  could  plainly  see,  it 
was  in  gratitude  for  restoring  to  her  the  use  of  her 
arms :  but  she  cared  not  to  speak. 

Indeed  she  generally  aiFects  deep  silence :  yet,  at 
times,  I  see  her  very  soul  is  fretted.  She  moves  to 
one  place,  is  tired  of  that ;  shifts  to  another,  and 
another,  all  round  the  room. 

I  am  grieved  at  my  heart  for  her  :  I  never  knew 
a  more  excellent  young  creature. 

She  is  very  fervent  in  her  devotions,  and  as  con- 
stant in  them  as  she  used  to  be :  every  good  habit 
she  preserves ;  yet,  at  other  times,  rambles  nmch. 

She  is  often  for  writing  letters  to  you  ;  but  when 
what  she  writes  is  privately  taken  from  her,  she 
makes  no  enquiry  about  it,  but  takes  a  new  sheet, 
and  begins  again. 

Sometimes  she  draws :  but  her  subjects  are  gene- 
rally, angels  and  saints.  She  often  meditates  in  d 
map  of  the  British  dominions,  and  now-and-then 
wishes  she  were  in  England. 

Lady  Juliana  de  Sforza  is  earnest  to  have  her 
with  her  at  Urbino,  or  at  Milan,  where  she  has  also 
a  noble  palace ;  but  I  hope  it  will  not  be  granted. 
That  lady  professes  to  love  her ;  but  she  cannot  be 
persuaded  out  of  her  notion  of  harsh  methods;  which 
-will  never  do  with  Clementina. 

I  shall  not  be  able  to  stay  long  with  her.  The 
discomposure  of  so  excellent  a  young  creature  af- 
fects me  deeply.  Could  I  do  her  either  good  or 
pleasure,  I  should  be  willing  to  deny  myself  the  so- 
ciety of  my  dear  friends  at  Florence :  but  I  am  per- 
suaded, and  have  hinted  as  much,  that  one  interview 
with  you  would  do  more  to  settle  her  mind,  than  all 
the  methods  they  have  taken. 

I  hope,  Sir,  to  see  you  before  you  leave  Italy.   It 
must  be  at  Florence,  not  at  Bologna,  I  believe.    It 
is  generous  of  you  to  propose  the  latter. 
L  L  2 


388  THE  HISTORY  OF 

I  have  now  been  here  a  week,  without  hope.  The 
doctors  they  have  consulted  are  all  for  severe  me- 
thods, and  low  diet.  The  first,  I  think,  is  in  com- 
pliment to  some  of  the  family:  she  is  so  loth  to  take 
nourishment,  and,  when  she  does,  is  so  very  abste- 
mious, that  the  regimen  is  hardly  necessary.  She 
never,  or  but  very  seldom,  used  to  drink  any-thing 
but  water. 

She  took  it  into  her  poor  head  several  times  this 
day,  and  perhaps  it  will  hold,  to  sit  in  particular 
places,  to  put  on  attentive  looks,  as  if  she  were  lis- 
tening to  somebody.  She  sometimes  smiled,  and 
seemed  pleased ;  looked  up,  as  if  to  somebody,  and 
spoke  English.  I  have  no  doubt,  though  I  was  not 
present  when  she  assumed  these  airs,  and  talked 
English,  but  her  disordered  imagination  brought 
before  her  her  tutor  instructing  her  in  that  tongue. 

You  desired  me,  Sir,  to  be  very  particular.  I 
have  been  so ;  but  at  the  expence  of  my  eyes:  and 
I  shall  not  wonder  if  your  humane  heart  should  be 
affected  by  my  sad  tale. 

God  preserve  you,  and  prosper  you  in  what- 
soever you  undertake ! 

HORTENSIA  BEAUMONT. 

Mrs.  Beaumont  staid  at  Bologna  twelve  days, 
and  then  left  the  unhappy  young  lady. 

At  taking  leave,  she  asked  her,  What  commands 
she  had  for  her? — Love  me,  said  she,  and  pity  me  ; 
that  IS  one.  Another  is  (whispering  her)  you  will 
see  the  chevalier,  perhaps,  though  I  must  not. — Tell 
him,  that  his  poor  friend  Clementina  is  sometimes 
very  unhappy  ! — Tell  him,  that  she  shall  rejoice  to 
sit  next  him  in  heaven ! — Tell  him,  that  1  say  he 
cannot  go  thither,  good  man  as  he  is,  while  he  shuts 
his  eyes  to  the  truth. — Tell  him,  that  I  shall  take  it 
very  kindly  of  him,  if  he  will  not  think  of  marrying 
till  he  acquaints  me  with  it;  and  can  give  me  assur- 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  389 

ance,  that  the  lady  will  love  him  as  well  as  somebody 
else  would  have  done. — O  Mrs.  Beaumont !  should 
the  Chevalier  Grandison  marry  a  woman  unworthy 
of  him,  what  a  disgrace  would  that  be  to  me ! 

Mr.  Grandison  by  this  time  had  prepared  every- 
thing for  his  journey  to  Paris.  The  friend  he  ho- 
noured with  his  love,  was  arrived  from  the  Levant, 
and  the  Archipelago.  Thither,  at  his  patron's  re- 
quest, he  had  accompanied  Mr.  Beauchamp,  the 
amiable  friend  of  both  ;  and  at  parting,  engaged  to 
continue  by  letter  what  had  been  the  subject  of  their 
daily  conversations,  and  transmit  to  him  as  many 
particulars  as  he  could  obtain  of  Mr.  Grandison's 
sentiments  and  behaviour,  on  every  occasion;  Mr. 
Beauchamp  proposing  him  as  a  pattern  to  himself, 
that  he  might  be  worthy  of  the  credential  letters  he 
had  furnished  him  with  to  every  one  whom  he  had 
thought  deserving  of  his  own  acquaintance,  when  he 
was  in  the  parts  which  Mr.  Beauchamp  intended  to 
visit. 

To  the  care  of  the  person  so  much  honoured  by 
his  confidence,  Mr.  Grandison  left  his  agreeable 
ward.  Miss  Jervois ;  requesting  the  assistance  of 
Mrs.  Beaumont,  who  kindly  promised  her  inspec- 
tion; and  with  the  goodness  for  which  she  is  so  emi- 
nently noted,  performed  her  promise  in  his  absence. 

He  then  made  an  offer  to  the  bishop  to  visit  Bo- 
logna once  more ;  but  that  not  being  accepted,  he 
set  out  for  Paris. 

It  was  not  long  before  his  father's  death  called 
him  to  England ;  and  when  he  had  been  there  a  few 
weeks,  he  sent  for  his  ward  and  his  friend. 

But,  my  good  Miss  Byron,  you  will  say,  That  I 
have  not  yet  fully  answered  your  last  enquiry,  relating 
to  the  present  situation  of  the  unhappy  Clementina. 

I  will  briefly  inform  you  of  it. 

When  it  was  known,  for  certain,  that  Mr.  Gran- 
JL  L  3 


890  THE  HISTORY  OF 

dison  had  actually  left  Italy,  the  family  at  Bologna 
began  to  wish  that  they  had  permitted  the  interview 
so  much  desired  by  the  poor  lady :  and  when  they 
afterwards  understood  that  he  was  sent  for  to  Eng- 
land, to  take  possession  of  his  paternal  estate,  that 
farther  distance  (the  notion  likewise  of  the  seas 
between  them  appearing  formidable)  added  to  their 
regrets. 

The  poor  lady  was  kept  in  travelling  motion  to 

quiet  her  mind :  for  still  an  interview  with  Mr.  Grari- 

dison  having  never  been  granted,  it  was  her  first  wish. 

They  carried  her  to  Urbino,  to  Rome,  to  Naples ; 

then  back  to  Florence,  then  to  Milan,  to  Turin. 

Whether  they  made  her  hope  that  it  was  to  meet 
with  Mr.  Grandison,  I  know  not ;  but  it  is  certain, 
she  herself  expected  to  see  him  at  the  end  of  every 
journey ;  and,  while  she  was  moving,  was  easier, 
and  more  composed ;  perhaps  in  that  hope. 

The  marchioness  was  sometimes  of  the  party. 
The  air  and  exercise  were  thought  proper  for  her 
health,  as  well  as  for  that  of  her  daughter.  Her 
cousin  Laurana  was  always  with  her  in  these  excur- 
sions, and  sometimes  Lady  Sforza;  and  their  escorte 
was,  generally,  Signors  bebastiano  and  Juliano. 

But,  within  these  four  months  past,  these  jour- 
neyings  have  been  discontinued.  The  young  lady 
accuses  them  of  deluding  her  with  vain  hopes.  She 
is  impatient,  and  has  made  two  attempts  to  escape 
from  them. 

She  is,  for  this  reason,  closely  confined,  and 
watched. 

They  put  her  once  into  a  nunnery,  at  the  motion 
of  Lady  Sforza,  as  for  a  trial  only.  She  was  not 
uneasy  in  it ;  but  this  being  done  unknown  to  the 
general,  when  he  was  apprised  of  it,  he,  for  reasons 
I  cannot  comprehend,  was  displeased,  and  had  her 
taken  out,  directly. 
3 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  391 

Her  head  runs  more  than  ever  upon  seeing  her 
tutor,  her  friend,  her  chevalier,  once  more.  They 
have  certainly  been  to  blame,  if  they  have  let  her 
travel  with  such  hopes ;  because  they  have  thereby 
kept  up  her  ardor  for  an  interview.  Could  she  but 
once  more  see  him,  she  says,  and  let  him  know  the 
cruelty  she  has  been  treated  with,  she  should  be 
satisfied.  He  would  pity  her,  she  is  sure,  though 
nobody  else  will. 

The  bishop  has  written  to  beg,  that  Sir  Charles 
would  pay  them  one  more  visit  at  Bologna. 

I  will  refer  to  my  patron  himself  the  communi- 
cating to  3^ou,  ladies,  his  resolution  on  this  subject. 
I  had  but  a  moment's  sight  of  the  letters  which  so 
greatly  affected  him. 

It  id  but  •voithin  these  few  days  past  that  this  new 
request  has  been  made  to  him,  in  a  direct  manner. 
The  question  was  before  put,  If  such  a  request*/^o?/^rf 
be  made,  would  he  comply  ?  And  once  Camilla  wrote, 
as  having  heard  Sir  Charles's  presence  wished  for. 

Mean  time  the  poor  lady  is  hastening,  they  are 
afraid,  into  a  consumptive  malady.  The  Count  of 
Belvedere,  however,  still  adores  her.  The  disorder 
in  her  mind  being  imputed  chiefly  to  religious  me- 
lancholy, and  some  of  her  particular  flights  not  being 
generally  known,  he,  who  is  a  pious  man  himselt, 
pities  her;  and  declares,  that  he  would  run  all 
risques  of  her  recovery,  would  the  family  give  her 
to  him;  and  yet  he  knows,  that  she  would  choose 
to  be  the  wife  of  the  Chevalier  Grandison,  rather 
than  that  of  any  other  man,  were  the  article  of  re- 
ligion to  be  got  over;  and  generously  applauds  her 
for  preferring  her  faith  to  her  love. 

Signor  Jeronymo  is  in  a  very  bad  way.  Sir  Charles 
often  writes  to  him,  and  with  an  affection  worthy  of 
the  merits  of  that  dear  friend.  He  was  to  undergo 
another  severe  operation  on  the  next  day  after  tlie 


592  THE  HISTORY  OF 

letters  came  from  Bologna ;  the  success  of  which 
was  very  doubtful. 

How  nobly  does  Sir  Charles  appear  to  support 
himself  under  such  heavy  afflictions !  For  those  of 
his  friends  were  ever  his.  But  his  heart  bleeds  in 
secret  for  them.  A  feeling  heart  is  a  blessing  that 
no  one,  who  has  it,  would  be  without ;  and  it  is  a 
moral  security  of  innocence  ;  since  the  heart  that  is 
able  to  partake  of  the  distress  of  another,  cannot 
wilfully  give  it. 

I  thmk,  my  good  Miss  Byron,  that  I  have  now,  as 
f^r  as  I  am  at  present  able,  obeyed  all  your  com- 
mands that  concern  the  unhappy  Clementina,  and 
her  family.  I  will  defer,  if  you  please,  those  which 
relate  to  Olivia  and  Mrs.  Beaumont  (ladies  of  very 
different  characters  from  each  other)  having  several 
letters  to  write. 

Permit  me,  my  good  ladies,  and  my  lord,  after 
contributing  so  much  to  afflict  your  worthy  hearts, 
to  refer  you,  for  relief  under  all  the  distresses  of 
life,  whether  they  affect  ourselves  or  others,  to 
those  motives  that  can  alone  give  support  to  a 
rational  mind.  This  mortal  scene,  however  per- 
plexing, is  a  very  short  one  ;  and  the  hour  is  has- 
tening when  all  the  intricacies  of  human  affairs 
shall  be  cleared  up ;  and  all  the  sorrows  that  have 
had  their  foundation  in  virtue  be  changed  into  the 
highest  joy :  when  all  worthy  minds  shall  be  united 
in  the  same  interests,  the  same  happiness. 

Allow  me  to  be,  my  good  Miss  Byron,  and  you, 
my  Lord  and  Lady  L.  and  Miss  Grandison, 

Your  most  faithful  and  obedient  servant, 
AMBROSE  BARTLETT. 

Excellent  Dr.  Bartlett!  How  worthy  of  himself  is 
this  advice !  But  think  you  not,  my  Lucy,  that  the 
doctor  has  in  it  a  particular  view  to  your  poor  Har- 
5 


SIR  CHARLES   GRANDISON.  393 

riet?  A.  generous  one,  meaning  consolation  and 
instruction  to  her  ?  I  will  endeavour  to  profit  by  it. 
Let  me  have  your  prayers,  my  dear  friends,  that  I 
may  be  enabled  to  succeed  in  my  humble  endea- 
vours. 

It  will  be  no  wonder  to  us  now,  that  Sir  Charles 
was  not  solicitous  to  make  known  a  situation  so 
embarrassing  to  himself,  and  so  much  involved  in 
clouds  and  uncertainty :  but  whatever  may  be  the 
event  of  this  affair,  you,  Lucy,  and  all  my  friends, 
will  hardly  ever  know  me  by  any  other  name  than 
that  of 

HARRIET  BYRON. 


END  OF  VOL.  XI. 


4 


C.  Baldwin,  Printer, 
New  Bridce.street,  London. 


<' 
^ 


SOUTHERN  BRANCH 

iBNIVERSfTY  OF  CALIFORNIA 
LIBRARY 


0 


»1 


Si 


UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITV 


AA      000  072  973    1