THE 


BRITISH  NOVELISTS; 

WITH    AN 

ESSAY,    AND    PREFACES 

BIOGRAPHICAL    AND    CRITICAL, 

BY 

MRfr  84?1J¥L?- 

-V   .2  'J  _*.  O 
&  $ciu  (£trttton. 

VOL.  IX. 


LONDON : 

I'ltlNTED  FOR  F.  C.  AND  J.  RIVINGTON  ;  W.  LOWNDES  J  SCATCHF.RD 
AND  LETTERMAN  ;  .1.  NUNN:  J.  CUTHELL  J  JEFFERY  AND  SON; 
LONGMAN,  HURST,  REES,  ORMEANDCO.  ;  T.  WILKIE;  CADELL 
AND  DAVIES  ;    J.  AND  W.  T.  CLARKE  ;  J.  OTRIDGE  ;  LACKINCTON 

and  co.;  s.  bagster;   j.  Murray;  j.  3ooker  ;   j.  biack; 

BLACK  AND  CO.;  J.  R ICH  ARDSON  ;  J,  M.  RICHARDSON  ;  R.  SCHO- 
I.EY  ;      .T.     MAWMAN  ;      R.    H.    EVANS;      A.    K.    NEWMAN    AND    CO.; 

.1.  asperne;  j.  carpenter  ;   j.  booth;  w.  ginger;  Baldwin, 

CRADOCK  AND  JOY;  T.  HODGSON,  J.  BOH.N  J  J.  EBF.RS;  SHER- 
WOOD, NEEI.Y  AND  JONES;  G.  AND  W.  B.  WHITTAKER;  SETCH- 
ELL  AND  SON;  WIIITMORF.  AND  I'ENN  ;  R.  HUNTER;  C.  COWIE 
AND    CO.;     R.  SAUNDERS;      T.    AND    J.    AI.LMAN  ;      T.    BOONE;    C. 

brown;  J.  brumby;  edwards  and  co.  ;  t.  Hamilton;  j. 
i.epard;  g.  mackie;   w.  mason  ;    j.  miller;    ogle,  duncan 

AND  CO.  ;  RODWELI.  AND  MARTIN  ;  HURST,  ROBINSON  AND  CO.; 
WILSON  AND  SONS,  YORK;  STERLING  AND  SLADE  J  AND  FAIR- 
BAIRN   AND  ANDFRSON,    EDINBURGH, 

1820. 


C.  Baldwin,  Printer,  LridSc  Street,  Blackfriars,  London. 


THE 

HISTORY 

OF 

SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON ; 

IN  A 

SERIES  OF  LETTERS. 


BY  MR.  SAMUEL  RICHARDSON, 

AUTHOR  OF  PAMELA  AND  CLARISSA. 


IN    SEVEN    VOLUMES. 
VOL.   I. 


A  NEW  EDITION, 

WITH  THE  LAST  CORRECTIONS  BY  THE  AUTHOR. 


PRE  F  A  C  E. 


The  Editor  of  the  following  Letters  takes  leave  to 
observe,  that  he  has  now,  in  this  publication,  com- 
pleted the  plan,  that  was  the  object  of  his  wishes, 
rather  than  of  his  hopes,  to  accomplish. 

The  first  collection  which  he  published,  intituled 
PAMELA,  exhibited  the  beauty  and  superiority 
of  virtue  in  an  innocent  and  unpolished  mind,  with 
the  reward  which  often,  even  in  this  life,  a  protect- 
ing Providence  bestows  on  goodness.  A  young 
woman  of  low  degree,  relating  to  her  honest  parents 
the  severe  trials  she  met  with  from  a  master  who 
ought  to  have  been  the  protector,  not  the  assailer 
of  her  honour,  shews  the  character  of  a  libertine  in 
its  truly  contemptible  light.  This  libertine,  how- 
ever, from  the  foundation  of  good  principles  laid  in 
his  early  years  by  an  excellent  mother ;  by  his  pas- 
sion for  a  virtuous  young  woman  ;  and  by  her  ami- 
able example,  and  unwearied  patience,  when  she 
became  his  wife ;  is,  after  a  length  of  time,  perfectly 
reclaimed. 

The  second  collection,  published  under  the  title 
of  CLARISSA,  displayed  a  more  melancholy  scene. 
A  young  lady  of  higher  fortune,  and  born  to  happier 


IV  PREFACE. 

hopes,  is  seen  involved  in  such  variety  of  deep  dis- 
tresses, as  lead  her  to  an  untimely  death  ;  affording 
a  warning  to  parents  against  forcing  the  inclinations 
of  their  children  in  the  most  important  article  of 
their  lives  ;  and  to  children  against  hoping  too  far 
from  the  fairest  assurances  of  a  man  void  of  princi- 
ple. The  heroine,  however,  as  a  truly  Christian 
heroine,  proves  superior  to  her  trials ;  and  her 
heart,  always  excellent,  refined  and  exalted  by  every 
one  of  them,  rejoices  in  the  approach  of  a  happy 
eternity.  Her  cruel  destroyer  appears  wretched 
and  disappointed,  even  in  the  boasted  success  of  his 
vile  machinations  :  but  still  (buoyed  up  with  self- 
conceit  and  vain  presumption)  he  goes  on,  after 
every  short  fit  of  imperfect,  yet  terrifying  conviction, 
hardening  himself  more  and  more ;  till,  unreclaimed 
by  the  most  affecting  warnings,  and  repeated  admo- 
nitions, he  perishes  miserably  in  the  bloom  of  life, 
and  sinks  into  the  grave  oppressed  with  guilt,  re- 
morse, and  horror.  His  letters,  it  is  hoped,  afford 
many  useful  lessons  to  the  gay  part  of  mankind 
against  that  misuse  of  wit  and  youth,  of  rank  and 
fortune,  and  of  every  outward  accomplishment, 
which  turns  them  into  a  curse  to  the  miserable  pos- 
sessor, as  well  as  to  all  around  him. 

Here  the  editor  apprehended  he  should  be  obliged 
to  stop,  by  reason  of  his  precarious  state  of  health, 
and  a  variety  of  avocations  which  claimed  his  first 
attention:  but  it  was  insisted  on  by  several  of  his 
friends,  who  were  well  assured  he  had  the  materials 


PREFACE.  V 

in  his  power,  that  he  should  produce  into  public 
view  the  character  and  actions  of  a  man  of  true 
honour. 

He  has  been  enabled  to  obey  these  his  friends, 
and  to  complete  his  first  design  :  and  now,  therefore, 
presents  to  the  public,  in  Sir  Charles  Grandison, 
the  example  of  a  man  acting  uniformly  well  through 
a  variety  of  trying  scenes,  because  all  his  actions 
are  regulated  by  one  steady  principle :  a  man  of 
religion  and  virtue  ;  of  liveliness  and  spirit ;  accom- 
plished and  agreeable  ;  happy  in  himself,  and  a  bless- 
ing to  others. 

From  what  has  been  premised,  it  may  be  supposed, 
that  the  present  collection  is  not  published  ulti- 
mately, nor  even  principally,  any  more  than  the 
other  two,  for  the  sake  of  entertainment  only.  A 
much  nobler  end  is  in  view.  Yet  it  is  hoped  the 
variety  of  characters  and  conversations  necessarily 
introduced  into  so  large  a  correspondence  as  these 
volumes  contain,  will  enliven  as  well  as  instruct : 
the  rather,  as  the  principal  correspondents  are 
young  ladies  of  polite  education,  and  of  lively 
spirits. 

The  nature  of  familiar  letters,  written,  as  it  were, 
to  the  moment,  while  the  heart  is  agitated  by  hopes 
and  fears,  on  events  undecided,  must  plead  an  ex- 
cuse for  the  bulk  of  a  collection  of  this  kind.  Mere 
facts  and  characters  might  be  comprised  in  a  much 
smaller  compass :  but,  would  they  be  equally  inter- 
esting ?  It  happens  fortunately,  that  an  account  of 
a  2 


VI  PREFACE. 

the  juvenile  years  of  the  principal  person  is  narra- 
tively given  in  some  of  the  letters.  As  many,  how- 
ever, as  could  be  spared,  have  been  omitted.  There 
is  not  one  episode  in  the  whole ;  nor,  after  Sir 
Charles  Gkandison  is  introduced,  one  letter  in- 
serted but  what  tends  to  illustrate  the  principal 
design.  Those  which  precede  his  introduction,  will 
not,  it  is  hoped,  be  judged  unnecessary  on  the  whole, 
as  they  tend  to  make  the  reader  acquainted  with 
persons,  the  history  of  most  of  whom  is  closely  in- 
terwoven with  that  of  Sir  Charles. 


SONNE  T. 


Sweet  moralist,  whose  generous  labours  tend 
With  ceaseless  diligence,  to  guide  the  mind, 
In  the  wild  maze  of  error  wandering  blind, 

To  virtue,  truth,  and  honour,  glorious  end 

Of  glorious  toils  !  Vainly  would  I  commend, 
In  numbers  worthy  of  your  sense  refin'd, 
This  last  great  work,  which  leaves  all  praise  be- 
hind, 

And  justly  styles  you  of  mankind  the  friend  : 

Pleasure  with  profit  artful  while  you  blend, 
And  now  the  fancy,  now  the  judgment  feed 
With  grateful  change,  which  every  passion  sways 
Numbers,  who  ne'er  to  graver  lore  attend, 
Caught  by  the  charm,  grow  virtuous  as  they  read; 
And  lives  reform' d  shall  give  you  genuine  praise. 

T.  E 


NAMES  OF  THE  PRINCIPAL  PERSONS. 

MEN. 

George  Selby,  Esq. 

John  Greville,  Esq. 

Richard  Fenvvick,  Esq. 

Robert  Orme,  Esq. 

Archibald  Reeves,  Esq. 

Sir  Rowland  Meredith,  Knt. 

James  Fowler,  Esq. 

Sir  Hargrave  Pollexfen,  Bart. 

The  Earl  of  L.  a  Scottish  nobleman. 

Thomas  Deane,  Esq. 

Sir  Charles  Grandison,  Dart. 

James  Bagenhall,  Esq. 

Mr.  Solomon  Merceda. 

John  Jordan,  Esq. 

Sir  Harry  Beauchamp,  Bart. 

Edward  Beauchamp,  Esq.  his  son. 

Everard  Grandison,  Esq. 

The  Rev.  Dr.  Bartlett. 

Lord  W.  ancle  to  Sir  Charles  Grandison. 

Lord  G.  son  of  the  Earl  q/G. 

ITALIANS. 

Marchese  della  Porretta,  the  father. 
Marchese  della  Porretta,  his  eldest  son. 
The  Bishop  o/Nocera,  his  second  son. 
Signor  Jeronymo  della  Porretta,  third  son. 
Coute  della  Porretta,  their  uncle. 
Count  of  Belvedere. 
Father  Marescotti. 


WOMEN. 

Miss  Harriet  Byron. 

Mrs.  Shirley,  her  grandmother,  by  the  mother  s  side. 
Mrs.  Selby,  sister  to  Miss  Byvonsfather,  and  wife  of 
Mr.  Selby. 

Mhs  Nana   i  Selh^'  nieC6S  t0  Mr'  Sdby' 

Miss  Orme,  sister  of  Mr.  Orme. 

Mrs.  lieevcs/unfeofMr.  Reeves, cousin  of  Miss  Byron, 

Lady  Betty  Williams. 

The  Countess  ofh.  wife  of  Lord  L.  eldest  sister  of  Sir 

Charles  Grandison. 
Miss  Grandison,  younger  sister  of  Sir  Charles. 
Mrs.  Eleanor  Grandison,  aunt  to  Sir  Charles. 
Miss  Emily  Jervois,  his  ward. 
Lady  Mansfield. 
Lady  Beauchamp. 
The  Countess  Dowager  of  D. 
Mrs.  Hortensia  Beaumont. 

ITALIANS. 

Marchese  delta  Porretta. 

Signora  Clementina,  her  daughter. 

Signora  Juliana  Sforza,  sister  to  the  Marchese  delta 

Porretta. 
Signora  Laurana,  her  daughter. 
Signora  Olivia. 

Camilla,  Lady  Clementina's  governess. 
Laura,  her  maid. 


THE 


HISTORY 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON.BART. 


LETTER  I. 

MISS  LUCY  SELBY  TO  -MISS  HARRIET  BYRON. 

Ashby-Canons,  January  10. 

Your  resolution  to  accompany  Mrs.  Reeves  to 
London,  has  greatly  alarmed  your  three  lovers: 
and  two  of  them,  at  least,  will  let  you  know  that  it 
has.  Such  a  lovely  girl  as  my  Harriet,  must  expect 
to  be  more  accountable  for  her  steps  than  one  less 
excellent  and  less  attractive. 

Mr.  Greville,  in  his  usual  resolute  way,  threatens 
to  follow  you  to  London;  and  there,  he  says,  he  will 
watch  the  motions  of  every  man  who  approaches  you; 
and,  if  he  find  reason  for  it,  will  early  let  such  man 
know  his  pretensions,  and  the  danger  he  may  run 
into,  if  he  pretend  to  be  his  competitor.  But  let 
me  not  do  him  injustice;  though  he  talks  of  a  rival 
thus  harshly,  he  speaks  of  you  more  highly  than 
man  ever  spoke  of  woman.   Angel  and  goddess  are 

VOL.  IX  E 


2  THE    HISTORY   OF 

phrases  you  have  been  used  to  from  him;  and 
though  spoken  in  his  humorous  way,  yet  I  am  sure 
he  most  sincerely  admires  you. 

Mr.  Fenwick,  in  a  less  determined  manner,  de- 
clares, that  he  will  follow  you  to  town,  if  you  stay 
there  above  one  fortnight. 

The  gentle  Orme  sighs  his  apprehensions,  and 
w  hes  you  would  change  your  purpose.  Though 
hopeless,  he  says,  it  is  some  pleasure  to  him  that  he 
can  think  himself  in  the  same  county  with  you  ;  and 
much  more,  that  he  can  tread  in  your  footsteps  to 
and  from  church  every  Sunday,  and  behold  you 
there.  He  wonders  how  your  grandmamma,  your 
aunt,  your  uncle,  can  spare  you.  Your  cousin 
Reeves's  surely,  he  says,  are  very  happy  in  their 
influences  over  us  all. 

Each  of  the  gentlemen  is  afraid,  that  by  increas- 
ing the  number  of  your  admirers,  you  will  increase 
his  difficulties  :  but  what  is  that  to  them,  I  asked, 
when  they  already  know,  that  you  are  not  inclined 
to  favour  any  of  the  three  ? 

If  you  hold  your  resolution,  and  my  cousin  Reeves's 
their  time  of  setting  out,  pray  let  me  know,  and  1 
will  attend  you  at  my  uncle  Selby's,  to  wish  you  a 
good  journey,  much  pleasure  in  town,  and  a  return 
with  a  safe  and  sound  heart.  My  sister,  who,  poor 
dear  girl,  continues  extremely  weak  and  low,  will 
spare  me  for  a  purpose  so  indispensable.  I  will  not 
have  you  come  to  us.  I  know  it  will  grieve  you 
to  see  her  in  the  way  she  is  in.  You  too  much  take 
to  heart  the  infirmities  of  your  friends  which  you 
cannot  cure  ;  and  as  your  grandmamma  lives  upon 
your  smiles,  and  you  rejoice  all  your  friends  by  your 
cheerfulness,  it  would  be  cruel  to  make  you  sad. 
*     #     * 

Mr.  Greville  has  just  left  us.  He  dropt  in  upon 
us  as  we  were  going  to  dinner.     My  grandmother 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  3 

Selby  you  know  is  always  pleased  with  his  rattling. 
She  prevailed  on  him  to  alight,  and  sit  down  with 
us.  All  his  talk  was  of  you.  He  repeated  his  for- 
mer threatenings  (as  I  called  them  to  him)  on  your 
going  to  town.  After  dinner,  he  read  us  a  letter  from 
Lady  Frampton  relating  to  you.  He  read  us  also 
some  passages  from  the  copy  of  his  answer,  with 
design,  I  believe,  that  I  should  ask  him  to  leave  it 
behind  him.  He  is  a  vain  creature,  you  know,  and 
seemed  fond  of  what  he  had  written.  I  did  ask  him. 
He  pretended  to  make  a  scruple  oi't/our  seeing  it ; 
but  it  was  a  faint  one.  However,  he  called  for  pen 
and  ink ;  and  when  it  was  brought  him,  scratched 
over  two  passages,  and  that  with  so  many  little  flou- 
rishes (as  you  will  see)  that  he  thought  they  could 
not  be  read.  But  the  ink  I  furnished  him  with, 
happening  to  be  paler  than  his,  you  will  find  he  was 
not  cunning  enough.     I  promised  to  return  it. 

Send  me  a  line  by  the  bearer,  to  tell  me  if  your 
resolution  holds  as  to  the  day. 

Adieu,  my  dearest  Harriet.   May  angels  protect 
and  guide  you  whithersoever  you  go  ! 

LUCY  SELBY. 


LETTER  II. 

MR.  GREVIbLE  TO  LADY  FRAMPTON. 
[Inclosed  in  the  preceding.] 

Northampton,  January  6. 
Your  ladyship  demands  a  description  of  the  person 
of  the  celebrated  Miss  Byron  in  our  neighbour- 
hood ;  and  to  know,  whether,  as  report  tells  you, 
love  has  listed  me  in  the  number  of  her  particular 
admirers? — Particular  admirers  you  well  distin- 
guish ;  since  every  one  who  beholds  her  admires  her. 
b  2 


4-  THE   HISTORY  Of 

Your  ladyship  confines  your  enquiries  to  her  per- 
son, you  tell  me :  and  you  own,  that  women  are 
much  more  solicitous  about  the  beauties  of  that, 
than  of  the  mind.  Perhaps  it  may  be  so ;  and  that 
their  envy  is  much  sooner  excited  by  the  one  than 
the  other.  But  who,  madam,  can  describe  the  per- 
son of  Miss  Harriet  Byron,  and  her  person  only ; 
animated  as  every  feature  is  by  a  mind  that  be- 
speaks all  human  excellence,  and  dignifies  her  in 
every  air,  in  every  look,  in  every  motion  ? 

No  man  living  has  a  greater  passion  for  beauty  than 
I  have.  Till  I  knew  Miss  Byron,  I  was  one  of  those 
who  regarded  nothing  else  in  the  sex.  Indeed,  I  con- 
sidered all  intellectual  attainments  as  either  useless 
or  impertinent  in  women.  Your  ladyship  knows 
what  were  my  free  notions  on  this  head,  and  has 
rebuked  me  for  them.  A  wise,  a  learned  lady,  I 
considered  as  a  very  unnatural  character.  I  wanted 
women  to  be  all  love,  and  nothing  else.  A  very 
little  prudence  allowed  I  to  enter  into  their  composi- 
tion ;  just  enough  to  distinguish  the  man  of  sense 
from  the  fool ;  and  that  for  my  own  sake.  You 
know  I  have  vanit}^  madam :  but  lovely  as  Miss 
Byron's  person  is,  I  defy  the  greatest  sensualist  on 
earth  not  to  admire  her  mind  more  than  her  person. 
What  a  triumph  would  the  devil  have,  as  I  have  often 
thought,  when  I  have  stood  contemplating  her  per- 
fections, especially  at  church,  were  he  able  to  raise 
up  a  man  that  could  lower  this  angel  into  woman? 
— Pardon  me!  —  Your  ladyship  knows  my  mad  way 
of  saying  every  thing  that  rises  to  my  thoughts. 

Sweetness  of  temper  must  make  plain  features 
glow:  what  an  effect  must  it  then  have  upon  fine 
ones  ?  Never  was  there  a  sweeter-tempered  woman. 
Indeed  from  sixteen  to  twenty,  all  the  sex  (kept 
in  humour  by  their  hopes,  and  by  their  attractions) 
are  said  to  be  good-tempered ;  but  she  is  remarka- 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  5 

bly  so.  She  is  just  turned  of  twenty,  but  looks  not 
more  than  seventeen.  Her  beauty  hardly  yet  in  its 
full  blow,  will  last  longer,  I  imagine,  than  in  an  ear- 
lier blossom.  Yet  the  prudence  visible  in  her  whole 
aspect,  gave  her  a  distinction,  even  at  twelve,  that 
promised  what  she  would  be  at  a  riper  age. 

Yet  with  all  this  reigning  good-nature  visible  in 
her  face  and  manner,  there  is  such  a  native  dignity 
in  all  she  says,  in  all  she  does  (though  mingled  with 
a  frankness  that  shews  her  mind's  superiority  to  the 
minds  of  almost  all  other  women)  that  it  damps 
and  suppresses,  in  the  most  audacious,  all  imagina- 
tions of  bold  familiarity. 

I  know  not,  by  my  soul,  how  she  does  this  nei- 
ther :  yet  so  it  is.  She  jests ;  she  raillies :  but  I 
cannot  railly  her  again.  Love,  it  is  said,  dignifies 
the  adored  object.  Perhaps  it  is  that  which  awes 
me. 

And  now  will  your  ladyship  doubt  of  an  affirma- 
tive answer  to  your  second  question,  Whether  love 
has  listed  me  in  the  number  of  her  particular  ad- 
mirers ? 

He  has  :  and  the  devil  take  me  if  I  can  help  my- 
self: and  yet  I  have  no  encouragement — nor  any- 
body else ;  that's  my  consolation.  Fenwick  is  deeper 
in,  if  possible,  than  I.  We  had  at  our  first  acquaint- 
ance, as  you  have  heard,  a  tilting-bout  on  the  occa- 
sion :  but  are  sworn  friends  now ;  each  having  agreed 
to  try  his  fortune  by  patience  and  perseverance; 
and  being  assured  that  the  one  has  no  more  of  her 
favour  to  boast  of,  than  the  other*.  "  We  have 
indeed  blustered  away  between  us  half  a  score  more 
of  her  admirers.  Poor  whining  Orme,  however,  per- 

*  The  passages   in  this  letter  thus  marked  (")  are  those 
which  in  the  preceding  one  are  said  to  be  scratched  out ;  but 
yet  were  legible  by  holding  up  the  letter  to  the  light. 
B  3 


6  THE   HISTORY   OF 

severes.  But  of  him  we  make  no  account:  he  ha? 
a  watery  head,  and  though  he  finds  a  way,  by  his 
sister,  who  visits  at  Mr  Selby's,  and  is  much 
esteemed  there,  to  let  Miss  Byron  know  his  pas- 
sion for  her,  notwithstanding  the  negative  he  has 
received;  yet  doubt  we  not  that  she  is  safe  from 
a  flame  that  he  will  quench  with  his  tears,  before 
it  can  rise  to  a  head  to  disturb  us. 

"  You  ladies  love  men  should  whine  after  you  ; 
but  never  yet  did  I  find,  that  where  a  blustering 
fellow  was  a  competitor,  the  lady  married  the 
milksop." 

But  let  me  in  this  particular  do  Miss  Byron  justice : 
how  she  manages  it  I  cannot  tell ;  but  she  is  cour- 
teous to  all ;  nor  could  ever  any  man  charge  her 
either  with  pride  or  cruelty.  All  I  fear,  is,  that  she 
has  such  an  equality  in  her  temper,  that  she  can  hard- 
ly find  room  in  her  heart  for  a  particular  love:  Nor 
will,  till  she  meets  with  one  whose  mind  is  nearly  as 
faultless  as  her  own ;  and  the  general  tenor  of  whose 
life  and  actions  calls  upon  her  discretion  to  give  her 
leave  to  love.  "  This  apprehension  I  owe  to  a  con- 
versation I  had  with  her  grandmother  Shirley;  a 
lady  that  is  an  ornament  to  old  age  ;  and  who  hint- 
ed to  me,  that  her  grand-daughter  had  exceptions 
both  to  Fenwick  and  me,  on  the  score  of  a  few  in- 
dulgencies  that  perhaps  have  been  too  public  ;  but 
which  all  men  of  fashion  and  spirit  give  themselves, 
and  all  women,  but  this,  allow  of,  or  hate  not  men 
the  worse  for.  But  then  what  is  her  objection  to 
'Jrme ?     lie  is  a  sober  dog." 

She  was  but  eight  years  old  when  her  mother 
died  She  also  was  an  excellent  woman.  Her  death 
•was  brought  on  by  grief  for  that  of  her  husband ; 
which  happened  but  six  months  before — a  rare  in- 
stance ! 

The  grandmother  and  aunt,    to  whom  the  girl 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  7 

is  dutiful  to  a  proverb,  will  not  interfere  with  her 
choice.  If  they  are  applied  to  for  their  interest,  the 
answer  is  constantly  this  :  the  approbation  of  their 
Harriet  must  be  first  gained,  and  then  their  con- 
sent is  ready. 

There  is  a  Mr.  Deane,  a  man  of  an  excellent 
character  for  a  lawyer  ;  but  indeed  he  left  off  prac- 
tice on  coming  into  possession  of  a  handsome  estate. 
He  was  the  girl's  godfather.  He  is  allowed  to  have 
great  influence  over  them  all.  Harriet  calls  him 
papa.  To  him  I  have  applied  ;  but  his  answer  is 
the  very  same :  his  daughter  Harriet  must  choose 
for  herself:  all  motions  of  this  kind  must  come  first 
from  her. 

And  ought  /  to  despair  of  succeedingwith  the  girl 
herself?  I,  her  Greville ;  not  contemptible  in  person ; 
an  air — free  and  easy,  at  least;  having  a  good  estate 
in  possession  ;  fine  expectances  besides  ;  dressing 
well,  singing  well,  dancing  well,  and  blest  with  a  mo- 
derate share  of  confidence;  which  makes  other  women 
think  me  a  clever  fellow:  she,  a  girl  of  twenty;  her 
fortune  between  ten  and  fifteen  thousand  pounds 
only;  for  her  father's  considerable  estate,  on  his  de- 
mise, for  want  of  male  heirs,  went  with  the  name ; 
her  grandmother's  jointure  not  more  than  5001.  a 
year. — And  what  though  her  uncle  Selby  has  no 
children,  and  loves  her,  yet  has  he  nephews  "and 
nieces  of  his  own,  whom  he  also  loves ;  for  this 
Harriet  is  his  wife's  niece. 

I  will  not  despair.  If  resolution,  if  perseverance 
will  do,  and  if  she  be  a  woman,  she  shall  be  mine — 
and  so  J  have  told  her  aunt  Selby,  and  her  uncle 
too;  and  so  I  have  told  Miss  Lucy  Selby,  her 
cousin,  as  she  calls  her,  who  is  highly  and  de- 
servedly in  her  favour  ;  and  so  indeed  have  I  more 
than  once  told  the  girl  herself. 

But  now  to  the  description  of  her  person — Let  me 


8  THE    HISTORY    OF 

die,  if  I  know  where  to  begin.  She  is  all  over  love- 
liness. Does  not  every -body  else  who  has  seen  her 
tell  you  so?  Her  stature;  shall  I  begin  with  her  sta- 
ture ?  She  cannot  be  said  to  be  tall ;  but  yet  is  some- 
thing above  the  middling.  Her  shape-^-But  what 
care  I  for  her  shape  ?  I,  who  hope  to  love  her  still 
more,  though  possession  may  make  me  admire  her 
less,  when  she  has  not  that  to  boast  of?  We  young 
fellows  who  have  been  abroad,  are  above  regarding 
English  shapes,  and  prefer  to  them  the  French  neg- 
ligence. By  the  way,  I  think  the  foreign  ladies  in 
the  right,  that  they  aim  not  at  what  they  cannot  at- 
tain. Whether  we  are  so  much  in  the  right  to  come 
into  their  taste,  is  another  thing.  But  be  this  as  it 
will,  there  is  so  much  ease  and  dignity  in  the  per- 
son, in  the  dress,  and  in  every  air  and  motion,  of 
Miss  Harriet  Byron,  that  fine  shapes  will  ever  be 
in  fashion  where  she  is,  be  either  native  or  fo- 
reigner the  judge. 

Her  complexion  is  admirably  fair  and  clear.  I 
have  sat  admiring  her  complexion,  till  I  have  ima- 
gined I  have  seen  the  life-blood  flowing  with  equal 
course  through  her  translucent  veins. 

Her  forehead,  so  nobly  free  and  open,  shews  dig- 
nity and  modesty,  and  strikes  into  one  a  kind  of  awe, 
singly  contemplated,  that  (from  the  delight  which 
accompanies  the  awe)  I  know  not  how  to  describe. 
Every  single  feature,  in  short,  will  bear  the  nicest 
examination ;  and  her  whole  face,  and  her  neck,  so 
admirably  set  on  her  finely-proportioned  shoulders 
— let  me  perish,  if,  taking  her  altogether,  I  do  not 
hold  her  to  be  the  most  unexceptionable  beauty  I 
ever  beheld.  But  what  still  is  her  particular  excel- 
lence, and  distinguishes  her  from  all  other  English 
women  (for  it  must  be  acknowledged  to  be  a  charac- 
teristic of  the  French  women  of  quality)  is  the  grace 
which  that  people  call  plii/siogjiomi/,  and  we  may 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  9 

call  expression  :  had  not  her  features  and  her  com- 
plexion been  so  fine  as  they  are,  that  grace  alone, 
that  soul  shining  out  in  her  lovely  aspect,  joined 
with  the  ease  and  gracefulness  of  her  motion,  would 
have  made  her  as  many  admirers  as  beholders. 

After  this,  shall  I  descend  to  a  more  particular 
description? — I  will. 

Her  cheek — I  never  saiv  a  cheek  so  beautifully 
turned ;  illustrated  as  it  is  by  a  charming  carmine 
flush,  which  denotes  sound  health.  A  most  be- 
witching dimple  takes  place  in  each  when  she  smiles ; 
and  she  has  so  much  reason  to  be  pleased  with  her- 
self, and  with  all  about  her  (for  she  is  the  idol  of  her 
relations)  that  I  believe  from  infancy  she  never 
frowned;  nor  can  a  frown,  it  is  my  opinion,  sit  upon 
her  face  for  a  minute.  Would  to  Heaven  I  were 
considerable  enough  with  her  to  prove  the  contrary ! 

Her  mouth — There  never  was  so  lovely  a  mouth. 
But  no  wonder ;  since  such  rosy  lips,  and  such  ivory 
and  even  teeth,  must  give  beauty  to  a  mouth  less 
charming  than  hers. 

Her  nose  adds  dignity  to  her  other  features.  Her 
chin  is  sweetly  turned,  and  almost  imperceptibly 
dimpled. 

Her  eyes  ; — Ay,  madam,  her  eyes  ! — Good  hea- 
ven !  what  a  lustre,  yet  not  a  fierce,  but  a  mild  lus- 
tre !  How  have  I  despised  the  romancing  poets  for 
their  unnatural  descriptions  of  the  eyes  of  their 
heroines  !  But  I  have  thought  those  descriptions, 
though  absurd  enough  in  conscience,  less  absurd 
(allowing  something  for  poetical  licence)  ever  since 
I  beheld  those  of  Miss  Harriet  Byron. 

Her  hair  is  a  real  and  unlaboured  ornament  to 
her.  All  natural  its  curls  :  art  has  no  share  in  the 
lustre  it  gives  to  her  other  beauties. 

I  mentioned  her  neck — Here  I  dare  not  trust  my- 
self— Inimitable  creature!  All-attracting  loveliness, 


10  THE    HISTORY    OF 

Her  arm — Your  ladyship  knows  my  passion  for 
a  delicate  arm.  By  my  soul,  madam,  your  own 
does  not  exceed  it. 

Her  hands  are  extremely  fine.  Such  fingers ! 
And  they  accustomed  to  the  pen,  to  the  needle, 
to  the  harpsichord ;  excelling  in  all — O  madam  ; 
women  have  souls.  I  am  now  convinced  they  have. 
I  dare  own  to  your  ladyship,  that  once  I  doubted 
it,  on  a  supposition  that  they  were  given  us  for  tem- 
porary purposes  only.  And  have  I  not  seen  her 
dance !  have  I  not  heard  her  sing  !  But  indeed, 
mind  and  person,  she  is  all  harmony. 

Then  for  reading,  for  acquired  knowledge,  what 
lady  so  young — But  you  know  the  character  of  her 
grandfather  Shirley.  He  was  a  man  of  universal 
learning,  and,  from  his  public  employments  abroad, 
as  polite  as  learned.  This  girl,  from  seven  years  of 
age,  when  he  came  to  settle  in  England,  to  four- 
teen, when  she  lost  him,  was  his  delight ;  and  her 
education  and  instruction  the  amusement  of  his  va- 
cant hours.  This  is  the  period,  he  used  to  say,  in 
which  the  foundations  of  all  female  goodness  are  to 
be  laid,  since  so  soon  after  fourteen  they  leap  into 
women.  The  dead  languages  he  aimed  not  to  teach 
her ;  lest  he  should  overload  her  young  mind :  but 
in  the  Italian  and  French  he  made  her  an  adept. 

Nor  were  the  advantages  common  ones  which 
she  received  from  his  lady,  her  grandmother,  and 
from  her  aunt  Selby,  her  father's  sister,  a  woman  of 
equal  worthiness.  Her  grandmother  particularly  is 
one  of  the  most  pious,  yet  most  cheerful,  of  women. 
She  will  not  permit  her  daughter  Byron,  she  says,  to 
live  with  her,  for  both  their  sakes.  For  the  girl's 
sake,  because  there  is  a  greater  resort  of*  company 
at  Mr.  Selby 's,  than  at  Shirley  manor;  and  she  is 
afraid,  as  her  grandchild  has  a  serious  turn,  that  her 
own  contemplative  life  may  make  her  more  grave 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  11 

than  she  wishes  so  young  a  woman  to  be.  Youth,  she 
says,  is  the  season  for  cheerfulness.  For  her  oivn 
sake,  because  she  looks  upon  her  Harriet's  company 
as  a  cordial  too  rich  to  be  always  at  hand ;  and  when 
she  has  a  mind  to  regale,  she  will  either  send  for  her. 
fetch  her,  or  visit  her  at  Mrs.  Selby's.  One  of  her 
letters  to  Mrs.  Selby  I  once  saw.  It  ran  thus — 
"  You  must  spare  me  my  Harriet.  I  am  in  pain. 
My  spirits  are  not  high.  I  would  not  have  the  un- 
decayed  mind  yield,  for  want  of  using  the  means, 
to  the  decaying  body.  One  happy  day  with  our 
child,  the  true  child  of  the  united  minds  of  her  late 
excellent  parents,  will,  I  hope,  effect  the  cure :  if 
it  do  not,  you  must  spare  her  to  me  hvo." 

Did  I  not  tell  you,  madam,  that  it  was  very  diffi- 
cult to  describe  the  person  only  of  this  admirable 
young  lady  ?  But  I  stop  here.  A  horrid  appre- 
hension comes  across  me !  How  do  I  know  but  I 
am  praising  another  maris  future  wife,  and  not  my 
own?  Here  is  a  cousin  of  hers,  a  Mrs.  Reeves,  a 
fine  lady  from  London,  come  down  under  the 
cursed  influence  of  my  evil  stars,  to  carry  this  Har- 
riet away  with  her  into  the  gay  world.  Woman  ! 
woman  ! — I  beg  your  ladyship's  pardon  ;  but  what 
angel  of  twenty  is  proof  against  vanity  ?  The 
first  hour  she  appears,  she  will  be  a  toast ;  stars 
and  titles  will  crowd  about  her :  and  who  knows 
how  far  a  paltry  coronet  may  dazzle  her  who  de- 
serves an  imperial  crown  ?  But,  woe  to  the  man, 
whoever  he  be,  whose  pretensions  dare  to  inter- 
fere (and  have  any  assurance  of  success)  with 
those  of 

Your  ladyship's 
Most  obedient  and  faithful  servant, 

JOHX  GRKVILLE. 


12  THE    HISTORY   OF 

LETTER  III. 

MISS  HARRIET  BYRON  TO  MISS  LUCY  SELBY. 
Selby-house,  Jan.  16. 

I  return  you  inclosed,  my  Lucy,  Mr.  Greville's 
strange  letter.  As  you  asked  him  for  it,  he  will 
have  no  doubt  but  you  shewed  it  to  me.  It  is  better 
therefore,  if  he  make  enquiry  whether  you  did  or 
not,  to  own  it.  In  this  case  he  will  be  curious  to 
know  my  sentiments  upon  it.  He  is  sensible  that 
my  whole  heart  is  open  to  you. 

Tell  him,  if  you  think  proper,  in  so  many  words, 
that  I  am  far  more  displeased  with  him  for  his  im- 
petuosity, than  gratified  by  his  flattery. 

Tell  him,  that  I  think  it  very  hard,  that  when  my 
nearest  relations  leave  me  so  generously  to  my  li- 
berty, a  man  to  whom  I  never  gave  cause  to  treat 
me  with  disrespect,  should  take  upon  himself  to 
threaten  and  controul  me. 

Ask  him,  What  are  his  pretences  for  following 
me  to  London,  or  elsewhere  ? 

If  I  had  not  had  reasons  before  to  avoid  a  more 
than  neighbourly  civility  to  him,  he  has  now  fur- 
nished me  with  very  strong  ones.  The  threatening 
lover  must  certainly  make  a  tyrant  husband.  Don't 
you  think  so,  Lucy?  But  make  not  supposals  of 
lover  or  husband  to  him:  these  bold  men  will  turn 
shadows  into  substance  in  their  own  favour. 

A  woman  who  is  so  much  exalted  above  what  she 
can  deserve,  has  reason  to  be  terrified,  were  she  to 
marry  the  complimenter  (even  could  she  suppose 
him  so  blinded  by  his  passion  as  not  to  be  absolutely 
insincere)  to  think  of  the  height  she  must  fall  from 
in  his  opinion,  when  she  has  put  it  into  his  power 
to  treat  her  but  as  what  she  is. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISOX.  Hi 

Indeed  I  both  despise  and  fear  a  very  high  com- 
plimenter. — Despise  him  for  his  designing  flattery, 
supposing  him  not  to  believe  himself;  or,  if  he 
mean  what  he  says,  for  his  injudiciousness.  \fear 
him,  lest  he  should  (as  in  the  former  case  he  must 
hope)  be  able  to  raise  a  vanity  in  me,  that  would 
sink  me  beneath  his  meanness,  and  give  him  cause 
to  triumph  over  my  folly,  at  the  very  time  that  I 
am  full  of  my  own  wisdom. 

High-strained  compliments,  in  short,  always  pull 
me  down ;  always  make  me  shrink  into  myself. 
Have  I  not  some  vanity  to  guard  against  ?  I  have 
no  doubt  but  Mr.  Greville  wished  I  should  see 
this  letter  :  and  this  gives  me  some  little  indigna- 
tion against  myself;  for  does  it  not  look  as  if,  from 
some  faults  in  my  conduct,  Mr.  Greville  had  formed 
hopes  of  succeeding  by  treating  me  like  a  fool  ? 

I  hope  these  gentlemen  will  not  follow  me  to 
town,  as  they  threaten.  If  they  do,  I  will  not  see 
them,  if  I  can  any  way  avoid  it.  Yet,  for  me  to 
appear  to  them  solicitous  on  this  head,  or  to  desire 
them  not  to  go,  will  be  in  some  measure  to  lay  my- 
self under  an  obligation  to  their  acquiescence.  It  is 
not  therefore  for  me  to  hope  to  influence  them  in 
this  matter,  since  they  expect  too  much  in  return  for 
it  from  me ;  and  since  they  will  be  ready  to  found 
a  merit  in  their  passion  even  for  disobliging  me. 

I  cannot  bear,  however,  to  think  of  their  dangling 
after  me  wherever  I  go.  These  men,  my  dear,  were 
we  to  give  them  importance  with  us,  would  be 
greater  infringers  of  our  natural  feedom  than  the 
most  severe  parents;  and  for  their  owisakes:  where- 
as parents,  if  ever  so  despotic  (if  not  unnatural  ones 
indeed)  mean  solely  our  good,  though  headstrong 
girls  do  not  always  think  so.  Yet  such,  even  such 
c  in  be  teazed  out  of  their  wills,  at  least  out  of  their 
duty,  by  the  men  who  stile  themselves  lovers,  when 
c 


14  THE    HISTORY    OF 

they  are  invincible  to  all  the  entreaties  and  com- 
mands of  their  parents. 

O  that  the  next  eight  or  ten  years  of  my  life,  if  I 
find  not  in  the  interim  a  man  on  whom  my  whole 
undivided  heart  can  fix,  were  happily  over!  As  hap- 
pily as  the  last  alike  important  four  years  !  To  be 
able  to  look  down  from  the  elevation  of  thirty  years, 
my  principles  fixed,  and  to  have  no  capital  folly  to  re- 
proach myself  with,  what  a  happiness  would  that  be ! 

My  cousin  Reeves's  time  of  setting  out  holds ; 
the  indulgence  of  my  dearest  friends  continues  ; 
and  my  resolution  holds.  But  I  will  see  my  Nancy 
before  I  set  out.  What !  shall  I  enter  upon  a 
party  of  pleasure,  and  leave  in  my  heart  room  to 
reflect,  in  the  midst  of  it,  that  there  is  a  dear  suf- 
fering friend  who  had  reason  to  think  I  was  afraid 
of  giving  myself  pain,  when  I  might,  by  the  balm 
of  true  love  and  friendly  soothings,  administer  com- 
fort to  her  wounded  heart  ? — No,  my  Lucy,  believe 
me,  if  I  have  not  generosity  enough,  I  have  sel- 
fishness enough,  to  make  me  avoid  a  sting  so  severe 
as  this  would  be,  to  your 

HARRIET  BYRON. 


LETTER  IV. 


MISS    BYRON    TO    MISS    SELBY. 

Grosvenor-street,  Tuesday,  Jan.  24. 
We  are  just  arrived.     We  had  a  very  agreeable 
journey. 

I  need  not  tell  you  that  Mr.  Greville  and  Mr. 
Fenwick  attended  us  to  our  first  baiting ;  and  had 
a  genteel  dinner  ready  provided  for  us :  the  gen- 
tleman will  tell  you  this,  and  all  particulars. 

They  both  renewed  their  menaces  of  following 
me  to  London,  if  I  staid  above  one  month.  They 
were  so  good  as  to  stretch  their  fortnight  to  a  month. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  15 

Mr.  Fenwick,  in  very  pathetic  terms,  as  lie  found 
an  opportunity  to  engage  me  alone  for  a  few  mi- 
nutes, besought  me  to  love  him.  Mr.  Greville  was 
as  earnest  with  me  to  declare  that  I  hated  him. 
Such  a  declaration,  he  said,  was  all  he  at  present 
wished  for.  It  was  strange,  he  told  me,  that  he 
could  neither  prevail  on  me  to  encourage  his  love, 
nor  to  declare  my  hatred.  He  is  a  whimsical 
creature. 

I  raillied  liim  with  my  usual  freedom  ;  and  told 
him,  that  if  there  were  one  person  in  the  world 
that  I  was  capable  of  hating,  I  could  make  the  less 
scruple  to  oblige  him.     lie  thanked  me  for  that. 

The  two  gentlemen  would  fain  have  proceeded 
farther  :  but  as  they  are  never  out  of  their  way,  I 
dare  say,  they  would  have  gone  to  London ;  and 
there  have  dangled  on  till  we  should  not  have  got 
rid  of  them,  for  my  whole  time  of  being  in  town, 

I  was  very  gravely  earnest  with  them  to  leave  us, 
when  we  stept  into  the  coach  in  order  to  proceed. 
Fenwick,  you  dog,  said  Mr.  Greville,  we  must  re- 
turn ;  Miss  Byron  looks  grave.  Gravity,  and  a 
rising  colour  in  the  finest  face  in  the  world,  indi- 
cate as  much  as  the  frowns  of  other  beauties.  And 
in  the  most  respectful  manner  they  both  took  leave 
of  mo ;  insisting,  however,  on  my  hand,  and  that  I 
would  wish  them  well. 

1  gave  each  my  hand ;  1  wish  you  very  well, 
gentlemen,  said  1 :  and  I  am  obliged  to  your  ci- 
vility in  seeing  me  so  far  on  my  journey  :  especially 
as  you  are  so  kind  as  to  leave  me  here. 

Why,  dear  madam,  did  you  not  spare  your  espe- 
cially, said  Mr.  Greville  ? — Come,  Fenwick,  let  us 
retire,  and  lay  our  two  loggerheads  together,  and 
live  over  again  the  past  hour,  and  then  hang  our- 
selves. 

Poor  Mr.  Orme !  The  coach,  at  our  first  setting 
c  2 


16  THE    HISTORY    OF 

out,  passed  by  his  park-gate,  you  know.  There 
was  he — on  the  very  ridge  of  the  highway.  I  saw 
him  not  till  it  was  near  him.  He  bowed  to  the  very 
ground,  with  such  an  air  of  disconsolateness! — Poor 
Mr.  Orme ! — I  wished  to  have  said  one  word  to 
him,  when  we  had  passed  him  :  but  the  coach  flew 
— Why  did  the  coach  fly !  -  But  I  waved  my  hand, 
and  leaned  out  of  the  coach  as  far  as  I  could,  and 
bowed  to  him. 

O  Miss  Byron,  said  Mrs.  Reeves  (so  said  Mr. 
Reeves)  Mr.  Orme  is  the  happy  man. 

Did  I  think  as  you  do,  I  should  not  be  so  desirous 
to  have  spoken  to  him  :  but,  methinks,  I  should 
have  been  glad  to  have  once  said,  Adieu,  Mr.  Orme; 
for  Mr.  Orme  is  a  good  man. 

But,  Lucy,  my  heart  was  softened  at  parting 
with  my  dear  relations  and  friends ;  and  when  the 
heart  is  softened,  light  impressions  will  go  deep. 

My  cousins'  house  is  suitable  to  their  fortune : 
very  handsome,  and  furnished  in  taste.  Mrs. 
Reeves,  knowing  well  what  a  scribbler  I  am,  and 
am  expected  to  be,  has  provided  me  with  pen,  ink, 
and  paper,  in  abundance.  She  readily  allowed  me 
to  take  early  possession  of  my  apartment,  that  I 
might  pay  punctual  obedience  to  the  commands  of 
all  my  friends  on  setting  out.  These,  you  know, 
were  to  write  in  the  first  hour  of  my  arrival :  and 
it  was  allowed  to  be  to  you,  my  dear.  But,  writing 
thus  early,  what  can  have  occurred  ? 

My  apartment  is  extremely  elegant.  A  well- 
furnished  book-case  is,  however,  to  me  the  most 
attracting  ornament  in  it  ? — Pardon  me,  dear  pen 
and  ink !  I  must  not  prefer  any  thing  to  you,  by 
whose  means  I  hope  to  spend  some  part  of  every 
day  at  Selby-house;  and  even  at  this  distance 
amuse  with  my  prattle  those  friends  that  are  always 
so  partial  to  it. 


SIR    CHARLES   GRANDISON.  17 

And  now,  my  dear,  my  revered  grandmamma,  I 
ask  your  blessing — yours,  my  ever-indulgent  aunt 
Selby — and  yours,  my  honoured  and  equally  be- 
loved uncle  Selby.  Who  knows  but  you  will  now 
in  absence  take  less  delight  in  feazing  your  ever-du- 
tiful Harriet?  But  yet  I  unbespeak  not  my  monitor. 

Continue  to  love  me,  my  Lucy,  as  I  shall  endea- 
vour to  deserve  your  love :  and  let  me  know  how 
our  dear  Nancy  does. 

My  heart  bleeds  for  her.  I  should  have  held 
myself  utterly  inexcusable,  had  I  accepted  of  your 
kindly  intended  dispensation,  and  come  to  town  for 
three  whole  months,  without  repeating  to  her,  by 
word  of  mouth,  my  love  and  my  sympathizing  con- 
cern for  her.  What  merit  does  her  patience  add 
to  her  other  merits !  How  has  her  calamity  en- 
deared her  to  me  !  If  ever  I  shall  be  heavily  af- 
flicted, (jod  give  me  her  amiable,  her  almost  me- 
ritorious patience  in  sufferings ! 

To  my  cousin  Iiolles's,  and  all  my  other  rela- 
tions, friends,  companions,  make  the  affectionate 
compliments  of  your 

HARRIET  BYRON. 


LETTER  V. 

MISS    BYRON    TO    MISS    SELBY. 

Jan.  23. 
You  rejoice  me,  my  dear,  in  the  hopes  which,  you 
tell   me,   Dr.  Mitchell  from  London  gives  you  in 
relation  to  our  Nancy.    May  our  incessant  prayers 
for  the  restoration  of  her  health  be  answered! 

Three  things  my  aunt  Selby,  and  you,  in  the 
name  of  every  one  of  my  friends,  injoined  me  at 
parting.  The Jhsl.  To  write  often,  venj  often,  were 
//our  words.     This  injunction  was  not  needful:  my 


18  THE    HISTORY   OF 

heart  is  with  you ;  and  the  good  news  you  give  me 
of*  my  grandmamma's  health,  and  of  our  Nancy, 
enlarges  that  heart.  The  second,  To  give  you  a  de- 
scription of  the  persons  and  characters  of  the  peo- 
ple 1  am  likely  to  be  conversant  with  in  this  great 
town.  And,  thirdly,  Besides  the  general  account 
which  you  all  expected  from  me  of  the  visits  I  made 
and  received,  you  injoined  me  to  acquaint  you  with 
the  very  beginnings  of  every  address  (and  even  of 
every  silent  and  respectful  distinction,  were  your 
words)  that  the  girl  whom  you  all  so  greatly  favour, 
might  receive  on  this  excursion  to  town. 

Don't  you  remember  what  my  uncle  Selby  an- 
swered to  this  ? — /  do  :  and  will  repeat  it,  to  shew, 
that  his  correcting  cautions  shall  not  be  forgotten. 

The  vanity  of  the  sex,  said  he,  will  not  suffer 
any  thing  of  this  sort  to  escape  our  Harriet.  Wo- 
men make  themselves  so  cheap  at  the  public  places 
in  and  about  town,  that  new  faces  are  more  enquired 
after  than  even  fine  faces  constantly  seen.  Harriet 
has  an  honest  artless  bloom  in  her  cheeks;  she  may 
attract  notice  as  a  novice:  but  wherefore  do  you 
fill  her  head  with  an  expectation  of  conquests  ?  Wo- 
men, added  he,  offer  themselves  at  every  public 
place,  in  rows,  as  at  a  market.  Because  three  or 
four  silly  fellows  here  in  the  country  (like  people 
at  an  auction,  who  raise  the  price  upon  each  other 
above  its  value)  have  bid  for  her,  you  think  she  will 
not  be  able  to  set  her  foot  out  of  doors,  without 
increasing  the  number  of  her  followers. 

And  then  my  uncle  would  have  it,  that  my  head 
would  be  unable  to  bear  the  consequence  which  the 
partiality  of  my  other  friends  gave  me. 

It  is  true,  my  Lucy,  that  we  young  women  are 
too  apt  to  be  pleased  with  the  admiration  pretended 
for  us  by  the  other  sex.  But  I  have  always  endea- 
voured to  keep  down  any  foolish  pride  of  this  sort, 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  19 

by  such  considerations  as  these  :  that  flattery  is  the 
vice  ot*  men :  that  they  seek  to  raise  us  in  order  to 
lower  us,  and  in  the  end  to  exalt  themselves  on  the 
ruins  of  the  pride  they  either  hope  to  find,  or  in- 
spire :  that  humility,  as  it  shines  brightest  in  a  high 
condition,  best  becomes  a  flattered  woman  of  all 
women :  that  she  who  is  puffed  up  by  the  praises 
of  men,  on  the  supposed  advantages  of  person,  an- 
swers their  end  upon  her  ;  and  seems  to  own,  that 
she  thinks  it  a  principal  part  of  hers,  to  be  admired 
by  them :  and  what  can  give  more  importance  to 
them,  and  less  to  herself,  than  this  ?  For  have  not 
women  souls  as  well  as  men,  and  souls  as  capable  of 
the  noblest  attainments,  as  theirs  ?  Shall  they  not 
therefore  be  most  solicitous  to  cultivate  the  beau- 
ties of  the  mind,  and  to  make  those  of  person  but 
of  inferior  consideration  ?  The  bloom  of  beauty 
holds  but  a  very  i'ew  years  ;  and  shall  not  a  woman 
aim  to  make  herself  mistress  of  those  perfections 
that  will  dignify  her  advanced  age  ?  And  then  may 
she  be  as  wise,  as  venerable — as  my  grandmamma. 
She  is  an  example  for  us,  my  dear:  who  is  so  much 
respected,  who  is  so  much  beloved,  both  by  old  and 
young,  as  my  grandmamma  Shirley? 

In  pursuance  of  the  second  injunction,  I  will  now 
describe  some  young  ladies  and  gentlemen  who 
paid  my  cousins  their  compliments  on  their  arrival 
in  town. 

.Miss  Allestree,  daughter  of  Sir  John  Allestree, 
was  one.  She  is  very  pretty,  and  very  genteel, 
easy,  and  free.     I  believe  I  shall  love  her. 

Miss  Bramber  was  the  second.  Not  so  pretty 
as  Miss  Allestree;  but  agreeable  in  her  person  and 
air.     A  little  too  talkative,  I  think. 

It  was  one  of  my  grandfather's  rules  to  me,  not 
impertinently  to  start  subjects,  as  if  I  would  make 
a:i  ostentation  of  knowledge;  or  as  if  1  were  fond 


20  THE   HISTORY   OF 

of  indulging  a  talking  humour  :  but  frankness  and 
complaisance  required,  he  used  to  say,  that  we 
women  should  unlock  our  bosoms,  when  we  were 
called  upon,  and  were  expected  to  give  our  sen- 
timents upon  any  subject. 

Miss  Bramber  was  eager  to  talk.  She  seemed, 
even  when  silent,  to  look  as  if  she  was  studying  for 
something  to  say,  although  she  had  exhausted  two 
or  three  subjects.  This  charge  of  volubility,  I  am 
the  rather  inclined  to  fix  upon  her,  as  neither  Mr. 
nor  Mrs.  Reeves  took  notice  to  me  of  it,  as  a  thing 
extraordinary  ;  which,  probably,  they  would  have 
done,  if  she  had  exceeded  her  usual  way.  And  yet, 
perhaps,  the  joy  of  seeing  her  newly  arrived  friends 
might  have  opened  her  lips.  If  so,  your  pardon, 
sweet  Miss  Bramber ! 

Miss  Sally,  her  younger  sister,  is  very  amiable 
and  very  modest :  a  little  kept  down,  as  it  seems, 
by  the  vivacity  of  her  elder  sister  ;  between  whose 
ages  there  are  about  six  or  seven  years  :  so  that. 
Miss  Bramber  seems  to  regard  her  sister  as  one 
whom  she  is  willing  to  remember  as  the  girl  she 
was  two  or  three  years  ago  ;  for  Miss  Sally  is  not 
above  seventeen. 

What  confirmed  me  in  this,  was,  that  the  younger 
lady  was  a  good  deal  more  free  when  her  sister  was 
withdrawn,  than  when  she  was  present ;  and  again 
pursed-up  her  really  pretty  mouth  when  she  re- 
turned :  and  her  sister  addressed  her  always  by  the 
word  child,  with  an  air  of  eldership ;  while  the  other 
called  her  sister,  with  a  look  of  observance. 

These  were  the  ladies. 

The  two  gentlemen  who  came  with  them,  were, 
Mr.  Barnet,  a  nephew  of  Lady  Allestree,  and  Mr. 
Somner. 

Mr.  Somner  is  a  young  gentleman  lately  married; 
very  affected,  and  very  opinionated.     I  told  Mrs. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  21 

Reeves,  after  he  was  gone,  that  I  believed  he  was 
a  dear  lover  of  his  person ;  and  she  owned  he  was. 
Yet  had  he  no  great  reason  for  it.  It  is  far  from  ex- 
traordinary ;  though  he  was  very  gaily  dressed.  His 
wife,  it  seems,  was  a  young  widow  of  great  fortune; 
and  till  she  gave  him  consequence  by  falling  in  love 
with  him,  he  was  thought  to  be  a  modest  good  sort 
of  young  man;  one  that  had  not  discovered  anymore 
perfections  in  himself,  than  other  people  beheld  in 
him ;  and  this  gave  her  an  excuse  for  liking  him. 
But  now  he  is  loquacious,  forward,  bold,  thinks 
meanly  of  the  sex ;  and,  what  is  worse,  not  the  higher 
of  the  lady,  for  the  preference  she  has  given  him. 

This  gentleman  took  great  notice  of  me ;  and 
yet  in  such  a  way,  as  to  have  me  think,  that  the 
approbation  of  so  excellent  a  judge  as  himself,  did 
me  no  small  honour. 

Mr.  Barnet  is  a  young  man,  that  I  imagine  will 
be  always  young.  At  first  I  thought  him  only  a  fop. 
He  affected  to  say  some  things,  that,  though  trite, 
were  sententious,  and  carried  with  them  the  air  of 
observation.  There  is  some  degree  of  merit  in  hav- 
ing such  a  memory,  as  will  help  a  person  to  repeat 
and  apply  other  men's  wit  with  some  tolerable  pro- 
priety. But  when  he  attempted  to  walk  alone,  he 
said  things  that  it  was  impossible  a  man  of  common 
sense  could  say.  I  pronounce  therefore  boldly  about 
him  :  yet  by  his  outward  appearance  he  may  pass 
for  one  of  your  pretty  fellows  ;  for  he  dresses  very 
gaily.  Indeed  if  he  has  any  taste,  it  is  in  dress;  and 
this  he  has  found  out ;  for  he  talked  of  little  else, 
when  he  led  the  talk  ;  and  boasted  of  several  parts 
of  his.  What  finished  him  with  me,  was,  that  as 
often  as  the  conversation  seemed  to  take  a  serious 
turn,  he  arose  from  his  seat,  and  hummed  an  Italian 
air ;  of  which  however  he  knew  nothing  :  but  the 
sound  of  his  own  voice  seemed  to  please  him. 


22  THE    HISTORY   OF 

This  fine  gentleman  recollected  some  high-flown 
compliments,  and,  applying  them  to  me,  looked  as 
if  he  expected  I  should  value  myself  upon  them. 

No  wonder  that  men  in  general  think  meanly  of 
us  women,  if  they  believe  we  have  ears  to  hear,  and 
folly  to  be  pleased  with,  the  frothy  things  that  pass 
under  the  name  of  compliments,  from  such  random- 
shooters  as  these. 

Miss  Stevens  paid  us  a  visit  this  afternoon.  She 
is  the  daughter  of  Colonel  Stevens,  a  very  worthy 
man.  She  appears  sensible  and  unaffected ;  has 
read,  my  cousin  says,  a  good  deal ;  and  yet  takes  no 
pride  in  shewing  it. 

Miss  Darlington  came  with  her.  They  are  related. 
This  young  lady  has,  I  find,  a  pretty  taste  in  poetry. 
Mrs.  lleeves  prevailed  on  her  to  shew  us  three  of 
her  performances.  And  now,  as  it  was  with  some 
reluctance  that  she  shewed  them,  is  it  fair  to  say 
any  thing  about  them  ?  I  say  it  only  to  you,  my 
friends. — One  was  on  the  parting  qftivo  lovers  ;  very 
sensible;  and  so  tender,  that  it  shewed  the  fair  writer 
knew  how  to  describe  the  pangs  that  may  be  inno- 
cently allowed  to  arise  on  such  an  occasion. — One 
on  the  morning-datvn,  and  sun-rise  ;  a  subject  that 
gave  credit  to  herself;  for  she  is,  it  seems,  a  very 
early  riser.  I  petitioned  for  a  copy  of  this,  for  the 
sake  of  two  or  three  of  my  dear  cousins,  as  well  as 
to  confirm  my  own  practice;  but  I  was  modestly  re- 
fused.— The  third  was  on  the  death  of  a  favourite 
linnet ;  a  little  too  pathetic  for  the  occasion  ;  since 
were  Miss  Darlington  to  have  lost  her  best  and 
dearest  friend,  I  imagine  she  had  in  this  piece, 
which  is  pretty  long,  exhausted  the  subject ;  and 
must  borrow  from  it  some  of  the  images  which  she 
introduces  to  heighten  her  distress  for  the  loss  of 
the  little  songster.  It  is  a  very  difficult  matter,  I 
believe,  for  young  persons  of  genius  to  rein-in  their 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  23 

imaginations.  A  great  flow  of  spirits,  and  great 
store  of  images  crowding  in  upon  them,  carry  them 
too  frequently  above  their  subject ;  and  they  are 
apt  rather  to  say  all  that  may  be  said  on  their  fa- 
vourite topics,  than  what  is  proper  to  be  said.  But 
it  is  a  pretty  piece,  however. 

Thursday  morning. 

Lady  Betty  Williams  supped  with  us  the  same 
evening.  She  is  an  agreeable  woman,  the  widow 
of  a  very  worthy  man,  a  near  relation  of  Mr. 
Reeves.  She  has  a  great  and  just  regard  for  my 
cousin,  and  consults  him  in  all  affairs  of  importance. 
She  seems  to  be  turned  of  forty ;  has  a  son  and  a 
daughter;  but  they  are  both  abroad  for  education. 

It  hurt  me  to  hear  her  declare,  that  she  cared  not 
for  the  trouble  of  education  ;  and  that  she  had  this 
pleasure,  which  girls  brought  up  at  home  seldom 
give  their  mothers  ;  that  she  and  Miss  Williams  al- 
ways saw  each  other,  and  always  parted,  as  lovers. 

Surely  there  must  be  some  fault  either  in  the 
temper  of  the  mother,  or  in  the  behaviour  of  the 
daughter  ;  and  if  so,  I  doubt  it  will  not  be  amended 
by  seeing  each  other  but  seldom.  Do  not  lovers 
thus  cheat  and  impose  upon  one  another  ? 

The  young  gentleman  is  about  seventeen ;"  his 
sister  about  fifteen :  and,  as  I  understand  she  is  a 
very  lively,  and,  'tis  feared,  a  forward  girl,  shall  we 
wonder,  if  in  a  few  years  time  she  should  make 
such  a  choice  for  her  husband  as  Lady  Betty  would 
least  of  all  choose  for  a  son-in-law  ?  What  influence 
can  a  mother  expect  to  have  over  a  daughter  from 
whom  she  so  voluntarily  estranges  herself?  and 
from  whose  example  the  daughter  can  receive  only 
hearsay  benefits  ? 

But  after  all,  methinks  I  hear  my  correcting 
uncle  ask,  May  not  lady  Betty  have  better  reasons 


2^  THE    HISTORY    OF 

for  her  conduct  in  this  particular,  than  she  gave 
you  ? — She  may,  my  uncle,  and  I  hope  she  has : 
but  I  wish  she  had  condescended  to  give  those 
better  reasons,  since  she  gave  any ;  and  then  you 
had  not  been  troubled  with  the  impertinent  re- 
marks of  your  saucy  niece. 

Lady  Betty  was  so  kind  as  to  take  great  notice  of 
me.  She  desired  to  be  one  in  every  party  of  plea- 
sure that  I  am  to  be  engaged  in.  Persons  who  were 
often  at  public  places,  she  observed,  took  as  much 
delight  in  accompanying  strangers  to  them,  as  if 
they  were  their  own.  The  apt  comparisons,  she 
said ;  the  new  remarks ;  the  pretty  wonder ;  the 
agreeable  passions  excited  in  such,  on  the  occasion ; 
always  gave  her  high  entertainment :  and  she  was 
sure  from  the  observation  of  such  a  young  lady, 
civillybowing  tome, she  should  be  equally  delighted 
and  improved.  I  bowed  in  silence.  I  love  not  to 
make  disqualifying  speeches  ;  by  such  we  seem  to 
intimate  that  we  believe  the  complimenter  to  be  in 
earnest,  or  perhaps  that  we  think  the  compliment 
our  due,  and  want  to  hear  it  cither  repeated  or  con- 
firmed ;  and  yet,  possibly,  we  have  not  that  pretty 
confusion,  and  those  transient  blushes,  ready,  which 
Mr.  Greville  archly  says  are  always  to  be  at  hand 
when  we  affect  to  disclaim  the  praises  given  us. 

Lady  Betty  was  so  good  as  to  stop  there;  though 
the  muscles  of  her  agreeable  face  shewed  a  polite 
promptitude,  had  I,  by  disclaiming  her  compliments, 
provoked  them  to  perform  their  office. 

Am  I  not  a  sauey  creature? 

1  know  I  am.  But  I  dislike  not  Lady  Betty,  for 
all  that. 

I  am  to  be  carried  by  her  to  a  masquerade,  to  a 
ridotto  ;  when  the  season  comes,  to  llanelagh  and 
Vauxhall :  in  the  mean  time,  to  balls,  routs,  drums, 
and-so-forth  ;  and  to  qualify  me  for  these  latter,  I 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISOX.  2,7 

am  to  be  taught  all  the  fashionable  games.  Did 
my  dear  grandmamma,  twenty  or  thirty  years  ago. 
think  she  should  live  to  be  told,  that  to  the  danc- 
ing-master, the  singing  or  music-master,  the  high 
mode  would  require  the  gaming-master  to  be  added 
for  the  completing  of  the  female  education? 

Lady  Betty  will  kindly  take  the  lead  in  all  these 
diversions. 

And  now,  Lucy,  will  you  not  repeat  your  wishes, 
that  I  return  to  you  with  a  sound  heart  ?  And  are 
you  not  afraid  that  I  shall  become  a  modern  fine 
lady  ?  As  to  the  latter  fear,  I  will  tell  you  vchen 
you  shall  suspect  me — If  you  find  that  I  prefer  the 
highest  of  these  entertainments,  or  the  opera  itself, 
well  as  I  love  music,  to  a  good  play  of  our  favourite 
Shakespeare,  then,  my  Lucy,  let  your  heart  ake 
for  your  Harriet :  then,  be  apprehensive  that  she  is 
laid  hold  on  by  levity ;  that  she  is  captivated  by 
the  eye  and  the  ear ;  that  her  heart  is  infected  by 
the  modern  taste;  and  that  she  will  carry  down 
with  her  an  appetite  to  pernicious  gaming ;  and,  in 
order  to  support  her  extravagance,  will  think  of 
punishing  some  honest  man  in  marriage. 

James  has  signified  to  Sally  his  wishes  to  be  al- 
lowed to  return  to  Selby-house.  I  have  not  there- 
fore brought  him  the  new  liveries  I  designed  for  him 
on  coming  to  town.  I  cannot  bear  an  uncheerful 
brow  in  a  servant ;  and  he  owning  to  me,  on  my 
talking  with  him,  his  desire  to  return,  I  have  pro- 
mised that  he  shall,  as  soon  as  Mr.  Reeves  has  pro- 
vided me  with  another  servant. — Silly  fellow !  But 
I  hope  my  aunt  will  not  dismiss  him  upon  it.  The 
servant  I  may  hire,  may  not  care  to  go  into  the 
country  perhaps,  or  may  not  so  behave,  as  that  I 
should  choose  to  take  him  down  with  me.  And 
James  is  honest ;  and  his  mother  would  break  her 
heart,  if  he  should  be  dismissed  our  service, 

D 


26  THE    HISTORY    OF 

Several  servants  have  already  offered  themselves; 
but,  as  I  think  people  are  answerable  for  the  cha- 
racter of  such  as  they  choose  for  their  domestics,  I 
find  no  small  difficulty  in  fixing.  I  am  not  of  the 
mind  of  that  great  man,  whose  good-natured  reason 
for  sometimes  preferring  men  no  way  deserving, 
was,  that  he  loved  to  be  a  friend  to  those  whom  no 
other  person  would  befriend.  This  was  carrying 
his  goodness  very  far  (if  he  made  it  not  an  excuse 
for  himself,  for  having  promoted  a  man  who  proved 
bad  aftervoards,  rather  than  as  supposing  him  to  be 
so  at  the  time) ;  since  else,  he  seemed  not  to  con- 
sider, that  every  bad  man  he  promoted,  ran  away 
with  the  reward  due  to  a  better. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Reeves  are  so  kind  to  me,  and 
their  servants  are  so  ready  to  oblige  me,  that  I 
shall  not  be  very  uneasy,  if  I  cannot  soon  get  one 
to  my  mind.  Only  if  I  could  fix  on  such  a  one, 
and  if  my  grandmamma's  Oliver  should  leave  her, 
as  she  supposes  he  will,  now  he  has  married  Ellen, 
as  soon  as  a  good  inn  offers,  James  may  supply 
Oliver's  place,  and  the  new  servant  may  continue 
mine  instead  of  James. 

And  now  that  I  have  gone  so  low,  don't  you  wish 
me  to  put  an  end  to  this  letter? — I  believe  you  do. 

Well  then,  with  duty  and  love  ever  remembered 
where  so  justly  due,  believe  me  to  be,  my  dear  Lucy, 
Your  truly  affectionate 

HARRIET   BYRON. 

I  will  write  separately  to  what  you  say  of  Mr. 
Greville,  Mr.  Fenwick,  and  Miss  Ormc  ;  yet 
hope  to  be  time  enough  for  the  post. 


SIR    CHARLES    GllANDISON.  27 

LETTER  VI. 

MISS    BYRON    TO    MISS    SELBY. 

Sat.  Jan.  28. 
As  to  what  you  say  of  Mr.  Greville's  concern  on 
my  absence  (and,  I  think,  with  a  little  too  much 
feeling  for  him)  and  of  his  declaring  himself  un- 
able to  live  without  seeing  me ;  I  have  but  one  fear 
about  it ;  which  is,  that  he  is  forming  a  pretence 
from  his  violent  love,  to  come  up  after  me :  and  if 
he  does,  I  will  not  see  him,  if  I  can  help  it. 

And  do  you  indeed  believe  him  to  be  so  much  in 
love  ?  By  your  seriousness  on  the  occasion,  you 
seem  to  think  he  is.  O  my  Lucy !  What  a  good 
heart  you  have  !  And  did  he  not  weep  when  he  told 
you  so  ?  Did  he  not  turn  his  head  away,  and  pull 
out  his  handkerchief! — O  these  dissemblers  !  The 
hyaena,  my  dear,  was  a  male  devourer.  The  men 
in  malice,  and  to  extenuate  their  own  guilt,  made 
the  creature  &  female.  And  yet  there  may  be  male 
and  female  of  this  species  of  monsters.  But  as 
women  have  more  to  lose  with  regard  to  reputation 
than  men,  the  male  hyaena  must  be  infinitely  the. 
more  dangerous  creature  of  the  two ;  since  he  will 
come  to  us,  even  into  our  very  houses,  fawning, 
cringing,  weeping,  licking  our  hands ;  while  the 
den  of  the  female  is  by  the  highway-side,  and 
wretched  youths  must  enter  into  it,  to  put  it  in  her 
power  to  devour  them. 

Let  me  tell  you,  my  dear,  that  if  there  be  an  art- 
ful man  in  England,  with  regard  to  us  women  (art- 
ful equally  in  his  free  speaking,  and  in  his  syco- 
phancies)  Mr.  Greville  is  the  man  ;  and  he  intends 
to  be  so  too,  and  values  himself  upon  his  art.  Does 
he  not  as  boldly  as  constantly,  insinuate,  that  flat- 
tery is  dearer  to  a  woman  than  her  food  ?  Yet  who 
d  2 


28  THE    HISTORY    OF 

so  gross  a  flatterer  as  himself,  when  the  humour  is 
upon  him  ?  And  yet  at  times  he  wants  to  build  up 
a  merit  for  sincerity  or  plain-dealing,  by  saying 
free  things. 

It  is  not  difficult,  my  dear,  to  find  out  these  men, 
were  we  earnest  to  detect  them.  Their  chief 
strength  lies  in  our  weakness.  But  however  weak 
we  are,  I  think  we  should  not  add  to  the  triumph  of 
those  who  make  our  weakness  the  general  subject 
of  their  satire.  We  should  not  prove  the  justice 
of  their  ridicule  by  our  own  indiscretions.  But  the 
traitor  is  within  us.  If  we  guard  against  ourselves, 
we  may  bid  defiance  to  all  the  arts  of  man. 

You  know,  that  my  great  objection  to  Mr.  Gre- 
-ville  is  for  his  immoralities.  A  man  of  free  prin- 
ciples, shewn  by  practices  as  free,  can  hardly  make 
a  tender  husband,  were  a  woman  able  to  get  over 
considerations  that  she  ought  not  to  get  over.  Who 
shall  trust  for  the  performance  of  his  second  duties, 
the  man  who  avowedly  despises  hh  first?  Mr.  Gre- 
ville  had  a  good  education :  he  must  have  taken 
fains  to  render  vain  the  pious  precepts  of  his  wor- 
thy father  ;  and  still  more  to  make  a  jest  of  them. 

Three  of  his  women  we  have  heard  of,  besides 
her  whom  he  brought  with  him  from  Wales.  You 
know  he  has  only  affected  to  appear  decent  since 
he  has  cast  his  eyes  upon  me.  The  man,  my  dear, 
must  be  an  abandoned  man,  and  must  have  a  very 
hard  heart,  who  can  pass  from  woman  to  woman, 
without  any  remorse  for  a  former,  whom,  as  may 
be  supposed,  he  has  by  the  most  solemn  vows  se- 
duced. And  whose  leavings  is  it,  my  dear,  that  a 
virtuous  woman  takes,  who  marries  a  profligate  ? 

Is  it  not  reported  that  his  Welshwoman,  to 
whom,  at  parting,  he  gave  not  sufficient  for  a  twelve- 
month's scanty  subsistence,  is  now  upon  the  town  ? 
Vile  man !  He  thinks  it  to  his  credit,  I  have  heard, 


SIR    CHARLES    fIRANDISON.  29 

to  own  it  a  seduction,  and  that  she  was  not  a  vicious 
creature  till  he  made  her  so. 

One  only  merit  has  Mr.  Greville  to  plead  in  this 
hlack  transaction  :  it  is,  that  he  has,  by  his  whole 
conduct  in  it,  added  a  warning  to  our  sex.  And 
shall  I,  despising  the  warning,  marry  a  man,  who, 
specious  as  he  is  in  his  temper,  and  lively  in  his 
conversation,  has  shown  so  bad  a  nature  ? 

His  fortune,  as  you  say,  his  great.  The  more 
inexcusable  therefore  is  he  for  his  niggardliness  to 
his  Welshwoman.  On  his  fortune  he  presumes :  it 
will  procure  him  a  too  easy  forgiveness  from  others 
of  our  sex :  but  fortune  without  merit  will  never 
do  with  me,  were  the  man  a  prince. 

You  say,  that  if  a  woman  resolves  not  to  marry 
till  she  finds  herself  addressed  to  by  a  man  of  strict 
virtue,  she  must  be  for  ever  single.  If  this  be  true, 
what  wicked  creatures  are  men  ?  What  a  dreadful 
abuse  of  passions,  given  them  for  the  noblest  pur- 
poses, are  they  guilty  of! 

I  have  a  very  high  notion  of  the  marriage-state. 
I  remember  what  my  uncle  once  averred;  that  a 
woman  out  of  wedlock  is  half  useless  to  the  end  of 
her  being.  How  indeed  do  the  duties  of  a  good 
wife,  of  a  good  mother,  and  a  worthy  matron,  well 
performed,  dignify  a  woman  !  Let  my  aunt  Selby's 
example,  in  her  enlarged  sphere,  set  against  that  of 
any  single  woman  of  like  years  moving  in  her  nar- 
row circle,  testify  the  truth  of  the  observation.  My 
grandfather  used  to  say,  that  families  are  little  com- 
munities; that  there  are  but  few  solid  friendships 
out  of  them ;  and  that  they  help  to  make  up  wor- 
thily, and  to  secure,  the  great  community,  of  which 
they  are  so  many  miniatures. 

But  yet  it  is  my  opinion,  and  I  hope  that  I  never 
by  my  practice  shall  discredit  it,  that  a  woman  who, 
with  her  eyes  open,  marries  a  profligate  man,  had, 
d  3 


30  THE   HISTORY   OF 

generally,  much  better  remain  single  all  her  life ; 
since  it  is  very  likely,  that  by  such  a  step  she  de- 
feats, as  to  herself,  all  the  good  ends  of  society. 
What  a  dreadful,  what  a  presumptuous  risque  runs 
she,  who  marries  a  wicked  man,  even  hoping  to  re- 
claim him,  when  she  cannot  be  sure  of  keeping  her 
own  principles! — Be  not  deceived  ;  evil  communication 
corrupts  good 'manner s  ;  is  a  caution  truly  apostolical. 

The  text  you  mention  of  the  unbelieving  husband 
being  converted  by  the  believing  wife,  respects,  as  I 
take  it,  the  first  ages  of  Christianity ;  and  is  an  in- 
struction to  the  converted  wife  to  let  her  uncon- 
verted husband  see  in  her  behaviour  to  him,  while  he 
beheld  her  chaste  conversation  coupled  with  fear,  the 
efficacy  upon  her  own  heart  of  the  excellent  doc- 
trines she  had  embraced.  It  could  not  have  in  view 
the  woman  who,  being  single,  chose  a. pagan  husband 
in  hopes  of  converting  him.  Nor  can  it  give  encour- 
agement for  a  woman  of  virtue  and  religion  to  marry 
a  profligate  in  hopes  of  reclaiming  him.  Who  can 
touch  pitch,  and  not  be  defiled? 

As  to  Mr.  Fenwick,  I  am  far  from  having  a  bet- 
ter opinion  of  him  than  I  have  of  Mr.  Greville.  You 
know  what  is  whispered  of  him.  He  has  more  de- 
cency however :  he  avows  not  free  principles,  as 
the  other  does.  But  you  must  have  observed  how 
much  he  seems  to  enjoy  the  mad  talk  and  free  sen- 
timents of  the  other:  and  that  other  always  bright- 
ens up  and  rises  in  his  freedoms  and  impiety  on 
Mr.  Fenwick's  sly  applauses  and  encouraging  coun- 
tenance. In  a  word,  Mr.  Fenwick,  not  having  the 
same  lively  things  to  say,  nor  so  lively  an  air  to 
carry  them  off,  as  Mr.  Greville  has,  though  he 
would  be  thought  not  to  want  sense,  takes  pains  to 
show  that  he  has  as  corrupt  a  heart.  If  I  thought 
anger  would  not  give  him  consequence,  I  should 
hardly  forbear  to  show  myself  displeased,  when  he 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  31 

points  by  a  leering  eye,  and  by  a  broad  smile,  the 
free  jest  of  the  other,  to  the  person  present  whom 
he  thinks  most  apt  to  blush,  as  if  for  fear  it  should 
be  lost ;  and  still  more,  when  on  the  modest 
cheek's  showing  the  sensibility  of  the  person  so  in- 
sulted, he  breaks  out  into  a  loud  laugh,  that  she 
may  not  be  able  to  recover  herself. 

Surely  these  men  must  think  us  women  egregious 
hypocrites :  they  must  believe  that  we  only  affect 
modesty,  and  in  our  hearts  approve  of  their  free- 
dom: for,  can  it  be  supposed,  that  such  as  call 
themselves  gentlemen,  and  who  have  had  the  edu- 
cation and  opportunities  that  these  two  have  had, 
would  give  themselves  liberties  of  speech  on  pur- 
pose to  affront  us  ? 

I  hope  I  shall  find  the  London  gentlemen  more 
polite  than  these  our  neighbours  of  the  fox-chace : 
and  yet  hitherto  I  have  seen  no  great  cause  to  pre- 
fer them  to  the  others.  But  about  the  court,  and 
at  the  fashionable  public  places,  I  expect  wonders. 
Pray  Heaven,  I  may  not  be  disappointed! 

Thank  Miss  Orme,  in  my  name,  for  the  kind 
wishes  she  sends  me.  Tell  her,  that  her  doubts  of 
my  affection  for  her  are  not  just;  and  that  I  do 
really  and  indeed  love  her.  Nor  should  she  want 
the  most  explicit  declarations  of  my  love,  were  I 
not  more  afraid  of  her  in  the  character  of  a  sister  to 
a  truly  respectable  man,  than  doubtful  of  her  in  that 
of  a  friend  to  rut' :  in  which  latter  light,  I  even  joy 
to  consider  her.  But  she  is  a  little  naughty,  tell 
her,  because  she  is  always  hading  to  one  subject. 
And  yet,  how  can  I  be  angry  with  her  for  it,  if  her 
good  opinion  of  me  induces  her  to  think  it  in  my 
power  to  make  the  brother  happy,  whom  she  so 
dearly  and  deservedly  loves?  1  cannot  but  esteem 
her  for  the  part  she  takes. — And  this  it  is  that 
makes  me  afraid  of  the  artlessly-artful  Miss  Orme. 


32  THE    HISTORY   OF 

It  would  look  as  if  I  thought  my  duty,  and  love? 
and  respects,  were  questionable,  if  in  every  letter 
I  repeated  them  to  my  equally  honoured  and  be- 
loved benefactors,  friends,  and  favourers.  Sup- 
pose them  therefore  always  included  in  my  sub- 
scription to  you,  my  Lucy,  when  I  tell  you  that  I 
am,  and  will  be, 

Your  ever-affectionate 

HARRIET  BYRON. 


LETTER  VII. 

MR.  SELBY    TO    MISS    BYRON. 

Selby-house,  Jan.  30. 
Well  !  and  now  there  wants  but  a  London  lover 
or  two  to  enter  upon  the  stage,  and  Vanity-Fair 
will  be  proclaimed,  and  directly  opened.  Greville 
every  where  magnifying  you  in  order  to  justify 
his  flame  for  you :  Fenwick  exalting  you  above 
all  women :  Orme  adoring  you,  and  by  his  hum- 
ble silence  saying  more  than  any  of  them :  pro- 
posals besides  from  this  man :  letters  from  that ! 
What  scenes  of  flattery  and  nonsense  have  I  been 
witness  to  for  these  past  three  years  and  half,  that 
young  Mr.  Elford  began  the  dance  ?  Single !  Well 
may  you  have  remained  single  till  this  your  twen- 
tieth year,  when  you  have  such  ehoice  of  admirers, 
that  you  don't  know  which  to  have.  So  in  a  mer- 
cer's shop,  the  tradesman  has  a  fine  time  with  you 
women ;  when  variety  of  his  rich  wares  distract 
you ;  and  fifty  to  one  at  last,  but  as  well  in  men  as 
silks,  you  choose  the  worst,  especially  if  the  best  is 
offered  at  first,  and  refused.  For  women  know 
belter  how  to  be  sorry,  than  to  amend. 

"  It  is  true,  say  you,  that  we  young  women  are 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  33 

apt  to  be  pleased  with  admiration" — Oil  oh !  Are 
you  so  ?  And  so  I  have  gained  one  point  with  you 
at  last ;  have  I  ? 

"  But  I  have  always  endeavoured"  [And  I,  Har- 
riet, wish  you  had  succeeded  in  your  endeavours] 
"  to  keep  down  any  foolish  pride" — Then  you  own 
that  pride  you  have  ? — Another  point  gained !  Con- 
science, honest  conscience,  ivill  now-and-then  make 
you  women  speak  out.  But  now  I  think  of  it,  here 
is  vanity  in  the  very  humility.  Well  say  you  endea- 
voured, when  female  pride,  like  love,  though  hid 
under  a  barrel,  will  flame  out  at  the  bung. 

Well,  said  I,  to  your  aunt  Selby,  to  your  grand- 
mamma, and  to  your  cousin  Lucy,  when  we  all  met 
to  sit  in  judgment  upon  your  letters,  now  I  hope 
you'll  never  dispute  with  me  more  on  this  flagrant 
love  of  admiration  which  I  have  so  often  observed 
swallows  up  the  hearts  and  souls  of  you  all ;  since 
your  Harriet  is  not  exempt  from  it ;  and  since  with 
all  your  speciousness,  with  all  her  prudence,  with 
all  her  caution,  she  (taken  with  the  qualm  of  con- 
science) owns  it. 

But,  no,  truly  !  All  is  right  that  you  say :  all  is 
right  that  you  do! — Your  very  confessions  are 
brought  as  so  many  demonstrations  of  your  diffi- 
dence, of  your  ingenuousness,  and  I  cannot  tell  what. 

Why,  1  must  own,  that  no  father  ever  loved  his 
daughter  as  I  love  my  niece :  but  yet,  girl,  your 
faults,  your  vanities,  I  do  not  love.  It  is  my  glory, 
that  1  think  myself  able  to  judge  of  my  friends  as 
they  deserve  ;  not  as  being  my  friends.  Why,  the 
best  beloved  of  my  heart,  your  aunt  herself— you 
know,  I  value  her  now  more,  now  less,  as  she  de- 
serves. But  with  all  those  I  have  named,  and  with 
all  your  relations,  indeed,  their  Harriet  cannot  be  in 
fault.  And  why  ?  Because  you  are  related  to  them  ; 
and  because  they  attribute  to  themselves  some  merit 


34'  THE    HISTORY    OF 

from  the  relation  they  stand  in  to  you.  Super eroga- 
torians  all  of  them  ( /  will  make  words  whenever  I 
please)  with  their  attributions  to  you ;  and  because 
you  are  of  their  sex,  forsooth ;  and  because  I  accuse 
you  in  a  point  in  which  you  are  all  concerned,  and 
so  make  a  common  cause  of  it. 

Here  one  exalts  you  for  your  good  sense;  because 
you  have  a  knack,  by  help  of  a  happy  memory,  of 
making  every  thing  you  read,  and  every  thing  that 
is  told  you,  that  you  like,  your  own  (your  grand- 
father's precepts  paiticularly)  ;  and  because,  I 
think,  you  pass  upon  us  as  your  own  what  you 
have  borrowed,  if  not  stolen. 

Another  praises  you  for  your  good-nature — The 
deuce  is  in  it,  if  a  girl  who  has  crowds  of  admirers 
after  her,  and  a  new  lover  wherever  she  shows  her 
bewitching  face ;  who  is  blest  with  health  and  spi- 
rits ;  and  has  every-body  for  her  friend,  let  her  de- 
serve it  or  not ;  can  be  z//-natured.  Who  can  such 
a  one  have  to  quarrel  with,  trow  ? 

Another  extols  you  for  your  cheerful  wit,  even 
when  displayed,  bold  girl  as  you  are,  upon  your 
uncle ;  in  which  indeed  you  are  upheld  by  the  wife 
of  my  bosom,  whenever  I  take  upon  me  to  tell  you 
what  ye  all,  even  the  best  of  ye,  are. 

Yet  sometimes  they  praise  your  modesty:  and 
why  your  modesty  ? — Because  you  have  a  skin  in  a 
manner  transparent ;  and  because  you  can  blush — 
I  was  going  to  say,  whenever  you  please. 

At  other  times,  they  will  find  out,  that  you  have 
features  equally  delicate  and  regular ;  when  I  think, 
and  I  have  examined  them  jointly  and  separately, 
that  all  your  taliivgness  is  owing  to  that  open  and 
cheerful  countenance,  which  gives  them  a  gloss  (or 
what  shall  I  call  it?)  that  we  men  are  apt  to  be  pleas- 
ed with  at  first  sight.  A  gloss  that  takes  one,  as  it 
were,  by  surprize.     But  give  me  the  beauty  that 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  35 

grows  upon  us  every  time  we  see  it ;  that  leaves 
room  for  something  to  be  found  out  to  its  advan- 
tage, as  we  are  more  and  more  acquainted  with  it. 

"  Your  correcting  uncle,"  you  call  me.  And 
so  I  will  be.  But  what  hope  have  I  of  your  amend- 
ment, when  every  living  soul,  man,  woman,  and 
child,  that  knows  you,  puffs  you  up  ?  There  goes 
Mr.  Selby  !  I  have  heard  strangers  say — And  who 
is  Mr.  Selby  ?  another  stranger  has  asked — Why, 
Mr.  Selby  is  uncle  to  the  celebrated  Miss  Byron. — 
Yet  I,  who  have  lived  fifty  years  in  tin's  country, 
should  think  I  might  be  known  on  my  oivn  account, 
and  not  as  the  uncle  of  a  girl  of  twenty. 

"  Am  I  not  a  saucy  creature  ?"  in  another  place 
you  ask.  And  you  answer,  "  I  know  I  am."  I  am 
glad  you  do.  Now  may  I  call  you  so  by  j'our  own 
authority,  I  hope.  But  with  your  aunt,  it  is  only 
the  effect  of  your  agreeable  vivacity.  What  abomi- 
nable partiality  !  E'en  do  what  you  will,  Harriet, 
you'll  never  be  in  fault.  I  could  almost  wish — But 
I  won't  tell  you  what  I  wish  neither.  But  some- 
thing must  betide  you,  that  you  little  think  of;  de- 
pend upon  that.  AH  your  days  cannot  be  halcyon 
ones.  I  would  give  a  thousand  pounds  with  all  my 
soul,  to  see  you  heartily  love  :  ay,  up  to  the  very 
ears,  and  unable  to  help  yourself!  You  are  not 
thirty  yet,  child :  and,  indeed,  you  seem  to  think 
the  time  of  danger  is  not  over.  I  am  glad  of  your 
consciousness,  my  dear.  Shall  I  tell  Greville  of  your 
doubts,  and  of  your  difficulties,  Harriet?  As  to  the 
ten  coming  years,  I  mean?  And  shall  I  tell  him  of 
your  prayer  to  pass  them  safely? — But  is  not  this 
wish  of  yours,  that  ten  years  of  bloom  were  over- 
past, and  that  you  were  arrived  at  the  thirtieth  year 
nf  your  age,  a  very  singular  one? — A  flight!  a 
mere  Might!  Ask  ninety-nine  of  your  sex  out  of  an 
hundred,  if  they  would  adopt  it. 


36  THE    HISTORY   OF 

In  another  letter  you  ask  Lucy,  "  If  Mr.  Greville 
has  not  said,  that  flattery  is  dearer  to  a  woman  than 
her  food."  Well  niece,  and  what  would  you  be  at  ? 
Is  it  not  so? — I  do  aver,  that  Mr.  Greville  is  a  sen- 
sible man;  and  makes  good  observations. 

"  Men's  chief  strength,  you  say,  lies  in  the  weak- 
ness of  women."  Why  so  it  does.  Where  else 
should  it  lie  ?  And  this  from  their  immeasurable 
love  of  admiration  and  flattery,  as  here  you  seem 
to  acknowledge  of  your  own  accord,  though  it  has 
been  so  often  perversely  disputed  with  me.  Give 
you  women  but  rope  enough,  you'll  do  your  own 
business. 

However,  in  many  places  you  have  pleased  me: 
but  no-where  more  than  when  you  recollect  my 
averment  (without  contradicting  it ;  which  is  a 
rarity  !)  "  that  a  woman  out  of  wedlock  is  half  use- 
less to  the  end  of  her  being."  Good  girl  !  That 
was  an  assertion  of  mine,  and  I  will  abide  by  it. 
Lucy  simpered  when  we  came  to  this  place,  and 
looked  at  me.  She  expected,  I  saw,  my  notice  upon 
it;  so  did  your  aunt:  but  the  confession  was  so 
frank,  that  I  was  generous ;  and  only  said,  True  as 
the  gospel. 

I  have  written  a  long  letter  :  yet  have  not  said 
one  quarter  of  what  I  intended  to  say  when  I  began. 
You  will  allow  that  you  have  given  your  correct- 
ing uncle,  ample  subject.  But  you  fare  something 
the  better  for  saying,  "  you  unbespeak  not  your 
monitor." 

You  own  that  you  have  some  vanity.  Be  more 
free  in  your  acknowledgments  of  this  nature  (you 
may;  for  are  you  not  a  woman?)  and  you'll  fare 
something  the  better  for  your  ingenuousness  ;  and 
the  rather,  as  your  acknowledgment  will  help  me 
up  with  your  aunt  and  Lucy,  and  your  grandmamma, 
in  an  argument  I  will  not  give  up. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  37 

I  have  had  fresh  applications  made  to  me — But 
1  will  not  say  from  whom :  since  we  have  agreed 
long  ago  not  to  prescribe  to  so  discreet  a  girl,  as 
in  the  main  we  all  think  you,  in  the  articles  of  love 
and  marriage. 

With  ah  your  faults  I  must  love  you.  I  am  half 
ashamed  to  say  how  much  I  miss  you  already.  We 
are  all  naturally  cheerful  folks :  yet,  I  don't  know 
how  it  is;  your  absence  has  made  a  strange  chasm  at 
our  table.  Let  us  hear  from  you  every  post :  that 
will  be  something.  Your  doting  aunt  tells  the  hours 
on  the  day  she  expects  a  letter.  Your  grandmother 
is  at  present  with  us,  and  in  heart  I  am  sure  regrets 
your  absence :  but  as  your  tenderness  to  her  has 
kept  you  from  going  to  London  for  so  many  years, 
she  thinks  she  ought  to  be  easy.  Her  example  goes 
a  great  way  with  us  all,  you  know  ;  and  particularly 
with 

Your  truly  affectionate 
(though  correcting)  uncle, 

GEO.  SELBY. 


LETTER   VIII. 
MISS    BYRON    TO    MISS    SELBY. 

Tuesday,  January  31. 
I  am  already,  my  dear  Lucy,  quite  contrary  to  my 
own  expectation,  enabled  to  obey  the  third  gene- 
ral injunction  laid  upon  me  at  parting,  by  you,  and 
all  my  dear  friends;  since  a  gentleman,  not  incon- 
siderable in  his  family  or  fortune,  has  already  beheld 
your  Harriet  with  partiality. 

Not  to  heighten  your  impatience  by  unnecessary 
parade,  his  name  is  Folder.  He  is  a  young  gentle- 
man of  an  handsome  independent  fortune,  and  still 
larger  expectations  from  a  Welch  uncle  now  in  town, 
Sir  Rowland  Meredith,  knighted  in  his  sheriffalty, 

VOL.   IX.  ,      *     f*     f.   ry 

4  4010 


38  THE    HISTORY   OF 

on  occasion  of  an  address  which  he  brought  tip  to 
the  king  from  his  county. 

Sir  Rowland,  it  seems,  requires  from  his  nephetr, 
on  pain  of  forfeiting  his  favour  for  ever,  that  he  mar- 
ries not  without  his  approbation:  which,  he  de- 
clares, he  never  will  give,  except  the  woman  be  of  a 
good  family ;  has  a  gentlewoman's  fortune ;  has  had 
the  benefit  of  a  religious  education  ;  which  he  con- 
siders as  the  best  security  that  can  be  given  for  her 
good  behaviour  as  a  wife,  and  as  a  mother ;  so  for- 
ward does  the  good  knight  look !  Her"  character 
unsullied :  acquainted  with  the  theory  of  the  do- 
mestic duties,  and  not  ashamed,  occasionally,  to  en- 
ter into  the  direction  of  the  practice.  Her  fortune, 
however,  as  his  nephew  will  have  a  good  one,  he  de- 
clares to  be  the  least  thing  he  stands  upon ;  only 
that  he  would  have  her  possessed  of  from  six  to  ten 
thousand  pounds,  that  it  may  not  appear  to  be  a 
match  of  mere  love,  and  as  if  his  nephew  were 
taken  in,  as  he  calls  it,  rather  by  the  eyes  than  by 
the  understanding.  Where  a  woman  can  have  such 
a  fortune  given  her  by  her  family,  though  no  greater, 
it  will  be  an  earnest,  he  says,  that  the  family  she  is 
of  have  worth,  as  he  calls  it,  and  want  not  to  owe 
obligations  to  that  of  the  man  she  marries. 

Something  particular,  something  that  has  the 
look  of  forecast  and  prudence,  you'll  say,  in  the  old 
knight. 

O  but  I  had  like  to  have  forgot;  his  future  niece 
must  also  be  handsome.  He  values  himself,  it 
seems,  upon  the  breed  of  his  horses  and  dogs,  and 
makes  polite  comparisons  between  the  more  noble, 
and  the  less  noble  animals. 

Sir  Rowland  himself,  as  you  will  guess  by  his  par- 
ticularity, is  an  old  batchelor,  and  one  who  wants 
to  have  a  woman  made  on  purpose  for  his  nephew  : 
and  who  positively  insists  upon  qualities,  before  In- 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  39 

knows  her,  not  one  of  which,  perhaps,  his  future 
niece  will  have. 

Don't  you  remember  Mr.  Tolson,  of  Derbyshire? 
he  was  determined  never  to  marry  a  widow.  If  he 
did,  it  should  be  one  who  had  a  vast  fortune,  and 
who  never  had  a  child.  And  he  had  still  a  more 
particular  exception  ;  and  that  was  to  a  woman  who 
had  red  hair.  He  held  his  exceptions  till  he  was 
forty ;  and  then  being  looked  upon  as  a  determined 
batchelor,  no  family  thought  it  worth  their  while  to 
make  proposals  to  him ;  no  woman  to  throw  out  a 
net  for  him  (to  express  myself  in  the  stile  of  the 
gay  Mr.  Greville) ;  and  he  at  last  fell  in  with,  and 
married,  the  laughing  Mrs  Turner :  a  widow,  who 
had  little  or  no  fortune,  had  one  child,  a  daughter, 
living,  and  that  child  an  absolute  ideot ;  and,  to 
complete  the  perverseness  of  his  fate,  her  hair  not 
only  red,  but  the  most  disagreeable  of  reds.  The 
honest  man  was  grown  splenetic :  disregarded  by 
every  body,  he  was  become  disregardful  of  himself: 
he  hoped  for  a  cure  of  his  gloominess,  from  her 
cheerful  vein  ;  and  seemed  to  think  himself  under 
obligation  to  one  who  had  taken  notice  of  him, 
when  nobody  else  would.  Batchelors'  wives !  Maids' 
children  !    These  old  saws  always  mean  something. 

Mr.  Fowler  saw  me  at  my  cousin  Reeves's  the 
first  time.  I  cannot  say  he  is  disagreeable  in  his 
person :  but  he  seems  to  want  the  mind  I  would  have 
a  man  blessed  with,  to  whom  J  am  to  vow  love  and 
honour.  I  purpose,  whenever  I  marry,  to  make  a  very 
good  and  even  a  dutiful  wife  [must  I  not  vow  obe- 
dience? and  shall  I  break  my  marriage-vow?] :  I 
would  not,  therefore,  on  any  consideration,  marry  a 
man,  whose  want  of  knowledge  might  make  me 
stagger  in  the  performance  of  my  duty  to  him;  and 
who  would  perhaps  command  from  caprice,  or  want 
cf  understanding,  what  I  should  think  unreasonable 
e2 


40  THE    HISTORY    OF 

to  be  complied  with.  There  is  a  pleasure  and  a 
credit  in  yielding  up  even  one's  judgment  in  things 
indifferent,  to  a  man  who  is  older  and  wiser  than 
one's  self:  but  we  are  apt  to  doubt  in  one  of  a  con- 
trary character,  what  in  the  other  we  should  have 
no  doubt  about :  and  doubt,  you  know,  of  a  per- 
son's merit,  is  the  first  step  to  disrespect  :  and 
what,  but  disobedience,  which  lets  in  every  evil,  is 
the  next  ? 

I  saw  instantly  that  Mr.  Fowler  beheld  me  with  a 
distinguished  regard.  We  women,  you  know  [let 
me  for  once  be  aforehand  with  my  uncle]  are  very 
quick  in  making  discoveries  of  this  nature.  But 
every -body  at  table  saw  it.  He  came  again  next 
day.  and  besought  Mr- Reeves  to  give  him  his  inte- 
rest with  me.  without  asking  any  questions  about  my 
fortune:  though  he  was  even  generously  particular 
as  to  his  own.  He  might,  since  he  has  an  unexcep- 
tionable one.  Who  is  it  in  these  cases  that  forgets 
to  set  foremost  the  advantages  by  which  he  is  dis- 
tinguished ?  While  fortune  is  the  last  thing  talked 
of  by  him  who  has  little  or  none :  and  then  Love, 
love,  love%  is  all  his  crv. 

Mr.  Reeves,  who  has  a  good  opinion  of  Mr. 
Fowler,  in  answer  to  his  enquiries,  told  him,  that  he 
believed  I  was  disengaged  in  my  affections :  Mr. 
Fowler  rejoiced  at  that.  That  I  had  no  ques- 
tions to  ask  :  but  those  of  duty  :  which  indeed,  he 
said,  was  a  stronger  tie  with  me  than  interest.  He 
praised  my  temper,  and  my  frankness  of  heart :  the 
latter  at  the  expence  of  mv  sex  :  for  which  I  least 
thanked  him.  when  he  told  me  what  he  had  said. 
In  short,  he  acquainted  him  with  every  thing  that 
was  necessary,  and  more  than  was  necessary  for 
him  to  know,  of  the  favour  of  my  family,  and  of 
my  good  Mr.  Deane,  in  referring  all  proposals  of 
this  kind  to  myself;  mingling  the  detail  with  com- 
mendations, which  only  could  be  excused  by  the 


SIR    CHARLIS    CRANDISOK.  41 

goodness  of  his  own  heart,  and  accounted  for  bv  Ids 
partiality  to  his  cousin. 

Mr.  Fowler  expressed  great  apprehensions  on  mv 
cousin's  talking  of  these  references  of  mv  grand- 
mother, aunt,  and  Mr.  Deane.  to  myself,  on  occa- 
sions of  this  nature ;  which,  he  said,  he  presumed 
had  been  too  frequent  for  his  hopes. 

If  you  have  any  hope,  Mr.  Fowler,  said  Mr. 
Reeves,  it  must  be  in  your  good  character ;  and  that 
much  preferably  to  your  clear  estate  and  great  ex- 
pectations. Although  she  takes  no  pride  in  the 
number  of  her  admirers,  yet  it  is  natural  to  suppose, 
that  it  has  made  her  more  difficult :  and  her  diffi- 
culties are  enhanced,  in  proportion  to  the  generous 
confidence  which  all  her  friends  have  in  her  discre- 
tion. And  when  I  told  him.  proceeded  Mr  Reeves, 
that  your  fortune  exceeded  greatly  what  Sir  Row- 
land required  in  a  wife  for  him  ;  and  that  you  had, 
as  well  from  inclination,  as  education,  a  serious  turn : 
Too  much,  too  much,  in  one  person,  cried  he  out. 
As  to  fortune,  he  wished  you  had  not  a  shilling;  and 
if  he  could  obtain  your  favour,  he  should  be  the 
happiest  man  in  the  world. 

O  my  good  Mr.  Reeves,  said  I,  how  have  you 
over-rated  my  merits !  Surely,  you  have  not  eiven 
Mr.  Fowler  your  interest  ?  If  you  haie,  should  you 
not.  for  his  sake,  have  known  something  of  my  mind 
before  you  had  eet  me  out  thus,  had  I  even  deserved 
your  high  opinion? — Mr.  Fowler  might  have  reason 
to  repent  the  double  well-meant  kindru  >s  of  his 
friend,  if  men  in  these  days  were  used  to  break 
their  hearts  for  love. 

I:  is  the  language  I  do  and  must  talk  of  you  in, 

to  every  body,  returned  Mr.  Reeves :  is  it  not  the 

_'-  "hat  those  most  taik  who  know  you  best? 

Where  the  world  is  inclined  to  favour,  replied  I, 
it  i>  apt  to  ■  ■  -rati  .  as  much  as  it  will  :.'  .ifr-rate 
where  ■  '  disfavours.     In  this  case,  you  should  not 


42  THE   HISTORY   Of 

have  proceeded  so  far  as  to  engage  a  gentleman's 
hopes.  What  may  be  the  end  of  all  this,  but  to 
make  a  compassionate  nature,  as  mine  has  been 
thought  to  be,  if  Mr.  Fowler  should  be  greatly 
in  earnest,  uneasy  to  itself,  in  being  obliged  to 
shew  pity,  where  she  cannot  return  love  ? 

What  I  have  said,  I  have  said,  replied  Mr. 
Reeves.  Pity  is  but  one  remove  from  love.  Mrs. 
Reeves  (there  she  sits)  was  first  brought  to  pity  me  ; 
for  never  was  man  more  madly  in  love  than  I ;  and 
then  I  thought  myself  sure  of  her.  And  so  it 
proved.  I  can  tell  you  I  am  no  enemy  to  Mr. 
Fowler. 

And  so,  my  dear,  Mr.  Fowler  seems  to  think  he 
has  met  with  a  woman  who  would  make  a  fit  wife  for 
him  :  but  your  Harriet,  I  doubt,  has  not  in  Mr. 
Fowler  met  with  a  man  whom  she  can  -think  a  fit 
husband  for  her. 

The  very  next  morning,  Sir  Rowland  himself — 

But  now,  my  Lucy,  if  I  proceed  to  tell  you  all 
the  fine  things  that  are  said  of  me,  and  to  me,  what 
will  my  uncle  Selby  say  ?  Will  he  not  attribute  all 
I  shall  repeat  of  this  sort,  to  that  pride,  to  that  va- 
nity, to  that  fondness  of  admiration,  which  he,  as 
well  as  Mr.  Greville,  is  continually  charging  upon 
all  our  sex  ? 

Yet  he  expects  that  I  shall  give  a  minute  account 
of  every  thing  that  passes,  and  of  every  conversa- 
tion in  which  I  have  any  part.  Flow  shall  I  do  to 
please  him  ?  And  yet  I  know  I  shall  best  please 
him,  if  I  give  him  room  to  find  fault  with  me.  But 
then  should  he  for  my  faults  blame  the  whole  sex  ? 
Is  that  just  ? 

You  will  tell  me,  I  know,  that  if  I  give  speeches 
and  conversations,  I  ought  to  give  them  justly: 
that  the  humours  and  characters  of  persons  cannot 
be  known  unless  I  repeat  xvhat  they  say,  and  their 
manner  of  saying :    that  I  must  leave  it  to  the 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  43 

speakers  and  complimenters  to  answer  for  the  like- 
ness of  the  pictures  they  draw  :  that  I  know  best 
my  own  heart,  and  whether  I  am  puffed  up  by  the 
praises  given  me :  that  if  I  am,  I  shall  discover  it 
by  my  superciliousness;  and  be  enough  punished  on 
the  discovery,  by  incurring,  from  those  I  love,  de- 
served blame,  if  not  contempt,  instead  of  preserving 
their  wished-for  esteem. — Let  me  add  to  all  this, 
that  there  is  an  author  (I  forget  who)  who  says,  "  It 
is  lawful  to  repeat  those  things,  though  spoken  in  our 
praise,  that  are  necessary  to  be  known,  and  cannot 
otherwise  be  come  at." 

And  now  let  me  ask,  Will  this  preamble  do,  once 
for  all  ? 

It  will.  And  so  says  my  aunt  Selby.  And  so  says 
every  one  but  my  uncle.  Well  then  I  will  proceed, 
and  repeat  all  that  shall  be  said,  and  that  as  well  to 
my  disadvantage  as  advantage;  only  resolving  not  to 
be  exalted  with  the  one,  and  to  do  my  endeavour  to 
amend  by  the  other.  And  here,  pray  tell  my  uncle, 
that  I  do  not  desire  he  will  spare  me ;  since  the 
faults  he  shall  find  in  his  Harriet  shall  always  put  her 
upon  her  guard. — Not,  however,  to  conceal  them 
from  his  discerning  eye ;  but  to  amend  them. 

And  now,  having,  as  I  said,  once  for  all,  prepared 
you  to  guard  against  a  surfeit  of  self-praise,  though 
delivered  at  second  or  third  hand,  I  will  go  on  with 
my  narrative —But  hold — my  paper  reminds  me  that 
I  have  written  a  monstrous  letter — I  will  therefore, 
with  a  new  sheet,  begin  a  new  one.  Only  adding 
to  this,  that  I  am,  and  ever  will  be, 

Your  affectionate 

HARRIET  BYRON. 

P.S.  Well,  but  what  shall  I  do  now? — I  have  just 
received  my  uncle's  letter.  And,  after  his  charge 
upon  me  of  vanity  and  pride,  will  my  parade,  as 
above,  stand  me  in  any  stead  ? — I  must  trust  to 


44  THE    HISTORY   OF 

it.  Only  one  word  to  my  dear  and  ever-ho- 
noured uncle — Don't  you,  Sir,  impute  to  me  a 
belief  of  the  truth  of  those  extravagant  compli- 
ments made  by  men  professing  love  to  me ;  and 
I  will  not  wish  you  to  think  me  one  bit  the  wiser, 
the  handsomer,  the  better,  for  them,  than  I  was 
before. 


LETTER  IX. 

MISS  BYRON.     IN  CONTINUATION. 

Thursday,  February  2. 

The  very  next  morning  Sir  Rowland  himself  paid 
his  respects  to  Mr.  Reeves. 

The  knight,  before  he  would  open  himself  very 
freely  as  to  the  business  he  came  upon,  desired  that 
lie  might  have  an  opportunity  to  see  me.  I  knew 
nothing  of  him,  nor  of  his  business.  We  were  just 
going  to  breakfast.  Miss  Allestree,  Miss  Bramber, 
and  MissDolyns,  ayoung  lady  of  merit,  were  with  us. 

Just  as  we  had  taken  our  seats,  Mr.  Reeves  intro- 
duced Sir  Rowland,  but  let  him  not  know  which  was 
Miss  Byron.  He  did  nothing  at  first  sitting  down, 
but  peer  in  our  faces  by  turns ;  and  fixing  his  eye 
upon  Miss  Allestree,  he  jogged  Mr.  Reeves  with  his 
elbow — Hay,  Sir  ? — audibly  whispered  he, 

Mr.  Reeves  was  silent.  Sir  Rowland,  who  is 
short-sighted,  then  looked  under  his  bent  brows,  at 
Miss  Bramber  ;  then  at  Miss  Uolyns ;  and  then  at 
me — Hay,  Sir?  whispered  he  again. 

He  sat  out  the  first  dish  of  tea  with  an  impatience 
equal,  as  it  seemed,  to  his  uncertainty.  And  at  last 
taking  Mr.  Reeves  by  one  of  his  buttons,  desired  a 
word  with  him.  They  withdrew  together ;  and  the 
knight,  not  quitting  hold  of  Mr.  Reeves's  button, 
Ad's-my-life,  Sir,  said  he,  I  hope  I  am  right.  I  love 
my  nephew  as  I  love  myself.  I  live  but  lor  him.  He 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  45 

ever  was  dutiful  to  me  his  uncle.  If  that  be  Miss 
Byron  who  sits  on  the  right-hand  of  your  lady,  with 
the  countenance  of  an  angel,  her  eyes  sparkling 
with  good  humour,  and  blooming  as  a  May-morning, 
the  business  is  done.  I  give  my  consent.  Although  I 
heard  not  a  word  pass  from  her  lips,  I  am  sure  she  is 
all  intelligence.  5ly  boy  shall  have  her.  The  other 
young  ladies  are  agreeable  :  but  if  this  be  the  lady 
my  kinsman  is  in  love  with,  he  shall  have  her.  How 
will  she  outshine  all  our  Caermarthen  ladies ;  and 
yet  we  have  charming  girls  in  Caermarthen  ! — Am 
I,  or  am  I  not  right,  Mr.  Reeves,  as  to  my  ne- 
phew's^ame,  as  they  call  it  ? 

The  lady  you  describe,  Sir  Rowland,  is  Miss 
Byron. 

And  then  Mr.  Reeves,  in  his  usual  partial  man- 
ner, let  his  heart  overflow  at  his  lips  in  my  favour. 

Thank  God,  thank  God  !  said  the  knight.  Let 
us  return.  Let  us  go  in  again.  I  will  say  some- 
thing to  her  to  make  her  speak  :  but  not  a  word  to 
dash  her.  I  expect  her  voice  to  be  music,  if  it  be 
as  harmonious  as  the  rest  of  her.  By  the  softness 
or  harshness  of  her  voice,  let  me  tell  you,  Mr. 
Reeves,  I  form  a  judgment  of  the  heart,  and  soul, 
and  manners,  of  a  lady.  'Tis  a  criterion,  as  they 
call  it,  of  my  own  ;  and  I  am  hardly  ever  mistaken. 
Let  us  go  in  again,  I  pray  ye. 

They  returned,  and  took  their  seats ;  the  knight 
making  an  awkward  apology  for  taking  my  cousin 
out. 

Sir  Rowland,  his  forehead  smoothed,  and  his  face 
shining,  sat  swelling,  as  big  with  meaning,  yet  not 
knowing  how  to  begin.  Mrs.  Reeves  and  Miss  Al- 
lestree  were  talking  at  the  re-entrance  of  the  gen- 
tlemen. Sir  Rowland  thought  he  must  say  some- 
thing, however  distant  from  his  main  purpose. 
Breaking  silence  therefore;    You,  ladies,  seemed 


46  THE    HISTORY    OF 

to  be  deep  in  discourse  when  we  came  in.     What- 
ever were  your  subject,  I  beg  you  will  resume  it. 

They  had  finished,  they  assured  him,  what  they 
had  to  say. 

Sir  Rowland  seemed  still  at  a  loss.  He  hemmed 
three  times ;  and  looked  at  me  with  particular  kind- 
ness. Mr.  Reeves  then,  in  pity  to  his  fulness,  asked 
him  how  long  he  proposed  to  stay  in  town  ? 

He  had  thought,  he  said,  to  have  set  out  in  a 
week  ;  but  something  had  happened,  which  he  be- 
lieved could  not  be  completed  under  a.  fortnight. 
Yet  I  want  to  be  down,  said  he ;  for  I  had  just 
finished,  as  I  came  up,  the  new-built  house  I  design 
to  present  to  my  nephew  when  he  marries.  I  pre- 
tend, plain  man  as  I  am,  to  be  a  judge,  both  of  taste 
and  elegance  [Sir  Rowland  was  now  set  a  going] . 
All  I  wish  for  is  to  see  him  happily  settled.  Ah, 
ladies !  that  I  need  not  go  further  than  this  table 
for  a  wife  for  my  boy  ? 

We  all  smiled,  and  looked  upon  each  other. 

You  young  ladies,  proceeded  he,  have  great  ad- 
vantages in  certain  cases  over  us  men ;  and  this 
(which  I  little  thought  of  till  it  came  to  be  my  own 
case)  whether  we  speak  for  our  kindred  or  for  our- 
selves. But  will  you,  madam,  to  Mrs.  Reeves,  will 
you,  sir,  to  Mr.  Reeves,  answer  my  questions — as 
to  these  ladies  ? — I  must  have  a  niece  among  them. 
My  nephew,  though  I  say  it,  is  one  whom  any  lady 
may  love  :  and  as  for  fortune,  let  me  alone  to  make 
him,  in  addition  to  his  own,  all  clear  as  the  sun, 
worthy  of  any  woman's  acceptance,  though  she  were 
a  duchess. 

We  were  all  silent,  and  smiled  upon  one  another. 

What  I  would  ask  then,  is,  Which  of  the  ladies 
before  me — Mercy !  I  believe  by  their  smiling,  and 
by  their  pretty  looks,  they  are  none  of  them  en- 
gaged.    I  will  begin  with  the  young  lady  on  your 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON".  47 

fight  hand.  She  looks  so  lovely,  so  good-natured, 
and  so  condescending ! — Mercy  !  what  an  open  fore- 
head ! — Hem  ! — Forgive  me,  madam  ;  but  I  believe 
you  would  not  disdain  to  answer  my  question  your- 
self. Are  you,  madam,  are  you  absolutely  and  bond 
Jide,  disengaged  ?  or  are  you  not  ? 

As  this,  Sir  Rowland,  answered  I,  is  a  question  I 
can  best  resolve,  I  frankly  own,  that  I  am  disengaged. 

Charming !  charming ! — Mercy  !  Why  now  what 
a  noble  frankness  in  that  answer  ! — No  jesting  mat- 
ter !  You  may  smile,  ladies.  I  hope,  madam,  you 
say  true  :  I  hope  I  may  rely  upon  it,  that  your  affec- 
tions are  not  engaged. 

You  may,  Sir  Rowland.  I  do  not  love,  even  in 
jest,  to  be  guilty  of  an  untruth. 

Admirable  ! — But  let  me  tell  you,  madam,  that  I 
hope  you  will  not  many  days  have  this  to  say.  Ad's- 
my  lite  !  sweet  soul !  how  I  rejoice  to  see  that  charm- 
ing flush  in  the  finest  cheek  in  the  world!  But  hea- 
ven forbid  that  I  should  dash  so  sweet  a  creature ! — 
Well,  but  now  there  is  no  going  further.  Excuse 
me,  ladies  ;  I  mean  not  a  slight  to  any  of  you  :  but 
now,  you  know,  there  is  no  going  further : — And 
will  you,  madam,  permit  me  to  introduce  to  you,  as 
a  lover,  as  an  humble  servant,  a  very  proper  and 
agreeable  young  man  ?  Let  me  introduce  him  :  he 
is  my  nephew.  Your  looks  are  all  graciousness.  Per- 
haps you  have  seen  him:  and  if  you  are  really  dis- 
engaged, you  can  have  no  objection  to  him  ;  of  that 
1  am  confident.  And  I  am  told,  that  you  have  no- 
body that  either  can  or  will  controul  you. 

The  more  controulable  for  that  verj-  reason,  Sir 
Rowland. 

Ad's-my-life,  I  like  your  answer.  Why,  madam, 
\  on  must  be  full  as  good  as  you  look  to  be.  I  wish 
1  were  a  young  man  myself  for  your  .sake !  But  tell 
me,  madam,  will  you  permit  a  visit  from  mv  nephew 

3 


48  THE    HISTORY    OF 

this  afternoon? — Come,  come,  dear  young  lady,  be 
as  gracious  as  you  look  to  be.  Fortune  must  do. 
Had  you  not  a  shilling,  I  should  rejoice  in  such  a 
niece ;  and  that  is  more  than  I  ever  said  in  my  life 
before.  My  nephew  is  a  sober  man,  a  modest  man. 
lie  has  a  good  estate  of  his  own :  a  clear  2000/.  a 
year.  I  will  add  to  it  in  my  life-time  as  much  more. 
Be  all  this  good  company  witnesses  for  me.  I  am 
no  flincher.  It  is  well  known  that  the  word  of  Sir 
Rowland  Meredith  is  as  good  as  his  bond  at  all 
times.  I  love  these  open  doings.  I  love  to  be 
above-board.  What  signifies  shilly-shally  ?  What 
says  the  old  proverb  ? 

Happy  is  the  wooing 
That  is  not  long  a  doing. 

But,  Sir  Rowland,  said  I,  there  are  proverbs  that 
may  be  set  against  your  proverb.  You  hint  that  I 
have  seen  the  gentleman:  now  I  have  never  yet 
seen  the  man  whose  addresses  I  could  encourage. 

O,  I  like  you  the  better  for  that.  None  but  the 
giddy  love  at  first  sight.  Ad's-my-life,  you  would 
have  been  snapt  up  before  now,  young  as  you  are, 
could  you  easily  have  returned  love  for  love.  Why, 
madam,  you  cannot  be  above  sixteen  ? 

O,  Sir  Rowland,  you  are  mistaken.  Cheerfulness, 
and  a  contented  mind,  make  a  difference  to  advan- 
tage of  half  a  dozen  years  at  any  time.  I  am  much 
nearer  twenty-one  than  nineteen,  I  assure  you. 

Nearer  to  twenty-one  than  nineteen,  and  yet  so 
freely  tell  your  age  without  asking ! 

Miss  Byron,  Sir  Rowland,  said  Mrs.  Reeves,  is 
young  enough  at  twenty,  surely,  to  her  own  age. 

True,  madam;  but  at  twenty,  if  not  before,  time 
always  stands  still  with  women.  A  lady's  age  once 
known,  will  be  always  remembered ;  and  that  more 
for  spite  than  love.    At  twenty-eight  or  thirty,  I  be- 


SIR    CHARLES    GRAXDISOX.  49 

lieve  most  ladies  are  willing  to  strike  off  half  a  dozen 
years  at  least. — And  yet,  and  yet,  (smiling,  and 
looking  arch)  I  have  always  said  (pardon  me,  la- 
dies) that  it  is  a  sign,  when  women  are  so  desirous 
to  conceal  their  age,  that  they  think  they  shall  be 
good  tor  nothing  when  in  years.  Ah.  ladies  !  shak- 
ing his  head,  and  laughing,  Avomen  don't  think  of 
that.  But  how  I  admire  you,  madam,  for  your  frank- 
ness !  Would  to  the  Lord  you  were  twenty-four ! — 
I  would  have  no  woman  marry  under  twenty-four  : 
and  that,  let  me  tell  you,  ladies,  for  the  following 
reasons — standing  up,  and  putting  the  fore-finger 
of  his  right-hand,  extended  with  a  flourish,  upon 
the  thumb  of  his  left. 

O,  Sir  Rowland !  I  doubt  not  but  you  can  give 
very  good  reasons.  And  I  assure  you,  I  intend  not 
to  marry  on  the  wrong  side,  as  I  call  it,  of  twenty- 
four. 

Admirable,  by  mercy  !  but  that  won't  do  neither. 
The  man  lives  not,  young  lady,  who  will  stay  your 
time,  if  he  can  have  you  at  his.  I  love  your  noble 
frankness.  Then  such  sweetness  of  countenance 
(sitting  down,  and  audibly  whispering,  and  jogging 
my  cousin  with  his  elbow  I  such  dove-like  eyes,  dar- 
ing to  tell  all  that  is  in  the  honest  heart! — I  am  a 
phvsiognomist.  madam  (raising  his  voice  to  me.) 
Ad's-my-life,  you  are  a  perfect  paragon  !  Say  you 
will  encourage  my  boy.  or  you  will  be  worse  off;  for 
(standing  up  again)  I  will  come  and  court  you  my- 
self A  good  estate  gives  a  man  confidence;  and. 
when  I  set  about  it — Hum! — (one  hand  stuck  in 
his  side  ;  flourishing  with  the  other)  no  woman  yet, 
I  do  assure  you,— ever  won  my  heart  as  you  have 
done. 

O  Sir  Rowland,  I  thought  vou  were  too  wise  to 
be  swayed  bv  first  impressions  :  none  but  the  giddy, 
you  know,  love  at  first  sight, 
c 


50  THE    HISTORY   OP 

Admirable  !  admirable  indeed !  I  knew  you  had 
wit  at  will ;  and  I  am  sure  you  have  wisdom.  Know 
you,  ladies,  that  tvit  and  wisdom  are  two  different 
things,  and  are  very  rarely  seen  together?  Plain 
man  as  I  appear  to  be  (looking  on  himself  first  on 
one  side,  then  on  the  other,  and  unbuttoning  his  coat 
two  buttons  to  let  a  gold  braid  appear  upon  his 
waistcoat)  I  can  tell  ye,  I  have  not  lived  all  this 
time  for  nothing.  I  am  considered  in  Wales — Hem ! 
— But  I  will  not  praise  myself. — Ad's-my-life !  how 
do  this  young  lady's  perfections  run  me  all  into 
tongue ! — But  I  see  you  all  respect  her  as  well  as  I ; 
so  I  need  not  make  apology  to  the  rest  of  you 
young  ladies,  for  the  distinction  paid  to  her.  I 
wish  I  had  as  many  nephews  as  there  are  ladies  of 
ye  disengaged:  by  mercy,  we  would  be  all  of  kin. 

Thank  you,  Sir  Rowland,  said  each  of  the  young 
ladies,  smiling,  and  diverted  at  his  oddity. 

But  as  to  my  observation,  continued  the  knight, 
that  none  but  the  giddy  love  at  first  sight ;  there  is 
no  general  rule  without  exception,  you  know: 
every  man  must  love  you  at  first  sight.  Do  I  not 
love  you  myself?  and  yet  never  did  I  see  you  be- 
fore, nor  any-body  like  you. 

You  know  not  what  you  do,  Sir  Rowland,  to 
raise  thus  the  vanity  of  a  poor  girl.  How  may  you 
make  conceit  and  pride  run  away  with  her,  till  she 
become  contemptible  for  both  in  the  eye  of  every 
person  whose  good  opinion  is  worth  cultivating  ? 

Ad's-my-life,  that's  prettily  said !  But  let  me 
tell  you,  that  the  she  who  can  give  this  caution  in  the 
midst  of  her  praisings,  can  be  in  no  danger  of  being 
run  away  with  by  her  vanity.  Why,  madam  !  you 
extort  praises  from  me !  I  never  ran  on  so  glibly 
in  praise  of  mortal  woman  before.  You  must  cease 
to  look,  to  smile,  to  speak,  I  can  tell  you,  if  you 
would  have  me  cease  to  praise  you ! 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISO.V.  51 

'Trs  well  you  are  not  a  young  man,  Sir  Rowland, 
said  Miss  Allestree.  You  seem  to  have  the  art  of 
engaging  a  woman's  attention.  You  seem  to  know 
how  to  turn  her  own  artillery  against  her ;  and,  as 
your  sex  generally  do,  to  exalt  her  in  courtship, 
that  you  may  have  it  in  your  power  to  abase  her 
afterwards. 

Why,  madam,  I  must  own,  that  we  men  live  to 
sixty,  before  we  know  how  to  deal  with  you  ladies, 
or  with  the  world  either ;  and  then  we  are  not  fit  to 
engage  with  the  one,  and  are  ready  to  quit  the  other. 
An  old  head  upon  a  young  pair  of  shoulders  would 
make  rare  work  among  ye.  But  to  the  main  point 
(looking  very  kindly  on  me) :  I  ask  no  questions 
about  you,  madam.  Fortune  is  not  to  be  mentioned. 
I  want  you  not  to  have  any.  Not  that  the  lady  is 
the  worse  for  having  a  fortune  :  and  a  man  may 
stand  a  chance  for  as  good  a  wife  among  those  who 
have  fortunes,  as  among  those  who  have  none.  I 
adore  you  for  your  frankness  of  heart.  Be  all  of  a 
piece  now,  I  beseech  you.  You  are  disengaged, 
you  say  :  Will  you  admit  of  a  visit  from  my  nephew  ? 
My  boy  may  be  bashful.  True  love  is  always  mo- 
dest and  diffident.  You  don't  look  as  if  you  would 
dislike  a  man  for  being  modest.  And  I  will  come 
along  with  him  myself'. 

And  then  the  old  knight  looked  important,  as  one 
who,  if  he  lent  his  head  to  his  nephew's  shoulders, 
had  no  doubt  of  succeeding. 

What,  Sir  Kowland  !  admit  of  a  visit  from  your 
nephew,  in  order  to  engage  him  in  a  three  years 
courtship  ?  I  have  told  you  that  I  intend  not  to 
marry  till  I  am  twenty-four. 

Twenty-four,  I  must  own,  is  the  age  of  marriage 
I  should  choose  for  a  lady;   and  for  the  reasons 
aforesaid. — But,  now  I  think  of  it,  I  did  not  tell 
you  my  reasons — These  be  they— 
f2 


52  THE    HISTORY    OF 

Down  went  his  cup  and  saucer ;  up  went  his  left 
hand  ready  spread,  and  his  crooked  finger  of  his 
right  hand,  as  ready  to  enumerate. 

No  doubt,  Sir  Rowland,  you  have  very  good  rea- 
sons. 

But,  madam,  you  must  hear  them — And  I  shall 
prove — 

I  am  convinced,  Sir  Rowland,  that  twenty-four 
is  an  age  early  enough. 

But  I  shall  prove,  madam,  that  you  are  twenty, 
or  twenty- one — 

Enough,  enough,  Sir  Rowland :  What  need  of 
proof  when  one  is  convinced? 

But  you  know  not,  madam,  what  I  was  driving 
at — 

Well  but,  Sir  Rowland,  said  Miss  Bramber,  will 
not  the  reasons  you  could  give  for  the  proper  age 
at  twenty-four,  make  against  yourwishes  in  this  case? 

They  will  make  against  them,  madam,  in  general 
cases  :  but  in  this  particular  case  they  will  make  for 
me  :  for  the  lady  before  me  is — 

Not  in  my  opinion,  perhaps,  Sir  Rowland,  will 
your  reasons  make  for  you :  and  then  your  excep- 
tion in  my  favour  will  signify  nothing.  And  besides, 
you  must  know,  that  I  never  can  accept  of  a  com- 
pliment that  is  made  me  at  the  expence  of  my  sex. 

Well  then,  madam,  I  hope  you  forbid  me  in  fa- 
vour to  my  plea.  You  are  loth  to  hear  any-thing 
for  twenty-four  against  twenty-one,  I  hope? 

That  is  another  point,  Sir  Rowland. 

Why,  madam,  you  seem  to  be  afraid  of  hearing 
my  reasons.  No  man  living  knows  better  than  I, 
how  to  behave  in  ladies'  company.  I  believe  1 
should  not  be  so  little  of  a  gentleman,  as  to  offend 
the  nicest  ear.  No  need  indeed  !  no  need  indeed  ! 
looking  archly ;  ladies  on  certain  subjects  are  very 
quick. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRAXDISOV.  53 

That  is  to  say,  Sir  Rowland,  interrupted  Mrs. 
Reeves,  that  modesty  is  easily  alarmed. 

If  any-thing  is  said,  or  implied,  upon  certain  sub- 
jects, that  you  would  not  be  thought  to  understand, 
ladies  know  how  to  be  ignorant. 

And  then  he  laughed. 

Undoubtedly,  Sir  Rowland,  said  I,  such  company 
as  this  need  not  be  apprehensive,  that  a  gentleman 
like  you,  should  say  any-thing  unsuitable  to  it.  But 
do  you  really  think  affected  ignorance  can  be  ever 
graceful,  or  a  proof  of  true  delicacy  ?  Let  me  ra- 
ther say,  That  a  woman  of  virtue  would  be  wanting 
to  her  character,  if  she  had  not  courage  enough  to 
express  her  resentment  of  any  discourse  that  is 
meant  as  an  insult  upon  modesty. 

Admirably  said  again  !  But  men  will  sometimes 
forget,  that  there  are  ladies  in  company. 

Very  favourably  put  for  the  men,  Sir  Rowland. 
But  pardon  me,  if  1  own,  that  I  should  have  a  mean 
opinion  of  a  man,  who  allowed  himself  to  talk  even 
to  men  what  a  woman  might  not  hear.  A  pure 
heart  whether  in  man  or  woman,  will  be  always,  in 
every  company,  on  every  occasion,  pure. 

Ad's-my-life,  you  have  excellent  notions,  madam ! 
i  wanted  to  hear  you  speak  just  now  :  and  now  you 
make  me,  and  every  one  else,  silent — Twenty-one ! 
why  what  you  say  would  shame  sixty-one.  You  must 
have  kept  excellent  company  all  your  life  ! — Mercy ! 
if  ever  I  heard  the  like  from  a  lady  so  young ! — 
What  a  glory  do  you  reflect  back  upon  all  who  had 
any  hand  in  your  education  !  Why  was  I  not  born 
within  the  past  thirty  years  ?  I  might  then  have  had 
some  hopes  of  you  myself! — And  this  brings  me  to 
my  former  subject,  of  my  nephew — But,  Mr.  Reeves, 
one  word  with  you,  Mr.  Reeves.  I  beg  your  par- 
don, ladies :  but  the  importance  of  the  matter  will 
f3 


54?  THE   HISTORY   OF 

excuse  me:  and  I  must  get  out  of  town  as  soon  as 
I  can — One  word  with  you,  Mr.  Reeves. 

The  gentlemen  withdrew  together  :  for  breakfast 
by  this  time  was  over.  And  then  the  knight  opened 
all  his  heart  to  Mr.  Reeves,  and  besought  his  inte- 
rest. He  would  afterwards  have  obtained  an  audi- 
ence, as  he  called,  of  me :  but  the  three  young  la- 
dies having  taken  leave  of  us,  and  Mrs.  Reeves  and 
I  being  retired  to  dress,  I  excused  myself. 

He  then  desired  leave  to  attend  me  to-morrow 
evening  :  but  Mr.  Reeves  pleading  engagements  till 
Monday  evening,  he  besought  him  to  indulge  him 
with  his  interest  in  that  long  gap  of  time,  as  he  called 
it,  and  for  my  being  then  in  the  way. 

And  thus,  Lucy,  have  I  given  you  an  ample  ac- 
count of  what  has  passed  with  regard  to  this  new 
servant ;  as  gentlemen  call  themselves,  in  order  to 
become  our  masters. 

'Tis  now  Friday  morning.  We  are  just  setting 
out  to  dine  with  Lady  Betty.  If  the  day  furnishes 
me  with  any  amusing  materials  for  my  next  pacquet, 
its  agreeableness  will  be  doubled  to 

Your  ever-affectionate 

HARRIET  BYRON. 


LETTER  X. 

MISS    BYRON.       fir    CONTINUATION. 

Friday  night. 
Some  amusement,  my  Lucy,  the  day  has  afforded : 
indeed  more  than  I  could  have  wished.     A  large 
pacquet,  however,  for  Solby-house. 

Lady  Betty  received  us  most  politely.  She  had 
company  with  her,  to  whom  she  introduced  us,  and 
presented  me  in  a  very  advantageous  character. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  55 

Shall  I  tell  you  how  their  first  appearance  struck 
me,  and  what  I  have  since  heard  and  observed  of 
them  ? 

The  first  I  shall  mention  was  Miss  Cantillon; 
very  pretty  ;  but  visibly  proud,  affected,  and  con- 
ceited. 

The  second  Miss  Clements  ;  plain ;  but  of  a 
fine  understanding,  improved  by  reading ;  and  who 
having  no  personal  advantages  to  be  vain  of,  has,  by 
the  cultivation  of  her  mind,  obtained  a  preference 
in  every  one's  opinion  over  the  fair  Cantillon. 

The  third  was  Miss  Barnevelt,  a  lady  of  mas- 
culine features,  and  whose  mind  belied  not  those 
features ;  for  she  has  the  character  of  being  loud, 
bold,  free,  even  fierce  when  opposed  ;  and  affects  at 
all  times  such  airs  of  contempt  of  her  own  sex,  that 
one  almost  wonders  at  her  condescending  to  wear 
petticoats. 

The  gentlemen's  names  were  Walden  and  Sin- 
gleton ;  the  first,  an  Oxford  scholar  of  family  and 
fortune ;  but  quaint  and  opinionated,  despising  every 
one  who  has  not  had  the  benefit  of  an  university 
education. 

Mr.  Singleton  is  a  harmless  man  ;  who  is,  it  seems, 
the  object  of  more  ridicule,  even  down  to  his  very 
name,  among  all  his  acquaintance,  than  I  think  he 
by  any  means  ought,  considering  the  apparent  in- 
offensiveness  of  the  man,  who  did  not  give  himself 
his  intellects  ;  and  his  constant  good-humour,  which 
might  intitle  him  to  better  quarter ;  the  rather  too 
as  he  has  one  point  of  knowledge,  which  those  who 
think  themselves  his  superiors  in  understanding  do 
not  always  attain,  the  knowledge  of  himself;  for  he 
is  humble,  modest,  ready  to  confess  an  inferiority 
to  every  one :  and  as  laughing  at  a  jest  is  by  some 
taken  for  high  applause,  he  is  ever  the  first  to  be- 
stow that  commendation  on  what  others  say ;  though 


56  THE    HISTORY   OF 

it  must  be  owned,  he  now  and  then  mistakes  for  a 
jest  what  is  none :  which,  however,  may  be  gene- 
rally more  the  fault  of  the  speakers  than  of  Mr. 
Singleton ;  since  he  takes  his  cue  from  their  smiles, 
especially  when  those  are  seconded  by  the  laugh  of 
one  of  whom  he  has  a  good  opinion. 

Mr.  Singleton  is  in  possession  of  a  good  estate, 
which  makes  amends  for  many  defects ;  he  has  a 
turn,  it  is  said,  to  the  well-managing  of  it ;  and  no- 
body understands  his  own  interest  better  than  he  ; 
by  which  knowledge,  he  has  opportunities  to  lay 
obligations  upon  many  of  those,  who  behind  his 
back  think  themselves  intitled  by  their  supposed 
superior  sense  to  deride  him :  and  he  is  ready  enough 
to  oblige  in  this  way:  but  it  is  always  on  such  se- 
curities, that  he  has  never  given  cause  for  spend- 
thrifts to  laugh  at  him  on  that  account. 

It  is  thought  that  the  friends  of  the  fair  Cantillon 
would  not  be  averse  to  an  alliance  with  this  gentle- 
man :  while  I,  were  I  his  sister,  should  rather  wish, 
that  he  had  so  much  wisdom  in  his  weakness,  as  to 
devote  himself  to  the  worthier  Pulcheria  Clements 
(Lady  Betty's  wish  as  well  as  mine)  whose  fortune, 
though  not  despicable,  and  whose  humbler  views, 
would  make  her  think  herself  repaid,  by  his  fortune, 
the  obligation  she  would  lay  him  under  by  her  ac- 
ceptance of  him. 

Nobody,  it  seems,  thinks  of  a  husband  for  Miss 
Barnevelt.  She  is  sneeringly  spoken  of  rather  as  a 
young  Jbllotv,  than  as  a  woman;  and  who  will  one 
day  look  out  for  a  wife  for  herself.  One  reason  in- 
deed, she  every-where  gives,  for  being  satisfied  with 
being  a  woman ;  which  is,  that  she  cannot  be  married 
to  a  WOMAN. 

An  odd  creature,  my  dear.  But  see  what  women 
get  by  going  out  of  character.  Like  the  bats  in  the 
fable,  they  are  looked  upon  as  mortals  of  a  doubtful 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  57 

species,  hardly  owned  by  either,  and  laughed  at  by 
both. 

This  was  the  company,  and  all  the  company,  be- 
sides us,  that  Lady  Betty  expected.  But  mutual 
civilities  had  hardly  passed,  when  Lady  Betty,  hav- 
ing been  called  out,  returned,  introducing,  as  a  gen- 
tleman who  would  be  acceptable  to  every  one,  Sir 
Hargrave  Pollexfen.  He  is,  whispered  she  to 
me,  as  he  saluted  the  rest  of  the  company,  in  a  very 
gallant  manner,  a  young  baronet  of  a  very  large 
estate,  the  greatest  part  of  which  has  lately  come 
to  him  by  the  death  of  a  grandmother,  and  two 
uncles,  all  very  rich. 

When  he  was  presented  to  me,  by  name,  and  I  to 
him,  I  think  myself  very  happy,  said  he,  in  being 
admitted  to  the  presence  of  a  young  lady  so  cele- 
brated for  her  graces  of  person  and  mind.  Then, 
addressing  himself  to  Lady  Betty,  Much  did  I  hear, 
when  I  was  at  the  last  Northampton  races,  of  Miss 
Byron  :  but  little  did  I  expect  to  find  report  fall  so 
short  of  what  I  see. 

Miss  Cantillon  bridled,  played  with  her  fan,  and 
looked  as  if  she  thought  herself  slighted :  a  little 
scorn  intermingled  with  the  airs  she  gave  her- 
self. 

Miss  Clements  smiled,  and  looked  pleased,  as  if 
she  enjoyed,  good-naturedly,  a  compliment  made 
to  one  of  the  sex  which  she  adorns  by  the  goodness 
of  her  heart. 

Miss  Barnevelt  said,  she  had,  from  the  moment  I 
first  entered,  beheld  me  with  the  eye  of  a  lover. 
And  freely  taking  my  hand,  squeezed  it. — Charm- 
ing creature  !  said  she,  as  if  addressing  a  country 
innocent,  and  perhaps  expecting  me  to  be  covered 
with  blushes  and  confusion. 

The  baronet,  excusing  himself  to  Lady  Betty, 
assured  her,  that  she  must  place  this  his  bold  intru- 


58  THE    HISTORY   OF 

sion  to  the  account  of  Miss  Byron ;  he  having  been 
told  that  she  was  to  be  there. 

Whatever  were  his  motive,  Lady  Betty  said,  he 
did  her  favour ;  and  she  was  sure  the  whole  com- 
pany would  think  themselves  doubly  obliged  to  Miss 
Byron. 

The  student  looked  as  if  he  thought  himself 
eclipsed  by  Sir  Hargrave,  and  as  if,  in  revenge,  he 
was  putting  his  fine  speeches  into  Latin,  and  trying 
them  by  the  rules  of  grammar ;  a  broken  sentence 
from  a  classic  author  bursting  from  his  lips  ;  and,  at 
last,  standing  up,  half  on  tip-toe  (as  if  he  wanted  to 
look  down  upon  the  baronet)  he  stuck  one  hand  in 
his  side,  and  passed  by  him,  casting  a  contemptuous 
eye  on  his  gaudy  dress. 

Mr.  Singleton  smiled,  and  looked  as  if  delighted 
with  all  he  saw  and  heard.  Once  indeed  he  tried 
to  speak :  his  mouth  actually  opened,  to  give  pas- 
sage to  his  words ;  as  sometimes  seems  to  be  his 
way  before  the  words  are  quite  ready :  but  he  sat 
down  satisfied  with  the  effort. 

It  is  true,  people  who  do  not  make  themselves 
contemptible  by  affectation  should  not  be  despised. 
Poor  and  rich,  wise  and  unwise,  we  are  all  links  of 
the  same  great  chain.  And  you  must  tell  me,  my 
dear,  if  I,  in  endeavouring  to  give  true  descriptions 
of  the  persons  I  see,  incur  the  censure  I  pass  on 
others  who  despise  any  one  for  the  defects  they 
cannot  help. 

Will  you  forgive  me,  my  dear,  if  I  make  this 
letter  as  long  as  my  last  ? 

No,  say. 

Well  then,  I  thank  you  for  a  freedom  so  consist- 
ent with  our  friendship  :  and  conclude  with  assur- 
ances, that  I  am,  and  ever  will  be, 

Most  affectionately  yours, 

HARRIET  BYRON. 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  50 

LETTER  XI. 

MISS    BYRON.       IX    CONTINUATION. 

It  was  convenient  to  me,  Lucy,  to  break  off  just 
where  I  did  in  my  last ;  else  I  should  not  have  been 
so  very  self-denying  as  to  suppose  you  had  no  cu- 
riosity to  hear,  what  undoubtedly  I  wanted  to  tell. 
Two  girls  talking  over  a  new  set  of  company,  would 
my  uncle  Selby  say,  are  not  apt  to  break  off  very 
abruptly ;  not  she  especially  of  the  two,  who  has 
found  out  a  fair  excuse  to  repeat  every  compliment 
made  to  herself;  and  when  perhaps  there  may  be  a 
new  admirer  in  the  case. 

May  there  so,  my  uncle  ?  And  which  of  the  gen- 
tlemen do  you  think  the  man?  The  baronet,  1 
suppose,  you  guess. — And  so  he  is. 

Well  then,  let  me  give  you,  Lucy,  a  sketch  of 
him.  But  consider ;  I  form  my  accounts  from 
what  I  have  since  been  told,  as  well  as  from  what 
I  observed  at  the  time. 

Sir  Hargrave  Pollexfen  is  handsome  and  genteel ; 
pretty  tall,  about  twenty-eight  or  thirty.  His  com- 
plexion is  a  little  of  the  fairest  for  a  man,  and  a  little 
of  the  palest.  He  has  remarkably  bold  eyes  ;  rather 
approaching  to  what  we  would  call  goggling :  and 
he  gives  himself  airs  with  them  as  if  he  wished  to 
have  them  thought  rakish :  perhaps  as  a  recom- 
mendation, in  his  opinion,  to  the  ladies.  Lady 
Betty,  on  his  back  being  turned,  praising  his  per- 
son, Miss  Cantillon  said,  Sir  Hargrave  had  the 
finest  eyes  she  ever  saw  in  a  man.  They  were 
manly,  meaning  ones. 

He  is  very  voluble  in  speech  ;  but  seems  to  owe 
his  volubility  more  to  his  want  of  doubt,  than  to  the 
extraordinary  merit  of  what  he  says.  Yet  he  is 
thought  to  have  sense  ;  and  if  he  could  prevail  upon 


60  THE    HISTORY    OF 

himself  to  hear  more,  and  speak  less,  he  would 
better  deserve  the  good  opinion  he  thinks  himself 
sure  of.  But  as  he  can  say  any-thing  without  hesi- 
tation, and  excites  a  laugh  by  laughing  himself  at 
all  he  is  going  to  say,  as  well  as  at  what  he  has  just 
said,  he  is  thought  infinitely  agreeable  by  the  gay, 
and  by  those  who  wish  to  drown  thought  in  merri- 
ment. 

Sir  Hargrave,  it  seems,  has  travelled:  but  he 
must  have  carried  abroad  with  him  a  great  number 
of  follies,  and  a  great  deal  of  affectation,  if  he  has 
left  any  of  them  behind  him. 

But,  with  all  his  foibles,  he  is  said  to  be  a  man  of 
enterprize  and  courage ;  and  young  women,  it 
seems,  must  take  care  how  they  laugh  with  him : 
for  he  makes  ungenerous  constructions  to  the  dis- 
advantage of  a  woman  whom  he  can  bring  to  seem 
pleased  with  his  jests. 

I  will  tell  you  hereafter,  how  I  came  to  know 
this,  and  even  worse,  of  him. 

The  taste  of  the  present  age  seems  to  be  dress ; 
no  wonder,  therefore,  that  such  a  man  as  Sir  Har- 
grave aims  to  excel  in  it.  What  can  be  misbe- 
stowed  by  a  man  on  his  person,  who  values  it  more 
than  his  mind?  But  he  would,  in  my  opinion,  bet- 
ter become  his  dress,  if  the  pains  he  undoubtedly 
takes  before  he  ventures  to  come  into  public,  were 
less  apparent :  this  I  judge  from  his  solicitude  to 
preserve  all  in  exact  order,  when  in  company;  for  he 
forgets  not  to  pay  his  respects  to  himself  at  every 
glass  ;  yet  does  it  with  a  seeming  consciousness,  as 
if  he  would  hide  a  vanity  too  apparent  to  be  con- 
cealed ;  breaking  from  it,  if  he  finds  himself  ob- 
served, with  a  half-careless  yet  seemingly  dissatis- 
fied air,  pretending  to  have  discovered  something 
amiss  in  himself.  This  seldom  fails  to  bring  him  a 
compliment :  of  which  he  shows  himself  very  sen- 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  61 

sible,  by  affectedly  disclaiming  the  merit  of  it ;  per- 
haps with  this  speech,  bowing  with  his  spread  hand 
on  his  breast,  waving  his  head  to  and  fro — By  my 
soul,  Madam  (or  Sir)  you  do  me  too  much  honour. 

Such  a  man  is  Sir  Hargrave  Pollexfen. 

He  placed  himself  next  to  the  country  girl ;  and 
laid  himself  out  in  fine  speeches  to  her,  running  on 
in  such  a  manner,  that  I  had  not  for  some  time  an 
opportunity  to  convince  him,  that  I  had  been  in 
company  of  gay  people  before.  He  would  have  it 
that  I  was  a  perfect  beauty,  and  he  supposed  me 
very  young — very  silly  of  course :  and  gave  him- 
self such  airs,  as  if  he  were  sure  of  my  admiration. 

I  viewed  him  steadily  several  times  ;  and  my  eye 
once  falling  under  his,  as  I  was  looking  at  him,  I 
dare  say,  he  at  that  moment  pitied  the  poor  fond 
heart,  which  he  supposed  was  in  tumults  about  him ; 
when,  at  the  very  time,  I  was  considering  whether, 
if  I  were  obliged  to  have  the  one  or  the  other,  as  a 
punishment  for  some  great  fault  I  had  committed, 
my  choice  would  fall  on  Mr.  Singleton,  or  on  him. 
I  mean,  supposing  the  former  were  not  a  remarkably 
obstinate  man ;  since  obstinacy  in  a  weak  man,  I 
think,  must  be  worse  than  tyranny  in  a  man  of 
sense. — If  indeed  a  man  of  sense  can  be  a  tyrant. 

A  summons  to  dinner  relieved  me  from  his  more 
particular  addresses,  and  placed  him  at  a  distance 
from  me. 

Sir  Hargrave,  the  whole  time  of  dinner,  received 
advantage  from  the  supercilious  looks  and  behaviour 
of  Mr.  Walden ;  who  seemed,  on  every-thing  the 
baronet  said  (and  he  was  seldom  silent)  half  to  de- 
spise him ;  for  he  made  at  times  so  many  different 
mouths  of  contempt,  that  I  thought  it  was  impossi- 
ble for  the  same  features  to  express  them.  I  have 
been  making  mouths  in  the  glass  for  several  mi- 
nutes, to  try  to  recover  some  of  Mr.  Walden's,  in 


62  THE   HISTORY  OF 

order  to  describe  them  to  you,  Lucy ;  but  I  cannot 
for  my  life  so  distort  my  face  as  to  enable  me  to  give 
you  a  notion  of  one  of  them. 

He  might  perhaps  have  been  better  justified  in 
some  of  his  contempts,  had  it  not  been  visible,  that 
the  consequence  which  he  took  from  the  baronet, 
he  gave  to  himself;  and  yet  was  as  censurable  one 
way,  as  Sir  Hargrave  was  the  other. 

Mirth,  however  insipid,  will  occasion  smiles ; 
though  sometimes  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  mirth- 
ful. But  gloom,  severity,  moroseness,  will  always 
disgust,  though  in  a  Solomon.  Mr.  Walden  had 
not  been  taught  that :  and  indeed  it  might  seem  a 
little  ungrateful  [don't  you  think  so,  Lucy?]  if  wo- 
men failed  to  reward  a  man  with  their  smiles,  who 
scrupled  not  to  make  himself  a — monkey  (shall  I 
say?)  to  please  them. 

Never  before  did  1  see  the  difference  between  the 
man  of  the  town,  and  the  man  of  the  college,  dis- 
played in  a  light  so  striking  as  in  these  two  gentle- 
men in  the  conversation  after  dinner.  The  one 
seemed  resolved  not  to  be  pleased ;  while  the  other 
laid  himself  out  to  please  every-body ;  and  that  in  a 
manner  so  much  at  his  own  expence,  as  frequently 
to  bring  into  question  his  understanding.  By  a 
second  silly  thing  he  banished  the  remembrance  of 
the  first ;  by  a  third  the  second;  and  so  on;  and 
by  continually  laughing  at  his  own  absurdities,  left 
us  at  liberty  to  suppose  that  his  folly  was  his  choice  ; 
and  that,  had  it  not  been  to  divert  the  company, 
he  would  have  made  a  better  figure. 

Mr.  Walden,  as  was  evident  by  his  scornful  brow, 
by  the  contemptuous  motions  of  his  lip,  and  by 
his  whole  face  affectedly  turned  from  the  baronet, 
grudged  him  the  smile  that  sat  upon  every  one's 
countenance  ;  and  for  which,  without  distinguishing 
whether  it  was  a  smile  of  approbation  or  ?iot,  he 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  63 

looked  as  if  he  pitied  us  all,  and  as  if  he  thought 
himself  cast  into  unequal  company.  Nay  twice  or 
thrice  he  addressed  himself,  in  preference  to  every 
one  else,  to  honest  simpering  Mr.  hingleton:  who, 
for  his  part,  as  was  evident,  much  better  relished  the 
baronet's  flippancies,  than  the  dry  significance  of 
the  student.  For,  whenever  Sir  Hargrave  spoke, 
Mr.  Singleton's  mouth  was  open :  but  it  was  quite 
otherwise  with  him,  when  Mr.  W  alden  spoke,  even 
at  the  time  that  he  paid  him  the  distinction  of  ad- 
dressing himself  to  him,  as  if  he  were  the  principal 
person  in  the  company. 

But  one  word,  by  the  bye,  Lucy — Don't  you 
think  it  is  very  happy  for  us  foolish  women,  that  the 
generality  of  the  lords  of  the  creation  are  not  much 
wiser  than  ourselves  ?  Or,  to  express  myseif  in  other 
words,  That  owr-wisdom  is  as  foolish  a  thing  to  the 
full,  as  moderate  folly ! — But,  hush  !  I  have  done. 
— I  know  that  at  this  place  my  uncle  will  be  ready 
to  rise  against  me. 

After  dinner,  Mr.  Walden,  not  choosing  to  be 
any  longer  so  egregiously  eclipsed  by  the  man  of 
the  town,  put  forth  the  scholar 

By  the  way,  let  me  ask  my  uncle,  if  the  word 
scholar  means  not  the  learner,  rather  than  the 
learned  ?  If  it  originally  means  no  more,  I  would 
suppose  that  formerly  the  most  learned  men  were 
the  most  modest,  contenting  themselves  with  being 
thought  but  learners;  for  as  my  revered  first  in- 
structor used  to  say,  the  more  a  man  knows,  the 
more  he  will  find  he  has  to  know. 

Pray,  Sir  Hargrave,  said  Mr.  Walden,  may  I  ask 
you — You  had  a  thought  just  now,  speaking  of  love 
and  beauty,  which  1  know  you  must  have  from 
Tibullus  [and  then  he  repeated  the  line  in  an  heroic 
accent;  and,  pausing,  looked  round  upon  us  women] 
g2 


64  THE    HISTORY    OF 

Which  university  had  the  honour  of  finishing  your 
studies,  Sir  Hargrave  ?  I  presume  you  were  brought 
up  at  one  of  them. 

Not  I,  said  the  baronet :  A  man,  surely,  may  read 
Tibullus,  and  Virgil  too,  without  being  indebted  to 
either  university  for  his  learning. 

No  man,  Sir  Hargrave,  in  my  humble  opinion 
[with  a  decisive  air  he  spoke  the  word  humble']  can 
be  well-grounded  in  any  branch  of  learning,  who 
has  not  been  at  one  of  our  famous  universities. 

I  never  yet  proposed,  Mr.  Walden,  to  qualify 
myself  for  a  degree.  My  chaplain  is  a  very  pretty 
fellow.  He  understands  Tibullus,  I  believe  [im- 
moderately laughing,  and  by  his  eyes  cast  in  turn 
upon  each  person  at  table,  bespeaking  a  general 
smile] — And  of  Oxford,  as  you  are. 

And  again  he  laughed :  but  his  laugh  was  then 
such  a  one  as  rather  shewed  ridicule  than  mirth  :  a 
provoking  laugh,  such  a  one  as  Mr.  Greville  often 
affects  when  he  is  in  a  disputing  humour,  in  order 
to  dash  an  opponent  out  of  countenance,  by  getting 
the  laugh,  instead  of  the  argument,  on  his  side. 

My  uncle,  you  know,  will  have  it  sometimes, 
that  his  girl  has  a  satirical  vein.  I  am  afraid  she 
has — But  this  I  will  say  for  her :  she  means  no  ill- 
nature  :  she  loves  every-body :  but  not  their  faults  : 
as  her  uncle  in  his  letter  tells  her.  Nor  wishes  to 
be  spared  for  her  own.  Nor,  very  probably,  is  she, 
if  those  who  see  her,  write  of  her  to  their  chosen 
friends  as  she  does  to  hers,  of  them. 

Shall  I  tell  you  what  I  imagine  each  person  of 
the  company  I  am  writing  about  (writing  in  cha- 
racter) would  say  of  me  to  their  correspondents  ? — 
It  would  be  digressing  too  much,  or  I  would. 

Mr.  Walden  in  his  heart,  I  dare  say,  was  re- 
venged on  the  baronet.     He  gave  him  such  a  look, 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  65 

as  would  have  grieved  me  the  whole  day,  had  it 
been  given  me  by  one  whom  I  valued. 

Sir  Hargrave  had  too  much  business  for  his  eyes 
with  the  ladies,  in  order  to  obtain  their  counte- 
nance, to  trouble  himself  about  the  looks  of  the 
men.  And  indeed  he  seemed  to  have  as  great  a 
contempt  for  Mr.  Walden,  as  Mr.  Walden  had  for 
him. 

But  here  I  shall  be  too  late  for  the  post.  Will 
this  stuff  go  down  with  you  at  Selby-house,  in  want 
of  better  subjects? 

Every-thing  from  you,  my  Harriet — 

Thank  you  !  thank  you,  all,  my  indulgent  friends ! 
So  it  ever  was.  Trifles  from  those  we  love,  are  ac- 
ceptable.    May  I  deserve  your  love. 

Adieu,  my  Lucy ! — But  tell  my  Nancy,  that  she 
has  delighted  me  by  her  letter. 

H.  B. 


LETTER  XII. 

MISS    BYRON.       IN    CONTINUATION. 

What  is  your  opinion,  my  charming  Miss  Byron? 
-aid  the  baronet:  May  not  a  man  of  fortune,  who 
has  not  received  his  education  and  polish  [he  pro- 
nounced the  word  polish  with  an  emphasis,  and  an- 
other laugh]  at  an  university,  make  as  good  a  figure 
in  social  life,  and  as  ardent  a  lover,  as  it* he  had? 

I  would  have  been  silent :  but,  gazing  in  my  face, 
he  repeated,  What  say  you  to  this,  Miss  Byron? 

The  world,  Sir  Hargrave,  I  have  heard  called  an 
university  :  but,  is  it  not  an  obvious  truth,  that  nei- 
ther a  learned,  nor  what  is  called  a  fine  education, 
has  any  other  value  than  as  each  tends  to  improve 
the  morals  of  men,  and  to  make  them  wise  and  good? 
g3 


66  THE    HISTORY   OF 

The  world  an  university!  replied  Mf.  Walden. 
Why,  truly,  looking  up  to  Sir  Hargrave's  face,  and 
then  down  to  his  feet,  disdainfully,  as  if  he  would 
measure  him  with  his  eyes,  I  cannot  but  say,  twist- 
ing his  head  on  one  side,  and  with  a  drolling  accent, 
that  the  world  produces  very  pretty  scholars — for 
the  ladies — 

The  baronet  took  fire  at  being  so  contemptuously 
measured  by  the  eye  of  the  student;  and  I  thought 
it  was  not  amiss,  for  fear  of  high  words  between 
them,  to  put  myself  forward. 

And  are  not  women,  Mr.  Walden,  resumed  I, 
one  half  in  number,  though  not  perhaps  in  value, 
of  the  human  species? — Would  it  not  be  pity,  Sir, 
if  the  knowledge  that  is  to  be  obtained  in  the 
lesser  university  should  make  a  man  despise  what 
is  to  be  acquired  in  the  greater,  in  which  that 
knowledge  was  principally  intended  to  make  him 
useful ? 

This  diverted  Sir  Hargrave's  anger :  Well,  Mr. 
Walden,  said  he,  exultingly  rubbing  his  hands, 
what  say  you  to  the  young  lady's  observation  ?  By 
my  soul  it  is  worth  your  notice.  You  may  carry 
it  down  with  you  to  your  university ;  and  the  best 
scholars  there  will  not  be  the  worse  for  attending 
to  it. 

Mr.  Walden  seemed  to  collect  himself,  as  if  he 
were  inclined  to  consider  me  with  more  attention 
than  he  had  done  before ;  and  waving  his  hand,  as 
if  he  would  put  by  the  baronet,  as  an  adversary  he 
had  done  with,  I  am  to  thank  you,  madam,  said  he, 
it  seems,  for  your  observation.  And  so  the  lesser 
university — 

I  have  great  veneration,  Mr.  Walden,  interrupted 
I,  for  learning,  and  great  honour  for  learned  men — 
But  this  is  a  subject — 

That  you  must  not  get  off  from,  young  lady. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  67 

I  am  sorry  to  hear  you  say  so,  Sir — But  indeed 
I  must. 

The  company  seemed  pleased  to  see  me  so  likely 
to  be  drawn  in ;  and  this  encouraged  Mr.  Walden 
to  push  his  weak  adversary. 

Know  you,  madam,  said  he,  any-thing  of  the 
learned  languages  ? 

No,  indeed,  Sir — Nor  do  I  know  which,  particu- 
larly, you  call  so. 

The  Greek,  the  Latin,  madam. 

Who,  I,  a  woman,  know  any-thing  of  Latin  and 
Greek !  I  know  but  one  lady  who  is  mistress  of 
both ;  and  she  finds  herself  so  much  an  owl  among 
the  birds,  that  she  wants  of  all  things  to  be  thought 
to  have  unlearned  them. 

Whj',  ladies,  I  cannot  but  say,  that  I  should  ra- 
ther choose  to  marry  a  woman  whom  I  could  teach 
something,  than  one  who  would  think  herself  quali- 
fied to  teach  me. 

Is  it  a  necessary  consequence,  Sir,  said  Miss  Cle- 
ments, that  knowledge,  which  makes  a  man  shine, 
should  make  a  woman  vain  and  pragmatical  ?  May 
not  two  persons,  having  the  same  taste,  improve 
each  other?  Was  not  this  the  case  of  Monsieur 
and  Madame  Dacier? 

Flint  and  steel  to  each  other,  added  Lady  Betty. 

Turkish  policy,  I  doubt,  in  you  men,  proceeded 
Miss  Clements — No  second  brother  near  the  throne. 
That  empire  some  think  the  safest  which  is  founded 
in  ignorance. 

We  know,  Miss  Clements,  replied  Mr.  Walden, 
that  you  are  a  well-read  lady.  But  I  have  nothing 
to  say  to  observations  that  are  in  every-body's 
mouth — Pardon  me,  madam. 

Indeed,  Sir,  said  Mr.  Reeves,  I  think  Miss  Cle- 
ments should  not  pardon  you.  There  is,  in  my  opi- 
nion, great  force  in  what  she  said. 


68  THE   HISTORY  OF 

But  I  have  a  mind  to  talk  with  this  fair  lady,  your 
cousin,  Mr.  Reeves.  She  is  the  very  woman  that  1 
wish  to  hold  an  argument  with,  on  the  hints  she 
threw  out. 

Pardon  me,  Sir.  But  I  cannot  return  the  com- 
pliment.    I  cannot  argue. 

And  yet,  madam,  I  will  not  let  you  go  offso  easily. 
You  seem  to  be  very  happy  in  your  elocution,  and 
to  have  some  pretty  notions,  for  so  young  a  lady. 

I  cannot  argue,  Sir. 

Dear  Miss  Byron,  said  Sir  Hargrave,  hear  what 
Mr.  Walden  has  to  say  to  you. 

Every  one  made  the  same  request.  I  was  silent, 
looked  down,  and  played  with  my  fan. 

When  Mr.  Walden  had  liberty  to  say  what  he 
pleased,  he  seemed  at  a  loss  himself,  for  words. 

At  last,  I  asked  you,  madam,  I  asked  you  (hesi- 
tatingly began  he)  whether  you  knew  any-thing  of 
the  learned  languages?  It  has  been  whispered  to  me, 
that  you  have  had  great  advantages  from  a  grand- 
father, of  whose  learning  and  politeness  we  have 
heard  much.  He  was  a  scholar.  He  was  of  Christ- 
church,  in  our  university,  if  I  am  not  mistaken — 
To  my  question  you  answered,  That  you  knew  not 
particularly  which  were  the  languages  that  I  called 
the  learned  ones :  and  you  have  been  pleased  to 
throw  out  hints  in  relation  to  the  lesser  and  the 
greater  university ;  by  all  which  you  certainly  mean 
something — 

Pray,  Mr.  Walden,  said  I — 

And  pray,  Miss  Byron — I  am  afraid  of  all 
smattercrs  in  learning.  Those  who  know  a  little 
— and  ladies  cannot  know  to  the  bottom — The\ 
have  not  the  happiness  of  an  university  edu- 
cation— 

Nor  is  every  man  at  the  university,  I  presume, 
Sir,  a  Mr.  Walden. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  69 

0  my  Lucy !  I  have  since  been  told,  that  this 
pragmatical  man  has  very  few  admirers  in  the  uni- 
versity to  which,  out  of  it,  he  is  so  fond  of  boast- 
ing a  relation. 

He  took  what  I  said  for  a  compliment — Why,  as 
to  that,  madam — bowing — But  this  is  a  misfortune 
to  ladies,  not  a  fault  in  them — But,  as  I  was  going 
to  say,  Those  who  know  little,  are  very  seldom 
sound,  are  very  seldom  orthodox,  as  we  call  it, 
whether  respecting  religion  or  (earning  ;  and  as  it 
seems  you  lost  your  grandfather  too  early  to  be 
well-grounded  in  the  latter  (in  the  former  Lady 
Betty,  who  is  my  informant,  says,  you  are  a  very 
good  young  lady)  I  should  be  glad  to  put  you  right 
if  you  happen  to  be  a  little  out  of  the  way. 

1  thank  you,  Sir,  bowing,  and  (simpleton  !)  still 
playing  with  my  fan.  But,  though  Mr.  Reeves 
said  nothing,  he  did  not  think  me  very  politely 
treated.  Yet  he  wanted,  he  told  me  afterwards, 
to  have  me  drawn  out. 

He  should  not  have  served  me  so,  I  told  him ; 
especially  among  strangers,  and  n:en. 

Now,  madam,  will  you  be  pleased  to  inform  me, 
said  Mr.  Walden,  whether  you  had  any  particular 
meaning,  when  you  answered,  that  you  knew  not 
which  I  called  the  learned  languages?  You  must 
know,  that  the  Latin  and  Greek  are  of  those  so 
called. 

I  beg,  Mr.  Walden,  that  1  may  not  be  thus  singled 
out — Mr.  Reeves — Sir — yon  have  had  an  university 
education.     Pray  relieve  your  cousin. 

Mr.  Reeves  smiled ;  bowed  his  head ;  but  said 
nothing. 

You  were  pleased,  madam,  proceeded  Mr. Wal- 
den, to  mention  one  learned  lady  ;  and  said  that 
she  looked  upon  herself  as  an  owl  among  the 
birds. —  5 


70  THE   HISTORY   OF 

And  you,  Sir,  said,  that  you  had  rather  (and  I 
believe  most  men  are  of  your  mind)  have  a  woman 
you  could  teach — 

Than  one  who  would  suppose  she  could  teach  me 
—I  did  so. 

Well,  Sir,  and  would  you  have  me  be  guilty  of  an 
ostentation  that  would  bring  me  no  credit,  if  I  had 
had  some  pains  taken  with  me  in  my  education?  But 
indeed,  Sir,  I  know  not  any-thing  of  those  you  call 
the  learned  languages.  Nor  do  I  take  all  learning 
to  consist  in  the  knowledge  of  languages*. 

All  learning ! — Nor  I,  madam — But  if  you  place 
not  learning  in  language,  be  so  good  as  to  tell  us 
what  you  do  place  it  in  ? 

He  nodded  his  head  with  an  air,  as  if  he  had  said, 
This  pretty  Miss  has  got  out  of  her  depth :  I  believe 
I  shall  have  her  now. 

I  would  rather,  Sir,  said  I,  be  a  hearer  than  a 
speaker ;  and  the  one  would  better  become  me  than 
the  other.  I  answered  Sir  Hargrave,  because  he 
thought  proper  to  apply  to  me. 

And  I,  madam,  apply  to  you  likewise. 

Then,  Sir,  I  have  been  taught  to  think,  that  a 
learned  man  and  a  linguist  may  very  well  be  two 
persons  f. 

Be  pleased  to  proceed,  madam. 

Languages,  undoubtedly,  Sir,  are  of  use,  to  let 
us  into  the  knowledge  for  which  so  many  of  the 
antients  were  famous — But — 

Here  I  stopt  Every  one's  eyes  were  upon  me. 
I  was  a  little  out  of  countenance. 

In  what  a  situation,  Lucy,  are  we  women  ? — If 
we  have  some  little  genius,  and  have  taken  pains  to 

*  This  argument  is  resumed,  Vol.  XIV.  by  a  more  compe- 
tent judge  both  of  learning  and  languages  than  Mr.  Walden. 

+  In  other  words,  that  science  or  knowledge,  and  net 
language  merely,  is  learning. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  71 

cultivate  it,  we  must  be  thought  guilty  of  affecta- 
tion, whether  we  appear  desirous  to  conceal  it,  or 
submit  to  have  it  called  forth. 

But,  what,  madam  ?  Pray  proceed,  eagerly  said 
Mr.  Walden — But,  what,  madam  ? 

But  have  not  the  moderns,  Sir,  if  I  must  speak, 
the  same  advantages  which  the  antients  had,  and 
some  which  they  had  not  ?  The  first  great  genius's 
of  all  had  not  human  example,  had  not  human 
precepts — 

Nor  were  the  first  genius's  of  all  (with  an  empha- 
sis, replied  Mr.  Walden)  so  perfect,  as  the  observa- 
tions of  the  genius's  of  after-times,  which  were  built 
upon  their  foundations,  made  them;  and  they  others. 
Learning,  or  knowledge,  as  you  choose  to  call  it,  was 
a  progressive  thing  :  and  it  became  necessary  to  un- 
derstand the  different  languages  in  which  the  sages 
<jf  antiquity  wrote,  in  order  to  avail  ourselves  of 
their  learning. 

Very  right,  Sir,  I  believe.  You  consider  skill  in 
languages  than  as  a  vehicle  to  knowledge — Not,  I 
presume,  as  science  itself. 

I  was  sorry  the  baronet  laughed  ;  because  his 
laughing  made  it  more  difficult  for  me  to  get  off,  as 
I  wanted  to  do. 

Pray,  Sir  Hargrave,  said  Mr.  Walden,  let  not 
every  thing  that  is  said  be  laughed  at.  I  am  fond 
of  talking  to  this  young  lady ;  and  a  conversation 
upon  this  topic  may  tend  as  much  to  edification, 
perhaps,  as  most  of  the  subjects  with  which  wc  have 
been  hitherto  entertained. 

Sir  Hargrave  took  an  empty  glass,  and  with  it  hu- 
morously rapped  his  own  knuckles,  bowed  smiled, 
and  was  silent;  by  that  act  of  yielding,  which  had 
gracefulness  in  it,  gaining  more  honour  to  himself, 
than  Mr.  Walden  obtained  by  his  rebuke  of  him, 
however  just. 


72  THE    HISTORY    OF 

-Novo,  madam,  if  you  please,  said  Mr.  Walden 
(and  he  put  himself  into  a  disputing  attitude)  a  word 
or  two  with  you,  on  your  vehicle,  and-so-forth. 

Pray  spare  me,  Sir :  I  am  willing  to  sit  down 
quietly.  I  am  unequal  to  this  subject.  I  have 
done. 

But,  said  the  baronet,  you  must  not  sit  down 
quietly,  madam  :  Mr.  Walden  has  promised  us  edi~ 
Jication;  and  we  all  attend  the  effect  of  his  promise. 

No,  no,  madam,  said  Mr.  Walden,  you  must  not 
come  off  so  easily.  You  have  thrown  out  some  ex- 
traordinary things  for  a  lady,  and  especially  for  so 
young  a  lady,  From  you  we  expect  the  opinions  of 
your  worthy  grandfather,  as  well  as  your  own  no- 
tions. He  no  doubt  told  you,  or  you  have  read, 
that  the  competition  set  on  foot  between  the  learn- 
ing of  the  antients  and  moderns,  has  been  the  sub- 
ject of  much  debate  among  the  learned  in  the  latter 
end  of  the  last  century. 

Indeed,  Sir,  I  know  nothing  of  the  matter.  I  am 
not  learned.  -  My  grandfather  was  chiefly  intent  to 
make  me  an  English,  and,  I  may  say,  a  Bible  scho- 
lar. I  was  very  young  when  I  had  the  misfortune 
to  lose  him.  My  whole  endeavour  has  been  since, 
that  the  pains  he  took  with  me,  should  not  be  cast 
away. 

I  have  discovered  you,  madam,  to  be  a  Parthian 
lady.  You  can  fight  flying,  I  see.  You  must  not, 
J  tell  you,  come  off"  so  easily  for  what  you  have 
thrown  out.  Let  me  ask  you,  Did  you  ever  read 
The  Tale  of  a  Tub'? 

Sir  Hargrave  laughed  out,  though  evidently  in 
the  wrong  place. 

How  apt  are  laughing  spirits,  said  Mr.  Walden, 
looking  solemnly,  to  laugh,  when  perhaps  they 
ought — There  he  stopt —  [to  be  laughed  at,  I  suppose 
he  had  in  his  head.]     But  I  will  not,  however,  be 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISOJT.  73 

laughed  out  of  my  question. — Have  you,  madam, 
read  Swift's  Tale  of  a  Tub  ? — There  is  such  a  book, 
Sir  Hargrave;  looking  with  an  air  of  contempt  at 
the  baronet. 

I  know  there  is,  Mr.  Walden,  replied  the  baronet, 
and  again  laughed — Have  ymi,    madam?   to  me. 
Pray  let  us  know  what  Mr.  Walden  drives  at. 
I  have,  Sir. 

Why  then,  madam,  resumed  Mr.  Walden,  you 
no  doubt  read,  bound  up  with  it,  The  Battle  of  the 
Books  ;  a  very  fine  piece,  written  in  favour  of  the 
antients,  and  against  the  moderns ;  and  thence 
must  be  acquainted  with  the  famous  dispute  I  men- 
tioned. And  this  will  shew  you,  that  the  moderns 
are  but  pygmies  in  science  compared  to  the  an- 
tients. And,  pray,  shall  not  the  knowledge  which 
enables  us  to  understand  and  to  digest  the  wisdom 
of  these  immortal  antients  be  accounted  learning? 
—Pray,  madam,  nodding  his  head,  answer  me  that. 

0  how  these  pedants,  whispered  Sir  Hargrave  to 
Mr.  Reeves,  strut  in  the  livery  and  brass  buttons  of 
the  antients,  and  call  their  servility  learning  ! 

You  are  going  beyond  my  capacity,  Sir.  I  believe 
what  you  say  is  very  just :  yet  the  antients  may  be 
read,  I  suppose,  and  not  understood. — But  pray, 
Sir,  let  the  Parthian  fly  the  field.  I  promise  you 
that  she  will  not  return  to  the  charge.  Escape,  not 
victory,  is  all  she  contends  for. 

All  in  good  time,  madam — But  who,  pray,  learns 
the  language  but  with  a  view  to  understand  the 
author  ? 

No-body,  I  believe,  Sir.  But  yet  some  who  read 
the  antients,  may  fail  of  improving  by  them. 

1  was  going  to  say  something  further;  but  the 
baronet,  by  his  loud  and  laughing  applause,  dis- 
concerted me;  and  I  was  silent. 

And  here  I  must  break  oft*  till  I  return  from  the 

VOL.  IX.  H 


74  THE    HISTORY   OF 

play :  and  then,  or  in  the  morning  early,  I  will  be- 
gin on  another  sheet. 


LETTER  XIII. 

MISS  BYRON.      IN  CONTINUATION. 

Now,  Lucy,  will  I  resume  the  thread  of  an  argu- 
ment, that  you,  perhaps,  will  not  think  worth  re- 
membering ;  yet,  as  I  was  called  upon  by  every  one 
to  proceed,  I  would  not  omit  it,  were  it  but  to 
have  my  uncle's  opinion  whether  I  was  not  too 
pert,  and  too  talkative ;  for  my  conscience  a  little 
reproaches  me.  You  know  I  have  told  him,  that  I 
will  not  unbespeak  my  monitor. 

Mr.  Walden  told  me,  I  seemed  to  think,  that  the 
knowledge  we  gather  from  the  great  antients  is 
hardly  worth  the  pains  we  take  in  acquiring  the 
languages  in  which  they  wrote. 

Not  so,  Sir.  I  have  great  respect  even  for  lin- 
guists: Do  we  not  owe  to  them  the  translation  of 
the  sacred  books? — But  methinks  I  could  wish  that 
such  a  distinction  should  be  made  between  language 
and  science,  as  should  convince  me,  that  that  confu- 
sion of  tongues,  which  was  intended  for  a  punish- 
ment of  presumption  in  the  early  ages  of  the  world, 
should  not  be  thought  to  give  us  our  greatest  glory 
in  these  more  enlightened  times. 

Well,  madam,  ladies  must  be  treated  as  ladies. 
But  I  shall  have  great  pleasure,  on  my  return  to 
Oxford,  in  being  able  to  acquaint  my  learned  friends, 
that  they  must  all  turn  fine  gentlemen,  and  laughers 
[jVIr.  Reeves  had  smiled  as  well  as  the  baronet]] 
and  despise  the  great  antients  as  men  of  straw,  or 
very  shortly  they  will  stand  no  chance  in  the  ladies' 
favour. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  75 

Good  Mr.  Walden!  Good  Mr.  Walden !  laughed 
the  baronet,  shaking  his  embroidered  sides,  let  me, 
let  me,  beg  your  patience,  while  I  tell  you,  that  the 
young  gentlemen  at  both  universities  are  already  in 
more  danger  of  becoming  fine  gentlemen  than  fine 
scholars. 

And  then  again  he  laughed;  and  looking  round 
him,  bespoke,  in  his  usual  way,  a  laugh  from  the 
rest  of  the  company. 

Mr,  Reeves,  a  little  touched  at  the  scholar's  re- 
ference to  him,  in  the  word  laughers,  said,  It  were 
to  be  wished,  that,  in  all  nurseries  of  learning,  the 
manners  of  youth  were  proposed  as  the  principal  end. 
It  is  too  known  a  truth,  that  the  attention  paid  to 
languages  has  too  generally  swallowed  up  all  other 
and  more  important  considerations ;  insomuch  that 
sound  morals  and  good  breeding  themselves  are 
obliged  to  give  way  to  that  which  is  of  little  moment, 
but  as  it  promotes  and  inculcates  those.  And 
learned  men,  I  am  persuaded,  if  they  dared  to  speak 
out,  would  not  lay  so  much  stress  upon  mere  lan- 
guages as  you  seem  to  do,  Mr.  Walden. 

Learning  here,  replied  Mr.  Walden,  a  little  pee- 
vishly, has  not  a  fair  tribunal  to  be  tried  at.  As  it  is 
said  of  the  advantages  of  birth  or  degree,  so  it  may 
be  said  of  learning ;  No  one  despises  it  that  has 
pretensions  to  it.  But,  proceed,  Miss  Byron,  if 
you  please. 

Very  true,  I  believe,  Sir,  said  I :  But,  on  the 
other  hand,  may  not  those  who  have  either,  or  both, 
value  themselves  too  much  on  that  account? 

I  knew  once,  said  Miss  Clements,  an  excellent 
scholar,  who  thought,  that  too  great  a  portion  of 
life  was  bestowed  in  the  learning  of  languages ; 
and  that  the  works  of  many  of  the  antients  were 
more  to  be  admired  for  the  stamp  which  antiquity 
h  2 


76  THE    HISTORY   OF 

has  fixed  upon  them,  and  for  the  sake  of  their  purity 
in  languages  that  cannot  alter  (and  whose  works 
are  therefore  become  the  standard  of  those  lan- 
guages) than  for  the  lights  obtained  from  them  by 
men  of  genius,  in  ages  that  we  have  reason  to  think 
more  enlightened,  as  well  by  new  discoveries  as  by 
revelation. 

I  am  even  tempted  to  ask,  continued  she,  Whe- 
ther the  reputation  of  learning  is  not  oftener  ac~ 
quired  by  skill  in  those  branches  of  science  which 
principally  serve  for  amusement  to  inquisitive  and 
curious  minds,  than  by  that  in  the  more  useful  sort. 
Here  Mr.  Walden  interrupted  her ;  and  turning 
to  me,  as  to  the  weaker  adversary;  yet  with  an 
air  that  had  severity  in  it ;  I  could  almost  wish,  said 
he  (and  but  almost,  as  you  are  a  lady)  that  you* 
madam,  knew  the  works  of  the  great  antients  in 
their  original  languages. 

Something,  said  Miss  Clements,  should  be  left 
for  men  to  excel  in.  I  cannot  but  approve  of  Mr. 
Wal  den's  word  almost. 

She  then  whispered  me ;  Pray,  Miss  Byron,  pro- 
ceed (for  she  saw  me  a  little  out  of  countenance 
at  Mr.  Walden's  severe  air) — Strange,  added  she, 
still  whispering,  that  people  who  know  least  how  to 
argue,  should  be  most  eager  to  dispute.  Thank 
Heaven,  all  scholars  are  not  like  this. 

A  little  encouraged  ;  Pray,  Sir,  said  I,  let  me  ask 
one  question — Whether  you  do  not  think  that  our 
Milton,  in  his  Paradise  Lost,  shews  himself  to  be  a 
very  learned  man?  And  yet  that  work  is  written 
wholly  in  the  language  of  his  own  country,  as  the 
works  of  Homer  and  Virgil  were  in  that  of  theirs: — 
and  they,  I  presume,  will  be  allowed  to  be  learned 
men. 
Milton,   madam,   let  me  tell  you,   is  infinitely 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON".  77 

obliged  to  the  great  antients;  and  his  very  fre- 
quent allusions  to  them,  and  his  knowledge  of  their 
mythology,  shew  that  he  is. 

His  knowledge  of  their  mythology,  Sir! — His 
own  subject  so  greatly,  so  nobly,  so  divinely,  above 
that  mythology! — I  have  been  taught  to  think,  by  a 
very  learned  man,  that  it  was  a  condescension  in 
Milton  to  the  taste  of  persons  of  more  reading  than 
genius  in  the  age  in  which  he  wrote,  to  introduce 
so  often  as  he  does,  his  allusions  to  the  pagan  my- 
thology :  and  that  he  neither  raised  his  sublime 
subject,  nor  did  credit  to  his  vast  genius,  by  it. 

Mr.  Addison,  said  Mr.  Walden,  is  a  writer  ad- 
mired by  the  ladies.  Mr.  Addison,  madam,  as  you 
will  find  in  your  Spectators  [sneeringly  he  spoke 
this^  gives  but  the  second  place  to  Milton,  on  com- 
paring some  passages  of  his  with  some  of  Homer. 

If  Mr.  Addison,  Sir,  has  not  the  honour  of  being 
admired  by  the  gentlemen,  as  well  as  by  the  ladies, 
I  dare  say  Mr.  Walden  will  not  allow,  that  his  au- 
thority should  decide  the  point  in  question :  and 
yet,  as  I  remember,  he  greatly  extols  Milton.  But 
I  am  going  out  of  my  depth — Only  permit  me  to 
say  one  thing  more — If  Homer  is  to  be  preferred  to 
Milton,  he  must  be  the  sublimest  of  writers  ;  and 
Mr.  Pope,  admirable  as  his  translation  of  the  Iliad 
is  said  to  be,  cannot  have  done  him  justice. 

You  seem,  madam,  to  be  a  very  deep  English 
scholar.  But  say  you  this  from  your  own  observa- 
tion, or  from  that  of  any  other  ? 

I  readily  own,  that  my  lights  are  borrowed,  re- 
plied I.  I  owe  the  observation  to  my  godfather 
Mr.  Deane.  He  is  a  scholar ;  but  as  great  an  ad- 
mirer of  Milton  as  of  any  of  the  antients.  A  gen- 
tleman, his  particular  friend,  who  was  as  great  an  ad- 
mirer of  Homer,  undertook  from  Mr.  Pope's  trans- 
lation of  the  Iliad,  to  produce  passages  that  in  sub- 
H  3 


78  THE   HISTORY   OF 

limity  exceeded  any  in  the  Paradise  Lost.  The 
gentlemen  met  at  Mr.  Deane's  house,  where  I  then 
was.  They  allowed  me  to  be  present ;  and  this  was 
the  issue:  the  gentlemen  went  away  convinced, 
that  the  English  poet  as  much  excelled  the  Grecian 
in  the  grandeur  of  his  sentiments,  as  his  subject, 
founded  on  the  Christian  system,  surpasses  the 
pagan. 

The  debate,  I  have  the  vanity  to  think,  said  Mr. 
Walden,  had  /  been  a  party  in  it,  would  have  taken 
another  turn ;  for  I  do  insist  upon  it,  that  without 
the  knowledge  of  the  learned  languages*  a  man 
cannot  understand  his  own. 

I  opposed  Shakespeare  to  this  assertion :  but 
wished  on  this  occasion,  that  I  had  not  been  a  party 
in  this  debate ;  for  the  baronet  was  even  noisy  in  his 
applauses  of  what  I  said;  and  the  applause  of  empty 
minds  always  gives  one  suspicion  of  having  incurred 
it  by  one's  over-forwardness. 

He  drowned  the  voice  of  Mr.  Walden,  who  two 
or  three  times  was  earnest  to  speak;  but  not  find- 
ing himself  heard,  drew  up  his  mouth,  as  if  to  a 
contemptuous  whistle,  shrugged  his  shoulders,  and 
sat  collected  in  his  own  conscious  worthiness:  his 
eyes,  however,  were  often  cast  upon  the  pictures 
that  hung  round  the  room,  as  much  better  objects 
than  the  living  ones  before  him. 

But  what  extremely  disconcerted  me,  was  a  free- 
dom of  Miss  Barnevelt's;  taken  upon  what  I  last 
said,  and  upon  Mr.  Walden's  hesitation,  and  Sir 
Hargrave's  applauses:  she  professed  that  I  was  able 
to  bring  her  oxvn  sex  into  reputation  with  her.  Wis- 
dom, as  I  call  it,  said  she,  notwithstanding  what  you 
have  modestly  alleged  to  depreciate  your  own,  when 
it  proceeds  through  teeth  of  ivory,  and  lips  of  coral, 
receives  a  double  grace.  And  then  clasping  one  of 
her  mannish  arms  round  me,  she  kissed  my  cheek. 


Silt   CHARLES    GRANDISOtf.  79 

I  was  surprised,  and  offended  ;  and  with  the  more 
reason,  as  Sir  Hargrave,  rising  from  his  seat,  de- 
clared, that  since  merit  was  to  be  approved  in  that 
manner,  he  thought  himself  obliged  to  follow  so 
good  an  example. 

I  stood  up,  and  said,  Surely,  Sir,  my  compliance 
with  the  request  of  the  company,  too  much  I  fear 
at  my  own  expence,  calls  rather  for  civility  than 
freedom,  from  a  gentleman.  I  beg,  Sir  Hargrave — 
There  I  stopt;  and  I  am  sure  looked  greatly  in 
earnest. 

He  stood  suspended  till  I  had  done  speaking  ;  and 
then,  bowing,  sat  down  again ;  but,  as  Mr.  Reeves 
told  me  afterwards,  he  whispered  a  great  oath  in  his 
ear,  and  declared,  that  he  beheld  with  transport  his 
future  wife ;  and  cursed  himself  if  he  would  ever 
have  another ;  vowing,  in  the  same  whisper,  that 
were  a  thousand  men  to  stand  in  his  way,  he  would 
not  scruple  any  means  to  remove  them. 

Miss  Barnevelt  only  laughed  at  the  freedom  she 
had  taken  with  me.  She  is  a  loud  and  fearless 
laugher.  She  hardly  knows  how  to  smile :  for  as 
soon  as  any  thing  catches  her  fancy,  her  voice  im- 
mediately bursts  her  lips,  and  widens  her  mouth  to 
its  full  extent.  Forgive  me,  Lucy.  I  believe  I 
am  spiteful. 

Lady  Betty  and  Miss  Clements,  in  low  voices, 
praised  me  for  my  presence  of  mind,  as  they  called 
it,  in  checking  Sir  Hargrave's  forwardness. 

Just  here,  Lucy,  I  laid  down  my  pen,  and  stept 
to  the  glass,  to  see  whether  I  could  not  please  my- 
self with  a  wise  frown  or  two  ;  at  least  with  a  solem- 
nity of  countenance,  that,  occasionally,  I  might 
dash  with  it  my  childishness  of  look;  which  cer- 
tainly encouraged  this  freedom  of  Miss  Barnevelt. 
But  I  could  not  please  myself.     My  muscles  have 


80  THE    HISTORY   OF 

never  been  used  to  any-thing  but  smiling :  so  fa- 
voured, so  beloved,  by  every  one  of  my  friends  ;  a 
heart  so  grateful  for  all  their  favours — How  can  I 
learn  now  to  frown ;  or  even  long  to  look  grave  ? 

All  this  time  the  scholar  sat  uneasily-careless. 

In  the  mean  time  Mr.  Reeves,  having  sent  for 
from  his  study  (his  house  being  near)  Bishop 
Burnet's  History  of  his  own  Times,  said  he  would, 
by  way  of  moderatorship  in  the  present  debate,  read 
them  a  passage,  to  which  he  believed  all  parties 
would  subscribe :  and  then  read  what  I  will  tran- 
scribe for  you  from  the  conclusion  to  that  perform- 
ance : 

'  I  have  often  thought  it  a  great  error  to  waste 
young  gentlemen's  years  so  long  in  learning  Latin, 
by  so  tedious  a  grammar.  I  know  those  who  are 
bred  to  the  profession  in  literature,  must  have  the 
Latin  correctly  ;  and  for  that  the  rules  of  gram- 
mar are  necessary :  but  these  rules  are  not  at  all 
requisite  to  those,  who  need  only  so  much  Latin,  as 
thoroughly  to  understand  and  delight  in  the  Roman 
authors  and  poets. 

'  But  suppose  a  youth  had,  either  for  want  of  me- 
mory, or  of  application,  an  incurable  aversion  to 
Latin,  his  education  is  not  for  that  to  be  despaired 
of:  there  is  much  noble  knowledge  to  be  had  in 
the  English  and  French  languages :  geography, 
history,  chiefly  that  of  our  own  country,  the  know- 
ledge of  nature,  and  the  more  practical  parts  of 
the  mathematics  (if  he  has  not  a  genius  for  the 
demonstrative)  may  make  a  gentleman  very  know- 
ing, though  he  has  not  a  word  of  Latin'  [And  why,  I 
would  fain  know,  said  Mr.  Reeves,  not  a  gentlewo- 
man ?].  '  There  is  a  fineness  of  thought,  and  a  no- 
bleness of  expression,  indeed,  in  the  Latin  authors' 
[This  makes  for  your  argument,  Mr.  Walden]  '  that 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  81 

will  make  them  the  entertainment  of  a  man's  whole 
life,  if  he  once  understands  and  reads  them  with  de- 
light' [Very  well,  said  Mr.  Walden  !]  But  if  this  can- 
not be  attained  to,  I  would  not  have  it  reckoned 
that  the  education  of  an  ill  Latin  scholar  is  to  be 
given  over.' 

Thus  far  the  bishop. 

We  all  know,  proceeded  Mr.  Reeves,  how  well 
Mr.  Locke  has  treated  this  subject.  And  he  is 
so  far  from  discouraging  the  fair  sex  from  learning 
languages,  that  he  gives  us  a  method  in  his  Trea- 
tise of  Education,  by  which  a  mother  may  not  only 
learn  Latin  herself,  but  be  able  to  teach  it  to  her 
son.  Be  not,  therefore,  ladies,  ashamed  either  of 
your  talents  or  acquirements.  Only  take  care,  you 
give  not  up  any  knowledge  that  is  more  laudable 
in  your  sex,  and  more  useful,  for  learning ;  and 
then  I  am  sure  you  will,  you  must,  be  the  more 
agreeable,  the  more  suitable  companions  for  it,  to 
men  of  sense.  Nor  let  any  man  have  so  narrow  a 
mind  as  to  be  apprehensive  for  his  own  prerogative, 
from  a  learned  woman.  A  woman  who  does  not 
behave  the  better  the  more  she  knows,  will  make  her 
husband  uneasy,  and  will  think  as  well  of  herself, 
were  she  utterly  illiterate  ;  nor  would  any  argument 
convince  her  of  her  duty.  Do  not  men  marry  with 
their  eyes  open  ?  And  cannot  they  court  whom 
they  please  ?  A  conceited,  a  vain  mind  in  a  wo- 
man cannot  be  hidden.  Upon  the  whole,  I  think 
it  may  be  fairly  concluded,  that  the  more  a  woman 
knows,  as  well  as  a  man,  the  wiser  she  will  generally 
be ;  and  the  more  regard  she  will  have  for  a  man  of 
sense  and  learning. 

Here  ended  Mr.  Reeves. 

Mr.  Walden  was  silent ;    yet    shrugged  up  his 
shoulders,  and  seemed  unsatisfied. 

The  conversation  then  took  a  more  general  turn, 


82  THE    HISTORY   OF 

in  which  every  one  bore  a  part.  Plays :,  fashion, 
dress,  and  the  public  entertainments,  were  the  sub- 
jects. 

Miss  Cantillon,  who  had  till  now  sat  a  little  un- 
easy, seemed  resolved  to  make  up  for  her  silence : 
but  did  not  shine  at  all  where  she  thought  herself 
most  intitled  to  make  a  figure. 

But  Miss  Clements  really  shone.  Yet  in  the  eye 
of  some  people,  what  advantages  has  folly  in  a  pretty 
woman,  over  even  wisdom  in  a  plain  one  ?  Sir  Har- 
grave  was  much  more  struck  with  the  pert  things 
spoken  without  fear  or  wit,  by  Miss  Cantillon,  than 
with  the  just  observations  that  fell  from  the  lips  of 
Miss  Clements. 

Mr.  Walden  made  no  great  figure  on  these 
fashionable  subjects ;  no,  not  on  that  of  the  plays: 
for  he  would  needs  force  into  conversation,  with  a 
preference  to  our  Shakespeare,  his  Sophocles,  his 
Euripides,  his  Terence ;  of  the  merits  of  whose  per- 
formances, how  great  soever,  no  one  present  but 
Mr.  Reeves  and  himself  could  judge,  except  by 
translations. 

Sir  Hargrave  spoke  well  on  the  subject  of  the 
reigning  fashions,  and  on  modern  dress,  so  much  the 
foible  of  the  present  age. 

Lady  Betty  and  Mrs.  Reeves  spoke  very  pro- 
perly of  the  decency  of  dress,  and  propriety  of 
fashions,  as  well  as  of  public  entertainments. 

Miss  Clements  put  in  here  also  with  advantage  to 
herself. 

Nor  would  Mr.  Walden  be  excluded  this  topic. 
But,  as  the  observations  he  made  on  it,  went  no 
deeper  than  what  it  was  presumed  he  might  have 
had  at  second-hand,  he  made  a  worse  figure  here, 
than  he  did  on  his  more  favourite  subject.  He  was, 
however,  heard,  till  he  was  for  bringing  in  his  Spar- 
tan jacket  (I  forget  what  he  called  it)  descending 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  83 

only  to  the  knees  of  the  women,  in  place  of  hoops ; 
and  the  Roman  toga  for  the  men. 

Miss  Barnevelt  broke  in  upon  the  scholar ;  but 
by  way  of  approbation  of  what  he  said;  and  went 
on  with  subjects  of  heroism,  without  permitting 
him  to  rally  and  proceed,  as  he  seemed  inclined 
to  do. 

After  praising  what  he  said  of  the  Spartan  and 
Roman  dresses,  she  fell  to  enumerating  her  heroes, 
both  antient  and  modern.  Achilles,  the  savage 
Achilles,  charmed  her.  Hector,  however,  was  a 
good  clever  man  :  yet  she  could  not  bear  to  think 
of  his  being  so  mean  as  to  intreat  a  favour,  though 
of  her  heroic  Achilles.  He  deserved  for  it,  she  said, 
to  have  his  corpse  dragged  round  the  Trojan  walls 
at  the  wheels  of  the  victor's  chariot.  Alexander  the 
Great  was  her  dear  creature  ;  and  Julius  Caesar  was 
a  very  pretty  felloxo. 

These  were  Miss  Barnevelt's  antient  heroes. 

Among  the  moderns,  the  great  Scanderbeg,  our 
Henry  V.  Henry  IV.  of  France,  Charles  XII.  of 
Sweden,  and  the  great  Czar  Peter,  who  my  grand- 
father used  to  say  was  worth  them  all,  were  her  fa- 
vourites. 

All  this  while  honest  Mr.  Singleton  had  a  smile 
at  the  service  of  every  speaker,  and  a  loud  laugh 
always  ready  at  the  baronet's. 

Sir  Hargrave  seemed  not  a  little  pleased  with  the 
honest  man's  complaisance ;  and  always  directed 
himself  to  him,  when  he  was  disposed  to  be  merry. 

Laughing,  you  know,  my  dear,  is  almost  as 
catching  as  gaping,  be  the  subject  ever  so  silly  ;  and 
more  than  once  he  shewed  by  his  eyes,  that  he 
could  have  devoured  Miss  Cantillon  for  generally 
adding  her  affected  Te-he  (twisting  and  bridling  be- 
hind her  fan)  to  his  louder  Hah,  hah,  hah,  hah. 


&4>  THE   HISTORY   OF 

What  a  length  have  I  run!  How  does  this  narra- 
tive letter-writing,  if  one  is  to  enter  into  minute 
and  characteristic  descriptions  and  conversations, 
draw  one  on ! — I  will  leave  off  for  the  present :  yet 
have  not  quite  dismissed  the  company  (though  I 
have  done  with  the  argument)  that  I  thought  to 
have  parted  with  before  I  concluded  this  letter. 

But  1  know  I  shall  please  my  uncle  in  the  livelier 
parts  of  it,  by  the  handle  they  will  give  him  against 
his  poor  niece.  My  grandmother,  and  aunt  Selby, 
will  be  pleased,  and  so  will  you,  my  Lucy,  with  all  I 
write,  for  the  writer's  sake  :  such  is  their  and  your 
partial  love  to 

Their  and  your  ever-grateful 

HARRIET. 


LETTER   XIV. 

*MISS    BYRON.      IN    CONTINUATION. 

By  the  time  tea  was  ready,  Lady  Betty  whisper- 
ingly  congratulated  me  on  having  made  so  consider- 
able a  conquest,  as  she  was  sure  I  had,  by  Sir  Har- 
grave's  looks. 

She  took  notice  also  of  a  gallant  expression  of 
his,  uttered,  as  she  would  have  it,  with  an  earnest- 
ness that  gave  it  a  meaning  beyond  a  common  com- 
pliment. My  cousin  Reeves  had  asked  Miss  Cle- 
ments if  she  could  commend  to  me  an  honest,  mo- 
dest man-servant?  J,  said  Sir  Hargrave,  can.  I  my- 
self shall  be  proud  to  wear  Miss  Byron's  livery ; 
and  that  for  life. 

Miss  Cantillon,  who  was  within  hearing  of  this, 
and  had  seemed  to  be  highly  taken  with  the  baro- 
net, could  hardly  let  her  eyes  be  civil  to  me  ;  and 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  85 

yet  her  really  pretty  mouth,  occasionally,  worked  it- 
self into  forced  smiles,  and  an  affectation  of  com- 
plaisance. 

Sir  Hargrave  was  extremely  obsequious  to  me 
all  the  tea-time ;  and  seemed  in  earnest  a  little  un- 
easy in  himself:  and  after  tea  he  took  my  cousin 
Reeves  into  the  next  room ;  and  there  made  your 
Harriet  the  subject  of  a  serious  conversation ;  and 
desired  his  interest  with  me. 

He  prefaced  his  declaration  to  Mr.  Reeves,  with 
assuring  him,  that  he  had  sought  for  an  opportunity 
more  than  once,  to  be  admitted  into  my  company, 
when  he  was  last  at  Northampton  ;  and  that  he  had 
not  intruded  himself  then  into  this  company,  had  he 
not  heard  I  was  to  be  there. 

He  made  protestations  of  his  honourable  views ; 
which  looked  as  if  he  thought  they  might  be  doubt- 
ed, if  he  had  not  given  such  assurances.  A  tacit 
implication  of  an  imagined  superiority,  as  well  in 
consequence  as  fortune. 

Mr.  Reeves  told  him,  It  was  a  rule  which  all  my 
relations  had  set  themselves,  not  to  interfere  with 
my  choice,  let  it  be  placed  on  whom  it  would. 

Sir  Hargrave  called  himself  a  happy  man  upon 
this  intelligence. 

He  afterwards,  on  his  return  to  company,  found 
an  opportunity,  as  Mrs.  Reeves  and  I  were  talking 
at  the  further  part  of  the  room,  in  very  vehement 
terms,  to  declare  himself  to  me  an  admirer  of  per- 
fections of  his  own  creation  ;  for  he  volubly  enumer- 
ated many  ;  and  begged  my  permission  to  pay  his 
respects  to  me  at  Mr.  Reeves's. 

Mr.  Reeves,  Sir  Hargrave,  said  I,  will  receive 
what  visits  he  pleases  in  his  own  house.  I  have  no 
permission  to  give. 

He  bowed,  and  made  me  a  very  high  compliment, 
taking  what  I  said  for  a  permission, 
i 


86  THE   HISTORY   OP 

What,  Lucy,  can  a  woman  do  with  these  self- 
flatterers  ? 

Mr.  Walden  took  his  leave :  Sir  Hargrave  his  : 
he  wanted,  I  saw,  to  speak  to  me,  at  his  departure ; 
but  I  gave  him  no  opportunity. 

Mr.  Singleton  seemed  also  inclined  to  go,  but 
knew  not  how ;  and  having  lost  the  benefit  of  their 
example  by  his  irresolution,  sat  down. 

Lady  Betty  then  repeated  her  congratulations. 
How  many  ladies,  said  she,  and  fine  ladies  too, 
have  sighed  in  secret  for  Sir  Hargrave.  You  will 
have  the  glory,  Miss  Byron,  of  fixing  the  wavering 
heart  of  a  man  who  has  done,  and  is  capable  of 
doing,  a  great  deal  of  mischief. 

The  ladies,  madam,  said  I,  who  can  sigh  in  secret 
for  such  a  man  as  Sir  Hargrave,  must  either  deserve 
a  great  deal  of  pity,  or  none  at  all. 

Sir  Hargrave,  said  Miss  Cantillon,  is  a  very  fine 
gentleman  ;  and  so  looked  upon,  I  assure  you :  and 
he  has  a  noble  estate. 

It  is  very  happy,  replied  I,  that  we  do  not  all  of 
us  like  the  same  person.  I  mean  not  to  disparage 
Sir  Hargrave  ;  but  I  have  compassion  for  the  ladies 
who  sigh  for  him  in  secret.  One  woman  only  can 
be  his  wife ;  and  perhaps  she  will  not  be  one  of 
those  who  sigh  for  him  ;  especially  were  he  to  know 
that  she  does. 

Perhaps  not,  replied  Miss  Cantillon :  but  I  do 
assure  you,  that  /  am  not  one  of  those  who  sigh  for 
Sir  Hargrave. 

The  ladies  smiled. 

I  am  glad  of  it,  madam,  said  I.     Every  woman 

should  have  her  heart  in  her  own  keeping,  till  she 

can  find  a  worthy  man  to  bestow  it  upon. 

Miss  Barnevelt  took  a  tilt  in  heroics. 

Well,  ladies,  said  she,  you  may  talk  of  love  and 

love  as  much  as  you  please  :  but  it  is  my  glory,  that 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  87 

I  never  knew  what  love  was.  I,  for  my  part,  like 
a  brave  man,  a  gallant  man :  one  in  whose  loud 
praise  fame  has  cracked  half  a  dozen  trumpets. 
But  as  to  your  milksops,  your  dough-baked  lovers, 
who  stay  at  home  and  strut  among  the  women, 
when  glory  is  to  be  gained  in  the  martial  field ;  I  de- 
spise them  with  all  my  heart.  I  have  often  wished 
that  the  foolish  heads  of  such  fellows  as  these  were 
cut  off  in  time  of  war,  and  sent  over  to  the  heroes 
to  fill  their  cannon  with,  when  they  batter  in  breach, 
by  way  of  saving  ball. 

I  am  afraid,  said  Lady  Betty,  humouring  this  ro- 
mantic speech,  that  if  the  heads  of  such  persons 
were  as  soft  as  we  are  apt  sometimes  to  think  them, 
they  would  be  of  as  little  service  abroad  as  they  are 
at  home. 

O,  madam,  replied  Miss  Barnevelt,  there  is  a 
good  deal  of  lead  in  the  heads  of  these  fellows.  But 
were  their  brains,  said  the  shocking  creature,  if  any 
they  have,  made  to  fly  about  the  ears  of  an  enemy, 
they  would  serve  both  to  blind  and  terrify  him. 

Even  Mr.  Singleton  was  affected  with  this  horrid 
speech  :  for  he  clapt  both  his  hands  to  his  head,  as 
if  he  were  afraid  for  his  brains. 

Lady  Betty  was  very  urgent  with  us  to  pass  the 
evening  with  her  ;  but  we  excused  ourselves  ;  and 
when  we  were  in  the  coach,  Mr.  Reeves  told  me, 
that  I  should  find  the  baronet  a  very  troublesome 
and  resolute  lover,  if  I  did  not  give  him  counte- 
nance. 

And  so,  Sir,  said  I,  you  would  have  me  do,  as  I 
have  heard  many  a  good  woman  has  done,  marry  a 
man,  in  order  to  get  rid  of  his  importunity. 

And  a  certain  cure  too,  let  me  tell  you,  cousin, 
said  he,  smiling. 

We  found  at  home,  waiting  for  Mr.  Reeves's  re- 
i  2 


88  THE    HISTORY   OF 

turn,  Sir  John  Allestree :  a  worthy  sensible  man,  of 
plain  and  unaffected  manners,  upwards  of  fifty. 

Mr.  Reeves  mentioning  to  him  our  past  enter- 
tainment and  company,  Sir  John  gave  us  such  an 
account  of  Sir  Hargrave,  as  helped  me  not  only  in 
the  character  I  have  given  of  him,  but  let  me  know 
that  he  is  a  very  dangerous  and  enterprising  man. 
He  says,  that  laughing  and  light  as  he  is  in  com- 
pany, he  is  malicious,  ill-natured,  and  designing ; 
and  sticks  at  nothing  to  carry  a  point  on  which  he 
has  once  set  his  heart.  He  has  ruined,  Sir  John 
says,  three  young  creatures  already  under  vows  of 
marriage. 

Sir  John  spoke  of  him  as  a  managing  man,  as 
to  his  fortune  :  he  said,  That  though  he  would,  at 
times,  be  lavish  in  the  pursuit  of  his  pleasures;  yet 
that  he  had  some  narrownesses  which  made  him 
despised,  and  that  most  by  those  for  whose  regard 
a  good  man  would  principally  wish  ;  his  neighbours 
and  tenants. 

Couldyouhave  thought,  my  Lucy,  that  this  laugh- 
ing, fine-dressing  man,  could  have  been  a  man  of 
malice  ;  of  resentment ;  of  enterprize  ;  a  cruel  man  ? 
Yet  Sir  John  told  two  very  bad  stories  of  him,  be- 
sides what  I  have  mentioned,  which  prove  him  to  be 
all  I  have  said. 

But  I  had  no  need  of  these  stories  to  determine 
me  against  receiving  his  addresses.  What  I  saw  of 
him  was  sufficient ;  though  Sir  John  made  no  man- 
ner of  doubt  (on  being  told  by  Mr.  Reeves,  in 
confidence,  of  his  application  to  him  for  leave  to 
visit  me)  that  he  was  quite  in  earnest ;  and  making 
me  a  compliment,  added,  that  he  knew  Sir  Har- 
grave was  inclined  to  marry  ;  and  the  more,  as  one 
half  of  his  estate,  on  failure  of  issue  male,  would 
go  at  his  death  to  a  distant  relation  whom  he  hated ; 
but    for    no   other    reason    than  for  admonishing 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  89 

him,  when  a  school-boy,  on  his  low  and  mischiev- 
ous pranks. 

His  estate,  Sir  John  told  my  cousin,  is  full  as 
considerable  as  reported.  And  Mr.  Reeves,  after 
Sir  John  went  away,  said,  What  a  glory  will  it  be 
to  you,  cousin  Byron,  to  reform  such  a  man,  and 
make  his  great  fortune  a  blessing  to  multitudes ;  as 
I  am  sure  would  be  your  endeavour  to  do,  were  you 
Lady  Pollexfen ! 

But,  my  Lucy,  were  Sir  Hargrave  king  of  one 
half  of  the  globe,  I  would  not  go  to  the  altar  with 
him. 

But  if  he  be  a  very  troublesome  man,  what  shall 
I  say  to  him  ?  I  can  deal  pretty  well  with  those, 
who  will  be  kept  at  arms  length  ;  but  I  own,  I  should 
be  very  much  perplexed  with  resolute  wretches. 
The  civility  I  think  myself  obliged  to  pay  every  one 
who  professes  a  regard  for  me,  might  subject  me  to 
inconveniencies  with  violent  spirits,  which,  protected 
as  I  have  been  by  my  uncle  Selby,  and  my  good 
Mr.  Deane,  I  never  yet  have  known.  O  my  Lucy, 
to  what  evils,  but  for  that  protection,  might  not  I, 
a  sole,  an  independent  young  woman,  have  been 
exposed  ?  Since  men,  many  men,  are  to  be  looked 
upon  as  savages,  as  wild  beasts  of  the  desert ;  and  a 
single  and  independent  woman  they  hunt  after  as 
their  proper  prey. 

To  have  done  with  Sir  Hargrave  for  the  present, 
and  I  wish  I  may  be  able  to  say  for  ever ;  Early 
in  the  morning,  a  billet  was  brought  from  him  to 
Mr.  Reeves,  excusing  himself  from  paying  him  a 
visit  that  morning  (as  he  had  intended)  by  reason 
of  the  sudden  and  desperate  illness  of  a  relation, 
whose  seat  was  near  Reading,  with  whom  he  had 
large  concerns,  and  who  was  desirous  to  see  him 
before  he  died.  As  it  was  impossible  that  he  could 
return  under  three  days,  which,  he  said,  would 
t  3 


90  THE    HISTORY   OP 

appear  as  three  years  to  him,  and  he  was  obliged  to 
set  out  that  moment ;  he  could  not  dispense  with 
himself  for  putting  in  his  claim,  as  he  called  it,  to 
Miss  Byron's  favour,  and  confirming  his  declaration 
of  yesterday.  In  very  high  strains,  he  professed 
himself  her  admirer;  and  begged  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Reeves's  interest  with  her.  One  felicity,  he  said, 
he  hoped  for  from  his  absence,  which  was,  that  as 
Miss  Byron,  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Reeves,  would  have 
time  to  consider  of  his  offers  ;  he  presumed  to  hope 
he  should  not  be  subjected  to  a  repulse. 

And  now,  my  Lucy,  you  have  before  you  as 
good  an  account  as  1  can  give  you  of  my  two  new 
lovers. 

How  I  shall  manage  with  them,  I  know  not :  but 
I  begin  to  think  that  those  young  women  are  hap- 
piest, whose  friends  take  all  the  trouble  of  this  sort 
upon  them;  only  consulting  their  daughters'  inclina- 
tions as  preliminaries  are  adjusting. 

My  friends  indeed  pay  a  high  compliment  to  my 
discretion,  when  they  so  generously  allow  me  to 
judge  for  myself:  and  we  young  women  are  fond  of 
being  our  own  mistresses :  but  I  must  say,  that  to 
me  this  compliment  has  been,  and  is,  a  painful  one ; 
for  two  reasons ;  That  I  cannot  but  consider  their 
goodness  as  a  task  upon  me,  which  requires  my  ut- 
most circumspection,  as  well  as  gratitude  ;  and  that 
they  have  shewn  more  generosity  in  dispensing  with 
their  authority,  than  I  have  done  whenever  1  have 
acted  so  as  to  appear,  though  hit  to  appear,  to 
accept  of  the  dispensation  :  let  me  add  besides,  that 
now,  when  I  find  myself  likely  to  be  addressed  to 
by  mere  strangers,  by  men  who  grew  not  into  my 
knowledge  insensibly,  as  our  neighbours  Greville, 
Fenwick,  and  Orme,  did,  I  cannot  but  think  it  has 
the  appearance  of  confidence,  to  stand  out  to  receive, 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  91 

as  a  creature  uncontroulable,  the  first  motions  to  an 
address  of  this  awful  nature.  Awful  indeed  might 
it  be  called,  were  one's  heart  to  incline  towards  a 
particular  person. 

Allow  me  then  for  the  future,  my  revered  grand- 
mamma, and  you,  my  beloved  and  equally  honoured 
uncle  and  aunt  Selby,  allow  me  to  refer  myself  to 
you,  if  any  person  offers  to  whom  I  may  happen  to 
have  no  strong  objections.  As  to  Mr.  Fowler,  and 
the  baronet,  I  must  noio  do  as  well  as  I  can  with 
them.  It  is  much  easier  for  a  young  woman  to  say 
no,  than  yes.  But  for  the  time  to  come  I  will  not 
have  the  assurance  to  act  for  myself.  I  know  your 
partiality  for  your  Harriet  too  well,  to  doubt  the 
merit  of  your  recommendation. 

As  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Reeves  require  me  to  shew 
them  what  I  write,  they  are  fond  of  indulging  me 
in  the  employment :  you  will  therefore  be  the  less 
surprised  that  1  write  so  much  in  so  little  a  time, 
Miss  Byron  is  in  her  closet ;  Miss  Byron  is  "writing; 
is  an  excuse  sufficient,  they  seem  to  think,  to  every- 
body, because  they  allow  it  to  be  one  to  them :  but 
besides,  I  know  they  believe  they  oblige  you  all  by 
the  opportunity  they  so  kindly  give  me  of  shewing 
my  duty  and  love  where  so  justly  due. 

I  am,  however,  surprised  at  casting  my  eye  back. 
Two  sheets  !  and  such  a  quantity  before  ! — Uncon- 
scionable, say ;  and  let  me,  echo-like,  repeat, 
Unconscionable 

HARRIET  BYRON. 

Sunday  night. 
Letters  from  Northamptonshire,  by  Farmer  Jen- 
kins !  I  kiss  the  seals.  What  agreeable  things, 
now,  has  my  Lucy  to  say  to  her  Harriet  ?  Dis- 
agreeable ones  she  cannot  write,  if  all  my 
beloved  friends  are  well. 


92  THE   HJSTORY   OF 


LETTER  XV, 


MISS    BYRON.      IN   CONTINUATION. 

Monday,  February  6. 

And  so  my  uncle  Selby,  you  tell  me,  is  making 
observations  in  writing,  on  my  letters ;  and  waits 
For  nothing  more  to  begin  with  me,  than  my  con- 
clusion of  the  conversations  that  offered  at  Lady 
Betty's. 

And  is  it  expected  that  I  should  go  on  furnishing 
weapons  against  myself? 
It  is. 

Well ;  with  all  my  heart.  As  long  as  I  can  con- 
tribute to  his  amusement ;  as  long  as  my  grand- 
mamma is  pleased  and  diverted  with  what  I  write, 
as  well  as  with  his  pleasantries  on  her  girl ;  I  will 
proceed. 

Well,  but  will  you  not,  my  Harriet,  methinks  you 
ask,  write  with  less  openness,  with  more  reserve,  in 
apprehension  of  the  rod  which  you  know  hangs 
over  your  head  ? 

Indeed  I  will  not.  It  is  my  glory,  that  I  have 
not  a  thought  in  my  heart  which  I  would  conceal 
from  any  one  whom  it  imported  to  know  it,  and  who 
would  be  gratified  by  the  revealing  of  it.  And  yet 
I  am  a  little  chagrined  at  the  wager  which  you  tell 
me  my  uncle  has  actually  laid  with  my  grand- 
mamma, that  I  shall  not  return  from  London  with 
a  sound  heart. 

And  does  he  teaze  you,  my  Lucy,  on  this  subject, 
with  reminding  you  of  your  young  partiality  for 
Captain  Duncan,  in  order  to  make  good  his  asser- 
tion of  the  susceptibility  of  us  all  ? 

Why  so  let  him.  And  why  should  you  deny, 
that  you  were  susceptible  of  a  natural  passion? 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  93 

You  must  not  be  prudish,  Lucy.  If  you  are  not, 
all  his  raillery  will  lose  its  force. 

What  better  assurance  can  I  give  to  my  uncle, 
and  to  all  my  friends,  that  if  I  were  caught,  I 
would  own  it,  than  by  advising  you  not  to  be 
ashamed  to  confess  a  sensibility  which  is  no  dis- 
grace, when  duty  and  prudence  are  our  guides, 
and  the  object  worthy  ? 

Your  man  indeed  was  not  worthy,  as  it  proved  ; 
but  he  was  a  very  specious  creature ;  and  you  knew 
not  his  bad  character,  when  you  suffered  liking  to 
grow  into  love. 

But  when  the  love-fever  was  at  the  height,  did 
you  make  any-body  uneasy  with  your  passion  ?  Did 
you  run  to  the  woods  and  groves  to  record  it  on  the 
barks  of  trees  ? — No  ! — You  sighed  in  silence  in- 
deed :  but  it  was  but  for  a  little  while.  I  got  your 
secret  from  you ;  not,  however,  till  it  betrayed  itself 
in  your  pined  countenance ;  and  then  the  man's 
discovered  unworthiness,  and  your  own  discretion, 
enabled  you  to  conquer  a  passion  to  which  you  had 
given  way,  supposing  it  unconquerable,  because  you 
thought  it  would  cost  you  pains  to  contend  with  it. 

As  to  myself,  you  know  I  have  hitherto  been  on 
my  guard.  I  have  been  careful  ever  to  shut  the 
door  of  my  heart  against  the  blind  deity,  the  mo- 
ment I  could  imagine  him  setting  his  incroaching 
foot  on  the  threshold,  which  I  think  liking  may  be 
called.  Had  he  once  gained  entrance,  perhaps  I 
might  have  come  off  but  simply. 

But  I  hope  I  am  in  the  less  danger  of  falling  in 
love  with  any  man,  as  I  can  be  civil  and  courteous 
to  all.  When  a  stream  is  sluiced  off  into  several 
channels,  there  is  the  less  fear  that  it  will  overflow 
its  banks.  I  really  think  I  never  shall  be  in  love 
with  any-body,  till  duty  directs  inclination. 


94<  THE    HISTORY   OF 

Excuse  me,  Lucy.  I  do  now-and-then,  you 
know,  get  into  a  boasting  humour.  But  then  my 
punishment,  as  in  most  other  cases,  follows  my 
fault :  my  uncle  pulls  me  down,  and  shews  me,  that 
I  am  not  half  so  good  as  the  rest  of  my  friends 
think  me. 

You  tell  me,  that  Mr.  Greville  will  be  in  London 
in  a  very  few  days.  I  can't  help  it.  He  pretends 
business,  you  say;  and  (since  that  calls  him  up) 
intends  to  give  himself  a  month's  pleasure  in  town, 
and  to  take  his  share  of  the  public  entertainments. 
Well,  so  let  him.  But  I  hope  that  I  am  not  to  be 
either  his  business  or  entertainment.  After  a  civil 
neighbourly  visit,  or  so,  I  hope,  I  shall  noi.  be 
tormented  with  him. 

What  happened  once  betwixt  Mr.  Fenwick  and 
him  gave  me  pain  enough ;  exposed  me  enough, 
surely !  A  young  woman,  though  without  her  own 
fault,  made  the  occasion  of  a  rencounter  between 
two  men  of  fortune,  must  be  talked  of  too  much  for 
her  own  liking,  or  she  must  be  a  strange  creature. 
What  numbers  of  people  has  the  unhappy  rashness 
of  those  two  men  brought  to  stare  at  me  ?  And 
with  what  difficulty  did  my  uncle  and  Mr.  Deane 
bring  them  into  so  odd  a  compromise,  as  they  at 
last  came  into,  to  torment  me,  as  I  may  call  it,  by 
joint  consent,  notwithstanding  all  I  could  say  to 
them  ;  which  was  the  only  probable  way,  shocking 
creatures  !  to  prevent  murder  ? 

But,  Lucy,  what  an  odd  thing  is  it  in  my  uncle, 
to  take  hold  of  what  I  said  in  one  of  my  letters, 
that  I  had  a  good  mind  to  give  you  a  sketch  of 
what  I  might  suppose  the  company  at  Lady  Betty's 
would  say  of  your  Harriet,  were  each  to  write  her 
character  to  their  confidents  or  correspondents,  as 
she  has  done  theirs  to  you ! 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  95 

I  think  there  is  a  little  concealed  malice  in  my 
uncle's  command :  but  I  obey. 

To  begin  then — Lady  Betty,  who  owns  she 
thinks  favourably  of  me,  I  will  suppose  would  write 
to  her  Lucy,  in  such  terms  as  these :  But  shall  I 
suppose  every  one  to  be  so  happy,  as  to  have  her 
Lucy? 

'  Miss  Byron,  of  whom  you  have  heard  Mr. 
Reeves  talk  so  much,  discredits  not,  in  the  main, 
the  character  he  has  given  her.  We  must  allow 
a  little,  you  know,  for  the  fondness  of  relationship. 

'  The  girl  has  had  a  good  education,  and  owes 
all  her  advantages  to  it.  But  it  is  a  country  and 
bookish  one:  and  that  won't  do  every-thing  for  one 
of  our  sex,  if  any-thing.  Poor  thing !  she  never  was 
in  town  before ! — But  she  seems  docile,  and,  for  a 
country  girl,  is  tolerably  genteel :  I  think,  there- 
fore, I  shall  receive  no  discredit  by  introducing  her 
into  the  beau  monde.' 

Miss  Clements,  perhaps,  agreeable  to  the  good- 
ness of  her  kind  heart,  would  have  written  thus : 

'  Miss  Byron  is  an  agreeable  girl :  she  has  invited 
me  to  visit  her ;  and  I  hope  I  shall  like  her  better 
and  better.  She  has,  one  may  see,  kept  worthy 
persons'  company  ;  and  I  dare  say,  will  preserve 
the  improvement  she  has  gained  by  it.  She  is 
lively  and  obliging :  she  is  young ;  not  more  than 
twenty ;  yet  looks  rather  younger,  by  reason  of  a 
country  bloom,  which,  however,  misbecomes  her 
not ;  and  gives  a  modesty  to  her  first  appearance, 
that  prepossesses  one  in  her  favour.  What  a  cast- 
away would  Miss  Byron  be,  if  knowing  so  well,  as 
she  seems  to  know,  what  the  duty  of  others  is,  she 
would  forget  her  own  !' 


9G  THE    HISTORY   OF 

Miss  Cantillon  would  perhaps  thus  write : 

'  There  was  Miss  Harriet  Byron  of  Northamp- 
tonshire ;  a  young  woman  in  whose  favour  report 
has  been  very  lavish.  I  can't  say  that  I  think  her 
so  very  extraordinary :  yet  she  is  well  enough  for  a 
country  girl.  But  though  I  do  not  impute  to  her  a 
very  pert  look,  yet  if  she  had  not  been  set  up  for 
something  beyond  what  she  is,  by  all  her  friends, 
who,  it  seems,  are  excessively  fond  of  her,  she  might 
have  had  a  more  humble  opinion  of  herself  than  she 
seems  to  have  when  she  is  set  a  talking.  She  may, 
indeed,  make  a  figure  in  a  country  assembly ;  but 
in  the  London  world  she  must  be  not  a  little  awk- 
ward, having  never  been  here  before. 

*  I  take  her  to  have  a  great  deal  of  art.  But  to 
do  her  justice,  she  has  no  bad  complexion :  that, 
you  know,  is  a  striking  advantage :  but  to  me  she 
has  a  babyish  look,  especially  when  she  smiles ;  yet 
I  suppose  she  has  been  told  that  her  smiles  become 
her  ;  for  she  is  always  smiling — so  like  a  simpleton, 
I  was  going  to  say ! 

'  Upon  the  whole,  I  see  nothing  so  engaging  in 
her  as  to  have  made  her  the  idol  she  is  with  every- 
body— And  what  little  beauty  she  has,  it  cannot 
last.  For  my  part,  were  I  a  man,  the  clear  bru- 
nette—  But  you  will  think  I  am  praising  my- 
self.' 

Miss  Barnevelt  would  perhaps  thus  write  to  her 
Lucy — To  her  Lucy! — Upon  my  word  I  will  not 
let  her  have  a  Lucy — She  shall  have  a  brother  man 
to  write  to,  not  a  woman,  and  he  shall  have  a  fierce 
name. 

We  will  suppose,  that  she  also  had  been  describ- 
ing the  rest  of  the  company : 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  97 

<  Well  but,  my  dear  Bombardino,  I  am  now  to 
give  you  a  description  of  Miss  Byron.  'Tis  the 
softest,  gentlest,  smiling  rogue  of  a  girl — 1  protest, 
I  could  five  or  six  times  have  kissed  her,  for  what 
she  said,  and  for  the  manner  she  spoke  in — for  she 
has  been  used  to  prate ;  a  favourite  child  in  her 
own  family,  one  may  easily  see  that.  Yet  so  pret- 
tily loth  to  speak  till  spoken  to  ! — Such  a  blushing 
little  rogue ! — 'Tis  a  dear  girl,  and  I  wished  twenty 
times  as  I  sat  by  her,  that  I  had  been  a  man  for 
her  sake.  Upon  my  honour,  Bombardino,  I  believe 
if  I  had,  I  should  have  caught  her  up,  popt  her 
under  one  of  my  arms,  and  run  away  with  her.' 

Something  like  this,  my  Lucy,  did  Miss  Barnevelt 
once  say. 

Having  now  dismissed  the  women,  I  come  to 
Mr.  Singleton,  Mr.  Walden,  and  Sir  Hargrave. 

Mr.  Walden  (himself  a  Pasquin)  would  thus  per- 
haps have  written  to  his  Marforio  : 

'  The  first  lady,  whom,  as  the  greatest  stranger, 
I  shall  take  upon  me  to  describe,  is  Miss  Harriet 
Byron  of  Northamptonshire.  In  her  person  she  is 
not  disagreeable  ;  and  most  people  think  her  pretty. 
But,  what  is  prettiness  ?  Why,  nevertheless,  in  a 
woman,  prettiness  is — pretty:  What  other  word 
can  I  so  fitly  use  of  a  person,  who,  though  a  little 
sightly,  cannot  be  called  a  beauty  ? 

'  I  will  allow,  that  we  men  are  not  wrong  in  ad- 
miring modest  women  for  the  graces  of  their  per- 
sons; but  let  them  be  modest;  let  them  return  the 
compliment,  and  revere  us  for  our  capaciousness 
of  mind :  and  so  they  will,  if  they  are  brought  up 
to  know  their  own  weakness,  and  that  they  are 

K 


98  THE    HISTORY   OF 

but  domestic  animals  of  a  superior  order.  Even 
ignorance,  let  me  tell  you,  my  Marforio,  is  pretty 
in  a  woman.  Humility  is  one  of  their  principal 
graces.  Women  hardly  ever  set  themselves  to 
acquire  the  knowledge  that  is  proper  to  men,  but 
they  neglect  for  it,  what  more  indispensably  be- 
longs to  women.  To  have  them  come  to  their 
husbands,  to  their  brothers,  and  even  to  their  lo- 
vers when  they  have  a  mind  to  know  any-thing  out 
of  their  way,  and  beg  to  be  instructed  and  inform- 
ed, inspireth  them  with  the  becoming  humility 
which  I  have  touched  upon,  and  giveth  us  import- 
ance with  them. 

'  Indeed,  my  Marforio,  there  are  very  few  topics 
that  arise  in  conversation  among  men,  upon  which 
women  ought  to  open  their  lips.  Silence  becomes 
them.  Let  them  therefore  hear,  wonder,  and  im- 
prove, in  silence.  They  are  naturally  contentious, 
and  lovers  of  contradiction'  [something  like  this 
Mr.  Walden  once  threw  out :  and  you  know  who, 
my  Lucy — but  I  am  afraid — has  said  as  much] 
'  and  shall  we  qualify  them  to  be  disputants  against 
ourselves  ? 

'  These  reflections,  Marforio,  are  not  foreign  to 
my  subject.  This  girl,  this  Harriet  Byron,  is  ap- 
plauded for  a  young  woman  of  reading  and  obser- 
vation. But  there  was  another  lady  present,  Miss 
Clements,  who  (if  there  be  any  merit  to  a  woman 
in  it)  appeareth  to  me  to  excel  her  in  the  compass 
of  her  reading ;  and  that  upon  the  strength  of  her 
own  diligence  and  abilities  ;  which  is  not  the  case 
with  this  Miss  Harriet ;  for  she,  truly,  hath  had 
some  pains  taken  with  her  by  her  late  grandfather, 
a  man  of  erudition,  who  had  his  education  among 
us.  This  old  gentleman,  I  am  told,  took  it  into 
his  head,  having  no  grandson,  to  give  this  girl  a 
bookish,  turn  ;  but  he  wisely  stopt  at  her  mother- 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  99 

tongue ;  only  giving  her  a  smattering  in  French 
and  Italian. 

'  As  I  saw  that  the  eyes  of  every  one  were  upon 
her,  I  was  willing  to  hear  what  she  had  to  say  for 
herself.  Poor  girl !  she  will  suffer,  I  doubt,  for  her 
speciousness.  Yet  I  cannot  say,  all  things  con- 
sidered, that  she  was  very  malapert :  that  quality 
is  yet  to  come.     She  is  young. 

'  I  therefore  trifled  a  little  with  her :  and  went 
further  than  I  generally  choose  to  go  with  the  read- 
ing species  of  women,  in  order  to  divert  an  inunda- 
tion of  nonsense  and  foppery,  breaking  in  from  one 
of  the  company;  Sir  Hargrave  Pollexfen:  of  whom 
more  anon. 

'  You  know,  Marforio,  that  a  man,  when  he  is 
provoked  to  fight  with  an  overgrown  boy,  hath 
every-body  against  him :  so  hath  a  scholar  who  en- 
gageth  on  learned  topics  with  a  woman.  The  sex 
must  be  flattered  at  the  expence  of  truth.  Many 
things  are  thought  to  be  pretty  from  the  mouth  of  a 
woman,  which  would  be  egregiously  weak  and  silly 
proceeding  from  that  of  a  man.  His  very  eminence 
in  learning,  on  such  a  contention,  would  tend  only 
to  exalt  her,  and  depreciate  himself.  As  the  girl 
was  every-body 's  favourite,  and  as  the  baronet 
seemed  to  eye  her  with  particular  regard,  I  spared 
her.  A  man  would  not,  you  know,  spoil  a  girl's 
fortune.' 

But  how,  Lucy,  shall  I  be  able  to  tell  what  I 
imagine  Sir  Hargrave  would  have  written  ?  Can  I 
do  it,  if  I  place  him  in  the  light  of  a  lover,  and  not 
either  underdo  his  character  as  such,  or  incur  the 
censure  of  vanity  and  conceit  ? 

Well,  but  are  you  sure,  Harriet,  methinks  my  un- 
cle asks,  that  the  baronet  is  really  and  truly  so  egre- 
giously smitten  with  you,  as  he  pretended  he  was  ? 
'k2 


100  THE    HISTORY    OF 

Why,  ay !  That's  the  thing,  Sir  ! 

You  girls  are  so  apt  to  take  in  earnest  the  com- 
pliments made  you  by  men  ! — 

And  so  we  are.  But  our  credulity,  my  dear  Sir, 
is  a  greater  proof  of  our  innocence,  than  men's  pro- 
fessions are  of  their  sincerity.  So,  let  losers  speak, 
and  winners  laugh. 

But  let  him  be  in  jest,  if  he  will.  In  jest  or  in 
earnest,  Sir  Hargrave  must  be  extravagant,  I  ween, 
in  love-speeches.  And  that  I  may  not  be  thought 
wholly  to  decline  this  part  of  my  task,  I  will  sup- 
pose him  professing  with  Hudibras,  after  he  has 
praised  me  beyond  measure,  for  graces  of  his  own 
creation ; 

The  sun  shall  now  no  more  dispense 
His  own,  but  Harriet's  influence. 
Where-e'er  she  treads,  her  feet  shall  set 
The  primrose  and  the  violet : 
Ali  spices,  perfumes,  and  sweet  powders, 
Shall  borrow  from  her  breath  their  odours  : 
Worlds  shall  depend  upon  her  eye, 
And  when  she  frowns  upon  them,  die. 

And  what  if  I  make  him  address  me,  by  way  of 
apostrophe,  shall  1  say  ?  (writing  to  his  friend)  in  the 
following  strain  ? 

My  faith  [my  friend']  is  adamantine 
As  chains  of  destiny,  I'll  maintain; 
True,  as  Apollo  ever  spoke, 
Or  oracle  from  heart  of  oak: 
Then  shine  upon  me  but  benignly, 
With  that  one,  and  that  other  pigsnye; 
The  sun  and  day  shall  sooner  part, 
Than  love  or  you  shake  off  my  heart. 

Well,  but  what,  my  Harriet,  would  honest  Mr. 
Singleton  have  written,  had  he  written  about  you  ? 

Why  thus,  perhaps,  my  Lucy  :  and  to  his  grand- 
mother ;  for  she  is  living. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  101 

*  We  had  rare  fun  at  dinner,  and  after  dinner, 
my  grandmother. 

'  There  was  one  Miss  Barnevelt,  a  fine  tall  portly 
young  lady. 

'  There  was  Miss  Clements,  not  handsome,  but 
very  learned,  and  who,  as  was  easy  to  perceive, 
could  hold  a  good  argument,  on  occasion. 

1  There  was  Miss  Cantillon;  as  pretty  a  young 
ladv  as  one  would  wish  to  behold  in  a  summer  s  day. 

1  And  there  was  one  Miss  Byron,  a  Northampton- 
shire lady,  whom  I  never  saw  before. 

*  There  was  Mr.  Walden,  a  most  famous  scholar. 
I  thought  him  very  entertaining ;  for  he  talked  of 
learning,  and  such-like  things ;  which  I  know  not 
so  much  of  as  I  wish  I  did ;  because  my  want  of 
knowing  a  little  Latin  and  Greek  has  made  my  un- 
derstanding look  less  than  other  men's.  O  my 
grandmother !  what  a  wise  man  would  the  being  able 
to  talk  Latin  and  Greek  have  made  me !  And  yet  1 
thought  that  now-and-then  Mr.  Walden  made  too 
great  a. fuss  about  his. 

'  But  there  was  a  rich  and  noble  baronet ;  richer 
than  me,  as  they  say,  a  great  deal ;  Sir  Hargrove 
Pollcxfun,  if  I  spell  his  name  right.  A  charming 
man !  and  charmingly  dressed !  and  so  many  fine 
things  he  said,  and  was  so  merry,  and  so  facetious, 
that  he  did  nothing  but  laugh,  as  a  man  may  say  ! 
And  I  was  as  merry  as  him  to  the  full.     Wrhy  not? 

'  O  my  grandmother  !  What  with  the  talk  of  the 
young  country  lady,  that  same  Miss  Byron ;  for 
they  put  her  upon  talking  a  great  deal ;  what  with 
the  famous  scholar ;  who,  however,  being  a  learned 
man,  could  not  be  so  merry  as  us ;  what  with  Sir 
Hargrave  (I  could  live  and  die  with  Sir  Hargrave : 
you  never  knew,  my  grandmother,  such  a  bright 
man  as  Sir  Hargrave),  and  what  with  one  thing, 
and  what  with  another,  we  boxed  it  about,  and  had 
k3 


102  THE    HISTORY  OF 

rare  fun,  as  I  told  you — So  that  when  T  got  home, 
and  went  to  bed,  I  did  nothing  but  dream  of  being 
in  the  same  company,  and  three  or  four  times  waked 
myself  with  laughing.' 

There,  Lucy !— Will  this  do  for  Mr.  Singleton  ? 
It  is  not  much  out  of  character,  I  assure  you. 

Monday  afternoon. 
This  knight,  this  Sir  Rowland  Meredith! — He 
is  below,  it  seems ;  his  nephew  with  him ;  Sir  Row- 
land, my  Sally  tells  me,  in  his  gold  button  and  but- 
ton-hole coat,  and  full-buckled  wig ;  Mr.  Fowler  as 
spruce  as  a  bridegroom. — What  shall  I  do  with  Sir 
Rowland  ? 

I  shall  be  sorry  to  displease  the  good  old  man ; 
yet  how  can  I  avoid  it  ? 

Expect  another  letter  next  post :  and  so  you  will, 
if  I  did  not  bid  you ;  for  have  I  missed  one  yet  ? 
Adieu,  my  Lucy. 

H.  B. 


LETTER  XVL 

MISS    BYRON    TO    MISS    SELBY. 


Monday  night,  )Feb_ 
luesdaymorn.  J 


Sir  Rowland  and  his  nephew,  tea  being  not  quite 
read}',  sat  down  with  my  cousins ;  and  the  knight, 
leaving  Mr.  Fowler  little  to  say,  expatiated  so  hand- 
somely on  his  nephew's  good  qualities,  and  great 
passion  for  me,  and  on  what  he  himself  proposed 
to  do  for  him  in  addition  to  his  own  fortune,  that  my 
cousins,  knowing  I  liked  not  the  gentlemen  in  our 
own  neighbourhood,  and  thought  very  indifferently 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  103 

of  Sir  Hargrave,  were  more  than  half  inclined  to 
promote  the  addresses  of  Mr.  Fowler;  and  gave 
them  both  room  to  think  so. 

This  favourable  disposition  set  the  two  gentlemen 
up.  They  were  impatient  for  tea,  that  they  might 
see  me. 

By  the  time  I  had  sealed  up  my  letters,  word 
was  brought  me  that  tea  was  ready ;  and  I  went 
down. 

The  knight,  it  seems,  as  soon  as  they  heard  me 
coming,  jogged  Mr.  Fowler. — Nephew,  said  he, 
pointing  to  the  door,  see  what  you  can  say  to  the 
primrose  of  your  heart! — This  is  now  the  primrose 
season  with  us  in  Caermarthen,  Mr.  Reeves. 

Mr.  Fowler,  by  a  stretch  of  complaisance,  came 
to  meet  and  introduce  me  to  the  company,  though 
at  home.  .The  knight  nodded  his  head  after  him, 
smiling  ;  as  if  he  had  said,  Let  my  nephew  alone  to 
galant  the  lady  to  her  seat. 

I  was  a  little  surprised  at  Mr.  Fowler's  approach- 
ing me  the  moment  1  appeared,  and  with  his  taking 
my  hand,  and  conducting  me  to  my  seat,  with  an 
air ;  not  knowing  how  much  he  had  been  raised  by 
the  conversation  that  had  passed  before. 

He  bowed.  I  courtesied,  and  looked  a  little  sil- 
lier than  ordinary,  I  believe. 

Your  servant,  young  lady,  said  the  knight.  Love- 
lier, and  lovelier,  by  mercy  !  How  these  blushes  be- 
come that  sweet  face ! — But,  forgive  me,  madam, 
it  is  not  my  intent  to  dash  you. 

Writing,  Miss  Byron,  all  day !  said  Mrs.  Reeves. 
We  have  greatly  missed  you. 

My  cousin  seemed  to  say  this,  on  purpose  to  give 
me  time  to  recover  myself. 

I  have  blotted  several  sheets  of  paper,  said  I, 
and  had  just  concluded. 

1  hope,  madam,  said  the  knight,  leaning  forward 


104  THE    HISTORY    OF 

his  whole  body,  and  peering  in  my  face  under  his 
bent  brows,  that  tve  have  not  been  the  cause  of  has- 
tening you  down. 

I  stared.  But  as  he  seemed  not  to  mean  any 
thing,  I  would  not  help  him  to  a  meaning  by  my 
own  over-quickness. 

Mr.  Fowler  had  done  an  extraordinary  thing,  and 
sat  down,  hemmed,  and  said  nothing ;  looking  how- 
ever, as  if  he  was  at  a  loss  to  know  whether  he  or 
his  uncle  was  expected  to  speak. 

The  cold  weather  was  then  the  subject ;  and  the 
two  gentlemen  rubbed  their  hands,  and  drew  nearer 
the  hre,  as  if  they  were  the  colder  for  talking  of 
it.  Many  hems  passed  between  them,  now  the 
uncle  looking  on  the  nephew,  now  the  nephew 
on  the  uncle :  at  last  they  fell  into  talk  of  their 
new-built  house  at  Caermarthen,  and  the  furnishing 
of  it. 

They  mentioned  afterwards,  their  genteel  neigh- 
bourhood, and  gave  the  characters  of  half-a-dozen 
people,  of  whom  none  present  but  themselves  ever 
heard;  but  all  tending  to  shew  how  much  they  were 
valued  by  the  best  gentry  in  Caermarthenshire. 

The  knight  then  related  a  conversation  that  had 
once  passed  between  himself  and  the  late  Lord 
Mansell,  in  which  that  nobleman  had  complimented 
him  on  an  estate  of  a  clear  30001.  a-year,  besides  a 
good  deal  of  ready  cash,  and  with  supposing  that  he 
would  set  up  his  nephew  when  at  age  (for  it  was 
some  years  ago)  as  a  representative  for  the  county. 
And  he  repeated  the  prudent  answer  he  gave  his 
lordship,  disavowing  such  a  design,  as  no  better 
than  a  gaming  propensity,  as  he  called  it,  which  had 
ruined  manjr  a  fair  estate. 

This  sort  of  talk,  in  which  his  nephew  could  bear 
a  part  (and  indeed  they  had  it  all  between  them) 
held  the  tea-time  ;  and  then  having  given  them- 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  105 

selves  the  consequence  they  had  seemed  to  intend, 
the  knight,  drawing  his  chair  nearer  to  me,  and 
winking  to  his  nephew,  who  withdrew,  began  to  set 
forth  to  me  the  young  gentleman's  good  qualities ; 
to  declare  the  passion  he  had  for  me  ;  and  to  beg 
my  encouragement  of  so  worthy,  so  proper,  and  so 
xvell-favoured  a  young  man  ;  who  was  to  be  his  sole 
heir  ;  and  for  whom  he  would  do  such  things,  on  my 
account,  as,  during  his  life,  he  would  not  do  for  any 
other  woman  breathing. 

There  was  no  answering  a  discourse  so  serious 
with  the  air  of  levity  which  it  was  hardly  possible 
to  avoid  assuming  on  the  first  visit  of  the  knight. 

I  was  vexed  that  I  found  myself  almost  as  bash- 
ful, as  silly,  and  as  silent,  as  if  I  had  thoughts  of 
encouraging  Mr.  Fowler's  addresses.  My  cousins 
seemed  pleased  with  my  bashfulness.  The  knight 
I  once  thought,  by  the  tone  of  his  voice,  and  his 
hum,  would  have  struck  up  a  Welsh  tune,  and 
danced  for  joy. 

Shall  I  call  in  my  kinsman,  madam,  to  confirm 
all  I  have  said,  and  to  pour  out  his  whole  soul  at 
your  feet  ?  My  boy  is  bashful :  but  a  little  favour 
from  that  sweet  countenance  will  make  a  man  of 
him.  Let  me,  let  me,  call  in  my  boy.  I  will  go 
for  him  myself;  and  was  going. 

Let  me  say  one  word,  Sir  Rowland — before  Mr. 
Fowler  comes  in — before  you  speak  to  him — You 
have  explained  yourself  uncxceptionably.  I  am 
obliged  to  you  and  Mr.  Fowler  for  your  good  opi- 
nion :  but  this  can  never  be. 

How,  madam  !  Can  never  be  ! — I  will  allow  that 
you  shall  take  time  for  half-a-dozen  visits,  or  so, 
that  you  may  be  able  to  judge  of  my  nephew's 
qualities  and  understanding,  and  be  convinced  from 
bis  own  mouth,  and  heart,  and  soul,  as  I  may  say, 
of  his  love  for  you.    No  need  of  time  for  him.    He, 


206  the  history  of 

poor  man !  is  fixed,  immoveably  fixed :  but  say  you 
will  take  a  week's  time,  or  so,  to  consider  what  you 
can  do,  what  youtw//  do — and  that's  all  I  at  present 
crave,  or  indeed,  madam,  can  allow  you. 

I  cannot  doubt,  ?iozv,  Sir  Rowland,  of  what  my 
mind  will  be  a  week  hence,  as  to  this  matter. 

How,  madam ! — Why  we  are  all  in  the  suds,  then ! 
— Why,  Mr.  Reeves,  Mrs.  Reeves !  Whew  !  with 
a  half-whistle — Why,  madam,  we  shall,  at  this  rate., 
be  all  untwisted! — But  (after  a  pause)  by  mercy 
1  will  not  be  thus  answered ! — Why,  madam,  would 
you  have  the  conscience  to  break  my  poor  boy's 
heart? — Come,  be  as  gracious  as  you  look  to  be — 
Give  me  your  hand — [he  snatched  my  hand.]  In 
respect  to  his  years  I  withdrew  it  not]  and  give  my 
boy  your  heart. — Sweet  soul !  Such  sensible,  such 
good-natured  mantlings  I — Why  you  can't  be 
cruel,  if  you  would  ! — Dear  lady  I  say  you  will  take 
a  little  time  to  consider  of  this  matter.  Don't 
repeat  those  cruel  words,  "  It  can  never  be." — 
What  have  you  to  object  to  my  boy  ? 

Mr.  Fowler,  both  by  character  and  appearance, 
Sir  Rowland,  is  a  worthy  man.  He  is  a  modest 
man ;  and  modesty — 

Well,  and  so  he  is — Mercy !  I  was  afraid  that  his 
modesty  would  be  an  objection — 

It  cannot,  Sir  Rowland,  with  a  modest  woman.  I 
love,  I  revere,  a  modest  man  :  but,  indeed,  I  cannot 
give  hope,  where  I  mean  not  to  encourage  any. 

Your  objection,  madam,  to  my  nephew  ? — You 
must  have  seen  something  in  him  you  dislike. 

I  do  not  easily  dis-like,  Sir ;  but  then  I  do  not  easily 
like  :  and  I  never  will  marry  any  man,  to  whom  I  can- 
not be  more  than  indifferent. 

Why,  madam,  he  adores  you — He — 

That,  Sir,  is  an  objection,  unless  I  could  returnhis 
love.     My  gratitude  would  be  endangered. 


Silt    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  107 

Excellent  notions ! — With  these  notions,  madam, 
you  could  not  be  ungrateful. 

That,  Sir,  is  a  risque  I  will  never  run.  How  many 
bad  wives  are  there,  who  would  have  been  good  ones, 
had  they  not  married  either  to  their  dislike,  or  with 
indifference  ?  Good  beginnings,  Sir  Rowland,  are 
necessary  to  good  progresses,  and  to  happy  con- 
clusions. 

Why  so  they  are.  But  beginnings  that  are  not  bad, 
with  good  people,  will  make  no  bad  progresses,  no 
bad  conclusions. 

No  bad  is  not  good,  Sir  Rowland ;  and  in  such  a 
world  as  this,  shall  people  lay  themselves  open  to 
the  danger  of  acting  contrary  to  their  duty  ?  Shall 
they  suffer  themselves  to  be  bribed,  either  by  con- 
veniencies,  or  superfluities,  to  give  their  hands,  aud 
leave  their  hearts  doubtful  or  indifferent  ?  It  would 
not  be  honest  to  do  so. 

You  told  me,  madam,  the  first  time  I  had  the 
honour  to  see  you,  that  you  were  absolutely  and 
bona  fide  disengaged — 
I  told  you  truth,  Sir. 

Then,  madam,  we  will  not  take  your  denial.  We 
will  persevere.  We  will  not  be  discouraged  !  What  a 
deuce!  Have  I  not  heard  it  said,  that  faint  heart 
never  won  fair  lady? 

I  never  would  give  an  absolute  denial,  Sir,  were  I 
to  have  the  least  doubt  of  my  mind,  if  I  couid  ba- 
lance, I  would  consult  my  friends,  and  refer  to  them  ; 
and  their  opinion  should  have  due  weight  with  me. 
But  for  your  nephew  s  sake,  Sir  Rowland,  while  his 
esteem  for  me  is  young  and  conquerable,  urge  not 
this  matter  farther.  I  would  not  give  pain  to  a  wor- 
thy heart. 

As  I  hope  for  mercy,  madam,  so  well  do  Hike  your 
notions,  that  if  you  will  be  my  niece,  and  let  me  but 


108  THE    HISTORY    OF 

converse  with  you  once  a  day,  I  will  be  content  with 
1001.  a-year,  and  settle  upon  you  all  I  have  in  the 
world. 

His  eyes  glistened ;  his  face  glowed ;  an  honest 
earnestness  appeared  in  his  countenance. 

Generous  man  !  Good  Sir  Rowland  !  said  I.  I 
was  affected.     I  was  forced  to  withdraw. 

I  soon  returned,  and  found  Sir  Rowland,  his  hand- 
kerchief in  his  hand,  applying  very  earnestly  to  my 
cousins  :  and  they  were  so  much  affected  too,  that 
on  his  resuming  the  subject  to  me,  they  could  not 
help  putting  in  a  word  or  two  on  his  side  of  the 
question. 

Sir  Rowland  then  proposed  to  call  in  his  nephew, 
that  he  might  speak  for  himself.  My  boy  may  be 
over-awed  by  love,  madam :  true  love  is  always 
fearful :  yet  he  is  no  milksop,  I  do  assure  you.  To 
men  he  has  courage.  How  he  will  behave  to  yoicy 
madam,  I  know  not ;  for,  really,  notwithstanding 
that  sweetness  of  aspect,  which  I  should  have 
thought  would  have  led  one  to  say  what  one  would 
to  you  (in  modesty  I  mean)  I  have  a  kind  of  I- 
cannot-tell-what  for  you  myself.  Reverence  it  is 
not  neither,  I  think — I  only  reverence  my  Maker — 
And  yet  I  believe  it  is.  Why,  madam,  your  face  is 
one  of  God  Almighty's  wonders  in  a  little  compass  ! 
— Pardon  me — You  may  blush — But  be  gracious 
now! — Don't  shew  us,  that,  with  a  face  so  encou- 
ragingly tender,  you  have  a  hard  heart. 

0  Sir  Rowland,  you  are  an  excellent  advocate  : 
But  pray  tell  Mr.  Fowler — 

1  will  call  him  in — And  was  rising. 

No,  don't.  But  tell  Mr.  Fowler,  that  I  regard  him 
on  a  double  account ;  for  his  own  worth's  sake,  and 
for  his  uncle's :  but  subject  me  not,  I  once  more  en- 
treat you,  to  the  pain  of  repulsing  a  worthy  man.    I 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISOV.  109 

repeat,  that  I  am  under  obligation  to  him  for  the 
value  he  has  for  me:  I  shall  be  under  more,  if  he  will 
accept  of  my  thanks  as  all  I  have  to  return. 

My  dear  Miss  Byron,  said  Mr.  Reeves,  oblige  Sir 
Rowland  so  far,  as  to  take  a  little  time  to  consider— 
God  bless  you  on  earth  and  in  heaven,  Mr.  Reeves, 
for  this !  You  are  a  good  man — Why,  ay,  take  a  little 
time  to  consider — God  bless  you,  madam,  take  a 
little  time.  Say  you  will  consider.  You  know  not 
what  a  man  of  understanding  my  nephew  is.  Why, 
madam,  modest  as  he  is,  and  awed  by  his  love  for 
you,  he  cannot  shew  half  the  good  sense  he  is  mas- 
ter of. 

Modest  men  must  have  merit,  Sir.  But  how  can 
you,  Mt.  Reeves,  make  a  difficult  task  more  diffi- 
cult ?  And  yet  all  is  from  the  goodness  of  your 
heart.  You  see,  Sir  Rowland  thinks  me  cruel :  I 
have  no  cruelty  in  my  nature.  I  love  to  oblige.  I 
wish  to  match  you  in  generosity,  Sir  Rowland. — 
Ask  me  for  any  thing  but  myself,  and  I  will  endea- 
vour to  oblige  you. 

Admirable,  by  mercy!  Why  every  thing  you  say, 
instead  of  making  me  desist,  induces  me  to  perse- 
vere. There  is  no  yielding  up  such  a  prize,  if  one 
can  obtain  it.  Tell  me,  Mr.  Reeves,  where  there  is 
such  another  woman  to  be  had,  and  we  may  give  up 
Miss  Byron:  but  I  hope  she  will  consider  of  it. — 
Pray,  madam — But  I  will  call  in  my  nephew.  And 
out  he  went  in  haste,  as  if  he  were  afraid  of  being 
again  forbidden. 

Mean  time  my  cousins  put  it  to  me — But  be- 
fore I  could  answer  them,  the  knight,  followed  by 
his  nephew,  returned. 

Mr.  Fowler  entered,  bowing  in  the  most  repect- 
ful  manner.  He  looked  much  more  dejected  than 
when  he  approached  me  at  my  first  coming  down. 

VOL.    IX.  L 


]10  THE    HISTORY    OF 

His  uncle  had  given  him  a  hint  of  what  had  passed 
between  us. 

Mr.  Fowler  and  I  had  but  just  sat  down,  when  the 
knight  said  to  Mr.  Reeves  (but  took  him  not  by  the 
button,  as  in  his  first  visit)  one  word  with  you,  Sir — 
Mr.  Reeves,  one  word  with  you,  if  you  please. 

They  withdrew  together;  and  presently  after 
Mrs.  Reeves  went  out  at  the  other  door ;  and  I  was 
left  alone  with  Mr.  Fowler. 

We  both  sat  silent  for  about  three  or  four  mi- 
nutes. 1  thought  I  ought  not  to  begin ;  Mr.  Fowler 
knew  not  how.  He  drew  his  chair  nearer  to  me  ; 
then  sat  a  little  farther  off;  then  drew  it  nearer  again ; 
stroked  his  ruffles,  and  hemmed  two  or  three 
times ;  and  at  last,  You  cannot,  madam,  but  ob- 
serve my  confusion,  my  concern,  my,  my,  my  con- 
fusion ! — It  is  all  owing  to  my  reverence,  my  re- 
spect, my  reverence,  for  you — hem  ! — He  gave  two 
gentle  hems,  and  was  silent. 

I  could  not  enjoy  the  modest  man's  awkwardness. 
— Every  feature  of  his  face  working,  his  hands  and 
his  knees  trembling,  and  his  tongue  faltering,  how 
barbarous  had  I  been,  if  I  could — O  Lucy,  what  a 
disqualifier  is  love,  if  such  agitations  as  these  are  the 
natural  effects  of  that  passion! 

Sir  Rowland  has  been  acquainting  me,  Sir,  said 
I,  with  the  good  opinion  you  have  of  me.  I  am  very 
much  obliged  to  you  for  it.  I  have  been  telling 
Sir  Rowland — 

Ah,  madam!  Say  not  what  you  have  been  telling 
Sir  Rowland;  he  has  hinted  it  to  me.  Imustindeed 
confess  my  unworthiness;  yet  I  cannot  forbear  as- 
piring to  your  favour.  Who  that  knows  what  will 
make  him  the  happiest  of  men,  however  unworthy 
he  may  be,  can  forbear  seeking  his  happiness?  I  can 
only  say,  I  am  the  most  miserable  of  men,  if— 


Sill    CHARLES    GRANDISONT.  Ill 

Good  Mr.  Fowler,  interrupted  I,  indulge  not  a 
hope  that  cannot  be  answered.  I  will  not  pretend 
to  say,  that  I  should  not  merit  your  esteem,  if  I 
could  return  it;  because  to  whomsoever  I  should 
give  my  hand,  I  would  make  it  a  point  of  duty  to 
deserve  his  affection :  but  for  that  very  reason,  and 
that  I  may  have  no  temptation  to  do  otherwise,  I 
must  be  convinced  in  my  own  mind  that  there  is 
not  a  man  in  the  world  whom  I  could  value  more 
than  him  I  chose. 

He  sighed.  I  was  assured,  madam,  said  he,  that 
your  heart  was  absolutely  disengaged;  on  that  as- 
surance I  founded  my  presumptuous  hope. 

And  so  it  is,  Mr.  Fowler.  1  have  never  yet  seen 
a  man  whom  1  could  wish  to  marry. 

Then,  madam,  may  I  not  hope,  that  time,  that 
my  assiduities,  that  my  profound  reverence,  my 
unbounded  love — 

0  Mr.  Fowler,  think  me  not  either  insensible  or 
ungrateful.  But  time,  I  am  sure,  can  make  no  al- 
teration in  this  case.  I  can  only  esteem  you,  and 
that  from  a  motive  which  I  think  has  selfishness  in 
it,  because  you  have  shewn  a  regard  for  me. 

No  selfishness  in  this  motive,  madam ;  it  is  ami- 
able gratitude.  And  if  all  the  services  of  my  life, 
if  all  the  adoration — 

1  have  a  very  indifferent  notion  of  sudden  impres- 
sions, Mr.  Fowler:  but  I  will  not  question  the  sin- 
cerity of  a  man  I  think  so  worthy.  Sir  Rowland  has 
been  very  urgent  with  me.  He  has  wished  me  to 
take  time  to  consider.  I  have  told  him  I  would,  if  I 
could  doubt:  but  that  I  cannot.  For  your  own  sake 
therefore,  let  me  intreat  you  to  place  your  affections 
elsewhere.  And  may  you  place  them  happily ! 

You  have,  madam,  I  am  afraid,  seen  men  whom 
you  could  prefer  to  me — 

Our  acquaintance,  Mr.  Fowler,  is  very  short.    It 
I.  2 


112  THE   HISTORY   OF 

would  be  no  wonder  if  I  had.  Yet  I  told  you  truly, 
that  I  never  yet  saw  a  man  whom  I  could  wish  to 
marry. 

He  looked  down,  and  sighed. 

But,  Mr.  Fowler,  to  be  still  more  frank  and  ex- 
plicit with  you,  as  I  think  you  a  very  worthy  man ; 
I  will  own,  that  were  any  of  the  gentlemen  1  have 
hitherto  known  to  be  my  lot,  it  must  be,  I  think,  in 
compassion  (in  gratitude,  I  had  almost  said)  one 
(who  nevertheless  it  cannot  be)  who  has  professed 
a  love  for  me  ever  since  I  was  a  child.  A  man  of 
honour,  of  virtue,  of  modesty;  such  a  man  as  I  be- 
lieve Mr.  Fowler  is.  His  fortune  indeed  is  not  so 
considerable  as  Sir  Rowland  says  yours  will  be ;  but, 
Sir,  as  there  is  no  other  reason  on  the  comparison, 
why  I  should  prefer  Mr.  Fowler  to  him,  1  should 
think  the  worse  of  myself  as  long  as  I  lived,  if  I  gave 
a  preference  over  such  a  tried  affection  to  fortune 
only.  And  now,  Sir,  I  expect  that  you  will  make  a 
generous  use  of  my  frankness,  lest  the  gentleman,  if 
you  should  know  him,  may  hear  of  it.  And  this  I 
request  for  his  sake,  as  I  think  I  never  can  be  his  ; 
as  for  yours  I  have  been  thus  explicit. 

I  can  only  say,  that  I  am  the  most  miserable  of 
men! — But  will  you,  madam,  give  me  leave  to  visit 
Mr.  Reeves  now-and-then  ? 

Not  on  my  account,  Mr.  Fowler.  Understand  it 
so ;  and  if  you  see  me,  let  it  be  with  indifference, 
and  without  expectation  from  me;  and  I  shall 
always  behave  myself  to  you,  as  to  a  man  who  has 
obliged  me  by  his  good  opinion. 

He  bowed:  sat  in  silence:  pulled  out  his  hand- 
kerchief.— 1  pitied  him. 

But  let  me  ask  all  you,  my  friends,  who  love  Mr. 
Orme,  Was  I  wrong?  1  think  I  never  could  love 
Mr.  Fowler,  as  a  wife  ought  to  love  her  husband — 
May  he  meet  with  a  worthy  woman  who  can !  And 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  113 

surely  so  good,  so  modest  a  man,  and  of  such  an 
ample  fortune,  easily  may;  while  it  maybe  my  lot, 
if  ever  I  marry,  to  be  the  wife  of  a  man,  with  whom 
I  may  not  be  so  happy,  as  either  Mr.  Orme  or  Mr. 
Fowler  would  probably  make  me,  could  I  prevail 
upon  myself  to  be  the  wife  of  either — O  my  uncle! 
often  do  I  reflect  on  your  mercer's  shop. 

Mr.Fowler  arose,  and  walked  disconsolately  about 
the  room,  and  often  profoundly,  and,  I  believe  (not 
Greville-like)  sincerely  sighed.  His  motion  soon 
brought  in  the  knight  and  Mr.  Reeves  at  one  door, 
and  Mrs.  lleeves  at  the  other. 

Well!  What  news?  What  news? — Good,  I  hope, 
said  the  knight  with  spread  hands— Ah  my  poor  boy! 
Thus  a-la-mort!  Surely,  madam — 

There  he  stopt,  and  looked  wistfully  at  me;  then 
at  my  cousins — Mr.  Reeves,  Mrs.  Reeves,  speak 
a  good  word  for  my  boy.  The  heart  that  belongs  to 
that  countenance  cannot  be  adamant  surely. — Dear 
young  lady,  let  your  power  be  equalled  by  your 
mercy. 

Mr.  Fowler,  Sir  Rowland,  has  too  much  gene- 
rosity to  upbraid  me,  I  dare  say.  Nor  will  you  think 
me  either  perverse  or  ungenerous,  when  he  tells 
you  what  has  passed  between  us. 

Have  you  given  him  hope,  then?  God  grant  it, 
though  but  distant  hope!  Have  you  said  you  will 
consider — Dear,  blessed  lady! — 

0  Sir,  interrupted  I,  how  good  you  are  to  your 
nephew!  How  worthily  is  your  love  placed  on  him! 
What  a  proof  is  it  of  his  merit,  and  of  the  goodness 
of  your  heart! — I  shall  always  have  an  esteem  for 
you  both!  Your  excuse,  Sir  Rowland:  yours,  Mr. 
Fowler.  Be  so  good  as  to  allow  me  to  withdraw. 

1  retired  to  my  own  apartment,  and  throwing 
myself  into  a  chair,  reflected  on  what  had  passed; 


114  THE  HISTORY  OF 

after  a  while  recollected  myself  to  begin  to  write  it 
down  for  you. 

As  soon  as  I  had  withdrawn,  Mr.  Fowler  with  a 
sorrowful  heart,  as  my  cousins  told  me,  related  all 
that  1  had  said  to  him. 

Mr.  Reeves  was  so  good  as  to  praise  me  for  what 
he  called  my  generosity  to  Mr.  Orme,  as  well  as  for 
my  frankness  and  civility  to  Mr.  Fowler. 

That  was  the  deuce  of  it,  Sir  Rowland  said,  that 
were  they  to  have  no  remedy,  they  could  not  find 
any  fault  in  me  to  comfort  themselves  with. 

They  put  it  over  and  over  to  my  cousin,  Whether 
time  and  assiduity  might  not  prevail  with  me  to 
change  my  mind?  And  whether  an  application  to 
my  friends  in  the  country  might  not,  on  setting 
every  thing  fairly  before  them,  be  of  service  ?  But 
Mr.  Reeves  told  them,  that  now  I  had  opened  so 
freely  my  mind,  and  had  spoken  so  unexpectedly, 
yet  so  gratefully  in  favour  of  Mr.  Orme,  he  feared 
there  could  be  no  hopes. 

However,  both  gentlemen,  at  taking  leave,  re- 
commended themselves  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Reeves  for 
their  interests;  and  the  knight  vowed  that  I  should 
not  come  off  so  easily. 

So  much,  and  adieu,  my  Lucy,  for  the  addresses 
of  worthy  Mr.  Fowler.  Pray,  however,  for  your 
Harriet,  that  she  may  not  draw  a  worse  lot. 

Tuesday  morning. 

At  a  private  concert  last  night  with  my  cousins 
and  Miss  Clements ;  and  again  to  be  at  a  play  this 
night ;  I  shall  be  a  racketer,  I  doubt. 

Mr.  Fowler  called  here  this  morning.  Mrs. Reeves 
and  I  were  out  on  a  visit.  But  Mr.  Reeves  was  at 
home,  and  they  had  a  good  deal  of  discourse  about 
me.    The  worthy  man  spoke  s©  despairingly  of  his 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDJSON.  115 

success  with  me,  that  I  hope,  for  his  own  sake,  I 
shall  hear  no  more  of  his  addresses;  and  with  the 
more  reason,  as  Sir  Rowland  will  in  a  few  days  set 
out  for  Caermarthen. 

Sir  Rowland  called  afterwards;  but  Mr.  Reeves 
was  abroad;  and  Mrs.  Reeves  and  I  were  gone  to 
Ludgate-hill  to  buy  a  gown,  which  is  to  be  made 
up  in  all  haste,  that  1  may  the  more  fashionably 
attend  Lady  Betty  Williams  to  some  of  the  public 
entertainments.  I  have  been  very  extravagant;  but  it 
is  partly  my  cousin's  fault.  I  send  you  inclosed  a 
pattern  of  my  silk.  I  thought  we  were  high  in  the 
fashion  in  Northamptonshire;  but  all  my  clothes 
are  altering,  that  I  may  not  look  frightful,  as  the 
phrase  is. 

But  shall  I  as  easily  get  rid  of  the  baronet,  think 
you,  as  I  hope  I  have  of  Mr.  Fowler?  He  is  come 
to  town,  and  by  his  own  invitation  (in  a  card  to  Mr. 
Reeves)  is  to  be  here  to-morrow  afternoon.  What 
signifies  my  getting  out  of  the  way  ?  He  will  see  me 
at  another  time;  and  I  shall  increase  my  own  diffi- 
culties and  his  consequence,  if  he  thinks  I  am  afraid 
of  him. 


LETTER   XVII. 

MISS    BYRON.       IN    CONTINUATION. 

Wednesday  night. 

Sir  Hargrave  came  before  six  o'clock.  He  was 
richly  dressed.  He  asked  for  my  cousin  Reeves. 
I  was  in  my  closet,  writing.  He  was  not  likely  to 
be  the  better  received  for  the  character  Sir  John 
Allestree  gave  of  him. 

He  excused  himself  for  coming  so  early,  on  the 
score  of  his  impatience,  and  that  he  might  have  a 


116  THE    HISTORY    OF 

little  discourse  with  them,  if  I  should  be  engaged, 
before  tea-time. 

Was  I  within  ? — I  was. — Thank  heaven  ! — I  was 
very  good. 

So  he  seemed  to  imagine  that  I  was  at  home,  in 
compliment  to  him. 

Shall  I  give  you,  from  my  cousins,  an  account  of 
the  conversation  before  I  went  down  ?  You  know 
Mrs.  Reeves  is  a  nice  observer. 

He  had  had,  he  told  my  cousins,  a  most  uneasy 
time  of  it,  ever  since  he  saw  me.  The  devil  fetch 
him,  if  he  had  had  one  hour's  rest.  He  never  saw 
a  woman  before  whom  he  could  love  as  he  loved 
me.  By  his  soul,  he  had  no  view,  but  what  was 
strictly  honourable. 

He  sometimes  sat  down,  sometimes  walked  about 
the  room,  strutting,  and  now-and-then  adjusting 
something  in  his  dress  that  nobody  else  saw  wanted 
it.  He  gloried  in  the  happy  prospects  before  him: 
not  but  he  knew  I  had  a  little  army  of  admirers : 
but  as  none  of  them  had  met  with  encouragement 
from  me,  he  hoped  there  was  room  for  him  to  flatter 
himself  that  he  might  be  the  happy  man. 

I  told  you,  Mr.  Reeves,  said  he,  that  I  will  give 
you  carte  blanche  as  to  settlements.  What  I  do  for 
so  prudent  a  woman,  will  be  doing  for  myself.  I 
am  not  used,  Mr.  Reeves,  to  boast  of  my  fortune 
[then,  it  seems,  he  went  up  to  the  glass,  as  if  his 
person  could  not  fail  of  being  an  additional  recom- 
mendation ;]  but  I  will  lay  before  you,  or  before 
any  of  Miss  Byron's  friends  (Mr.  Deane,  if  she 
pleases — )  my  rent-rolls.  There  never  was  a  better- 
conditioned  estate.  She  shall  live  in  town,  or  in  the 
country,  as  she  thinks  fit;  and  in  the  latter,  at  which 
of  my  seats  she  pleases.  I  know  I  shall  have  no  will 
but  hers.  I  doubt  not  your  friendship,  Mr.  Reeves. 
I  hope  for  yours,  madam.     I  shall  have  great  plea- 


SIK    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  117 

sure  in  the  alliance  I  have  in  view,  with  every  indi- 
vidual of  your  family — As  if  he  would  satisfy  them 
of  his  friendship,  in  the  near  relation,  as  the  only 
matter  that  could  bear  a  doubt. 

Then  he  ran  on  upon  the  part  I  bore  in  the  con- 
versation at  Lady  Betty  Williams's— By  his  soul,  only 
the  wisest,  the  wittiest,  the  most  gracefully  modest 
of  women — that  was  all — Then  Ha,  ha,  ha,  hah,  poor 
Walden !  What  a  silly  fellow !  He  had  caught  a  Tar- 
tar ! — Ha,  ha,  ha,  hah — Shaking  his  head  and  his 
gay  sides :  Devil  take  him  if  he  ever  saw  a  prig  so 
fairly  taken  in! — but  I  was  a  sly  little  rogue  ! — He 
saw  that ! — By  all  that's  good,  I  must  myself  sing 
small  in  her  company! — I  will  never  meet  at  hard- 
edge  with  her — If  I  did — (and  yet  I  have  been 
thought  to  carry  a  good  one)  1  should  be  con- 
foundedly gapped,  /  can  see  that.  But,  continued 
he,  as  a  woman  is  more  a  husband's  than  a  man  is  a 
wife's  [Have  all  the  men  this  prerogative-notion, 
Lucy  ?  You  know  it  is  a  better  man's]  I  shall  have 
a  pride  worth  boasting  of,  if  I  can  call  such  a  jewel 
mine.  Poor  Walden  ! — Rot  the  fellow  ! — I  warrant 
he  would  not  have  so  knowing  a  wife  for  the  world. 
— Ha,  ha,  ha,  hah  !  He  is  right :  it  is  certainly  right 
for  such  narrow  pedants  to  be  afraid  of  learned  wo- 
men ! — Methinks,  I  see  the  fellow,  conjurer  like, 
circumscribed  in  a  narrow  circle,  putting  into  Greek 
what  was  better  expressed  in  English ;  and  forbid- 
ding every  one's  approach  within  the  distance  of  his 
wand !  Hah,  hah,  hah  ! — Let  me  die,  if  I  ever  saw 
a  tragi-comical  fellow  better  handled ! — Then  the 
faces  he  made — Did  you  ever,  Mr.  Reeves,  see  in 
your  life,  such  a  parcel  of  disastrous  faces  made  by 
one  man  ? 

Thus  did  Sir  Hargrave,  laughingly,  run  on  ;  nor 


118  THE    HISTORY    OF 

left  he  hardly  any-thing  for  my  cousins  to  say,  or  to 
do,  but  to  laugh  with  him,  and  to  smile  at  him. 

On  a  message  that  tea  was  near  ready,  I  went 
down.  On  my  entering  the  room,  he  addressed  me 
with  an  air  of  kindness  and  freedom :  Charming 
Miss  Byron!  said  he,  I  hope  you  are  all  benignity 
and  compassion.  You  know  not  what  I  have  suffered 
since  I  had  the  honour  to  see  you  last ;  bowing  very 
low;  then  rearing  himself  up,  holding  back  his  head ; 
and  seemed  the  taller  for  having  bowed. 

Handsome  fop !  thought  I  to  myself.  I  took  my 
seat :  and  endeavoured  to  look  easy  and  free,  as 
usual ;  finding  something  to  say  to  my  cousins,  and 
to  him.  He  begged  that  tea  might  be  postponed 
for  half  an  hour;  and  that,  before  the  servants  were 
admitted,  I  would  hear  him  relate  the  substance  of 
the  conversation  that  had  passed  between  him  and 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Reeves. 

Had  not  Sir  Hargrave  intended  me  an  honour, 
and  had  he  not  a  very  high  opinion  of  the  efficacy  of 
eight  thousand  pounds  a-year  in  an  address  of  this 
kind,  I  dare  say,  he  would  have  supposed  *a  little 
more  prefacing  necessary :  but,  after  he  had  told  me, 
in  a  few  words,  how  much  he  was  attracted  by  my 
character  before  he  saw  me,  he  thought  fit  directly 
to  refer  himself  to  the  declaration  he  had  made  at 
Lady  Betty  Williams's,  both  to  Mr.  Reeves  and  my- 
self; and  then  talked  of  large  settlements;  boasted 
of  his  violent  passion ;  and  besought  my  favour  with 
the  utmost  earnestness. 

I  would  have  played  a  little  female  trifling  upon 
him,  and  affected  to  take  his  professions  only  for 
polite  raillery,  which  men  call  making  love  to  young 
women,  who  perhaps  are  frequently  but  too  willing 
to  take  in  earnest  what  the  wretches  mean  but  in 
jest ;  but  the  fervour  with  which  he  renewed  (as  he 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  119 

called  it)  his  declarations,  admitted  not  of  fooling  ; 
and  yet  his  volubility  might  have  made  questionable 
the  sincerity  of  his  declarations.  As  therefore  I 
could  not  think  of  encouraging  his  addresses,  I 
thought  it  best  to  answer  him  with  openness  and 
unreserve. 

To  seem  to  question  the  sincerity  of  such  profes- 
sions as  you  make,  Sir  Hargrave,  might  appear  to 
you  as  if  I  wanted  to  be  assured.  But  be  pleased  to 
know  that  you  are  directing  your  discourse  to  one 
of  the  plainest-hearted  women  in  England;  and  you 
may  therefore  expect  from  me  nothing  but  the 
simplest  truth.  I  thank  you,  Sir,  for  your  good 
opinion  of  me ;  but  I  cannot  encourage  your  ad- 
dresses. 

Youcannot,  madam,  encourage  my  addresses  !  And 
express  yourself  so  seriously  !  Good  heaven  !  [He 
stood  silent  a  minute  or  two,  looking  upon  me,  and 
upon  himself;  as  if  he  had  said,  Foolish  girl!  knows 
she  whom  she  refuses?]  I  have  been  assured, 
madam,  recovering  a  little  from  his  surprise,  that 
your  affections  are  not  engaged.  But  surely  it  must 
be  a  mistake :  some  happy  man — 

Is  it,  interrupted  I,  a  necessary  consequence,  that 
the  woman  who  cannot  receive  the  addresses  of  Sir 
Hargrave  Pollexfen,  must  be  engaged  ? 

Why,  madam — As  to  that — 1  know  not  what  to 
say — But  a  man  of  my  fortune,  and  I  hope,  not  ab- 
solutely disagreeable  either  in  person  or  temper ;  of 
some  rank  in  life — He  paused ;  then  resuming — 
What,  madam,  if  you  are  as  much  in  earnest  as  you 
seem,  can  be  your  objection  ?  Be  so  good  as  to 
name  it,  that  I  may  know,  whether  I  cannot  be  so 
happy  as  to  get  over  it? 

We  do  not,  we  cannot,  all  like  the  same  person. 
Women,  I  have  heard  say,  are  very  capricious.  Per- 


120  THE    HISTORY   OF 

haps  I  am  so.  But  there  is  a  something  (we  cannot 
always  say  what)  that  attracts  or  disgusts  us. 

Disgusts!  madam — Disgusts!  Miss  Byron. 

I  spoke  in  general,  Sir:  I  dare  say,  nineteen  wo- 
men out  of  twenty  would  think  themselves  favoured 
in  the  addresses  of  Sir  Hargrave  Pollexfen. 

But  you,  madam,  are  the  twentieth  that  I  must 
love :  and  be  so  good  as  to  let  me  know — 

Pray,  Sir,  ask  me  not  a  reason  for  a  peculiarity. 
Do  you  not  yourself  shew  a  peculiarity  in  making 
me  the  twentieth  ? 

Your  merit,  madam- 
It  would  be  vanity  in  me,  Sir,  interrupted  I,  to 
allow  a  force  to  that  plea.  You,  Sir,  may  have  more 
merit,  than  perhaps  the  man  I  may  happen  to  ap- 
prove of  better ;  but— shall  I  say?  (Pardon  me,  Sir) 
You  do  not — You  do  not  (hesitating) — hit  my 
fancy — Pardon  me,  Sir. 

If  pardon  depends  upon  my  breath,  let  me  die  if 
I  do  ! — Not  hit  your  fancy,  madam  !  [And  then  he 
looked  upon  himself  all  around]  Not  hit  your  fancy, 
madam ! 

I  told  you,  Sir,  that  you  must  not  expect  any- 
thing from  me  but  the  simplest  truth.  You  do  me 
honour  by  your  good  opinion  ;  and  if  my  own  heart 
were  not,  in  this  case,  a  very  determined  one,  I 
would  answer  you  with  more  politeness.  But,  Sir, 
on  such  an  occasion  as  this,  I  think  it  would  not  be 
honourable,  it  would  not  be  just,  to  keep  a  man  in 
an  hour's  suspense,  when  I  am  in  none  myself. 

And  are  you  then  (angrily)  so  determined,  Miss 
Byron  ? 

I  am,  Sir. 

Confound  me! — And  yet  I  am  enough  con- 
founded ! — But  I  will  not  take  an  answer  so  con- 
trary to  my  hopes.     Tell  me,  madam,  by  the  since- 


sIR    CHARLES    GRAXDISOX.  121 

rity  which  you  boast ;  Are  you  not  engaged  in  your 
affections  ?  Is  there  not  someone  happy  man,  whom 
you  prefer  to  all  men  ? 

I  am  a  free  person,  Sir  Hargrave.  It  is  no  im- 
peachment of  sincerity,  if  a  free  person  answers  not 
every  question  that  may  be  put  to  her,  by  those  to 
whom  she  is  not  accountable. 

Very  true,  madam.  But  as  it  is  no  impeachment 
of  your  freedom  to  answer  this  question  either  ne- 
gatively or  affirmatively,  and  as  you  glory  in  your 
frankness,  let  me  beseech  you  to  answer  it ;  Are 
you,  madam,  or  are  you  not,  disengaged  in  your 
affections  ? 

Excuse  me,  Sir  Hargrave  ;  I  don't  think  you  are 
intitled  to  an  answer  to  this  question.  Nor,  perhaps, 
would  you  be  determined  by  the  answer  1  should 
make  to  it,  whether  negative  or  affirmative. 

Give  me  leave  to  say,  madam,  that  I  have  some 
little  knowledge  of  Mr.  Fenwick  and  Mr.  Greville, 
and  of  their  addresses.  They  have  both  owned 
that  no  hopes  have  you  given  them ;  yet  declare 
that  they  mill  hope.  Have  you,  madam,  been  as 
explicit  to  them,  as  you  are  to  me  ? 

I  have,  Sir. 

Then  they  are  not  the  men  I  have  to  fear — Mr. 
Orme,  madam — 

Is  a  good  man,  Sir. 

Ah !  madam  ! — But  why  then  will  you  not  say 
that  you  are  engaged? 

If  I  own  I  am;  perhaps  it  will  not  avail  me:  it 
will  still  much  less,  if  I  say  I  am  not. 

Avail  you !  dear  Miss  Byron  !  I  have  pride, 
madam.  If  I  had  not,  I  should  not  aspire  to  your 
favour.  But  give  me  leave  to  say  [and  he  reddened 
with  anger]  that  my  fortune,  my  descent,  and  my 
ardent  affection  for  you,  considered,  it  may  not  dis- 
avail  you.    Your  relations  will  at  least  think  so,  if  I 

M 


122  THE   HISTORY   OF 

may  have  the  honour  of  your  consent  for  applying 
to  them. 

May  your  fortune,  Sir  Hargrave,  be  a  blessing  to 
you !  It  will,  in  proportion  as  you  do  good  with  it. 
But  were  it  twice  as  much,  that  alone  would  have  no 
charms  for  me.  My  duties  would  be  increased  with 
my  power.  My  fortune  is  an  humble  one ;  but  were 
it  less  it  would  satisfy  my  ambition  while  I  am  single; 
and  if  I  marry,  I  should  not  desire  to  live  beyond  the 
estate  of  the  man  I  choose. 

Upon  my  soul,  madam,  you  must  be  mine.  Every 
word  you  speak  adds  a  rivet  to  my  chains. 

Then,  Sir,  let  us  say  no  more  upon  this  subject. 

He  then  laid  a  title  to  my  gratitude  from  the 
passion  he  avowed  for  me. 

That  is  a  very  poor  plea,  Sir,  said  I,  as  you  your- 
self would  think,  I  believe,  were  one  of  our  sex, 
whom  you  could  not  like,  to  claim  a  return  of  love 
from  you  upon  it. 

You  are  too  refined,  surely,  madam. 

Refined  !  what  meant  the  man  by  the  word  in  this 
place? 

I  believe,  Sir,  we  differ  very  widely  in  many  of  our 
sentiments. 

We  will  not  differ  in  one,  madam,  when  I  know 
yours;  such  is  the  opinion  I  have  of  your  prudence, 
that  I  will  adopt  them,  and  make  them  my  own. 

This  may  be  said,  Sir,  but  there  is  hardly  a  man 
in  the  world  that,  saying  it,  would  keep  his  word: 
nor  a  woman,  who  ought  to  expect  he  should. 

But  you  will  allow  of  my  visits  to  your  cousins, 
madam  ? 

Not  on  my  account,  Sir. 

You  will  not  withdraw  if  I  come  ?  You  will  not 
refuse  seeing  me  ? 

As  you  will  be  no  visitor  of  mine,  I  must  be 
allowed  to  act  accordingly.  Had  I  the  least  thought 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  123 

of  encouraging  your  addresses,  I  would  deal  with 
you  as  openly  as  is  consistent  with  my  notions  of 
modesty  and  decorum. 

Perhaps,  madam,  from  my  gay  behaviour  at  Lady 
Betty  Williams's,  you  think  me  too  airy  a  man.  You 
have  doubts  of  my  sincerity:  you  question  my 
honour. 

That,  Sir,  would  be  to  injure  myself. 

Your  objections,  then,  dear  madam?  Give  me,  I 
beseech  you,  some  one  material  objection. 

Why,  Sir,  should  you  urge  me  thus  ? — When  I 
have  no  doubt,  it  is  unnecessary  to  look  into  my  own 
mind  for  the  particular  reasons  that  move  me  to  dis- 
approve of  the  addresses  of  a  gentleman  whose  pro- 
fessions of  regard  for  me,  notwithstanding,  intitle 
him  to  civility  and  acknowledgment. 

By  my  soul,  madam,  this  is  very  comical: 

I  do  not  like  thee,  Dr.  Fell; 
The  reason  why,  1  cannot  tell — 
But  I  don't  like  thee,    Dr.  Fell. 

Such,  madam,  seem  to  me  to  be  your  reasons. 

You  are  very  pleasant,  Sir.  But  let  me  say,  that 
if  you  are  in  earnest  in  your  professions,  you  could 
not  have  quoted  any  thing  more  against  you  than 
these  humorous  lines ;  since  a  dislike  of  such  a 
nature  as  is  implied  by  them,  must  be  a  dislike 
arising  from  something  resembling  a  natural  aver- 
sion ;  whether  just  or  not  is  little  to  the  purpose. 

I  was  not  aware  of  that,  replied  he:  but  I  hope 
yours  to  me  is  not  such  a  one. 

Excuse  me,  cousin,  said  I,  turning  to  Mrs. 
Reeves;  but  I  believe  I  have  talked  away  the 
tea-time. 

I  think  not  of  tea,  said  she. 

Hang  tea,  said  Mr.  Reeves. 
m  2 


124?  THE   HISTORY  OF 

The  devil  fly  away  with  the  tea-kettle,  said  Sir 
Hargrave ;  let  it  not  have  entrance  here,  till  I  have 
said  what  I  have  further  to  say.  And  let  me  tell  you, 
Miss  Byron,  that  though  you  may  not  have  a  dying 
lover,  you  shall  have  a  resolute  one:  for  1  will  not 
cease  pursuing  you  till  you  are  mine,  or  till  you  are 
the  wife  of  some  other  man. 

He  spoke  this  fiercely,  and  even  rudely.  I  was  dis- 
gusted as  much  at  his  manner,  as  with  his  words. 

I  cannot,  replied  I,  but  congratulate  myself  on 
one  felicity,  since  I  have  been  in  your  company,  Sir; 
and  that  is,  That  in  this  whole  conversation  (and  I 
think  it  much  too  long)  I  have  not  one  thing  to  re- 
proach myself  with,  or  be  sorry  for. 

Your  servant,  madam,  bowing — But  I  am  of  the 
contrary  opinion.  By  heaven,  madam,  [with  anger 
and  an  air  of  insolence  I  think]  you  have  pride, 
madam — 

Pride,  Sir! 

Cruelty. — 

Cruelty,  Sir! 

Ingratitude,  madam. 

I  thought  it  was  staying  to  be  insulted.  All  that 
Sir  John  Allestree  had  said  of  him,  came  into  my 
head. 

Hold,  Sir  (for  he  seemed  to  be  going  on) :  pride, 
cruelty,  ingratitude,  are  crimes  black  enough.  If 
you  think  I  am  guilty  of  them,  excuse  me  that  I  re- 
tire for  the  benefit  of  recollection. — And,  making  a 
low  courtesy,  I  withdrew  in  haste.  He  besought  me 
to  return ;  and  followed  me  to  the  stair's  foot. 

He  shewed  his  pride,  and  his  ill-nature  too,  before 
my  cousins,  when  I  was  gone.  He  bit  his  lip:  he 
walked  about  the  room;  then  sitting  down,  he  la- 
mented, defended,  accused,  and  re-defended  him- 
self; and  yet  besought  their  interest  with  me. 

He  was  greatly  disturbed,  he  owned,  that  with  such 


SIR    CHARLES    ORANDISON.  125 

honourable  intentions,  with  so  much  power  to  make 
me  happy,  and  such  a  will  to  do  so,  he  should  be 
refused;  and  this  without  my  assigning  one  reason 
for  it. 

And  my  cousins  (to  whom  he  again  referred  on 
that  head)  answering  him,  that  they  believed  me 
disengaged  in  my  affections — D —  him,  he  said,  if 
he  could  account  then  for  my  behaviour  to  him. 

He,  however,  threatened  Mr.  Orme  :  who  [if  any) 
he  said,  was  the  man  I  favoured.  I  had  acknow- 
ledged, that  neither  Greville  nor  Fenwick  were. 
My  proud  repulse  had  stung  him,  he  owned.  He 
begged,  that  they  would  send  for  me  down  in  their 
names. 

They  liked  not  the  humour  he  seemed  to  be  in 
well  enough  to  comply  with  his  request;  and  he 
sent  up  in  his  own  name. 

But  I  returned  my  compliments;  I  was  busy  in 
writing  [and  so  I  was — to  you,  my  Lucy]  ;  I  hoped 
Sir  Hargrave,  and  my  cousins,  would  excuse  me. 
I  put  them  in  to  soften  my  refusal. 

This  still  more  displeased  him.  He  besought 
their  pardon  ;  but  he  would  haunt  me  like  a  ghost. 
In  spite  of  man  and  devil  I  should  be  his,  he  had 
the  presumption  to  repeat :  and  went  away  with  a 
flaming  face. 

Don't  you  think,  my  dear,  that  my  cousin  Reeves 
was  a  little  too  mild  in  his  own  house ;  as  I  am  under 
his  guardianship?  But  perhaps  he  was  the  more  pa- 
tient for  that  very  reason;  and  he  is  one  of  thebest- 
naturedmen  in  England.  And  then  80001.  a-year! 
— Yet  why  should  a  man  of  my  counsin's  independent 
fortune — But  grandeur  will  have  its  charms! 

Thus  did  Sir  Hargrave  confirm  all  that  Sir  John 
Allestree  had  said  of  his  bad  qualities:  and  I  think  I 
am  more  afraid  of  him  than  ever  I  was  of  any  man 
M  3 


126  THE   HISTORY   OF 

before.  I  remember,  that  mischievous  is  one  of  the 
bad  qualities  Sir  John  attributed  to  him :  and  re- 
vengeful another.  Should  I  ever  see  him  again  on 
the  same  errand,  I  will  be  more  explicit,  as  to  my 
being  absolutely  disengaged  in  my  affections,  if  I  can 
be  so  without  giving  him  hope,  lest  he  should  do  pri- 
vate mischief  to  some  one  on  my  account.  Upon  my 
word,  I  would  not,  of  all  the  men  I  have  ever  seen, 
be  the  wife  of  Sir  Hargrave  Pollexfen. 

And  so  much  for  this  first  visit  of  his.  I  wish 
his  pride  may  be  enough  piqued  to  make  it  the 
last. 

But  could  you  have  thought  he  would  have  shewn 
himself  so  soon? — Yet  he  had  paraded  so  much,  be- 
fore I  went  down,  to  my  cousins,  and  so  little  ex- 
pected a  direct  and  determined  repulse,  that  a  man 
of  his  self-consequence  might,  perhaps,  be  allowed 
to  be  the  more  easily  piqued  by  it. 

Lady  Betty  has  sent  us  notice,  that  on  Thursday 
next,  there  will  be  a  ball  at  the  Opera  house  in  the 
Hay-market.  My  cousins  are  to  choose  what  theirs 
will  be ;  but  she  insists,  that  my  dress  shall  be  left 
to  her.  I  am  not  to  know  what  it  is  to  be,  till  the 
day  before,  or  the  very  day.  If  I  like  it  not,  she 
will  not  put  me  to  any  expence  about  it. 

You  will  easily  imagine,  upon  such  an  alternative, 
I  shall  approve  of  it,  be  it  what  it  will.  I  have  only 
requested,  that  I  may  not  be  so  remarkably  dressed, 
as  to  attract  the  eyes  of  the  company:  if  I  am,  I  shall 
not  behave  with  any  tolerable  presence  of  mind. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  127 

LETTER  XVIII. 

MISS   BYRON.      IN   CONTINUATION. 

Friday,  February  10. 
One  of  Mr.  Greville's  servants  has  just  been  here, 
with  his  master's  compliments.  So  the  wretch  is 
come  to  town.  I  believe  I  shall  soon  be  able  to 
oblige  him :  he  wishes,  you  know,  to  provoke  me 
to  say  I  hate  him. 

Surely  I  draw  inconveniencies  upon  myself  by 
being  so  willing  to  pay  civility  for  esteem.  Yet  it  is 
in  my  nature  to  do  so,  and  I  cannot  help  it  without 
committing  a  kind  of  violence  on  my  temper.  There 
is  no  merit,  therefore,  in  my  behaviour,  on  such  oc- 
casions. Very  pretty  self-deception  ! — I  study  my 
own  ease,  and  (before  I  consider)  am  ready  to  call 
myself  patient,  and  good  humoured,  and  civil,  and 
to  attribute  to  myself  I  know  not  how  many  kind  and 
complaisant  things  ;  when  I  ought,  in  modesty,  to 
distinguish  between  the  virtue  and  the  necessity. 

I  never  was  uncivil,  as  I  call  it,  but  to  one  young 
gentleman ;  a  man  of  quality  (you  know  who  I 
mean) ;  and  that  was,  because  he  wanted  me  to  keep 
secret  his  addresses  to  me,  for  family  considerations. 
The  young  woman  who  engages  to  keep  her  lover's 
secrets  in  this  particular,  is  often  brought  into  a 
plot  against  herself,  and  oftener  still  against  those 
to  whom  she  owes  unreserved  honour  and  duty : 
and  is  not  such  a  conduct  also  an  indirect  confession, 
that  you  know  you  are  engaging  in  something 
wrong  and  unworthy  ? 

Mr.  Greville's  arrival  vexes  me.  I  suppose  it  will 
not  be  long  before  Mr.Fenwick  comes  too.  I  have 
a  good  mind  to  try  to  like  the  modest  Mr.  Orme  the 
better,  in  spite. 


128  THE    HISTORY    OF 

Saturday  morning,  February  II. 

I  shall  have  nothirfg  to  trouble  you  with,  I  think, 
but  scenes  of  courtship.  Sir  Rowland,  Sir  Har- 
grave,  and  Mr.  Greville.  all  met  just  now  at  our 
breakfast-time. 

Sir  Rowland  came  first ;  a  little  before  breakfast 
was  ready.  After  enquiries  of  Mr.  Reeves  whether 
I  held  in  the  same  mind,  or  not ;  he  desired  to  have 
the  favour  of  one  quarter  of  an  hour's  conversation 
with  me  alone. 

Methinks  I  have  a  value  for  this  honest  knight. 
Honesty,  my  Lucy,  is  good  sense,  politeness,  ami- 
ableness,  all  in  one.  An  honest  man  must  appear 
in  every  light  with  such  advantages,  as  will  make 
even  singularity  agreeable.     I  went  down  directly. 

He  met  me  ;  and  taking  my  not-withdrawn  hand, 
and  peering  in  my  face,  Mercy  !  said  he,  the  same 
kind  aspect !  The  same  sweet  and  obliging  counte- 
nance !  How  can  this  be  ?  But  you  must  be  gra- 
cious !     You  tvill.     Say  you  will. 

You  must  not  urge  me,  Sir  Rowland.  You  will 
give  me  pain  if  you  lay  me  under  a  necessity  to  re- 
peat— 

Repeat  what  ?  Don't  say  a  refusal.  Dear  madam, 
don't  say  a  refusal !  Will  you  not  save  a  life  ?  Why, 
madam,  my  poor  boy  is  absolutely  and  bonajide 
broken-hearted.  I  would  have  had  him  come  with 
me  :  but,  no,  he  could  not  bear  to  teaze  the  beloved 
of  his  soul !  Why  there's  an  instance  of  love  now  ! 
Not  for  all  his  hopes,  not  for  his  life's  sake  could  he 
bear  to  teaze  you!  None  of  your  fluttering  Jack  a- 
dandy's,  now,  would  have  said  this!  And  let  not 
such  succeed,  where  modest  merit  fails  ! — Mercy  ! 
You  are  struck  with  my  plea!  Don't,  don't,  God 
bless  you  now,  don't  harden  your  heart  on  my  ob- 
servation.   I  was  resolved  to  set  out  in  a  day  or  two  : 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  129 

but  I  will  stay  in  town,  were  it  a  month,  to  see  my 
boy  made  happy.  And,  let  me  tell  you,  I  would 
not  wish  him  to  be  happy  unless  he  could  make  you 
so. — Come,  come — 

I  was  a  little  affected.     I  was  silent. 

Come,  come,  be  gracious ;  be  merciful.  Dear 
lady,  be  as  good  as  you  look  to  be.  One  word  of 
comfort  for  my  poor  boy.  1  could  kneel  to  you  for 
one  word  of  comfort — Nay,  I  will  kneel ;  taking  hold 
of  my  other  hand,  as  he  still  held  one ;  and  down  on 
his  knees  dropt  the  honest  knight. 

I  was  surprised.  I  knew  not  what  to  say,  what  to 
do.  I  had  not  the  courage  to  attempt  to  raise  him. 
Yet  to  see  a  man  of  his  years,  and  who  had  given 
himself  a  claim  to  my  esteem,  kneel ;  and,  with 
glistening  eyes,  looking  up  to  me  for  mercy,  as  he 
called  it,  on  his  boy  ;  how  was  1  affected ! — But,  at 
last,  Rise,  dear  Sir  Rowland,  rise,  said  I :  you  call 
out  for  mercy  to  me ;  yet  have  none  upon  me.  O 
how  you  distress  me  ! 

I  would  have  withdrawn  my  hands  ;  but  he  held 
them  fast.  I  stamped  in  tender  passion  [I  am  sure 
it  was  in  tender  passion]  now  with  one  foot,  now 
with  the  other ;  Dear  Sir  Rowland,  rise ;  I  cannot 
bear  this.  I  beseech  you  rise  [and  down  I  dropt  in- 
voluntarily on  one  knee],  What  can  I  say  ?  Rise, 
dear  Sir,  on  my  knee  I  beg  of  you  kneel  not  to  me  : 
indeed,  Sir,  you  greatly  distress  me  !  Pray  let  go 
my  hands. 

Tears  ran  down  his  cheeks — And  do  I  distress 
you,  madam !  And  do  you  vouchsafe  to  kneel  to 
me  ? — I  will  not  distress  you :  for  the  world  I  will  not 
distress  you. 

He  arose,  and  let  go  my  hands.  I  arose  too 
abashed.  He  pulled  out  his  handkerchief,  and 
hastening  from  me  to  the  window,  wiped  his  eyes. 
Then  turning  to  me,    What  a  fool  I  am !    What  a 


130  THE    HISTORY    OF 

mere  child  I  make  of  myself!  How  can  I  blame  my 
boy  ?  O  madam !  have  you  not  one  word  of  comfort 
to  send  by  me  to  my  boy  ?  Say,  but,  you  will  see 
him.  Give  him  leave  to  wait  on  you  :  yet,  poor 
soul !  (wiping  his  eyes  again)  he  would  not  be  able 
to  say  a  word  in  his  own  behalf. — Bid  me  bring  him 
to  you :  bid  us  come  together. 

And  so  I  could,  and  so  I  would,  Sir  Rowland,  if 
no  other  expectations  were  to  be  formed  than  those 
of  civility.  But  I  will  go  farther  to  shew  my  regard 
for  you,  Sir  :  let  me  be  happy  in  your  friendship, 
and  good  opinion :  let  me  look  upon  you  as  my 
father :  let  me  look  upon  Mr.  Fowler  as  my  brother : 
I  am  not  so  happy,  as  to  have  either  father  or  bro- 
ther. And  let  Mr.  Fowler  own  me  as  his  sister ; 
and  every  visit  you  make  me,  you  will  both,  in  these 
characters,  be  dearer  to  me  than  before. — But,  O 
my  father!  (already  will  I  call  you  father!)  urge 
not  your  daughter  to  an  impossibility ! 

Mercy  !  Mercy  !  What  will  become  of  me !  What 
will  become  of  my  boy,  rather  ! 

He  turned  from  me,  with  his  handkerchief  at  his 
eyes  again,  and  even  sobbed :  Where  are  all  my  pur- 
poses !  Irresistible  lady ! — But  must  I  give  up  my 
hopes  !  Must  my  boy  be  told — And  yet,  do  you  call 
mejather  ;  and  do  you  plead  for  my  indulgence  as  if 
you  were  my  daughter  ? 

Indeed  I  do  ;  indeed  I  must.  I  have  told  Mr. 
Fowler,  with  so  much  regard  for  him,  as  an  honest, 
as  a  worthy  man — 

Why  that's  the  weapon  that  wounds  him,  that 
cuts  him  to  the  heart !  Your  gentleness,  your  open- 
ness— And  are  you  determined  ?  Can  there  be  no 
hope  ? 

Mr.  Fotvler  is  my  brother,  Sir ;  and  you  are  my 
father. — Accept  me  in  those  characters. 

Accept  you  !  Mercy  !  Accept  you  !  — Forgive  me, 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  131 

madam,  (catching  my  hand,  and  pressing  it  with  his 
lips)  you  do  me  honour  in  the  appellation :  but  if 
your  mind  should  change  on  consideration,  and 
from  motives  of  pity — 

Indeed,  indeed,  Sir  Rowland,  it  cannot  change. 

Why  then,  I,  as  well  as  my  nephew,  must  acqui- 
esce with  your  pleasure.  But,  madam,  you  don't 
know  what  a  worthy  creature  he  is.  1  will  not, 
however,  teaze  you. — But  how,  but  how,  shall  I  see 
Mr.  Reeves  ?  I  am  ashamed  to  see  him  with  this 
baby  in  my  face. 

And  I,  Sir  Rowland,  must  retire  before  I  can  ap- 
pear. Excuse  me,  Sir  (withdrawing) ;  but  I  hope 
you  will  breakfast  with  us. 

I  will  drink  tea  with  you,  madam,  if  I  can  make 
myself  fit  to  be  seen,  were  it  but  to  claim  you  for  my 
daughter:  but  yet  had  much  rather  you  would  be 
a  farther  remove  in  relation  :  would  to  God  you 
would  let  it  be  niece  ! 

I  courtesied,  as  a  daughter  might  do,  parting  with 
her  real  father  ;  and  withdrew. 

And  now,  my  Lucy,  will  you  not  be  convinced 
that  one  of  the  greatest  pains  (the  loss  of  dear 
friends  excepted)  that  a  grateful  mind  can  know,  is 
to  be  too  much  beloved  by  a  worthy  heart,  and  not 
to  be  able  to  return  his  love? 

My  sheet  is  ended.  With  a  new  one  I  will  begin 
another  letter. — Yet  a  few  words  in  the  margin — I 
tell  you  not,  my  dear,  of  the  public  entertainments 
to  which  Lady  Betty  is  continually  contriving  to 
draw  me  out.  She  intends  by  it  to  be  very 
obliging,  and  is  so :  but  my  present  reluctance  to 
go  so  very  often,  must  not  be  overcome,  as  it  pos- 
sibly would  be  too  easily  done,  were  I  to  give  way 
to  the  temptation.  If  it  be,  your  Harriet  may  turn 
gadder,  and  never  be  easy  but  when  she  is  forming 
parties,  or  giving  way  to  them,  that  may  make  the 


132  THE    HISTORY    OF 

home,  that  hitherto  has  been  the  chief  scene  of  her 
pleasures,  undelightful  to  her.  Bad  habits  are 
sooner  acquired  than  shaken  off,  as  my  grand- 
mamma has  often  told  us. 


LETTER  XIX. 

MISS    BYRON.      IN    CONTINUATION. 

Who  would  have  thought  that  a  man  of  Sir  Row- 
land's time  of  life,  and  a  woman  so  young  as  I, 
could  have  so  much  discomposed  each  other  ?  I 
obeyed  the  summons  to  breakfast,  and  entered  the 
room  at  one  door,  as  he  came  in  at  the  other.  In 
vain  had  I  made  use  of  the  short  retirement  (o  con- 
ceal my  emotion  from  my  cousins.  They  also  saw 
Sir  Rowland's  by  his  eyes,  and  looked  at  him,  at 
me,  and  at  each  other. 

Mercy!  said  Sir  Rowland,  in  an  accent  that 
seemed  between  crying  and  laughing,  You,  you, 
you,  madam,  are  a  surprising  lady  !  I,  I,  I  never  was 
so  affected  in  my  life.  And  he  drew  the  back  of  his 
hand  cross  first  one  eye,  then  the  other. 

O  Sir  Rowland,  said  I,  you  are  a  good  man.  How 
affecting  are  the  visible  emotions  of  a  manly  heart ! 

My  cousins  still  looked  as  if  surprised;  but  said 
nothing. 

O  my  cousins,  said  I,  I  have  found  a  father  in 
Sir  Rowland ;  and  I  acknowledge  a  brother  in  Mr. 
Fowler. 

Best  of  women !  Most  excellent  of  creatures ! 
And  do  you oiv)i  me?  He  snatched  my  hand,  and 
kissed  it.  What  pride  do  you  give  me  in  this  open 
acknowledgment !  If  it  must  not  be  niece,  why 
then  I  will  endeavour  to  rejoice  in  my  daughter,  I 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISOM.  133 

think.  But  yet,  my  boy,  my  poor  boy — But  you 
are  all  goodness :  and  with  him  I  say,  I  must  not 
teaze  you. 

What  you  have  been  saying  to  each  other  alone, 
said  Mrs.  Reeves,  I  cannot  tell ;  but  I  long  to  know. 
Why,  madam,  I  will  tell  you — if  I  know  how — 
You  must  know,  that  I,  that  I,  came  as  an  ambas- 
sador extraordinary  from  my  sorrowful  boy  :  yet  not 
desired;  not  sent;  I  came  of  my  own  accord,  in 
hopes  of  getting  one  word  of  comfort,  and  to  bring 
matters  on  before  I  set  out  for  Caermarthen. 

The  servant  coming  in,  and  a  loud  rap,  rap,  rap, 
at  the  door,  put  a  stop  to  Sir  Rowland's  narrative. 
In  apprehension  of  company,  I  breathed  on  my 
hand,  and  put  it  to  either  eye :  and  Sir  Rowland 
hemmed  twice  or  thrice,  and  rubbed  his,  the  better 
to  conceal  their  redness,  though  it  made  them  red- 
der than  before.  He  got  up,  looked  in  the  glass  : 
would  have  sung.  Toll,  doll — Hem,  said  he;  as  if 
the  muscles  of  his  face  were  in  the  power  of  his 
voice.  Mercy !  All  the  infant  still  in  my  eye — 
Toll — doll — Hem  ! — I  would  sing  it  away  if  I  could. 
Sir  Hargrave  entered  bowing,  scraping  to  me, 
and  with  an  air  not  ungraceful. 

Servant,  Sir,  said  the  knight  (to  Sir  Hargrave's 
silent  salute  to  him)  bowing,  and  looking  at  the 
baronet's  genteel  morning  dress,  and  then  at  his 
own — Who  the  deuce  is  he!  whispering  to  Mr. 
Reeves ;  who  then  presented  each  to  the  other  by 
name. 

The  baronet  approached  me ;  I  have,  madam,  a 
thousand  pardons  to  ask — 
Not  one,  Sir. 

Indeed  I  have — And  most  heartily  do  I  beg — 
You  are  forgiven,  Sir — 
But  I  will  not  be  so  easily  forgiven. 

N 


134?  THE    HISTORY    OF 

Mercy !  whispered  the  knight  to  Mr.  Reeves,  I 
don't  like 'n.  Ah !  my  poor  boy :  no  wonder  at  this 
rate ! — 

You  have  not  much  to  fear,  Sir  Rowland  (re- 
whispered  my  cousin)  on  this  gentleman's  account. 

Thank  you,  thank  you — And  yet  'tis  a  fine  figure 
of  a  man !  whispered  again  Sir  Rowland :  nay,  if 
she  can  withstand  him — But  a  word  to  the  wise,  Mr. 
Reeves! — Hem! — I  am  a  little  easier  than  I  was. 

He  turned  from  my  cousin  with  such  an  air,  as  if 
from  contrasted  pleasure  and  pain,  he  would  again 
have  sung  Toll,  doll. 

The  servant  came  in  with  the  breakfast :  and  we 
had  no  sooner  sat  down,  as  before,  than  we  were 
alarmed  by  another  modern  rapping.  Mr.  Reeves 
was  called  out,  and  returned,  introducing  Mr.  Gre- 
ville. 

Who  the  deuce  is  he  ?  whispered  to  me  Sir  Row- 
land (as  he  sat  next  me)  before  Mr.  Reeves  could 
name  him. 

Mr.  Greville  profoundly  bowed  to  me.  I  asked 
after  the  health  of  all  our  friends  in  Northampton- 
shire. 

Have  you  seen  Fenwick,  madam? 
No,  Sir. 

A  dog  !  I  thought  he  had  played  me  a  trick.  I 
missed  him  for  three  days — But  (in  a  low  voice)  if 
you  have  not  seen  him,  I  have  stolen  a  march  upon 
him ! — Well,  I  had  rather  ask  his  pardon  than  he 
should  ask  mine.  I  rejoice  to  see  you  well,  madam! 
(raising  his  voice)  But  what ! — looking  at  my  eyes. 
Colds  are  very  rife  in  London,  Sir — 
I  am  glad  it  is  no  worse ;  for  your  grandmamma, 
and  all  friends  in  the  country,  are  well. 

I  have  found  a  father,  Mr.  Greville  (referring  to 
Sir  Rowland)  since  I  came  to  town.  This  good 
gentleman  gives  me  leave  to  call  him  father. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISOX.  135 

No  son  ! — I  hope,  Sir  Rowland,  you  have  no  son, 
said  Mr.  Greville :  the  relation  comes  not  about  that 
way,  I  hope.  And  laughed,  as  he  used  to  do,  at  his 
own  smartness. 

The  very  question,  I  was  going  to  put,  by  my  soul, 
said  the  baronet. 

No  ! — said  the  knight :  but  I  have  a  nephetv,  gen- 
tlemen— a  very  pretty  young  fellow  !  And  I  have 
this  to  say  before  ye  all  (I  am  downright  Dunsta- 
ble) I  had  much  rather  call  this  lady  niece  than 
daughter.  And  then  the  knight  forced  a  laugh,  and 
looked  round  upon  us  all. 

O  Sir  Rowland,  replied  I,  I  have  uncles,  more 
than  one — I  am  a  niece :  but  I  have  not  had  for 
many  years  till  now  the  happiness  of  a  father. 

And  do  you  own  me,  madam,  before  all  this  gay 
company  ?  — The  first  time  I  beheld  you,  I  remem- 
ber I  called  you  a  perfect  paragon.  Why,  madam, 
you  are  the  most  excellent  of  women  ! 

We  are  so  much  convinced  of  this,  Sir  Rowland, 
said  the  baronet,  that  I  don't  know,  but  Miss 
Byron's  choosing  you  for  a  father,  instead  of  an 
uncle,  may  have  saved  two  or  three  throats. 

And  then  he  laughed.  His  laugh  was  the  more 
seasonable,  as  it  softened  the  shockingness  of  his 
expression. 

Mr.  Greville  and  Sir  Hargrave  had  been  in  com- 
pany twice  before  in  Northamptonshire  at  the  races: 
but  now-and-then  looked  upon  each  other  with 
envious  eyes ;  and  once  or  twice  were  at  cross- 
purposes  ,  but  my  particular  notice  of  the  knight 
made  all  pass  lightly  over. 

Sir  Rowland  went  first  away.  He  claimed  one 
word  with  his  daughter  in  the  character  of  a  father. 

I  withdrew  with  him  to  the  further  end  of  the 


136  THE    HISTORY    OF 

Not  one  word  of  comfort  ?  not  one  word,  madam  ? 
—to  my  boy  ?  whispered  he. 

My  compliments  (speaking  low)  to  my  brother, 
Sir.  I  wish  him  as  well  and  as  happy  as  1  think  he 
deserves  to  be. 

Well  but— Well  but- 
Only  remember,   Sir  Rowland,   that  you  act  in 
character.     I  followed  you  hither,  on  the  strength 
of  your  authority,  as  a.  father  ;  I  beg,  Sir,  that  you 
will  preserve  to  me  that  character. 

Why  God  in  heaven  bless  my  daughter,  if  only 
daughter  you  can  be.  Too  well  do  1  understand 
you !  I  will  see  how  my  poor  nephew  will  take  it. 
If  it  can  be  no  otherwise,  I  will  prevail  upon  him, 
I  think,  to  go  down  with  me  to  Caermarthen  for  a 
few  months. — But  as  to  those  two  fine  gentlemen, 
madam — it  would  grieve  me  ('tis  a  folly  to  deny  it) 
to  say  I  have  seen  the  man  that  is  to  supplant  my 
nephew. 

/  will  act  in  character,  Sir  Rowland :  as  your 
daughter,  you  have  a  right  to  know  my  sentiments 
on  this  subject — You  have  not  yet  seen  the  man 
you  seem  to  be  afraid  of. 

You  are  all  goodness,  madam — my  daughter — and 
I  cannot  bear  it ! 

He  spoke  this  loud  enough  to  be  heard  ;  and  Mr. 
Greville  and  the  baronet  both,  with  some  emotion, 
rose,  and  turned  about  to  us. 

Once  more,  Sir  Rowland,  said  I,  my  compli- 
ments to  my  brother — Adieu ! 

God  in  heaven  bless  you,  madam,  that's  all- 
Gentlemen,  your  servant.  Mrs.  Reeves,  yourmost 
obedient  humble  servant.  Madam,  to  me,  you  will 
allow  me,  and  my  nephew  too,  one  more  visit,  I 
hope,  before  I  set  out  for  Caermarthen. 

I  courtesied,  and  joined  my  cousins.     Away  went 


.SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  137 

the  knight,  brushing  the  ground  with  his  hat,  at 
his  going  out.  Mr.  Reeves  waited  on  him  to  the 
outward  door. 

'Bye,  bye,  to  you,  Mr.  Reeves — with  some  emo- 
tion (as  my  cousin  told  me  afterwards) — A  wonder- 
ful creature !  By  mercy,  a  wonderful  creature  ! — I  go 
away  with  my  heart  full;  yet  am  pleased;  I  know 
not  why  neither,  that's  the  jest  of  it — 'Bye,  Mr. 
Reeves,  I  can  stay  no  longer. 

An  odd  mortal!  said  the  man  of  the  town — But  he 
seems  to  know  on  which  side  his  bread  is  buttered. 

A  whimsical  old  fellow  !  said  the  man  of  the  coun- 
try.    But  I  rejoice  that  he  has  not  a  son  ;  that's  all. 

A  good  many  frothy  things  passed  not  worth  re- 
lating. I  wanted  them  both  to  be  gone.  They 
seemed  each  to  think  it  time ;  but  looked  as  if 
neither  cared  to  leave  the  other  behind  him. 

At  last,  Mr.  Greville,  who  hinted  to  me,  that  he 
knew  I  loved  not  too  long  an  intrusion,  bowed,  and, 
politely  enough,  took  his  leave.  And  then  the 
baronet  began,  with  apologizing  for  his  behaviour 
at  taking  leave  on  his  last  visit. 

Some  gentlemen,  I  said,  had  one  way,  some 
another,  of  expressing  themselves  on  particular  occa- 
sions :  he  had  thought  fit  to  shew  me  what  was  his. 

He  seemed  a  little  disconcerted.  But  quickly 
recovering  himself,  he  could  not  indeed  excuse  him- 
self, he  said,  for  having  then  called  me  cruel — Cruel 
he  hoped  he  should  not  find  me — Proud — I  knew 
not  what  pride  was.  Ungrateful — I  could  not  be 
guilty  of  ingratitude.  He  begged  me  to  forgive  his 
peremptoriness — He  had  hoped  (as  he  had  been 
assured,  that  my  affections  were  absolutely  disen- 
gaged) that  the  proposals  he  had  to  make,  would 
have  been  acceptable  ;  and  so  positive  a  refusal, 
without  any  one  reason  assigned,  and  on  his  first 
visit,  had  indeed  hurt  his  pride  (he  owned,  he  said, 
n  3 


138  THE    HISTORY    OF 

that  he  had  some  pride)  and  made  him  forget  that 
he  was  addressing  himself  to  a  woman  who  deserved 
and  met  with  the  veneration  of  every  one  who 
approached  her.  He  next  expressed  himself  with 
apprehensions  on  Mr.  Greville's  arrival  in  town. 
He  spoke  slightly  of  him.  Mr.  Greville,  I  doubt 
not,  will  speak  as  slightly  of  Sir  Hargrave.  And 
if  I  believe  them  both,  I  fancy  I  shall  not  injure 
either. 

Mr.  Greville's  arrival,  I  said,  ought  not  to  con- 
cern me.  He  was  to  do  as  he  thought  fit.  I  was 
only  desirous  to  be  allowed  the  same  free  agency 
that  I  was  ready  to  allow  to  others. 

That  could  not  be,  he  said.  Every  man  who  saw 
me,  must  wish  me  to  be  his  ;  and  endeavour  to  ob- 
tain his  wishes. 

And  then  making  vehement  professions  of  love, 
he  offered  me  large  settlements  ;  and  to  put  it  in  my 
power  to  do  all  the  good  that  he  knew  it  was  in  my 
heart  to  do — And  that  I  should  prescribe  to  him  in 
every  thing  as  to  place  of  residence,  excursions, 
even  to  the  going  abroad  to  France,  to  Italy,  and 
wherever  I  pleased. 

To  all  which  I  answered  as  before  ;  and  when  he 
insisted  upon  my  reasons  for  refusing  him,  I  frankly 
told  him,  though  I  owned  it  was  with  some  reluct- 
ance, that  I  had  not  the  opinion  of  his  morals  that 
I  must  have  of  those  of  the  man  to  whom  I  gave  my 
hand  in  marriage. 

Of  my  morals,  madam!  (starting;  and  his  colour 
went  and  came)  My  morals,  madam! — I  thought 
he  looked  with  malice  :  but  I  was  not  intimidated  : 
and  yet  my  cousins  looked  at  me  with  some  little 
surprise  for  my  plain  dealing,  though  not  as  blam- 
ing me. 

Be  not  displeased,  Sir,  with  my  freedom.  You 
call  upon  me  to  make  objections.    I  mean  not  to 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISO>T.  139 

upbraid  you;   that  is   not  my  business;   but  thus 
called  upon,  I  must  repeat — I  stopt. 

Proceed,  madam,  angrily. 

Indeed,  Sir  Hargrave,  you  must  pardon  me  on 
this  occasion,  if  I  repeat  that  I  have  not  that  opinion 
of  your  morals — 

Very  well,  madam — 

That  I  must  have  of  those  of  the  man  on  whose 
worthiness  I  must  build  my  hopes  of  present  happi- 
ness, and  to  whose  guidance  entrust  my  future 
This,  Sir,  is  a  very  material  consideration  with  me, 
though  I  am  not  fond  of  talking  upon  it,  except  on 
■proper  occasions,  and  to  proper  persons;  but,  Sir,  let 
me  add  that  I  am  determined  to  live  longer  single. 
I  think  it  too  early  to  engage  in  a  life  of  care  :  and 
if  I  do  not  meet  with  a  man  to  whom  I  can  give  my 
whole  heart,  I  never  will  marry  at  all  [O  how  ma- 
liciously looked  the  man!] — You  are  angry,  Sir 
Hargrave,  added  I;  but  you  have  no  right  to  be  so. 
You  address  me  as  one  who  is  her  own  mistress. 
And  though  I  would  not  be  thought  rude,  I  value 
myself  on  my  openness  of  heart. 

He  arose  from  his  seat.  He  walked  about  the 
room  muttering,  "  You  have  no  opinion  of  my 
morals  ' — By  heaven,  madam ! — But  I  will  bear  i  t 
all — Yet,  "No  opinion  of  my  morals!" — I  cannot 
bear  that — 

He  then  clenched  his  fist,  and  held  it  up  to  his 
head ;  and  snatching  up  his  hat,  bowing  to  the 
ground  to  us  all,  his  face  crimsoned  over  (as  the 
time  before)  he  withdrew. 

Mr.  Reeves  attended  him  to  the  door — "  Net 
like  my  morals !"  said  he — I  have  enemies,  Mr. 
Reeves.  "  Not  like  my  morals!" — Miss  Byron  treats 
politely  every  body  but  me,  Sir.  Her  scorn  may 
be  repaid — Would  to  God  I  could  say  with  scorn, 
Mr.  Reeves. — Adieu.  Excuse  my  warmth. — Adieu. 


140  THE    HISTORY    OF 

And  into  his  chariot  he  stept,  pulling  up  the 
glasses  with  violence;  and,  as  Mr.  Reeves  told  us, 
rearing  up  his  head  to  the  top  of  it,  as  he  sat  swell- 
ing.    And  away  it  drove. 

His  menacing  airs,  and  abrupt  departure,  terrified 
me.  I  did  not  recover  myself  in  an  hour. 

A  fine  husband  for  your  Harriet  would  this  half 
madman  make! — O  Mr.  Fowler,  Sir  Rowland,  Mr. 
Orme,  what  good  men  are  you  to  Sir  Hargrave! 
Should  I  have  known  half  so  much  as  I  do  of  his 
ill  qualities,  had  I  not  refused  him  ?  Drawn  in  by 
his  professions  of  love,  and  by  80001.  a  year,  I 
might  have  married  him;  and,  when  too  late,  found 
myself  miserable,  yoked  with  a  tyrant  and  madman, 
for  the  remainder  of  a  life  begun  with  happy  pro- 
spects, and  glorying  in  every  one's  love ! 


LETTER  XX. 

MISS    BYRON.      IN    CONTINUATION. 

Monday,  February  13. 
I  have  received  my  uncle's  long  letter.  And  I 
thank  him  for  the  pains  he  has  taken  with  me.  He 
is  very  good.  But  my  grandmamma  and  my  aunt 
are  equally  so,  and,  in  the  main,  much  kinder, 
in  acquitting  me  of  some  charges  which  he  is 
pleased  to  make  upon  his  poor  Harriet.  But,  either 
for  caution  or  reproof,  I  hope  to  be  the  better  for 
his  letter. 

James  is  set  out  for  Northamptonshire:  pray  re- 
ceive  him   kindly.     He  is  honest:  and  Sally  has 
«;iven  me  a  hint,  as  if  a  sweetheart  is  in  his  head : 
if  so,  his  impatience   to  leave  London  may  be  ac- 
5 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISOX.  141 

counted  for.  My  grandmamma  has  observed,  that 
young  people  of  small  or  no  fortunes  should  not  be 
discouraged  from  marrying:  Who  that  could  be 
masters  or  mistresses  would  be  servants?  The 
honest  poor,  as  she  has  often  said,  are  a  very  va- 
luable part  of  the  creation. 

Mr.  Reeves  has  seen  several  footmen,  but  none 
that  he  gave  me  the  trouble  of  speaking  to  till  just 
now:  when  a  well-looking  young  man.  about  twen- 
ty-six years  of  age,  offered  himself,  and  whom  1 
believe  I  shall  like.  Mrs.  Reeves  seems  mightily 
taken  with  him.  He  is  well-behaved,  has  a  very 
sensible  look,  and  seems  to  merit  abetter  service. 

Mr.  Reeves  has  written  for  a  character  of  him  to 
the  last  master  he  lived  with;  Mr.  Bagenhall,  a 
young  gentleman  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Reading ; 
of  whom  he  speaks  well  in  the  main  ;  but  modestly 
objected  to  his  hours,  and  free  way  of  life.  The 
young  man  came  to  town  but  yesterday,  and  is  with 
a  widow  sister,  who  keeps  an  inn  in  Smithfield.  I 
have  a  mind  to  like  him,  and  this  makes  me  more 
particular  about  him. 

His  name  is  William  Wilson:  he  asks  pretty  high 
wages :  but  wages  to  a  good  servant  are  not  to  be 
stood  upon.  What  .signify  forty  or  fifty  shillings  a 
year?  An  honest  servant  should  be  enabled  to  lay 
up  something  for  age  and  infirmity.  Hire  him  at 
once,  Mrs.  Reeves  says.  She  will  be  answerable 
for  his  honesty  from  his  looks,  and  from  his  answers 
to  the  questions  asked  him. 

Sir  Hargruve  has  been  here  pgain.  Mrs.  Reeves, 
Miss  Clements,  and  I,  were  in  the  back  room  to- 
gether. We  had  drank  tea;  and  I  excused  myself 
to  his  message,  as  engaged. 

Me  talked  a  good  deal  to  Mrs.  Reeves:  sometimes 
high,  sometimes  humble.  He  had  not  intended,  he 
said,  to  have  renewed  his  visits.     My  disdain  had 


142  THE    HISTORY    OF 

stung  him  to  the  heart:  yet  he  could  not  keep  away. 
He  called  himself  names.  He  was  determined  I 
should  be  his ;  and  swore  to  it.  A  man  of  his  for- 
tune to  be  refused,  by  a  lady  who  had  not  (and 
whom  he  wished  not  to  have)  an  answerable  fortune, 
and  no  preferable  liking  to  any  other  man  [there 
Sir  Hargrave  was  mistaken ;  for  I  like  almost  every 
man  I  know,  better  than  him];  his  person  not  con- 
temptible [and  then,  my  cousin  says,  he  surveyed 
himself  from  head  to  foot  in  the  glass] ;  was  very, 
very  unaccountable. 

He  asked  if  Mr.  Greville  came  up  with  any 
hopes  ? 

Mr.  Reeves  told  him  that  I  was  offended  at  his 
coming,  and  he  was  sure  he  would  not  be  the  bet- 
ter for  his  journey. 

He  was  glad  of  that,  he  said.  There  were  two 
or  three  free  things,  proceeded  he,  said  to  me  in 
conversation  by  Mr.  Greville ;  which  I  knew  not 
well  what  to  make  of:  but  they  shall  pass,  if  he 
has  no  more  to  boast  of  than  I.  I  know  Mr.  Gre- 
ville's  blustering  character;  but  I  wish  the  carrying 
of  Miss  Byron  were  to  depend  upon  the  sword's 
point  between  us.  I  would  not  come  into  so  paltry 
a  compromise  with  him  as  Fenwick  has  done.  But 
still  the  imputing  want  of  morals  to  me,  sticks  with 
me.  Surely  I  am  a  better  man,  in  point  of  morals, 
than  either  Greville  or  Fenwick.  What  man  on 
earth  does  not  take  liberties  with  the  sex?  You 
know,  Mr.  Reeves!  women  were  made  for  us;  and 
they  like  us  not  the  worse  for  loving  them.  Want 
of  morals! — And  objected  to  me  by  a  lady  ! — Very 
extraordinary,  by  my  soul ! — Is  it  not  better  to  sow 
all  one's  wild  oats  before  matrimony,  than  run  riot 
afterwards? — What  say  you,  Mr.  Reeves? 

Mr.  Reeves  was  too  patient  with  him.  He  is  a 
mild  man:  yet  wants  not  spirit,  my  cousin  says,  on 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  143 

occasion.  He  gave  Sir  Hargrave  the  hearing;  who 
went  away,  swearing,  that  I  should  be  his,  in  spite 
of  man  or  devil. 

Monday  night. 

Mr.  Greville  came  in  the  evening.  He  begged 
to  be  allowed  but  ten  words  with  me  in  the  next 
room.  I  desired  to  be  excused.  You  know,  Sir,  said 
I,  that  I  never  complied  with  a  request  of  this  na- 
ture, at  Selby-house.  He  looked  hard  at  my  cou- 
sins ;  and  first  one,  then  the  other,  went  out.  He 
then  was  solicitous  to  know  what  were  Sir  Har- 
grave's  expectations  from  me.  He  expressed 
himself  uneasy  upon  his  account.  He  hoped  such 
a  man  as  that  would  not  be  encouraged.  Yet  his 
ample  fortune! — Woman!  woman! — iiut  he  was 
neither  a  wiser  nor  a  better  man  than  himself;  and 
he  hoped  Miss  Byron  would  not  give  a  prefer- 
ence to  fortune  merely,  against  a  man  who  had  been 
her  admirer  for  so  long  a  time ;  and  who  wanted 
neither  will  nor  powrer  to  make  her  happy. 

It  was  very  irksome  to  me,  I  answered,  to  be 
obliged  so  often  to  repeat  the  same  things  to  him. 
1  would  not  be  thought  affronting  to  any-body, 
especially  to  a  neighbour  with  whom  my  friends 
were  upon  good  terms:  but  I  did  not  think  myself 
answerable  to  him,  or  to  any  one  out  of  my  own 
family,  for  my  visitors ;  or  for  whom  my  cousin 
lleeves's  thought  fit  to  receive  as  theirs. 

Would  I  give  him  an  assurance,  that  Sir  Har- 
grave should  have  no  encouragement? 

No,  Sir,  I  will  not.  Would  not  that  be  to  give 
you  indirectly  a  kind  of  controul  over  me  ?  Would 
not  that  be  to  encourage  a  hope,  that  I  never  tvill 
encourage  ? 

I  love  not  my  own  soul,  madam,  as  1  love  you; 
I  must,  and  will,  persevere.     If  I  thought   Sir  Har- 


114  THE    HISTORY    OF 

grave  had  the  least  hope,    by  the  great  God    of 
heaven,  I  would  pronounce  his  days  numbered. 

I  am  but  too  well  acquainted  with  your  rash- 
ness, Mr.  Greville.  What  formerly  passed  between 
you  and  another  gentleman,  gave  me  pain  enough. 
In  such  an  enterprise  your  own  days  might  be 
numbered  as  well  as  another's.  But  I  enter  not 
into  this  subject — Henceforth  be  so  good  as  not  to 
impute  incivility  to  me,  if  I  deny  myself  to  your 
visits. 

I  would  have  withdrawn — 

Dear  Miss  Byron  (stepping  between  me  and  the 
door)  leave  me  not  in  anger.  If  matters  must 
stand  as  they  were,  I  hope  you  can,  I  hope  you 
tuill,  assure  me,  that  this  Sir  Fopling — 

What  right  have  you,  Sir,  to  any  assurance  of 
this  nature  from  me  ? 

None,  madam — but  from  your  goodness — Dear 
Miss  Byron,  condescend  to  say,  that  this  Sir  Har- 
grave  shall  not  make  any  impression  on  your  heart. 
For  his  sake  say  it,  if  not  for  mine.     I  know  you 
care  not  what  becomes  of  me  ;  yet  let  not  this  milk- 
faced,  and  tyger-hearted  fop,  for  that  is  his  cha- 
racter, obtain  favour  from  }ou.     Let  your  choice, 
if  it  must  fall  on  another  man,  and  not  on  me,  fall 
on  one  to  whose  superior  merit,  and  to  whose  good 
fortune,    I  can  subscribe.      For  your  own  fame's 
sake,  let  a  man  of  unquestionable  honour  be  the 
happy  man;  and  vouchsafe  as  to  a  neighbour,  and 
as  to  a  well-wishing  friend  only  (I  ask  it  not  in  the 
light  of  a  lover)  to  tell  me  that  Sir  Hargrave  Pol- 
lexfen  shall  not  be  the  man. 

Whnt,   Mr.  Greviile,    lot  me  ask  you,    is  your 
businti-s  in  town? 

Pay  chief  business,  madam,  you  may  guess  at.    I 
had  s  hint  of  this  man's  intentions  given  me ;  and 
that  lie  has  the  vanity  to  think  he  shall  succeed. 
3 


SIR    CHAKLfcS    URANDISON.  145 

But  if  I  can  be  assured  that  you  will  not  be  pre- 
vailed upon  in  favour  of  a  man,  whose  fortune  is  so 
ample — 

You  will  then  return  to  Northamptonshire  ? 

"Why,  madam,  I  can't  but  say  that  now  I  am  in 
town,  and  that  I  have  bespoke  a  new  equipage,  and- 
so-forth — 

Nay,  Sir,  it  is  nothing  to  me,  what  you  will  or 
will  not  do  :  only  be  pleased  to  remember,  that  as  in 
Northamptonshire  your  visits  were  to  my  uncle 
Selby,  not  to  me,  they  will  be  here  in  London,  to 
my  cousin  Reeves's  only. 

Too  well  do  I  know  that  you  can  be  cruel  if  you 
will :  but  is  it  your  pleasure  that  I  return  to  the 
country  ? 

My  pleasure,  Sir ! — Mr.  Grcville  is  surely  to  do  as  he 
pleases.    I  only  wish  to  be  allowed  the  same  liberty. 

You  are  so  very  delicate,  Miss  Byron  !  So  very 
much  afraid  of  giving  the  least  advantage — 

And  men  are  so  ready  to  take  advantage — But 
yet,  Mr.  Greville,  not  so  delicate  as  just.  I  do 
assure  you,  that  if  I  were  not  determined — 

Determined! — Yes,  yes!  you  can  be  steady,  as 
Mr.  Selby  calls  it !  I  never  knew  so  determined  a 
woman  in  my  life.  I  own,  it  was  a  little  inconve- 
nient for  me  to  come  to  town  just  now :  and  say, 
that  you  would  ivish  me  to  leave  London  ;  and  that 
neither  this  Sir  Hargrave,  nor  that  other  man,  your 
new  father's  nephew  (What  do  you  call  him  ?  Fore- 
gad,  madam,  1  am  afraid  of  these  new  relations) 
shall  make  any  impression  on  your  heart ;  and  that 
you  will  not  withdraw  when  I  come  here ;  and  I 
will  set  out  next  week ;  and  write  this  very  night  to 
let  Fenwick  know  how  matters  stand,  and  that  I 
am  coming  down  but  little  the  better  for  my  jour- 
ney: and  this  may  save  you  seeing  your  other 
tormentor,  as  your  cousin  Lucy  says  you  once  call- 
voi..  ix.  o 


146  THE    HISTORY    OF 

ed  that  poor  devil,  and  the  still  poorer  devil  before 
you. 

You  are  so  rash  a  man,  Mr.  Greville  (and  other 
men  may  be  as  rash  as  you),  that  I  cannot  say  but  it 
would  save  me  some  pain — 

O  take  care,  take  care,  Miss  Byron,  that  you 
express  yourself  so  cautiously,  as  to  give  no  advan- 
tage to  a  poor  dog,  who  would  be  glad  to  take  a 
journey  to  the  farthest  part  of  the  globe  to  oblige 
you.  But  what  say  you  about  this  Sir  Hargrave, 
and  about  your  new  brother? — Let  me  tell  you, 
madam,  I  am  so  much  afraid  of  those  whining,  in- 
sinuating, creeping  dogs,  attacking  you  on  the  side 
of  your  compassion,  and  be  d — n'd  to  them  (Orme 
for  that)  that  I  must  have  a  declaration.  And  now, 
madam,  can't  you  give  it  with  your  usual  cau- 
tion ?  Can't  you  give  it,  as  I  put  it,  as  to  a  neigh- 
bour, as  to  a  well-wisher,  and-so-forth,  not  as  to  a 
lover  ? 

Well  then,  Mr.  Greville,  as  a  neighbour,  as  a 
well-wisher  ;  and  since  you  own  it  was  inconvenient 
to  your  affairs  to  come  up — I  advise  you  to  go  down 
again. 

The  devil !  how  you  have  hit  it !  Your  delicacy 
ought  to  thank  me  for  the  loop-hole.  The  condi- 
tion, madam ;  the  condition,  if  I  take  your  neigh" 
hourly  advice  ? 

Why,  Mr.  Greville,  I  do  most  sincerely  declare' 
to  you,  as  to  a  neighbour  and  well-wisher,  that  I  ne- 
ver yet  have  seen  the  man  to  whom  I  can  think  of 
giving  my  hand. 

Yes,  you  have!  By  Heaven  you  have  (snatching 
my  hand):  you  shall  give  it  to  me! — And  the  strange 
wretch  pressed  it  so  hard  to  his  mouth,  that  he 
made  prints  upon  it  with  his  teeth. 

Oh !  cried  I,  withdrawing  my  hand,  surprised, 
and  ny  face,  as  I  could  feel,  all  in  a  glow. 


SIR    CHARLES    GBANDISON.  147 

And  Oh  !  said  he,  mimicking  (and  snatching  my 
other  hand,  as  I  would  have  run  from  him)  and  pat- 
ting it,  speaking  through  his  closed  teeth,  You  may- 
be glad  you  have  a  hand  left.  By  my  soul,  I  could 
cat  you. 

This  was  your  disconsolate,  fallen-spirited  Gre- 
ville,  Lucy! 

I  rushed  into  the  company  in  the  next  room.  He 
followed  me  with  an  air  altogether  unconcerned, 
and  begged  to  look  at  my  hand  ;  whispering  to  Mrs. 
Reeves ;  By  Jupiter,  I  had  like  to  have  eaten  up 
your  lovely  cousin.  I  was  beginning  with  her  hand. 
I  was  more  offended  with  this  instance  of  his  as- 
surance and  unconcern,  than  with  the  freedom  itself; 
because  that  had  the  appearance  of  his  usual  gaiety 
with  it.  I  thought  it  best,  however,  not  to  be  too 
serious  upon  it.  But  next  time  he  gets  me  by  him- 
self, he  shall  eat  up  both  my  hands. 

At  taking  leave,  he  hoped  his  mad  flight  had  not 
discomposed  me.  See,  Miss  Byron,  said  he,  what 
you  get  by  making  an  honest  fellow  desperate  ! — 
But  you  insist  upon  my  leaving  the  town?  As  a 
neighbour,  as  a  icell-ivisher,  you  advise  it,  madam  ? 
Come,  come,  don't  be  afraid  of  speaking  after  me, 
when  I  endeavour  to  hit  your  cue. 
I  do  advise  you — 

Conditions  remember  !  You  know  what  you  have 
declared — Angel  of  a  woman!  said  he  again  through 
his  shut  teeth. 

I  left  him  ;  and  wrent  up  stairs  ;  glad  I  had  got  rid 
of  him. 

He  has  since  seen  Mr.  Reeves,  and  told  him,  he 
will  make  me  one  visit  more  before  he  leaves  Lon- 
don :  and  pray  tell  her,  said  he,  that  I  have  actually 
written  to  my  brother  tormentor  Fenwick,  that  I  am 
returning  to  Northamptonshire. 

I  told  you,  that  Miss  Clements  was  with  me  when 
o  2 


148  THE    HISTORY    OF 

Sir  Hargrave  came  last.  I  like  her  every  time  I 
see  her,  better  than  before.  She  has  a  fine  under- 
standing ;  and  if  languages,  according  to  my  grand- 
father's observation,  need  not  be  deemed  an  indis- 
pensable part  of  learning,  she  may  be  looked  upon 
as  learned. 

She  has  engaged  me  to  breakfast  with  her  to- 
morrow morning  ;  when  she  is  to  shew  me  her  books, 
needleworks,  and  other  curiosities.  Shall  I  not 
fancy  myself  in  my  Lucy's  closet?  How  continually, 
amid  all  this  fluttering  scene,  do  I  think  of  my  dear 
friends  in  Northamptonshire  !  Express  for  me  love, 
duty,  gratitude,  every  sentiment  that  fills  the  heart 
of your 

HARRIET  BYRON. 


LETTER   XXI. 

MISS    BYRON.       IN    CONTINUATION. 

Tuesday  morning,  February  14. 

I  have  passed  an  agreeable  two  hours  with  Miss 
Clements,  and  am  just  returned.  She  is  extremely 
ingenious,  and  perfectly  unaffected.  I  am  told, 
that  she  writes  finely  ;  and  is  a  Madame  de  Sevigne 
to  her  correspondents.  I  hope  to  be  one  of  them. 
But  she  lun>  not,  I  find,  suffered  her  pen  to  run 
away  with  her  needle  ;  nor  her  reading  to  interfere 
with  that  housewifery  which  the  best  judges  hold 
so  indispensable  in  the  character  of  a  good  woman. 
I  revere  her  for  tiiis,  as  her  example  may  be 
produced  as  one,  in  answer  to  such  as  object  (I  am 
afraid  sometimes  too  justly,  but  I  hope  too  gener- 
ally) against  learning  in  women.  Methinks,  how- 
ever,  1  would  not  have  learning  the  principal  dis- 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  149 

tinction  of  the  woman  I  love.  And  yet,  where 
talents  are  given,  should  we  wish  them  to  be  either 
uncultivated  or  unacknowledged  ?  Surely,  Lucy, 
we  may  pronounce,  that  where  no  duty  is  neglected 
for  the  acquirement ;  where  modesty,  delicacy,  and 
a  teachable  spirit,  are  preserved,  as  characteristics 
of  the  sex,  it  need  not  be  thought  a  disgrace  to  be 
supposed  to  know  something. 

Miss  Clements  is  happy  as  well  as  your  Harriet, 
in  an  aunt,  that  loves  her.  She  has  a  mother  living, 
who  is  too  great  a  self-lover,  to  regard  any-body 
else  as  she  ought.  She  lives  as  far  off  as  York, 
and  was  so  unnatural  a  parent  to  this  good  child, 
that  her  aunt  was  not  easy  till  she  got  her  from  her. 
Mrs.  Wimburn  looks  upon  her  as  her  daughter,  and 
intends  to  leave  her  all  she  is  worth. 

The  old  lady  was  not  very  well ;  but  she  obliged 
us  with  her  agreeable  company  for  half  an  hour. 

Miss  Clements  and  I  agreed  to  fall  in  occasionally 
upon  each  other  without  ceremony. 

I  should  have  told  you,  that  the  last  master  of  the 
young  man,  William  Wilson,  having  given  him  in 
writing  a  very  good  character,  I  have  entertained 
him  ;  and  his  first  service  was  attending  on  me  to 
Miss  Clements. 

Lady  Betty  called  here  in  my  absence.  She  is, 
it  seems,  very  full  of  the  dresses,  and  mine  in  parti- 
cular ;  but  1  must  know  nothing  about  it,  as  yet. 
We  are  to  go  to  her  house  to  dress,  and  to  proceed 
from  thence  in  chairs.  She  is  to  take  care  of  every 
thing.  You  shall  know,  my  Lucy,  what  figure  I 
am  to  make,  when  I  know  it  myself. 

The  baronet  also  called  at  my  cousins  while  I 
was  out.  He  saw  only  Mr.  Reeves.  He  staid 
about  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  He  was  very  moody 
and  sullen,  it  seems.  Quite  another  man,  Mr. 
lleeves  said,  thanhe  had  ever  seen  him  before.  Not 
o  3 


150  THE    HISTORY    OF 

one  laugh  ;  not  one  smile.  All  that  fell  from  his 
lips  was  Yes  or  No ;  or  by  way  of  invective  against 
the  sex.  It  was  "  The  devil  of  a  sex."  It  was  a 
cursed  thing,  he  said,  that  a  man  could  neither  be 
happy  with  them,  nor  without  them.  Devil's  bails 
was  another  of  his  compliments  to  us.  He  hardly 
mentioned  my  name. 

Mr.  Reeves  at  last  began  to  railly  him  upon  his 
moodiness  ;  and  plainly  saw,  that  to  avoid  shewing 
more  of  his  petulance  (when  he  had  not  a  right  to 
shew  any)  to  a  man  of  Mr.  Reeves's  consideration, 
and  in  his  own  house,  he  went  away  the  sooner. 
His  footmen  and  coachman,  he  believed,  had  an  ill 
time  of  it ;  for,  without  reason,  he  cursed  them, 
swore  at  them,  and  threatened  them. 

What  does  the  man  haunt  us  for  ? — Why  brings 
he  such  odious  humours  to  Mr.  Reeves's? 

But  no  more  of  such  a  man,  nor  of  any-thingelse, 
till  my  next.     Only, 

Adieu,  my 

LUCY. 


LETTER  XXII. 

MISS    BYRON.       IN    CONTINUATION. 

Wednesday  morning,  February  15. 
Mr.  Grcville  took  leave  of  us  yesterday  evening, 
in  order  to  set  out  this  morning,  on  his  return  home. 
He  would  fain  have  engaged  me  for  half  an  hour, 
alone  ;  but  I  would  not  oblige  him. 

He  left  London,  he  said,  with  some  regret,  be- 
cause of  the  fluttering  Sir  Margrave,  and  the  creeping 
Mr.  Fowler:  but  depended  upon  my  declaration 
that  1  had  not  in  either  of  them  seen  the  man  I  could 
encourage.     Either  of  them  were  the  words  he 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  151 

chose  to  use;  for,  in  compliment  to  himself,  he 
would  not  repeat  my  very  words,  that  I  had  not 
yet  seen  any  man  to  whom  I  could  give  my  hand. 
Shall  I  give  you  a  few  particulars  of  what  passed 
between  me  and  this  very  whimsical  man  ? — 1  will. 
He  had  been  enquiring,  he  said,  into  the  charac- 
ter and  pretensions  of  my  brother  Fowler;  and  in- 
tended, if  he  could  bring  Orme  and  him  together, 
to  make  a  match  between  them,  who  should  out- 
whine  the  other. 

Heroes,  I  told  him,  ought  not  to  make  a  jest  of 
those,  who,  on  comparison,  gave  them  all  their  ad- 
vantages. 

He  bowed,  and  called  himself  my  servant — and 
with  an  affected  laugh,  Yet,  madam,  yet,  madam,  I 
am  not  afraid  of  these  piping  men  :  though  you  have 
compassion  for  such  watery  headed  fellows,  yet  you 
have  only  compassion. 

Respectful  love,  Mr.  Greville,  is  not  always  the 
indication  either  of  a  weak  head,  or  a  faint  heart ; 
any  more  than  the  contrary  is  of  a  true  spirit. 

Perhaps  so,  madam.  But  yet  I  am  not  afraid  of 
these  two  men. 

You  have  no  reason  to  be  afraid  of  any  body,  on 
my  account,  Mr.  Greville. 
1  hope  not. 

You  will  find,  Sir,  at  last,  that  you  had  better 
take  my  meaning.     It  is  obvious  enough. 

But  I  have  no  mind  to  hang,  drown,  or  pistol 
myself. 

Mr.  Greville  still ! — Yet  it  would  be  well  if  there 
were  not  many  Mr.  Grevilles. 

I  take  your  meaning,  madam.  You  have  ex- 
plained it  heretofore.  It  is,  that  I  am  a  libertine ; 
that  we  have  all  one  dialect ;  and  that  I  can  say 
nothing  new,  or  that  is  worthy  of  your  attention — 


152  THE    HISTORY   OF 

There,  madam !  May  I  not  be  always  sure  of  your 
meaning,  when  I  construe  it  against  myself? 

I  wish,  Sir,  that  my  neighbour  would  give  me 
leave  to  behave  to  him  as  to  my  neighbour — 

And  could  you,  madam,  supposing  love  out  of  the 
question  (which  it  cannot  be),  could  you,  in  that 
case,  regard  me  as  your  neighbour  ? 

Why  not,  Sir  ? 

Because  I  believe  you  hate  me  ;  and  I  only  want 
you  to  tell  me  that  you  do. 

I  hope,  Sir,  I  shall  never  have  reason  given  me  to 
hate  any  man. 

But  if  you  hate  any  one  man  more  than  another, 
is  it  not  me  ?  [I  was  silent]  Strange,  Mrs.  Reeves, 
turning  to  her,  that  Miss  Byron  is  not  susceptible 
either  of  love  or  hatred  ! 

She  is  too  good  to  hate  any-body  ;  and  as  for  love, 
her  time  seems  not  to  be  yet  come. 

When  it  is  come,  it  will  come  with  a  vengeance, 
I  hope. 

Uncharitable  man  !  said  I,  smiling. 

Don't  smile :  I  can't  bear  to  see  you  smile : 
Why  don't  you  be  angry  at  me? — -Angel  of  a  crea- 
ture !  with  his  teeth  again  closed,  don't  smile :  I 
cannot  bear  your  bewitching  smiles! 

The  man  is  out  of  his  right  mind,  Mrs.  Reeves. 
I  don't  choose  to  stay  in  his  company. 

1  would  have  withdrawn.  He  besought  me  to 
stay  ;  and  stood  between  me  and  the  door.  1  was 
angry. 

He  whimsically  stamped — Obliging  creature! — 
I  besought  you  to  forbear  smiling — You  frown- 
Do,  God  for  ever  bless  you,  my  dear  Miss  Byron, 
let  me  be  favoured  with  another  frown. 

Strange  man  !  and  bold  as  strange ! — I  would 
have  passed  to  the  door,  but  he  set  his  back  against  it. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  153 

These  are  the  airs,  you  know,  Lucy,  for  which  I 
used  to  shun  him. 

Pish  !  said  I,  vexed  to  be  hindered  from  with- 
drawing. 

Another,  another  such  a  frown  said  the  confident 
man,  and  I  am  happy ! — The  last  has  left  no  trace 
upon  your  features  :  it  vanished  before  I  could  well 
behold  it.  Another  frown,  I  beseech  you;  another 
pish — 

I  was  really  angry. — Bear  witness  [looking 
around  him]  Bear  witness !  Once  did  Miss  Byron 
endeavour  to  frown  :  and,  to  oblige  whom  ? — Her 
Greville! 

Mr.  Greville,  you  had  better — I  stopt.  I  was 
vexed.     1  knew  not  what  I  was  going  to  say. 

How  better,  madam  !  Am  I  not  desperate  ? — But 
had  1  better  ?  Say,  repeat  that  again — Had  I  better 
— Better  what  ? 

The  man's  mad.  O  my  cousins,  let  me  never 
again  be  called  to  this  man. 

Mad! — And  so  I  am.  Mad  for  you.  I  care  not 
who  knows  it  Why  don't  you  hate  me  ?  He 
snatched  at  my  hand  ;  but  I  started  back.  You 
own  that  you  never  yet  loved  the  man  who  loved 
you.     Such  is  your  gratitude  ! — Say,  you  hate  me. 

I  was  silent,  and  turned  from  him  peevishly. 

Why  then  (as  if  I  had  said  I  did  not  hate  him) 
say  you  love  me  ;  and  I  will  look  down  with  con- 
tempt upon  the  greatest  prince  on  earth. 

We  should  have  had  more  of  this — But  the  rap  of 
consequence  gave  notice  of  the  visit  of  a  person  of 
consideration.      It  was  Sir  Hargrave. 

The  devil  pick  his  bones,  said  the  shocking  Gre- 
ville.     1  shall  not  be  civil  to  him. 

He  is  not  your  guest,  Mr.  Greville,  said  1 — afraid 
that  something  affronting  might  pass  between  two 


154?  THE    HISTORY   OF 

spirits  so  unmanageable ;  the  one  in  an  humour  so 
whimsical,  the  other  so  very  likely  to  be  moody. 

True,  true ;  replied  he.  I  will  be  all  silence  and 
observation. — But  I  hope  you  will  not  noiv  be 
for  retiring 

It  would  be  too  particular,  thought  I,  if  I  am : 
yet  I  should  have  been  glad  to  do  so. 

The  baronet  paid  his  respects  to  every  one  in  a 
very  set  and  formal  manner  ;  nor  distinguished  me. 

Silly,  as  vain  !  thought  I :  Handsome  fop  !  to  ima- 
gine thy  displeasure  of  consequence  to  me  ! 

Mr.  Greville,  said  Sir  Hargrave,  the  town  I  un- 
derstand is  going  to  lose  you. 

The  town,  Sir  Hargrave,  cannot  be  said  to  have 
found  me. 

How  can  a  man  of  your  gallantry  and  fortune  find 
himself  employment  in  the  country,  in  the  winter,  I 
wonder  ? 

Very  easily,  when  he  has  used  himself  to  it,  Sir 
Hargrave,  and  has  seen  abroad  in  greater  perfection 
than  you  can  have  them  here,  the  kind  of  diversions 
you  all  run  after,  with  so  keen  an  appetite. 

In  greater  perfection!  I  question  that,  Mr.  Gre- 
ville :  and  I  have  been  abroad ;  though  too  early,  I 
own,  to  make  critical  observations. 

You  may'  question  it,  Sir  Hargrave ,  but  I  don't. 

Have  we  not  from  Italy  the  most  famous  singers, 
Mr.  Greville,  and  from  thence,  and  from  France, 
for  our  money,  the  most  famous  dancers  in  the 
world  ? 

No,  Sir.  They  set  too  great  a  value  in  Italy,  let 
me  tell  you,  upon  their  finest  voices,  and  upon  their 
finest  composers  too,  to  let  them  turn  strollers. 

Strollers  do  you  call  them  ?  Ha,  ha,  ha,  hah  ! — 
Princely  strollers,  as  we  reward  them !  And  as  to 
composers,  have  we  not  Handel  ? 


5IR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  155 

There  you  say  something,  Sir  Hargrave.  But 
you  have  but  one  Handel  in  England :  they  have 
Several  in  Italy. 

Is  it  possible?  said  every  one. 

Let  me  die,  said  the  baronet,  with  a  forced  laugh, 
if  I  am  not  ready  to  think  that  Mr.  Greville  has  run 
into  the  fault  of  people  of  less  genius  than  himself. 
He  has  got  such  a  taste  for  foreign  performers,  that 
he  cannot  think  tolerably  of  those  of  his  own  coun- 
try, be  they  ever  so  excellent. 

Handel,  Sir  Hargrave,  is  not  an  Englishman  : 
but  I  must  say,  that  of  every  person  present,  I 
least  expected  from  Sir  Hargrave  Pollexfen  this 
observation. 

[He  then  returned  the  baronet's  laugh,  and  not 
without  an  air  of  mingled  anger  and  contempt.] 

Xor  I  this  taste  for  foreign  performances  and 
compositions  from  Mr.  Greville ;  for  so  long  time  as 
thou  hast  been  a  downright  country  gentleman. 

[Indeed,  thought  I,  you  seem  both  to  have 
changed  characters.  But  I  know  how  it  comes 
about :  let  one  advance  what  he  will,  in  the  present 
humour  of  both,  the  other  will  contradict  it.  Mr. 
Greville  knows  nothing  of  music  :  what  he  said  was 
from  hearsay :  and  Sir  Hargrave  is  no  better  ground- 
ed in  it.] 

A  downright  country  gentleman  !  repeated  Mr. 
Greville,  measuring  Sir  Hargrave  with  his  eye,  and 
putting  up  his  lip. 

Why,  pr'ythee  now,  Greville,  thou  what-shall-I- 
call-thee  ?  thou  art  not  offended,  I  hope,  that  we  are 
not  all  of  one  mind ;  Ha,  ha,  ha,  hah  ! 

I  am  offended  at  nothing  you  say,  Sir  Hargrave. 

Nor  I  at  any  thing  you  look,  my  dear,  Ha,  ha,  ha, 
hah. 

Vet  his  looks  shewed  as  much  contempt  for  Mr. 
Greville  as  Mr.  Greville's  did  for  him.     How  easily 


156  THE    HISTORY    OF 

might  these  combustible  spirits  have  blown  eacb 
other  up !  Mr.  Reeves  was  once  a  little  appre- 
hensive of  consequences  from  the  airs  of  both. 

Mr.  Greville  turned  from  Sir  Hargrave  to  me  : 
Well,  Miss  Byron,  said  he  ;  but  as  to  what  we  were 
talking  about — 

This  he  seemed  to  say,  on  purpose,  as  I  thought 
by  his  air,  to  alarm  the  baronet. 

I  beg  pardon,  said  Sir  Hargrave ;  turning  with  a 
stiff  air  to  me  :  I  beg  pardon,  Miss  Byron,  if  I  have 
intruded — 

We  were  talking  of  indifferent  things,  Sir  Har- 
grave, answered  I — Mere  matters  of  pleasantry. 

I  was  more  in  earnest  than  in  jest,  Miss  Byron, 
replied  Mr.  Greville. 

We  all,  I  believe,  thought  you  very  whimsical, 
Mr.  Greville,  returned  I. 

What  was  sport  to  you,  madam,  is  death  to  me. 

Poor  Greville !  Ha,  ha,  ha,  hah  (affectedly  laugh- 
ed the  baronet) :  but  I  know  you  are  a  joker.  You 
are  a  man  of  wit  [this  a  little  softened  Mr.  Greville, 
who  had  begun  to  look  grave  upon  Sir  Hargrave] 
Come,  pr'ythee,  man,  give  thyself  up  to  me  for  this 
night ;  and  I  will  carry  thee  to  a  private  concert ; 
where  none  but  choice  spirits  are  admitted  ;  and  let 
us  see  if  music  will  not  divert  these  gloomy  airs, 
that  sit  so  ill  upon  the  face  of  one  of  the  liveliest 
men  in  the  kingdom. 

Music !  Ay,  if  Miss  Byron  will  give  us  a  song, 
and  accompany  it  with  the  harpsichord,  I  will  de- 
spise all  other  harmony. 

Every  one  joined  in  his  request :  and  I  was  not 
backward  to  oblige  them,  as  I  thought  the  conver- 
sation bore  a  little  too  rough  a  cast,  and  was  not 
likely  to  take  a  smoother  turn. 

Mr.  Greville,  who  always  enjoys  any  jest  that 
tends  to  reflect  on  our  sex,  begged  me  to  sing  that 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  157 

whimsical  song  set  by  Galliard,  which  once  my 
uncle  made  me  sing  at  Selby-house,  in  Mr.  Gre- 
ville's  hearing.  You  were  not  there,  Lucy,  that 
day,  and  perhaps  may  not  have  the  book,  as  Gal- 
liard is  not  a  favourite  with  you. 

Chloe,  by  all  the  powers  above, 
To  Damon  vow'd  eternal  love  : 
A  ro?e  adorn'd   her  sweeter  breast; 
She  on  a  leaf  the  vow  imprest  : 
But  Zephyr,  by  her  side  at  play, 
Love,  vow,  and  leaf,  blew  quite  away. 

The  gentlemen  were  very  lively  on  the  occasion ; 
and  encored  it :  but  I  told  them,  That  as  they  must 
be  better  pleased  with  the  jest  on  our  sex  contained 
in  it,  than  they  could  be  with  the  music,  I  would 
not,  for  the  sake  of  their  own  politeness,  oblige 
them. 

You  will  favour  us,  however,  with  your  Discreet 
Lover,  Miss  Byron,  said  Mr.  Greville.  That  is  a 
song  written  entirely  upon  your  own  principles. 

Well  then  I  will  give  you  it,  said  I,  set  by  the 
same  hand. 

THE    DISCREET    LOVER. 

Ye  fair,  that  would  be  blest  in  love, 
Take  your  pride  a  little  lower  ; 

Let  the  swain  whom  you  approve, 
Rather  like  you,  than  adore. 

Love,  that  rises  into  passion. 

Soon  will  end  in  hate  or  strife: 
But  from  tender  inclination, 

Flow  the  lasting  joys  of  life. 

These  two  light  pieces  put  the  gentlemen  into 
good  humour;  and  a  deal  of  silly  stuff  was  said  to 
me,  by  way  of  compliment,  on  the  occasion,  by  Sir 
Hargrave  and  Mr.  Greville;  not  one  word  of  which 
I  believed. 

p 


I.)S  THE    HISTORY    OF 

The  baronet  went  away  first,  to  go  to  his  concert. 
He  was  very  cold  in  his  behaviour  to  me  at  taking 
leave,  as  he  had  been  all  the  time. 

Mr.  Greville  soon  after  left  us,  intending  to  set 
out  this  morning. 

He  snatched  my  hand  at  going.  I  was  afraid  of 
a  second  savage  freedom,  and  would  have  with- 
drawn it. — Only  one  sigh  over  it;  but  one  sigh,  Oh! 
— said  he,  an  Oh,  half  a  yard  long — and  pressed  it 
with  his  lips — But  remember,  madam,  you  are 
watched ;  I  have  half  a  dozen  spies  upon  you :  and 
the  moment  you  find  the  man  you  can  favour,  up 
comes  your  Greville,  cuts  a  throat,  and  flies  his 
country. 

He  stopt  at  the  parlour-door — One  letter,  Mis* 
Byron — Receive  but  one  letter,  from  me. 

No,  Mr.  Greville;  but  I  wish  you  well. 

Wishes !  that,  like  the  bishop's  blessing,  cost  you 
nothing.  I  was  going  to  say  No,  for  you:  but  you 
were  too  quick.  It  had  been  some  pleasure  to  have 
denied  myself,  and  prevented  the  mortification  of  a 
denial  from  you. 

He  went  away;  every  one  wishing  him  a  good 
journey,  and  speaking  favourably  of  the  odd  crea- 
ture. Mrs.  Reeves,  in  particular,  thought  fit  to 
say,  that  he  was  the  most  entertaining  of  all  my 
lovers:  but  if  so,  what  "is  it  they  call  entertaining? 
and  what  are  those  others,  whom  they  call  my 
lovers? 

The  man,  said  I,  is  an  immoral  man;  and  had 
he  not  got  above  blushes,  and  above  being  hurt  by 
love,  he  could  not  have  been  so  gay,  and  so  enter- 
taining, as  you  call  it. 

Miss  Byron  says  true,  said  Mr.  Reeves.  I  never 
knew  a  man  who  could  make  a  jesting-matter  of  the 
passion  in  the  presence  of  the  object,  so  very  deeply 
in  love,  us  to  be  hurt  by  a  disappointment.     There 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISOX.  I5j> 

sits  Mrs,  Reeves.     Did  I  ever  make  a  jest  of  my 
love  to  you,  madam  ? 

No  indeed,  Sir  ;  had  I  not  thought  you  most  de- 
plorably in  earnest,  you  had  not  had  any  of  my  pity. 

That's  a  declaration  in  point.  Either  Mr.  Orme, 
or  Mr.  Fowler,  must  be  the  happy  man,  Miss 
Byron. 

Indeed,  neither. 

But  why?  They  have  both  good  estates.  They 
both  adore  you.  Sir  Hargrave  I  see  you  cannot 
have.  Mr.  Greville  dies  not  for  you,  though  he 
would  be  glad  to  live  with  you.  Mr.  Fenwick  is  a 
still  less  eligible  man,  I  thinly.  Where  can  you  be 
better  than  with  one  of  the  two  I  have  named? 

You  speak  seriously,  cousin:  I  will  not  answer 
lightly  :  but  neither  of  those  gentlemen  can  be  the 
man :  yet  I  esteem  them  both  because  they  are 
good  men. 

Well,  but  don't  you  pity  them? 

I  don't  know  what  to  say  to  that:  you  hold,  that 
pity  is  but  one  remove  from  love :  and  to  say  I  pity 
a  man  who  professes  to  love  me,  because  I  cannot 
consent  to  be  his,  carries  with  it,  I  think,  an  air  of 
arrogance,  and  looks  as  if  I  believed  he  must  be 
unhappy  without  me,  when  possibly  there  may  be 
hundreds  of  women,  with  any  one  of  whom  he 
might  be  more  truly  happy. 

Well,  this  is  in  character  from  you,  Miss  Byron  : 
but  may  I  ask  you  now,  Which  of  the  two  gentle- 
men, Mr.  Orme,  or  Mr.  Fowler,  were  you  obliged 
to  have  one  of  them,  would  you  choose  ? 

Mr.  Orme,  I  frankly  answer.  Have  I  not  told 
Mr.  Fowler  so  ? 

Well,  then,  what  are  your  objections,  may  I  ask, 
to  Mr.  Orme?  He  is  not  a  disagreeable  man  in  his 
person.     You  own  that  you  think  him  a  good  man. 


160  THE    HISTORY    OF 

His  sister  loves  you ;  and  you  love  her.  What  is 
your  objection  to  Mr.  Orme? 

I  don't  know  what  to  say.  I  hope  I  should  per- 
form my  duty  to  the  man  to  whom  I  shall  give  my 
vows,  be  he  who  he  will ;  but  I  am  not  in  haste  to 
marry.  If  a  single  woman  knows  her  own  happiness, 
she  will  find  that  the  time  from  eighteen  to  twenty- 
four  is  the  happiest  part  of  her  life.  If  she  stay 
till  she  is  twenty-four,  she  has  time  to  look  about 
her,  and  if  she  has  more  lovers  than  one,  is  enabled 
to  choose  without  having  reason,  on  looking  back, 
to  reproach  herself  for  hastiness.  Her  fluttering, 
her  romantic  age  (we  all  know  something  of  it,  I 
doubt)  is  over  by  twenty-four,  or  it  will  hold  too 
long :  and  she  is  then  fit  to  take  her  resolutions, 
and  to  settle.  I  have  more  than  once  hinted,  that 
I  should  be  afraid  to  engage  with  one  who  thinks 
too  highly  of  me  beforehand.  Nothing  violent  can 
be  lasting,  and  I  could  not  bear  when  I  had  given 
a  man  my  heart  with  my  hand  (and  they  never  shall 
be  separated)  that  he  should  behave  to  me  with  less 
affection  than  he  shewed  to  me  before  I  was  his. 
As  I  wish  not  now  to  be  made  an  idol  of,  I  may 
the  more  reasonably  expect  the  constancy  due  to 
friendship,  and  not  to  be  affronted  with  his  indif- 
ference after  I  had  given  him  my  whole  self.  In 
other  words,  I  could  not  bear  to  have  my  love 
slighted :  or  to  be  despised  for  it,  instead  of  being 
encouraged  to  shew  it.  And  how  shall  extravagant 
passion  warrant  hopes  of  this  nature — if  the  man 
be  not  a  man  of  gratitude,  of  principle,  and  a  man 
whose  love  is  founded  in  reason,  and  whose  object 
is  mind,  rather  than  person? 

But  Mr.  Orme,  replied  Mr.  Reeves,  is  all  this. 
Such,  I  believe,  is  his  love. 

Be  it  so.     But  if  I  cannot  love  him  so  well  as  to 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  161 

wish  to  be  his  (a  man,  I  have  heard  my  uncle,  as 
well  as  Sir  Hargrave,  say,  is  his  oivn  ;  a  woman  is  a 
man's) ;  if  I  cannot  take  delight  in  the  thought  of 
bearing  my  part  of  the  yoke  with  him ;  in  the  belief, 
that,  in  case  of  a  contrariety  of  sentiments,  I  cannot 
give  up  my  judgment,  in  points  indifferent,  from 
the  good  opinion,  I  have  of  his  ;  what  but  a  fond- 
ness for  the  state,  and  an  irksomeness  in  my 
present  situation,  could  bias  me  in  favour  of  any 
imn  ?  Indeed,  my  cousin,  I  must  love  the  man  to 
whom  I  would  give  my  hand,  well  enough  to  be 
able,  on  cool  deliberation,  to  ivish  to  be  his  wife; 
and  for  his  sake  (with  my  whole  heart)  choose  to 
quit  the  single  state,  in  which  I  am  very  happy. 

And  you  are  sure  that  your  indifference  to  Mr. 
Orme  is  not,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  owing  to 
his  obsequious  love  of  you;  and  to  the  milkiness  of 
his  nature,  as  Shakespeare  calls  it? 

Very  sure!  All  the  leaning  towards  him  that  I 
have  in  preference,  as  I  think,  to  every  other  man 
who  has  beheld  me  with  partiality,  is,  on  the  contra- 
ry, owing  to  the  grateful  sense  I  have  of  his  respect 
to  me,  and  to  the  gentleness  of  his  nature.  Does 
not  my  behaviour  to  Mr.  Greville,  to  Mr.  Fen- 
wick,  to  Sir  Hargrave,  compared  with  my  treat- 
ment of  Mr.  Orme,  and  Mr.  Fowler,  confirm  what. 
I  say? 

Then  you  are,  as  indeed  I  have  always  thought 
you,  a  nonsuch  of  a  woman. 

Not  so ;  your  own  lady,  whom  you  first  brought 
to  pity  you,  as  I  have  heard  you  say,  is  an  instance 
that  I  am  not. 

Well,  that's  true ;  but  is  she  not,  at  the  same  time, 
an  example,  that  pity  melts  the  soul  to  love? 

I  have  no  doubt,  said  Mrs.  Reeves,  but  Miss  Byron 
may  be  brought  to  love  the  man  she  can  pity. 

p3 


162  THE    HISTORY   OF 

But,  madam,  said  I,  did  you  not  let  pity  grow 
into  love,  before  you  married  Mr.  Reeves? 

I  believe  I  did;  smiling. 

Well  then  I  promise  you,  Mr.  Reeves,  when  that 
comes  to  be  the  case  with  me,  I  will  not  give  pain 
to  a  man  I  can  like  to  marry. 

Very  well,  replied  Mr.  Reeves:  and  I  dare  say, 
that  at  last  Mr.  Orme  will  be  the  man.  And  yet 
how  you  will  get  off  with  Sir  Hargrave,  I  cannot 
tell.  For  Lady  Betty  Williams,  this  very  day,  told 
me,  that  he  delared  to  her,  he  was  resolved  you 
should  be  his.  And  she  has  promised  him  all  her 
interest  with  you,  and  with  us;  and  is  astonished 
that  you  can  refuse  a  man  of  his  fortune  and  address, 
and  who  has  many,  very  many,  admirers,  among 
people  of  the  first  rank. 

The  baronet  is  at  the  door.  I  suppose  he  will 
expect  to  see  me. 

Wednesday  afternoon. 

Sir  Hargrave  is  just  gone.  He  desired  to  talk 
with  me  alone.  I  thought  I  might  very  well  decline 
obliging  him,  as  he  had  never  scrupled  to  say  to 
me  all  he  had  a  mind  to  say  before  my  cousins;  and 
as  he  had  thought  himself  of  consequence  enough 
to  behave  moodily;  and  even  made  this  request 
rather  with  an  air  of  expectation,  than  of  respect; 
and  1  accordingly  desired  to  be  excused.  He  stalk- 
ed about.  My  cousins,  first  one,  then  the  other, 
withdrew.  His  behaviour  had  not  been  so  agreea- 
ble, as  to  deserve  this  compliance :  I  was  vexed 
they  did 

He  offered,  as  soon  as  they  were  gone,  to  take 
my  hand. 

I  withdrew  it. 

Madam  (said  he,  very  impertinently  angry)  you 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  163 

would  not  do  thus  to  Mr.  Greville:  you  would  not 
do  thus  to  any  man  but  me. 

Indeed,  Sir,  I  would,  were  I  left  alone  with  him. 

You  see,  madam,  that  I  cannot  forbear  visiting 
you.  My  heart  and  soul  are  devoted  to  you.  I 
own  I  have  pride.  Forgive  me;  it  is  piqued.  I  did 
not  believe  I  should  have  been  rejected  by  any 
lady,  who  had  no  dislike  to  a  change  of  condition ; 
and  was  disengaged.  You  declare  that  you  are  so; 
and  I  am  willing,  I  am  desirous,  to  believe  you. — 
And  yet  that  Greville — 

There  he  stopt,  as  expecting  me  to  speak. 

To  what  purpose,  Sir  Hargrave,  do  you  expect 
an  answer  to  what  you  hint  about  Mr.  Greville?  It 
is  not  my  way  to  behave  with  incivility  to  any  man 
who  professes  a  regard  for  me — 

Except  to  me,  madam — 

Self-partiality,  Sir,  and  nothing  else,  could  cause 
you  to  make  this  exception. 

Well,  madam,  but  as  to  Mr.  Greville — ■ 

Pray,  Sir  Hargrave — 

And  pray,  Miss  Byron — 

1  have  never  yet  seen  the  man  who  is  to  be  my 
husband. 

By  G —  said  the  wretch,  fiercely  (almost  in  the 
language  of  Mr.  Greville  on  the  like  occasion)  but 
you  have — And  if  you  are  not  engaged  in  your  af- 
fections, the  man  is  before  you. 

If  this,  Sir  Hargrave,  is  all  you  wanted  to  say  to 
me,  and  would  not  be  denied  saying  it,  it  might 
have  been  said  before  my  cousins.  I  was  for  leaving 
him. 

You  shall  not  go.  I  beg,  madam — Putting  him- 
self between  me  and  the  door. 

What  further  would  Sir  Hargrave  say  [[standing 
still,  and  angry]  What  further  would  Sir  Hargrave 
say? 


164?  THE    HISTORY   OF 

Have  you,  madam,  a  dislike  to  matrimony  ? 

What  right  have  you,  Sir,  to  ask  me  this  ques- 
tion? 

Do  you  ever  intend  to  enter  into  the  state  ? 

Perhaps  I  may,  if  I  meet  with  a  man  to  whom  I 
can  give  my  whole  heart. 

And  cannot  that  man  be  I  ? — Let  me  implore  you, 
madam.  I  will  kneel  to  you  [and  down  he  dropt 
on  his  knees.]  I  cannot  live  without  you.  For 
God's  sake,  madam  !  Your  pity,  your  mercy,  your 
gratitude,  your  love !  I  could  not  do  this  before 
any-body,  unless  assured  of  favour.  I  implore  your 
favour. 

[Foolish  man!  It  was  plain,  that  this  kneeling 
supplication  was  premeditated.] 

0  Sir,  what  undue  humility! — Could  I  have  re- 
ceived your  address,  none  of  this  had  been  necessary. 

Your  pity,  madam,  once  more,  your  gratitude, 
your  mercy,  your  love. 

Pray,  Sir,  rise. 

He  swore  by  his  God,  that  he  would  not,  till  I 
had  given  him  hope — 

No  hope  can  I  give  you,  Sir.  It  would  be  cheat- 
ing, it  would  be  deluding  you,  it  would  not  he 
honest,  to  give  you  hope. 

You  objected  to  my  morals,  madam :  have  you 
any  other  objection  ? 

Need  there  any  other  ? 

But  I  can  clear  myself. 

To  God,  and  to  your  conscience,  then  do  it,  Sir. 
I  want  you  not  to  clear  yourself  to  me. 

But,  madam,  the  clearing  myself  to  you,  would 
be  clearing  myself  to  God,  and  my  conscience. 

What  language  is  this,  Sir  ?  But  you  can  be 
nothing  to  me:  indeed  you  can  be  nothing  to  me — 
Rise,  Sir;  rise  or  I  leave  you. 

1  made  an  effort  to  go.    Fie  caught  my  hand ; 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  165 

and  arose — Then  kissed  it,  and  held  it  between  both 
his. 

For  God's  sake,  madam — 

Pray,  Sir  Hargrave  — 

Your  objections  ?  I  insist  upon  knowing  your 
objections.  My  person,  madam — Forgive  me,  I  am 
not  used  to  boast — My  person,  madam — 

Pray,  Sir  Hargrave. 

— Is  not  contemptible.     My fortune — 

God  bless  you,  Sir,  with  your  fortune. 

— Is  not  inconsiderable.     My  morals — 

Pray,  Sir  Hargrave  !  Why  this  enumeration  to 
me  ? 

■ — Are  as  unexceptionable  as  those  of  most  young 
men  of  fashion  in  the  present  age. 

[I  am  sorry  if  this  be  true,  thought  I  to  myself] 

You  have  reason,  I  hope,  Sir,  to  be  glad  of  that. 

My  descent — 

Is  honourable,  Sir,  no  doubt. 

My  temper  is  not  bad.  I  am  thought  to  be  a  man 
of  vivacity,  and  of  cheerfulness. — I  have  courage, 
madam — And  this  should  have  been  seen,  had  I 
found  reason  to  dread  a  competitor  in  your  favour. 

I  thought  you  were  enumerating  your  good  qua- 
lities, Sir  Hargrave. 

Courage,  madam,  magnanimity  in  a  man,  ma- 
dam— 

Are  great  qualities,  Sir.  Courage  in  a  right  cause, 
I  mean.  Magnanimity,  you  know,  Sir,  is  greatness 
of  mind. 

And  so  it  is ;  and  I  hope — 

And  I,  Sir  Hargrave,  hope  you  have  great  reason 
to  be  satisfied  with  yourself :  but  it  would  be  very 
grievous  to  me,  if  I  had  not  the  liberty  so  to  act,  so 
to  govern  myself,  in  essential  points,  as  should  leave 
me  as  well  satisfied  with  ?wj/-self. 

This,  I  hope,  may  be  the  case,  madam,  if  you 


166  THE    HISTORY    OF 

encourage  my  passion :  and  let  me  assure  you,  that 
no  man  breathing  ever  loved  a  woman  as  I  love  you. 
My  person,  my  fortune,  my  morals;  my  descent,  my 
temper  (a  man  in  such  a  case  as  this  may  be  allowed 
to  do  himself  justice)  all  unexceptionable  ;  let  me 
die  if  I  can  account  for  your — your — your  refusal  of 
me  in  so  peremptory,  in  so  unceremonious  a  man- 
ner, slap-dash,  as  I  may  say,  and  not  one  objection 
to  make,  or  which  you  will  condescend  to  make ! 

You  say,  Sir,  that  you  love  me  above  all  women: 
would  you,  can  you,  be  so  little  nice,  as  to  wish  to 
marry  a  woman  who  does  not  prefer  you  to  all  men? 
— If  you  are,  let  me  tell  you,  Sir,  that  you  have 
assigned  a  reason  against  yourself,  which  I  think  I 
ought  to  look  upon  as  conclusive. 

I  make  no  doubt,  madam,  that  my  behaviour  to 
you  after  marriage,  will  induce  you,  in  gratitude  as 
well  as  justice,  to  prefer  me  to  all  men. 

Your  behaviour  after  marriage,  Sir  ! — Never  will 
I  trust  to  that,  where — 

Where  what,  madam? 

No  need  of  entering  into  particulars,  Sir.  You 
see  that  we  cannot  be  of  the  same  mind.  You,  Sir 
Hargrave,  have  no  doabt  of  youi  merit — 

I  know,  madam,  that  I  should  make  it  the  business 
as  well  as  pleasure  of  my  life,  to  deserve  you. 

You  value  yourself  upon  your fortune,  Sir — 

Only  as  it  gives  me  power  to  make  you  happy. 

Riches  never  yet,  of  themselves,  made  any-body 
happy.  I  have  already  as  great  a  fortune  as  I  wish 
for.     You  think  yourself  polite. — 

Polite,  madam  ! — And  I  hope — 

The  whole  of  what  I  mean,  Sir  Hargrave,  is  this : 
you  have  a  very  high  opinion  of  yourself:  you  may 
have  reason  for  it ;  since  you  must  know  yourself, 
and  your  own  heart,  better  than  I  can  pretend  to 
do :  but  would  you,  let  me  ask  you,  make  choice  of 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  167 

a  woman  for  a  wife,  who  frankly  owns,  that  she 
cannot  think  so  highly,  as  you  imagine  she  ought  to 
think  of  you  ? — In  justice  to  yourself,  Sir — 

By  my  soul,  madam,  haughtily,  you  are  the  only 
woman  who  could  thus — 

Well,  Sir,  perhaps  I  am.  But  will  not  this  singu- 
larity convince  you,  that  I  can  never  make  you 
happy,  nor  you  me  ?  You  tell  me  that  you  think 
highly  of  me;  but  if  I  cannot  think  so  highly  of  you, 
pray,  Sir,  let  me  be  intitled  to  the  same  freedom 
in  my  refusal  that  governs  you  in  your  choice. 

He  walked  about  the  room;  and  gave  himself  airs 
that  shewed  greater  inward  than  even  outward  emo- 
tion. 

I  had  a  mind  to  leave  him;  yet  was  not  willing  to 
withdraw  abruptly,  intending,  and  hoping,  to  put  an 
end  to  all  his  expectations  for  the  future.  I  there- 
fore in  a  manner  asked  for  leave  to  withdraw. 

I  presume,  Sir,  that  nothing  remains  to  be  said 
but  what  may  be  said  before  my  cousins.  And, 
courtesying,  was  going. 

He  told  me  with  a  passionate  air,  that  he  was  half- 
distracted;  and  complained  of  the  use  I  made  of  the 
power  I  had  over  him.  And  as  I  had  near  opened 
the  door,  he  threw  himself  on  his  knees  to  me  against 
it,  and  undesignedly  hurt  my  finger  with  the  lock. 

He  was  grieved.  I  made  light  of  it,  though  in 
pain,  that  he  might  not  have  an  opportunity  to 
flourish  upon  it,  and  to  show  a  tenderness  winch  I 
doubt  is  not  very  natural  to  him. 

How  little  was  I  affected  with  his  kneeling,  to 
what  I  was  with  the  same  posture  in  Sir  Rowland ! 
Sir  Hargrave  supplicated  me  as  before.  I  was 
forced  in  answer  to  repeat  some  of  the  same  things 
that  I  had  said  before. 

I  would  fain  have  parted  civilly.  He  would  not 
permit  me  to  do  so.  Though  he  was  on  his  knees,  he 


168  THE    HISTORY    OF 

mingled  passion,  and  even  indirect  menaces,  with 
his  supplications.  I  was  forced  to  declare,  that  I 
never  more  would  receive  his  visits. 

This  declaration  he  vowed  would  make  him  des- 
perate, and  he  cared  not  what  became  of  him. 

I  often  begged  him  to  rise;  but  to  no  purpose,  till 
I  declared  that  I  would  stay  no  longer  with  him :  and 
then  he  arose,  rapt  out  an  oath  or  two;  again  called 
me  proud  and  ungrateful;  and  followed  me  into  the 
other  room  to  my  cousins.  He  could  hardly  be  civil 
to  them:  he  walked  two  or  three  turns  about  the 
room :  at  last,  Forgive  me,  Mr.  Reeves,  forgive  me, 
Mrs.  Reeves,  said  he,  bowing  to  them;  more  stiffly 
to  me — And  yon  forbid  my  future  visits,  madam, 
said  he,  with  a  face  of  malice. 

I  do,  Sir ;  and  that  for  both  our  sakes.  You  have 
greatly  discomposed  me. 

Next  time,  madam,  I  have  the  honour  of  attend- 
ing you,  it  will  be,  I  hope — [he  stopt  a  moment, 
but  still  looking  fiercely]  to  a  happier  purpose. 
And  away  he  went. 

Mr.  Reeves  was  offended  with  him,  and  discour- 
aged me  not  in  my  resolution  to  avoid  receiving 
his  future  visits.  You  will  now  therefore  hear  very 
little  farther  in  my  letters  of  this  Sir  Hargrave  Pol- 
lexfen. 

And  yet  I  wish  I  do  not  see  him  very  soon.  But 
it  will  be  in  company  enough  if  1  do  :  at  the  mas- 
querade, I  mean,  to-morrow  night;  for  he  never 
misses  going  to  such  entertainments. 

Our  dresses  are  ready.  Mr.  Reeves  is  to  be  a 
hermit;  Mrs.  Reeves  a  nun;  Lady  Betty  a  lady  ab- 
bess :  but  I  by  no  means  like  mine,  because  of  its 
gaudiness:  the  very  thing  I  was  afraid  of. 

They  call  it  the  dress  of  an  Arcadian  princess : 


SIR    CHAKLES    GRANDISON.  169 

but  it  falls  not  in  with  any  of  my  notions  of  the 
pastoral  dress  of  Arcadia. 

A  white  Paris  net  sort  of  a  cap,  glittering  with 
spangles,  and  incircled  by  a  chaplet  of  artificial 
flowers,  with  a  little  white  feather  perking  from  the 
left  ear,  is  to  be  my  head-dress. 

My  masque  is  Venetian. 

My  hair  is  to  be  complimented  with  an  appear- 
ance, because  of  its  natural  ringlets,  as  they  call  my 
curls,  and  to  shade  my  neck. 

Tucker  and  ruffles  blond  lace. 

My  shape  is  also  said  to  be  consulted  in  this 
dress.  A  kind  of  waistcoat  of  blue  satin  trimmed 
with  silver  point  d'Espagne,  the  skirts  edged  with 
silver  fringe,  is  made  to  sit  close  to  my  waist  by 
double  clasps,  a  small  silver  tassel  at  the  end  of 
each  clasp ;  all  set  off  with  bugles  and  spangles, 
which  make  a  mighty  glitter. 

But  I  am  to  be  allowed  a  kind  of  scarf  of  white 
Persian  silk ;  which,  gathered  at  the  top,  is  to  be 
fastened  to  my  shoulders;  and  to  fly  loose  behind 
me. 

Bracelets  on  my  arms. 

They  would  have  given  me  a  crook  ;  but  I  would 
not  submit  to  that.  It  would  give  me,  I  said,  an 
air  of  confidence  to  aim  to  manage  it  with  any  tole- 
rable freedom;  and  I  was  apprehensive,  that  I  should 
not  be  thought  to  want  that  from  the  dress  itself. 
A  large  Indian  fan  was  not  improper  for  the  ex- 
pected warmth  of  the  place;  and  that  contented 
me. 

My  petticoat  is  of  blue  satin,  trimmed  and 
fringed  as  my  waistcoat.  I  am  not  to  have  a  hoop 
that  is  perceivable.  They  wore  not  hoops  in 
Arcadia. 

What  a  sparkling  figure  shall  I  make !  Had  the 
ball  been  what  they  call  a  subscription  ball,  at  which 
Q 


170  THE    HISTORY    OF 

people  dress  with  more  glare  than  at  a  common  one, 
this  dress  would  have  been  more  tolerable. 

But  they  all  say,  that  I  shall  be  kept  in  counte- 
nance by  masques  as  extravagant,  and  even  more 
ridiculous. 

Be  that  as  it  may,  I  wish  the  night  was  over.  I 
dare  say,  it  will  be  the  last  diversion  of  this  kind  I 
ever  shall  be  at ;  for  I  never  had  any  notion  of  mas- 
querades. 

Expect  particulars  of  all  in  my  next.  I  reckon 
you  will  be  impatient  for  them.  But  pray,  my 
Lucy,  be  fanciful,  as  I  sometimes  am,  and  let  me 
know  how  you  think  every-thing  will  be  before- 
hand ;  and  how  many  pretty-fellows  you  imagine, 
in  this  dress,  will  be  slain  by  your 

HARRIET  BYRON. 


LETTER  XXIII. 

MR.  REEVES    TO    GEORGE    SELBY,  ESQ. 
DEAR  MR.  SELBY,  Friday,  February  17. 

No  one,  at  present,  but  yourself,  must  see  the  con- 
tents of  what  I  am  going  to  write. 

You  must  not  be  too  much  surprised. 

But  how  shall  I  tell  you  the  news ;  the  dreadful 
news? — My  wife  has  been  ever  since  three  this 
morning  in  violent  hysterics  upon  it. 

You  must  not — But  how  shall  1  say,  you  must 
not,  be  too  much  affected,  when  we  are  unable  to 
support  ourselves  ? 

0  my  cousin  Selby ! — We  know  not  what  is  be- 
come of  our  dearest  Miss  Byron  ! 

1  will  be  as  particular  as  my  grief  and  surprise 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDJSON.  171 

will  allow.     There  is  a  necessity  for  it,  as  you  will 
find. 

Mr.  Greville,  as  I  apprehend — But  to  particulars 
first. 

We  were  last  night  at  the  ball  in  the  Hay-market. 

The  chairmen  who  carried  the  dear  creature,  and 
who,  as  well  as  our  chairmen,  were  engaged  for  the 
night,  were  inveigled  away  to  drink  somewhere. 
They  promised  Wilson,  my  cousin's  servant,  to 
return  in  half  an  hour. 

It  was  then  but  little  more  than  twelve. 

Wilson  waited  near  two  hours,  and  they  not  re- 
turning, he  hired  a  chair  to  supply  their  place. 

Between  two  and  three,  we  all  agreed  to  go  home. 
The  dear  creature  was  fatigued  with  the  notice 
every -body  took  of  her.  Every-body  admired  her. 
She  wanted  to  go  before  ;  but  Lady  Betty  prevailed 
on  her  to  stay  a  little  longer. 

I  waited  on  her  to  her  chair,  and  saw  her  in  it  be- 
fore I  attended  Lady  Betty  and  my  wife  to  theirs. 

I  saw  that  neither  the  chair,  nor  the  chairmen, 
were  those  who  brought  her.  I  asked  the  mean- 
ing ;  and  received  the  above  particulars  after  she 
was  in  the  chair. 

She  hurried  into  it  because  of  her  dress,  and 
being  warm,  and  no  less  than  four  gentlemen  fol- 
lowing her  to  the  very  chair. 

It  was  then  near  three. 

I  ordered  Wilson  to  bid  the  chairmen  stop  when 
they  had  got  out  of  the  crowd,  till  Lady  Betty's 
chair  and  mine,  and  my  wife's,  joined  them. 

I  saw  her  chair  move,  and  Wilson  with  his  lighted 
flambeaux  before  it ;  and  the  four  masques  who  fol- 
lowed her  to  the  chair  return  into  the  house. 

When  our  servants  could  not  find  that  her  chair 
had  stopt,  we  supposed  that  in  the  hurry,  the  fellow 
heard  not  my  orders ;  and  directed  our  chairmen  to 
Q2 


172  THE    HISTORY    OF 

proceed ;  not  doubting  but  we  should  find  her  got 
home  before  us. 

We  had  before  agreed  to  be  carried  directly 
home  :  declining  Lady  Betty's  invitation  to  resume 
our  own  dresses  at  her  house,  where  we  dressed  for 
the  ball. 

We  were  very  much  surprised  at  finding  her  not 
arrived :  but  concluding,  that,  by  mistake,  she  was 
carried  to  Lady  Betty's,  and  was  there  expecting  us, 
we  sent  thither  immediately. 

But,  good  God!  what  was  our  consternation,  when 
the  servants  brought  us  word  back,  that  Lady  Betty 
had  not  either  seen  or  heard  of  her  ! 

Mr.  Greville,  as  I  apprehend — 

But  let  me  give  you  all  the  lights  on  which  I 
ground  my  surmises. 

Last  night  Lady  Betty  Williams  had  a  hint  given 
her,  as  she  informed  me  at  the  masquerade,  that 
Mr.  Greville,  who  took  leave  of  my  cousin  on  Tues- 
day evening  in  order  to  set  out  for  Northampton- 
shire the  next  morning,  was  neither  gone,  nor  in- 
tended to  go  ;  being,  on  the  contrary,  resolved  to 
continue  in  town  perdue,  in  order  to  watch  my 
cousin's  visiters. 

He  had  indeed  told  her,  that  she  would  have  half 
a  dozen  spies  upon  her ;  and  threw  out  some  hints 
of  jealousy  of  two  of  her  visiters. 

Sir  Hargrave  Pollexfen  in  a  harlequin  dress  was 
at  the  ball :  he  soon  discovered  our  lovely  cousin, 
and  notwithstanding  his  former  ill-nature  on  being 
rejected  by  her,  addressed  her  with  the  politeness 
of  a  man  accustomed  to  public  places. 

He  found  me  out  at  the  side-board  a  little  before 
we  went  off;  and  asked  me,  if  I  had  not  seen  Mr. 
Greville  there  ?     1  said,  No. 

He  asked  me,  if  I  had  not  observed  a  masque  dis- 
tinguished by  a  board-brimmed  half-slouched  hat, 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  173 

with  a  high  flat  crown,  a  short  black  cloak,  a  dark 
lantern  in  his  hand,  holding  it  up  to  every  one's 
masque  ;  and  who,  he  said,  was  saluted  by  every- 
body as  Guido  Vaux  ?  That  person  he  said  was 
Mr.  Greville. 

I  did  indeed  observe  this  person ;  but  recollected 
not,  that  he  had  the  air  of  Mr.  Greville;  but  thought 
him  a  much  more  bulky  man.  But  that,  as  he  in- 
tended to  have  it  supposed  he  had  left  the  town, 
might  be  easily  managed. 

Mr.  Greville,  you  know,  is  a  man  of  enterprize. 

He  came  to  town,  having  professedly  no  other 
material  business  but  to  give  obstruction  to  my 
cousin's  visiters.  He  saw  she  had  two  new  ones. 
He  talked  at  first  of  staying  in  town,  and  partaking 
of  its  diversions,  and  even  of  bespeaking  a  new 
equipage. 

But  all  of  a  sudden,  though  expecting  Mr.  Fen- 
wick  would  come  up,  he  pretended  to  leave  the 
town,  and  to  set  out  directly  for  Northamptonshire, 
without  having  obtained  any  concession  from  my 
cousin  in  his  favour. 

Laying  all  these  circumstances  together,  I  think 
it  is  hardly  to  be  doubted,  but  Mr.  Greville  is  at  the 
bottom  of  this  black  affair. 

You  will  therefore  take  such  steps  on  these  lights 
as  your  prudence  will  suggest  to  you.  If  Mr.  Gre- 
ville is  not  come  down — If  Mr.  Fenwick — what 
would  I  say  ? 

The  less  noise,  however,  the  affair  makes,  till  we 
can  come  at  certainty,  the  better. 

How  I  dread  what  that  certainty  may  be  ! — Dear 
creature ! 

But  I  am  sure  you  will  think  it  advisable  to  keep 
this  dreadful  affair  from  her  poor  grandmother. 
And  I  hope  your  good  lady — Yet  her  prudent  ad- 
vice may  be  necessary. 

tt3 


174  THE    HISTORY    OF 

I  have  six  people  out  at  different  parts  of  the 
town,  who  are  to  make  enquiries  among  chairmen, 
coachmen,  &c. 

Her  new  servant  cannot  be  a  villain — What  can 
one  say  ? — What  can  one  think  ? 

We  have  sent  to  his  sister,  who  keeps  an  inn  in 
Smithfield.     She  has  heard  nothing  of  him. 

I  have  sent  after  the  chairmen  who  carried  her 
to  this  cursed  masquerade.  Lady  Betty's  chairmen, 
who  had  provided  the  chairs,  knew  them,  and  their 
number.  They  were  traced  with  a  fare  from  White's 
to  Berkeley-square. 

Something  may  be  discovered  by  means  of  those 
fellows,  if  they  were  tampered  with.  They  are 
afraid,  I  suppose,  to  come  to  demand  their  but 
half-earned  money.  Woe  be  to  them  if  they  come 
out  to  be  rascals ! 

I  had  half  a  suspicion  of  Sir  Hargrave,  as  well 
from  the  character  given  us  of  him  by  a  friend  of 
mine,  as  because  of  his  unpolite  behaviour  to  the 
dear  creature  on  her  rejecting  him  :  and  sent  to  his 
house  in  Cavendish -square,  to  know  if  he  were  at 
home ;  and  if  he  were,  at  what  time  he  returned 
from  the  ball. 

Answer  was  brought,  that  he  was  in  bed,  and 
they  supposed  would  not  be  stirring  till  dinner-time, 
when  he  expected  company  :  and  that  he  returned 
not  from  the  ball  till  between  four  and  five  this 
morning. 

We  sent  to  Mr.  Greville's  lodgings.  He  has  ac- 
tually discharged  them  ;  and  the  people  think  (as 
he  told  them  so)  that  he  is  set  out  for  the  country. 
But  he  is  master  of  contrivances  enough  to  manage 
this.  There  can  be  no  thought  that  he  would  give 
out  otherwise  to  them,  than  he  did  to  us.  Happy  ! 
had  we  found  him  not  gone. 
Mr.  Greville  must  be  the  man  ! 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISO.V.  175 

You  will  be  so  good,  as  to  dispatch  the  bearer 
instantly  with  what  information  can  be  got  about 
Mr.  Greville. 

Ever,  ever  yours ! 

ARCHIBALD  KEEVES. 


LETTER  XXIV. 

Mil.  SELBY  TO  ARCHIBALD  REEVES,  ESQ. 

[In  answer  to  the  preceding. ] 

Saturday,  February  13. 
O  Mr.  Reeves  ! — Dear  sweet  child  ! — Flower  of  the 
world  ! — 

But  how  could  I  keep  such  dreadful  tidings  within 
my  own  breast? — 

I  low  could  I  conceal  my  consternation? — My 
wife  saw  it.     She  would  know  the  cause  of  it. 

I  could  not  tell  her  the  fatal  news — Fatal  news 
indeed  !  It  will  be  immediate  death  to  her  poor 
grandmother — 

We  must  keep  it  from  her  as  long  as  we  can ! — 
But  keep  it  from  her! — And  is  the  dearest  creature 
spirited  away? — O  Mr.  Reeves  ! — 

I  gave  my  wife  your  letter  She  fainted  away, 
before  she  had  read  it  through. 

Masquerades,  I  have  generally  heard  said,  were 
more  silly  than  wicked:  but  they  are  now,  I  am 
convinced,  the  most  profligate  of  all  diversions. 

Almost  distracted,  cousin ! — You  may  well  be  so  : 
we  shall  all  be  quite  distracted — Dear,  dear  creature! 
What  may  she  not  have  suffered  by  this  time  ? 

Why  parted  we  with  such  a  jewel  out  of  our  sight? 

You  would  not  be  denied  :  you  mould  have  her  to 
that  cursed  town. 


176  THE   HISTORY  OF 

Some  damned  villain,  to  be  sure ! — Greville  it  is 
not. 

Greville  was  seen  late  last  night,  alighting  at  his 
own  house  from  a  post-chaise.  He  had  nobody  with 
him. 

In  half  an  hour,  late  as  it  was,  he  sent  his  com- 
pliments to  us  to  let  us  know  that  he  had  left  the 
dear  child  well,  and  (in  his  usual  style)  happier  than 
she  would  make  him.  He  knows  that  our  lives  are 
bound  up  in  hers. 

Find  out  where  she  is :  and  find  her  safe  and 
well :  or  we  will  never  forgive  those  who  were  the 
cause  of  her  going  to  London. 

Dear  soul !  She  was  over  persuaded! — She  was 
not  fond  of  going ! 

The  sweetest,  obliging  creature ! — What  is  now 
become  of  her ! — What  by  this  time  may  she  not 
have  suffered ! — 

Search  every-where — But  you  will,  no  doubt!  — 
Suspect  every-body — This  Lady  Betty  Williams — 
Such  a  plot  must  have  a  woman  in  it.  Was  she 
not  Sir  Hargrave's  friend? — This  Sir  Hargrave — 
Greville  it  could  not  be.  Had  we  not  the  proof  I 
mentioned,  Greville,  bad  as  he  is,  could  not  be  such 
a  villain. 

The  first  moment  you  have  any  tidings,  bad  or 
good, spare  no  expence — 

Greville  was  this  moment  here. 

We  could  not  see  him.  We  did  not  let  him  know 
the  matter. 

He  is  gone  away,  in  great  surprise,  on  the  ser- 
vants telling  him  that  we  had  received  some  bad 
news,  which  made  us  unfit  to  see  any-body.  The 
servants  could  not  tell  him  what :  yet  they  all  guess 
by  your  livery,  and  by  our  grief,  that  something  has 
befallen  their  beloved  young  lady.     They  are  all  in 


SIR  CHARLES    GRANDISON.  177 

tears — and  they  look  at  us,  when  they  attend  us, 
with  such  inquisitive,  yet  silent  grief! — We  are 
speechless  before  them;  and  tell  them  our  wills  by 
motions,  and  not  by  words. 

Good  God! — After  so  many  happy  years! — Hap- 
py in  ourselves!  to  be  at  last  in  so  short  a  time 
made  the  most  miserable  of  wretches  ! 

But  this  had  not  been,  if — But  no  more — Good 
God  of  heaven,  what  will  become  of  poor  Mrs. 
Shirley  ! — Lucy,  Nancy,  will  go  distracted — But  no 
more — Hasten  your  next — And  forgive  this  dis- 
tracted letter.  I  know  not  what  I  have  written.  But 
I  am 

Yours, 

GEORGE  SELBY. 


LETTER  XXV. 

MR  REEVES  TO  GEORGE  SELBY,  ESQ. 
[77i  continuation  of  Letter  XXIII.] 

Lady   Betty's  chairmen  have  found  out  the  first 
chairmen. 

The  fellows  were  made  almost  dead  drunk.  They 
are  sure  something  was  put  into  their  liquor.  They 
have  been  hunting  after  the  footmen,  who  enticed 
them,  and  drank  them  down.  They  describe  their 
livery  to  be  brown,  trimmed  and  turned  up  with 
yellow;  and  are  in  the  service  of  a  merchant's  relict, 
who  lives  either  in  Mark-lane,  or  Mincing-lane;  they 
forgot  which  ;  but  have  not  yet  been  able  to  find 
them  out.  Their  lady,  they  said,  was  at  the  mas- 
querade. They  were  very  officious  to  scrape  ac- 
quaintance with  them.  We  know  not  any-body  who 
gives  this  livery:  so  no  lights  can  be  obtained  by 
this  part  of  the  information.     A  cursed   deep-laid 


178  THE   HISTORY  OF 

villany  ! — The  fellows  are  resolved,  they  say,  to  find 
out  these  footmen,  if  above  ground;  and  the  chair- 
men who  were  hired  on  their  failure. 

Every  hour  we  have  one  messenger  or  other  re- 
turning with  something  to  say  ;  but  hitherto  with 
nothing  to  the  purpose.  This  has  kept  me  within. 
O  Mr.  Selby,  I  know  not  what  to  direct !  I  know 
not  what  to  do  !  I  send  them  out  again  as  fast  as 
they  return  :  yet  rather  show  my  despair,  than  my 
hope. 

Surely  this  villany  must  be  Mr.  Greville's. 
Though  I  have  but  just  dispatched  away  my  ser- 
vant to  you,  I  am  impatient  for  his  return. 

I  will  write  every  hour,  as  any-thing  offers,  that  I 
may  have  a  letter  ready  to  send  you  by  another  man, 
the  moment  Ave  hear  any-thing.  And  yet  I  expect 
not  to  hear  any-thing  material,  but  from  you. 

We  begin  to  suspect  the  servant  (that  Wilson) 
whom  my  cousin  so  lately  hired.  Were  he  clear  of 
the  matter,  either  he,  or  the  chairmen  he  hired, 
must  have  been  heard  of.  He  would  have  return- 
ed. They  could  not  all  three  be  either  murdered 
or  secreted. 

These  cursed  masquerades  ! — Never  will  I — 

#  # 
* 

O  Mr.  Selby!  Her  servant  is,  must  be  a  villain! — 
Sarah,  my  dear  cousin's  servant  (my  poor  wife  can 
think  of  nothing.  She  is  extremely  ill)  Sarah  took  it 
into  her  head  to  have  the  specious  rascal's  trunk 
broke  open.  It  felt  light,  and  he  had  talked,  but  the 
night  before,  of  his  stock  of  clothes  and  linen,  to  the 
other  servants.  There  was  nothing  of  value  found  in 
it ;  not  of  six-pence  value.  The  most  specious  villain, 
if  a  villain.  Every-body  liked  him.  The  dear  crea- 
ture herself  was  pleased  with  him.  He  knew  every 
thing  and  every-body — Cursed  be  he  for  his  adroit- 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  179 

ness  and  knowledge  !    We  had  made  too  many  en- 
quiries after  a  servant  for  her. 

Eleven  o'clock. 
I  am  just  returned  from  Smithfield.     From  the 
villain's  sister.    He  comes  out  to  be  a  villain — This 
Wilson  I  mean — A  practised  villain ! 

The  woman  shook  her  head  at  the  enquiry  which 
I  made,  half  out  of  breath,  after  what  was  become 
of  him.  She  was  afraid,  she  said,  that  all  was  not 
right :  but  was  sure  her  brother  had  not  robbed. 

He  had  been  guilty,  I  said,  of  a  villany  that  was 
a  thousand  times  worse  than  robbery. 

She  was  inquisitive  about  it ;  and  I  hinted  to  her 
what  it  was. 

Her  brother,  she  said,  was  a  young  man  of  parts 
and  understanding,  and  would  be  glad,  she  was  sure, 
of  getting  a  livelihood  by  honest  services.  It  was  a 
sad  thing  that  there  should  be  such  masters  in  the 
world,  as  would  put  servants  upon  bad  practices. 

I  asked  after  the  character  of  that  Bagenhall, 
whose  service  her  brother  last  lived  in  ?  and  impru- 
dently I  threatened  her  brother. 

Ah,  Sir !  was  all  the  answer  she  made,  shaking 
her  head. 

I  repeated  my  question,  Who  was  that  Bagen- 
hall ?— 

Excuse  me,  Sir,  said  she.  I  will  give  no  other 
answer,  till  I  hear  whether  my  brother's  life  may  be 
in  danger  or  not.  She  abhorred,  she  said,  all  base 
practices  as  much  as  any-body  could  do :  and  she 
was  sorry  for  the  lady,  and  for  mo. 

1  then  offered  to  be  the  making  of  her  brother, 
were  it  possible  to  engage  him  before  any  violence 
was  done  to  the  lady.  I  asked,  if  she  knew  where 
to  send  to  him  ? 

Indeed  she  did  not.  She  dared  to  sav,  she  should 


180  THE    HISTORY    OK 

not  hear  of  him  for  one  while.  Whenever  he  had 
been  drawn  in  to  assist  in  any  out-of-the-way  pranks 
[see,  Mr.  Selby,  a  practised  villain  !  ]  he  kept  away 
from  her  till  all  was  blown  over.  Those  who  would 
take  such  steps,  she  feared,  would  by  this  time  have 
done  the  mischief. 

How  I  raved ! 

I  offered  her  money,  ahandsome  sum,  if  she  would 
tell  me  what  she  knew  of  that  Bagenhall,  or  of  any 
of  her  brother's  employers :  but  she  refused  to  say 
one  word  more,  till  she  knew  whether  her  brother's 
life  were  likely  to  be  affected  or  not. 

I  left  her,  and  hastened  home,  to  enquire  after 
what  might  have  happened  in  my  absence :  but  will 
soon  see  her  again,  in  hopes  she  may  be  wrought 
upon  to  drop  some  hints,  by  which  something  may 
be  discovered — But  all  this  time,  What  may  be  the 
fate  of  the  dear  sufferer ! — I  cannot  bear  my  own 
thoughts ! 

Lady  Betty  is  inexpressibly  grieved — 

I  have  dispatched  a  man  and  horse  (God  knows 
to  what  purpose)  to  a  friend  I  have  at  Reading,  to 
get  him  to  enquire  after  the  character  of  this  Ba- 
genhall. There  is  such  a  man,  and  he  is  a  man  of 
pleasure,  as  Sir  John  Allestree  informs  me — Ac- 
cursed villain,  this  Wilson!  He  could  not  bear  with 
his  master's  constant  bad  hours,  and  profligate 
course  of  life,  as  he  told  our  servants,  and  Mrs. 
Sarah  ! — Specious  impostor  ! 

One  o'clock. 
Lady  Betty's  chairmen  have  found  out,  and 
brought  with  them,  one  of  the  fellows  whom  that 
vile  Wilson  hired.  The  other  was  afraid  to  come.  I 
have  secured  this  fellow:  yet  he  seems  to  be  inge- 
nuous :  and  1  have  promised,  that  if*  he  prove  inno- 
cent, he  shall  be  rewarded  instead  of  being  punished : 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  181 

and  the  two  chairmen,  on  this  promise,  are  gone  to 
try  to  prevail  upon  his  partner  to  come,  were  it  but 
to  release  the  other,  as  both  insisted  upon  their  in- 
nocence. 

And  now  will  you  be  impatient  to  know  what  ac- 
count this  fellow  gives. 

O  Mr.  Selby  !  The  dear,  dear  creature — But  be- 
fore I  can  proceed,  I  must  recover  my  eyes. 

Two  o'clock. 

This  fellow's  name  is  Macpherson.  His  partner's 
M'Dermot.  This  is  Macpherson's  account  of  the 
matter. 

Wilson  hired  them  to  carry  his  young  lady  to 
Paddington — To  Paddington  !  A  vile  dog  ! — 

They  objected  distance  and  danger  ;  the  latter,  as 
Macpherson  owns,  to  heighten  the  value  of  the  ser- 
vice. 

As  to  the  danger,  Wilson  told  him,  they  would  be 
met  by  three  others  of  his  fellow-servants,  armed,  at 
the  first  fields  :  and  as  to  the  distance,  they  would  be 
richly  rewarded  ;  and  he  gave  them  a  crown  apiece 
earnest,  and  treated  them  besides  with  brandy. 

To  prevent  their  curiosity,  and  entirely  to  remove 
their  difficulties,  the  villain  told  them,  that  his  young 
lady  was  an  heiress,  and  had  agreed  to  go  off  from 
the  masquerade  with  her  lover :  but  that  the  gentle- 
man would  not  appear  to  them  till  she  came  to  the 
very  house,  to  which  she  was  to  be  conveyed. 

She  thinks,  said  the  hellish  villain,  that  she  is  to  be 
carried  to  May-Fair  chapel,  and  to  be  married  di- 
rectly ;  and  that  the  minister  (unseasonable  as  the 
hour  is)  will  be  there  in  readiness.  But  the  gentle- 
man, who  is  a  man  of  the  utmost  honour,  intends 
first  to  try  whether  he  cannot  obtain  her  friends' 
consent.  So  when  she  finds  her  way  lengthened,  pro- 
ceeded the  vile  wretch,  she  will  perhaps  be  frightened 
vol.  ix.  R 


182  THE    HISTORY   OF 

and  will  ask  me  questions.  I  would  not  for  the  world 
disoblige  her ;  but  here  she  must  be  cheated  for  her 
own  sake ;  and  when  all  is  over,  will  value  me  the 
more  for  the  innocent  imposture.  But  whatever  or- 
ders she  may  give  you,  observe  none  but  mine,  and 
follow  me.  You  shall  be  richly  rewarded,  repeated 
the  miscreant.  Should  she  even  cry  out,  mind  it  not : 
she  is  full  of  fears,  and  hardly  holds  in  one  mind  for 
an  hour  together. 

He  farther  cautioned  them  not  to  answer  any 
questions  which  might  possibly  be  asked  of  them,  by 
the  person  who  should  conduct  his  young  lady  to 
her  chair ;  but  refer  to  himself:  and  in  case  any  other 
chairs  were  to  go  in  company  with  hers,  he  bid  them 
fall  behind,  and  follow  his  flambeau. 

Macpherson  says,  that  she  drew  the  curtains  close 
(because  of  her  dress,  no  doubt)  the  moment  I  had 
left  her,  after  seeing  her  in  the  chair. 

The  fellows,  thus  prepossessed  and  instructed, 
speeded  away,  without  stopping  for  our  chairs.  Yet 
my  cousin  must  have  heard  me  give  that  direction. 

They  had  carried  her  a  great  way  before  she 
called  out :  and  then  she  called  three  times  before 
they  would  hear  her  :  at  the  third  time  they  stopt, 
and  her  servant  asked  her  commands.  Where  am  I, 
William  ?  Just  at  home,  madam,  answered  he. 
Surely  you  have  taken  a  strange  round-about  way. 
We  are  come  about,  said  the  rascal,  on  purpose  to 
avoid  the  crowd  of  chairs  and  coaches. 

They  proceeded  onwards,  and  were  joined  by 
three  men,  as  Wilson  had  told  them  they  would ; 
but  they  fancied  one  of  them  to  be  a  gentleman  ;  for 
he  was  muffled  up  in  a  cloak,  and  had  a  silver-hilted 
sword  in  his  hand  :  but  he  spake  not.  He  gave  no 
directions  :  and  all  three  kept  aloof,  that  they  might 
not  be  seen  by  her. 

At  Marybone,she  again  called  out;  William,  Wil- 

'A 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  183 

liam,  said  she,  with  vehemence :  the  Lord  have 
mercy  upon  me  !  Where  are  you  going  to  carry  me  ? 
Chairmen,  stop  !  Stop  chairmen  !  Set  me  down  !— 
William  ! — Call  my  servant,  chairmen  ! — 

Dear  soul !  Her  servant !  Her  devil ! 

The  chairmen  called  him.  They  lifted  up  the 
head.  The  side-curtains  were  still  drawn,  and 
M'Dermot  stood  so  close,  that  she  could  not  see  far 
before  her.  Did  you  not  tell  me,  said  the  villain  to 
them,  that  it  was  not  far  about  ? — See  how  you  have 
frighted  my  lady ! — Madam,  we  are  now  almost  at 
home. 

They  proceeded  with  her,  saying,  they  had  indeed 
mistaken  their  way  ;  but  they  were  just  there,  and 
hurried  on. 

She  then  undrew  the  side-curtains — Good  God  of 
heaven  protect  me  !  they  heard  her  say — I  am  in  the 
midst  of  fields — They  were  then  at  Lissom  Green. 

They  heard  her  pray  ;  and  Macpherson  said,  he 
began  then  to  conclude,  that  the  lady  was  too  much 
frightened,  and  too  pious  to  be  in  a  love-plot. 

But,  nevertheless,  beckoned  by  their  villanous 
guide,  they  hurried  on  :  and  then  she  screamed  out, 
and  happening  to  see  one  of  the  three  men,  she 
begged  his  help  for  God's  sake. 

The  fellow  blustered  at  the  chairmen,  and  bid 
them  stop.  She  asked  for  Grosvenor  Street.  She 
was  to  be  carried,  she  said,  to  Grosvenor  Street. 

She  was  just  there,  that  fellow  said — It  can't  be, 
Sir !  it  can't  be  ! — Don't  I  see  fields  all  about  me  ? — 
I  am  in  the  midst  of  fields,  Sir. 

Grosvenor  Square,  madam,  replied  that  villain ;  the 
trees  and  garden  of  Grosvenor  Square. 

What  a  strange  way  have  you  come  about,  cried 
her  miscreant !  And  then  trod  out  his  flambeau ; 
while  another  fellow  took  the  chairmen's  lantern 
r  2 


184  THE    HISTORY   OF 

from  them  ;  and  they  had  only  a  little  glimmering 
star-light  to  guide  them. 

She  then,  poor  dear  soul !  screamed  so  dismally, 
that  Macpherson  said,  it  went  to  his  heart  to  hear 
her.  But  they  following  Wilson,  who  told  them  they 
were  just  landed,  that  was  his  word,  he  led  them  up 
a  long  garden-walk,  by  a  back  way.  One  of  the  three 
men  having  got  before,  opened  the  garden-door,  and 
held  it  in  his  hand  ;  and  by  the  time  they  got  to  the 
house  to  which  the  garden  seemed  to  belong,  the 
dear  creature  ceased  screaming. 

They  too  well  saw  the  cause,  when  they  stopt  with 
her.     She  was  in  a  fit. 

Two  women,  by  the  assistance  of  the  person  in  the 
cloak,  helped  her  out,  with  great  seeming  tenderness. 
They  said  something  in  praise  of  her  beauty,  and 
expressed  themselves  concerned  for  her,  as  if  they 
were  afraid  she  was  past  recovery :  which  apparently 
startled  the  man  in  the  cloak. 

Wilson  entered  the  house  with  those  who  carried 
in  the  dear  creature;  but  soon  came  out  to  the  chair- 
men. They  saw  the  man  in  the  cloak  (who  hung 
about  the  villain  and  hugged  him,  as  in  joy)  give  the 
rascal  money;  who  then  put  a  guinea  into  each  of 
their  hands ;  and  conveyed  them  through  the  garden 
again,  to  the  door  at  which  they  entered;  but  refused 
them  light,  even  so  much  as  that  of  their  own  candle 
and  lantern.  However,  he  sent  another  man  with 
them,  who  led  them  over  rough  and  dirty  by-ways 
into  a  path  that  pointed  London-ward  ;  but  plainly 
so  much  about  with  design  to  make  it  difficult  for 
them  to  find  out  the  place  again. 
#  * 

The  other  fellow  is  brought  hither.  He  tells  ex- 
actly the  same  story. 

I  asked  of  both,  what  sort  of  a  man  he  in  the  cloak 


SIR    CHARLES    GRAXDISON.  185 

was:  but  he  so  carefully  muffled  himself  up,  and  so 
little  appeared  to  them,  either  walking  after  them, 
or  at  the  house,  that  I  could  gain  no  light  from  their 
description. 

On  their  promise  to  be  forth-coming,  I  have  suf- 
fered them  to  go  with  Lady  Betty's  chairmen  to  try 
if  they  can  trace  out  their  own  footsteps,  and  find 
the  place. 

How  many  hopeless  things  must  a  man  do,  in  an 
exigence,  who  knows  not  what  is  right  to  be  done  ! 
*  * 

I  have  enquired  of  Lady  Betty,  who  it  was  that  told 
her,  Mr.  Greville  was  not  gone  out  of  town,  but  in- 
tended to  lie  perdue  ;  and  she  named  her  informant. 
I  asked  how  the  discourse  came  in  ?  She  owned,  a 
little  awkwardly.  I  asked  whether  that  lady  knew 
Mr. Greville  ?  She  could  not  say  whether  she  did,  or 
not. 

I  went  to  that  lady  :  Mrs.  Preston,  in  New  Bond 
Street.  She  had  her  intelligence,  she  told  me,  from 
SirHargravePollexfen  ;  who  had  hinted  to  her,  that 
he  should  take  such  notice  of  Mr.  Greville,  as  might 
be  attended  with  consequences;  and  she  was  the  rea- 
dier to  intimate  this  to  Lady  Betty,  in  order  to  pre- 
vent mischief. 

Now,  Mr.  Selby,  as  the  intimation  that  the  dark- 
lantern  figure  at  the  masquerade  was  Mr.  Greville, 
came  from  Sir  Hargrave,  and  nobody  else ;  and  we 
saw  nothing  of  him  ourselves  ;  how  do  we  know — 
And  yet  Mr.  Greville  intended  that  we  should  be- 
lieve him  to  be  out  of  town. — Yet  even  that  intima- 
tion came  from  Sir  Hargrave — And  furthermore, 
was  it  not  likely  that  he  would  take  as  much  care  to 
conceal  himself  from  Sir  Hargrave,  as  from  us? — 
But  I  will  go  instantly  to  Sir  Hargrave's  house.  He 
was  to  dine  at  home,  and  with  company.  If  I  cannot 
R  3 


186  THE    HISTORY    OF 

see  him;  if  he  should  be  absent — But  no  more  till 
I  return. 

#  # 

0  Mr.  Selby !  I  believe  I  have  wronged  Mr.  Gre- 
ville.  The  dear  soul,  I  am  afraid,  is  fallen  into  even 
worse  hands  than  his. 

1  went  to  Sir  Hargrave's  house.  He  was  not  at 
home.  He  ivas  at  home.  He  had  company  with  him. 
He  was  not  to  be  spoken  with.  These  were  the  dif- 
ferent answers  given  me  by  his  porter,  with  as  much 
confusion  as  I  had  impatience ;  and  yet  it  was  evident 
to  me,  that  he  had  his  lesson  given  him.  In  short,  I 
have  reason  to  think,  that  Sir  Hargrave  came  not 
home  all  night.  The  man  in  the  cloak,  I  doubt,  was 
he.  Now  does  all  that  Sir  John  Allestree  said  of  the 
malicious  wickedness  of  this  devilish  man,  and  his 
arrogant  behaviour  to  our  dear  Miss  Byron,  on  her 
rejecting  him,  come  fresh  into  my  memory.  And  is 
she,  can  she  be,  fallen  into  the  power  of  such  a  man  ? 
— Rather,  much  rather,  may  my  first  surmises  prove 
true.  Greville  is  surely  (exceptionable  as  he  is)  a 
better  man,  at  least  abetter-natured  man,  than  this  ; 
and  he  can  have  no  thoughts  less  honourable  than 
marriage:  but  this  villain,  if  he  be  the  villain — I  can- 
not, I  dare  not,  pursue  the  thought. 

*  * 

The  four  chairmen  are  just  returned.  They  think 
they  have  found  the  place ;  but  having  gained  some 
intelligence  (intelligence  which  distracts  me !)  they 
hurried  back  for  directions. 

They  had  asked  a  neighbouring  alehouse-keeper, 
if  there  were  not  a  long  garden  (belonging  to  the 
house  they  suspected)  and  a  back-door  out  of  it  to  a 
dirty  lane  and  fields.  He  answered  in  the  affirmative, 
The  front  of  this  house  faces  the  road. 

They  called  for  some  hot  liquors ;  and  asked  the 


SIR    CHARLES   GRANDISON.  187 

landlord  after  the  owners.  Heknew  nothing  of  harm 
of  them,  hesaid.  They  hadlived  there  near  a  twelve- 
month in  reputation.  The  family  consisted  ofa  widow, 
whose  name  is  Awberry,  her  son,  and  two  daughters. 
The  son  (a  man  of  about  thirty  years  of  age)  has  a 
place  in  the  Custom-house,  and  only  came  down  on 
a  Saturday,  and  went  up  on  Monday.  But  an  odd 
circumstance,  he  said,  had  alarmed  him  that  very 
morning. 

He  was  at  first  a  little  shy  of  telling  what  it  was. 
He  loved,  he  said,  to  mind  his  own  business :  what 
other  people  did  was  nothing  to  him  :  but,  at  last,  he 
told  them,  that  about  six  o'clock  in  the  morning  he 
was  waked  by  the  trampling  of  horses;  and  looking 
out  of  his  window,  saw  a  chariot-and-six,  and  three 
or  four  men  on  horseback,  at  the  widow  Awberry's 
door.  He  got  up.  The  footmen  and  coachmen  were 
very  hush,  not  calling  for  a  drop  of  liquor,  though  his 
doors  were  open ;  a  rare  instance,  he  said,  where 
there  were  so  many  men-servants  together,  and  a 
coachman  one  of  them.  This,  he  said,  could  not  but 
give  a  greater  edge  to  his  curiosity. 

About  seven  o'clock,  one  of  the  widow's  daugh- 
ters came  to  the  door,  with  a  lighted  candle  in  her 
hand,  and  directed  the  chariot  to  drive  up  close  to 
the  house.  The  alehouse-keeper  then  slipt  into  an 
arbour-like  porch,  next  door  to  the  widow's;  where 
he  had  not  been  three  minutes  before  he  saw  two 
persons  come  to  the  door ;  the  one  a  tall  gentleman 
in  laced  clothes,  who  had  his  arms  about  the  other,  a 
person  of  middling  stature,  wrapt  up  in  a  scarlet 
cloak  ;  and  resisting,  as  one  in  great  distress,  the 
other's  violence;  and  begging  not  to  be  put  into  the 
chariot,  in  a  voice  and  accent  that  evidently  shewed 
it  was  a  woman. 

The  gentleman  made  vehement  protestations  of 


188  THE    HISTORY    OTT 

honour ;  but  lifted  the  lady  into  the  chariot.  She 
struggled,  and  seemed  to  be  in  agonies  of  grief;  and 
on  being  lifted  in,  and  the  gentleman  going  in  after 
her,  she  screamed  out  for  help ;  and  he  observed  in 
the  struggling,  that  she  had  on,  under  her  cloak, 
a  silver-laced  habit  [the  masquerade  habit,  no 
doubt !  J  :  her  screaming  grew  fainter  and  fainter, 
and  her  voice  sounded  to  him  as  if  her  mouth  were 
stopped  :  and  the  gentleman  seemed  to  speak  high, 
as  if  he  threatened  her. 

Away  drove  the  chariot.  The  servants  rode  after  it. 

In  about  half  an  hour,  a  coach  and  four  came  to 
the  widow's  door ;  the  widow  and  her  two  daughters 
went  into  it,  and  it  took  the  same  road. 

The  alehouse-keeper  had  afterwards  the  curiosity 
to  ask  the  maid-servant,  an  ignorant  country  wench, 
whither  her  mistresses  went  so  early  in  the  morning  ? 
She  answered  they  were  gone  to  Windsor,  or  that 
way,  and  would  not  return,  she  believed,  in  a  week. 

0  this  damned  Sir  Hargrave  !  He  has  a  house 
upon  the  forest.  I  have  no  doubt  but  he  is  the  villain. 
Who  knows  what  injuries  she  might  have  sustained 
before  she  was  forced  into  the  chariot  ? — God  give 
me  patience !  Dear  soul !  Her  prayers !  Her  strug- 
gling !  Her  crying  out  for  help  !  Her  mouth  stopt ! 
O  the  villain ! 

1  have  ordered  as  many  men  and  horses  as  two  of 
my  friends  can  furnish  me  with,  to  be  added  to  two 
of  my  own  (we  shall  be  nine  in  all)  to  get  ready  with 
all  speed.  I  will  pursue  the  villain  to  the  world's  end, 
but  I  will  find  him. 

Our  first  course  shall  be  to  his  house  at  Windsor. 
If  we  find  him  not  there,  we  will  proceed  to  that 
Bagenhalfs,  near  Reading. 

It  would  be  but  losing  time,  were  I  to  go  now  to 
Paddington.     And  when  the  vile  widow  and  her 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON'.  189 

daughters  are  gone  from  home,  and  only  an  ignorant 
wench  left,  what  can  we  learn  of  her  more  than  is 
already  told  us  ? 

I  have,  however,  accepted  Lady  Betty's  offer  of 
her  steward's  going  with  the  two  chairmen,  to  get 
what  farther  intelligence  he  can  from  Paddington, 
against  my  return. 

I  shall  take  what  I  have  written  with  me,  to  form 
from  it  a  letter  less  hurrying,  less  alarming,  for  your 
perusal,  than  this  that  I  have  written  at  such  snatches 
of  time,  and  under  such  dreadful  uncertainties,  would 
be  to  you,  were  I  to  send  it ;  that  is  to  say,  if  I  have 
time,  and  if  I  am  able  to  write  with  any  certainty — 
O  that  dreaded  certainty  ! 

At  four  in  the  morning  the  six  men  I  borrow,  and 
myself,  and  two  of  my  servants,  well  armed,  are  to 
rendezvous  at  Hyde-Park  Corner.  It  is  grievous  that 
another  night  must  pass.  But  so  many  people  cannot 
be  got  together  as  two  or  three  might. 

My  poor  wife  has  made  me  promise  to  take  the  as- 
sistance of  peace-officers,  wherever  I  find  either  the 
villain,  or  the  suffering  angel. 

Where  the  road  parts  we  shall  divide,  and  enquire 
at  every  turnpike ;  and  shall  agree  upon  our  places  of 
meeting. 

I  am  harassed  to  death  :  but  my  mind  is  the  great- 
est sufferer. 

O  my  dear  Mr.  Selby  !  We  have  tidings — God  be 
praised,  we  have  tidings — Not  so  happy  indeed  as 
were  to  be  wished  :  yet  the  dear  creature  is  living, 
and  in  honourable  hands — God  be  praised ! 

Read  the  inclosed  letter  directed  to  me. 


Miss  Byron  is  in  safe  and  honourable  hands. 
The  first  moment  she  could  give  any  account  of 


190  THE    HISTORY   OF 

herself,  she  besought  me  to  quiet  your  heart,  and 
your  lady's,  with  this  information. 

She  has  been  cruelly  treated. 

Particulars,  at  present,  she  cannot  give. 

She  was  many  hours  speechless. 

But  don't  fright  yourselves  :  her  fits,  though  not 
less  frequent,  are  weaker  and  weaker. 

The  bearer  will  acquaint  you  who  my  brother  is  ; 
to  whom  you  owe  the  preservation  and  safety  of  the 
loveliest  woman  in  England  ;  and  he  will  direct  you 
to  a  house  where  you  will  be  welcome  with  your 
lady  (for  Miss  Byron  cannot  be  removed)  to  con- 
vince yourselves  that  all  possible  care  is  taken  of 
her,  by,  Sir, 

Your  humble  servant, 
Friday,  February  17.         CHARLOTTE  GRANDISON. 

In  jits! — Has  been  cruelly  treated  ! — Many  hours 
speechless  ! — Cannot  be  removed  ! — Her  solicitude, 
though  hardly  herself,  for  our' ease  ! — Dearest,  dear 
creaturel — But  you  will  rejoice  with  me,  my  cou- 
sins, that  she  is  in  such  honourable  hands. 

What  I  have  written  must  now  go.  I  have  no  time 
to  transcribe. 

I  have  sent  to  my  two  friends  to  let  them  know, 
that  I  shall  not  have  occasion  for  their  people's  as- 
sistance. 

She  is  at  a  nobleman's  house,  the  Earl  of  L.  near 
Colnebrook. 

My  wife,  harassed  and  fatigued  in  mind  as  she  has 
been  on  this  occasion,  and  poorly  in  health,  wanted 
to  go  with  me :  but  it  is  best  first  for  me  to  see  how 
the  dear  creature  is. 

I  shall  set  out  before  day,  on  horseback.  My  ser- 
vant shall  carry  with  him  a  portmanteau  of  things, 
ordered  by  my  wife.     My  cousin  must  have  made  a 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  191 

strange  appearance  in  her  masquerade  dress,  to  her 
deliverer. 

The  honest  man  who  brought  the  letter  [he  looks 
remarkably  so  ;  but  had  he  a  less  agreeable  counte- 
nance, he  would  have  been  received  by  us  as  an  an- 
gel, for  his  happy  tidings]  was  but  just  returnedfrom 
Windsor,  whither  he  had  been  sent  early  in  the 
morning,  to  transact  some  business,  when  he  was  dis- 
patched away  to  us  with  the  welcome  letter.  He 
could  not  therefore  be  so  particular  as  we  wished 
him.  What  he  gathered  was  from  the  housekeeper  ; 
the  men-servants,  who  were  in  the  fray  [a  fray  there 
was!]  being  gone  to  town  with  their  master.  But 
what  we  learnt  from  him,  is,  briefly,  as  follows  : 

His  master  is  Sir  Charles  Grandison;  a  gentleman 
who  has  not  been  long  in  England.  I  have  often 
heard  mention  of  his  father,  Sir  Thomas,  who  died 
not  long  ago.  This  honest  man  knew  not  when  to 
stop  in  his  master's  praise.  He  gives  his  young  lady 
also  an  excellent  character. 

Sir  Charles  was  going  to  town  in  his  chariot  and 
six  when  he  met  (most happily  met!)  our  distressed 
cousin. 

Sir  Hargrave  is  the  villain  ! 

I  am  heartily  sorry  for  suspecting  Mr.  Greville. 

Sir  Charles  had  earnest  business  in  town  ;  and  he 
proceeded  thither,  after  he  had  rescued  the  dear 
creature,  and  committed  her  to  the  care  of  his  sis- 
ter.— God  for  ever  bless  him ! 

The  vile  Sir  Hargrave,  as  the  servant  understood, 
was  wounded.  Sir  Charles,  it  seems,  was  also  hurt. 
Thank  God  it  was  so  slightly,  as  not  to  hinder  him 
from  pursuing  his  journey  to  town  after  the  glorious 
act. 

I  would  have  given  the  honest  man  a  handsome 
gratuity  :  but  he  so  earnestly  besought  me  to  excuse 
him,  declaring  that  he  was  under  an  obligation  to 


192  THE    HISTORY   OF 

the  most  generous  of  masters  to  decline  all  gifts,  that 
I  was  obliged  to  withdraw  my  hand. 

I  will  speed  this  away  by  Richard  Fennell.  I  will 
soon  send  you  farther  particulars  by  the  post :  not 
unhappy  ones,  I  hope. 

Excuse,  mean  time,  all  that  is  amiss  in  a  letter  the 
greatest  part  of  which  was  written  in  such  dreadful 
uncertainty,  and  believe,  that  I  will  be 
Ever  yours, 

ARCHIBALD  REEVES. 


LETTER  XXVI. 

MR.  REEVES  TO  GEORGE  SELBY,  ESQ. 

DEAR   SIR,  Saturday,  February  18. 

I  am  just  returned  from  visiting  my  beloved  cousin. 
You  will  be  glad  of  every  minute  particular,  as  I 
can  give  it  to  you,  relating  to  this  shocking  affair ; 
and  to  her  protector  and  his  sister.  There  are  not 
such  another  brother  and  sister  in  England. 

I  got  to  the  hospitable  mansion  by  nine  this  morn- 
ing. I  enquired  after  Miss  Byron's  health  ;  and,  on 
giving  in  my  name,  was  shewn  into  a  handsome  par- 
lour, elegantly  furnished. 

Immediately  came  down  to  me  a  very  agreeable 
young  lady;  Miss  Grandison.  I  gave  her  a  thousand 
thanks  for  the  honour  of  her  letter,  and  the  joyful 
information  it  had  given  me  of  the  safety  of  one  so 
deservedly  dear  to  us. 

She  must  be  an  excellent  young  lady,  answered 
she.  I  have  just  left  her — You  must  not  see  her 
yet— 

Ah,  madam,  said  I,  and  looked  surprised  and 
grieved,  I  believe — 


SIR    CHARLES    GKAXDISOX.  193 

Don't  affright  yourself,  Sir.  Miss  Byron  will  do 
Very  well :  but  she  must  be  kept  quiet.  She  has  had 
a  happy  deliverance — She — 

O  madam,  interrupted  I,  your  generous,  your  no- 
ble brother — 

Is  the  best  of  men,  Mr.  Reeves  :  his  delight  is  in 
doing  good. — And,  as  to  this  adventure,  it  has  made 
him,  I  am  sure,  a  very  happy  man. 

But  is  my  cousin,  madam,  so  ill,  that  I  cannot  be 
allowed  to  see  her  for  one  moment  ? 

She  is  but  just  come  out  of  a  fit.  She  fell  into  it 
in  the  relation  she  would  have  made  of  her  story,  on 
mentioning  the  villain's  name  by  whom  she  has  suf- 
fered. She  could  give  only  broken  and  imperfect 
accounts  of  herself  all  day  yesterday,  or  you  had 
heard  from  me  sooner.  When  you  see  her,  you  must 
be  very  cautious  of  what  you  say  to  her.  We  have  a 
skilful  physician,  by  whose  advice  we  proceed. 

God  for  ever  bless  you,  madam  ! 

He  has  not  long  left  her.  He  advises  quiet.  She 
has  had  a  very  bad  night.  Could  she  compose  her- 
self, could  she  get  a  little  natural  rest,  the  cure  is 
performed.     Have  you  breakfasted,  Sir  ? 

Breakfasted,  madam  !  My  impatience  to  see  my 
cousin  allowed  me  not  to  think  of  breakfast. 

You  must  breakfast  with  me,  Sir.  And  when  that 
is  over,  if  she  is  tolerable,  we  will  acquaint  her  with 
your  arrival,  and  go  up  together.  I  read  your  impa- 
tience, Sir  :  we  will  make  but  a  very  short  break- 
fasting.    I  was  just  goingto  breakfast. 

She  rang.     It  was  brought  in. 

I  longed,  I  said,  as  we  sat  at  tea,  to  be  acquainted 
with  the  particulars  of  the  happy  deliverance. 

We  avoid  asking  any  questions  that  may  affect  her. 
I  know  very  little  of  the  particulars  myself.  My  bro- 
ther was  in  haste  to  get  to  town.     The  servants  that 
were  with  him  at  the  time,  hardly  dismounted :  he 
s 


194"  THE   HISTORY  Or 

doubted  not  but  tbe  lady  (to  whom  he  referred  me 
for  the  gratifying  my  curiosity)  would  be  able  to 
tell  me  every  thing.  But  she  fell  into  fits,  and  as  I 
told  you,  was  so  ill,  on  the  recollection  of  what  she 
had  suffered — 

Good  God !  said  I,  what  must  the  dear  creature 
have  suffered ! 

— That  we  thought  fit  to  restrain  our  curiosity, 
and  so  must  you,  till  we  see  Sir  Charles.  I  expect 
him  before  noon. 

I  am  told,  madam,  that  there  was  a  skirmish.  I 
hope  Sir  Charles — 

I  hope  so  too,  Mr.  Reeves,  interrupted  she.  I 
long  to  see  my  brother  as  much  as  you  can  do  to 
see  your  cousin — But  on  my  apprehensions,  he  as- 
sured me  upon  his  honour,  that  he  was  but  very 
slightly  hurt.  Sir  Charles  is  no  qualifier,  Sir,  when 
he  stakes  his  honour,  be  the  occasion  either  light  or 
serious. 

I  said,  I  doubted  not  but  she  was  very  much  sur- 
prised at  a  lady's  being  brought  in  by  Sir  Charles, 
and  in  a  dress  so  fantastic. 

I  was,  Sir.  I  had  not  left  my  chamber :  but 
hastened  down  at  the  first  word,  to  receive  and 
welcome  the  stranger.  My  maid,  out  of  breath, 
burst  into  my  room — Sir  Charles,  madam,  beseeches 
you  this  moment  to  come  down.  He  has  saved  a 
lady  from  robbers  (that  was  her  report)  a  very  fine 
lady !  and  is  come  back  with  her.  He  begs  that 
you  will  come  down  this  instant. 

I  was  too  much  surprised  at  my  brother's  unex- 
pected return,  and  too  much  affected  with  the  lady's 
visible  grief  and  terror,  to  attend  to  her  dress,  when 
I  first  went  down.  She  was  sitting,  dreadfully  trem- 
bling, and  Sir  Charles  next  her,  in  a  very  tender 
manner,  assuring  her  of  his  and  of  his  sister's  kindest 
protection.  I  saluted  her,  continued  the  lady  :  Wei- 


SIR   CHARLES    GRAJfDISON.  195 

come,  welcome,  thrice  welcome  to  this  house,  and 
to  me — 

She  threw  herself  on  one  knee  to  me.  Distress 
had  too  much  humbled  her.  Sir  Charles  and  I  rais- 
ed her  to  her  seat.  You  see  before  you,  madam, 
said  she,  a  strange  creature,  aud  looked  at  her  dress : 
but  I  hope  you  will  belivc  I  am  an  innocent  one, 
Th?o  vile  appearance  was  not  my  choice.  Fie  upon 
me !  I  must  be  thus  dressed  out  for  a  masquerade; 
Hated  diversion!  I  never  had  a  notion  of  it.  Think 
not  haixlly,  Sir,  turning  to  Sir  Charles,  her  hands 
clasped  and  held  up,  of  her  whom  you  have  so 
generously  delivered.  Think  not  hardly  of  me,  ma- 
dam, turning  to  me:  I  am  not  a  bad  creature.  That 
vile,  vile  man  ! — She  could  say  no  more. 

Charlotte,  said  my  brother,  you  will  make  it  your 
first  care  to  raise  the  spirits  of  this  injured  beauty; 
your  next,  to  take  her  directions,  and  inform  her 
friends  of  her  safety.  Such  an  admirable  young  lady 
as  this,  cannot  be  missed  an  hour,  without  exciting 
the  fears  of  all  her  friends  for  her.  I  repeat,  madam, 
that  you  are  in  honourable  hands.  My  sister  will 
have  pleasure  in  obliging  you. 

She  wished  to  be  conveyed  to  town;  but  looking 
at  her  dress,  I  offered  her  clothes  of  mine ;  and  my 
brother  said,  if  she  were  very  earnest,  and  thought 
herself  able  to  go,  he  would  take  a  horse,  and  leave 
the  chariot,  and  he  was  sure  that  I  would  attend 
her  thither. 

But  before  she  could  declare  her  acceptance  of 
this  offer,  as  she  seemed  joyfully  ready  to  do,  her 
spirits  failed  her,  and  she  sunk  down  at  my  feet. 

Sir  Charles  just  staid  to  see  her  come  to  herself: 
and  then — Sister,  said  he,  the  lady  cannot  be  re- 
moved. Let  Dr.  Holmes  be  sent  for  instantly.  I 
know  you  will  give  her  your  best  attendance.  I  will 
be  with  you  before  noon  to-morrow.  The  lady  is 
s2 


196  THE   HISTORY   OF 

too  low,  and  too  weak,  to  be  troubled  with  questions 
now.  Johnson  will  be  back  from  Windsor.  Let  him 
take  her  commands  to  any  of  her  friends.  Adieu, 
dear  madam — [Your  cousin,  Sir,  seemed  likely  to 
faint  again]  Support  yourself.  Repeating,  You  are 
in  safe  and  honourable  hands  ;  bowing  to  her,  as  she 
bowed  in  return,  but  spoke  not — Adieu,  Charlotte ; 
and  away  went  the  best  of  brothers. 

And  God  Almighty  bless  him,  said  I,  wherever 
he  goes! 

Miss  Grandison  then  told  me,  that  the  house  I 
was  in  belonged  to  the  Earl  of  L.  who  had  lately 
married  her  eldest  sister;  about  three  mouths  ago, 
they  set  out,  she  said,  to  pay  a  visit  to  my  lord's 
estate  and  relations  in  Scotland,  for  the  first  time, 
and  to  settle  some  affairs  there :  they  were  expected 
back  in  a  week  or  fortnight :  she  came  down  but 
last  Tuesday,  and  that  in  order  to  give  directions 
for  every  thing  to  be  prepared  for  their  reception. 
It  was  happy  for  your  cousin,  said  she,  that  I  ob- 
tained the  favour  of  my  brother's  company;  and  that 
he  was  obliged  to  be  in  town  this  morning.  He  in- 
tended to  come  back  to  carry  me  to  town  this  even- 
ing. We  are  a  family  of  love,  Mr.  Reeves.  We 
are  true  brothers  and  sisters — But  why  do  I  trouble 
you  with  these  things  now?  We  shall  be  better 
acquainted.   I  am  charmed  with  Miss  Byron. 

She  was  so  good  as  to  hurry  the  breakfast:  and 
when  it  was  over,  conducted  me  up  stairs.  She  bid 
me  stay  at  the  door,  and  stept  gently  to  the  bed- 
side, and  opening  the  curtain,  I  heard  the  voice 
of  our  cousin. 

Dear  madam,  what  trouble  do  I  give !  were  her 
words. 

Still  talk  of  trouble,  Miss  Byron  ?  answered  Miss 
Grandison,  with  an  amiable  familiarity  ;  you  will  not 
forbear — Will  you  promise  me  not  to  be  surprised 
at  the  arrival  or' your  cousin  Reeves? 


SIK   CHARLES    GRANDISOX.  197 

I  do  promise — I  shall  rejoice  to  see  him. 

Miss  Grandison  called  to  me. — I  approached;  and 
catching  my  cousin's  held-out  hand — Thank  God, 
thank  God,  best  beloved  of  a  hundred  hearts!  said 
I,  that  once  more  1  behold  )rou!  that  once  more  I 
see  you  in  safe  and  honourable  hands! — I  will  not 
tell  you  what  we  have  all  surFered. 

No,  don't,  said  she — You  need  not — But,  O  my 
cousin!  I  have  fallen  into  the  company  of  angels. 

Forbear,  gently  patting  her  hand,  forbear  these 
high  flights,  said  the  kind  lady,  or  I  shall  beat  my 
charming  patient.  I  shall  not  think  you  in  a  way 
to  be  quite  well,  till  you  descend. 

She  whispered  me,  that  the  doctor  had  expressed 
fears  for  her  head,  if  she  were  not  kept  quiet.  Then 
raising  her  voice,  Your  cousin's  gratitude,  Mr. 
Reeves,  is  excessive.  You  must  allow  me,  smiling, 
to  beat  her.  When  she  is  well,  she  shall  talk  of 
angels,  and  of  what  she  pleases. 

But,  my  dear  Mr.  Selby,  we  who  know  how  her 
heart  overflows  with  sentiments  of  gratitude,  on 
every  common  obligation,  and  even  onbutintentional 
ones,  can  easily  account  for  the  high  sense  she 
must  have  of  those  she  lies  under  for  such  a  deliver- 
ance by  the  brother,  and  of  such  kind  treatment 
from  the  sister,  both  absolute  strangers,  till  her  dis- 
tresses threw  her  into  their  protection. 

I  will  only  ask  my  dear  Miss  Byron  one  question, 
said  I  (forgetting  the  caution  given  me  below  by 
Miss  Grandison),  Whether  this  villain,  by  his  vio- 
lence—  [meant  marriage,  I  was  going  to  say] 
But  interrupting  me,  You  shall  not,  Mr.  Reeves, 
said  Miss  Grandison,  smiling,  ask  half  a  question, 
that  may  revive  disagreeable  remembrances.  Is  she 
not  alive,  and  here,  and  in  a  way  to  be  well  ?  Have 
patience  till  she  is  able  to  tell  you  all. 

My  cousin  was  going  to  speak:  My  dear,  said  the 
s  3 


198  THE    HISTORY    OF 

lady,  you  shall  not  answer  Mr.  Reeves's  question,  if 
it  be  a  question  that  will  induce  you  to  look  back- 
ward. At  present  you  must  look  only  forward. 
And  are  you  not  in  my  care,  and  in  Sir  Charles 
Grandison's  protection  ? 

I  have  done,  madam,  said  I,  bowing — The  desire 
of  taking  vengeance — 

Hush,  Mr.  Reeves! — Surely! — Smiling,  and  hold- 
ing her  finger  to  her  lip. 

It  is  a  patient's  duty,  said  my  cousin,  to  submit  to 
the  prescriptions  of  her  kind  physician  :  but  were  I 
ever  to  forgive  the  author  of  my  distresses,  it  must 
be  for  his  being  the  occasion  of  bringing  me  into 
the  knowledge  of  such  a  lady :  and  yet  to  lie  un- 
der the  weight  of  obligations  that  I  never  can  re- 
turn— Here  she  stopt. 

I  took  this  as  a  happy  indication  that  the  last  vio- 
lence was  not  offered:  if  it  had,  she  would  not  have 
mentioned  forgiving  the  author  of  her  distress. 

As  to  what  you  say  of  obligation,  Miss  Byron, 
returned  Miss  Grandison,  let  your  heart  answer  for 
mine,  had  you  and  I  changed  situations.  And,  if  on 
such  a  supposition,  you  can  think,  that  your  huma- 
nity would  have  been  so  extraordinary  a  matter, 
then  shall  you  be  at  liberty,  when  you  are  recover- 
ed, to  say  a  thousand  fine  things  :  till  when,  pray 
be  silent  on  this  subject. 

Then  turning  to  me,  See  how  much  afraid  your 
cousin  Byron  is  of  lying  under  obligation.  I  am 
afraid  she  has  a  proud  heart :  has  she  not  a  very 
proud  heart,  Mr.  Reeves  ? 

She  has  a  very  grateful  one,  madam,  replied  I. 

She  turned  to  my  cousin:  Will  you,  Miss  Byron, 
be  easy  under  the  obligations  you  talk  of,  or  will 
you  not? 

I  submit  to  your  superiority,  madam,  in  every 
thing,  replied  my  cousin :  bowing  her  head. 


SIR   CHARLES   GRAKDISOK.  199 

She  then  asked  me,  if  I  had  let  her  friends  in  the 
country  know  of  this  shocking  affair? 

I  had  suspected  Mr.  Greville,  I  said,  and  had 
written  in  confidence  to  her  uncle  Selby — 

0  my  poor  grandmamma — O  my  good  aunt  Sel- 
by, and  my  Lucy — I  hope — 

Miss  Grandison  interposed  humorously,  inter- 
rupting— I  will  have  nothing  said  that  begins  with 
0.  Indeed,  Miss  Byron,  Mr.  Reeves,  I  will  not 
trust  you  together — Cannot  you  have  patience — 

We  both  asked  her  pardon.  My  cousin  desired 
leave  to  rise — But  these  odious  clothes,  said  she — 

If  you  are  well  enough,  child,  replied  Miss  Gran- 
dison, you  shall  rise,  and  have  no  need  to  see  those 
odious  clothes,  as  you  call  them.  I  told  them  Mrs. 
lteeves  had  sent  her  some  of  her  clothes.  The 
portmanteau  was  ordered  to  be  brought  up. 

Then  Miss  Grandison,  sitting  down  on  the  bed 
by  my  cousin,  took  her  hand;  and,  feeling  her  pulse, 
Are  you  sure,  my  patient,  that  you  shall  not  suffer 
if  you  are  permitted  to  rise?  Will  you  be  calm, 
serene,  easy?  Will  you  banish  curiosity?  Will  you 
endeavour  to  avoid  recollection? 

1  will  do  my  endeavour,  answered  my  cousin. 
Miss  Grandison  then  rung,  and  a  maid-servant 

coming  up,  Jenny,  said  she,  pray  give  your  best 
assistance  to  my  lovely  patient.  But  be  sure  don't 
let  her  hurry  her  spirits.  I  will  lead  Mr.  Reeves 
into  my  dressing-room.  And  when  you  are  dress- 
ed, my  dear  we  will  either  return  to  you  here,  or 
expect  you  to  join  us  there,  at  your  pleasure. 

And  then  she  obligingly  conducted  me  into  her 
dressing-room,  and  excused  herself  for  refusing  to 
let  us  talk  of  interesting  subjects.  I  am  rejoiced, 
said  she  to  find  her  more  sedate  and  composed  than 
hitherto  she  has  been.  Her  head  has  been  greatly 
in  danger.    Her  talk,  for  some  hours,  when  she  did 


200  THE    HISTORY    OF 

talk,  was  so  wild  and  incoherent,  and  she  was  so 
full  of  terror,  on  every  one's  coming  in  her  sight, 
that  I  would  not  suffer  any  body  to  attend  her  but 
myself. 

I  left  her  not,  continued  Miss  Grandison,  till 
eleven :"  and  the  housekeeper,  and  my  maid,  sat  up 
in  her  room  all  the  rest  of  the  night. 

I  arose  before  my  usual  time  to  attend  her.  I 
slept  not  well  myself.  I  did  nothing  but  dream  of 
robbers,  rescues,  and  murders:  such  an  impression 
had  the  distress  of  this  young  lady  made  on  my 
mind. 

They  made  me  a  poor  report,  proceeded  she,  of 
the  night  she  had  passed.  And  as  I  told  you,  she 
fainted  away  this  morning,  a  little  before  you  came, 
on  her  endeavouring  to  give  me  some  account  of  her 
affecting  story. 

Let  me  tell  you,  Mr.  Reeves,  I  am  as  curious  as 
you  can  be,  to  know  the  whole  of  what  has  befallen 
her.  But  her  heart  is  tender  and  delicate:  her 
spirits  are  low:  and  we  must  not  pull  down  with  one 
hand,  what  we  build  up  with  the  other:  my  brother 
also  will  expect  a  good  account  of  my  charge. 

I  blessed  her  for  her  goodness.  And  finding  her 
desirous  of  knowing  all  that  I  could  tell  her,  of  our 
cousin's  character,  family,  and  lovers,  I  gave  her  a 
brief  history,  which  extremely  pleased  her.  Good 
God,  said  she,  what  a  happiness  is  it,  that  such  a 
lady,  in  such  a  distress,  should  meet  with  a  man  as, 
excellent,  and  as  much  admired  as  herself!  My 
-brother,  Mr.  Reeves,  can  never  marry  but  he  must 
break  half  a  score  hearts.  Forgive  me,  that  I  bring 
him  in,  whenever  any  good  person,  or  thing,  or 
action,  is  spoken  of.  Every-body,  I  believe,  who  is 
strongly  possessed  of  a  subject,  makes  every-thing 
seen,  heard,  or  read  of,  that  bears  the  least  resem- 
blance, turn  into  and  serve  to  illustrate  that  subject. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  201 

But  here  I  will  conclude  this  letter,  in  order  to 
send  it  hy  the  post.  Besides,  I  have  been  so  much 
fatigued  in  body  and  mind,  and  my  wife  has  also 
been  so  much  disturbed  in  her  mind,  that  I  must 
give  way  to  a  call  of  rest. 

I  will  pursue  the  subject,  the  now  agreeable  sub- 
ject, in  the  morning;  and  perhaps  shall  dispatch 
what  I  shall  farther  write,  as  you  must  be  impatient 
for  it,  by  an  especial  messenger. 

Sir  Rowland  was  here  twice  yesterday,  and  once 
to-day.  My  wife  caused  him  to  be  told,  that  Miss 
Byron,  by  a  sudden  call,  has  been  obliged  to  go  a 
little  way  out  of  town  for  two  or  three  days. 

He  proposes  to  set  out  for  Caermarthen  the  be- 
ginning of  next  week.  He  hoped  he  should  not  be 
denied  taking  his  corporal  leave  of  her. 

If  our  cousin  has  a  good  day  to-morrow,  and  no 
return  of  her  fits,  she  proposes  to  be  in  town  on 
Monday.  I  am  to  wait  on  her,  and  Sir  Charles  and 
his  sister,  at  breakfast  on  Monday  morning,  and  to 
attend  her  home ;  where  there  will  be  joy  indeed, 
on  her  arrival. 

Pray  receive  for  yourself,  and  make  for  me  to 
your  lady,  and  all  friends,  my  compliments  of  con- 
gratulation. 

I  have  not  had  either  leisure  or  inclination,  to 
enquire  after  the  villain,  who  has  given  all  this 
disturbance. 

Ever,  ever  yours, 
Saturday  night.  ARCHIBALD  REEVES. 


202  THE    HISTORY    OF 

LETTER  XXVII. 

FROM    MR.    REEVES    TO    GEORGE    SELBY,     ESQ. 
IN    CONTINUATION. 

Miss  Grandison  went  to  my  cousin,  to  see  how 
she  bore  rising,  supposing  her  near  dressed. 

She  soon  returned  to  me.  The  most  charming 
woman,  I  think  said  she,  I  ever  saw!  But  she  trem- 
bles so,  that  I  have  persuaded  her  to  lie  down.  I 
answered  for  you,  that  you  would  stay  dinner. 

I  must  beg  excuse,  madam.  I  have  an  excellent 
wife.  She  loves  Miss  Byron  as  her  life:  she  will 
be  impatient  to  know — 

Well,  well,  well,  say  no  more,  Mr.  Reeves :  my 
brother  has  redeemed  one  prisoner,  and  his  sister 
has  taken  another :  and  glad  you  may  be,  that  it 
is  no  worse. 

I  bowed,  and  looked  silly,  I  believe. 

You  may  look,  and  beg  and  pray,  Mr.  Reeves. 
When  you  know  me  better,  you  will  find  me  a  very 
whimsical  creature:  but  you  must  stay  to  see  Sir 
Charles.  Would  you  go  home  to  your  wife  with 
half  your  errand  ?  She  won't  thank  you  for  that, 
I  can  tell  you,  let  her  be  as  good  a  woman  as  the 
best.  But,  to  comfort  you,  we  give  not  into  every 
modern  fashion.  We  dine  earlier  than  most  people 
of  our  condition.  My  brother,  though  in  the  main, 
above  singularity,  will  nevertheless,  in  things  lie 
thinks  right,  be  governed  by  his  own  rules,  which 
are  the  laws  of  reason  and  convenience.  You  are 
on  horseback;  and,  were  I  you,  such  good  news 
as  I  should  have  to  carry,  considering  what  might 
have  happened,  would  give  me  wings,  and  make  me 
fly  through  the  air  with  it. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  203 

I  was  about  to  speak:  Come,  come,  I  will  have 
no  denial,  interrupted  she ;  I  shall  have  a  double 
pleasure,  if  you  are  present  when  Sir  Charles  comes, 
on  hearing  his  account  of  what  happened.  You  are 
a  good  man,  and  have  a  reasonable  quantity  of  won- 
der and  gratitude,  to  heighten  a  common  case  into 
the  marvellous.     So  sit  down,  and  be  quiet. 

I  was  equally  delighted  and  surprised  at  her  hu- 
morous raillery,  but  could  not  answer  a  single  word. 
If  it  be  midnight  before  you  will  suffer  me  to  depart, 
thought  I,  I  will  not  make  another  objection. 

While  this  amiable  lady  was  thus  entertaining 
me,  we  heard  the  trampling  of  horses — My  bro- 
ther! said  she,  I  hope! — He  comes!  pardon  the 
fondness  of  a  sister,  who  speaks  from  sensible  effects 
— A  father  and  a  brother  in  one  ! 

Sir  Charles  entered  the  room.  He  addressed 
himself  to  me  in  a  most  polite  manner.  Mr.  Reeves ! 
said  he,  as  I  understand  from  below — Then  turn- 
ing to  his  sister,  Excuse  me,  Charlotte.  I  heard 
this  worthy  gentleman  was  with  you :  and  I  was 
impatient  to  know  how  my  fair  guest — 

Miss  Byron  is  in  a  good  way,  I  hope,  interrupted 
she,  but  very  weak  and  low-spirited.  She  arose  and 
dressed ;  but  I  have  prevailed  on  her  to  lie  down 
again. 

Then  turning  to  me  with  a  noble  air,  he  both 
welcomed  and  congratulated  me. 

Sir  Charles  Grandison  is  indeed  a  fine  figure.  He 
is  in  the  bloom  of  youth.  I  don't  know  that  I  have- 
ever  seen  a  handsomer  or  genteeler  man.  Well 
might  his  sister  say,  that  if  he  married,  he  would 
break  half  a  score  hearts.  0  this  vile  Pollexfen! 
thought  1,  at  the  moment;  could  he  draw  upon, 
has  he  hurt,  such  a  man  as  this? 

After  pouring  out  my  acknowledgments,  in  the 
name  of  several  families,  as  well  as  in  my  own,  1 


20i  THE   HISTORY   OF 

could  not  but  enquire  into  the  nature  of  the  hurt 
he  had  received. 

A  very  trifle! — My  coat  only  was  hurt,  Mr. 
Reeves.  The  skin  of  my  left  shoulder  raked  a  little, 
putting  his  hand  upon  it. 

Thank  God,  said  I :  Thank  God,  said  Miss  Gran- 
dison — But  so  near  I — O  the  villain!  what  might  it 
have  been!  — 

Sir  Hargrave  pent  up  in  a  chariot,  had  great  dis- 
advantage. My  reflections  on  the  event  of  yester- 
day, yield  me  the  more  pleasure,  as  I  have,  on  en- 
quiry, understood  that  he  will  do  well  again,  if  he 
will  be  ruled.  I  would  not,  on  any  account,  have 
had  his  instant  death  to  answer  for.  But  no  more 
of  this  just  now.  Give  me  the  particulars  of  the 
young  lady's  state  of  health.  I  left  her  in  a  very 
bad  way. — You  had  advice  ? 

Miss  Grandison  gave  her  brother  an  account  of 
all  that  had  been  done ;  and  of  every-thing  that 
had  passed  since  he  went  away ;  as  also  of  the  cha- 
racter and  excellencies  of  the  lady  whom  he  had 
rescued. 

I  confirmed  what  she  said  in  my  cousin's  favour ; 
and  he  very  gratefully  thanked  his  sister  for  her 
care,  as  a  man  would  do  for  one  the  nearest  and 
dearest  to  him. 

We  then  besought  him  to  give  an  account  of  the 
glorious  action,  which  had  restored  to  all  that  knew 
her,  the  darling  of  our  hearts. 

I  will  relate  all  he  said,  in  the  first  person,  as 
nearly  in  his  own  words  as  possible,  and  will  try  to 
hit  the  coolness  with  which  he  told  the  agreeable 
story. 

'  You  know,  sister,  said  he,  the  call  I  had  to  town. 
It  was  happy,  that  I  yielded  to  your  importunity  to 
attend  you  hither. 

'  About  two  miles  en  this  side  Hounslow,  I  saw  a 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  205 

chariot-and-six  driving  at  a  great  rate.    I  also  had 
ordered  Jerry  to  drive  pretty  fast. 

'  The  coachman  seemed  inclined  to  dispute  the 
way  with  mine.  This  occasioned  a  few  moments 
stop  to  both.  I  ordered  my  coachman  to  break  the 
way.  I  don't  love  to  stand  upon  trifles.  My  horses 
were  fresh  :  I  had  not  come  far. 

'  The  curtain  of  the  chariot  we  met  was  pulled 
down.  I  saw  not  who  was  in  it;  but  on  turning 
out  of  the  way,  I  knew,  by  the  arms,  it  was  Sir  Har- 
grave  Pollexfen's. 

'  There  was  in  it  a  gentleman,  who  immediately 
pulled  up  the  canvas. 

'  I  saw,  however,  before  he  drew  it  up,  another 
person,  wrapt  up  in  a  man's  scarlet  cloak. 

'  For  God's  sake !  help,  help  !  cried  out  the  per- 
son :  For  God's  sake,  help  ! 

'  I  ordered  the  coachman  to  stop. 

'  Drive  on,  said  the  gentleman ;  cursing  his 
coachman  :  drive  on,  when  I  bid  you. 

'  Help  !  again  cried  she,  but  with  a  voice  as  if 
her  mouth  was  half  stopt. 

'  I  called  to  my  servant  on  horseback  to  stop  the 
postilion  of  the  other  chariot :  and  I  bid  Sir  Har- 
grave's  coachman  proceed  at  his  peril. 

'  Sir  Hargrave  called  out,  on  the  contrary  side 
of  the  chariot  (his  canvas  being  still  up  on  that  next 
me)  with  vehement  execrations,  to  drive  on. 

'  I  alighted,  and  went  round  to  the  other  side  of 
the  chariot. 

'  Again  the  lady  endeavoured  to  cry  out.  I  saw 
Sir  Hargrave  struggle  to  pull  over  her  mouth  a 
handkerchief,  which  was  tied  round  her  head.  He 
swore  outrageously. 

'  The  moment  she  beheld  me,  she  spread  out  both 
her  hands — For  God's  sake — 

T 


206  THE   HISTORY   OF 

'  Sir  Hargrave  Pollexfen,  said  I,  by  the  arms. — 
You  are  engaged,  I  doubt,  in  a  very  bad  affair. 

'  I  am  Sir  Hargrave  Pollexfen;  and  am  carrying 
a  fugitive  wife — Your  own  wife,  Sir  Hargrave  ? 

*  Yes,  by  G — ,  said  he  ;  and  she  was  going  to 
elope  from  meata  damned  masquerade — See!  draw- 
ing aside  the  cloak,  detected  in  the  very  dress  ! 

'  O  no  !  no  !  no  !  said  the  lady — 

'  Proceed,  coachman,  said  he,  and  cursed  and 
swore. 

'  Let  me  ask  the  lady  a  question,  Sir  Hargrave. 

'  You  are  impertinent,  Sir.  Who  the  devil  are 
you  ? 

'  Are  you,  madam,  Lady  Pollexfen  ?  said  I. 

'  O  no  !  no  !  no  ! — was  all  she  could  say — 

'  Two  of  my  servants  came  about  me  ;  a  third 
held  the  head  of  the  horse  on  which  the  postilion 
sat.  Three  of  Sir  Hargrave's  approached  on  their 
horses  ;  but  seemed  as  if  afraid  to  come  too  near, 
and  parleyed  together. 

'  Have  an  eye  to  those  fellows,  said  I.  Some 
base  work  is  on  foot.  You'll  presently  be  aided  by 
passengers.  Sirrah,  said  I  to  the  coachman  (for  he 
lashed  the  horses  on)  proceed  at  your  peril. 

'  Sir  Hargrave  then,  with  violent  curses  and 
threatenings,  ordered  him  to  drive  over  every  one 
that  opposed  him. 

*  Coachman,  proceed  at  your  peril,  said  I.  Ma- 
dam, will  you — 

'  O  Sir,  Sir,  Sir,  relieve,  help  me  for  God's  sake  ! 
I  am  in  a  villain's  hands  !  Tricked,  vilely  tricked 
into  a  villain's  hands!     Help,  help,  for  God's  sake ! 

'  Do  you,  said  1,  to  Frederick,  cut  the  traces,  if 
you  cannot  otherwise  stop  this  chariot.  Bid  Jerry 
cut  the  reins,  and  then  seize  as  many  of  those  fel- 
lows as  you  can.     Leave  Sir  Hargrave  to  me. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRAN'DISON".  207 

;  The  lady  continued  screaming  and  crying  out 
lor  help. 

'  Sir  Hargrave  drew  his  sword,  which  he  had  held 
between  his  knees  in  the  scabbard  ;  and  then  called 
upon  his  servants  to  fire  at  all  that  opposed  his 
progress. 

'  My  servants,  Sir  Hargrave,  have  fire-arms  as  well 
as  yours.  They  will  not  dispute  my  orders.  Don't 
provoke  me  to  give  the  word. 

'  Then  addressing  the  lady,  Will  you,  madam, 
put  yourself  into  my  protection  ? 

'  O  yes,  yes,  yes,  with  my  whole  heart — Dear 
good  8ir,  protect  me  ! 

'  I  opened  the  chariot  door.  Sir  Hargrave  made 
a  pass  at  me.  Take  that,  and  be  damn'd  to  you,  for 
your  insolence,  scoundrel !  said  he. 

'  I  was  aware  of  his  thrust,  and  put  it  by  ;  but  his 
sword  a  little  raked  my  shoulder. 

'  My  sword  was  in  my  hand  ;  but  undrawn. 

'  The  chariot-door  remaining  open  (I  was  not  so 
ceremonious,  as  to  let  down  the  foot-step  to  take  the 
gentleman  out)  I  seized  him  by  the  collar  before  he 
could  recover  himself  from  the  pass  he  had  made  at 
me;  and  with  a  jerk,  and  a  kind  of  twist,  laid  him 
under  the  hind-wheel  of  his  chariot. 

'  I  wrenched  his  sword  from  him,  and  snapped  it, 
and  flung  the  two  pieces  over  my  head. 

'  His  coachman  cried  out  for  his  master.  Mine 
threatened  his  if  he  stirred.  The  postilion  was  a 
boy.  My  servant  had  made  him  dismount,  before 
he  joined  the  other  two,  whom  I  had  ordered  aloud 
to  endeavour  to  seize  (but  my  view  was  only  to  ter- 
rify) wretches  who,  knowing  the  badness  of  their 
cause,  were  before  terrified. 

'  Sir  *  largrave's  mouth  and  face  were  very  bloody. 
I  believe  I  might  hurt  him  with  the  pommel  of  my 
sword. 

t2 


208  THE    HISTORY   OF 

'  One  of  his  legs,  in  his  sprawling,  had  got  be- 
tween the  spokes  of  his  chariot-wheel.  I  thought 
that  was  a  fortunate  circumstance  for  preventing 
.further  mischief;  and  charged  his  coachman  not  to 
stir  with  the  chariot,  for  his  master's  sake. 

'  He  cried  out,  cursed,  and  swore.  I  believe  he 
was  bruised  with  the  fall.  The  jerk  was  violent. 
So  little  able  to  support  an  offence,  Sir  Hargrave, 
upon  his  own  principles,  should  not  have  been  so 
ready  to  give  it. 

'  1  had  not  drawn  my  sword:  I  hope  I  never  shall 
be  provoked  to  do  it  in  a  private  quarrel.  I  should 
not,  however,  have  scrupled  to  draw  it  on  such  an 
occasion  as  this,  had  there  been  an  absolute  neces- 
sity for  it. 

'  The  lady,  though  greatly  terrified,  had  disen- 
gaged herself  from  the  man's  cloak.  I  had  not 
leisure  to  consider  her  dress  ;  but  I  was  struck  with 
her  figure,  and  more  with  her  terror. 

*  I  offered  my  hand.  I  thought  not  now  of  the 
foot-step,  any  more  than  I  did  before  :  she  not  of 
any-thing,  as  it  seemed,  but  her  deliverance. 

'  Have  you  not  read,  Mr.  Reeves  (Pliny,  I  think, 
gives  the  relation),  of  a  frighted  bird,  that,  pursued 
by  a  hawk,  flew  for  protection  into  the  bosom  of  a 
man  passing  by  ? 

'  In  like  manner,  your  lovely  cousin,  the  moment 
I  returned  to  the  chariot-door,  instead  of  accepting 
of  my  offered  hand,  threw  herself  into  my  arms. — 
O  save  me!  save  me! — She  was  ready  to  faint.  She 
could  not,  I  believe,  have  stood. 

'  I  carried  her  round  Sir  Hargrave's  horses,  and 
seated  her  in  my  chariot. — Be  assured,  madam,  said 
I,  that  you  are  in  honourable  hands.  I  will  convey 
you  to  my  sister,  who  is  a  young  lady  of  honour 
and  virtue. 

'  She  looked  out  at  one  window,  then  at  the  other, 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  209 

in  visible  terror,  as  if  fearing  still  Sir  Hargrave. 
Fear  nothing,  said  I :  I  will  attend  you  in  a  moment. 
I  shut  the  chariot  door. 

'  I  then  went  backward  a  few  paces  (keeping 
however,  the  lady  in  my  eye)  to  see  what  had 
become  of  my  servants. 

'  It  seems,  that  at  their  first  coming  up  pretty 
near  with  Sir  Hargrave's  horsemen,  they  presented 
their  pistols. 

'  What  shall  we  do,  Wilkins,  or  Wilson,  or  some 
such  name,  said  one  of  Sir  Hargrave's  men  to  an- 
other, all  three  of  them  on  their  defence?  Fly  for 
it,  answered  the  fellow.  We  may  swing  for  this. 
I  see  our  master  down.     There  may  be  murder. 

'  Their  consciences  put  them  to  flight. 

'  My  servants  pursued  them  a  little  way;  but  were 
returning  to  support  their  master,  just  as  1  had  put 
the  lady  into  my  chariot. 

'  I  saw  Sir  Hargrave  at  a  distance,  on  his  legs, 
supported  by  his  coachman.  He  limped ;  leaned 
his  whole  weight  upon  his  servant :  and  seemed  to 
be  in  agonies. 

'  I  bid  one  of  my  servants  tell  him  who  I  was. 

'  He  cursed  me,  and  threatened  vengeance.  lie 
cursed  my  servant  ;  and  still  more  outrageously  his 
own  scoundrels,  as  he  called  them. 

•'  I  then  stept  back  to  my  chariot. 

'  Miss  Byron  had,  through  terror,  sunk  down  at 
the  bottom  of*  it ;  where  she  lay  panting,  and  could 
only  say,  on  my  approach,  Save  me  !  save  me  ! 

'  I  re-assured  her.  I  lifted  her  on  the  seat,  and 
brought  her  to  my  sister  ;  and  what  followed,  I  sup- 
pose, Charlotte,  bowing  to  her,  you  have  told  Mr. 
Reeves.' 

We  were  both  about  to  break  out  in  grateful  ap- 
plauses ;  but  Sir  Charles,  as  if  designing  to  hinder 
us,  proceeded : 

t3 


210  THE    HISTORY   OF 

'  You  see,  Mr.  Reeves,  what  an  easy  conquest  this 
was.  You  see  what  a  small  degree  of  merit  falls  to 
my  share.  The  violator's  conscience  was  against 
him.  The  consciences  of  his  fellows  were  on  my 
side.  My  own  servants  are  honest  worthy  men. 
They  love  their  master.  In  a  good  cause  I  would  set 
any  three  of  them  against  six  who  were  engaged 
in  a  bad  one.  Vice  is  the  greatest  coward  in  the 
world,  when  it  knows  it  will  be  resolutely  opposed. 
And  what  have  good  men,  engaged  in  a  right  cause, 
to  fear  ?' 

What  an  admirable  man  is  Sir  Charles  Grandison  J 
— Thus  thinking  !  thus  acting  ! 

I  explained  to  Sir  Charles  who  this  Wilson  was, 
whom  the  others  consulted,  and  were  directed  by  ; 
and  what  an  implement  in  this  black  transaction. 

To  what  other  man's  protection  in  the  world,  Mr. 
Selby,  could  our  Miss  Byron  have  been  obliged,  and 
so  little  mischief  followed? 

Sir  Hargrave,  it  seems,  returned  back  to  town. 
What  a  recreant  figure,  my  dear  Mr.  Selby,  must 
he  make,  even  to  himself! — A  villain! 

Sir  Charles  says,  that  the  turnpike-men  at  Small- 
bury  Green  told  his  servants,  on  their  attending  him 
to  town  after  the  happy  rescue,  a  formidable  story 
of  a  robbery  committed  a  little  beyond  Hounslow 
by  half  a  dozen  villains  on  horseback,  upon  a  gen- 
tleman in  a  chariot-and-six  ;  which  had  passed 
through  that  turnpike  but  half  an  hour  before  he  was 
attacked  ;  and  that  the  gentleman,  about  an  hour 
and  half  before  Sir  Charles  went  through,  returned 
o  town,  wounded,  for  advice ;  and  they  heard  him 
groan  as  he  passed  through  the  turnpike. 

I  should  add  one  circumstance,  said  Sir  Charles  : 
Do  you  know,  Charlotte,  that  you  have  a  rake  for 
your  brother  ? — A  man  on  horseback,  it  seems,  came 
to  the  turnpike  gate,  whilst  the  turnpike-men  were 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  211 

telling  my  servants  this  story.  Nothing  in  the  world, 
said  he,  but  two  young  rakes  in  their  chariots-and- 
six,  one  robbing  the  other  of  a  lady.  I,  and  two 
other  passengers,  added  the  man,  stood  aloof  to  see 
the  issue  of  the  affair.  We  expected  mischief;  and 
some  there  was.  One  of  the  by-standers  was  the 
better  for  the  fray ;  for  he  took  up  a  silver-hilted 
sword,  broken  in  two  pieces,  and  rode  off  with  it. 

Sir  Hargrave,  said  Sir  Charles,  smiling,  might 
well  give  out  that  he  was  robbed ;  to  lose  such  a 
prize  as  Miss  Byron,  and  his  sword  besides. 

I  asked  Sir  Charles,  if  it  were  not  adviseable  to 
take  measures  with  the  villain  ? 

He  thought  it  best,  lie  said,  to  take  as  little  notice 
of  the  affair  as  possible,  unless  the  aggressor  stirred 
in  it.  Masquerades,  added  he,  are  not  creditable 
places  for  young  ladies  to  be  known  to  be  insulted 
iit  them.  They  are  diversions  that  fall  not  in  with 
the  genius  of  the  English  commonalty.  Scandal 
will  have  something  to  say  from  that  circumstance, 
however  causeless.  But  Miss  Byron's  story,  told 
by  herself,  will  enable  you  to  resolve  upon  your  fu- 
ture measures. 

So,  Sir  Charles  seems  not  to  be  a  friend  to  mas- 
querades. 

I  think,  were  I  to  live  a  hundred  years,  I  never 
would  go  to  another.  Had  it  not  been  for  Lady 
Betty — She  has,  indeed,  too  gay  a  turn  for  a  woman 
of  forty,  and  a  mother  of  children.  Miss  Byron,  I  dare 
say,  will  be  afraid  of  giving  the  lead  to  her  for  the 
future.  But,  excepting  my  wife  and  self,  nobody  in 
town  has  suffered  more  than  Lady  Betty  on  this  occa- 
sion. Indeed  she  is,  I  must  say,  an  obliging,  well- 
meaning  woman  :  and  she  also  declares  (so  much  has 
she  been  affected  with  M  iss  Byron's  danger,  of  which 
she  takes  herself  to  be  the  innocent  cause)  that  she 
will  never  again  go  to  a  masquerade. 


212  THE    HISTORY    OF 

I  long  to  have  Miss  Byron's  account  of  this  horrid 
affair. — God  grant,  that  it  may  not  be  such  a  one, 
as  will  lay  us  under  a  necessity — But  as  our  cousin 
has  a  great  notion  of  female  delicacy — I  know  not 
what  1  would  say — We  must  have  patience  a  little 
while  longer. 

Miss  Grandison's  eyes  shone  with  pleasure  all  the 
time  her  brother  was  giving  his  relation. 

I  can  only  say,  brother,  said  she,  when  he  had 
done,  that  you  have  rescued  an  angel  of  a  woman ; 
and  you  have  made  me  as  happy  by  it,  as  yourself. 

I  have  a  generous  sister,  Mr.  Reeves,  said  Sir 
Charles. 

Till  I  knew  my  brother,  Mr.  Reeves,  as  I  now 
know  him,  I  was  an  inconsiderate,  unreflecting  girl. 
Good  and  evil,  which  immediately  affected  not  my- 
self, were  almost  alike  indifferent  to  me.  But  he  has 
awakened  in  me  a  capacity  to  enjoy  the  true  plea- 
sure that  arises  from  a  benevolent  action. 

Depreciate  not,  my  Charlotte,  your  own  worth. 
Absence,  Mr.  Reeves,  endears.  I  have  been  long 
abroad:  not  much  above  a  year  returned!  But 
when  you  know  us  better,  you  will  find  I  have  a 
partial  sister. 

Mr.  Reeves  will  not  then  think  me  so.  But  I 
will  go  and  see  how  my  fair  patient  does. 

She  went  accordingly  to  my  cousin. 

O  Sir  Charles,  said  1,  what  an  admirable  woman 
is  Miss  Grandison ! 

My  sister  Charlotte,  Mr.  Reeves,  is,  indeed,  an 
excellent  woman.  I  think  myself  happy  in  her  : 
but  I  tell  her  sometimes,  that  I  have  a  still  more 
excellent  sister  :  and  it  is  no  small  instance  of  Char- 
lotte's greatness  of  mind,  that  she  herself  will  allow 
me  to  say  so. 

Just  then  came  in  the  ladies  :  the  two  charming 
creatures  entered  together,  Miss  Grandison  support- 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISOX.  213 

mg  my  trembling  cousin  :  but  she  had  first  acquaint- 
ed her,  that  she  would  find  Sir  Charles  in  her  dress- 
ing-room. 

She  looked  indeed  lovely,  though  wan,  at  her  first 
entrance;  but  a  fine  glow  overspread  her  cheeks,  at 
the  sight  of  her  deliverer. 

Sir  Charles  approached  her,  with  an  air  of  calm- 
ness and  serenity,  for  fear  of  giving  her  emotion. 
She  cast  her  eyes  upon  him,  with  a  look  of  the  most 
respectful  gratitude. 

I  will  not  oppress  my  fair  guest  with  many  words: 
but  permit  me  to  congratulate  you,  as  I  hope  I  may, 
on  your  recovered  spirits — Allow  me,  madam — 

And  he  took  her  almost-motionless  hand,  and 
conducted  her  to  an  easy  chair  that  had  been  set 
for  her.  She  sat  down,  and  would  have  said  some 
thing  ;  but  only  bowed  to  Sir  Charles,  to  Miss  Gran- 
dison,  and  me  ;  and  reclined  her  head  against  the 
cheek  of  the  chair. 

Miss  Grandison  held  her  salts  to  her. 
She  took  them  into  her  own  hands,  and  smelling 
to  them,  raised  her  head  a  little  :  Forgive  me,  ma- 
dam. Pardon  me,  Sir!— O  my  cousin,  to  me— 
How  can  I — So  oppressed  with  obligations  ! — Such 
goodness ! — No  words ! — My  gratitude  ! — My  full 
heart ! — 

And  then  she  again  reclined  her  head,  as  giving 
up  hopelessly  the  effort  she  made  to  express  her 
gratitude. 

You  must  not,  madam,  said  Sir  Charles,  sitting 
down  by  her,  over-rate  a  common  benefit. — Dear 
Miss  Byron  (permit  me  to  address  myself  to  you, 
as  of  long  acquaintance)  by  what  Mr.  Reeves  has 
told  my  sister,  and  both  have  told  me,  I  mast  think 
yesterday  one  of  the  happiest  days  of  my  life.  I  am 
Korry  that  our  acquaintance  has  begun  so  much  at 
your  cost :   but  you  must  let  us  turn  this  evil  ap- 


214-  THE    HISTORY    OF 

pearance  into  real  good.  I  have  two  sisters :  the 
world  produces  not  more  worthy  women.  Let  me 
henceforth  boast  that  I  have  three  :  and  shall  I  not 
then  have  reason  to  rejoice  in  the  event  that  has 
made  so  lovely  an  addition  to  my  family  ? 

Then  taking  her  passive  hand  with  the  tenderness 
of  a  truly-affectionate  brother,  consoling  a  sister  in 
calamity,  and  taking  his  sister's5  and  joining  both  ; 
Shall  I  not,  madam,  present  my  Charlotte  to  a  sis- 
ter ?  And  will  you  not  permit  me  to  claim  as  a  bro- 
ther under  that  relation  ?  Miss  Byron's  christian 
name,  Mr.  Reeves? 
Harriet,  Sir. 

My  sister  Harriet,  receive  and  acknowledge  your 
Charlotte.     My  Charlotte — 

Miss  Grandison  arose,  and  saluted  my  cousin  ; 
who  looked  at  Sir  Charles  with  reverence,  as  well  as 
gratitude  ;  at  Miss  Grandison  with  delight ;  and  at 
me  with  eyes  lifted  up :  and,  after  a  little  struggle 
for  speech  ;  How  shall  I  bear  this  goodness  !  said 
she — This,  indeed,  is  bringing  good  out  of  evil ! 
Did  I  not  say,  cousin,  that  I  was  fallen  into  the 
company  of  angels  ? 

I  was  afraid  she  would  have  fainted. 
We  must  endeavour,  Mr.  Reeves,  said  Sir  Charles 
to  me,  to  lessen  the  sense  our  Miss  Byron  has  of 
her  past  danger,  in  order  to  bring  down  to  reason- 
able limits,  the  notion  she  has  of  her  obligation  for 
a  common  relief. 

Miss  Grandison  ordered  a  few  drops  on  sugar — 
You  must  be  orderly,  my  sister  Harriet,  said  she. 
Am  I  not  your  elder  sister  ?  My  elder  sister  makes 
me  do  what  she  pleases. 

Oh  !  madam  !  said  my  cousin — 
Call  me  not  madam  ;  call  me  your  Charlotte.  My 
brother  has  given  mc  and  himself  a  sister — Will  you 
not  own  me  ? 


SIR    CHARLES    GRAXDISON.  215 

How  can  a  heart  bowed  down  by  obligation,  and 
goodness  never  to  be  returned,  rise  to  that  lovely  fa- 
miliarity, by  which  the  obligers  so  generously  dis- 
tinguish themselves  ?  My  lips  and  my  heart,  I  will 
be  so  bold  as  to  say,  ever  went  together :  but  how 
— And  yet  so  sweetly  invited.  My — my — my  Char- 
lotte (withdrawing  her  hand  from  Sir  Charles,  and 
clasping  both  her  arms  round  Miss  Grandison's 
neck,  the  two  worthiest  bosoms  of  the  sex  joining 
as  one)  take  your  Harriet,  person  and  mind- 
May  I  be  found  worthy,  on  proof,  of  all  this  good- 
ness ! 

*     * 

Lady  Betty  has  just  left  us.  I  read  to  her  what 
I  have  written  since  my  visit  to  Colnebrook.  She 
shall  not,  she  says,  recover  her  eyes  for  a  week  to 
come. 

The  women,  Mr.  Selby,  are  ever  looking  forward 
on  certain  occasions.  Lady  Betty  and  my  wife  ex- 
tended their  wishes  so  far,  as  that  they  might  be 
able  to  call  Miss  Grandison  and  our  Miss  Byron 
sisters ;  but  by  a  claim  that  should  exclude  Sir 
Charles  as  a  brother  to  one  of  them. 

Should  Sir  Charles — But  no  more  on  this  subject 
— Yet  one  word  more :  When  the  ladies  had  men- 
tioned it,  1  could  not  help  thinking  that  this  grace- 
ful and  truly  fine  gentleman  seems  to  be  the  only 
man,  whom  our  cousin  has  yet  seen,  that  would 
meet  with  no  great  difficulty  from  her  on  such 
an  application. 

Bul  Sir  Charles  has  a  great  estate,  and  still  greater 
expectations  from  my  Lord  W.  His  sister  says, 
he  would  break  half  a  score  hearts,  were  he  to  mar- 
ry— So  for  that  matter  would  our  Miss  Byron.  But 
once  more — Not  another  word,  however,  on  this 
subject. 

I  staid    to    dine  with  this  amiable  brother  and 


216  THE   HISTORY  OF 

sister.  My  cousin  exerted  herself  to  go  down, 
and  sat  at  table  for  one  half-hour :  but  changing 
countenance,  once  or  twice,  as  she  sat,  Miss  Gran- 
dison  would  attend  her  up,  and  make  her  lie  down. 
I  took  leave  of  her,  at  her  quitting  the  table. 

On  Monday  I  hope  to  see  her  once  more  among 
us. 

If  our  dear  Miss  Byron  cannot  write,  you  will 
perhaps  have  one  letter  more,  my  dear  Mr.  Selby, 
from 

Your  ever  affectionate, 

ARCHIBALD  REEVES. 

My  servant  is  this  moment  returned  with  your  let- 
ter. Indeed,  my  dear  Mr.  Selby,  there  are 
two  or  three  passages  in  it,  that  would  have  cut 
me  to  the  heart,*  had  not  the  dear  creature 
been  so  happily  restored  to  our  hopes. 


LETTER  XXVIII. 

MR.    REEVES.      IN   CONTINUATION. 

Monday  night,  February  20. 
I  will  write  one  more  letter,  my  dear  Mr.  Selby, 
and  then  I  will  give  up  my  pen  to  our  beloved  cou- 
sin. 

I  got  to  Colnebrook  by  nine  this  morning.  I  had 
the  pleasure  to  find  our  Miss  Byron  recovered  be- 
yond my  hopes.  She  had  a  very  good  night  on  Sa- 
turday ;  and  all  Sunday,  she  said,  was  a  cordial  day 
to  her  from  morning  till  night ;  and  her  night  was 
quiet  and  happy. 

Miss  Grandison  staid  at  home  yesterday  to  keep 
my  cousin  company.     Sir  Charles  passed  the  great- 

*  See  Letter  xxiv. 


SIR    CHARLES   GRANDISON'.  217 

est  part  oi'  the  day  in  the  library.  The  two  ladies 
were  hardly  ever  separated.  My  cousin  expresses 
herself  in  raptures,  whenever  she  speaks  of  this 
bother  and  sister.  Miss  Grandison,  she  says  (and 
indeed  every  one  must  see  it)  is  one  of  the  frankest 
and  most  communicative  of  women.  Sir  Charles 
appears  to  be  one  of  the  most  unreserved  of  men, 
as  well  as  one  of  the  most  polite.  He  makes  not 
his  guests  uneasy  with  his  civilities :  but  you  see 
freedom  and  ease  in  his  whole  deportment :  and  the 
stranger  cannot  doubt  but  Sir  Charles  will  be  equally 
pleased  with  freedom  and  ease,  in  return.  I  had  an 
encouraging  proof  of  the  justness  of  this  observation 
this  morning  from  him,  as  we  sat  at  breakfast.  I  had 
expressed  myself,  occasionally,  in  such  a  manner  as 
shewed  more  respect  than  freedom:  My  dear  Mr. 
Reeves,  said  he,  kindred  minds  will  be  intimate  at 
first  sight.  Receive  me  early  into  the  list  of  your 
friends:  I  have  already  numbered  you  among  mine. 
I  should  think  amiss  of  myself,  if  so  good  a  man  as 
I  am  assured  Mr.  Reeves  is,  should,  by  his  distance, 
shew  a  diffidence  of  me,  that  would  not  permit  his 
mind  to  mingle  with  mine. 

Miss  Grandison,  my  cousin  says,  put  her  on  re- 
lating to  her,  her  whole  history;  and  the  histories 
of  the  several  persons  and  families  to  whom  she  is 
related. 

Miss  liyron  concluding,  as  well  as  I,  that  Sir 
Charles  would  rather  take  his  place  in  the  coach, 
than  go  on  horseback  to  town  :  and  being  so  happily 
recovered,  as  not  to  give  us  apprehension  about  her 
bearing  tolerably  the  little  journey:  I  kept  my  horse 
in  our  return,  and  Sir  Charles  went  in  the  coach. 
This  motion  coming  from  Miss  Byron,  I  raillied  her 
upon  it  when  1  got  her  home :  but  she  won't  forgive 
me,  if  she  knows  that  I  told  you  whose  the  motion 

vol,  ix.  u 


218  THE   HISTORY   OF 

was.  And  yet  the  dear  creature's  eyes  sparkled 
with  pleasure  when  she  had  carried  her  point. 

I  was  at  home  near  half  an  hour  before  the  coach 
arrived ;  and  was  a  welcome  guest. 

My  dear  Mrs.  Reeves  told  me,  she  had  expected 
our  arrival  before  dinner,  and  hoped  Sir  Charles  and 
his  sister  would  dine  with  us.  I  hoped  so  too,  I  told 
her. 

I  found  there  Lady  Betty  and  Miss  Clements,  a 
favourite  of  us  all,  both  impatiently  waiting  to  see 
my  cousin. 

Don't  be  jealous,  Mr.  Reeves,  'said  my  wife,  if 
after  what  I  have  heard  of  Sir  Charles  Grandison, 
and  what  he  has  done  for  us,  I  run  to  him  with 
open  arms. 

I  give  you  leave,  my  dear,  to  love  him,  replied  I ; 
and  to  express  your  love  in  what  manner  you  please. 

I  have  no  doubt,  said  Lady  Betty,  that  1  shall 
break  my  heart,  if  Sir  Charles  takes  not  very  par- 
ticular notice  of  me. 

He  shall  have  my  prayers,  as  well  as  my  praises, 
said  Miss  Clements. 

She  is  acquainted  with  the  whole  shocking  affair. 

When  the  coach  stopt,  and  the  bell  rung,  the  ser- 
vants contended  who  should  first  run  to  the  door.  I 
welcomed  them  at  the  coach.  Sir  Charles  handed 
out  Miss  Byron,  I  Miss  Grandison :  Sally,  said  my 
cousin,  to  her  raptured  maid,  take  care  of  Mrs. 
Jenny. 

Sir  Charles  was  received,  by  Mrs.  Reeves,  as  I 
expected.  She  was  almost  speechless  with  joy.  He 
saluted  her:  but  I  think,  as  I  tell  her,  the  first 
motion  was  hers.  He  was  then  obliged  to  go  round  ; 
and  my  cousin,  I  do  assure  you,  looked  as  if  she 
would  not  wish  to  have  been  neglected. 

As  soon  as  the  ladies  could  speak,  they  poured  out 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  219 

their  blessings  and  thanks  to  him,  and  to  Miss  Gran- 
dison ;  whom,  with  a  most  engaging  air,  he  present- 
ed to  each  lady;  and  she,  as  engagingly,  saluted  her 
sister  Harriet  by  that  tender  relation,  and  con- 
gratulated them,  and  Miss  Byron,  and  herself  upon 
it ;  kindly  bespeaking  a  family  relation  for  herself 
through  her  dear  Miss  Byron,  were  her  words. 

When  we  were  seated,  my  wife  and  Lady  Betty 
wanted  to  enter  into  the  particulars  of  the  happy 
deliverance,  in  praise  of  the  deliverer ;  but  Sir  Charles 
interrupting  them,  My  dear  Mrs.  Reeves,  said  he, 
you  cannot  be  too  careful  of  this  jewel.  Every  thing 
may  be  trusted  to  her  own  discretion:  but  how  can 
we  well  blame  the  man  who  would  turn  thief  for  so 
rich  a  treasure?  I  do  assure  you,  my  sister  Harriet 
(Do  you  know,  Mrs.  Reeves,  that  I  have  found  my 
third  sister?  Was  she  not  stolen  from  us  in  her 
cradle?)  that  if  Sir  Hargrave  will  repent,  I  will 
forgive  him  for  the  sake  of  the  temptation. 

Mrs.  Reeves  was  pleased  with  this  address,  and 
has  talked  of  it  since. 

I  never  can  forgive  him,  Sir,  said  Miss  Byron, 
were  it  but — 

That  he  has  laid  you  under  such  an  obligation, 
said  Miss  Grandison,  patting  her  hand  with  her 
fan,  as  she  sat  over  against  her:  But  hush,  child! 
You  said  that  before! — And  then  turning  to  Mrs. 
Reeves,  Has  not  our  new-found  sister  a  very  proud 
heart,  Mrs.  Reeves? 

And,  dearest  Miss  Grandison,  replied  my  smiling, 
delighted  cousin,  did  you  not  ask  that  question  be- 
fore? 

I  did,  child,  I  did,  but  not  of  Mrs.  Reeves — A 
compromise  however — Do  you  talk  no  more  of  obli- 
gation, and  I'll  talk  no  more  of  pride. 

Charlotte  justly  chides  herHarriet,  saidSirCharles. 
What  must  the  man  have  been  that  had  declined  his 
u  2 


220  THE   HISTORY   OF 

aid  in  a  distress  so  alarming  ?  Not  one  word  more 
therefore  upon  this  subject. 

We  were  all  disappointed,  that  this  amiable  bro- 
ther and  sister  excused  themselves  from  dining  with 
us.  All  I  mean  of  our  own  family :  for  Lady  Betty 
and  Miss  Clements,  not  being  able  to  stay,  were 
glad  they  did  not. 

They  took  leave,  amidst  a  thousand  grateful  bless- 
ings and  acknowledgments;  Miss  Grandison  promis- 
ing to  see  her  sister  Harriet  very  soon  again ;  and 
kindly  renewing  her  wishes  of  intimacy. 

When  they  went  away,  There  goes  your  heart,  • 
Miss  Byron,  said  Mrs.  Reeves. 

True,  answered  Miss  Byron,  if  my  heart  have  no 
place  in  it  for  any-thing  but  gratitude,  as  I  believe 
it  has  not. 

Miss  Grandison,  added  she,  is  the  most  agree- 
able of  women — 

And  Sir  Charles,  rejoined  Mrs.  Reeves,  archly, 
is  the  most  rfw-agreeable  of  men. 

Forbear  cousin,  replied  Miss  Byron,  and  blushed. 

Well,  well,  said  Lady  Betty,  you  need  not,  my 
dear,  be  ashamed,  if  it  be  so. 

Indeed  you  need  not,  joined  in  Miss  Clements :  I 
never  saw  a  finer  man  in  my  life.  Such  a  lover,  if 
one  might  have  him — 

If,  if—  replied  Miss  Byron — But  till  if  is  out  of 
the  question,  should  there  not  be  such  a  thing  as 
discretion,  Miss  Clements  ? 

No  doubt  of  it,  returned  that  young  lady;  and  if 
it  be  to  be  shewn  by  any  woman  on  earth,  where 
there  is  such  a  man  as  this  in  the  question,  and  in 
such  circumstances,  it  must  be  by  Miss  Byron. 

Miss  Byron  was  not  so  thoroughly  recovered 
but  that  her  spirits  bjegan  to  flag.  We  made  her 
retire,  and,  at  her  request,  excused  her  coming 
down  to  dinner. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  221 

I  told  you  I  had  accepted  the  offer  made  by  Lady 
Betty,  when  we  were  in  dreadful  uncertainty,  that 
her  steward  should  make  further  enquiries  about  the 
people  at  Paddington.  Nothing  worth  mentioning 
has  occurred  from  those  enquiries;  except  confirm- 
ing, that  the  widow  and  her  daughters  are  not  peo- 
ple of  bad  characters.  In  all  likelihood  they  thought 
they  should  entitle  themselves  to  the  thanks  of  all 
Miss  Byron's  friends,  when  the  marriage  was  com- 
pleted with  a  man  of  Sir  Hargrave's  fortune. 

The  messenger  that  I  sent  to  enquire  after  that 
Bagenhall's  character,  has  informed  us,  that  it  is  a 
very  profligate  one;  and  that  he  is  an  intimate  of  Sir 
Margrave  :  but  no  more  is  necessary  now,  God  be 
praised,  to  be  said  of  him. 

The  vile  wretch  himself,  I  hear,  keeps  his  room  ; 
and  it  is  whispered,  that  he  is  more  than  half-crazed; 
insomuch  that  his  very  attendants  are  afraid  to  go 
near  him.  We  know  not  the  nature  of  his  hurt ;  but 
hurt  he  is,  though  in  a  fair  way  of  recovery.  He 
threatens,  it  seems,  destruction  to  Sir  Charles,  the 
moment  he  is  able  to  go  abroad.  God  preserve  one 
of  the  worthiest  and  best  of  men  ! 

Sir  Hargrave  has  turned  off  all  the  servants,  we 
are  told,  that  attended  him  on  his  shocking,  but 
happily-disappointed,  enterprize. 

Miss  Byron  intends  to  write  to  her  Lucy  by  to- 
morrow's post  (if  she  continue  mending)  an  ample 
account  of  all  that  she  suffered  from  the  date  of  her 
last  letter,  to  the  hour  of  her  happy  deliverance.  1 
am  to  give  her  minutes,  to  the  best  of  my  recollec- 
tion, of  what  I  have  written  to  you:  that  so  the  ac- 
count may  be  as  complete  as  possible,  and  that  she 
may  write  no  more  than  is  consistent  with  the  series, 
which  she  is  required  to  preserve.  She  begins  this 
evening,  she  bids  me  tell  you,  that  you  may  be  as 
little  a  while  in  suspense  about  her  as  possible  :  but 
uS 


222  THE   HISTORY    OF 

if  she  cannot  finish  by  to-morrow  night,  she  will  have 
an  opportunity  to  dispatch  her  letter  on  Wednesday 
by  a  servant  of  Mr.  Greville's,  whom  he  left  in  town 
with  some  commissions,  and  who  promises  to  call  for 
any-thing  we  may  have  to  send  to  Selby-house. 

Sir  Rowland — But  let  my  cousin  write  to  you 
upon  that  and  other  matters.  She  knows  what  to 
say  on  that  subject  better  than  I  do. 

Mean  time  I  heartily  congratulate  every  one  of  the 
dear  family  upon  the  return  and  safety  of  the  darling 
of  so  many  hearts;  and  remain,  dear  Mr.  Selby, 

Your  most  faithful  and  obedient  servant, 

ARCHIBALD  REEVES. 


LETTER  XXIX. 

MISS    BYRON    TO    MISS    SELBY. 

Monday,  February  20. 
Is  it  again  given  me  to  write  to  you,  my  Lucy !  and 
in  you,  to  all  my  revered  friends!  To  write  with 
cheerfulness !  To  call  upon  you  all  to  rejoice  with 
me ! — God  be  praised! 

"What  dangers  have  I  escaped!  How  have  my  head 
and  my  heart  been  affected !  I  dare  not,  as  yet, 
think  of  the  anguish  you  all  endure  for  me. 

With  what  wretched  levity  did  I  conclude  my  last 
letter !  Giddy  creature,  that  I  was,  vain  and  foolish  ! 
But  let  me  begin  my  sad  story.  Your  impatience 
all  this  while  must  be  too  painful.  Only  let  me  pre- 
mise, that  gaily  as  I  boasted,  when  I  wrote  to  you  so 
conceitedly,  as  it  might  seem,  of  my  dress,  and  of 
conquests,  and  I  know  not  what  nonsense,  I  took 
no  pleasure  at  the  place,  in  the  shoals  of  fools  that 
swam  after  me.  I  despised  myself  and  them.  De+ 
spised!  I  was  shocked  at  both. 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  223 

Two  Lucifers  were  among  them  ;  but  the  worst, 
the  very  worst  Lucifer  of  all,  appeared  in  a  harlequin 
dress.  He  hopped  and  skipt,  and  played  the  fool 
about  me ;  and  at  last  told  me,  He  knew  Miss  Byron  ; 
and  that  he  was,  as  he  called  himself,  the  despised, 
the  rejected,  Sir  Hargrave  Pollexfen. 

He  behaved,  however,  with  complaisance ;  and  I 
had  no  apprehension  of  what  I  was  to  suffer  from 
his  villany. 

Mr.  Reeves  has  told  you,  that  he  saw  me  into  the 
chair,  provided  for  me  by  my  vile  new  servant.  O 
my  Lucy!  One  branch  of  my  vanity  is  entirely  lopt 
off.  I  must  pretend  to  some  sort  of  skill  in  phy- 
siognomy !  Never  more  will  I,  for  this  fellow's  sake, 
presume  to  depend  on  my  judgment  of  people's 
hearts  framed  from  their  countenances. 

Mr.  Reeves  has  told  you  every  thing  about  the 
chair,  and  the  chairmen.  How  can  I  describe  the 
misgivings  of  my  heart  when  I  first  began  to  suspect 
treachery!  But  when  I  undrew  the  curtains,  and 
found  myself  farther  deluded  by  another  false  heart, 
whose  help  I  implored,  and  in  the  midst  of  fields, 
and  soon  after  the  lights  put  out,  I  pierced  the  night 
air  with  my  screams,  till  I  could  scream  no  more.  I 
was  taken  out  in  fits;  and  when  I  came  a  little  to  my 
senses.  I  found  myself  on  a  bed,  three  women  about 
me ;  one  at  my  head,  holding  a  bottle  to  my  nose, 
my  nostrils  sore  with  hartshorn,  and  a  strong  smell 
of  burnt  feathers ;  but  no  man  near  me. 

Where  am  I?  Who  are  you,  madam?  And  who 
are  you?  Where  am  I?  were  the  questions  1  first 
asked. 

The  women  were  a  mother  and  two  daughters. 
The  mother  answered,  You  are  not  in  bad  hands. 

God  grant  you  say  truth!  said  I. 

No  harm  is  intended  you ;  only  to  make  you  one 


224  THE    HISTORY   OF 

of  the  happiest  of  women.    We  would  not  be  con- 
cerned in  a  bad  action. 

I  hope  not :  I  hope  not :  let  me  engage  your  pity, 
madam.  You  seem  to  be  a  mother:  these  young 
gentlewomen,  I  presume,  are  your  daughters.  Save 
me  from  ruin,  I  beseech  you,  madam:  save  me  from 
ruin,  as  you  would  your  daughters. 

These  young  women  are  my  daughters.  They  are 
sober  and  modest  women.  No  ruin  is  intended  you. 
One  of  the  richest  and  noblest  men  in  England 
is  your  admirer :  he  dies  for  you.  He  assures  me, 
that  he  intends  honourable  marriage  to  you.  You 
are  not  engaged,  he  says:  and  you  must,  and  you 
shall,  be  his.  You  may  save  murder,  madam,  if  you 
consent.  He  resolves  to  be  the  death  of  any  lover 
whom  you  encourage. 

This  must  be  the  vile  contrivance  of  Sir  Hargrave 
Pollexfen,  immediately  cried  I  out:  Is  it  not?  Is  it 
not?  Tell  me;  I  beg  of  you  to  tell  me. 

I  arose,  and  sat  on  the  bed-side;  and  at  that  mo- 
ment in  came  the  vile,  vile  Sir  Hargrave. 

I  screamed  out.  He  threw  himself  at  my  feet.  I 
reclined  my  head  on  the  bosom  of  the  elderly  person, 
and  by  hartshorn  and  water  they  had  much  ado  to 
keep  me  out  of  a  fit.  Had  he  not  withdrawn ;  had 
he  kept  in  my  sight ;  I  should  certainly  have  fainted. 
But  holding  up  my  head,  and  seeing  only  the  wo- 
men, I  revived :  and  began  to  pray,  to  beg,  to  offer 
rewards,  if  they  would  facilitate  my  escape,  or  pro- 
cure my  safety  :  but  then  came  in  again  the  hated 
man. 

I  beg  of  you,  Miss  Byron,  said  he,  with  an  air  of 
greater  haughtiness  than  before,  to  make  yourself 
easy,  and  hear  what  I  have  to  say.  It  is  in  your  own 
choice,  in  your  own  power,  to  be  what  you  please, 
and  to  make  me  what  you  please.     Do  not  therefore 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  225 

needlessly  terrify  yourself.  You  see  I  am  a  deter- 
mined man.     Ladies,  you  may  withdraw — 

Not  and  leave  me  here! — And  as  they  went  out, 
I  pushed  by  the  mother,  and  between  the  daugh- 
ters, and  followed  the  foremost  into  the  parlour ; 
and  then  sunk  down  on  my  knees,  wrapping  my 
arms  about  her :  O  save  me !  save  me !  said  I. 

The  vile  wretch  entered.  I  left  her,  and  kneeled 
to  him.  I  knew  not  what  I  did.  I  remember,  I  said, 
wringing  my  hands,  If  you  have  mercy;  if  you  have 
compassion ;  let  me  now,  now,  I  beseech  you,  Sir, 
this  moment,  experience  your  mercy. 

He  gave  them  some  motion,  I  suppose,  to  with- 
draw (for  by  that  time  the  widow  and  the  other 
daughter  were  in  the  parlour) ;  and  they  all  three 
retired. 

I  have  besought  you,  madam,  and  on  my  knees  too, 
to  shew  me  mercy ;  but  none  would  }7ou  shew  me, 
inexorable  Miss  Byron  !  Kneel,  if  you  will ;  in  your 
turn  kneel,  supplicate,  pray ;  you  cannot  be  more  in 
earnest  than  I  was.    Now  are  the  tables  turned. 

Barbarous  man !  said  I,  rising  from  my  knees.  My 
spirit  was  raised ;  but  it  as  instantly  subsided.  I  be- 
seech you,  Sir  Hargrave,  in  a  quite  frantic  way, 
wringing  my  hands,  and  coming  near  him,  and  then 
running  to  the  window,  and  then  to  the  door  (with- 
out meaning  to  go  out  at  either,  had  they  been  open ; 
for  whither  could  I  go?)  and  then  again  to  him  :  Be 
not,  I  beseech  you,  Sir  Hargrave,  cruel  to  me.  I 
never  was  cruel  to  any-body.  You  know  I  was  civil 
to  you;  I  was  very  civil — 

Yes,  yes,  and  very  determined.  You  called  me  no 
names.  I  call  you  none,  Miss  Byron.  You  were  very 
civil.  Hitherto /have  not  been  uncivil.  But  remem- 
ber, madam — But,  sweet  and  ever-adorable  creature, 
and  he  clasped  his  arms  about  me,  your  very  terror 
is  beautiful !  I  can  enjoy  your  terror,  madam — And 


226  THE    HISTORY    OF 

the  savage  would  have  kissed  me.  My  averted  head 
frustrated  his  intention  ;  and  at  his  feet  I  besought 
him  not  to  treat  the  poor  creature,  whom  he  had  so 
vilely  betrayed,  with  indignity. 

I  don't  hit  your  fancy,  madam  ! 

Can  you  be  a  malicious  man,   Sir  Hargrave? 

You  don't  like  my  morals,  madam  ! 

And  is  this  the  way,  Sir  Hargrave,  are  these  the 
means  you  take,  to  convince  me  that  I  ought  to  like 
them? 

Well,  madam,  you  shall  prove  the  mercy  in  me, 
you  would  not  shew.  You  shall  see  that  I  cannot  be 
a  malicious  man ;  a  revengeful  man  :  and  yet  you 
have  raised  my  pride.  You  shall  find  me  a  moral 
man. 

Then,  Sir  Hargrave,  will  I  bless  you  from  the 
bottom  of  my  heart ! 

But  you  know  what  will  justify  me,  in  every  eye, 
for  the  steps  I  have  taken.  Be  mine,  madam.  Be 
legally  mine.  I  offer  you  my  honest  hand.  Consent 
to  be  Lady  Pollexfen — No  punishment,  I  hope — Or, 
take  the  consequence. 

What,  Sir!  justify  by  so  poor,  so  very  poor,  a  com- 
pliance, steps  that  you  have  so  basely  taken! — Take 
my  life,  Sir :  but  my  hand  and  my  heart  are  my  own : 
they  never  shall  be  separated. 

I  arose  from  my  knees,  trembling,  and  threw  my- 
self upon  the  window-seat,  and  wept  bitterly. 

He  came  to  me.  I  looked  on  this  side,  and  on 
that,  wishing  to  avoid  him. 

You  cannot  fly,  madam.  You  are  securely  mine : 
and  mine  still  more  securely  you  shall  be.  Don't 
provoke  me :  don't  make  me  desperate.  By  all 
that's  good  and  holy — 

He  cast  his  eyes  at  my  feet ;  then  at  my  face ; 
then  threw  himself  at  my  feet,  and  embraced  my 
knees  with  his  odious  arms. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  227 

I  was  terrified.  I  screamed.  In  ran  one  of  the 
daughters — Good  Sir!  Pray  Sir! — Did  you  not  say 
you  would  be  honourable  ? 

Her  mother  followed  her  in — Sir,  Sir !  In  my 
house — 

Thank  God,  thought  I,  the  people  here  are  better 
than  I  had  reason  to  apprehend  they  were.  But,  O 
my  Lucy,  they  seemed  to  believe,  that  marriage 
would  make  amends  for  every  outrage. 

Here  let  me  conclude  this  letter.  I  have  a  great 
deal  more  to  say. 


LETTER  XXX. 

MISS    BYRON.       IK    CONTINUATION. 

What  a  plague,  said  the  wretch  to  the  women,  do 
you  come  in  for?  I  thought  you  knew  your  own  sex 
better  than  to  mind  a  woman's  squalling  They  are 
always  ready,  said  the  odious  fellow,  to  put  us  in 
mind  of  the  occasion  we  ought  to  give  them  for  cry- 
ing out.    I  have  not  offered  the  least  rudeness — 

I  hope  not,  Sir.     I  hope  my  house — So  sweet  a 
creature — 

Dear  blessed,  blessed  woman  (frantic  with  terror, 
and  mingled  joy,  to  find  myself  in  better  hands  than 
I  expected — Standing  up,  and  then  sitting  down,  I 
believe  at  every  sentence)  Protect  me!  Save  me!  Be 
my  advocate!  Indeed  I  have  not  deserved  this  trea- 
cherous treatment.  Indeed  I  am  a  good  sort  of  crea 
ture  (I  scarce  knew  what  I  said):  all  my  friends  love 
me  :  they  will  break  their  hearts,  if  any  misfortune 
befal  me  :  they  are  all  good  people:  you  would  love 
them  dearly  if  you  knew  them:  Sir  Hargrave  may 
have  better  and  richer  wives  than  I :  pray  prevail 


228  THE   HISTORY   OF 

upon  him  to  spare  me  to  my  friends,  for  their  sake. 
I  will  forgive  him  for  all  he  has  done. 

Nay,  dear  lady,  if  Sir  Hargrave  will  make  you 
his  lawful  and  true  wife,  there  can  be  no  harm 
done,  surely. 

I  will,  I  will,  Mrs.  Awberry,  said  he.  I  have  pro- 
mised, and  I  will  perform.  But  if  she  stand  in  her 
own  light — She  expects  nothing  from  my  morals — If 
she  stand  in  her  own  light;  and  looked  fiercely — 

God  protect  me!  said  I:  God  protect  me! 

The  gentleman  is  without,   Sir,  said  the  woman. 

0  how  my  heart,  at  that  moment,  seemed  to  be  at 
my  throat !  What  gentleman  ?  thought  I.  Some  one 
come  to  save  me  ! — O  no  ! 

And  instantly  entered  the  most  horrible-looking 
clergyman  that  I  ever  beheld. 

This,  as  near  as  I  can  recollect,  is  his  description 
— A  vasttall,  big-boned,  splay-footed  man.  A  shabby 
gown  ;  as  shabby  a  wig ;  a  huge  red  pimply  face ;  and 
a  nose  that  hid  half  of  it,  when  he  looked  on  one 
side,  and  he  seldom  looked  fore-right  when  I  saw 
him.  He  had  a  dog's-eared  common-prayer-book  in 
his  hand,  which  once  had  been  gilt ;  opened,  horrid 
sight!  at  the  page  of  matrimony  ! 

Yet  I  was  so  intent  upon  making  a  friend,  when  a 
man,  a  clergyman  appeared,  that  I  heeded  not,  at 
his  entrance,  his  frightful  visage,  as  I  did  afterwards. 

1  pushed  by  Sir  Hargrave,  turning  him  half  round 
with  my  vehemence,  and  made  Mrs.  Awberry  totter; 
and  throwing  myself  at  the  clergyman's  feet,  Man 
of  God,  said  I,  my  hands  clasped,  and  held  up  ;  Man 
of  God  !  Gentleman  !  Worthy  man  ! — A  good  cler- 
gyman must  be  all  this  ! — If  ever  you  had  children  ! 
save  a  poor  creature  !  basely  tricked  away  from  all 
her  friends !  innocent !  thinking  no  harm  to  any- 
body !  I  would  not  hurt  a  worm !  I  love  every-body! 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  229 

—Save  me  from  violence  !  Give  not  your  aid  to 
sanctify  a  base  action. 

The  man  snuffled  his  answer  through  his  nose. 
When  he  opened  his  pouched  mouth,  the  tobacco 
hung  about  his  great  yellow  teeth.  He  squinted  upon 
me,  and  took  my  clasped  hands,  which  were  buried 
in  his  huge  hand  :  Rise,  madam  !  Kneel  not  to  me ! 
No  harm  is  intended  you.  One  question  only:  Who 
is  that  gentleman  before  me,  in  the  silver-laced 
clothes  ?  What  is  his  name  ? — 

He  is  Sir  Hargrave  Pollexfen,  Sir  :  a  wicked,  a 
very  wicked  man,  for  all  he  looks  so  ! 

The  vile  wretch  stood  smiling,  and  enjoying  my 
distress. 

O  madam  !  A  very  hon-our-able  man  !  bowing, 
like  a  scyophant,  to  Sir  Hargrave. 

And  who  pray,  madam,  are  you  ?  What  is  your 
name  ? 

Harriet  Byron,  Sir :  a  poor  innocent  creature 
(looking  at  my  dress)  though  I  make  such  a  vile  ap- 
pearance— Good  Sir,  your  pity  !  And  I  sunk  down 
again  at  his  feet. 

Of  Northamptonshire,  madam  ?  You  are  a  single 
woman  !  Your  uncle's  name — 

Is  Selby,  Sir.  A  very  good  man — I  will  reward 
you,   Sir,  as  the  most  grateful  heart — 

All  is  fair!  All  is  above-board  :  all  is  as  it  was  re- 
presented. I  am  above  bribes,  madam.  You  will  be 
the  happiest  of  women  before  day-break — Good 
people .' — The  three  women  advanced. 

Then  I  saw  what  an  ugly  wretch  he  was ! 

Sir  Hargrave  advanced.  The  two  horrid  creatures 
raised  me  between  them.  Sir  Hargrave  took  my 
struggling  hand  ;  and  then  I  saw  another  ill-looking 
man  enter  the  room,  who  I  suppose  was  to  give  me 
to  the  hated  man. 

Dearly  beloved,  began  to  read  the  snuffling  mon- 
ster—  x 


230  THE    HISTORY    OF 

0  my  Lucy !  Does  not  your  heart  ake  for  your 
Harriet  ?  Mine  has  seemed  to  turn  over  and  over, 
round  and  round,  I  don't  know  how,  at  the  recital. 
— It  was  ready  to  choak  me  at  the  time. 

1  must  break  off",  for  a  few  minutes. 


LETTER  XXXI. 

MISS  BYRON.      IN  CONTINUATION. 

I  was  again  like  one  frantic.  Read  no  more !  said 
and,  in  my  frenzy,  dashed  the  book  out  of  the  mi- 
nister's hand,  if  a  minister  he  was.    I  beg  your  par- 
don, Sir,  said  I;  but  you  must  read  no  further.   I  am 
basely  betrayed  hither.  I  cannot,  I  will  not,  be  his. 

Proceed,  proceed,  said  Sir  Hargrave,  taking  my 
hand  by  force ;  virago  as  she  is,  I  will  own  her  for 
my  wife — Are  you  the  gentle,  the  civil,  Miss  Byron, 
madam  ?  looking  sneeringly  in  my  face. 

Alas !  my  Lucy,  I  was  no  virago :  I  was  in  a  perfect 
frenzy :  but  it  was  not  an  unhappy  frenzy ;  since  in 
all  probability  it  kept  me  from  falling  into  fits ;  and 
fits,  the  villain  had  said,  should  not  save  me. 

Dearly  beloved,  again  snuffled  the  wretch.  O  my 
Lucy  !  I  shall  never  love  these  words.  How  may 
odious  circumstances  invert  the  force  of  the  kindest 
words  !  Sir  Hargrave  still  detained  my  struggling 
hand. 

I  stamped,  and  threw  myself  to  the  length  of  my 
arm,  as  he  held  my  hand.  No  dearly  beloved's,  said  I. 
I  was  just  beside  myself.  What  to  say,  what  to  do, 
I  knew  not. 

The  cruel  wretch  laughed  at  me ;  No  dearly  be- 
loved's !  repeated  he,  Very  comical,  'faith,  and 
laughed  again :  but  proceed,  proceed,  doctor. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  231 

We  are  gathered  together  here  in  the  sight  of  God, 
read  he  on. 

This  affected  me  still  more.  I  adjure  you,  Sir,  to 
the  minister,  by  that  God  in  whose  sight  you  read 
we  are  gathered  together,  that  you  proceed  no  fur- 
ther. I  adjure  you,  Sir  Hargrave,  in  the  same  tre- 
mendous name,  that  you  stop  further  proceedings. 
My  life  take  :  with  all  my  heart,  take  my  life  :  but 
my  hand  never,  never,  will  I  join  with  yours. 

Proceed,  doctor:  doctor,  pray  proceed,  said  the 
vile  Sir  Hargrave.  When  the  day  dawns,  she  will 
be  glad  to  own  her  marriage. 

Proceed  at  your  peril,  Sir,  said  I.  If  you  are  really 
and  truly  a  minister  of  thatGodwhosepresencewhat 
you  have  read  supposes,  do  not  proceed :  do  not 
make  me  desperate. — Madam,  turning  to  the  widow, 
you  are  a  mother,  and  have  given  me  room  to  hope 
you  are  a  good  woman ;  look  upon  me  as  if  I  were 
one  of  those  daughters,  whom  I  see  before  me :  could 
you  see  one  of  them  thus  treated?  Dear  young  wo- 
men, turning  to  each,  can  you  unconcernedly  look 
on,  and  see  a  poor  creature,  tricked,  betrayed,  and 
thus  violently,  basely,  treated,  and  not  make  my  case 
your  own  ?  Speak  for  me  !  Plead  for  me !  Be  my  ad- 
vocates !  Each  of  you,  if  ye  are  women,  plead  for 
me,  as  you  would  yourselves  wish  to  be  pleaded  for, 
in  my  circumstances,  and  were  thus  barbarously 
used ! 

The  young  women  wept.  The  mother  was  moved. 

I  wonder  I  kept  my  head.  My  brain  was  on  fire. 

Still,  still,  the  unmoved  Sir  Hargrave  cried  out, 
Proceed,  proceed,  doctor:  to-morrow  before  noon, 
all  will  be  as  it  should  be. 

The  man  who  stood  aloof  (the  sliest,  sodden-faced 

creature  I  ever  saw)  came  nearer — To  the  question, 

doctor,  and  to  my  part,  if  you  please  ! — Am  not  I 

her  father? — To  the  question,  doctor,  if  you  please! 

x  2 


232  THE  HISTORY  OF 

— The  gentlewoman  will  prepare  her  for  what  is  to 
follow. 

O  thou  man  !  of  heart  the  most  obdurate  and  vile ! 
And  will  ye,  looking  at  every  person,  one  hand  held 
up  (for  still  the  vile  man  griped  the  other  quite  be- 
numbed hand  in  his  iron  paw)  and  adjuring  each, 
Will  ye  see  this  violence  done  to  a  poor  young  crea- 
ture ? — A  soul,  gentlewomen,  you  may  have  to  an- 
swer for.     I  can  die.     Never,  never,  will  I  be  his. 

Let  us  women  talk  to  the  lady  by  ourselves,  Sir 
Hargrave.  Pray  your  honour,  let  us  talk  to  her 
by  ourselves. 

Ay,  ay,  ay,  said  the  parson,  by  all  means :  let  the 
ladies  talk  to  one  another,  Sir.  She  may  be  brought 
to  consider. 

He  let  go  my  hand.  The  widow  took  it.  And 
was  leading  me  out  of  the  room — Not  up-stairs,  I 
hope,  madam,  said  I. 

Youshan't  then,  said  she.  Come,  Sally ;  come, 
Deb ;  let  us  women  go  out  together. 

They  led  me  into  a  little  room  adjoining  to  the 
parlour :  and  then,  my  spirits  subsiding,  I  thought 
I  should  have  fainted  way.  I  had  more  hartshorn  and 
water  poured  down  my  throat. 

When  they  had  brought  me  a  little  to  myself,  they 
pleaded  with  me  Sir  Hargrave's  great  estate. — What 
are  riches  to  me  ?  Dirt,  dirt,  dirt !  I  hate  them. 
They  cannot  purchase  peace  of  mind:  I  want  not 
riches. 

They  pleaded  his  honourable  love — I  my  invin- 
cible aversion. 

He  was  a  handsome  man — The  most  odious  in 
my  eyes  of  the  human  species.  Never,  never,  should 
my  consent  be  had  to  sanctify  such  a  baseness. 

My  danger !  And  that  they  should  not  be  able- 
to  save  me  from  worse  treatment — 

How! — Notable.' — Ladies,  madam,  is  not  this 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  233 

your  own  house?  Cannot  you  raise  a  neighbourhood? 
Have  you  no  neighbours?  A  thousand  pounds  will  I 
order  to  be  paid  into  your  hands  for  a  present  before 
the  week  is  out:  I  pledge  my  honour  for  the  pay- 
ment ;  if  you  will  but  save  me  from  a  violence,  that 
no  worthy  woman  can  see  offered  to  a  distressed 
young  creature! — A  thousand  pounds! — Dear  ladies! 
Only  to  save  me,  and  see  me  safe  to  my  friends! 

The  wretches  in  the  next  room,  no  doubt,  heard 
all  that  passed.  In  at  that  moment  came  Sir  Har- 
grave:  Mrs.  Awberry,  said  he,  with  a  visage  swell- 
ed with  malice,  young  ladies,  we  keep  you  up;  we 
disturb  you.  Pray  retire  to  your  own  rest :  leave  me 
to  talk  with  this  perverse  woman.  She  is  mine. 
Pray,  Sir  Hargrave,  said  Mrs.  Awberry — 
Leave  her  to  me,  I  say: — Miss  Byron,  you  shall 
be  mine.  Your  Grevilles,  madam,  your  Fenwicks, 
your  Ormes,  when  they  know  the  pains  and  the  ex- 
pence  I  have  been  at,  to  secure  you,  shall  confess 
me  their  superior — Shall  confess — 

In  wickedness,  in  cruelty,  Sir,  you  are  every 
man's  superior. 

You  talk  of  cruelty,  Miss  Byron!  triumphing 
over  scores  of  prostrate  lovers,  madam !  You  re- 
member your  treatment  of  me,  madam  !  kneeling, 
like  an  abject  wretch,  at  your  feet!  Kneeling  for 
pity !  But  no  pity  could  touch  your  heart,  madam: 
— Ungrateful,  proud  girl ! — Yet  am  I  not  humbling 
you  ;  take  notice  of  that :  I  am  not  humbling  you : 
I  am  proposing  to  exalt  you,  madam. 
Vile,  vile  debasement,  said  I. 
To  exalt  Miss  Byron  into  Lady  Pollexfen.  And 
yet  if  you  hold  not  out  your  hand  to  me — 

He  would  have  snatched  my  hand.  I  put  it  behind 
me.  He  would  have  snatched  the  other:  I  put  that 
behind  me  too:  and  the  vile  wretch  would  then  have 
kissed   my  undefended  neck:  but,  with  both  my 


234  THE    HISTORY   OF 

hands  I  pushed  his  audacious  forehead  from  me. 
Charming  creature !  he  called  me,  with  passion  in 
his  look  and  accent :  then,  Cruel,  proud,  ungrate- 
ful :  and  swore  by  his  Maker,  that  if  I  would  not 
give  my  hand  instantly,  instead  of  exalting  me,  he 
would  humble  me.  Ladies,  pray  withdraw,  said  he. 
Leave  her  to  me  :  either  Lady  Pollexfen,  or  what 
I  please  ;  rearing  himself  proudly  up  !  She  may  be 
happy  if  she  will.     Leave  her  to  me. 

Pray,  Sir,  said  the  youngest  of  the  two  daughters; 
and  wept  for  me. 

Greatly  hurt,  indeed,  to  be  the  wife  of  a  man  of 
my  fortune  and  consequence !  But  leave  her  to  me, 
I  say. — I  will  soon  bring  down  her  pride  :  What  a 
devil,  am  I  to  creep,  beg,  pray,  entreat,  and  only  for 
a  ivifef  But,  madam,  said  the  insolent  wretch,  you 
will  be  mine  upon  easier  terms,  perhaps. 

Madam,  pray  madam,  said  the  widow  to  me,  con- 
sider what  you  are  about,  and  whom  you  refuse. 
Can  you  have  a  handsomer  man?  Can  you  have  a 
man  of  a  greater  fortune  ?  Sir  Hargrave  means 
nothing  but  what  is  honourable.  You  are  in  his 
power — 

In  his  power,  madam  !  returned  I:  I  am  in  yours. 
You  are  mistress  of  this  house.  I  claim  the  protec- 
tion of  it.  Have  you  not  neighbours?  Your  protec- 
tion I  put  myself  under.  Then  clasping  my  arms 
about  her,  Lock  me  from  him  till  you  can  have  help 
to  secure  to  you  the  privilege  of  your  own  house ; 
and  deliver  me  safe  to  my  friends,  and  I  will  share 
my  fortune  with  your  two  daughters. 

The  wicked  man  took  the  mother  and  youngest 
daughter  each  by  her  hand,  after  he  had  disengaged 
the  former  from  my  clasping  arms,  and  led  them  to 
the  door.  The  elder  followed  them  of  her  own  ac- 
cord. They  none  of  them  struggled  against  going. 
I  begged,  prayed,  besought  them  not  to  go,  and 


SIR    CHARLES    GRAXDISOX.  235 

when  they  did,  would  have  thrust  myself  out  with 
them :  but  the  wretch,  in  shutting  them  out,  squeezed 
me  dreadfully,  as  I  was  half  in,  half  out;  and  my  nose 
gushed  out  with  blood. 

I  screamed:  he  seemed  frighted:  but  instantly  re- 
covering myself — So,  so,  you  have  done  your  worst  1 
— You  have  killed  me,  I  hope.  I  was  out  of  breath  ; 
my  stomach  was  very  much  pressed,  and  one  of  my 
arms  was  bruised.  I  have  the  marks  still ;  for  he  clapt 
to  the  door  with  violence,  not  knowing,  to  do  him 
justice,  that  I  was  so  forward  in  the  door-way. 

I  was  in  dreadful  pain.  1  talked  half  wildly,  I  re- 
member. I  threw  myself  in  a  chair — So,  so,  you 
have  killed  me,  I  hope — Well,  now  I  hope,  now  I 
hope  you  are  satisfied.  Now  may  you  moan  over 
the  poor  creature  you  have  destroyed :  for  he  ex- 
pressed great  tenderness  and  consternation ;  and  I, 
for  my  part,  felt  such  pains  in  my  bosom,  that  having 
never  felt  such  before,  I  really  thought  I  was  bruised 
to  death  :  repeating  my  foolish  So,  so — But  I  forgive 
you,  said  I — Only,  Sir,  call  to  the  gentlewomen,  Sir 
— Retire,  Sir.  Let  me  have  my  own  sex  only  about 
me.  My  head  swam  :  my  eyes  failed  me ;  and  I 
fainted  quite  away. 


LETTER  XXXII. 

MISS    BYRON.       IN    CONTINUATION. 

I  understood  afterwards  that  he  was  in  the  most 
dreadful  consternation.  He  had  fastened  the  door 
upon  me  and  himself;  and  for  a  few  moments  was 
not  enough  present  to  himself  to  open  it.  Yet  cry- 
ing  out  upon  his  God  to  have  mercy  upon  him,  and 
running  about  the  room,  the  women  hastily  rapped 


236  THE    HISTORY   OF 

at  the  door.  Then  lie  ran  to  it,  opened  it,  Cursed 
himself,  and  besought  them  to  recover  me,  if  pos- 
sible. 

They  said  I  had  death  in  my  face  :  they  lamented 
over  me  :  my  nose  had  done  bleeding:  but,  careful  of 
his  own  safety  in  the  midst  of  his  terror,  he  took  my 
bloody  handkerchief;  if  I  did  not  recover,  he  said, 
that  should  not  appear  against  him ;  and  he  hasted 
into  the  next  room,  and  thrust  it  into  the  fire  ;  by 
which  were  sitting,  it  seems,  the  minister  and  his 
helper,  over  some  burnt  brandy. 

O  gentlemen  !  cried  the  wretch,  nothing  can  be 
done  to-night.  Take  this  ;  and  gave  them  money. 
The  lady  is  in  a  fit.     I  wish  you  well  home. 

The  younger  daughter  reported  this  to  me  after- 
wards, and  what  follows :  They  had  desired  the  maid, 
it  seems,  to  bring  them  more  firing,  and  a  jug  of  ale  ; 
and  they  would  sit  in  the  chimney-corner,  they  said, 
till  peep  of  day :  but  the  same  young  woman  who 
was  taken  off  from  her  errand,  to  assist  me,  finding 
me,  as  they  all  thought,  not  likely  to  recover,  ran  in 
to  them,  and  declared,  that  the  lady  was  dead,  cer- 
tainly dead ;  and  what,  said  she,  will  become  of  us 
all  ?  This  terrified  the  two  men.  They  said,  It  was 
then  time  for  them  to  be  gone.  Accordingly,  taking 
each  of  them  another  dram,  they  snatched  up  their 
hats  and  sticks,  and  away  they  hurried  ;  hoping,  the 
doctor  said,  that,  as  they  were  innocent,  and  only 
meant  to  serve  the  gentleman,  their  names,  whatever 
happened,  would  not  be  called  in  question. 

When  I  came  a  little  to  myself,  I  found  the  three 
women  only  with  me.  I  was  in  a  cold  sweat,  all 
over  shivering.  There  was  no  fire  in  that  room : 
they  led  me  into  the  parlour,  which  the  two  men 
had  quitted ;  and  sat  me  down  in  an  elbow-chair ; 
for  I  could  hardly  stand,  or  support  myself;  and 
chafed  my  temples  with  Hungary-water. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISOX.  237 

Wretched  creatures,  men  of  this  cast,  my  Lucy, 
thus  to  sport  with  the  healths  and  happiness  of  poor 
creatures  whom  they  pretend  to  love  !  I  am  afraid  I 
never  shall  be  what  I  was.  At  times  I  am  very  sen- 
sible at  my  stomach  of  this  violent  squeeze. 

The  mother  and  elder  sister  left  me  soon  after, 
and  went  to  Sir  Hargrave.  I  can  only  guess  at  the 
result  of  their  deliberations  by  what  followed. 

The  younger  sister,  with  compassionate  frankness, 
answered  all  my  questions,  and  let  me  know  all  the 
above  particulars.  Yet  she  wondered  that  I  could 
refuse  so  handsome  and  so  rich  a  man  as  Sir  Har- 
grave. 

She  boasted  much  of  their  reputation.  Her  mo- 
ther would  not  do  an  ill  thing,  she  said,  for  the 
world  :  and  she  had  a  brother  who  had  a  place  in 
the  Custom-house,  and  was  as  honest  a  man,  though 
she  said  it,  as  any  in  it.  She  owned  that  she  knew 
my  vile  servant ;  and  praised  his  fidelity  to  the  ma- 
sters he  had  served,  in  such  high  terms,  as  if  she 
thought  all  duties  were  comprised  in  that  one,  of 
obeying  his  principles,  right  or  wrong.  Mr.  Wil- 
liam, she  said,  was  a  pretty  man,  a  genteel  man,  and 
she  believed  he  was  worth  money  ;  and  she  was  sure 
would  make  an  excellent  husband.  I  soon  found 
that  the  simple  girl  was  in  love  with  this  vile,  this 
specious  fellow.  She  could  not  bear  to  hear  me 
hint  any -thing  in  his  disfavour,  as,  byway  of  warn- 
ing to  her,  I  would  have  done.  But  she  was  sure 
Mr.  William  was  a  downright  honest  man  ;  and  that 
if  he  were  guilty  of  any  bad  thing,  it  was  by  com- 
mand of  those  to  whom  he  owed  duty  ;  and  they  are 
to  be  answerable  for  that,  you  know,  madam. 

We  were  broke  in  upon,  as  I  was  intending  to 
ask  more  questions  (for  I  find  this  Wilson  was  the 
prime  agent  in  all  this  mischief)  when  the  elder 


238  THE    HISTORY    OF 

sister  called  out  the  younger :  and  instantly  came 
in  Sir  Hargrave. 

He  took  a  chair,  and  sat  down  by  me,  one  leg 
thrown  over  the  knee  of  the  other  ;  his  elbow  upon 
that  knee,  and  his  hand  supporting  his  bowed  down 
head ;  biting  his  lips ;  looking  at  me,  then  from  me, 
then  at  me  again,  five  or  six  times,  as  in  malice. 

Ill-natured,  spiteful,  moody  wretch !  thought  I 
(trembling  at  his  strange  silence,  after  such  hurt  as 
he  had  done  me,  and  what  I  had  endured,  and  still 
felt  in  my  stomach  and  arm)  what  an  odious  crea- 
ture thou  art ! 

At  last  I  broke  silence.  I  thought  I  would  be  as 
mild  as  I  could,  and  not  provoke  him  to  do  me  far- 
ther mischief.  Well  have  you  done,  Sir  Hargrave, 
(have  you  not  ?)  to  commit  such  a  violence  upon  a 
poor  young  creature  that  never  did  nor  thought  you 
evil! 

I  paused.     He  was  silent. 

What  distraction  have  you  given  to  my  poor  cou- 
sin Reeves's  !  How  my  heart  bleeds  for  them  ! 

I  stopt.     He  was  still  silent. 

I  hope,  Sir,  you  are  sorry  for  the  mischief  you 
have  done  me  ;  and  for  the  pain  you  have  given  to 
my  friends  ! — I  hope,  Sir — 

Cursed !  said  he. 

I  stopt,  thinking  he  would  go  on :  but  he  said  no 
more  ;  only  changing  his  posture  ;  and  then  resum- 
ing it. 

These  people,  Sir,  seem  to  be  honest  people.  I 
hope  you  designed  only  to  terrify  me.  Your  bring- 
ing me  into  no  worse  company  is  an  assurance  to 
me  that  you  meant  better  than — 

Devils  all !  interrupted  he — 

I  thought  he  was  going  on;  but  he  grinned,  shook 
his  head,  and  then  again  reclined  it  upon  his  hand. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  239 

I  forgive  you,  Sir,  the  pain  you  have  given  me. — 
But  my  friends — As  soon  as  day  breaks  (and  I  hope 
that  is  not  far  off)  I  will  get  the  women  to  let  my 
cousin  Reeves — 

Then  up  he  started — Miss  Byron,  said  he,  you 
are  a  woman  ;  a  true  woman — And  held  up  his 
hand,  clenched.  I  knew  not  what  to  think  of  his 
intention. 

Miss  Byron,  proceeded  he,  after  a  pause,  you  are 
the  most  consummate  hypocrite  that  I  ever  knew  in 
my  life :  and  yet  I  thought  that  the  best  of  you  all 
could  fall  into  fits  and  swoonings  whenever  you 
pleased. 

/  was  now  silent.     I  trembled. 

Damn'd  fool !  ass  !  blockhead  !  'woman's  fool ! — 
I  ought  to  be  d — n'd  for  my  credulous  folly  ! — I  tell 
you,  Miss  Byron — Then  he  looked  at  me  as  if  he 
were  crazy ;  and  walked  two  or  three  times  about 
the  room. 

To  be  dying  one  half-hour,  and  the  next  to  look 
so  provoking — 

I  was  still  silent. 

I  could  curse  myself  for  sending  away  the  parson. 
I  thought  I  had  known  something  of  women's  tricks 
— But  yet  your  arts,  your  hypocrisy,  shall  not  serve 
you,  madam.  What  I  failed  in  here,  shall  be  done 
elsewhere.     By  the  great  God  of  heaven,  it  shall. 

I  wept.     I  could  not  then  speak. 

Can't  you  go  into  fits  again  ?  Can't  you  ?  said  the 
barbarian ;  with  an  air  of  a  piece  with  his  words  ; 
and  using  other  words  of  the  lowest  reproach. 

God  deliver  me,  prayed  I  to  myself,  from  the 
hands  of  this  madman  ! 

I  arose,  and  as  the  candle  stood  near  the  glass,  I 
saw  in  it  my  vile  figure,  in  this  abominable  habit, 
to  which,  till  then,  I  had  paid  little  attention.  O 
how  I  scorned  myself! 


240  THE    HISTORY    OF 

Pray,  Sir  Tlargrave,  said  I,  let  me  beg  that  you 
will  not  terrify  me  further.  I  will  forgive  you  for 
all  you  have  hitherto  done,  and  place  it  to  my  own. 
account,  as  a  proper  punishment  for  consenting  to 
be  thus  marked  for  a  vain  and  foolish  creature. 
Your  abuse,  Sir,  give  me  leave  to  say,  is  low  and 
unmanly:  but  in  the  light  of  a  punishment  I  will  own 
it  to  be  all  deserved :  and  let  here  my  punishment 
end,  and  I  will  thank  you  ;  and  forgive  you  with  my 
whole  heart. 

Your  fate  is  determined,  Miss  Byron. 

Just  then  came  in  a  servant-maid  with  a  capu- 
chin, who  whispered  something  to  him  :  to  which  he 
answered,  That's  well — 

He  took  the  capuchin  ;  the  maid  withdrew ;  and 
approached  me  with  it.  I  started,  trembled,  and  was 
ready  to  faint.  I  caught  hold  of  the  back'  of  the 
elbow-chair. 

Your  fate  is  determined,  madam,  repeated  the  sa- 
vage— Here,  put  this  on — Now  fall  into  fits  again 
— -Put  this  on  ! 

Pray,  Sir  Hargrave — 

And  pray,  Miss  Byron  :  what  has  not  been  com- 
pleted here,  shall  be  completed  in  a  safer  place  ; 
and  that  in  my  own  way — Put  this  on,  I  tell  you. 
Your  compliance  may  yet  befriend  you. 

Where  are  the  gentlewomen  ?  Where  are — 

Gone  to  rest,  madam — John,  Frank,  called  he 
out. 

In  came  two  men-servants. 

Pray,  Sir  Hargrave — Lord  protect  me — Pray,  Sir 
Hargrave — Where  are  the  gentlewomen  ? — Lord 
protect  me ! 

Then  running  to  the  door,  against  which  one  of 
the  men  stood — Man,  stand  out  of  the  way,  said  I. 
But  he  did  not :   he  only  bowed. 

I  cried  out,  Mrs. 1  forget  your  name:  Miss 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  24-1 

And  t'other  Miss 1  forget  your  names  — —  If 

you  are  good  creatures,  as  1  hoped  you  were — 

I  called  as  loud  as  my  fears  would  let  me. 

At  last  came  in  the  elder  sister — O  madam  !  good 
young  gentlewoman !  I  am  glad  you  are  come,  said  I. 

And  so  am  I,  said  the  wicked  man — Pray,  Miss 
Sally,  put  on  this  lady's  capuchin. 

Lord  bless  me !  for  why  ?  for  what  ?  I  have  no 
capuchin  ! 

I  would  not  permit  her  to  put  it  on,  as  she  would 
have  done. 

The  savage  then  wrapt  his  arms  about  mine,  and 
made  me  so  very  sensible,  by  his  force,  of  the  pain 
I  had  had  by  the  squeeze  of  the  door,  that  I  could 
not  help  crying  out.  The  young  woman  put  on 
the  capuchin,  whether  I  would  or  not. 

Now,  Miss  Byron,  said  he,  make  yourself  easy  ; 
or  command  a  fit,  it  is  all  one  :  my  end  will  be  bet- 
ter served  by  the  latter — Miss  Sally,  give  orders. 

She  ran  out  with  the  candle.  Frank,  give  me  the 
cloak,  said  SirHargrave. 

The  fellow  had  a  red  cloak  on  his  arm.  His  bar- 
barous master  took  it  from  him.  To  your  posts, 
said  he. 

The  two  men  withdrew  in  haste.  Now,  my  dear- 
est life,  said  he,  with  an  air  of  insult,  as  I  thought, 
you  command  your  fate,  if  you  are  easy. 

He  threw  the  cloak  about  me. 

I  begged,  prayed,  would  have  kneeled  to  him; 
but  all  was  in  vain :  the  tyger-hearted  man,  as  Mr. 
Greville  had  truly  called  him,  muffled  me  up  in  it, 
and  by  force  carried  me  through  a  long  entry  to  the 
fore-door.  There  was  ready  a  chariot-and-six  ;  and 
that  Sally  was  at  the  door  with  a  lighted  candle. 

I  called  out  to  her.  I  called  out  for  her  mother  ; 
for  the  other  sisier.  I  besought  him  to  let  me  say 
but  six  words  to  the  widow. 

Y 


242  THE    HISTORY    OF 

But  no  widow  was  to  appear ;  no  younger  sister ; 
she  was  perhaps  more  tender-hearted  than  the  elder: 
and  in  spite  of  all  my  struggles,  prayers,  resistance, 
he  lifted  me  into  the  chariot. 

Men  on  horseback  were  about  it.  I  thought  that 
Wilson  was  one  of  them  ;  and  so  it  proved.  Sir 
Hargrave  said  to  that  fellow,  You  know  what  tale  to 
tell,  if  you  meet  with  impertinents.  And  in  he 
came  himself. 

I  screamed.  Scream  on,  my  dear,  upbraidingly 
said  he  ;  and  barbarously  mocked  me,  imitating,  low 
wretch  !  the  bleating  of  a  sheep  [Could  you  not 
have  killed  him  for  this,  my  Lucy  ?]  Then  rearing 
himself  up,  Now  am  I  lord  of  Miss  Byron  !  exulted  he. 

Still  I  screamed  for  help ;  and  he  put  his  hand 
before  my  mouth,  though  vowing  honour  and  such 
sort  of  stuff;  and,  with  his  unmanly  roughness,  made 
me  bite  my  lip.  And  away  lashed  the  coachman 
with  your  poor  Harriet. 


LETTER  XXXIII. 

MISS    BYRON.       IN    CONTINUATION. 

As  the  chariot  drove  by  houses,  I  cried  out  for  help 
once  or  twice,  at  setting  out.  But  under  pretence 
of  preventing  my  taking  cold,  he  tied  a  handkerchief 
over  my  face,  head,  and  mouth,  having  first  muffled 
me  up  in  the  cloak ;  pressing  against  my  arm  with 
his  whole  weight,  so  that  I  had  not  my  hands  at 
liberty.  And  when  he  had  done,  he  seized  them, 
and  held  them  both  in  his  left-hand,  while  his  right- 
arm  thrown  round  me,  kept  me  fast  on  the  seat : 
and  except  that  now  and  then  my  struggling  head 
gave  me  a  little  opening,  I  was  blinded. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  243 

But  at  one  place  on  the  road,  just  after  I  had 
screamed,  and  made  another  effort  to  get  my  hands 
free,  I  heard  voices;  and  immediately  the  chariot 
stopt  Then  how  my  heart  was  filled  with  hope  ! 
But,  alas  !  it  was  momentary.  I  heard  one  of  his 
men  say  (that  Wilson  I  believe)  The  best  of  hus- 
bands, I  assure  you,  Sir ;  and  she  is  the  worst  of 
wives. 

I  screamed  again.  Ay,  scream  and  be  d — n'd,  I 
heard  said  in  a  stranger's  voice,  if  that  be  the  case. 
Poor  gentleman  !  I  pity  him  with  all  my  heart.  And 
immediately  the  coachman  drove  on  again. 

The  vile  wretch  laughed  ;  That's  you,  my  dear ; 
and  hugged  me  round.  You  are  the  d — n'd  wife. 
And  again  he  laughed :  By  my  soul,  I  am  a  charm- 
ing contriver !  Greville,  Fenwick,  Orme,  where  are 
you  now  ? — By  my  soul,  this  will  be  a  pretty  story 
to  tell  when  all  your  fears  are  over,  my  Byron  ! 

I  was  ready  to  faint  several  times.  I  begged  for 
air  :  and  when  we  were  in  an  open  road,  and  I  sup- 
pose there  was  nobody  in  sight,  he  vouchsafed  to 
pull  down  the  blinding  handkerchief,  but  kept  it  over 
my  mouth  ;  so  that,  except  now-and-then  that  I 
struggled  it  aside  with  my  head  (and  my  neck  is 
still,  my  dear,  very  stiff  with  my  efforts  to  free  my 
face)  I  could  only  make  a  murmuring  kind  of  noise. 

The  curtain  of  the  fore-glass  was  pulled  down, 
and  generally  the  canvas  on  both  sides  drawn  up. 
But  I  was  sure  to  be  made  acquainted  when  we 
came  near  houses,  by  his  care  again  to  blind  and 
stifle  me. 

A  little  before  we  were  met  by  my  deliverer,  I 
had,  by  getting  one  hand  free,  unmuffled  myself  so 
far  as  to  see  (as  I  had  guessed  once  or  twice  before 
by  the  stone  pavements)  that  we  were  going  through 
a  town ;  and  then  I  again  vehemently  screamed. 
But  he  had  the  cruelty  to  thrust  a  handkerchief 
y  2 


244  THE   HISTORY   OV 

into  my  mouth,  so  that  I  was  almost  strangled  ;  and 
my  mouth  was  hurt,  and  is  still  sore,  with  that  and 
his  former  violence  of  the  like  nature. 

Indeed,  he  now-and-then  made  apologies  for  the 
cruelty,  to  which,  he  said,  he  was  compelled,  by  my 
invincible  obstinacy,  to  have  recourse.  I  was  sorely 
hurt,  he  said,  to  be  the  wife  of  a  man  of  his  consi- 
deration !  But  I  should  be  that  or  worse.  He  was 
in  for  it  (he  said  more  than  once)  and  must  proceed. 
I  might  see  that  all  my  resistance  was  in  vain.  He 
had  me  in  his  net :  and,  d — n  him,  if  he  were  not 
revenged  for  all  the  trouble  I  had  given  him.  You 
keep  no  terms  with  me,  my  Byron,  said  he  once ; 
and  d — n  me,  if  1  keep  any  with  you  ! 

I  doubted  not  his  malice :  his  love  had  no  ten- 
derness in  it :  but  how  could  I  think  of  being  con- 
senting, as  I  may  say,  to  such  barbarous  usage,  and 
by  a  man  so  truly  odious  to  me  ?  What  a  slave  had 
1  been  in  spirit,  could  I  have  qualified  on  such 
villanous  treatment  as  I  had  met  with !  or  had  1 
been  able  to  desert  myself! 

At  one  place  the  chariot  drove  out  of  the  road, 
over  rjough  ways,  and  little  hillocks,  as  I  thought, 
by  its  rocking ;  and  then,  it  stopping,  he  let  go 
my  hands,  and  endeavoured  to  sooth  me.  He  beg- 
ged I  would  be  pacified,  and  offered,  if  I  would  for- 
bear crying  out  for  help,  to  leave  my  eyes  un- 
muffled  all  the  rest  of  the  way.  But  I  would  not, 
I  told  him,  give  such  a  sanction  to  his  barbarous 
violence. 

On  the  chariot's  stopping,  one  of  his  men  came 
up,  and  put  an  handkerchief  into  his  master's  hands, 
in  which  were  some  cakes  and  sweet-meats ;  and 
gave  him  also  a  bottle  of  sack,  with  a  glass.  Sir 
Hargrave  was  very  urgent  with  me  to  take  some 
of  the  sweet-meats,  and  to  drink  aglass  of  the  wine  : 
but  I  had  neither  stomach  nor  will  to  touch  either. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  245 

He  eat  himself  very  cordially.  God  forgive  me, 
I  wished  in  my  heart,  there  were  pins  and  needles 
in  every  bit  he  put  into  his  mouth. 

He  drank  two  glasses  of  the  wine.  Again  he 
urged  me.  I  said,  I  hoped  I  had  eat  and  drank  roy 
last. 

You  have  no  dependence  upon  my  honour,  ma- 
dam, said  the  villain ;  so  cannot  be  disappointed 
much,  do  what  I  will.  Ungrateful,  proud,  vain,  ob- 
stinate, he  called  me. 

What  signifies,  said  he,  shewing  politeness  to  a 
woman,  who  has  shewn  none  to  me,  though  she  was 
civil  to  every  other  man  ?  Ha,  ha,  ha,  hah  !  What, 
my  sweet  Byron,  I  don't  hit  your fancy  ! —  You  dorit 
like  my  morals  !  laughing  again.  My  lovely  fly,  said 
the  insulting  wretch,  hugging  me  round  in  the 
cloak,  how  prettily  have  1  wrapt  you  about  in  my 
web  ! 

Such  a  provoking  low  wretch ! — I  struggled  to 
free  myself ;  and  unhooked  the  curtain  of  the  fore- 
glass  :  but  he  wrapt  me  about  the  closer,  and  said 
he  would  give  me  his  garter  for  my  girdle,  if  I  would 
not  sit  still,  and  be  orderly.  Ah,  my  charming 
Byron  !  said  he,  ycur  opportunity  is  over — All  your 
struggles  will  not  avail  you — Will  not  avail  you. 
That's  a  word  of  your  own,  you  know.  I  will, 
however,  forgive  you,  if  you  promise  to  love  me 
now.  But  if  you  stay  till  I  get  you  to  the  allotted 
place  ;  then,  madam,  take  what  follows. 

I  saw  that  I  was  upon  a  large,  wild,  heath-like 
place,  between  two  roads,  as  it  seemed.  I  asked 
nothing  about  my  journey's  end.  All  I  had  to 
hope  for  as  to  an  escape  (though  then  I  began  to 
despair  of  it)  was  upon  the  road,  or  in  some  town. 
My  journey's  end,  I  knew,  must  be  the  beginning 
of  new  trials ;  for  I  was  resolved  to  suffer  death 
rather  than  to  marry  him.  What  I  now  was  most 
y  3 


246  THE    HISTORY   OF 

apprehensive  about,  was,  of  falling  into  fits ;  and  I 
answered  to  his  barbarous  insults  as  little  as  possi- 
ble, that  I  might  not  be  provoked  beyond  the  little 
strength  I  had  left  me. 

Three  or  four  times  he  offered  to  kiss  me  ;  and 
cursed  my  pride  for  resisting  him;  making  him  clasp 
a  cloud,  was  his  speech  (aiming  at  wit)  instead  of 
his  Juno  ;  calling  the  cloak  a  cloud. 

And  now,  my  dear  Byron,  said  he,  if  you  will 
not  come  to  a  compromise  with  me,  I  must  dress 
you  again  for  the  journey.  We  will  stop  at  a  town 
a  little  further  (beckoning  to  one  of  his  men,  and, 
on  his  approaching,  whispering  to  him,  his  whole 
body  out  of  the  chariot)  and  there  you  shall  alight ; 
and  a  very  worthy  woman,  to  whom  I  shall  intro- 
duce you,  will  persuade  you,  perhaps,  to  take 
refreshment,  though  I  cannot. 

You  are  a  very  barbarous  man,  Sir  Hargrave.  I 
have  the  misfortune  to  be  in  your  power.  You 
may  dearly  repent  the  usage  1  have  already  re- 
ceived from  you.  You  have  made  my  life  of  no  es- 
timation with  me.     I  will  not  contend. 

And  tears  ran  down  my  cheeks.  Indeed  I  thought 
my  heart  was  broke. 

He  wrapt  me  up  close,  and  tied  the  handkerchief 
about  my  mouth  and  head.     I  was  quite  passive. 

The  chariot  had  not  many  minutes  got  into  the 
great  road  again,  over  the  like  rough  and  sometimes 
plashy  ground,  when  it  stopt  on  a  dispute  between 
the  coachman,  and  the  coachman  of  another  chariot- 
and-six,  as  it  proved. 

Sir  Hargrave  had  but  just  drawn  my  handkerchief 
closer  to  my  eyes,  when  this  happened.  Hinder  not 
my  tears  from  flowing,  said  I ;  struggling  to  keep 
my  eyes  free,  the  cloak  enough  muffling  me,  and 
the  handkerchief  being  over  my  mouth  ;  so  that 
my  voice  could  be  but  just  heard  by  him,  as  I  ima- 
gine. 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON".  247 

He  looked  out  of  his  chariot,  to  see  the  occasion 
of  this  stop ;  and  then  I  found  means  to  disengage 
one  hand. 

I  heard  a  gentleman's  voice  directing  his  own 
coachman  to  give  way. 

I  then  pushed  up  the  handkerchief  with  my  disen- 
gaged hand,  from  my  mouth,  and  pulled  it  down 
from  over  my  eyes,  and  cried  out  for  help  ;  Help 
for  God's  sake ! 

A  man's  voice  (it  was  my  deliverer's,  as  it  hap- 
pily proved)  bid  Sir  Hargrave's  coachman  proceed 
at  his  peril. 

Sir  Hargrave,  with  terrible  oaths  and  curses,  or- 
dered him  to  proceed,  and  to  drive  through  all  op- 
position. 

The  gentleman  called  Sir  Hargrave  by  his  name; 
and  charged  him  with  being  upon  a  bad  design. 

The  vile  wretch  said,  he  had  only  secured  a  run- 
away wife,  eloped  to,  and  intending  to  elope  from, 
a  masquerade,  to  her  adulterer  [Horrid !]  he  put 
aside  the  cloak,  and  appealed  to  my  dress. 

I  cried  out,  No,  no,  no,  five  or  six  times  repeated ; 
but  could  say  no  more  at  that  instant,  holding  up 
then  both  my  disengaged  hands  for  protection. 

The  wicked  man  endeavoured  to  muffle  me  up 
again,  and  to  force  the  handkerchief,  which  I  had 
then  got  under  my  chin,  over  my  mouth ;  and  bru- 
tally cursed  me. 

The  gentleman  would  not  be  satisfied  with  Sir 
Hargrave's  story.  He  would  speak  to  me.  Sir 
Hargrave  called  him  impertinent,  and  other  names ; 
and  asked,  Who  the  devil  he  was  ?  with  rage  and 
contempt. — The  gentleman,  however,  asked  me, 
and  with  an  air  that  promised  deliverance,  if  I  were 
Sir  Hargrave's  wife. 

No,  no,  no,  no — I  could  only  say. 

For  my  own  part,  I  could  have  no  scruple,  dia* 


248  THE    HISTORY    OF 

tressed  as  I  was,  and  made  desperate,  to  throw  my- 
self into  the  protection,  and  even  into  the  arms, 
of  my  deliverer;  though  a  very  fine  young  gen- 
tleman. It  would  have  been  very  hard,  had  1  fallen 
from  bad  to  bad  ;  had  the  sacred  name  of  protector 
been  abused  by  another  Sir  Hargrave,  who  would 
have  had  the  additional  crime  of  betraying  a  confi- 
dence to  answer  for.  But,  however  this  had  proved, 
an  escape  from  the  present  evil  was  all  I  had  in  my 
head  at  the  time. 

But  you  may  better  conceive,  than  I  can  express, 
the  terror  I  was  in,  when  Sir  Hargrave  drew  his 
sword,  and  pushed  at  the  gentleman  with  such  words 
as  denoted  (for  I  could  not  look  that  way)  he  had 
done  him  mischief.  But  when  I  found  my  oppressor, 
my  low-meaning,  and  soon  after  low-laid  oppressor, 
pulled  out  of  the  chariot,  by  the  brave,  the  gallant 
man  (which  was  done  with  such  force,  as  made  the 
chariot  rock)  and  my  protector  safe ;  I  was  as  near 
fainting  with  joy,  as  before  I  had  been  with  terror. 
I  had  shaken  off  the  cloak,  and  untied  the  handker- 
chief 

He  carried  me  in  his  arms  (I  could  not  walk)  to 
his  own  chariot. 

I  heard  Sir  Hargrave  curse,  swear,  and  threaten. 
I  was  glad,  however,  he  was  not  dead. 

Mind  him  not,  madam,  fear  him  not,  said  Sir 
Charles  Grandison,  [You  know  his  noble  name,  my 
Lucy]  :  Coachman,  drive  not  over  your  master  : 
take  care  of  your  master ;  or  some  such  words  he 
said,  as  he  lifted  me  into  his  own  chariot.  He  came 
not  in,  but  shut  the  chariot-door,  as  soon  as  he  had 
seated  me. 

He  just  surveyed,  as  it  were,  the  spot,  and  bid  a 
servant  let  Sir  Hargrave  know  who  he  was  ;  and 
then  came  back  to  me. 

Partly  through  terror,  partly  through  weakness, 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  249 

I  had  sunk  to  the  bottom  of  the  chariot.  He  opened 
the  door,  entered,  and,  with  all  the  tenderness  of  a 
brother,  soothed  me,  and  lifted  me  on  the  seat  once 
more.  He  ordered  his  coachman  to  drive  back 
to  Colnebrook.  In  accents  of  kindness,  he  told  me, 
that  he  had  there  at  present  the  most  virtuous  and 
prudent  of  sisters,  to  whose  care  he  would  commit 
me,  and  then  proceed  on  his  journey  to  town. 

How  irresistibly  welcome  to  me  was  his  support- 
ing arm,  thrown  round  me,  as  wejleiv  back,  com- 
pared to  that  of  the  vile  Sir  Hargrave ! 

Mr.  Reeves  has  given  you  an  account  from  the 
angelic  sister — O  my  Lucy,  they  ar  .  a  pair  of 
angels  ! 

I  have  written  a  long,  long  letter,  or  rather  five 
letters  in  one,  of  my  distresses,  of  my  deliverance  : 
and,  when  my  heart  is  stronger,  I  will  say  more  of 
the  persons,  as  well  as  minds,  of  this  excellent 
brother  and  his  sister. 

But  what  shall  I  do  with  my  gratitude  ?  O  my 
dear,  I  am  overwhelmed  with  my  gratitude :  I  can 
only  express  it  in  silence  before  them.  Every  look, 
if  it  be  honest  to  my  heart,  however,  tells  it:  re- 
verence mingles  with  my  gratitude — Yet  there  is  so 
much  ease,  so  much  sweetness,  in  the  behaviour  of 
both — O  my  Lucy !  Did  I  not  find  that  my  vene- 
ration of  both  is  equal ;  did  I  not,  on  examination, 
find,  that  the  amiable  sister  is  as  dear  tome,  from  her 
experienced  tenderness,  as  her  brother  from  his  re- 
membered bravery  (which  must  needs  mingle  awo 
with  my  esteem) ;  in  short,  that  I  love  the  sister, 
and  revere  the  brother  ;  I  should  be  afraid  of  my 
gratitude. 

I  have  over-written  myself.  I  am  tired.  O  my 
grandmamma,  you  have  never  yet,  while  I  have 
been  in  London,  sent  me  your  ever  valued  blessing 
under  your  own  hand:  yet,  I  am  sure  I  had  it;  and 


250  THE    HISTORY    OP 

your  blessings,  my  dear  uncle  and  aunt  Selby ;  and 
your  prayers,  my  Lucy,  my  Nancy,  and  all  my 
loves  ;  else  my  deliverance  had  not  perhaps  followed 
my  presumptuous  folly,  in  going  dressed  out,  like 
the  fantastic  wretch  I  appeared  to  be,  at  a  vile,  a 
foolish,  masquerade. — How  often,  throughout  the 
several  stages  of  my  distress,  and  even  in  my  deli- 
verance, did  1  turn  my  eye  to  myself,  andfrom  my- 
self, with  the  disgust  that  made  a  part,  and  that  not 
a  light  one,  of  my  punishment ! 

And  so  much,  my  Lucy,  for  masquerades,  and 
masquerade  dresses,  for  ever ! 

Pray  letnotany-body  unnecessarily  be  acquainted 
with  this  shocking  affair:  particularly  neither  Mr. 
Greville  nor  Mr.  Fenwick.  It  is  very  probable, 
that  they  (especially  Mr.  Greville)  would  be  for 
challenging  Sir  Hargrave,  were  it  only  on  a  suppo- 
sition that  it  would  give  him  an  interest  in  me  in  the 
eye  of  the  world.  You  know  that  Mr.  Greville  watches 
for  all  opportunities  to  give  himself  consequence 
with  me. 

Were  any  farther  mischief  to  happen  to  any-body, 
I  should  be  grieved  beyond  measure.  Hitherto  I 
have  reason  to  think,  that  a  transaction  so  shocking 
is  not  very  unhappily  concluded.  May  the  vile 
man  sit  himself  down  satisfied,  and  I  shall  be  will- 
ing to  do  so  too  ;  provided  I  never  more  behold  his 

face. 

*     * 

Mr.  Reeves  will  send  you,  with  the  above  packet, 
a  letter  from  Sir  Charles  Crandison,  inclosing  one 
from  that  vile  Wilson.  I  can  write  no  more  just 
now,  and  they  will  sufficiently  explain  themselves. 
Adieu,  my  dearest  Lucy.  I  need  not  say  how 
much  I  am,  and  ever  will  be, 

Your  faithful  and  affectionate 

HARRIET  BYRON. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  251 

LETTER  XXXIV. 

SIRCHA.  GRANDISON  TO  ARCH.  REEVES,  ESQ. 

dear  sir,  Canterbury,  February  22. 

The  inclosed  long  letter  is  just  now  brought  to  me. 
I  pretend  not  to  judge  of  the  writer's  penitence. 
Yet  his  confessions  seem  ingenuous  ;  and  he  was  not 
under  any  obligation  to  put  them  on  paper. 

As  I  presume  that  you  will  not  think  it  adviseable 
to  make  the  ineffectual  attempt  upon  Miss  Byron 
public  by  a  prosecution,  perhaps  your  condescend- 
ing to  let  the  man's  sister  know,  that  her  brother, 
if  in  earnest,  may  securely  pursue  the  honest  pur- 
poses he  mentions,  may  save  the  poor  wretch  from 
taking  such  courses  as  might  be  fatal,  not  only  to 
himself,  but  to  innocent  persons  who  otherwise  may 
suffer  by  his  being  made  desperate. 

The  man,  as  you  will  see  by  his  letter,  if  you  had 
not  a  still  stronger  proof,  has  abilities  to  do  mischief. 
He  has  been  in  bad  hands,  as  he  tells  us,  from  his 
youth  upwards,  or  he  might  have  been  an  useful 
member  of  society.  He  is  a  young  man  ;  and  if  yet 
he  could  be  made  so,  his  reformation  will  take  from 
the  number  of  the  profligate,  and  add  to  that  of  the 
hopeful ;  and  who  knows  how  wide  the  circle  of  his 
acquaintance  is,  and  how  many  of  them  maybe  in- 
fluenced by  his  example  either  way  ?  If  he  marry 
the  not-dishonest  young  woman,  to  whom  he  seems 
to  be  contracted,  may  not  your  lenity  be  a  means  of 
securing  a  whole  future  family  on  the  side  of  moral 
honesty  ? 

His  crime,  as  the  attempt  was  frustrated,  is  not 
capital :  and,  not  to  mention  the  service  of  such  an 
evidence  as  this,  should  Sir  Margrave  seek  for  a  legal 
redress,  as  he  sometimes  weakly  threatens,  my  hope 


252  THE   HISTORY   OF 

makes  me  see  a  further  good  that  may  be  brought 
about  by  this  man's  reformation :  wicked  masters 
cannot  execute  their  base  views  upon  the  persmm  of 
the  innocent,  without  the  assistance  of  wicked  ser- 
vants. What  a  nest  of  vipers  may  be  crushed  at 
once,  or,  at  least,  rendered  unhurtful,  by  depriving 
the  three  monsters  he  names  of  the  aid  of  such  an 
agent?  Men  who  want  tosave  appearances,  and  have 
estates  to  forfeit,  will  sometimes  be  honest  of  neces- 
sity, rather  than  put  themselves  into  the  power  of 
untried  villains. 

You  will  be  so  good  as  to  make  my  compliments 
to  your  lady,  and  to  our  lovely  ward.  You  see,  Sir, 
that  I  join  myself  with  you  in  the  honour  of  that 
agreeable  relation. 

I  hope  the  dear  lady  has  perfectly  recovered  her 
health  and  spirits.    I  am,  good  Mr.  Reeves, 

Your  most  faithful  and  obedient  servant, 

CHARLES  GRAWDISON. 


LETTER  XXXV. 

TO   SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON,   BART. 

Saturday,  February  18. 
In  what  an  odious  light  must  that  wretch  appear  be- 
fore the  worthiest  of  men,  who  cannot  but  abhor 
himself. 

I  am  the  unhappy  man  who  was  hired  into  the  ser- 
vice of  the  best  of  young  ladies:  whom  I  was  the 
means  of  betraying  into  the  power  of  Sir  Hargrave 
Pollexfen,  from  the  ball  in  the  Hay-market  on 
Thursday  night  last. 

Your  honour  has  made  yourself  an  interest  in  Miss 
Byron's  fate,  as  I  may  say,  by  your  powerful  pro  lee- 


bill  CHARLES  OKANDISON.  253 

tion.  Pardon  me  if  I  give  you  some  account  of  my- 
self, and  of  transactions  which  perhaps  will  otherwise 
never  be  known  :  and  this  in  justice  to  all  round. 

My  parentage  was  honest.  My  education  was 
above  my  parentage.  I  set  out  with  good  principles : 
but  I  fell  into  a  bad  service.  I  was  young,  and  of  a 
good  natural  disposition;  but  had  not  virtue  enough 
to  resist  a  temptation :  I  could  not  say  No,  to  an 
unlawful  thing,  when  my  principals  commanded  my 
assent. 

I  was,  at  first  setting  out,  by  favour  of  friends, 
taken  as  clerk  to  a  merchant.  In  process  of  time  I 
transacted  his  business  at  the  Custom-house.  He 
taught  me  to  make  light  of  oaths  of  office  ;  and  this 
by  degrees  made  me  think  light  of  all  moral  obliga- 
tions, and  laid  the  foundation  of  my  ruin. 

My  master's  name  was  Bagenhall.  He  died  ;  and 
I  was  to  seek  employ.  His  brother  succeeded  to  his 
fortune,  which  was  very  large :  he  was  brought  up  to 
no  business  :  he  was  a  gentleman  :  his  seat  is  near 
Reading.  I  was  recommended  by  him  to  the  service 
of  a  gentleman  who  was  nominated  to  go  abroad  on 
a  foreign  embassy.  I  will  name  his  name,  lest  your 
honour  would  imagine  I  have  any  design  to  evade 
the  strictest  truth  ;  Sir  Christopher  Lucas;  I  was  to 
be  this  gentleman's  master  of  the  horse  abroad. 

The  first  service  my  new  master  employed  me  in, 
was  to  try  to  get  for  him  the  pretty  daughter  of  an 
honest  farmer. 

I  had  been  out  of  place  for  a  twelvemonth.  Had 
I  had  twenty  shillings  aforehand  in  the  world,  I 
would,  I  think,  have  said  Xo.  Nevertheless  I  con- 
sulted, in  confidence,  my  late  master's  brother  upon 
it.  The  advice  he  gave  me,  was,  not  to  boggle  at  it : 
But  if,  he  said,  I  could  manage  the  matter  so,  as  to 
cheat  Sir  Christopher,  and  get  the  girl  for  him,  and 
keep  the  secret,  he  would  give  me  501.  I  abhorred 

VOL.  IX.  7. 


254;  THE    HISTORY  OF 

the  double  treachery  of  young  Mr.  Bagenhall :  but 
undertook  to  serve  Sir  Christopher ;  and  carried  on  a 
treaty  with  the  farmer  for  his  daughter ;  as  if  she 
were  to  be  the  wife  of  Sir  Christopher;  but  not  to  be 
owned  till  he  returned  from  abroad ;  no,  not  even  if 
ehe  should  prove  with  child. 

I  found,  in  the  course  of  my  visits  at  the  farmer's, 
so  much  honesty  both  in  father  and  mother,  and  so 
much  innocence  in  the  daughter,  that  my  heart  re- 
lented; and  I  took  an  opportunity  to  reveal  Sir  Chris- 
topher's base  design  to  them ;  for  the  girl  was  de- 
signed to  be  ruined  the  very  first  moment  that  Sir 
Christopher  could  be  alone  with  her.  Your  honour 
may  believe,  that  I  enjoined  all  three  strict  secrecy. 

Nevertheless  this  contriving  devil  of  a  master 
found  a  way  to  get  the  young  woman  by  other 
means  ;  and,  in  amorous  dalliance,  she  told  him  to 
whom  he  was  obliged  for  not  succeeding  before. 

In  rage  he  turned  me  out  of  his  service,  in  the 
most  disgraceful  manner ;  but  without  giving  any 
other  reasons,  than  that  he  knew  me  to  be  a  villain ; 
and  that  I  knew  myself  to  be  one  ;  nor  would  he 
give  me  a  character  :  so  I  was  quite  reduced ;  and 
but  for  the  kindness  of  a  sister,  who  keeps  an  inn 
in  Smithfield,  I  should  have  starved,  or  been  ob- 
liged to  do  worse. 

I  should  have  told  your  honour,  that  the  poor 
farmer  and  his  wife  both  died  of  grief  in  half  a  year. 
An  honest  young  man,  who  dearly  loved  the  young 
woman,  was  found  drowned  soon  after  :  it  is  feared 
he  was  his  own  executioner.  Sir  Christopher  went 
not  on  his  embassy.  His  preparations  for  it,  and  his 
expensive  way  of  life, before  and  after,  reduced  him : 
and  he  has  been  long  a  beggar,  as  1  may  say.  The 
poor  young  woman  is  now,  if  living,  on  the  town.  I 
taw  her  about  half  a  year  ago  in  St.  Martin's  Round- 
"house,  taken  upas  a  common  prostitute,  and  charged 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  255 

with  picking  a  pocket.  She  was  a  pretty  creature, 
and  had  a  very  pious  turn,  when  I  knew  her  first. 
Her  father  had  gone  beyond  himself  in  her  educa- 
tion :  and  this  was  the  fruit.  What  has  such  a  man 
as  Sir  Christopher  to  answer  for  !  —But  it  is  come 
home  to  him.  I  rejoice  that  this  wickedness  was 
not  added  to  my  score. 

But  heavy  scenes  I  had  enough  afterwards.  Being 
utterly  destitute,  except  what  my  sister  did  for  me, 
and  not  enduring  to  be  a  burden  to  her,  I  threw  my- 
self upon  my  master  Bagenhall.  He  employed  me 
in  mean  offices,  till  his  pander  died  (he  is  a  very 
profligate  man,  Sir  !) :  and  then  he  promoted  me  to 
a  still  meaner. 

In  this  way,  I  grew  a  shameless  contriver.  He  in- 
troduced me  to  Sir  Hargrave  Follexfen,  and  to  Mr. 
Merceda,  a  Portuguese  Jew.  In  the  service  of  these 
three  masters,  good  heaven  forgive  me  !  what  villa- 
nies  was  I  not  the  means  of  perpetrating ;  Yet  I  ne- 
ver was  so  hardened,  but  I  had  temporary  remorses. 
But  these  three  gentlemen  would  never  let  me  rest 
from  wickedness  :  yet  they  kept  me  poor  and  neces- 
sitous ;  as  the  only  means  to  keep  me  what  they 
called  honest ;  for  they  had  often  reason  to  think, 
that  had  I  had  any  other  means  of  subsistence,  I 
would  have  been  really  honest. 

I  was  now  Mr.  Bagenhall's  constant  servant.  Sir 
Hargrave  and  Mr.  Merceda  used  to  borrow  me  ;  but 
I  must  say  Sir  Hargrave  is  an  innocent  man  to  the 
other  two.  They  caressed  me,  I  speak  it  to  my 
shame,  as  a  man  fit  for  their  turn.  I  had  contrivance; 
temper;  I  knew  something  of  every-body.  But  my 
sister  knows  my  frequent  compunctions  ;  and  that  I 
hated  the  vile  eourse  I  wras  in.  She  used  to  lecture 
me  enough.     She  is  a  good  woman. 

Will  your  honour  have  patience  with  me  a  little 
longer  ? 


256  THE  HISTORY  OF 

Sir  Hargrave  on  the  seventh  of  this  month  came 
to  my  master  Bagenhall  at  Reading,  with  whom  he 
had  double  business :  one  was  to  take  a  bond  and! 
judgment  of  him  (Sir  Hargrave  is  no  better  than  an 
usurer) :  Mr.  Bagenhall  has  lived  a  most  extravagant 
life:  the  other  was  to  borrow  me.  Mr.  Merceda  had 
a  scheme  on  foot  at  the  same  time,  which  he  was 
earnest  to  engage  me  in  ;  but  it  was  too  shocking  ; 
and  Mr.  Bagenhall  came  into  Sir  Hargrave's. 

Sir  Hargrave  told  them,  he  designed  nothing  more 
than  a  violation,  if  he  could  get  my  assistance,  of  the 
most  beautiful  woman  in  the  world.  And,  Sir,  to 
see  the  villany  of  the  other  two ;  they  both,  unknown 
to  each  other,  made  proposals  to  me,  to  trick  Sir 
Hargrave,  and  to  get  the  lady,  each  for  himself. 

But  to  me,  Sir  Hargrave  swore,  that  he  was  fully 
resolved  to  leave  this  wicked  course  of  life.  Bagen- 
hall and  Merceda,  he  said,  were  devils;  and  he  would 
marry,  and  have  no  more  to  say  to  them.  All  that 
was  in  his  view  was  honest  marriage.  He  said  he 
had  never  been  in  the  lady's  company  but  once,  and 
that  was  the  day  before  at  Lady  Betty  Williams's. 
He  said  he  wrent  thither,  knowing  she  was  to  be 
there :  for  having  for  some  time  had  it  in  his  head 
to  marry,  this  was  the  lady  he  had  pitched  upon  in 
his  mind,  from  the  character  he  had  of  her  from 
every  mouth  at  the  Northampton  races. 

Now,  said  he,  I  shall  have  some  difficulty  to  ob- 
tain her,  notwithstanding  my  fortune  is  so  great ; 
for  every  one  who  sees  her  is  in  love  with  her ;  and 
he  named  several  gentlemen  who  laid  close  siege 
to  her. 

She  brought  a  servant  up  with  her,  said  he,  who 
pines  after  the  country,  and  is  actually  gone,  or  soon 
will.  Her  cousin  enquires  of  every  one  after  a  pro- 
per servant  for  her.  You,  Wilson,  said  he,  are  hand- 
some and  genteel ;  he  was  pleased  to  say  so.     You 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  257 

have  a  modest  humble  look  :  you  know  all  the  duties 
of  a  servant :  get  yourself  entertained,  and  your  for- 
tune is  made  for  life,  if  by  your  means  I  obtain  the 
lady.  I  have  already  tendered  myself,  said  he.  Per- 
haps she  will  have  me  in  a  few  days.  I  don't  expect 
to  be  denied,  if  she  be  disengaged,  as  it  is  said  she 
is.  If  you  can  get  into  her  service,  you  will  find  out 
every-thing.  This  is  all  that  is  to  be  done  :  but  you 
must  never  mention  my  name,  nor  ever  know  any- 
thing of  me,  as  I  go  and  come. 

Sir  Hargrave  declared,  that  his  heart  was  burnt  up 
with  the  love  of  the  lady:  and  if  he  succeeded  (as 
he  had  little  doubt,  even  without  my  help,  had  I  been 
actually  in  Merceda's  service)  you  will,  said  he,  as 
my  lady's  servant,  be  mine  of  course ;  you  shall  ne- 
ver wear  a  livery  4  and  you  shall  be  my  gentleman, 
till  I  can  get  a  place  for  you  in  the  customs.  This, 
may  it  please  your  honour,  he  knew  I  had  long 
aimed  at ;  and  it  had  been  often  promised  by  him- 
self, and  my  other  two  masters  ;  and  was  their  first 
promise  when  they  wanted  to  engage  me  in  any  of 
their  schemes,  though  they  never  thought  more  of 
it  when  the  service  was  over.  If  I  got  but  myself 
engaged,  I  was,  on  the  day  I  entered  into  my  lady's 
service,  to  have  as  an  earnest  ten  guineas. 

Encouraged  by  such  promises  (and  the  project 
being  an  honester  one  than  ever  Sir  Hargrave,  or 
either  of  the  other  two,  had  sought  to  engage  me 
in)  I  offered  my  service  to  my  lady;  and,  on  Mr. 
Bagenhall's  writing  a  good  character  of  me,  was  ac- 
cepted. 

I  could  have  been  happy  in  the  service  of  this 
lady  all  the  days  of  my  life.  She  is  all  goodness  : 
all  the  servants,  every-body,  gentle  and  simple, 
adored  her:  but  she,  unexpectedly,  refusing  to  have 
Sir  Hargrave,  and  he  being  afraid  that  one  of  her 
three  or  four  lovers  would  cut  him  out,  he  resolved 
z3 


258  THE  HISTORY  OF 

to  take  more  violent  measures  than  he  had  at  first 
intended. 

If  any  man  was  ever  mad  in  love,  it  was  Sir 
Hargrave.  But  then  he  was  as  mad  with  anger  to 
be  refused.  Sir  Hargrave  was  ever  thought  to  be 
one  of  the  proudest  men  in  England  :  and  he  com- 
plained that  my  lady  used  him  worse  than  she  did 
any-body  else.  But  it  was  not  her  way  to  use  any 
any-body  ill,  I  saw  that. 

Nevertheless  he  was  resolved  to  strike  a  bold  stroke 

for  a  wife,  as  were  his  words  from  the  title  of  a 

play  :  and  between  us  we  settled  the  matter  in  one 

night :  for  I  had  found  means  to  get  out  unknown 

to  the  family. 

It  will  be  trespassing  too  much  upon  your  ho- 
nour's patience,  to  be  very  particular  in  our  con- 
trivances.    I  will  be  as  brief  as  possible. 

My  lady  was  to  go  to  a  masquerade.  I  got  into 
the  knowledge  of  every-thing  about  it.  The  maids 
were  as  full  of  the  matter  as  their  master  and  mis- 
tresses. 

Itwasagreed  tomake  the  chairmen  fuddled.  Two 
of  Mr.  Merceda'sjbotmen  were  to  undertake  the  task. 
Brandy  was  put  into  their  liquor,  to  hasten  them. 

They  were  soon  overcome.  The  weather  was 
cold  :  they  drank  briskly,  and  were  laid  up  safe.  I 
then  hired  too  chance  chairmen,  and  gave  them 
orders,  as  had  been  contrived. 

I  had  twenty  guineas  given  me  in  hand,  for  my 
encouragement ;  in  which  were  included  the  pro- 
mised ten. 

1  had,  when  I  was  my  first  master  Bagenhall's 
clerk,  made  acquaintance  with  several  clerks  of  the 
Custom-house,  particularly  with  one  Awberry,  a  so- 
ber modest  man  ;  who  has  two  sisters  ;  to  one  of 
whom  I  am  contracted,  and  always,  for  two  years 
past,  intended  to  make  my  wife,  as  soon  as  I  should 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  259 

be  in  any  way  to  maintain  her.     The  mother  is   a 
widow.     All  of  them  are  very  honest  people. 

Mr.  Awberry  the  brother  being  assured  by  me 
(and  I  was  well  assured  of  it  myself,  and  had  no 
doubt  about  it)  that  marriage  was  intended ;  and 
knowing  Sir  Hargrave's  great  estate  (and  having 
indeed  seen  Sir  Hargrave  on  the  occasion,  and  re- 
ceived his  protestations  of  honour)  engaged  his  mo- 
ther and  sisters  in  it;  and  the  result,  as  to  them  and 
me,  was,  that  I  was  to  receive,  as  soon  as  the  knot 
was  tied,  a  hundred  guineas  besides  the  twenty ; 
and  moreover  an  absolute  promise  of  a  place ;  and 
twenty  pounds  a  year  till  I  got  it ;  and  then  my 
marriage  with  young  Mrs.  Awberry  was  to  follow. 

The  widow  has  an  annuity  of  thirty  pounds,  which, 
with  her  son's  salary,  keeps  them  above  want. 

She  lives  at  Paddington.  There  is  a  back  door  and 
garden,  as  it  happens,  convenient  to  bring  any-body 
in,  or  carry  any-body  out,  secretly ;  and  hither  it 
was  resolved,  if  possible,  that  the  lady  should  be 
brought,  and  a  Fleet  parson  and  his  clerk  ready  sta- 
tioned, to  perform  the  ceremony ;  and  then  all  that 
the  bridegroom  wished  was  to  follow  of  course. 

Sir  Hargrave  doubted  not  (though  he  was  fruitful 
in  contrivances,  and  put  many  others  in  practice) 
but  he  should  be  detected  if  he  carried  the  lady  to 
his  own  house.  And  as  he  was  afraid  that  the  chair- 
men (notwithstanding  several  other  artful  contriv- 
ances) would  be  able  to  find  out  the  place  they 
carried  her  to,  he  had  ordered  his  chariot-and-six  to 
be  at  the  widow  Awberry 's  by  six  in  the  morning, 
with  three  servants  on  horseback,  armed,  and  a 
horse  and  pistols  besides.  After  marriage  and  con- 
summation, he  was  resolved  to  go  to  his  house  on 
the  forest,  but  not  to  stay  there ;  but  to  go  to  Mr. 
Merceda's  house  near  Newbury,  where  he  doubted 
not  but  he  should  be  secret  till  he  thought  fit  to  pro- 


260  THE    HISTORY   OF 

duce  the  lady  as  Lady  Pollexfen  :  and  often,  very 
often,  did  he  triumph  on  the  victory  he  should 
obtain  over  her  other  lovers,  and  over  her  own 
proud  heart,  as  he  would  have  it  to  be. 

The  parson,  Sir,  came  :  the  clerk  was  there  :  but 
what  with  fits,  prayers,  tears,  and  one  thing  or  other 
(at  one  time  the  lady  being  thought  irrecoverable, 
having  received  some  unintended  hurt  in  her  strug- 
gling to  get  out  of  a  door,  as  I  heard  it  was)  Sir 
Hargrave  in  terror  dismissed  the  parson ;  and  re- 
solved to  carry  the  lady  (who  by  that  time  was  re- 
covered) in  the  chariot  to  his  seat  at  Windsor ;  and 
then,  staying  there  only  to  marry,  go  to  New- 
bury ;  and  from  thence  break  out  by  degrees,  as  the 
matter  should  be  taken. 

My  lady  screamed,  resisted,  and  did  all  that 
woman  could  do,  to  get  free  :  and  more  than  once, 
people  who  heard  her  cry  out  for  help  were  put  on  a 
wrong  scent :  and  had  we  not  met  with  your  honour 
(who  would  see  with  your  own  eyes,  and  hear  with 
your  own  ears)  the  affair  had  been  all  over  in  the 
way  Sir  Hargrave  wished,  and  was  at  so  much 
pains  and  expence  to  effect.  For,  Sir,  the  chariot 
generally  drove  so  fast,  that  before  passengers  could 
have  resolved  whether  to  interfere  or  not,  we  should 
have  been  out  of  sight  or  reach. 

Sir  Hargrave  is  in  the  greatest  rage  with  us  all, 
because  we  stood  not  better  by  him.  He  refuses 
any  favour  to  me,  and  threatens  to  pistol  me  the 
moment  he  sees  me.     That's  to  be  my  reward. 

We  were  four  at  setting  out  from  Paddington:  but 
one  of  the  servants  was  dispatched  to  prepossess  an 
old  servant  of  Sir  Hargrave's  mother,  at  Colne- 
brook,  who  keeps  there  a  kind  of  haberdashery 
shop;  and  where  he  proposed  to  get  some  refresh- 
ment for  the  lady,  if  he  could  make  her  take  any. 
For  my  part,  I  wonder  how  she  kept  out  of  fits  on 
the  road.     She  had  enow  of  them  at  Paddington, 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  261 

The  two  servants  who  staid  about  Sir  Hargrave, 
are  discharged  with  all  the  marks  of  indignation 
that  a  master  incensed  by  such  a  disappointment 
could  express ;  and,  as  I  said  before,  he  is  resolved 
to  pistol  me  the  moment  he  sees  me.  Yet  I  too 
well  served  him  for  the  peace  of  my  conscience. 

A  coach-and-four  was  ordered  to  carry  the  widow 
and  her  two  daughters  to  Reading,  to  the  New  Inn 
there,  where  they  were  to  reside  for  a  week  or  so, 
till  all  was  blown  over;  and  that  they  might  be  out 
of  the  way  of  answering  questions  :  and  my  brother 
Awberry,  as  I  call  him,  and  hope  to  make  him  (for 
he  is  a  very  honest  man)  was  to  go  to  them  there. 

And  there,  in  all  probability,  had  Sir  Hargrave 
succeeded,  and  been  as  good  as  his  word,  should 
I  have  been  the  husband  of  as  tender-hearted  a 
young  woman  as  any  in  the  parish  she  lives  in. 

Here  is  a  very  long  letter,  may  it  please  you,  Sir. 
I  have  shortened  it,  however,  as  much  as  I  could : 
but  in  hatred  to  myslf,  and  the  vile  ways  I  have, 
by  excess  of  good-nature,  and  by  meeting  with 
wicked  masters,  been  drawn  into — For  the  clearing 
of  my  sister's  character,  who  lives  in  credit  among 
her  neighbours,  and  of  every  other  person  who 
might  otherwise  have  been  suspected — In  justice  to 
Mrs.  Awberry's  and  her  two  daughters,  and  her  son's 
characters — And  in  justice  no  far  to  Sir  Hargrave's, 
as  that  he  intended  marriage  (and  had  he  not,  he 
would  have  found  no  friends  in  his  designs  at  Pad- 
dington)  and  so  far  as  to  clear  him  of  having  not 
offered  the  least  incivility  to  my  lady — [Had  he 
intended,  or  been  provoked  so  to  do,  he  was  too 
well  watched  by  the  widow,  and  her  daughters,  to 
have  been  permitted;  and  that  by  my  own  request, 
which  was,  that  they  should  be  ready  to  run  in 
whenever  they  heard  her  cry  out,  and  that  they 
would  not  leave  Sir  Hargrave  alone  with  my  lady 


262  THE    HISTORY   OF 

for  six  minutes,  till  their  hands  were  joined  in  wed- 
lock]— In  justice  I  say  to  all  these  persons,  I 
thought  proper  thus  to  give  you,  Sir,  all  that  I  knew 
relating  to  this  wicked  transaction.  And  if,  may  it 
please  your  honour,  I  were  to  be  taken  up,  I  could 
say  no  more  before  a  magistrate;  except  this,  which 
I  had  like  to  have  forgot ;  which  is,  that  had  it  not 
been  for  me,  some  mischief  might  have  been  done, 
between  Sir  Hargrave's  servants  and  yours,  if  not 
to  your  honour's  person. 

All  that  I  most  humbly  beg,  is  the  pardon  of  so 
sweet  a  lady.  I  have  chosen,  ever-to-be-honoured 
Sir,  to  write  to  you,  whose  goodness  is  so  generally 
talked  of,  and  who  have  so  nobly  redeemed  and 
protected  her.  Mr.  Reeves,  1  know,  has  suffered 
too  much  in  his  mind  to  forgive  me.  He  is  a  worthy 
gentleman.  I  am  sorry  for  the  disturbance  I  have 
given  him.  I  have  hopes  given  me,  that  I  shall  get 
employment  on  the  keys,  or  as  a  tide-waiter  extra- 
ordinary. 

Please  the  Lord,  I  will  never,  never  more,  be  the 
tool  of  wicked  masters.  All  I  wish  for  is,  to  be 
able  to  do  justice  to  the  love  of  an  honest  young 
woman*  and  I  am  resolved,  whether  so  enabled 
or  not,  to  starve,  rather  than  to  go  any  more,  no, 
not  for  a  single  hour,  into  the  service  of  the  ini- 
quitous gentlemen  1  have  so  often  named  in  this 
long  letter. 

If  I  might  be  assured,  that  I  may  pursue  unmo- 
lested any  honest  calling,  so  as  that  I  may  not  be 
tempted  or  driven  into  unhappy  courses,  my  heart 
would  be  at  rest. 

There  might  have  been  murder  in  this  affair:  that 
shocks  me  to  think  of.  O  Sir,  good,  excellent, 
brave,  and  the  most  worthy  of  gentlemen,  you  have 
given  to  me  as  great  a  deliverance,  as  you  have  to 
the  lady:  yea,  greater;  for  mine  may  be  a  deliver- 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  263 

ance,  if  I  make  a  proper  use  of  it,  of  soul  as  well 
as  body-     Which  God  grant,  as  also  j'our  honour's 
health  and  prosperity,  to  the  prayers  of 
Your  honour's  ever-devoted 

Humble  servant, 

WILLIAM  WILSON. 

I  thought  1  had  something  else  to  say:  something 
it  is  of  high  importance :  your  life  is  threatened, 
Sir:  God  preserve  your  precious  life.   Amen! 


LETTER  XXXVI. 

MISS    BYRON    TO    MISS    SELBY. 

Friday,  February  24. 
My  cousin  Reeves  has  given  assurance  to  the  sister 
of  that  Wilson,  that  he  may,  unmolested  by  any  of 
us,  pursue  the  best  means  he  can  fall  upon  for  the 
obtaining  of  an  honest  livelihood. 

In  every-thing  it  is  determined  to  follow  the  ad- 
vice of  my  deliverer. 

What  a  letter  is  that  fellow's  !  What  men  are 
there  in  the  world  ! 

Of  such  we  have  read  :  but  I  hoped,  that  I  might 
have  escaped  suffering  by  any  such. 

We  are  extremely  disturbed  at  the  fellow's  post- 
script: and  the  more,  as  we  are  told  by  several  peo- 
ple, that  Sir  Hargrave  will  not  sit  down  quietly;  buL 
threatens  vengeance  upon  Sir  Charles.  I  wish  I  had 
not  come  to  London. 

I  hope  my  grandmamma's  spirits  are  not  affected 
by  what  she  knows  of  the  matter.  It  was  very  good 
of  my  aunt  Selby  to  take  the  measures  she  did,  in 
softening  every  circumstance,  and  not  to  let  her 


264  THE    HISTORY    OF 

know  any-thing  till  the  danger  was  over.  But  in- 
deed it  was  but  the  natural  effect  of  that  prudence 
which  regulates  all  the  actions  of  my  honoured  aunt. 

My  grandmamma  has  such  strength  of  mind,  that 
now  she  knows  I  am  safe,  and  not  unhappy,  I  dare 
say  she  will  by  degrees  bear  to  hear  my  narrations 
read.  She  will  be  more  uneasy  if  she  thinks  any- 
thing is  kept  from  her. 

Yet  I  know  that  her  tenderness  and  her  love  for 
her  Harriet  will  cost  her  some  anguish,  some  sighs, 
some  tears,  as  she  reads,  or  hears  read,  the  cruelty 
her  girl  has  been  treated  with  :  who,  so  tenderly 
brought  up,  so  greatly  indulged,  never  before  knew 
what  harshness  was.  But  then  she  will  have  more 
joy,  I  hope,  in  my  deliverance,  than  she  will  have 
pain  in  my  sufferings.  And  pray  let  her  know,  that 
I  am  every  day  less  and  less  sensible  of  the  pain  in 
my  stomach,  of  which  I  was  so  apprehensive,  as 
really,  at  the  time,  to  think  it  a  mortal  blow.  My 
grandmamma  has  told  us  girls,  you  know,  my  Lucy, 
twenty  and  twenty  frightful  stories  of  the  vile  en- 
terprizes  of  men,  against  innocent  creatures;  and 
will  therefore  call  to  mind  stories  which  have  con- 
cluded much  worse  than,  blessed  be  God,  mine 

has  done. 

*  *  * 

Just  now  I  have  received  a  congratulatory 
pacquet  of  letters: 

One  from  my  aunt  Selby,  such  a  sweetly  kind, 
such  a  truly  maternal  letter ! 

One  from  my  dearest  grandmamma.  I  will  put  it 
next  my  heart,  whenever  I  feel  there  any  of  that 
pain,  of  which  she  is  so  kindly  apprehensive. 

One  from  Nancy — Dear  girl ! — She  is  very  gene- 
rous to  forget  her  own  malady  to  condole  and  con- 
gratulate me.  Your  brother  James,  my  Lucy,  has 
written  me  a  very  kind  letter.     He  is  a  good  young 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  265 

man:  God  keep  him  so!  What  a  mischievous  crea- 
ture is  a  bad  man  ! 

I  have  a  charming  letter,  by  the  post,  from  my 
godfather  Deane:  he  has  heard  nothing  of  what 
has  happened ;  and  I  am  sure  is  too  solicitous  for 
my  welfare,  to  take  it  well,  if  I  do  not  let  him 
know  something  about  it:  I  will  therefore  soon 
write  to  him. 

But  your  letter,  my  Lucy ! — What,  I  warrant, 
you  thought  I  had  forgot  your  letter  in  the  enume- 
ration of  the  contents  of  the  precious  pacquet !  If 
I  had,  your  goodness,  your  love,  might  have  made 
you  forgive  me :  but  I  never  would  have  forgiven 
myself. 

But  you  and  I,  my  dear,  write  for  all  to  see 
what  we  write :  and  so  I  reserved  yours  to  be  last- 
mentioned.  Only  I  slid  in  my  godfather  Deane's 
between  ;  not  because  I  love  him  better  than  I  do 
my  Lucy — No,  that  is  impossible ! — But  because  I 
had  a  mind  to  shew  you,  that  I  was  hastening  to  be 
quite  well,  and  so  assumed  my  little  saucy  tricks, 
and  surprises,  as  if  it  were  possible  for  me  to  be 
heedless,  where  my  love  to  my  Lucy  was  in  the 
question. 

And  so  you  expect  the  particular  character  and 
description  of  the  persons  of  this  more  than  amiable 
brother  and  sister.  Need  you  to  have  told  me  that 
you  do  ?  And  could  you  think  that  after  having 
wasted  so  many  quires  of  paper  in  giving  you  the 
characters  of  people,  many  of  whom  deserved  not 
to  be  drawn  out  from  the  common  crowd  of  mor- 
tals, I  would  forbear  to  give  yoxi  those  of  persons 
who  adorn  the  age  in  which  they  live,  and  even 
human  nature  ? 

You  don't  question,  you  say,  if  I  begin  in  their 
praises,  but  my  gratitude  will  make  me  write  in  a 
sublime  style ;  so  you  phrase  it;  and  are  ready,  you 

A  A 


"2,66  THE   HISTORY   Or 

promise  me,  to  take  with  allowance,  all  the  fine 
things  from  me,  which  Mr.  Reeves  has  already 
taught  you  to  expect. 

You  may  be  right  in  your  expectations,  as  far  as 
I  know  ;  for  my  grandfather  (so  many  years  ago) 
used  to  say,  that  his  little  Byron  was  an  enthusiast 
in  her  gratitude.  But,  however,  when  I  say  any- 
thing of  the  exalted  minds,  of  the  expanded  hearts, 
of  the  amiable  manners,  of  this  happy  brother  and 
sister,  which  seems  to  exceed,  in  my  praises,  the 
bounds  you  will  all  be  willing  to  set  me,  then  let 
the  overflowings  be  carried  to  account  of  the 
grateful  enthusiasm,  and  only  to  that. 

Which  shall  I  begin  with  ?  You  will  have  a  sharp 
look-out  upon  me,  you  say :  Ah,  my  Lucy  !  I  know 
what  you  mean.  But  I  am  safe  from  every-thing 
but  my  gratitude,  I  will  assure  you. 

And  so,  if  I  begin  with  the  character  of  the  bro- 
ther, then  will  you  join  with  my  uncle,  shake  your 
head,  and  cry,  Ah!  my  Harriet!  If  I  begin  with  the 
sister,  will  you  not  say,  that  I  save  my  choicest  sub- 
ject for  the  last?  How  difficult  is  it  to  avoid  censure, 
when  there  is  a  resolution  taken  to  be  censorious. 

Well,  but  keep  a  look-out,  if  you  please,  my  Lucy: 
not  the  least  shadow  of  reserve  shall  it  give  to  my 
heart :  my  pen  shall  be  honest  to  that  heart ;  and  I 
shall  be  benefited,  I  am  sure,  by  thejhithful  wounds 
of  such  affectionate,  and  equally-beloved  as  revered 
friends — And  so,  pen,  take  thy  course. 

Miss  Grandison — Yes,  my  volant,  my  self-con- 
ducted quill,  begin  with  the  sister,  say  my  Lucy 
what  she  pleases — 

Miss  Grandison  is  about  twenty-four;  of  a  fine 
stature:  she  has  dignity  in  her  aspect;  and  a  very 
penetrating  black  eye,  with  which  she  does  what  she 
pleases:  her  hair  is  black,  very  fine,  and  naturally 
curls:  she  is  not  fair;  but  her  complexion  is  delicate 


SIR  CHARLES  GRAXDISON.  267 

and  clear,  and  promises  a  long  duration  to  her  love- 
liness :  her  features  are  generally  regular :  her  nose 
is  a  little  aquiline  ;  but  that  is  so  far  from  being  a 
blemish,  that  it  gives  a  kind  of  majesty  to  her  other 
features :  her  teeth  are  white  and  even  :  her  mouth 
is  perfectly  lovely,  and  a  modest  archness  appears  in 
her  smiles,  that  makes  one  both  love  and  fear  her, 
when  she  begins  to  speak.  She  is  finely  shaped  ; 
and,  in  her  air  and  whole  appearance,  perfectly  gen- 
teel. 

She  herself  says,  that  before  her  brother  came  to 
England,  she  was  thought  to  be  proud,  pert,  and 
lofty  :  but  1  hardly  believe  her  ;  for  the  man  lives 
not,  it  is  my  belief,  who  in  fourteen  months  time 
(and  Sir  Charles  has  not  been  longer  arrived)  could 
so  totally  eradicate  those  qualities  in  a  mind  of  which 
they  had  taken  possession,  as  that  they  should  not 
occasionally  shew  themselves. 

She  has  charming  spirits.  I  dare  say  she  sings 
well,  from  the  airs  she  now-and-then  warbles  in 
the  gaiety  of  her  heart,  as  she  goes  up  and  down 
stairs  ;  she  is  very  polite  ;  yet  has  a  vein  of  raillery, 
that,  were  she  not  polite,  would  give  one  too  much 
apprehension  for  one's  ease :  but  I  am  sure  she  is 
frank,  easy,  and  good  humoured  :  and,  by  turning 
over  all  the  just  and  handsome  things  which  are 
attributed  to  herself,  to  her  brother's  credit,  she 
must  be  equally  humble  and  generous. 

She  says,  she  has  but  lately  taken  a  very  great 
liking  to  reading :  but  I  am  ready  to  question  what 
she  says,  when  she  speaks  any-fhing  that  some  would 
construe  to  her  disadvantage.  She  pretends,  that 
she  was  too  volatile,  too  gay,  too  airy,  to  be  confin- 
ed to  sedentary  amusements.  Her  father,  however, 
according  to  the  genteelest  and  most  laudable  mo- 
dern education  for  women,  had  given  her  a  master, 
who  taught  her  history  and  geography ;  in  both 
A  a  2 


268  THE  HISTORY  OF 

which  she  acknowledges  she  made  some  progress.  Ire 
music,  she  owns  she  has  skill:  but  I  am  told  by  her 
maid  who  attended  me  by  her  young  lady's  direc- 
tion, and  who  delights  to  praise  her  mistress,  that 
she  reads  and  speaks  French  and  Italian  :  that  she 
writes  finely;  and  is  greatly  admired  for  her  wit, 
prudence,  and  obligingness.  Nobody,  said  Jenny 
(who  is  a  sensible  young  woman,  a  clergyman's 
daughter,  well  educated,  and  very  obliging)  can 
stand  against  her  good-natured  raillery :  her  brother, 
she  says,  is  not  spared  :  but  he  takes  delight  in  her 
vivacity,  and  gives  way  to  it ;  when  it  is  easy  to  see, 
that  he  could  take  her  down,  if  he  pleased.  And 
then,  added  this  good  young  woman,  she  is  an  ex- 
cellent manager  in  a  family,  finely  as  she  is  educated 
[I  rejoiced  to  hear  that,  for  the  honour  of  our 
reading  ladies,  as  in  Miss  Clement's  case]  :  she 
knows  every-thing,  and  how  to  direct  what  should 
be  done,  from  the  private  family-dinner,  to  a  sump- 
tuous entertainment :  and  every  day  inspects,  and 
approves,  or  alters,  the  bill  of  fare  :  by  the  way,  my 
Lucy,  she  is  an  early  riser — Do  you  mind  that?  And 
so  can  do  every-thing  with  ease,  pleasure,  and  with- 
out hurry  and  confusion:  for  all  her  servants  are 
early  risers  of  course.  What  servants  can  for  shame 
be  in  bed,  at  a  reasonable  hour  to  be  up,  when  they 
have  a  master  or  mistress's  example  for  early  rising  ? 

Yet  this  fine  lady  loves  to  go  to  the  public  places, 
and  often  goes,  and  makes  a  brilliant  figure  there. 
She  has  time  for  them,  and  earns  her  pleasures  by 
her  early  rising. 

Miss  Grandison,  Jenny  tells  me,  has  two  humble 
servants  [I  wonder  she  has  not  two-and-twenty]  : 
one  is  Sir  Walter  Watkyns,  a  man  of  a  large  estate 
in  Somersetshire  ;  the  other  is  Lord  G.  son  of  the 
Earl  of  G. ;  but  neither  of  them  highly  approved  by 
her :  yet  Jenny  says,  they  are  both  of  them  hand- 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISOK.  269 

some  men,  and  admired  by  the  ladies :  this  makes 
me  afraid  that  they  are  modern  men ;  and  pay  their 
court  by  the  exterior  appearance,  rather  than  by 
interior  worth.  Who,  my  Lucy,  that  has  heard  what 
my  late  grandfather  has  said,  and  my  grandmamma 
still  says,  of  the  men  in  their  youthful  days,  will  not 
say,  that  we  have  our  lots  cast  in  an  age  of  petits 
maitres,  and  insignificants  ? 

Such  an  amiable  woman  is  Miss  Charlotte  Gran- 
dison — May  I  be  found,  on  further  acquaintance, 
but  half  as  amiable  in  her  eyes,  as  she  is  in  mine  ! — 
Don't  be  jealous,  Lucy !  I  hope  I  have  a  large  heart. 
I  hope  there  is  room  in  it  for  half  a  dozen  sweet 
female  friends  ! — Yes,  although  another  love  were 
to  intervene  I  could  not  bear,  that  even  the  affec- 
tion due  to  the  man  of  my  choice,  were  I  to  marry, 
should,  like  Aaron's  rod,  swallow  up  all  the  rest. 

But  now  for  her  brother — my  deliverer  ! — 

But  pray  now,  Lucy,  dont'tyou  come  with  your 
sharp  look-out :  I  warrant  you  will  expect  on  this 
occasion  to  read  the  tumults  of  the  poor  girl's  heart 
in  her  character  and  description  of  a  man,  to  whom 
she  is  so  much  obliged! — But  what  if  she  disappoint 
you,  and  yet  do  justice  to  his  manifold  excellencies? 
What,  if  she  find  some  faults  in  him,  that  his  sister 
has  not  ? 

Parading  Harriet,  methinks  you  say  !  Teazing 
girl !  Go  on,  go  on  ;  leave  it  to  us  to  find  you  out : 
and  take  care  that  the  very  faults  you  pretend  to 
discover,  do  not  pass  for  a  colour  only,  and  lead  to 
your  detection. 

Thank  you.,  Lucy,  for  your  caution  :  but  I  will 
not  be  obliged  to  it.  My  pen  shall  follow  the  dic- 
tates of  my  heart;  and  if  it  be  as  honest  to  me,  as  I 
think  it  is  to  every-body  else,  I  hope  1  have  nothing 
to  fear  either  from  ijour  look-out,  or,  which  is  still  a 
sharper,  my  uncle  Selby's. 
A  a  3 


270  THE  HISTORY  OF 

Sir  Charles  Grandison,  in  his  person,  is  really  a 
very  fine  man.  He  is  tall;  rather  slender  than  full ; 
his  face  in  shape  is  a  fine  oval :  he  seems  to  have 
florid  health  ;  health  confirmed  by  exercise. 

His  complexion  seems  to  have  been  naturally  too 
fine  for  a  man  :  but  as  if  he  were  above  being  re- 
gardful of  it,  his  face  is  overspread  with  a  manly 
sunniness  [I  want  a  word]  that  shews  he  has  been 
in  warmer  climates  than  England :  and  so  it  seems 
he  has ;  since  the  tour  of  Europe  has  not  contented 
him.  He  has  visited  some  parts  of  Asia,  and  even 
of  Africa,  Egypt  particularly. 

I  wonder  what  business  a  man  has  for  such  fine 
teeth,  and  so  fine  a  mouth,  as  Sir  Charles  Grandison 
might  boast  of,  were  he  vain. 

In  his  aspect  there  is  something  great  and  noble, 
that  shews  him  to  be  of  rank,  Were  kings  to  be 
chosen  for  beauty  and  majesty  of  person,  Sir  Charles 
Grandison  would  have  few  competitors.  His  eye — 
Indeed,  my  Lucy,  his  eye  shews,  if  possible,  more 
of  sparkling  intelligence  than  that  of  his  sister — 

Now  pray  be  quiet,  my  dear  uncle  Selby  !  What 
is  beauty  in  a  man  to  me  ?  You  all  know,  that  I 
never  thought  beauty  a  qualification  in  a  man. 

And  yet,  this  grandeur  in  his  person  and  air  is 
accompanied  with  so  much  ease  and  freedom  of 
manners,  as  engages  our  love  with  our  reverence. 
His  good  breeding  renders  him  very  accessible. 
His  sister  says,  he  is  always  the  first  to  break 
through  the  restraints,  and  to  banish  the  diffidences, 
that  will  generally  attend  persons  on  a  quite  new 
acquaintance.  He  may ;  for  he  is  sure  of  being 
acceptable  in  whatever  he  does  or  says, 

Very  true,  Lucy  :  shake  your  head  if  you  please. 

In  a  word,  he  has  such  an  easy,  yet  manly  polite- 
ness, as  well  in  his  dress,  as  in  his  address  (no  singu- 
larity appearing  in  either)  that  were  he  not  a  fine 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  271 

figure  of  a  man,  but  were  even  plain  and  hard- 
featured,  he  would  be  thought  (what  is  far  more 
eligible  in  a  man,  than  mere  beauty)  very  agree- 
able. 

Sir  Charles  Grandison,  my  dear,  has  travelled,  we 
may  say,  to  some  purpose 

Well  might  his  sister  tell  Mr.  Reeves,  that  when- 
ever he  married,  he  would  break  half  a  score  hearts. 

Upon  my  word,  Lucy,  he  has  too  many  personal 
advantages  for  a  woman,  who  loved  him  with  peculi- 
arity, to  be  easy  with,  whatever  may  be  his  virtue, 
from  the  foible  our  sex  in  general  love  to  indulge 
for  handsome  men.  For,  O  my  dear,  women's  eyes 
are  sad  giddy  things ;  and  will  run  away  with  their 
sense,  with  their  understandings,  beyond  the  power 
of  being  overtaken  either  by  stop  thief,  or  hue-and- 
cry. 

I  know  that  here  you  will  bid  me  take  care  not  to 
increase  the  number  of  the  giddy :  and  so  I  will, 
my  Lucy. 

The  good  sense  of  this  real  fine  gentleman  is  not 
as  lean  find,  rusted  over  by  sourness,  by  moroseness; 
he  is  above  quarrelling  with  the  world  for  trifles : 
but  he  is  still  more  above  making  such  compliances 
with  it,  as  would  impeach  either  his  honour  or  con- 
science. Once  Miss  Grandison,  speaking  of  her 
brother,  said,  My  brother  is  valued  by  those  who 
know  him  best,  not  so  much  for  being  a  handsome 
man ;  not  so  much  for  his  birth  and  fortune ;  nor 
for  this  or  that  single  worthiness  ;  as  for  being,  in 
the  great  and  yet  comprehensive  sense  of  the  word, 
a  good  man .  And  at  another  time  she  said,  that  he 
lived  to  himself,  and  to  his  own  heart ;  and  that, 
though  he  had  the  happiness  to  please  every-body, 
yet  he  made  the  judgment  or  approbation  of  the 
world  matter  but  of  second  consideration.  In  a 
word,  added  she,  Sir  Charles  Grandison,  my  brother 


2/2  THE  HISTORY  OF 

(and  when  she  looks  proud,  it  is  when  she  says,  miy 
brother)  is  not  to  be  misled  either  by  false  glory,  or 
false  shame,  which  he  calls,  The  great  snares  of 
virtue. 

What  a  man  is  this,  so  to  act ! — What  a  woman  is 
this,  so  to  distinguish  her  brother's  excellencies ! 

What  a  poor  creature  am  I,  compared  to  either  of 
them  !  And  yet  I  have  had  my  admirers.  So  per- 
haps may  still  more  faulty  creatures  among  their 
inferiors.  If,  my  Lucy,  we  have  so  much  good  sense 
as  to  make  fair  comparisons,  what  have  we  to  do  but 
to  look  up,  rather  than  downward,  in  order  to  ob- 
tain the  grace  of  humility. 

But  let  me  tell  you,  :ny  dear,  that  Sir  Charles  does 
not  look  to  be  so  great  a  self-denier,  as  his  sister 
seems  to  think  him,  when  she  says,  he  lives  to  him- 
self, and  to  his  own  heart,  rather  than  to  the  opi- 
nion of  the  world. 

He  dresses  to  the  fashion,  rather  richly,  'tis  true, 
than  gaudily;  but  still  richly:  so  that  he  gives  his 
tine  person  its  full  consideration.  He  has  a  great 
deal  of  vivacity  in  his  whole  aspect ;  as  well  as  in  his 
eve.  Mrs.  Jenny  says,  that  he  is  a  great  admirer 
of  handsome  women.  His  equipage  is  perfectly  in 
taste,  though  not  so  much  to  the  glare  of  taste,  as  if 
he  aimed  either  to  inspire  or  shew  emulation.  He 
seldom  travels  without  a  set,  and  suitable  attend- 
ants ;  and,  what  I  think  seems  a  little  to  savour  of 
singularity,  his  horses  are  not  docked :  their  tails 
are  only  tied  up  when  they  are  on  the  road  This 
I  took  notice  of  when  we  came  to  town.  I  want, 
methinks,  my  dear,  to  find  some  fault  in  his  out- 
ward appearance,  were  it  but  to  make  you  think 
me  impartial  ;  my  gratitude  to  him,  and  my  vene- 
ration for  him,  notwithstanding. 

But  if  he  be  of  opinion  that  the  tails  of  these  no- 
ble animals  are  not  only  a  natural  ornament,  but  are 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  273 

of  real  use  to  defend  them  from  the  vexatious  in- 
sects that  in  summer  are  so  apt  to  annoy  them  (as 
Jenny  once  told  me  was  thought  to  be  his  reason  for 
not  depriving  his  cattle  of  a  defence,  which  nature 
gave  them)  how  far  from  a  dispraise  is  this  humane 
consideration !  And  how,  in  the  more  minute  as 
well  as  we  may  suppose  in  the  greater  instances, 
does  he  deserve  the  character  of  the  man  of  mercy, 
who  will  be  merciful  to  his  beast ! 

I  have  met  with  persons,  who  call  those  men 
good,  that  yet  allow  themselves  in  liberties  which 
no  good  man  can  take.  But  I  dare  say,  that  Miss 
Grandison  means  by  good,  when  she  calls  her  brother, 
with  so  much  pride,  a  good  man,  what  I,  and  what 
you,  my  Lucy,  would  understand  by  the  word. 

With  so  much  spirit,  life,  and  gallantry,  in  the 
first  appearance  of  Sir  Charles  Grandison,  you  may 
suppose,  that  had  I  not  been  so  dreadfully  terrified 
and  ill-used,  and  so  justly  apprehensive  of  worse 
treatment ;  and  had  I  been  offered  another  protec- 
tion; I  should  hardly  have  acted  the  frighted  bird 
flying  from  the  hawk,  to  which,  as  Mr.  Reeves  tells 
me,  Sir  Charles  (though  politely,  and  kindly  enough, 
yet  too  sensibly  for  my  recollection)  compared  me. 
Do  you  wonder,  Lucy,  that  I  cannot  hold  up  my 
head,  when  I  recollect  the  figure  I  must  make  in 
that  odious  masquerade-habit,  hanging  by  my  clasp- 
ing arms  about  the  neck  of  such  a  young  gentleman? 
Can  1  be  more  effectually  humbled  than  by  such  a 
recollection  ?  And  yet  is  not  this  an  instance  of 
that  false  shame  in  me,  to  which  Sir  Charles  Gran- 
dison is  so  greatly  superior  ? 

Surely,  surely,  I  have  had  my  punishment  for  my 
compliances  with  this  foolish  world.  False  glory, 
and  false  shame,  the  poor  Harriet  has  never  been 
totally  above.  Why  was  I  so  much  indulged?  Why 
was  I  allowed  to  stop  so  many  miles  short  of  my 


274  THE  HISTORY  OF 

journey's  end,  and  then  complimented,  as  if  I  had 
no  farther  to  go  ? — But  surely,  I  was  past  all  shame, 
when  I  gave  my  consent  to  make  such  an  appear- 
ance as  I  made,  among  a  thousand  strangers,  at  a 
masquerade ! 

But  now,  I  think,  something  offers  of  blame  in  the 
character  of  this  almost  faultless  man,  as  his  sister, 
and  her  Jenny,  represent  him  to  be. 

I  cannot  think,  from  a  hint  given  by  Miss  Gran- 
dison,  that  he  is  quite  so  frank,  and  so  unreserved, 
as  his  sister  is.  Nay,  it  was  more  than  a  hint:  I 
will  repeat  her  very  words  ;  she  had  been  mention- 
ing her  own  openness  of  heart,  and  yet  confessing 
that  she  would  have  kept  one  or  two  things  from 
him,  that  affected  him  not.  '  But  as  for  my  brother, 
said  she,  he  winds  one  about,  and  about,  yet  seems 
not  to  have  more  curiosity  than  one  would  wish  him 
to  have.  Led  on  by  his  smiling  benignity,  and  fond 
of  his  attention  to  my  prattle,  I  have  caught  myself 
in  the  midst  of  a  tale  of  which  I  intended  not  to 
tell  him  one  syllable. 

'  O  Sir  Charles !  where  am  I  got  ?  have  I  said ; 
and  suddenly  stopt. 

'  Proceed,  my  Charlotte !  No  reserves  to  your 
nearest  friend. 

'  Yet  he  has  his,  and  I  have  winded  and  winded 
about  him,  as  he  had  done  about  me ;  but  all  to  no 
purpose. 

'  Nevertheless,  he  has  found  means,  insensibly,  to 
set  me  on  again  with  my  own  story,  till  I  had  told 
him  all  I  knew  of  the  matter ;  and  all  the  time  I  was 
intending  only  that  my  frankness  should  be  an  ex- 
ample to  him  ;  when  he,  instead  of  answering  my 
wishes,  double-locked  the  door  of  his  heart,  and  left 
not  «o  much  as  the  key-hole  uncovered  by  which  I 
might  have  peeped  into  it ;  and  this  in  one  or  two 
points,  that  I  thought  it  imported  me  to  know.  And 
then  have  I  been  ready  to  scold.' 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  275 

Now  this  reserve  to  such  a  sister,  and  in  points 
that  she  thinks  it  imports  her  to  know,  is  what  I  do 
not  like  in  Sir  Charles.  A  friend  as  well  as  a  sister! 
ought  there  to  be  a  secret  on  one  side,  when  there 
is  none  on  the  other  ?  Very  likely,  he  would  be  as 
reserved  to  a  wife  :  and  is  not  marriage  the  highest 
state  of  friendship  that  mortals  can  know  ?  And 
can  friendship  and  reserve  be  compatible  ?  Surely, 
No. 

His  sister,  who  cannot  think  he  has  one  fault,  ex- 
cuses him,  and  says,  that  her  brother  has  no  other 
view  in  drawing  her  on  to  reveal  her  own  heart,  but 
the  better  to  know  how  to  serve  and  oblige  her. 

But  then,  might  not  the  same  thing  be  said  in 
behalf  of  the  curiosity  of  so  generous  a  sister?  Or, 
is  Sir  Charles  so  conscious  of  his  own  superiority, 
as  to  think  he  can  give  advice  to  her,  but  wants  not 
hers  to  him  ?  Or,  thinks  he  meanly  of  our  sex,  and 
highly  of  his  own  ?  Yet  there  are  but  two  years  dif- 
ference in  their  age :  and  from  sixteen  to  twenty- 
four,  I  believe,  women  are  generally  more  than  two 
years  aforehand  with  the  men  in  ripeness  of  under- 
standing ;  though,  after  that  time,  the  men  may 
ripen  into  a  superiority. 

This  observation  is  not  my  own ;  for  I  heard  a 
very  wise  man  once  say,  That  the  intellects  of  wo- 
men usually  ripen  sooner  than  those  of  men ;  but 
that  those  of  men,  wh^n  ripened,  like  trees  of  slow 
growth,  generally  hold  longer,  are  capable  of  higher 
perfection,  and  serve  to  nobler  purposes. 

Sir  Charles  has  seen  more  of  the  world,  it  may  be 
said,  than  his  sister  has :  he  has  travelled.  But  is 
not  human  nature  the  same  in  every  country,  al- 
lowing only  for  different  customs? — Do  not  iove, 
hatred,  anger,  malice,  tdi  the  passions  in  short,  good 
or  bad,  shew  themselves  by  like  eft jcis  in  the  laces, 
hearts,  and  actions  of  the  people  of  every  country? 


276  THE    HISTORY    OF 

And  let  men  make  ever  such  strong  pretensions  to 
knowledge,  from  their  far-fetched  and  dear-bought 
experience,  cannot  a  penetrating  spirit  learn  as  much 
from  the  passions  of  a  Sir  Hargrave  Pollexfen  in 
England,  as  it  could  from  a  man  of  the  same  or  the 
like  ill  qualities,  in  Spain,  in  France,  or  in  Italy? 
And  why  is  the  Grecian  Homer,  to  this  day,  so 
much  admired,  as  he  is  in  all  these  nations,  and  in 
every  other  nation  where  he  has  been  read,  and  will 
be,  to  the  world's  end,  but  because  he  writes 
from  nature  ?  And  is  not  the  language  of  nature 
one  language  throughout  the  world,  though  there 
are  different  modes  of  speech  to  express  it  by  ? 

But  I  shall  go  out  of  my  depth.  All  I  mean  (and, 
from  the  frankness  of  my  own  heart,  you  will  expect 
from  me  such  a  declaration)  is,  that  I  do  not  love  that 
a  man  so  nearly  perfect,  be  his  motives  what  they 
will,  should  have  reserves  to  such  a  sister.  Don't 
you  think,  Lucy,  that  this  seems  to  be  a  kind  of 
"fault  in  Sir  Charles  Grandison  ?  Don't  you  think, 
that  it  would  mingle  some  fear  in  a  sister's  love  of 
him?  And  should  one's  love  of  so  amiable  a  brother 
be  dashed  or  allayed  withjear?  He  is  said  to  be  a 
good  man  :  and  a  good  man  I  dare  say  he  is  :  What 
secrets  can  a  good  man  have,  that  such  a  sister, 
living  with  him  in  the  same  house,  and  disdaining 
not,  but,  on  the  contrary,  priding  herself  in,  the 
title  of  her  brother's  housekeeper,  should  not  be  made 
acquainted  with  ?  Will  a  man  so  generous  look  upon 
her  as  he  would  upon  a  mere  housekeeper  ? — Does 
not  confidence  engage  confidence  ? — And  are  they 
not  by  nature,  as  well  as  inclination,  friends  ? 

But  I  fancy  I  am  acting  the  world,  in  its  male- 
volence, as  well  as  impertinence  :  that  world,  which 
thinks  itself  affronted  by  great  and  superior  merit ; 
and  takes  delight  to  bring  down  exalted  worth  to 
its  own  level.     But,  at  least,  you  will  collect  from 


SIR    CHARLES    GKANDISON.  277 

what  I  have  written,  an  instance  of  my  impartiality; 
and  see,  that,  though  bound  to  Sir  Charles  by  a  tie 
of  gratitude  which  never  can  be  dissolved,  I  cannot 
excuse  him,  if  he  be  guilty  of  distance  and  reserve 
to  his  generous  sister,  which  she  is  above  shewing 
to  him. 

If  I  am  allowed  to  be  so  happy,  as  to  cultivate 
this  desirable  acquaintance  [and  I  hope  it  is  not 
their  way  to  leave  those  whom  they  have  relieved 
and  raised,  in  order  to  shine  upon,  and  bless,  only 
neiv  objects  of  compassion]  then  will  I  closely  watch 
every  step  of  this  excellent  man  ;  in  hope,  however, 
to  find  him  as  perfect  as  report  declares  him,  that  I 
may  fearlessly  make  him  my  theme,  as  I  shall  de- 
light to  make  his  sister  my  example.  And  if  I  were 
to  find  any  considerable  faults  in  him,  never  fear,  my 
dear,  but  my  gratitude  will  enlarge  my  charity  in 
his  favour.  But  I  shall,  at  the  same  time,  arm  my 
heart  with  those  remembered  failings,  lest  my  gra- 
titude should  endanger  it,  and  make  me  a  hopeless 
fool. 

Now,  my  uncle,  do  not  be  very  hard  on  your 
niece.  I  am  sure,  very  sure,  that  I  am  not  in  dan- 
ger as  yet :  and  indeed  I  will  tell  you,  by  my  Lucy, 
whenever  I  find  out  that  I  am.  Spare,  therefore, 
my  dear  uncle  Selby,  all  your  conjectural  construc- 
tions. 

And  indeed  you  should  in  pity  spare  me,  my  dear 
Sir,  at  present ;  for  my  spirits  are  still  weak  :  I  have 
not  yet  forgiven  myself  for  the  masquerade  affair  ; 
especially  since  Mr.  Reeves  has  hinted  to  me,  that 
Sir  Charles  Grandison  (as  he  judges  from  what  he 
dropt  about  that  foolish  amusement)  approves  not 
of  masquerades.  And  yet  self-partiality  has  sug- 
gested several  strong  pleas  in  my  favour  ;  indeed  by 
way  of  extenuation  only.  How  my  judge,  con- 
science, will  determine  upon  those  pleas,   when 

B    B 


278  THE   HISTORY    OF 

counsel  has  been  heard  on  both  sides,  I  cannot  say 
yet  I  think,  that  an  acquittal  from  this  brother  and 
sister  would  go  a  great  wajr  to  make  my  conscience 
easy. 

I  have  not  said  one  half  of  what  I  intended  to  say 
of  this  extraordinary  man.  But  having  imagined, 
from  the  equal  love  I  have  to  his  admirable  sister, 
that  I  had  found  something  to  blame  him  for,  my 
impartiality  has  carried  me  out  of  my  path  ;  and  I 
know  not  how  to  recover  it,  without  going  a  great 
way  back.  Let  therefore  what  I  have  further  to  say, 
mingle  in  with  my  future  narratives,  as  new  occa- 
sions call  it  forth. 

But  yet  [  will  not  suffer  any  other  subject  to  in- 
terfere with  that  which  fills  my  heart  with  the  praises, 
the  due  praises,  of  this  worthy  brother  and  sister  ; 
to  which  I  intended  to  consecrate  this  rambling  and 
very  imperfect  letter :  and  which  here  1  will  con- 
clude, with  assurances  (however  needless  I  hope 
they  are)  of  duty,  love,  and  gratitude,  where  so  much 
due  from  your 

HARRIET  BYRON. 


LETTER  XXXVII. 

MISS  BYRON.      IN  CONTINUATION. 

February  24,  and  25. 
Now  have  I  near  a  week  to  go  back,  my  Lucy,  with 
my  current  narrative,  having  been  thrown  behind- 
hand by  the  long  letters  I  have  been  obliged  to 
write,  to  give  you  an  account  of  my  distress,  of  my 
deliverance,  of  the  characters  of  this  noble  brother 
and  sister,  and  a  multitude  of  coincidences  and  re- 
flections, which  all  my  dear  friends  expect,  as  they 
fall  in,  from  the  pen  of  their  Harriet.     And  this  let- 


Silt    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  279 

ter  shall  therefore  be  a  kind  of  diary  of  that  week  ; 
only  that  I  will  not  repeat  what  my  cousin  Reeves 
has  told  me  he  has  written. 

On  Monday  I  was  conducted  home  in  safety,  by 
my  kind  protector,  and  his  amiable  sister. 

Mrs  Reeves,  Lady  Betty,  and  Miss  Clements, 
are  in  love  with  them  both. 

My  cousin  has  told  you,  how  much  they  disap- 
pointed us  in  declining  to  stay  dinner.  What  shall 
we  do,  if  they  are  not  as  fond  of  our  company  as  we 
are  of  theirs  ?  WTe  are  not  used  to  be  slighted,  you 
know  :  and  to  be  slighted  by  those  we  love,  there  can 
be  no  bearing  of  that :  but  I  hope  this  will  not  be  the 
case. 

At  tea,  the  name  of  Sir  Rowland  Meredith  car- 
ried me  instantly  down. 

Mr.  Reeves  had  told  the  good  knight,  on  his 
calling  on  the  Friday.  Saturday,  Sunday,  and  on 
this  day,  before  we  returned  from  Colnebrook,  that 
I  had  been  over-fatigued  at  the  masquerade  on 
Thursday  night  [and  so  1  xxias] ;  and  was  gone  a  lit- 
tle way  out  of  town.  Carriedhe  should  have  said  : 
I  was  carried,  with  a  witness! 

Sir  Rowland  took  notice,  that  I  must  have  had  a 
smart  illness  for  the  time,  by  my  altered  countenance. 
You  are,  and  must  be,  ever  lovely,  Miss  Byron  :  but 
I  think  you  look  not  quite  so  serene,  you  don't  look 
so  composed,  as  you  used  to  do  But  I  was  afraid 
you  were  denied  to  my  longing  sight.  I  was  afraid 
you  would  let  your  papa  go  down  to  Caermarthen, 
without  giving  him  an  opportunity  to  bless  his  cross 
girl.  It  is  in  vain,  I  fear,  to  urge  you — He  stopt, 
and  looked  full  in  my  face — Pray,  Sir  Rowland,  said 
I,  how  does  my  brother  Fowler  ? 

Why,  ay,  that's  the  deuce  of  it !  Your  brother 
Fowler.  But  as  the  honest  man  says,  so  say  I ;  I 
b  b  2 


280  THE    HISTORY    OF 

will  not  teaze  you.  But  never,  never,  will  you  have 
— But  no  more  of  that — I  come  to  take  my  leave  of 
you.  I  should  have  set  out  this  very  morning,  could 
I  have  seen  you  on  Saturday,  or  yesterday  :  but  I 
shall  go  to-morrow  morning  early.  You  are  glad  of 
that,  madam,  I  am  sure. 

Indeed,  Sir  Rowland,  I  shall  always  respect  and  va- 
lue you :  and  I  hope  I  shall  have  your  good  wishes,  Sir- 
Yes,  yes,  madam,  you  need  not  doubt  it.     And 
I  will  humble  all  the  proud  women  in  Wales,  by 
telling  them  of  Miss  Byron. 

You  tell  me,  my  Lucy,  that  you  were  all  moved 
at  one  of  the  conversations  I  gave  you  between  the 
knight,  Mr.  Fowler,  and  myself. 

Were  I  to  be  as  particular  in  my  account  of  what 
passed  on  Sir  Rowland's  taking  leave  of  me,  as  I  was 
on  that  other  occasion,  and  were  you  to  judge  by  the 
effect  his  honest  tenderness  had  on  me,  as  I  craved  his 
blessing,  and  as  he  blessed  me  (the  big  tears,  unheed- 
ed by  himself,  straying  down  his  reverend  cheeks) 
I  think  you  would  have  been  in  like  manner  affected. 
Mr.  Fowler  is  to  go  down  after  him  — If — if — if, 
said  the  knight,  looking  fervently  in  my  face — 

I  should  be  glad,  I  said,  to  see,  and  to  wish  my 
brother  a  good  journey. 

Tuesday  morning  early  I  had  a  kind  enquiry  after 
my  rest,  from  MissGrandison,  in  her  brother's  name, 
as  well  as  in  her  own.  And  about  eleven  o'clock 
came  the  dear  lady  herself.  She  would  run  up  stairs 
to  me,  following  Sally — In  her  dressing-room,  say 
you  ? — She  shall  not  come  down. 

She  entered  with  the  maid — Writing,my  dear!  said 
she.  I  one  day  hope,  my  Harriet,  you  will  shew  me 
all  you  write — There,  there  (sitting  down  by  me) 
no  bustle.  And  how  does  my  fair  friend ? —  Well — I 
see  very  well — To  a  lover — or  of  a  lover — that's  the 
same  thing. — 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  281 

Thus,  sweetly  familiar,  ran  she  on. 

Mrs.  Reeves  entered  :  Excuse  me,  madam,  said 
Miss  Grandison  ;  this  is  but  one  of  my  flying  visits, 
as  I  call  them  :  my  next  shall  be  to  you.  But  per- 
haps I  may  not  make  it  in  form  neither:  we  are 
relations,  you  know.  How  does  Mr.  Reeves  ?  He  is 
a  good  man.     At  home  ? — 

He  is,  madam,  and  will  be  rejoiced — 

I  know  he  will — Why,  madam,  this  our  Byron, 
our  Harriet,  I  should  say,  looks  charmingly  ! — You 
had  best  lock  her  up.  There  are  many  more  Sir 
Hargraves  in  the  world,  than  there  are  Miss  Byrons. 

She  told  me,  that  Sir  Charles  had  set  out  that 
morning  early  for  Canterbury.  He  will  be  absent 
two  or  three  days,  said  she.  He  charged  me  with 
his  compliments.  He  did  nothing  but.  talk  of  his 
new-found  sister,  from  the  time  he  parted  with  you. 
I  shall  promote  your  interest  with  him,  in  order  to 
strengthen  my  own.     I  want  to  find  him  out. 

Some  love-engagements,  I  suppose,  madam  ?  said 
Mrs.  Reeves — It  is  impossible  but  the  ladies — 

The  ladies!  Ay,  that's  the  thing !  The  deuce  is  in 
them  !  They  will  not  stay  to  be  asked.  These  men, 
the  best  of  them,  love  nothing  but  what  is  attended 
with  difficulty.  But  all  his  love-matters  he  keeps  to 
himself;  yet  knows  all  mine — except  one  little  entan- 
glement— Mr.  Reeves  hears  not  what  we  say  (looking 
about  her) :  but  you,  my  dear,  shall  reveal  to  me  your 
sneaking  passion,  if  you  have  one,  and  I  will  discover 
mine — But  not  to  you,  Mrs.  Reeves.  No  married 
women  shall  I  trust  with  what  lies  in  the  innermost 
fold  of  my  heart.  Your  husbands  are  always  the 
wiser/or tvhat you  know  ;  though  they  can  keep  their 
own  counsel :  and  then,  Harriet,  Satan-like,  the  un- 
generous wretches,  becoming  both  tempters  and 
accusers,  laugh  at  us,  and  make  it  wonderful  for  a 
woman  to  keep  a  secret. 

b  b  3 


282  THE   HISTORY   OF 

The  ladies  will  not  stay  to  be  ashed,  Lucy ! — An 
odd  hint ! — These  men,  the  best  of  them,  love  nothing 
but  what  comes  to  them  with  difficulty : — he  keeps  all  his 
love-matters  to  himself. — All  !  my  Lucy  ! — But  in- 
deed she  had  said  before,  that  if  Sir  Charles  married, 
half  a  dozen  hearts  would  be  broken  ! 

This  is  nothing  to  me,  indeed.  But,  once  more,  I 
wonder  why  a  man  of  a  turn  so  laudable,  should  have 
any  secrets  ?  The  more  a  good  man  permits  any  one 
to  know  of  his  heart,  the  more  good  he  might  do, 
by  way  of  example. — And  has  he,  can  he  have,  so 
many  love-secrets,  and  yet  will  he  not  let  them  tran- 
spire to  such  a  sister  ? — Whom  (and  so  she  once 
hinted)  it  imported  to  know  something  of  them. 
But,  he  knows  best.  I  am  very  impertinent  to  be 
more  concerned  for  his  sister,  than  she  is  for  herself. 
But  I  do  love  her.  And  one  can  no  more  bear  to 
have  those  slighted  whom  we  love,  than  one's  self. 

It  is  very  difficult,  Lucy,  to  know  one's  self.  I 
am  afraid  I  have  a  little  spice  of  censoriousness  in 
my  temper,  which  I  knew  nothing  of  till  now  :  but, 
no,  it  is  not  censoriousness  neither.  I  cannot  be  so 
mean,  as  to  be  censorious :  and  yet  I  can  now,  me- 
thinks  (for  the  first  time)  a  little  account  for  those 
dark  spirits  who  may  be  too  much  obliged ;  and  who, 
despairing  to  be  able  ever  to  return  the  obligation, 
are  ready  to  quarrel  with  the  obliger. 

Spiteful  men  say,  that  we  women  know  not  our- 
selves ;  know  not  our  own  hearts.  I  believe  there  is 
something  of  truth  in  the  aspersion  :  but  as  men  and 
women  are  brothers  and  sisters,  as  I  may  say,  are  not 
the  men  equally  censurable?  And  should  not  we  wo- 
men say  so,  were  we  to  be  as  spiteful  as  they?  Must 
it  needs  be,  that  a  daughter  of  the  same  father  and 
mother  must  be  more  silly,  more  unsteady,  more  ab- 
surd, more  impertinent,  than  her  brother?  I  hopenot. 

Mrs.  Reeves,  not  knowing,  as  she  said  afterwards, 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISOK.  283 

but  Miss  Grandison  might  have  something  to  say  to 
me,  withdrew. 

I  believe  1  told  you  last  Sunday,  said  Miss  Gran- 
dison, of  a  cousin  that  we  have :  a  good-natured 
young  fellow :  he  supped  with  us  last  night.  Sir 
Charles  was  so  full  of  your  praises,  yet  not  letting 
him  into  your  history,  that  he  is  half-wild  to  see  you. 
God  forbid,  thought  I,  wben  she  had  gone  only 
thus  far,  that  tins  cousin  should  be  proposed! — What 
an  easy  thing  is  it,  my  Lucy,  to  alarm  a  woman  on 
the  side  of  her  vanity! 

He  breakfasted  with  me  this  morning,  continued 
she,  after  Sir  Charles  had  set  out ;  and  knowing  that 
I  intended  to  make  you  a  flying  visit,  he  besought  me 
to  take  him  with  me  :  but  I  would  not,  my  dear, 
bring  an  inundation  of  new  admirers  upon  you  :  he 
has  a  great  acquaintance ;  and  is  very  bold,  though 
not  indecent :  he  is  thought  to  be  a  modern  wit,  you 
must  know ;  and,  to  speak  after  an  admirable  writer, 
a  minute  philosopher ;  and  thinks  he  has  something  to 
say  for  himself  when  his  cousin  is  not  present.  Be- 
fore Sir  Charles  arrived,  and  when  we  were  in  ex- 
pectation of  his  coming,  being  apprised  that  Sir 
Charles  had  a  serious  turn,  he  threatened  to  play 
upon  him,  and,  as  he  phrased  it,  to  bamboozle  him  ; 
for  these  wits  and  witlings  have  a  language  peculiar 
to  themselves.  But  on  Sir  Charles's  arrival,  in  two 
conversations,  he  drew  in  his  horns,  as  we  say ;  and 
now  reverences  those  good  qualities  which  he  has 
not,  however,  the  grace  to  imitate.  Now  I  will  not 
answer,  but  you  may  have  a  visit  from  him  to  see  the 
loveliest  woman  in  England.  If  he  comes,  see  him, 
or  not,  as  you  please  ;  and  think  not  yourself  under 
any  civil  obligation  to  my  brother,  or  me,  to  go  out 
of  your  own  way  :  but  I  hope  he  will  not  be  so  im- 
pertinent. I  don't  wish  you  to  see  him  out  of  my 
brother's  company  ;  because  you  will  see  him  then 
to  his  own  advantage.     And  yet  he  has  such  a  no- 


284  THE    HISTORY    OF 

tion  that  we  women  love  to  be  admired,  and  to  have 
handsome  things  said  to  us,  that  he  imagines,  the 
visit  of  a  man,  made  for  that  purpose,  will  give  him 
as  free  a  welcome  to  the  finest  woman  in  the  world, 
as  painters  give  to  those  who  come  to  see  their  pic- 
tures, and  for  the  like  reason.  But  no  more  of  Mr. 
Grandison.  Yet  I  thought  proper  to  prepare  you, 
if  he  should  take  so  confident  a  liberty. 
I  thanked  her 

Well  but,  my  dear,  you  seem  to  have  a  long  parcel 
of  writing  before  you  ;  one,  two,  three,  four — Eight 
leaves — Upon  my  word! — But  Mr.  Reeves  told  me 
you  are  a  writer ;  and  that  you  gave  an  account  of 
all  that  befel  you,  to  our  grandmother  Shirley,  to  our 
uncle  and  aunt  Selby,  to  our  cousins  Lucy  and  Nancy 
—You  see  I  remember  every  name :  and  will  you 
one  day  let  me  see  what  j'ou  write  ? 
Most  willingly,  madam — 

Madam  !  interrupted  she.  So  formal !  Charlotte  say. 
With  all  my  heart,  my  ever-amiable,  my  ever  kind, 
Charlotte 

So,  so — Well  may  the  men  say  we  love  flattery, 
when  rather  than  want  it,  we  will  flatter  one  another. 
I  was  going  to  disclaim  flattery :  Hush,  hush,  hush, 
my  dear  !  I  doubt  not  your  sincerity.  You  are  a 
grat jful  and  good  girl :  but  dare  you,  will  you,  shew 
me  ail  and  every-thing  about  that  Greville,  that 
Orme,  that  Fowler,  that  Fenwick  ? — You  see,  I  for- 
get none  of  the  names  that  your  cousin  Reeves  told 
me  of  on  Saturday  last,  and  which  I  made  you  talk 
of  last  Sunday. 

All  and  every-thing,  Miss  Grandison :  But  will 
you  tell  me  of  your  gentleman  ? 

Will  I  !  No  doubt  of  it :  How  can  young  women 
be  together  one  quarter  of  an  hour,  and  not  lead  one 
another  into  talk  of  their  lovers  ?  Lord,  my  dear, 
these  seerets,  bir  Charles  once  said,  are  the  cement 
pf  young  women's  friendships. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  285 

And  could  Sir  Charles — 

Could  Sir  Charles ! — Yes,  yes,  yes.  Do  you  think 
a  man  can  be  a  judge  of  human  nature,  and  leave 
■women  out  of  the  question?  Why,  my  dear,  he  finds 
us  out  in  a  minute.  Take  care  of  yourself,  Harriet 
—  If— 

I  shall  be  afraid  of  him — 

What  if  you  have  a  good  conscience,  my  dear! — 

She  then  looked  very  archly.  She  made  me  blush. 

She  looked  more  archly.  I  blushed,  I  believe,  a 
deeper  dye. 

Did  I  not  tell  you,  Lucy,  that  she  could  do  what 
she  pleased  with  her  eyes  ? — But  what  did  she  mean 
by  this  ? 

In  my  conscience,  my  Harriet,  little  or  much,  I 
believe  we  women  are  all  rogues  in  our  hearts. 

And  does  Miss  Grandison  say  that  from  her  own 
conscience  ? 

I  believe  I  do  :  but  I  must  fly :  I  have  ten  more 
visits  to  pay  before  I  go  home  to  dress.  You  will 
tell  me  all  about  your  fellows,  you  say  ? 

And  you  will  tell  me  about  your  entanglement,  as 
you  called  it. 

Why  that's  a  difficulty  upon  me :  but  you  must 
encourage  me  by  your  freedom,  and  we  will  take  up 
our  wretches,  and  lay  them  down  again,  one  by  one, 
as  we  run  them  over,  and  bid  them  lie  still  and  be 
quiet  till  we  recal  them  to  our  memory. 

But  I  have  not  one  lover,  my  Charlotte,  to  tell 
you  of:  I  always  gave  them  their  dismission  — 

And  I  have  but  two,  that  at  present  I  care  to  own ; 
and  they  won't  be  dismissed  :  but  then  I  have  half  a 
dozen,  I  believe,  that  have  said  extravagant  things  to 
me;  and  we  must  look  upon  them  as  lovers  elect, 
you  know,  who  only  want  to  be  coquetted  with. 

Miss  Grandison,  I  hope,  cannot  think  of  coquet- 
ting? 


286  THE    HISTORY   OF 

Not  much  :  only  a  little  now-and-then,  to  pay  the 
men  in  their  own  coin 

Charming  vivacity  !  said  I.  I  shall  be  undone,  if 
you  don't  love  me. 

No  fear,  no  fear  of  that! — I  am  a  whimsical  crea- 
ture :  but  the  sun  is  not  more  constant  in  his  course 
than  I  am  steady  in  my  friendships.  And  these  com- 
munications on  both  sides  will  rivet  us  to  each  other, 
if  you  treat  me  not  with  reserve. 

She  arose  to  go  in  a  hurry.  Abate,  my  dear 
Charlotte,  of  half  your  other  visits,  and  favour  me 
with  your  company  a  little  longer. 

Give  me  6ome  chocolate  then ;  and  let  me  see  your 
cousin  Reeves's  :  I  like  them.  Of  the  ten  visits,  six 
of  the  ladies  will  be  gone  to  sales,  or  to  plague  trades- 
men, and  buy  nothing :  any-where  rather  than  at 
home :  The  devil's  at  home,  is  a  phrase  :  and  our  mo- 
dern ladies  live  as  if  they  thought  so  Two  of  the 
other  four  called  upon  me,  and  hardly  alighted  :  I 
shall  do  so  by  them.  The  other  two  I  shall  have 
paid  my  compliments  to  in  one  quarter  of  an  hour. 

I  rang  for  chocolate ;  and  to  beg  my  cousins 
company. 

They  wanted  but  the  word  :  in  they  came.  My 
apartment  (which  she  was  pleased  to  admire)  then 
became  the  subject  of  a  few  moments'  conversation: 
and  then  a  much  better  took  place  :  Sir  Charles,  I 
mean. 

I  asked,  If  her  brother  had  any  relations  at  Can- 
terbury ? 

I  protest  I  don't  know,  said  she  :  but  this  I  know, 
that  I  have  none  there.  Did  I  not  hint  to  you,  that 
Sir  Charles  has  his  secrets? — But  he  sometimes  loves 
to  play  with  my  curiosity:  he  knows  I  have  a  reason- 
able quantity  of  that. 

Were  I  his  sister — 

Then  you  must  do  as  he  would  have  you,  Harriet 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  287 

I  know  him  to  be  steady  in  his  purposes  :  but  he  is 
besides  so  good,  that  I  give  up  any-thing  to  oblige 
him — 

Your  entanglement,  Charlotte  ?  asked  I,  smiling. 
Mr.  Reeves  knows  nothing  from  that  word . 

Why,  yes,  my  entanglement ;  and  yet  I  hate  to 
think  of  it :  so  no  rtiore  of  that.  It  is  the  only  secret 
I  have  kept  from  him  ;  and  that  is,  because  he  has 
no  suspicion  of  the  matter:  if  he  had,  though  ray 
life  were  to  be  the  forfeit,  I  believe  he  would 
have  it. 

She  told  us,  that  she  expected  us  soon  to  dine 
with  her  in  St.  James's  Square :  but  that  she  must 
fix  Sir  Charles.  I  hope,  said  she,  you  will  often 
drop  in  upon  me ;  as  I  will  upon  you.  From  this 
time,  we  will  have  nothing  but  conversation  visits 
between  us  ;  and  we  wili  leave  the  modern  w  orld  to 
themselves;  and  be  Queen  Elizabeth's  women.  I 
am  sorry  to  tell  you — Let  me  whisper  it — 

And  she  did ;  but  loud  enough  for  every  one  to 
hear :  Although  I  follow  the  fashion,  and  make  one 
fool  the  more  for  it,  I  despise  above  one  half  of  the 
women  I  know. 

Miss  Grandison,  affectedly  whispered  I  again, 
should  not  do  so  ;  because  her  example  is  of  weight 
enough  to  amend  them. 

I'll  be  hanged  if  Miss  Byron  thinks  so,  re-whisper- 
ed she.  The  age  is  too  far  gone.  Nothing  but  a 
national  calamity  can  do  it.  But  let  me  tell  you, 
that,  at  the  same  time,  I  despise  more  than  one  half 
of  the  men.  But,  speaking  out,  You  and  I  will  try 
to  think  ourselves  wiser  than  any -body  else ;  and  we 
shall  have  this  comfort,  we  shall  not  easily  find  any 
of  our  sex,  who  by  their  superior  wisdom  will  give 
us  reason  to  think  ourselves  mistaken. 

But  adieu, adieu,  and  adieu,  my  agreeable  friends: 
let  me  see  you,  and  you,  and  you,  turning  to  each 
of  the  three,  as  often  as  is  convenient,  without  cere- 


288  THE  HISTORY  OF 

mony:  and  remember  we  have  been  acquainted 
these  hundred  years. 

Away  she  hurried,  forbidding  me  to  go  out  of  my 
apartment.  Mrs.  Reeves  could  not  overtake  her. 
Mr.  Reeves  had  much  ado  to  be  in  time  to  make  his 
compliment.  She  was  in  her  chariot  before  he  could 
offer  his  hand.    ' 

How  pretty  it  was,  my  Lucy,  in  Miss  Grandison, 
to  remember  the  names  of  all  my  dear  friends  !  She 
told  me,  indeed,  on  Sunday,  that  she  should. 

If  travelling  into  foreign  countries  gives  ease  and 
politeness,  would  not  one  think  that  Miss  Grandison 
has  visited  every  European  court,  as  well  as  her 
brother  ?  If  she  has  not,  was  it  necessary  for  Sir 
Charles  to  go  abroad  to  acquire  that  freedom  and 
ease  which  his  sister  has  so  happily  attained  with- 
out stirring  out  of  the  kingdom  ? 

These  men  had  not  best  despise  us,  Lucy.  There 
is  not,  I  hope,  so  much  difference  in  the  genius  of 
the  two  sexes  as  the  proud  ones  among  theirs  are 
apt  to  imagine  ;  especially  when  you  draw  compa- 
risons from  equal  degrees  in  both. 

O  Mr.  Walden,  take  care  of  yourself,  if  ever  again 
you  and  I  meet  at  Lady  Betty's! — But  this  abomi- 
nable Sir  Hargrave  !  Not  one  word  more  of  meeting 
at  Lady  Betty's !  There  saw  I  first  the  wretch  that 
still,  on  recollection,  strikes  terror  into  my  heart. 

Wednesday,  a  visit  from  Miss  Clements  and  Lady 
Betty  took  me  off  my  writing  about  two  hours  ;  yet 
I  over-writ  myself,  and  was  obliged  to  lie  down  for 
about  two  more.  At  night  we  had  Sir  John  A  lies- 
tree,  and  his  nephew,  Miss  Allestree,  Miss  Cle- 
ments, and  Lady  Betty,  at  supper,  and  cards.  But 
my  stomach  paining  me,  about  eleven  I  was  per- 
mitted to  retire  to  bed. 

On  Thursday  I  finished  my  letters,  relating  my 
distresses,  and  deliverance.  It  was  a  dreadful  sub- 
ject.    I  rejoiced  when  I  had  concluded  it. 


Silt  CHARLES  ORANDISON.  289 

Tlie  same  day  Mr.  Reeves  received  Sir  Charles's 
letter,  inclosing  that  of  the  wretched  Wilson.  I  have 
often  heard  my  grandfather  observe,  that  men  of 
truly  great  and  brave  spirits  are  most  tender  and 
merciful ;  and  that,  on  the  contrary,  men  of  base  and 
low  minds  are  cruel,  tyrannical,  insolent,  wherever 
they  have  power.  What  this  short  letter,  so  full  of 
lenity,  of  mercy,  of  generous  and  humane  care  for 
the  future  good  of  a  criminal,  and  extended  to  un- 
born families,  as  well  as  to  all  his  acquaintance  and 
friends  in  being,  enables  one  to  judge  of  the  truly 
heroic  Sir  Charles  Grandison;  and  what  I  have  ex- 
perienced of  the  low,  grovelling,  unmanly  insults  of 
Sir  Hargrave  Pollexfen  (I  a  poor  defenceless  silly 
girl,  tricked  into  his  power)  ;  are  flagrant  proofs  of 
the  justice  of  the  observation. 

I  wish  with  all  my  heart,  that  the  best  woman  in 
the  world  were  queen  of  a  great  nation  :  and  that  it 
were  in  my  power,  for  the  sake  of  enlarging  Sir 
Charles's  ability  to  do  good,  to  make  him  her  con- 
sort :  then  am  I  morally  sure,  that  I  should  be  the 
humble  means  of  making  a  whole  people  happy  ! 

But  as  we  had  all  been  informed  from  other 
hands,  of  Sir  Hargrave'sthreatenings  of  Sir  Charles's 
life,  Wilson's  postscript  has  fastened  a  weight  on  my 
heart,  that  will  not  be  removed  till  the  danger  is 
overblown. 

This  day  I  had  Miss  Grandison's  compliments, 
with  tender  enquiries,  brought  me  ;  and  a  desire, 
that  as  she  supposed  my  first  visit  would  be  one  of 
thankful  duty,  meaning  to  church  (for  so  I  had  told 
her  it  should)  my  next  might  be  to  her. 

Yesterday  I  received  the  welcome  packet  from  so 
many  kind  friends  ;  and  1  prosecuted  with  the  more 
vigour,  for  it,  my  writing-task.  How  easily  do  we 
glide  into  subjects  that  please  us! — How  swiftly  flies 
the  pen  ! — The  characters  of  Sir  Charles  and  of  Miss 

vol.  iv.  re 


290  THE  HISTOUY  OF 

Grandison  were  the  subjects  ;  and  I  was  amazed  to 
find  how  much  I  had  written  in  so  short  a  time. 

Miss  Grandison  sent  me  in  the  evening  of  this 
day  her  compliments  joined  with  those  of  her  bro- 
ther, who  was  but  just  returned  from  Canterbury. 

I  wonder  what  Sir  Charles  could  do  at  Canter- 
bury so  many  days,  and  to  have  nobody  there  whom 
his  sister  knows. 

She  would  have  made  me  a  visit,  she  sent  me 
word  ;  but  that  as  she  expected  her  brother  in  the 
morning,  she  had  intended  to  have  brought  him 
with  her.  She  added,  that  this  morning  {Saturday) 
they  should  both  set  out  for  Colnebrooke,  in  hopes 
of  the  Earl  and  Countess  of  L.  arriving  there  as 
this  night  from  Scotland. 

Do  you  think,  Lucy,  it  would  not  have  been  ge- 
nerous in  Sir  Charles  to  have  made  one  visit,  before 
he  set  out  for  so  many  days,  to  that  Canterbury,  to 
the  creature  on  whom  he  had  laidsuch  an  obligation? 
I  can  only  mean  as  to  the  civility  of  the  thing,  you 
must  think  ;  since  he  was  so  good  as  to  join  in,  nay, 
to  propose,  the  further  intimacy,  as  a  brother,  and 
friend,  and  so-forth — I  wish  that  Sir  Charles  be  as 
sincere  in  his  professions  as  his  sister.  He  may  in 
his  travels  (possibly  he  may)  have  mistaken  some 
gay  weeds  for  fine  flowers,  and  picked  them  up,  and 
brought  them  with  him  to  England  :  and  yet,  if  he 
has  done  so,  he  will,  even  then,  be  superior  to  thou- 
sands, who  travel,  and  bring  home  nothing  but  the 
weeds  of  foreign  climates. 

He  once  said,  as  Miss  Grandison  told  me,  that 
the  Countess  of  L.  is  still  a  more  excellent  woman 
than  my  Charlotte.  Ah!  Sir  Charles  !  You  can  tell 
fibs,  I  believe.  I  will  not  forgive  in  you,  those 
slighter  deviations,  which  we  are  too  apt  to  pass  by 
in  other,  even  tolerable,  men. 

I  wish  you  may  be  in  earnest,  my  good  Sir,  in  pro- 
posing to  cultivate  an  intimate  friendship  with  me,  as 


SIE   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  291 

that  of  a  brother  to  a  sister  [Shake  your  head,  my 
Lucy,  if  you  will,  I  mean  no  more]  that  I  may  be 
intitled  to  tell  you  your  faults,  as  I  see  them.  In 
your  sister  Harriet  you  shall  find,  though  a  respect- 
ful, yet  an  open-eyed  monitor.  Our  Charlotte  thinks 
you  cannot  be  wrong  in  any-thing. 

All  I  fear  is,  that  Sir  Charles's  tenderness  was  de- 
signed to  be  excited  only  while  my  spirits  were  weak. 
Yet  he  bespoke  a  brotherly  relation  to  me,  before 
Mr.  Reeves,  when  he  brought  me  home,  and  sup- 
posed me  stolen  from  his  family  in  my  infancy.  That 
was  going  farther  than  was  necessary,  if  he  thought 
to  drop  the  fraternal  character  soon. 

But  might  not  my  own  behaviour  alarm  him  ?  The 
kind,  the  considerate  man,  is  perhaps  compassionate 
in  his  intention.  Not  distinguishing  aright  my  bash- 
ful gratitude,  and  down-cast  eye,  he  might  be 
afraid,  lest  I  should  add  one  to  the  half-score,  that 
his  sister  says  will  die  if  he  marry. 

If  this  be  so,  what,  my  dear,  will  your  Harriet 
deserve,  if  his  caution  does  not  teach  her  some  ? 

After  all,  I  believe,  these  men  in  general  think  our 
hearts  are  made  of  strange  combustible  materials. 
A  spark  struck,  a  match  thrown  in — But  the  best  of 
men,  this  admirable  man,  will,  I  hope,  find  himself 
mistaken,  if  he  thinks  so  of  your  Harriet. 

What  ails  me,  that  I  am  grown  such  a  boaster ! 
Surely,  this  horrid  attempt  of  Sir  Hargrave  has  not 
affected  my  brain.  Methinks  I  am  not,  some  how 
or  other,  as  I  used  to  be  in  my  head,  or  heart,  I 
know  not  which. 

Do  you,  Lucy,  bring  me  back  again,  by  your 
reminding  love,  if  you  think  there  is  any  alteration 
in  your  Harriet,  for  the  worse:  and  the  rather,  as 
it  may  prevent  my  uncle — 

But  what  makes  me  so  much  more  afraid  of  my 
uncle,  that  I  used  to  be? — Yet  men  in  their  raillery, 
cc2 


292  THE    HISTORY    OF 

[don't,  however,  read  this  paragraph  to  him]  are 
so — I  don't  know  how — so  ww-tender — But  let  me 
fall  into  the  hands  of  my  indulgent  grandmamma, 
mid  aunt  Selby,  and  into  your  gentle  hands,  and  all 
will  be  as  it  should  be- 
But  what  was  my  subject,  before  this  last  seized, 
and  ran  away  with,  my  pen?  I  did  not  use  to  wan- 
der thus,  when  I  had  a  beaten  path  before  me.  O 
this  vile,  vile  Sir  Hargrave!  If  I  have  a  fault  in  my 
head  that  did  not  use  to  be  there,  it  is  entirely  owing 
to  him.     I  am  sure  my  heart  is  not  wrong. 

But  I  can  write  nothing  now  but  of  Miss  Grandi- 
son  and  her  brother.  What  entirely  new  scenes  are 
opened  to  me  by  my  distress  ? — May  I  have  cause, 
as  Sir  Charles  wished,  to  reap  good  from  the  evil ! 

1  will  endeavour  to  bring  Miss  Clements  into  an 
acquaintance  with  these  worthies;  that  is  to  say, 
if  I  have  myself  the  interest  to  preserve  my  footing 
in  their  favour. 

Lady  Betty  resolves  to  recommend  herself.  She 
ivill  be  acquainted  with  them,  she  says,  whether  they 
will  or  not.  And  yet  I  could  not  bear  for  Lady  Betty 
that  she  should  be  slighted  by  those  whom  she  dotes 
upon.  That,  surely,  is  one  of  the  heaviest  of  evils. 
And  yet  self-hvc,  where  it  is  evidently  inherent,  will 
enable  one  to  get  over  it ;  I  believe,  pretty  soon  ; 
though  nothing  but  that  and  pride  can,  in  sacli.  Of 
some  use,  therefore,  you'll  be  apt  to  say,  are  pride 
and  self-love.  Why,  yes,  and  so  they  are,  where 
they  arc  a  part  of  a  person's  habit.  But,  O  my 
Lucy,  will  not  a  native  humility  render  this  pride, 
whose  genuine  offspring  are  resentment  and  ill-will, 
absolutely  unnecessary,  and  procure  for  us,  un- 
mingled  with  mortification,  the  esteem  we  wish  for 
in  the  hearts  of  the  worthy? 

As  to  the  rest  of  my  new  acquaintance  in  town, 
who,  till  I  knew  this  admirable  sister  and.  brother, 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  293 

took  up  60  much  of  my  paper,  though  some  of  them 
are  doubtless  very  worthy ;  Adieu — That  is  to  say, 
m  cho&en  subjects — Adieu !  says  your 

HARRIET  BYRON. 


LETTER  XXXVIII. 

MISS    BYRON    TO    MISS    SELBY. 

Saturday  night. 
Lord  have  mercy  upon  me,  my  dear! — What  shall 
I  do? — The  vile  Sir  Hargrave  has  sent  a  challenge 
to  Sir  Charles] — What  may  be  the  event — O  that  I 
had  not  come  to  London ! — This  is  a  copy  of  the 
letter,  that  communicates  it. — It  is  from  that  Ba- 
genhall.  But  this  is  the  copy  of  the  letter — I  will 
endeavour  to  transcribe  it — But,  no,  I  cannot — My 
Sally  shall  write  it  over.  Lord  bless  me!  What 
shall  I  do  ? 

TO   MISS    BYRON. 

madam,  Cavendish  Square,  February  25. 

You  mighteasily  believe,  that  the  affair  betwixt  Sir 
Hargrave  Pollexfen  and  Sir  Charles  Grandison  could 
not,  after  so  violent  an  insult  as  the  former  received 
from  the  latter,  end  without  consequences. 

By  all  that's  sacred,  Sir  Hargrave  knows  not 
that  I  write. 

There  is  but  one  way  that  I  can  think  of  to  pre- 
vent bloodshed;  and  that,  madam,  seems  to  be  in 
your  own  power. 

Sir  Hargrave  insists  upon  it,  that  he  meant  you 
nothing  but  honour.  You  know  the  use  or  abuse  o. 
cc  3 


291-  THE    HISTORY    OF 

the  power  he  had  obtained  over  you.    If  he  behaved 
with  indecency,  he  tells  me  not  the  truth. 

To  make  a  young  lady,  whatever  were  her  merit, 
the  wife  of  a  man  of  near  10,000Z.  a  year,  and  who 
had  declared  herself  absolutely  disengaged  in  her 
affections,  was  not  doing  dishonour  to  her,  so  much 
as  to  himself,  in  the  violent  measures  his  love  obliged 
him  to  take  to  make  her  so. 

Now,  madam,  Sir  Charles  Grandison  was  utter- 
ly a  stranger  to  you;  as  Sir  Hargrave  intended  so 
honourably  by  you;  and  as  you  are  not  engaged  in 
your  affections ;  if  you  will  consent  to  be  Lady  Pol- 
lexfen;  and  if  Sir  Charles  Grandison  will  ask  pardon 
for  his  unprovoked  knight-errantry ;  I  will  not  be  Sir 
Hargrave's  second  in  the  affair,  if  he  refuse  to  accept 
ofsuch  satisfactioninfull  for  the  violence  he  sustained. 
I  solemnly  repeat,  that  Sir  Hargrave  knows  no- 
thing of  my  writing  to  you.  You  may  (but  I  insist 
upon  it,  as  in  confidence  to  every -body  else)  consult 
your  cousin  Reeves  on  the  subject.  Your  honour 
given,  that  you  will  in  a  month's  time  be  Sir  Har- 
grave's, will  make  me  exert  all  my  power  with  him 
(and  I  have  reason  to  think  that  is  not  small)  to  in- 
duce him  to  compromise  on  those  terms. 

I  went  to  Sir  Charles's  house  this  afternoon,  with 
a  letter  from  Sir  Hargrave.  Sir  Charles  was  just 
stepping  into  his  chariot  to  his  sister.  He  opened 
it;  and,  with  a  civility  that  became  his  character,  told 
me  he  was  just  going  with  his  sister  to  Colnebrook, 
to  meet  dear  friends  on  their  return  from  Scotland: 
that  lie  should  return  on  Monday;  that  the  pleasure 
he  should  have  with  his  long-absent  friends,  would 
not  permit  him  to  think  of  the  contents  till  then  : 
but  that  the  writer  should  not  fail  ofsuch  an  answer 
as  a  gentleman  ought  to  give. 

Now,  madam,  1  was  so  much  charmed  with  Sir 
Charles  Grandison's  fine  person  and  politeness,  and 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  295 

his  character  is  so  extraordinary,  that  I  thought 
this  interval  between  this  night  and  Monday  morn- 
ing a  happy  one.  And  1  took  it  into  my  head  to 
make  the  above  proposal  to  you ;  and  I  hope  you 
will  think  it  behoves  you,  as  much  as  it  does  me,  to 
prevent  the  fatal  mischief  that  may  otherwise  hap- 
pen to  men  of  their  consideration. 

I  have  not  the  honour  of  being  personally  known 
to  you,  madam;  but  my  character  is  too  generally 
established  for  any  one  to  impute  to  me  any  other 
motives  for  this  my  application  to  you,  than  those 
above  given.  A  line  left  for  me  at  Sir  Hargrave's, 
in  Cavendish  Square,  will  come  to  the  hands  of, 
madam, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

JAMES  BAGENHALL. 

O  my  dear!  What  a  letter! — Mr.  Reeves,  Mrs. 
Reeves,  are  grieved  to  the  heart.  Mr.  Reeves  says, 
that  if  Sir  Hargrave  insists  upon  it,  Sir  Charles  is 
obliged,  in  honour,  to  meet  him — Murderous,  vile 
word  honour!  What,  at  this  rate,  is  honour!  The 
very  opposite  to  duty,  goodness,  piety,  religion ; 
and  to  every  thing  that  is  or  ought  to  be  sacred 
among  men. 

How  shall  I  look  Miss  Grandison  in  the  face? 
Miss  Grandison  will  hate  me  ! — To  be  again  the  oc- 
casion of  endangering  the  life  of  such  a  brother  ! 

But,  what  do  you  think  ? — Lady  Betty  is  of  opinion 
— Mr.  Reeves  has  consulted  Lady  Betty  Williams, 
in  confidence — Lady  Betty  says,  that  if  the  matter 
can  be  prevented — Lord  bless  me!  she  says,  I  ought 
to  prevent  it! — What!  by  becoming  the  wife  of  such 
a  man  as  Sir  Hargrave!  so  unmanly,  so  malicious,  so 
low  a  wretch! — What  does  Lady  Betty  mean? — Yet 
were  it  in  my  power  to  save  the  life  of  Sir  Charles 
Grandison,  and  I  refused  to  do  it ;  for  selfish  reasons 


296  THE    HISTOKY   OF 

refused ;  for  the  sake  of  my  worldly  happiness ;  when 
there  are  thousands  of  good  wives,  who  are  miser- 
able with  bad  husbands — But  will  not  the  sacrifice 
of  my  life  be  accepted  by  this  sanguinary  man! 
That,  with  all  my  heart,  would  I  make  no  scruple  to 
lay  down.  If  the  wretch  will  plunge  a  dagger  in 
my  bosom,  and  take  that  for  satisfaction,  I  will  not 
hesitate  one  moment. 

But  my  cousin  said,  that  he  was  of  opinion,  that 
Sir  Charles  would  hardly  be  brought  to  ask  pardon. 
How  can  I  doubt,  said  I,  that  the  vile  man,  if  he  may 
be  induced  by  this  Bagenhall  to  compromise  on  my 
being  his  wife,  will  dispense  with  that  punctilio,  and 
wreak  on  me,  were  I  to  be  his  unhappy  property,  his 
whole  unmanly  vengeance?  Is  he  not  spiteful,  mean, 
malicious? — But,  abhorred  be  the  thought  of  my 
yielding  to  be  the  wife  of  such  a  man  ! — Yet,  what 
is  the  alternative  ?  Were  I  to  die,  that  wretched  al- 
ternative would  still  take  place:  his  malice  to  the 
best  of  men  would  rather  be  whetted  than  blunted  by 
my  irrevocable  destiny  !  O  my  Lucy !  violent  as  my 
grief  was,  dreadful  as  my  apprehensions  were,  and 
unmanly  as  the  treatment  I  met  with  from  the  base 
man,  I  never  was  distressed  till  now ! 

But  should  Miss  Grandison  advise,  should  she 
insist  upon  my  compliance  with  the  abhorred  condi- 
tion (and  has  she  not  a  right  to  insist  upon  it,  for  the 
sake  of  the  safety  of  her  innocent  brother?)  can  I 
then  refuse  my  compliance  with  it? — Are  we  not 
taught,  that  this  world  is  a  state  of  trial,  and  of  mor- 
tification? And  is  not  calamity  necessary  to  wean 
our  vain  hearts  from  it  ?  And  if  my  motive  bo  a  mo- 
tive of  justice  and  gratitude,  and  to  savealifo  much 
more  valuable  to  the  world  than  my  own;  and  which, 
but  forme  had  not  been  in  danger — Ought  I — And 
yet — Ah!  my  Lucy!  what  can  [  say? — How  un- 
happy !  that  I  cannot  consult  this  dear  lady,  who  has 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  297 

such  an  interest  in  a  life  so   precious,  as  I  might 
have  done,  had  she  been  in  town! 

O  Lucy!  What  an  answer,  as  this  unwelcome, 
this  wicked  mediator  gives  it,  was  that  which  the 
exeellent  man  returned  to  the  delivered  challenge 
— "  I  am  going  to  meet  dear  friends  on  their  return 
from  Scotland!  "  What  a  meeting  of  joy  will  be 
here  saddened  over,  if  they  know  of  this  shocking 
challenge!  And  how  can  his  noble  heart  overflow 
with  pleasure  on  this  joyful  occasion,  as  it  would 
otherwise  have  done,  with  such  an  important  event 
in  suspense,  that  may  make  it  the  last  meeting  which 
this  affectionate  and  most  worthy  of  families  will 
ever  know !  How  near  may  be  the  life  of  this  dear 
brother  to  a  period,  when  he  congratulates  the  safe 
arrival  of  his  brother  and  sister!  And  who  can  bear 
to  think  of  seeing,  ere  one  week  is  over-past,  the 
now  rejoicing  and  harmonious  family,  clad  in  mourn- 
ing for  the  first  of  brothers,  and  first  of  men  ?  And 
I,  my  Lucy,  I,  the  wretched  Harriet  Byron,  to  be 
the  cause  of  all ! 

And  could  the  true  hero  say,  "  That  the  pleasure 
he  should  have  on  meeting  his  long-absent  friends 
would  not  permit  him  to  think  of  the  contents  of 
such  a  letter,  till  Monday;  but  that  then  the  waiter 
should  not  fail  of  such  an  answer — as  a  gentleman 
ought  to  give  ?" — O  my  dear  Sir  Charles  !  [on  this 
occasion  he  is,  and  ought  to  be,  very  dear  to  me] 
How  I  dread  the  answer  which  vile  custom,  and 
false  honour,  will  oblige  you,  as  a  gentleman,  to 
give  !  And  is  there  no  way  with  honour  to  avoid 
giving  such  an  answer,  as  distracts  me  to  be  told 
(as  Mr.  Reeves  tells  me)  must  be  given,  if  I,  your 
Harriet,  interpose  not,  to  the  sacrifice  of  all  my 
happiness  in  this  life? 

But  Mr.  Reeves  asks,  May  not  this  Bagenhall, 
though  he  says  Sir  Hargrave  knows  nothing  of  his 


298  THE   HISTORY   OF 

writing,  have  written  in  concert  with  him  ? — What 
if  he  has,  does  not  the  condition  remain  ?  And  will 
not  the  resentment,  on  the  refusal,  take  place  ? — And 
is  not  the  challenge  delivered  into  Sir  Charles's 
hands  ?  A  nd  has  he  not  declared,  that  he  will  send  an 
answer  to  it  on  Monday  ?  This  is  carrying  the  mat- 
ter beyond  contrivance  or  stratagem.  Sir  Charles, 
so  challenged,  will  not  let  the  challenger  come  offso 
easily.  He  cannot,  in  real  honour,  now,  make  pro- 
posals for  qualifying ;  or  accept  of  them,  if  made  to 
him.  And  is  not  Monday  the  next  day  but  one? 
— Only  that  day  between,  for  which  I  have  been 
preparing  my  grateful  heart  to  return  my  silent 
praises  to  the  Almighty,  in  the  place  dedicated  to 
his  honour,  for  so  signal  a  deliverance !  And  now 
is  my  safety  to  be  owing,  as  it  may  happen,  to  a 
much  better  person's  destruction ! 
*  * 

I  was  obliged  to  lay  down  my  pen. — See  how  the 
blistered  paper — It  is  too  late  to  send  away  this  let- 
ter: if  it  were  not,  it  would  be  barbarous  to  torment 
you  with  it,  while  the  dreadful  suspense  holds. 

Sunday  morning. 

I  am  unable  to  write  on  in  the  manner  I  used  to 
do.  Not  a  moment  all  the  night  past  did  I  close  my 
eyes :  how  they  are  swelled  with  weeping !  I  am 
preparing,  however,  to  go  to  church :  there  will 
I  renew  my  fervent  prayers,  that  my  grateful 
thanksgiving  for  the  past  deliverance  may  be  bless- 
ed to  me  in  the  future  event! 

Mr.  Reeves  thinks,  that  no  step  ought  to  be,  or 
can  be  taken  in  this  shocking  affair,  till  Sir  Charles 
returns,  or  Miss  Grandison  can  be  consulted.  He 
has  taken  measures  to  know  every  motion  of  the 
vile  Sir  Hargrave. 

Lord  bless  me,  my  dear !  the  man  has  lost  three  of 


SIR   CHARLES   GRANDISON.  299 

his  fore-teeth !  A  man  so  vain  of  his  person !  0  how 
must  he  be  exasperated! 

Mr.  Reeves  also  will  be  informed  of  Sir  Charles's 
arrival  the  moment  he  comes  to  town.  He  has  pri- 
vate information  that  the  furious  Sir  Hargrave  has 
with  him  a  man  skilled  in  the  science  of  offence, 
with  whom  he  is  practising — O  my  dear,  how  this 
distracts  me ! 

For  Mr.  Reeves  or  me  to  answer  this  Bagenhall, 
Mr.  Reeves  says,  is  not  to  be  thought  of,  as  he  is  a 
wicked  man,  and  was  not  likely  to  have  written  the 
alarming  letter  from  good  principles.  I  once  indeed 
proposed  to  write — I  knew  not  what  to  do,  what  to 
propose — Can  you  write,  said  Mr.  Reeves,  and  pro- 
mise or  give  hope  to  Sir  Hargrave  ? 

O  no,  no  !  answered  I. 

If  you  could,  it  is  my  opinion,  that  Sir  Charles 
and  his  sister  would  both  despise  you,  however  self- 
denying  and  laudable  your  motive  might  be. 


LETTER   XXXIX. 

MISS    BYRON.       IX    CONTINUATION. 

Monday  morning,  February  27. 
What  a  dreadful  day  was  yesterday  to  me  ;  and 
what  a  still  worse  night  had  I,  if  possible,  than  the 
former !  My  prayers,  I  doubt,  cannot  be  heard, 
since  they  have  not  that  affiance  with  them  that  they 
used  to  be  attended  with.  How  happy  was  I  before 
I  came  to  London  !  I  cannot  write :  I  cannot  do 
any-thing.  Mr.  Reeves  is  just  informed,  that  Sir 
Charles  and  Lord  L.  and  the  two  sisters,  arrived  in 
town  late  last  night.     O  my  Lucy,  to  return  such 


300  THE    HISTORY    OF 

an  answer,  I  doubt,  as  Sir  Charles  thinks  a  gentleman 
ought  to  send.  Good  heaven  !  how  will  this  end? 

Eight  o'clock. 

I  have  received  this  moment  the  following  billet. 

MY  DEAR  HARRIET, 

Prepare  yourself  for  a  new  admirer :  my  sister  L. 
and  1  are  resolved  to  breakfast  with  you,  unless 
you  forbid  us  by  the  bearer.  If  we  find  you  to  have 
made  an  attempt  to  alter  your  usual  morning  ap- 
pearance, we  shall  suspect  you  of  a  desire  to  triumph 
over  us  in  the  conciousness  of  your  superior  graces. 
It  is  a  sudden  resolution.  You  should  otherwise 
have  had  notice  last  night ;  and  yet  it  was  late 
before  we  came  to  town. — Have  you  been  good  ? 
Are  you  quite  recovered  ?  But  in  half  an  hour  I  hope 
to  ask  you  an  hundred  thousand  questions. 

Compliments  to  our  cousins. 

CH.  GR. 

Here  is  a  sweet  sprightly  billet.  Miss  Grandison 
cannot  know,  the  countess  cannot  know,  any-thing 
of  the  dreadful  affair,  that  has  given  to  my  coun- 
tenance, and  I  am  sure  will  continue  on  it,  an 
appearance,  that,  did  I  not  always  dress  when  I 
arose  for  the  morning,  would  make  me  regardless  of 
that  Miss  Grandison  hints  at. 

What  joy,  at  another  time,  would  the  honour  of 
this  visit  have  given  us !  But  even  now,  we  have  a 
melancholy  pleasure  in  it :  just  such  a  one,  as  the 
sorrowing  friends  of  the  desperate  sick  experience, 
on  the  coming-in  of  a  long-expected  physician,  al- 
though they  are  in  a  manner  hopeless  of  his  success. 
But  a  coach  stops — 

I  ran  to  the  dining-room  window.  O  my  dear ! 
It  is  a  coach  !  but  only  the  two  ladies  !  Good  God  ! 
— Sir  Charles  at  this  moment,  at  this  moment,  my 
bod insr  heart  tells  mc — 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  301 


Twelve  o'clock. 

My  heart  is  a  little  lighter :  yet  not  unapprehen- 
sive— Take  my  narrative  in  course,  as  I  shall  en- 
deavour to  give  you  the  particulars  of  every-thing 
that  passed  in  the  last  more  than  agreeable  three 
hours. 

I  had  just  got  down  into  the  great  parlour,  be- 
fore the  ladies  entered.  Mr.  Reeves  waited  on 
them  at  their  coach.  He  handed  in  the  countess. 
Miss  Grandison  in  a  charming  humour  entered  with 
them.  There,  Lady  L.  first  know  our  cousin 
Reeves,  said  she — 

The  countess,  after  saluting  Mrs.  Reeves,  turned 
to  me — There,  Lady  L.  said  Miss  Grandison,  That's 
the  girl !  That's  our  Harriet !  [Her  ladyship  salut- 
ed me]  But  how  now  !  said  Miss  Grandison,  look- 
ing earnestly  in  my  face.  How  now,  Harriet! — 
Excuse  me,  Lady  L.  (taking  my  hand)  I  must  rec- 
kon with  this  girl ;  leading  me  to  the  window — How 
now,  Harriet ! — Those  eyes  ! — Mr.  Reeves,  cousin, 
Mrs.  Reeves  !  What's  to  do  here  ! 

Lively  and  ever  amiable  Miss  Grandison,  thought 
I,  how  will,  by-and-by,  all  this  sweet  sunshine  in 
your  countenance  be  shut  in ! 

Come,  come,  1  ivill  know,  proceeded  she,  making 
me  sit  down,  and  taking  my  hand  as  she  sat  by  me ; 
I  ivill  know  the  whole  of  the  matter. — That's  my 
dear,  for  I  tried  to  smile — An  April  eye — Would  to 
heaven  the  month  was  come  which  my  Harriet's 
eye  anticipates. 

I  sighed.  Well,  but  why  that  heavy  sigh  ?  said 
she. — Our  grandmother  Shirley — 

I  hope,  madam,  is  very  well. 

Our  aunt  Selby  ?  Our  uncle  Selby  ?  Our  Lucy  ? 

All  well  I  hope. 

What  a  deuce  ails  the  girls  then  ?  Take  care  I 


302  THE    HISTORY   OP 

don't  have  cause  to  beat  you ! — Have  any  of  your 
fellows  hanged  themselves  ? — And  are  you  concern- 
ed they  did  not  sooner  find  the  rope  ? — But  come, 
we  will  know  all  by-and-by. 

Charlotte,  said  Lady  L.  approaching  me  [I  stood 
up]  you  oppress  our  new  sister  :  1  wish,  my  dear, 
you  would  borrow  a  few  of  our  younger  sister's 
blushes.  Let  me  take  you  out  of  this  lively  girl's 
hands  :  I  have  much  ado  to  keep  her  down,  though 
I  am  her  elder  sister.  Nobody  but  my  brother 
can  manage  her. 

Miss  Grandison,  madam,  is  all  goodness. 

We  have  been  all  disturbed,  said  Mrs.  Reeves 
[I  was  glad  to  be  helped  out]  in  the  fear  that  Sir 
Hargrave  Pollexfen — 

0  madam !  He  dare  not ;  he  will  not : — he'll  be 
glad  to  be  quiet,  if  you'll  let  him,  said  the  countess. 

It  was  plain  they  knew  nothing  of  the  challenge. 
You  have  not  heard  any-thing  particular,   asked 
Miss  Grandison,  of  Sir  Hargrave  ? 

1  hope  your  brother,  madam,  has  not,  answered  I. 
Not  a  word,  I  dare  say. 

You  must  believe,  ladies,  said  I,  that  I  must  be 
greatly  affected,  were  any-thing  likely  to  happen  to 
my  deliverer;  as  I  should  have  been  the  unhappy 
cause.  Such  a  family  harmony  to  be  interrupted- 
Come,  said  Miss  Grandison,  this  is  very  good  of 
you  :  this  is  like  a  sister :  but  I  hope  my  brother 
will  be  here  by-and-by. 

And  Lord  L.  added  the  obliging  countess,  wants 
to  see  you,  my  dear.  Come,  Miss  Byron,  if  Char- 
lotte is  naught,  we  will  make  a  party  against  her ; 
and  she  shall  be  but  my  second-best  sister.  I  hope, 
my  Lord  and  Sir  Charles  will  come  together,  if  they 
can  but  shake  off  wicked  Everard,  as  we  call  a 
kinsman,  whom  Sir  Charles  has  no  mind  to  intro- 
duce to  you,  without  your  leave. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISOX.  303 

But  we'll  not  stay  breakfast  for  them,  said  Miss 
Grandison  :  they  were  not  certain  :  and  desired  we 
would  not. — Come,  come,  get  us  some  breakfast ; 
Lady  L.  has  been  up  before  her  hour  ;  and  I  have 
told  you,  Harriet,  that  I  am  an  early  riser.  I  don't 
choose  to  eat  my  gloves. — But  I  must  do  something 
to  divert  my  hunger  :  and  stepping  to  the  harpsi- 
chord, she  touched  the  keys  in  such  a  manner,  as 
shewed  she  could  make  them  speak  what  language 
she  pleased. 

1  attended  to  her  charming  finger :  so  did  every 
one.  But  breakfast  coming  in — No  but  I  won't, 
said  she.  anticipating  our  requests  ;  and  continuing 
the  air  by  her  voice,  ran  to  the  table  :  Hang  cere- 
mony, said  she,  sitting  down  first ;  let  slower  souls 
compliment :  and  taking  some  muffin,  I'll  have  break- 
fasted before  these  Pray  madams,  and  Pray  my 
dears,  are  seated. 

Mad  girl !  Lady  L.  called  her.  These,  Mrs, 
Reeves,  arc  always  her  airs  with  us :  but  I  thought 
she  would  have  been  restrained  by  the  example  of 
her  sister  Harriet.  We  have  utterly  spoiled  the  girl 
by  our  fond  indulgence.  But,  Charlotte,  is  a  good 
heart  to  be  everywhere  pleaded  for  a  whimsical  head? 

Who  sees  not  the  elder  sister  in  that  speech  ?  re- 
plied Miss  Grandison:  but  I  am  the  most  generous 
creature  breathing;  yet  nobody  finds  it  out.  For 
why  do  I  assume  these  silly  airs,  but  to  make  you, 
Lady  L.  shine  at  my  expence? 

Still,  Lucy,  the  contents  of  that  Bagenhall's  let- 
ter hung  heavy  at  my  heart.  But  as  I  could  not 
be  sure  but  Sir  Charles  had  his  reasons  for  conceal- 
ing the  matter  from  his  sisters,  I  knew  not  how  to 
enter  directly  into  the  subject :  but,  thought  I,  can- 
not I  fish  something  out  for  the  quiet  of  my  own 
heart ;  and  leave  to  Sir  Charles's  discretion  the  man- 
ner of  his  revealing  the  matter  to  his  sisters,  ot 
otherwise  ?  d  d  2 


304  THE    HISTORY    OF 

Did  your  ladyship,  said  I  to  Lady  L.  arrive  on 
Saturday  [I  knew  not  how  to  begin]  at  the  hospit- 
able house  at  Colnebrook,  my  asylum  ? 

I  did:  and  shall  have  a  greater  value  for  that  house 
than  ever  I  had  before,  for  its  having  afforded  a 
shelter  to  so  valued  a  lady. 

You  have  been  told,  ladies,  I  suppose,  of  that 
Wilson's  letter  to  Sir  Charles  ? 

We  have :  and  rejoice  to  find  that  so  deep  a  plot 
was  so  happily  frustrated. 

His  postscript  gives  me  concern. 

What  were  the  contents  of  it  ? 

That  Sir  Hargrave  breathed  nothing  but  revenge. 

Sir  Charles  told  us  nothing  of  that :  but  it  is  not 
unlikely  that  a  man  so  greatly  disappointed  should 
rave  and  threaten.  I  am  told  that  he  is  still,  either 
by  shame,  or  illness,  confined  to  his  chamber. 

At  that  moment,  a  chariot  stopt  at  the  door  :  and 
instantly,  It  is  Lord  L.  and  Sir  Charles  with  him, 
said  Miss  Grandison. 

I  dared  not  to  trust  myself  with  my  joy.  I  hur- 
ried out  at  one  of  the  doors,  as  if  I  had  forgot 
something,  as  they  entered  at  the  other.  I  rushed 
into  the  back  parlour — Thank  God!  thank  God! 
said  I — My  gratitude  was  too  strong  for  my  heart : 
I  thought  I  should  have  fainted. 

Do  you  wonder,  Lucy,  at  my  being  so  much  af- 
fected, when  I  had  been  in  such  a  dreadful  suspense, 
and  had  formed  such  terrible  ideas  of  the  danger  of 
one  of  the  best  of  men,  all  owing  to  his  serving  and 
saving  me  ? 

Surprises  from  joy,  I  fancy,  and  where  gratitude 
is  the  principal  spring,  are  sooner  recovered  from 
than  surprises  which  raise  the  more  stormy  passions. 
Mrs.  Reeves  came  into  me :  My  dear !  your  with- 
drawing will  be  noticed.  I  was  just  coming  in,  said 
I :  and  so  I  was.     I  went  in. 

Sir  Charles  bowed  low  to  me  :  so  did  my  lord. 


srR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  305 

Permit  me,  madam,  said  Sir  Charles,  to  present  Lord 
L.  to  you  :  he  is  our  brother — Our  late-found  sister 
Harriet,  my  lord. 

Sir  Charles,  said  Miss  Grandison,  Miss  Byron, 
and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Reeves,  have  been  tormenting 
themselves  about  a  postscript  to  that  footman's  let- 
ter.    You  told  not  us  of  that  postscript. 

Who  minds  postscripts,  Charlotte?  Except  indeed 
to  a  lady's  letter.  One  word  with  you,  good  Miss 
Byron  ;  taking  my  hand,  and  leading  me  to  the  win- 
dow. 

How  the  fool  coloured  !  I  could  feel  my  face  glow. 

O  Lucy  !  What  a  consciousness  of  inferiority  fills 
a  mind  not  ungenerous,  when  it  labours  under  the 
sense  of  obligations  it  cannot  return ! 

My  sister  Charlotte,  madam,  was  impatient  to 
present  to  you  her  beloved  sister.  Lady  L.  was  as 
impatient  to  attend  you.  My  Lord  L.  was  equally- 
desirous  to  claim  the  honour  of  your  acquaintance. 
They  insisted  upon  my  introducing  my  lord.  I 
thought  it  was  too  precipitate  a  visit,  and  might  hurt 
your  delicacy,  and  make  Charlotte  and  me  appear, 
as  if  we  had  been  ostentatiously  boasting  of  the  op- 
portunities that  had  been  thrown  into  our  hands,  to 
do  a  very  common  service.  I  think  I  see  that  you 
are  hurt.  Forgive  me,  madam,  I  will  follow  my  own 
judgment  another  time.  Only  be  assured  of  this, 
that  your  merits,  and  not  the  service,  have  drawn 
this  visit  upon  you. 

I  could  not  be  displeased  at  this  polite  address,  as 
it  helped  me  to  an  excuse  for  behaving  so  like  a  fool, 
as  he  might  think,  since  he  knew  not  the  cause. 

You  are  very  obliging,  Sir.  My  Lord  and  Lady 
L.  do  me  great  honour.  Miss  Grandison  cannot  do 
any-thing  but  what  is  agreeable  to  me.  In  such 
company,  I  am  but  a  common  person  :  but  my  gra- 
titude will  never  let  me  look  upon  your  seasonable 
d  n  3 


306  THE    HISTORY    OV 

protection  as  a  common  service.  I  am  only  anxious 
for  the  consequences  to  yourself.  I  should  have  no 
pretence  to  the  gratitude  I  speak  of,  if  I  did  not 
own,  that  the  reported  threatenings,  and  what  Wilson 
writes  by  way  of  postscript,  have  given  me  disturb- 
ance, lest  your  safety  should,  on  my  account,  be 
brought  into  hazard. 

Miss  Byron  speaks  like  herself:  but  whatever 
were  to  be  the  consequences,  can  you  think,  madam, 
that  a  man  of  any  spirit  could  have  acted  otherwise 
than  I  did  ?  Would  I  not  have  been  glad,  that  any 
man  would  have  done  just  the  same  thing,  in  favour 
of  my  sister  Charlotte?  Could  I  behave  with  greater 
moderation  ?  I  am  pleased  with  myself  on  looking 
back ;  and  that  I  am  not  always :  there  shall  no 
consequences  follow,  that  I  am  not  forced  upon  in 
my  own  necessary  defence. 

We  spoke  loud  enough  to  be  heard :  and  Miss 
Grandison,  joining  us,  said,  But  pray,  brother,  tell 
us,  if  there  be  grounds  to  apprehend  any-thing  from 
what  the  footman  writes  ? 

You  cannot  imagine  but  Sir  Hargrave  would  blus- 
ter and  threaten  :  to  lose  such  a  prize,  so  near  as  he 
thought  himself  to  carrying  his  point,  must  affect  a 
man  of  his  cast :  but  are  ladies  to  be  troubled  with 
words  ?  Men  of  true  courage  do  not  threaten. 

Shall  I  beg  one  word  with  you,  Sir  Charles  ?  said 
Mr.  Reeves. 

They  withdrew  to  the  back  parlour:  and  there 
Mr.  Reeves,  who  had  the  letter  of  that  Bagenhall, 
shewed  it  to  him. 

He  read  it — A  very  extraordinary  letter!  said  he ; 
and  gave  it  back  to  him — But  pray,  what  says  Miss 
Byron  to  it? — Is  she  willing  to  take  this  step  in 
consideration  of  my  safety  ? 

You  may  believe,  Sir  Charles,  she  is  greatly 
distressed. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  307 

As  a  tender-hearted  woman,  and  as  one  who 
thinks  already  much  too  highly  of  what  was  done, 
she  may  be  distressed :  but  does  she  hesitate  a  mo- 
ment upon  the  part  she  ought  to  take  ?  Does  she 
not  despise  the  writer  and  the  writing  ? — I  thought 
Miss  Byron — 

He  stopt,  it  seems,  and  spoke  and  looked  warm  ; 
the  first  time,  said  Mr.  Reeves,  that  I  thought  Sir 
Charles,  on  occasion,  passionate. 

I  wish,  Lucy,  that  he  had  not  stopt,  I  wish  he 
had  said  what  he  thought  Miss  Byron.  I  own  to 
you,  that  it  would  go  to  my  heart,  if  I  knew  that 
Sir  Charles  Grandison  thought  me  a  mean  creature. 

You  must  think,  Sir  Charles,  that  Miss  Byron — 

Pray,  Mr.  Reeves,  forgive  me  for  interrupting 
you ;  What  steps  have  been  taken  upon  this  letter  ? 

None,  Sir. 

It  has  not  been  honoured  with  notice  ;  not  with 
the  least  notice  ? 

It  has  not. 

And  could  it  be  supposed  by  these  mean  men 
(all  men  are  mean,  Mr.  Reeves,  who  can  bepremedi- 
tatedly  guilty  of  a  baseness)  that  I  would  be  brought 
to  ask  pardon  for  my  part  in  this  affair  ?  No  man, 
Mr.  Reeves,  would  be  more  ready  than  myself  to 
ask  pardon,  even  of  my  inferior,  had  I  done  a  wrong 
thing  :  but  never  should  a  prince  make  me  stoop  to 
disavow  a  right  one. 

But,  Sir  Charles,  let  me  ask  you,  Has  Sir  Har- 
grave  challenged  you  ?  Did  this  Bagenhall  bring 
you  a  letter  ? 

Sir  Hargrave  has :  Bagenhall  did :  but  what  of 
that,  Mr.  Reeves?  I  promised  an  answer  on  Mon- 
day. I  would  not  so  much  as  think  of  setting  pen 
to  paper  on  such  an  account,  to  interrupt  for  a  mo- 
ment the  happiness  I  had  hoped  to  receive  in  the 


308  THE    HISTORY    OF 

meeting  of  a  sister  and  her  lord,  so  dear  to  me  :  an 
answer  I  have  accordingly  sent  him  this  day. 

You  have  sent  him  an  answer,  Sir ! — I  am  in  great 
apprehensions — 

You  have  no  reason,  Mr.  Reeves,  I  do  assure  you. 
But  let  not  my  sisters,  nor  Lord  L.  know  of  this 
matter.  Why  should  I,  who  cannot  have  a  moment's 
uneasiness  upon  it,  for  my  own  sake,  have  the  need- 
less fears  and  apprehensions  of  persons  to  whom  I 
wish  to  give  nothing  but  pleasure,  to  contend  with  ? 
An  imaginary  distress,  to  those  who  think  it  more 
than  imaginary,  is  a  real  one  :  and  1  cannot  bear  to 
see  my  friends  unhappy. 

Have  you  accepted,  Sir — Have  you — 

I  have  been  too  much  engaged,  Mr.  Reeves,  in 
such  causes  as  this :  I  never  drew  my  sword  but  in 
my  own  defence,  and  when  no  other  means  could 
defend  me.  I  never  could  bear  a  designed  insult. 
I  am  naturally  passionate.  You  know  not  the  pains 
it  has  cost  me,  to  keep  my  passion  under :  but  I 
have  suffered  too  much  in  my  after-regret,  when  I 
have  been  hurried  away  by  it,  not  to  endeavour  to 
restrain  its  first  sallies. 

I  hope,  Sir,  you  will  not  meet — 

I  will  not  meet  any  man,  Mr.  Reeves,  as  a  duel- 
list :  I  am  not  so  much  a  coward,  as  to  be  afraid  of 
being  branded  for  one.  I  hope  my  spirit  is  in  ge- 
neral too  well  known  for  any  one  to  insult  me  on 
such  an  imputation.  Forgive  the  seeming  vanity, 
Mr.  Reeves  :  but  I  live  not  to  the  world  :  I  live  to 
myself;  to  the  monitor  within  me. 

Mr.  Reeves  applauded  him  with  his  hands  and 
eyes;  but  could  not  in  words.  The  heart  spoke 
these  last  words,  said  my  good  cousin.  How  did  his 
face  seem  to  shine  in  my  eyes  ! 

There  are  many  bad  customs,  Mr.  Reeves,  that  I 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  309 

grieve  for  :  but  for  none  so  much  as  this  of  preme- 
ditated duelling.  Where  is  the  magnanimity  of  the 
man  that  cannot  get  above  the  vulgar  breath  ?  How 
many  fatherless,  brotherless,  sonless  families  have 
mourned  all  their  lives  the  unhappy  resort  to  this 
dreadful  practice  !  A  man  who  defies  his  fellow- 
creature  into  the  field,  in  a  private  quarrel,  must  first 
defy  his  God;  and  what  are  his  hopes,  but  to  be  a 
murderer?  to  do  an  irreparable  injury  to  the  inno- 
cent family  and  dependents  of  the  murdered  ? — But 
since  you  have  been  let  into  the  matter  so  far,  by  the 
unaccountable  letter  you  let  me  see,  I  will  shew  you 
Sir  Hargrave's  to  me. — This  is  it,  taking  it  out  of 
his  pocket-book. 

You  did  well,  Sir  Charles  Grandison,  to  leave  your 
name.  My  scoundrels  were  too  far  off  their  master 
to  inform  themselves,  who  the  person  was  that  in- 
sulted an  innocent  man  (as  to  him,  innocent,  how- 
ever) on  the  highway.  You  expected  to  hear  from 
me,  it  is  evident ;  and  you  should  have  heard  before 
now,  had  I  been  able  from  the  effects  of  the  unmanly 
surprise  you  took  advantage  of,  to  leave  my  cham- 
ber. I  demand  from  you  the  satisfaction  due  to  a 
gentleman.  The  time  your  own  ;  provided  it  exceed 
not  next  Wednesday  ;  which  will  give  you  opportu- 
nity, I  suppose,  to  settle  your  affairs  ;  but  the  sooner 
the  better.  The  place,  if  you  have  no  objection, 
Kensington  Gravel-pits.  I  will  bring  pistols  for  your 
choice;  or  you  may  for  mine,  which  you  will.  The 
rest  may  be  left  to  my  worthy  friend  Mr.  Bagenhall, 
who  is  so  kind  as  to  carry  you  this,  on  my  part ;  and 
to  some  one  whom  you  shall  pitch  upon,  on  yours. 
Till  when,  I  am 

Your  humble  servant, 

Saturday.  HARGRAVE  POLLEXFEW 


310  THE   HISTORY   OF 

I  have  a  copy  of  my  answer  somewhere — Here  it 
is.  You  will  wonder,  perhaps,  Mr.  Reeves,  on  such 
a  subject  as  this,  to  find  it  a  long  one.  Had  Sir  Har- 
grave  known  me  better  than  he  does,  six  lines 
might  have  been  sufficient. 

SIR, 

Mr.Bagenhallgave  me  yours  on  Saturday  last,  just 
as  I  was  stepping  into  my  chariot  to  go  out  of  town. 
Neither  the  general  contents,  nor  thetime mentioned 
in  it,  made  it  necessary  for  me  to  alter  my  measures, 
My  sister  was  already  in  the  chariot.  I  had  not 
done  well  to  make  a  woman  uneasy.  I  have  many 
friends ;  and  I  have  great  pleasure  in  promoting  theirs, 
I  promised  an  answer  on  Monday. 

My  answer  is  this — I  have  ever  refused  (and  the 
occasion  has  happened  too  often)  to  draw  my  sword 
upon  a  set  and  formal  challenge.  Yet  I  have  reason 
to  think,  from  the  skill  I  pretend  to  have  in  the 
weapons,  that  in  declining  to  do  so,  I  consult  my 
conscience  rather  than  my  safety. 

Have  you  any  friends,  Sir  Hargrave  ?  Do  they 
love  you  ?  Do  you  love  them  ?  Are  you  desirous  of 
life  for  their  sakes  ?  for  your  own  ? — Have  you  ene- 
mies to  whom  your  untimely  end  would  give  plea- 
sure?— Let  these  considerations  weigh  with  you; 
they  do,  and  always  did,  with  me.  I  am  cool :  you 
cannot  be  so.  The  cool  person,  on  such  an  occasion 
as  this,  should  put  the  warm  one  on  thinking  :  this 
however  as  you  please. 

But  one  more  question  let  me  ask  you — If  you 
think  I  have  injured  you,  is  it  prudent  to  give  me  a 
chance,  were  it  but  a  chance,  to  do  you  a  still  greater 
injury? 

You  were  engaged  in  an  unlawful  enterprise.  If 
you  would  not  have  done  by  me  in  the  same  situa- 
tion, what  I  did  by  you,  you  are  not,  let  me  tell 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANHISON.  311 

you,  Sir  Hargrave,  the  man  of  honour,  that  a  man 
of  honour  should  be  solicitous  to  put  upon  a  foot 
with  himself. 

I  took  not  an  unmanly  advantage  of  you,  Sir  Har- 
grave :  you  drew  upon  me :  I  drew  not  in  return. 
You  had  a  disadvantage  in  not  quittingyour  chariot; 
after  the  lunge  you  made  at  me,  you  may  be  thank- 
ful that  I  made  not  use  of  it. 

I  should  not  have  been  sorry  had  I  been  able  to 
give  the  lady  the  protection  she  claimed,  with  less 
hurt  to  yourself:  for  I  could  have  no  malice  in  what 
I  did :  although  I  had,  and  have  still,  a  just  abhor- 
rence of  the  violence  you  were  guilty  of  to  a  helpless 
woman  ;  and  who  I  have  found  since  merited  better 
treatment  from  you ;  and  indeed  merits  the  best 
from  all  the  world ;  and  whose  life  was  endangered 
by  the  violence. 

I  write  a  long  letter,  because  I  propose  only  to 
write.  Pardon  me  for  repeating,  that  the  men  who 
have  acted  as  you  and  I  have  acted,  as  well  with  re- 
gard to  the  lady,  as  to  each  other,  cannot,  were  their 
principles  such  as  would  permit  them  to  meet,  meet 
upon  a  foot. 

Let  any  man  insult  me  upon  my  refusal,  and  put 
me  upon  my  defence,  and  he  shall  find  that  numbers 
to  my  single  arm  shall  not  intimidate  me.  Yet,  even 
in  that  case,  I  would  much  rather  choose  to  clear 
myself  of  them  as  a  man  of  honour  should  wish  to 
do,  than  either  to  kill  or  maim  any  man.  My  life 
is  not  my  own :  much  less  is  another  man's  mine. 
Him  who  thinks  differently  from  me,  I  can  despise 
as  heartily  as  he  can  despise  me.  And  if  such  a 
one  imagines,  that  he  has  a  title  to  my  life,  let  him 
take  it :  but  it  must  be  in  my  own  way,  not  in  his. 

In  a  word,  If  any  man  has  aught  a^ain^t  me,  and 
will  not  apply  for  redress  to  the  laws  of  his  country, 
my  goings  out,  and  comings  in,  are  always  known  ; 
3 


312  THE    HISTORY    OF 

and  I  am  any  hour  of  the  day  to  be  found,  or  met 
with,  wherever  I  have  a  proper  call-.  My  sword  is 
a  sword  of  defence,  not  of  olfence.  A  pistol  I  only 
carry  on  the  road,  to  terrify  robbers :  and  I  have 
found  a  less  dangerous  weapon  sometimes  sufficient 
to  repel  a  sudden  insult.  And  now,  if  Sir  Hargrave 
Pollexfen  be  wise,  he  will  think  himself  obliged  for 
this  not  unfriendly  expostulation,  or  whatever  he 
pleases  to  call  it,  to 

His  most  humble  servant, 
Monday.  CHARLES  GRANDISON. 

Mr.  Reeves  besought  Sir  Charles  to  let  him  shew 
me  these  letters.  You  may,  Mr.  Reeves,  said  he ; 
since  I  intend  not  to  meet  Sir  Hargrave  in  the  way 
he  prescribes. 

As  I  asked  not  leave,  my  Lucy,  to  take  copies  of 
them,  I  beg  they  may  not  be  seen  out  of  the  venera- 
ble circle. 

I  know  I  need  not  say  how  much  I  am  pleased 
with  the  contents  of  the  latter :  I  doubt  not  but  you 
all  will  be  equally  so :  yet,  as  Sir  Charles  himself 
expects  not  that  Sir  Hargrave  will  rest  the  matter 
here ;  and  indeed  says  he  cannot,  consistently  with 
the  vulgar  notions  of  honour ;  do  you  think  I  can 
be  easy,  as  all  this  is  to  be  placed  to  my  account  ? 

But  it  is  evident,  that  Sir  Charles  is.  He  is  go- 
verned by  another  set  of  principles,  than  those  of 
false  honour ;  and  shews,  what  his  sister  says  to  be 
true,  that  he  regards  first  his  duty,  and  then  wh  at  is 
called  honour.  How  does  the  knowledge  of  these 
his  excellencies  raise  him  in  my  mind !  Indeed, 
Lucy,  I  seem  sometimes  to  feel,  as  if  my  gratitude 
had  raised  a  throne  for  him  in  my  heart;  but  yet  as 
for  a  near  friend,  as  a  beloved  brother  only.  My 
reverence  for  him  is  too  great — Assure  yourself, 
my  dear,  that  this  reverence  will  always  keep  me 
right. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  SIS 

Sir  Charles  and  Mr.  Reeves  returning  into  com- 
pany, the  conversation  took  a  general  turn.  But, 
oppressed  with  obligations  as  I  am,  I  could  not  be 
lively.  My  heart,  as  Miss  Grandison  says,  is,  I  be- 
lieve, a  proud  one.  And  when  I  thought  of  what 
might  still  happen  (who  knows,  but  from  assassina- 
tion, in  resentment  of  some  very  spirited  strokes  in 
Sir  Charles's  letter,  as  well  as  from  the  disgrace  the 
wretch  must  carry  in  his  face  to  the  grave  ?)  I  could 
not  but  look  upon  this  fine  man  who  seemed  to  pos- 
sess his  own  soul  in  peace,  sometimes  with  concern, 
and  even  with  tender  grief,  on  supposing,  that  now, 
lively  and  happy  as  he  seemed  to  be,  and  the  joy  of 
all  his  friends,  he  might  possibly,  and  perhaps  in  a 
few  hours — How  can  I  put  down  my  horrid  thoughts ! 

At  other  times,  indeed,  I  cast  an  eye  of  some 
pleasure  on  him  (when  he  looked  another  way)  on 
thinking  him  the  only  man  on  earth,  to  whom,  in 
such  distress,  I  could  have  wished  to  owe  the  obli- 
gations 1  am  under  to  him.  His  modest  merit, 
thought  I,  will  not  make  one  uneasy :  he  thinks  the 
protection  afforded  but  a  common  protection.  He 
is  accustomed  to  do  great  and  generous  things.  I 
might  have  been  obliged  to  a  man  whose  fortune 
might  have  made  it  convenient  for  him  to  hope  such 
advantages  from  the  risque  he  run  for  me,  as  pru- 
dence would  have  made  objections  to  comply  with, 
not  a  little  embarrassing  to  my  gratitude. 

But  here,  my  heart  is  left  free.  And  O,  thought 
I,  now-and-then,  as  I  looked  upon  him,  Sir  Charles 
Grandison  is  a  man  with  whom  I  would  not  "wish  to 
be  in  love.  I,  to  have  so  many  rivals!  He,  to  be  so 
much  admired !  Women  not  to  stay  till  they  are 
asked,  as  Miss  Grandison  once  said  ;  his  heart  must 
be  proof  against  those  tender  sensations,  which  grow 
into  ardour,  and  glow,  in  the  bosom  of  a  man  pur- 
suing dijirst  and  only  love. 

E    E 


3M<  THE   HISTORY   OF 

I  warrant,  my  Lucy,  if  the  truth  were  known,  al- 
though Sir  Charles  has  at  Canterbury,  or  at  one 
place  or  other,  his  half-score  ladies,  who  would 
break  their  hearts  if  he  were  to  marry,  yet  he 
knows  not  anyone  of  them  whom  he  loves  better  than 
another.  And  all  but  right !  All  but  justice,  if  they 
will  not  stay  till  they  are  asked ! 

Miss  Grandison  invited  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Reeves,  and 
me,  to  dinner,  on  Wednesday,  and  for  the  rest  of 
the  day  and  evening.     It  was  a  welcome  invitation. 

The  countess  expressed  herself  pleased  with  me. 
Poor  and  spiritless  as  was  the  figure  which  I  made 
in  this  whole  visit,  her  prepossession  in  my  favour 
from  Miss  Grandisonmust  have  been  very  great  and 
generous. 

And  will  you  not,  before  now, have  expected  that 
I  should  have  brought  you  acquainted  with  the  per- 
sons of  Lord  and  Lady  L.  as  I  am  accustomed  to 
give  you  descriptions  of  every  one  to  whom  I  am 
introduced  ? 

To  be  sure  we  have,  say  you. 

Well,  but  my  mind  has  not  always  been  in  tune  to 
gratify  you.  And,  upon  my  word,  I  am  so  much 
humbled  with  one  thing  and  another,  that  I  have 
lost  all  that  pertness,  I  think,  which  used  to  give 
such  a  liveliness  to  my  heart,  and  alertness  to  my 
pen,  as  made  the  writing  task  pleasant  to  me,  because 
I  knew  that  you  all  condescended  to  like  the  flippant 
airs  of  your  Harriet. 

Lady  L  is  a  year  older  than  Sir  Charles  :  but  has 
that  true  female  softness  and  delicacy  in  her  features, 
which  make  her  perfectly  lovely;  and  she  looks  to 
be  two  or  three  years  younger  than  she  is.  She  is 
tall  and  slender;  and  enjoys  the  blessings  of  health 
and  spirits  in  a  high  degree.  There  is  something  of 
more  dignity  and  sprightliness  in  the  air  and  features 
of  Miss  Grandison,  than  in  those  of  Lady  L. :  but 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON\  315 

there  is  in  those  of  the  latter,  so  much  sweetness  and 
complacency,  that  you  are  not  so  much  afraid  of  her 
as  you  are  of  her  sister.  The  one  you  are  sure  to  love 
at  first  sight :  the  otheryou  will  be  ready  to  ask  leave 
to  let  you  love  her ;  and  to  be  ready  to  promise  that 
you  will,  if  she  will  spare  you  :  and  yet,  whether  she 
will  or  not,  you  cannot  help  it. 

Lady  L.  is  such  a  wife,  I  imagine,  as  a  good  wo- 
man should  wish  to  be  thought.  The  behaviour  of 
my  lord  to  her,  and  of  her  to  my  lord,  is  free,  yet 
respectful ;  and  affectionate,  but  not  apishly  fond. 
One  sees  their  love  for  each  other  in  their  eyes  All 
love-matches  are  not  happy  :  this  was  a  match  of 
love ;  and  does  honour  to  it.  Every -body  speaks  of 
Lady  L.  with  equal  affection  and  respect,  as  a  dis- 
creet and  prudent  woman.  MissGrandison,by  her 
livelier  manner,  is  not  so  well  understood  in  those 
lights  as  she  ought  to  be ;  and,  satisfied  with  the 
worthiness  of  her  own  heart,  is  above  giving  herself 
concern  about  what  the  world  thinks  of  it. 

Lord  L.  is  not  handsome ;  but  he  is  very  agree- 
able. He  has  the  look  of  an  honeht  good  man  ;  and 
of  a  man  of  understanding.  And  he  is  what  he  looks 
to  be.  He  is  genteel,  and  has  the  air  of  a  true  Bri- 
tish nobleman;  one  of  those,  I  imagine,  who  would 
have  been  respected  by  his  appearance  and  manners, 
in  the  purest  times,  a  hundred  or  two  years  (or  how 
long  ?)  ago. 

I  am  to  have  the  family-history  of  this  lord  and 
lady,  on  both  sides,  and  of  their  loves,  their  dif- 
ficulties, and  of  the  obligations  they  talk  of  being 
under  to  their  brother,  to  whom  both  my  lord  and 
lady  behave  with  love  that  carries  the  heart  in  every 
word,  in  every  look. 

What,  my  dear,  shall  we  say  to  this  brother  ? 
Does  he  lay  every-body  that  knows  him  under  obli- 
gation ?  And  is  there  no  way  to  be  even  with  him 
E  e  2 


316  THE    HISTORY    OF 

in  any  one  thing  ?  I  long  to  have  some  intimate  con- 
versation with  Miss  Grandison,  by  which  I  shall 
perhaps  find  out  the  art  he  has  of  making  every -body 
proud  of  acknowledging  an  inferiority  to  him. 

I  almost  wish  I  could,  while  I  stay  in  town,  de- 
vote half  my  time  to  this  amiable  family ;  without 
breaking  in  upon  them  so  much  as  to  be  thought 
impertinent.  The  other  half  ought  to  be  with  my 
kind  cousin  Reeves's.  I  never  shall  make  them 
amends  for  the  trouble  I  have  given  them. 

How  I  long  for  Wednesday,  to  see  all  the  family 
of  the  Grandisons — They  are  all  to  be  there — On 
several  accounts  I  long  for  that  day :  yet  this  Sir 
Har  grave — 

I  have  written,  my  dear,  as  usual,  very  unreserv- 
edly. I  know  that  I  lie  more  open  than  ever  to  my 
uncle's  observations.  But  if  he  will  not  allow  for 
weakness  of  heart,  of  head,  and  for  having  been 
frighted  out  of  my  wits  and  cruelly  used ;  and  for 
further  apprehensions ;  and  for  the  sense  I  have  of 
obligations  that  never  can  be  returned ;  why  then  I 
must  lie  wholly  at  his  mercy — But  if  he  should  find 
me  to  be  ever  so  silly  a  creature,  J  hope  he  will  not 
make  his  particular  conclusions  general  in  disfavour 
of  the  sex. 

Adieu,  my  dear  Lucy ! — And  in  you,  adieu  all 
the  dear  and  revered  friends,  benefactors,  lovers,  of 
your 

HARRIET  BYRON. 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  317 

LETTER  XL. 

MRS.  SELBY  TO  MISS  HARRIET  BYRON. 

my  dearest  Harriet.  Selby-house,  February  25. 

Although  we  have  long  ago  taken  a  resolution, 
never  to  dictate  to  your  choice  ;  yet.  we  could  not 
excuse  ourselves,  if  we  did  not  acquaint  you  with 
any  proposal  that  is  made  to  us,  on  your  account, 
that  you  might  encourage  it,  or  otherwise,  as  you 
thought  fit. 

The  dowager  Lady  D.  wrote  me  a  letter  some 
time  ago  (as  you  will  see  by  the  date) :  but  insisted, 
that  I  should  keep  the  contents  a  secret  in  my  own 
bosom,  till  she  gave  me  leave  to  reveal  it.  She  has 
now  given  me  that  leave,  and  requested  that  I  will 
propose  the  matter  to  you.  I  have  since  shewn 
what  has  passed  between  her  ladyship  and  me,  to 
your  grandmamma,  Mr.  Selby,  and  Lucy.  They 
are  all  silent  upon  it ;  for  the  same  reasons,  that  I 
give  you  not  my  opinion  ;  that  is  to  say,  till  you  ask 
it. 

But  do  we  not  see,  my  dearest  child,  that  some- 
thing has  happened,  within  a  very  few  days  past, 
that  must  distance  the  hope  of  every  one  of  your 
admirers,  as  they  come  to  be  acquainted  with  the 
circumstances  and  situation  you  are  now  in  ?  My 
dear  love,  you  will  never  be  able  to  resist  the  im- 
pulses of  that  gratitude  which  always  opened  and 
expanded  your  worthy  heart. 

Your  uncle's  tenderness  for  you,  on  such  a  pro- 
spect, has  made  him  suppress  hL  inclination  to  rally 
you.  He  professes  to  pity  you,  my  dear.  While, 
says  he,  the  sweet  girl  was  vaunting  herself,  and 
refusing  this  man ;  and  dismissing  that ;  and  imagin- 
ing herself  out  of  the  reach  of  the  deity,  to  which, 

E  E  3 


318  THE  HISTORY  OP 

sooner  or  later,  all  women  bow;  I  spared  her  not; 
but  now,  that  I  see  she  is  likely  to  be  over  head  and 
ears  in  the  passion,  and  has  so  much  to  be  said  for 
her  excuse  if  she  is  caught ;  and  as  our  side  must 
perhaps  be  the  hoping  side,  the  gentleman's  the 
triumphant ;  I  pity  her  too  much  for  what  may  be 
the  case,  to  teaze  her  with  my  animadversions ;  es- 
pecially after  what  she  has  suffered  from  the  vile 
Sir  Hargrave. 

By  several  hints  in  your  letters,  it  is  impossible, 
my  dear,  that  we  can  be  aforehand  with  your  incli- 
nations. Young  women  in  a  beginning  love  are  al- 
ways willing  to  conceal  themselves  from  themselves  ; 
they  are  desirous  to  smother  the  fire,  before  they 
will  call  out  for  help,  till  it  blazes,  and  frequently 
becomes  too  powerful  to  be  extinguished  by  any 
help.  They  will  call  the  passion  by  another  name ; 
as, gratitude,  suppose:  but,  my  Harriet,  gratitude  so 
properly  founded  as  yours  is  can  be  but  another 
name  for  love.  The  object  so  worthy,  your  own 
heart  so  worthy,  consent  of  minds  must  bring  it  to 
love  on  one  side ;  perhaps  on  both,  if  the  half- 
score  of  ladies  you  have  heard  of  are  all  of  them  but 
mere  moderns.  But  that,  my  dear,  is  not  to  be  sup- 
posed ;  since  worthy  hearts  find  out,  and  assimilate 
with,  each  other.  Indeed,  those  ladies  may  be  such 
as  are  captivated  with  outward  figure.  A  handsome 
man  need  not  to  have  the  great  qualities  of  a  Sir 
Charles  Grandison,  to  engage  the  hearts  of  the  ge- 
nerality of  our  sex.  But  a  good  man  and  a  hand- 
some man,  if  he  has  the  vivacity  that  distinguishes 
Sir  Charles,  may  marry  whom  he  pleases.  If  we 
women  love  a  handsome  man,  for  the  sake  of  our 
eye,  we  must  be  poor  creatures  indeed,  if  we  love 
not  good  men  for  the  sake  of  our  hearts. 

What  makes  us  apprehensive  for  you,  my  Harriet, 
is  this  :  that  we  every  one  of  us  are  in  love  ourselves 


SIK  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  319 

with  this  fine  young  gentleman.  Your  uncle  has 
fallen  in  with  Mr.  Dawson,  an  attorney  of  Notting- 
ham, who  acts  for  Sir  Charles  in  some  of  his  affairs  ; 
and  gives  him  such  a  character  respecting  his  good- 
ness to  his  tenants  and  dependents  only,  as  will 
render  credible  all  that  even  the  fondest  love,  and 
warmest  gratitude,  can  say  in  his  praise. 

We  can  hardly  tell  sometimes  how  to  regret 
(though  your  accounts  of  your  sufferings  and  danger 
cut  us  to  the  heart  as  we  read  them)  the  base  attempt 
of  Sir  Hargrave :  were  all  to  end  as  we  wish,  we 
should  not  regret  it :  but  that,  my  Harriet,  is  our 
fear.  What  will  become  of  me,  said  your  grand- 
mamma, if,  at  last,  the  darling  of  my  heart  should 
be  entangled  in  a  hopeless  passion  ? 

If  this  is  likely  to  be  the  case,  while  the  fire  I 
spoke  of  is  but  smothering,  and  while  but  here  and 
there  a  spark  escapes  your  struggling  efforts  to  keep 
it  down,  resolve,  my  dear,  to  throw  cold  water  on 
it,  and  quench  it  quite.  And  how  is  this  to  be  done, 
but  by  changing  your  personal  friendship  with  the 
amiable  family,  into  a  correspondence  by  pen  and 
ink,  and  returning  to  our  longing  arms,  before  the 
flame  gets  a-head  ? 

When  you  are  with  us,  you  may  either  give  hope 
to  the  worthy  Orme,  or  encourage  the  proposal  1 
inclose,  as  you  please. 

As  you  are  not  capable  of  the  mean  pride  of  see- 
ing a  number  of  men  in  your  train,  and  have  always 
been  uneasy  at  the  perseverance  of  Mr.Fenwick  and 
Mr.  Greville — As  you  have  suffered  so  much  from 
the  natural  goodness  of  your  heart,  on  the  urgency 
of  that  honest  man  Sir  Rowland  Meredith  in  his 
nephew's  favour  ;  and  still  more  from  the  baseness 
of  that  wicked  Sir  Hargrave — As  your  good  cha- 
racter, and  lovely  person,  engage  you  more  and  more 
admirers — And,  lastly,  as  it  would  be  the  highest 


320  THE  HISTORY  OF 

comfort  that  your  grandmamma  and  your  uncle,  and 
I,  and  all  your  friends  and  well-wishers,  could  know, 
to  see  you  happily  married — We  cannot  but  wish  for 
this  pleasure  and  satisfaction ;  the  sooner  you  give 
it  to  us,  the  better. 

But  could  there  be  any  hope — You  know  what  I 
mean — A  royal  diadem,  my  dear,  would  be  a  de- 
spicable thing  in  the  comparison. 

Adieu,  my  best  love.  You  are  called  upon,  in 
my  opinion,  to  a  greater  trial  than  ever  yet  you 
knew,  of  that  prudence  for  which  you  have  hitherto 
been  so  much  applauded  by  every  one,  and  parti- 
cularly by 

Your  truly  maternal 

MARIANiNA  SELBY. 


LETTER  XLI, 

FROM    THE    COUNTESS    DOWAGER     OF    D.    TO    MRS,. 
SELBY. 

'[Inclosed  in  the  preceding'] . 

January  23. 

Give  me  leave,  madam,  to  address  myself  to  you, 
though  personally  unknown,  on  a  very  particular 
occasion ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  beg  of  you  to 
keep  secret,  even  from  Mr.  Selby,  and  the  party  to 
be  named  as  still  more  immediately  concerned  in  the 
subject,  till  I  give  my  consent ;  as  no  one  creature 
of  my  family,  not  even  my  son,  does,  or  shall  know 
f.-orn  me  till  you  approve  of  it. 

My  lord  has  just  entered  into  his  twenty-fifth 
year.  There  are  not  many  better  young  men  among 
the  nobility.  His  minority  gave  an  opportunity  to 
me,  and  his  other  trustees,  to  put  him  in  possession, 


SIK  CHARLES  GRANDISON.  321 

when  he  came  of  age,  of  a  very  noble  and  clear  es- 
tate ;  which  he  has  not  impaired.  His  person  is  not 
to  be  found  fault  with.  He  has  learning,  and  is  al- 
lowed to  have  good  sense,  which  every  learned  man 
has  not.  His  conduct,  his  discretion,  in  his  travels, 
procured  him  respect  and  reputation  abroad.  You 
may  make  enquiry  privately  of  all  these  matters. 

We  are,  you  must  believe,  very  solicitous  to  have 
him  happily  married.  He  is  far  from  being  an  undu- 
tiful  son.  Indeed  he  was  always  dutiful.  A  dutiful 
son  gives  very  promising  hopes  of  making  a  good 
husband.  He  assures  me  that  his  affections  are  dis- 
engaged, and  that  he  will  pay  the  most  particular 
regard  to  my  recommendation. 

1  have  cast  about  for  a  suitable  wife  for  him.  I 
look  farther  than  to  the  person  of  a  woman  ;  though 
my  lord  will  by  no  means  have  beauty  left  out  in 
the  qualifications  of  a  wife.  I  look  to  the  family  to 
whom  a  lady  owes  her  education  and  training  up. 
Quality,  however,  I  stand  not  upon.  A  man  of  qua- 
lity, you  know,  confers  quality  on  his  wife.  An 
ancient  and  good  gentleman's  family  is  all  I  am  so- 
licitous about  in  this  respect.  In  this  light,  yours, 
madam,  on  all  sides,  and  for  many  descents,  is  un- 
exceptionable. I  have  a  desire,  if  all  things  shall  be 
found  to  be  mutually  agreeable,  to  be  related  to  it : 
and  your  character,  as  the  young  lady  has  been 
brought  up  under  your  eye,  is  a  great  inducement 
with  me. 

Your  niece  Byron's  beauty,  and  merits,  as  well 
as  sweetness  of  temper,  are  talked  of  by  every-body 
Not  a  day  passes,  but  we  hear  of  her  to  her  great 
advantage.  Now,  madam,  will  you  be  pleased  to  an- 
swer me  one  question,  with  that  explicitness  which 
the  importance  of  the  case,  and  my  own  intended 
explicitness  to  you,  may  require  from  woman  to  wo- 
man ?     Especially,  as  I  ask  it  of  you  in  confidence. 


322  THE  HISTORY  OF 

Are  then  Miss  Byron's  affections  absolutely  dis- 
engaged ?  We  are  very  nice,  and  must  not  doubt 
in  this  matter. 

This  is  the  only  question  I  will  ask  at  present.  If 
this  can  be  answered  as  I  wish,  others,  in  a  treaty 
of  this  important  nature,  will  come  into  considera- 
tion on  both  sides. 

The  favour  of  a  line  as  soon  as  it  will  suit  your 
convenience,  will  oblige,  madam, 

Your  most  faithful  and  obedient  servant, 

M.  D. 


LETTER  XLII. 

MRS.   SELBY  TO  THE  COUNTESS  DOWAGER    OF  D. 

madam,  January  27. 

I  am  greatly  obliged  to  your  ladyship  for  your  good 
opinion  of  me,  and  for  the  honour  you  do  me,  and 
all  our  family,  in  the  proposed  alliance. 

I  will  answer  your  ladyship's  question  with  the 
requisite  explicitness. 

Mr.  Greville,  Mr.  Orme,  and  Mr.  Fenwick,  all 
of  this  county,  have  respectively  made  application 
to  us  for  our  interest,  and  to  Miss  Byron  for  her  fa- 
vour :  but  hitherto  without  effect ;  though  the  terms 
each  proposes  might  intitle  him  to  consideration. 

Miss  Byron  professes  to  honour  the  married  state, 
and  one  day  proposes  to  make  some  man  happy  in 
it,  if  it  be  not  his  own  fault :  but  declares,  that  she 
has  not  yet  seen  the  man  to  whom  with  her  hand 
she  can  give  her  heart. 

In  truth,  madam,  we  are  all  neutral  on  this  occa- 
sion. We  have  the  highest  opinion  of  her  discre- 
tion. She  has  read,  she  has  conversed ;  and  yet  there 


SIR  CHARLES  GRANDISOK.  323 

is  not  in  the  county  one  who  would  make  a  more 
prudent  manager  in  a  family.  We  are  all  fond  of  her 
even  to  doting.  Were  she  not  our  child,  we  should 
love  her  for  her  good  qualities,  and  sweetness  of 
manners,  and  a  frankness  that  has  few  examples 
among  young  women. 

Permit  me,  madam,  to  add  one  thing ;  about  which 
Miss  Byron,  in  her  turn,  will  be  very  nice.  Your 
ladyship  is  pleased  to  say,  that  my  lord's  affections 
are  disengaged.  Were  his  lordship  a  prince,  and 
hoped  to  succeed  with  her,  they  must  not  be  so, 
after  he  had  seen  and  conversed  with  her.  Yet  the 
future  happiness,  and  not  pride,  would  be  the  consi- 
deration with  her:  for  she  has  that  diffidence  in  her 
own  merits,  from  which  the  worthy  of  both  sexes 
cannot  be  totally  free.  This  diffidence  would  in- 
crease too  much  for  her  happiness,  were  she  to  be 
thought  of  with  indifference  by  any  man  on  earth, 
who  hoped  to  be  more  than  indifferent  to  her. 

As  to  other  questions,  which,  as  this  is  answered, 
your  ladyship  thinks  may  come  to  be  asked.  I 
choose  ?*«-asked  (having  no  reserves)  to  acquaint 
your  ladyship  that  Miss  Byron  has  not,  in  her  own 
power,  quite  15,0001.  She  has,  it  is  true,  reversion- 
ary expectations :  but  we  none  of  us  wish  that  they 
should  for  many  years  take  place ;  since  that  must 
be  by  the  death  of  Mrs.  Shirley,  her  grandmother, 
who  is  equally  revered  and  beloved  by  all  that  know 
her :  and  whose  life  is  bound  up  in  the  happiness 
of  her  grand-daughter. 

I  will  strictly  obey  your  ladyship  in  the  secrecy 
enjoined;  and  am,  madam, 
Your  ladyship'sobligedandfaithful  humble  servant, 
MARIANNA  SELBY. 


324  THE  HISTORY  OF 


LETTER  XLIII. 

FROM     THE    COUNTESS    DOWAGER    OF    D.    TO    MRS. 
SELBY. 

February  23. 

I  should  sooner  have  answered  yours,  had  I  not 
waited  for  the  return  of  my  son,  who  had  taken  a 
little  journey  into  Wales,  to  look  into  the  condition 
of  a  small  estate  he  has  there,  which  he  finds  capable 
of  great  improvement ;  and  about  which  he  has 
given  proper  orders. 

I  took  the  first  opportunity  to  question  him  in  re- 
lation to  his  inclinations  to  marriage,  and  whether  he 
had  a  regard  to  any  particular  woman  :  and  having 
received  an  answer  to  my  wishes,  I  mentioned  Miss 
Byron  to  him,  as  a  young  lady  that  I  should  think, 
from  the  general  good  character  she  bore,  would 
make  him  an  excellent  wife. 

He  said,  he  had  heard  her  much  talked  of,  and 
always  to  her  advantage.  I  then  shewed  him,  as  in 
confidence,  my  letter,  and  your  answer.  There  can 
be,  said  I,  (on  purpose  to  try  him)  but  one  objection 
on  your  part;  and  that  is  fortune:  15,0001.  to  a  noble- 
man, who  is  possessed  of  12,0001.  a  year,  and  has 
been  offered  four  times  the  portion,  may  be  thought 
very  inadequate.  The  less  to  be  stood  upon,  replied 
he,  where  the  fortune  on  my  side  is  so  considerable. 
The  very  answer,  my  dear  Mrs.  Selby,  that  I  wished 
him  to  make. 

I  asked  him,  if  I  should  begin  a  formal  treaty  with 
you,  upon  what  he  said.  He  answered,  that  he  had 
heard  from  every  mouth,  so  much  said  in  praise  of 
Miss  Byron's  mind,  as  well  as  person,  that  he  desired 
I  would ;  and  that  I  would  directly  endeavour  to 
obtain  leave  for  him  to  visit  the  young  lady. 
.5 


SIK    CHARLES    OR  ANDISON.  32.5 

1  propose  it  accordingly.  I  understand,  that  she 
is  at  present  in  London.  I  leave  it  to  your  choice, 
madam,  and  Mrs.  Shirley's,  and  Mr.  Selby's  (to 
whom  now,  as  also  to  Miss  Byron,  you  will  be  so 
good  as  to  communicate  the  affair)  whether  you  will 
send  for  her  down  to  receive  my  lord's  visit  and 
mine ;  or  whether  we  shall  wait  on  her  in  town. 

I  propose  very  high  satisfaction  to  myself,  if  the 
young  people  approve  of  each  other,  in  an  alliance  so 
much  to  my  wishes  in  every  respect.  I  shall  love 
the  Countess  of  D.  as  well  as  any  of  you  can  do 
Miss  Byron  :  and  as  she  has  not  at  present  a  mother, 
I  shall  with  pleasure  supply  that  tender  relation  to 
her,  for  the  sake  of  so  many  engaging  qualities,  as 
common  fame,  as  well  as  good  Mrs.  Selby,  says  she 
is  mistress  of. 

You  will  dispatch  an  answer  as  to  the  interview. 
I  am  impatient  for  it.  I  depend  much  upon  the 
frankness  of  the  young  lady,  which  you  make  a  part 
of  her  agreeable  character.     And  am,  madam, 

Your  affectionate  and  faithful  humble  servant, 

M.  D. 


LETTER  XLIV. 

MISS  BYRON   TO  MRS.  SELBY. 

London,  February  23. 
Indeed,  my  dear  and  ever  indulgent  aunt  Selby, 
you  have  given  me  pain  ;  and  yet  I  am  very  ungrate- 
ful, I  believe,  to  say  so  :  but  if  I  feel  the  pain  (though 
perhaps  I  ought  not)  should  I  not  own  it? 

What  circumstances,  what  situation,  am  I  in,  ma- 
dam, that  I  cannot  be  mistress  of  myself  ?  That  shall 
turn  my  uncle's  half-feared,  though  always  agreea- 
ble, raillery  into  pity  for  me? 

VOL.  ix.  2  F 


326  THE    HISTOUY    OF 

"  Over  head  and  ears  in  the  passion" — '  I  to  be 
on  the  hoping  side ;  the  gentleman  on  the  trium- 
phant"— "  It  is  impossible  for  you,  my  friends,  to  be 
aforehand  with  my  inclinations" — "  A  beginning 
love  to  be  mentioned,  in  which  one  is  willing  to 
conceal  one's  self  from  one's  self !"  Fires,  flames, 
blazes,  to  follow  ! — Gratitude  and  love  to  be  spoken  of 
as  synonymous  terms — Ah !  my  dear  aunt,  how  could 
you  let  my  uncle  write  such  a  letter,  and  then  copy 
it,  and  send  it  to  me  as  yours  ? 

And  yet  some  very  tender  strokes  are  in  it,  that 
no  man,  that  hardly  any-body  but  you  among  women , 
could  write. 

But  what  do  you  do,  madam,  when  you  tell  your 
Harriet  of  your  own  prepossessions  in  favour  of  a 
man  who,  as  you  thought,  had  before  in  my  eye  too 
many  advantages  ?  Indeed  you  should  have  taken 
care  not  to  let  me  know,  that  his  great  qualities  had 
impressed  you  all  so  deeply :  and  my  grandmamma 
to  be  so  very  apprehensive  too  for  the  entangled  girl  I 
Hopeless  passion,  said  she  ?  Entangled  in  a  hopeless 
passion !  O  let  me  die  before  this  shall  be  deserved 
to  be  said  of  your  Harriet ! 

Then  again  rises  to  your  pen,  smothering  and 
escaped  sparks ;  and  I  am  desired  to  hurry  myself  to  get 
cold  water  to  quench  the  flame — Dear,  dear  madam, 
what  images  are  here  ?  And  applied — To  whom  ? — 
And  by  whom  ? — Have  I  written  any-thing  so  very 
blazing  ?  —  Surely  I  have  not.  But  you  should  not 
say  you  will  all  forgive  me,  if  this  be  my  sad  situa- 
tion. You  should  not  say,  how  much  you  are  your- 
selves, all  of  you,  in  love  with  this  excellent  man  ;  and 
talk  of  Mr.  Dawson,  and  of  what  he  says  of  him  : 
but  you  should  have  told  me,  that  if  I  suffer  my  gra- 
titude to  grow  into  love,  you  will  never  forgive  me  ; 
then  should  I  have  had  a  call  of  duty  to  check  or 
controul  a  passion,  that  you  were  afraid  could  not  be 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  327 

Well,  and  there  is  no  way  left  for  me,  it  seems, 
but  to  fly  for  it !  To  hurry  away  to  Northampton- 
shire, and  either  to  begin  a  new  treaty  with  Lord  D. 
or  to  give  hope  to  an  old  lover.  Poor  Harriet 
Byron !  And  is  it  indeed  so  bad  with  thee  ?  And  does 
thy  aunt  Selby  think  it  is  ? 

But  is  there  no  hope  that  the  man  will  take  pity 
of  thee  ?  When  he  sees  thee  so  sadly  entangled,  will 
he  not  vouchsafe  to  lend  an  extricating  hand  ? 

Oh,  no — Too  much  obliged,  as  thou  already  art, 
how  canst  thou  expect  to  be  farther  obliged?  Oblig- 
ed in  the  highest  degree  ? 

But  let  me  try  if  I  cannot  play  round  this  bright, 
this  beamy  taper,  without  singeing  my  wings !  I  fancy 
it  is  not  yet  quite  so  bad  with  me!  At  least,  let  me 
stand  this  one  visit  of  to-morrow  :  and  then  if  I  find 
reason  to  think  I  cannot  stand  it,  I  will  take  the  kind 
advice,  and  fly  for  it ;  rather  than  add  another  hope- 
less girl  to  the  half-score  that  perhaps  have  been 
long  sighing  for  this  best  of  men. 

But  even  then,  my  aunt,  that  is  to  say,  were  I  to 
fly,  and  take  shelter  under  your  protecting  wings,  I 
shall  not,  I  hope,  think  it  absolutely  necessary  to  light 
up  one  flame,  in  order  to  extinguish  another.  I  shall 
always  value  Mr.  Orme  as  a  friend  ;  but  indeed  I  am 
less  than  ever  inclined  to  think  of  him  in  a  nearer  light. 

As  to  Lady  D.'s  proposal,  it  admits  not  with  me 
of  half  a  thought.  You  know,  my  dearest  aunt,  that 
I  am  not  yet  rejected  by  one  with  whom  you  are  all 
in  love — But  this  seriously  I  will  own  (and  yet  I  hope 
nothing  but  my  gratitude  is  engaged,  and  that  indeed 
is  a  very  powerful  tie)  that  since  I  have  seen  and 
known  Sir  Charles  Grandison,  I  have  not  only  (as 
before)  an  indifference,  but  a  dislike,  to  all  other  men. 
And  I  think>  if  1  know  my  own  heart,  I  had  rather 
converse  but  an  hour  in  a  week  with  him,  and  with 
2  b-  2 


328  THE    HISTORY    OF 

Miss  Grandison,  than  be  the  wife  of  any  man  I  have 
ever  seen  or  known. 

If  this  should  end  at  last  in  love,  and  if  I  should 
be  entangled  in  a  hopeless  passion,  the  object  of  it 
would  be  Sir  Charles  Grandison :  he  could  not  insult 
me ;  and  mean,  as  the  word  pity  in  some  cases 
sounds,  I  had  rather  have  his  pity,  than  the  love  of 
any  other  man. 

You  will,  upon  the  strength  of  what  I  have  said, 
be  so  good,  dear  madam,  as  to  let  the  Countess  of 
D.  know,  that  I  think  myself  highly  obliged  to  her, 
for  her  favourable  opinion  of  me  :  that  she  has  by  it 
interested  all  my  good  wishes  in  her  son's  happi- 
ness ;  and  that  I  was  always  of  opinion,  that  equality 
of  fortune  and  degree,  though  not  absolutely  neces- 
sary to  matrimonial  felicity,  was  however  a  circum- 
stance not  to  be  slighted  :  but  you,  madam,  can  put 
my  meaning  in  better,  in  fitter  words,  when  you  are 
assured,  that  it  is  my  meaning,  to  give  an  absolute, 
though  grateful,  negative  to  this  proposal.  And  I 
do  assure  you  that  such  is  my  meaning ;  and  that  I 
should  despise  myself,  were  I  capable  of  keeping  one 
man  in  suspense,  even  had  I  hope  of  your  hope, 
while  I  was  balancing  in  favour  of  another. 

I  believe,  madam,  I  have  been  a  little  petulant, 
and  very  saucy,  in  what  I  have  written  :  but  my  heart 
is  not  at  ease  :  and  I  am  vexed  with  these  men,  one 
after  another,  when  Sir  Hargrave  has  given  me  a 
surfeit  of  them  ;  and  only  that  the  bad  has  brought 
me  into  the  knowledge  of  the  best,  or  I  could  resolve 
never  more  to  hear  a  man  talk  to  me,  no  not  for  one  mo- 
ment, upon  a  subject,  that  is  become  so  justly  painful 
to  one  who  never  took  pleasure  in  their  airy  adulation; 

I  know  you  will,  with  your  usual  goodness,  and  so 
will  my  grandmamma,  and  so  will  my  uncle  Selby, 
pardon  all  the  imperfections  of,  dearest  madam, 
Your  and  their  ever  dutiful 

HARRIET  BYRON. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISOV.  329 

LETTER    XLV. 

MISS  BYHON  TO  MISS  SELBY. 

Tuesday  evening,  February  28. 
Mr.  Reeves,  my  dear,  is  just  returned  from  a  visit 
he  made  in  St.  James's  Square.  1  transcribe  a  paper 
giving  an  account  of  what  passed  between  Mr. 
Bagenhall  and  Sir  Charles  in  relation  to  the  shock- 
ing affair  which  has  filled  me  with  so  much  appre- 
hension ;  and  which  Sir  Charles,  at  my  cousin's  re- 
quest, allowed  him  to  put  in  his  pocket. 

Air.  Bagenhall  came  to  Sir  Charles  yesterday 
evening  with  a  message  from  Sir  Hargrave,  demand- 
ing a  meeting  with  him,  the  next  morning,  at  a  par- 
ticular hour,  at  Kensington  Gravel-pits.  Sir  Charles 
took  Mr.  Bagenhall  with  him  into  his  study ;  and, 
asking  him  to  sit  down,  Mr.  Bagenhall  said,  That  he 
was  once  concerned  in  an  affair  of  this  nature,  which 
had  been  very  much  misrepresented  afterwards ;  and 
that  he  had  been  advised  to  take  a  step  which  Sir 
Charles  might  think  extraordinary:  which  was,  that 
he  had  brought  with  him  a  young  gentleman,  whom 
he  hoped,  for  Sir  Hargrave's  satisfaction,  as  well  as 
to  do  justice  to  what  should  pass  between  them,  Sir 
Charles  would  permit  to  take  minutes  of  their  con- 
vex ution  ;  and  that  he  was  in  the  hall. 

Let  not  a  gentleman  be  left  in  the  hall,  said  Sir 
Charles  ;  and,  ringing,  directed  him  to  be  shewn  into 
the  study  to  them.  Yet,  Mr.  Bagenhall,  said  he,  1 
see  no  occasion  for  this.  Our  conversation  on  the 
subject  you  come  to  talk  of,  can  be  but  short. 

Were  it  to  hold  but  two  minutes,  Sir  Charles — 

What  you  please,  Mr.  Bagenhall. 

The  young  gentleman  entered  ;  and  pen  and  ink 
■;  j- re  set  heroic  him.     He  wrote  in  short  hand  :  and 


330  THE    HISTORY    OF 

read  it  to  the  gentlemen ;  and  Sir  Charles,  as  it  was 
to  be  transcribed  for  Sir  Hargrave,  desiring  a  cop 
of  it,  it  was  sent  him  the  same  night. 

A  CONFERENCE  BETWEEN    SIR    CHARLES    CRANDISON,    BART. 
AND  JAMES  BAGENHAIX,  ESQ. 

Sir  Ch.  You  have  told  me,  Mr.  BagenhaU,  Sir 
Hargrave's  demand.  Have  you  seen,  Sir,  the  an- 
swer I  returned  to  his  letter? 

Mr.  BagenhaU.     I  have,  Sir. 

Sir  Ch.  And  do  you  think,  there  needs  any  other, 
or  further  ? 

Mr.  B.  It  is  not,  Sir  Charles,  such  an  answer  as 
a  gentleman  can  sit  down  with. 

Sir  Ch.  Do  you  give  that  as  your  oven  opinion,  Mr. 
BagenhaU  ?  Or,  as  Sir  Hargrave's  ? 

Mr.  B.  As  Sir  Hargrave's,  Sir.  And  I  believe  it 
would  be  the  opinion  of  every  man  of  honour. 

Sir  Ch.  Man  of  honour!  Mr.  BagenhaU.  A  man 
of  honour  would  not  have  given  the  occasion  which 
has  brought  you  and  me,  Sir,  into  a  personal  know- 
ledge of  each  other.  I  asked  the  question,  supposing 
there  could  be  but  one  principal  in  this  debate. 

Mr.B.  Ibegpardon:  Imeant  not  that  there  should 
be  two. 

Sir  Ch.  Pray,  Sir,  let  me  ask  you,  Do  you  know 
the  particulars  of  Sir  Hargrave's  attempt,  and  of  his 
violence  to  the  lady  ? 

Mr.  B.  Sir  Hargrave,  I  believe,  has  given  me  a 
very  exact  account  of  every-thing.  He  meant  not 
dishonour  to  the  lady. 

Sir  Ch.  He  must  have  a  very  high  opinion  of  him- 
self, if  he  thought  the  best  he  could  do  for  her,  would 
be  to  do  her  honour — Sir,  pray  put  that  down.— > 
Repeating  what  he  said  to  the  writer,  that  he  might 
not  mistake. 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  331 

Sir  Ch.  But  do  you,  Mr.  Bagenhall,  think  Sir 
Hargrave  was  justifiable,  as  a  man  of  honour,  in 
what  he  did  ? 

Mr.  B.  I  mean  not,  as  I  told  you,  Sir  Charles,  to 
make  myself  a  principal  in  this  affair.  I  pretend  not 
to  justify  what  Sir  Hargrave  did  to  the  lady. 

Sir  Ch.  I  hope  then  you  will  allow  me  to  refer  to 
my  answer  to  Sir  Hargrave's  letter.  I  shall  send 
him  no  other.  I  beg  your  pardon,  Mr.  Bagenhall,  I 
mean  not  a  disrespect  to  you. 

Air.  B.  No  other,  Sir  Charles? 

Sir  Ch.  Since  he  is  to  see  what  this  gentleman 
writes,  pray  put  down,  Sir,  that  I  say,  The  answer 
I  have  written,  is  such  a  one  as  he  ought  to  be  satis- 
fied with  :  such  a  one  as  becomes  a  man  of  honour 
to  send,  if  he  thought  fit  to  send  any:  and  such  a  one 
as  a  man  who  has  acted  as  Sir  Hargrave  acted  by  a 
woman  of  virtue  and  honour,  ought  to  be  thankful 
for. — Have  you  written  that,  Sir? 

Writer.     I  have,  Sir. 

Sir  Ch.  Write  further,  if  you  please;  That  I  say, 
Sir  Hargrave  may  be  very  glad,  if  he  hear  no 
more  of  this  affair  from  the  lady's  natural  friends  : 
that,  however,  I  shall  rid  him  of  all  apprehensions 
of  that  nature  ;  for  that  I  still  consider  the  lady  as 
under  my  protection,  with  regard  to  any  conse- 
quences that  may  naturally  follow  what  happened 
on  Hounslow-heath ;  That  I  say,  I  shall  neglect  no 
proper  call  to  protect  her  farther  :  but  that  his  call 
upon  me  to  meet  him,  must  be  such  a  one  as  my  own 
heart  can  justify  ;  and  that  it  is  not  my  way  to  obey 
the  insolent  summons  of  any  man  breathing. — And 
yet,  what  is  this,  Mr.  Bagenhall,  but  repeating  what 
I  wrote? 

Mr.  B.  You  are  warm,  Sir  Charles. 

Sir  Ch.  Indeed  I  am  not :  I  am  only  earnest.  As 


332  THE   HISTORY   OF 

Sir  Hargrave  is  to  be  shewn  what  passes,  I  say 
more  than  otherwise  I  should  choose  to  say. 

Mr.  B.  Will  you  name  your  own  time  and  place, 
Sir  Charles? 

Sir  Ch.  To  do  what? 

Mr.  B.  To  meet  Sir  Hargrave. 

Sir  Ch.  To  do  him  good — To  do  good  to  my  bit- 
terest enemy,  I  would  meet  him.  Let  him  know, 
that  I  wrote  a  very  long  letter,  because  I  would  dis- 
charge my  mind  of  all  that  I  thought  necessary  to 
say  on  the  occasion. 

Mr.  B.  And  you  have  no  other  answer  to  return  ? 

Sir  Ch.  Only  this — Let  Sir  Hargrave  engage  him- 
self in  a  like  unworthy  enterprize;  and  let  the  lady, 
as  this  did,  claim  my  protection ;  and  I  will  endea- 
vour to  give  it  to  her,  although  Sir  Hargrave  were 
surrounded  by  as  many  men  armed,  as  he  has  in  his 
service  ;  that  is  to  say,  if  a  legal  redress  were  not  at 
hand:  if  it  were,  I  hold  it  not  to  be  a  point  of  bravery 
to  insult  magistracy,  and  to  take  upon  myself  to  be 
my  own  judge ;  and,  as  it  might  happen,  another 
man's  executioner. 

Mr.  B.  This  is  nobly  said,  Sir  Charles  :  but  still 
Sir  Hargrave  had  not  injured  you,  he  says.  And  as 
I  had  heard  you  were  a  man  of  an  excellent  charac- 
ter, and  know  Sir  Hargrave  to  be  a  man  of  courage, 
I  took  it  into  my  head,  for  the  prevention  of  mis- 
chief, to  make  a  proposal  in  writing  to  the  lady, 
whom  Sir  Hargrave  loves  as  his  own  soul ;  and  if  she 
had  come  into  it — 

SirCh.  A  strange  proposal,  Mr.  Bagenhall.  Could 
you  expect  any-thing  from  it  ? 

Mr.B.  Why  not,  Sir  Charles?  She  is  disengaged, 
it  seems.  I  presume,  Sir,  you  do  not  intend  to  make 
court  to  her  yourself? 

Sir  Ch.  We  are  insensibly  got  into  a  parley,  upon 
a  subject  that  will  not  bear  it,  Mr.  Bagenhall.     Tell 


SIR    CHARLES    GRANDISON.  333 

Sir  Hargrave — or,  write  it  down  from  my  lips,  Sir 
(speaking  to  the  writer)  that  I  wish  him  to  take 
time  to  enquire  after  my  character,  and  after  my 
motives  in  refusing  to  meet  him  on  the  terms  he  ex- 
pects me  to  see  him.  Tell  him,  that  I  have,  before 
now,  shewn  an  insolent  man,  that  I  way  be  provoked: 
but  that,  when  I  have  been  so,  I  have  had  the  hap- 
piness to  chastise  such  a  one  without  murdering 
him,  and  without  giving  any  advantage  over  my  own 
life,  to  his  single  arm. 

Mr.  B.  This  is  great  talking,  Sir  Charles. 
Sir  Ch.  It  is,  Mr.  Bagenhall.     And  I  should  be 
sorry  to  have  been  put  upon  it,  were  I  not  in  hope, 
that  it  may  lead  Sir  Hargrave  to  such  enquiries  as 
may  be  for  his  service  as  much  as  for  mine. 

Mr.  B.  I  wish,  that  two  such  spirits  were  better 
acquainted  with  each  other,  or  that  Sir  Hargrave 
had  not  suffered  so  much  as  he  has  done,  both  in 
person  and  mind. 

Sir  Ch.  What  does  all  this  tend  to,  Mr.  Bagenhall? 
I  look  upon  you  as  a  gentleman ;  and  the  more,  for 
having  said,  you  were  solicitous  to  prevent  further 
mischief,  or  I  should  not  have  said  so  much  to  so  little 
purpose.  And  once  more,  I  must  refer  to  my  letter. 
Mr.  B.  I  own  I  admire  you  for  your  spirit,  Sir. 
But  it  is  amazing  to  me,  that  a  man  of  such  spirit 
can  refuse  to  a  gentleman  the  satisfaction  which  is 
demanded  of  him. 

Sir  Ch.  It  is  owing  to  my  having  some  spirit,  that 
I  can,  fearless  of  consequences,  refuse  what  you  call 
satisfaction  to  Sir  Hargrave,  and  yet  be  fearless  of 
insult  upon  my  refusal.  I  consider  myself  as  a  mor- 
tal man  :  I  can  die  but  once :  once  I  must  die  :  and 
if  the  cause  be  such  as  will  justify  me  to  my  own 
heart,  I,  for  my  oivn  sake,  care  not  whether  my  life 
be  demanded  of  me  to-morrow,  or  forty  years 
hence :   but,  Sir  (speaking  to  the  writer)   let  not 


334  THE    HISTORY    OF 

this,  that  I  have  now  said,  be  transcribed  from  your 
notes  :  it  may  to  Sir  Hargrave  sound  ostentatiously. 
I  want  not,  that  any-thing  should  be  read  or  shewn 
to  him,  that  would  appear  like  giving  consequence 
to  myself,  except  for  Sir  Hargrave's  own  sake. 

Mr.  B.  I  beg,  that  it  may  not  be  spared.  If  you 
are  capable  of  acting  as  you  speak ;  by  what  I  have 
heard  of  you  in  the  affair  on  Hounslow-heath  ;  and 
by  what  I  have  heard  from  you  in  this  conversation  ; 
and  sec  of  you  ;  I  think  you  a  wonder  of  a  man,  and 
should  be  glad  it  were  in  my  power  to  reconcile  you 
to  each  other. 

Sir  Ch.  I  could  not  hold  friendship,  Mr.  Bagen- 
hall,  with  a  man  that  has  been  capable  of  acting  as 
Sir  Hargrave  has  acted,  by  an  innocent  and  helpless 
young  lady.  But  I  will  name  the  terms  on  which  I 
can  take  by  the  hand,  wherever  I  meet  him,  a  man 
to  whom  I  can  have  no  malice  :  these  are  they,  That 
he  lay  at  the  door  of  mad  and  violent  passion  the  il- 
legal attempt  he  made  on  the  best  of  women  :  that 
he  express  his  sorrow  for  it ;  and,  on  his  knees,  if  he 
pleases  (it  is  no  disgrace  to  the  proudest  man  to 
kneel  to  an  injured  lady)  beg  her  pardon  ;  and  con- 
fess her  clemency  to  be  greater  than  he  deserves,  if 
she  give  it. 

Mr.  B.  Good  God  ! — Shall  that  be  transcribed, 
Sir  Charles? 

Sir  Ch.  By  all  means  :  and  if  Sir  Hargrave  is  a 
man  that  has  in  his  heart  the  least  spark  of  true 
magnanimity,  he  will  gladly  embrace  the  opportunity 
of  acting  accordingly  :  and  put  down,  Sir,  that  sor- 
row, that  contrition,  is  all  the  atonement  that  can 
be  made  for  a  perpetrated  evil. 

A  faithful  narrative.  HENRY  COTES. 


SIR   CHARLES    GRANDISON.  335 

February  27. 

Does  not  your  heart  glow,  my  Lucy,  now  you 
have  read  (as  1  suppose  you  have)  this  paper?  And 
do  not  the  countenances  of  every  one  of  my  revered 
friends  round  you  [pray  look !]  shine  with  admira- 
tion of  this  excellent  man  ?  And  yet  you  all  loved 
him  before :  and  so  you  think  I  did.  Well,  I  can't 
help  your  thoughts  ! — But  I  hope  I  shall  not  be  un- 
done by  a  good  man  ! 

You  will  imagine,  that  my  heart  was  a  little  agi- 
tated, when  I  came  to  read  Mr.  Bagenhall's  question, 
Whether  Sir  Charles  intended  to  make  court  to  me 
himself?  I  am  sorry  to  tell  you,  Lucy,  that  I  was  a 
little  more  affected  than  I  wished  to  be.  Indeed,  I 
shall  keep  a  look-out,  as  you  call  it,  upon  myself. 
To  say  truth,  I  laid  down  the  paper  at  that  place, 
and  was  afraid  to  read  the  answer  made  to  it.  When 
I  took  it  up,  and  read  what  followed,  I  might  have 
spared,  I  saw,  my  foolish  little  tremors.  See  how 
frank  I  continue  to  be  :  but  if  you  come  not  to  this 
paragraph  before  you  are  aware,  you  need  not  read 
it  to  my  uncle. 

Mr.  Bagenhall  went  away  so  much  pleased  with 
Sir  Charles  (as  he  owned)  that  Mr.  Reeves  en- 
courages me  to  hope,  some  way  may  be  found  to 
prevent  further  mischief.  Yet  the  condition,  which 
Sir  Charles  has  proposed  for  my  forgiving  the 
wretch — Upon  my  word,  my  dear,  I  desire  not  to 
see  Sir  Hargrave  either  upon  his  knees,  or  upon  his 
feet :  I  am  sure  I  could  not  see  him  without  very 
violent  emotions.  His  barbarity,  his  malice,  his 
cruelty,  have  impressed  me  strongly  :  nor  can  I  be 
glad  to  see  the  wretch  with  his  disfigured  mouth  and 
lip.  His  lip,  it  seems,  has  been  sewed  up,  and  he 
wears  a  great  black-silk  patch  upon  the  place. 

I  can't  find  that  Sir  Charles  has  heard  from  the 


336  THE    HISTORY,  &C. 

exasperated  man,  since  Mr.  Bagenhall  left  him  yes- 
terday. 

I  hope  nothing  will  happen  to  overcloud  to-mor- 
row. I  propose  to  myself  as  happy  a  day,  as,  in  the 
present  situation  of  things,  can  be  given  to  your 

HARRIET  BYRON. 


END   OF   VOL.   IX. 


<'.  Baldwin,  Printer, 
New  Bridge-Street,  London . 


fc*?S 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY 
.    Los  Angeles 
This  book  is  DUE  on  the  last  date  stamped  below. 


1  '<.  c. '. ' 


,  w  JUL 3° 
'JUL  3  0 1994 


315 


University  of  California,  Los  Angeles 


L  006  481   876  8 


UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILI1 


A  A      000 


05  498    o