».  '5.  >» 


:i.-^" 


j-^-'f  f,i^^^.  ^.'^r 


Mr., 


^^.  h 


cX/i^'-'lC^-^tL 


\ 


OBSERVATIONS 

O  N    T  H  E 

NATURE,   CAUSES,    and  CURE 

of  thofe  Disorders  which  have  been  commonly  called 

NERVOUS    HYPOCHONDRIAC, 
or  HYSTERIC, 

To  which   are  prefixed  fome  Remarks  on  the 
Sympathy  of  the  Nerves. 

B    Y 
ROBERT  WHYTT,  M.  D.  F.  R.  S. 

Phyfician  to  his  Majefly,  Prefident  of  the  Royal 
College  of  Phyficians,  and  Profeffor  of  Medicine 
in  the  Univerfity  of  Edinburgh. 

2u/!A7»-a9£«  TTctj/Tfls,    Hippocrat.  de  aliment,  §  4. 


EDINBURGH: 

Printed  for  T.  Becket,  and  P.  Du  Hondt,  London  ; 
and  J.  Balfour,  Edinburgh. 

M  DCG  LXV, 


[  iii  ] 

PREFACE. 

*'  I  ^HE  diforders  which  are  the  fubjcct 
-■-  of  the  following  Obfervations,  have 
been  treated  of  by  authors,  under  the 
names  of  Flatulent,  Spaiiiiodic,  Hypo- 
chondriac or  Hyfteric.  Of  late,  they 
have  alfo  got  the  name  of  Nervous  ; 
which  appellation  having  been  com- 
monly given  to  many  fymptoms  feem- 
ingly  diiferent,  and  very  obfcure  in  their 
nature,  has  often  made  it  be  £aid  that 
Phylicians  have  bellowed  the  characfter 
of  nervous  on  all  thofe  diforders  whole 
nature  and  caufes  they  were  ignorant  of. 
To  wipe  off  this  reproach,  and,  at  the 
fame  time,  to  throw  fome  light  on  ner- 
vous, hypochondriac  and  hyfteric  com- 
plaints, is  the  defign  of  the  following 
Obfervations  ;  which  are  alfo  intended 
to  fliew,  how  far  the  principles  laid 
down  in  my  Effay  on  the  vital  and  other 

involuntary 


iV 


PREFACE. 


involuntary  Motions  of  Animals,  may 
be  of  life  in  explaining  the  nature  of 
(everal  difeafes,  and  confequently,  in 
leading  to  the  moft  proper  method  of 
cure  *. 

Since,  in  almofl  every  difeafe,  the 
nerves  fuffer  more  or  lefs,  and  there 
are  very  few  difbrders  which  may  not 
in  a  large  fenie  be  called  nervous,  it 
might  be  thought  that  a  treatife  on  ner- 
vous difeafes  fliould  comprehend  almofl 
all  the  complaints  to  which  the  human 
body  is  liable.  The  deiign,  however, 
of  the  following  Obfervations  is  far  dif- 
ferent. In  them,  it  is  only  propofed 
to  treat  of  thole  diibrders,  which  in  a 
peculiar  fenfe  deferve  the  name  of  nervotiSy 
in  fo  far  as  they  are,  in  a  great  meafiire, 
owing  to  an  uncommon  delicacy  or 
unnatural  feniibility  of  the  nerves,  and 
are  therefore  obferved   chiefly  to  afFe^l 

perfons  of  flich  a  conftitution. 

As 

*  See  a.i  ECay  on  the  vital,  SiC.  motions,  edit,  ifl,  p.  390. 


PREFACE.  V 

As  many  of  thefe  complaints  depend 
upon  that  fympathy  which  obtains  be- 
tween the  various  parts  of  the  body,  it 
feemed  neceilary  to  begin  with  fome 
oblervations  on  the  fympathy  of  the 
nerves  ;  a  flibje^l  of  the  greateil  impor- 
tance in  pathology  ! 

In  reafoning  on  the  nature  and  caufes 
of  nervous  diforders,  I  have  endeavour- 
ed to  avoid  uncertain  bypothefcs  ;  and 
therefore  have  had  no  recourfe  to 
any  imaginary  flight,  reperciijfion,  dijper- 
fioiiy  confitfion  or  jarring  coiiteft  of  the 
animal  fpirits  ;  for  whole  exigence  we 
have  only  probability,  and  of  whofe 
peculiar  nature  and  properties,  we  are 
altogether  ignorant.  Bat  altho*  the 
minute  flrucflure  of  the  nerves,  the  na- 
ture of  their  fluid,  and  thofe  conditions 
on  which  depend  their  powers  of  feeling 
and  communicating  motion  to  the  bo- 
dy, lie  much  beyond  our  reach  ;  yet 
we  know  certainly,  that  the  nerves  are 
endued  with  feeling,   and  that  as  there 

is 


vi  PREFACE. 

is  a  general  iympathy  which  prevails 
through  the  whole  f}  Item  ;  fo  there  is  a 
particular  and  a  very  remarkable  conjhit 
between  various  parts  of  the  body. 
From  this  fentient  and  lympathetic 
power  of  the  nerves,  I  have  endeavour- 
ed to  deduce  the  various  fymptoms  of 
the  nervous  kind  :  and  have  thought 
it  better  to  flop  fliort  here,  than  to  a- 
mufe  myfelf  or  others,  with  fubtile  fpe- 
culations  concerning  matters  that  are 
involved  in  the  greateft  obfcurity. 

If  it  fhould  be  faid,  that  to  account 
for  difeafes  from  tlie  fenfibility  or  Iym- 
pathy of  the  nerves,  while  we  know 
not  wherein  thefe  powers  conflfl,  is  no 
better  than  referring  them  to  a  faciiltas 
incognita^  or  to  the  hypothetical  motions 
and  cQuntermotions  of  the  animal  ipi- 
rits  ;  I  Ihall  only  anfwer,  that  altho*  we 
cannot  explain  why  grief  or  joy  (liould, 
by  means  of  the  nerves,  excite  a  greater 
motion  than  ufual,  in  the  vefTels  of  the 
lachrymal  glands,  yet  it  is  leading  us  to 
the  truth,  and  advancing  one  ftep  far- 
ther 


PREFACE.  vli 

ther  in  our  knowledge,  to  (liew  that 
the  increafed  fecretion  of  tears,  occa- 
lioned  by  thole  palfions  of  the  mmd,  pro- 
ceeds from  this  caufe,  and  not  from  any 
comprellion  of  the  lachrymal  glands  or 
their  du(^ts,by  the  neighbouring  mufcles, 
as  has  been  commonly  imagined :  And, 
to  afcend  from  fmall  things  to  great, 
altho'  Sir  Ifaac  Newton  did  not  pretend 
to  explain  the  caufe  of  gravity,  yet  he 
made  no  fmall  improvement  in  phyfical 
Aftronomy,  when,  from  this  principle 
alone,  he  accounted  for  the  various  mo- 
tions of  the  planets,  and  baniflied  the 
imaginary  vortices  oi  DefcarteSy  which  had 
been  contrived,  bvit  unfuccefs fully,  to 
explain  the  phenomena  of  the  folar  fyllem. 

In  the  practical  part,  I  have  confined 
myfelf  chiefly  to  what  experience  had 
fuggefted  ;  and  have  only  advifed  fucli 
remedies  as  I  have  ufed  with  fuccels  my- 
felf, or  had  recommended  to  me  by 
thofe  whom  I  could  trufl. 

As  many  of  the  fubjecfls  I  have  treated 
of,  are  not  a  little  obfcure,  it  cannot  be 

expecl:ed 


Vlll 


PREFACE. 


expefed  that  they  fliould  admit  of  as 
clear  an  explication  as  matters  that  are 
lefs  intricate  ;  and  this,  it  is  hoped,  will 
make  the  learned  in  the  profeliion  over- 
look, with  candor,  the  defects  which 
may  be  found  in  the  following  Obfer- 
vations.  However,  if,  with  all  their 
imperfedlions,  they  ihall  be  of  any  nle 
in  conveying  to  the  younger  and  lels 
experienced  Phyficians,  a  clearer  notion 
of  the  natui'e  of  thofe  diforders,  which 
have  been  commonly  called  nervous,  hy- 
pochondriac or  hyfleric,  or  in  any  cafe 
direct  them  more  happily  in  the  cure  ; 
I  fliall  have  my  aim,  and  be  fufficiently 
rewarded  in  the  fatisfaction  of  thinking 
that  my  labour  has  not  been,  altogether, 
ufelefs  to  the  Public,  the  good  of  which 
ought  to  be  the  principal  view  of  every 
writer. 

Hoc  opus,  hoc  Jlitdiimi,  parvi  properemus 
et  ampliy 

Si  patriis  vohmitu,   fi  nobis  vivere  chari. 

Edinburgh,  Nov.  15. 
1764. 


THE 

CONTENTS. 

CHAP.      I. 

Of  the  Jiru&ure,    ufe  and  fimfath'^  of  the 
nerves  Page   i. 

CHAP.     n. 

Of  nervous,    h'jpochondriac  and  hyjieric  dif 
orders  in  general  85 

CHAP.     HI. 

Of  the  predifpofing  caifes  of  nervotis,  h'jpQ- 
chondriac  and  hy ft  eric  dif  orders  in 

CHAP.     IV. 

Of  the  general   occafional  caifes  of  nervous, 
hypochondriac  and  hyfleric  diforders      143 

CHAP. 


CONTENTS. 

CHAP.     V. 

Of  the  particular  occaJJonal  cmtfcs  of  nervous, 
h-^pochondriac  and  byjie?-ic  diforders       1 8'8 

CHAP.     VI. 

Obfervations  on  fome  of  the  moft  remarkable 
fymptoms  of  the  nervous,  h'jpochondriac  or 
hyjlcjic  kind  224 

I.  ^n  tincojmnon  fenfe  of  cold  Or  heat  in 
different  parts  of  the  bodj  224 

n.  Pains  in  different  parts  of  the  bod-y 
fuddenly  moving  from  one  place  to 
another  220 

ni.   Hyjicric  faintings   and   convulfions 

231 

IV.  y^catalepfis  and  tetanus        235 

V.  TVind  in   the  fomach  and  bowels 

237 

VI.  A  great  craving  for  food        240 

VII.  y^  black  vomiting  242 

vni.  J 


CONTENTS. 

VIII.  A  judden  and  great  flux   of  pale 
^inne  Pag.    246 

IX.  A  nervous  atrophy  253 

X.  A  nervous    or  fpafmodic  afthma 

260 

XI.  A  nervous  cough  265 

XII.  Palpitations  of  the  heart  286 

XIII.  The  piilfe  often  varying  in  quick- 
nefsy  ftrength  and  fulnefs  287 

XIV.  Periodical  headachs  305 

XV.  A  giddincfs  308 

XVI.  A  dimnefs  of  fight  vjithout  awj  vi- 
fhle  faidt  in  the  eys  310 

XVII.  Lovj  fpiritSf    melancholy  and  a 
mania  311 

XVIII.  The   incubus    or   night-marc 

315 

CHAP. 


CONTENTS. 

CHAP.     VII. 

Of  the  cure  of  nervous,  hypochondriac  and 
hyfteric  diforders  P^g*   329 

CHAP.   vm. 

Of  the  cure  of  fome  of  the  moft  remarkable 
nervous,  h'^pochondriac  or  hyjleric  fnip- 
toms  440 

I.  Convidfive  motions,   or   fixed  fpafms 
of  the  mifcles  440 

II.  Hyfteric  faintings  vjith  convtdfions 

470 

III.  A  violent  pain  with  cramps  in  the 
Jlomach  474 

IV.  An  indigeftion   and   vomiting,  ivith 
pains  in  the  Jlomach  ^•jy 

V.  A  colic  of  the  hyjieric  or    flatulent 
kind  484 

VI.  Flatulence  in  the  fomach  and  bovjcls 

487 

VIII.  J 


CONTENTS. 

VII.  A  nervous  or  fpafmodic  aflhma 

Pag.    491 

VIII.  A  palpitation  of  the  heart     503 

IX.  An  immoderate   dif charge  of  pale 
tirine  505 

X.  Periodical  headachs  511 

XI.  Low  fpirits  517 


ERRATA. 

Page  96.  Line  17.  for  inconjijlent  lege  inconfiant. 
■  100.  L.  ult.  leg.  at  the  Jiomach. 

1 1 1.  L.  3.  after  ner^vous  add  hypechondriac  or  hyjleric, 

.  166.  L.  21.  for  returnin  leg.  returning. 

176.  L  21.  place  I.  before  That. 

. 209.  L.  21.  for  4.  leg.  3. 

'— —  210.  L.  6.  for  5.  leg.  4. 
».         229.  L.  21.  iox  finking  \t^.  Jiicking, 
■  266.  L.  14.  for  /ra^  leg.  truely. 

— —  284.  L.  5.  after  Theriaca  dele  , 
— —  314.  L.  20.  dele  i«/. 


Lately  publiflied  and  fold  by  John  Bal- 
four Bookfeller  in  Edinburgh, 

I.  An  Eifay  on  the  Vital  and  other  Involuntary 
Motions  of  Animals. 

The  fecond  Edition  with  Corrections  and 
Additions. 

II.  Phyfiological  Effays. 

The  fecond  Edition  corre<5led  and  enlarged, 
with  an  Appendix  containing  a  review  of 
the  Controverfy  concerning  the  Senfibi' 
lity  and  moving  Power  of  the  Parts  of 
Men  and  other  Animals;  in  anfwer  to 
M.  de  Mailer's  Remarks. 

N.  B.   The  Appendix  may  be  had  fe- 
parately. 

III.  An  ElTay  on  the  Virtues  of  Lime-v/ater  and 
Soap  in  the  Cure  of  the  Stone. 

The  third  Edition  corrected  and  enlarged. 

The   above  by   Robert  JVJiytt,  M.  D. 
F,  R.  S,   Phyfician  to  his  M.ajesty,  &c. 


C  H  A  p.      L 

Of  the  Structure,    Use,   and  S  y  m* 
PATHY    0/  r/);^  Nerves. 

EFORE  we  enter  upon  the  fub- 
jecl  of  the  folio  whig  obfervations, 
it  may  be  proper  to  make  a  few  remarks 
concerning  the  ftru(fb.ire,  ufe  and  fym- 
pathy  of  the  Nerves. 

1.  The  nerves  are  thofe  fmall  cords, 
which  rifing  from  the  brain  and  ipinal 
marrow,  are  diilributed  to  every  part 
of  the  body.  They  appear  to  be  no 
more  than  continuations  of  the  medul- 
lary fubftance  of  the  parts  from  whence 
they  proceed,  and  owe  their  ftrength 
and  firmnefs  to  the  membranes  and  cel- 
lular texture  which  flirround  them. 

2.  The  larger  nerves  (i.)  are  evi- 
dently compofed  of  many  fmaller  ones, 

A  which 


t  Of  the  Sy  UP  AT  uY 

which  run  parallel  to  each  other,  and 
feem  to  be  quite  diflin(fl  from  their  ori- 
gin to  their  termination,  without  2iny  fiich 
communications  between  their  branches, 
as  are  obferved  every  where  in  the  fy- 
ftem  of  arteries  and  veins. 

3.  The  fmallefl  nervous  filaments 
that  can  be  traced  by  diife^lion,  are  flill 
compofed  of  lefTer  threads,  fo  that  we 
can  have  no  idea  of  the  exility  of  a  fingle 
nervous  fibril. 

4.  Alt  ho'  it  fecms  probable  that 
the  nerves  (3.),  which  are  continuations 
of  the  medullary  flibflance  of  the  brain 
and  Ipinal  marrow,  derive  from  thence  a 
fluid  ;  yet  the  extreme  fmallnefs  of  the 
nervous  tubes,  and  the  fubtility  of  that 
fluid  which  they  contain,  make  us  alto- 
gether ignorant  of  its  peculiar  nature 
and  properties.  Nor  do  we  know,  cer- 
tainly, whether  this  fluid  ferves  only  for 
the  nourifhment  and  fupport  of  the 
nerves,  or  whether  it  be  not  the  medium 
by  which  all  their  ad:ions  are  performed. 

5.  The 


of  r/;^  Nerves.  3 

5.  The  nerves  communicate  fenfe 
and  a  power  of  motion  to  the  body. 

Since  opiuniy  without  entering  the 
blood,  or  being  carried  to  the  feveral 
parts  of  the  body,  lelfens  or  deflroys  their 
powers  of  feehng  and  motion,  mere- 
ly by  ailing  on  the  extremities  of  the 
nerves  to  which  it  is  applied  *,  it  fol- 
lows, that  the  nerves  mull  be  the  inftru- 
ments  of  fenfation,  and  necefTary  for 
performing  motion.  Many  other  expe- 
riments and  arguments  might  be  menti- 
oned to  the  fame  purpole  ;  but  as  this 
agency  of  the  nerves  is  a  point  general- 
ly acknowledged,  it  would  be  unnecef* 
iary  to  enter  here  into  a  more  particular 
proof  of  it. 

6.  Alt  ho'  every  part  of  the  body 
furniflied  with  nerves,  has  either  more 
or  lefs  of  feeling  f ;   yet  there  are  only 

A  2  fome 

*  See  Edinburgh  Phyfical  EiTays,  vol.  ii.  p.  304.  309. 
310,  &c. 

t  There  are  fome  exceptions  to  this,  fuch  as  the  honej  and 
carriages,  which,  tho'  not  deftitute  of  nerves,  are  yet,  in  a 
natural  ftate,  infenfible. 


4  Of  the   Sympathy 

fbme  of  thofe  parts,  whofe  ftruclure  ren- 
ders them  capable  of  motion,  viz,  the 
mufcles,  and  fuch  organs  as  are  in  part 
mufcular ;  and  the  blood  vefTels,  which, 
from  the  eifeCl:s  of  bliflers  and  other  fti- 
muli,  appear  evidently  to  be  poflelled  of 
irritability,  or  a  power  of  alternate  con- 
trad:ion. 

7.  There  are  only  two  kinds  of 
motion  obferved  in  the  bodies  of  living 
animals,  viz,  voluntary,  and  involunta- 
ry from  Jiimuli,  In  order  to  the  perfor- 
mance of  the  fit'fty  the  nervous  power 
is  not  only  neceffary,  but  alfo  a  free 
communication,  by  means  of  the  nerves, 
between  the  brain  and  the  parts  to  be 
moved.  The  fccond  continues  for  fome 
time,  tho'  in  a  much  weaker  degree, 
even  in  thofe  mufcles,  whofe  connexion 
with  the  brain  is  wholly  cut  off;  whence 
it  has  been  concluded  that  this  kind  of 
motion  is  independent  of  the  nerves, 
and  owing  to  fome  power  or  property  in 
the  mufcular  fibres  themfelves,  or  in  the 

glutinous 


of  the  Nerves.  5 

glutinous  matter  connecting  the  ele- 
ments of  whicii  they  are  compofed  *. 
That  this  concluiion,  however,  is  not 
well  founded,  I  have  formerly  fliewn  by 
fever al  arguments  and  experiments  t ; 
and  fhall,  therefore,  at  prefent  only  ob- 
ferve,  that,  llnce  a  folution  of  o-piiim,  by 
afte6ling  the  extremities  of  the  nerves 
to  which  it  is  applied,  and  without  be- 
in  2:  received  into  the  blood,  or  carried 
to  the  brain  or  mufcles,  deflroys,  not 
only  the  power  of  voluntary  motion  in 
animals,  but  alfo  renders  their  mufcles 
incapable  of  being  excited  into  contrac- 
tion by  the  ftrongefl  flimidi  % ;  it  evident- 
ly follows,  that  involuntaiy,  as  well  as 
voluntary  motion,  depends  upon  fome 
power  or  influence  of  the  nerves  ||. 

But 

•  Ada  Getting,  vol.  ii.  p.  152,  &c. 

f  See  Edinb.  Phyfical  EfTays,  vol.  ii.  p.  309,  ic.  and 
Phyfiological  Effays,  edit.  2d,  &c. 

X  See  Eflay  on  the  vital  motions  of  animals,  edit.  2d, 
p.  418. 

jj  See  this  argument  farther  purfued  in  Phyfical  ElTays, 
vol.  ii.  p.  304,  310,  &c. 


6  Of    the    S  Y  xM  P  A  T  H  Y 

But  be  this  as  it  will ;  from  the  con- 
tinuance of  the  motion  of  the  heart,  and 
other  mufcles,  after  they  are  feparated 
from  the  body,  one  may  fafely  conclude, 
that  the  contraction  of  imtated  mufcles 
is  not  owing  to  the  diflenlion  of  their 
hollow  fibres  by  a  more  copious  influx  of 
the  nervous  fluid  at  that  time.  Does  this 
fluid  aft  in  fome  other  way  than  by  di- 
ftending  the  mufcular  fibres  ?  or  is  it 
only  neceffary  to  keep  them  in  a  proper 
ftate  for  being  acted  upon  by  that  living 
principle  from  which  all  their  motions 

ai'e  to  be  derived  *  ? 

8.   As 

*  Since  it  has  been  the  prevailing  opinion  among  Phyfiolo- 
gifts,  that  the  contraftion  of  the  mufcles  is  owing  to  the  dilata- 
tion of  their  hollqw  fibres  by  a  greater  influx  of  the  nervous 
fluid  into  them,  it  may  not  be  amifs,  briefly,  to  mention  the 
principal  argum€;nC9  which  render  this  opinion,  at  leaft,  very 
improbable. 

I.  As  far  as  we  can  judge  from  experiments,  the  mufcles 
become  lefs  bulky  in  ?  fliate  of  contraaion,  than  they  were  be- 
fore. The  hearts  of  frogs,  when  taken  out  of  the  body,  be- 
come really  lefs  every  time  they  contraft,  and  their  contrac- 
tion feems  not  to  be  owing  to  an  inflation  of  their  fibres  or 
%'eflels,  but  to  the  particles,  of  which  they  arccompofed,  ap- 
proachino-  nearer  to  one  another,  and  running  into  clofer  con-' 


of  the  Nerves,  y 

8.  As  the  nerves  are  continuations  of  the 
medullary  fubftance  of  the  brain  and  fpi- 
nal  marrow,  it  is  probable  that  they  are 
partly  nouriilied  by  thofe  velTels  which 

are 

z.  The  extraordinary  fmallnefs  of  the  nerves,  and  the  very 
flow  fecretion  and  raotion  of  their  fluid,  makes  it  improbable 
that  mufcularmotionis  owing  to  the  diflenfion  of  the  fibres  of 
the  mufcles  by  a  fudden  influx  of  that  fluid.  Nor  have  we 
anyreafon  to  think,  that  the  nervous  juice  dilates  the  iriuicu- 
lar  fibres  by  means  of  any  rarefaftion  or  efi^ervefcence. 

3.  The  mufcles  grow  more  tendinous  by  age,  /.  e.  their 
fibres  towards  their  extremities  degenerate  into  folid  threads  ; 
and  this  happens  foonefl  when  the  mufcles  are  much  ufed  : 
but  if  the  contraftion  of  a  mufcle  were  owing  to  the  Inflation 
of  its  fibres  by  any  fluid,  the  more  frequently  it  was  moved, 
it  would  be  the  lefs  apt  to  become  tendinonjs. 

4.  If  the  mufcular  fibres  are  hollow,  and  of  a  cylindrical 
form,  or  made  up  of  veficles,  it  may  be  demonftrated,  that 
they  cannot  be  rendered,  in  the  firfl:  cafe,  above  ~,  and  ia 
the  fecond  above  j  part  ftiorter,  by  the  influx  of  a  fluid  into 
their  cavities ;  but  we  know  that  the  difference  between 
x!iit  fphincler  pupill^  a.nd  ani,  and  the  ftomach  and  bladder,  in 
their  grcatefl:  fl&te  of  contraction  and  diflenfion,  is  much  more 
than  any  of  thefe  proportions. 

5.  The  regular  alternate  contraflion  of  the  hearts  of  froo-?, 
for  five  or  fix  hours  after  decollation  and  the  deflruclion  of 
their  fpinal  marrow,  and  for  half  an  hour  or  more  after  they 
arc  feparated  from  their  bodies,  clearly  proves,  that  an  influx 
of  a  fluid  from  the  nerves  into  the  mufcles,  is-  not  neceffary 
for  their  contra£i.ion  :  For  although  the  fpirits  remaining  in 
thp  nerves  of  the  heart,  fhoald  be  fuppofed  to  occafion  a  few 

contradtions 


8  Of  the  Sympathy 

are  fpread  on  that  production  of  the  pia 
'mater  v.^hich  (lirrounds  them,  in  like  man- 
ner as  the  brain  derives  its  nonrifliment 
from  the  arteries  of  the  pia  mater.  If  this 
be  true,  we  may  readily  fee  why  the 
nerves  lole  their  powers,  when  they  are 
Vv^holly  deprived  of  the  arterial  blood  ; 
and,  on  the  other  hand,  retain  them  ,  in 
fome  meafure,  after  die  brain  is  offiiied 
or  petrified. 

It  has  been  thought  by  fome,  that, 
nutrition  is  cliiefly  performed  by  means 
of  the  nervous  fluid,  becaufe  thofe  parts, 
whofe  nerves  are  deftroyed,  or  wholly 
deprived  of  their  uiual  power,  are  ob- 
ierved  to  become  fnialler. 

But  whoever  confiders  the  incon-* 
ceiveable  exility  of  the  nerves,  and  how 

flo^vly 

contradlioRS  of  this  mufcle,  yet  they  cannot  be  fafficient  for 
producing  feveral  thoufand  diftenfions  of  its  hollow  fibres. 

The  above  arguments,  if  they  do  not  entirely  overthrow  the 
common  opinion,  will,  at  lead,  juflify  me  in  not  having  re- 
courfe,  in  the  following  treatife,  to  the  irregular  motion,  increaf. 
ed  derivation,  reperatffion ,  csnfufton,  or  hurrj  o£  the  animal  fpi- 
rits,  in  accounting  for  the  fymptoms  of  nervous  hypochondriac 
or  hyftenc  diforders. 


■o/  the   IM  ERVEs,,^^  ..  ^ 

llowly  any  fluid  miift  be  derived  by  their 
means  from  the  brain  *,  will  fcarcely 
think  that  the  nutrition  and  growth  of 
the  body  can  be  performed  in  this  way. 
Nor  does  the  withering  of  fuch  mufcles 
as  are  totally  palfied,  prove,  that  nutriti^ 
on  is  owing  to  the  nervous  fluid  ;  for 
we  know,  from  certain  experiments  and 
obfervations,  that  the  motion  of  the 
fluids  in  the  very  fmall  velTels,  depends, 
in  a  great  meafure,  upon  the  influence 
of  their  nerves  ;  and  that  when  this  is 
wanting,  the  fluids  either  do  not  circu- 
late at  all  through  thofe  vefl^els,  or,  at 
leaft,  in  a  very  languid  manner  :  whence 
the  parts,  to  which  they  belong,  collapfe, 
and  are  not  properly  nourifhed  f* 

c;.  Our  bodies  are,  by  means  of  the 
nerves,  not  only  endowed  with  feeling, 
and  a  power  of  motion,  but  with  a  re- 
markable fympathy,  which  is  either  ge- 
neral and  extended  through  the  whole 

fyftem, 

*  See  Phyfiological  Effays,  edit.  2.  p.  22,  &c. 
f  Ibid.  p.  49.  and  50. 


I  o  of  the   Sympathy 

fyftem,  or  confined,  in  a  great  meafure, 
to  certain  parts. 

lo.  That  every  fenlible  part  of  the 
body  has  a  fympathy  with  the  whole, 
Avill  fufficiently  appear  from  the  follow- 
ing facls. 

Cold  water  thrown  on  any  part  of 
the  body  that  is  warm,  produces  a  fud- 
den  contraction  of  the  whole  veflels  and 
pores  of  the  ikin,  and  by  that  means 
frequently  puts  a  flop  to  fmall  hasmor- 
rhages.  The  effaivia  of  certain  fubflances 
when  fnielled  to,  inftantly  communicate 
new  life  and  vigour  to  the  whole  body, 
while  others  affe(ffc  fome  delicate  women 
with  fainting  and  convulfions.  — By 
means  of  different  mufical  founds,  vari- 
ous pailions  may  be  excited  or  calmed, 
and.  difeafes  are  faid  to  have  been  Ibme- 
times  cured  *.  By  doleful  ftories,  or 
fliocldng   lights,    delicate    people    have 

beei:^ 

■   *  Hijioir:  Acad.  B.oyale  des  Sciences^  An.  1717. 


r 


af  the  l<i ERv ES.  '  jx 

been  often   afFecred  with  fainting   and 
general  convuliions  *.  " 

When  the  brain  is  wounded,  inflam- 
ed, iiippurated,  or  otherwife  hurt,  al- 
moft  every  part  of  the  body  is  liable  to 
fliffer,  and  vomithigs,  tremors,  convul- 
iions, palfies,  <^c.  often  enflie.  In  ani-  -^ 
mals  newly  dead,  the  vv'hole  mufcles  of 
the  trunk  and  extremities  are  flrongly 
convulfed,  when  a  probe  is  puili^d  down 
through  the  ipinal  marrow, 

Wh  en  the  ftomach  is  in  a  found  ftate, 
and  digeflicn  is  properly  performed, 
the  fpirits  are  good,  and  the  body  is 
light  and  eaiy;  but  when  that  organ  is 
out  of  order,  a  languor,  debility,  melan- 
choly, watchfulnefs,  or  troublefome 
dreams,  the  night  mare,  (j^^r.  are  the 
coniequences.  —  Grateful  food,  flrong 
wine,   or   other    ipirltuous    liquors,   no 

fooner 

♦  Although  in  thefe  cafes,  the  changes  produced  in  the  bo- 
,dy  are  owing  to  the  paflions  of  the  mind,  yet  as  the  mind  is 
only  affedled  through  the  intervention  of  the  optic  and  audi- 
tory nerves,  they  feem  proper  enough  inftances  of  the  gene- 
ral fympathy  that  extends  through  the  whole  nervous  fyllera. 


XI  Of  the    Sy  Isi?  AT  HY 

fboner  touch  the  ftomach  of  one  ready 
to  faint  from  emptinefs,  than  they  com- 
municate new  Ufe  and  flrength  to  the 
whole  body:  And,  on  the  other  hand, 
feveral  poilbns  occalion  violent  iicknefs, 
vomiting,  fainting,  tremors,  convulfi- 
ons,  ftupidity,  an  intermitting  pulie,  dif- 
ficult breathing,  coldnefs  of  the  extre- 
mities, and  other  fymptoms. — A  fever, 
delirium,  and  violent  convulfions,  have 
been  produced  by  a  pin  flicking  in  the 
coats  of  the  flomach  * :  And  worms,  af- 
fefting  either  this  part  or  the  inteftines, 
occafion  a  llirprifing  variety  of  fymp- 
toms. 

Epileptic  fits  have  proceeded  from 
a  rough  bone  or  cartilaginous  fubftance, 
irritating  the  nerves  of  the  great  toe,  or 
the  calf  of  the  leg ;  and  the  wound  of 
a  tendon  or  nerve  has  been  the  caufe  of 
a  fever,  delirium,  tremors,  violent  convul- 
fions, a  tetanus  and  death. 

Many 

*  Hildan.  Centar.  ii.  obfervat,  3  ^. 


o/  r/;f   Nerves.  ij 

Many  more  examples  might  be  men- 
tioned, were  it  necelTary,  of  that  gene- 
ral iympathy  which  prevails  throughout 
the  whole  body.  But  there  is  nothing 
which  lets  this  matter  in  fo  clear  and  in- 
difputed  a  light,  as  the  effects  of  opiimi  : 
For  a  folution  of  this  fubflance  injected 
into  the  great  guts  of  a  dog,  in  a  few 
minutes  brought  on  a  paify  of  his  po- 
llerior  extremities,  attended  with  a  flu- 
por  and  convulfions  *.  Some  days  af- 
ter, a  like  folution  being  injected,  by  a 
perforation  through  the  teguments  into 
the  abdomen  of  the  fame  dog,  he  became 
almoft  inftantaneoufly  paralytic,  and 
died  in  a  few  minutes  f* 

A  SOLUTION  of  opiitm  inje^ied  either 
into  the  flomach  or  inteilines  of  frogs, 
or  even  applied  to  the  mufcles  of  their 
belly  laid  bare,  produces  a  paralytic 
weaknefs,  a  ftupor  and  death  at  laft  ; 
although  fiich  is  the  nature  of  thefe  ani- 
mals, 

♦  Edinburgh  Phyfical  EfTays,  vol.  ii,  p.  297. 
f  Ibid.  p.  298. 


14  Of  the    Sy  UV  AT  HY 

mals,  that  opium  docs  not  kill  them  neaf 
fo  foon  as  it  does  dogs  *. 

From  thefe  experiments  it  appears, 
that  not  only  thole  nerves,  to  which  opi- 
um is  immediately  applied,  are  rendered 
incapable  of  performing  their  office ;  but 
that  the  brain,  fpinal  marrow,  and  whole 
nervous  fyftem  are  afFe(^ed  in  the  fame 
manner,  folcly  by  the  action  of  the  opi~ 
tim  on  the  nerves  which  it  touches.  For 
its  effects  upon  dogs  are  too  initantane- 
ous  to  allow  of  the  fuppofition,  that  the 
more  HTbtile  parts  of  tliis  poifon  are  re- 
ceived into  the  blood,  and  by  that  means 
are  conveyed  to  the  brain:  And  in  frogs, 
after  the  heart  is  taken  out,  and  confe- 
quently  a  ftop  put  to  the  chxulation, 
yet  a  folution  of  opiimi  inje^led  into  the 
flomach  and  inteftines,  has  the  fame  ef- 
fect, as  vv^hen  thefe  animals  are  entiref. 

ir.   Besides 

*  Edinburgh  Phyfical  Effay;,  vol.  ii.  p.  281 292. 

t  Ibid.  vol.  ii.  p.  281.  and  302.  and  Efiay  on  the  vitaP 
motions  of  animals,  edit.  2.  p.  413. 


of  the  Nerves.  15 

II.  Besides  this  general  confent 
(10.)  ^vhich  prevails  throughout  the 
whole  body,  there  is  a  particular  and 
very  remarkable  fympathy  between  fe- 
veral  of  its  organs,  by  means  of  which 
many  operations  are  carried  on  in  a 
found  flate  ;  and  pain,  convulfive  moti- 
ons, and  other  morbid  fymptoms  are  of- 
ten produced  in  fuch  parts,  as  have  no 
near  connexion  with  thofe  that  are  im- 
mediately affecled. 

To  illuflrate  this,  I  fhall  give  feveral 
inflances,  beginning  with  the  head,  and 
taking  the  parts  in  their  order  down- 
wards. 

{a)  The  PI  E  A  D.  Violent  pains  in 
the  head,  which  have  their  feat  moft 
commonly  in  the  membranes  of  the 
brain  or  pericranium,  are  frequently  at- 
tended with  a  ficknefs  at  the  ftomach, 
and  vomiting.  —  The  fpafmus  cyiiciis, 
locldng  of  the  jaws,  and  an  univerial 
tetanus  have  followed  a  wound  of  the  left 
fide  of  the  head,  by  which  the  temporal 

miufcle 


1 6  Of    ?/;^    S  Y  iM  P  A  t  H  Y 

mufcle  was  divided  *.— Light  and  noiie 
are  offenfive  both  to  the  eyes  and  ears 
in  fevere  headachs. — Wounds  and  con- 
tuiions  of  the  brain  generally  occafion 
bilious  vomitings.  —  Certaiil  imprefiions 
made  on  the  J  en  for  mm  commune  by  exter- 
nal objects,  inftantly  give  the  eyes  either 
a  dull,   a  lively,    or  a  fierce  look. 

Grief,  vexation,  or  fear,  leflen  the 
fecretion  of  the  falivay  deilroy  the  ap- 
petite, and  fometimes  occafion  a  loofe- 
nefs. — The  great  confent  between  the 
brain  and  heart  appears  from  the  fudden 
and  remarkable  effects  of  the  paflions  on 
the  latter. 

(b)  The  Eyes.  When  one  eye  is  af- 
fefted  with  an  inflammation,  a  catarad:, 
or  the  giitta  fcrcna^  the  other  is  often  fbon 

after  attacked  with  the  fame  difeafe. 

The  contraction  of  the  pupil  is  not  ow- 
ing to  light  afting  as  a  ftimukis  on  the 
iris,  but  folely  to  the  fympathy  between 

this 

*  Kil<3an.  Centur.  v.  obfervat.  9. 


of  the  'Nerves.  17 

this  membrane  and  the  retina  *. 

There  is  iiich  a  iympathy  between  the 
two  pupils,  that,  even  in  a  gutta  ferefin, 
the  pupil  of  the  morbid  eye  is  obferved 
to  follow  the  motions  of  the  found 
one.  — We  fliut  both  eye-lids,  whether 
we  will  or  no,  as  often  as  any  thing 
threatens  to  hurt  either  eye. — A  bright  -»^ 
light  coming  fiiddenly  on  the  eyes  fome- 

times  occafions  fneezing. Hippocrates 

has  observed,  that  the  unexped:ed  fight 
of  a  ferpent  will  make  the  countenance 
pale  f. — The  light  of  grateful  food  oc- 
cafions an  uncommon  flux  of  the  faliva, 
in  a  hungry  perfon. — Yawning  and  vo- 
miting are  often  catching. 

(c)  The  Ears.    The  noife  of  a  file  and 
other  harfli  founds  affei^l  the  teeth  with 
an  uneaiy  fenfation.  —  The  whetting  of      /- 
a  knife  has  caufed  the  gums  to  bleed  $.-• » 
Great  and  unexpefted  founds,   fuch  as 

B  the 

*  See  an  EfTay  on  the  vital  motions  of  animals,  edit.  z. 
§  vii. 

f  Lib.  de  humorihus.. 

t  Boyle's  ufefulnefs  of  experimental  Phllof.  part  2.  p.  34S. 


1 8  Of  the   Sympathy 

the  explolion  of  a   cannon   or  mufket, 
make  us  inftantly  clofe  our  eye-lids.  — 

y-  As  the  ear  is  frequently  pained  when  the 
fauces  are  inflamed,  fo  an  irritation  of  the 
■meatus  auditorins  will  often  excite  cough- 
ing,   and  fometinies  vomiting  *. A 

f  conftant  pain  of  one  fide  of  the  head, 
with  a  numbnefs  of  the  left  arm  and  leg, 
a  fupprellion  of  the  ?nenjes,  and  epileptic 
fits,  have  all  been  occafioned  by  a  glafsr 
ball,  not  larger  than  a  pea,  flicking  in 
the  ear  t- 

{d)  The  Nose.  The  effluvia  of  Hunga  ry 
water,  or  fpirit  of  wine  drawn  ftrongly 
into  the  noftrils,  increafe  thq  derivation 
of  the  fdlival  juice  into  the  mouth,  and 
fometimes  flop  a  tickling  cough. — The 
iinell  of  grateful  food  makes  the  faliva 
liow  when  one  is  hungry. Sternuta- 
tories not  only  increafe  the  fecretion 
from  the  nofe,  but  alfb  from  the  lachry- 
mal veflels. After  finelling  to  volatile 

falts, 

*  Pechlin.  obfervat.  med.  lib.  2.  No.  45. 
f  Hildan.  Centur.  i.  obfervat.  4., 


of  the  Nerves.  19 

{alts,  or  eating  too  much  ftrong  muftard 
with  one's  meat,  a  pain  is  often  felt  a- 
bove  the  eye-brows ;  and  it  is  obfervable,  -/- 
that  after  taking  a  large  draught  of 
very  cold  water  m  winter,  that  part  of  the 
fore-head  immediately  above  the  nofe, 
is  affecled  with  a  painful  fenfation. — A- 
crid  flibftances  applied  to  the  olfaftory 
nerves  bring  the  diaplu-agm,  intercoflal 
and  abdominal  mufcles  into  convulfive 
motions. 

Mr.  Bo)le  mentions  feveral,  who  were  •/- 
purged  by  fmelling  to  a  cathartic  medi- 
cine *  ;  and  we  are  told,  that,  in  fbme, 
the  effect  failed,  when,  from  a  cor^zdy 
or  obftrud:ion  of  the  membrane  of  the 
nofe,  the  olfadlory  nerves  had  loft  their 
power  of  diftinguifliing  fmells. 

[e)   The  Teeth.    A  rotten  tooth  will       f- 
fometimes  occafion  a  violent  pain  in  a 
found  one,   tho'  at  a  diftance  from  it ; 
and  the  pain  will  ceafe  as  foon  as  the 
fpoilt  tooth  is  drawn,   or  its  nerve  de- 

ftroyed. A  pain   in  the  teeth  often 

B  2  affed:s 

*  Ufefulnefs  of  Experimental  Philof.  part  2.  p.  242. 


20  Of    the     S  Y  xM  P  A  T  H  Y 

affecls  the  cheek-bone,  one  fide  of  the 
head,  the  throat,  and  the  correii3onding 

ear. Children,  from  the  irritation  of 

the  gums  in  teething,  are  liable  to  vo- 
miting, purging,  a  cough,  a  fever  and 
convuliions. 

(/)  The  Trachea.  An  irritation  of 
the  V.  indpipe,  or  any  of  its  fmall  branch- 
es, raiies  coughing,  or  a  convulfive  mo- 
tion of  the  mulcles  employed  in  expli^a^ 
f-  tion  ;  and  a  7iaufea,  vomiting  and  con- 
vuliions are,  fometimes,  the  coniequence 
of  a  violent  or  long  continued  irritation 
of  thefe  parts. 

(^g)  The  Lungs.  The  fympathy  of 
the  hmgs,  with  the  diaphragm  and  in- 
tercoftal  mufcles,  is  evident  from  their 
motion  even  in  ordinary  reipiration ; 
but  dill  more  fo  in  the  laborious  breath- 
ing, which  is  always  the  confequence 
of  a  difficult  paflage  of  the  blood  thro' 
the  pulmonary  veflels. 

{k)  The  Diaphragm.  When  the  dia^ 
piiragra  is  inflamed,  the  ftomach,  brain 

and 


of  the  Nerves.  21 

and  mufcles  of  the  face  are  affedled  by 
fympathy,  as  appears  from  the  delirmn, 
vomiting  and  ?'ifij  fardonicusy  which  at* 
tend  this  difeafe. 

(/)  The  Stomach  and  Intestines. 
A  difordered  flate  of  the  ftomach  and 
inteftines,  with  wind  or  noxious  hu- 
mours lodging  in  them,  will  fometimes 
fo  aiFecl  the  brain,  as  to  deprive  people 
of  their  reafon.  At  other  times,  the 
fame  caufes  will  produce  a  vertigo y  cepha^ 
Ua,  heinicrania,  clavtis  hyjlerictts,  palpitati- 
ons, intermiflions  of  the  pulfe,  difficul- 
ty of  breathing,  fudden  fiufhes  of  heat 
and  Aveating,  &c. — — After  hard  drink- 
ing, or  a  large  doze  of  opiunty  the  eyes 
lofe  their  luftre. — The  headach,  after  a 
debauch,  proceeds  chiefly  from  the  flo- 
mach,  as  appears  by  the  removal  of  the 
pain,  upon   drinking  a  few   glafTes    of 

ftrong    wine. The   diforder   of  the 

ftomach  will  fometimes  occafion  dimneis 
of  light  *.      I  know  a  Lady,  to  Avhom 

every 

*  Lomrr.ii  obfenrat.  med.  lib.  ?. 


22  Of  the  Sympathy 

jf  every  object  appears,  as  if  covered  with 
a  thick  fmoke,  as  often  as  her  ftomach 
is  loaded  with  an  acid;  and  who,  there- 
fore, finds  vomits,  abforbent  powders 
and  bitters  her  beft  ophthahnic  medi- 
cines.— Another  Lady,  with  tender  eyes, 
feldom  has  any  confiderable  pain  or  lick- 
nefs  at  ftomach,  without  her  head  being 
afFefted,  and  her  eyehds  or  eyes  becom- 
ing,  in  fome   degree,  inflamed. In 

little  more  than  half  an  hour  after  fwal- 
lowing  fifteen  or  twenty  grains  of  the 
extracmm  ciciit£y  I  have  been  often  affedled 
with  a  weaknefs  and  dazzling  of  my  eyes, 
together  with  a  giddinefs  and  a  debility 
of  my  whole  body,  efpecially  the  muf- 
cles  of  my  legs  and  arms ;  fo  that,  when 
I  attempted  to  walk,  I  was  apt  to  flag- 
ger  like  a  perfon  who  had  drunk  too 
much. 

A  CONVULSIVE  motion  of  the  flo- 
mach  and  inteflines  often  fpreads  to  the 
throat,  where  it  occafions  a  difficulty  of 
breathing,  and  a  fenfe  of  fufFocation : 

On 


of  r/je   "N ERVEs,  23 

On  the  other  hand,    an  irritation  of  the 

fauces  J  or  pharynx,  excites  vomiting 

A  natfea  or  difagreeable  fenfation  in  the 
ftomach  makes  the  pulfe  quicker  and 
fmaller,  raifes  a  Iweat,  and  fometimes 
greatly  in-creafes  the  fecretion  o^  the  fa- 

liva  or  urine. When  the  ftomach  is 

empty,  and  affected  with  a  {^eni^e  of  hun- 
ger, the  faUval  juice  flows  much  more 
copioufly  into  the  mouth,  than  after  a 
full  meal,  or  when  the  natural  appetite 
for  food  is  wanting. — An  inflammation 
of  the  flomach  and  bowels  is  attended, 
in  the  beginning,  with  a  fhuddering  of 
the  whole  body,  and  a  great  coldnels  of 

the  hands  and  feet. Long  continued 

vomiting  and  purging  occafion  violent 
cramps  of  the  mufcles  of  the  legs  and 
thighs  ;  and  the  dry  belly-ach  brings  on 
a  palfy  of  the  extremities. — A  tremor  of 
the  hamds  is  often  leflened  or  removed, 
for  a  while,  by  a  dram,  or  fome  ftrong 
wine ;  and  tliis  effecfl  is  owing  fokly  to 
the  adion  of  thefe  liquors  on  the  fto- 
mach, 


24  ^f  the  Sympathy 

mach,  and  not  to  their  having  entered 
the  blood,  which  does  not  happen  fo 
foon. — The  particular  fympathy  of  the 
ftomach  with  the  diaphragm  and  abdo- 
minal mufcles,  appears  from  their  con- 
vulfive  motions  in  vomiting,  and  in  the 

^  hiccup.  A  violent  fpafmodic  pain  in  the 
ftomach  or  inteftines,  often  renders  the 
pulfe  much  flower  than  natural. 

An  inflammation  of  the  inteftines  is 
frequently  attended  with  vomiting  and 
a  flippreflion  of  urine. An  opijlhotomis 

ju  or  a  tetanus  is  often  occafioned,  in  hot 
climates,  by  a  retention  of  the  mecQuium^ 
or  other  acrid  humours,  in  the  bowels  of 
infants. — That  itching  of  the  nofe,  which 
is  a  common  fign  of  worms,  feems  to 
indicate  a  particular  fympathy  between 
this  part  and  the  inteftines  ;  and  the  ma- 
ny other  fymptoms  produced  by  worms, 
which  I  fhall  have  occaiion  to  mention 
afterwards,  ftiew  a  remarkable  and  ex- 
tenfive  confent  between  the  firft  palla- 
ges,  and  many  other  parts  of  the  body. 

{k)   The 


of  the  Nerves.  25 

{k)  The  Liver.    Stones  irritating  the 
biliary  dudls,  frequently  occafion  a  nati- 
fea  and  vomiting. — An  inflammation  of 
the  liver  is  generally  accompanied  with 
a  vomiting  and  the  hiccup,   and  often 
with  a  pain  between  the  vertebrae  of  the 
neck  and  top  of  the  flioulder.    In  a  fup- 
puration  of  the  liver,  I  have  twice  i^cGn       j^ 
the  patients  affected  with  a  numbnefs  and 
debility  of  the  right  arm,  tliigh  and  leg. 
(I)    The  Kidneys    and   Ureters. 
A  naiijea,  vomiting,  coftivenefs  and  infla- 
tion of  the  bowels,   are  often  produced 
by  an  inflammation  in  the  kidneys,   or 
ftones  in   the  ureters. — A  flone   in  the 
-pelvis  of  the   kidney,    or   in   the  ureter^ 
fometimes  occafions  a  frequent  inclina- 
tion to  make  urine,    and  a  heat  in  the 
extremity  of  the  urethra, — When  one  of 
the  kidneys  is  inflamed,  little  urine  is  fe- 
parated  by  the  other,  probably  on  ac- 
count of  a  fpafmodic  fl:rifture  of  its  fe- 
cretory  veflels. — 'When  a  fl:one  is  pafling 
through  the  ureter,  the  tefticle  of  the  fame 

fide 


26  'Of  the  Sympathy 

fide  is  fometimes  drawn  upwards  and 
fwells ;  and  an  ered:  pofture  is  then  pain- 
ful. 

(m)  The  Bladder  and  Rectum. 
An  irritation  of  the  neck  of  the  bladder, 
or  extremity  of  the  reBum,  is  the  caufe 
of  a  conflant  contraction  of  the  dia- 
phragm and  abdominal  mufcles.  —  A 
ftrangm'y  and  tenejmu  mutually  occafion 
each  other. — The  pain  of  the  h^emor-- 
rhoids  is  fometimes  accompanied  with  a 
licknefs  at  the  ftomach,  and  faintiflmefs. 
A  ftone  or  ulcer  in  the  bladder  is  attend- 
ed with  a  fliarp  pain  near  the  end  of  the 
urethra,  efpecially  after  making  water.  I 
^  had  fome  years  iince  a  patient  with  an 
ulcer  in  the  bladder,  who,  when  he  paf- 
fed  his  urine,  had  not  only  a  violent  pain 
in  the  point  of  the  penis,  but  this  pain  de- 
fcended  down  his  thighs  and  legs,  and  af- 
fecled  the  foles  of  his  feet,  as  if  he  had 
been  {landing  barefooted  on  bmniing 
coals. 

(n)  The  Genitals  in  Men.  At 
the  time  of  puberty,  not  only  the  voice, 

but 


of  the  Nerves.  27 

but  the  whole  body  vindergoes  a  fenfible 
change,  which  is  probably  owing  to  the 
jiimidiis  communicated  to  the  nerves  of 
the  genital  parts  by  the  jhnen  ;  for  we 
certainly  know  that  other  fi'miuli  applied 
to  the  nerves  of  the  nofe  or  flomach,  ac- 
cording to  their  nature,  will  either  in- 
ftantaneouily  impart  new  vigour  to  the 
whole  body,  or  foon  occalion  a  general 
Jlupor  and  debility. — It  is  owing  to  a  fym- 
pathy  with  the  glans,  that  the  vefiaiU  fe- 
minales  are  contracted  in  time  of  coition ; 
and,  when  the  membrane  which  lines 
the  lower  part  of  the  urethra  is  flimulated 
by  the  Jhnen,  the  acceleratores  iiririfS  are  ex- 
cited into  convulfive  motions. 

(0)  The  Uterus.  The  great  variety 
of  fymptoms  in  the  hyfteric  difeafe  is  the 
reafon,  why  a  more  extenfive  fympathy 
has  been  afcribed  to  the  womb,  than  to 
any  other  part,  except  the  brain.  But, 
altho'  thefe  fymptoms  proceed  from  the 
womb,  much  lefs  frequently  than  has 
been  imagined  ;  yet  the  vomiting  which 

2:enera]lv 


28  Of  the  Sympathy 

generally  accompanies  an  inflammation 
of  that  organ,  the  naufea^  and  depraved 
appetite  after  conception,  the  violent 
contracT:ion  of  the  diaphragm  and  abdo- 
minal mnfcles  in  delivery,  the  headach, 
and  the  heat  and  pain  in  the  back  and 
bowels  about  the  time  of  menflruation, 
are  iiifficient  proofs  of  the  confent  be- 
tween the  uterus  and  feveral  other  part^ 
of  the  body.  But  there  is  no  part  fo 
much  alFed:ed  by  the  different  ftates  of 
the  womb  as  the  breafts,  which  become 
more  turgid  before  every  appearance  of 
the  meufes,  and  fublide  after  the  period  is 
over.  The  changes  that  happen  to  the 
breafts  in  time  of  pregnancy,  and  after 
delivery,  are  ftill  more  remarkable. 
J-  (P)  The  Extremities.  Strait  flioes 
give  fome  people  a  headach  ;  while  fina- 
pifms  applied  to  the  foles,  or  blifters  to 
the  legs,  often  lelTen,  and  fometimes  re- 
move a  delirium,  —  In  an  obftinate  coftive- 
nefs,  cold  water  thrown  on  the  feet  and 
legs,  has  fometimes  opened   the  body. 


after 


of  r/;5   Nerves.  29 

after  many  other  remedies  had  failed. — 
f^  By  tickling  the  foles,  not  only  the  miil^ 
cles  of  the  legs,  but  of  the  whole  body, 
may  be  thrown  into  convuliions. — An 
opijihotonusy  with  convuliions  returning 
every  day,  has  been  owing  to  a  wound 
in  the  fole  of  the  foot  by  a  nail  ;*  and 
the  fpafmus  cyniciu  to  a  violent  pain  in 
the  toes.f — The  locking  of  the  jaws 
fometimes  happens  after  amputations  of 
the  extremities,  or  lacerations  of  the 
nerves  or  membranes. 

Many  other  examples  o^fpipath^y  both 
in  a  found  and  morbid  ftate  of  the  bo- 
dy, might  be  mentioned  ;  but  the  above 
will  be  fulficient  at  prefent,  as  I  iliall 
have,  afterwards,  frequent  occafion  to 
touch  on  the  fame  llibje<^. 

12.  All  fynpath-j  or  conjhnt  flippofes 
feeling,  and  therefore  muft  be  owing  to 
the  nerves,   which  are  the  fole  inftru- 

ments 

^  ♦  Nova  A£l.  Acad.  Caefar.  natur.  curlof.  torn.  i.  p.  i6. 
f  Hoffjnan.  Syilem,  med,  torn.  iii.  feft.  i.cap.  5.  No.  39* 


3©  Of  the   Sympathy 

Tnents  of  renfation(5).  The  truth  of  this 
Items  to  be  fully  evinced,  by  the  follow- 
ing experiment.  When  the  liinder  toes 
of  a  frog  are  wounded,  immediately  af- 
ter cutting  off  its  head,  there  is  either 
no  motion  at  all  excited  in  the  mufcles 
of  the  legs,  or  a  very  inconfiderable  one. 
But  if  the  toes  of  this  animal  be  pinch- 
ed, or  wounded  with  a  pen-knife,  ten 
or  fifteen  minutes  after  decollation,  the 
mufcles,  not  only  of  the  legs  and  thighs, 
but  alfo  of  the  trunk  of  the  body,  are, 
for  the  m.oft  part,  ftrongly  convulfed, 
and  the  frog  fometimes  moves  from  one 
place  to  another.  In  this  caie,  is  not 
the  irritation  of  the  toes,  immediately 
after  decollation,  rendered  ineffectual  to 
produce  any  motion  in  the  mufcles  of 
the  legs  a;nd  thighs,  by  the  greater  pain 
occaiioned  by  cutting  off  the  head  ?  And 
are  not  the  mufcles  of  the  pollerior  ex- 
tremities, as  well  as  of  the  trunk  of  the 
body,  brought  into  aftion  by  wounding 
the  toes  fifteen  minutes  after  decollation, 

becaufe 


of  the   Nerves.  .3J 

|3ecaufe  the  pain  produced  by  cutting 
off  the  head,  is  now  {o  much  leflened, 
as  not  to  prevent  the  animal  from  feel- 
ing very  fenilbly  when  its  toes  are  hurt. 
But  further,  that  tAI  fympathy  is  ow- 
ing to  feeling,  and  confequently  pro- 
ceeds from  the  nerves,  appears  evident, 
becauie  the  changes  in  the  body,  occa-. 
iioned  by  the  fympathy  of  the  parts,  are 
ftopt  by  v/hatever  affe(!l:s  the  nervous  fy- 
ftem  fb  ftrongly,  as  to  overcome  the  feur- 
fations  that  produced  thole  changes. — 
Thus  the  hiccup  is  flopt  by  terror,  fear, 
furprife,  or  other  ftrong  padions. — An 
irritation  of  the  noie  Avill  not  occalion 
fneezing,  when  the  firft  effort  to  fneeze 
is  attended  with  an  acute  pain  in  fome 
of  the  mufcles  of  the  back  or  ^des  from 
a  rheumatic  caufe. — Hungary  water,  or 
volatile  ipirits,  drawn  ftrongly  into  the 
nofe,  will  often  ftop  a  tickHng  cough ; 
and  laudanmn  taken  by  the  mouth,  or  gi- 
ven in  a  clyfter,  by  weakening  the  fen- 
dent  pov/er  of  the  nerves,  will  leil'en  or 

remove 


$2.  cy  r/;^  Sympathy 

remove  the  fympathetic  vomiting,  ari- 
sing from  a  ftone  in  the  kidney  or  ui*eter, 
and  the  violent  contradlions  of  the  dia- 
phragm and  abdominal  mufcles,  occafl- 
oned  by  a  tenefmiis  or  ftrangury. 

Could  we  fuppofe  the  circulation  of 
the  blood  were  to  remain  after  a  total 
abolition  of  the  fentient  powers  of  the 
brain  and  nerves,  there  would  be  no 
more  fjmpathyheuveen  the  parts  of  fuch 
an  animal  body,  than  between  thofe  of 
any  hydraulic  machine.  As  in  this  cafe 
the  motion  of  the  fluids  would  be  mere- 
ly mechanical,  fo  every  change  made  in 
any  of  its  parts,  mufl  be  the  refult  of 
mechanifm  alone,  and  confequently 
wholly  different  from  confmt^  which,  as 
it  depends  upon  feeling,  cannot  be  ex- 
plained upon  mechanical  principles. 

13,  Those  f-jmpathies  which  have  been 
afcribed  bv  fome  authors  to  the  tela  ccl- 
lulofa^  blood-velTels,  membranes,  and  the 
fimilarity  of  parts,  if  duly  confldered, 
will  appear  either  to  proceed  from  the 

nerves, 


of  the  'Nek WES.  33 

nerves,   or  not  to  deferve  the  name  of 
confent  orfjjnpathy. 

With  regard  to  the  ceUular  mem- 
brane, as  in  a  natm*al  flate,  it  has  little 
or  no  fenfibility,  fo  it  muft,  of  all  other 
parts j  be  the  leall  fubjed:  to  j)mpathctic 
aife^lions.  Its  cells  have  every  vv^here  a 
free  communication  ;  and  therefore  air, 
water,  purulent  matter,  or  other  hu- 
mours, are  often  conveyed,  by  their 
means,  from  one  part  of  the  body  to 
another.  But  this  cannot  be  properly 
referred  to  fpnpathj,  and  is  no  more  than 
what  happens  to  a  fpunge,  a  piece  of 
fugar,  or  other  porous  fub fiances. 

The  fyflem  of  blood  veffels  affords  us 
no  more  inftances  of  true  fyinpathy  than 
the  tela  cellulofa,  except  what  may  be  ow- 
ing to  the  nerves  which  belong  to  thefe 
veffels.  The  changes  made  in  the  cir- 
culation, and  the  morbid  fymptoms  pro- 
duced, or  removed  by  the  force  of  the 
blood  being  turned  upon  different  parts 
of  the  body ;  the  abforption  of  the  ve- 
C  nereal 


34  ^f   i^^S    S  Y  M  P  A  T  H  Y 

nereal  contagion,  oi  pus,  or  other  hu-* 
mours,  and  their  tranilation  to  diftant 
parts,  are  not,  ftri(5lly  fpeaking,  inftan- 
c£S  of  confentf  but  are  folely  the  confe- 
quences  of  the  circulation  of  the  fluids, 
aad  the  communication  between  the  fe- 
veral  parts  of  the  vafcular  fyflem.  The 
changes,  indeed,  produced  in  the  moti- 
on of  the  blood,  and  in  the  various  fe- 
cretory  organs,  by  different  affedlions  of 
the  mind,  are  undoubtedly  owing  to 
jjmpathy ;  not,  however,  of  the  blood- 
vefTels,  but  of  the  brain  and  nerves,  as 
will  appear  afterwards. 

The  various  inftances  o( conjhit  froin 
the  continuity  of  mertibranes,  are,  ftricft:- 
ly  fpeaking,  owing  to  the  nerves  them- 
felves,  with  which  thofe  membranes  are 
fupplied  ;  far,  were  they  deftitute  of 
nerves  and  feeling,  no  fuch  confent  could 
iiappen.  If  the  heat  and  pain  in  the  ex- 
tremity of  the  zirerbray  from  a  flone  or 
ulcer  in  the  bladder  ;  and  the  itching  in 
die  nofe,  from  worms  in  the  inteflines, 

and 


of  the   Nerves*  35 

tind  fuch  like  fymptoms,  were  owing  to 
the  continuity  of  the  membranes  affect- 
ed, the  gullet  and  fauces  ought  to  fuffer 
more  than  the  nofe  ;  and  the  lower  or 
middle  parts  of  the  urethra  fliould  be 
more  pained  than  its  extremity.  Fur- 
ther, if  thefe  inftances  of  f^m-path)  were 
merely  owing  to  the  continuity  of  mem^ 
branes,  why  does  not  the  bladder  fuffer 
in  a  gonorrhaa,  where  there  is  a  great  ir* 
ritation  and  pain  near  the  extremity  of 
the  urethra? 

Although  a  deafnefs. has  been fome 
times  cured  by  purging,  this  no  more  ar- 
gues a  fjiipathy  between  the  ears  and  in- 
teftines  from  the  continuity  of  the  mem- 
brane that  lines  them,*  than  the  cure  of 
an  ophthalmia  by  the  fame  remedy,  proves 
a  fympathy  between  the  eyes  and  bow- 
els. The  elie6l  in  both  cafes  is  chiefly 
owing  to  the  derivation  of  the  humours 
from  the  parts  affected  ;  and  hence  bli- 
Itering  the  head  often  affords  a  more 

C   1  fpeedy 

*  Haller.  prim.  lin.  phyfiolog.  §  555. 


3^  Of   the    S  Y  MP  AT  H  Y 

ipeedy  relief,  in  thofe  difeafes,  than  piU'^ 

Th  e  fjjnpathy  between  the  breads  and 
the  uterus,  has  been  derived  from  the  fi- 
milarity  of  their  ftrud:ure,  or  of  the  li- 
quors fecreted  by  them.  But  although 
thofe  parts  were  much  more  fimilar  in 
thefe  refpecls  than  they  really  are,  yet 
if  there  were  no  conned:ion  between 
them  by  means  of  blood-vefTels,  or  con- 
fent  by  means  of  nerv^es,  it  would  be 
difficult  to  conceive,  how  the  condition 
of  the  one  could  be  fo  much  affected 
by  that  of  the  other ;  and  much  more, 
how  a  titillation  of  the  one  fhould  com- 
municate a  particular  fenfation  to  the 
other.  The  iimilarity  of  flrudnre  be- 
tween the  mufcles  of  the  legs  and  arms, 
between  the  tefticles,  and  between  the 
parotid  glands,  is  confiderably  greater 
than  between  the  womb  and  breafts ;  and 
yet  the  former  have  no  iuch  fynpath)  as 
the  latter. 

14.  Although 


of  the  Nekwes.  37 

14.  Although  it  may  appear,  from 
what  has  been  faid,  that  all  real  confent 
between  the  different  parts  of  the  body, 
is  owing  to  the  nerves,  yet  it  will  be 
found  very  hard  to  account,  particular- 
ly, for  the  various  inftances  o^  fjmpath'^y 
either  in  a  found  or  morbid  ftate. 

The  prevailing  opinion  has  been, 
that  thele  pjmpathies  are  owing  to  the 
communications  between  the  nerves, 
and  particularly  to  the  connexion  which 
the  intercoftah  have  with  the  fifth,  fixth, 
and  eighth  pairs,  and  with  almoft  all 
thofe  which  proceed  from  the  fpinal 
marrow  *.      Upon  this  principle  it  has 

been 

*  Hippocrates  was  not  ignorant  of  a  general  fympathy  be- 
tween the  parts  of  the  body  ;  and  Galen  treats  particularly  of 
thofe  difeafes  which  arife  ixova  fympathy  qi  confent:  but  he  was 
fo  far  from  having  any  notion  that  fympathetic  afFe£lions  were 
owing  to  the  nerves,  that  he  afcribes  thofe  headaclis,  which 
do  not  proceed  from  any  fault  in  the  head,  to  vapours  afcend- 
ing  from  the  llomach  or  uterus.  The  following  writers,  even 
as  far  down  as  Fernelius  and  Sennertus,  feem  to  do  little  more 
than  copy  what  Galen  had  faid  on  this  fubjeft.  Andrea: 
l^anreniius,  who  wrote  about  the  1600,  afcribes  the  fympathy 

between 


3^  Of  the  Sympathy 

been  thought  eafy  to  trace  the  various 
J)mpathics,  not  only  between  the  feveral 
parts  of  the  abdomen,  but  alfo  between 
them  and  the  head,  neck,  thorax,  and  ex- 
tremities. But  however  plaufible  thi> 
theory  may  appear  at  firft  view,  and 
how  readily  loever  it  may  feem  to  ex- 
plain many  remarkable  inflances  of  to;/- 

fent, 

between  the  mammee  and  uterus,  partly  to  the  intercoftal  nerve, 
which  fends  fome  branches  to  the  organs  of  generation,  and 
partly  to  the  itna  ^.zjgcs,  which  terminates  in  the  left  fperma- 
tic  vein.  He  deduces  the  vomiting  in  a  nephritis  partly  from 
the  nerves,  which-  the  kidneys  have  from  the  ftomachic  plexus, 
and  partly  from  their  exterior  coat,  being  a  continuation  of 
that  which  covers  the  bottom  of  the  ftomach.  Cafpar  Bauhi- 
nus  derives  the  confent  between  the  noftrils  aad  exterior  parts 
of  the  abdomen,  from  the  communication  between  the  epiga- 
ftric  and  mammary  veins.  Riclan,  who  fiourifhed  before  the 
middle  of  the  feventeentli  century,  has  not,  with  all  his  learn- 
ing, made  any  Improvement  in  the  doctrine  of  fympathy  j  and 
his  cotemporary  Ri'verius  afcribes  fympathetic  difeafes  to  five 
caufes,  fvix.  the  connexion,  fituation,  vicinity,  or  fimilarity  of 
the  parts,  or  to  their  having  the  fame  kind  of  office.  Doctor 
Willis,  who  has  given  a  more  accurate  dcfcriptionof  the  brain 
and  nen'es,  than  any  anatomifi:  before  him,  endeavoured,  firil, 
to  explain  the  various  inllances  of  fympathy  between  the  p^rts 
of  the  body,  from  the  connexion  or  communication  of  their 
nerves.  This  dodtrine  was  afterwards  further  illuftrated  by 
Vieu£ens,  and  has  been  embraced  by  moft  of  the  later  writers. 


of  the   Nerves.  ^s^ 

fent^  yet  a  more  ftri6l  examination  will 
fliew  it  to  be  liable  to  iniiiperable  diffi- 
culties. 

(a)  Since  every  individual  nerve 
appears  to  be  quite  difdnct  from  every 
other,  not  only  in  its  rife  from  the  me- 
dullary fobflance  of  the  brain  or  Ipinal 
marrow,  but  alfo  in  its  progrefs  to  that 
part  where  it  terminates  (2.),  it  follows, 
that  the  various  inflanccs  o^ fynpath^,  ob- 
ferved  between  the  different  parts  of  the 
body,  cannot  be  owing  to  any  communi- 
cation or  anajlomofis  of  their  nerves  ;  and 
confequently,  that  it  can  be  here  of  no 
ufe,  minutely  to  enquire  into  the  nu- 
merous connexions,  which  the  intercojial 
nerves  have  with  the  fifth,  fixth,  and 
eighth  pairs,  and  with  thofe  of  the  fpi- 
nal  marrow. 

But  left  it  fhould  be  alledged,  that 
the  courfe  of  the  nervous  filaments  in 
the  ganglia  is  fo  intricate,  that  it  is  not 
altogether  clear,  whether  they  may  not 
intermix  or  communicate  with  one  an- 
other 


4<*  Of  the  Sympathy 

other  in  their  paflage  through  thofe  bo-, 
dies,  it  will  be  necefTary  to  offer  fome 
lefs  doubtful  arguments  for  proving  that 
t\iQ  fympathy  of  thefeveral  parts,  does  not 
depend  on  any  union  or  anajiojnofis  be-^ 
tween  their  nerves. 

(b)  If  there  Avere  any  anaJio?nofis,  or 

real  communication  between  the  nerves 

of  the  fame  or  different  trunks,  either  in 

the  ganglia  or  elfewhere,   it  is  natural  to 

think,  that  a  confuiion  would  necellari- 

ly  happen  in  our  fenfations,  as  well  as 

in  the  motions  of  our  leveral  mufcles  ; 

for   the  imprellions  of  external  objedls 

would   be   communicated,  at  the  places 

of  union,  to  other  nerves  than  thofe  af^. 

fedled  ;  and  the  change  produced  by  the 

will  in  any  nerve  at   its  origin   in  the 

brain   or  Ipinal  marrow,    in   order  for 

moving  a  particular  mufcle,  would  af- 

i'e^t  all   thofe  nerves  with  which  it  has 

any   communication,    by  means   of  the 


o-atidia  or  otherwife. 


(cJlT 


of  the  Nerves.  ai 

(c)  It  does  not  appear,  that  there  is 
zny  J^mpath-j  between  the  nerves  that  are 
derived  from  the  fame  trunk,  by  means 
of  the  membranes  that  furronnd  them. 
If  the  dura  mater  were  endowed  with  that 
degree  of  fenfibility,  and  with  thole 
powers  of  ofcillation  which  have  been 
afcribed  to  it  by  leveral  authors,  this  o- 
pinion  would  not  appear  altogether  im- 
probable ;  but  as  the  membranes  of  the 
brain,  and  thofe  productions  of  them 
which  furround  the  nerves,  feem,  in  a 
natural  ftate,  to  be  poflefTed  only  of  a  ve- 
ry obtufe  kind  of  feeling*,  and  are  alto- 
gether deftitute  of  motion,  we  have  no 
reafon  to  afcribe  'the  various  inftances  of 
fjinpath'^,  between  the  different  parts  of 
the  body,  to  their  fenfibility  or  moving 
power. 

(d)  We 

*  The  experiments  of  the  learned  M.  de  Haller,  altho'  they 
do  not  prove  thefe  membranes  to  be  wholly  infenfible,  yet  they 
certainly  (hew  them  to  have  no  painful  or  acute  feeling  in  a, 
found  ftate,  vid.  Afta  Gottingen.  vol.  ii.  and  Phyliological 
]Eilays,  edit.  2. 


42  Of  the  Sympathy 

(dj  We  obferve  a  remarkable  fympa- 
thy  between  many  parts,  whofe  nerves 
have  certainly  not  the  fmallefl  commu- 
nication with  one  another.  Thus  the 
dimnefs  of  fight  occafioned  by  a  difor- 
der  of  the  flomach,  the  naiifea  upon  fee- 
ing others  vomit,  and  the  fiux  of  the 
faliva  mto  the  mouth  of  a  hungry  per- 
Ibn  at  the  fight  of  favouiy  food  *,  are 
proofs,  that  the  flomach  and  falivary 
glands  f^mpathize  with  the  retinay  though 
there  is  no  communication  between  the 
optic  nerves  and  any  other.  —  A  fliud- 
dering  is  excited  by  particular  founds, 
and  yet  the  portio  mollis  of  the  auditory 
fierve,  after  it  leaves  the  brain,  does  not 

appear 

*  In  thefe  inftances  the  change  in  the  ftomaeh  and  falivary 
glands  are  produced,  through  the  intervention  of  the  brain 
and  fentient  principle :  for  thinking  flrongly  on  favoury  vi- 
ftuals,  or  difagreeable  medicines,  will  have  almoft  the  fame  ef- 
fedls  on  fome  people,  as  feeing  them.  But  fince  an  imprellion 
on  the  optic  nerve  can,  by  means  of  the  brain,  occafion  vo- 
miting, and  an  increafed  difcharge  of  the  falival  juice,  why 
may  not  impreflions  on  the  other  nerves  produce  various  other 
fympathies  in  t\ic/ame  m(inmr  ?  But  of  this  more  hereafter. 


of  the  Nerves,  43 

appear  to  communicate  with  the  portio 
dura,  nor  any  other  nerve.  —  Although 
the  optic  nerves  unite  at  the  cella  "turcica, 
yet  it  has  been  fliewn,  that  their  fibres 
do  not  crofs,  intermix,  or  truly  commu- 
nicate with  each  other  *  ;  neverthelefs, 
there  is  a  confiderable  fympathy  between 
the  two  eyes. — -Although  the  nerves  of 
the  two  kidneys  do  not  appear  to  have 
any  connexion  with  each  other,  yet, 
when  one  of  thefe  glands  is  inflamed, 
or  irritated  by  a  flone,  the  iecretion 
from  the  other  is  frequently  much  di- 
miniflied. — We  know  for  certain,  that 
the  different  fize  of  the  pupil  in  diffe- 
rent lights,  is  owing  to  a  canjent  between 
the  retina  and  itvea,  and  yet  the  optic 
nerves,  and  thoie  belonging  to  the  uvcay 
have  no  communication,  in  their  courle, 
from  the  brain  to  the  eye.  Nor  can  a- 
ny  fympathy  be  fuppofed  to  arife  from  • 
|:he  nerves  of  the  iroca,  palfmg  between 

the 

^  See  VefuL  anatom.  corp.  human,  lib,  iv.  cap.  iv.  and 
^anton'n.  obfervat.  anatom.  p.  63. 


44  O/'  r/;^  Sympathy 

•the  retina  and  tunica  choroidea,  as  there 
is  no  anajlojnofuy  nor  any  other  kind 
of  union  between  them. — The  nerves, 
with  which  the  uvea  of  the  two  eyes  are 
furniflied,  have  no  connexion,  and  yet 
we  find  a  moil  remarkable  fympathy  be- 
tween the  motions  of  the  two  pupils. 

Almost  the  whole  mufcles  of  the 
body  may  be  brought  into  convulfive 
motions  by  tickling  the  foles,  or  the 
fides  ;  nay,  the  dread  of  this  will  affed: 
fome  people.  Now,  thefe  motions  can- 
not reafonably  be  deduced  from  the  con- 
nexion of  the  intercoftal  nerves  with 
thofe  of  the  fliine  ;  or,  if  they  could, 
it  would  follow  that  the  flomach  and 
bowels  fhould  fufFer,  at  leafl,  equally 
with  the  cliaphragm  and  mufcles  of  the 
trunk  of  the  body. 

(e)    If  the  confent  between  the  vifcera 
of  the  abdomen y   and  the  other  parts  of 
the  body,  be  owing  to  a  communication 
of  nerves,  by  means  of  the  inter coftals ; 
why  do   not  all  thofe   ip3.rtsr)'mpathize, 

v/hofe 


of  the  Nerves.  45 

whofe  nerves  are  either  derived  from,  or 
communicate    with  the   intercoftals  ?  — 
Why,   in  the  nephritis,  does  the  ftomach 
fufFer  more  than  the  inteftines  ?  and  why 
are  not  the  kings  and  other  parts  at  all 
afFefted  in  this  difeafe  ?  — Why  does  not 
an  irritation  of  the  bladder  from  a  ilone, 
commonly  occalion  a  naufea  and  vomi- 
ting;  fince  the  bladder,  as  well  as  the 
kidneys,  has  its  nerves  partly  from  the 
eighth  pair  and  intercoflals  ? — Wliy  does 
an  irritation  of  the  nofe  occafion  fneez- 
ing  only,  and  not  coughing,  vomiting, 
purging,    or  the   hiccup  ?  —  Why   does 
not  a  blifler,  applied  from  the  ear  to  the 
top  of  the  fhoulder,  bring  on  a  convul- 
five  motion,    or  Ibme  other  affecflion  of 
the  diaphragm,  flnce  the  connexion  of 
the  phrenic  nerves  with  the  2d  and  3d 
cervical  pairs  is  much  greater,   and  lefs 
remote    than   with    the   nerves    of  the 

nofe  *  ? 

If 

*  The  pain  between  the  vertebra  of  the  neck  and  top  of 
the  Ihoulder,  which  fometimes  attends  an  inflammation  of 

the 


46  Of  the   S  Y  M  P  A  T  H  V 

If  the  delirium y  which  generally  at- 
tends an  inflammation  of  the  diaphragm, 
were  owing,  as  has  been  alledged,  to  the 
remote  connexion  between  the  phrenic, 
and  fifth  pair  of  nerves  which  fends  fi- 
laments to  the  dura  mater  ;  why  flioukl 
not  an  inflammation  of  the  lungs,  flo- 
mach  and  inteflines  be  attended  with 
that  f^^mptom  as  often,  and  in  a  greater 
degree  ;  lince  thefifth  pair  of  nerves  have 
a  more  immediate  connexion  with  the  in- 
tercoftal  than  with  the  phrenic  nerves  ? — > 
Why  does  an  irritation  of  thefphin^lers  of 

the 

the  liver  or  diaphragm,  has  been  afcribed  to  the  connexion 
between  the  phrenic  nerves,  and  the  2d  and  3d  cervical  pairs : 
Bat,  if  this  were  the  cafe,  why  fhould  this  fymptom  be  fo 
rarely  obferved  in  a  paraphrenitis,  as  to  be  omitted  by  moil 
authors  ?  and  why  fhould  not  the  diaphragm  be  difturbed  in 
its  motions,  when  the  zd  and  3d  pairs  of  cervical  nerves  are 
irritated  by  bliflers,  the  extirpation  of  tumours  or  other  cau- 
fes  ?  It  is  net  eafy  to  fay  what  may  be  the  caufc  of  that  pain 
in  the  neck,  and  top  of  the  flioulder,  which  often  attends  a 
hepatitis  ;  but  there  fcems  to  be  good  reafon  to  doubt  of  its 
proceeding  from  any  connexion  between  the  phrenic  and  2d 
and  3d  cervical  nerves.  Some  of  the  older  phyficians  afcrib- 
ed this  fymptom  to  the  weight  of  the  inflamed  and  fwelled 
liver  drawing  downwards,  and  ilretching  the  membranes  that 
line  the  thorax  *. 

•  N.  Pifo  de  cognofcend.  et  cur  and,  morh,  lib.  iii.  cap.  xx'v. 


of  the  Nerves.  47 

the  anus  or  bladder,  occafion  a  continued 
contra^ion  of  the  diaphragm  and  abdo- 
minal mufcles,  rather  than  an  alternate 
motion  of  thole  parts,  as  in  coughing 
and  the  hiccup,  when  either  the  trachea 
or  left  orifice  of  the  flomach  is  irrita- 
ted ? — Since  the  diaphragm  fympathizes 
with  the  nole,  lungs,  titeriiSy  rectum,  and 
bladder,  why  do  not  thefe  parts  lufFer 
equally,  when  that  mufcle  is  inflamed,  or 
otherwife  violently  affected? — If  the  f\^m- 
pathy  between  the  nofe  and  diaphragm, 
be  owing,  not  to  the  olfactory  nerves,  but 
to  a  branch  of  the  fifth  pair  fent  to  the 
nofe,  why  do  not  flernutatories  excite 
convulfive  motions  of  the  mufcles  of  the 
face  (to  which  the  5th  pair  is  diftribu- 
ted)  as  well  as  fpafms  of  the  diaphragm* 
whofe  nerves  can  have  only  a  remote 
connexion  with  the  fifth  pair  by  means 
of  the  intercoflals  *  ?  —  And  wliy  does 

not 

*  When  fneezing  is  ftopt,  by  preffing  with  one's  finger  and 
thumb,  the  nofe  near  the  internal  angle  of  each  eye ; 
this  effeft  is  not  owing,  as  fomc  have  thought,  to  the  prefTure 

made 


48  Of  the  Sympathy 

not  the  great  irritation  of  fome  of  thef 
filaments  of  the  fifth  pair  of  nerves,  in 
the  toothach,  produce  the  convulfive 
motion  of  fneezing  ?  —  If  the  fiux  of 
tears  occafioned  by  grief  or  joy,  were 
owing,  as  Dr.  Willis  alledges,  to  the 
communication  between  the  fifth  pan 
of  nerves  which  ferves  the  lachrymal 
glands,  and  the  inter coftals  winch  are 
diftributed  to  the  pracordia  * ;  why  do 
not  thofe  affeftions  of  the  mind  produce 
an  increafed  excretion  of  the  falival  as 
well  as  lachrymal  juice  ?  —  If  the  diftur- 
bance  of  the  motion  of  the  heart,  from 
certain  founds,  were  owing,  as  Vieujjhts 
imagines,  to  the  feventh  and  eighth  pair 
of  nerves  being  partly  compofed  of  me- 
dullary fibres,  derived  from  a  particular 

fafciculiis 

made  on  the  nerves  lent  to  the  nofe  from  the  ophthalmic 
branch  of  the  fifth  pair  j  for  fneezing  may  be  flopt,  almoft 
as  readily,  by  preffing  hard  with  one's  fingers  on  the  fore- 
head. In  both  cafes,  fneezing  is  prevented  in  the  fame 
manner,  nji-z,.  by  the  uneafy  fenfation  occafioned  by  ftrong- 
\y  pre/Ting  on  the  brow  or  nofe. 

*  Anatom.  cerebri,  edit,  in  410.  p.  288- 


of  the  Nerves.  49 

fafcictihis  ariiing  from  the  cerehdhim  %  why 
ihould  not  the  mulcles,  which  are  fup- 
piied  with  nerves  from  the  fixth  pair  and 
the  portio  dura  of  the  feventh,  be  equally 
affefted  ;  lince  their  connexion,  at  their 
origin,    with  the  portio  mollis  is  not  lefs 
than  that  of  the  eightli  pair  f  ?  Or  why, 
in  violent  palpitations  of  the  heart,  are 
not  the  auditory  nerves  at  all  alfecled? 
The  truth  is,  the  changes  in  the  motion 
of  the  heart  occalioned  by  external  ob- 
jects, ailing  either  on  the  organs  of  iight, 
or  hearing,    are  not  ov/ing  to  any  com- 
munication of  then*  nerves  with  thole  of 
the  heart,   but  to  the  impreilions  made 
on  the  fenforiiim  commune^  and  the  affecti- 
ons of  the  mind  excited  thereby  %. — If 
the  fympathy  between  the  different  parts 
be  owing  to  their  nerves  being  derived 
from  the  fame  trunk,  w^hy   is  there  not 
the  fame  confcnt  between  theleveral  muf- 
cles  of  the  foot,  of  the  leg,  and  of  the 
D  thigh, 

*  Neurograph.   lib.  iii.  cap.  4. 
f  Id.    lib.  i.  cap.  1 2. 
X  See  belcv/,  No.  17. 


50  0/   //;^    S  Y  M  P  A  T  H  Y 

thigh,  as  between  the  kidneys  and  the 
flomach,  or  between  the  nofe  and  the  dia- 
phragm ? — Lallly,  if  an  irritation  of  the  a- 
limentary  canal  in  hyfteric  women,  fome- 
times  produces  convulfions  of  the  legs, 
by  reafonof  the  communication  between 
the  intercoflals  and  the  two  lafl  lumbar 
nerves  ;  why  are  not  the  fiomach  and 
bowels  feized  with  Ipalins  or  convulfive 
motions  from  the  violent  pain  of  the 
gout  in  the  knees,  ancles,  or  feet?  Thefe 
queftions,  I  doubt,  will  fcarce  admit  of 
a  fatisfatloiy  anfxver,  upon  the  principle 
of  fympathy  depending  on  the  commu- 
nication, or  connexion  of  nerves. 

15.  If,  therefore,  the  various  inftan- 
ces  of  fympathy  cannot  be  accounted  for, 
from  any  union  or  aiiajiomofis  of  the 
nerves  in  tlieir  way  from  the  brain  to 
the  leveral  organs ;  and  if  there  are  ma- 
ny remarkable  inflances  of  confent  be- 
tween parts  whofe  nerves  have  no  con- 
nexion at  all ;  it  follows,  that  all  fympa- 

tliy 


of  tht  Nerves,  51 

thy  mud  be  referred  to  the  brain  itlelf 
and  fpinal  marrow,  the  fource  of  all  the 
nerves. 

But  for  a  more  dire<ft  proof  of  tliis, 
^ve  may  obferve,  that  the  confent  of  the 
ieveral  parts  hiflantly  ceafes,  when  their 
communication  with  the  origin  of  the 
nerves  is  interrupted.  Thus,  tho'  the 
mufcular  coat  of  the  ftomach,  in  an  a- 
nimal  newly  dead,  is  excited  into  con- 
traftion  by  irritation,  yet  the  diaphragm 
is  noways  affected  by  this  Jiimuhis.  In 
like  manner,  when  any  of  the  mufcles 
of  the  legs  of  a  frog  are  pricked,  moft 
of  the  mufcles  of  the  legs  and  thighs 
contraft,  even  after  cutting  off  its  head, 
if  the  fpinal  marrow  be  left  entire  ;  but 
when  that  is  deftroyed,  altho'  the  fibres 
of  the  llimulated  mufcle  are  alFed:ed 
with  a  weak  tremulous  motion,  yet  the 
neighbouring  mufcles  remain  wholly  at 
reft. 

Further,   the  effects  of  pain,    and 

of  fear  and  other  paffions,  in  preventing 

D  2  feveral 


52  Of  the   Symv  AT  H  Y 

'feveral    fympathetic  motions,    fecm    to 
fhew,  that  the  caiile  of  that  confent  which 
obtains  between  the  parts  of  animals,  is 
to  be  referred  to  the  origin  of  the  nerves : 
And,  fince  certain  aifecl:ions  of  the  mind 
excited  by  the  action  of  external  objefts 
on  the  organs  of  fenfe,  produce  extra- 
ordinary  motions   and  other  effedls   in 
the  body,  merely  by  affecting  the  brain; 
why  may  not  imprellions  made  on  the 
nerves  in  other  parts,  produce  likewile, 
through  the  intervention  of  the  brain, 
various  motions  and  other  effedls  in  di- 
flant  parts  of  the  body  ?   The  analogy  is 
obvious. 

Lastly,  Notwithftanding  the  man)/ 
lympathetic   motions,    which    are  daily 
obferved,   by  Phyficians,   to   arife   from 
an  irritation  of  the  nerves  in  diifereht 
parts  of  the  body;  yet,  when  the  nerve 
going  to  any  mufcle  is  irritated,    there 
is  no  motion  excited  in  any  part,   except 
in  the  mufcle  to  which  it  is  diftributed  *. 
Does  it  not  hence  appear  highly  proba- 
ble, 

*  Memoire  fur  la  nature  fenfible  et  irritable,  tovi.  i.  p.  237, 


of  the   Nerves.  53 

ble,  that  the  various  iympathetic  moti- 
ons of  animals  produced  by  ii'ritation, 
whether  in  a  found  or  morbid  ftate,  are 
owing,  not  to  any  union  or  connexion 
of  their  nerves,  but  to  particular  fenfa- 
tions  excited  in  certain  organs,  and 
thence  communicated  to  the  brain  or 
fpinal  marrow  ?  For,  if  this  were  not 
the  cafe,  why  fliould  not  the  diaphragm, 
for  example,  be  convulfed,  by  irritating 
the  nerves  that  go  to  the  bladder  and 
intefiinum  reduniy  as  well  as  when  thefe 
parts  themfelvcs  are  affected  by  an  unuflial 
Jimuluj  ? 

If  the  fympathies  obferved  betv/een 
the  different  parts  of  the  body  be  owing 
to  particular  fenfations  excited  in  them, 
and  thence  communicated  to  the  brain ; 
we  may  eafily  fee  why  an  irritation  of 
the  intejliniim  jejunum  does  not  affect  the 
diaphragm  fo  much  as  an  irritation  of 
the  reBimi  ;  for,  tho*  the  jejiinimi  is  not 
lefs  feniible  than  the  rectum,  and  the 
nerves  of  both  have   the   fame  remote 

connexion 


54  0/  the  Sympathy 

connexion  with  the  nerves  of  the  dia- 
phragm ;   yet  the  fenfations  excited  by 
the  fame  fthuidi  ad:ing  oi>  the  jejimmn  and 
return  are  very  different,  and  therefore 
mufl  affect  the  brain  or  common  fenjori' 
wn   differently.  —  An    irritation  of  the 
nerves  of  the  face  does  not  produce  any 
fuch  convulfive  motion   of  the  mufcles 
of  relj^iration  as  happens  in  '  fneezing, 
becaule  it  does  not  occaiion  that  kind  of 
fenfation    v/hich   is    excited   by  fiimtili 
appUed     to    the     nofe :     And    the   dia- 
phragm, wliich  is  brought  into  a  conti- 
nued contraction  when  the  extremity  of 
the  rectum  or  neck  of  the  bladder  is  pain- 
fully affected,  is  agitated  with  alternate 
convulfions,  when  the  left  orifice  of  the 
ffomach  is  irritated,  becaule  very  diffe- 
rent fenfations   are  excited  by  an  irrita- 
on  of  thole  parts. 

Further,  when  the  meatus  audi  tor  ius 
is  irritated,  by  introducing  into  it  a  fea- 
ther, or  any  fuch  flibftance  ;  an  incli- 
nation to  cough  is  often  excited,  efpeci- 

allv 


(f  the  Nerves.  ^^ 

ally  if  tli€  membrane  of  the  trachea  has 
been  rendered  more  fenfible  than  uiual 
by  catchhig  cold  ;   but,    when  the   mea- 
JUS  miditoriiu  is  violently  pained,   in  con- 
lequence  of  an  inflammation  in  it,   no 
coughing  is  occafioned :    From  which  it 
follows,  that  the  fympathy  between  that 
meatus  and  the  organs  of  refplration  in 
the  former  cafe,  cannot  be  owing  to  any 
connexion  between  their  nerves,  or  m- 
deed  to  any  mechanical  caufe,  but  pro- 
ceeds from  a  -particular  feeling,  and  mufl 
be  referred  to  the  fenforium  commune^ — In 
like  manner,   neither  an  acrid  injedlion 
of  a  folutlon  of  the  corrofive  iliblimate 
in  water,    nor  the  introduction  of  a  ca- 
theter into  the  urethra^    occalions  any  al- 
ternate convulflve  motions  of  the  mufculi 
accelerator  es  urin£  ;  altho'  the  J  emeu,  which 
ftimulates  the  nerves  of  the  urethra  much 
more  gently,  produces  this  eife^l.    Lafl- 
ly,    on  this  head,  altho'  when  the  fides 
or  folcs  of  the  feet  arc  tickled,  the  bo- 
dy is  often  thrown  into  convulfive  mo- 
tions ; 


5(i  Of  the   Sympathy 

tions  ;  yet  nothing  of  this  kind  happens 
when  thefe  parts  are  either  inflamed  or 
wounded  ;  from  which  it  evidently  fol- 
lows, that  thofe  motions  are  occafioned 
by  the  particular  fenfation  excited  by  the 
tickling,  and  do  not  proceed  from  any 
lympathy,  which  the  nerves  of  the  fides 
and  foles  have  v/ith  thofe  of  the  other 
parts  of  the  body,  in  confequence  of 
any  connexion  betv»^een  them, 

I  6.  But  altho',  from  what  has  been 
faid,  it  may  appear  probable,  that  all 
nervous  conjhit  proceeds  from  the  brain ; 
yet  we  cannot  pretend,  from  this  prin- 
ciple, to  account,  in  a  fatisfacfory  man- 
ner, for  all  the  various  imlances  o^  fjm- 
path"^  obfervable  in  the  bodies  of  animals, 
fince  many  of  them  may  depend  on  fuch 
a  flate  of  the  brain,  and  other  parts,  as 
cannot  be  the  objecl:  of  our  fenfes  *. 

The 

*  If  it  fhould  be  obieaed,  that  it  is  as  difficult  to  ac- 
toa.it  for  a  fvmpathy  between  the  nerves  at  their  origin  in 
l\\t  brain,  as  in  their  cour.e  to  the  feveral  partj,  where  they 
happen  to  be  connefled ;  I  anfwer,  that  the  purpofe  of  thefe 
obfervations  J5  not  to  explain  how  the  diilcrent  pnrts  of  the 

body 


of  the  'Nek VES.  57 

The  fympathy  between  every  indivi- 
dual nerve  and  the  whole  fyftem  *,  will 
be  readily  allowed  to  be  owing  to  the 
mediation  of  the  brain,  and  not  to  any 
connexion  or  communication  among  the 
nerves  proceeding  from  it :  I  fhall,  how- 
ever, mention  one  experiment  as  the 
moft  dccifive  of  this  queflion. 

A  SOLUTION  of  opium  y  applied  to  the 
abdominal    mulcles    of   a    frog,    whole 

brain 

body  can  be  endued,  by  means  of  the  nerves,  either  with 
a  fentient  or  a  fympathetic  power ;  but,  to  endeavour  to 
trace  the  fympathy  of  the  nerves  to  its  true  fource,  which 
I  take  to  be  the  brain  and  fpinal  marrow.  It  would  be  in 
vain  to  inquire  further  into  this  matter,  unlefs  we  knew  the 
minute  ftrufture  and  connexions  of  the  feveral  parts  of  the 
brain,  and  were  better  acquainted  with  the  laws  of  anion  be- 
tween the  body  and  foul,  to  whofe  fentient  power  the  fym- 
pathy of  the  nerves,  at  their  origin,  muft  be  at  laft  refer- 
red :  For,  if  con/ent  iupvoks  feeling  (12.),  and  if  feeling 
cannot,  any  more  than  intelligence,  be  a  property  of  ^:atfer 
however  modified;  it  muft  follow,  tnat  Jympathy  depends 
upon  a  principle  that  is  not  mechanical ;  and  that,  to  fup- 
pofe  it  may  be  owing  folely  to  the  particular  fituation,  ar- 
rangement, or  connexion  of  the  medullary  fibres  of  the 
brain,  or  to  the  union  of  the  nerves  proceeding  from  it,  is 
as  unreafonable,  as  to  imagine  that  thought  may  be  the 
rcfult  of  a  motion  among  the  particles  of  the  animal  fpi- 
fits,  or  other  fubtile  matter  in  the  brain. 
*  See  No.  10.  above. 


58  Of  the  Sympathy 

braiii  and  Ipinal  marrow  had  been  de- 
ftroyed,  did  not  itop  the  motion  of  the 
heart  near  fo  foon,  as  it  would  have 
done,  if  tb.e  brain  and  fpinal  marrow 
had  been  entire  *.  A  clear  proof,  tirat 
the  power  of  opiimi,  to  deftroy  the  moti- 
on of  thofe  parts  which  it  does  not 
touch,  is  owing  folely  to  the  mediation 
of  the  brain  and  ipinal  marrow,  and  not 
to  any  other  communication  among  the 
nerves. 

'Tis  true,  when  a  frog  is  deprived  of 
the  brain  and  fpinal  marrow,  upon  ap- 
plying a  folution  of  opium  to  the  abdomi- 
nal mufcles,  its  heart  will  ccaie  from  mo- 
tion fomevvhat  fooner  than  it  would  o- 
therways  do  ;  but  this  effect  is  not  to  be 
afcribed  to  the  action  of  the  opmm  on  the 
nerves  which  it  touches,  but  to  fome  of 
its  finer  parts  being  taken  up  by  the  ab- 
forbent  veins  f?    ^'^'^^  carried   with  the 

blood  to  the  heart. 

That 

*  See  Euinburgh  Phyfical  Effays,  vol.  ii.  p.  283  —  288. 
and  p.  303. 

t  Ibid.  p.  304,  and  505.  and  Phyfiologlcai  Eflays,  edir. 
ii.  p    ■J.o:. 


of  the  Nerves,  59 

That  life  and  vigour,  wliich  is,   al- 
moft  inflantaneoiifly,   communicated  to 
the  whole  body,  by  volatile  fpirits  appli- 
ed to  the  nofe,  or  cordial  medicines  recei- 
ved into  the  ftomach,    are,   like  the  ef- 
fects of  opium,  to  be  referred  to  fome  fti^ 
mulus  or  imprefllon  communicated  to  the 
brain  by  the  nerves  of  the  nofe  and  fto- 
mach.     A  dram  of  brandy  ad:3   in  the 
fame  manner,  when  it  fettles  a  fliaking 
of  the  hands :   and  as  thofe  epileptic  fits, 
which  are  occafioned  by  fome  extraordi- 
nary irritation  of  the  nerves  of  the  arms, 
legs,    or  toes,    do  not  begin  till  after  a 
certain   fenfation   has  been  propagated 
from  the  part  irritated  to  the  head;  we 
may  fafely  conclude,    that  thefe  fympa- 
thetic  motions  proceed  from  the  brain^ 
and  not  from  any  connexion  which  the 
nerves  of  the  parts  aifecled  can  have,  by 
means  of  the  intercoftals,  with  the  other 
nerves  of  the  body  *.      Nor  is  it  more 

furprifing, 

*  Doctor  Hilaiy  has  remarked,  in  the  cclica  plSlotium,  that 
jyben  the  pain  in  the  bowels  has  continued  long,  and  at  laft 

begins 


6o  Of   the     S  Y  xM  P  A  T  H  Y 

flirprifing,  that  an  uncommon  irritation 
of  any  feniible  part,  fiiould,  efpecially  in 
thoie  of  a  delicate  frame,  produce  con- 
vulfive  motions  of  almoft  the  whole  bo- 
dy, tlii'o'  the  intervention  of  the  brain, 
than  that  opium  applied  to  the  nerves  of 
die  flomach,  inteftines,  or  abdominal 
niulcles,  lliould  quickly  deitroy  the  pow- 
ers of  feeling  and  motion,  throughout 
the  whole  nervous  fyftem  *. 

17.  Nothing  makes  more  fudden, 
or  more  furpriiing  changes  in  the  body, 
than  the  feveral  pallions  of  the  mind. 
Theie,  howxver,  acl  folely  by  the  medi- 
ation of  the  brain,  and,  in  a  Itrong  light, 

Oiew 

begins  to  abate,  a  pain  in  the  llioulder  points  and  adjoin- 
ing mufcles,  conies  on,  with  an  unufual  fenfation  and 
tingling  along  the  fpinal  marrow,  that  foon  extends  it- 
felf  from  thence  to  the  nerves  of  the  arms  and  legs ;  which 
members  firft  become  weak,  and  afterwards  quite  paralytic. 
Fid.  Hita'j  on  the  epidemical  difeafes  of  Barbadoes, 
p.  1S4,  and  185.  Does  not  this  obfervation  feera  to  fhew, 
that  the  paify  of  the  extremities,  occafioned  by  the  colica 
pi^onnm,  is  not  owing  to  any  communication  between  the 
nerves  of  the  bowels  and  of  thofe  parts,  but  proceeds  from 
the  fpinal  marrow,  which  is  firfl:  afFefled  ? 

*  Fid.  Edinburgh  Phyfical  EfTays,  vol.  ii.  p.  303. 


of  the  Nerves.  6r 

iliew  its   fympathy  with  every  part    of 
the  fyftem. 

Such  is  the  conftitution  of  the  ani- 
mal frame,  that  certain  ideas  or  affec- 
tions excited  in  the  mind,  are  ahvays  ac- 
companied with  correlponding  motions 
or  feehngs  in  the  body  ;  and  thefe  are 
owing  to  fome  change  made  in  the  brain 
and  nerves,  by  the  mind  or  Jhitient  prin- 
ciple^: but  what  that  change  is,  or  how 
it  produces  thofe  effects,  we  know  not : 
as  httle  can  we  tell,  why  fliame  fliould 
raife  a  heat  and  rednefs  in  the  face, 
while  fear  is  attended  with  a  palenefs. 
Thefe  and  many  other  effects  of  the  dif- 
ferent paffions  miifl  be  referred  to  the 
original  conftitution  of  our  frame,  or 
the  laws  of  union  between  the  foul  and 
body. 

But  although,   in  thefe  matters,    we 
muft  confefs  our  ignorance,   yet,    from 

what 

*  By  \\ie/ent'.ent  principle,  I  underftand  the  mind  or  foul 
in  man,  and  that  principle  in  brutes  which  refembles  it. 
Pld.  An  EiTay  on  the  vital  and  other  involuntary  moti- 
ons, edit.  ii.  p.  307 323. 


6l  Of   the     S  Y  xM  P  A  T  H  Y 

what  we  certainly  know  of  die  action  of 
the  nerves,  we  can  ealily  fee,  that  a 
change  in  them  may  occafion  many  of 
thofe  effects  which  are  produced  by  the 
paffions. 

As  the  force  of  the  heart,  and  the  re- 
gularity with  which  it  contra(^ls,  de- 
pend, in  a  great  meaiiu-e,  on  the  flate 
of  its  nerves,  fo  does  the  action  of  the 
arterial  fyllem,  in  carrying  on  the  cir- 
culation; and  particularly  thofe  alter- 
nate contractions,  with  which  the  mi- 
nuter veflels  are  continually  agitated, 
and  to  which  the  motion  of  the  fluids 
in  them  is,  in  a  great  meailire,  owing*. 

The 

*  It  has  been  (hewn,  from  a  variety  of  facls,  as  well  as 
from  analogy,  (Phyfiological  Efiays,  edit.  ii.  p.  35.  &c.)  that 
the  very  fmall  veflels,  to  which  the  direft  force  of  the  heart 
does  not  feem  to  reach,  are  endued  with  a  power  or  mo- 
tion, excited  by  the  Jhmulus  of  the  fluids,  as  they  pafs  a- 
long ;  and  that  thefe  vibratory  or  ofcillatory  motions  of 
thofe  veflels  are  much  increafed,  when  they  are  more  than 
ordinarily  irritated,  or  when,  throjgh  fl;rong  pafiions  or 
.  other  caufes,  the  nerves  are  greatly  afFedled. 

The  fpeedy  inflammation  of  the  eyes,  by  acrid  fubftances, 
the  inflammation  of  the  fiiin  by  blifters  and  finapifms,  and 
th^  increafed  fecretion  from  the  nofe  and  falivary  glands, 

when 


of  the  Nerves.  6.^ 

The  other  muicles  of  the  body  are 
often,  by  an  uncommon  exertion  of  the 
nervous  power,  alfed:ed  either  with  al- 
ternate convullive  motions,  or  a  conti- 
nued fpafm.  It  is  reafonable,  therefore, 
to  think,  that  the  heart  and  vafcular  fy- 
ftem  may  fulfer  in  the  fame  manner ;  and 
that,  when  the  influence  of  the  nerves 
is  much  weakened,  or  in  fome  meafure 
flifpended,  the  veilels  Avill  be  relaxed, 
the  circulation  will  become  languid,  and 
an  univerfal  debility  ^^'ill  eniiie. 

The  increafed  force  of  the  heart,  and 
fometimes  indeed  of  the  whole  mufcles 
of  the  body,  from  great  anger  or  rage,  is 
to  be  afcribed  to  a  llronger  exertion  of 
the  nervous  power  ;  while  the  trembling 

and 

when  ftimulating  fubllances  are  taken  into  the  mouth,  or 
applied  to  the  noftrils,  can  only  be  accounted  for,  from  an 
increafed  motion  of  the  fmall  vefiels  of  thofe  parts.  And 
that  the  circulation  of  the  fluids,  in  the  very  fmall  veffels, 
depends,,  greatly  on  fome  influence  communicatrd  to  them 
by  the  nerves,  appears  from  Dr.  Niick's  having  obfcrved  the 
fecretion  by  the  glands  to  be  much  diminifhed,  or  entirely 
llopt,  after  their  nerves  were  obftrufted  or  comprefTed  *. 
*  Ademgraph,  {uriof.  p.  16. 


64  ^f  t^^^  Sympathy 

and  debility  produced  by  fear,  arife  from 
a  contraiy  caufe. 

The  palpitation  of  the  heai't  from 
terror,  feems  to  proceed  from  the  blood 
returning  to  it,  in  too  great  a  quantity, 
in  confequence  of  a  Hidden  fpafm  or 
contradlion  of  the  veins.  It  is  aUo,  in 
part,  occalioned  by  the  heart  being  ren- 
dered more  irritable,  or  being  otherwile 
difturbed  by  the  violent  agitation  of  the 
nervous  fyflem. 

The  rcdnefs  and  glow  of  the  face 
from  a  ^gw^q  of  fliame,  are  mod  proba- 
bly owing  to  an  increafed  motion  of  the 
fmall  arteries  of  that  part ;  for  the  florid 
colour  and  Hidden  warmth,  feem  to  be 
more  the  confequences  of  a  quicker  mo- 
tion of  the  blood  in  thefe  veflels,  than 
a  flagnation  of  it  from  any  compreilion 
or  fpafm  of  the  veins,  which  would  pro- 
duce but  a  livid  rednefs  and  lefs  heat. 
Belides,  we  know,  that  a  greater  degree 
of  rednefs  is,  inftantly,  brought  on  the 
eyes,  and,  in  a  fhort  time,  on  the  fkin, 

by 


ef  the    Nerves.  65 

by  an  increafed  motion  of  their  fmall 
velFels,  upon  the  apphcation  of  acrid 
fubilances  to  them. 

Some  grow  pale  upon  anger,  which 
effect  may  be  owing  to  a  fpafm,  or  con- 
tinued contraction  of  the  fmall  arteries 
of  the  face,  by  which  the  motion  of  the 
blood  in  them  will  be  retarded. 

The  palenefs  from  fear  may  arife 
from  a  different  caufe,  "oiz,  a  deficiency 
of  the  nervous  poiucr  :  Hence,  tho'  the 
fmall  vefTels  are  not  affed:ed  with  any 
fpafm,  as  in  anger ;  yet  they  are,  in  a 
great  meafure,  deprived  of  their  alter- 
nate contractions,  to  which  the  motion 
of  the  blood  in  them  is  principally  ow- 
ing. But  the  more  than  ufual  flow  of 
the  blood  towai'ds  the  heart,  occafion- 
ed  by  terror,  fcems  to  fliev/,  that  the 
veins,  at  leaft,  are  fuddenly  contracted. 

The  diminution  of  perfpiration  at- 
tending fuch  paifions  as  affed:  us  with 
fadnefs,  may  be  owing  to  the  impaired 
force   of  the  heart   and    arteries  :    and 

E  the 


66  Of  ihe  Sympathy 

the  diarrhtsa  from  fear,  may  be  a  confe- 
quence  of  obflrucled  perlpiration,  or  of 
that  debility  and  relaxation,  which  fear, 
or  grief,  is  obferved  to  bring  on  the  a- 
limentary  canal. 

Th  e  increafed  fecretion  of  tears  from 
gi'ief,  and  the  great  flux  of  limpid  urine, 
which  is  often  occafioned  by  fear  or 
A^exation,  are  owing  to  an  increafed  mo- 
tion, excited  by  thefe  pailions,  in  the 
fmall  arteries  and  excretory  du6ls  of  the 
lachrymal  glands  and  kidneys. 

The  dull  look  of  the  eyes  in  grief, 
and  their  lively  appearance  from  joy, 
depend  upon  a  diminution  or  increafe 
of  the  motion  of  the  fluids  through  the 
fmall  velTels  of  that  organ,  particulai'ly 
of  the  cornea^  in  confequence  of  their  vi- 
bratory motions  being  lefTened  or  aug- 
mented, by  the  change  which  thofe  dif- 
ferent palfions  produce  in  their  nerves. 
It  ^vould  be  eafy,  upon  the  fame 
principles,  to  account  for  various  other 
eifed;s  produced  by  the  paffions  ;    but 

what 


of  the   Nerves.  67 

what  is  already  faid,  will  be  fufficieiit 
for  fliewins:  in  what  manner  we  can  rea- 
fon  upon  this  fubjed;. 

18.  Because  the  nerves  are  obfer- 
ved,  in  many  parts  of  the  body,  to  fur- 
round  the  arteries  and  veins  like  fmall 
cords  ;  it  has  been  thought,  that  the 
fudden  changes  in  the  motion  of  the 
fluids  made  by  the  palfions,  are  owing 
to  theie  velTels  being  contracted  by  fuch 
ligatures.  But  this  opinion,  tho'  flip- 
ported  by  authors  of  great  character  *, 
will,  upon  a  further  inquiry,  appear  in- 
confiflent  with  what  we  know  for  cer- 
tain of  the  nature  and  ufe  of  the  nerves. 

Every  part  endowed  with  a  power 
of  contraction,  owes  that  adlion  either 
to  its  mufcular  flru6ture,  or  to  its  ela- 
flicity ;  but  as  the  nerves  are  in  no  fenfe 
mufcular,  fo  they  have  been  proved  to 
be  among  the  leafl  elaflic  parts  of  the 
body.  Further,  in  a  natural  ftate,  the 
nerves  lie  pretty  loofe  in  that  cellular 

E  2  fubflance 

t 

•  Willist  VieuJJins,  &c. 


6^  Of  the     S  Y  xM  P  A  T  H  Y 

fubftance  which  fvirrounds  the  arteries^, 
and  ai'e  never  on  the  ftretch  :  and,  upon 
making  the  experiment,  we  fhall  find, 
that  the  trunks  of  thofe  nervous  branch- 
es, that  encompafs  the  large  arteries  and 
veins,  muft  be  coniiderably  pulled  be- 
fore thefe  veffels  can  be  feniibly  con- 
trat1:ed.  There  is  no  example  of  any 
motion  being  performed  by  a  contrac- 
tion of  the  nerves,  whofe  action  does 
not  confifl  in  pulling,  or  in  growing 
more  tenfe  at  one  time  than  another, 
but  in  fupplying  the  mufcular  fibres 
with  that  influence  or  power,  which  leems 
to  be  immediately  necefTary  for  their 
contra^lion. 

Last  LY,  it  appears  from  experiments, 
that  the  nerves  are  utterly  incapable  of 
any  fiich  contracflion  as  is  here  iiippo- 
fed.  Nothing  occafions  a  more  fudden 
or  ftronger  exertion  of  the  nervous 
power,  than  an  irritation  of  the  brain, 
fpinal  marrow,  or  nerves  ;  as  appears 
from  the    violent   convulfions    in   the 

mulcles 


of  r/;^  Nerves.  6^ 

mufcles  and  mufcular  organs,  when  tliofe 
parts  are  injured  :  but,  on  fuch  occafl- 
ons,  it  has  never  been  obferved,  that 
the  nerves  themfelves  became  iliorter, 
or  underwent  any  feniible  change.  Nay, 
the  ilhiftrious  M.  de  Halkr  has,  after  ma- 
ny experiments,  jullly  concluded,  that 
the  nerves  are  not  endowed  with  irrita- 
bility, or  a  power  of  contradlion  when 
ftimulated  *. 

But,  fuppofing  the  nervous  filaments 
could,  like  cords,  fcraiten  the  blood- 
vellels,  as  feveral  writers  have  imagined ; 
yet,  upon  refleclion,  we  fliall  be  con- 
vinced, that  the  changes  produced  in 
the  body  by  the  feveral  paffions,  cannot 
be  explained  upon  that  principle. 

Thus  the  rednefs  and  glow  of  the 
face  attending  a  confcioufnefs  of  fliame, 

cannot 

*  It  may  be  proper  here  to  take  notice,  that,  altho'  M, 
de  Halkr  had  embraced  the  doftrine  of  the  nervous  laquei, 
and  faid  more  in  fupport  of  it  than  any  other  author;  yet  he 
has  candidly  given  up  this  opinion,  upon  finding  it  not  con- 
firmed by  any  of  thofe  numerous  experiments  he  has  made 
on  living  animals.  Vid.  Memoires  fur  la  nature  fenfible  n 
irritable,  torn.  i.  p,  238,  and  Z'^g, 


yo  Of    the    Sy  "SIT  AT  HY 

cannot  be  owing  to  a  conftriclion  of  the 
temporal  or  jugular  veins  by  the  ner-r 
vous  cords  furrounding  them  * ;  for 
this  v/ould  not  raife  a  florid  colour,  but 
a  rednefs  of  a  different  kind,  and  ac- 
companied but  with  little  heat. 

In  like  manner,  a  comprefTion  of  the 
vieins  of  the  penis  by  the  nerves,  will  not 
account  for  its  erection  f,  ^^  hich  is  ow- 
ing more  to  an  increafed  motion  of  the 
blood  in  the  ai*teries,  than  to  any  ob- 
flruction  of  its  veins  t-  Nor  is  it  lefs 
credible,  that  the  fmall  arteries  of  the 
penis  fliould,  in  confequence  of  an  affec- 
tion of  the  mind,  be  agitated  with  an 
uncommon  motion,  than  that  the  fmell, 
fight,  or  even  remembrance  of  grateful 
food,  fhould  affect  the  falivary  veffels  of 
a  hungry  perfon  in  a  fimilar  manner. 

A  CONVULSIVE  contraction  of  the 
plexus  renalis  occafioned  by  fear,    might 

render 

*  Vieujfcjis  Neurogrcph.  lib.  iii.  cap.  \v. 
t  Du'verncy  in  aSI.  Petropol.   torn.  ii.   p.  379    383.  384. 
X  See  an  Eflay  on  the  vital  motion?,  \  vi.  and  the  cele-? 
bratcd  Albir.uis  annotationes  Academiccti  lib,  ii.  cap.  xviii. 


of  the  Nerves.  71 

render  the  urine  limpid  by  flraltening 
the  fecretory  vefTels  of  the  kidneys ;  but, 
upon  the  lame  principle,  it  ought  alio 
to  leflen  its  quantity,  contrary  to  what 
happens. 

I  SHALL  only  add,  that  it  may  ap- 
pear from  what  has  been  faid,  that  fuch 
exprellions  as  the  increafed  motions,  con- 
viilfiomy  or  Jpaf?nodic  coiitradions  of  the 
nerves  are  all  improper,  altho'  they  have 
been  frequently  ufed  by  many  learned 
writers. 

19.  There  are  many  of  the  mod 
remarkable  fympathetic  motions,  both 
in  a  found  and  clifeafed  flate,  in  which 
we  can  plainly  perceive  a  wife  inten- 
tion. Thus,  the  contraction  of  the  pu- 
pil when  light  offends  the  eyes,  and  of 
the  eye-lids  when  grofler  bodies  threat- 
en to  hurt  them ; — The  vomitmg,  trom 
a  ftone  in  the  kidneys  and  m^eters; — 
The  coughing,  occalioned  by  an  u'rita- 
tion  of  the  meatus  auditor  his  \ — The  conti- 
nued contrailion  of  the  abdominal  muf- 

cles 


72  Of  the  Sympathy 

clc3  and  diaphragm  in  a  tenefmuSy  a 
ftranguns  and  during  the  pains  in  la- 
bour;— The  alternate  contraftions  of 
the  fame  mufcles  in  fneezing,  cough- 
ing, and  in  the  liiccup  ; —  The  increaf- 
ed  motion  of  the  organs  of  relpiration 
in  the  fit  of  an  afthma; — The  copious 
fecretion  of  tears  and  the  Jailva,  when 
Simulating  fubftances  ai'e  applied  to 
the  eyes,  or  taken  into  the  mouth  ; 
and  the  uncommon  flux  of  humours  to 
every  part  that  is  irritated. — All  thele, 
and  man)'  more,  are  the  efforts  of  na- 
ture to  free  the  body  of  fomething  hurt- 
ful ;  and  are  lb  many  mftances  of  that 
principle  of  felf-prefervation  fo  confpi- 
cuous  in  all  animals.  Thele  motions, 
therefore,  cannot,  in  my  opinion,  be  re-r 
ferred  to  any  connexion  or  communi- 
cation among  the  nerves,  but  to  the 
brain  itfelf,  and  to  that  fentient  being 
which  animates  our  whole  frame,  and 
which  endeavours,  at  all  times,  to  free 

the 


of  the  Nerves.  73 

the  body  of  whatever  occaflons  pain  or 
uneaiinefs. 

Indeed,  when  thele  efforts  are  unable 
to  expel  the  offending  caitfe,  as  in  great 
inflammations  of  the  ftomach,  or  when 
a  large  flone  is  lodged  in  the  kidneys 
or  bladder,  they  often  become  hurtful, 
and  increafe  the  pain  they  were  intend- 
ed to  remove.  Nay,  as  m  many  other 
inflances,  the  befl  things  may,  by  ex- 
cefs,  become  the  worft :  fo  this  endea- 
voiu*  to  free  the  body,  or  any  of  its 
parts,  from  what  is  noxious,  is  fbme- 
times  fo  flrong  and  impetuous,  as  to 
have  fatal  confequences.  But,  in  gene- 
ral, this  principle  of  prefervation  is 
highly  ufeful^  fince  without  it  we  fliould 
often  cherifli,  within  oiu*  bodies,  fuch 
caufes  as  would  iboner  or  later  end  ir^ 
pur  ruin. 

Nor  can  we  confider  the  mind  as 
^fting  either  ignorantly  or  perverfely, 
when  it  fometim^s  excites  fuch  motions 
in  the  body   as  increafe   its  own  pain, 

and, 


74  Q/'  ^^'^  Sympathy 

and,  in  the  end,  prove  more  hurtful 
than  beneficial ;  for  thefe  motions  do 
not  proceed,  as  the  followers  of  Stahl 
have  imagined,  from  any  rational  views 
in  the  mind,  or  a  confcioufnefs  that  the 
Avelfare  of  the  body  demands  them,  but 
are  an  immediate  confequence  of  the 
difagi'eeable  perception  which  excites  it 
into  acTion  *. 

20,  There  are  various  inftances  of 
fympathy,  which  feem  to  be  chiefly  oc- 
eaiioned  by  the  vicinity  of  the  parts  f. 

Of 

*  See  this  point  further  illuurated  in  aii  Eflay  on  the  vi- 
lz\  and  other  involuntary   motions  of   animals,    edit.  ii. 

•3*5— 3-1-  an^  3+3 343- 

*  Parts  may  fuffer  fro.n  vicinity,  although   their  nerves 

have  no  particular  fympathy  with  one  another.  Thus, 
pain  caufes  inflammation,  nbt  only  in  the  vefTels  immedi- 
ately affefted,  but  alfo  in  thofe  contiguous  to  them.  Fur- 
ther, any  conliderable  obftru6lion,  though  attended  with 
little  or  no  inflammation,  may,  in  feme  cafes,  occafion 
fympathetic  aircflions  in  the  neighbouring  parts,  by  chan- 
ging the  diftribution  of  the  blood  through  the  veflels  of 
thofe  part?. 

When  one  of  the  fingers  is  inflamed,  in  confequence  of 
a  wound  below  the  nail,  or  feme  acrid  matter  lodged  there; 
the  hand,  and  foraetimes  the  arm,  may  become  fwelled  and 
i;iflamed,  not  only  by  means  of  the  pain,  which  occafions 


a 


of  the  Nerves.  75 

Of  this  kind  is,  perhaps,  the  confent  be- 
tween the  neck  of  the  bladder  and  ex- 
tremity of  the  rediini ;  whence  a  violent 
tcneffmis  and  flrangury  mutually  excite 
each  other.  —  The  vomiting  occafioned 
by  an  inflammation  of  the  liver  ; — The 
pain,  fwelhng,  and  inflam.mation  of  the 
hand  and  arm,  from  2.  paron^jchia  ; — The 
increafed  fenlibility  of  the  retina,  from 
an  inflammation  of  the  conjundiva  or  cor- 
ned',-— The  pain  andfwelling  of  the  face 
from  the  toothach,  and  the  pain  in  the 
ear  from  an  inflammation  of  the  back 
part  of  the  fauces  ; — The  flipprellion  of 
urine  from  an  inflammation  of  the  in- 
teftines  or  mefentery,  or  from  a  fevere 
nephritic  paroxyfm  in  either  kidney; — 
The  lympathy  between  the  larynx  and 
pharynx,  and  feveral  others,  may  be,  in 
a  great  meailire,  owing  to  the  fame 
cauie. 

To 

a  greater  derivation  of  fluids  to  the  vefiels  of  trie  finger  and 
Jiand,  but  alfo  from  a  kind  of  inflammation  being  propaga- 
ted up  the  arm  along  the  coats  of  the  nerves,  which  are  di- 
ftributed  to  the  fingers. 


76  0/*   //;^    Sy  MP  ATH  Y 

To  this  head,  alfo,  may  be  referred, 
thofe  fympathies  which  are  fometimes 
occafioned  by  hard  tumours  prelTing 
upon,  or  irritating  the  nerves  that  are 
contiguous  to  them.  Thus,  a  hard 
{\velling  on  one  fide  of  the  neck,  has 
occafioned  an  uneafy  fenfation  near  the 
end  of  the  radius y  a  Uttle  above  the 
wrifl :  and  the  fwelhng  and  drawing  up 
of  the  teflicle,  from  a  flone  defcending 
tlirough  the  ureter y  is  probably  owing  to 
an  irritation  of  the  nerves  of  the  tefli- 
cle, where  they  run  along  the  pfoas  muf^ 
cle,  over  which  the  ureter  paflcs.  But 
it  may  be  proper  to  obferve,  that  the 
heavinefs  of  the  eyes,  and  flecpinefs  af- 
ter a  full  meal,  drinking  largely  of 
ftrong  liquors,  or  a  dofe  of  opiuniy  which 
have  been  afcribed  to  the  compreffion  of 
the  third  pair  of  nerves,  by  the  diflenfion 
of  a  branch  of  the  carotid  artery,  which 
pafles  over  them  near  then'  origin,  are 
owing  folely  to  the  change  produced  in 
the  nerves  of  the  flomach  ;  whence  the 

fenfibility 


of  the  Nerves.  77 

fenfibility  of  the  whole  iyflem  is  impair- 
ed. 

May  not  the  complaints  of  the  flo- 
mach  and  bowels,  from  a  fuppreffion  of 
the  menfes,  and  foon  after  conception,  be 
owing  not  only  to  a  particular  fympa- 
thy  between  their  nerves,  but  partly  al- 
io to  the  change  made  in  the  quantity 
of  the  blood  thrown  upon  theie  parts, 
by  the  obftru6lion  of  the  uterine  veflels? 
And  does  not  the  fudden  relief,  obtain- 
ed by  a  fmall  evacuation  of  blood  from 
the  hsemorrhoidal  veins,  fhew,  that  ma- 
ny diforders  may  be  either  occafioned, 
or  cured,  by  a  Irnall  change  made  in  the 
diflribution  of  the  blood  to  the  diffe- 
rent parts  of  the  body  ? 

The  pain  in  the  head,  fbmetimes  the 
eonfequence  of  wearing  ftrait  flioes,  is, 
perhaps,  rather  to  be  afcribed  to  a 
greater  determination  of  blood  to  the 
vefTels  of  the  pericranium,  than  to  any 
particular  fympathy  between  the  nerves 
of  that  part  and  the  feet.      And  the  ef- 

fea 


78  Of   the    S  Y  xM  P  A  T  H  Y 

fe6l  of  linapifms  applied  to  the  foles,  in. 
leflening  a  deliriiimy  is  chiefly  owing  to 
the  pain  they  excite;  which,  by  afFed:- 
ing  the  whole  nervous  fyflem,  lelTens 
the  perception  of  that  irritation  in  the 
brain,  or  its  membranes,  which  is  the 
cauie  of  the  delirium:  and  hence  it  is 
that  finapilms,  applied  to  the  hams,  or 
other  feniible  parts,  have  produced  the 
fame  effed:s,  as  when  laid  to  the  feet. 

22.  Lastly,  in  morbid  cafes,  we 
meet  with  a  variety  of  anomalous  fym- 
pathies,  ^\'hich  we  can  neither  explain 
from  the  vicinity  of  the  parts,  the 
connexion  or  communication  between 
their  nerves,  nor  from  that  general  ten- 
dency to  the  welfare  and  prefervation 
of  the  body,  which  is  i^o  obfervable  in 
many  lympathetic  motions,  that  take 
place  in  a  found  as  well  as  morbid  flate. 

Of  this  kind,    are  the  purging  from 
fmelling  to  a  cathartic  medicine  ;  That 
pungent  fenfation  felt  on  the  top  of  the 
left  llioulder-blade,  when  a  pimple  a  lit- 
tle 


of  the  Nerves.  79 

tie  beloAV  the  out  fide  of  the  right  knee 
was  Icratched  *;  That  burning  pain, 
which,  upon  making  water,  has  been  felt 
in  the  foles  of  the  feet  by  a  perfon  affeft- 
ed  with  an  ulcer  in  the  bladder  ;  the 
J'paJ'mns  cyniais  from  a  wound  in  the  foot, 
and  the  locking  of  the  jaws  after  an  am- 
putation. Thus,  Avhat  reafon  can  be  gi- 
ven, why,  fometimes,  after  cutting  off  an 
arm  or  leg,  thole  mufcles  which  raife 
the  lower  jaw  fliould  be  affected  with  a 
fl[3afiii,  rather  than  any  other  mufcles? 
I  fhall  allow,  that  Ibme  fymptom  of  this 
kind  might  be  expected  from  the  irrita- 
tion of  the  nerves  of  the  flump,  or  from 
Ibme  acrid  humour  abforbed  by  the  vef- 
fels  of  the  fore,  and  carried  to  the  brain ; 
but  in  either  cafe,  why  do  the  temporal 
and  mafleter  mufcles  only  fliffer  ? 

I  THINK  it  moft  probable,  that  the  a- 
nomalous  fympathies  above  mentioned, 
and  many  others,   whofe  caufe  appears 
equally  obfcure,    proceed  from  that  ge- 
neral 

*  See  Hale\  Statical  EiTays,  vol.  ii.  p.  6c. 


t 


80  Of  the   Sympathy 

neral  fympathy  which  prevails  tlirough 
the  whole  nervous  fyflem ;  and  which, 
in  certain  cafes,  in  confequence  of  the 
uncommon  weaknefs  or  delicacy  of  a 
particular  organ,  makes  it  fuffer,  altho' 
the  other  parts  of  the  body  are  not  fen- 
Hbly  afFed:ed.  The  following  cafes,  com- 
pared together  will  ferve  to  illuftrate 
this. 

A  MIDDLE  aged  woman,  Avho  had 
fprain'd  her  right  foot  and  ancle,  fome 
weeks  after,  not  only  complained  of  a 
pain  and  flifFnefs  in  thefe  parts,  but  alfb 
felt,  though  in  a  much  lefs  degree,  a  ten- 
fion  and  forenefs  over  her  whole  body. 
—  On  the  other  hand,  a  girl  of  nine 
years,  as  often  as  one  of  her  feet  was 
extended,  fo  as  to  bring  it  nearly  to  a 
right  line  with  the  leg,  and  coniequent- 
ly  greatly  to  flretch  its  ligaments  and 
tendons,  was  inftantly  feized  with  a  moil 
violent  convulfive  cough,  which  conti- 
nued without  intermifTion,  as  long  as 
the  foot  v/as  kept  in  that  pofition. 

In 


of  r/>  Nerves.  8r 

In  the  former  cafe,  it  will  readily  be 
allowed,  that  the  ftifthefs  and  forenefs 
felt  through  the  whole  body,  proceeded 
from  that  general  fympathy  which  ob- 
tains between  all  its  parts  by  the  medi- 
ation of  the  brain,  which>  however, 
would  not  have  produced  hich  an  effecft, 
but  for  the  pecidiar  delicay  of  the  ner- 
vous fyilem  in  that  patient i 

In  the  latter  cafe,  tJie  convulfive 
cough,  occalioned  by  extending  the 
foot,  could  not  proceed  from  any  par- 
ticular fympathy  between  this  part  and 
the  lungs,  in  confequence  of  any 
connodon  or  communication  between 
their  nerves,  llnce  the  nerves  of  many 
other  parts  have  an  equal  or  greater 
connexion  with  thole  which  ferve  the 
feet.  This  convullive  cough,  therefore,- 
mufl  be  afcribed  to  a  peculiar  delicacy 
or  uncommon  fenlibility  of  the  lungs  ; 
whence,  in  confequence  of  that  general 
fympathy  which  prevails  thro'  the  whole 
nervous  fyflem,  they  v/ere  affciled  with 

F  a 


Sz  Of  the  Sympathy 

a  difagreeable  fenfation,  as  often  as  the 
ligaments  and  tendons  of  the  ancle  and 
foot  were  overflretched  ;  which,  how- 
ever, produced  no  uneafinefs  nor  fym- 
pathetic  motion  in  the  other  parts  of  the 
body,  becaufe  they  were  endued  with 
no  inch  morbid  delicacy  or  uncommon 
fenfibility. 

Asa  fiirther  proof  of  this,  I  knew  a 
woman  poffefled  of  a  moft  delicate  fto- 
mach,  who,  when  this  organ  was  more 
than  ufually  indifpofed,  was  apt  to  fall 
a  retching  as  often  as  flie  made  the  ne- 
ceflary  effort  to  pafs  water  ;  and  I  have 
had  fever al  patients  affe(fl:ed,  in  confe- 
quence  of  a  virulent  goiiorrhoca,  with  a 
gleet  and  a  tendernels,  and  Ibme  degree 
of  forenefs  in  the  urethra^  who,  as  often 
as  they  drank  two  or  three  glalles  of 
wine,  immediately  felt  an  uncommon 
uneafinefs  in  that  part.  This  extraor- 
dinary lympathy,  however,  between  the 
ftomach  and  urethra,  ceafed  as  foon  as 
the  latter  became  quite  found. 

Since 


Gf  the  Nerves.  83 

Since  we  oblerve  that  only  thole, 
whofe  nervous  fyflem  is  remarkably  de- 
licate, are  afFcfled  with  general  and 
violent  convulfive  motions  or  i|)afms 
from  the  paffions  of  the  mind,  difor- 
ders  in  the  prirms  i)U^  and  other  cau- 
fes  ;  have  we  not  reafon  to  conclude, 
when,  in  conlequence  of  an  irritation  of 
any  one  part,  an  uncommon  fympathe- 
tic  motion  is  produced  in  a  diilant  or- 
gan, with  which  it  has  lefs  connexion, 
either  by  the  nerves  or  blood-veilels, 
than  with  many  other  parts  which  are 
noways  diiturbed  ;  that  llich  fympathe- 
tic  motion  is  owing  to  a  peculiar  deli- 
cacy or  mobility  of  that  organ  ;  and 
that,  were  the  other  moving  organs  of 
the  body  equally  delicate  and  fenfible, 
univerlal,  or  at  leaft  more  general  con- 
vulfions  or  fpafms  would  have  been  the 
confequence  ? 

But,  fuppollng  we  could  neither  ex- 
plain fatisfa^torily,  nor  even  conje(fl:ure 
with  probability  concerning  the  caufe 
F  2  of 


84  0/  the  Sympathy,  6-^\ 

of  many  uncommon  and  anomalous 
fympathies,  it  would  be  no  more  tharl 
what  happens  to  us  every  day  in  our  in- 
quiries into  the  more  abflrufe  opera- 
tions of  nature.  In  every  part,  even 
of  the  inanimate  world,  we  find  inex- 
plicable difficulties ;  what  wonder  then, 
if,  in  the  human  body,  a  fyftem  fo  cu- 
rious, fo  fubtile  and  compounded,  we 
fliould  meet  with  many  appearances 
wliich  we  cannot  at  all  account  for  ? 
The  farther  we  puili  our  inquiries  into 
nature,  the  more  fhall  Ave  be  convinced 
of  our  ignorance,  and  how  fmall  a  por- 
tion is  known  of  the  works  of  the  Great 
Creator ! 

Scarcely  do  lue  guefs  aright  at  the  things 
that  are  upon  earth,  and  with  labour  do  we 
find  the  things  that  are  before  us  ** 


CHAP. 


*  Wi/dom,  chap.  ix.  fver.  16. 


[     85     ] 


CHAP.      II. 

Of  Nervous,    Hypochondriac, 
and  Hysteric  DifordcrSy  in  general, 

'TpHE  nerves,  like  the  other  parts  of 
the  body  are  liable  to  various  dif- 
eafes,  which  may  arife  from  a  fault  ei- 
ther in  their  coats,  then'  medullary  fub- 
ftance,  or  in  the  brain  and  Ij^inal  mar- 
row, from  which  they  all  proceed. 

The  coats  of  the  nerves  may  be  ob- 
flrufted,  or  inflamed,  comprefTed  by  hard 
fwellings,  or  irritated  by  acrid  humours. 
With  regard  to  their  medullary  fub- 
flance  ;  if  a  lingle  nervous  filament,  ex- 
clufive  of  the  membranes  flirrounding 
it,  be  an  extremely  fmall  canal,  we  may 
conceive  it,  according  to  the  different 
ftatcs  of  the  body,  to  be  endued  with 

different 


86  _      0/  Nervous 

different  degrees  of  fii'mners  or  laxity, 
whence  the  action  of  the  nerves  may 
perhaps  be  conilderably  affected. 

This  nervous  canal  may  likewife  be 
obftrucled,  tho'  fuch  obllrucflion  is  ra- 
ther more  lilcely  to  arife  from  fome  ex- 
ternal caiiie,  than  from  any  fwelling 
in  the  medullary  fubftance  of  which  its 
fides  confifts,  or  from  the  vifcidity  of 
the  fluid  it  contains.  In  the  fmall  ar- 
terial veilels,  obftruclions  may  often 
happen  from  a  fpafm  ;  but  altlio'  the 
nerves  cc^mmunicate  a  power  of  motion 
to  other  parts,  yet  it  does  not  appear  that 
they  themfelves  have  any  motion. 

If  the  medullary  part  of  the  nerves 
be  fimple  and  not  made  of  veflels,  like 
the  other  parts  of  the  body,  it  can  nei- 
ther be  liable  to  obftruclions  nor  inflam- 
mations, but  may  fuffer  greatly  from 
the  irritation  of  acrid  fubftances. 

With  refpecl  to  that  fluid  Avhich 
the  nerves  are  fuppofed  to  contain,  as 
we  are  wholly  ignorant  of  its   nature, 

both 


Disorders  in  general.  87 

both  in  a  Ibund  and  morbid  flate,  we 
can  never  know,  when  the  diieales  of 
the  nerves  arile  from  a  fault  in  this  fluid, 
aitho'  their  action  muil  be  coniiderably 
affected  whenever  it  is  vitiated. 

When  the  brain  or  ipinal  marrow 
is  obftruc^led,  comprefled,  irritated,  or 
otherwife  difealed,  the  nerves  will  fuifer 
almoft  equally,  as  if  they  themfelves  were 
primarily  affected. 

It  would  be  of  little  life  to  infift  fur- 
ther on  thofe  faults,  in  the  brain  or 
nerves,  which  may  produce  difeafes,  iince 
the  llibtility  of  thefe  parts  makes  it  of- 
ten impoffible  for  us,  either  before  or 
after  death,  to  difcover,  precifely,  from 
what  caule  fuch  difeafes  proceed ;  nor 
have  we  any  ligns  to  diflinguiili,  from 
one  another,  thofe  morbid  fymptoms, 
which  may  arife  from  a  fault  in  the 
coats,  the  medullary  fubftance,  or  the 
fluid  of  the  nerves.  But  how  much 
foever  we  may  be  in  the  dark  about  the 
immediate  caufes  of  the  difeafes  of  the 

nerves. 


88  Of  Nervous 

nerves,  yet  their  eiFecls  may  all  be  re^ 
cluced  to  Ibme  change  in  that  fenfibility 
or  moving  power,  which  the  nerves 
communicate  to  the  different  parts  of 
the  body. 

The  fentient  power  of  the  nerves 
may  be  either  too  acute,  obtufe,  depra^ 
ved,  or  wholly  wanting ;  and  that  pow^ 
er  in  them,  which  is  necefPary  for  mvif- 
cular  motion,  may  be  either  weakened, 
or  quite  deftroyed. 

1,  (,?)  When  the  feeling  of  the  nerves 
is  too  acute  ;  difagreeable  or  painful 
fenfations,  and  violent  or  irregular  mo- 
tions will  be  excited  in  the  body,  by  the 
application  of  fuch  fubflances  to  the 
nerves  of  the  diifcrent  organs,  as  in  a 
more  hcaltiiy  and  firmer  ftate,  \\'ould 
either  occaiion  lefs  unealinels  and  dif^ 
turbance,  or  none  at  all.  In  Rich  a  con- 
dition .  of  the  nervous  iyftem,  the  paf- 
iions  of  the  mind,  ei'rors  in  diet,  and 
changes  of  heat  and  cold,  or  of  the 
weight  and  humidity  of  the  atmolphere, 

will 


Disorders    in  general.  89 

v.iU  be  apt  to  produce  morbid  fym- 
ptoms ;  fo  that  there  ^^411  be  no  firm  or 
Ions:  continued  flate  of  health,  but  al- 
moll  a  conftant  lliccellion  of  greater  or 
lefs  complaints. 

(h)  On  the  other  hand,  when  either 
the  whole  nerves,  or  a  part  of  them,  are 
deprived  of  a  proper  degree  of  fenfibi- 
lity,  altho'  the  body  in  general,  will 
then  be  lefs  apt  to  be  affe<^ed  by  the 
caules  above  mentioned ;  yet,  as  fome  of 
its  organs  will  not  be  fufficiently  u'rita- 
ted  by  the  Jiimnli  defigned  by  nature  to 
excite  them  into  aclion,  the  a(^ion  of 
thofe  parts  will  be  imperfect.  Thus, 
when  the  nerves  of  the  inteftines  are 
lefs  difpofed  than  ufual  to  be  affecl:ed 
by  then*  natural  y?w/?///,  the  irritation  of 
the  aliments,  air  and  bile,  will  only  bq 
able  to  raife  a  languid  periftaltic  motion, 
and  therefore   the   perlbn  will  become 

coftive.   WJien    the    fenfibility    of 

the  retina  is  impaired,   objects  are  feen 
lefs   diftin6tly ;    and  when  the  audito- 
ry 


^o  0/^Nervols 

ry  nen^es  lofe  fome  part  of  their  ex- 
quiiite  fenfibility,  the  ear  cannot  accu- 
rately diftinguiih  the  various  mufical 
founds. 

(r)  When  the  feehng  of  the  nerves 
in  any  of  the  organs  of  the  body,  be- 
comes unnatural  or  depraved,  the  moffc 
difagreeable  fenfations  and  alarming 
fymptoms  are  fbmetimcs  raifed  by  the 
application  of  fuch  flibilances,  as  in  a 
found  ftate  would  produce  no  manner 
of  diilurbance  :  And  hence  we  may  un- 
derftand  the  fm-prifing  effe^ls  of  certain 
fmcUs,  aliments  and  medicines  on  many 
delicate  people. 

This  uncommon  or  depraved  feelino; 

-I-  o 

of  the  nerves  does  not  always  conlift  in 
a  more  acute  fenfibility  ;  for  water  Avill 
raife  violent  convulfions  in  a  h'^drophobia, 
whilft  the  fauces  and  (rfophagiis  are  not  at 
all  aiFected  in  that  manner  by  folid  food ; 
and  a  fmall  quantity  of  honey  will  fome- 
times  occaflon  more  violent  gripes,  than 
many  of  the  flronger  piu*gatives. 

{d)  When 


Disorders    in  general,  c^  i 

[d)  When  any  of  the  nerves  lofe 
their  power  of  feeling  entirely,  the  or- 
gans, or  parts  to  which  they  are  diflri- 
buted,  become  quite  infenfible.  When 
the  whole  nerves  of  the  organs  of  fenfe 
and  voluntary  motion  are  thus  affedled, 
whilfl  the  heart  and  mufcles  of  relpira- 
tion  continue  to  ad:,  we  call  the  difeafe 
an  apoplexy. 

2.  {a)  A  GREATER  degree  of  that; 
j)o%yer  in  the  nerves,  which  is  neceflary 
for  motion,  can  only  give  more  force 
and  fteadinefs  to  the  mufcles,  when  they 
all  pofTefs  it  in  an  equal  degree ;  the  in- 
creafe,  therefore,  of  this  power  is  hard- 
ly to  be  accounted  a  diftemper  :  It  is  ne- 
ver exerted,  except  in  confequence  of 
an  effort  of  the  will,  of  fome  affection 
of  the  mind,  or  of  the  a£lion  of  fome 
Jlimiikts  on  the  brain  or  nerves  ;  to  the 
two  laft  of  which,  are  to  be  afcribed  all 
the  depraved  and  irregular  motions  ob- 
ferved  in  the  body,  and  not  to  any  real 
depravation  of  the  nervous  power  itfelf, 

which 


92  0/  Ner  vo  u  s 

which  feems  only  to  occallon  dileaies, 
when  it  is  either  weakened,  or  wholly 
deftroyed.  Thus  a  tetanus  or  unnilial 
Ipafmodic  contraction  of  any  miifcle,  is 
not  ovv'ing  to  an  increafe  of  that  power 
in  its  nerves,  which  is  necelfary  for  mul- 
ciilar  motion,  but  to  an  extraordinaiy 
exertion  of  it,  in  confequence  of  fome 
uncommon  irritation  or  affection  of  the 
brain  and  nerves. 

{b)  A  DIMINUTION  of  the  moving 
pwcr  of  tiie  nerves,  produces  a  debility 
of  the  whole  body. 

(c)  A  TOTAL  want  of  this  power ^ 
occafions  either  a  partial  or  univerfal 
palfy,  according  as  only  a  few  of  the 
nerves  or  the  whole  fyflem  is  affected. 
When  any  of  the  qiufcles  are  deprived 
of  the  nervous  influence^  they  are  not  on-- 
ly  rendered  paralytic,  but  foon  after  be- 
come fmaller ;  hecaufe  the  circulation  of 
the  fluids  cannot  be  carried  on,  as  ufual, 
tlirougli  the  very  fmall  vefFels  when  they 

rire  deppvcd  of  the  nervous  power  *. 

But 

*  See  above,  chap.  i.  Nq.  8. 


Disorders    i:i  gmcraL  <)  ^ 

But  here  it  vv'ill  be  proper  to  ob- 
lerve,  that,  as  there  is  fcarce  any  part 
of  the  body  without  nerves,  and  very 
few  altogether  without  feeling,  the 
nerves  mnil  not  only  fuffer,  when  they 
themfelves,  or  the  brain  and  fpinal 
marrow  are  primarily  afFei^ed,  but  alio 
when  the  other  parts  are  difeafed:  and 
hence  the  difficulty,  perhaps  the  impof- 
fibility,  of  fixing  a  certain  criterion,  by 
which  nervous  diforders  may  be  diflin- 
ffuiflied  from  all  others* 

All  difeafes  may,  in  Ibme  fenfe,  be 
called  affections  o^  the  nervous  lyftem, 
becauie,  in  almofh  every  difeafe,  the 
nerves  are  more  or  lefs  hurt  ;  and,  in 
confequence  of  this,  various  fenfations, 
motions,  and  changes,  are  produced  in 
the  body.  —  However,  thofe  diforders 
may,  peculiarly,  deferve  the  name  of 
NERVOUS,  which,  on  account  of  an  un- 
uHial  delicacy,  or  unnatural  (late  of  the 
nerves,  are  produced  by  caules,  which, 
in  people  of  a  found  conjflitution,  would 

either 


94  ^f  Nervous 

either  have  no  fuch  eiFecls,  or  at  lead  in 
a  much  lefs  degree. 

To  iUuftrate  this  by  a  few  examples. 
— We  do  not  call  the  toothach  a  ner- 
vous dileafe,  becaufe  the  nerves  of  the 
teeth  are  greatly  pained  ; .  but  if,  from 
a  particular  delicacy  of  conftitution,  the 
patient  is,  by  this  pain,  thrown  into 
convulfions  and  faintings,  we  call  theie 
fymptoms  nervous,  —  An  obflruc^ion  in 
the  coats  of  the  ftomach,  or  other  hypo- 
chondriac vifccray  is  not,  ftri(^ly  fpeak- 
ing,  a  nervous  difeafe ;  but  if  the  nerves 
of  thefe  parts  are  fo  changed  from  their 
natural  ftate,  that  low  fpirits,  melancho- 
ly, or  madnefs,  are  the  confequence  of 
this  obflrud:ion,  then  thele  fymptoms 
delerve  the  name  gf  nervous. — Again, 
although  the  fever  excited  by  the  pain- 
ful inflammation  of  the  finger  in  -Sl  paro- 
jiychiaj  and  the  fever  and  Vomiting  occa- 
fioned  by  a  nephritis ^  arife  from  the  fym- 
pathy  of  the  nerves,  yet  flich  fyjnptoms 
are  N  not  commonly   accounted   nervous 

diforders. 


Disorders    in  general,  ^5 

diforders,  becaufe  they  do  not  indicate 
any  particular  unfound  flate  of  the 
nerves,  and  happen,  in  Ibme  degree,  to 
eveiy  one  ill  of  a  paronychia  or  nephritis  ; 
but  if  convulfions  or  faintings  are  add- 
ed, then  thefe  laft  fymptoms,  being  the 
eifeAs  of  an  uncommon  delicacy  of  the 
nervous  fyftem,  may  be  juftly  called 
nervous.  —  In  like  manner,  the  convul- 
fions fometimes  preceding  the  erup- 
tion of  the  fmall-pox  deferve  this  name, 
becaule  they  only  feize  thofe  whofe  ner- 
vous fyflem  is  ealily  moved,  while  the 
quick  pulfe,  and  other  feverifli  fymp- 
toms,  though  excited  by  the  variolous 
matter  afting'as  a  ftimidns  on  the  nerves, 
are  not  reckoned  nervous.  —  To  con- 
clude, even  a  gntta  Jereita,  from  a  tumor 
preiling  upon  the  optic  nerve,  is  not,  in 
our  fenfe,  fo  much  a  nervous  difeafe,  as 
that  dimnefs  of  fight  which  4s  fome- 
times occafioned  by  a  diforder  of  the 
ftomach;  for  the  caufe  now  mentioned 
will  produce  the  gntta  ferena    in  every 

perfon 


(^6  0/  N  E  R  V  o  u  s 

perfon  equally;  whereas  tliis  dimneib 
will  only  happen  to  fuch  as  have  a  pe- 
culiar delicacy  of  nerves. 

In  treating,  therefore,  of  nervous  dis- 
orders, I  fliall  confine  myfelf  chiefly  to 
thofe  complamts  which  proceed,  in  a 
great  meailire,  from  a  weak  or  unnatu- 
ral conflitution  of  the  nerves;  and  of 
tliis  kind,  I  prefunie,  are  moll  of  thofe 
iymptoms  Avhich  phyiicians  have  com- 
monly diftingui filed  by  the  names  of  fta- 
ndcnt,  fpafmodic,  hypochondriac  or  hyjieric. 

As  the  iagacious  Sydenham  has  juftly 
obferved,  that  the  fliapes  of  Proteus,  or 
the  colours  of  the  chanidleon  are  not  more 
numerous  and  inconiiiiiei. . ,  than  the  va- 
riations of  the  hypochondriac  and  hy- 
fleric  difeafe  *";  fo  thofe  morbid  fymp- 
toms  which  have  been  commonly  cal- 
led nervous,  are  fo  many,  fo  various, 
and  fo  ii'regular,  tliat  it  would  be  ex- 
tremely hard,  either  rightly  to  defcribe, 
or  fully  to  enumerate  them.  They  imi- 
tate 

*  Sydankam.  oper.  ^/i/?.  ad  D.  Cole, 


Disorders   in  general.  ^7 

tate  the  iymptoms  of  almoft  all  other 
difeafes ;  and,  indeed,  there  are  few 
chronic  diftempers  with  wliich  they  are 
not  more  or  Icis  blended  or  intermixed. 
Hence  it  is,  that  the  late  celebrated  Dr. 
Mead  fays  of  the  hypochondriac  afiec- 
tion,  non  uriam  ftdem  bahet,  Jed  morbus  toti^ 
jis  corporis  eft  *.  I  fiiail  not,  therefore,  un- 
dertake to  give  a  full  or  exa6t  defcrip- 
tion  of  thele  diforders,  nor  pretend  to 
exhibit  a  complete  liil  of  all  the  morbid 
fymptoms,  which  have  been  commonly 
reckoned  of  the  nervous,  hypochon- 
driac, orhyileric  kind;  butfliall  content 
myfelf  with  mentioning  the  following, 
as  being  the  moil  common  and  remark- 
able. 

Wind  in  the  flomach  and  inteflincs, 
heart-burning,  four  bclchings,  fqueam- 
iflmefs,  and  vomiting  of  a  watery  fluff, 
tough  phlegm,  or  a  black  liquor  like 
the  grounds  of  coffee ;  want  of  appetite 
and  indigeflion,  or  an  uncommon  cra- 

G  ving 

*'    Monita  et prtecept.  med.  cap.  xvii. 


98  0/  Ner  vou  s 

ving  for  food  and  quick  digeftion;  a 
debility,  faintnefs,  and  fenfe  of  great 
emptinefs  about  the  llomach,  when  hun- 
giy ;  a  ftrong  defire  for  rare  or  uncom- 
mon forts  of  food,  or  for  things  that 
can  afford  no  nourifliment ;  a  vilible 
^veiling  or  inflation  of  the  ftomach,  e- 
ipecially  after  eating  ;  fometimes  a  fe- 
vere  pain  with  cramps  in  it ;  an  oppref- 
fion  about  the  pviscordia ;  an  unealy, 
though  not  painful,  fenfation  abovit  the 
flomach,  attended  with  low  ipirits,  anxi- 
ety, and  fometimes  great  timidity; 
flrong  pulfations  within  the  belly  ; 
fpafms  in  the  bowels,  and  diflenfions  of 
certain  portions  of  them  ;  violent  cholic 
pains  ;  a  grumbling  noife  from  wind 
paffing  through  the  inteflines  ;  the  bo- 
dy fometimes  too  lax,  oftener  bound; 
pains  in  the  back  and  belly,  refembling 
thofe  of  the  nephritic  kind;  a  fenfe  of 
irritation  and  heat  in  the  neck  of  the 
bladders  and  urethra^  with  a  frequent  de- 
fire 


Disorders    in   generaL  o  o 

fire  to  make  water ;  a  great  difcharge  of 
limpid  urine;  at  other  times  a  frequent 
i]3itting. 

Sudden  fluilies  of  heat  over  the  whole 
body,    fliiverings,    a  fenfe    of    cold    in 
certain   parts,  as  if  water  was    poured 
on  them,    at  other   times   an    unufual 
glow  ;    flying  pains    in    the    arms  and 
limbs ;    a  troublefome  pain  in  the  back, 
and  between   the  flioulders ;    pains,  at- 
tended with   a    hot  feniation,   fliifting 
often  from  the  fides  or  back  to  the  in- 
terior parts  of  the  abdomen;  cramps,  or 
convulfive  motions  of  the  mufcles,  or  of 
a  few  of  their  fibres  ;    fiidden  ftartings 
of  the  legs  and  arms  ;   almoll  confi;ant 
involuntary   motions  of  the  mufcles  of 
the  neck  and  head,  or  arms  and  legs  ; 
a  general  convulfion  affed:ing,  at  once, 
the  flomach,  bowels,  throat,  legs,  arms, 
and,  indeed,  aimoil  the  whole  members 
of  the  body,  in  which  the  patient  ftrug- 
gles  as   in  a  violent  epileptic  fit ;    long 
G    2  faintings. 


100  (y-NERVOUS 

faintings,   in  fome  cafes,  following  one 
another,  after  fliort  intervals. 

Palpitations  or  trembling  of  the 
heart;  the  piilfe  very  variable,  frequent- 
ly natiu-al,  fometimes  iincommonl)'  flow, 
and  other  times  quick,  oftener  fmall 
than  full,  and,  on  certain  occafions,  irre- 
gular or  intermitting;  a  dry  cough  with 
difficulty  of  breathing,  or  a  conftric- 
tion  of  the  lungs,  fometimes  rctiu-ning 
periodically  ;  yawning,  the  hiccup,  fre- 
quent ilghings,  and  a  fenfe  of  fuifoca- 
tion,  as  if  from  a  ball  or  lump  in  the 
throat ;  fits  of  crying,  and  convullive 
laughing.  Altho'  in  the  day-time  the 
patients  are  generally  pretty  cool,  and 
the  pulfe  fometimes  (lower  than  natural, 
yet  in  the  night,  efpecially  in  time  of 
ileep,  hot  fluflies  often  fpread  over  al- 
moft  the  whole  body,  the  pulfe  becomes 
quicker  and  flronger,  and  a  faintneis, 
or  fome  degree  of  ficknefs  at  ftomach  is 
felt. 


Disorders    in  general,       \  i  o  i 

A  GIDDINESS,  efpeclally  after  riiing 
up  hafliiy ;  pains  in  the  head,  fomc 
times  returning  periodically;  a  vio- 
lent pain  in  a  linall  part  of  the  head, 
not  larger  than  a  ftiilling,  as  if  a  nail 
was  driven  into  it ;  a  finging  in  the  ears; 
a  dimnefs  of  fight,  and  appearance  of  a 
thick  niift,  without  any  viliblc  fault  in 
the  eyes.  Objects  are  fometimes  i^etn 
double,  and  unufual  fmells  are  percei- 
ved ;  obftinatc  Avatchings,  attended 
fometimes  witli  an  uneafinefs,  which  is 
not  to  be  defcribed,  but  which  is  lef- 
fened  by  getting  out  of  bed  ;  diflurbed 
fleep,  frightful  dreams,  the  night-mare; 
fometimes  a  drowfinefs,  and  too  great 
inclination  to  fleep  ;  fear,  peeviflmefs, 
ladnels,  defpair,  at  other  times  high  fpi- 
rits;  wandering  thoughts,  impaired  me- 
mory, ridiculous  fancies;  ftrange  per- 
Hiafions  of  their  labouring  under  difea- 
fes  of  which  they  are  quite  free  ;  and 
imagining  their  complaints  to  be  as  dan- 
gerous as  they  find  them  troublefome; 

.thev 


10  2  Of  Nek w ov s 

they    are   often  angry  with  thofe  who 
would  convince  them  of  their  miflake. 

Patients,  after  having  been  long 
afflicled  with  nian^v^  of  thefe  fymptoms, 
(for  all  of  them  never  happen  to  any  one 
perfon)  fometimes  fall  into  melancholy, 
madnefs,  the  black  jaundice,  a  dropfy, 
tympany,  pbthifis  pulmonalis,  palfy,  apo- 
plexy, or  fomc  other  fatal  diftemper. 

Those  patients  who  are  liable  to  the 
above  complaints,  fome  of  v/hich  delerve 
the  name  o^  nervous  much  better  than  o- 
thers,  may  be  diltingiiifiied  into  tln-ee 
dalles. 

I.  Such  as,  though  ufually  in  good 
liealth,  are  vet.  on  account  of  an  un- 
common  delicacy  of  their  nervous  fy- 
llcm,  apt  to  be  often  affected  with  vio- 
lent tremors,  palpitations,  faintings 
and  convulfive  lits,  from  fear,  grief,  lur- 
prize,  or  other  palhons ;  and  from  w^hat- 
ever  greatly  h'ritates  or  dilagreeably  af- 
feels  any  of  the  more  fenfible  parts  of 
the  body. 

2.  Such 


Disorders    in  general,  103 

2.  Such  as,  belldes  being  liable  to 
the  above  diforders  from  the  fame 
cauies,  are  almofl  always  more  or  lefs 
troubled  with  indigeflion,  flatulence  in 
the  flomach  and  bowels,  a  lump  in  the 
throat,  the  cla'viu  /jyjiericusy  giddinefs,  fly- 
ing pains  in  the  head,  and  a  fenfe'of 
cold  in  its  back  part,  frequent  fighings, 
palpitations,  inquietude,  fits  of  faliva- 
tion,  or  pale  urine,  <<!:)X. 

3.  Such  as,  froni  a  lefs  delicate  feel- 
ing, or  mobihty  of  their  nervous  fyilem 
in  general,  are  fcarce  ever  affedled  with 
violent  palpitations,  fain  tings  or  con- 
\ailiive  motions,  from  fear,  grief,  flir- 
prife,  or  other  palTions  ;  but,  on  ac- 
count of  a  difordered  ftate  of  the  nerves 
of  the  flomach  and  bowels,  are  feldom 
free  from  complaints  of  indigeflion, 
belching,  flatulence,  w^ant  of  appetite,  or 
too  great  craving,  coflivenefs,  or  loofe- 
nefs,  flufliings,  giddinefs,  oppreffion  or 
faintnefs  about  the  pr^cordia,  low  fpirits, 

difagreeable 


IQ4  0/'    Ne  R  VQU  S. 

diiagreeable  thoughts,   watching  or  dii^ 
-tiirbed  fleep,  t^v. 

The  complaints  of  the  iirll  of  the 
above  clafles  may  be  called  fimply  ner- 
voiu ;  thoLc  of  the  fecond,  in  compli- 
ance with  ciiflom,  may  be  faid  to  be 
}?yftericy  and  thofe  of  the  third,  hypochon- 
diiac. 

The  hypochondriac  and  hyileric  dif- 
eafes  are  generally  conladered  by  phy- 
iicians  as  the  fame ;  only  in  women, 
fiich  diforders  have  got  the  name  of 
hyfterlCy  from  the  antient  opinion  of  their 
leat  being  folely  in  the  womb  ;  while 
in  men,  they  v/ere  called  h'jpocbondriaCy 
upon  the  fuppoiition,  that  in  them  they 
proceeded  from  fome  fau^t  in  thofe  vif^ 
cera  which  ly  under  the  cartilages  of  the 
ribs. 

The  learned  Hoffman,  difTenting  from 
moft  of  the  later  writers,  affirms  that 
the  hypochondriac  and  hyfleric  are  dif- 
ferent dheafes,  whether  we  regard  their 

fyrnptoms. 


Disorders    in  general ,  105 

iymptoms,  caufes,  or  terniination  * : 
But  we  cannot  agree  to  this  opinion,  a<5 
their  fyniptoms  areof  fb  flniilar  a  nature, 
and  as  the  hypochondriac  difeafe  is  not 
more  unlike  the  hyfteric,  than  this  laft 
is  often  unhke  to  itfelf.  It  is  true  that  in 
women,  hylleric  lymptoms  occur  more 
frequently,  and  are  often  much  more 
flidden  and  violent,  than  the  hypochon- 
driac in  men  ;  but  this  circumftance, 
which  is  only  a  confequence  of  the  more 
delicate  frame,  fedentary  life,  and  par- 
ticular condition  of  the  womb  in  wo- 
men, by  no  means  fliews  the  two  dif- 
eafes  to  be,  ftriftly  fpeaking,  different. 
Nor  does  it  appear  more  reafonable  to 
pronounce  the  hyfteric  diforder  of  a  dif- 
ferent kind  from  the  hypochondriac; 
becaufe  the  former  may  have  its  feat  fre- 
quently in  the  uterus,  and  the  latter  in 
the  alimentary  canal,  than  it  would  be 
to  diftingui/li  the  hypochondriac  com- 
plaints  into   as  many  different  difeafes 

as 

*  SjJ^efn.  med.  torn.  ni.p.  4.   cat,  v.  §  v.  et  vi. 


io6  O/^Nervous 

as  the  caufes  from  which  they  may  ariie ; 
or  to  divide  hyfteric  fits,  as  they  are 
called,  in  women,  into  nervous,  ftoma- 
chic  and  hyfteric,  becaufe  they  often 
proceed  from  violent  affedions  of  the 
mind,  or  a  difordered  ftate  ot  the  iiot 
mach,  as  well  as  from  a  fault  in  the 
iiterus. 

But  further,  it  is  to  be  obferved  that 
in  women,  the  fymptoms  commonly  cal- 
led hyfteric,  are  lefs  frequently  owing 
to  the  unfound  ftate  of  the  womb,  than 
to  faults  fomewhere  elfe  in  the  body; 
for  virgins  are  often  free  of  fuch  com- 
plaints, while  married  women,  and  even 
thofe  who  bear  children  with  eafy  la- 
bours, are  fometimes  aftii^led  with 
them.  Add  to  this,  that  women  who 
are  regular,  and  have  no  ailment  about 
the  uterus,  do  not  always  efcape  the 
hyfteric  difeafe;  while  thofe  who  labour 
under  fchirrous  tumours  and  other  difor- 
ders  of  that  part,  are  often  not  affected, 

at 


Disorders    in  general,  107 

at  lead,  with  its  worfl  fymptoms.  Laft- 
\y,  in  thofe,  who  have  long  and  greatly 
fufFcred  by  this  malady,  the  womb,  af- 
ter death,  has  frequently  been  obferved 
to  be  found. 

Upon  the  whole  therefore,  the  fymp- 
toms of  the  hyfteric  difeafe  in  women 
feem  only  to  diiter  from  thofe  of  the 
hypochondriac  in  men,  in  lb  far  as  the 
former,  fometimes,  proceed  from  the 
iitcnuy  and  are,  on  account  of  the  more 
delicate  frame  of  the  fex,  more  frequent 
and  often  more  violent,  than  the  lymp^ 
toms  of  the  hypochondriac  affed:ion  in 
juen. 

But  whether  thefe  two  diftempers  be 
conlidered  as  the  fame  or  diftincl,  fince 
the  fymptoms  of  both  are  £0  much  a- 
kin,  we  fliall  coniider  them  under  the 
general  character  of  Nervous;  and  be- 
gin with  inquiring  into  the  caufes  from 
which  they  moft  commonly  proceed. 

The  antient  phyficians,  with  feveral 
of  the  moderns,  have  agreed  in  placing 

the 


io8  0/  Nervous 

the  foie,  or,  at  leaft,  the  chief  feat  of  the 
hyfleric  difeafe,  in  the  womb ;  but,  with 
regard  to  the  parts  affedled  in  the  hy- 
pochondriac, the  opinions  ha^  e  been 
various  and  contradictory. 

Many  authors  have  afcribed  this  dis- 
order in  men,  to  obflructions  in  the 
Ipleen,  liver  and  mefentery. — Righmorc, 
to  a  vitiated  conftitution  of  the  flo- 
mach  *. — TVilliSy  to  an  indiipoiition  of 
the  brain  and  nerves,  or  to  a  fault  of 
the  fj^irits.- — EtmuUcry  who  confounds 
the  hypochondriac  difeale,  v/hen  in  a 
higher  degree,  with  the  fcur\y,  has 
Avrltten  a  diiPertation  to  prove  that  its 
ieat  is  not  in  the  fpleen,  but  in  the  in- 
teftines,  cfpeciaily  in  that  part  of  the 
colon y  wliich  lies  in  the  left  hypocliondre, 
in  which  the  excrements  often  ftagnate, 
and  where  much  wind  is  pent  upt- — 
S-^denham  afcribes  the  fame  diftemper  to 

an 

*  Exercitaf tones  de  pa£lone  hyjler,  et  affisclion.  hyfochondr. 
\  Oper.  /.  1S20. 


Disorders    in  general,  i  o  ^ 

<in  ataxy  or  confufion  of  the  ipirits  *. — 
MandeviUey  to  a  dilbrdered  chylification, 
and  a  deficiency  or  paucity  of  the  ipi- 
rits t« — Junckerns  makes  the  caiifa  proxima 
of  the  hypochondriac  affeftion  to  confifl 
in  an  obilruvn:ed  motion  of  the  blood  in 
the  "oena  portarum  and  vifcera  connefted 
with  it  X — Bocrhaave  derives  it  from  an 
atrabiliary  humour  lodging  in  the  pan- 
creas,  Ipleen,  flomach,  and  neighbouring 
organs  II . — H.off'man  from  a  perverted  pe- 
rillaltic  motion  of  the  ftomach  and  in- 
teflines  **.  And  laftly,  Dr  Chc\nc  is  of 
opinion  that  all  great  nervous  diforders 
proceed  from  fome  glandular  obftrucfcion 
in  the  ftomach,  bowels,  liver,  fpleen, 
mefentery  or  other  organs  of  the  lower 

belly  tt. 

But 

•  Epiji.  ad  D.  Cok. 

t  A  Treatife  of  the  hypochondriac  and  hyileric  pafTion^, 
dialogues  i.  and  ii. 

X  Junckeri  Coufped.  Medicinal  p.  iS6. 
II  Jphorifm.de   cognofcend.  morh.  %  1098. 
**  Syjlem.  Med.  torn.  \n.  part.  iii.  cap.  v. 
ff  Englifh  Malady,  partii.  chap.  \ii, 


no  ^f  Nervous 

But  altho'  it  is  not  to  be  doubted, 
that  the  hypochondriac  and  hyfteric 
aiFed:ions  often  proceed  from  a  morbid 
flate  of  the  ahmentary  canal,  uterus,  or 
other  vifccra  of  the  abdomen,  yet  as  there 
are  feveral  of  their  lymptoms,  which  feem 
independent  of  any  cUforder  in  thoie 
parts ;  and  as  there  has  often  no  trace  of 
thofe  difeafes  appeared,  after  death,  in 
any  of  the  abdominal  organs,  it  feems 
highly  probable,  they,  may  frequently 
arife  from  fome  lefs  viiible  fault  in  the 
body. 

We  fliall  therefore  proceed  to  inquire 
into  the  mod  common  caufes  of  thofe 
nervous,  hypochondriac  or  hyfteric 
lymptoms  above  mentioned,  treating 
firft  of  fuch  caufes  as  render  the  body 
more  liable  to  thefe  diforders  ;  fe- 
condly,  of  thofe,  which,  meeting  with 
the  former,  actually  produce  them. 
The  firft  have  been  called  the  predifpo- 
fing  caufes;  the  fecond  the  occafional 
caufes. 

CHAP. 


[  III   ] 


'CHAP.     III. 

Of  the  Predifpofing  Causes  0/ Nervous 
Disorders. 


THESE  may   be   reduced    to    two, 
viz. 

LA  TOO  great  delicacy  and  fenlibi- 
lity  of  the  whole   nervous  fyftem. 

II.  An  uncommon  weaknefs,  or  a  de- 
praved or  unnatural  feeling,  in  fome  of 
the  organs  of  the  body. 

I.  A  TOO  great  delicacy  and  fenfibi- 
lity  of  the  whole  nervous  fyftem,  may 
be  either  natviral,  that  is,  an  original 
defed:  in  the  conftitution,  or  produced 
by  fuch  difeafes  or  irregularity  in  li- 
ving, as  weaken  the  whole  body,  efpe- 
cially  the   nerves.      Long   or   repeated 

fevers. 


112  Of  the   Causes 

fevers,  profufe  haemorrhages,  great  fa^ 
tigue,  excellive  or  long  condnued  grief, 
luxurious  living  and  want  of  exercife, 
may  increafe  or  even  bring  on  fuch  a 
delicate  ftate  of  the  nervous  fyllem. 

As  the  whole  animal  frame  is  contri- 
ved with  the  greateilwifdom,  fo  we  can- 
not but  admire,  in  particular,  how  the 
nerves,  tho'  all  are  endued  with  the  ge- 
neral lenfe  of  feeling,  have  yet  in  differ- 
ent organs,  certain  fenfations,  quite  dif- 
ferent from  each  other  ;  and  are  per- 
fecl:ly  well  adapted  to  thofe  things, 
which  are  deligned  by  nature  to  be 
appUed  to  them.  Tlius,  for  example, 
as  pure  air  gives  no  uneafmefs  to  the 
nerves  of  the  wind-pipe,  and  is  refrefti- 
ing  to  thofe  of  the  lungs  ;  fo  to  a  cra- 
ving ftomach  wholefom  food  is  highly 
o-rateful  :  but  air  collected  in  the  flo- 
mach  feidom  fails  to  produce  a  difa- 
greeable  fenfation,  and  not  only  folid 
food,  but  even  the  mildeft  liquids,  fal- 
ling by   accident   into   the  v,'ind-pipe, 

bring 


o/ Nervous   Disorders.         113 

bring  on  violent  fits  of  coughing,  which 
do  not  ceafe  till  the  fenfe  of  irritation  is 
lefTenecI. — ^In  like  manner,  warm  blood, 
which  does   not  affect  the  heart  or  vai^ 
cular  fyftem,  with  any  difagreeable  fen- 
fation, 'occafions,  in  the  ftomach,  faint- 
nefs,    hea^'y   ficknefs    and   vomiting. — 
The  nerves  of  the  nofe,  tongue  and  fto- 
mach, are  all    endowed  with  ienfations 
of  different  kinds ;    whence  fome   fub- 
ftances  very  ungrateful  to   the  palate, 
are  often  agreeable  to  the  ftomach.    Se- 
veral flibftances,  which  hurt  the   eyes, 
give  no  uneafinefs  to  the  alimentary  ca- 
nal;   and,   on  the  other  hand,  antimo- 
nial  wine,  or  an  infufion  of  ipecacuanha 
in  water,  which  neither  irritate  much  the 
tongue  or  other  fenfible  parts,  affedl  the 
ftomach  fo  difagreeably  as   to  occafion 
violent  vomiting. 

But  further,  as  the  nerves,  in  many 
of  oiu'  organs,  have  very  different  feel- 
ings ;  fo,  in  different  people,  or  even  in 
the  fame  perfon  at  different  times,  the 

H  feeling 


X 1 4  ^f  ^'-^^  Causes 

feeling  of  the  fame  nerves  varies  confi- 
derably,  and  is  more  or  lefs  acute  or 
blunt,  and  fometimes  unnatural  or  de- 
praved. And  hence  it  is,  that  the  very 
fame  things  applied  to  the  fame  nerves, 
or  organs,  have  very  different  effefts,  ac- 
cording to  the  conftitution  of  the  per- 
fons,  or  then*  date  of  health  at  the  time. 

In  fome,  tlie  feelings,  perceptions, 
and  pafiions,  are  naturally  dull,  (low,  and 
di  ill  cult  to  be  roufed  ;  in  others,  they 
are  very  quick  and  eafily  excited,  on 
account  of  a  greater  delicacy  and  fenfi- 
bility  of  the  brain  and  nerves. 

All  children,  when  compared  with 
adults,  have  their  nervous  fyflem  very 
fenfible  and  eafily  moved,  and  are  in 
this  refpecl  fomething  like  thofe  grown 
people,  who  are  mod  fubjecl  to  the  high- 
eil  nervous  Ox*  hyfleric  fymptoms  :  And 
hence  it  is,  that  children  are  fo  liable  to 
convulfive  fits  from  the  pain  of  teething, 
from  worms,  acrid  humours  in  their 
ilo.macli   or  bowels,    and  other  caufes, 

which. 


o/'  Nervous    Disorders.  115 

whicli,  in  people  of  a  more  advanced 
age,  and  lefs  fenlible  nerves,  would  pro- 
duce no  fuch  effects » 

A  DELICATE  or  cafily  irritable  ner- 
vous fyflem,  niuft  expofe  a  perfon  to  va- 
rious ailments,  from  caules,  affecting  ei- 
ther the  body  or  mind,  too  flight  to  make 
any  remarkable  impreliion  upon  thole 
of  firmer  and  lefs  fenfible  nerves.  Thus, 
any  accident  occafioning  fudden  fur- 
prife,  will,  in  many  delicate  people,  pro- 
duce ftrong  palpitations  of  the  heart, 
and  fometimes  fainting  with  convul- 
fions. — I  have  known  fome,  even  men, 
whofe  nervous  fyftem  was  fo  delicate  and 
moveable,  that  a  vomit,  a  fmart  purge, 
or  the  pain  raifed  by  a  blifter,  would 
throw  them  into  convulfive  fits.  Nay, 
there  was  lately  a  paralytic  patient  in 
the  Royal  Infirmary  here,  who  felt  a  re- 
markable uneafinefs  thro'  his  whole  bo- 
dy, when  it  was  charged  with  the  elec- 
trical fluid,  by  means  of  a  wire  held  in 
liis  hand,  altho*  there  was  no  fliock  given 
H  %  him. 


1 1 6  Of  the   Cavses 

him,  nor  any  fparks  draAvn  from  him. — - 
We  are  told  of  a  Lady,  who,  upon  hear- 
ing the  found  of  a  bell,  or  any  loud 
noife,  would  fall  into  fits  of  fwooning, 
which  were  fcarce  to  be  diflinguiflied 
from  death  ^ :  And  I  have  feen  the  pain 
of  the  toothach  throw  a  young  woman, 
of  weak  nerves,  into  convulfions  and  in- 
fenfibility,  which  continued  for  fevcral 
hours,  and  returned,  upon  the  pain  be- 
coming again  more  acute  t* 

Some 

*  Boy'e^s  ufefulnefs  of  exp.  Philofophy,  part  ii.  p.  248. 

■J  The  following  cafe,  communicated  to  me  by  Mr. 
James  Sfcnce  furgeon  in  Dunkeld,  is  a  remarkable  inftance 
of  the  many  violent  and  uncommon  fymptoms,  which  may 
arife  from  a  fmall  caufe,  in  perfons  of  a  very  delicate  ner- 
vous fyftem. 

An  unmarried  woman,  of  23  years  of  age,  immediately 
after  having  been  ftung  in  the  neck  by  a  bee,  felt  a  Iharp 
pain,  with  a  violent  itching  in  that  part,  and  over  the 
whole  head  and  f.Kc,  which,  together  with  her  arms,  felt 
uiff  and  fwelled.  In  a  few  minutes,  the  pain  fpread  to  her 
throat,  and  then  to  her  Itcmach,  occafioning  a  great  anxiety 
and  difficulty  of  refpirat'.on.  At  this  time,  a  large  dram  of 
malt  fpirits  was  given  her,  which,  the'  it  was  immediately 
vomited  up  again,  relieved  the  pain  for  a  little  :  But,  foon 
after,  it  was  felt  violently  in  the  lower  belly,  and  was  ioU 
lowed  bv  a  Icofe  ftool.     She  complained  novy  of  an  un- 

conainoi^ 


of  Nervous    Disorders.  iiy 

Some  women,  from  a  too  great  deji- 
cacy  or  lenfibility  of  the  nervous  fyflem, 
are,  after  conception,  fo  much  affecled 
with  a  heat  and  uneafy  fenfation  in  their 
back,  colick-pains,  and  other  fymptoms, 
as  to  be  in  hazard  of  mifcarriage.  In 
fuch  cafes,  when  the  danger  neither  a- 
riles  from  too  much  blood,  nor  too  great 
a  laxity  of  the  uterine  veflels,  but,  mere- 
ly, from  an  uncommon  weaknels  and 
delicacy  of  the  nerves,  bleeding  will  do 
harm^  and  aftringent  and  cooling  me- 
dicines will  prove  ineifectual,  whilfl  lau- 
danum given  from  time  to  time,  in  pro- 
per 

common  heat  in  her  face  and  head,  and  of  a  great  faintnefs  : 
Her  pulfe  was  fmall  and  irregular,  her  tongue  and  throat 
dry,  her  extremities  cold,  and  the  whole  body  aiFedted 
with  a  tremor.  After  taking  a  draught  of  warm  water, 
and  having  the  part  that  was  Hung,  rubbed  with  warm  oil 
of  olives,  fhe  was  put  to  bed,  and  found  confiderable  re- 
lief from  flannel-cloths,  wrung  out  of  a  hot  decotftion  of 
fome  emollient  herbs,  applied  to  the  abdomen  and  feet. 
After  this,  a  draught  with  fome  of  the  elixir  paregoriaim^ 
foon  produced  a  profufe  fweat,  and  freed  her  of  the  pain, 
inclination  to  vomit,  and  other  fymptoms.  Next  day  her 
fkin  being  hot,  and  her  pulfe  full,  a  new  fweat  was  pro- 
cured by  a  draught  with  y^.  minder,  znd /al.  'vol  ammon. 
and,  before  the  evening,  Ihe  was  net  of  every  complaint. 


ii8  Of  the   Causes 

per  dofes,  will  produce  the  beft  effecfis  : 
For,  by  lefTening  the  too  great  fenfibility 
of  the  nervous  fyftem,  it  not  only  quiets 
all  the  uneafy  fenfations,  but  calms  the 
mind  itfelf,  and  renders  it  lefs  liable  to 
be  ruffled  by  flight  caufes. 

Women,  in  whom  the  nervoujs  fy- 
ftem is  generally  more  moveable  than  in 
men,  are  more  fubjeft  to  nervous  com- 
plaints, and  have  them  in  a  higher  de- 
gree. On  the  other  hand,  old  people, 
in  whom  the  nerves  have  become  lefs 
fenfible,  are  little  afflicfled  with  thofe 
diforders  ;  nay.  Dr.  Cheyie  has  obfer- 
ved,  that  an  advanced  age  fometimes 
proves  a  cure. 

Lastly,  altho'  the  variolous  matter  in 
the  blood,  by  its  Jlwmlus,  frequently  pro- 
duces in  children,  convulfions  before 
the  eruption ;  yet,  in  grown  people, 
whofe  nerves  are  lefs  delicate,  this  fym- 
ptom,  rarely,  if  ever,  happens.  On  the 
other  hand,  people  whofe  folids  are  lefs 
firm,  and  their  nerves  more  delicate  and 

eaflly 


I 


of  Nervous    Disorders.  li^ 

ealily  afFecled,  altlio'  ilibject  to  many 
Gomplaints,  yet  are  feldom  attacked  with 
ardent  fevers  or  violent  infiammator}'" 
difeafes  ;  which  feems  to  be  chiefly  ow- 
ing to  the  weak  (tate  of  their  blood  and 
veflels. 

To  the  dilFerent  fen (ibility  of  the 
nerves  in  general,  or,  at  lead,  of  the 
heart,  is  owing,  in  a  great  meaiure,  the 
Variety  of  the  quickneis  of  the  pidie  in 
healthy  people.  A  late  phyfician  of  this 
place  told  me  of  one  of  his  patients, 
v/hofe  pulfe,  in  a  healthy  ftate,  did  not 
beat  above  38  or  40  times  in  a  minute : 
And  I  know  a  young  woman,  whofe  na- 
tural pulfe,  when  fitting,  is  rarely  under 
1 20,  yet  has  no  complaint,  and  feems 
to  enjoy  good  health  :  Near  nhie  years 
ago,  when  I  attended  her  in  a  fever^ 
her  pulfe  beat  upwards  of  igo  in  a 
minute  ;  and  {i\G  was,  at  that  time,  trou- 
bled with  the  greateil  ftartings  and  tre- 
mors I  had  ever  feen  :  Nay,  fo  very  ir-  ' 
ritable  was  her  heart,  that,  after  the  fe-* 

.    vet* 


I20  Of  the   Causes 

ver  vv^as  much  abated,  and  when,  in  a 
horizontal  pofture,  her  pulfe  beat  under 
140,  by  only  fitting  up  in  her  bed  for 
a  little  while,  it  became  fo  quick,  that, 
with  difficulty,  I  could  count  it  ;  but, 
after  repeated  trials,  found  it  to  be  near- 
ly 220  in  a  minute. 

Is  not  the  quicknefs  of  the  pulfe,  in 
children,  chiefly  owing  to  the  greater 
fenlibihty  of  their  heai't  ?  and  does  not 
the  pulfe  generally  grow  flower  with 
age,  becauie  the  heart  becomes  lefs  fen- 
iible,  and,  in  a  very  advanced  age,  per- 
haps, in  fome  degree,  callous?  Laftly,  is 
not  the  pulle,  c£tcris  paribus y  quicker  in 
fmall  than  in  large  animals,  chiefly  be- 
caufe  the  nerves  are  endued  with  a  great- 
er degree  of  fenlibility  in  the  former, 
than  in  the  latter  *? 

Since,  as  we  have  obferved,  the 
nerves,  in  the  different  organs,  are  en- 
dued with  various  kinds  of  feeling,  and 

are 

*  The  flownefs  of  the  pulfe  in  larger  animals,  is,  no 
doubt,  partly  owing  to  the  ventricles  of  their  heart,  on 
account  of  their  greater  capacity,  requiring  a  longer  time 
for  the  performance  of  their  feveral  motions. 


of  Nervous    Disorders.  121 

are  very  differently  afFe(^ed  by  the  fame 
things,  will  not  morbid  humours  in  the 
blood  be  more  apt  to  produce  difeafes  in 
thofe  parts,  whofe  nerves  are  mofl  flrong- 
ly  afFecled  by  them,  than  in  others 
which  flifFer  lefs  ?  And  may  not  this  be, 
partly,  the  reafbn  why,  in  certain  dif- 
eafes, fome  parts  of  the  body  are  much 
more  commonly  affected  than  others  ? 
And  w^hy,  in  fome  epidemics,  the  eyes, 
nofe,  or  fauces;  and,  in  others,  the  breafl 
or  inteftines  are  mofl  apt  to  fuifer  ?  This 
alfo  may,  partly,  be  the  caufe  why  thofe 
organs,  which  have  fliffered  by  fome 
former  difeafes,  are  mofl  liable  to  be  at- 
tacked, when  the  body  is  feized  with 
any  new  diforder ;  for  this  does  not 
feem  to  be  owing,  yo/Jy,  to  the  weaknefs 
of  the  vefFels,  but  alfb  to  their  being 
more  eafily  irritated  by  any  acrimony 
in  the  blood,  or  by  its  increafed  force. 
Further,  it  may  be  proper  to  take  no- 
tice here,  that  the  different  operations 
of  various  medicines  are  not  fo  mvich 


owing 


Ii2r  Of  the   Cavses 

owing  to  their  powers,  either  of  dilTol- 
ving  the  blood,  or  changing  it  in  other 
relpecls,  as  to  the  particular  nature  of 
the  nerves  of  the  different  organs,  dif- 
poilng  them  to  be  very  differently  af- 
fected by  the  fame  kind  of  flimulating 
fubflances. 

Thus  cathartic  medicines  applied  to 
the  belly  of  children,  in  the  form  of  a 
plaifter,  do  not  fenfibly  increafe  the  fe- 
cretion  from  the  liver,  or  from  the  fall- 
vary  or  lachrymal  glands  ;  but  they  fb 
affecl;  the  nerves  of  the  inteflines,  as  to 
occalion  a  greater  flux  of  humours  from 
their  veffels,  and  accelerate  the  periflal- 
tic  motion,  and  fo  bring  on  a  purging: 
And  this  does  not  feem  to  be  owing,  fo 
much,  to  the  finer  parts  of  thofe  medi- 
cines, which  enter  the  blood,  and  may- 
be conveyed  with  it  to  the  bowels,  a(5l- 
ing  immediately  on  their  nerves  or  fmall 
veiTels,  as  to  a  particular  fympathy  be- 
tween the  nerves  diflributed  to  the  te- 
guments of  the  abdomen  and  thofe  of  the 

inteflines  } 


'  o/'  Nervous    Disorders.  123 

inteflines;  otherwife  an  aloetic  plalfter 
applied  to  the  back  or  the  head,  fliould 
open  the  body  as  much,  as  when  laid 
to  the  belly. — Nitre,  which  proves  of- 
ten highly  diuretic,  does  not  feem  to 
afFecl:  the  fecretions  of  the  other  glands 
remarkably. — The  finer  parts  of  cantha- 
rides  entering  the  blood  by  the  applica- 
tion of  blifters,  rarely  produce  vomiting 
or  purging,  or  difagreeably  aftecl  any 
part,  except  the  urinary  pafTages,  Vv^here 
the  nerves  are  fo  formed,  as,  by  the  a- 
crimony  of  the  flies,  to  be  more  irritated, 
than  thofe  of  the  other  organs.  Nor 
can  the  ftrangury,  occafioned  by  cantha- 
rides y  be  owing,  as  fbme  have  thought, 
to  their  particles  not  pading  freely  tln^o* 
the  vellels  of  the  kidneys  and  bladder, 
fince  the  vellels  of  the  brain  are  much 
fmaller  than  thcfc,  and  fmce  the  kidneys 
are  not  near  fo  much  affected  by  them, 
as  the  neck  of  the  bladder. — Does  not 
mercury,  when  mixed  with  the  blood, 
generally  increafe  the   fecretion  of  the 

faliva 


X 


124  Q/'  ^^'^    Causes 

faliva,  much  more  than  that  of  any  o- 
ther  humour,  becaufe  the  fmall  vefTels 
of  the  falivai-y  glands  are  more  ftrongly 
affe^led   by    its  pecuUar  Jlimulus,    than 
thofe  of  any   other   fecretoiy  organ  ? — - 
Laftly,  does  it  not  appear,  from  what  has 
been  faid,  that  the  virtue  of  a  medicine, 
which  is  fpecifically  to  promote  the  fe- 
cretion  of  the  bile,  fcvicu,  urine,  or  the 
faliva,    muft  conlifl  in  its  being  peculi- 
arly fitted   for  flimulating,    and   confe- 
quently  increafing  the  vibratory  motions 
of  the  fmall  fecreting  velTels  of  the    li- 
ver, kidneys,  teflicles,  or  falivaiy  glands, 
more  than  thofe  of  the  other  parts  ?  And 
do  not  fuch  medicines  alone,  if  any  fuch 
there  be,   deferve,   in  a  ilrict  fenie,  the 
name   of  Emenagogue,   which  not  on- 
ly tend,    by   their   general  flimulating 
or   attenuating  power,   to  promote  the 
menftrual  evacuation,  but  ahb,  by  their 
particular  quality,  are  fitted  to  ftimulate 
the  nerves  and  veflels  of  the  womb  more 
than  any  other  ? 

But, 


of  Nervous  Disorders.  125 

But,  to  return  from  this  digrcffion; 

II.  Besides  a  too  great  fenfibility 
of  the  nervous  fyflem  hi  general,  there 
is  often  an  uncommon  weaknefs  or  de- 
licacy, or  an  unnatural  or  depraved  feel- 
ing in  various  parts  of  the  body,  which 
expofes  certain  peribns  to  violent,  and 
fometimes  very  extraordinary  affections, 
from  caufes  which  would  fcarce  pro- 
duce any  difturbance  in  people  of  a 
found  conftitution. 

Thus,  feveral  delicate  women,  who 
could  eafily  bear  the  flronger  fmell  of 
tobacco,  have  been  thrown  into  fits  by 
muik,  ambergreafe,  or  a  pale  rofe,  which, 
to  mofl  people,  are  either  grateful,  or, 
at  lead,  not  difagreeable.  The  fmell 
of  cheefe  has,  almofl  always,  occafion- 
ed  a  bleeding  of  the  nofe  in  fome  *. 
Mr.  Boyle  tells  of  a  Nobleman,  who 
v/as  apt  to  faint  aAvay  when  taniy  was 
brought  near  him  ;  and  there  lately 
lived,  in  this  country,  a  Lady,  who 
was  aifecFled  with  a  general  uneafinefs, 

as 

*  Kaau  Boerhaave  impet.  faciens,  §  ^09. 


126  Of  the   Causes 

as  often  -  as  there  v/as  any  fclleiy  in 
in  the  room  where  flie  fat.  The  fight 
of  a  cat,  nay,  even  the  invifible  effluvia 
from  that  animal,  have  occafioned  an- 
xiety, faintnefs  and  fweating  *.     I  had, 

-\  feveral  years  fince,  a  patient,  who  was 
alvv^ays  affected  with  an  itching  and  un- 
eafinefs  over  her  whole  body,  when  flie 
either  fwallov/ed  nutmeg,  or  applied  it 
externally.  There  have  been  fome  who 
were  ready  to  faint  when  they  finelled 
to  cinnamon  :  and  Mr.  Bo)le  mentions 
a  Lady,  who  had  fuch  an  antipathy  to 
honey,  that  a  little  of  it,  put  mto  a 
poultice,  without  her  knowledge,  and 
laid  to  a  fliglit  wound,  tlirew  lier  into 
great  diforder,  which  continued  until 
tliat  application  was  removed  f* — 1  knew 

-L  a  woman,  who,  foon  after  conception, 
always  contracted  an  averfion  to  fnuif, 
and  did  not  recover  her  tafte  for  it,  un- 
til fometime  after  her  delivery  :  And  it 
is  well  known,  that,  in  time  of  preg- 
nancy, 

*  Kaatt  Boerhawve  Impet.  faciens,   ^  409- 

f  Ufefulnefs  of  experimental  philof.  part  ii.  p.  260. 


-f 


of  Nervous   Disorders.  127 

nancy,  the  nerves  of  the  flomach  are  fo 
much  changed,  that  mofl  women  are 
then  troubled  with  a  natifeUy  vomiting,  or 
depraved  appetite.  Laftly,  certain  per- 
fons,  in  confequence  of  an  uncommon 
delicacy,  or  unnatural  fenfibility  of  the 
nerves  "which  terminate  in  the  bronchia^ 
or  veficles  of  the  lungs,  are  apt  to  fuf- 
fer  an  afthmatic  fit  from  the  effluvia  of 
particular  fub fiances,  which  produce  no 
ilich  eife(ft;  on  thofe  whole  pulmonary 
jierves  are  differently  diipofed. 

But  there  is  no  organ  of  the  body, 
the  unnatural  ftate  of  whole  nerves  is 
fo  frequently  the  caufe  of  nervous,  hy- 
pochondriac and  hyfteric  diforders,  as 
the  alimentary  canal,  efpecially  the  fto- 
mach. 

An  uncommon  delicacy  of  the  nerves 
of  the  flomach  and  inteflines,  which  may 
be  either,  in  a  great  me^-fure,  natiu-al, 
or  brought  on  by  difeafes,  improper  ali- 
ment, irregular  living,  exceflive  grief, 
$)r  other  caufes,  is   to  be  diflinguifhed 

fron^ 


I  28  Of   ^^^^     CaU  SES 

from  that  acute  feeling,  or  increaled 
fenfibility,  which  is  the  confequence  of 
an  inflammation,  or  of  an  aphthous  flate 
of  thefe  parts,  iince  m  thefe  laft  cafes  e- 
very  acrid  fubflance  gives  them  pain  ; 
whereas,  in  the  former,  many  infipid 
and  fcemingly  innocent  aliments,  pro- 
duce great  uneafineis  in  the  ftomach 
and  bowels,  while  volatile  fpirits,  flrong 
wine,  brandy,  and  ipiceries,  are  not 
only  inolfeniive,  but  often  neceflary  for 
allaying  thofe  diforders,  which  are  pro^ 
duced  in  the  firfl  paffages,  by  fiich  cau- 
fes  as  would  fcarce  give  any  diflurbance 
in  a  found  flate. 

Further,  this  morbid  or  delicate 
flate  of  the  flomach  and  bowels,  does 
not  condfl  folely  in  their  weaknefs,  but 
chiefly  in  tlie  uncommon  difpofition  of 
their  nerves,  which  have  a  feeling  very 
different  from  what  is  natural.  As  a 
proof  of  this,  we  obferve,  that  in  fuch  a 
flate  of  the  alimentary  canal,  the  appe- 
tite is  often  not  only  good,  but  beef  and 

mutton, 


of  Nervous    Disorders.         129 

mutton,  even  when  falted  and  dried, 
will  be  more  eafily  digefted,  and  give 
lefs  difturbance,  tiian  many  vegetables, 
which  in  healthy  peribns  fit  much  light- 
er on  the  ftomach  *. 

It  is  furprifing,  how  much  the  con- 
dition of  the  ftomach  and  inteftines, 
and  the  diipofition  of  their  nerves,  will 
vary,  even  in  the  fame  perfons,  at  differ- 
ent times. 

I  Thus 

•  It  is  a  miftake  to  think,  as  fome  have  done,  that  ve- 
getable food  in  general,  is  worfe  to  digeft  than  animal. 
The  contrary  feems  to  be  demonftrated  by  Walaus''^  expe- 
riments on  dogs ;  from  which  it  appears,  that  bread  and 
herbs  are  much  fooner  digefted  than  butcher  meat,  even  by 
thefe  animals  which  are  naturally  carnivorous  j  the  for- 
mer rt^maining  in  the  ftomach  only  four  or  five  hours,  and 
the  latter  feven  or  eight.  Vid.  Epiji.  tie  mot.  chyl,  et  fang,  ad 
Thorn.  Bartholin.  Agreeably  to  this,  people  whofe  ftomach 
and  inteftines  are  quite  found,  find  themfelves  lighter,  and 
much  fooner  hungry  after  a  dinner  of  white  bread,  herbs, 
roots,  or  ripe  fruit,  than  one  of  beef,  mutton,  or  pork. 
It  is  not  owing,  therefore,  to  their  being  moj-e  difficult  to 
digeft,  or  their  remaining  longer  in  the  ftomach,  that  ma- 
ny vegetable  aliments  give  fuch  difturbance  to  fome  deli- 
cate people,  but  to  their  affefting  difagreeably  the  nerves 
of  the  alimentary  canal.  For  the  fame  reafon  it  is,  that 
roafted  meat  agrees  better  with  them  than  broth  or  boil- 
ed meat,  and  old  cheefe  than  new  preffed  curds. 


130  Of  the   Cau  SES 

Thus  cabbage,  onions,  leeks  and  o- 
ther  vegetables,  will  lie  long  on  the  fto^ 
mach,  and  occafion  flatulence  and  looie 
ftools  in  many,  who  formerly  found  no 
fiich  inconvenience  from  them;  and 
the  fame  thing  is  true  of  honey  and  o- 
ther  aliments :  nay,  Mr.  Boylc  tells  us  of 
a  perfon,  who  was  more  violently  vo- 
mited by  coffee  than  crocus  mctallonim,  or 
other  ftrong  emetics  ;  and  was  made 
iick  even  by  the  fmell  of  this  liquor,  as 
he  pafTed  by  a  coffee-houfe,  although 
formerly  he  had  ufed  to  drink  it  with- 
out feeling  any  difagreeable  effects  *.  In 
fome  people  the  ftate  of  the  nerves  of 
the  ftomach  is  fo  very  uncommon,  that 
laudanum f  inftead  of  relieving,  will  excite 
vomiting,  and  occafion  violent  cramps 
in  that  organ  :  nay,  there  have  been  per- 
fons  with  wliom  pills  of  opium  always  dis- 
agreed when  newly  made ;  but  occafion- 
ed  no  difturbance  after  being  kept  ibme 
weeks. 

That 

*  Ufefulnefs  of  Exp.  Philof.  part  ii.  p.  260. 


o/' Nervous    Disorders.         131 

That  many  of  thofe  complaints, 
v/hich  have  been  commonly  called  ner- 
vous, proceed,  in  a  great  meaflire,  from 
a  particular y  unnatui'al,  or  depraved  fen- 
fibility  of  the  nerves  of  the  alimenta- 
ry canal,  appears  evidently  from  this, 
that  altho',  in  many  cafes,  the  ftomach 
and  inteftines  are  much  diieafed,  yet 
the  patients  are  not  affe^^led  with  any 
remarkable  nervous  or  hypochondriac 
fymptoms,  while  others  are  greatly  trou- 
bled with  thefe  complaints  who  have  a 
good  appetite,  a  quick  digeftion,  and  no 
tough  phlegm,  or  other  noxious  humour 
in  their  ftomach.  Add  to  this,  altho' 
cliildren,  on  account  of  the  great  fenfibili- 
ty  of  their  nerves,  are  liable  to  convullive 
diforders  and  other  nervous  complaints  ; 
yet  they  are  rarely  affe<R:ed  with  the  hy- 
pochondriac diieaie,  becaufe  the  nerves 
of  their  ftomach  and  inteftines  have  not 
that  unnatural  or  depraved  feeling  which 
is  common  in  this  malady  ;  and  which, 
when  it  Ls,  on  certain  occalions,  much 
I  2  increafed 


132  Of  the  Causes 

increafed  by  fome  acrid  matter  in  the 
blood  falling  on  them,  becomes  not  only 
the  predilpofing  caule,  but  conftitutes 
the  hypochondriac  difeafe  itfelf,  and 
gives  rife  to  mofl  of  its  fymptoms. 

In  aweakly  and  delicate,  or  an  unna- 
tural ftate  of  the  llomach  and  bowels, 
improper  aliments,  excefs  in  eating  or 
drinking,  wind,  fliarp  humours,  and 
fbrong  paflions,  fuch  as  grief,  anger  and 
the  like,  will  occafion  much  more  vio- 
lent fymptoms,  than  in  perfons  whofe 
alimentary  canal  is  firm  and  found.  — : 
Thus,  a  draught  of  cold  water,  will  in- 
ftantly  affed:  fome  very  delicate  wo- 
men with  a  violent  pain  and  cramp  in 
their  ftomach  ;  and  the  fight  of  one  vo- 
miting, or  of  certain  difagreeable  ali- 
ments, or  medicines,  will  produce  a  nau- 
fcay  and  even  vomiting,  in  perfons  whole 
flomachs  are  eafily  moved.  Nay,  in  fome 
cafes,  fo  very  delicate  is  the  ftate  of 
the  flomach,  that  turning  the  body 
haftily  in  bed,  or  raifing  one's  felf,  will 

iiii  mediately 


of  Nervous    Disorders.         133 

immediately  occafion  a  faintnefs,  giddi- 
nefs,  a  general  weaknefs,  and  fometimes 
an  inclination  to  vomit.  This  lafl  fym- 
ptom  has  been  remarked  by  S^jdenham^ 
in  hylleric  women  ;  and  I  have  had  fe- 
veral  patients  in  continued  fevers,  who, 
together  with  an  uncommon  debility 
and  faintnefs,  were,  upon  the  frnalleft 
motion  in  their  bed,  feized  with  a  naii- 
fea  and  retching  to  vomit. 

Further,  a  delicate  flate  of  the  firfl 
paflages,  or  an  unnatural  fenfibility  of 
then*  nerves,  not  only  difpofes  people  to 
many  complaints  in  thefe  parts,  but  the 
whole  nervous  iyftem  is  thereby  render- 
ed more  moveable,  and  liable  to  be  af- 
fetl:ed  by  the  flighteft  caufes.  —  Thus,  I 
have  known  fome  women  of  a  delicate 
frame,  in  whom,  from  an  obftrudlion  or 
irregularity  of  the  menftrua,t\\e  nerves  of 
the  ftomach  had  acquired  fuch  an  uncom- 
mon fenfibility,  that,  after  eating  free- 
ly of  any  folid  meat,  they  were  not  only 
feized  with  a  pain   and  ficknefs  at  the 

ftomach, 


134  Of  the  Cav  SES 

ftomach,  and  a  fenfe  of  ftifFnefs  and  rigi- 
dity in  the  trunk  of  the  body,  but  fonie- 
times  aifo  with  faintings,  attended  with 
a  quick  trembling  pulfe,  and  fmall  con- 
vulfions  of  the  mufcles  of  the  legs  and 
arms. — A  woman  of  a  delicate  conftitu- 
tion,  who  v/as  attacked  with  a  quotidian 
intermittent,  feven  weeks  after  cliild- 
bearing;,  as  often  as  (he  fwallowed  fome 
magnefia  alba,  felt  immediately  a  kind  of 
quivering  motion  propagated  through 
her  whole  body.  The  fame  perfon,  as 
often  as  (he  took  a  draught  of  lime-wa- 
ter, obfen^ed  the  palms  of  her  hands, 
which  before  were  foft  and  moift,  be- 
come at  once  di*y  and  hard.  It  was  re- 
markable, that  neither  crabs  eyes,  nor 
chalk,  occaiioned  any  fuch  uneafy  feel- 
ing as  the  magnefia  did. 

When  my  ftomach  and  bowels  have 
been  out  of  order,  and  affected  with  an 
uneafy  fenfation  from  wind,  I  have  not 
only  been  fenfible  of  a  general  debility 
and  flatnels  of  Ipirits,  but  the  unexpect- 
ed 


of  Nervous   Disorders.  i^^ 

ed  opening  of  a  door,  or  any  llich  tri- 
flins:  unforefeen  accident,  would  inftant- 
ly  occaflon  an  odd  fenfation  about  my 
heart,  extending  itleli'  from  thence  to 
my  head  and  arms,  and,  in  a  lefTer  de- 
gree, to  the  inferior  parts  of  my  body. 
At  other  times,  when  my  ilomach  is  in 
a  firmer  ftate,  I  have  no  fuch  feelings, 
or  at  leaft  in  a  very  fmall  degree,  from 
caufes  which  might  be  thought  more 
apt  to  produce  them. 

From  what  has  been  faid,  we  may 
fee,  that  faintings,  tremors,  palpitations 
of  the  heart,  convulfive  motions,  and 
great  fearfulnefs,  may  be  often  owing 
more  to  the  infirm  ftate  of  the  firft  paf- 
fages,  than  to  any  fault  either  in  the 
brain  or  heart.  But  it  would  be  un- 
neceflary  to  infift  farther  on  this  head, 
as  the  powers  which  the  alimentary  ca- 
nal, when  its  nerves  are  difagreeably  af- 
fected, muft  have  in  producing  difor- 
ders  in  the  moft  diftant  parts  of  the  bo- 
dy, cannot  be  doubted  of  by  thofe  who 

attend 


13^  Of  the   Causes 

attend  to  that  wonderful  and  widely  ex- 
tended fympathy  which  obtains  between 
it  and  almoft  the  whole  fyftem  *.  What 
has  been  faid  may  be  fufficient  to  lliew, 
how  much  a  delicate  or  unnatm-al  Hate 
of  the  nerves  of  the  alimentary  canal 
muft  dilpofe  people  to  nervous,  hypo- 
chondriac, and  hyfleric  complaints.  But 
further,  wlien,  through  the  fault  of  the 
ftomach  and  inteftines,  the  digeftion  is 
imperfe(fi:ly  carried  on,  the  ill  prepared 
chyle  may  lay  a  fomidation  in  the  blood 
for  exciting  a  variety  of  nervous  fym- 
ptoms,  as  will  afterwards  more  fully  ap- 
pear. 

Since  the  flronger  or  weaker  effefts 
of  emetics  and  cathartics  muft  depend, 
entirely,  on  the  different  conftitution 
of  the  nerves  of  the  prinid;  vias,  and  the 
quantity  of  mucus  defending  them,  it  is 
eafy  to  fee  that  the  dofes  of  thofe  medi- 
cines can  neither  be  certainly  determined 
-by  the  ages  nor  iizes  of  the  patients,  nor 

*  See  above  chapter  i.  No.  1 1. 


c)/' Nervous   Disorders.       137 

by  the  quantity  of  blood   in  their  \e£- 
lels. 

It  is  owing  alone  to  the  different 
fenlibility  whicli  the  nerves  of  the  ali- 
mentary canal,  in  different  perfons, 
have  of  various  Jlimiiliy  that  the  feveral 
vomiting  and  purging  medicines  have 
flich  different  effects. — That  the  ftrongefl 
emetics  icarce  move  Ibme  people,  while, 
in  others,  the  mildefl  are  apt  to  have 
too  great  an  operation. — That  a  few 
grains  of  rhubarb  fhall  purge  and  gripe 
one  patient  feverely,  and  a  drachm  of 
the  fame  medicine  have  no  fenlible  ef- 
fect on  another. — That  a  drachm  and  a 
half  of  foluble  Tartar  fhall  prove  a 
ftronger  purgative  to  fbme,  than  four 
ounces  of  facred  tin^lure. — That  child- 
ren are  often  harder  to  purge  than  fome 
adults'*. — That  worms,   tough  phlegm 

and 

*  It  is  here  to  be  obferved  that  in  children,  frequently, 
and  alio  fometimes  In  adults,  vomiting  and  purging  medicines 
have  much  lefs  effeft  than  might  be  expefted,  confidering 
the  delicacy  of  their  nerves,  on  account  of  the  ftomach  and 

inteftines 


rg8  Of  the  Causes 

and  other  noxious  humours,  lodging  in 
the  ftomach  and  bowels,  produce  very 
diiFerent  effects  in  different  perfbns; 
and  that  the  bark,  which  generally 
makes  the  body  coftive,  occafions  gripes 
and  purging  in  fome.  And  is  it  not  to 
be  afcribed  chiefly,  if  not  folelyy  to  the 
different  conftitution  of  the  nerves  in 
different  animals,  that  what  is  highly 
noxious  to  fome,  proves  wholefome  food 
to  others  ?  Thus  the  cicuta  aquatica, 
which  is  eat  by  goats  without  any 
harmf,  is  a  deadly  poifon  to  men  and 
other  animals. 

Wherein  confifl  the  various  kinds 
and  degrees  of  fenfibility  which  the 
nerves  of  the  alimentary  canal  and  other 
organs  polTefs,  Ave  no  more  know,  than 
we  do  their  peculiar  ftrufture,  or  how 
they  come  to  be  endued  with  fenfation 
at  all:  but  that  the  particular  fenfibili- 
ty 

intellines  being  lined  either  with   a  great  deal  of  natural 
mucus,  or  morbid  flime. 

t  Sv^encke  dijfertat.  de  c'lciit.  aq^uat.  Ge/neru 


.of  Nervous    Disorders.      139 

ty  of  the  nerves  of  the  gullet,  flomach 
and  inteflines  is  often  greatly  changed 
by  difeafes,  even  when  the  nervous  fy- 
ftem  in  general  is  not  much  altered,  we 
know  from  experience  *.  Nor  is  there, 
perhaps,  to  be  found  a  ftronger  inflance 
of  this  than  in  the  hydro^phohia  confequent 
on  the  bite  of  a  mad  dog ;  where  the 
pureft  water  excites  fuch  convviliive  mo- 
tions of  the  gullet,  flomach,  diaphragm 
and  abdominal  mufcles,  that,  after  a 
few  attempts  to  fwallow  it,  the  fight  of 
any  fluid,  and  efpecially  if  it  touches 
the  patient's  lips,  will  inllantly  affecl  him 
w4th  horror,  and  throw  him  into  violent 
convulfions    and    vomiting.      In    fome 

cafes 

•  Since  it  is  probable  that  the  nerves  are  partly  nourifh- 
ed  by  the  fluids  diftributed  to  that  produftion  of  the  pia 
tnater  which  furrounds  their  medullar)'  fuhltance  ;  it  is  eafy 
to  fee  that  the  nerves  of  a  particular  organ  may  have  their 
fenfibility  increafed,  diminifhed  or  otherwife  changed  by 
fluids  that  are  improper,  or  of  an  acrid  nature,  being  fent 
to  tkem  ;  when,  in  the  mean  time,  the  brain  and  nervous 
fyltem,  in  general,  may  be  found,  and  fufFer  in  no  other 
way,  but  by  fympathy  with  that  organ  whofe  nerves  are 
morbidly  afFefted. 


1^6  Of  the  Causes 

cafes  (altiio*  thefe  more  rarely  happen) 
the  nerves  aHb  of  the  intelHnes  become 
fo  far  depraved  in  their  feeling,  that  li- 
quors can  no  more  be  admitted  by  in- 
jeftion  into  the  great  guts,  than  into 
the  ftomach  by  deglutition.  Nay,  it 
fliould  feem  that,  fometimes,  not  only 
the  nerves  of  the  alimentary  canal  are 
flrangely  altered  in  this  difeafe,  but  al- 
fo  thofe  of  the  face,  and  perhaps  of  the 
whole  fiirface  of  the  body,  lince  we  are 
told  of  hydrophobic  patients,  who  could 
not  even  bear  a  blaft  of  cool  air  *. 

How  tliis  change  is  produced  in  the 
nerves  of  the  fii'fl  palTages  or  other  parts 
in  the  Jy^drophohia,  or  in  what  it  con- 
lifts,  is,  perhaps,  one  of  thofe  difficulties 
which  phyficians  may  defpair  of  being 
ever  able  to  explain.  One  tiling,  how- 
ever, is  certain,  that,  in  men  as  well  as 
dogs,  who  have  died  of  that  difeaie,  the 
gullet    and   ftomach    have    been    often 

found 

*  Philof.  Tranfadl.    abridged,    vol.  v.  p.  366,   and  Ad. 
Acad.  Moguntin.  torn,  i.  J>,  ^J^\. 


of  Nervous  Disorders.      141 

found  free  of  any  vifible  inflammation ; 
whence  the  difeafe  muil  hav€  had  its  feat 
either  in  the  nerves  themfelves,  or  in  vef- 
lels  frnaller  than  thofe  which  carry  red 
blood.  But  whatever  may  be  the 
change  made  by  this  diftemper  on  the 
nerves  of  the  ahmentary  canal,  or  in 
what  manner  foever  the  canine  poifbii 
produces  this  change,  we  know  that  if, 
from  any  caufe,  the  nerves  of  the  fauces, 
gullet  and  ftomach  fliould  acquire  a  fen- 
iibihty,  fomething  ilmilar  to  that  Avhich 
the  nerves  of  the  larynx  and  trachea  are 
naturally  endued  with,  the  moft  violent 
convulfive  motions  of  thofe  parts,  and 
retchings  to  vomit  would  enfue,  upon 
attempting  to  fwallow  even  the  mildeft 
liquors.  In  this,  however,  the  fenfibir 
lity  of  the  fauces  and  gullet,  in  the  bj- 
drophohiay  differs  from  that  of  the  larynx 
and  trachea  in  a  natural  flate,  that  thefe 
lafl:  parts  fuffer  flill  more  from  folidg 
^han  liquors  of  a  rnild  natiu'e ;    whereas 


142  Of  the  Cal'ses,    6^c, 

the  former  are  difagreeably  afFed^ed  by- 
liquids  alone. 

But  to  return. — As  a  too  great  fen^ 
libility  of  the  nervous  lyftem  in  general, 
or  an  unnatural  delicacy  of  the  llomach 
and  inteftines  or  other  organs  in  parti- 
cular, do  not,  commonly,  of  thenifelves 
produce  thofe  various  fymptoms  which 
go  by  the  name  of  nervous,  hypochon- 
driac and  hyfleric,  I  come  next  to  in- 
quu'e  into  thofe  feveral  occafional  cau- 
fes,  which,  meeting  with  the  predhpo- 
fing  ones  above  mentioned,  may  bring 
on  this  numerous  train  of  difeafes. 


CHAP. 


[     143     ] 


CHAP.     IV. 

Of  the  occafional  Caiifes  of  Nervous, 
Hypochondriac,  and  Hyste- 
ric   Diforders, 

'nr^HESE  are  either  to  be  found  in 
the  blood,  or  they  have  their  leat 
in  fome  particular  organ  of  the  body. 
The  former  I  fhall  call  general,  the  lat- 
ter, particular  occafional  caufes. 

The  general  occafional  caufes  may 
be  reduced  to  three,   viz, 

I.  Some  morbid  matter  bred  in  the 
blood. 

n.  The  diminution  or  retention  of 
fome  accuilomed  evacuation. 

HI.  The  want  of  a  fuflicient  quan- 
tity of  blood,  or  of  blood  of  a  proper 
denfityo 

L  The 


144  Of  the   Causes 

I.  Something  bred  in  the  blood, 
and  not  carried  off  by  any  of  the  excre- 
tories,  difagreeably  affe^li ng  the  nerves, 
as  often  as  it  comes  into  contact  with 
them ;  or  forming  obilru(ftions  in  the 
fmall  vefTels,  and  producing  different 
fymptoms,  according  to  the  parts  it  at- 
tacks. 

That  many  of  the  fymptoms  com- 
monly called  nervous,  hjpocbondriacy  or 
byjleric,  are  frequently  owing  to  ibme 
noxious  matter  in  the  blood,  affecting,  at 
different  times,  different  parts  of  the  bo- 
dy, I  have  been  fully  convinced  by  ma- 
ny cafes  which  have  occurred  in  my 
pracftice,  but  fliall  only  mention  two, 
AvJiich  feem  to  prove  this  point  fufEci- 
ently. 

I,  A  BOY,  often  years  of  age,  of  a 
very  feniible  nervous  f)."ftem,  who,  in 
December  IJ^J,  had  been  feized  with 
a  palpitation  of  his  heart,  fell  from  his 
Horfe  about  the  beginning  of  January. 
From  this  time  the  palpitation  left  him ; 

but. 


of  Nervous    Disorders.  145 

but,  in  a  few  clays  after,  he  was  attack- 
e'd  with  a  violent  headach,  returning 
Ibmetiiues  once  a  day,  at  other  times  on- 
ly every  3d  or  4th  day.  Dming  the  fit, 
his  pvilfe  became  fmaller  and  quicker, 
and  often  intermitted  ;  his  feet  were 
cold,  but,  by  the  violence  of  the  pain, 
a  plentiful  fweat  broke  out  and  relie- 
ved him.  As  thefe  headachs  continued 
to  increafe,  the  patient  loll  his  flomach 
and  fiefli,  and  looked  pale.  By  the  ufe, 
chiefly,  of  an  electuary  of  the  bark  and 
valerian,  in  lefs  than  three  weeks  the 
pain  in  the  head  abated  greatly ;  but  his 
appetite  grew  worfe,  and  he  often  com- 
plained of  a  nanfea,  Thefe  fymptoms, 
however,  were  all  removed,  in  four  or 
five  days,  by  fome  warai  ftomachic  and 
cordial  medicines ;  but  were  fucceeded 
by  an  intolerable  pain  a-crofs  the  mid- 
dle of  his  belly,  which,  in  the  fpace  of 
eight  days,  returned  five  or  fix  times, 
and  not  only  affed:ed  his  pulfe,  as  the 
headach  had  done,  but,  fometimes,  oc- 
K  cafioned 


146  Of  the    Cavses 

cafioncd  a  difficulty  and  pain  in  making- 
water.  This  pain  no  fooner  left  liis  bel- 
ly, than  the  headach  returned  with 
greater  violence  than  ever,  fo  that  the 
boy  would  faint  in  Tome  of  the  worft  pa- 
roxyfms.  It  had  no  certain  periods, 
coming  fbmetimes  twice  a-day,  fome- 
times  only  once  in  two  days,  and  was 
attended  with  a  fenie  of  fuffocation 
from  wind,  and  a  lump  in  his  throat. 
He  was  eafieft  in  the  night  when  he  flept 
or  lay  quiet,  but  any  confiderable  mo- 
tion of  his  body  alwavs  raifed  his  head- 
ach.  Before  the  fits,  he  was  obferved 
to  be  uncommonly  lively,  and  diipoied 
to  laugh.  On  the  21ft  of  February,  at 
two  in  the  afternoon,  he  was  feized  with 
fits  of  involuntary  laughter,  between 
which  he  complained  of  a  llrange  fmeU, 
and  of  pins  pricking  his  nofe  ;  he  talk- 
ed incoherently,  ftared  in  an  odd  man- 
ner, and  Ills  complexion  changed  to  a 
livid  colour  ;  immediately  after,  he  was 
feized  with  convullions,    and  then  fell 

into 


of  Nervous   Disorders.  147 

into  a  faintingfit,  which  laded  near  half 
an  hour.  Wiien  his  pulfe,  breathing, 
and  ienfes  returned,  he  complained  of 
a  great  coldnefs  and  pain  in  the  back 
part  of  his  head,  and  vomited  his  din- 
ner, with  fome  tough  phlegm.  At  this 
time  his  appetite  w^as  good,  and  after- 
wards it  became  greater  than  it  ufed  to 
be  in  perfect  health. 

On  the  9th  o^  March,  fome  purulent 
matter  was  difcharged  from  his  right  no- 
flril,  and  much  about  the  fame  time,  a 
fmall  quantity  more  came  from  the  right 
ear ;  after  w  hich  he  had  fcarce  any  vio- 
lent fits  of  the  headach,  but  a  continued, 
tho'  lefs  fevere,  pain  in  die  back-part  of 
the  head  ;  which  being  greatly  increa- 
ied  by  motion,  he  lay  conflantly  a-bed, 
and  moflly  on  his  back.  Altho'  he  had 
a  confiderable  thirft,  and  drank  plenti- 
fully ;  yet,  during  the  whole  month  of 
March,  he  did  not  make  above  fix  oun- 
ces of  water  in  tw^enty-four  hom's,  and 
iweated  none. 

K  2  About 


148  Of  the   Causes 

About  the  beginning  of  ApriU  the 
complaints  of  his  head  were  fo  much  a- 
bated,  that  he  covild  bear  fitting  up  in 
a  chair  ;  he  began  to  make  water  more 
plentifully,  and,  when  any  thing  ruffled 
him,  voided  great  quantities  of  quite 
limpid  lu'ine.  During  the  month  of 
Mrzy  he  continued  to  grow  better;  and, 
before  the  end  of  Jiimy  he  had  perfect- 
ly recovered. 

In  February  ly^f)^    he  began  to  com- 
plain of  a  conflant  headach,  which,  tho' 
worfe  at  times,  yet  was  never  fo  violent 
as  the  year  before,  nor  alfedied  his  pulfe 
or  ftomach  :  But  now,  he  frequently  faw 
objefts   double.      In    the  beginning  of 
March,  fome  purulent  matter  came  from 
one  of  his  noflrils,    and  foon  after  the 
headach  abated,  but  he  loft  his  appetite, 
and  was  attacked  with  a  pain  in  the  left 
ilde  of  his  belly,   between  the  fhort  ribs 
and  OS  iliiimy  confined  to  a  fpace  little  lar- 
ger than  the  breadth  of  a  fliilling.    This 

pain  was  often  fo  fevere,  as  to  make  him 

readv 


of  Nervous  Disorders.  14^ 

ready  to  faint :  fometimes  it  fliifted,  and 
then  he  was  feized  with  fatiguing  fits  of 
involuntary  laughter.  His  head  was  al- 
ways eafy  when  the  pain  in  his  belly  v/as 
worft.  In  the  funimer  he  recovered  his 
health  as  the  year  before  ;  and  next  win- 
ter complained  little  or  nothing  of  his 
head,  but,  for  fome  months,  had  a  wea  k- 
nefs  and  painful  feeling  in  Ms  left  eye, 
when  expofed  to  the  leaft  light.  As 
there  was  no  inflammation  in  this  eye, 
the  pain  feemed  to  be  owing  to  too  great 
a  fenfibility  of  the  retina. 

2.  An  unmarried  Avoman,  aged  be- 
tween 25  and  30,  had  an  irregular  ague 
in  Aiigufl  and  September  1757,  of  which 
no  lymptoms  remained  in  OBoher^  except 
a  fweating  every  other  day,  if  file  lay 
long  in  bed.  This  flie  prevented  by 
getting  up  before  breakfall  ;  but,  in 
eight  or  ten  days  after,  file  was  feized 
with  a  tightnefs  in  her  breaft,  which  oc- 
cafioned  a  cough,  but  without  expedlo- 
ration.      This   oppreilion  at  her  breaft, 

with 


150  Of  the  Cavses 

with  the  cough  increaliiig,  altho*  the 
pulfe  was  good,  I  thought  it  proper  to 
make  her  lole  eight  ounces  of  blood  ; 
but  neither  this  evacuation,  nor  a  bh- 
fter  afterwards  apphed  to  her  back,  gave 
any  rehef.  She  ufed  a  mixture  with  the 
acetum  fcillitkum,  was  vomited,  purged 
with  facred  tinchirc,  took  camphire,  ca- 
ftor,  afa  fostida  and  laudanum,  with  very 
little  benefit :  At  laft,  about  the  begin- 
ning of  November,  a  mufk  julep  taken 
for  a  forDiight,  aimoft  quite  freed  her 
of  her  diforder. 

After  having  continued  during  the 
winter  in  pretty  good  health,  fhe  began, 
in  April,  to  complain  of  pains  in  her 
legs  and  knees,  but  moftly  in  her  body, 
Altho'  her  pulfe  was  not  altered,  yet 
twelve  ounces  of  blood  were  taken  a- 
way,  which  had  a  thin  iizy  fkin  of  a 
blueifh  colour.  Some  days  after  the 
pain  in  her  lides,  ftomach,  ftermm  and 
back  increafed,  fhe  was  much  troubled 
with  wind  in  the  firft  palFages,  and  made 

very 


of  Nervous    Disorders.  151 

very  little  water.  The  fenfe  of  fufFoca- 
tion  and  dry  cough,  which  (lie  had  in 
October,  returned,  and  Die  was  feized, 
efpecially  in  the  evenings,  with  liich 
violent  catchings  or  convulfive  motions 
of  her  legs,  thighs,  and  almoil  her 
whole  body,  as  not  only  to  (hake  the 
bed,  but  the  room  in  which  flie  lay.  At 
this  time,  flie  was  vomited,  bliftered  on 
the  back,  and  took  draughts  o^  fp.  Mm- 
derer.  with  Jal,  vol.  ammon,  but  without 
any  advantage.  By  the  ufe,  however, 
of  bolufes  of  camphire  and  mufk,  with 
fmall  dofes  o^  laudanum  at  bed-tune,  ilie 
got  pretty  free  of  the  catchings  ;  and 
tlie  tightneis  and  dry  cough  were  alfo 
ieflened;  but  the  pains  in  her  fides,  bow- 
els and  legs  continued  as  bad  as  ever. 
On  the  7th  of  Ma^  flie  complained  of  a 
pain  and  fwelling  in  one  of  her  arm-pits, 
which  daily  increafed  ;  and  her  pulfe, 
which  had  generally  beat  only  between 
60  and  70  times  in  a  minute,  now  ex- 
ceeded 100,  •  She  lofl  ten  ounces  of  blood, 

which 


152  Of  the    Causes 

which  was  very  fizy;  emollient  fomen- 
tations and  fiippurating  poultices  were 
applied  to  the  arm-pit ;  notwithftanding 
which,  the  pain  increafed  to  fuch  a  de- 
gree, that  (he  was  obliged  to  take  every 
night  a  large  dofe  of  laudanum  to  procure 
reft.  From  the  time  this  fwellingand  pain 
began  under  her  arm,  the  fenfe  of  fuffo- 
cation,  the  cough,  the  other  pains  and 
catchings  abated,  and  left  her  intirely, 
about  the  20th  of  A/^y,  after  the  tumor 
had  broke  and  difcharged  fome  bloody 
matter.  During  both  illnefles,  flie  con- 
tinued perfecftly  regular. 

From  thefe  two  cafes  it  appears,  that 
various  fymptoms  of  the  nervous  kind, 
mav  be  owins;  to  fome  morbid  matter  in 
the  blood,  occafioning  different  com- 
plaints, according  to  the  parts  upon 
wliich  it  falls,  even  when  there  is  no  rea- 
fon  to  fufpeft  any  obflrud:ion  in  the  vif- 
cera  of  the  abdomen^  or  fault  in  the  uterus. 
In  the  firft  cafe,  it  is  not  eafy  to  fay, 
what  gave  rife  to  the  difeafe  \  but,  in  the 

fecond. 


I 

of  Nervo.us    Disorders.  153 

fecond,  an  agucifli  diforder  imprudent- 
ly checked,  leaving  a  taint  in  the  blood, 
produced  a  fenfe  of  fufrocation,  the  dry 
cough,  pains  in  various  parts  of  the  bo- 
dy, and  fpafmodic  contradlions  of  the 
mufcles ;  which  complaints  were  never 
intireiy  cured  till  fome  noxious  matter 
I  was  difcharged  by  the  flippuration  of 
a  gland  in  the  arm-pit.  Nor  can  it 
appear  Itrange,  that  fo  fmall  an  evacu- 
ation Uiould  purify  the  blood,  and  re- 
lieve the  patient,  when,  in  the  plague  it- 
felf,  a  proper  fuppuration  of  one  of  the 
glands  of  the  neck,  arm-pit,  or  groin, 
will  prove  a  perfed:  crifis. 

As  a  further  proof,  that  complaints 
of  the  nerv^ous  or  hyfleric  kind  often 
proceed  from  Ibme  morbid  humour  in 
the  blood,  I  have  frequently  feen  them 
relieved  by  an  itching  between  the 
toes,  red  puftles  appearing  on  the  bread 
and  belly,  or  fome  other  cutaneous  e- 
ruption. 

That 


1 54  Of  the   Causes 

That  taint  or  morbid  matter  in  the 
blood,  which  occafions  many  fymptoms 
of  the  nervous  kind,  may  proceed  from 
very  different  canfes;  fuch  as,  improper 
food,  a  fcorbutic  *  or  fcrophulous  ha- 
bit, fevers  Avhich  have  had  imperfect 
crffeSy  or  other  difeafes  not  fully  cured, 
elpecially  the  cutaneous  diibrders  ; 
when  the  morbid  matter,  inftead  of  be- 
ing thrown  off  by  the  {k\n,  is  reallumed 
into  the  blood,  and  depoflted  on  fome 
of  the  internal  parts.  But  by  far  the 
mofl  frequent  taint  in  the  blood  affect- 
ing the  nerves,  is  an  arthritic  matter, 
falling  at  different  times  on  different 
paits  of  the  body. 

Araeteus  has  long  ago  taken  no- 
tice,   that,  in  fome,  the  gout  wanders 

through 

*  By  fcorbutic  is  not  iiere  meant,  that  fault  in  the  blocd 
which  produces  the  true  fcurv  y,  to  which  people  who  live 
3t  fea  and  in  marOiy  places  are  fo  fubjecl,  but  that  humour 
which  has  been  common'v-,  though  improperly,  called 
'coibutic,  and  which,  when  it  is  carried  to  the  (kin,  in- 
ilead  of  livid  blotches,  produces  dry,  fcurfy  eruption?, 
fcabsj  tetters.  trV.  and,  when  in  a  high  degree,  the  lepra 
(ii-jTccruf/:, 


of  Nervous    Disorders.  155 

tlii'ongh  the  whole'  body  * ;  the  truth 
of  which  obfervation  has  been  confirm- 
ed by  later  writers  t>  and  Avould  have 
been  more  carefully  attended  to  by 
phyficians,  if  thofe  fymptoms  which  a- 
rofe  only  from  an  imperfe(^  gout,  had 
not  been,  for  the  moft  part,  either  llur- 
red  over,  under  the  ipecious  name  of 
nervous,  without  any  particular  inquiry 
into    then*    real    caufe,    or    confidered 

merely 

*  De  eaujis  et  fignh  morhorum^  lib.  xi.  cap.  xii. 

■\  "  Enimvero  ufu  medico  vel  parum  exercitatos,  hoc 
"  latere  nequit ;  archritide  (praecipue  frigida,  inerti,  lan- 
*'  guida  ;  maxima  vero  omnium  ea  fupprefTa,  retufaque) 
'•  aegrotantes,  interdum  humeri,  peftoris,  dcrfi,  lumbo- 
•'  rum,  aliarumque  in  ambitu  corporis  partium  dolore 
*'  vago  tanquam  rheumatico  ;  faepe  etiam  capitis  afFedli- 
*'  bus,  more  prorfus  hyfcerico;  alias,  aliis  in  corpora  malis, 
**  quafi  fcorbuticis  urgeri  ;  fepiffime  vero  valetudine  du- 
•'  bia,  et  in  tempus  diuturnum  incerta,  et  neutra  efle. 
"  Qui  quidem  eorum  flatus  ac  conditiones,  fenfu  remiffiori 
*'  et  leniori  gradu  morbofas  natales  fuos  arthritico  miaf- 
''  mati,  coeco,  in  corpus  fubrepenti,  et  eo  loci  clam  agenti, 
"  fe  debere,  ultro  videntur  agnofcere :  quinetiam  ali- 
*'  quando,  multos  poft  annos,  dubium  hunc  in  modum 
*'  actos  ;  tandem  apparente  paroxyfmo  arthritidis  ideoneo, 
••  de  iftoriun  origine  et  natura  malorum  arthritica,  omnis 
*'  fublata  dubitatio  eft."  Mufgra'vc  de  arthrittde  anomalqy 
fap.  xix.  p.  316, 


I §6  Of  the   Causes 

merely  as  the  efFecls  of  the  hypochon- 
driac or  hyfleric  diieafe,  or  of  the  fcur- 
vy  ;  elpecially  in  fuch  as,  having  never 
had  a  regular  fit  of  the  gout,  were  not 
fiiipe^led  of  any  arthritic  humour. 

Were  it  neceflary,  many  cafes  might 
be  produced  to  (hew,  that  nervous,  hy- 
pochondriac, and  hyfleric  complaints 
are  often  owing  to  an  imperfed:  gout 
wandering  through  the  body;  but  I 
ihall  only  mention  the  two  following. 

I.  A  GENTLEMAN  aged  §8,  tempe- 
rate, and  fubjecl  to  no  diftemper,  except 
a  rheum.atifm,  of  which,  for  fome  years, 
he  had  frequent  returns  in  his  loins, 
in  Augufl  1 752,  after  a  fevere  fit  of  this 
kind  had  fuddenly  left  him,  was  feized 
with  a  great  depreffion  of  fpirits,  often 
attended  with  a  ficknefs  at  flomach, 
and  a  particular  fenfation  about  the 
epigaftric  region,  which  he  could  not 
well  defcribe.  In  leis  than  two  months, 
by  proper  medicines  and  exercife,  he 
i^ot  free  of  thoie  complaints  ;  but  had 

not 


of  Nervous    Disorders.  157 

not  long  enjoyed  good  health,  when  he 
began  to  feel,  frequently,  a  flight  palpi- 
tation of  his  heart,  which  was  attended 
with  an  intermiffion  of  his  pulfe.  This 
was  fucceeded  by  the  lumbago^  during 
w^hicli  he  found  his  appetite  and  fpirits 
better  than  at  other  times,  and  indeed 
as  good  as  in  his  beft  health.  After- 
wards, he  had  frequent  returns  of  the 
diforder  about  his  flomach,  with  low 
fpirits,  and  a  naiifea^  efpecially  in  the 
morning ;  and  complained  fometimes  of 
a  difficulty  of  breathing,  but  without 
any  cough  or  fpitting.  This  perfon, 
who  never  had  had  the  gout,  nor  fu- 
Ipedled  it,  being  told,  that  all  his  com- 
plaints were  owing  to  an  arthritic  mat- 
ter wandering  through  his  body,  feem- 
ed  furprifed  at  firft,  but  was  foon  af- 
ter convinced,  by  a  flight  pain  and  in- 
flammation, M^iich  feized  one  of  his 
great  toes  ;  and,  during  the  few  days  it 
lafled,  relieved  him  of  his  lownefs  of  fpi- 
rits, and  complaints  of  his  fliomach.   He 

was 


15^  Of  the   Causes 

was  for  ieveral  years,  both  before  and 
after  tliis  fit  of  tlie  gout,  afFefted,  at 
times,  with  a  fmall  running  from  the 
urethra,  and  a  pain  in  the  left  groin, 
wliich  fonietimes  attacked  the  teflicle  of 
that  fide.  Thefe  fyniptoms  I  confider- 
ed,  as  well  as  the  others,  to  be  purely 
arthritic,  fince  he  had  never  in  his  life 
had  any  venereal  infection. 

Tea,  coffee,  and  all  flatulent  ali- 
ments, hurt  this  patient.  Flefli-meats, 
old  cheefe,  vvinc,  porter,  and  bitters 
with  the  bark,  fteel,  and  exercifc,  efpe- 
cially  riding,  did  him  mod  fervice. 

2.  A  GENTLEMAN  aged  40,  generally 
healthy,  who,  from  June  1752,  had  been 
troubled  with  pains  in  his  heels,  and 
fometimes  in  the  middle  of  his  left  foot, 
in  the  endof  Mr?y  1755,  about  i^GWQn  in 
the  morning,  awaked  Vvdth  an  unuflial 
fenfation  in  his  breafl,  and  a  faintnefs, 
but  without  any  ficknefs  at  his  ftomach, 
or  fwimming  in  his  head :  his  puUe  wa^ 
flirprifingly  irregular  and  intermitting. 

Twelve 


of  Nervous   Disorders.        159 

Tv/elve  ounces  of  blood  were  taken 
from  him  of  a  natural  appearance,  he 
Iwallovved  fome  warm  wine  and  water, 
fp.  corn.  ccrv.  tind.  caflor  and  a  folu- 
tion  of  afa  footida,  but  without  any  re- 
markable effe<^. 

Upon  getting  up,  and  walking  thro' 
the  room,  he  found  himfelf  quite  free 
of  a  pain,  which,  for  fome  months,  he 
had  felt  in  the  middle  of  his  left  foot. 
About  ten,  he  began  to  make  pale  urine, 
and,  in  five  hours,  voided  five  Engliili 
pints  of  it,  altho'  what  he  had  drunk, 
during  this  time,  did  not  amount  to  half 
that  quantity.  About  noon,  partly  to 
abate  this  immoderate  difcharge,  and 
partly  to  lefTen  the  too  great  irritability 
of  the  heart  by  bracing  the  vifcera  of 
the  lower  belly,  he  girded  himfelf  very 
tight  with  a  broad  belt,  and,  in  three  or 
four  minutes  after,  the  languor,  and 
that  unufual  lenfation  within  his  breafl 
ceafed  at  once,  and  his  pulle  became 
regular  and  natural.  Next  day  he  began 

to 


t6o  Of  the   Causes 

to  be  troubled  with  wind  in  his  ftomach 
and  bov/els,  v/hich  did  not  occaiion  any 
(liai-p  pain,  but  a  diiagreeable  fenfation 
and  great  lov/nefs  of  fpirits. 

After  thefe  fymptoms  had  continu- 
ed by  fits  for  four  or  live  d^tys,  he  rode 
out  fome  miles  for  exercife,  and  retui'n- 
ed  home,  entirely  free  from  his  com- 
plaints ;  only,  by  being  expofed  to  a  cold 
eaft  wind,  he  got  a  fwelling,  and  a  fmall 
degree  of  inflammation  in  one  of  his 
tonfils.  Having  fupped  as  ufual,  he 
went  to  bed,  and,  after  a  fliort  fleep, 
waked  quite  free  of  the  inflammation  in 
the  throat,  but  with  a  great  faintneis, 
attended  with  a  very  quick  and  fmall 
pulfe.  A  glafs  or  two  of  claret,  and  a 
bit  of  bread,  removed  this  faintneis  for 
the  time  ;  and,  upon  its  retiu'n,  it  was 
cured  by  the  fame  remedy.  For  fome 
weeks  after,  he  was  much  troubled  with 
flatulencies  in  his  flomach  and  bowels, 
with  low  fi)irits  fonietimes,  though  in  a 
much  lefs  degree  than  before,   and  did 

not 


of  Nervous   Disorders.  i6i 

not    entii^ely    recover     his    health    and 
itrength   in  leveral  months.      The  pain 
in  his  heels,  which  he  had  felt  little  du- 
ring moft    of  this   time,  returned   and 
continued  pretty  conftant  till  the  end  of 
Augufl  1 757,  when  he  had  a  flight  fit  of 
the  gout,  with  a  fwelling  and  inflamma- 
tion in    his  right  heel.      Since  that  pe- 
riod,  as  well  as  before  it,   he  has  been 
often  troubled  with  a  giddinefs,  and  fly- 
ing pains  in  his  head,  arms,  and  hands, 
frequent  pains  in  his  heels,  and  wind  in 
the  prim£  vi^e. 

These  cafes  need  no  comment.  The 
fymptoms  with  which  the  patients  wxre 
affecled,  mufl  have  proceeded  from  an 
irregular  gout,  the  matter  of  which, 
inftead  of  going  to  the  extremities,  wan- 
dered through  the  body.  The  flomach 
complaints  could  not  be  owing  to  any 
tough  phlegm,  or  other  crudities  ;  for 
the  laft  perfon  had  never,  in  his  life, 
thrown  up,  by  a  vomit,  any  thing  of 
this  kind  ;   and  the  other,  who  took  fe- 

L  veral 


1 62  Of  the    Causes 

veral  vomits  during  his  illnefs,  never 
appeared  to  have  much  of  a  foul  fto- 
mach ;  nay,  though  he  was  often  oppref- 
fed  ^vith  a  heavy  licknefs  and  a  naiifca 
in  the  night  and  morning;  yet  he  grew 
eafy  before  dinner,  and  then  eat  with 
as  good  an  appetite  and  digeftion,  as  in 
his  befl  health. 

From  what  has  been  laid,  it  may  ap- 
pear,  that   fome    morbid   matter  in  the 
blood,  either  arthritic  or  of  another  kind, 
may  be  often  the  cauie  of  nervous  com- 
plaints.     When   this  matter  is  carried 
fmoothly  along  with  the  blood,  without 
forming  obftruftions  in  any  of  the  vef- 
fels,  or  irritating  the  nerves,  it  gives  little 
trouble.      When  it  remains  fixed  in  the 
extremities,  or  the  mufcular  parts  of  the 
trunk  of  the  body,  it  will  only  occafion 
acliing  pains  of  the  goutifh  or  rheuma- 
tic kind:   but  when  it  is    depofited  on 
fiich  of  the  vifcera  as  are  very  fenfible, 
or  by  fympathy  are  apt,  ftrongly,  to  af- 
fect almofl  the  whole  body,  it  may  pro- 
duce 


of  Nervous    Disorders.  163 

duce  the  moft  of  thofe  iymptoms  which 
have  been  commonly  called  nervous, 
hypochondriac,  or  hyfteric  *.  This  mat- 
ter may,  in  general,  act  either  by  its  viP 
cidity  in  obilrud;ing  the  fmaller  veflels, 
and  thereby  ftretching  too  much  their 
feniible  fibres  and  nervous  filaments,  or 
by  its  acrimony  in  difagreeably  afFed:- 
ing  the  extremities  of  thoie  nerves  which 
it  touches  t* 

It  is  to  be  obferved,  however,  that 
the  kind  and  violence  of  the  fymptoms 
occafioned  by  this  morbific  matter ^  will 
not  only  be  different  according  to  the 
parts  which  it  affecfts,  but  in  proportion 
L    2  to 

*  See  above,  p.  97,  i^c6 

f  It  is  probable,  that  the  morbid  matter  in  the  blood, 
producing  nervous  complaints,  generally  proves  hurtful  by 
its  acrimony,  and  but  rarely  by  its  vifcidity  :  at  leaft  we 
know,  that  in  the  fmall  pox,  meafles,  and  continued  fe- 
vers, an  acrimony  in  the  blood,  by  ilimulating  the  brain 
and  nerves,  frequently  produces  a.  delirium,  tr^morSy  twitch- 
ings,  convulfions,  and  other  nervous  fymptoms ;  and  the 
.horror  febrilis,  or  fhuddering  upon  the  attack  of  a  fever,  is 
rather  owing  to  a  fpafmodic  contraftion  of  the  fmall  veflels, 
than  an  obftrudlion  of  them  from  vifcid  blood. 


164  Of  the  Causes 

to  the  greater  or  lefler  natural  delicacy 
or  fenfibility  of  the  patient's  nerves. 

Hence  it  feems  to  be,  that  men  of 
otherways  hale  and  ftrong  conftitutions, 
and  fome  robufl  women,  are  liable  to  a 
regular  gout,  and  but  little  to  nervous 
complaints.  Their  firmer  fibres  and  lefs 
delicate  nerves  do  not  predifpofe  them 
to  the  latter,  and  the  fh-ength  of  their 
digeilive  organs,  and  vafcular  fyftem, 
enables  them  to  tlnrow  off  the  arthritic 
matter  on  the  extremities,  by  which 
means  the  body  is  cleared  of  it. 

Men  of  a  middle  conftitution,  be- 
tween the  delicate  and  ftrong,  are,  from 
tliis  morbid  matter,  affefted  with  pains 
of  the  cold  rheumatic  kind,  and  various 
nervous  lymptoms  in  a  lefler  degree; 
and  fome  times  alfo  Avith  a  fit  of  the  true 
gout.  But  in  them,  this  diftemper  is 
not  commonly  fo  compleately  formed, 
as  to  clear  the  habit  of  the  artliritic  mat- 
ter, at  leaft  for  any  confiderable  time  ; 
for  foon  after  the  imperfect  fit  of  the 

gout. 


q/'  Nervous    Disorders.      165 

gout,    their  old  complaints  begin  to  re- 
turn. 

On  the  other  hand,  women  of  a  more 
delicate  habit,  and  men  of  weak  fibres 
and  very  fenfible  nerves,  have  more 
rarely  any  diforder  like  the  true  gout; 
either,  becaufe  in  fuch  conflitutions  the 
arthritic  matter  is  imperfectly  formed  ; 
or,  what  is  more  probable,  becaufe  the 
vital  organs  are  unable  to  throw  it  off 
upon  the  joints  and  extremities.  Hence 
this  morbid  caufe  in  the  blood,  inftead 
of  being  depofited  on  the  apoueiirofh, 
tendons,  ligaments,  and  membranes  of 
the  feet,  hands,  or  other  joints,  falls 
upon  different  parts  of  the  body,  and 
produces  fymptoms  almofl  as  differ- 
ent as  are  the  parts  which  it  attacks. 
Such,  for  inftance,  are  the  flying  pains, 
fpafmodic  contractions,  and  fudden  fen- 
fations  of  heat  and  cold  in  the  mufcles 
and  exterior  parts  of  the  body. — A  want 
of  appetite,  or  too  great  craving  and 
faintnefs,  a  naiijca  or  vomiting,  flatulent 

fwellings. 


1 66  Of  the   Cav sEs 

Avelllngs,  horborygmi,  watching,  low  ipi- 
rits,  cramps,  convulfions,  and  violent 
pains  in  the  flomach  and  bowels.  — An 
increaied  fecretion  offallva,  from  an  ir- 
ritation of  the  veffels  of  the  falivary 
glands. — The  globus  hyjieriais  in  the  gul- 
let.— A  Ipafmodic  ajihma  in  the  lungs. — 
Palpitations  and  irregular  motions  in 
the  heart. — An  excelfive  flow  of  pale  u- 
rinc,  or  fbmetimes  nephritic  pains  in  the 
kidneys. — A  hemicrania,  the  claims  hyjle- 
7-icuSy  or  lliooting  pains  in  the  head. — 
Belides  thefe,  I  have  feen  many  other 
fymptoms,  occalioned  by  an  imperfect 
or  an  u'regular  gout,  fuch  as  a  delirmn 
and  mania,  an  inflammation  in  one  of 
the  tonlils,  a  troublefome  djfuria  ;  a  vio- 
lent itching  between  the  toes  ;  a  fevere 
pain  about  the  c  anil  ago  enfiformis,  return- 
in'^twice  or  thrice  a-day,  elpecially  upon 
any  ftrong  affedion  of  the  mind  or  ef- 
fort of  the  body,  and  fometimes  attend- 
ed with  a  painful  fenlation  in  the  middle 
of  each  arm  ;    a  fenfe  of  a  burning  heat 

over 


of  Nervous    Disorders.      167 

over  the  whole  lurface  of  the  body,  ex- 
cept the  legs,  while,  in  the  mean  time, 
the  £kin  was  icarce  fenllbly  hotter  than 
in  a  flate  of  health,  and  the  pulfe  was 
under  80  in  a  minute.  In  one  patient, 
I  met  with  a  flight,  but  frequently  re- 
turning gonorrhcea,  from  a  gouty  humour 
falling  on  the  nerves  or  velTels  of  the  tt- 
rethra;  and,  in  another,  an  uneafy  itch- 
ing of  the  fcrotiim,  I  have  feen  three  cafes 
of  a  fliarp  pain  in  the  tefticles  from  the 
fame  caufe.  In  one  of  thefe  there  was  a 
confiderable  fwelling  along  with  the 
pain,  both  which  went  off  upon  the  gout 
coming  into  both  the  feet. 

All  tliis  is  confirmed  by  obferving, 
that  perfons  who  have  been  but  little 
troubled  before  with  thofe  fymptoms, 
commonly  called  nervous,  upon  the  rheu- 
matic or  rather  gouty  pains  leaving 
their  feet,  hands,  or  loins,  have  been 
feized  with  an  irregular  intermitting 
pulfe,  giddinefs,  faintnefs,  difficulty  in 
breathing,  naufca  and  vomiting,  iiatu- 
Jence  in  the  flomach  and  bowels,    de- 

prefllon 


r68  Of  the  Causes 

preflion  of  fpirits,   and  other  fymptoms 
of  the  like  kind  *. 

Such  complaints,  if  the  patient  has 
never  had  the  gout,  are  generally  called 
nervous;  but,  if  he  has  been  lubject  to  it, 
are  readily  enough  afcribed  to  the  ar- 
thritic matter  leaving  the  extremities, 
and  fixing  upon  the  head,  or  vifcera  of 
the  thorax  or  belly. 

This  difference,  however,  may  be 
obferved,  that  the  fymptoms  arifing 
from  the  retroceffion  of  the  true  gout, 

are 

*  As  the  arthritic  matter  affeif^ing  the  nerves  of  the  fto- 
mach,  net  cnly  occafions  the  fymptoms  now  mentioned, 
but  fo:netimes  extraordinary  languors,  an  univcrfal  debi- 
lity, anxiety,  and  faintings ;  it  is  noways  improbable,  that 
the  fudden  death  of  fevera!,  fubjed  to  a  wandering  gout, 
may  have  been  fometimcs  owing  to  its  afTcding  the  nerves 
of  the  Itomach  at  once,  and  in  fo  ftrong  a  manner,  as  not 
only  to  occafion  fainting,  but  a  total  fufpenfion  of  the  mo- 
tion of  the  heart :  and  this  will  appear  ftill  more  probable 
by  obferving,  that  fuch  perfons  have  often,  immediate'y 
before  their  death,  complained  of  a  fliarp  pain  or  ficknefs 
or  other  unufual  fenfation  in  their  ftomach.  In  fuch  cafes, 
the  caufe  of  the  death  will  be,  in  vain,  fought  for  in  the 
heart,  lungs,  brain,  or,  Indeed,  in  any  other  part  of  the 
body ;  for  the  arthritic  matter  affedling  the  ftomach  is  too 
fubtile  to  be  feen,  altho'  aftive  enough  to  dcftfoy. 


of  Nervous    Disorders.  16?^ 

are  generally  more  violent,  than  thofe 
which  are  occafioned  by  a  rheumatic  or 
imperfed:  arthritic  humour  wandering 
through  the  body. 

Upon  the  whole,  it  may  appear  that 
one  very  frequent  occafional  caufe  of 
many  nervous,  hypochondriac  and  hy- 
ileric  fymptoms,  is  fome  acrid  matter  in 
the  blood,  commonly  no  other  than  the 
arthritic  humour,  the  caufe  likewiie  of 
the  chronic  rheumatifm  and  true  sfout  *. 

It 

*  It  may  be  objefled,  that  nervous  and  hyfteric  com- 
plaints cannot  be  owing  to  any  noxious  matter  in  the  blood 
or  finer  fluids,  fince  violent  pains  and  other  fymptoms  of 
this  kind,  are  obferved  to  fhift  fo  fuddenly  from  one  place 
to  another,  that  we  can  fcarcely  conceive  this  to  be  owlno- 
to  the  tranflation  of  any  morbid  matter.  But  altho'  here, 
as  well  as  on  many  other  occafions,  we  are  obliged  to  own 
our  ignorance,  yet  we  have  no  more  reafon  to  deny  that 
nervous,  fpafmodic  or  hyfteric  difoiders  are  owing  to  fome 
acrid humcur  irritating  the  nerves  of  the  parts  afFefted,  or 
of  fome  other  parts,  with  which  they  have  a  remarkable 
fympathy,  than  that  the  gout  or  rheumatifm  proceed  from 
fuch  a  caufe,  becaufe  they  often  move  fuddenly  from  one 
place  to  another,  efpecially  upon  the  imprudent  application 
of  topical  remedies.  When  the  gout  leaves  the  head  or 
Itomach,  and  immediately  feizes  the  feet ;  is  the  arthri- 
tic matter,  which  afFefted  the  veffels  of  the  former  parts, 

inft^tly 


1 70  Of  the  Causes 

It  may  be  proper  to  oblerve,  that, 
altho*  a  gouty  humour  in  the  blood 
may  be  much  oftener  the  caufe  of 
nervous  fymptoms  in  men  than  in  wo- 
men; yet,  in  the  latter,  many  com- 
plaints of  this  kind  do  certainly  flow 
from  that  fource.  Of  this  I  could  re- 
late many  inflances  which  have  occiu'- 
red  in  my  practice;  but,  that  I  may  not 
be  tedious,    I  lliall  only  mention  one. 

A  Lady  aged  60,  of  a  delicate  conftitu- 

tion, 

inftantly  carried  to  the  latter?  Or,  is  It  not  more  reafonable 
to  fuppofe,  that  the  gouty  matter,  which  abounds  in  the 
blood  or  finer  fluids,  as  foon  as  it  falls  particularly  on  the 
feet,  by  exciting  a  great  pain  there,  leflens  or  deflroys  the 
diforder  in  the  ftomach  or  head ;  and,  perhaps,  by  remo- 
ving fome  fpafmodic  contradtion  in  their  very  fmall  veffels, 
allows  the  gouty  matter,  that  was  fixed  in  them,  to  pafs 
through,  and  mix  itfelf  with  the  general  mafs  of  fluids  ? 
It  is,  further,  to  be  obferved,  that  many  fymptoms  of  the 
nervous  or  hyfteric  kind  feem  to  be  owing  not  to  any  acrid 
matter  immediately  irritating  tlie  parts  which  fufFer,  but 
cnly  afFeding  the  ftcmach  and  intellines ;  whence,  by  means 
of  their  remarkable  fympathy  with  moft  other  parts  of  the 
body,  a  variety  of  fymptoms  are  occafioned,  which  either 
increafe  or  abate,  or  Ihift  from  place  to  place,  according 
as  the  nerves  of  the  firll  paflages  are  varioufly  affi^fted. 


o/ Nervous  Disorders.      171 

tion,  and  who  had  been  often  liable  to 
complaints  in  her  llomach,  upon  her 
becoming  free  from  flight  rheumatic 
pains,  which  fhe  ufed  to  feel  in  her 
arms,  began  to  beaffetled  with  an  a- 
verlion  to  food,  a  heavy  ficknefs,  and 
fometimes  a  vomiting ;  an  acute,  or  burn- 
ing pain  in  her  flomach,  fometimes  fliift- 
ing  from  it  to  her  bowels  ;  flatulence, 
belching,  palpitations,  and,  on  fbme  oc- 
cafions,  a  fenfe  of  faintnefs  at  the  fto- 
inach,  or  a  difficulty  of  breathing  :  Af- 
ter being  affected  with  thefe  various 
lymptoms,  which  fucceeded  one  ano- 
ther, without  any  regularity,  for  three  or 
four  weeks,  or  longer,  they  generally 
abated,  and  fometimes  went  quite  off, 
upon  fiiarp  pains  coming  into  the  thighs, 
legs,  and  feet,  which  lafl  not  only  felt 
hot,  but  were  often  fwelled.  I  fhall 
only  add,  that,  as  in  thofe  women,  who 
were  quite  regular  as  to  the  monthly  e- 
vacuation,  or  long  paft  that  time  of  life 
when  it  naturally  ceafes,    I  have  found 

hyfteric 


lyz  Of  the   Ck\]ST.s 

byilerlc  complaints  to  be  owing  very  of^ 
ten  to  a  rheuinatic  or  gouty  hunioiir  af- 
fefting  them  differently  at  diiterent 
times ;  fb  the  mofl  attentive  obfervation 
has  convinced  me,  that,  by  far,  the  mofl 
Irequent  caufe  of  the  hypochondriac  dil- 
eaie  in  men  is  no  other,  than  a  humour 
of  the  fame  kind  affecting  chiefly  the 
nerves  of  the  ftomach  and  bowels,  which 
from  an  original  weaknefs  had  been 
more  expofed  to  its  attacks,  than  the 
other  parts  of  the  body.  This  humour, 
in  thofe  of  a  melancholic  temperament, 
befides  other  fymptoms,  generally  occa- 
fions  watching,  timidity,  a  great  deprel- 
fion  of  fpirits,  and  Ibmetimes  very  un- 
eafy  diftra6ting  thoughts.  In  others,  of  a 
different  conllitution,  the  fame  caufe 
produces  a  variety  of  complaints  in  the 
flomach  and  bowels,  and  other  parts  of 
the  body,  with  much  lefs  watching,  and 
v/ithout  any  great  degree  of  low  i^^irits. 
The  arthritic  matter  may  be  bred, 
cither  in  confequence  of  fome  hereditary 

defed 


(^/Nervous   Disorders.        173 

defed  in  the  conftitutlon,  or  from  high 
living  ;  whereby  the  ftomach  and  bow- 
els are  £0  weakned,  or  loaded  with  rich, 
heavy,  or  hot  aliments,  as  to  convey 
very  improper  chyle  into  the  blood. 

Physicians  have  widely  differed  a- 
bont  the  natnre  of  that  humour  which 
is  the  caufe  of  the  gout,  fome  making  it 
tartareous  or   acid  /   others  urinous  or 
alkaline.  But,  fenlible  how  vain  all  fuch 
difquilitions  are,   I  fhall  not  attempt  to 
define  the  nature  of  that  noxious  mat- 
ter in  the  blood,   fo  often  the  caufe  of 
nervous,    hypochondriac,    and   hyfteric 
diforders,  further  than  as  I  have  alrea- 
dy endeavoured  to  fliew,  that  it  is  mofl 
commonly  of  the  arthritic  kind  :   And  I 
fhall  now  add,  that  it  may  be  fometimes 
a  fcorbutic  or  fcrophulous  taint,  or  fome 
other    fault,    in   confequence  of   other 
difeafes     imperfectly    cured.       Indeed, 
there  is  no  reafon  to  believe,  that,  what- 
ever is  hurtful  to  the  human  body,  mufl 
be   either  acid  or  alkaline,    or   of  fome 

other 


174  V  ^^'^   Causes 

other  known  fpecies  of  acrimony.  What 
is  the  acrimony  of  ipecacuanha,  antimo- 
nial  wine,  oi  fcmen  hpfcyamiy  opium,  rhus, 
mytifolia  Monfpeliaca,  and  of  the  roots  of 
the  cictita  aqtiatica  ?  Moil  of  thefe  fub- 
ilances  fhew  no  remarkable  fliarpnefs  or 
pungency  to  the  tafle  ;  and  yet,  when 
received  into  the  ftomach,  they  quickly 
occafion  either  ficknefs  and  vomiting, 
raving,  or  infenfibility,  epileptic  fits,  or 
even  death.  What  peculiar  acrimony 
have  the  effluvia  of  mufli,  ambergreafe, 
or  a  pale  rofe,  which  tlirow  fome  delicate 
women  into  hylleric  fits  ?  In  like  man- 
ner, with  regard  to  that  morbid  matter 
in  the  blood,  the  caufe  of  fo  many  ner- 
vous complaints,  and  even  of  the  gout ; 
all  we  know  is,  that  it  is  apt  to  ftick  in 
the  iiualler  vefTels  ;  that  it  difagreeably 
affeclis  the  nerves  as  often  as  it  falls  upon 
them,  and  thereby  occafions  various 
lymptoms,  more  or  lefs  violent,  accord- 
ing to  the  fenfibility  of  the  parts  affect- 
ed, and  the  confiitution  of  the  patient  : 

But 


of  Nervous    Disorders.         175 

But  in  what  manner,  or  by  means  of 
what  particular  kind  of  acrimony,  it  pro- 
duces thele  efl^e^s,  we  are  yet  entire- 
ly ignorant,  and,  indeed,  likely  to  con- 
tinue fo. 

11.  A  SECOND  occalional  caufe  exci- 
ting nervous  diforders,  may  be  the  re- 
tention of  fome  accuftomed  evacuation, 
fuch  as  the  mmfes  or  haemorrhoids. 

The  naufeay  vomiting,  depraved  ap- 
petite, faintings,  and  other  complaints 
to  which  many  women  are  liable  for 
fome  months  after  conception,  fliew  that 
a  change  of  the  circulation  in  the 
womb,  an  obflruclion  and  diflenfion  of 
its  veflels,  or  whatever  irritates  the  ute- 
rine nerves,  may  produce  many  of  thole 
fymptoms  commonly  called  nervous  or 
hyfleric.  The  fame  remark  may  be 
made  upon  the  various  diforders  whick 
happen  upon  the  fupprellion,  diminu- 
tion or  u'regularity  of  the  menfes,  and 
at  that  time  of  life  when  this  evacuation 
ceafes.      'Tis  true  thefe  complaints  are 

much 


IjG  Of  the    Cavses 

much  lefs  remarkable  in  fome  than  in 
others  :  Thus,  while  many  are  only  af- 
fec^hed  with  a  naiifeay  want  of  appetite, 
flatulence  in  the  flomach  and  bowels,  a 
cough,  difficulty  in  breathing,  headach, 
or  flying  pains  through  the  body ;  there 
are  others,  Avho,  belides  feveral  of  thefe 
fymptoms  in  a  higher  degree,  are  alio 
fubjedl  to  uncommon  haemorrhages, 
faintings,  and  violent  hyfleric  convul- 
fions,  on  account  of  a  greater  delicacy 
and  mobility  of  their  nervous  lyftem. 

An  obftruclion  or  fuppreflion  of  the 
menfes  may  produce  nervous  or  hyfleric 
diforders,  either  from  the  lympathy  of 
the  womb  with  the  other  parts,  from  a 
redundancy  of  blood,  or  from  the  re- 
tention of  fomething  hurtful  to  the 
nerves. 

r  That  many  parts  of  the  body  may 
be  affefted  through  the  confent  of  then* 
nerves  with  thofe  of  the  womb,  will 
not  appear  improbable,  after  what  has 
been  faid  of  the  remarkable  fympathy 

that 


■of  Nervous   Disorders.        177 

that  takes  place  between  the  various 
parts  of  the  body*.  But  it  may  be 
proper  to  obferve,  that  when  the  men- 
fes  are  obflrui^ed,  the  ftomach  gene- 
rally fufters  firft,  and,  by  means  of  its 
confint  with  almoft  every  part  of  the  bo- 
dy, gives  rife  to  many  of  the  complaints 
which  follow.  Thus  the  hy fieri c  con- 
vullions  and  other  violent  fymptoms, 
which  are  fometimes  occafioned  by  a  Rid- 
den ftoppage  of  the  menfes,  do  not  feem  to 
proceed  immediately  from  the  uterus^  but 
commonly  from  the  ftomach  and  bowels, 
whofe  nerves  are  firft  affe^led  either  by 
their  fympathy  with  thofe  of  the  womb, 
or  by  the  blood  which  fliould  have  been 
difcharged  by  this  organ,  being  partly 
turned  upon  the  alimentary  canal.  For, 
2.  Alt  ho'  it  is  probable  that  the 
menftrual  evacuations  is  not  owing  to  a 
general  plethora,  or  increafe  of  the  mafs 
of  blood  at  the  end  of  every  month,  but 
to  the  particular  ftru<n:ure  of  the  womb, 

M  yet 

*  See  above  chapter  i.   No.  j  i,  {o). 


178  Of  the   Cavses 

yet  as  the  body,  after  being  long  ac- 
cuflomed  to  any  regular  evacuation, 
feldom  fails  to  fufFer  from  a  ftoppage 
of  it,  fo  it  is  not  to  be  doubted,  that  in 
women,  and  efpecially  in  the  more  fan- 
guine,  fome  degree  of  a  plethora  may  be 
often  the  confequence  of  a  flipprellion 
of  the  menfes.  Agreeably  to  this,  we 
obferve,  that  bleeding  is  often  the  beft 
remedy  for  the  complaints  incident  to 
women  at  that  time  of  life  when  their 
couries  leave  them. 

3.  If  we  confider  that,  by  means  of 
the  other  excretory  organs,  fome  hu- 
mour is  thrown  off,  which,  if  retained, 
would  prove  noxious  to  the  body,  it 
will  not  appear  altogether  improbable 
that  the  menftrual  evacuation,  when 
fupprefled,  may  become  hurtful  by  its 
quaUty  as  well  as  quantity:  And  this 
feems  to  be  confirmed,  by  thofe  un- 
common haemorrhages  from  the  eyes, 
ears,  ends  of  the  fingers  and  other 
parts,  upon  the  total  fuppreffion  of  the 

menfes  ; 


of  Nervous   Disorders.  17^ 

menfes;  for  fuch  haemorrhages  cannot  be 
owing  to  a  general  plethora  occafioning 
too  great  a  diftenfion  of  the  whole  val- 
cular  fyftem :  Were  this  the  cafe,  the  vef- 
fels   of  the   lungs,    and   other  internal 
parts  muft  burfl  before  any  blood  could 
pafs  by  the  pores  of  the   fkin.      When 
one  runs  fail,    or  walks  up  a  fleep  hill, 
the  force  of  the  blood  is  much  more  in- 
creafed  than  it  can  be  from  any  plethora, 
that  may  be  fuppofed  to  happen  to  wo- 
men who  are  obflrucfced  ;    and   yet  we 
never  find  that  violent  exercife  makes 
the  blood  iflue  from  the  points  of  the 
fingers  or  the  pores  o^xht  meatus  audito- 
riiis,    altho'  it    fbmetimes   occafions   an 
haemorrhage  from  the  lungs.    Further, 
if  a  general  plethora  were  the   caufe  of 
thofe  uncommon  haemorrhages   which 
happen  in  confequence  of  a  fuppreflion 
of  the   menfesy    bleeding   would   always 
prevent   them,    which,  however,   it  fel- 
dom  does.      An  inftance  of  this  I  had 
many  years  fince  in  a  patient,  who,,  tho' 
M  2  file 


f 


-f 


180  Of  the   Causes 

fhe  had  loft  by  the  lancet  about  forty 

ounces    of   blood,    in    the    {pace   of  a 

month,   yet  continued  to  have  a  Imall 

haemorrhage   from  the  left  ear,    once 

in  twelve  or  fourteen  days.      Another 

cafe,   no  lefs  remarkable,  was  that  of  a 

woman  aged   34,   who,    near  fix  weeks 

after  bearing  her  fecond  child,  to  which 

fhe   gave  flick,   was  feized  with  a  pain 

in  the   middle  of  her  fore-arm  ftriking 

down  to  the   middle  finger  of  the   left 

hand.      Next  day,  flie  felt  a  pain  in  the 

point   of  that  finger,    where  there  had 

been  for  two  or  three  days  a  red  fpot, 

from    which    there    ifllied    about    four 

ounces   of  blood.      At  the  diftance  of 

24  hours,  fhe  loft  near  an  ounce  of  blood 

in    the    fame    manner ;     and    notwith- 

ftanding    flie    was    blooded    once    and 

again,  yet  for  fome  days,    almoft  at  the 

fame  hour,   this  haemorrhage  returned, 

but  always  in  fmaller  quantity.      In  this 

woman,  the  lochia  had  ftopt  foon  after 

delivery. 

If 


of  Nervous    Disorders.  i8i 

If  thefe  periodical  evacuations  of 
blood  cannot,  then,  be  accounted  for 
from  a  general  ■plethora,  is  it  not  prob- 
able that  when  the  mmjh  are  ftopt,  fome- 
thing  hurtful  may  be  retained,  which 
falling  on  certain  parts,  in  people  whole 
nervous  fyftem  is  eafily  afterted,  may 
throw  the  fmall  vefTels  of  thofe  parts  into 
Hich  violent  alternate  contra(5lions,  as  to 
force  the  red  blood,  inftead  of  the  tliin- 
ner  fluids,  through  their  dilated  ori- 
fices ?  When,  in  this  manner,  the  of- 
fending matter  is  moftly  evacuated,  the 
extraordinary  motions  of  the  fmall  vef- 
fels,  and  confequently  the  flux  of  blood 
from  them,  will  ceaie  *. 

In  like  manner,  thofe  various  other 
(complaints,  confequent  on  the  obflruc- 
tion  of  the  menfes,  may  be  often  owing  to 
the  quality  of  what  is  retained,  which 

loon 

*  See  above  chap.  I.  No.  17.  Alfo  Phyfiologlcal  EfTays, 
edit.  ii.  p.  35,  ^c.  where  I  have  endeavoured  to  fhew,  by 
a  variety  of  fafts,  that  the  fmall  veflels,  when  afFefted  with 
any  unufual  y?/«»/«r,  are  agitated  with  uncommon  con- 
tradlion*. 


i82  Of  the  Cavses 

fooii  becoming  acrid,  difagreeably  affe^ls 
the  nerves  of  thofe  pai'ts  upon  which 
it  falls. 

What  has  been  faid  of  obftriifted 
menfcs  as  the  caufe  of  nerv^ous  diforders, 
may  be,  in  a  great  meafure,  applied  to 
the  flippredion  of  the  haemorrhoids,  in 
Inch  as  have  been  accuftomed  to  them : 
And  it  may  not  be  amifs,  when  treating 
of  the  fupprelllon  of  the  jncnfes  and  hae- 
morrhoids, to  add  the  difcharges  of  iA 
lues,  fetons,  or  other  old  fores  fliddenly 
dried  up,  as  producing  fimilar  effects. 
Further,  fince  cold  feet,  or  cold  and 
moiflure  in  general,  by  flopping  the  per- 
fpiration,  is  obferved  to  increafe  nervous 
diforders,  is  it  not  probable  that  fome 
acrid  matter  may  be  then  retained, 
which,  by  falling  on  the  ftomach  and 
other  internal  parts,  fometimes  gives 
rife  to  nervous,  as  well  as  other  morbid 
fymptoms?  Hence  we  find,  that,  during 
the  dry  warm  weather  in  our  climate, 
and  the  dry  and  temperate  weather  of 

hotter 


of  Nervous   Disorders.  183 

hotter  countries,  the  nervous,  hyfteric 
and  hypochondriac  complaints  are  lels 
frequent  than  lat   other  times. 

III.  A  TH I  RD  general  occalional  caufe 
of  nervous  diibrders  may  be,  the  want 
of  a  fufficient  quantity  of  blood,  or  of 
blood  of  a  proper  denlity  :  And  hence 
it  is,  that  an  immoderate  flux  of  the 
menfesy  lochia  and  haemorrhoids,  or  any 
other  great  haemorrhage,  will  often  oc- 
cafion  violent  fymptoms  of  this  kind. 

Hippocrates  has  obferved,  that  convul- 
fions  may  arife  from  inanitiouy  as  well  as 
repletion  :  And  as  the  flrength  and  firm- 
nefs  of  the  whole  body  depend  upon 
proper  fluids,  and  a  due  quantity  of 
them,  may  not  very  irregular  and  flrange 
diforders  happen  from  a  want  of  blood, 
or  from  a  too  watery  ftate  of  it,  efpe- 
cially  in  thofe  whofe  nervous  fyftem  is 
very  delicate  and  eafily  aifefted  ?  For 
when  there  does  not  remain  in  the  vef- 
fels  a  quantity  of  blood  fufficient  for  car- 
rying on  the  feveral  functions  in  a  pro- 
per 


1 84  Of  the   Causes 

per  manner,  the  regular  circulation  of 
all  the  fluids  mufl  be  diflurbed,  and  the 
diflribution  or  exertion  of  the  nervous 
7noving  power  will  become  irregular. 

But,  in  whatever  way  great  lofs  of 
blood  may  give  rife  to  nervous  difeafes, 
we  are  fo  certain  of  the  fa(fl:,  from  ex- 
perience, that  perhaps  the  following  ca- 
fes, in  proof  of  it,  may  be  thought  fii- 
perfluous. 

I .  A  Y  o  u  N  G'gentleman  of  feventeen, 
complaining  of  a  pain  in  his  right  fide 
after  a  fall  from  his  horfe,  was  blooded 
-\'  very  largely.  Some  days  after,  he  felt 
a  coldnefs  in  his  ftomach,  which  was 
foon  fucceded  by  fits  of  violent  pain  and 
fpafms  in  that  part,  fometimes  lafting 
twenty  minutes,  or  half  an  hour  at  a 
time.  Thefe  fymptoms  returned  after 
no  regular  intervals,  but  generally  twice 
or  oftener  in  24  hours  ;  and  gradually 
increafed  to  fuch  a  height,  that  the  pa- 
tient was  obliged  to  be  held  down  in 
his  bed  by  two  or  three  people,  in  or- 
der 


I 


of  Nervous   Disorders.  185 

der  to  prevent  his  tearing  his  hair,  and 
doing  himfelf  other  mifcliief.  The  pain 
and  cramps  were  ahvays  preceded  with 
afenfation  of  coldnefs  intheflomach,  and 
frequently  went  off  in  an  inftant.  Gin- 
ger with  hot  brandy  felt  cold  in  the  fto- 
mach  at  the  acceflion  of  the  fit.  After  the 
patient  had  fuffered  in  this  manner  for 
three  weeks,  the  diforder  gradually  a- 
bated  ;  and,  by  uUng  a  few  ftomachic 
medicines,  a  proper  diet  and  exercife, 
he  perfectly  recovered. 

On  another  occafion,  after  lofins:  a 
good  deal  of  blood,  he  was  attacked 
with  the  fame  fymptoms,  but  in  a  much 
lefs  violent  degree. 

2.  A  GENTLEMAN  between  40  and 
50,  for  thefe  thirteen  years  paft,  has  fel-  -k 
dom  been  much  blooded,  or  fweated, 
and  lived  low  for  a  few  days  in  order 
to  get  rid  of  a  cold,  rheumatifm,  or  o- 
ther  cafual  diforder,  without  making  a 
great  quantity  of  pale  water,  efpecially 
in  the  night,  which  has,  fometimes,  con- 
tinued 


I S6  Of  the  .Cavses 

tinued  for  two  or  three  weeks,  and  has 
not  been  flopt  without  ufing  large  quan- 
tities of  the  bark,  riding,  and  other  re- 
medies. 

3.  A  Gentlewoman,  in  whom  the 
menfes  flow  too  plentifully,   is  frequent- 

4-  ly  troubled  with  a  gnawmg  pain  and 
fbmetimes  a  flatulent  diilenfion  of  her 
ftomach  when  flie  is  not  with  child;  but 
during  the  time  of  pregnancy,  flie  is 
generally  free  of  any  fuch  complaints. 

4.  In  the  Philofopliical  Tranfaclions 
No.  174  we  have  a  remarkable  cafe  by 
Dr  Cole,  of  a  Lady  fubjed:  to  hyflerics, 
who  after   being  much  reduced  by  an 

-f  uncommon  lofs  of  blood  in  cliild-bear- 
ing,  was  for  a  long  time  affefted  with 
violent  periodic  convulfions,  accompani- 
ed with  a  great  flux  of  limpid  urine,  re- 
turning every  fourth  or  fifth  day  at  a 
certain  hour. 

Under  this  head  of  general  occafio- 
nal  caufes,  may  alfo  be  comprehended 
watching,  great  fatigue  and  exceflive  ve- 

nery. 


of  Nervous    Disorders.  187 

nery;  all  of  which  not  only  tend  to 
break  the  conflitution,  and  difpofe  the 
body  to  nervous  difeafes,  but  alio  to 
create  them,  elpecially  in  fuch  as  are 
already  prediipofed  to  them. 

Having  thus  far  treated  of  the  gene- 
ral occafional  caufes,  we  fliall  proceed 
next  to  mention  the  chief  of  thofe  oc- 
cafional caufes  which  we  call  particuldr, 
from  their  having  their  feat  in  certain 
parts  of  the  body. 


CHAP, 


1^8  Of  the  Causes 


CHAP.     V. 

Of  the  particular  occafional  Caifes  of  ^ZK-^ 
vous,  Hypochondriac,  andYLY" 
§  T  E  R  I  c  Diforders, 


'"F^HESE   may  be  reduced  to  the  fix, 
-■-     following,  viz, 

I.  Wind  :>.   .  n 

/in  the  Itomach 
n.   Atouffh  phleo;m>        ,   , 

^      &    ^      ^     r  and   bowels. 
HI.  Worms  J 

IV.  Aliments  improper  in  then-  quan- 
tity or  quality. 

V.  Scirrhous  or  other  obftru6lions  in 
the  vifcera  of  the  lower  belly. 

VI.  Violent  affections  of  the  mind. 

I.  Wind 


of  Nervous   Disorders.  189 

I.  Wind  in  the  flomach  and  intel^ 
tines,  though  of  itfelf  a  very  common 
fymptom  in  nervous  diforders,  yet  de- 
ferves  a  place  among  their  occafional 
caufes,  as  giving  rife  to  many  unealy 
fenfations.  Altho'  all  our  food  abovmds 
more  or  lefs  with  air,  yet,  in  the  time  of 
digeftion,  it  is  feldom  feparated  in  iiich 
a  quantity,  as  to  give  any  trouble,  un- 
lefs  when  the  flomach  and  bowels  are 
weak,  or  when  their  nerves  are  endued 
with  an  uncommon  fenfibility  :  But  in 
fuch  circumilances,  the  complaints  it 
occafions,  are  various,  fuch  as  want  of 
appetite,  naiij'ca,  faintnefs,  low-fpirits, 
watching,  fwelling  of  the  flomach  and 
bowels,  violent  pains  in  them,  tight- 
nefs,  and  oppreflion  about  the  p-gcordia^ 
difficult  breatliing,  a  fenfation  of  a 
weight  in  the  flomach,  belching,  the^/<7- 
his  hyfiericuSy  giddinefs,  fliooting  pains  in 
the  head,  (^c.  Nay,  I  have  frequently 
felt,  in  myfelf,  a  plain  connexion  be- 
tween wind  in  the  prima  vU  and  pains 

in 


190  Of  the   Causes 

•  in  my  legs  and  feet ;  and  the  uneafy 
fenfation,  fometimes,  as  it  were,  coming 
and  going  between  thefe  parts. 

The  manner  in  which  wind  pro- 
duces fo  many  and  fiich  various  com- 
plaints, may  be  underflood  from  its 
diflending  the  ftomach  and  inteftines, 
and  thereby  occafioning  Ipafms  in  thofe 
parts,  or  otherwife  difagreeably  afFe<5t- 
ing  their  nerves,  which  have  fo  great  a 
fympathy  with  the  other  parts  of  the 
body*. 

However, 

*  See  above,  chap.  i.  No.  11. 

Some  have  imagined,  that  the  flatulence  produced  in 
the  ftomach  and  bowels,  pafTes  freely  by  means  of  the  ab- 
forbent  veins  into  the  blood,  with  which  it  circulates  thro' 
the  body,  and  produces  a  variety  of  fymptoms,  fuch  as 
Ihooting  pains  in  the  head,  the  cla^'us  hyfiericus,  or  flying 
pains  in  the  arms,  legs,  and  other  parts,  palpitations  of 
the  heart,  a  fluttering  motion  of  fome  of  the  fibres  of  the 
voluntary  mufcles,  and  puiFy  fwellings  below  the  fkin.  At 
other  times,  when  thefe  complaints  ceafe,  and  the  firft  paf- 
fages  fuffer  more  from  wind,  they  fuppofe,  that  the  flatu- 
lence finds  a  ready  way  from  the  blood  into  the  ftomach 
and  inteftines  by  their  pores  or  exhaling  arteries.  This  opi- 
nion, however,  is  ill  founded  ;  for  experiments  made  on 
animals  newly  dead  fliiew,  that  neither  the  ftomach  nor 

inteftines 


of  Nervous  Disorders.  I91 

However,  it  may  be  proper  to  ob- 
ferve,  that  the  effects  of  whid  in  the" 
iirfh  paflages  are  not  only  various  in  dif- 
ferent perfons,  but  in  the  fame  perfon 
at  different  times.  In  people  whofe  fto- 
mach  and  bowels  are  in  a  found  ftatCj 

if 

Inteftlnes,  nor  even  the  peritonaeum  which  is  much  thinner, 
are  pervious  to  elaftic  air ;  and  we  know,  from  other  ex- 
periments, that  capillary  tubes,  or  abforbent  vcfTels, 
do  not  attradl  elaftic  air  as  they  do  watery  fluids  ;  nay, 
fmall  portions  of  air,  when  they  get  into  fnch  tubes,  pre- 
vent their  attra(fiing  any  more  of  other  fluids. 

In  hypochondriac  and  hyfleric  patients,  I  have  cbfer- 
ved  little  fwellings  or  elevations  of  the  fkin,  of  a  pale  co- 
lour, and  of  different  fliapes.  Thefe,  in  a  few  minutes, 
acquired  their  full  flze,  and  after  half  an  hour,  or  more, 
would  quickly  vanifli.  In  hyfleric  women  alfo,  we  meet 
with  foft  puffy  fwellings  below  theficin,  which,  becaufe  of 
their  fudden  rifing  and  difappearance,  have,  by  fome,  been 
afcribed  to  wind  fliifting  from  one  part  of  the  cellular  mem- 
brane to  another.  But  this  is  no  ways  probable ;  and 
both  thefe  pufiy  fwellings,  and  thofe  riflngs  of  the  fldn, 
feem  to  be  owing  to  the  fame  caufe,  ^oiz.  an  increafed  al- 
ternate motion  of  the  fmall  arteries  of  the  parts,  occafioned 
by  an  uncommon  irritation  of  them,  or  their  nerves  ; 
whence  there  muft  happen  an  effufion  of  a  ferous  or  lym- 
phatic fluid  in  the  fpaces  of  the  tella  celulc/a,  or  in  the 
interftices  of  the  fl<in,  which,  as  foon  as  the  extraordinary 
motion  of  the  fmall  vefl'els  ceafes,  will  be  quickly  abforb- 
ed  ;  and  confequently  thofe  fwellings  will  difappear. 


19^  Of  the   CavsK6 

if  wind  happens  to  be  colle<fled,  it  may 
create  fome  uneafinefs,  but  does  not 
quicken  their  pulfe,  or  afFe<a  them  with 
that  dilagreeable  fenfation,  anxiety  a- 
bout  the  prtecordiay  or  depreifion  of  fpi- 
.  rits,  fo  often  its  confequences  in  thofe 
whofe  alimentary  canal  is  endued  with 
a  more  delicate  feeling.  Nay,  the  fame 
perfons  are,  at  different  times,  very  dif- 
ferently affected  by  wind,  juft  as  the 
nerves  of  the  ftomach  and  inteflines 
happen  to  be  more  or  lefs  fenfible,  or 
their  feeling  more  or  lefs  different  from 
what  it  is  in  a  natural  flate.  Thus, 
when  an  ai'thritic  or  rheumatic  humour 
in  the  blood  is  turned  upon  thofe  vi- 
fceva,  the  wind  produces  a  much  more 
uneafy  fenfation  than  at  other  times. 

Further,  the  great  diflenfion  of  the 
inteflines,  and  fometimes  alfb  of  the  fto- 
mach in  a  tympany,  without  thole  un- 
eafy complaints  that  attend  wind  in 
hypochondriac  or  hyfleric  cafes,  fliews, 
that  unlefs  there  be  a  particular  indif- 

pofition 


of  Nervous    Disorders.  193 

polition  of  the  nerves  of  thefe  organs, 
flatulence  alone  will  not  give  very  re- 
markable diflurbance. 

II.  A  tough  phlegm  in  the  flomach 
and  inteftines. 

Patients  generally  imagine,  tliat 
this  is  produced  by  their  food,  which 
they  believe  is  all  turned  into  phlegm  : 
But  they  are  miftaken  ;  for  while  the 
flomach  remains  dilbrdered,  be  the  ali- 
ments ever  fo  little  of  a  glutinous  na- 
ture, this  fub fiance  will  be  continually 
generated. 

In  the  alimentary  canal,  befides  the 
fine  exhaling  arteries,  which  furnilli  the 
gaftric  and  intellinal  lymph,  there  are 
many  fmall  glands,  which  fecrete  a  li- 
quor of  a  more  glutinous  nature.  In 
a  found  flate,  this  mucus  is  in  no  greater 
quantity  than  necefTary  to  defend  the 
delicate  nerves  of  thofe  parts  from  the 
heat,  cold,  acrimony,  or  attrition  of  the 
food ;  but  when  the  fecreting  vellels 
have  lofl  their  tone,  or  are  affe£led  with 

N  an 


1^4  ^f  ^^^   Causes 

an  unnatural  jiimuhtSy  not  only  the  mu- 
cous glands,  but  alfo  the  exhaling  arte- 
ries may  throw  out,  in  a  greater  quanti- 
ty, a  vilcid  fluid,  which,  by  lying  fome 
time,  may  acquire  ftill  a  greater  degree 
of  cohefion. 

When  much  phlegm  is  collected  iii 
the  ftomach  and  inteflines,  their  nerves 
are  rendered  left  lenfible  of  the  Jlinmlus 
of  the  aliments,  their  abforbent  vefTels 
are  partly  obftrufted,  and  the  gaftric 
and  inteftinal  lymph  are  more  Iparingly 
fecreted,  or,  at  lead,  become  more  vif- 
cid.  Hence,  the  digeftion  and  abforp- 
tion  of  the  finer  parts  of  the  food,  are, 
in  a  great  meafiire,  prevented  ;  whilft 
this  phlegm,  by  difagreeably  affecting 
the  nerves  of  the  alimentary  canal,  efpe- 
cially  when  they  are  in  a  delicate  ftate, 
occafions  want  of  appetite,  fometimes 
an  unnatural  craving  for  food,  a  naitfca^ 
flatulence,  gripes  and  loofenefs,  cold 
and  hot  fits,  a  quick  pulfe,  weaknels, 
faintings,  lownefs  of  ipirits,   fleepinefs, 

fighing. 


of  Nervous    Disorders.      1^5 

fighiiig,  coiivulUve  motions  *,  and  gid- 
dinefs.  Nay,  I  have  had  fome  patients 
who,  from  a  viicid  phelgm  in  their  flo- 
mach,  were  afFerted  with  a  flight  deli- 
riwHy  and  had  their  eyes  like  thofe  of 
people  in  liquor. 

Nor  will  it  appear  flrange,  thatfo  ma- 
ny and  fuch  different  fymptoms  fliould 
proceed  from  a  diibrder  in  the  ftomach 
and  bowels  only,  if  we  attend  to  that 
lympathy  which  I  have  fo  often  men- 
tioned as  taking  place  between  them 
and  the  other  parts  of  the  body. 

III.  Worms  in  the  firft  paflages,  e- 
fpecially  in  children,  are  frequently  the 
caufe  of  nervous  fymptoms,  flich  as  great 
craving  for  food,  inflations  of  the  ali- 
mentary canal,  hiccup,  vomiting,  dry 
N  2  cough, 

*  A  Girl  of  14,  who  had  been  troubled  with  t\ie  chorea 
Sancli  Viti,  was  feized  with  the  meafles.  A  few  days  after 
her  recovery,  fhe  had  a  return  of  her  former  diflemper, 
which,  after  it  had  continued  near  a  fortnight  with  little 
abatement,  notwithftanding  the  ufe  of  feveral  medicines, 
was  entirely  removed  in  a  few  days,  by  a  natural  locfenefs, 
by  which  fhe  voided  a  great  deal  of  fiimy  ftufF.  It  may  be 
worth  remarking,  that,  during  the  continuance  of  this 
convulfive  difcrder,  her  appetite  was  much  greater  than 
ulual. 


196  Of  the   Causes 

cough,  difficult  breathing,  lighing,  irre- 
gularities of  the  puUe,  palpitations,  tre- 
mors, convullions,  epileptic  fits,  drowfi- 
nefs,  raving,  infenfibility,  e^r. 

Worms  produce  mofl  of  thefe  fym- 
toms,  by  preventing  the  proper  dige- 
ftion  of  the  food,  or  by  irritating,  with 
their  frequent  motions  or  biting,  the 
fenlible  nerves  of  the  flomach  or  bow- 
els, whence  every  other  part  may  be  af- 
fedled  by  fympathy. 

Several  of  the  above  fyniptx)ms 
may  alfo  be  occafioned  by  acrid  humours 
in  the  prm£  vi£  ;  as  will  appear  by  the 
following  cafe. 

A  Boy  of  14,  on  the  12th  of  J aimary 
1757,  was  feized  with  a  pain  in  his 
head  and  belly,  and  foon  after  became 
delirious,  and  made  no  anRvcr  when 
fpoke  to.  When  awake,  he  fometimes 
cried  out  in  a  wild  manner,  as  if  com- 
plaining, or  praying  to  be  freed  from 
his  trouble ;  but  his  words  had  general- 
ly little  connexion.      He  flept  well,  had 

a 


of  Nervous  Disorders.  197 

a  fharp  appetite,  was  not  coftive,  and 
his  piiile  was  full  and  flow,  but  fome- 
"what  irregular.  Thefe  fymptonis  con- 
tinued 'till  the  I  6th  of  January y  when  I 
faw  him  firft,  and  ordered  ^e'vcn  ounces 
of  blood  to  be  taken  away,  a  blifter  be- 
tween his  (lioulders,  and  a  clyfter.  On 
the  17th  no  better:  the  blifter  had  oc- 
cafioned  a  ftrangury.  On  the  1 8th,  took- 
a  bolus  of  calomel  and  rhubarb,  but 
foon  vomited  it  up  again.  On  the  19th, 
fwallowed  five  grains  of  calomel  at  bed- 
time, and  next  morning  had  three 
ftools,  after  which  he  became  much  more 
fenfible,  but  ftill  complained  of  his  head: 
2ift,  had  a  natural  ftool,  in  which  were 
two  finall  worms  of  the  afcarides  kind. 
Upon  this  he  was  ordered  piihis  ftanni^ 
and  another  dofe  of  calomel  and  rhubarb, 
which  brought  away  a  great  deal  of 
flime,  but  no  worms.  On  the  25th,  he 
was  free  of  all  his  complaints. 

This  patient,    m  Jtdy  1758,  having 
had  a  return  of  thelymptoms  above  men- 
tioned ; 


198  Of  the  Causes 

tioned ;  he  was  blooded  without  any  be- 
nefit, but  was  greatly  relieved  by  a  dofe 
of  rhubarb  and  calomel,  and  entirely 
cm*ed  by  a  repetition  of  it,  altho'  no 
worms  were  found  in  his  ftools.  At 
this  time,  as  well  as  in  his  former  ill- 
nefs,  he  had  a  greater  appetite  than 
ufual,  elpecially  when  the  difeafe  began 
to  yield. 

IV.  Aliments  improper  in  their 
quantity  or  quality. 

The  mofl  wholefbme  food,  in  too 
great  a  quantity,  opprefTes  the  ftomach 
and  bowels,  is  not  properly  digefted, 
but  becomes  either  acid  or  putrid,  and 
generates  much  wind  ;  whence  the 
nerves  of  thofe  parts  being  difagreeably 
affed:ed,  a  variety  of  complaints  are  pro- 
duced. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  want  of  a 
due  quantity  of  aliments  occafions  faint- 
nefs  and  wind,  and,  in  time,  fo  much 
weakens  the  ftomach  and  bowels,  as  to 
render  them  unfit  either  to  receive,   or 

to 


of  Nervous    Disorders.  199 

to  digeft  what  is  neceflary  for  fupport- 
ing  the  body. 

But  altho*  food  be  taken  with  nei- 
ther too  full  nor  too  iparing  a  hand, 
yet  its  quality  may  difpoie  it  to  produce 
nervous  diforders.  Thus  high  feafon- 
ed  and  heavy  meats,  flrong  fauces  and 
wines,  will  not  only,  by  degrees,  ener- 
vate the  tone  of  the  ftomach,  and  pre- 
vent or  dellroy  the  natural  feeling  of  its 
nerves,  but  will  corrupt  the  blood,  per 
haps  breed  the  arthritic  matter ^  and  bring 
on  a  difeafed  Hate  of  the  whole  body. 
On  the  contrary,  a  watery  and  flatulent 
diet,  by  difagreeably  affecting  the  nerves 
of  the  firll  paflages,  generating  a  great 
deal  of  wind,  and  not  affording  proper 
nourifliment,  will  be  the  caufe  of  many 
ailments. 

It  is,  however,  to  be  obfervcd,  that 
aliments,  either  hurtful  in  their  nature 
or  quantity,  will  chiefly  produce  nervous 
fymptoms   in  thofe,  who,    from  the  pe- 
culiar 


200  Of  the   Causes 

culiar  ftate  of  their  alimentary  canal,  are 
moll  liable  to  iuch  diforders. 

Thus,  v/ind  or  crudities  in  t\iG  pri- 
m£  vi<je,  occafioned  by  diet,  will  often 
give  na  great  uneafinefs  to  thofe  of  firm 
nerves,  and  whofe  ftomach  and  bowels 
are  ftrong ;  but  in  more  delicate  peo- 
ple, on  accoimt  of  the  particular  fenfi- 
bility  of  thefe  organs,  fiich  caufes  will 
either  excite  painful  fpafins,  or  other 
difagre cable  feniations,  attended  with 
lownefs  of  fpirits. 

I  have  obferved  above,  that  in  fbme 
the  ftomach  becomes  fo  very  delicate, 
that  even  a  fudden  change  of  pO' 
fture  will  be  apt  to  occafion  a  naufea  or 
vomiting:  and  there  are  others,  who, 
when  their  ftomach  is  empty,  efpecially 
after  a  late  error  in  diet,  feel  an  uneafy 
craving,  faintnefs,  and  giddinefs,  which 
fymptoms  are  almoft  as  certainly  relie- 
ved by  a  little  folid  food,  or  a  glafs  of 
wine,  as  pain  is  by  opium.  To  this 
faintnefs  and   difagreeable  fenfation   in 

the 


o/  Nervous    Disorders.      201 

the  ftomach,  ^^hen  empty,  tliofe  are 
mofl:  liable,  avIio,  belides  a  particular 
vv  eaknefs  of  that  organ,  carry  an  arthri- 
tic matter  in  their  blood  frequently  af- 
fecting it. 

V.  Scirrhous,  or  other  obflrudlions 
in  the  ftomach,  inteflines,  liver,  fpleen, 
pancreas,  mefentery,  uterus^  and  ovariUy 
often  produce  iymptoms  of  the  hypo- 
chondriac or  hyfteric  kind  ;  fuch  as  want 
of  appetite,  naufea^  cramps  in  the  flo- 
mach,  vomiting,  fometimes  of  a  black 
or  bloody  coloured  matter,  flatulence 
and  crudities  in  the  firft  paflages,  hecl.ig 
heats,  cold  fweats,  low  ipirits,  and  other 
complaints,  more  or  lefs  violent,  ac- 
cording as  the  patient's  nerves  are  more 
or  lefs  delicate. 

Such  obftructions  in  the  ftomach 
and  bowels,  feem  to  occafion  many  of 
the  above  effedls,  by  liindering  the  free 
circulation  of  the  fluids  through  thele 
parts,  by  affeifling  their  nerves  with  an 
uneafy  fenfation,  and  by  preventing  di- 

gcftion, 


2-02  Of  the   Causes 

geftion.  —  In  the   liver  and   fpleen,  by 
impeding  the  fecretion  of  bile,    and,  by 
their  weight,  occalioning  a  difagreeable 
lenfation,   not  only   in  thefe,    but  the 
neighbouring  parts  by  f^'mpathy  *. — In 
the    mefentery,  by  preventing  the  fur- 
ther preparation  of  the  chyle,  and  its 
courfe  towards  the  thoracic  d\\^.  —  In 
the  titei'iis  and  ovarian  by  diHurbing  the 
fimftions  of  thefe  parts,  and  by  confent 
aifecling  the  flomach  and  bowels.    Fur- 
ther, hard  fwellings  in  tlie  titenis  or  other 
abdominal    vlfcera,    by    irritating    fuch 
nerves  as  are  contiguous  to  them,  more 
at  one  time  than  another,  may  give  rife 
to   fpafinodic   contractions  of  the  inte- 
ftines  in  fome  parts,  and  iiatulent  diften- 
lions  of  them  in  others,   and  may  fb  af- 
fect the  whole  nervous  fyftem,  as  to  oc- 

cafion 

*  Iv:  the  bodies  of  thofe  who  have  died  of  the  hypo- 
chondriac difeafe,  the  meferaic,  and  other  veins  which 
meet  to  form  the  t-ena  portanm,  have  been  often  found 
wreatly  diftended  with  blood.  But  this  diftenfion  of  thofe 
vein?,  if  any  thing  preternatural,  was  probably  only  a 
confequence  of  fome  oburuclion  in  the  liver,  aod  not  to  he 
reckoned,  as  it  lias  been  by  fome  authors,  the  caufe  of 
■ha:  difiemnc:. 


o/'Nervous  Disorders.      203 

cafloii   hyfleric    faintings    and    convul- 
fions. 

As  obftruclions  in  the  ftomach,  liver, 
ii'c,  may  be  often  the  caufe  of  low  fpi- 
rits,  fo,  on  the  other  hand,  melancholy, 
or  long  continued  grief,  frequently  gives 
rife  to  hypochondriac  and  hyfleric  com- 
plaints, and  fometimes  to  obilruclions  in 
thole  vifcera.  For  fuch  a  ftate  of  the  mind 
not  only  diforders  the  nerves  of  the 
ftomach,  liver,  and  bowels,  and  occa- 
iions  a  want  of  appetite  and  digeftion, 
with  its  various  confequences ;  but  by 
means  of  the  agency  of  thole  nerves,  it 
may  alfo  produce  in  fome  of  the  fmall 
veilels  of  thefe  vifcera^  fiich  a  fixed  fpaf^ 
modic  contraction,  as  to  lay  the  founda-. 
tion  of  an  irrefolvable  obflruclion ;  in 
much  the  fame  manner  as  a  fudden 
fright  has  given  rife  to  a  fcirrhtis,  and  af-. 
terwards  a  cancer  in  the  breafl.  Fur- 
ther, the  flow  interrupted  breathing, 
and  the  fedentary  life  of  thofe  who  are 
much  affected  with  grief,  will  make  the 

fluids 


204  ^f  the  Causes 

fluids  more  apt  to  ftagnate,  and  confe- 
qucntly  to  form  obftrud:ions  iu  the  fmall 
velTels  of  the  hypochondriac  vifcera, 

I.  A  Gentleman  aged  60,  who  had 
been  above  three  years  fubjecl  to  cramps 
and  pains  in  his  ftomach,  want  of  ap- 
petite, belching,  fits  of  ficknefs  and  vo- 
miting, began,  in  fpring  1748,  to  throw 
up  a  dark-coloured  liquor  like  coffee- 
grounds,  and  to  void  the  fame  by  flool. 
In  the  end  of  Afril  1749,  ^^^  vomited  a 
greater  quantity  of  this  black  fluff  than 
ever,  and  foon  after  he  threw  up  about 
an  Enghfh  quart  of  blood,  moflly  clot- 
ted, which  reduced  him  lb  low,  that  he 
never  recovered  his  liefla  or  colour. 
Throughout  the  flimmer,  he  continued 
in  a  declining  way,  being  much  oppreff- 
ed  with  belching,  ficknefs  at  Itomach, 
and  frequent  retchings  to  vomit,  tho* 
rarely  bringing  up  any  thing,  but  a 
tough  phlegm,  till  the  beginning  of  Or- 
toha\  v»-hen,  after  licavy  ficknefs,  he  vo- 
mited a  great  deal  of  bbckifh  coloured 

fluff 


of  Nekvous   Disorders.  205 

fluff*  one  morning,  and  in  the  evening  a 
confiderable  quantity  of  clotted  blood. 
On  the  15th  of  this  month,  about  eleven 
in  the  forenoon,  after  retching  to  vo- 
mit, he  complained  fuddenly  of  a  fharp 
pain  below  the  falie  ribs  of  his  left  fide : 
immediately  after,  his  pulfe  began  to 
fink,  and  he  died  at  tv^^o. 

This  body  being  opened,  the  coats 
of  the  ftomach  were  found  thick  and 
fcirrhous  in  feveral  parts,  efpecially  a- 
bout  its  left  orifice.  In  thofe  morbid 
parts  feveral  fmall  ulcerations  and 
chops  were  obferved,  and  near  the  bot- 
tom of  the  ftomach  a  hole  as  broad  as 
a  fliilling.  This  part,  which  had  been 
thinner  than  the  reft  of  the  ftomach, 
feems  to  have  given  way  on  the 
morning  before  the  patient  died,  and 
the  laceration  was  probably  the  caufe 
of  that  fliarp  pain  he  complained  of  in 
his  left  fide.  There  was  nothing  in  the 
ftomach,  as  all  its  contents  had  been 
emptied  into  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen. 

It 


206  Of   the     CaU  S  ES 

It  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  the 
black-coloured  liquor,  which  this  pati- 
ent frequently  vomited,  as  well  as  the 
clotted  blood,  came  from  the  veflels  of 
thofe  fcirrhous  parts  of  the  flomach,  in 
which  the  fmall  ulcerations  and  chops 
were  obferved.  The  blood  that  ovizes 
flowly  into  the  flomach  from  very  fmall 
veflels,  may  lie  for  a  confiderable  time 
before  it  is  thrown  up,  and  acquire  a 
dark  brown,  or  blackifli  colour;  but 
when  it  flows  in  greater  quantity,  and 
from  larger  veflels,  it  is  vomited  up, 
either  partly  coagulated,  or  quite  fluid, 
if  it  has  remained  only  a  very  little 
time  m  the  flomach. 

It  may  be  proper  to  obferve,  that 
the  black  as  well  as  bloody  vomitings, 
were  probably  increafecl,  if  not  fli'ft  oc- 
cafloned  by  the  frequent  emetics  which 
the  patient  had  taken  to  remove  the 
flcknefs,  want  of  appetite,  and  other 
complaints  of  his  flomach  :  and  un- 
doubtedly whenever  there  is  a  confirm- 
ed 


cf  Nervous    Disorders.  207 

ed  fcirrhus  in  the  (lomach,  ftrong  vo- 
mits mud  incrcafe,  exalperate,  or  in- 
flame it,  and  probably  break  fome  of  the 
veflels  leading  to  the  tumor.  In  fiicli 
cafes,  therefore,  inllead  of  ipecacuanha 
and  antimonials,  the  patient  fliould  ufe 
nothing  but  warm  water,  or  a  decoc- 
tion of  camomile-flowers,  which  will  be 
fiifficient  to  relieve  the  ftomach  when 
foul,  without  occafioning  fuch  violent 
convulfive  contraclions  in  it,  as  the 
ftronger  emities  do. 

2.  A  MAIDEN  Gentlewoman  about  30, 
in  September  iJS5i  hegan  to  complain  of 
w^ant  of  appetite,  and  wind  in  her  fto- 
mach,  and  loft  her  flefii  and  ftrength. 
From  the  beginning  of  March  following 
her  pulfe  became  quicker  than  natural, 
and  file  then  began  to  bring  up  every 
thing  file  fwallowed,  two  or  three  hours 
after ;  and  feldom  went  to  ftool  v>  ithout 
a  clyfter.  V/hen  her  flomach  was  empty 
of  vi6luals,  flie  threw  up  tough  phlegm, 
which,  a  few  days  before  her  death,  was 


mixed 


2oS  Of  the    Causes 

mixed  with  fome  blackifli  matter.  She 
never  complained  of  any  acute  pain, 
but  only  of  an  uneafineis  and  tightnefs 
about  the  ftomach.  Her  bowels  were 
much  diftended  with  wind,  wliich  gave 
her  a  great  deal  of  trouble  ;  and  the  air 
fliifting  frequently  from  one  place  to 
another,  produced  confiderable  fwel- 
lings,  which  could  be  ealily  felt  outward- 
ly. After  trying  various  medicines,  to 
little  purpofe,  fhe  died  about  the  end  of 
Ma). 

Upon  opening  her  body,  the  colo;t  was 
obferved  to  be  much  contracted  in  fe- 
veral  places,  and,  in  the  right  fide,  to 
adhere  to  the  peritoneum  ;  but  the  chief 
caufe  of  her  complaints  and  death,  ap- 
peared to  be  a  fcirrhous  tumour,  which 
Ipread  over  the  whole  pylorus y  and  a  fmail 
part  of  the  ftomach  adjoining  to  it.  The 
fides  of  the  pylorus  conflfted  of  a  firm 
cartilaginous  flibftancc,  near  an  inch 
thick,  and  the  paflage  was  fo  ftraitened, 
as  fcarcely  to  admit  a  quill.    On  the  in- 

fide 


of  Nervous    Disorders.  20^ 

fide  of  the  j^y/on/i  were  found  fome  fmall 
chops  and  inequalities,   from  which,  as 
I  hnagine,    a   cdnfiderable  part  of  the 
phkgm  which  (lie  vomited  might  come* 
Be   that   as   it  will,    it  is  fcarce    to   be 
doubted,    that  the  black   coloured  fluff 
was   furniflied    by   the    mouths  of  the 
fmall    blood-vellels    in   thofe    ruptured 
parts  of  the  pylorus.      If  thele  veflels  had 
been  larger,  this  matter  would  have  had 
more  of  a  dark  brown,  or  reddifli  colour; 
or  the  blood  itfelf,  either  fluid  or  clot- 
ted,  would   have  fbmetimes   appeared. 
At  no  rate  could  this  matter  come  from 
the  liver,  for  that  part  was  found ;  nor, 
fuppofing  it  otherways,  could  any  thing 
have  eafily  pafTed   from  the  duodemmi  in- 
to the  ftomach,  on  account  of  the  ffrait- 
nefs  of  the  pylorus, 

o  4.  A  Female  child,  which,  from  its 
birth,  had  been  afflided  with  wind, 
gripes,  and  violent  convulfions,  died  at 
the  age  of  five  months,  after  many  re- 
medies had   been   ufed   unfiiccefs fully. 

O  Nothing 


21  o  Of  the   Cau  ses 

Nothing  preternatural  was  difcovered 
upon  diiledlion,  except  a  portion  of  the 
colon,  about  five  inches  in  length,  quite 
fcirrhous. 

4|.  A  Gentlewoman,  who  had  born 
feveral  children,  and  had  been  general- 
ly healthy,  in  the  59  th  year  of  her  age, 
ten  years  after  the  Jiienfes  had  left  her, 
began  to  complain  of  pains  in  her  back, 
groins  and  belly,  above  the  os pubis ,  the 
violence  of  which  brought  on  the  fliior 
,alhiis,  and  frequently  a  difcharge  of 
blood  from  the  vagina.  Thefe  pains 
lafted  uiually  five  or  fix  hours,  and  re- 
turned every  day  nearly  at  the  fame 
time.  During  the  fit,  fhe  had  always 
this  haemoi'rhage,  but  at  other  times 
the  wliite  flux  only. 

Notwithstanding  the  ufe  of  fe- 
veral medicines  for  twelve  or  fourteen 
months,  her  complaints  were  increafed; 
the  pains,  which  now  began  in  her  legs 
and  thighs,  and  rofe  to  the  lower  parts 
of  her  belly,   returned  regularly   every 


morning 


of  Nervous    Disorders.  211 

morning  at  ten,  and  were  fo  acute,  that 
fbe  cried  out  almofh  the  whole  time  they 
lafted;  nor  had  fhe  now  any  perfed:  in- 
tervals of  eafe.  During  the  paroxyihi, 
her  pulfe  was  fmall  and  quick,  and  her 
body  cold,  altho*  all  over  in  a  fweat. 
Her  pains  were  always  mofl  fevere  and 
lading  when  fhe  was  coflive,  which  hap- 
pened often.  The  matter  difcharged 
from  the  vagina  had  no  ofFenfive  fmell. 
She  was  much  troubled  with  wind  in 
her  ftom^ch  and  bowels.  While  the  fit 
lafted,  fhe  never  made  any  water,  but 
fpit  a  great  deal  more  than  ufual.  By 
the  continuance  of  her  difeafe,  flie  gra- 
dually wafted  away*  and  at  laft  died. 

As  I  was  only  confulted  for  this  per- 
fon  at  a  diftance,  I  never  learned  whe- 
ther her  body  was  opened  or  not  ;  but 
I  think  there  can  be  little  doubt,  that 
almoft  all  her  complaints,  and  particu- 
larly the  fliarp  periodic  pains  in  the  hy- 
pogaftric  region,  were  owing  to  a 
O  2  fchirrus 


'zii  of  tbc    Causes 

fcirrluis  in  the  t/iirus  beginning  to  turn 
cancerous. 

VI.  Vi  o  L  ENT  affocTions  of  the  mind. 

Nothing  produces  more  liiddcn  or 
lurprizing changes  in  tlie  body,tlian  vio- 
lent aftecHons  of  the  mind,  whether  tliefe 
be  excited  by  external  objects,  or  by  the 
exercife  of  tlie  internal  fenfes.  Tlius 
dolefid,  or  moving  ftories,  horrible  or 
unexpected  lights*,  great  grief,  luiger, 
terror  and  other  pallions,  frequently  oc- 
calion  the  molt  fuddcn  and  >iolent 
nervous  Amptoms.  Tlie  fh*ong  im- 
prellions  made  in  fiich  cafes  on  the  brain 
aiid  ner^  es,  often  tlirow  the  perfon  into 
hylleric  fits,  either  of  the  con\iillive  or 
fainting  kind. — Long  continued  grief 
and  anxiety  of  mind  weaken  the  tone 
of  the   ftomach,    deflroy   the   appetite 

digeilion, 

*  I:  is  faid,  that  the  great  Lord  Veruuzm  was  wont  to 
faint,  when  he  faw  an  eclipfe  of  the  fun  :  and  we  are  told 
of  a  Lady,  who,  upon  looking  through  a  telefcope  at  the 
comet  of  1681,  was  llruck  with  fuch  terror,  that  fhe  died 
in  a  few  days.  FicdUk.  chjcrvat.  hied.  lib.  iii.  ohfew. 
xxiii. 


of  Nervous    Disorders.  213 

digeftion,  occafion  thirft,  a  white  tongue, 
flatulence,  and  other  complaints  *. — 
Great  fear  produces  paleneft  of  the 
countenaiice,  an  univerfal  debility  and 
fhaking,  palpitations  of  the  heart,  anxie- 
ty about  the  breaft,  quick  breathing, 
and  a  looienefs,  or  a  large  difcharge  of 
limpid  urine. — By  fbdden  terror,  deli- 
cate women  or  children  have  been  not 
only  thrown  into  fainting  and  convul- 
iions,  but  rendered  fubject,  all  their  life- 
time, to  epileptic  fits. — Anger  quickens 
the  pulfe  and  refpiration,  and  increafes 
the  force  of  the  heart  :  Hence  it  has 
been  immediately  followed  by  an  un- 
common excretion  of  the  faliva,  by  bi- 
lious vomitings  t,  bleeding  at  the  nip- 
ples t,    and  a  rupture  of  fuch  veflels  as 

were 

•  "  Qui  laborant  animi  pathemate,  pctiffimcm  corripi 
"  folenc  morbia  ventricxili,  ut  inter  caetera  oblervavi  in 
**  moerentibas,  qui  conqaeruntur  priaio  de  languore  ven- 
triculi,  mox  inappetentia,  oris  amaritie,  lid  circa  horis 
matutina'',  craditatibus,  flatibus  et  tenSonibui  hvpochon- 
driorum."     Baglivii  opera,  Ofia,  p.  565. 

t  Pechlin.  lib.  iii.  obfervat.  xzv. 

X  Stalpart.  Vender  Wi«U  cent.  i.  obf.  Lxxiv- 


214  Of  the    Cav  SEs 

were  lately  cicatrized.  In  women,  it 
frequently  occalions  fpafmodic  contrac- 
tions in  the  bowels,  and  a  flatulent  or 
hylleric  cholic. — Some  of  the  more  vio- 
lent paflions  have,  all  at  once,  occafion- 
ed  a  kind  of  tetanus,  or  catalepiy;  fo 
that  the  perfon  has  appeared  liker  a 
flatue  than  any  thing  alive  ;  nay,  exr 
cellive  fear,  grief,  joy  and  flianie  have 
been  fometimes  followed  by  fudden 
death. 

Bonetiis  has  recorded  the  cafe  of  a 
Lady,  who,  among  other  hyfteric  fymp- 
toms,  owing  to  grief  and  difappoint- 
ments,  was  feized  with  frequent  faint- 
ing fits,  which  fometimes  laded  half  an 
hour*  :  And,  feveral  years  ago,  I  had  a 
patient,  who,  upon  the  unexpected  death 
of  her  hufband,  fell  into  fuch  fits,  gene- 
rally holding  her  from  five  to  fifteen 
minutes.  In  thefe  faintings  fhe  lay  like 
a  dead  perfon,  without  any  apparent 
breathing,  or  motion  of  the  breafl ;  only, 

when 

f  Se^ukkret.  anatom.  lib,  ii.   §  xxxiii,    oh/,  ix. 


of  Nervous   Disorders.        215 

when  a  candle  was  held  near  her  mouth, 
the  flame  was  obferved  to  move  a  little. 
Her  pulfe,  however,  was  fcarce  changed, 
only  fomewhat  flower  and  feebler  than 
uiiial.  She  came  out  of  thefe  faintings 
with  fighings  and  crying,  and  general- 
ly relapfed  into  them  in  little  more  than 
a  quarter  of  an  hour.  In  this  way,  flie 
continued  for  two  days. 

Baglivius  mentions  a  young  man  of 
Dalmatia,  v/ho,  from  looking  at  a  perfon 
in  an  epileptic  fit,  was  himfelf  affecled 
in  the  fame  manner  *  :  And  it  has  fre- 
quently happened,  in  the  Royal  Infir- 
maiy  here,  that  women  have  been  feized 
Avith  hylleric  fits  from  feeing  others  at- 
tacked with  them.  But  one  of  the  mofl 
remarkable  inftances  of  this  kind,  hap- 
pened in  the  Poor's-houfe  at  Haerkm,  in 
the  time  of  the  learned  Dr  Boerhaave, 
and  is  recorded  by  his  nephew  in  the 
following  manner, 

"  In 

*  Praxis  Medica,  cap.  xiv.   §  il.       See  alfo  Natttr.  curiof^ 
1730,  /.  30?. 


21 6  Of  the    Causes 

*'  In  domo,  qua  pauperes  ex  cleemo- 
fynis  publlce  aluntiir,  in  civitate  Harle- 
menfiy  perterrita  puella  incidit  in  mor- 
biim  nervorum  convulfivum,  certis  pa- 
roxyfniis  reducem  :  Adftantiuni  et  ad- 
juvantium  in  earn  intenta  itidem  corri- 
pitur  eodeni  morbo,  poftridie  altera, 
deinde  tertia,  quarta,  imo  fere  omnes, 
tarn  pueri  quam  puellae  :  Status,  mifer- 
rinius!  Corripitur  hie,  corripitur  ilia, 
imo  fere  omnes  eodem  tempore,  dum 
unum  alter  a{|)icit,  proflernuntur.  Me- 
dici iblertes  fruftra  adhibent,  quae  dic- 
tat  ars,  faluberrima  antiepileptica  me- 
dicamina.  Confugitur  tandem  ad  Bo- 
erhaavium^  qui  mifertus  infelicis  paupe- 
rum  Ibrtis,  petiit  Harlemum^  et  dum  rem 
examinat,  invadente  in  unum  paroxyf- 
ino,  vidit  convelli  plures  fi^ecie  epilep- 
iiae.  Datis  incafflmi  optimis  remediis 
a  medicis  iapientibus,  et  ad  imaginati- 
onem  ex  uno  in  alterum  tradufto  mor- 
bo, rite  perpenfis,  han-c  avertendo,  cre- 
didit,  poITe  curam  obtineri,  et  obtinuit. 

Scilicet 


of  Nervous   Disorders.  217 

Scilicet  praemonitis  ephoris,  praefenti- 
biis  omnibus,  juifit  per  cameram  difpo- 
ni  fornaces  portatiles,  prunis  arclentibus 
inftru6las,  atque  iis  imponi  ferreos  ha- 
miilos,  acl  certain  figurani  adaptatos, 
turn  ita  niandavit  ;  quia  omnia  fruftra 
forent,  ie  aliud  nelcire  remedium, 
quam,  ut  qui  primus  puer  foret  vel 
puella,  infauilo  morbi  paroxyfmo  arri- 
peretur,  locus  quidam  nudati  brachii 
candente  ferro  ad  os  ulque  inureretur ; 
utque  gravitate  pollebat  dicendi,  per- 
territi  omnes  ad  crudele  remedium, 
dum  inftare  fentiunt  paroxyfmum,  om- 
ni  mentis  intentione,  et  metu  dolorifi- 
cae  inuftionis,  eidem  refiftunt  fortioris 
oblatione  ideae:  et  certe  quantum  va- 
leat  hie  ab  objeclo  animae  intentae  re- 
vulfio,  docet  epilepfia  diverfimode  cura- 
ta,  ut  quidem  ipfe  terror  eandem  luftu- 
lerit,  febris  epidemic  a,  quartana,  ptya- 
lifmus,    matrimonium,  virga  *," 

There 

*  Abr.  Kaau  Boerhaax-e  impet.  faciem  Hippocrati  diJlum, 
§  406. 


21 8  Of  the   Causes 

There  is  a  difeafe  very  common  in 
the  Iflaiid  of  Zetlandy  which  is  known 
there  by  the  name  of  the  convulfrje  fits. 
It  begins  with  a  violent  palpitation  of 
the  heart ;  foon  after  which,  the  patients 
fall  to  the  ground,  imlefs  they  are  fup- 
ported  ;  their  arms  and  legs  are  alter- 
nately con  trailed  and  relaxed;  and,  in 
fome  cafes,  their  joints  become  lb  rigid 
that  they  cannot  be  bent.  Their  re- 
fpiration  feems  to  be  difficult,  and  they 
cry  terribly  while  the  fit  lafts,  which  is 
generally  lels  than  a  quarter  of  an  hour ; 
altho'  in  fome  rare  cafes,  it  has  conti- 
nued above  an  hour.  Tliis  diforder 
feldom  attacks  married  women ;  but 
young  women,  and  even  girls  of  twelve 
or  ten  years  of  age,  are  liable  to  it. 
Some  boys  and  two  young  men  in  the 
ifland  liave  been  alio  ailbcfed  with  it. 
in  the  cliurch  or  other  public  meetings, 
as  ibon  as  any  one  is  feized,  all  fuch  as 
have  been  formerly  fubjeft  to  tlie  dif- 
temper  are  attacked  Vvklt  it,  which  of- 
ten^ 


o/ Nervous   Disorders,       219 

ten  occafions  great  difturbance  ;  and 
fonie,  who  never  had  thefe  fits,  will  be 
afFe(^ed,  upon  feeing  or  even  hearing 
the  noife  of  fuch  as  are  feized  with 
them. 

This  difeafe  does  not  fecm  to  im- 
pair die  health  of  the  patients  ;  for  the 
young  women  fubjecl  to  it  are  general- 
ly as  ilrong,  and,  in  other  refpecls,  as 
healthy  as  any  in  the  Ifland. 

We  have  feen  above  *,  that  there  is 
a  remarkable  fympathy,  by  means  of  the 
nerves,  between  the  various  parts  of  the 
body ;  and  now  it  appears  that  there  is 
a  Hill  more  wonderful  fympathy  be- 
tween the  nervous  fyflems  of  different 
perfons,  whence  various  motions  and 
morbid  fymptoms  are  often  transferred, 
from  one  to  another,  without  any  cor- 
poreal contacl:   or  infection. 

In  thefe    cafes,  the  impreflion  made 
upon  the  mind  or  fenfor'mm  commune  by 
feeing    others    in    a    difordered    flate, 
raifes,  by  means  of  the  nerves,  liich  mo- 
tions 

*  See  chap,  i,   Tso.  lo  and  u. 


220  Of  the  Causes 

tions  or  changes  in  certain  parts  of  the 
body  as  to  produce  fimilar  afFecftions  in 
them:      And  hence  it  is,  that  the  fight 
only    of  a   perfon  vomiting   has    often 
excited  the  fame  action  in  others;    that 
fore  eyes  become  fometimes  infectious; 
that  yawning  is   propagated  from  one 
perfon  through  a  whole  company,  and 
that  convulfive  diforders  are  caught  by 
looking  on  thoie  who  are  aiFed:ed  with 
them.      Now,  altho'  we  cannot  explain 
how  different  impreflions  made  on  the 
fenforium  commune    fliould    occafion,     by 
means  of  the  nerves,  thofe  various  chan- 
ges in  the  body;  yet  that  the  nerves  are 
really  capable  of  producing  very  Hidden 
changes  in  the  circulation  and  diftribu- 
tion    of  the  fluids,    when   the  mind  is 
varioufly  affecled,   we   have   full   proof 
in  that  rednefs  of  the  face  which  accom- 
panies afcnic  of  Ihamc,  that  increafed  flux 
of  the  falha  which  happens  to  a  hungry 
perfon  upon  the  fight  of  grateful  food, 
and    tliat    plentiful   diichargc   of  tears 

wliich 


of  Nervous    Disorders.         iit 

which  is  often  produced  by  piteous  ob- 
]eSis  or  tragical  ftories. 

Thus  far  we  know,  from  certain  ex- 
perience, that,  when  the  nervous  fyfteni 
is  extremely  delicate,  a  fmall  impreilion 
on  anv  of  the  or2;ans  of  fenfe  v/ili  often 
throw  the  whole  body  into  diforder. 
For  example,  I  have  knovv^n  people  of 
■weak  nerves,  fubjecl;  to  wind  in  their 
ftomach,  and  a  fwimming  of  their  head, 
who,  by  looking  into  a  miri'oir  that  was 
kept  conftantly  moving  before  them, 
became  i^o  giddy,  as  to  be  in  hazard  of 
falling.  Others  upon  the  fudden  open- 
ing of  a,  door,  or  any  other  unexpected 
noife,  have  been  liable  to  be  feized 
with  convulfions.  Nay,  there  have  been 
fome,  Avhofe  brain  and  organs  of  fenfe 
were  fo  iiifceptible  of  imprellions,  that 
they  could  fcarce  abflain  from  imitating 
every  motion  and  gefture  they  faw  per- 
formed  by  others  *. 

On 

*  Philofophical  Tranfaft.  abrljg.  vol.  iii.  p.  8. 


222  .  Of  the   Causes 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  to  be  obfer- 
ved,  that  flroiig  nervous  fymptoms  are 
feldom  occalloned  by  fear,  terror,  grief, 
the  force  of  imagination,  or  any  Hidden 
imprellion  on  the  organs  of  fenfe,  in 
perfons  whofe  nerves  are  firm  and  lefs 
fenfible  ;  but,  when  the  contrary  is  the 
cafe,  the  caufes  above  mentioned  will 
often  produce  the  mofl  flidden  and  vio- 
lent hyfleric  fits,  or  convulfive  difor- 
ders,  wdthout  any  fault  in  the  womb, 
alimentary  canal,  or  other  parts  of  the 
body. 

To  conclude  our  obfervations  on  the 
caufes  of  nervous  difeafes,  it  may  be 
proper  to  take  notice,  that  altho'  it  ap- 
pears from  the  clifledlions  of  thofe  who 
have  died  of  them,  that  the  ftomach 
and  inteflines,  liver,  fpleen,  omentum^ 
melentery,  or  uterus,  have  frequently 
been  found  obftrucled,  fcn*rhous,  or  o- 
therwife  unfound,  yet  as  in  many  other 
cafes  of  the  fame  dilbrders,  no  fuch 
morbid  appearances  have  been  obferved 

in 


of  Nervous    Disorders.  223 

in  the  body  after  death ;  it  follo'vvs,  that 
thele  fymptoms  may  frequently  proceed 
from  caufes,  which,  ehiding  our  fenfes, 
are  not  to  be  difcovered  by  diilec^ion. 
Nay,  obftrudlions,  fchirriy  and  other 
diforders  of  the  infceraj  obferved  in 
thofe  who  have  died  after  long  differ- 
ing from  nervous  ailments,  feem,  Ibme- 
times  to  have  been  the  confequences  of 
a  long  flate  of  bad  health,  rather  than 
the  caufes  of  it :  Particularly,  by  the  fre- 
quent attacks  of  that  arthritic  or  other 
morbid  matter  which  is  often  the  cauie 
of  thefe  diforders;  and,  by  the  pains 
and  fpafms  attending  them,  fome  ob- 
ftruftions  may  at  length  be  formed  in 
the  fmall  veflels  of  the  itomach  or 
neighbouring  parts ;  to  which  every  new 
return  adds  a  little,  juft  as  new  inflam- 
mations of  the  cornea  always  increaie 
Ipecks  on  that  membrane. 

CHAP. 


224  Of  the  mojl  remarkable 


CHAP.     VI. 

Ohfervations  on  fome  of  t1)e  mojl  remarkable 
S-^mptoms  of  the  Nervous,  Hypo- 
chondriac, and  Hysteri  c  kind. 

I.    A  N    uncommon   fenfe   of  cold   or 
•^  ^    heat   in    different   parts    of  the 
body,    fometimes   fuddenly  fucceeding 
each  other. 

The  natural  heat  of  animal  bodies  is 
owing  to  the  regular  and  uninterrupt- 
ed circulation  of  the  fluids.  As  this 
degree  of  heat,  however,  is  nearly  the 
fame  in  every  part  that  is  defended  from 
the  external  cold,  and  is  what  we  are 
accuftomed  to,  we  are,  commonly,  no 
more  confcious  of  it,  than  of  the  beat- 
ing of  the  heart,  or  of  the  alternate  con- 
traction 


Nervous    Symptoms.  225 

traclion  of  the  inteflines.  But  as  of- 
ten as  there  is  a  more  rapid  motion 
of  the  fluids  through  the  whole  body,  or 
only  in  the  fmaller  veilels  of  fbme  part, 
we  feel  a  greater  heat,  than  the  natu- 
ral. In  like  manner,  a  fenfation  of  cold 
proceeds  from  a  diminiflied  circulation 
or  a  ftagnation  of  the  fluids  in  the 
fmaller  veiTels. 

In  hypochondriac  and  hyfteric  cafes, 
a  quicker  or  flower  motion  of  the  fluids, 
and  confequently  an  unufual  fenfation 
of  heat  or  cold  in  the  vefl^els  of  the 
head,  back,  arms,  legs  and  other  parts, 
may  arife  either  from  the  vefl^els  them- 
felves,  or  their  fluids.  From  the  vef- 
fels, — when  thefe,  from  fome  fault  or 
irritation  of  the  nervous  fyftem,  or  from 
fympathy  between  their  nerves  and 
thofe  of  the  fl:omach,  or  fome  other  ve- 
ry fenfible  part,  are  either  thrown  into 
an  unufual  alternate  motion,  or  aifeft- 
ed  with  a  continued  fpafmodic  fl:rid;ure. 
From  the  fluids, — when,  by  their  acri 

P  mony 


22  6  Of  the  juoji  remarkable 

mony  or  vlicid  quality,  the  very  fmall 
veflels  are  either  excited  into  uncommon 
vibratory  contractions*,  or  become  in 
a  great  meafure  obftrucled. 

It  is  obfervable,  that  in  thofe  parts 
of  the  body,  in  which  patients  com- 
plain of  an  unufual  lieat  or  cold,  v/e 
can,  often,  neither  by  our  feeling,  nor 
the  thermometer,  difcover  a  greater 
or  leis  degree  of  heat  than  in  the  neigh- 
bouring parts,  where  there  is  no  ilich 
fenfation.  This  may  be  owing  to  the 
heat  or  cold,  in  fuch  cafes,  being  felt 
below  the  fkin  and  memhrana  adipoja, 
viz,  in  the  mufcles  :  Or,  perhaps,  a  vio- 
lent alternate  motion  excited  in  the 
very  fmall  vefFels,  by  fome  acrid  fluid, 
may  give  a  fallacious  ]^Gn£Q  of  heat  to 
the  perfon,  Vvhen  there  is  really  no 
greater  degree  of  it,    as   far  as  can  be 

difcovered 

*  That  acrid  humours  and  afFetTiions  of  the  brain  and 
nerves  may  excite  a  violent  alternate  motion  in  the  fmall 
vCiTels,  or  affccl  them  with  a  continued  fprfiii  or  tctauus, 
we  hav2  fhcwn  above  chap.  i.   No.  17. 


Nervous    Symptoms.  227 

difcovered  by  the  thermometer.  In 
like  manner,  the  ftagnation  of  fome  vif^ 
cid  humom'  in  the  lame  veiTels  may 
produce  a  ihnCe  of  cold,  altho'  the  real 
heat  is  little,  if  at  all  diminillied.  'Tis 
true,  that  in  bludiing  the  increafed  mo- 
tion of  the  fluids  through  the  vellels  of 
the  face  is  accompanied  with  a  glow; 
but  it  is  to  be  confidered  that  the  in- 
creafed motion  here,  is  in  the  veflels  of 
the  Ikin,  and  fuch  alfo  as  carry  red 
blood,  which  leems  more  apt  to  acquire 
heat  by  friftion  or  agitation,  than  the 
thinner  fluids. 

The  fenle  of  cold  and  fliiverino;  in 
the  beginning  of  mofl:  fevers  and  in- 
flammations, feems  not  to  be  owing,  as 
fome  have  imagined,  to  vifcid  fluids 
fl:agnating  in  the  fmall  cutaneous  vefl^els, 
but  to  a  Ipafmodic  contracflion  of  thefe 
vefl^els,  in  confequence  of  that  irritation 
which  the  nervous  lyfl:em  fuffers  from 
the  febrile  ftirnidiu,  or  the  beginning  in- 
flammation. Hovi^ever,  altho'  all  fevers 
P    2  proceed 


22  8  Of  the  mojl  remarkable 

proceed  from  irritation,  and  confe-. 
quently  from  an  aiFetlion  of  the  nerves, 
and  many  fevers  of  the  low  kind  have 
had  the  name  of  nervous  pecitliarly  be- 
ftov/ed  on  them;  yet  a  regular  intermit- 
tent feems  to  deierve  that  appellation 
better  than,  ahnofl  any  other  fpecies  of 
fever ;  for  its  paroxfyms,  like  thofe  of 
the  epilepfy,  or  other  convuliive  difor- 
ders,  are  owing,  not  fo  much  to  any 
fixed  obllruclion  in  the  vafcular  iyftem, 
or  general  acrimony,  or  vifcidity  of 
the  mafs  of  fluids,  as  to  an  irritation  or 
affeflion  of  the  nerves  of  fome  particu- 
lar part,  fuch  as  the  flomach  or  in- 
teflines;  Vv  hence  the  v/hole  fy (lem  fuffers 
by  fympathy,  and  a  fliuddering  is  pro- 
duced, which  is  Ricceeded  by  a  hot  fit 
and  fv/eating,  that,  for  the  time,  removes 
the  caufe  of  the  difcafe.  And  as  an 
intermittent  agrees  ^vith  epileptic  and 
other  convuliive  diforders  as  to  its 
caufe ;  fo  its  returning  paroxyfms,  like 
theirs,  may  be  often  prevented  or  weak- 
ened 


Nervous    Symptoms.  229 

ened,  by  raifing,  a  fliort  time  before  the 
approach  of  the  fit,  an  acute  pahi  or  a- 
ny  great  commotion  in  the  body. 

II.  Pains  in  different  parts  of  the 
body,  fuddenly  moving  from  one  place 
to  another. 

These  pains  are  fomething  a-ldn  to 
thofe  of  the  rheumatic  kind,  but  gene- 
rally have  their  feat  in  the  fkin,  mem- 
branes, and  mufcles,  and  not  in  the  liga- 
ments and  joints.  Their  fhifting  fudden- 
ly, and  their  feeming  fometimes  to  have 
a  connexion  with  the  flatulent  complaints 
of  the  ftomach,  has  induced  fbme  phy- 
ficians,  as  well  as  the  patient,  to  afcribe 
them  to  the  motion  of  air  between  the 
fkin  and  muicles,  from  one  part  of  the 
body  to  another.  But  their  true  caufe 
feems  to  be,  either  fbme  vifcid  or  acrid 
matter  fiatking  for  a  fliort  time  in  the 
fmall  veflels  of  certain  parts,  and  irrita- 
ting them,  or  fpafmodic  contractions  of 
thefe  vefTels   from  a  f}aiipathy  betv/eeii 

their 


230  Of  the    mofi   remarkable 

their  nerves  and  thofe  of  the  flomach 
and  inteftmes,  or  fome  other  very  fen- 
fible  part  *. 

From  the  fame  caufes  affeftms:  the 
velTels  or  nerves  of  the  pericranium,  or 
other  parts  of  the  head,  proceed  flying 
pains  in  this  part,  and  the  claviis  hyfte- 
ricus,  which  Syicnham,  who  imagined  the 
hyfteric  difeafe  to  proceed  from  a  con- 
fufion  of  the  animal  fpirits,  afcribed  to 
the  whole  fpirits  of  the  body  being  con- 
tracted into  a  fmall  part  of  the  head, 
and  producing  much  the  fame  fenfa- 
tion,  as  if  a  nail  were  driven  into  it  t* 

That  thofe  pains  in  the  head  often 
proceed  from  a  fympathy  with  the  flo- 
mach, is  rendered  probable  by  the  vio- 
lent vomiting  which  fometimes  accom- 
panies the  claviis  hyjlericus,  and  by  obfer- 
ving,   that  people  much  troubled  with 

wind 

*  It  is  obfervable,  that  Diodes  Caryftius  mentions,  a- 
mong  the  figns  of  diforders  of  the  belly,  pains  flying 
through  the  body,  without  any  apparent  caufe.  Vid.  Epiji. 
ad  Regem  Antigonum. 

*  Sydenhami  Oper.  EpiJi.  ad  D.  Cole. 


Nervous    Symptoms.  231 

wind  ill  their  llomach,  and  flying  pains 
in  dieir  licad,  are  not  fo  often  aiTecled 
with  thefe  pains,  when  they  are  free 
from  the  flatulence* 

III.  Hysteric  faintings,  and  convul- 
fions. 

Many  hyfleric  women  are  liable  to 
be  ieized  v/ith  faintings,  during  which 
they  lie  as  in  a  deep  fleep  ;  only  their 
refj^iration  is  fo  low  as  Icarce  to  be  per- 
ceived. Others,  along  with  faintings  of 
this  kind,  are  affected  with  catchings 
and  ftrono;  conviilfions. 

These  fits  come  on  differently  in  dif- 
ferent patients  ;  in  fome,  a  coldnefs,  at- 
tended with  a  fenfe  of  fliffnefs^  is  firft 
perceived  in  the  legs,  or  in  the  trunk  of 
the  body  ;  after  this,  a  yav/ning  and 
flretching  of  their  arms  ;  a  lownefs  of 
fpirits,  with  an  opprcilion  about  the 
prc-cordia  ;  the  flomach,  or  fome  part  of 
the  inteftines,  is  diflcnded  with  wind  ; 
tliey  often  feel,  as  it  were,  a  ball  in  then* 

throat  J 


232  Of  the    moft   remarkable 

throat ;  their  breathing  becomes  quick  ; 
the  heart  flutters,  or  is  affected  with  a 
ftrong  palpitation ;  a  giddinefs,  a  noile 
in  the  ears,  and  a  lofs  of  fight,  as  well  as 
of  the  other  fenfes,  fuccced,  together 
with  convulfive  motions  of  the  extremi- 
ties and  other  parts  of  the  body. 

Fits  of  tliis  kind  may  be  owing  to 
various  caufes  ;  fuch  as, 

I .  An  irritation  of  the  nerves  of  the 
ftomach  or  inteflines,  from  wind,  acrid 
humours,  or  other  caufes,  whence  the 
whole  fyflem  is  often  brought  into  con- 
fent.  Nor  can  it  admit  of  any  doubt, 
that  hyfleric  fits  frequently  proceed 
from  tliis  caufe,  fince  the  patients  are 
often  fenfible  of  their  beginning  with 
an  uneafy  fenfation  in  thofe  parts. 

2.  A  SUDDEN  flippreliion  of  the  menfes 
often  gives  rife  to  hyfleric  fits :  And  in 
fome  a  fatal  apoplexy,  attended  with  a 
violent  fpafm  of  the  mufcles  of  the  glot- 
tis^ has  been    the    confequence   of  the 

menflrual 


Nervous    Symptoms.  233 

menftrual    evacuation  being    fuddenly 
ftopt;  as  in  the  following  cafe. 

An  unmarried  woman,  aged  20,  of  a 
delicate  habit,  having  expofed  herfelfto 
cold  at  the  return  of  the  monthly  peri- 
od, was,  next  morning  at  four,  fuddenly 
feized  with  ^Jiupor,  and  a  difficulty  in 
fpeaking,  and  moving  any  of  her  limbs. 
She  was  foon  after  blooded,  and  a  bli- 
fter  was  applied  between  her  flioulders. 
At  eight,  w^hen  I  iirft  faw  her,  flie  could 
neither  fpeak  nor  fwallow,  but  was  trou- 
bled Avith  a  hiccup:  Her  face  was  pale, 
her  fkin  cold,  altho'  her  pulfe  and 
breathing  were  natural.  About  half  an 
hour  after  ten,  (lie  began  to  breathe 
with  labour,  and  with  a  fnorting  noife. 
This  flruggle,  however,  eipecialiy  in  ex- 
piration, did  not  arife  from  any  fault 
in  the  lungs  or  mufcles  of  refpiration, 
but  from  a  fpafm  of  thofe  mufcles  of  the 
larynx  which  fliut  the  glottis;  and  it  came 
by  fits,  which  continued  three  or  four 
minutes,  and  fometimes  more.      In  the 

intervals, 


-34  V  ^^^^   ^^ft   rcmdrkabld 

intervals,  which  were  fomewhat  longef 
than  the  accellions,  fhe  breathed  pretty 
eafily.  The  oleum  fuccini  held  to  the  nole, 
leflened  at  firfl  the  ipafmodic  contrac- 
tion of  the  glottis y  and  made  her  breathe 
eafier.  She  was  blooded  again,  and  had 
a  purging  clyfler.  About  eleven,  the 
fore-part  of  her  neck  around  the  laryiXy 
and  under  the  flerno-maftokl  mufcles, 
was  much  Avelled,  as  if  the  cellular 
membrane  had  been  diflended  with 
air.  A  poultice  of  theriaca  and  camphire 
applied  to  this  fwelling,  feemed  to  leflen 
the  violence  of  the  fits  of  difficult  refpi- 
ration.  In  the  afternoon,  her  pulfe  be- 
coming quick  and  full,  and  her  fkin  hot, 
file  was  blooded  a  third  time;  but  not- 
withftanding  this  and  other  remedies, 
fhe  died  that  night  at  ten  ;  eighteen 
hours  after  flie  Avas  firfl:  taken  ill. 

3.  Avery  acute  pain  in  any  of  the 
more  fenfible  parts  of  the  body,  or  vio- 
lent affections  of  the  mind,  as  terror, 
grief,    anger,  or   difappointments,   will 

fometimes 


Nervous    Symptoms.  235 

fometimes  lb  llrongly  afFecl  the  whole 
nervous  fyftem,  as  to  bring  on  hyfteriq 
fahitings,  with  convulfions,  altho'  the 
body  be  in  every  relpe^l:  healthful  and 
found,  bating  the  too  great  delicacy  or 
fenfibility  of  the  brain  and  nerves. 

IV.  A  Catalepfij  and  tetanus. 

Of  all  the  nervous  or  fpafrnodic  difor- 
ders,  there  is  none  more  fiirprifing  than 
the  catalepjis  or  fliipor  vigilans,  as  it  is  cal- 
led by  Fernelius  *.  In  this  the  patient 
becomes  either  wholly,  or  in  agreatmea- 
fiire,  infenfible  of  Avhat  is  doing  about 
him,  and  remains  exacl:lv  in  the  fame 
pofture  in  which  he  wasfirftfeized.  Hi^ 
joints  are  fometimes  fo  ftifF,  that  they 
can  fcarcely  be  bent,  or,  if  they  are,  they 
remain  in  whatever  fituation  they  are 
placed.  The  pulfe  is  often  low  and  ir- 
regvilar.  This  difeafe  may  be  ov,  Ing  to 
fome  violent  affeftion  of  the  mind  difor- 

dering 

*  Patholog,  lib.  v.  cap.  ii. 


236  Of  the  mojl    remarkable 

dering  the  brain  and  nerves,  or  to  fome 
acrid  matter  affedling  them,  either  by 
its  immediate  contact,  or  by  fympathy 
with  the  flomach,  inteftines,  uterus,  or 
fome  very  fenfible  parts.  To  the  lame 
general  caufes  are  Ukeways  to  be  afcrib- 
ed  the  emprojlhotomis  and  opifthotonus,  and 
tetanus.  And  here  ^^'e  mufl  reft ;  for  to 
endeavour  to  explain  more  particularly, 
either  how  the  paftions,  or  an  irritation 
of  the  brain  or  other  fenfible  parts, 
brings  on  alternate  convullions  or  fixed 
fpafms  of  the  mufcles,  would  be  to  no 
pui'pofe,  till  we  are  better  acquainted 
with  the  ftruchii'e  of  thefe  organs,  and 
with  that  caiife  Avhich  immediately  pro- 
duces their  contraftion  ;  points  which 
will,  probably,  for  ever  elude  our  re- 
fearches.  All  we  know,  is,  that  what- 
ever irritates,  or  difagreeably  aiTe^ls  the 
brain,  nerves,  or  any  of  the  more  fen- 
fible parts,  occafions  continued  fpafms 
or  convulfive  motions,  either  in  the 
pai'ts  themfelves,  if  mufcular,  or  in  thofe 

with 


Nervous    SymptoxMs.  237 

with  which  they  have  any  coniiderable 
fympathy ;  and  that,  when  the  nervous 
fyflem  is  delicate,  or  the  irritation  great, 
ahiiofl  the  whole  mufcles  will  be  fomer 
times  agitated  with  alternate  contrac- 
tions, or  aiFe(fi;ed  with  a  tetanus  or  gene- 
ral rigidity. 

V.  Wind  in  the  flomach  and  bowels. 

All  our  aliments,  efpecially  thofe  of 
the  vegetable  kind,  abound  with  an*.  In 
the  time  of  digeftion,  part  of  this  air  is 
feparated,  and  produces  that  flatulence 
or  wind  in  the  flomach  and  bowels  with 
which  many  people  are  greatly  trou- 
bled. But  altho'  flatulence  arifes  from 
our  aliments,  fome  of  wliich  produce  it 
more  than  others,  yet  ftrong  and  health- 
ful people  are  feldom  troubled  with 
wind,  unlefs  they  either  over-load  their 
flomach  too  much,  or  fwallow  liquors 
that  are  in  a  fermenting  ftate,  and  con- 
fequentiy  full  of  elaflic  air.  Wliile, 
therefore,  the  matter  of  flatulence  pro- 
ceeds 


238  Of  the  tnoft    remarkable 

ceeds  from  our  aliments,  die  caufe 
which  makes  air  feparate  from  them  in 
fuch  quantity,  as  to  occalion  uneafy 
complaints  in  the  prinice  vhrj  is,  almoft 
always,  a  fault  there  ;  for  when,  on  ac- 
count of  a  weaknefs  of  die  ftomach 
and  bovv'eis,  or  an  unnatural  flate  of 
their  nerves,  the  digcrtion  does  not  go 
on  properly,  not  only  more  liatulence 
is  produced,  but  lefs  of  it  returns  again 
to  a  fixed  flate.  Farther,  when,  tliro' 
the  weaknefs  of  the  coats  of  the  flo- 
mach  and  inteilines,  the  prefRire  upon 
its  contents  is  conliderably  diminillied, 
the  air  emitted  by  the  aliments  in  di- 
o:eftion,  will  not  only  be  in  2:reater 
quantity,  but  will  expand  itielf  more 
than  in  people  of  ftronger  organs.  A- 
grceably  to  this,  it  is  obferved,  that  dogs 
are  much  troubled  with  wind  and  borho- 
rygmi,  after  tying  the  eight  pair  of  nerves, 
Vv'hich  ^^wd  man;',  branches  to  the  ali- 
IJlcn^^!ry  canal. 

Air 


Nervous    Symptoms.  239 

Air  in  the  ftomach  being  often  hin- 
dered from  riling,   by  a  flight   fpafm  of 
the  cardia,   or  lower  part  of  the  gullet, 
either  occafions  an  inflation  of  that  or- 
gan, with  other  uneafy  fymptoms,  or 
pafTes  into  the  inteflines  ;  where,  joined 
to  more   that  is  generated  there,  it  di- 
ftends  them  in  fome  places,  and  confe- 
quently   occafions  a  contracFlion  in   o- 
thcrs.   Hence  pain;  and  when  the  fpafm 
gives  way,    the   air   rufliing  through  a 
narrow  paflage  of  fome  of  the  bowels, 
makes  a  rumbling  noife :  But  when  the 
fpafm  in  any  part  of  the  inteflines,  efpe- 
ciaily  the  colony  is  greater,  or  lafls  long- 
er than  ufual,  the  air  is  more  and  more 
rarefied  by  the  heat  of  the  body,  whence 
their  coats  being  over-ftretched,  great 
pain  is  occafioned,  which    is    often   at^ 
tended  with  a  vomiting.      This  is  what 
is  commonly  called  2i  flatulent  or  hyfteric 
colic.      In  fome  cafes,    certain  parts  of 
the  alimentary  canal  are    affected  with 
filch  a  fixed  fpafmodic  contratflion,  that 

fcarce 


240  Of  the    mojl   remarkable 

fcarce  any  air  pafles  either  upward  or 
downward;  and  more  being  daily  ge- 
nerated, the  ftomach  and  bowels  become 
at  lengtii  greatly  diftended,  or  a  tympa- 
ny is  produced.  In  this  difeafe,  I  have, 
ieveral  times,  obferved  the  fwelling  of 
the  belly  fall  greatly,  and  the  difeafe  go 
almofl  quite  off,  while  in  the  mean  time 
very  little  wind  was  difcharged.  This 
fliews,  when  the  alimentaiy  canal  re- 
turns to  a  found  flate,  that  not  only  lefs 
air  is  generated  from  the  food,  but  what 
has  been  produced,  may  be  moflly  de- 
llroyed  or  reduced  to  a  more  fixed  con- 
dition. 

VI.  A*  GREAT  craving  for  food. 

This  may  be  owing  to  fome  humoiu- 
in  the  cavity  of  the  flomach  ftimulating 
its  nerves,  or  to  thofe  nerves  being  fo 
changed,  that  they  are  almofl  always 
affecled  with  that  fenfation  we  call  hun- 
ger, unlefs  when  food  is  newly  taken 
into  the  flomach. 

Doctor 


Nervous   Symptoms.  241 

Doctor  Lovjer  has  obferved,  that 
hypochondriac  and  hylleric  people,  are 
often  troubled  with  an  uncommon 
hunger  or  fames  canina ;  and  while  this 
lafls,  they  are  almoft  quite  free  of  other 
complaints ;  but  that  their  uiual  ail- 
ments return  with  their  natural  ap- 
petite. In  other  cafes,  however,  the 
morbid  matter  aiFe(R:ing  the  nerves  of 
the  ftomach  in  hypochondriac  and  hy- 
fleric  patients,  fometimes  occafions  a 
want  of  appetite  and  naufea.  In  like 
manner,  the  true  gout,  when  turned 
upon  the  ftomach,  according  to  the 
different  fenlibility  of  the  nerves  of  that 
organ,  or  its  being  more  or  lefs  fixed 
upon  thefe  nerves,  produces  very  diffe- 
rent effects;  fuch  as,  an  oppreflion,  a 
languor,  flatulence,  want  of  appetite, 
and  a  ^Qw^e  of  coldnfefs  in  the  ftomach, 
or  a  violent  pain  with   cramps  and  vo- 


miting. 


The   malacia   and   pica,    common  to 
women  with  child,  and  to  girls  aifedted 

Q^  with 


242  Of  the  mojl  remarkable 

with  the  chlorofis,  proceed  either  from 
Uii  acid  or  ibme  other  acrid  humour  in 
the  ftomach,  or  from  its  nerves  being  fo 
changed  by  the  flate  of  pregnancy,  as 
to  produce  a  longhig  for  certain  foods, 
and  other  fubllances,  which,  in  thefe 
cafes,  are  generally  moft  grateful  to  the 
tafte,  as  well  as  apt  to  remedy  the  dis- 
order of  the  ftomach. 

VII.     A  Black  vomitinq;. 

Alt  ho'  not  a  few  of  the  moderns, 
following  the  opinion  of  the  antient 
Phylicians,  have  fuppofed  the  hypochon- 
driac difeafe  to  be  owing  to  an  atrabili- 
ary  humom*  produced  in  the  ftomach, 
liver,  or  fpleen,  yet,  in  many  hypo- 
chondriac patients,  there  is  no  fuch  hu- 
mour ;  and  where  it  is  obferved,  it  is 
only  a  fymptom  or  confequence  of  that 
difeafe,   but  not  its  original  caufe. 

Patients  who  have  been  long  af- 
fiicled  with  violent  pains  and  cramps, 
or  other  diforders  in  their  ftomach,  of- 
ten 


Nervous   Symptoms.  243 

ten  throw  up  fbme  dark  coloured  fluff, 
which  is  commonly  nothing  but  blood 
that  has  loft  its  colour ;  lor  altlio' 
when  blood  is  poured  into  the  cavity  of 
the  ftomach  in  a  large  quantity,  it  is 
foon  vomited  either  in  its  fluid  ftate,  or 
coagulated;  yet,  v^^hen  it  ouzes  flowly 
from  the  fmaller  veflels,  it  lofes  its  red 
colour  by  long  lying,  and  when  thrown 
up,  refembies  the  coffee-grounds.  This 
kind  of  black  vomiting  is  generally 
owing  to  fbme  of  the  following  cauies, 
viz, 

1.  Violent  pain  or  cramps  in  the 
flomach  ;  the  lii'fl  of  which  may  great- 
ly increafe  the  motion  of  the  fluids  in 
the  fmall  veifels,  and  the  laft  may  fqueeze 
the  globules  of  blood  through  the  ori- 
fices of  the  fmall  arteries,  deiigned  for 
conveying  the'gaflric  lymph,  only,  in- 
to the  cavity  of  the  flomach. 

2.  Scirrhous  tumors  in  the  flo- 
mach beginning  to  ulcerate,   or  a  rup- 

(^  2  tiire 


244  Of  the   mojl  remarkable 

tnre  of  Ibme  of  the  fmall  vefTels  leading 
to  them  *. 

3- A 

*  Further,  fcirrhous  tamors  in  the  ftomach,  byobftrvift- 
ingf  in  a  great  meafure,  the  courfe  of  the  blood  through  the 
indurated  part,  may  occafion  a  more  copious  influx  of  this 
fluid  into  the  neighbouring  veflels  ;  whence  the  orifices  of 
fome  of  the  exhaling  arteries  in  the  villous  coat  of  the  fto- 
mach,  may  be  fo  dilated  as  to  allow  globules  of  red  blood 
to  efcape  with  the  thinner  humours.  This  fuppofition  is 
rendered,  at  baft,  not  improbable  by  the  following  inftance 
of  bloody  urine,  occafioned  by  the  womb  prefling  upon 
the  neighbouring  parts  in  time  of  pregnancy. 

A  Gentlewoman,  aged  19,  began,  in  the  fourth  month  of 
her  firft  pregnancy,  to  make  bloody  urine,  which  continued 
till  within  fifteen  days  of  her  time.  This  conftant  difcharge, 
tho'  weakening,  yet  was  not  attended  with  a  quick  puHl-, 
nor  any  pain  in  the  back  or  belly.  After  being  deliver- 
ed, fhe  recovered  and  enjoyed  perfedl  health,  'till  about 
three  or  four  months  after  flie  had  conceived  again,  when 
the  bloody  urine  returned  and  continued,  as  formerly,  till 
a  fortnight  before  file  was  brought  to  bed.  In  her  third 
pregnancy,  flie  was  afFefted  in  the  fame  manner,  only  flie  was 
much  troubled  with  collivenefs,  which  increafed  the  other 
diforder  ;  and  after  this  delivery,  before  flie  fell  with  child 
againy  flie  had  foraetimes  returns  of  the  bloody  urine. 
During  her  fourth  pregnancy,  which  happened  in  the  25th 
year  of  her  age,  the  fame  fymptom  returned,  but  her  lofs 
of  blood  was  now  greater  and  more  confl:ant  than  ever,  fo 
that  fhe  complained  of  gre:;t  weaknefs,  of  a  giddinefs  and 
lofs  of  appetite  ;  her  pulfe  was  quick  and  fmall,  and  for 
■  above  a  month  together,  flie  had  quotidian  feverifli  pa- 
roxyfms,  generally  of  ten  or  twelve  hours  continuance. 
About  the  middle  of  the  ninth  month,  her  water  returncd 

to 


Nervous   Symptoms.  245 

3 .  A  fupprelTion  of  the  menfes  or  hae- 
■morrhoids,  whence  the  blood  that  ufed 
to  be  evacuated  by  the  uterus  or  reBum  is 
turned  upon  the  flomach,  and  partly  dif- 
charged  by  fome  of  its  exhaling  arteries. 

I  HAVE  known  fome  hyfleric  patients 
affed;ed  with  levere  pains  and  fpafms  in 
their  bowels  who  did  not  vomit  any 
black  fluff,  but  often  paffed  it  by  ftool. 
In  this  cafe,  the  black  purging  was  ow^- 
ing  to  red  blood  making  its  way,  in 
fmall  quantity,  into   the  cavity  of  the 

inteftines ; 

to  the  natural  colour;  but  after  lying  in  and  recovering 
flowly,  in  fix  or  feven  weeks  ihe  grew  as  ill  as  ever.  Her 
blood  was  now  become  fo  thin,  that  when  fhe  happened  to 
cut  her   finger,  it  would  fcarcely  tinge  lin?n. 

This  difeafe,  to  which  this  perfon  feems  to  have  been 
predifpofed  by  a  laxity  of  the  vefTels  of  the  kidneys,  was 
moft  probably  owing  to  the  preffure  of  the  womb  on  the 
iliac  arteries,  by  which  means  the  blood  was  thrown  with 
greater  force  upon  the  emulgents  ;  for,  if  the  caufe^of  this 
haemorrhage  had  been  merely  the  fupprefllon  of  the  menfes, 
it  ought  to  have  appeared  much  fooner  than  the  fourth 
month.  But  however  that  may  be,  the  patient  found  great 
beneStfrom  the  tinfture  of  rofes,  the  bark  with  elixir  of  vi- 
triol, a  ftrengthening  plaifter,  and  a  diet  confifting  chiefly 
of  mucilaginous  fubftances,  gellies  and  the  lighter  flefn 
meats,  with  a  little  claret. 


2±6t  Of  the  mojl   refnarkable 

inteftines;  for  that  this  atrabiliary  hu- 
mour, as  it  has  been  called,  did  not 
come  from  the  liver,  I  was  convinced, 
by  obferving,  that  fuch  patients  aspafled 
it  by  ftool,  frequently  vomited  up,  at 
the  fame  time,  bile  of  a  natural  colour. 
However,  as  hypochondriac  and  hyfte- 
ric  patients  fometimes  throw  up  a  dark 
green  bilious  humotu',  there  may  be, 
perhaps,  a  few  cafes,  in  which  a  black- 
ifli  liquor  coming  from  the  liver  or  gall- 
bladder, may  pais  from  the  duodenum  in- 
to the  ftomach,  and  be  afterwards  dii- 
charged  by  vomiting. 

yill.   A  SUDDEN  and' great  flux  of 

Dale  urine. 

i. 

This  is  reckoned  by  Sydenham  the 
pathognomic  fign  of  the  hypochon- 
driac and  hyfleric  difeafe  "'^.  It  has  been 
afcribed  by  Hoffman  to  a  fpafm  of  the 
fphindcr  of  the   bladder  t;   and    by  Dr. 

Cheyne 

*  Epji.  ad  D.  Cole. 

\  Syftem.  Med.  torn.  iv.  part.  iii.  cap.  vi.  §  xvi. 


Nervous   Symptoms.  247 

Chejne  to  an  obflruclion  of  the  perfpira- 
tion  *;  but  without  fufficieiit  reafon. 

The  real  proximate  caufe  of  this 
fymptom  is  always  the  lame,  viz.  an  in- 
creafed  motion,  together  with  fome 
degree  of  conftrid:ion  of  the  fccre- 
tory  veflels  of  the  kidneys ;  the  firft 
augments  the  quantity,  and  the  fecond 
occahons  the  pale  colour  of  the  water: 
Altho',  it  mull  be  owned,  that  this 
colour  is,  principally,  owing  to  the 
quicknefs  of  the  fecretion  of  the  u- 
rine  and  of  its  palTage  through  the 
bladder,  before  the  finer  parts  are  ab- 
forbed,  and  it  has  had  time  to  acquh'e 
the  common  fmell  and  tafle,  as  well  as 
coloiu'  of  that  fluid. 

The  caufes  of  fuch  an  increafed  mo- 
tion of  the  fecretory  veflels  of  the  Idd- 
neys  may  be  reduced  to  the  following ; 

I.  Sudden  or  violent  affe^^tions  of  the 
mmd.  Thus  people  of  a  delicate  frame 
and  very  moveable  nerves  will,  foon  af- 
ter a  fright,    anger  or  vexation,  make 

great. 

•  Engliih  Malady,  part  ii.  chap.  ix. 


248  Of  the  moji  remarkable 

great  quantities  of  pale  water.  The 
whole  nervous  iyftem  being  in  fuch 
cafes  violently  agitated,  the  fecretory 
veflels  of  the  kidneys  are  tlirown  into 
ftronger  and  quicker  alternate  contrac- 
tions than  ufual,  and  fo  make  a  larger 
fecretion  of  urine.  Add  to  this,  that 
as  the  perfpiration  is  generally  checked 
by  diforders  of  the  mind,  the  watery 
parts  of  the  blood,  will  be  turned  more 
upon  the  kidneys. 

2.  An  increafed  motion  of  the  renal 
veflels  is  often  owing  to  fympathy.  Thus 
as  pain  in  the  kidneys  produces  a  naiifea 
and  vomiting,  fb  a  difagreeable  fenlation 
in  the  ftomach  and  bowels,   from  wind, 
crudities  or  other  caufes,  frequently  af- 
fedls  the  veflels  of  the  kidneys  with  flich 
an  increafed  alternate  motion,  as  greatly 
to  quicken  the  fecretion  of  urine.    Fur- 
ther,  when  the  body  is  thrown   into  a 
general    diforder,     which   happens    in 
hyflieric  fits,  the  nerves  of  the   kidneys 

are 


Nervous   Symptoms.  249 

are  afFecled  as  well  as  others ;  and  if  the 
renal  veflels  are  weaker  or  more  irritable 
than  thofe  of  the  other  glands,  the 
fluids,  which  are  put  into  violent  mo- 
tion, will  run  off  this  way  in  the  form 
of  pale  water.  If  the  inteftines  are  par- 
ticularly weak,  the  perfon  will  be  feized 
with  a  purging. 

In  children  breeding  teeth,  the  irri- 
tation of  the  nerves  of  the  gums,  fome- 
times,  affecls  the  kidneys  by  confmty 
fo  as  to  occafion  a  confiderable  difcharge 
of  tirine  of  this  kind. 

3.  Since  Sydenham  has  oblerved,  that 
the  hyfteric  difeafe  will  often  feize  the 
kidne)'s,  and  occafion  a  pain,  like  that 
of  a  nephritic  paroxylm  *,  may  not  that 
noxious  matter  in  the  blood  wliich  is 
often  the  caufe  of  nervous  diforders,  be 
thrown,  fometimes,  in  llich  a  manner 
on  thofe  parts,  as,  tho'  not  to  produce 
pain,  yet  fo  to  flimulate  their  fecretory 

vefTels, 

*  Epiji.  ad  D.  Cole, 


^5^  Q/'  ^^-^  ^^^ft  remarkable 

veflels,  as  greatly  to  iiicreafe  the  quan- 
tity of  the  urine  ?  Nor  is  this  more 
furpriiing,  than  that  the  fame,  matter 
affecting  the  nerves  of  the  flomach 
ihould  produce,  at  diiferent  times,  very 
different  complaints.  I  have  met  with 
feveral  inftances  of  a  great  and  long- 
continued  flux  of  urine  from  an  arthri- 
tic humour  turned  on  the  kidneys. 

Further,  lince  a  floppage  of  ui-ine, 
with  a  pain  at  the  neck  of  the  bladder, 
will,  in  fuch  patients,  fometimes  pro- 
ceed from  the  morbid  matter  producing 
a  Ipafm  there ;  may  not  a  diminifhed  fe- 
cretion  of  urine,  withovit  any  pain  in 
the  bladder  or  tirethray  be  owing,  in 
fome  cafes,  to  a  fpalinodic  contraction 
of  the  ureters,  or  fecretory  vefKls  of  the 
kidneys  ? 

I    fiAVE   had  patients,  who,   after  a 

Y      long  fever,   or  fome  other  tedious  and 

Vv^eakening    didemper,     made    a   great 

quantity   of  pale   water   in  the   night, 

but  in  the  day-time  no  more,  fometimes 

lefs. 


Nervous    Symptoms.  251 

lefs,  than  ufual,  and  of  a  natural  colour. 
This  increafed  fecretion  did  not  gene- 
rally begin  at   any  certian  hour  in  the 
evening,  but  foon   after  going  to  bed  ; 
and  in  the  morning,  after  getting  up, 
it  gradually    abated.      Nay,   a   Gentle-       -h 
man  who  had  been  in  ufe,  for  ten  or 
twelve  days,  to  make  from  four  to  fix 
Englifli  pints  of  pale  water  in  the  night, 
finding  himlelf  greatly  weakened  there- 
by, refolved  to  try  what  getting  out  of 
bed  would  do ;  and  accordingly,  at  two 
in  the  morning,  after  having  that  night 
paffed  about  a  pint  and  a  half  of  urine 
at  twice,  he   rofe   and    fat  up  for  two 
hours,    and   then  was  able  to  make  but 
about  half  a  gill.      After   this  he  went 
to  bed  again,  and,  in  two  hours  more, 
made  near  three  quarters   of  a  pint  of 
pale  water.  This  experiment  was  repeat- 
ed fome  nights  after  with  the  fame  event. 
Those  who  are  troubled  with  this 
flux  of  limpid  urine  in  the  night,    find 
themfelves  ftronger,  cooler,   and  in  the 

befl 


152  Of  the    mojl  remarkable 

beft  fpirits  in  the  evening,  at  wliich 
time  their  pulfe  is  floweft;  but  foon  af- 
ter going  to  bed,  their  pulfe  becomes 
quicker,  they  grow  warmer,  and  begin 
to  make  water  in  great  quantity ;  They 
are  not  refreflied  with  fleep,  and,  in  the 
morning,  they  feel  thirfty  and  languid, 
and  have  a  quicker  pulfe  than  at  other 
times. 

This  excefs  of  pale  tu^ine,  tho*  mofl 
incident  to  people  of  weak  nerves,  yet, 
to  diflinguifli  it  from  the  true  hyfteric 
^rofluvium,  may  be  called  hectical  or 
colliquative,  as  coming  in  the  place  of 
thofe  night-fweats,  which  often  exhauft 
fuch  ^s  have  had  their  velTels  weakened, 
and  their  blood  impoveriflied  by  fome 
difeafe.  When  the  veflels  of  the  kidneys 
are  relaxed,  and  yield  too  eafily,  or  are 
too  irritable,  the  fever  raifed  in  die 
night,  by  the  heat  of  the  bed,  will  na- 
turally tlu'ow  off  the  humour  by  them, 
rather  than  by  the  pores  of  the  /kin: 
But,  in  the  day-time,    the  whole  body, 

and 


Nervous    Symptoms.  253 

and  the  loins  in  particular,  being  kept 
cooler,  the  blood  will  be  lefs  rarefied, 
and  will  move  with  lefs  force,  whence 
the  dilatation,  or  increafed  alternate  mo- 
tion of  the  renal  veiTels  will  abate,  and 
confeqiiently  the  urine  will  be  feparated 
in  much  lefs  quantity. 

An  increafed  fecretion  of  the  falivUf 
is,  like  the  copious  limpid  urine,  owing 
to  an  unuflial  motion  of  the  vefFels  of 
the  falivary  glands  :  And  it  may  be  ob- 
ferved,  that  in  patients  whofe  falivary 
veflels  are  weakefl  and  mofl  Lrritable,  a 
falivation  will  oftener  happen,  while,  in 
thofe  whofe  kidneys  are  mofl  apt  to  be 
affecT:ed  by  any  diforder  in  the  body,  a 
flux  of  pale  water  will  be  more  fre- 
quent. 

IX.  A  NERVOUS  atrophy. 

A  marafmus,  or  fcnfible  wafling  of  the 

body,  not  attended  with  flveatings,  any 

confiderable  increafe  of  the  excretions 

by  urine  or  flool,    a  quick  pulfe   or   fe- 

verifh 


254  ^f  ^^^^  ^'^^ft  remarkable 

verifli  heat,  may  deferve  the  name  of 
nervous :  Not  that  I  would  be  thought 
by  this  to  iiilinuate,  that  fuch  a  difeafe 
proceeds  from,  a  diminifhed  fecretion  of 
the  animal  f|)irits,  or  from  their  vitiat- 
ed quality.  The  fluid  of  the  nerves  does 
not  feem  to  be  that  nutritious  juice,  by 
means  of  which  the  daily  wafte  of  the 
body  is  repaired  * ;  and  we  know  too 
little  of  its  properties,  to  make  it  the 
foundation  of  our  reafoning  on  the  na- 
ture or  cure  of  difeaies.  But  this  kind 
of  atrophy,  tho'  not,  perhaps,  owing 
to  any  fault  in  the  fpirits,  or  even  in  the 
brain  or  nervous  fyftem  in  general,  may 
yet  deferve  the  name  of  nervous,  as  it 
feems,  frequently,  to  proceed  from  an 
unnatural  or  morbid  ftate  of  the  nerves 
of  the  ftomach  and  inteflines. 

The  influence  of  the  floniach  In  the 
animal  oeconomy,  is  greater  than  is,  per- 
haps, generally  imagined :    It  not  only 
contributes  to  the  digeftion  of  the  ali- 
ment, 

*  See  ubove,  chap.  i.  No.  9. 


Nervous   Symptoms.  255 

merit,   but   the  whole  fyilem  is  either 
invigorated,  or  alfecled  with  a  languor, 
according  to  the  different  difpofition  of 
its  nerves.      By  proper  food  the  nerves 
of  the  ftomach  are  gratefully  ftimulated, 
and  the  whole  body  is  thence  enlivened 
and   ftrengthened  ;   fo  that,  befides  its 
nfe  for  nutrition,   food  in  the  ftomach 
becomes,  on  account  of  its  ftimulus^   al- 
together neceflary  in  fome  delicate  ner- 
vous people,  for  keeping  up  the  ftrength 
of  the  body,  and  the  due  exercife  of  all 
its  fun(ffcions :  And  hence  it  is,  that  ilich 
perfons  become  often  faintiili  as  foon  as 
the  greateft  part  of  the  food  has  pafTed 
into  the  inteftines ; — that  ftrong  broths, 
tho'  they  may  aiford  as  much,   or  more 
nourifliment   than  fome  kinds  of  folid 
meat,  yet  do  not  ladsfy  the  ftomach,  at 
leaft   for  any  conliderable  time,  or  en- 
able   us   to  endure  much  labour;  and 
that^  according  to  the  different  diipofi- 
tion  of  the  nerves  of  the  ftomach,  dif- 
ferent 


2§6  Of  the   mojl   remarkable 

ferent  aliments  will  be  moft  grateful  to 
it,    and  moft  invigorating  to  the  body* 

We  know,  that  an  unnatural  flate  of 
the  nerves  of  the  ftoniach  may  either  pro- 
duce a  craving  or  an  averlion  to  food; 
that  low  fpirits  and  melancholy  often 
proceed  from  that  caufe ;  nor  is  it  to  be 
doubted,  that  when  the  nerves  of  the 
flomach  are,  from  certain  caufes,  affe(fi:- 
ed  in  a  manner  fomewhat  different,  an 
indifference  for  food,  a  weak  digeftion,  a 
languor  and  coldnefs,  a  flow  pulfe,  and 
wafting,  may  be  the  confeqviences  *. 

The  morbid  affeftion  of  the  nerves 
of  the  flomach,  by   fympathy,   impah's 

the 

*  Long  continued  grief,  and  other  paffions,  too  great 
application  of  mind,  a  gouty  humour,  or  the  morbid  mat- 
ter of  feme  difeafe  imperfeftly  cured,  remaining  in  the  bo- 
dy, and  thrown  upon  the  flomach,  as  vve!l  as  other  caufes, 
may  bring  on  fuch  a  ftate  of  the  nerves  of  that  organ,  efpe- 
cidly  in  thofe  whofe  nervous  f)'ftem  and  alimentary  canal 
are  naturally  too  delicate  and  fenfible.  I  had  fome  time 
fince  a  patient  fubjed  to  fits  of  the  gout  at  the  diftance  of 
feveral  years,  who,  after  labouring  under  fuch  an  atrophy 
as  r  am  now  treating  of,  for  eight  or  ten  months,  and  ufing 
various  medicines  with  no  great  benefit,  was  cured  by  a 
return  of  the  gout  to  one  of  his  great  toes. 


Nervous   Symptoms.  257 

the  vigour  and  energy  of  the  whole  fy- 
ftem;  whence  the  motion  of  the  heart 
and  circulation  of  the  blood  will  be- 
come flower  and  moi'e  languid,  the  bo- 
dy will  be  deprived  of  its  natural  heat, 
and  be  affected  with  a  general  weaknefs. 
The  patient  decays  daily,  tho'  exliauft- 
ed  by  no  excefllve  evacuations,  becaufe 
his  food  is  not  converted  into  good 
chyle;  and  the  nutritious  fluid  in  the 
blood,  either  does  not  poflefs  its  ufual 
properties,  or,  on  account  of  the  lan- 
guid manner  in  wjiich  all  the  operations 
of  the  body  go  on,  is  not  applied  to  the 
fever al  parts,  in  fuch  a  way  as  to  repair 
the  wafte  they  daily  fiiffer.  Further, 
the  watching  or  want  of  refrefliing  refl, 
and  low  fpirits  or  melancholy,  which 
generally  accompany  this  difeafe,  may 
contribute  to  prevent  the  proper  nutri- 
tion of  the  body. 

This  atrophy  is  generally  attended 
with  great  coftivenefs,  and  fometimes 
with  belchings,  and  other  figns  of  flatu- 

R  lence 


25^  ^f  ^^^^  ^^^^ft  remarkable 

lence  in  the  alimentaiy  canal.  In  fomc 
cafes,  the  urine  does  not  exceed  the  na- 
tural quantity,  there  is  no  thirfl,  and 
the  tongue  is  clean.  In  others,  the  dis- 
charge by  urine  conies  at  length  to  be 
confiderably  increafed,  a  drought  pre- 
vails, and  the  patient  decays  faller. 

The  pulfe  often  differs  little  from 
what  it  is  in  health,  except  that  it  beats 
with  lefs  force.  In  fome,  it  has  a  fmall 
degree  of  quicknefs  ;  and  in  others,  it 
becomes  a  good  deal  flower  than  is  na- 
tural. 

After  a  nervous  atrophy  has  conti- 
nued long,  and  reduced  the  patient 
much,  obilru^lions,  fometimes,  begin  to 
be  formed  in  the  lungs,  either  from  the 
languid  circulation,  or  the  fault  of  the 
fluids  ;  a  dry  cough  comes  on,  the  pulfe 
grows  quick,  and  ahec^lic  fever  is  kind- 
led, which,  together  with  the  original 
difeafe  in  the  ftomach,  increaies  the  de- 
cay, and  haflens  the  patient's  fate. 

Some- 


Nervous    Symptoms.  259 

Sometimes  tliis  difeafe,  after  it  has 
brought  the  patient  very  low,  vv^ill  take 
a  fudden  turn,  without  any  apparent 
caule.  The  patient,  who  had  little  in- 
clination to  eat,  will  get  an  uncommon 
craving  and  quick  digeftion,  even  of  fo- 
lid  food,  which  ufed  to  lie  remarkably 
heavy  on  liis  Itomach  :  His  pu Ife  will  be- 
come quicker  than  natural,  and  his  fkin 
warm  ;  his  veins,  which  were  contract- 
ed, will  appear  fwelled  with  blood;  from 
being  low  fpirited,  he  will  become 
chearful,  and  daily  grow  ftronger  and 
plumper  * :  All  which  effecfls  feem  to 
proceed,  in  a  great  meafure,  if  not  fble- 
ly,  from  fome  change  in  the  nerves  of 
the  ftomach  and  bowels. 

In  other  cafes,  this  diforder  goes  off 
as  flowly  as  it  came  on,  and  the  patient 
does  not  recover  fully,  'till  after  a  long 

time. 

R  2  X.  A 

*  See  a  cafe  of  this  kind,  in  a  young  lad  of  14,  defcrib- 
ed  under  No.  xiii.  of  this  chapter. 


26o  Of  the  mofi  remarkable 

X.  A  NERVOUS  or  fpafmodic  ajlhma. 

Every  difficulty  of  breathing,  which 
is  owing  to  a  fpafm  of  the  bronchial  vef- 
fels,  or  veficles  of  the  lungs,  may,  in  a 
large  fenfe,  be  called  a  nervous  or  ipaf- 
modic  ajlhma;  but  as  in  moft  afthmatic 
ailments,  where  the  lungs  are  obftrud:- 
ed,  or  loaded  with  phlegm,  there  is  ge- 
nerally more  or  lefs  of  a  fpafmodic  con- 
traction excited  in  the  air-vefTels  of  the 
lungs  ;  I  ihould  chufe  to  define  a  fpaf- 
modic afih7na  to  be  that  ipecies  of  diffi- 
cult breathing,  which  is  not  owing  to 
any  obftrudlion  in  the  lungs,  or  load  of 
humours  compreffmg  their  veiFels,  but 
to  an  uncommon  contraction  of  their 
bronchial  tubes  and  veficles,  whereby 
they  do  not  yield,  as  ufual,  to  the  pref- 
fure  of  the  air  in  infpiration. 

The  prediipofing  caufe  of  this  diieafe, 
is  a  particular  weaknefs  and  delicacy,  or 
fenfibility  of  the  pulmonary  vefiels  and 
nerves,  which  renders  the  mufculo-ten- 

dineous 


Nervous   Symptoms.  261 

diaeous  membrane  comiefting  the  an- 
nular cartilages  of  the  bronchia  liable  to 
be  alfe&d  with  a  fpafmodic  contradlion 
from  fuchoccafional  caufes,  as  in  a  found 
ftate  of  the  lungs  would  not  produce 
this  effedl. 

These  caufes  may  be  reduced  to  the 
following. 

1.  Any  acrid  or  noxious  matter  in 
the  blood,  whether  of  the  arthritic,  rheu- 
matic, or  fome  other  kind,  thrown  on 
the  lungs,  and  irritating  their  nerves. 

As  a  proof  of  this,  I  have  known  a  per- 
fon,  affected  with  a  fit  of  the  fpafmodic 
ajihma,  fliddenly  relieved  by  a  gouty  pain 
in  his  great  toe,  and  become  worfe  after 
a  day  or  two,  when  this  pain  went  off. 

2.  Sympathy  with  the  ftomach. 
When  the  nerves  of  this  organ  are  dif^ 
agreeably  affected  by  wind,  phlegm,  or 
crudities,  the  lungs,  if  they  are  more 
than  ufually  irritable,  often  fuffer  by 
fympathy,  and  are  feized  with  a  fpafm. 
Further,  when  the  flomach  is  much  dif^ 

tended 


262  Of  the   mofi    remarkable 

tended  by  wind,  it  may,  by  prefling 
upon  the  diaphragm,  increafe  an  aflh- 
matic  fit. 

3.  As  hyfteric  fits  and  fpafinodic  co- 
lics are  often  occafioned  by  violent  af- 
fections of  the  mind;  fo  I  have  known 
Ridden  fear  bring  on  an  afthmatic  pa- 
roxyfm,  in  a  woman  who  was  fubjed:  to 
frequent  attacks  of  this  difeafe. 

4.  A  SUDDEN  diminution  of  the  per- 
jfpiration  or  contraction  of  the  cutane- 
ous velFcls  from  cold,  may,  by  turn- 
ing the  humours  in  too  great  quantity 
upon  the  lungs,  occafion  a  fit.  The 
cold  affecting  the  cutaneous  nerves, 
may  alfo,  by  fympathy,  produce  fome 
kind  of  fpafm  in  the  air-vefi[els  of  the 
lungs. 

5.  Too  great   lofs  of  blood  will,    in 

thofe  Vv'ho  have  very  delicate  or  irritable 

lungs,    be    fometimes    apt  to    produce 

aflhmatic  fits,  rather  than  other  nervous 

:^'mptom3  *, 

6.  Some 

*  See  an  inllance  cf  this  in  Dr.  Banfs  treatife  on  the 
three  digeftions  and  difcharges  of  the  human  body,  p.  291, 


Nervous    Symptoms.  263 

6.  Some  fixed  ob{lru(fl:ioii  in  the 
lungs,  which,  at  all  times,  makes  the 
breathing  fomewhat  lefs  free  than  in 
perfed:  health,  efpecially  if  any  conlicler- 
able  exerciie  is  ufed,  and  which,  when 
fome  of  the  above-mentioned  caufes 
concur,  produces  an  adhmatic  fit,  which, 
indeed,  ftriclly  ipeaking,  is  of  the  mix- 
ed kind.  And  here  it  may  be  proper 
to  obferve,  that  among  the  many  pati- 
ents liable  to  periodical  fits  of  the  ajlhma^ 
there  are  but  very  few  who  have  not 
fome  obflrucfbion,  or  other  obftacle  con- 
flantly  remaining  in  their  lungs  ;  fo 
that  a  true  nervous  or  fpafmodic  aj}b?}m, 
without  any  other  fault  in  the  lungs, 
than  an  uncommon  dehcacy,  or  irrita- 
bility of  their  nerves,  is  a  difeafe  which 
we  feldom  meet  with  ;  and,  on  this  ac- 
count,   I  have  fubjoined    the  following 


cafe. 


A  GIRL,  healthful,  well  made,  and  0/ 
a  feemingly  good  conftitution,  began, 
at  the  age  of  feven,  to  complain  of  a  pain 

at 


264  or  i^^^    ^^^ft  rsriiarkabk 

at  the  lower  part  of  the  fternum.  This 
pam,  which  returned  at  no  certain  in- 
tervals, became  gradually  more  fevere 
during  the  fpace  of  near  two  years  ;  af- 
ter which,  in  place  of  it,  the  patient  be- 
gan to  be  affected,  at  times,  with  a  dif- 
ficulty of  breathing,  which  returned  fre- 
quently, without  obferving  any  certain 
periods ;  as  a  week,  a  fortnight,  or  a 
month,  would  fometimes  interveen  be- 
tween the  fits.  She  was  generally  feiz- 
ed  with  the  fits  all  at  once  ;  and  after 
breathing  with  the  utmoft  difficulty  for 
half  an  hour,  fometimes  more  than  an 
hour,  (he  would,  of  a  fudden,  become 
perfectly  well,  and  fall  a-dancing  imme- 
diately after  with  her  companions.  It 
was  obfervable,  that  this  girl  had  no 
complaint  of  her  flomach,  no  cough, 
nor  other  apparent  fault  in  her  lungs  ; 
nor  did  flie  ufually  expectorate  phlegm 
when  the  fit  went  off;  and,  except  in 
time  of  the  aflhmatic  paroxyfm,  breath- 
ed with  the  fame  eafe  as  any  perfon  in 

perfe(fl 


Nervous    SyxMptoms.         265 

perfedl  health.  After  having  been  lub- 
jedl  to  returns  of  this  fpafinodic  afthma 
for  above  two  years,  fhe  died  of  a  con- 
tinued fever,  in  which  her  head  was 
greatly  affected. 

Was  this  diflemper  owing  to  fome 
morbid  matter  in  the  blood,  which  firft 
affed:ed  the  parts  about  the  Jlenmm,  or, 
perhaps,  the  mediajlinum,  with  a  painful 
ienfation,  and  afterwards  falling  on  the 
lungs,  and  irritating  then-  nerves,  occa- 
fioned  a  Ipafm,  or  true  cramp  of  their 
aereal  vefTels  ?  I  fliall  only  add,  that  fits 
of  the  fpafmodic  afthma  are  fometimes 
preceded  by  a  great  difcharge  of  pale 
urine;  fo  that  the  patients  can  foretell 
them  a  day  or  two  before  they  are  at- 
tacked, 

XI.    A  Nervous  cough. 

A  COUGH  may  be  called  nervous,  when 
it  does  not  proceed  from  any  plilegm, 
obftruclion  or  other  irritating  caufe  in 
the  lungs  themfelves,   but  from  fympa- 

thy 


+ 


z66  Of  the    mofi   remarkable 

thy  with  fome  other  part  whofe  nerves 
ai'e  difagreeably  afFeifbed.  Of  this  kind 
is  that  dry  cough  wiiich  is  occalioned 
by  worms,  or  by  teething  in  children* 
A  cough  with  very  unufual  fymptoms, 
has  alfo  been  owing  to  water  in  the  pe- 
ricardiwn,  and  other  dilbrders  of  the 
heart,  when  the  huigs  thenifelves  ap- 
peared to  be  found.  But  inftead  of 
making  any  further  oblervations  on  this 
{iibje(ft,;  I  fliall  give  a  particular  account 
of  a  very  extraordinai^y  cough  of  the 
true   nervous  or  f)  mpathetic  kind. 

A  GIRL  aged  eight,  in  January  1760, 
was  feized  with  a  dry  cough,  which 
continued  for  two  or  three  months,  not- 
withfianding  feveral  remedies  that  were 
iifed  to  remove  it.  In  Odobcr  following, 
the  cough  returned  v»dth  as  much  vio- 
lence as  before,  and  vvith  this  difference 
only,  that  it  v/as  rather  more  fevere 
when  (lie  fat  up  than  when  ilie  lay  in 
bed.  Altho'  her  fldn  was  cool,  her 
pulfc  fcarce   quicker   than  ufual,  fome 

blood 


Nervous    Symptoms.  267 

blood  was  taken  away,  and  a  vomit 
was  given,  but  without  any  good  ef- 
feft..  Upon  a  fuipicion  that  this  cough 
might  be  owing  to  worms  in  the  fto- 
mach  or  inteflines,  flie  took  fome  pow- 
der of  tin,  and  two  dofes  of  rhubarb 
with  calomel.  The  cough  ceafed  in 
eight  or  ten  days  after  ufing  thefe  me- 
dicines, altho'  no  worms  were  brought 
away  by  them. 

Towards  the  en  d  of  December  1760, 
this  girl,  after  having  been  in  good 
health  for  fix  or  feven  weeks,  was  again 
feized  with  a  dry  cough,  for  wliich  fhe 
was  tvv^ice  blooded  without  any  advan- 
tage ;  but  file  found  fome  relief,  for  a 
few  days,  by  a  blifber  applied  to  her 
back. 

About  the  middle  of  Jamiar'j,  the 
cough  became  more  conftant  and  fpvere 
when  fhe  fat  up,  but  never  afFe<fl:ed 
her  when  flie  lay  in  bed.  On  the  tliird 
o?  February i  when  I  was  called,  I  found 
the  following  fymptoms, 

Wh  I  l  e 


268  Of  the  mojl   remarkable 

Wh  I  l  e  flie  lay  in  bed,  fhe  had  no 
cough,  no  difficulty  in  breathing,  nor 
any  pain  Ox-  unealinefs  in  her  bread  ; 
her  fkin  was  cool,  her  tongue  moifl 
and  clean,  her  appetite  good  ;  and  fhe 
was  as  chearful  as  iifual.  Her  pulfe 
beat,  then,  about  c^o  times  in  a  minute; 
it  was  of  a  moderate  ftrength,  but  a  lit- 
tle irregular.  When  flie  fat  up  in  bed, 
her  pulfe  became  quicker  by  ten  or 
twelve  ftrokes  in  a  minute,  but  fhe  flill 
was  free  from  the  cough  and  every  o- 
ther  complaint ;  and  in  tliis  pofture  fhe 
continued  mofl  part  of  the  day.  When 
fhe  flood  either  on  the  bed,  or  on  the 
floor,  or  when  fhe  fat  on  the  bedfide  or 
on  a  chair,  fhe  was  immediately  feized 
with  the  cough,  which  continued  with- 
out intermiihon,  *till  flie  lay  down  a- 
gain.  The  cough  was  dry  and  convul- 
five,  for  fhe  could*  not  reflrain  it  for  one 
moment  ;  it  was  attended  v/ith  a  pain 
in  the  fiernu?n,  about  an  inch  or  more 
above  the  xiphoid  cartilage,  which  pain 

fhe 


Nervous    SyxMptoms.  26^ 

fhe  never  felt  in  any  degree,  when  fhe 
lay  down   or  fat  up  in  her  bed. 

When  fhe  flood  on  her  feet,  her  pulfe 
became  very  fmall  and  irregular,  and 
beat  at  the  rate  of  200  times  in  a  mi- 
nute. 

At  different  times,  in  the  months  of 
February  and  March^  I  frequently  repeat- 
ed the  following  experiments  with  a 
view  to  diicover  more  of  the  nature 
and  caufe  of  this  uncommon  coi/gh, 

1.  When  Ihe  lay  on  her  back,  a- 
crofs  the  bed,  Avith  her  legs  hanging  o- 
ver  it,  fhe  was  free  from  the  cough,  but 
was  immediately  troubled  with  it  when 
file  fat  up. 

2.  Wh  en  fhe  fat  up  in  the  bed,  or  fat 
on  the  floor,  with  her  thighs  and  legs 
in  a  horizontal  poilure,  flie  coughed 
none. 

3.  When    flie  fat   in   the   bed,  and 
drew  up    both  her  legs  as  clofe  as  fhe 
could   to  her  thighs,  fhe   was  then  at- 
tacked 


1'jo  Of  the  7120JI  remarkable 

tacked  with  the  cough,   and  with  the 
pain  in  her  breaft. 

4.  When  ftie  fat  in  her  bed  on  the 
bolfler  and  pillow,  with  her  thighs  and 
legs  inclining  a  little  downwards,  flie 
had  no  cough. 

5.  When  llie  kneeled  down,  either 
on  the  floor  or  in  the  bed,  with  her  bo- 
dy erecl,  flie  was  immediately  feized 
with. the  cough,  and  the  pain  in  her 
breaft. 

6.  When  flie  lay  on  her  back,  with 
her  head  and  flioulders  as  low  or  a  little 
lower  than  her  body,  flie  coughed  with- 
out intermiflion,  as  flie  did  alio  in  an 
erect  poftnre. 

7.  In  a  prone  pofture,  with  her  head  as 
lo\v  or  lower  than  her  body,  flie  cough- 
ed inceflantly,  and  was  like  to  be  iuffo- 
cated  ;  but  as  loon  as  her  face  was  a  little 
raifcd  and  fupported  on  the  bolfter  or 
pillow,  the  cough  ceafed. 

The  cough,  the  pain  in  her  breaft, 
and   iQw^Q  of  fuffocation,   were  greater, 

and 


Nervous    Symptoms.  271 

and  her  pvdfe  was  fmaller,  quicker,  and 
more  irregular,  when  her  head  was  low, 
than  when  (lie  flood  upright ;  but  lying 
low  on  her  face  feemed  to  give  her  fliii 
greater  uneafineis  than  lying  low  on  her 
back. 

8.  She  lay  on  either  fide  with  eafe, 
and  without  coughing,  unlefs  when  her 
head  was  as  low  or  lower  than  her  bo- 
dy. 

^.  When  flie  fat  or  flood  with  her 
feet  in  Avarin  water,  fhe  had  neither  any 
difficulty  in  breathing,  nor  inclination 
to  cough,  nor  pain  in  her  breafl;  but 
file  coughed  without  intermiilion  the 
moment  her  feet  were  taken  out  of  the 
Avater. 

When  fhe  fat  with  her  feet  in  the 
warm  water,  her  pulfe  beat  i  20  times 
in  a  minute  ;  and,  when  flanding  in  it, 
between  130  and  140  times.  When  flie 
flept  out  of  the  water,  and  flood  on 
the  floor,  the  cough  infcantly  returned, 
and  her  pulfe  rofe  to  200  in  a  minute. 

10.  When 


2yz  Of  the  moji  remarkable 

10.  When  the  heat  of  the  water  was' 
reduced  (by  pouring  fome  cold  water 
flowly  into  it)  from  above  loo  degrees 
of  Farenheit^s  fcale,  to  about  70,  the 
cough  returned  with  its  ufual  violence  ; 
and  altho'  fhe  fat  in  a  chair,  her  pulfe 
rofe  from  about  120  to  near  190,  and 
turned  fmall  and  irregular.  After  this, 
upon  gradually  adding  boiling  water,  fb 
as  to  raiie  the  heat  of  the  bath  to  88  or 
90  degrees,  the  cough  flopt,  and  her 
pulfe  became  fuller,  much  flower  and 
more  regular. 

I  r .  When  flie  coughed  the  moft  vio- 
lently, if  her  foles  were  only  madp  to 
touch  the  warm  water,  flie  grew  imme- 
diately eafy,  and  continued  fo,  altho' 
her  feet  were  not  wholly  immerfed. 

12.  When  one  of  her  feet  was  taken 
out  of  the  bath,  the  cough  was  not  pre- 
vented, by  increaling  the  quantity  of 
warm  water,  fo  as  to  make  it  not  only 
cover  the  other  foot,  but  alfo  a  good 
part  of  the  leg. 

13.  After 


Nervous  Symptoms.  273 

13.  After  her  feet  had  been,  for 
fome  minutes,  m  water  heated  to  about 
114  degrees,  one  of  them  was  taken  out 
of  it,  and,  that  inflant,  the  cough  re- 
turned with  its  ufual  violence;  not- 
withflanding,  that  foot  and  ancle  con- 
tinued, for  fbme  time,  to  be  warmer  than 
the  body  naturally  is,  or  than  was  ne- 
ceflary  to  prevent  coughing  upon  put- 
ting the  foot  into  the  warm  water. 

14.  When  one  of  her  legs  was  taken 
out  of  the  water  (warmed  to  about  (^6 
degrees)  and  wrapt  in  a  dry  or  vv^et 
piece  of  flannel  whofe  heat  was  at  leaft 
114  degrees,  flie  coughed  as  ullial,  but 
was  relieved  as  foon  as  her  foot  was  a- 
gain  put  into  the  warm  water. 

1 5.  Wh  en  her  feet  were  covered  with 
dry  fand,  heated  to  above  no  degrees, 
flie  coughed  with  the  fame  violence  llie 
ufed  to  do  on  the  floor.  Nor  was  the 
cough,  either  when  (lie  fat  or  flood, 
prevented  by  the  flannel  wrung  out  of 
hot  water,   and  applied  round  her  feet 

S  and 


274  ^f  ^^■'^   ^^^^fi  remarkable 

and  legs ;  altho*  an  equal  or  a  greater 
degree  of  heat,  was,  by  this  means, 
communicated  to  thefe  parts,  than  by 
the  pedihroium. 

1 6.  When  her  hands  were  dipt  in 
warm  water  fhe  continued  as  free  from 
the  cough,  as  when  her  feet  were  bath- 
ed. But  a  bottle  filled  with  hot  water 
and  held  between  her  hands,  had  no 
fuch  efFe^. 

17.  When  one  of  her  feet  was  taken 
out  of  the  bath,  altho'  the  hand  of  that 
or  the  other  fide  was  put  into  water  of 
an  equal  or  a  greater  heat,  fhe  coughed 
without  intermiflion,  but  as  foon  as 
both  hands  were  dipt  in  the  warm  wa- 
ter, file  coughed  no  more. 

1 8.  I  MADE  her  breathe  over  the  fleam 
of  hot  water,  when  one  of  her  feet  was 
taken  out  of  the  pedlhroiimi ;  but  this  did 
not  prevent  the  cough. 

19.  When  fhe  lay  with  her  head  as 
low  or  lower  than  her  body  (No.  6.  and 
7.)    warm  water   then   applied   to  her 

hands 


Nervous   Symptoms.  ^y^ 

hands  or  feet  had  no  efFed;  in  prevent- 
ing or  lelTening  the  cough ;  but  in  eve- 
ry other  pofture  it  kept  her  quite  eafy. 

20.  If  one  or  both  hands  were  dipt 
in  cold  vi^ater,  fhe  was  prefently  feized 
with  the  cough,  and  with  the  pain  in 
her  bread,  whether  fhe  lay  in  bed,  or 
fat  with  her  feet  in  warm  water.  The 
fame  thing  happened  when  her  palrns 
were  applied  to  a  quart  bottle  of  cold 
water;  with  this  difference,  that  the  cold 
water  inftantly  raifed  her  cough,  where- 
as the  cold  bottle  took  two  or  thi'ee  fe- 
conds  before  it  could  produce  that  ef- 
feift.  The  cough  was  alfo  raifed  by  ap- 
plying a  bottle  full  of  cold  water  to  her 
ftomach. 

21 .  Wh  EN  fhe  lay  with  her  legs  hang- 
ing over  the  bed-fide  (No.  i.)  fhe  be- 
san  to  coui^h  as  foon  as  her  foles  touch- 
ed  fome  cold  water. 

2  2.  The   putting  her  hands  in  cold 

water,  when  fhe  lay  in  bed,    not  only 

excited  the  cough,  but  raifed  her  pulfe 

S  2  from 


276  Of  the  mojl  remarkable 

from  about  ^o  to  above  180  flrokes  in 
a  minute. 

These  experiments  were  often  re- 
peated between  the  3d  o^  February  and 
the  8th  of  March;  but  fome  time  after 
this,  I  found  the  following  difference 
with  refped:  to  fome  of  the  above  men- 
tioned lymptoms. 

23.  On  the  ifl  and  4th  o^ April y  when 
fhe  lay  acrofs  the  bed  with  her  head 
llipported  by  a  pillow,  and  her  legs 
hanging  over  (No.  i.)  flie  was  imme- 
diately attacked  with  the  cough,  and 
lier  pulfe  turned  fo  fmall  and  quick, 
that  I  could  not  exacT:ly  count  it ;  but  I 
was  fore  it  did  not  beat  lefs  than  18  or 
20  times  in  five  feconds  (No.  9.).  Upon 
railing  her  legs,  lb  as  to  bring  them  to 
a  horizontal  pollure,  the  cough  imme- 
diately ceafed,  and  her  pulfe  in  a  mi- 
nute after  beat  only  ten  times  in  five  fe- 
conds. As  foon  as  her  legs  were  al- 
lowed to  hang  down  again,  the  cough 
returned  with  its  ufaal  violence. 

24.  y^pril 


Nervous   Symptoms.  277 

24.  April  4th,  upon  putting  one  of 
her  hands  into  cold  water  when  a-bed, 
file  was  feized  with  the  cough,  and  her 
pulfe  became  very  fmall,  and  beat  at 
lead  20  times  in  five  feconds.    (No.  22.) 

Of  late,  flie  felt  more  uneafinefs  and 
pain  in  her  breafl,  with  a  greater  fenle 
of  fuffocation,  when  flie  was  feized  with 
the  cough,  either  upon  a  change  of 
pofture,  or  putting  her  hands  into  cold 
water.  And  her  pulfe  which  ufed  to 
be  about  90  when  flie  lay  in  bed,  was 
now  at  96  in  a  minute  :  but  her  fldn 
continued  cool,  flie  had  no  thirft,  and 
her  appetite  was  good. 

It  will  be  proper  to  add,  that  fhe  has 
had  no  expectoration  from  the  beginning. 

From  the  above  fafls  it  appears, 

[a)  That   an  ere(^  poflure  does  not 
excite  the  cough,   unlefs  either  the  legs 
or  thighs   be   much  bent   or   in  a  de- 
pending or  perpendicular  fituation.   See 
No.    I,    2,  3,  4  and  5  above. 

[b)  That 


278  Of  the  moji   remarkable 

(b)  That  a  depending  fltuation  of 
the  legs  did  not,  at  firjfl:,  occafion  the 
cough,  unlefs  when  the  body  was  ereS:; 
but  afterwards,  that  poflure  of  the  legs 
had  this  efFed:  altho'  the  body  lay  hori- 
zontal. No.  I  and  23.  Her  pulfe  al- 
fo  became  a  great  deal  quicker  in  this 
attitude  than  it  had  formerly  been,  ei- 
ther when  file  fat  up,  or  when  fhe  flood ; 
whence  it  would  feem  that  the  caufe  of 
the  difeafe  had  been  gradually  increa- 
fing  from  the  3d  of  February  to  the  jfl 
o^  April.     No.  9,  10,  23  and  24. 

[c)  That  when  the  head  and  flioul- 
ders  are  as  low  or  lower  than  the  body, 
the  cough  is  flill  more  fevere  than 
when  fhe  flood  upright.      No.  7. 

(J)  From  the  experiments  already 
related,  I  was  ready  to  imagine  that  the 
cough  might  be  owing  to  fome  tumor 
or  other  fixed  caufe  in  the  breaft,  which, 
in  certain  poflures,  fo  ftrongly  irritated 
that  part  of  the  lungs  which  it  touch- 
ed, as   to  occafion   a  conflant  convul- 

five 


Nervous    SymptOiMs.  279 

five  motion  of  the  mufcles  of  refpii^a- 
tion  ;  but  the  following  experiment, 
which  I  frequently  repeated,  foon  diffi- 
pated  this  theoretical  illulion. 

When  my  patient  lay  in  bed,  upon 
extending  one  of  her  feet,  fo  as  to  bring 
it  nearly  to  a  right  line  with  the  leg, 
fhe  coughed  violently,  and  her  pulfe 
role  from  94  in  a  minute  to  1 8  in  five 
feconds  :  But  when  her  hands  were  ei- 
ther flrongly  bent  inwards  or  extended 
outwards,  or  when  flie  pulled  ftrongly, 
or  raifed  a  conllderable  weight  with 
them,  no  coughing  enfued. 

When  the  cough  was  raifed  by 
ftretching  her  feet,  warm  water  applied 
to  her  hands  immediately  put  a  (top 
to  it. 

From  this  experiment,  as  w^ell  as 
No.  23.  it  may  appear,  that  this  extra- 
ordinary cough  did  not  depend  on  any 
fixed  obflrudlion  or  tumor  within  the 
thorax  irritating  the  lungs  in  certain  po- 
ftures.      But,  in  this  patient,  the  nerves 

of 


28o  Of  the   mojl  remarkable 

of  the  lungs  feem  to  have  been  endued 
with  an  uncommon  degree  of  fenfibi- 
lity,  and  to  have  had  a  peculiar  fympa- 
thy  with  the  legs  and  feet ;  whence  as 
often  as  they  were  in  a  depending  fitu- 
ation,  or  the  nerves,  tendons,  and  liga- 
ments at  the  ancles,  Avere  ftretched,  an 
uneafy  fenfation  Avas  felt  in  the  lungs, 
which  occafioned  an  inceflant  cough. 
Altho'  the  fympathy  betAveen  the  lungs 
and  the  other  parts,  appears  to  have 
bcenlefs  remarkable,  yet  the  fliockAvhich 
their  nerves  llifFered  from  cold  Avater, 
(No.  20  and  21.)  Avas  fo  ftrongly  felt 
in  the  lungs,  as  to  occaiion  a  pain  in 
the  breaft,  together  Avith  the  cough. 

When  the  head  and  flioulders  Avere 
loAver  than  the  body,  the  cough  Avas 
more  fevere  than  in  any  other  fituation, 
probably,  becaufe  in  that  poflure  the 
refpiration  is  lefs  free,  and  the  blood 
Avould  pafs  Avith  more  difficulty  thro' 
the  lungs. 

((?)  Warm 


Nervous    Symptoms.  281 

(e)  Warm  water  did  not,  by  its  pref- 
fure  on  the  nerves  or  blood-vefTels  of  the 
feet,  prevent  the  cough,  becaufe  it  was 
excited  by  cold  water,  whofe  weight  is 
greater.  Neither  did  the  pedihivium  pro- 
duce this  effed:  by  its  heat  alone,  or  e- 
ven  by  its  heat  and  moifture;  for  fand 
or  wet  flannel  of  an  equal  or  greater  de- 
gree of  heat  applied  to  the  feet,  did  not 
prevent  the  cough.  No.  15.  and  16. 

(/)  As  the  effedis  of  the  pediluviwn 
cannot  be  deduced  from  its  rarefying 
the  blood  by  its  heat,  neither  can  they 
be  owing  to  any  derivation  of  this  fluid 
towards  the  inferior  extremities,  be- 
caufe warm  water,  whether  it  was  ap- 
plied to  the  hands  or  the  feet,  liad  the 
fame  influence  in  flopping  the  cough ; 
and  as  foon  as  the  foles  of  her  feet 
touched  the  water,  the  cough  ceafed. 
No.  I  6.  and  11. 

[g]  It  remains,  therefore,  that  warm 
water,  by  its  particular  ad:ion  on  the 
extremities  of  the  nerves  to  which  it  is 

applied. 


282  Of  the    moji    remarkahU 

applied,  renders  the  whole  fyflem  lefs 
fenfible  of  any  irritation  ;  whence  the 
too  delicate  lungs  would  be  lefs  afFe6l- 
ed  in  confequence  of  their  fympathy 
with  the  inferior  extremities  [d).  How- 
ever, when  the  patient  lay  with  her 
head  lower  than  her  body,  the  warm 
water  did  not  then  prevent  the  cough ; 
becaufe,  in  that  pofition,  the  irritation 
in  the  lungs  was  too  great  to  be  whoUy 
removed  by  the  anodyie  power  of  the 
warm  water :  And,  for  the  fame  reafon, 
it  feems  to  have  been,  that  the  pedilwohim 
did  -  not  prevent  the  pain  within  her 
bread  and  the  cough,  wliich  were  rai- 
fed  by  dipping  her  hands  in  cold  water. 
No.  6.  7.  19.  and  20. 

(/;)  It  appears  from  the  above  expe- 
riments, that  warm  water  affecls  our 
nerves  very  differently,  not  only  from 
a  dry  heat,  but  alfo  from  warm  fleams, 
or  cloths  dipt  in  hot  vrater ;  a  fact  which 
feems  not  to  have  been  known,  or,  at 
leaft,   not  fufficiently  attended  to,    and 

wliich. 


Nervous   Symptoms.  283 

which,  perhaps,  may  afford  feme  iifeful 
hints  in  practice.      No.  14.  and  15. 

(/)  Si  N CE  warm  water,  applied  to  the 
nerves,  has  a  fiiperior  anodyne  efFe6l, 
not  only  to  fubilances  that  are  warm 
and  dry,  but  even  to  warm  fleams  or 
vapour ;  it  is  eafy  to  fee,  how  clyfters  of 
warm  water  may  give  relief  in  pains  of 
the  bowels  and  other  abdominal  vifceray 
altho'  they  do  not  communicate  more 
heat  to  the  great  guts  than  they  pof- 
fefTed  before. 

{k)  Lastly,  the  effects  of  the  warm 
water  in  this  cafe  appe^tr  the  more  re- 
markable, as  a  pill,  conlifting  of  half  a 
grain  of  opium,  and  three  grains  of  afa 
footida,  given  every  evening  and  morn- 
ing, for  feveral  days,  had  not  the  lead 
effect  in  either  preventing  or  leflening 
the  cough. 

Between  the  20th  of  January  and 
the  25th  oi  March y  a  variety  of  remedies 
v/ere  prefcribed  for  this  patient,  with- 
out any  advantage,  viz.  vomits,  blifters 

and 


284  ^f  ^^^^  ^f^'^ft   rejnarkahle 

and  an  ifTue  between  the  fhoiilders,  the 
bark,  powder  of  tin,  rhubarb  with  ca- 
lomel, -^WXs  o^  opium  With  afa  f(Etida,  bo- 
lufes  of  theriaca,  with  camphire  and 
valerian . 

Towards  the  end  o^  March,  I  put 
her  on  a  courfe  of  pills  made  of  the  ex- 
trad:  of  hemlock,  which  flie  continued 
for  two  months.  About  the  middle  of 
Mfzy  file  began  to  have  lefs  pain  in  her 
breaft,  and  lefs  lenfe  of  fuifo cation  and 
coughing,  when  flie  fat  up  out  of  bed, 
or  Avalked  through  the  room.  Upon 
the  2 2d  o^  May,  thefe  complaints  left 
her  altogether  ;  and  on  the  28th  of  that 
month,  the  cough  was  neither  raifed  by 
Handing  nor  walking,  nor  when  her 
head  was  laid  lower  than  her  body :  Alfo 
cold  water  applied  to  her  hands,  had 
now  no  effect  in  exciting  the  cough  or 
pain  in  her  breaft.  On  the  30th  of 
iA/jv,  after  walking  a  little  abroad,  the 
cough  returned  for  a  day  or  two.  Up- 
on tlie  3d  of?// 7^',  after  having  made  a 

journey 


Nervous   Symptoms.  285 

journey  of  about  ten  Englilli  miles  in  a 
chaife,  the  cough  attacked  her  with  as 
great  violence  as  ever.  Being  now  ful- 
ly convinced,  that  this  ailment  was  not 
OAving  to  any  fixed  obftrud:ion  in  the 
lungs,  but  to  an  uncommon  delicacy  or 
fenfibility  in  their  nerves,  I  ordered  for 
her,  pills  of  extract  of  gentian  and  lima" 
tiira  martis,  which  flie  took  twice  a  day 
for  about  ten  weeks.  Towards  the  end 
of  y?//y,  the  violence  of  the  cough  began 
to  abate,  and  for  the  firft  eight  or  ten 
days  oi  Aiignjl,  (lie  was  feldom  troubled 
with  it.  On  the  loth  o^  Aiiguft^  it  re- 
turned and  continued  to  the  2d  of 
September,  when  it  left  her  entirely.  In 
the  month  of  'November  following,  flie 
had  a  flight  attack  of  the  cough  and  un- 
eafinefs  in  her  breafl ;  which  fymptoms 
returned,  for  one  day,  vn September  1762, 
fince  which  flie  has  been  very  rarely  af- 
fefted  with  them  in  any  coniiderable 
degree.  It  was  obierved,  tliat  the  re- 
turns of  her  cough  after  September  lyGi, 

were 


286  Of  the  mojl  remarkable 

were  always  owing  to  her  ufing  exer- 
cile  too  freely. 

XII.  Pal  p  I  TAT  I  ONs  of  the  heart. 

1 .  In  thofe  whofe  nervous  fyftem  is 
eafily  moved,  any  fudden  and  ftrong 
pailion,  but  efpccially  fear,  will  produce 
palpitations,  and  an  irregular  motion  of 
the  heart,  by  rendering  it  more  irri- 
table, and,  at  the  fame  time,  by  forcing 
upon  it  the  venous  blood  in  greater 
quantity  than  ufual  *. 

2.  The  regular  motion  of  the  heart 
may  be  alfo  difturbed  by  its  fympathy 
with  the  ftomach,  when  this  organ  is 
difordered,  by  wind,  noxious  humours, 
worms,  or  other  caufes ; — by  the  flippreP 
iion  of  fome  habitual  evacuation  ; — by 
fome  acrid  matter  in  the  blood  falling 

on 

•  Fear  or  furprize  feems  to  occafion  a  fudden  contrac- 
tion of  the  right  finu:  'venofus,  and,  perhaps,  alfo  of  the 
adjoining  trunks  of  the  n.e>ia  cava  ;  for  I  frequently  feci, 
upon  any  furprize,  a  fudden  contraflion  about  my  heart, 
while  the  veins  in  my  hands  and  fingers  feel  as  if  the)' 
were  diftended  with  blood. 


Nervous   Symptoms.         287 

on  the  heart  itfelf*; — by  mflammations 
or  obftru(!l:ions  in  it  or  the  pericardmmy 
and  by  polypi  or  oiTiiied  valves  ;  for  thefe 
caufes  either  render  the  heart  more  ir- 
ritable than  in  a  natural  ftate,  or  difhirb 
the  free  motion  of  the  blood  through 
the  great  velTels  adjoining  to  it. 

XIII.  The  pulfe  often  varying  in 
quicknefs,  ftrength,  and  fulnefs,  not 
only  in  different  patients,  but  in  the 
fame  at  different  times. 

To  account  for  thefe  variations  of  the 
pulfe,  it  will  be  fliiiicient  to  mention, 
briefly,  the  general  califes  of  a  flrong 
and  weak,  hard  and  foft,  quick  and 
flow  pulfe. 

I.  As  a  ftrong  pulfe  is  ov/ing  to  the 
ventricles  of  the  heart  expelling  with  a 
confiderable  force,  that  quantity  of 
blood  which  they  can  contain ;  fo  a 
weak  pulfe  may  proceed  from  a  debili- 
ty 

*  I  have  often  feen  palpitations,  which,  as  far  as  I  could 
judge,  were  owing  fol>;ly  to  an  arthritic  humour  affecting 
the  heart. 


288  Of  the   mo/l  remarkable 

ty  of  the  ventricles,  whence  a  proper 
impulfe  is  not  given  to  that  fluid ;  or  it 
may  be  owing  to  a  too  great  irritability 
■whereby  the  ventricles  contrail  before 
they  are  fufficiently  filled ;  or  to  the 
want  of  a  free  circLilation  of  the  blood 
through  the  lungs,  whence  it  returns 
in  too  fmall  a  fir  earn  to  the  heart. 

2.  A  HARD  pulfe  is  owing  either  to  a 
too  great  denfity  of  the  blood,  or  to 
an  obftru6lion,  or,  oftener,  a  fpafinodic 
contraction  of  the  vafcular  fyflem,  par- 
ticularly the  capillary  arteries ;  in  which 
cafe  the  blood  palfing  with  difficulty 
into  the  veins,  the  arteries  mufl  feel 
tenfe  and  hard  *. 

This  pulfe  often  occurs  in  pleurifies, 
and  other  inflammatory  dLfeafes.  It  is 
to  be  obferved,  however,  that  in  inflam- 
mations of  liich  parts  as  are  veiy  {en- 

fible, 

*  I  have  known  fome  people,  whofe  pulfe,  in  a  natural 
ftate,  was  harder  than  that  of  moft  others  in  the  greateft 
inflan.rnatory  difeafes.  Is  it  not  probable,  that  in  fuch, 
the  coats  of  the  arterial  fyflera  were  more  tenfe,  and  the 
paflage  from  the  arteries  into  the  veins  ftraiter  than  ufual  ? 


Nervous   SymptoiMs.  289 

iible,  and  have  a  remarkable  fympathy 
with  the  heart,  while  the  pain  produces  a 
kind  of  fpafmodic  contraction  of  the  ar- 
terial fyftem,  it  often  renders  the  heart 
fo  irritable,  that,  though  the  pulfe  feels 
fomewhat  hard,  yet  it  is  very  fmall ;  be- 
caufe  the  ventricles  contract  before  they 
are  fiifficiently  filled  with  the  returning 
blood  :  And  this  is  frequently  the  cafe  in 
inflammations  of  the  ftomach,  bowels, 
and  uterus  *.  On  the  other  hand,  when 
the  lungs  or  liver  are  inflamed,  the 
pulfe  is  generally  fofter  and  fuller,  be- 
caufe  thefe  parts  have  but  little  painful 
feeling;  and  therefore  the  vafcular  iy- 
flem  is  feldom  affefted  with  any  fpafm. 
It  is,  however,  to  be  obferved,  that  an 
inflammation  of  the  external  membrane 
of  the  liver  or  lungs,  is  attended  with 
confiderable  pain,  and  a  hard  pulfe  as 
in  a  pleurify. 

3.   A   too  foft  pulfe  is  owing  either 

to  a  laxity  of  the  whole  vefTels,  and  par- 

T  tlcularly 

*  Phyfiologica!  EHays,  edit.  ii.  p.  6G. 


290  Of  the   mojl  remarkable 

ticularly  of  the  capillary  arteries,  or  to 
a  thinneis  or  watery  ftate  of  the  bloody 
which  palTes  into  the  veins  and  fecrdr 
tory  veilels  fo  eafily,  that  it  can  exert' 
little  of  its  force  in  dilating  the  arte- 
ries. 

A  SOFT  pulfe  is  more  common  than 
a  hard  one,  in  thofe  patients  who  are 
flibjecl  to  nervous  or  hy fieri c  com- 
plaints ;  becaule,  too  thin  blood  and  a 
laxity  of  the  vafcular  fyftem  are  more 
common  in  fuch,  than  denfe  blood  and 
a  too  great  tenfion  or  ij^afmodic  con- 
tracftion  of  the  arteries,  which  occafion 
a  hard  pulfe. 

4.  A  PULSE  quicker  than  natural  muft 
be  owing  to  one  or  more  of  the  follow- 
ing caufes,  "jiz,  an  increafe  of  the  ftimu- 
lating  quaUty  of  the  blood,  its  quicker 
return  to  the  heart,  or  a  greater  degree 
of  fenlibility,  and  confequently  a  great- 
er aptitude  for  motion  in  the  heart. 

(^)  The  flimulating  quality  of  the 
blood  is  increafed,  by  its  becominq;  too 

denle 


Nervous    Symptoms.  •        291 

denfe  or  fizy, — by  external  heat, — by 
frefli  chyle,  flich  efpecially  as  is  prepa- 
red from  annual  food,  or  acrid  and  heat- 
ing aliments ;  and  by  the  mixture  of 
any  noxious  humours  bred  in  the  body, 
or  of  malignant  or  poifonous  effluvia  re- 
ceived from  the  air. 

(b)  Th  e  blood  is  made  to  return  in 
greater  quantity  to  the  heart  by  all 
kinds  of  exercife,  fuddeu  fear,  and 
other  flrong  pallions. 

(c)  The  fenfibiiity,  and  confequently 
the  irritability  of  the  heart  *  is  increa- 
fed,  by  various  affections  of  the  mind, 
or  whatever  increafes  the  general  fenfi- 
biiity of  the  nervous  fyflem, — by  fympa- 
thy  with  the  other  parts,  efpecially  the 
ftomach  and  inteflines,  when  thefe  are 
pained,  or  affected  with  a  difagreeable 
ienfation, — by  an   arthritic,    fcorbutic, 

T    2  or 

*  See  Phyfiological  EfTays,  edit.  ii.  p.  185,  &c.  and 
p.  252,  Arc.  and  Edinburgh  Phyfical  Efiky  ,  vol,  ii.  art.  xx. 
p.  310,  &c.  where  it  is  proved,  from  undoubted  experi- 
ments and  obfervations,  that  the  irritability-  of  the  mufcles 
of  animals  depends  on  their  fenfibiiity. 


292  Of  the    mofl   remarkahk 

or  fbme  other  morbid  humour  thrown 
upon  the  heart;  and  by  obftru(ftions 
and  inflammations  in  any  part  of  the 
body,  but  eipecially  in  the  lungs,  peri- 
cardiiun^  or  in  the  heart  itfelf. 

5.  A  PULSE  flower  than  natural  muft 
be  owing  either  to  a  diminution  of  the 
flimulating  quality  of  the  blood,  its  flow- 
er return  to  the  heart,  or  a  lefs  degree 
of  fenfibility,  or  aptitude  for  motion  in 
that  organ. 

(^)  The  flimulating  quality  of  the 
bload  is  lefTened  by  external  cold, — by 
too  weak  or  too  fpare  diet;  and  by  the 
blood  being  not  of  a  proper  denfity,  but 
poor  and  watery  from  a  weaknefs  of 
the  vafcular  lyftem.  Hence,  after  great 
evacuations,  the  pulfe  not  only  often 
becomes  low,  but  very  flow.  I  have 
feen,  in  patients  recovering  from  fe- 
vers, or  in  women,  ten  or  twelve  days 
after  child-bearing,  the  pulfe  fall  under 
fifty  flrokes  in  a  minute,  and  rife  after- 
wards to  about  feventy,its  natural  ftand- 

ard,. 


Nervous    Symptoms.  2^3 

ard,  when  the  patients  were  flronger, 
and  their  vefTels  fuller.  In  flich  cafes, 
befides  die  poornefs  of  the  blood,  and 
the  want  of  a  fufficient  quantity  of  it,  a 
general  languor  and  debility  of  the 
whole  body,  probably  concurred  to 
niake  the  pulfe  fo  very  flow. 

(b)  The  return  of  the  blood  to  the 
heart  becomes  flower  when  the  body  is 
at  reft,  efpecially  in  a  horizontal  pofture, 
and  when  the  mind  is  not  difturbed  by 
pallions. 

(c)  The  fenllbility  and  irritability  of 
the  heart  are  leffened  by  age,  deep  fleep, 
and  every  medicine  or  diftemper  that 
impairs  the  general  fenfibility  of  the 
brain  and  nervous  fyftem,  as  opmn,  a 
lethargy,  coma,  apoplexy,  6^f.  Further, 
as  the  heart  is  often  rendered  more  ir- 
ritable by  its  confent  with  the  ftoniacli 
and  bowels,  when  thefe  parts  are  difi- 
greeably  affected  by  wind,  the  arthritic 
matter,  or  other  caufes  ;  fo  its  irritabi- 
lity feems,  in  fome  cafes,  to  be  leffened 

by 


294  ^f  ^^^^  ^^^^ft   remarkable 

by  its  fympathy  with  thefe  parts,  when 
their  nerves  are  affected  in  a  different 
manner  *.  Thus,  worms  or  vifcid 
phlegm  in  the  ftomach  and  bowels,  or 
a  violent  pain  of  the  fpafmodic  kind  af- 
fecting them,  will  fometimes  make  the 
pulfe  much  flower  than  natural,  as  well 
as  irregular:  And  long  continued  grief, 
melancholy,  or  low  fpirits,  by  impair- 
ing the  vigour  of  the  whole  nervous  as 
well  as  vafcular  fyflem,  may  render  the 
pulfe  flower  than  in  its  natural  flate, 
unlefs  fome  morbid  caufe  quickens  the 
motion  of  the  heart. 

From  what  has  been  faid,  of  the  cau- 
fes  of  the  quicknefs,  flownefs,  flrength, 
and  fiilnefs  of  the  pulfe,  it  will  eafily 
appear,  why,  in  nervous,  hypochon- 
driac, and  hyfleric  dlforders,  the  pulfe 
is  often  fo  different,  not  only  in  various 
perfons,  but  in  the  fame  perfon  at  dif- 
ferent times.      I  fliall,    therefore,   only 

add 

*  *'  yence  -^ pleramque    fatis  fano   corpore,  fi  fco- 

*'  machus  infirmus  eft,  fubeunt  et  cjuiefcunt."     Cc//n:  de 
Medici  r.a,  lib,  iii.  cap.   6. 


Nervous    Symptoms.  295 

add  a  few  inftances  of  the  effect  of  thofe 
ailments  in  making  the  pulfe  quicker 
or  flower  than  uiual. 

(i)  A  LADY  aged  38,  who  had  loft  a 
great  deal  of  blood  in  child^bed,  on  the 
eighteenth  day  after  her  delivery,  at  fix 
in  the  morning,  was  feized  with  a  fliarp 
pain  above  the  os  pubisy  darting  towards 
the  anus.  This  pain  Ibmetimes  extend- 
ed upwards,  and  then  over  to  the  right 
fide  in  the  direction  of  the  colon,  Not- 
Vvdthflanding  her  having  taken  twenty- 
five  drops  of  laudanum,  flie  complained 
of  a  naiifea  and  inclination  to  vomit  a- 
bout  half  an  hour  paft  feven,  and  before 
two  in  the  afternoon,  (lie  vomited  fix  or 
{^Y^n  times.  About  eleven  in  the  fore- 
noon, having  got  a  clyfter  with  afa  foo- 
tida,  (lie  had  tv/o  ftools,  and  palTcd  a 
great  deal  of  wind.  Her  pulfe,  which, 
when  file  was  taken  ill,  beat  60  times 
in  a  minute,  about  feven  in  the  morn- 
ing began  to  grow  quicker,  and,  before 
two  in  the  afternoon,  rofe  to  130,  but 

became 


296-  Of  the  mojl  remarkable 

became  feebler  and  fmaller  in  proper-  \ 
tion  to  its  quicknefs.  At  this  time,  as 
fcarce  any  tiling  would  ftay  on  her  fto- 
mach,  fhe  got  a  broth  clyfter,  with  40 
drops  of  laudanum  in  it  :  After  wliich  ftie 
lay  quiet  for  two  hours,  and  her  pulfe 
came  down  to  120.  From  four  in  the 
afternoon  to  ten,  flie  took  every  hour 
fome  panada,  with  a  little  claret  and 
cinnamon,  by  which  her  pulfe  was  re- 
duced to  100  in  a  minute,  and  began 
to  be  fuller.  After  this,  as  the  com- 
plaints in  her  ftomach  and  bowels  de- 
creafed,  her  pulfe  returned  to  its  natu- 
ral ftrcngth  and  flowneis. 

A  Q,uiCK  pulfe,  as  in  the  above  cafe, 
is  carefully  to  be  diftinguiflied  from  a 
quick  pulfe  occafloned  by  an  inflamma- 
tion, or  a  common  fever.  In  the  former 
it  is  foft,  and  neither  full,  hard,  nor 
contrafted ;  it  becomes  fmaller  as  it  in- 
creafes  in  quicknefs;  nor  is  it  common- 
ly attended  with  any  great  heat  or 
thirft ;  but  the  furefl  mark  is,  that  it  be- 
comes 


Nervous   Symptoms.  297 

comes  flower  upon  eating  a  little  flefli- 
meat,  drinking  a  glafs  of  claret,  or  u* 
ling  caftor  and  opium  \  all  which  are 
hurtful  when  the  pulfe  is  quickened  by 
inflammation,  and,  for  the  moft  part,  in 
fevers  'till  their  decline. 

However,  it  may  be  proper  to  ob- 
ferve  that  a  quick  pulfe,  occafioned  by 
pain  from  fpafms  or  wind  in  the  fto- 
mach  or  bowels,  may,  efpecially  in  ilich 
as  are  plethoric,  upon  continuing  long, 
change  its  nature,  and,  from  being 
merely  nervous  or  ipafhiodic,  become,  at 
laft,  inflammatory;  that  is  the  conie- 
quence  of  an  inflammation  produced  in 
the  part  affefted  with  pain. 

(2)  An  unmarried  Lady,  between  30 
and  40,  was  feized  with  a  ievere  pain  in 
her  lower  belly,  andhad  been  ill  of  it  near 
two  days  before  I  was  called.  I  found 
her  pulfe  at  70  ftrokes  in  a  minute,  and 
of  a  natural  foftnefs.  I  ordered  her, 
at  bed-time,  25  drops  of  laudaiiwn  with 
as  many  grains  of  rhubarb.      She  was 

eafy 


298  Of  the  moft  remarkable 

eaiy  tlirough  the  night,  but  next  morn- 
ing, when  the  effects  of  the  laudarium 
were  over,  and  the  rhubarb  had  begun 
to  operate,  her  pains  returned  with 
greater  violence,  and  flie  had  two  ftools.  j 
About  noon,  the  pains  increafed,  and 
then  her  pulfe,  which  in  the  mornmg 
had  been  juft  as  the  day  before,  became 
fmaller  and  flower,  fo  that  at  two  in  the 
afternoon  it  was  not  above  56  in  a  mi- 
nute. At  that  time,  fhe  complained  of 
a  lownefs,  and  a  coldnefs  through  her 
whole  body.  I  dired;ed  her  to  take 
fome  panada  with  wine  and  nutmeg, 
and  ordered  a  clyfter  with  fifty  drops  of 
laudanum  in  it.  This  foon  removed  the 
pain  and  reftored  the  pulfe  to  its  natu- 
ral fulnefs  and  quicknefs  ;  the  coldnefs 
went  of}',  and  her  fkin  grew  rather 
warmer  tlian  ulual. 

In  thefe  two  cafes,  we  fee,  from  the 
fame  general  cauie,  viz.  a  fliarp  pain  in 
the  bowels,  oppofite  effects,  a  quick 
pulfe  in  the  firfb,  and  a  flov/  one  in  the 

focond  ; 


Nervous   Symptoms.  299 

fecond  ;  and  by  the  fame  medicine  and 
diet,  viz,  iaudammi,  panada  and  wine, 
we  find  the  pulfe  made  flower  and  fuller 
in  the  one,  and  quicker  and  fuller  in 
the  other.  What  might  be  the  reafbn 
of  fuch  a  difference  is  hard  to  fay  :  Was 
it  owing  to  the  different  kind  ofjiimulie 
affefting  the  nerves  of  the  bowels,  or 
rather  to  the  different  conftitution  of 
thefe  two  patients  ? 

An  acute  pain  in  any  part  generally 
brings  on  an  inflammation,  and  quickens 
the  pulfe,  but  in  people  fubje^l:  to  ner- 
vous or  hyfleric  complaints,  a  violent 
pain  ill  one  fide  of  the  head,  in  the  flo- 
mach  or  inteflines,  often  renders  the 
pulfe  flower  and  more  languid. 

When  pain  produces  inflammation, 
it  not  only  excites  the  veffels  of  the  part 
into  flronger  and  more  frequent  alter- 
nate contrad;ions  than  ufual;  but  the 
heart  and  whole  arterial  fyftem  are,  by 
fympathy,  rendered  more  irritable.  On 
the  contrary,  when  an  irritation  or  pain 

in 


300  Of  the  mojl  remarkable 

in  any  part  occafions  a  fpafm  or  conti- 
nued contraCiHon  of  its  veflels,  no  in- 
flammation is  produced  in  it  ;  and  the 
heart  and  vafcular  fyflem,  being,  by 
fympathy,  alfo  commonly  affected  with 
fome  degree  of  fpafm,  perform  their  al- 
ternate motions  with  lefs  freedom  and 
readinefs ;  whence  the  pulfe  becomes 
flow,  fmall,  and  fometimes  irregular, 
and  the  whole  body  feels  cold. 

Does  then  the  difference  between 
pain,  with  or  without  inflammation, 
confifl  in  the  vefFels  of  the  part  affecT:ed 
being  agitated,  in  the  former  cafe,  with 
an  uncommon  alternate  contraction, 
and  in  the  latter  with  a  continued 
ipafin  ? 

When,  in  delicate  people,  we  meet 
with  pain  producing  a  quick  but  foft 
and  feeble  pulfe,  and  vvithout  any  con- 
llderable  increafe  of  the  heat  of  the 
body,  we  may  fiippofe  either,  that  al- 
tho'  the  veflels  of  the  pained  part  be  af- 
fe^led  with  a  fpafm,  yet  the  he^rt  does 

not 


NeIivous    Symptoms.  30^ 

not  fliffer  in  this  way,  but  is  only  ren- 
dered more  iiritable  by  the  pain  ;  or 
that  notwithftanding  thofe  velTels  may 
be  agitated  with  a  greater  alternate  mo- 
tion than  ulual,  yet,  on  account  of  the 
weak  ftate  of  the  blood  or  laxity  of  the 
folids,  fcarce  any  degree  of  inflamma- 
tion is  produced. 

(3.)  A  Gentleman  betwixt  30  and 
40,  who,  for  feveral  years,  had  been 
much  troubled  with  flatulent  com- 
plaints, was,  after  an  error  in  diet, 
feized  with  a  pain  about  the  middle  of 
the  abdomeriy  and  ftriking  into  his  back, 
which  foon  became  fo  intolerable,  that, 
after  having  vomited  up  feveral  dofes 
of  laudanwjz,  and  got  clyllers  to  no  pur- 
pofe,  he  was  obliged  to  have  recom-fe 
to  the  ft^miaipium  for  relief.  His  pulfe, 
which  in  a  natural  (late  beat  about  64 
times  in  a  minute,  was,  by  the  violence 
of  the  pain,  reduced  to  44  flrokes  in 
that  time,  and  was,  befides,  fmall,  feeble 
and   often  iiTegular.      The  warm  bath 

not 


$02  Of  the   moft  remarkable 

not  only  relieved  the  pain  in  the  bow- 
els alnloft  inftantaneoully,  but  alfo  ren- 
dered his  pulfe  full,  foft  and  regular, 
-tho'  feme  what  quicker  than  it  uied  to  be  i 
when  he  was  in  health.  Sometime  af- 
ter he  came  out  of  the  warm  bath  the 
pains  returned  with  conliderable  vio- 
lence, and  his  pulfe  alfo  became;  flow, 
fmall  and  irregular  ;  but  upon  having 
recourfe  to  it  again,  he  was  immedi- 
ately made  eafy,  and  the  pulfe  returned 
nearly  to  its  natural  ftate. 

(4.)  A  YOUTH  of  fifteen,  of  a  ftrong 
make  and  feemingly  healthy  conftitu- 
tion,  had,  for  fome  time,  been  fubjecl, 
once  in  fix  or  eight  v/eeks,  to  a  violent 
pain  in  his  belly,  with  an  apprehenlibn 
of  immediate  danger.  During  the 
time  he  was  mofl  troubled  with  thefe 
colic  pains,  his  pulfe  commonly  beat 
only  fifty  times  in  a  minute ;  but  as 
foon  as,  by  the  ufe  of  laxadves,  and  aro- 
matic bitters,  he  had  got  free  of  this 
complaint,    it   returned  to    its    natural 

quicknefs, 


Nervous    Symptoms.  303 

quicknefs,   wliich  was  about  80  flrokes 
in  that  time. 

(5)  Another   lad  of  14,   of  a  thin 
and  delicate  habit,    and  of  quick  and 
lively  feelings,  whofe  pulfe,  in  health, 
ufed  to  be  between  70  and  80  in  a  mi- 
nute, about  the  beginning  ofjwte  1  y§y, 
was    oblerved   to    be    low-fpirited  and 
thoughtful,    to   lofe   his    appetite,    and 
have  a  bad  digeftion.      Altho'  he  fell  a- 
way  daily,   yet  he  had  no  night-fweats, 
no    extraordinary   difcharge   of  urine, 
and  was  coftive.    His  tongue  v/as  clean, 
his  fkin  cooler  than  natural,  and,  when 
in  bed,  his  pulfe  beat  only  43  times  in 
a  minute  ;   nay,    about  the    middle   of 
July,  when  reduced   almoft  to  fkin  and 
bone,  his  pulfe,  in  a  horizontal  pofture, 
did  not  exceed  39.      About  the  end  of 
Align  ft,  his  diflemper  took  a  fudden'turn ; 
he  then  began  to  have  fuch  a  craving 
for  food,  with  aquick  digeftion,  that  lie 
grew  faint,  unlefs  he  eat  almofl  every  two 
hours;  he  had  two  or  three  llools  a-day ; 

his 


304  Of  the  mo  ft.   remarkable 

his  piilfe  beat  from  9610110;  his  fkiii 
-was  warm  ;  and  his  veins,  which  fcarce 
could  be  feen  before,  became  now  tur- 
gid with  blood.  The  flrong  apprehen- 
fions  he  formerly  had  of  dying  left  him, 
he  was  fure  he  fhould  recover  ;  and  ac- 
cordingly, by  the  middle  of  OBobcr,  he 
was  plumper  than  ever  he  had  been  be- 
fore. Towards  the  end  of  November,  his 
appetite  became  moderate,  and  his  pulfe 
gradually  returned  to  its  natural  flate. 

It  was  obfervable,  that  the  pulie  was 
flowed  towards  the  evening,  and  gene- 
rally of  a  proper  ftrength   and  fulnels. 

Since,  with  all  my  attention,  I  nei- 
ther could  difcover  the  caufe  of  this  pa- 
tient's firft  complaints,  nor  of  the  fiid- 
den  and  contrary  turn  which  they  took 
afterwards,  I  fliall  not  pretend  to  rea- 
fon  on  his  cafe  ;  but  I  thought  it  de- 
ferved  to  be  mentioned,  as  a  good 
inflance  of  a  nervous  atrophy,  and  of 
the   efteci  of  fuch  diforders    In  making 

the 


Nervous    Symptoms.         305 

the  pulfe  much  flower,  than  ever  it  has 
been  obferved  in  a  natural  ft  ate. 

XIV.    Periodical    Headachs. 

These  either  affect  almoft  the  whole 
head,  efpecially  the  fore-part,  or  only  one 
fide  of  it ;  fometimes  no  more  than  one 
of  the  eyes,  with  part  of  the  fore-head 
and  temple  of  the  fame  fide. — They  ge- 
nerally return  once  a-day,  nearly  at  the 
fame  hour,  and  as  regularly  as  the  fit  of 
a  quotidian  ague. — In  fome  cafes,  they 
are  attended  with  a  vifible  fwelling  not 
only  of  the  eye  affected,  but  alfo  of  that 
fide  of  the  fore-head.  Sometimes  the 
eye  feems  to  fink  within  its  orbit :  at 
other  times,  nothing  can  be  obferved 
but  that  the  eyes  want  their  ufual  luflre, 
and  look  as  if  the  perfon  had  watched 
long,    or  drunk  too  much. 

The  moft  common  caufes  of  periodic 
headachs  in  thofe  who  are  fubjed  to 
nervous  difordcrs,  are, 

I.  Sympathy  with  the  flomach,  by 

which  the  nerves  chiefly  of  the  fore-part 

U  of 


3 ©6  Of  the  moft   remarkable 

of  the  head  fufFer  ;  and  the  fiiiall  vef^ 
fels  to  which  they  are  diftribiited,  are 
either  afFecled  with  a  continued  fpafm, 
or  agitated  with  uncommon  alternate 
contraclions  and  relaxations  ;  in  con- 
fequence  of  which  the  patient  feels  a 
pain,  flraitnefs,  fulnefs  and  pulfation 
about  the  fore-head  and  temples. 

2.  A  VISCID  or  acrid  humour  ob- 
flrudiing  or  irritating  the  linall  vellels  of 
the  pericranium^  mufcles  of  the  head,  or 
(hira  mater,  and  confequently  affe^ling  the 
nerves  of  thofe  parts  with  a  painful  fen- 
fation.  This  may  be  often  no  other  than 
a  rheumatic,  gouty,  or  fcorbutic  humour 
falling  chiefly  on  the  head. 

3.  A  PARTICULAR  wcakncis,  delica- 
cy and  fenfibility  of  the  nerves  of  thofe 
parts  of  the  head  ;  whence,  from  Hidden 
changes  of  weather,  errors  in  diet,  fa- 
tigue of  body,  llrong  pallions,  intenle 
application  of  mind,  ilippreflion  of  ordi- 
nary evacuations,  or  even  from  (lighter 
Cviufes,  thefe  nerves  being  eafily  fuicep- 

tible 


Nervous    Symptoms.  307 

tible  of  pain,  the  fmall  veilels  to  which 
they  are  diftributed,  become  affected  ei- 
ther with  violent  alternate  contractions 
and  relaxations,  or  a  fixed  fpafm.  This 
feems  to  be  confirmed  by  obferving, 
that  women  liable  to  tliefe  periodic 
headachs  fufFer  mofl  feverely  about  the 
menftrual  periods  ;  at  which  time  it  is 
well  known,  that  ifTues  and  other  fores 
become  generally  more  painful  and  in- 
flamed, as  being  more  irritable  and  ea- 
iily  affected  than  the  other  parts.  In 
any  general  indifpofition,  thofe  parts, 
which  are  leafl  firm  and  found,  fuffer 
moft. 

How  thefe  headachs  fliould  return 
every  day,  or  fometimes  once  in  tvvo 
clays,  is  a  hard  queflion.  We  know, 
that  intermitting  fevers  obferve  very  re- 
gular periods  :  And  I  have  feen  epilep- 
tic patients  have  fits  once  or  twice  every 
day,  or  once  in  two  days,  almoft  pre- 
cifely  at  the  fame  hour.  Hyftcric  con- 
vulflons,  and   other   difeafes,   have  alfo 

U    2  been 


3o8  Of  the  mofl  remarkable 

been  obferved  fometimes  to  be  regulan-  j 
ly  periodical. 

Does  the  morbid  matter  in  fuch 
cafes,  after  being  diflodged  by  the  viof 
lence  of  the  paroxyfm,  require  a  cer- 
tain time,  before  it  is  again  collected  or 
depofited  on  the  parts  affecfled,  in  fuch 
a  quantity,  as  is  fuflicient  to  produce  a 
new  fit  ?  Such  is  the  obfcurity  of  nature 
in  many  of  her  operations,  that  we 
meet,  ahnoft  every  where,  with  appear- 
ances, of  which  we'  are  unable  to  give 
any  fatisfadlory  explanation.  However, 
both  in  natural  philofophy  and  medi- 
cine, it  is  often  fuificient,  at  leaft  for  the 
purpofes  of  life,  to  know  the  certainty 
of  fome  particular  fb^nomenay  altho'  we 
cannot  account  for  them.  Sitficit  ft  quid 
fiat  ijitclliganms,  etiajnfi  quomodo  quidqtie  fiat 
igiioremus .      Cic  er  o . 

XV,    A   GIDDINESS. 

This  may  proceed  from  fome  of  the 
caufes  which  have   been  mentioned  a- 

bove. 


Nervous   Symptoms.  309 

bove,  as  producing  periodic  headachs, 
eipecially  when  they  afFe6l  the  anterior 
part  of  the  brain  or  dura  mater. 

Many  people  of  a  delicate,  nervous, 
and  vafcvilar  fyftem,  after  (looping  and 
fuddenly  raiflng  their  head,  are  apt  to 
be  feized  with  a  vertigo^  which  is  fbme- 
times  accompanied  with  a  faintneis.  In 
this  cafe,  the  vefFels  of  the  brain  being 
too  weak,  feem  to  yield  more  than  ufu- 
al  to  the  weight  of  the  blood,  when  the 
head  is  inclined ;  and  afterwards,  when 
it  is  fuddenly  raifed,  and  the  blood  at 
once  defcends  towards  die  heart,  thofe 
vefTels  do  not  contrad:  fad  enough,  fo  as 
to  accommodate  themfelves  to  the  quan- 
tity of  blood  remaining  in  them:  At  the 
fame  time  the  brain,  on  account  of  its 
too  great  feniibility,  is  more  affeded 
than  ufual,  by  any  fudden  change  in  tlie 
motion  of  the  fluids  through  its  vefTels. 

It  feems  to  be  owing  to  an  uncom- 
mon delicacy  and  fenfibility  of  the  re- 
tinHf  and  indeed  of  the  whole  nervous 

fyftem, 


3IO  Of  the   mojl    remarkable 

fyftem,  that  fome  people  become  fo  gid- 
dy as  to  be  in  hazard  of  falling,  if  they 
look  ftedfaftly  into  a  glafs  that  is  kept 
-conftantly  moving  before  them,  or  at 
any  obje<ft  that  is  turned  fwiftly  round. 

XVI.    A   DIMNESS  of  fight,   without 
any  vifible  fault  in  the  eyes. 

This  fometimes  proceeds  from  the 
ftomach  *;  in  which  cale  the  patients 
are  only  affecled  with  it,  at  particular 
times,  when  that  organ  is  out  of  order, 
and,  by  fympathy,  affedis  the  retina,  op- 
tic nerves,  or  that  part  of  the  brain 
from  which  they  take  their  rife.  I  know 
a  Lady  much  troubled  with  a  fournefs 
hi  her  ftomach,  who,  when  this  increa- 
fes  to  a  greater  degree  than  ufual,  lees 
every  thing  indiftin6lly,  as  if  a  thick 
fhioak  or  m]ft  were  before  her  eyes  ;  nor 
does  fhe  get  quite  free  of  this,  till,  by 
chalk,  or  crabs  eyes,  lime-water,  nmgnc- 
fa  alba,  vomits  and  bitters,  fhe  has   de- 

ftroyed, 

*  See  Lommii  Qhfer--vat.   Med.  lib.  ii. 


Nervous    Symptoms.  311 

ftroyed,  in  a  great  meafure,    the  acidity 
in  her  ftomach. 

I  HAD  fome  years  fince  a  patient  of  a 
a  very  deUcate  nervous  fyflem,  whole 
eyes,  when  his  ftomach  was  much  trou- 
bled with  acidity  and  flatulence,  were 
fometimes  rendered  fo  very  fenfible, 
that  looking  ftedfaftly  on  a  crimfon  co- 
lour, or  coming  fuddenly  from  a  bright 
light  into  a  dark  room,  or  from  this  laft 
into  the  fim-fhine,  wovild  occafion  a 
giddinefs  and  pain  above  his  eyes,  to- 
gether with  a  dimnefs  of  fight,  and  a 
bilious  vomiting. 

XVII.  Low  ipirits,    melancholy   and 
a  mania, 

I.  In  cafes  of  an  irregular  gout,  Avhen 
the  arthritic  matter  falls  upon  the  fto- 
mach and  bowels,  it  frequently  produ- 
ces a  naufea,  flatulence,  low  Ipirits,  and 
other  uneafy  fymptoms.  In  ilich,  wind 
pent  up  in  the  ftomach  or  inteftines,  oc- 
cafions  a  difagreeable,  though  not  pain- 
ful. 


312  Of  the   moft  remarkable 

fill,  fenfation,  attended  with  a  faintnefs, 
languor,  and  depreflion  of  mind.  But 
at  other  time^,  when  this  arthritic  mat- 
ter has  left  thefe  parts,  we  may  obferve, 
that  a  greater  degree  of  flatulence,  oc- 
cafioned  by  errors  in  diet,  will  have  no 
fuch  effed:.  Low  fpirits,  therefore,  in 
hypochondriac  and  hyfleric  cafes,  may 
be  frequently  owing  to  fome  morbid 
matter  in  the  blood,  flatulent  and  im- 
proper aliments,  or  other  caufes  affedl- 
ing  the  fliomach  and  bowels  with  a  par- 
ticular fenfation,  which,  though  not 
painful,  neverthelefs  is  attended  with 
great  dejed:ion  of  mind. 

2.  Low  fpirits  may  be  occafloned  by 
obftrucfbions  in  the  hypochondriac  vif- 
ccra,  viz.  the  fl:omach,  liver,  e^^.  But  as 
obftru^lions  often  happen  in  thofe  parts 
without  any  remarkable  dejection  of 
mind ;  whenever  they  are  attended  with 
this  fymptom,  it  muft  be  owing,  princi- 
pally, to  the  nature  of  the  obltrud:ing 

matter. 


Nervous   Symptoms.         313 

matter,  or  rather  to  a  particular  morbid 
ftate  of  the  nerves  ofthoie  vifcera* 

3.  A  MANIA,  and  the  higher  degrees 
of  melancholy,  may  proceed  from  fome 
noxious  matter  in  the  blood,  carried 
from  the  vifccra  of  the  lower  belly  or  o- 
ther  parts,  where  it  was  chiefly  lodged, 
to  the  brain.  Of  this  I  fliall  give  an 
inflance  or  two,  that  fometime  ago  oc- 
curred ivx  my  practice. 

{a)  A  Gentlewoman  upwards  of  30, 
who  had  been  long  troubled  with  wind 
in  her  ftomach  and  bowels,  indigeftion, 
faintnefs,     languor,    palpitations,    and 
fudden  fits  of  terror,  with  a  pulfe  gene- 
rally quick,  but  variable,   having  been 
for  fome  little  time  much  freer  of  thefe 
complaints  than  ufual,  on   the    24th  of 
Augufti  became   all   at  once  deprived  of 
Jier  reafon.      During  the  nights  and  in 
the  mornings,   flie  talked  incoherently, 
but   throughout  the  day,   flie  had  fome 
intervals   of  reafon.      While  flie  conti- 
nued in  this  way,  her  pulfe  was  better 

than 


314  Of  the  mojl  remarkable 

than  ufual,  and  fhe  was  quite  free  of  her 
ordinaiy  nervous  fymptoms.  She  had 
no  fharp  pain  in  her  head,  but  com- 
plained of  an  uneafy  fenfation  and  great 
confufion  in  it.  Being  coftive,  fhe  took 
fome  aloetic  pills;  but  could  not  be 
prevailed  on  to  ufe  any  other  medi- 
cine. However,  in  a  few  days,  fhe 
grew  much  better,  and  by  the  5  th 
of  September  entirely  recovered  the  ufe 
of  her  reafon,  but  relapfed,  in  fome 
degi'ee,  into  her  old  complaints  of  fla- 
tulence, indigeflion,  and  palpitation. 

(^)  A  Gentleman  aged  between  fix- 
ty  and  feventy,  after  having  been  for 
fome  years  free  of  the  gout,  began  to 
have  conftant  complaints  of  his  flomach 
and  bowels,  and  at  laft  was  feized,  all 
at  once,  with  a  delirium,  |^  which,  by 
the  application  of  finapifms  to  his  fbles, 
went  off  in  a  few  hours.  In  two  days 
the  delirium  returned,  when,  by  blifler- 
ing  his  legs,  a  pain  came  into  one  of 
Ills  great  toes,  upon  which  he  recovered 

his 


Nervous    SymptOxMs.  315 

his  ienfes  entirely.  In  this  manner  the 
gouty  humour  moved  backwards  and 
forwards,  between  his  head  and  feet, 
for  near  two  months,  ^till  at  laft,  being 
more  fixed  in  the  brain,  it  brought  on  a 
continued  and  violent  madnefs,  which 
no  remedy  could  leflen.  In  this  ftate 
he  obllinately  refufed  almoft  every  kind 
of  food,  and  died  in  a  few  weeks. 

4.  Sudden  terror,  exceffive  grief,  or 
other  violent  pailions  of  the  mind,  in 
people  whole  nervous  fyftem  is  very  de- 
licate, may  affect  the  brain  fb  as  to  pro- 
duce a  continued  mania  or  melancholy. 
But  in  what  manner  the  paflions,  or  the 
morbid  matter  of  nervous  difeafes 
change  the  ftate  of  the  brain  or  cojiimon 
fenforhim,  and  occafion  flich  diforders, 
is  entirely  unknown. 

XVIII.   The  inaibus^  or  night-mare. 

In  this  difeafe  the  patient,  in  time  of 
fleep,  imagines  he  feels  an  uncommon 
oppreffion    or  weight  about    iiis   breaft 

and 


i 


316  -  Of  the  mojl  remarkable 

and  ftomach,  which  he  can,  by  no  ef- 
fort, fliake  oiF;  but  groans,  and  fome- 
times  cries  out,  though,  oftener,  he  at- 
tempts to  {peak  in  vain.  He  imagines 
himfelf  to  be  ftruggling  with  ftrong  men 
or  devils,  to  be  in  a  houfe  on  fire,  or  in 
danger  of  being  drowned  in  the  fea  or 
fome  river.  In  attempting  to  run  away 
from  danger,  or  climb  up  a  hill,  he  fan- 
cies he  falls  back  as  much  after  every 
ftep  as  he  had  advanced  before.  The 
terror  excited  by  the  frightful  ideas  at- 
tendingthe  night -mare,  fometimes  occa- 
fions  a  tingling  of  the  ears,  and  a  tremor 
over  the  whole  body. 

This  diforder  has  been  commonly 
fuppofed  to  proceed  from  a  ftagnation 
of  the  blood  in  the  fumfes  of  the  brain, 
or  in  the  veflels  of  the  lungs  ;  or  from 
too  great  a  quantity  of  blood  being  fent 
to  the  head. 

The  horizontal  poflure  in  time  of 
lleep,  and  the  prelTure  of  the  llomach 
upon  the  aorta,    in   a   fupine   lituation, 

have 


Nervous   Symptoms.  317 

have  been  thought  fufficient  to  occafion 
a  more  than  ufual  diftenlion  of  the  finu- 
fes  and  other  velTels  of  the  brain  ; 
and  the  weight  of  the  heart  prefling  on 
the  left  auricle  and  large  trunks  of  the 
pulmonary  veins,  may,  it  is  faid,  pre- 
vent the  eafy  return  of  the  blood  from 
the  lungs,  and  fo  produce  an  oppref- 
fion,  and  fenfe  of  weight  and  fliffocation 
in  the  brealt*.  But  not  to  enter  into 
a  particular  examination  of  thefe  opi- 
nions, which  are  far  from  being  fatis- 
faclory,  I  fliall  only  obferve,  that,  if  they 
were  true,  fbme  degree  of  the  night- 
mare ought  to  happen  to  every  perfon 
that  lies  on  liis  back,  ef])ecially  after 
eating  a  full  meal.  Further,  if  a  ho- 
rizontal fltuation  could  overcharge  the 
brain  with  blood  fo  as  to  occafion  the 
incubiiSf  how  comes  it  that  people,  who 
remain,  for  fome  time,  in  an  inverted 
poflure,  do  not  feel  tliis  difeafe  begin- 
ning to  attack  them?     And  why  does  a 

(lighter 

•  See  Dr.  Bend's  Eflay  on  the  incubus,  chapter  ii. 


3 1 8  Of  the   mojl  remarkahk 

flighter  degree  of  the  night-mare  fbme- 
times  feize  people  who  fleep  m  an  ere(^ 
fituation  in  a  chair  *  ?  As  the  weight 
of  the  ftomach,  even  when  filled  with 
food,  can  have  fcarce  any  efFed:  upon  the 
motion  of  the  blood  in  the  aorta,  fo  the 
preffure  of  the  heart  is  by  much  too 
fmall  to  be  able,  fenfibly,  to  retard  the 
motion  of  that  fluid  in  the  pulmonary 
veins  ;  otherways  people  exhaufted  by 
tedious  dileafes,  who  generally  lie  on 
their  back,  woidd  be  conftantly  affecfted 
with  the  inathits. 

We  knov/,  that  certain  medicines  or 
poifons,  worms,  and  even  corrupted 
bile  or  other  humours,  by  difagreeably 
aftefting  the  nerves  of  the  flomach,  pro- 
duce an  opprefTion  about  the  pracordia, 
v/ild  imaginations,  frightful  dreams,  ra- 
ving and  infenfibility:  And  there  is  no 
doubt,    that   low    ipirits,    melancholy, 

and 

*  Something  of  this  kind  I  have  experienced  myfelf, 
not  only  after  eating,  but  alfo  before  fupper,  when  my 
ftomach  was  our  of  order,  and  troubled  with  wind. 


Nervous  Syimptoms.  31^ 

and  diflurbecl  fleep,  often  proceed  from 
a  difordered  flate  of  the  ftomach.  Is 
it  not  probable,  that  the  night-mare  has 
its  feat  chiefly  in  the  fame  organ?  If 
epileptic  fits  often  proceed  from  the  fto- 
mach, why  may  not  the  inciihits,  which 
has  been  confidered  by  Galen  as  a  noc- 
turnal or  flighter  epilepfy,  liave  its  feat 
in  that  part  ?  People  troubled  with  ner- 
vous and  hypochondriac  ailments,  and 
who  have  delicate  or  flatulent  ftomachs, 
are  more  fubjed;  than  others  to  this  dif^ 
order. — A  heavy  or  flatulent  flipper 
greatly  increafes  the  night-mare  in  thofe 
who  are  predifpofed  to  it. — The  {yvci.- 
pathy  of  the  ftomach  with  the  head, 
heart,  lungs,  and  diaphragm,  is  fo  re- 
markable, that  there  can  be  no  difficul- 
ty in  fuppofing  the  feveral  fymptoms  of 
the  inatbiis  to  arife  from  a  difa2:reeable 
affe(^ion  of  the  nerves  of  that  organ. 

When  my  ftomach  has  been  out  of 
order,  and  troubled  with  wind,  I  have 
often   perceived  a  flighter  inciibus  {^yl^ 

me 


320  Of  the  mofi  remarkable 

me  before  I  was  fully  afleep,  the  unea* 
ilnefs  of  which  would  make  me  get  up 
fuddenly.  As  foon  as  I  was  quite  a- 
wake,  I  was  generally  feniible  I  had 
been  affected  with  a  weight  and  un- 
calinefs  about  my  ftomach,  attend- 
ed with  a  faintnefs,  and  fome  fort  of 
oppreflion  or  fuffocation  about  my 
breaft,  as  if  the  circulation  in  my  lungs 
had  been  a  good  deal  obflrud:ed.  While 
I  fat  up  in  bed,  or  lay  awake,  I  felt  no- 
thing of  thefe  fymptoms,  except,  per- 
haps, fome  degree  of  uneaiinefs  about 
my  ftomach;  but  when  I  was  juft  about 
to  fall  afleep,  they  began  to  return  a- 
gain.  In  this  way,  I  have  often  gone 
on,  for  two  hours  or  more,  in  the  be- 
ginning of  the  night.  At  laft,  I  found, 
that  a  dram  of  brandy  after  the  fii*ll  at- 
tack, kept  me  eafy  the  whole  night. 
This  remedy  has  never  failed  to  fiicceed 
with  me,  the  few  times  I  have  had  oc 
cafion  to  try  it ;  fo'r  of  late,  fince  my 
flomach  has  been  pretty  found,   I  have 

feldom 


Nervous    Symptoms.         321 

feldom  felt  in  my  fleep  any  of  thofe 
uneafy  fenfations  which  refemblc  the 
night-mare. 

From  what  has  been  faid,  it  feems 
probable,  that  in  the  incubus  the  flomach 
is  commonly  the  part  primarily  afFecled: 
I  fay  commonl'j,  becaufe  fymptoms  like 
thofe  of  the  night-mare  may  fometimcs 
arife  without  any  fault  in  the  ftomach. 
Thus,  I  have  known  aflhmatic  patients, 
whofe  lungs  w^ere  much  obftrucfled, 
who,  in  time  of  ileep,  were  greatly  op- 
prefled  with  a  fenfe  of  fuiFocation,  and 
diflm'bed  with  uneafy  dreams  :  And  Dr. 
Lower  mentions  a  patient,  w^ho,  though 
he  could  fleep  pretty  eafily  with  his 
head  inclined  forward,  yet  in  the  op- 
pofite  fituation,  he  was  always  foon  a- 
waked  with  horrid  dreams  and  tremors  ; 
the  caufe  of  w^hich  appeared,  after  his 
death,  to  have  been  a  great  quantity  of 
water  in  the  ventricles  of  the  brain. 

The  incubus  is  moft  apt  to  ieize  per- 
ions  when  lying  on  their  back;  becaule 

X  ia 


322  Of  the   moft  remarkable 

in  this  pofition,  on  account  of  die  flo- 
mach  and  other  abdominal  vifiera  prefT- 
ing  more  upon  the  diaplii'agm,  we  can- 
not inlpii'e  with  the  fame  eafe,  as  when 
we  lit  up,  or  lie  on  one  fide.  Further, 
in  that  iituation  .of  the  body,  the  food 
feems  to  lie  heavier  on  the  ftomach,  and 
wind  in  it  does  not  efcape  fo  readily  by 
the  (sfophagns  or  pylorus  as  in  an  ereci 
ftate,  when  thefe  paffages  are  liighei* 
than  the  other  parts  of  the  ftomach  *. 
We  are  only  affecled  with  tlie  night- 
mare in  time  of  fleep,  becaufe  the 
fti'ange  ideas  excited  in  the  mind,  in 
confequence  of  the  difordered  ftate  of 
the  ftomach,  are  not  tlien  corrected  by 

tlie 

*  When  I  have  been  liable  to  be  attacked  with  a  fenfa-. 
tion  offaintnefs  at  my  ftomach,  I  have  found  it  always 
vvorft  when  I  lay  on  my  back  in  the  night-time,  and  be- 
come better  when  I  got  out  of  bed,  or  fat  up  in  it :  And  a 
middle  aged  woman,  who,  in  the  morning,  was  frequently 
fubjed  to  faintings,  -found  that  fhe  could  prevent  them  fay 
getting  up  as  foon  as  flie  perceived  them  about  to  come  on. 
Further,  when  the  miliary  eruption  does  not  come  out  pro- 
perly in  women  after  child-bearing,  they  are  often  affefted 
with  a  fenfe  of  faintnefs,  and  with  an  oppreflion  in  their 
breathing,  which  fymptoms  are  commonly  worfe  when 
they  ly  on  their  back,  than  when  they  fit  up  in  bed. 


Nehvous   Symptoms.  323 

the  external  fenfes,  as  when  we  are  a- 
wake  * ;  nor  do  we,  by  an  mcreafed  rC' 
fph'ation,  or  other  motions  of  the  body, 
endeavour  to  fliake  off  any  beginning 
uneafy  fenfation  about  the  flomach  or 
bread.  The  incubus  generally  feizes  one 
in  his  firft  fleep,  but  feldom  towards  the 
morning,  becaufe  at  this  time  the  flo- 
mach is  much  lefs  loaded  with  food, 
than  in  the  beginning  of  the  night. 

If  the  night-mare  were  owing  to  a 
ftagnation  of  the  blood  in  the  lungs 
from  the  weight  of  the  heart,  or  in  the 
finufes  and  other  veflels  of  the  brain 
from  the  horizontal  pofture  of  the  bo- 
dy, it  would  become  greater  the  longer 
it  continued,  and  would  fcarce  ever  go 
off  Ipontaneoufly  :  But  we  know,  that 
this  diieafe,  after  affecting  people  for 
X  2  fometime, 

*  I  had,  fome  years  fince,  a  patient  aftbi^ed  with  an 
eryjipelas  in  his  face,  who,  when  awake,  was  free  of  any 
confufion  in  his  ideas ;  but  no  fooner  did  he  fiiut  his  eyes, 
altho'  not  a-flecp,  than  his  imagination  began  to  be  great- 
ly diilurbed :  He  thought  himfelf  carried  fwifily  through 
the  air  to  diftant  regions  ;  and  fometimcs  imagined  his 
head,  arms,  and  legs,  to  be  feparared  from  his  body,  and 
to  fly  ofF  different  ways. 


324  Of  the  mojl  remarkable 

fometime,  often  gradually  ceafes,  and 
is  fucceeded  by  rcfrefliing  fleep  ;  for  as 
foon  as  the  load  of  meat,  or  wind,  or 
other  caufe  difagreeably  affecting  the 
nerves  of  the  ftomach,  is^  removed,  the 
oppreflion  and  weight  on  the  bread, 
wild  imaginations,  frightfnl  dreams,  ^r. 
will  vaniih,  as  all  thefe  proceed  origi- 
nally from  the  diforder  of  the  ftomach. 
It  is  worth  while,  however,  ta  obferve, 
that  as  neither  wind,  tough  phlegm, 
nor  crudities  in  the  ftomach,  will  occa- 
lion  the  fymptoms  of  the  hypochon- 
driac difeafe,  unlefs  the  nerves  of  that 
organ  be  indifpofed  ;  fo  neither  a  hori- 
zontal pofture,  fleep,  nor  heavy  flippers, 
will  produce  the  night-mare,  at  leaft  in 
any  coniiderable  degree,  unlels  the  per- 
fon  be  predilpofed  to  it  from  the  parti- 
cular condition  of  the  nerves  of  his  fto« 
niach  :  And  here  I  fliall  juft  remark, 
that  a  plethora,  as  well  as  other  caufes, 
may  fo  affed:  the  nerv#of  the  ftomach 
as  to  give  rile  to  the  incuhiis*      Hence,  a 

fupprelHon 


Nervous   Symptoms.  325 

ilippreflion  of  the  menfes  in  women, 
fometimes  occalions  this  as  well  as  o- 
ther  diforders  of  that  organ.  It  mufl, 
however,  be  acknowledged,  that  a  pU- 
thora^  by  rendering  the  circulation  thro' 
the  lungs  lefs  free,  may  help  to  pro- 
duce, or  at  leafl  increafe,  the  opprelfion 
df  the  breaft  in  the  night-mare  :  And 
hence  it  is,  perhaps,  that  young  men, 
who  abound  in  blood,  are  often  trou- 
bled with  this  diforder. 

It  has  been  obferved  above  *,  that 
violent  or  long  continued  complaints  of 
the  nervous,  hypochondriac,  or  hyfle- 
ric  kind,  fometimes  terminate  in  an  a- 
poplexy,  palfy,  jaundice,  dropfy,  tympa- 
ny, or  phthifis.  Now,  from  what  has 
been  faid  it  will  not  appear  ftrange, 
that  the  brain  and  nerves  may,  by  the 
continuance  or  frequent  repetition  of 
fuch  fliocks,  be  fo  weakened  or  diforder- 
ed,  that  not  only  fatuity,  a  deep  melan- 
choly,   or  mania,    but  alio  a  paliy  or  an 

apo- 
*  See  p.  102. 


326  Of  the  mojl  remarkable 

apoplexy,  may  enfue.  Further,  as  ner- 
vous diforders  are  often  owing  to  ibme 
morbid  matter  in  the  blood,  when  this 
leaves  the  ftomach  and  inteftines,  or  o- 
ther  parts  where  it  ufed  chiefly  to  fix, 
and  is  thrown,  in  a  great  meafure,  on 
the  brain  or  origin  of  the  nerves,  it  is 
eafy  to  conceive,  how  a  palfy  or  apo^- 
plexy  may  be  the  confequence. 

Again,  flnce  hypochondriac  and  hy- 
fteric  diforders,  are  fbmetimes  occafion- 
ed  by  obflrucflions  in  the  abdominal 
vifceray  and  often  give  rile  to  them  ;  and 
as  from  a  bad  digeftion  the  chyle  mufl 
be  ill  prepared,  it  will  appear  why  thofe 
difcafes  do  fbmetimes  terminate  in  the 
jaundice  or  dropfy. 

It  has  been  obferved  alfo,  that  pa- 
tients much  afflicted  with  thofe  ailments 
have  at  length  fallen  into  a  tympanites, 
which  may  be  thus  accounted  for.  I 
have  fhown  above,  that  the  great  pre- 
difpoling  caufe  of  nervous,  hypochon- 
driac, and  hyfteric  diforders,  is  a  parti- 
cular 


Nervous    Symptqms.O  527 

cular  weaknefs  and  delicacy,  or  uncom- 
mon fenfibility  of  the  ftomach  and  bow- 
els ;  whence,  from  fliglit  caufes,  they  will 
be  often  afFed:ed  with  fpafms.  Now, 
when  the  fpafmodic  contrad:ions  of  the 
alimentary  canal  do  not  continue  long, 
the  wind  that  was  pent  up  is  allowed 
to  move  fi*om  one  place  to  another,  and 
is  at  laft  expelled  either  upwards  or 
downwards :  But  when  the  ftomach  and 
inteftines,  by  reafon  of  their  weaknefs, 
and  fmall,  but  continued,  fpafms,  have 
been  inflated  by  flow  degrees,  the  irrita- 
tion occafioned  by  this  dillenfion  in- 
creafes  the  fpafm  fo  much,  that  the  air, 
continually  generated  by  the  aliment  in 
time  of  digeftion,  is  moftly  retained,  or, 
at  leaft,  is  not  difcharged  in  fuch  a 
quantity  as  to  relieve  the  patient,  or  fen- 
fibly  todiminifli  thefwelling  of  the  belly. 
Lastly,  9.  pbthiJJs  pidmonalis  may  alfo 
be  the  confequence  of  nervous  diforders, 
when  the  morbid  matter  producing 
them  falls   chiefly  upon  the  lungs ;   or 

when 


328  Of  the  7noJl  remarkable ,  &c. 

when  the  vitiated  chyle  or  blood  forms 
obflruclions  in  that  organ. 

And  here  it  may  be  worth  obferving, 
that  while  the  morbid  matter  producing 
the    hypochondriac   difeafe,    cliiefly  af- 
fe^ls   the  ftomach  and  bowels,    the  pa- 
tients are  always  apprehenlive,  and  of- 
ten greatly  alarmed  from  any  trifling 
increafe  or  variation  of  their  complaints, 
as  if  they  were  in  immediate  danger  of 
dying  ;    but  after  this  matter  has  left  its 
old  feat,    and,   by  fixing  on  the   lungs, 
has   brought  on   an   incurable  phthifiSy 
they  generally  ceafe  to  be  apprehenlive 
or  fearful,  and  cherifh  the  hopes  of  life 
to  the  laft.      The  reafon  is,  that  when 
the  lungs  are  affected  there  are  no  fuch 
uneafy    feelings   excited  in  the   body, 
nor  fear  and  defpondency  in  the  mind, 
as  when  the  flomach  and  inteftines  flif- 
fer,  which  are    not  only  poflelled  of  a 
much  more  delicate  fenfibility  than  the 
lungs,  but  have  alfo  a  more  remarkable 
iympathy  with  the   brain,    and    whole 
nervous  f^^llem. 

CHAP. 


[     329     1 


CHAP.     VII. 

Of  the  Cure  of  Nervous,  Hypochon- 
driac, ^z^i  Hysteric  Disorders. 

ALTHO'  it  may  be  faid  in  general, 
that  thefe  diforders  are  more 
troublefome  and  lading  than  dangerous, 
yet  as  they  proceed  from  various  caufes, 
the  danger,  as  well  as  the  cure,  muft  be 
often  very  different.  Thus,  when  they 
are  owing  to  an  original  delicacy  of  the 
whole  nerves,  or  a  debility  of  thofe  be- 
longing to  the  flomach  and  inteftines, 
they  feldom  prove  quickly  fatal,  but 
fcarce  ever  admit  of  a  thorough  cure.  — - 
When  they  are  occafioned  by  an  arthri- 
tic matter  in  the  blood,  their  cure  will 
be  almoll  as  diilicuit  as  that  of  a  chro- 
nic  rheumatifm,   or  of  the  gout  itfelf ; 

and 


330  Of  the   Cure    of 

and  in  fuch  a  cafe,  perhaps,  the  befl  that 
can  happen,  is  for  the  morbid  matter 
to  throw  itfelf  off,  by  regular  fits,  m  the 
extremities.  —  When  they  arife  from 
too  great  or  too  Ihiall  a  flux  of  the 
mmfa,.  if  the  uterus  can  be  reftored  to  a 
found  ftate,  the  nervous  fymptoms  will 
vanifh  of  courfe. — When  great  and  con- 
firmed fcirrhous  obftrucflionstin  the  ab- 
dominal vfccra  are  the  caufes  of  hypo- 
chondriac or  hyfleric  complaints,  they 
are  not  only  incurable,  but  likely  to  j 
prove  foon  fatal. — When  they  proceed 
from  worms,  phlegm  in  the  flomach  and 
bowels,  or  violent  affeiflions  of  the  mind, 
they  maybe  often,  and  fometimes  fpeed- 
ily  cured. — Laftly,  when  intemperance 
in  eating  or  drinking  has  brought  on 
nervous  ailments,  they  may  be,  almofi: 
always,  leUened,  and  fometimes  cured, 
by  a  proper  diet,  moderate  exercife,  and 
a  few  medicines. 

But  however  troiiblefomc  and   ob- 
llinate  neWous  difordcrs  often  may  be, 

thcv 


Nervous  Disorders.  331 

they  have  fome  advantages  attending 
them ;  for  the  weak  ftate  of  the  blood 
and  vafcular  fyflem  in  many  of  thele 
cafes,  renders  fuch  patients  much  lefs 
fubjed:  to  inflammatory  difeafes,  than 
thole  of  a  ftronger  conftitution. 

FrOiM  the  account  I  have  given  of 
nervous,  hypochondriac,  or  hyfteric  diP 
orders,  it  will  appear,  as  has  been  al- 
ready obferved,  that  their  cure,  far  from 
being  the  {ame,  muft  differ  according 
to  the  various  caufes  from  which  they 
proceed :  and  that  the  numerous,  warm, 
aromatic,  flimulating,  and  foetid  medi- 
cines, which  have  been  called  nervous, 
or  antihyfleric,  however  proper  they 
may  be  in  fome  cafes,  are,  neverthelefs, 
hurtful  in  others. 

In  treating,  therefore,  of  the  cure  of 
thofe  difeafes,  I  fliall  not  attempt  to 
lay  down  any  general  method  to  aniVver 
in  all  cafes  or  circumftances,  even  for 
the  fame  fymptoms  ;  but  fliall  endea- 
vour to  point  out  that  particular  treat- 
ment. 


332  Of  the   Cure   of 

ment,  which  feems  befl  fuited  to  the 
cafe,  according  to  the  various  caufes 
from  wliich  it  may  arife. 

But,  before  I  proceed,  it  will  be  pro- 
per to  obferve,  that  as  it  is  generally  in 
the  power  of  medicine  to  relieve,  it  is 
frequently  beyond  the  art  to  eradicate 
the  diforders  we  now  treat  of;  and 
therefore  it  may  be  often  of  ufe  to 
intimate  this  to  our  patients,  eii^eci-* 
ally  to  fuch  as  have  fortitude  enough 
to  bear  thofe  evils,  which  can  neither 
be  wholly  prevented,  nor  fully  cured ► 
— It  is  further  neceflary  to  acquaint 
every  patient,  that  without  a  long  per- 
feverance  in  a  courfe  of  medicines,  diet, 
and  cxercife,  no  great  or  lafting  benefit 
can  be  expecfled.  To  this  purpofe  is 
the  following  pafTage  oi  Mont  anus,  which 
equally  deferves  the  attention  of  fuch 
patients  as  are  affected  with  ner- 
vous ailments,  and  of  the  phyficians 
who  undertake  their  cm'e.  *'  In  cura- 
**  tione  hujus  morbi  (fciz.  bypochondriaci) 

**  non^ 


«< 


Nervous  Disorders.  333 

non  licet  prafiuire  Umpis  nienfu  iinhiSy  aut 
**  anniy  ftciit  in  aliis  contingat,  fed  oportet 
"  in  toto  vitds  fu(S  tempore  curationi  operam 
**  dare;  interdtm  czirationi,  iitterdtim  pnefer^ 
**  vationi,  attendendo,''* 

The  general  intentions  in  the  cure 
of  nervous  diforders,  may  be  reduced 
to  the  two  following,  viz. 

I.  To  lefTen  or  remove  thofe  predil^ 
pofing  caufes  in  the  body,  which  ren- 
der it  peculiarly  liable  to  nervous  ail- 
ments. 

II.  To  remove  or  correal  the  occafi- 
onal  caufes,  which,  efpecially  in  luch  as 
are  prediipofed,  produce  the  numerous 
train  of  nervous,  hypochondriac,  or  hy- 
ileric  fymptoms  mentioned  in  the  pre- 
c ceding  part  of  this  work  f* 

I.  The  great  predifpoflng  caufe  of 
nervous  diforders  is,  as  I  have  fliown,  a 
too  great  delicacy  or  uncommon  fenfi- 
bility  of  the  nerves  in  general,  or  of 
thofe  of  the  flomach  and  inteftines,  or 

other 

*  Confil.  230. 

f  See  above,  p.  98,  CfV. 


334  V  ^^■'^  Ct^RE  of 

other  organs  in  particular.  If  tliis 
fault  in  the  conftitution  could  be  effec- 
tually cured,  we  fliould  always  have  it 
in  our  power  to  leflen  the  violence  of 
nervous  fymptoms  from  whatever  caufe 
they  might  arife,  and  to  prevent  moft 
of  thofe  which  proceed  from  fudden  im- 
preffions  made  on  the  mind.  But  when 
the  fault  in  the  nervous  fyftem,  ali- 
mentary canal,  or  other  parts,  is  0770;/- 
nal,  i,  e,  natm'al  to  the  conftitution, 
and  not  the  confequence  of  fome  difeafe 
or  irregularity  in  living,  it  does  not 
admit  of  a  perfect  cure :  The  utmoft 
that  can  be  done,  is  to  lellen  it. 

The  beft  remedies  to  anfwer  xhc  frji 
intention  of  cure,  are  either  fuch  as  not 
only  ftrengthen  the  ftomach  and  bow- 
els, but  the  whole  body,  or  thofe  which, 
by  their  pecuhar  a(5lion  on  the  extre- 
mities of  thofe  nerves  to  wliich  they  are 
applied,  lelFen,  for  a  time,  the  too  great 
fendbility  of  the  whole  fyftem. 

I.  The 


Nervous   Disorders.  335 

\. I. ^cTh,e  remedies  which  have  been 
found  by  experience  to  communicate 
greater  ftrength  to  the  body  are, 

(a)  Bitters.  Of  thele,  I  moft  com- 
monly ufe  the  radix  gentian£,  fiimmitates 
teittattrn  fninoiisj  and  cortices  ciurantiorum ; 
the  two  former,  as  being  lefs  naiileous 
and  heating  than  many  of  the  other  bit- 
ters; and  the  laft,  partly  on  account 
of  its  agreeable  flavour.  Thefe  bitters 
may  be  put  into  any  of  the  ftronger 
white  wines ;  but  if  die  patient  be  trou- 
bled with  acidity  in  the  firft  paflagcs, 
they  ought  to  be  infufed  in  brandy  or 
boiling  water.  The  watery  infufion 
will  be  rendered  more  agreeable  to  ma- 
ny ftomachs,  by  adding  to  each  Engliih 
pint  of  it  three  ounces  of  the  aqua  cinna- 
momi  fortisy  or  aqua  arcsnatica  of  our  Dif- 
penfatory  *. 

The  ftrength,  as  well  as  the  dofc  of 
thefe   bitters,   muft  be  adapted  to  the 

con- 

*  The  officinal  compofitions  mentioned  in  thefe  cbfer- 
vations  are  always  underflood  to  be  thofe  of  the  Edinburgh 
Difpenfatory ,  unlefs  the  contrary  is  exprefTed. 


336  Of  the  Cure  of 

conftitution  and  circumftances  of  the 
patient.  If  they  heat  too  much  they 
mufl  be  weakened,  or  taken  along  with 
fome  drops  of  the  elixir  of  vitriol  *. 
When  bitters  lie  heavy  on  the  flomach, 
and  lefTen,  inftead  of  mending,  the  ap- 
petite, they  ought  to  be  omitted,  and 
the  cure  mufl  be  attempted  by  other 
remedies. 

{b)  The  Bark.  This  is  more  ftrength- 
ening  and  lefs  heating  than  any  of  the 
bitters.  It  may  be  given  either  in  fub- 
ilance  or  decoction,  or  infufed  in  cold 
or  in  boiling  water,  in  lime-water,  wine, 
brandy  or  rum. 

The  bark  in  fubflance,  frequently 
difagrees  with  delicate  ftomachs,  and  oc- 
caiions  ficknefs,  gripes,  and  fometimes 
a  loofenefs.  An  infulion  or  decocflion 
of  it  in  water,  efpecially,  if  fome  grate- 
ful aromatic,  fuch  as  cinnamon  or  nut- 
meg be  added,  is  lefs  apt  to  produce 
thefe  effects ;  but  when  infufed  in  bran- 

dy 

*  Mead  7r,onita   medica,  p.   109. 


Nervous   Disorders.  337 

dy,  with  fome  bitters  or  aromatics,  it 
will  agree  well  with  mofl  people.  The 
bark  in  fubftance  often  fits  lighter  on 
the  ftomach,  if  a  glafs  of  red  port  be 
taken  after  every  dofe  of  it;  and  the 
gripes  and  purging,  which  it  occafions 
in  fome,  may  be  certainly  prevented,  by 
adding,  for  a  few  days,  the  confeciio  Ja- 
■ponica  to  it;  for  after  the  ftomach  and 
bowels  have  been  accuftomed  to  the  ufe 
of  the  bark,  it  generally  occafions  either 
much  lefs  difturbance,  or  none  at  all. 

For  feveral  years  paft  I  have  frequent- 
ly joined  the  bark  and  bitters  in  the  fol- 
lowmg  form. 

R.  Cort.  Peruvian.  Pulv.  unc.  iv. 
Rad.  Gentian. 

Cort.  Aurant.  ana  unc.  i.  fs.   Mifce. 
Infunde  in  fpir.  vin.  Gall.  lib.  iv.  in  balnea  arena:  per 
dies  vi.  et  cola. 

Of  this  tindlure,  I  generally  give  one 
table  fpoonful,  with  four  or  five  Ipoon- 
fuls  of  water,  every  morning  an  hour 
and  a  half  before  breakfaft,  and  be- 
tween feven  and  eight   in  the  evening. 

Y  I 


338  Of  the  Cure    of 

I  fometimes  add  to  each  pound  of  this 
tinclure,  an  ounce  or  more  of  the  fp, 
lavend,  cQmp,  which  improves  its  tafte, 
and  makes  it  fit  better  on  fome  flo- 
machs. 

I    HAVE,    myfelf,    taken    the    above 
tincffcure    in    the    morning,    for    eight 
months  together,   and  with  remarkable 
advantage.      For   three   or    four   years 
before,    I    had    been    much    troubled 
Avith  wind  in  my  ftomach,  a  giddinefs, 
and  fometimes  a  faintnefs.      I  obferved 
in  the  morning,   foon   after  taking  this 
medicine,   a  grateful   fenfation   in  my 
flomach,   accompanied   with  better  Ipi- 
rits,    than  I  had   at  any  time  through 
the   day,   or   than   I  ever    found   from 
drinking   wine,    even  when   I   ufed  it 
freely.      I  have  ordered  this  tincture  to 
many  patients,    v/ho  have  taken  it  for 
two  or  three  months  running,   and,  af- 
ter intermitting  it  for  fome  time,  have 
begun    again.       Moft    of    them    have 
found  benefit,  and  tliofe  moft,  who  ufed 

it 


Nervous    Disorders.  33^ 

it  longeft.  The  cafes  were  chiefly  weak 
and  windy  flomachs,  with  a  general  de- 
licacy or  debility  of  the  nervous  fy- 
flem  *. 

When  the  ftomach  and  bowels   do 

not  difagree  with  acids,  twenty  or  thir- 

Y    2  ty 

*  A  married  Lady  aged  40,  of  a  thin  habit  and  delicate 
nerves,  had  been  complaining  for  fome  years  of  a  general 
weaknefs  and  feeblenefs  through  her  whole  body,  efpecial- 
ly  in  her  limbs,  with  a  pain  fometimes  in  her  ftomach  and 
belly,  which  flie  attributed  to  wind.  1  prefcribed  for  her 
the  tindure  of  the  bark,  &c.  which  fhe  took  once  a-day 
for  near  two  years,  intermitting  now  and  then  a  week  or 
ten  days.  It  had  a  moft  fenfible  efFeft  in  ftrengthening  her, 
and  never  failed  to  raife  her  fpirits.  When,  after  inter- 
mitting this  medicine  for  a  longer  time  than  ufual,  her  old 
complaints  have  begun  to  return  in  a  lefs  degree,  a  kv/ 
dofes  of  it,  have,  almoft  always,  put  her  to  rights  again. 
Another  married  Lady  aged  between  30  and  40,  of  a  deii- 
cate  nervous  fyftem,  and  affedled  with  wind  in  her  ftomach, 
giddmefs,  flying  pains  through  her  body,  frequent  fits  of 
loofenefs  in  a  morning,  feeblenefs  and  low  fpirits,  was,  by 
the  ufe  of  the  fame  tinfture  for  near  two  years  (inter- 
mitting it  now  and  then  a  month  or  more  at  a  time)  cured, 
in  a  great  meafure,  of  all  her  complaints,  except  that  fhe 
continued,  fometimes,  to  be  troubled  with  the  pains,  and 
fomething  of  the  low  fpirits,  though  in  a  much  iefs  degree 
than  formerly. 

Were  it  necefTary,    I   could  add  many  other  cafes    in 
ivhich  the  fame  remedy  has  been  remarkably  ufeful. 


340  Of  the  Cure  cf 

ty  drops  of  the  elixir  of  vitriol  may 
fometimes  be  taken  with  advantage  in 
each  dofe  of  the  tinfture.  This  elixir 
taken  twice  a-day,  in  this  or  a  larger 
dofe,  in  fpring  water  alone,  has  often 
good  effecis  in  ftrengthening  the  fto- 
mach  and  refloring  a  decayed  appetite ; 
and  is  generally  an  excellent  cooler 
when  the  flomach  complaints  are  at- 
tended with  any  degree  of  febrile  heat, 
a  white  tongue  and  a  thirft. 

Alt  ho'  the  bark  is  preferable  as  a 
ilrengthener  to  any  of  the  bitters,  yet 
it  does  not  wholly  fuperfede  their  ule. 
The  bark  alone  will  not  fit  fo  well  on 
many  ftomachs,  as  when  it  is  joined 
with  an  agreeable  bitter;  and  I  think 
I  have  found  more  benefit,  myfelf, 
from  the  above  tineS:ure,  than  from  the 
hark  alone  either  in  fubftance  or  de- 
coftion.  With  regard  to  the  fafety  of 
taking,  for  a  long  time,  the  bark,  a- 
gainfl  wliich  many  have  had  great  pre- 
judices ;  I  can  fay,  that  I  do  not  recol- 
lect 


JNervous    Disorders.  341 

lecH:  its  proving  hurtful  in  any  cafe  in 
which  I  have  ordered  it,  unlefs  where 
it  happened  to  difagree  with  the  pa- 
tient's ftomach.  About  fourteen  years 
lince,  I  fwallowed,  in  iixteen  days,  near 
four  ounces  of  it  in  fvibllance,  when  I 
laboured  under  a  catarrhous  cough, 
without  feeling  any  bad  effei^s  from 
its  allringent  quality.  In  a  tertian  in- 
termittent attended  with  a  cough  and 
(pitting,  after  the  ufe  of  vomits  and 
fome  pectorals,  I  have  prefcribed  the 
bark  in  the  uflial  quantity,  without  the 
bread  being  any  ways  hurt  by  it.  I 
have  had  repeated  experience  of  its 
virtues  in  curing  a  hoarfenefs  after  the 
meafles,  unattended  with  a  fever  or 
difficult  breathing  ;  and  in  the  chin- 
cough,  when  given  early,  and  before 
any  obftru£lions  are  formed  in  the 
lungs,  I  have  found  it  one  of  the  befl 
remedies.  Laftly,  The  fuccefs  of  the 
bark    in   refolvin^  indolent    gjlandular 

fwel- 


+ 


34-  ^f  the   Cure    of 

iwellings  *,  may  fliew  that  it  is  not  pofi 
feiTed  of  any  con fider able  obflrud:ing 
quality. 

(r)  Steel.  There  are  few  medicines 
that  fo  remarkably  ftrengthen  the  fto- 
mach  and  bowels,  and  indeed  the 
whole  body,  as  iron  and  its  preparati- 
ons. The  aftringent  quality  of  this 
metal  was  not  unknown  to  Diof cor  ides  ^ 
who  recommends,  for  a  weaknefs  of  the 
itonlach  and  inteflines,  water  in  which 
a  red-hot  iron  has  been  extinguifhed. 

The  fal  mart  is  was  in  great  efteem 
with  River  ins 'y  but  Sydenham  preferred 
the  filings  of  iron  to  all  its  prepara- 
tions f. 

The  filings  have  been  commonly 
prefcribed  from  five  to  fifteen  or  twenty 
grains  ;  but  altho'  this  lafl  quantity 
^vill  heat  many  people,  yet  fo  different 
are  conftltutions,  that  fome  will  bear  a 
much    greater    dofe  ;    nay    I    know    a 

Gentleman, 

*  See  Mu«!ical  Inquiries  and  Obfervations,  vol.  i. 
t   Dijfsrt,  epipl  ad  D.  Cole. 


Nervous   Disorders.  343 

Gentleman,  who,  for  a  weaknefs  in  his 
ftomach  and  indigeftion,  has  taken  eve- 
ry day,  for  fome  months  together,  about 
230  grains  of  the  filings  of  iron,  divi- 
ded into  three  dofes.  It  is  obvious, 
however,  to  obferve,  that  thefe  filings 
will  ad:  varioufly  as  they  are  finer  or 
coarfer,  and  according  to  the  quantity 
of  an  acid  in  the  flomach  and  bowels. 
They  fometimes  occafion,  eipecially  in 
the  more  delicate  conflitutions,  a  dilbr- 
der  in  the  firft  pafTages ;  in  which  cafe, 
Sydenham  has  advifed  a  few  drops  of 
laudanum  to  be  taken  with  them  at 
bed-time ;  but  fifteen  grains  or  a  fcruple 
of  theriaca  will  have  as  good  or  a  better 
effect. 

Those  who  cannot  take  the  limatitra 
jnartis  will  often  bear  Mynficbt^s  tind:ure, 
the  chalybeate  wine,  and  Pyrmont  or 
other  fleel  waters  of  a  weaker  nature. 
I  know  a  Lady  whom  fix  or  eight  grains  l. 
of  the  filings  of  iron  purge  more  flrong- 
ly  than   an  ordinary  dofe   of  rhubarb, 

and 


344.  Of  the  Cure  of 

and  yet  fifteen  or  twenty  drops  of  the 
t'mBura  martis  M^nfichti  give  her  no  dif-' 
tiirbance. 

I  fometimes  order  this  tind;ure,  or 
th6  mars  faccharatuj,  to  be  taken  at  the 
fame  time  with  the  tin£hire  of  the  bark 
and  bitters  above  mentioned  ;  but,  com- 
monly, I  advife  the  chalybeates  only 
at  thofe  times,  when  the  patients  inter- 
mit the  bitters. 

The  chalybeate  waters,  altho'  they 
contain  but  a  very  fmall  proportion  of 
iron,  are  often  obferved  to  have  re- 
markable effed:s  in  ftrengthening  the 
body.  Particularly,  the  waters  of  Bath 
in  Somerfetfoire  have  been  of  great  ufe  to 
many,  who,  from  a  weak  flate  of  the 
Itomach  and  bowels,  were  affected  with 
low  fpirits  and  other  nervous  com- 
plaints. 

It  may  be  worth  while  to  obferve, 
that  notwithftanding  the  remarkable 
effects  of  chalybeates  in  many  difeales, 
yet  thefe  medicines,  in  a  flate  of  fofu- 

tion, 


Nervous   Disorders.         345 

tion,  or  in  a  faline  form,    do   not  feem 
to  enter  the  blood  ;    for  the  late  hige- 
nious  Dr  JVrighty   having   made  a  dog, 
who    had  fafted    36  hours,    Rvallow   a 
pound  of  bread  and  milk,   with  which 
he  had  mixed  an   ounce   and  a  half  of 
fal  martis  diflblved  in  a  fufficient  quan- 
tity of  water  and  filtrated  ;    he  opened 
the  dog    an   hour  after,    and  colled:ed 
from  the   thoracic   duel:   near   half  an 
ounce  of  chyle,    which   did   not  fuffer 
the  leaft  change  of  colour  by  dropping 
into  it   a  tincture  of  galls  ;    altho'  this 
fame   chyle,    after  -^  of  a  grain  of  fal 
martis  was   dilTolved  in  it,    acquired  a 
deep    purple    colour    from    that    tinc- 
ture*. 

If  fal  martis  and  other  preparations 
of  iron  do  not  enter  the  blood,  it 
is  obvious,  they  mufc  produce  their 
effedis  /o/Jj  by  ftrengthening  the  flo- 
mach  and  inteilines  ;  whence  not  only 
the  digeftion  of  the  aliment  will  be  bet- 
ter 

*  See  Philofophical  Ttanniifl.  for  1750,  vol.  l.  part,  ii. 
P-  595- 


34^  Of  the   Cure   0/ 

ter  performed,  but  by  means  of  that 
remarkable  fympathy  which  fubfifts  be- 
tween the  alimentary  canal  and  the 
whole  fyftem,  a  greater  degree  of  vi- 
gour will  be  communicated  to  every 
part  of  the  body  :  for  there  is  nothing 
more  certain,  than  that  we  feel  our- 
felves  either  vigorous  and  healthful,  or 
feeble  and  fickly,  as  the  nerves  of  the 
flomach  and  bowels  are  in  a  found,  or 
an  infirm  flate. 

Th  e  above  medicines,  (a^  b,  c,J  are 
to  be  ufed  not  for  days  or  weeks  only, 
but  often  for  many  months  together, 
otherwife  no  great  or  lading  benefit  is 
to  be  expelled  from  them.  In  fome 
cafes,  it  may  be  necellary  not  to  omit 
their  ufe,  wholly,  for  years  ;  for  when 
the  caufe  of  any  difeafe  is  deeply  rooted 
in  the  conflitution,  thofe  medicines 
Avhich  are  proper  for  removing  it,  muft 
be  taken  almofl  like  our  diet,  r)ot  only 
regularly,  but  for  a  very  long  time. 

In 


Nervous   Disorders.  347 

In  fuch  cafes,  it  may  be  beft  to  take 
the  bark  and  bitters  chiefly  in  the  win- 
ter and  Ipring-feafon,  intermitting  their 
life  now  and  then  for  a  week  or  two  ; 
and  in  the  fummer  to  drink  either 
fome  of  the  chalybeate  waters  at  the 
wells,  or  a  gill  or  more  of  the  Pyrmont 
or  Hartfell-Spa  *  thrice  a  day  on  an 
empty  ftomach. 

(d).  The  Cold  BATH.  Nothing  per- 
haps ftrengthens  the  nervous  fyftem 
more  fenfibly,  or  gives  a  greater  Qiring 
to  all  the  velTels,  than  cold  bathing  ; 
for  altho'  the  water  only  ad:s  imme- 
diately 

*  The  Hartfell-Spa  is  a  water  which  ifTues  from  a  moun- 
tain of  that  name  near  Moffat  in  North  Britain.  It  has 
a  ftrong  chalybeate  together  with  an  aluminous  talie,  is 
mach  faturated  with  iron,  and  feems  alfo  to  contain  an  a- 
luminous  fait.  It  is  deflitute  of  that  fpirit  obfervable  in 
the  Pyrmont  water  and  thofe  of  Spa  near  Liege,  but  retains 
its  virtues  longer,  and  may  be  carried  to  a  great  dillance 
without  being  fenfibly  weakened.  It  is  an  excellent 
ftrengthener,  and  has  often  been  found  ferviccable  in  wealc- 
nefles  of  the  ftomach  and  intellines  with  indigellion  and 
flatulence.  For  a  more  particular  account  of  this  water. 
See  Effays  Phyfical  and  Literary,  vol.  i,  and  Philofoph. 
Tranfaft.  vol.  l,   part  i. 


34^^  Of  the  Cure   of 

diately  pa  the  cutaneous  nerves  and 
vefTels,  yet  its  ftrengthening  power  is, 
by  fympathy,  communicated  to  the  in- 
moft  parts  of  the  body.  The  cold 
bath,  like  the  former  remedies,  ought 
to  be  long  continued.  The  moft  pro- 
per feafons  for  it,  are  the  fpring,  fltm- 
mer  and  autumn.  It  is  enough,  efpe- 
cially  for  thofe  of  a  (pare  habit,  to  go 
into  the  cold  bath  three  or  four  times 
a  week  ;  but  as  it  tends  to  make  people 
thinner,  thofe  who  are  too  plump  may 
life  it  daily.  When  the  ftomach,  liver 
or  other  vifcera  are  much  obftruc^ed,  or 
otherwife  very  unfound,  the  cold  bath 
is  improper,  fince  by  turning  the  blood 
with  more  force  than  ufual  upon  thefe 
parts,  it  may  increafe,  inftead  of  lefFen- 
ing  the  patient's  complaints. 

Many  inftances  might  be  given  of 
the  good  efFefts  of  cold  bathing  in 
ilrengthening  people  of  delicate  confti- 
tutioiis,  and  making  them  lefs  fubje<5l 
TO   nervous  ailments  ;   but  as   fo  much 

may 


Nervous    Disorders.  349 

may  be  found  to  tliis  purpofe  in  Sir 
John  Floyer^s  hiflory  of  cold  bathing,  I 
fhall  only  obferve,  that  I  have  known 
it  of  great  fervice  to  feveral  women, 
who,  chiefly  from  a  weaknefs  of  their 
nervous  fyftem,  were  very  liable  to  fuf- 
fer  abortion ;  and  that  a  young  Lady 
whofe  nerves  feemed  to  have  a  very 
great  degree  of  fenfibility  from  the  in- 
tolerable pain  which  fhe  felt  from 
blifters,  and  from  the  very  uneafy  fen- 
fation,  which  was  occafioned  by  every 
red  pimple  that  rofe  on  her  face,  found 
more  benefit  from  a  long  courfe,  firft 
of  the  cold  bath,  and  afterwards  of  fea- 
bathing,  than  ffom  bark,  bitters,  chaly- 
beate waters,  and  various  other  reme- 
dies. 

To  prevent  miftakes,  it  may  be  pro- 
per to  mention  here,  that  while  I  re- 
commend bitters,  the  bark,  elixir  of 
vitriol,  chalybeates  and  cold  bathing, 
as  the  beft  ftrengtheners  of  a  delicate 
nervous  fyftem,    I  do  not  mean  that  all 

thefc 


350  Of  the  Cure    of 

thefe  are  to  be  ufed,  efpecially  at  once, 
by  the  fame  patient.  In  fome  cafes, 
the  tincture  of  the  bark  with  fome  bit- 
ters will  be  fufficient.  In  others,  more 
benefit  may  be  found  from  fteel  in  fub- 
ftance,  or  from  the  chalybeate  waters  ; 
and  fometimes  cold  bathing  may  fuc- 
ceed,  or  at  lead  make  the  cure  more 
compleat,  after  internal  flrengtheners 
have  in  a  good  meafure  failed.  I  fliall 
only  add,  that  when  nervous  com^ 
plaints,  arifing  principally  from  a  deli- 
cacy of  the  nervous  fyftem,  are  attended 
with  a  quick  pulfe  and  a  preternatural 
heat,  bitters  and  ileel  are  improper;  but 
an  infulion  of  the  bark  in  cold  water, 
with  elixir  of  vitriol,  will  often  prove 
uieful. 

(e)  Air.  As  a  cool  and  dry  air 
braces  and  imparts  vigor  to  the  whole 
body,  fo  nothing  tends  more  to  relax 
and  weaken  tlian  hot  air,  elpccially 
that  which  is  rendered  fo,  by  great 
fii'es,  or  by  ftoves  in  fmall  rooms. 

When 


Nervous  Disorders.  351 

When  the  ftomach  and  bowels  are 
weak,  the  body  ought  to  be  well  guard- 
ed againft  cold,  efpecially  in  winter, 
by  wearing  a  thin  flannel  waiftcoat  next 
the  fkin;  for  this  will  keep  up  an  e- 
qual  perfpiration,  and  defend  the  ali- 
mentary canal  from  many  impreflions 
it  would  be  otherwife  fiibjec^  to,  upon 
every  fudden  change  from  warm  to 
very  cold  weather. 

(/)  Aliment.  The  food  ought  to 
be  nourifhing,  but  of  eafy  digeftion, 
and  iuited  to  the  ftomach  of  the  pati- 
ent. Fat  meats  and  heavy  fauces  are 
hurtful.  All  exccfs  is  to  be  avoided. 
Valetudinarians  ought  never  to  eat 
more  at  once  than  they  can  digeft  with 
eafe.  Every  time  the  ftomach  is  over- 
loaded, its  ftrength  is  impaired,  and  its 
nerves  are  dilbrdered  ;  but  when  one 
eats  moderately,  not  only  the  ftomach, 
but  the  v/hole  body  is  invigorated  and 
repaired.  Above  all  things  heavy  flip- 
pers ought  to  be  avoided,  fince  the  fto- 
mach 


352  Of  the  Cure  of 

mach  is  more  apt  to  be  oppreiled  with 
tlie  fame  quantity  of  food,  iii  a  horizon- 
tal than  in  an  ered:  pofture  ;  and  fince 
the  digeflion  goes  on  flower  in  time  of 
deep,  than  when  we  are  awake. 

Wine  in  excefs  enfeebles  the  body, 
and  impairs  the  faculties  of  the  mind. 
A  few  glafles  in  time  of  eating,  or  after 
it,  may  be  ufcful,  but  more  will  load  a 
weak  flomach  and  retard  digeflion. 
The  befl  time  to  drmk  a  little  wine,  is 
upon  an  empty  ftomach ;  for  the  liquor 
being,  in  that  cafe,  lefs  weakened  and 
more  readily  applie^i  to  the  nerves 
there,  mufi:  have  the  greater  eifed:  in 
ftrengthening  them.  AVhen  my  flo- 
mach has  been  Aveak,  and  when,  after 
havhig  been  indifpofed,  I  had  hot 
palms,  was  languid  and  apt  to  fweat 
upon  motion,  I  have  often  found  my- 
Iclf  much  better  for  a  glafs  of  claret 
and  a  bit  of  bread,  an  hour  or  more 
before  dinner  ;  in  this  cafe,  the  ^vine 
cooled  me,   made  my  pulfe  flower,  and 


Nervous   Disorders.  353 

gave  me  more  fpirits  and  ftrength.  I 
have  ordered  claret  in  the  fame  way  to 
others,  before  dinner  and  between 
feven  and  eight  in  the  evening,  with 
advantage.  When  children  are  weakly, 
have  a  tendency  to  the  fcrophiday  or  are 
inclined  to  the  rickets  ;  or  when  they 
have  been  much  reduced  by  a  fit  of 
teething,  I  find  a  little  claret  once  or 
twice  a  day,  upon  an  empty  flomach, 
an  excellent  flrengthener  and  the  befl 
fticcedaneum  to  the  bark,  which  many 
children  will  not  take. 

These  good  effects  of  wine  thus  ufed, 
leem  not  to  have  been  altogether  un- 
known to  Celfus,  who  tells  us  "  Si  qids 
**  vero  Jlomacho  labor  at  ^  non  aqnam,  fed  vimim 
**  caliduniy  bibere  jejunus  debet  ^,^' 

Wine  in  general,  is  preferable  to 
malt-liquor,  as  being  lighter,  lefs  apt  to 
ferment,  and  lefs  flatulent.  For  com- 
mon drink,  water  alone,  or  with  a  little 
wine,  is  the  lighted  and  befl ;  but  when 
Z  the 

*  De  medicina,  lib.  i .  cap.  viii. 


354  or  ^^^^  Cure  of 

the  flomach  and  bowels  ai'e  troubled 
with  acidity,  water  mixed  with  a  imall 
proportion  of  rum  or  brandy  is  greatly 
preferable  to  wine  or  malt-liquor. 

LInder  this  head,  it  may  not  be  im- 
proper  to  obierve,  that  the  frequency, 
now-a-days,  of  ftomach  complaints,  and 
nervous  ailments,  as  they  are  common- 
ly called,  may  be  partly  owing  to  the 
too  great  \\£g  of  tea.  I  once  imagined 
tea  to  be  in  a  great  meafure  unjuftly  ac- 
cufed  ;  and  that  it  did  not  hurt  the 
ftomach  more  than  an  equal  quantity 
of  warm  water ;  but  experience  has, 
iince,  taught  me  the  contrary.  Strong 
tea  di'iMik  in  any  coniiderable  quantity, 
in  a  morning,  eipecially  if  I  eat  little 
bread  with  it,  generally  makes  me  faint- 
er before  dinner  than  if  I  had  taken  no 
breakfaft  at  all ;  at  the  fame  time,  it 
quickens  my  pulfe,  and  often  affe^ls  m-e 
with  a  kind  of  giddinefs.  Thele  bad 
effecfs  of  tea  are  moft  remarkable  when 
my  ftomach  is  out  of  order. 

(g)*  Ex- 


Nervous    Disorders.  355 

(g).  Exercise.  Exercife  is  of  fuch 
ule  for  ftrengthening  the  nervous  fyf- 
tem,  that,  without  its  alliftance,  the  moft 
powerful  medicines  will  prove  often  in- 
effed:uaL  Of  all  kinds,  riding  on  horfe- 
back  has  been  juftly  efteemed  the  beft  : 
It  has  been  particularly  extolled  by 
Sydenham  in  hypochondriac  and  hyfleric 
dilbrders.  It  greatly  promotes  digeflion, 
fanguification,  the  diftribution  and  fe- 
cretion  of  all  the  fluids ;  and  ftrengthens 
the  whole  body,  as  well  as  the  flomach 
and  bowels.  Riding  is  preferable  to 
walking,  as  it  fliakes  the  body  more  and 
fatigues  it  lefs.  But  it  is  proper  to  ob- 
ferve,  that  any  great  exercife,  elpeeially 
riding  on  horfeback,  after  a  full  mealy 
will  diforder  the  ftomach,  and  retard 
digeflion,  inftead  of  promoting  it. 

The  ingenious  Dr  Gilchriji oi Dumfries ^ 
has  recommended  failing,  as  a  kind  of 
exercife  well  adapted  to  the  cure  of 
nervous  complaints  arifing  from  a  weak 
ilate  of  the  blood  and  alimentary  canaiy 
Z  2  ^n4 


356  Of  the   Cure   of 

and  has  given  fome  inftances  of  its  good 
effects*.      But   as   we  find  it  very  dif* 
ficult  to  prevail  with  any  patient  in  this 
place  to  undertake   a   long  lea-voyage, 
I  can  fay  little   on  this   head   from  my 
own  experience.     However,  I  have  not 
only  been  well  informed,  that  a  Gentle- 
man, who  had  been  long  fubjecft  to  epi- 
leptic fits  at  land,  was  never  feized  with 
them  wlien  at  fea ;  but  a  young  Gentle- 
man, lately  my  patient,  who  had  a  very 
delicate  nervous  f^ftem,    and  whole  fto- 
mach    and   inteflines   were    £0   uncom- 
monly fenfible,   that  a  fingle  ftool,  pro- 
cured even  by  the   elixir  facrumy    made 
him  faintifh  ;    and  vomiting  or  purging 
Avas   almoft   fure  to   bring  on   fainting 
fits     with     flight      convulfions  :      This 
perfon,   I  fay,  had   his    conftitution   fo 
changed  while  he  was  at  fea,  that  altho' 
dm'ing  a  voyage  of  four  or  five  weeks, 
he  vomited  much  every  day,    and  pur- 
ged 

•  See  his   Treatife  on   the  ufe   of  Sea  voyages  in  me- 
dicine. 


Nervous    Disorders.  357 

ged  frequently  ;  yet  he  had  neither  any 
faintings,  nor  was  fenlible  of  any  par- 
ticular weaknefs  in  his  flomach  or 
bowels.  After  this  voyage,  he  had  no 
return  of  thofe  fits  to  wliich,  for  fome- 
time  before,  he  had  been  liable,  till  at 
the  diftance  of  eight  months,  when  he 
applied  a  blifler  to  the  under  part  of 
his  breafl  ;  the  pain  of  which,  when 
the  plafler  was  taken  off,  occafioned 
faintings  with  flight  convulfions. 

Friction  of  the  legs,  arms,  trunk 
of  the  body  and  ahdo^neii  with  a  fielli- 
brufli,  with  flannel  or  a  coarfe  linen 
cloth,  is  a  kind  of  exercife  that  ftrength- 
ens,  promotes  the  circulation,  and  is 
particularly  beneficial  when  the  bowels 
are  weak. 

Lying  too  long  in  bed  will  weaken 
and  relax,  while  early  rifing,  like  gentle 
exercife  or  cool  air,  will  brace  and  in- 
vigorate the  body. 

(h)  Amusement.  The  mind  ought 
to  be  diverted   and  kept    as    eafy   and 

chearful 


358  Of  the   Cure    of 

chearful  as  pofTible  ;  fince  nothing  hiirts^ 
more  the  nervous  fyflem,  and  particu- 
larly the  concod;ive  powers,  than  fear, 
grief  or  anxiety. 

2.  But  as  the  remedies  ^^,  b,  c,  d,  e, 
f  g,  hyj  above  mentioned,  however  pro- 
per for  mending  a  delicate  flate  of  the 
nerves  in  general,  or  of  thofe  of  the 
alimentary  canal  in  particular,  mufl 
often  be  ufed  a  confiderable  time  before 
they  can  produce  any  great  effefts,  it 
becomes  frequently  necellary  to  have 
recourfe  to  medicines  of  another  na- 
ture ;  in  order  to  palliate  thole  uneafy 
fymptoms  with  which  nervous  and 
hyfterical  people  are  often  afFecfled. 

Th  e  principal  remedies  of  tliis  kind 
are  the  following,  viz. 

(a)  Such  as  weaken,  during  the 
time  of  their  operation,  the  fentient 
power  of  the  nerves,  and  confequently 
lefTen  thofe  pains,  irregular  motions  or 
fpafms  which  arife  from  any  unuflial 
irritation.      The  chief  of  thefe  is  ap'mm, 

which  J 


Nervous    Disorders.  359 

which,  when  applied  in  fufficient  quan- 
tity to  the  nerves  of  any  fenfible  pai't, 
not  only  leflens  their  power  of  feeling, 
but,  by  fynipathy,  alio  that  of  the  whole 
fyftem :  By  this  quality,  it  often  gives 
fudden  relief  in  many  violent  diforders 
of  the  nervous  and  hy fieri c  kind.  It 
is  of  great  ufe  in  fixed  fpafms,  as  well 
as  in  alternate  convulfions  of  the  muf- 
cles,  and  in  pains  not  attended  with 
inflammation  ;  in  a  weaknefs,  laflitude 
and  yawning,  occafioned  by  too  great 
a  flux  of  the  menjh,  in  flatutent  colics, 
and  fometimes  in  the  true  fpafmodic 
ajlbma,  where  tliere  is  no  obflru(n:ion  in 
the  lungs  nor  phlegm  opprelhng  them. 
When  given,  at  bedtime,  to  the  quan- 
tity of  a  grain  or  a  grain  and  a  half, 
along  with  a  little  afa  foctida,  I  have 
frequently  feen  it  lefTen  that  reftlefTnefs, 
and  thofe  hot  flufliings  and  fick  fits 
which  many  hypochondriacal  people 
are  liable  to  ;  but  after  being  ufcd  for 
fome  time,  it  lofes  this  effed;  in  a  great 

ineafures 


i 


360  Of  the  Cv  KE   of 

meafure,  unlefs  its  dofe  be  increafed 
from  time  to  time.  It  is  to  be  obfer- 
ved,  that  if  the  patient  be  in  any  degree 
plethoric,  bleeding  or  other  evacuations 
ought  to  precede  the  liberal  exhibition 
of  opium  y  for  this  will  make  its  good 
eifecfts  more  certain  and  conlpicuous, 
and  will  prevent,  in  a  great  meafure, 
any  bad  confequences  that  it  might 
otherwiie  have. 

',:Al71ho'  opium  is  often  proper  for 
quieting  many  nervous  and  hyfteric 
fymptoms  from  whatever  caufe  they 
may  arife,  yet  it  is  peculiarly  ufefiil, 
when  thofe  fymptoms  are  principally 
owing  to  an  extraordinary  delicacy  of 
the  nervous  fyftem. 

But  however  ufeful,  o/>/i;^//2  may  be 
in  many  cafes,  yet  we  often  meet  with 
patients  who  receive  more  hurt  than 
benefit  from  it.  Some  are  affetled  with 
an  uncommon  faintnefs  and  languor 
about  the  pr^cordiay  or  with  flar tings  ; 
others  with  a  ficknefs  and  vomiting,  or 

a 


Nervous    Disorders.  361 

a  violent  pain  with  cramps  in  the  fto- 
mach,    or  an  itching  over  the   whole    ^ 
body,    elpecially   about    the    eyes    and 
nofe.     In  fome  few,  it  occafions  a  raving 
and  niadnefs.  ,,riiji  L   . 

Alt  HO*  opium  i  in  many  cafes,  exhi- 
larates, inftead  of  occailoning  heavinefs 
and  fleep,  yet  it  ought  rarely  to  be  gi- 
ven to  patients  who  are  low^fpirited ; 
for  however  it  may  relieve  them  for 
the  prefent,  yet  after  its  effects  are  over, 
they  generally  become  more  depreiled 
than  before. 

Opium  given  too  largely,  and  too 
long  continued,  leflens  the  fenfibility 
and  vigour  of  the  whole  nervous  fyftem, 
whence  not  only  the  flrength  of  the 
body,  but  alfo  the  faculties  of  the  mind 
are  confider ably. impaired. 

But  notwithftanding  theie  bad  ef- 
fefts  of  opium  when  too  liberally  ufed,  I 
have  leldom  feen  any  mifchief  from  it, 
as  a  palliative,  in  diforders  arifing  from 
a  too    great    delicacy   of   the    nerves, 

where 


362  Of  the  Cure  0/  « 

where  it  was  ordered  with  difcretion, 
and  given  in  fmall  quantities  at  firft. 
Nay,  in  this  way,  thofe  who  fufFer  moft 
from  opium  may  be  brought  at  length 
-{-  to  bear  it  eaflly  ;  a  remarkable  inftance 
of  which,  I  lately  had  in  a  middle  aged 
Lady,  whom  fovir  or  five  drops  of  laii- 
daniimy  taken  by  the  mouth,  affe<5led 
with  a  violent  pain  and  cramp  in  her 
flomach ;  and  fixteen  di'ops  in  a  clyfter, 
though  it  did  not  occafion  thefe  com- 
plaints, made  her  dehrious  for  twelve 
hours  ;  for  this  Lady,  having  after- 
wards begun  with  one  drop  of  laiida- 
mmy  gradually  rofe  to  twenty-five  ; 
nay,  fhe  has  fometimes  taken  that  quan- 
tity thi'ice  a  day,  without  feeling  any 
of  its  former  bad  effects.  In  cafes  of 
great  ficknefs  accompanied  with  a  pain 
in  the  flomach  and  frequent  vomiting, 
when  the  patient  could  not  bear  lauda- 
num inwardly,  I  have  ordered  three 
or  four  tea-fpoonfiils  of  it  to  be  rubbed 
hito  tlie   flomach  and  belly,  afterwards 

applying 


Nervous   Disorders.  363 

applying  to  thefe  parts  a  piece  of  flan- 
nel moiftened  with  Hungary -water 
made  hot.  The  effect  was,  that  all  the 
patient's  complaints  began  to  abate  in 
lefs  than  an  hour  after  the  application 
of  the  laudanum,  which  I  ordered  to  be 
repeated  at  the  diflance  of  fix  or  eight 
hours,  if  it  was  neceflary. 

There  is  one  inconvenience  which 
feldom  fails  to  attend  the  continued  ule 
of  opiumy  viz.  coftivenefs,  which  is  beft 
remedied  by  takins:  now  and  then  an 
aloetic  pill,  or  fome  other  gentle  pur- 
gative. But  in  fome  cafes  of  pains  in 
the  ftomach  and  bowels  with  indio-ef- 
tion,  much  flatulence  and  belching, 
where  laudanum,  chiefly  through  its 
binding  quality,  did  not  anfwer  fo  well, 
I  have  found  very  good  effects  from 
the  extradiim  hyofqami,  given  from  a  "v 
grain  and  a  half  to  three  or  four  grains 
at  bedtime,  and  repeated  in  a  lefs  quan- 
tity in  the  morning  ;  for  altho'  as  an 
anodyne,  the  powers  of  this  extraci:  are 

much 


364  Of  the  Cure  of 

much  inferior  to  thofe  of  ophm't  yet, 
by  its  proving  often  laxative,  it  be- 
comes preferable  to  it  in  feveral  cafes. 

(b)  Such  as,  by  afFecling  the  nerves 
in  an  agreeable  manner,  and  perhaps 
relaxing  them,  leflen  the  ^Gn£e  of  pain, 
and  often  put  a  flop  to  tremors,  con- 
vullions,  fpafms  and  an  uncommon  agi- 
tation of  the  nervous  fyftem.  Of  this 
kind  are  the  warm  Jcmicupium,  pedilnvi- 
nm^  and  hot  fomentations,  which  are 
frequently  ferviceable  in  cafes  where 
opiimi  would  be  improper  ;  but  as  they 
all  tend  to  relax,  they  are  only  to  be 
ufed  by  delicate  people,  as  palhatives 
in  urgent  cafes. 

(c)  Such  as,  by  their  peculiar  Jlimii- 
///j,  powerfully  affecl  the  nerves,  fo  as 
not  only  to  render  them  lefs  feniible  of 
the  irritation  ariflng  from  various  mor- 
bid caufes,  but  alfo  to  communicate  to 
them  fome  degree  of  vigour,  at  leail 
for  a  fiiort  time. 

Of 


Nervous    Disorders.         365 

Of  this  kind  are  camphire,  caflor, 
mufk  and  the  f^tid  gums.  The  firft 
and  moft  remarkable  efFedts  of  thefe 
medicines  are  owing  to  their  aflion 
on  the  nerves  of  the  ftomach  ;  but  in 
what  particular  manner  they  operate 
on  thefe  nerves,  we  know  not.  They 
do  not  feem,  at  leaft,  moft  of  them, 
to  pofleis  any  real  ftupifying  or  narcotic 
quality,  like  opium  and  other  medicines 
of  that  clafs. 

Camphire  is  very  volatile  and  pene- 
trating ;  it  promotes  peripiration,  and 
frequently  a6ls  as  an  atilpafmodic  ;  it 
fbmetimes  procures  fleep,  in  fevers  at- 
tended with  raving,  where  opium  would 
prove  hurtful  ;  and  I  have  found  it  of 
good  ufe  in  rendering,  more  quiet  and 
compofed,  fome  maniac  and  melancho- 
lic patients.  ;,, 

Camphire,  given  in  large  quantities 
to  different  animals,  produces  fleep, 
fometimes  madnefs,  a  vomiting,  pur- 
ging, a  flux  of  urine,  the  hiccup,  epi- 
leptic 


$66  Of  the   Cure   of 

leptic  convulfions  and  death*:  and  fe- 
veral  of  thefe  efFed:s  are  fo  fudden,  that 
they  muft  proceed  rather  from  the  im- 
mediate action  of  the  camphire  on  the 
nerves  of  the  ftomach,  than  from  its  be- 
ing mixed  with  the  blood. 

Physicians  have  differed  widely  in 
their  opinions  concerning  the  nature  of 
campliire  ;  fome  having  efleemed  it  hot 
and  others   of  a  refrigerating  nature ; 

but 

*  Commentar.  Somnieftf.    torn.  \v.  p.  199,  {fff. 

The  following  cafe  was,  fometime  fince,  communicated 
CO  me  by  a  friend. 

A  Gentleman  defirotfs  of  knowing  what  efFefts  a  large 
dofe  of  camphire  would  have,  fwallowed  half  a  dram  of  it 
ciffolved  in  a  little  oil  of  olives,  and  very  foon  after  percei- 
ved an  uncommon  but  not  difagreeable  glow  of  heat  in  his 
ilomach.-  After  having  walked  abroad  for  half  aft  hour, 
upon  looking  at  a  news-paper,  he  found  himfelf  quite  in- 
capable to  underitand  what  he  read,  his  head  being  crowd- 
ed with  a  great  many  confufed  ideas.  He  now  began  to 
ftageer  when  he  walked  ;  and,  fometime  after,  a  dark 
cloud  feeming  to  come  over  his  eyes,  and  feeling  other 
fymptoms  which  made  him  apprehend  an  apopledlic  attack, 
he  went  to  a  neighbouring  apothecary,  with  a  view  to  get 
fome  blood  taken  away ;  but  upon  going  into  the  open 
air,  all  thefe  fymptoms  began  to  abate,  and,  in  a  few  hours, 
he  found  himfelf  in  his  ufual  health,  without  the  affiftance 
of  any  remedy. 


Nervous   Disorders.  367 

but  as  it  is  not  my  purpofe  to  enter 
deeply  into  this  difpute,  I  fhall  only  ob- 
ferve,  that  altho',  in  fome  cafes,  a  glais 
of  claret  or  port,  or  even  a  dram  of 
brandy,  will  render  the  pulfe  flower  and 
the  body  cooler  j  and,  in  catarrhous  fe- 
vers, baftard  peripneumonies,  pleurifies 
and  anginas,  blifters  often  leflen  the 
quicknefs  of  the  pulfe  remarkably  ;  ne- 
verthelefs,  wine,  brandy,  and  blifters, 
are,  in  their  own  nature,  not  coohng,  but 
heating  :  In  like  manner,  camphire,  as 
its  effed:s  in  the  mouth,  and  on  the  fkin 
and  the  eyes,  fhew,  is  naturally  heating; 
but  fometimes  it  may  cool,  by  lefFening 
or  removing  fome  diforder  in  the  body 
w^hich  increafed  its  heat  and  quickened 
the  pulfe.  I  have  known,  in  many 
cafes,  a  confiderable  ienCe  of  heat  raifed 
in  the  ftomach,  by  a  bolus  of  fix  or  fe- 
ven  grains  of  camphire  well  mixed  with 
a  fcruple  of  conferve  of  rofes.  Howe- 
ver,   altho'  I  cannot   agree  witli  thofe 

who   think  camphire  a    cooling   medi- 
cine. 


-t 


368  Of  the  Cure   of 

cine,  yet  I  do  not  look  upon  it  to  be  fa 
heating  as  fome  have  imagined.  Perhaps 
camphire  may  excite  a  lefs  degree  of 
heat  in  the  ftomach  than  in  the  mouth, 
or  even  than  when  applied  to  the  fkin; 
for  we  know  that  the  fame  flimvilating 
fubflances  afFeft  the  nerves  of  the  fto- 
mach and  of  thefe  parts  very  differ- 
ently. 

Castor.  I  cannot  help  thinking 
the  virtues  of  tliis  medicine,  in  nervous 
diforders,  are  lefs  than  many  have  ima- 
gined. When  given  from  twelve  to 
twenty  grains,  it  fometimes  procures 
reft,  not,  as  I  imagine,  by  any  true  nai*- 
cotic  quality  like  opium,  but  by  leflening 
that  uneafy  fenfation  in  the  ftomach 
from  wind,  \vhicli  is  often  the  caufe  of 
v/atching  :  and  indeed,  caftor  feems  to 
have  the  beft  effecls  on  thofe  patients, 
whofe  complaints  are  in  a  great  mea- 
fure  flatulent.  In  fome  cafes,  I  have 
thought  laiulamim  had  a  better  effecl: 
when  it  was  joined  Avith  cafior  either  in 

fubftance 


Nervous   Disorders.  369 

flibflance  or  in  tinclure.  A  Gentle- 
woman aged  upwards  of  forty,  much 
troubled  with  flatulence  and  low  fpirits, 
was  often  feized,  when  flie  lay  to  fleep, 
with  a  fenle  of  faint nefs  about  her  fto- 
mach,  which  obliged  her  to  fit  up,  and 
often  prevented  her  from  getting  reft 
moft  of  the  night.  Twenty  drops  of 
laudajtum  made  her  drowfy,  but  did  not 
remove  the  faintnefs  ;  this,  however, 
was  effecfted  by  adding  to  it  a  tea- 
Ipoonful  or  two  of  the  tin[i.  cajiorei  com- 
pofita. 

Musk,  is  lefs  heating  than  cajlor,  and 
may  be  given  in  cafes,  where  neither 
it  nor  opmn  are  proper.  Altho'  the 
fmell  of  mufk  is  olfenlive  to  many,  yet 
I  have  fcarce  ever  found  it  difagree 
with  the  ftomach.  It  is  chiefly  uieful 
in  xhc  fubfultus  tendinum  in  fevers,  in  the 
hiccup,  cramps  in  the  ftomach,  and 
other  fpafmodic  diforders.  I  have  tried 
it  in  the  chin-cough  and  the  true  fpaf- 
modic aJ}J?ma,  but  it  was  given  in  too 
A  a  jinall 


370  Of  the  Cure   of 

fmall  clofes  to  determine,  with  certainty, 
as  to  its  virtue  in  thefe  difeafes.  Two 
or  thi'ee  grains  of  mufk  well  rubbed 
with  a  little  fligar,  and  mixed  with  half 
a  table  fpoonful  of  mint-water,  will 
fomctimes  flop  the  vomiting  occalloned 
by  teething  in  children.  The  good 
effed:s  of  mufk  are  frequently  lefs  con- 
fpicuous  from  its  being  not  genuine,  or 
taken  in  too  fmall  dofes.  Rinxerius  men- 
tions it  as  having,  in  his  time,  been 
given  with  fuccefs  to  the  quantity  of 
thirteen  grains  in  a  hyfteric  fit ;  and 
now  it  is  common  to  order  it  in  this, 
or  a  larger  dofe,  three  or  four  times  a*- 
day. 

Asa  foetida,  is  the  flrongefl  of  the 
foetid  gums,  and  almofl  the  only  one 
that  I  have  been  in  ufe  to  prefcribe 
internally  in  nervous  or  hyfleric  cafes. 
It  has  good  effects  in  flatulent  diforders, 
and  fpafms  of  the  alimentary  canal,  and 
in  aflhmatic  fits  that  are  either  owing 
to  ^vmd  in  the  flomach  or  increafed  by 

it. 


Nervous  Disorders.  371 

it.      In  cafes,    where    fiidden  relief  is 

wanted,  it  ought  to   be  given  diffoh  ed 

in  fbme  of  the   fimple  waters.      I  have 

often  given,  with    advantage,    pills   of 

aja  fmtiday  p,  iii.  aloes  and  Jal  mart,   ana 

/>.  i.  to  patients  who,  along  with  a  cof- 

tivenefs,   were   troubled   v/ith  flatulent 

pains  working  up  from  their  bowels  to 

then*  flomach,    and   producing  ficknefs 

and  vomiting.      Theie  pills  were  taken 

every  night,  or  once  in  two  nights,  in 

fuch    quantity   as    to    keep    the    body 

gently  open.  Afa  footida,  like  cajior,  fome- 

times  procvires  fleep  ;    it  gives  relief  in 

fits  of  lownels,  efpecially  when  difTolved 

in   fpu'its,    or   joined   with  the  volatile 

falts  ;    but  a  too  frequent  repetition  of 

filch  warm  medicines  hurts  the  flomach 

at  lafl. 

When  nervous  or  hyfleric  com- 
plaints are  attended  with  a  quick  pulfe 
and  a  feverifh  heat,  the  foetid  gum.s, 
camphire  and  cafior^  on  account  o 
their  heating  quality,  ought  to  be  given 
A  a   2  very 


c 


372  Of  the  Cure   of 

very  fparingly,  or  not  at  all.  They  are 
much  better  adapted  to  cafes  where 
the  pulfe  is  low  and  flow.  As  we  do 
not  know  the  particular  manner  in 
which  each  of  them  operates  on  the 
nerves,  fo  we  cannot  tell,  before  trial, 
in  what  conflitutions  they  will,  feveral- 
ly,  be  moft  fuccefsful.  Frequently,  one 
of  them  will  anfwer  where  another  has 
failed  :  nay,  fuch  is  the  uncommon  dif^ 
pofition  of  the  nerves  of  the  ftomach  in 
fome  cafes,  that  a  table  fpoonful  of  the 
f  }\\icG  of  lemons,  unmixed  with  any 
thing,  has  proved  always  a  certain  cure 
for  a  palpitation  of  the  heart,  after 
many  of  the  medicines  called  antihyfteric 
iiad  been  tried  in  vain  :  and  agreeably 
to  this,  we  are  told  by  Riveriiis,  that  a 
draught,  or  a  clyfter  of  vinegar  and 
water,  has  often  given  immediate  relief 
in  a  hyfleric  fit*. 

It  is  to  be  remarked,  that  die  feveral 
medicines  mentioned  under   this  head, 

*  Praxis  medicay   lib.  XV.  cap.  vi. 


Nervous    Disorders.         373 

(2.  (ly  hf  c,)  are  chiefly  ferviceable  as 
palliatives,  for  lefleniiig  or  removing 
the  prefent  pain  or  other  complaints 
in  nervous  and  hyfleric  cafes,  but  not 
for  giving  any  durable  flrength  to  the 
body  or  lirmnefs  to  the  nerves,  upon 
wliich  depends  the  radical  cure.  How- 
ever, when  thofe  diforders  do  not  pro- 
ceed fo  much  from  a  general  debility 
of  the  nervous  fyftem,  as  from  a  mor- 
bid or  vinnatural  ftate  of  the  nerves 
of  the  flomach  or  fome  other  part, 
long  continued  palliation  may  fome- 
times  make  a  cure  ;  for  wliile  the  pal- 
liative remedies  lefTen  the  bad  efFed;s  of 
this  diforder  of  the  nerves,  nature, 
cither  by  herfelf,  or  with  their  afTiftance, 
at  length  expels  or  fiibdues  the  morbid 
caule.  Thus  obflinate  headachs,  as  well 
as  feveral  other  complaints  commonly 
reputed  of  the  nervous  kind,  have  been 
cured,  after  other  remedies  had  failed, 
by  the  long  continued  ufe  of  opium,  as 
will  appear  from   the   following    cafes, 

wliich 


374  ^f  ^^^^  Cure   of 

which  were  communicated  to  me  by  a 
friend. 

N.  N.  AGED  28,  healthy  and  ftrong, 
after  a  fea-voyage  of  three  months,  du- 
ring which  he  was  alraoft  conftantly 
fick  at  the  ftomach,  but  never  vomited, 
was  much  expofed  to  cold  in  a  long 
journey  he  made  by  land.  At  this  time, 
fomething  happened  which  greatly  vex- 
ed him,  and  foon  after,  he  began  to  be 
affected  with  a  fixed  pain  in  his  fore- 
head, which  increafing  by  degrees,  at 
laft  fpread  over  his  whole  head.  I  faw 
him  firft,  about  two  years  after  the  head- 
ach  began,  at  which  time  he  complain- 
ed of  a  conflant  pain,  attended  with  a 
v/eight  and  heavinefs,  in  his  head  ;  he 
had  befides  fiiarp  flying  pains  in  diffe- 
rent parts  of  it,  as  if  a  nail  had  been 
driven  into  them.  At  certain  times 
the  hcadach  increafed  greatly,  and  was 
attended  with  a  quick  pulfe.  He  fre- 
quently pafled  great  quantities  of  pale 
water,   ^ipecially  in  ^'iolent  fits  of  the 

headach. 


Nervous    Disorders.  375 

T:ieadach.  His  fleep  was  difturbed  with 
frightful  dreams,  out  of  which  he  would 
often  awake  with  great  opprellioii  and 
terror.  He  was  generally  low-fpkited, 
fufpicious  and  peevifli,  tho'  on  fome  oc- 
Gallons,  he  was  uncommonly  chearful. 
The  leaft  contradi(flion  threw  him  into 
a  fit  of  melancholy.  He  felt  a  tenfion 
about  liis  eyes,  elpecially  when  his  head 
was  much  pained.  There  was  fcarce 
any  lecretion  of  mucus  from  his  nofe ; 
and  fo  moveable  was  his  nervous  fyftem, 
that  if  he  retained  his  water  too  long, 
or  hurt  his  nofe  ever  fo  little,  by  haftily 
bringing  away  from  it  fome  of  the  hard- 
ened miicus^  he  never  failed  to  have  an 
increafe  of  his  headach.  He  was  liable 
to  fits  of  iickn^fs  at  his  flomach,  and  of- 
ten threw  up  a  clear  watery  humour 
without  tafte  or  fmell.  He  was  gene- 
rally coftive  and  his  pulfe  good,  except 
when  attacked  with  the  violent  fits  of 
pain  in  his  head,  wliich  nothing  was  fo 
apt  to  bring  on,  as  any  intenfe  thought 

or 


376  Of  the  Cv  KE    of 

or  long-continued  application  of  mind. 
Invohmtaria  penis  crcdione^  cum  feminis  pie- 
rumqtie  emijfione,  tarn  die  qiiam  noBu  f<epe  ten- 
tatus  fuit. 

For  three  years  after  I  had  firft  feen 
him  in  this  condition,  he  continued  un- 
der the  care  of  fome  phyficians  of  cha- 
racter in  Ital'jy  who,  having  prefcribed 
for  him  a  variety  of  medicines  without 
any  advantage,  gave  him  up  as  incu- 
rable. Upon  this  I  told  him  one  reme- 
dy ftill  remained,  which  might  be  of 
fervice,  viz.  opium  ;  and  as  he  readily  a- 
greed  to  my  advice,  I  began  with  giving 
him  half  a  grain  every  night  at  bed-time. 
I  alfo  difTolved  two  drams  of  ftrained 
opium  in  four  ounces  of  fpirit  of  wine, 
and  ordered  him  to  rub  a  little  of  this 
on  thofe  parts  of  his  head  which  were 
mofl  pained.  The  dofe  of  opiton  at  bed- 
time, was  gradually  increafed  to  a  grain 
and  a  half,  and  fometimes  he  took  a 
grain  twice  a-day.  He  had  not  ufed 
the  o-hium  a   month,    when   he   became 

fenfibly 


Nervous    Disorders.  377 

fenfibly  better,  and  in  eight  or  ten 
months  found  himfelf  free  of  all  his 
moft  troublefome  complaints.  After  this 
he  began  to  leflen  the  dofe  of  the  opiums 
and  to  take  it  only  once  in  two  nights, 
and  fometimes  feldomer.  Only,  when, 
from  vexation  or  any  other  caufe,  he 
was  threatened  with  a  fit  of  the  head- 
ach,  he  immediately  had  recourfe  to 
the  opium  in  a  larger  quantity.  He  was 
adviied  to  ule  daily  exercife,  and  to  keep 
his  mind  as  eafy  and  chearful  as  pollible. 
At  fii'ft  he  drank  a  few  glafTes  of  wine 
at  his  meals  ;  but,  after  he  had  taken 
the  ophim  for  fome  time,  he  found  that  a 
lingie  glafs  of  wine  heated  him,  and 
made  his  headach  worfe  ;  on  which 
account  he  confined  himfelf  to  water  a- 
lone.  The  third  year  after  he  began 
to  ufe  the  opium,  he  was  fb  free  of  his 
complaints,  that,  during  the  fpace  of 
twelve  months,  he  did  not  take  above 
three  dofes  of  it. 

It 


378  Of  the  Cure  of 

It  may  be  worth  while  to  remark, 
that  this  patient  was  fo  fenflble  of  any 
change  of  weather,  tliat,  by  a  general 
feehng  of  weaknefs  and  inactivity,  and 
of  pains  in  his  joints,  he  could  have  told, 
in  the  morning  before  he  got  out  of  bed, 
that  the  weather  was  moid  and  rainy, 
©r  the  winds  eafterly  or  foutherly. 

M.  N,  An  unmarried  woman  aged 
30,  after  confiderable  vexation  of  mind, 
began  to  be  feized  in  much  the  fame  man- 
ner with  the  above  patient,  and  had  ta- 
ken medicines  for  five  years  to  little  pur- 
pofe.  The  chief  fymptoms  were  a  con- 
ftant  and  fever e  pain  over  her  whole 
head,  cfpecially  the  back-part,  a  fliffnefs 
in  the  mufcles  of  the  neck,  great  pain 
and  loofenfs  of  her  teeth  ;  diflurbed 
fleep,  frightful  dreams,  low  fpirits,  ilia- 
kings  and  trembhngs  of  her  whole  bo- 
dy, cold  and  hot  fits  by  turns,  fiurtiings 
in  her  face,  flatulence  and  fwelling  in 
her  ftomach  with  frequent  belchings,  iu- 
aitivity,   lofs   of  appetite,   flying  pains 

through 


Nervous   Disorders.  37^ 

through  her  body,  and  inability  to  ap- 
ply with  attention  to  any  thing  ferious. 
In  fummer  1759,  flie  began  to  take  the 
opium  in  the  fame  way  with  the  former 
patient.  In  three  weeks  flie  found 
herfelf  fomewhat  eafier,  and  after  fix 
weeks  was  much  better  in  every  refJ3ecl. 
Her  headach  was  moftly  gone,  her  teeth 
were  free  of  pain,  and  firm,  her  fleep 
much  lefs  difturbed,  and  the  ffufhings 
and  fhakings  in  a  great  meafure  re- 
moved. For  about  two  weeks  after 
fhe  began  to  take  the  ophpn,  flie  was 
troubled  with  gripes,  which  however 
went  off  after  being  longer  ufed  to  this 
remedy.  A  folution  of  opium  in  fpirit  of 
wine  was  often  applied  to  her  head  and 
neck,  and  always  gave  her  eafe.   • 

II.  With  regard  to  the  fecond  in- 
tention of  cure,  which  was  to  correct  or 
remove  the  occafional  caufes,  which,  e- 
fpecially  in  fuch  as  are  predifpofed,  give 
rife  to  all  the  nervous,  hypochondriac 
and  hyfleric  fymptoms ;    as  thefe  caufes 

are 


38o  Of  the  Cure    of 

are  various,  the  medicines  muft  be  often 
different :  nay,  what  is  proper  in  one 
cafe,  may  be  hm^tful  in  another. 

The  occafional  caufes  were  diflin- 
guiflied  before  into  the  general  and 
particular. 

The   general  caufes  were, 

1.  SoxME  morbid  matter  bred  in  the 
blood. 

2.  The  diminution  or  fuppreffion  of 
fbme  habitual  evacuation. 

3.  The  want  of  a  fufficient  quantity 
of  blood. 

.  ,.^  ,  The  particular  caufes  were, 

I.. Wind  *)  •       t_     n  i 

/  in  the  Itomach 

2.  Tough  phlegm  >        ,  ,         , 

\  and  bowels. 

3.  Worms  j 

4.  Aliments  improper  in  then'  na- 
ture or  quantity. 

5.  Obstructions,  frequently  of  the 
fcirrhous  kind,    in  the  abdominal  vif- 

ccra. 

6.  Sudden 


Nervous   Disorders.  381 

6.  Sudden  and  violent  afFedlions  of 
the  mind. 

In  order  therefore  to  treat  diflindlly 
of  the  fecond  intention  of  cure,  it  will 
be  neceflary  to  mention  particularly 
the  different  remedies,  which  are  moft 
likely  to  lefFen  or  remove  thefe  feveral 
caufes. 

I.  Some  morbid  matter  in  the  blood. 

(rt)  As  we  are  often  ignorant  of  the 
nature  of  that  matter  in  the  blood, 
which  is  the  caufe  of  nervous  diforders, 
fo  we  mufl  be  often  at  a  lofs  how  to 
corredl  or  expel  it.  When  I  fufpe(fl  it 
to  be  of  that  kind  which  produces  the 
arthritis  vaga,  from  knowing  the  family- 
diftemper  of  the  patient,  his  conftitu- 
tion  and  manner  of  life,  or  his  being 
much  troubled  with  flying  pains  in  his 
head,  arms  or  limbs,  I  rely  moft  upon 
a  proper  diet  and  exercife,  with  the 
tinchire  of  the  bark  and  bitters  men- 
tioned under  the  firft  intention  of  cure, 
in  order  to  prevent  the   generation  of 

this 


382  Of  the  Cure   of 

this  'matter  ;  or  gradually  to  fubdue  and 
carry  it  off,  when  ah'eady  generated. 
But  Hippofing  the  bark  and  bitters  had 
no  power  to  deftroy  the  arthritic  matter 
in  the  blood,  which  feems  mofl  pro- 
bably to  be  the  cafe,  yet  by  ftrengthen- 
ing  the  flomach  and  bowels,  they  may 
not  only  retard  the  generation  of  more, 
but  prevent,  in  a  great  meafure,  an 
attack  upon  thefe  parts ;  which  are  ob- 
ferved  to  fuifer  moft,  when,  from  any 
caufe,  they  have  been  much  weakened, 
or  otherwife  put  out  of  order. 

The  reputation  which  bitters  have 
had  in  gouty  cafes,  among  the  antient 
as  well  as  fome  of  the  modern  Phyfl- 
cians,  led  me  to  think,  that  a  well  cho- 
fen  medicine  of  this  kind  might  be 
very  ufeful  in  nervous,  hypochondriac 
or  hyfteric  complaints  from  an  arthritic 
matter  in  the  blood  :  And  altho',  in 
patients  in  the  decline  of  life,  the  tinc- 
ture of  the  bark  and  bitters  has  often 
failed  me,  yet  in  thofe  who  were  under 

forty 


Nervous   Disorders.         383 

forty  or  fifty,  I  have  found  it  do  more 
fervice  than  any  other  remedy. 

When  the  patients  are  liable  to  fits 
of  the  true  gout,  I  increafe  the  propor* 
tion  of  the  rad,  gentian,  and  cort»  aurant* 
in  the  tincture,  adding  at  the  fame  time 
fome  nutmeg  or  ginger,  eipecially  if 
the  ftomach  be  cold  and  flatulent.  In 
this  cafe  alfo,  the  tindlure  may  be  taken 
to  the  quantity  of  two  table-fpoonfuls 
twice  a-day. 

I  HAVE  known  an  indigeflion  and 
flatulence,  with  a  pain  and  flcknefs  at 
the  ftomach  from  the  gout,  greatly  re- 
lieved, after  other  medicines  had  failed, 
by  drinking,  thrice  a-day,  fix  ounces 
of  a  ftrong  decodlion  of  feveral  of  the 
common  bitters*  in  water:  And  a 
Gentleman  of  my  acquaintance,  who 
had  been  much  troubled,  for  fifteen 
years,  with  a  pain  in  his  fl:omach,  has 
been  cured  by  chewing  two   drams   of 

the 

Vi%.  Rad,  gentian,  calctm.  aromat.    cort.  aurant,  fumtnit, 
ah/ynth.  centaur,  min.  card,  benedicl.  withy'va.  cat-v. 


384  Of  the   Cure  of 

the  roots  of  gentian  daily.  This  kept 
his  body  open,  and  increafed  his  appe- 
tite;  it  began  to  give  him  eafe  in  a  few 
days  ;  and  when,  upon  omitting  it, 
the  pain  returned  in  a  lefTer  degree,  it 
was  quickly  removed  by  having  re- 
courfe  to  the  gentian  again. 

A  milk  diet  which,  fometimes,  has 
proved  a  radical  cure  for  the  goutf, 
has  been  commended  by  Sydenham  in 
certain  hyfleric  cafes,  after  other  medi- 
cines have  failed  J.  I  can  fay  little  of 
its  eifecfls  in  either  cafe  from  my  own 
experience.  We  meet  with  few  patients 
who  will  confine  themfelves  to  this  diet, 
and,  in  feveral  cafes,  it  is  improper  to 
advife  it.  About  eighteen  years  ago, 
I  had  a  patient  aged  48,  who,  on  ac- 
count of  an  ulcer  in  his  lungs,  reftricled 
himfelf  for  many  months  to  a  diet  of 
milk  and  vegetables  alone,  and  after  he 
got  free  of  that   diieafe,    continued  to 

live 

^  Celfus  de  medidna,  lib.  v.  cap.  xxiv; 
X  DiJJkrt.  Epiji.  ad  D.  Cole. 


Nervous    Disorders.         385 

live  in  this  way  for  feveral  years.  This 
perfbn,  who  was  of  a  very  full  habit> 
and  had  been  formerly  attacked  once 
a-year,  at  lead,  with  the  gout,  remained 
free  from  this  diftemper  for  feven  or 
eight  years,  that  is,  till  fome  years  after 
he  had  returned  to  the  ufe  of  flefli 
meats  and  fermented  liquors. 

Lime-water  is  faid  to  have  been 
drunk  fucceisfully  by  feveral  gouty  pa- 
tients*. I  have  only  had  one  who 
gave  it  a  decilive  trial.  This  perfon 
was  aged  about  fifty,  and  had  for  fe- 
veral years  been  fubjecl  every  winter 
to  a  fmart  fit  of  the  gout.  In  February 
or  March  IJ5S)  he  began  to  drink  daily 
an  Englifli  quart  of  lime-water,  living  at 
the  fame  time  very  temperately.  Be- 
fore the  end  of  the  fii'ft  year,  he  had  a 
very  flight  attack  of  the  gout ;  about 
the  end  of  the  fee  on  d  year,  he  had  ra- 
ther lefs  of  this  difeafe  ;  but  after  he 
B  b  had 

*  See  AlJion\  DifTertation  on  quicklime  and  lime-water, 
part  iii. 


386  Of  the  Cuke  of 

had  continued  drinking  the  lime-water 
conftantly  for  near  three  years,  he  was 
feized  with  a  fevere  and  long  continued 
fit  of  the  gout,  in  both  his  hands  and 
both  his  feet.  This  patient  obferved, 
tliat  the  hme-water  when  drunk  warm, 
mended  the  ftate  of  his  ftomach,  when 
it  was  difordered  before  the  coming  on 
of  a  fit  of  the  gout,  and  he  thought  it 
had  a  good  effect,  in  driving  this  difeaie 
to  the  extremities.  The  lime-water 
agreed  perfectly  well  with  liim,  and 
mended  his  appetite. 

From  this  cafe  it  may  be  fairly  con- 
cluded, that  lime-water  does  not  radi- 
cally cure  the  gout  or  deftroy  the  arthri- 
tic matter  in  the  blood,  altho',  by 
flrengthening  the  ftomach  and  inteftines 
imd  preventing  acidity  in  them,  it  may 
render  the  attacks  of  this  difeafe  lefs 
frequent,  and  in  fome  perfbns,  perhaps, 
lefs  fevere*. 

When 

*  It  may  be  proper  to  mention,   that  a  patient  of  Dr 
Clerk'sy  Phyncian  to  the  Royal  Infirmary  here,  who  ufed  to 

have 


Nervous    Disorders.  387 

When  lime-v/ater  is  drunk  for  the 
cure  of  nervous  complaints  from  an 
imperfect  gout,  it  ought  to  be  taken  to 
the  quantity  of  at  leaft  an  EngUfli  quart 
daily ;    as,    at  firil,   it  is  fometimes  apt  \ 

to  occafion  an  uncaly  heat  in  the  fto- 
mach,  a  Httle  fweet  milk  may  be  added 
to  it ;  but  afterwards  it  is  better  to 
drink  it  alone.  In  the  winter-feafon, 
and  when  the  ftomach  is  more  difor^ 
dered  than  ufual,  the  lime-water  ought 
to  be  drunk  nearly  blood- warm. 

Soap  has  been   propofed  by  the  late 

Doctor  John  Cierk,  a  Phyfician  of  diilin- 

guifhed  character  in  this  place,    as  the 

B  b  2  proper 

have  a  fevere  and  long  continued  fit  of  the  gout  once  in 
two  years,  has  been  kept  free  of  this  difeafe  for  near  three 
years  paft,  by  drinking  off,  at  once,  an  Englifh  quart  of 
lijne-water,  every  forenoon  about  eleven  o'clock-  The 
lime-water  taken  in  this  way,  always  purges  him  twice 
or  thrice  about  three  o'clock  in  the  afrernoon.  But  as 
this  perfon  is  of  a  very  full  habit  of  body,  it  is  probable 
that  the  lime-water  has  proved  ufeful  to  him  rather  by  that 
daily  evacuation  which  it  occaficns  by  ftool,  than  by  any 
virtue  it  pofTefTes  of  deftroying  the  arthritic  matter  in  the 
blood. 


388  Of  the  Cure  of 

proper  folvent  of  the  arthritic  matter 
in  the  blood*.  It  has  fometimes  been 
of  life  in  old  rheumatifms,  and  may  be 
properly  taken  along  with  the  lime- 
water,  as  it  prevents  coftivenefs  and 
deftroys  acidities  in  the  flomach  and 
bowels. 

As  fome  perfons  fubjecl  to  the  true 
gout,  have  found  great  benefit  from 
drinking,  twice  a-day,  about  a  gill  and 
a  half  of  a  ftrong  infufion  of  tanfy  in 
boiling  water,  it  is  probable  the  fame 
medicine  might  be  ufeful  in  thofe  com- 
plaints which  arife  from  an  imperfecH: 
gout  afferting  the  flomach  and  other 
parts.  But  of  this  I  can  fay  nothing 
certain  from  my  own  experience,  not 
having  had  any  patient  who  gave  the 
tanfy  a  fair  trial. 

Issues  and  perpetual  bliflers  have 
been  often  of  ufe  in  headachs,  and  in 
tlie  fciatic  or  chronic  rheumatifm  affec- 


ting 


*  See  Dr  Pringle's  Obfervat,  on  the  difeafes  of  the  army, 
part  ii'.  chap.  2.  edit.  i. 


Nervous    Disord-ers.  389 

ting  one  leg ;  but  I  have  not  found  them 
do  much  fervice  in  nervous  or  hypo- 
chondriac complaints  from  an  arthritic 
humour. 

(/>)  I  have  obferved  above,  that  com- 
plaints of  th«  nervous  kind  fometimes 
proceed  from  that  kind  of  humour  in 
the  blood  which  is  commonly,  but  im- 
properly, called  fcorbutic  ;  and  which, 
when  it  is  thrown  out  on  the  flcin,  ap- 
pears in  the  form  of  tettars,  fcurfy 
erruptions  or  the  lepra  gracoriim.  In  this 
cafe,  we  mufl  endeavour  to  drive  the 
morbid  humour  outwards  to  the  fkin, 
by  vomits,  warm  ftomachics  and  fudo- 
rifics  ;  after  which  the  radical  cure 
mud  be  attempted  by  mild  mercurials 
and  the  purging  mineral-waters. 

The  method  which  I  have  always 
found  fuccefsful,  at  leaft  in  flighter 
cafes,  is  to  give  twelve  grains  of  tlie  pi- 
luU  athiopic(j£  every  night  at  bedtime,  and 
every  other  morning  a  dram  or  a  dram 
gild  a  half  of  polychreil  fait  diffolved  in 

an 


39©  Of  the    Cure   of 

an  Engli/h  pint  of  water*.  The  fait, 
befides,  otherwife  contributing  to  the 
cure,  opens  the  body,  and  prevents  the 
pills  from  raifing  a  falivation,  which 
they  are  fometimes  apt  to  do.  Thefc 
medicines  arc  to  be  ufed  till  the  fcurfy 
or  leprous  erruptions  quite  difappear. 
When  the  obftinacy  of  the  difeafe  re- 
quires it,  I  give  the  pills  both  morning 
and  evening. 

Alt  ho'  the  true  fcurv^  is  a  difeaie 
rarely  obferved,  except  in  thofe  who 
live  at  fea  or  in  marfliy  places,  yet  we 
frequently  meet  with  patients,  who  have 
fome  degree  of  a  fcorbutic  taint  in  their 
blood,  as  appears  from  their  fpungy 
gums,  a  lalfitude  and  other  complaints. 
I  have  had  feveral  patients  of  this  con- 
flitution,  who  were  deeply  affedled  with 
the  hypochondriac  difeafe  ;  their  chief 
lymptoms  were  low  Ipirits  or  melan- 
choly,   watching,    flatulence,    frequent 

Ipitting 

*  In  place  of  this  folutlon  of  the  Polychrefl  fait,   I  have 
fometimes  ordered  fea-water  to  be  drunk. 


Nervous   Disorders.  391 

Ipitting  of  the  faliva,  a  bad  digeflion, 
flying  pains,  a  tightnefs  about  the  />r«e- 
cordiay  a  dark  colour  and  troubled  look. 
I  have  never  fucc ceded  in  curing  any 
of  thofe  patients  ;  but  a  long  courfe  of 
the  tincture  of  the  bark  and  bitters  with 
elixir  of  vitriol,  and  daily  exerciie, 
feemed  to  agree  better  with  them  than 
any  thing  elfe.  When  they  are  coftive, 
I  order,  once  in  two  or  three  days,  as 
much  foluble  tartar  as  is  neceflary  to 
open  them  gently. 

{c)  When  nervous  fymptoms  are  oc- 
cafioned  by  fome  morbid  matter  re- 
maining in  the  blood,  in  confequence 
of  fome  former  difeafe  imperfeftly  cu- 
red ;  we  muft  have  recourfe  to  fucli 
remedies  as  are  beft  fuited  to  the  nature 
of  that  difeafe  or  the  circumftances  of 
the  patient. 

That  humour  which  produces  the 
rafli  or  miliary  erruption,  when  it  falls 
on  the  internal  parts,  inftead  of  being 
thrown    out   upon  the  fkin,    generally 

occafions 


3 9 -  Of  the   Cure    of 

occafions  a  great  depreflion  of  fpirits, 
anxiety  and  faintnefs,  pale-water  and 
watching,  and  fometimes  raving  and 
convuliions.  In  this  cafe,  I  have  found 
mofh  advantage  from  the  warm  pedilu- 
vium,  or  warm  fomentations  applied  to 
the  feet  and  legs,  from  bliflers,  wine, 
whey  and  bolufes  of  camphire,  fafron 
and  fait  of  hartfliorn.  When  in  the 
miliary  fever,  the  patients  are  much 
opprelfed  at  the  ftomach  and  complain 
of  a  difficulty  of  breathing,  a  gentle 
vomit  of  ipecacuanha,  or  of  an  infufion 
of  camomile,  often  gives  relief. 

The  warm  pediluvimn  and  fomenta- 
tions often  procure  fleep,  and  give 
fome  immediate  eafe  to  the  patient  ; 
they  likewife  contribute  to  promote  the 
niihary  erruption,  by  removing  that 
tenfion  or  fpafmodic  contraction  of  the 
cutaneous  veflels  which  frequently  re- 
tards it.  Where  the  patients  are  in  any 
degree  plethoric,  bleeding  will  often, 
not  only  give  fome  prefent  relief,  but, 

by 


Nervous    Disorders.         393 

by  relaxing  the  vafcular  fyftem,  will  alfo 
contribute  to  the  expullion  of  the  mor->- 
bid  matter  by  the  fkin. 

2.  When  nervous  hypochondriac  or 
hyfteric  fymptoms  proceed  from  a  di- 
minution of  fome  habitual  evacuation ; 
that  evacuation  is  to  be  promoted  b}/ 
the  proper  remedies. 

(a)  When  the  menfes  are  obftrufted, 
we  mull  endeavour  to  recal  them,  and, 
till  that  can  be  done,  the  mofh  troubler 
fome  fymptoms  are  to  be  palliated. 
There  are  few  cafes  in  which  we  are 
oftener  difappointed  than  in  bringing 
back  the  monthly  evacuation,  after  it 
has  been  long  fupprefled  ;  and  the  me- 
dicines proper  in  one  cafe,  may  prove 
ineifet^ual  or  even  hurtful  in  another. 

When  the  want  of  good  blood  is  the 
caufe  why  the  menfes  do  not  flow,  the 
befl  remedies  are  the  bark,  bitters  and 
Heel,  together  with  a  nourifliing  diet, 
and  exercife.  After  the  patient  has,  by 
^hefe  means,  got  more  and  better  blood. 


394  Of  the  Cuke    of 

it  ought  to  be  determined  to  the  uterus 
by  frequent  dofes  of  tiuBiira  facra,  and 
by  making  the  patient  iit  every  evening 
over  the  fleams  of  warm  water. 

If  a  plethora  or  a  too  great  abundance 
of  blood  prevents  the  iiux  of  the  mcnfes^ 
bleeding,  efpecially  in  the  foot  or  at  the   | 
ancle,    and  gentle    purges,   will  prove 
moft  efFedaial. 

When  the  thicknefs  or  vifcidity  of 
the  blood  hinders  it  from  making  its 
way  through  the  uterine  vefTels,  fre- 
quent vomits,  and  the  pihiU  mercmiales 
laxanteSy  or  gentle  purges  with  calomel, 
will  anfwer  bed. 

Lastly,  when  the  fuppreffion  of  the 
merfes  has  been  owing  to  a  fpafmodic 
contraction  of  the  uterine  veifels,  in 
confeqiience  of  cold,  fome  violent  paf- 
fion,  or  other  caiifes,  the  chief  remedies 
are  the  warm  femicupiiim  and  pedihroiwn, 
oily  draughts,  and  pills  of  aloes,  afa 
frtida,  extract  of  black  hellebore  and 
faffron.      A  clyiler  of  vv'arm  v/ater  with 

tliirty 


Nervous    Disorders.  395 

thirty  or  forty  drops  of  laudanum  may  be 
given,  in  the  evening,  about  the  time 
the  menfes  fliould  return. 

Obstinate  obflrud:ions  of  the 
monthly  evacuation  in  women,  have 
fometimes  been  cured  by  eledi'ifying 
them,  and  drawing  the  iparks  chiefly 
from  their  thighs.  But  Dr  Clerk  informs 
me,  tliat  he  has  obferved  this  remedy 
to  iiicceed  bed  in  thofe  whole  puile  w^as 
fhiall  and  languid. 

Some  young  women,  about  the  time 
of  the  return  of  the  menfeSy  are  apt  to 
be  feized  with  violent  pains  in  then* 
back  and  belly,  vvith  faintings,  raving, 
and  fometimes  convulfions.  In  fuch 
caies,  the  warm  Jhnicupmm  is  of  great 
life  ;  but  as,  often,  tliis  cannot  be 
readily  got,  I  have  generally  ordered 
with  Ibccefs,  a  clyfler  of  warm  water 
with  fifty  drops  of  Lmdanum,  and  a  flan- 
nel bag  with  the  emollient  herbs  to  be 
wrung  out  of  hot  water,  and  applied  to 
the  abdomen.      When    the    patient    has 

been 


39^  Of  t])£  Cure   of 

been  coftive,  a  laxative  clyfler  with  afa 
fastida  muft  be  given  to  procure  a  ftool, 
before  the  anodyne  one  is  injected. 

In  the  intervals  between  the  returns 
of  the  menfs,  in  order  to  render  the  pa- 
tient lefs  liable  to  the  above  mentioned 
complaints,  I  have  advifed  with  good 
efFecl,  the  frequent  ufe  of  the  warm 
pediluviiim^  fome  dofes  of  the  piluU  rtifi, 
and  thofe  oily  draughts,  which,  in  this 
cafe,  were  much  commended  by  Sir 
David  Hamilton^ ;  and  which  I  have  alio 
found  of  good  ufe  in  pains  of  the 
bowels,  in  thofe  whom  the  meufes  had 
left. 

I  have  fometimes  met  with  immarried 
women,  who  were  liable  to  be  attacked 
with  faintings  and  convulfive  fits,  after 
every  period  of  the  menfes  was  over ; 
which  feemed  to  be  owing  to  this  eva- 
cuation being  lefs  copious  than  ufiial. 
Ill  a  cafe  of  this  kind,  the  following  re^ 

medics 

*  D:  Praxci  rrgulis,  cop.  iii. 


Nervous    Disorders.  397 

medies  ufed  for  two  or   three   months 
proved  luccefsful. 

R,  Aloes  focotrin. 
Afa  foetid. 

Extraft.  hellebor.  nigr. 
fal.   Mart. 

croc.  Angl.  ana  drach.  i. 
Elix.  proprietat.  q.  f.  ut.  f.  pil.  gr.  iv. 
Quarum  capiat  v.  vel  vi.  alternis  noftibus. 

R.  Rad.  Gentian. 

calam.  aromat.  ana  unc.  i. 
Summit,  centaur,  min.  drach.  vi, 
Flor.  anthos,  drach.  ii. 
M.  f.  materialia  infundenda,   per  hor.  vi.    in  aqu.  bul- 
lient.   lib.  iv.  colatur.     Adde 
Tinft.  Cort,  Peruvian,  unc.  x.     Mifce. 
Cape  unc.  iii.  bis  in  die. 

Along  with  theie  medicines  the  pe- 
dihrjiimi  was  ufed  every  night  at  bed- 
time. 

When,  in  the  decline  of  hfe,  the  ;/z^;z- 
fes  ceaie,  various  nervous  or  hyfleric 
lymptoms  appear,  which  are  generally 
leflened,  and  fometimes  removed,  by 
frequent  fmall  bleedings,  gentle  ftoma- 
chic  purges  and  ifllies. 

{b)  If  the  haemorrhoidal  flux  is  want- 
ing in  thofe  who  have  been  accuflomed 

to 


398  Of  the  Cure    of 

to  it,  we  mufl  endeavour  to  recal  it  by 
emollient  fomentations,  and  aloetic  me- 
dicines. When  thefe  or  other  remedies 
prove  inefFeclual,  Hoffman  has  advifed 
leeches  to  be  applied  near  the  anus  once 
a  month. 

{c)  When  old  ulcers,  or  fores  too 
quickly  dried  up,  have  given  occafion 
to  nervous  diforders,  purgatives,  and  e- 
Ipecially  ifRies  or  a  feton,  will  be  moil 
fliccefsful  in  carrying  off  that  humour 
which  diflurbs  the  body. 

{^d)  Wh  en  pimples  or  other  enniptions 
on  the  face  have  been  fuddenly  repel- 
led by  improper  applications,  violent 
headachs,  giddinefs,  ficknefs  at  ftomach, 
palpitations  and  other  nervous  fymp- 
toms  have  been,  fometimes,  the  conle- 
quence.  In  fuch  cafes,  if  the  morbid 
humour  cannot  be  brought  back  to  the 
face,  \\Q  muft  try  to  carry  it  off  by  per- 
petual bliflers  or  ilfues'  in  the  head  or 
neck,  and  by  mercurial  purges. 

When 


Nervous   Disorders.  3^^ 

3.  When  nervous  or  hyfteric  com- 
plaints are  occafionedby  a  wantof  blood, 
in  confequence  of  an  immoderate  flux  of 
the  haemorrhoids,  menfes  or  lochia;  the 
cure  confifts  in  reflraining  thefe  evacu- 
ations, and  filling  the  velTels  by  means 
of  fuch  aliments  as  are  light  and  nou- 
rifliing,  but  not  heating.  In  the  mean 
time,  the  violence  of  the  fymptoms  mufl 
be  abated  by  anodynes  and  wine,  or 
other  cordial  medicines.  A  horizontal 
poflure  is  here  of  confiderable  ufe. 

The  medicines  which  I  have  found 
moft  iuccefsful  in  reftraining  an  immo- 
derate flux  of  the  merifcs  are  the  tindura 
rojamm,  terra  Japonic  a,  alom,  opium,  and 
elixir  of  vitriol. 

I  HAVE  fometimes  given  the  alom 
mixed  Vvith  terra  Japonic  a  as  in  the  pulvis 
Jljpticns  ;  bvit  of  late,  I  have  prefcribed 
it  more  frequently,  in  the  following 
form,  as  being  lefs  difagreeable  to  the 
ftomach. 

R.  Laft.  recent.  buUient.  lib.  i. 

Alum,  rup.  pulverat.  drach.  i.  .id  drach,  i.  fs.  Mifce  ut 

£at 


400  Of  the   Cure  of 

fiat  coagulum,  et  fero  colato.     Adde 
Sacchari  albi   unc.  i. 
Cape  uric.  iii.  quaterin  die. 

If  the  alom-whey  occafions  a  fournels 
in  the  ftomach  with  a  cardialgia,  a  fcruple 
of  crab's  eyes  or  prepared  oifter-fliells 
twice  or  thrice  a-day  will  be  ufeful.  In 
one  cale,  the  alom-whey  leflened  a  pro- 
flttviiim  menfmm  after  the  patient  had  ta- 
ken, for  fome  time,  forty  drops  of  the 
tincliira  antipthifica  thrice  a-day,  without 
any  |benefit.  The  fame  medicine  alfo 
cured  a  flttor  albiu  of  feveral  years  {land- 
ing- 

I  HAVE  not  obferved  remarkable  ef- 
fects from  the  bark,  in  flopping  hae- 
morrhages. After  an  immoderate  flux 
of  the  menjes  had  refifled  that  medicine 
taken  in  fubflance  for  near  a  fortnight, 
I  have  feen  it  yield  in  two  or  three  days 
to  fuch  a  mixture  as  the  following, 

R.  Aqu.  menth.  unc.  vi. 

cinnamom,  f.  v.  unc.  ii. 

Confeft.  Japon.  drach.  vi. 

Syr.  limon.  unc.  ii.     Mifce. 
Cape  cochl,  ii.  4ta  vel  6ta  quaque  hora. 

To 


Nervous    Disorders.         401 

To  remedy  the  coftivenels  v/hich  this 
mixture  generally  occalions,  it  becomes 
neceflary  once  in  two  or  three  days,  to 
order  either  feme  rhubarb  or  a  laxative 
clyfter. 

Th  e  bark,  which  is  more  remarkable 
for  its  flrengthening  than  aftringent 
quality,  feems  to  be  lefs  adapted  for 
flopping  hsemorrhages,  than  for  reito- 
ring  ftrength  to  thole  who  have  been 
reduced  by  them.  However,  it  is  often 
very  proper,  not  only  to  give  the  bark 
after  the  flux  of  blood  is  lelTened,  but 
alfo,  at  the  fame  time,  with  fome  of  the 
ilronger  aftringents. 

Wh  EN  a  profiuvmni  maifmniy  or  a  flood- 
ing after  abortion,  is  attended  with, 
or  preceded  by  an  acute  pain,  not  in- 
flammatory, in  tlie  lower  part  of  the 
back  or  belly,  and  returns  ^vith  greater 
violence,  as  often  as  the  pain  returns  or 
increafcs,  opiinr.  ^vill  prove  a  more  effec- 
tual remedy  than  any  of  theaftringenta, 
as  happened  in  the  following  cafe. 

C   c  Mrs 


402  Of  the  Cure    of 

Mrs  D ,  aged  between  30  and  40, 

having  gone  abroad  too  foon,  after  an 
abortion  in  the  fourth  month  of  her 
pregnancy,  was  feized  with  a  violent 
pain  in  her  back  and  the  lower  part  of 
her  belly,  which  retm'ned  once  in 
eighteen  or  twenty  hours,  and  w^as  al- 
ways attended  with  an  exceflive  flood- 
ing, which  abated  when  the  pain  left 
lier.  Having  been  called,  after  flie  had 
uled  feveral  aftringent  and  ftrengthen- 
ing  medicines  with  very  little  advan- 
tage, I  ordered  a  clyfter  of  fix  ounces 
of  an  infufion  of  dryed  red  rofes  in 
boiling  water  with  fifty  drops  of  lauda- 
num, to  be  given  every  night  at  bed- 
time, and  once  in  two  days  a  laxative 
clyfter  in  the  morning,  if  it  fhould  be 
neceflary.  After  the  firft  anodyne 
clyfter,  flie  had  httle  either  of  the  pain 
or  flooding,  and  after  the  third, 
was  quite  cured  of  both  thefe  com- 
plaints. 

Liulovictis 


Nervous    Disorders.  403 

Ltidoviais  Sept  alius  ^,  and  after  him, 
^ir  David  Ha?nihon'\,  has  commended  a 
ftrong  decodlion  of  bitter  orange-lkins, 
as  a  moil  effectual  remedy  in  a  profluviimi 
menfium ;  and  I  have  been  informed  by 
an  able  Phyfician,  that  he  has  prefcribed 
it  once  and  again  with  fuccefs  in  the 
following  manner : 

R.  Cort.  aurant.  Sevil.  recent,  integr.  vli. 

Coque  ex  aqu.  fontan.  lib.  iii.  ad  lib.  ii. 

Colaturas  adde  facchar.  alb.  unc.  i. 

Elix.  vitriol  gut.  Ix. 
Cape  cochl.  vi.  tertia  quaque  hora. 

I  HAVE  known  the  f.iior  alhus  cured, 
in  a  great  meafure,  by  a  courfe  of  fea- 
bathing,  after  many  powerful  medicines 
had  been  tried  in  vain.  The  fame  re- 
medy in  the  intervals  of  a  projiiivium 
mcnfmm  has  contributed  much  to  lefTen 
that  flux  ;  and  a  Lady  aged  between 
40  and  50,  a  patient  of  mine,  who  was 
fo  much  diftrefled  with  the  bleeding 
piles,  that  (lie  rarely  went  to  ftool  with- 
C  c   2  out 

*  See  Animadverf.  med.   lib.  vii.  art.  144. 
+  Ds  Praxeos  repulh,  cap,  iii. 


404  0/  the  Cure   of 

out  loling  a  great  deal  of  blood,  found 
more  benefit  from  fea-beathing  than 
any  thing  elfe.  It  not  only  leiTened 
the  difcharge  of  blood  from  the  hemor- 
rhoidal vefTels,  but  foon  gave  her  a  bet- 
ter appetite,  more  flrength  and  a  frefher 
colour. 

And  thus  much  may  ferve  for  the 
cure  of  the  general  occafional  caufes  of 
nervous,  hypochondriac  and  hyfleric 
diforders,  I  come  next  to  mention  the 
method  for  leffening  or  removing  their 
particular  caufes,  -jiz. 

I,  Wind  in  the  flomach  and  bowels. 

As  this  proceeds  either  from  a  debili- 
ty or  fpafmodic  affed:ion  of  the  alimen- 
tary canal,  or  from  improper  aliments  ; 
the  remedies  for  performing  the  radical 
cure  may  be  found  under  the  firfl  in- 
tention of  cure  above*  and  below,  un- 
der No.  4,  where  the  treatment  of  ner- 
vous complaints,  ariling  from  errors  in 

diet, 

*  See  above,  pag.  3  34,  IS'V, 


Nervous  Disorders.  405 

diet,  is  laid  down.  Tlie  medicines  pro- 
per for  giving  immediate  relief  for  the 
uneafy  fenfations  occafioned  by  flatu- 
lence, will  be  mentioned  afterwards, 
when  I  come  to  treat  of  the  cure  of 
fome  of  the  principal  lymptoms  of  the 
nervous  or  hyfteric  kind. 

2.  Tough  phlegm  bred  in  the  flo- 
mach  and  inteflines. 

The  cure  of  this  phlegm  is  often  te- 
dious and  difficult,  and  in  many  cafes 
can  by  no  means  be  obtained  :  For, 
altho'  by  repeated  vomits  we  may  clear 
the  ftomach  of  the  prefent  load,  yet 
unlels  that  organ  is  fufliciently  flrengtli- 
cned  and  its  fecretory  vefTels  reftored 
to  a  found  ftate,  more  phlegm  will  be 
continually  produced.  Wherefore,  be- 
iides  frequent  vomits,  we  mufl  have  re- 
courfe  to  the  bark,  bitters,  chalybeates, 
animal  food  and  exercife,  efpeclally  ri- 
ding or  faiUng*.   Repeated  dofes  of  the 

ti  flu-urn 

*  Si'vero  pituita  ftomachus  Impletiir,  utilis  navigatio. 
Cel/uj  de  medicina,  lib.  iv.  cap.  v. 


4o6  Of  the  Cure  of 

tinBura  rhabarhari  amara  or  elixir  facrum, 
are  not  only  ufeful  for  ftrengthening 
the  ftomach  and  bowels,  but  for  carry- 
ing down  and  evacuating  part  of  the 
phlegm  that  diforders  them.  I  have 
fometimes  thought  that  the  emplaflriim 
ftomachicum  applied  to  the  epigaftric  re- 
gion was  of  life. 

Those  avIio  are  apt  to  breed  much 
phlegm  in  their  ftomach,  generally  find 
it  neceflhry  to  take  a  vomit  once  in  ten 
days  or  a  fortnight,  and  fometimes  of- 
tener.  When  a  vomit  of  ipecacuanha  is 
taken,  either  an  infufion  of  horfe-radifti 
fhould  be  drunk,  or  a  little  brandy  or 
powder  of  muftard  fliould  be  added  to 
each  draught  of  the  Avarm  water  ;  for 
theie,  by  their  warm  fimiihis,  tend  to 
invigorate  the  ftomach,  at  the  fame 
time  that   the   phlegm   oppreiling  it  is 

evacuated. 

As  lime-water  diftblyes  ichtyocolla  and 

other  glutinous  ftibftances,  I  thought  it 

might  be  worth  while  to  try  what  effecl 

it 


Nervous   Disorders.         407 

it  would  have   on    the    tough  phlegm 
bred  in  the  ftomach.      With  this  view, 
I  poured  three  gills  of  lime-water  on  a 
gill  of  that  phlegm   newly  vomited  up, 
and  mixed  them  well  together  :  at  firft, 
the  phlegm  feemed  to  be  rendered  fome- 
what   thicker   by  the    lime-water  ;    but 
after  {landing  five   or   fix  hours,  it  was 
quite  difTolved.      After  this,  one  of  my 
patients,  at  my  defire,  mixed  one  part 
of  very  tough  phlegm,  brought  up  from 
his  ftomach  by  a  vomit  in  the  evening, 
with  two  parts  of  lime-water ;  and  upon 
examining  this  mixture  next  morning, 
he   found   the   phlegm   had  wholly  loft 
its  tenacity.      This  Gentleman,    at   the 
fame  time,    mixed  fome  of  the  phlegm 
with  common  water ;  but  after  ftanding 
24  hours,    it   retained  its  tenacity  in  a 
great  meafure,    altho*   it   was  rendered 
thinner  by  the  mixture  of  the  water. 

When    lime-water    is    ufed    with    a 
view  to  the  cure  of  phlegm  in  the  fto- 
jnach,  it  fliould  be  drunk  to  the  quan- 
tity 


4o8  Of  the  Cure  of 

tity  of  near  an  Englifti  pint,  every 
morning  upon  an  empty  ftomach,  and 
nothino:  fliould  be  taken  for  two  hours 
after.  An  hour  and  a  half  before  din- 
ner and  as  long  before  fupper,  half  a 
pint  fliould  be  alfo  drunk. 

Further,  as  often  as  an  emetic  is 
ufed,  the  patient,  fome  time  after  its  o- 
peration  is  over,  fliould  lirft  of  all  take  a 
drauglit  of  lime-water,  which  in  this 
cafe,  will  ad:  more  flrongly  m  diflblving 
any  phlegm  that  may  remain  in  the 
ftomach,  as  well  as  in  bracing  its  relax- 
ed pores  and  veilels. 

When  together  with  a  tough  phlegm 
tliere  is  a  confiderable  degree  of  acidity 
in  the  ftomach,  I  have  known  good  effects 
from  ten  grains  of  the  fal  ahfyntbii  or  fait 
of  tartar  given  twice  a-day.  When  the 
ilomach  is  quite  free  of  acidity,  the  e- 
iixir  of  vitriol  may  be  of  ufe  to  ftrength- 
en  its  vefTels,    altho'  it   has   no  effect:  in 


dilFolving  the  phlegm. 


3.  Worms 


Nervous   Disorders.  409 

3.  Worms  in  the  flomach  and  intell 
tines. 

In  this  cafe,  ^vhile  we  palliate  the 
niofl  troublefome  fymptoms,  we  miift 
endeavour  to  deflroy  the  worms  by  flich 
anthelmintic  medicines  as  may  feem 
befl  adapted  to  the  particular  ftate  of 
the  patient.  I  fliall  only  add  on  this 
head,  that  in  fome  cafes,  I  have  ihen 
good  elfe^ls  from  au  infullon  of  the  root 
of  the  Indian-pink  * ;  but  this  remedy  is 
certainly  much  lefs  efficacious  here  than 
in  South  Carolina,  and  feems  to  lofe  a  great 
deal  of  its  virtue  by  being  long  kept. 

I  HAVE  ordered,  with  good  fuccels, 
to  fome  grown  perfons,  fix  drams  or  an 
ounce  of  Spanip  foap  daily.  It  deftroys 
the  afcarides  as  well  as  the  round  and 
fiat  worms.  Lime-water  has  been  much 
commended  as  an  anthelmintic,  but  it 
will  fcarcely  be  of  any  ufe,  except  whcr^ 
the  worms  are  lodged  in  the  llomach  or 
high  up  in  the  inteftines  ;    for,  if  they 

remain 

*  EfTays  phyfical  and  literary,  vol.  i. 


41  o  Of  the  Cure    of 

remain  in  the  ileum  or  the  inferior  part 
of  the  jejunum,  the  Hme-water  will  be 
moflly  all  abforbed  before  it  can  reach 
them. 

4.  Aliments  noxious  from  their 
quality  or  quantity. 

When  nervous,  hypochondriac  or 
hyfleric  diforders  are  owing  to  tliis 
caufe,  or  increafed  by  it,  a  proper  re- 
gulation of  diet  is  the  principal  remedy. 

[a)  If,  by  a  long  habit  of  eating  too 
little,  the  concoftive  powers  are  much 
weakened,  the  patient  muft,  by  flow  de- 
grees, increafe  the  quantity  of  his  ali- 
ment. 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  his  complaints 
have  been  occafioned  by  excefs  in  eat- 
ing and  drinking,  he  muft  gradually 
leflen  the  quantity,  till  he  has  reduced 
jiimfelf  within  the  bounds  of  ftricH:  tem- 
perance ;  that  is,  he  muft  never  eat  fb 
much  at  dinner  as  to  make  himfelf,  foon 
jifter,  unfit  to  go  about  any  bufincfs,  or 

apply 


Nervous    Disorders.  411 

apply  himfelf  to  any  ftudy  ;  and  he 
muft  make  light  fuppers,  or  none  at 
all,  if  he  does  not  find  his  dinner  di- 
gefled. 

I  HAVE  known  fome  people  much  af- 
fiicled  Avith  the  gout,  while  they  lived 
too  fully,  who  being  afterwards  redu- 
ced, by  neceflity,  to  a  ipare  diet,  got 
quite  free  of  that  diftemper :  And  in- 
deed when  nervous  ailments  have  been 
owing  to  high  living  or  an  arthritic 
matter  in  the  blood,  abftinence,  or  ra- 
ther moderation  in  eating  or  drink- 
ing, is  of  the  greateft  confequence  in 
the  cure. 

(b)  With  regard  to  the  quality  of 
the  food,  the  patients  ought  to  abflain 
from  all  heavy  and  fat  meats,  from 
whatever  they  find  hard  of  digeflion,  and 
from  all  flatulent  aliments. 

If  the  ftomach  and  bowels  have  been 
hurt  by  a  flatulent  diet  ;  greens,  roots, 
fruits,  and  whatever  is  apt  to  breed 
much  wind,  ought  to  be  avoided;    and 

the 


41  ^  Of  the  C  V  isi  z    of 

the  patient  fliould  live  chiefly  on  bread, 
rice  and  flefli-meats,  with  a  few  glalles 
of  wine  of  a  good  body  and  age,  ai:^d 
not  apt  to  turn  four. 

If  heavy  meats,  rich  fauces,  and  the 
too  free  ufe  of  wine  or  other  ftrong  li- 
quors have  hurt  the  flomach  and  bow- 
els ;  the  patient  ought  gradually  to  re- 
duce himfelf  to  a  fmall  quantity  of 
wine,  and  eat  only  the  lighter  animal 
fubftances  plainly  drefTed,  and  fuch  ve- 
getables as  are  lead  flatulent.  In  this 
cafe,  a  diet  of  milk  and  vegetables  alone 
mayfometimes  be  of  great  fer vice,  which, 
however,  muft  not  be  gone  into  all  at 
once,  but  very  gradually  :  And  it  is  fur- 
ther to  be  obferved,  that  while  feme, 
who  had  been  accuflomed  to  animal 
food  and  wine,  liave  found  great  bene- 
fit by  abflaining  from  them,  without 
loiing  much  ftrcngth,  or  any  ipirits; 
there  have  been  others  of  a  different 
conftitution,  who  could  not  bear  the 
V.  ant  of  fuch  n  diet,   and   vvhen  wholly 

confined 


Nervous   Disorders.         4I3 

confined  to  milk  and  vegetables,  were 
not  only  troubled  with  faintnefs  and  low- 
nefs  of  {pirits,  but  with  great  flatulence 
and  othei*  diforders  of  the  primes  via  : 
From  which  it  may  appear,  how  far 
fome  have  erred  in  recommending, 
without  fufficient  reflri^lion,  a  diet  of 
this  kind  in  the  greateft  part  of  nervous 
diforders. 

It  may  be  obferved,  that  many  peo- 
ple who  have  weak  or  windy  ilomachs, 
elpecially  fuch  as  are  liable  to  the  gout, 
find  not  only  vegetables,  but  milk  to  a- 
gree  befl  with  them,  when  they  take, 
at  the  fame  time,  fome  pepper  or  other 
fpicery  :  And  I  have  known  fome  per- 
fons  fiibjecl  to  violent  attacks  of  the 
gout  in  their  ftomach,  who  have  been 
much  the  better  for  fwallovving,  every 
morning,  twelve  or  fixteen  corns  of 
white  pepper,  with  the  water-gruel 
which  they  took  for  breakfail. 

That    abftinence    from    wine    and 
flefli  meats,  and  a  diet  wholly  of  milk 

and 


414  Of  the   Cure   of 

and  vegetables,    dues  not  prevent  ner- 
vous ailments,    we  have  a  ftrong  proof 
in  the  poorer  fort  of  the  country  people 
of  North  Britain,     who,     though    they 
live  on  milk,  whey,   barley,   peafe  and 
oat-meal,    with  coleworts,  potatoes  and 
other  vegetables,    without   almofl   any 
animal  food  or   fermented  liquors,    are 
neverthelefs  remarkably  flibjecl  to  pains 
in  their  ftomach  and  bowels,  flatidence 
and  other  complaints  of  the  hypochon- 
driac or  hyfleric  kind  conned:ed  with  it. 
Nay,    however  much  a  milk  and  ve- 
getable  diet   may   be   of  uie    in   fome 
cafes,  to  leflen  or  remove  fuch  difbrders 
as  have  been  the   confequence  of  high 
living,  yet,  in  general,  it  is  certain  that 
a  diet  of  this  kind  is  more  apt  to  pro- 
duce flatulence  in  the  iirft  paiTages  and 
all  the    troublefome  iymptoms  depend- 
ing upon  it,  than  a  diet  conlifting  partly 
of  vegetable  and  partly  of  animal  food. 
Nay,    even   milk   itfeif,    which   holds  a 
kind  of  middle  place  between  vegetable 

and 


Nervous    Disorders.  415 

and  animal  fubftances,  has  been  ob- 
ferved  by  Hippocrates^  to  be  hurtful  to 
thofe  who  are  much  fubjed:  to  wind  in 
dieir  bowels*. 

Because  a  mixture  of  flefli-meats 
with  vegetable  fubftances  and  water, 
kept  in  a  heat  equal  to  that  of  the  hu- 
man body,  has  been  obferved  to  fer- 
ment fooner  and  much  more  brifklv 
than  thofe  vegetables  and  Avater  alone, 
fome  have  concluded  that  vegetable  and 
animal  aliments  together  will  produce 
more  flatulence  in  the  pr'nna  vm,  than 
vegetables  alone  :  But  it  ought  to  be 
confldered  that  the  digejiion  of  the  ali- 
ments is  very  different  from  that  cliange 
which  happens  to  them  in  a  chymical 
vefTel,  and  that  as  the  production  of 
flatulence  in  the  llomach  and  bowels,  is 
chiefly  owing  to  a  weaknefs  of  thefe 
parts,  a  difordered  ftate  of  their  nerves, 
or  f]iafmodic  contraclious  In  them  ;  a 
certain     proportion    of    animal    food, 

by 

*  Aphor.  feci.  v.  N"  64, 


41 6  Of  the   Cure    0/ 

by  invigorating  the  alimentary  canal, 
gratefully  affecting  its  nerves,  and  ren- 
dering it  lefs  liable  to  irregular  motions 
and  fpafms,  may  occallon  lefs  flatulence 
in  time  of  digeftion,  than  would  hap- 
pen from  vegetables  alone. 

Wh  en  nervous  complaints  are  owing 
to  an  arthritic  matter,  a  diet  of  milk 
and  vegetables,  if  the  ftomach  can  bear 
it,  may,  by  deflroying,  or  rather  not 
furnifliing  frefli  fupplies  of  that  matter, 
effefl  a  cure.  But  where  the  ftomach, 
from  its  weaknefs,  or  the  peculiar  dil^ 
polition  of  its  nerves,  cannot  bear  the 
greateft  part  of  vegetable  aliments,  fuch 
a  diet  would  be  extremely  improper  ; 
^vhilft  the  lighter  animal  food,  in  liich 
quantity  as  can  be  ealily  digelled,  will 
not  only  nourifli  and  ftrengthen  the 
body  more,  but  will  aft  as  an  anodyne 
in  preventing  or  allaying  many  com- 
plaints of  the  ftomach  and  bowels. 

Upon  tlie  whole,  no  conftant  rule 
can  be   oiven  as  to  the  kinds  of  food  ; 

for 


Nervous    Disorders.  417 

"for  while  a  diet  chiefly  of  fiedi  meats 
anlwers  well  with  Ibme,  others  live  beft 
on  milk  and  vegetables,  either  alone  or 
with  a  fmall  proportion  of  animal  food. 
In  like  manner,  with  regard  to  liquor, 
fome  cannot  do  without  wine,  while 
water  alone,  or  water  with  a  little 
brandy  or  rum,  agrees  bell:  with  others. 
Eveiy  valetudinary  perfon  ought,  there- 
fore, to  keep  by  thofe  kinds  of  meat 
and  drink,  which  he  finds  by  experi- 
ence to  be  moll  agreeable  and  lightefc 
to  his  llomach.  But  whatever  aliments 
may  be  ufed,  moderation  lliould  be 
conflantly  obferved,  as  people  are  ge- 
nerally lefs  hurt  by  the  quality,  than  by 
the  quantity  of  what  they  eat  and  drink. 
(<:)  When  the  llomach  and  intefdnes 
have  been  much  hurt  by  high  living, 
or  weakened  by  flatulent  food,  befldes 
a  proper  diet,  the  bark,  bitters,  chaly- 
beates  and  exercife*  will  be  often  ne- 
ceHary  for  giving  new  ftrengtii  to  the 
D  d  alimentary 

*  See  the  firft  intention  of  cure,  p.  •»,  3  j,  l^c.  above  (^)  {k) 


41 8  Of  the  Cure  of 

alimentaiy  canal.  Gentle  vomits  and 
ftomachic  purges  may  alfo  be  of  ufe  to 
cleanfe  the  firft  pafTages  and  promote 
the  natm-al  fecretions  there. 

5.  Indolent  obflruftions,  chiefly  of 
the  fcirrhous  kind,  in  fome  of  the  abdo- 
minal vifeera. 

Obstructions  of  the  indolent  kind 
have  their  feat  either  in  the  fecretory 
tubes  of  the  glands,  or  in  otlier  velTels 
fmaller  than  thofe  which  carry  red 
blood,  in  the  glandular  follicles,  or  in 
the  Ipaces  of  the  tela  cellulofa,  in  which 
there  is  depolited,  by  the  exhaling  arte- 
ries, a  fluid  which  foon  becomes  too 
thick  to  be  taken  up  by  the  abforbent 
veins,  and  is  daily  increafed  by  the 
addition  of  new  matter  of  the  fame 
kind.  In  fome  cafes,  the  vefFels  of  the 
obflrucled  part  are  fo  changed  from 
their  original  ftate,  as  to  feparate,  from 
the^blood,   fluids  which,    by  flagnating 

in 


Nervous    Disorders.  41^ 

in  the  follicles  or  cellular  Ipaces,  acquire 
a  cartilaginous  nature. 

It  is  generally  difficult  to  difcover 
when  nervous  *  or  hypochondriac  com- 
plaints are  owing  to  fcirrhous  or  other 
indolent  fwellings  in  the  coats  of  the 
ftomach  and  inteflines,  or  in  the  other 
abdominal  vifcera,  unlefs  when  the  tu* 
mours  can  be  felt,  which  is  often  not 
the  cafe.  But  when  I  meet  (efpecially 
in  women  after  the  mcnfcs  have  left 
the  m)  with  complaints  of  want  of  appe- 
tite, indigeftion,  vomiting,  flatulence, 
and  pains  in  the  belly  which  have  con- 
tinued long,  without  any  confiderable 
intervals  of  eafe,  and  inftead  of  yielding 
to  medicines,  become  worfe  ;  I  fufped; 
fome  fixed  obftrud:ion  in  the  flomach, 
inteftines  or  neighbouring  parts,  efpe- 
cially if  the  patient  has  a  quick  pulfe, 
without  any  confiderable  heat  or  thirft. 

When  hypochondriac  or  hyfteric  ail- 
ments are  owing  to  indolent  obftruc- 
tions,  we  mud  endeavour  to  refolve 
D  d   3  them 


420  0/'  the   Cure    of ^ 

them  by  degrees,  and,  in  the  mean  time^ 
palliate  the  moil:  troublefome  fymptoms 
occalioned  by  them. 

(a)  There  are  few  remedies  of  great- 
er ferviee   in  obftrucftions   of  the  indo- 
lent and  cold  kind  than  gentle  friction. 
It   not    only   promotes    the  circulation 
tlirough  the  fmall  vefTels,    but  tends  to 
attenuate,  and  increale  the   abforption 
of  the  matter  flagnating  in  the  follicles, 
or  extravafated  in  the  fpaces  of  the  cel- 
lular niembrane  of  the  obitrud:ed  part. 
I  have  had  inflances  of  incyfted  tumors 
cm'ed  by  long  continued  fricfion  alone. 
One  was  on   the   upper  eye-lid,    about 
tlie  lize  of  a  common  cherry  and  of  the 
fteatomatous  kind.      Another   was  fitu- 
ated  in  the  memhrana  adipofa   on  the  left 
lide  of  the  abdomen  ;    it  was  bigger  than 
one's  fifl:,   pretty  foft,   and  felt  like  the 
ileatomas  or  atheromas.     It  was  treated 
with   nothing   but  friction   of  the  part 
twice  a-day  with  oleum  cajupboratum.    For 
the  firfl  four  months   it   did    not   feem 

to 


Nervous    Disorders.         421 

to  yield,  but  foon  after  it  began  to  lef- 
ieii  and  went  off  very  fafl.  The  fniall 
tumour  on  tlie  eye-lid  was  rubbed  only 
■with  xhe.  faliva. 

(h)  Warm  fomentations  are  of  great 
ufe  ;  they  not  only  relax  the  veflels  and 
attenuate  the  obflructing  matter,  but 
by  their  warmth  promotes  the  circula- 
tion of  the  fluids  through  the  obftrucled 
part.  They  will,  often,  either  relblve 
ind-olent  fwellings,  or  bring  them  to  a 
iiippiu'ation,  when  internal  medicines, 
without  their  alliftance,  Avould  do  little. 
They  ought  to  be  applied  every  morn- 
ing and  evening  for  near  two  hours, 
but  fliould  not  be  fo  hot  as  to  be  in 
hazard  of  inflaming  the  fkin  or  making 
it  too  tender.  I  generally  ufe  flannel- 
cloths  wrung  out  of  hot  water  alone ; 
and  fometimes,  in  place  of  this,  a  hot 
clecoclion  of  wormwood  and  camomUe 
flowers  or  of  the  tops  of  hemlock,  add- 
ing to  it  a  httle  vinegar. 

It 


4^2  Of  the  Cure    of 

It  is  obvious,  that  when  obftruftions 
are  deep  feated  in  the  abdomen,  neither 
fri^lions  nor  fomentations  will  have 
fuch  remarkable  efFefts  as  when  they 
lie  in  the  tunica  cellulofa  immediately  be- 
low the  fkin. 

[c)  Gentle  vomits  and  purges*  fre- 
quently repeated,  are  particularly  ufeful 
in  beginning  indolent  obllruiftions  of 
the  abdominal  vifcera.  But  when  an 
obftru6lion  in  the  flomach  is  fo  far  con- 
firmed as  to  be  irrefolveable,  vomits, 
elpecially  of  the  ftronger  land,  may 
prove  hurtful  by  irritating  the  infard:ed 
part,  or  even  burfling  fbme  of  its  vef- 
ielsf*  And  here  it  may  be  remarked, 
that  many  of  thofe  hot  and  acrid  medi- 
cines commonly  prefcribed  in  nervous 
diibrders,  muft  be  likewiie  improper  in 
this    cafe,     fince    by   their   flimulating 

quality, 

*  I  look  upon  the  good  efFefts  of  fca-watcr  in  glandular 
fwellings  to  be  chiefly  owing  to  its  purging  quality.  When 
it  does  not  prove  laxative,  but  makes  the  patient  thirfty  an^ 
hot,  no  good   is  to  be  expeded  from  it. 

•{•  oee  above,  p.  206. 


Nervous    Disorders,         423 

quality,  they  will  be  more  apt  to  inflaine 
and  exalperate,  than  to  lefTen  or  refolve 
any  fcirrhous  obftrucflion. 

(d)  With  regard  to  thofe  internal 
medicines  Commonly  called  deobflruent, 
they  can  have  little  or  no  effect,  when 
the  obftrudling  matter  is  accumulated 
in  the  fpaces  of  the  tela  celluiofa,  and 
are,  therefore,  chiefly  ufeful  in  thofe 
obftrud:ions  whofe  feat  is  in  the  follicles 
of  the  glands,  or  in  the  fmall  veiTels 
themfelves. 

The  internal  deobflruent  medicines 
which  I  have  ufed  with  mofl  advantage, 
are  the  tartanis  fohihilisy  fal  pol'jchrefttis^ 
mercury  and  foap. 

I  GIVE  the  foluble  tartar  from  drach. 
i.  fs.  to  drach.  iii.  or  half  an  ounce,  and 
the  polychreft  fait  from  fcrup.  ii.  to 
drach.  i.  fs,  diflblved  in  an  Englifli  pint 
of  water,  which  is  to  be  drunk,  at  three 
or  four  draughts,  every  morning  for 
two  months  or  longer. 

I 


424  Of  the    Cure   of 

I  COMMONLY  prefer! be  mercury  as  a 
deobflrucnt,  either  in  the  form  of  the 
pilulae  merciiriales  laxantes,  or  of  the  folu- 
tion  of  the  corrofive  fiiblimate.  To 
prevent  thefe  medicines  from  running 
too  much  to  the  mouth,  I  give  the  pills 
only  once  in  two  or  three  days,  and 
when  the  folution  is  ufed,  I  order  a 
gentle  purgative  once  in  four  or  five 
days. 

In  glandular  fwelhngs  of  the  neck, 
of  the  flrumous  rather  than  the  true 
fcirrhous  kind,  I  have  \^qqi\  nothing 
lucceed  £0  well  as  a  courie  of  the  bark, 
in  fubilance  or  decoc^fion,  for  leveral 
months  ;  giving  at  the  fame  time,  eveiy 
fourth  or  fifth  night,  fuch  a  dofe  of 
calomel  and  rhubarb,  or  of  the  pihiU 
merciiriales  laxantes,  as  may  purge  the 
patient  twice  or  thrice  next  morning. 
Nor  have  I  found  thefe  medicines  lefs 
efficacious,  when  together  with  indo- 
lent   Iwellings    and   a   fcrofulous  habit, 

there 


Nervous   Disorders.  425 

there  was  a  confiderable    degree  of  fe- 
ver ;  as  in  the  following  cafe. 

A  CHILD  aged  feven,  of  a  lax  and 
fcrofulous  habit,  in  March,  began  to  be 
affed:ed  with  hard  fwellings  on  her  left 
wrifl  and  one  of  her  legs,  and  with  a 
foft  edematous  fwelling  of  her  feet 
and  hands  ;  at  the  fame  time,  her 
tongne  was  foul,  her  pulfe  quick,  and 
her  fldn  hotter  than  natural.  In  June 
following,  when  I  was  flrll  called,  all 
thefe  fymptoms  were  increafed,  flie  was 
much  emaciated,  and  her  pulfe  beat  a- 
bove  130  times  in  a  minute.  As  file 
had  ufed  many  other  remedies  without 
advantage,  after  a  vomit  and  a  gentle 
purge,  I  prefcribed  a  decoction  of  the 
bark,  with  Ibme  fpirit  of  vitriol,  to  be 
taken,  four  times  a-day,  in  the  quanti- 
ty of  two  or  three  table-ipoonfuls  ;  and 
once  in  five  or  fix  days  a  dofe  of  rhu- 
barb with  calomel.  In  lefs  than  four 
weeks  after  flae  began  this  courfe,   her 

pulfe 


426  Of  t1?e  Cure    of 

pulfe  became  flower,  her  fkin  cooler, 
and  her  appetite  better,  and  at  the  end 
of  two  months  flie  was  almoft  quite  free 
of  all  her  complaints. 

Wh  En  glandular  fwellings  lie  immedi- 
ately under  the  fkin,  the  mercurial  oint- 
ment rubbed  into  the  part,  or  a  ftrong 
mercvu'lal  plafter  applied  to  it,  has  fome- 
times  made  a  cure. — A  Gentleman,  a- 
ged  21,  had  one  of  the  conglobate 
glands  on  the  left  fide  of  his  neck  fwel- 
led  from  cold.  This  fwelling,  which 
was  without  j>ain,  increafed  gradually, 
fo  that  at  the  end  of  three  months,  it 
had  acquired  the  fize  of  a  hen's  G^g,  cut 
longitudinally  through  the  middle.  Af- 
ter he  had  ufed,  for  fix  weeks,  mercu- 
rial purges,  fomentations,  and  the  com- 
mon difcutient  plaflcrs  to  no  purpofe, 
the  emplajlrum  fiiercin  iak  cum  triplice  mer- 
curio  was  applied  to  the  part.  In  two 
or  three  days  after,  he  began  to  falivate, 
and  for  a  week  continued  to  fmt  at  the 
rate  ^\  ^.w  Englifh  ^'inK  a-c«ay.    After  this, 

the 


Nervous   Disorders.         427 

the  {pitting  decreafed  gradually,  and 
left  the  tumour  reduced  to  one-third  of 
the  fize  it  had  before.  The  warm  wea- 
ther of  fummer,  which  foon  followed, 
carried  off  what  the  mercurial  plafter 
had  left  unrefolved. 

Among  the  deobflruent  medicines 
Spanijh  foap  deferves  a  principal  place. 
Obftinate  glandular  fwelHngs  havelbme- 
times  yielded  to  it  after  mercury  had 
been  tried  in  vain,  as  will  appear  from 
one  of  the  following  cafes.  It  fhould 
be  given,  daily,  from  half  an  ounce  to 
an  ounce  or  more,  if  the  patient's  flo- 
mach  can  bear  £0  much. 

I.  A.  M.  UPWARDS  of  20,  applied  to 
me  in  April  1752  for  a  Avelling  in  the 
epigaflric  region,  a  little  below  the 
cartildgo  enfiformis.  This  tumour  was 
near  as  large  as  one's  hft,  and  felt  hard, 
but  without  pain :  It  was  evidently  un del" 
the  mufcles  and  peritonmm,  and  as  it 
fliifted  its  place  upon  the  patient's  turn- 
ing from  one  fide  to  the  other,   I  con- 

jeftured 


428  Of  the  C  u  R  E    0/ 

Je£liired  its  feat  to  be  in  the  oynentum,  e- 
ipecially  as  it  was  attended  with  no  diC- 
order  in  the  ftomach  or  bowels. 

I  ADVISED  him  to  let  warm  water 
fall  from  a  confiderable  height  upon  the 
fwelling  ;  to  cover  it,  all  day,  with  a 
piece  of  flannel,  to  nfe  the  pikiU  feilitic^, 
and  drink  with  them,  at  leafl,  an  En^ 
glijh  quart  of  cow-whey  daily.  Some- 
time after,  he  got  pills  of  gum,  ammon. 
galban.  and  aloesy  but  without  any  bene- 
fit ;  for  the  tumour  became  larger,  and 
^vhen  he  fat  to  write,  which  his  bufinefs 
often  obliged  him  to  do,  he  fuffered 
much  uneafinefs  from  that  pofture.  On 
this  account,  I  fent  him  to  the  country 
in  the  end  of  J«/)',  and  advifed  him  to 
Iwallow,  e\  ery  day,  from  half  an  ounce 
to  a  Avhole  ounce  of  Spaiiijh  foap,  and 
continue  the  whey.  Towards  the  end 
of  October  he  returned  to  town  with  the 
tumour  fenfibly  diminiflied,  and  by  go- 
iii'^  on  with  the  fbap  'till  about  tlie  hc- 
ginnjng.of  j<:w///2;v,  it  was  fcarcely  to  be 

felt. 


Nervous   Disorders.  429 

felt.  He  then  left  off  all  medicine,  and 
has  beenever  fince  in  good  health,  with- 
out any  fenfible  fwelling  or  hardnefs  a- 
bout  the  part  firft  affected. 

2.  A  Gentleman  aged  33,  after  ha- 
ving been   fubjet^t,    for  fome  years,    to 
rheumatic    pains,    obferved,    in    March 
I J 52,    an  indolent   glandular  fwelling, 
neither  foft,  nor  yet  of  the  hardeft  kind, 
on  the  right  fide  of  his  neck,  immedi- 
ately above   the   clavicle.      In  the  Au- 
tumn  following,    having  expofed  him- 
felf  to  cold  and  wet,  on  a  journey,  this 
fwelling  became,   foon  after,  conlider- 
ably  larger.      He  then  lofl  fome  blood, 
which  was  very  lizy  ;    and   in  November 
he  ufed  fome  warm  difcutient  fomenta- 
tions and  the  mercurial   laxative   pills. 
Theie  laft,  which  he  took,    once  in  two 
days,  for  about  three  weeks,  made  him 
fpit  gently,    but  did   not  cUminlfh  the 
tumour.      About   a   fortnight   after  he 
had  difcontinued  the  pills,   he  began  to 
take  three  drachms  of  foap  daily,  and 

foon 


4^0  Of  the  Cure  of 

foon  doubled  that  quantity.  Ill  three 
weeks,  the  fwelhng  being  fenfibly  di- 
minifhed,  he  was  encouraged  to  con- 
tinue this  medicine  ;  but,  about  the 
middle  of  faniiar),  having  catched  cold, 
he  was  feized  with  a  diarrhcca^  and  obli- 
ged to  omit  the  Ibap  for  above  a  fort- 
night. In  Fehmar-jy  foon  after  the  diar- 
rhooa  left  him,  he  began  to  be  troubled 
with  a  violent  itching  over  his  whole 
fkin,  efpecially  when  in  bed,  and  tliis 
fymptom  increafing,  towards  the  end 
of  this  month,  he  was  advifed  once 
more  to  difcontinue  the  foap.  At  this 
time  the  tumour  was  reduced,  at  leall:, 
one  half  fince  the  middle  of  December* 

On  account  of  the  increafe  of  this 
itching  and  other  complaints,  he  never 
returned  to  the  foap  ;  but  after  trying 
a  variety  of  other  medicines,  and  the 
air  of  different  climates,  in  vain,  he  died 
in  Aiiguft  1754. 

Since  people  affected  with  the  ftone, 
often   take  foap  to  a  greater  quantity 

than 


Nervous   Disorders.         431 

than  this  patient  did,  without  any  com- 
plaint of  itching,  I  think  this  fymptom 
cannot  be  juflly  afcribed  to  that  medi- 
cine ;  efpecially  as  the  patient  had  no- 
thing of  it  for  the  firil:  five  weeks  he 
ufed  the  foap,  and  as  it  came  on  after 
a  diarrhcoa  occafioned  by  cold.  Nei- 
ther can  I  think  the  fwelling  in  his  neck 
was  critical,  and  that  the  itching  and  o- 
ther  bad  fymptoms  were  owing  to  the 
matter  in  it  being  dilFolved  by  the  foap 
and  carried  into  the  blood  ;  becaufe,  in 
March  1752,  when  this  tumour  began, 
the  patient  had  no  particular  com- 
plaints, and  in  November,  when  it  was 
become  fo  large  as  to  be  broader,  though 
not  fo  thick  as  one's  lift,  his  health  was 
bad  and  his  blood  fizy. 

Alt  ho'  I  have  prefcribed  foap  in  Ic- 
veral  other  cafes  without  the  lame  fnc- 
cefs,  yet  as  many  glandular  fwellings 
are  altogther  incurable,  foap,  if  it  fliould 
be  found  to  anfwer  in  two  cafes  out  of 

ten. 


'432  Of  the   Cure    of 

ten,    ought  to   be  efleemed  a  valuable 
medicine. 

If  it  fliall  be  objected  to  the  virtues 
of  Ibap  as  a  relblvent,  that  fcirrhous 
tumours,  >vhen  cut  out  of  the  body,  are 
not  difTolved  by  being  immerfed  in  a 
fohition  of  it  in  water ;  I  anfwer,  that 
foap,  in  diflblving  urinary  concretions, 
acts  hke  other  chymical  menfiriia;  but 
in  refolving  obllrud:ed  glands,  it  muft 
be  alliiled  by  the  motion  communicated 
to  the  fluids  by  the  heart  and  arteries, 
which  it  may  probably  flimulate  into 
ftronger  contractions,  and  thus,  as  well 
as  by  its  refolving  quality,  contribute 
to  the  cure.  But  further,  I  do  not  i- 
magine  that  Ibap  will  ever  dillblve  a 
lYue  fchirnu  either  in  the  body  or  out  of 
it ;  I  only  exped:  that  it  will  fometimes 
remove  glandular  obftructions  that  are 
lefs  confirmed  and  of  a  fofter  kind. 

Qu ICKSILVER  and  its  preparations, 
altho*  among  the  moil  powerful  deob- 
flruents,    if  they  fail  of  refolving  hard 

fwellines. 


Nervous   Disorders.         433 

fwellings,  are  apt  to  irritate  and  inflame 
them.  This  efFedl  has  been  generally 
afcribed  to  the  weight  of  the  mercu- 
rial medicines,  but  without  Hifficient 
reafon  ;  for  when  ten  grains  of  calomel 
have  raifed  and  kept  up  a  falivation, 
in  fome  perfons,  for  two  or  three  weeks 
Together,  and  when  a  flight  Ipitting  has 
been  occafioned  by  a  grain  and  a  half 
of  corrofive  fublimate,  diiTolved  in  fpi- 
rits  and  taken  in  four  days,  it  is  plain 
that  the  addition  of  weight  to  the  mafs 
of  blood,  in  thefe  cafes,  muft  have  been 
fo  frnall,  that  no  fenfible  change  in  the 
circulation  could  have  been  produceti 
by  it. 

Soap  has  not  only  this  advantage  over 
mercury,  that  it  may  be  ufcd  in  mod 
cafes,  without  irritating  and  inflaming, 
and   confequcntly  without  any  hazard 

of  changing  a  fcirrhous  fwelling  into  a 
carcinomatous  one,  but  it  does  not  melt 
down  the  fluids  and  reduce  the  flrength 
like  mercurials. 

E  e  Soap 


434  ^f  ^^■'^  Cure   of 

Soap  feems  to  a61;  cliiefly  by  its  de- 
tergent quality,  and  perhaps,  in  fomc 
cafes,  as  a  true  difTolvent.  Every  one 
knows  the  property  of  a  folution  of  foap 
for  cleaning  the  fkin  :  And  if  a  patient 
fwallows  an  ounce  of  foap  daily,  his 
blood  will  in  time  become  fo  faponace- 
ous,  that  whilft  it  cuxulates  through  the 
half  obftrucl:ed  vefTels  of  a  Rvelled  gland, 
it  may  infenfibly  clear  away  and  carry 
along  with  it,  that  vifcid  matter,  which, 
by  adhering  to  the  infide  of  theie  vef- 
fels,  in  a  great  mealure  filled  up  their 
cavity. 

Of  late,  the  extract  of  the  ciatta  has 
been  much  extolled  as  a  deobftruent  * ; 
but  aitho*  I  have  tried  it,  as  well  as  the 
powder  of  hemlock,  in  feveral  hard 
fwellings,  fbme  of  which  were  external 
and  others  lituated  ^vithin  the  abdomen, 
I  have  only  £Gen  it  do  fervice  in  tw^o 
cafes,  one  of  whicli  was  a  large  fcirrhous 
fwelling  in  the  left  breaft,  and  the  other 
a  hardened  gland  in   the  neck.      The 

latter 

*  See  Dr  Storck't  three  treatlfes  on  the  virtues  of  the  cicuta. 


Nervous   Di-sorders.  435 

latter  was  removed  by  the  extradl  of  the 
ciciua  in  eight  months  ;  and  the  former, 
by  the  continued  ufe,  either  of  this  me- 
dicine, or  of  the  powder  of  hemlock, 
has  not  only  been  kept  from  increafing 
for  thefe  four  years  paft,  but  is  now  re- 
duced to  one  third  of  the  bulk  it  once 
had. 

[e)  In  attempting  the  cure  of  ob- 
ftruclions  in  the  vifiera,  belides  fome  of 
the  remedies  above  mentioned,  it  will 
be  proper  to  order  a  diet  confifting 
of  the  leall  flatulent  vegetables,  weak 
broths  and  the  lighter  meats.  Ripe 
fruits,  if  they  do  not  offend  the  flomach 
and  bowels  by  their  flatulence,  may  be 
ufefiil  on  account  of  their  faponaceous 
or  refolving  quality  ;  as  alio,  goat  or 
cow-whey,  efpecially  in  the  beginning 
of  Summer,  when  it  is  mofl  impreg- 
nated with  the  virtue  of  the  grafs  and 
other  herbs.  The  patient's  drink  ought 
to  be  rather  tepid  than  cold,  and  the 
beft  is  either  water  alone,  <jr  mixed  with 
E  e   2  a 


43^  Gf  the  Cure  of 

a  little  Rhenifli,   or  fome   other   light 
white-wine. 

(/)  Exercise,  elpecially  richng,  is 
exceeding  iifeful,  not  only  to  prevent, 
but  to  remove  beginning  obflriiftions. 
And  here  it  may  be  proper  to  obferve, 
that  as  thofe  Avho  lead  a  fedentary  life, 
eipeciaily  the  ftudious,  (who  in  reading 
and  writing  lit  fo  much  with  their  body 
bent  forward,)  ai'e  moft  fubjeft  to  hypo- 
chondriac diforders  and  obftrudlions  ; 
it  would  be  of  great  confequence  for 
fuch,  to  allot  fome  part  of  the  day  for 
exercife,  or  if  that  cannot  be  done,  at 
leafl,  to  read  or  write  moflly  Handing  ; 
in  which  poflure  the  abdominal  vifcera 
are  much  lefs  comprelFed  than  in  the 
other. 

[g)  In  coniiderable  obftriKftions  of 
the  vificra,  if  the  patient  be  of  a  full 
habit,  the  cure  ought  to  begin  with 
bleeding,  which  by  emptying  the  vefTels, 
may  not  only  tend  to  leflen  the  obflruc- 
tion,  but  alfiil  the  at^ion  of  the  deob- 

llruent  medicines. 

(/;)  Whilst 


Nervous   Disorders.  437 

(/;)  Whilst  by  the  ufe  of  fome  of 
the  above  remedies,  we  aim  at  a  radi- 
cal cure,  we  muft  not  ncgleft  to  palliate 
the  fymptoms  which  fo  often  attend 
thefe  obftrud:ions.  This  is  to  be  done, 
chiefly,  by  opiates,  and  by  the  lefs 
heating  carminatives  and  nervovis  medi- 
cines.  But  of  this  more  hereafter. 

6.  Violent  affe(5lions  of  the  mind. 

When  nervous  or  hyfleric  diforders 
arife  from  this  caufe,  the  cure  confilts, 

(a)  In  avoiding  all  difagreeable  and 
fliocking  fights,  and  every  occafion  that 
may  be  apt  to  excite  violent  pallions,  or 
commotions  of  the  nervous  lyftem. 

(Z')  In  ftrengthening  the  nerves,  fo 
that  the  mind  may  be  lefs  apt  to  be 
ftrongly  affecfted  either  by  impreilions 
from  external  objed:s,  or  by  fuch  ideas 
as  arife  purely  from  reflexion  ;  the 
belt  medicines  for  this  purpofe  are  the 
bark,  bitters,  fteel,  the  cold  bath,  and 
exercife  with  proper  aliment  ;  concern- 


438  Of  the  Cure   of 

ing  all  which,  fee  the  firft  intention  of 
cure*. 

{c)  Nervous  diforders  occalioned 
by  ftrong  impredions  on  the  mind,  are 
often  prevented,  leiTened  or  cured  by 
exciting  other  fenfations  or  pallions  of 
a  fuperior  force.  Of  this  we  had  a  re- 
markable inflance  in  the  cure  perform- 
ed by  Boerhaave,  on  the  boys  and  girls  in 
the  poor's-houfe  at  Haerk?n'\. — Epileptic 
fits  have  been  cured  by  whipping  if. — 
Convulfions  from  the  toothach  are  re- 
moved by  blifters,  —  vomiting  has  been 
ftopt  by  putting  the  hands  fuddenly  in 
cold  water  ;  and  a  common  hiccup  is 
inftantly  cured,  by  whatever  excites 
fm-prize,  or  ftrongly  engages  the  atten- 
tion. 

(d)  Ner- 

*  Pag.  344,  iffc.  above, 
t  See  above,  p.  217. 

X  Kaau  Boerhaave,  impet.  faciens  Hippocrat.  diet.  §  406. 

In  t\\&HiJloire  de  I'  Jcademie  Royale  d^s  Sciences  1 75 2,  there 
is  an  account  of  a  girl,  who  was  cured  of  epileptic  fits 
arifing  from  melancholy,  by  firing  a  gun  at  her  bedfide, 
juft  as  fhe  was  coining  out  of  one  of  the  paroxyfms. 


Nervous    Disorders.  439 

(i)  Nervous  or  hyfleric  afFedlions 
from  a  concealed  or  difappointed  paf- 
fion  are  better  cured  by  the  fruition  of 
the  obje(fl*  ;  or  if  this  cannot  be  ob- 
tained, by  proper  diet,  amufements  and 
by  opiates,  efpecially  at  bed-time,  for 
compofing  the  mind  and  procuring 
fleep,  than  by  the  whole  clafs  of  nervous 
medicines. 

Having  thus  far  treated  of  the  cure 
of  the  feveral  caules  of  nervous,  hypo- 
chondriac and  hyfleric  diforders,  I  fliall 
conclude  thefe  obfervations  with  men- 
tioning particularly,  the  remedies  mofl: 
proper  for  removing  or  palliating  fome 
of  their  mofl  troublefome  fymptoms. 

CHAP. 

*  A  remarkable  inftance  of  this,  we  have  in  a  young 
man,  who,  from  difappointment  in  marriage,  was  fuddenly 
feized  with  a  catalepjis,  fo  that  he  remained  for  a  whole 
day  in  his  chair,  in  the  fame  pofture,  without  the  leall 
motion  or  feeming  attention  to  any  thing  about  him  .  Nay, 
his  whole  body  became  as  flifF  as  if  he  had  been  frozen. 
However,  no  fooner  was  he  told  with  a  loud  voice,  that 
he  was  to  have  his  beloved  objeft,  than  waking  as  out  of 
a  deep  fleep,  he  fprung  from  his  feat,  and  recovered  at 
once.     S^tTulpn  obfervationes  tnediae,  lib.  l.  cb/crv.  2  3. 


[  44c>  i 


CHAP.     VIII. 

Of  the  Cure  of  fome  of  the  moft  remarkable 
Nervous,  Hypochondriac,  ©r Hy- 
steric Symptoms, 

I.  /^^Onvulsive    motions  or  fixed 
^^   Ipafins  of  the  mufcles. 

These  are  either  general,  affecting 
ahnofl  the  whole  body,  or  confined 
to  one  or  a  few  mufcles  or  organs. 
As  they  often  arife  from  very  different 
caufes,  their  radical  or  prophylactic 
cure  muft  confifl  in  the  removal  or  pre- 
vention of  thofe  caufes  *.      But  as  the 

immediate 

*  In  fo  far  as  they  may  proceed  from  fome  peccant  mat- 
ter in  the  blood,  from  phlegm,  acrid  humours,  worms  or 
wind  in  the  ftomach  and  inteftines,  from  a  great  lofs  of 
blood,  an  obftruftion  of  the  tnen/es,  or  afFeftions  of  the 
mind,  their  radical  cure  is  to  be  found  in  the  preceding, 
chapter. 


Of  the  Cure,  &€.  441 

immediate  caufe  is,  in  every  cafe,  the 
fame,  viz.  fomethiiig  that  irritates  the 
brain  or  nerves,  or  affe^ls  them  with  a 
difagreeable  fenfation,  their  palliative  or 
temporary  cure  will  be  beft  efFefted  by, 

(i)  Such  medicines,  as  by  their  ftu- 
pifying  or  narcotic  quality  leflen  the 
fenfibility  of  the  brain  and  nervous  fy- 
flem  *. 

In  continued  ipafms,  as  well  as  alter- 
nate convullive  contraftions  of  the  flo- 
mach  and  inteflines,    nothing  gives   fo 
flidden  or  fo   fenfible  relief  as  opiates  ; 
which  are  often  not  lefs  efficacious  when 
the   other  mufcles  are  fpafmodically  af- 
fected.     In  that  ipecies   of  the   tetanus 
called  opijihotonuSf   as  well  as  that  which 
is  confined  to   the   lower  jaw,   opium  is 
the  principal  remedy  f ;    and  as  the   /;y- 
drophobia  is   only  a  violent  convullion  of 
the  gullet  and  (lomach,  <6'c,  ariiing  from 
the    difagreeable    fenfation    excited   by 

any 

*   See  above,  p.  358,  Cffr. 

•j-  See  Medical  Inquiries  and  Obfervations,  vol.  i. 


442  Of  the  Cure  of 

any  liquids  touching  the  fauces^  or  by 
the  effort  the  patient  makes  to  fwallow 
them,  opiitm  in  large  dofes,  efpecially  if 
given  by  way  of  a  clyfter,  and  repeated 
at  proper  intervals,  would  probably  be 
found,  at  leaft,  the  beft  palliative*. 

Convulfive  fits  of  the  (lighter  kind, 
which  returned  daily  at  a  certain  time, 
have  been  prevented   by  giving  opium 

an 

•  Altho'  this  reafoning  fcems  to  be  much  confirmed  by 
the  cure  of  Dr  Nugem'i  patient,  (See  his  efTay  on  the  fydro- 
fhobia)  yet,  in  this  cafe,  as  mufk  and  other  remedies  were 
ofed  as  well  as  opiates,  it  may  be  doubted  whether  the  for- 
mer had  not  fome  confiderable  fhare  in  the  cure.  It  were 
to  be  v/ifhed,  therefore,  that  fuch  as  (hall  have  opportuni- 
ties, would  make  a  fair  trial  of  opium  alone  in  the  hydro- 
pbohia . 

About  the  20th  of  Auguft  1761,  a  farmer's  fervant  near 
J^orbam  in  NortbumherlanJ,  three  weeks  after  having  been 
bit  by  a  mad  dog,  became  delirious,  had  violent  fpafms,  a 
dread  of  water,  and  other  fymptoms  common  in  fuch  cafes. 
He  was  treated  by  Mr  Davj/on  Surgeon  in  CcUjireamy  ac- 
cording to  Dr  Nugcvji's  method,  and  recovered  fo  quickly 
as  to  be  able  to  be  employed  iu  reaping  the  corn  before 
the  middle  of  September. 

He  was  blooded,  got  every  three  hours  mulk  and  cin- 
nabar with  honey  in  a' bolus,  and  a  pill  of  cplum.  A  plaf- 
ter  cT  galbanum  with  half  an  ounce  of  opium  was  applied  to 
the  throat  and  neck. 


Nervous   Symptoms.  443 

an.  hour  or  more  before  that  time.  But 
in  an  epileptic  patient,  who  was  feized 
every  day  about  two  in  the  morning, 
the  fits  were  neither  prevented  nor  fen- 
fibly  lefTcned  by  forty  or  fifty  drops  of 
laudanum^  which  I  ordered  him  to  take, 
for  feveral  nights,  about  two  hours  be- 
fore the  return  of  the  fit. 

It  is  to  be  obferved,  that  in  curing 
or  palliating  violent  fpafms  or  convulfive 
motions,  opiates  muft  be  given  in  lar- 
ger dofes  than  ufual,  and  repeated  more 
frequently  ;  for  here,  as  in  cafes  of  a- 
cute  pain,  the  patients  bear  thefe  me- 
dicines much  better  than  in  health. 

In  fome  cafes,  elpecially  where  the 
vellels  are  full,  bleeding  and  other 
evacuations  ought  to  precede  the  free 
ufe  of  opium. 

(2.)  Such  medicines  as,  though  not 
endued  with  a  narcotic  quality,  are 
found  by  experience  to  be  ufeful  in 
Ipafms  and  alternate  convulfions  of  the 
mufcles ;    and  feem   to   produce    their 

good 


444  V  ^^^^  Cv RE  of 

good  efFefts,  by  th^t  Jiimulus  which  they 
communicate  to  the  nerves,  eipecially 
of  the  ftomach  and  inteftines.  Of 
this  kind  are  camphire,  caftor,  mu(k,  afa 
fa:tida,  the  fpiritiu  £thereiUf  fpirit  of  hartf- 
horn,  6'^.* 

A  DRAM  of  brandy,  by  ftimulating 
the  nerves  of  the  ftomach,  will  almoft 
inftantly  lelTen  a  tremor  of  the  hands^ 
and  in  fome  cafes  make  the  pulfe  flow- 
er :  And,  do  not  other  ftimulating  me- 
dicines, in  fbme  fuch  way,  remove  a  pal- 
pitation of  the  heart,  and  other  convuL 
five  motions,  as  well  as  fixed  fpalius  of 
the  mufcles  ?  Thefe  efFefts  may  happen 
equally,  whether  thofe  medicines  excite, 
in  the  nerves,  an  agreeable,  or  an  un- 
pleafant  or  painful  feniation.  Thus  a 
glafs  of  warm  wine  with  cinnamon  and 
nutmeg,  and  a  mixture  with  aqua  fulegii 
or  ruUy  tincture  of  cafior  and  afa  footiday 
will  often  have  fimilar  effects  in  flatulent 
i^nd  fpalinodic  affedlions  of  the  alimen- 
tary 

*  See  above,  p,  364, 


Nervous    Symptoms.  445 

tary  canal ;  and  we  fliall  fee,  below, 
that  blifters  and  other  painful  applica- 
tions are  fometimes  ufeful  in  removing 
fpafms  and  convulfive  motions. 

(3.)  Such  remedies  as  relax,  and,  at 
the  fame  time,  affeft  with  an  agreeable 
fenlation  the  mulcular  fibres  and  nerves, 
rendering  them,  thereby,  lefs  liable  to 
fiifFer  from  iiTitation  ;  viz.  the  warm 
bath,  femicupiufHy  and  pediluvium,  emolli- 
ent clyflers  and  warm  fomentations  ap- 
plied to  the  feet  and  legs,  or  other  parts 
of  the  body  *.  To  this  clals  alfo,  we 
may,  perhaps,  refer  venaefeftion,  which, 
by  emptying  the  vellels,  produces  a  ge- 
neral relaxation  ;  but  whatever  be  in 
this,  we  know  from  certain  experience 
that  it  has  often  very  flidden  and  re- 
markable effects  in  lellening  or  remo- 
ving Ipafms  and  convulfive  motions. 

Olam  Borichms  mentions  a  young  wo- 
man liable  to  a  periodic  hiccup,  which 
returned  regularly  about  tlie  fame  time 

once 

*  5ee  above,  p.  364. 


446  Of  the   CvKE  of 

once  a-year,  who,  after  other  remedies 
had  proved  ineffectual,  was  always  cured 
by  bleeding  largely  at  the  arm.  It  was 
obfervable,  that  this  hiccup  was  not  lef^ 
fened  by  the  menfes  flowing  plentifully 
during  the  time  the  patient  was  affed:ed 


with  it  *, 


The  warm  bath  affeCls  the  nerves 
with  an  agreeable  fenfation,  removes 
fpafms  in  the  fmall  veiFels,  promotes  an 
equable  circulation,  gently  expands  the 
fluids,  and  confequently  fills  the  whole 
vefFels  of  the  body.  But  in  whatever  man- 
ner the  warm  bath  and  fomentations  may 
aft,  their  power  in  givhig,  often,  imme- 
diate relief  from  violent  pain,  and  pre- 
venting or  allaying  fpafms  and  conviil- 
five  motions,  has  been  fufficiently  afcer- 
tained  by  experience.  However,  as  the 
ufe  of  the  warm  pedilitviiim  and  fomenta- 
tions applied  to  the  feet  and  legs  in  fe- 
vers  attended  with   a  delirium^    tremors 

and 

*  Ada  Hofniesif.a,  167 1,  and   1672.    §  Ixxiii. 


Nervous   Symptoms. 


447 


and  convulfions  *,  may  not  be  fo  gene- 
rally known,  I  ftiall  give  fome  inftances 
of  their  good  efFe^ls. 

(a)  Mrs aged  23,  on  Saturday 

the  tliird  day  after  being  delivered  of 
her  firft  child,  was  feized  with  a  cold- 
nefs  and  fliuddering,  flicceeded  by  a 
hot  fit  and  fweating.  Next  day  fhe  was 
better,  but  after  a  reftlefs  night  between 
Sunday  and  Monday,  her  fkin  felt  hot  and 
dry,  and  her  pulfe  was  quicker.  Her  u- 
rine  which,  before,  had  been  of  a  na- 
tural colour,  was  now  limpid  and  in  too 
great  quantity.  On  Tttejday  her  pulfe 
was  much  quicker  than  ever,  viz,  at  1 3  6 
flrokes  in  a  minute,  but  not  full :  She 
became  apprehenhve  of  dying,  and, 
after  fome  fits  of  vnieaiy  breathing,  fell 
into  a  kind  of  hylteric  fainting,   wliich 

did 

*  The  fuccefi  which  fomenting  the  legs  liad  in  a  cafe  of 
this  kind,  was  communicated  to  me  about  feven  years  fincc 
by  my  learned  and  ingenious  friend  Dr  John  Prhigle  physi- 
cian to  her  Majefty.  The  Doaor  mixed  f  part  of  vine- 
gar  with  the  water  ;  whereas  I  have  always  ufed  hot  wa- 
ter alone. 


44^  Of  the  Cure   of 

did  not  affed:  the  piilfe,  altho'  hef 
breathing  was  fcarce  perceptible.  Du- 
ring this  fit,  which  lafted  about  an  hour- 
and  a  quarter,  flie  fighed  and  moaned 
frequently.  About  mid-night,  flie  was 
very  reftlefs,  her  arms  and  head  were 
convulfed,  and  ilie  became  quite  deliri- 
ous. This  day  a  rafli  which  had  come 
out  on  Monday,  had  in  a  great  mealure 
difappeared.  All  this  time  the  lochia 
continvied,  though  in  a  fmaller  quanti- 
ty than  ufual.  Hitherto  diluents,  dia- 
phoretics, clyfters,  fmall  dofes  of  cam- 
phire,  laudanum,  bliflers  to  the  legs  and 
iinapifms  to  the  foles  had  had  no  effect. 
On  Wednefdaj,  the  dclirmm  increafed :  at 
noon  two  leeches  were  applied  to  each 
temple,  and  foon  after,  becoming  pret- 
ty diltin(fl,  file  faid  flic  found  herfelf 
much  eafier  :  But,  about  eight  in  the 
evening,  flie  grew  more  delirious  than 
ever,  crying  out  in  a  diflraded  manner, 
and  was  fo  ftrongly  convulfed,  that  with 
dllliculty  file  could  be  kept  in  her  bed 

by 


Nervous    Symptoms.         449 

by  two  flrong  perfons  employed  for 
that  purpofe.  At  this  time,  I  ordered 
large  pieces  of  flannel  wrung  out  of  hot 
water  to  be  wrapped  round  her  feet  and 
legs.  This  application,  which  was  re- 
newed once  in  fifteen  or  twenty  mi- 
nutes, and  continued  near  three  hours, 
had  a  mofi:  happy  effecft ;  for  her  deliri- 
Jim,  and  flruggling  to  get  up,  ibon  be- 
gan to  abate  ;  flie  fell  afleep  at  eleven, 
and  did  not  awake  till  two  in  the  morn- 
ing, when  (he  was  quite  calm  and  fen- 
fible  ;  after  this  fhe  fleept  near  three 
hours  more,  and  was  pretty  eafy  and 
clear  in  her  head  all  Tim? f day,  till  the 
evening,  when  the  delirium  returned  in 
a  lefs  degree.  But  this  fymptom  being 
foon  removed  by  frefli  fomentations,  flie 
pafled  a  good  night,  and  gradually  re- 
covered, without  any  return  of  the  ra- 
ving, fainting,  or  convulfions. 

[b)    R.  B.    a   boy  aged   eleven,    was 
feized  with  a  headach  and  fever  ;    Mon- 
day, he  complained  of  a  iliarp  pain  in 
F  f  his 


45^  ^f  ^^^^   Cure  of 

his  right  fide,  on  which  account  i^ear 
eight  ounces  of  blood  were  taken  from 
him.  On  Tiiefda^y  his  hea.d  wi^s  eafier, 
but  the  pain  in  the  fide  contuiued  ;  his 
piilfe  beat  120  times  in  a  minute.  Tliis 
evening  a  bhfter  was  applied  to  the 
right  fide.  Next  morning  the  pain 
Avas  much  abated,  but  a  llight  delirium. 
began,  and  increafed  towards  the  even- 
ing, when  his  pulfe  was  about  1 30, 
though  no-ways  full.  Leeches  were 
applied  to  the  temples,  and  poultices  to 
the  feet.  On  Tlmrfda^  morning,  the 
delirium  and  fever  continuing,  his  head 
was  fliaved,  and  afterwards  fomented 
with  cloths  wrung  out  of  hot  water. 
Tliis  made  him  fomewhat  drowfy  and 
calmer  for  a  fliort  time  ;  but  about 
mid-day,  his  pidfc  became  quicker, 
iliarpcr  and  fmaller,  and  the  delirium 
increafed.  At  three  afternoon  he  was 
quite  inlenfible,  had  a  fubfultus^  tmdinum 
with  catchings,  and  liis  pulle  which  was 
fmall  beat  near  150  times  in   a  minute. 

In 


Nervous   Symptoms.  451 

In  this  flate,  I  ordered  his  feet  and  legs 
to  be  immediately  fomented,  as  in  the 
preceding  cale :  the  effe^l  was,  that  he  fell 
ibon  afleep  and  waked  at  four,  Ibmewhat 
calmer,  and  with  a  little  fweat  on  his 
fkin.  The  fotdentations  were  renewed  ; 
he  had  another  fleep,  and  about  lix  in 
the  evening  he  was  much  lefs  delirious, 
and  his  puHe  did  not  exceed  124.  At 
eight  the  legs  were  fomented  again,  a 
conliderable  time.  He  Kad  feveral  good 
fleeps  during  the  night,  and,  Friday 
morning,  was  quite  diftinft,  with  a  puHe 
at  96.  From  tliis  time  he  recovered 
daily,  without  any  return  of  the  fever 
or  deli  rum* 

(c)  A  middle-aged  man,  who  was 
feized  with  a  continued  fever,  in  a  few 
days  became  delirious,  had  a  quick  and 
very  fmall  pulfe,  a  parched  tongue, 
fiufliings  in  his  face,  and  twitchings ; 
and  he  palled  his  urine  infenfibly.  He 
was  treated  with  the  common  remedies, 
and  liad  a  bliftcr  applied  between  his 
F  f  2  fl\oulders. 


452  Of  the  CVKE   of 

Ihoiilders,  but  with  little  advantage* 
My  advice  being  alked  about  the  8  th  or 
9  th  day  of  the  difeale,  I  ordered  his  legs 
and  feet  to  be  fomented  with  flannel 
wrung  out  of  hot  water.  This,  in  a 
little  time,  put  him  afleep ;  and,  next 
day,  his  pulfe  was  fuller  and  lefs  quick, 
the  delirium  was  abated,  his  tongue  was 
moifter,  and  a  gentle  fweat  came  on. 
After  this,  the  fever  decreafed  gradual- 
ly, and  the  patient  recovered. 

Having  found  fuch  benefit  from  the 
warm  fomentations  in  fevers  attended 
with  a  delirium,  tremors  and  fpafms  ;  I 
thought  it  might  be  worth  while  to 
make  trial  alfo  of  the  warm  pediluvium  in 
fuch  cafes  ;  and  I  foon  found  this  to 
liave  tlie  fame,  but  more  powerful,  ef- 
fecTts  than  the  fomentations :  for  in 
fome  cafes,  when  thefe  laft  had  failed  to 
lelTen  the  tolling,  raving  and  convul- 
fions,  the  pedihroium  fucceeded,  not  only 
in  the  time  the  patient  ufed  it,  but  its 
effects   continued  a  good    while    after; 

and 


3 


Nervous  Symptoms.  45 

and  when  they  ceafed,  it  was  renewed 
again  with  the  fame  advantage  as  be- 
fore. In  fome  cafes,  I  have  ordered  the 
feet  and  legs  to  be  put  in  warm  water 
four  or  five  times  in  24  hours,  and  to 
continue  in  it  from  half  an  hour  to  near 
an  hour  at  a  time,  unlefs  the  patients 
became   faintifli. 

(a)  A  Lady  aged  about  20,  on  the 
fourth  day  after  being  delivered  of  her 
iirft  child,  began  to  be  feverifli,  and  fleept 
none.  After  this  (lie  became  very  de- 
lirious, talked  conftantly,  had  fome- 
times  tremors,  and  was  fo  reftlefs,  that 
for  two  days  flie  'lad  not  lain  one  mi- 
nute in  the  fame  pofture,  and  was  with 
difficulty  kept  in  bed  by  two  or  three 
nurfes.  On  the  loth  day  after  her  de- 
livery, when  I  firft  fliw  her,  the  fymp- 
toms  now  mentioned  were  all  increafed, 
only  (lie  fpoke  none,  and  feemed  to  un- 
derftand  nothing  that  was  faid  to  her  : 
her  pulfe,  which  was  but  of  a  moderate 
^rength,  beat  above  1 50  times  in  a  mi- 
nute. 


i- 


454  ^f  ^^^^  Cure   of 

niite.  Nay  once,  when  flie  was  more 
agitated  than  iifual,  it  rofe  to  i8o 
ftrokes  in  that  time,  and  became  withal 
very  fmall.  As  (he  had  been  blooded 
and  bliftered,  and  iifed  fever al  other  re- 
medies without  advantage,  I  ordered 
her  feet  and  legs  to  be  put  immediately 
into  the  warm  pediluvhmiy  which  was 
done  by  making  her  lit  up  on  the  bedr 
fide.  At  firft,  it  required  two  people 
to  keep  her  feet  in  the  water,  but,  in 
lefs  than  a  quarter  of  ah  hour,  fhe  grew 
calmer,  and  made  little  motion  either 
with  her  legs  or  any  other  part  of  lier 
body.  After  ufing  the  pcdihivhim  for 
half  an  hour,  flie  was  put  to  bed;  but 
foon  began  to  grow  as  refllefs  as  for- 
merly ;  upon  w^hich  account  warm  fo- 
mentations were  applied  to  her  legs  and 
feet,  and  renewed  from  time  to  time  for 
near  two  hours,  but  without  any  bene- 
fit. I  therefore  thought  it  beft  to  re- 
new the  pcdiliroiitm,  which  was  ufed  at 
this  time  for  a  full  hour;    it  foon  made 

her 


Nervous    Symptoms.  455 

her  fit  quiet,  and  after  flie  was  put  to 
bed,  altho'  flie  did  not  fall  afleep,  yet 
fhe  lay  feveral  hours  without  toiling  as 
ufual,  and  her  pulle  was  reduced  to  136. 
As  often  as  flie  began  to  be  any  ways 
reftlefs,  the  pediluvmm  was  renewed. 
After  ufing  it  the  fourth  time,  flie  got 
feveral  fliort  fleeps,  was  lefs  delirious, 
and  her  pulfe  only  made  i  20  flrokes  in 
a  minute  ;  from  this  time  (viz,  the  e- 
leventh  day  after  her  delivery)  the  pe- 
diiiivium,  which  was  never  repeated  above 
twice  in  24  hours,  procured  her  longer 
fleeps,  and  leflened  all  her  bad  fymp- 
toms  ;  fo  that  in  two  days  more,  flie 
was  quite  free  of  the  delirium,  and  her 
pulfe  did  not  exceed  c^o  in  a  minute. 

(b)  A  Gentleman  aged  40,  after 
having  had  a  continued  fever  feven  or 
eight  days,  began  to  rave,  and  the  deli- 
rhim  increafed  fo  much,  that  about  the 
I  ith  day,  he  could  not  be  kept  in  bed  ; 
nor  would  he  allow  either  fomentations, 
bliflers  or  finapifms  to  be  applied  to  his 

legs 


456  Of  the   Cure    of 

legs  or  feet.  In  this  condition,  I  ad- 
viled  to  take  him  out  of  bed,  as  often  as 
he  infifted  upon  riling,  and,  while  he 
fat  up,  to  keep  his  feet  and  legs  in 
warm  water.  Between  feven  and  half 
an  hour  pad  eleven  in  the  evening,  he 
was  feven  times  out  of  bed,  and  as  often 
ufed  the  pediluvium  for  about  a  quarter 
of  an  hour,  or  longer,  at  a  time.  Be- 
fore midnight  the  hurry  of  his  fpirits 
began  to  abate,  he  talked  lefs,  and  feem- 
ed  drowfy.  In  the  fu'll  part  of  the 
night  he  had  fome  fliort  fleeps,  and 
towards  the  morning,  he  flept  three 
hours  at  once.  His  pulfe  was  now  re- 
duced from  120  to  100  flrokes  in  a  mi- 
nute ;  and  from  this  time  the  dellriimt 
decreafed  gradually  for  feveral  days, 
and  he  recovered. 

[c)  Having  been  called  to  A.  A. 
aged  30,  in  a  continued  fever  with  in- 
flamed eyes,  and  fo  violent  a  deliriwn, 
that  he  could  not  be  kept  in  bed  ;  I  or- 
dered him  to  be  taken  up,  and  to  have 

his 


Nervous    Symptoms.  457 

liis  feet  and  legs  put  in  warm  water  for 
twenty  minutes.  This  was  done  thrice 
in  the  fpace  of  thirteen  hours ;  and  it 
always  leflened  his  raving,  made  him 
quieter,  and  procured  a  fleep  after  he 
went  to  bed.  Next  day,  he  became  a 
good  deal  comatous,  and  liis  eyes  were 
rather  more  inflamed  ;  but  the  day 
after,  he  grew  more  lenfible,  his  eyes 
looked  better,  and  his  pulfe  had  fallen 
from  about  170,  (which  was  its  quick- 
nefs  when  at  the  worfl,)  to  128  llrokes 
in  a  minute.  After  tliis,  he  recovered 
gradually. 

(d)  Another  patient  aged  25,  in  a 
continued  fever,  with  a  pulfe  above  140, 
inflamed  eyes,  and  a  violent  delirium,  ib 
that  two  ftrong  men  had  been  employed 
to  keep  him  in  bed,  recovered,  after 
being  taken  up  thrice,  and  having  his 
feet  and  legs  kept  in  warm  Water  for 
above  twenty  minutes  each  time.  The 
v/arm  water  always  lefTened  the  deliriimiy 
and,   after  he  returned  to   bed,    made 

him  fall  afleep. 

Instead 


45S  Of  the  Cure   of 

Instead  of  adding  more  cafes,  liliall 
only  obferve,  that  I  have  faved  more 
patients  who  appeared  to  be  in  great 
danger,  in  the  delirious  flate  of  a  fever, 
by  the  fomentations,  and  efpecially  by 
the  warm  pediluviiim,  than  by  any  other 
remedy  :  and  even  in  thofe  cafes,  where 
thefe  applications  were  infufficient  to 
compleat  the  cure,  they,  almofl  always, 
gave  fome  prefent  relief,  by  making  the 
patients  fomewhat  quieter  and  difpofing 
them  to  fleep. 

Th  e  fomentations  and  wai'm  bath  to 
the  feet  are  particularly  ufeful  in  fevers, 
where  the  brain  and  nervous  fyflem  are 
much  irritated.  In  cafes  where  the 
eyes  are  inflamed,  they  will  anfwier  bet- 
ter, if  the  patient  has  been  bled  at  the 
temples  with  leeches,  before  their  appli- 
cation. When  the  Hck  cannot  bear  the 
■pcdihroiinn  in  an  ereft  pofture,  I  order 
dieir  legs  to  be  put  o^  er  the  fide  of  the 
bed,  fo  as  they  may  be  immerfcd  in  the 
warm  water  ;    the  heat  of  which  fhould 

not 


Nervous    Symptoms.  45^ 

not  be  lefs  than  100  degrees  of  Faren- 
hcit*s  fcale. 

I  SHALL  only  add  on  this  lubjecl,  that 
I  have  found  the  warm  femicnpmn  or  fe- 
diluvium,  the  beffc  remedy  for  thofe  con- 
vullions  which  fometimes  precede  the 
eruption  of  the  fmall  pox  ;  and  for  that 
general  tremor  of  the  whole  body,  which 
often  happens  towards  the  end  of  that 
difeafe,  when  the  puftles  are  of  a  very 
bad  kind.      But  to  return, 

(4.)  In  convuliive  motions  or  fpafms, 
fuch  remedies  are  often  ufeful,  as,  by 
painfully  affefting  the  nerves  of  fome 
part  of  the  body  that  is  found,  in  a 
great  meafure  lefTen  or  deftroy  the  fenfe 
of  that  irritation  which  was  the  caufe  of 
thofe  fymptoms*.  Of  this  kind  are 
blifters,  aprid  cataplafins,  diy  cu2:)ping, 
fridiion  and  the  cold  bath. 

About  feventeen  years  iince,  a  wo- 
man aged  20,  was  leized  with  an  alter- 
nate motion  of  die  abdominal  mufcles. 

lu 

*  Hippocrat,  aphor.  lib,  ii.  N"  46. 


460  Of  the  Cure    of 

In  the  night,  when  in  bed,  flie  was 
pretty  free  of  this  aihiient ;  but,  through 
the  day,  thofe  mufcles  were  ahnoft  con- 
ftantly  in  motion,  and  it  was  not  in  her 
power  to  reftrain  them  in  the  fmalleft 
degree.  After  (lie  had  tried  many  me- 
dicines without  any  benefit,  I  ordered 
a  circular  blifter  of  about  eight  inches 
diameter  to  be  applied  to  the  abdomen, 
Tliis  put  a  flop  to  the  convullive  mo- 
tions for  feveral  days  ;  and  altho'  they 
returned  afterwards,  they  were  much 
weaker  and  lefs  frequent,  and  in  a  (liort 
time,  they  ceafed  entirely,  without  the 
alliftance  of  any  medicine,  except  a  few 
dofes  of  camphire. 

In  cafes,  where  epileptic  convullions 
took  their  rife  from  an  uneafy  fenfation 
in  fome  part  of  the  arm  or  leg,  I  have 
found  blifters  appHed  to  thefe  parts  the 
bed  remedy.  It  may  be  proper,  how- 
ever, to  obferve,  that,  in  people  whofe 
nerves  are  uncommonly  delicate  and 
fenfible,  it  is  often  better  to  attempt  the 

cure 


Nervous   Symptoms.  461 

cure  of  conviilfive  motions  or  ipafms 
by  opiates,  miifk,  camphire,  and  the 
Avarm  bath  or  pcdiluvhauy  than  by  bliilers, 
which  fometimes  do  harm  by  the  vio- 
lent pain  which  they  occafion. 

I  HAVE  found  dry  cupping  not  only 
iifeful  in  convulfive  contractions  of  the 
mufcles*,  but  aHb  in  removing  recent 
rheumatic  pains  from  cold,  where  there  . 
was  no  fever  ;  nay,  in  older  pains  of 
this  kind,  I  have  feen  patients  relieved, 
at  leaft,  for  fome  time,  by  this  remedy. 

I  order  the  cupping  glafs  to  be  applied 

*  j 
to  the  pained  part  and  all  round  it,  and 

let  it  ftick  each  time  three  or  four  mi- 
nutes, or  till  it  falls  off.  The  liiclion  is 
often  fo  ftrong  as  to  occafion  fiiiall  effu- 
fions  of  blood  below  the  fcarf-fkin.   The 

good 

*  A  man  aged  about  50,  who  had  for  many  years  been 
coaftantly  afflnfled  with  an  alternate  motion  of  the  mufcles 
of  his  head  and  neck,  found  more  benefit  from  dry  cupping 
along  the  back  part  of  the  neck  and  fhoulders,  than  from 
any  other  remedy.  It  is  true  indeed,  the  good  effedls  of 
this  application  lafled  only  for  a  few  days;  but,  had  the 
diforder  been  lefs  fixed,  it  is  probable,  that  repeated  cup- 
ping might  have   made  a  perfe<ft  cure. 


4^2  Of  the   Cure   of 

good  effects  of  dry  cupping  do  not  pro- 
ceed Iblely  from  the  pain  it  occafions,- 
which  is  not  very  confiderable  ;  but 
chiefly  from  the  change  it  makes  in  the 
circulation  of  the  blood  through  the 
lub cutaneous  parts  :  for^  while  the  cup- 
ping-glafs  remains  fixed,  the  blood 
which  ufed  to  be  fent  to  the  parts  be- 
low, is,  in  a  good  raeaflire,  derived  into 
the  velfels  of  the  memhrana  adipofa  and 
fkin  ;  and,  even  for  fome  time  after,  the 
motion  of  the  fluids  through  thefe  parts 
continues  to  be  greater  than  uflial,  on 
account  of  that  irritation,  and  flight 
degree  of  inflamation  wliich  is  generally 
occafloned  by  cupping. 

The  cold  bath  is  often  ufeful  in  cu« 
ring  thofe  convulflons  wliich  go  by  the 
name  of  St  Vitush  dance  :  And  cold 
water  thrown  on  a  perfon  labouring 
under  the  hydrophobia,  has  enabled  him, 
for  fome  time,   to  drink  pretty  freely'^'. 

Was 

*  See  Mead  on  poifons,  edit.  v.  pag.  182.  and  Fan  Sivie- 
tCK.  comment,  in  aphor.  Boerhaave,  torn,  iii.  p.  576. 


Nervous   Symptoms.         463 

Was  not  this  effeS:  owing  to  the  ftrong 
impreifion  made  on  the  nei-vous  lyflem 
by  the  cold  water,  which,  in  fome  niea- 
fure,  deftroyed  or  lefTened  the  unnatu- 
ral fenfibility  of  the  nerves  of  the  fauces 
and  gullet  ?  For  the  inability  to  fwal- 
low  liquids  in  the  h'jdrophohia,  is  not 
owing  to  a  palfy  of  the  throat,  as  fome 
authors  of  great  cliaracler  have  thought, 
but  folely  to  the  difagreeable  fenfation 
excited  in  the  fiiuces  a.nd  gullet,  by  the 
touch  of  water  and  other  fluids,  which 
raife  as  great  fpallns  and  convullive 
contractions  in  thole  parts  and  the  fto- 
mach,  as  they  do  in  the  mulcles  of  re- 
fph'ation,  Ayhen,  by  an  accident  in  fwal- 
lowing,  they  get  into  the  trachea, 

(5.)  Fear,  furprizc,  attention,  or  o- 
ther  ftrong  affecllons  of  the  mind,  will 
frequently  put  a  ftop  to  convulfive  mo- 
tions and  fpafms,  and  fometimes  fuc- 
ceed  after  other  remedies  have  failed,  as 
in  the  following  cafe. 

A 


464  ^f  the  Cure   of 

A  GIRL  aged  eight,  in  the  beginning 
of   September  175^)9   was   feized  with  an 
alternate  motion  of  the  maffeter  and  tem- 
poral mufcles,  for  which  no  caufe  covild 
be  alTigned.      This  motion  exactly  imi- 
tated the  pulfation  of  the  heart.      Only 
thofe  miifcles   were   contracted  and  re- 
laxed   above    140  times  in   a  minute, 
while  the    heart   did  not   make   above 
90  ftrokes.    Their  contradlions  were  all 
of  equal  ftrength,  and  the  intervals  be- 
tween  them    were    alfo   equal.      When 
the  patient  prefTed  the  teeth  of  the  lower 
jaw  ftrongly  againft  thole  of  the  upper 
one,  by  a  voluntary  contracT:ion  of  the 
majfeter  and  temporal  mufcles,  their  con- 
vullive  motions  were  much  lefs  remark- 
able ;    and  when  flie  pulled  down  the 
lower  jaw  as  much  as  flie  could,   and, 
by  the  continued  aftion  of  its  mufcles, 
kept  it  in  this  fituation,  the  majfeter  and 
temporal    mufcles   were  no    ways  con- 
vulfed.      Before  I  faw  this  patient,  ilie 
had  been  bliflered   upon   the  courfe  of 

the 


Nervous    Symptoms.  465 

the  affected  miiTcles,  which  lefTened 
theu*  convulfive  motions,  while  the  bhi- 
tered  parts  continued  to  run,  but  no 
longer.  I  ordered  plaflers  of  the  em- 
■plaflrum  antih'jjiericiim  with  fome  opium 
to  be  applied  where  the  blifters  had  for- 
merly been.  Thele  were  kept  on  no 
longer  than  two  days,  during  which 
time,  the  convulllons  were  weaker  and 
leis  frequent,  not  being  repeated  above 
50  or  60  times  in  a  minute  ;  however, 
in  a  day  or  two  after  the  removal  of 
theie  plaflers,  the  convuliive  contrac- 
tions became  as  llrong  and  as  frequent 
as  ever.  Brimilone,  in  powder,  was 
rubbed  on  the  temples  and  cheeks  with- 
out any  vifible  effecl.  Suipecting  that 
this  convulfive  diforder  might,  perhaps, 
proceed  from  worms,  I  prelcribed  a  bolus 
of  rhubarb  with  calomel,  which  the 
girl  obflinately  refulmg  to  take,  her 
father  went  to  fetch  a  horfe-whip  to 
beat  her.  The  fear  of  this  aiFecled  her 
fo  flrongly,  that,  without  the  hohis,  the 
G  g  convulfions 


466  Of  the  Cure  of 

convulfions  of  the  majfeter  and  temporal 
mufcles  inftantly  ceafed  ;  and  have  ne- 
ver returned  fince,  except  once  on  oc- 
cafion  of  a  fright,  when  they  continued 
near  an  hour,  and  then  went  off  with- 
out any  remedy. 

Cdfus,    in  the  fpafmus-  opticus ^  recom- 
mends  pouring  on  the   patient's  head, 
v/arm  fea-water   and  llilphur*  :    And  a 
roll  of  brimftone,   held  in  the  hand,  is 
frequently  ufed,    now  a-days,  as  a  cure 
for  cramps  or  fixed  ipafins  of  the  muf- 
cles ;    and  I  have  known   it  fucceed  in 
feveral    cafes.       The    fnapping    of   the 
brimftone,    which   often    happens,    has 
been,  by  fomc,  afcribed  to  the  eleclrical 
lire  being  difcharged  in  great  quantity 
out  of  the  body,    but  without  any  rea- 
fon.      The  truth  is,    that  a  roll  of  pure 
brimftone  held  in  the  hand  when  warm, 
will  frequently  break,  whether  the  per- 
fon  be  affected  with  the  cramp  or  not  ; 
and  the   fame   thing   happens  to  brim- 
ftone, 

*  De  medidna,  lib.  iv.  cap.2,  ^ 


Nervous    Symptoms.  467 

flone,  when  placed  before  the  fire  in  a 
heat  equal  to,  or  a  little  greater  than 
that  of  the  human  body.  I  am,  there- 
fore, of  opinion,  that  brimftone  cures 
fpafms  not  by  any  medical  virtue  ;  but 
that  its  effects  are  to  be  afcribed  to  the 
patient's  attention*  and  faith,  or  rather 
to  the  fiirprize  occafioned  by  the  roll 
fnapping  in  his  hand  :  And  as  a  confir- 
mation of  this,  I  have  known  fome  af- 
fected with  the  cramp,  who,  having 
been  informed  that  the  breaking  of  the 
brimftone  was  owing  to  the  heat  of  the 
hand,   miffed  of  a  cure. 

(6.)  Convulsive  motions  or  fpafms 
are  often  prevented  or  cured  by  com- 
preflion,  which  braces  and  renders  fir- 
mer fuch  parts  of  the  body  as  are  moft 
fubjeCt  to  them.  Thus  cramps  in  the 
Gg  2  legs 

*  I  have  been  often  cured  of  a  flight  hiccup  by  looking 
ftedfaftly,  for  two  or  three  minutes,  on  the  impreflion  upon 
a  fhilllng,  or  any  other  coin  :  And  I  know  a  Lady  who, 
though  very  liable  to  hyfteric  fits,  is  never  afFefted  with 
them,  or  even  flighter  complaints,  when  any  of  her  children 
happen  to  be  dangeroufly  ill. 


468  Of  the  Cure    of 

legs  are  prevented  by  tight  bandages; 
and  when  convnliions  arife  from  a  fla- 
tulent diflenfioii  of  the  inteftines,  or 
from  fpafms  beginning  in  them,  they 
may  be  often  leflened  or  cured  by  ma- 
king a  pretty  flrong  comprellion  upon 
the  abdomen  by  means  of  a  broad  belt. 
The  Baron  Van  Swieten,  mentions  the 
cafe  of  a  young  Lady,  whofe  legs, 
thighs  and  belly,  were  kept  tight  with 
rollers  for  feveral  months,  in  order  to 
prevent  convulfions,  which,  from  an 
uncommon  delicacy  of  her  nerves,  flie 
was  frequently  fubjed:  to*.  Epileptic 
fits,  which  take  their  rife  from  a  pecu- 
liar fenfation  in  fome  part  of  the  legs 
or  arms,  may  be  kept  oif  by  making  a  1 
tioht  lio-ature  about  thefe  members  as 
foon  as  that  fenfation  begins,  or  at  leafl, 
before  it  has  reached  the  fuperior  parts 
of  the  body. 

To  the  remedies  already  mentioned 
maybe  added  the  bark,  which  has  fome- 

times 

*  Comment,  in  aphor.  Boerhaave,  torn,  l: 


Nervous   SyxMPtoms.  469 

times  cured  periodic  convulfions  after 
other  medicines  had  failed*. 

I  SHALL  only  obferve  further,  that 
Avhen  fpafms,  or  convuKive  motions,  a- 
rile  from  fliarp  humours  in  the  ftomach 
and  inteflines,  nothing  will  procure  any 
lading  relief  till  thefe  are  either  cor- 
redled  f  or  expelled  J. 

II. 

*  See  Philofoph.  Traiifaft.  N»  174. 

•}■  A  young  man  under  20,  in  a  continued  fever,  was 
affefted  with  a  ftrong  delirium  and  convulfions  of  his  face, 
throat,  and  almoft  all  the  parts  of  his  body,  particularly  his 
arms  and  legs.  At  the  fame  time,  he  complained  of  a  great 
thirft  and  heat  within  him.  After  having  been  in  this  way  for 
two  or  three  days,  he  had  a  fweet  orange  given  him,  which 
he  eat  greedily,  and  calling  always  for  more,  confumed 
near  two  dozen  of  them  in  two  days.  After  he  began 
to  eat  the  oranges,  the  convulfions  abated,  and  went  quite 
off  in  three  days. 

X  For  the  following  cafe,  in  which  violent  convulfive 
fits  were  removed  by  repeated  vomits,  I  am  obliged  to 
Dr  John  Gardiner,  Phyfician  in  this  place, 

A  young  woman  of  17  years  of  age,  of  a  delicate  frame, 
after  having  been  a  good  deal  fatigued,  was  feized,  on  the 
20th  of  Julyy  with  convulfions  of  almoft  every  part  of  her 
body,  which  continued  about  five  minutes ;  after  which 
fhe  fainted  away,  and  the  convulfions  ceafed  ;  but  upon  her 
recovery,  the  convulfive  motions  of  her  arms,  and  the 
niufcks  of  refpiration,  returned.    Thefe  convulfions  i-.aving 

continued, 


470  Of  the  Cure  of 

II.  Hysteric    faintings   with  con- 
vulfions. 

If   the  pulfe  be  full,  or  the  patient 
any  ways  plethoric,   fome  blood  flioiild 

be 

continued,  except  in  rime  of  fleep  to  the  22d,  when  I  was 
called,  I  ordered  a  bolus  of  ten  grains  of  mufk  to  be  taken, 
every  three  or  four  hours  with  two  table-fpoonfuls  of  a 
musk  julep.  On  the  zzd,  23d  and  24th,  fhe  was,  feveral 
times,  free  from  the  convulfions  for  half  an  hour,  or  fome- 
times  an  hour  :  But,  upon  the  leaft  noife  in  the  room,  or 
any  thing  that  occafioned  furprize,  they  returned.  The 
drawing  the  curtain  of  her  bed,  or  the  lifting  of  the  latch 
of  the  door,  ufed  to  have  this  eiFeft.  Nay,  altho'  fhe  faw 
her  fillers  going  to  open  or  ftiut  the  door,  or  to  handle  the 
tea-cnps,  and  therefore  expefted  to  hear  fome  little  noife, 
yet  fo  powerful  was  the  impreflion  made  by  it  on  her 
nerves,  that  by  no  effort  could  ihe  prevent  the  convulfions 
from  coming  on. 

In  order  to  lelTen  this  uncommon  fenfibility  of  the  ner- 
vous fyllem,  camphire  was  added  to  the  mufli  bolus,  and 
fhe  got  1 2  drops  of  laudanum  in  a  difh  of  valerian  tea  five 
or  fix  times  in  24  hours.  After  this,  fhe  was  oftener  free 
from  the  convulfions  ;  but  when  they  returned,  they  were 
more  fevere.  On  the  27th,  altho'  her  menfes  came  at  the 
ufual  time,  her  fymptoms  did  not  abate.  After  this  flux 
ceafed,  fhe  had  a  blifter  applied  between  her  fhoulders,  ufed 
z  (o\\ii\on  oi  a/a  faticla,  and  increafed  the  laudanum  to  2. 
hundred  drops  a-day. 

On 


Nervous   Symptoms.  471 

be  taken  away ;   after  wliich,   we  may 
endeavour  to  roufe  her  by  the  linoak 

of 

On  the  31ft  of  July,  (he  began  to  be  feized  with  faint- 
ings,  for  about  five  minutes  at  a  time  ;  and  foon  after  this, 
the  convulfions  became  uni\  erfal,  and  attacked  her  from 
twelve  to  eighteen  times  a-day  in  regular  paroxyfms,  which 
lafted  two  or  three  minutes.  In  the  night,  Ihe  was  almolt 
always  free  of  diem.  I  now  prefcribed  for  her  an  ounce 
of  the  bark,  half  an  ounce  of  valerian  and  a  dram  of  caftor, 
to  be  made  with  fyrup  of  white  poppies  into  an  eleduary, 
of  which  fhe  fwallowed  the  bulk  of  a  nutmeg  three  or  four 
times  a-day,  at  the  fame  time  continuing  the  laudanum  and 
bolufes  of  mu(k.  After  ther  3d  oi  Augujl,  fiie  was  feized 
with  fevere  afthmatic  fits,  which,  together  with  her  faintings 
and  convulfions,  would  often  make  thirty  paroxyfms  in  a 
day  :  Some  days  after  this,  upon  the  convulfions  leaving 
her,  fhe  was  feized  with  continued  fpafms  in  her  arms, 
legs  and  thighs ;  after  which,  flie  fometimes  complained 
of  a  fmall  degree  of  pain  and  confufion  in  her  head. 

Her  pulfe  during  all  thefe  complaints,  feldom  exceeded 
80  ftrokes  in  a  minute,  nor  were  there  any  appearances  of 
her  ftomach  being  difordered.  However,  on  the  9th  of 
Auguji,  I  prefcribed  a  vomit  of  ipecacuanha,  which  made 
her  throw  up  a  great  deal  of  dark  greenilh  and  very  bitter 
bile  ;  about  an  hour  after  this,  fhe  was  attacked  with  one  of 
the  convulfive  fits,  but  had  no  more  of  them  that  day.  On  the 
loth  ol  Auguft,  fhe  had  twelve,  and  on  the  r  ith,  fourteen 
of  thefe  fits.  Upon  the  12th,  in  the  morning,  fhe  got  ano- 
ther vomit,  which  was  alfo  repeated  on  the  13th.  Each 
time  (he  threw  up  a  good  deal  of  bile,  and  had  no  fit  either 
of  thefe  two  days.  On  the  14th,  fhe  took  a  decoction  of 
tamarinds  \4'\x\i  fenna,  which  purged  her  five  cr  fix  times, 

and 


472  Of  the  Cure  of 

of  afa  fostida  or  burnt  feathers,  or  by 
oleum  fitccini  and  fpirit  of  hartfliorn 
dropt  on  cotton  and  put  into  the 
noftrils.  Thefe  medicines,  by  the  ftrong 
and  fudden  impreffion  they  make  on 
the  very  fenfible  nerves  of  the  nofe,  not 
only  tend  to  excite  the  feveral  organs 
into  a6lion,  but  to  lefTen  or  deflroy  the 
difagreeable  fenfation  in  that  part  of 
the  body,  which  brought  on  the  fit. 
With  the  fame  view,  hot  bricks  may  be 

applied 

and  in  the  evening,  flie  was  attacked  fix  times  with  the 
convulfions  and  fainting  fits.  On  the  15th,  their  number 
was  near  double  that;  but  on  the  i6th,  when  the  vomit 
was  repeated,  fhe  efcaped  tliem  altogether.  Having  been 
informed  that  a  peaiiTue,  which  had  been  long  kept  open 
.in  one  of  her  arms,  had  dried  up  near  twelve  months  be- 
fore flie  fell  ill,  an  ifiue,  fufficient  to  receive  two  or  three 
peas,  was  made  in  each  arm.  Every  other  day  for  a  week, 
fhe  took  a  vomit  of  pul-v.  ipecacuanhee  gr.  'v.  and  tart.  emet. 
gr.  i.  and  at  night,  fometimes,  a  fmall  dofe  of  elixir  fa- 
crum  ;  by  which  means,  before  the  beginning  of  September^ 
fhe  got  quite  free  of  the  fainting  fits  and  convulfions. 

It  was  obfervable,  that,  during  her  illnefs,  in  the  inter- 
vals of  the  fits,  fhe  was  often  very  chearful,  and  fometimes 
jocofe  ;  but  after  fhe  recovered,  fhe  became  grave,  thought- 
ful and  fomewhat  raorofe,  v/hich  was  her  natural  difpQ- 
fition. 


Nervous    Symptoms.  473 

applied  to  the  foles  of  the  feet  ;  and  the 
legs,  arms  and  belly  may  be  ftrongly 
rubbed.  But  there  is  no  remedy,  which 
I  have  found  fo  effectual  in  removing 
hyfteric  faintings  with  convulfions,  as 
the  warm  pediluvium  ;  for  after  many 
other  things  had  been  tried  to  no  pur- 
pofe,  I  have  feen  the  patients  reflored 
to  their  fenfes,  almoft  inftantly,  by  put- 
ting their  feet  and  legs  in  water  a  little 
more  than  blood-warm  :  And  it  was  re- 
markable, that  upon  difcontinuing  the 
pediluvium  too  foon,  the  fainting  and 
cat;chings  often  retm'ned  in  a  lefs  de- 
gree, and  the  pulfe  became  fmaller  and 
irregular.  In  a  few  cafes,  where  the 
patients  were  plethoric,  and  the  con- 
vulfions  very  ftrong,  the  pedihroium  has 
failed. 

Warm  water  thus  ufed,  is  not  only 
the  Ipeedieft,  but  the  fafeft  cure  for 
hyfteric  faintings;  while  ftrong  volatile 
fpirits    held    to    the   nofe,    are    apt   to 

t;hrow 


474  Of  the  Cure  of 

throw  Ibme  very  delicate  women  into 
more  violent  convvilfions. 

In  cafe  of  coftivenefs,  a  laxative 
clyfter  with  afa  foctida  will  be  proper  ; 
and,  as  foon  as  the  patient  can  fwallow, 
two  table-fpoonfuls  of  a  folution  of  afa 
foctida^  or  fome  cordial  julep,  may  be 
given. 

After  the  fit  is  over,  the  radical 
cure  muft  vary  according  to  the  diffe- 
rent caufes  from  which  it  may  proceed. 
However,  fuch  medicines  will  com- 
monly be  found  moft  efficacious  as 
ftrengthen  the  alimentary  canal  and  the 
whole  nervous  fyftem.  An  antihyfleric 
plafler  applied  to  the  abdomen  has  been, 
in  fome  cafes,  ufeful  ;  as  alfo  gentle  vo- 
mits and  ftomachic  purges. 

III.  A  VIOLENT  pain  with  cramps 
in  the  ilomach. 

The  method  which  I  have  found 
niofl  fuccefsful  in  tliis  cafe,  is,  to  make 
the  patient,  if  there  be  any  inclination 

to 


Nervous   Symptoms.  475 

to  vomit,  take  fome  draughts  of  warm 
water  to  clean  his  ftomach.  After  this, 
I  order  a  clyfter  of  fix  ounces  of  water 
and  from  50  to  So  drops  of  Imidamim, 
This  is  much  furer  than  laudanum  given 
by  the  mouth,  which  is  often  vomited 
up ;  and,  in  fome  cafes,  increafes  the 
pain  and  fpafms  in  the  ftomach. 

If  the  pain  and  cramps  return  with 
great  violence,  after  the  effects  of  the 
anodyne  clyfter  are  over,  I  order  ano- 
ther to  be  given,  with  an  equal  or  lar- 
ger quantity  of  laudanum  ;  and,  once  in 
four  hours,  two  table-fpoonfuls  of  fuch 
a  julep  as  the  following. 

R  Mofch.  fcrup.  ii. 

optime  teratur  cum 
Sacchar.  alb.  drach.  ii. 

Dein  adde 
Mucilag.  gum.  Arab.  unc.  fs. 
Aqu.  cinnamom.  f.  v. 

menth.  piper,  ana  unc.  ii. 
aromat.  drach.  vi. 
M.   f.  a. 

If  the  patient  has  been  coftlve,  a  lax* 
ative  clyfter  muft  be  given  before  the 
anodyne  ones. 

The 


476  Of  the   Cure   of 

The  anodyne  balfani  rubbed  into 
the  ftomach,  and  the  warm  femicupium  are 
often  ufeful.  After  the  pain  and  cramps 
have  been  removed,  the  emplajlrum  an- 
tibyjtericum  appHed  to  the  epigaftric  re- 
gion, has  fometimes  contributed  to  pre- 
vent their  return. 

In  all  very  violent  or  lading  pains  of 
the  ftomach,  fome  blood  ought  to  be 
taken  away,  unlefs  the  weaknefs  of  the 
patient  makes  it  improper  ;  for  this  e- 
vacuation  will  always  leilen  the  danger 
of  an  inflammation,  and  can  feldom  do 
any  conflderable  harm. 

When  the  p^in  or  fpafms  in  the  fto- 
mach, proceed  from  a  fuppreftion  of  the 
mc?i/l'jy  venaefe(^ion  is  of  great  ufe.  If 
they  are  owing  to  the  true  gout,  befides 
latdanwn  and  mufk,  (piceries  and  fome  of 
the  ftronger  cordial  waters,  or  a  large 
dramof  brandy  or  rum,  will  be  neceflary, 
together  with  blifters  to  the  ancles. 

V,  An 


Nervous    Symptoms.         477 


IV.  An  indigeflion  and  vomiting, 
with  pains  in  the  ftomach. 

1.  When  thefe  complaints  proceed 
from  noxious  humom's  in  the  ftomach, 
the  beft  remedies  are  vomits  and  gentle 
ftomachic  purges ;  together  with  elixir  of 
vitriol  or  the  teftaceous  powders,  accord- 
ing to  the  different  nature  of  thofe  hu- 
mours. 

2.  When,  from  fcirrhous  obftrudlions 
in  the  alimentary  canal,  we  can  do  little 
more  than  to  palliate  by  means  of  grate- 
ful ftomachic  medicines,  and  opiates. 
However,  in  cafes  of  this  kind,  a  fmall 
glafs  of  Spa  or  Fymont  water  frequently 
repeated,  has  fometimes  ftaid  on  the 
ftomach,  \vhen  every  thing  elfe  has  been 
thrown  up. 

When  there  is  a  fcirrhous  obftruclion 
in  the  coats  of  the  ftomach  near  the  f)- 
loriiSy  this  paftage  is  often  fo  much  ftrait- 
ened,  that  only  the  thinner  part  of  the 
aliment  can  get  into  the  duodermm ;  while 

the 


47^  Of  the   Cure   of 

the  more  folid  part,  after  remaining  fe- 
veral  hours  in  the  ftomach,  and  occa- 
fioning  heart-burning  and  ficknefs,  is 
at  laft  difcharged  by  vomiting.  Pa- 
tients in  this  fituation,  always  find  them- 
lelves  eafieft,  when  they  ufe  only  the 
thinner  kinds  of  aliments,  flich  as  light 
broths,  milk,  panada,  fago,  falep,  and 
the  like. 

3.  When  a  ficknefs  and  pain  in  the 
ftomach,  with  vomiting  foon  after  eat- 
ing, are  owing  to  a  too  great  delicacy 
or  an  unnatural  fenlibility  of  the  nerves 
of  the  ftomach,  either  in  confequence  of 
an  irregularity  of  the  menjlriia^  or  of 
fome  acrid  humour  in  the  blood  falling 
on  thofe  nerves  ;  while  we  palliate  with 
agreeable  cordials  and  aromatics,  we 
muft  endeavour  to  ftrengthen  the  fto- 
mach by  the  bark,  bitters,  chalybeates, 
and  exercife.  But,  in  cafes  of  this  kind, 
I  have  found  nothing  produce  fuch  im- 
mediate good  effecls,  as  laudanum  given 
an    hour     or    more    before    dinner    or 

fappcr. 

{a)  An 


Nervous    Symptoms.  47^ 

(a)  An  unmarried  Gentlewoman  aged 
44,  irregular  as  to  the  menfesy  was  feized 
with  a  pain  in   her  flomach,    and  foon 
after   every  meal   became  fick,  and  vo- 
mited what  flie  had  eat.      After  having 
been  in  this  way  for  eight  or  ten  days, 
fhe  took  a  vomit  of  ipecacuanhay  feveral 
dofes  of  the  elixir  facrum,  and  tinBura  rhor- 
barbari  amara  ;    file  alfo  ufed  warm  cla- 
ret with  cinnamon  and  nutmeg,  and  a 
julep   of  pepper-mint   water   with    the 
fpirit.  voiat.  okofi    but  without   any  ad- 
vantage.    As  file  flept  ill,  I  advifed  her 
to  take  twenty  drops  of  laudanum  at  bed- 
time, which  made  her  refl  better  in  the 
night,  but  did  not  lefTen  the  vomiting 
the  following  day.      Next  night  I  de- 
fired   her   to   take  the  laiidammi,   not  at 
bed-time,    but  an  hour  before  fupper. 
The   firft  dofe,  in   this  way,  prevented 
her  vomiting  after  flipper,  and  next  day 
after  breakfafl ;    but  fhe  threw  up  her 
dinner  as  ufual.      However,  by  increa- 
iing  the  laudanum^  before  fupper,  to  twen- 
ty- 


480  Of  the   Cure   of 

ty-five  drops,  in  three  or  four  days  fhe 
got  free  of  the  pain  and  ficknefs  at  her 
ftomach,  as  well  as  of  the  vomiting  af- 
ter meals. 

{h)  A  MARRIED  Lady,  aged  about 
30,  after  having  been,  for  fome  time, 
ii'regular  as  to  the  monthly  evacuation, 
upon  eating  freely  of  almoft  any  kind 
of  meat,  but  efpecially  fuch  as  lay  hea- 
vy on  her  ftomach,  was  apt  be  affected  J 
with  ficknefs,  faintings  and  flight  con- 
vulfive  motions,  attended  with  a  fmall 
irregular  and  quick  pulfe,  and  a  cold- 
nefs  of  her  whole  body.  After  flie  had 
ufed  vomits,  the  bark,  bitters,  facred 
elixir,  and  various  grateful  ftomachic 
medicines  to  little  purpofe,  I  advifed 
her  to  take  Ibme  laudanum  every  day,  an 
hour  or  two  before  dinner.  Having 
been  formerly  much  accuftomed  to  this 
medichie,  ftie  began  with  thirty-five 
drops,  and  foon  incrcafed  them  to  fifty 
or  lixty.  The  laudanum,  inftead  of  ma- 
king lier  drowfy,  gave  her   better  fpi- 

rits, 


Nervous    Symptoms.         481 

rits,  and  enabled  her  to  eat  at  dinner  as 
ufual,  without  being  afFed:ed  with  fick- 
nefs  or  faintings  after  it.  She  conti- 
nued the  ufe  of  the  laudanum,  in  this 
way,  pretty  conflantly  for  five  or  fix 
weeks.  Some  days,  when  (he  had  ne- 
glected the  laudanum  before  dinner,  if 
fhe  took  it  as  loon  as  flie  began  to  be 
uneafy  after  eating,  it  foon  lefiened  the 
ficknels  at  her  ftomach,  and  prevented 
the  faintings  and  convulfive  motions. 

{c)  Another  married  Lady,  aged 
about  thirty,  who  had  been  often  trou- 
bled with  a  pain,  a  fournefs  and  wind 
in  her  ftomach,  and,  when  thefe  left 
her,  with  afthmatic  fits  ;  complained  of 
a  lump  in  her  throat,  flatulence,  and 
fuch  a  weaknefs  of  her  ftomach  and  in- 
digeftion,  that  every  kind  of  food  oc- 
calioned  pain,  fickneis  and  vomiting, 
except  bread  and  wine,  or  a  very  little 
boiled  or  roafted  chicken.  After  trying 
the  bark,  vomits,  facred  elixir,  and 
exercifc,  vvdth  fcarce  any  benefit,  I  de- 
H  h  fired 


482  Of  the  Cure    0/ 

fired  her  to  take  fome  landamtm  an 
hour  before  dhmer.  Altho'  (he  did  not 
exceed  fixteen  drops,  yet  ftie  ahvays 
eat  her  dinner  better,  and  digefted  it 
with  the  fame  eafe,  as  when  flie  was  in 
health  ;  nor  did  flie  find  any  inconve- 
nience from  the  laicdamimf  except  that  it 
made  her  thirfly  in  the  afternoon. 

4.  In  fbme  cafes,  I  have  known  a 
pain  in  the  ftomach  with  vomiting  after 
eating,  cured  by  foap  taken  daily  to  the 
quantity  of  two  drachms  ;  in  other 
cafes,  half  a  pint  of  tepid  lime-water, 
drunk  thrice  a-day,  has  anfwered  better 
than  the  foap. 

When  a  heat  and  forenefs  in  the 
flomach  arife  from  an  acid,  the  tefla- 
ceous  powders  ought  to  be  taken  freely. 
They  have  alfo  cured,  at  leaft,  for  the 
time,  fome,  who,  upon  drinking  a  glafs 
of  wine,  have  felt,  in  their  flomach, 
a  burning  heat  inflantly  fpreading 
through,  alniofl,  their  whole  body. 

Several 


Nervous   Symptoms.  483 

Several  have  found  great  relief  from 
a  pain  in  the  ftomach,  both  before  and 
after  eating,  by  taking  a  large  draught 
of  warm  water  with  a  little  wine  or 
brandy  in  it. 

In  the  2d  vol.  of  the  Medical  Inquiries 
and  Ohfervations,  we  have  an  account 
of  a  violent  pain  in  the  region  of  the 
right  kidney  in  one  patient,  and  of  a 
pain  in  the  ftomach  in  another,  imme- 
diately relieved  by  a  draught  of  equal 
parts  of  fountain-water  boiling,  and 
Fymont  or  Bath  water.  But,  I  imagine 
the  relief  procured  in  thefe  cafes,  was 
rather  owing  to  the  warmth  of  the  li- 
quor than  any  virtue  in  the  Pyrmont  or 
Bath  water  ;  for  a  patient  of  mine  near 
eighty,  who,  after  having  been  long 
llibjed:  to  bloody  urine,  came  at  laft  to 
have  an  ulcer  in  his  bladder,  found  his 
pains  always  much  leilened,  and  fome- 
times  almoft  quite  removed,  by  drink- 
ing largely  of  Arabic  emulfion,  tea,  milk 
nnd  water,  or  weak  broth,  a  good  deal 
II  h   2  more 


484  Of  the  Cure    of 

more  than  blood-warm.  As  the  good 
ciFect  of  thefe  warm  liquors  was  always 
immediate,  it  muft  have  been  owing 
folely  to  their  aclion  on  the  nerves  of 
the  flomach.  We  know  that  warm 
-water  applied  externally,  often  eafes 
internal  pains  ;  it  is  no  wonder  then, 
that  warm  liquors  received  into  the  fto- 
mach,  a  part  much  more  fenfible  than 
the  fkin,  and  whofe  nerves  have  a  re- 
markable fympathy  with  almoft  every 
part  of  the  body,  fhould  have  equal  or 
more  powerful  effects  in  relieving  pains, 
even  in  fuch  parts  as  are  not  imme- 
diately connected  with  it. 

V.  A  C  o  L  I  c  of  the  hyfleric  or  flatu- 
lent kind. 

If  the  patient  be  coflive,  as  is  almoft 
always  the  cafe,  the  body  muft  be  open- 
ed by  laxative  clyfters,  to  wliich  a 
drachm  or  two  of  afa  fxtida  may  be 
added.  H  there  are  violent  vomitings, 
after  feveral  draughts  of  toaft  and  water. 


Nervous    Symptoms.  485 

a  mixture  ought  to  be  given,  of  fait  of 
wormwood,  lemon-juice  and  pepper- 
mint water*,  together  with  laudanum. 
However,  thefe  draughts  are  ofcen  inef- 
fe(ftual,  and  in  fome  few  patients  the 
vomiting  is  increafed  by  the  laudanum. 

In 

*  The  draughts  of  fait  of  wormwood  and  juice  of  le- 
mons are  obferved,  in  a  great  meafure,  to  lofe  their  power 
of  flopping  a  vomiting,  when  they  are  not  fwallowed  in 
the  aft  of  efFervefcence  :  And  is  not  their  fuperior  antieme  • 
tic  power,  in  this  ftate,  owing  to  their  making  a  much 
ftronger  imprefiion  upon  the  nerves  of  the  ftomach,  while 
they  continue  to  emit  their  fixed  air,  and  when  all  their 
parts  are  in  violent  motion,  than  after  faturation,  when 
they  can  aft  only  by  their  faline  quality  ?  For  while  the 
nerves  of  the  ftomach  are  afFefted  with  this  brifl<  and  unufual 
Jiimulus,  that  difagreeable  fenfation  which  produced  the 
vomiting  muft  be  lefTened  or  deftroyed.  And  is  it  not  the 
efFeft,  which  thofe  draughts  fometimes  have  in  preventing 
the  attack  of  intermittent  fevers,  to  be  afcribed  folely  to 
their  aftion  on  the  very  fenlible  nerves  of  the  ftomach,  and 
not  to  any  fudden  change  which  they  may  be  fuppofed  to 
produce  in  the  nature  of  the  humours  contained  in  the 
prim.r  vi^e  ?  Further,  are  not  many  of  thofe  mineral-waters 
which  contain  a  good  deal  of  fixed  air  and  fparkle  in  the 
glafs,  much  more  grateful,  as  well  as  invigorating  to  the 
ftomach  when  drunk  at  the  well,  than  after  they  have  ftood 
for  fome  time  in  an  open  veflel,  becaufe  in  this  laft  cafe 
they  have,  together  with  their  fixed  air,  loft  their  power  of 
gratefully  ftimulating  the  nerves  of  the  ftomach  ? 


486  Of  the  Cure   of 

In  fuch  cafes  I  have  always  fucceeded, 
by  ordering  a  clyfter  of  fix  ounces  of 
water,  with  fifty,  fixty  or  even  eighty 
drops  of  laudanum  ;  and  when  no  tho- 
rough paffage  could  be  procured,  I  gave, 
by  favour  of  this  opiate,  fome  pills  of 
aloes  with  calomel  ;  which  palling  into 
tlie  inteflines  before  the  vomiting  re- 
turned, generally  procured  a  plentiful 
evacuation  by  ftool,  which,  either  whol- 
ly, or  in  a  great  nieafure,  removed  the 
difeafe. 

If  the  purging  pills  fail  to  open  the 
body,  and  the  pain  and  vomiting  re- 
turn, another  anodyne  clyfler  mufl  be 
given,  and  foon  after  it,  a  larger  dofe 
of  the  pills  ;  and  a  little  before  the 
time  thefe  pills  may  be  expecfted  to 
Avork,  the  patient  fhould  go  into  the 
warm  bath.  In  patients  of  a  full  habit, 
efpecially  if  the  pain  be  very  great, 
fome  blood  ought  to  be  taken  away. 

To  prevent  the  frequent  return  of 
liyfleric  colics,    an   antihyfleric    plafler 

applied 


Nervous    SyiMPtoms.  487 

applied  to  the  abdomen,  a  dofe  of  the 
lacred  tincfture  or  elixir  once  a- week 
and  exercife,  elpecially  riding,  will  be 
found  ufeful.  A  milk  diet  has  fome- 
times  cured  thofe  who  have  been  much 
afflicled  with  thofe  colics  ;  and  the 
fulphureous  water  of  Moffat,  drunk  for 
two  or  three  months  in  the  Summer 
has,  in  fome  cafes,  made  their  returns 
much  lefs  frequent, 

VI.  FxATULENCE  in  the  ilomach 
and  bowels. 

The  medicines  moft  proper  in  com- 
plaints of  this  kind,  are  either  iuch  as 
procure  fpeedy  relief  by  expelling  the 
wind,  or  thofe  which,  by  ftrengthening 
the  alimentary  canal,  lefTen  its  genera- 
tion. Among  the  former,  I  have  found 
none  more  efficacious  than  the  fpiritus 
ssthereus  and  laudanum.  I  commonly  give 
the  laudanum  in  a  mixture  with  pepper- 
mint water  and  tindure  of  cafior,  or 
ffiritus   nitri  dnkis.      In  fome   cafes,    in 

place 


488  Of  the   Cure   of 

place  of  this,  I  prcfcribe  opium  in  pills 
with  afa  fa;tida.  And  here  it  may  be 
worth  while  to  obferve,  that  the  good 
efFedls  of  opiates  are  equally  confpicu- 
ous,  whether  the  flatulence  be  con- 
tained in  the  flomach  or  inteftines  ; 
whereas  thofe  warm  medicines  com- 
monly called  carminative,  do  not  often 
give  immediate  relief,  except  when  the 
wind  is  in  the  flomach. 

With  regard  to  the  fpiritus  eethereus, 
I  have  frequently  feen  very  good  eiFe<fls 
from    it    in    flatulent    complaints  ;     of 
which  I  fliall  content  myfelf  with  giving 
one   inftance.      A  Lady  aged   between 
40  and  50,    about   the  time   the   menfes 
were  leaving  her,    found  her   belly  in- 
creafe  fo  much  in  bulk,  that,  for  fome- 
time,  file  fufpe6led  herfelf  to   be  with 
child.      In  the  morning,    flie  was  often 
fo  much  fwelled  about   the  flomach,  as 
not  to   be   able  to  bear   her   flays,    or 
breathe  freely.      She  ufed   a  variety  of 
medicines,   but  nothing  gave  fuch  im- 
mediate 


Nervous    Symptoms.  489 

mediate  relief  as  a  tea-ipoonful  of  the 
fpirims  aethereusy  mixed  with  two  table- 
Ipoonfuls  of  water.  This  ahvays  made 
her  bring  up  a  good  deal  of  wind,  and 
leUened  the  flraitnefs  and  fwelling  about 
her  jftomach. 

In  gouty  cales,  the  fpiritiis  athcreiis, 
a  dram  of  French  brandy  or  of  the  aqtia 
aromatica  ;  and  ginger,  either  in  fub- 
ftance,  or  infufed  in  boiling  water,  are 
among  the  beft  medicines  to  expel 
wind. 

When  the  cafe  of  flatulent  pa- 
tients is  fuch  as  to  make  it  improper  to 
give  them  warm  medicines  inwardly,  a 
plafter  made  of  equal  parts  of  the  ejn- 
plaftriim  autibyjleriatm  and  Jiomacbiatm  may 
be  applied  to  the  ftomach  or  belly  witli 
advantage  ;  or  four  or  five  tea-fpoonfuls 
of  the  following  liniment  may  be  rub- 
bed into  them   at  bed-time. 

R.  Balf  anodyn.  Batean.  unc.  i. 
01.  mac.  perexprefT.  unc.  fs. 
menth.  drach.  ii.      Mifce, 

The 


49<5  Of  the   Cv  KE   of 

The  remedies  moil:  proper  for 
fh-engthening  the  flomach  and  bowels, 
and  confequently  for  lefTening  the  pro- 
duction of  flatulence,  are  the  bark,  bit- 
ters, chalybeates  and  exercife.  In  fla- 
tulent cafes,  I  add  to  the  tinClure  of  the 
bark  and  bitters,  which  I  have  fo  often 
recommended,  fome  nutmeg  or  ginger. 
And  when  I  prefcribe  the  filings  of 
iron,  I  join  tliem  with  the  piilvis  diaroma- 
ton.  When  windy  complaints  are  at- 
tended with  coftivenefs,  nothing  an- 
fwers  better  than  four  or  five  of  the  fol- 
lowing pills  every  other  night  at  bed- 
time, 

R.  h{.  fcEtid.  drach.  ii. 
Aloes  focotiin. 
Sal.  Mart. 

Rad.  zinziber.  ana  drach.  i. 
Elix.  proprietat.  q.  1".  ut.  f.  pil.  gr.  iv. 

On    the  other  hand,  when  the  body 

is  too  open,  twelve  or  fifteen  grains  of 

rhubarb,   with    half   a   drachm  or  two 

fcruples   of  the  confedio  Japonka,  given 

every   other   evening,    will   have    very 

o;ood  effecls. 

In 


Nervous    Symptoms.  491 

In  thofe  flatulent  complaints  which 
come  on  about  the  time  the  menfes  ceafe, 
repeated  fmall  bleedings,  often  give 
more  relief  than  any  other  remedy. 

With  regard  to  diet,  I  fliall  only 
obferve,  that  tea  and  all  flatulent  ali- 
ments are  to  be  avoided  ;  and  that,  for 
drink,  water  with  a  little  brandy  or 
rum,  is  not  only  preferable  to  malt  li- 
quor, but,  in  mofl  cafes,  alfo  to  wine. 

VII.  A  NERVOUS  or  fpalhiodic  afthma, 

(i.)  In  the  true  fpafmodic  afthma, 
where  there  is  no  fixed  obllrud:ion  in 
the  lungs,  nor  any  load  of  phlegm  op- 
preffing  them,  the  fits  are  befl:  relieved 
by  bleeding  and  opium.  If  the  patient 
be  of  a  full  habit,  we  may  bleed  largely ; 
if  otherwife,  we  mufl:  either  take  away 
little  blood,  or  omit  this  evacuation  al- 
together. 

The  opium  may  be  given  either  in  the 
form  of  the  elixir  paregoriamiy  or  in  fuch 
a  draught  as  the  following. 

R.  Aqu. 


49^  Of  the  Cure   of 

R.  Aqu.  menth.  unc.  i.  fs. 
Laud,  liquid. 

Sp.  volat.  oleof.  ana  gutt.  xxv. 
Syr.  commun.  drach.  ii.      Mifce. 

Si  r  Richard  Blackmore  tells  of  a  phyfi- 
cian,  much  afFecled  in  the  winter-time 
with  a  dry  aflhmn,  who  every  morning 
took  thu'ty  drops  of  laudanmn,  without 
w  hich  he  found  himfelf  unable  to  go  a- 
broad  about  his  bufinefs. 

Nor  are  opiates  lefs  fliccefsful  when 
a  true  fpafmodic  afhma  arifes  from  fym- 
pathy  with  the  flomach,  than  when  the 
nerves  of  the  lungs  are  themielves  pri- 
marily affecfled  *. 

That 

*  A  Gentleman,  aged  25,  after  having  taken  mercury 
for  feveral  weeks,  on  account  of  a  venereal  diforder,  be- 
came peevifh  becaule  of  his  confinement,  and  would  eat 
no  meat  for  upwards  of  twenty-four  hours,  but  drank 
largely  of  whey  and  water-gruel.  In  the  afternoon  he 
began  to  be  afFedled  with  a  difficulty  of  breathing,  unat- 
tended with  any  cough  or  fpitting.  The  tinfture  oi  cajior, 
fpirit  of  hartfliorn  and  other  medicines,  which  were  pre- 
fcribed,  gave  very  little  relief;  and  the  afthmatic  fit  be- 
coming much  woife  about  midnight,  a  draught  with  twenty 
drops  ot  laudanum  w;is  ordered.  This  foon  lefTened  ths 
difiicuity  of  breathing  fu  much,  that  he  fell  afleep,  and 

next 


Nervous    Symptoms,  4^3 

That  fenfe  of  faintnefs  about  the 
flomach,  with  a  frequent  fighing  and  a 
difficulty  of  breathing,  with  which  wo- 
men after  child-bearing  are  fbmetimes 
affefted,  when  the  miliary  eruption  does 
not  come  properly  out,  are  often  leflen- 
ed  or  removed  by  a  dofe  of  the  elixir 
faregoricwn,  or  a  bolus  of  cajior,  JaL  corn, 
cerv.  and  opium. 

In  the  true  fpafmodic  ajihma,  efpeci- 
ally  when  it  is  owing  to  wind  in  the 
flomach  and  bowels,  or  increafed  by 
this,  a  fblution  of  qfa  fa!tida,  the  tint^ure 
of  cajior  and  Ipirit  of  hartfhorn,  are  often 
ufeful,  altho'  their  antifpafmodic  virtue 
is  much  lefs  than  that  of  opiion. 

(2.)  When  an  afihma  of  the  fpafmo- 
dic kind  is  occafioned  by,  or  attended 
with  fome  fixed  obftruclions  in  the 
kuigs  or  a  confiderable  accumulation  of 
luimours  in  them,  we  mufl  ufe  a  method 
.of  cure    fomewhat   different    from  the 

above. 

next  morning  awaked  in  a  great  raeafure  free  of  this  com- 
plaint, which,  after  eating  feme  broiled  chicken  to  din- 
ner, left  him  entirely. 


494  Of  the  Cure   of 

above.  For  altho'  bleeding  is  equally 
uieful,  and  often  more  neceflary  here, 
than  in  the  true  fpafmodic  tijlh?na ;  yet 
opiates  are  not  to  be  given  to  leflen  the 
fits,  till  after  the  lungs  have  been  fuffi- 
ciently  cleared  by  evacuations  and  at^ 
tenuating  medicines.  A  large  blifter 
between  the  fhonlders  is  of  excellent  ufe 
to  promote  expectoration  and  relieve 
the  lungs.  Vomits  are  likewife  proper, 
but  cannot  be  fafely  given,  till  after  the 
afthmatic  fit  begins  to  abate.  In  fome 
patients,  a  purge  of  manna  and  glauber 
fait,  or  of  ibluble  tartar,  almoft  always 
lelfens  or  carries  off  the  fit :  while  in 
others,  who  have  weaker  bowels,  what- 
ever purges  brifkly,  whether  it  be  food 
or  medicine,  is  apt  to  bring  on,  or,  at 
leafb,   to  increafe  the  fit. 

For  prefent  relief,  I  commonly  give 
fyir'it  of  hartfliorn  or  compounded  tinc- 
ture of  caftor,  diluted  with  a  fufficient 
quantity  of  water.  With  the  fame 
view  alfo,  a  table-fpoonful  of  a  folution 

of 


Nervous    Symptoms.  495 

of  eqvial  parts  of  gum  ammoniac^  and  afa 
fxtida  in  penny-royal  water,  may  be 
taken  five  or  fix  times  in  twenty-four 
hours. 

A  DRAUGHT  of  Water,  with  ^  part 
of  vinegar,  and  fweetened  with  honey 
or  fligar,  often  gives  confiderable  re- 
lief in  afthmatic  fits  ;  altho'  fuch  is  the 
difference  of  conflitutions,  that  I  have 
met  with  fome  perfons  whofe  breatliing 
was  ahvays  made  worfe  by  acids  of 
every  kind. 

Those  aflhmatic  patients,  whofe  flo- 
mach  and  bowels  are  weak,  and  much 
troubled  with  flatulence,  do  better  with 
the  lighter  flefh-meats  and  a  little  wine, 
than  with  a  milk  and  vegetable  diet  ; 
and  the  folution  of  ginn  ammoniac,  with 
acetum  fcillitiaim  or  ihe  pilule  Jailitiae,  do 
not  commonly  agree  fo  well  with  them 
as  the  afa  fcotida  and  volatile  alcaline 
falts. 

When  elderly  perfons  have  been 
feized  with  an  aftmatic  paroxyfm  from 

the 


49  6  Of  the  Cure  of 

the  gout  attacking  the  lungs,  I  have 
found  mofl  benefit  from  blifters  applied 
between  the  (lioulders  and  to  the  leo-s. 
and  from  bolufes  of  gum  ammoniac,  faL 
vol.  ammon,  and  camphire,  given  twice 
or  thrice  a-day. 

(3.)  To  prevent  the  return  of  the 
fits  in  the  true  fpafmodic  aflhma,  we 
muft:  endeavour  to  flrengthen  the  lungs 
and  whole  nervous  iyllem  by  means 
of  the  bark,  chalybeates,  elixir  of  vi- 
triol, a  proper  diet,  country  air,  and 
riding. 

A  FLANNEL  waiffccoat  next  the  fkin, 
or  a  large  piece  of  flannel  wore  on  the 
breaft,  has  contributed  to  prevent  the 
frequent  return  of  afthmatic  fits. 

Th  e  patients  fliould,  above  all  things, 
-avoid  eating  or  drinking  fb  much,  at 
once,,  as  to  burden  their  flomach. 

In  the  mixed  ajihma,  the  bark  mufl 
be  ufed  with  more  caution,  efpecially 
if  the  lungs  be  confiderably  obflrudled, 
or  loaded  with  phlegm  ;    and  the  cure 

mufl 


Nervous    Symptoms.  4^7 

miifl  be  chiefly  attempted  by  iiTues  in 
the  back  and  arms,  or  a  feton  in  the 
fide  ;  and  by  other  medicines  that  tend 
to  remove  the  obftruclion  in  the  pul- 
monary vefTels,  or  lelTen  the  flux  of  hu- 
mours to  them  ;  of  this  kind  are,  the 
piluU  fcilliticce  taken  in  fiich  quantity  as 
keep  the  body  ahva^/s  open  ;  pills  of 
garlic  and  foap;  the  juice  of  forty  or 
fifty  millipede  in  two  or  three  table- 
fpoonfiils  of  French  white-wine,  Rheuijh 
or  cyder,  taken  twice  a-day  ;  and  crude 
mercury,  or  quickfilver  pills,  which  have 
fometimes  cured  aflhmatic  ailments  af- 
ter other  remedies  had  failed. 

As  not  only  different  patients  are  re- 
lieved by  different  remedies,  but  the 
fame  patients,  from  a  change  in  their 
conflitution,  or  in  the  nature  of  the 
dilbrder,  often  require  a  confiderable 
change  in  their  medicines  and  diet,  it 
may  not  be  amifs  to  add  the  following 
caie  of  one  who  has  been  long  fubjecl 
to  (evere  afthmatic  fits. 

I  i  A  Gen-le- 


498  Of  the  Cure  of 

A  Gentleman,  aged  about  forty,  of 
a  ipare  make,  lively,  healthy  and  ullng 
a  great  deal  of  exercife,  one  day,  after 
too  great  an  exertion   of  his   ftrength, 
began  to  feel  a  pain  in  his  breaft  about 
the  fiernum.      Two   years  after  this,  he 
was,  at  times,    affecfted  with  a  difficulty 
of  breathing ;   which  continued  to   in- 
creafe   for  feveral  years,   and  was  gene- 
rally attended  with  a  great  flux  of  hu- 
mours upon  his  lungs,    and  a  confider- 
able  expedloration  of  a  thick  phlegm. 
In  violent   fits,    he   found  the  moft  im- 
mediate relief  from  bleeding  and  bliflcr- 
ing  ;    and  he  ufed,  with  advantage,  vo- 
mits of  ipecacuanha  with  the  oxymel  fcilli- 
ticwTif   and  xhe.piliiU  fcillitic^e   or  a  folu- 
tion  of  gum  ammoniac  with  acetum  fcilliti'' 
cum.       He   abftained    for    feveral    years 
from   wine,  malt-liquor,    and   all  flefh- 
meats,  except  chicken  ;   and  often  made 
Ills  dinner  of  bread  and  butter-milk  on- 
ly.     He  frequently  found  his  breathing 
made  eaficr,   by  drinking  water  with  a 

little 


Nervous    Symptoms.  4^^ 

little  vinegar,  feveral  times  through  the 
day. 

After  he  had  fuffered  much  by  ma- 
ny violent  attacks  of  this  diforder,  he 
began  to  complain  of  wind  in  his  fto- 
mach ;  and,  upon  vomiting,  difcharged 
a  good  deal  of  tough  phlegm.  His 
body  became  likewife  too  open,  and 
whatever  food  or  medicine  increafed 
this  dilpofition  was  hurtful  to  him.  The 
fquill-pills  and  the  lac  ammoniacum  with 
the  acetiim  fcillitkum,  did  not  now  agree 
near  fo  well  with  him,  or  do  him  fo 
much  fervice  as  the  compound  tinOure 
of  cajlor,  or  a  folution  of  afa  fatida  with 
a  little  fal.  vol.  ammon,  in  penny-royal  or 
mint-water  :  And  a  bit  of  broiled  meat, 
with  two  or  three  glailes  of  claret  after 
his  meals,  agreed  better  with  him  than 
vegetable  food,  or  watery  liquors  alone ; 
but  he  found  it  befl  to  eat  little  at  a 
time,  and  often.  Now  alfo,  he  found 
great  benefit  from  the  bark,  not  only  in 
the  intervals,  but  alfo  in  the  decline  of 
I i   2  the 


500  Of  the  Cure  of 

the  fits.  He  took  it  in  deco<flion,  witii 
four  ounces  of  the  tincture  added  to 
each  pound,  tjo  the  quantity  of  two 
table-ipoonfuls  four  times  a-day  ;  and> 
fo  far  from  finding  it  increafe  his  whee- 
zing or  diifi  culty  of  breathing,  he  thought 
it  often  lefFened  them,  and  prevented  or 
broke  the  force  of  finaller  paroxyfms. 

Soon  after  he  became  fubjecl  to  fits 
of  loofenefs,  he  began  to  fpit  lefs  than 
ke  had  done  for  feveral  years  before  ; 
and  now  I  obferved  that  bUfters,  which 
run  longer  with  him  tlian  mofl  people, 
did  him  lefs  fervice  than  formerly,  when 
he  had  a  greater  exped:oration  and  no 
tendency  to  a  loofenefs.  During  the  vio- 
lence of  the  worft  fits,  he  Ibmetimes  al- 
mofl  lofes  his  fight,  nor  is  he  then  able  to 
cough  till  they  begin  to  abate.  At  firfl 
he  brings  up  a  little  tough  phlegm  with 
great  difficulty,  but  as  the  conftri^lion 
in  the  lungs  lefTens,  he  expectorates 
more  freely* 

For 


Nervous   SyxMptoms.  501 

For  fome  years,  he  had  more  fre- 
quent returns  of  his  difeafe  in  Summer 
and  Autumn  than  in  winter  ;  fudden 
changes  of  weather,  cold  or  fatigue 
bring  on  the  ajlbmay  which  he  can  fome- 
times  foretel  by  the  palenefs  of  his 
m'ine.  Flatulent  aliments  and  what- 
ever purges  him  much,  will  now,  in 
his  befl  health,  occafion  a  flight  fit.  Al- 
tho'  he  has  been  often  free  from  any 
violent  attack  for  two  or  three  months, 
yet  he  feldom  breathes  in  the  night  fo 
freely  as  one  in  perfect  health.  His 
pulfe  is  often  fmall,  his  extremities  cold, 
and  face  livid,  during  a  fevere  fit.  After 
bleeding,  his  pulfe  becomes  fuller  and 
quicker  ;  but  does  not  return  to  its  na- 
tural flownefs  till  his  breathing  is  free. 
The  fits  are  generally  over  in  two  or 
three  days,  fometimes  they  lafl:  eight 
or  ten  ;  and,  after  yielding  in  part,  re- 
turn a  fecond  time  with  more  violence. 
He  is  commonly  worfl  in  the  evening 
or   in    the    night  ;     and  has  fometimes 

exacerbations 


502  Of  the   Cure    of 

exacerbations  evening  and  morning. 
The  paroxyfms  of  late  are  almoft  always 
attended  with  complaints  of  flatulence 
in  his  itomach,  and  he  finds  relief  as 
often  as  he  brings  up  wind.  The  re- 
medies which  in  this  flate  have  been 
of  moft  fervice  to  his  flomach,  are  the 
bark,  a  folution  of  afa  fcctiday  the  emplaf- 
trtim  antibyjiericum  applied  to  the  epiga- 
flric  region,  and  the  diet  of  flefh-meats 
with  claret.  A  bit  of  mutton-chop  has 
often  given  him  relief  in  leller  fits  of 
bad  breathing.  Obferving  that,  even  in 
the  intervals  of  the  fits,  he  often  breath- 
ed with  difliculty  about  three  or  four 
in  the  afternoon,  he  eat  a  little  mutton- 
chop,  beef-ilake,  or  broiled  chicken  be- 
tween eight  and  nine  in  the  morning, 
and  dined  between  one  and  two  on 
panada  with  a  little  claret,  or  fomething 
equally  light.  By  this  means  he  found 
the  wheezing  and  difficulty  of  breathing 
in  the  afternoon  ahvays  much  leffened, 
and    fometimes    prevented    altogether. 

He 


Nervous   Symptoms.         503 

He  often  cirank  near  two-thirds  of  a 
bottle  of  claret  daily,  but  feldom  took 
above  a  quarter  of  a  pint  of  it  at  once. 
By  this  diet,  and  the  conflant  ufe  of  the 
bark,  for  above  two  months,  firfl  in 
tind:ure  and  deco£lion,  and  afterwards 
in  fubftance,  he  not  only  breathed  more 
eafily  at  all  times,  but  was  kept  much 
longer  free  of  the  afthmatic  fits  than 
uflial,  not  having  had  an  attack  of  this 
kind  worth  mentioning,  from  the  begin- 
ning of  November  till  tlie  April  or  M^y 
following  ;  notwithftanding  his  having 
been  affected  feveral  times,  during  the 
winter  months,  with  a  cough  and  a  con- 
fiderable  expectoration  of  thick  phlegm. 

VIII.  A  PALPITATION  of  the  heart. 

(i)  When,  from  a  weak  or  diforder- 
ed  ftate  of  the  ftomach,  the  heart,  by 
fympathy,  is  rendered  fo  irritable,  as 
from  very  flight  caufes  to  be  liable  to 
flrong  palpitations,  the  moft  proper  re- 
medies are,  the  tindure  of  the  bark  and 

bitters. 


504  Of  the  Cv  K  E    of 

bitters,  and  moderate  exeixife.  If  there 
be  any  noxious  humours  lodging  in  the 
ftomach,  vomits  will  be  proper  ;  and, 
if  the  patient  be  any  ways  coftive,  a 
table-lpoonful  of  the  facred  elixir  may 
be  given  once  in  two  or  three  nights. 

For  prefent  relief,  fpirit  of  hartfhorn, 
the  tiiiBura  cajiorei  compofita,  fpiritus  tethc' 
reus  and  opiates  generally  anfwer  beft. 

(2)  When  palpitations  proceed  from 
the  gouty  matter  affecting  the  heart,  we 
ought  to  trufl  chiefly  to  warm  llomacliic 
laxatives,  to  campliire,  the  volatile  falts, 
the  warm  pedilirjium,  bliflers  applied  to 
the  legs,  or  iinapifms  to  the  foles  of  the 
feet  ;  and  to  bleeding,  if  the  patient  be 
of  a  full  habit. 

(3)  When  palpitations  arife  from  the 
fupprelhou  of  fome  habitual  evacuation ; 
if  this  cannot  be  reflored,  the  redun- 
dant humours  are  to  be  carried  off  by 
fmall  bleedings,  gentle  purges,  diapho- 
retics or  iilues. 

(4)  Lastly, 


Nervous    Symptoms.  505 

(4)  Lastly,  when  palpitations  are 
owing  to  pol'jpi  in  the  heart  itfelf,  or  in 
the  great  blood-vefTels  opening  into  it, 
to  accretions  of  the  pericardium  to  the 
heai't,  olfiiied  valves  or  fuch  like  caufes  ; 
the  difeafe  may  be  looked  upon  as  in- 
curable ;  fince,  hitherto,  we  know  of  no 
medicines  which  can  remove  thefe 
caufes.  However,  fome  relief  may  be 
procured  by  frequent  fmall  bleedings, 
gentle  purges,  and  a  cooling  attenuating 
light  diet ;  at  the  fame  time,  avoiding 
all  viicid,  incrafTating  and  heating  ali- 
ment, and  every  kind  of  exercife  that 
too  much  quickens  the  motion  of  the 
blood. 

IX.  An  immoderate  difcharge  of 
pale  urine. 

As  I  have  obferved  above*,  that  the 
proximate  caufe  of  that  great  difcharge 
of  pale-water,  to  which  hyfleric  people 
are   frequently  liable,    is   an   increafed 

motion 

*  See  chapter  VI.  N".  VIII. 


5o6  Of  the  Cure  of 

motion  of  the  fecretory  vefTels  of  the 
kidneys ;  fo  there  is  no  medicine  that 
will  generally  lefTen  it  fo  foon,  or  fo 
remarkably  as  of  him  *  ;  but  as  opimn  does 
not  ftrengthen  the  kidneys,  nor  remove 
the  feveral  remote  caufes  of  this  increa- 
led  fecretion,  other  remedies  are  re- 
quired to  prevent  its  frequent  returns. 

Those  which  have  fucceeded  beft 
with  me  are,  the  bark,  either  in  fubflance 
or  decoction,  with  fome  cinnamon  add- 
ed to  it  ;  fmall  dofes  of  the  tiuBura 
rhaharhari  amara  cum  vim  once  in  three  or 
four  nights,  moderate  exercile  on  horfe- 
back  or  in  a  chaifc,  and  a  diet  confiding 
chiefly  of  rice,  iago,  falep,  and  the  light- 
er fle/li-meats  roafled,    together  with  a 

few 

*  Altho'  in  fome  flatulent  or  fpafmodic  cafe?,  cpitan 
often  proves  one  of  the  beil  diaretics,  yet  it  has  a  contrary 
effi;d,  when,  on  account  of  an  uncommon  irritation  of  the 
nervous  fyflem,  the  urine  is  fecreted  in  too  great  quantity. 
I  know  an  elderly  Lady,  who  is  frequently  hot  and  uneafy 
in  the  night,  and  pafles  a  great  deal  of  pale-water,  whom 
A  dole  of  lavdamm,  at  bed-time,  always  relieves,  in  a  great 
nieature,  of  this  Sax,  aitho'  it  feldom  procures  her  good 
reih 


Nervous   Symptoms.         507 

few  glafles  of  claret   or  red  port  after 
meals. 

In  cafes,  where  the  flux  of  pale  urine 
is  attended  with  hectical  heats,  I  add 
to  the  above  remedies  the  tlndura  rofu' 
rujiiy  or  ehxir  of  vitriol. 

When  the  increafed  fecretion  is,  in 
a  great  meafure,  owing  to  a  particular 
debility  of  the  kidneys,  a  flannel-fliirt 
will  fometimes  leflen  the  quantity  of 
the  urine,  by  increaling  the  perfpira- 
tion. 

A  TIGHT  belt  about  the  loins,  or  a 
ftrengthening  plafter  applied  to  them, 
has  been  attended  with  remarkable 
effects,  as  will  appear  by  the  following 
cafes. 

(i)  A  GENTLEMAN  near  40,  troubled 
with  wind  in  his  ftomach,  and  with 
gouty  pains  in  his  feet,  in  Auguft  1753, 
w^as  attacked  Avith  fits  of  ficknefs  at  his 
ftomach,  attended  with  a  quicknefs  of 
pulfe,  for  which  he  lay  in  bed  and 
fweated    for  fever al    days.      After  this, 

he 


50 8  Of  the  Cure   of 

he  began  to  make  great  quantities  of 
pale  water,  info  much  that  in  the  night, 
he    commonly  ufed    to   pais    near    an 
Englifh  pint  every  two  hours  :     After 
getting  up,  the  quantity  began  to  leflen, 
and  continued  to  diminifli   as   the   day 
advanced.      Notwithftanding  the  ufe  of 
the   bark,    conferve  of  rofes,  alom  and 
feveral  other  medicines,  for  near  a  fort- 
night, this  flux  of  urine  increafed,  and, 
for  the  two  laft  days,  it  had  been  made 
almoft  as  plentifully  in  the  day  as  in  the 
night.     From  a  fufpicion  that  this  pro- 
fuie  fecretion  might  arife  either  from  a 
laxity  or  weaknefs  of  the  renal  vellels, 
or   from   their   being    affefted  with  an 
luicommon  alternate  motion,  about  two 
in  the  afternoon,   a  broad  pofting  belt 
was  put  about  the  belly  and   loins,    as 
tight  as  the  patient  could  bear  it :   And 
altlio'   all    that    morning,   and  the  day 
before,  he  had  made,  every  two  hours 
at  Icaft,   three  gills  of  urine,  almoft  as 
clear  .as   rock-water,  yet,  after  the  belt 

was 


Nervous   SymptoiMs.  509 

was  on,  he  voided  none  for  above  four 
hours,  and  then  not  quite  half  a  pint. 
About  ten  at  night,  he  pafTed  much  the 
fame  quantity  ;  but  not  being  able  to 
fuffer  the  belt  in  bed,  it  was  removed, 
and  the  flux  of  urine  returned  in  the 
night  time,  though  not  to  that  degree 
it  had  done  for  feveral  nights  before. 
From  this  time,  by  keeping  to  the  belt, 
riding  out  in  a  chaife,  and  returning  to 
the  ufe  of  light  fiefli  meats,  which,  on 
account  of  a  quicknefs  in  his  pulfe  and 
great  thirft,  he  had  almoft  wholly  ab- 
ftained  from,  the  flux  of  urine  daily 
leflened,  and  the  patient  recovered. 

(2.)  A  Gentleman,  upwards  of  30, 
after  having  been  in  a  flow  fever,  at- 
tended with  rlieumatic  pains,  for  ten 
or  twelve  days,  began  (November  20. 
1745)  to  make  a  great  deal  of  pale 
water,  and  chiefly  in  the  night  time, 
this  diforder,  notwithflanding  the  uie 
of  the  bark,  tinBura  rofamm  and  other  re- 
medies, continued  without  any  fenflble 
abatement    till    the    24th    of  December^ 

when 


51  o  Of  the  CvKE    of 

when  a  large  plafter  of  the  cmplaftriim 
defenftviim  being  applied  to  the  os  facrum 
and  loins,  had  fo  good  an  efFed:,  that, 
on  the  night  following,  he  made  no  wa- 
ter till  after  he  had  been  three  hours  in 
bed  ;  though,  for  fome  time  before,  he 
had  feldom  lain  an  hour  and  a  half 
without  a  call.  The  fecond  night,  he 
was  above  four  hours  in  bed  before  he 
was  diftiu'bed,  and  the  quantity  of  urine 
through  the  whole  night  did  not  exceed 
five  gills;  whereas,  for  feveral  weeks 
before,  it  had  commonly  amounted  to 
three  Englifl)  pints  a-night,  and  fome- 
times  to  much  more.  In  leis  than  a 
week,  from  the  time  he  had  the  plafter, 
the  urine  returned  to  its  natural  colour 
and  quantity,  and  die  patient  foon  re- 
covered his  ftrength. 

The   fame  Gentleman,   in   November 

1750,  after  a  fever  and  cough,   was  a- 

gain   attacked  with   his   old  diftemper, 

upon    which  he    had    immediately   re- 

courle  to  the  emplaftrum  defenfivum^  which, 

though 


Nervous   Symptoms.  511 

though  it  feemed,  fbmewhat,  to  reftrahi 
tlie  flux,  for  the  firll  night,  yet  had  no 
effect  afterwards.  But  it  is  to  be  ob- 
ferved,  that,  on  this  relapfe,  neither  the 
bark  nor  the  other  flrengtheners  had 
been  ufed  before  the  plafter. 

(3)  Mr  J.  P.  aged  above  50,  after  a 
tedious  fever  in  Jul^  175S,  began  to 
make  in  the  night  great  quantities  of 
pale  water,  which  much  retarded  his 
recovery.  After  ufing  the  bark,  claret, 
and  other  remedies,  I  advifed  him  to 
apply  to  his  loins  the  fame  ftrengthen- 
ing-plafter  wliich  I  had  found  fo  fervice- 
able  to  the  laft  mentioned  patient;  by- 
means  of  Avhich,  the  flux  was  in  a  few 
clays  fenfibly  diminiOied,  although  not 
quite  ftopt  for  fever al  weeks. 

X.  Periodical   headachs. 

(i.)  When  thefe  arife  from  a  dilbr- 
dered  (late  of  tlie  ftomach,  the  befl 
medicines  are  vomits,  flomachic  laxa- 
tives, and  bitters.      If  there  is  an  acid 

in 


512  Of  the    Cv  KE   of 

in  the  ftomach,  the  teflaceous  powderSj, 
magnefia  alba  or  lime-water  will  be  of 
great  ufe. 

(2)  When  periodic  headachs  pro- 
ceed from  a  rheumatic  or  gouty  hu- 
mour affecting  the  fmall  veflels  or  nerves 
of  the  pericranium,  or  other  parts  of  the 
head;  the  propereft  remedies  are  bli- 
fters  applied  to  the  head  or  legs ;  iiTues 
in  the  head  or  neck  ;  the  warm  pcdilu- 
vium,  with  dry  friftion  of  the  legs  and 
feet,  and  frequent  doles  of  facred  tinc- 
ture*. 

In  a  violent  pain  of  the  head  from  a 
rheumatic  humour,  after  feveral  other 
remedies  had  failed,  I  have  feen  good 
effecT:s  from  fifteen  or  twenty  grains  of 
gwjh  guaiac.  with  ten  grains   of  fal.   vol. 

ammon. 

*  The  following  efFeft  of  an  extraordinary  dofe  of  facred 
tindlure  was  communicated  to  me  by  a  phyfician  of  cha- 
ratler.  A  Lady,  affliifted  with  a  rheumatic  pain  in  her 
head,  by  miflake.  drank  over  night  at  once,  near  an  Englifh 
pint  of  facred  tinftnre.  Next  day,  fhe  purged  feven  times, 
and,  for  three  days  after,  falivated,  as  if  fhe  had  taken  mer- 
cury, but  was  entirely  cured  of  the  pain  of  her  head. 


Nervous    Symptoms.  513 

ammon.  given  in  a  bolus  at  bed-time, 
and  repeated  for  feveral  nights. 

Th  e  pulvis  foL  afari  ufed  as  a  fternu- 
tatory  has  fometimes  cured  obflinate 
headachs,  by  making  a  large  evacuation 
from  the  vellels  of  the  nofe. 

(3.)  When  periodic  or  frequently  re- 
turning pains  of  the  head  are  owing  to 
a  peculiar  weaknefs  or  delicacy  of  the 
nerves  of  that  part,  rendering  them  li- 
able to  be  affected  by  flight  caufes,  we 
mud  attempt  to  relieve  the  patients  by 
the  bark,  chalybeates,  moderate  exer- 
cife,  and  daily  wafliing  of  the  head  with 
cold  water.  Here  alfo,  fome  of  thofe 
medicines,  commonly  called  nervous, 
may  be  of  ufe,  fiich  as  camphire,  mufk, 
and  valerian.  The  laft  of  thefe  has 
been  commended  as  a  kind  of  ipecific 
in  obftinate  hemicranias *  ;  and  I  have 
found  it  ferviceable  in  removing  a  con- 
fufion  of  the  head,  with  which  an  epi- 
leptic patient,  of  very  delicate  nerves, 
K  k  was 

*  See  Fordjce  de  Hemicrania. 


514  Of  the  CvKE    of 

was  almofl  conftantly  afFecled  ;  as  well 
as  ill  lefTening  or  protracting  the  returns 
of  the  convulfive  fits.  The  valerian,  in 
this  cafe,  was  given  in  the  form  of  an 
electuary,  and  to  the  quantity  of  three 
drachms  daily. 

(4.)  When  headachs  are  regular  as 
to  their  periods,  vomits  fliould  be  given 
an  hour  and  a  half,  or  two  hours,  before 
the  returns  of  the  fits,  and  the  bark  be- 
tween them. 

I  HAVE  known  a  violent  hemicrania, 
which  returned  regularly  at  a  certain 
time  of  the  day,  in  a  good  meaflire 
prevented  by  taking  the  following 
draught,  an  hoiTr  before  the  coming  on 
of  the  pain. 

R.  Laud.  liquid,  gutt.  xl. 
Tinft.  ipecacuan.  gutt.  xlv. 
Sp.  Minderer,   unc.  fs. 
Aqu.  rofar.  unc.  i. 
Sacch.  alb.  drach.  ii.       Mifce. 

This   medicine,  while  it   leiTens  the 

pain,    feldom    fails   to  raife    a  plentiful 

fvveat. 

(5)  When 


Nervous    SyiMptoms.  515 

(5.)  When  headachs,  whether  regu- 
larly periodic  or  not,  arife  from  a  fup- 
prelTion  of  the  menjh,  we  muft  endea- 
vour to  reflore  this  evacuation  ;  but  if 
that  cannot  be  done,  bleeding,  efpecial- 
ly  at  the  ancles,  perpetual  bliflers  or 
iflues  in  the  head  or  neck,  and  laxatives, 
are  the  beft  remedies. 

(6.)  When  the  returning  pain  has 
been  attended  with  a  fwelling  of  the 
part,  after  other  medicines  had  failed, 
mercurial  laxative  pills  have  fucceeded*. 

(7.)  To  relieve  prefent  pain  in  vio- 
lent periodic  headachs,  the  beft  remedies 

are 

*  A  Lady,  between  25  and  30,  of  a  thin  habit  and  deli- 
cate conftitution,  was  feveral  years  fince  attacked  with  a 
hemicrania,  which  returned  commonly  every  afternoon  ;  at 
which  time,  that  part  of  her  forehead,  which  was  affedted, 
was  often  fenfibly  fwelled.  She  kept  a  perpetual  blifter 
on  her  head  for  many  months,  ufed  facred  elixir  and 
tinfture,  pul'vis  afari  as  a  fternutatory,  and  other  remedies, 
without  any  benefit ;  infomuch  that  after  a  twelvemonth, 
lier  complaint  was  rather  worfe  than  ever.  I  then  advifed 
her  to  take  from  twelve  to  fixteen  grains  of  the  pilula  ?ner- 
curiales  laxantes  every  other  night.  By  the  ufe  of  thefe 
pills,  a  gentle  falivation  was  raifed,  and  kept  up  for  about 
twelve  days,  which  intirely  removed  the  headachy  nor 
has  flie  had  any  return  of  it  fince. 


5 1 6  Of  the   Cv  KE   of 

are  the  warm  pediluvium,  flannel  cloths 
wrung  out  of  hot  water,  or  a  hot  de- 
coction of  rofeniary,  anxl  applied  to  the 
fliaved  head  ;  x\\q  fpiritus  athereiu  applied 
in  the  hollow  of  one's  hand  to  the 
pained  part,  and  kept  there  for  fome 
minutes  ;  large  dofes  of  laiidamim,  and, 
in  fome  cafes,  leeches  put  to  the  tem- 
ples. 

Cold  water  will  give  eafe  in  fome 
headachs,  while  hot  applications  do 
moll:  fervice  in  others.  In  like  manner, 
ftiaving  the  head  relieves  fome  patients, 
but  is  hurtful  to  others. 

It  may  be  proper  to  obferve,  that  in 
all  violent  headachs,  we  ought  to  be- 
gin the  cure  with  bleeding,  either  by 
applying  leeches  to  the  temples,  or 
opening  the  artery  there.  If  the  pa- 
tient be  plethoric,  a  larger  quantity  of 
blood  may  be  taken  from  the  jugular 
vein. 

Moderate  exercife  is  generally  ufe- 
fiil  in  periodic  headachs,  from  which- 

foever 


Nervous    SymptOxMs.  517 

fbever  of  the  foregoing  caufes  they  may 
arife,  but  the  proper^me  for  it  is  in 
the  intervals  of  the  fits. 

XL  Low   fpirits. 

Hypochondriac  and  hyfteric  pa- 
tients are  commonly  afFecled  with  this 
complaint,  in  a  greater  or  lefs  degree. 
In  general,  exercife  and  the  cold  bath 
are  among  the  beft  remedies.  But  to 
be  more  particular, 

(i.)  When  low  fpirits  are  owing  to 
a  weak  flate  of  the  nerves  of  the  flo- 
mach  and  bowels,  the  tincture  of  the 
bark  and  bitters,  chalybeates,  aromatics, 
a  proper  diet  *  and  riding,  will  do  mofl 
fervice. 

(2,)  When  they  arife  from  obflruc- 
tions  in  the  hypochondriac  vifcera,  or 
a  foulnefs  of  the  flomach  and  inteflines, 
the  mofl  proper  medicines  are,  aloetic 
purges,    Harrigate  'waters,   and  foluble 

tartar, 

?  Sce^bove,  p.  35i,&c. 


51 8  Of  the   CVKZ   of 

tartar.      I  commonly  prefcribe   the  fo- 
luble  tartar  in  the  followhig  manner, 

R.  Tartar,  folub.  drach.  ii.  ad  unc.  fs. 
Solve  in  aqu.  fontan.  imc.  viii. 
Cui  adde  aqu,  cinnamom.  f.  v. 
Syr.  violar.  aa  unc.  i.     Mifce. 

This  fohition  is  to  be  taken  at  two 
or  three  draughts,  either  every  morning, 
or  only  once  in  two  days,  and  to  be 
continued  for  feveral  weeks. 

Doctor  Muzzel  has  publifhed, 
Ibme  years  lince,  feveral  inftances  of  the 
Htccefs  of  the  foluble  tartar  in  mad- 
nefs  and  melancholy.  In  cafes  of  low 
Ipirits,  I  have  found  it  cool  the  patients, 
dilpofe  them  to  lleep,  and  quiet  the  hur- 
ry of  their  fpirits ;  but  it  fometimes  be- 
comes hurtful  by  increafing  flatulence, 
and  occafioning  a  faintnefs  :  and,  as 
far  as  I  have  obferved,  the  foluble  tartar 
is  more  ufeful  in  maniac  or  melancholic 
diforders,  proceeding  from  noxious  hu- 
mours in  the  pn?!i£  vice,  than  in  thofe 
which  are  owing  to  a  fault  in  the  brain, 

(3.)  When 


Nervous    Sympto:-:3.  519 

[3.)  \Vhen  low  rpirits  proceed  from 
a  lupprellion  of  tlie  ?kc::Uj  or  hxmor- 
rhoids  ;  if  thcfe  evacuations  cannot  be 
rellored,  fome  oiliers  mull:  be  lubftitutcd 
in  their  pLice  :  but  notliing  lias  fucli 
fudden  good  eftects  as  bleeding*. 

(4.)   Lastly, 

*  A  Gentkwomaii,  aged  Mcf,  foon  after  die  mai/es  had 
left  her,  was  feized'with  a  coogh,  and  fomedmes  with  a 
flight  lutmsftte.  This  laft  fymptom  went  off  in  a  few 
mondis,  hot  die  coogh  lafied  abore  three  years  ;  and  npoa 
its  ceaflng,  fhe  began  to  be  mach  tioabled  \nth  wind  la 
her  ftomach,  low  ipirits,  a  confnfion  in  her  head,  and  a 
want  of  fkep.  In  this  condition  Ihe  condnoed  for  feveral 
months,  daring  which,  thefe  complaints  incieafed,  notwith- 
fiandiog  the  free  oie  of  warm,  carminative,  aromatic,  chaly- 
beate and  antihyfteric  medicines.  A  bkfier  applied  to  her 
head  leflened  the  confxifion  in  it,  acd  procured  her  better 
reft  for  a  few  m^ts.  BeUering  zr.a:  ii  :  :  .  :>.  ws;,  ia 
ibme   meafore,   a  oonfeqoence    ::  :     rrenlon  of  the 

memfesy  fo  the  wind  in  the  ftc  '.:--■  fririts  were 

owing  to  the  nerves  of  this  or^-  -  ':  ie  ..i.  by  that 

matter  which  ofed  to  be  thrown  o€  by  die  longs  ;  aliho' 
her  poUe  was  neither  full  nor  qaick,  I  orderei  :;  -.  :  -r.ces 
of  blood  to  !?e  tsken  from  the  arm;  imicc^.  v  ^."Bcr 
V.  rich,  hs:  re  relieved,  the  confofion  in  her  head 

removed,  and  die  flatdent  fymptoms 

This  peribn  afterwards,  upon  the  return  of  the  fame 
fymptoms,  has  found  bleeding  do  her  more  fenrice  than 
any  other  remedy. 


$20  Of  the  Cure  of,  See, 

(4.)  Lastly,  when  low  fpirits  or  me- 
lancholy have  been  owing  to  long  con- 
tinued grief,  afixious  thoughts,  or  other 
diftrefs  of  the  mind,  nothing  has  done 
more  fervice  than  agreeable  company, 
daily  exercife,  efpecially  travelling,  and 
a  variety  of  amufements. 


THE     END. 


C'-ii 


7> 


S  r^. 


IT'"     -   "^ 

ft" 


'/.■■^.' 


