ir^£ 


DUKE 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 


Treasure  H&om 


i> ; 


i 


V///76 


i  7 


i 


k 


LETTERS 


TO     A 


YOUNG     LADY, 


ON'     A    VARIETY    Of 


USEFUL  and  INTERESTING  SUBJECTS  r 


CALCULATED    TO 


IMPROVE  the  HEART,  to  FORM  the  MANNERS, 
and  ENLIGHTEN  the  UNDERSTANDING. 

"  That  our  Daughters  maybe  as  fiolified  Corners  of  the  Temple" 


By  the  Rev.  JOHN  BENNETT, 

Author  of  Striftures  on  Female  Education 
IN  TWO  VOLUMES. 


VOL.  I. 


HARTFORD: 

PRINTED  BY 

HUDSON  y  GOODWIN. 


1798. 


<7IL  L- 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


■*  HE  following  Letters  have  long  lain  by  the  au- 
thor in  ajlate  ofneglecl  ;  indeed  of  uncertainty  whether  the 
publication  of  them  would  do  any  credit  to  himfelf,  orfer- 
vice  to  the  world.  Nor  does  he  think,  that  he  Jhould 
ever  have  prefumed  to  expofe  them  before  the  formidable 
tribunal  of  the  public,  unlefs  animated  by  the  name  vf  the 
very  exalted  and  amiable  perfonage,  to  whom  they  arc 
addrejfed. 

If  they  deferve  no  fame,  they  ought,  however,  in  his 
opinion,  to  be  branded  with  no  malignant  or  invidious 
cenfure,  as  it  heir  intention  is  really  to  ferve  the  fairejl  and 
mojl  amiable  part  of  the  creation  ;  to  roufe  young  ladies 
from  a  vacant  or  injipid  life,  into  one  of  ufefulnefs,  and 
laudable  exertion — to  recal  them  from  vijionary  novels  and 
romances  into  folid  reading  and  reflection — and  from  the 
criminal  abfurdities  offajhion,  to  the  Jimplicity  of  nature 
and  the  dignity  of  virtue.  He  has  attempted  a  method  of 
uniting,  in  their  character,  the  graces  with  the  virtues  ; 
an  amiable  heart  with  elegant  manners  and  an  enlighten- 
ed under/landing  ;  and  if  he  Jhould  not  have fucceeded,  is, 
by  no  means  the  jirjl  perfon,  who  has  misjudged  his pow* 
ers,  "  qui  magnis  excidit  aufis,"  andean  refleSfor  his 
comfort,  that  laudable  projects  are  perhaps  the  whole, 
that  lies  within  the  narrow  circle,  or  the  talents  of  the 
bulk  of  mortals. 


jJfafJK&AskjgJk&qJKiqJK&s^^ 


TABLE  of  CONTENTS. 


This  JVorh  recommends,  in  the  following  Order, 

I.  RELIGIOUS  KNOWLEDGE  with  a  Lift 
of  proper  Writers. 

II.  Polite  Knowledge,  as  it  relates  to  the  Belles  Let- 
ins  in  general ;  Epiftolary  writing,  Hiftory,  the  Lives 
of  particular  Perfons,  Geography,  Natural  Hiftory, 
Aftronomy,  Poetry,  Painting,  Sculpture,  Architecture, 
Heraldry,  Voyages,  Travels,  &c.  with  a  catalogue  of, 
and  criticifms  upon,  the  moil  approved  authors  under 
each  article. 

III.  Accomplifhments,  as  difplayed  in  Needlework, 
Embroidery,  Drawing,  Mufic,  Dancing,  Drefs,  Polite- 
nefs,  &c. 

IV.  Prudential  conducl  and  maxims,  with  refpect  to 
Amufements,  Love,  Courtfhip,  Marriage,  &c. 


TO   THE 


Q^  U     E     E     N. 


MADAM, 


T 


HE  encouragement  of  every  thing  virtuous  and 
laudable  has  been  a  diftinguiihing  characleriilic  of  your 
reign  ;  and  if  licentioufnt-fs  and  vice  have  infefted  the 
kingdom,  it  is  not  becaufe  they  have  received  any 
countenance  from  your  fovereign  authority,  or  even 
wanted  its  mod  falutary  reftraints  and  pointed  oppo- 
fition. 

To  your  own  fex,  in  particular,  you  have  exhibi- 
ted a  mofr.  inltruclive  and  animating  example. — You 
have  taught  them  by  a  (ilent,  but  impreffive  language, 
to  depend  more  for  real  influence  and  efteem,  on  the 
mild,  the  foft,  and  the  attractive  graces,  than  on  all 
the  perifhable  appendages  of  greatnefs,  illuftrious  birth, 
political  interference,  or  even  the  dazzling  fplendours 
of  a  throne. 

In  an  age,  when  artificial  gaieties  have  almoft  ban- 
ifhed  the   fweeter  pleafures  of  fimplicity  and  nature, 
you  have  difplayed  as  great  a  fondnefs,  as  the  necef- 
A  2 


vi  DEDICATION. 

fary  avocations  of  royalty  would  permit,  for  domeftic 
retirement.  Fafhionable  mothers  might  have  derived 
a  lefTon  from  your  conduct.  You/  royal  breaft  has 
appeared  to  vibrate  with  a  more  exquifite  delight,  to 
the  carefTes  of  a  tender  offspring,  in  the  (hades  of 
Windfor,  than  it  ever  received  from  crowded  levee;, 
or  the  fuperbeft  brilliance  of  a  court. 

In  a  period  of  falfe  refinement,  when  conjugal  fidel- 
ity has  not  appeared  a  favourite  virtue,  your  Majefty 
has  been  a  model  of  as  delicate  an  attachment,  as  ever 
graced  the  pureft  ages  of  antiquity,  or  occurs  in  the 
voluminous  annals  of  the  world.  And  in  an  era  of 
fallidious  affluence,  when  Christianity  has  been  under- 
mined by  the  fubtilty  of  fceptics,  and  ftill  more  difgra- 
ced  by  the  lukewarmnefs  and  irregularities  of  its  pro- 
feilbrs  ;  when  its  grand  bulwark,  the  chriftian  fab- 
bath,  has  been  daringly  attacked,  particularly  amongft 
the  higher  ranks  of  people,  by  ma»y  kinds  of  licen- 
tious amufement,  you  have  done  every  thing  in  co-op- 
eration with  our  beloved  Monarch,  to  ftop  the  progrefs 
of  the  evil,  that  could  refult  from  virtuous  precepts, 
or  the  unfullied  luftre  of  example. 

Amicfil:  this  general  afTemblage  of  virtues,  there  is 
one  point,  however,  in  which  your  Majefty's  charac- 
ter mines  forth  with  peculiar  luftre,  and  will  command 
the  grateful  veneration  of  the  moil:  diftant  pofterity. 
It  is  that,  which  is  particularly  enforced  in  this  work, 
and  fo  clofely  interwoven  with  the  mod:  elTential  in- 
tereft  of  fociety — female  education.  This,  your  Ma- 
jefty is  allowed  to  have  ftudied  with  greater  earneft- 
nefs  than  any  woman  throughout  your  dominions  ; 
I  may  add,  with  better  fuccefs.  Your  royal  daughters 
are  a  daily  living  comment  on  the  excellence  of  your 
inftruftions,  and  are  infinitely  more  celebrated  for  the 
graces  of  their  hearts,  the  elegance  of  their  manners, 


DEDICATION.  fii 

and  the  improvement  of  their  underftanding,  than  the 
magnificence  of  their  family,  or  the  fplendour  of  their 
birth. 

I  cannot,  therefore,  but  be  deeply  fenfible  of  the 
high  honour,  that  was  conferred  on  me,  when  your 
Majefty  condefcended  to  look  into  this  work  in  man- 
ufcript,  and  give  me  the  unreferved  privilege  of  infcri- 
bing  it  to  your  protection  ;  and  I  would  take  a  refpect- 
ful  leave  of  your  Majefty  with  uttering  an  earned  wifh, 
which,  elevated  as  you  are,  muft  come  near  the  heart 
—that  the  daughters  you  have  cultivated  with  fuch  a 
tender  afliduity,  may  long  continue  (what  they  are,) 
the  ornament  of  their  fex — of  their  kingdom — of  Eu- 
rope— the  prop,  when  file  wants  it,  of  their  declining 
parent  ;  your  confolers  in  that  awful  moment,  when 
even  Majefty  muft  be  duft,  and  your  companions  in 
that  heaven,  where  the  virtues  will  remain,  though  ti- 
tles and  greatnefs  and  diftinclions  are  forgotten  ! 

I  have  the  honor  to  be,  with  the  moft  profound 
gratitude  and  refpecl, 

Madam, 

Your  Majesty's 

moft  devoted  Subject 

and  Servant, 

THE  AUTHOR. 


LETTERS,  &c. 


LETTER  I. 
To  Miss  LUCT  

MY    DEAR    LUCY, 

THOUGH  I  myfelf  have  fuftained  an  heavy Iofs 
by  the  death  of  your  excellent  mother,  who 
Jived  fo  much  in  my  friend/hip  and  efteera,  and  by  her 
letters  and  fociety  had  conferred  upon  me  fome  of  the 
fweeteft  pleafures  in  human  life,  yet  you  alas  !  are  the 
principal  fufFerer  by  this  afflicting  difpenfation.  It 
would  give  me  the  lincereft  pleafure,  if  I  knew  how  to 
alleviate  your  grief,  or  afford  you  a  fingle  moment's 
confolation. 

I  need  not  prefs  on  you  the  doctrines  of  religion. 
You  have,  doubtlefs,  confidered  who  it  is,  that  has  de- 
prived you  of  this  invaluable  parent ;  a  God  of  infinite 
wifdom,  who  never  ftrikes,  but  at  the  fitteft  moment ; 
a  God  of  equal  goodnefs,  who  without  the  ftrongeft 
reafons,  would  not  afflicl,  and  a  being  of  unbounded 
power,  who  is  abundantly  able  to  make  up  your  lofs, 
and  open  to  you  a  thoufand  fources  of  comfort. 

Chriftianity  mould  exclude  all  unreafonable  forrow. 
If  we  believe  that  our  friends  are  dead  in  God  ;  we 
know  that  this  life  is  only  a  vapour  ;  that  our  fepara- 


i«  LETTERS  TO  A 

tion  is  but  for  a  moment,  and  that  we  (ball  foon  be  re- 
stored to  them  in  a  world,  where  life  is  without  pain, 
and  where  friendfhip  is  immortal. 

Though  you  are,  in  the  literal  fenfc,  an  orphan,  yet 
the  number  of  friends,  to  whom  you  arc  fo  juftly  dear, 
will  render  your  fituation  neither  folitary,  nor  defcnce- 
lefs.  The  fenfible,  the  elegant  and  the  good  will 
think  themfelves  honored  by  your  acquaintance.  They 
will  give  you  credit  for  inheriting  all  the  amiable  qual- 
ities of  a  mother,  who  was  revered,  as  far  as  known, 
whilft  nature  has  fo  ftrongly  imprinted,  on  your  face, 
the  refemblance  of  her  features. 

The  fcene  is  ft  ill  frefh  upon  my  memory,  when,  in 
her  lad  moments,  fhe  fo  flrongly  recommended  you  to 
my  protection.  And  though  me  naid  a  compliment 
to  my  abilities,  which  only  a  partial  friendfhip  could 
have  excited,  fhe  did  nothing  more  than  ftridt  juftice 
to  the  warmth  of  my  affection.  I  mall  really  think 
myfelf  complimented  by  your  correfpondence.  If  you 
will  call  me  father  or  brother,  you  will  give  an  unufual 
luftre  to  my  name.  This  fond  heart  mall  vibrate  to 
your  wifhes  and  your  happinefs  :  and,  if  you  will  oc- 
cafionally  vifit  my  little  cot,  it  mall  put  on  all  its  love- 
liefl  charms,  and  fmile  in  all  its  gayeft  attire,  to  receive 
fo  dear  and  fo  amiable  a  ftranger.  The  rofes  of  my 
humble  garden  fhall,  if  poflible,  be  doubly  fweet  ;  my 
Jeffamines  fhall  emit  an  unufual  fragrance  ;  and  if  na- 
ture will  but  obey,  I  will  order  the  general  fcenery  to 
be  delightful. 

We  fhall  reap,  I  am  afTured,  mutual  benefits  by  this 
acquaintance.  If  I  am  able  to  communicate  to  you 
any  little  knowledge,  you  will  more  than  repay  it  by 
that  eafe,  delicacy,  refinement,  confidence  and  expan- 
fion,  which  the  mind  never  effectually  feels,  but  in  the 
friendfhip  of  a  fenfible  and  an  interefting.  woman. 
Such  a  friendfhip  is  the  richeft  cordial  of  life.  Either 
•f  the  fexes  without  it,  are  never  what  they  fhould  be. 


YOUNG  LADY.  n 

Like  the  beft  figures,  mutilated,  they  appear  to  difad- 
vantage.  Unnatural  expedients  may  be  tried  to  fup- 
ply  its  place.  Bufinefs,  ambition,  an  o<ver-ft  rained  pru- 
dence,  or  peculiar  fituations  may  lead  us  to  deny  our- . 
felves  fo  fweet  a  pleafure  ;  but,  in  fact,  all  human  pro- 
jects and  fuccefTes  are  inftpid  without  it.  They  are 
rofelefs  thorns,  a  winter  without  a  fpring.  Pleafures 
have  n©t  their  relifh,  and  forrow  wants  a  bofom  to  re- 
cline on.  Our  manners  have  not  their  proper  foftnefs  ; 
our  morals  their  purity,  and  our  fouls  feel  an  uncom- 
fortable void. 

They,  who  talk  degradingly  of  women,  do  not  know 
the  value  of  the  treafure  they  defpife.  They  have  not 
iufricient  tafte  to  relifh  their  excellencies,  or  purity  e- 
nough  to  court  their  acquaintance.  They  have  taken 
the  portrait  of  abandoned  women,  a.nd  they  think  the 
features  applicable  to  all. 

The  fofter  fex,  it  is  certain,  are  exceedingly  injured 
by  their  education.  If  they  were,  what  they Jbou/d  be, 
they  are  thofe  lights  in  the  picture  of  human  life,  that 
are  intended  to  cheer  all   its  darknefs  and  its  fhades. 


LETTER  II. 

THE  education  of  women  is  unfortunately  direc~ 
ted  rather  to  fuch  accomplishments,  as  will  ena- 
ble them  to  make  a  noife  and  fparkle  in  the  world,  than 
to  thofe  qualities,  which  might  enfure  their  comfort 
here,  and  happinefs  hereafter.  Boarding  fchools  con- 
fult  but  little  thofe  domeftic  qualifications,  which  are 
confefTedly  the  higheft  point  of  ufefulnefs  in  your  fex, 
and  (till  lefs  that  folid  piety  and  virtue,  which  alone,  to 
an  intelligent  creature,  can  be  the  fource  of  any  real, 
heart-felt  enjoyment. 


12  LETTERS  TO  A 

Though  religion  is  indifpcnfably  neceffary  \oboib 
fexes,  and  in  every  poflible  character  and  ftation,  yet 
a  woman  feems,  more  peculiarly,  to  need  its  enlivening 
fupports,  whillt  her  frame  muft  be  confefled  to  be  ad- 
mirably calculated  for  the  exercife  of  all  the  tender  and 
devout  affections. 

The  timidity,  arifing  from  the  natural  weaknefs  and 
delicacy  of  yoar  frame  ;  the  numerous  difeafes,  to  which 
you  are  liable  ;  that  exquifite  fenfibility,  which  in  ma- 
ny of  you,  vibrate  to  the  flighted  touch  of  joy  or  for- 
row  ;  the  tremulous  anxiety  you  have  for  friends,  chil- 
dren, a  family,  which  nothing  can  relieve,  but  a  fenfe 
of  their  being  under  the  protection  of  God  ;  the  feden- 
tarinefs  of  your  life,  naturally  followed  with  low  fpirits 
or  ennui,  whilfr.  we  are  feeking  health  and  pleafure  in 
the  field  ;  and  the  many,  lonely  hours,  which  in  almoft 
every  fituation,  are  likely  to  be  your  lot,  will  expofe 
you  to  a  number  of peculiar  forrows,  which  you  cannot, 
like  the  men,  either  drown  in  wine,  or  divert  by  dif- 
fipation. 

From  the  era,  that  you  become  marriageable,  the 
fphere  of  your  anxieties  and  afflictions  will  be  enlarged. 
The  generality  of  men  are  far  from  acting  on  fuch  (trict 
principles  of  honour  and  integrity,  in  their  connections 
with  you,  as  they  would  rigidly  obferve,  in  matters  of  a 
much  more  trivial  importance.  Some  delight  in  fport- 
ing  with  your  niceft  fenfibilities,  and  afterwards  expo- 
ling  with  an  illiberal  triumph,  the  fondnefs  of  a  credu- 
lous and  unfufpecting  heart ;  others,  from  fafhion  mere- 
ly, and  to  be  called  men  of  gallantry,  will  fay  a  thou- 
fa,nd  civil  things,  and  mew  as  many  preferences,  with 
no  other  view,  than  to  amufe  the  moment,  or  acquire 
a  fantnftic,  vifionary  honour.  A  third  fort  of  men  (yes 
it  is  poflible  that  there  ihould  be  male  coquettes !)  will 
do  and  fay  every  thing  to  infpire  you  with  fondnefs, 
and  get  poiTeflion  of  your  heart,  without  proceeding  to 
that  explanation,  which  nature  has  intended  to  come 


YOUNG  LADY.  13 

fiom  us,  and  which  the  delicacy  of  your  fex,  whatever 
you  may  fujfer,  will  not  permit  you  to  demand.  Oth- 
ers, without  any  particular  defigns  upon  you,  or  im- 
proper attentions,  (lor  attachments  fpring  upinfenjibly, 
and  are  as  poflible  in  one  fex,  as  the  other,)  may  be 
too  agreeable  for  your  fafety  and  repofe,  and  leave  you 
to  a  filent  heartfelt  concern,  which  will  prey  doubly  in 
proportion  to  its  concealment — or  even  when  the  indif- 
foluble  knot  of  marriage  is  tied,  and  you^ave  refigned 
every  thing,  till  it  comes  to  your  name  and  perfon,  it 
may  be  to  a  man  of  mere  integrity,  who  knows  nothing 
of  thofe  many,  little,  tender  attentions,  which  involve 
fo  great  a  (hare  of  a  woman's  happinefs — it  may  be  to 
a  perfon  of  great  ambition,  who  has  neither  leifure  nor 
inclination  for  foft  domeftic  fcenes — it  may  be  to  a 
fafhionable  Infipid,  who,  for  the  fake  of  flirting  with 
fome  elegant  fair,  and  giving  your  jealonfy  the  wildefl 
range,  leaves  y&ur  charms  and  the  endearments  of  his 
children  to  perifli  in  neglect — nay  flakes,  perhaps,  his 
very  lajl  thoufand  on  the  uncertainty  of  game,  when 
the  unhappy  throw  may  confign  both  you  and  your 
helplefs  babes  to  poverty  and  ruin — or  it  may  be  to  a 
perfon  of  a  peevim,  ill-natured,  faturnine  caft,  artfully 
concealed  till  he  had  you  in  pofTeilion,  which  no  atten- 
tions can  alter,  no  charms  can  fweeten,  and  no  vivacity 
can  cheer.  Under  thtfe,  or  indeed  any  other  diftref- 
fes,  religion  is  the  only  true  and  unfailing  refource,  and 
its  hopes  and  profpecls,  the  only  folid  balls  of  confola- 
tion.  In  your  n)zny,folitaiy  moments,  what  can  afford 
the  mind  fo  fovereign  a  relief,  as  the  exercife  of  devo- 
tion to  an  all-prefent  God  ?  and,  when  domeftic  for- 
rows  clufter  upon  you,  which  you  cannot  reveal  to  any 
friend  on  earth,  what  method  have  you  left,  but  to 
pour  them  into  the  bofom  of  your  father  in  heaven,  who 
is  confeifedly  the  friend  of  the  friendlcfs,  always  wil- 
ling to  hear  their  cries,  and  always  able  to  protect. 
B 


i4  LETTERS  TO  A 

The  period,  my  dear  girl,  I  trull,  is  diftant,  when 
fuch  afflielons  (hall  attack  your  glowing  fcnlibility. 
They  may  come,  however,  when  1  am  no  more  ;  when 
this  tongue  cannot  give  a  word  of  comfort,  nor  thefe 
eyes  drop  a  fympathizing  tear.  If  they JhouM,  remem- 
ber my  advice,  and  let  your  friendfhip  ftrew  a  few, 
purple  flowers  over  the  grave  of 

Your  very  faithful  and  affectionate, 


LETTER  III. 

I  CONSIDERED  devotion,  in  my  laft  letter,  only 
as  an  advantage  for  relieving  folitude,  or  as  the 
beft  refource  under  any  afflictions.  But  it  is,  indeed, 
in  itfelf  one  of  the  higheft  and  moft  exquifite  pleafures  ; 
opening  the  mind  to  the  fublimeft  contemplations,  ex- 
panding it  with  the  moft  delightful  hopes,  and  footh- 
ing  all  its  powers  with  feelings  and  confolations,  that 
are  infinitely  beyond  the  reach,  the  nature  and  the  lit- 
tlenefs  of  all  human  things. 

There  muft  be  a  thoufand  moments  in  the  life  of  ev- 
ery perfon,  that  is  not  elevated  by  this  devotion,  when 
all  earthly  bleflings  will  be  cold  and  iafipid,  and  the  foul 
muft  feel  an  inexpreflible  languor,  though  poiTeiTed  of  all 
:he  kingdoms  of  the  world,  and  the  glories  of  them. 

Though  fome  fanatics  have  made  the  love  of  God 
ridiculous  by  couching  it  in  too  fenfual,  rapturous,  or 
extravagant  language,  yet  fuch  a  paflion  there  is,  groun- 
ded on  the  moft  rational  principles,  and  fpringing  from 
the  purejl  fource  ;  without  which  our  lives  would  fre- 
quently be  miferable,  and  our  duties,  the  formal,  unan- 
i  mated  fervice  of  a  body  without  a  foul. 

If  we  admire  what  is  great,  fublime  and  magnificent, 
on  other  occafions ;  if  we  love  what  is  amiable,  difin- 
terefted,  benevolent  and  merciful  in  many  of  our  fcl- 


YOUNG  LADY.  15 

low-creatures,  whom  we  have  never  feen,  what  princi- 
ple either  of  reafon  or  philofophy  forbids  us  to  admire 
and  love  the  fame  in  God,  who  is  the  primary  author 
of  all  amiablenefs,  and  at  once  the  fource  and  fulnefs 
of  all  pofiible  perfection  ;  and,  if  we  acknowledge  him 
as  the  parent  of  all  real  happinefs,  where  is  the  abfurd- 
ity  of  cultivating  an  intercourfe  &&d.friendjbip  with  him, 
in  order  to  obtain  that  happinefs,  by  prayer,  reflection, 
and  pious  afpirations  ? 

Thou  malt  love  the  Lord  thy  God,  with  all  thy 
heart,  and  with  all  thy  foul  :  This  is  the Jii >jl  and  great 
commandment. 

If  a  virtuous  attachment  to  an  imperfect  creature  here 
is  attended  with  fuch  tranfports  ;  if  friendship,  pure 
and  difmterefted,  has  fuch  exquifite  enjoyments,  the 
pleafure,  refulting  from  an  intimacy  with  God  muft 
far  furpafs  all  human  comprehenfioR,  and  be  infinitely 
more  exalted  and  fublime.  It  is  heaven,  compared 
with  earth,  or  the  immenfity  of  fpace,  with  the  little, 
narrow  boundaries  of  aprifon,  or  a  convent. 


N 


LETTER  IV. 

EVER  fancy,  that  religion  will  render  you 
gloomy,  or  unpleafing.  If  indeed  you  take  it 
from  the  coarfe  daubings  of  fuperftition  or  of  enthufi- 
afm,  it  is  a  frightful  raonfter,  or  a  melancholy  fpectre, 
that  will  difcourage  people  from  approaching  you.  If 
you  deduce  it  from  the  fcriptures,  and  ground  it  upon 
reafon,  folid  argument  and  truth, it  will  become  a  fource 
of  perpetual  cheerfulnefs  to  yourfelf,  that  will  be  re- 
flcfted  on  every  perfon  and  objecl:  about  you. 

Never  fail  to  treat,  with  the  greater!:  reverence,  ev- 
ery thing,  that  relates  to  the  houfe  of  God,  to  his  min- 
ifters,  to  his  facraments,  and  to  his  word.     To  men- 


1 6  LETTERS  TO  A 

tion  any  thing,  that  is  (acred,  with  kvity,  is  a  certain 
mark  of  a  depraved  heart,  and  a  weak  undcrflanding. 
A  witty  fneer  or  farcafm,  on  fuch  (objects,  is  not  to  be 
forgiven.  It  fnocks  all  the  fenfible  and  better  part  of 
mankind,  and,  is  a  fpecies  of  blafphemy  or  facnlege. 

You  remember  who  has  laid,  that  "  every  woman 
u  is  at  heart  a  rake."  This  fentence  is  fevere,  and 
not  to  be  admitted  without  rellriclions.  Pope  was  a 
rancorous  fatirift  of  women.  Whatever  be  his  merit 
in  the  world  of  letters,  they,  at  lealt,  owe  no  extraor- 
dinary gratitude  to  his  memory  or  talents.  "  Tread 
"  lightly  upon  the  afhes  of  the  dead,"  is  a  maxim  I 
revere.  I  would,  otherwife,  retaliate  his  infults  on 
the  fex,  and  become  the  champion  of  their  injured 
honor.  I  would  infinuate,  that  the  poet  was  little  and 
deformed,  and  had  experienced  few  of  their  carefTes 
or  attentions.  Other  writers,  however,  have  charged 
you  with  a  ftrong  preference  for  dffipated  men.  But 
this,  furely  is  the  ungenerous  afperfion  of  your  enemies, 
or  of  thofe,  who  have  not  known  the  moft  deferving 
amongft  you,  and  have  formed  an  unjuft  and  unfavora- 
ble conclufion,  from  the  unamiablenefs  of  a  few. 

Tour  example,  I  truir,  will  always  contradict  fuch 
indifcriminate  cenfure.  The  idea,  if  we  could  admit  it 
in  its  full  extent,  would  be  unfriendly  to  the  focial 
happinefs  of  life.  It  would  deitroy  that  cfteem  and 
confidence  in  your  virtues,  which  the  beft  and  wifeft 
men  have  uniformly  thought  no  inadequate  counter- 
poife  to  their  forrows,  and  their  cares.  A  bad  man  is 
terrible  in  fociety  ;  but  an  unprincipled  woman  is  a 
manjler.  The  peace,  happinefs  and  honor  of  our  fex 
are  fo  very  much  in  die  power  of  yours  after  marriage, 
that  the  moil:  abandoned  libertine  iliudders  at  thetho't 
of  an  union  with  a  woman,  who  has  not  piety  and  vir- 
tue. His  intimacy  with  fome  females,  of  a  certain  de- 
fcnptiotiy  has  given  him  fuch  a  diigufting  picture,  as  will 
r  -be  forgotten.     In  his  moments  q£  reflexion,  he 


YOUNG  LADY.  a7 

♦execrates  his  folly,  and,  when  he  deliberates,  whom 
tfie  fhould  choofe  for  the  companion  of  his  life,  appeals 

from  the  treacherous,  ruffled  bofora  of  an  harlot,  to 
•one,  that  will   be  always  faithful,  and  always  ferene. 

Without  piety)  indeed,  a  woman  can  never  fully  pof- 
•fefs  the  true  powers  of  plcafing.  She  will  want  that 
week  benevolence,  fympathy  and  foftnefs,  which  give 
•an  inexpreffible  lujlre  to  her  features,  and  fuch  a  won- 
•  derful  afcendancy  over  our  affections.  We  {hall  not 
■other  wife  approach  her  with  confidence,  or  dare  to  re- 
•pofe  any  of  our  fecrets,  our  concerns  or  our  forrows^ 
un  her  fympathizing  bread. 


LETTER  V. 


TMY    DEAR     GIR 


TF  your  mind  is  in  a  proper  frame,  every  thing  in 
you  and  about  yoti  will  inculcate  the  neceiTity,  and 
■prompt  you  to  the  continual  cxercife  of,  devotion^ 
You  will  find  yourfelf  encompafled  with  innumerable 
•fears,  weaknefTes,  wants, forrows,  difeafes,  wiihes,  hopes* 
-under  which  all  human  creatures  will  be  unable  to  alfifr, 
•or  give  you  any  adequate  relief  ;  bat  wherever  you 
caft  your  eyes,  you  will,  at  the  fame  time,  be  environed 
with  the  immenfity  of  a  Being,  who  is  poffelTed  of  all 
pomble  perfections,  and  who  holdeih  the  iffues  of  life 
-and  death,  of  Jiappinefs  and  mifery,  folely  in  his  hands. 
The  power,  majefty,  grandeur  and  wifdom  of  this 
Being  are  difccrnable  in  every  part  of  your  frame,  ia 
every  function  of  your  body,  and  operation  of  your 
unind,  nay  in  the  curious  and  exquifite  formation  of  ev- 
ery animal  and  infect.  They  are  feen,  on  a  dill  fubli- 
tticr  fcale,  i«  the  fize,  the  didances,  grandeur,  and  w.&u- 
£.2 


i8  LETTERS  TO  A 

derful  revolution  of  the  heavenly  bodies  ;  in  the  beau- 
tifully variegated  canopy  of  heaven,  in  all  the  delicious 
landfltips  of  nature,  in  thepleafing  fucceflion  of  day  and 
night,  fpring  and  autumn,  fummer  and  winter.  In 
fhort,  winds  and  dorms,  thunder  and  lightning,  earth- 
quakes and  volcanoes,  the  grand,  magnificent  ocean, 
waves  and  somets,  fulfilling  his  word,  appearing  and 
receding,  at  his  fovereign  command  ;  flower3,  blofToms, 
fruits,  foflils,  minerals,  petrefactions,  precipices,  hills, 
caverns,  valleys,  all  tell  you,  that  their  former  is  im- 
menfely  magnificent,  "  that  he  doeth  what  he  will  in 
"  the  armies  of  heaven,  and  amongft  the  inhabitants  of 
"  the  earth,  and  that  none  can  withftand  the  thunder 
"  of  his  power." 

This  God  then  is  able  to  gratify  your  wifhes,  and 
fupport  you  under  all  your  furTerings  ;  he  has  ivi/Jom 
enough  to  protect  and  guide  you  ;  the  queftionthen  is  ; 
is  he  willing  ?  On  this  head,  hearken  to  all  nature, 
for  it  fpeaks  aloud.  Look  through  the  number- 
lefs  orders  and  gradations  of  animals,  infects,  nay 
the  meaneft  reptiles,  and  yon  will  be  aftoniihed  with 
the  attention,  that  has  been  laviflied  on  them,  in  the 
contrivance  of  their  frame,  the  allotment  of  their  fitu- 
ation,  and  theprovifion,  made  for  their  continual  fup- 
port. They  are  happy.  Shift  your  eye  to  all  the  inan- 
imate creation,  and  you  will  find  it  a  fcene  of  harmony, 
of  order,  and  beauty,  and  feemingly  constructed  for  our 
'ratification.  Lovely  picturefque  views  delight  our 
imagination  ;  fhrubs  and  plaats  and  flowers  regale  us 
with  aromatic  fmells.  But  a  poet,  of  very  decriptive 
talents,  mail  fpeak  on  this  occafion. 

Wherefore  nature's  form 
So  exquifitely  fair  ?  her  breath  perfum'd 
With  fuch  ethereal  fwectnefs  ?  whence  her  voice, 
Inform'd  at  will,  to  raife  or  to  deprefs 
Th'  impaffion'd  foul,  and  whence  the  robes  of  light, 
Which  thus  invefiher  with  more  lovely  pomp, 


YOUNG  LADY.  19 

Than  fancy  can  defcribe  ?  whence  but  from  Tbce, 
O  fource  divine  of  never  failing  love, 
And  thy  unmeafur'd  goodnefs  ?  not  content 
With  ev'ry  food  of  life  to  nourifh  man, 
Thou  mak'fl  all  nature,  beauty  to  his  eye, 
Or  mufic  to  his  ear  ;  well  pleas'd  he  fcans 
The  goodly  profped:,  and  with  inward  fmiles, 
Treads  the  gay  verdure  of  the  painted  plain, 
Beholds  the  azure  canopy  of  heav'n, 
And  living  lamps,  that  overarch  his  head 
With  more  than  regal  fplendour,  lends  his  ears 
To  the  full  choir  of  water,  air,  and  earth. 

In  every  part 
We  tra«e  the  bright  imprciTions  of  his  hand, 
In  earth,  or  air,  the  meadow's  purple  ftores, 
The  moon's  mild  radience,  or  the  virgin  form, 
Blooming  with  rofy  fmiles,  we  fee  pourtray'd 
That  uncreated  beauty,  which  delights 
The  mind  fupremc — 

Indeed,  if  you  reafon  for  a  moment  why  could  the  Al- 
mighty create  at  all>  but  to  diffuje  and  variegate  enjoy- 
ment ?  InexhaufHble  fource  of  happinefs,  from  all 
eternity,  he  needed  not,  and,  in  fact,  could  not  receive, 
an  addition  to  his  own.  In  himfelf  fupremely  bleiTed, 
fountain  of  eternal  majefty  and  fplendour,  adored  by 
feraphs,  furrounded  by  myriads  of  angels  and  archan- 
gels, what  dignity  could  he  derive  from  the  exigence, 
or  fervices  of  man,  who  is  but  a  worm,  or  the  production 
of  ten  tkoufand  worlds  ?  It  was  infinite  wifdom,  there- 
fore, that  fketchedout  the  plan  of  univerfal  nature,  and 
all-communicative  goodnefs,  that  bade  fo  many  worlds 
exift,  and  bade  them  to  be  happy.  The  fupreme  and 
gracious  former  wifhed  to  communicate  fome  fcattered 
rays  of  his  glory  and  his  bleiTednefs  to  this  extended 
world  of  matter  and  of  life,  ajid  has  therefore  replen- 
iflied  every  leaf,  every  drop  of  water,  and  every  pof- 
fibility  of  fpace  with  meals  of  inhabitants  ;  for 


sd  LETTERS  TO  A 


Scarce  buds  a  leuf,  or  fprings  the  laweft  weed, 
But  little  flocks  upon  it>>  Ik  u>m  U 
No  fruit  our  palate  courts,  or  talk-  our  fmell, 
But  on  its  fragrant  bofom,  nation*  dwell. 

Is  it  not  then  a  certain  conclufion,  that  he  created 
you,  as  well  as  all  inferior  animals  for  happinefs  ?  On 
this  you  may  depend,  as  much  as  you  can  upon  the 
,:crtuin(y  of  your  exigence,  and  that  he  is  always  more 
willing  to  .be  your  protector,  than  you  are  ready  to  re- 
•quert  it. 

Open  they "acred  booh,  and,  from  beginning  to  end, 
it  will  confirm  this  opinion, and  exalt  your  ideas  ofthe 
idivine  perfections.  "  I  delight  in  exerciiing  loving- 
*'  kindnefs,  faith  the  Lord. — The  Lord  is  good  to  all, 
•i  and  his  tender  mercies  are  over  all  his  works.  If 
•*'  he  clothes  the  grafs  ofthe  fields  which,  to-day.,  is, 
"  and  to-morrow  is  cart  into  the  oven,  how  much 
"  more  mail  he  clothe  you,  O  ye  of  little  faith  :M 
That  religion  is  built  on  wrong  notions,  or  a  melancholy 
ttemper,  that  fills  us  with  imaginary  terrors.  All  na- 
ture breathes  a  language  of  hope  and  mtrcv.  And 
nature  is  the  meflengcr  of  God. 

It  is  true  there  is  evil  in  the  world,  as  well  as  good  ; 
-there  are  marks  of  judgment,  as  well  as  mercy.  There 
.are  hurricanes,  as  well  as  fanning  breezes  ;  noxious 
.are  intermixed  with  ufeful  animals ; poifonom  and  faluta- 
■ry  herbs  grow  befule  each  other,  and  rofes  have  their 
•thorns.  There  are  wars  and  rumours  of  wars  ;  there 
are  earthquakes,  that  defolate  to  hole  countries  ;  a  thou- 
sand forms  of  difeafe.;  a  .thoufand  modifications  of  for- 
row,  anxiety,  death.  If  he,  who  fits  at  the  helm,  be 
110  gracious,  whence  all  this  difordcr  ?  If  his  infinite 
power  be  combined  with  equal  wifdom  and  goodnefs, 
•why  did  he  not  prevent  it  ? 

If  men  were  not  to  be  free  .agents,  the  total  preven- 
tion of  fin  and  evil  feems  an  impojjibilily.  Moral  lib- 
tcrtj  could  not  contort  with  a  mechanical^  forced  o.h&di- 


YOUNG  LADY.  21 

«nce  ;  and  if  we  had  not  been  free,  the  idea  of  punifh- 
ments  or  rewards,  of  an  heaven  or  an  hell,  would  be  the 
greateft  of  all  poffible  abfurdities.  So  that  thequeftion 
ultimately  amounts  to  this,  whether  it  was  proper  for  the 
Almighty  to  create  fuch  a  world  at  all  ?  Had  we  not 
better  referve  the  propriety  of.  this  conduct  to  be  difpii- 
tedwith  him,  at  his  great  tribunal  ?  There,  I  doubt  not, 
we  mail  be  amply  convinced,  that  the  creation  was  a 
work  of  infinite  mercy,  as  well  as  power,  and  that  a 
greater  degree  of  happinefs,  than  mifery  has  arifen from 
it.  There  too,  when  we  are  able  to  difcern  with  glori- 
fied eyes,  the  whole  chain  of  caufes  and  effects,  from 
the  beginning,  to  the  end,  of  time  ;  the  dependence 
•of  one  link  of  being  on  another,  and  of  worlds,  on 
worlds  ;  this  evil  we  now  complain  of,  may  become  a 
means  of  exalting  our  ideas  of  the  attributes  of  the  Al- 
mighty ;  and  we  mall  blufli  at  ourfelves  for  even  ha- 
ving queftioned  his  goodnefs  for  a  moment,  or  encour- 
aged a  reafoning  pride,  fo  ill  becoming  creatures,  whofe 
•days  are  few,  whofe  ftrength  is  weaknefs,  whofe  wif- 
dom  folly  ;  and  who,  in  theprefent  immurement  of  their 
underftanding,  fcarcely  know  the  nature  of  a  blade  of 
grafs,  or  of  the  very  pebbles,  on  which  they  tread. 

This  queftion  concerning  the  origin  of  evil  has  puz- 
zled the  whole  tribe  of  rcafoners  and  philofophers, 
from  the  creation,  to  the  prefent  moment.  The  fcrip- 
ture  alone  has  folved  the  enigma  to  our  fatisfaclion. 
This  deranged  ftate  of  things  is  the  providential  pun- 
ifhmentofguilt,but  at  the  fame  time,  contrived  in  mercy, 
as  a  falutary  regimen,  and  as  a  iviode  of  purifying  fallen 
ereaturesjfor  the  innocence  andhappinefs  of  abetter  world. 
It  is  a  chaos,  fitted  to  our  prefent  conftitution,  and  will 
refine,  as  ive  do,  into  its  primitive  beauty  and  fplendour. 
"  There  mall  then  be  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth, 
"  wherein  dwelleth  righteoufnefs.  The  wolf  mail 
"  dwell  with  the  lamb,  and  the  leopard  lie  down  with 
■"  the  kid,  when  the  earth  is  full  of  the  knowledge  of 


LETTERS  TO*  A 

"**  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the  Teas."  Resigna- 
tion, in  the  mean  time,  has  a  balm  for  furTering,  and  the 
faith  of  a  chriilian  "  looketh  to  a  better  country,  with 
"  foundations,  whofe  builder  and  maker  is  God." 

But  fpeculations  apart,  if  you  draw  nigh  to  the  Al- 
mighty, he  will  draw  nigh  to  you  ;  if  you  feek  his  fa- 
vor and  friendfliip,  all  things  (hall  work  together  for 
your  good.  Tribulation,  anguiih,  nakednefs,  or  fam- 
ine, or  peril,  or  the  fword  will  all  be  fo  many  inftru- 
ments,  in  his  hands,  of  procuring  your  eternal  happi- 
nefs  and  glory. 

Remember  the  gift  of  his  only  Son  to  be  a  facrifice 
for  your  fins,  and  it  is  more  than  a  thoufand  lefTons  of 
a  mercy  beyond  a  parallel,  and  that  far  exceeds  all  hu- 
man comprehenfioH. 

On  fo  delightful  a  fubject,  it  is  difficult  to  flop  one's 
pen,  or  retrain  the  fallies  of  imagination.  This  idea 
of  the  fupreme  being  calls  a  delicious  fragrance  over 
all  the  real  enjoyments  of  life.  It  gives  an  inexprefli- 
ble  poignancy  to  friendship,  and  to  the  affection,  with 
which  I  {hall  ever  feel  myfelf  inviolably  yours. 


LETTER  VL 


MY    DEAR    GIR3 


DEVOTION,  confidered  fimply  in  itfclf,  is  an  in- 
tercourfe  betwixt  us  and  God  ;  betwixt  the  fu- 
preme,  felf-exiftent,  inconceivable  fpirit,  which  formed 
and  preferves  the  univerfe,  and  that  particular  fpirit, 
with  which,  for  awful  reafons,  he  has  animated  a  por- 
tion of  matter  upon  earth,  that  we  call  man.  It  is  a 
filefot  act,  in  which  the  foul  diverts  itfelf  of  outward 
things,  flies  into  heaven,  and  pours  forth  all  its  wants, 
wiflies,  hopes,  fears,  guilt  or  pleafures,  into  the  bofom 
e:  an  almighty  friend. 


YOUNG  LADY.  23 

Though  this  devotion,  in  its  firfl:  llages,  may  be  a 
wearifome  or  infipld  exercife,  yet  this  arifes  merely 
from  the  depravity  of  nature,  and  of  our  pafiions.  A 
little  habit  will  overcome  this  reluctance  When  you 
have  fairly  entered  on  your  journey,  "  the  ways  of  this 
"  wifdom  will  be  ways  of  pleafantnefs,  and  all  its 
M  paths,  peace." 

True  devotion,  doubtlefs,  requires  a.  confiderable 
degree  of  abjlratllon  from  the  world.  Hence  modern 
chriftians  treat  it,  as  a  v'fion.  Hence  many  modern 
writers  have  little  of  itsun&ion.  But  it  glows  in  the 
fcriptures.  It  warms  us  in  the  fathers.  It  burned  in 
an  Auftin,  and  in  many  other  of  thofe  perfecuted  mar- 
tyrs, who  now  are  with  God. 

That  we  hear  little  of  it,  is  not  wonderful.  It  makes 
no  noife  in  the  circles  of  the  learned  or  of  the  elegant. 
Under  an  heap  of  worldly  cares,  vtzf mother  the  lovely 
infant,  and  will  not  let  it  breathe.  Vanity,  ambition, 
pleafure,  avarice,  quench  the  celeltial  fire.  And  thefe 
alas  !  are  too  much  the  god  of  mortals  !  Ever  fince  the 
world  began,  writers  have  been  amufing  us  only  with 
Jhadotvs  of  this  piety,  inftead  of  giving  us  hs  foul  and 
fuhjlance.  Superftition  has  placed  it  in  opinions,  cere- 
monies, aufterities,  pilgrimages,  perfecution,  an  >auguil 
temple,  or  fplendid  imagery,  which  had  little  connex- 
ion with  fentiment  or  fpirit.  Enthufiafm  has  fwelled 
with  unnatural  conceptions,  and  obtruded  zfpurious 
offspring  on  the  world,  inftead  of  this  engaging  child. 
of  reafon  and  truth  ;  whilft  the  lukewarm  have  refted 
in  a  few  outward  duties,  which  have  had  no  vigor,  and, 
as  they  fprung  not  from  the  heart,  never  entered  the 
temple  of  the  moft  High. 

Real  piety  is  of  a  very  different,  and  of  a  much  more 
animated,  nature.  It  looks  up  to  God,  fees,  hears, 
feels  him,  in  every  event,  in  every  viciffitude,  in  all 
places,  in  all  feafons,  and  upon  all  occafions.  It  is 
theory,  vivified  by  experience.     It  is  faith, fubjlantlated 


24  LETTERS  TO  A 

by  mental  enjoyment.  It  is  heaven,  tranfplanted  into 
the  human  bofom.  It  is  the  radiance  of  the  Divinity, 
warming  and  incircling  man.  It  is  fpiritual  fenfe, 
gratified  by  fplritual  fenfations.  Without  this,  all  cer- 
emonies are  inefficacious.  Books,  prayers,  facraraentg 
and  meditations  are  but  a  body,  without  a  foul,  or  a 
ftatue,  without  animation. 

That  man  is  capable  of  fuch  an  intercourfe  with  his 
maker,  there  are  many  living  witnefTes  to  prove.  With- 
out having  recourfe  to  the  vifions  of  fanatics,  or  the 
dreams  of  tnthufiafts,  it  may  be  proved  to  fpring  from 
natural  and  philofophical  caufes.  God  is  a  fpirit ;  fo 
is  the  mind.  Bodies  can  have  intercourfe  ;  fo  can 
fouls.  When  minds  are  in  an  ajftmilat'wg  (late  of  pu- 
rity, they  have  union  with  their  Maker.  This  was  the 
blifs  ofparadife ;  fin  interrupted,  and  holinefs  muft 
reftort  it.  To  a  foul,  thus  difpofed,  the  creator  com- 
municates himfelf,  in  a  manner,  which  is  as  infenfible 
to  the  natural  eye,  as  the  falling  of  dews,  but  not  lefs 
refrefhing  to  its  feeret  powers,  than  that  is  to  vegetation. 

The'primitive  faints  are  defcribing  this,  when  they 
fpeak  of  their  tranfports.  David  felt  it,  when  he 
longed  for  God,  as  the  heart  panteth  after  the  water 
brooks.  St.  Paul  knew  it,  when  he  gloried  in  his 
tribulations.  It  was  embodied  in  him,  when  he  was 
carried  up  into  the  third  heavens,  and  heard  things, 
impoflible  to  be  uttered.  St.  Stephen  was  filled  with 
it,  when  he  faw  the  heavens  ©pen,  and  prayed  for  his 
murderers.  By  it,  martyrs,  were  fupported,  when  they 
were  ftoned,  and  fawn  afunder.  And  till  we  feel  it 
in  our/elves,  we  (hall  never  fully  know,  how  gracious 
the  Lord  is. 

If  you  can  acquire  this  fpiritual  abJlracHon^  you  will, 
at  once,  have  made  your  fortune  for  eternity.  It  will 
be  of  little  moment,  what  is  your  lot  on  earth,  or  what 
the  diftinguifhing  viciflitudes  of  your  life.  Piofperity 
or  adverfity,  health  or  ficknefs,  honor  or  difgrace,  a 


YOUNG  LADY.  $5 

cottage  or  a  crown,  will  all  be  fo  many  inftruments  of 
glory.  The  whole  creation  will  become  a  temple*  Ev- 
ery event  and  every  object  will  lead  your  mmd  to  God, 
and  in  his  greatnefs  and  perfections,  you  will  infenfibly 
lofe  the  littlenefs,  the  glare  and  tinfel  of  all  human 
tkings. 

If  I  wifhed  only  to  fet  off  your  per/on  to  the  greatest 
advantage,  I  would  recommend  this  true  fublime  of  re- 
ligion. It  gives  a  pleafing  ferenity  to  the  countenance, 
and  a  cheerfulnefs  to  the  fpirits  beyond  the  reach  of 
art,  or  the  power  of  affectation.  It  communicates  a 
real  tranfport  to  the  mind,  which  diflipation  mimics 
only  for  a  moment ;  a  fweetnefs  to  the  difpofition,  and 
a  lujlrc  to  the  manners  which  all  the  airs  of  modern 
politenefs  ft udy  but  in  vain.  Eafy  in  yourfelf,  it  will 
make  you  in  perfect  good  humor  with  the  world,  and 
when  you  are  diffufing  happinefs  around  you,  "  you 
"  will  only  be  dealing  out  the  broken  fragments,  that 
"  remain  after  you  have  eaten." 


LETTER  VII. 

THIS  devotion,  however,  though  effentially  a filent 
intercourfe  betwixt  the  foul  and  God,  yet,  to 
creatures,  confining  of  matter,  as  well  as  fpirit,  muftbe 
nourifhed  by  external  forms.  It  mult  itrike  the  fenfes, 
in  order  to  awaken  the  imagination. 

The  bulk  of  people,  indeed,  are  fo  far  materialized, 
(if  I  may  thus  exprefs  it,)  and  funk  \xi  fenfe,  that  noth- 
ing but  outward  ceremonies  would  give  them  any  ade- 
quate perception  either  of  the  neceffily  or  pleafures,  of 
devotion  j  and  even  the  mod:  fp'iritual,  in  a  (late  of 
frailty,  will  need  thefe  powerful  calls  and  leffons  to 
retrace  the  vaniihing  impreflions  of  their  duty. 
C 


56  LETTERS  TO  A 

Public  worfliip  and  the  facraments  are  the  grand 
outwork  of  piety.  They  are  the  doors,  by  which  we 
enter  the  fanctuary  of  God.  They  are  the  channels 
for  conveying  heavenly  grace  and  vigor  to  the  foul. 
It  is  here  the  Redeemer  gives  us  food,  that  nourifhes 
to  eternal  life.  It  is  here  he  rains  down  fountains  of 
living  water. 

Whoever  pretends  to  be  above  thefe  forms,  is  the 
fanatic,  who  might  as  well  tell  us,  that  his  animal  life 
can  be  fupported  without  food  ;  whoever  defpifes  them, 
is  the  Infidel,  that  does  every  thing  in  his  power,  to 
root  out  the  remembrance  of  God  from  the  earth,  and 
violate  the  deareft  interefts  of  mankind.  Whoever, 
confcientioujly  attends,  yet  confiders  them,  only  as  in- 
troductory to  good,  is  a  true  rational  chriftian,  that 
unites  the  feparate  links  of  matter  and  fpirit,  and  lets 
his  Hght  mine  before  men,  that  they  may  fee  his  good 
works,  and  glorify  his  father,  who  is  in  heaven. 

Lukewarmnefs,  an  infenfibility  to  all  facred  things, 
fcepticifm,  profligacy,  and  licentious  pleafures  are  the 
difcriminating  traits  of  thofe,  who  neglect,  from  what- 
ever vain  pretences,  thefe  means  of  grace.  The  bed 
difpofed  are  gradually  hardened,  and  the  poor  are  plun- 
ged into  fuch  diforders,  as  bring  them  to  the  fatal  tree. 


LETTER  VIII. 

ANOTHER  excellent  method  of  inkindling  pie- 
ty, is  reading  the  fcriptures.  A  chriftian,  in- 
deed, mould  have  this  facred  book,  ever  folded  in  his 
breaft.  There  is  a  richnefs  and  a  comfort  in  it,  that 
nothing  elfe  can  equal.  Every  word  is  big  with  in- 
ftru&ion  ;  every  fentence  is  divine.  It  is  a  mine,  per- 
petually opening  ;  the  deeper  we  dig,  the  richer  is  the 
ore.     It  is  a  feaft,  adapted  to  every  tafte  ;  the  moft 


YOUNG  LADY.  27 

exalted  undemanding  mufl  admire,  and  the  loiuejl  can- 
not fail  to  comprehend,  its  inftruclions. 

If  people  only  read  for  the  fake  of  entertainment, 
where  can  they  find  a  book  equal  to  the  Bible  ?  What 
other  production,  either  ancient  or  modern,  has  fuch 
ftriking  pafl'ages  of  the  pathetic  and  fublime,  the  vehe- 
ment and  impaffioned  ?  Where  are  there  fuch  lofty 
images,  fuch  grand  conceptions,  or  fuch  piclurefque 
and  animated  defcriptions,  as  in  the  pfalms  ?  There  is 
fcarcely  a  perfon  in  the  world,  to  whole  cafe  fome  of 
them  are  not  adapted,  nor  a  forrow  which  they  can- 
not footh.  In  one  part,  plaintive,  affecting,  peniten- 
tial;  in  another  full  of  triumph  and  exultation,  enno- 
bling, elevating  ;  here  defcribing  the  immenfity,  raa- 
jefry,  omnipotence  and  omniprefence  of  God  ;  there 
the  littlenefs  of  the  world,  and  the  vanity  of  man  ; 
whoever  can  read  them  without  emotion,  mult  be  pro- 
nounced void  both  of  piety  and  tafte. 

The  prophets  are  the  true  fublime  of  holy  reading. 
The  bold  images,  metaphors,  allufions,  and  defcrip- 
tions,  with  which  they  abound,  have  been  the  admira- 
tion of  the  moft  accomplifhed  fcholars,  orators  and 
critics  in  the  world.  The  proverbs  of  Solomon  and 
the  book  of  Eccleiiafticus  are  an  excellent  fyftem  for 
the  government  of  private  life,  as  well  as  a  fund  of 
fpiritual  instruction  !  They  have  all  the  marrow  of  our 
modern  fyftems  of  good  breeding,  without  any  of  their 
poifon.  The  facred  (lories  of  the  fcripture  are  related 
with  amazing  fimpiicity  and  pathos  ;  the  parables  are 
beautifully  pointed  and  inftructive  ;  and  the  epiftles  of 
St.  Paul  are  a  model  of  the  fublimeft  and  mod:  ener- 
getic eloquence,  that  can  be  found  in  any  age,  or  in 
any  language. 

When  the  immortal  Locke  and  Newton  had  dived 
into  every  other  kind  of  knowledge,  they  fat  down  to 
contemplate  the  vanity  and  poverty  of  all,  in  the  rich- 
aefs  of  the  fcriptures.     The  famous  Bacon,  an  oracle 


2$  LETTERS  TO  A 

of  learning,  in  his  day,  and  the  wonder  of  all  fucceed- 
*n£  ages>  confefled  them  to  be  the  fource  of  all  real 
mj'tfdom.  The  illuflrious  Sclden,  on  his  death-bed, 
allured  archbifhop  Ufher,  that  the  ivhoh  of  his  immenfe 
library  could  not  give  him  half  the  comfort,  which  he 
derived  from  oncfuiglc  fentence  of  the  infpircd  wri- 
tings j  and  Addifon,  whofe  rame  mud  be  ever  dear 
to  every  friend  of  religion  and  virtue,  fpent  no  little 
time  in  collecting  together,  and  arranging  into  one 
common  point  of  view,  the  united  evidences  of  the 
chriftian  religion. 

The  primitive  chriftia'RS  ufed  to  read  this  book,  on 
their  knees.  Their  preface  was,  "  Open  thou  mine 
"  eyes,  that  I  may  fee  the  wondrous  things  of  thy  law." 
Imitate  them  on  earth,  and  in  time  you  fhall  join  that 
illuftrious  choir  of  fdiRts,  that  are  continually  worship- 
ping before  the  throne  in  heaven. 


LETTER  IX. 

THE  old  Scriptures  may  appear,  in  themfelves, 
dry  and  infipid  ;  but  when  you  confider  them, 
as  typical  of  the  new,  and  affording  a  (hong,  collateral 
testimony  to  the  truth  of  revelation  ;  as  the  defcribing 
circamflances,  manners,  and  anecdotes  of  a  peculiar, 
chofen  people,  whofe  hiftory,  rebellion,  captivity  and 
difperfion  are  interwoven  with  the  whole  fyfteni  of 
chriftianity,  you  will  read  them  with  a  greater  relifh, 
and  more  godly  edification. 

Jefus  Chrift  is  the  foundation  of  the  apofrles  and 
prophets  ;  all  the  incidents  you  read,  point  to  him,  as 
J  heir  origin,  and  as  their  end  ;  "  the  great  corner  (tone 
"  in  Zion  ;  the  lamb  flain  from  the  foundation  of  the 
"  world." 


YOUNG  LADY.  t9 

The  bondage  of  the  children  of  Ifrael  in  Egpyt,  is 
an  image  of  our  captivity  to  fin  and  their  deliverance, 
of  our  redemption  through  the  blood  of  Chrift  ;  their 
journeying  through  the  wiidernefs,  is  a  ftrong  picture  of 
our  wearifome  paffage  through  this  vale  of  tears.  Mo- 
les is  the  Saviour,  making  waters  of  comfort  gufh  from 
tUc  (tony  rock  ;  the  manna  is  the  food  of  his  word, 
and  the  waters  are  the  graces  of  his  holy  fpirit  ;  the 
beautiful  and  affecting  hiftory  of  Jofeph  is  an  emblem 
of  that  better  perfonage,  who  was  envied,  hated,  perfe- 
cted and  murdered  by  his  brethren,  for  the  general 
falvation  :  Abraham  is  a  linking  image  of  the  Al- 
mighty, offering  up  his  only  fon,  and  all  the  ceremonies 
of  the  law  point  to  that  true  blood  o^  fprinkling,  which 
alone  can  take  away  the  fins  of  the  world.  Thus  is 
every  page  holy  ;  thus  do  you  tread,  every  moment,  on 
confecrated  ground,  and  thus  every  word,  when^ro^- 
eriy  underftood,  is  fpirit  and  is  life. 

But  of  all  the  fcriptures,  the  gofpels  are  certainly  the 
mod  edifying  and  inftructive.  They  are  plain,  forci- 
ble, fpiritual  ;  they  come  from  the  very  mouth  ofholi- 
nefs  and  wifdom,  and  do  not  admit  of  any  wrong  con- 
ftru&ions  or  doubtful  interpretations.  If  there  was 
only  the  fifth  chapter  of  St.  Matthew's  gofpel  extant, 
we  mould  have  an  incomparible  abridgement  of  chrif- 
tianity,  fuffieient  to  direct  our  faith,  to  animate  our 
practice,  and  flam  confufion  on  that  hoft  of  writers, 
who  have  built  fo  many  ftrong  and  dangerous  opinions 
on  the  pretended  balls  of  revelation. 

Commentators  may  ferve  to  explain  an  eaftern  ctif- 
tom,  ceremony,  allufion  or  mode  of  exprefiion,  but  I 
cannot  in  general,  recommend  them,  at  leaft  to  young 
peopfe.  They  cmbarrafs  more  frequently,  than  they 
direct  ;  they  have  often  perplexed,  what,  in  itfelf,  was 
clear,  and  darkened,  where  they  affected  to  illuminate. 
The  fayings  of  cur  Lord  are  fo  very  obvious,  as  to  need 

C    2 


30  LETTERS  TO  A 

little  or  no  explanation.  They  are  a  precious  wine, 
which  the  profane  wifdom  offcholars  and  philofophers 
has  mixed  with  water.  If  men  had  only  studied  them 
with  earne(tnefs,in(t.eadof  their  own  interefts,  prejudices 
and  paflions,  we  mould  never  have  been  diffracted  with 
fo  many  fyftems  of  error  and  fuperftition. 

Do  not  read  much,  at  a  time.  Meditation  is  the 
ftomach,  which  digefts  this  food  ;  you  mould  refleft 
many  hours,  for  reading  one.  And  there  is  fuch  a 
condenfed  richnefs  in  the  fcriptures,  that  one  fingle 
verfe  will  often  fugged  an  ample  fund  for  ferious  con- 
templation. 

Every  moment,  that  you  perufe  this  book,  confider 
yourfelf  as  in  the  immediate  prefence  of  your  Maker. 
Fancy  that  you  heard  him,  delivering  the  command- 
ments, in  all  the  thunder  and  lightning  of  the  mount. 
Remember  that,  though  heaven  and  earth  fail,  one  jot 
or  one  title  (halt,  in  no  wife,  pafs  from  the  law,  till  all 
be  fulfilled.  Coniider  what  a  number  of  holy  men 
.have  fealed  the  truth  of  this  teftimony  with  their  blood. 
Examine  yourfelf  by  the  promifes  and  threatnings,  as 
you  go  along,  and  do  not  forget  to  blefs  God,  upon 
your  knees,  that  he  has  given  you  fuch  a  lamp  for  your 
feet,  and  fuch  a  light  to  your  paths. 

Without  this  facred  volume,  the  world  would  have 
been  at  this  very  moment,  confiderably  unenlightened  ; 
worshipping  (locks  or  (tones,  perhaps  offering  human 
blood,  and  tormenting  themfelves  with  burdenfome  ce- 
remonies, that  had  no  manner  of  connection  with  the 
heart  ;  immerfed  in  forrows,  which  they  could  not 
have  eafed,  and  perplexed  with  a  thoufand,  gloomy  en- 
igmas, which  they  never  could  have  folved.  The  light, 
whieh  fuperficial  fceptics  vaunt,  as  that  of  nature  or  phi- 
iofophy,  or,  in  a  great  degree,  derived  from  the  fcrip- 
tures. The  arguments,  which  they  level  againft  Chris- 
tianity, haye  bsenfuggefted  by  the  light  of  chtiitianity 
ufelf . 


YOUNG  LADY.  3i 

LETTER  X. 

THOUGH  I  have  reprobated  prolix  commenta- 
tat©rs,  there  are,  however,  feveral  little  books, 
which  will  illuftrate  and  enliven  the  facred  writings, 
and  enable  you  to  read  them  with  greater  plcafure  and 
advantage.  Melmoth,  on  the  beautiful  and  fublime 
of  fcripture,  falls  under  this  defcription.  He  will  fug- 
geff.  fome  ftriking  paffages,  which  before  may  have  cf- 
caped  your  obfervation. 

The  ComtefTele  Genlis  is  in  titled  to  the  gratitude 
of  all  young  people.  She  is  poflefTed  of  an  elegant 
tafte,  a  fplendid  ftyle,  and  a  very  enlightened  under- 
ftanding.  She  has  thrown  into  a  dramatic  form,  fev- 
eral of  the  hiftorical  parts  of  the  Bible;  and  though 
the  chaftityofan  Englilh  tafte  is  not  eafily  reconciled 
to  ferioufnefs  "  in  fo  queftionable  a  mape,"  her  inge- 
nuity fparkles  through  the  whole  performance,  and  has 
given  it  a  pathos,  an  inter  eft  and  a  brilliancy,  that  will 
both  improve  your  heart,  and  delight  your  imagination. 

I  fcarcely  know  a  woman,  that  deferves  fo  much 
pirom  the  community  at  large,  as  Mrs.  Trimmer.  Her 
facred  hiftory  is  a  well  known,  ufeful  performance  : 
her  unwearied  labours  for  the  fervice  of  the  poor,  in 
her  Family  Magazine,  and  her  active  patronage  of  Sun- 
day Schools,  befpeak  an  heart,  that  is  warm  with  be- 
nevolence, and  an  underftanding  of  no  ordinary  fize. 
The  pride  of  philofphy  and  profound  learning  may, 
perhaps  look  down  on  fuch  attempts,  as  beneath  their 
ambition.  But  how  can  talents  be  fo  ufeftilly,  or  fo 
amiably  employed,  as  when  (tripped  ofthair  gaudy- 
plumage,  they  condefcend  to  inftrucl,  to  blefs  and  re- 
form the  meaneft  of  mankind.  Metaphyseal  reafon- 
•ings  are  for  the  learned  feiv>  and  often  miflead  them  ; 
thefe  pratlical  labours  confult  the  good  of  millions,  and 
-will  continue  to  edify,  when  all  fuch  cobwebs  fyftems 


32  LETTERS  TO  A 

are  totally  demolifhed,  and  their  authors  confined  to 
the  oblivion,  they  defer*  C 

There  is  not,  perhaps,  a  better  method  of  turning 
fcripture  to  ad\antage,  than  that  ufed  by  the  good  biih- 
op  Will  on,  in  his  Sacra  Prroata.  He  felefts  a  few, 
detached  verfes,  and,  in  his  natural  and  eafy  ityle, 
raifes  upon  each,  a  train  of  reflections,  which  mult  in- 
kindle  and  animate  the  devotion  of  every  reader. 

Doddridges  paiaphrafe  on  the  new  teftament  may  be 
juftly  recommended  for  its  zeal,  piety,  carneftnefs  and 
animation.  Nor  does  it  want  the  embellifhments  of 
a  lively  fancy,  or  of  an  eafy  and  unadorned  language. 
But,  like  moit  diilenters  of  his  time,  he  was  a  pupil  of 
the  Calviniilic  fchool  ;  and  though  I  mall  never  be  a 
convert  to  his  fyftem,  I  cannot  but  approve  the  general 
air  and  fpii  it  of  his  writings.  There  are  few  things 
or  characters  in  life,  any  more  than  authors  that  are 
formed  to  command  an  unreferved  admiration.  The 
moil  delightful  landfkip  has  its  fhades.  The  molt  ani- 
mated countenance  has  frequently  fame  feature  imper- 
fect, or  diverted.  There  will  b&  accidental  he&ts  and 
jJufhes  on  the  molt  delicate  complexion. 


LETTER  XI. 


THERE  are  fereral,  excellent  manuals  of  pri 
devotion.  But  I  have  no  great  opinion  of 
thefe  forms.  Look  into  the  hiftory  of  your  private 
life  and  the  difpenfations  of  Providence  ;  to  what  is 
daily  happening  within  you,  and  about  you,  and  your 
own  heart  will  be  the  beft  prayer  book  in  the  world. 
If  you  attend  to  its  wilhes,  its  breathings  and  its  wants, 
you  can  never  want  Linkage  ;  or  if  you  fiouhl,  God 
is  ever  prefent  and  will  accept  the  naked  villus  of  your 
foiil.     A  le^ar,  in  great  diflrcfs,  is  always  eloquent. 


YOUNG  LADY.  33 

Hisjrghs  and  tears  fpeak  ;  he  feels  what  he  wants,  and 
he  needs  no  artificial  arrangement  of  words.  Still 
babes  muft  be  nourished  with  milk.  There  is  a  period 
in  the  chri/lian,  as  weli  as  the  natural,  life,  when  lead- 
ing firings  are  neceiTary  to  the  infant. 

I  have  known  people  fall  into  a  total  difufe  of  pri- 
vate devotion,  folely  from  a  fancied  poverty  of  words. 
This  is  a  very  dangerous  error.  Prayers,  drawn  from 
books,  are  furely  preferable  to  no  prayers  at  all.  Ar- 
tificial exercife  is  better  than  total  inaction.  But 
prayer  of  the  heart  is  that  fupcrior  glow,  which  arifes 
from  motion  in  the  open  air,  and  exhalirates  us  with  a 
riew  of  all  the  charming  pictures  and  productions  of 
nature. 

As  a  public  fyftem  of  devotion,  that  of  our  church 
is  excellent.  How  fimple  and  energetic  is  the  lan- 
guage !  How  rich  and  beautifully  varied,  are  the  col- 
lects !  How  unconfined  and  univerfal  the  prayers,  ex- 
tending to  all  conditions  of  men,  fituations  of  life,  and 
comprising  every  wifli  and  forrow  of  the  heart.  If 
other  forms  do  not  pleafe  your  tafte,  you  may  con- 
trive to  adapt  fome  portion  of  this  to  your  private  oc- 
cafions. 

Two  capital  traits  will  ftrike  you  in  our  liturgy  ;  the 
great  ftrefs,  laid  upon  Jefus  drift,  and  the  continual 
intercellion  for  the  bleilings  of  the  holy  fpirit.  Theft 
are,  indeed,  the  grand  leffon  to  be  learned  from  it,  as 
well  as  from  the  fcriptures.  They  arc  the  pi I/a rs  of 
the  church  ;  the  life  and  blood  of 'the  chriitian  fyftem. 

Without  the  atonement  of  Chrift,  criminals  as  we 
are,  there  never  could  have  been  any  hope  of  mercy  ; 
without  the  ailiftance  and  graces  of  the  fpirit,  we  could 
not  have  been  purified  for  the  manfions  of  glory. 
If  Chrift  has  been  called  the  fun  of  righteoufnefs,  the 
holy  fpirit  is  the  air,  which  purifies  and  invigorates  the 
whole  moral  world,  and  prefcrves  it  from  ftagnation 
and  putrefaction. 


34  LETTERS  TO  A 

Meditate  frequently  on  thefe  furTerings  or"  Chrift, 
till  you  abhor  every  fin,  that  produced  them  ;  and  in 
order  to  be  enriched  with  all  graces  and  bieilings,  pray 
daily  and  fervently  for  this  holy  fpirir.  The  good 
Bifhop  Kenn  has  a  few  words,  in  one  of  his  hymns, 
which  wonderfully  epitomize  our  petitisns  and  our 
wants  : 


Direct,  control,  fuggeft  thij  day, 

All  I  defign,  or  do,  or  fay, 

That  all  my  pow'rs,  with  all  their  might, 

In  thy  fole  glory  may  unite. 


LETTER  XII. 

MY    DEAR     LUCY, 

YOUR  facred  reading  needs  not  to  be  wholly  con- 
fined to  the  fcriptures.  A  few,  other  ferious 
books  will  alHft:  your  piety,  as  well  as  ferve  to  illujlratt 
and  confirm  the  fcriptures  themfelves. 

I  cannot,  in  this  refpecl,  fo  much  recommend  modern 
fermons,  as  fome  little  practical  treatifes  of  piety.  En- 
glim  difcourfes  in  general,  by  a  ftrange,  fcholaftic 
mifmanagement,  are  not  fufficiently  addrefTed  to  the 
heart.  Either  they  are  learned  difquifitions,  on  fome 
fpcculative,  controverted  fubjedl,  more  calculated  to 
difplay  abilities,  than  to  edify  ;  or  they  are  fpruce, 
moral  eiTays  with  little  more  of  chrijltanity  in  them, 
than  might  be  gleaned  from  the  works  of  Plato  or  E- 
piftetus.  They  want  that  fimplicity,  fire,  energy,  an- 
imation, that  boldnefs  of  images,  appeal  to  the  con- 
science, and  that  picrurefque  difplay  of  heaven  and  hell, 
which  give  fuch  an  un&ion  to  the  writings  of  St.  Paul, 
and  of  the  fathers.  They  do  not  thunder  and  lighten 
4t  the  firmer  j  they  do  not  carry  us  by  a  whirlwind, 


YOUNG  LADY.  s5 

into  heaven,  and  fhew  us  thrones  and  fceptres  ;  they 
convince,  but  they  do  not  animate  ;  they  glitter,  but 
they  do  not  warm. 

Ancient  divines  have  more  fire  and  matter.  They 
(tudied  the  fcriptures,  more  than  human  fyflems. 
"  They  were  filled  with  the  fpirit ;"  they  were  men 
of  watchfulnefs  and  prayers.  A  profane  fpirit  ofcrit- 
icifm  or  of  philofophy,  falfely  fo  called,  makes  us  cold 
and  languid.  In  pervading  many  learned  or  fplendid 
pages,  the  heart  is  often  left  devoid  of  one,  pious  emo- 
tion. 

Many  fermons,  no  doubt,  are  to  be  excepted  from 
this  cenfure.  Thofe  of  Archbifhop  Seeker  contain  a 
fund  of  folid  matter,   piety  and    initruction  ;  but  the 

Jiyle  is  rather  lingular  and  uncouth.  The  marble  is 
rich,  but  it  is  unpolifhed.  There  is  fuch  a  thing,  as 
an  elegant  fimplicity.  Seeker  had  a  fimplicity  with- 
out, this  elegance. 

Few  prelates,  however,  have  deferved  fo  well  from 
the  church,  or  pofterity.  The  metropolitan,  though 
placed  in  the  bofom  of  a  court,  had  neither  pride,  in- 
dolence, nor  adulation.  His  Wgilance  was  extraordi- 
nary ;  his  labors  unremitting,  and  his  crofier  but  an 
imperfect  emblem  of  the  real  paftoral  zeal,  "  which  eat 
"  up  his  foul."     The   prefent  bifhop  of  London  has 

-all  the  fimplicity  of  his  illuitrious  patron,  tiiTucd  with 
that  elegance,  which  the  archbifhop  wanted.  His  fer- 
mons have  been  univerfally  read ;  they  are  written  on 
a  truly  evangelical  plan  ;  and  their  object  is  not  merely 
to  amufe,  but  to  inflrucl:  and  edify. 


E 


LETTER  XIII. 

VERYperfon  fhouldread  the  difcourfes  of  Sher- 
lock, who  wiflies  to  fee  the  grand  doctrines  a* 


36  LETTERS  TO  A 

chriftianity  properly  illuftrated,  and  inforced  with  e~ 
qual  energy  of  argument  and  language.  Sherlock  is 
one  of  the  few,  original  writers  of  fermons.  He  is 
the  Locke  of  divinity,  who  anatomizes  the  whole 
fyftem,  and  difplays  its  component  parts. 

Many  authors  glean  all  their  matter  from  other  books. 
He  borrowed  bis  from  the  fcriptures  and  reflexion. 
He  thought  many  hours,  for  writing  one.  If  all  men 
did  the  fame,  the  prefs  would  not  groan  with  fuch 
continual  abortions. 

Ogdcn's  Sermons  have  very  great,  original  merit. 
Perhaps  I  mifcalkd  them  ;  they  are,  more  properly, 
fketches  on  facred  fubjects  ;  on  the  fundamental  arti- 
cles of  the  chriftian  faith.  There  is  more  vigour,  and 
energy  and  conviction  in  one  page  of  this  writer,  than 
in  whole  volumes  of  fome  others,  who  have  received  a 
much  more  general  applaufe. 

The  doctor  feems  particularly  to  have  ftudied  con- 
cifenefs,  and  his  miniature  plan  fometimes  leaves  the 
features  of  his  pieces  indiftinct.  There  is  a  fingular 
abruptnefs  in  his  tranfitions,  and  the  mind  is  frequent- 
ly obliged  to  paufc,  in .  order  to  difcover  the  invifible 
connexion,  and  unite  the,  feemingly,  broken  chain  of 
ideas.  Thefe  dilcourfes  were,  probably,  in  their 
original  ftate,  much  more  dijfufe.  He  retrenched  by 
degrees,  and,  as  an  ingenious,  French  writer  once  faid, 
"  had  leifure  to  be  concife." 


LETTER  XIV. 

THERE  is  more  popular  eloquence,  argument 
and  pathos  in  Archbifhop  Tillotfon,  than  in  al- 
moft  any  ancient  writer  of  fermons,  that  I  recollect:. 
But  his  works  are  much  incumbered  with  the  fcholaf- 
tic  divinity  of  his  age,  and  flrangcly  perplexed  with 


YOUNG  LADY.  37 

divifions  and  fubdivifions.  Unity  of defign  is  the  beau- 
ty of  all  writings.  A  religious  difcourfe  fhould  tend 
only  to  the  enforcing  of  one  grand  point.  This  fhould, 
always,  be  kept  in  fight,  and  the  way  to  it  fliould  be 
as  direct,  concife  and  fimple,  as  poilible.  Divines  of 
the  laft  century  fpent  more  time   in   proving  what  was 

filf-evident,  and  illuftrating  it  by  learned  quotations, 
than  would  have  fufficed  for  inculcating  fome  lefTon  of 
piety,  that  would  never  have  been  forgotten.  Modern 
writers  have  judicioufly  corrected  this  miftake.  The}' 
come  more  immediately  to  the  point,  and  would  think 
it  as  downright  pedantry  to  amufe  their  hearers  with. 
a  long  lift  of  writers,  as  to  retail  little  fcraps  of  Greek 
or  Latin  in  converfation. 

Atterbury  was  the  pulpit  Cicero  of  his  day,  and, 
for  the  beauty,  fweetnefs  and  harmony  of  his  ltyle,  has 

Jlill  an  admirer  in  every  perfon  of  elegance  and  tafte. 
But  to  me  he  has  always  appeared  rather  graceful,  than 
forcible,  and  more  fplendid,  than  impafiioned.  He  is 
always  dreffedfor  court ;  and  Jludied  ornaments,  how- 
ever rich,  cannot  but  have  an  uninterefting  uniformity. 
He  is  invariably  a  fine,  flowing,  pellucid  ftream,  never 
that  impetuous  torrent,  which  overflows  its  banks, 
carries  all  before  it,  and  gives  us  the  idea  of  fublimity 
and  grandeur.  Nature  would  have  tired,  if  fhe  had 
prefented  us  with  nothing  but  fine,  level  extended 
lawns.  She  has  wifely  intermixed  wild  heaths,  bar- 
ren rocks,  and  craggy  precipices  in  her  infinitely  beau- 
tiful and  variegated  landfkips. 


LETTER  XV. 

THE  late,  unfortunate  Dr.  Dodd  owed,  I  mould 
conceive,  his  great  popularity  (0  the  advantage 
D 


38  LETTERS  TO  A 

of  his  voice,  pcrfon,  manner,  gefture  and  addrefs. 
For  indeed  his  compofitions  have  not  intrinfic  merit 
enough  to  have  challenged  any  extraordinary  applaufe. 

Weak,  flimfy,fuperficial  in  his  arguments,  and  rather 
plaufible,  than  energetic  in  his  language,  it  mull  have 
been  only  the  popularity  of  his  fubjecls,  the  new  vein 
of  pathetic,  which  he  attempted,  and  his  fortunate  con- 
genial fituation  at  the  Magdalen,  and  in  a  metropolis, 
which,  under  the  management  of  fuch  advantages, 
procured  him    his  extenfive,  temporary  reputation. 

But  alas  !  his  popularity  was  very  dearly  purchafed  ! 
Jt  was  built  on  the  ruins  of  his  innoeence'and  virtue. 
Happy,  if  he  had  lived  and  died  in  obfeurity,  or  been 
an  humble  curate  in  fome  fequeftered  village,  where 
jeffamines  had  clafped  round  his  unenviedmaniion,with 
unenlightened  nifties  only  for  his  aflbciates  !  Admira- 
tion would  not  then  have  dazzled  his  eyes.  His  van- 
ity Gould  not  have  fought  thofe  unequal  connexions, 
which  he  afterwards  found  himfelf  unable  to  fupport, 
nor  expenfive  pleafures  led  him  to  an  aclion,  which 
wounded  religion  in  its  very  vitals,  and  brought  fo 
much  difgrace  on  his  facred  profeflipn. 

He  might,  then,  like  many  other  excellent  men, 
have  "  fallen  afleep,"  arnidft  the  tender  offices  of  be- 
wailing friends  ;  and  grateful  villagers,  would  have 
wetted  his  monument  with  tears  of  heart-felt  gratitude 
and  efteem.  He  is  now  a  beacon,  rifing  high  in  the 
bofom  of  the  ocean,  which  fays  to  the  wary  mariner, 
u  beware  of  rocks  and  quickfands."  It  has  been  faid, 
that  Dodd,  in  the  beginning  of  his  facred  office,  was 
remarkably  pious.  What  is  the  conclufion  ?  .Hear  it 
from  compaffion.  Bathed  in  tears,  fke  lifts  up  her 
voice,  and  cries  aloud,  "  Let  him  who  thinketh  he 
"  ftandeth,  take  heed  left  he  fall." 

Faringdon's  Sermons  have  very  fingular  merit.  It 
is  but  feldom  that  fo  much  vivacity  finds  its  way  into 
this  fpecies  of  writing.    They  -will  improve  your  heart  -, 


YOUNG  LADY.  39 

they  will  pleafeyour  tafte,  and  inchant  your  imagina- 
tion. It  is  many  years  fince  I  read  them  ;  but  the  im- 
preflion  they  made  upon  my  mind,  will  never  be  erafed. 

If  I  durft  invidioufly,  amidft  their  many  excellen- 
cies, mention  a  defect,  it  is,  that  they  are  not  fufft- 
ciently  full  of  fcriptural  alluiions.  It  is  amazing  what 
force  and  energy  the  judicious  introduction  of  fcriptural 
pafTages,  authorities  and  images  gives  to  difcourfes  of 
this  nature.  The  reft  may  be  the  ingenious  conject- 
ures of  the  author.  Tbefe  ftrike  the  reader  with  all 
the  certainty  and  irrefiftible  evidence  of  mathematical 
demonftration. 

Though  genius  and  tafte  may  be  permitted  to  em- 
belltjby  the  facrcd  writings  mould  be  the  groundwork 
of  all  pulpit  productions.  They  mould  check,  our 
flights  into  the  regions  of  fancy,  and  they  mould  guide 
us  through  the  bewildering  mazes  of  metaphyfics. 

Faringdon  is  long  fince  dead,  but  the  real*  author 
of  thefe  Difcourfes  is  yet  alive.  I  have  long  had  the 
honor  of  knowing  him,  and  as  long  have  admired  his 
talents.  And  of  his  virtues  and  great  benevolence, 
he  exhibited,  I  think,  no  ordinary  proof,  when,  to 
ferve  the  family  of  a  deceafed  brother  clergyman,  he 
gave  his  time,  his  labor,  his  abilities,  and  (what  i» 
more,)  denied  himfelfthe  dazzling  profpect  of  repu- 
tation. 


LETTER  XVI. 

YOUNG  people  are  in  raptures  with  (what  thcy 
choofe  to  call)  Sterne's Sermons.  But  true  crit- 
icifm  will  not  give  them  fo  dignified  a  name.  They 
are  the  facred  ftories  of  feripture  embelliihed  with  his 


Rev.  Mr.  O rn,  Reftor  of  W- 


4o  LETTERS  TO  A 

original  talent  at  the  defcriptive  and  pathetic.  They 
are  \\\s  fen  timet;  tal]o\ixnz.y  to  Zion  ;  but  have  little  more 
of  true  divinity  in  them,  than  they  might  have  had,  if 
iuch  an  heavenly  perfonage  as  Jefus  Chrift,  had  never 
lived  in  the  world,  nor  publifhed  his  gofpel. 

Sermons,  that  aim  only  to  amufe  or  entertain,  are 
beneath  the  pulpit.  They  are  the  moral  beauifm  of  di- 
vines ;  an  attempt  to  mix  all  the  colours  ©f  the  rain- 
bow, with  the  dark  folemnity  of  a  moft  ferious  garb. 
They  arc  mufic  playing  in  the  ears  of  a  man,  whofe 
houfe  is  on  fire,  and  can  only  beguile  the  moment, 
which  mould  be  fpent  in  faving  all  the  valuables  of  his 
furniture,  and  efcaping  for  his  life.  Difcourfes  of  this 
nature  fliould  alaimthe  confeience  ;  mould  difplay  at 
once  our  mifery  and  the  mode  of  cure  ;  mould  probe 
all  the  rankling  fores  of  the  heart,  and  pour  in  the 
precious  oil  of  divine  confolati^i. 

Sterne  was  a  very  great,  eccentric,  original  genius, 
but  he  was  never  formed  for  a  clergyman.  He  had  a 
levity  of  mind,  that  ill  befitted  fo  ferious  a  character. 
tt  painter,  in  fancying  an  altar-piece,  would  have 
grouped  a  beau  cVefprit,  or  a  facetious  bon  vivani,  with 
our  Saviour  and  his  apoflles  at  the  lad  fupper  ? 


LETTER  XVII. 

THE  Chriftian  Pattern  will  abundantly  recom- 
mend itfelf  by  the  name.  The  tranflation  of  it 
by  Stanhope,  is  too  difTufe.  Wefley  has,  more  faith- 
fully, prelerved  the  fpirit  and  concife  energy  of  the 
-jxcellent  original. 

The  (angular  merit  of  this  little  book  is  obvious  from 
its  tranflation  into  almoft  all  languages.  Ganganelli 
afcribes  it,  with  pride,  to  an  Italian  author.  But, 
whatever  country  gave  it  birth,  it  is  lifted  with  a  facred 


YOUNG  LADY.  41 

unclion,  and  "  the  wifdom  which  cometh  from  above." 
Read  a  chapter  of  it  every  day,  and  you  will  never 
want  a  fund  of  chriftian  meditations. 

There  is  more  true  piety  and  information,  couched 
in  reflexions  on  the  feven  Days  of  the  Week,  by  Mrs. 
Talbot,  than  you  will  fometimes  meet  with  in  large 
and  fplendid  volumes.  You  cannot  have  a  better 
train  of  reflexions  for  the  beginning  of  your  every  day. 
This  good  lady  lived  in  the  family  of  Archbifhop 
Seeker,  and  feems  to  have  imbibed  that  fpirit  of  piety, 
which  fo  eminently  diiHnguifhed  this  illuftrious  pre- 
late. She  is  long  fince  dead  ;  but  her  little  book  will 
live  in  the  hearts  of  the  pious,  when  time  has  tarnifhed 
all  the  luftre  of  more  founding  names. 

I  have  always  thought,  that  little,  fhort  treatifes  of 
this  kind  have  done  the  moil  extend ve  good.  We  can 
carry  them  about  us,  and  the  fizc  does  not  deter  us  from 
looking  within.  People  will  not  read  large  treatifes  of 
religion,  and  writers,  in  this  refpecr,  mould  accommo- 
date themfelves  to  the  weaknefs  of  mankind.  Tender 
ftomachs  cannot  digeft  rich,  fubltantial  food,  nor  much, 
at  a  time. 

Addifon's  Saturday's  papers  are  all  of  them  inimita- 
ble. They  contain  a  rich  fund  of  knowledge  and  enter- 
tainment, raife  the  imagination,  and  improve  the  heart. 
The  good  man  very  judicioufly  appointed  them  for  Sat- 
urdays. They  are  the  belt  preparatives  for  being 
41  truly  in  the  fpirit,  on  the  Lord's  day." 

Scott  is  not,  perhaps,  a  lively  or  entertainiag  writer  ; 
but  his  Chriftian  Life  is  a  molt  excellent  and  rational 
fyftem  of  divinity.  Indeed  fubjecls  of  this  nature  do 
not  admit  of  fo  much  colouring,  as  fome  others.  Ima- 
gination may  better  lend  its  charms  to  painters,  poets, 
orators,  than  to  fyftematic  divines.  I  think,  however, 
that,  even  on  facred  topics,  genius  might  more  fre- 
quently, embellifh,  than  it   does.     Young  people  will 

E    2 


42  LETTERS  TO  A 

have  language,  pathos  and  pictureSque  images,  or  they 
will  not  read.  Some  little  condeSccnfion  is  due  to  their 
weaknefs.  Children  muft  be  cheated  into  the  taking 
of  ufeful  medicines.  The  pill  mould  be  gilded,  and 
the  bitter  mixed  with  a  fweet. 


LETTER  XVIII. 

THE  immortal  Locke  analyzed  the  powers  of  the 
human  underftanding.  MaSon  on  Self  knowl- 
edge is  the  anatomift  of  the  heart.  If  you  would  fee 
yourfelf  in  your  true  colours,  you  muft  be  daily  con- 
verfant  with  this  book.  You  fhould  take  it  to  your 
pillow,  when  you  go  to  fleep.  You  fhould  read  it, 
when  you  rife.  It  has,  however,  in  my  idea,  one  cap- 
ital defect.  It  is  too  much  ramified  into  heads,  divis- 
ions and  fubdivifions.  The  fize  of  the  houSe  is  too 
fmall  for  the  numerous  apartments. 

Though  I  am,  by  no  means,  partial  to  the  httcr>  fan- 
c'lful  writings  of  Mr.  Law,  I  will  venture  to  recom- 
mend the  two,  firft  books  he  ever  produced,  his  Seri- 
ous Call,  and  Chriftian  Perfection.  They  are  very 
awakening,  animated  treatifes,  written  with  great  fim- 
plicity  of  ftyle,  ftrength  of  argument,  and  originality  of 
manner.  His  Miranda  is  a  very  amiable  character  ; 
and,  though  her  piety  has  Something  of  the  monajlic,  in 
its  air,  there  are  traits  in  the  portrait  that  deferve  your 
emulation. 

One  cannot  recollect  the  beginning  of  this  good  man's 
life,  when  his  conceptions  were  fo  clear,  and  his  man- 
ner fo  impafiioned,  without  fhuddering  at  the  danger  of 
giving  way  to  fanciful  theories,  or  vifionary  writers. 
It  is  wonderful,  that  fo  very  discriminating  a  genius 
fhould  have  been,  afterwards,  fhackled  with  the  Spirit- 
ual chymiftry,and  the  unintelligible  rhapSodies  of  Beh« 


YOUNG  LADY.  43 

men.  But  even  the  great  and  amiable  Fenelon  was 
the  difciple  of  a  vifionary.  He  who  wrote  Telema- 
chus,  fell  into  reveries.  "  We  have  this  treafure  in 
"  earthen  veffels,  and  it  wi//be  tinged  with  our  particu- 
"  lar  complexions.'* 


LETTER  XIX. 

YOUNG's  Night-Thoughts  have  confiderable  mer- 
it, and  may  occafiona/Jy,  be  read  with  advantage. 
But  they  are  much  difcoloured  with  melancholy,  and 
give  chriftianity,  which  is  naturally  jfozzxixA,  too  dark 
a  complexion. 

Born  with  no  flender  fliare  of  ambition,  Young  had 
anxioufly  and  unfuccefsfully  courted  promotion.  The 
bubble  always  burft,  as  he  attempted  to  grafp  it  ;  the 
ignis  fatuus  deluded  him,  as  it  has  done  thoufands  be- 
fides.  Difappointment  is  generally  followed  with  difc 
guft,  and  difgufl  will  always  dictate  to  the  pen. 

With  all  thatfenfibility,  which  is  the  infeparable  con- 
comitant of  genius,  the  author  of  the  Night-Thoughts 
had  likewife  the  misfortune  to  be  deprived,  by  an  ear- 
ly death,  offeveral  of  thofe  relatives,  from  whofe  ten- 
der offices  andfoothing  attentions,  he  might  naturally 
have  expected,  in  the  evening  of  a  gloomy  life,  to  have 
received  fome  confolation.  His  poems,  therefore, 
have  much  the  (train  of  elegy,  and  his  piety  is  breath- 
ed in  fighs.  But  his  Night-Thoughts  have  awakened 
many  into  ferioufnefs,  and  you  rauft  take  them.,  as  you 
do  all  other,  human  things,  v/ith  their  good  and  their 
bad.  The  brighteft  pearl  is  furrounded  with  a  mud. 
It  is  the  buflnefs  of  tafte  and  judgment  to  make  the 
feparation. 

The  works  of  Wilfon  (the  once  bifliop  of  Sodor  and 
Man,)  are  a  treafure  of  plain,  practical  devotion.   His 


44  LETTERS  TO  A 

Indian  •lftrucled,  his  Parocbialia,  his  Sacra  Prrvata, 
and  his  treatife  on  the  Sacrament,  are  all  ferious  and 
interefting. 

This  good  prelate  has  not  difplayed  much  genius  or 
learning.  But  his  writings  are  ufeful,  in  proportion 
to  their  plainnefs»  and  will  edify  thoufands,  who  could 
never  have  comprehended  the  depths  of  learning,  or 
the  fubtilties  of  metaphyfics. 

Thrown  into  an  ignorant  andfuperjlitious  diocefs,  he 
{looped  to  the  level  of  the  meanefr.  undemanding.  He 
confidered  himfelf  as  the  father  of  his  people,  and  they 
paid  him  a  filial  duty  and  refpeet.  The  iflander  Jlill 
vifits  his  grave,  and  weeps  at  the  recollection  of  his 
deceafed  virtues.  Such  bifliops  will  live  in  the  mem- 
ory of  the  faithful,  when  fplendor  is  forgotten.  His 
labours  were  unremitting,  his  zeal,  primitive  ;  and  if 
he  gave  no  brilliance  to  the  mitre,  he  added  to  its  fob d 
weight. 


LETTER  XX. 

THE  meditations  of  St.  Auftin  are  admirable,  but 
have  fufFered  not  a  little  from  the  tranflation. 
It  is,  I  frill  repeat  it,  in  thefe  old  books,  that  we  chiefly 
nnd  the  true  fpirit  of  piety.  Has  it  evaporated,  like 
fome  mineral  waters,  by  a  long  prefervation  ?  Or  is  it 
that  we  would  be  men  of  philofophy  and  criticifm, 
rather  than  divines  ?  A  modern  theologian  plays  about 
the  head,  but  fcarcely  warms  the  heart  ;  an  ancient 
writer  carries  us,  by  an  irrefiftible  impulfe,  into  heaven, 
and  fills  us  with  all  the  raptures  of  devotion. 

The  difference  will  be  very  forcibly  illudrated  by 
the  different  conitriiction  of  ancient  and  modern 
churches.  The  wide  magnificence,  the  luminous 
darknefs,   the  mouldering  walls  and  long  drawn  aite 


YOUNG  LADY.  45 

of  gothic  ftructures  infpire  us  with  a  pleafing  melan- 
choly, thoughtfulnefs  and  devotion  ;  whilfl:  the  glaring 
light,  artificial  ornaments,  primnefs  and  convenience 
of  our  modern  fynagogues  fill  us  only  with  little,  world- 
ly ideas  of  elegance  and  tafte. 

Beveridge's  private  thoughts  and  reiblutions  richly 
deferve  a  place  in  your  collection.  They  are  not  ani- 
mated or  elegant,  but  they  are  pious  and  ufeful.  He 
is  one  of  thole  hofpitable  friends,  that  gives  us  a  very 
comfortable  and  rich  repair,  without  ceremony  or  often- 
tation. 

Taylor  is  the  Shakefpeare  of  divinity.  The  fertility 
of  his  invention,  the  force  of  his  arguments,  the  rich- 
nefs  of  his  images  and  the  copioufnefs  of  his  ftyle  are 
not  often  to  be  paralleled  in  the  works  of  ancient  or 
modern  writers.  His  holy  living  and  dying  is  a  chef 
iTauvre. 

I  do  not  remember  to  have  received  more  pleafure 
and  improvement  from  any  book,  that  I  have  read  for 
fome  time  pad,  than  from  the  two  firft  volumes  of  Gan- 
ganelli's  Letters.  Befides  being  furprized  to  fee  fuch 
a  generous  mode  of  thinking  in  the  fovereign  pontiff, 
fo  much  vivacity  in  a  monl',  tempered  with  fo  great  a 
fhare  of  unaffected  piety,  I  was  quite  charmed  with 
the  fimplicity  of  his  ftyle,  the  beauty  of  his  metaphors, 
and  that  fpirit  of  philanthropy,  which  pervades  the 
whole,  and  does,  all  along,  more  honor  to  his  heart, 
than  his  eafy  periods,  to  his  underftanding. 

There  is  fomething  in  the  climate  of  Italy,  which 
wonderfully  heats  and  fublimes  the  imagination.  It  is 
the  garden  of  Europe,  and  its  writers  breathe  that  a- 
greeable  perfume  with  which  it  is  fcented.  Gangancl- 
li's  defcription  of  this  country  is  particularly  fplendid. 
His  ftatues  breathe.  His  torrents  abfolutely  murmur 
dfcthe  ear.  His  cliffs  have  an  impending  horror  on 
'^  the  fancy,  and  his  gardens  waft  upon  us  aromatic 
imells.     I  would  ftill  gladly  hope,  notv/ithftanding  all 


46  LETTERS  TO  A 

that  has  been  advanced  to  the  contrary,  that  thefe  let- 
ters really  came  from  this  diftinguifhed  peiibn.  I  am 
not  willing  to  give  up  the  idea,  that  liberality  of  fenti- 
nient  has  extended  itfelf,  even  to  the  papal  tknone. 


LETTER  XXI. 

MY    DEAR    LUCY, 

YOU  would  obferve  from  the  complexion  of  my  laff. 
letter,  that  I  have  recommended  writers  of  very 
different  fects,  and  from  various  denominations  of 
chriilians.  The  truth  is,  I  have  confidered  thzivfpirit 
and  tendency,  and  not  their  name  or  party.  I  do  not 
want  to  make  you  a  mcthodiff,  a  diffenter,  a  rnyflic,  a 
papift,  a  fanatic,  an  enthufiafK  or  any  thing  but  a  real 
christian.  I  mould,  wifh  to  diveft  your  mind  of  every 
fpecics  of  bigotry,  and  convince  you,  that  real  piety 
has  exiiled  under  every  communion. 

When  your  judgment  is  more  matured,  you  mould 
examine  authors  of  all  different  perfuafions,  as  the 
Grecian  artifr.  did  women,  when  he  wifhed  to  paint 
his  Venus  of  Medici.  He  felected  from  every  one  he 
faw,  that  particular  limb  or  feature,  in  which  they, 
feparately,  excelled.  From  one,  he  borrowed  the  moft 
beautiful  eye  ;  from  another,  an  hand ;  from  a  third, 
a  bofom,  &c.  Thefe,  by  a  wonderful  effort  of  genius, 
he  combined  into  a  perfect  whole. 

All  fyftems,  like  all  human  figures,  have  their  de- 
fects ;  but  they  have,  likewife,  their  excellencies. 
Collect  thefe,  diftinct  charms,  and  work  them  up  in 
the  crucible  of  your  heart,  till  they  produce  "  the  very 
"  beauty  of  holinefs"  in  your  life  and  conversation. 

Above  all,  look  through  all  books  and  forms  and 
ordinances,  up  to  your  God.     Cherifh,  by  every  meth- 


YOUNG  LADY.  47 

od,  a  fpirlt  of  devotion.  Set  the  Lord  always  before 
you.  Confider  him,  as  the  foul  of  the  world,  the  Al- 
pha and  Omega,  the  beginning  and  the  end.  Think, 
act,  live,  as  in  his  prefencc,  and  do  every  thing  to  his 
glory.  Begin,  continue  and  end  every  day,  as  in  his 
light,  and  every  action,  as  under  his  direction.  Re- 
member that  all  things  on  earth  are  but  a  fhadow  ;  that 
time  is  tumbling  down  the  fyflem  of  the  univerfe,  and 
that  religion  only  can  rife  upon  the  ruins,  by  the  labors 
it  has  inferibed  to  Eternity  and  God. 


LETTER  XXII. 

MY    DEAR    GIRL, 

THOUGH  it  may  appear  to  be  dealing  with  you 
in  dry,  abftracled  fubjects  above  your  age,  yet  I 
do  think  it  neceffary,  that  you  mould  underftand  the 
grounds,  on  which  your  faith  is  built,  or  the  teftimony, 
which  confirms  the  truth  of  chriftianity,  and  of  the 
fcriptures.  You  will  thus  be  preferved  from  an  un- 
comfortable fluctuation  of  opinions,  and  guarded  from 
the  falfe  infinuations  of  thofe,  that  lie  in  wait  to  deceive. 

I  believe,  indeed,  we  very  falfely  eftimate  the  period, 
at  which  the  talents  of  women  begin  to  open,  as  well 
as  the  degree  of  their  extent  and  comprehenfion,  and 
fupercilioufly  withhold  from  you,  that  folid  informa- 
tion which,  alone  in  either  fex,  can  be  the  true  founda- 
tion of  a  rational,  a  fteady  and  confident  conduct. 

This  teftimony  in  favor  of  revelation,  is  divided, 
for  the  fake  of  order,  into  two  kinds,  internal  and  f.v- 
ternal.  The  internal  is  that,  which  arifes  from  the 
nature  and  excellency  of  the  precepts  them/elves,  and 
from  the  writers  having  had  no  private  or  finifter  yiews 


48  LETTERS  TO  A 

to  anfwcr,  but  confulting  only  the  general  good  and 
edification  of  mankind. 

This  firjl  mark  of  authenticity  is  fixed  on  every  page 
of  the  fcriptures.  The  laws  of  Chrift  arc  of  luch  a 
nature,  as  no  man  would  have  framed,  who  wiihed  to 
avail  himfelf  of  the  paflions,  prejudices  andinterefts  of 
mankind  ;  for  they  prefcribe,  on  the  other  hand,  an 
univerfal  humility,  mortification  and  felf-denial  ;  ex- 
hibit, in  the  ftrongeft  colours,  the  emptinefs  of  riches, 
and  the  vanity  of  ambition,  and  have  no  other  view, 
but  to  elevate  the  affections,  regenerate  the  heart,  and 
put  all  men  on  looking  beyond  the  tranfient  concerns 
of  this  life,  to  the  happinefs  of  another.  What  elfe 
could  happen  to  the  original  promulgers  of  thefe  laws, 
but  that,  which  aclually  did,  violence  and  perfecution  r 

Our  bleffed  Lord  pofitively  declared,  that  his  king- 
dom was  not  of  this  world.  He  fought  none  of  its 
diftinctions,  and  he  received  none,  unlefs,  by  a  ftrange 
perverfion  of  ideas,  we  place  them  in  the  poverty  of  a 
manger,  or  the  tortures  of  his  crofs.  His  apoJUes  were 
inflamed  with  the  very  fame,  d'ifinterejied  zeal.  They 
willingly  refigned  lucrative  employments  at  the  call  of 
their  mafter ;  they  cheerfully  abandoned  weeping 
friends  ;  undertook  the  moll:  hazardous  voyages  and 
travels  ;  had  no  reft  day  nor  night,  were  carried  be- 
fore kings  and  governors  of  the  earth,  "  and  even 
"  hated  by  all  men  for  his  name's  fake.', 

Read  the  account  of  their  labors,  perfecution,  ban- 
ifhment,  death  ;  perufe  the  hiftory  of  all  the  martyrs, 
written  with  their  blood,  and  tell  me,  whether  their 
zeal  muft  not  have  come  from  heaven,  or  what  could 
ever  have  infpired  it,  but  a  fincere  conviction  of  duty, 
"  a  faith,  which  looked  to  a  city  with  foundations, 
"  whofe  builder  and  maker  was  God." 


YOUNG  LADY.  4V 

LETTER  XXIII. 

THINK,  my  dear  girl,  for  yourfelf.  Are  there 
any  marks  of  fecular  wifciom  or  policy  or  im- 
pofture,  in  the  conduct  ©f  the  primitive  apoftles  and 
chriftians  ?  Examine  the  hiftory  of  the  whole  world, 
as  it  relates  to  religion,  and  where  elfe  will  you  dis- 
cover any  portion  of  the  fame,  difinterefted  fpirit, 
which  actuated  thefe  original  publishers  of  the  gofpel  r 

The  Roman  Emperor  inftituted  a  facredcode  to  work 
upon  the  confciences,  and  to  keep  the  minds  of  a  fav- 
age  and  a  barbarous  people  in  fubjection  to  government. 
Zoroafter,  Lycurgus,  Solon,  all  celebrated  in  their 
day,  and  certainly  men  of  extraordinary  talents,  had 
more  a  view  to  policy,  than  any  moral  interefts,  in  their 
refpective  fyftems  of  legiflation.  Mahomet  availed 
himfelf  of  the  narrow,  fenfual  views,  and  paffions  of 
his  followers,  and  of  the  particular  complexion  and 
diflenfions  of  his  times,  merely  to  be  the  fole,  exclu- 
sive monarch  of  an  extenfive  empire,  and  procure  a 
little  fading  honor  and  distinction. 

"  The  kingdom  of  all  thefe  men  was  certainly  of 
M  this  world,"  and  their  laws,  in  many  inftances,  were 
repugnant  to  right  reafon,  and  the  bed:  and  deareft  in- 
terefts  of  their  fellow  creatures.  Of  Chrift,  his  very 
enemies  faid,  "  never  man  fpake,  like  this  man  ;"  his 
injunctions  had  but  one  afpect — -to  univerfal  happinefs, 
and  one,  fimple  method  to  it — univerfal  reformation. 
The  angels  that  announced  him,  at  his  mil  appear- 
ance, proclaimed  "  peace  on  earth,  and  good-will  to- 
wards men." 

Nor  is  the  wonderful  progrefs  of  this  religion  in  (6 

Jhort  a  fpace  of  time,  over  all  Afia,  and  a  great   part 

of  Europe,  indeed  over  almoft  the  whole  of  the,  then, 

known  world,  the  lead  convincing  proof  of  its  divine 

original.     Confider  the    mijfionaries — illiterate   fifher- 

E 


5o  LETTERS  TO  A 


men  nics,  and  you  muft  conclude,  either  that 

were  endowed  with  fupernatvral  gifts  and  afliit- 
,  or  that  their  'A-onderful/z/rr^/r  was  even  a  great- 
racky  than  the  endowment,  you  difpute. 

On  this  fuhjecl  permit  mc  to  recommend  to  your 
ferious  perufal,  Soame  Jenyn's  Internal  Evidence  of 
the  Chriftian  Religion.  He  is  on  the  whole  a  fanci- 
ful writer  ;  but  this  is  an  excellent,  little  book,  that 
has  done  much  good,  and  comes  with  greater  force, 
to  every  bofom,  as  he  was  once,  according  to  his  own 
candid  confeflion,  in  the  number  of  thofe,  who  difpu- 
ted  the  facred  truths  of  revelation.  You  will  receive 
great  pleafure  and  improvement,  likewife  from  Addi- 
fon's  Evidences  of  Christianity,  arranged  and  collected 
into  one  volume,  and  from  a  late  fimilar  production  of 
the  celebrated  Dr.  Beattie. 

Every  word  of  the  fcriptures,  indeed,  muft  convince 
any  candid  or  thoughtful  perfon,  that  they  come  from 
God.  The  pafiions,  pride,  vices  and  interefts  of  man- 
kind have  induced  not  a  few  to  fet  up  for  fecptics. 
"  Much  learning  has  made  them  mad,"  or  a  little 
has  rendered  them  frivolous  and  conceited.  They 
have  fought  only  to  diftinguifh  themfelves  by  uncom- 
mon opinions  ;  they  have  been  dupes  to  their  own  fan- 
cied penetration  ;  they  have  attempted  to  grafp  the  im- 
menfity  of  the  Deity,  in  arms  ofJ?r/b,  or  have  fhrunk 
into  fcepticifm,  as  a  refuge  from  their  vices. 

Hear  what  the  fcripture  faith,  "  Every  one,  that 
**  doeth  evil,  hateth  the  light,  neither  cometh  to  the 
"  light,  left  his  deeds  mould  be  reproved.  Except 
"  ye  become  as  little  children,  (humble,  docile,  trac- 
"  table,)  ye  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
"  How  can  ye  believe,  which  receive  honor  one  of 
"  another,  and  feek  not  the  honor,  which  cometh  of 
"  God  only  ?" 


YOUNG  LADY.  51 

LETTER  XXIV. 

^PHE  external  teftimony,  in  favour  of  the  chriftian 

X  religion,  arifes  from  prophecy,  miracles,  and 
the  correfponding  evidence  of  hiftory.  And  thefe  feeni 
to  include  all  the  probable  methods,  which  heaven 
could  employ  for  the  converfion  of  mankind. 

The  whole  facred  book  of  the  Old  Teftament  is, 
from  beginning  to  end,  a  clear  prediction  of  the  Mef- 
fiah.  One  of  the  prophets  has  foretold  the  preciie 
year,  in  which  this  "  righteous  branch"  mould  make 
his  appearance.  And  this  event  you  know,  has  taken 
place  to  the  comfort  of  the  chrif Han  world. 

Others  have  predicted  the  deftruction  of  Jerufalem, 
Babylon,  Tyre,  the  difperfion  and  calamities  of  the 
Jews,  &c.  long  before  they  happened ; — and  all  pro- 
fane hiftory,  which  has  been  written  fince  their  time, 
will  inform  you,  that  thefe  awful  judgments  were  won- 
derfully accompliihed,  in  their  proper  feifon. 

The  Revelation  contains  darker  hints  of  fome  e- 
vents,  that  are  vifibly,  though  gradually  fulfilling,  at 
this  moment.  But  as  I  can  only  glance  at  the  fubject, 
you  will  fee  it  treated  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  confirm 
your  faith  and  exalt  your  devotion,  in  the  late  Bifhop 
of  Briftol  (Dr.  Newton's)  difcouifes  on  the  Prophe- 
cies. 

The  miracles  of  our  Saviour  and  of  his  immediate 
apoftles  meet  you  in  every  page  of  the  infpired  book  ; 
and  in  profane  hiftory,  you  will  learn  from  thofe,  who 
were  avowed  enemies  to  the  caufe,  that,  at  a  particular 
period  of  time,  there  did  exift  fuch  a  facred  perfonage, 
as  Jefus  Chrift,  who  wrought  miracles,  healed  the  tick, 
and  raifed  the  dead  ;  fuch  a  feet  as  that  of  Chriftians, 
who  met  to  receive  the  facrament,  who  bound  them- 
felves  by  this  oath,  to  commit  no  iniquity,  practifed  a 
wonderful  innocence  and  aufterity  of  manners,  and, 
beyond  all  example,  loved  one  another.     You  will  fee 


52  LETTERS  TO  A 

likcwife,  in  the  fame  pages,  a  full  description  of  their 
manners,  morals,  ceremonies   and  religious  institutions. 

The  lapfe  of  time,  moreover,  to  us,  who  live  in  thefe 
later  times,  has  given  an  additional  force  to  the  eviden- 
ces, in  favour  of  revelation.  The  ingenious  author  o{ 
the  Spectator,  in  his  day,  confidered  the  particular  cafe 
of  the  Jews,  their  calamities,  difperfion,  vagabond, un- 
fettled  fhite,  &c.  as  a  (landing  and  inconteftible  miracle, 
in  fupport  of  the  facred  writings.  They  JIM  continue 
(what  is  there  fo  circumftantially  foretold,)  unable  to 
incorporate  with  any  people,  and  loaded  with  the  ha- 
tred and  abhorrence  of  all.  The  tciiimony,  therefore, 
from  //v/V  hiftory  is  proportionably  more  ill  unrated  and 
confirmed. 

The  deftrutftion  of  the  Romifli  church,  likewife,  is 
palpably  predicted  in  the  fcriptures.  And,  if  we  may 
judge  from  llrong  appearances,  is  daily  approaching. 
The  ^reat  and  general  difftifion  of  knowledge  ;  the 
confequcnt  progrefs  of  religious  toleration,  and  that 
difperfion  of  the  mills  of  prejudice  from  all  eyes,  pro- 
duced by  the  genial  rays  of  a  meridian  fun,  muft,  in 
time,  effect  the  downfall  of  all  tyranny  and  fuperfH- 
tion  :  whilft  the  empsror,  employed  in  destroying 
monafteries,  and  encouraging  population,  appears  an  in- 
ifrumentin  the  hand  of  Providence,  for  accelerating 
the  approach  of  this  aufpicious  moment.  The  late 
difmemberment,  moreover,  of  territory  from  the  Holy 
Se«s ;  the  contentions,  in  which  the  fovereign  pontiff 
has  been  involved  by  thofe  monarchs,  who  once  trem- 
bled at  his  frown  ;  and  the  mere  external  deference  on- 
ly, which  is  paid  to  his  authority,  prove  that  his  throne 
is  tottering  from  its  bafe,  and  like  all  other  human 
things,  approaching  to  its  diflblution.  Thus  is  our 
holy  religion  founded  on  a  rock,  againft  which  the 
winds  and  waves  of  infidelity  beat  in  vain.  Proud 
men  may  reafon,  and  wicked  men  pretend  to  doubt, 
but  "  the  very  gates  of  hell  mall  not  prevail  againft  it.*' 


YOUNG  LADY.  53 

*  LETTER  XXV. 

MY    DEAR    LUCY, 

WONDER  not  at  the  diverfity  of  opinions  in 
religion.  It  has  been  from  the  beginning, 
and  will  continue  to  be  the  cafe,  to  the  end,  of  the 
world.  Men  will  never  have  the  fame  religious  fenti- 
ments,  till  you~can  give  them  the  very  fame  natural  dif- 
pofitions  of  humility,  candour,  teachablenefs  ;  the 
fame  capacity,  education,  acquaintance,  or  even  the 
fame  fet  of  features  or  the  fame  complexion. 

The  hiftory  of  the  church,  from  the  firft  moment, 
to  the  prefent,  is  an  hiftory  of  thefe  diifenfions.  So 
foon  as  Chriif.  and  his  apoftles  disappeared,  men  mixed 
"  tares  of  human  opinion  with  this  good  feed  of  the 
word."  Even  two  of  thefe  apoflles  had  a  fharp  con- 
tention, and  the  fpirit  has  never  vaniflied  from  their 
iucceflbrs. 

There  has  been  the  fame  fafliion  in  religious  opin- 
ions, as  in  common  things.  Particular  notions  have 
been  abetted,  laid  afide,  refumed  and  difmified  again, 
under  different  names  and  leaders,  exactly  like  the  va- 
rying modes  of  drefs,  furniture  or  entertainments. 

Nor  is  this  the  leaft  impeachment  of  our  holy  reli- 
gion. The  truth  of  that,  like  the  God,  whence  it 
comes,  is  the  "  fame  yefterday,  to-day  and  forever." 
It  is  nierved,  as  the  privilege  of  a  more  glorious  era, 
that  an  men  mall  be  of  one  "  heart  and  of  one  foul 
11  and  keep  the  unity  of  the  fpirit  in  the  bond  of  peace." 

In  all  human  fyftems  of  faith,  there  mud:  be  error. 
Where  error  is  involuntary,  and  fprings  from  no  crim- 
inal paffions,  but  only  from  a  weaknefs  or  mifdireclion 
of  judgment,  the  Almighty,  who  looketh  chiefly  at  the 
heart,  doubtlefs  will  forgive.  Charity,  in  the  mean 
time,  is  the  great  bond  of  union,  amongft  all  parties* 
E  2 


54  LETTERS  TO  A 

"  They  fliall  come  from  the  eaft,  and  from  the  weft, 
"  and  fit  down  in  the  kingdom  of  God."  If  we  hope 
to  be  companions  in  glory,  we  "  mould  not  furely  fall 
"  out  by  the  way." 

The  chriftian  blood,  which  has  ftained  fo  many  ages 
of  the  church,  has  flowed  from  the  moft  malignant  and 
felliih  paflions.  The  gofpel  breathes  nothing  but  uni- 
verfal  love,  and  candour  and  forbearance.  "  Ye 
"  know  not  what  manner  of  fpirit  ye  are  of,"  is  the 
mild  rebuke  to  every  perfecutor,  that  would  flay  with 
the  fword. 


LETTER  XXVI. 

THOUGH  it  is  really  invidious,  yet  for  the  fake 
of  directing  your  judgment,  and  gratifying  a 
very  natural  and  laudable  curiofity,  I  will  give  you  a 
brief,  comprehenfive  ilcetch  of  the  opinions  of  the  more 
celebrated,  religious  feels,  that  have  prevailed  in  this 
kingdom.  You  will  thus  be  able  to  form  fome  com- 
parative idea  of  their  merits  or  defects  ;  you  will  not 
be  fo  likely  to  be  "  toffed  about  with  every  blaft  of  vain 
**  doctrine,"  and  you  will  never  feel  yourfelf  at  a  loft, 
in  company,  when  they  become  the  fubject  of  conver- 
fation. 

Pagans  are  thofe  who  are  wholly  unenlightened  with 
revelation,  and  worfhip  idols,  inftead  of  the  true  God. 
Thefe  idols  have  been  various,  as  the  caprices  or  im- 
aginations of  the  people  amongft  whom  they  are  found  ; 
fometimes  fictitious  beings,  fuch  as  Jupiter,  Apollo, 
Mercury,  Mars,  Juno,  Venus,  Minerva,  &c.  fometimes, 
good  qualities  perfonified  ;  Faith,  Hope,  Victory,  Con- 
cord ;  fometimes  animals,  as  Serpents,  Crocodiles,  &c. 
or  even  vegetables  ;  as  Leek,  Onion,  Garlic.  Thefe 
lad  were  objects  of  adoration  amongft  the  Egyptians. 


YOUNG  LADY.  55 

Before  the  appearance  of  Chrifl:,  almoft  the  whole 
world  was  covered  with  paganifm.  All  the  learning 
and  politenefs  of  Athens  and  of  Rome  could  not  dif- 
pel  this  ignorance.  It  has  only  vanifhed  "  where  the 
"  fun  of  righteoufnefs  has  appeared  with  healing  in 
"  his  wings." 

An  ingenious  writer  has  faid,  that,  if  we  divide  the 
known  countries  of  the  globe  into  thirty  equal  parts, 
five  will  be  Chriftians  ;  fix,  Mahometans,  and  nineteen 
Pagans.  How  dreadful  the  reflection,  that  the  greateft 
of  all  poflible  bleflings  mould  have  penetrated  but  fo 
fmall  a  way !  When  we  confider  the  privileges  of  the 
gofpel,  how  gladly  would  one  carry  it,  if  it  were  pof- 
fible,  into  every  country  of  the  known  world  !  How 
ardently  mould  we  pray  to  our  father  in  heaven,  that 
his  kingdom  of  grace  may  daily  come  on  earth,  and 
how  thankful  fhould  we  be  to  that  gracious  Providence, 
that  has  fixed  our  lot  in  a  chriftian  land,  and  under 
the  enlivening  beams  of  revelation  ! 


LETTER  XXVII. 

MY    DEAR    GIRL, 

MAHOMETANS  are  fo  called  from  being  fol- 
lowers of  the  great  impoftor,  Mahomet.  This 
extraordinary  man  was  born  at  Mecca,  in  Arabia,  a- 
bout  the  middle  of  the  fixth  century  ;  and,  in  his  for- 
tieth year,  after  fome  time  previoufly  fpent  in  the  fi- 
lence,  retirement  and  aufterity  of  a  cave,  prefumed  to 
(tile  himfelf,  the  Apollle  of  God  ;  pretended  to  have 
received  from  heaven,  a  new  and  a  lajl  revelation, 
which  was  to  illuftrate  and  inforce,  what  had  been 
miftaken  or  perverted,  in  the  chrijiian,  by  the  lapfe  of 
time  or  the  fophiftry  of  men.     He  affecled,  likewife, 


56  LETTERS  TO  A 

a  commifllon  from  above,  if  gentler  methods  mould 
prove  inejfedualy  to  propagate  his  particular  religion  by 
the  fword. 

His  tenets  are  contained  in  the  Koran,  which,  for 
its  Angularity,  is  worth  your  reading.  To  give  them 
plaufibility,  they  are  interfpcrfed  with  fome  chriftian 
doclxines,  but,  at  the  fame  time,  carry  a  moit  artful 
addrefs  to  the  paflions  ;  allowing  polygamy,  and  de- 
ferring the  future  paradife,  as  confuting  principally,  of 
/<vi/i/tf/pleafures  ;  fplendid,  filken  garments  ;  rivers  of 
water,  wine,  milk,  honey;  mufic,  feafling  and  moft 
beautiful  women. 

Mahomet  was  a  man  of  great  talents  and  ambition. 
He  had  no  view  but  to  render  himfelf  the  fole  and  for- 
midable monarch  of  an  extenfive  empire.  Religion 
was  made  the  injlrumeni  for  executing  his  wicked  and 
tyrannical  defigns.  Hence  all  his  aufteritts,  difguifes, 
deceptions.  Hence  he  pretended  fuch  a  familiar  in- 
tercourfe  with  heaven,  and  by  his  Angular  addrefs, foun- 
ded a  religion,  which  has  continued  fince  his  time,  with 
little  variation,  to  overfpread  a  confiderable  part  of  the 
world.  It  is  profefTed  by  the  Turks  and  Perfians,  by 
feveral  nations  amongft  the  Africans,  and  by  many 
amongft  die  Eaft-Indians. 

The  outline  of  it  was  fketched  by  the  hands  of  a 
great  mailer.  It  was  fuited  to  the  climate  ;  it  took 
advantage  of  the  diforders  and  difTenfions,  then  pre- 
vailing amongft  Christians,  and  it  promifed  a  fpecies  of 
gratifications,  to  which  our  nature  will  always  feel  the 
ftronoeft  propenfity. 

The  bulk  of  people,  in  any  country,  do  not,  indeed 
cannot,  think  or  judge  for  themfelves  ;  it  will  therefore, 
always  be  in  the  power  of  thofe,  who  have  Tiny  popular 
talents   to   make  the  multitude,    their   profelytes  and 

Jlaves  ;  and  thus,  if  we  turn  over  the  hiftory   of  the 
world,  fhall  we  find  the  ambition,  luft,  and  avarice  of  a 

few,  trampling  on  the  dearcft  interefts  of  the  many. 


YOUNG  LADY.  57 

LETTER  XXVIII. 

MY    DEAR    LUCY, 

UNDER  the  name  of  Chriftians,  however  differ- 
ing from  each  other  in  private  opinions,  or  di- 
vided and  fubdivided  amongft  themfelves,  are  included 
all  thofe,  who  embrace  the  facred  revelation  and  doc- 
trines of  Jefus  Chr'ijl.  Amongft  thefe,  the  Roman 
Catholics,  both  in  point  of  numbers,  and  the  figure 
they  have  made  in  the  hiftory  of  Europe  may  feem  to 
claim  fome  degree  of  precedence.* 

This  religion,  which  has  fubfifted  for  fuch  a  length 
of  time,  and  c©vered  fo  confiderable  a  part  of  the 
world,  is  little  elfe  but  a  fyftem  of  political  tyranny  ef- 
tabliflied  by  the  clergy,  over  the  confeiences  and  for- 
tunes  of  men,  merely  to  enrich  and  aggrandize  them- 
felves.  They  who  mould  have  afpired  to  no  other 
greatnefs,  but  to  become  the  fervants  of  all  for  their 
eternal  good,  have  undertaken  "  to  lord  it  over  God's 
"  heritage,  and  rule  it  with  a  rod  of  iron." 

Can  any  thing  in  the  world  be  more  inconfiftent  ? 
The  Pope  in  all  the  plenitude  of  temporal  power,  pre- 
fumptuoufly  ftiles  himfelf  the  vicar  general  of  Jefus 
Chrift  !  that  Jefus,  who  appeared  in  a  manger^  emptied 
himfelf  of  all  his  glory,  and  difclaimed  all  temporal 
greatnefs  and  diftinction  ! 

The  public  worfhip  of  the  papifts  is  overloaden  with 
ceremony.  It  is  performed  in  a  learned  language,  un- 
known to  the  vulgar,  and  intermixed  with  fuch  a  con- 
tinual change  of  drefs,  attitude  and  ceremonies,  as  are 
only  calculated  to  excite  the  ridicule  of  a  rational  and 


*  The  Roman  Catholic  religion  is  at  this  day  the  eftab- 
lifhed  religion  of  the  following  Countries,  viz.  Portugal, 
Spain,  France,  Italy,  Bohemia,  Hungary,  Poland,  and  like- 
wife  part  of  Germany  and  Swiflerlaud. 


53  LITERS  TO  A 


enlightened  mind.  The  great,  Supreme  incompre- 
henfible  Spirit  is  only  to  be  ferved  with  the  heart  and 
affections,  and  the  mod  unlearned  pcrfon  in  a  congre- 
gation mould  forely  understand  every  prayer,  that  is 
uttered. 

The  Roman  Catholics  acknowledge  the  Pope  for 
their  head.  They  think  the  church  infallible  in  its 
councils  and  deciiions,  and  brand  all,  who  differ  from 
them,  with  the  odiot-s  name  of  heretics,  as  people,  who 
are  not  within  the  •  on.     They  keep  the 

minds  of  poor  people  in  ignorance  ;  they  do  not  permit 
them  to  read  the  fcriptures,  but  refrr  them  for  infbuc- 
tion  folely  to  their  briejh  ;  they  maintain  the  necellity 
of  conferring  their  fins  and  frailties  to  their  paftor,  and 
the  validity  of  human  abfolution  ;  they  believe  the  ab- 
furdand  incomprehenfiblc  doctrine  of '  tranfubjlantiation, 
or  that  the  elements  of  bread  and  wine,  in  the  facra- 
ment,  are  changed  into  the  real  bedy  and  blood  of 
Chril't ;  they  have  been  accufed  of  worfhipping  images  ; 
faints,  they  certainly  invoke,  to  be  mediators  for  them  ; 
they  have  fwelled  the  number  of  facraments  to  Jcoen  ; 
thefe  are  baptifm,  confirmation,  the  euchaiiit,  penance, 
extreme  unction,  holy  orders,  and  marriage  ;  they  ad- 
mit the  doctrine  of  a  purgatory  after  death,  in  which 
fouls  are  refined  from  their  former  pollutions  ;  they 
forbid  their  priefh  to  marry,  preach  up  the  neceffity, 
oijuperlor  fanSity  ofafingle  life,  and  induce  as  many 
people  of  fortune,  as  pofiible,  to  bury  themfelresin  con- 
vents and  monafteries,  and  pour  their  fortunes  into  the 
bofom  of  the  church  ;  in  fome  of  the  more  corrupt 
agee,  indigencies  for  thegreat^  crimes  might  be  pur- 
chafed  with  money,*   and  every  degree  of  guilt  has  had 


*  The  felling  of  thefe  indigencies  by  John  Tczel,  a  Do- 
minican friar, rcr.ltd  the  fpirit  of  Dr.  Martin  Luther,  pro- 
feffor  of  BWinity  in  the  Univerfity  of  Wittenberg,  in  the 
electorate  of  Saxony.     He  caufed  05    thefes,  oppofing    tnis 


YOUNG  LADY.  59 

its  dated  fum  of  acquittance  ;  perfecutionforconfcience 
fake,  has  been  deemed  meritorious,  and  their  annals  are 
ftained  with  the  blood  of  thousands. 

There  are,  doubtlefs,  multitudes  of  papifta,  who,  in 
an  enlightened  a.ge,Jlrudder  at  many  of  thefe  dreadful 
opinions,  and  laugh  at  others  ;  the  gay  and  volatile 
people  of  France,  in  general  ridicule  them  all;  and 
make  a  natural  tranfition  from  the  extreme  of  fuperfti- 
tion  to  that  of  unbelief.  Whether  thefe  be,  or  be  not, 
the  principles  of the  prefent  members,  they  are  indifpu- 
tably,  the  eftablifhed  doctrines  of  the  church,  however 
varnilhed  over  by  art,  or  evaded  by  affectation  ;  and 
though  this  people  at  prefent,  are  loyal,  inoffenfiye 
fubjects,  and  feemingly  attached  to  the  fovereign  on 
the  throne,  yet  there  is  rcafon  to  fear,  that  a  renewal  of 
their  power  would  be  attended  with  a  repetition  of  their 
violence,  and  blow  up  the  feemingly  extinguished  em- 
bers of  hatred  and  perfecution.  Such  a  many-headed 
monfter  mould  be  carefully  guarded.  Delsges  of  hu- 
man blood  are  not  to  be  forgotten. 

For  their  fake,  and  for  the  honor  of  Chriftianity,  I 
do  moft  ardently  wifh  their  converfion.  I  long  to  em- 
brace, as  brethren,  a  thoufand  excellent  men,  who  now 
live,  as  I  cherifh  the  memories  of  many,  who  have 
died,  within  their  communion.  Nor  do  I  think  the 
period  is  very  diflant.  Bigotry  cannot  much  longer 
be  a  weed  in  the  prefent  highly  cultivated  itate  of 
Great-Britain.  I  have  before  mentioned  the  empe- 
ror, as  a  probable  inftrument  of  this  good  work.  His 
ambition,  I  truft,  will  thus  be  confecrated  to  the  glory 
of  God,  and  the  welfare  of  mankind.  The  happieft 
events  we  celebrate,  have  fometimes,  fprung  from  the 
impurefl  pamons.      Our  own    reformation   from  this 


abufc  and  other  errors,  to  be  printed  and  nailed  to  the  door 
of  the  Electoral  Church,  October  31, 151 7  ;  and  this  was 
the  beginaing  ©f  the  Reformation. 


6o  LETTERS  TO  A 

church  was  fngularly  effected.*  The  Almighty  can 
bend  the  counfels  of  men,  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  an- 
fwer  his  fovereign  defigns.  "  He  doeth  what  he  will, 
"  in  the  armies  of  heaven,  and  amongft  all  the  inhabi- 
44  tants  of  the  earth." 


LETTER  XXIX. 

THE  Greek  church  is  much  Iefs  known  amongft 
us,  as  to  its  doctrine  or  difcipline,  than  the  Ro- 
man. Indeed  there  are,  comparatively,  but  few  mem- 
bers of  it  in  England.  It  was  firir.  eftablifhed  in 
Greece,  from  whence  it  derived  its  name,  and  extends 
to  fome  other  parts  of  Turkey. f  It  is  often  called 
the  eajleniy  in  contradiftinction  to  the  Romifh,  which  is 
the  ivejlern,  church. 

Though  the  profeflbrs  of  this  religion  difavow  the 
fupremacy  of  the  Pope,  and  many  other  opinions  of  the 
Holy  See,  yet  they  are  conliderably  tinctured  with  fu- 
perftition.  Their  worfhip  is  overloaden  with  ceremo- 
ny, (hew,  fplendid  drefTes,  faftings,  aufterities,  &c.  as 
well  as  the  former.  They  are  governed  by  bifhops 
and  patriarchs.  Their  head  is  the  patriarch  of  Con- 
ftantinople. 


LETTER  XXX. 


MY    DEAR    LUCY, 


D 


ISSENTER  is  a  vague  word,  which,  in  its  full 
latitude,  may  be  applied  to  a//t  who  differ  from 


*  In  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII. 

|  It  is  iikewife  the  eftablifhed  Church  throughout  the  vaft 
empire  of  Ruflia  in  Europe. 


YOUNG  LADY.  61 

the  eflablifhed  religion.  Originally,  however,  it  meant 
only  one  kind  of  people,  then  diftinguifhed  by  the  name 
of  prefbyterians,  who  rather  difTented  from  the  difci- 
pline  and  polity,  than  the  opinions,  of  the  church. 
Thefe,  in  general,  embraced  the  fentiments  of  Calvin, 
relating  to  foreknowledge,  divine  decrees,  irrefiftible 
grace,  predeftination,  reprobation,  &c.  They  difclaim- 
ed  epifcopacy,  and  their  government  was  vefted  in  pref- 
byters  and  fy nods.  The  word  prejbytcr,  means  an  el- 
der, and  fynod,  an  ecclefiaft  ical  council  or  aiTembly. 

Theprefent  race  of  diiTenters  may  be  ftrictly  fubdivi- 
ded  into  two  clafTes  ;  thofe  who  ftill  retain  the  doc- 
trines of  Calvin,  and  his  mode  of  difcipline,  and  call 
themfelves,  from  their  form  of  government,  Indepen- 
dants  ;  and  fuch  as  aiTume  the  more  fpecious  title  of 
proteftant  diiTenters.  The  firft  are  extremely  rigid 
and  puritanical  in  their  outward  deportment ;  but  they* 
d©  not  breathe  all  the  fweetnefs  of  piety,  nor  are  their 
annals  unftained  with  inftances  of  intolerance  and  per- 
fection.— Their  leader  was  a  furious  and  unrelenting 
*  bigot.  His  murder  of  the  poor  honeft  Servetus  will 
be  an  eternal  ftigma  on  his  memory,  and  throw  a  dark 
{hade  over  his  pretended  virtues. 

Indeed  how  can  people,  with  fuch  fentiments,  act 
otherwife  ?  I£  their  God  be  only  merciful  to  afeiv, 
elect,  how  fliould  they  think  of  a  general  benevolence  ? 
If  he  can  be  cruel  to  fo  many  millions  of  creatures, 
where  is  the  harm  of  imitating  his  example,  or  exter- 
minating ihoufands  ? 

I  do  not  know  that  the  latter  kind  of  diiTenters  have 
any  fettled code  of  faith.  "  Every  minifterhas  apfalm 
"  of  his  own,  has  a  doctrine,  has  an  interpretation," 
fo  that  very  oppofite  fentiments  may  be  confidently  de- 
livered by  different  perfons,  in  the  fame  pulpit.  They 
value  themfelves  highly,  with  whatever  juffice,  on 
their  learning,  candour  and  liberality.  Far  from  be- 
F 


ti  LETTERS  TO  A 


ing  actuated  with  any  blind  or  enthufiajlic  zeal,  they 
fccm  to  worjhip  reafon,  as  their  guide,  and  facrilegioufiy 
'.xalt  it,  almoft  on  the  ruins  of  revelation.  Their 
danger  is  of  falling  into  fcepticifm,  the  molt  alarming 
and  incurable  of  all  fpiritual  diforders.  They  are  faid, 
in  general,  to  difbelieve  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  of 
the  atonement,  and  divinity  of  Chrifr,  and  unite  with 
the  Calvinifts,  in  o«<rfentiment,  at  lead — that  of  abhor- 
ring epifcopacy,  and  of  confidering  the  eftablifhed 
church,  as  a  fyfkm,  raifed  by  priejlcraft,  and  fuppor- 
ted  by  fuperjlition. 


LETTER  XXXI. 

THE  methodifts  are  comparatively  a  new  feci? 
and  fprung  up  about  fixty  years  ago,  under  the 
aufpices  of  John  Wefley,  and  George  Whitfield  then 
ftudents  at  Oxford.  They  received  their  name,  from 
affecting  to  live  by  a  ftricter  regimen  and  method,  than 
other  people. 

They  have  been  long  divided  into  two  claries  accor- 
ding to  the  different  principles,  efpoufed  by  their  lea- 
ders. The  firft  follow  the  opinions  of  Arminius,  un- 
der the  guidance  of  Wefley,  who  is  JiiU  a  very  vene- 
rable looking  patriarch,  at  their  head  ;  and  the  other, 
believing  divine  decrees,  foreknowledge,  reprobation 
and  election,  are  more  ftrictly  members  of  the  kirk, 
(only  that  they  do  not  admit  its  difcipline)  having 
long  fince  loft  their  original  director.* 

1  do  not  know,  that  the  methodifts,  (particularly 
they,  who  follow  Wefley,)  are  difTenters  from  the  ef- 

*  George  Whitfield.  Both  before  and  fince  his  death, 
the  Countefs  of  Huntingdon  has  been  a  perfon  of  great  in- 
fluence among  this  latter  clafs  of  Mcthedifii. 


YOUNG  LADY.  63 


lablifliment,  further  than  in  having  fepr-rate  meetings  to 
inkindle  and  infpirit  the  zeal  of  their  followers  :  a  cir- 
cumftance,  which  they  conceive  to  be  much  neglected 
by  the  regular  clergy.  They  are  baptized  with  us  ; 
attend  our  fervices  and  facrament ;  admire  our  litur- 
gy ;  and  only  blame  us  for  our  lukewarmnefs  and 
want  of  energy  and  animation.  This  cenfure,  it  is 
true,  comes  but  with  a  very  ill  grace  fiom  fuch  a  peo- 
ple ;  but,  I  fear,  we  cannot  eafily  refute  it. 

They  had  originally  a  great  mare  of  enihufiafm. — 
But  it  is  greatly  fofteoed  by  the  indulgence  they  have 
received,  and  mellowed  down  by  time.  They  are  no 
longer  a  new  ;  they  are  no  longer  a  perfccuied  fed:. 

The  journals  of  Wefley,  written  in  the  infancy  of 
his  career,  are  a  Orange  medley  of  goodncfs  and  en- 
thufiafm.  The  old  man  has  lived  long  enough  to  have 
feen  his  error.  That  glow  of  imagination  is  confider- 
ably  abated,  which  miftook  fhadows  for  fubflance,  and 
made  fiction  pafs  for  truth. 

The  great  error  amongfr.  this  people,  is  their  em- 
ploying fuch  low,  illiterate  men  as  tkeir  inftructors,  and 
fancying  them  under  the  immediate  guidance  of  divine  in- 
(piration — preaching  up  the  neceffity  of  injlantaneous  con- 
version and  juftification  by  a  fort  of  miracle — making 
faith  to  confift  in  A  full  affurance  of  falvation,  and  de- 
nouncing damnation  againir.  thofe,  who  have  it  not  in 
this  fuper- eminent  degree — and  laftly,  in  fnppofmg  this 
affurance  to  depend  on  certain,  inward  extraordinary 
impulfes,  rather  than  the  fcriptures. 

Thefe  fentiments  lead  many  artful  people  into  a 
wicked  pretence  of  feelings  and  affurances,  which  they 
have  not  ;  others  of  warm  imaginations  to  the  belief  of 
what  is  only  chimerical,  and  plunge  ftill  more  of  hon- 
ed, timid  minds  or  an  hypochondriacal  temperament 
into  melancholy  and  defpair. 

The  Saviour,  doubtlefs,  can  forgive  (ins  to  whom, 
aad  at  whatever  moment,  he   pleafes.     A  thief,  upon 


64  LETTERS  TO  A 

the  crofs,  was  a  miracle  of  his  mercy  ;  but  this  is  not 
the  ordinary  method  of  his  providence  ;  there  are  un- 
doubtedly, thoufands  of  excellent  people,  who  pafs 
through  the  world  without  fuch  a  full  ajfurance  of  faith; 
and  the  fpiritual  life,  like  that  of  animals  or  vegetables, 
is  generally  progreflive.  We  grow  imperceptibly 
"  from  ftrength  to  ftrength,"  and,  though  the  peace 
of  God  may  be  diffufed  through  our  confeiences,  we 
dare  not  fay,  "  that  we  have  already  attained." 

The  methodifts  were,  once,  extremely  lavifh  in  their 
cenfures  of  others  ;  but  juftice  obliges  me  to  confefs, 
that  they  are  now  in  general,  an  harmlefs,inoffenfiveand 
pious  people.  If  they  be  gloomy,  it  is  their  own  mis- 
fortune ;  if  they  go  mourning  all  their  days,  theirs  is 
the  forrow  ;  the  world  in  general,  is  too  diffipated  and 
unreflecting. 

As  to  their  leader, he  is  doubtlefs  a  prodigy. — What- 
ever be  the  merit  or  demerit  of  his  opinions,  his  indefat- 
igable labours,  activity,  pilgrimages,  zeal,  and  refolu- 
tion  challenge  our  amazement.  An  old  man  of  near- 
ly ninety  rifing  conftantly  at  four  o'clock  in  the  depth 
of  winter,  preaching  frequently,  on  the  fame  day,  jour- 
neying from  place  to  place,  "  and  from  one  people  to 
"  another  kingdom  ;"  himfclf  the  bifhop,  fecretary, 
judge,  governor  of  his  people,  the  mainfpring  of  fuch  a 
vaft,  and  complicated  machine,  is  a  phenomenon,  that 
will  vanifh  from  our  earthly  horizon,  when  he  ceafes 
to  exift.  His  opinions,  it  is  laid,  do  not  injure  his 
cheerfulnefs.  Time  has  planted  few  wrinkles  on  hie 
forehead,  though  it  has  covered  his  head  with  fnow. 

Notwithftanding  the  religious  zeal,  which  works 
wonders  in  his  favour,  and  the  deference  naturally 
paid  to  the  firjl  founder  of  a  feet,  particularly  when 
pofTefled  of  any  genius  or  learning,  yet  his  peaceful 
government  of  fo  numerous  a  people,  for  fuch  a  length 
of  time,  is  a  proof  of  extraordinary  talents  and  addrefs. 
Whenever  he  dies,  his  difciples  will  dwindle.     They 


YOUNG  LADY.  6$ 

will  not  eafily  agree  about  a  fuccefTor.  No  fucceflbr 
can  have  fo  undifputed  a  fovereignty,  or  pofTefs  fo 
unmolefted  a  throne.  They  will  feparate  from  the 
church  ;  and  the  feparation  will  be  fatal.  It  will  be 
the  lofs  of  union,  confequence  and  power.  The  republic 
will  probably  be  divided  in  its  councils,  and  have  lefs 
di-fpatch  and  energy  in  the  execution. 


LETTER  XXXII. 

THE  Baptifts  or  Anabaptifts  are  a  fpecies  of  the 
independent  diffenters,  who  differ  from  their 
brethren,  chiefly  in  the  mode  of  adminiflering  baptifm, 
which  they  conceive,  mould  always  be  by  immer/ion.* 
There  were  many  of  this  perfuafion,  amongd  the  re- 
formed abroad.  In  Holland,  Germany,  and  the  North, 
they  were  called  Anabaptifts,  or  Mennonites  ;  in  Pi- 
edmont and  the  South,  they  were  found  amongft  the 
Albigenfes.  In  England,  they  are  few,  and,  at  pres- 
ent, little  mentioned. 

The  Quakers  arofe  about  the  middle  of  the  feven- 
teenth  century,f  and  had  their  name  affixed  upon 
them  in  derifion,  from  the  violent  emotions,  with  which 
they  affected  to  be  agitated,  when  they  conceived 
themfelves  under  the  more  immediate  impulfe  of  the 
j'pirit.  They  explain  the  whole  letter  offcripture  into 
a  kind  of  inward,  and  fpiritual  allufion.  They  never 
fpeak,  preach  or  exhort  in  public,  but  when  they  fancy 
themfelves  to  be  moved  by  thefpirit ;  they  fet  afide  the 
peceffity  of  the  external  fasraments,  baptifm  and    the 

*  They  like  wife  reje&  the  baptifm  of  infants, 
f  Georga  foxfeems  to  have  been  their  founder  about  ;he 
y*ar  1649. 

F2 


66  LETTERS  TO  A 

Lord's  fupper,  and  would  certainly  be  right,  if  men 
had  no  matter  in  their  compofition,  and  if  the  imagi- 
nation was  not  to  be  awakened  thro  the  medium  of 
ihe  finfcs. 

They  acknowledge  no  head,  but  Chrift,  no  mafter 
but  God  ;  refufe  to  pay  tithes,  and  think  the  common 
civilities  of  life  profane  and  unchriftian.  They  even 
appear  covered  in  the  prefence  of  their  fovereign,  and 
addrefs  him  with  the  familiar  appellation  of  thou. 
They  are  a  religious  community  within  themfelves, 
and  their  government  is  wholly  'internal.  You  may 
fee  their  principles  ably  delineated  by  their  ingenious 
apologift,  Barclay.  - 

There  are,  however,  many  excellent  traits  in  the 
character  of  the  quakers.  They  are,  on  the  whole,  a 
peaceable  inoffenfive  people  ;  fupport  their  own  poor, 
have  manifeftedj  for  a  long  time,  from  a  fpirit  of  hu- 
manity, a  ftrong  and  pointed  oppofition  to  the  very  in- 
famous practice  of  the  flave  trade  ;  they  never  difturb 
the  peace  of  the  church,  or  fhackle  the  wheels  of  gov- 
ernment, and  are  tolerated  in  all  tkeir  'innocent  peculi- 
arities by  a  liberal  and  an  enlightened  kingdom. 


LETTER  XXXIII. 

THE  Moravians,  or  the  brethren,  are  a  fpecies  of 
proteftants,  who,  in  the  fifteenth  century,  threw 
off  the  defpotic  yoke  of  Rome,  animated  by  the  zeal- 
ous exhortations  and  heroic  example  of  John  Mufs.* 
Count  Zinzendorff  was  a  very  eminent  leader  of  this 
fed,  and,  for  his   fignal  fervices  amongft  them,   has 


*  Jehn  Mufs  and  Jerom  of  Prague,  fullered  martyrdom 
a!  Prague,  in  the  year  1414. 


YOUNG  LADY.  67 

been  difliflguifhed  by  the  name  of  Papa*  or  fpiritual 
father ;  and  a  Monfieur  la  Trobe,  who  lived  in  the 
metropolis,  and  made  continual  circuits  amongft  them, 
has  more  lately,  acquired  great  celebrity  in  their  annals. 

They  have  more  than  once  pafTed  through  the  fie- 
ry ordeal  of  perfecution.  Their  religious  principles, 
however,  are  found  and  orthodox.  At  a  period,  when 
great  clamours  were  raifed  againft  them,  Potter,  the 
then  learned  Archbifhop  of  Canterbury,  pronounced 
them  a  proteftant,  epifcopal  community,  as  they  retain- 
ed no  doctrines  that  were  repugnant  to  the  articles  of 
the  church  of  England  ;  and  the  pious  bifhop  of  Sodor 
and  Man  (Wilfon)  was  created  an  honorary  prefident 
of  (what  is  called)  the  reformed  Tropusy  in  the  Unitas 
f rat  rum,  (the  unity  of  the  brethren.) 

Their  difcipline  and  mode  of  government  are  very 
lingular.  They  form  within  themfelves  a  religious 
community,  independent  of  every  other,  and  extend- 
ing to  all  their  brethren  throughout  the  world.  They 
are  not  fuffered  to  intermarry  with  people,  of  a  differ* 
ent  perfuafion  ;  they  have  groups  of  religious  houfes, 
fcattered  through  the  kingdom  ;  they  have  choirs  of 
fmgle  filters  and  brethren  ;  the  firft:  are  occupied  in 
every  kind  of  ingenious  needle-work,  in  which  they 
have  made  an  amazing  proficiency,  and  the  latter  in 
all  forts  of  mechanical  employments ;  and  their  earn- 
ings, after  a  maintenance  for  themfelves,  which  they 
receive  in  the  houfe,  go  into  one  common  fund  for  the 
fupport  of  the  general  fociety,f  and  particularly  of  the 

*  This  was  rather  an  appellation,  which  very  naturally 
was  ufed  in  the  familiar  circle  of  his  family.  In  the  writings 
publifhedby  the  United  Brethren,  they  generally  ftile  him, 
the  ordinary  of  the  Brethren. 

f  There  is  no  fuch  general  fund  among  the  United  Breth- 
ren. Each  member  of  their  community  gives,  without  con- 
straint what  he  pleafcs  for  fupportiug  any  of  their  infti  tui- 
tions, or  their  Millions  among  the  Heathen. 


€8  LETTERS  TO  A 

children,  belonging  to  the  married  biethrcn  and  Afters, 
which  are  fed,  educated  and  clothed  in  thcfe  religious 
ferninaries. 

The  morals  and  chaftity  of  their  women  are  guarded 
With  a  very  peculiar  vigilance  ;  thev  are  not  permitted 
to  ftcp  without  the  walls  of  ftieir  afylum,  unaccompa- 
nied by  a  fuperintendent  of  their^Hvn  fex  :f  when  any 
of  them,  or  the  brethren  is  married,  it  is  tranfacled  by 
the  cafting  of  lots,  and  fuppofed  to  be  ordained  by  a 
particular  providence,  and  the  union  is  generally  form- 
ed with  fome  members  of  their  fociety  abroaJ.%  They 
much  refemble  the  methodiils  in  having  private  con- 
ferences, claffes,  leaders,  and  examinations  concerning 
the  flate  and  progrefs  of  grace  in  the  foul,  and  none 
are  permitted  to  receive  the  facrament,  without  having 
previously  pafTed  through  a  very  ferere  procefs-of  re- 
ligious examination. 

Their  worfhip  confiils  principally  in  jinging,  and 
hence,  perhaps,  their  focieties  are  called  choirs.  Their 
residences  have  much  the  air  of  religious  houfes  ;  and 
their  fingle  brethren  and  fifters  are  often  in  the  morti- 
fied (rate  of  invohwtary  friars  or  nuns.  Their  devo- 
tions, like  thofe  of  a  convent,  are  almoft  perpetual  ;[| 
and  they  feem  to  have  forgotten,  that  they  were  born 
for  fociety,  as  well  as  for  themfelves.J 

•f-  The  author's  aiTertion  is  to  be  underftood  only  of  the 
growing  youth  of  the  fex,  who  are  not  of  a 

|  Not  generally,  hat  fometimet it  has  been  the  cafe  as  with 
other  inhabitants  of  thefe  kingdoms. 

[j  Their  ftatcd  foeial  devotions  are  limited  to  morning  and 
evening  prayers,  and  a  weekly  exhortation  by  the  Minified 

§  They  carry  on  trades  and  manufactures  like  other  ufe- 
ful  citizens;  and  tho'  they  never  urge  any  member  of  the 
different  denominations  in  Chriftendom  to  become  members 
of  their  Church,  being  averfe  to  profelyte-making  ;  yet  from 
a  full  conviction  that  they  were  not  born  for  themfclvcs 
only,  they  have  made  uncommon  exertions  for  the  Conver- 
sion of  the  Heathen ;  for  example ;  of  the  Cr ceuianders, 


YOUNG  LADY.  69 

Such  reftraints  on  nature  are  not  tolerable,  and  na- 
ture will,  fometimes,  afl'ert  her  rights,  and  ftain  their 
hiflory  with  indifcretions.  We  were  fent  here  to  be 
tried.  Innocence,  that  fubfifts  only  by  the  abfence  of 
temptation,  fcarcely  deferves  the  name  ;  perpetual  de- 
votion is  an  impojjibility  ;  it  is  as  impracticable,  as  that 
the  eye  mould  be  ever  looking  at  the  fame  object ;  and, 
if  I  do  not  much  millake,  that  piety  is  moft  ardent, 
which  knows  moll:  of  the  world,  from  dear-bought  ex- 
perience, and  finding  it  a  fcene  of  mortification  and  van- 
ity, appeals  to  heaven,  for  more  fubftantial  fatisfaclion. 

There  are  many  fcattered  focieties  of  Moravians  in 
England,  but  they  appear  to  be  a  declining  feci:.  It 
is  immured  ignorance  or  prejudice,  which  has  led 
Chrifrians  to  feparate  from  each  other  for  little,  frivo- 
lous diilinclions.  The  era,  I  hope,  is  coming  which 
will  bring  us  "  more  into  one  common  fold,  under  one 
"  fhepherd,  Chrift  Jefus,  the  Righteous." 

There  is  certainly  a  great  mixture  ef  good  in  this 
people.  What  a  pity,  that  they  cannot  join  with  us 
in  offering  a  rational  fervice,  and  lifting  up  one  com- 
mon hallelujah,  to  the  great  God  and  Father  of  all. 


1 


LETTER  XXXIV. 

KNOW  not  why  the  myflics  are  fo  called,  un- 
lefs  it  be  for  difcovering  myjiical  palTages  in  the 
fcripture,  or  making  religion  at  large  wear  the  appear- 
ance of  myflery.  They  are  a  very  ancient  k&,  and 
fprung  upfo  early,  as  about  theclofe  of  the  third  century. 

Efkimos,  North  American  Indians,  of  the  Negroes  in  the 
Weft-Indian  iflands,  of  the  Negroes,  Indians  and  free  Ne- 
groes in  Surinam,  likewife  of  the  natives  of  the  Eaft-Iudies 
and  of  the  Calmucks  in  Afiatic  Ruffia.  See  Cram's  Hiftory 
of  the  Brethren,  and  Hiftory  of  Greenland. 


7o  LETTERS  TG  A 

This  people,  by  a  very  fingular  kind  of  ingenuity, 
difcover  a  fpiritual  or  hidden  fenfe  in  the  moft  literal 
paffages  of  fcripture,  and  indeed  convert  the  whole, 
rather  into  an  amufing  allegory,  than  a  plainjand  fimple 
narrative  of  fads. 

They  hold  all  divine  truth  to  come,  by  an  immedi- 
ate influx,  from  thejpiritual  world,  and  pretend  to  a 
knowledge  of  God,  and  heavenly  things,  that  can  only 
be  attained  in  this  extraordinary  manner.  Sometimes 
they  are  called  quietifts,  becauie  they  maintain,  tint 
the  foul  mould  be  in  a  ftill,  quid,   pafli. .  ndif- 

tracted  with  noife  and  cares,  and  almoft  fuperior  to 
fenfe  or  matter,  in  order  to  receive  this  diviae  illumi- 
nation.— Their  ftation,  in  the  thermometer  of  differ- 
ent, religious  orders,  is  that  of  lighter  elemen  s,  carri- 
ed by  fuperior  fubtilty  into  the  air,  whilft  ethers,  com- 
pofed  of  grofler  matter,  adhere,  by  an  invincible  necef- 
fity,  to  the  earth,  till  death  dhTolves  the  union  betwixt 
foul  and  body. 

•  The  myfr.ic  theology  feems  to  be  the  philofophy  of 
Plato,  refined  and  grafted  upon  a  Chriftian  (lock  ;  the 
qu'ixot'ifm  of  religion,  which  affects  to  attain  in  life,  what 
the  fcriptures  have  taught  us  to  expect  only  after  death  ; 
an  intimate  knowledge  of  the  Almighty,  vifions,  reve- 
lations, almoft  intuition  ! 

If  the  myftics  would  reafon  for  a  moment,  (but 
people,  under  the  guidance  of  immediate  illumination 
•ire  far  above  the  vulgar  fhacldes  o£reaJbn9J  they  would 
ice  that  fuch  a  fubtile,  metaphyfical  fyftem  is  poorly  fit- 
ted for  the  reception  of  mankind  at  large,  who  can 
lcarcely  be  brought  to  underftand,  relilli,  or  practifc 
the  moft  obvious  truths  ;  they  would  acknowledge  that 
divinity  to  be  the  beft,  which  does  not,  with  the  light- 
nefs  of  fome  matter,  afcend  into  the  air,  but  contents 
itfelf  on  earth,  with  inculcating  and  enforcing  the  molt 
obvious  duties  of  common  life  ;  the  reciprocal  obli- 
gations of  parents  and  children,  mailers  and  feryants, 


YOUNG  LADY.  7i 

kings  and  fubjects  ;  the  fubjcction  of  the  pafiions,  the 
difcipline  of  reafon,  and  the  duty  of  all  to  one  common 
God.  They  would  know,  that  their  opinions  mud 
create  an  indifference,  or  a  fancied /inferiority  to  thofe 
cftablifhed  ordinances,  which  are  the  very  bails  of  all 
religion,  and  that  if  (ill  men  were  governed  by  their 
paflive  quietude,  there  would  be  none  to  encounter  with 
the  vices  and  diforders  of  a  mixed,  heterogenous  ftate, 
— Chriftians  would  "  ceafe  to  be  the  light  of  the  world, 
or  the  fait  of  the  earth  ;"  there  would  be  none  to 
item,  by  powerful,  turbid  eloquence  the  ragings  of  ini- 
quity, or  let  the  luftre  of  their  example  lhine  before 
men." 

Our  Lord's  piety  was  not  of  this  kind.  It  fought 
not  the  indulgence  ofreclufe  contemplation.  It  was 
not  paflive,  but  active  ;  every  where  with  the  finner 
and  the  faint,  to  reprove  the  one,  and  encourage  the 
other  ;  in  the  wildcrnefs  to  pray,  and  in  the  world, 
to  reform  ;  at  a  marriage,  "  to  rejoice  with  them,  that 
"  did  rejoice,  and  at  the  grave  of  Lazarus,  to  weep 
"  with  his  afflicted  friends." 


LETTER  XXXV. 

THE  myftic  theology  boafts  fome  great  names, 
Madame  de  Guion  was  a  warm  efpoufer  of  it  in 
France  ;  a  woman  of  great  fafhion  and  confequence, 
remarkable  for  the  goodnefs  of  her  heart,  and  the  reg- 
ularity of  her  conduct,  but  of  a  capricious  unfettled  tem- 
per, and  liable  to  the  feductions  of  a  warm  imagination. 
The  opinions  of  this  lady  made  a  great  noife  in  that 
country,  about  the  year  1687.  They  were  confuted, 
fome  time  afterwards,  by  the  celebrated  BofTuet.  The 
great  and  good    Fenelon   undertook  her  vindication  ; 


72  LETTERS  TO  A 

but  his  book  was  condemned  by  Pope  Innocent  the 
twelfth. 

The  Teutonic  philofopher  (Jacob  Behemen,)  was 
a  kind  of  father  to  this  feci,  and  publifhed  a  book, 
which  contains  a  fyftem  of  the  moil  abfurd  and  inco- 
herent reveries,  that  perhaps  ever  gained  an  admiiTion 
into  the  world.  It  is  a  fpecies  of  moral  chymilcry, 
and  occult  philofophy,  a  bewildering  explanation,  and 
a  cloudy  light,  which  I  will  venture  to  fay,  that  neither 
Sir  Ifaac  Newton,  nor  Mr.  Looke,  with  all  their  clear- 
nefs  of  conception,  could  have  been  able  to  underfland. 

Law,  who  wrote  the  Serious  Call  (a  nonjuror  of 
Northamptonfhire,)  was  an  abettor  of  thefe  doctrines  ; 
a  man  of  very  exemplary  life,  and  difcriminating  tal- 
ents ;  but  it  was  an  honour,  referved  for  the  late  Ba- 
ron Swedenborg  to  carry  them  to  their  very  height  of 
perfection.-}-  Compared  with  bis,  all  other  writings, 
on  the  fubject,  are  but  the  morning  contracted  with  the 
perfect  day.  He  tells  us  confidently  of  his  unreftrained 
communications  with  the  fpiritual  world,  vifions,  reve- 
lations ;  he  gives  to  every  portion  of  fcripture,  a  natural, 
a  fpiritual,  and  a  celeftial  fenfe  ;  he  defcribes  to  us  the 
very  form,  and  furniture,  and  apparatus  of  heaven  ;  he 
retails  to  the  reader  his  converfations  with  angels  ;  he 
defcribes  the  condition  of  Jews,  Mahometans,  Chris- 
tians, of  the  Englifh,  French,  Dutch,  of  clergymen  of 
every  denomination,  laity,  &c.  in  another  world  ;  he 
has  a  key  to  unlock  all  the  hitherto  impenetrable  fecrets 
of  futurity,  afid  already,  whilft  in  the  body,  "  knows 
even  as  he  is  known." 

What  is  the  inference?  When  imagination  is  per- 
mitted to  ufurp  the  place  of  rcafon,  fanaticifm  becomes 
a  chriftian  duty,  and  enthufiafm  the  more  credible y  in 
proportion  as  it  exceeds  all  bounds  oi  credibility. 

f  Thofe  who  embrace  the  tenets  of  Earon  Swedenborg, 
have  very  lately  begun  to  form  themfclves  into  a  feparate 
connexion,  under  the  name  of  the  New  Jerufalcm  Church. 


YOUNG  LADY.  73 

What  can  induce  men  offenfe  to  hearken  to  thefc 
dreams  ?  Early  prejudices,  confined  reading,  lingular 
acquaintance,  a  reclufe  life,  a  gloomy,  fpeculative,  ab- 
stracted turn  of  mind,  and  affociating  together,  for  a 
long  time,  particular,  however  incongruous,  ideas. 

This  will  account  for  an y  reveries.  It  accounts  for 
in  faulty.  And  men,  from  this  caufe,  may,  in  a  partic^ 
u/ar  inftance  (fuppofe  religion,)  be  infane,  though  in 
all  other  refpecls,  their  minds  arc  ever  fo  enlightened, 
or  ever  fo  expanfive. 

It  mult,  however,  be  faid  in  favour  of  the  my  (tics, 
that  their  principles  inculcate  in  the  ftrongeft  manner, 
the  neceflity  of  fpiritual  holinefs  and  regeneration  ; 
that  their  lives  in  general,  are  unblemiihed  and  exempla- 
ry. They  are  a  quiet,  retired  people,  who  let  the 
world  go  as  it  will,  as  to  riches  or  promotions  ;  who 
enjoy  indeed,  in  a  paflive  fuperiority,  thofe  tumults  of 
the  crowd,  ashigherfpirits  may  condrfcend  to  look  down, 
with  a  pitying  fmile,  on  the  toils  of  mortals  ;  and  who 
deny  themfelves  all  the  gayer  pleafures,  in  order  to  rel- 
ifh,  in  a  fublimer  degree,  all  the  raptures  of  devotion. 

If  the  opinions  of  the  quietiits  fpring  from  fpiritual 
pride,  it  is  more  than  they  fufpecl  ;  for  they  preach 
up  the  deeped  felf-abafement,  annihilation,  and  poverty 
of  fpirit  ;  they  almoft  ftarve  the  animal  part  of  their 
nature,  to  nurle  the  angelic,  and  half  live  on  meditation. 

If  fuch  people  have  errors,  they  fnould  be  touched 
with  a  gentle  hand.  If  they  are  milled,  it  is  in  amiable 
company.  There  is  not  a  much  more  lovely  name 
than  that  of  Fenelon.  Few  men  have  poficiTed  fuch  a 
fwcetnefs  of  piety. 

I  have  but  one  wiili  for  them,  myfelf,  or  any  other 
feel,  and  it  is  a  wifli  of  charity  ;  that  what  is  wrong  in 
any  of  us,  may  be  done  away,  becaufc  I  long  to  meet 
them  all  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 


74        LETTERS  TO  A 
LETTER  XXXVI. 

THEOLOGY,  like  arts  and  feiences,  has  its  fcho- 
laftic,  technical  terms,  and  1  will  endeavour  to 
explain  them. 

The  Arians  arc  fo  called  from  Arius,  a  prcibyter  of 
the  church  of  Alexandria,  in  the  year  315.  He  be- 
lieved Chrift  to  be  God,  but  conceived  him  inferior  to 
the  Father,  as  to  his  deity  and  effence.  The  term,  at 
prefent  is  indifcriminately  applied  to  all,  who,  in  any 
degree,  embrace  this  opinion. 

This  herefy  was  firlr.  revived  by  Mr.  Whifton,  in 
the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century.  The  works 
of  Dr.  Clarke  afterwards  entailed  upon  him  the  name 
of  Semi-Arian  (Half-Arian.) 

Socinians  derive  their  name  from  the  illuftrious  fam- 
ily of  Sozzini,  which  flourifhed,  a  long  time,  at  Sienna 
in  Tufcany,  and  produced  feveral  great  and  eminent 
men.  Fauftus  Socinus,  the  great  author  of  this  feel, 
was  born  at  Sienna  in  1539,  denied  the  divinity  of 
Chrift,  the  pcrfonality  of  the  Holy  Ghoft,  and  the 
perpetuity  of  baptifm,  as  a  divine  ordinance. 

The  mod:  diftinguifhed  men,  who  have  favored  this 
opinion,  are  Le  Clerc,  Biddle,  Lardner,  Lowman> 
Fleming,  Lindfey,  &c. 


LETTER  XXXVII. 

THE  Deifts are  fo  called,  perhaps, from  the  Latin 
word,  Deus,  a  God  ;  becaufe  they  acknowledge 
only  the  exigence  of  a  God,  profefs  no  particular  form 
or'fyftemof  religion,  and  only  follow  the  law  and 
light  of  nature.  Of  thefe,  however,  there  are  many 
degrees,  from  the  moderate  ones,  who  believe  revela- 
tion in  a  certain,  qualified  fenfe,  to   thofe,  who  abfo- 


YOUNG  LADY. 

lutely  dlfavow  it  in   all.     The  fir[\  who  figured  or 

wrote,  in  this  country,  was  Baron  Herbert  of  Cherbury. 

Dcifm  is  generally  embraced,  eithel  by  men  of  a 
cold,  phlegmatic,  philofophical  call,  who  are  indUpo* 
fed  to  believe  any  thing,  for  which  they  have  not  ab- 
folutc  demonftr&tton,  or  by  thofe,  who,  having  nev<  I 
thought  cr  reafoned,  confider  it,  as  a  mark  of  wit  and 
talents,  to  fet  up  for  unbelievers. 

The  iirft  defcrvc  an  anfwer,  and  it  is  eafy.  All  na- 
ture is  full  of  myfteries,  as  well  as  revelation  ;  the  un- 
ion of  foul  and  body  is  a  miracle  ;  the  infinite  divisibil- 
ity of  matter,  and  the  idea  of  an  eternal  duration  are 
abfolutely  incomprehensible  ;  nothing  can  be  more  fo, 
than  the  neceiTary felf-cxijlence  of  God.  The  latter  are 
better  anfvvered  with  irony.  Their  infidelity  is  a  fafli- 
ionable  livery.  When  deifm  is  not  in  vwgue  amongft 
the  gay  circles,  they  will  foon  put  it  off,  and  difavow 
their  ever  having  worn  fo  obfolete  a  garb. 

A  third  clafs  of  deiffs  may  be  faid  to  fpring  up  from 
the  fuperititions  of  Rome.  Great  men,  who  live  in 
catholic  countries,  are  difgufted  with  their  bigotry,  and 
a»re  apt  to  think  religion  in  general  only  an  hnpafilion  on 
the  credulity  ©f  mankind.  Was  not  this  the  cafe  with 
all  that  fplendid  group,  RoufTeau,  Voltaire,  the  Abbe 
de  Raynal,  and  Helvetius,  who  wrote  a  famous  trea- 
tife  de  >r  Efprlt  ?  Genius  hates  fliackles,  and  (hackles 
arc  the  peculiar  manufacture  of  Rome. 

A  fourth  clafs  of  deifts  are  continually  produced  by 
the  love  of  fame,  venting  itfelfin  paradoxes,  and  lin- 
gular opinions  to  make  a  noifc  ;  by  an  averfion  to  the 
ftrictnefs  of  gofpel  rnoralitj',  and  by  criminal  pallions, 
which  endeavour  to  hide  their  guilt  in  the  fliadesof  un- 
belief. Some  of  thefe  have  commenced  authors,  and 
endeavoured  to  immortalize  their  errors  by  the  prefs. 
But  their  books,  on  a  near  view,  have  been  found  only 
gilt  and  lettered  with  vanity,  and  have  qnickly  been 
configned  to  the  oblivion,  they  deferved.     Whilft  we 


?6  LETTERS  TO  A 

are  in  this  world,  enemies  will  mix  thefc  tares  with  the 
good  feed  of  the  gofpel.  We  mull  wait  till  harvejly 
to  fee  the  final  reparation. 

The  deifts  are  thegreatefr.  enemies,  of  all  other?,  to 
true  religion.  Their  pride  and  fecpticifm  flop  up 
every  avenue,  by  which  divine  grace  and  conviction 
Should  be  conveyed  to  the  foul.  Nature,  with  them, 
is  only  a  necejfary  fyftem  of  caufes  and  effects.  Crea- 
tion rofe  into  its  prefent  fplendour,  by  a  kind  of  fatality. 
Thunders  roar,  lightnings  flam,  volcanoes  vomit,  tem- 
pers rage,  feas  overflow,  millions  perifla,  and  kingdoms 
are  defolated,  only  by  a  train  of  Jlated,  inevitable  cau- 
fes. They  exclude  a  jirjl  efficient  mover,  and  think 
not  of  the  providence,  which,  at  a  certain  moment, 
and  forthewifeft,  moral  caufes, predefined  fuch  events. 

Few  of  thefe  men  have  died  in  peace.  Their  forti- 
tude has  deferted  them,  when  they  wanted  its  fupport. 
Their  philofophy  has  vaniihed,  as  their  ftrength  has 
abated.  The  blaft  of  death  has  demolifhed  their  fplen- 
did  fabric,  and  their  hopes  and  peace  have  perlflxd  in 
■die  ruins.* 


LETTER  XXXVIII. 

MY    DPAR    GIRL, 


TRAVELLERS,  that  have  made  (what  \s  cal- 
led) the  grand  tour,  felicitate  themfelvcs  on  their 
return  to  England,  and  pronounce  it  the  happieil  coun- 


*  Atheifl  is  the  name,  and  Athcifm  the  doctrine  of  fuck 
a  pcri'on  who  entirely  denies  the  exiftence  of  God.  Whether 
any  man  ever  did  in  his  heart  believe  this  abfurd  notion,  it 
doubtful.  But  whoever  pretends  to  it,  may  read  his  char- 
acter in  Pfalm  xiv.  i.  "  The  fool  hath  faid  in  his  heart, 
TJier.c  is  no  God." 


YOUNG  LADY.  77 

try  in  tke  world.  And  fuch  it  certainly  is,  if  not  in 
beauty  and  delicioufnefs  of  climate,  yet  in  that  abfo- 
lute  fecurity  of  property  it  enjoys  above  all  other  na- 
tions, and  that  liberty,  which  endears  every  poffeflion. 

If  you  have  made  proper  obfervations  on  the  differ- 
ent, religious  feels,  that  have  patted  in  review  before  us, 
you  will  feel  much  the  fame  fentiment,  when  you  com- 
pare them  with  your  own  church. — You  will  be  the 
moral  traveller  returned  from  more  unpleafant  fecnes, 
to  tafle  the  bleffings  of  true  repofe  and  dignity  at  home. 
Nor  is  this  idea,  I  hope,  the  effect,  of  prejudice,  but 
fprings  from  folid  reafon  and  conviction. 

The  Church  of  England*  has  enough  of  ceremony 
and  external  decency  to  ftrike  the  fenfes,  and  to  fup- 
port  the  dignity  of  religion,  in  the  eyes  of  the  vulgar, 
and  yet  nothing,  that  can  juftly  offend  the  delicacy  of 
the  fdblimeft  understanding.  It  aims  not  at  the  total 
abstraction  of  diffenters,  nor  affects  the  fuperftitious 
forms  and  ceremonies  of  the  Church  of  Rome.  Its 
piety  has  a  rational,  fed?.te,  eompefed  air,  and  is  uni- 
formly grave  and  decent  without  pretending  to  the 
flights,  the  fervours  and  the  rifion  of  fome,  modern  fa- 
natics. 

The  facraments  are  not  ridicuioufiv  multiplied,  nor 
has  human  policy  invented  them.  They  are  but  two 
in  number,  baptifm  and  the  Lord's  fuppcr  ;  both  poii- 
tively  enjoined  by  Chrifr,  and  neither  of  them  fuppo- 
fed  to  have  any  further  merit,  than  as  they  lead  to  pu- 
rity of  heart  and  conduct.      The  liturgy  has  been   ad- 

*  The  Church  of  England,  together  with  the  eftablifhed 
Church  of  Ireland,  forms  enly  one  of  the  three  leading  divif- 
ions  of  the  Proteftants.  Lutheranijm  is  the  eftablifhed  reli- 
gion in  Sweden,  Denmark,  Norway,  Livonia,  and  a  conlid- 
erable  part  of  Germany  ;  and  Calvlnifm  or  Prrftyteriamfm  is 
the  eftablifhed  religion  in  Scotland,  Holland,  and  in  fc\<.n-i 
£arts  of  Germany  and  Swiflerland. 
62 


78  LETTERS  TO  A 

■mired  by  the  greateft  men  ;  the  minifters  of  this  churdi 
are,  in  general,  an  ornament  to  their  facred  profeffion-, 
and  perhaps  on  the  whole,  men  of  as  great  learning, 
candour,  piety  and  moderation,  as  are  to  be  found  un- 
-der  any  communion.  That  there  were  no  exceptions, 
would  be  a  miracle.  There  was  a  Judas  amongft 
twelve  apoftles. 

After  all  thejine-fpun  theories  of  liberty,  every  foci- 
cty  mud  have  a  mode  of  government  ;  and  that  gov- 
ernment fuppofes  power  to  be  lodged  fame  where  for 
the  general  good.  That  of  the  Church  of  England  is 
veiled  in  biihops  ;  no  one  will  difpute  the  antiquity,  or 
perhaps  ufefulnefs  of  the  order,  whatever  he  may  ob- 
ject to  its  temporal  diftinctions.  St.  Paul  appointed 
bifhops  in  the  primitive  church. 

Much  abufe  is  often  levelled  again  ft  the  facred 
bench.  But  the  (hafts  come  from  *7iT^y,aad  are  poin- 
ted by  religious  prejudice  and  refentment.  It  is,  in 
fact,  their  temporal  emoluments,  that  provoke  this  un- 
generous kind  of  perfecution.  But  if  they  muft  at- 
tend parliament,  they  have  indeed  no  fuper-abundant 
provifion.  Whilft  it  is  thought  expedient  to  have  a 
national  church,  the  interefts  of  it,  as  connected  with 
the  ftate,  muft  frequently  be  a  fubjecl  of  parliamentary 
<Hfcuflion  ;  and  it  would  be  very  extraordinary  indeed, 
if  they,  who  are  moft  immediately  concerned,  mould 
not  have  the  liberty  of  giving  their  opinion  and  votes 
on  the  occafion.  Whatever  equal  right,  from  educa- 
tion or  abilities,  the  bifhops  may  poilefs,  along  with  the 
temporal  peers  of  the  realm,  to  deliver  their  fentiments 
on  any  other  fabjed,  they  exercrfe  it  very  rarely,  and 
with  great  difcretion.  Their  honors  too,  it  fhould  be 
obferved,  ufually  come  late  in  life,  and  the  hope,  of 
attaining  them,  at  fomc  dijlant  period,  is  doubtlefs, 
■among  the  younger  dergy,  a  ftrong  incentive  to  emu- 
lation. 

£ut  prejudice  apart,  the  bifhops,  in  general,  per- 


YOUNG  LADY.  79 

form  their  facred  duties  with  great  decorum,  and  the 
prefent  bench  can  boaft  the  names  of  feveral  who,  with- 
out the  aid  of  purple,  would  be  an  ornament  to  human 
nature. 

To  fuppofe  the  Church  of  England  without  defects, 
would  be  fuppofing  it  not  an  /;«wj«eftablilhment.  But 
innovation  in  religious  fyftems,  is  a  dangerous  experi- 
ment. Projects  of  a  reformation  in  our  liturgy  and 
articles  have  come  from  very  fufpicious  quarters,  and 
worn  no  very  promifing  appearance.  The  little  er- 
rors ©f  this  church  are  better  trufled  to  the  enlighten- 
ed prudence  and  moderation  of  its  governors,  than  the 
raih  and  daring  fpirit  of  adventurers,  who,  under  the 
pretence  of  'only  attempting  to  remove  its  rubbifli, 
might  artfully  undermine  the  very  foundc* ion,  on  which 
it  refts.  They  who  have  talked  molt  loudly  on  the 
fubject  of  an  alteration,  have  certainly  difplayed  no 
very  great  attachment  to  the  ejfentials  of  our  holy  faith. 

We  might,  perhaps,  borrow  from  feclaries,  without 
any  inconvenience,  a  little  more  zeal,  fervour  and  ani- 
mation. If  our  internal  difcipline,  like  theirs,  was 
more  rigidly  inforced,  and  if,  like  thera,  we  had  a  few 
more  conferences  with  our  people,  and  an  opportunity 
of  keeping  the  unworthy  from  the  altar,  we  mould  be 
fo  much  nearer  the  model  of  perfection. 

But  alas  !  the  great  evil  amongft  us,  is  a  want  of  en- 
couragement. The  church,  at  any  rate,  has  but  a  fmall 
pittance.  A  learned  prelate*  has  obferved,  that,  if  all 
its  dignities,  (bifhopricks  included,)  were  annulled, 
and  their  produce  thrown  into  one  common,  equalizing 
fund,  for  the  general  fupport,  the  amount  of  annual  fal- 
ary,  to  every  individual  would  not  exceed  ^120,  or  at 
moit,  .£150. 

Under  fuch  circunaftances,  who  can  be  very  anima- 
ted ?  Or  what  energy  can  attend  the  excrcife  of  out 

*  Tkc  J3— p  of  L— d— ff. 


So  LETTERS  TO  A 

profeflion  in  the  eyes  of  a  world,  that  fupcrcilioufly  ap- 
preciates the  characters  of  men  infinitely  morebythtir 
temporal  poflcifions,  than  by  the  graces  of  their  heart, 
or  the  fublimity  of  their  uRderftunding.  To  a  perfon 
of  any  refinement  or  fenfibility,  houfes  without  con- 
veniences, and  children,  without  proviiion,  are  but  .1 
melancholy  portion  !  If  merchants  or  lawyers  had  no 
better  profpects,  what  would  be  their  exertions  ?  And 
yet  under  all  this  heavy  load  of  embaira/Tment,  what 
great  and  good  men  do  our  annals  boalt  \ 

Fanatics,  indeed,  alledge,  that  paiiors  mould  be  fu- 
perior  to  all  hopes  of  reward,  except  in  heaven,  V\,\- 
to  has  likewiie  faid  that  we  mould  be  raifed  above  the 
fenfc  of  pain.  But  neither  thofe  vifionaiies  nor  this 
philofopher  have  been  able  to  change  the  nature  of 
things  ;  to  take  from  nerves,  their  fenfibility  ;  from 
the  world,  its  infolence,  from  education,  its  delicacy, 
or  from  poverty,  its  itings. 

And  we  have  learned  from  an  higher  authority,  thr.n 
either  of  theirs,  that  "  the  chriftian  labourer  is  worthy 
"  of  his  hire,  and  that  he  who  ferves  at  the  altar, 
"  fhould  live  of  the  altar." 


LETTER  XXXIX. 

BOOKS  and  rules  of  all  kinds  are  the  theory  of  n 
ligion,  and  can  have  no  further  life,  than  as  thef1' 
lead  to  praclice.     We  have    then    profited   by  fyilems 
and  opinions,   when  our  life  is  a  continual  comment  on 
what   we    have  read,  and  we  make   the    light  of  our 
example  mine  before  men. 

Chriftianity  has  but  two,  capital  features  ;  love  to 
God,  evidence  in  acts  of  piety  ;  and  good  will  towards 
man,  exemplified  in  all  the  poffibilities  of  doing  good. 
As  devotion,  however  neceilary,  can  bring  no  profit 


YOUNG  LADY.  8r 

lo  our  Maker,  any  more  than  a  little  taper  can 
add  to  the  fplendors  of  the  fun,  the  fcripturcs  have 
laid  the  greate(t  flrefs  on  charity  to  our  fellow-creatures. 
This  is  called  the  "  end  of  the  commandment  ;"  it  is 
the  embodying  of  our  piety  ;  and  the  world  could  not 
fubfift  without  it.  Human  life  is  full  of  woe.  Char- 
ity is  the  angel,  that  binds  up  the  fores  of  our  fellow- 
creatures,  heals  the  broken  in  heart,  clothes  the  naked, 
and  fGeds  the  hungry.  The  poor  are  made  the  rcprc- 
fentatives  of  Chrift. ;  whatever  we  give  to  them  is,  in 
fcripture  language,  bellowed  on  the  Saviour.  Moth 
nnd  ruft  corrupt  the  treafures  we  hoard  up,  but  this  is 
placed  in  thofe  funds  of  heaven,  which  never  fail. 

The  Saviour  has  (aid,  that  "  it  is  more  blefled  to 
€i  give  than  to  receive."  And  the  pleafures,  which 
fpring  from  charity,  prove  its  origin  to  be  divine. 
What  value  has  an  heap  of  money,  or  what  confeious 
dignity  do  we  derive  from  it,  if  it  is  not  employed  in 
giving  comfort  to  the  miferable,  and  protection  to  the 
diftrefled  ? 

The  very  poor  are  provided  for  by  the  laws  of  the 
kingdom.  And  common  beggars  are  far  from  being 
the  mod:  deferving  objects.  Charity  mould  rather 
leek  out  the  modeft  and  uncomplaining  who  have  feea 
better  days,  and  have  all  the  pains  of  a  delicate  fenfi- 
bility,  annexed  to  their  diflrefs. 

True  charity  does  not  fo  much  -con-fid  in  multiply- 
ing little  alms  to  a  number  of  poor  people,  as  in  ma- 
king fome  grand  and  well  directed  efforts  in  favour  of 
a  few.  Educating  one  child  of  an  oveiburthened  fam- 
ily is  a  greater  act  of  beneficence,  than  retailing  to 
them,  occafionally,  a  thoufand,  petty  benefactions. 
It  is  not  a  few,  fcattered  drops  of  rain,  but  it  is  a  gen- 
erous (ho  wer,  coming  all  at  once,  which  revives  the 
parched  earth,  and  quickens  vegetation. 

It  is  amazing  what  charities  even  a  fmall  fortune 
will  enable  people  to  perform,  if  under  the  influence 


82  LETTERS  TO  A 

of  a   chriftian  (Economy.      A  few  retrenchments  from 
drefs,  ?anil  ire,  poured  into  the  chriftian  (lock, 

will  make  it  rich  indeed. 

I    do  not  know  a   better  practice,  than  that  of  the 
primitive  chrifBans — laying   by,  on  the  firft  day*  of  the 
week   a  little  pittance  for  this  purpofc. — Thefe   (  . 
will  not  be  miffed  from  the  general  refervoir,  and 
collectively,  v.  ill  rain  a  mower  of  bleffings  en  many  in- 
digent and  d 


LETTER  XL. 

YOUNG  ladies  hare  many  methods  of  charity  be- 
fides  the  mere  act  of  giving  money.  That  time, 
which  fometimes  hangs  heavy  on  their  hands,  might 
be  ufefully  employed  in  making  garments  for  the  na- 
ked, or  providing  cordials  for  the  lick.  Such  an  ac- 
ute benevolence  would  likewife  be  an  excellent  recipe 
for  their  health  and  fpirits  ;  it  would  dignify  their  char- 
acter, and  when  the  Iqft  moment  came,  gratitude 
would  "  fhewlhe  garments  which  a  Dorcas  had  made,'' 
iind  the  good  name  "  they  had  acquired,  would  be  in- 
"  finitely  richer,  and  more  precious  than  ointment." 

If  I  wifhed  a  woman  to  be  mnverjaUy  charming, 
I  would  recommend  this  expedient.  Compaffion  is 
the  higheft  excellence  of  your  fex,  and  charity  is  the 
facredroot  fro:  f  fprings.     The  foft  bofom  of 

a  woman,  throbbing  with  fympathy,  or  her  eye  gliften- 
ing  with  eryftal  chops  of  pity,  are  fome  of  the  fineft 
touches  in  nature's  pencil.  The  whole  train  of  ac- 
complifhments,  the  whole  gioup  of  graces  do  not  ex- 
alt her  half  fo  much  in  the  eitimation  of  the  worthy, 
the  amiable  and  the  difcerning.  Alas !  when  death 
comes,  what  will  be  all  the  accomplifnmcnts  and  gra- 
ces ?  But  charity  mall  never  fail ;  its  pie;  fures  then  are 


YOUNG  LADY.  8 


gaining  their  meridian  of  perfection.  Remember  what 
the  fcripture  has  faid,  "  alms  giving  delivereth  from 
"  death,  and  will  not  fuflfer  us  to  come  into  darknefs." 
The  young  lady  y©u  have  fo  frequently  heard  me  men- 
lion,  as  ftanding  high  in  my  cfteem,  is  very  eminently 
diftinguimed  by  this  gr^ce.  Nature  has  been  furncient~ 
]y  kind  to  her perfon  ;  but  it  is  not  her  fweet  complex- 
ion, it  is  not  her  flowing,  unartirlcial  ringlets,  it  is  not 
thzfoftnefs  of  her  voice  and  manner,  or  the  mild  luftre 
of  her  eyes,  that  would  have  called  forth  a  panegyric 
from  my  pen,  or  touched  a  bread,  that  is  cunfidera- 
bly  petrified  with  philofophy  and  reflection.  It  is  a 
conviction  that  me  lives  in  the  conftaht  exercife  of 
piety  ;  that  her  excellencies  are  chiefly  thofe  of  the 
mind,  and  that  her  benevolence  is  bounded  only  by 
creation. 

When  others  are  at  plays  or  afTemblies,  her  fair 
hands  are  making  garments  for  the  naked,  or  reflora- 
tives  for  the  fick.  The  ingenuity,  which  fome  of  her 
fitter  females  employ  to  adorn  themfehes,  is  confecrated 
by  hery  to  the  fervice  of  the  poor. 

This  is  laying  up  in  ftore  againftthe  day  of  necemty. 
This  is  weaving  for  herfelf  a  chaplet  of  laurels,  that 
fhall  be  green  in  age.  Her  countenance  mall  fmile 
even  in  diflblution.  A  beauteous  ruin  "  even  in 
"  death  Hie  mall  have  power  to  charm  ;"  and  the 
gratitude  of  fome  admiring  bard  mall  collect:  her  fcat- 
tered  merits  into  an  urn  that  mall  long  fecure  the  pre- 
cious relicks  from  the  ravages  of  time. 

But  I  will  not  add  another  touch  to  the  portrait,  for 
fear  of  difcovering  the  excellent  original.  I  mould 
wound  that  foft  and  delicate  timidity,  which  is,  in  my 
idea,  the  enamel  of  her  graces.  Her  true  merit  wi/hes 
to  be  unknown.  It  is  fatisfied  with  its  own,  and  the 
approbation  of  its  God. 


8+  LETTERS  TO  A 

LETTER  XLI. 

ALMS,  however,  to  the  body,  which  mud  very 
foon  perifh,  are  but,  if  1  may  fo  fay,  the  threjb- 
hold j  of  charity.  The  xsntfublime  of  it  is  compaflion 
to  the  foul  ;  becaufe  that  is  immortal,  and  can  never 
die. 

Every  effort  to  fave  this,  is  exalted  in  its  nature, 
and  the  neareft  approach  we  can  make,  in  thefe  hou- 
fes  of  clay,  to  the  miniftry  of  angels,  to  the  attributes 
of  Jehovah,  and  to  the  unbounded  compaflion  of  him, 
who  died  for  the  fins  of  all. 

A  few,  timely  advices,  inftructions  or  reproofs  to 
thofe,  over  whom  our  fortune  or  ftation  give  us  any 
influence,  may  have  more  lading  and  beneficial  confe- 
quences,  than  all  the  food  or  raiment,  or  money  we  can 
poflibly  beftow  ;  at  lead  when  we  give  our  temporal 
things,  they  mould  be  perfumed  with  fpiritual,  "  with 
"  words,  thus  fpoken  in  due  feafon." 

The  inftitution  of  Sunday  Schools  promifes  the  hap- 
piefl:  confequences  to  the  poor,  and  the  community  at 
large.  It  has  indeed,  already  produced  a  furprifing 
reformation.  The  prefent  age  beholds  the  dawn  of  a 
blefTed  morning,  which  in  another,  may  brighten  into 
a  more  perfect  day. 

If  k  fails,  it  will  be  from  carelefs  and  indolence  in 
the  parents  thernfelves,  or  for  want  of  attention  from 
the  higher  orders  of  people.  Many,  who  will  give 
their  money,  are  not  equally  liberal  of  their  exertion. 
This  grand  fcheme,  however,  requires  an  unremitting 
labour  and  vigilance.  It  is  the  watchful  eye  of  fupe- 
riors,  which  alone  will  produce  exemplarinefs  in  the 
teachers,  or,  in  the  fcholars,  emulation.  And  I  do 
not  know  a  greater  charity  within  the  fphere  of  a 
young  lady,  than  to  vilit  the  girls  in  thefe  ufeful 
ferninaries,  in  order  to  correct  their  foibles,  encourage 
their  dawning  virtues,  and  iUiuulate  them  to  improve- 


YOUNG  LADY.  85 

ment.  Clofe,  uncomfortable  rooms,  it  is  true,  in  cel- 
lars or  garrets,  poifoncd  with  unplcafant  fmells,  and 
but  filled  with  poor  children,  are  no  very  inviting  ob- 
jects to  thofe,  who  live  in  houfes,  "  ceiled  with  cedar, 
"  and  painted  with  vermillion."  But  the  merit  of 
the  action  is,  doubtlefs,  in  proportion  to  its  unpleafant- 
nefs  ;  and  it  is  done  for  him,  who  on  our  account, 
refufed  neither  hardship  nor  diftrefs.  Thefe  poor  chil- 
dren, he  has  vouchfafed  to  call  "  his  lambs,"  and  it 
is  a  mod  chriitian  effort  to  "  feed  them." 

Such  advice  will,  doubtlefs,  found  very  flrange  in 
the  ears  of  fome  young  ladies,  who  dare  "  fcarcely  fet 
"  their  feet  upon  the  ground  for  delicatenefs  and  ten- 
"  dernefs."  But  this,  alas  !  is  a  falfe  and  over-acted 
refinement.  They  were  not  born  merely  to  vegetate, 
like  tulips,  for  ojlentation.  The  world,  their  friends,  the 
poor,  religion,  have  claims  upon  them.  All  nature, 
fun,  moon,  (tars,  tides,  preach  up  the  neceflity  of  con- 
tinual acllon  ;  and  I  will  venture  to  fay,  that  this  kind 
of  exertion  would  be  recompenfed  with  fuch  a  fecret 
plcafure,  as  they  never  found  in  the  gayeft  circles  of 
fa!hion,or  the  molt  crowded  haunts  of  diflipation. 

Another  excellent  mode  of  charity,  is  difperfing  lit- 
tle, religious  tracts  amongft  your  poor  neighbors.  Thefe, 
with  the  blefling  of  God,  may  have  a  wonderful  effect, 
and  indeed  be  doing  molt  extenfive  good,  when  you 
are  no  more.  Every  family  of  fervants  mould  have 
fmall  chriflian  library ;  the  benefits,  I  doubt  not,  would 
foon  be  felt  in  their  orderly  deportment. 

The  Society  for  promoting  chriftian  knowledge  a« 
bounds  with  a  variety  of  little,  plain,  ufeful  treatifes, 
that  are  fuited  to  all  occafions.  You  may  eafily  pro- 
cure a  catalogue  of  the  whole,  and  felecl  fuch,  as  are 
mod  adapted  to  the  date  of  your  particular  depen- 
dents. 

On  the  whole,  my  dear  girl,  that  time  which  tar- 
H 


$6  LETTERS  TO  A 

niilieth  the  glory  of  all  human  things,  will  quickly  lay 
both  you  and  me,  in  the  dull  of  the  earth.  Let  us  en- 
deavour to  extend  this  little  fpan  by  amiable  actions, 
and,  ifpoilible,  render  our  memories  immortal. 


LETTER  XLII. 

MY    DEAR    LUCY, 

THE  very  firfl  thing  I  fhould  recommend  after  re- 
ligious duties,  as  abfolutely  efTential  to  your  pri- 
vate comfort,  is  felf-government  in  the  fulleft  fenfe  of 
the  word.  This  may  be  fuppofed  to  be  included  under 
the  article  of  religion.  And  fo  in  fact  it  is.  But  there 
are  many  well  difpofed  people,  that  feem  to  think  little 
things  of  thiskind  almofl  beneath  their  notice,  though  in 
reality  they  are  interwoven  with  the  repofe  of  everyday, 
and  almofl  every  moment. 

The  difcipline  of  the  imagination  is  the  firfl  thing 
to  be  attempted.  This,  in  young  people,  is  naturally 
warm ;  and  if  they  are  not  cautious,  will  be  apt  to 
miflead  them  into  very  dangerous  errors. 

Thus  whatever  captivates  their  fancy,  they  take, 
without  examination,  to  be  all  over  excellence.  Tin- 
fel,  becaufe  it  glitters  more,  will  be  preferred  to  folid 
gold  ;  a  luxuriant,  florid  flyle  in  a  writer,  to  the  found- 
eft  and  beft  arranged  arguments  ;  the  fhewy  and  bril- 
liant in  characlers,  to  the  truly  valuable,  and  the  gaudy 
in  drefs,  to  that  artlefs  fimplicity,  which  is  the  offspring 
of  an  elegant  and  well  cultivated  tafte. 

Young  people,  almofl  univerfally  fubject  themfelveS 
to  this  kind  oiillufion.  They  enter  upon  life,  as  an  in- 
chanted  country.  The  world,  in  their  idea,  has  no  ca- 
price ;  fortune,  no  viciflitude  ;  friendfhip  is  without 
fincerity  j  attachment  without  bitters,  and  marriage  13 


YOUNG  LADY.  87 

nil  happinefs  without  allay.  What  the  fcripture  has 
called  a  wUdernefs>  they  make  a  paradife,  whofe  land- 
fkips  are  dclicioufly  picturefque,  and  whofe  fpring  is 
ever  green. 

Experience,  be  aflured,  will  not  realize  fuch  high 
expectations.  You  will  find,  that  every  object  has  its 
imperfections  ;  that  the  world  at  bed  is  but  a  mixture 
of  good  and  ill,  and  that  the  lights  of  the  picture  will 
be  interfperfed  with  fliades. 

You  will  afk,  where  is  the  great  harm  of  indulging, 
for  a  little  while,  thefe  high  colourings  of  fancy  ?  The 
inconvenience  is  obvious.  Itwillexpofe  you  to  per- 
petual difappointments,  and  difappointments  will  cre- 
ate difguft.  By  fuch  zfalfe  fublimation,  you  will  have 
no  relifhfor  the  rational  pleasures,  and  no  refolution  to 
perform  the  fol'ul  duties  of  your  condition.  At  any 
rate,  you  will  want  a  proper  mare  of  fortitude  and  pa- 
tience to  encounter  the  many  unavoidable  ilk  and  ca- 
lamities of  life. 


LETTER  XLIII. 

THE  next,  moft  important  thing  is  the  govern- 
ment of  your  temper.  I  know  many  perfons, 
that  would  not,  for  the  world,  be  abfent  from  the  fa- 
crament,  or  refu<e  t®  do  a  generous  action,  yet  indulge 
themfelves,  feemingly  without  remorfe,  in  fuch  little 
inltances  of  ill-nature,  peevimnefs,  tyranny,  and  ca- 
price towards  their  fervants  and  inferiors,  as  render 
their  houfes  a  perpetual  fcene  of  difcord,  and  hang,  on 
every  countenance,  an  uncomfortable  gloom. 

Such  people  fliould  confider,  that  religion  was  in- 
tended to  regulate  the    moft  ordinary   actions    of  our 
i:vcs  ;  that   prayers  facraments,  and  opportunities   of 
13  great  good  come,  comparatively,    but   fcldom  ; 


38  LETTERS  TO  A 

but  that  it  is  every  moment,  in  our  power  to  diffufc 
happinefs  amongft  our  domeltics,  and  that  this,  if  it 
proceeds  from  proper  motives,  will  be  an  acceptable 
fervice  to  the  God,  who  has  appointed  all  the  differ- 
ent ranks  in  foeiety,  and  is  the  father  of  all  compaf- 
fion.  Nor  have  we  much  imbibed  the  true  fpirit  of 
the  gofpel,  if  it  has  not  taught  us  to  bear  patiently  the 
imperfections  of  our  fellow-creatures,  and  to  temper 
authority  with  gentlencfs  and  good  nature. 

No  Confeqmv.ce  can  juirify  one  fingle  act  of  caprice, 
fullennefs  or  ili-humour.  It  is  a  direct  violation  of 
that  uni-verfal  law  of  charity,  which  requires  us,  in  all 
our  actions,  to  keep  in  view,  the  happinefs  of  others,  as 
well  as  our  own. 

Tyranny  is  a  downright  infult  to  any  creature  for- 
med in  thi  f  God  ;  it  would  be  unpardonable, 
if  exercifed  even  to  a  worm  or  infect,  and  generally 
proceeds  from  caufes,  which  reflect  no  honor  on  the 
heart  or  understanding.  It  is  often  the  refult  of  a 
new-born  greatnels,  that  has  not  yet  learned  how  to 
Lear  fuperiority  ;  of  a  fpleen,  collected  from  want 
of  employment,  or  a  natural,  ill-temper,  that  never  has 
fabmitted  to  the  discipline  of  virtue. 

Mitdneft  is  neceflary  to  our  own  comfort.  They, 
who  are  continually  tormenting  others,  muft  be  wretch- 
ed themfehes.  It  is  efitntial  to  the  dignity  of  our  own 
character ;  and  it  is,  I  am  fure,  thehigheir/wZ/Vy,  wheth- 
er we  mean  to  fecure  the  afflflions,  or  the  goodferiices 
of  our  dependents. 

It  is  a  pitiful  condefcention  in  a  women  of  fortune  to 
aggravate  every  little  caufe  of  complaint.  A  ruffled, 
angry,  fcolding  woman  is  fo  far  vulgar  and  difgufting, 
and,  for  the  moment,  a  fort  of  virago. 

Moderation  is  the  great  fecret  of  government.  To 
be  always  duTatisfied  is  the  way  to  lofe  all  authority  and 
refpect.      The  conlecmence  of  thofe  people  is  I 


YOUNG  LADY.  «9 

cheerfully  acknowledged,  who  feern  the  leafl  forward 
to  aflert  it. 

And  what  fays  the  law  of  all  wifdom  and  of  all  per- 
fection ?  "  Mailers,  give  unto  your  fervants,  that  which 
"  is  juir  and  equal,  knowing  that  ye  alfo  have  a  matter 
*'  in  heaven.  Put  on,  as  the  eleft  of  God,  bowels  of 
U  mercies,  kindnefs,  humblenefs  of  mind,  long  fuffer- 
u  ing,  forbearing  one  another,  and  forgiving  one  anoth- 
44  er.  Learn  of  me,  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart. 
"  Be  pitiful,  be  courteous." 

If  the  gofpel  waspublifhed  "  to  bring  peace  on  earth, 
"  and  good-will  towards  men,"  this  kind  affection 
mould  begin  with  families,  which,  colleelively,  compofe 
all  the  nations  of  the  world. 


LETTER  XLIV. 

THE  piety,  I  have  recommended,  will  make  you 
always  happy  in  yourfelf,  and  refpecled  by  all 
the  worthy  and  difcerning,  though  you  fhould happen 
to  have  none  of  thofe  intelleftual  endowments,  which 
procure  a  greater  (hare  of  fame  and  admiration.  But 
you  may  beferjille,  as  well  as  pious  ;  you  maybera- 
tertainingy  as  well  as  good.  Your  reafon  and  under- 
pin ding  were  given  you  to  be  improved  ;  a  proper  pur- 
fuit  of  knowledge,  at  the  fame  time,  will  aid  and  in- 
flame your  piety,  and  render  you  much  more  valuable 
and  interefting  to  all  your  acquaintance.  When  the 
foundation  is  laid  in  virtue,  the 'fuperjlruclure  may  have 
«very  graceful  embellifhment. 

Knowledge    will  recommend  you  to   many,  over 
whom  mere  piety  would  have  no  power.     It  will  give  a 
greater  energy  to  your  goodnefs.     The  picture  will  be 
Hz 


9o  LETTERS  TO  A 

thus  elegantly  framed,  and  placed  in  the  heft  point  of 
view. 

Learned  women,  however,  hare  been  often  a  pror- 
crb  of  reproach,  feared  by  their  own  fcx,  and  difliked 
by  ours.  A  neglect  of  their  perfon,  and  of  family  con- 
cerns, as  of  little  things  beneath  a  fuper'tor  undetjland- 
ing  ;  a  vain  oftentation  of  their  abilities  in  company, 
and  upon  all  occafions,  a  fupercilious  contempt  of  their 
filler  women  in  general,  and  an  ungraceful  avidity  for 
the  company  of  men,  have  been  reckoned  amongft  their 
diftinguimed  characteriftics. 

The  truth  is,  fome  females  have  been  viragos  in  their 
knowledge,  not  only  injudicious  in  the  kind  they  have 
afpired  to,  but  the  ufe  they  have  made  of  it,  and  an  in- 
difcriminate  ftigma  has  been  fixed  upon  all,  who  have 
endeavoured  rationally  to  improve  their  underfrandings. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  faid  of  women,  that  they 
are  fo  ignorant,  frivolous  and  infipid,  as  to  be  unfit  for 
friendfhip,  fociety  or  converfation  ;  that  they  are  una- 
ble, to  amufe,  entertain  or  edify  a  lonely  hour,  much 
more  to  blefs  or  grace  that  connexion,  for  which  they 
were  principally  formed. 

What,  my  dear  girl,  can  a  judicious  woman  do,  in 
fuch  a  dilemma  ?  How  muft  Hie  act  to  avoid  the  im- 
putation of  pedantry  on  the  one  hand,  and  ignorance  on 
the  other. 

There  is  a  narrow,  middle  path  betwixt  thefe  ex- 
tremes. Judgment  rauft  point  it  out,  and  good  fenfe 
direct:  you  in  the  execution. 

The  prominent  excellencies  of  your  minds  are  tafle 
and  imagination,  and  your  knowledge  mould  be  of  a 
kind,  which  ajpmilates  with  thefe  faculties.  Politics, 
philofophy,  mathematics,  or  metaphyfics  are  not  your 
province.  Machiavcl,  Newton,  Euclid,  Malebranche 
or  Locke  would  lie  with  a  very  ill  grace  in  your  clofets. 
"They  would  render  you  unwomanly  indeed.  They 
*yo.uld  damp  that  vivacity  and  deftroy  that  difengaged 


YOUNG  LADY.  9i 

eafe  and  feftnefs,  which  are  the  very  ejfence  of  your 
graces. 

The  elegant  ftudies  are,  more  immediately,  your  de- 
partment. They  do  not  require  fo  much  time,  ab- 
ilraction  or  comprehenfivenefs  of  mind  ;  they  bring 
no  wrinkles,  and  they  will  give  a  polifh  to  your  man- 
ners, and  fuch  a  liberal  expanfion  to  your  underftand- 
ing  as  every  rational  creature  mould  endeavour  to 
attain. 

Whilftwww,  with  folid  judgment  and  a  fuperior  vig- 
our arc  to  combine  ideas,  to  difcriminate,  and  exam- 
ine a  fubject  to  the  bottom,  you  are  to  give  it  all  its 
brilliancy  and  all  its  charms.  They  provide  the  fur- 
niture ;  you  difpofe  it  with  propriety.  They  build  the 
houfe  ;  you  are  to  fancy,  and  to  ornament  the  cieling. 

Cultivate,  then,  fuch  ftudies,  as  lie  within  the  re- 
gion of  fentiment  and  tafte.  Let  your  knowledge  be 
feminine,  as  well  as  your  perfon.  And  let  it  glow 
nvithin  you,  rather  than  fparkle  upon  others  about  you. 
A  diamond,  fo  polifhed,  will  always  be  valued.  You 
-will  charm  all,  but  the  ignorant  and  vulgar.  You  will 
be  a  rational,  entertaining  companion,  and  the  fymme- 
try  of  your  features  will  derive  a  double  luftre  from 
the  beauties  of  your  mind. 


LETTER  XLV. 

ENDEAVOUR  to  acquire  a  tafte  for  the  beau- 
ties of  fine  writing,  as  it  is  difplayed  in  our  pre-> 
fent,  numerous  lift  of  Englifh  daffies,  the  Spectators, 
Tatlers,  the  Guardian,  the  Rambler,  the  Adventurer, 
the  World,  &c.  I  have  placed  Addifon  at  the  head 
of  this  catalogue,  becaufe  he,  more  frequently  than  any 
of  the  reft,  gives  leffons  of  morality  and  prudence  to 
four  fex,  and,  for  delicacy  of  fentiment,   is  peculiarly 


92  LETTERS  TO  A 

adapted  to  female  reading.  There  is  fcraetlmes  per- 
haps, a  langour  in  his  papers.  He  may  not  have  all 
that  lire  and  energy  and  pathos,  which  have  fince  char- 
acterized fome  celebrated  writers  ;  but  for  cafe,  grace- 
fulnefs,  Simplicity  and  nature,  he  is  abfolutely  without 
a  rival,  and,  perhaps,  ever  will  be  without  a  fuperior. 
A  critic*  of  modern  times  has  (aid,  that  whoever 
would  write  the  Engliih  language  with  eafe,  mould 
fpeud  his  days  and  nights  in  reading  the  works  of  Ad- 
difon. 

To  this  frequent  perufal  of  the  be  ft  writers,  add,  if 
poflible,  an  acquaintance  with  fome  living  characters  of 
improved  education.  Conversation  with  people  of 
genius  and  fentiment  is  the  eafieft  and  quickeft  way  to 
improvement.  It  gives  us  all  its  graces,  without  its 
nufterities  ;  its  depth,  without  its  wrinkles.  We  foon 
grow  languid  and  gloomy  wkhattftracrti!  li\.\d'\es>  weary 
of  ourfelves,  and  fated  with  our  purfuits.  Converfa- 
tion  gently  agitates  the  fedentary  frame,  and  gives  a 
brifker  motion  to  the  blood  and  fpirits.  The  counte- 
nance is  flufhed  with  pleafure  ;  the  eyes  fparkle,  and 
the  heart  expands  and  glows  with  emulation. 


LETTER  XLVI. 

TO  write  letters  well  is  a  very  defnable  excellence 
in  a  woman.  Every  fituation,  character,  con- 
nexion, devotion,  friendfhip,  love,  bufinefs,  all  require 
the  exercife  of  this  talent.  It  is  an  office  particularly 
fuited  to  the  livelinefs  of  your  fancy,  and  the  fenfibility 
of  your  heart  ;  and  yourfex,  in  general,  much  excels 
our  own,  in  the  cafe  and  graces  of  epiftolary  correfpon- 
dence.     Not  cramped  with  the  fhackles  and  formality 

*  Dr.  Johiifoa. 


YOUNG  LADY.  93 

of  rules,  their  thoughts  are  expreiTed  fpontaneoujly,  as 
they  flow,  and  become,  more  immediately,  (what  a  let- 
ter always  JJjould  be,)  a  lively,  amufing,  written  con- 
verfation.  A  man  attends  to  the  niceties  of  grammar, 
or  well  turned  periods  ;  a  woman  gives  us  the  efTufions 
of  her  foul.  The  firft  may  pleafe  a  few,  languid  crit- 
ics ;  the  latter  will  delight  every  perfon  of  fenfibility 
and  difcernment. 

I  had  once  the  honour  of  correfponding  with  a  lady, 
whofe  letters  aftonifhed  me.  Imagery,  tafie,  pathos, 
fpirit,  fire  and  eafe  vied  with  each  other,  which  fhould 
be  the  mod  confpicuous  feature  in  the  productions  of 
her  pen.  They  came  not  from  the  head ;  it  was  the 
heart,  which  wrote  them.  They  were  not  faidtlefs, 
but  they  were  impaflioned.  They  had  defects,  but 
they  had  likewife  beauties,  which  mud  have  warmed 
the  coldefl:  critic,  that  ever  exifted.  They  were  in- 
terefKng  to  an  high  degree,  and  left  this  conviction 
ftrongly  on  my  mind,  that  we  often  labour  only  to  be 
dull,  and,  in  the  fearch  of  dijlant  ornaments,  chill  the 
catural  fervours  of  the  foul. 


LETTER  XLVII. 

WITH  the  hiitory  of  your  own  country  you  can- 
not decently  be  unacquainted.  Itwould  betray 
an  unpardonable  ignorance,  if  you  could  not  tell,  on 
being  aiked  in  company,  the  general  character  of  all  the 
lb  vereigns,  that  have  fat  upon  the  Britifh  throne  'j  what 
were  the  religion,  manners,  cuftoms,  ceremonies  of  the 
primitive  inhabitants  of  the  Ifland  ;  by  what  means  the 
prefent  itate  of  civilization  has  been  gradually  introdu- 
ced ;  what  contributed  to  bring  about  our  reformation 
from  the  Church  of  Rome  ;  at  what  period  the  outline 
of  our  happy  conflitution  firft  began  to  be  iketched  out, 


94  LETTERS  TO  A 


and    what  is  the  particular   excellence  of  our  govern- 
ment, over  all  others  in  the  known  world. 

If  indeed  you  confider  hiftory  in  its  proper  light, 
not  as  a  mere  detail  of  names,  fads,  epochs,  and  e- 
vents,  but  as  a  picture  of  human  nature,  and  of  the 
wonderful  adminiirration  of  Piovidence,  apportioning 
rewards  and  punifhments  to  nations,  and  frequently 
to  individuals,  according  their  actions  it  will  become 
not  only  an  entertaining  (hidy,  but  afouice  of  the  fub- 
limeft,  moral  improvement.  It  will  give  you  the  rich- 
eft  knowledge  of  men  and  things  ;  from  what  has 
happened,  you  may  deduce  what  ivi//,  in  fimilar  filia- 
tions ;  and  you  will  learn  to  adore  the  wifdom,  juftice 
and  perfections  of  him,  who,  under  all  the  changes  of 
time,  falls  of  empire,  the  -conflicts  of  pailion,  and  the 
interefts  of  man,  is"  the  fame  "  yefterday,  to-day,  and 
11  for  ever  ;"  carrying  on,  amidft  all  apparent  disor- 
der, one  grand  and  Ncompreheniive  fcheme  of  happi- 
jiefsand  probation. 

Goldfmith  lias  agreeably  abridged  and  coKdenfed 
the  Englifh  hiftory,  in  a  well-known  work  of  two 
fmall  volumes  intitled  Letters  from  a  Nobleman  to  his 
Son.  If  your  curiofity  is  excited  to  purfue  this  fludy 
on  a  larger  fcaie,  Henry  will  give  you  every  thing  that 
delights  in  genius,  language,  colouring  and  deicrip- 
tion.f 

Hume  is  by  no  means,  an  impartial  hiilorian,  but  lie 
is  a  very  fplcndid,  captivating  writer.  If  he  is  not 
difpafiionaie,  he  is  always  inchanting  ;  and,  if  he  does 
not  uniformly  convince,  he  never  fails  to  charm. 

It  jiad  been  happy  for  this  wiiter,  if  he  had  never 
attempted  any  thing  but  h'tjlory.  He  might  then  have 
gene  to  his  grave  with  unequivocal   applaufe.      But  in 

f  "  Dr.  Henry's  Hiftory  of  Great-Britain  contains  more 
■"  good  natter  than  any  hiftery  we  yet  have." 

Analytical  Review,  Number  III, 
/or  July  J/M,p.  207. 


YOUNG  LADY.  9$ 

his  moral  and  metaphyseal  works,  he  is  an  enemy  to 
the  dearell  interefts  of  mankind.  He  has  endeavour- 
ed to  fap  the  foundations  of  that  religion,  which  is  the 
only  fource  of  every  hope  and  every  comfort.  His  cold 
and  fullen  fceptifcifm  has  done  infinite  mifchief.  It 
more  than  fullies  all  the  lufter  of  his  literary  fame. 


LETTER  XLVIII. 

ROBERTSON'S  hiftory  of  Charles  the  fifth,  and 
of  Mary  Queen  of  Scots,  will  both  inftrucl  and 
entertain  you.  The  hiftoriographer  has  been  efteemed 
an  excellent  writer.  But  I  have  always,  in  private, 
thought  his  ftyle  too  laboured  and  ftately.  It  has  not 
the  eafe  and  Simplicity  of  the  ancients.  It  does  not 
equal  feveral  of  the  moderns.  It  has  neither  the  con- 
cife  energy  of  Hume,  nor  the  more  flowing  and  eafy 
graces  of  Gibbon. 

The  late  Dr.  Stewart,  in  a  very  elegant  work,  has 
controverted  almoft  all  the  afTertions  of  his  predecef- 
for,  concerning  Mary,  and  become  the  champion  of 
this  unfortunate  queen.  But  you  have  nothing  to  do 
with  literary  controverfy.  Leave  them  to  the  tribu- 
nal of  an  impartial  public.  Time  will  weigh  their  fep- 
arate  merits  in  the  balance  of  truth.  Either  or  both 
of  them  will  exercife  your  tafte,  and  improve  your  un- 
demanding. 

Stretch's  Beauties  of  Hiftory*  will  furnifh  yon 
with  many  fhoit,  agreeable  anecdotes,  both  ancient 
and  modem,  at  a  very  fmall  expence  of  time  and 
trouble.  Knowledge  thus  epitomized,  is  what  I  fliould. 
recommend.     On  fuch  fubjects,  you  want  fhort  and 

*  A  new  Edition  of  which  has  lately  been  publillied  in 
Dublin,  in  %  vols.  Price  6s.  6d. 


96  LETTERS  TO  A 

pithy  (ketches,  rather  than  labored^and  prolix  difTerta- 
tions. 

The  hiftory  of  Greece  and  Rome  is  fo  frequently 
alluded  to,  fo  connected  with  that  of  almoft  all  other 
nations,  and  fo  full  of  curious  incidents  and  anecdotes, 
that  a  little  knowledge  of  it  would  be  very  ufeful  and 
entertaining.  But,  in  general,  the  writers  on  the  fub- 
jec!  are  to©  voluminous  for  a  female.  They  make  up 
no  little  mare  of  the  labour,  in  a  claflical  education. 
Goldfmith  has  likewife  given  his  afliflance  to  epito- 
mize this  branch  of  hiftory.  I  know  no  other  writer 
fo  proper  for  your  purpofe. 

To  attain  juft  ngUmpfe  of  general  hiftory,  the  moft 
ufeful  work  I  recollect,  is  the  Abbe  Millot's  Elements 
fur  VH'iJlo'ire.  On  his  comprehenfive  and  condenfed 
plan,  there  is  much  in  a  little  compafs.  By  travelling 
over  a  few  fields,  you  gain  a  moft:  immenfe  and  exten- 
ded horizon,  and  many  tracts  of  hitherto  undifcovered 
country.  Hiftory  at  large  is  fo  voluminous  and  com- 
plicated, that,  to  a  young  lady,  who  mould  undcrftand, 
as  it  were,  but  the  outline,  it  very  much  wants  fuch  a 
mode  of  abridgement,  z&Afimplijkation, 


LETTER  XLIX. 

MY    DEAR     LUCY, 

ROLLIN's  ancient  hiftory  is  a  treafureto  young 
people,  if  the  number  of  volumes  does  not  alarm 
you.  This  man  was  one  of  the  moft  excellent  pre- 
ceptors, that  the  world  ever  law.  It  was  his  ambi- 
tion to  unite  the  fcholar,  and  the  chnftian.  He  la- 
bours to  promote  religious  improvement  by  every  inci- 
dent, he  relates.  He  holds  t  mh  Providence,  as  con- 
tinually fuperintendingthe  government  of  the  univerfe, 


YOUNG  LADY.  97 

and  its  finger,  as  directing  all  the  movements  of  the  fyf- 
tcm  ',  and,  when  he  has  related  a  number  of  furpri- 
fing  viciflitudes  and  events,  he  takes  his  pupil  up  "  to 
"  an  high  mountain,  from  whence  he  mows  him  all 
"  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  and  all  the  glories  of 
"  them"  to  be  continually  under  the  control  and  di- 
rection of  heaven,  and  not  eolleelively  to  poffefs  half  the 
Juftre  of  the  excellence  of  one,  pious  difpofition. 

Under  the  pen  of  this  moil  chriflian  writer,  every 
Safer  metal  is  purified  from  its  alloy.  Every  found- 
ing action  is  diverted  of  its  bombajl,  and  traced  to  its 
real  fource.  Splendour  has  no  dignity,  if  unailbciated 
with  •virtue.  Ambition  is  painted  as  zfury,  that  de- 
ftroys.  Heroifm  is  reprefented,  as  murder  in  difguife. 
The  laurels  of  an  Alexander  are  wrefled  from  his 
brow.  Caefar  is  (tripped  of  his  fictitious  plumage. 
They  are  both  defer]  bed,  as  vultures,  preying  on  their 
fpecics,  who  were  born  to  be  only  the  fcourges  of  hu- 
manity,  and  a  terror  <o  the  world. 

This  man  deferves  univerfal  veneration.  His  pupils 
mould  have  raifed  a  monument  to  his  memory,  and 
poderity  have  rendered  that  monument  immortal. 
Learning  and  religion  mould  be  grouped  over  his  tomb, 
mingling  their  united  tears  for  the  lofs  of  his  virtues. 

If  you  have  not  leifure  to  perufe  his  writings,  yet  be 
careful  to  read  all  other  hirtory  with  this  view,  and  it. 
will  lead  you  to  God.  It  will  teach  you,  no  longer  te» 
be  dazzled  with  grandeur,  becaufe  grandeur  fades  a- 
way.  It  will  mow  you,  that  vices  have  demolished 
the  mightiefl  empires,  and  fwept  the  fineft  cities  "with 
"  the  befom  of  deduction."  It  will  convince  you, 
that  every  thing  on  earth  is  a  fliadow,  and  that  neither 
men  nor  nations  "  continue  in  one  flay."  It  will  at 
fure  you,  that,  "  though  clouds  and  darknefs  may  be 
"  about  the  throne  of  God,  yet  righteoufnefs  and  judg- 
"  ment  are  the  habitation  of  his  feat."     It  will  inftruct 

r 


9$  LETTERS  TO  A 

you,  that  every  action  is  "  weighed  in  its  balance  ;" 
that,  however,  feaningly,  disregarded  for  a  time,  Tice 
and  virtue  will  have  their  juft  proportion  of  puniihment 
or  reward,  and  that  nothing  but  religion  will  be  able 
to  triumph,  amidft  the  crufh  of  elements,  of  maiter, 
and  the  world. 


LETTER  L. 

MY    DEAR    LUCY, 

THOUH  I  think  every  woman  in  the  worTd 
mould  execrate  the  memory  of  the  late  Lord 
Chefterfield,  as  having  written  the  mod  fcandalous  li- 
bels on  her  fex,  yet  his  /ketches  of  heathen  mythology, 
of  Grecian,  Roman,  and  Britifh  hiftory  in  the  firft 
volume  of  his  letters,  are  well  worth  your  attention. 
If  this  ingenious  nobleman  had  given  us  more  fpeci- 
mins  of  this  nature,  and  fewer  lectures  on  the  graces 
and  intrigue,  the  gratitude  of  pofterity  would  have  im- 
balmed  his  afhes.  He  was  certainly  pofTefled  of  an  el- 
egant ftyle,  and  had  a  very  happy  method  of  convey- 
ing his  inftructions. 

But  in  order  to  make  any  real  improvement  in  this, 
or  any  other  of  your  ftudies,  let  me  adtife  you  to  read 
only  one  half  hour,  at  a  time,  and  to  employ  a  double 
fpace,  in  abridging  and  exprefling  what  you  recollect, 
in  your  own  language.  This  will  have  the  double  ad- 
vantage of  imprefling  it  very  ftrongly  on  your  memo- 
ry, and  enabling  you  to  form  a  ftyle  of  your  own. 

Though  a  good  ftyle  is,  doubtlefs,  a  mark  of  gen- 
ius, and  not  attainable  by  every  perfon,  yet  it  depends 
amazingly  on  mechanical  habit,  as  well  as  our  gait, 
countenance  or  gefture.  The  pen  accuftomed  to  a 
certain  routine  of  period,  performs  it  as  infenfibly,  a? 


YOUNG  LADY.  99 

the  memory  retraces  all  the  variations  of  notes  in  a 
fong,  whilft,  perhaps,  we  are  filentJy,  occupied  with 
fome  other  object. 

Be  fo  kind  as  to  indulge  me  with  a  fight  of  thefe 
Sheets  exactly  as  they  are  penned  from  your  jirjl  im- 
preflions,  and  I  will  endeavour  to  correct  them.  Ban- 
ifh  the  childijh  fear  of  betraying  any  ignorance,  where 
I  cannot  expefi  you  to  be  informed  ;  and,  if  fome,  ef- 
fential  alterations  mould  be  made,  remember  it  is  the 
pen  of  friendfhip  which  erafes,  guided  by  that  affection, 
with  which  I  have  the  honour  to  be, 

Your  ever  faithful 
and  affectionate. 


LETTER  LI. 

THAT fpecies  of  hiftory,  which  defcribes the  lives 
and  characters  of  particular  perfons,  and  is  in- 
cluded under  the  name  of  biography,  is  by  far  the  moft 
ufeful  and  interefting  to  a  woman.  Inftead  of  wars, 
fieges,  victories  or  great  achievements,  which  are  not 
fo  much  within  the  province  of  a  female,  it  prefents 
thofe  domejlic  anecdotes  and  events,  which  come  more 
forcibly  home  to  her  bofom  and  her  curiofity. 

I  have  always  thought  that  one  great  advantage  of 
boys  over  girls,  is  their  having  the  moft  illuftriouschar- 
acters  of  antiquity  to  form  their  fentiments,  and  fire 
their  emulation.  Biography  will  open  to  you  the  fame 
fource  of  improvement.  You  will  read  of  perfons, 
elevated  with  every  noble  fentiment  and  virtue  ;  and 
your  judgment  and  tafte  will  felect  fome  particular  fa- 
vorite from  the  group,  as  a  model  for  your  imitation. 

Though  Johnfon  has  been  fo  very  much  celebrated 
in  the  republic  of  letters  for  all  his  productions,  yet 
I  have  always  thought  his  Lives  of  the  Poets  by  far 


ioo  LETTERS  TO  A 


his  mod  agreeable  performance.  It  has  not  that  turgid 
pompofity  of  ftyle,  which  appears  in  fume  of  his  more 
juvenile  labours  ;  it  is,  all  along,  interfperfed  with  ju- 
dicious fentiments  and  moral  reflections  ;  it  abounds 
with  an  original  vein  of  criticifm,  and  anecdotes  of  fo 
many  illuflrious  men,  as  cannot  fail  to  amufe,  as  well 
as  to  inftrud.  His  criticifms,  it  is  true,  havebeen  con- 
troverted, and  traduced  ;  but  what  writings  of  merit 
are  exempt  from  fuch  a  tax  ?  The  enthuliaiHc  admi- 
rers of  Milton,  in  particular,  have  handled  him  with 
f*. verity.  But  who  does  not  know,  that  favourites,  at 
any  rate,  will  be  defended  ? 

But  indeed  all  men  of  fenfe  unite  in  paying  a  fincere 
tribute  of  refpecc  to  the  memory  of  Johnfon.  In  fpite 
of  all  his  petty  and  ungenerous  biographers,  the  fneers 
of  party  malice,  or  the  ftill  fharpcr  arrows  of  infidious 
ids,  he  Hands  an  huge  coloflus,  in  the  bofom  of  an 
ocean,  unmoved  with  the  angry  darning  of  its  waves. 

Johnfon  in  all  his  multiplied  productions,  has  not  a 
finale  period,  that  can  patronize  indecency,  or  unhinge 
belief.  And,  though,  no<u>,  it  fignifies  but  little  to  this 
cxtiaordinary  man,  that  he  was  confidered  as  an  ora- 
cle of  knowledge  in  his  day,  as  an  ornament  to  his 
country,  and  a  bleiling  to  the  world,  it  mult  tranfport 
him  to  recollect,  that  he  has  carefully  endeavoured  to 
dlffufe  happinefs,  as  widely  as  his  writings,  and  to  ren- 
der piety  diffuiive  as  his  fame.  The  death  of  the  au- 
thor will  exempt  me  from  fufpicions  of  flattery  or  de- 
it'ui  in  this  little  panegyric.  Gratitude  may  be  allow- 
ed to  offer,  without  any  cenfure,  this  little  incenfe,  to 
his  venerable  fhade. 

If  all  the  private  anecdotes  of  every  perfon's  life 
and  temper  mull  be  arraigned  before  the  tribunal  of 
the  public,  who  could  efcape  ?  If  Johnfon  <was  uhac- 
commodating,  rough  and  morofe,  let  it  be  remember- 
ed, that  thefe  were  but  little  pimples  on  a  Jkin>  where 
the  heart  gtowed  with   univerfai  benevolence  ;  let  it 


YOUNG  LADY.  ioi 

be  coniidered,  that  conflicts,  difappointraents  and  mis- 
fortunes are  unfriendly  to  fweetnefs  of  manners  or  dif- 
pofition  ;  that  fevere  application  has  a  tendency  to  ren- 
der any  man  irritable  and  peevifh  ;  that  gaiety  and 
fpi  ightlinefs  confiderably  arifes  from  an  eafe  of  circum- 
ftances  ;  and  let  us  oppofe  to  thefe  a  piety,  that  was 
profound  and  warm,  almort,  tofuperftitioti>  and  unwea- 
ried labours  for  the  fervice  of  mankind,  which  fcarccly 
knew  a  moment's  interruption. 


LETTER  LII. 

SULLY's  Memoirs,  in  five  volumes,  -are  interfper- 
{td  with  very  curious  and  interefting  anecdotes  ; 
and  the  private  life  of  Louis  XV.  is.a  very  entertain- 
ing work.  Indeed  the  French  particularly  fhine  in 
biographical  writing.  It  is  quite  in  their  province,  and 
forms  a  part  of  the  national  tafte.  Their  imagination 
fparkles,  in  an  efpecial  manner,  in  painting  the  com- 
plexion of  courts,  monarchs  or  perfonagcsofdillinclion. 
They  feel  as  great  an  ardour  for  extolling  the  virtues 
of  their  le  rot  and  his  attendants,  as  lue  do  for  record- 
ing all  the  great  achievements  of  the  field  or  ocean. 

The  Marquis  Caraccioli  is  univerfally  known,  as  an 
author  of  great  vivacity  and  talents.  He  has  written 
the  life  of  Pope  Clement  XIV.  and  it  does  honour  to 
his  pen,  as  well  as  to  the  memory  of  the  fovereign 
pontiff. 

If  the  Marquis  really  wrote  the  letters,  which  go  un- 
der the  name  of  Ganganelli,  he  has  hit  off,  with  a  won- 
derful addrefs,  the  air  and  features  of  the  illuftrious 
original.  The  habits,  fentiments,  manners  and  difpo- 
fition  of  the  Pope,  as  couched  in  this  life,  all  breathe 
through  thefe  letters. 

12 


io2  LETTERS  TO  A 

The  name  of  Dr.  Johnfon,  and  the  intimacy  known 
to  have  fubfifted  betwixt  the  parties,  have  gi\ 
great  currency  to  Mrs.  Piozzi's  anecdotes,  relating  to 
this  Jiterary  hero.  But  they  have  not  immortalized 
either  her  talents,  or  the  goodnefs  of  her  heart.  They 
are  a  moil  difgulting  fpecimen  of  treachery  in  friend- 
ihip  ;  a  copious  effufion  of  fpleen,  that  had  long  been 
collecting.  They  remind  one  forcibly  of  a  number  of 
jittle  infects,  nimbling  at  their  eafe,  on  the  carcafe  of 
fome  noble  animal,  that  a  fugle  motion  of  the  living 
creature  would  have  difperfed  in  an  inftant,  or  crumed 
into  atoms. 


LETTER  LIII. 

WRAXALL  is  a  very  agreeable  author,  and 
he  has  chofen  a  fruitful  happy  fubjecT,  in  his 
Memoirs  of  the  Kings  of  France,  of  the  HoufeofVa- 
iois.  The  execution  is  not  inferior  to  the  judicioufnefs 
of  the  defign.  His  book  has  an  admirer  in  every  per- 
fon  of  fentiment  and  tafte. 

The  late  Mr.  Sheridan  is  allowed  to  have  poffefTed 
confiderable  abilities.  He  has  given  the  world  a  fpeci- 
men of  them  in  his  life  of  Swift.  It  is,  however,  in 
my  idea,  too  flattering  a  portrait.  The  painter  was  a 
countryman,  and  an  admirer.  No  talents  can  conveit 
deformity  into  beauty*  or  make  darknefs  to  be  light. 

Swift  was  a  very  great,  original  genius  :  but  the  in- 
decency of  fome  of  his  writings  is  intolerable  ;  his 
fpleen,  exceffive,  and  his  behaviour  to  Stella  an  eternal 
itigma  on  his  memory  and  his  virtues.  Ever  dabbling 
in  the  turbid  ocean  of  politics,  what  bufinefs  had  he 
with  the  quiet  and  retired  haven  of  the  church  ?  But 
genius  and  taleats  can  ernbellifh  any  fide  of  a  fubjetf, 


YOUNG  LADY. 


103 


and  the  biographer  has  poured,  on  his  favourite  author, 
a  deluge  of  panegyric. 

The  life  of  Garrick  is  fo  much  interfperfed  with 
the  dome/lie  hiftory,  and  the  moft  illuftrious  perfons  of 
his  time,  that  it  will  highly  engage  and  gratify  your 
curiofity.      It  is  written  by  Davies  in  two  volumes. 

England  has  long  laboured  with  a  diforder,  that  I 
cannot  call  by  a  better  name,  than  the  theatrical  mania. 
A  principal  aftor  is  more  diftinguifhed,  carefTed  and 
enriched  by  a  luxurious  nation,  than  many  of  the  mod: 
deferving  perfons,  in  the  learned  profeflions.  An 
Abiagdon,  a  Siddons,  and  a  Mara  (as  once  a  Garrack, 
a  Henderfon,  and  a  Yates,)  inchant  the  feelings  of  a 
Britim  audience,  drain  the  money  which  mould  be  fa- 
crcd  to  better  purpofes,  acquire,  in  a  few  years,  an  in- 
dependent fortune  and  are  admitted  to  the  firft  cirelcs 
in  the  kingdom,  whilft  a  thoufand,  amiable  and  merito« 
rious  clergymen  are  fuffered  to  live  in  want,  and  to  die 
in  the  moil  uncomfortable  obfcurity.  This  is  not  a  ve- 
ry favourable  trait  in  the  moral  hiftory  of  a  nation.  It 
feems  rather  afymptom  of  its  approaching  diiTolution. 

Hume  was  a  great  champion  of  infidelity,  and  as 
fuch,  a  character,  that  excites  uncommon  curiofity. 
He  has  written  his  own  life,  and,  as  an  unique  in  biog- 
raphy, it  is  worthy  your  reading. 

Bolingbroke  was  another  of  the  fceptical  family. 
His  hiftory  is  agreeably  recorded  by  Dr.  Goldfmith. 

On  the  fubject  of  biography,  you  will  meet  with  a 
great  variety  of  other,  entertaining  writers  ;  but  I  mult 
not  clofe  this  article,  without  particularly  recommend- 
ing a  book,  that  has  given  me  fo  much  pleafure  and  in- 
formation, as  the  life  and  writings  of  Gray,  by  Mr. 
Mafon. 

A  particular  friendfliip  of  the  warmeft  and  moft  dif- 
interefted  kind,  fubfifted  betwixt  thefe  celebrated  au- 
thors. It  commenced  in  that  early  period  of  life, 
when  fouls  are  incapable  of  guile  or  felfifhaefs  and  mu- 


io4  LETTERS  TO  A 

tually  expand ;  and  Mafon  has  endeavoured  to  im- 
mortalize it  in  a  manner,  which  does  equal  credit  to 
his  heart  and  under  flan  ding. 

The  hiftory  of  a  retired,,  literary  perfon  cannot,  gen- 
erally, prefent  much  variety  of  entertainment.  But  in 
the  character  of  Gray,  there  is  fomewhat  very  intereft* 
tng  ;  and  his  friend  has  difplayed  it  to  the  greateir.  ad- 
vantage. No  man,  perhaps,  by  fachjlight  Sketches,  as 
the  author  of  an  Elegy  in  a  country  church-yard  has 
left  behind  him,  ever  acquired  fo  extenfive  a  reputation. 
And  there  was  a  dignity,  a  foftnefs  and  a  delicacy  in 
his  whole  manner  of  thinking  and  acting,  which  com- 
penfate  for  the  want  of  more  remarkable  anecdotes, 
and  of  more  founding  connexions. 


LETTER  LIV. 


MY    DEAR    LUCY, 

•  •  'HT^HERE  is  not  (fays  a  fenfible  writer,)  a 
X  "  fon  or  daughter  of  Adam,  who  has  not 
"  fome  concern  in  the  knowledge  of  Geography." 
It  is  necefTary  to  your  underftanding  the  connexion, 
which  this  globe  has  with  the  other  planetary  fyftem, 
and  with  all  the  wonderful  works  of  God.  It  is  in- 
difpenfible  to  your  comprehending  hiftory,  or  having 
a  proper  idea  of  the  events  and  tranfaclions  it  relates, 
as  well  as  to  divefl  your  mind  of  little  narrow  preju- 
dices by  giving  you  a  view  of  the  cuftoms,  manners, 
•ceremonies  and  institutions  of  all  the  different  nations 
over  the  world. 

A   celebrated  writer*  has   called  geography  and 

*  Lord  CheiterfitJd. 


YOUNG  LADY.  105 

chronology,  the  two  eyes  of  hiftory  ;  the  fird  informs 
you  where  events  happened,  and  the  latter,  at  what 
particular  period;  if  it  was  not  for  thefe  helps  your 
reading  would  be  a  eonfufed  chaos,  without  order, 
light  or  perfpicuity. 

Geography  is,  indeed,  fo  much  attended  to  at  all 
fchools,  that  there  is  little  occafion  to  dwell  on  its  ne- 
ceffity  ;  if  you  have  learned  the  life  of  the  globes,  and 
the  divilion  of  it  by  names,  which  are  only  fancied  for 
the  fake  of  reducing  the  immenfity  of  it  to  the  narrow 
fcale  of  human  comprehenfion,thebeft  method,  Iknow, 
is  never  to  read  the  name  of  a  place  in  a  common  news 
paper,  or  any  other  hiftory,  without  immediately  re- 
curring to  authorities  for  the  fituation  and  divifion  of 
the  country  in  which  it  lies,  the  manners  of  the  inhab- 
itants, their  ceremonies,  civil  government,  and  religious 
inflitutions.  It  is  this  mode  of  ftudying  from  the  ur- 
gency of  the  occafion,  which  gives  energy  to  our  re- 
fearches  and  vigour  to  improvement. 

Guthrie  is  one  of  the  beft  authors  in  geography  ; 
and  for  chronology,  the  tables  of  Dr.  Prieftley  (a 
name,  which  I  would  only  mention,  where  fcience  and 
not  religion,  is  concerned,)  are  fo  compendious  and 
comprehenfire,  as  to  afford  you,  on  a  fingfe  glance,  con- 
fiderable  information.  There  is  no  fpecics  of  knowl- 
edge, that  is  fo  eafily  attained,  as  that  of  geography  ; 
nor  any  of  which  the  want  is  more  flagrant  and  awk- 
ward. 

I  lately  blumed  for  a  young  lady,  who  was  afked  in 
company,  the  latitude  and  fituation  of  a  particularplace, 
which  happened  to  be  mentioned  in  the  public  papers 
of  the  day.  She  was  drefTed  in  the  higheft  tafte.  The 
rofes  and  carnations  vied  in  her  countenance.  She 
piques  herfelf  on  her  fmartnefs  and  vivacity  ;  but  in 
this  inftance,  could  make  no  reply.  Her  embarrajf- 
ment  betrayed  her  ignorance,  and,  polltencjs  relieved  it 
by  a  change  of  converfation. 


xo6  LETTERS  TO  A 

How  much  higher  would  her  character  have  flood 
in  the  estimation  of  all  fenfible  and  difcerning  men,  if 
fhe  had  come  down  (lairs,  dreifed  in  an  elegant  plain- 
nefs,  and,  inftead  of  (landing  fo  long  before  her  glafs, 
had  devoted  fome  little  (hare  of  her  time  to  this  fpecies 
of  improvement.  Not  that  I  have  any  objection  to  a 
blufh  upon  a  woman's  cheek.  I  think,  the  crimfon 
tint  ornamental  ;  but  I  would  have  yours  to  be  the 
blufh  of  delicacy  and  referve,  not  of  ignorance yjhynefs or 
ill-breeding. 


LETTER  LV. 


MY    DEAR    LUCY, 

NATURAL  hiftory  is  another  ftudy,  which  I 
conceive  to  be  particularly  feminine.  It  has,  of 
Jate,  been  cultivated  with  uncommon  attention.  Bot- 
any has  been,  particularly,  faihionable.  It  has  found 
a  place  in  the  amufements  of  the  elegant,  as  well  as 
the  learned.  Nothing  is  more  calculated  to  amufe 
the  mind,  improve  the  health  and  fpirits,  and  to  infpire 
at  once  cheerfulness  and  devotion. 

The  furprifing  hiftory  of  plants  and  flowers,  the  im- 
menfe  variety,  the  mechanifm,  order,  government  and 
economy  of  animals,  fowls  with  their  plumage  and 
iilhes  with  their  fcales,  fofiils,  minerals,  petrefaclions, 
mountains,  vallies,  volcanoes,  all  nature  full  of  life,  full 
of  happinefs  and  full  of  miracles,  will  crowd  your 
mind  with  the  iublimeft  images,  and  teach  you  to 
.adore  the  great,  almighty  former  and  preferver  of  the 
world.  What  beauty  in  each  flower  !  What  traits  of 
divine  wifdom  and  goodnefs  in  an  infect  !  Surveyed 
with  a  truly  philosophical  eye,  the  whole  creation  is  a 


YOUNG  LADY. 


107 


temple  !  Not  a  fhrub,  but  is  eloquent,  not  an  animal- 
cule, but  is  a  powerful  monitor  of  virtue  ! 

I  never  fpend  an  afternoon  with  Mifs  Louifa  — 
without  being  both  inftructed  and  delighted.  I  never 
take  a  walk  with  her  in  the  garden,  but  fhe  unfolds  a 
thoufand,  natural  curiofities,  which  had  hitherto  efca- 
ped  my  unfeienced  or  inattentive  eyes.  I  never  ram- 
ble with  her  into  the  fields,  but  (he  gives  me  fuch  art 
hiitory  of  the  moit  common  plants  and  flowers,  as  at 
once  furprizes  my  curiofity,  and  gratifies  my  tafte.  In 
ber  clofet  flie  has  a  large  collection  of  infects,  which 
her  microfcope  clothes  with  moftexquifite  beauty,  and 
a  mufeum,  filled  with  (hells,  corals,  and  petrefa<5Uons> 
the  fparkling  of  which  is  exceeded  by  nothing,  but  the 
vivacity  of  her  eyes,  or  the  ftronger  or  more  perma- 
nent luftre  of  her  virtues. 

I  would  infinitely  rather  have  her  tafte,  than  her 
fortune.  And  I  never  quit  her  without  fecretly  envy- 
ing her  enjoyments.  She  is  ever  fprightly,becaufe  fhe 
has  never  a  moment  unemployed.  She  always  fmiles> 
becaufe  fhe  is  always  innocent.  Her  pleafures  are  of 
the  rational  and  rejined  kind.  They  never  leave  a 
thorn  in  the  heart,  or  pluck  one,  blufhing  rofe  from  her 
cheeks.  Howfolid  andhowcalm,  ifcompared  withthe 
midnight  revels  of  fafhion,  or  the  giddinefs  of  admiration  I 

Be  like  Louifa,  my  dear  girl,  and  you  will  always  be 
happy.  Study  nature,  till  it  leads  you  uptonature's  God. 
Pore  on  plants  and  flowers,.till  they  perfume  you  with  a 
rai/ devotion  ;  and  I  will  engage  you  to  become,  in  your 
turn,  one  of  the  mod  beautiful  flowers  in  the  creation* 


N 


LETTER  LVI. 

ATUR  AL    hiftory  is  divided  into  three  grand 
parts,  as  it   refpefts   the  animal,  the  mineral, 


io8  LETTERS  TO  A 

and  the  vegetable  kingdoms,  and  under  thefe  different 
articles,  aftumes  the  name  of  zoology,  or  an  hiftory  of 
animals  ;  lithology,  or  a  description  of  (tones,  foiTils, 
&c.  and  botany,  or  an  account  of  herbs,  plants,  flow- 
ers. Thefe  again  have,  each  their  refpective  fubdi- 
vifions. 

Linnaeus,  who  was  born  at  Upfal,isthe  great  father 
of  this  fcience,  and  from  the  Swedifli  fchools  have  ifTu- 
ed  the  works  of  the  mofl:  eminent  matters.  But  he  is 
too  voluminous  and  fcientific  for  a  female,  who  wants 
only  a  general  knowledge  of  nature,  and  not  to  pene- 
trate the  minutiae  of  her  plan. 

The  slm&ni  tales  Academic  a:  arc  a  number  of  ingeni- 
ous efTays  on  a  variety  of  fubjects,  (elected  from  the 
works  of  the  moil:  capital  difciples  of  the  Linnasan 
fchool.  Some  of  thefe  have  been  tranflatcd  by  Stil- 
lingfleet,  under  the  name  of  Tracts  on  Natural  Hifto- 
ry,  and  are  very  valuable  and  initructive  ;  others  by 
Brand,  in  two  volumes,  which  contain  a  number  of 
rious  and  entertaining  defcriptions. 

Pulteny's  View  of  the  Works  of  Linnasus  you  may 
read,  likewife,  with  great  pleafurc  and  improvement. 
Next  to  thefe  I  mould  recommend  to  a  mere  Englifli 
reader,  the  works  of  Ray  ;  him,  who  wrote  "  The 
wifdom  of  God  in  the  creation."  They  are  highly 
ufeful  and  valuable,  though  written  before  this  fludy 
had  ,  nivedto  its  prefent  ft  ate  of  perfection. 

Goldfmith's  Hiflory  of  the  Earth  and  animated 
Nature  is  but  a  mere  compilation.  Still  it  may  have 
its  i.fe,  as  affording  fome  collateral  lights  and  inftruclion. 

BufTon  is  an  author  of  firfl  rate  abilities.  His  flyle 
is  fplendid  ;  his  knowledge  is  extenfive,  and  his  elo- 
quence, in  a  high  degree,  brilliant  and  feducing.  But 
I  cannot  recommend  him  for  many  reafons.  He  is 
too  voluminous  ;  the  extenfivenefs  of  his  plan  leads  him 
into  a  great  variety  of  detail,  and  of  indelicate  defcrip- 
tions.     He   is    more  attached  to  fyflems  of  his  own, 


YOUNG  LADY.  to9 

than  the  difcovery  of  truth  ;  and  he  is  a  fort  offeeplie, 
who  refolves  every  thing  into  a  chain  of  fecondary  cau- 
fes,  and  facrilegioufly  excludes  the  Deity  from  his  cre- 
ation. This  temper  is  the  bane  of  modem  philofo- 
phers.  They  endeavour  to  account  for  every  thing 
upon  tttf/ttA77/principles,  arid  wherever  they  are  puzzled, 
ridicuioufly  disbelieve.  Inftead  of  making  their  knowl- 
edge, a  fcaffoldiiig  to  God,  they  build  on  it,  a  monu- 
ment to  their  own  vanity  and  folly,  which  will  not 
ftand,  "  whefi  winds  and  ltorms  arife."  Do  people  of 
fu?h  diitinguiihed  abilities  need  to  be  reminded,  that  a 
world  without  defign,  or  an  active  machine,  without  a 
jirjly  moving  principle,  involves  the  greateft  and  mod 
palpable  of  contradictions?  Nature,  in  the  hands  of  a  true 
philofopher,  reads  a  continual  leiTon  of  piety  ;  in  thofe 
of  a.  falfe  one,  it  is  th.;  parent  of  fcepticifm,  gloom  and 
defpair.  Sir  Ifaac  Newton  was  the  moll  pious  of  men  ; 
many  of  his  bumble  followers  have  been  as  impious  re- 
tailers  of  infidelity. 

You  will  derive  great  pleafure  and  improvement 
from  all  the  writings  of  Mr.  Pennant,  and  they  are  nu- 
merous. Always  lively  and  always  authentic,  they 
entertain  the  man  of  tafte,  the  fcholar,  and  the  anti- 
quarian, as  well  as  the  naturaliit.  Few  perfons  have 
published  fo  much,  in  any  one  department  of  fcience, 
with  fo  great  fuccefs. 

The  Flora  Londinenfis  of  Curtis  is  a  fplendid  work, 
that  does  credit  to  the  author.  It  is  embelliflied  with 
beautiful  engravings  of  all  the  common  plants  and 
flowers  of  this  country,  and  is  (till  in  continuation. 

Volcanoes  are  amongft  the  prodigies  of  nature,  which 
fill  the  mind  with  the  grandeft  and  fubliraeft  images. 
Hamilton's  account  of  them,  and  Rafpe  on  the  volca- 
nos  in  Germany,  will  aftonifh  your  imagination.  You 
may  add  to  the  lift  Swammerdam's  Hiftory  of  Infects* 
tranflated  by  Floyd,  and  revifed  by  Dr.  Hill. 
K 


no  LETTERS  TO  A 

But  I  will  defift,  for  if  I  was  to  give  yon  only  the 
names  of  writers  on  the  fubject,  they  would  fill  a  vol- 
ume. No  private  fortune  would  be  fufHcient  to  purchafe 
them,  and  the  perufal  would  require  more  time,  than 
would  confift  with  your  other,  various  engagements. 


LETTER  LVII. 

WHEN  you  have  viewed  the  wonders  of  nature 
in  miniature,  aftronomy  will  fhew  them  in  the 
fublime.  Tclefcopes  will  prefent  you  with  a  mod  ftu- 
pendous  view  of  the  heavens  ;  funs  piled  on  funs  ; 
worlds  on  worlds  ;  and  the  great  creator,  prefiding 
over  all,  in  the  majefty  of  perfection.  You  will  be  loft 
and  abforbed  in  the  magnificent  contemplation.  You 
•will  feel  yourfelf  as  nothing  before  God,  and  confefs 
him  to  be  all  in  all. 

A  real  aftronomer  mud  be  pious  or  infenfible. 
However  fome  have  thought  revelation  partial,  the 
language  of  thefe  orbs  is  certainly  univerfa/,  "  Their 
u  found  is  gone  out  into  all  lands,  and  their  words 
"  unto  the  ends  of  the  world."  The  fentiment  they 
proclaim,  is  majefty  to  God  ;  to  man,  humility,  felf- 
abafement,  devotion. 

Nicholfon's  Introduction  to  Natural  Philofophy,  in 
two  volumes,  octavo,  is  an  excellent  book  upon  this 
fubject,  and  Derham's  Aftro-theology  muft  elevate  the 
mind,  and  improve  the  heart  of  every  reader.  Greg- 
ory's Aftronomy,  and  Huygen's  Celeftial  Worlds  dis- 
covered, are  very  ufeful  and  entertaining,  and  may  to- 
gether form  a  fufHcient  library  for  this  department  of 
fcience.  Perhaps  I  mould  have  added  Ray's  Wifdom 
of  God,  in  the  Creation.  They,  who  declaim  againft 
knowledge,  in  a  woman,  have  not  furely  eonfidered 
how  much  this,  ar  d  many,  other  branches  of  it,  are 
connected  with  all  the  fublime  and  pious  affections. 


YOUNG  LADY.  in 

LETTER  LVIII. 

POETRY,  I  do  not  willi  you  to  cultivate,  further 
than  to  polTefs  a  reli/h  for  its  beauties.  Verfes, 
if  not  excellent,  are  execrable  indeed.  The  mufes 
live  upon  a  mount,  and  there  is  no  enjoying  any  of  their 
favors,  unlefs  you  can  climb  to  the  heights  of  ParnafTus. 

Befides  a  paflion  for  poetry  is  dangerous  to  a  woman. 
It  heightens  htr  natural  fenfibility  to  an  extravagant 
degree,  and  frequently  infpires  fuch  a  romantic  turn  of 
mind,  as  is  utterly  inconfiltent  with  all  the  folid  duties 
and  proprieties  of  life. 

To  increafe  the  number  of  imaginary,  when  life  a- 
bounds  with  fuch  real  forrows,  by  nurling  a  fickly  ex- 
travagant fenfibility,  is,  in  a  rational  creature,  the  very 
height  of  imprudence.  The  ancients  endeavored  to 
cherifh  fortitude,  and  refolution,  by  giving  ftrength  to 
the  body  and  vigour  to  the  mind.  From  fome  of  their 
ftates,  poetry,  amongft  other  things,  was  abfolutely  *•*- 
eluded,  as  tending  to  enervate  the  minds  of  a  people, 
and  unfit  them  for  the  ftruggles  and  activities  of  life  ; 
and  it  is  certain  that  the  owners  of  an  exquifite  fenfi- 
bility, for  a  few  moments  of  pleafure  have  days  of  vexa- 
tion. In  this  human  wildernefs,  thorns  are  perennials. 
Rofcs  are  but  the  perijloable  ornaments  of  fummer. 

The  late  Mr.  Shenftone,  amonglt  many  others,  is 
an  unhappy  initanee  of  the  misfortune,  I  have  men- 
tioned. His  works,  though  not  of the  jirjl  magnitude, 
are  exceedingly  agreeable  ;  but  his  poetical  enthufiafm 
was  a  fource  of  perpetual  irritation  and  misfortune. 
Having  cultivated  his  tafte,  more  than  his  prudence, 
his  feelings,  more  than  his  fortitude,  and  his  imagina- 
tion, more  than  his  judgment,  his  life  was  one,  unva- 
ried train  of  inquietudes.  His  mind  was  ruffled  with 
imaginary  injuries  ;  his  peace  disturbed  with  fanciful 
affronts,  and  his  difordered  finances  left  him  every 
fthing,  but  comfort,  dignity,  and  independence. 


ii2  LETTERS  TO  A 

With  a  fortune,  that  only  juftiiicd  a  neat  and  homely 
dwelling,  his  genius  was  not  content  with  lefs  than  the 
fu]  .rb  appendages  of  a  palace.  In  forming  the  Leafe- 
o-ves,  he  facrifked  to  enthufiafm,  what  he  owed  to 
contentment.  He  panted  for  a  paradife,  and  a  para- 
dife  he  had  ;  but  it  foon  became  a  wildernefs  of  thorns. 
Merciiefs  creditors  had  no  candour  for  the  poet,  and 
made  no  allowance  for  the  exquifitenefs  of  his  tafte. 

They  faw  no  charms  in  fhrubs,  in  bloflbms,  or  in 
profpecls,  and  they  awoke  him  with  an  iron  grafp,  from 
his  delicious  intranccment.  Whilir.  a  ncble  neighbour, 
emulating  and  outvying,  on  a  larger  fcale,  the  beauties 
of  his  elyfium,  or  exhibiting  it  to  a  ftranger,  from  an 
unfavorable  point  of  view,  inflicted  on  his  fickly  feel- 
ings, an  heartfelt  affliction,  which  he  had  neither  the 
pofEbility  of  avoiding,  nor  the  philofephy  to  fupport. 


LETTER  LIX. 

THOUGH  I  do  not  wifh  you  to  become  a  poet, 
it  is,  however,  neccflary,  that  you  fhould  not  be 
wholly  unacquainted  with  the  writings  of  many,  inim- 
itable bards.  They  will  certainly  refine  your  tafte,  and 
fpread  a  very  elegant  repaft  for  your  private  amufement. 

Shakefpeare  is,  perhaps,  the  firft  genius  of  the  world ; 
and  fome  of  his  dramatic  works,  whilir.  they  aftonifh, 
will  give  you  an  ufeful  fund  of  hiftorical  information. 

The  immortal  poem  of  Paradife  Loft  fhould  not 
only  be  in  the  hands,  but  graven  on  the  heart,  of  every 
woman,  becaufe  Milton,  above  all  other  authors,  de- 
fcribes  the  diftinguifhing  graces  of  the  fex,  and  in  his 
Eve,  has  exhihited  an  exquifite  pattern  of  female  per- 
fection. On  this  fubject,  his  feelings  were  always  awak- 
ened in  an  extraordinary  manner;  his  imagination  glow- 
ed, and  he  has  given  it  the  fineft  touches  of  his  pencil. 


YOUNG  LADY. 


"3 


Milton,  like  all  great  men,  was  fully  fenfible  of  the 
bleffings  we  derive  from  the  fociety  of  women,  and 
how  checrlefs  the  face  of  nature  would  have  been  with- 
out them.  He,  therefore,  labors  to  make  the  mother 
of  his  Paradife  every  thing,  that  could  charm,  and 
every  thing  that  could  alleviate  the  infelicities  of  life. 
Let  the  libertine  read  his  defcription  of  marriage,  and 
tell  me  what  he  thinks  of  the  prevailing  rage  for  impu- 
rity and  feduction. 

Homer  is  univerfally  celebrated  ;  and,  though  you 
cannot  read  his  poem  in  the  original  language,  Pope 
has  given  an  admirable  tranflation.  The  fame  may  be 
faid  of  Dryden's  Virgil,  if  you  wifh  to  tafte  the  ex- 
quifite  richnefs  of  thefe  ancient  authors. 

Mafon's  poems  have  great  merit,  3nd  have  acquired 
him  a  confiderable  celebrity.  His  Caractacus,  his 
Elfrida,  and  his  Englim  Garden  have  all  been  admi- 
red. Nothing,  however,  from  his  pen,  has  pleafed  me 
more,  than  the  epitaph  upon  his  lady.  His  talents 
feem  to  be  particularly  formed  for  the  penfive  and  pa- 
thetic. But  poetry,  after  all,  is  but  an  embelljjhment,  and, 
in*  the  character  of  a  divine,  a  very  fecondary  diftinct- 
ion.  How  much  more  important  and  ufeful  to  maru 
kind,  are  the  labors  of  that  pallor,  who  by  one  judi- 
cious, impaflioned  and  well  directed  difcourfe,  appals 
the  (inner,  encourages  the  faint,  revives  the  drooping, 
guides  the  perplexed,  or  condefcends  to  cheer  the  bed 
of  ficknefs  with  divine  confolations  ! 

This  remark,  however,  is  not  particularly  intended 
to  depreciate  the  ingenious  author  of  Caractacus.  He 
is  faid  to  excel  likewife,  as  a  preacher. 


i 


LETTER  LX. 

N  poetry,    the  ladies  have,    of  late,   aflerted  their 
claim  to  genius,  and  the  trampled  honors  of  their 
K  z 


ii4  LETTERS  TO  A 


underftanding.  Several  of  them  appear,  in  the  walks 
of  Parnaffus,  with  confiderable  luftre. 

Mifs  Seward,  in  my  idea,  is  a  ftar  of  the  firft  mag- 
nitude in  the  hemifphere  of  imagination.  She  has 
given  us  chiefly  little,  fugitive  pieces  ;  a  monody  on 
tke  death  of  Captain  Cook,  and  major  Andre  ;  a  po- 
em to  the  memory  of  lady  Miller,  and  a  few  ftanzas  to 
Mr.  Wright,  on  taking  her  father's  picture.  The  laft 
always  gave  me  the  higheft  pleafure.  It  required  in- 
deed no  great  effort,  but  is  a  mod:  pleafing  fpecimen  of 
filial  affection,  and  of  a  rich,  fervid,  glowing  imagina- 
tion. Her  Louifa,  though  her  largefr,  is  not,  in  my 
idea,  her  happ'icfl  performance.  A  novel  is  too  much 
dignified  by  the  charms  of  poetry.  It  is  a  courtefan, 
dreffed  like  a  queen. 

Whenever  Mifs  Hannah  More  takes  up  her  pen, 
Jhe  never  lofes  fight  of  piety  and  virtue.  Her  Bleed- 
ing rock,  Search  after  Happinefs,  Sir  Eldred  of  the 
Bower,  Sacred  Dramas,  Female  Fables,  &c.  will 
pleafe  and  inffruct  you.  The  little  tract,  lately  pub- 
limed,  intitled,  "  Thoughts  on  the  Manners  of  the 
Great,"  which  has  had  lb  very  extenfive  a  circulation, 
is  faid  to  have  come  from  her  ingenious  pen.  The  de- 
fign  is  excellent,  and  the  execution  difplays  a  confide- 
rable knowledge  of  human  life  and  manners.  I  wifh 
it  may  leave  fome  lading  impremons.  But  alas  !  the 
diffipated  have  few  intervals  for  reflection. 

Mifs  Williams  bids  fair  for  a  poetic  laurel,  that  mail 
long  be  green.  Her  Peru,  is  a  work  of  confiderable 
merit. 

The  little  fonnets  of  Mifs  Charlotte  Smith  are  foft, 
penfivc,  fentimcntal  and  pathetic,  as  a  woman's  produc- 
tions mould  be.  The  mules,  if  I  miftake  not,  will,  in 
time,  raife  her  to  a  confiderable  eminence.  She  has, 
as  yet,  ftepped  forth  only  in  little  things  with  a  diffi- 
dence that  is  charaderiiUe  of  real  genius    in  it$jir/l  at- 


YOUNG  LADY.  u5 

tempts.  Her  next,  public  entre  may  be  more  in  ftyle* 
and  more  confequential. 

The  ComtefTe  le  Genlis  I  have  before  mentioned, 
as  a  woman  of  a  fine  talte,  and  a  cultivated  under- 
ftanding.  Her  Theatre  fur  I'  Education,  as  founded  on 
a  dramatic  plan,  may  be  recommended  araongft:  other 
poetical  productions.  There  is  not  a  fweater  rofe  in 
the  garden  of  nature,  than  hers  of  Salemcy. 

Lord  Littleton  was  not,  by  any  means,  a  capital 
poet.  There  is,  however,  fuch  a  delicacy,  foftnefs, 
piety,  and  tender  pathos  in  his  (trains,  as  do  the  highefr, 
credit  to  his  own  heart,  and  mult  improve  that  of  every 
attentive  reader.  His  monody  upon  his  Lucy  has 
immortalized  his  fenfibility,  his  affection,  and  his  virtue. 

Akenfide's  work  on  the  Pleafures  of  Imagination^ 
needs  no  other  recommendation,  that  what  it  has  re- 
ceived from  a  generous  and  a  difcerning  public.  It  is 
highly  interefting  ;  it  required  a  very  confiderable  ef- 
fort, and  his  genius  has  rendered  it  beautifully  pic- 
turefque. 

Cowper's  poems  are  calculated  to  do  confiderable 
fervice.  He  has  made  the  mufes  hand-maids  to  reli- 
gion. He  has  chofen  verfes,  only  as  a  vehicle  for 
conveying  inftruclions  of  fo  important  a  nature,  as  would 
not,  by  any  means,  have  dishonoured  the  pulpit.  His 
ftyle  is  fimple,  bold,  manly,  fpirited-  and  energetic  ; 
his  judgment,  ftrong  and  penetrating;  his  metaphors, 
forcible  and  happily  conceived ;  his  obfervations  on 
life  and  manners,  accurate,  and  his  fatire,  juft  and 
poignant. 

He  does  not  feern  fo  much  to  have  ftudied  the  pro- 
duction of  a  poem,  with  unity  for  its  defign,  and  har- 
mony in  all  its  parts,  as  toferve  the  caufeef  piety  and 
virtue  by  general,  defultory  and  impaflioned  reflexions.. 
His  work  on  the  whole,  is  a  ftrong  fpecimen  of  gen- 
ius and  talents  ;  rigid   criticifm,  perhaps,  would  fay. 


n6  LETTERS  TO  A 

that  his  piety  wants   a  little    mildnefs,  and   Teems  to 
breathe  the  fpirit  of  a  party. 

But  the  molt  finifhed  poet  of  the  age  is  Hayley. 
His  EfTay  on  Hiftory  and  on  Epic  Poetry,  his  Ode 
to  Howard,  and  his  Triumphs  of  Temper  have  re- 
ceived very  great  and  very  general  applauic. 


LETTER  LXI. 

YOUR  queftion  is  a  very  proper  one,  and  I  will 
give  you  the  belt  fatisfaclion  in  my  power. 

Pronunciation  or  that  part  of  grammar,  called  Or- 
thography, as  to  any  uncommon  or  difficult  words,  is 
governed  by  the  quantity,  Which  thofc  words  have  in 
the  original  language,  from  which  they  are  derived. 
As  you  cannot  be  fuppofed  to  undcrltand  the  dead 
languages,  you  will  of  courle,  frequently,  be  at  a  lofs 
how  to  pronounce  many  words  with  propriety.  The 
only  method  is  recourfe  to  a  dictionary,  and  the  befr. 
in  my  opinion,  are  thofe  of  Sheridan  and  Johnfon. 
Pronunciation,  however,  is  a  very  fluctuating  thing; 
and  though  there  certainly  is  a  ftandard  of  propriety, 
over  which  mere  fafnion  ought  to  have  no  power,  yet  I 
mould  always  recommend  a  conformity  to  the  man- 
ners of  the  politefr.  people  you  may  happen  to  con- 
t'd fe  with,  rather  than  a  pedantic  affectation  of  gram- 
matical ftrictnefs.  The  latter  would  be  thought  a  con- 
ceiled  o dentation  of  knowledge,  which,  in  a  young  la- 
dy, would  not  be  forgiven. 

The  allufions  to  Jupiter,  Pallas,  Venus,  the  Graces, 
the  Mufes,  Helicon,  ParnafTus,  which  have  fo  much 
puzzled  you  in  the  poets  you  have  lately  read,  will  be 
fully  explained  in  Tookc's  Pantheon,  or  Hiftory  of 
the  Heathen  Gods.  The  general  h&  is,  that  before 
the  knowledge  of  the   true  God   dawned  on  their 


YOUNG  LADY.  117 

minds,  thefe  poor,  ignorant  heathens,  never  dreamed 
of  one  omnipotent,  all-fuflkient,  all  pervading  fpirit, 
which  the  fcriptures  have  revealed,  and  defcribed,  as 
poiTefTed  of  all  poflible  perfections.  They,  therefore, 
formed  to  themfelves  a  multiplicity  of  gods,  and  attri- 
buted to  one  of  them  in  particular,  with  a  fpecific 
name,  every  great  quality  or  fuperior  excellence,  that 
appeared  beyond  the  ability  of  mortals.  Thefe  deities 
they  arranged  into  different  claffes,  according  to  their 
fuppofed  degrees  of  pre-eminence  ;  and  fancied  fome 
of  them  to  inhabit  the  heavens,  and  others,  the  woods, 
groves,  rivers,  fprings,  mountains,  &c. 

You  will  be  amufed  with  their  fanciful  opinions  ; 
and  if  you  think  aright,  you  will  learn  to  blefs  the  Al- 
mighty, on  your  knees,  for  having  cafl  your  lot  in  an 
age  and  country,  where  the  gofpel  has  difperfed  thefe 
mifts  and  errors,  dignified  our  views  and  nature  be- 
yond all  expreffion,  and  given  us  the  cleareft  knowledge 
of  our  duty.  You  will  feel  the  force  and  propriety  of 
that  claufe  in  our  liturgy.  "  We  blefs  thee  for  our 
"  creation,  prefervation,  and  all  the  bleflings  of  this 
"  life  ;  but  above  all,  for  thine  ineftimable  love  in 
"  the  redemption  of  the  world  by  our  Lord  Jefus 
"  Chrift,  for  the  means,  of  grace,  and  for  the  hope  of 
"  glory." 


LETTER  LXII. 

MY    DEAR     LUCY, 

A  LITTLE  tafte  for  the  fine  arts  of  painting, 
fculpture,  architecture,  will  be  of  fingular  ufe.  It 
will  render  every  excisrfion  you  make,  and  every  cu- 
riofity  you  behold,  exceedingly  delightful  and  enable 
you  to  become  entertaining  to  all,  with  whom  you 
converfe. 


ii*  LETTERS  TO  A 

A  perfon  thus  accomplifhed,  furveys  an  elegant 
pile  of  building,  the  dcfigns  of  a  Palladio,  the  landfc.ipe 
of  a  Claude  Lorrain,  the  portraits  of  a  Titian,  or  the 
transfiguration  of  a  Raphael,  with  uncommon  rapture, 
and  can  entertain  herfelf,  for  hours,  with  a  ruin  or  a 
cattle,  in  which  the  unfkilful  can  fee  nothing  but  de- 
formity, or  the  corrofions  of  time. 

"Writers  on  Sculpture  and  Architecture  are  not  nu- 
merous, and  I  am  wading  beyond  my  depth,  when  I 
attempt  to  recommend  them.  Winkleman's  reflex- 
ions on  the  fculpture  of  the  Greeks,  Evelyn's  Parallel 
of  ancient  and  modern  Architecture,  and  Morris's 
Lectures  may  give  youfome  ideas  on  ths  fubject. 

On  the  art  of painting,  more  has  been  written  ;  yet 
without  a  natural  genius  for  it,  and  fome  previous  in- 
ductions from  a  mafter,  I  do  not  know  whether  you 
will  be  able  to  make  any  great  proficiency. 

Webb's  Inquiry  into  the  Beauties  of  Painting  is  a 
very  learned,  elegant,  ingenious  work,  and  interefting, 
in  an  high  degree,  even  to  thofe,  who  are,  by  no  means, 
to  be  ranked  amongft  the  cognefcenti.  The  quotations 
from  Homer,  Virpl*  Shakefpeare,  Milton,  Boileau, 
Moliere,  Racine,  Ta/To,  Ariofco  and  Mctailafio  are 
not  only  well  contrived  to  illujlvaie  the  fubject,  but  to 
delight  every  perfon  of  reading  and  tafle  ;  whiift  the 
picturefque  imagery  and  fp-lendid  language  would 
(lamp  a  value  on  any  production. 

I  remember  to  have  been  charmed,  Come  years  ago, 
with  reading  a  fmall  work,  intitled  an  "  Eflay  on  Prints 
"  and  Picturefque  Beauty."  I  do  wot  recollect, 
whether  it  bore  the  name  of  any  author  ;  but  it  itruck 
me  as  a  very  interefting  and  valuable  performance. 
Genius  and  knowledge  were  wonderfully  united,  and 
embellilhed  the  whole. 

Fergufou's  Art  of  Drawing  in  Perfpective,  I  con- 
ceive to  be  ufeful,  as  an  elementary  work.  An  Eflay 
on  Landfcape  may  be    considered  in  the  fame  light  j 


YOUNG  LADY.  119 

and  you  will  be  inftiuflcd  and  delighted,  at  the  fame 
time,  with  Hayley's  two  epiftles  to  llomney,  and  Fref- 
noy's  Art  of  Painting,  translated  by  Mafon.  This 
laft  mentioned  author  is  faid  to  excel  in  the  three  fif-  : 
ter  arts  of  painting,  poetry  and  mufic.  In  the  two 
firfr,  he  has  given  the  world  fpecimens  of  his  fkill ; 
with  the  latter  he  is  faid  frequently  to  entertain  the 
circle  of  his  private  friends. 

Btit  the  heft  place  for  gratifying  your  curiofity,  and 
I  mould  think,  for  improving  your  tafte  in  paintings, 
is  the  annual  exhibition  of  them,  at  Somerfct-houfe. 
The  metropolis,  amidft  all  its  variety  of  invention,  does 
not  furnifh  in  my  idea,  a  more  elegant,  or  a  more  im- 
proving amufement.  We  fee,  with  pride,  fome  artifts 
of  our  own  country,  vying  with  the  moft  celebrated 
matters  of  antiquity.  Under  the  hands  of  a  Reynolds, 
a  Wright,  a  Weft,  and  many  others,  the  Englifh  can- 
vafs  glows  with  inimitable  beauty.  A  Raphael,  a  Ti- 
tian, a  Dorreggio,  a  Rubens,  a  Pouflin,  or  a  Salvator 
Rofa,  feem,  in  fome  degree,  tranfplanted  to  the  Britifh 
ljfle. 

A  ftranger,  indeed  is,  at  firft  fight,  fo  much  dazzled, 
with  the  fplendor  and  elegance  of  the  company  about 
him,  that,  in  the  charms  of  living  beauty,  he  is  tempt- 
ed to  overlook  the  efforts  of  the  pencil.  In  no  other 
place,  that  I  ever  faw  or  recollect,  do  art  and  nature 
fo  powerfully  combine  to  bewitch  the  fenfes,  and  cap- 
tivate the  imagination. 

If  my  time  and  place  of  refidence  were  at  my  own 
■  command,  I  mould  frequently  in  the  feafon,  devote  to 
this  pleafure,  one  of  thofe  languid,  afternoon  hours, 
when  the  spirits  are  exhaufted  with  the  employments 
of  the  morning,  and  want  renewed  vigour,  elafticity 
and  animation. 

I  am  much  interested,  believe  me,  in  the  reliih  I 
would  give  you  for  this  fpecies  of  improvement.  I 
look  forward,  with  a  degree  of  pleafure,  to  the  timc3 


120  LETTERS  TO  A 

when  I  may  be  the  companion  of  your  little  tours,  and 
delighted  with  your  obfervations  ; — when  we  may  hang 
in  curiofity,  over  foflils  and  petrefactions  ;  when  we 
fhall  pore  over  paintings,  buildings,  ruins,  with  all  the 
luxury  of  artifts,  and  in  fuch  rational,  innocent  pleaf- 
ures  endeavor  to  forget  the  forrows,  that  will  crowd 
on  this  variegated  life. 


LETTER  LXIII. 

IT  is  fo  very  agreeable  to  perufe  voyages  and  travels 
into  foreign  countries  by  way  of  coming  eafily  at 
a  knowledge  of  their  hiftory,  cuftoms,  ceremonies  and 
degrees  of  civilization,  that  I  do  not  wonder  at  the 
number  and  multiplicity  of  thefe  productions.  Au- 
thors wifh  to  be  ready  and  this  is  the  fort  of  work, 
which,  if  judicioufly  executed,  fuits  every  tafte.  It 
has  a  tendency  to  enlarge  the  mind,  and  diveft  it  of 
illiberal  prejudices.  Books  of  this  kind  are  now  be- 
come fo  numerous,  that  the  difficulty  only  is  how  to 
make  the  felection. 

I  will  begin  with  Moore,  for  he  has  pleafed  univer- 
fally.  Your  collection  will  be  graced  by  his  View  of 
Society  and  Manners  in  France,  Switzerland,  and 
Germany,  in  two  volumes,  and  his  View  of  Society  in 
Italy,  in  two  more. 

Wraxall  is  anothor  writer  in  this  way,  who  has  fu- 
perior  merit.  He  has  publifhcd  a  tour  through  the 
northern  parts  of  Europe,  and  thrcugh  France. 

Pennant  has  been  Angularly  happy  in  all  his  at- 
tempts. He  intereits  the  antiquarian,  the  fcholar  and 
the  man  of  geniir.  in  his  various  productions.  His 
works  are  lumerous.  A  Tour  through  Scotland, 
Voyages  to  the  Hebrides,  a  Tour  in  North  Wales  ;  a 


YOUNG  IlADY.  121 

Journey  to  Snowdon  ;  and  a  Journey  from  Chefter  to 
London,  &c. 

Switzerland  is  one  of  thofe,  romantic  countries,  that 
delights  us  in  idea.  Coxe  has  given  (ketches  of  it,  in 
a  very  pleafing  and  picturefque  manner. 

Sherlock's  Englilh  Traveller  is  a  very  original  and 
entertaining  book.  The  author  is  evidently  a  man  of 
fancy  and  genius,  but  rather  iulfome  in  his  panegyrics 
on  particular  characters,. and  eccentric  both  in  his  fen- 
timents  and  manner.  He  will,  fometimes  make  you 
fmile  with  egotifms  and  the  appearance  of  conceit ; 
but  he  will  likewife  enlighten  your  underftanding. 

Cordiner's  Antiquities  and  Scenery  of  the  North  of 
Scotland  is  an  entertaining  work.  The  plates  annex- 
ed to  it,  pleafe  the  eye,  and  invigorate  the  imagination. 

A  tour  to  the  lakes  is  become  very  fafhionable,  and 
is  faid  abundantly  to  repay  the  travellers  curiofity. 
Weft's  defcription  of  them  may  be  ufeful,  though  the 
language  appears  too  florid  and  poetical. 

The  Tour  to  Ermenonville  I  have  never  feen ';  but 
it  is  mentioned  as  pofTemng  confiderable  merit.  Gil- 
pin's Defcription  of  the  River  Wye  abounds  with 
beautiful  fcenery,  and  is  a  mod  lively  and  entertaining 
production. 

But  the  catalogue  would  be  endlefs.  A  thoufand 
other  books  of  this  kind,  are  at  hand,  whenever  you 
are  difpofed  to  travel*  with  them  in  your  clofet. 

If  you  have  a  little  knowledge  of  Heraldry,  it  will 
be  an  embeUifoment  ;  an  agreeable  exercife  of  your  tafte 
and  ingenuity,  and  may,  occafionally,  fugged  a  chan- 
nel, through  which  you  may  ferve  a  valuable  friend. 
The  only  books  I  recollect,  are  the  Elements  of  it,  by 
Porney  ;  Gwillim,  a  large  folio,  and  Edmondion's 
Complete  Body  of  it,  in  two  volumes. 

But  after  all  this  recommendation    of  different  ftud- 
ies,  do  not  miftake  me.     I  do  not  want  to  make  you 
L 


1*1  LETTERS  TO  A 

a  fine  writer,  an  hiftorian,  a  naturalift,  a  geographer, 
an  aftronomcr,  a  poet,  a  painter,  a  connoifleur,  or  a 
yirtHofo  of  any  kind.  But  I  would  have  you  to  poffefs 
fuch  a  general  knowledge,  as  will  ufefully  and  inno- 
cently fill  up  youi  leifure  hours,  raife  your  tafte  above 
fantaiHc  levities,  render  you  an  agreeable  friend  and 
acquaintance,  qualify  you  for  the  folid  duties  of  your 
ftation,  whatever  they  may  be,  and  elevate,  above  all, 
your  foul  to  him,  who  is  the  fource  of  all  knowledge, 
greatnefs  and  perfection. 


LETTER  LXIV. 

THE  accomplifhments  of  a  woman  may  be  com* 
prized  under  fome,  or  all  of  the  following  arti- 
cles ;  needle-work,  embroidery,  &c.  drawing,  mufic, 
dancing,  drefs,  politenefs,  &c. 

To  wield  the  needle  with  advantage,  fo  as  to  unite 
the  ufeful  and  beautiful,  is  her  particular  province,  and 
a  fort  of  ingenuity,  which  (hews  her  in  the  mod  amia- 
ble and  attracting  point  of  view. — Solomon  defcribes 
his  excellent  daughter,  as  employed  in  the  labours  of 
the  diftafF  or  the  needle.  Homer  paints  his  lovely 
matrons  as  engaged  in  fuch  domeftic  avocations.  And- 
romache is  thus  relieving  her  folitude,  when  (he  is  fur- 
prifed  into  tranfport  by  the  unexpected  return  of  Hec- 
tor from  the  wan. 

The  heart  glows  with  pleafure,  whefi  we  read  the 
accounts  of  the  good  Roman  matrons  in  the  purer  and 
unvitiated  ages  of  their  republic.  The  greateft  men, 
princes,  warriors,  fenators  and  philofopherswere  cloth- 
ed in  the  labours  of  their  wives  and  daughters.  In- 
duftry  in  this  happy  period,  was  efteemed  a  virtue,  and 
it  was  not  beneath  a  woman  of  the  firft  quality  or  a*- 


YOUNG  LADY.  123 


demanding  to  be  an  excellent  economift,  who  "  looked 
w  well  to  tire  ways  of  her  houfehold." 

Employment  is  the  grand  preservative  of  health  and 
innocenee.  When  we  have  nothing  to  do,  we  imme- 
diately become  a  burden  to  ourfelves  ;  the  mind  and 
body  languifh  for  want  of  exercife,  and  we  fall  into  a 
thoufand  dangerous  temptations. 


LETTER  LXV. 

IF  you  have  any  natural  taffe  for  drawing,  I  mould 
wifh  you  to  indulge  it.  I  think  it  an  accomplifh- 
ment,  very  well  adapted  both  to  the  tafte  and  delicacy 
of  your  fex.  It  will  agreeably  exercife  your  ingenuity 
and  invention.  It  will  teach  you  to  difcover  a  fuperior 
finifh  in  all  the  varied  landfcapes  and  fcenery  of  nature  ; 
to  furvey  the  works  of  our  diftinguimed  matters,  with 
an  higher  relifh  and  a  more  poignant  curiofity  ;  and  it 
will  heighten  all  the  innocent  pleafures  of  your  retire- 
ment. When  nature  howls  with  winds,  or  is  covered 
with  fnow,  you  will  be  able  in  a  moment,  to  call  a.fan~ 
(y  fprlng  upon  the  canvas,  of  which  the  bloiTomswill 
be  ever  fragrant,  and  the  trees  ever  green.  You  may 
thus  have  birds  always  on  the  fpray,  and  larks,  appa- 
rently thrilling  out  praife  to  their  bountiful  Creator. 


LETTER  LXVI. 

MUSIC,  by  which  I  mean  playing  on  an  instru- 
ment, or  occafionally  finging,  is  a  very  defirable 
accjuifition  in  any  woman,  who  has  time  and  money 
enough  to  devote  to  the  purpofe,  for  it  requires  no  in- 
confiderable  portion  oHoth.     It  will  enable  you  to  en- 


124-  LETTERS  TO  A 


tertain  your  frlerds  ;  to  confer  plcafure  upon  others, 
mu(t  incrcafe  your  oivn  happinefs,  and  h(  will  infpire 
tranquility,  and  harmonize  your  mind  and  fpirits,  in 
many  of  thofe  ruffled  or  lonely  hours,  which,  in  almofl 
every  fituation,  will  be  your  lot. 

The  paffions  of  mankind,  however,  have  very  much 
debafed  and  profaned  this  art,  which,  like  others  was 
originally  facred,  and  intended  to  chant  the  praifes  of 
the  Almighty.  Many  fongs  are  couched  in  fuch  /«- 
delicate  language,  and  convey  fuch  a  train-  of  lufcious 
ideas,  as  are  only  calculated  to  foil  the  purity  of  a 
youthful  mind.  I  fhould  therefore  recommend,  (if  I 
may  fo  exprefs  myfelf,)  rather  the  facred,  than  the 
profane,  of  this  ftudy.  Indeed  church  mufic  is,  in  it- 
felf,  more  delightful  than  any  other.  What  can  be 
fuperior  to  fome  paffages  of  Judas  Maccabseus,  or  the 
MefTiah  ?  There  is  not,  perhaps,  an  higher  amongft  the 
melancholy  pleafures  than  a  funeral  dirge. 

Dancing,  in  a  degree,  is  profefledly  an  cffential  part 
of  a  good  education,  as  correcting  any  atvkivardnefs  of 
gefrure,  giving  an  eafy  and  graceful  motion  to  the  body, 
and  if  practiied  early,  perhaps  even  in  dircding  its 
growth.  '  Modern  manners,  however,  have  carried  the 
fondnefs  for  this  accomplishment  to  an  immoderate  ex- 
treme. Apaflion  for  making  the  bed  figure  in  a  min- 
uet, is  vailly  beneath  the  dignity  of  a  woman's  under- 
itanding.  And  1  am  not  lure,  whether  excelling  in 
this  particular  does  not  infpire  too  great  a  fondnefs  for 
diffipating  -pleafures,  and  proportionably  abate  the  ar- 
dour for  more  retired  virtues.  A  woman,  who  can 
iparkle  and  engage  the  admiration  of  every  beholder, 
at  a  birth  night  or  a  ball,  is  not  always  content  with 
the  graver  office  of  managing,  a  family,  or  the  f till 
and  fober  innocence  of  domeftic  icenes.  Bclides 
dancing  is  not,  at  certain  moments,  without  its  tempt- 
ations. An  elegant,  illuminated  room,  brilliant 
company,  the  enchanting  powers  of  mufic,  admiring 


YOUNG  LADY.  125 

eyes,  obfequious  beaus,  attitude,  &c.  are  apt  to  tranf- 
port  the  mind  a  little  beyond  the  rational  medium  of 
gentle  agitation. 

I  would  not,  however,  be  a  cynical  moraliit,  that 
would  abridge  you  of  any  harmlefs  amufement.  I 
have  only  my  apprehenfions  for  your  innocence,  for 
indeed  it  is  a  plant  of  a  very  delicate  complexion. 
And  you  will  then  have  attained  the  perfection  of  your 
character,  when  you  can  mix  a  paffion  for  thefe  elegant 
accomplifhments,  with  a  turn  for  folid  and  domeftic 
virtue  ;  when  you  can,  one  night  be  diftinguifhed  at  a 
ball,  and  the  next  want  no  other  entertainment,  than 
what  the  fliade,  your  family,  a  well  chofen  book  or  an 
agreeable  walk  are  able  to  afford.  I  mould  wifh  you 
to  be  innocent,  and  if  poffible,  accompli  Hied  at  the  fame 
time  ;  but  at  any  rate,  I  would  have  you  innocent^  be- 
caufe  otherwife  you  cannot  be  happy. 


LETTER  LXVII. 

MY    DEAR    LUCY, 

WILL  you  bear  with  my  impertinence,  if  I  at- 
tempt to  give  you  my  directions  on  a  fubject 
where  your  fex  are  allowed  to  pofTefs  infinitely  more 
tafte  and  judgment  than  our  own — that  of  drefs.  I 
offer,  however,  my  plain  and  undifguifed  fentiments, 
only  for  your  advantage  ;  and  I  am  fure  you  will  re- 
ceive them  with  that  candour  and  indulgence,  to  which 
my  friendfhip  for  you  has  an  indifputable  claim. 

Ncatncfs,  yoa   cannot  cultivate  with  too    much   at- 
tention.     I  would  prefs  it  on  every  female,  as  ftrongly, 
if  poflible,  as  Lord  Chederfield  did  the  graces  on   his 
foe.     The  want  of  it  is  unpardonable  in  a  man,  but  in 
L  2 


1*6  LETTERS  TO  A 

a  woman,  it  isjhocling.  It  difgufts  all  her  friends  and 
intimates  ;  has  eftranged  the  affections  of  many  an  huf- 
band,  and  made  him  feek  that  fatisfaction  abroad, 
which  he  found  not  at  home. 

Some  ladies,  who  were  remarkably  attentive  to  their 
perfons  before  marriage,  neglect  them  afterwards,  in  an 
egregious  manner.  They  cannot  pay  a  woife  compli- 
ment to  their  own  delicacy,  or  to  their  hufbands.  If 
they  conceived  fome  efforts  neceflary  to  gain  the  prize, 
more,  I  am  fure,  are  required  to  preferve  it. 

It  is  the  opinion  of  (I  believe,)  Rochefoucault, 
that  nice  obferver  of  life  and  manners,  that  the  affec- 
tion of  woman  increafes  after  marriage,  whilfl  that  of 
man  is  apt  to  decline.  Whatever  be  the  caufe,  a  pru- 
dent woman  will,  at  leaft,  ufe  every  method  in  her 
power,  to  guard  againft  fo  mortifying  a  charge.  Neat- 
nefs,  however,  is  eafily  practifed,  and  will  always  have 
confiderable  weight. 

In  the  eyes  offervants  and  domeftics,  indeed,  a  wo- 
man lofes  her  confequence  and  authority  by  a  neglect 
of  her  perfon.  She  will  not  be  obeyed  with  cheerfuU 
nefs,  and  me  will  become  an  object  of  ridicule,  in  all 
their  private  parties  and  converfations.  If  inferiors 
mu(t  be  fubject,  they  will  pay  an  unconjl  rained  homage 
only  to  a  perfon,  who  attiacts  by  propriety,  the  eftima- 
tion  of  the  world. 

Neatnefs  is  the  natural  garb  of  a  well  ordered  mind, 
and  has  a  near  alliance  with  purity  of  heart.  Law  has 
laid  of  his  Miranda,  that  Hie  was  always  clean  without, 
becaufe  Hie  was  always  pure  within.  And  Richard- 
fon,  whofe  tafle  was  as  exquifite,  as  his  imagination 
glowing,  has  painted  his  Clariila,  as  always  dreffed, 
before  fhe  came  down  ftairs  for  any  company,  that 
might  break  in  upon  her  during  the  whole  day. 

Finery  is  feldom  graceful.  The  eafy  undrefs  of  a 
morning  often  pleafes  more,  than  the  moit  elaborate 
and  coftly  ornaments.     I  need   not  fay  of  how  much 


YOUNG  LADY.  127 

time  and  money  they  rob  us,  which  are  facrcd  to  vir- 
tue and  to  the  poor,  nor  how  foon  this  very  embellijlocd 
body  will  be  dull  and  aflies.  The  perfection  of  the 
art  is  conveyed  in  two  words  ;  an  elegant  /implicit y. 
Ladies  are  certainly  injudicious  in  employing  fo  many 
male  freifeurs  about  their  perfons.  The  cuitom  is  in- 
delicate ;  it  is  contrary  to  cleanlinefs,  and  all  their  ma- 
noeuvres cannot  equal  the  beauty  of  natural,  eafy  ring- 
lets, untortured  and  unadorned. 

The  nearer  you  approach  to  the  mafculine  in  your  ap- 
parel, the  further  you  will  recede  from  the  appropriate 
graces  and  foftnefs  of  your  fex.  Addifon,  in  his  day, 
laflied,  with  a  delicate  vein  of  irony,  this  abfurd  trans- 
formation. The  prefent  age  wants  fuch  an  inimitable 
cenfor.  The  riding  habits,  particularly,  that  have 
been  fo  fafhionable,  and  even  made  their  appearance  at 
all  public  places,  conceal  every  thing  that  is  attractive 
in  a.  woman's  perfon,  her  figure,  her  manner,  and  her 
graces.  They  wholly  unfex  her,  and  give  her  the  un- 
pleafing  air  of  an  Amazon,  or  a  virago.  Who  likes 
the  idea  ?  or  if  you  would  be  more  {truck  with  the  «5- 
furdity,  tell  me  what  you  would  think  of  petite  maitres 
in  muffs  ?  You  immediately  defpife  the  1  idiculoufnefs 
of  the  one  ;  we  daily  feel  the  unnaturalnefs  of  the  oth- 
er. We  forget  that  you  are  women  \v.fiich  agarbyznd 
and  we  forget  to  love. 

Every  public  paper  one  opens,  is  a  violation  of  your 
delicacy  and  an  infult  to  your  underftanding.  Pow- 
ders, perfumes,  pomatums  cofmetics,  effence  of  rofes, 
Olimpian  dew,  artificial  eyes,  teeth,  hair  advertifed  for 
your  advantage,  wouldbe  an  heavy  ftigma,  if  fome  kind 
and  well  difpofed  perfons  amongft  our  own  f ex,  were 
not  willing  to  fhare  with  you  a  part  of  the  burden. 
Blufli,  my  dear  girl,  at  fuch  unfeemly  practices.  Be 
content  to  be,  what  God  and  nature  intended  you  :  ap- 
pear in  your  true  colours  ;  abhor  any  thing,  like  deceit 
in  your  appearance,  as  well  as  your  character. — What 


128  LETTERS  TO  A 

muit  all  fenfible  men  think  of  a  woman,  who  has  a 
room,  filled  with  a  thoufand  preparations  and  mixtures 
to  deceive  him  ?  What  money,  what  time  muft  be  given 
to  this  odious,  infufTsrable  rarity  !  Under  fuch  unnatu- 
ral management,  how  different  muft  be  the  female  of 
the  evening  and  the  morning  !  What  muft  we  think  of 
marriage,  drefling  rooms  and  toilets  !  What  an  opening 
for  expoftulation,  coldnefTes,  averfions !  Ifan"ele- 
"  gant  fimplicity"  be  the  perftclkn  of  drefs,  this  is 
furtly,  as  far  as  pofiible,  removed  from  perfection.  It 
is  notjimplic'rty  ;   it  is  not  elegant. 

It  would  be  cruel  to  add  any  thing  to  the  pcmiihment 
of  the  men,  who  can  have  recourfe  to  fuch  effeminate  ar- 
tifices. They  have  already  the  fcorn  and  ridicule  of 
one  fex,  and  the  ftern  contempt  and  indignation  of 
the  other.  They  are  poor,  amphibious  animals,  that 
the  bed  naturaiifts  know  not,  under  what  clafs  to  ar- 
range. 

Painting  is  indecent,  ofTenfive,  criminal.  It  haftens 
the  approach  of  wrinkles  ;  it  deftroys  confutations, 
and  defaces  the  ima*e  of  your  maker. 

Would  you  think  of  giving  the  lad  touch  to  the  pie- 
ces of  a  PoufTin,  or  a  Salvator  Rofa  ?  Believe  for  a 
moment,  that  the  Almighty  is,  at  lead,  as  great  in  bis 
way,  as  either  of  thefc  artifts. 

Let  the  martyrs  of  fafhion,  luxury  and  diffipation 
who  turn  night  into  day,  have  recourfe  to  this  filthy 
and  abominable  practice.  Let  them  feek  a  refurce 
from  the  rebukes  of  their  conscience  in  gaity  and  noifc. 

But  let  the  fairnefs  of  your  complexion  fee  only  that 
G? nature,  and  let  ycur  rouge  by  the  crimfon  blum  of 
health,  arifing  from  temperance,  regularity,  exercife 
and  air. 

That  beauty,  truly  blent,  vhofe  red  and  white, 
Niturc'e  tiun  i'weet,  and  canning  hand  laid  en. 


YOUNG  LADY.  129 

Such  fimplicity  will  recommend  you  to  God  ; — and# 
if  you  retain  any  fears  of  offending  him,  how  dare  you 
deface  his  image,  in  your  countenance,  by  artificial  dec- 
orations.  Such  innocence  will  charm,  when  paint  is 
diflblved.  It  will  call  up  a  bloom,  and  cafl  a  fragrance 
even  on  the  lateft  winter  of  your  age. 


END    OF    VOLUME    FIRST. 


LETTERS 


YOUNG    LADY, 

ON    A    VARIETY    OF 

USEFUL  and  INTERESTING  SUBJECTS  j 

CA1CULATED    TO 

IMPROVE  the  HEART,  to  FORM  the  MANNERS, 
and  ENLIGHTEN  the  UNDERSTANDING. 

u  That  our  Daughters  may  be  as  polijhcd  Corners  of  the  Temple* 


By  the  Rev.  JOHN  BENNETT, 

Author  of  Strictures  on  Fe?nale  Education 
IN  TWO  VOLUMES. 


VOL.  II. 


HARTFORD: 

PRINTED  BY 

HUDoON  &.  GOODWIN. 


1798, 


LETTERS,  &c. 


LETTER  I. 
To  Miss  LUCY 

MY    DEAR     LUCY, 

A  WOMAN  may  be  fairly  allowed  a  little  more 
attention  to  ornament,  than  would  be  pardona- 
ble in  the  other  fex.  Nature,  through  all  her  works 
has  lavifhed  more  external  brilliancy,  colouring  and 
plumage  on  the  female.  And  though  drefs,  in  itfelf,  is 
no  ejfential  quality,  we  are  induced  to  judge  more  of 
your  real  character  and  difpofition  from  it,  than  you 
are  apt  to  imagine.  We  fancy  it,  in  its  different  mod- 
ifications, a  mark  of  good  fenfe,  delicacy  and  difcretion, 
or  of  the  very  oppofite  defects.  Every  fenfible  woman, 
therefore,  will  ftudy  it  fo  far,  as  not  to  fubjecl  herfelf 
to  unfavorable  conftruclions.  She  will  endeavor  to 
convince  every  beholder,  that  me  knows  the  proper 
medium  betwixt  a  ridiculous profusion,  and  a  total  want, 
of  ornammt  ;  that  (lie  can  tiflue  plainnefs  with  ele- 
gance ;  that  fhe  does  not  wifli  to  /educe  by  her  appear- 
ance, but  only  to  pleafe  ;  that  fhe  has  cultivated  her 
mind,  much  more  than  her  perfon,  and  placed  the 
higheft  value,  not  on  the  outward,  perifhable  cajkef, 
but  the  diamond  within. 

M 


4  LETTERS  TO  A 

I  rejoice  that  the  good  fenfe  of  my  countrywomen 
has  corrected  fome  late  glaring  indecencies  of  drefs. 
Young  ladies  mould  not  be  too  liberal  in  the  difplay  of 
their  charms.  Too  mucli  expofure  does  not  enhance 
their  value.  And  it  approaches,  too  nearly,  to  the 
manner  oithofe  women,  whom  they  would  fuiely  think 
it  no  honour  to  refemble.  Bofoms  mould  throb  unfeen. 
The  bouffant  was  an  ornament  of  too  tranfparent  a 
kind.  Wherever  delicacy  throws  its  model!  drapery, 
imagination  always  lends  inexpreflible  charms.  As 
fine  a  woman,  as  the  Venus  of  Medici,  would  ceafe  to 
be  admired,  if  curiofity  ceafed  to  be  fufpended. 

There  is  a  great  neatnefs  in  the  drefs  of  quakers,  and 
of  fome  other  fectaries,  who  have  copied  their  exam- 
ple. It  has,  however,  more  primnefs,  than  eafe.  In 
this  refpect,  you  have  too  much  good  fenfe  to  affedt 
Jtngularity.  Religion  confifts  in  fomething  mort  fub- 
Jlantial,  than  any  particular  modes  of  appearance.  And 
there  is,  if  I  miftake  not,  fome  conceit  and  pride,  under 
this  prodigious,  over-atled  plainnefs.  Many,  whom 
thefe  narrow  minded  perfons  would  fentence,  perhaps, 
to  torments,  for  being  elegantly  drefled,  have  hearts 
that  overflow  with  univerfal  benevolence,  and  infinitely 
more  piety  and  goodnefs,  than  themfelves. 

You  know  what  young  lady  I  mean  by  Emelia.  I 
do  not  know  a  perfon,  that  drcfles  better.  She  is  fin- 
gularly  happy  in  her  choice  of  colours.  Like  her  vir- 
tues they  areof  the  Cofta.ndJJsaded  kind, not  the  brilliant 
or  the  gaudy.  I  never  faw  her  fine  ;  but  fire  never  is 
fantajlic.  She  is  feldom  fplendid  ;  but  neatnefs  is  all 
her  own.  If  fhe  puts  on  only  a  ribbon,  it  is  feJected 
with  all  the  exquifite  modefty  of  her  mind,  and  difpo- 
fed  of  by  the  hands  of  tafte.  The  graces  always  ap- 
pear to  have  been  in  waiting  for  the  few  moments,  that 
fhe  ever  fuffers  drefs  to  take  up  her  attention. 

I  very  much  admire  the  fafhes,  which,  of  late,  have 
been  fo  fajhionable  aruongft  young  ladies.     They  give 


YOUNG  LADY.  $ 

me  the  idea  of  a  childifh  fimplicity,  innocence  and  cafe. 
Thefe,  and  flowing  ringlets  are  on  the  fyftem  of  nature. 
And  nature  will  always  pleafe. 

I  ani  forry,  however,  to  obferve  that  thefe  girlifi  or- 
naments Ihould  likewife  have  encircled  the  lefs  deli- 
cate waifts  of  fome  married  women.  There  cannot 
be  a  more  abfurd  or  difgudixg  affectation.  Jf  I  was 
not  writing  to  ladies,  I  would  be  humorous.  On  fuch 
a  fubjecl,  I  could  befevere.  But  fome  improper  ideas 
might  be  fuggefted,  and  I  will  only  fay,  that  the  fober, 
aged  autumn,  is  never  clad  in  the  cheerful  livery  of 
fpring. 

On  the  whole,  my  dear  girl,  as  a  reafonable  crea- 
ture, and  as  a  chriflian,  never  fuffer  yourfelf  to  be  led 
away  by  an  extravagant  fondnefs  for  drefs.  What  is 
finery,  compared  with  understanding  ?  What  is  fplen- 
dor  contracted  with  reafon  ?  What  is  your  body,  but 
a  temporary  receptacle  for  an  immortal  mind  ?  It  is  but 
the  cajket  ;  the  jewel  is  the  foul.  And  how  very  low 
and  poor  in  itfelf  is  the  ambition  of  apparel  ?  After 
all  our  efforts,  we  can  never  make  it  equal  the  beauty 
of  lillies,  or  to  vie  with  the  exquifite  tints  of  the  rofe. 
Whatever  you  can  fpare,  from  fuch  expence,  to  give 
to  the  poor,  will  be  a.fo/uI  treafure,  when  beauty  is  but 
dull  and  allies,  and  when  gaiety  is  forgotten. 


LETTER  If. 

POLITENESS,  if  fuppofed,  like  Lord  Chefler- 
field'sjto  be  made  up  of  diJfimulationy  or  to  confift 
in  a  number  of  ceremonious  attitudes  or  fulfome  com- 
pliments, without  any  meaning,  is  ridiculoufly  frivo- 
lous ;  but  on  the  other  hand,  if  itfprings  from  princi- 
ple, from  a  real  defiie  of  pleafing,  and  is  directed  to  its 
proper  ends,  it  is,  at  leait,  a  molt  amiable  quality,  if  k 


6  LETTERS  TO  A 

does  not  rank  in  the  number  of  the  virtues.  In  the 
intercourfc  of  life  and  the  prefent  ftate  of  fociety,  this 
good  breeding  is  necefTary  to  our  own  peace,  and  to 
that  of  others.  It  prevents  a  thoufand  inquietudes,  ir- 
ritations, offences  ;  it  diffufes  an  innocent  pleafure, 
and  it  diffufes  it  every  moment.  We  daily  converfe 
•with  many  perfons,  confiderably  indifferent  to  us,  and 
from  whom  we  expect  neither  fervices  nor  obligations, 
who,  yet,  have  it  in  their  power,  by  a  rough,  ungra- 
cious manner,  by  unguarded  fayings,  or  fpeaking  (as  it 
is  called)  their  minds,  elTentially  to  hurt  our  feelings, 
four  our  fpirits,  give  us  a  bad  head  ach,  or  to  break  our 
reft ;  there  are  as  many,  on  the  other  hand,  who  look 
up  to  us  for  no  ejfential  favours,  whom  yet,  in  our  turn, 
we  may,  not  a  little,  irritate  and  diftrefs,  by  a  want  of 
civility,  by  any  hauteur  or  fupercilioufnefs  in  our  looks 
or  carriage,  or  a  withholding  of  thofe  kind  attentions, 
which,  on  every  principle  of  reafon,  humanity  and  civ- 
ilization are  reciprocally  due  from  every  human  crea- 
ture to  another. 

This  reafoning,  dill  more  forcibly,  applies  to  mem- 
bers of  the  fame  family  ;  to  wives  and  hufbands  ;  chil- 
dren and  parents  ;  brothers  and  fitters.  If  this  kind 
of  good  breeding  be  ever  violated  amongfl:  them,  the 
confeqeence  is  coldnefs,  quarrels,  and  gradual  aveifion. 

So  great,  indeed,  is  the  influence  of  true  politenefs 
over  the  mind,  that  even  favours  conferred  in  an  //;/- 
pleafing  manner,  without  it,  become  an  infupportable 
infultj  whilft  a  refufal,  Jbfieiu  by  it,  into  an  obliga- 
tion, and  is,  forne  times,  made  the  balls  of  a  lading  grat- 
,  affection  or  efteecn. 

This  grace  may  be  defined  the  art  of  being  eafy  our- 
felves,  in  company,  and  of  making  all  others  eafy  a- 
bout  us.  It  is  the  proper  medium  betwixt  the  total 
want  of,  and  an  officious,  over-acted,  civility.  It  con- 
fid  s  in  a  general,  indifcri initiate  attention  ;  in  doing  lit- 
ivil  offices,  and   faying  obliging  tilings  to  all  the 


YOUNG  LADY.  7 

parties  we  converfe  with  ;  in  accommodating  ourfelves, 
as  well  as  the  converfation  to  their  particular  taftes, 
liabits  and  inclinations  ;  in  keeping  every  ofTenfive 
lubjett  and  idea  out  of  view  ;  in  never  glancing  at  our 
own  affairs,  and  always  paying  the  minuted:  regard  to 
thofe  of  others  ;  in  annihilating,  as  it  ware,  ourfelves, 
and  as  (tudioufly  exalting  all  that  are  about  us. 

If  I  have  not  much  miftaken,  the  beft  rules  for  it 
will  be  found  in  that  religion,  which  requires  us  "  to 
"  love  one  another  ;  to  be  gentle  and  courteous  ;  to 
"  avoid  offences  ;  to  become  innocently  all  things  to 
"  all  men  ;  in  honour  to  prefer  one  another,  and  to 
"  efteem  others  better  than  ourfelves." 

The  exteriors  of  good  breeding,  fuch  as  prefenting 
yourfe If  gracefully,  entering  or  quitting  a  room  with 
eafe,  a  proper  gait,  air,  gefture,  &c.  I  am  not,  at  pres- 
ent, conlidering.  Tbefe  are  only  acquired  by  early 
education,  habitG  of  good  company,  or  by  ^general  in- 
tercourfe  with  the  world  ;  an<a  though  they  may  be 
wanting,  I  will  venture  to  fay,  that  the  perfon  will  al- 
ways pleafe,  and  always  be  refpected,  whopofleiTes  only 
this  principle  within. 

True  politenefs  gives  a  luflre  to  all  our  good  quali- 
ties. It  is  a  fovereign  enamel  to  all  the  virtues,  and 
proportionally  extends  our  power  of  doing  good.-— 
Learning,  riches,  ftation,  talents,  genius  without  it,  are 
overbearing  and  infafferable,  or  at  lead:  may  be  very 
awkward  and  unpleafing.  They  refemble  a  rich,  un- 
Jinijhed  picture,  thrown  into  a  dark  and  an  unpleafani 
room.  Politenefs  givas  them  the  laft  touch,  raife-s 
them  into  a  proper  light,  and  clothes  them  with  the 
jnoil  beautiful  drapery. 

Religion  itfelf  has  often  fuffered  for  want  of  this 
.grace.  Good  people,  have  not,  always,  been  gentle, 
courteous  or  well  bred,  and  an  odium  has  been  fixed 
M   2 


/ 


8  LETTERS  TO  A 

on  their  profeflion,  which  has  deterred  many  from  be- 
coming converts, 

Many  bad  men,  on  the  other  hand,  by  a  pkafing 
manner,  have  fo  fuccefsfully  varnifhed  over  their  vices, 
as  to  have  acquired  a  confiderable  reputation.  Their 
crimes  have  been  forgotten  in  their  politenefs.  Can  I 
mention  a  ftronger  argument  to  recommend  this  ac- 
complishment ?  We  mould  not,  furely,  for  want  of  a 
little  care,  "  faffer  our  good  to  be  evil  fpoken  of," 


LETTER  III. 

IT  is  a  great  unhappinefs  to  many  ladies  of fortune, 
that  they  have  not  fuilicient  employment  to  fill  up 
their  time  ;  and  in  order  to  prevent  that,  langour 
and  ennui,  which  are  the  mod  unpleafant  feelings  of 
human  life,  either  fall  into  a  low  ftate  of  fpirits,  or 
have  recourfe  to  play,  public  pleafures,  or  a.  perpetual 
round  ofvifits,  for  their  amufement. 

The  religious  exercifes,  however,  and  the  ftudies,  I 
have  recommended,  will  not  only  occupy  your  hours 
in  a  rational  and  ufeful  manner,  but  fome  of  them,  from 
their  very  nature,  will  become  an  inexhauflible  fource 
of  the  pureft  pleafure. — Still  uniformity  in  any  one  pur- 
fuit,  however  pleafing,  will  exhauft  the  fpirits,  and 
they  will  frequently  want  ^relief.  The  eye  could  not 
conjlantly  behold,  without  injury,  the  moil  beautiful 
landfcape.  It  may,  perhaps,  be  the  privilege  of  angels 
and  fuperior  fpirits,  to  ferve  their  Maker  without  wea- 
rinefs  or  diftracTlon  ;  but  a  mind,  united  to  a  body  of 
clay,  mult  have  very  frequent  intervals  of  languor,  and 
want  as  many  of  intermijfion. 

Innocent  relaxation  is  as  much  a  part  of  true  wi£ 
dom,  as  employment  itfelf.  Indeed  it  is  necefTary  to 
fit  us  for  our  duties.     The  earth  itfelf  would  not  be- 


YOUNG  LADY.  9 

able  to  vegetate  and  flioot  forth  into  all  the  bloom  and 
verdure  of  fpring,  if  it  did  not  regain  its  exhausted  pow- 
ers during  the  fombrous  leifure  of  the  winter. 

The  rule  is,  we  mould  amufe  ourfelves,  in  order  to 
live,  in  the  true  fenfe  of  the  word,  and  not  live  to  be 
amufed.  Relaxation,  conducted  on  this  principle,  will 
never  occupy  too  great  a  (hare  of  our  time  or  attention. 
It  will  be  confident  with  the  univerfal  principle  of"  do- 
"  ing  all  things  to  the  glory  of  God." 

A  woman's  amufements  mould,  as  much  as  poflible, 
be  domejlk  ;  and  her  own  walls  will  prefent  many  ex- 
cellent opportunities  of  fuch  a  nature.  The  exercife 
of  parental  or  filial  affection  is  a  fource  of  heart-felt  and 
refined  pleafure.  Intercourfcs  of  tendernefs  betwixt 
branches  of  the  fame  family,  and  the  little  engaging  at- 
tentions they  create,  ftimulate  the  finer  movements  of 
the  body  and  give  play  to  all  the  refrefliing  emotions. 
A  mother,  in  particular,  muff  have  thefe  natural  delights 
in  perfection.  Her  heart  muft  vibrate,  with  an  exqui- 
fite  fondnefs,  to  the  playful  graces  of  a  little  offspring, 
and  their  continually  unfolding  charms. 

Exercife  in  the  open  air,  is  another  great  amufe- 
ment.  Frefh  breezes,  vaiiety  of  objects,  gentle  mo- 
tion, and  all  the  charming  pictures  of  nature  cheer  the 
mind,  and  invigorate  the  fpirits.  The  fedentary  life 
of  women  is  the  parent  of  many  famionable  com- 
plaints ;  weak  nerves,  low  fpirits,  vapours,  hyiterics, 
languors.  No  conftitution  can  long  withftand  the  bad 
effects  of  luxury  and  inaction.  Such  people  may  exjjl 
but  they  cannot  live. 

In  a  rich  entertainment,  Mr.  Addifon  faw  fevers, 
dropfies,  gouts  and  rheumatrfms  in  embryo.  Who, 
that  Iooksat  women,  emaciated  with  midnight  pleafc 
urcs,  and  pale  for  want  of  exercife  and  air,  muft  not 
behold  the  feeds  of  in  finite  diforders,  and  likewife  trem- 
ble for  the  rifing  generation  ? 


io  LETTERS  TO  A 

The  ancients  paid  a  very  nice  attention  to  the  con- 
futation of  females.  To  give  them,  in  particular fitua- 
t'toasy  every  degree  of  firmnefs,  was  not  thought  be- 
neath the  attention  of  thofe  great  men,  who  by  their 
eloquence  and  valour,  aftonifhed  the  world. 

Attention  to  a  garden  is  truly  feminine  amufement. 
If  you  mix  it  with  a  tafte  for  botany  and  a  knowledge 
cf  plants  and  flowers,  you  will  never  be  in  want  of  an 
excellent  reftorative.  Our  firft  parents  are  defcribed 
•by  Milton,  as  tending  the  fluubs  and  flowers  of  their 
paradife,  with  unceafing  afliduity,  and  as  rifing  with 
the  dawn  to  work  : 

Amongft  fweet  dews  and  flow'rs,  where  any  row 
Of  fruit   trees  over  woody,  reach'd  too  far 
Their  pamper'd  boughs,  and  needed  hands  to  check 
Fruitlcfs  embraces,  or  they  lead  the  vine 
To  wed  her  elm. 

There  is  an  inexpreiTible  tranquility  in  a  garden, 
which  fooths  the  fpirits  into  that  kind  of  cheerful  pen- 
fivenefs,  which  is,  perhaps,  the  right  temperature  of  the 
moral  conflitution.  Our  Saviour  often  rcforted  to  a 
garden.  Innocence  and  piety  found  it  thehappieft 
place  for  meditation  and  repofe.  It  is  impoflibie,  in- 
deed, to  have  a  richer  blefling,  than  a  tafte  for  the  gen- 
cral  beauties  of  nature.  It  is  an  inexhauftible  fund  of 
pleafure  within  every  perfor/s  reach  ;  it  purifies  and 
refines  the  mind,  and  raifes  it  above  the  artificial  gaie- 
ties, which  are  purchafed  at  fo  great  an  expence  of 
•time,  money,  and  often,  of  conftitution, 

O  blefs'd  of  heav'n,  whom  not  the  languid  fongs 

Of  luxury,  the  firen,  not  tht  bribes 

Of  fordid  wealth,  nor  all  tht-  gaudy  fports 

Of  pageant  honours  can  feduce  to  leave 

Thefe  ever  blooming  fwects,  which  from  the  ftore 

Of  nature,  fair  imagination  culls 

To  charm  thccnlivew'd  foul 


YOUNG  LADY.  n 

Thus  the  men 
Whom  nature's  works  can  charm,  with  God  kimfclf 
Hold  converfe,  grow  familiar  day  by  day 
With  his  conceptions,  a&  iipon/^/V  plan, 
And  form  to  bit,  therelifh  vl  their  fouls. 

Butfriend/bip,  after  all,  is  the  great  medicine  of  life. 
We  were  born  for  fociety,  and  the  mind  never  fo  ef- 
fectually unburdens  itfelf,  as  in  the  converfation  of  a 
well  chofen  friend.  Happy  the  woman  who  finds 
fuch  a  treaiurc  !  "  It  is  more  precious,  than  thoufands 
of  gold  or  filver." 

Great  care,  indeed,  judgment,  tafle  and  vigilanco 
tre  abfolutely  necelTary  to  direct  you  in  the  choice. 
A  Jlricl  friendship  is  adopting,  as  it  were,  the  fenti- 
ments,  the  manners,  the  morals,  and,  almofl:  the  happi* 
fiefs  or  mifery  of  others.  Religion  fhould  guide  you 
on  this  occasion.  None  but  a  good  perfon  is  capable 
of  true  attachment,  and,  I  truft,  with  you  no  other  would 
alTimilate.  If  you  can  meet  with  fnch  a  character, 
who,  at  the  fame  time,  has  a  liberal  and  cultivated 
mind,  you  are  rich  indeed  ! 

Sincere  friendfhips  are,  mod  generally,  formed  at  an 
early  age.  The  heart,  in  this  tender  feafon,  is  foftand 
uniufpicious.  It  is  amazing  how  the  little  tumults  of 
life  afterwards  joftie  us  againjl  and  put  us  out  of  hu- 
mor and  conceit  with,  one  another.  Senfibility  be- 
comes petrified  by  age  and  obfervation.  Ambition, 
avarice,  and  the  little  paltry  competitions,  freeze  up 
the  generous  current  of  the  foul. 


LETTER  IV. 

lUBLIC  pleafures  are  ciTeemed  and  called  the  a- 
muferacnts  of  women.     But  I  think  them  far 


12  LETTERS  TO  A 

from  anfwering  the  name.  In  fact  they  agitate,  rather 
than  relieve,  and  are  more  frequently  iources  of  vexa- 
tion, than  repofe.  Superior  rivals  eclipfe  ;  fancied 
friends  are  inattentive,  and  the  gaiety  of  the  fcene  has 
no  connection  with  quiet  of  the  heart.  The  time, 
money,  and  preparation  they  require,  are  a  ferious  con- 
fiderimon,  asd  their  frequency  renders  them  a  bufinefs  ; 
inftead  of preferring  health,  they  undermine  and  de- 
ftroy  it.  Late  hours,  hot  rooms,  and  an  agitated  mind 
are  unfavorable  to  reft  ;  and  the  God  of  deep  will  not 
long  be  defrauded  of  his  rights,  without  retaliating  the 
orrence. 

What  we  call  pleafurc,  is  but  a  fplendid  and  a  vol- 
untary fervice.  If  it  had  not  the  name  of  amufement, 
we  (hould J/jrinl:  from  it,  as  an  intolerable  burden. 

Who  are  fo  great  flaves  as  the  votaries  of  fafhion  ? 
What  requires  more  fyjlematical  diligence,  than  the 
watching  of  every,  varying  mode  of  drefs,  and  "catch- 
"  ing  chefe  living  manners,  as  they  rife  ? 

Of  all  women,  they  who  call  themftlves  fafhionable, 
are  the  mo  ft  unhappy  ;  ever  idly  bufy  ;  ever  vainly 
agitated  ;  their  peace  depends  on  a  whifper,  on  a  look, 
cr  a  thoufand,  little  emulations,  too  ridiculous  to  be 
mentioned  !  They  dread  a  private  moment  more  than 
'an  a  flail}  n,  and  with  very  great  reafen  ;  they  cannot 
glance  into  themfelvts  with  eomfort ;  they  cannot  look 
into  eternity  with  hope  !  Reafon  luggeita,  that  they 
v/ere  born  for  ibmething  higher,  and  there  are  mo- 
ments, when  conference  will  be  heard. 

How  unheeded  are  the  cries  and  prattle  of  their  in- 
fants !  How  unhappy  niuft  be  the  man,  who  has  re- 
ceived from  fuch  women,  vows  which  they  will  not 
perform,  of  fidelity  and  of  attachment ! 

After  all,  it  is  only  in  the  practice  of  virtue  ;  it  is 
only  in  dome/lie  life,  that  lies  all  thefolia*9  becaufe  aji 
the  untumultuous,  joy. 


YOUNG  LADY.  13 

LETTER  V. 

IT  would  be  uncomfortable  to yourfelf  to  live  wholly 
alone  in  the  midf't  of  iocicty  ;  and  to  others,  it  would 
carry  the  appearance  of  great  pride,  or  conceit,  or 
Angularity.  As  we  were  born  to  be  citizens  of  the 
world,  wc  feel  ourfelves  uncomfortable,  when  we  are 
not  in  the  exchange  of  little  civilities  with  people  a- 
bout  us  ;  and  they  in  their  turn,  contracl  unpleafant 
piques  and  prejudices  againft  us.  Mixing  with  com- 
pany has  certainly  the  good  erTecl:  of  promoting  benev- 
olence, and  preventing  many  little  fhynciTes  and  mifc 
ConftrucYions.  Nay,  even  the  lighted  and  moft  infig- 
nilicant  converfation  has  a  tendency  to  relieve  fntenle 
thoughtfulnefs,  and  keep  the  mind  from  preying  too 
much  upon  itfelf. 

Tea  parties  are  the  general  mode  of  fociety,  amongft 
ladies.  And  you  mult  give  into  them  in  fome  degree, 
if  you  will  cultivate  any  acquaintance  with  people  of  for- 
tune. Some  of  your  lex  fpend  their  time  in  a  continual 
rotation  of  thefe  vifits,  and  have  To  many  preconcerted 
engagements  on  their  hands,  as  require  a  very  orderly 
arrangement  upon  paper.  But  this  is  a  moft  ufelefs  and 
infipid  life  ;  and,  where  there  is  -a  family,  cannot  fail  to 
interfere  with  many  duties  of  fat  higher  importance. 
The  time  that  is  taken  up  in  drefs  alone,  and  the  money 
it  requires,  are  a  prodigious  facrifice. 

Nor  in  the  light  of  amufement  alone,  is  this  continual 
vifiting  to  be  much  recommended.  It  affords  neither 
air  nor  cxercife,  and,  frequently,  not  much  agreeable 
or  ufeful  converfation.  The  generality  of  men  are  fo 
much  undomejlicaied,  fo  loft  to  every  thing,  that  is  in- 
nocent in  tafte,  or  natural  in  pleafure,  that  they  are  but 
feldom  to  be  met  with  in  thefe  parties.  A  group  of 
beautiful  females  are  not,  unfrequently  feen  together, 
without  one  fingle  perfon  of  the  other  fex,  to  fhare  the 
enjoyment;  and  it  is,   I  conceive,  in  mixed  companies 


i4  LETTERS  TO  A 

alone,  that  converfation  has  its  proper  interejl,  flavour  or 
improvement. 

Your  vifits,  therefore,  I  truft,  will  be,  comparatively, 
rare,  and  nicely  felected  ;  and  I  hope  you  will  always 
prcferve  yourfelf  from  the  reproach,  that  is  generally 
thrown  on  thefe  meetings,  as  being  vehicles  of  gofliping 
and  fcandal.  It  has  been  objected  to  your  fex,  that 
they  are  prone  to  Jatire.  At  a  certain  age,  and  under 
fome  cl'i [appointments,  perhaps  this  is  true.  They  have 
been  collecting,  for  many  years,  a  quantity  of  fpleen, 
and  imprudently  difcharge  it  on  every  perion,  that  falls 
in  their  way.  This  renders  a  woman  unlovely  indeed. 
Nay  the  attempt  at  <wit,  or  faying  /mart  things,  is,  by 
no  means  to  be  encouraged.  True  humour  is  the  lot 
of  few,  and  can  never  be  an  advantage  to  a  woman. 
From  her  we  expect  the  qualities,  that  pleafe,footh  and 
enliven.  Unfortunately  they,  who  think  thcmfelves  in 
pofTefTion  of  this  weapon,  are  brandifhing  it  indifcrimu 
nately  on  all  occafions,  fo  as  fometimes  to  wound  their 
very  nearejl  friends.  If  you  could  really  fay  ihtfmart- 
ejl  things,  you  might  he  feared,  b*t  you  never  would  be 
loved. 

The  curlqpty  of  women  is  a  proverbial  object  of  fat- 
ire,  and  gives  birth  to  all  that  little  gofliping,  which 
I  have  reprobated.  Never  convince  the  world,  by  an 
attention  to  mere  trifles,  that  you  have  fo  unfurnifhed  a 
mind,  or  fo  little  to  engage  it.  Read  Hayley's  truly 
humorous  Effrys  on  Old  Maids,  and  blufh  at  the  prac- 
tice. Remember  the  fate  of  the  poor,  unhappy  fpinjler% 
who  caught  her  death  by  her  immoderate  curiofity. 

You  can  furely  find  infinite  fubje&s  for  the  enter- 
tainment of  an  hour,  without  dtf  riding  to  thefe  little 
things.  If  you  cannot,  it  is  high  time  to  give  up  (what 
is  only  calid)  an  amufemem,  for  tiiat,  which  is  a  real 
one,  a  walk,  a  ride,  a  book,  a  garden,  or  the  fociety  of 
a  chofen  friend. 


YOUNG  LADY.  15 

It  is  aftonifliing  into  how  many  difficulties  a  woman 
betrays  herfelf,  who  is  fond  of  this  practice  ;  what 
quarrels,  mifconftrudions,  and  explanations,  what  fe- 
fecret  fhynefTes,  averfions,  mifchiefs  fuch  babblers  cre- 
ate ;  what  friends  they  feparate,  and  what  a  badge  of 
infamy  they  fix  upon  themfelves,  in  the  eyes  of  'all  the 
fenfible  and  the  good  ! 

There  was  a  famous  fchool  amongft  the  ancients, 
where  the  pupils  fpent  feveral  years  in  learning  the  very 
neceflary  art  of  being  Ji/ent.  Remember,  my  dear  girl, 
that  nature  has  given  you  two  ears,  and  onXyone  tongue  ; 
and  that  fcripture  has  faid,  "  be  fwift  to  hear,  but  flow 
"  tofpeak." 


LETTER  VI. 

CARDS,  which  are  the  infeparable  concomitants 
of  tea  vifits,  and  introduced  as  foon  as  perfons 
are  well  feated  in  company,  are  a  very  equivocal  pleas- 
ure, and,  by  no  means,  to  be  much  recommended. 
Little  habits  infenfibly  beget  a  pajfion  for  them  ;  and  a 
paflion  for  cards  murders  time,  money,  talents,  under- 
ftanding,  every  thing,  that  is  rational  in  our  nature, 
and  every  thing,  that  is  divine. 

If  experience  did  not  convince  us  of  the  facl,  one 
fiiould  never  have  imagined,  that  a  reafonable  creature 
would  ever  have  been  able  to  confume  hours,  days, 
weeks,  months,  years,  in  counting  over  the  black  and 
red  fpots  upon  paper,  and  childifhly  to  quarrel  about 
their  fuccefs — a  creature,  who  has  an  underftanding, 
that  is  capable  of  improvement,  to  an  infinite  degree  1 
a  creature  living  in  a  world,  where  knowledge  is  im- 
menfe,  and  every  flower  or  ftirub  a  fubjed  of  aitonifli- 
N 


2  6  LTTERS  TO  A 

ment — who  has  a  temper  that  requires  continuai  watch- 
fulnefs  ;  a  foul  that  needs  unremitting  cultivation  ; 
perhaps  children,  that  call  for  incelTant  instruction ; 
amid  ft.  objects  of  diftrefs,  for  which  heaven  begs  each 
fuperfluous  penny,  and  in  a  body,  that  may,  any  mo- 
ment, drop  into  the  grave  ! 

I  will  advert,  no  longer,  t®  the  moral  confequences. 
A  woman*  who  has  a  wifh  only  to  pleafe,  fhould  not 
be  much  addicted  to  this  practice.  It  is  very  apt  to 
ruffle  the  temper,  and  d'ifcompofe  the  features  ;  and  a 
four  or  an  angry  look  is  more  deftruclive  to  female 
charms,  than  an  high  fcorbutic  flufli,  or  the  fmall-pox. 

It  is  faid  in  favour  of  cards,  that  they  prevent  fcan- 
daU  and  are  a  fubftitute  to  many,  for  the  want  of  con- 
verfation.  This  conveys  a  fevere  ftigma  both  on  our 
hearts  and  underftanding.  It  fuppofes  that  we  have 
few  (lores  of  entertainment  ivithin  ourfelves  ;  and  that 
the  only  way  to  avoid  a  greater  crime,  is  to  fall  into  a 
lefs.  Our  moments  I  fear,  will  not  bear  the  fcrutiny 
of  confeience  or  reafon,  much  lefs  ®f  the  great  day,  if 
we  cannot  contrive  to  fpend  them  in  an  innocent  and 
ufefu!  manner  without  the  low  refource  of  either  fcan- 
ial  or  play  ! 


LETTER  VII. 

THE  defenders  of  cards,  however,  will  fay  nothing 
in  favor  of  gaming.  No  fortune,  they  know,  is 
equal  to  its  extravagant  demands.  An  unlucky  throw 
lofes  thoufands  in  a  moment.  It  has  reduced  the  molt 
opulent  families  to  indigence  ;  it  has  led  fome  to  for- 
gery, and  an  ignominious  death ;  others,  whofe  pride 
would  not  brook  the  degradation,  to  the  fatal  aft  of 
fuicide  j  at  beft  it  has  plunged  into  poverty  and  difirefs, 


YOUNG  LADY.  17 


many  heirs  of  honorable  and  illuftrious  houfes,  who 
were  born,  in  all  appearance  to  happier  days. 

Your  moderate  card  players  (as  they  call  themfelves,) 
have  often  wondered,  what  can  tempt  people  of  for- 
tune to  fuch  a  dreadful  and  ruinous  amufement,  as  that 
of  gaming.  I  will  venture  to  fay,  that  this  mocking 
practice  is  nothing  more,  than  the  fpirit  of  card  play- 
ing, carried  to  its  extreme ;  that  equal  temptations 
would  probably  have  led  them  to  the  very  fame  impru- 
dence ;  that  they  bsth,  generally,  originate  in  the  fame 
principle,  (the  want  of  fomething  fubflantial  to  fill  and 
exercife  the  mind,)  and  are  only  an  artificial  method 
of  deftroying  that  ennui  and  languor,  which  are  the 
moft  infupportable  feelings  of  human  life  ;  and  that  the 
cure  of  both  muft,  equally,  fpring  from  folid  knowl- 
edge, and  from  folid  virtue. 

Though  gaming,  atjfry?,  rifes  from  no  worfe  a  prin- 
ciple, than  a  want  of  amufement,  or  of  having  fomething 
to  call  the  pafiions  into  exercife,  yet,  in  its  confequences, 
it  has  a  tendency  to  eradicate  every  religious  and  moral 
difpofition,  every  focial  duty,  every  laudable  and  vir- 
tuous affection.  It  renders  the  mind  felfijh  in  the  ex- 
treme, and  callous  to  the  touch  of  woe,  in  every  ftiape  ; 
whilft  it  flops  up  the  Jluices  of  charity,  it  extinguishes 
the  inclination  for  it ;  it  is  deaf  to  every  call  of  friend- 
fhip  or  of  prudence.  There  can  be  no  fuch  thing,  as 
an  attentive  parent,  mother,  wife,  brother,  fitter  or  a 
fympatrn^ing  heart,  where  this  infernal  rage  has  taken 
pofTeflion  of  the  foul.  Every  thing  elfe  is  fwallowed 
up  in  the  all  devouring  vortex.  A  gamefter  would 
ftakc  the  laft  thoufand  on  a  throw,  though  zprifon,  for 
her  hufband,  rags  for  her  children,  or  a  gallows  far 
her  neareft/WcW,  were  the  melancholy  profpect  ! 

If  you  difbelieve  this  reafoning,  look  into  life.  What 
effects  has  this  paffion  gradually  produced  on  women, 
who  had  once  hearts  full  of  tendernefs  and  virtue,  and 
were  affected  with  every  appearance  of  diftrefs ;  who 


1 8  LETTERS  TO  A 

had  from  nature,  every  refinement  of  tafte,  and  every 
elegance  of  manners  to  captivate  and  charm. 

If  it  were  not  invidious,  I  could  produce  many  liv- 
ing characters  to  fupport  my  afiertions.  They  would 
make  a  difmal  picture,  and  the  motto  would  be,  u  be- 
u  ware  of  beginnings." 

Though  I  abhor  novels,  yet,  perhaps,  the  celebia- 
ted  one  of  Cecilia  is  worth  reading,  if  it  was  only  to 
guard  our  fafhionable  ladies  from  fplitting  on  the  dread- 
ful rock  of  the  Harrels.  Many  characters,  in  that 
book,  are  ovei  (trained  ;  but  this  is  borrowed  from  real 
life,  and  daily  obfervation. 


LETTER  VIII. 

LAY  down  a  little  plan  for  yourfelf,  and  all  your 
ftudies,  exercifes  and  employments  will  be  eafy 
and  practicable.  You  will  have  time  for  every  thing  ; 
and  you  will  never  feem  in  an  hurry  or  embarrajjed. 

Order  is  the  firft  law  of  nature,  and  of  nature's  God. 
The  moon,  (tars  and  tides  vary  not  a  moment,  and  the 
Jim  knoweth  the  "  hour  of  its  going  down." 

Without  order,  a  thoufand  things  will  be  improper- 
ly delayed,  or  wholly  neglected.  Whilft  we  are  hefi- 
tating  where  to  begin,  or  what  to  do,  hours  fly  away, 
infenjibly,  never  to  return  ! 

If  every  thing  knows  its  place,  you  will  efcape  the 
lofs  of  many,  valuable  moments,  and  the  anxiety  of  as 
many  unprofitable  fearches.  Exaclnejs  is,  by  no  means, 
the  necejfary  appendage  of  an  old  maid. 

Order  is  the  very  parent  of  tranquility.  A  peifon 
is  always  eafy,  whole  affairs  are,  always,  in  a  regular 
arrangement.  At  the  fame  time,  let  the  mechanifm  of 
your  procefs  be  innyifible.  The  perfection  of  art,  you 
know,  Wiocofjcealk. 


YOUNG  LADY.  19 

Be  always  ready  to  receive  your  friends  with  an 
open  countenance,  and  a  cheerful  heart.  Society  and 
connection  have  claims  upon  us,  to  which  we  mould 
facrifice  every  fclfijh  confideration. 

If  you  are  an  early  rifer,  you  may  find  time  for  every 
thing.  It  is  amazing  how  much  is  gained  by  lopping 
off  an  hour  or  two,  from  indulgence  in  the  morning. 
Nor  is  the  mere  faving  of  time  the  only  advantage. 
Our  fpirits  are  more  lively,  and  our  faculties  are  more 
awake. 

I  do  not  know  a  practice  which  I  mould  more  re- 
commend, whether  devotion,  health,  beauty,  or  im- 
provement of  the  mind,  were  the  objects  in  view.  How 
cheerful  and  how  animated  are  the  meditations  of  the 
morning  !  What  a  delightful  bloom  fluflies  into  the 
cheeks  from  its  balmy  exhalations !  What  an  unfpeak- 
able  cheerfulnefs  glides  into  the  foul  from  hearing  the 
devotional  matins  of  the  lark,  and  from  beholding  the 
new-born  fcenery  of  nature  !  How  neceiTary  is  fuch  a 
regimen  to  preferve  that  fweetnefs  of  complexion,  and 
of  breath,  which  are  the  very  elTence  and  perfume  of 
beauty  !  When  people  think  of  accounting  to  God  for 
the  talents,  they  have  received,  they  overlook  the 
hours,  which  are  loft  in  morning  floth,  and  unreafona- 
ble  indulgence. 

I  have  inured  myfelf,  for  many  years,  to  this  habit 
of  early  riling.  In  the  fpring  months  of  April  and 
May,  particularly,  I  grudge  every  moment  that  is 
wafted  after  five.  I  confider  it  as  a  rude  neglect  to 
all  thofe  fweets,  which  opened  to  falute  me.  And  I 
always  find  fo  much  more  deducted  from  the  firmnefs 
of  my  health,  and  the  vigour  of  my  underftanding. 


N  2 


2o  LETTERS  TO  A 

LETTER  IX. 

I  HAVE  indeed,  as  you  fay,  frequently  dwelt  with 
pleafure  on  Mifs  Louifa ,  and  do  think  her  a 

charming  woman.  She  always  ftruck  me  as  pofTefling, 
in  a  fuperior  degree,  thofe  qualities,  which  conftitute 
the  graceful  and  attractive,  and  therefore  as  a  very 
proper  pattern  to  all  young  people.  Not  that  I  think 
a  fervile  imitation  of  any  original,  however  excellent, 
would  render  another  pleafing.  Nature  no  more  in- 
tended any  two  perfons  to  have  precifely  the  fame 
manner,  than  the  fame  eyes,  or  features,  or  complex- 
ion. But  (till  a  familiar  intimacy  with  fuch  a  woman 
muft  infenfibly  communicate  fome  traits  of  refemblancc, 
which  by  incorporating  with  the  general  mats  of  a  char- 
acter, will  form  a  beautiful  and  confident  whole. 

Though  I  have  always  admired  her  only  in  xhtgrofs, 
and  was  charmed,  without  confidering  the  conftituerit 
principles  of  her  excellence,  I  will  as  you  requeft  it, 
endeavour  to  analyze  and  trace  them  to  their  fource. 

Her  perfon  is  rather  genteel,  than  beautiful,  fo  that 
Ihe  is  more  indebted  to  herfelf,  than  to  nature,  for  her 
attractions.  And  a  wonderful  energy  indeed  they 
have.  For  I  have  often  feen  this  girl  (teal  the  notice 
of  the  whole  campany  from  others  of  her  fex,  who 
were  infinitely  more  diftinguifhed  by  the  beauty  of 
their  perfons,  as  well  as  the  advantage  of  birth  and 
fortune. 

The  ground  work  of  all  her  charms,  is,  (what  I 
cannot  call  by  a  better  name,  than  that  of)  fimplicity  ; 
an  artlefs,  undefigning,  unjludied  manner,  flowing  from 
an  innocent  and  virtuous  heart,  which,  never  feeks 
concealment,  as  having  indeed  nothing  to  conceal.  Lou- 
ifa never  affects  to  be  any  thing,  but  what  fhe  is.  She 
does  not  exalt  herfelf  above  meafure,  nor  ever  ridicu- 
ioufiy  degrades  herfelf,  in  order  to  be  exalted.  Her 
cftures,  attitude,  voice,  pronunciation  are  all  under 


YOUNG  LADY.  21 

the  immediate  impreflion  and  guidance  of  nature.  Lou- 
ifa  exprejfes  an  innocent  pleafure,  becaufe  fhe feels  it  in 
the  company  of  fenfible  and  agreeable  men,  and  yet 
never  feeks  it  with  an  improper  avidity.  She  never 
harangues  upon,  or  vaunts  a  fuperior  fenfibiiity,  but 
frequently  difplays  no  inconfiderable  (hare  of  it,  by  in- 
voluntary emotions.  She  never,  in  any  refpect,  affects 
connections,  appearance  or  any  thing  above  her  fortune, 
nor  endeavours  to  fhine  at  the  expence  of  others. 

This,  though  very  imperfe6tly  defcribed,  is,  accor- 
ding to  my  idea,  the  firir.  excellence  in  the  character 
of  this  lady.  It  is  the  very  reverfe  of  that  abfurd  af- 
fectation, which,  by  afTuming  a  thoufand,  'fanciful 
fhapes,  renders  graces  unlovely,  and  even  beauty  dif- 
gufting.  Louifa  charms  every  perfon  becaufe  fhe  is 
aliuays  amiable  and  obliging  without  Jluaying  to  charm. 
Her  face  is  always  welcome  in  company,  though  fhe 
throws  no  artificial  lightning  into  her  eyes,  foftnefs  into 
her  features,  nor  lifp'ing  into  her  articulation. 

The  common  fyflematic  education  of  girls  is  unfa- 
vourable to  this  fimplicity.  The  tendency  of  modern 
culture  is  to  raife  art,  upon  the  ruins  of  nature.  Such 
a  method  would  not  fucceed  in  any  thing  elfe,  and 
how  mould  it  in  the  treatment  of  women  ?  If  there 
be  one  object  in  the  world,  more  difgufting  than  all 
others,  it  is  a  girl,  whom  nature  formed  to  be  innocent 
and  artlefs,  reducing  affectation  and  difgu-ife  to  a 
fyflem. 

It  is  with  fimplicity  of  manner,  as  it  is  with  eafe  of 
ftyle,  in  a  writer.  When  we  read  his  works,  it  appears 
the  mod  eafy  attainment  imaginable  ;  but,  in  fact, 
nothing  is  fo  uncommon,  either  in  conduct  or  in  wri- 
tings. And  the  reafon  muff,  be,  that,  in  (lead  of  atten- 
ding to  the  guidance  of  nature  people  make  an  extra- 
ordinary effort  to  be  fomethir.g  great,  or  fuperior,  and 
uncommon.     Simplicity  may  be  ftyled  the  eafy  and  the 


22  LETTERS  TO  A 

graceful  negligence  of  conduct,  yet,  as  in  drefs,  it  charms 
more  than  the  mod  elaborate  ornaments. 

Through  all  the  wonderful  works  of  God  there  is 
a  m^jeftic  finiplicity.  Nature  knows  no  affeSatlon. 
Her  profpects,  lulls,  rallies,  alcoves,  grottos  are  all  un- 
ftudied  ;  her  magnificence  is  wild  and  artlefs.  There 
is  a  fimplicity  of  defign  and  effect  in  all  her  wonders, 
in  the  conftmction  and  revolution  of  planets,  in  the 
flow  and  ebbing  of  the  tides,  and  in  the  vomiting  of 
immenfe  volcanos.  The  carnation  never  aims  at  the 
ftately  magnificence  of  the  oftentatious  hoary  oak. 
Every  rofe  is  content  with  its  own  natural  hues  and 
odours  f  and  affects  not  the  elegant  fweetnefs  of  the 
Refeda,  (minionette.) 

Nature  is  the  ftandard  of  perfection.  Every  char- 
acter and  every  art  is  only  fo  far  finifhed,  as  it  ap- 
proaches to  her  likenefs.  No  paintings  are  beautiful 
without  this  ground-work  of  JimpRcity,  It  charms 
in  a  Correggio.  It  was  the  excellence  of  a  Raphael. 
It  lives  in  the  exquifite  touches   of  a  Reynolds. 

The  beauty  of  all  writing  is  founded  in  fimplicity. 
It  was  with  Homer,  Virgil  and  Milton,  when  they 
Sketched  out  their  inimitable  poems.  Of  Shakefpeare 
it  was  the  very  foul.  Statuaries,  fculptors,  architects 
have  only  gained  an  extenfivc  reputation,  in  propor- 
tion as  they  have  ftudied  this  divine  fimplicity. 

No  woman  can  be  graceful  without  it.  It  will  go 
further,  in  the  art  of  pleafing,  without  any  accomplifh- 
ments,  than  all  the  accomplishments  will  go,  without  it. 


LETTER  X. 


ANOTHER    ftrikifig    quality  in    Louifa,  is  her 
conflant  deerfulnef .     Though  few  women  in 


YOUNG  LADY.  23 

the  world  are  more  ferious  or  thoughful,  where  any 
Jol'id  duties  are  concerned,  where  the  health,  peace, 
comfort,  convenience  of  her  friends  and  parents,  or 
any  domeftic  attentions  are  at  (lake,  and  though  me  is 
pofTeiTed  of  fuch  an  exquifite  fenfibility,  as  is  apt  to 
produce  an  unevennefs  of  fpirits,  yet,  whenever  I  fee 
this  lovely  girl,  fhe  always  beguiles  me  into  a  temporary 
cheerfulnefs,  by  the  force  of  her  own.  This  gaiety 
of  heart,  equally  removed  from  a  thoughtlefs  levity  or 
a  moping  gloom,  is  a  mod  defirable  quality  in  women. 
Men  are  perplexed  with  various  anxieties  of  bufinefs 
and  ambition,  and  are  naturally  more  thoughtful,  pro- 
found, and  melancholy  j  women  certainly  were  formed 
to  footh  and  to  enliven.  It  is  one  of  the  greated  blef- 
fings  we  derive  from  their  fociety,  and  from  the  moft 
facred  of  all  connections. 

Cheerfulnefs  (faith  the  wife  man)  doeth  good,  like  a 
medicine.  It  has  a  wonderful  efFecl:  on  all  the  finer 
organs  of  the  body.  If  it  was  not  for  little  innocent 
Tallies  of  this  kind,  it  would  be  impoflible  to  bear  fe- 
vcre  application.  The  year  would  be  infupportable,  if 
it  was  wholly  compofed  of  the  dark  and  gloomy  days 
of  November. 

There  are  many  unavoidable  ills,  fickneiTes  and  mif- 
fortunes  in  human  life,  which  will  come  uncalled  to  de- 
ject our  fpirits,  and  poifon  our  repofe  ;  but  we  fhould 
not  anticipate  them  by  gloomy  apprehenfions,  nor  ever 
fuffer  an  unneceffary  melancholy  to  fit  upon  our  looks. 
It  is  the  trued:  policy  to  be  innocent/yg&y  and  cheerful, 
whild  we  can.  It  forbids  the  approach  of  wrinkles, 
and  adds  many  years  to  the  little  fleeting  fpan  of  hu- 
man life.  Some  pietids  have  encouraged  gloom  by 
their  erroneous  notions  of  the  Deity,  and  of  chndian 
felf-denial.  But  I  mould  drongly  fufpect  their  good- 
nefs,  or  their  judgment.  If  any  thing  can  make  a  per- 
ibn  truly  cheerful,  it  mould  be  a  good  confeience.  And 
true  religion  is  doubly  charming,  when  it  wears  ijmlh. 


24  LETTERS  TO  A 

A  melancholy  countenance  is,  by  no  means,  femi- 
nine. It  is  as  remote  from  the  true  point  of  graceful- 
nefs,  in  the  fex,  as  ill-natured  wit,  or  ironical  pert- 
nefs. 


LETTER  XL 

THOUGH  Louifa  is  the  mod  remote  from/>r*- 
dery,  of  any  woman  I  know,  eafy  and  acceflible 
to  the  other  fex,  and  cheerful,  lively  and  unconjlravwd, 
in  her  conveifation  with  them,  yet  fhe  has  really  fo 
great  a  (hare  of  true,  female  delicacy,  that  the  mod  li- 
centious man  living  would  not  dare  to  ufe  a  double 
entendre  in  her  company,  or  give  the  converfation  an 
improper  turn.  Nor  is  it,  that  fne  has  reduced  rules 
of  propriety  to  a  fyftem.  She  has  really  a  native  fee- 
ling, which  vibrates  to  the  mod  diftant  touch  of  what 
is  proper  and  becoming,  and  would  tremble,  like  the 
fenfitive  plant,  where  any  thing,  that  could  (lain  the 
delicacy  of  her  mind,  was  conveyed  in  the  mofl  dif- 
tant  allufion. 

Fafhionable  manners  have  been  long  attempting  to 
banifh  delicacy,  as  a  fort  oi  incumbrance  ;  but  no  wo- 
man will  ever  long  be  lovely  without  it.  Let  France 
or  Italy  do  what  they  will,  it  is  that  facred,  fence, 
which  is  never  broken  down,  without  melancholy 
conferences.  Delicacy  is  a  very  general  and  compre- 
henjive  quality.  It  extends  to  every  thing,  where  wo- 
man is  concerned.  Converfation,  books,  pictures,  at- 
titude, geilure,  pronunciation,  mould  all  be  under  its 
falutary  reftraints.  If  a  girl  ever  lofes  it,  farewel,  a 
long  farewel  to  all  her  greatnefs  1  If  this  "  fait  have 
"  loft  its  favour  wherewith  mall  it  be  feafoned  ?" 

How  unfit  are  many  parents  to  educate  a  daughter  ! 
What  injudicious  pleafantries  do  they   fometimeB   ufe, 


YOUNG  LADY.  25 

even  in  their  prefence  !  A  girl  fhould  hear,  (he  fhould 
fee,  nothing,  that  can  call  forth  a  blufli,  or  even  (lain 
the  purity  of  her  mind. 

Another  dijlinguijhing  grace  of  Louifa  isfoftnefs. 
She  is  (what  nature  intended  her  to  be,)  wholly*  wo- 
man. She  has  a  quality,  that  is  the  direct  oppofite  te 
manlinefs  and  vigour.  Her  voice  is  gentle  ;  her  pro- 
nunciation delicate  ;  her  paflions  are  never  fuffered  to 
btboijlerous  :  (he  never  talks  politics  :  me  never  foams 
with  anger:  fhe  is  feldom  feen  in  any  mafculine  amufe- 
ments  :  me  does  not  practife  archery.  I  will  venture 
to  prophefy,  that  Hie  will  never  canvafs  for  votes  at  an 
election.  I  never  faw  her  in  an  unfeminine  drefs,  or 
her  features,  difcompofed  with  play.  She  really  trem- 
bles with  the  apprehenflon  of  danger.  She  feels,  ««- 
affecledly,  for  every  perfon,  expofed  to  it.  A  friend, 
leaving  her  father's  houfe,  only  for  a  (hort  time,  calls 
forth  her  concern.  The  farewel  tear  ftands  big  in  its 
tranfparent  fluice.  And  whenever  he  returns,  the  ea- 
fy,  undijfembled  fmile  testifies  her  joy.  She  difplays 
more  fympathy  for  the  indifpojition  of  a  fervant,  thaD 
fome  do  for  the  death  of  their  ne&rc  ft  friends. 

Of  all  the  women  I  ever  faw,  Louifa  has  the  mofr. 
univerfal  and  indifcriminate  affability.  She  never 
meets  any  poorperfons  in  her  neighbourhood,  without 
entering  into  a  very  minute  inquiry  about  the  health 
of  their  children,  family  and  friends  ;  and  the  villagers 
revere  her,  they  know  that  (he  is  conflantly  planning 
for  them  fome  afliftance  and  relief. 

Little  minds  endeavour  tofupport  a  confequence  by 
dijlance  and  hauteur.  But  this  is  a  miftake.  True 
dignity  arifes  from  condefcenfion,  and  is  fupported  by 
noble  actions. 

Supereilioufnefs  is  almofl:  a  certain  mark  of  low 
birth,  and  ill  breeding.  People,  who  have  juft  emer- 
ged into  greatnefs,  think  it  neceflary  to  maintain  their 


26  LETTERS  TO  A 

fuperiority  by  a  proud  look  and  an  high  ftomach.  The 
confequence  is  general  hatred  and  contempt. 

In  fact  this  proud,  high-bearing  referve  is  a  very  great 
crime.  Every  perfon,  that  bears  the  image  of  his  Ma- 
ker, is  entitled  to  our  attentions,  and  indeed  our  be- 
nevolence. Inferiority  is,  of  it/elf  a  fufficient  burden, 
without  our  endeavouring  to  aggravate  it  by  ill-nature 
or  neglect. 

I  have  often  heard  Louifa  dwell,  with  rapture,  on 
the  entertainment  and  edification  fhe  has  received  in 
many  cottages  when  (he  has  been  carrying  clothing, 
cordials  or  money  to  the  diftrefTed  inhabitants  ;  and 
tell  me  which  is  the  more  dignified  character  ?  a  wo- 
man, who  would  turn  from  her  poor  neighbours  with 
difdain,  or  one,  who  for  her  kindnefs  and  attention  to 
them,  is  praifed,  as  often  as  her  name  is  mentioned, 
and  followed,  whitherfoever  fhe  moveth,  with  their 
tears  and  with  their  bleflings. 

There  is  not  a  greater  charm  in  any  character,  than 
fuch  a  condefceri/ion.  A  woman,  thus  forgetting  all  her 
distinctions,  to  fympathize  with  the  unfortunate,  muff, 
captivate  every  man,  who  has  either  a  fingle  grain  of 
piety  or  underflanding.  Even  the  plaineji  face  would 
be  forgotten  in  fuch  real  and  unaffected  goodnefs. 

The  manner  of  luoulQifinifijes  her  character.  It  is 
a  beautful  bordering  to  all  her  graces  and  her  virtues. 
It  is  impolTible  for  me  to  define,  (what  I  mean  by,) 
manner  ;  yet  no  one  can  be,  half  an  hour,  in  the  com- 
pany of  this  lady,  without  feeling  its  aftonifhing  effects. 
Though  fhe  frequently  fays  nothing,  but  what  might 
have  dropped  from  any  other  perfon,  yet  in  her  it  be- 
comes fo  very  interesting,  as  to  command  attention,  and 
even  to  delight.  She  embellifhes,  in  a  wonderful  man- 
ner, a  look,  a  geflure,  an  attitude,  nay  even  filence  it- 
felf.  She  confers  a  grace  on  the  moll  common  civility. 
She  heightens  every  favour  by  the  mock  of  doing  it,  and 
file  obliges,  alraoft,  by  rcfufat. 


YOUNG  LADY.  27 

The  befr.  definition  I  can  give  of  this  quality  mud 
be  imperfect.  I  mould  call  it,  however,  a  quick  dis- 
cernment of  what  is  graceful,  directed  by  an  exquifite 
fenfibility,  and  faying  in  an  inftant,  to  airs,  geftures, 
features,  looks,  come  with  correfponding  energy,  and 
they  "  come."  No  rules  can  be  laid  down  for  its  at- 
tainment. Nature  mult  have  been  propitious,  where 
it  is  feen  in  any  high  perfection. 

Manner  is  more  engaging,  than  the  moil  fmifhed 
beauty.  The  latter  is  an  agreeable  profpect,  that  foon 
grows  infipid,  and  fatigues  by  uniformity .  The  firft  is 
a  continual  change  of  country,  with  landfcapes  ever 
new,  interefting  and  delicious. 


LETTER  XII. 

THE  father  of  Louifa  is  one  of  the  mod  worthy 
clergymen,  I  ever  knew,  and  has  long  lived  in 
myefteem.  He  married,  early  in  life,  a  woman  of 
confiderable  beauty  and  fortune,  but  infinitely  more 
diftinguifhed  by  her  piety  and  under/landing.  He  has 
learning  and  goodnefs  enough  to  have  graced  the  high- 
eft  (rations  in  the  church  ;  but  he  fuffers  not  ambition 
todifturbhis  tranquility,  and  prefers  the  filent  pleas- 
ures of  retirement  to  all  the  pomp  and  fplendour  of  a 
court.      He  is  rector  of  a  fnoall  parifh  in  the  county  of 

,  and  has  fuch  a  paftoral  tendernefs  and  affection 

for  his  flock  that  I  do  not  think  he  would  be  tempted 
to  leave  them  for  any  temporal  confiderations  whatfo- 
ever.  "  I  would  not  refign  (he  has  frequently  (aid 
"  to  me)  the  fragrant  flirubs  and  plants  that  encircle 
"  this  little  cot  for  the  mod  enviable  promotions;  nor 
"  mould  the  tumults  and  anxieties  of  the  higheft  fta- 
"  tion  depriye  me  of  thofe  domejlk  endearments,  which 
O 


28  LETTERS  TO  A 

"  after  all  its  bewitching  gaity  and  buftle,  are  the  only 
"  real  fweetnefs  of  life.  What  could  equal  the  heart- 
**  felt  joys  I  derive  from  the  fond  and  ever  growing 
"  attachment  of  my  Harriet,  or  the  pleafure  of  watch- 
"  ing  the  continually  expanding  graces  and  improve- 
«'  ments  of  my  lovely  girl  r" 

It  has,  long,  been  my  private  opinion,  that  a  good 
clergyman  is  more  likely  to  have  a  dutiful  and  affec- 
tionate family,  than  a  perfon  of  almoft  any  other  char- 
acter. And  I  am  not  a  little  confirmed  in  it  by  the 
inftance  before  us. 

Whoever  fees  this  happy  pair,  is  delighted  with  that 
mutual  efteem  and  fondnefs,  which  revolving  years 
have  not  been  able  to  diminifh,  but  only  to  mature  ; 
and  mud  form  a  very  high  idea  of  that  union,  which 
the  licentious  only  endeavour  to  ridicule,  becaufe  they 
have  not  tafte  and  innocence  enough  for  its  unpurchafed, 
and  refined  fweets.  I  have  lately  fpent  a  few  days 
with  this  amiable  group,  and  returned,  quite  difgufted 
with  my  own  fituation.  It  appeared,  uncommonly/o/- 
itary  and  infipid.  I  began  to  blame  my  books,"  as  the 
obftacle  of  my  felicity,  and  to  afk  philofophy  and  cold- 
hearted  prudence,  what  joy  they  had  to  boaft,  if  com- 
pared with  thefe  natural  tranfports  of  the  foul. 

Fortunately  for  my  friend,  a  comfortable,  paternal 
fortune,  in  conjuction  with  that,  which  he  received 
with  his  lady,  has  placed  him  in  very  eafy,  and  rather 
affluent,  circumftances.  Providence  has  crowned 
their  virtuous  friendfhip  only  with  Louifa  ;  but  indeed, 
in  her  alone,  has  rained  down  a  profufion  of  its  bleflings. 
In  her,  therefore,  all  their  cares  and  anxieties  concen- 
ter ;  and  her  education,  you  may  well  fuppofe,  has  not 
been  neglected. 

Her  parents  are  both  averfe  to  boarding  fchools,  as 
infpiring  a  young  perfon  with  improper  notions,  and 
undermining  the  tafte  for  pure  fimplicity  and  domeftic 
worth.     She  has,  therefore,  been  always  kept  under 


YOUNG  LADY.  i9 

their  own,  immediate  infpection  ;  but  her  hours  arc  as 
ftrictly  arranged,  as  they  could  have  been, at  any  fchool, 
into  a  regular  plan  of  employment.  She  has  her  allot- 
ted intervals  for  domefHc  duties,  needle-work,  reading, 
correfpondence,  exercife  and  recreation  ;  and  every 
hour  knows  its  particular  engagement. 

She  opens  every  morning,  and  clofes  every  day  with 
an  hymn  of  praife  to  her  bountiful  Creator,  which  is 
chanted  to  the  harpfichord,  with  fo  fweet  a  voice,  as 
I  cannot  even  at  this  difhnce  of  time,  recoiled  without 
emotion. 

If  you  faw  the  beautiful  fancy-work,  which  has  been 
wrought  by  this  girl,  in  carpets,  bafkets  of  flowers,  em- 
broidery, &c.  yoK  would  imagine,  that  (he  could  have 
but  little  leifure  for  .the  improvement  of  her  under- 
/landing.  But  a  ftrict  economy  of  time,  an  invariable 
adherence  to  order,  and  an  habit  of  early  r'iftng  have 
enabled  her  to  do  woaders.  Her  father  fuperintends 
that  part  of  her  education,  which  is  connected  with 
books  ;  and  has  fuch  an  happy  method  of  conveying 
his  idea  as  wonderfully  mixes  inftruction  with  delight. 

Natural  hiitory  and  botany,  on  fine  days,  they  ftudy 
in  thejfieMs  ;  and  when  the  weather  is  lefs  favourable, 
(lie  has  fuch  a  collection  of  animals,  infects,  and  other 
curiofities  as  would  adorn  the  mufeum  of  a  connohTeur. 
This  is  called  her  grotto  ;  and  is  placed  in  a  fliady 
part  of  the  garden,  over-arched  with  an  alcove  of  en- 
twined elms. 

Hiitory,  in  the  hands  of  her  able  inftructor,  becomes 
a  fund  of  unfpeakable  improvement.  When  events 
are  recorded,  (he  is  afked  what  caufes  gave  them  birth  ; 
what  injlruments  were  made  ufe  of  for  their  completion, 
and  what  traces  (he  can  difcover,  of  a  wonderful  and 
an  all-wife  Providence,  governing  the  whole. 

Geography  and  chronology  are  infeparable  guides 
confulted  on  the  occafion ;  and  when  characlers  are 
defcribed,  (he  is  interrogated  concerning  the  praife* 


6o  LETTERS  TO  A 

worthy  or  the  rcprchenfiblc>  in  them  ;  where  the  hif. 
torian  has  been  too  fparing  of  his  praife,  or  extolled 
beyond  the  bounds  of  reafon  and  of  truth.  Her  fenti- 
ments,  on  all  thefe  fubjects,  arc  given,  in  her  own  lan- 
guage, upon  paper  ;  and  afterwards  corrected  by  the 
mature  judgment  and  critical  talte  of  her  incomparable 
tutor. 

On  Sundays,  flie  prepares  a  concife  abridgment  of 
the  fermon,  which  undergoes  the  fame  rigid  examina- 
tion ;  and  fhe  has  a  little  volume,  filled  with  fuch  fa- 
cred  reflections,  as  would  not  dishonour  the  underftand- 
ing,  or  the  repofitory  of  a  profefled  divine. 

You  would  fuppofe  from  this  account,  that  Louifa 
would  appear  (what  the  world  calls,)  a  very  learned 
woman.  No  fuch  thing.  In  a  mixed  company,  you 
would  not  difcern,  that  fhe  poiTefTed  any  fuperior 
knowledge  or  advantage  over  her  fex,  except  in  an  ele- 
gant mode  of  expreflion.  She  enters  into  other  peopled 
views,  feelings,  interefls  and  concerns,  with  apolitenefs, 
that  very  few  pofTefs  ;  and  converfes  with  all  her  coun- 
try neighbours,  on  fuch  eafy  terms,  as  banifh  every  un- 
pleafant  feeling  ofdillance  or  rcftraint. 

The  heart  of  this  lovely  girl  is,  all  over,  fympathy 
andfoftnefs.  The  big  tear  trembles  in  her  eye,  on  ev- 
ery trying  occafion  ;  and  in  her  clofet,  along  with  a 
fmall,  but  well  chofen  collection  of  books,  me  has  a 
little  box,  with  this  infeription,  "  facred  to  the  poor." 
Into  this,  me  puts,  every  night,  before  fhe  fleeps,  fome- 
thing  to  be  a  fund  for  merit  and  difrrofs.  She  en- 
riches it  with  the  favings  fhe  has  made,  by  retrench- 
ing fome  expenfive  articles  of  drefs  or  pleafure.  It  is 
filled  with  money,  that  others  v/ould  have  fpent  on 
plays,  concerts  or  affemblies  ;  and  I  will  venture  to 
fay,  that  fhe  has  infinitely  fweeter  mufic  in  her  heart, 
and  a  more  innocent,  fparkling  brilliance  in  her  eyes, 
than  any  of  the  moft  admired  frequenters  of  thefe  gay 
.imufements. 


YOUNG  LADY.  jr 

LETTER  XIII. 

FROM  Louifa's  ftricl:  confinement  and  fyjtematic 
life  you  would  conclude,  perhaps,  that  me  had 
almoft  contracted  a  difrelljh  for  books.  But,  indeed, 
it  is  far  otherwife  ;  her  ftudies  are  her  pleafure  ;  they 
are  fo  judicioufly  mixed  with  entertainment,  and  fo  in- 
terwoven, as  it  were,  with  the  common  cafual  occur- 
rences of  the  day,  that  (he  confiders  them  more  as  an 
amufement,  than  a  bufuiefs.  Her  private  moments, 
when  flie  is  left  to  her  own  choice,  are  not  unfrequent- 
ly  beguiled  with  the  very  fame  employments,  which 
had  engrofTed  the  other  parts  of  the  day. 

The  garden  is  the  fcene,  where  fhe  indulges  all  the 
luxury  of  her  tafte  ;  and  her  rambles  into  it  are  as  fre- 
quent, as  the  great  variety  of  her  avocations  will  per- 
mit. One  day,  I  found  her  in  this  retirement.  The 
place  was  very  happily  fancied.  Large  clumps  of  trees, 
on  both  fides,  with  their  intervening  foilage,  had  ren- 
dered it  impervious  to  any  human  eye.  Nature  had 
wantoned  with  particular  luxuriance.  A  clear,  tranfc 
parent  fpring  murmured  through  the  valley.  And  it 
was  fenced,  on  both  fides,  with  a  very  lofty  mound, 
caft  up  as  on  purpofe,  and  planted  with  perennial  fhrubs. 
A  fliady  arbour,  in  the  middle,  catching  through  a  beau- 
tiful villa,  the  fpire  of  the  village  church,  invited  to 
meditation  and  to  repofe.  She  was  reclined  here  rath- 
er in  a  penfive  attitude,  reading  Burke's  EfTays  on  the 
Beautiful  and  Sublime  ;  and  to  me  fhe  appeared,  I 
mull:  confefs,  more  enchanting,  more  beautiful and  more 
fublime,  than  the  admired  work  of  that  well  known  and 
admired  author. 

On  another  occafion,  her  mother  being  much  indif- 
poC-d,  flie  had  ftolen  from  the  domeflic  circle  to  in- 
dulge, at  leifure,  a  folitary  grief.  The  book  flie  held 
ki  her  hands,  was  Lord  Lyttleton's  Dialogues  of  the 

O   2 


32  LETTERS  TO  A 

Dead.  The  foft  melancholy  vifible  in  her  counte- 
nance, the  very  apparent  agitation  of  her  fpirits,  and 
the  grief  burfting  through  her  animated  eyes,  formed  a 
very  interefting  whole  ;  whilff  her  obfervations  on  a 
future  life,  on  the  comfort  (he  derived  from  the  hope  of 
converfing  with  her  friends  after  death  ;  on  the  proba- 
ble nature  and  happinefs  of  heaven,  and  the  permanen- 
cy of  virtuous  friendfhip  and  affection,  would  not  have 
difgraced  any  divine  or  philofopher  of  the  age. 

A  third  time  of  her  elopement,  me  was  reading  the 
only  novel  which  flie  permits  herfelf  to  read,  that  of  Sir 
Charles  Grandifon.  Tears,  like  an  April  fhower,  tin- 
ged with  the  fun,  were  mingled  with  her  joy. 

The  book  was  opened,  where  the  once-amiable  Har- 
riet Byron  is  now  Lady  Grandifon  ;  where  the  pain- 
ful fufpenfe  of  her  virtuous,  though  premature,  attach- 
ment, is  crowned  by  an  eternal  union  with  its  object, 
and  me  is  kneeling  to  her  ever-venerable  grandmother, 
to  implore  ableffing.  "  Heavens!"  (faid  (he,)  "  what 
"  an  exquifite  and  inimitable  painter  was  Richardfon ! 
*'  How  overwhelmed  with  admiration,  efteem  and 
**  felf-annihilation  do  I,  always,  feel  myfelf,  when  I 
"  read  the  defcription  of  his  Harriet  Byron.  So  much 
"  piety,  yet  fo  much  cheerfulnefs  ;  fuch  filial  duty, 
"  tendernefs,  affection,  fo  exquifite  a  fenfibility  ;  fo 
"  deep  and  glowing  a  paffion,  conducted  with  fo 
'<  much  delicacy  ;  fuch  beauty  of  perfon,  loft  in  fo 
"  much  greater  fweetnefs  of  temper,  and  fuch  a  win- 
*'  ning  candour  and  opennefs  of  heart,  complete  my 
**  idea  of  every  thing  that^is  noble  and  amiable  in  wo- 
"  man. 

"  I  never  read  this  writer  without  weeping.  He 
"  had  an  amazing  talent  for  the  pathetic  and  defcrip- 
"  tive.  He  opens  all  the  fluices  of  tendernefs,  and 
«'  tears  flow  down  our  cheeks,  like  a  river.  And 
«*  (what  is  moft  of  all,)  I  never  open  his  book  without 
««  feeling  my  fentiments  elevated  and  fublimed,  and 


YOUNG  LADY.  3$ 

u  my  heart  more  alive  to  all  the  fuggeftions  of  piety 
•'  and  virtue.  If  all  novels  had  been  written  on  fuch 
"  a  plan,  they  would,  doubtlefs,  have  been  very  excel- 
"  lent  vehicles  of  wifdom  and  goodnefs." 

The  lajl  time  I  broke  in  upon  Louifa's  retirement, 
fhe  was  furrovndcd  with  authors  She  feemed  bent 
upon  indulging  her  elegant  tafle,  in  all  its  extravagance. 

Addifon's  papers  on  the  Pleafures  of  Imagination  ; 
feveral  pieces  of  Mifs  Seward  :  Mafon's  Englifh  Gar- 
den ;  Arioflo,  with  Hoole's  Tranflation,  and  Webb's 
Inquiry  into  the  Beauties  of  Painting,  together  with  a 
Collection  of  Poems,  lay,  in  promifcuous  dignity,  be- 
fide  her.  She  has  accuflomed  herfelf  to  enter  into  a 
fort  of  common-place  book,  pafTages,  which  fhe  thinks 
particularly  finking.  I  am  happy  in  being  able  to  give 
you  a  little  fpecimen  of  her  choice,  for  fhe  indulged 
me  with  a  fight  of  the  valuable  manufenpt. 

The  firft,  poetical  rofe  fhe  had  plucked,  was  from 
the  Italian  poet,  Arioflo.  It  was  his  beautiful  picture 
of  Alcina,  the  enchantrefs.  I  will  tranferibe  a  few  of 
the  lines,  and  the  tranflation,  though  a  modeft  blufh 
tinged  her  cheeks,  whilft  I  read  the  defcription. 

Di  perfona  era  tanto  ben  formata, 
Quanto  me  finger  fan  pittori  induftri, 
Con  bionda  chioma  lunga  ed  ancdata ; 
Oro  non  e,  che  piu  rifplenda  e  luftri. 
Spargeafi  per  la  guancia  dclicata 
Mifto  color  di  rofe,  e  di  liguflri. 

Her  matchlefs  perfon  every  charm  combin'd, 
Fam'd  in  th'  idea  of  a  painter's  mind. 
Bound  in  a  knot,  behind  her  ringlets  rell'd 
Down  her  fair  neck,  and  flione  like  waving  gold ; 
Her  blooming  cheeks  the  blended  tints  difclofe 
Of  lillies,  damafk'd  with  the  blufhing  rofe,  &c.  &c. 

From  Lord  Lyttleton's  monody  on  his  lady,  me  had 
copied  the  following  pathetic  verfes-  Whilft  I  read 
them,  fhe  appeared  amazingly  affected. 


3+  LETTERS  TO  A 

O  fhadci  of  Hagley,  where  is  now  your  boafl? 

Your  bright  inhabitant  is  loft; 

Torn  fhe  prefcrr'd  to  all  the  gay  rcforts, 

Where  female  vanity  might  wifli  to  fhine, 
The  pomp  of  cities  and  the  pride  of  courts: 
Her  modeft  beauties  fhunn'd  the  public  eye  ! 
To  your  fequefter'd  dales, 
And  flow'r-embroider'd  vales, 
From  an  admiring  world  ike  choie  to  fly. 
With  nature  there  retir'd  and  nature's  God, 

The  filent  paths  of  wifdom  trod, 
And  banifh'd  ev'ry  pafTiou  from  her  bread, 

But  thofe,  the  gent  It  ft  and  the  beft, 
Whofe  holy  flames,  with  energy  divine, 
The  virtuous  heart  enliven  and  improve, 
The  conjugal  and  the  maternal  love. 

Sweet  babes,  who,  like  the  little,  playful  fawns, 
Were  wont  to  trip  along  thofe  verdant  lawns, 

By  your  delighted  mother's  fide. 

Who  now  your  infant  fteps  fhall  guide  ? 
Ah  !  where  is  now  the  hand,  whofe  tender  care 
To  ev'ry  virtue  would  have   frvm'd  your  youth, 
And  ftrcw'd  with  flow'rs  the  thorny  ways  of  truth,. 
O   loft  beyond  repair  ! 

O  wretched  father  left    lone 
'To  weep  their  dire  misfortune  and  thv  own  ! 
How  fhall  thy  weaken'd  mind,  epprefs'd  with  woe, 
And  drooping  o'er  thy  Lucy's  Grave, 

Perform  the  duties,  that  you. doubly  owe! 
Now  flie,  alas!  is  gene 
From  folly  and  from  vice,  their  hclplefs  age  to  fare  ? 

Mrs.  Carter's  celebrated  Ode  to  Wifdom  always 
makes  one  thrill  with  a  melancholy  pleafure,  and  it  had 
furniftied  Louifa  with  thefe  beautiful  ftanzas  ; 

Thy  breath  infpircs  the  poets  fong, 
The  patriot's  tree,  unbiafs'd  tongue, 

The  hero's  gen'rous  ftrife  ; 
Thine  are  retirement's  filent  joys, 
And  all  the  fweet,  endearing  ties 

Of  flill,  domeftic  life, 


YOUNG  LADY.  35 

No  more  to  fabled  names  confin'd 
To  thee,  fupreme,  all-perfect  mind, 

My  thoughts  direct  their  flight  : 
Wifdom's  thy  gift,  and  all  her  force 
From  thee  deriv'd,  unchanging  fourcc 

Of  intellectual  light. 

O  fend  her  fure,  her  fteady  ray 
To  regulate  my  doubtful  way 

Through  life's  perplexing  road  ; 
The  mifls  of  error  to  control, 
And,  through  its  gloom,  direct  my  foul 

To  happinefs  and  good. 

Beneath  her  clear,  difcerning  eye 
The  vifionary  fhadows  fly 

Of  folly's  painted  fhow  ; 
She  fees  through  ev'ry  fair  difguife, 
That  all,  but  virtue's  folid  joys 

Is  vanity  and  woe. 

Mifs  Seward's  poetical  addrefs  to  Mr.  Wright,  en- 
gaged in  taking  her  father's  picture,  had  fupplied  her 
■with  thefe  four  mod  intereiting  and  pathetic  lines  : 

O  when  his*  urn  fhall  drink  my  falling  tears, 
Thyf  faithful  lints  fhall  filed  a  foft  relief, 

Glow,  with  mild  luftre,  o'er  my  darken 'd  years, 
And  gild  the  gathering  fhades  of  filial  grief. 

The  ever  graceful  and  elegant  Fontaine,  fo  juftly 
efteemed  the  Correggio  of  poetry,  had  fupplied  her 
with  the  fables  of  Le  Chene  et  le  Rofeau,  La  Fille ; 
and  from  the  theatre  Sur  V  Education  of  the  ComtefTe 
le  Genlis,  fhe  had  ftolen  the  fragrant  rofe  of  Salency. 

From  a  judicious  arrangment  of  thefe  feparate  fweets, 
fhe  had  compofed  a  very  elegant  bouquet  which  caffs  a 
delicious  fragrance  on  her  character  and  virtues. 

And  now,  tell  me,  what  think  you  of  Louifa  ?  If 
me  was  married  to  the  firft  fovereign  of  Europe,  would 
Hie  not  be  the  richeft  jewel  in  his  crown  I 

*  Her  father's.  t  Wright's. 


56  LETTERS  TO  A 

LETTER  XIV. 

I  WILL  now  give  you  another  picture.     It  is  that 
of  a  young  lady,  whom  I  have  lately  had  the  hon- 
or of  feeing,  juft  arrived  from  a  boarding  fckool.      It  is 

Lady  Harriet .      But  I  will  not  undertake  to 

fay,  that  the  features  will  pleafe  you.     They  are  cer- 
tainly different  from  thofe  of  Louifa. 

She  was  almoft  inccflantly  practifing  little  arts,  and 
adjuflingxill  her  airs  and  graces  to  engage  admiration. 
When  me  fpoke,  me  minced  her  fyllables,  and  when 
(he  looked,  me  threw  an  unnatural  vivacity  into  her  eyes. 
She  is  a  fine  blooming  girl  ;  and,  if  me  had  not  taken 
fuch  uncommon  pains  to  pleafe,  muft  necefTarily  have 
charmed  every  beholder. 

How  long  will  it  be  before  people  learn,  that  nothing 
engages  fo  much,  as  the  eafe  of  nature  ?  An  artlefsj^w- 
pTicity  is  the  higheft  charm.  Whatever  Jludies  admira- 
tion, raifes  difguft.  Syftem  and  conflraint  deftroy  eafe. 
And  eafe  is  the  parent  of  all  the  graces. 

It  is  the  bufinefs  of  education  to  lop  off  fome  little 
luxuriant  boughs  from  the  tree  of  nature,  but  not  to 
conjlrain  it,  that  it  cannot  vegetate,  or  give  to  every 
branch,  an  unnatural  direction.  I  mould  prefer  the 
plain,  honeft  awkwardnefs  of  a  mere,  country  girl  to 
over-acted  refinement. 

Though  Lady  Harriet is  not  yet  fourteen 

years  old,  fhe  has  more  than  the  airs  and  forwardnefs 
of  a  woman.  Who  can  have  taught  this  girl,  that  rofes 
are  expected  to  open  all  at  once,  and  not  by  degiees  ? 

Timidity  and  diffidence  are  the  moll  attracting  quali- 
tiesof  a  girl ;  a  countenance  always modeft, and  undefign- 
ing  ;  a  tongue,  often  filent,  and  ears,  always  attentive. 

Boarding  fchools,  it  mould  feem,  may  be  compared 
to  hot-beds.  They  bring  fruits  and  flowers  quickly  to 
their  growth.  But  they  have  not  their  proper  elTencc, 
healthinefs  or  flavour. 


YOUNG  LADY.  37 

The  girTtJh  ftate  is  fo  pleaflng,  in  itfelf,  that  wc  wifh 
not  to  fee  it  exchanged,  before  its  time,  for  the  cau- 
tion, the  artifices,  or  the  fubtil  policy  of  age. 

It  is  defirable,  that  a  girl  (hould  retain,  as  long  as 
poffible,  the  innocent  drefs,  manners,  habit  and  fenti- 
ments  of  childhood.  She  will  never  be  more  captiva- 
ting, when  fhc  is  a  woman.  Natural,  untortured  ring- 
lets, fafhes,  frocks,  &c.  are  fuperior  to  all  the  laboured 
trappings  of  fafliion.  Nature  has  given  to  every  age, 
as  well  as  to  every  feafon  of  the  year,  its  appropriate 
charms.  We  fhould  be  greatly  difappointed,  if  the  foft 
breezes  and  the  pleating,  new-born  fcenery  of  the 
fpring  were  impatient  to  difTolve  into  the  fultry  heats 
of  fummer. 

A  forward  girl  always  alarms  me.  Indelicacy,  im- 
prudence and  improper  connections  (tart  up  to  my  view. 
I  tremble  for  her  friends,  and  fee  her  hiftory,  gradually, 
unfolding  into  indifcretion. 

Children  are  apt  enough,  of  them/elves,  to  afpire  into 
womanhood.  A  governefs  mould  check  this  fpirit, 
and  nip  it  in  the  bud.  A  long  nonage,  if  I  may  fo 
call  it,  is  favourable  to  your  fex.  During  this  period, 
a  girl  is  acquiring  fome  Jolid  improvement.  When 
(he  fancies  herfelf  a  woman,  company,  pleafures  and 
Gonverfation  with  the  other  fex,  unhinge  her  mind,  and 
bid  unquiet  thoughts  take  pofTeilion  of  her  fancy. 

I  could  dilcovei  from  the  converfation  of  Lady 
Harriet,  that  (he  was  deeply  read  in  novels  and  ro- 
mances. Her  exprefhons  were  beyond  nature,  turgid 
and  overftrained,  where  (he  only  wiihed  to  convey  a 
common  idea. 

A  volume  would  not  be  fufficient  to  expofe  the  dan- 
gers of  thefe  books.  They  lead  young  people  into  an 
enchanted  country,  and  opsn  to  their  view  an  imaginable 
world,  full  of  inviolable  friendfhips,  attachments,  ecfla- 
cies,  accomplimments,  prodigies,  and  fuch  vifionary 
joys,  as  never  will  be  realized  in  the  coarfenefs  of  com- 


3  8  LETTERS  TO  A 

mon  life.  The  romantic  turn,  they  create,  indifpofe* 
for  every  thing  that  is  rational  01  fubllantial.  They 
corrupt  all  principle.  Fortitude  they  unnerve,  and  fub- 
ftitute,  in  its  place,  a  ftckly  fenfibility,  that  cannot 
relifh  common  bleffings  or  common  things  ;  that  is  con- 
tinually wounded  with  its  own  fancies,  and  even 
"  ready  to  expire  of  a  rofe,  in  aromatic  pain."  Their 
(enliment  is  but  a  fine  fpun  word  for  indelicate  emotions. 
Their  fympathy  and  friendjhip  are  often  but  a  fpecious, 
flimfy  covering  for  criminal  attachments.  Such  falfe, 
over  (trained  ideas  have  led  many  a  poor  girl  to  ruin. 
Under  the  notion  of  fuperior  refinement,  fnnilarity  of 
fouls,  and  involuntary  frit  ndfoip,  lhe  has  gradually  been 
feduced  from  the  paths  of  virtue,  to  the  commiflion  of 
the  grofTefr.  crimes.  A  fine,  fplendi^  idea  has  been 
ufed  to  palliate  the  dreadful  action.  Sentiment  has 
triumphed  over  the  vulgar  (hackles  of  confeience,  and 
of  every  foeial  and  moral  obligation. 

Plays,  operas,  mafquerades,  and  all  the  other  fafli- 
ionable  pleafures  have  not  half  fo  much  danger  to  young 
people,  as  the  reading  of  thefe  books.  With  them, 
the  mod  delicate  girl  can  entertain  herfelf,  in  private, 
without  any  cenfure  ;  and  the  poifon  opeiates  more 
forcibly,  becaufe  unperceived.  The  mod  profligate 
villain,  that  was  bent  on  the  infernal  purpofe  of  fedu- 
cing  a  woman,  could  not  wim  a  fymptom,  more  favor- 
able to  his  purpofe,  than  an  imagination,  inflamed  with 
the  rhapfocbes  of  novels. 

Lady  H betrayed  great  pride,  in  difavowing  any 

acquaintance  with  fome  young  ladies,  at  the  fame  fchool, 
becaufe  their  parents  were  not  equal  to  hers  in  point 
of  fortune.  She  had  formed,  poor  girl  !  wrong  notions 
of  importance  ;  and  they  had  not,  it  mould  feem,  been 
properly  corrected. 

Under  the  idea  of  teaching  young  people,  what  is 
due  to  their  rank,  boarding  fchools  encourage  pride  by 
afyjlem.     Whoever  confults  the  happinefs  of  adaugh* 


YOUNG  LADY.  39 

ter,  mould,  zs/yjlematically,  endeavor  to  propagate  hu- 
mility. 

Alas  !  my  dear  girl,  what  have  any  of  us  to  boafr.  of  ? 
What  dignity  is  there  in  an  heap  of  money,  unlefs  it 
be  devoted  to  charitable  actions  ?  To  be  carried  in 
ftate,  to  eat  delicioujly,  or  to  fleep  on  down,  may  have 
fomething  in  it,  to  ivcak  mortals,  that  elevates  and 
charms  ;  but  to  an  inhabitant  of  heaven,  or  to  fuperior 
fpirits,  mud  be  as  frivolous,  as  the  toils  or  little  play 
things  of  children  appear  to  us. 

What  fupreme  importance  does  it  give  to  a  rational 
creature,  that  the  filk  worm  has  fpun  for  her  a  robe  of 
elegance,  or  that  the  millener  has  befpangled  her  with 
ornaments  ?  Thefe  ornaments,  alas !  cover  only  a 
u  poor  worm,"  a  finner  !  a  creature,  fubject  to  innu- 
merable infirmities  and  forrows  !  and  after  all,  the 
peacock  has  more  gaudy  plumage,  and  flowers  of  the 
field  are  more  beautifully  decked  ! 

Where  again  is  the  dignity  of  high  birth,  unlefs  it 
leads  to  dignified  conduct  ?  And  what  are  all  thefe  dis- 
tinctions to  a  creature,  that,  any  injlant,  may  be  (trip- 
ped of  every  thing  ;  that  may  die  any  hour  ;  and  muft 
be  called  to  a  very  fevere  account,  if  they  have  not 
been  religioufly  improved  ? 

If  you  are  ever  difpofed  to  be  proud,  look  forward 
to  the  moment,  which  will  bury,  along  with  you,  in  the 
dujl,  titles,  honours,  riches,  beauty,  friends,  connect- 
ions— to  the  moment,  when  the  world  will  be  fhriv- 
elled  into  atoms — when  you  muft  (land,  a  naked  and 
unprotected  criminal,  before  the  fupreme  Majefty  of 
heaven  ;  and  endeavour  to  acquire  that  univerfal  love, 
which,  for  the  fake  of  doing  a  religious  action,  is  con- 
tent to  "  become  the  fervant  of  all."  This  love  will 
be  a  fovereign  balfam  to  the  foul.  It  will  heal  a  thou- 
fand  diforders,  and  prevent  as  many  more. 
P 


40  LETTERS  TO  A 

The  Author  of  all  wifdom  and  greatnefs  was  "  meek 
*  and  lowly  in  heart."  He,  who  could  have  com- 
manded  kingdoms,  inhabited  a  cottage.  Humility  is 
the  d'tflingu't/hing  badge  of  his  religion.  And,  when- 
ever you  are  his  real  difciple,  you  will  not  exalt  your- 
felf  above  the  meaneft  creature,  but  under  an  accumu- 
lation of  all  worldly  distinctions,  will  fmite  upon  your 
bread  with  the  publican,  and  fay,  "  God  be  merciful 
"  to  me  a  finner." 

Happhufs  and  pride  are  abfolutely  incompatible. 
Continual  vexations,  fanciful  flights  and  injuries  and 
provocations  wound  the  felf-fufficient  mind. 

Pride  is  contrary  to  every  thing,  that  pleafes  in  a 
woman.  It  has  no  foftnefs,  no  benignity,  no  eafe. 
The  apoftle  has  juflly  called  u  a  meek  and  quiet  fpirit, 
*'  an  ornament."  It  is  the  robe,  in  which  a  woman 
fhould  always  be  drefTed,  who  wifhes  to  fecure  a  per- 
manent efteem. 


LETTER  XV. 

MY    DEAR    LUCY, 

1GAVE  you  a  defcription  of  the  true  delicacy  of 
Louifa.  I  have  lately  feen  it  over-acted  by  another 
perfon,  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  difguft  me  beyond  ex- 
preflion.  The  virtues  and  graces  have  all  their  limits. 
If  pufhed  further,  they  degenerate  into  the  very  oppo- 
fite  defects.  The  lady,  who  hurt  my  feelings,  had  not 
ton/idered  this  maxim.  Or  (he  had  nottafte  and  fenfe 
enough  to  apply  it.  ifrr  delicacy  was  abfolute prudery 
and  affeSatlon. 

True  delicacy  is  nothing  more,  than  the  refinement 
of  modefly.  It  is  the  fenfitive  plant  of  woman,  which 
giyes  the  quickeH  notice  of  approaching  danger,  and 


YOUNG  LADY.  41 

trembles  at  the  bare  apprehenfion  of  any  thing,  which 
can  injure  her  honor,  her  farety,  or  repofe.  So  amia- 
ble in  itfelf,  one  cannot  wonder,  that  every  female 
wiflies  to  be  thought  in  poffcffion  of  it.  But  it  is  a  fhy 
and  timid  plant,  and  leaft  difplays  itfclf,  where  it  is 
known  to  exift  in  the  higheft  cultivation. 

Some  women  are  fo  over-loaclen  with  this  virtue,  as 
to  be  almofr.  infufTerable  in  fociety  ;  io  outrageoujly  vir- 
tuous, that  they  render  all  their  purity  and  principles 
fufpected. 

This  tremblingly  modefl:  female,  in  a  company,  of 
which  I  had  lately  the  honor  of  making  one,  on  hear- 
ing that  a  number  of  gentlemen  were  coming  to  drink 
tea,  feemed  very  much  alarmed,  and  pretended  to  make 
an  apology  for  retiring.  Now  this  was  nothing  lefs 
than  downright  hypoenfy.  If  it  had  been  poffible  to 
look  into  her  heart,  probably,  at  the  very  moment,  it 
was  thrilling  with  joy,  for  the  agreeable  information. 

Every  woman  in  the  world  is  fond  of  our  fociety, 
unlefs  (he  had  formed  fame  particular  attachment,  and 
wifhes  to  indulge  the  greater  luxury  of  folitary  recol- 
lection. It  is  a  natural  and  an  innocent  pleafure,  and 
it  would  be  the  falfefl  delicacy  to  difown  .  it.  We  al- 
ways fufpctl  thefe  prudes.  We  fancy,  that  their  mod- 
efty  diminifhes  in  private,  in  proportion,  as  it  appears  to 
dilate  and  to  magnify  itfelf,  before  the  publie  infpection. 

Upon  hearing,  again,  that  a  young  lady  had  been 
fmart  and  lively  with  a  gentleman  of  her  acquaintance, 
(he  biffed  herjlars,  and  wondered,  how  fuch  forward- 
nefs  efcaped  reprobation  !  Now  this  girl  acted  from  na- 
ture. The  gentleman  was  agreeable.  She  felt  the 
pleafure.  She  dared  to  exprefs  it.  She  wifhed  to 
entertain  him,  and  (he  did  right.  The  other  blamed 
her  from  envy  or  from  affectation. 

Thefe  over-nice  and  over-virtuous  people  would  do 
well  to  confider,  that  an  odious  reftraint  would  banifh 
all  the  fweets  of  an  intercourfe  betwixt  the  fexes,  and 


42  LETTERS  TO  A 

fix  a  moping  and  a  difmal  gloom  on  the  face  of  the 
creation.  J  t  is  no  breach  of  true  delicacy  to  comply 
with  the  innocent  dictates  of  natuiw  A  woman  may, 
▼cry  modeftly,  avow  a  virtuous  attachment.  She  may 
cxprefs  an  approbation  of  particular  men,  and  do  juf- 
tice  to  their  merit.  She  may  (hew  a  fondnefs  for 
being  in  their  company.  She  may  chat,  in  a  fociable 
and  van  eafy  manner  with  them  ;  nay  fhe  may  think  of 
being  a  wife  or  a  mother,  without  injuring  the  fined 
tints  of  this  laudable  .  quality.  Providence  intended 
her  for  fuch  circumflances  and  connections,  and  they 
need  not  a  Uujh. 

That  J>iefy  is  mod  folid,  which  affects  no  gloomy 
iigours,  or  Angularities  ;  which  makes  no  noile,  and 
courts  no  obfervation.  It  is  fo  with  delicacy.  That 
is  always  the  moil  exquifite,  which  is  lead  ojlentatious. 

An  unjludied  opennefs  and  Simplicity  of  manners  aie 
the  ftrongeft.  fymptoms  of  a  guiltlefs  heart,  and  a  virtu- 
ous intention.  Thofe  young  people  are,  generally  the 
moll  amiable,  that  are  molt  undifguifed.  Having 
nothing  to  conceal,  they  have  fludied  no  art.  They 
may,,  f.  null  rr.es,  give  way  to  little  fallies,  which  the 
rigid  would  condemn  ;  but  they  are  Tallies  of  good 
humour,  and  generofity  forgives  them. 

Another  inftance,  in  which  this  Lady  offended  me, 
and  yet  fiom  an  over  defire  of  pleafing,  was  by  afTu- 
ming  a  miilaken  dignity.  In  fact,  true  dignity,  in  any 
perfon,  confiita  in  the  virtues  ;  humility,  condefcen* 
iion,  candour  ;  and  is  on lyfupported  by  great  qualities, 
or  by  a  train  of  amiable  actions.  But  in  a  'woman s 
manner,  if  fhe  confidcred  only  what  is  graceful,  there 
Ihould  always  be  more  of  the  lovely,  than  the  great  ; 
of  the  engaging,  than  the  magnificent  or  fublime. 
Her  authority  fhould  be  loft  mfiveetnefs  ;  the  dazzling, 
in  the  mild. 

Women  were  not  formed  to  awe  us  by  their  majefly, 
but  to  foot h  us  by  their  graces.     We  may  be  flruck  with 


YOUNG  LADY.  43 

a  Cleopatra,  but  we  love   an    Antiope.     A  Catharine 
may  ajlonifj  us,  but  we  are  charmed  with  a C— e. 


LETTER  XVI. 

THE  tour  of  affectation  is  unbounded.  I  hare 
jull  returned  from  a  circle  of  ladies,  who  have 
been  entertaining  me  with  a  very  long  harangue,  on 
(what  they  choofe  to  catt,)  fine  feelings.  This  is  quite 
a  fafhionable  fubject.  The  truth  is,  fenfibility  is  con- 
fidered,  as  a  matter  of  refinement,  and  a  proof  of  being 
raifed  above  the  vulgar  ;  and  many  young  people,  I  do 
believe,  would  be  more  hurt  by  any  reflection  on  their 
fenfibility,  than  if  you  fufpected  their  piety  and  virtue. 

This  rage  for  the  compliment  of  fine  feelings  feems 
to  have  originated  in  the  writings  of  Sterne.  His  very 
eccentric  talents  were  always  contriving  forne  fictitious 
tale  of  woe,  and  bidding  the  tear  to  drop  ;  the  general 
circulation  of  his  works,  and  the  novels  which  have, 
fince,  fprung  up  in  the  hot-bed  of  France,  and  of  our 
own  imaginations,  have  led  young  people  to  fancy  eve- 
ry grace  and  alrnoft  every  virtue,  comprifed  under  this 
fpecious  and  comprehensive  name. 

Nothing  certainlr  can  be  more  naufeous  and  difguf- 
ting,  than  an  affeQed  fenfibility,  as  nothing  is  more, 
charming,  than  the  pure  and  genuine.  But,  with  all 
this  noife  about  it, -I  am  far  from  knowing  whether 
there  is  much  of  the  real  in  the  world.  They,  who 
would  be  thought  to  have  it  in  perfection,  are  only 
in  poiTeffion  of  the  artificial.  For  is  it  fenfibility  to 
prefer  the  turbid  pleafures  of  midnight  to  opening  buds 
and  blolToms  ;  to  the  lelTons,  which  the  Creator  gives 
in  every  vegetable  and  every  infect  ;  to  undiflurbed 
contemplation  j  to  the  raptures  of  devotion,  or  all  the 
P2 


44  LETTERS  TO  A 

fair  and  enchanting  landfcapes  of  creation  ;  to  the  fen- 
timent,  the  tafte  and  knowledge,  that  are  difplayed  in 
the  works  of  the  mod  learned  and  ingenious  men,  or 
the  entertainment  and  delight  and  profit,  we  might  re- 
ceive from  the  volume  of  revelation  ?  Is  it  fenfibility  to 
form  a  facred  connection  with  one  perfon,  and  encour- 
age a  criminal  attachment  to  another  ?  Is  it  fenfibility 
to  leave  the  charms,  the  cries,  the  wants  and  tender 
pleadings  of  an  infant  offspring,  for  the  vain  and  per- 
ifliable  fplendour  of  a  ball,  a  birth-night  or  a  levee  ? 

Every  thinking  perfon  muft  be  difgufted  vrithfucb 
a  kind  of  fenfibility.  Rigid  criticifm  would  call  it  by 
a  very  harm  name,  and  fociety  has  reafon  to  reprobate 
its  tendency.  Yet  Sterne's  fenfibility  led  to  many  of 
thefe  evils  ;  and  who  knows  not,  that  a  thoufand  la- 
dies, who  vaunt Jine  feelings,  are  dupes  to  this  ridicu- 
lous illufion  ? 

True  feeling  is  of  a  very  different  complexion.  Like 
genius,  it  muft  come  from  heaven  ;  indeed  it  is  a  part 
of  genius  ;  and,  like  that,  is  very  rare.  It  depends^ 
conliderably  on  temperament  and  organization  ;  is 
much  heightened  by  particular  advantages  of  education, 
fociety,  friends,  reading,  obfervation  and  reflection  ; 
and  will  generally  be  quickeft  in  the  mod:  elevated 
minds.  But,  even  when  it  is  moft  genuine  and  poign- 
ant, it  will  never  be  a  guide,  fafeiy  to  be  trufted,  till  it 
is  governed  by  reafon,  checked  by  difcretion,  and 
moulded  by  that  religion,  which  requires  us  to  devote 
every  hifiincl  we  have,  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  to  the 
happinels  of  all  our  fellow-creatures,  and  of  ourfelves. 

Thus  confecratedi  it  is  a  fource  of  the  pureft  and  the 
richeft  bleffings.  It  is  the  parent  of  an  earned  devo- 
tion to  him,  who  gave  it,  and  of  a  thoufand  bleffings  to 
mankind.  It  appropriates  all  the  forrows  of  its  breth- 
ren ;  it  feels  in  every  woe,  "  rejoices  with  them,  that 
41  do  rejoice,  and  weeps  v/ith  them  that  weep  ;"  and 
doubly  alive  to  all  the  exercifes,  of  piety,  in  bloiToms, 


YOUNG  LADY.  45 

in  Sowers,  in  minerals,  in  vegetables,  in  liars,  in  plan- 
ets, in  the  azure  vault  of  heaven,  in  thunders,  in  ftorms, 
in  earthquakes,  in  volcanoes,  in  the  revolutions  of  em- 
pire, and  deftruction  of  cities,  feels  mod  exquifitely, 
adores  and  loves  and  venerates  the  wifdom,  the  power, 
the  goodnefs  and  wonders  of  an  all-prefent,  and  all-dif- 
pofing  God. 

It  is  with  this,  as  with  every  other  grace  and  virtue. 
There  is  a  falfe  and  a  true.  The  falfe  is  loud  and 
noify,  much  addicted  to  egotifm,  and  obtrudes  itfelfon 
public  obfervation  in  order  to  gratify  its  own  conceit 
and  vanity  ;  the  other,  modeft,  timid,  retired  Jhrinfo 
into  itfelf;  feels,  but  fays  nothing  of  its  feelings  ;  fuf- 
fers,  but  conceals  its  fufTerings  ;  rejoices,  but  does  not 
vaunt  its  joy,  and  is  too  delicate  in  its  nature,  and  too 
much  interejled  to  folicit  pity,  or  to  court  approbation. 
The  one  is  an  humble  fire  work,  which  cracks  and 
fparkles  ;  the  other  is  that  lightning,  which,  in  an  w- 
Jlant,  electrifies  and  fhocks  ;  this  is  the  offspring  of 
heaven  ;  that,  the  artificial  creature  of  the  world. 

I  will  conclude  this  letter  with  a  contrail  taken  from 
life.  Flavia  lies  in  bed  till  noon  ;  as  foon  as  fhe  rifes, 
me  opens  a  novel,  or  a  play  book  ;  weeps  profufely  at 
imaginary  diftrefs,  fips  flrong  tea,  till  flic  is  almofl  in 
hyflerics  ;  concludes,  that  fenfibility  is  all  her  own, 
and  is  perpetually  complaining  how  her  feelings  are 
mocked  with  fuch  a  room,  or  fuch  a  profpecl,  the  eoarfe- 
nefs  of  this  character,  and  oithat  converfation,  and  how 
the  fight  of  a  poor  beggar  gives  her  the  vapours. 

Emily  never  fays  a  word  about  her  feelings,  rifes 
with  the  dawn,  endeavours  to  fortify  her  body  with  air 
and  exercife,  and  her  mind  with  devotion  ;  is  oftener 
feen  with  her  bible,  than  any  other  book  ;  feems  plcafed 
with  every  perfon  and  every  object  about  her,  and  puts 
on  a  cheerful  fmile,  when  her  bofom  is  really  throbbing 
xvith  pain,  for  the  diftreffes  of  her  fellow-creatures. 


46  LETTERS  TO  A 

I  was  lately  in  her  company,  when  a  cafe  of  very 
lingular  diftrefs  happened  to  be  related,  of  a  lady  redu- 
ced, from  the  height  of  affluence,  to  a  poverty,  which 
(he  attempted  to  conceal.  She  uttered  not  a  fyllable, 
but,  in  a  little  while,  quitted  the  room,  and  returned, 
after  a  conliderable  interval,  with  eyes,  that  flie  had 
'vainly  bidden  not  to  betray  her  emotions.  The  next 
circumit trice  I  heard,  was,  that  fhe  had  font  ft  £$o 
bank  note  without  any  fignature,  to  the  relief  of  the  fair 
{urTerer.  The  iecret  was  difcovered,  contrary  I  • 
flricleft  injunctions,  by  the  imprudence  of  the  bearer. 
She  has,  fince,  adopted  one  of  the  daughters  to  be  ed- 
ucated for  her  own. 

Tell  me  now,  my  Lucy,  which  of  thefe  is  the  true 
and  the  producl'ive  fen  Ability. 


LETTER  XVII. 

I  WILL  give  you  candidly,  at  your  requeft,  my  o- 
pinion  of  fome  celebrated  writers.  If  you  differ 
from  me  on  reading  them,  it  may  produce  a  collifion 
of  fentiments,  which  will  be  favourable  to  our  mutual 
improvement.  At  any  rate,  it  will  ferve  to  exercife 
your  own  judgment  and  difcrimination. 

Voltaire  is  a  graceful,  but  a  fttperficial  writer.  He 
had  more  tafte  than  genius,  and  more  Iivelinefs  than 
authenticity.  Volatile  in  his  refearches,  impatient  of 
invciligatien  and  hafty  in  his  dccifions,  you  can  fcarcely 
rely  on  the  truth  or  authority  of  any  fa<5ls,  he  relates. 

If  I  mud  recommend  any  of  his  works,  it  fhoaJd  be 
his  Herniate.  But  I  do  not  wifli  you  to  cultivate  any 
dofe  acquaintance  with  fo  erroneous,  and  feduclive  an 
author. 

RoufTeau  is  very  fanciful,  hut  very  engaging.  His 
ti'hkis  are  all  the  ebullitions  of  genius  ;  and,  as  fuch, 


YOUNG  LADY.  47 


they  pleafe.  Nothing  was  ever  fo  (trangely  romantic, 
as  his  Emilius,  or  fyftem  of  Education  ;  a  mere, paper 
edifice  of  children,  which  the  firft  and  gentled  touch 
of  experience  totally  deftroys.  You  may  read  it  to 
be  amufed,  not  to  be  inftrucled. 

Why,  you  will  naturally  a(k,  were  thefe  diiringuifhed 
men  enemies  to  revelation  ?  The  truth  is,  genius  dif- 
dains  to  move  in  (hackles,  or  to  tread  beaten  paths. 
Originality  is  its  conftant  aim.  It  mud  candidly,  be 
©wned,  that  revelation  has  fome  doctrines,  fupcrior  to 
our  reafon.  Otherwife,  we  fliould  have  no  exercife 
for  our  faith  ;  and  our  organs  of  perception  would  be 
too  fubtile  and  too  refined  for  a  mortal  ftate.  And 
thefe  very  enlightened  men  choofe  not  to  flop  at  myf- 
teries,  but,  in  the  pride  of  under  landing,  arrogantly 
diihelieve  what  they  cannot  comprehend. 

Happy  the  humble  chriftian,  who  fubmits  and  adores ! 
who  confiders  reafon  but  as  an  mperfeel  guide,  and  pa- 
tiently waits  the  moment,  when  the  fplendours  of  full 
difcovery  mail  mine  around  him  ! 


LETTER  XVIII. 

"MY     DF.AR     LUCY, 

AFTER  all  the  noife,  that  has  becq  made  about 
him,  what  has  this  great  Lord  Chetterfield  writ- 
ten ?  What  new  ideas  has  he  communicated  to  the 
world  ? 

He  has  given  us  a  few  Sketches  of  heathen  mythol- 
ogy, of  the  Grecian,  Roman  and  Englilh,  hiitories, 
written  in  a  pleafing  ftyle  ;  and  he  has  inculcated  upon 
youth,  that  excellent  maxim,  of  not  looting  a  fingle 
moment  from  improvement.  A  man  of  very  moderate 
talents  might  have  done  likewife.      He  had  doubtkfs, 


48  LETTERS  TO  A 

fome  claim  to  tafte  ;  but  very  little  frrength  or  origin- 
ality of  genius  appears  through  lus  writings,  but  he  was 
a  nobleman,  who  had  been  confpicuous  for  his  flation, 
and  his  coronet  had  reflected  a  luftre  on  his  page. 

What  real  critic  mult  not  fmile  at  his  decifion,  when 
he  boldly  pronounces  the  Henriade  of  Voltaire,  fiyc- 
rior  to  the  Iliad,  the  JEneid,  and  to  Paradife  Loll  ? 
Perhaps,  this  poem  may  be  free  from  fome,  little  fpots 
of  the  others  ;  but  then  it  is  not  a  fun,  whofe  fire  con- 
fumes  every  (lighter  blemilh,  and  leaves  the  reader 
"wrapped  in  a  profound  enthufiafm  and  amazement. 

If  it  furpafles  them  in  a  cold  corre&nefs,  has  it  their 
fublimity,  their  energy  and  fire  ?  If  it  has  not  their 
excrefcences,  has  it  their  impaflioned  beauties  ?  Com- 
pared with  the  Iliad,  or  with  the  work  of  Milton,  it 
is  a  neat  fpruce  fir,  placed  near  a  fpreading  and  majek 
tic  oak.  It  is  a  gentle  rivulet  by  the  fide  of  a  foaming 
torrent,  or  a  magnificent  ocean.  It  is  a  pretty  artifi- 
cial fire-work,  playing  in  the  neighbourhood  of  a  tre- 
mendous iEtna. 

But  Voltaire  was  a  congenial  writer,  and  a  congenial 
foul.  In  praifing  his  Jupujlual  talents,  Cheflerfield 
did  an  honour  to  his  own. 

If  this  writer  had  not  been  a  peer,  who  would  have 
read  his  letters  with  fo  much  avidity  ?  All  he  has  pro- 
duced, would,  immediately  have  perifhed  with  the  other 
frothy  bubble?  of  the  day.  His  eternal  repetition  of 
"  graces,  graces,"  makes  one  abfolutely  fick  ;  and  the 
regimen  he  prefcribes  for  the  attainment  of  them,  creates 
him  an  enemy,  in  every  friend  of  religion  and  of  virtue. 

Society  fhould  burn  his  books.  All  the  women  in 
the  world,  mould  form  an  unanimous  confederacy  a- 
gainft  him.  Ke  has  done  every  thing  in  his  power  to 
render  them  detedable  ;  they  fhould  do  every  thing  in 
theirs,  to  make  the  infamy  of  his  character,  immortal. 

Read  him,  to  defpife  his  opinions  and  maxims. 
Read  him  that  you  may  refcue  the  honours  of  your  fex, 


YOUNG  LADY.  49 


and  give  the  lie,  in  your  own  example,  to  every  libelht 
has  uttered,  and  every  fcandal  he  has  endeavoured  to 
propagate  through  the  world. 


LETTER  XIX. 

GIBBON  is  fplendid,  elaborate,  elegant.  To 
me,  however,  he  is  not,  always, perfpicuous.  I 
tan  fometimes,  obliged  to  paufe  to  difcorer  his  meaning. 
This  arifes  from  his  having  ftudied  an  uniform,  con- 
denfed  harmony  of  period,  or  attempting  to  graft  ^he 
peculiarities  of  Tacitus,  on  the  Englilli  idiom.  He 
is,  however,  on  the  whole,  a  captivating  writer ;  and 
I  would  not  forbid  you  the  pleafure  of  perufing  his  in- 
terefting  work.  You  may  admire  his  language,  with- 
out imbibing  his  infidelity.  It  is,  indeed,  fo  artfully 
concealed  under  beds  of  rofes,  that,  if  you  had  not 
heard  fo  much  about  it,  you  would  not  eafily  have  dis- 
covered the  venom  of  his  pen. 

What  could  induce  this  fplendid  hiftorian  fo  infidi- 
oufly  to  attempt  the  undermining  of  chriftianity,  which 
is  the  greateft  balm  and  fweetner  of  life  ?  What  are 
his  rounded  periods,  if  they  have  a  tendency  to  rob 
the  world  of  its  fublimeft  profpects,  and  of  all  its  fup- 
porting  hopes  ?  What  will  the  fame  of  talents  avail 
him,  if  he  has  done  his  ufcmoft  to  circulate  infidelity,  as 
widely  as  his  writings,  and  drew  his  paths,  in  every 
place,  through  which  he  has  pailed,  with  heaps  of  the 
murdered. 

It  is  amazing  that  authors  do  not,  more  frequently, 
look  forward  to  the  moment,  when  to  have  made  a 
noife  in  the  world,  \>yfmgular  opinions,  will  convey  no 
joy  or  comfort  to  the  heart ;  and  when  the  only  eon- 
folation  muft  be,  that  they  have  laboured  to  promote 
t-he  glory  of  God,  and  the  benefit  of  man. 


5o  LETTERS  TO  A 

I  would  not,  for  the  richeft  mitre  in  the  kingdom, 
be  a  Gibbon,  in  my  lateft  moments.  In  health  and 
profperity,  we  may  be  dazzled  with  tinfel.  But  when 
we  come  to  die,  every  thing  will  vanifh,  but  piety  and 
truth. 

Immoral  writers  may  do  the  greateil:  mifchief  to  fo- 
ciety,  cf  any  other  characters  whatever.  They  may 
corrupt  and  taint  the  morals  of  the  mod  diftant  pofter- 
ity.  In  this  fenfe,  they  may,  for  a  long  time,  continue 
to  be  finning,  when  their  bodies  are  entombed.  Their 
fentiments  may  convey  a  deadly  poilbn,  to  operate  on 
many  generations  yet  unborn.  And  what  reparation 
or  atonement  can  they  make  for  unhinged  principle, 
for  violated  integrity,  and  undermined  hope.  The 
Romifh  Church  has  a  very  finking  doclrine,  that  fuch 
people  continue  in  purgatory,  the  longefr.  of  all  others. 

I  blefs  God,  that  I  never  wrote  a  line,  however  fee- 
ble, but  with  a  good  intention.  And  may  this  pen 
drop  from  my  hands,  before  it  ever  leads  me  to  finifh  a 
period,  that  (hall  give  me  one  uncomfortable  thought, 
or  one  feeling  of  remorfe,  in  my  expiring  moments. 


LETTER  XX. 

MY    DEAR     LUCY, 

THOUGH,  from  principle,  a  declaimer  againft 
novels,  yet  of  one  writer,  who  goes  under  this 
name,  I  profefs  myfelf  a  paflionate  admirer.  I  mean 
Richardfon.  His  works,  indeed,  arc  not  to  be  exam- 
ined by  the  flricl  laws  of  a  faflidious  criticifm.  They 
have  many  luxuriancies,  and  too  much  prolixity.  The 
language  is  natural  and  eafy,  but  it  is  not  condenfed  into 
the  elegant  concifenefs  and  energy  of  the  ancients. 
Richardfon  was  a  ftranger  to  the  inimitable  models  of 


YOUNG  LADY.  51- 

Greece  and  Rome.  He  was  not  a  clajfic  ;  but  he 
poffeffed  a  molt  extenfive  knowledge  ef  human  life  and 
manners  ;  his  judgment,  was  ftrong  and  penetrating  ; 
his  talte,  accurate  ;  his  fenfibility,  exquifite  ;  his  ima- 
gination, wonderful  ;  and  his  heart  impailioned.  Maf- 
ter  of  the  human  character,  he  knew  all  its  meandrings. 
Matter  of  the  human  foul,  he  penetrated  into  all  its  fol- 
dings and  receffes. 

With  the  fame  breath,  and  in  the  fame  moment,  he 
melts,  he  tranfports,  he  elevates,  he  dignifies,  he  con- 
vinces, and  inftrucls.  Pathos  is  all  his  own.  "  He 
"  opens  the  hardeft  rocks  by  the  mere  force  of  his 
"  narrative,  and  the  waters  flow." 

Richardfon  was,  indeed,  a  writer  of  no  trifling  mag- 
nitude. He  was  a  genius  of  no  ordinary  kind.  De- 
grade this  ethereal  fpirit,  as  you  will,  it  will  mount  up 
to  its  kindred  ikies.  Call  Jhim  a  novell/l,  his  merit  rifes 
above  names  and  forms.  Theje  cannot  debafe  his  tal- 
ents. Handle  this  fubftance,  as  roughly  as  you  pleafeP 
it  returns,  with  ?.n  elalHc  vigour,  to  its  ufaal  fhape,  and 
defies  oppofition. 

But  the  excellency  of  his  'intention  is  above  all  praife. 
The  interefts  of  virtue  and  religion  were  near  his-heart  ; 
and  he  chofe  the  epidolary  plan  merely  to  engage  the 
attention  of  his  readers,  and  that  imagination  might 
lend  its  livelier!:  ckarms  to  animate  his  precepts. 

What  a  pattern  of  all  virtues  and  graces  is  his  Gran- 
difon  !  What  a  lovely  and  (mimed  girl,  is  his  Harriet 
Byron  !  What  an  unruffled  piety  !  What  a  melting 
affeclion  1  What  filial  duty  to  her  aged  grandmother  I 
What  a  kind  lympathy  with  all  her  friends  !  What 
fenfibility,  yet  what  prudence  !  What  tendernefs,  yet 
wh.it  difcretion  appear  in  her  character  !  How  nicely 
13  her  ferioufnefs  mixed  with  vivacity,  her  line  fenfe 
with  modefty,  and  her  franknefs,  with  decorum  !  How 


LETTERS  TO  A 


fondly  does  fhe  love,  yet  how  delicately  does  fhe  man- 
age and  regulate  the  flame  ! 

When  fhe  pined,  in  fecret,  with  an  unconquerable 
attachment,  what  cheerfulnefs  to  all  her  friends  burft 
through  the  heavy  gloom,  that  lowered  on  her  mind  ! 
What  fear  of  giving  any  pain  to  others,  though  com- 
fortlefs  herfelf  !  What  veneration  did  fhe  exprefs  for 
the  unhappy  Clementina  !  What  a  generous  concern 
for  the  innocent,  girlifh  emotions  of  Emily  !  What  aa 

unaffected  friendship  for  the   lively  Lady  G ,  and 

when  fhe  was  really  addreffedby  her  Grandifon,  with 
what  an  open  franknefs,  yet  what  a  guarded  delicacy 
and  involuntary  confafion,  did  fhe  tell  him  that  he  had 
the  full  pofTtflion  of  her  foul  ! 

How  venerable  and  engaging  has  this  writer  made 
the  character  of  a  clergyman,  in  the  cafe  of  Dr.  Bart- 
lett  !  Howjudicioufly  has  he  mixed  the  pallor,  with 
the  friend,  and  combined  the  mod  rigid  principles*, 
with  the  fofteft  and  mofl  attractive  graces.  What  in- 
nocence, integrity,  and  what  prudence  and  caution 
about  interfering  in  family  concerns,  has  he  given,  in 
another  work,  to  Dr.  Lewen  !  What  an  independent 
fpirit,  likewife  ;  what  a  learning  to  the  fide  of  the  un- 
fortunate ClarifTa,  in  oppofition  to  all  the  greatefl:  of 
her  friends  ;  what  a  glowing,  nniverfal  benevolence  ; 
what  aferene,  and  undiffembled  piety  !  Andhowffrik- 
ingly  has  he  contrafled  both  with  the  cunning  hypocrify 
and  pedantic  affectation  of  another  perfon,  who,  like- 
wife,  wore,  without  really  deferring,  fo  facred  a  garb  !' 

In  oppofition  to  modern  cuftoms,  which  under  a 
falfe  idea  of  greatnefs,  would  trample  on  facred  cere- 
monies, and  bring  the  holy  ordinances  of  religion,  to 
their  owa  fire-fide* •,  in  a  manner,  which  divefh  them 
of  all  folemnity  and  decorum,  what  an  invincible  at- 
tachment does  his  Grandifon  difplay  to  all  the  decen- 
cies and  duties  of  the  church  !  What  a  reluctance  does 
he  exprefs  againft  having  his  marriage  defecvated  by  a 


YOUNG  LADY. 


St 


ate  celebration  ;  and  how  does  he  oblige  his 
timid  and  his  bluflong  Harriet  to  vow  at  the  altar,  in 
the  prefence  of  God,  and  in  the  face  of  day,  her  obe- 
dience and  her  affe&ion  !  In  fact  thefe  outward  decen- 
cies are  the  very  fences  of  piety.  Break  them  down, 
and  the  facred  enclofure  will  foon  become  "  common 
"  and  unclean. " 

If,  in  fliort,  I  wifhed  a  girl  to  be'  every  thing,  that 
was  great,  I  would  have  her  continually  frudy  his 
Clarifla.  If  I  was  ambitious  to  make  her  every  thin£, 
that  was  lovely,  (he  fhould  fpend  her  days  and  nights, 
in  contemplating  his  Byron. 

I  mufl,  however,  confefs  a  ftrong  preference  for  the 
work  of  Sir  Charles  Grandifon.  The  reading  of 
Clarifla  leaves,  upon  the  mind,  too  melancholy  im- 
preffions.  Her  diftrefTes  are  too  deep  and  too  unvari- 
ed for  fenfibility  to  bear.  She  was  every  thing,  that 
was  virtuous,  and  we  look  up  with  admiration.  She 
was  every  thing,  that  was  miferable,  and  we  look  down 
with  defpair.  We  are  tempted  to  fancy,  that  "  there 
"  is  no  reward  for  the  righteous,  nor  any  God  that 
"  judgeth  the  earth.'7 

There  is  a  certain  point,  beyond  which  our  paflions 
will  not  bear  to  be  racked.  Beyond  it  even  fympa- 
thy,  the  lovelieft  of  them  all,  tarns  into  the  wildnefs 
of  defpair.  Virtue  may  have  its  forrows  and  its  tri- 
als ;  but  they  fhould  not  be  perpetual.  Hope  would 
ceafe  to  bloom,  and  the  year  become  intolerable,  if  it 
was  wholly  compofed  of  a  dull  and  dreary  winter, 
without  a  fpripg.  If  Providence  did  not,  generally, 
interfere  in  favour  of  its  faints,  religion,  I  fhould  fu£- 
ped,  would  foon  lofe  one  of  its  ftrongeft  encourage- 
ments, and  mod:  fovereign  fupports. 

Mifs  Byron  is  always  lovely,  and  always  enchant- 
ing. Her  virtues  are  more  within  the-  reach  of  mor- 
tality. Her  afflictions  are  lefs  poignant  ;  and  when 
her  long  attachment  is  crowned  with  iuccefs,  every 


54  LETTERS  TO  A 

good  mind  feels  a  pleafure,  too  big  for  expreflion. 
We  arc  happy  for  Clarirfa,  only  when  {lie  is  dead. 
We  are  very  agreeably  interefted  for  Mils  Byron, 
through  every  period  of  her  life,  and  Lady  Grandifon 
chariBS  us  into  congratulating  triumph. 


LETTER  XXI. 

YOU  fay  very  truly,  that  the  pictures  of  Richai d- 
fon  are  drawn  above  life ;  that  Sir  Charles 
Grandifon  never  exifted,  except  in  idea,  nor  fo  ac- 
complifhed  a  woman,  as  Harriet  Byron. 

All  this  is  granted.  Mortality  does  not  admit  of 
perfection.  Light  and  made  go  together.  Foibles 
and  perfections  are  an  infeparable  mixture.  The  rich 
foil,  which  produces  great  talents,  by  the  fame  prolific 
energy,  narfes  the  ranked  weeds. 

But  what  is  all  this  againft  his  writings  ?  Why  peo- 
ple, you  fay,  are  deterred  from  attempting  to  imitate 
fo  exalted  a  pattern.  But  that  would  be  a  mark  of 
an  ignoble  foul,  and  of  a  luktwarmnefs  in  the  caufe 
of  religion  and  virtue.  If  we  defpair  of  attaining  to 
all  their  perfeEticns,  is  it  nothing  to  approximate,  as 
nearly  as  we  can  ?  Is  it  not  a  noble  and  a  glorious  em- 
ulation, atleaft,  to  exert  our  almojl  firength,  when  wc 
are  running  the  race  of  immortality  ? 

The  founder  of  our  holy  religion  is  much  more 
highly  raifed  above  our  imitation,  and  yet  do  not  the 
fcriptures  prefs  us  to  make  the  neceffary  attempt  ? 
Who  ever  thought,  this  pattern  blameable,  becauie  '~o 
exalted  ?  Or  whoever  dreamed  of  remitting  his  endeav- 
ours, becaufe  he  could  not  reach  the  fublhnity  of  its 
virtues  ? 

The  one,  you  will  fay,  was  real ;  the  other  is  ficTa* 
•  tious  ;  this  is  human  ;  that  was  divine. 


YOUNG  LADY.  5S 

True  ;  but  arc  we  not  to  copy  this  divinity,  in  our 
degree  ?  And  who  can  blame  fancy  for  presenting  us 
with  a  perfeel  mirror  of  goodnefs  ?  If  imagination  can 
be  ufed  to  an  important  purpofe,  this,  I  think,  is  the 
plan  ;  if  it  can  be  fanflified  to  aid  the  interefts  of  piety, 
this  appears  the  mode  of  fanctification.  It  is  only  to 
be  blamed,  and  it  then  becomes,  in  all  thefe  books,  a 
moft  dangerous  and  unholy  principle,  when  it  exhibits 
fcenes  and  images  to  inflame  thofe  paffions,  which 
mould  always  be,  religioufly,  fupprefled. 

Nor  do  I  blufh,  on  the  whole,  cautious  as  I  mould 
be,  to  have  borne  this  humble  tefKmony  to  the  merit 
of  the  author  of  Sir  Charles  Grandifon,  to  have  offer- 
ed my  unavailing  incenfe,  at  his  fhrine.  If  I  durft 
preach  in  fome  fuch  manner,  I  could  make  more  con- 
verts. The  pulpit  will  never  have  its  full  influence 
and  effeft,  till  argument  is  mixed  with  ftrong  appeals 
to  the  heart  ;  and  till,  whilil  the  judgment  is  convin- 
ced, the  imagination  is  permitted  by  lively,  defcrip- 
tive  and  energetic  fallies,  to  captivate  the  foul.. 


LETTER  XXII. 

MY    DEAR    LUCY, 

I  REJOICE  to   find  you  difgufted  with    Trirtrarn 
Shandy.     I  never  thought  thefe  writings  fit  for  a 
lady. 

Let  me  candidly  afk  our  modern  fair  ones  ?  Could 
they  bear  to  hear  fuch  cotiverfatlons,  without  blufhing, 
or  exprefling  their  contempt  ?  And  mould  not  then 
the  eye  be  as  chaite,  as  the  ear  ?  The  firfr,  indeed, 
can  be  gratified  in  private.  But  can  that  delicacy  be 
very  exquifite,  which  can  regale,  when  alone,  on  fan- 


$6  LETTERS  TO  A 

timents  and  defcrlptions,  from  which,  in  public,  it  af- 
fects to  turn  away  with  indignation  and  abhorrence  ? 

I  have  always,  in  private  lamented,  that  Sterne  was 
a  clergyman.  He  might  be  a  lively,  humorous  com- 
panion, but  he  had  too  much  levity  for  this  profeflion. 
It  is  true,  he  had  talents,  but  what  is  ungoverncd  gen- 
ius, but  a  violent  flame,  which  burns,  inftead  of  warm- 
ing, and  dazzles,  where  it  fliould  enlighten  and  direct? 

This  writer  «has  done  inexpreflible  mifchief.  He 
has  opened  wide  the  flood-gates  of  indecency,  and  an 
overwhelming  torrent  has  poured  on  the  land.  He 
has  conveyed  indelicate  ideas  into  the  minds  of  young 
people,  under  the  fpecious  vehicle  of  fentiment,  and  he 
has  dignified  eventual  criminality  with  the  falfe,  infidi- 
ous  title  of  involuntary  attachment.  The  corrupted 
and  unblufhing  fair  has  glorified  in  her  fhame.  She 
has  appealed  for  her  juftification,  from  the  grojfnefs  of 
paflion,  to  fecret  and  irrefiflible  feelings  of  the  heart. 

It  is  a  jufl:  compliment  to  the  prefent  age,  that  the 
bed:  writers  preferve  more  decorum.  An  indelicate  al- 
lufion  would,  now,  be  efteemed  an  unpardonable  of- 
fence againft  the  public  tafte.  Even  the  Jlage  is  con- 
fiderably  reformed.  It  was  far  otherwife  in  (what  was 
called)  our  Augujlan  age.  Almoft:  every  author  of 
that  period  (Addifon  excepted,)  breathes  fomething  of 
indelicacy.  In  many  paflages,  Swift  is  intolerable ; 
Pope  indecent  ;  and  even  Bolingbroke,  with  all  his 
claims  to  birth,  as  well  as  eloquence,  is  not  without 
fome  grofs  ideas,  and  fome  vulgar  expreflions. 

But  the  great  corrupter  of  them  all  was  Swift.  The 
refcrvior  of  filthinefs  ;  all  the  feparate  ftreams  might 
claim  him  for  their  parent  fourcc.  I  have  already  giv- 
en my  fentiments  of  this  author.  It  is  not  neccflary  to 
iwe'll  the  invective,  or  add  any  thing  to  the  charges, 
■adduced  againft  him.  His  abilities  I  never  fufpec"ted  ; 
but  I  always  called  ia  queftion  his  temper  and  his  heact, 


YOUNG  LADY.  57 

Panegyrifts,  however,  have  enumerated  his  many 
virtues.  To  Ireland,  they  fay,  he  was  a  fkilful  patri- 
ot ;  to  the  church,  a  defender,  and  to  the  poor  a  friend. 

For  the  honour  of  human  nature,  I  will  not  endeav- 
our to  put  a  negative  on  thefe  virtues.  Let  them  all 
be  taken  into  the  general  account.  The  balance  will 
not  (till  be  heavy  in  his  favour. 


LETTER  XXIII. 

WHATEVER  devotional  writers  increafeyour 
piety,  by  all  means  ufe  thesi.  I  did  not  men- 
tion in  my  catalogue,  Mrs.  Rowe's  Devout  Exercifes  of 
the  Heart,  with  which  you  are  fo  muchpleafed,  becaufc 
to  me  they  appeared,  overjlrained,  and  rather  rhapfodies 
of  a  fervid  imagination,  than  the  dictates  of  a  cool  and 
a  difpaflionate  judgment.  But  if  they  really  warm  and 
edify,  that  is  the  great  and  ultimate  end  of  all  religious 
writings  ;  and  no  one  can  pretend,  in  this  refpecl,  to 
prefcribe  to  the  confcience  or  the  feelings  of  others. 

From  my  obfervations,  however,  upon  life  and  man- 
ners, that  piety  has  always  appeared  the  moft  durable, 
which  is  moft  founded  on  reafon  and  conviction  ;  and, 
though  I  abhor  the  cold  rock  of  fcep-ticifm,  yet  there 
is,  likewife,  fome  danger,  that  a  well  difpofed  woman, 
whofe  fenhbility  is,  as  yet  ftronger  than  her  judgment, 
may  founder  on  the  oppofite  quicklands  of  enthufiafm, 
or  of  fuperftition. 

Still  I  would  rather  fee  a  fraall  mixture  of  credulity, 
than  unbelief  ;  but  there  is  an  happy  medium  betwixt 
the  extremes  ;  and  it  is  very  obfervable,  that  thofe 
people,  who,  in  fome  peculiar  period  of  their  lives,  or 
under  fome  dijlrejfing  circumftances,  have  feemed  to 
foar  upon  the  wings  of  pious  zeal,  into  the  higheft  re- 


5S  LETTERS  TO  A 

gions,  have,  afterwards,  funk  below  the  common  level, 
into  a  ftrange  degree  of  carelefnefs  and  inattention. 

There  are  moments  in  the  moral  life,  when  fancy 
plucks  the  reins  out  of  the  hands  of  reafon  ',  and 
though  (he  drives  at  intervals  with  a  furious  rapidity, 
yet  nature  foon  becomes  exhaufted  with  the  violence, 
and  cannot  mount  fome  intervening  hills  without  (lop- 
ping for  refrefliment.  Sometimes  me  has  been  known 
to  fit  down  in  a  liftlefs  languor,  and  wholly  to  abandon 
the  journey  in  defpair. 

We  are  not,  in  this  (late,  formed  for  extremes.  Any 
of  the  paflions,  too  'violently  exercifcd,  would  wear  out 
an  imperfect  frame.  True  piety  is  not  the  blazing 
meteor  of  an  hour,  fiery  in  its  afpect,  and  engaging  the 
aftonifhrnent  of  a  gazing  multitude,  but  that  lbfter  and 
fettled  light  of  the  firmament,  "  which  mineth  moie 
"  and  more,  unto  the  perfect  day." 


LETTER  XXIV. 

I  AM  forry  to  fay,  that  you  difplay  a  falfe  tafte  in 
admiring  Kilkham'pton  Abbey.  I  am  now  fpeak- 
ing  of  its  merits,  merely  as  a  compofition.  It  is  not  ex- 
ecuted with  the  flail  of  a  mailer.  The  fame  uniform 
turn  of  period  and  of  fentiment,  and  the  fame  labored 
pomp  of  words,  is  viiible  through  all  the  different  in- 
fcriptions.  Surely  the  epitaphs  on  fo  many  charac- 
ters, all  written  as  might  be  fuppofed,  by  different  hands, 
mould  be  various  and  multiform. 

I  never  thought  epitaph  an  eafy  fpeeies  of  writing. 
It  requires  fuch  a  nice  difcrimination  of  character,  fueli 
a  force  of  pathos,  and  fo  concife  an  elegance,  as  fall 
not  to  the  lot  of  one  man,  in  a  thoufand.  Many  have 
attempted  this  ftyle  of  compofition  j  but,  in  my  opii 
•:few  have  fbeceeded. 


YOUNG  LADY.  59 

I  do,  indeed,  mod  cordially  deteft.  this  anonymous 
abufe.  It  is  contrary  to  all  my  ideas  of  civilization,  po- 
litenefs,  fortitude,  and  even  common  generofity,  and 
militates  againfr.  every  thing,  that  mould  conftitute  the 
real  character  of  a  gentleman,  or  a  chriftian. 

No  man  lives,  without  foibles  ox  particularities  ;  and, 
if  inftead  of  making  allowance  for  thofe  of  others,  in 
order  to  receive  an  indulgence  for  our  own,  we  ungen- 
eroufly  expofe  them  to  lidicule  or  contempt,  the  con- 
fequence,  in  fociety,  rnuft  be  a  general  coldnefs,  difgufl, 
rancour,  hoftility,  and  unceafing  perfecution. 

No  peifon  can  be  fo  circumfpeft,  particularly,  in  a 
public  character,  as  to  avoid  creating,  though  without 
intending  it,  a  number  of  little  piques  and  enemies  a- 
gainir.  himfclf ;  fometimes  even  by  an  inflexible  dis- 
charge of  necejjary  duties  ;  and  if  nis  character  mud  be 
taken  from  the  colourings  of  thofe,  whom  he  has  thus 
innocently,  perhaps  laudably,  offended,  all  his  virtues 
will  be  thrown  into  the  back  ground,  and  his  foibles 
aggrarated  with  the  utmoft  virulence  of  malice  and  re- 
fentment.  Prejudice  againjl^  may  render  the  mofr.  a- 
miable  perfon  ridiculous,  by  concealing  the  great,  and 
•bringing  forward  the  little  ;  and  prejudice/or,  may  give 
fomefort  of  merit  to  the  moft  defpicable  and  abandon- 
ed. Such  a  liberty  of  the  prefs  is  downright  hceniiouf- 
nefs  ;  and  every  friend  to  order  and  virtue,  if  he  will 
confult  his  own  feelings,  will  not  hedtate  to  pronounce, 
that,  of  all  [acred  things,  character  is  mojl  fo. 

If  a  perfon,  however  great,  had  wfe&mzungeneroujly > 
I  would  certainly  expofe  him  to  public  cenfure,  and 
drag  him  before  the  formidable  tribunal  of  my  country. 
I  would  appeal  from  the  oppreffion  of  any  individual, 
to  the  general  equity  and  can  dour  of  mankind.  This, 
I  mould  conceive,  not  merely  an  ad  of  jufHce  tomyfelf, 
but  like  wife  to  the  world.  It  is  a  common  interclt,  that 
./.fY however  high  in  rank,  or  in  felf-eftfmalion, 
fliould  meet  with  their  deferved  infamy  and  contempt.— 


oo  LETTERS  TO  A 

Such  a  difplay  of  true  fpirit  wonderfully  flops  the  prog- 
rcfsof  defpotifm,  and  teaches  Lnfblence  the  hard  le (Ton 
of  moderation.  But,  then,  it  mould  be  done  in  the 
moft  open  manner.  I  would  candidly  fubferibe  my 
name  to  the  charges,  I  adduced  ;  and,  whilft  I  (hewed 
the  world  that  I  feared  not  the  perfon  of  man,  I  would 
convince  mine  adverfary,  that  I  was  far  above  the  mean- 
nefs  of  taking  an  unmanly  or  ungenerous  revenge. 

This  honeft  courage  was  poiTeiTed,  in  an  eminent 
degree,  by  the  late  Dr.  Johnfon.  Nothing  has  pleafed 
me  more  in  the  hiftory  of  his  life,  than  his  truly  mag- 
nanimous conduct  to  the  late  earl  of  Chefterfield. 
When  he  undertook  to  compofe  his  elaborate  dictiona- 
ry, he  folicited  the  favour  of  inferibing  it  to  his  Lord- 
fhip,  who  was  then  if  I  miftake  not  Secretary  of  State. 
Flattered  with  appearing  the  patron  of  literature,  Chef- 
terfield  accepted  the  honour  of  the  dedication,  and  an 
honour  it  v/ouid  have  been  to  any  nobleman  in  the 
world. — In  the  progrefs  of  this  loDg  and  tedious  work, 
he  received  no  very  folid  marks  of  encouragement 
from  his  patron,  and  fufpected  on  the  whole,  that  the 
courtly  peer  meant  only  to  amufe  him. 

Johnfon  had  too  much  fpirit  either  to  brook  the  idea 
of  neglect,  the  chicanery  of  a  miniiter,  the  violation  of 
a  promife,  or  the  fervility  of  an  abject  dependence. 
He  was  not  likely  to  be  dazzled  with  the  glitter  of  a 
coronet,  or  intimidated  with  the  ceremonious  pageantry 
of  office.  He,  therefore,  wrote  a  formal  letter  to  the 
nobleman,  upbraiding  him  with  infrncerity,  difclaiming 
his  protection,  and  afluring  him,  that  he  did  not  want, 
and  never  would  receive,  any  of  his  favours. — The 
confequence  of  this  fracas  was,  that  he  afterwards  fhmg 
Cheiterfield  with  fuch  bitter  invectives,  and  fo  many 
pointed  (trokes  of  raillery  and  fatire,  as  made  him 
heartily  repent  of  having  roufed  his  refentment,  and 
defirous,  at   any  rate,  of  a  reconciliation.     Johnfon, 


YOUNG  LADY.  61 

however,  perfifted  in  his  antipathy,  and  never  after- 
wards, I  believe  wrote  a  dedication.  y 

If  Chefterfield  intended  only  to  dally  with  the  au- 
thor of  this  dictionary,  he  fliould  certainly  have  consid- 
ered, that  men  of  great  abilities  have  too  much  penetra- 
tion not  to  fee  through  any  flimfy  difguifes  of  a  min- 
ister ;  too  much  irritability  not  to  be  exafperated  with' 
hypocrify  or  artifice,  and  too  lofty  a  reliance  on  their 
own  native  powers  to  be  afraid  of  any  peer  or  monarch 
in  the  world. 

Johnfon,  it  is  true,  had  not  then  attained  all  his  em- 
inence and  diftinction.  He  was  comparatively,  but 
rifing  into  notice.  The  day  that  mould  announce  him 
the  hero  of  literature,  was  only  in  its  dawn.  But  con- 
trafted  with  his  folia'  merit,  what  is  the  paltry  tinfel  of 
ftation,  from  which  fome  people  immediately  become 
fo  fupercilious  and  forbidding  ? 

If  Cheflerfield  did  not  think  the  author  of  the  Ram- 
Wer,  greater  than  himfelf  ;  if  from  the  foot  alone,  he 
could  not  prognofticate  the  future  ftrength  and  in> 
menfe  proportions  of  this  literary  Hercules,  he  had  not 
a  fingle  grain  of  that  fhrewdnefs  or  difcernment,  for 
which  he  has  been  fo  much  complimented  by  the 
world. 

Such  is  my  idea  of  the  true  and  genuine  fpirit,  which, 
mould  characterize  a  fcholar  and  a  gentleman.  It  is 
not  a  ftiletto,  dabbing  in  the  dark,  but  a  challenge  to  a 
fair  and  generous  onfet,  in  which  your  antagonift  has 
the  opportunity  of  felf-defence,  and  of  managing  all  his 
weapons  to  advantage. 


LETTER  XXV. 

THE  beauty  of  the  lady  you  allude  to,  was  herauf- 
fortune.     It  infpired  her  with  an  immoderate 


6*  LETTERS  TO  A 

vanity,  and  that  vanity  paved  the  way  to  her  ruin.  It 
dug  the  grave,  in  which  her  peace  and  character  are 
now  intombed. 

And  after  all,  my  dear  girl,  what  It  this  beauty  ?  It 
is  a  little  clay,  caft  in  an  elegant  moald,  and  by  the 
hand  of  an  exquifite  artift,  fafhioned  into  fomething  of 
iymmetry  and  order.  It  is  a  fmall  mixture,  in  the 
cheek  of  rofes  and  carnations. 

But  who  needs  to  be  informed  that  clay  is  very  per- 
ifhable,  that  rofes  and  carnations  are  but  for  fummer 
moments i  and  that  afterwards  there  co.nes  a  long  au- 
tumn of  ficknefsor  a  {till  more  dreary  winter  of  infirmity 
and  old  age. 

How  traniient  are  the  power  and  duration  of  beau- 
ty !  How  very  flight  an  accident  or  difeafe  blafts  it 
for  ever  !  How  fatal  is  a  fever,  the  fmall  pox,  or  a  lit- 
tle corroding  grief  to  all  its  allurements  !  and  if  they 
do  not  perifh  fooner,  how  dreadfully  are  they  ravaged 
by  the  hand  of  time  ! 

Whilft  fummer  lafts,  a  few,  fluttering  infects  light  up- 
on its  lips  to  fip  the  fweets.  Some  flraggling  birds  of 
paffage  chirp  upon  the  neighbouring  fpray,  delighted 
with  a  view  of  the  amiable  object.  The  notice  is  en- 
chanting, and  imagination  promifes  that  it  fliall  be  eter- 
nal. But  the  firir.  ftorm,  that  comes,  alas  !  thefe 
feathered  fongfters  migrate  to  warmer  climates,  and  a 
ferener  fky,  leaving  all  its  withered  charms  to  perifh  in 
neglect ! 

How  ridiculous  is  the  girl,  who  wilfully  fwallows 
the  poifon  of  flattery  for  any  perfonal  charms,  and,  in 
the  height  of  her  intoxication,  can  be  infolent  or  con- 
ceited !  What  woman  of  fpirit  fliould  not  afpire  to 
qualities,  that  are  lefs  accidental  and  lefs  fubject  to 
change  !  What  woman  of  reflcxiofc  fhonkl  not  refolve, 
to  adorn  and  cultivate  a  mind,  whofe  treafures  may  be 
inexjiauftable,  and  whofe  attractions  nefer  die  ? 


YOUNG  LADY.  63 

I  pity  every  girl,  whom  nature  has  gifted  with  a 
very  pretty  face.  She  feems,  by  the  very  act,  to  have 
marked  her  out  for  trials  and  temptations,  and  our 
ftrength  is  not  always  in  proportion  to  our  confli&s. 

Molt  of  the  unfortunate  ladies  I  have  known,  have 
been  celebrated  for  their  beauty.  This  has  gathered 
all  the  woithlefs  of  our  fex  about  them  ;  and  called 
them  into  battle,  where,  if  they  have  not  fallen,  they 
have  generally  received  confiderable  fears. 

Beautiful  women,  flufhed  with  conqueft,  often  neg- 
lect the  necejfary  cultivation  of  their  heart  and  under- 
flanding  ;  and,  if  every  man  would  examine  himfelf 
ferioufly,  and  was  required  to  give  in  a  lift  of  the  fe- 
males he  mojl  refpects,  the  prettied,  I  believe,  would 
not  generally,  be  in  the  number. 


LETTER  XXVI. 

DO  you  afk  for  patterns  of  conduct  after  what  I 
have  faid  of  Louifa  ?  I  do  not  think  you  want 
any  ;  but  I  will  mention  a  few,  which  jutt  occur,  and 
endeavour  to  appreciate  their  merits  or  defects. 

Addifon  has  fevcral  in  his  fpectators,  which  are 
wrought  up  with  inimitable  beauty. 

The  Ant'wpe  of  Cambray,  is  a  charming  picture,  but 
it  betrays  the  touches  of  a  popim  ecclefiaftic. 

Law's  Miranda  is  an  heroine  of  virtue  ;  but  (he 
breathes  too  much  the  aufterity  and  the  abltraction  of 
that  very  animated,  but  peculiar,  writer.  Her  piety  is 
too  monadic.      It  wants  grace,  cheerfulnefs  and  eafe. 

Richard/on*  s  Clan  [fa  has  qualities  above  woman,  and 
her  forrows  plunge  the  reader  into  defpair. 

Mifs  Byron  is  every  thing,  that  is  fmifhed  in  a  fe- 
male. We  admire  her  greatly,  but  we  lov&  her  more. 
R 


64  LETTERS  TO  A 

The  fiveetnefs  of  the  character  fwallowsup  its  dign 
in  the  amiable,  we  forget  the  great.      She  is  precifely 
what    every  man  of  principle  and  tafte  would   have  a 
woman  to  be,  when  he  wifhes  to  be  married,  and  wifhes 
to  be  happy. 

With  fome  perfons,  his  Clementina  may  have  her  fu- 
perior  excellencies.  A  paffion,  all  fentimtnt,  and  all 
directed  to  the  mine/,  and  a  fuperltitious  religion,  in  a 
particular  country,  wholly  vanquifhing  that  paflion, 
may  be  a  fine-fpun,  amufing  fpeculation.  But  to  me 
it  appears  vifionary  and  romantic  ;  and  the  admirers 
of  this  ftory  will  generally,  I  conceive,  be  found  a- 
mongfr.  thofe  ladies  who  would  gladly  perfuade  us,  that 
by  a  rant  of  goodnefs,  they  can  rife  above  the  innocent 
paifions  of  mortality,  and  all  the  natural  weaknefTes  of 
their  fex. 

When  I  wifh  to  be  delighted  and  charmed  with  wo- 
man, I  would  always  place  before  me  the  full-length 
piece  of  Harriet  Byron.  She  has  fentiment,  but  me 
has  frailty  ;  fhe  has  fpirit,  but  fhe  confeffes  herfelf  to 
have,  like  wife,  matter  in  her  composition. 


LETTER  XXVII. 

POOR  Louifa,  notwithftanding  all  her  goodnefs, 
is,  at  prcfent,  in  the  greateft  affliction,  and  for  a 
reafon,  which  reflects  no  little  honor  on  her  fenfibtlity 
.and  virtue. 

I  have  juft  received  a  letter  from  her  father,  inform- 
ing me,  that  Dr. ,  Rector  ©f  B ,  and  the  con- 
fidential friend  and  intimate  of  their  family,  ib  very 
probable  on  his  death  bed.  He  was  lately  called  up- 
on, it  feems,  to  vifit  one  of  his  hearers,  who  was  fck 
with  a  putrid,  fore  throat,  and  fever,  and  has  taken 
the  infection.     The   phyficians  entertain  but  flender 


YOUNG  LADY.  65 

hopes  of  his  recovery,  and  Philander*  has  been  ad- 
miniftering  to  him  that  holy  facrament,  which  with 
prayers  and  bleflings,  he  has  himfelf  fo  often',  admin- 
iftered  to  others.  The  whole  village  is  in  mourning. 
All  the  the  peafants,  I  an:  told,  appear  as  iheep  with- 
out a  fhepherd. 

This  good  man  was  well  acquainted  with  every 
perfon  in  his  parifli.  He  thought  it  his  duty,  to  vifit 
all  his  hearers,  to  inveftigate  their  fpiritual,  as  well  as 
temporal  wants,  and  to  remove  the  former  whilit  he 
extended  a  liberal  fupply  to  the  latter. 

The  death  of  fuch  a  perfon  is  more  than  the  lofs  of 
the  neareft:  relatives.  A  good  clergyman,  in  the  coun- 
try, unites,  in  his  own  perfon,  all  the  tender  connec- 
tions.     He   is   father,   brother,    guardian,  all  in  one. 

"Dr.  was    not  only    revered  as  a  minifter,  but  in 

every  family  welcomed  as  a  bofom  friend. 

A  religious  paflor,  indeed,  never  fully  knows  the 
comforts  of  his  office,  till  he  is  thus  united  to  his  peo- 
ple, "  till  he  knows  his  fheep  and  they  follow  "  him." 
In  fuch  an  intimacy,  hearts  expand  ;  many  excellent 
and  feafonable  advices  may  be  given  which  the  folem- 
nity  of  the  pulpit  would  not  admit  ;  little  griefs  are 
unbofomed  ;  little  perplexities  are  removed,  and  af- 
fection fprings  up  by  the  fide  of  duty. 

I  am  going  to  make  a  vifit  to  this  worthy  clergyman, 
and  will  give  you  the  earlied:  intelligence  of  the  (late 
in  which  I  find  him. 


LETTER  XXVIII. 

THE  apprehenfions   concerning  Dr. were 
but  too  well  founded.     He  is,  I  do  believe,  in 

•  Th«  Fath«r  of  Louifa. 


66  LETTERS  TO  A 

the  laft  ftages  of  his  life.  Death  is  on  the  point  of 
clofing  his  eyes,  and  opening  for  him  thejuit  leward  of 
all  his  labours  and  his  zeal. 

I  have  been  with  him  almoft  night  and  day,  ever 
(ince  I  had  the  pleafure  of  writing  to  you,  and  have  re- 
ceived a  (Longer  kflbn,  than  ever,  of  the  vanity  of  all 
earthly  things,  ar.d  the  fupremc  dignity  of  virtue. 

Thefe  folcmn  fcenes  wonderfully  improve  the  heart. 
They  drip  ambition  of  its  plumage.  The  world  ap- 
pears a  phantom  !  honours  and  promotions  all  a  dream  ! 

Though  I  have  been  much  aiTecled,  yet  I  have 
been  comforted  in  an  equal  degree,  by  his  cheerful 
piety,  and  edifying  conversation.  His  faith  and  re- 
signation rife  (uperior  to  his  pains.  They  are  literally 
big  with  immortality  ;  and  he  longs  to  bcdiflblved  and 
to  be  with  ChriO. 

Unwearied  and  exemplary  as  lie  has  always  been 
in  the  difcharge  of  his  paftoral  duties  he  is  continually 
lamenting  his  want  of  zeal,  vigilance  and  exertion. 
The  duties  of  the  minifrry  are,  I  do  believe,  beyond 
human  ability  :  "  who,  laid  St.  Paul,  is  fufficient  for 
4<  thefe  things?"  But  when  I  hear  the  declarations  of 
this  excellent  man,  and  compare,  as  it  is  natural,  his 
example  with  my  own,  I  cannot  but  be  ferioufly  alarm- 
ed, and  (ketch  our  nothing  for  my  own  lad  moments, 
but  remoife  and  fears. 

My  good  friend  and  his  lady  have  taken  their  laft 
leave.  It  would  have  touched  any  heart  to  have  feen 
this  interview.  I  cannot  do  it  julHce  by  words.  The 
pencil  of  a  Raphael  could  not  fully  reprefent  it.  It 
was  all  heart  and  foul.  Silent  looks  and  manner  were 
the  principal  language,  and  they  fpoke  indeed  !  Such 
a  woman's  breaft  panting  with  grief,  upon  fuch  an  oc- 
cafion,  rifes  above  the  powers  of  defcription. 

"  O"  (fays  the  expiring  chriftian,  raifing  his  lan- 
guid eyes  and  endeavouring  to  ufe  a  tongue,  which 
Seath  had  almoft  pallicd,)   "  be  as  you  have  been,  the 


YOUNG  LADY.  67 

*'  comforters  of  my  people  (for  they  alas  !  will  feel 
"  a  tranfient  void,)  andourfriendfhip,  I  doubt  not,  will 
"  fhortly  be  renewed  in  another  life.  Death  can  on- 
"  ly,  for  a  little  time,  feparate  thefe  bodies  :  our  real 
"  interefls,  our  fouls  and  happinefs  mult  ever  be  uni- 
"  ted." 

Louifa  is  inconfolable.  "  Tears  have  been  her 
"  meat  day  and  night  ;"  and  her  grief  is  the  heavier, 
as  (lie  is  not  permitted,  from  motives  ofjtrudence,  to 
fee  the  laft  ftruggles  of  this  excellent  man,  or  receive 
his  bleHing. 

"  Providence,  (fays  the  accomplifhed  girl,)  has 
"  now,  but,  one  heavier  ftroke  to  inflict,  and  that  is 
"  the  death  of  my  father,  or  my  mother.  Indeed  a 
"  fecGTid  father  he  has  always  been  to  me,  in  the  ful- 
"  left  fenfe  of  the  word.  What  has  not  this  good 
u  man  done,  what  has  he  not  ever  faid  to  train  my 
"  youthful  fentiments  to  virtue,  and  direct  my  fteps 
"  into  the  way  of  peace"!  To  him  I  could  difclofe 
"  every  riling  fear.  To  him  I  could  unbofom  the 
*'  anxious  forrow,  that  would  have  lurked  at  my  heart. 
"  But  why  mould  1  complain  :  Have  I  not  f till  a 
"  thoufand  comforts,  fpread  round  my  ret'rement  ? 
"  Have  I  not  yet  two  parents  left,  accomplidied,  as 
"  they  are  tender,  and  watchful,  as  they  are  good  ? 
"  It  is  improper  to  grieve.  I  will  dry  thefe  tears. 
"  It  is  the  Lord,  let  him  do  what  feemeth  him  good. 
i6  The  good  Abraham  was  required  to  facrifice  on 
M  the  altar,  with  his  own  hands,  an  only  fon.  And 
"   I  fhould   furely  learn  to  refign    without  murmuring, 

.  er  it  fnall  feem  meet  to  his  wifdom  and  g 
lt  osfsj  the  neareft  friend." 


R 


68  LETTERS  TO  A 


LETTER  XXIX. 


THE  conflict  is  finished.  The  pangs  are  over. 
Dr. is  no    more.      He  is   now,  I  truft,  a 

bJefTed  fpirit,  and  knows  no  longer  pain,  or  for  row,  or 
apprehenfion. 

From  the  natural  tendernefs  and  fenfibility  of  his 
temper  you  may  wonder  that  he  lived  and  died  un- 
married. But  it  is  a  fccret  krown  only  to  his  intimate 
friends  that  he  had  formed  an  attachment,  in  his  ear- 
ly years,  which  being  difappointed  by  the  death  of  the 
lady,  the  delicacy  of  his  mind  never  afterwards  ad- 
mitted of  another.  His  partiality  was  not  of  the  com- 
mon fugitive  kind.  It  was  a  deep  and  permanent  im- 
preflion.  Having  once  fondly  loved,  he  attempted  to 
love  no  more. 

As  his  private  fortune  was  comfortable,  and  his  pre- 
ferment, good,  you  will  conclude,  perhaps,  that  he 
died  very  rich.  But  this  is  not  the  cafe.  The  poor 
were  constantly  fed  from  his  table,  as  well  as  edified  by 
his  counfels.  He  was  a  living  example  of  the  charity 
he  recommended,  and  a  witnefs  of  the  truth,  "  that  it 
*l  is  more  blefTed  to  give  than  t©  receive." 

Though  remarkable  for  his  prudence,  as  well  as  paf- 
toral  zeal,  yet  having  but  a  few,  distant  relatives,  who 
were  all  in  very  eafy  circumftances,  he  has  only  left  to 
each,  an  equal  legacy  office  and  the  remainder  of 
the  £$ooo,  he  pofefled,  is  entirely  devoted  to  chari- 
table ufes. 

To  each  of  hi*  three  fervants,  he  has  bequeathed  an 
annual  /lipend  of  £2.0,  on  this  eafy  condition,  howev- 
er that  they  be  never  abfent,  when  in  health,  from  the 
church  or  faciament ;  that  they  always  appear  neat  and 
•decent.  2nd  that  they  lay  ujx,  from  their  pittance,  one 
ilngle  fix  pence  on  the  firfc  day  of  every  week,  to  be, 
expended  in  charity.     The  rcfidue  of  his  fortune  is  to 


YOUNG  LADY.  69 

be  employed,  partly  in  eftablifhing  a  fund  for  the  dif- 
tribution  of  religious  books  and  tracts,  amongft  the 
poor  and  ignorant  of  his  parifti,  at  the  difcretion  of  the 
minifter  ;  and,  partly,  for  the  clothing  and  educating 
a  fpecific  number  of  boys  and  girls  in  a  fchool,  which 
he  had  founded,  and  very  principally  fupported  in  his 
life-time. 

My  friend  and  I  are  joint  executors.  To  him  he 
has  demifed  a  considerable  part  of  his  excellent  libra- 
ry ;  to  me  a  number  of  books,  which  are   at    once    a 

monument  of  his  talle  and  friend/hip  ;  to  Mrs. , 

all  the  elegant  furniture  of  his  drawing  room,,  and  to 
his  fweet,  and,  as  he  (tyles  her,  ever  dear  Louifa,  his 
pictures,  ftatues,  bulls  and  petrefactions,  befide  a  num- 
ber of  devotional  authors,  gilt  and  finimed  with  an  el- 
egance and  beauty,  which  exprefs  the  opinion  he  had 
juftly  conceived  of  her  cultivated  mind. 

When  the  poor  girl  was  informed  of  this  legacy,  fhe 
burff.  into  a  flood  of  tears,  nor  could  all  the  tender  of- 
fices of  her  friends  confole  her.  "  How  infupportable 
"  (faid  fhe,)  is  this  man's  generofity  !  with  what 
"  a  cruel  kindnefs  does  he  haunt  me  after  death  !  Had 
"  it  not  been  for  this  perhaps,  I  mould  more  eafily 
"  have  learned  the  hard  leflon  of  refignation.  But 
u  this  tendernefs  renews  my  grief,  and  tears  open 
"  afrefli  the  wounds,  which  I  have  been  fummoning 
"  all  my  fortitude  to  clofe.  But  why  mull  I  not  fee 
"  this  good  man  on  his  death-bed,  to  teflify,  for  the 
"  lad  time,  the  warmth  of  my  gratitude,  and  the  fin- 
"  cerity  of  my  efteem  ? 

"  But  tell  me,  ye,  who  were  admitted  to  his  pref- 
u  encc,  what  faid  he  of  me,  in  his  lateft  moments  ? 
"  Did  he,  then,  at  all  recollect  his  Louifa  ?  Did  he 
<l  even  glance  at  fo  humble  a  name  ?  Did  he  fend  me 
"  one  precious  word  of  advice  ?  Did  he  conjure  me 
"  never  to  forget  his  directions  ?  Did  he  bid  me  to 
"  be  virtuous,  did  he  bid  me  to  be  happy  ,?  Yes,  blef- 


jo  LETTERS  TO  A 

11  fed  fpirit,  I  will  remember  thv  example  :  1 
"  will  treafure  up  thy  counfels.  Thy  inductions 
"  mail  never  fade.  Thy  memory  ihall  be  immor- 
"  tal." 

And,  now,  what  is  your  opinion  of  Louifa  :  "What 
think  you  of fuch  a  clergyman  ?  What  are  dignities, 
compared  with  fuch  virtues  ?  "What  are  kingdoms, 
contracted  with  fuch  joys  ?  Should  not  hiflory  embalm 
his  relics,  and  mould  not  gratitude  pour  over  his  undy- 
ing memory,  an  undying  perfume  ? 


LETTER  XXX. 

I   REJOICE  to  hear  that  you  have  fo  great  a  tafre 
for  paintings.      You  will  find   it   an  inexhauflible 
fource  of  pleafure  and  improvement.      For, 

"  Each  pfcafingart  lends  feftnefs  to  our  minds, 
"  And  with  our  (hidies,  are  our  lives  refin*d.'' 

I  will  give  you  a  very  handfome  eulogy  on  this  art, 
in  the  words  of  a  great  writer,  Quintilian.  "  Picture 
•**  (fays  he,)  a  hlent  and  uniform  addrefs,  yet  pene- 
"  trates  fo  deeply  into  our  inmoit.  affe<5Hons,  that  it 
w  feems  often  to  exceed  even  the  powers  of  eloquence. 
"  Its  effects,  indeed,  are  fometimes  amazing.  It  is 
M  faid,  that  Alexander  trembled  and  grew  pale,  on 
"  feeing  a  picture  of  Palamedes,  betrayed  to  death 
u  his  friends  ;  it  bringing  to  his  mind  a  Hinging  re- 
a  membrance  of  his  treatment  of  AriHonicus.  Por- 
"  tia  could  bear,  with  an  unfh;  iftancy,  her  Iaft 

"  reparation  from  Brutus  ;  but  when    flie  faw,  fome 
ut  hours  after  a  picture  of  the   parting  of  Hector  and 
Ci   Andromache,  (lie  bum  into  a  flood  oi"  tears. 
Ci  as  fjemed  her    forrow,    the    painter   fucaeircd  new 
1  Ci  ideas  of  grief,  or  imprciled  more  ftrongly  her  cms-3* 


YOUNG  LADY.  71 

Your  queflion  concerning  the  fupcriority  of  the  an- 
cients or  moderns  in  this  particular,  is  very  eafily  an- 
fwcred.  In  moft,  if  not  all  the  fine  aits,  indeed,  the 
former,  according  to  my  apprehenlion,  arc  abfolutely 
unrivalled.  By  the  ancients,  I  now  mean,  particular- 
ly the  Greeks. 

Whether  it  was  owing  to  the  particular  nature  and 
freedom  of  their  government — to  the  fuperior  honors 
and  cncouiagemesit  that  were  lavifhed  on  genius  and 
the  arts  in  this  more  early  period  of  fociety — whether 
to  any  particular  fuperiority  of  organization  in  the  na- 
tives of  this  country — whether  to  its  beautiful  fcenery 
or  the  allegorical  nature  of  a  religion,  which  fo  much 
called  painting,  poetry  and  fculpture  into  exercife — or 
whether  we  may  not  afcribe  it  to  an  happy  combination 
of  all  thefe  feparate  caufes,  it  is  certain,  that  their 
tafte  and  imagination  were  exquifite  beyond  thofe  of 
any  other  people,  and  produced  a  degree  of  excellence 
in  their  artifts,  that  we  cannot  find  in  any  other  age  or 
country  of  the  world. 

Raphael,  whom  all  Europe  has  fo  much  praifed,  ex- 
celled only,  as  he  formed  himfelf  upon  the  model  of 
the  Greeks.  The  Italians  (obferves  an  able  judge,) 
may  excel  in  colouring  ;  but  compofition,  drawing,  the 
art  of  grouping,  attitude,  movement,  cxprefiion,  con- 
trait,  drapery,  character  and  «race — all  thefe,  this 
great  genius  confefTedly  borrowed  from  the  ancient 
ftatues  and  has  reliefs. 

Palladio  is  the  firft  of  architects,  Michael  Angelo, 
Fiammingo,  Algardi,  the  mod  celebrated  fculptors, 
only  for  the  fame  reafon  ;  they  ftudicd  the  Greeks. 
Yet  Angelo  was  the  boldeft  genius,  that  Italy  ever  had. 
"  It  was  he,  who  conceived  the  idea  of  placing  the 
"  pantheon  in  the  air,  and  conflruelcd  the  dome  of  St. 
"   Peter's  on  the  fame  dimenfions." 

Nor  in  letters  were  the  Greeks  lefsthe  model  of  per- 
fection.    To  emulate  their  beft  writers  has   been  the 


72  LETTERS  TO  A 


ambition  of  every  fucceeding  age.  And  excellence 
has  been  attained  only  in  proportion  to  the  fuccefsful- 
nefs  of  this  imitation. 

The  firft  and  moft  complete  poem  in  the  world,  is 
Grecian — the  Iliad  of  Homer.  It  unites  all  the  fepa- 
rate  aft oriifhing  excellencies  of  this  moil  difficult  fpe- 
cies  of  compofition  ;  the  majdtic,  the  terrible,  the  pa- 
thetic and  the  fublime.  Naturali(ts,philofophers,  pain- 
ters, poets,  orators,  mctaphyfkians  have  all,  in  vaiious 
methods,  dug  from  this  mine,  and  dill  left  it  full  of 
inexhauftible  treafures.  It  is  proverbially  known  how 
much  the  great  Roman  orator  fhidied  Homer,  and  in- 
deed how  much  he  has  been  piaifed  by  the  whole 
world.      I  will  give  you  a  few  tcllimonies  in  his  favor. 

The  firft  critic,  that  ever  cxifted,  is  Longinus,  who 
wrote  a  trcatife  on  the  fublime  :  This  is  bis  opinion  of 
the  Iliad  : 

"  Thofe  only,  who  have  fublime  and  folid  thoughts, 
"  can  make  elevated  difcourfes,  and,  in  this  part,  Ho- 
"  mer  chiefly  excels,  whofe  thoughts  are  all  fublime, 
11  as  may  be  feen  in  the  defcription  of  the  goddefs, 
"  Difcord,  who  has,  fays  he,  her  head  in  the  fkies, 
"  and  her  feet  upon  the  earth  ;  for  it  may  be  faid, 
41  that  that  grandeur  which  he  gives  her,  is  lefs  the 
"  meafure  of  Difcoid,  than  of  the  capacity  and  eleva- 
"  tion  of  Homer's  genius."      Treatife  on  the  Sublime. 

Again  in  another  place  :  "  To  Homer,  that  is,  to 
"  him,  who  had  received  the  applaufes  of  the  whole 
"  world." 

And,  in  a  third  pafTage,  mentioning  the  number  of 
men,  who  had  endeavoured  to  imitate  Homer,  he  ob- 
ferves  : 

"  Plato,  however,  is  he,  who  has  imitated  him  moft, 
ci  for  he  has  drawn  from  this  poet,  as  from  a  living 
"  fpting,  from  which  he  has  turned  an  infinite  nuna- 
u  ber  of  rivulets." 


YOUNG  LADY.  73 

Another  excellent  judge  is  Horace,  who  bears  to 
this  prince  of  poets,  this  honourable  teftimony,  that  he 
taught  pbilofopl.y  better  than  many,  who  were  philofo- 
phers  by  profeffton* 

A  third  critic  of  no  inconfiderable  talents  has  thefe 
lines  in  his  favour  : 

On  diroit  que  pour  plaire  inftrutt  par  la  nature 
Homere  ait  a  Venus  derohe  la  ceinture  ; 
Son  hvre  eft  d'agremens  un  fertile  trfor, 
Tout  ce  qu'il  a  touche  fc  convertit  en  or. 

Pope's  opinion  of  him  it  is  not  necefiary  to  recite  ; 
and  the  Jerufalem  Delivered  of  a  great  author,  is,  from 
beginning  to  end,  a  tacit  comment  on,  for  it  is  an  at- 
tempt to  imitate,  his  greatnefs. 

Let  me  not  omit  the  compliment  of  Dante,  for  it  is 
worth  recording : 

Quegli  e  Omcro  pocta  fovrana 
SJgnsr  dtU'  altirtimo  c 
Che  fovra  gli  altri,  come  Aquila,  vola. 

The  bed  writers  of  the  Augu/b.n  age  of  Rome  for- 
med themfch  es  confiderabty  on  Grecian  models.  The 
mod:  perfect  authors  in  England,  France  and  Italy  ; 
Addifon,  Pope,  Racine,  Boileau,  Taflb  and  Metafta- 
fio  took  the  fame  method  to  arrive  at  perfection  ;  and 
one  might  challenge  the  whole  woi  Id  to  produce  any 
other  poem,  like  the  [Had  ;  an  orator,  equal  to  De- 
mofthencs  ;  fuch  a  finilhed  tragedy  as  the  Oedipus  of 
Sophocles  ;  any  figure  in  marble,  like  the  Belvedere 
Apollo;  fuch  fine  and  light  drapery,  as  that  of  the 
Flora,  or  a  female  beauty,  as  perfect  as  the  Venus  of 
Medici. 

The  great  Mbntefquieu  was,  for  fome  time,  in  Ita- 
ly, and,  as  you  may  fuppojfe,  no  fuperficial  obferver. 
This  was  his  decifion  concerning  the  Greeks.  "  Tafte 
u  and  the  arts  have  been  carried  by  them  to  fuch  an 


74  ITERS  TO  A 


"  height,  that  to  think  to  furpafs,  will  be  always  not  to 
"  know  them." 

I  have  been  thus  difFufe  on  a  fubjec~r,  that  may  ap- 
pear, but  it,  by  no  means  foreign  to  your  improvement, 
or  above  your  comprchenfion,  merely  that  you  might 
formjuii  ideas  in  your  favourite  art;  that  you  might 
know  why  we  fay  fo  much  of  claflic  or  ancient  wri- 
ters ;  and  why  cveiyperfon  (hould  emulate  their  man- 
ner, who  wifhes,  even  by  a  fingle  fentence,  to  pleafe. 
I  will  cloft  this  letter  with  adding  my  own  grateful 
tribute  to  the  venerable  (hade  of  a  bard,  that  fo  much 
delighted  my  early  years,  and  yet  fills  rae  with  a  pleaf- 
ing  enthufiafm,  every  time  I  perufe  him.  I  will  ufe 
the  words  of  a  French  writer  : 

Recois  l'eloge  pur,  l'hommage  merite  : 
Je  le  dois  a  ton  nom,  comme  a  la  veritc. 

Art  de  la  Gutrrt. 

Receive  this  pure  applaufe,  this  homage  due 
To  thy  great  name,  becaufe  I  know  ti3  true. 


LETTER  XXXI. 

THE  Italians  excel  in  fome  of  the  fine  arts.  In 
rivfu,  perhaps,  they  may  juflly  claim  a  decifive 
fuperiority.  Of  colouring  they  are  great  mafters.  A- 
mongfl  many  other  diftinguifhed  painters,  they  boafl:  a 
Coiregio.  No  one  could  do  more  honor  to  any  na- 
tion. He  is  the  very  pupil  of  nature,  and  has  won- 
derfully united  elegance  and  cafe.  If  Raphael  mines 
in  the  majejlic,  he  has  all  the  J oft  and  amiable  graces. 

In  land/cape  painting,  Italy  is  unrivalled.  Thofe  of 
Claude  Lona'.M  are  fuperior  to  any  other  matter's. 
Perhaps  one  reafon  is,  the  beauty  of  the  fecnes,  fiom 
which  they  are  taken.      Viewed  collectively,  there  is 


YOUNG  LADY.  75 

not,  I  fhould  conceive,  a  more  delightful  and  enchant- 
ing country.  It  feems  to  mingle  all  the  foft  and  mild- 
er beauties  of  climate,  with  the  magnificent  and  tre- 
mendous ;  gentle  hills,  rich  vallies,  fruitful  extenfive 
vineyards,  with  craggy,  rugged  precipices,  with  the 
portentous  afpect  and  caverns  of  iEtna  ;  the  bay  of 
Naples,  with  the  formidable  grandeur  and  thunder  of 
Vefuvio. 

No  place  has  been  the  fcene  of  fo  many  memorable 
events,  or  given  birth  to  fuch  a  number  of  diftinguiihed 
men.  Tufcany  produced  Dante,  Petrarch,  and  Mi- 
chael Angelo  ;  Livy  was  born  at  Padua  ;  Titian  at 
Venice,  and  Ariofto  at  Ferrara.  Urbino  is  juftly 
proud  of  Raphael,  and  Parma  of  Corregio.  Rome 
claims  Tacitus  and  Lucretius,  Arpinum,  Cicero,  and 
Venufium,  Horace. 

If  my  leifure  and  opportunities  had  been  equal  to 
my  wifhes,  I  mould  have  gloried  in  traverfing  this 
country.  Every  ftep  would  have  had  a  peculiar  in- 
tereft,  and  every  fcene  revived  thofe  glowing  defcrip- 
tions  of  a  Virgil  or  an  Horace,  that  fafcinated  my  ear- 
hejl  years.  When  a  perfon  has  been  fome  time,  in  the 
world,  whatever  recals  the  frjl  days  of  life,  adminif- 
ters  the  fweeteft  pleafure.  It  is  the  picture  of  inno- 
cence and  tranquility,  whilfl  our  maturer  age  is  often 
a  buftle  or  a  {torm. 

In  ancient  Rome,  it  was  a  confefTed  maxim,  that 
true  politenefs  and  tafte  were  derived  from  the  Gre- 
cians. And  the  Italian  artifts  ftill  owe  much  of  their 
excellence  to  thefe  primitive  mafters. 

The  literary  tafte.of  the  Italians  is  very  exceptiona- 
ble. It  is  a  falfe  fublime,  a  fictitious  glitter,  and  a  bar- 
ren abundance,  and  has  loft:  the  true  Attic  fait  of  na- 
ture, of  truth  and  limplicity.  Hence  they  are  faid  to 
prefer  the  Gothic  works  of  Dante,  the  abfurdities  of 
Ariollo,  the  extravagancies  of  Marini,  and  the  tinfel 
S 


76  LETTERS  TO  A 

puerilities  of  Taflb,  to  the  tender  and  impa/fioned  de- 
scriptions of  Mctaftafio. 

The  French  feem  to  think  themfelves  exclufive  pro- 
prietors of  every  thing,  that  goes  under  the  denomina- 
tion of  tafte.  And,  indeed,  they  are  univerfally  ef- 
teemed  a  polifhed,  eafy,  graceful  and  fcducing  people. 
Few  of  their  writers,  however,  have  much  of  the  pro- 
found, or  that  bids  fair  for  duration.  Of  all  people, 
they  feem  leajl  to  have  fhidied  the  dailies.  Their 
ftile,  in  general,  wants  energy  and  compactnefs.  In 
many  words  they  communicate  but  few  ideas,  and  their 
imagination  is  permitted  to  run  wild  without  hearken- 
ing to  the  fober  dictates  of  judgment.  Though  trees 
in  bloflbm  are  a  beautiful  object,  yet  the  folid  advan- 
tage lies  in  their  fruit.  I  could  except  many  great 
names  from  this,  apparently,  invidious  cenfure.  One, 
particularly,  I  will  mention — that  is  Montefquieu. 
This  man  will  do  them  honor  with  all  other  nations, 
and  the  moft  diftant  pofterity.  His  Efprit  de  Loix  is, 
indeed,  a  mod  aftonifhing  performance.  It  unites  the 
depth,  the  phlegm  and  patience  of  fome  other  coun- 
tries, with  the  vivacity  of  that,  m  which  it  fprung. 

I  do  not  think  that  England  is,  by  any  means,  either 
from  climate,  or  other  foftering  circumftances,  the  nat- 
ural foil  of  the  fine  arts.  The  hot  bed  of  riches  it  is 
true,  has  raifed  a  few  exotics,  in  this  way  to  a  fuperior 
flavour  ;  and  public  encouragement  called  forth  many 
virtuofos  from  other  countries.  But  in  fact:,  we  are 
too  much  engaged  with  trade  and  politics  to  cultivate, 
in  any  extraordinary  degree,  x\\q  finer  emotions.  Com- 
mercial habits,  manufactures,  and  the  love  of  money, 
wherever  they  prevail,  will  always  be  the  grave  of 
virtu  and  of  tafte.  In  point  of  polite  learning  this- 
kingdom  has,  long  fince,  according  to  my  apprehen- 
fion,  been  at  its  zenith.  The  fun  of  its  Auguftan  age 
appears  to  be  fet.  But  for  profound  knowledge  and 
genius,  no  nation,  perhaps  in  the  known  world  has  beeir 


YOUNG  LADY.  77 

more  diftinguifhed.  Shakefpeare,  Milton,  Locke,  Sir 
Ifaac  Newton  !  what  other  country  can  produce  fuch 
a  group  ?  Nor  fhall  we  want  models  of  the  mod:  grace- 
ful in  writing,  whilfr.  we  can  read  the  works  of  Addi- 
ibn,  many  papers  in  the  World,  the  Letters  of  Lady 
Wortley  Montague,  or  thofe  of  Chefterfield. 

I  do  not  mean  to  deny,  but  that  general  fclence  is 
more  cultivated  among  the  moderns,  than  it  ever  was 
by  the  ancients,  and,  in  the  prefent  age,  more  than  at 
any  former  period  whatever.  Natural  philofophy  in 
all  its  branches,  chemiftry,  mathematics,  hiltory,  poli- 
tics, jurifprudence,  and  the  mechanical  arts  have  arri- 
ved to  a  wonderful  degree  of  perfection,  and  are  daily 
receiving  frefh  acceilions  of  improvement.  But  I  mult 
frill  afTert,  that  polite  learning  feems  to  have  fiourifhed 
moft  in  the  days  of  Swift,  Pope  and  Addifon.  What 
<an  be  the  reafon  ?  Is  it  that  being  then  more  new,  as 
having  but  juft  emerged  from  the  darknefs  of  the  times, 
it  was  treated  with  that  fuperior  refpect  and  deference, 
we  extend  to  a  ftranger  ?  Is  there  a  greater  dearth  of  real 
genius  ?  That  we  cannot  fuppofe,  if  we  give  ourfelves 
only  leifure  to  confider  the  many  exalted  characters, 
which  Britain  boafts.  The  cafe,  I  think,  is  clear,  that 
a  molt  extended  commerce  has  debafed  our  feelings 
and  vitiated  our  tafte  ;  that  the  grand,  political  intereffs 
of  the  nation,  as  it  is  now  circumftanced,  require  a 
mod  unremitting  attention  ;  that  the  high  road  to  hon- 
ors and  emoluments  chiefly  lying  through  the  bar  or 
fenate,  the  greatefl:  talents  in  the  kingdom  are  turned 
into  thefe  channels.  Men  rather  chufe  to  wrangle  and 
debate  themfelves  into  affluence  and  titles,  than  ftarve 
on  the  mere,  Jhadonvy  fame  of  an  elegant  production. 

Wherever  there  is  hope  of  patronage,  genius  fprings 
of  courfe  ;  and  though  his  prefent  Majcfty  has  always 
been  a  liberal  encourager  of  polite  knowledge,  yet 
nothing  can  effectually  counteract  the  wide,  and  mofl 
unlimited  agency  of  this  national  fituation. 


7«  LETTERS  TO  A 

Many  writers,  in  our  Augujlan  age,  arrived  by  their 
labours  merely,  not  only  to  confiderable  affluence,  but 
to  high  difKnctions.  They  were  carcfled  and  honour- 
ed in  the  moft  fafhionable  circles.  To  reward  and 
patronize  talents,  was  a  glory  and  a  pride.  It  is  very 
obfervable,  that  all  the  great,  literary  characters  of  the 
prefent  times,  who  were  born  neareft  to  the  period, 
which  I  have  defcribed,  retain  moit  of  this  liberal,  pat- 
ronizing fpirit.  I  could,  with  great  truth  and  feeling 
mention  fome  names,  if  Jituation  and  peculiar  circum- 
ftances  would  not  expofe  me  to  the  falfe  fufpicion  of 
intending  to  pronounce  fulfome  panegyrics.  But  will 
not  the  whole  world  acquit  me  of  partiality,  if  I  glance 
at  fuch  illuftrious  names  as  the  A — b — p  of  Y — k, 
the  prefent  Lord  C — 1 — r,  or  the  Earl  ofM — sf — d? 


LETTER  XXXII. 

YOUR  knowledge  of  the  Italian  language  is  much 
fuperior  to  my  own.  The  little  that  I  have, 
was  acquired  merely  to  read  a  few  productions  of  their 
heft,  authors,  and  be  able  to  form  fome  comparative 
idea  of  their  merits  or  defects. 

I  am  far  from  denying  to  this  people  the  praife  of 
great  genius.  But  I  fliouid  fuppofe,that  it  is  not  prop- 
erly cultivated,  and  the  reafon,  perhaps,  may  be,  that, 
in  modern  Italy,  learning  meets  but  with  little  encour- 
agement. 

The  bad  tafte  of  the  Italians  in  poetry,  is  obvious 
from  many  instances.  Dante,  in  their  eftimation,  is 
fuperior  to  a/I  men  ;  andAriofto,  whom  they  confider 
as  much  beneath  him,  they  exalt  far  above  Homer 
himfelf. 

Dante  had,  doubtlefs,  wonderful  abilities.  He  rifes 
in  many  inftances,  to  the  fublime  j  and,  for  the  times, 


YOUNG  LADY.  79 

in  which  he  lived,  may  juflly  be  considered  as  a  literary 
prodigy.  But  his  work,  on  the  whole,  is  but  a  goth'tc 
niafs  of  various  kinds  of  knowledge  ftrangely  heaped 
together  without  arrangement,  defign,  or  perfpicuity. 
To  compare  him  with  the  author  of  the  Iliad,  is  to  be- 
tray a  total  want  of  all  the  principles  of  enlightened 
criticifm. 

Ariofto  mines  in  narrative.  He  tells  a  flory  with 
gracefulnefs  and  eafe.  Some  of  his  defcriptions  are 
particularly  fplendid  ;  and  his  Orlando  Furiofo  is  a 
lively,  and  wonderfully  various  production.  But  how 
frequently  does  he  fall  into  ridiculous  abfurdities,  where 
he  entirely  lofes  fight  of  nature  and  of  truth,  forget' 
ting  that  excellent  rule  of  a  judicious  critic  : 

Tout  doit  tendre  au  bon  fens ; 
Bien'n'efl  beau  que  le  vrai,  le  vrai  fcul  eft  aimable. 

SAltfenfe  be  e;Ter  in  your  view, 
Nothing  is  teiutiful,  that  is  not  true  ; 
The  true  alone  is  lovely. 

TafTo's  Gerufakmme  Liberata  has,  indifputably,  great 
merit.  The  fubject  is  grand,  and  very  happily  chofen ; 
the  language,  elegant  ;  the  verfification,  harmonious  : 
but  who  can  fay,  that  it  does  not  abound  with  falfe 
thoughts  with  infinite  inftances  of  playing  upon  words 
and  a  prodigious  quantity  of  tinfel,  or  that  it  is  not,  in 
the  main,  disfigured  with  low  conceits,  and  trifling 
puerilities. 

No  Italian  writer  interefis  fo  much,  or  has  fo  nicely 
■developed  the  human  heart,  as  Metajlafo.  He  had 
great  advantages  by  being  introduced,  at  an  early  pe- 
riod of  his  life,  into  the  family  cf  the  celebrated  Gra- 
vina,  and  there  learning  to  explode  the  falfe  taile  of  his 
country.  He  formed  himfelf  on  the  model  of  the  an~ 
clems.  He  took  Boileau  and  Horace  for  his  guides, 
S  2 


"So  LTTERS  TO  A 

and  few  men  have  fucceeded  better  in  painting  tender 
fcenes,  or  leaving  a  durable  impreflion  on  the  heart. 
Read  his  Canzonettes,  particularly  that  which  begins 
with  Grazie  agV  inganni  tuol  ;  an  tell  me  whether  I 
have  formed  an  improper  judgment. 


LETTER  XXXIII. 

I  HAVE  now  finimed  my  recommendation  of  au- 
thors. I  am  apprehenfive,  indeed,  of  having 
mentioned  too  many.  But  from  the  whole  you  can 
JelecJ  the  few,  you  like,  or  which  it  is  moft  convenient 
for  you  to  purchafe. 

Some  of  thefe  books,  particularly  thofe,  which  treat 
on  religious  fubjecls  may  not  entertain  you  fo  much  at 
prefent,  as  they  will  at  fome  future  period,  when  your 
tafte  and  judgment  are  more  effectually  ripened  ;  but  I 
did  not  know  whether  then  I  might  have  the  opportu- 
nity of  writing  to  you  or  whether  I  mould  even  be  in 
the  world  ;  and  I  wifhed  to  give  you  fomething  of  a 
fyjlematic  plan,  that  might  be  confulted  through  every 
ltage  of  your  life. 

The  criticifms  upon  books,  characters,  &c.  have  not 
been  introduced  from  a  faftidious  fpirit,  or  with  a  view 
of  difplaying  learning  and  talents,  but  to  exercife  and 
improve  your  dif criminating  faculties,  and  enliven  the, 
other<wife,  dull  uniformity  of  didactic  letters.  I  have 
only  pre  fumed  to  give  my  opinion  ;  and  to  this,  in  a 
land  of  liberty,  and  in  an  enlightened  age,  I  conceive 
myfelfto  have  an  equal  right  with  the  firftfcholar,  or 
critic  frf  the  world. 

Louifa,  you  well  know,  is  not  zjicliiious  but  a  rccA 
character  ;  and,  though  ray  partiality  may  have  heigh- 
tened her  merit,  yet  after  all,  it  is  inexpreflibly  great ; 
and  I  introduced  her,  as  a. pattern  of  female  graces. 


YOUNG  LADY.  81 

merely  to  avoid  the  formality  of  precepts,  and  the*  au- 
thoritative airs  of  a  teacher.  I  confidered  this  mode, 
as  likely  to  communicate  fome  little  interejl  and  variety 
to  my  letters  ;  and  that  appeared  to  me  a  motive,  which, 
with  all  young  people,  fhould  be  confulted. 

On  the  whole,  confider  me  not  as  dogmatizing,  but 
only  as  communicating  to  you,  with  great  freedom  and 
fincerity,  the  beft  fentiments,  I  can  ;  thofe,  which 
convince  your  underftanding,  receive  with  candour  ; 
the  reft:  reject,  and  do  not  fancy  me  fo  conceited  ;  as 
even  for  a  moment,  to  have  perfuaded  myfelf  that  from 
my  tribunal,  there  lies  no  appeal. 


LETTER  XXXIV- 

MY    DEAR    LUCY, 

IF  I  was  called  upon  to  write  the  hiftory  of  a-za*- 
man\  trials  andforrows,  I  would  date  it  from  the 
moment  when  nature  has  pronounced  her  marriageable, 
and  fhe  feels  that  innocent  defire  of  afTociating  with  the 
other  fex,  which  needs  not  a  blufh.  If  I  had  a  girl 
of  my  own,  at  this  critical  age,  1  fhould  be  full  of  the 
keenefr.  apprehenfions  for  her  fafety  ;  and,  like  the 
great  poet,  when  the  tempter  was  bent  on  feducing  our 
fir  ft:  parent'sfrom  their  innocence  andhappincfs,  I  fhould. 
invoke  the  amftance  of  fome  guardian  angel,  to  conduct: 
her  through  the  flippery  and  dangerous  paths. 

You  muft  remember  the  pafTage  ; 

"  O  for  that warningvoice,  which  he,whoheard,"&c. 

Marriage  is,  doubtlefs  the  mod  natural,  innocent  and 
ufeful  (rate,  if  you  can  form  it  to  any  tolerable  advan- 
tage. It  bids  faireft:  for  that  little  portion  of  happinefs, 
which  this  life  admits  ;  and  is,  in  fome  degree,  a  duty 
which,  we  owe  to   the  world.     If  entered  into  from 


82  LETTERS  TO  A 

proper  motives,  It  is  a  fource  of  the  greateft  benefits  to 
the  community  y  as  well  as  of  private  comfort  to  ourfelves. 
What  are  the  higheft  bleflings,  unfweetened  by  fociety  ? 
How  poignant  are  many  forrows  of  life,  without  a 
friend  to  alleviate  and  divide  them  !  How  many  are 
the  moments,  how  many  are  the  exigencies,  in  which 
we  want  fympathy,  tendernefs,  attention  !  And  what 
is  a  moping  individual  to  the  world,  compared  with  the 
woman  who  acts  in  the  tender  character  of  a  wife,  or 
parent,  and,  by  a  religious  culture  of  an  offspring,  is 
training  up  inhabitants  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

A.  Jingle  woman  is,  particularly,  defencelefs.  She 
.cannot  move  beyond  the  precintts  of  her  houfe  without 
apprehenfions.  She  cannot  go  with  eafe  or  fafety,  in- 
to public.  She  is  furrounded  with  many,  real  dangers, 
and  fancy  conjures  up  more  fpe&res  of  its  own,  to  dif- 
turb  her  repofe. 

As  (he  goes  down  the  hill  of  life,  her  friends  grad- 
ually drop  away  from  her,  like  leaves  in  the  autumn, 
and  leave  her  a  pining,  folitary  creature.  Even  brothers 
and/ijlers,  when  married  themfelvcs,  lofe  their  ufual 
fondnefs  for  her,  in  the  ardours  of  a  newly  acquired 
connection  ;  and  me  wanders  through  a  wide,  buttling 
world,  uncomfortable  in  heifelf,uninterefting  to  other?, 
frequently  the  fport  of  wanton  ridicule,  or  a  proverb  of 
reproach. 

Men  are  often  too  much  engrofTed  with  bufinefs,  am- 
bition or  criminal  purfuits  to  think  very  ferioufly  of  thfs 
eonneclion  ;  but  if  they  happen  to  remain  Jngle,  their 
very  efforts  become  their  amufement,  and  keep  them 
from  experiencing  that  unquiet  indolence,  which  by 
enervating  the  mind,  powerfully  awakens  imagination 
and  the  fenfes.  A  woman  has  abundant  leifure  to  brood 
over  her  inquietude,  and  to  narfe  the  vapours,  till  they 
terminate  in  difeafe.  She  has  not  fo  many  methods 
for  diffipating  thought.  Her  element  is  her  houftholdt 
^rui  the  management  of  her  children  j  and  till  ilie  be- 


YOUNG  LADY.  S3 

cosies  a  mother,  fhe  has  not  objects  of  confequence 
enough  to  occupy  the  mind,  and  preferve  it  from  feeling 
unpleafant  agitations. 

I  mean  not,  however,  to  infinuate,  that  there  is  any 
thing  really  reproachful  in  virginity,  unlefs  a  woman 
choofes  to  render  it  fuch,  by  verifying  the  ftigmas,  which 
have  been  fixed  upon  it,  and  fiihflantiating,  in  her  own 
practice,  the  malevolence,  envy,  fcandal,  curiofity  and 
fpleen,  which  have,  fo  often,  farcajlically  been  impu- 
ted to  the  Jijier- hood.  It  may  be,  and  fometimes,  is, 
the  choice  of  very  amiable  women,  who  would  not 
marry  any,  but  the  man  of  their  affections,  or  with 
whom  they  had  a  rational  profpect  of  happinefs  ;  who 
having  been  by  death  or  difappointment  deprived  of 
one,  had  a  delicacy,  that  never  admitted  the  idea  of  a 
fecond,  attachment,  or  who  were  not  fo  devoid  of  prin- 
ciple and  tafte,  as  to  be  connected  with  a  difjolutc, 
drunken,  or  abandoned  perfon,  whatever  might  be  his 
fortune,  or  confequence  or  connexions.  Women,  who 
act  from  fuch  principles,  may  be  expofed  to  the  indeli- 
cate feoffs  of  the  licentious,  but  mull  have  the  unreferved 
eft eem  and  veneration  of  all  the  fenfible  and  the  good. 

It  fhould  not,  however,  be  diffunbied,  (for  it  arifes 
from  natural  principles,)  tfeat  married  women  are  gen- 
erally more  pleafing,  than  fuch,  as  never  formed  this 
connection.  Their  heart  is  continually  refined,  foft- 
ened  and  enlarged  by  the  exercife  of  all  the  tender 
feelings  to  an  offspring,  whilft  the  weighty  concerns  of 
their  particular  families  raife  them  above  that  frivolous 
infipidity,  which,  with  whatever  ju(Uce,  is  the  prover- 
bial ftigma  of  a  fmgle  ftate. 

A  married  woman,  likewife,  has  banifhed  that  my 
referve,  which  young  ladies  think  themfelves,  and,  in- 
deed, in  fome  degree,  are  obliged  to  practife,  but  which, 
neceffary  as  it  may  be,  conceals  many  of  their  loveliefi 
graces.  The  fociety,  moreover,  of  a. fenfible  man  gives, 
tc  a  female,  a  richer  fund  of  ideas,  a  fuperior  mode  of 


3+  LETTERS  TO  A 

thinking  and  a&ing,  agreeably  tempers  her  vivacity  with 
ferioufnefs,  and  introduces  her  to  many  improving  ac- 
quaintance, and  entertaining  circles,  from  which  the 
ceremonious  coldnefs  of  a  virgin  ftate,  mult  have  kept 
her,  at  an  unapproachable  diftanoe. 

Be  not,  however  difappointed,  if  all  your  merit  and 
amiablenefs  do  not  fecure  to  you  fuch  a  connexion,  as 
your  principles  and  judgment  can  approve. 

The  lives  of  young  men  are  fo  undomejlicated,  and, 
indeed,  fo  criminal,  that  deferving  women,  in  the  pref- 
ent  age,  are  far  from  receiving  thofe  attentions  and 
civilities,  to  which,  on  every  principle  of  juftice  and 
politenefs,  they  are  certainly  entitled. 

In  proportion  as  the  morals  of  men  are  depraved, 
marriage  will,  always,  be  unfafhionable  and  rare  ;  and 
there  are  thoufonds  amongft  us,  who  have  neither 
knowledge,  ifenfe  or  virtue  enough  to  wifh  for  all  that 
delicacy  of  friendfhip,  fprightlinefs  of  converfation  or 
eafe  of  manners,  which  only  an  accomplimed  woman 
can  beftow,  or  for  thofe  innocent  domtjlie  enjoyments, 
which  communicate  the  highei\yft7w«r  to,  and  are  the 
grand  and  ukimate  end  of,  an  intercourfe  betwixt  the 
fexes. 

Pleas  of  inability  to  fupport  a  family,  of  the  expen- 
Jivenefs  of  wives,  and  their  propenfity  to  fplendour  and 
dhTipation  are   ufed,  I  know,  by  fome  to  foften  their 
mifconducl:,  and  throw  njlimfy  veil  over  their  crimes. 

This  is  not  a  proper  place  for  reafening  with  liber- 
tines or  rakes.  Still,  from  their  arguments,  however 
trifling  or  fallacious,  you  may  deduce  this  ufeful  lefTon  ; 
that  an  extravagant  turn  for  .finery  and  /hew  is  a  great 
difadvantage  to  every  woman  ;  that  it  is  adverfe  to  all 
her  happiejl  profpecls,  and  prevents  not  a  few  from  ever 
■addrefling  her,  who,  in  reality,  might  have  been  the 
mod:  faithful  and  obliging  companions  through  life. 
Though  immoral  perfons  make  this  apology,  from  very 
•unjuftifiable  motives,  yet   many  others,  in  moderate 


YOUNG  LADY.  85 

circumftances,  might  advance  it  with  truth  ;  who, 
though  they  neither  want  integrity,  knowledge,  nor  a 
fenfibility  to  the  charms  and  merit  of  a  woman,  would, 
yet,  never  think  of  degrading  her  to  a  condition,  which 
they  conceive  to  be  beneath  her  wifhes  and  her  habits. 
I  have  long  confidered  the  immoderate  expenfivenefs 
of  young  ladies,  as,  by  no  means,  favorable  to  their 
profpects  or  happinels,  in  any  view.  No  parent  can 
take  a  more  certain  method  to  make  a  daughter's  life 
a  fcene  of  continual  irritation  and  misfortune,  than  by 
thus  ridiculoufly  training  her  to  high  expectations.  It 
has  been  the  gradual  death  of  many  ;  it  has  made  the 
exigence  of  others  a.  burden,  heavy  to  be  borne.  Nor 
can  there  even,  in  point  of  real  tafte,  be  a  greater  mif 
take'xn  education.  True  dignity  confifteth  not  in  tinfel 
or  (hew.  The  neareft  approach  we  can  make  to  fupe- 
rior  fpirits,  is  to  have  as  few  wants ,  as  poflible,  whilft. 
we  inhabit  this  tenement  of  clay. 


LETTER  XXXV. 

IN  your  manner  with  the  fex  at  large,  I  could  wifh 
you  to  avoid  the  modern  forwardnefs,  as  well  as 
thaty^y  referve,  which  throws  a  damp  on  all  the  inno- 
cent gaieties  of  life.  The  firfl  bears  upon  its  face,  a 
mafculine  indelicacy  ;  the  other  is  the  effect  of  down- 
fight  prudery,  \\\  breeding,  or  affectation. 

Some  women  affect  a  coldnefs  in  their  deportment, 
and  act,  as  if  they  fuppofed  that  every  man,  who  ap- 
proaches them,  had  a  defign  on  their  perfon.  Alas  ! 
how  miferubly  are  they  deceived  !  How  ridiculous  is 
the  vanity  which  gives  birth  to  fuch  a  conduct !  Men 
are  fo  much  engaged  in  bufinefs,  pleafure,  and  the 
amufements  of  the  world,  that  the  conqueft  of  a  female 
heart  is  often  thought  beneath  their  ambition.     At  any 


36  LETTERS  TO  A 

rate  it  is  time  enough  to  be  upon  your  guard,  when  you 
really  perceive  them  bent  on  tnakxngfcriotu  advances. 

Many  of  them  will  approach  you  with  Jlattery, 
This,  they  have  been  led  to  think,  the  only,  current 
coin,  with  the  generality  of  females.  If  it  be  not  very 
grofs,  bear  it  ,y:ith  good  humour.  Though  you  may 
defpife,  do  not  wantonly  return,  it  with  contempt. 
This  is  the  method  to  make  them  enemies,  and  put 
them  on  avoiding  your  fociety  forever.  You  may  ea- 
fily  be  civil,  and  yet  convince  them  by  your  looks  and 
manner,  that  you  perfectly  underftand  how  to  appre- 
ciate indifcriminate  complaifance. 

Though,  by  no  means,  ftrioufly  bent  upon  matrimo* 
ny,  yet  not  a  few  of  them,  will  pay  you  flattering  at- 
tentions. Thefe,  if  you  be  not  cautious,  may,  very  in- 
fenfibly,  foften  your  heart,  and  enfnare  your  affections, 
particularly  if  they  come  from  men,  whok  general  char- 
acter or  manners  you  efteem.  One  caution,  there- 
fore, permit  me  to  give  you,  with  an  ajfurance  that  it 
mud  be  religioujly  obferved,  as  you  value  either  your 
dignity  or  repofe — never  to  believe  any  man  in  earnejly 
till  he  makes  the  moft  pointed  declarations  in  your  fa- 
vour. 

Fajlnon  has  made  it  fo  much  a  matter  of  form  to 
pay  attentions  to  a  woman,  and,  particularly,  if  fhe  is 
fmart,  witty,  beautiful  ;  if  fhe  is  celebrated  for  high 
connections,  or  accomplifhments,  or  makes  a  good  fig- 
ure in  public,  that  numbers  of  men  will  be  mechanically 
led  to  flutter  about  you,  who,  in  fafly  mean  only  to 
amufe  the  moment,  or  do  honour  to  their  own  good 
breeding  and  politenefs. 

Believe  me,  my  dear  girl,  this  gay  and  lively  feafon 
vi\\\foon  be  at  an  end.  Girls,  that  dwell  on  every 
body's  tongue,  and  (port  away,  in  all  their  gaudy  co- 
lours, during  fummer  months,  like  butterflies,  are  never 
heard  of  in  the  winter ',  but  fink  into  a  torpid  flate. 
They  do  not,  however,  referable    foaie  infects  in  the 


YOUNG  LADY.  a7 

very  happy,  and  enviable,  privilege  of  rifing  with  re- 
neiued  charms.  Once  forgotten,  they  feldom  revive, 
but  are  difplaced  by  other,  rifing  favourites  for  ever  ; 
and  it  has  often  been  obferved,  that  thofc  women  are 
raoft  rarely  thought  of  for  wives,  with  whom  we  are 
the  fondeft  of  (what  is  called,)  flirting,  and  of  faying 
a  thoufand,  civil  things,  without  meaning  or  defign. 

With  men  of  principle  and  integrity,  you  are  always 
fecure.  They  will  religiowfly  beware  of  engaging  your 
affections,  without  honourable  views.  But  thefe  alas  ! 
where  'women  are  concerned,  are  not  fo  numerous,  as 
might  be  expected.  More  breaches  of  fidelity  are  ob- 
fervable  in  this  intercourfe,  than  in  any  other  inftance 
of  the  mod  trifling  importance. 

To  entertain  a  fecret  partiality  for  a  man,  without 
knowing  it  reciprocal)  is  dreadful  indeed.  If  you  have 
addrefs  and  fortitude  enough  not  to  betray  it,  and  thus 
expofe  yourfelf  to  ridicule  and  cenfure,  (and  yet  what 
prudence  is  always  equal  to  the  tafk  ?)  it  will  coft  you 
infinite  grief,  anxiety  and  vexation  ;  and  a  victory 
over  yourfelf,  if  you  do  gain  it,  may  be  at  the  expenfe 
of  your  health  and  confutation.  It  will,  at  the  fame 
time,  totally  unfit  you  for  any  other  connection  ;  for 
who  would  take  the  body,  when  another  perfon  is  in 
pofTefTion  of  the  foul  P 

If  any  man,  therefore,  can  deliberately  be  fo  cruel, 
as  to  vifit  you  frequently,  and  fhew  you  every  particu- 
larity, that  is  only  fhort  of  this  grand  explanation,  nev- 
er fee  him  in  private  ;  and,  if  that  be  infufHcieiit,  and 
youjlill  feel  tender  fentiments  towards  him,  determine 
to  fliun  his  company  for  ever.  Ii  is  eafier,  remember, 
to  extinguifh  a  fire,  that  has  but  jit/!,  broken  out,  than 
one,  which  has  been  gathering  (trength  and  violence, 
from  a  long  concealment.  Many  have  neglected  this 
neceffary  precaution,  and  died  fil  :nt  martyrs  to  their 
fondnefs  and  imprudence.  The  eye  of  beauty  has  Ian- 
T 


88  LETTERS  TO  A 

guifhed  in  fohtude,  or  been  dimmed  with  a  flood  of  *Y- 
remediable  tears.  The  heart  has  throbbed  with  uncon- 
querable tumults,  which,  gradually  have  diffolved  an 
elegant  frame,  that  deferred  a  much  better  fate.  Un- 
difcovered  by  the  phyfician,  they  have  baffled  all  the 
rcfources  of  his  (kill  ;  they  have  rendered  ineffectual 
all  the  tendernefs  of  friends,  and  death  alone  has  ad- 
miniftered  that  eafe,  which  neither  beauty,  friends,  nor 
fortune  could  bellow. 

It  is  poflible,  that  men  may  not  always  act  from 
anamiable  motives,  when  they  carry  their  attentions  to 
a  confiderable  height,  without  an  explanation.  Their 
tafte  may  have  privately  fingled  you  out  from  all  the 
reft  of  the  world,  whilfl:  Providence  has  not  propi- 
tioufly  raifed  them  to  cii  cumftances,  which  they  con- 
ceive to  be  worth  your  acceptance.  They  may  have 
a  delicacy,  a  dignity,  and  independence  of  mind,  which 
would  not  eafily  brook  a  repulfe,  or  an  inferior  fituafcion  ; 
and  they  may  be,  very  honourably ,  probing  by  thefe, 
little  methods,  the  date  of  your  inclinations. 

Of  theje  circumftances  you  rciuft  endeavour  to  judge 
for  yourfelf,  or  get  fome  difcerning,  impartial  and  more 
experienced  friend  to  be  your  advifer.  If  you  fufpect 
aperfon's  conduct  to  arife  from  fuch  motives,  you  can- 
not treat  him  with  too  much  attention.  He  has  paid 
you,  in  the  mod  delicate  and  flattering  manner,  the 
higheft  compliment  in  the  world  ;  and  you  may  de- 
pend on  his  affection  being  more  Jinceret  in  proportion 
as  it  is  lefs  alTuming,  confident,  or  obtruftve. 

If  you  have  any  regard  for  fuch  a  character,  his  pen- 
etration will  have  difcovered  it.  Ufe  no  ajfeftation  to 
him.  He  will  fee  through  all  its  flimfy  difguifes.  At- 
tempt no  prudery  ;  he  will  behold  your  bofom  pant- 
ing though  the  thin,  flight  veil,  and  the  hypocrify  will 
difguft.  Talk  not  of  fortune  or  circumftances  ;  they 
have  been  the  objects  of  his  confideration.  I  know  no 
method,  but,  with  an  honeft  candour,  to  throw  your- 


YOUNG  LADY.  89 

fil£,  a  fair,  enchanting  object,  on  his  generous  protection. 
If  by  my  concealment,  you  mould  hint  that  felf-confcious 
dignity  and  affection,  which  will,  always,  attend  fuch 
a  mind,  as  this,  he  will  never  again  fue  to  your  clemency, 
but  leave  you  to  ruminate  on  the  artifices,  you  have 
tiled,  in  an  hopelefs  repentance. 

If  you  fuppofe  on  the  other  hand,  that  any  perfoa 
da/lie's  with  your  feelings  from  rvantonnefs,  or  mere 
amufement,  you  cannot  mew  him  too  marked  a  con- 
tempt. Though  delicacy  will  not  permit  you  to  glance 
at  the  particular  impropriety  of  his  conduct,  yet  there 
are  a  thou/and  methods  of  making  him  feel  his  own  in* 
Jignificance,  and  of  changing  the  little  plumage  of  his 
yanity,  into  a  monument  of  his  ffiame. 

There  is  fomething  fo  unmanly  in  fporting  with  the 
tender  feelings  of  a  woman  ;  there  is  fomething  fo  tru- 
ly defpicable  in  the  character  of  a  perfon,  who  wifhes 
a  confequence,  built  upon  the  tears  and  diftreffes  of 
thofe,  whom  all  great  and  generous  minds  are  difpo- 
fed  to  protect,  that  if  a  female  coquette  is  odious  to 
your  fex,  a  male  one  fhould  be  doubly  abhorred  by  his 
aiun. 

If  a  perfon  once  comes  to  a  ferious  declaration  ia 
your  favour,  affect  no  prudijh  airs  of  referve.  If  you 
really,  feel  an  affection  for  him,  and  can  indulge  it  with 
prudence, do  not  fcruple  to  acknowledge,  or  to  treat  him 
with  the  greateft  opennefs  and  candour.  This  will  en- 
gage, for  ever,  the  efteem  of  every  liberal  and  honefi 
man.  If,  from  any  circumflances,  unforefeen  at  the 
time,  you  fhould  be  under  the  neceffity  of  difmijjing 
him,  as  a  lover,  you  would  never  fail  to  retain  him  as 
a  friend  ;  and  though,  with  a  bafe,  dejigning  perfon, 
fuch  a  conduct  may  expofe  you  to  fome  little  inconven- 
ience, yet  ivhofe  will  be  the  difgrace  ?  Leave  him  to 
the  contempt  and  indignation  of  the  fenfible,  aid  let 
him  make  the  moft.of  the  godlike  reflection,  that  he  has 


99  LETTERS  TO  A 

endeavoured  to  triumph  over  artlefs  innocence,  and  un- 
iufpccling  fenfibility. 

There  is,  generally,  too  much  iijfeclat'ion  of  coynefs 
in  this  intercourfe  betwixt  the  fexes.  I  have  no  idea 
of  a  woman's  blujh'ing  to  avow  an  attachment.  If 
flic  has  it  indeed,  it  will  appear  to  a  penetrating  mind, 
even  from  her  very  efforts  to  conceal  it.  The  invol- 
untary embarrajfment,  the  timid  look,  the  modeft  blufh, 
and  the  downcafr  eye  are  indifputable  fymptoms  of  a 
ftrong  partiality,  which  cannot  either  be  concealed  or 
mil  taken. 

Your  fex,  I  know  have  ideas  of  fufpenfe,  and  fancy, 
that  it  heightens  the  merit  of  the  prize. — But  I  dare 
not  recommend  fuch  a  dangerous  expedient.  If  the 
cunning  be  difcovered,  the  punifhment  may  be  a  lafting 
coldnefs  and  neglect.  I  do  not  know  any  thing  fo 
really  graceful  as  unajfeftedfimplicity. 

Never  difclofe  the  offers  or  preferences  you  receive, 
except  to  thofe  friends,  who  are  immediately  interefted 
in  your  decifion.  They  zxzfecrets  of  honor,  which  you 
mould  carry  inviolate  to  your  grave.  It  is  ungenerous 
to  make  a  man  the  fubjecl  of  obfervation,  perhaps,  of 
ridicule,  becaufe  he  has  tendered  yeu  his  warmeft  af- 
fections ;  and  the  envy  of  your  own  fex  will  not  be 
difpofed  to  fpare  you,  for  fuch  a  palpable  difplay  of 
vanity  and  pride.  If  you  intend  to  marry,  it  is  the 
higheft  impolicy  ;  and  if  you  mean  to  difmifs  him,  it  is 
//Wtoaggiavate  difmiffion  with  contempt. 


LETTER  XXXVI. 

FROM  the  unfavourable  fketch,    I  hare  given   of 
the   morals  and  fentiments  of  young  men,  it   is 
not  probable,  that  a  woman  of  the  greateft  merit,  will 


YOUNG  LADY.  91 

iiave  any  prodigious  number  of  admirers  to  diflrad  her 
choice.  Generally  in  the  prefent  ftate  of  things,  if  a 
lady  'will  be  married,  (he  has  a  number  of  accommo- 
dations to  make,  many  wifhes  to  facrifice,  and  many 
inftances  of  private  tafte  to  be  refigned.  She  muit  be 
content  with  a  fortune  merely  without  expecting  many 
good  or  great  qualities,  annexed  ;  or  if  me  feek  the  lat- 
ter, fhe  muft  often  forego  all  hopes  of  the  former. 

If,  however,  you  JJjould  have  a  number  of  Fuitors, 
(and,  without  any  compliment,  it  is  not  impoffible,) 
there  are  a  few,  general  principles  of  moft  ejfential  con- 
fequence  to  regulate  your  choice. 

Fortune,  fplendour,  greatnefs  are  the  alone  cry  of 
mercenary  friends.  I  am  not  wholly  of  their  opinion. 
I  have  feen  many  wretched  in  marriage,  with  all  the 
trappings  of  greatnefs.  I  have  known  a  {till  greater 
number  happy,  who  have  had  only  "  a  dinner  of 
"  herbs  and  love  therewith." 

Do  not  fuffer  your  imagination  to  be  dazzled  wich 
mere  fplendour.  Never  fancy,  that  brilliance  is  con- 
nected with  the  mind,  or  that  the  happinefs  of  women, 
any  more  than  that  of  men,  "  confifteth  in  the  abun- 
u  dance  of  the  things,  that  fhe  poflcfTtth." 

An  immoderate  fondnefs  for  fhew  is  a  great  misfor- 
tune. It  has  led  many  a  poor  girl  to  facrifice  herfelf 
to  fome  illiterate  boor,  who  had  nothing  but  his  afflu- 
ence to  recommend  him.  If  fuch  fhould  ever  be  your 
misfortune,  I  need  not  mention  what  would  be  your 
feelings.  If  you  was  prudent  enough  to  avoid  all  other 
evil  conferences,  (and  many  fuch,  experience  records, 
but  delicacy  forbears  to  mention,)  you  might  live  to 
envy  the  ruddy  urt-amhitious  milkmaid,  whole  lolls  arq 
fweetened  by  conjugal  attachment,  and  whdfe  blooming 
children  cheer  thejeemirig  Infelicities  of  life. 

How  wretched  mult  be  a  woman,  unitec        a  man,, 
-*vhom  flic  does  not  prefer  to  every  other  in  the  world  '. 
T  2 


pa  LETTERS  TO  A 

What  fecret  preferences  mud  (leal  into  her  heart ! 
What  unquiet  thoughts  take  poffeffion  of  her  fancy  ! 
And  what  can  men  of  principle  call  fuch  an  act,  but 
legal  pro/lit  ution  f 

If  I  was  a  defpotic  tyrant,  I  would  inflict  this  pun- 
ifhmcnt  on  the  woman  I  abhorred.  She  mould  enter- 
tain a  private  partiality  for  one  perfon,  and  be  married 
to  another. 

Never  fuflfer  yourfelf  to  think  of  a  perfon,  who  has 
not  religious  principle.  A  good  man  alone  is  capable 
of  true  attachment,  fidelity  and  affection. 

Others  may  feel  a.  fugitive  pafllon  ;  but  on  this,  alas  I 
you  can  place  no  dependence.  It  may  be  abated  by 
caprice,  fupplanted  by  fome,  new  favourite,  palled  by 
pojfejfwn,  and,  at  any  rate,  will  lafr.  no  longer,  than  your 
perfonal  charms,  though  thofe  charms  may  have  faded 
by  almojl  laying  down  your  life  for  their  fake,  by  bring- 
ing them  a  beautiful  offspring  into  the  wrorld. 

During  the  flattering  feafon  of  eourt/hip,  men  will 
always  endeavour  to  appear  in  their  bejl  colours,  and 
put  on  all  the  appearance  of  good  humour.  But  fuppo- 
fing  this  good  humour,  real,  it  is  but  zfuduating,  un- 
fteady  principle,  depending  on  the  motion  of  the  blood 
and  fpirits.  Nothing,  but  religion,  is  permanent  and 
unchangeable,  always  confident,  and  always  the  fame. 

A  man  of  this  call  will  never  fail  to  treat  you  with 
tendernefs  and  attention.  If  little  provocations  happen, 
he  will  foften  them  with  gcntlenefs  ;  if  offences  come, 
he  will  be  flnelded  with  patience  ;  if  his  own  temper 
be  unhappy,  he  will  correct  it  by  the  afliftance  of  divine 
grace  and  of  reflection  ;  if  misfortunes  affail  you,  he 
will  bear  them  with  refignation  ;  in  every  exigence, 
he  will  be  a  friend  ;  in  all  your  troubles,  a  ftay  ;  in 
your  ficknefs,  a  phyfician  ;  and,  when  the  Iaft,  convul- 
sive moment  comes,  he  will  leave  you  with  his  tears, 
and  with  his  bleflings.  All  his  impetuous  pajjions  he 
vill  fuppreffj  from  a  fenfc  of  </z/£y  ;  and  if  ever  by  an 


YOUNG  LADY. 


93 


'unguarded Tally,  me  fhould  unfortunately  have  hurt  your 
feelings,  or  violated  your  peace,  he  will  fufFer  more 
pain  from  the  private  recollection,  than  he  can  poflibly 
have  inflicted  upon  you.  Ten  thoufand  cares,  anxie- 
ties and  vexations  will  mix  with  the  married  ftate.  Re- 
ligion is  the  only  principle,  that  can  infufe  an  healing 
balm,  infpire  both  parties  with  ferenity  and  hope,  dif- 
pofe  them  to  mutual  conceflions  and  forbearance,  and 
prompt  them  to  mare  each  others  burdens  with  alacrity 
and  eafe. 

Gay  and  volatile  as  your  fpirits  may  be  before  this 
union,  when,  as  yet,  no  great  trials  or  misfortunes  have 
prefTed  on  them,  yet  when  you  feiioufly  think  of  ha- 
ving a  family,  and  calling  yourfelf  mother  of  a  nume- 
rous offspring,  what  pofftble  comfort  can  you  piomife 
to  yourfelf  without  a  man  of  fol'id  probity  and  virtue  ; 
one  who  will  be  regular  in  the  difcharge  of  all  the  re- 
ligious, focial  and  domeftic  duties  ;  who  will  faithfully 
train  up  your  common  children  in  the  fear  of  God,  and 
not  neglect  their  many  interefts  and  wants,  and  wifhes 
for  the  turbid  and  licentious  pleafures  of  the  bottle, 
gaming,  intrigue,  the  chace,  the  theatre,  or  for  any 
other  fcenes  of  famionable  diflipation  ? 

The  next  thing  you  fhould  look  for  is  a  perfon  of  a 
dome/lie  caft.  This  will,  mod  frequently,  be  found  in 
men  of  the  mod  virtuous  hearts  and  improved  under- 
standings. They  will  always  have  abundance  of  enter- 
tainment in  private  unknown  to  vulgar  minds.  And 
thefe  will  fecure  them  from  feeking  their  happinefs  in 
the  factitious  pleafures  of  the  world. 

Of  what  confequence  are  all  the  good  qualities  of 
your  hufband,  if  you  muftbe  conftantly  feparated  from 
him  ?  Your  tendernefsin  this  cafe  will  only  be  the  inftru- 
ment  of  a  poignant  affliction — your  anxiety  will  be  per- 
petually on  the  rack  ;  your  jealoufy  may  be  alarmed  ; 
-and,  in  the  bed  point  of  view,  you  will  be  a  widow., 


$4  LETTERS  TO  A 

with  only  a  nominal  hufband,  and  unprote&ed  with  all 
the  appearance  of  protecVon. 

Men,  whofe  circumftances  abfolutely  require  fuch 
abfences,  mould  never  think  of  this  tender  connexion. 
It  is  this  necejfary  feparation  after  marriage,  and  the 
artificial  one,  which  fafiion  has  created,  that  are  the 
catife  of  half  the  difquiets,  which  infeft  this  facred 
ftate.  True  affe&ion  is  only  nurfed  by  the  parties  liv- 
ing much  together,  in  the  ftillnefs  of  retirement.  It  is 
in  the  Jloade  chiefly,  that  the  pureft  affections  glow. 
It  is  from  dwelling  on  the  graces  of  a  common  offspring, 
and  repeating,  in  the  cafe  of  familiar  converfation, 
little  domeftic  anecdotes,  playfulnefs  and  events,  that 
matrimonial  friendfhip  riies  to  its  proper  maturity  and 
vigour.  By  conftantly  growing  together,  even  branches 
become  infeparably  entwined. 

The  lajl  thing,  though  I  do  not  mention  it,  as  abfo- 
lutely neceffary,  yet  highly  defirable  in  a  perfon,  with 
whom  you  muft  fpend  all  your  days,  is  fniimvnt  and 
tajle.  This  will  variegate  every  hour  with  a  fucceflion 
of  pleafure,  every  fcene  with  animated  remarks,  every 
incident  with  frefli  converfation,  and  will  make  a  little 
paradife  of  your  deeped  folitude,  in  which  you  wiH 
never  want  the  poor  refources  of  foreign  entertainment. 

Fortune  furely  mould  be  confidered.  It  were  ab- 
furd  to  think  of  love,  where  there  is  not  fome  profpecl 
of  a  decent  prcvifion  for  your  probable  defcendents. 
That  decency  depends  on  birth,  habit  and  education. 
But  if  you  can  compafs  the  other  requifites,  be  as  mod- 
erate as  pofTible,  in  your  demands  of  fortune.  Virtue 
and  affection  have  an  amazing  power  of  infpiring  con- 
tentment. A  morfelthus  fwectened,  will  be  pleafant 
to  the  tafte.  In  a  csttage  fo  enlivened,  joy  will  fpring. 
Children,  fo  educated,  will  be  rich  in  goodnefs.  The 
Almighty  will  look  down  from  heaven,  with  appro- 
.  Nation  and  crown  the  -happy  pair  with  the  choi<;ek  of 
iiiis  bleftngs  \ 


YOUNG  LADY.  gS 

LETTER  XXXVII. 

NEVER  think  of  marrying  a  weal  man,  in  hopes 
of  governing  him.  Silly  people  are  often  more 
peevifli  and  refractory,  than  you  would  fuppofe  ;  but  if 
you  could  even  gain  your  point,  and  by  great  addrefs 
and  management  rife  to  the  helm,  I  mould  not,  by  any 
means,  congratulate  your  fuccefs. 

Women,  that  aiTume  the  reins,  feldom  manage  them 
with  dignity.  Their  authority  breaks  forth  in  num. 
berlefs,  petty  inftances  erf  tyranny  and  caprice,  which 
only  render  them  mifci  able  in  themfelves,  as  well  as 
unamiable  to  every  beholder.  The  quality,  which 
fhews  a  married  lady  to  advantage,  is  a  modeftfubmrf- 
fwn  of  her  underftanding  to  the  man,  whom  me  has  not 
been  afhamedto  honour  with  her  choice. 

I  have  frequently  mentioned  Milton,  as  peculiarly 
happy  in  his  ideas  of,  what  con  ftitutes,  conjugal  propri- 
ety. His  Eve  reveres  her  huiband.  She  iiftens  to  his 
converfation,  in  order  to  be  indrucled.  In  him,  (lie 
feels  herfelf  annihilated  and  abforbed.  She  always 
fhews  that  deference  and  confeioufnefs  of  inferiority t 
which,  for  the  fake  of  order,  the  all  wife  Author  of  na- 
ture, maniftjlly,  intended.  The  confequence  is,  that 
her  character  appears  lovely  to  all,  and  that  her  af- 
fociate,  (as  all  fenfible  men  will,)  treats  her  with  double 
tendernefs  and  gives  her  every  mark  of  a  delicate  pro- 
tection : 

He  iu  delight 
Both  of  her  beauty,  ^nd/uimij/ivc  charms, 
Smil'd  with  fuperior  love. 

To  whom  thus  Eve,  with  perfect  beauty  adorn 'd, 
My  author  and  difpofer,  what  thou  Uidd'ft, 
Unarg«'d  I  obey  ;  fo  God  ordains  ; 
God  is  thy  lav/  ;  //"></,  mine  ;   to  know  no  more 
I*  •wemans  happieit  know  Ledge  and  her  praiff- 


96  LETTERS  TO  A 

When  men  have  lived  fingle  for  fifty  or  ilxty  years, 
through  a  multiplicity  of  bufinefs,  ambitious  fchemes, 
or  perhaps  from  more  criminal  caufes,  it  is  ho  uncom- 
mon thing  to  fee  them,  all  at  or.ee,  determined  on  wed- 
lock, and  paying  their  court  to  fome  fine,  blooming  girl 
of  cigljJeen.  Indeed,  in  theprcf.nl  (late  of  things,  if  a 
woman  be  not  married  early,  her  chance  is  fmall  ;  fo 
violent  is  the  rage  for  youth  and  beauty,  even  in  decre- 
pit beam  J 

There  is  fomething  in  this  practice,  that  very  grofsly 
infults  both  your  delicacy  and  underftanding.  It  looks 
as  if  thefe  fovereign  lords  of  the  creation,  at  the  mo- 
ment, when  they  condefcended  to  pity  your  diflrefs,  and 
found  no  comfort  in  habits  of  another  kind,  eould  or- 
der the  mod  elegant  and  fafhionable  amongft  you,  to 
come  at  a  colli 

It  is  true  indeed,  that  they  do  make  you  a  conside- 
ration. Your  jointure  is,  generally,  in  proportion  to  tlve 
age  of  the  party.  The  hundreds  are  increafed,  as  the 
head  is  hoary,  as  the  frame  is  enfeebled,  or  as  wrinkles 
have  contracted  the  countenance. 

Never  indulge  the  thought  of  marrying  in  this  man- 
ner. Wherever  there  is  great  difparity  of  years,  there 
cannot  be  any  durable  union  of  hearts.  Gloom  and 
gaiety  do  not  eafily  affimilate.  Nature  has  placed  at 
u  great  diftance  from  each  other,  the  torrid  and  the 
frigid  zones. 

People's  views  of  life,  their  Tenements,  projects, 
companies,  pleafures  and  amufements  differ  fo  exceed- 
ingly, at  thefe  different  ages,  that  it  is  impolTible  their 
affections  fliould  be  united.  A  thoufand  conflicts  of 
tafle  and  opinion,  and  as  many  caufes  of  jealoufy  and 
diflike  will  mingle  with  fo  injudicious  a  connection. 

A  woman,  in  fuch  delicate  circumltances,  where  the 
heart  is  not  engroffed  by  a  real  attachment,  may,  and 
probably  will,  fee  many  perfons  more  agreeable,  than 
him,  to  whom  fiie  is  bound  by  an  indiifoluble  tie.     If 


YOUNG  LADY.  $? 

fie  has  prudence  and  principle  enough  to  keep  up  ap- 
pearances, and  thus  preferve  her  innocence  in  the  eyes 
of  the  world,  it  can  be  no  fnpreme  felicity  to  be  the  wife 
cf  one  man,  whilft  her  heart  is  fecretly  panting  for 
another.  It  is  indeed  a  trial,  which  no  fplendour  can 
recompence  and  no  fortune  cafe.  If  (he  mould  ever 
be  fo  unguarded  as  to  betray  fuch  a  preference,  in  any 
part  of  her  conduct,  her  peace  and  happinefs  are  loft 
for  ever  !  But  admitting  her  to  behave  with  the  great- 
eft  propriety,  and  even  to  be  attached  to  the  Sultan? 
who  owns  her,  ftill  the  jcaloufy  of  old  men  is  a  moil 
amazingly  irritable  paflion.  It  is  thavwatchful  dragon,, 
which  guards  the  Hefpetian  fruit  ;  and  with  a  keen- 
eyed  glance,  will  be  apt  to  difcover  fome  hidden  mean- 
ing in  a  look,  impropriety  in  a  gefture,  or  a  violation  of 
the  marriage  covenant  in  the  moft  common  civility. 
At  any  rate,  it  is  no  very  flattering  allotment  to  a  wo- 
man, to  be  the  nurfe  of  a  peevifh,  infirm  or  emaciated, 
old  man,  at  an  age,  when  me  might  claim  the  moft  del- 
icate pafTion,  and  reciprocal  endearments.  What  wo- 
man of  fpirit  would  bear  to  be  fufpected  ?  What  chrif- 
tian  mould  vow,  at  the  altar  of  her  God,  an  affection 
to  a  man,  when  her  attachment  was  folely  to  his  for- 
tune ?  And  who  that  has  read  one  page  of  human  life, 
muft  not  tremble  at  the  confequences  that  have  gene- 
rally, attended  fuch  imprudent  connexions  ? 

"  A  reformed  rake  makes  the  Deft  huiband." 
Does  he  ?  It  would  be  very  extraordinary,  if  he 
fliould.  Befides,  are  you  very  certain,  that  you  have 
power  to  reform  him  ?  It  is  a  matter,  that  requires  fonae 
deliberation.  This  reformation,  if  it  is  to  be  accom- 
plished, muft  take  place  before  marriage.  Then  if  ever, 
is  "the  period  of  your  power.  But  how  will  you  be  af- 
fured  that  he  is  reformed  ?  If  he  appears  fo,  is  he  not 
infidioully  concealing  his  vices,  to  gain  your  affections  ? 
And  when  he  knows,  they  are  feenred,  may  he  not, 
gradually,  throw  off  the  maik,  and  be  difnpated,  as  be- 


9S  LETTERS  TO  A 

fore  ?  Profligacy  of  this  kind  is  feldom  eradicated.  1: 
refembles  fome  cutaneous  diforders,  which  appear  to  be 
healed,  and  yet  are,  continually,  making  themfelves 
vifible  by  frefh  eruptions. 

A  man,  who  has  carried  on  a  criminal  intercourse 
with  immoral  women  is  not  to  be  trufted.  His  opin- 
ion of  all  females  is  an  infult  to  their  delicacy.  His 
attachment  is  to  [ex  alone, under  particular  modifications. 
On  him  virtue,  knowledge,  accomplishments  and  gra- 
ces are  miferably  thrown  away.  To  gratify  an  inex- 
tinguifhable  third  for  variety,  fuch  a  wretch  is  often 
feen  toforfake  the  moft  deferving,wifeto  feek  his  ufual, 
fugitive  pleafure,  with  an  abandoned,  mercenary  harlot. 

What  would  you  think  of  this  ?  Vet  no  graces,  no 
affection,  no  delicacy,  on  your  part,  may  be  able  to 
prevent  it.  It  feems  the  curfe  of  heaven,  entailed  on 
his  vices,  and,  generally,  purfueshim  even  to  the  grave. 

Ths  fuppofed  predilection  of  your  fex  for  rakes, 
muft,  probably,  arife  from  their  oftentatious  appearance, 
gaiety,  fpirits  and  aflumed  politenefs.  But  how  dear- 
ly is  fuch  tinfel  purchafed  by  an  union  with  them  I 
How  often  has  a  long,  harrafTed  life  of  poverty  and  re- 
morfe  been  the  dreadful  facrifice  to  this  indifcretion 
©fa  moment. 


LETTER  XXXVIII. 

MEN  in  profefilons  may  be  expected  to  po/Tefs 
the  moft  //7/tr^/fentiments,  as  ha\ing  enjoyed 
a  fuperior  education  ;  and  their  manners  and  fociety 
will,  of  courfe,  be  moft  agreeable  and  interefting  to 
ladies.      Military  people  are, proverbially,  favourites. 

I  will  not  fo  much  degrade  the  dignity  of  your  fex, 
as  to  fuppofe,  that  it  is  the  mere  colour  of  their  habits, 
which  dazzles  your  eyes,  and   works  fuch  aftoni/hing 


YOUNG  LADY.  -* 

miracles  in  their  favour.  There  are  reafons,  which 
may  account,  more  rationally,  for  your  partiality,  whilft 
they  do  more  credit  to  your  undcrltanding. 

Undiftracted  with  Cares  and  buiinefs,  they  are  hap- 
py in  that  eafy  difengagednefs  of  mind,  which  can  ex- 
haurt  all  its  efforts  upon  the  fingle  article  of  pleafing. 
With  much  time  upon  their  hands,  they  have  frequent 
opportunities  of  being  in  your  company,  and  of  feel- 
ing, or  at  lead  ajfecling  admiration.  Lively  and  vola- 
tile from  an  healthy  life  of  activity  and  exercife,  they 
eafily  afTimilate  with  the  manners  of  a  fex,  whole  dif- 
tinguifhmg  grace  is  a  cheerful  vivacity.  Having  trav- 
elled through  various  places  and  kingdoms,  they  ne- 
ceiTarily  acquire  that  eafe  and  urbanity  of  manners, 
which  refult  from  a  general  intercourfe  wiih  mankind. 
Expected,  profeffionally,  to  be  men  of  courage,  you 
may  fuppofe  them  the  bed  protectors  of  your  perfon 
and  your  weaknefs.  Their  very  choice  of  the  army 
/narks  them  for  genteel  notions  and  fpirit  ;  and  any  of 
thefe  rcafons  is,  perhaps,  no  difadvantage  with  a  fe- 
male heart.  I  ihould  be  forry  to  fuppofe,  that  their 
general  love  of  pleafure,  gaiety  and  intrigue  is  amongft 
their  recommendations  to  the  favour  of  thofe,  who 
Jljould,  uniformly,  difcourage  by  their  blujloes  and  their 
frowns,  every  fpecies  of  levity  and  vice. 

In  fact,  and  to  be  impartial,  the  agreeablenefs  of  of- 
ficers, is  like  that  of  other  men.  There  is  the  human- 
mixture  of  the  good  and  the  bad.  I  have  always 
found,  from  my  own  obfervation,  that  the  older  and 
experienced  are  f©me  of  the  mod:  interefting  characters 
in  fociety.  The  various  fcenes,  through  which  they 
have  paiTed,  give  a  fprightlinefs  and  diverjity  to  their 
converfation,  and  their  politenefs  lends  it  a  charm.  I 
have  met  with  as  many  of  the  younger  fort,  who  have 
feemed  to  think  the  petty  ornament  of  a  cockade  an 
adequate  fubftitute  for  all  improvements  of  the  mind  ; 
U 


ioo  LETTERS  TO  A 

a  flielter  for  litigious  infolence  and  puppy  if m ,  and  an  ex- 
clufive  fccurity  for  the  tendered  affections,  and  attach- 
ment of  woman. 

But  this  evil  is  not  confined,  merely,  to  the  army. 
It  is  (o  in  the  church.  How  truly  amiable  are  the  ex- 
perienced, the  learned,  and  the  exemplary  of  this  pro- 
feflion,  whofe  knowledge  is  happily  tiflued  with  devo- 
tion, and  foftened  by  a  general  intercourfe  with  the 
world  !  How  many,  on  the  other  hand,  when  they 
are  jufl:  initiated  into  the  facred  office,  ridiculoufly 
pique  themfelves  on  a  cajfock  and  zfcarf  ;  and,  under 
that  folemn  garb,  go  as  far  as  poflible,  in  the  mazes  of 
beauifm,  vanity,  and  affectation  ! 

There  are,  doubtlefs,  very  amiable  people  in  the  ar- 
my ;  but  their  general  notions  and  treatment  of  your 
fex,  forbid  me  to  wiih  that  you  mould,  ever,  cultivate 
much  acquaintance  with  them,  becaufe  the  circum- 
ftances,  in  which  they  are  placed,  render  the  thoughts 
of  a  ferious  connection,  by  no  means  defir?ble.  I£ 
we  could  fuppofe  their  principles  not  to  be  injured  by 
their  mode  of  life  ;  if  they  could  refign,  from  the  mo- 
ment of  marriage,  all  their  notions  of  unlimited  gallant- 
ry, and  pleafure,  what  is  their  pay,  but  afcanty  fubllfr- 
ence  for  a  folitary  individual  ?  What  is  their  life,  but 
an  unfettled  pilgrimage  from  one  country  to  another  ? 
How  often  are  they  called,  at  a  moment's  warning,  to 
fight,  perhaps,  to  perifb,  for  their  king  and  country  ? 
or,  to  die  more  fuddenly,  and  more  ignominioufly,  by 
the  hands  of  a  Duelift,  who  challenges  them  into  tier* 
nity  for  the  flighted-  provocation,  perhaps  for  the  mif- 
placing  only  of  a  fyllable  ! 

In  the  mid  ft  of  fuch  alarming  profpecls,  what  has  a 
woman  to  expect  from  marriage  with  them,  but  con- 
tinual toils,  unceafing  dangers,  perpetual  apprehen- 
fions  ;  poverty,  remorfe,  vexation,  children,  without 
provifion,  and  forrows,  which  the  lenient  hand  of  time, 
fcarcely  can  afliiage. 


YOUNG  LADY.  101 


If  you  was  ever  fo  happily  united  to  a  man  of  tnis 
defcription,  how  dreadful  muft  be  the  abfences,  you 
will  have  to  bear,  mixed  as  they  will  be,  with  a  diflblv- 
ing  teadernefs,  and  unavoidable  alarms  ;  or,  on  the 
other  hand,  how  infupportable  your  toils,  "  with  per- 
"  ils  in  the  wildernefs,  perils  by  the  fea,  and  perils 
*'  araongft  falfe  brethren  ;  with  wearinefs,  and  pain- 
**  fulneis,  with  watchings,  often  ;  with  hunger  and 
<:  thiifc;  with  fallings,  otten  ;  with  cold  and  naked- 
"  nefs."  Remember  the  fate  of  lady  C — w — s,  and 
drop  a  tear.  That  gaiety  of  heart,  which,  once,  doted 
on  a  man  for  his  fmartnefs  or  vivacity,  will  find  too 
much  exercife  for  its  penitence  and  grief  in  fuch  ferious 
afflictions. 


LETTER  XXXIX, 

INykwrt/recmifites  to  an  happy  marriage profejponal 
men  do  not  appear,  by  any  means,  the  moft  eligible. 
A  great  writer  has  called  a  phyfician,  "  the  mere 
il  play-thing  of  forcune."  However  ftraitened  in  his 
circumftances,  from  having  received  an  expenfive  edu- 
cation, he  muft  alTume  particularly  in  the  metropolis, 
the  appearance  of  property  merely  to  gain  employment. 
rT\\\s  fMitious  grandeur  may  involve  him  in  difficulties 
for  many  years.  His  fuccefs,  from  the  nature  of  things, 
muft,  generally  bzJlo-Tv,  nor  will  it  ever  depend  fo  much 
on  his  own  intrinfic  merit,  as  on  a  fortanate  coincid- 
ence of  circumftances,  wholly  out  of  his  power.  If  he 
fucceeds,  it  will,  frequently  be  late  in  life  ;  and,  if  he 
does  not,  he  muft  be  embarrafTed  indeed  !  The  chil- 
dren of  fuck  a  perfon  "  cannot  dig,  and  to  beg  they  arc 
"  afhamed."  Poverty,  fharpened  by  refinement  and 
fenftbility)  is  afflicting  in  the  extteme  ! 


10a  LETTERS  TO  A 

I  do  not  think  the  profeflion  of  the  lazu,  calculated 
to  render  a  man,  the  moll  agreeable  companion,  in  the 
dill,  unruffled  fhades  of  domeftic  life.  It  calls  into 
continual  exercife,  the  more  /w-/-/</ paffions  ;  it  begets 
an  unpleafant  fpirit  of  caviling  and  contradiction,  and 
has  lefs  tendency  to  nurfe  the  Jiner  feelings,  than  any 
of  the  other  learned  profeflions. 

By  being  crowded  together,  at  a  dangerous  age,  in 
the  Temple  or  Lincoln's  Inn,  young  men  are  apt  to 
contract  a  licentioufnefs  of  morals ,  a  laxity  of  princi- 
ples, a  fpecies  offcepticifm  to  palliate  their  vices,  habits 
of  profanenefs,  not  a  little  diflipation,  and  fo  far  zsyoar 
fex  is  concerned,  very  dangerous  notions. 

Before  marriage,  military  men  and  young  lawyers 
are  not,  in  my  idea,  the  fafeft  acquaintance.  The 
{ui\  are  only  bent,  without  looking  any  further,  on  do* 
mejticoting  themfelves,  in  agreeable  families,  by  every 
polite  attention  to  wives  and  daughters,  and  thus  amu- 
fing  many,  leifure  hours,  which,  in  their  ftate  of 
continual  peregrination,  would  be,  otherwife,  infup- 
portable  ;  the  latter,  in  general,  fcruple  not  to  go  great 
length*;  in  gallantry  where  they  have  noferious intention. 

Beware  of  fuck  fociety  ;  beware  of  your  heart.  Let 
not  the  unblujhing  front  of  a  barrifter,  let  not  the  mere 
fcarkt  habit  of  a  petit  maitre,  who  has  ftudied  the  wind- 
ings of  the  female  heart,  infinitely  more,  than  ta&ies, 
or  the  art  of  war,  let  not  a  few  civil  fayings  or  flatter- 
ing attentions  beguile  your  imagination,  or  lay  your 
prudence  afleep.  I  do  not  think  the  commerce  very 
fafe.  If  I  had  a  girl  of  my  own,  I  would  not  expofe 
her  to  fo  dangerous  a  trial.  Many,  doubtlefs,  have 
come  off  conquerors,  but  more  have  fallen  ;  and  their 
wounds  and  tears  have  made,  upon  my  memory,  a  lajl- 
Jng  impreflion. 

Our  imagination,  however,  annexes  riches,  honors, 
and  even  titles  to  the  profeflion  of  the  law.  But  this 
fancy  often  mi/leads   us.     It  is  true,  that   merit  has  a 


YOUNG  LADY.  103 

*  — — — 

greater  chance  in  this,  than  in  any  other  profeflion  ; 
and  it  is  certain,  that  a  fortunate  few  have  attained  to 
very  considerable  greatnefs.  We  hear  of  a  Mansfield, 
a  Thurlow,  a  Kenyon,  a  Loughborough,  a  Law,  an 
Erfkine,  and  are  dazzled  with  their  names,  their  fuc- 
cefs,  and  honors.  But  not  a  word  is  faid  of  a  thou- 
fand  others  of  the  fraternity,  whom,  though  poiTefTed 
of  confiderable  talents,  fortune  never  chofe  to  bring 
into  the  public  view,  or  to  diftinguifli  with  any  of  her 
favours. 

But  all  thefe  difcouragements  apart,  if  a  lawyer  is 
eminent,   he  can    fcarcely  ever  be  at  home.      Perpetual 

,  cares  and  bufinefs  furround  him,  and  poifon  his  repofe. 
His  wife  and  children  muft  be  neglelled,  and  domeftic 
endearments  (acrificed  to  tumultuous  cares.  And  if 
he  be  poor,  no  poverty  can  open  the  door  to  more 
chicanery,  artifice,  or  meannefs.  At  any  rate,  if  he 
be  a  man  ©f  pure  morals  and  religious  principles,  he 
has  withftood  the  greateft  temptations,  that  human 
nature  can  encounter,  and  for  fuperior  and  heroic  vir- 
tue, almoft  deferves  a  place  in  the  kalendar  of  faints. 

See  now  a  man's  partiality  to  his  own  profeflion  ;  but 
if  it  be  not  founded  in  reafon,  I  beg  you  will  reject  it. 

The  office  of  clergymen  calls  them  to  a  mere  regular 
and  retired  life,  than  that  of  moft  other  men.  Their 
exemption  from  the  buftle  and  competitions  of  the 
world  nurfes  innocence  and  fenfibility  ;  and  if  their 
heart  be  not  very  depraved,  their  employments  and 
ftudies    mud  /often   and    refine   it.     Their  education 

Jbould  have  given  them  the  power  of  entertaining,  and 
their  calling  fuppofes  not  only  integrity,  but  piety  and 
virtue. 

A  man  of  this  cad:  fcems  particularly  calculated  not 

only  to  relijhy  but  to  enhance  the  happinefs  of  a  married 

(late.     With  hours  at  command,  he  has  feifure  for  the 

tender  offices  of  flriendfhip,  and  the  little,  fpzrtive  xAny- 

U  2 


i<?4  LETTERS  TO  A 

fulnefs  of  amufing  converfation.  Whilft:  the  wood- 
bine and  the  jefTamine  furround  his  modeftmanfion,he 
dreads  no  unprapitious  accident,  that  fhall  drag  him 
from  his  retreat,  and  can  tread,  with  the  faithful  part- 
ner of  his  cares,  the  lonely,  "  filent  haunts,  which  con- 
"  templation  loves. "  He  has  time  for  fuperintending 
the  inft ruction  of  his  children,  and  calling  their  latent 
powers  into  exercife  and  action.  He  has  opportunity 
to  realize  the  pictures  of  a  Milton,  and  watch  the 
opening  beauties  of the paradife  about  him. 

Let  me,  however,  be  candid,  and  give  you  the pojfible 
reverfe  of  this  piece.  The  church  is  in  a  very  unhap- 
py fituation.  That  education,  which  renders  the  ec- 
clefiaftic  agreeable,  often  fliarpens  his  affliction.  That 
refinement,  which  captivates  the  elegant  and  inexperi- 
enced, is  the  fpear,  which  fetches  drops  of  blood  from 
his  heart.  Frequently  without  an  adequate  provifion, 
and  incapable,  by  3 ny  fecular  employment,  of "improving 
Lis  circumffances,  thefe  apparent  privileges  are  only  his 
misfortune.  The  fenfibility,  which  loves  a  woman, 
doubly  mourns  her  allotment.  That  tendernefs,  which 
embraces  children  with  fuch  affection,  Jhudders  at  their 
profpects.  That  independence,  which  refults  from 
liberal  fentiments,  If  artles  at  the  thought  of  poverty  or 
diftrefs  ;  and  that  peace,  which  he  has  found  in  the 
abodes  offolitude,  unfits  him  for  the  turbulent  agitations 
of  the  woild. 

Many  men,  however,  there  are  in  this  profeflion, 
very  amply  provided  for ';  and,  if  one  of  thefe  falls  to 
your  lot,  with  the  habits  and  difpofitions,  that  Jhould 
refult  from  his  character,  I  think  you  may  form  every 
rational  hope  of  comfort  and  enjoyment.  Still,  do 
mot  fuppofeme  narrow  or  illiberal.  There  are,  doubt- 
.!efs,  numbers  of  worthy  and  amiable  men  in  the  other 
.profeilicms  ;  there  are,  as  certainly,  many  worthlefs, 
immoral^  and  profligate  perfons  in  the  church.  General 
yules  admit  of  infinite  exceptions.     And  as  your  heart 


YOUNG  LADY.  105 

is  difengaged,  I  meant  only  to  (late  the  influence  of 
different  habits  and  employments  on  the  mind,  and  the 
probability  of  their  conducing  to  happinefs  or  mifery 
in  this  important  connexion.  And  t  Jltll  muft  urge, 
that  if  a  clergyman  be  a  bad  hufband,  it  is  in  defiance 
of  the  ftrongeft  inducements  to  be  othertvife,  and  of  ev- 
•ery  difpofition,  which  his  ftudies  and  his  prayers  mould 
have  led  him,  either  to  cultivate  in  himfelfy  or  recom- 
mend to  others. 


LETTER  XL. 

A  ME  RE  country  J quire  will  be  more  attached  to 
his  dogs,  his  hunting  parties,  and  horfes,  than  he 
could  be  to  any  wife  in  the  world.  The  mofl"  lovely 
graces,  the  mofl:  exquifite  accomplifhments  will  make 
no  impreflion  on  his  debafed  and  vitiated  mind.  He 
will  not  be  able  even  to  difcover  them.  From  him, 
you  muft  expect  none  of  the  little,  foothine  attentions. 
He  will  fliock  your  delicacy  with  a  thoufand  coarfe- 
nefles,  wkSLi)t  a  fenfibility  that  he  is  doinp  wrong; 
and  if  you  mould  expoflulate,  he  will  place  it  only  to 
the  account  of  female  prudery,  conceit  or  affectation. 
He  will  converfe  with  you  chiefly  on  the  delicious  fub- 
jecls  of  the  bottle  or  the  chace  ;  and  he  will  occajion- 
ally  introduce  you  to  the  honor  of  an  acquaintance 
with  a  number  of  ignorant  ill  bred  boors,  who  will 
efteem  you  in  exact  proportion,  as  you  want  elegance 
of  manner,  fentiment  or  underftanding  ! 

Young  ladies  never  act  fo  'injudicioufly,  as  when 
they  facrifice  themfelves  to  ftupid  vulgarity.  Their 
charms  are  never  loft  on  men  of  fenfe,  delicacy  and 
politenefs.  By  them  their  throne  is  eftablifhed.  It 
is  in  their  hearts,  that  they  have  always  zfovercign  and 
undifputed  fway. 


ic6  LETTERS  TO  A 

I  have  now  given  you  Kiy  fentiments  very  freely 
concerning  a  great  variety  of  characters.  But,  marry 
whom  you  will,  one  further  leflbn  is  neceffarv  to  your 
bappinefs,  as  well  as  that  of  the  perfon,  with  whom  you 
are  connected — and  that  is — to  conGder  your  home,  as 
the  chief  fcene  of  your  pleafures,  and  your  exertion. 

Though  a  woman,  before  this  union,  may  be  admired 
for  her  accomplifhments  of  dancing,  drefs,  painting, 
finging,  &c.  yet  after  it,  we  expect  her  character  to 
difplay  fomething  more  fubflanlial.  To  a  man,  who 
mud  fpend  his  days  in  her  company,  all  thefe  little  fu- 
perficial  decorations  will  fpeedily  become  infipid  and 
unimportant.  Love  muff  be  preferred  by  the  qualities 
of  the  heart,  and  efteem  fecured  by  the  domeftic  virtues. 

A  man  does  not  want  to  be  denuded  in  this  coRnex- 
ion,  or  to  pofTefs  a  partner,  who  fecks  the  admiration 
of  coxcombs  or  beaux.  He  wants  a  perfon,  who 
will  kindly  divide  and  alleviate  his  cares  and  prudently 
arrange  his  hou&hold  concerns.  He  feeks  not  a  co- 
quette, a  famionift,  a  flirt,  but  a  comfortable  affiitant, 
companion  and  friend. 

Let  not  a  woman's  fancy  dream  of  perpetual  admi- 
ration. Let  it  no:  be  Sketching  out  e^jfs  mazes  of 
pleafure.  The  miftrefs  of  a  family  has  ceafed  to  be  a 
girl.  She  can,  no  longer,  be  frivolous  or  childifh  with 
impunity.  The  angel  of  ccurtfhip  has  funk  into  a  wo- 
man, and  that  woman  will  be  valued  principally  as  her 
fondnefs  lies  in  retirement,  and  her  pleafures  near  the 
nurfery  of  her  children.  Nor  are  thefe  pleafures  fmall. 
Whatever  fafhion.  thinks,  they  have  a  fecrct  relifh, 
which  the  world  cannot  give. 

If  men  are  expected  to  diftinguiih  themfelves  by  fci- 
ence,  valour,  eloquence  or  the  arts,  a  woman's  greateft 
praife  confifis  in  the  order  and  good  government  of  her 
family.  Nor  is  this  beneath  the  a'ignity  of  any  female 
in  the  world.  Never  is  (he  greater  than  in  fuch  condc- 
fcention.     It  fpoils  no  features.     It   places   the   very 


YOUNG  LADY.  107 

fined  in  the  happiefl  attitude,  and  in  the  mo  ft  favour- 
able light. 

This  exercife  will  be  a  fovereign  preventive  of  the 
vapours  ;  and  every  family,  without  it,  muft  be  a  fcene 
of  diforder  ;  a  ftate  of  anarchy,  in  which  there  is  no 
head  to  govern,  and  all  the  members  feem  unwilling  to 
obey. 

If  we  could  fee  the  infule  of  fome  fafliionable  hou- 
fes,  what  apiofpect  would  they  prefent  !  The  miftrefs 
at  a  mafquerade  or  an  opera — fervants,  drunken,  ex- 
travagant, criminal  ! — Children,  receiving  their  very 
firft  imprefiions  from  their  oaths  and  curfes — here,  meat 
perifhing,  which  might  have  fed  the  hungry — there, 
garments  mouldering,  which  would  have  cloathed  the 
naked — in  one  place,  filth  and  naftinefs  concealed — in 
another  valuable  furniture  toffed  about,  without  decen- 
cy and  without  care  !  No  fortune  can  anfwer  fuch  im- 
moderate  expences.  No  comfort  can  confift  with  fo 
much  diforder.  "  A  good  woman  looketh  well  to 
"  the  ways  of  her  houfehold,  and  all  her  family  is 
"  clothed  in  fcarlet." 

A  turn  for  dimpation,  in  any  woman,  is  unfeemly, 
but,  in  a  married  one,  it  is  criminal  m  the  extreme.  If 
fhe  loves  her  children,  what  can  fo  much  entertain 
her,  as  their  lively  prattle,  as  their  innocent  endear- 
ments, or  unfolding  their  latent  powers  ?  If  me  loves 
her  hufband,  what  other  fociety  can  be  half  fo  footh- 
i-ng,  or  half  fo  delightful? 

The  tour  of  a  woman's  gaiety  mould  terminate  with 
marriage.  From  that  moment,  her  purfuits  mould  be 
foiid,  and  her  pleafures  circumfcribed  within  the  limits 
of  her  houfehold.  So  much  as  this,  fhe  vowed  at  the 
altar  :  fo  much  her  interefts  and  her  happinefs  require. 

A  wife,  who  is  always  gadding  about,  virtually  tells 
the  world,  that  fhe  is  unhappy  in  her  connexion  ;  that 
her  vanity  is  moft  immoderate,  or  her  tafte  moft  de- 
praved. 


io8  LETTERS  TO  A 

What  (trips  this  union  of  its  fweeteft  pleafures  ? 
What  makes  wives  and  hufoands  fo  indifferent  to  each 
other  ?  DilTipation. 

They  f;>end  fo  little  time  together  in  private  ;  and 
it  is  chiefly  in  folitude,  that  affection  fprings. 

If  a  man  after  the  bufinefs  and  fatigues  of  the  day, 
could  return  to  an  houfe,  where  a  wife  was  engaged 
in  domeifjc  cares,  and  an  attention  to  his  offspring,  he 
muff  be  a  monfrer  of  favagenefs  and  ffupidity  indeed, 
if  he  did  not  (trcngly  feel  the  influence  of  her  virtues, 
and  if  they  did  not  convey  a. /oft  rapture  to  his  foul. 

What  woman  is  molt  really  admired  in  the  world  ? 
The  domefKc.  What  woman  has  all  the  fuffrages  of 
the  fenfible,  and  the  good  ?  The  domefiic. 

If  I  wifhed  a  lady's  picture  to  appear  to  advantage, 
it  mould  not  be  taken  when  me  was  drefiing  for  an  a£ 
fembly,  a  levee  or  a  birth  night.  She  fhould  be  hold- 
ing one  lovely  infant  in  her  arms,  and  prefenting  a 
moral  page,  for  the  instruction  of  another. 

Such  a  pointer  would  give  us  thtjine/l  object  in  the 
world,  and  wrap  that  world,  libertines  and  ftoics,  in 
one  general  admiration. 


LETTER  XLI. 

I  AM  not  at  all  furprized  with  the  tnfip'uiXxfe  of  the 
parties  you  mention.  Their  cafe  is,  by  no  means, 
uncommon.  Nor  would  it  have  required  any  great 
penetration  to  have  foretold  the  confequences  of  fo 
hafty  a  connexion. 

The  truth  is,  the  gentleman  was  ftrictly  in  the  lan- 
guage of  the  world,  a  beau  a" e/prit,  that  is,  he  drefTed 
fmartly,  frequented  (what  is  eftcemed)  genteel  com- 
pany, and  public  places,  drank,  hunted,  ran  into  the 
extremes  of  fafhios,  and   had  fome  fortune  to  fupport 


YOUNG  LADY.  ie>9 

it.  In  proportion  as  thefe  little  matters  had  engaged 
his  mind,  fmall  attention  had,  you  may  fuppofe,  been 
paid  to  the  formation  of  his  heart  or  underftanding. 

In  this  thoughtlefs  period,  it  was  the  misfortune  of 
this  poor  girl,  with  an  elegant  perfon  and  interesting 
manner,  to  fall  in  his  way.  She  was  beautiful  ;  na- 
ture had  defigned  her  to  plcafe  ;  and,  if  me  had  been 
connected  with  a  fenfible  man,  might  have  been  moul- 
ded almoft  into  any  thing,  that  captivates  in  graceful- 
nefs,  or  aftonrmes  in  underftanding.  Her  perfonal  ac- 
complilhments  infpired  this  pet  it  matt  re  with  -a  fugitive 
paffion  ;  his  fortune-  was  competent  ;  diflimilarity  of 
tafles,  habits  or  abilities  never  was  confidered  ;  ten- 
der tales  were  fwallowed  by  her  artlefs  innocence,  and 
his  addrefTes  were  accepted.  After  a  very  fhort  ac- 
quaintance, they  are  weary  of  each  other.  The  force 
of  beauty  and  of  paflion  is  exhaufted.  He  has  not 
tafte  enough  for  the  delicacies  of  friendship,  nor  knowl- 
edge to  entertain  a  lonely  hour  with  edifying  conver- 
fatton,  but  flies  to  the  bottle  and  his  mad  companions, 
for  pleafures,  wh;ch  it  is  not  in  her  power  to  beftow  ; 
whilft  me,  poor  creature  !  has  leifure  to  brood  over 
her  imprudence  and  misfortunes  in  ftill,  domeftic 
fcenes,  having  learned,  but  alas  !  too  late,  that  ration- 
al and  durable  enjoyment  is  only  to  be  found  with  a 
perforrof  virtue,  .principle  and  underftanding. 

For  my  own  part,  I  had  never  any  idea  of  fuch 
early  marriages.  If  this  girl  had  feen  the  world,  and 
a  variety  of  characters,  fhe  would  not  have  fubmitted 
to  fuch  a  connection  ;  and  if  he  had  lived  fingle,  till 
he  had  learned  the  extent  of  his  own  under  (tan  ding,  or 
the  nature  of  his  frivolous  and  criminal  habits,  he 
would  never  have  fuppoTed,  that  mere  innocence  and 
beauty  would  have  fatisiied  his  vagrant,  and  licentious 
wifhes  ! 

Bcfides,  what  knowledge  can  a  girl,  at  her  age,  have 
of  the  governmeRt  of  a  family,  or  the  arrangement  cf 


no  LETTERS  TO  A 

dome/lie  concerns  ?  Servants  will  take  advantage  of  her 
inexperience  ;  and  fhe  muff,  either  be  made  a  dupe  to 
their  artifices,  or,  from  a  narrow  fyrtein  of  jealoufy  and 
fufpicion,  me  will  lofe  their  confidence,  and  become 
the  object  of  their  perfecution. 

With  refpecl  to  the  other  cafe,  you  mention,  with  fo 
much  concern,  it  was  equally  probable.  People  may 
accuftom  therafelves  to  [peak  lightly  of  religion,  in  or- 
der to  be  efkemed  men  of  fpirit,  and,  in  a  thoughtlefs 
circle,  pafs  for  very  excellent  companions.  But,  when 
a  man  has  a.  family,  fuch  a  levity  is  infamous.  If  he 
believes  his  own  principles,  he  cannot  fail  to  be  refer- 
able ;  and  he  will  find,  that  the  fence  he  wifhes  to 
break  down,  is  that,  which  guards  the  chaility  and  af- 
fection of  a  wife  ;  the  obedience,  morals,  and  atten- 
tion, of  children  ;  the  refpect,  fidelity  and  principles  of 
fervants,  and  the  whole  of  his  affairs  from  finking  into 
a  terrible  ruin  and  cunfufion  ! 

The  general  caufe  of  fuicide  is  a  total  want,  or  an 
unfortunate</?«5«a//o«  of,  principle.  Without  the  com- 
forts of  religion,  what  fnpport  has  any  man  to  lean  up- 
on, in  the  day  of  trouble  ?  If  a  perfon  accuffoms  him- 
felf  to  fceptical  icafonings,  he  believes,  by  degrees,  that 
there  may  be  no  future  torments  for  the  wicked  ;  and 
if  he  can  once  bring  his  mind  to  this  unwarrantable  per- 
fusfion,  he  will  be  ready  to  lay  violent  hands  upon 
himfelf,  whenever  his  pride  is  hurt  by  any  fanciful  de- 
gradation, and  he  cannot  any  longer,  fupport  the  con- 
fequence,  for  which  he  has  been  diflinguiflied  by  his 
fellow  mortals. 


LETTER  XLII. 

WILL  now  give  you  the  defer iption  of  an  happier 
marriage.     I  have  been  fpending  a  few  days  in  t 


YOUNG  LADY. 


family,  who  have  long  lived  in  my  efteem,  and  of  whom 
you  have  often  heard  me  fpeak  in  terms  of  veneration. 

My  friendship  with  Eugenio,  (for  fo  I  will  call  the 
gentleman,)  was  formed  in  thofe  eaily  years,  when  un- 
fufpicious  hearts  vibrate  to  each  other,  without  ceremo- 
ny or  referve.  For  his  lady,  fo  foon  as  introduced  to 
her,  I  felt  a  very  ajfunilating  partiality.  We  mingled 
fouls  at  our  fir  ft  meeting,  and  they  have  never  fince, 
difcorded  for  a  moment. 

Eugenio  is  a  man  of  confiderable  learning,  and  ftill 
greater  tafte.  In  every  thing  that  relates  to  polite 
knowledge,  he  has  not  many  fuperiors  in  his  age.  He 
is  complete  mafter  of  mufic,  painting  and  poetry.  In 
architecture,  his  (kill  is  very  confiderable.  In  all  the 
phenomena  of  natural  hiftory,  he  is  profejfedly,  a  con- 
noiffeur.  The  beft  writers  of  Greece  and  Rome  lie  con- 
ftantly  on  his  table,  and  amufe  many  of  his  leifure  hours. 

Nature  lias  given  to  his  amiable  lady,  fuperior  un- 
derftanding,  which  has  been  improved  by  a  good  edu- 
cation, and  polifhedby  the  belt  company  in  the  king- 
dom. Her  mother  was  one  of  thofe  uncommon  wo- 
men, who  efteemed  it  her  higheft  dignity  to  be  herfelf 
the  nurfe  and  governefs  of  her  children,  and  taught 
them  to  mingle  accomplifhrnents  with  knowledge,  the 
ornamental  graces,  with  domeftic  aiTiduity. 

I  will  leave  you  to  judge,  what  muft  be  the  confe- 
quenc.s  of  fuch  an  union.  Think  how  Eugenio  ,nufl 
have  improved  fuch  a  woman  !  Imagine  how  this  lady 
muft  have  blc/fed  fuch  a  man  ! 

In  this  family |  I  am  quite  in  my  element.  I  read, 
ftroll,  think,  or  amufe  myfelf  without  cenfure  or  re- 
ftraint.  I  feel  a  fovereign  pity  for  the  world  of  fafh- 
ion,  and  forget  that  there  are  any  charms  in  ambition, 
or  any  for  rows  in  difappointment. 

Their  fortune   :s  juft,   what    it  mould  be,  foi  folid 
contentment;  tooliuie  to  infpire  a  fanuilic  emulation 
W 


rii  LETTERS  TO  A 

with  the  manners  of  the  great  world  ;  too  large  to  ad- 
mit of  embarra  Anient  or  want.  It  is,  in  fhort,  neither 
more  nor  ltfs,  than  £\ooo  per  annum.  Their  family 
confifts  of  two  fine  boys,  and  one  girl,  who  is  half  as 
amiable,  and  diflinguifhed,  as  Louiia. 

Though  the  fafhionable  world  would  think  fuch 
circumdances  narrow,  yet  that  economy,  which  can 
do  every  thing,  has  made  them  very  comfortable,  and 
their  entire  complacency  in  each  other's  company,  rich 
indeed  !  They  do  not  diflipate  their  fortune  in  txpen- 
five  journeys,  to,  or  by  refidence  in,  the  metropolis,  and 
are  too  happy  in  tbewfe/ves,  to  be  frequently  feen  in  any 
other  places  of  diffipation. 

This,  my  dear  Lucy,  is  the  happieft  of  lives. — Af- 
ter all  our  ambition,  and  all  our  ftruggles,  it  is  chiefly 
in  theyZWf,  that  we  rauft  find  contentment.  The 
pleafures  there  are  calm  ;  they  are  pleafures  of  the 
heart. 

Their  houfe  is  fituated,  at  two  miles  diftance  from  a 
confiderable  town  in  the  county  of ,  upon  an  em- 
inence, which  commands  a  full  view  of  the  city,  but 
has  its  afpeel  to  thofe  woods  and  fhades,  with  which  its 
owners  are  infinitely  more  converfant,  than  the  more 
noify  fcenes  of  diflipatedlife.  Elegant,  but  not  fuperb, 
and  fpacious,  tho'  plain,  it  expreffesthe  cultivated  tafte 
of  its  inhabitants,  and  the  hofpitable  kindnefs  that 
reigns  within. 

The  pleafure  grounds  and  gardens  are  in  that  unor- 
namented  ftyle,  which  to  me,  is  always  particularly 
pleafing.  Nature  has  not  been  wholly  facrificed  to 
art,  nor  wildnefs  to  refinement. — The  wildtrntfs  here 
and  there  prefents  you  with  all  its  fliaggy  luxuriance, 
and  venerable  glooms.  You  rove  imbofomed  in  woods 
and  thickets,  and  are  mingled  at  a  diftance  from  every 
prying  eye,  in  thofe  filent  haunts  offolitude,  which 
poetry  has  always  decked  with  its  charms.  Here  the 
hand  of  the  Creator  has  formed  a  grotto,   and  art  has- 


YOUNG  LADY.  113 

not  dettroyed  it  ;  there  an  alcove,  and  the  pruning 
knife  has  not  officioujly  feparatedthc  intwining  branches. 
In  one  place,  a  little  fountain  murmurs,  at  its  eafe,  and 
nothing  has  attempted  to  divert  it  from  its  original 
channel.  In  another  you  havo  tufted  beauties,  a  caf- 
cade,  a  lawn,  an  hill  or  a  valley,  beautifully  interfper- 
fed,  exactly  as  they  were  formed  by  the  hand  of  na- 
ture, in  one  of  thole  more  fportive  moments,  whea  fhs 
wiilied  to  pleafe. 

Through  the  branches  of  a  beautiful  hanging  wood, 
which  lie.--  before  the  houfe,  you  defcry  the  glittering 
fpire  of  the  pariih  church,  belonging  to  the  village,  of 
which  Eugenio  is  the  patron,  and  a  very  exemplary 
clergyman,  the  prefent  incumbent.  It  is  placed  on  a 
rjfing  ground,  as  if  continually  afpiring  to  that  heaven, 
to  which  its  excellent  paftor  is  always  calling  the  af- 
fections of  his  people.  It  is  built  in  that  gothic  ftyle, 
which  i  always  moil  approved  in  this  facred  kind  of 
ftrueture,  as  bell  adapted  to  infpire  the  mind  with  fe- 
rioufhefs  and  devotion.  But  it  is  not  from  the  mere 
beauty  of  the  place,  or  the  delicioufnefs  of  its  fituation, 
that  its  enviable  owners  derive  their  happinefs.  They 
expect  not  from  fhrubs  or  blofToms,  or  the  mod:  en- 
chanting fcenery,  the  pleafures  of  the  heart.  They 
know,  that  the  richeft  profpects  would  foon  fade  upon 
the  eye,  if  they  did  not  derive  a  freffi  and  lively  bloom 
from  principle  within. 

In  an  age  of  levity,  this  happy  pair  are  not  a  (named 
to  be  thought  religious.  They  are  perfuaded,  that 
their  bleffings  could  have  no  permanency  or  relifh,  if 
unfanctified  with  the  fmile  and  protection  of  heaven. 
Their  houfe  is,  in  fact,  a  temple,  where  prayers  and 
praifes,  are  regularly  offered  up,  every  night  and 
morning,  to  the  great  Author  and  preferver  of  their 
lives.  Every  fervant  is  required  to  attend  the  fervice  ; 
and  they  are  all  occafionally>  inftructed  in  their  duties 
to  God  and  man.     They  have  likewife,  each  a  little 


114  LETTERS  TO  A 

library  of  devotional  traces,  which  have  been  prefented 
to  them  by  their  generous  fuperiors.  I  had  the  cuii- 
ofity  one  day,  to  examine  the  title  page?,  and  found 
£ht_m,  principally  to  confift  of  the  great  importance  of 
a  Religious  Life  ;  Beveiidge's  Private  Thoughts  and 
Refolutions  ;  Taylor's  Holy  Living  and  Dying  ; 
Advice  againft  (wearing,  drunkennefs,  profanenefs,  &c. 
in  little  traces  from  the  Society,  for  promoting  Chris- 
tian Knowledge  ;  W.lfon  on  the  Sacrament  ;  th« 
Clrriitian  Pattern  ;  Henry's  Pleafantntfs  of  a  Reli- 
gious Life,  &c. 

It  would  delight  you  to  obferve  with  what  a  mix- 
ture of  love  and  reverence,  thefe  fervants  approach 
their  real  benefactors.  You  hear  nothing,  under  this 
roof  of  thofe  feuds  and  animofities,  which  fo  much 
embitter  the  happinefs  of  families.  "  They  live  as 
*f  brethren  together  in  unity."  The  only  contention 
is,  which  mail  be  mo  ft  ardent,  afliduous  and  vigilant  in 
the  performance  of  their  duty. 

If  Maria  (Eugenio's  lady,)  has  the  Jlightejl  indifpo- 
fjtion,  you  might  read  it,  without  afking  a  fyllable,  in 
the  anxious  looks  and  geftures  of  all  her  attendants. 
She  was  lately  confined  with  a  nervous  fever  ;  and  it 
would  have  aftonifhed  you  to  fee  the  unaffected  grief 
and  concern,  exprefTed  in  their  looks.  "  What  (faid 
"  they)  will  become  of  our  excellent  mafter,  if  he 
"  mould  lofe  the  mod  amiable  woman  in  the  world  :" 

The  piety  of  thefe  people  is  the  more  engaging,  be- 
cairfe  it  is  always  cheerful  and  ferene.  It  proceeds 
from  reafov,  and  it  encourages  no  unnatural  aufterity 
or  gloom.  It  is  mixed  with  fentiment  ;  it  is  graced 
with  knowledge,  and  guided  by  difcretion.  Who 
would  not  pique  himfelf  onafrimdfhip  with  fuch  a  fam- 
ily ?  Who  would  not  wilhthat  friendihip  tobe  eternal  ? 

When  I  have  added  you  to  the  group,  I  fancy  my- 
felf  in  pofTemon  oi  almolfc  every  thing,  that  mortality 
can  give,  and  wim  only  the  continuance  of  myenjoy  meet. . 


YOUNG  LADY,  ttf 

LETTER  XLIII. 

MANY  people  of  fortune  are  uncomfortable  in 
marriage,  for  want  of  employment ,  or  of  fome- 
thing  to  give  an  inUreJl  to  the,  otherwife,  bifipid  uni- 
formity of  the  fame  excurfions,  vifits,  company,  or  en- 
tertainments. This  is  never  the  cafe  within  the  walls 
of  Eugenio.  He  is  always  introducing,  from  inci- 
dents as  they  rife,  f©mc  ufeful  and  entertaining  topics 
of  convcrf  ition.  A  news-paper,  books,  the  garden, 
flowers,  plants,  flirubs,  hiftory,  the  azure  vault  of 
heaven,  ftars,  planets,  or  even  a  common  infe&,  furnifii 
to  this  worthy  family,  ample  fubjects  for  obfervation, 
ever  edifying,  and  ever  new.  His.  lady  has  tafte  and 
information  enough  to  enter  into  the  fpirit  of  all  thefe 
defcriptions  ;  and  the  general fcene  is,  not  a  little  enliv- 
ened by  the  mode,  in  which  they  treat  and  educate 
their  children. 

My  good  friend  is  perfuaded,  that  public  education, 
as  it  is  generally  managed,  is  more  calculated  to  teach 
languages  and  fcience,  than  to  inculcate  principles  or 
morals ;  and,  therefore,  keeps  his  fons  at  home,  till 
they  have  acquired  a  fufficient  ftock  of  virtue  to  ferve 
them  as  an  antidote  agaisd:  the  dangers  of  the  world* 
They  have,  however,  their  regular  fchool  hours  and 
exercifes,  which  are  obferved  with  the  molt  undevia- 
ting  punctuality.  The  older  of  the  boys  has  made  a 
confiderable  proficiency  in  the  Latin  Language.  Pie 
has  abridged  the  Englifh  and  the  Roman  hiflories,  and 
is  completely  verfed  in  heathen  mythology.  But* 
above  all,  he  is  inftructed  in  the  fundamentals  of  reli- 
gion, and  of  his  duty  to  God  and  man.  The  fcrip- 
tures  make  a  part  of  his  daily  reading  ;  and  the  fenli- 
ble  parent  embellifhes  them  with  fuch  a  number  of 
(Inking  observations,  as  greatly  intereft  the  curioftty, 
And  fix  the  attention  of  his  unvitiated  pupil. 

W.2 


ii6  LETTERS  TO  A 

With  Rollin's  BeHes  Lettres,  and  the  Abbe  Mil- 
lot's  Elementes  far  Phijioire,  he  is  perfectly  acquainted. 
The  latter  he  is  abridging  ;  and  Telemachus  is  warmly 
prefled  on  his  attention,  as  containing  thofe  immortal 
leiTons  of  virtue,  which  alone  can  dignify  any  charac- 
ter or  ftation. 

Eugenio  has  been  at  the  pains  of  throwing  felec"i 
parts  of  Seneca,  Marcus  Antoninus,  and  the  Memora- 
billia  of  Xenophon  into  an  Englifh  drefs,  for  the  ad- 
vantage of  his  little  family.  He  has  felecled  a  fyftem 
of  Ethics,  and  almoft  of  divinity,  from  the  entertain- 
ing works  of  Addifon,  Johnfon,  The  World,  &c.  and 
the  arrangement  is  fo  excellent,  that  it  ought  to  be 
made  public  for  the  benefit  of  mankind. 

The  firft  morning,  that  I  fpent  under  this  happy 
roof,  I  was  awakened  from   my  {lumbers  by  the  foft 

harmonious  voice  of  Mifs ,  who  was  chanting  to 

the  harpficord,  an  early  hymn  of  gratitude  and  devo- 
tion to  her  merciful  Creator.  It  was  taken  from  the 
■Spectator- 

When  all  thy  mercies,  O  my  God, 

My  rifing  foul  furveys  ; 
Traniported  with  the  view,  I'm  loft 

In  wonder,  love  and  praife. 

The  whole  reminded  me  of  the  words  of  an  ingea- 
ious  poet : 

J'entcnds  encore  fa  voix,  cc  language,  enchanteur, 
Et  ccs  fon.s  fouverains  de  1'oreiUe  et  du  coeur. 

Her  voice  th'  enchanting  language,y?/'//  I  hear, 
Thofe  fov'reigu  accents  of  tin.  heart 7  and  ear. 

This  is  her  cobftant  practice  every  morning,  at  fix 
■o'clock  ;  and  it  has  the  happieft  effect  on  her  temper 
iind  fpirits,  for  the  reft  of  the  day.  It  fooths  the  foul 
to  harmony,  and  cherifhes  all  the  gentler  emotions- 


YOUNG  LADY.  m 

•Immediately  after  this  was  finifhed,  the  lovely  girl 
took  a  walk,  into  the  garden,  as  fhe  regularly  does, 
when  the  weather  will  permit,  to  obferve  the  gradual 
progrefs,  health  and  vegetation  of  her  plants  and  flow- 
ers. I  requeued  the  honor  of  attending  her,  and  was 
amazed,  young  as  fhe  is,  with  her  knowledge  of  natural 
hiftory,  and  with  the  judicious  remarks  fhe  made  on 
the  power  and  goodnels,  on  the  wifdorn  and  contriv- 
ance of  the  magnificent  Creator. 

Before  breakfalr,  Maria  (their  mother,)  hears  all 
the  children  together  read  the  pfalms  and  lefTons  for 
the  day.  To  this  pious  cxercife  I  was  not  invited  ; 
but  I  doubt  not  it  was  a  fpecimen  of  female  eloquence, 
defcanting  on  the  vanity  of  every  thing,  but  devotion, 
and  glancing  at  the  dangers  and  temptations  of  the 
world. 

The  employment  of  this  good  family  is  as  flrift,  as 
ufual,  and  not  lefs  pleafing  even  upon  Sundays. 

Thzjirft  exercife  of  this  day,  after  the  accullomed 
hymn  of  praife  to  their  Creator,  is  to  abridge  a  few  pa- 
ges of  Wilfon's  Indian  Infr.ru<£ted,  or  of  Seeker's 
Lectures  on  the  Catechifm.  After  the  fervice,  all  the 
children  give  in,  to  the  beft  of  their  power,  an  account 
of  the  fermon,  which  they  have  heard.  The  compan- 
ion of  their  different  meiits  is  pleafing,  and  the  very 
€onttjl  excites  emulation. 

When  this  is  finifhed  their  father  inftru&s  them  with 
a  fhort  comment  on  the  lefTons  for  the  day.  One  hap- 
.pened  to  be  the  hiftory  of  Dives  and  La%arus.  Very 
few  have  greater  powers  of  the  pathetic  than  my  friend. 
He  brought  them  all  to  tears  with  dwelling  on  the  pit- 
iable circumftances  of  the  beggar,  and  poured  this  leiTon 
into  their  J "oftered  minds,  that  riches  are  apt  to  harden 
•the  heart,  and  have  no  real  dignity  or  ufe,  but  as  em- 
ployed in  acls  of  mercy  to  our  neighbour.  He  gave,  to 
cthe  parable  at  large,  a  new  and  fngular  afpeft.     He 


nS  LETTERS  TO  A 

©bferved,  that  luxury  had  led  Dives  to  unbelief,  and 
that  unbelief  had  plunged  him  into  hell. 

On  another  occafion,  he  dwelt  on  the  fcriptural  hifto- 
ry  of  Haman.  In  him,  he  expatiated  on  the  uncer- 
tainty and  ficklenefs  of  all  outward  greatnefs,  and  the 
infufficiency  of  honors,  ftations,  popularity  to  confer  a- 
ny  /Whappinefs  on  a  mind,  that  had  not  fubmitted  to 
internal  government  and  the  difcipline  of  religion. 

"  What  a  trifle  (faid  he,)  deranged  this  greatman's 
enjoyment  !  Becaufe  a  poor  Mordecai  wwuld  not  bow 
to  his  pomp,  his  honours  loft  their  flavour,  and  his 
dignities  their  charm  ;  his  ileep  went  from  him,  and  he 
refufed  to  be  comforted.  If  his  paflions  had  been  fub- 
dued,  and  his  foul  regenerated  with  divine  grace,  he 
would  have  been  contented  in  the  lowed  obfeurity. 
A  cottage  would  have  given  him  more  fatisfaftion  than 
this  palace.  It  would  have  been  irradiated  with  hope, 
and  it  would  have  fmi'ed  with  divine  confolations." 

Eugenio  is  coEilant  at  church,  and  his  deportment 
there  is  an  excellent  pattern  to  all  its  dependents.  His 
features  are  marked  with  a  ferious  fervour,  and  a  cheer- 
ful dignity,  when  he  is  humbly  prefenting  his  {implica- 
tions to  the  author  of  his  being. 

You  would  be  charmed  to  fee  how  the  honeft  peas- 
ants dwell  on  his  looks !  what  eulogies  are  expreiTed 
in  every  countenance  !  what  fervent  bleflings  are  pour- 
ed forth,  when  he  ftops  to  enquire  about  their  families 
and  concerns,  and  what  earned  wifhes,that  his  manfion 
■may  long  retain  him,  for  its  owner,  and  that  his  con- 
tinuance amongft  them,  may  be  lading  as  their  days  ! 

Not  behind  him  in  any  of  the  wilder  virtues,  his 
confort  looks  up  to  him,  with  a  confeicus  inferiority,  as 
the  pride  of  her  heart.  Blended  with  more  J ofi nefs, 
her  piety  is,  if  poflible,  frill  more  engaging ;  but  me 
feems  to  decline  all  pcrfonal  confequence,  and  to  be 
^wholly  abforbed  in  the  fuperior  luftre  of  his  character 
£nd  virtues.     Siie  receives  the  prayeis  and  bleffings  oi' 


YOUNG  LADY.  u9 

their  tenants,  as  if  only  due  to  the  man  of  her  affec- 
tions ;  and,  though  the  zeal  of  the  populace  would  con- 
vey her,  in  their  arms.,  yet,  when  Eugenio  offers  his 
hand  to  lift  her  into  the  carriage,  her  eyes  fparkle  with 
peculiar  checrfulnefs,  and  ftrongly  exprefs  both  her  love 
and  gratitude  to  her  protector  and  her  friend. 

It  is  no  wonder  that  they  are  fo  much  admired. 
No  wonder  that  every  tongue  loads  them  with  bleffings. 
This  is  bat  the  fpeculatlve  part  of  their  piety  ;  the  prae- 
tical  is  more  ufeful  and  more  engaging.  They  love 
their  God  ;  they  love  their  Redeemer,  and  for  his 
fake  they  go  about  doing  good.  Not  a  tenant  expe- 
riences an  uncomfortable  year,  but  he  receives  a  con- 
liderable  abatement  in  his  rent.  Not  a  perfon  is  inju- 
red in  all  the  neighbourhood,  but  his  caufe  is  pleaded, 
and  his  wrongs  are  redreffed.  Not  an  old  man  exiles, 
but  he  has  fomething,  by  way  of '  penjion,  from  this  vir- 
tuous family,  to  eafe  his  infirmities,  and  pillow  his  de- 
clining age.  Not  a  great  man  endeavours  to  take  ad- 
vantage of  a  leffer,  but  my  friend,  who  is  an  excellent 
lawyer,  undertakes  the  bufmefs,  and  expofes  the  op- 
preffor  to  his  merited  contempt. 

Every  hour,  that  Maria  ca.n  fpare  from  her  particu- 
lar domeftic  employments,  is  fpentin  makinggarments, 
providing  cordial?,  phyfic  and  accommodations  for  the 
naked,  the  fick  and  indigent  of  her  village  ;  and  there 
are  times  of  the  day,  in  which  you  would  conclude, 
from  the  vaft  concourfe  of  people,  that  their  houfe  was 
a  profeffed  afylum  for  poverty  and  diftrefs. 

But  now  comes  out  the  great  fecret  of  their  happinefs. 
"  Alas  !"  faid  this  good  man  to  me,  one  night,  after 
fupper,  when  he  was  reviewing  the  actions  of  the  day, 
"  your  obliging  partiality  thinks  me  happy,  and  fo  in- 
"  deed  I  am.  In  the  tendernefs,  fiiendfliip,  fidelity 
"  and  difcretion  of  my  Maria,  I  have  more  than  the 
*'  treafures  even  of  a  world.  But  this  fweet  abode 
"  M-ouId  foon  ceafe  to  pleafe,  and  the  lovely  woman 


x2o  LETTERS  TO  A 

u  lofe  the  greater  part  of  her  charms,  if  we  wcie  not 
u  both  animated  with  chriltian  fentiments,  and  if  we 
**  did  not  contrive  to  relieve  thsfamemfj  and  to  digni- 
"  tythe  Uulenefs  of  life  by  the  activities  of  virtue 
*'  That  divine  philanthropy,  which  is  the  eflence  of 
**  religion,  is  the  fource  of  oarpleafures.  And,  when 
"  I  drop  into  the  grave,  I  lhalJ  have  but  one  fingle 
"  wifh,  that  this  amiable  guide  may  be  fpared  to  my 
*"  offspring,  and  that  the  poor  may  pronounce  a  laft 
il  panegyric  on  me,  with  their  prayers  and  tears.  But 
"  how  very  felfifh  and  how  cruel  is  the  defire  !  What 
"  would  become  of  the,  then,  lonely  and  difconfolate 
"  Maria  ?  Alas  !  continually  together  in  this  retire- 
"  ment,  continually  endeared  by  growing  aclsoften- 
"  dernefs,  you  cannot  think  how  very  much  our  hearts 
**  are  united  !  But  this  is  the  condition  of  all  human 
"  happinefs.  The  tendered  love  mud  feel  the  bit- 
"  tered  pangs  from  a  feparation.  It  is  the  decree  of 
"  infinite  w:fdom,  that  this  world  mould  have  no  un- 
"  mixed  fatisfaclion,  to  put  us  on  earnejlly  feeking  it 
"  id  one,  which  is  unfading  and  eternal." 

Thefe  are  the  fentiments  ofzsjlne  a  gentleman,  as 
the  age  can  boafr.  ;  of  one,  who  would  do  honor  to  the 
politeir.  circles,  and  has  power  to  charm  the  mod  im- 
proved underdandings.  But  that  gentleman  is  a  chrif- 
t'tan.  He  has  learned  to  facrifice  all  glitter  and  ac- 
complifhments  at  the  banners  of  the  crofs.  And  this 
has  made  him  fo  charitable  a  landlord,  fo  active  a  pat- 
ron, fo  tender  an  hufband,  fo  :  grceable  a  companion, 
fo  indulgent  a  parent,  and  fo  valuable  a  friend.  Read 
this,  ye  conceited  coxcombs,  who  fancy  that  the  char- 
acter of  gentleman  conlifts  in  levity  or  wic&ednefs,  and 
*>lufti  at  your  miftake  ' 


YOUNG  LADY.  fix 

LETTER  XLIV. 

I  CANNOT  fully  fatisfyyour  inquiry.  So  far, 
however,  as  fcripture  and  reafon  will  be  our  guides, 
I  will  endeavour  to  accompany  you  into  the  pleafing 
{peculation. 

To  you,  who  have  buried  fo  many  dear  and  amia- 
ble friends,  and  had  iojbort  an  enjoyment  of  them  here, 
it  is  natural  to  inquire,  what  you  may  fee,  or  know  of 
them  hereafter  ;  whether  you  (hall  be  able  to  recognize 
departed  fpirits  after  death,  and  wherein  the  joys  of 
heaven  will  confift. 

It  is  plain  from  facred  writ,  that  our  prefent,  earthly, 
will  be  changed  into  glorious,  bodies,  and  our  fouls,  as 
it  were,  fublimed  or  re-modified,  as  neceffary  to  the  en- 
joyment of  future  blifs,  'whatever  it  may  be.  Whilft 
therefore  we  are,  in  part,  compofed  of  matter,  it  is  im- 
poffible  that  we  mould  have  2.  full  conception,  or  that 
any  adequate  reprefentation  can  be  conveyed  to  us  iri 
tvords,  of  the  real  nature  and  effence  of  fuch  pleafures, 
as  in  fact,  are  only  adapted  to  minds  of  amuch  fuperior 
texture,  and  bodies  of  a  more  celeftial  and  divine  or- 
ganization.  Thus  the  fcriptural  images"  of  thrones, 
"  fceptres,  kingdoms,  of  mining  as  the  (tars  of  the  iir- 
"  mament,  of  being  clothed  in  white  robes,  and  ha- 
u  ring  palms  in  our  hands,  of  feeding  in  green  paf- 
"  tures,  and  being  led  befide  living  fountains  of  wa- 
*  ters,"  are  not  to  be  understood,  as  conftituting  any 
thing  of  the  real  quality  of  future  happinefs,  but  as  im- 
perfectly fhadowing  forth,  by  the  analogy  of  fenlible 
objects,  joys,  which,  both  in  their  nature  and  degree^ 
are  wholly  raifed  above  our  prefent  comprehenfion. 

So  (bong  and  literally  juft  is  that  paflage  ;  "  Eye 
"  has  not  feen  nor  ear  heard,  neither  has  it  entered  in- 
"  to  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive  the  things,  which 
"  God  has  prepared  for  them,  that  love  him." 

The  fame  idea  is,  in  fomc  degree,  intended,  by  St.. 


V 


122  LTTERS  TO  A 

Paul,  when  he  fays,  that,  "  when  carried  up  into  the, 
"  third  heaven,  lie  heard  things,  which  it  was  impof- 
"  fible  for  man  to  utter  :"  he  had,  it  fhould  feem, 
the  idea  of  them,  but  could  not  convey  it,  in  human 
words,  to  the  human  underflanding.  It  is  fufficient 
for  us  to  know,  that  thefe  delights  will  be  of  zfpirit- 
val  nature,  proceeding  from  the  fupreme,  all-perfect 
fpirit,  and  adapted  to  the  fullefr.  capacities  of  thofe,  he 
has  been  pleafed  to  glorify  ;  that  they  will  be  exquifite, 
as  unbounded  power  and  wifdom  and  goodnefs  can 
beftow,  and  lading,  as  the  days  of  that  eternal  heaven, 
in  which,  they  fpring. 

That  we  (hall  be  able  to  recognize  /pints,  and 
amongft  others,  thofe  of  our  nearefi  intimates  after  death, 
is  probable  from  the  very  nature  of  the  foul,  which  can- 
not be  fuppofed  to  lofe    its    confeioufnefs  or  recollection, 

whilfr  the  body  is  deeping  in  the  duft  of  the  earth 

froai  the  poflibihiy,  that  an  exquifite  part  of  future  hap- 
pinefs  will  arife  from  reviewing,  along  with  prefent 
friends,  the  trials,  temptations,  and  forrows,   which  we 

overcame,  along  with  them,  upon  earth and,  more 

efpecially,  from  the  attributes  of  God,  which  feem 
pledged  to  convince  us,  by,  (;is  it  were,)  ocular  demon- 
stration, that  thofe,  who,  we  are  well  aiTurcd,  fufil-i  cd 
undefei  vedly,  in  various  methods  here,  are  rewarded 
hereafter,  and  that  fonie  guilty  perfons,  who  wanted  no 
profperities  in  this  world,  experience  all  the  horrors  o( 
another. 

To  this  doctrine,  there  is  but  one  weak,  and  ill-foun- 
ded objection  ;  that  witneiling  the  mifery  of  friends,  if 
they  died  in  a  finful  (hate,  mult  be  a  dreadfu'  abatement 
of  our  own  felicity.  That  is  imp'-flible.  The  affec- 
tion betwixt  relatives  here  was  implanted  only  for  tem- 
porary purpofes,  and  will,  in  fome  cafes,  ceafe  a*ter 
death.  The  only  attachment,  then,  will  b«-,  (as  the 
only  rational  one,  always  was,)  to  fouls,  that  ajftmilaU 
in  real  wifdom,  purity  and  goodnefs.     We  (lull  love,  in 


YOUNG  LADY.  123 

our  degree,  even  as  God  loveth,  not  with  the  weaknefs 
of  paflion  orinftinct,  but  the  unchangeable  fublimky  of 
order.  "  They,  that  do  the  will  of  our  Father  in 
"  heaven,  will  be  our  fathers  and  brethren,  our  fillers 
"  and  mothers." 

How  glorious  and  inexhauftible  a  fource  of  happi- 
nefs does  fuch  a  profpectopen  to  the  mind  !  With  what 
rapture  will  a  tender  mother,  who  left  a  number  of  chil- 
dren behind  her,  with  a  thoufand,  anxious  apprehen- 
fions  for  their  fafety,  meet  them  in  heaven,  where  their 
innocence  is  crowned,  their  trials  are  finimed,  and 
their  eternal  happinefs  fecurcd  !  With  what  dutiful 
tranfports  will  children  embrace  the  religious  parent, 
to  whofe  counfels  under  Providence^  they  owe  conlid- 
erably  their  prefent  glorification  !  And  what  delight 
mu(l  it  give  both  parties  to  reflefr,  that  death  can,  no 
more  divorce  them  from  each  other,  nor  a  grain  of  for- 
row  poifon  their  cup  of  blifs  !  Affectionate  brothers 
and  lifters,  unavoidably  fevered  here,  by  various,  im- 
portant exigences,  with  what  ardour  will  they  renew 
their  natural  connection,  and  reciprocate  each  other's 
joys  !  Not  a  fear  to  rife  upon  their  future  profpecls, 
not  a  cloud  to  darken  the  celeftial  fky  ! 

Another  delightful  idea  of  heaven  is,  that  it  will 
bring  to  maturity  all  thofe  amiable  iniiincts,  which  were 
planted  in  us  by  the  Deity,  whiKt  we  were  on  earth, 
but  from  a  multitude  of  obftacles,  or  the  fhortnefs  of 
life,  could  not  attain  their  perfection. 

Our  ftrong  third  for  happinefs,  it  is,  on  all  hands,  al- 
lowed, that  was  only  mocked  in  a  world  of  Jhadoivt, 
will  be  fully  gratified  in  one  of  glory. 

It  will,  probably,  be  fo  with  our  paffion  for  knowl- 
edge— friendship — fociety — which,  when  properly  di- 
rected, are  equally  virtuous  and  ufeful  propenfities,  and, 
therefore,  alike  proceed  from  the  Author  of  everv  per- 
fettgift. 

X 


r24  LETTERS  TO  A 

How  eagerly  do  fome  men  third:  after  knowledge, 
but  how  much  are  they  retarded  in  the  purfuit,  by  the 
imperfection  of  their  pi  efent  organs,  the  weaknefs  of 
their  bodily  frame,  by  the  long,  loft  fpace  of  childhood 
and  old  age,  by  the  want  of  books,  acquaintance,  and 
other  opportunities,  or  by  the   tranfitorinefs  of  life  it- 

felf ! or  when  all  human  advantages  center  in  one, 

privileged  man,  enlightened  as  he  vnzyfeem,  what  is  his 
wifdom,  but  comparative  folly  :  When  contracted  with 
the  immenfity  of  fcience,  and  the  inexhauflibie  won^ 
ders  of  creation,  what  does  it  refemble,  but  a  grain,  an 
atom,  a  drop  of  water,  or  a  particle  of  fand  on  the  fea 
fliore  ?  Here  we  fee  but  through  "  a  glafs  darkly." 
A  Newton  and  a  Locke,  after  all  their  improvements, 
felt  and  confeffed  this  poverty  of  foul. 

But  how  fublime  will  be  the  pleafures  of  this  inter- 
courfe  in  heaven,  when  the  greateft  men,  that  have  ever 
lived,  are  all  collected  together  from  all  quarters  of  the 
world  !  When  there  are  no  little  envies,  jealoufies,  in- 
terests or  bigotries  to  interrupt  their  mutual  concord 
and  improvements  !  nor  any  languor,  fatigue  or  difeafe 
in  the  renovated  frame !  When  the  Almighty  mail 
have  unlocked  all  the  treafures  of  his  wifdom,  all  the 
fecrets  of  his  government,  and  the  wonders  of  his 
grace  !  When  the  foul  fhall  have  received  fuch  frefli 
and  fuperior  inlets  of  intelligence,  and  "  we  fnall 
"  know,  even  as  we  are  known."  The  wondrous 
page  of  nature  will  then  be  plain.  The  book  of  Prov- 
idence will  open,  in  the  mod  legible  characters,  on  the 
enlarged  mind.  That  myftery  of  redemption,  into 
which  the  very  angels  have  been  defirous  to  l®ok,  will 
be  unfolded,  in  all  its  abylTes  ;  and  the  confequence  of 
fuch  difcoveries  mud  be  an  inexpreflible  fenfation  of 
love,  aftonifhment  and  rapture.  "  We  fhall  not  ceafe, 
"  day  or  night,  to  worfhip  him,  that  fittcth  on  the 
"  throne,  and  the  Lamb,  that  has  wafhed  us  from  our 
' '  fins,  in  his  own  blood." 


YOUNG  LADY.  i*$ 

The  cafe,  in  all  probability,  will  be  the  fame  with 
friend/hip.  Friendfhip,  balm  of  this  uncafy  (late  !  in- 
fpirerofvirtuousthoughtsandcounfels!  medicine  of  life! 
iiiJl  chequered,  dill  imperfect  upon  earth,  mixed  v/ith 
caprice,  with  paflion,  with  inlmcerity,and  often  chilled 
by  death,  (thoufands  of  congenial  fouls  prevented  by 
fcas,  mountains,  referee  offex,  bigotries  of  religion, 
peculiarities  of  education,  from  ever  uniting,)  this 
friendlhip  (hall,  there,  have  all  its  fulleff.  poignancy,  and 
flourilh  in  immortal  bloom!  The  amiable  of  all  ages 
and  nations  mall  be  aiTembled  together,  fiailities  and 
death,  and  the  pojjibility  of  feparatioa,  wholly  done 
away  ! 

Think  only  of  the  expanfion  and  luxury  the  mind 
enjoys  from  unbofoming  its  pleafures  or  forrov/s  to  a 
pet  Ton  upon  earth,  from  the  focial  glow  and  confiden- 
tial converfation  !  and  imagine,  for  a  moment,  what 
this  privilege  muft  be,  where  all  around  us  are  friends 
— where  friends  are  angels — and  angels  are  continual- 
ly imbibing  frefh  ftreams  of  knowledge,  of  purity  and 
graces  in  the  prefence  of  their  God  ! 

Our  focial  inftinct  likewife,  will,  doubtlefs,  hare  a 
ftmilar  gratification.  People  are  drawn  together  into 
\cs  on  earth,  by  a  fimilarity  of  taftes,  purfuits,  hab- 
its and  improvements.  The  principle  is  natural  and 
has  many  laudable  effects  ;  and,  from  the  nature  of  the 
human  foul,  which  will,  probably,  be  going  through 
iucccilive  ftages  of  improvement  to  all  eternity,  may  be 
fuppofed,  likely  to  continue  in  a  glorified  ftate.  Thus, 
though  holinefs  and  purity  be  the  alone  medium  oiad- 
ui'ijjion  into  thefe  blelTed  manfions,  yet  focieties  may  be 
formed  of  people  of  fimilar  improvements  and  congeni- 
al taftes  ;  of  holy  philofophers,  (fuppofe,)  naturalifts, 
divines,  doubly  endeared  by  this  refemblance,  and  car- 
rying their  various  refearches  to  perfection, in  a  world, 
where  knowledge  is  totally  unobirru&ed,  and  in  thepre- 
Jknce  of  him,  from  whom  all  wifdom  and  all  goodnefj 


i26  LETTERS  TO  A 


flows.  Whilltthe  different  manfions  of  heaven  may 
rcfenible,  on  this  principle,  the  fcattered  groups  of  ftars 
in  the  firmament,  and  adminiftcr  that  chaimingand 
cxquifitc  variety,  which  feems  to  be  the  wonderful  plan 
of  Providence  through  the  whole  creation. 

Thus  much,  at  lead,  may  be  fairly  inferred,  that  the 
intellecJual  improvements,  we  have  made  here,  will  not 
per'ijb  in  the  grave.  We  fliall,  doubtlefs,  in  this  re- 
fpecl,  rife  with  the  fame  views  and  habits  of  thinking* 
with  which  we  died.  How  much  men  at  prcfent,  dif- 
fer, from  this  caufe  alone,  fo  that  the  leajl,  and  the 
nfo/I  enlightened,  almoft  appear  creatures  of  another 
fpecies,  needs  not  be  obferved.  And,  though  a  Boyle 
or  a  Bacon,  would  from  an  union  in  gondnefs  only,  be 
happy  in  the  converfation  of  the  moil:  illiterate  faint, 
yet,  on  all  principles  of  analogy,  it  may,  reafonably,  be 
prefumed,  that  their  blifs  could  not  fail  to  be  infinitely 
heightened  by  the  fociety  of  thofe,  who,  like  them, 
had  fpent  a  whole  life  in  laudable  invefligations. 

But  the  grand  idea  is,  that  the  "  great  I  am  will 
"  be  prcfent !"  He,  who  is  the  fource  of  all  perfection 
and  bleifings  !  He,  who  can  open,  in  the  mind,  innu- 
merable avenues  of  inconceivable  enjoyment !  Whole 
whole  creation  is  but  a  ray,  emanating  from  the  pleni- 
tude of  his  happinefs  and  glory,  and  who  will  certainly 
give  his  children  all  that  their  enlarged  faculties  can 
admit  of  pleafure  and  fruition. 

Here  we  are  continually  mocked  with  the  appearance 
of  happinefs,  which,  on  trial,  is  always  found  check- 
ered with  ill.  Here  the  fweetefr.  odour  has  attendant 
briars  ;  the  mod  delicious  landfcape  has  its  (hade  ;  the 
moir,  apparently,  finiflied  enjoyment,  its  alloy.  Even 
the  fweet,  engaging  child  and  friend,  dear  to  us,  as  our 
own  fouls,  bring  infcparable  anxieties,  and  a  thoufand 
unquiet  apprehenfions  for  their  health,  their  innocence 
and  peace.  Every  enviable  acquifition  is  followed 
with  its  trouble  j  every  accefiion  of  fortune  or  intcrcft, 


YOUNG  LADY.  ,         127 

with  its  cares ;  and,  in  the  height  o^femtng,  worldly 
blifs,  trouble,  dill,  will  find,  through  various  chinks, 
its  moments  of  admiflion.  But,  in  heaven,  all  will  be 
unmixed,  all  will  be  perfect,  all  will  be  ferene  ! 

Such  is  my  private  opinion  of  heaven.  Such  is  the 
paradife  of  my  imagination.  If  it  be  innocent,  I  have 
a  right  to  indulge  it ;  if  you  think  it  <vi/ionary,  you  are 
at  liberty  to  reject  it.  If  it  be  an  error,  it  is,  at  leaft, 
a  plcafing  one  ;  and,  if  it  ferves  to  comfort  life,  or  ex- 
cite us  to  any  laudable  improvements,  it  has  its  ufes  in 
fociety,  and  mult,  ultimately,  promote  the  glory  of  God. 

I  hope  it  is  true,  becaufe  time,  which  difTolves  all 
earthly  things,  is  ever  on  the  wing,  and  I  wifh  to  have 
my  intimacy  with  you,  perpetuated  through  immortality. 


LETTER  XLV. 

I  AM  truly  concerned  for  your  indifpofition.  Your 
nerves  are  relaxed,  and  your  fpirits  cannot  fail  to 
be  affej6red  in  proportion.  The  complaints  of  this  age, 
principally,  arife  from  inactivity  and  over-indulgence. 
We  thwart  nature,  in  a  thoufand  inftances,  and,  in  as 
many,  me  retaliates  the  offence. 

We  almoft  diJfoJve  in  hot,  carpeted  rooms,  inftead  of 
continually  expofing  our  bodies  to  the  open  air.  We 
go  to  flcep  when  we  mould  be  rifing.  We  invent  ar- 
tificial methods  of  provoking  an  appetite,  which  can 
only  be  excited,  in  a  proper  manner,  by  labor  and  ap- 
plication. And  faclitious  amufements  are  vainly  bid- 
den to  create  thofe  fpirits,  which  fliould  arife  from  ex- 
ercife  and  air. 

This  may  anfwer  a  temporary   purpofe,  but,  in   the 
tnd,  it   would   deitroy  the  firmefl  conftitution.      It  is, 
in  fa£r,  undermining  the  very  ground,  upon  which  we 
ftand,  and  digging  a  premature  gv?c\Q  under  our  feet. 
X  2 


128  LETTERS  TO  A 

To  mc,  who  follow  nature,  and  am  only  afpeclator 
of  the  buftling  fcenes  around  me,  thefe  things  appear 
to  have  ferious  confequences.  When  I  look  at  fine, 
enervated  ladies,  I  tiemble,  by  a  fort  of  involuntary 
inirincl,  for  the  rifing  generation. 

What  a  vigilant,  fyftematic  care  did  the  ancient  le- 
giflators  befrow  upon  this  fex  !  To  give  them  an  heal- 
thy, vigorous  conftitution,  and  to  confult,  in  particular 
Jrtuationsy  their  eafe  and  cheerfulnefs,  was  an  object  not 
beneath  the  attention  of  thofe  heroes,  who,  by  their 
valour  and  their  talents,  governed  the  world. 

If  you  intend  to  have  asy  comfort  yourfelf,  or  be  of 
any  folid  ufefulnefs  to  others,  you  rauft  be  careful  of 
your  health.  It  is  a  plant,  that  requires  continual  nurf- 
ing,and  without  the  greateft  attention,  will  gradually  die. 

You  muft  not  diflblve  on  downy  pillows,  till  your 
frame  is  almoft  thrown  into  convulfions.  You  mould 
rife  with  the  dawn,  and  exercife  gently,  in  the  open 
air,  particularly,  on  horfcback.  A  little  cheerful  com- 
pany will  amufe,  and  keep  your  mind,  from  preying  too 
much  upon  itfelf.  Too  much,  on  the  other  hand,  will 
opprefs  your  fpirits,  and  aggravate  your  complaints. 

Above  all,  if  you  wifli  a  removal  of  your  prefent  in- 
difpofition,  you  mufl:  cautioufly  abftain  from  tea,  par- 
ticularly in  mornings.  However  agreeable  this  beve- 
rage may  be,  it  is,  doubtlefs,  the  fource  of  weak  nerves, 
hyfrerical  and  hypochondriac  affections,  and  of  half 
thofe  dreadful,  paralytic  fymptoms,  which  have  lately 
become  fo  general  and  alarming. 

Inflead  of  langtn/hing  in  elegant  rooms,  you  mould 
frequently  be  ftroliing  into  the  fields  or  garden,  if  you 
would  avoid  the  bitter  draught  of  an  apothecary,  or 
innocently  rob  the  phyfician  of  his  fee.  Your  diet 
mould  be  fimplc  and  moderate,  confined  to  one  dim, 
and  that  rather  animal,  than  vegetable.  You  mould 
eat  fparingly,  but  often9  and  "  ;»ie  a  little  wine  for  your 
*'  ftomach's  fuke,  and  your,  cfien,  infirmities."     The 


YOUNG  LADY.  129 

town  has,  doubtlefs,  contributed  to  your  difordcr. 
When  you  return  into  the  country,  its  pure  air,  I  truft, 
and  tranquil  feencs  will  confiderably  reftore  you.  Na- 
ture never  intended  fuch  multitudes  of  people  to  be 
crowded  together,  and  breathe  the  infinite,  noxious  ef- 
fluvia of  great  cities.  They  are,  in  fact,  the  graves  of 
mankind.  We  may  extfl  in  them  for  a  time  ;  but  it 
is  only  in  the  country,  that  health  has  any  thing  of  its 
natural  vigour,  or  life,  of  its  enjoyment. 

Do  not  tamper  with  your  conftitution.  The  whole 
power  of  medicine,  in  your  cafe,  does  not  afford  the 
fhadow  of  relief.  Diforders  of  this  kind  baffle  all  the 
penetration  of  the  medical  fraternity.  When  they 
pronounce  our  cafe  nervous,  it  is  only  faying,  in  fo  ma- 
ny words,  that  they  cannot  give  us  any  adequate  afliftance. 

The  very  nature,  form,  or  texture  of  the  nerves  are, 
to  this  da)r,  by  no  means,  clearly  afcertained,  or  fully 
underftood.  Perhaps,  they  compofe  that  fubtil  and 
amazing  union  of  body  and  foul,  of  matter  and  fpirit, 
which  eludes  all  enquiry.  When  they  are  difordered, 
I  know  no  method,  but  to  avoid  all  extremes,  to  fly  into 
the  country  andkeepthemin^if^e^/^eafy  and  ferene. 


LETTER  XLVI. 

IF  I  had  the  opportunity,  it  Would  give  me  great 
pleafure  to  be  of  your  party  to  Bath.  But  indeed 
I  am  quite  fixed  and  flationary  here  ;  unable  to  move, 
or  vifit  even  my  nearefr.  friends.  Every  day  brings, 
along  with  it,  a  train  of  engagements  ;  and  almofr.  eve- 
ry hour,  fubftantial  duties,  that  cannot  be  omitted. 

Nature,  at  times,  is  difpofed  to  repine,  and  think 
fuch  confinement  an  intolerable  hardfhip,  till  I  begin 
to  reflect,  that  all  durable  pleafure  is  derived  from  em- 
ployment, and  that  the  only,  real  dignity  of  life  confiih 
in  doing  good. 


1 3o  LETTERS  TO  A 

They,  who  are  continually  in  motion,  and  varying 
the  fcene,  are  not,  that  I  can  difcover,  more  fatisfied 
than  myfelf.  They  carry  their  private  burdens,  along 
with  them,  over  hills  and  mountains  ;  and,  when  th*y 
hare  exhaufted  the  whole  circle  ofpleafures,  ftill  there 
is  a  great  void  in  the  foul. 

I  was  once,  for  five  weeks  at  Bath,  and  recoiled  it 
with  a  mixture  of  gratitude  and  pleafure.  It  was  par- 
ticularly ferviceable  to  my  health  ;  and,  on  the  whole, 
made  impreflions  on  '*.iy  mind,  that  will  never  be  erafed. 

The  very  ride  to  this  place  will  amazingly  revive  you. 
Worceftermire,  at  this  feafoo  of  the  year,  is  one  grand 
magnificent  garden,  whofe  air  is  perfume,  whofe  fcene- 
ry  is  bloiToms,  and  whofe  walls  are  the  fpacious  canopy 
of  heaven.  If  you  make  Briftol  in  your  way,  I  dare 
promife,  that  your  curiofity  will  be  amply  gratified  by  a 
light  of  that  ancient  and  extenfive  city.  Though  the 
place,  irt  itfe{f9  is  low  and  dirty,  yet  the  adjacent  coun- 
try is,  perhaps,  the  raoft  piclurefque  and  beautiful  in 
Britain.  Clifton  Hill  is  delicioufly  romantic  ;  on  one 
fide  commanding  a  full  profpect  of  the  city,  and  look- 
ing, on  the  other,  towards  that  magnificent  ocean, 
which  brings  the  inhabitants  all  their  merchandize  and 
riches.  At  the  foot  of  this  eminence,  you  will  defcry 
the  medicinal  fpring  of  the  hot-wells,  fo  celebrated  for 
their  efficacy  in  confumptivc  cafes.  Here  you  will  be 
"mocked  with  a  number  of  w'AlkingJ&ektotis,  who  are 
yellow  with  (icknefs,  dying  of  confumptions,and  breath- 
ing in  their  fighs,  the  emptinefs  and  vanity  of  all  human 
things.  Thus  is  no  human  pleafure  to  be  unmixed  ; 
and  thus  are  thorns  to  be  intwincd  with  the  rofe. 

King's  Wefton  Hill,  in  the  environs  of  this  place, 
has  lately  been  celebrated  by  a  poet.  But  the  copy 
comes  not  up  to  the  original.  Nature  has  painted 
better,  than  the  bard.  It  is  vifited  by  all  Grangers  not 
only  for  its  own,  magnificent  beauties,  and  wonderful 
ibenery,  but  as  -an  opportunity  of  beholding  the  fea,. 


YOUNG  LADY.  i3i 

which  here  opens,  all  at  once,  in  a  grand  and  unex- 
pected expansion,  on  the  aftonifhed  eye.  If  you  are 
fortunate  enough  to  have  a  fine  day,  you  cannot  be- 
hold a  more  fublime  or  finking  curiofity. 

When  you  arrive  at  your  journey's  end,  every  thing 
will  delight  you.  Regular  flreets,  magnificent  build- 
ings, fumptuous  public  rooms,  delightful  profpecls, 
walks,  hills,  vallies,  fountains,  gardens,  company, 
amufements — all  will  proclaim,  that  you  are  at  Bath. 
You  will  feel,  that  this  is  the  paradife  of  Britain  ;  and 
that  the  goddefs  of  health  has  here,  more  particularly, 
fixed  her  abode.  The  mind,  it  is  true,  carries  its  fe- 
ciet  burdens  with  it,  into  every  fituation  ;  but  I  know 
no  place  more  calculated  to  efface  melancholy  imprcf- 
fions,  or  do  away  the  bad  effects  of  over  exertion. 
The  waters  are  a  wonderful  cordial  to  the  ftomach, 
and  a  powerful  remover  of  that  indigeftion,  which,  to 
the  ftudious  and  the  fair  offidentary  lives,  is  become  fo 
very  general  a  complaint ;  and  the  mind  infenfibly, 
lofes  its  little,  fanciful  burdens  in  the  general  gaiety  and 
fpi  ightlinefs  of  the  fcenc.  There  are,  it  muff  be  con- 
fefTed,  many  invalids  ;  but  there  are,  likewife,  multi- 
tudes of  young  people  of  both  fexes,  whofe  manners 
are  very  highly  engaging,  and  whofe  faces  wear  a  per- 
petual fmile. 

The  amufements,  to  which  you  are  admitted  at  a 
very  moderate  expence,  are  conducted  with  the  (tricleft 
order  and  decorum  ;  and  in  the  charms  and  fplendour 
of  a  ball,  as  it  is  managed  here,  one  would  be  led  to 
fancy,  that  life  was  wholly  compofed  of  pleafure,  if  it 
did  not  occur,  that  all  this  brilliant  throng  have  their 
private  vexations, and  the  heart  itsown  bitternefsw/7 /'/>;. 

The  Abbey  church  pleafes  me  more,  than  almoft 
any  facred  edifice,  I  have  feen  in  the  kingdom.  It  has 
not  the  grandeur  and  magnificence  of  fome  others,  but 
it  is  more  calculated  for  ufc,  and  yields  to  none  in  el- 
egance and  neatnefs. 


LETTERS  TO  A 


Lady  H 's  chapel  is  vifited  by  all  Grangers,  as 

an  elegant  curioiity  of  the  folemn  kind,  more  perhaps, 
from  the  melody  and  fweetnefs  of  the  fmging,  than 
motives  of  devotion.  The  good  woman,  probably 
founded  it  in  this  bofom  of  plcafure,  with  a  view  of 
calling  finners  of  diitinclion  to  repentance.  Her  in- 
tention was  amiable  ;  and  her  piety,  though  grounded 
on  the  narrow  and  intolerant  principles  of  Calvin,  is 
entitled  to  refpect.  When  people  openly  give  their 
money,  zeal,  talents  and  labour  to  any  caufe,  we  may 
trufr.  xht'wjtncerity.  Nor  mould  criticifm  expofe  the 
little  involuntary  errors  of  thofe,  who  fcrupuloufly  act 
up  to  the  dictates  of  their  confeience,  and  have  thus 
literally,  "  left  all  and  followed  Chrifr.', 

Lady  H ,  it  is  (aid,  has  much  injured  her  pri- 
vate fortune  by  her  religious  generofity  ;  in  building 
chapels,  fupporting  preachers,  and  many  other  public, 
a.nd  private  donations.  Prudence,  furely  did  not  war- 
rant fo  extravagant  a  facrifice.  But  it  is  not  neceffaiy 
to  expofe  a  conduct,  which  fo  few  will  ever  be  difpof- 
ed  to  imitate.  Over-righteoufnefs  is  not,  by  any  means, 
the  fin  of  this  age. 

I  was  indeed,  not  a  little  difgufted  with  the  preacher 
of  the  evening,  on  which  I  happened  to  be  at  her  la- 
dy fliip's  chapel.  His  diicourfe  was  a  violent,  inflam- 
matoiy  harangue  without  elegance,  reafoning  or  con- 
nexion ;  and  confided,  for  the  greater  part,  of  a  fe4 
vere  abufe  of  the  eftabiimed  clergy.  We  are,  per- 
haps, too  languid  and  remifs  in  the  difcharge  of  our 
duty  ;  but  to  expofe  with  virulence  and  rancour,  is  not 
furely  the  method  to  reform  us.  Declamation  or  fa- 
tire  irritates.  It  is  folid  argument  alone,  mixed  with 
love  and  gentlenefs,  which  foften  and  converts. 

Thefe  people  have  not  the  gracefuhufs  of  piety.-— 
They  difplay  not  in  their  looks  or  manner,  or  cenfures, 
the  "  beauty  of  holinefs."  A  fevere  critic,  perhaps, 
would  accuie  them   of  fpiritual  pride,   and  give  them 


YOUNG  LADY.  133 

this  motto,  "  Stand  from  me,  for  I  am  holier  than- 
"  thou."  Their  preachers  appear  deficient  in  general 
knowledge.  Thev  do  not  ftudy  force  of  argument  or 
embellifhmcnts  of  ityle.  They  are  not,  indeed,  with- 
out zeal  ;  but  it  is  wild,  extravagant  and  frantic. — 
They  do  not  fcem  "  pitiful  or  courteous,  or  to  be  pof- 
•*  fidTed  of  that  charity,  which  thinketh  not  evil." 

The  greateit.  difgrace  to  Bath  are  the  gambling  par* 
ties  at  the  lower  rooms.  Would  you  believe  it  poffi- 
ble  ?  You  may  fee  people  of  the  firfr.  diffinction  who 
are  actuated  with  the  infernal  rage  of  play,  mixing 
with  a  fet  of  the  very  loweft,  mercenary  (harpers  !  One 
would  fuppofe  that  their  pride  and  tafte  alone  would 
not  fubmit  to  fuch  a  degradation.  But  fo  little  is  all 
ftation,  when  it  has  forgotten  its  real  dignity  ;  (6 
groveling  is  the  human  mind,  when  it  has  loTt  fight  of 
the  true  fource  of  happinefs,  and  "  is  hewing  out  for 
"  itfelf,  broken  citterns,  that  can  hold  no  water  !" 
Even  Cheiferfleld  himfelf,  with  all  his  parade  of  graces, 
was  a  dupe  to  this  molt  abominable  practice  ! 

The  Avon,  which  runs  through  this  city,  filled  mc 
with  great  ideas.  Shakefpeaic,  Stratford,  the  Jubilee, 
immortal  talents  and  immortal  fame  rufhed  into  my 
mind,  as  often  as  I  faw  its  foft,  flowing  ftream  roll 
filcntly  along. 

I  fliould  wifh  you  to  take  a  view  of  Prior  Park,  as 
a  place  which  has  fo  long  been  facred  tofcience  and  the 
mufes.  The  late  Mr.  Allen  was  the  Mcecenas  of  his 
times.  You  cannot  tread  the  ground  about  it,  without 
recollecting  many  of  thofe  celebrated  wits,  who  were 
often  invited  to  this  hofpitable  retreat,  and  entertained 
its  poiTeiTor  with  all  that  luxury  of  taite  and  lufcious 
flow  of  foul  which  genius  infpires. 

A  great  character  itamps  an  immortality  on  the  pla- 
ces he  frequents,  or  the  houfes  he  inhabits.  Prior 
Park  will  be  remembered,  when  its  elegance  is  moul- 
dered.    Fancy  will  plant  a  laurel  rousd  this  manfion  of 


j  34  LETTERS,  3tc. 

tafte,  which   will  continue  to  be  green  when  the  man- 
fion  itfelf  mall  kave  crumbled  into  atoms. 

You  will  much  oblige  me  by  a  frequency  of  letters, 
whilft.  you  are  at  Bath.  They  will  improve  your  own 
talent  at  the  defcript'roe.  To  me  they  will  give  a  more 
lively  recollection  of  pleafures,  which  I  once  enjoyed. 
They  will  retrace  upon  my  mind,  agreeable  fcenes  and 
images,  which  I  have,  formerly,  beheld.  They  will 
intereft  an  heart,  that  always  vibrates  to  your  pleafures 
or  your  pains.  They  will  relieve  fpirits  that  are  too 
much t  opprefTed  by  a  variety  of  thoughts.  Whilfl  I 
read  them,  I  mall  forget,  that  I  had  ever  a  complaint, 
or  that  I  eyer  was  unhappy. 


THE     EKD. 


•  v  X 


A     V* 


jm&Mmm 


■•• 


®^ 


«fc 


OIL 


