f-^^^ 

o           Oo 

„  •    — *- 

^T£** 

It      > 

u_  <  to 

'I  :     U> <£jj 

11       k: 
< 

f          [Q 
lU  .U 

LL_     3 

*>     ,-r 

O     L 
>-    Z 

Hi 

£     P" 

M    ■  ft! 

STOD 
05TO 

"WMl 

^      U 

LU 

r 

(-       ■ 

z 

^6 

_£Jj 

■ —        j 

H     ~-^JBB 

o 

fHw 

pfc 

~»P 

FIRST       LINES 


OF        THE 


PRACTICE  of  PHYSIC. 


-— *^^^^r|^#^^€^€^*^— 


B    Y 


WILLIAM    CULLEN,    M.  D. 

Profeflbr  of  the  Practice  of  Phyfic-in  the  Univerfity  of  Edinburgh 
Firft  Phylician  to  his  Britannic  Majefty  for  Scotland  ; 
Fellow  of  the  Royal  College  of  Phyficians  of  Edinburgh  ; 

Of  the  Royal   Societies  of  London  and  of  Edinburgh, 
Of    the  Royal  Society  of  Medicine  of  Paris,  &c.  &c.  &c; 


>^!^C>fi^0€^<M 


A      NEW      EDITION. 

From  the  Laft  British  Edition, 
Revised,  CoRRECTEDandENLARGED,  by  the  Author, 


IN      THREE      VOLUMES, 


Vol.  I. 


printed  at  WO  R  CE S TER,  Massachusetts,    ' 
by    ISAIAH    THOMAS. 

Sold  at  his  Bookstore  in  WORCESTER,  and  by  him  and 
Company    in   B  O  S  T  O  N. 


MDCCXC. 


2»Si^-S 


CONTENTS. 


.^~ooocax>ae<^lX)OOSXt^ 


Preface 
introduction 


Page  19 
49 


PART         I. 

©f  PYREXIA,  or  FEBRILE  DI$- 


EASES 

53 

BOOK         I. 

e*  FEVERS 

54 

CHAPTER         I. 

Of  the  Phenomena  0/"  Fevers 

54 

CHAP.         II. 

Of  the  Proximate  Caufe  of  Fever 

-    66 

CHAP.         III. 

Of  the   Difference  of  Fevers,  and  its 
Caufes  -  -  .  82 

CHAP, 


CONTENTS. 


CHAP.         IV. 

P*ge. 

Of  the  remote  Caufes  of  Fevers 

■       94 

CHAP.         V. 

Of  the  Prognojis  of  Fevers 

109 

CHAP.         VI. 

Of  the  Method  of  Cure  m  Fevers  124 

$e£l.  I.  Of  the  Cure  in  Continued  Fe- 
vers -  -  124 
Se&.  II.  Of  the   Cure  of  Intermittent 
Fevers                 -                -                173 

BOOK         II. 

of  INFLAMMATIONS,orPHLEG- 
MASIjE  -  178 

C     H     A     P.         I. 

Of  Inflammation    in  general  178 

Seft.  I.  Of  the  Phenomena  of  Inflam- 
mation -  -  -  178 

Seft.  II.  Of  the  proximate  Caufe  of  In- 
flammation -  180 

Se6L   III.  Of  the  Terminations  of  In- 
flammation -  188 

Seft.  IV.   Of  the  remote  Caufes  of  In- 
flammation -  197 

Se£fc.  V.  Of  the  Cure  of  Inflammation     198 

CHAP, 


CONTENTS. 

Pag~; 

CHAP.         II, 

Of  Inflammation,  more  JiriBly  Cu- 
taneous -  -     2Cfgi 

C     H     A    P.         III. 

Of  Ophthalmia,  or  Inflammation  cf  the 
Eye  -  2095 

CHAP.         IV. 

0/"  Phrensy,  or  Phrenitis  -  217' 

C    H     A     P.         V. 

Of  the  Quinsy,  or  Cynanche  -        222 

Seel;.  I.  0/  the  Cynanche  Tonfillaris  222 
Seel.  II.  Of  the  Cynanche  Maligna  226 
Seel.  III.  0/  £Ae  Cynanche  Trachealis  231 
Se&.   IV.   0/  Me    Cynanche  Pharyn- 

g<ea-  -  -  237. 

Se&.  V.  Of  the  Cynanche  Parotide       23^ 

C     H     A.    P.         VI.- 

0/  Pneumonic  Inflammation  24^ 

C     H     A.    P.         VI L 

Of  Peripneumonia  Notha,^  Baf- 
tard  Peripneumony  ~  265^ 

GHA'E..- 


CON  T  E  NTS. 

Page. 

CHAP.        VIII. 

Of  the  Gastritis,  or  Inflammation  of 

the  Stomach  -  -  27a 

CHAP.         IX. 

Of  the  Enteritis,  or  Inflammation  of 
the  Inteftines  -  283^ 

C     H     A     P.         X. 

Of  the  Hepatitis,   or  Inflammation  of 
the  Liver  -  -  286 

C     H     A     P.         XI. 

Of  the  Nephritis,   or  Inflammation  of 
the  Kidneys  -  293 

CHAP.         XII. 

O/^Rheumatism  -  -      296 

CHAP.         XIII. 
Of  the  Toothach,  or  Odontalgia  314 

CHAP.         XIV. 
Of  the  Gov?  -  «  323 


19 


&M£&ag&  r 


A  O  deliver  a  Syftem  of  the  Doctrines 
and  Rules  proper  for  directing  the  Practice  of  Phyfic,  is 
an  undertaking  that  appears  to  me  to  be  attended  with 
great  difficulty  ;  and,  after  an  experience  of  more  than 
forty  years  in  that  practice,  as  well  as  after  much  reading 
and  reflection,  it  was  with  great  diffidence  that  I  ever  en- 
tered upon  fuch  a  work.  It  was,  however,  what  feemed 
to  be  my  duty  as  a  ProfefTor  that  induced  me  to  make  the 
attempt ;  and  I  was  engaged  in  it  by  the  fame  fentiments 
that  the  illuftrious  Dr.  Boerhaave  has  exprefled  in  the 
following  pafTage  of  the  Preface  to  his  Inftitutions  :  Simul 
enim  docendo  admotus  eramfenjz,  propriorum  cogitatorum  ex- 
plicatlone  docentem  plus  prqficere,  quam  fi  opus  ab  alio  con- 
fcriptum  interpretari  fufcipit.  Sua  quippe  optime  intelligit^ 
fua  cuique  pr'Se  c ceteris  placent,  unde  clarior  fere  doclrina,  cli- 
que animate, plerumque  fequitur  oratio.  Qui  everofe?ifa  alte- 
rius  exponit,  infelicius  fcepenumero  eadem  ajfequitur  ;  quum- 
quefuo  quifquefenfu  abundat,  mult  a  refutanda  frequenter  in- 
*venit,  unde  gravemfruftra  labarem  aggra<vat,  minufque  ifk- 
citata  diclione  utitur.  It  is  well  known,  that  a  Text  book 
is  not  only  extremely  ufeful,  but  neceffary  to  Students 
who  are  to  hear  Lectures  \  and  from  the  fame  confidera- 

tions: 


so  PREFACE. 

tions  that  moved  Dr.  Boerhaave,  I  alfo  wifhed  to  have  one 
for  myfelf ;  while  at  the  fame  time,  from  fome  peculiar 
circumftances  in  my  fituation,  I  had  fome  additional  in- 
ducements to  undertake  fuch  a  work. 

before  I  was  eftablifhed  as  a  Profefler  of  the  Practice 
of  Phyfic  in  thisUniverfity,  I  had  been  employed  in  giving 
Clinical  Lectures  in  the  Royal  Infirmary  ;  and  upon  that 
occafion  had  delivered,  what,  in  my  own  opinion,  feemed 
molt  juft  with  regard  to  both  the  nature  and  the  cure  of 
the  difeafes  of  which  I  had  occafion  to  treat.  But  I  foon 
found,  that  my  doctrines  were  taken  notice  of,  as  new,  and 
peculiar  to  myfelf;  and  were  accordingly  feverely  criticif? 
ed  by  thofe  who,  having  long  before  been  trained  up  in  the 
fyftem  of  Boerhaave,  had  continued  to  think  that  that  fyf- 
tem neither  required  any  change,  nor  admitted  of  any  a* 
mendment.  I  found,  at  the  fame  time,  that  my  dod'trines 
were  frequently  criticifed  by  perfons  who  either  had  not 
been  informed  of  them  correctly,  or  who  feemed  not  to 
underftand  them  fully  ;  and  therefore,  as  foon  as  I  was 
employed  to  teach  a  more -complete  fyftem  of  the  Prac- 
tice of  Phyfic,  I  judged  it  neceflary  to  publifh  a  Text 
book,  not  only  for  the  benefit  of  my  hearers,  but  that  I 
might  alfo  have  an  opportunity  of  obtaining  the  opinion 
of  the  public  more  at  large,  and  thereby  be  enabled  ei- 
ther to  vindicate  my  do6trines,orbe  taught  to  correct  them* 
Thefe  were  the  motives  for  my  attempting  the  Volumes  I 
formerly  publifhed  ;  and  now,  from  many  years  experi- 
ence of  their  utility  to  my  hearers,  as  well  as  from  the  fa- 
vourable reception  they  have  met  with  from  the  Public, 
I  am  induced  to  give  a  new  edition  of  this  Work,  not  on* 

I*, 


PREFACE.  81 

ly,  as  I  hope,  more  correct  in  many  parts,  but  alfo  more 
complete  and  comprehenfive  in  its  general  extent, 

at  the  firft  publication  of  this  Work,  it  was  intended 
chiefly  for  the  ufe  of  thofe  Gentlemen  who  attended  my 
Lectures  :  Although,  even  then,  for  the  reafons  I  have 
mentioned,  it  was  rendered  more  full  than  Text  books 
commonly  are  ;  and,  in  the  repeated  Editions  I  have  fince 
had  occafion  to  give,  I  have  been  conftantly  endeavour- 
ing to  render  it  more  full  and  comprehenfive.  In  thefe 
refpe&s,  I  hope  the  prefent  edition  will  appear  to  be  ren- 
dered more  fit  for  general  ufe,  and  better  calculated  to  af- 
ford fatisfaftion  to  all  thofe  who  think  they  may  Rill  re- 
ceive any  inftruction  from  reading  on  this  fubjecl. 

while  I  thus  deliver  my  Work  in  its  now  more  im- 
proved ftate,  with  the  hopes  that  it  may  be  of  ufe  to  oth- 
ers as  well  as  to  thofe  who  hear  my  Ledufes,  I  muft  at 
the  fame  time  obferve,  that  it  prefents  a  fyftem  which  is 
in  many  refpetts  new  ;  and  therefore  I  apprehend  it  to  be 
not  only  proper,  but  necefTary,  that  I  mould  explain  here 
upon  what  grounds,  and  from  what  confiderations,  this 
has  been  attempted. 

in  the  firft  place,  I  apprehend,  that,  in  every  branch  of 
fcience  withrefpeft  to  which  new  facts  are  daily  acquired, 
and  thefe  confequently  giving  occafion  to  new  reflections, 
which  correct  the  principles  formerly  adopted,  it  is  necef- 
fary,  from  time  to  time,  to  reform  and  renew  the  whole 
fyftem,  with  all  the  additions  and  amendments  which  it 
has  received  and  is  then  capable  of.  That  at  prefent  this 
is  requifite  with  regard  to  the  Science  of  Medicine,  will,- 1 

believe^ 


22  PREFACE. 

believe,  readily  occur  to  every  perfon  who  at  all  thinks 
for  himlelf,  and  is  acquainted  with  the  Syftems  which  have 
hitherto  prevailed.  While,  therefore,  I  attempt  this,  I 
think  it  may  be  allowable,  and  upon  this  occafion  even 
proper,  that  I  mould  offer  fome  remarks  on  the  principal 
Syftems  of  Medicine  which  have  of  late  prevailed  in  Eu- 
rope, and  that  I  mould,  take  notice  of  the  prefent  ftate  of 
Phyfic  as  it  is  influenced  by  thefe.  Such  remarks,  I  hope, 
may  be  of  fome  ufe  to^thofe  who  attempt  to  improve  their 
knowledge  by  the  reading  of  books. 

whether  the  Pradice  of  Phyfic  mould  admit  of  rea- 
foning,  or  be  entirely  refted  upon  experience,  has  long 
been,  and  may  full  be,  a  matter  of  difpute.  I  mail  not, 
however,  at  prefent  enter  upon  the  difcuflion  of  this  ;  be- 
caufe  I  can  venture  to  aflert,  that,  at  almoft:  all  times,  the 
practice  has  been,  and  ftill  is,  with  every  perfon,  founded, 
more  or  lefs,  upon  certain  principles  eftablifhed  by  rea- 
foning  :  And  therefore,  in  attempting  to  offer  fome  view 
of  the  prefent  ftate  of  Phyfic,  I  muft  give  an  account  of 
thofe  fyftems  of  the  principles  of  the  fcience  which  have, 
lately  prevailed,  or  may  be  fuppofed  ftill  to  prevail,  in 
Europe. 

when,  after  many  ages  of  darknefs,  which  had  deftroy- 
cd  almoft:  the  whole  of  ancient  literature,  learning  was  a- 
gain  reftored  in  the  fifteenth  century  ;  fo,  from  caufes 
which  are  well  known,  it  was  the  fyftem  of  Galen  alone 
that  the  Phyficians  of  thofe  days  became  acquainted,  with  ; 
and  during  the  courfe  of  the  fixteenth  century,  the  ftudy 
of  Phyficians  was  almoft  folely  employed  in  explaining 
and  confirming  that  fyftem.  Early,  indeed,  in  the  fix- 
teenth, 


PREFACE.  23 

leenth  century,  the  noted  Paracelfus  had  laid  the  founda- 
tion of  a  Chemical  Syftem  which  was  in  direct  oppofition  to 
that  of  Galen  ;  and,  by  the. efficacy  of  the  medicines  em- 
ployed by  Paracelfus  and  his  followers,  their  fyftem  came 
to  be  received  by  many  :  But  the  fyftematic  Phyficians 
continued  to  be  chiefly  Galenifts,  and  kept  pofleflion  of 
the  Schools  till  the  middle  of  the  feventeenth  century.  It 
is  not,  however,  ^ceflTary  here  to  enter  into  any  further 
detail  refpefting  the  fate  of  thofe  two  oppofite  fetts  ;  for 
the  only  circumftance  concerning  them,  which  I  would 
wifh  at  prefent  to  point  out,  is,  that,  in  the  writings  of 
both,  the  explanations  they  feverally  attempted  to  give  of 
the  phenomena  of  health  or  ficknefs  turned  very  entirely 
apon  the  ftate  of  the  fluids  of  the  body. 

such  was  the  ftate  of  thefcienceof  Phyfic  till  about  the 
middle  of  the  feventeenth  century,  when  the  circulation 
efthe  blood  came  to  be  generally  known  and  admitted; 
and  when  this,  together  with  the  difcovery  of  the  recepta- 
cle of  the  chyle,  and  of  the  thoracic  duel:,  finally  exploded 
the  Galenic  fyftem.  About  the  fame  period,  a  confidera- 
ble  revolution  had  taken  place  in  the  fyftem  of  Natural 
Philofophy.  In  the  courfe  of  the  feventeenth  century, 
Galileo  had  introduced  mathematical  reafoning ;  and  Lord 
Bacon  having  propofed  the  method  of  induction,  had 
thereby  excited  a  difpofifion  to  obferve  facts,  and  to  make 
experiments.  Thefe  new  modes  of  philofophizing,  it 
might  be  fuppofed,  would  foon  have  had  fome  influence 
on  the  ftate  of  medicine \  but  the  progrefs  of  this  was  flow. 
The  knowledge  of  the  Circulation  did  indeed  neceflarily 
lead  to  the  confideration  as  well  as  to  a  clearer  view  of  the 
Organic  Syftem  in  animal  bodies  ;  which  again  led  to  the 

applicatioa 


24 


PREFACE, 


application  of  the  mechanical  philofophy  towards  explain- 
ing  the  phsenomena  of  the  animal  economy  ;  and  it  was 
applied  accordingly,  and  continued,  till  very  lately,  to  be 
the  fafhionable  mode  of  reafoning  on  the  fubjecl.  Such 
reasoning,  indeed,  muft  (till  in  ieveral  ref  peels  continue  to 
be  applied  :  But  it  would  be  eafy  to  fhow,  that  it  neither 
could,  nor  ever  can  be,  applied  to  any  great  extent  in  ex- 
plaining the  animal  economy ;  and  we  muft  therefore  look 
for  other  circumftances  which  had  a  greater  fhare  in 
modelling  the  fyftem  of  Phyfic. 

with  this  view  it  may  be  remarked,  that,  till  the  pe- 
riod juft  now  mentioned,  every  Phyfician,  whether   Ga- 
leniftor  Chemift,  had  been  fo  much  accuftomed  to  con>- 
fider    the   ftate  and  condition  of     the  fluids,    both   as 
the  caufe  of  difeafe,  and  as  the  foundation  for  explaining 
the  operation  of  medicines,  that  what  we  may  term  an  Hu- 
moral Pathology  ftiil  continued  to  make  a  great  part 
of  every  fyftem.    In  thefe  circumftances,  it  was  foon  per- 
ceived, that  chemiftry  promifed  a  much  better  explana- 
tion than  the  Galenic    or  Ariftotelian  philofophy  had 
done  ;  and,  therefore,  while  the  latter  was  entirely  laid  a- 
fide,a  chemical  reafoning  was  every  where  received.  Lord 
Bacon,  with  his  ufual  fagacity,  had  early  obierved,  that 
chemiftry  promifed  a  great  number  of  facts,  and  he  there- 
by gave  it  credit ;  whilft  the  Corpufcularian  philofophy,  re- 
floredbyGaffendi,  readily  united  with  the  realonings  of  the 
Chemifts  ;  and  the  philofophy  of  Des  Cartes  readily  unit- 
ed with  both.  From  all  thefe  circumftances,  an  Humoral, 
and  chiefly  a  Chemical   Pathology,  came  to  prevail  very 
much  till  the  end  of  the  laft  century  ;  and  has,  indeed, 

continued 


PREFACE.  25 

continued  to  have  a  great  fhare  in  our  fyftems  down  to  the 
prefent  time. 

it  is  proper  now,  however,  to  obferve,  that  about  the  be- 
ginning of  the  prefent  century,  when  every  part  of  icience 
came  to  be  on  a  more  improved  and  correct  footing,  there 
appeared  in  the  writings  of  Stahl,  of  Hoffman,  and  of 
Boerhaave,  three  new,  and  confiderably  different,  Syf- 
tems  of  Phyfic  ;  which  have  ever  fince  had  a  great  fhare 
in  directing  the  practice  of  it.  In  order,  therefore,  to 
give  a  nearer  view  of  the  prefent  ftate  of  Phyfic,  I  fhall  of- 
fer fome  remarks  upon  thefe  different  fyftems ;  endeavour- 
ing to  point  out  the  advantages  as  well  as  the  difadvan- 
tages  of  each,  and  how  far  they  frill  prevail  ;  or,  ac- 
cording to  my  judgment,  deferve  to  do  fo, 

1  shall  begin  with  confideringthat  of  Dr.  Stahl, which 
I  think  appeared  firft,  and  for  a  long  time  after  was  the 
prevailing  fyftem  in  Germany. 

the  chief  and  leading  principle  of  this  fyftem  is,  that 
the  rational  foul  of  man  governs  the  whole  economy  of 
his  body.  At  all  times,  Phyficians  have  obferved,  that 
the  animal  economy  has  in  itfelf  a  power  or  condition,  by 
which,  in  many  inftances,  it  refills  the  injuries  which 
threaten  it ;  and  by  which  it  alfo,  on  many  occafions,  cor- 
rects or  removes  the  diforders  induced,  or  arifing  in  it. 
This  power,  Phyficians  very  anciently  attributed,  under  a 
vague  idea,  to  an  agent  in  the  fyftem,  which  they  called 
nature  ;  and  the  language  of  a  *uis  confervatrix  et  med- 
icatrix  natura,  has  continued  in  the  fchools  of  medicine 
from  the  moft  ancient  times  to  the  prefent. 

B  DR. 


26  PREFACE. 

DR.  Stahl  has  explicitly  founded  his  fyftem  on  the 
fuppofition,  that  the  power  of  nature,  io  much  talked  of, 
is  entirely  in  the  rational  foul.  He  fuppofes,  that,  upon 
many  occafions,  the  foul  acts  independently  of  the  ftate  of 
the  body  ;  and  that,  without  any  phyfical  neceflity  arifing 
from  that  ftate,  the  foul,  purely  in  confequence  of  its  in* 
telligence,  perceiving  the  tendency  of  noxious  powers 
threatening,  or  of  diforders  anywife  arifing  in  the  fyftem, 
immediately  excites  fuch  motions  in  the  body  as  are  fuited 
to  obviate  the  hurtful  or  pernicious  confequences  which 
might  otherwiie  take  place.  Many  of  my  readers  may 
think  it  was  hardly  neceftary  for  me  to  take  notice  of  a 
fyftem  founded  upon  fo  fanciful  a  hypothefis  j  but  there  is 
often  io  much  feeming  appearance  of  intelligence  andde- 
fign  in  the  operations  of  the  animal  economy,  that  many 
eminent  perfons,  as  Perrault  in  France,  Nichols  and  Mead 
in  England,  Porterfield  and  Simfon  in  Scotland,  and 
Gaubius  in  Holland,  have  very  much  countenanced  the 
fame  opinion,  and  it  is  therefore  certainly  entitled  to  fome 
regard.  It  is  not,  however,  neceflary  for  me  here  to  en- 
ter into  any  refutation  of  it.  Dr.  Hoffman  has  done  this 
fully,  in  his  Comment  arius  de  differentia  inter  Hoffmanni 
doclrinam  medico-mechanicam  et  G.  E.  Stahlii  medico  organ- 
ham ;  and  both  Boerhaave  and  Haller,  though  no  favour- 
ers of  materialifm,  have  maintained  a  doctrine  very  oppo- 
se to  that  of  Stahl. 

in  my  Phyfiology  I  have  offered  fome  arguments  againfr 
the  fame  \  and  I  mall  only  add  now,  that  whoever  confid- 
ers  what  has  been  faid  by  Dr.  Nichols  in  his  Oratio  de  An- 
ima  Medica,  and  by  Dr.  Gaubius  in  fome  parts  of  his 
Pathology,  muft  perceive,  that  the  admitting  of  fuch  a 
capricious  government  of  the  animal  economy,  as  thefe 

authors 


PREFACE.  27 

authors  in  fome  inftances  fuppofe,  would  at  once  lead  us 
to  reject  all  the  phyficaF  and  mechanical  reafoning  we 
might  employ  concerning  the  human  body.  Dr.  Stahi 
himfelf  feems  to  have  been  aware  of  this  ;  and  therefore, 
in  his  Preface  to  Juncker's  Qonfpeclus  Therapeix  Specialise 
has  acknowledged,  that  his  general  principle  was  not  at 
all  neceffary  ;  which  is  in  effect  faying  that  it  is  not  com- 
patible with  any  fyftem  of  principles  that  ought  to  govern 
©ur  practice.  Upon  this  footing,  I  might  have  at  once 
rejected  the  Stahlian  principle  :  But  it  is  even  dangerous 
to  bring  any  fuch  principle  into  view  ;  for,  after  all  Dr. 
Stahl  had  faid  in  the  pafTage  juft  now  referred  to,  I  find, 
that,  in  the  whole  of  their  practice,  both  he  and  his  fol- 
lowers have  been  very  much  governed  bj  their  general 
principle.  Trufting  much  to  the  conftant  attention  and 
wifdom  of  nature,  they  have  propofed  the  Art  of  curing  by 
expectations  have  therefore,  for  the  moft  part,  propofed 
©nly  very  inert  and  frivolous  remedies  ;  have  zealoufl? 
©ppofed  the  ufe  of  fome  of  the  moft  efficacious,  fuch  as  o- 
pium  and  the  Peruvian  bark  ;  and  are  extremely  referved 
in  the  ufe  of  general  remedies,  fuch  as  bleeding,  vomiting. 
kt. 

although  thefe  remarks,  upon  a  fyftem  which  may 
now  be  confidered  as  exploded  or  neglected,  may  feem 
fuperfluous  ;  I  have  been  willing  to  give  thefe  ftrictures 
©n  the  Stahlian  fyftem,  that  I  might  carry  my  remarks  a 
little  farther,  and  take  this  opportunity  of  obferving,  that, 
in  whatever  manner  we  may  explain  what  have  been  call- 
ed the  operations  of  nature,  it  appears  to  me,  that  the  gen- 
eral doctrine  of  Nature  curing  difeafef,  the  fo  much  vaunt- 
ed Hippocratic  method  of  curing,  has  often  had  a  very 
kaneful  influence  on  the  practice  of  phyfic  j  as  either  lead- 

B  %  i*ng 


28  PREFACE. 

ing  phyficians  into,  or  continuing  them  in,  a  weak  and  fee- 
ble practice  ;  and  at  the  fame  time  fuperfeding  or  difcour- 
aging  all  the  attempts  of  art.  Dr.  Huxham  has  properly 
cbferved,  that  even  in  t'he  hands  of  Sydenham  it  had  this 
effect.  Although  it  may  fometimes  avoid  the  mifchiefs  of 
bold  and  rafh  practitioners,  yet  it  certainly  produces  that 
caution  and  timidity  which  have  ever  oppoled  the  intro- 
duction of  new  and  efficacious  remedies.  The  oppofition 
to  chemical  medicines  in  the  fixteenth  and  feventeenth 
centuries,  and  the  noted  condemnation  of  Antimony  by  the 
Medical  Faculty  of  Paris,  are  to  be  attributed  chiefly  to 
thofe  prejudices,  which  the  phyficians  of  France  did  not 
entirely  get  the  better  of  for  near  a  hundred  years  after. 
We  may  take  notice  of  the  referve  it  produced  in  Boer- 
ha'ave,  with  refpect  to  the  ufe  of  the  Peruvian  Bark.  We 
have  had  lately  publifhed,  under  the  title  of  Conftituthnes 
Epidemicce^  notes  of  the  particular  practice  of  the  late 
Baron  Van  Swieten  ;  upon  which  the  editor  very  properly 
obferves,  That  the  ufe  of  the  bark,  in  intermitting  fevers, 
appears  very  rarely  in  that  practice  ;  and  we  know  very 
well  where  Van  Swieten  learned  that  referve. 

i  might  go  farther,  and  mow  how  much  the  attention 
to  the  Autocratela,  allowed  of,  in  one  fhape  or  other,  by 
every  feet,  has  corrupted  the  practice  among  all  phyfi- 
cians, from  Hippocrates  to  Stahl.  It  mull,  however,  be 
fufficiently  obvious,  and  I  lhali  conclude  the  fubject  with 
obferving,  that  although  the  *vis  medicatrix  natures  rnuft 
unavoidably  be  received  as  a  fact ;  yet,  wherever  it  is  ad- 
mitted, it  throws  an  obfeurity  upon  our  fyftem  ;  and  it  is 
only  where  the  impotence  of  our  art  is  very  manifeft  and 
.coufiderable,  that  we  ought  to  admit  of  it  in  practice. 


TO 


PREFACE.  29 

TO  finifh  our  remarks  upon  the  Stahlian  Syftem,  I  (hall 
fhortly  obferve,  that  it  did  not  depend  entirely  upon  the 
Autoaaieia,  but  alfo  fuppofed  a  ftste  of  the  body  and  dif- 
eafes,  that  admitted  of  remedies  ;  which,  under  the  power 
and  direction  of  the"  foul,  acted  upon  the  organization  and 
matter  of  the  body,  fo  as  to  cure  its  difeafes.  Upon  this- 
footing,  the  Stahlian  pathology  turned  entirely  upon  Pleth- 
ora and  Cacochymy.  It  was  with  refpect  to  the  former 
that  they  efpecially  applied  their  doctrine  of  the  Autocrat 
Uia  in  a  very  fanatical  manner  ;  and,  with  refpect  to  the 
latter,  they  have  been  involved  in  a  humoral  pathology  ay 
much  as  the  fyftematic  phyficians  who  had  gone  before 
them,  and  with  a  theory  fo  incorrect  as  not  to  merit  now 
the  fmalleft  attention.  After  all,  I  ought  not  to  difmifs  the 
confideration  of  the  Stahlian  fyftem,  without  remarking, 
that  as  the  followers  of  this  fyftem  were  very  intent  upon 
obferving  the  method  of  nature,  fo  they  were  very  atten- 
tive in  observing  the  phenomena  of  difeafes,  and  have  giv- 
en us  in  their  writings  many  facts- not  to  be  found  else- 
where. 

while  the  doctrines  of  Stahl  were  prevailing  in  the  11-- 
niverfity  of  Halle,  Dr.  Hoffman,  a  profeffbr  in  the  fame 
univerfity,  propofed  a  fyftem  that  was  very  different.  He 
received  into  his  fyftem  a  great  deal  of  the  mechanical, 
Cartefian,  and  chemical  doctrines  of  the  fyftems  which 
had  appeared  before  :  But,  with  refpect  to  thefe,  it  is  of 
no  conlequence  to  obferve  in  what  manner  he  modified 
the  doctrines  of  his  predeceflors,  as  his  improvements  in 
thefe  refpects  were  no  ways  confiderable,  and  no  part  of 
them  now  remain  ;  and  the  real  value  of  his  works,  be- 
yond what  I  am  juft  now  going  to  mention,  refts  entirely* 
B3  •  OBP 


3o  PREFACE. 

on  the  many  fa£b  they  contain.  The  merit  of  Dr.  Hoff- 
man and  of  his  works  is,  that  he  made,  or  rather  fuggefted, 
an  addition  to  the  fyftem,  which  highly  deferves  our  atten- 
tion. Of  this  I  cannot  give  a  clearer  account  than  by  giving 
it  in  the  author's  own  words.  In  his  Medicina  Rationalis 
SyJiematica,Tom.  III.  §  i.  chap.  4.  he  has  given  his  Gene- 
alogta  morborum  ex  turbato  fol'tdorum  etfiuidorum  mecbanij- 
mo  ;  and  in  the  47th  and  laft  paragraph  of  this  chapter,  he 
fums  up  his  doclrine  in  the  following  words  :  Ex  hlfce  au- 
tem  omnibus  uberius  haclenus  excujis,  per  quant  dilucide  ap- 
parere  arbltror,  quod folus  spasmus  et /implex  atonia,  a- 
quabllem,  liberum,  ac proportlonatum  fanguinls  omnifque  gen- 
eris fluidorum  motum,  quibus  excretlonum  fuccejfus  et  integri- 
tasfuncllonum  animi  et  corporis  proxime  nititur,  turbando  ac 
per^vertendo,  uni<verfam  tntalem  ceconomiantfubruantacdef- 
truant ;  atque  hincuni<ver]a  pathologia  longe  recliusatquefacll- 
tUSEX  VITIO  MOTUUM  MICROCOSMICORUM  IN  S0LIDIS, 

quam  EX  VARUS  affectionibus  vitiosorum  Humo- 
rum,  deduct  atque  explicari  pojfit,  adeoque  omn'is  generis  a- 
gritudines  interna,  ad  FRiETERNATU RALES  generis 
nervosi  affectione sjint  referenda.  Eten'im  lafis  quo- 
cunque  modo,  <vel  nervis per  corpus  difcurrentibus,  n>el  mem- 
brawfis  quibufvis  nervofis  partibus,  illico  motuum  anomalies, 
modo  leviores,  modo  granj'iores  fubfequuntur.  Delude  attenta 
obfer'vatio  docet,  motus  quofois  morbofos  pnnclpallter  fedem 
jigere  et  tyrannidem  exercere  in  newqjis  corporis  partibus, 
cujus  generis  prater  omnes  canales,  qui  fyftaltico  et  diaftalti- 
co  motupollentes,  contentos  fuccos  tradunt,  uni<verfum  nimi- 
rum  intejlinorum  et  <ventriculi  ab  oefophago  ad  anum  cana~ 
lem,  totum  fyftema  'vaforum  arterloforum,  dutluum  blliarlo- 
r  urn,  fall^  album,  urinariorum  et  fubcutaneorum,funt  quoqut 
membrana  nerveo-mufculares  cerebri  et  medulla  fpinalis, 
prafertim  bact  qva  dura  mater  vocatur,  organis  fenforiis 

obduclar 


PREFACE. 


Ql 


ebducJa,  nee  tioti  tunica  ilia  ac  l/gamenta,  qua  ojfa  cingunt 
nrtufque  firmant.  Nam  nullus  dolor \  nulla  inflammation 
nullusjpafmuSi  nulla  motus  et  fen/us  impotentia,  nulla  febris 
ant  humoris  illius  excretio,  acridity  in  qua  non  ha  partes  pa- 
tiantur.  Porro  etiam  omnes,  qua  morbos  gignuni  caufa, 
tperationem  fuam  potijjimam  perficiunt  in  partes  motu  et  fen- 
Ju  praditas,  et  canales  ex  bis  coagmentatos}  eorum  metum, 
et  cum  hoc  ftuidorum  curfum,  pernjertendo  ;  it  a  tamen,  ui 
flcuti  'varia  indolis  funt,  Jic  etiam  <varie  in  nerveas partes  a- 
gant,  ii/demque  noxam  affricent.  Demum  omnia  quoque  eximi* 
'virtutis  medicamenta,  non  tarn  in  partis  fluidas,  earum  cra- 
Jin  ac  intemperiem  corrigenda ,  quam  potius  in  f olid  as  ct 
nervofas,  earundem  motus  alter ando  ac  moderando,  fuam 
edunt  operationem  :  De  quibus  tamen  omnibus,  in  <vulgari  uf- 
que  ec  recepta  morborum  doclrina,  ahum  eft  Jilentium. 

it  is  true  that  Dr.  Willis  had  laid  a  foundation  for  this 
doctrine,  in  his  Patbologia  Cerebri  et  Nervorum  ;  and  Bag- 
livi  had  propofed  a  fyftem  of  this  kind  in  his  Specimen  de 
fbra  motrici  et  morbofa*  But,  in  theie  writers,  it  was  ei- 
ther not  extenfively  applied  to  difeaies,  or  was  ftill  fo  in- 
volved in  many  phyfiological  errors,  that  they  had  at- 
tracted little  attention  ;  and  Dr.  Hoffman  was  the  firft 
who  gave  any  tolerably  fimple  and  clear  fyftem  on  the 
fubjedt,  or  pointed  out  any  extenfrve  application  of  it  to 
the  explanation  of  difeafes. 

there  can  be  no  fort  of  doubt  that  the  phenomena  of 
the  animal  economy  in  health  and  in  ficknefs,  can  only  be 
explained  by  confidering  the  ftate  ana  affections  of  the 
primary  moving  powers  in  it.  It  is  to  me  iurprifing  that 
phyficians  were  fo  long  of  perceiving  this,  and  I  think  we 
are  therefore  particularly  indebted  to  Dr.  Hoffman  for 
B  4  putting 


32  PREFACE. 

putting  us  into  the  proper  train  of  inveftigation  ;  and  it 
every  day  appears  that  Phyficians  perceive  the  neceflity 
of  entering  more  and  more  into  this  inquiry.  It  was  this, 
I  think,  which  engaged  Dr.  Kaaw  Boerhaave  to  publifh 
his  work  intitlcd  lmpetum  faciens  ;  as  well  as  Dr.  Gaubius 
to  give  the  Pathology  of  the  Solidum  *vi<vum.  Even  the 
Baron  Van  Swieten  has  upon  the  fame  view  thought  it 
necefl'ary,  in  at  leaft  one  particular,  to  make  a  very  con- 
siderable change  in  the  doctrine  of  his  mafter,  as  he  has 
done  in  his  Commentary  upon  the  755th  Aphorifm.  Dr. 
Haller  has  advanced  this  part  of  fcience  very  much  by  his 
experiments  on  irritability  and  f  enfibility.  In  thefe  and  in 
many  other  inftances,  particularly  in  the  writings  of  Mr. 
Barthez  of  Montpelier,  of  fome  progrefs  in  the  ftudy  of 
the  affections  of  the  Nervous  Syftem,  we  muft  perceive 
how  much  we  are  indebted  to  Dr.  Hoffman  for  his  fo 
properly  beginning  it.  The  fubject,  however,  is  difficult  : 
The  laws  of  the  Nervous  Syffem,  in  the  various  circum- 
ftances  of  the  animal  economy,  are  by  no  means  afcer- 
tained  ;  and,  from  want  of  attention  and  obfervation  with 
the  view  to  a  fyftem  on  this  fubject,  the  bufinefs  appears 
to  many  as  an  inexplicable  myffery.  There  is  no  wonder, 
therefore,  that,  on  fuch  a  difficult  fubject,  Dr.  Hoffman's 
fyftem  was  imperfect  and  incorrect  ;  and  has  had  lefs  in- 
fluence on  the  writings  and  practice  of  Phyficians  fince 
his  time,  than  might  have  been  expected.  He  himfelf  has 
not  applied  his  fundamental  do6trine  fo  extenfiveiy  as  he 
might  have  done  ;  and  he  has  every  where  intermixed  an 
Humoral  Pathology  as  incorrect  and  hypothetical  as  any 
other.  Though  he  differed  from  his  colleague  Dr.  Stahl 
in  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  his  fyftem,  it  is  but  too 
evident  that  he  was  very  much  infected  with  the  Stahlian 

doctrines 


P     R     E     F     A     C     Ev  g$l 

doctrines  of  Plethora  and  Cacochymy,  as  may  be  obferv- 
ed  throughout  the  whole  courfeof  his  work  ;  and  particu- 
larly in  his  chapter  De  morborum  generatione  ex  nimia  fan* 
guinis  quantitate  et  humorum  impuritate . 

but  it  is  needlefs  for  me  to  dwell  any  longer  upon  the  : 
lyftem  of  Hoffman  ;  and  I  am  next  to  offer  fome  remarks 
on  the  fyftem  of  Dr.  Boerhaave  the  cotemporary  of  both 
the  other  Syfiematics,  and  who,  over  all  Europe,  and  es- 
pecially in  this  part  of  the  world,  gained  higher  reputa- 
tion than  either  of  the  others. 

dr;  Boerhaave  wasa  man  of  general  erudition  ;  and, 
in  applying  to  medicine,  he  hadcarefuily  ftudied  the  aux- 
iliary branches  of  Anatomy,  Chemiftry,  and  Botany,  fa- 
that  he  excelled  in  each.  In  forming  a  Syftem  of  Phytic, 
he  feems  to  have  ftudied  diligently  all  the  feveral  writ- 
ings of  both  ancient  and  modern  phyficians  ;  and,  without 
prejudice  in  favour  of  any  former  fyftems,  he  endeavour- 
ed to  be  a  candid  and  genuine  eccleclic.  PofTeffed  of  an 
excellent  fyftematic  genius,  he  gave  a  fyftem  fuperior  to- 
any  that  had  ever  before  appeared.  As  in  the  great  ex-  - 
tent,  and  feemingly  perfect  confiftency,  of  fyftem,  he  ap- 
peared to  improveand  refineirpon  everything  that  had 
before  been  offered  ;  and  as  in  his  Lectures  he  explained 
his  doctrines  with  great  clearnefs  and  elegance  ;  he  ibon- 
acquired  a'  very  high  reputation,  and -his  fyftem  was  more 
generally  received  than  any  former  had  been  fince'the 
time  of  Galen.-  Whoever  will  confider  the  merits  of  Dr, 
Boerhaave,  and  can  compare  his  fyftem  with  that  of  forrad- 
er writer,  mufi  acknowledge  that  he  was  very  jnftiy  es- 
teemed, and  gave  a  fyftem  which  was  at  that  time  defers 

edly  valued, 

B  5  suTj-' 


34  PREFACE. 

but,  in  the  progrefs  of  an  inquifitive  and  induftrious 
age,  it  was  not  to  be  expecled  that  any  fyftem  fhould  laft 
io  long  as  Boerhaave's  ha6  done.  The  elaborate  Com- 
mentary of  Van  Swieten  on  Boerhaave's  fyftem  of  prac- 
tice, has  been  only  finifhed  a  few  years  ago  ;  and  though 
this  Commentator  has  added  many  facls,  and  madefome 
corrections,  he  has  not,  except  in  the  particular  mention- 
ed above,  made  any  improvement  in  the  general  fyftem. 
It  is  even  furprifing  that  Boerhaave  himfelf,  though  he 
lived  near  forty  years  after  he  had  firft  formed  his  fyftem, 
had  hardly  in  all  that  time  made  any  corrections  of  it  or 
additions  to  it ;  the  following  is  the  moft  remarkable.  In 
Aphorifm  755,  the  words  forteet  nernjofi,  tarn  cerebri  quam 
cerebelli  cordi  dejllnati  inertia,  did  not  appear  in  any  e- 
dition  before  the  fourth  ;  and  what  a  difference  of  fyftem 
this  points  at,  every  phyfician  mult  perceive. 

when  I  firft  applied  to  the  ftudy  of  Phyfic,  I  learned 
only  the  fyftem  of  Boerhaave  ;  and  even  when  I  came  to 
take  a  Profeflbr's  chair  in  this  univerfity,  I  found  that  fyf- 
tem here  in  its  entire  and  full  force  ;  and  as  I  believe  it 
ftill  fubfifts  in  credit  elfewhere,  and  that  no  other  fyftem 
of  reputation  has  been  yet  offered  to  the  world,  I  think  it 
neceffary  for  me  to  point  out  particularly  the  imperfec- 
tions and  deficiencies  of  the  Boerhaavian  fyftem,  in  order 
to  fhow  the  propriety  and  neceffity  of  attempting  a  new 


to  execute  this,  however,  fo  fully  as  I  might,  would 
lead  me  into  a  detail  that  can  hardly  be  admitted  of  here  ; 
and  I  hope  it  is  not  neceffary,  as  I  think,  that  every  intel- 
ligent perfon,  who  has  acquired  any  tolerable  knowledge 
of  the  prefent  ftate  of  our  fcience,  maft,  in  manyinftances, 

perceive 


PREFACE.  35 

perceive  its  imperfections.  I  fhall  therefore  touch  only 
upon  the  great  lines  of  this  fyftem  ;  and  from  the  remarks 
I  am  to  offer,  truft  that  both  the  miftakes  and  deficiencies 
which  run  through  the  whole  of  his  works  will  appear. 

dr.  Boerhaave's  treatife  of  the  difeafes  of  the  fimple 
folid,  has  the  appearance  of  being  very  clear  and  confid- 
ent, and  was  certainly  confidered  by  him  as  a  fundamental 
doctrine  ;  but,  in  my  apprehenfion,  it  is  neither  correct 
nor  extenfively  applicable.  Not  to  mention  the  ufelefs, 
and  perhaps  erroneous,  notion  of  the  compofition  of  earth 
and  gluten  ;  nor  his  miftake  refpecting  the  nructure  of 
compound  membranes  ;  nor  his  inattention  to  the  fiate  of 
the  cellular  texture  ;  all  of  them  circumftances  which 
render  his  doctrine  imperfect  ;  I  fhall  infift  only  upon  the 
whole  being  very  little  applicable  to  the  explaining  the 
phenomena  of  health  or  ficknefs.  The  laxity  or  rigidity" 
of  the  fimple  folid,  does,  indeed,  take  place  at  the  differ- 
ent periods  of  life,  and  may  perhaps,  upon  other  occafions, 
occur  as  the  caufe  of  difeafe  :  But  I  prefume,  that  the 
ftate  of  the  fimple  folid  is,  upon  few  occafious,  eitheF 
changeable  or  actually  changed  ;  and  that,  in  ninety  nine 
cafes  of  an  hundred,  the  phenomena  attributed  to  fuch  a 
change,  do  truly  depend  on  the  ftate  ofthefolidum  n>i*vum  ; 
a  circumftancc  which  Dr.  Boerhaave  has  hardly  taken 
notice  of  in  any  part  of  his  works.  How  much  this  fhows 
the  deficiency  and  imperfection  of  his  fyftem,  I  need  not 
explain.  The  learned  work  of  Dr.  Gaubius,  above  re- 
ferred to,  as  well  as  many  other  treatifes  of  late  authors, 
point  out  fufficiently  the  defects  and  imperfections  of 
Boerhaave  on  this  fubject. 

after  Dr.  Boerhaave  has  confidered  the  difeafes  of  the 

folids,  he  in  the  next  place  attempts  to  explain  the  more 

B  6  fimple 


36  PREFACE. 

fimple  difeafes  of  the  fluids  ;  and  there,  indeed,  he  deliv- 
ers a  more  correct  doctrine  of  acid,  and  alkali  than  had 
been  given  before  :  But,  after  all,  he  has  done  it  very  im- 
perfectly. We  have,  indeed,  fince  his  time,  acquired  more 
knowledge  upon  the  fubject  of  digeftion  ;  and  fo  much  as 
to  know,  that  a  great  deal  more  is  yet  heceffary  to  enable 
us  to  underltand  in  what  manner  the  animal  fluids  are 
formed  from  the  aliments  taken  in.  And  although  Dr. 
Boerhaave  has  fallen  into  no  confiderable  error  with  re- 
fpect  to  a  morbid  acidity  in  the  ftomach,  he  could  not  pol- 
fibly  be  complete  upon  that  fubject  ;  and  his  notion  of  the 
effects  of  acidity  in  the  mafs  of  blood  feems  to  have  been 
entirely  miftaken,  and  is  indeed  not  confident  with  what  he 
himfelf  has  delivered  elfewhere. 

his  do6trine  of  alkali  is  fomewhat  better  founded,  but 
is  probably  carried  too  far  ;  and  the  ftate  of  alkalefcency 
and  putrefadtion,  as  well  as  all  the  other  changes  which 
can  take  place  in  the  condition  of  animal  fluids,  are  par- 
ticulars yet  involved  in  great.obfcurity,  and  are  therefore 
flili  f  ubjects  of  difpute. 

there  is  another  particular,  in  which  Boerhaave's  doc- 
trine concerning  the  fluids  appears  to  me  imperfect  and 
unsatisfactory  ;  and  that  is,  in  his  doctrine  de  Gluiinofo 
fpontaneo.  The  caufes  which  he  has  afligned  for  it  are  by 
no  means  probable,  and  the  actual  exigence  of  it  is  feldom 
to  be  proved.  Some  of  the  proofs  adduced  for  the  exig- 
ence of  the  phlegma  calidum,  are  mani'feftly  founded  on  a 
miftake  with  refpect  to  what  has  been  called  the  inflam- 
matory cruft,  (fee  Van  Swieten's  Commentary,  page  96)  ; 
and  the  many  examples  given  by  Boerhaave  of  a. glutinofum 
appearing  in  the  human  body,  (Aph.  75.)  are  all  of  them 

nothing 


PREFACE.  37 

nothing  more  than  inftances  of  collections  or  concretions 
found  out  of  the  courfe  of  the  circulation. 

if,  then,  we  confider  the  imperfe6tion  of  Dr.  Boer- 
haave's  doctrine  with  refpedt  to  the  ftate  and  various  con- 
dition of  the  animal  fluids  ;  and  if  at  the  fame  time  we  re- 
fleft  how  frequently  he  and  his  followers  have  employed 
the  fuppofition  of  an  acrimony  or  lentor  of  the  fluids,  as 
caufes  of  difeafe,  and  for  directing  the  practice  ;  we  muft, 
as  I  apprehend,  be  fatisfied,  that  his  fyftem  is  not  only  de- 
ficient and  incomplete,  but  fallacious  and  apt  to  miflead. 
Although  it  cannot  be  denied,  that  the  fluids  of  the  hu- 
man body  fuffer  various  morbid  changes  ;  and  that  upon 
thele,  dileafes  may  primarily  depend  ;  yet  I  muft  beg  leave 
to  maintain,  that  the  nature  of  thele  changes  is  feldom  un- 
derftood,  and  more  feldom  ftill  is  it  known  when  they 
have  taken  place  :  That  our  reafonings  concerning  them, 
have  been,  for  the  mod  part,  purely  hypothetical ;  have 
therefore  contributed  nothing  to  improve,  and  have  often 
milled  the  practice  of  phyfic.  In  this,  particularly,  they 
have  been  hurtful,  that  they  have  withdrawn  our  attention 
from,  and  prevented  our  ftudy  of,  the  motions  of  the  ani- 
mal fyftem,  upon  the  ftate  of  which  the  phenomena  of  dii- 
eales  do  more  certainly  and  generally  depend.  Whoever, 
then,  fhall  confider  the  almoft  total  neglect  of  the  ftate  of 
the  moving  powers  of  the  animal  body,  and  the  prevalence 
of  an  hypothetical  humoral  pathology,  fo  confpicuous  in 
every  part  of  the  Boerhaavian  Syftem,  muft  be  convinced 
of  its  very  great  defects,  and  perceive  the  neceluty  of  *at- 
tempting  one  more  correct. 

after  giving  this  general  view,  it  is  not  requifite  to  en- 
ter into  particulars ;  But,  I  believe,  there  are  very  few 

pages 


38  PREFACE. 

pages  of  his  aphorifmsin  which  there  does  not  occur  fome 
error  or  defect ;  although,  perhaps,  not  to  be  imputed  to 
the  fault  of  Boerhave,  fo  much  as  to  this,  that  fince  his 
time  a  great  collection  of  new  facts  has  been  acquired  by 
obfervation  and  experiment.  This  indeed,  affords  the  bed 
and  mod:  folid  reafon  for  attempting  a  new  fyftem  :  For 
when  many  new  fa6b  have  been  acquired,  it  becomes  requi- 
fite  that  thefe  mould  be  incorporated  into  a  fyftem,  where- 
by not  only  particular  fubjedts  may  be  improved,  but  the 
whole  may  be  rendered  more  complete,  confident,  and 
ufeful.  Every  fyftem,  indeed,  muft  be  valuable  in  pro- 
portion to  the  number  of  facts  that  it  embraces  and  com- 
prehends ;  and  Monf.  Quefney  could  not  pay  a  higher 
compliment  to  the  Syftem  of  Boerhaave,  than  by  faying 
that  it  exhibited  La  medicine  colkcJive. 

but  here  it  will,  perhaps,  be  fuggefted  to  me,  that  the 
only  ufeful  work  on  the  fubject  of  Phyfic,  is  the  making 
a  collection  of  all  the  facts  that  relate  to  the  art,  and 
therefore  of  all  that  experience  has  taught  us  with  refpect 
to  the  cure  of  difeafes.  I  agree  entirely  in  the  opinion  5 
but  doubt  if  it  can  ever  be  properly  accomplifiied,  with- 
out aiming  at  tome  fyftem  of  principles,  by  a  proper  in- 
duction and  generalifation  of  facts  :  At  leaft  I  am  per- 
fuaded  that  it  can  be  done  not  only  very  fafely,  but  moft 
ufefully  in  this  way.  This,  however,  muft  be  determin- 
ed by  a  trial.  I  know  that  the  late  Mr.  Lieutaud  has  at- 
tempted a  work  on  the  plan  of  collecting  facts  without 
any  reafoning  concerning  their  caufes  :  And  while  I  ,am 
endeavouring  to  give  fome  account  of  the  prefent  ftate  of 
Phyfic,  I  cannot  difmifs  the  f ubject  without  offering  fome 
,  remarks  upon  the  promifing  Synopjis  umverfa  medicine, 

competed 


PREFACE.  39 

compofed  by  the  firft  phyfician  of  a  learned  and  ingenious 
nation. 

in  this  work  there  are  many  facts  and  much  obferva- 
tion  from  the  Author's  own  experience,  which  may  be 
ufetul  to  thofe  who  have  otherwife  acquired  fome  knowl* 
edge  and  difcernment  j  but,  throughout  the  whole  work, 
there  is  fuch  total  want  of  method,  arrangement,  fyftem, 
or  decifion,  that,  in  my  humble  opinion,  it  can  be  of  little 
ufe,  and  may  prove  very  perplexing  to  thofe  who  are  yet 
to  learn.  The  diftinction  of  the  genera  of  difeafes,  the 
diftinction  of  the  fpecies  of  each,  and  often  even  that  of 
the  varieties,  I  hold  to  be  a  neceffary  foundation  of  every 
plan  of  Phytic,  whether  Dogmatical  or  Empirical.  But 
very  little  of  this  diftinction  is  to  be  found  in  the  work  of 
Mr.  Lieutaud  ;  and  in  his  preface  he  tells  us,  that  he 
meant  to  neglect  fuch  arguta  fedulitas.  And  indeed  his 
method  of  managing  his  fubject  muft  certainly  interrupt 
and  retard  all  methodical  nofology.  His  arrangement  of 
difeafes  is  according  to  no  affinity,  but  that  of  the  flighteft 
and  uninftructive  kind,  the  place  of  the  body  which  they 
happen  to  affect.  His  Generalia  et  incerta:  fedis,  have 
hardly  any  connexion  at  all  j  the  titles  RheumattfmSy  Hy- 
pochondriqfis,  Hydrops,  follow  one  another.  When  he  does 
attempt  any  general  doctrine,  it  is  not  till  long  after  he 
has  treated  of  the  widely  fcattered  particulars.  Under 
each  particular  title  which  he  afTumes,  he  has  endeavour- 
ed to  enumerate  the  whole  of  the  fymptoms  that  ever  ap~ 
peared  in  a  difeaie  under  that  title  ;  and  this  without 
aiming  at  any  diftinction  between  the  efTential  and  acci- 
dental fymptoms,  or  marking  the  feveral  combinations 
under  which  thefe  fymptoms  do  for  the  moft  part  fteadily 

appear# 


4Q         PREFACE. 

appear.  From  the  concurrence  of  accidental  fymptoms*. 
the  variety  of  the  fame  difeafe  is  frequently  confiderable, 
a  circumftance  necefTarily  perplexing  and  diftracting  to 
young  practitioners  ;  but  it  feems  ftrange  to  me,  that  an 
experience  of  thirty  years,  in  confiderable  practice,  could' 
do  nothing  to  relieve  them. 

MR.  Lieutaud  has  at  the  fame  time  increafed  thecon- 
fufion  that  muft  arife  from  this  want  of  diftin&ion,  by 
his  centering  as  primary  difeafes,  what  appear  to  me  to 
be  the  fymptoms,  effects,  and  fequels,  of  other  difeafes 
only.  Of  this  I  think  the  JEftus  morbofus,  Virum  exolutio, 
Dolores ;  Siagnatio  fanguinis,  Purulentia,  Tremor,  Pervigili- 
um, Raucedo,  Suffocatio,  Vomica,  Empyema,  Singultus,  Vom- 
ttus  Dolor  Stomachi,  Tenefmus,  all  treated  of  under  fepa- 
rate  titles,  are  examples,  A  general  fymptomatologia  may- 
be a  very  uieful  work,  with  a  view  to  a  Syftem  of  Patholo-. 
gy  ;  but,  with  a  view  to  practice  without  any  Syftem,  it. 
muft  have  bad  effects,  as  leading  only  to  a  palliative, 
practice,  and  diverting  from  the  proper  efforts  towards 
obtaining  a  radical  cure.  Mr.  Lieutaud,  indeed,  has  en- 
deavoured to  exhibit  the  fymptoms  above  mentioned  as 
fo  many  primary  difeafes  :  But  he  has  feldom  fucceeded  in 
this  ;  and,  in  delivering  the  practice,  he  commonly  finds 
it  neceflTary  to  confider  them  as  fymptoms,  and  that  not 
without  fome  theory,  implied  or  expreffed,  with  refpect- 
to  their  proximate  caufes.  His  title  of  Dolores  may  be  tak- 
en as  an  example  of  this  ;  and  from  which  it  may  be 
readily  perceived  how  far  fuch  treatifes  can  be  really 
ufeful. 

in  eftablifhing  a  proper  pathology,  there  is  nothing  that 
has  been  of  more  fervice  than  the  Diflection  of  morbid* 

bodies. 


PREFACE.  41 

bodies.  Mr.  Lieutaud  has  been  much  and  mcft  com- 
mendably  employed  in  this  way,  and  in  this  Synopfis  he 
has  endeavoured  to  communicate  his  knowledge  on  the 
fubjecT: ;  but,  in  my  humble  opinion,  he  has  feldom  done 
it  in  a  manner  that  can  be  ufeful.  In  the  fame  way  that 
he  has  delivered  the  fymptoms  of  difeafes  without  any 
inftruclive  arrangement;  fo,  on  the  fubjecT:  of  the  appear- 
ances after  death,  he  has  mentioned  every  morbid  appear- 
ance that  had  ever  been  obferved  after  the  difeafe  of 
which  he  is  then  treating  ;  but  thefe  appearances  are 
ftrangely  huddled  together,  without  any  notice  taken  of 
thofe  which  belong  to  one  fet  of  fymptoms  or  to  another  ; 
and,  with  regard  to  the  whole,  without  any  attempt  to 
diftinguifli  between  the  caufes  of  difeafes  and  the  caufes 
of  death  3  although  the  want  of  fuch  diftincTion  is  the 
well  known  ground  of  fallacy  upon  this  fubjecT:.  I  take 
for  an  example,  the  appearances  mentioned  as  having  been 
obferved  after  dropfy.  Here  morbid  appearances,  found 
in  every  part  of  the  body,  in  every  cavity  of  it,  and  in  ev- 
ery vifcus  contained  in  thefe  cavities,  are  enumerated  ; 
but  which  of  thefe  morbid  ftates  are  more  frequent  or 
more  rare,  tnd  which  had  been  more  particularly  con- 
nected with  the  different  caufes,  or  with  the  different  ftate 
of  fymptoms  previoufly  recited,  w- e  are  not  informed,  nor 
has  he  enabled  us  to  difcover.  In  fhort,  the  direction  of 
morbid  bodies  has  been,  and  may  be,  highly  ufeful  ;  but 
in  order  to  be  fo,  it  rauft  be  under  a  different  management 
from  what  we  find,  either  in  this  Synopfis,  or  even  in  the 
Hijloria  Anatomico-medica. 

i  cannot  difmifs  this  fubjecT:  without  remarking,  that 
tbe  difTecTion  of  morbid  bodies,  is  chiefly  valuable  upon 

account 


42  PREFACE. 

account  of  its  leading  us  to  difcover  the  proximate  caufes 
of  difeafes  ;  and  the  great  and  valuable  work  of  the  illuf- 
trious  Morgaghi,  is  properly  intitled  Defedibus  ^/causis. 
It  may  well  feem  furprifmg,  then,  that  Lientaud  mould 
find  the  whole  of  proximate  caufes  atra  caligine  merfas  ; 
and  that  he  fhould  never  have  thought  of  applying  his 
direction  towards  the  afcertaining  at  leaft  fome  of  thefe. 

but  let  me  now  proceed  to  confider  the  important  part 
of  every  practical  work,  and  of  this  Synopfis  univerfce  medi- 
cines ;  that  is,  the  method  of  curing  difeafes. 

HERE,  again,  upon  the  fame  plan  as  in  giving  the  hiftories 
of  difeafe,  the  method  of  cure  is  delivered  by  enumerating 
the  whole  of  the  remedies  that  have  ever  been  employed 
in  a  difeafe  under  the  title  prefixed;  without  afligning  the 
fpecies,  or  the  circumftances  to  which  the  remedies, 
though  of  a  very  different  and  fometimes  oppofite  nature, 
are  peculiarly  adapted.  On  thefubjecT:  of  Afthma,  he  very 
juftly  obferves  that  phyficians  have  been  to  blame  in  con- 
founding under  this  title,  almoftallthe  fpecies  of  Dyf- 
pncea  ;  and  he  himfelf  very  properly  confiders  Afthma  as 
a  difeafe  diftincl  from  all  the  other  cafes  of  Dyfpncea.  Still, 
however,  he  confiders  Afthma  as  of  many  different  fpecies, 
arifing  from  many  different  caufes,  which,  till  we  under- 
ftand  better,  we  cannot  attempt  to  remove.  Notwithstand- 
ing all  this,  he  proceeds  to  deliver  a  very  general  cure. 
Parum  abeft>  fays  he,  quin  fpecifici  titulo  gaud e  ant  peel  or  alia, 
vulneraria,  et  incidentia  !  But  from fuch language  I  receive 
no  clear  idea  ;  nor  can  I  obtain  any  clear  direction  from 
the  enumeration  of  his  medicines.  Bacae  juniperi,  gummi 
tragacantbum  <vel  ammoniacum,fapo,  aqua  picea,  terebintbi- 
na%  ISs*  $v#  tatnen  baud  indifcriminatimfuntufur panda,  fed 

pr* 


PREFACE.  43 

pro  re  nata,  deleclu  opus  eft.  Very  juflly  indeed,  deleclu 
opus  eft  ;  but  here,  as  in  many  other  in/lances,  he  gives  us 
no  fort  of  afiiftance. 

from  his  endeavours,  though  not  always  fuccefsful,  to 
neglect  all  fyftem,  his  practice  is  generally  delivered  in  a 
Tery  indecifive  manner;  or,  what  has  the  fame  effect,  in  a 
way  fo  conditional  as  v/ill  render  it  always  difficult,  and 
often  impoflible,  for  a  young  practitioner  to  follow  him. 
Let  us  take,  for  example,  his  cureof  Dropfy.  "  The  cure 
'•  may  be  begun  by  bloodletting  in  certain  conditions  ; 
11  but,  in  others,  it  cannot  be  employed  without  danger.  It 
"  gives  relief  in  difficult  breathing;  but,  after  it  is  praclif- 
"  e d,  the  fymptoms  are  aggravated,  and  rendered  more  obfti- 
M  nate.  It  is  not  to  be  concealed  that  fome  perfons  have 
'*  been  cured  by  repeated  bloodlettings,  or  fpontaneous 
11  haemorrhagies  ;  but  it  is  at  the  fame  time  known,  thatfuch 
li  a  remedy  inopportunely  employed,  has  in  many  inftances  haf- 
u  tened  on  the  fatal  event." 

in  the  fame  manner  he  treats  of  vomiting,  purging, 
fweating,  and  the  ufe  of  mineral  waters  ;  but  I  muft  con- 
fel's,  that  he  has  no  where  removed  any  of  my  doubts  or 
difficulties,  and  indeed  he  has  fometimes  increafed  them. 
He  fays,  that  hepatics,  or  aperients,  fuchas  the  lingua  cer- 
vina,  herbce  capillares,  &c.  deferve  commendation  ;  but 
that,  when  the  difeafe  has  arifen  to  a  certain  degree,  they 
have  been, for  the moft part,  found  to  be  ufelefs.  Heobferves, 
that  the  powder  of  toads  given  in  wine,  to  the  quantity  of  a 
fcrupleor  more,  has  iucceededwithfeverals. 

such  are,  commonly,  the  methods  of  cnre  delivered 
by  Mr.  Lieutaud,  hngiori  et  forte  felicijfima  praxi  edocTuS. 

IT 


44  PREFACE. 

IT  would  be  tedious  to  enter  further  into  that  detail, 
which  a  criticifm  of  this  irarnethodical  and  uninftructive 
work  might  lead  me  into  ;  but,  if  the  bounds  proper  for 
this  preface  did  not  prevent  me,  I  would  particularly 
fhow  that  the  work  is  far  from  being  free  from  thofe  rea- 
fonings  which  the  author  pretends  to  avoid,  and  would  af- 
fect even  to  de'pife.  He  (till  holds  the  doctrines  of  the 
concoction  and  CRITICAL  evacuation  of  MORBIF- 
IC matter  ;  doctrines  depending  upon  fubtile  theories, 
and  which,  in  my  opinion,  can  in  nowife  be  afcertained 
as  matters  of  fact.  Mr.  Lieutaud  likewife  is  frill  very 
much  upon  the  old  plan  of  following  nature,  and  there- 
fore gives  often  what  I  confider  as  a  feeble  and  inert  prac- 
tice. The  humetlant'ia,  diluentia,  demukentia,  et  temper  an- 
tia,  are  with  him  very  univerfal  remedies,  and  often  thofe 
which  alone  are  to  be  employed. 

the  mention  of  thefe  medicines  might  lead  me  to  take 
notice  of  Mr.  Lieutaud's  fecond  volume,  in  which,  ab  in- 
fula  remediorwnfarragine  alienus,  he  promifes  a  great  ref- 
ormation upon  the  fubject  ;  but  this  falls  fo  far  fhort  of 
the  idea  of  Britifh  phyficians,  that  I  need  not  make  any 
remarks  upon  it.  "With  refpect  to  his  lift  of  fimples,  or 
Emporetica,  as  he  is  pleafed  to  term  them,  an  Englifh  apoth- 
ecary would  fmile  at  it  ;  and  with  refpect.  to  his  officinalia^ 
I  believe  they  are  to  be  found  no  where  but  in  the  Codex 
Medicamentarius  of  Paris  ;  and  in  his  Magifiralla  his  dofes 
are  generally  fuch  as  the  molt  timid  practitioner  of  this 
country  would  hardly  defcend  to,  and  fuch  as  none  of  our 
practitioners  of  experience  would  depend  upon.  In  fhort, 
the  whole  of  the  work,  both  with  refpect  to  the  theories 
with  which  it  abounds,  and  to  the  facts  which  it  gives, 

will 


PREFACE.  45 

will  not,  in  my  apprehenfion,  bear  any  ferious  criticifm. 
But  I  muft  conclude  ;  and  fhall  only  fay  further,  that  fuch 
as  I  have  reprefented  it,  is  this  work,  executed  by  a  man 
ofthefirft  rank  in  the  profeffion.  It  is  indeed  for  that 
reafon  I  have  chofen  it  as  the  example  of  a  work,  upon 
the  plan  of  giving  facts  only,  and  of  avoiding  the  ftudy  or 
even  the  notice  of  the  proximate  caufes  of  difeafes  ;  and 
with  what  advantage  fuch  a  plan  is  purfued,  I  fhall  leave 
my  readers  to  confider. 

in  the  following  treatife  I  have  followed  a  different 
courfe.  I  have  endeavoured  to  collect  the  facts  relative 
to  the  difeafes  of  the  human  body,  as  fully  as  the  nature  of 
the  work  and  the  bounds  neceffarily  prefcribed  to  it  would 
admit :  But  I  have  not  been  fatisfied  with'giving  the  facts, 
without  endeavouring  to  apply  them  to  the  inveftigation 
of  proximate  caufes,  and  upon  thefe  to  eftablifh  a  more 
fcientific  and  decided  method  of  cure.  In  aiming  at  this, 
I  flatter  myfelf  that  I  have  avoided  hypothefis,  and  what 
have  been  called  theories.  I  have,  indeed,  endeavoured 
to  eftablifh  many  general  doctrines,  both  phyfiological  ; 
and  pathological  ;  but  I  truft  that  thefe  are  only  a  general- 
ifation  of  facts,  or  concliifions  from  a  cautious  and  full 
induction  ;  and  if  anyone  fhall  refufe  to  admit,  or  directly 
fhall  oppofe,  my  general  doctrines,  he  mud  do  it  by  mow- 
ing that  I  have  been  deficient  or  miftaken  in  affuming  and 
applying  facts.  I  have,  myfelf,  been  jealous  of  my  being 
fometimes  imperfect  in  thefe  ref pects ;  but  I  have  gener- 
ally endeavoured  to  obviate  the  confequences  of  this,  by 
proving,  that  the  proximate  caufes  which  I  have  afligned, 
are  true  in  fact,  as  well  as  deductions  from  any  reafoning 
that  I  may  feem  to  have  employed.  Further,  to  obviate 
any  dangerous  fallacy  in  propcfing  a  method  of  cure,  I 

have 


46  PREFACE. 

have  always  been  anxious  to  fuggeft  that  which,  to  the 
bed  of  my  judgment,  appeared  to  be  the  method  approved 
ot  by  experience,  as  much  as  it  was  the  confequence  of 
fvftem. 

upon  this  general  plan  I  have  endeavoured  to  form  a 
fyftem  of  phyfic  that  mould  comprehend  the  whole  of  the 
facts  relating  to  the  fcience,  and  that  will,  I  hope,  collect 
and  arrange  them  in  better  order  than  has  been  done  "be- 
fore, as  well  as  point  out  in  particular  thole  which  are  ftill 
wanting  to  eftablifh  general  principles.  This  which  I 
have  attempted,  may,  like  other  fyftems*  hereafter  fuffer 
a  change  ;  but  I  am  confident  that  we  are  at  prefent  in  a 
better  train  of  inveftigation  than  phyficians  were  in  before 
the  time  of  Dr.  Hoffman .  The  affections  of  the  motions 
and  moving  powers  of  the  animal  economy,  muft  certainly 
be  the  leading  inquiry  in  confideringthe  difeafes  of  the  hu- 
man body.  The  inquiry  may  be  difficult ;  but  it  muft  be 
attempted,  or  the  fubjeft  muft  be  deferted  altogether.  I 
have,  therefore,  aflumed  the  general  principles  of  Hoff- 
man, as  laid  down  in  the  pafTage  which  I  have  quoted  a- 
bove  ;  and  if  I  have  rendered  them  more  correct,  and  more 
extenfive  in  their  application  j  and,  more  particularly,  if 
1  have  avoided  introducing  the  many  hypothetical  doc- 
trines of  the  Humoral  Pathology  which  disfigured  both 
his  and  all  the  other  fyftems  which  have  hitherto  prevail- 
ed ;  I  hope  I  fhall  be  excufed  for  attempting  a  fyftem, 
which  upon  the  whole  may  appear  new. 
Edinburgh,  Nov.  1783. 


PART      I. 

of     PYREXIA 

O    R 

FEBRILE    DISEASES, 


FIRST      LINES 

OF  THE 

PRACTICE    of    PHYSIC. 

tJ TutvodiLciwn. 


I. 

N  teaching  the  Practice 
of  Physic,  we  endeavour 
to  give  infirucT-ion  for 
d  ifc  e  mingy  d  ift  inguijh  ingy 
preventing,  and  curing  dif- 
eafes,  as  they  occur  in  par- 
ticular perfons. 


II 


The  art  of  d  i  sc  e  r  n  i  n  g  and  distinguish- 
ing difeafes,  may  be  belt  attained  by  an  ac- 
C  curate 


50  PRACTICE 

curate  and  complete  obfervation  of  their  phe- 
nomena, as  thefe  occur  in  concourfe  and  in 
iucceffion,  and  by  conftantly  endeavouring  to 
diflinguifh  the  peculiar  and  inseparable  con- 
currence of  fymptoms,  to  eftabliih  a  M  e  t h  o  d- 
i c a l  Nosology,  or  an  arrangement  of  dif- 
eafes  according  to  their  genera  and  fpecies, 
founded  upon  obfervation  alone,  abftra&ed 
from  all  reafoning.  Such  an  arrangement  I 
have  attempted  in  another  work,  to  which  in 
the  courfe  of  the  prefent  I  fhall  frequently 
refer. 

III. 

The  Prevention  of  difeafes  depends 
upon  the  knowledge  of  their  remote  caufes  ; 
which  is  partly  delivered  in  the  general  Pa- 
thology, and  partly  to  be  delivered  in  this 
treatife. 


IV. 


The  Cure  of  difeafes  is  chiefly,  and  ai- 
med unavoidably,  founded  in  the  knowledge 
of  their  proximate  caufes.  This  requires  an 
acquaintance  with  the  Inflitutions  of  Medi- 
cine ;  that  is,  the  knowledge  of  the  ftructure, 
action,  and  functions  of  the  human  body; 
of  the  feveral  changes  which  it  may  undergo  ; 
and  of  the  feveral  powers  by  which  it  can 
be  changed.  Our  "knowledge  of  thefe  par- 
ticulars, 


OF       P  H  Y  S  I  C.  51 

ticulars,  however,  is  flill  incomplete,  is  in 
many  refpects  doubtful,  and  has  been  often 
involved  in  miftake  and  error.  The  doc- 
trine, therefore,  of  proximate  caufes,  founded 
upon  that  knowledge^  muff  be  frequently  pre- 
carious and  uncertain.  *  It  is,  however,  poffi- 
ble  for  a  judicious  phyfician  to  avoid  what  is 
vulgarly  called  theory,  that  is,  all  reafoning 
founded  upon  hypothecs,  and  thereby  many 
of  the  errors  which  have  formerly  taken 
place  in  the  Inftitutions  of  Medicine.  It  is 
poflible  alfo  for  a  perfon  who  has  an  extenfive 
knowledge  of  the  facts  relative  to  the  animal 
economy  in  health  and  in  ficknefs,  by  a  cau- 
tious and  complete  induction,  to  eftablifh 
many  general  principles  which  may  guide  his 
reafoning  with  fafety  ;  and  while,  at  the  fame 
time,  a  phyfician  admits  as  a  foundation  of 
practice  thofe  reafonings  only  which  are  fim- 
ple,  obvious  and  certain,  and  for  the  moft  part 
admits  as  proximate  caufes  thofe  alone  that 
are  eftablifhed  as  matters  of  fact  rather  than 
as  deductions  of  reafoning,  he  may  with  great 
advantage  eftablifh  a  fyflem  of  practice  chiefly 
founded  on  the  doctrine  of  proximate  caufes. 
But  when  this  cannot  be  done  with  fuflicient 
certainty,  the  judicious  and  prudent  phyfician 
will  have  recourfe  to  Experience  alone  ; 
always,  however,  aware  of  the  hitherto  in- 
complete and  fallacious  flate   of  Empiricifm. 


C  2 


52         P  R  A  C   T   I   C  E,    &c. 


V. 


With  a  ftrift  attention  to  thefe  confidera- 
tions  in  the  whole  of  the  following  Treatife, 
I  proceed  to  treat  of  particular  difeafes  in  the 
order  of  my  Methodical  Nofology. 


PART 


fjy,vea>LGLe>,   ov  Jfe,uvil&  zDu&cuie^, 


Of 


VI. 

YREXI^E,  or  febrile  difeafes, 
are  diflinguifhed  by  the  fol- 
lowing appearances.  After 
beginning  with  fome  degree 
of  cold  fhivering,  they  mow 
fome  increafe  of  heat,  and 
an  increafed  frequency  of  pulfe,  with  the  in- 
terruption and  diforder  of  feveral  functions, 
particularly  fome  diminution  of  ftrength  in 
the  animal  functions. 

VII. 

Of  thefe  Pyrexias  I  have  formed  a  clafs, 
and  have  fubdivided  it  into  the  five  orders  of 

Fevers,  Inflammations,  Eruptions, 
Hemorrhages,  and  Fluxes.  See  Synop- 
fis  Nofologiae.  Methodicae,  Edit.  3.  1780. 

C  3  BOOK 


BOOK  I. 


of      FEVERS. 

C     H     A     P.    *       I. 

of    the    PHENOMENA    of    FEVERS. 

VIII. 

1  HOSE  difeafes  are  more 
ftriclly  called  Fevers,  which  have  the  gen- 
eral fymptoms  of  pyrexia,  without  having 
alongft  with  them  any  topical  affection  that  is 
effential  and  primary,  fuch  as  the  other  orders 
of  the  Pyrexias  always  have. 


IX. 


Fevers,  as  differing  in  the  number  and  va- 
riety of  their  fymptoms,  have  been  very  prop- 
erly confidered  as  of  diflincl  genera  and  fpe- 
cies.  But  we  fuppofe,  that  there  are  certain 
circumftances  in  common  to  all  the  difeafes 
comprehended  under  this  order,  which  are 
therefore   thofe  effentially  neceffary  to,  and 

properly 


O  F       P.H  YSIC.  55 

properly  conftituting  the  nature  of  fever.  It 
is  our  bufinefs  efpecially,  and  in  the  fir  ft .place, 
to  inveftigate  thefe  ;  and  I  expect  to  find  them 
as  they  occur  in  the  paroxyfm,  or  fit,  of  an  in- 
termittent fever,  as  this  is  moil  commonly 
formed. 

X. 

The  phenomena  to  be  obferved  in  fuch  a 
paroxyfm  are  the  following.     The  perfon  is 
affected,  firft,  with  a  languor  or  fenfe  of  debil- 
ity, a  fluggifhnefs  in  motion,  andfome  uneafi- 
nefs  in  exerting  it,  with  frequent  yawning  and 
ftretching.     At  the  fame  time,    the  face  and 
extremities  become  pale  ;  the  features  fhrink ; 
the  bulk  of  every  external  part  is  diminiihed  ; 
and  the  fkin,  over  the  whole  body,  appears 
conftricled,  as  if  cold  had  been  applied   to  it. 
At  the  coming  on  of  thefe   fymptoms,  fome 
coldnefs  of  the  extremities,  though  little  taken 
notice  of  by  the  patient,,  may  be  perceived  by 
another  perfon.     At  length,  the  patient  him- 
felf  feels  a  fenfation  of  cold,  commonly  firft  in 
his  back,  but,  from   thence,  paffing  over  the 
whole  body  ;  and  now  his  fkin  feels  warm  to 
another  perfon.     The  patient's  fenfe  of  cold 
increafing,  produces  a  tremor  in  all  his  limbs, 
with  frequent   facceflions   or    rigors    of    the 
trunk  of  the  body.     When  this  fenfe  of  cold, 
and  its  effe&s,  have  continued  for  fome  time, 
they  become  lefs  violent,  and  are  alternated 
with  warm  flufhings.     By  degrees,  the  cold 
C  4  goes 


56  PRACTICE 

goes  off  entirely  ;  and  a  heat,  greater  than 
natural,  prevails,  and  continues  over  the 
whole  body.  With  this  heat,  the  colour  of 
the  fkin  returns,  and  a  preternatural  rednefs 
appears,  efpecially  in  the  face.  Whilfl  the 
heat  and  rednefs  come  on,  the  fkin  is  relaxed 
and  fmoothed,  but,  for  fome  time,  continues 
dry.  The  features  of  the  face,  and  other 
parts  of  the  body,  recover  their  ufual  fize,  and 
become  even  more  turgid.  When  the  heat, 
rednefs,  and  turgefcence  have  increafed  and 
continued  for  fome  time,  a  moifture  appears 
upon  the  forehead,  and  by  degrees  becomes  a 
fweat,  which  gradually  extends  downwards 
over  the  whole  body.  As  this  fweat  contin- 
ues to  flow,  the  heat  of  the  body  abates  ;  the 
fweat,  after  continuing  fome  time,  gradually 
ceafes  ;  the  body  returns  to  its  ufual  tempera- 
ture j  and  moll  of  the  functions  are  reftored  to 
their  ordinary  ftate. 

XI. 

This  feries  of  appearances  gives  occafion 
to  divide  the  paroxyfm  into  three  different 
ftages  ;  which  are  called  the  Cold,  the  Hot, 
and  the  Sweating  Stages  or  Fits. 

In  the  courfe  of  thefe,  confiderable  changes 
happen  in  the  ftate  of  feveral  other  functions, 
which  are  now  to  be  mentioned. 

XII. 

Upon  the  firft  approach  of  languor,  the 
pulfe  becomes  fometimes  flower,  and  always 

weaker 


OF       PHYSIC.  57 

weaker  than  before.  As  the  fenfe  of  cold 
comes  on,  the  pulfe  becomes  fmaller,  very- 
frequent,  and  often  irregular.  As  the  cold 
abates,  and  the  heat  comes  on,  the  pulfe  be- 
comes more  regular,  hard,  and  full ;  and  in 
thefe  refpecls,  increafes  till  the  fweat  breaks 
out.  As  the  fweat  flows,  the  pulfe  becomes 
fofter,  and  lefs  frequent,  till  the  fweat;  ceafing 
altogether,  it  returns  to  its  ufual  ilate. 

XIII. 

The  refpiration  alfo  fuffers  fome  changes. 
During  the  cold  ftage,  the  refpiration  is  fmall, 
frequent,  and  anxious,  and  is  fometimes  at- 
tended with  a  cough  ;  as  the  hot  ftage  comes 
on,  the  refpiration  becomes  fuller  and  more 
free  •  but  continues  ftill  frequent  and  anxious, 
till  the  flowing  of  the  fweat  relieves  the  anxi- 
ety, and  renders  the  breathing  lefs  frequent  and 
more  free.  With  the  ceafmg  of  the  fweat,  the 
breathing  returns  to  its  ordinary  (late. 

XIV. 

The  natural  functions  alfo  fufFer  a  chancre. 
Upon  the  approach  of  the  cold  ftage,  the  ap- 
petite for  food  ceafes,  and  does  not  return  till 
the  paroxyfm  be  over,  or  the  fweat  has  flowed 
for  fome  time.  Generally,  during  the  whole 
of  the  paroxyfm,  there  is  not  only  a  want  of 
appetite,  but  an  averfion  from  all  folid,  and 
efpecially  animal  food.  As  the  cold  ftage  ad- 
C  5  vances, 


58  PRACTICE 

varices,  there  frequently  comes  on  a  ficknefs  and 
naufea,  which  often  increafe  to  a  vomiting  of 
a  matter  that  is  for  the  moil  part  bilious.  This 
vomiting  commonly  puts  an  end  to  the  cold 
ftage,  and  brings  on  the  hot.  As  the  hot  ftage 
advances,  the  naufeaand  vomiting  abate  »  and 
when  the  fweat  breaks  out,  they  generally  ceafe 
altogether. 

XV. 

A  conhderable  degree  of  thirft  is  common- 
ly felt  during  the  whole  courfe  of  the  parox- 
yfm.  During  the  cold  ftage,  the  thirft  feems 
to  arife  from  the  drynefs  and  clamminefs  of  the 
mouth  and  fauces ;  but,  during  the  hot  ftage, 
from  the  heat  which  then  'prevails  over  the 
whole  body  ;  and,  as  the  fweat  flows,  the 
mouth  becomes  rnoifter,  and  the  thirft,  togeth- 
er with  the  heat,  gradually  abates. 

XVI. 

In  the  courfe  of  a  paroxyfm,  there  is  often 
a  confiderable  change  in  the  ftate  of  the  fe- 
cretions.  The  circumftances  juft  now  men- 
tioned (how  it  in  the  fecretion  of  the  faliva 
and  mucus  of  the  mouth  ;  and  it  is  ftill  more 
remarkable  with  refpecl  to  the  urine.  Dur- 
ing the  cold  ftage,  the  urine  is  almoft  colour- 
lefs,  and  without  cloud  or  fediment.  In  the 
hot  ftage,  it  becomes  high  coloured,  but  is 
-ftill  without  fediment.     After  the  fweat  has 

flowed 


OF       PHYSIC.  59 

flowed  freely,  the  urine  depolites  a  fediment, 
commonly  lateritious,  and  continues  to  do  fo 
for  fome  time  after  the  paroxyfm  is  over, 

XVII. 

Excepting  in  certain  uncommon  cafes  whicJi 
are  attended  throughout  with  a  diarrhoea, 
flools  feldom  occur  till  towards  the  end  of  a 
paroxyfm,  when  commonly  a  flool  happens> 
and  which  is  generally  of  aloofe  kind. 

XVIII. 

Analogous  to  thefe  changes  in  the  ft  ate  of 
the  fecretions5.  it  frequently  happens,  that  tu- 
mours fub  filling  on  the  furface  of  the  body., 
fufcFer,  during  the  cold  flage  of  fevers,  a  hid- 
den and  conhderable  detumefcence  :  but  sen- 
erally,  though  not  always,  the  tumours  return 
to  their  former  fize  during  the  (wearing  ftage. 
In  like  manner,  ulcers  are  fometirnes  dried 
up  during  the  cold  flage ;  and  return  again  to 
difcharge  matter  during  thefweating  flage,, or 
after  the  paroxyfm  is  over. 

XIX, 

Certain  changes  appear  alio  in  fenfation 
and  thought.  During  the  cold  flage,  the 
fenfibility  is  often  greatly  impaired  ;  but  when 
the  hot-  flage  is  formed,  the  fenfibility  is  re- 
covered, and  often  considerably  increafed. 

C  5  XX, 


6o  PRACTICE 

XX. 

With  refpecr.  to  the  intelle&ual  functions, 
when  the  cold  flage  comes  on,  attention  and 
recollection  become  difficult,  and  continue 
more  or  lefs  fo  during  the  whole  paroxyfm. 
Hence  fome  confufion  of  thought  takes  place, 
and  often  arifes  to  a  delirium,  which  fometimes 
iomes  on  at  the  beginning  of  the  cold  flage, 
but  more  frequently  not  till  the  hot  flage  be 
formed. 

XXI. 

It  belongs  alfo  to  this  place  to  remark  that 
the  cold  flage  fometimes  comes  on  with  a  drow- 
fmefs  and  flupor,  which  often  increafe  to  a 
degree  that  may  be  called  comatofe,  or  apo- 
plectic. 

XXII. 

We  have  flill  to  add,  that  fometimes,  early 
in  the  cold  flage,  a  headach  comes  on  •  but 
which,  more  commonly,  is  not  felt  till  the  hot 
flage  be  formed,  and  then  is  ufually  attended 
with  a  throbbing  of  the  temples.  The  head- 
ach continues  till  the  fweat  breaks  out  ;  but 
as  this  flows  more  freely,  that  gradually  goes 
off.  At  the  fame  time  v/ith  the  headach, 
there  are  commonly  pains  of  the  back,  and 
of  fome  of  the  great  joints  ;  and  thefe  pains 
have  the  fame  courfe  with  the  headach. 

XXIII. 


OF      PHYSIC.  6t 


XXIII. 

Thefe  are  nearly  the  whole,  and  are  at  leaft 
the  chief  of  the  phenomena  which  more  con- 
ftantly  appear  in  the  paroxyfm  of  an  intermit- 
tent fever  ;  and  we  have  pointed  out  their  or- 
dinary concourfe  and  fucceffion.  With  re- 
fpecl;  to  the  whole  of  them,  however,  it  is  to 
be  obferved,  that,  in  different  cafes,  the  feve- 
ral  phenomena  are  in  different  degrees  ;  that 
the  feries  of  them  is  more  or  lefs  complete  ; 
and  that  the  feveral  parts  or  ftages  in  the  time 
they  occupy,  are  in  a  different  proportion  to 
one  another. 

XXIV. 

It  is  very  feldom  that  a  fever  confifls  of  a 
fmgle  paroxyfm,  fuch  as  we  have  now  de- 
fcribed  ;  and  it  more  generally  happens,  after 
a  certain  length  of  time  has  elapfed  from  the 
ceafing  of  the  paroxyfm,  that  the  fame  feries 
of  phenomena  again  arifes,  and  obferves  the 
fame  courfe  as  before  ;  arid  thefe  ftates  of  Fe- 
ver and  Apyrexia  often  continue  to  alter- 
nate with  one  another  for  many  times.  In 
fuch  cafes,  the  length  of  time  from  the  end  of 
one  paroxyfm  to  the  beginning  of  another,  is 
called  an  Intermission;  and  the  length  of 
time  from  the  beginning  of  one  paroxyfm  to 
the  beginning  of  another  next  fucceeding,  is 
called  an  Interval. 

V  vv 


€2  PRACTICE 


XXV. 

When  the  difeafe  confifts  of  a  number  of 
paroxyfms,  it  is  generally  to  be  obferved,, 
that  the  intervals  between  them  are  nearly 
equal ;  but  thefe  intervals  are  of  different 
lengths  in  different  cafes.  The  mod  ufual 
interval  is  that  of  forty  eight  hours,  which  is 
named  the  Tertian  period.  The  next  mofl 
common  is  that  of  feventy  two  hours,  and  is 
named  the  Quartan  period.  Some  other 
intervals  alfo  are  obferved,. particularly  one  of 
twenty  four  hours,  named  therefore  the  Quo- 
tidian ;  and  the  appear  ace  of  this  is  pretty 
frequent.  But  all  other  intervals  longer  than 
that  of  the  quartan  are  extremely  rare,  and 
probably  are  only  irregularities  of  the  tertian 
or  quartan  periods. 

XXVI. 

The  paroxyfms  of  pure  intermittent  fevers 
are  always  finiihed  in  lefs  than  twenty  four 
hours  ;  and  though  it  happens  that  there  are 
fevers  which  confift  of  repeated  paroxyfms, 
without  any  entire  intermiffionbetween  them  ; 
ytt  in  fuch  cafes  it  is  obferved,  that,  though 
the  hot  and  fweating  ftages  of  the  paroxyfm 
do  not  entirely  ceafe  before  the  twenty  four 
hours  from  their  beginning  have  expired,  they 
fufFer,  however,  before  that  time,  a  confider- 
able  abatement  or  Remission  of  their  vio- 
lence ; 


OF       PHYSIC.  63 

lence  ;  and,  at  the  return  of  the  quotidian  pe- 
riod, a  paroxyfm  is  in  fome  fhape  renewed, 
which  runs  the  fame  courfe  as  before.  This 
conftitutes  what  is  called  a  Remittent 
Fever. 

XXVII. 

When  in  thefe  remittents  the  remiffion  is 
confiderable,  and  the  return  of  a  new  parox- 
yfm  is  diftinctly  marked  by  the  fymptoms  of 
a  cold  ftage  at  the  beginning  of  it  ;  fuch  fe- 
vers retain  ftricrly  the  appellation  of  Re- 
mittents. But  when  it  happens,  as  it  does 
in  certain  cafes,  that  the  remiffion  is  not  con- 
fiderable, is  perhaps  without  fweat,  and  that 
the  returning  paroxyfm  is  not  marked  by  the 
moft  ufual  fymptoms  of  a  cold  ftage,  but 
chiefly  by  the  aggravation  or  Exacerba- 
tion of  a  hot  ftage,  the  difeafe  is  called  a 
Continued  Fever. 

XXVIII. 

In  fome  cafes  of  continued  fever,  the  re- 
millions  and  exacerbations  are  fo  inconfider- 
abie  as  not  to  be  eaiily  obferved  or  diilin- 
guifhed  ;  and  this  has  led  phyficians  to  imag- 
ine, that  there  is  a  fpecies  of  fever  fubfi fling 
for  feveral  days  together,  and  feemingly  con- 
fifting  of  one  paroxyfm  only.  This  they 
have  called  a  Continent  Fever  ;  but,  in 
a  long  courfe  of  practice,  I  have  not  had  an 
opportunity  of  obferving  fuch  a  fever. 

XXIX. 


64  PRACTICE 

XXIX. 

It  is,  however,  to  be  obferved  here,  that 
the  fevers  of  a  continued  form  are  to  be  dis- 
tinguished from  one  another  ;  and  that,  while 
fome  of  a  very  continued  form  do  Hill  belong 
to  the  fecrion  of  intermittents,  there  are  oth- 
ers which,  though  ftill  confiding  of  feparate 
and  repeated  paroxyfms,  yet,  as  different  by 
their  caufes  and  circumftances  from  intermit- 
tents, are  to  be  diftinguifhed  from  the  whole 
of  thefe,  and  are  more  flrict-ly  to  be  called  and 
confidered  as  Continued.  Such  are  molt 
of  thofe  which  have  been  commonly  fuppofed 
to  be  Continent  •  and  thofe  which  by  moil 
writers  have  been  fimply  named  Continu- 
ed ;  and  which  term  I  have  employed  as  the 
title  of  a  fection,  to  be  diftinguifhed  from  that 
of  Intermittent. 

I  fhall  here  add  the  marks  by  which,  in 
practice,  thefe  different  continued  fevers  may 
be  diftinguifhed  from  one  another. 

Thofe  fevers  of  a  continued  form,  which, 
however,  ftill  belong  to  the  fection  of  Inter- 
mittents, may  be  diftinguifhed  by  their  hav- 
ing palled  from  an  intermittent  or  remittent 
form,  to  that  of  a  continued  ;  by  their  mow- 
ing fome  tendency  to  become  intermittent,  or 
at  leait.  remittent  •  by  their  being  known  to 
have  been  occaiioned  by  marfh  miafmata- ; 
and,  for  the  mod  part,  by  their  having  but 
one  paroxyfm,  or  one  exacerbation  and  re- 
rnimon,  in  the  cc-urfe  of  twenty  four  hours. 

On 


OF      PHYSIC.  65 

On  the  other  hand,  Continued  Fevers,  to 
be  more  flriftly  fo  called,  may  be  diflinguifh- 
ed  by  their  mowing  little  tendency  to  become 
intermittent  or  remittent  in  any  part  of  their 
courfe,  and  efpecially  after  the  firii  week  of  their 
continuance  ;  by  their  being  occafioned  by  hu- 
man contagion,  at  leaft  by  other  caufes  than 
the  marfh  miafmata  ;  and  by  their  having  pret- 
ty conflantly  an  exacerbation  and  remiffion 
twice  in  the  courfe  of  every  twenty  four  hours. 
In  both  cafes,  the  knowledge  of  the  nature  of 
the  epidemic  for  the  time  prevailing,  may  have 
a  great  fhare  in  determining  the  nature  of  .the 
particular  fever. 

XXX. 

With  refpeft  to  the  form,  or  Type,  of  fe- 
vers, this  further  may  be  obferved,  That  the 
quartan,  while  it  has  the  longefl  interval,  has, 
at  the  fame  time,  the  longefl  and  moil  violent 
cold  flage  ;  but,  upon  the  whole,  the  fhortefl 
paroxyfm  :  That  the  tertian,  having  a  fhorter 
interval  than  the  quartan,  has,  at  the  fame  time, 
a  fhorter  and  lefs  violent  cold  ftage  ;  but  a 
longer  paroxyfm  :  And,  laftly,  that  the  quo- 
tidian, with  the  fhortefl  interval,  has  the  leaft 
of  a  cold  flage,  but  the  longefl  paroxyfm. 

XXXI. 

The  type  of  fevers  is  fometimes  changed  in 
their  courfe.     When  this  happens,  it  is  gener- 
ally 


66  PRACTICE 

ally  in  the  following  manner  :  Both  tertians 
and  quartans  change  into  quotidians,  quotid- 
ians into  remittents,  and  thefe  laft  become  ©fc- 
en  of  the  mod  continued  kind.  In  all  thefe 
cafes,  the  fever  has  its  paroxyfms  protracted 
longer  than  ufual,  before  it  changes  into  a 
type  of  more  frequent  repetition. 

XXXII. 

From  all  this  a  prefumption  arifes,  that 
every  fever  confifls  of  repeated  paroxyfms  ; 
differing  from  others  chiefly  in  the  circum- 
flances  and  repetition  of  the  paroxyfms  ;  and, 
therefore,  that  it  was  allowable  for  us  to  take 
the  paroxyfm  of  a  pure  intermittent  as  an  ex- 
ample and  model  of  the  whole. 

CHAP.  II. 

©f  the   Proximate    Cause    of  FEVER. 

XXXIII. 

1  HE  proximate  caufe  of  fe- 
ver feems  hitherto  to  have  eluded  the  refearch 
of  phyficians  ;  and  I  fhall  not  pretend  to  as- 
certain it  in  a  manner  that  may  remove  every 
difficulty  ;  but  I  fhall  endeavour  to  make  an 
approach  towards  it,  and  fuch  as,  I  hope,  may 
be  of  ufe  in  conducing  the  practice  in  this 

difeafe  y 


OF       PHYSIC.  67 

difeafe  ;  while  at  the  fame  time  I  hope  to  a- 
void  feveral  errors  which  have  formerly  pre- 
vailed on  this  fubjecl;. 

XXXIV. 

As  the  hot  ftage  of  fever  is  fo  conftantly 
preceded  by  a  cold  ftage,  we  prefume  that 
the  latter  is  the  caufe  of  the  former  ;  and, 
therefore,  that  the  caufe  of  the  cold  ftage  is 
the  caufe  of  all  that  follows  in  the  courfe  of 
the  paroxyfm.      See  Boerh.  Aph.  756. 

XXXV. 

To  difcover  the  caufe  of  the  cold  ftage  of 
fevers,  we  may  obferve,  that  it  is  always  pre- 
ceded by  ftrong  marks  of  a  general  debility 
prevailing  in  the  fyftem.  The  fmallnefs  and 
weaknefs  of  the  pulfe,  the  palenefs  and  cold- 
nefs  of  the  extreme  parts,  with  the  ihrinking 
of  the  whole  body,  fufnciently  (how  that  the 
a&ion  of  the  heart  and  larger  arteries  is,  for 
the  time,  extremely  weakened.  Together 
with  this,  the  languor,  inactivity,  and  debility 
of  the  animal  motions,  the  imperfect  fenfa- 
tions,  the  feeling  of  cold,  while  the  body  is 
truly  warm,  and  fome  other  fymptoms,  all 
ftiow  that  the  energy  of  the  brain  is,  on  this 
occafion,  greatly  weakened  ;  and  I  prefume, 
that,  as  the  weaknefs  of  the  action  of  the  heart 
can  hardly  be  imputed  to  any  other  caufe, 
this  weaknefs  alfo  is  a  proof  of  the  diminifh- 
ed  energy  of  the  brain. 

XXXVL 


68  PRACTICE 


XXXVI. 

I  fhall  hereafter  endeavour  to  fhow,  that 
the  molt  noted  of  the  remote  caufes  of  fever, 
as  contagion,  miafmata,  cold,  and  fear,  are 
of  a  fedative  nature  ;  and  therefore  render  it 
probable  that  a  debility  is  induced.  Like- 
wife,  when  the  paroxyfms  of  a  fever  have 
ceafed  to  be  repeated,  they  may  again  be  re- 
newed, and  are  moil  commonly  renewed  by 
the  application  of  debilitating  powers.  And, 
further,  the  debility  which  fub  lifts  in  the  ani- 
mal motions  and  other  functions  through  the 
whole  of  fever,  renders  it  pretty  certain  that 
fedative  or  debilitating  powers  have  been  ap- 
plied to  the  body. 

XXXVII. 

It  is  therefore  evident,  that  there  are  three 
dates  which  always  take  place  in  fever  ;  a  ftate 
of  debility,  a  ftate  of  cold,  and  a  ftate  of  heat ; 
and  as  thefe  three  ftates  regularly  and  con- 
ftantly  fucceed  each  other  in  the  order  we 
have  mentioned  them,  it  is  prefumed  that  they 
are  in  the  feries  of  caufe  and  effecl;  with  re- 
fpe£l  to  one  another.  This  we  hold  as  a 
matter  of  facl,  even  although  we  fhould  not 
be  able  to  explain  in  what  manner  or  by  what 
mechanical  means  thefe  ftates  feverally  pro- 
duce each  other. 

XXXVIIL 


OF       PHYSIC.  69 

XXXVIII. 

How  the  ftate  of  debility  produces  fome  of 
the  fymptoms  of  the  cold  ftage,  may  perhaps 
be  readily  explained  ;  but  how  it  produces 
all  of  them,  I  cannot  explain  otherwife  than 
by  referring  the  matter  to  a  general  law  of  the 
animal  economy,  whereby  it  happens,  that 
powers  which  have  a  tendency  to  hurt  and 
deftroy  the  fyftem,  often  excite  fuch  motions 
as  are  fuited  to- obviate  the  effects  of  the  nox- 
ious power.  This  is  the  vis  medicatrix 
nature,  fo  famous  in  the  fchools  of  phyfic  ; 
and  it  feems  probable,  that  many  of  the  mo- 
tions excited  in  fever  are  the  effects  of  this 
power. 

XXXIX. 

That  the  increafed  action  of  the  heart  and 
arteries,  which  takes  place  in  the  hot  ftage  of 
fevers,  is  to  be  confidered  as  an  effort  of  the 
vis  medicatrix  naturae,  has  been  long  a  com- 
mon opinion  among  phyhcians  ;  and  I  am 
difpofed  to  affert,  that  fome  part  of  the  cold 
ftage  may  be  imputed  to  the  fame  power.  I 
judge  fo,  becaufe  the  cold  ftage  appears  to  be 
univerfally  a  means  of  producing  the  hot  ; 
becaufe  cold,  externally  applied,  has  very 
often  fimilar  effects  ;  and  more  certainly  ftill, 
becaufe  it  feems  to  be  in  proportion  to  the 
degree  of  tremor  in  the  cold  ftage,  that  the 
hot  ftage  proceeds  more  or  lefs  quickly   to  a 

termination 


70  PRACTICE 

termination  of  the  paroxyfm,  and  to  a  more 
complete  folution  and  longer  intermiflion. 
See  XXX. 

XL. 

It  is  to  be  particularly  obferved,  that,  dur- 
ing the  cold  ftage  of  fever,  there  feems  to  be  a 
fpafm  induced  every  where  on  the  extremi- 
ties of  the  arteries,  and  more  efpecially  of 
thofe  upon  the  furface  of  the  body.  This  ap- 
pears from  the  fuppreffion  of  all  excretions, 
and  from  the  fhrinking  of  the  external  parts  ; 
and  although  this  may  perhaps  be  imputed, 
in  part,  to  the  weaker  action  of  the  heart  in 
propelling  the  blood  into  the  extreme  veffels  ; 
yet,  as  thefe  fymptoms  often  continue  after 
the  action  of  the  heart  is  reftored,  there  is 
reafon  to  believe,  that  a  fpafmodic  conftric- 
tion  has  taken  place  ;  that  it  fubfifts  for  fome 
time,  and  fupports  the  hot  ftage ;  for  this  ft  age 
ceafes  with  the  flowing 'of  the  fweat,  and  the 
return  of  other  excretions,  which  are  marks 
of  the  relaxation  of  veffels  formerly  conftrict- 
ed.  Hoffman.  Med.  rat.  Syftem.  Tom.  IV. 
P.  I.  Sea.  I.  Cap.  I.  art.  4. 

XLI. 

The  idea  of  fever,  then,  may  be,  that  a 
fpafm  of  the  extreme  veffels,  however  induc- 
ed, proves  an  irritation  to  the  heart  and  ar- 
teries ;  and  that  this  continues  till  the  fpafm 
is  relaxed  or  overcome.  There  are  many' 
appearances  which  fupport  this  opinion  ;  and 

there 


OF       PHYSIC.  71 

there  is  little  doubt  that  a  fpafm  does  take 
place,  which  proves  an  irritation  to  the  heart, 
and  therefore  may  be  confidered  as  a  princi- 
pal part  m  the  proximate  caufe  of  fever.  It 
will  ftill,  however  remain  a  queftion,  what  is 
the  caufe  of  this  fpafm  ;  whether  it  be  direct- 
ly produced  by  the  remote  caufe  of  fever,  or 
if  it  be  only  a  part  of  the  operation  of  the 
vis  medicatrix  nature. 

XLII. 

I  am  difpofed  to  be  of  the  latter  opinion, 
becaufe,  in  the  firjl  place,  while  it  remains 
ftill  certain  that  a  debility  lays  the  foundation 
of  fever,  it  is  not  obvious  in  what  manner  the 
debility  produces  the  fpafm,  and,  what  feems 
to  be  its  effect.,  the  increafed  action  of  the 
heart  and  arteries  ;  and,  fecondly,  becaufe,  in 
almoft  all  the  cafes  in  which  an  effort  is  made 
by  the  vis  me die atr ix  naturae  >  a  cold  fit  and  a 
fpafm  of  the  extreme  vefTels  are  afmofl  always 
the  beginnings  of  fuch  an  effort.  See  Gaub. 
Pathol.  Medicin.  art.  750. 

XLIII. 

It  is  therefore  prefumed,  that  fuch  a  cold 
fit  and  fpafm  at  the  beginning  of  fever,  is  a 
part  of  the  operation  of  the  vis  medicatrix  ; 
but,  at  the  fame  time,  it  feems  to  me  proba- 
ble, that,  during  the  whole  courfe  of  the  fe- 
ver, there  is  an  atony  fubfifting  in  the  ex- 
treme vefTels,   and  that  the  relaxation  of  the 

fpafm 


72  PRACTICE 

fpafm  requires  the  reftoring  of  the  tone  and 
action  of  thefe. 

XLIV. 

This  it  may  be  difficult  to  explain  ;  but 
I  think  it  may  be  afcertained  as  a  fa6l,  by  the 
consideration  of  the  fymptoms  which  take 
place  with  refpedl  to  the  functions  of  the 
flomach  in  fevers,  fuch  as  the  anorexia,  nau- 
fea,  and  vomiting.   (XIV.) 

From  many  circumflances  it  is  fufficiently 
certain,  that  there  is  a  confent  between  the 
flomach  and  furface  of  the  body  ;  and  in  all 
cafes  of  the  confent  of  diflant  parts,  it  is  pre- 
fumed  to  be  by  the  connexion  of  the  nervous 
fyflem,  and  that  the  confent  which  appears  is 
between  the  fentient  and  moving  fibres  of  the 
one  part  with  thofe  of  the  other ;  is  fuch,  that 
a  certain  condition  prevailing  in  the  one  part 
occafions  a  fimilar  condition  in  the  other. 

In  the  cafe  of  the  flomach  and  furface  of 
the  body,  the  confent  particularly  appears  by 
the  connexion  which  is  obferved  between  the 
Hate  of  the  perfpiration  and  the  flate  of  the  ap- 
petite in  healthy  perfons  ;  and  if  it  may  be 
prefumed  that  the  appetite  depends  upon  the 
flate  of  tone  in  the  mufcular  fibres  of  the 
flomach,  it  will  follow,  that  the  connexion 
of  appetite  and  perfpiration  depends  upon  a 
confent  between  the  mufcular  fibres  of  the 
flomach  and  the  mufcular  fibres  of  the  extreme 
veffels,  or  of  the  organ  of  perfpiration,  on  the 

the  furface  of  the  body. 

It 


OF       PHYSIC.  73 

It  is  further  in  proof  of  the  connexion  be- 
tween the  appetite  andperfpiration,  and  at  the 
fame  time  of  the  circumftances  on  which  it 
depends,  that  cold  applied  to  the  furface  of 
the  body,  when  it  does  not  flop  perfpiration, 
but  proves  a  flimulus  to  it,  is  always  a  power- 
ful means  of  exciting  appetite. 

Having  thus  eflablimed  the  connexion  or 
confent  mentioned,  we  argue,  that  as  the 
fymptoms  of  anorexia,  naufea,  and  vomiting, 
in  many  cafes,  manifeflly  depend  upon  a  flate 
of  debility  or  lofs  of  tone  in  the  mufcular  fibres 
of  the  flomach  ;  fo  it  may  be  prefumed,  that 
thefe  fymptoms,  in  the  beginning  of  fever,  de- 
pend upon  an  atony  communicated  to  the 
mufcular  fibres  of  the  flomach  from  the  muf- 
cular fibres  of  the  extreme  veffels  on  the 
furface  of  the  body. 

That  the  debility  of  the  flomach  which 
produces  vomiting  in  the  beginning  of  fe- 
vers a&ually  depends  upon  an  atony  of  the 
extreme  veffels  on  the  furface  of  the  body, 
appears  particularly  from  a  fact,  obferved  by 
Dr.  Sydenham.  In  the  attack  of  the  plague, 
a  vomiting  happens,  which  prevents  any  med- 
icine from  remaining  on  the  flomach  ;  and 
Dr.  Sydenham  tells  us,  that  in  fuch  cafes  he 
could  not  overcome  this  vomiting  but  by  ex- 
ternal means  applied  to  produce  a  fweat  ;  that 
is,  to  excite  the  aclion  of  the  veffels  on  the 
furface  of  the  body. 

The  fame  connexion  between  the  flate  of 

the  flomach  and  that   of  the   extreme  veffels 

D  oa 


74  PRACTICE 

on  the  furface  of  the  body,  appears  from  this 
alfo,  that  the  vomiting,  which  fo  frequently 
happens  in  the  cold  flage  of  fevers,  commonly 
ceafes  upon  the  coming  on  of  the  hot,  and  very 
certainly  upon  any  fweat's  coming  out  (XIV.) 
It  is  indeed  probable,  that  the  vomiting  in 
the  cold  flage  of  fevers,  is  one  of  the  means 
employed  by  nature  for  reftoring  the  deter- 
mination to  the  furface  of  the  body  ;  and  it  is 
a  circumftance  affording  proof,  both  of  this, 
and  of  the  general  connexion  between  the 
ftomach  and  furface  of  the  body,  that  emetics 
thrown  into  the  ftomach,  and  operating  there, 
in  the  time  of  the  cold  ftage,  commonly  put 
an  end  to  it,  and  bring  on  the  hot  ftage. 

It  alfo  affords  a  proof  of  the  fame  connex- 
ion, that  cold  water  taken  into  the  ftomach 
produces  an  increafe  of  heat  on  the  furface 
of  the  body,  and  is  very  often  a  convenient 
2nd  effeclual  means  of  producing  fweat. 

From  the  whole  we  have  now  faid  on  this" 
fubjeclt,  I  think  it  is  fufhciently  probable,  that 
the  "fymptoms  of  anorexia,  naufea,  and  vomit- 
ing, depend  upon,  and  are  a  proof  of,  an  atony 
fub lifting  in  the  extreme  yeffels  on  the  furface 
of  the  body  ;  and  that  this  atony  therefore, 
now  afcertained  as  a  matter  of  fa  61,  may  be 
confidered  as  a  principal  circumftance  in  the 
proximate  caufe  of  fever. 

XLV. 

This  atony  we  fuppofe  to  depend  upon  a 
diminution  of  the  energy  of  the  brain  ;  and 

that 


OF       PHYSIC,  7r0 

that  this  diminution  takes*  place  in  fevers,  we 
conclude,  not  only  from  the  debility  prevail- 
ing in  fo  many  of  the  functions  of  the  body, 
mentioned  above  (XXXV.)  but  particularly 
from  fymptoms  which  are  peculiar  to  the  brain 
itfelf.  Delirium  is  a  frequent  iymptom  of 
fever  ;  and  as  from  the  phyliology  and  pathol- 
ogy we  learn  that  this  fymptom.  commonly 
depends  upon  fome  inequality  in  the  excite- 
ment of  the  brain  or  intellectual  organ  ;.we 
hence  conclude,  that,  in  fever,  it  denotes  fome 
diminution  in  th&  energy  of  the  brain.  De- 
lirium, indeed,  feems  often  to  depend  upon 
an  increafed  impetus  of  the  blood  in  the  vef- 
fels  of  the  brain,  and  therefore  attends  phren- 
itis.  It  frequently  appears  alfo  in  the  hot 
ftage  of  fevers,  accompanied  with  a  headach 
and  throbbing  of  the  temples.  But  as  the 
impetus  of  the  blood  in  the  veffels  of  the  head 
is  often  coniiderably  increafed  by  exercife,  ex- 
ternal heat,  paflions,  and  other  caufes,  without 
occafioning  any  delirium  ;  fo,  fuppofing  that 
the  fame  impetus,  in  the  cafe  of  fever,  produces 
delirium,  the  reafon  mud  be,  that,  at  the  fame 
time,  there  is  fome  caufe  which  diminimes  the 
energy  of  the  brain,  and  prevents  a  free  com- 
munication between  the  parts  concerned  in 
the  intellectual  functions.  Upon  the  fame 
principles  alfo,  I  fuppoTe  there  is  another  fpe- 
cies  of  delirium,  depending  more  entirely  on 
the  diminimed  energy  of  the  brain,  and  which 
may  therefore  arife  when  there  is  no  unufual 
increafe  of  the  impetus  of  the  blood  in  the 
D  2  veffels 


76  P   Pv   A   C    T   I    C   E 

veflels  of  the  brain.  Such  feems  to  be  the  de- 
lirium occurring  at  the  beginning  of  the  cold 
ge  of  fevers,  or  in  the  hot  ftage  of  fuch  fe- 
vers as  fhow  llrong  marks  of  debility  in  the 
whole  fyflem. 

XLVI. 

Upon  the  whole,  our  doctrine  of  fever  is 
explicitly  this.  The  remote  caufes  (XXXVI.) 
are  certain  fedative  powers  applied  to  the 
nervous  fyflem,  which  diminifhing  the  energy 
of  the  brain,  thereby  produce  a  debility  in 
the  whole  of  the  functions  (XXXV.)  and  par- 
ticularly in  the  action  of  the  extreme  veifels 
(XLIII.)  (XLIV.)  Such,  however,  is,  at 
the  fame  time,  the  nature  of  the  animal  econ- 
omy (XXXVIII.)  that  this  debility  proves  an 
indirect  ftimulus  to  the  fanguiferous  fyflem  ; 
whence,  by  the  intervention  of  the  cold  flage, 
andfpafm  connected  with  it  (XXXIX.  XL.) 
the  action  of  the  heart  and  larger  arteries  is  in- 
creafed  (XL.)  and  continues  fo  (XLI.)  till  it 
has  had  the  effect  of  reftoring  the  energy  of 
the  brain,  of  extending  this  energy  to  the  ex- 
treme veifels,  of  reftoring  therefore  their  action, 
and  thereby  especially  overcoming  th^  fpafm 
affecting  them  ;  upon  the  removing  of  which, 
the  exertion  of  fweat,  and  other  marks  of  the 
relaxation  of  excretories,  take  place. 

XLVI  I. 

This  doctrine  will,  as   I  fuppofe,  ferve  to 
explain  not  only  the  nature  of  fever  in  gen- 
eral. 


OF        PHYSIC.  jj 

eral,  but  alio  the  various  cafes  of  it  which  oc- 
cur.    Before  proceeding,  however,  to  this,   \% 
may  be  proper  to  point  out  the  opinions, 
as   I    apprehend,    the    miflakes,    which   have 
formerly  prevailed  on  this  fubject.. 

XLVIIL 

It  has  been  fuppofed  that  a  lentor  or  vifcid- 
ity  prevailing  in  the  mafs  of  blood,  and  ftag- 
natinsr  in  the  extreme  veflels.  is  the  caufe-  of 
the  cold  ftage  of  fevers  and  its  confequences. 
But  there  is  no  evidence  of  any  fuch  viicidity 
previoufly  fubfifting  in  the  fluids  ;  and  as  it 
is  very  improbable  that  fuch  a  ftate  of  them 
can  be  very  quickly  produced,  fo  the  fudden- 
nefs  with  which  paroxyfms  come  on,  renders 
it  more  likely  that  the  phenomena  depend  up- 
on fome  caufe  acting  upon  the  nervous  fyflem, 
or  the  primary  moving  powers  of  the  animal 
economy.  See  Van  Swieten  apud  Boerh. 
Aph.  755. 

XLIX. 

Another  opinion,  which  has  been  almofl 
univerfally  received,  is,  that  a  noxious  mat- 
ter introduced  into  or  generated  in  the  body, 
is  the  proximate  caufe  of  fever ;  and  that  the 
increafed  action  of  the  heart  and  arteries, 
which  forms  fo  great  a  part  of  the  difeafe,  is  an 
effort  of  the  vismedicatrix  natures  to  expel  this 
morbific  matter;  and  particularly  to  change 
D  3  or 


78  PRACTICE 

or  concoct  it,  fo  as  to  render  it  either  alto- 
gether innocent,  or,  at  leaft,  fit  for  being  more 
eafily  thrown  out  of  the  body.  This  doc- 
trine, however,  although  of  as  great  antiquity 
as  any  of  the  records  of  phyfic  now  remain- 
ing, and  although  it  has  been  received  by  al- 
moft  every  fchool  of  medicine,  yet  appears  to 
me  to  reft  upon  a  very  uncertain  foundation. 
There  are  fevers  produced  by  cold,  fear,  and 
other  caufes,  accompanied  with  all  the  effen- 
tial  circumftances  of  fever,  and  terminating 
by  fweat  ;  but,  at  the  fame  time,  without  any 
evidence  or  fufpicion  of  morbific  matter. 

There  have  been  fevers  fuddenly  cured  by 
a  hemorrhagy,  fo  moderate  as  could  not  car- 
ry out  any  confiderable  portion  of  a  matter 
diffufed  over  the  whole  mafs  of  blood  ;  nor 
can  we  conceive  how  the  morbific  matter 
could  be  collected  or  determined  to  pafs  off 
by  fuch  an  outlet  as  in  that  cafe  is  opened. 

Even  fuppofing  a  morbific-  matter  were 
prefent,  there  is  no  explanation  given  in  what 
manner  the  concoction  of  it  is  performed  ; 
nor  is  it  ihown  that  any  fuch  change  does  in 
fact,  take  place.  In  certain  cafes,  it  is  indeed 
evident,  that  a  noxious  matter  is  introduced 
into  the  body,  and  proves  the  caufe  of  fever  ; 
but,  even  in  thefe  cafes,  it  appears  that  the 
nOxious  matter  is  thrown  out  again,  without 
having  fuffered  any  change  ;  that  the  fever 
often  terminates  before  the  matter  is  expelled ; 
and  that,  upon  many  occafions,  without  wait- 
ing the  fuppofed  time  of  concoction,  the  fe- 
ver 


OF       PHYSIC.  79 

ver  can  be  cured,  and  that  by  remedies  which 
do  not  feem  to  operate  upon  the  fluids,  or  to 
produce  any  evacuation. 


While  we  thus  reafon  againft  the  notion  of 
fever  being  an  effort  of  nature,  for  concoct- 
ing and  expelling  a- morbific  matter  ;  I  by  no 
means  intend  to  deny  that  the  caufe  of  fever 
frequently  operates  upon  the  fluids,  and  par- 
ticularly produces  a  putrefcent  Rate  of  them. 
I  acknowledge  that  this  is  frequently  the  cafe  ; 
but,  at  the  fame  time,  I  maintain,  that  fuch 
a  change  of  the  fluids  is  not  commonly  the 
caufe  of  fever  ;  that  very  often  it  is  an  efrecl: 
only  ;  and  that  there  is  no  reafon  to  believe 
the  termination  of  the  fever  to  depend  upon 
the  expulfion  of  the  putrid  matter. 

LI. 

Another  opinion  which  has  prevailed,  re- 
mains ftill  to  be  mentioned.  In  intermittent 
fevers,  a  great  quantity  of  bile  is  commonly 
thrown  out  by  vomiting;  and  this  is  fo  fre- 
quently the  cafe,  that  many  have  fuppofed  an 
unufua]  quantity  of  bile,  and  perhaps  a  pecu- 
liar quality  of  it,  to  be  the  caufe  of  intermit- 
tZat fevers.  This,  however,  does  not  appear 
to  be  well  founded.  Vomiting,  by  whatever 
means  excited,  if  often  repeated  with  violent 
{training,  feems  to  be  powerful  in  enralging 
D  4  the 


8o  PRACTICE 

die  biliary  duels,  and  commonly  throws  out 
a  great  deal  of  bile.  This  will  happen  espe- 
cially in  the  cafe  of  intermittent  fevers.  For 
as,  in  the  flate  of  debility  and  cold  flage  of 
thefe  fevers,  the  blood  is  not  propelled  in  the 
ufual  quantity  into  the  extreme  veffels,  and 
particularly  into  thofe  on  the  furface  of  the 
body,  but  is  accumulated  in  the  veffels  of  the 
internal  parts,  and  particularly  in  the  vena 
portarum  ;  fo  this  may  occafion  a  more  copi- 
ous fecretion  of  bile. 

Thefe  considerations  will,  in  fome  meafure, 
account  for   the    appearance   of  an   unufual 
quantity  of  bile  in   intermittent  fevers  ;  but 
the  circumflance   which  chiefly  occafions  the 
appearance  of  bile  in  thefe  cafes,  is  the  influ- 
ence of  warm   climates  and  feafons.      Thefe 
feldom  fail  to  produce   a  flate  of  the  human 
body,  in  which  the  bile  is  difpofed  to  pafs  off, 
by  its   fecretories,   in   greater  quantity  than 
ufual ;  and  perhaps  alfo  changed  in  its  quality, 
as  appears  from  the  difeafe  of  cholera,  which 
fo  frequently  occurs  in  warm  feafons.      At  the 
fame  time,  this   difeafe   occurs   often  without 
fever  ;  and  we  fhali  hereafter  render  it  Suf- 
ficiently probable,   that    intermittent   fevers, 
for  the  molt  part,  '2fife  from  another  caufe, 
■that   is,  from  marfh  effluvia ;  wni!e>  on  l^e 
other    hand,   there   is    no   evidence   of  their 
arihng  from  the  flate  of  the   bile  only.     *?&§, 
marfh  effluvia,  however,    commonly  operate 
mofl   powerfully    in    the    fame    feafon    that 
produces  the  change  and  redundance  of  the 

bile  ; 


OF     PHYSIC.  o; 

bile  ;  and  therefore,  confidering  the  vomit- 
ing, and  other  circumilances  of  the  intermit- 
tent fevers  which  here  concur,  it  is  not  iur- 
prifing  that  autumnal  intermittents  are  fo  oft- 
en attended  with  eflruiions  of  bile. 

This  view  of  the  fubjecl  does  not  lead  us 
to  confider  the  ftate  of  the  bile  as  the  caufe 
of  intermittents,  but  merely  as  a  circumflance 
accidentally  concurring  with  diem,  from  the 
Hate  of  the  feafon.in  which  they  arife.  What 
attention  this  requires  in  the  conduct  of  the 
difeafe,  I  fhall  confider  hereafter, 

LIL. 

From  this  view  of  the  principal  hypothefes 
which  have  hitherto  been  maintained  with 
refpecl;  to  the  proximate  caufe  of  fever,  it 
will  appear,  that  fevers  do  not  arife  from 
changes  in  the  ftate  of  the  fluids  ;  but  that, 
on  the  contrary,  aimoft  the  whole  of  the  phe- 
nomena of  fevers  lead  us  to  believe  that  they 
chiefly  depend  upon  changes  in  the  ftate  of 
the  moving  powers  of  the  animal  fyilern, 
Though  we  mould  not  be  able  to  explain  all 
the  circumftances  of  the  difeafe,  it  is  at  leafl* 
of  fome  advantage  to  be  led  into  the  proper 
train  of  inveftigation.  I  have  attempted  to 
purfue  it  ;  and  fhall  now  endeavour  to  apply 
the  doctrine  already  delivered,  towards  ex- 
plaining the  diversity  of  fevers, 

CHAP.". 
D  5' 


82  PRACTICE 


CHAP.       III. 

of    the     DIFFERENCE    of    FEVERS, 
AND  ITS   CAUSES. 

LIII. 

1  O  afcertain  the  difference  of 
fevers,  I  think  it  neceffary  to  obferve,  in  the 
firft  place,  that  every  fever  of  more  than  one 
clay's  duration  confifts  of  repeated,  andin  fome 
meafure  feparate,  paroxyfms  ;  and  that  the 
difference  of  fevers  taken  notice  of  above 
(from  XXV.  to  XXX.)  appears  to  confift  in 
the  different  fiate  of  paroxyfms,  and  in  the 
different  circumftances  of  their  repetition. 

LIV. 

That  fevers  generally  coniift  of  diflincl:, 
and  in  fome  meafure  feparately  repeated,  par- 
oxyfms, I  have  alleged  above  to  be  a  mat- 
ter of  fact  ;  but  I  mall  here  endeavour  to 
confirm  it,  by  afligning  the  caufe. 

LV. 

In  every  fever,  in  which  we  can  diflinctly 
obferve  any  number  of  feparate  parox- 
yfms, we  conftantly  find  that  each  parox- 
yfm  is  finifhed  in  lefs  than  twenty  four  hours ; 
but   as    I    cannot    perceive     any    thing    in 

the 


OF     PHYSIC.  83 

the  caufe  of  fevers  determining  to  this,  I 
mult  prefume  it  to  depend  on  fome  general 
law  of  the  animal  economy.  Such  a  law 
feems  to  be  that  which  fubject.s  the  economy, 
in  many  refpecls,  to  a  diurnal  revolution. 
Whether  this  depends  upon  the  original  con- 
formation of  the~  body^or  upon  certain  pow- 
ers conftantly  applied  to  it,  and  inducing  a 
habit,  I  cannot  pohtively  determine  ;  but  the 
returns  of  fleep  and  watching,  of  appetites 
and  excretions,  and  the  changes  which  regu- 
larly occur  in  the  flate  of  the  pulfey  fhow  fuf— 
ficiently,  that  in  the  human  body  a  diurnal 
revolution  takes  place. 

LVI. 

It  is  this  diurnal  revolution  which,  I  fup- 
pofe,  determines  the  duration  of  the  parox- 
yfms of  fevers;  and  the  conftant  and  uni- 
verfal  limitation  of  thefe  paroxyfms  (as  oh- 
ferved  in  LV.)  while  no  other  caufe  of  it  can 
be  affigned,  renders  it  fufficiently  probable: 
that  their  duration  depends  upon,  and  is  de- 
termined by,  the  revolution  mentioned.  Anct 
that  thefe  paroxyfms  are  connected :  with  that 
diurnal  revolution,  appears  further  from  this,, 
that  though  the  intervals  of  paroxyfms  are  dif- 
ferent in  different  cafes,  yet  the  times  of  the  ac- 
ceSion  of  paroxyfms  are  generally  fixed  to  one 
time  of  the  day  ;  fo  that  Quotidians  come  on 
in  the  morning,  Tertians  at  noon,  and  Quar- 
tans in  the  afternoon. 

D  6  LVIL 


84  PRACTICE 


LVIL 

It  remains  to  be  remarked,  that  as  Quar-, 
tans  and  Tertians  are  apt  to  become  Q  J- 
tidians,  thefe  to  pafs  into  the  flate  of  Remit- 
tents, and  thefe  laft  to  hecon^  Continued  ; 
and  that,  even  in  the  Continued  form,  daily 
exacerbations  and  romiffions  are  generally  to 
be  obferved  ;  fc  ail  this  ihows  fo  much  the 
power  of  diurnal  revolution,  that  when,  in 
certain  cafes,  the  daily  exacerbations  and  re- 
miffions  are  with  difficulty  diftinguifhed,  we 
may  ftill  prefume,  that  the  general  tendency 
of  the  economy  prevails,  that  the  difeafe  ftill 
confifts  of  repeated  paroxyfms,  and,  upon  the 
whole,  that  there  is  no -fuch  difeafe  as  that 
which  the  fchools  have  called  a  Continent  Fe- 
ver. I  expecl  that  this  doclrine  will  be  con- 
firmed by  what  I  mall  fay  hereafter  concern- 
ing the  periodical  movements  obferved  in 
continued  fevers. 

LVIIL 

It  being  thus  proved,  that  every  fever,  of 
more  than  one  day's  duration,  confifts  of  re- 
peated paroxyfms  ;  we  in  the  next  place,  re- 
mark, that  the  repetition  of  paroxyfms  de- 
pends upon  the  circumftances  of  the  parox- 
yfms which  have  already  taken  place.  From 
what  was  obferved  in  XXX.  and  XXXI.  it 
appears,  that  the  longer  paroxyfms  are  pro- 
traded, 


OF       PHYSIC.  85 

h-a£led,  they  are  the  fooner  repeated  ;  and, 
therefore,  that  the  caufe  of  the  frequent  rep- 
etition is  to  be  fought  for  in  the  caufe  of  the 
protraction  of  paroxyfms. 

LIX. 

Agreeably  to  what  is  laid  down  in  XL VI. 
and  to  the  opinion  of  moll  part  of  phyli- 
cians,  I  fuppofe,  that,  in  every  fever,  there  is  a 
power  applied  to  the  body,  which  has  a  tenden- 
cy to  hurt  and  deftroy  it,  and  produces  in  it 
certain  motions  which  deviate  from  the  natural 
ftate ;  and,  at  the  fame  time,  in  every  fever 
which  has  its  full  courfe,  I  fuppofe,  that,  in 
confequence  of  the  conftitution  of  the  animal 
economy,  there  are  certain  motions  excited, 
which  have  a  tendency  to  obviate  the  effects  of 
the  noxious  power,  or  to  correct  and  remove 
them.  Both  thefe  kinds  of  motion  are  con- 
fidered  as  constituting  the  difeafe. 

But  the  former  is  perhaps  flri£tly  the  mor- 
bid flate,  while  the  latter  is  to  be  confidered 
as  the  operation  of  the  vis  medicatrix  natura 
of  falutary  tendency,  and  which  I  mall  here- 
after'call  the  REACTiONof  the  fyilem. 

LX. 

Upon  the  fuppofition  that   thefe  two  dates 
take    place   in  every  paroxyfm    of   fever,    it 
will  appear  to  be  chiefly  in   the  time  of  the 
hot  flage  that  the  reaction  operates  in  remov- 
ing 


86  PRACTICE^ 

ing  the  morbid  ftate ;  and  therefore,  as  this 
operation  fucceeds  more  or  lefs  quickly,  the 
hot  ftage  of  paroxyfms  will  be  fhorter  or 
longer.  But  as  the  length  of  paroxyfm  depends 
chiefly  upon  the  duration  of  the  hot  ftage,  fo 
the  longer  duration  of  this  and  of  paroxyfms, 
muft  be  owing  either  to  the  obftinacy  of  re- 
fiftance  in  the  morbid  ftate,  or  to  the  weak- 
nefs  of  the  falutary  reaction  ;  and  it  is  prob- 
able that  fometimes  the  one  and  fometimes 
the  other  of  thefe  circumftances  takes  place. 

LXI. 

It  feems  to  be  only  by  the  ftate  of  the 
fpafm,  that  we  can  judge  of  the  refiftance  of 
the  morbid  ftate  of  fever  :  And  with  refpecl; 
to  this  fpafm  I  obferve,  that  either  the  caufe 
exciting  it  may  be  different  in  different  caf- 
es ;  or,  though  the  caufe  mould  be  the  fame  in. 
different  perfons,  the  different  degree  of 
irritability  in  each  may  give  occafion  to  a 
greater  or  leffer  degree  of  fpafm  ;  and  there- 
fore, the  reaction  in  fever  being  given,  the  con- 
tinuance  of  the  hot  ftage,  and  of  the  whole 
paroxyfm,  may  be  longer  or  fhorter,  according 
to  the  degree  of  fpafm  that  has  been  formed. 

LXIL 

One  caufe  of  the  obftinacy  of  fpafm  in  fe- 
vers may  be  clearly  perceixTed.  In  inflam- 
matory difeafes,  there"  is  a  diathefis  phlogiftica 

prevailing 


OF      PHYSIC.  87 

prevailing  in  the  body,  and  this  diathefis  we 
iuppofe  to  confifl  in  an  increafed  tone  of  the 
whole  arterial  fyftem.  When,  therefore, 
this  diathefis  accompanies  fever,  as  it  fome- 
times  does,  it  may  be  fuppofed  to  give  oc- 
cafion  to  the  febrile  fpafm's  being  formed 
more  ftrongly,  and  thereby  to  produce  more 
protracted  paroxyfms.  Accordingly  we  find, 
that  all  inflammatory  fevers  are  of  the  con- 
tinued kind  ;  and  that  all  the  caufes  of  the 
diathefis  phlogiflica  have  a  tendency  to  change 
intermittent  into  continued  fevers.  Contin- 
ued fevers,  then,  being  often  attended  with 
the  diathefis  phlogiflica,  we  conclude,  that  in 
many  cafes,  this  is  the  caufe  of  their  continued 
form. 

LXIII. 

In  many  fevers,  however,  there  is  no  evi- 
dence of  any  diathefis  phlogiflica  being  pre- 
fent,  nor  of  any  other  caufe  of  more  confider- 
able  fpafm  ;  and,  in  fuch  cafes,  therefore,  we 
mufti  mpute  the  protraction  of  paroxyfms, 
and  the  continued  form  of  the  fever,  to  the 
weaknefs  of  reaction.  That  this  caufe  takes 
place,  we  conclude  from  hence,  that,  in  many 
cafes  of  fever,  wherein  the  feparate  paroxyfms 
are  the  longefl  protracted,  and  the  mofl  diffi- 
cultly obferved,  we  find  the  mofl  confiderable 
fymptoms  of  aN  general  debility  :  And  there- 
fore we  infer,  that,  in  fuch  cafes,  the  protract- 
ed paroxyfms,  and  continued  form,  depend 
upon  a  weaker  reaction  ;  owing  either  to  the 

caufes 


88  PRACTICE 

caufes  of  debility  applied  having  been  of  a  more 
powerful  kind,  or  from  circumilances  of  the 
patient's  conftitution  favouring  their  opera- 
tion. 

LXIV. 

Upon  thefe  principles  we  make  a  flep  to- 
wards explaining  in  general,  with  fome  prob- 
ability, the  difference  of  fevers  ;  but  muff 
own,  that  there  is  much  doubt  and  difficulty 
in  applying  the  doctrine  to  particular  cafes. 
It  applies  tolerably  well  to  explain  the  different 
Hates  of  intermittents,  as  they  are  more  pure- 
ly fuch,  or  as  they  approach  more  and  more 
to  the  continued  form  :  But  feveral  difficul- 
ties ftill  remain  with  refpe6t  to  many  circum- 
ilances of  intermittents  ;  and  more  Hill  with 
refpecl:  to  the  difference  of  thofe  continued 
fevers,  which  we  have  diftinguilhed  in  our 
Nofology  as  different  from  intermittents,  and 
as,  more  efpecially  intitled  to  the  appellation 
of  Continued,  (fee  Syn.  Nof.  Meth.  P.  V. 
Ch.  L  Seel:.  II.)  and  explained  more  fully 
above. 

LXV. 

From  the  view  given  (LXIII.  and  LXIV.) 
of  the  caufes  of  the  protraction  of  paroxyfrns, 
and  therefore  of  the  form  of  Continued  fevers, 
ftriclly  fo  called,  it  feems  probable,  that  the 
remote  caufes  of  thefe  operate  by  occasioning 

either 


OF       PHYSIC.  89 

either  a  phlogiflic  diathefis,  or  a  weaker  re- 
action ;  for  we  can  obferve,  that  the  moil  obvi- 
ous difference  of  continued  fevers  depends  up- 
on the  prevalence  of  one  or  other  of  thefe  ftates. 

LXVL 

Continued  fevers  have  been  accounted  of 
great  diverhty  ;  but  phyficians  have  not  been 
iuccefsful  in  marking  thefe  differences,  or  in 
reducing  them  to  any  general  heads.  The 
diftinclions  made  by  the  ancients  are  not  well 
underflood  ;  and,  fo  far  as  either  they  or  the 
modern  nofologifts  have  diftinguifhed  contin- 
ued fevers  by  a  difference  of  duration,  their 
diftinclions  are  not  well  founded,  and  do  not 
apply  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  be  of  any  ufe. 
We  think  it  agreeable  to  obfervation,  and  to 
the  principles  above  laid  down  (LXIII. 
LXIV.)  to  diftinguifh  continued  fevers  ac- 
cording as  they  fhow  either  an  inflammatory 
irritation,  or  a  weaker  reaction. 

LXVII. 

This  dift.in6t.ion  is  the  fame  with  that  of 
fevers  into  the  Inflammatory  and  Ner- 
vous; the  diftincrion  at  prefenfc  mofl  gen- 
erally received  in  Britain.  To  the  firft,  as  a 
genus,  I  have  given  the  name  of  Synocha  ; 
to  the  fecond,  that  of  Typhus  ;  and,  little  ftu- 
dious  whether  thefe  names  be  authorifed  by  the 
ancient  ufe  of  the  fame  terms,  I  depend  upon 

their 


9o  PRACTICE 

their  being  underftood  by  the  characters  aiW 
nexed  to  them  in  our  Nofology,  which  I  ap-- 
prehend  to  be  founded  on  obfervation. 

LXVIII. 

By  thefe  characters  I  think  continued  fe- 
vers may  in  practice  be  diftinguifhed  ;  and  if 
that  be  the  cafe,  the  principles  above  laid 
down  will  be  confirmed. 

LXIX. 


Befide  thefe  differences  of  continued  fever,. 
now  mentioned,  I  am  not  certain  of  having 
obferved  any  other  that  can  be  confidered  as 
fundamental.  But  the  moll  common  form 
of  continued  fevers,  in  this  climate,  feems  to 
be  a  combination  of  thefe  two  genera  ;  and- 
I  have  therefore  given  fuch  a  genus  a  place 
in  our  Nofology,  under  the  title  of  Synochus. 
At  the  fame  time,  I  think  that  the  limits  be- 
tween the  Synochus  and  Typhus  will  be  with 
difficulty  affigned ;  and  I  am  difpofed  to  be- 
lieve, that  the  Synochus  arifes  from  the  fame 
caufes  as  the  Typhus,  and  is  therefore  only  a 
variety  of  it. 

LXX. 

The  Typhus  feems  to  be  a  genus  compre- 
hending feveral  fpecies.  Thefe,  however,  are 
not  yet  well  afcertained  by  obfervation  ;  and 


OF       P'HYSI  C.  91 

in  the  mean  time  we  can  perceive  that  many 
of  the  different  cafes  obferved  do  not  imply  any 
fpecific  difference,  but  feem  to  be  merely  va- 
rieties, arifing  from  a  different  degree  of  power 
in  the  caufe,  from  different  circumflances  of 
the  climate  or  feafon  in  which  they  happen, 
or  from  different  circumflances  in  the  confli- 
tution  of  the  perfons  affected. 

LXXI. 

Some  of  the  effects  arifing  from  thefe  cir- 
cumflances require  to  be  particularly  explain- 
ed. 

One  is,  an  unufual  quantity  of  bile  appear- 
ing in  the  courfe  of  the  difeafe.  This  abun- 
dance of  bile  may  poffibly  attend  fome  con- 
tinued fevers,  ftri6t.ly  fo  called  ;  but,  for  the 
reafons  above  explained,  it  more  commonly 
attends  intermittents,  and,  we  believe,  it  might 
have  been  enumerated  (XXIX.)  among  the 
marks  diflinguifhing  the  latter  kind  of  fevers 
from  the  former.  But,  though  an  unufual 
quantity  of  bile  mould  appear  with  continued 
fevers,  it  is  confidered  in  this  cafe,  as  in  that 
of  intermittents,  to  be  a  coincidence  only,  ow- 
ing to  the  flate  of  the  feafon,  and  producing 
no  different  fpecies  or  fundamental  diflinc- 
tion,  but  merely  a  variety  of  the  difeafe.  I 
think  it  proper  to  obferve  here,  that  it  is 
probable  that  the  molt  part  of  the  continued 
fevers  named  Bilious  have  been  truly  fuch  as 
belong  to  the  fe&ion  of  Intermittents. 

LXXIL 


92  PRACTICE 

LXXII. 

Another  effe£l  of  the  circumftances  occa- 
fionally  varying  the  appearance  of  typhus,  is 
a  putrefcent  flate  of  the  fluids.  The  an- 
cients, and  like  wife  the  moderns,  who  are  in 
general  much  difpofed  to  follow  the  former, 
have  diftinguifhed  fevers,  as  putrid  and  non- 
putrid  :  But  the  notions  of  the  ancients,  on 
this  fubjeQ,  were  not  fufficientiy  correct,  to 
deferve  much  notice  •  and  it  is  only  of  late  that 
the  matter  has  been  more  accurately  obferv- 
ed,  and  better  explained. 

From  the  diffolved  ftate  of  the  blood,  as  it 
prefents  itfelf  when  drawn  out  of  the  veins, 
or  as  it  appears  from  the  red  blood's  being 
difpofed  to  be  effufed  and  run  off  by  various 
outlets,  and  from  feveral  other  fymptoms  to 
be  hereafter  mentioned,  I  have  now  no  doubt, 
how  much  foever  it  has  been  difputed  by 
fome  ingenious  men,  that  a  putrefcency  of  the 
fluids  to  a  certain  degree  does  really  take  place 
in  many  cafes  of  fever.  This  putrefcency,. 
however,  often  attends  intermittent,  as  well  as 
continued  fevers,  and,  of  the  continued  kind, 
both  the  fynochus  and  typhus,  and  all  of  them 
in  very  different  degrees  ;  fo  that,  whatever  at- 
tention it  may  deferve  in  practice,  there  is  no 
fixing  fuch  limits  to  it  as  to  admit  of  eftablifh- 
ing  a  fpecies  under  the  title  of  Putrid, 

LXXIII. 

Befide  differing  by  the  circumftances  al- 
ready mentioned^  fevers  differ  alfo  by  their 

being 


OF      PHYSIC.  93 

being  accompanied  with  fymptoms  which  be- 
long to  difeafes  of  the  other  orders  of  pyrex- 
iae. This  fometimes  happens  in  fuch  a  man- 
ner, as  to  render  it  difficult  to  determine  which 
of  the  two  is  the  primary  difeafe.  Common- 
ly, however,  it  may  be  afcertained  by  the 
knowledge  of  the  remote  caufe,  and  of  the 
prevailing  epidemic,  or  by  obferving  the  fe- 
ries  and  fucceffion  of  fymptoms. 

LXXIV. 

Moft  of  our  fyftems  of  phy  fie  have  marked, 
as  a  primary  one,  a  fpecies  of  fever  under  the 
title  of  Hectic  ;  but,  as  it  is  described,  I 
have  never  feen  it  as  a  primary  difeafe.  I 
have  conilantly  found  it  as  a  fymptom  of  fom£ 
topical  affection,  moil  commonly  of  an  inter- 
nal fuppuration  ;  and  as  fuch  it  fhall  be  con- 
fidered  in  another  place. 

LXXV. 

The  diftinction  of  thefeveral  cafes  of  inter- 
mittent fever  I  have  not  profecuted  here  ; 
both  becaufe  we  cannot  aflign  the  caufes  of 
the  differences  which  appear  ;  and  becaufe  I 
apprehend  that  the  differences  which  in  facr. 
occur  may  be  readily  underilood  from  what  is 
faid  above  (XXV.  XXVI.  and  XXVII.) 
and  more  fully  from  our  Methodical  Nofolo- 
gy/ CI.  I.  SeQ.  I. 

CHAP. 


94  PRACTICE 

CHAP.       IV. 

of  the  REMOTE  CAUSES  of  FEVER. 

LXXVI. 

AS  fever  has  been  held  to 
eonfifl  chiefly  in  an  increafed  action  of  the 
heart  and  arteries,  phyhcians  have  fup- 
pofed  its  remote  caufes  to  be  certain  direcl: 
ftimulants  fitted  to  produce  this  increafed  ac- 
tion. In  many  cafes,  however,  there  is  no 
evidence  of  fuch  flimulants  being  applied  ; 
and,  in  thofe  in  which  they  are  applied,  they 
either  produce  only  a  temporary  frequency 
of  the  pulfe,  which  cannot  be  confidered 
as  a  difeafe  ;  or,  if  they  do  produce  a 
permanent  febrile  ftate,  it  is  by  the  inter- 
vention of  a  topical  inflammation,  which  pro- 
duces a  difeafe  different  from  what  is  flriclly 
called  fever.     (VIII.) 

LXXVII. 

That  direcl:  flimulants  are  the  remote  cauf- 
es of  fever,  feems  farther  improbable  ;  be-^ 
caufe  the  fuppofition  does  not  account  for 
the  phenomena  attending  the  acceflion  of  fe- 
vers, and  becaufe  other  remote  caufes  can  with 
greater  certainty  be  afTigned. 

LXXVIII. 


OF    -PHYSIC.  95 


LXXVIII. 

As  fevers  are  fo  generally  epidemic,  it  is 
probable,  that  fome  matter  floating  in  the  at- 
mofphere,  and  applied  to  the  bodies  of  men, 
ought  to  be  conhdered  as  the  remote  caufe  of 
fevers :  And  thefe  matters  prefent  in  the  at- 
mofphere,  and  thus  acting  upon  men,  may  be 
considered,  either  as  Contagions,  that  is, 
effluvia  ariling  directly  or  originally  from  the 
body  of  a  man  under  a  particular  difeafe,  and 
exciting  the  fame  kind  of  difeafe  in  the  body 
of  the  perfon  to  whom  they  are  applied  ;  or 
Miasmata,  that  is  effluvia  arifmg  from  oth- 
er fubflances  than  the  bodies  of  men,  pro- 
ducing a  difeafe  in  the  perfon  to  whom  they 
are  applied. 

LXXIX. 

Contagions  have  been  fuppofed  to  be  of 
great  variety  ;  and  it  is  poffible  this  may  be 
the  cafe  ;  but  that  they  truly  are  fo,  does  not 
appear  clearly  from  any  thing  we  know  at 
prefent.  The  genera  and  fpecies  of  contagi- 
ous difeafes,  of  the  clafs  of  Pyrexiae,  at  pref- 
ent known,  are  in  number  not  very  great. 
They  chiefly  belong  to  the  order  of  Fevers,  to 
that  of  Exanthemata,  or  that  of  ProHuvia. 
Whether  there  l>e  any  belonging  to  the  order 
of  Phlegmahse,  is  doubtful ;  and  though  there 
fhouid,  it  will  not  much  increafe  the  number 

of 


96  PRACTICE 


of  contagious  pyrexiae.  Of  the  contagious 
exanthemata  and  profluvia,  the  number  of 
fpecies  is  nearly  afcertained  ;  and  each  of 
them  is  fo  far  of  a  determined  nature,  that 
though  they  have  now  been  obferved  and  dif- 
tinguifhed  for  many  ages,  and  in  many  differ- 
ent parts  of  the  world,  they  have  been  always 
found  to  retain  the  fame  general  character, 
and  to  differ  only  in  circumflances,  that  may 
be  imputed  to  feafon,  climate,  and  other  ex- 
ternal caufes,  or  to  the  peculiar  conflitutions 
of  the  feveral  perfons  affected.  It  feems, 
therefore,  probable,  that,  in  each  of  thefe  fpe- 
cies, the  contagion  is  of  one  fpecific  nature ; 
and  that  the  number  of  contagious  exanthe- 
mata or  profluvia  is  hardly  greater  than  the 
number  of  fpecies  enumerated  in  the  fyftems 
of  nofology. 

LXXX. 

If,  while  the  contagious  exanthemata  and 
profluvia  are  thus  limited,  we  mould  fuppofe 
the  contagious  pyrexiae  to  be  ftill  of  great 
and  unlimited  variety,  it  mull  be  with  re- 
fpecl;  to  the  genera  and  fpecies  of  continued 
fevers.  But  if  I  be  right  in  limiting,  as  I  have 
done,  the  genera  of  thefe  fevers  (LXVII. — 
LXX.)  it  will  appear  likely  that  the  conta- 
gions which  produce  them  are  not  of  great  va- 
riety ;  and  this  will  be  much  confirmed,  if  we 
can  render  it  probable  that  there  is  one  prin- 
cipal, perhaps  one  common,  fource  of  fuch 
contagion. 

LXXXI. 


OF       PHYSIC,  97 

LXXXI. 

To  this  purpofe,  it  is  now  well  known,  that 
the  effluvia  conftantly  arifing  from  the  living 
human  body,  if  long  retained  in  the  fame 
place,  without  being  diffufed  in  the  atmof- 
phere,  acquire  a  lingular  virulence  ;  and,  in 
that  ftate,  being  applied  to  the  bodies  of  men, 
become  the  caufe  of  a  fever  which  is  highly 
contagious. 

The  exiftence  of  fuch  a  caufe  is  fully  prov- 
ed by  the  late  obfervations  on  jail  and  hof- 
pital  fevers  ;  and  that  the  fame  virulent  mat- 
ter may  be  produced  in  many  other  places, 
mult  be  fufficiently  obvious  :  And  it  is  prob- 
able that  the  contagion  arifing  in  this  manner 
is  not,  like  many  other  contagions,  perma- 
nent and  conftantly  exifting  ;  but  that,  in  the 
circumflances  mentioned,  it  is  occafionally 
generated.  At  the  fame  time,  the  nature  of 
the  fevers  from  thence,  upon  different  occa- 
fions,  arifing,  renders  it  probable  that  the 
virulent  ftate  of  human  effluvia  is  the  com- 
mon caufe  of  them,  as  they  differ  only  in  a 
ftate  of  their  fymptoms  ;  which  may  be  im- 
puted to  the  circumflances  of  feafon,  climate, 
Sec.  concurring  with  the  contagion,  and  mod- 
ifying its  force. 

LXXXII. 

With  refpeel;  to  thefe  contagions,  though 
we  have  fpoken  of  them  as  of  a  matter  float- 
ing in  the  atmofphere,  it  is  proper  to  obferve, 
E  that 


98  PRACTICE 

that  they  are  never  found  to  act  but  when 
they  are  near  to  the  fources  from  whence 
they  arife  ;  that  is,  either  near  to  the  bodies 
of  men,  from  which  they  immediately  iffue  ; 
or  near  to  fome  fubftances  which,  as  having 
been  near  to  the  bodies  of  men,  are  imbued 
with  their  effluvia,  and  in  which  fubftances 
thefe  effluvia  are  fometimes  retained  in  an 
active  (late  for  a  very  long  time. 

The  fubftances  thus  imbued  with  an  active 
and  infectious  matter,  may  be  called  Fomites  ; 
and  it  appears  to  me  probable,  that  contagi- 
ons, as  they  arife  from  fomites,  are  more  pow- 
erful than  as  they  arife  immediately  from  the 
human  body. 

LXXXIII. 

Miafmata  are  next  to  be  confidered.  Thefe 
may  arife  from  various  fources,  and  be  of  dif- 
ferent kinds  ;  but  we  know  little  of  their  va- 
riety, or  of  their  feveral  effects.  We  know 
with  certainty  only  one  fpecies  of  miafma, 
v-*i  ich  can  be  confidered  as  the  caufe  of  fe- 
ver ;  and,  from  the  univerfality  of  this,  it 
may  be  doubted  if  there  be  any  other. 

LXXXIV. 

The  miafma,  fo  univerfally  the  caufe  of  fe- 
ver, is  that  which  arifes  from  marines  or  moifl 
ground,  acted  upon  by  heat.  So  many  ob- 
iervations  have  now  been  made  with  refpect  to 

this, 


OF       PHYSIC-  99 

this,  in  fo  many  different  regions  of  the  earth, 
that  there  is  neither  any  doubt  of  its  being  in 
general  a  caufe  of  fevers,  nor  of  its  being  very 
univerfally  the  caufe  of  intermittent  fevers, 
in  all  their  different  forms.  The  fimilarity 
of  the  climate,  feafon,  and  foil,  in  the  differ- 
ent countries  in  which  intermittents  arife,  and 
the  fimilarity  of  the  difeafes,  though  arifing 
in  different  regions,  concur  in  proving  that 
there  is  one  common  caufe  of  thefe  difeafes, 
and  that  this  is  the  marfh   miafma. 

What  is  the  particular  nature  of  this  miaf- 
ma, we  know  not ;  nor  do  we  certainly  know 
whether  or  not  it  differs  in  kind  :  But  it  is 
probable  that  it  does  not  ;  and  that  it  varies 
only  in  the  degree  of  its  power,  or  perhaps  as 
to  its  quantity,  in  a  given  fpace. 

LXXXV, 

It  has  been  now  rendered  probable,  that 
the  remote  caufes  of  fevers  (VIII.)  are  chief- 
ly Contagions  or  Miafmata,  and  neither  of 
them  of  great  variety..  We  have  fuppofed 
that  miafmata  are  the  caufe  of  intermittents, 
and  contagions  the  caufe  of  continued  fevers, 
ftri&ly  fo  named  ;  but  we  cannot  with  pro- 
priety employ  thefe  general  terms.  For,  as 
the  caufe  of  continued  fevers  may  arife  from 
fomites,  and  may,  in  fuch  cafes,  be  called  a 
Miafma  ;  and  as  other  miafmata  alfo  may  pro- 
duce contagious  difeafes  ;  it  will  be  proper  to 
diftinguifh  the  caufes  of  fevers,  by  ufing  the 
E  2  terms 


ico  PRACTICE 

terms  Human  or  Marjh  Effluvia,  rather  tha*a 
the  general  ones  of  Contagion -or  Miafma. 

LXXXVI. 

To  render  our  doctrine  of  fever  confident 
and  complete,  it  is  neceffary  to  add  here,  that 
thole  remote  caufes  of  fever,  human  and  marfh 
effluvia,  feem  to  be  of  a  debilitating  or  feda- 
tive  quality.  They  arife  from  a  putrefcent 
matter.  Their  production  is  favoured  and 
their  power  increafed,  by  circumflances  which 
favour  putrefaction  ;  and  they  often  prove 
putrefactive  ferments  with  refpect  to  the  ani- 
mal fluids.  As  putrid  matter,  therefore,  is 
always,  with  refpect  to  animal  bodies,  a  pow- 
erful iedative,  fo  it  can  hardly  be  doubted 
that  human  and  marfh  effluvia  are  of  the 
fame  quality  ;  and  it  is  confirmed  hy  this,  that 
the  debility  which  is  always  induced,  feems  to 
be  in  proportion  to  the  other  marks  that  ap- 
pear -of  the  power  of  thofe  caufes. 

LXXXVIL 

Though  we  have  endeavoured  to  fhow 
that  fevers  generally  arife  from  marfh  or  hu- 
man effluvia,  we  cannot,  with  any  certainty, 
exclude  fome  other  remote  caufes,  which  are 
commonly  fuppofed  to  have  at  leaft  a  fhare  in 
producing  thofe  difeafes.  And  I  proceed, 
therefore,  to  inquire  concerning  thefe  caufes ; 
the  firfl  of  which  that  merits  attention  ist  the 
power  of  cold  applied  to  the  human  body. 

LXXXVIII. 


OF       PHYSIC,  101 

LXXXVIII. 

The  operation  of  cold  on  a  living  body  is 
fo  different  in  different  circumftances,  as  to 
be  of  difficult  explanation  ;  it  is  here,.,  there- 
fore, attempted  with  feme  diffidence. 

The  power  of  cold  may  be  confidered  as 
abfolute  or  relative. 

The  abfolute  power  is  that  by  v/hich  it  can 
diminifh  the  temperature  of  the  body  to  which 
it  is  applied.  And  thus,  if  the  natural  tem- 
perature of  the  human  body  is,  as  we  fuppofe 
it  to  be,  that  of  9$  degrees  of  Farenheit's  ther- 
mometer *  ;  every  degree  of  temperature  lefs 
than  that,  may  be  confidered  as  cold  with  re- 
fpec~r,  to  the  human  body ;  and,  in  proportion 
to  its  degree,  will  have  a  tendency  to  (fimintfh 
the  temperature  of  the  body..  But  as  the  liv- 
ing human  body  has  in  itfelf  a  power  of  gen- 
erating heat,  fo  it  can  fuftain  its  own  proper 
heat  to  the  degree  above  mentioned,  thougf* 
furrounded  by  air  or  other  bodies  of  a  lower 
temperature  than  itfelf ;  and  it  appears  from 
obfervation,  that,,  in  this  climate,  air,  or  other 
bodies,,  applied  to  the  living  man,  do  not  di- 
minifh the  temperature  of  his  body,  unlefs  the 
temperature  of  the  bodies  applied  be  below  62 
degrees..  From  hence  it  appears,  that  the  ab- 
folute power  of  cold  in  this  climate,  does  not 
E  3  a& 

*  In  every  inPcance  of  our  mentioning  degrees  of  heat 
■  or  cold,  we  fhall  mention  them  by  the  degrees  in  Faren- 
Keit's  fcale  ;  and  the  expreflion  of  higher  or  lower  fhall 
aiways  be  according  to  that  fcale, 


102  PRACTICE 

aft  upon  the  living  human  body,  unlefs  the 
cold  applied  be  below  the  degree  juft  now 
mentioned. 

It  appears  alio,  that  the  human  body's  be- 
ing (unrounded  by  air  of  a  lower  temperature 
than  itfelf,  is  neceflary  to  its  being  retained  in 
its  proper  temperature  of  98  degrees  ;  for,  in 
this  climate,  every  temperature  of  the  aijr 
above  62  degrees,  applied  to  the  human  body, 
though  ftill  of  a  lower  temperature  than  itfelf, 
is  found  to  increafe  the  heat  of  it.  And  from 
all  this  it  appears,  that  the  abfolute  power  of 
cold  with  refpeft;  to  the  human  body,  is  very 
different  from  what  it  is  with  refpeft;  to  inan- 
imate bodies. 

LXXXIX. 

The  relative  power  of  cold  with  refpecl:  fa 
the  living  human  body,  is  that  power  by  which 
it  produces  a  fenfation  of  cold  in  it  j  and  with 
refpecl:  to  this,  it  is  agreeable  to  the  general 
principle  of  fenfation,  that  the  fenfation  pro- 
duced, is  not  in  proportion  to  the  abfolute 
force  cf  impreffion,  but  according  as  the  new 
impreflion  is  ftronger  or  weaker  than  that 
which  had  been  applied  immediately  before. 
Accordingly,  with  refpecl  to  temperature,  the 
fenfation  produced  by  any  degree  of  this,  de- 
pends upon  the  temperature  to  which  the 
body  had  been  immediately  before  expofed  ; 
fo  that  whatever  is  higher  than  this  feels  warm, 
and  whatever  is  lower  than  it  feels  cold  ;  and 

it 


OF     PHYSIC.  103 

it  will  therefore  happen  that  the  oppofite  fen- 
fations  of  heat  and  cold  may  on  different  oc- 
cafions  arife  from  the  fame  temperature,  as 
marked  by  the  thermometer. 

With  refpecl;  to  this,  however,  it  is  to  be 
obferved,  that  though  every  change  of  tem- 
perature gives  a  fenfation  of  cold  or  heat  as  it 
is  lower  or  higher  than  the  temperature  ap- 
plied immediately  before,  the  fenfation  pro- 
duced is,  in  different  cafesy  of  different  dura- 
tion. If  the  temperature  at  any  time  applied 
is  under  62  degrees,  every  increafe  of  temper- 
ature applied  will  give  a  fenfation  of  heat ;  but 
if  the  increafe  of  temperature  does  not  arife  to 
62  degrees,  the  fenfation  produced  will  not 
continue  long,  but  be  foon  changed  to  a  fen- 
fation of  cold.  In  like  manner,  any  temper- 
ature, applied  to  the  human  body,  lower  than 
that  of  the  body  itfelf,  gives  a  fenfation  of 
cold ;  but  if  the  temperature  applied  does  not 
go  below  62  degrees,  the  fenfation.  of  cold  will 
not  continue  long,  but  be  foon  changed  to  a 
fenfation  of  heat. 

It  will  appear  hereafter,  that  the  effects  of 
the  fenfation  of  cold  will  be  very  different,  ac- 
cording as  it  is  more  permanent  or  tranfitory. 

XC. 

Having  thus  explained  the  operation  of  cold 
as  abfolute  or  relative  with  refpecl;  to  the  hu- 
man body,  I  proceed  to  mention  the  general 
effects  of  cold  upon  it. 

E  4  i.  Cold', 


104  PRACTICE 

1.  Cold,  in  certain  circumftances,  has  man-. 
ifeflly  a  fedative  power.  It  can  extinguifh 
the  vital  principle  entirely,  either  in  particu- 
lar parts,  or  in  the  whole  body  ;  and  confider- 
ing  how  much  the  vital  principle  of  animals 
depends  upon  heat,  it  cannot  be  doubted  that 
the  power  of  cold  is  always  more  or  lefs  di- 
rectly fedative. 

This  efFecl;  may  be  faid  to  take  place  from 
every  degree  of  abfolute  cold  ;  and,  when  the 
heat  of  the  body  has  upon  any  occafion  been 
preternaturally  increafed,  every  lower  temper- 
ature may  be  ufeful  in  diminifning  the  activi- 
ty of  the  fyftem  ;  but  it  cannot  dirninifh  the 
natural  vigour  of  the  vital  principle,  till  the 
cold  applied  is  under  62  degrees ;  nor  even 
then  will  it  have  this  efFecl;,  unlefs  the  cold 
applied  be  of  an  intenfe  degree,  or  be  applied 
for  fome  length  of  time  to  a  large  portion  of 
the  body. 

2.  It  is  equally  manifeft,  that,  in  certain 
circumftances,  cold  proves  a  flimulus  to  the 
living  body,  and  particularly  to  the  fanguifer- 
ous  fyftem. 

It  is  probable,  that  this  efFect  takes  place 
in  every  cafe  in  which  the  temperature  appli- 
ed produces  a  fenfation  of  cold  ;  and  this, 
therefore,  as  depending  entirely  on  the  relative 
power  of  cold,  will  be  in  proportion  to  the 
change  of  temperature  that  takes  place. 

It  appears  to  me  probable,  that  every  change 
of  temperature  from  a  higher  to  a  lower  de- 
gree, will  prove  more  or  lefs  ftimulant  ,♦  ex- 
cepting 


0  F       PHYSIC.  105 

cepting  when  the  cold  applied  is  fo  intenle, 
as  immediately  to  extinguish  the  vital  princi- 
ple in  the  part, 

3.  Befide  the- fedative  and flimulant  pow- 
ers of  col d,   it  is  manifefdy   alio  a  powerful- 
aJlringentyC&vSing  a  contraction  of  the  vellels 
on  the  furface  of  the  body,  and  thereby  pro~- 
dticing  apalenefs  of  the  (kin  and  a  fuppreffioil^ 
of  perfpiration  ;  and  it  feems  to  have  iimilar 
effects  when  applied  to  internal  parts.     It  is 
likewife  probable,  that  this  conflriction,  as  it 
takes  place  efpecially  in   confequence   of  the 
fenfibility  of  the  parts   to  which  the  cold  is 
applied,  will  in  fome  meafure   be   communi- 
cated to  other  parts  of  the  body -0    and  that 
thereby  the  application  of  cold  proves  a  tonic 
power  with  refpect  to  the  whole  fyilem. 

Thefe  effects  of  tonic  and  aftrinsrent  t>ower 
feem  to  take  place  both  from  the  abfolute  and 
relative  power  of  cold;  and  therefore  every 
application  of  it  which  gives  a  fenfation  of 
cold,  is,  in  its  firfl  effect,  both  anringent  and 
flimulant, ,  though  the  former  may  be  oft- 
en prevented  from  being  either  confiderable  or 
permanent  when  the  latter  immediately  takes 
place, 

XCI." 

It  will  be  obvious,  that  thefe  feveraT  effects 
of  cold  cannot  all  take  place  at  the  fame  time^ 
but  may  in  fuccefhon  be  variouily  combined. 
The  flimulant  power  taking  place  obviates  the 

£  5  .  effects^ 


106  PRACTICE 

effects,  at  leaft  the  permanency  of  the  effects, 
that  might  otherwife  have  arifen  from  the  fe- 
dative  power.  That  the  fame  ftimulant  pow- 
er prevents  thefe  from  the  aftringent,  I  have 
faid  above  ;  but  the  ftimulant  and  tonic  pow- 
ers of  cold  are  commonly,  perhaps  always» 
conjoined. 

XCII. 

Thefe  general  effects  of  cold  now  pointed 
out  are  fometimes  falutary,  frequently  mor- 
bid ;  but  it  is  the  latter  only  I  am  to  confider 
here,  and  they  feem  to  be  chiefly  the  follow- 
ing. 

1.  A  general  inflammatory  difpofition  of 
the  fyftem,  which  is^commonly  accompanied 
with  Rheumatifm  or  other  Phlegmafiae. 

2.  The  fame  inflammatory  difpofition'  ac- 
companied  with  Catarrh. 

3.  A  Gangrene  of  particular  parts. 

4.  A  Palfy  of  a  fingle  member. 

5.  A  Fever,  or  Fever  ftrictly  fo  called 
(VIII.)  which  it  often  produces  by  its  own 
power  alone,  but  more  commonly  tit  is  only 
an  exciting  caufe  of  fever  by  concurring  with 
the  operation  of  human  or  marfh  effluvia. 

XCIIL 

Cold  is  often  applied  to  the  human  body 
without  producing  any  of  thefe  morbid  ef- 
fects, and  it  is  difficult  to  determine  in  what 

circumftances 


OF       P  H  Y  S  I  C.  icy 

circumftances  it  efpecially  operates  in  produc- 
ing them.  It  appears  to  me,  that  ihi  morbid 
effefts  of  cold  depend  partly  upon  certain 
circumftances  of  the  cold  itfeif,  anc}  partly  on 
certain  circumftances  of  tke^gfirfbn  to  whom 
it  is  applied, 

xciv,. 

The  circumftances  of  the  cold  applied, 
which  feem  to  give  it  effect,  are,  1.  The  in- 
tenfity  or  degree  of  the  cold  ;  2.  The  length 
of  time  during  which  it  is  applied  ;  3,  The 
degree,  of  moifture  at  the  fame  time  accom- 
panying it  ;  4.  Its  being  applied  by  a  wind 
or  current  of  air  ;  5.  Its  being  a  viciffitude,  or 
fudden  and  confiderable  change  of  tempera- 
ture,  from  heat  to  cold,. 

xcv; 


The  circumftances  of  perfons  rendering 
them  more  liable  to  be  affected  by  cold,  feem 
to  be,  1.  The  weaknefs  of  the  fyftem,  and 
particularly  the  leffened  vigour  of  the  circula- 
tion, .  occasioned  by  failing,  by  evacuations,, 
by  fatigue,  by  a  laft  night's  debauch^  by  ex- 
cels in  venery,  hy  long  watching,  by  much 
ftudy,  by  reft  immediately  after  great  exer- 
cife,  by  fleep,  and  by  preceding  difeafe. 
2.  The  body,  or  its  parts,  being  deprived  of 
their  accuftomed  coverings.  3.  One  part 
E.6  of 


108  PRACTICE 

of  the  body  being  expofed  to  cold,  while  the 
reft  is  kept  in  its  ufual  or  a  greater  warmth, 

XCVL 

The  power  of  thefe  circumflances  (XCVV 
is  demonstrated  by  the  circumflances  enabling 
perfons  to  refift  cold.  Thefe  are  a  certain 
vigour  of  constitution,  exercife  of  the  body,, 
the  prefence  of  active  paflions,  and  the  ufe  of 
cordials. 

Befide  thefe,  there  are  other  circumflances 
which,  by  a  different  operation,  enable  per- 
fons to  refift  cold  acting  as  a  fenfation  ;  fuch 
as,  paflions  engaging  a  clofe  attention  to  one 
object,  the  ufe  of  narcotics,  and  that  ftate  of 
the  body  in  which  fenfibility  is  greatly  dimin- 
ifhed,  as  in  maniacs.  To  all  which  is  to  be 
added,  the  power  of  habit  with  refpect  to  thofe 
parts  of  the  body  to  which  cold  is  more  con- 
stantly applied,  which  both  diminifhes  fenfi- 
bility and  increafes  the  power  of  the  activity 
generating  heat. 

XCVIL 

Befide  cold,  there  are  other  powers  that 
feern  to  be  remote  caufes  of  fever  ;  fuch  as, 
fear,  intemperance  in  drinking,  excels  in  ven- 
ery,  and  other  circumflances,  which  evidently 
weaken  the  fyftem.  But  whether  any  of  thefe 
fedative  powers  be  alone  the  remote  caule  of 
fever,  or  if  they  only  operate  either  as  concur- 
ring 


OF       PHYSIC.  109 

ring  with  the  operation  of  marih  or  human  ef- 
fluvia, or  as  giving  an  opportunity  to  the  ope- 
ration of  cold,  are  queftions  not  to  be  pofitive- 
\y  anfwered  ;  they  may  poffibly  of  themfelves 
produce  fever  ;  but  moil  frequently  they  ope- 
rate as  concurring  in  one  or  other  of  the  way  a 
above  mentioned. 

xcvriL 

Having  now  mentioned  the  chief  of  the  re- 
mote caufes  of  feverSj  it  may  be  further  ob- 
ferved,  that  thefe  will  arife  more  orlefs  readi- 
ly, according  as  miafmata  and  contagions  are 
more  or  kfs  prevailing  and  powerful,  or  as 
thefe  are  more  or  lefs  favoured  by  the  con- 
currence of  cold  and  other  fedative  powers, 


CHAP.       V. 

of  the    PROGNOSIS  of  FEVERS, 

XCIX. 

AS  fevers  (by  LX.)  confift 
of  both  morbid  and  falutary  motions  and 
fymptoms,  the  tendency  of  the  difeafe  to  a 
happy  or  fatal  iffue,  or  the  prognostic  in  fe- 
vers, has  been  eltabliihed  by  marking  the 
prevalence  of  the  morbid  or  cf  the  falutary 
fymptoms  1  and  it  might  be  properly  fo  eflab- 

lifheJ, 


lie  PRACTICE 

lifhed,  if  we  could  certainly  diftinguifh  between 
the  one  and  the  other  of  thefe  kinds  of  fymp~ 
toms ;  but  the  operation  of  the  reaction,  or 
falutary  efforts  of  nature  in  curing  fevers,  is 
{till  involved  in  fo  much  obfcurity,  that  I 
cannot  explain  the  feveral  fymptoms  of  it  fo 
clearly  as  to  apply  them  to  the  eftablifhing 
prognoflics  ;  and  this,  I  think,  may  be  done 
better,  by  marking  the  morbid  fjonptoms 
which  mow  the  tendency  to   death  in  fevers. 


This  plan  of  the  prognoftics  in  fevers  muft 
proceed  upon  our  knowledge  of  the  caufes  of 
death  in  general,  and  in  fevers  more  particu- 
larly. 

The  caufes  of  death,  in  general,  are  either 
direct  or  indirect. 

The  firft  are  thofe  which  directly  attack  and 
deftroy  the  vital  principle,  ,as  lodged  in  the 
nervous  fyftem  ;  or  deftroy  the  organization 
of  the  brain  immediately  neceffary  to  the  ac- 
tion of  that  principle. 

The  fecond,  or  the  indirect  caufes  of  death, 
are  thofe  which  interrupt  fuch  functions  as 
are  neceffary  to  the  circulation  of  the  blood, 
and  thereby  neceffary  to  the  due  continuance 
and  fupport  of  the  vital  principle. 

CI. 

Of  thefe  general  caufes,  thofe  which  ope- 
rate more  particularly  in  fevers  feem  to   be, 


OF       PHYSIC.  til 

Jirjl,  The  violence  of  reaction  ;  which  either,  by 
repeated  violent  excitements,  deftroys  the  vital 
power  itfelf  ;  or,  by  its  violence,  deftroys  the 
organization  of  the  brain  neceffary  to  the  ac- 
tion of  that  power  ;  or,  by  the  fame  violence, 
deftroys  the  organization  of  the  parts  more 
immediately  neceffary  to  the  circulation  of 
the  blood. 

Secondly,  The  caufe  of  death  in  fevers  may 
be  a  poifon,  that  is,  a  power  capable  of  de~ 
ftroying  the  vital  principle  ;  and  this  poifon 
may  be  either  the  miafma  or  contagion  which 
was  the  remote  caufe  of  the  fever,  or  it  may  be 
a  putrid  matter  generated  in  the  courfe  of  the 
fever.  In  both  cafes,  the  operation  of  fuch  a 
power  appears  either  as  a6ling  chiefly  on  the 
nervous  fyftem,  inducing  the  fymptoms  of  de- 
bility ;  or  as  a6ling  upon  the  fluids  of  the  body, 
inducing  a  putrescent  ft  ate  in  them. 

CII. 

From  all  this  it  appears,  that  the  fymptoms 
fhowing  the  tendency  to  death  in  fevers,  may 
be  difcovered  by  their  being  either  the  fymp- 
toms 

Of  violent  reaction  ; 

Of  great  debility  ; 

Or,  of  a  Jlrong  tendency  to  putrefaction  in 
the  fluids. 

And  upon  this  fuppofition,  I  proceed  now 
to  mark  thofe  fymptoms  more  particularly. 

CIII. 


fe«*  F  R   A  C   T   X   G   £ 


CIIL 

The  fymptoms  which  denote  the  violence  of 
reaction,  are,  1 .  The  increafed  force,  hardnefs, 
and  frequency  of  the  pulie.  2.  The  increafed 
heat  of  the  body.  3.  The  fymptoms  which 
are  the  marks  of  a  general  inflammatory  dia- 
thefis,  and  more  efpecially  of  a  particular  de- 
termination to  the  brain,  lungs,  or  other  im- 
portant vifcera.  4.  The  fymptoms  which  are 
the  marks  of  the  caufe  of  violent  reaction  ;  that 
is,  of  a  ilrong  ftimulus  applied,  or  of  a  flrong 
fpafm  formed,  the  latter  appearing  in  a  con- 
fiderable  fuppreflion  of  the   excretions. 

CIV. 

The  fymptoms  which  denote  a  great  degree 
of  debility,  are, 

In  the  Animal  Functions  :  I.  The 
weaknefs  of  the  voluntary  motions  ;  11/  The 
irregularity  of  the  voluntary  motions,  de- 
pending on  their  debility  ;  III.  The  weaknefs 
of  fenfation  ;  IV.  The  weaknefs  and  irregu- 
larity of  the  intellectual  operations. 

In  the  Vital  Functions  :  I.  The  weak- 
nefs of  the  pulfe  ;  II.  The  coldnefs  or  mrmkT 
ing  of  the  extremities  ;  III.  The  tendency  to 
a  deliqiiium  animi  in  an  erect,  poiture  ;  IV* 
The  weaknefs  of  refpiration. 

In  the  Natural  Functions  :  I.  The 
weaknefs  of  the  ftomach,  as  appearing  in  an- 
orexia} 


OF       PHYSIC.  113 

©rcxia,  naufea,  and  vomiting  5  II.  Invol- 
untary excretions  depending  upon  a  pally 
of  the  fphinclers  ;  III.  Difficult  deglutition, 
depending  upon  a  palfy  of  the  mufcles  of  the 
fauces. 


CV. 


Laflly,  The  fymptoms  denoting  the  puiref- 
ceni  ft  ate  of  the  jluids,  are, 

I.  With  refpecl  to  the  flomach  ;  the  loath- 
ing of  animal  food,  naufea  and  vomiting,  great 
third,  and  a  defire  of  acids. 

II.  With  refpecl;  to  the  fluids  ;  i.  The 
blood  drawn  out  of  the  veins  not  coagulating 
as  ufual  ,•  2.  Hemorrhagy  from  different 
parts,  without  marks  of  increafed  impetus  ; 
3.  Effufions  under  the  fkin  or  cuticle,  forming 
petechiae,  maculae,  and  vibices  ;  4.  Effufions 
of  a  yellow  ferum  under  the  cuticle. 

III.  With  refpecl;  to  the  ftate  of  the  excre- 
tions ;  fetid  breath,  frequent  loofe  and  fetid 
flools,  high  coloured  turbid  urine,  fetid  fweats^ 
and  the  fetor  and  livid  colour  of  bliflered 
places. 

IV.  The  cadaverous  fmell  of  the  whole 
body. 

CVI. 

Thefe  feveral  fymptoms  have  very  often^ 
each  of  them  flngly,  a  ihare  in  determining  the 
prognoflic  ;    but  more   especially    by  their 

concurrence 


ii4  PRACTICE 

concurrence  and  combination  with  one  anoth- 
er ;  particularly  thofe  of  debility  with  thofe 
of  putrefcency. 

CVII. 

On  the  fubje6l  of  the  prognoflic,  it  is  prop- 
er to  obferve,  that  many  phyficians  have  been 
of  opinion  there  is  fomething  in  the  nature  of 
fevers  w hich  generally  determines  them  to  be 
of  a  certain  duration  ;  and  therefore  that  their 
terminations,  whether  falutary  or  fatal,  hap- 
pen at  certain  periods  of  the  difeafe,  rather 
than  at  others.  Thefe  periods  are  called  the 
Critical  Days  ;  carefully  marked  by  Hip- 
pocrates and  other  ancient  phyficians,  as  well 
as  by  many  moderns  of  the  greater!  eminence 
in  practice  ;  whilft  at  the  fame  time  many  oth- 
er moderns,  of  no  inconfiderable  authority  > 
deny  their  taking  place  in  the  fevers  of  thefe 
northern  regions  which  we  inhabit. 

CVIII. 

I  am  of  opinion  that  the  doctrine  of  the  an- 
cients, and  particularly  that  of  Hippocrates, 
on  this  fubjecl:,  was  well  founded  ;  and  that  it 
is  applicable  to  the  fevers  of  our  climate. 

CIX. 

I  am  of  this  opinion,  Jirjl,  Becaufe  I  ob- 
ferve that  the  animal  economy,  both  from  its 

own 


OF       PHYSIC,  n5 

own  conftitution,  and  from  habits  which  are 
eafiiy  produced  in  it,  is  readily  fubjected  to 
periodical  movements.  Secondly,  Becaufe,  in 
the  difeafes  of  the  human  body,  I  obferve  pe- 
riodical movements  to  take  place  with  great 
conftancy  and  exa&nefs  ;  as  in  the  cafe  of  in- 
termittent fevers,  and  many  other  difeafes. 


ex. 

Thefe  confiderations  render  it  probable^ 
that  exacl  periodical  movements  may  take 
place  in  continued  fevers  ;  and  I  think  there 
is  evidence  of  fuch  movements  actually  taking 
place. 

CXI. 

The  critical  days,  or  thofe  on  which  we 
fuppofe  the  termination  of  continued  fevers 
efpecially  to  happen,  are,  the  third, fifth, /ev- 
ent h>  ninth,  eleventh,  fourteenth,  /eventeenth3 
and  twentieth.  We  mark  none  beyond  this 
laft  ;  becaufe,  though  fevers  are  fometimes 
protracled  beyond  this  period,  it  is,  however, 
more  rarely  ;  10  that  there  are  not  a  fufficient 
number  of  obfervations  to  afcertain  the  courfe 
of  them  ;  and  further,  becaufe  it  is  probable 
that,  in  fevers  long  protracted,  the  movements 
become  lefs  exact  and  regular,  and  therefore 
lefs  eafiiy  obferved, 

CXIL 


n6  PRACTICE 


CXII. 

That  the  days  now  mentioned  are  the  crit- 
ical days,  feems  to  be  proved  by  the  particu- 
lar facls  which  are  found  in  the  writings  of 
Hippocrates.  From  thefe  facts,  as  collected 
from  the  feveral  writings  of  that  author  by 
M.  de  Haeni  it  appears,  that  of  one  hundred 
and  fixty  three  infiances  of  the  termination  of 
fevers,  which  happened  on  one  or  other  of  the 
firft  twenty  days  of  the  difeafe,  there  are  one 
hundred  and  leven>  or  more  than  two  thirds 
of  the  whole  number,  which  happened  on  one 
or  other  of  the  eight  days  above  mentioned  % 
that  none  happened  on  the  fecond  or  thir- 
teenth day ;  and  upon  the  eighth,  tenth,, 
twelfth,  fifteenth,  fixteenth,  eighteenth,  and 
nineteenth,  there  are  but  eighteen  inftances  of 
termination,,  or  one  ninth  of  the  whole. 


CXIIL 

As  the  terminations  which  happen  on  the 
feven  days  laft  mentioned,  are,  upon  the 
whole,  few  ;  and,  upon  any  one  of  them,  few- 
er than  thofe  which  happen  on  any  of  our 
iuppofed  critical  days  ;  fo  there  are  therefore 
nine  days  which  may  be  called  noncriti- 
cal;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  many  ter- 
minations which  happened  on  the  feventh, 
fourteenth,  and  twentieth  days,  afford  a  proof 
both  of  critical  days  in  general,  and  that  thefe 

are- 


OF       P  H  Y  S  I  C.  117 

•arc  the  chief  of  them.  Hereafter  I  mail  men- 
tion an  analogy  that  renders  the  power  of  the 
other  critical  days  fufrkiently  probable. 

CXIV. 

It  appears  further,  that  as,  of  the  termina- 
tions which  were  final  and  falutary,  not  a 
tenth  part  happened  on  the  noncritical  days  ; 
and  of  the  terminations  which  were  final  and 
fatal,  though  the  greater  number  happened 
-on  the  critical  days,  yet  above  a  third  of  them 
happened  on  the  noncritical  ;  fo  it  would  ap- 
pear, that  the  tendency  of  the  animal  economy 
is  to  obferve  the  critical  days,  and  that  it  is 
by  the  operation  of  fome  violent  and  irregular 
caufe  that  the  courfe  of  things  is  fometimes 
turned  to  the  noncritical. 

cxv. 

What  has  been  faid  gives  fufficient  ground 
for  prefuming,  that  it  is  the  general  tendency 
of  the  animal  economy  to  determine  the  pe- 
riodical movements  in  fevers  to  be  chiefly  on 
the  critical  days.  At  the  fame  time,  we  mufl 
acknowledge  it  to  be  a  general  tendency  only  ; 
and  that,  in  particular  cafes,  many  circum- 
fiances  may  occur  to  difturb  the  regular  courfe 
of  it.  Thus,  though  the  chief  and  more  re- 
markable exacerbations  in  continued  fevers 
happen  on  the  critical  days,  there  are  truly 
exacerbations   happening    every   day  ;     and 

thefe, 


ii8  PRACTICE 

thefe,  from  certain  caufes,  may  become  con- 
fiderable  and  critical.  Further,  though  in- 
termittent fevers  are  certainly  very  ftrongly 
determined  to  obferye  a  tertian  or  quartan 
period,  we  know  there  are  circumftances  which 
prevent  them  from  obferving  thefe  periods 
exactly,  and  which  render  them  either  antici- 
pating or  poflponing  fo  much,  that  the  days 
of  paroxyfms  come  to  be  quite  changed  ;  and 
it  is  allowable  to  fuppofe,  that  the  like  may 
happen  with  refpect  to  the  exacerbations  of 
continued  fevers,  fo  as  thereby  to  difturb  the 
regular  appearance  of  critical  days. 

A  particular  inftance  of  this  occurs  with  re- 
fpe£t  to  the  fixth  day  of  fevers.  In  the  writ- 
ings of  Hippocrates,  there  are  many  inftances 
of  terminations  happening  on  the  fixth  day  ; 
but  it  is  not  therefore  reckoned  among  the 
critical  days ;  for,  of  the  terminations  happen- 
ing on  that  day,  there  is  not  one  which  proves 
finally  of  a  falutary  kind ;  the  greater  number 
are  fatal ;  and  all  the  reft  are  imperfect,  and 
followed  with  a  relapfe.  All  this  fhows,  that 
fome  violent  caufe  had,  in  thefe  cafes,  produc- 
ed a  deviation  from  the  ordinary  courfe  of 
nature  ;  that  the  terminations  on  the  lixth  day 
are  nothing  more  than  anticipations  of  the 
feventh,  and  therefore  a  proof  of  the  power 
of  this  laft. 

CXVL 

The  doctrine  of  critical  days  has  been  much 
embarraffed  by  fome  diffonant  accounts  of  it, 

which 


OF       PH'YSIC,  119 

which  appear  in  the  writings  imputed  to  Hip- 
pocrates. But  this  may  be  juilly  accounted 
for  from  thefe  writings  being  truly  the  works 
of  different  perfons,  and  from  the  mofl  genu- 
ine of  them  having  fuffered  many  corruptions  ; 
fo  that,  in  fhort,  every  thing* which  is  incon- 
fiflent with  the  fads  above  laid  down,  may 
be  afcribed  to  one  or  other  of  thefe  caufes. 

CXVII. 

This,  further,  has  efpecially  diflurbed  the 
doctrine  of  critical  days,  that  Hippocrates 
himfelf  attempted,  perhaps  too  haflily,  to  ef- 
\  tablifh  general  rules,  and  to  bring  the  doctrine 
;to  a  general  theory,  drawn  from  Pythagorean 
opinions  concerning  the  power  of  numbers. 
I  It  is  this  which  feems  to  have  produced  the 
idea  of  odd  days,  and  of  a  quaternary  and  fep- 
tenary  period,  doctrines  which  appear  fo  oft- 
;en  in  the  writings  of  Hippocrates.  Thefe, 
however,  are  inconfiflent  with  the  facts  above 
laid  down  ;  and  indeed,  as  Afclepiades  and 
Celfus  have  obferved,  are  inconfiflent  with 
one  another. 

CXVIII. 

Upon  the  whole,  therefore,  it  is  apprehend- 
ed, that  the  critical  days  above  affigned  are 
truly  the  critical  days  of  Hippocrates,  and 
may  be  confiftently  explained  in  the  following 
manner. 

CXIX. 


120  PRACTICE 


CXIX. 

From  the  univerfality  of  tertian  or  quartan 
periods  in  intermittent  fevers,  we  cannot  doubt 
of  there  being,  in  the  animal  economy,  a  ten** 
dency  to  obferve  fuch  periods ;  and  the  critical 
days  above  mentioned  are  confident  with  this 
tendency  of  the  economy,  as  all  of  them  mark 
either  tertian  or  quartan  periods.  Theie  pe- 
riods, however,  are  not  promifcuoufly  mixed, 
but  occupy  conftantly  their  feveral  portions 
in  the  progrefs  of  the  difeafe  ;  fo  that,  from 
the  beginning  to  the  eleventh  day,  a  tertian 
period  takes  place  ;  and,  from  the  eleventh  to 
the  twentieth,  and  perhaps  longer,  a  quartan 
period  is  as  Readily  obferved. 

cxx. 

What  determines  the  periods  to  be  changed 
about  the  eleventh  day,  we  have  not  clearly 
perceived  ;  but  the  facl:  is  certain  ;  for  there 
is  no  inftance  of  any  termination  on  the  thir- 
teenth, that  is,  the  tertian  period  next  follow- 
ing the  eleventh  ;  whereas,  upon  the  four- 
teenth, feventeenth,  and  twentieth,  which 
mark  quartan  periods,  there  are  forty  three 
inftances  of  terminations,  and  fix  only  on  all 
the  intermediate  days  between  thefe. 

This  prevalence  of  a  quartan  period  leaves 
no  room  for  doubting  that  the  twentieth,  and 
not  the  twenty  nrfl,  is  the  critical  day  marked 

by 


OF       PHYSIC.  121 

by  Hippocrates,  though  the  laft  is  mentioned 
as  fuch  in  the  common  edition  of  the  Aphor- 
isms, taken  from  an  erroneous  manufcript, 
which  Celfus  alio  feems  to  have  copied. 

CXXL 

A  confiftency  with  the  general  tendency  of 
the  fyftem,  renders  the  feries  of  critical  days 
we  have  mentioned,  probably  the  true  one  ; 
and  the  only  remaining  difficulty  in  finding 
what  we  have  delivered  to  be  the  fame  with 
the  genuine  doctrine  of  Hippocrates,  is  the 
frequent  mention  of  the  fourth  as  a  critical 
day. 

It  is  true  there  are  more  inflances  of  termi- 
nations happening  on  this  day  than  on  fome 
of  thofe  days  we  have  ailerted  to  be  truly 
critical  ;  but  its  inconfiftency  with  the  more 
general  tendency,  and  fome  other  confidera- 
tions.  lead  us  to  deny  its  being  naturally  a 
critical  day  ;  and  to  think,  that  the  inftances 
of  terminations,  which  have  really  occurred 
on  the  fourth  day,  are  to  be  reckoned  among 
the  other  irregularities  that  happen  in  this 
matter. 

CXXII. 

I    have  thus  endeavoured  to    fupport   the 

doclrine    of  critical    days,    chiefly   upon   the 

particular  facts  to  be  found  in  the  writings  of 

Hippocrates  ;     And    although    I    might   alfo 

F  produce 


,122  PRACTICE 

produce  many  other  teftimonies  of  both  an- 
cient and  modern  times  ;  yet  it  mull  be  own- 
ed, that  fome  of  theie  teflimonies  may  be  fuf- 
pected  to  have  arifen  rather  from  a  veneration 
of  Hippocrates,  than  from  accurate  obferva- 
tion. 

CXXIIL 

With  refpecl  to  the  opinions  of  many  mod- 
erns who  deny  the  prevalence  of  critical  days, 
.they  are  to  be  little  regarded ;  for  the  obferva- 
tion  of  the  courfe  of  continued  fevers  is  known 
to  be  difficult  and  fallacious  ;  and  therefore 
the  regularity  of  that  courfe  may  have  often 
efcaped  inattentive  and  prejudiced  obfervers. 

CXXIV. 

Our  own  obfervations  amount  to  this,  that 
fevers  with  moderate  fymptoms,  generally 
cafes  of  the  fynocha,,  frequently  terminate  in 
nine  days,  or  fooner,  and  very  conftantly  up- 
on one  or  other  of  the  critical  days  which  fall 
,within  that  period  ;  but  it  is  very  rare,  in  this 
climate,  that  cafes  Gf  either  the  typhus  or 
fynochus  terminate  before  the  eleventh  day  ; 
and,  when  they  do  terminate  on  this  day,  it  is 
for  the  moil  part  fatally.  When  they  are 
.protracted  beyond  this  time,,  I  have  very  con- 
ftantly found,  that  their  terminations  were  up- 
on the  fourteenth,  feventeenth,   or  twentieth 

day* 

In 


OF       PHYSIC.  irj 

In  fuch  cafes,  the  falutary  terminations  are 
feldom  attended  with  any  confiderable  evacu- 
ation. A  fweating  frequently  appears,  but  is 
ieldom  confiderable  ;  and  I  have  hardly  ever 
obferved  critical  and  decifive  terminations  at- 
tended with  vomiting,  evacuations  by  (tool,  or 
remarkable  changes  in  the  urine.  The  folution 
of  the  difeafe  is  chiefly  to  be  difcerned  from 
fome  return  of  fleep  and  appetite,  the  ceafmg 
of  delirium,  and  an  abatement  of  the  frequen- 
cy of  the  pulfe.  By  thefe  fymptoms  we  can 
often  mark  a  crifis  of  the  difeafe  ;  but  it  fel- 
dom happens  fuddenly  and  entirely  ;  and  it  is 
moil  commonly  from  fome  favourable  fymp- 
toms occurring  upon  one  critical  day,  that  we 
can  announce  a  more  entire  folution  upon  the 
next  following. 

Upon  the  whole,  I  am  perfuaded,  that,  if 
obfervations  (hall  be  made  with  attention,  and 
without  prejudice,  I  mall  be  allowed  to  con- 
clude with  the  words  of  the  learned  and  faga- 
cious  Gaubius,  "  Fallor,  ni  fua  coniliterit 
:<  HippocpvATi  aucloritas,  Gale  no  fides, 
*(  Nature  virtus  et  ordo," 


F  2  CHAP. 


124  PRACTICE' 

CHAP.       VI. 
gf  the  METHOD  of  CURE  in  Feve; 


Of  the  CURE  of  CONTINUED  FEVERS. 

cxxv. 

i\S  it  is  allowed,  that,  in  ev- 
ery fever  which  has  its  fall  courfe,  there  is  an 
effort  of  nature  of  a  falutary  tendency,  it  might 
be  fuppofed  that  the  cure  of  fevers  mould  be 
left  to  the  operations  of  nature,  or  that  our  art 
fhould  be  only  directed  to  fupport  and  regu- 
late thefe  operations,  and  that  we  fhould  form 
our  indications  accordingly.  This  plan,  how- 
ever, I  cannot  adopt,  becaufe  the  operations 
of  nature  are  very  precarious,  and  not  fo  well 
underfiood  as  to  enable  us  to  regulate  them 
properly.  It  appears  to  me,  that  trailing  to 
thefe  operations  has  often  given  occafion  to  a 
negligent  and  inert  practice  ;  and  there  is  rea- 
fon  to  believe,  that  an  attention  to  the  opera- 
tions of  nature  may  be  often  fuperfeded  by 
art, 

CXXVL 


OF       PHYSIC.  125 


CXXVI. 

The  plan  which  to  me  appears  to  be 
moft  fuitable,  is  that  which  forms  the  indica- 
tions of  cure  upon  the  view  of  obviating  the 
tendency  to  death  ;  while,  at  the  fame  time, 
the  means  of  executing  thefe  indications  are 
directed  by  a  proper  attention  to  the  proxi- 
mate caufe  of  fevers. 

Upon  this  plan,  in  confequence  of  what  has 
been  laid  down  above  on  the  fubjecl:  of  the 
prognoftic,  we  form  three  general  indications 
in  the  cure  of  continued  fevers  ;  and  the  one 
or  other  of  thefe  is  to  be  employed  according 
as  the  circumilances  of  the  fever  (CI I.)  mall 
direct. 

The  flrfl  therefore  is,  To  moderate  the  vio- 
lence of  reaBion, 

The  fecond  is,  To  remove  the  caufes  or  ob- 
viate the  effects  of  debility.     And, 

The  third  is,  To  obviate  or  correct  the  ten* 
dency  of  the  fluids  to  putrefaction, 

CXXVII. 

The  firft  indication  may  be  anfwered,  that 
is,  the  violence  of  rea&ion  may  be  moderated, 

1.  By  all  thofe  means-  which  diminim  the 
a£tion  of  the  heart  and  arteries. 

2.  By  thofe  means  which  take  off  the  fpafm 
of  the  extreme  vefTels,  which  we  fuppofe  to 
htQ.  the  chief  caufe  of  violent  reaction. 

F3  CXXVIII. 


126  P  R   A    C    T    I    C    E 

CXXVIII. 

The  action  of  the  heart  and  arteries  may- 
be diminifhed, 

i.  By  avoiding  or  moderating  thofe  irrita- 
tions, which,  in  one  degree  or  other,  are  al- 
moft conftantly  applied  to  the  body. 

2.  By  the  ufe  of  certain  fedative  powers. 

3.  By  diminifhing  the  tenfion  and  tone  of 
the  arterial  fyftem. 

CXXIX. 

The  irritations  (CXXVIII.  1.)  almoft 
conftantly  applied,  are  the  impreflions  made 
upon  our  fenfes  ;  the  exercife  of  the  body  and 
mind  ;  and  the  taking  in  of  aliments.  The 
avoiding  thefe  as  much  as  poflible,  or  the  mod- 
erating their  force,  conftitute  what  is  rightly 
called  the  Antiphlogistic  Regimen, 
proper  to  be  employed  in  almoft  every  con- 
tinued fever. 

CXXX. 

The  conduct  of  this  regimen  is  to  be  direct- 
ed by  the  following  rules  and  confiderations. 

1 .  Impreflions  on  the  external  fenfes,  as  be- 
ing ftimulant  to  the  fyftem,  and  a  chief  fup- 
port  of  its  activity,  fhould  be  avoided  as  much 
as  poflible  ;  thofe  efpeciaily  of  more  conftant 
application,  thofe  of  a  ftronger  kind,  and  thofe 
which  give  pain  and  uneannefs. 

No 


OF       PHYSIC.  127 

No  impreffion  is  to  be  more  carefully  guard- 
ed againft  than  that  of  external  heat  ;  while,  af 
the  fame  time,  every  other  means  of  increaf- 
ing  the  heat  of  the  body  is  to  be  fhunned, 
Both  thefe  precautions  are  to  be  obferved  as 
foon  as  a  hot  ftage  is  fully  formed,  and  to  be 
attended  to  during  its  continuance  ;  excepting 
in  certain  cafes,  where  a  determination  to 
fweating  is  neceffary,  or  where  the  ftimulantr 
effects  of  heat  may  be  compenfated  by  circurn- 
fiances  which  determine  it  to  produce  a  relax- 
ation and  revuliion. 

2.  All -motion -of  the  body  is  to  be  avoided, 
efpecially  that  which  requires  the  exercife  of 
its  own  mufcles  ;  and  that  pofture  of  the  body 
is  to  be  chofen  which  employs  the  feweft  muf- 
cles,  and  which  keeps  none  of  them  long  in  a 
ftate  of  contraction.  Speaking,  as  it  accelerates 
refpiration,  is  particularly  to  be  refrained  from. 

It  is  to  be  obferved,  that  every  motion  of 
the  body  is  the  more  ftimulant  in  proportion 
as  the  body  is  weaker. 

3.  The  exercife  of  the  mind  alfo  is  a  ftim^ 
ulus  to  the  body  ;  fo  that  all  imprefiions  which 
lead  to  thought,  and  thofe  efpecially  which 
may  excite  emotion  or  paffion,  are  to  be  care- 
fully (hunned. 

With  refpecl  to  avoiding  irnpreflions  o£ 
all  kinds,  an  exception  is  to  be  made  in  the 
cafe  of  a  delirium  coming  on,  when  the  pre~- 
fenting  of  accuitomed  objects  may  have  the 
effect,  of  interrupting  and  diverting  the  irreg- 
ular train  of  ideas  then  arifmg  in  the  mind. 

F  4-r  4,.  The- 


128  PRACTICE 

4.  The  prefence  of  recent  aliment  in  the 
flomach  proves  always  a  flimulus  to  the  fyflem, 
and  ought  therefore  to  be  as  moderate  as  pof- 
fible.  A  total  abilinence  for  fome  time  may 
be  of  fervice  ;  but  as  this  cannot  be  long  con- 
tinued with  fafety,  we  mull  avoid  the  flimulus 
of  aliment,  by  choofing  that  kind  which  gives 
the  leafL  We  fuppofe  that  alimentary  mat- 
ters are  more  flimulant,  according  as  they  are 
more  alkalefcent  ;  and  this  leads  to  avoid  all 
animal,  and  to  ufe  vegetable  food  only. 

As  our  drinks  alfo  may  prove  flimulant,  fo 
all  aromatic  and  fpirituous  liquors  are  to  be 
avoided  ;  and,  in  anfwering  the  prefent  indi- 
cation, all  fermented  liquors,  excepting  thofe 
of  the  lowefl  quality,  are  to  be  abllainedfrom. 

CXXXI. 

Befides  thefe  ftimulant  powers  more  con- 
flantly  applied,  there  are  others  which,  al- 
though occafional  only,  yet,  as  commonly 
accompanying  fevers,  mufl  be  attended  to  and 
removed. 

One  ist  the  fenfe  of  thirfl,  which,  as  a  pow- 
erful flimulus,  ought  always,  in  one  way  or 
other,  to  be  removed. 

Another  flimulus  frequently  arifes  from 
crudities,  or  corrupted  humours,  in  the  flom- 
ach i  and  it  is  to  be  removed  by  vomiting,  by 
dilution,  or  by  the  ufe  of  acids. 

A  third  flimulus  often  arifes  from  the  pre- 
ternatural retention  of  faeces  in  the  intef- 
tines  ;  and  ought  to  be  removed  by  frequent 
laxative  glyfters.  A 


OF       PHYSIC.  129 

A  fourth  ftimulus  to  be  conftantly  fufpect.- 
ed  in  fevers,  is  a  general  acrimony  of  the  flu- 
ids, as  produced  by  the  increafe  of  motion 
and  heat,  joined  with  an  interruption  of  the 
excretions.  This  acrimony  is  to  be  obviated 
or  removed  by  the  taking  in  of  large  quantities 
of  mild  antifeptic  liquors. 

CXXXII. 

The  avoiding  of  irritation  in  all  thefe  par- 
ticulars, (CXXX.  and  CXXXLj  conftitutes- 
the  antiphlogiftic  regimen  abfolutely  necerla- 
ry  for  moderating  the  violence  of  reaction  • 
and,  if  I  miflake  not,  is  proper  in  almoft 
every  circumftance  of  continued  fevers  ;  be- 
caufe  the  propriety  and  fafety  of  employing 
flimulants  is  often  uncertain  ;  and  becaufe 
feveral  of  thofe  above  mentioned,  beiide  their 
flimulant  powers,  have  other  qualities  by- 
which  they  may  be  hurtful. 

It  appears  to  me,  that  the  fuppofed  utility 
of  flimulants,  in  certain  cafes  of  fever,  has  oft- 
en arifen  from  a  miflake  in  having  afcribed  to 
their  flimulant  what  really  depended  upon 
their  antifpafmodic  power, 

cxxxin: 

A  fecond  head  of  the  means  (CXXVIII. 
2.)  for  moderating  the  violence  of  reactiorv 
comprehends  certain  fedative  powers,  which 

may 

f5 


130  PRACTICE 

may  be  employed  to  diminifh  the  activity  of 
the  whole  body,  and  particularly  that  of  the 
fanguiferous  fyllem. 

The  firjl  of  thefe  to  be  mentioned  is  the 
application  of  cold. 

Heat  is  the  chief  fupport  of  the  activity  of 
the  animal  fyftem;  which  is  therefore  provid- 
ed in  itfelf  with  a  power  of  generating  heat. 
But,  at  the  fame  time,  we  obferve,  that  this 
would  go  to  excefs,  were  it  not  conftantly 
moderated  by  a  cooler  temperature  in  the  fur- 
rounding  atmofphere.  When,  therefore, 
that  power  of  the  fyftem  generating  heat  is  in- 
creafed,  as  is  commonly  the  cafe  in  fevers,  it 
is  neceffary  not  only  to  avoid  all  means  of  in- 
creafmg  it  further,  but  it  feems  proper  alfo  to 
apply  air  of  a  cooler  temperature  ;  or  at  lead 
to  apply  it  more  entirely  and  freely,  than  in  a 
(late  of  health. 

Some  late  experiments  in  the  fmall  pox  and 
in  continued  fevers,  mow  that  the  free  admif- 
fion  of  cool  air  to  the  body  is  a  powerful  rem- 
edy in  moderating  the  violence  of  reaclion  ; 
but  what  is  the  mode  of  its  operation,  to  what 
circumftances  of  fever  it  is  peculiarly  adapt- 
ed, or  what  limitations  it  requires,  I  mall  not 
venture  to  determine,  till  more  particularly 
inftrucled  by  further  experience. 

CXXXIV. 

A  Jtcond  fedative  power  which  may  be  em- 
ployed in  fevers,  is  that  of  certain  medicines, 

known, 


OF       P  H  Y  S  I  C.  13* 

known,  in  the  writings  on  the  Materia  Medi- 
ca,  under  the  title  of  Refrigerants. 

The  chief  of  thefe  are  acids  of  all  kinds, 
when  fufficiently  diluted  ;  and  they  are,  in 
feveral  refpects,  remedies  adapted  to  continu- 
ed  fevers.  Thofe  efpeeially  in  ufe  are,  the 
Vitriolic  and  Vegetable  ;  and5  on  many  ac- 
counts* we  prefer  the  latter.-. 

cxxxv. 

Another  fet  of  refrigerants  are,  the  Neutral 
Salts,  formed  of  the  vitriolic,  nitrous  or  vege- 
table acids  ;  with  alkalines,  either  fixed  or 
volatile.  All  thefe  neutrals,  while  they  are 
difTolving  ;.in  water,  ^generate  cold  •  but  $* 
that  cold  ceafes  foon  after  the  foliation  is 
finifhed,  and  as  the  falts  are  generally  exhib^ 
ited  in  a  diifolved  (late,  their  refrigerant  pow-* 
er  in  the  animal  body  does  not  at  all  depend 
upon  their  power  of  generating  cold  with  wa- 
ter. The  neutral  chiefly  employed  as  a  refrig- 
erant, is  Nitre  •  but  all  the  others,  com- 
pounded as  above  mentioned^  partake  more  or 
lefs  of  the  fame  quality, 

CXXXVL 

Befides  thefe  neutrals,  fome  metallic  falts" 
alfo  have  been  employed  as  refrigerants  in 
fevers;  and  particularly  the  Sugar  of  Lead, 
But  the  refrigerant  powers  of  this  are  not  well 
ascertained ;  and  its  deleterious  Qualities  are 
too  well  known  to  admit  of  its  being  freely 
ufed, 

¥6  CXXXVXU- 


*3*a  PRACTICE 

CXXXVIL 

Under  the  third  general  head  (CXXVIII. 
3.)  of  the  means  to  be  employed  for  moderat- 
ing the  violence  of  reaction,  are  comprehend- 
ed the  feveral  means  of  diminifhing  the.  ten- 
fion,  tone,  and  activity,  of  the  fanguiferous 
fyftem.  As  the  activity  of  this  fyftem  de- 
pends, in  a  great  meafure,  upon  the  tone,  and 
this  again  upon  the  tenfion  of  the  veffels,  giv- 
en to  them  by  the  quantity  of  fluids  they 
contain,  it  is  evident,  that  the  diminution 
of  the  quantity  of  thefe,  mud  diminifh  the 
activity  of  the  fanguiferous  fyftem, 

CXXXVIII. 

The  quantity  of  fluids  contained  in  the 
fanguiferous  fyftem,  may  be  diminiihed  moft 
conveniently  by  the  evacuations  of  blood  let- 
ting and  purging. 

CXXXIX. 

Nothing  is  more  evident,  than  that  blooc 
letting  is  one  of  the  moft  powerful  means  oi 
diminifhing  the  activity  of  the  whole  body, 
efpecially  of  the  fanguiferous  fyftem  ;  and  it 
muft  therefore  be  the  moft  effectual  means  of 
moderating  the  violence  of  reaction  in  fevers. 
Taking  this  as  a  fact,  I  omit  inquiring  into  its 
mode  of  operation,  and  fhall  only  confider  in 

what 


O  F     P  H  Y  S  I  C.  133 

what  circumftances  of  fevers  it  may  be  moft 
properly  employed. 

CXL. 

When  the  violence  of  reaction,  and  its  con- 
usant attendant,  a  phlogiftic  diathefis,  are  fuf- 
ficiently  manifeft  ;  when  thefe  conftitute  the 
principal  part  of  the  difeafe,  and  may  be  ex- 
pected to  continue  throughout  the  whole  of  it, 
as  in  the  cafes  of  fynocha  ;  then  blood  letting 
is  the  principal  remedy,  and  may  be  employed 
as  far  as  the  fymptoms  of  the  difeafe  may  feem 
to  require,  and  the  conftitution  of  the  patient 
will  bear.  It  is,  however,  to  be  attended  to3 
that  a  greater  evacuation  than  is  neceffary, 
may  occaiion  a  flower  recovery,  may  render 
the  perfon  more  liable  to  a  relapfe,  or  may 
bring  on  other  difeafes. 

C£LI. 

In  the  cafe  of  fynocha,  therefore,  there  is 
little  doubt  about  the  propriety  of  blood  let- 
ting ;  but  there  are  other  fpecies  of  fever,  as 
the  fynochuSy  in  which  a  violent  reaction  and 
phlogiftic  diathefis  appear,  and  prevail  dur- 
ing fome  part  of  the  courfe  of  the  difeafe ; 
while,  at  the  fame  time,  thefe  circumftances 
do  not  conftitute  the  principal  part  of  the  dif- 
eafe, nor  are  to  be  expected  to  continue  dur- 
ing the  whole  courfe  of  it  ;  and  it  is  well 
known,  that,  in  many  cafes,  the  ftate  of  violent 

reaction 


i34  P   R   A   C  T  I    C   E 

reaction  is  to  be  fucceeded,  fooner  or  later,  by 
a  flate  of  debility,  from  the  excefs  of  which 
the  danger  of  the  difeafe  is  chiefly  to  arife.  II 
is,  therefore,  neceffary,  .that,  in  many  cafes, 
blood  letting  mould  be  avoided ;  and  even  al- 
though during  the  inflammatory  ftate  of  the 
difeafe,  it  may  be  proper,  it  will  be  necefiary 
to  take  care  that  the  evacuation  be  not  fo  large 
as  to  increafe  the  ftate  of  debility  which  is  to 
follow. 


CXLII. 

From  all  this  it  muft  appear,  that  the  em- 
ploying blood  letting,  in  certain  fevers,  re- 
quires much  difcernment  and  Ikill,  and  is  to 
be  governed  by  the  confideration  of  the  fol- 
lowing circumftances  : 

i.  The  nature  of  the  prevailing  epidemic. 

2.  The  nature  of- the  remote  caufe. 

3.  The  feafon  and  climate  in  which  the 
difeafe  occurs. 

4.  The  degree  of  phlogiftic  diathefis  pref- 
ent. 

5.  The  period  of  the  difeafe. 

6.  The  age,  vigour,  and  plethoric  ftate  of 
the  patient. 

7.  The  patient's  former  difeafes  and  habits 
of  blood  letting. 

8.  The  appearance  of  the  blood  drawn  out. 

9.  The  efre&s  of  the  blood  letting  that 
may  ha.ve  been  already  pra&ifed. 

CXLIII. 


OF       PHYSIC.  135 


CXLIIL 

When,  after  the  cpnfideration  of  thefe  cir- 
cumftances,  blood  letting  is  determined  to  be 
neceffary,  it  mould  be  obferved,  that  it  is 
more  effectual,  according  as  the  blood  is  more 
fuddenly  drawn  off,  and  as  the  body  is  at  the 
fame  time  more  free  from  all  irritation,  and 
confequently  when  in  a  pofture  in  which  the 
feweft  mufcles  are  in  action. 

CXLIV, 

Another  evacuation  whereby  the  quantity 
of  fluids  contained  in  the  body  can  be  confid- 
erably  diminifhed,  is  that  of  Purging. 

CXLV. 

If  we  confider  the  quantity  of  fluids  con- 
flantly  prefent  in  the  cavity  of  the  inteftines, 
and  the  quantity  which  may  be  drawn  from  the 
innumerable  excretories  that  open  into  this 
cavity,  it  will  be  obvious,  that  a  very  great 
evacuation  can  be  made  by  purging  ;  and,  if 
this  be  done  by  a  ftimulus  applied  to  the  intef- 
tines, without  being  at  the  fame  time  commu- 
nicated to  the  reft  of  the  body,  it  may,  by  emp- 
tying both  the  cavity  of  the  inteilines,  and  the 
arteries  which  furnifh  the  excretions  poured 
into  it,  induce  a  coniiderable  relaxation  in 
the  whole  fyftem  ;    and    therefore,    purging 

feems 


t36  PRACTICE 

feems  to  be   a  remedy  fuited  to  moderate  the 
violence  of  reaction  in  fevers. 

CXLVI. 

But  it  is  to  be  obferved,  that,  as  the  fluid 
drawn  from  the  excretories  opening  into  the 
interlines,  is  not  all  drawn  immediately  from 
the  arteries,  as  a  part  of  it  is  drawn  from  the 
mucous  follicles  only  ;  and  as  what  is  even 
more  immediately  drawn  from  the  arteries,  is 
drawn  off  ilowly  ;  fo  the  evacuation  will  not,, 
in  proportion  to  its  quantity,  occafion  fuch  a 
fudden  depletion  of  then-ed  veifels  as  blood 
letting  does ;  and  therefore  cannot  operate  fo . 
powerfully  in  taking  off  the  phlogiflic  diathe- 
fis  of  the  fyftem. 

CXLVII. 

At  the  fame  time,  as  this  evacuation  may 
induce  a  conliderable  degree  of  debility  ;  fo, 
in  thofe  cafes  in  which  a  dangerous  ftate  of 
debility  is  likely  to  occur,  purging  is  to  be 
employed  with  a  great  deal  of  caution  ;  and 
more  efpecialiy  as  the  due  meafure  of  the 
evacuation  is  more  difficult  to  be  applied  than 


m  the  cafe  of  blood  letting. 


CXLVIII. 


As  we  mail  prefently  have  occafion  to  ob- 
ferve,  that  it  is  of  great   importance,  in  the 

cure 


OF       PHYSIC.  137 

cure  of  fevers,  to  reflore  the  determination  of 
the  blood  to  the  veffels  on  the  furface  of  the 
body  ;  fo  purging,  as  in  fome  meafure  taking 
off  that  determination,  feems  to  be  an  evacua- 
tion not  well  adapted  to  the  cure  of  fevers. 

CXLIX. 

If,  notwithftanding  thefe  doubts,  (CXLVI. 
CXLVILandCXLVIII.)itmaIlbeafferted, 
that  purging,  even  from  the  exhibition  of 
purgatives,  has  often  been  ufeful  in  fevers  ;  I 
would  beg  leave  to  maintain,  that  this  has  not 
happened  from  a  large  evacuation  ;  and,  there- 
fore, not  by  moderating  the  violence  of  reac- 
tion, excepting  in  the  cafe  of  a  more  purely 
inflammatory  fever,  or  of  exanthemata  of  an 
inflammatory  nature.  In  other  cafes  of  fever, 
I  have  feen  a  large  evacuation  by  purging,  of 
mifchievous  confequence  ;  and  if,  upon  occa- 
fion,  a  more  moderate  evacuation  has  appear- 
ed to  be  ufeful,  it  is  apprehended  to  have  been 
only  by  taking  off  the  irritation  of  retained 
faeces,  or  by  evacuating  corrupted  humours 
which  happened  to  be  prefent  in  the  intef- 
tines  ;  for  both  of  which  purpofes,  frequent 
laxatives  may  be  properly  employed. 

CL- 

Another  fet  of  means  (CXXVII.  2.)  for 
moderating  the  violence  of  reaction  in  fevers, 
are  thofe  fuited  to  take  off  the  fpafm  of  the 

extreme 


i38  PRACTICE 

extreme  veffels,  which  we  believe  to  be  the  ir- 
ritation that  chiefly  fupports  the  reaction. 

Though  I  have  put  here  this  indication  of 
taking  off  the  fpafm  of  the  extreme  veffels,  as 
fubordinate  to  the  general  indication  of  mod- 
erating the  violence  of  reaction  ;  it  is  howev- 
er to  be  obferved  here,  that  as  fever  univer- 
fally  confifts  in  an  increafed  action  of  the 
heart,  either  in  frequency  or  in  force,  which 
in  either  cafe  is  fupported  by  a  fpafm  of  the 
extreme  veffels,  fo  the  indication  for  remov- 
ing this  is  a  very  general  one,  and  applicable 
in  almoft  every  circumftance  of  fever,  or  at 
leaft  with  a  few  exceptions*  to  be  taken  notice 
of  hereafter. 

CLI. 

For  taking  off  the  fpafm  of  the  extreme 
veffels,  the  means  to  be  employed  are  either 
internal  or  external. 

CLIL 

The  internal  means  (CLI.)  arer 

1.  Thofe  which  determine  the  force  of  the 
circulation  to  the  extreme  veffels  on  the  furface 
of  the  body,  and,  by  reftoring  the  tone  and 
activity  of  thefe  veffels,  may  overcome  the 
fpafm  on  their  extremities. 

2.  Thofe  medicines  which  have  the  power 
of  taking  off  fpafm  in  any  part  of  the  fyftenii 
and  which  are  known  under  the  title  of  An* 
xispasmodics..  CLIIL. 


OF       PHYSIC,  139 


CLIIL 

Thofe  remedies  which  are  fit  to  determine 
to  the  furface  of  the  body,  are^ 

1.  Diluents.  , 

2.  Neutral  Salts. 

3.  Sudorifics, 

4.  Emetics. 

CLIV. 

Water  enters,  in  a  large  proportion,  into 
the  compofition  of  all  the  animal  fluids,  and  a 
large  quantity  of  it  is  always  diffufed  through 
the  whole  of  the  common  mafs.  Indeed,  in 
a  found  flate,  the  fluidity  of  the  whole  mafs 
depends  upon  the  quantity  of  water  prefent 
in  it.  Water,  therefore,  is  the  proper  diluent 
of  our  mafs  of  blood ;  and  other  fluids  are  dil- 
uent only  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  of 
water  they  contain. 

CLV. 

Water  may  be  faid  to  be  the  vehicle  of  the 
feveral  matters  which  ought  to  be  excerned  j 
and  in  a  healthy  flate  the  fulnefs  of  the  ex- 
treme vefTels,  and  the  quantity  of  excretions, 
are  nearly  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  of 
water  prefent  in  the  body.  In  fever,  how- 
ever, although  the  excretions  are  in  fome 
meafure  interrupted,  they  continue  in  fuch 

quantity 


140  PRACTICE 

quantity  as  to  exhale  the  more  fluid  parts  of 
the  blood  ;  and  while  a  portion  of  them  is  at 
the  fame  time  neceffarily  retained  in  the  larger 
veffels,  the  fmaller  and  the  extreme  veffels; 
both  from  the  deficiency  of  fluid,  and  their 
own  contracted  ft  ate,  are  lefs  filled,  and  there- 
fore allowed  to  remain  in  that  condition. 

CLVI. 

To  remedy  this  contracted  ilate,  nothing  is 
more  neceffary  than  a  large  fupply  of  water  of 
watery  fluids,  taken  in  by  drinking  or  other- 
wife  j  for  as  any  fuperfluous  quantity  of  water 
is  forced  off  by  the  feveral  excretories,  fuch  a 
force  applied,  may  be  a  means  of  dilating  the 
extreme  veffels,  and  of  overcoming  the  fpafn* 
affecting  their  extremities. 

CLVII. 

Accordingly  the  throwing  in  of  a  large 
quantity  of  watery  fluids  has  been,  at  all  times, 
a  remedy  much  employed  in  fevers  ;  and  in 
no  inftance  more  remarkably,  than  by  the 
Spanifh  and  Italian  phyficians,  in  the  ufe  of 
what  they  call  the  Diata  aquea. 

CLVIII. 

This  practice  confifts  in  taking  away  every 
other  kind  of  aliment  and  drink,  and  in  giv- 
ing in  divided  portions  every  day,  for  feveral 

days- 


OF       PHYSIC.  141 

days  together,  fix  or  eight  pounds  of  plain 
water,  generally  cold,  but  fometimes  warm. 
All  this,  however,  is  to  be  done  only  after  the 
difeafe  has  continued  for  forne  time,  and,  at 
leaft,  for  a  week. 

CLIX. 

A  fecond  means  (CLIII.  2.)  of  determin- 
ing to  the  furface  of  the  body,  is  by  the  ufe  of 
neutral  falts.     Thefe,  in  a  certain  dofe  taken 
into  the  flomach,  produce,  foon  after,  a  fenfe 
of  heat  upon  the  furface  of  the  body  ;  and,  if 
the  body  be  covered  clofe  and  kept  warm,   a 
1  fweat  is  readily  brought  out.   The  fame  med- 
;  icines,  taken  during  the  cold  ftage  of  a  fever, 
<  very  often  put  an  end  to  the  cold  ftage,  and 
bring  on  the  hot  ;  and  they  are  alfo  remarka- 
ble for  flopping  the  vomiting  which  fo  fre- 
quently attends  the  cold  ftage  of  fevers.     All 
this  fhows,  that  neutral  falts  have  a  power  of 
determining  the  blood  to  the   furface  of   the 
(  body,  and  may  therefore  be  of  ufe  in  taking 
■off  the  fpafm  which  in  fevers  fubfifts  there. 

CLX. 

The  neutral  mo  ft  commonly  employed  m 
fevers,  is  that  formed  of  an  alkali  with  the 
native  acid  of  vegetables  ;  but  all  the  other 
neutrals  have  more  or  lefs  of  the  fame  virtue  ; 
and  perhaps  fomeof  them,  particularly  the  am- 
swoniacal  Lilts,  poftefs  it  in  a  ftronger  decree. 

CLX  I. 


i42  PRACTICE 


CLXI. 

As  cold  water  taken  into  the  ftomach,  oft- 
en fhows  the  fame  diaphoretic  effects  with  the 
neutral  falts,  it  is  probable  that  the  effect  of 
the  latter  depends  upon  their  refrigerant  pow- 
ers mentioned  above,  (CX  XXIV.)  What  is  the 
effect  of  the  neutral  falts,  given  when  they  are 
forming  and  in  a  ftate  of  effervefcence  ?  It  is 
probable  that  this  circumftance  may  increafe 
the  refrigerant  power  of  thefe  falts,  and  may 
introduce  into  the  body  a  quantity  of  fixed 
air ;  but  for  thefe  purpofes  it  would  feem  prop- 
er to  contrive  that  the  whole  of  the  effervef- 
cence ihould  take  place  in  the  ftomach. 

CLXII. 

A  third  means  (CLIII.  3-)of  determining 
to  the  furface  of  the  body,  and  taking  off  the 
fpafm  fubfifting  there,  is  by  the  ufe  of  fudo- 
rific  medicines,  and  of  fweating. 

CLXIII. 

The  propriety  of  this  remedy  has  been 
much  difputed  ;  and  fpecious  arguments  may 
be  adduced  both  for  and  againft  the  practice* 

In  favour  of  the  practice,  it  may  be  faid  ; 

1.  That,  in  healthy  perfons,  in  every  cafe 
of  increafed  action  of  the  heart  and  arteries,  a 
fweating   takes    place,    and  is  feemingly  the 

'   means 


Or       PHYSIC.  143 

means  of  preventing  the  bad  effe&s  of  fuch 
increafed  a&ion. 

2.  That,  in  fevers,  their  mod  ufual  Solu- 
tion and  termination  is  by  Spontaneous  Sweat- 
ing. 

3.  That,  even  when  excited  by  art,  it  has 
been  found  manifeftly  ufeful,  at  certain  peri- 
ods, and  in  certain  fpecies  of  fever. 

CLXIV, 

Upon  the  other  hand,  it  may  be  urged  a- 
gainft  the  practice  of  fweating  ; 

1 .  That  as  in  fevers  a  fpontaneous  fweating 
does  not  immediately  come  on,  fo  there  mud 
be  in  thefe  fome  circumftances  different  from 
thofe  in  the  State  of  health,  and  which  may 
therefore  render  it  doubtful  whether  the  fweat- 
ing can  be  fafely  excited  by  art. 

2.  That,  in  many  cafes,  the  practice  has 
been  attended  with  bad  confequences.  The 
means  commonly  employed  have  a  tendency 
to  produce  an  inflammatory  diathefis  ;  which, 
if  not  taken  off  by  the  fweat  following  their 
ufe,  mull  be  increafed  with  much  danger. 
Thus  fweating  employed  to  prevent  the  ac- 
ceffionsof  intermitting  fevers,  has  often  chang- 
ed them  into  a  continued  form,  which  is  al- 
ways dangerous. 

3.  The  utility  of  the  practice  is  further 
doubtful,  becaufe  fweating,  when  it  happens, 
does  not  always  give  a  final  determination  ; 
as  aiuft  be  manifefl  in  the  cafe  of  intermit- 

tents, 


144  PRACTICE 

tents,  as  well  as  in  many  continued  fevers, 
which  are  fometimes  in  the  beginning  attend- 
ed with  fweatings  that  do  not  prove  final  ;  and, 
on  the  contrary,  whether  fpontaneous  or  ex- 
cited by  art,  feem  often  to  aggravate  the  dif- 
eafe. 

CLXV. 

From  thefe  confiderations,  it  is  extremely 
doubtful  if  the  practice  of  fweating  can  be  ad- 
mitted very  generally  ;  but,  at  the  fame  time, 
it  is  alfo  doubtful,  if  the  failure  of  the  practice, 
or  the  mifchiefs  faid  to  have  arifen  from  it,  have 
not  been  owing  to  the  improper  conduct  of 
the  practitioner. 

With  refpecl.  to  this  lafl,  it  is  almoft  agreed 
among  phyhcians, 

1.  That  fweating  has  been  generally  hurt- 
ful when  excited  by  ftimulant,  heating,  and 
inflammatory  medicines. 

2.  That  it  has  been  hurtful  when  excited 
by  much  externalheat,  and  continued  with  a 
great  increafe  of  the  heat  of  the  body. 

3.  That  it  is  always  hurtful  when  it  does 
not  foon  relieve,  but  rather  increafes,  the  fre- 
quency and  hardnefs  of  the  pulfe,  the  anxiety 
and  difficulty  of  breathing,  the  headach,  and 
delirium. 

4.  That  it  is  always  hurtful  if  it  be  urged 
when  the  fweat  is  not  fluid,  and  when  it  is 
partial,  and  on  the  fuperior  parts  of  the  body 
only. 

CLXVL 


O  F     P  H  Y  S  I  C,  145 

CLXVI. 

In  thefe  cafes,  it  is  probable,  that  either  an 
inflammatory  diathefis  is  produced,  which  in- 
creafes  the  fpafm  on  the  extreme  veffels  •  or 
that,  from  other  eaufes,  the  fpafm  is  too  much 
fixed  to  yield  eafily  to  the  increafed  a£lion  of 
the  heart  and  arteries  ;  and,  upon  either  fup- 
pofition,  it  mull  be  obvious,  that  urging  the 
fweat,  as  ready  to  produce  a  hurtful  determi- 
nation to  fome  of  the  internal  parts,  may  be 
attended  witfrvery  great  danger, 

CLXVII. 

Though  the  doubts  flarted  (CLXIV.)  are 
to  be  attended  to ;  and  although  the  practices 
(CLXV.)  having  been  found  hurtful,  are 
therefore  to  be  rejected  ;  it  fall  remains  true, 

1.  That  fweating  has  certainly  been  often 
ufeful  in  preventing  the  acceffion  of  fevers, 
xvhen  the  times  of  this  have  been  certainly 
forefeen,  and  a  proper  condu6t  employed. 

2.  That,  even  after  fevers  have  in  fome 
meafure  come  on,  fwea.ting,  when  properly 
employed,  either  at  the  very  beginning  of  the 
difeafe,  or  during  its  approach  and  gradual 
formation,  has  often  prevented  their  further 
progrefs. 

3.  That,  even  after  pyrexias  have  continu- 
ed for  fome  time,  fweating  has  been  fuccefT- 
fully  employed  in  curing  them,  as  particular- 
ly in  the  cafe  of  rheumatifm. 

G  4,  That 


146  PRACTICE 

4.  That  certain  fevers,  produced  by  a  very 
powerful  fedative  contagion,  have  been  gener- 
ally treated,  fo  far  as  we  yet  know,  moll  mc- 
cefsfully  by  fweating. 

CLXVIII. 

Thefe  inflances  (CLXVII.)  are  in  favour 
of  fweating,  but  give  no  general  rule  ;  and  it 
mufl  be  left  to  further  experience  to  deter- 
mine how  far  any  general  rule  can  be  eftab- 
lifhed  in  this  matter.  In  the  mean  time,  if 
the  praclice  of  fweating  is  to  be  attempted,  we 
can  venture  to  lay  down  the  following  rules 
for  the  conduct  of  it. 

i.  That  it  mould  be  excited  without  the 
ufe  of  flimulant  inflammatory  medicines. 

2.  That  it  mould  be  excited  with  as  little 
external  heat,  and  with  as  little  increafe  of  the 
heat  of  the  body,  as  poilible. 

3.  That,  when  excited,  it  mould  be  contin- 
ued for  a  due  length  of  time,  not  lefs  than 
twelve  hours,  and  fometimes  for  twenty  four 
or  forty  eight  hours  ;  always,  however,  pro- 
viding that  it  proceeds  without  the  circurn- 
frances  mentioned  (CLXV.  3.  4.) 

4.  That  for  fome  part  of  the  time,  and  as 
long  as  the  perfon  can  eafily  bear,  it  mould 
be  carried  on  without  admitting  of  deep. 

5.  That  it  mould  be  rendered  univerfal 
over  the  whole  body  ;  and,  therefore,  particu- 
larly, that  care  be  taken  to  bring  the  fweating 
to  the  lower  extremities. 

6.  That 


OF       PHYSIC.  147 

6.  That  the  practice  mould  be  rendered 
fafer  by  moderate  purging,  excited  at  the  fame 
time. 

7.  That  it  mould  not  be  fuddenly  checked 
by  cold  any  how  applied  to  the  body. 

CLXIX. 


When  attention  is  to  be  given  to  thefe 
rules,  the  fweating  may  be  excited,  1.  By 
warm  bathing,  or  a  fomentation  of  the  lower 
extremities.  2.  By  frequent  draughts  of 
tepid  liquors,  chiefly  water,  rendered  more 
grateful  by  the  addition  of  a  light  aromatic, 
or  more  powerful  by  that  of  a  fmall  quantity 
of  wine.  3.  By  giving  fome  dofes  of  neutral 
ialts.  4.  Moil  effeclually,  and  perhaps  mod 
fafely,  by  a  large  dofe  of  an  opiate,  joined  with 
a  portion  of  neutral  falts,  and  of  an  emetic. 

In  what  cafes  may  cold  water,  thrown  into 
the  ftomach  in  large  quantities,  be  employed 
to  excite  fweating?  See  Celsus,  Lib.  III. 
chap.  vii. — ix. 

CLXX. 

The  fourth  means  (CLIII.  1.)  of  deter- 
mining to  the  furface  of  the  body,  and  thereby 
taking  off  the  fpafm  affe6fcing  the  extreme  vef- 
fels,  is  by  the  ufe  of  emetics. 

G  2  CLXXL 


i,i8  PRACTICE 


CLXXI. 

Emetics,  and  particularly  antimonial  emet- 
ics, haye  been  employed  in  the  cure  of  fevers 
ever  fmce  the  introduction  of  chemical  med- 
icines ;  but,  for  a  long  time,  they  were  em- 
ployed by  chemifls  and  chemical  practitioners 
only  ;  and  although  of  late  the  ufe  of  them 
has  become  very  general,  their  efficacy  is  ftill 
difputed,  and  their  manner  of  operating  is  not 
commonly  explained. 

CLXXII. 

Vomiting  is,  in  many  refpects,  ufeful  in  fe- 
vers- ;  as  it  evacuates  the  contents  of  the  flom- 
ach  ;  as  it  emulges  the  biliary  and  pancreatic 
duels  ;  as  it  evacuates  the  contents  of  the  du- 
odenum, and  perhaps  alfo  of  a  larger  portion 
of  the  interlines  ;  as  it  agitates  the  whole  of 
the  abdominal  vifcera,  expedes  the  circulation 
in  them,  and  promotes  their  feveral  fecretions  ; 
and,  laflly,  as  agitating  alfo  the  vifcera  of  the 
thorax,  it  has  like  effects  there.  All  thefe 
feveral  effects  are,  in  many  cafes  and  circum- 
stances of  fever,  procured  with  advantage  ;  but 
do  not  properly  fall  under  our  view  here,  where 
we  are  to  confider  only  the  effect  of  vomiting 
in  determining  to  the  furface  of  the  body. 

CLXXII  I. 


OF     PHYSIC.  149 


CLXXIIL 

This  effect  we  do  not  impute  to  the  exercife 
of  vomiting  in  agitating  the  whole  frame  ;  but 
to  the  particular  operation  of  emetics  upon  the 
mufcular  fibres  of  the  ftomach,  whereby  they 
excite  the  action  of  the  extreme  arteries  on  the 
furface  of  the  body,  fo  as  thereby  effectually 
to  determine  the  blood  into  thefe  veffels,  re- 
move the  atony,  and  take  off  the  fpafrn  affect- 
ing them. 

CLXXIV. 

That  fuch  is  the  po~v\  er  of  emetics,  will  ap- 
pear from  the  feveral  confiderations  mention- 
ed above  (XLIV.);  and,  therefore,  that  they 
are  remedies  well  fuitecl  to  the  cure  of  fevers* 

CLXXV. 

Emetics,  for  that  purpofe,  are  adminiftered 
in  two  different  ways;  that  is,  either  in  fuch 
dofes  as  may  excite  full  and  repeated  vomit- 
ings ;  or  in  fuch  dofes  as  may  excite  ficknefs 
and  naufea  only,  with  little  or  no  vomiting  at 
all. 

CLXXVI. 

Full  vomiting  is  befl  fuited  to  the  feveral 

gurpofes  mentioned  CLXXIL  ;  and  is  alfr>- 

G  3  well 


ISO  PRACTICE 

well  fuited  to  determine  to  the  furface  of  the 
body,  fo  as  thereby  to  obviate  the  atony  and 
fpafm  which  lay  the  foundation  of  fever. 
Thus  vomiting,  excited  a  little  before  the  ex- 
pected accemon  of  the  paroxyfm  of  an  inter- 
mittent, has  been  found  to  prevent  the  parox- 
yfm altogether.  And  it  has  been  obferved 
alfo,  that,  when  contagion  has  been  applied  to 
a  perfon,  and  firfl  difcovers  its  operation,  a 
vomit  given  will  prevent  the  fever,  which  was 
otherwife  to  have  been  expe£ted.  See  Lin© 
on  Fevers  and  Infection, 

CLXXVII. 

Thefe  are  advantages  to  be  obtained  by  ex- 
citing vomiting  at  the  firfl  approach  of  fevers, 
or  of  the  paroxyfms  of  fevers  ;  and  after  fevers 
are  formed,  vomiting  may  alfo  be  employed, 
to  take  off,  perhaps  entirely,  the  atony  and 
fpafm,  or  at  leaft  to  moderate  thefe,  fo  that  the 
fever  may  proceed  more  gently  and  fafely. 

CLXXVIII. 

It  is  feldom, however,  thatvomitingis  found 
to  produce  a  final  folution  of  fevers  ;  and,  af- 
ter they  are  once  formed,  it  is  commonly  nec- 
effary  to  repeat  the  vomiting  feveral  times  ; 
but  this  is  attended  with  inconvenience,  and 
fometimes  with  difadvantage.  The  operation 
cf  full  vomiting  commonly  foon  ceafes,  and 
the  exercife  of  vomiting  is  often  a  debilitating 

power  i 


OF       PHYSIC.  15*. 

power  ;  and  therefore,  when  the  vomiting  does 
not  remove  the  atony  and  ipafm  very  entirely, 
it  may  give  occafion  to  their  recurring  with 
greater  force. 

CLXXIX. 

For  thefe  reafons,  after  fevers  are  fully 
formed,  phyficians  have  thought  proper  to 
employ  emetics  in  naufeating  doles  only. 
Thefe  are  capable  of  exciting  the  action  of 
the  extreme  veffels,  and  their  operation  is  more 
permanent.  At  the  fame  time,  they  often 
ihow  their  power  by  exciting  fome  degree  of 
fweat ;  and  their  operation  is  rendered  more 
fafe,  by  their  commonly  producing  fome  evac- 
uation by  ilool. 

CLXXX, 

Such  are  the  advantages  to  be  procured  by 
naufeating  dofes  of  emetics  ;  and  it  only  re- 
mains to  mention,  what  are  the  medicines  moil 
fit  to  be  employed  in  that  manner,  what  are  the 
moil:  proper  times  for  exhibiting,  and  what  is 
the  bell  manner  of  adminiifering  them, 

CLXXXL 

The  emetics  at  pre fent  chiefly  in  ufe,  are, 
Ipecacuanha  and  Antimony. 

The  former  may  be  employed  for  every 
purpofe  of  emetics,  particularly  thofe  men- 
tioned CLXXII.  It  may  iikewife  be  emw 
G  4  ployed, 


152  PRACTICE 

ployed,  either  in  larger  or  fmaller  dofes,  for 
determining  to  the  furface  of  the  body  ;  but, 
even  in  very  fmall  dofes,  it  fo  readily  excites 
vomiting,  as  to  be  with  difficulty  employed 
for  the  purpofe  of  naufeating  only  ;  and,  how- 
ever employed,  there  is  reafon  to  believe,  that 
its  effects  are  lefs  permanent,  and  lefs  power- 
fully communicated  from  the  ftomach  to  the 
reft  of  the  fyftem,  than  thofe  of  Antimony. 

CLXXXII. 

This,  therefore,  is  generally  preferred  ;  and 
its  preparations,  feemingly  various,  may  all  ' 
be  referred  to  two  heads  ;  the  one  compre- 
hending thofe  in  which  the  reguline  part  is  in 
a  condition  to  be  afted  upon  by  acids  ;  and 
therefore,  on  meeting  with  acids  in  the  ftom- 
ach, becomes  active ;  and  the  other  compre- 
hending thofe  preparations  in  which  the  regu- 
line part  is  already  joined  with  ai|  acid,  ren- 
dering it  aclive. 

CLXXXIII. 

Of  each  kind  there  are  great  numbers,  but 
not  differing  effentially  from  one  another. 
It  will  be  enough  for  us  to  compare  the  Calx 
Antimonii  Nitrata  of  the  Edinburgh  Difpen- 
fatory  with  the  Emetic  Tartar  of  the  fame. 
The  former,  as  I  judge,  is  nearly  the  fame  with 
what  is  called  James's  Powder.  Which  of 
thefe  is  beft  fuited  to  the  cure  of  fevers,  as 

above. 


OF       PHYSIC.  153: 

above  explained,  feems  doubtful ;  but  it  ap- 
pears to  me,  that,  although  the  former  may- 
have  fome  advantages  from  its  flower  opera- 
tion,  and  may  thereby  feem  to  be  more  cer- 
tainly Sudorific  and  purgative,  yet  the  uncer- 
tainty of  its  dofe  renders  it  inconvenient,  has 
often  given  occafion  to  the  timid  to  be  dii- 
appointed,  and  to  the  bold  to  do  mifchief. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  dofe  of  the  Emetic 
Tartarean  be  exaclly  afcertained  ;  and  I  think 
it  may  be  exhibited  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to* 
produce  all  the  advantages  of  the  other^ 

CLXXXIV. 


Whichsoever  of  thefe  preparations  be  em- 
ployed, I  judge  the  moft  proper  time  for  ex- 
hibiting them,  to  be  the  time  of  acceffions ;  or 
a  little  before,  when  that  can  be  certainly- 
known.  In  continued  fevers,  the  exacerba- 
tions are  not  always  very  obfervable  ;  but  there 
is  reafon  to  think,  that  one  commonly  hap- 
pens about  noon,,  or  foon  after  it,  and  anoth- 
er in  the  evening  ;  and  that  thefe,  therefore, 
are  the  moil  proper  times  for  exhibiting 
emetics.. 

CLXXXV. 

With  refpecl  to  the  manner  of  a dminiftrs- 

tion,  that  of  the  Calx  Nitrata  is  fimple,  as  the 

whole  of  what  is  judged  a  proper  dole  is  given 

G  5  afe 


154  PRACTICE 

at  once,  and  no  more  can  properly  be  given 
till  the  time  of  the  next  accefhon. 

The  adminiilration  of  the  Emetic  Tartar  is 
different.  It  is  to  be  given  in  fmall  dofes,  not 
fumcient  to  excite  vomiting  ;  and  thefe  dofes, 
after  fhort  intervals,  are  to  be  repeated  for 
feveral  times,  till  iicknefs,  naufea,  and  fome, 
but  not  much,  vomiting,,  come  on.  The  dif- 
ference of  this  adminiftration  mud  depend 
upon  the  dofe,.  and  the  length  of  the  intervals 
at  which  it  is  given,  If  it  be  intended  that 
the  medicine  mould  certainly  operate  by 
ftool,  the  dofes  are  made  fmall,.  and  the  inter- 
vals long.  On  the  contrary t  when  vomiting 
is  proper,  or  when  much  purging  ought  to  be 
avoided,,  and  therefore  fome  vomiting  rnuft  be 
admitted,  the  dofes  are  made  larger  and  the 
intervals  fhorter, 

CLXXXVI. 

With  refpecl:  to  both  kinds  of  preparations, 
the  repetition  is  to  be  made  at  the  times  of  ac- 
cefrion,  but  not  very  often  •  for  if  the  firft  ex- 
hibitions, duly  managed,  have  little  effect,  it  is 
feidom  that  the  after  exhibitions  have  much  ; 
and  it  fometimes  happens  that  the  repeated 
vomitings,  and  efpecially  repeated  purgings, 
do  harm  by  weakening  the  patient. 

CLXXXVIL 

The  other  fet  of  internal  medicines,  (CLII* 
2.)  which  I  fuppofe  may  be  ufeful  in  taking 

ofF 


OF      PHYSIC.  155 

off  the  fpafm  of  the  extreme  veffels,  are  thole 
named  Antifpafmodic.  How  many  of  thefe 
may  be  properly  employe &y  I  am  uncertain  ;, 
and  their  mode  of  operation  is  involved  in 
great  obfcurityaI  It  is  certain,  however,  that 
opium,,  camphor,  mufk,.  and  perhaps  fome 
others,-  have  been  employed  in  fevers  with  ad- 
vantage ;  but  the  circumffances  in  which  they 
are  efpecially  proper  and  fafe^  I  find  difficult 
to  afcertain  ;;  and  therefore  cannot  venture 
here  to  lay  down  any  general  doctrine  con- 
cerning them, 

CLXXXVIII. 

The  external  means  (CLI.)  fuited  to  take 
off  the  fpafm  of  the  extreme  veffelsvare  Blis- 
tering- and  Warm  Bathing 

CLXXXIX, 

What  are  the  effects  of  Bliilering,fo  frequenU 
3y  employed  in  fevers,  is  not  yet  agreed  upon 
among  phyiicians  1  and  many  different  opin- 
ions have  been  maintained  on  this  fubjec\ 
drawn  not  only  from  reafoning,  but  alfo  from, 
prefumed  experience.  I  muft  not,  however, 
enter  into  controverfy  ;  but  mall  deliver  my 
own  opinion  in  a  few  words* 

cxa 

I  am  perfuaded,  that  the  fmall  quantity  of 

eantharides  abforbed  from  a  buffering  plafler,, 

G  6  i& 


156  PRACTICE 

is  not  fufficient  to  change  the  confidence  of 
the  mafs  of  blood  ;  and  therefore  that  fuch  a 
quantity  can  neither  do  good,  by  refolving 
phlogiftic  lentor,  if  it  exifts ;  nor  do  harm, 
hy  increafing  the  diffolution  of  the  blood  arif- 
ing  from  a  putrid  tendency  in  it.  I  there- 
fore neglect  entirely  the  effects  of  cantharides 
upon  the  fluids. 

CXCI. 

The  inflammation  produced  by  the  ap- 
plication of  cantharides  to  the  fkin,  affords 
a  certain  proof  of  their  ilimulant  power  • 
but,  in  many  perfons,  the  effect  of  that  ftim- 
ulus  is  not  confiderable ;  in  many,  it  is 
not  communicated  to  the  whole  fyftem  ; 
and,  even  when,  the  effect  does  take  place  in 
the  whole  fyftem,.  it  feems  to  be  taken  off, 
very  entirely,  by  the  effufion  and  evacuation 
of  ierum  from  the  bliftered  part.  I  conclude, 
therefore,  that  neither  much  good  is  to  be 
expecled,  nor  much  harm  to  be  apprehended, 
from  the  ftimulant  power  of  bliftering  ;  and 
the  certainty  of  this  conclunon  is  eftabliihed, 
by  the  great  benefit  arifmg  from  the  proper 
practice  of  bliftering  in  inflammatory  difeafes„ 

cxcn; 

Much  has  been  imputed  to  the  evacuation 
occafioned   by    bliftering  ;    but  it  is  never  fo 
confiderable   as  to   affect    the  whole  fyftem ; 
and  therefore   can  neither,  by  fudden  deple- 
tion, 


OF       PHYSIC.  157 

tion,  relax  the  fanguiferous  veffels,  nor,  by 
any  revulfion,  affect  the  general  diftribution 
of  the  fluids* 

CXCIIL 

The  evacuation,  however,  is  fo  confider- 
able  as  to  affect  the  neighbouring  veffels ; 
and  the  manifeft  utility  of  bliftering  near  the 
part  affected,  in  inflammatory  difeafes,  leads 
me  to  believe,  that  bliftering,  by  deriving  to 
the  (kin,  and  producing  an  effulion  there, 
relaxes  the  fpafm  of  the  deeper  feated  veffels. 
I  apprehend  it  to  be  in  this  manner  that  the 
tumour  of  a  joint,  from  an  effufion  into  the 
cellular  texture  under  the  fkin,  takes  off  the 
rheumatic  pain  affecting  that  joint, 

CXCIV, 

Analogous  to  this,  it  may  be  held,  that  ih& 
good  effects  of  bliftering  in  continued  fevers, 
arife  from  its  relaxing  the  fpafm  of  the  ex- 
treme veffels,  by  a  communication  of  the 
bliftered  part  with  the  reft  of  the  flan ;  and 
this  is  illuftrated  by  the  effect  of  bliftering  in 
colic  and  dyfentery, 

CXCV. 

It  appears  to  me,  that  bliftering  may  be 
employed  at  any  period  of  continued  fevers  5 
but  that  it  will  be  of  moft  advantage  in  the 

advanced 


*58  PRACTICE 

advanced  ftate  of  fuch  fevers,  when,  the  reac- 
tion  being  weaken  all  ambiguity  from  the- 
ftimulant  power  of  bliftering  is  removed,  and 
when  it  may  bed  concur  with  other  circum- 
fiances  tending  to  a  final  folutionof  the  fpafrru 

CXCVL 

From  the  view  of  this  matter  given  im 
(CXCIII.  and  CXCIV.)  it  will  appear,  that 
the  part  of  the  body  to  which  blifters  ought 
to  be  applied,  is  indifferent,  excepting  upon 
the  fufpicion  of  topical  affeclion,  when  the 
bliilering  ought  to  be  made  as  near  as  poffible 
to  the  part  affe&ed, 


CXCVII. 


. 


Whether  Sinapisms,  and  other  Rube 
facie nt i  a,  acl  in  a  manner  analogous  to 
what  we  have  fuppofed  of  bliflering,  may  be 
doubtful ;  but  their  effects  in  rheumatifm^ 
and  other  inflammatory  difeafes,  render  it 
probable^ 

CXCVIIL 

The  other  external  means  of  taking  off  the* 
fpafm  of  the  extreme  veffels,  is  Warm  Bath- 
ing. This  was  frequently,  and  in  various 
circumPianoes,  employed  by  the  ancients;  but 
till  very  lately  has  been  neglected  by  modern 
phyficians.     As  the  beat  of  the  bath  ffimu- 

lates- 


OF      PHYSIC.  159 

lates  the  extreme  veffels,  and,  with  the  con- 
currence of  moifture,  alfo  relaxes  them,  it 
feems  to  be  a  fafe  ftimulus,  and  well  fuited 
to  take  off  the  fpafm  affecting  them, 

CXCIX. 

It  may  be  applied  to  the  whole  body  hy 
immerlion  ;  but  this  is,  in  many  refpects, 
inconvenient ;  and  whether  fome  of  the  in- 
conveniences of  immerhon  might  not  be 
avoided  by  a  vapour  bath,  I  have  not  learned 
from  experience.  I  know,  however,  from 
much  experience,  that  mod  of  the  purpofes 
of  warm  bathing  can  be  obtained  by  a  foment- 
ation of  the  legs  and  feet,  if  properly  admin- 
iflered,  and  continued  for  a  due  length  of 
time,  which  ought  not  to  be  lefs  than  an  hour, 

CC. 

The  "marks  of  the  good  effects  of  fuch  a 
fomentation,  are,thepatient's  bearing  it  eaiily, 
its  relieving  delirium,  and  inducing  fleep* 

CCI. 

Having  now  confidered  the  feveral  means 
of  fatisfying  trie  hrft  general  indication  in  the 
cure  of  fevers,  I  proceed  to  the  fecond, 
(CXXVI.),  which  is,  To  remove  the  caufe>  or 
obviate  the  effects,,  of  debility, 

ecu. 


160  PRACTICE 

CCII. 

Moll  of  the  fedative  powers  inducing  de- 
bility, ceafe  to  act  foon  after  they  have  been 
firfl  applied;  and,  therefore,  the  removing, 
them  is  not  an  object  of  our  prefent  indication.. 
There  is  only  one  which  may  be  fuppofed  to 
continue  to  act  for  a  long  time  ;  and  that  isy 
the  contagion  applied  ;  but  we  know  nothing 
of  the  nature  of  contagion  that  can  lead  us  to 
any  meafures  for  removing  or  correcting  it. 
We  know  only  its  effects  as  a  fedative  power 
inducing  debility,  or  as  a  ferment  inducing  a 
tendency  to  putrefaction  in  the  fluids.  The 
obviating  the  latter  will  be  confidered  under 
our  third  general  indication,  and  the  former 
alone  is  to  be  confidered  here. 

CCIIL 

The  debility  induced  in  fevers  hy  contagion^ 
©r  other  caufes,  appears  efpecially  in  the 
weaker  energy  of  the  brain  ;  but  in  what  this 
confifts,  or  how  it  may  be  directly  rerlored, 
we  do  not  well  know.  As  Nature,  however,, 
does,  feemingly  for  this  purpofe,.  excite  the 
action  of  the  heart  and  arteries,  we  afcribe  the 
continuance  of  debility  to  the  weaker  reaction? 
of  the  fanguiferous  fyftem  ;  fo  that  the  means 
to  be  employed  for  obviating  debility,  are 
immediately  directed  to  fupport  and  increafe 
the  action  of  the  heart  and  arteries  ;  and  the 
remedies  ufe d  are  Tonics  or  S  x  i  m  u  l  a  n  t  s . 

CCIV. 


OF       PHYSIC.  161 

CCIV. 

In  contagious  difeafes,  both  from  the  effects 
which  appear,  and  from  diffections,  it  is  known, 
that  the  tone  of  the  heart  and  arteries  is  con- 
fiderably  diminifhed ;  and  that  tonic  reme- 
dies, therefore,  are  properly  indicated. 

Thefe  are  to  be  considered  as  of  two  kinds  ; 
the  firft  being  the  power  of  cold,  the  fecond 
that  of  tonic  medicines. 

ccv. 

The  power  of  cold,  as  a  tonic,  I  have 
mentioned  above  (XC);  and  it  is  employed, 
in  fevers,  in  two  ways  ;  either  as  the  cold 
matter  is  thrown  into  the  flomach,  or  as  it  is 
applied  to  the  furfaceofthe  body. 

CCVI. 

As  it  has  been  mown  above,  that  the  tonic 
power  of  cold  can  be  communicated  from  any 
one  part  to  every  other  part  of  the  fyftem ;  fo 
it  will  readily  be  allowed,that  the  flomach  is  a 
part  as  fit  for  this  communication  as  any 
other;  and  that  cold  drink,  taken  into  the 
flomach,  may,  therefore,  prove  an  ufeful  tonic 
in  fevers. 

CCVII. 

This  the  experience  of  all  ages  has  confirm- 
ed ;  but,  at  the  fame  time,    it  has  been  fre- 
quently 


lfo  PRACTICE 

quently  obferved,  that,  in  certain  circum- 
ftances,  cold  drink,  taken  into  the  ftomach, 
has  proved  very  hurtful ;  and,  therefore,  that 
the  ufe  of  cold  drink  in  fevers  requires  fome 
limitations.  What  thefe  limitations  mould 
be,  and  what  are  all  the  circumflances  which 
may  forbid  the  ufe  of  cold  drink,  is  difficult 
to  determine  ;  but  it  feems  clearly  forbidden, 
in  all  cafes  where  a  phlogiftic  diathefis  pre- 
vails in  the  fyftem,  and  more  efpecially  when 
there  are  topical  affections  of  an  inflammatory 
nature. 

CCVIIL 

The  other  method  of  employing  cold  as  a 
tonic,  is,  by  applying  it  to  the  furface  of  the 
body.  The  application  of  cold  air  to  the  fur- 
face  of  the  body,  as  a  refrigerant  power  fit 
to  moderate  the  violence  of  reaction,  I  have 
fpoken  of  above  (CXXXIII.);  but  probably 
it  may  alio  be  considered  here  as  a  tonic,  and 
ufeful  in  cafes  of  debility. 

CCIX, 

Not  only  cool  air,  but  cold  water  alfo,  may 
be  applied  to  the  furface  of  the  body,  as  a 
refrigerant,  and  perhaps  as  a  tonic.  The  an- 
cients frequently  applied  it  with  advantage, 
to  particular  parts,  as  a  tonic  ;  but  it  is  a  dif- 
covery  of  modern  times,  that  in  the  cafe  of 
putrid  fevers,  attended  with  much  debility, 
the  body  may  be  wafhed  all  over  with  cold 
water. 

ccx. 


OF      PHYSIC.  163 

CCX. 

This  was  firft  praftifed  at  Breflaw  in  Silefia, 
as  appears  from  a  differtation,  under  the  title 
of  Epidemia  verna  quce  Wratijlaviam,  anno 
1737,  ajflixit,  to  be  found  in  the  appendix  to 
the  ABa  Nat.  Curiof.  Vol.  X.  And  from 
other  writers  we  find,  that  the  practice  has 
paifed  into  feme  of  the  neighbouring  countries  j 
although  in  this  ifland,  lo  far  as  I  know,  we 
have  hitherto  had  no  experience  of  it. 

CCXI. 

The  medicines  which  have  been  employed 
in  fevers,  as  tonics,  are  various.  If  the  Sac- 
charum  Saturni  has  been  found  ufeful,  it  is, 
probably,  as  a  tonic,  rather  than  as  a  refriger- 
ant ;  and  the  Ens  Veneris,  or  other  prepa- 
rations of  iron  which  have  been  employed, 
can  act  as  tonics  only.  The  preparations  of 
copper,  from  their  effects  in  epilepfy,  are  pre- 
fumed  to  poffefs  a  tonic  power  ;  but,  whether 
their  ufe  in  fevers  be  founded  upon  their  tonic 
orbheir  emetic  powers, may  be  uncertain.  The 
ufe  of  arfenic  and  of  alum,  in  intermittent 
fevers,  feems  manifeftiy  to  depend  upon  their 
tonic  power.  And,  upon  the  whole,  there 
may  occur  cafes  of  continued  fevers,  which 
may  be  cured  by  tonics  taken  from  the  foffil 
kingdom  ;  but  the  ufe  of  thefe  has  been  rare, 

as 


164  PRACTICE 

as  well  as  the  effe&s  uncertain ;  andphyficians 
have  employed,  more  commonly,  the  vege- 
table tonics. 

CCXII. 

A  great  variety  of  thefe  has  been  employed 
in  the  cure  of  intermittent  fevers  •  but  how 
many  of  them  may  be  employed  in  continued 
fevers,  or  in  what  circumftances  of  thefe 
fevers,  is  not  well  afcertained  •  and  I  mall 
now  only  confider  the  queftion  with  refpecl; 
to  the  raoft  celebrated  of  thefe  tonics,  the 
Peruvian  Bark. 

CCXIIL 

This  bark  has  been  commonly  confidered 
as  a  fpecific,  or  as  a  remedy  of  which  the 
operation  was  not  understood.  But  it  is  cer- 
tainly allowable  to  inquire  into  this  matter  ; 
and  I  apprehend  it  may  be  explained. 

CCXIV. 

To  this  purpofe  it  is  to  be  remarked,  that 
as,  in  many  cafes,  the  effects  of  the  bark  are 
perceived  foon  after  its  being  taken  into  the 
flomach,  and  before  it  can  poffibly  be  con- 
veyed to  the  mafs  of  blood,  we  may  conclude, 
that  its  effects  do  not  arife  from  its  operating 
on  the  fluids  ;  and  muft,  therefore,  depend 
upon  its  operating  on  the  nerves  of  the  flom- 
ach* 


OF       PHYSIC.  165 

ach,  and  being  thereby  communicated  to 
the  reft  of  the  nervous  fyftem.  This  opera- 
tion feems  to  be  a  tonic  power,  the  bark  being 
a  remedy  in  many  cafes  of  debility,  particu*. 
larly  in  gangrene  ;  and,  as  the  recurrence  of 
the  paroxyfms  of  intermittent  fevers  depends 
upon  a  recurrence  of  atony,  (XXXV.  and 
XXXVI.);  fo  probably  the  bark,  by  its 
;onic  power,  prevents  the  recurrence  of  thefe 
oaroxyfms  ;  and  this  is  greatly  confirmed  by 
Dbferving,  that  many  other  tonic  medicines 
mfwer  the  fame  purpofe. 

ccxv. 


If  the  operation  of  the  bark  may  be  thus 
xplained,  from  its  poffeffing  a  tonic  power, 
|t  is  eafy  to  perceive  why  it  is  improper  when 
phlogiftic  diathefis  prevails  ;  and,  from  the 
ime  view,  we  can  aicertain  in  what  cafes  of 
ontinued  fever  it  may  be  admitted.  Thefe 
re  either  after  considerable  remiffions  have 
ppeared,  when  it  may  be  employed  to  pre- 
ent  the  return  of  exacerbations,  on  the  fame 
)oting  that  it  is  ufed  in  intermittent  fevers, 
r  in  the  advanced  ftate  of  fevers,  when  all 
lfpicion  of  an  inflammatory  flate  is  removed, 
ad  a  general  debility  prevails  in  the  fyftem  ;  s 
ad  its  being  then  employed  is  fufficiently 
^reeable  to  the  prefent  practice. 

CCXVL 


t66  PRACTICE 


CCXVI. 

i  With  refpect   to  the  ufe  of  the  bark,  it  is 
proper  to  add,  that  good  effects  are  to  be  ex-  i 
peeled   from  it,    almoft   only  when  given  in ' 
fubftance  and  in  large  quantity, 

CCXVII. 

Another  fet  of  medicines  to  be  employed 
for  obviating  debility  and  its  effects,  are  the 
direa  nimulants  (CCIIL).  Thefe,  in  fome 
meafure,  increafe  the  tone  of  the  moving 
fibres ;  but  they  are  different  from  the  tonics, 
as  more  directly  exciting  and  increafing  the  I 
action  of  the  heart  and  arteries.  This  mode 
of  their  operation  renders  the  ufe  of  them 
ambiguous ;  and  when  an  inflammatory  dia- 
thefis  is  prefent,  as  fo  often  happens  in  the  be- 
ginning of  fevers,  the  effects  of  thefe  ftimu- 
lants  may  be  very  hurtful  ;  but  it  ftill  re- 
mains probable,  that,  in  the  advanced  ft  ate 
of  fevers,  when  debility  prevails,  they  may 
be  ufeful. 

CCXVIIL 

What  are  the  ftimulants  that  may  be  moft 
properly  employed,  I  am  uncertain,  as  the 
ufe  of  them  in  this  age  has  been  rare  ;  but  I 
am  difpofed  to  Relieve  that,  of  all  kinds,  wine 
is  the  befh 

CCXIX. 


OF       PHYSIC.  167 


CCXIX. 

Wine  has  the  advantage  of  being  grateful 
to  the  palate  and  ftomach,  and  of  having  its 
ftimulant  parts  fo  much  diluted,  that  it  can  be 
conveniently  given  in  fmall  dofes  ;  fo  that  it 
may  be  employed  with  fufficient  caution  j  but 
itis  of  little  fervice,unlefs  taken  pretty  largely. 

ccxx. 

It  may  be  fuppofed,  and  on  good  grounds, 
that  wine  has  an  operation  analogous  to  that 
of  opium  and  fome  other  narcotic  medicines. 
It  may  indeed  be  faid,  that  we  can  diftin&ly 
mark  its  ftimulant  power  only,  which  renders 
its  effects  in  the  phrenitic  delirium  manifeftly 
hurtful,  and,  in  the  mild  delirium,  depending 
on  debility,  as  remarkably  ufeful.  But  in  all 
this  the  analogy  with  opium  is  dill  obvious  • 
and  it  is  probable,  that  both  wine  and  opium 
iare  more  ufeful  by  their  fedative  and  anti- 
fpafmodic,  than  by  their  ftimulant  powers. 

CCXXL 

Thefe  are  the  means  of  anfwering  our  fee- 
ond  general  indication  (CXXVI.  2.) ;  and  I 
now  proceed  to  the  third,  which  is,  To  obviate 
or  to  corrett  the  tendency  of  the  fluids'  to  putre-. 

faction, 

CCXXII. 


i68  PRACTICE 


CCXXIL 


This  may  be  done, 

i.  By  avoiding  any  new  application  of  pu- 
trid or  putrescent  matter. 

2.  By  evacuating  the  putrid  or  putrescent 
matter  already  prefent  in  the  body. 

3*  By  correcting  the  putrid  or  putrefcent 
matter  remaining  in  the  body. 

4.  By  Supporting  the  tone  of  the  veifels,  and 
thereby  refilling  further  putrefaction,  or  ob- 
viating its  effects. 

CCXXIIL 


The  further  application  of  putrid  or  pu- 
trefcent matter  may  be  avoided, 

1.  -By  removing  the  patient  from  places  fill- 
ed with  corrupted  air. 

2 .  By  correcting  the  air  from  which  he  can- 
not be  removed. 

3.  By  preventing  the  accumulation  of  the 
patient's  own  effluvia,  by  a  conftant  ventila- 
tion, and  by  a  frequent  change  of  bed  clothes 
and  body  linen. 

4.  By  the  careful  and  fpeedy  removal  of 
all  excremental  matters  from  the  patient's 
chamber. 

5 .  By  avoiding  animal  food,  or  correcting  it. 

CCXXIV. 


OF       PHYSIC.  169 


CCXXIV. 


The  putrid  or  putrefcent  matter,  already 
prefent  in  the  body,  may  be  evacuated,  partly 
hy  evacuating  frequently  the  contents  of  the 
interlines  ;  and  more  effectually  fall,  by  fup- 
porting  the  excretions  of  perfpiration  and 
urine,  by  the  plentiful  ufe  of  diluents. 

ccxxv. 

The  putrid  or  putrefcent  matter,  remaining 
in  the  body,  may  be  rendered  more  mild  and 
innocent  by  the  ufe  of  diluents ;  or  may  be 
corrected  by  the  ufe  of  antifeptics.  Thefe  laft 
are  of  many  and  various  kinds  ;  but  which  of 
them  are  conveniently  applicable,  or  more 
particularly  fuited  to  the  cafe  of  fevers,  is  not 
well  afcertained.  Thofe  moft  certainly  ap- 
plicable and  ufeful,  are  acefcent  aliments,  acids 
of  all  kinds,  neutral  falts,  and  fixed  air. 

CCXXVL 

The  progrefs  of  putrefaction  may  be  confid- 
erably  retarded,  and  its  effects  obviated,  by 
fupporting  the  tone  of  the  veffels  ;  and  this 
may  be  done  by  tonic  remedies  ;  the  chief  of 
which  are,  Cold,  and  Peruvian -Bark,  both  fuf- 
ficiently  treated  of  above,  (CCV.  etfeq.) 

H  CCXXVII. 


i7o  PRACTICE 


CCXXVIL 


I  have  now  finifhed  the  confi deration  of  the 
three  general  indications  to  be  formed  in  the 
cure  ofcontinued^fevers  ;  and  have  mentioned 
moft  of  the  remedies  which  have  been,  upon 
any  occafion,  employed  in  this  bufmefs.  It 
was  neceffary,  in  the  firft  place,  to  confider 
thefe  indications  and  remedies  feparately,  and 
to  explain  the  operation  of  the  latter  more 
generally ;  but,  from  what  has  been  now  de- 
livered, compared  with  what  was  faid  above, 
concerning  the  difference  of  fevers,  and  the 
fignification  of  their  feveral  fymptoms  in  form- 
ing the  prognoftic,  I  expect  it  will  not  be  dif- 
ficult to  affign  the  indication,  and  to  felecl; 
and  combine  the  feveral  remedies  mentioned, 
fo  as  to  adapt  them  to  the  feveral  fpecies  and 
circumftances  of  continued  fevers. 


I  think 


OF       P  H  Y  S  I  C.  171 

I  think  it  may  be  ufeful  for  my  Readers  to 
have  the  whole  of  the  cure  of  Continued 
Fevers  brought  under  one  View,  as  in  the 
following  Table. 

*n  the  Cure  of  CONTINUED  FEVERS, 

The  Indicatio  ns  are, 
I.  To  moderate  the  violence  of  rtatiion. 

Which  may  be  done,  by 
i .  Diminifhing  the  action  of  the  heart  and  arteries,  by 
A.  Avoiding  or  moderating  thofe  irritations  which  are 
almofl  conftantly  applied  to  the  body  ;  as, 

a.  Theimpreflions  made  upon  our  fenfes,  particu- 

larly, 
a.  Increafed  heat,  whether  arifing  from 
«a.  External  heat,  or, 
/3#.  The  accumulation  of  the  heat  of  the  body. 

b.  The  exercife  of  the  body, 

c.  The  exercife  of  the  mind, 

d.  The  taking  in  of  aliment. 

e.  Particular  irritations  arifing  from 
a.  The  fenfe  of  third, 

J3.  Crudities,  or  corrupted  humours,  in  the  flora- 

ach, 
y.  The  preternatural  retention  of  fasces, 
£.  A  general  acrimony  of  the  fluids. 
3.  Employing  certain  fedative  powers  ;  as, 

a.  Cold, 

b.  Refrigerants  ;  the  chief  of  which  are, 
a.  Acids  of  all  kinds, 

£.  Neutral  Grits, 
7.  Metallic  falts. 


H  2 


C.  DIminifiiIng 


i7z  PRACTICE 

G.  Diminifhing  the  tenfion  and  tone  of  the  arterial 
fyflem,  by 

a.  Bloodletting, 

b.  Purging. 

a.  Taking  off  the  fpafm  of  the  extreme  veiTelSj  by 

A.  Internal  means  ;  which  are, 

a.  Thofe  remedies  which  determine  to  the  furface,  as, 
a,.  Diluents, 

jS.  Neutral  falts, 
y.  Sudorifics, 
£.  Emetics. 

b.  Thofe  remedies  named  antifpafmodics. 

B.  External  means  ;  as, 

a.  Bliftering, 

b.  Warm  bathing, 

II.  To  remove  the  caufes,  or  obviate  the  effec~l$> 
of  debility,  by 

i.  Supporting  and  increafing  the  a&ion  of  the  heart 
and  arteries,  by 

A.  Tonics,  as, 

a.  Cold, 

b.  Tonic  medicines,  which  are  either, 
a.  Foffil,  as, 

aa.  Saccharum  faturni,  &c.  or, 
/3.  Vegetable,  as, 
ccx*  Peruvian  bark. 

B.  Stimulants,  as, 
a.  Aromatics,  &c. 
b%  Wine. 

III.  To  obviate  or  correct  the  tendency  of  the 
fluids  to  putrefaction,  by 

i.  Avoiding  the  application  of    putrid  or  putrefcent 
matter,  by 

A.  Removing  the   patient  from    places    filled  with 

corrupted  air. 

B.  Correcting  the  air,    from  which    he  cannot  be 

removed, 

C»  Avoiding 


OF       PHYSIC.  173 

C.  Avoiding  the  accumulation  of  the  patient's  own 

effluvia,  by 

a.  A  conftant  ventilation, 

b.  Frequently  changing  the  bed  clothes  and  body 

linen. 

D.  Removing  carefully  and  fpeedily  all  excremental 

matters. 

E.  Avoiding  animal  food,  or  correcting  it. 

2.  Evacuating  the  putrid  or  putrefcent  matter  already 

prefent  in  the  body,  by 

A.  Evacuating  frequently  the  inteftines. 

B.  Supporting  the  excretions    of    perfpiration    and 

urine,  by 

a.  Diluents, 

b.  Neutral  falts. 

3.  Correfting  the  putrid  or  putrefcent  matter  remaining 

in  the  body,  by 

A.  Diluents, 

B.  Antifeptics, 
G_  Fixed  air. 

4.  Refitting  farther  putrefaction,  or  obviating  its    e& 

fe&s,  by 
Supporting  the  tone  of  the  veffels,  by 
Tonic  remedies. 


Sect.         II. 

Of  the  CURE  of  Intermittent  Fevers. 
CCXXVIIL 

It  dill  remains  to  confider  the  cure  of  in- 
termittent fevers  ;  and,  with  refpeclto  thefe, 
we  form  alfo  three  general  indications. 

1.  In  the  time  of  inter miffiony  to  prevent  the 
recurrence  of  paroxyfms. 

H  3  2.  In 


174  PRACTICE 

2.  In  the  time  of  paroxyfms,  to  condubl  thefe 
Jo  as  to  obtain  a  Jinal  folution  of  the  difeafe. 

3.  To  take  off  certain  circumflances  which 
might  prevent  the  fulfilling  of  the  twofrfl  indi- 
cations, 

CCXXIX. 

The  firft  indication  may  be  anfwered  in 
two   ways  : 

1.  By  increafing  the  action  of  the  heart 
and  arteries  fome  time  before  the  period  of 
acceflion,  and  fupporting  that  increafed  aftion 
till  the  period  of  the  acceflion  be  over,  fo  as 
thereby  to  prevent  the  recurrence  of  the  atony 
and  fpafm  of  the  extreme  veffels  which  give 
occafion  to  the  recurrence  of  paroxyfms. 

2.  Without  increafing  the  action  of  the 
heart  and  arteries,  the  recurrence  of  parox- 
yfms may  be  prevented,  by  fupporting  the 
tone  of  the  veffels,  and  thereby  preventing 
atony,  and  the  confequent  fpafm. 

ccxxx. 

For  the  purpofe  mentioned  in  (CCXXIX. 
i.),  the  a£tion  of  the  heart  and  arteries  may 
be  increafed  ; 

1.  By  various  ftimulant  remedies,  inter- 
nally given,  or  externally  applied,  and  that 
without  exciting  fweat. 

2.  By  the  fame  remedies,  or  others  fo  man- 
aged as  to  excite  fweating,  and  to  fupport  that 

fweating 


OF     PHYSIC.  175 

fweating   till    the  period  of  acceflion    be  for 
fome  time  pad. 

3.  By  naufeating  dofes  of  emetics,  given 
about  an  hour  before  the  time  of  acceflion, 
thereby  fupporting  and  increafing  the  tone 
and  action  of  the  extreme  vefTels. 

CCXXXI. 

The  tone  of  the  extreme  veflels  may  be  fup- 
ported  without  increafing  the  action  of  the 
heart  and  arteries  (CCXXIX.  2,),  by  various 
tonic  medicines ;  as, 

i.   Aflringents  alone. 

2.  Bitters  alone. 

3.  Aflringents  and  bitters  conjoined. 

4.  Aflringents  and  aromatics  conjoined. 

5.  Certain  metallic  tonics. 

6.  Opiates. 

Laflly,  An  impreflion  of  horror. 

A  good  deal  of  exercife,  and  as  full  a  diet 
as  the  condition  of  the  patient's  appetite  and 
digeflion  may  allow  of,  will  be  proper  during 
thetimeofintermiiiion,  and  may  beconfidered 
as  belonging  to  this  head. 

CCXXXII. 

Of  all  the  tonic  remedies  mentioned 
(CCXXXI.),  the  mofl  celebrated,  and  per- 
haps the  mofl  certainly  effectual,  is  the  Pe- 
ruvian bark,  the  tonic  power  of  which  we 
have  endeavoured  to  demonflrate  above 
H  4  (CCXIV.) 


176  PRACTICE 

(CCXIV.),    and  have  at  the  fame  time  ex- 
plained its  ufe  in  continued  fevers. 

The  fame  obfervation  as  made  in  CCXVI. 
is  efpeciallyproperinthecafeof  intermittents; 
and  further  with  refpecl;  to  thefe,  the  follow- 
ing obfervatios  or  rules  are  offered  here. 

1.  That  the  bark  may  be  employed  with 
fafety  at  any  period  of  intermittent  fevers, 
providing  that,  at  the  fame  time,  there  be 
neither  a  phlogiflic  diathefis  prevailing  in  the 
fyftem,  nor  any  confiderable  or  fixed  con- 
geftion  prefent  in  the  abdominal  vifcera. 

2.  The  proper  time  for  exhibiting  the  bark 
in  intermittent  fevers,  is  during  the  time  of 
interrniffion  ;  and  where  intermiffions  are  to 
be  expe&ed^  it  is  to  be  abflained  from  in 
the  time  of  paroxyfms. 

3.  In  remittents,  though  no  entire  apy- 
rexia  occurs,  the  Bark  may  be  given  during 
the  remiffions  j  and  it  fhould  be  given,  even 
though  the  remiffions  be  inconfiderable,  if,  from 
the  known  nature  of  the  epidemic,  inter- 
miffions or  confiderable  remiffions  are  not  to 
be  foon  expected,  and  that  great  danger  is 
apprehended  from  repeated  exacerbations. 

4.  In  the  cafe  of  genuine  intermittents,  while 
a  due  quantity  of  Bark  is  to  be  employed,  the 
exhibition  of  it  ought  to  be  brought  as  near 
to  the  time  of  acceffion  as  the  condition  of  the 
patient's  flomach  will  allow. 

5.  In  general,  in  all  cafes  of  intermittents, 
it  is  not  fufficient  that  the  recurrence  of  parox- 
yfms be  flopped  for  once  by  the  ufe  of  the 

bark  ,- 


OF       PHYSIC.  i77 

bark;  a  relapfe  is  commonly  to  be  expected,, 
and  mould  be  prevented  by  the  exhibition  of 
the  bark,  repeated  at  proper  intervals. 

CCXXXXIL 

Our   fecond  general   indication    for  con- 
ducting the  paroxyfms  of  intermittent  fevers, 
fo  as  to  obtain  a  final  folutionof  the  difeafe,, 
may  be  anfwered, 

1.  By  exhibiting  emetics  during  the  time 
of  the  cold  itag-e,  or  at  the  beginning  of  the 
hot. 

2.  By  opiates  given  during  the  time  of  the 
Hot  11  age. 

GCXXXIV. 

The  circumftances  which  may  efpecially 
prevent  the  fulfilling  of  thofe  two  indications^ 
and  therefore  give  occafion  to  our  third,  are 
a  phlogiflic  diathefis  prevailing  in  the  fyftem5 
and  congeftions  fixed  in  the  abdominal  vifcera. 
The  firft  mult  be  removed  by  bloodletting 
and  the  antiphlogiflic  regimen  ;  the  fecond^ , 
by  vomiting  and  purging. 

Where  thefe  meafures  are  not  immediately 
effectual,   I  hold  it  fafer   to  attempt  the  cure  - 
of  the    difeafe   by  the    means  pointed  out  in 
general  in  CCXXIX.  rather  than  by  thofe  in  ; 
article  fecond  of  the  fame  paragraph. 


11.  n  EQ0: 


BOOK         IL 

©f   INFLAMMATIONS,  or 

PHLEGMASIA 


CHAP.       I. 
©f  INFLAMMATION  in    GENERAL. 

S       E       C       IV  I. 

0/  Me   Phenomena   of  Inflammation. 

ccxxxv. 

VV  HEN  any  part  upon  the 
furface  of  the  body  k  affe&d  with  unufual 
rednefs,  heat,  pain,  and  tumour,  we  name 
the  difeafe  an  Inflammation  or  Phlegma- 
sia. Thefe  fymptoms  of  inflammation  are 
never  confiderable,  without  the  whole  fyllem 
being,  at  the  fame  time,  affected  with  pyrex- 
ia. 

CCXXXVI. 


OF     PHYSIC,  179 

CCXXXVI. 

As  the  external,  fo  likewife  the  internal 
parts  may  be  affected  with  inflammation  ;  and 
we  judge  them  to  be  fo,  when,  together  with 
pyrexia,  there  is  a  fixed  pain  in  any  internal 
part,  attended  with  fome  interruption  in  the 
exercife  of  its  functions. 

CCXXXVII. 

We  judge  of  the  pre  fence  of  inflamma- 
tion alfo  from  the  flate  of  the  blood  drawn 
out  of  the  veins.  When  the  blood,  after 
cooling  and  concreting,  mows  a  portion  of 
the  gluten  feparated  from  the  reft  of  the  mafs, 
and  lying  on  the  furface  of  the  crafTamentum ; 
as  fuch  feparation  happens  in  all  cafes  of  more 
evident  phlegmafia  ;  fo,  in  ambiguous  cafes 
we,  from  this  appearance,  joined  with  other 
fymptoms,  infer  the  prefence  of  inflammation. 
At  the  fame  time,  it  mufl  be  obferved,  that 
as  feveral  circumflances  in  bloodletting,  may 
prevent  this  feparation  of  gluten  from  taking 
place  in  blood  otherwife  difpofed  to  it ;  fo, 
from  the  abfence  of  fuch  appearance,  we  can- 
not always  conclude  againfl  the  prefence  of 
inflammation. 

CCXXXVIIL 

I    cannot    eafily   give    any   other  general 

hiflory    of  the  phenomena  of  inflammation 

H  6  thauss 


180  PRACTICE 

than  what  is  contained  in  the  three  preceding 
paragraphs ;  and  the  variations  which  may 
take  place  in  its  circumflances,  will  occur  to 
be  more  properly  taken  notice  of  under  the 
feveral  heads  of  the  particular  genera  and 
fpecies  to  be  hereafter  mentioned.  I  proceed, 
therefore,  to  inquire  into  the  proximate  caufe 
of  inflammation  in  general. 


Sect.         II. 

Of    the    Proximate    Cause  of  Inflam- 
mation. 

CCXXXIX. 

The  phenomena  of  inflammation 
(CCXXXV.)  all  concur  in  mowing,  that 
there  is  an  increafed  impetus  of  the  blood  in 
the  veffeis  of  the  part  affected ;  and  as,  at  the 
fame  time,  the  action  of  the  heart  is  not 
always  evidently  increafed,  there  is  reafon  to 
prefume,  that  the  increafed  impetus  of  the 
blood  in  the  particular  part  is  owing  efpec- 
ially  to  the  increafed  action  of  the  veffeis  of 
that  part  itfelf. 

CCXL. 

The   caufe   of  this  increafed  action  in   the 
veffeis  of  a  particular  part  is,  therefore,  what 

we 


OF       PHYSIC.  181 

we  are  to  inquire  after,  and  to  confider  as  the 
proximate  caufe  of  inflammation. 

In  many  cafes,  we  can  manifeftly  perceive, 
that  inflammation  arifes  from  the  application 
of  ftimulant  fubftances  to  the  part.  When 
the  application  of  fuch  ftimulants,  therefore, 
is  evident,  we  feek  for  no  other  caufe  of  in- 
flammation ;  but  as,  in  many  cafes,  fuch  ap- 
plication is  neither  evident,  nor,  with  any 
probability,  to  be  fuppofed,  we  mult,  in  fuch 
cafes,  feek  for  fome  other  caufe  of  the  increaf- 
ed  impetus  of  the  blood  in  the  veffels  of  the 
part. 

CCXLL 


Many  phy ficians  have  fuppofed,  that  an  ob- 
ftruc"fcion  of  the  extreme  veffels,  any  how  pro- 
duced, may  prove  a  caufe  of  inflammation  5 
and  particularly,  that  this  may  arife  from  an 
obftru&ion  formed  by  a  matter  flopping  up 
thefe  veffels.  But  many  difficulties  attend 
this  doctrine. 

1.  The  opinion  feems  chiefly  to  have  arifen 
from  the  appearance  of  the  blood  defcribed  in 
CCXXXVII.  when  the  feparated  gluten 
was  confidered  as  a  preternatural  and  morbid 
matter ;  but  we  now  know  very  certainly, 
that  this  gluten  is  conflantly  a  conftituent  part 
of  the  human  blood  ;  and  that  it  is  only  a 
peculiar  feparation  of  the  parts  of  the  blood 
that  happens  in  confequence  of  inflammation 

and 


i82  PRACTICE 

and  fome  other  circumftances,  which  gives 
occafion  to  the  appearance  that  was  falfely 
confidered  as  a  mark  of  a  morbid  lentor  in  the 
blood. 

2.  There  are  no  experiments  directly  in 
proof  of  a  preternatural  lentor  prevailing  in 
the  mafs  of  blood;  nor  is  there  any  evidence 
of  certain  parts  of  the  blood  occafionally  ac- 
quiring a  greater  denfity  and  force  of  cohefion 
than  ordinary  ;  neither  is  there  any  proof  of 
the  denfer,  or  more  coherent  parts,  being 
prefent  in  the  mafs.  of  blood  in  fuch  greater 
proportion  than  ufual,  as  to  occafion  a  danger- 
ous fpiflitude.  The  experiments  of  Dr. 
Browne  Langrifh  on  this  fubje&  afford  no 
conclufion,  having  been  made  on  certain 
parts  of  the  blood  feparated  from  the  reft, 
without  attending  to  the  circumftances  of 
bloodletting,  which  very  much  alter  the  ftate 
of  the  feparation  and  concretion  of  the  blood 
drawn  out  of  the  veins. 

3.  The  fuppofition  of  a  preternatural  lentor 
or  vifcidity  of  the  blood,,  is  not  well  founded  i 
for  it  is  probable,  that  nature  has  fpecially 
provided  againft  a  ftate  of  the  fluids,  fo  in- 
compatible with  the  exercife  of  the  moft  im- 
portant functions  of  the  animal  economy. 
While  motion  continues  to  prevent  any  fepa- 
ration of  parts,  and  heat  continues  to  preferve 
the  fluidity  of  the  more  vifcid,  there  feems  to 
be  always  fo  large  a  proportion  of  water  pref- 
ent as  to  give  a  fufficient  fluidity  to  the  whole. 
I    mufl  own  that  this  is  not  absolutely  con- 

clufive* 


OF       PHYSIC.  183 

clufive  ;    but   I    ftill   repeat  it,  as   giving   a 
probability  to  the  general  argument. 

4.  In  the  particular  cafe  of  inflammation, 
there  are  feveral  circumftances  which  render 
it  probable  that  the  blood  is  then  more  fluid 
than  ufual. 

5.  I  prefume  that  no  fuch  general  lentor, 
as  Boerhaave  and  his  difciples  have  fuppofed, 
does  ever  take  place  ;  becaufe  if  it  did,  it  mufl 
fhow  more  confidei'able  effects  than  commonly 
appear. 

6.  Befides  the  fuppofition  of  an  obftru&ing 
lentor,  phyficians  have  fuppofed,  that  an  ob- 
struction may  be  formed  by  an  impermeable 
matter  of  another  kind,  and  that  fuch  an  ob- 
struction may  alfo  be    the   caufe   of  inflam- 
mation.    This    fuppofition    is   what  is  well 
known  in   the  fchools  under  the  title  of  an 
error  loci ;  but  it  is  an  opinion    that  I    can- 
not find  to  be  at   all  probable  ;  for  the  mo- 
tion   of    the    blood    in  the   extreme   veffels 
is  fo  weak  and  flow,  as  readily  to  admit  a  ret- 
rograde courfe  of  it ;  and  therefore,  if  a  parti- 
cle of  blood  fhould  happen  to  enter  a  veffel 
whofe  branches  will  not  allow   of  its  paffage, 
it  will  be  moved  backwards,  till  it  meet  with 
a  veffel  fit   for  tranfmitting  it  ;    and  the  fre- 
quent ramifications   and   anaflomofes  of  the 
extreme   arteries   are  very  favourable  to  this, 
I  muft  own  indeed,  thatjrhis  argument  is  not 
absolutely  conclufive  ;    becaufe  I  allow  it  to 
be  pretty   certain,    that   an   error    loci  does 
actually  upon  occafion  happen  ,•   but,  for  the 

reafons 


184  PRACTICE 

reafons  I  have  given,  it  is  probable  that  it 
feldom  happens,  and  is  therefore  rarely  the 
caufe  of  inflammation  ;  or  if  it  be,  that  it  is 
not  merely  by  the  obftru&ion  that  it  produces ; 
as,  among  other  reafons,  I  conclude  particu- 
larly from  the  following  argument. 

7.  Though  an  obnru6tion  fhouldbe  fuppof- 
ed  to  take  place,  it  will  not  be  fufficient  for  pro- 
ducing the  effects,  and  exhibiting  the  phe- 
nomena, that  appear  in  inflammation.  The 
theory  that  has  been  commonly  employed  on 
this  occafionis  by  no  means  fatisfying  ;  and,, 
in  faffc,  it  appears,  from  many  obfer  vat  ions 
and  experiments,  that  confiderable  obftruc-- 
tions  may  be  formed,  and  may  fubfift,  with- 
out producing  the  fymptoms  of  inflammation, 

CCXLII. 

Obftru£Hon,  therefore,  from  a  matter  flop- 
ping up  the  veflels,  Gaub.  Pathol.   249.  i.  is 
not  to  be    confidered  as  the  primary  caufe  of 
inflammation;    but,    at  the  fame  time,  it   is 
fufnciently  probable,  that  fome  degree  of  ob- 
ftru&ion  does  take  place  in  every  cafe   of  in- 
flammation.     The  diflention,  pain,  rednefs, 
and  tumour   attending  inflammation,  are  to  . 
be  explained  only  by  fuppofing,  that  the  ex- 
tremities of  the  arteries  do  not  readily  tranfmit 
the  unufual  quantity  of  blood  impelled  into 
them  by  the  increafed  a£iion  in  the  courfe  of 
thefe  veflels.       Such  an   obftruclion  may  be 
fuppofed   to  happen  in  every  cafe  of  an  in- 
creafed 


OF       PHYSIC.  185 

creafed  impetus  of  the  blood ;  but  it  is  prob- 
able, that,  in  the  cafe  of  inflammation,  there 
is  alfo  a  preternatural  refiftance  to  the  free 
paffage  of  the  fluids. 

CCXLIII. 

From  the  do6lrine  of  fever,  we  are  led 
to  believe,  that  an  increafed  a£tion  of  the 
heart  and  arteries  is  not  fupported  for  any 
length  of  time  by  any  other  means  than  a 
fpafm  affecting  the  extreme  veifels ;  and  that 
the  fame  fpafm  takes  place  in  inflammation, 
feems  likely,  becaufe  that  every  confiderable 
inflammation  is  introduced  by  a  cold  flage, 
and  is  accompanied  with  that  and  other  cir- 
cumftances  of  pyrexia.  It  feems  alfo  probable, 
that  fomething  analogous  to  this  occurs  even 
in  the  cafe  of  thofe  inflammations  which  appear 
lefs  confiderable,  and  to  be  purely  topical. 

CCXLIV. 

From  all  this,  the  nature  of  inflammation 
may  m  many  cafes  be  explained  in  the  follow- 
ing manner.  Some  caufes  of  inequality  in  the 
diflribution  of  the  blood  may  throw  an  unufual 
quantity  of  it  upon  particular  veffels,  to  which 
it  muft  neceffarily  prove  a  ftimulus.  But, 
further,  it  is  probable,  that,  to  relieve  the 
congeftion,  the  vis  medicatrix  naturae  increafes 
ftill  more  the  action  of  thefe  veffels  -3  and 
which,  as  in  all  other  febrile  difeafes,  it  effects 

by 


186  PRACTICE 

hy  the  formation  of  a  fpafm  on  their  extremi- 
ties. 


CCXLV, 


A  fpafm  of  the  extreme  arteries,  fupporting 
an  increafed  a&ion  in  the  courfe  of  them,  may 
therefore  be  confidered  as  the  proximate  caufe 
of  inflammation ;  at  leafl,  in  all  cafes  not 
arifmg  from  direct  flimuli  applied  ;  and  even 
in  this  cafe  the  flimuli  may  be  fuppofed  to 
produce  a  fpafm  of  the  extreme  veflels. 


CCXLVI 


That,  in  inflammation,  there  is  the  con 
currence  of  a  conftri&ion  of  the  extreme 
veflels,  with  an  increafed  action  in  the  other 
parts  of  them,  feems  probable,  from  the  con- 
sideration of  Rheumatifm.  This  is  afpecies 
of  inflammation  which  is  often  manifeflly  pro- 
duced, either  by  cold  applied  to  over  diftend- 
ed  veflels,  or  by  caufes  of  an  increafed  impetus, 
and  over  distention  in  veflels  previously  con- 
ftri6ted.  Hence  the  difeafe  efpecially  appears 
at  feafons  liable  to  frequent  and  confiderable 
viciflitudes  of  heat  and  cold. 

To  this  we  may  add,  that  the  parts  of  the 
body  mofl  frequently  affected  with  inflamma- 
tion, are  thofe  expofed,  both  to  over  diften- 
tion, from  a  change  in  the  distribution  of  the 
fluids,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  to  the  immediate 
aftion  of  cold.  Hence,  quinfies,  and  pneu- 
monic 


OF      PHYSIC.  187 

rnonic  inflammations,  are  more  frequent  than 
any  others. 

CCXLVIL 

That  a  fpafm  of  the  extreme  veffels  takes 
place  in  inflammation,  is  to  be  further  pre- 
fumed  from  what  is  at  th§  fame  time  the  flate 
of  the  whole  arterial  fyflem.  In  every  con- 
fiderable  inflammation,  though  arifmg  in  one 
part  only,  an  affection  is  communicated  to  the 
whole  fyftem,  in  confequence  of  which  an  in- 
flammation is  readily  produced  in  other  parts 
befide  that  firfl  affected.  This  general  affec- 
tion is  well  known  among  phyficians,  under 
the  name  of  the  Diathesis  Phlogistica. 
It  appears  mofl  commonly  in  perfons  of  the 
moll  rigid  fibres  ;  is  often  manifeflly  induced 
by  the  tonic  or  aflringent  powers  of  cold  ;  is 
increafed  by  all  tonic  and  flimulant  powers 
applied  to  the  body  ;  is  always  attended  with 
a  hardnefs  of  the  pulfe  ;  and  is  moll  effectual- 
ly taken  off  by  the  relaxing  power  of  blood- 
letting. From  thefe  circumfiances,  it  feems 
probable,  that  the  diatheiis  phlogiftica  con- 
fifls  in  an  increafed  tone,  or  contractility,  and 
perhaps  in  an  increafed  contraction  of  the 
mufcular  fibres  of  the  whole  arterial  fyftem. 
Such  a  flate  of  the  fyftem  feems  often  to  arife, 
and  fubfifl  for  fome  time,  without  the  apparent 
inflammation  of  any  particular  part ;  but  fuch 
a  flate  of  the  fyflem  renders  it  likely,  that  a 
fpafm  may,  at  the  fame  time,  readily  arife  in 

any 


t88  PRACTICE 

any  of  the  extreme  veffels,  and  a  particular 
inflammation  be  there  produced.  It  does, 
however,  appear  alfo,  that  the  general  diathe- 
fis  frequently  arifes  from  inflammation  begun 
in  a  particular  part. 

CCXLVIII. 

I  have  thus  endeavoured,  in  the  cafe  of  in- 
flammation, to  explain  the  ftate  of  the  whole 
fyilem,  as  well  as  that  of  the  part  more  par- 
ticularly affected.  The  latter  I  have  confid- 
ered  as  when  in  its  firft  formation  ;  but  after 
it  has  fubfifted  for  fome  time,  various  changes 
take  place  in  the  part  affected ;  and  of  thefe  L 
muft  now  take  notice. 


Sect         III. 

Of  the  Terminations  of  Inflammation- 
CCXLIX. 

If  an  inflammation  be  cured  while  the  ftate 
and  texture  of  the  part  remain  entire  the 
difeafe  is  faid  to  be  terminated  by  Resolu- 
tion. 

This  happens  when  the  previous  congeftion 
and  fpafm  have  been  in  a  moderate  degree, 
and  the  inoreafed  impetus  of  the  blood  has 
been  fufncient  to  overcome  the  fpafm,  to  di- 
late the  veflels,  and  to  remove  the  congeftion, 

fo 


OF      PHYSIC.  189 

{0  that  the  part  is  reftored  to  its  ordinary  and 
healthy  ftate. 

A  refolution  takes  place  alfo  when  the  in- 
creafed  impetus  of  the  fluids  has  produced  an 
increafed  exhalation  into  the  adjoining  cellu- 
lar texture,  or  an  increafed  excretion  in  fome 
neighbouring  part,  and  has  thereby  relaxed 
the  fpafm,  and  relieved  the  congeftion,  in  the 
veffels  of  the  part  more  particularly  affected. 

Laftly,  A  refolution  may  take  place,  when 
the  increafed  impetus  of  the  blood  in  the 
whole  fyftem  occafions  an  evacuation,  which* 
though  in  a  diftant  part,  may  prove  fufRcient 
to  take  off  the  phlogiftic  diathefis  of  the 
whole  fyftem,  and  thereby  relieve  the  congef- 
tion and  fpafm  of  the  particular  part  affected 
by  inflammation. 

CCL. 

The  tumour  which  appears  in  inflamma- 
tion may  be  imputed  in  part  to  the  congeftion 
of  fluids  in  their  proper  veffels  ;  but  is  owing 
chiefly  to  an  effufion  of  matter  into  the  ad- 
joining cellular  texture  ;  and,  accordingly,  tu- 
mours feldom  appear  but  in  parts  adjoining 
to  a  lax  cellular  texture.  If,  in  this  cafe,  the 
matter  effufed  be  only  a  larger  quantity  of  the 
ordinary  exhaling  fluid,  this,  when  the  free 
circulation  in  the  veffels  is  reftored,  will  be 
read^y  abforbed,  and  the  ftate  of  the  part  will 
become  the  fame  as  before.  But,  if  the  in- 
creafed impetus  of  the  blood  in  an  inflamed 

part, 


i9o  PRACTICE 

part,  dilate  the  exhalant  veffels  to  fuch  a  de- 
gree, that  they  pour  out  an  entire  ferum,  this 
will  not  be  fo  readily  reabforbed  ;  and,  from 
the  experiments  of  Sir  John  Pringle,  and 
efpecially  from  thofe  of  Mr.  Gaber,  MifcelL 
Taurin.  Vol.  II.  we  learn,  that  the  ferum, 
under  ftagnation,  may  fufFer  a  particular 
change,  by  having  the  gluten  prefent  in  it 
changed  into  a  white,  opaque,  moderately  vif- 
cid,  mild  liquor,  which  we  name  Pus. 
When  this  change  takes  place  in  the  in- 
flamed part,  as  it  is  at  the  fame  time  attended 
with  an  abatement  of  the  rednefs,  heat,  and 
pain,  which  before  diftinguilhed  the  inflam- 
mation, fo  the  difeafe  is  faid  to  be  terminated 
hy  Suppuration  ;  and  an  inflamed  part, 
containing  a  collection  of  pus,  is  called  an 
Abscess. 

CCLL 

In  inflammation,  the  tendency  of  it  to  fup- 
puration  may  be  difcovered,  by  the  long  con- 
tinuance of  the  inflammation,  without  the 
fymptoms  of  refolution  ;  by  fome  remiflion  of 
the  pain  of  diftention  ;  by  the  pain  becoming 
of  a  throbbing  kind,  more  diftincHy  connected 
with  the  pulfation  of  the  arteries  ;  by  the 
pulfe  of  the  arteries  being  fuller  and  fofter  ; 
and  often  by  the  patient's  being  frequently 
affected  with  cold  miverings.  The  period  at- 
which  this  takes  place  is  not  determined,  but 
may   be  fometimes   fooner,  fometimes  later. 

When 


OF       PHYSIC.  191 

When  the  tendency  is  determined,  the  time 
neceffary  to  a  complete  fuppuration  is  differ- 
ent in  different  cafes. 

When  pus  is  completely  formed,  the  pain 
in  the  part  entirely  ceafes,  and  a  weight  is  felt 
in  it.  If  the  collection  be  formed  immediate- 
ly under  the  fkin,  the  tumour  becomes  point- 
ed, the  part  becomes  foft,  and  the  fluctuation 
of  the  fluid  within  can  commonly  be  perceiv- 
ed ;  while,  at  the  fame  time,  for  the  moft  part, 
the  rednefs  of  the  fkin  formerly  prevailing  is 
very  much  gone. 

CCLII. 

In  abfceffes,  while  the  pus  is  formed  of  one 
part  of  the  matter  which  had  been  effufed, 
the  other  and  thinner  parts  are  reabforbed,  fo 
that,  in  the  abfcefs,  when  opened,  a  pus  alone 
appears.  This  pus,  however,  is  not  the  con- 
verted gluten  alone  ;  for  the  converfion  of  this 
being  the  effect  of  a  particular  fermentation, 
which  may  affect  the  folid  fubftance  of  the 
part,  and  perhaps  every  folid  of  animal  bod- 
ies ;  fo  it  moft  readily,  and  particularly,  af- 
fects the  cellular  texture,  eroding  much  of  it, 
which  thereby  becomes  a  part  of  the  pus.  It 
generally  happens  alfo,  that  fome  of  the  fmall- 
er  red  veffels  are  eroded,  and  thereby  fome 
red  blood  often  appears  mixed  with  the  pus  in 
abfceffes.  Upon  the  whole,  the  internal  fur- 
face  of  an  abfcefs  is  to  be  confidered  as  an  ul- 
cerated part. 

CCLIII. 


i92  PRACTICE 


CCLIII. 

This  account  of  fuppuration  explains,  why 
an  abfcefs,  when  formed,  may  either  fpread 
into  the  cellular  texture  of  the  neighbouring 
parts  ;  or,  by  eroding  the  incumbent  tegu- 
ments, be  poured  out  upon  the  furface  of  the 
body,  and  produce  an  open  ulcer. 

CCLIV. 

We  have  here  given  the  idea  of  an  abfcefs 
as  a  collection  of  matter  following  inflam- 
mation ;  but  the  term  has  been  applied  to 
every  collection  of  matter  effufed,  and  chang- 
ed by  ftagnation  in  an  inclofed  cavity. 

The  matter  of  abfceffes,  and  of  the  ulcers 
following  them,  is  various,  according  to  the 
nature  of  what  is  effufed,  and  which  may  be, 

i .  A  matter  thinner  than  ferum. 

2.  An  entire  and  pure  ferum. 

3.  A  quantity  of  red  globules. 

4.  A  matter  furniihed  by  particular  glands 
feated  in  the  part. 

5.  A  mixture  of  matters  from  different 
fources,  changed  by  peculiar  fermentation. 

It  is  the  fecond  only  which  affords  a  proper 
pus  ;  the  effufion  whereof,  whether  in  fup- 
purating  parts  or  ulcers,  feems  to  be  the  peculiar 
effect  of  an  inflammatory  flate  of  the  veffels; 
and  for  this  reafon  it  is,  that,  when  ulcers  do 
not  produce  a  proper  pus,  a  circumftance  al- 
ways 


OF       PHYSIC.  193 

ways  abfolutely  neceffary  to  their  healing,  we, 
in  many  cafes,  bring  the  ulcers  to  a  ftate  of 
proper  fuppuration,  by  the  application  of 
ftimulants  exciting  inflammation,  iuch  as  bal- 
fams,  mercury,  copper,  Sec. 

CCLV. 

When  the  matter  effufed  into  the  cellular 
texture  of  an  inflamed  part,  is  tainted  with  a 
putrid  ferment,  this  produces,  in  the  effufed 
matter,  a  ftate  approaching  more  or  lefs  to 
that  of  putrefa&ion.  When  this  is  in  a  mode- 
rate degree,  and  affects  only  the  fluids  effufed, 
with  the  fubftance  of  the  cellular  texture,  the 
part  is  faid  to  be  affected  with  Gangrene  ; 
but  if  the  putrefaction  affecl  alfo  the  veiFels 
and  mufcles  of  the  part,  the  difeafe  is  faid  to 
be  a  Sphacelus. 

CCLVL 

A  gangrene,  and  its  confequences,  may 
arife  from  a  putrid  ferment  diffufed  in  the 
mafs  of  blood,  and  poured  out  with  the  ferum 
effufed,  which  it  operates  upon  more  power- 
fully while  the  ferum  is  ftagnant,  and  retained 
in  the  heat  of  the  body  ;  but  it  may  alfo  arife 
from  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  matter  effufed 
being  difpofed  to  putrefaction ;  as  particu- 
larly feems  to  be  the  cafe  of  the  red  globules 
of  the  blood  effufed  in  a  large  quantity.  In  a 
third  manner  alfo,  a  gangrene  feems  frequently 
■    I  to 


194  PRACTICE       * 

to  arife  from  the  violent  excitement  of  the  in- 
flammation deftroying  the  tone  of  the  veffels  ; 
whereby  the  whole  fluids  ftagnate,  and  run 
into  putrefaction,  which  taking  place  in  any 
degree,  deftroys  flill  further  the  tone  of  the 
veffels,  and  fpreads  the  gangrene. 

CCLVIL 

In  inflammation,  the  tendency  to  gangrene 
may  be  apprehended  from  an  extreme  violence 
of  pain  and  heat  in  the  inflamed  part,  and 
from  a  great  degree  of  pyrexia  attending  the 
inflammation. 

The  actual  coming  on  of  gangrene  may  be 
perceived,  by  the  colour  of  the  inflamed  part 
changing  from  a  clear  to  a  dark  red ;  by  blifters 
arifing  upon  the  part ;  by  the  part  becoming 
foft,  flaccid,  and  infeniible  j  and  by  theceafing 
of  all  pain  while  thefe  appearances  take  place. 

As  the  gangrene  proceeds,  the  colour  of 
the  part  becomes  livid,  and,  by  degrees,  quite 
black  ;  the  heat  of  the  part  entirely  ceafes ; 
the  foftnefs  and  flaccidity  of  the  part  increafe  ; 
it  lofes  its  confidence,  exhales  a  cadaverous 
fmell,  and  may  then  be  confidered  as  affected 
with  fphacelus. 

CCLVIII. 

Gangrene  is  thus  a  third  manner  in  which 
inflammation  terminates ;  and  the  fchools 
have  commonly  marked  a  fourth  termination 

of 


OF       PHYSIC.  195 

of  inflammation  ;  which  is,  by  a  fcirrhus,  or  an 
indolent  hardnefs  of  the  part  formerly  affe&ed 
with  inflammation.  This,  however,  is  a  rare 
occurrence,  and  does  not  feem  to  depend  fo 
much  upon  the  nature  of  inflammation,  as 
upon  the  circumflances  of  the  part  afFected. 
It  is  in  glandular  parts  chiefly  that  fcirrhofity 
is  obferved ;  and  it  is  probably  owing  to  the 
parts  readily  admitting  a  ftagnation  of  the 
fluids.  I  have  obferved,  that  inflammation 
feldom  induces  fcirrhus  ;  but  that  this  more 
commonly  arifes  from  other  caufes ;  and  when 
inflammation  fupervenes,  which  it  is  fooneror 
later  apt  to  do,  it  does  not  fo  commonly  in- 
creafe  as  change  the  fcirrhofity  into  forne  kind 
of  abfcefs.  From  thefe  confiderations,  it  does 
not  feem  neceflfary  to  take  any  further  notice 
of  fcirrhus  as  a  termination  of  inflammation. 

CCLIX. 

There  are,  however,  forne  other  termina- 
tions of  inflammation  not  commonly  taken 
notice  of,  but  now  to  be  mentioned. 

One  is,  by  the  effufion  of  a  portion  of  the 
entire  mafs  of  blood,  either  by  means  of  rup- 
ture or  of  anaflomofis,  into  the  adjoining  cel- 
lular texture.  This  happens  efpecially  in  in- 
flammations of  the  lungs,  where  the  efFufed 
matter,  by  comprefling  the  vefTels,  and  flop- 
ping the  circulation,  occafions  a  fatal  fuffbca- 
tion  ;  and  this  is  perhaps  the  manner  in  which 
I  2  pneumonic 


196  PRACTICE 

pneumonic     inflammation    molt   commonly 
proves  fatal. 


CCLX. 

Another  kind  of  termination  is,  that  of  cer- 
tain inflammations  on  the  furface  of  the  body, 
when  there  is  poured  out  under  the  cuticle  a 
fluid,  which  being  too  grofs  to  pafs  through 
its  pores,  therefore  feparates  it  from  the  fkin, 
and  raifes  it  up  into  the  form  of  a  veficle  con- 
taining the  effufed  fluid  ;  and  by  which  effu- 
fion  the  previous  inflammation  is  taken  off. 

CCLXI. 

Befide  thefe  already  mentioned,  I  believe 
there  is  flill  another  manner  in  which  inflam- 
mation terminates.  When  the  internal  parts 
are  affected  with  inflammation,  there  feems  to 
have  been  almoft  always  upon  their  furface 
an  exudation,  which  appears  partly  as  a  vifcid 
concretion  upon  their  furface,  and  partly  as  a 
thin  ferous  fluid  effufed  into  the  cavities  in 
which  the  inflamed  vifcera  are  placed.  Though 
we  have  become  acquainted  with  thefe  ap- 
pearances only,  as  very  conflantly  accompa- 
nying thofe  inflammations  which  have  proved 
fatal,  it  is  however  probable,  that  like  circum- 
ilances  may  have  attended  thofe  which  were 
terminated  by  refolution,  and  may  have  con- 
tributed to  that  event.     It  is  in  favour  of  this 

fuppofition 


OF       PHYSIC.  197 

fuppofition  that  there  are  inftances  of  pneu- 
monic inflammation  terminating  in  a  hy- 
drothorax. 


Sect.        IV. 

Of  the  remote  Causes  ^Inflammation. 
CCLXII. 


The  remote  caufes  of  inflammation  may  be 
reduced  to  five  heads. 

1.  The  application  of  ftimulant  fubftances; 
among  which  are  to  be  reckoned  the  action 
of  fire,  or  burnings  1 

2.  External  violence  operating  mechanically 
in  wounding,  bruifmg,  comprefhng,  or  over- 
ftretching  the  parts. 

3.  Extraneous  fubflances,  lodged  in  any 
part  of  the  body,  irritating  by  their  chemical 
acrimony  or  mechanical  form,  or  compreffing 
by  their  bulk   or  gravity. 

4„  Cold,  in  a  certain  degree,  not  fufficient 
immediately  to  produce  gangrene.   . 

5.  An  increaied  impetus  of  the  blooddeter- 
mined  to  a  particular  part. 

It  will  not  be    difficult  to  underftand  how 

thefe  remote  caufes,  fingly,  or  in  concurrence, 

produce  the  proximate  caufe  of  inflammation. 

I  g  CCLXIIL 


198  PRACTICE 


CCLXIII. 

It  does  not  appear,  that,  in  different  cafes 
of  inflammation,  there  is  any  difference  in  the 
Hate  of  the  proximate  caufe,  except  in  the  de- 
gree of  it;  and  though  fome  difference  of  inflam- 
mation mayarife  from  the  difference  of  there- 
mote  caufes,  yet  this  is  notneceffary  to  be  taken 
notice  of  here  ;  becaufe  the  different  appear- 
ances which  attend  different  inflammations  may 
be  referred,  for  the  moft  part,  to  the  difference 
of  the  part  affected;  as  will  appear  when  we 
mail  confider  the  feveral  genera  and  fpecies 
marked  in  the  Nofology.  When  I  come  to 
treat  of  thefe,  I  fhall  find  a  more  proper  oc- 
eafion  for  taking  notice  of  the  different  ftates 
©f  the  proximate,  or  of  the  differences  of  the 
remote  caufe,  than  by  treating  of  them  in 
general  here, 


Sect.       V. 

Of  the  £Ture   of  Inflammation. 

CCLXJV. 

The  indications  of  cure  in  inflammation  are 
different,  according  as  it  may  (till  be  capable  of 
refoiution,  ox  may  have  taken  a  tendency  to  the 

feveral 


OF       PHYSIC.  199 

feveral  other  terminations  abovementioned.  As 
the  tendency  to  thefe  terminations  is  not  always 
immediately  evident,  it  is  always  proper,  upon 
the  firft  appearance  of  inflammation,  to  at- 
tempt the  cure  of  it  by  refolution.  For  this 
purpofe,  the  indications  of  cure  are, 

1.  To  remove  the  remote  caufes,  when 
they  are  evident,  and  continue  to  operate. 

2.  To  take  off  the  phlogiftic  diathefis 
affecting  either  the  whole  fyftem,  or  the  par- 
ticular part. 

3.  To  take  of  the  fpafm  of  the  particular 
part,  by  remedies  applied  either  to  the  whole 
fyftem,  or  to  the  part  itfelf. 

CCLXV. 


The  means  of  removing,  the  remote  caufes 
will  readily  occur,  from  coniidering  the  par- 
ticular nature  and  circumftances  of  the  different 
kinds.  Acrid  matters  mull  be  removed,  or 
their  action  rnuft  be  prevented,  by  the  ap- 
plication of  correctors  or  demulcents.  Com- 
preffing  and  overftretching  powers  mult  be 
taken  away  ;  and,  from  their  feveral  circum- 
ftances, the  means  of  doing  fo  will  be  obvious* 

CCLXVI. 

The  means  of  taking  off  the  phlogiftic 
diathefis  of  the  fyftem  are  the  fame  with  thofe 
for  moderating  the   violence   of  reaction  in 

I  4  fever,. 


2oo  PRACTICE 

fever,  which  are  mentioned  and  treated  of 
from  CXXVII.  to  CXLIX.  and  therefore 
need  not  be  repeated  here.  I  only  obferve, 
that,  in  the  ufe  of  thofe  remedies,  there  is 
lefs  occafion  for  any  referve  than  in  many 
cafes  of  fever  ;  and  more  particularly,  that 
topical  bleedings  are  here  particularly  in- 
dicated and  proper. 

CCLXVIL 

The  means  of  taking  off  tl«e  fpafm  of  the 
particular  part  are  nearly  the  fame  as  thofe 
mentioned  above,  for  taking  off  the  fpafm  of 
the  extreme  veffels  in  the  cafe  of  fever,  and 
which  are  treated  of  from  CL.  to  CC.  Only 
it  is  obferved  here,  that  fome  of  thefe  are  here 
efpecially  indicated,  and  that  fome  of  them 
are  to  be  directed  more  particularly  to  the 
part  efpecially  affe&ed  •  the  management  of 
which  will  be  more  properly  confidered  when 
we  fhall  treat  of  particular  inflammations. 

CCLXVIII. 

IP 

When  a  tendency  to  fuppuration  (CCLI.) 
is  diftinctly  perceived,  as  we  fuppofe  it  to 
depend  upon  the  effufion  of  a  fluid  which 
cannot  be  eafily  reabforbed,  fo  it  becomes 
neceifary  that  this  fluid  be  converted  into  pus, 
as  the  only  natural  means   of  obtaining  its 

evacuation  ; 


O  F       PHYSIC.  2ci 

evacuation  j  and  as  the  effufion  is,  perhaps, 
feldom  made  without  fome  rupture  of  the 
velfels,  to  the  healing  of  which  a  pus  is  ab- 
folutely  neceffaiy ;  lb,  in  the  cafe  of  a  tendency 
to  fuppuration,  the  indication  of  cure  always 
is,  to  promote  the  production*  of  a  perfect 
pus  as  quickly  as  poffible. 

CCLXIX, 

For  this  purpofe^  various  remedies,  (up- 
pofed  to  pollers  a  fpecific  power,  have  been 
propofed;  but  I  can  perceive  no  fuch  power 
in  any  of  them;  and,  in  my  opinion,  ail  that 
can  be  done  is,  to  favour  the  fuppuration  by 
fuch  applications  as  may  fupport  a  proper 
heat  in  the  part,  as  by  fome  tenacity  may 
confine  the  perfpiration  of  the  part,  and  a^ 
by  an  emollient  quality,  may  weaken  the 
cohefion  of  the  teguments,  and  favour  their 
erofiom 

CCLXX. 

As,  in  the  cafe  of  certain  effufions,  a  fup- 
puration is  not  only  unavoidable,  but  defirable, 
it  may  befuppofed,  that  moil  of  the  means  of 
refolution  formerly  mentioned'  ihouid  be 
avoided  ;  and  accordingly  our  practice  is 
commonly  undirected.  But  as  we  obferve, 
on  the  one  hand,  that  a  certain  degree  of  in- 
creafed  impetus,  or  of  the  original  circum- 
{lances  of  inflammation  is  requifite  to  pro- 
I  5.  duce 


302  PRACTICE 

duce  a  proper  fuppuration ;  fo  it  is  then  efpec- 
ially  necelfary  to  avoid  thofe  means  of  ref- 
olution  that  may  diminiili  too  much  the 
force  of  the  circulation.  And  as,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  impetus  of  the  blood,  when 
violent,  is  found  to  prevent  the  proper  fuppu- 
ration ;  fo,  in  fuch  cafes,  although  a  tenden- 
cy to  fuppuration  may  have  begun,  it  may  be 
proper  to  continue  thofe  means  of  refolution 
which  moderate  the  force  of  the  circulation* 
With  refpeQ:  to  the  opening  of  abfceffes^ 
when  completely  for nied>  I  refer  to  the  writings 
on  furgery, 

CCLXXI. 

When  an  inflammation  has  taken  a  tend- 
ency to  gangrene,  that  event  is  to  he  pre- 
vented by  every  pofiible  means;  and  thefe 
mufl  be  different,  according  to  the  nature  of 
the  feveral  caufes  occafioning  that  tendency, 
as  may  be  underft ood  from  what  has  been  al- 
ready faid  of  them.  After  a  gangrene  has  in 
fome  degree,  taken  place,  it  can  be  cured 
only  by  the  feparation  of  the  dead  from  the 
living  parts.  This,  in  certain  circumfiances, 
can  be  performed  by  the  knife,  and  always 
moll  properly,   when  it  can  be  fo  done. 

In  other  cafes,  it  can  be  done  by  exciting 
a  fuppuratory  inflammation  on  the  verge  of 
the  living  part,  whereby  its  cohefion  with  the 
dead  may  be  every  where  broken  off,  fo  thafe 
the  latter  may  fall  off  by  itfelf,     While  this 

is 


OF       PHYSIC.  205. 

is  doing,  it  is  proper  to  prevent  the  further 
putrefaction  of  the  part,  and  its  fpreading 
wider.  For  this  purpofe,  various  antifeptic 
applications  have  been  propofed:  But  it  ap- 
pears to  me,  that,,  while  the  teguments  are 
entire,  thefe  applications  can  hardly  have  any 
effeel ;  and,  therefore,  that  the  fundamental 
procedure  mull  be  to  fcarify  the  part  fo  as  to 
reach  the  living  fubftance,  and,  by  the  wounds 
made  there,  to  excite  the  fuppuration  required. 
By  the  fame  incifions  alfov  we  giye  accefs  to 
antifeptics,  which  may  both  prevent  the  prog- 
refs  of  the  putrefaction  in  the  dead,  and  ex- 
cite the  inflammation  neceffary  on  the  verge 
ef  the  living  part, 

GGLXXIL 

When  the  gangrene  proceeds  from  a  lofs  of 
tone  ;  and  when  this,  communicated  to   the 
neighbouring  parts,  prevents  that  inflammation 
which,  as  I  have  laid,  is  neceffary  to  the  fepa- 
ration  of  the  dead  part  from   the  living  ;    it 
will  be  proper  to  obviate  this  lofs  of  tone  by 
tonic  medicines   given   internally  ; .  and,    for 
this  purpofe,  the  Peruvian  bark  has  been  found 
to  be  efpecially  effectual,     That  this  medicine 
operates  by  a  tonic  power,   I  have  endeavour- 
ed  to  prove  above  (CCXI V.)  5  and  from  what 
is   faid  in  CGXV.  the  limitations  to   be  ob~ 
ferved  in   emyloying  it  may  alio   be  learned,. 
When  the  gangrene   arifes   from  the  violence- 
of  inflammation,  the  bark  may   not  only  fail- 


^204  PRACTICE 

of  proving  a  remedy,  but  may  do  harm  ;  and 
its  power  as  a  tonic  is  efpecially  fuited  to  thofe 
cafes  of  gangrene  which  proceed  from  an  orig- 
inal lois  of  tone,  as  in  the  cafe  of  palfy  and 
oedema ;  or  to  •  thofe  cafes  of  inflammation 
where  a  lofs  of  tone  takes  place,  while  the 
original  inflammatory  fymptoms  are  removed. 

CCLXXIIL 

The  other  terminations  of  inflammation 
either  do  not  admit  of  any  treatment  except 
that  of  preventing  them  by  the  means  of  ref- 
olution;  or  they  belong  to  a  treatife  of 
furgery,  rather  than  to  this  place. 

Having  thus,  therefore,  delivered  the  general 
doclrine,  I  proceed  now  to  confider  the  partic- 
ular genera  and  fpecies  of  inflammation. 

It  has  been  hinted  above  (CCLXIIL), 
that  the  difference  of  inflammation  arifes 
chiefly  from  the  difference  of  the  part  affect- 
ed: I  have  therefore  arranged  them,  as  they 
are  cutaneous,  visceral,  or  articular  ; 
and  in  this  order  they  are  now  to  be  confid- 
ered. 


CHAP. 


OF       PHYSIC.  205 

CHAP.       II. 

/ 

of  INFLAMMATION,  more   strictly 
CUTANEOUS, 

CCLXXIV. 

CUTANEOUS  inflammations 
are  of  two  kinds,  commonly  diftinguifhed  by 
the  names  of  Phlegmon  and  Erysipelas. 
Of  the  latter  there  are  two  cafes,  which 
ought  to  be  diftinguifhed  by  different  appel- 
lations. When  the  difeafe  is  an  affe&ion  of  the 
fkin  alone,  and  verylittle  of  the  whole  fyftem, 
or  when  the  affection  of  the  fyftem  is  only 
fymptomatical  of  the  external  inflammation,  I 
fhallgive  the  difeafe  the  name  of  Erythema; 
but  when  the  external  inflammation  is  an  ex- 
anthema, and  fymptomatical  of  an  affection 
of  the  whole  fyftem,  I  fhall  then  name  the 
difeafe  Erysipelas. 

CCLXXV. 

It  is  the  erythema  only  that  I  am  to  con- 
fider  here. 

For  the  diftinction  between  Erythema  and 
Phlegmon,  I  have  formerly  referred  to  the 
characters  given  of  them  in  our  Nofology.   See 

Synopf. 


*0&  PRACTICE 

Synopf.  Nofolog.  Meth.  Vol.  II.  p.  5.  gen.  viL 
fpec.  1.  and  2.  But  I  think  it  proper  now  to  de- 
liver the  chara&ers  of  them  more  fully  and  ex- 
actly   here,  as  follows. 

A  Phlegmon  is  an  inflammatory  affection 
of  the  fkin,  with  a  fweliing,  riling  generally  to: 
a  more  confiderable  eminence  in  the  middle 
of  it ;  of  a  bright  red  colour ;  both  the  fwell- 
ing  and  colour  being  pretty  exactly  circum- 
fcribed  ;  the  whole  being  attended  with  a  pain 
of  diftention,  often  of  a  Hounding  or  throb- 
bing kind,  and  frequently  ending  in  fuppu- 
ration. 

An  Erythema,  Rofe,  or  St.  Anthony's 
Fire,  is  an  inflammatory  affection  of  the  fidn> 
with  hardly  any  evident  fweliing;  of  a  mixed 
and  not  very  bright  red  colour,  readily  dif~ 
appearing  upon  preffure.*  but  quickly  return- 
ing again  ;  the  rednefs  of  no  regular  circum- 
fcription,  but  fpreading  unequally,  and  con- 
tinuing almoft  conilantly  to  fpread  upon  the. 
neighbouring  part  -  with  a  pain  like  to  that 
from  burning  ;  producing  blifters,  fometimes- 
of  a  fmall,  fometimes  or  a  larger  fize  ;  and 
always  ending  in  a  desquamation  of  the  fcarf 
fkin,  fometimes  in  gangrene. 

This  fubjecl;  I  am  not  toprofecute  here,  as 
properly  belonging  to  furgery,  the  bufmefs  of 
which  I  am  feld^m  to  enter  upon  in  this  work; 
and  fhall  therefore  obferve  only  as  neceflary 
here,  that  the  difference  of  thele  appearances  i 
feems  to  depend  on  the  different  feat  of  the 
inflairimaticn.  In  the  phlegmon,  the  inflam- 
mation. 


OF       PHYSIC  207 

mation  feems  to  affeft  efpecially  the  vefTels  on 
the  internal  furface  of  the  fkin  communicating 
with  the  lax  fubjacent  cellular  texture ; 
whence  a  more  copious  effufion,  and  that  of 
ferum,  convertible  into  pus,  takes  place/  In 
the  erythema,  the  inflammation  feems  to  have 
its  feat  in  the  veffels  on  the  external  furface 
of  the  fkin,  communicating  with  the  rete 
mucofum,  which  does  not  admit  of  any 
effufion,  but  what  feparates  the  cuticle,  and 
gives  occafion  to  the  formation  of  a  blifter3 
while  the  fmaller  firze  of  the  veifels  admits 
only  of  the  effufion  of  a  thin  fluid,  very  fel- 
dom  convertible  into  pus. 

Befides  thefe  differences  in  the  circum- 
fiances  of  thefe  two  kinds  of  inflammation,  it 
is  probable  that  they  alfo  differ  with  refpe& 
to  their  caufes.  Erythema  is  the  efFect  of  all 
kinds  of  acrids  externally  applied  to  the  fkin  5 
and,  when  arifing  from  an  internal  caufe,  it 
is  from  an  acrimony  poured  out  on  the  furface 
of  the  fkin  under  the  cuticle.  In  the  phleg- 
mon, an  acrimony  is  not  commonly  evident, 

CCLXXVI. 

Thefe  differences  in  the  feat  and  caufes  of 
the  phlegmon  and  erythema  being  admitted., 
it  will  be  evident,  that  when  an  erythema 
affe&s  any  internal  part,  it  can  take  place  in 
thofe  only  whofe  furfaces  are  covered  with  an 
epithelibn,.  or  membrane  analogous  to-  the 
cuticle, 

CCLXXVIL 


2o8  P  R   A   C   T   I    C   E 


CCLXXVII.- 

The  fame  diftinftion  between  the  feat  and 
caufes  of  the  two  difeafes  will,  as  I  judge, 
readily  explain  what  has  been  delivered  by 
practical  writers,  with  refpecl  to  the  cure  of 
thefe  different  cutaneous  inflammations.  But 
I  mall  not,  however?  profecute  this  here,  for 
the  reafon  given  above  fCCLXXV.)  ;  and, 
for  the  fame  reafon,  fhall  not  fay  any  thing  of 
the  variety  of  external  inflammation,  that 
might  otherwife  be  confidered  here. 


CHAP. 


OF      PHYSIC,  209 


CHAP.         III. 


of   OPHTHALMIA,  or  INFLAMMtA- 
TION  of  the  EYE. 


CCLXXVIII. 

1  HE  inflammation  of  the  eye 
may  be  confidered  as  of  two  kinds  ;  according 
as  it  has  its  feat  in  the  membranes  of  the  ball 
of  the  eye,  when  I  would  name  it  Ophthal- 
mia Membranarumj  or  as  it  has  its  feat  in 
the  febaceous  glands  placed  in  the  tarfus,  or 
edges  of  the  eyelids,  in  which  cafe  it  may  be 
termed  Ophthalmia  Tarsi. 

Thefe  two  kinds  are  very  frequently  com- 
bined together,  as  the  one  may  readily  excite 
the  other  ;  but  they  are  frill  to  be  diftinguifh- 
ed  according  as  the  one  or  the  other  may  hap- 
pen to  be  the  primary  affection,  and  properly  as 
they  often  arife  from  different  caufes. 

CCLXXIX 

The  inflammation  of  the  membranes  of  the 
eye  affects  efpecially,  and  moft  frequently,  the 
adnata,  appearing  in  a  turgefcence  of  its  vef- 
fels  •  fo  that  the  red  veffels  which  are  natural- 
ly there,  become  not  only  increafed  in  fize, 

but 


2i'o  PRACTICE 

but  there  appear  many  more  than  did  in  a 
natural  ftate.  This  turgefcence  of  the  veffels 
is  attended  with  pain,  efpecially  upon  the  mo- 
tion of  the  ball  of  the  eye  ;  and  this,  like  ev- 
ery other  irritation  applied  to  the  furface  of 
the  eye,  produces  an  effuhon  of  tears  from  the 
lachrymal  gland. 

This  inflammation  commonly,  and  chiefly, 
affects  the  adnata  fpread  on  the  anterior  part 
of  the  bulb  of  the  eye  ;  but  ufually  fpreads  al- 
fo  along  the  continuation  of  that  membrane 
on  the  infide  of  the  palpebral  ;  and,  as  that  is 
extended  on  the  tarfus  palpebrarum,  the  ex- 
cretories  of  the  febaceous  glands  opening  there 
are  alfo  frequently  affe&ed.  When  the  af- 
fection of  the  adnata  is  confiderable,  it  is  fre- 
quently communicated  to  the  fubjacent  mem. 
branes  of  the  eye,  and  even  to  the  retina  itfelf, 
which  thereby  acquires  fo  great  a  fenfibility^ 
that  the  flighieft  imprefnon  of  light  becomes 
painful. 

CCLXXX. 

The  inflafmmation  of  the  membranes  of  the 
eye  is  in  different  degrees,  according  as  the 
adnata  is  more  or  lefs  affected,  or  according 
as  the  inflammation  is  either  of  the  adnata 
aJone,  or  of  the  fubjacent  membranes  alfo  ; 
and,  upon  thefe  differences,  different  fpecies 
have  been  eftablimed,  and  different  appelhu 
tions  given  to  them.  But  I  fhall  not,  howev* 
cr,  profecute  the  coniideratiQri  of  thefe,  being 

of 


OF       PHYSIC.  211 

of  opinion,  that  all  the  cafes  of  the  Ophthal- 
mia membranarum  differ  only  in  degree,  and 
are  to  be  cured  by  remedies  of  the  fame  kind, 
more  or  lefs  employed. 

The  remote  caufes  of  Ophthalmia  are 
many  and  various  ;  as, 

1.  External  violence,  by  blows,  contufions, 
and  wounds,  applied  to  the  eyes  ;  and  even 
very  flight  impulfes  applied,  whilft  the  eyelids 
are  open,  to  the  ball  of  the  eye  itfelf,  are  fome^ 
times  fufficient  for  the  purpofe. 

2.  Extraneous  bodies  introduced  under  the 
eyelids,  either  of  an  acrid  Quality,  as  fmoke 
and  other  acrid  vapours,  or  of  a  bulk  fufficient 
to  impede  the  free  motion  of  the  eyelids  upon 
the  ftirface  of  the  eyeball. 

3.  The  application  of  flrong  light,  or  even 
of  a  moderate  light  long  continued. 

4.  The  application  of  much  heat,  and  par- 
ticularly of  that  with  moifture. 

5.  Much  exercife  of  the  eyes  in  viewing 
minute  objects. 

6.  Frequent  intoxication. 

7.  Irritation  from  other  and  various  difeaf- 
es  of  the  eyes. 

8.  An  acrimony  prevailing  in  the  mafs  of 
blood,  and  depofited  in  the  febaceous  glands 
on  the  edges  of  the  eyelids. 

9.  A  change  in  the  difiribution  of  the 
blood,  whereby  either  a  more  than  ufual 
quantity  of  blood,  and  with  more  than  ufual 
force,  is  impelled  into  the  veffels  of  the  head3 

or 


ai*  PRACTICE 

or  whereby  the  free  return  of  the  venous  blood 
from  the  vefTels  of  the  head  is  interrupted. 

10.  A  certain  confent  of  the  eyes  with  the 
other  parts  of  the  fyftem,  whereby,  from  a 
certain  ftate  of  thefe  parts,  either  a  fimultane- 
ous,  or  an  altering  affection  of  the  eyes,  is 
produced. 

CCLXXXI. 

The  proximate  caufe  of  Ophthalmia  is  not; 
different  from  that  of  inflammation  in  general ; 
and  the  different  circumftances  of  Ophthal- 
mia may  be  explained  by  the  difference  of  its 
remote  caufes,  and  by  the  different  parts  of 
the  eye  which  it  happens  to  affect,  This  may 
be  underftood  from  what  has  been  already 
faid ;  and  I  (hall  now  therefore  proceed  to 
confider  the  Cure. 

CGLXXXII. 

In  the  cure  of  Ophthalmia,  the  firft  atten- 
tion will  be  always  due  to  the  removing  of  the 
remote  caufes,  and  the  various  means  neceffary 
for  this  purpofe  will  be  directed  by  the  con- 
fideration  of  thefe  caufes  enumerated  above. 

The  Ophthalmia  membranarum  requires 
the  remedies  proper  for  inflammation  in  gen- 
eral ;  and,  when  the  deeper  feated  membranes 
are  affected,  and  efpecially  when  a  pyrexia  is 
prefent,  large  general  bleedings  may  be  necef- 
fary.    But  this  is  feldom  the  cafe ;  as  the 

Ophthalmia* 


OF       PHYSIC.  *i3 

Ophthalmia,  for  the  mod  part,  is  an  affection 
purely  local,  accompanied  with  little  or  no  py- 
rexia. General  bleedings,  therefore,  from  the 
arm  or  foot,  have  little  effect  upon  it ;  and  the 
cure  is  chiefly  to  be  obtained  by  topical  bleed- 
ings, that  is,  blood  drawn  from  veffels  near  the 
inflamed  part ;  and  opening  the  jugular  vein 
or  the  temporal  artery,  may  be  confidered  as 
in  fome  meafure  of  this  kind.  It  is  common- 
ly fufncient  to  apply  a  number  of  leeches 
round  the  eye  ;  and  it  is  perhaps  better  ftill 
to  draw  blood  from  the  temples,  by  cupping 
and  fcarifying.  In  many  cafes,  a  very  effec- 
tual remedy  is,  that  of  fcarifying  the  internal 
furface  of  the  inferiour  eyelid  ;  and  more  fo 
ftill,  is  cutting  the  turgid  veffels  upon  the  ad- 
nata itfelf. 


CCLXXXIII. 


Befides  bloodletting,  purging,  as  a  remedy 
fuited  to  inflammation  in  general,  has  been 
confidered  as  peculiarly  adapted  to  inflamma- 
tions in  any  of  the  parts  of  the  head,,  and 
therefore  to  Ophthalmia ;  and  it  is  fometimes 
ufeful  ;  but,  for  the  reafons  given  before  with 
refpect  to  general  bleeding,  purging  in  the 
:afe  of  Ophthalmia  does  not  prove  ufeful  in 
my  degree  in  proportion  to  the  evacuation 
sxcited. 

CCLXXXIV. 


214  PRACTICE 


CCLXXXIV. 

For  relaxing  the  fpafm  in  the  part,  and 
taking  off  the  determination  of  the  fluids  tc 
it,  bliftering  near  the  part  has  commonly 
been  found  ufeful. 


CCLXXXV. 

Electrical  fparks  taken  from  the  eye  will 
often  fuddenly  difcufs  the  inflammation  of  the 
adnata,-  but  the  effect  is  feldom  permanent, 
and  even  a  frequent  repetition  feldom  gives 
an  entire  cure. 


CCLXXXVI. 

Ophthalmia,  as  an  external  inflammation, 
admits  of  topical  applications.  All  thofe, 
however,  that  increafe  the  heat  and  relax  the 
vefTels  of  the  part,  prove  commonly  hurtful ; 
and  the  admiflion  of  cool  air  to  the  eye,  the 
proper  application  of  cold  water  immediately 
to  the  ball  of  the  eye,  and  the  application  of 
various  cooling  and  ailringent  medicines, 
which  at  the  fame  time  do  not  produce  much 
irritation,  prove  generally  ufeful  ;  even  fpirit- 
uous  liquors,  employed  in  moderate  quantity, 
have  often  been  of  fervice. 

CCLXXXVII. 


OF      PHYSIC,  «5 

CCLXXXVII. 

In  the  cure  of  Ophthalmia,  much  care  is 
requifite  to  avoid  all  irrigation,  particularly 
that  of  light ;  and  the  only  fafe  and  certain 
means  of  doing  this,  is  by  confining  the  pa- 
tient to  a  very  dark  chamber. 

CCLXXXVIII. 

Thefe  are  the  remedies  of  the  Ophthalmia 
membranarum  ;  and  in  the  Ophthalmia  tarfi, 
fo  far  as  it  is  produced  by  the  Ophthalmia 
membranarum,  the  fame  remedies  may  be 
neceffary.  As,  however,  the  Ophthalmia 
tarfi  may  often  depend  upon  an  acrimony  de- 
pouted  in  the  febaceous  glands  of  the  part,  fo 
it  may  require  various  internal  remedies  ac- 
cording to  the  nature  of  the  acrimony  in  fault ; 
for  which  I  mull  refer  to  the  confideration  of 
fcrophula,  fyphilis,  or  other  difeafes  with 
which  this  Ophthalmia  may  be  connected  ; 
and  when  the  nature  of  the  acrimony  is  not 
afcertained,  certain  remedies,  more  generally 
adapted  to  the  evacuation  of  acrimony,  fuch, 
for  inflance,  as  mercury,   may  be  employed. 

CCLXXXIX. 

In  the  Ophthalmia  tarfi,  it  almoft  conftant- 
[y  happens,  that  fome  ulcerations  are  formed 
on  the  tarfus.     Thefe  require  the  application 

of 


2i6  PRACTICE 

of  mercury  or  copper,  either  of  which  may  by 
itfelf  fometimes  entirely  cure  the  afFe&ion  ; 
and  thefe  may  even  be  ufeful  when  the  difeafe 
depends  upon  a  fault  of  the  whole  fyftem. 

ccxc. 

Both  in  the  Ophthalmia  membranarum, 
and  in  the  Ophthalmia  tarfi,  it  is  neceflary  to 
obviate  that  gluing  or  flicking  together  of  the  i 
eyelids  which  commonly  happens  in  fleep; 
and  this  may  be  done  by  infinuating  a  little 
of  any  mild  un&uous  medicine  of  fome  tenac- 
ity between  the  eyelids  before  the  patient 
ihall  go  to  fleep. 


CHAP- 


O  F    P  H  Y  S  I  C.  217 

CHAP.        IV. 

•  f    PHRBNSY,  or  PHRENITIS. 


CCXCL 

1  HIS  difeafe  is  an  inflamma- 
tion of  the  parts  contained  in  the  cavity  of  the 
cranium ;  and  may  affect  either  the  mem- 
branes of  the  brain,  or  the  fubflance  of  the 
brain  itfelf.  Nofologifts  have  apprehended, 
that  thefe  two  cafes  might  be  diftinguifhed  by 
different  fymptoms,  and  therefore  by  different 
appellations  ;  but  this  does  not  feem  to  be 
confirmed  by  obfervation  and  diffeclion;  and 
therefore  I  fhall  treat  of  both  cafes  under  the 
title  of  Phrenfy,  or  Phrenitis* 

CCXCIL 

An  idiopathic  phrenfy  is  a  rare  occurrence, 
a  fympathic  more  frequent;  and  the  afcer- 
taining  either  the  one  or  the  other  is,  upon 
many  occafions,  difficult.  Many  of  the  fymp- 
toms by  which  the  difeafe  is  moft  commonly 
judged  to  be '  prefent,  have  appeared,  when, 
from  certain  confiderations,  it  was  prefumed, 
and  even  from  diffeclion  it  appeared,  that 
K  there 


5i8  PRACTICE 

there  had  been  no  internal  inflammation;  and, 
on  the  other  hand,  diffections  have  mown, 
that  the  brain  had  been  inflamed,  when  few 
of  the  peculiar  fymptoms  of  phrenfy  had  be- 
fore appeared. 


CCXCIII. 

The  fymptoms  by  which  this  difeafe  may  be 
mofl  certainly  known  are,  a  vehement  pyrexia, 
a  violent  deep  feated  headach,  a  rednefs  and 
turgefcence  of  the  face  and  eyes,  an  impatience 
of  light  or  noife,  a  conilant  watching,  and 
a  delirium  impetuous  and  furious.  Some 
nofologifh  have  thought  thefe  fymptoms  pecu- 
liar to  an  inflammation  of  the  membranes, 
and  that  the  inflammation  of  the  fubftance  of 
the  brain  was  to  be  diftinguifhed  by  fome  de- 
gree of  coma  attending  it.  It  was  for  this 
reafon  that  in  the  Nofology  I  added  the  Ty- 
phomania  to  the  character  of  Phrenitis  ;  but, 
upon  farther  reflection,  I  find  no  proper 
foundation  for  this  ;  and,  if  we  pafs  from  the 
characters  above  delivered,  there  will  be  no 
means  of  fixing  the  variety  that  occurs. 

I  am  here,  as  in  other  analogous  cafes,  of 
opinion,  that  the  fymptoms  above  mentioned 
of  an  acute  inflammation,  always  mark  in- 
flammations of  membranous  parts ;  and  that  an 
inflammation  of  the  paronchyma  or  fubftance 
of  vifcera,  exhibits,  at  leaft  commonly,  a  more 
.chronic  affection. 

CCXCIV. 


O  F     P  H  Y  S  I  C.  119 


CCXCIV. 

The  remote  caufes  of  phrenfy,  are  all  thofe 
which  directly  ftimulate  the  membranes,  or 
fubftance  of  the  brain  ;  and  particularly  all 
thofe  which  increafe  the  impetus  of  the  blood 
in  the  veflels  of  the  brain.  Among  thefe  the 
expofure  of  the  naked  head  to  the  direct  rays 
of  a  very  warm  fun,  is  a  frequent  caufe.  The 
paffions  of  the  mind,  and  certain  poifons,  are 
amongft  the  remote  caufes  of  phrenfy ;  but  in 
what  manner  they  operate,  is  not  well  under* 
ftood. 


ccxcv, 

The  cure  of  phrenfy  is  the  fame  with  that 
of  inflammation  in  general ;  but  in  phrenfy 
the  mofl  powerful  remedies  are  to  be  imme- 
diately employed.  Large  and  repeated  blood- 
letting is  efpecially  neceiTary'^  and  the  blood 
fhould  be  drawn  from  veifels  as  near  as  pof- 
fible  to  the  part  affected.  The  opening  of 
the  temporal  artery  has  been  recommended, 
and  with  fome  reafon  ;  but  the  practice  is 
attended  with  inconvenience ;  and  I  apprehend, 
that  opening  the  jugular  veins  may  prove 
more  effectual  ;  but,  at  the  fame  time,  it  will 
be  generally  proper  to  draw  blood  from  the 
temples  by  cupping  and  fcarifying. 

K  2  CCXCVI. 


220  PRACTICE 


CCXCVI. 

It  is  probable,  that  purging,  as  it  may 
operate  by  revulfion,  may  be  of  more  ufe  in 
this  than  in  fome  other  inflammatory  affe&ions. 

For  the  fame  purpofe  of  revulfion,  warm 
pediluvia  are  a  remedy  ;  but,  at  the  fame 
time,  fomewhat  ambiguous.  The  taking  off 
the  force  of  the  blood  in  the  veffels  of  the  head 
by  an  erecl  poflure,  is  generally  ufeful. 

CCXCVII. 

Shaving  of  the  head  is  always  proper  and 
necelfary  for  the  admiffion  of  other  remedies. 
BJiftering  is  commonly  ufeful  in  this  difeafe, 
but   chiefly  when  applied  near  to  the  part 

affe<5ted. 

CCXCVIII. 

Every  part  of  the  antiphlogiftic  regimen  is 
here  necelfary,  and  particularly  the  admiffion 
of  cold  air.  Even  cold  fubftances,  applied 
clofe  to  the  head,  have  been  found  fafe 
and  highly  ufeful ;  and  the  application  of  fuch 
refrigerants  as  vinegar,  is  certainly  proper. 

CCXCIX. 

It  appears  to  me  certain,  that  opiates  ar4 
hurtful  in  every  inflammatory  flate  of  the 

brain ; 


OF     PHYSIC.  221 

brain ,-  and  it  is  to  be  obferved,  that,  from 
the  ambiguity  mentioned  in  CCXCII.  the 
accounts  of  practitioners,  with  regard  to  the 
juvantia  and  laedentia  in  this  difeafe5  are  of 
very  uncertain  application. 


Kg  CHAP* 


222  PRACTICE 

CHAP.         V. 

©i  the  QUINSY,  or  CYNANCHE. 
CCC. 

A  HIS  name  is  applied  to 
every  inflammation  of  the  internal  fauces  ; 
but  thefe  inflammations  are  different,  accord- 
ing to  the  part  of  the  fauces  which  may  be 
affe6ted,  and  according  to  the  nature  of  the 
inflammation.  In  the  Nofology,  therefore, 
after  giving  the  character  of  the  Cynanche  as 
a  genus,  I  have  diftinguifhed  five  different 
fpecies,  which  muft  here  likewife  be  feparate- 
}y  conlidered. 

Sect.         I. 

Of  the  Cynanche  Tonsillaris. 

CCCI. 

THIS  is  an  inflammation  of  the  mucous 
membrane  of  the  fauces,  affe&ing  especially 
that  congeries  of  mucous  follicles  which  forms 
the  tonfils,  and  fpreading  from  thence  along 
the  velum  and  uvula,  fo  as  frequently  to  affect 
every  part  of  the  mucous  membrane. 

CCCII. 


OF       PHYSIC.  223 


j 


CCCIL 

The  difeafe  appears  by  fome  tumour,  fome- 
times  confiderable,  and  by  a  rednefs  of  the 
parts  ;  is  attended  with  a  painful  and  difficult 
deglutition  ;  with  a  pain  fometime  mooting 
into  the  ear  ;  with  a  troublefome  clamminefs 
of  the  mouth  and  throat ;  with  a  frequent,  but 
difficult,  excretion  of  mucous  ;  and  the  whole 
is  accompanied  with  a  pyrexia*. 

CCCIIL 


This  fpecies  of  quinfy  is  never  contagious, 
It  terminates  frequently  by  refolution,  fome- 
times  by  fuppuration,  but  hardly  ever  by  gan- 
grene ;  although  in  this  difeafe  fome  floughy 
fpots,  commonly  fuppofed  to  be  forerunners 
of  gangrene,  fometimes  appear  upon  the 
fauces. 

CCCIV. 

This  difeafe  is  commonly  occafioned  by- 
cold  externally  applied,  particularly  about 
the  neck.  It  affecls  efpecially  the  young  and 
fanguine,  and  a  difpofition  to  it  is  often  ac- 
quired by  habit ;  fo  that  from  every  confider- 
able  application  of  cold  to  any  part  of  the 
bodyj  this  difeafe  is  readily  induced.  It 
K  4  occurs 


224  PRACTICE 

occurs  efpecially  in  fpring  and  autumn,  when 
viciffitudes  of  heat  and  cold  frequently  take 
place.  The  inflammation  and  tumour  are 
commonly  at  firfl  mod  confiderable  in  one 
tonfil  5  and  afterwards,  abating  in  that,  in- 
creafe  in  the  other. 


cccv. 

In  the  cure  of  this  inflammation,  fome 
bleeding  may  be  proper ;  but  large  general 
bleedings  will  feldom  be  neceffary.  The 
opening  of  the  ranular  veins  feems  to  be  an 
infignificant  remedy  ;  and  leeches  fet  upon 
the  external  fauces  are  of  more  efficacy. 

CCCVI. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  difeafe,  full  vom- 
iting has  been  frequently  found  to  be  of 
great  fervice, 

CCCVIL 

This  inflammation  may  be  often  relieved 
by  moderate  aflringents,  and  particularly  by 
acids  applied  to  the  inflamed  parts.  In  many 
cafes,  however,  nothing  has  been  found  to 
give  more  relief  than  the  vapour  of  warm 
water  received  into  the  fauces  by  a  proper 
apparatus* 

CCCVIXI, 


©  F      P  H  Y  S  I  a  225 


gccviii. 

The  other  remedies  of  this  difeafe  are  rube- 
facient or  bliftering  medicines,  applied  ex- 
ternally to  the  neck  ;..  and,  with  thefe,  the 
employment  of  antiphlogiftic  purgatives,  as 
well  as  every  part  of  the  antiphlogiftic  regi- 
men, excepting  the  application  of  cold, 

CCCIX, 

This  difeafe,  as  we  have  faid,  often  ter- 
minates by  refolution,  frequently  accompani- 
ed with  fweating ;  which  is  therefore  to  be 
prudently  favoured  and  encouraged, 

eccx. 


When  this  difeafe  mail  have  taken  a  tend- 
ency to  fuppuration,  nothing  will  be  more 
ufeful,  than  the  frequent  taking  into  the 
fauces  the  fleams  of  warm  water.  When  the 
abfcefs  is  attended  with  much  fwelling,  if  it 
break  not  fpontaneoufly,  it  mould  be  opened 
hy  a  lancet  -y  and  this  does  not  require  much 
caution,  as  even  the  inflammatory  ftate  may 
be  relieved  by  fome  fcarification  of  the  tonfils, 
I  have  never  had  occafion  to  fee  any  cafe  re- 
quiring bronchotomy*. 

K  5  Sect,  I& 


226  PRACTICE 


Sect.         II, 


Of  the  Cynanche  Maligna* 


CCCXI. 

THIS  is  a  contagious  difeafe,feldomfporad- 
ic,  and  commonly  epidemic.  It  attacks  per- 
rons of  all  ages,  but  more  commonly  thofe  in 
a  young  and  infant  ftate.  It  attacks  perfons 
of  every  conflitution  when  expofed  to  the 
contagion,  but  mofl  readily  the  weak  and 
infirm. 

CCCXII. 

This  difeafe  is  ufually  attended  with  a  con- 
fiderable  pyrexia  ;  and  the  fymptoms  of  the 
acceflion  of  this,  fuch  as  frequent  cold  fhiver- 
ings,  ficknefs,  anxiety,  and  vomiting,  are  often 
the  firft  appearances  of  the  difeafe.  About 
the  fame  time,  a  ftiffnefs  is  felt  in  the  neck, 
with  fome  uneafmefs  in  the  internal  fauces, 
and  fome  hoarfenefs  of  the  voice.  The  inter- 
nal fauces,  when  viewed,  appear  of  a  deep  red 
colour,  with  fome  tumour  ;  but  this  laft  is 
feldom  confiderable,  and  deglutition  is  feldom 
difficult  or  painful.  Very  foon,  a  number  of 
white  or  afh  coloured  fpots  appear  upon  the 

inflamed 


OF       PHYSIC.  227 

inflamed  parts.  Thefe  fpots  fpread  and  unite, 
covering  almofc  the  whole  fauces  with  thick 
Jloughs  ;  which  falling  off,  difcover  ulcera- 
tions. While  thefe  fymptoms  proceed  in  the 
fauces,  they  are  generally  attended  with  a  co- 
ryza,  which  pours  out  a  thin  acrid  and  fetid 
matter,  excoriating  the  noftrils  and  lips* 
There  is  often  alfo,  efpecially  in  infants,  a  fre- 
quent purging  ;  and  a  thin  acrid  matter  flows 
from  the  anus,  excoriating  this  and  the  neigh- 
bouring parts,- 

cccxiir. 

With-  thefe  fymptoms,  the  pyrexia  proceeds- 
with  a  fmall,  frequent,  and  irregular  pulfe  ; 
and  there  occurs  a  manifeft  exacerbation  every 
evening,  and  fome  remiffion  in  the  mornings. 
A  great  debility  appears  in  the  animal  func- 
tions ;  and  the  fenforium  is  affected  with  de- 
lirium, frequently  with  coma. 

cccxiv;. 

Gn  the  fecond  day,.,  or  fometimes  later; 
efflorefcences  appear  upon  the  flcin,  which  are 
fometimes  in  fmall  points  hardly  eminent  ; 
but,  for  the  rrioft  part,  in  patches  of  a  red  col- 
our, fpreading  and  uniting  fo  as  to  cover  the 
whole  fkin.  They  appear  firft  about  the 
face  and  neck,  and  in  the  courfe  of  fome  days 
fpread  by  degrees    to  the   lower  extremities. 

le  fcarlet  rednefs  is  often  considerable  on 
K  6  ths 


228  PRACTICE 

the  hands  and  extremities  of  the  fingers,  which 
feel  ftiff  and  fwelled.  This  eruption  is  often 
irregular,  as  to  the  time  of  its  appearance,  as 
to  its  fteadinefs,  and  as  to  the  time  of  its 
duration.  It  ufually  continues  four  days, 
and  goes  off  by  fome  defquamation  of  the 
cuticle  %  but  neither  on  its  firft.  appearance, 
nor  on  its  defquamation,  does  it  always  pro*. 
duce  a  remifJion  of  the  pyrexia,  or  of  the  other 
fymptoms. 

cccxv. 

The  progrefs  of  the  difeafe  depends  on  the 
itate  of  the  fauces  and  of  the  pyrexia.  When 
the  ulcers  on  the  fauces,  by  their  livid  and 
black  colour,  by  the  fetor  of  the  breath,  and 
by  many  marks  of  acrimony  in  the  fluids, 
fhow  a  tendency  to  gangrene,  this  takes  place 
to  a  confiderable  degree ;  and,  the  fymptoms 
of  a  putrid  fever  conftantly  increafing,  the 
patient  dies,  often  on  the  third  day,  fome- 
times  later,  but  for  the  moll  part  before  the 
feventh.  The  acrimony  poured  out  from  the 
difeafed  fauces  mufl  neeeffarily,  in  part,  pafs 
into  the  pharynx,  and  there  fpread  the  in- 
fection into  the  cefophagus,  and  fometimes 
through  the  whole  of  the  alimentary  canal, 
propagating  the  putrefaction,  and  often  ex- 
haufting  the  patient  by  a  frequent  diarrhoea* 

The  acrid  matter  poured  out  in  the  fauces 
being  again  abforbed,  frequently  occafions 
large  fwellings  of  the  lymphatic  glands  about 

the 


OF       PHYSIC.  229 

the  neck,  and  fometimes  to  fuch  a  degree  as 
to  occafion  fuffocation. 

It  is  feldom  that  the  organs  of  refpiration 
efcape  entirely  unhurt,  and  very  often  the  in- 
flammatory affection  is  communicated  to  them. 
From  diffe&ions  it  appears,  that,  in  the  Cyn- 
anche  maligna,  the  larynx  and  trachea  are 
often  affe&ed  in  the  fame  manner  as  in  the 
Cynanche  trachealis  ;  and  it  is  probable,  that, 
in  confequence  of  that  affection,  the  Cynanche 
maligna  often  proves  fatal  by  fuch  a  fudden 
fuffocation  as  happens  in  the  proper  Cynanche 
trachealis ;  but  there  is  reafon  to  fufpecl;  that 
upon  this  fubjecl:  diffeclors  have  not  always 
diflinguifhed  properly  between  the  two  dif- 
eafes. 

CCCXVI. 

Thefe  are  the  feveral  fatal  terminations  of 
the  Cynanche  maligna;  but  they  do  not  always 
take  place.  Sometimes  the  ulcers  of  the 
fauces  are  of  a  milder  nature ;  and  the  fever 
is  more  moderate,  as  well  as  of  a  lefs  putrid 
kind.  And  when,  upon  the  appearance  of 
the  efflorefcence  on  the  fkin,  the  fever  fufFers 
a  remiffion ;  when  the  efflorefcence  continues 
for  three  or  four  days,  till  it  has  fpread  over 
the  whole  body,  and  then  ends  by  a  defqua- 
mation,  giving  a  further  remiffion  of  the  fe- 
ver ;  this  often  entirely  terminates,  by  gentle 
fweats,  on  or  before  the  feventh  day  ;  and  the 
reft  of  the  difeafe  terminates  in  a  few  days 


53o  PRACTICE 

more,  by  an  excretion  of  floughs  from  the 
fauces,  while  fleep,  appetite,  and  the  other 
marks  of  health,  return. 

From  what  is  faid  in  this  and  the  preceding 
paragraph,  the  prognoftics  in  this  difeafe  may 
be  readily  learned. 


CCCXVIL 


In  the  cure  of  this  difeafe,  its  feptic  tend- 
ency is  chiefly  to  be  kept  in  view.  The  de- 
bility, with  which  it  is  attended,  renders  all 
evacuations  by  bleeding  and  purging  improp- 
ery  except  in  a  few  inftances  where  the  debil- 
ity is  lefs,  and  the  inflammatory  fymptoms 
more  confiderable.  The  fauces  are  to  be  pre- 
ferred from  the  effects  of  the  acrid  matter 
poured  out  upon  them,  and  are  therefore  to 
be  frequently  warned  out  by  antifeptic  gar- 
gles or  injections  ;  and  the  feptic  tendency 
of  the  whole  fyftem  mould  be  guarded  againfl 
and  corrected  by  internal  antifeptics,  efpec- 
ially  by  the  Peruvian  bark  given  in  fubftance,, 
from  the  beginning,  and  continued  through 
the  courfe  of  the  difeafe.  Emetics,  both  by 
vomiting  a  id  naufeating,  prove  ufeful,  espec- 
ially when  employed  early  in  the  difeafe. 
When  any  confiderable  tumour  occurs,  blif- 
ters  applied  externally  will  be  of  fervice,  and, 
in  any  cafe,  may  be  fit  to  moderate  the  in- 
ternal inflammation. 

Sect. 


OF      PHYSIC,  231 

Sect.       III. 

Of  the  Cynanche  Trachealis, 

CCCXVIII. 

THIS  name  has  been  given  to  an  inflam- 
mation of  the  glottis,  larynx,  or  upper  part  of 
the  trachea,  whether  it  affect  the  membranes 
of  thefe  parts,  or  the  mufcles  adjoining.  It 
may  arife  firfl  in  thefe  parts,  and  continue  to 
fubfift  in  them  alone  ;  or  it  may  come  to  af- 
fect thefe  parts  from  the  Cynanche  tonnllaris 
or  maligna  fpreading  into  them. 

CCCXIX. 

In  either  way  it  has  been  a  rare  occurrence, 
and  few  inftances  of  it  have  been  marked  and 
recorded  by  phyficians.  It  is  to  be  known  by 
a  peculiar  ringing  found  of  the  voice,  bv  diffi- 
cult refpiration,  with  a  fenfe  of  ftraitening 
about  the  larynx,  and  by  a  pyrexia  attending 
it. 

CCCXX. 

From  the  nature  of  thefe  fymptoms,  and 
from  the  dilfeclion  of  the  bodies  of  ptrtbns 
who  had  died  of  this  difeafe,  there  is  no  doubt 

of 


*32  PRACTICE 

of  its  being  of  an  inflammatory  nature.  It 
does  not,  however,  always  run  the  courfe  of 
inflammatory  affections  ;  but  frequently  pro- 
duces fuch  an  obflru6Hon  of  the  paflage  of  the 
air,  as  fuffocates,  and  thereby  proves  fudden- 
ly  fatal. 

CCCXXI. 

If  we  judge  rightly  of  the  nature  of  this 
difeafe,  it  will  be  obvious,  that  the  cure  of  it 
requires  the  moft  powerful  remedies  of  in- 
flammation, to  be  employed  upon  the  very 
firft  appearance  of  the  fymptoms.  When  a 
fuffocation  is  threatened,  whether  any  reme- 
dies can  be  employed  to  prevent  it,  we  have 
not  had  experience  to  determine, 

CCCXXIL 

The  accounts  which  books  have  hitherto 
given  us  of  inflammations  of  the  larynx,  and 
the  parts  connected  with  it,  amount  to  what 
we  have  now  faid  ;  and  the  inftances  record- 
ed have  almoft  all  of  them  happened  in  adult 
perfons  ;  but  there  is  a  peculiar  affection  of 
this  kind  happening  efpecially  to  infants, 
which  till  lately  has  been  little  taken  notice 
of.  Dr.  Home  is  the  firft  who  has  given  any 
diftincl:  account  of  it  ;  but,  fince  he  wrote, 
feveral  other  authors  have  taken  notice  of  it,, 
(fee  M  i  c  h  a  e  l  i  s  De  angina  polypofa  Jive  mem- 
hranacia,  Argentorati  1778)  ;   and  have  given 

different 


OF      PHYSIC.  $33 

different  opinions  with  regard  to  it.  Con- 
cerning this  diverlity  of  opinions  I  fhall  noC 
at  prefent  inquire  ;  but  {hall  deliver  the  hif- 
tory  and  cure  of  this  difeafe,  in  fo  far  as  thefe 
have  arifen  from  my  own  obfervation,  from 
that  of  Dr.  Home,  and  of  other  fkilful  per- 
fons  in  this  neighbourhood. 

CCCXXIII. 

This  difeafe  feldom  attacks  infants  till  after 
they  have  been  weaned.  After  this  period, 
the  younger  they  are,  the  more  they  are  liable 
to  it.  The  frequency  of  it  becomes  lefs  a* 
children  become  more  advanced ;  and  there 
are  no  inflances  of  children  above  twelve 
years  of  age  being  affected  with  it.  It  attacks 
children  of  the  midland  countries,  as  well  as 
thofe  who  live  near  the  fea.  It  does  not  ap- 
pear to  be  contagious,  and  its  attacks  are  fre- 
quently repeated  in  the  fame  child.  It  is  oft- 
en manifeftly  the  effect  of  cold  applied  to  the 
body ;  and  therefore  appears  moil  frequently 
in  the  winter  and  fpring  feafons.  It  very 
commonly  comes  on  with^he  ordinary  fymp- 
toms  of  a  catarrh  ;  but  fometimes  the  peculiar 
fymptoms  of  the  difeafe  (how  themfelves  at 
the  very  firft. 

CCCXXIV. 

Thefe  peculiar  fymptoms  are  the  follow- 
ing :  A  hoarfenefs,  with  fome  fhrillnefs  and 

ringing 


234  PRACTICE 

ringing  found,  both  in  fpeaking  and  cough- 
ing, as  if  the  noife  came  from  a  brazen  tube. 
At  the  fame  time  there  is  a  fenfe  of  pain  about 
the  larynx,  fome  difficulty  of  refpiration,  with 
a  whizzing  found  in  infpiration,  as  if  the  paf- 
fage  of  the  air  were  ftraitened.  The  cough 
which  attends  it,  is  commonly  dry  ;  and,  if 
any  thing  be  fpit  up,  it  is  a  matter  of  a  puru- 
lent appearance,  and  fometimes  films  refem- 
bling  portions  of  a  membrane.  Together 
with  thefe  fymptoms,  there  is  a  frequency  of 
pulfe,  a  reftleffnefs,  and  an  uneafy  fenfe  of  heat. 
When  the  internal  fauces  are  viewed,  they  are 
fometimes  without  any  appearance  of  inflam- 
mation ;  but  frequently  a  rednefs,  and  even 
fwelling,  appear  ;  and  fometimes  in  the  fauces, 
there  is  an  appearance  of  matter  like  to  that  re- 
jected by  coughing.  With  the  fymptoms 
now  defcribed,  and  particularly  with  great 
difficulty  of  breathing,  and  a  fenfe  of  ftran- 
gling  in  the  fauces,  the  patient  is  fometimes 
fuddenly  taken  off. 

cccxxv. 

There  have  been  many  diffe&ions  made  of 
infants  who  had  died  of  this  difeafe  ;  and  al- 
moll  conftantly  there  has  appeared  a  preter- 
natural membrane  lining  the  whole  internal 
furface  of  the  upper  part  of  the  trachea,  and 
extending  in  the  fame  manner  downwards  in- 
to fome  of  its  ramifications.  This  preternat- 
ural membrane  may  be  ealily  feparated,  and 

fometimes 


OF       PHYSIC.  235 

fometimes  has  been  found  feparated  in  part, 
from  the  fubjacent  proper  membrane  of  the 
trachea.  This  laft  is  commonly  found  entire, 
that  is,  without  any  appearance  of  erofion  or 
ulceration  ;  but  it  frequently  lhows  the  veft- 
iges  of  inflammation,  and  is  covered  by  a 
matter  refembling  pus,  like  to  that  rejected  by 
coughing ;  and  very  often  a  matter  of  the  fame 
kind  is  found  in  the  bronchia?,  fometimes  in 
confiderable  quantity. 

CCCXXVI. 

From  the  remote  caufes  of  this  difeafe  ; 
from  the  catarrhal  fymptoms  commonly  at- 
tending it  ;  from  the  pyrexia  conftantly  pref- 
ent  with  it  j  from  the  fame  kind  of  preternat- 
ural membrane  being  found  in  the  trachea 
when  the  cynanche  maligna  is  communicated 
to  it  ;  and  from  the  veftiges  of  inflammation 
on  the  trachea  difcovered  upon  diffe&ion  ; 
we  muff  conclude,  that  the  difeafe  confifts  in 
an  inflammatory  affection  of  the  mucous 
membrane  of  the  larynx  and  trachea,  produc- 
ing an  exudation  analogous  to  that  found  on 
the  furface  of  inflamed  vifcera,  and  appearing 
partly  in  a  membranous  cruft,  and  partly  in 
a  fluid  refembling  pus. 

CCCXXVII. 

Though  this  difeafe  manifeftly  confifts  in 
an  inflammatory  affection,  it  does  not  com- 
monly 


236  PRACTICE 

monly  end  either  in  fuppuration  or  gangrene. 
The  peculiar  and  troublefome  circumftance 
of  the  difeafe  feems  to  confift  in  a  fpafm  of 
the  mufcles  of  the  glottis,  which,  by  inducing  a 
fuffocation,  prevents  the  common  confequen- 
ces  of  inflammation. 

CCCXXVIII. 

When  this  difeafe  terminates  in  health,  it  is 
by  a  refolution  of  the  inflammation,  by  a  ceaf- 
ing  of  the  fpafm  of  the  glottis,  by  an  expecto- 
ration of  the  matter  exuding  from  the  trachea, 
and  of  the  cruris  formed  there  ;  and  frequent- 
ly it  ends  without  any  expectoration,  or  at 
leaft  with  fuck  only  as  attends  an  ordinary 
catarrh. 

CCCXXIX. 

When  the  difeafe  ends  fatally,  it  is  by  a 
fufFocation ;  feemingly,  as  we  have  faid,  de- 
pending upon  a  fpafm  affecting  the  glottis  ; 
but  fometimes,  probably,  depending  upon  a 
quantity  of  matter  filling  the  bronchix* 

cccxxx. 

As  we  fuppofe  the  difeafe  to  be  an  inflam- 
matory affedlion,  fo  we  attempt  the  cure  of  it 
by  the  ufual  remedies  of  inflammation,  and 
which  for  the  moft  part  I  have  found  effec- 
tual.    Bleeding,  both  general  and  topical,  has 

oftei* 


OF       PHYSIC. 


237 


often  given  immediate  relief;  and,  by  being 
repeated,  has  entirely  cured  the  difeafe.  Blit. 
tering  alfo,  near  to  the  part  affe&ed,  has  been 
found  ufeful.  Upon  the  firfl  attack  of  the 
difeafe,  vomiting,  immediately  after  bleeding, 
feems  to  be  of  confiderable  ufe,  and  fometimes 
fuddenly  removes  the  difeafe.  In  every  ftage 
of  the  difeafe,  the  antiphlogiftic  regimen  is 
neceffary,  and  particularly  the  frequent  ufe  of 
laxative  glyfters.  Though  we  fuppofe  that  a 
fpafm  affecting  the  glottis  is  often  fatal  in  this 
difeafe,  I  have  not  found  antifpafmodic  medi- 
cines to  be  of  any  ufe. 


Sec     t.       IV. 

Of  the  Cynanche  Pharykgia. 

CCCXXXI. 

IN  the  Cynanche  tonfillaris,  the  inflamma- 
tion of  the  mucous  membrane  often  fpreads 
upon  the  pharynx,  and  into  the  beginning  of 
the  cefophagus,  and  thereby  renders  degluti- 
tion more  difficult  and  uneafy ;  but  fuch  a  cafe 
does  not  require  to  be  diftinguifhed  as  a  dif- 
ferent fpecies  from  the  common  Cynanche 
tonfillaris  ;  and  only  requires  that  bloodlet- 
ting, and  other  remedies,  mould  be  employed 
'With  greater  diligence  than  in  ordinary  cafes. 

We 


238  PRACTICE 

We  have  never  feen  any  cafe  in  which  the  in- 
flammation began  in  the  pharynx,  or  in  which 
this  part  alone  was  inflamed  ;  but  practical 
writers  have  taken  notice  of  fuch  a  cafe  ;  and 
to  them,  therefore,  I  rauft  refer,  both  for  the 
appearances  which  diftinguifh  it,  and  for  the 
method  of  cure. 


T. 


OJ  the  Cynanchb  Parotid^ea, 


CCCXXXII. 

THIS  is  a  difeafe  known  to  the  vulgar,  and 
among  them  has  got  a  peculiar  appellation  in 
every  country  of  Europe  ;  but  has  been  little 
taken  notice  of  by  medical  writers.  It  is  often 
epidemic,  and  manifeilly  contagious.  It 
comes  on  with  the  ufual  fymptoms  of  pyrexia, 
which  is  foon  after  attended  with  a  confider- 
abie  tumour  of  the  external  fauces  and  neck. 
This  tumour  appears  firft  as  a  glandular  move- 
able tumour  at  the  corner  of  the  lower  jaw  ; 
but  the  fweliing  foon  becomes  uniformly  dif- 
fufed  over  a  great  part  of  the  neck,  fometimes 
on  one  fide  only,  but  more  commonly  on  both. 
The  fweliing  continues  to  increafe  till  the 
fourth  day  ;  but  from  that  period  it  declines, 
and  in  a  few  days  more  paffes   off  entirely. 

As 


OF       P  H  Y  S  I  C.  239 

As  the  fwelling  of  the  fauces  recedes,  fome  tu- 
mour afFecls  the  tefticles  in  the  male  fex,  or 
the  breafts  in  the  female.  Thefe  tumours  are 
fometimes  large,  hard,  and  fomewhat  painful ; 
but,  in  this  climate,  are  feldom  either  very- 
painful  or  of  long  continuance.  The  pyrexia 
attending  this  difeafe  is  commonly  flight,  and 
recedes  with  the  fwelling  of  the  fauces  ;  but 
fometimes,  when  the  fwelling  of  the  tefticles 
does  not  fucceed  to  that  of  the  fauces,  or  when 
the  one  or  the  other  has  been  fuddenly  re- 
preifed,  the  pyrexia  becomes  more  confidera- 
ble,  is  often  attended  with  delirium,  and  has 
fometimes  proved  fatal. 

CCCXXXIIL 

As  this  difeafe  commonly  runs  its  courfe 
without  either  dangerous  or  troublefome 
fymptoms,  fo  it  hardly  requires  any  remedies. 
An  antiphlogiftic  regimen,  and  avoiding  cold, 
are  all  that  will  be  commonly  necejQTary.  But 
when  upon  the  receding  of  the  fwellings  of  the 
tefticles  in  males,  or  of  the  breafts  in  females, 
the  pyrexia  comes  to  be  coniiderable,  and 
threatens  an  affeclion  of  the  brain,  it  will  be 
proper,  by  warm  fomentations,  to  bring  back 
the  fwelling  ;  and,  by  vomiting,  bleeding,  or 
bliftering,  to  obviate  the  confequences  of  its 
abfence. 


C  H  A  -P. 


«40         PRACTICE 


CHAP.      VI. 


of    PNEUMONIA,    or    PNEUMONIC 
INFLAMMATION. 


CCCXXXIV. 

UNDER  this  title  I  mean  to 
comprehend  the  whole  of  the  inflammations 
affecting  either  the  vifcera  of  the  thorax  or  the 
membrane  lining  the  interior  furface  of  that 
cavity  ;  for  neither  do  our  diagnoftics  ferve 
to  afcertain  exa&ly  the  feat  of  the  difeafe  ; 
nor  does  the  difference  in  the  feat  of  the  dif- 
eafe exhibit  any  confiderable  variation  in  the 
ftate  of  the  fymptoms,  nor  lead  to  any  differ- 
ence in  the  method  of  cure. 

cccxxxv. 

Pneumonic  inflammation,  however  various 
in  its  feat,  feems  to  me  to  be  always  known  and 
diftinguifhed  by  the  following  fymptoms  ; 
pyrexia,  difficult  breathing,  cough,  and  pain 
in  fome  part  of  the  thorax.  But  thefe  fymp- 
toms are,  on  different  occafions,  varioully 
modified. 

CCCXXXVI. 


OF       PHYSIC.  241 


CCCXXXVL 

The  difeafe  almoft  always  comes  on  with  a 
cold  ftage,  and  is  accompanied  with  the  other 
fymptoms  of  pyrexia ;  though,  in  a  few  in- 
ftances,  the  pulfe  may  not  be  more  frequent, 
nor  the  heat  of  the  body  increafed  beyond 
what  is  natural.  Sometimes  the  pyrexia  is 
from  the  beginning  accompanied  with  the  oth- 
er fymptoms  ;  but  frequently  it  is  formed  for 
fome  hours  before  the  other  fymptoms  become 
confiderable,  and  particularly  before  the  pain 
be  felt.  For  the  moil  part,  the  pulfe  is  fre- 
quent, full,  ftrong,  hard,  and  quick ;  but,  in  a 
few  inftances,  efpecially  in  the  advanced  Hate 
of  the  difeafe,  the  pulfe  is  weak  and  foft,  and 
at  the  fame  time  irregular. 

CCCXXXVII. 

The  difficulty  of  breathing  is  always  pref- 
ent,  and  moil  confiderable  in  infpiration ;  both 
becaufe  the  lungs  do  not  eafily  admit  of  a  full 
dilatation,  and  becaufe  the  dilatation  aggra- 
vates the  pain  attending  the  difeafe.  The 
difficulty  of  breathing  is  alfo  greater  when  the 
patient  is  in  one  pofture  of  his  body  rather 
than  another.  It  is  generally  greater  when 
he  lies  upon  the  fide  affected  ;  but  fometimes 
the  contrary  happens.  Very  often  the  patient 
cannot  lie  eafy  upon  either  fide,  finding  eafe 
only  when  lying  on  his  back  ;  and  fometimes 
L  he 


242  PRACTICE 

he  cannot  breathe  eafily,  except  when  in  fome- 
what  of  an  erett  pofture. 

CCCXXXVIII. 

A  cough  always  attends  this  difeafe  ;  but, 
in  different  cafes,  is  more  or  lefs  urgent  and 
painful.  It  is  fometimes  dry,  that  is,  without 
any  expectoration,  efpecially  in  the  beginning 
of  the  difeafe  ;  but  more  commonly  it  is,  even 
from  the  firft,  moifl,  and  the  matter  fpit  up 
various  both  in  confiftence  and  colour  ;  and 
frequently  it  is  {freaked  with  blood. 

CCCXXXIX. 

The  pain  attending  this  difeafe,  is,  in  dif- 
ferent cafes,  felt  in  different  parts  of  the  tho- 
rax, but  moll  frequently^ one  fide.  It  has 
been  faid  to  affe6i  the  nght^fide_more-fre- 
quently  than  the  left ;  but  this  is  not  certain  ; 
while,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  certain,  that  the 
left  fide  has  been  very  often  affected.  The 
pain  is  felt  fometimes  as  if  it  were  under  the 
fternum  ;  fometimes  in  the  back  between  the 
moulders  ;  and,  when  in  the  fides,  its  place 
has  been  higher  or  lower,  more  forward  or 
backward;  but  the  place  of  all  others  moil 
frequently  affe£ted,  is  about  the  fixth  or  fev- 
enth  rib,  near  the  middle  of  its  length,  or  a 
little  more  forward.  The  pain  is  often  fevere 
and  pungent ;  but  fometimes  more  dull  and 
.ofctufej   with  a  fenfe  of  weight  rather  than  of 

pain. 


OF       PHYSIC.  243 

pain.  It  is  moft  efpecially  fevere  and  pun- 
gent when  occupying  the  place  laft  mentioned. 
For  the  moft  part  it  continues  fixed  in  one 
place  ;  but  fometimes  moots  from  the  fide  to 
the  fcapula  on  one  hand,  or  to  the  fternum 
and  clavicle  on  the  other. 

CCCXL. 

The  varying  ftate  of  fymptoms  now  men- 
tioned does  not  always  afcertain  precifely  the 
feat  of  the  difeafe.  To  me  it  feems  probable, 
that  the  difeafe  is  always  feated,  or  at  leafl  be- 
gins, in  fome  part  of  the  pleura ;  taking  that 
membrane  in  its  greateft  extent,  as  now  com- 
monly underftood  ;  that  is,  as  covering  not 
only  the  internal  furface  of  the  cavity  of  the 
thorax,  but  alfo  as  forming  the  mediafiinum, 
and  as  extended  over  the  pericardium  and 
over  the  whole  furface  of  the  lungs. 

CCCXLL 

There  is,  therefore,  little  foundation  for  dif- 
tinguifhingthis  difeafe  by  different  appellations 
taken  from  the  part  which  may  be  fuppofed 
to  be  chiefly  afFecled.  The  term  Pleuri- 
fy,  might  with  propriety  be  applied  to  every 
cafe  of  the  difeafe  ;   and  has   been  very  im- 

I  properly  limited  to  that  inflammation  tihich 
begins  in,  and  chiefly  affects,  the  pleura  coftalis. 

I  I  have  no  doubt  that  fuch  a  cafe  does  truly 

occur  1  but,  at  the  fame  time,   I  apprehend  it 

L  2  to 


244  PRACTICE 

to  be  a  rare  occurrence  ;  and  that  the  difeafe 
much  more  frequently  begins  in,  and  chiefly 
affects,  the  pleura  inverting  the  lungs,  pro- 
ducing all  the  fymptoms  fuppofed  to  belong 
to  what  has  been  called  the  Pleuritis  vera* 

CCCXLII. 

Some  phyficians  have  imagined,  that  there 
is  a  cafe  of  pneumonic  inflammation  particu- 
larly entitled  to  the  appellation  of  Peripneu- 
mony ;  and  that  is,  the  cafe  of  an  inflamma- 
tion beginning  in  the  parenchyma  or  cellular 
texture  of  the  lungs,  and  having  its  feat  chief- 
ly there.  But  it  Teems  to  me  very  doubtful, 
if  any  acute  inflammation  of  the  lungs,  or  any 
difeafe  which  has  been  called  Peripneumony, 
be  of  that  kind.  It  feems  probable,  that  ev- 
ery acute  inflammation  begins  in  membranous 
parts  ;  and,  in  every  difTeCtion  of  perfons  dead 
of  peripneumony,  the  external  membrane  of 
the  lungs,  or  fome  part  of  the  pleura,  has  ap- 
peared to  have  been  confiderably  afFe&ed. 

CCCXLIIL 

An  inflammation  of  the  pleura  covering  the 
upper  furface  of  the  diaphragm,  has  been  dif- 
tinguifjred  by  the  appellation  of  Paraphrenia 
iist  as  -fuppofed  to  be  attended  with  the  pecu- 
liar fymptoms  of  delirium,  rifus  fardonicus, 
and  other  convulfive  motions ;  but  it  is  certain, 
that  an  inflammation  of  that  portion  of  the 

pleura, 


O  F     P  H  Y  S  I  C.  245 

pleura,  and  affecting  alfo  even  the  mufcular 
fubftance  of  the  diaphragm,has  often  taken  place 
without  any  of  thefe  fymptoms ;  and  I  have 
not  met  with  either  directions,  or  any  ac- 
counts of  diffeclions,  which  fupport  the  opin- 
ion, that  an  inflammation  of  the  pleura  cover- 
ing the  diaphragm,  is  attended  with  delirium 
more  commonly  than  any  other  pneumonic 
inflammation. 

CCCXLIV. 

With  refpecl;  to  the  feat  of  pneumonic  in- 
flammation, I  mud  obferve  further,  that  al- 
though it  may  arife  and  fubfift  chiefly  in  one 
part  of  the  pleura  only,  it  is  however  frequent- 
ly communicated  to  other  parts  of  the  fame, 
and  commonly  communicates  a  morbid  affec- 
tion through  its  whole  extent, 

CCCXLV. 

The  remote  came  of  pneumonic  inflamma- 
tion, is,  commonly,  cold  applied  to  the  body5 
obflrucling  perfpiration,  and  determining  to 
the  lungs  ;  while  at  the  fame  time  the  lungs 
themfelves  are  expofed  to  the  action  of  cold, 
Thefe  circumflances  operate  efpecially,  when 
an  inflammatory  diathefis  prevails  in  the  fyf- 
tem  ;  and  consequently,  upon  perfons  of  the 
greateft  vigour  ;  in  cold  climates ;  in  the  win- 
ter feafon  ;  and  particularly  in  the  fpring, 
when,  viciflitudes  of  heat  and  cold  are  fre- 
L  3  quento 


246  PRACTICE 

quent.  The  difeafe,  however,  may  arife  in  any 
ieafon  when  fuch  viciffitudes  occur. 

Other  remote  caufes  alfo  may  have  a  mare 
in  this  matter ;  fuch  as  every  means  of  ob- 
ftructing,  ftraining,  or  otherwife  injuring,  the 
pneumonic  organs. 

Pneumonic  inflammation  may  happen  to 
perfons  of  any  age,  but  rarely  to  thofe  under 
the  age  of  puberty  ;  and  moft  commonly  it 
affect.s  perfons  fomewhat  advanced  in  life,  as 
thofe  between  forty  five  and  fixty  years  ;  thofe, 
too,  efpeciaily  of  a  robufi  and  full  habit. 

The  pneumonic  inflammation  has  been 
fometimes  fo  much  an  epidemic,  as  to  occa- 
fion  a  fufpicion  of  its  depending  upon  a  fpe- 
cific  contagion  ;  but  I  have  not  met  with  any 
evidence  in  proof  of  this.  See  Morgagni 
de  caufis  etfedibus  morborum,  epift.  xxi.  art.  26. 

CCCXLVI. 


The  pneumonic,  like  other  inflammations, 
may  terminate  by  refolution,  fuppuration,  or 
gangrene  ;  but  it  has  alfo  a  termination  pecu- 
liar to  itfelf,  as  has  been  hinted  above, 
(CCLIX)  ;  and  that  is,  when  it  is  attended 
with  an  effufion  of  blood  into  the  cellular 
texture  of  the  lungs,  which  foon  interrupting 
the  circulation  of  the  blood  through  this  viC 
cus,  produces  a  fatal  fufFocation.  This,  in- 
deed, feems  to  be  the  moft  common  termina- 
tion  of  pneumonic  inflammation,  when  it  ends 

fatally  j 


OF       PHYSIC.  247 

fatally  ;  for,  upon  the  difFe£tion  of  almoft  ev- 
ery perfon  dead  of  the  difeafe,  it  has  appeared 
that  fuch  an  efFufion  had  happened. 

CCCXLVII. 

From  thefe  difFe&ions  alfo  we  learn,  that 
pneumonic  inflammation  commonly  produces 
an  exudation  from  the  internal  furface  of  the 
pleura  ;  which  appears  partly  as  a  foft  vifcid 
cruft,  often  of  a  compact.,  membranous  form, 
covering  every  where  the  furface  of  the  pleu- 
ra, and  particularly  thofe  parts  where  the 
lungs  adhere  to>  the  pleura  coilalis,  or  mediaf- 
tinum  ;  and  this  cruft  feems  always  to  be  the 
cement  of  fuch  adhefions. 

The  fame  exudation  mows  itfelf,  alfo,  by  a 
quantity  of  a  ferous  whitifh  fluid,  commonly 
found  in  the  cavity  of  the  thorax ;  and  fome 
exudation  or  efFufion  is  ufually  found  to  have 
been  made  likewife  into  the  cavity  of  the  pe« 
2-icardium.. 

CCCXLVIII. 

It  feems  probable,  too,  that  a  like  efFufion 
is  fometimes  made  into  the  cavity  of  the 
bronchia?  ;  for,  in  fome  perfons  who  have  di- 
ed after  labouring  under  a  pneumonic  inflam- 
mation for  a  few  days  only,  the  bronchi  as  have 
been  found  filled  with  a  Confiderable  quantity 
of  a  ferous  and  thickifli  fluid  ;  which,  I  think, 
mufl  be  confidered  rather  as  the  efFufion  men*. 
L.  4  tioned^ 


248  PRACTICE 

tioned,  having  had  its  thinner  parts  taken  off 
by  refpiration,  than  as  a  pus  fo  fuddenly 
formed  in  the  inflamed  part. 

CCCXLIX. 

It  is,  however,  not  improbable,  that  this 
effufion,  as  well  as  that  made  into  the  cavi- 
ties of  the  thorax  and  pericardium,  may  be  a 
matter  of  the  fame  kind  with  that  which,  in 
other  inflammations,  is  poured  into  the  cellu- 
lar texture  of  the  parts  inflamed,  and  there 
converted  into  pus  ;  but,  in  the  thorax  and 
pericardium,  it  does  not  always  affume  that 
appearance,  becaufe  the  cruft  covering  the 
furface  prevents  the  abforption  of  the  thinner 
part.  This  abforption,  however,  may  be 
compenfated  in  the  bronchiae  by  the  drying 
power  of  the  air  -3  and  therefore  the  effufion 
into  them  may  put  on  a  more  purulent  ap- 
pearance. 

In  many  cafes  of  pneumonic  inflammation, 
when  the  Sputa  are  very  copious,  it  is  diffi- 
cult to  fuppofe  that  the  whole  of  them  pro- 
ceed from  the  mucous  follicles  of  the  bron- 
£hiae.  It  feems  more  probable  that  a  great 
part  of  them  may  proceed  from  the  effufed  fe- 
rous  fluid  we  have  been  mentioning  ;  and  this 
too  will  account  for  the  fputa  being  fo  often 
of  a  purulent  appearance.  Perhaps  the  fame 
thing  may  account  for  that  purulent  expecto- 
ration, as  well  as  that  purulent  matter  found 
in  the  bronchiae,  which  the  learned  Mr.  de 

Haen 


OF       PHYSIC.  249 

Haen  fays  lie  had  often  obferved,  when  there 
was  no  ulceration  of  the  lungs;  and  this  ex- 
planation is  at  leaft  more  probable,  than  Mr. 
de  Haen's  fuppofition  of  a  pus  formed  in  the 
circulating  blood. 

CCCL. 

To  conclude  this  fubject,  it  would  appear^ 
that  the  efPufion  into  the  bronchiae,  which  we 
have  mentioned,  often  concurs  with  the  effu- 
fion of  red  blood  in  occahoning  the  fuffoca- 
tion,  which  fatally  terminates  pneumonic  in- 
flammation ;  that  the  effufion  of  ferum  alone 
may  have  this  effect;  and,  that  the  ferum 
poured  out  in  a  certain  quantity,  rather  than 
any  debility  in  the  powers  of  expectoration,  is 
the  caufe  of  that  ceafmg  of  expectoration 
which  very  conftantly  precedes  the  fatal  event. 
For,  in  many  cafes,  the  expectoration  has 
ceafed,  when  no  other  fymptoms  of  debility 
have  appeared,  and  when,  upon  diffection,  the 
bronchiae  have  been  found  full  of  liquid  mat- 
ter. Nay,  it  is  even  probable,,  that,  in  fome 
-cafes,  fuch  an  effufion  may  take  place,  with- 
out any  fymptoms  of  violent  inflammation  ;. 
and,  in  other  cafes,  the  effufion  taking  place, 
may  feem  to  remove  the  fymptoms  of  inflam- 
mation which  had  appeared  before,  and  thus 
account  for  thofe  unexpected  fatal  termina- 
tions which  have  fometimes  happened.  Pof- 
fibly  this  effufion  may  account  alfofor  rnanv  of 
the  phenomena  of  the  Peripneumonia  Notha. 
L  5  CCCLI. 


250  PRACTICE 

CCCLI. 

Pneumonic  inflammation  feldom  terminates 
by  refolution,  without  being  attended  with 
fome  evident  evacuation.  An  hemorrhagy 
from  the  nofe  happening  upon  fome  of  the 
firft  days  of  the  difeafe,  has  fometimes  put  an 
end  to  it  ;  and  it  is  faid,  that  an  evacuation 
from  the  hemorrhoidal  veins,  a  bilious  evac- 
uation by  (tool,  and  an  evacuation  of  urine 
with  a  copious  fediment,  have  Severally  had 
the  fame  effect  ;  but  fuch  occurrences  have 
been  rare  and  unufual. 

The  evacuation  moft  frequently  attending, 
and  feeming  to  have  the  greateft  efFecl;  in  pro- 
moting refolution,  is  an  expectoration  of  a 
thick  white  or  yellowifh  matter,  a  little  ftreak- 
ed  with  blood,  copious,  and  brought  up 
without  either  much  or  violent  coughing. 

Very  frequently  the  refolution  of  this  dif- 
eafe is  attended  with,  and  perhaps  produced 
by,  a  fweat,  which  is  warm,  fluid,  copious 
over  the  whole  body,  and  attended  with  an , 
abatement  of  the  frequency  of  the  pulfe,  of 
the  heat  of  the  body,  and  of  other  febrile 
fymptoms. 

CCCLIL 

The  prognoftics  in  this  difeafe  are  formed 
from  obferving  the  ilate  of  the  principal 
fymptoms. 

A  violent  pyrexia  is  always  dangerous. 

The 


&W     FEY  S  I  C,  251 

THe  danger,  however,  is  chiefly  denoted  by 
the  difficulty  of  breathing.  When  the  patient 
can  lie  on  one  fide  only  ;  when  he  can  lie  on 
neither  fide,  but  upon  his  back  only  ;  when 
he  cannot  breathe  with  tolerable  eafe,  except 
the  trunk  of  his  body  be  ereft  ;  when,  even 
in  this  pofture,  the  breathing  is  very  difficult,, 
and  attended  with  a  turgefcene  and  flufhing 
of  the  face,  together  with  partial  fweats  about 
the  head  and  neck,  and  an  irregular  pulfe  ; 
thefe  circumftances  mark  the  difficulty  of 
breathing  in  progreffive  degrees,  and,  confe- 
quently,  in  proportion,  the  danger  of  the 
difeafe. 

A  frequent  violent  cough  aggravating  the 
pain,  is  always  the  fymptom  of  an  obfiinate 
difeafe, 

As  I  apprehend  that  the  difeafe  is  hardly 
ever  refolved,  without  fome  expectorations 
fo  a  dry  cough  muft  be  always  an  unfavourable 
fymptom. 

As  the  expectoration  formerly  defcribed, 
marks  that  the  difeafe  is  proceeding  to  a  ref- 
olution  ;  fo  an.  expectoration  which  has  not 
the  conditions  there  mentioned,  mull  denote 
at  leaft  a  doubtful  flate  of  the  difeafe  ;  but 
the  marks  taken  from  the  colour  of  the  matter, 
are  for  the  moil  part  fallacious. 

An  acute  pain,  very  much  interrupting  in- 
fpiration,  is  always  the  mark  of  a  violent  dif- 
eafe ;  though  not  of  one  more  dangerous,  than 
an  obtufe  pain,  attended  with  very  difficult 
refpiration, 

L  6        '  When 


252  PRACTICE 

When  the  pains,  which  at  firft  had  affe&ed 
one  fide  only,  have  afterwards  fpread  into  the 
other  ;  or  when,  leaving  the  fide  firft  affe&ed, 
they  entirely  pafs  into  the  other;  thefe  are 
always  marks  of  an  increafmg,  and  therefore 
of  a  dangerous,  difeafe. 

A  delirium  coming  on  during  a  pneumonic 
inflammation,  is  conftantly  a  fymptom  de- 
noting much  danger. 


CCCLIII. 

When  the  termination  of  this  difeafe  proves 
fatal,  it  is  on  one  or  other  of  the  days  of  the 
firft  wecky  from  the  third  to  the  feventh.  This 
is  themoft  common  cafe  ;  but  in  a  few  inftan- 
ces,  death  has  happened  at  a  later  period  of 
the  difeafe. 

When  the  difeafe  is  violent,  but  admitting 
of  refolution,  this  alfo  happens  frequently  in 
the  courfe  of  the  firft  week ;  but,  in  a  more 
moderate  ftate  of  the  difeafe,  the  refolution  is 
often  delayed  to  the  fecond  week. 

The  difeafe,  on  fome  of  the  days  from  the 
third  to  the  feventh,  generally  fuffers  a  re- 
miifion  ;  which,  however,  may  be  often  falla- 
cious, as  the  difeafe  does  fometimes  return 
again  with  as  much  violence  as  before,  and 
then  with  great  danger. 

Sometimes  the  difeafe  difappears  on  the 
fecond  or  third  day,  while  an  eryfipelas  makes 
its  appearance  on  fome  external  part ;  and,  if 

this 


OF      PHYSIC,  253 

this  continue  fixed,  the  pneumonic  inflam- 
mation does  not  recur. 

CCCLIV. 

Pneumonia,  like  other  inflammations,  often 
ends  in  fuppuration  or  gangrene. 

CCCLV. 

When  a  pneumonia,  with  fymptoms  neither 
very  violent  nor  very  flight,  has  continued 
for  many  days,  it  is  to  be  feared  it  will  end  in 
a  fuppuration.  This,  however,  is  not  to  be 
determined  precifely  by  the  number  of  days ; 
for,  not  only  after  the  fourth,  but  even  after 
the  tenth  day,  there  have  been  examples  of 
a  pneumonia  ending  by  a  refolution  ;  and  if 
the  difeafe  has  fuffered  fome  intermiflion,  and 
again  recurred,  there  may  be  inftances  of  a 
refolution  happening  at  a  much  later  period 
from  the  beginning  of  the  difeafe,  than  that 
jufl  now  mentioned. 

CCCLVI. 

But  if  a  moderate  difeafe,  in  fpite  of  proper 
remedies  employed,  be  protracted  to  the  four- 
teenth day  without  any  confiderable  remifiion, 
a  fuppuration  is  pretty  certainly  to  be  expect- 
ed ;  and  it  will  be  ftill  more  certain,  if  no 
ligns  of  refolution  have  appeared,  or  if  an  ex- 
pectoration which  had  appeared  mall  have 


254  PRACTICE 

again  ceafed,  and  the  difficulty  of  breathing 
has  continued  or  increafed,  while  the  other 
fymptoms  have  rather  abated, 

CCCLVII. 

That,  in  a  pneumonia,  the  effufion  is  mad^, 
which  may  lay  the  foundation  of  a  fuppu- 
ration, we  conclude  from  the  difficulty  of 
breathing  becoming  greater  when  the  patient 
is  in  a  horizontal  pofture,  or  when  he  can 
lie  more  eafily  upon  the  affe&ed  fide. 

CCCLVIII. 

That,  in  fuch  cafes,  a  fuppuration  has 
actually  begun,  may  be  concluded  from  the 
patient's  being  frequently  affected  with  flight 
cold  Ihiverings,  and  with  a  fenfe  of  cold  felt 
fometimes  in  one  and  fometimes  in  another 
part  of  the  body.  We  form  the  fame  con- 
clufion  alfo  from  the  ftate  of  the  pulfe,  which 
is  commonly  lefs  frequent  and  fof ter,  but  fome«- 
times  quicker  and  fuller,  than  before. 

CCCLIX. 

That  a- fuppuration  is  already  formed,  may 
be  inferred  from  there  being  a  confiderable 
remiffion  of  the  pain  which  had  before  fub- 
fifted,  while,  along  with  this,  the  cough,  and 
efpecially  the  dyfpncea,  continue,  and  are 
rather  augmented.  At  the  fame  time,  the  fre- 
quency 


OF     PHYSIC.  255 

quency  of  the  pulfe  is  rather  increafed ;  the 
feverifh  ftate  fufFers  considerable  exacerbations 
every  evening,  and  by  degrees  a  hectic  in  all 
its  circumftances  comes  to  be  formed. 

CCCLX. 

The  termination  of  Pneumonia  by  gangrene, 
is  much  more  rare  than  has  been  imagined  j 
and,  when  it  does  occur,  it  is  ufualiy 
■joined  with  the  termination  by  effufion 
(CCCXLVI),  and  the  fymptoms  of  the  one 
are  hardly  to  be  diftinguiihed  from  thofe  of 
the  other. 

CCCLXX. 

The,  cure  of  pneumonic  inflammation  muft 
proceed  upon  the  general  plan  (CCLXIV); 
fe^thre  importance  of  the  part  affe&ed  and 
the  danger  to  which  it  is  expofed,  require 
^hat  the  remedies  be  fully,  as  well  as  early, 
employed. 

CCCLXII. 

The  remedy  chiefly  to  be  depended  upon, 
is  that  of  bleeding  at  the  arm  ;  which  will  be 
performed  with  mod  advantage  in  the  arm  of 
the  fide  affected ;  but  may  be  done  in  either 
arm,  as  may  be  mofl  convenient  for  the  patient 
or  the  furgeon.  The  quantity  drawn  muffc 
be  fuited  to  the  violence  of  the  difeafe,  and  to 

the 


256  PRACTICE 

the  vigour  of  the  patient ;  and  generally  ought 
to  be  as  large  as  this  lafl  circumftance  will  allow. 
The  remhTion  of  pain,  and  the  relief  of  ref- 
piration  during  the  Rowing  of  the  blood,  may 
limit  the  quantity  to  be  then  drawn  ;  but  if 
thefe  fymptoms  of  relief  do  not  appear,  the 
bleeding  mould  be  continued  till  the  fymp- 
toms of  a  beginning  fyncope  come  on.  It  is 
feldom  that  one  bleeding,  however  large,  will 
prove  a  cure  of  this  difeafe  ;  and  although  the 
pain  and  difficulty  of  breathing  may  be  much 
relieved  by  the  fir  if  bleeding,  thefe  fymptoms 
commonly,  and  after  no  long  interval,  recur  ; 
often  with  as  much  violence  as  before.  In  the 
event  of  fuch  recurrence,  the  bleeding  is  to 
be  repeated,  even  in  the  courfe  of  the  fame 
day,  and  perhaps  to  the  fame  quantity  as  before. 
Sometimes  the  fecond  bleeding  may  be 
larger  than  the  firfl.  There  are  perfons  who, 
by  their  conftitution,  are  ready  to  faint  even 
upon  a  fmall  bleeding  ;  and,  in  fuch  perfons, 
this  may  prevent  the  drawing  fo  much  blood 
at  firfl  as  a  pneumonic  inflammation  might  re- 
quire ;  but,  as  the  fame  perfons  are  frequent- 
ly found  to  bear  after  bleedings  better  than  the 
firfl,  this  allows  the  fecond  and  fubfequent 
bleedings  to  be  larger,  and  to  fuch  a  quantity 
as  the  fymptoms  of  the  difeafe  may  feem  to 
demand. 

CCCLXIII. 

It  is  according  to  the  flate  of  the  fymptoms 
that  bleedings  are  to  be  reoeated  ;    and  they 

Will 


OF       PHYSIC.  257 

will  be  more  effe&ual  when  pra&ifed  in  the 
courfe  of  the  firft  three  days,  than  afterwards  ; 
but  they  are  not  to  be  omitted,  although  four 
days  of  the  difeafe  may  have  already  elapfed. 
If  the  phyfician  (hall  not  have  been  called  in 
fooner  ;  or  if  the  bleedings  pra&ifed  during 
the  firft  days  lhall  not  have  been  large  enough, 
or  even  although  thefe  bleedings  lhall  have 
procured  fome  remiffion ;  yet,  upon  the  re- 
currence of  the  urgent  fymptoms,  the  bleeding 
fhould  be  repeated  at  any  period  of  the  dif- 
eafe, efpecially  within  the  fird  fortnight ;  and 
even  afterwards,  if  a  tendency  to  fuppuration 
be  not  evident,  or  if,  after  a  feeming  folution3 
the  difeafe  mall  have  again  returned. 

CCCLXIV. 

With  refpecl;  to  the  quantity  of  blood  which 
ought,  or  which  with  fafety  may  be  taken 
away,  no  general  rules  can  be  delivered,  as 
it  muft  be  very  different,  according  to  the 
flate  of  the  difeafe,  and  the  conftitution  of  the 
patient.  In  an  adult  male  of  tolerable 
ilrength,  a  pound  of  blood,  avoirdupois,  is 
a  full  bleeding.  Any  quantity  above  twenty 
ounces  is  a  large,  and  any  quantity  below 
twelve  a  fmall,  bleeding.  A  quantity  of  from 
four  to  five  pounds,  in  the  courfe  of  two  or 
three  days,  is  generally  as  much  as  fuch 
patients  will  fafely  bear  ;  but,  if  the  intervals 
between  the  bleedings  and  the  whole  of  the 
time  during  wliich  the  bleedings  have  been 

employed 


258  PRACTICE 

employed  have  been  long,  the  quantity  taken 
upon  the  whole  may  be  greater. 


CCCLXV. 

When  a  large  quantity  of  blood  has  been 
already  taken  from  the  arm,  and  when  it  is 
doubtful  if  more  can  with  fafety  be  drawn  in 
that  manner,  fome  blood  may  ftill  be  taken 
by  cupping  and  fcarifying.  Such  a  meafure 
will  be  more  particularly  proper,  when  the 
contiuance  or  recurrence  of  pain,  rather  than 
the  difficulty  of  breathing,  becomes  the  urgent 
fymptom  ;  and  then  the  cupping  and  fcar- 
ifying mould  be  made  as  near  to  the  pained 
part  as  can  conveniently  be  done. 

CCCLXVI. 

An  expectoration  takes  place  fometimes 
very  early  in  this  difeafe  ;  but  if,  notwith- 
(landing  that,  the  urgent  fymptoms  mould 
ftill  continue,  the  expectoration  mult  not 
fuperfede  the  bleedings  mentioned ;  and 
during  the  firft  days  of  the  difeafe,  its  folution 
is  notto  be  trufted  to  the  expectoration  alone. 
It  is  in  a  more  advanced  ftage  only,  when  the 
proper  remedies  have  been  before  employed, 
and  when  the  fymptoms  have  fuffered  a  con- 
fiderable  remiflion,  that  the  entire  cure  may 
be  trufted  to  a  copious  and  free  expectoration. 

CCCLXVIL 


OF       PHYSIC.  259 


CCCLXVII. 

During  the  firft  days  of  the  difeafe,  I  have 
not  found  that  bleeding  flops  expectoration. 
On  the  contrary,  I  have  often  obferved  bleed- 
ing promote  it ;  and  it  is  in  a  more  advanced 
ftage  of  the  difeafe  only,  when  the  patient,  by 
large  evacuations,  and  the  continuance  of  the 
difeafe,  has  been  already  exhaufted,  that 
bleeding  feems  to  ftop  expectoration.  It 
appears  to  me,  that  even  then  bleeding  does 
not  ftop  expectoration  fo  much  by  weakening 
the  powers  of  expectoration,  as  by  fa- 
vouring the  ferous  effulion  into  the  bronchi  ae 
(CCCXLVIIIJ,  and   thereby  preventing  it. 

CCCLXVIII. 

While  the  bleedings  we  have  mentioned  mail 
be  employed,  it  will  be  necelfary  to  employ 
alfo  every  part  of  the  antiphlo^iftic  regimen 
(CXXX— CXXXII),  and  particularly  to 
prevent  the  irritation  which  might  arife  from 
any  increafe  of  heat.  For  this  purpofe,  it 
will  be  proper  to  keep  the  patient  out  of  bed, 
while  he  can  bear  it  eafily  ;  and,  when  he 
cannot,  to  cover  him  very  lightly  while  he 
lies  in  bed.  The  temperature  of  his  chamber 
ought  not  to  exceed  iixty  degrees  of  Faren- 
heit's  thermometer;  and  whether  it  may  be 
at  any  time  colder,  I  am  uncertain, 

CCCLXIX, 


«6o  PRACTICE 

CCCLXIX. 

Mild  and  diluent  drinks,  moderately  tepid, 
at  leafl  never  cold,  given  by  fmall  portions  at 
a  time,  ought  to  be  adminiftered  plentifully. 
Thefe  drinks  may  be  impregnated  with  vegeta- 
ble acids.  They  may  be  properly  accompanied 
alfo  with  nitre,  or  fome  other  neutrals;  butthefe 
falts  mould  be  given  feparately  from  the  drink. 

It  has  been  alleged,  that  both  acids  and 
nitre  are  ready  to  excite  coughing,  and  in  fome 
perfons  they  certainly  have  this  effec~l  ;  but,, 
except  in  perfons  of  a  peculiar  habit,  I  have 
not  found  their  effects  in  exciting  cough  fo 
confiderable  or  troublefome  as  to  prevent  our 
feeking  the^advantages  otherwife  to  be  obtain- 
ed from  thefe  medicines. 

CCCLXX. 

Some  practitioners  have  doubted,  if  purga- 
tives can  be  fafely  employed  in  this  difeafe  ; 
and  indeed  a  fpontaneous  diarrhoea  occurring 
in  the  beginning  of  the  difeafe  has  feldom 
proved  ufeful  ;  but  I  have  found  the  mode- 
rate ufe  of  cooling  laxatives  generally  fafe  ;  and 
have  always  found  it  ufeful  to  keep  the  belly 
open  by  frequent  emollient  glyflers, 

CCCLXXL 

To  excite  full  vomiting  by  emetics,  I  judge 
to  be  a  dangerous  practice  in  this  difeafe  -t  but 


OF       PHYSIC.  261 

I  have  found  it  ufeful  to  exhibit  naufeating 
<Iofes  ;  and,  in  a  fomewhat  advanced  ftate  of 
the  difeafe,  I  have  found  fuch  dofes  prove  the 
belt  means  of  promoting  expectoration. 

CCCLXXII. 

Fomentations  and  poultices  applied  to  the 
pained  part  have  been  recommended,  and  may- 
be ufeful  ;  but  the  application  of  them  is  ofu 
en  inconvenient,  and  may  be  entirely  omitted 
for  the  fake  of  the  more  effectual  remedy, 
bliflermg. 

Very  early  in  the  difeafe,  a  blifler  mould 
be  applied  as  near  to  the  pained  part  as  pofli- 
ble.  But  as,  when  the  irritation  of  a  blifler 
is  prefent,  it  renders  bleeding  lefs  effectual ;  fo 
the  application  of  the  blifler  mould  be  delayed 
till  a  bleeding  mail  have  been  employed.  If 
the  difeafe  be  moderate,  the  blifler  may  be 
applied  immediately  after  the  firft  bleeding  ; 
but  if  the  difeafe  be  violent,  and  it  is  prefum- 
«d  that  a  fecond  bleeding  may  be  neceffary 
foon  after  the  firft,  it  will  then  be  proper  to 
delay  the  blifler  till  after  the  fecond  bleeding, 
when  it  may  be  fuppofed  that  any  farther 
bleeding  may  be  poflponed  till  the  irritation 
arifing  from  the  blifler  mail  have  ceafed.  It 
may  be  frequently  neceffary  in  this  difeafe  to 
repeat  the  bliflering  ;  and,  in  that  cafe,  the 
plaflers  mould  always  be  applied  fomewhere 
on  the  thorax  ;  for,  when  applied  to  more  dif- 
tant  parts,  they  have  little  effect.  The  keeping 

the 


$62  PRACTICE 

the  bliftered  parts  open,  and  making  what  is 
called  a  perpetual  blifter,  has  much  lefs  effect 
than  a  frefh  bliftering. 

CCCLXXIII. 

As  this  difeafe  often  terminates  by  an  ex- 
pectoration, fo  various  means  of  promoting 
this  have  been  propofed  ;  but  none  of  them 
appear  to  be  very  effectual ;  and  fome  of  them, 
being  acrid  ftimulant  fubftances,  cannot  be 
very  fafe. 

The  gums  ufually  employed  feem  too 
heating  ;  fquills  feem  to  be  lefs  fo  ;  but  they 
are  not  very  powerful,  and  fometimes  incon- 
venient by  the  conflant  naufea  they  induce. 

The  volatile  alkali  may  be  of  fervice  as  an 
expectorant  ;  but  it  fhould  be  referved  for  an 
advanced  ftate  of  the  difeafe. 

Mucilaginous  and  oily  demulcents  appear 
to  be  ufeful,  by  allaying  that  acrimony  of  the 
mucus  which  occafions  too  frequent  cough- 
ing ;  and  which  coughing  prevents  the  ftagna- 
tion  and  thickening  of  the  mucus,  and  thereby 
its  becoming  mild. 

The  receiving  into  the  lungs  the  fleams  of 
warm  water  impregnated  with  vinegar,  has 
often  proved  ufeful  in  promoting  expectora- 
tion. 

But,  of  all  other  remedies,  the  mofl  power- 
ful for  this  purpofe,  are  antimonial  medicines, 
given  in  naufeating  dofes,  as  in  CLXXIX. 
Of  thefe,   however,    I   have   not  found   the 

kermes 


OF     PHYSIC.  263 

Jcermes  mineral  more  efficacious  than  emetic 
tartar,  or  antimonial  wine  ;  and  the  dofe  of  the 
kermes  is  much  more  uncertain  than  that  of 
the  others. 

CCCLXXIV. 

Though  a  fpontaneous  fweating  often 
proves  the  crifis  of  this  difeafe,  it  ought  not 
to  be  excited  by  art,  unlefs  with  much  cau- 
tion. At  leaft,  I  have  not  yet  found  it  either 
fo  effe&ualor  fafe,  as  fome  writers  have  alleg- 
ed. When,  after  fome  remiflion  of  the  fymp- 
toms,  fpontaneous  fweats  of  a  proper  kind  a- 
rife,  they  may  be  encouraged ;  but  it  ought  to 
be  without  much  heat,  and  without  flimulant 
medicines.  If,  however,  the  fweats  be  partial 
and  clammy  only,  and  a  great  difficulty  of 
breathing  ftill  remain,  it  will  be  very  danger- 
ous to  encourage  them. 

CCCLXXV. 

Phyficians  have  differed  much  in  opinion 
with  regard  to  the  ufe  of  opiates  in  pneumon- 
ic inflammation.  To  me  it  appears,  that,  in 
the  beginning  of  the  difeafe,  and  before  bleed- 
ing and  bliftering  have  produced  fome  remiflion 
of  the  pain,  and  of  the  difficulty  of  breathing, 
opiates  have  a  very  bad  effecl:,  by  their  in- 
creafmg  the  difficulty  of  breathing,  and  other 
inflammatory  fymptoms.  But  in  a  more  ad- 
vanced flate  of  the  difeafe,  when  the  difficulty 

of 


264  PRACTICE 

of  breathing  has  abated,  and  when  the  urgent 
fymptom  is  a  cough,  proving  the  chief  cauie  of 
the  continuance  of  the  pain  and  of  the  want 
of  fleep,  opiates  may  be  employed  with  great 
advantage  and  fafety.  The  interruption  of  the 
expectoration,  which  they  feem  to  occafion,  is 
for  a  fhort  time  only  ;  and  they  feem  often  to 
promote  it,  as  they  occafion  a  ftagnation  of 
what  was  by  frequent  coughing  diffipated  in- 
fenfibly,  and  therefore  give  the  appearance  of 
what  phyficians  have  called  Conco&ed  Mat- 
ter. 


CHAP. 


OF       PHYSIC.  265 


CHAR       VII. 


of    the    PERIPNEUMONIA  NOTHA, 
or  BASTARD  PERIPNEUMONY. 


CCCLXXVI. 

A  DISEASE  under  this  name 
is  mentioned  in  fome  medical  writings  of  the 
fixteenth  century  ;  but  it  is  very  doubtful  if 
the  name  was  then  applied  to  the  fame  difeafe 
to  which  we  now  apply  it.  It  appears  to  me, 
that  unlefs  fome  of  the  cafes  defcribed  under 
the  title  of  Catarrhus  Suffocativus  be  fuppof- 
ed  to  have  been  of  the  kind  I  am  now  to  treat 
of,  there  was  no  defcription  of  this  difeafe  giv- 
en before  that  by  Sydenham,  under  the  title  I 
have  employed  here. 

CCCLXXVII. 

After  Sydenham,  Boerhaave  was  the  firft 
who  in  a  fyftem  took  notice  of  it  as  a  diftincc 
difeafe  ;  and  he  has  defcribed  it  in  his  aphor- 
ifms,  although  with  fome  circumftances  differ- 
ent from  thofe  in  the  defcription  of  Sydenham. 
Of  late,  Mr.  Lieutaud  has  with  great  confi- 
dence aiferted,  that  Sydenham  and  Boerhaave 
M  had, 


266  PRACTICE 

had,  under  the  fame  title,  defcribed  different 
difeafes  •  and  that,  perhaps,  neither  of  them 
had  on  this  fubjecl  delivered  any  thing  but 
hypothecs. 

CCCLXXVIII. 

Notwithftanding  this  bold  affertion,  I  am 
humbly  of  opinion,  and  the  Baron  Van 
Swieten  feems  to  have  been  of  the  fame,  that 
Sydenham  and  Boerhaave  did  defcribe  under 
the  fame  title,  one  and  the  fame  difeafe.  Nay, 
I  am  further  of  opinion,  that  the  difeafe  de- 
fcribed by  Mr.  Lieutaud  himfelf,  is  not  effen- 
tially  different  from  that  defcribed  by  both  the 
other  authors.  Nor  will  the  doubts  of  the  very 
learned,  but  modeft  Morgagni,  on  this  fubjecl:, 
diflurb  us,  if  we  confider,  that  while  very  few 
defcribers  of  difeafes  either  have  it  in  their 
power,  or  have  been  fufhciently  attentive  in 
diftinguiming  between  the  effential  and  acci- 
dental fymptoms  of  difeafe  ;  fo,  in  a  difeafe 
which  may  have  not  only  different,  but  a 
greater  number  of  fymptoms,  in  one  perfon 
than  it  has  in  another,  we  need  not  wonder 
that  the  defcriptions  of  the  fame  difeafe  by 
different  perfons  mould  come  out  in  fome  re- 
fpecls  different.  I  mail,  however,  enter  no 
further  into  this  controverfy  ;  but  endeavour 
to  defcribe  the  difeafe  as  it  has  appeared  to 
myfelf ;  and,  as  I  judge,  in  the  effential  fymp- 
toms, much  the  fame  as  it  has  appeared  to  all 
the  other  authors  mentioned. 

CCCLXXIX. 


OF       PHYSIC.  267 


CCCLXXIX, 

This  difeafe  appears  at  the  fame  feafons 
that  other  pneumonic  and  catarrhal  affe&ions 
commonly  do ;  that  is,  in  autumn  and  in  fpring. 
Like  thefe  difeafes,  alfo,  it  is  feemingly  occa- 
fioned  by  fudden  changes  of  the  weather  from 
heat  to  cold.  It  appears,  alfo,  during  the  prev- 
alence of  contagious  catarrhs  ;  and  it  is  fre- 
quently under  the  form  of  the  Peripneumonia 
Notha,  that  thefe  catarrhs  prove  fatal  to  elder- 
ly perfons. 

This  difeafe  attacks  moil  commonly  per- 
fons fomewhat  advanced  in  life,  efpecially 
thofe  of  a  full  phlegmatic  habit ;  thofe  who 
have  before  been  frequently  liable  to  catarrhal 
aiFedtions,  and  thofe  who  have  been  much  ad- 
dicted to  the  large  ufe  of  fermented  and  fpir- 
ituous  liquors. 

The  difeafe  commonly  comes  on  with  the 
fame  fymptoms  as  other  febrile  difeafes  ;  that 
is,  with  alternate  chills  and  heats  ;  and  the 
fymptoms  of  pyrexia  are  fometimes  fufhciently 
evident  ;  but  in  mofl  cafes  thefe  are  very 
moderate,  and  in  fome  hardly  at  all  appear. 
With  the  firft  attack  of  the  difeafe,  a  cough 
comes  on  ;  ufually  accompanied  with  fome 
expectoration  ;  and  in  many  cafes  there  is  a 
frequent  throwing  up  of  a  confiderable  quan- 
tity of  a  vifcid  opaque  mucus.  The  cough 
often  becomes  frequent  and  violent ;  is,  fome- 
times accompanied  with  a  rending  headach  ; 
M  2  ana. 


268  PRACTICE 

and,  as  in  other  cafes  of  cough,  a  vomiting  is 
fometimes  excited  by  it.  The  face  is  fome- 
times  flufhed,  and  fome  giddinefs  or  drowfi- 
nefs  often  attends  the  difeafe.  A  difficulty 
of  breathing,  with  a  fenfe  of  oppreffion,  or 
ftraitening  in  the  cheft,  with  fome  obfcure 
pains  there,  and  a  fenfe  of  laffitude  over  the 
whole  body,  very  conftantly  attend  this  dif- 
eafe. The  blood  drawn  in  this  difeafe,  fhows 
a  bufFy  fuiface,  as  in  other  inflammatory  af- 
fections. 

The  difeafe  has  often  the  appearance  only 
of  a  more  violent  catarrh,  and  after  the  em- 
ployment of  fome  remedies  is  entirely  relieved 
hy  a  free  and  copious  expectoration.  In  oth- 
er cafes,  however,  the  feverifh  and  catarrhal 
fymptoms  are  at  firft  very  moderate,  and  even 
flight  ;  but,  after  a  few  days,  thefe  fymptoms 
fuddenly  become  confiderable,  and  put  an  end 
to  the  patient's  life  when  the  indications  of 
danger  were  before  very  little  evident. 

CCCLXXX. 

From  the  different  circumftances  in  which 
this  difeafe  appears,  the  pathology  of  it  is  dif- 
ficult. It  is  certainly  often  no  other  at  firft  than 
a  catarrhal  affection,  which,  in  elderly  perfons, 
is  frequently  attended  with  a  large  afflux  of 
mucus  to  the  lungs ;  and  it  was  on  this  foot- 
ing that  Sydenham  confidered  it  as  only  dif- 
fering in  degree  from  his  Febris  Hy  emails. 
A  catarrh,  however,  is  ftrictly  an  affection  of 

the 


OF       PHYSIC.  269 

the  mucous  membrane  and  follicles  of  the 
bronchiae  alone ;  but  it  may  readily  have,  and 
frequently  has,  a  degree  of  pneumonic  inflam- 
mation joined  to  it  ;  and  in  that  cafe  may 
prove  more  properly  the  peculiar  difeafe  we 
treat  of  here.  But,  further,  as  pneumonic  in- 
flammation very  often  produces  an  effufion 
offerum  into  the  bronchiae  (CCCXLVIII), 
fo  this,  in  elderly  perfons,  may  occur  in  con- 
fequence  of  a  flight  degree  of  inflammation  ; 
and  when  it  does  happen,  will  give  the  exqui- 
lite  and  fatal  cafes  of  the  peripneumonia  notha9 


CCCLXXXI. 


After  this  attempt  to  eftablim  the  patholo- 
gy, the  method  of  cure  in  the  different  cir- 
eumft ances  of  the  difeafe  will  not  be  difficult. 

In  cafe  the  fever,  catarrhal  and  pneumonic 
fymptoms,  are  immediately  confiderable,  a 
bloodletting  will  certainly  be  proper  and  nec- 
effary  ;  but,  where  thefe  fymptoms  are  mode- 
rate, a  bloodletting  will  hardly  be  requifite  ; 
and,  when  an  efiufion  is  to  be  feared,  the  rep- 
etition of  bloodletting  may  prove  extremely 
hurtful. 

In  all  cafes,  the  remedies  chiefly  to  be  de- 
pended upon,  are    vomiting   and   bliftering. 

Full  vomiting  may  be  frequently  repeated, 
and  naufeating  dofes  ought  to  be  conftantly 
employed. 

M  3  Purging 


27o  PRACTICE 

Purging  may  perhaps  be  ufeful ;  but  as  it 
is  feldom  fo  in  pneumonic  afFe&ions,  nothing 
but  gentle  laxatives  are  here  neceffary. 

In  all  the  circumftances  of  this  difeafe,  the 
antiphlogiffic  regimen  is  proper  ;  cold  is  to  be 
guarded  againft  ;  but  much  external  heat  is 
to  be  as  carefully  avoided. 

CCCLXXXIL 

If  a  perfon  fweats  eafily,  and  it  can  be 
brought  out  by  the  ufe  of  mild  tepid  liquors 
only,  the  practice  may  in  fuch  perfons  be  tri- 
ed. See  Morgagni  De  Sed,  et  Cauf.  Epift. 
xiii.  Art.  4. 

CCCLXXXIII, 

I  might  here,  perhaps,  give  a  feparate  fe&ion 
on  the  Carditis  and  Pericarditis,  or  the  In- 
flammations of  the  Heart  and  Pericardium  ; 
but  they  hardly  require  a  particular  confid- 
eration.  An  acute  inflammation  of  the  peri- 
cardium is  almoft  always  a  part  of  the  fame 
pneumonic  affection  I  have  been  treating  of  ; 
and  is  not  always  diftinguifhed  by  any  differ- 
ent fymptoms  ;  or,  if  it  be,  does  not  require 
any  different  treatment.  The  fame  may  be 
faid  of  an  acute  inflammation  of  the  heart  it- 
felf ;  and  when  it  happensihat  the  one  or  oth- 
er is  difcovered  by  the  fymptoms  of  palpita- 
tion or  fyncope,  no  more  will  be  implied  than 

that 


OF       PHYSIC.  271 

that  the  remedies  of  pneumonic  inflammation 
fhould  be  employed  with  greater  diligence. 

From  difle&ions,  which  fhow  the  heart  and 
pericardium  affected  with  erofions>ulcerations> 
and  abfcefles,  we  difcover,  that  thefe  parts  had 
been  before  affected  with  inflammation  ;  and 
that  in  cafes  where  no  fymptoms  of  pneumon- 
ic inflammation  had  appeared  ;  it  may  there- 
fore be  alleged,  that  thofe  inflammations  of 
the  heart  and  pericardium  fhould  be  coniider- 
ed  as  difeafes  independent  of  the  pneumonic^ 
This  indeed  is  juft  ;  but  the  hiflory  of  fuch 
cafes  proves,  that  thofe  inflammations  had 
been  of  a  chronic  kind,  and  hardly  difcovering 
themfelves  by  any  peculiar  fymptoms  ,•  or,  if 
attended  with  fymptoms  marking  an  affection 
of  the  heart,  thefe  were,  however,  fuch  as  have 
been  known  frequently  to  arife  from  other 
caufes  than  inflammation.  There  is,  there- 
fore, upon  the  whole,  no  room  for  our  treat- 
ing more  particularly  of  the  inflammation  of 
the  heart  or  pericardium. 


M4  r.  ** 


272  PRACTICE 


CHAP.         VIII. 


of   the  GASTRITIS,  or  INFLAMMA- 
TION of   the  STOMACH. 


CCCLXXXIV. 

AMONG  the  mflammatioi 
of  the  abdominal  region,  I  have  given  a  plac 
in  our  Nofology  to  the  Peritonitis  ;  compre- 
hending under  that  title,  not  only  the  inflam- 
mations affecting  the  peritonaeum  lining  the 
cavity  of  the  abdomen,  but  alfo  thofe  affecting 
the  extenfions  of  this,  membrane  in  the 
omentum  arid  mefentery.  It  is  not,  however, 
propofed  to  treat  of  them  here,  becaufe  it  is 
very  difficult  to  fay  by  what  fymptoms  they  are 
always  to  be  known^  and  farther,  becaufe, 
when  known,  they  do  not  require  any  reme- 
dies befide  thofe  of  inflammation  in  general. 
I  proceed,  therefore,  to  treat  of  thofe  inflam- 
mations, which,  affecting  vifcera  of  peculiar 
functions,  both  give  occafion  to  peculiar  fymp- 
toms, and  require  fome  peculiarities  in  the 
method  of  cure  ;  and  I  (hall  begin  with  the 
inflammation  of  the  ftomach. 

CCCLXXXV, 


OF       PHYSIC.  273 


CCCLXXXV, 

The  inflammation  of  the  flomach  is  of 
two  kinds ;  Phlegmonic,  or  Erythematic*. 
The  firft  may  be  feated  in  what  is  called  the 
Nervous  Coat  of  the  flomach,  or  in  the  peri- 
tonaeum invefling  it,  The  fecond  is  always 
feated  in  the  villous  coat  and  cellular  texture 
immediately  fubjacent.  - 

CCCLXXXVI. 

The  Phlegmonic  inflammation  of  the  flom- 
ach., or  what  has  been  commonly  treated  of 
under  the  title  of  Gaflritis,  is  known  by  an 
acute  pain  in  fome  part  of  the  region  of  the 
flomach,  attended  withpyrexia,  with  frequent 
vomiting,  efpecially  upon  occafion  of  any 
thing  being  taken  down  into  the  flomach,  and 
frequently  with  hickup*  The  pulfe  is  com- 
monly fraall  and  hard  ;  and  there  is  a  greater 
lofs  of  flrength  in  all  the  functions  of  the 
body,  than  in  the  cafe  of  almoft  any  other  in- 
flammation, -. 

ccclxxxvii: 

This  inflammation  may  be  produced  by  va- 
rious caufes  ;  as^   by  external  contufion  3   by 
M  5  acrids 

*  This  is  a  new  term  ;  but  whoever  confiders  what  is 
faid  in  CCLXXIV,  will,  I  expeel,  perceive  the  proprie- 
ty, and  even  tbeueceffity,  ef  it, 


274  PRACTICE 

acrids  of  various  kinds  taken  into  the  ftom- 
ach  ;  frequently  by  very  cold  drink,  taken  in- 
to it,  while  the  body  is  very  warm  ;  and  fome- 
times  by  over  diftention,  from  the  having  tak- 
en in  a  large  quantity  of  food  of  difficult  di- 
geffion.  All  thefe  may  be  confidered  as  ex- 
ternal caufes  -  but  the  difeafe  fometimes  arifes 
alfo  from  internal  caufes  not  fo  well  under- 
flood.  It  may  arife  from  inflammations  of 
the  neighbouring  parts  communicated  to  ths 
fiomach,  and  is  then  to  be  confidered  as  a 
iymptomatic  afFe£lion  only.  It  may  arife  al- 
io from  various  acrimonies  generated  within 
the  body,  either  in  the  fiomach  itfelf,  or  in 
other  parts,  and  poured  into  the  cavity  of  the 
fiomach.  Thefe  are  caufes  more  directly  ap- 
plied to  the  fiomach  ;  but  there  are  perhaps 
others  originating  eifewhere,  and  affecting  the 
fiomach  only  fympathetically.  Such  may  be 
fuppofed  to  have  acted  in  the  cafe  of  putrid 
fevers  and  exanthematic  pyrexias  ;  in  which3 
upon  dilfeclion,  it  has  been  discovered  that 
the  fiomach  had  been  affected  with  inflam- 
mation. 

CCCLXXXVIIL 

From  the  fenfibility  of  the  fiomach,  and  its 
communication  with  the  reft  of  the  fyflem;  it 
will  be  obvious,  that  the  inflammation  of  thig 
organ,  by  whatever  caufes  produced,  may  be 
attended  with  fatal  confequences.  In  partic- 
ular, by  the  great  debility  which  fuch  an  in- 
flammation 


OF       PHYSIC.  275 

flammation  fuddenly  produces,  it  may  quickly 
prove  fatal,  without  running  the  common 
courfe  of  inflammations. 

When  it  lafts  long  enough  to  follow  the  or- 
dinary courfe  of  other  inflammations,  it  may 
terminate  by  refolution,  gangrene,  or  fuppu- 
ration.  The  fcirrhofities  which  are  often  dif- 
covered  afFecling  the  flomach,  are  feldom 
known  to  be  the  conferences  of  inflam- 
mation. 

ccclxxxix, 

The  tendency  of  this  difeafe  to  admit  of 
refolution,  may  be  known  by  its  having  arifen 
from  no  violent  caufe  ;  by  the  moderate  flate 
of  the  fymptoms ;  and  by  a  gradual  remiffion 
of  thefe,  efpecially  in  confequence  of  remedies 
employed  in  the  courfe  of  the  firft,  or  at  far- 
theft  the  fecond,  week  of  the  difeafe, 

cccxa 

The  tendency  to  fuppuration  may  be  known 
by  the  fymptoms  continuing,  in  a  moderate 
degree,  for  more  than  one  or  two  weeks  ;  and 
likewife  by  a  considerable  remiffion  of  the 
pain,  while  a  fenfe  of  weight  and  anxiety  fliil 
remain. 

When  an  abfcefs  has  been  formed,  the  fre- 
quency of  the  pulfe  is  at  firft  abated  ;  but  foon 
after,  it  is  again  increafed,  with  frequent  cold 
fhiverings,  and  with  marked  exacerbations  in 
M  6  the 


276  PRACTICE 

the  afternoon  and  evening,  followed  by  night, 
fweatings  and  other  fymptoms  of  heclic  fever. 
Thefe  at  length  prove  fatal,  unlefs  the  abfcefs 
open  into  the  cavity  of  the  ftomach,  the  pus 
be  evacuated  by  vomiting,  and  the  ulcer  foon 
heal. 

CCCXCI, 

The  tendency  to  gangrene  may  be  fufpecl;- 
ed  from  the  violence  of  the  fymptoms  not 
yielding  to  the  remedies  employed  during  the 
firft  days  of  the  difeafe  ;  and  that  a  gangrene 
has  already  begun,,  may  be  known  from  the 
fudden  remiffion  of  the  pain,  while  the  fre- 
f|ucncy  of  the  pulfe  continues,  and  at  the  fame 
time  becomes  weaker,  accompanied  with  other 
marks  of  an  increafing  debility  in  the  whole 
fyftem.. 

CCCXCII. 

From  the  difIe6tion  of  dead  bodies  it  ap- 
pears, that  the  ftomach  very  often  has  been 
affected  with  inflammation,,  when  the  charac- 
terise fymptoms  of  it  (CCCLXXXVI)  had 
not  appeared  ;  and  therefore  it  is  very  difficult 
to  lay  down  any  general  rules  for  the  cure  of 
this  difeafe. 

CCCXCIIL 

It  is  only  in  the  cafe  of  phlegmonic  inflam- 
mation, as  chara&erifed  in  CCCLXXXVI. 

that 


O  F     P  H  Y  S  I  C.  277 

that  we  can  advife  the  cure  or  refdrution  to 
be  attempted  by  large  and  repeated  bleedings 
employed  early  in  the  difeafe  -,  and  we  are  not 
to  be  deterred  from  thefe  by  the  fmallnefs  of 
the  pulfe  *  for,  after  bleeding,  it  commonly 
becomes  fuller  and  fofter.  After  bleeding,  a 
blifter  ought  to  be  applied  to  the  region  of  the 
ftomach ;  and  the  cure  will  be  affifted  by  fo- 
mentations of  the  whole  abdomen,  as  well  as- 
by  frequent  emollient  and  laxative  glyflers. 


cccxcrv. 

In  this  difeafe,  the  irritability  of  the  ftom- 
ach will  not  admit  of  any  medicines  being 
thrown  into  it  -y  and,  if  any  internal  medicines 
can  be  fuppofed  neceffary,  they  muff  be  ex- 
hibited in  glyfters.  The  giving  of  drink  may 
be  tried  ;  but  it  ought  to  be  of  the  very  mild- 
eft  kind,  and  in  veryfmall  quantities  at  a  time, 

cccxcv. 


Opiates,  in  whatever  manner  exhibited,  are 
very  hurtful  during  the  firft  days  of  the  dif- 
eafe •  but  when  its  violence  mail  have  abated, 
and  when  the  violence  of  the  pain  and  vomit- 
ing recur  at  intervals  only,  opiates  given  in 
glyflers  may  be  cautioufly  tried,  and  forne- 
iimes  have  been  employed  with  advantage. 

CCCXCVI. 


*78  PRACTICE 


CCCXCVI. 

A  tendency  to  fuppuration,  in  this  difeafc, 
is  to  be  obviated  by  the  means  juft  now  pro- 
pofed.  After  a  certain  duration  of  the  dif- 
eafe,  it  cannot  be  prevented  by  any  means 
whatever  ;  and  when  actually  begun,  muft  be 
kft  to  nature  ;  the  bufmefs  of  the  phyfician 
being  only  to  avoid  all  irritation. 

CCCXCVII. 

A  tendency  to  gangrene  can  be  obviated  in 
no  other  way  than  by  the  means  fuggefted 
CCCXCIII,  employed  early  in  the  difeafe  ; 
and,  when  it  does  actually  fupervene,  admits 
of  no  remedy. 

CCCXCVI  XL 

Erythematic  inflammations  of  the  ftomach, 
are  more  frequent  thanthofe  of  the  phlegmon- 
ic  kind.  It  appears,  at  leaft,  from  diffe&ions, 
that  the  ftomach  has  often  been  affected  with 
inflammation,  when  neither  pain  nor  pyrexia 
had  before  given  any  notice  of  it ;  and  fuch 
inflammation  I  apprehend  to  have  been  chief- 
ly of  the  erythematic  kind.  This  fpecies  of 
inflammation  alfo,  is  efpecially  to  be  expected 
from  acrimony  of  any  kind  thrown  into  the 
ftomach  ;  and  would  certainly  occur  more 
frequently  from  fuch  a  caufe,  were  not  the 

interior 


OF       PHYSIC.  279 

interior  furface  of  this  organ  commonly  de- 
fended by  mucus  exuding  in  large  quantities 
from  the  numerous  follicles  placed  immedi- 
ately under  the  villous  coat.  Upon  many  oc- 
canons,  however,  the  exudation  of  mucus  is 
prevented,  or  the  liquid  poured  out  is  of  a 
lefs  vifcid  kind,  fo  as  to  be  lefs  fitted  to  defend 
the  fubjacent  nerves  ;  and  it  is  in  fuch  cafes 
that  matters  even  of  moderate  acrimony,  may 
produce  any  erythematic  affec~lion  of  the 
ftomach.. 

CCCXCIX. 

From  what  has  been  faid  it  muff  appear,, 
that  an  erythematic  inflammation  of  the  ftom- 
ach  may  frequently  occur  ;  but  will  not  al- 
ways difcover  itfelf,  as  it  fometimes  takes  place 
without  pyrexia,  pain,  or  vomiting. 

ccca 

There  are  cafes,  however,  in  which  it  may 
be  difcovered.  The  affection  of  the  ftomach 
fometimes  fpreads  into  the  cefophagus,  and 
appears  in  the  pharynx,  as  well  as  on  the 
whole  internal  furface  of  the  mouth.  When, 
therefore,. an  erythematic  inflammation  affe&a 
the  mouth  and  fauces,  and  when  at  the  fame 
time  there  fhall  be  in  the  ftomach  ?an  unufual 
fenfibrlity  to  all  acrids,  with  a  frequent  vom- 
iting, there  can  be  little  doubt  of  the  ftomach 
being  affecled  with  the    fame    inflammation 

that 


28o  PRACTICE 

that  has  appeared  in  the  fauces.  Even  when 
no  inflammation  appears  in  the  fauces,  yet  if 
fome  degree  of  pain  be  felt  in  the  ftomach,  if 
there  be  a  want  of  appetite,  an  anxiety,  fre- 
quent vomiting,  an  unufuai  fenfibility  with 
refpecf  to  acrids,  fome  thirft,  and  frequency 
of  pulfe,  there  will  then  be  room  to  fufpetf 
an  erythematic  inflammation  of  the  ftomach  ; 
and  we  have  known  fuch  fymptoms,  after 
fome  time,  difcover  their  caufe  more  clearly 
by  the  appearance  of  the  inflammation  in  the 
fauces  or  mouth. 

Erythematic  inflammation  is  often  difpofed- 
to  fpread  from  one  place  to  another  on  the 
fame  furface ;  and,  in  doing  fo,  to  leave  the 
place  it  had  at  firft  occupied.  Thus,  fuch  an 
inflammation  has  been  known  to  fpread  fue- 
ceftively  along  the  whole  courfe  of  the  ali- 
mentary canal,  occafioning  in  the  interlines 
diarrhoea,  and  in  the  ftomach  vomitings  ;  the 
diarrhoea  ceafing  when  the  vomitings  came  on,  . 
or  the  vomitings  upon  the  coming  on  of  the  4 
diarrhoea. 

CCCCI. 

When  an  erythematic  inflammation  of  the  */ 
ftomach  fhall  be  difcovered,  it  is  to  be  treated 
differently,  according  to  the  difference  of  its 
caufes  and  fymptoms. 

When  it  is  owing  to  acrid  matters  taken  in 
by  the  mouth,  and  when  thefe  may  be  fup- 
pofed  ftill  prefent  in  the  ftomach*  they  are  to 

fce 


OF    PHYSIC.  28* 

be  wafhed  out  by  throwing  in  a  large  quantity 
of  warm  and  mild  liquids,  and  by  exciting 
vomiting.  At  the  fame  time,  if  the  nature  of 
the  acrimony  and  its  proper  corrector  be 
known,  this  mould  be  thrown  in  •  or  if  a  fpe- 
cific  corrector  be  not  known,  fome  general  de- 
mulcents mould  be  employed. 

CCCCII. 

Thefe  meafures,  however,  are  more  fuited 
to  prevent  the  inflammation,  than  to  cure  it 
after  it  has  taken  place.  When  this  laft  may 
be  fuppofed  to  be  the  cafe,  if  it  be  attended 
with  a  fenfe  of  heat,  with  pain  and  pyrexia, 
according  to  the  degree  of  thefe  fymptoms  the 
meafures  propofed  in  CCCXCIII,  are  to  be 
more  or  lefs  employed. 

CCCCIII. 

When  an  erythematic  inflammation  of  the 
ftomach  has  arifen  from  internal  cau fes,  if 
pain  and  pyrexia  accompany  the  difeafe,  fome 
bleeding  in  perfons  not  otherwife  weakened, 
may  be  employed  ;  but,  as  the  affection  often 
arifes  in  putrid  difeafes,  and  in  convalefcents 
from  fever  ;  fo  in  thefe  cafes,  bleeding  is  in- 
admiffible  ;  all  that  can  be  done  being  to  avoid 
irritation,  and  to  throw  into  the  ftomach  what 
quantity  of  acids,  and  of  acefcent  aliments,  it 
fliall  be  found  to  bear. 

In 


282  PRACTICE 

In  fome  conditions  of  the  body,  in  which 
this  difeafe  arifes,  the  Peruvian  bark  and  bit- 
ters may  feem  to  be  indicated  ;  but  an  eryth- 
ematic  flate  of  the  ftomach  does  not  common- 
ly allow  of  them. 


CHAP. 


OF       PHYSIC.  283 


CHAP.         IX 


of  the  ENTERITIS,  or  INFLAMMA- 
TION of  the  INTESTINES. 


CCCCIV, 

1  HE  inflammation  of  the  in- 
teftines,  like  that  of  the  ftomach,  may  be  ei- 
ther phlegmonic,  or  erythematic  ;  but,  on  the 
fubjecl;  of  the  latter,  I  have  nothing  to  add  to 
what  has  been  faid  in  the  lafl  chapter ;  and 
fhall  here  therefore  treat  of  the  phlegmonic 
inflammation  only. 

CCCCVI. 

This  inflammation  may  be  known  to  be 
prefent,  by  a  fixed  pain  of  the  abdomen,  at- 
tended with  pyrexia,  coftivenefs,  and  vomit- 
ing. Practical  writers  mention  the  pain  in 
this  cafe  as  felt  in  different  parts  of  the  abdo- 
men, according  to  the  different  feat  of  the  in- 
flammation ;  and  fo,  indeed,  it  fometimes 
happens ;  but  very  often  the  pain  fpreads 
over  the  whole  belly,  and  is  felt  more  efpecial- 
ly  about  the  navel. 

CCCCVIL 


284  PRACTICE 

CCCCVII. 

The  Enteritis  and  Gaftritis  arife  from  like 
caufes  ;  but  the  former,  more  readily  than  the 
latter,  proceeds  from  cold  applied  to  the  low- 
er extremities,  or  to  the  belly  itfelf.  The  en- 
teritis has  Jikewife  its  own  peculiar  caufes,  as 
fupervening  upon  the  fpafmodic  colic,  incar- 
cerated hernia,  and  volvulus. 

CCCCVIIL 

Inflammations  of  the  interlines  have  the 
fame  terminations  as  thofe  of  the  fiomach  ; 
and,  in  both  cafes,  the  feveral  tendencies  are 
to  be  difcovered  by  the  fame  fyrrrptoms 
(CCCLXXXIX,— CCCXCI). 

CCCCIX. 

The  cure  of  the  enteritis  is,  in  general,  the 
fame  with  that  of  the  gaftritis  (CCGXCIII.  & 
feq. J  but  in  the  enteritis,  there  is  commonly 
more  aceefs  to  the  introduction  of  liquids,  of 
acid,  ace fcent,  and  other  cooling  remedies,  and 
even  of  laxatives.  As,  however,  a  vomiting 
fo  frequently  attends  this  difeafe,  care  muft  be 
taken  not  to  excite  that  vomiting  by  either  the 
quantity  or  the  quality  of  any  thing  thrown 
into  the  fiomach. 

The  fame  obfervation,  with  refpecV  to  the 
ufe  of  opiales,  is  to  be  made  here  as  in  the 
cafe  of  gaftois* 

CCCCX. 


OF     PHYSIC.  285 


ccccx. 

Under  the  title  of  Enteritis,  it  has  been 
ufual  with  practical  writers  to  treat  of  the 
remedies  proper  for  the  colic,  and  its  higher 
degree  named  Ileus  ;  but,  although  it  be  tine 
that  the  enteritis  and  colic  do  frequently  ac- 
company each  other,  I  ilill  hold  them  to  be 
diflincl:  difeafes,  to  be  often  occurring  fepa- 
rately,  and  accordingly  to  require  and  admit 
of  different  remedies.  I  fhail  therefore  delay 
fpeaking  of  the  remedies  proper  for  the  colic, 
till  I  {hall  come  to  treat  of  this  difeafe  in  its 
proper  place. 

CCCCXI. 

What  might  be  mentioned  with  refpecl:  to 
the  fuppuration  or  gangrene  occurring  in  the 
enteritis  may  be  fufficiently  underftood  from 
what  has  been  faid  on  the  fame  fubjeft  with 
.refpecl  to  the  gaftritis. 


CHAP. 


r 


286         PRACTICE 
CHAP.        X. 


of  the  HEPATITIS,  or  INFLAMMA- 
TION of  the  LIVER. 


CCCCXIL 

1  HE  inflammation  of  the  liv- 
er feems  to  be  of  two  kinds ;  the  one  acute,  the 
other  chronic. 

CCCCXIII. 

The  acute  is  attended  with  pungent^  pain ; 
confiderable  pyrexia  ;  a  frequent,  ftrong,  and 
hard  pulfe  ;  and  high  coloured  urine. 

CCCCXIV. 

The  chronic  hepatitis  very  often  does  not 
exhibit  any  of  thefe  fymptoms  ;  and  it  is  only 
difcovered  to  have  happened,  by  our  finding 
in  the  liver,  upon  diffeclion,  large  abfcefTes, 
which  are  prefumed  to  be  the  effect  of  fome 
degree  of  previous  inflammation.  As  this 
chronic  inflammation  is  feldom  to  be  certain- 
ly known,  and  therefore  does  not  lead  to  any 
determined   practice,  we    omit    treating  of  it 

here, 


OF       PHYSIC.  287 

here,  and  fhall  only  treat  of  what  relates  to 
the  acute  fpecies  of  the  hepatitis. 

ccccxv. 

The  acute  hepatitis  may  be  known  by  a 
pain  more  or  lefs  acute  in  the  right  hypochon- 
drium,  increafed  by  preffing  upon  the  part. 
The  pain  is  very  often  in  fuch  a  part  of  the 
fide  as  to  make  it  appear  like  that  of  a  pleuri- 
fy  ;  and  frequently,  like  that  too,  is  increafed 
on  refpiration.  The  difeafe  is,  infome  in- 
flances,  alfo  attended  with  a  cough,  which  is 
commonly  dry,  but  fometimes  humid  ;  and 
when  the  pain  thus  refembles  that  of  a  pleuri- 
fy>  the  patient  cannot  lie  eafily  except  upon 
the  fide  afFe&ed. 

In  every  kind  of  acute  hepatitis,  the  pain  is 
often  extended  to  the  clavicle,  and  to  the  top 
of  the  moulder.  The  difeafe  is  attended  fome- 
times with  hickup,  and  fometimes  with  vom- 
iting. Many  practical  writers  have  mention- 
ed the  jaundice,  or  a  yellow  colour  of  the  fkin 
and  eytst  as  a  very  conftant  fymptom  of  the 
hepatitis  ;  but  experience  has  ihown,  that  it 
may  often  occur  without  any  fuch  fymptom. 

CCCCXVI. 

The  remote  cau fes  of  hepatitis  are  not  al- 
ways to  be  difcerned,  and  many  have  been  af- 
figned  on  a  very  uncertain  foundation.  The 
following    feem    to    be   frequently  evident. 

l.vExternal 


288  PRACTICE 

i .  External  violence  from  contuiions  or  falls, 
and  efpecially  .thofe  which  have  occafioned  a 
fracture  of  the  cranium.  2.  Certain  paffions 
of  the  mind.  3.  Violent  fummer  heats. 
4.  Violent  exercife.  5.  Intermittent  and  re- 
mittent fevers.  6.  Cold  applied  externally, 
or  internally  ;  and  therefore  in  many  cafes  the 
fame  caufes  which  produce  pneumonic  in- 
flammation, produce  hepatitis  ;  and  whence 
alfo  the  two  difeafes  are  fometimes  joined  to- 
gether. 7.  Various  folid  concretions  or  col- 
lections of  liquid  matter,  in  the  fubflance  of 
the  liver,  produced  by  unknown  caufes.  Laft- 
ly,  The  acute  is  often  induced  by  a  chronic 
inflammation  of  this  vifcus. 

CCCCXVII. 

It  has  been  fuppofed,  that  the  hepatitis  may 
be  an  affe&ion  either  of  the  extremities  of  the 
hepatic  artery,  or  of  thofe  of  the  vena  porta- 
rum ;  but  of  the  laft  fuppofition  there  is  neither 
evidence  nor  probability. 

CCCCXVIII, 

It  feems  probable,  that  the  acute  hepatitis 
is  always  an  affection  of  the  external  mem- 
brane of  the  liver ;  and  that  the  parenchymat- 
ic  is  of  the  chronic  kind.  The  acute  difeafe 
may  be  feated  either  on  the  convex  or  on  the 
concave  furface  of  the  liver.  In  the  former 
cafe,  a  more  pungent  pa:n  andhickup  may  be 

produced, 


OF     PHYSIC.  289 

produced,  and  the  refpiration  is  more  confid- 
erably  affected.  In  the  latter,  there  occurs 
lefs  pain  ;  and  a  vomiting  is  produced,  com- 
monly by  fome  inflammation  communicated 
to  the  ftomach.  The  inflammation  of  the 
concave  furface  of  the  liver,  may  be  readily 
communicated  to  the  gall  bladder  and  biliary 
duels  ;  and  this  perhaps  is  the  only  cafe  of  idi- 
opathic hepatitis  attended  with  jaundice  ^ 

CCCCXIX. 

The  hepatitis,  like  other  inflammations,  may 
end  by  refolution,  fuppuration,  or  gangrene  ; 
a.nd  the  tendency  to  the  one  or  the  other  of 
thefe  events,  may  be  known  from  what  has 
been  delivered  above. 

ccccxx. 

The  refolution  of  hepatitis  is  often  the  con-. 
fequence  of,  or  is  attended  with,  evacuations 
of  different  kinds.  A  hemorrhagy,  fometimes 
from  the  right  noflril,  and  fometimes  from  the 
hemorrhoidal  veffels,  gives  a  folution  of  the 
difeafe.  Sometimes  a  bilious  diarrhcea  con- 
tributes to  the  fame  event ;  and  the  refolution 
of  the  hepatitis,  as  of  other  inflammations,  is 
attended  with  fweating,  and  with  an  evacua- 
tion of  urine,  depofiting  a  copious  fediment, 
Can  this  difeafe  be  refolved  by  expectoration  P 
It  would  feem  to  be  fometimes  cured  by  an 
eryfipelas  appearing  in  fome  external  part. 

N  CCCCXXI. 


29o  PRACTICE 

CCCCXXI. 

When  this  difeafe  has  ended  in  fuppura- 
tion,  the  pus  collected  may  be  difcharged  by 
the  biliary  duels  ;  or,  if  the  fuppurated  part 
does  not  any  where  adhere  clofely  to  the 
neighbouring  parts,  the  pus  may  be  difcharged 
into  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen  ;  but  if,  dur- 
ing the  firft  Hate  of  inflammation,  the  af- 
fected part  of  the  liver  (hall  have  formed  a  clofe 
adhefion  to  fome  of  the  neighbouring  parts, 
the  diicharge  of  the  pus  after  fuppuration 
may  be  various,  according  to  the  different  feat 
of  the  abfeefs.  When  feated  on  the  convex 
part  of  the  liver,  if  the  adhefion  be  to  the  pe- 
ritonaeum lining  the  common  teguments,  the 
pus  may  make  its  way  through  thefe,  and  be 
difcharged  outwardly  ;  or,  if  the  adhefion 
mould  have  been  to  the  diaphragm,  the  pus 
may  penetrate  through  this,  and  into  the  cav- 
ity of  the  thorax,  or  of  the  lungs  ;  and  through 
the  latter  may  be  difcharged  by  coughing. 
When  the  abfeefs  of  the  liver  is  feated  on  its 
concave  part,  then,  in  confequence  of  adhe- 
fions,  the  pus  may  be  difcharged  into  the  ftom- 
ach  or  the  inteftines  ;  and  into  thefe  laft,  ei- 
ther directly,  or  by  the  intervention  of  the  bil- 
iary duels. 

CCCCXXXI. 

The  prognoflics  in  this  difeafe  are  eftablifh- 
ed  upon  the  general  principles  relating  to  in- 
flammation, 


OF     PHYSIC,  291 

flammation,  upon  the  particular  circumflances 
of  the  liver,  and  upon  the  particular  flate  of 
its  inflammation. 

The  cure  of  this  difeafe  mud  proceed  upon 
the  general  plan  ;  by  bleeding,  more  or  lefs, 
according  to  the  urgency  of  pain  and  pyrexia  ; 
by  the  application  of  bliflers  ;  by  fomenta- 
tions, of  the  external  parts  in  the  ufual  man- 
ner, and  of  the  internal  parts  by  frequent 
emollient  glyfters  ;  by  frequently  opening  the 
belly  by  means  of  gentle  laxatives,  and  by 
diluent  and  refrigerant  remedies. . 

CCCCXXIIL 

Although,  in  many  cafes,  the  chronic  hepa- 
titis does  not  clearly  difcover  itfelf ;  ytti  upon 
many  occafions,  it  may  perhaps  be  difcovered, 
or  at  leaft  fufpe&ed,  from  thofe  caufes  which 
might  affea  the  liver  (CCCXVI)  having 
been  applied  ;  from  fome  fulnefs  and  fome 
tenfenefs  of  weight  in  the  right  hypochondri- 
um  ;  from  fome  ihooting  pains  at  times  felt  in 
that  region  ;  from  fome  uneafmefs  or  pain  felt 
upon  preffure  in  that  part  ;  from  fome  unea- 
fmefs from  lying  upon  the  left  fide  ;  and  laft- 
ly,  from  fome  degree  of  pyrexia,  combine! 
with  more  or  fewer  of  thefe  fymptoms. 

When  from  fome  of  thefe  circumftances  1 

chronic  inflammation   is  to  be  fufpetced,  it  is 

to  be  treated  by  the  fame  remedies   as  in  the 

laH  paragraph,  errroioved  more  or  lefs  as  the 

N   2  degree 


292  PRACTICE 

degree   of  the  feveral  fymptoms  fhall  more 
diftinctly  indicate. 

CCCCXXIV. 

When  from  either  kind  of  inflammation  a 
fuppuration  of  the  liver  has  been  formed,  and 
the  abfce fs  points  outwardly,  the  part  muftbe 
opened,  the  pus  evacuated,  and  the  ulcer  heal- 
ed according  to  the  ordinary  rules  for  cleanf- 
ing  and  healing  fuch  abfceffes  and  ulcers. 

ccccxxv. 

I  might  here  confider  the  Splenitis,  or  in- 
flammation of  the  fpleen  ;  but  it  does  not  feem 
necelfary,  becaufe  the  difeafe  very  feldom  oc- 
curs. When  it  does,  it  may  be  readily  known 
by  the  character  given  in  our  Nofology  ;  and 
its  various  termination,  as  well  as  the  practice 
which  it  requires,  may  be  underftood  from 
what  has  been  already  faid  with  refpecl:  to  the 
inflammations  of  the  other  abdominal  vifcera. 


CHAR 


OF       PHYSIC.  293 


CHAP.       XL 


of  the  NEPHRITIS,  or  the  INFLAMU- 
MATION  of  the  KIDNEYS. 


CCCCXXVI. 

1  HIS  difeafe,  like  other  in- 
ternal inflammations,  is  always  attended  with 
pyrexia  ;  and  is  efpecially  known  from  the  re- 
gion of  the  kidney  being  affected  by  pain, 
commonly  obtufe,  fometimes  pungent.  This 
pain  is  not  increafed  by  the  motion  of  the 
trunk  of  the  body,  fo  much  as  a  pain  of  the 
rheumatic  kind  affecting  the  fame  region. 
The  pain  of  the  nephritis  may  be  often  dis- 
tinguished by  its  mooting  along  the  courfe  of 
the  ureter  ;  and  is  frequently  attended  with  a 
drawing  up  of  the  tefticle,  and  with  a  numb- 
nefs  of  the  limb  on  the  fide  affected  ;  although, 
indeed,  thefe  fymptoras  moft  commonly  ac- 
company the  inflammation  arifing  from  a  cal- 
culus in  the  kidney  or  in  the  ureter.  The 
nephritis  is  almoft  conffantiy  attended  with 
frequent  vomiting,  and  often  with  coflivenefs 
and  colic  pains.  Ufually  the  Rate  of  the  urine 
is  changed  ;  k  is  mod  commonly  of  a  deep  red 
Goloury  is  voided  frequently,  and  in  fmall 
N,  3  quantity 


294  P   R   A    C    T    I    C   E 

quantity  at  a  time.      In  more  violent   cafes, 
the  urine  is  fometimes  colourlefs. 

CCCCXXVII. 

The  remote  caufes  of  this  difeafe  may  be 
various  ;  as,  external  contufion  ;  violent  or 
long  continued  riding  ;  ftrains  of  the  mufcles 
of  the  back  incumbent  on  the  kidneys  ;  vari- 
ous acrids  in  the  courfe  of  the  circulation  con- 
veyed to  the  kidney  ;  and  perhaps  fome  other 
internal  caufes  not  yet  well  known.  The  mod 
frequent  is  that  of  calculous  matter  obftruct.- 
ing  the  tubuli  uriniferi,  or  calculi  formed  in 
the  pelvis  of  the  kidneys,  and  either  flicking 
there,  or  fallen  into  the  ureter. 


CCCCXXVIII. 

The  various  event  of  this  difeafe  may  be 
underftood  from  what  has  been  delivered  on 
the  fubjedfc  of  other  inflammations. 

CCCCXXIX. 

Writers,  in  treating  of  the  cure  of  nephri- 
tis have  commonly  at  the  fame  time  treated  of 
the  cure  of  the  Calculus  renalis  ;  but,  though 
this  may  often  produce  nephritis,  it  is  to  be , 
confidered  as  a  diftincl  and  feparate  difeafe  ; 
and  what  I  have  to  offer  as  to  the  mode  of 
treating  it,  mufl  be  referved  to  its  proper  place. 

Here 


OF       PHYSIC.  295 

Here  I   fhall  treat  only   of  the  cure  of  the 
Nephritis  Vera  or  Idiopathica. 

ccccxxx. 

The  cure  of  this  proceeds  upon  the  general 
plan,  by  bleeding,  external  fomentation,  fre- 
quent emollient  glyfters,  antiphlogiflic  purga- 
tives, and  the  free  ufe  of  mild  and  demulcent 
liquids.  The  application  of  bliuers  is  hardly 
admiffible  ;  or,  at  le all,  will  require  gre^f  care, 
to  avoid  any  confiderable  abforption  of  the 
cantharides. 

CCCCXXXI. 

The  Cyilitis,  or  inflammation  of  the  blad- 
der, is  feldom  a  primary  difeafe  ;  and  there- 
fore is  not  to  be  treated  of  here.  The  treat- 
ment of  it,  fo  far  as  neceffary  to  be  explained, 
may  be  readily  underftood  from  what  has  been 
already  delivered. 

CCCCXXXII. 

Of  the  vifceral  inflammations,  there  remains 
to  be  confidered  the  inflammation  of  the  Ute- 
rus ;  but  I  omit  it  here,  becaufe  the  confeder- 
ation of  it  cannot  be  Separated  from  that  of  the 
difeafes  of  child  bearing  women. 


N  4  CHAP, 


296  PRACTICE 


C     H     A     P.         XII. 


o.f  the   RHEUMATISM 


CCCCXXXIII. 

OF  this  difeafe  there  are  two 
fpecies ;  the  one  named  the  Acute,  the  other 
the  Chronic  rheumatifm. 

ecccxxxiv. 

It  is  the  Acute  Rheumatifm  which  efpeeial- 
ly  belongs  to  this  place,  as  from  its  caufes, 
fymptoms,  and  methods  of  cure,  it  will  appear 
to  be  a  fpecies  of  phiegmafia  or  inflammation, 

ccccxxxv. 

This  difeafe  is  frequent  in  cold,  and  more 
uncommon  in  warm,  climates.  It  appears 
mofl  frequently  in  autumn  and  fpring,  lefs 
frequently  in  winter  when  the  cold  is  confide 
erable  and  conftant^  and  very  feldom  during 
the  heat  of  fummer.  It  may  occur,  howev- 
er, at  any  feafon,  if  viciffitudes  of  heat  and 
cold  be  for  the  time  frequent. 

ccccxxxvi* 


&F       PHYSIC.  297 


ccccxxxvx. 

The  acute  rheumatifm  generally  arifes  from- 
the  application  of  cold  to  the  body  when  any 
way  unufually  warm  ;  or  when  one  part  of  the 
body  is  expofedto  cold  whilfl  the  other  parts 
are  kept  warm ;  or  laftly,  when  the  applica- 
tion of  the  cold  is  long  continued,  as  it  is- 
when  wet  or  moift  clothes  are  applied  to  any 
part  of  the  body. 

CCCCXXXVIL 

Thefe  caufes  may  affecl;  perfons  of  all  ages  ; 
but  the   rhuematifm  feldom  appears  in  either 
very  young  or  in  elderly  perfons,  and  mod 
commonly  occurs  from  the  age  of  puberty  to- 
that  of  thirty  five  years.. 

GCCCXXXVIII.' 

Thefe  caufes  (CCCCXXXVI)  may  alio 
affecl:  perfons  of  any  confutation  j  but  they  mofc 
commonly  affecl;  thofe  of  a  -fanguine  temper- 
ament.- 

CCCCXXX1X.. 

This  difeafe  is  particularly  diflinguimed  by- 

pains    affe&ing     the    joints,     for   the    moil 

part  the  joints  alone,  but  fometimes  affecling- 

alfc  the  mufcular  parts.    Very  often  the  pains 

N-  5,  ikcm 


298  PRACTICE 

fhoot  along  the  courfe  of  the  mufcles,  from 
one  joint  to  another,  and  are  always  much  in- 
creased by  the  action  of  the  mufcles  belonging 
to  the  joint  or  joints  affected. 

CCCCXL. 

The  larger  joints  are  moll  frequently  af- 
fected ;  fuch  as  the  hip  joint,  and  knees  of 
the  lower,  and  the  moulders  and  elbows  of  the 
upper  extremities.  The  ankles  and  wrifts  are 
alfo  frequently  afFefted  ;  but  the  fmaller 
joints,  fuch  as  thofe  of  the  toes  or  fingers, 
feldom  fuffer. 

CCCCXLL 

This  difeafe,  although  fome times  confined  ta 
one  pa^t  of  the  body  only,  yet  very  often  af- 
fects many  parts  of  it ;  and  then  it  comes  on 
with  a  cold  ft  age,  which  is  immediately  Suc- 
ceeded by  the  other  fymptoms  of  pyrexia,, 
and  particularly  by  a  frequent,  full,  and  hard 
pulfe.  Sometimes  the  pyrexia  is  formed  be- 
fore any  pains  are  perceived  ;  but  more  com^ 
monly  pains  are  felt  in  particular  parts,  before 
any  fymptoms  of  pyrexia  appear  fc 

CCCCXLIL 

When   no  pyrexia   is  prefent,  the  pain   is 
fometimes   confined  to  one  joint  only  ;    but,, 
when  any  confiderable  pyrexia  is  prefent,  al- 
though 


OF       PHYSIC.  299 

though  the  pain  may  be  chiefly  in  one  joint, 
yet  it  feldom  happens  but  that  the  pains  affect 
feveral  joints  often  at  the  very  fame  time,  but 
for  the  moft  part  fhifting  their  place,  and,  hav- 
ing abated  in  one  joint,  become  more  violent 
in  another.  They  do  not  commonly  remain 
long  in  the  fame  joint,  but  frequently  fhift 
from  one  to  another,  and  fometimes  return  to 
joints  formerly  affected  j  and  in  this  manner 
the  difeafe  often  continues  for  a  long  time. 

CCCCXLIIL 

The  pyrexia  attending  this  difeafe  has  an 
exacerbation  tvcry  evening,  and  is  moil  con- 
iiderable  during  the  night,  when  the  pains  al- 
fo  become  more  violent  ;  and  it  is  at  the  fame 
time  that  the  pains  fhift  their  place  from  one 
joint  to  another.  The  pains  feem  to  be  alfo- 
increafed  during  the  night,  by  the  body  being 
covered  more  clofely,  and  kept  warmer.. 

CCCCXLIV, 

A  joint,  after  having  been  for  fome  time 
affected  with  pain,  commonly  becomes  af- 
fected alfo  with  fome  rednefs  and  fwelling^ 
which  is  painful  to  the  touch.  It  feldom  hap- 
pens, that  a  fwelling  coming  on  does  not  al- 
leviate the  pain  of  the  joint ,;  but  the  fwelling. 
does  not  always  take  off  the  pain  entirely,  nor 
fecure  the  joint  againfl  a  return  of  it. 

NS  CCCCXLV. 


3oo  PRACTICE 


CCCCXLV. 

This  difeafe  is  commonly  attended  with 
fome  fweating,  which  occurs  early  in  the  courfe 
of  the  difeafe ;  but  it  is  feldom  free  or  copious, 
and  feldom  either  relieves  the  pains  or  proves 

critical.. 

CCCCXLVi. 

In  the  courfe  of  this  difeafe  the  urine  is 
high  coloured,  and  in  the  beginning  without 
fediment  ;  but  as  the  difeafe  advances,  and 
the  pyrexia  has  more  confiderable  reraifuons, 
the  urine  depoiits  a  lateritious  fediment.  This, 
however,  does  not  prove  entirely  critical  ;  for 
the  difeafe  often  continues  long  after  fuch  a 
fedirneisit  has  appeared  in  the  urine, 

CCCCXLVII. 

When  blood  is  drawn  in  this  difeafe,  it  al~ 
ways  exhibits  the  appearance  mentioned 
CCXXXVIL 

CCCCXLVHI. 

The  acute  rheum-atifm,  though  k  has  Co 
much  of  the  nature  of  the  other  phlegmanse^ 
differs  from  all  thole  hitherto  mentioned,  in 
this,  that  it  is  not  apt  to  terminate  in  fuppura- 
tion,     This  almaft  never  happens  in  rheuma- 

tiim; 


OF       PHYSIC.  301 

tifm ;  but  the  difeafe  fometimes  produces  ef- 
fuuons  of  a  tranfparent  gelatinous  fluid  into 
the  fheaths  of  the  tendons.  If  we  maybe  al- 
lowed to  fuppofe  that  fuch  effufions  are  fre- 
quent, it  mull  alfo  happen,  that  the  effufed 
fluid  is  commonly  reabforbed  ;  for  it  has  fel- 
dom  happened,  and  never  indeed  to  my  ob- 
servation, that  confiderable  or  permanent  tu- 
mours have  been  produced,  or  fuch  as  requir- 
ed to  be  opened,  and  to  have  the  contained 
fluid  evacuated.  Such  tumours,  however, 
have  occurred  to  others,  and  the  opening 
made  in  them  has  produced  ulcers  difficult  to 
heal.     Vide  Storck.  Ann.  Med.  II. 

GCCCXLIX. 

With  the  circumftances  mentioned  from 
CCCCXXXIX,  to  CCCCXLVIII,  the  dif- 
eafe often  continues  for  feveral  weeks.  It 
feldom,  however,  proves  fatal  ;  and  it  rarely 
happens  that  the  pyrexia  continues  to  be  con- 
fiderable for  more  than  two  or  three  weeks, 
While  the  pyrexia  abates  in  its  violence,  if 
the  pains  of  the  joints  continue^  they  are  lefs 
violent,  more  limited  in  their  place,  being 
confined  commonly  to  one  or  a  few  joints  on- 
ly, and  are  lefs  ready  to  change  their  place.. 

CCCCL. 

When  the  pyrexia  attending  rhenmatifm 
has   entirely  ceafed  ;  when  the  fwellmg,  and 

particularly 


302  PRACTICE 

particularly  the  rednefs  of  the  joints,  are  en- 
tirely gone  ;  but  when  pains  Hill  continue  to 
affect  certain  joints,  which  remain  {tiff,  which 
feel  uneafy  upon  motion,  or  upon  changes  cf 
weather  ;  the  difeafe  is  named  the  Chronic 
Rheumatifm,  as  it  very  often  continues  for  a 
long  time.  As  the  chronic  is  commonly  the 
fequel  of  the  acute  rheumatifm,  I  think  it 
proper  to  treat  of  the  former  alio  in  this  place, 

CCCCLI. 

The  limits  between  the  acute  and  chronic 
rheumatifm  are  not  always  exactly  marked. 

When  the  pains  are  ftill  ready  to  fhift  their 
place  ;  when  they  are  efpecially  fevere  in  the 
night  time  ;  when,  at  the  fame  time,  they  are 
attended  with  fome  degree  of  pyrexia,  and 
with  fome  fwelling,  and  efpecially  with  fome 
rednefs  of  the  joints  ;  the  difeafe  is  to  be  con- 
fidered  as  ftill  partaking  the  nature  of  the  acute 
rheumatifm., 

But,  when  there  is  no  degree  of  pyrexia  re- 
maining ;  when  the  pained  joints  are  without 
rednefs  ;  when  they  are  cold  and  ftiff  ;  when- 
they  cannot  eafily  be  made  to  fweat  ;  or  when,, 
while  a  free  and  warm  fweat  is  brought  out  on. 
the  reft  of  the  body,  it  is  only  clammy  and 
cold  on  the  pained  joints  ;  and  when,  efpecial- 
ly, the  pains  of  thefe  joints  are  increafed  by 
cold,  and  relieved  by  heat  applied  to  them  ; 
the  cafe  is  to  be  confidered  as  that  of  a  purely 
chronic  rheumatifm, 

CCCCLIL. 


OF       PHYSIC.  303 


CCCCLII. 

The  chronic  rheumatifm  may  affect  differ- 
ent joints;  but  is  especially  ready  to  affect, 
thofe  joints  which  are  (unrounded  with  many 
mufcles,  and  thofe  of  which  the  mufcles  are 
employed  in  the  moll  conftant  and  vigorous 
exertions.  Such  is  the  cafe  of  the  vertebrae 
of  the  loins,  the  affection  of  which  is  named 
Lumbago  ;  or  that  of  the  hip  joint,  when  the 
difeafe  is  named  Ifchias,  or  Sciatica. 

CCCCLIII. 

Violent  {trains  and  fpafms  occurring  on 
fudden  and  fomewhat  violent  exertions,  bring 
on  rheumatic  affections,  which  at  firft  partake 
of  the  acute,  but  very  foon  change  into  the 
nature  of  the  chronic  rheumatifm, 

CCCCLIV. 

I  have  thus  delivered  the  hiftory  of  rheuma- 
tifm ;  and  fuppofe,  that^  from  what  has  been 
faid,  the  remote  caufes,  the  diagnoiis>  and 
prognofis,  of  the  difeafe,  may  be  underftood. 
The  diftinc~tion  of  the  rheumatic  pains  from 
thofe  refembling  them,  which  occur  in  the  fy- 
philis  and  fcurvy>  will  be  obvious,  either  from 
the  feat  of  thofe  pains>  or  from  the  concomi- 
tant fymptoms  peculiar  to  thefe  difeafes.  The 
diftin&ion   of    rheumatifm  from    gout   will 

be 


304  PRACTICE 

be  more  fully  underftood  from  what  is  to  b£ 
delivered  in  the  following  chapter. 

CCCCLV. 

With  refpecl;  to  the  proximate  caufe  of 
rheumatifm,  there  have  been  various  opinions. 
It  has  been  imputed  to  a  peculiar  acrimony  ; 
of  which,  however,  in  ordinary  cafes,  I  can 
find  no  evidence  ;  and,  from  the  confideration 
of  the  remote  caufes,  the  fymptoms,  and  cure 
of  the  difeafe,  I  think  the  fuppofitioii  very  im- 
probable. 

The  caufe  of  anlfchias  Nervofa  aflignedby 
C  o  t  u  n  n  i  u  s,  appears  to  me  hypothetical,  and 
is  not  fupported  by  either  the  phenomena  or 
method  of  cure.  That,  however,  a  difeafe  of 
a  rheumatic  nature  may  be  occafioned  by  an 
acrid  matter  applied  to  the  nerves,  is  evident 
from  the  toothach,  a  rheumatic  affection  gen- 
erally ariilng  from  a  carious  tooth. 

That  pains  refembling  thofe  of  rheumatifm,. 
may  arife  from  deep  feated  fuppurations,  we- 
know  from  fome  cafes  depending  on  fuch  a. 
caufe,  and  which>.in  their  fymptoms,  referable 
the  lumbago  or  ifchias.  I  believe,  however, .. 
that,  by  a  proper  attention,  thefe  cafes  de- 
pending on  fuppuration,  may  be  commonly 
diftinguifhed  from  the  genuine  cafes  of  lum- 
bago and  ifchias  ;  and,  from  what  is  faid  in 
CCCCXLVHI,  I  judge  it  to  be  at  le ail  im- 
probable, that  a  genuine  lumbago  or  ifchias 
does  ever  end  in  fuppuration. 

eCCCLVE 


OF      PHYSIC.  305 


CCCCLVI. 

The  proximate  caufe  of  rheumatifm  has 
been  by  many  fuppofed  to  be  a  lentor  of  the 
fluids  obftru&ing  the  veflels  of  the  part ;  but 
the  fame  confi deration  as  in  CCXLI.  1,  2,  3, 
4,  and  5,  will  apply  equally  here  for  rejecting 
the  fuppohtion  of  a  lentor. 


CCCCLVIL 

While  I  cannot,  therefore,  find  either  evi- 
dence or  reafon  for  fuppofing  that  the  rheu- 
matifm depends  upon  any  change  in  the  ftate 
of  the  fluids,  I  muft  conclude  that  the  proxi- 
mate caufe  of  acute  rheumatifm,  is  commonly 
the  fame  with  that  of  other  inflammations  not 
depending  upon  a  direct  ftimulus. 

CCCCLVIII. 

In  the  cafe  of  rheumatifm  I  fuppofe,  that 
the  moil  common  remote  caufe  of  it,  that  is, 
cold  applied,  operates  efpecially  on  the  veffels 
of  the  joints,  from  thefe  being  lefs  covered  by 
a  cellular  texture  than  thofe  of  the  intermedi- 
ate parts  of  the  limbs.  I  fuppofe  further, 
that  the  application  of  cold  produces  a  con- 
firiclion  of  the  extreme  veifels  on  the  furface, 
and  at  the  fame  time  an  increafe  of  tone  or 
phlogiflic  diathefis  in  the  courfe  of  them,  from 
which  arifes  an  increafed  impetus  of  the  blood, 

and^ 


a,  -.;o6  PRACTICE 

and,  at  the  fame  time,  a  refiftance  to  the  free 
paffage  of  it,  and  confequently  inflammation 
and  pain.  Further,  I  fuppofe,  that  the  re- 
iiflance  formed  excites  the  vis  medicatrix  to  a 
further  increafe  of  the  impetus  of  the  blood  ; 
and,  to  fupport  this,  a  cold  flage  arifes,  a  fpafm 
is  formed,  and  a  pyrexia  and  phlogiflic  dia- 
thefis  are  produced  in  the  whole  fyflem. 

CCCCLIX. 

According  to  this  explanation,  the  caufe  of 
acute  rheumatifm  appears  to  be  exactly  anal- 
ogous to  that  of  the  inflammations  depending 
on  an  increafed  afflux  of  blood  to  a  part  while 
it  is  expofed  to  the  action  of  cold. 

But  there  feems  to  be  alfo,  in  the  cafe  of 
rheumatifm,  a  peculiar  affection  of  the  fibres 
of  the  mufcles.  Thefe  fibres  feem  to  be  un- 
der fome  degree  of  rigidity,  and  therefore  lefs 
eafily  admit  of  motion  ;  and  are  pained  upon 
the  exertions  of  it. 

It  is  alfo  an  affection  of  thefe  fibres  which 
gives  an  opportunity  to  the  propagation  of 
pains  from  one  joint  to  another,  along  the 
courfe  of  the  mufcles  ;  and  which  pains  are 
more  feverely  felt  in  the  extremities  of  the 
mufcles  terminating  in  the  joints,  becaufe  be- 
yond thefe  the  ofciilations  are  not  propagated. 

This  affection  of  the  mufcular  fibres  at- 
tending rheumatifm,  feems  to  explain  why 
ft  rains  and  fpafms  produce  rheumatic  affec- 
tions ;  and,  upon  the  whole,  fhows,  that,  with 

an 


OF       PHYSIC.  307 

an  inflammatory  affe&ion  of  the  fanguiferous 
fyftem,  there  is  alfo  in  rheumatifm  a  peculiar 
affection  of  the  mufcular  fibres,  which  has  a 
confiderabie  fliare  in  producing  the  phenome- 
na of  the  difeafe. 

CCCCLX. 

Having  thus  given  my  opinion  of  the 
proximate  caufe  of  rheumatifm,  I  proceed  to 
treat  of  the  cure. 

CCCCLXL 

Whatever  difficulty  may  occur  with  refpecl 
to  the  explanation  given  (CCCCLVIII,  and 
CCCCLIX)  this  remains  certain,  that  imacute 
rheumatifm,  at  leaft  in  all  thofe  cafes  which 
do  not  artfe  from  direct  ftimuli,  there  is  an 
inflammatory  afFe&ion  of  the  parts,  and  a 
phlogiflic  diathefis  in  the  whole  fyftem  ;  and 
upon  thefe  is  founded  the  method  of  cure, 
which  frequent  experience  has  approved  of. 

CCCCLXIL 

The  cure  therefore  requires,  in  the  firfl 
place,  an  antiphlogiftic  regimen,  and  partic- 
ularly a  total  abfiinence  from  animal  food, 
and  from  all  fermented  or  fpirituous  liquors  5 
fubftituting  a  vegetable  or  milk  diet,  and  the 
plentiful  ufe  of  bland  diluent  drinks. 

CCCCLXIIL 


308  PRACTICE 

CCCCLXIII. 

Upon  the  fame  principle  (CCCCL)  at  leaft 
with  perhaps  the  Tame  exception  as  above, 
bloodletting  is  the  chief  remedy  of  acute  rheu- 
matifm.  The  blood  ought  to  be  drawn  in 
large  quantity,  and  the  bleeding  is  to  be  re- 
peated in  proportion  to  the  frequency,  full- 
nefs,  and  hardnefs  of  the  pulfe,  and  to  the  vi- 
olence of  the  pain.  For  the  moft  part,  large 
and  repeated  bleedings,  during  the  firft  days 
of  the  difeafe,  feem  to  be  necefTary,  and  ac- 
cordingly have  been  very  much  employed ;  but 
to  this  fome  bounds  are  to  be  fet ;  for  very 
profufe  bleedings  occafion  a  flow  recovery, 
and,  if  not  abfolutely  effectual,  are  ready  to 
produce  a  chronic  rheumatifm. 

CCCCLXIV. 

To  avoid  that  debility  -of -the  fyflem,  which 
general  bleedings  are  ready  to  occafion,  the  ur- 
gent fymptom  of  pain  may  be  often  relieved 
by  topical  bleedings  ;  and,  efpecially  when 
any  fwelling  and  rednefs  have  come  upon  a 
joint,  the  pain  of  it  may  be  very  certainly  re- 
lieved by  fuch  bleedings  ;  but,  as  the  contin- 
uance of  the  difeafe  feems  to  depend  more 
upon  the  phlogiftic  diathefis  of  the  whole  fyf- 
tem,  than  upon  the  affection  of  particular 
parts,  fo  topical  bleedings  will  not  always  fup- 
ply  the  place  of  the  general  bleedings  propof- 
ed  above. 

CCCCLXV. 


OF       PHYSIC.  309 


CCCCLXV. 

To  take  off  the  phlogiftic  diathefis  prevail- 
ing in  this  difeafe,  purging  may  be  ufeful,  if 
procured  by  medicines  which  do  not  ftimu- 
late  the  whole  fyftem,  fuch  as  the  neutral  falts, 
and  which  have  in  fome  meafure  a  refrigerant 
power.  Purging,  however,  is  not  fo  powerful 
as  bleeding,  in  removing  phlogiftic  diathefis  ; 
and,  when  the  difeafe  has  become  general  and 
violent,  frequent  ftools  are  inconvenient,  and 
even  hurtful,  by  the  motion  and  pain  which 
-they  occafion. 

CCCCLXVI. 

In  acute  rheumatifm,  applications  to  the 
pained  parts  are  of  little  fervice.  Fomenta- 
tions, in  the  beginning  of  the  difeafe,  rather 
aggravate  than  relieve  the  pains.  The  ru- 
befacients and  camphire  are  more  effectual  in 
relieving  the  pains  ;  but  generally  they  only 
fhift  the  pain  from  one  part  into  another,  and 
do  little,  towards  the  cure  of  the  general  affec- 
tion.  Bliflering,  applied  to  the  pained  part, 
may  alfo  be  very  effectual  in  removing  the 
pain  from  it  ;  but  will  be  of  little  ufe,  except 
where  the  pains  are  much  confined  to  one 
part. 

CCCCLXVIL 


3io  PRACTICE 


CCCCLXVII. 

The  feveral  remedies  mentioned  from 
(CCCCLI,  to  CCCCLV)  moderate  the  vio- 
lence of  the  difeafe,  and  fometimes  remove  it 
entirely  ;  but  they  fometimes  fail  in  this,  and 
leave  the  cure  imperfect.  The  attempting  a 
cure  by  large  and  repeated  bleedings,  is  at- 
tended with  many  inconveniences,  (fee  CXL); 
and  the  mod  effectual  and  fafe  method  of  cur- 
ing this  difeafe,  is,  after  fome  general  bleed- 
ings for  taking  off,  or  at  lead  diminifhing  the 
phlogiftic  diathefis,  to  employ  fweating,  con- 
ducted by  the  rules  laid  down  CLXVIII, 
and  CLXIX. 

CCCCLXVIII. 

Opiates,  except  where  they  are  directed  to. 
procure  fweat,  always  prove  hurtful  in  every 
ftage  of  this  difeafe. 

CCCCLXIX. 

The  Peruvian  bark  has  been  fuppofed  a 
remedy  in  fome  cafes  of  this  difeafe  ;  but  we 
have  feldom  found  it  ufeful,  and,  in  fome 
cafes,  hurtful.  It  appears  to  me  to  be  fit  in 
thofe  cafes  only,  in  which  the  phlogiftic  dia- 
thefis is  already  much  abated  ;  and  where  at 
the  fame  time  the  exacerbations  of  the  difeafe 

are 


OF     PHYSIC,  311 

are  manifeftly  periodical,  withconfiderable  re- 
millions  interpofed. 

CCCCLXX. 

Calomel,  and  fome  other  preparations  of 
mercury,  have  been  recommended  in  the 
acute  rheumatifm  ;  but  I  believe  they  are  ufe- 
ful  only  in  cafes  of  the  chronic  kind,  or  at 
leaft  in  cafes  approaching  to  the  nature  of 
thefe. 

CCCCLXXI. 

Having  now  treated  fully  of  the  cure  of  the 
acute  rheumatifm,  I  proceed  to  treat  of  the 
cure  of  the  chronic,  which  is  fo  frequently  a 
fequel  of  the  former. 

CCCCLXXII. 

The  phenomena  of  the  purely  chronic 
rheumatifm,  mentioned  in  CCCCXXXIX, 
and  CCCCXL,  lead  me  to  conclude,  that  its 
proximate  caufe  is  an  atony,  both  of  the 
blood  veffels  and  of  the  mufcular  fibres  of  the 
part  affected,  together  with  a  degree  of  rigidity 
and  contraction  in  the  latter,  fuch  as  frequent- 
ly attends  them  in  a  date  of  atony. 

CCCCLXXIII. 

Upon  this  view  of  the  proximate  caufe,  the 
general  indication  of  cure   muft  be  to  reftore 

the 


312  PRACTICE 

the  activity  and  vigour  of  the  vital  principle  in 
the  part  ;  and  the  remedies  for  this  difeafe, 
which  experience  has  approved  of,  are  chiefly 
fuch  as  are  manifeftly  fuited  to  the  indication 
propofed. 

CCCCLXXIV. 

Thefe  remedies  are  either  external  or  inter- 
nal. 

The  external  are,  The  fupporting  the  heat 
of  the  part,  by  keeping  it  conftantly  covered 
with  flannel  ;  the  increafing  the  heat  of  the 
part  by  external  heat,  applied  either  in  a  dry  or 
in  a  humid  form  ;  the  diligent  ufe  of  the  flefh 
brufh,  or  other  means  of  friction  ;  the  applica- 
tion of  electricity  in  fparks  or  fhocks  ;  the  ap- 
plication of  cold  water  by  afFufion  or  immer- 
fion  ;  the  application  of  eflential  oils  of  the 
mo  ft  warm  and  penetrating  kind  ;  the  ap- 
plication of  fait  brine  ;  and,  laftly,  the  em- 
ployment of  exercife,  either  of  the  part  itfelf, 
fo  far  as  it  can  eafiiy  bear  it ;  or  of  the  whole 
body,  by  riding,  or  other  mode  of  geftation. 

CCCCLXXV. 

The  internal  remedies  are,  1.  Large  dofcs 
of  eflential  oil  drawn  from  refmous  fubftances, 
fuch  as  turpentine  ;  2.  Subftances  containing 
fuch  oils,  as  guaiac  ;  3.  Volatile  alkaline  falts  ; 
4.  Thefe,  or  other  medicines  directed  to  pro- 
cure fweat,  (CLXIX)  ;   and  Jaftiy,  Calomel, 

or 


OF       PHYSIC.  313 

or  other  preparation  of  mercury,  in  fmall  dof- 
es,  continued  for  fome  time. 

CCCCLXXVI. 

Thefe   (CCCCLXIII,   CCCCLXIV)  are 

the  remedies  fuccefsfully  employed  in  the 
purely  chronic  rheumatifm  ;  and  there  are 
ftill  others  recommended  ;  as  bleeding,  gen- 
eral and  topical  ;  burning  ;  bliftering  ;  and 
ifTues  :  But  thefe  appear  to  me  to  be  chiefly, 
perhaps  only,  ufeful  when  the  difeafe  ftill  par- 
takes of  the  nature  of  acute  rheumatifm. 


O  CHAP. 


314  PRACTICE 


CHAP.         XIII 


of  the   TOOTHACH  or  ODONTAL- 
GIA. 


CCCCLXXVII. 

I  HAVE  formerly  confidered 
this  difeafe  as  a  fpecies  of  Rheumatifm,  to  be 
treated  upon  the  fame  principles  as  thofe  de- 
livered in  the  preceding  chapter  ;  but  how, 
from  more  attentive  confederation,  I  am  led  to 
confider  the  toothach  as  a  diftincl;  difeafe. 
Whilft  the  moll  of  what  has  been  delivered  in 
the  lafl  chapter  proceeds  upon  the  fuppofition 
that  the  rheumatifm  depends  upon  a  certain 
ftate  of  the  blood  veffels  and  of  the  motion  of 
the  blood  in  them,  without  this  being  produc- 
ed by  the  irritation  of  any  acrid  matter  appli- 
ed ;  I  judge,  that  in  the  toothach,  though 
there  are  often  the  fame  circumftances  in  the 
ftate  of  the  blood  veffels  as  in  the  cafes  of 
rheumatifm,  thefe  circumftances  in  toothach 
always  arife  from  the  application  of  an  acrid 
matter  to  the  nerves  of  the  teeth. 


CCCCLXXVIII. 


OF     PHYSIC, 


CCCCLXXVIII. 


3*5 


This  difeafe  is  often  no  other  than  a  pain 
felt  in  a  particular  tooth,  without  any  inflam- 
matory affection  being  at  the  fame  time  com- 
municated to  the  neighbouring  parts.  This, 
however,  is  rarely  the  cafe  ;  and  for  the  moil 
part,  together  with  the  pain  of  the  tooth,  there 
is  fome  degree  of  pain  and  of  inflammatory 
affection  communicated  to  the  neighbouring 
parts,  fometimes  to  the  whole  of  thofe  on  the 
fame  fide  of  the  head  with  the  affected  tooth, 

CCCCLXXIX. 

This  inflammatory  affection  feems  to  me  to 
be  always  an  affection  of  mufcles  and  of  the 
membranous  parts  connected  with  thefe,  with- 
out any  tendency  to  fuppuration  ;  and  fuch  an 
affection,  as  is  excited  by  cold  in  fimilar  parts 
eifewhere.  It  is  from  thefe  circumftances 
that  I  conclude  the  affection  to  be  of  the  rheu- 
matic kind. 

CCCCLXXX. 

It  is  poflible  that  the  mufcles  and  mem- 
branes of  the  jaw  may  be  affected  by  the 
fame  caufes  which  produce  the  rheumatifm 
in  other  parts  ;  and  it  is  alfo  poflible,  that  a 
rheumatic  diathefis  at  firPc  produced  by  irri- 
tation, m ay ^fub fid.  in  the  mufcles  and  mem- 
O   2  branes 


3i6  PRACTICE 

branes  of  the  jaw,  fo  that  the  inflammatory 
affe&ion  may  be  renewed  by  certain  caufes 
without  any  new  application  of  acrid  matter  : 
But  I  am  perfuaded  that  either  of  thefe  oc- 
currences are  very  rare,  and  I  have  never  been 
able  to  afcertain  any  cafes  of  toothach  to  be  of 
thefe  kinds.  I  confider  it,  therefore,  as  high- 
ly probable  that  this  rheumatic  affection  of 
the  jaws  which  we  name  toothach,  is  always 
dependent  upon  fome  immediate  application 
©f  acrid  matter  to  the  nerves  of  the  teeth. 


CCCCLXXXI. 

It  is  however  to  be  obferved,  that  this  ap- 
plication of  acrid  matter  does  not  always  ex- 
cite a  pain  in  the  tooth  itfelf,  or  an  inflamma- 
tory arTe6Hon  of  the  neighbouring  parts  ;  but 
that  it  very  often  operates  by  producing  a 
diathefis  only  ;  fo  that  cold  applied  to  the 
neighbouring  parts  does  excite  both  a  pain  in 
the  tooth,  and  an  inflammatory  affection  of 
the  neighbouring  parts  which  did  not  appear 
before. 

There  feems  to  be  alfo  certain  dates  of  the 
body,  which  operate  upon  the  fame  diathefis, 
fo  as  to  produce  toothach.  Such  feems  to  be 
the  cafe  of  pregnant  women,  who  are  more  li- 
able to  toothach  than  other  women.  There 
are  probably  alfo  fome  cafes  of  increafed  irri- 
tability which  render  perfohs  more  fubjeft:  to 
toothach.     Thus  women  are  more  liable  to 

the 


OF       PHYSIC.  317 

the  difeafe  than  men,  and  particularly  women 
liable  to  hyfteric  affections. 

CCCCLXXXII. 

The  acrid  matter  producing  this  difeafe 
feems  to  be  generated  firft  in  the  hard  fub- 
flances  of  the  teeth  •  and  as  it  often  appears 
firft  upon  the  external  furface  of  thefe,  it 
might  be  fufpe£ted  to  arife  from  the  applica- 
tion of  external  matters  to  the  teeth  :  But  as 
the  production  of  this  acrimony  is  often  begun 
in  the  internal  cavity  of  the  teeth,  where  the 
operation  of  external  matters  cannot  be  fuf- 
pe&ed,  and  as  even  when  it  begins  upon  the 
external  parts  of  the  teeth,  the  operation  of  the 
caufe  is  at  firft  in  a  fmall  portion  of  the  teeth 
only,  that  it  is  difficult  to  fuppofe  that  any 
matter  externally  applied  could  acl:  in  fuch  a 
partial  manner  ;  fo  it  is  prefumcd  that  the 
acrid  matter  occafioning  the  toothach  is  pro- 
duced by  fome  vice  originating  in  the  fub- 
ftance  of  the  tooth  itfelf.  When  it  begins  up- 
on the  external  furface,  it  is  on  the  enamel ;  but 
upon  the  internal  furface,  it muft  be  in  the  bo- 
ny part.  From  what  caufes  it  arifes  in  either 
of  thefe  fubflances,  I  do  not  at  ail  know  ;  but 
I  fufpe6f.  that  it  often  arifes  from  fome  more 
general  fault  in  the  fluids  of  the  body.  The 
frequent  ufe  of  mercury,  efpecially  when- 
thrown  much  upon  the  mouth,  and  the  ftate 
of  the  fluids  in  fcurvy,  feem  both  of  them  to 
give  a  difpofution  to  a  caries  in  the  teeth  ;  and 

a  3  * 


3i&  PRACTICE 

it  is  poffible  that  fome  other  acrimonious  dates 
of  the  fluids  may  have  the  fame  effect.  . 

CCCCLXXXIII. 

A  caries  in  fome  part  of  the  teeth,  whether 
arifing  upon  their  internal  furface  or  upon 
their  external,  proceeding  fo  far  as  to  reach 
the  nerves  in  the  cavity  of  the  teeth,  is  pretty 
rnanifeftly  the  caufe  of  toothach,  and  of  the 
firft  attacks  of  it  ;  but  when  the  cavity  of  the 
teeth  has  been  opened,  fo  that  the  external 
air  or  other  matters  can  reach  that  cavity, 
thefe  are  often  the  exciting  caufes  of  toothach, 
and  ferve  to  prove  in  general,  that  acrid  mat- 
ters applied  to  the  nerves  occafion  the  difeafe. 

CCCCLXXXIV. 

What  is  the  nature  of  the  matter  produced 
in  the  caries  of  the  teeth,  I  do  not  underftand, 
nor  have  I  found  any  proper  corrector  of  it  ; 
but  I  prefume  it  to  be  of  the  putrid  kind,  as  it 
often  taints  the  breath  with  a  fetid  odour. 

CCCCLXXXV. 

In  the  cure  of  this  difeafe,  a  long  experi- 
ence has  fhown,  that  the  extraction  of  the  ca- 
rious tooth  proves  the  moft  effectual,  and  very 
often  the  only  effectual,  remedy  of  the  dif- 
eafe. But  as  in  fome  cafes  this  extraction  is 
not  proper,  and  as  in  many  cafes  it  is  obfti- 

nately 


OF       PHYSIC.  319 

nately  avoided,  other  means  of  curing  the  dif- 
eafe,  or  at  leafl  of  relieving  the  pain,  have 
been  fought  for  and  much  practifed. 


CCCCLXXXVI. 

Among  thefe  remedies,  thofe  are  likely  to 
be  the  mod  effectual  which  entirely  deftroy 
the  affected  nerve,  or  at  leafl  fo  much  of  it  as 
is  expofed  to  the  action  of  the  acrid  matter  in 
the  tooth.  When  an  opening  is  made  into 
the  cavity  of  the  tooth,  the  nerve  of  it  may  be 
deftroyed  mod  certainly  by  the  actual  caute- 
ry, and  it  may  alfo  poflibly  be  done  by  the 
application  of  potential  cauflics,  either  of  the 
alkaline  or  acid  kind. 


CCCCLXXXVII. 

When  thefe  remedies  cannot  be  rendered 
effectual,  relief  may  often  be  obtained  by  di- 
minifhing  the  feniibility  of  the  nerve  affected, 
by  the  application  of  opium,  or  of  the  more 
acrid  aromatic  oils,  directly  to  the  nerve  in 
the  tooth.  It  appears  alfo,  that  the  fenfibil- 
ity  of  the  affected  nerve  may  often  be  for 
fome  time  diminiihed  by  the  external  appli- 
cation of  opium  to  the  extremities  of  thofe 
nerves  in  the  fkin,  which  are  branches  of  the 
fame  fifth  pair  of  nerves  with  thofe  of  the 
teeth, 

O  4  CCCCLXXXVIII, 


32o  PRACTICE 

CCCCLXXXVIII. 

When  the  difeafe  confifts  entirely  in  a  pain 
of  the  nerve  of  the  tooth,  without  any  consid- 
erable affection  communicated  to  the  neigh- 
bouring parts,  the  remedies  already  mentioned 
are  thofe  especially  to  be  employed  ;  but 
when  the  difeafe  confifts  very  much  in  an  in- 
flammatory affection  of  the  mufcles  and  mem- 
branes of  the  jaw,  and  when  at  the  fame  time 
there  is  little  or  no  accefs  for  the  abovemen- 
tioned  remedies  to  the  affected  nerve,  other 
meafures  are  to  be  employed  for  relieving  the 
difeafe. 

CCCCLXXXIX. 

If  the  difeafe  be  attended  with  any  general 
phlogiftic  diathefis  of  the  fyftem,  or  with  any 
considerable  degree  of  pyrexia, a  general  bleed- 
ing may  be  ufeful  in  relieving  the  difeafe  ;  but 
thefe  circumftances  occur  very  rarely,  and  the 
difeafe  is  for  the  moft  part  a  purely  topical 
affection  ;  in  which,  as  J  obferved  before,  a 
general  bleeding  is  of  very  little  fervice.  As 
this  difeafe,  however,  is  a  topical  inflammation, 
it  might  be  fuppofed  that  topical  bleedings 
would  be  very  ufeful,  and  fometimes  they  are 
ib  ;  but  it  is  feidom  that  their  effects  are  ei- 
ther considerable  or  permanent.  The  rea- 
sons of  this  I  take  to  be,  that  the  difeafe  does 
not  confift  in  an  affection  of  the  blood  veffels 

alone, 


OF       PHYSIC.  32* 

alone,  as  in  the  ordinary  cafes  of  rheumatifm  ; 
but  in  a  peculiar  affection  of  the  fibres  both  of 
the  mufcles  and  of  the  veffels  of  the  part  in- 
duced  by  irritation.  The  ineflicacy  of  topical 
bleedings  is  with  me  a  proof  of  the  difeafe  be- 
ing of  the  latter  kind. 

ccccxa 

The  remedies  therefore  neceffary  to  give  re- 
lief in  this  difeafe,  are  thofe  which  take  off 
the  fpafm  of  the  veffels,  and  especially  of  the 
mufcles  and  membranes  affected.  Such  are 
bliilering,  brought  as  near  to  the  part  affected 
as  can  be  conveniently  done  ;  and  fuch  are  al- 
fo  increafed  excretions  excited  in  the  neigh- 
bouring parts,  as  of  the  faliva  and  mucus  of 
the  mouth  by  the  ufe  of  acrid  mafticatories,,- 
It  is  often  fufficient  to  excite  a  ftrong  fenfa- 
tion  in  the  neighbouring  parts  ;  as  by  eau  de 
luce,  fpirit  of  lavender,  or  Hungary  water 
fnuffed  up  the  noflrils  ;  or  by  the  vitriolic 
aether  properly  applied  to  the  cheek.  It  is 
upon  the  fame  footing  that  I  fuppofe  brandy 
or  other  ardent  fpirit  held  in  the  mouth  is  oft- 
em  of  fervice. 

ceccxcL 

There  are  cafes  of  toothach  in  which  it  does 
not  appear  that  the  difeafe  arifes  from  an  ac- 
rid  matter  immediately    applied  to  the  nerve 
of  a  tooth  ;  but  from  the  external  applications 
O  &  *f 


322  PRACTICE 

of  cold,  or  fome  other  caufes  immediately  ap- 
plied to  the  mufcles  and  membranes  of  the 
jaw  ;  and  which  therefore  feem  to  require 
fome  remedies  different  from  thofe  above- 
mentioned.  But  in  all  fuch  cafes,  it  is  to  be 
fufpe&ed,  that  the  effects  of  cold  or  of  other 
fuch  caufes  are  owing  to  a  diathefis  produced 
by  an  acrid  matter  applied  to  the  nerve  of  a 
tooth,  and  continuing  in  fome  meafure  to  a& 
there  ;  and  we  have  accordingly  often  found, 
that  the  a&ion  of  thofe  external  caufes  were 
to  be  obviated  only  by  the  extraction  of  the 
tooth  from  which  the  diathefis  had  arifen. 


CHAP. 


OF       PHYSIC.  323 


CHAP.  XIV. 


OF     THE      GOUT. 


CCCCXCII. 

1  HE  Gout,  not  only  as  it 
occurs  in  different  perfons,  but  even  as  it  oc- 
curs in  the  fame  perfon  at  different  times,  is 
a  difeafe  of  fuch  various  appearance,  that  it  is 
difficult  to  render  the  hiftory  of  it  complete 
and  exacl;,  or  to  give  a  character  of  it  that  will 
univerfally  apply.  However,  I  mail  endeav- 
our to  defcribe  the  difeafe  as  it  molt  common- 
ly appears,  and  to  mark  the  varieties  of  it  as 
well  as  I  can.  From  fuch  a  hiftory  I  expect 
that  a  general  character  may  be  given  ;  and 
fuch  I  think  is  the  following,  as  given  in  the 
laft  edition  of  our  Nofblogy  : 

Gen.  XXIII.  PODAGRA. 

Morbus  hasreditarius,  oriens  fine  caufa  ex- 
terna evidente,  fed  praeeunte  plerumque  ven- 
triculi  affecf  ione  inlolita  ;  pyrexia  ;.  dolor  ad 
articulum  et  plerumque  pedis  pollici,  certe 
pedum  et  manuum  jun£turis,  potifiimum  in- 
O  6  feftus  ; 


324  PRACTICE 

feftus  ;  per  intervalla  revertens,  et  faepe  cum 
ventriculi  et  internarum  partium  affe&ioni- 
busalternans. 

CCCCXCIII. 

The  gout  is  generally  a  hereditary  difeafe  : 
But  fome  perfons,  without  hereditary  difpofi- 
tion,  feem  to  acquire  it ;  and,  in  fome,  a  hered- 
itary difpofition  may  be  counteracted  by  va- 
rious caufes.  Thefe  circumftances  may  feem 
to  give  exceptions  to  our  general  pofition  ; 
but  the  facls  direclly  fupporting  it  are  very 
numerous. 

CCCCXCIV. 

This  difeafe  attacks  efpecially  the  male  fex  ; 
but  it  fometimes,  though  more  rarely,  attacks 
alfo  the  female.  The  females  liable  to  it  are 
thofe  of  the  more  robuft  and  full  habits  ;  and 
it  very  often  happens  to  fuch  long  before  the 
menflrual  evacuation  has  ceafed.  I  have 
found  it  occurring  in  feveral  females,  whofe 
menflrual  evacuations  were  more  abundant 
than  ufual. 

CCCCXCV. 

This  difeafe  feldom  attacks  eunuchs  ;  and, 
when  it  does,  they  feem  to  be  thofe  who  hap- 
pen to  be  of  a  robuft  habit,  to  lead  an  indo- 
lent life,  and  to  live  very  full. 

CCCCXCVI. 


OF       PHYSIC.  325 


CCCCXCVI. 

The  gout  attacks  efpecially  men  of  robuft 
and  large  bodies,  men  of  large  heads,  of  full 
and  corpulent  habits,  and  men  whofe  fkins 
are  covered  with  a  thicker  rete  mucofum,  which 
gives  a  coarfer  furface. 

CCCCXCVII. 

If,  with  the  ancients,  we  might  afcertain, 
by  certain  terms,  the  temperaments  of  men,  I 
would  fay  that  the  gout  attacks  efpecially  men 
of  a  choleric 0  f anguine  temperament,  and  that 
it  very  feldom  attacks  the  purely  fanguine  or 
melancholic.  It  is,  however,  very  difficult  to 
treat  this  matter  with  due  precifion. 

CCCCXCVIII. 

The  gout  feldom  attacks  perfons  employed 
in  conftant  bodily  labour,  or  perfons  who  live 
much  upon  vegetable  aliment.  It  is  alfo  iaid 
to  be  lefs  frequent  among  thofe  people  who 
make  no  ufe  of  wine  or  other  fermented 
liquors. 

CCCCXCIX. 

The  gout  does  not  commonly  attack  men, 
till  after  the  age  of  five  and  thirty  ;  and  gener- 
ally not  till  a  Hill  later  period.     There  are  in- 
deed 


326  PRACTICE 

deed  inftances  of  the  gout  occurring  more  ear- 
ly ;  but  thefe  are  few  in  comparifon  of  the 
numbers  which  agree  with  what  we  have  given 
as  the  general  rule.  When  the  difeafe  does 
appear  early  in  life,  it  feems  to  be  in  thofe 
in  whom  the  hereditary  difpofition  is  very 
ftrong,  and  to  whom  the  remote  caufes  to  be 
hereafter  mentioned  have  been  applied  in  a 
confiderable  degree. 

D. 

As  the  gout  is  a  hereditary  difeafe,  and  af- 
fects efpecially  men  of  a  particular  habit,  its 
remote  caufes  may  be  confidered  as  predifpo- 
nent  and  occafional. 


DI. 


The  predifponent  caufe,  fo  far  as  exprefled 
by  external  appearances,  or  by  the  general 
temperament,  we  have  already  marked  ;  and 
phyficians  have  been  very  confident  in  align- 
ing the  occafional  caufes  :  But,  in  a  difeafe 
depending  fo  much  upon  a  predifpofition,  the 
affigning  occafional  caufes  mufl  be  uncertain  ; 
as,  in  the  predifpofed,  the  occafional  caufes 
may  not  always  appear,  and  in  perfons  not 
predifpofed,  they  may  appear  without  effect. 
This  uncertainty  mufl  particularly  afFeft  the 
cafe  of  the  gout  ;  but  I  fhall  offer  what  ap- 
pears to  me  mofl  probable  on  the  fubjeft. 

DII. 


OF      PHYSIC.  327 


DII. 

The  occafional  caufes  of  the  gout  feem  to 
be  of  two  kinds.  Firft,  thofe  which  induce  a 
plethoric  flate  of  the  body.  Secondly,  thofe 
which,  in  plethoric  habits,  induce  a  flate  of 
debility. 

Dili. 

Of  the  firft  kind  are  a  fedentary  indolent 
manner  of  life,  a  full  diet  of  animal  food,  and 
the  large  ufe  of  wine  or  of  other  fermented 
liquors.  Thefe  circumflances  commonly  pre- 
cede the  difeafe  ;  and  if  there  mould  be  any 
doubt  of  their  power  of  producing  it,  the 
facl:,  however,  will  be  rendered  fufhciently 
probable  by  what  has  been  obferved  in 
CCCCXCVIII. 

DIV. 

Of  the  fecond  kind  of  occafional  caufes 
which  induce  debility  are,  excefs  in  venery  ; 
intemperance  in  the  ufe  of  intoxicating  liq- 
ours  ;  indigefrion,  produced  either  by  the 
quantity  or  quality  of  aliments  ;  much  appli- 
cation to  ftudy  or  bufmefs  ;  night  watching  ; 
exceflive  evacuations  ;  theceafing  of  ufual  la- 
bour ;  the  iudden  change  from  a  very  full  to 
a  very  fpare  diet  ;  the  large  ufe  of  acids  and 
acefcents  ;  and,  laflly,  cold  applied  to  the 
lower  extremities.  DV. 


328  PRACTICE 


DV. 

The  firft  (Dili)  feem  to  aft  by  increafing 
the  predifpofition.  The  laft  (DIV)  are  com- 
monly the  exciting  caufes,  both  of  the  firft 
attacks,  and  of  the  repetitions  of  the  difeafe. 

DVI. 

It  is  an  inflammatory  affection  of  fome  of 
the  joints  which  efpecially  conftitutes  what  we 
call  a  paroxyfm  of  the  gout.  This  fometimes 
comes  on  fuddenly  without  any  warning,  but 
is  generally  preceded  by  feveral  fymptoms  ; 
fuch  as  the  ceafing  of  a  fweating  which  the 
feet  had  been  commonly  affected  with  before ; 
an  unufual  coldnefs  of  the  feet  and  legs  ;  a 
frequent  numbnefs,  alternating  with  a  fenfe  of 
prickling  along  the  whole  of  the  lower  extrem- 
ities ;  frequent  cramps  of  the  mufcles  of  the 
legs ;  and  an  unufual  turgefcence  of  the  veins., 

DVII. 

While  thefe  fymptoms  take  place  in  the 
lower  extremities,  the  whole  body  is  affected 
with  fome  degree  of  torpor  and  languor,  and 
the  functions  of  the  ftomach  in  particular  are 
more  or  lefs  diflurbed.  The  appetite  is  di- 
minifhed  ;  and  flatulency,  or  other  fymptoms 
of  indigeflion,  are  felt.  Thefe  fymptoms,  and 
thofe  of  DVI>  take   place   for  feveral  days* 

fometimes 


OF      PHYSIC.  329 

fometimes  for  a  week  or  two,  before  a  parox- 
yfm  comes  on  ;  but  commonly,  upon  the  day 
immediately  preceding  it,  the  appetite  be- 
comes greater  than  ufual. 

DVIII. 

The  circumftances  of  paroxyfms  are  the 
following  :  They  come  on  mofl  commonly  in 
the  fpring,  and  fooner  or  later  according  as 
the  vernal  heat  fucceeds  fooner  or  later  to  the 
winter's  cold  ;  and  perhaps  fooner  or  later  alfo 
according  as  the  body  may  happen  to  be  more 
or  lefs  expofed  to  viciflitudes  of  heat  and  cold. 

DIX. 

The  attacks  are  fometimes  felt  firft  in  the 
evening,  but  more  commonly  about  two  or 
three  o'clock  of  the  morning.  The  paroxyfm 
begins  with  a  pain  affecling  one  foot,  moft: 
commonly  in  the  ball  or  firft  joint  of  the  great 
toe,  but  fometimes  in  other  parts  of  the  foot. 
With  the  coming  on  of  this  pain,  there  is  com- 
monly more  or  lefs  of  a  cold  ihivering,  which, 
as  the  pain  increafes,  gradually  ceafes,  and  is 
fucceeded  by  a  hot  ftage  of  pyrexia,  which 
continues  for  the  fame  time  with  the  pain  it- 
felf.  From  the  firft  attack,  the  pain  becomes 
by  degrees  more  violent,  and  continues  in  this 
ftate  with  great  reftlelfnefs  of  the  whole  body 
till  next  midnight,  after  which  it  gradually 
remits  ;  and,  after  it  has  continued  for  twenty 

four 


330  PRACTICE 

four  hours  from  the  commencement  of  the 
firft  attack,  it  commonly  ceafes  very  entirely, 
and,  with  the  coming  on  of  a  gentle  fweat,  al- 
lows the  patient  to  fall  afleep.  The  patient, 
upon  coming  out  of  this  fleep  in  the  morning, 
finds  the  pained  part  affected  with  fome  red- 
nefs  and  fwelling,  which,  after  having  contin- 
ued forfome  days,  gradually  abate. 

DX, 

When  a  paroxyfm  has  thus  come  on,  al- 
though the  violent  pain  after  twenty  four 
hours  be  confiderably  abated,  the  patient  is 
not  entirely  relieved  from  it.  For  fome  days 
he  has  every  evening  a  return  of  more  confid- 
erable  pain  and  pyrexia,  and  which  continue 
with  more  or  lefs  violence  till  morning.  Af- 
ter continuing  in  this  manner  for  feveral  days, 
the  difeafe  fometimes  goes  entirely  off,  not  to 
return  till  after  a  long  interval. 

DXI. 

When  the  difeafe,  after  having  thus  remain- 
ed for  fome  time  in  a  joint,  ceafes  very  entire- 
ly, it  generally  leaves  the  perfon  in  very  per- 
fect health,  enjoying  greater  eafe  and  alacrity 
in  the  functions  of  both  body  and  mind,  than 
he  had  for  a  long  time  before  experienced. 

DXII. 


O  F     P  H  Y  S  I  C.  331 


DXII. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  difeafe,  the  returns 
of  it  are  fometimes  only  once  in  three  or  four 
years  ;  but,  after  fome  time,  the  intervals  be- 
come fhorter,  and  the  attacks  become  annual ; 
afterwards  they  come  twice  each  year,  and  at 
length  recur  feveral  times  during  the  whole 
courfe  of  autumn,  winter,  and  fpring  ;  and  as 
it  happens,  that,  when  the  fits  are  frequent, 
the  paroxyfms  become  alfo  longer,  fo,  in  the 
advanced  ftage  of  the  difeafe,  the  patient  is 
hardly  ever  tolerably  free  from  it,  except  per- 
haps for  two  or  three  months  in  fummer. 

DXIII. 

The  progrefs  of  the  difeafe  is  alfo  marked 
by  the  parts  which  it  affects.  At  firft,  it  com- 
monly affects  one  foot  only,  afterwards  every 
paroxyfm  affects  both  feet,  the  one  after  the 
other  ;  and,  as  the  difeafe  continues  to  recur, 
it  not  only  affects  both  feet  at  once,  but  after 
having  ceafed  in  the  foot  which  was  fecondly 
attacked,  returns  again  into  the  foot  firft  af- 
fected, and  perhaps  a  fecond  time  alfo  into  the 
other.  Its  changes  of  place  are  not  only  from 
one  foot  to  the  other,  but  alfo  from  the  feet 
into  other  joints,  efpecially  thofe  of  the  upper 
and  lower  extremities  ,-  fo  that  there  is  hardly 
a  joint  of  the  body  that  is  not,  on  oneoccafioii 
or  other,  affected.     It  fometimes  affects  two 

different 


332  PRACTICE 

different  joints  at  the  fame  time ;  but  more 
commonly  it  is  fevere  in  a  fmgle  joint  only, 
and  palfes  fucceflively  from  one  joint  to  an- 
other ;  fo  that  the  patient's  affliction  is  often 
protracted  for  a  long  time. 

DX1V. 

When  the  difeafe  has  often  returned,  and 
the  paroxyfms  have  become  very  frequent, 
the  pains  are  commonly  lefs  violent  than  they 
were  at  firft  ;  but  the  patient  is  more  affected 
with  ficknefs,  and  the  other  fymptoms  of  the 
atonic  gout,  which  fhall  be  hereafter  men- 
tioned. 

DXV. 

After  the  firft  paroxyfms  of  the  difeafe,  the 
joints  which  have  been  affecled  are  entirely 
reftored  to  their  former  fupplenefs  and 
ftrength  ;  but  after  the  difeafe  has  recurred 
very  often,  the  joints  affected  do  neither  fo 
fuddenly  nor  fo  entirely  recover  their  former 
ftate,  but  continue  weak  and  fliff  ;  and  thefe 
efFe&s  at  length  proceed  to  fuch  a  degree,  that 
the  joints  lofe  their  motion  altogether. 

DXVI. 

In  many  perfons,  but  not  in  all,  after  the 
difeafe  has  frequently  recurred,  concretions  of 
a  chalky  nature  are  formed  upon  the  outfide 

qf 


OF     PHYSIC. 


333 


of  the  joints,  and  for  the  moil  part  immedi- 
ately under  the  fkin.  The  matter  feems  to 
be  depofited  at  firft  in  a  fluid  form,  but  after- 
wards becomes  dry  and  firm.  In  their  dry 
Mate,  thefe  concretions  are  a  friable  earthy 
fubftance,  very  entirely  foluble  in  acids.  Af- 
ter they  have  been  formed,  they  contribute, 
with  other  circumftances,  to  deftroy  the  mo- 
tion of  the  joint. 

DXVII. 

In  moft  perfons  who  have  laboured  under 
the  gout  for  many  years,  a  nephritic  affection 
comes  on,  and  discovers  itfelf  by  all  the  fymp- 
toms  which  ufually  attend  calculous  concre- 
tions in  the  kidneys,  and  which  we  fhall  have 
occafion  to  defcribe  in  another  place.  All  that 
is  neceffary  to  be  obferved  here  is,  that  the 
nephritic  affection  alternates  with  paroxyfms 
of  the  gout  ;  arid  that  the  two  affe&ions,  the 
nephritic  and  the  gouty,  are  hardly  ever  pref- 
ent  at  the  fame  time.  This  alfo  may  be  ob- 
ferved, that  children  of  gouty  or  nephritic 
parents,  commonly  inherit  one  or  other  of 
thefe  difeafes  ;  but  which  ever  may  have  been 
the  principal  difeafe  of  the  parent,  fome  of  the 
children  have  the  one,  and  fome  the  other> 
In  fome  of  them,  the  nephritic  affection  oc- 
curs alone,  without  any  gout  fupervening; 
and  this  happens  to  be  frequently  the  cafe  of 
the  female  offspring  of  gouty  parents. 

DXVIII. 


334  PRACTICE 

DXVIII. 

In  the  whole  of  the  hiftory  already  given, 
I  have  defctibed  the  rrioft  common  form  of 
the  difeafe ;  and  which  therefore,  however  di- 
versified in  the  manner  I  h«ive  faid,  may  be 
flu  called  the  regular  Rate  of  the  gout.  Up- 
on occafion,  hoWeverA  the  difeafe  affumes  dif- 
ferent app^.ctnces  ;  but  as  I  fuppofe  the  dif- 
eafe to  depend  always  upon  a  certain  diathefis 
or  difpofition  of  the  fyftem  ;  fo  every  appear- 
ance which  we  can  percieve  to  depend  upon 
that  fame  difpofition,  I  (till  confider  as  a 
fymptom  and  cafe  of  the  gout.  The  princi- 
pal circumftance  in  what  we  term  the  Regular 
Gout,  is  the  inflammatory  affection  of  the 
joints ;  and  whatever  fymptoms  we  can  per- 
ceive to  be  connected  with,  or  to  depend  up- 
on, the  difpofition  which  produces  that  in- 
flammatory affection,  but  without  its  taking 
place,  or  being  prefent  at  the  fame  time,  we 
name  the  Irregular  Gout. 

DXIX. 

Of  fuch  irregular  gout  there  are  three  dif- 
ferent ftates ;  which  I  name  the  atonic,  the 
retrocedent,  and  the  mi/placed  gout. 

DXX. 

The  atonic  ftate  is  when  the  gouty  diathe- 
fis prevails    in   the   fyftem,    but,   from  cer- 
tain 


OF      PHYSIC.  335 

tain  caufes,  does  not  produce  the  inflammato- 
ry affection  of  the  joints.  In  this  cafe,  the 
morbid  fymptoms  which  appear  are  chiefly 
affections  of  the  rtomach  ;  fuch  as  lofs  of  ap- 
petite, indigeftion,  and  its  various  circum- 
flances  of  fickneis,  naufea,  vomiting,  flatulen- 
cy, acid  eructations,  and  pains  in  the  region 
of  the  ftomach.  Thefe  fymptoms  are  fre- 
quently accompanied  with  pains  and  cramps 
in  feveral  parts  of  the  trunk,  and  the  upper 
extremities  of  the  body,  which  are  relieved  by 
the  difcharge  of  wind  from  the  ftomach.  To- 
gether with  thefe  affections  of  the  ftomach, 
there  commonly  occurs  a  coftivenefs  ;  but 
fometimes  a  loofenefs  with  colic  pains.  Thefe 
affections  of  the  alimentary  canal  are  often  at- 
tended with  all  the  fymptoms  of  hypochon- 
driafis  ;  as  dejection  of  mind,  a  conftant  and 
anxious  attention  to  the  flightefl  feelings,  an 
imaginary  aggravation  of  thefe,  and  an  appre- 
henfion  of  danger  from  them. 

In  the  fame  atonic  gout,  the  vifcera  of  the 
thorax  alfo  are  fometimes  affected,  and  palpi- 
tations, faintings,  and  afthrna,  occur. 

Tn  the  head  alfo  occur,  headachs,  giddinefs, 
apoplectic  and  paralytic  affections. 

DXXL 

When  the  feveral  fymptoms  now  mention- 
ed occur  in  habits  having  the  marks  of  a  gouty 
difpofition,  this  may  be  fufpected  to  have  laid 
the  foundation  of  them  ;  and  efpecially  when 

either, 


336         PRACTICE 

either,  in  fuch  habits,  a  manifeft  tendency  to 
the  inflammatory  affection  has  formerly  ap- 
peared ;  or  when  the  fymptoms  mentioned  are 
intermixed  with,  and  are  not  relieved  by,  fome 
degree  of  the  inflammatory  gout.  In  fuch 
cafes  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  confidering  the 
whole  as  a  itate  of  the  gout. 


DXXII. 


Another  ftate  of  the  difeafe  I  name  the 
retrocedent  gout.  This  occurs  when  an  in- 
flammatory ftate  of  the  joints  has,  in  the  ufual 
manner,  come  on,  but  which,  without  arifing 
to  the  ordinary  degree  of  pain  and  inflamma- 
tion, or,  at  leaft,  without  thefe  continuing  for 
the  ufual  time,  and  receding  gradually  in  the 
ufual  manner,  they  fuddenly  and  entirely 
ceafe,  while  fome  internal  part  becomes  af- 
fected. The  internal  part  moft  commonly 
affected  is  the  ftomach,  which  is  then  affected 
with  anxiety,  ficknefs,  vomiting,  or  violent 
pain  ;  but  fometimes  the  internal  part  is  the 
heart,  which  gives  occafion  to  a  fyncope  ; 
fometimes  it  is  the  lungs  which  are  affected 
with  afthma ;  and  fometimes  it  is  the  head, 
giving  occafion  to  apoplexy  or  palfy.  In  all 
thefe  cafes,  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  fymp- 
toms being  all  a  part  of  the  fame  difeafe,  how- 
ever different  the  affection  may  feem  to  be  in 
the  parts  which  it  attacks. 

DXXIII. 


OF       PHYSIC.  337 


DXXIII. 

The  third  (late  of  irregular  gout,  which  we 
name  the  mifplaced,  is  when  the  gouty  diathe- 
fis,  inftead  of  producing  the  inflammatory  af- 
fection of  the  joints,  produces  an  inflammato- 
ry afFe&ion  of  fome  internal  part,  and  which 
appears  from  the  fame  fymptoms  that  attend 
the  inflammation  of  thofe  parts  arifing  from 
other  caufes. 

Whether  the  gouty  diathefis  does  ever  pro- 
duce fuch  inflammation  of  the  internal  parts, 
without  having  nrft  produced  it  in  the  joints* 
or  if  the  inflammation  of  the  internal  part  be 
always  a  tranflation  from  the  joints  previ- 
oufly  affe&ed,  I  dare  not  determine  ;  but,  even 
fuppofing  the  latter  to  be  always  the  cafe,  I 
think  the  difference  of  the  affection  of  the  in- 
ternal part  mult  ftill  diftinguifh  the  mifplaced 
from  what  I  have  named  the  retrocedent  gout. 

DXXIV, 

What  internal  parts  may  be  affecled  hy 
the  mifplaced  gout,  I  cannot  precifely  fay,  be- 
caufe  I  have  never  met  with  any  cafes  of  the 
mifplaced  gout  in  my  practice  ;  and  I  find  no 
cafes  of  it  diftinclly  marked  by  pra6tical 
writers,  except  that  of  a  pneumonic  inflam- 
mation* 

F  DXXV. 


33&  PRACTICE 


DXXV. 

There  are  two  cafes  of  a  tranflated  gout  ; 
the  one  of  which  is  an  affe£lion  of  the  neck 
of  the  bladder,  producing  pain,  ftrangury,  and 
a  catarrhus  veficae  :  The  other  is  an  affection 
of  the  re6lum,  fometimes  by  pain  alone  in  that 
part,  and  fometimes  by  hemorrhoidal  fwellings 
there.  In  gouty  perfons,  I  have  known  fuch 
affections  alternate  with  inflammatory  affec- 
tions of  the  joints  :  But  whether  to  refer  thofe 
affections  to  the  retrocedent,  or  to  the  mif- 
placed  gout,  I  will  not  pre  fume  to  determine, 

DXXVI. 

From  the  hiflory  which  I  have  now  deliver- 
ed of  the  gout,  I  think  it  may  be  difcerned 
under  all  its  various  appearances.  It  is,  how- 
ever, commonly  fuppofed,  that  there  are  cafes 
in  which  it  may  be  difficult  to  diftinguifh  gout 
from  rheumatifm,  and  it  is  poffible  there  may 
be  fuch  cafes  ;  but,  for  the  moft  part,  the  two 
difeafes  may  be  diftinguifhed  with  great  cer- 
tainty by  obferving  the  predifpofition,  the  an- 
tecedents, the  parts  affecled,  the  recurrences 
of  the  difeafe,  and  its  connexion  with  the 
other  parts  of  the  fyftem  ;  which  circumflanc- 
es,  for  the  mofl  part,  appear  very  differently 
in  the  two  difeafes. 

DXXVIL 


OF       PHYSIC.  339 


DXXVIL 

With  refpect  to  the  gout,  our  next  bufinefs 
is  to  inveftigate  its  proximate  caufe  ;  which 
muft  be  a  difficult  talk,  and  I  attempt  it  with 
fome  diffidence. 

DXXVIIL 

Upon  this  fubjecV  tne  opinion  which  has 
generally  prevailed  is,  that  the  gout  depends 
upon  a  certain  morbific  matter,  always  prefent 
in  the  body  ;  and  that  this  matter,  by  certain 
caufes,  thrown  upon  the  joints  or  other  parts, 
produces  the  feveral  phenomena  of  the  difeafe, 

DXXIX. 

This  doclrine,  however  ancient  and  gener- 
al, appears  to  me  very  doubtful  ;  for, 

Firft,  there  is  no  direcl  evidence  of  any 
morbific  matter  being  prefent  in  perfons  dif- 
pofed  to  the  gout.  There  are  no  experiments 
or  obfervations  which  (how  that  the  blood,  or 
other  humours  of  gouty  perfons,  are  in  any 
refpecl;  different  from  thofe  of  other  perfons. 
Previous  to  attacks  of  the  gout,  there  appear 
no  marks  of  any  morbid  ftate  of  the  fluids  ;  for 
the  difeafe  generally  attacks  thofe  perfons  who 
have  enjoyed  the  mo  ft  perfect  health,  and  ap- 
pear to  be  in  that  ftate  when  the  difeafe  comes 
on.  At  a  certain  period  of  the  difeafe,  a  pe- 
P  2  culiar 


34o  PRACTICE 

culiar  matter  indeed  appears  in  gouty  perfons, 
(DXVI)  ;  but  this,  winch  does  not  appear  in 
every  inftance,  and  which  appears  only  after 
the  difeafe  has  fubfifled  for  a  long  time,feems 
manifeftly  to  be  the  effecl:,  not  the  caufe,  of 
the  difeafe.  Further,  though  there  be  certain 
acrids  which,  taken  into  the  body,  feem  to  ex- 
cite the  gout  (DIV),  it  is  probable  that  thefe 
acrids  operate  otherwife  in  exciting  the  difeafe, 
than  by  affording  the  material  caufe  of  it.  In 
general,  therefore,  there  is  no  proof  of  any 
morbific  matter  being  the  caufe  of  the  gout. 

Secondly,  The  fuppofitions  concerning  the 
particular  nature  of  the  matter  producing  the 
gout,  have  been  fo  various  and  fo  contradic- 
tory to  each  other,  as  to  allow  us  to  conclude, 
that  there  is  truly  no  proof  of  the  exiflence  of 
any  of  them.  With  refpecl  to  many  of  thefe 
fuppofitions,  they  are  fo  inconfiflent  with 
chemical  philofophy,  and  with  the  laws  of  the 
animal  economy,  that  they  mufl  be  entirely 
rejected. 

Thirdly,  The  fuppofition  of  a  morbific 
matter  being  the  caufe  of  the  gout,  is  not  con- 
fiftent  with  the  phenomena  of  the  difeafe,  par- 
ticularly with  its  frequent  and  fudden  tranfla- 
tions  from  one  part  to  another. 

Fourthly,  The  fuppofition  is  further  ren- 
dered improbable  by  this,  that,  if  a  morbific 
matter  did  exift,  its  operation  mould  be  fimilar 
in  the  feveral  parts  which  it  attacks  ;  whereas 
it  feems  to  be  very  different,  being  ftimulant, 
and  exciting  inflammation  in  the  joints,   but 

fedative 


OF       PHYSIC,  341 

fedative  and  deftroying  the  tone  in  the  ftom- 
ach  :  Which,  upon  the  fuppofition  of  partic- 
ular matter  admg  in  both  cafes,  is  not  to  be 
explained  by  any  difference  in  the  part  af- 
feded. 

Fifthly,  Some  fads,  alleged  in  proof  of  a 
morbific  matter,  are  not  fufBciently  confirm- 
ed, fuch  as  thofe  which  would  prove  the  dif- 
eafe  to  be  contagious.  There  is,  however,  no 
proper  evidence  of  this,  the  fads  given  being 
not  only  few,  but  exceptionable  ;  and  the 
negative  obfervations  are  innumerable. 

Sixthly,  Some  arguments  brought  in  fa- 
vour of  a  morbific  matter,  are  founded  upon 
a  miftaken  explanation.  The  difeafe  has 
been  fuppofed  to  depend  upon  a  morbific 
matter,  becaufe  it  is  hereditary  :  But  the  m~ 
ference  is  not  jufi  5  for  moil  hereditary  dif- 
eafes  do  not  depend  upon  any  morbific  mat- 
ter, but  upon  a  particular  conformation  of  the 
ftrudure  of  the  body,  tranfmitted  from  the 
parent  to  the  offspring  ;  and  this  lafl  appears 
to  be  particularly  the  cafe  in  the  gout.  It 
may  be  alfo  obferved,  that  hereditary  difeafes^ 
depending  upon  a  morbific  matter,  always  ap- 
pear much  more  early  in  life  than  the  gout 
commonly  does. 

Seventhly,  The  fuppofition  of  a  morbific 
matter  being  the  caufe  of  the  gout-  has  been 
hitherto  ufelefs,  as  it  has  not  fuggefled  any 
fuccefsful  method  of  cure.  Particular  fup- 
pofitions  have  often  corrupted  the  pradice, 
and  have  frequently  led  from  thofe  views- 
P  3  which 


342  PRACTICE 

which  might  bfc4i£eful,  and  from  that  practice 
which  experience  had  approved.  Further, 
though  the  fuppofition  of  a  morbific  matter 
has  been  generally  received,  it  has  been  as 
generally  neglected  in  practice.  When  the 
gout  has  affected  the  Ilomach,  nobody  thinks 
of  correcting  the  matter  fuppofed  to  be  pres- 
ent there,  but  merely  of  refloring  the  tone  of 
the  moving  fibres. 

Eighthly,  The  fuppofition  of  a  morbific 
matter  is  quite  fuperfluous  ,•  for  it  explains 
nothing,  without  fuppofing  that  matter  to 
produce  a  change  in  the  Hate  of  the  moving 
powers  ;  and  a  change  in  the  Hate  of  the  mov- 
ing powers,  produced  by  other  caufes,  ex- 
plains every  circumftance,  without  the  fup- 
pofition of  a  morbific  matter  ;  and,  to  this 
purpofe,  it  may  be  obferved,  that  many  of  the 
caufes  (DIV)  exciting  the  gout,  do  not  ope- 
rate upon  the  ftate  of  the  fluids,  but  directly 
and  folely  upon  that  of  the  moving  powers. 

Lailly,  The  fuppofition  of  a  morbific  mat- 
ter is  alio  fuperfluous  •  becaufe,  without  any 
fuch  fuppofition,  I  think  the  difeafe  can  be 
explained  in  a  manner  more  confident  with 
its  phenomena,  with  the  laws  of  the  animal 
economy,  and  with  the  method  of  cure  which 
experience  has  approved. 

I  now  proceed  to  give  this  explanation ; 
but,  before  entering  upon  it,  I  mull  premife, 
fome  general  obfervaticns. 


DXXX. 


OF       PHYSIC.  343 


DXXX, 


The  firft  obfervation  is>  that  the  gout  is  a 
difeafe  of  the  whole  fyftem,  or  depends  upon 
a  certain  general  conformation  and  ftate  oi 
the  body ;  which  manifeftly  appears  from 
the  fads  mentioned  from  CCCCXCIV,  to 
CCCCXCVII.  But  the  general  ftate  of  the 
fyftem  depends  chiefly  upon  the  ftate  of  its 
primary  moving  powers  ;  and  therefore  the 
gout  may  be  fuppofed  to  be  chiefly  an  affec- 
tion of  thefe, 

DXXXI. 

My  fecond  obfervation  is,  that,  the  gout  is 
manifeftly  an  affection  of  the  nervous  fyftem  ; 
in  which  the  primary  moving  powers  of  the 
whole  fyftem  are  lodged.  The  occafional 
or  exciting  caufes  (DIV)  are  almoft  all 
fuch  as  a£i  direclly  upon  the  nerves  and  ner- 
vous fyftem ;  and  the  greater  part  of  the  fymp- 
toms  of  the  atonic  or  retrocedent  gout  are 
manifeftly  affeclions  of  the  fame  fyftem. 
(DXX,  and  D XXI I.)  This  leads  us  to  feek 
for  an  explanation  of  the  whole  of  the  difeafe 
in  the  laws  of  the  nervous  fyftem,  and  partic- 
ularly in  the  changes  which  may  happen  in  the 
balance  of  its  feveral  parts. 

P  4  DXXXII. 


344  PRACTICE 


DXXXII. 

My  third  obfervation  is,  that  the  ftomach, 
which  has  fo  univerfal  a  confent  with  the  reft 
of  the  fyftem,  is  the  internal  part  that  is  the 
moft  frequently,  and  often  very  confiderably, 
affe&ed  by  the  gout.  The  paroxyfms  of  the 
difeafe  are  commonly  preceded  by  an  affec- 
tion of  the  ftomach  (DVII)  j  many  of  the  ex- 
citing caufes  (DIV)  acl;  firft  upon  the  ftom- 
ach  ;  and  the  fymptoms  of  the  atonic  and 
retrocedent  gout  (DXX,  DXXII)  are  moft 
commonly  and  chiefly  affections  of  the  fame 
organ.  This  obfervation  leads  us  to  remark, 
that  there  is  a  balance  fubfifting  between  the 
ftate  of  the  internal  and  that  of  the  external 
parts  ;  and,  in  particular,  that  the  ftate  of  the 
ftomach  is  connected  with  that  of  the  external 
parts,  (XLIV)  ;  fo  that  the  ftate  of  tone  in 
the  one  may  be  communicated  to  the  other. 

DXXXIII. 

Thefe  obfervations  being  premifed,  I  (hall 
now  offer  the  following  pathology  of  the  gout. 

In  fome  perfons,  there  is  a  certain  vigorous 
and  plethoric  ftate  of  thefyftemfCCCCXCVI) 
which,  at  a  certain  period  of  life,  h  liable  to  a 
iofs  of  tone  in  the  extremities  (CCCCXCIX, 
DVI.)  This  is  in  fome  meafure  communi- 
cated to  the  whole  fyftem,  but  appears  more 
efpeeialiy   in  the  functions    of    the  ftomach 

(DYII.) 


OF       PHYSIC.  345 

(DVII.)  When  this  lofs  of  tone  occurs  while 
the  energy  of  the  brain  ftill  retains  its  vigour, 
the  vis  medicatrix  naturae  is  excited  to  reftore 
the  tone  of  the  parts  ;  and  accomplifhes  it  by 
exciting  an  inflammatory  affeelion;  in  fome 
part  of  the  extremities.  When  this  has  fub- 
iifled  for  fome  days,  the  tone  of  the  extremi- 
ties, and  of  the  whole  fyilem,  are  reftored,  and 
the  patient  returns  to  his  ordinary  ftate  of 
health  (DXI.) 

DXXXIV. 

This  is  the  courfe  of  things,  in  the  ordinary 
form  of  the  difeafe,  which  we  name  the  regu- 
lar gout ;  but  there  are  circumftances  of  the 
body,  in  which  this  courfe  is  interrupted  or 
varied.  Thus  when  the  atony  (DVI,  D VII) 
has  taken  place,  if  the  reaction  (DIXj  do  not 
fucceed,  the  atony  continues  in  the  flomach5; 
or  perhaps  in  other  internal  parts,  an4  pro- 
duces that  ftate  which  we  have,  for  reafons 
now  obvious^  named  the  atonic  gout3, 

pxxxv. 

A  feeond  cafe  of  variation  in  the  courfe  o£ 
the,  gout  is,  when,  to  the  atony,  the  reaction:: 
and  inflammation  have  to  a  certain  degree  fu ex- 
ceeded ;.  but,,  from  caufes  either  internal  or 
external,  the  tone  of  the  extremities,  and  per- 
haps of  the  whole  fyilem,  is  weakened  ;  fo» 
that  the  inflammatory  flate2,  before  it  had  ei~~ 
P   g  thex: 


3-io  PRACTICE 

ther  proceeded  to  the  degree,  or  continued 
for  the  time,  requifite  for  reftoring  the  tone  of 
the  fyftem,  fuddenly  and  entirely  ceafes. 
Hence  the  ftomach,  and  other  internal  parts, 
relapfe  into  the  ftate  of  atony  ;  and  perhaps 
have  this  increafed  by  the  atony  communi- 
cated from  the  extremities  :  All  which  ap- 
pears in  what  we  have  termed  the  retrocedent 


gout, 


DXXXVI. 


A  third  cafe  of  variation  from  the  ordinary 
eourfe  of  the  gout,  is,  when,  to  the  atony  ufu- 
ally  preceding,  an  inflammatory  reaction  fully 
fucceeds ;  but  has  its  ufual  determination  to 
the  joints  by  fome  circumflances  prevented  ; 
and  is  therefore  directed  to  an  internal  part, 
where  it  produces  an  inflammatory  affection, 
and  that  ftate  of  things  which  we  have  named 
the  mifplaced  gout., 

DXXXVII. 

We  have  thus  offered  an  explanation  of  the 
circumflances  of  the  fyflemin  the  feveral  Mates 
of  the  gout ;  and  this  explanation  we  fuppofe 
to  be  confident  with  the  phenomena  of  the 
difeafe,  and  with  the  laws  of  the  animal  econ- 
omy. There  are  indeed,  with  refpecl:  to  the 
theory  of  the  difeafe,  feveral  queftions  which 
might  be  put,  to  which  we  have  not  given  any 
anfwer.     But,  though  perhaps  we  could  give 

an 


OF       PHYSIC.  347 

an  anfwer  to  many  of  thefe  queftions,  it  does 
not  here  appear  neceffary  ;  as  at  preient  we 
intend  only  to  eftablifh  fuch  general  facts  with 
regard  to  this  difeafe,  as  may  lay  a  foundation 
for  the  cure  of  it,  fo  far  as  experience  has  en- 
abled us  to  profecute  it.  Proceeding,  there- 
fore, upon  the  feveral  parts  of  the  pathology 
given,  as  fo  many  matters  of  facl,  I  fhall  now 
confider  what  may  be  attempted  towards  the 
cure  of  the  difeafe,. 

D XXXVI I L 

Tn  entering  unon  this,  I  mud  obferve,  in 
the  firft  place,  that  a  cure  has  been  commonly 
thought  impofhble  ;  and  we  acknowledge  it 
to  be  very  probable,  that  the  gout,  as  a  difeafe 
of  the  whole  habit,  and  very  often  depending 
upon  original  conformation,  cannot  be  cured 
by  medicines,  the  effe&s  of  which  are  always 
very  tranfitory,  and  feldom  extend  to  the  pro- 
ducing any  conliderable  change  of  the  whola 
habit., 

DXXXTX. 

It  would  perhaps  have  been  happy  for 
gouty  perfons,  if  this  opinion  had  been  im- 
plicitly received  by  them  ;  as  it  would  have 
prevented  their  having  been  fo  often  the  dupes 
of  felfinterefted-  pretenders^  who  have  either 
amufed  them  with  inert  medicines,  or  have 
rafhly  employed  thofe  of  the  moil  pernicious 
P  6:  tendency.. 


34$  PRACTIC   E 

tendency.  I  am  much  difpofed  to  believe  tht 
impoffibility  of  a  cure  of  the  gout  by  medi- 
cines ;  and  more  certainly  flill  incline  to  think, 
that  whatever  may  be  the  poffible  power  of 
medicines,  yet  no  medicine  for  curing  the 
gout  has  hitherto  been  found.  Although  al- 
moft  every  age  has  prefented  a  new  remedy, 
yet  all  hitherto  offered  have  very  foon  been 
either  negle&ed  as  uSeleSs,  or  condemned  as 
pernicious, 

DXL. 

Though  unwilling  to  admit  the  power  of 
medicines,  yet  I  contend,  that  a  great  deal 
can  be  done  towards  the  cure  of  the  gout  by 
a  regimen  :  And  from  what  has  been  observ- 
ed (CCCCXCVIII),  I  am  firmly  perSuaded, 
that  any  man  who,  early  in  life,  will  enter  up- 
on the  conffant  practice  of  bodily  labour,  and 
of  abitinence  from  animal  food,  will  be  pre- 
served entirely  from  the  diSeaSe. 

Whether  there  be  any  other  means  of  rad- 
ically curing  the  gout,  I  am  not  ready  to  de- 
termine. There  are  hifiories  of  cafes  of  the 
gout,  in  which  it  is  faid,  that  by  great  emo- 
tions pf  mind,  by  wounds,  and  by  other  acci- 
dents, the  Symptoms  have  been  Suddenly  re- 
lieved, and  never  again  returned  ;  but  how 
far  thefe  accidental  cures  might  be  imitated  by 
art,  or  would  Succeed  in  other  cafes,  is  at  leail 
extremely  uncertain. 

DXLL 


O  F     P  H  Y  S  I  C,  349 


DXLI. 

The  practices  proper  and  neceffary  in  the 
treatment  of  the  gout,  are  to  be  confidered 
under  two  heads  ;  Jirft,  As  they  are  to  be  em- 
ployed in  the  intervals  of  paroxyfms  ;  or^ 
fecondly,  As  during  the  time  of  thefe. 

DXLII. 

In  the  intervals  of  paroxyfms,  the  indica- 
tions are,  to  prevent  the  return  of  paroxyfms^ 
or  at  leaft  to  render  them  lefs  frequent,  and 
more  moderate.  During  the  time  of  parox- 
yfms, the  indications  are,  to  moderate  the  vi- 
olence, and  fhorten  the  duration  of  them  as 
much  as  can  be  done  with  fafety. 

DXLIII. 

It  has  been  already  obferved,  that  the  gout 
may  be  entirely  prevented  by  conftant  bodily 
exercife,  and  by  a  low  diet ;  and  I  am  of  opin- 
ion, that  this  prevention  may  take  place  even 
in  perfons  who  have  a  hereditary  difpofition 
to  the  difeafe.  I  muft  add  here,  that,  even 
when  the  difpofition  has  difcovered  itfelf  by 
feveral  paroxyfms  of  inflammatory  gout,  I  am 
perfuaded  that  labour  and  abftinence  will  ab- 
folutely  prevent  any  returns  of  it  for  the  reft 
of  life.  Thefe,  therefore,  are  the  means  of 
anfwering  the  firft  indication  to  be  purfued  in 

the 


350  PRACTICE 

the  intervals  of  paroxyfms  ;  and  I  mu.ft  here 
offer  fome  remarks  upon  the  proper   ufe  of 


DXLIV. 

Exercife,  in  perfons  difpofed  to  the  gout,  is 
dire6tedto  two  purpofes  :  One  of  thefe  is  the 
ftrengthening  of  the  tone  of  the  extreme  vef- 
fels  ;  and  the  other,  the  guarding  againfl  a 
plethoric  ftate.  For  the  former,  if  exercife 
be  employed  early  in  life,  and  before  intem- 
perance has  weakened  the  body,,  a  very  mod- 
erate degree  of  it  will  anfwer  the  purpofe  ; 
and  for  the  latter,  if  abftinence  be  at  the  fame 
time  obferved,  little  exercife  will  beneceffary, 

DXLV. 

With  refpedfc  to  exercife,  this  in  general  is 
to  beobferved,thatit  mould  never  be  violent  -, 
for,  if  violent,  k  cannot  be  long  continued, 
and  muff  alwaj^s  endanger  the  bringing  on  an 
atony  in  proportion  to  the  violence  of  the 
preceding  exercife. 

DXLVL 

It  is  alfo  to  be  obferyed;,  that  the  exercife 
of  geflation,  though  confiderable  and  conftant, 
if  it  be  entirely  without  bodily  exercife,  will 
not  anfwer  the  purpofe  in  preventing  the  gout. 
For  this  end^  therefore^  the   exercife.  muff  be 

in 


OF       PHYSIC.  351 

in  fome  meafure  that  of  the  body ;  and  muff 
be  moderate,  but  at  the  fame  time  conflant, 
and  continued  through  life. 

DXLVII. 

In  every  cafe  and  circumftance  of  the  gout 
in  which  the  patient  retains  the  ufe  of  his 
limbs,  bodily  exercife,  in  the  intervals  of  par- 
oxyfms,  will  always  be  ufeful ;  and,  in  the  be- 
ginning of  the  difeafe,  vmen  the  difpofition 
to  it  is  not  yet  ftrong,  exercife  may  prevent  a 
paroxyfm  which  otherwife  might  have  come 
on.  In  more  advanced  ftates  of  the  difeafe, 
however,  when  there  is  fome  difpofition  to  a 
paroxyfm,  much  walking  will  bring  it  on  ;  ei- 
ther as  it  weakens  the  tone  of  the  lower  ex- 
tremities, or  as  it  excites  an  inflammatory  dif- 
pofition in  them  ;  and  it  is  probable,  that  in 
the  fame  manner  ftrains  or  contufions  often 
bring  on  a  paroxyfm  of  the  gout. 

DXLVIIL 

Abftinence,  the  other  part  of  our  regimen 
(DXL)  for  preventing  the  gout,  is  of  more 
difficult  application.  If  an  abftinence  from 
animal  food  be  entered  upon  early  in  life, 
while  the  vigour  of  the  fyftem  is  yet  entire, 
we  have  no  doubt  of  its  being'  both  fafe  and 
effectual ;  but  if  the  motive  for  this,  diet  mail 
not  have  occurred  till  the  conftitution  mall 
have  bQQXi  broken  by  intemperance,  or  by  the 

decline 


352  PRACTICE 

decline  of  life,  a  low  diet  may  then  endanger 
the  bringing  on  an  atonic  ftate. 

DXLIX. 

Further,  if  a  low  diet  Be  entered  upon  only 
in  the  decline  of  life,  and  be  at  the  fame  time 
a  very  great  change  in  the  former  manner  of 
Jiving,  the  withdrawing  of  an  accuflomed 
ftimulus  of  the  fyftern  may  readily  throw  this 
into  an  atonic  flate. 


DL 


The  faf ety  of  an  abftemious  eourfe  may  be. 
greater  or  lefs  according  to  the  management 
of  it.  It  is  animal  food  which  efpeciaiiy  dif~ 
pofes  to  the  plethoric  and  inflammatory  flate3 
and  that  food  is  to  be  therefore  efpeciaiiy  a- 
voided  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  vegetable 
aliment  of  the  lowefl  quality  that  is  in  danger 
of  weakening  the  fyftem  too  much,  by  not  af- 
fording fufficient  nourifhment ;  and  more  par- 
ticularly of  weakening  the  tone  of  the  ftomach 
by  its  acefcency..  It  is  therefore  a  diet  of  a 
middle  nature  that  is  to  be  chofen  ;  and  milk 
is  precifely  of  this  kind,  as  containing  both  an- 
imal and  vegetable  matter.. 

As  approaching  to  the  nature  of  milk,  and 
as  being  a  vegetable  matter  containing  the 
greateft  portion  of  nourifhment,  the  farinace- 
ous feeds  are  next  to  be  chofen,  and  are  the 
food  moil  proper  to  be  joined  with  milk. 

DLL 


OF     PHYSIC.  353 


DLL 

With  refpeft  to  drink,  fermented  liquors 
are  ufeful  only  when  they  are  joined  with  an- 
imal food,  and  that  by  their  acefcency  ;  and 
their  ftimulus  is  only  necefTary  from  cuftom. 
When,  therefore,  animal  food  is  to  be  avoid- 
ed, fermented  liquors  are  unneceffary  ;  and,  by 
increafing  the  acefcency  of  vegetables,  thefe 
liquors  may  be  hurtful.  The  flimulus  of  fer- 
mented or  fpirituous  liquors,  is  not  necefTary 
to  the  young  and  vigorous  ;  and,  when  much 
employed,  impairs  the  tone  of  the  fyftem. 
Thefe  liquors,  therefore,  are  to  be  avoided, 
except  fo  far  as  cuftom  and  the  declining  ftate 
of  the  fyftem  may  have  rendered  them  necef- 
fary.  For  preventing  or  moderating  the  reg- 
ular gout,  water  is  the  only  proper  drink. 

DLIL 

With  refpecl;  to  an  abftemious  courfe,  it 
has  been  fuppofed,  that  an  abftinence  from  an- 
imal food  and  fermented  liquors,  or  the  living 
upon  milk  and  farinacea  alone  for  the  fpace 
of  one  year,  might  be  fufficient  for  a  radical 
cure  of  the  gout ;  and  it  is  poffible,  that,  at  a 
certain  period  of  life,  in  certain  circumftances 
of  the  conftituion,  fuch  a  meafure  might  an- 
fwer  the  purpofe.  But  this  is  very  doubtful ; 
and  it  is  more  probable  that  the  abftinence 
muft,  in  a  great  meafure,  be  continued,  and 

the 


354  PRACTICE 

the  milk  diet  be  perfifted  in,  for  the  reft  of 
life.  It  is  well  known,  that  feveral  perfons 
who  had  entered  on  an  abftemious  courfe,  and 
had  been  thereby  delivered  from  the  gout,  have, 
however,  upon  returning  to  their  former  man- 
ner of  full  living,  had  the  difeafe  return  upon 
them  with  as  much  violence  as  before,  or  in  a 
more  irregular  and  more  dangerous  form, 

DLIII. 

It  has  been  alleged,  that,  for  preventing 
the  return  of  the  gout,  bloodletting,  or  fcari- 
iications  of  the  feet,  frequently  repeated,  and 
at  ftated  times,  may  be  pra&ifed  with  advan* 
tage  i  but  of  this  I  have  had  no  experience. 

DLIV. 

Exercife  and  abftinence  are  the  means  of 
avoiding  the  plethoric  ft  ate  which  gives  the 
difpofition  to  the  gout ;  and  are  therefore  the 
means  propofed  for  preventing  paroxyfms,  or 
at  leaft  for  rendering  them  lefs  frequent,  and 
more  moderate.  But  many  circumftances 
prevent  the  fteadinefs  neceflary  in  purfuing 
thefe  meafures  ;  and  therefore,  in  fuch  cafes, 
unlefs  great  care  be  taken  to  avoid  the  exciting 
caufes,  the  difeafe  may  frequently  return  ; 
and,  in  many  cafes,  the  preventing  of  parox- 
yfms is  chiefly  to  be  obtained  by  avoiding  thofe 
exciting  caufes  enumerated  in  DIV.  The 
conduct  neceflary  for  avoiding  them,  will  be 

fufficiently 


OF       PHYSIC.  355 

fufficiently  obvious  to  perfons  acquainted  with 
the  doclrines  of  the  Hygieine,  which  I  fup- 
pofe  to  have  been  delivered  in  another  place. 

DLV. 

A  due  attention  in  avoiding  thofe  feveral 
caufes  (Dili,  DIV)  will  certainly  prevent  fits 
of  the  gout  ;  and  the  taking  care  that  the  ex- 
citing caufes  be  never  applied  in  a  great  de- 
gree, will  certainly  render  fits  more  moderate 
when  they  do  come  on.  But,  upon  the  whole, 
it  will  appear,  that  a  ftricl:  attention  to  the 
whole  conducl  of  life,  is  in  this  matter  necef- 
fary  ;  and  therefore,  when  the  predifpofition 
has  taken  place,  it  will  be  extremely  difficult 
to  avoid  the  difeafe. 

DLVI. 

I  am  indeed  firmly  perfuaded,  that,  by  ob- 
viating the  predifpofition,  and  by  avoiding  the 
exciting  caufes,  the  gout  may  be  entirely  pre- 
vented :  But  as  the  meafures  neceffary  for 
this  purpofe  will,  in  mod  cafes,  be  purfued 
with  difficulty,  and  even  with  reluctance,  men 
have  been  very  defirous  to  find  a  medicine 
which  might  anfwer  the  purpofe  without  any 

reftraint  on  their  manner  of  livinsr.      To  ^rat- 
CD  o 

ify  this  defire,  phyficians  have  propofed,  and, 
to  take  advantage  of  it,  empirics  have  feigned, 
many  remedies,  as  we  have  already  obferved. 
Of  what  nature  feveral  of  thefe  remedies  have 

been, 


356  PRACTICE 

been,  I  cannot  certainly  fay  ;  but,  of  thofe 
which  are  unknown,  we  conclude,  from  their 
having  been  only  of  temporary  fame,  and  from 
their  having  foon  fallen  into  neglect,  that  they 
have  been  either  inert  or  pernicious,  and  there- 
fore I  make  no  inquiry  after  them  ;  and  mall 
now  remark  only  upon  one  or  two  known 
remedies  for  the  gout  which  have  been  lately 
in  vogue. 


DLVIL 


One  of  thefe  is  what  has  been  named  in 
England  the  Portland  Powder.  This  is  not  a 
new  medicine,  but  is  mentioned  by  Galen, 
and,  with  fome  little  variation  in  its  composi- 
tion, has  been  mentioned  by  the  writers  of  al- 
moft  every  age  fince  that  time.  It  appears  to 
have  been  at  times  in  falhion,  and  to  have  a- 
gain  fallen  into  neglect ;  and  I  think  that  this 
laft  has  been  owing  to  its  having  been  found 
to  be,  in  many  inftances,  pernicious.  In  ev- 
ery instance  which  I  have  known  of  its  exhibi- 
tion for  the  length  of  time  prefcribed,  the  per- 
fons  who  had  taken  it  were  indeed  afterwards 
free  from  any  inflammatory  affection  of  the 
joints  ;  but  they  were  affected  with  many 
fymptoms  of  the  atonic  gout  ;  and  all,  foon 
after  finifhing  their  courfe  of  the  medicine, 
have  been  attacked  with  apoplexy,  afthma,  or 
dropfy,  which  proved  fatal. 

DLVIIL 


O  F     P  H  Y  S  I  C.  357 


DLVIIL 

Another  remedy  which  has  had  the  appear- 
ance of  preventing  the  gout,  is  an  alkali  in  va- 
rious forms,  fuch  as  the  fixed  alkali  both  mild 
and  cauflic,  lime  water,  foap,  and  abforbent 
earths.  Since  it  became  common  to  exhibit 
thefe  medicines  in  nephritic  and  calculous 
cafes,  it  has  often  happened  that  they  were 
given  to  thofe  who  were  at  the  fame  time  fub- 
je6t.  to  the  gout ;  and  it  has  been  obferved, 
that,  under  the  ufe  of  thefe  medicines,  gouty 
perfons  have  been  longer  free  from  the  fits  of 
their  difeafe.  That,  however,  the  ufe  of  thefe 
medicines  has  entirely  prevented  the  returns 
of  gout,  I  do  not  know ;  becaufe  I  never  pufh- 
ed  the  ufe  of  thofe  medicines  for  a  long  time, 
being  apprehenfive  that  the  long  continued 
ufe  of  them  might  produce  a  hurtful  change 
in  the  flate  of  the  fluids. 

DUX. 

With  refpecl  to  preventing  the  gout,  I  have 
-only  one  other  remark  to  offer.  As  the  pre- 
venting the  gout  depends  very  much  on  fup- 
porting  the  tone  of  the  flomach,  and  avoiding 
indigeftion ;  fo  coftivenefs,  by  occafioning  this, 
is  very  hurtful  to  gouty  perfons.  It  is  there- 
fore necefiary  for  fuch  perfons  to  prevent  or 
remove  coftivenefs,  and  by  a  laxative  medicine, 
when  needful ;  but  it  is  at  the  fame  time  prop- 
er, 


358  PRACTICE 

er,  that  the  medicine  employed  mould  be  fuch 
as  may  keep  the  belly  regular,  without  much 
purging.  Aloetics,  rhubarb,  magnefia  alba, 
or  flowers  of  fulphur,  may  be  erhployed,  as 
the  one  or  the  other  may  happen  to  be  belt 
fuited  to  particular  perfons. 


DLX. 

Thefe  are  the  feveral  meafures  (from 
DXLII,  to  DLIX)  to  be  purfued  in  the  in- 
tervals of  the  paroxyfms  ;  and  we  are  next  to 
mention  the  meafures  proper  during  the  time 
of  them. 


DLXI. 

As  during  the  times  of  paroxyfms  the  body 
is  in  a  feverifh  Hate,  no  irritation  ihould  then 
be  added  to  it  ;  and  every  part,  therefore, 
of  the  antiphlogiftic  regimen,  (CXXX,  to 
CXXXIII)  except  the  application  of  cold, 
ought  to  be  ftriftly  obferved. 

Another  exception  to  the  general  rule  may 
occur  when  the  tone  of  the  ftomach  is  weak, 
and  when  the  patient  has  been  before  much 
accuftomed  to  the  ufe  of  ftrong  drink  ;  for  then 
it  may  be  allowable,  and  even  neceflary,  to 
give  fome  animal  food,  and  a  little  wine. 

DLXIL 


OF       PHYSIC.  353 


DLXII 


That  no  irritation  is  to  be  added  to  the  fyf- 
tern  during  the  paroxyfms  of  gout,  except  in 
the  cafes  mentioned,  is  entirely  agreed  upon 
among  phyficians  :  But  it  is  a  more  difficult 
matter  to  determine  whether,  during  the  time 
of  paroxyfms,  any  meafures  may  be  purfued 
to  moderate  the  violence  of  reaction  and  of 
inflammation.  .  Dr.  Sydenham  has  given  it  as 
his  opinion,  that  the  more  violent  the  inflam- 
mation and  pain,  the  paroxyfms  will  be  the 
morter,  as  well  as  the  interval  between  the 
prefent  and  next  paroxyfm  longer  ;  and,  if 
this  opinion  be  admitted  as  juft,  it  will  forbid 
the  ufe  of  any  remedies  which  might  mode- 
rate the  inflammation  ;  which  is,  to  a  certain 
degree,  undoubtedly  neceflary  for  the  health  of 
the  body.  On  the  other  hand,  acute  pain 
prefles  for  relief ;  and,  although  a  certain  de- 
gree of  inflammation  may  feem  abfolutely 
neceflary,  it  is  not  certain  but  that  a  moderate 
degree  of  it  may  anfwer  the  purpofe  :  And  it 
is  even  probable,  that,  in  many  cafes,  the  vio- 
lence of  inflammation  may  weaken  the  tone 
of  the  parts,  and  thereby  invite  a  return  of 
paroxyfms.  It  feems  tome  to  be  in  this  way, 
that,  as  the  difeafe  advances,  the  paroxyfms 
become  more  frequent. 

DLXIII. 


360  PRACTICE 


DLXIIL 

From  thefe  laft  confiderations,  it  feems 
probable,  that,  during  the  time  of  paroxyfms, 
lome  meafures  may  be  taken  to  moderate  the 
violence  of  the  inflammation  and  pain  ;  and 
particularly,  that  in  firfi  paroxyfms,  and  in  the 
young  and  vigorous,  bloodletting  at  the  arm 
may  be  praclifed  with  advantage  :  But  I  am 
perfuaded,  that  this  practice  cannot  be  re- 
peated often  with  fafety  ;  becaufe  bloodletting 
not  only  weakens  the  tone  of  the  fyftem,  but 
may  alfo  contribute  to  produce  plethora.  I 
believe,  however,  that  bleeding  by  leeches  on 
the  foot,  and  upon  the  inflamed  part,  may  be 
pra&ifed,  and  repeated  with  greater  fafety  ; 
and  I  have  known  inftances  of  its  having  been 
pra&ifed  with  fafety,  to  moderate  and  fhorten 
paroxyfms  ;  but  how  far  it  may  be  carried,  we 
have  not  had  experience  enough  to  deter- 
mine. 

DLXIV. 

Befides  bloodletting,  and  the  antiphlo- 
giftic  regimen,  it  has  been  propofed  to  employ 
remedies  for  moderating  the  inflammatory 
fpafm  of  the  part  affe&ed,  fuch  as  warm  bath- 
ing and  emollient  poultices.  Thefe  have 
fometimes  been  employed  with  advantage  and 
Fafety  ;  but  at  other  times,  have  been  found  to 
give  occafion  to  a  retroceflion  of  the  gout. 

DLXV. 


OF      PHYSIC.  361 

DLXV. 

Bliftering  is  a  very  effectual  means  of  re- 
lieving and  difcufTmg  a  paroxyfm  of  the  gout ; 
but  has  alfo  frequently  had  the  effect  of  ren- 
dering it  retrocedent. 

DLXVI. 

The  flinging  with  nettles  I  confider  as 
analogous  to  bliftering ;  and  I  think  it  proba- 
ble that  it  would  be  attended  with  the  fame 
danger, 

DLXVIL 

The  burning  with  moxa,  or  other  fub~ 
fiances,  I  confider  as  a  remedy  of  the  fame 
kind.  I  have  had  indeed  no  evidence  of  this 
proving  hurtful  ;  but  neither  have  I  had  any 
proper  evidence  of  its  having  proved  a  radi- 
cal cure. 

DLXVIII. 

Camphire,  and  fome  aromatic  oils,  have 
the  power  of  allaying  the  pain,  and  of  re- 
moving the  inflammation  from  the  part  af- 
fected ;  but  thefc  remedies  commonly  make 
the  inflammation  only  fhift  from  one  part  t6 
another,  and  therefore  with  the  hazard  of  its 
falling  upon  a  part  where  it  may  be  more 
Q  dangerous ; 


362  PRACTICE 

dangerous  ;  and  they  have  fometimes  render- 
ed tne  gout  retrocedent. 

DLXIX. 

From  thefe  refteaions  (DLXIV.  et  feq.)  it 
will  appear,  that  ibme  danger  mufl  attend  ev- 
ery external  application  to  the  parts  affected 
during  a  paroxyfm ;  and  that  therefore  the 
common  practice  of  committing  the  perfon  to 
patience  and  flannel  alone,  is  eftabliihed  up- 
on the  beft  foundation. 

DLXX. 

Opiates  give  the  moft  certain  relief  from 
pain;  but,  when  given  in  the  beginning  of 
gouty  paroxyfms,  ocean  on  thefe  to  return  with 
greater  violence.  When,  however,  the  par- 
oxyfms fhall  have  abated  in  their  violence,  but 
flill  continue  to  return,  fo  as  to  occafion  pain- 
ful and  reftlefs  nights,  opiates  may  be  then 
given  with  fafety  and  advantage,  especially  in 
the  cafe  of  perfons  advanced  in  life,  and  who 
have  been  often  affected  with  the  difeafe. 

DLXXI. 

When,  after  paroxyfms  have  ceafed,  fome 
fwelling  and  ftiffnefs  fhall  remain  in  the  joints,- 
thefe  fymptoms  are  to  be  difcuffed  by  the  dili- 
gent ufe  of  the  flefh  brufh. 

DLXXIL 


OF       PHYSIC.  363 

DLXXII. 

Purging,  immediately  after  a  paroxyfro, 
will  be  always  employed  with  the  hazard  of 
bringing  it  on  again. 

DLXXIII. 

I  have  now  iinifhed  what  has  occurred  to 
be  faid  upon  the  means  of  preventing  and  cur- 
ing the  regular  gout  ;  and  (hall  now  confider 
its  management  when  it  has  become  irregular  ; 
of  which,  as  I  have  obferved  above,  there  are 
three  different  cafes. 

DLXXIV. 

In  the  firft  cafe,  which  I  have  named  the 
Atonic  Gout,  the  cure  is  to  be  accomplifhed 
by  carefully  avoiding  all  debilitating  caufes  ; 
and  by  employing,  at  the  fame  time,  the 
means  of  ftrengthening  the  fyftem  in  general, 
and  the  ilomach  in  particular. 

DLXXV. 

For  the  avoiding  debilitating  caufes,  I  muft 
refer  to  the  doctrines  of  the  Hygieine,  as  in 
DLIV. 

DLXXVI-. 


364  PRACTICE 


DLXXVI. 

For  ftrengthening  the  fyftem  in  gener- 
al, I  muft  recommend  frequent  exercile  on 
horfeback,  and  moderate  walking.  Cold  bath- 
ing alfo  may  anfwer  the  purpofe,  and  may 
be  fafely  employed,  if  it  appear  to  be  power- 
ful in  Simulating  the  fyftem,  and  be  not  ap- 
plied when  the  extremities  are  threatened  with 
any  pain. 

For  fupporting  the  tone  of  the  fyftem  in 
general,  when  threatened  with  atonic  gout, 
iome  animal  food  ought  to  be  employed,  and 
the  more  acefcent  vegetables  ought  to  be  a- 
voided.  In  the  fame  cafe,  fome  wine  alfo 
may  be  neceftary  ;  but  it  fhould  be  in  mode- 
rate quantity,  and  of  the  leaft  acefcent  kinds  ; 
and  if  every  kind  of  wine  ftiall  be  found  to 
increafe  the  acidity  of  the  ftomach,  ardent 
fpirits  and  water  muft  be  employed. 

DLXXVII. 

For  ftrengthening  the  ftomach,  bitters  and 
the  Peruvian  bark  may  be  employed  ;  but  care 
muft  be  taken  that  they  be  not  conftantly  em- 
ployed for  any  great  length  of  time.  Com- 
pare DLVII. 

The  moft  effectual  medicine  for  ftrengthen- 
ing the  ftomach  is  iron,  which  may  be  em- 
ployed under  various  preparations  ;  but,  to 
me,  the  beft  appears  to  be  the  ruft  in  fine 

powder. 


OF     PHYSIC.  365 

powder,  which  may  be  given  in  very  large 
dofes. 

For  fupporting  the  tone  of  the  ftomach,  ar- 
omatics  may  be  employed ;  but  fhould  be  ufed 
with  caution,  as  the  frequent  and  large  ufe  of 
them  may  have  an  qppofite  effect ;  and  they 
mould  therefore  be  given  only  in  compliance 
with  former  habits,  or  for  palliating  prefent 
fymptoms. 

When  the  flomach  happens  to  be  liable  to 
indigeftion,  gentle  vomits  may  be  frequently 
given  ;  and  proper  laxatives  mould  be  always 
employed  to  obviate,  or  to  remove,  coflive- 
nefs. 

DLXXVIII. 

In  the  atonic  gout,  or  in  perfons  liable  to 
it,  to  guard  againft  cold  is  efpecially  neceffa- 
ry  ;  and  the  moll  certain  means  of  doing  this, 
is,  by  repairing  to  a  warm  climate  during  the 
winter  feafon, 

DLXXIX. 

In  the  more  violent  cafes  of  the  atonic  gour^ 
bliftering  the  lower  extremities  may  be  ufeful ; 
but  that  remedy  mould  be  avoided  when  any 
pain  threatens  the  extremities.  In  perfons 
liable  to  the  atonic  gout,  iffues  may  be  eftab- 
lifhed  in  the  extremities,  as,  in  fome  meafure, 
a  fupplement  to  the  difeafe. 

DLXXX. 


366  PRACTICE 


DLXXX. 

A  fecond  cafe  of  the  irregular  gout,  is  that 
which  I  have  named  the  Retrocedent.  When 
this  affects  the  flomach  and  inteftines,  relief 
is  to  be  inftantly  attempted  by  the  free  ufe 
of  ftrong  wines,  joined  with  aromatics,  and 
given  warm  ;  or  if  thefe  mall  not  prove  power- 
ful enough,  ardent  fpirits  muft  be  employed, 
and  are  to  be-  given  in  a  large  dofe.  In  mod- 
erate attacks,  ardent  fpirits  impregnated  with 
garlic,  or  with  afafcetida,  may  be  employed  ; 
or,  even  without  the  ardent  fpirits,  a  folution 
of  afafcetida  with  the  volatile  alkali  may  an- 
fwer  the  purpofe.  Opiates  are  often  an  ef~ 
fec~tual  remedy,  and  may  be  joined  with  aro- 
matics, as  in  the  Eleftuarium  Thebaicum  ;  or 
they  may  be  ufefully  joined  with  volatile  al- 
kali and  camphire.  Mufk  has  likewife  prov- 
ed ufeful  in  this  difeafe. 

When  the  affection  of  the  flomach  is  ac- 
companied with  vomiting,  this  may  be  en- 
couraged, by  taking  draughts  of  warm  wine, 
at  firft  with  water,  and  afterwards  without 
it  ;  having  at  length  recourfe,  if  neceffary,  to 
fome  of  the  remedies  above  mentioned,  and 
particularly  the  opiates. 

In  like  manner,  if  the  inteftines  be  affe&ed 
with  diarrhoea,  this  is  to  be  at  firft  encouraged, 
by  taking  plentifully  of  weak  broth ;  and  when 
this  fhall  have  been  done  fufficientiv,  the  tu- 
mult is  to  be  quieted  by  opiates. 

DLXXXI. 


OF     PHYSIC,  367 


DLXXXI. 

When  the  retrocedent  gout  (hall  affecl:  the 
lungs,  and  produce  afthma,  this  is  to  be  cured 
by  opiates,  by  antifpafmodics,  and,  perhaps, 
by  bliitering  on  the  breaft  or  back. 

DLXXXII. 

When  the  gout,  leaving  the  extremities, 
fhall  affe6l  the  head,  and  produce  pain,  verti- 
go, apoplexy,  or  palfy,  our  refources  are  very 
precarious.  The  moll  probable  means  of  re^ 
lief  is,  bliitering  the  head ;  and  if  the  gout 
fhall  have  receded  very  entirely  from  the  ex- 
tremities, blifters  may  be  applied  to  thefe  al- 
fo.  Together  with  thefe  blifterings,  aromat- 
ics,  and  the  volatile  alkali,  may  be  thrown  in- 
to the  ftomach. 


DLXXXIII. 

The  third  cafe  of  the  irregular  gout  is  what 
I  have  named  the  Mifplaced  ;  that  is,  when 
the  inflammatory  affection  of  the  gout,  inftead 
of  falling  upon  the  extremities,  falls  upon  fome 
internal  part.  In  this  cafe,  the  difeafe  is  to  be 
treated  by  bloodletting,  and  by  fuch  other 
remedies  as  would  be  proper  in  an  idiopathic 
inflammation  of  the  fame  parts. 

DLXXXIV, 


368      P   R  A   C   T  I   C  E,    &c. 


DLXXXIV. 

Whether  the  tranflation  fo frequently  made 
from  the  extremities  to  the  kidneys,  is  to  be 
confidered  as  an  inftance  of  the  mifplaced 
gout,  feems,  as  we  have  faid  before,  uncertain  ; 
but  I  am  difpofed  to  think  it  fomething  differ- 
ent ;  and  therefore  am  of  opinion,  that,  in  the 
Nephralgia  Calculofa  produced  upon  this  oc- 
cafion,  the  remedies  of  inflammation  are  to  be 
employed  no  farther  than  they  may  be  other- 
wife  fometimes  necefTary  in  that  difeafe,  aris- 
ing from  other  caufes  than  the  gout. 


is^Ci 


,^a 

o-               „.c"2 

m 

Ik 

z  Wc^  ^ 

m^ 

1 

> 

lyi 

P 

1 

< 

_1 

,?+  + 

^^ 

^^ 

IU 

o 

■^CTJ^I:1  a% 

n 

_] 

f- 

QD 

IL 

=3 

i 

f 

o 
>- 

Q 
O 
h- 

IL 
Z 

o 

m 

o 

y=> 

U 

(J 

02 

U_l 

n 
z 

-£?^» 

— 

"~  JW 

o 

ft 

FIRST       LINES 


OF        THE 


PRACTICE  of  PHYSIC. 


-^5a£9G^©*f®*Ge«t 


B    Y 

WILLIAM    CULL  EN,    M.  D. 

Profefibr  of  the  Pra&ice  of  Phyfic  in  the  Univeriity  of  Edinburgh  j 
Firft  Phyiician  to  his  Britannic  Majefty  for  Scotland  j 
Fellow  of  the  Roya!  College  of  Phyficians  of  Edinburgh  j 

Of  the  Royal   Societies  of  London  and  of  Edinburgh, 
Of  the  Royal  Society  of  Medicine  of  Paris,  &c,  Scz.  &c; 

— ^»^mm^^<^^^—  - 


A      NEW       EDITION. 

From  the  Lait  British  Edition, 
Revised,  Corrected  and  Enlarged,  by  the  Author, 


IN      THREE      VOLUMES. 


Vol.   II 


printed  at  WO  RCE S TER,  Massachusetts, 
by    ISAIAH    THOMAS. 

Sold  at  his  Bookstore  in  WORCESTER,  and  by  him  and 
Company  in   BOSTON. 


MDCCXC. 


CONTENTS 
of   VOL.    II. 

PART  I. 

BOOK         III. 


Of  exanthema- 
ta, or  ERUPTIVE  FEVERS 

CHAP.         I. 

Of  the  Small  Pox 

C     H     A     P.         II. 

Of  the  Chicken  Pox 

CHAP.         III. 

Of  the  Measles         -  — 

CHAP.       iv-; 

Of  the  Scarlet  Fever 


Page 


35 


44 


46 


55, 


G  H  A  P. 


viii  CONTENTS. 

Page 

CHAP.         V. 

Of  the   P  L  A  G  U  E  -  -  -  64 

Seel;.   I.    Of  the  Phenomena   of    the 
Plague  -  64 

$s&.  II.    Of  the    Prevention   of   the 
Plague  6j 

Seel;.  III.   Of  the  Cure  of  the  Plague       74 

C     H     A     P.         VI. 

Of  Erysipelas,  or  St.  Anthony's  Fire        78 

CHAP.  VIL 

Of  the  Miliary  Fever         -         -         86 

C     H     A     P.       VIII. 

Of  the  remaining  Exanthemata  : 
Urticaria,  Pemphigus,  and  Aph- 
tha -  -  -  97 

BOOK         IV. 
02   HEMORRHAGES  -  ioo 

CHAP. 


CONTENTS.  ix 

Page 

CHAP.         I. 

Of  Hemorrhagy  in  general         -  100 

Se&.  I.  Of  the  Phenomena  of  Hemor- 
rhagy -  102 

Se&.  II.  Of  the  Proximate  Caufe  of 
Hemorrhagy  -         -         -  104 

Se£L  III.     Of  the  Remote  Caufes   of 
Hemorrhagy  -  -  124 

Se&.  IV.   Of  the  Cure  of  Hemorrhagy    126 

CHAP.        II. 

Of  the   Ep  1  st  ax  is,  or  Hemorrhagy  of 
the  Nofe  -  -  -  14a 

CHAP.         III. 

Of  the   Hemoptysis,    or   Hemorrhagy 
from  the  Lungs         -  351 

Se&.  I.   Of  the  Phenomena  and  Caufes 
of  Hemoptyfis         -         -  -  151 

Se&,  II.  Of  the  Cure  of  Hemoptyfis       160 

CHAP, 


x  CONTENTS. 

Page 
CHAP.         IV. 

Of  the  Phthisis  Pulmonalis,  or  Con- 
fumption  of  the  Lungs         -        —  164 

Sect.  I.   Of  the  Phenomena  and  Caufes 
of  the  Phthifis  Pulmonalis         -  164 

Sea.  II1.   Of  the  Cure  of  Phthifis  193 

CHAP.         V. 

Of  the  He  mo  rr  ho  is,  or  of  the  Hemor- 
rhoidal Swelling  and  Flux  -  207 

Se£L  I.   Of  the  Phenomena  and  Caufes 
of  the  Hemorrhois  -  207  - 

Seel.  II.  Of  the  Cure  of  Hemorrhoidal 
Affections  —  ":  -  218 

BOOK  IV. 

CHAP.         VI. 

0/Me  Menorrhagia,  or  the  Immod- 
erate Flow  of  the  Menfes  -  228 

CHAP.         VII. 

Of  the  Leucorrhoea,  Fluor  Albus,  or 

Whites  -  -  -  237 

CHAP. 


CONTENTS.  xi 

Page 

CHAP.         VIII. 

>0f  the  Amenorrhoea,  or  Interruption 

of  the  Menjirnal  Flux  -  242 

CHAP.         IX. 

^/Symptomatic  Hemorrhages        253 

Se&.  I.  Of  the  He  mate  me  sis,  or 
Vomiting  of  Blood  -  254 

Se&.  II.  Of  the  Hematuria,  or  the 
Voiding  of  Blood  from  the  Urinary 
Pa f age  -  -  264 

BOOK         V. 

of  PROFLUVIA,  or  FLUXES  with 
PYREXIA  -  -  273 

CHAP.         I. 

Of  the  Catarrh  -  -  275 

CHAP.         II. 

Of  the  Dysentery  -  -         287 

PART         II. 

of  NEUROSES,  or  NERVOUS  DIS- 
EASES «  -  301 

BOOK 


xii  CONTENTS. 

Page 

BOOK         I. 

of    COMATA,    or    the    LOSS   of 
VOLUNTARY  MOTIONS  303 

CHAP.         I. 

Of  Apoplexy  -  -  304 

CHAP.  II. 

Of  Palsy  -  -  333 

BOOK         II. 

of    ADYNAMIC,    or    DISEASES 

CONSISTING    IN    A   WEAKNESS   OR 

LOSS  of  MOTION  in  either 
the  VITAL  or  NATURAL 
FUNCTIONS  -         ,  -  350 

CHAP.         L 
Of Syn cope,  or  Fainting  -  350 

CHAP.         IL 

Of  Dy  sp  ep  si  a,  or  Indigejlion.         -         363 

CHAP.         III. 

Of  Hypochondriasis,  or  the  Hypo- 
chondriac Ajft&ion>  commonly  called 
Vapours  or  Low  Spirits  -  382 

FIRST 


FIRST      LINES 

OF        THE 

PRACTICE    of    PHYSIC. 

B     O     O     K  III. 

of     EXANTHEMATA,      or 
ERUPTIVE      FEVERS. 

DLXXXV. 


HE   difeafes  compreliendedi 
under  this  title,  which  make 
the  third    Order  of  Pyrex- 
iae   in    our    Nofology,    are 
in  general  fuch  as  do  not  a- 
rife  but  upon  occafion  of  a 
TWf'^WP    *    fpecific  contagion   applied, 
which  firft  produces  fever,  and  afterwards  an 
Vol.   II.  B  eruption 


14  PRACTICE 

eruption  upon  the  furface  of  the  body  ;  and 
which  difeafes,  for  the  mod  part,  alTecl  per- 
fons  but  once  in  the  courfe  of  their  lives. 

DLXXXVI. 

Whether  the  character  of  the  Order  may- 
be thus  limited,  or  if  the  Order  may  be  al- 
lowed to  comprehend  alfo  the  eruptive  fevers 
produced  hy  a  matter  generated  in  the  body 
itfelf,  and  likewife  thofe  cafes  of  eruption 
which  do  not  depend  upon  contagion,  or  up- 
on a  matter  generated  before  the  fever,  but 
upon  a  matter  generated  in  the  courfe  of  the 
fever,  I  am  not  ready  to  determine.  Of  the 
difeafes  enumerated  by  the  Nofologifts  as 
Exanthemata,  there  are  certainly  three  differ- 
ent kinds,  which  may  be  difiinguifhed  by  the 
circumftances  mentioned  in  this  and  the  pre- 
ceding paragraph.  Of  the  fixil  kind  are  the 
Small  Pox,  the  Chicken  Pox,  the  Meafles, 
the  Scarlet  Fever,  and  the  Plague.  Of  the 
fecond  kind  feems  to  be  the  Eryfipelas  ;  and 
of  the  third  kind  I  judge  the  Miliaria  and 
Petechia  to  be.  But  as  I  am  not  fufEciently 
confident  in  the  facts  which  fhould  fupport 
thefe  diilinclions,  or  which  would  enable  us 
to  apply  them  in  all  cafes  ;  I  go  on  in  this 
book  to  treat  of  almofl  all  the  exanthemata 
enumerated  by  preceding  Nofologifts,  with 
only  fome  difference  in  the  arrangement  from 
what  it  was  in  my  former  editions. 

CHAP, 


OF       P  H  Y  S  I  C.  tji 


CHAP, 


the    SMALL     POX, 


DLXXXVIL 

1  HE  fmall  pcx  k  a  difeafe 
arifmg  from  a  contagion  of  a  fpecific  nature^ 
which  firft  produces  a'fever,  and  on  the  third  or 


i  y  —  — 

fourth  day  thereof  produces  an  eruption  of 
fmall  red  pimples.  Thefe  are  afterwards  forrru 
ed  into  pultules,  containing  a  matter,  which, 
in  the  courfe  of  eight  days  from  the  time  of 
the  eruption,  is  changed  into  pus.  After  thisa 
the  matter  dries,  and  falls  off  in  cr-ufts. 

DLXXXVIIL 

This  is  a  general  idea  of  the  difeafe  ;  but 
there  are  two  particular  forms  or  varieties  of 
it,  well  known  under  the  appellations  of  the 
DiJlinEl  and  ConJluentt  which  require  to  be 
fpecially  defcribed. 

B  8  DLXXX1X, 


i6  PRACTICE 


DLXXXIX. 

In  the  former,  or  the  didincl  fmall  pox,  the 
eruptive  fever  is  moderate,  and  appears  to  be 
evidently  of  the  inflammatory  kind,  or  what 
we  name  a  Synocha.  It  generally  comes  on 
about  mid  day,  with  fome  fymptoms  of  a  cold 
flage,  and  commonly  with  a  considerable  lan- 
guor and  drowfinefs.  A  hot  flage  is  foon 
formed,  and  becomes  more  confiderable  on 
the  fecond  and  third  days.  During  this 
courfe,  children  are  liable  to  frequent  ftartings 
from  their  Cumbers  ;  and  adults,  if  they  are 
kept  c^ed,  are  difpofed  to  much  fweating. 
On  the  third  day,  children  are  fometimes  af- 
fected with  one  or  two  epileptic  fits.  To- 
wards  the  end  of  the  third  day,  the  eruption 
commonly  appears,  and  gradually  increafes 
during  the  fourth  ;  appearing  firft  upon  the 
face,  and  fuccefhvely  on  the  inferior  parts,  fo 
as  to  be  completed  over  the  whole  body  on 
the  fifth  day. 

From  the  third  day  the  fever  abates  »,  and 
againfl  the  fifth  it  entirely  ceafes.  The  erup- 
tion appears  firft  in  frnall  red  fpots,  hardly 
eminent,  but  by  degrees  rifing  into  pimples. 
Thefe  are  generally  upon  the  face  in  fmall 
number  ;  but  even  when  more  numerous,  they 
are  feparate  and  diflincl:  from  one  another. 
On  the  fifth  or  fixth  day,  a  fmall  veficle,  con- 
taining an  almoft  colourlefs  or  whey  coloured 
fluid,   appears  upon  the  top  of  each  pimple. 

For 


OF       PHYSIC.  17 

For  two  days,  thefe  veficles  increafe  in  breadth 
only,  and  there  is  a  fmall  hollow  pit  in  their 
middle  ;  fo  that  it  is  only  againfl  the  eighth 
day  that  they  are  raifed  into  fpheroidical  puf- 
tules. 

Thefe  veficles  or  puftules,  from  their  firft 
formation,  continue  to  be  furrounded  with  an 
exaclly  circular  inflamed  margin,  which,  when 
the  puftules  are  numerous,  diflufes  fome  in- 
flammation over  the  neighbouring  (kin,  fo  as 
to  give  fomewhat  of  a  damafk  rofe  colour  to 
the  fpaces  between  the  puftules.  As  the  puf- 
tules  increafe  in  fize,  if  they  be  numerous  on 
the  face,  againfl  the  eighth  day  the  whole  of 
the  face  becomes  confiderably  fwelled  ;  and 
in  particular,  the  eyelids  are  fo  much  fwelled 
as  entirely  to  fliut  the  eyes. 

As  the  difeafe  thus  proceeds,  the  matter  in 
the  puftules  becomes  by  degrees  more  opaque 
and  white,  and  at  length  of  a  yellowiih  colour. 
On  the  eleventh  day,  the  fwelling  of  the  face 
is  abated,  and  the  puftules  feem  quite  full. 
On  the  top  of  each  a  darker  fpot  appears  ; 
and  at  this  place  the  puftule,  on  the  eleventh 
day,  or  foon  after,  is  fpontaneou fiy  broken, 
and  a  portion  of  the  matter  oozes  out  ;  in 
confequence  of  which,  the  puftule  is  ihrivel- 
led,  and  fubfides  •  while  the  matter  oozing  out 
dries,  and  forms  a  cruft  upon  its  furface. 
Sometimes  a  little  only  of  the  matter  oozes 
out  ;  and  what  remains  in  the  puftule  becomes 
thick,  and  even  hard.  After  fome  days,  both 
the  crafts  and  the  hardened  puftules  'fall  off", 
B  o  leaving 


i8  PRACTICE 

leaving  the  Ikin  which  they  covered  of  a  brown 
red  colour  ;  and  it  is  only  after  many  days 
that  the  ikin  in  thefe  places  refumes  its  nat- 
ural colour.  In  fome  cafes,  where  the  matter 
of  the  puflules  has  been  more  liquid^  the  cruris 
formed  by  it  are  later  in  falling  off,  and  the 
part  they  covered  buffer  fome  defquamation, 
which  leaves  in  it  a  fmali  pit  or  hollow. 

This  is  the  courfe  of  things  on  the  face  ; 
and  fucceili vely,  the  puilules  on  the  reft  of  the 
body  take  the  fame.  The  matter  of  the  puf- 
tules,  on  the  arms  and  hands,  is  frequently 
abforbed  ;  fo  that,  at  the  height  of  the  difeafe, 
thefe  puflules  appear  as  empty  veficles.  On 
the  tenth  and  eleventh  days,  as  the  fwelling 
of  the  face  fubfides,  a  fwelling  arifes  in  the 
hands  and  feet  ;  but  which,  again,  fubSdes  as 
the  puflules  come  to  maturity. 

When  the  puilules  on  the  face  are  nume- 
rous, fome  degree  of  pyrexia  appears  on  the 
tenth  and  eleventh  days,  but  difappears  again- 
after  the  puilules  are  fully  ripened  ;  or  per- 
haps remains  in  a  very  flight  degree  till  the 
puilules  on  the  feet  have  frnimed  their  courfe. 
It  is  feldom  that  in  the  diRintl  fmall  pox  the 
fever  continues  longer. 

When  the  puilules  on  the  face  are  nume- 
rous, fome  uneafinefs  in  the  throat,  with  a 
hoarfenefs  of  the  voice,  comes  on  upon  the 
iixth  or  feventh  day,  and  a  thin  liquid  is 
poured  out  from  the  mouth.  Thefe  fymp- 
toms  increafe  with  the  fwelling  of  the  face  ; 
and  the  !i  quids  of  the  mouth  and  throat  be- 
coming 


OF       PHYSIC.  19 

coming  thicker,  are  more  difficultly  thrown 
out.  -  There  is,  at  the  fame  time,  lome  diffi- 
culty of  {wallowing  ;  fo  that  liquids  taken  in 
to  be  fwallowed  are  frequently  rejected,  or 
thrown  out  by  the  nofe.  But  all  thefe  affec- 
tions of  the  fauces  abate  as  the  fwelling  of  the 
face  fubfides* 

DXC. 

In  the  other  form  of  fmall  pox,  or  what  is 
called  the  Confluent,  the  courfe  of  the  difeafe 
is,  in  general,,  the  fame  with  that  we  have  de- 
scribed ;  but  the  fymptoms  of  every  flage  are 
more  violent,  and  feveral  of  the  circum fiances 
are  different. 

In  particular,  the  eruptive  fever  is  more 
violent ;  the  pulfe  is  more  frequent  and  more 
contracted,  approaching  to  that  ftate  of  pulfe 
which  is  found  in  the  typhus  •  the  coma  is 
more  confiderable  ;.  and  there  is  frequently  a 
delirium.  Vomiting",  alfo,  is  a  common  fymrj- 
torn,  efpecially  at  the  coming  on  of  the  difeafe. 
In  very  young  infants,  epileptic  fits  are  fome- 
times  frequent  on  the  firfl  days  of  the  difeafe, 
and  fome  times  prove  fatal  before  any  eruption 
appears  ;  or  they  ulher  in  a  very  confluent, 
and  putrid  fmall  pox. 

DXCI.. 

The  eruption  appears  more  early  on  the  third 

day y  and  it  is  frequently  preceded  or  accom- 

B  4,  ganiedl 


so  PRACTICE 

panied  with  an  erysipelatous  efflorefcence. 
Sometimes  the  eruption  appears  in  clufters, 
like  that  of  the  meafles.  When  the  eruption 
is  completed,  the  pimples  are  always  more  nu- 
merous upon  the  face,  and  at  the  fame  time 
fmaller  and  lefs  eminent.  After  the  eruption, 
the  fever  fuffers  fome  remiffion,  but  never  goes 
off  entirely  ;  and,  after  the  fifth  or  fixthday, 
it  again  increafes,  and  continues  conhderable 
through  the  remaining  courfe  of  the  difeafe. 

The  velicles  formed  en  the  tops  of  the 
pimples  appear  (boner  i  and  while  they  in- 
creafe  in  breadth,  do  not  retain  a  circular,  but 
are  every  way  of  an  irregular  figure.  Many 
of  them  run  into  one  another,  infomuch  that 
very  often  the  face  is  covered  rather  with  one 
veficle  than  with  a  number  of  puftules.  The 
veficles,  fo  far  as  they  are  any  wife  feparated, 
do  not  arife  to  a  fpheroidical  form,  but  re- 
main flat,  and  fometimes  the  whole  of  the  face 
is  of  an  even  furface.  When  the  puftules  are 
in  any  meafure  feparated,  their  circumference 
is  not  bounded  by  an  inflamed  margin,  and 
the  part  of  the  fkin  that  is  free  from  puftules 
is  commonly  pale  and  flaccid. 

The  liquor  that  is  in  the  puftules  changes 
from  a  clear  to  an  opaque  appearance,  and  be- 
comes whitifh  or  brownifh,  but  never  acquires 
the  yellow  colour  and  thick  confidence  that 
appear  in  the  dillinc!  final!  pox. 


DXCII 


OF       PHYSIC.  21 


DXCII. 

The  fwelling  of  the  face  which  attends  the 
diftincl:  fmall  pox,  when  they  are  numerous, 
and  almoft  then  only,  always  attends  the  con- 
fluent, comes  on  more  early,  and  arifes  to  a 
greater  degree  •-  but  abates  on  the  tenth  day, 
and  on  the  eleventh  (till  more.  At  this  time 
the  puftules  or  veficles  break,  and  fhrivelling 
pour  out  a  liquor  that  is  formed  into  brown 
or  black  emits,  which  do  not  fall  off  for  many 
d'ays  after.  Thoie  of  the  face,  in  falling  off, 
leave  the  parts  they  cover  fubject  to  a  del- 
quamation,  which  pretty  certainly  produces 
pittings. 

On  the  other  parts  of  the  body,  the  puftules 
of  the  confluent  fmall  pox  are  more  diftincl 
than  upon  the  face,  but  never  acquire  the  fame 
maturity  and  coniiftence  of  pus  as  in  the 
properly  diftincl;  kind. 

The  falivation  which  only  fometimes  at- 
tends the  diftincl:  fmall  pox,  very  corrftantly 
attends  the  confluent  ;  and  both  the  falivation 
and  the  affeclion  of  the  fauces  abovemen- 
tioned  are,  efpecially  in  adults,  in  a  higher 
degree.  In  infants,  a  diarrhoea  comes  fre- 
quently in  place  of  the  falivation, 

In  tiie  confluent  fmall  pox,  there  is  often  a 
conliderable  putrefcency  of  the  fluids,  as  ap- 
pears from  petechias,  from  ferous  veficles,  un- 
der which  the  fkin  fhows  a  difpofition  to  gan- 
grene, and  from  bloody  urine  or  other  hem- 

Vol.   2,  JB  5  orrhagya 


22  PRACTICE 

orrhagy,   all  which   fymptoms  frequently  ac- 
company this  difeafe. 

In  the  confluent  fmall  pox,  the  fever,  which 
had  only  fuffered  a  remiliion  from  the  time  of 
eruption  to  that  of  maturation,  is  often,  at  or 
immediately  after  this  period,,  renewed  with 
confiderable  violence.  This  is  what  has  been 
called  the  Secondary  Fever ;  and  is,  in  differ- 
ent cafes,  of  various  duration  and  event. 

DXCIII. 

We  have  thus  endeavoured  to  defcribe  the 
various  circumftances  of  the  fmall  pox  ;  and 
from  the  difference  of  thefe  circumftances,  the 
event  of  the  difeafe  may  be  determined.  The 
whole  of  the  prognofis  may  be  nearly  com- 
prifed  in  the  following  propofitions. 

The  more  exactly  the  difeafe  retains  the 
form  of  the  diftincl  kind,  it  is  the  fafer  ;  and 
the  more  completely  the  difeafe  takes  the  form 
of  the  confluent  kind  it  is  the  more  dangerous. 

It  is  only  when  the  diftinct.  kind  mows  a 
great  number  of  puflules  on  the  face,  or  oth~ 
erwife,  by  fever  or  putrefcency,  approaches  to 
the  circumftances  of  the  confluent,  that  it  is 
attended  with  any  danger. 

In  the  confluent  fmall  pox  there  is  always 
danger  ;  and  this  is  always  more  confiderable 
and  cei'tain,  according  as  the  fever  is  more  vi- 
olent and  permanent,  and  efpecially  as  the 
marks  and  fymptoms  of  putrefcency  are  more 
evident. 

When 


O  F       PH'YS'I  C.  23 

When  the  putrid  difpoiition  is  very  great,. 
the  difeafe  fometimes  proves  fatal  before  the 
eighth  day  ;  but  in  mod  cafes  it  is  on  the 
eleventh  that  death  happens,  and  fometimes  it 
is  put  ofF  till  the  fourteenth  or  feventeenth 
day.  ^ 

Though  the  fmall  pox  mould  not  be  im- 
mediately fatal,  the  more  violent  kinds  are 
often  followed  by  a  morbid  flate  of  the  body, 
of  various  kind  and  event.  Thefe  conse- 
quences, as  I  judge,  may  be  imputed  fome- 
times to  an  acrid  matter  produced  by  the  pre- 
ceding difeafe,  and  depofited  in  different 
parts  ;  and  fometimes  to  an  inflammatory  di~ 
athefis  produced,  and  determined  to  particu- 
lar parts  of  the  body- 


DXCIV. 


It  is,  I  think  agreed  among  practitioners^ 
that,  in  the  different  cafes  of  fmall  pox,  the 
difference  chiefly  depends  upon  the  appear- 
ance of  diffract  or  confluent  ;  and,  from  the 
above  defcription  of  thefe  kinds,  it  will  ap- 
pear, that  they  chiefly  differ  in  the  period  of 
the  eruption,  in  the  number  of  puftules 
produced,  in  the  form  of  the  puftules,  in  the 
flate  of  the  matter  contained  in  them,  in  the 
continuance  of  the  fever,  and  laftly  in  the 
danger  of  the  difeafe. 

B  6  DXCV, 


H  PRACTICE 


DXCV. 

Upon  inquiring  into  the  caufes  of  thefe 
differences,  we  might  readily  fufpecl;,  that 
they  depended  upon  a  difference  of  the  con- 
tagion producing  the  difeafe.  This,  howev- 
er, is  not  probable  ;  for  there  are  innumerable 
inftances  of  the  contagion,  arifing  from  a  per- 
fon  labouring  under  the  fmall  pox  of  the  dif- 
tinct.  kind,  producing  the  confluent  ;  and  on 
the  contrary.  Since  the  practice  of  inocula- 
tion became  frequent,  we  have  known  the 
fame  variolous  matter  produce  in  one  perfon 
the  diflinci:,  and  in  another  the  confluent 
fmall  pox.  It  is  therefore  highly  probable, 
that  the  difference  of  the  fmall  pox  does  not 
depend  upon  any  difference  of  the  contagion, 
but  upon  fome  difference  in  the  flate  of  the 
perfons  to  whom  it  is  applied,  or  in  the  flate 
of  certain  circumflances  concurring  with  the 
application  of  the  contagion. 

DXCVI. 

To  find  out  wherein  the  difference  in  the 
flate  of  the  perfons  to  whom  the  contagion  of 
the  fmall  pox  is  applied  confifls,  I  obferve, 
that  the  difference  between  the  diftincT:  and 
confluent  fmall  pox  confifls  efpecially  in  the 
number^of  puflules  produced  ;  which,  in  the 
diflinci,  are  generally  few  ;  in  the  confluent, 
always  many.     If,  therefore,  we  fhall  be  able 

to 


O  F     P  H  Y  S  I  C.  25 

to  difcover  what,  in  the  flate  of  different  per- 
fons, can  give  occafion  to  more  or  fewer  puf- 
tules,  we  mall  probably  be  able  to  account  for 
all  the  other  differences  of  the  diftinct  and 
confluent  fmall  pox. 

DXCVII. 

It  is  evident,  that  the  contagion  of  the 
fmall  pox  is  a  ferment  with  refpecl:  tjo  the  hu- 
man fluids,  and  aflimilates  a  great  part  of 
them  to  its  own  nature  ;  and  it  is  probable, 
that  the  quantity  thus  affimilated,  is,,  in  pro- 
portion to  the  bulk  of  their  feveral  bodies,  near- 
ly the  fam  .  in  different  perfons.  This  quan- 
tity paffes  again  out  of  the  body,  partly  by  in- 
fenfible  perfpiration,  and  partly  by  being  de- 
posited in  puflules  ;  but  if  the  quantities  gen- 
erated be  nearly  equal,  the  quantities  pairing 
out  of  the  body  by  the  two  ways  mentioned 
are  very  unequal  in  different  perfons  j  and 
therefore,  if  we  can  explain  the  caufes  which 
determine  more  to  pafs  by  the  one  way  than 
by  the  other,  we  may  thereby  difcover  the 
caufes  which  give  occafion  to  more  puflules  in 
one  perfon  than  in  another. 

DXCVIII. 

The  caufes  which  determine  more  of  the 
variolous  matter  to  pafs  by  perfpiration,  or  to 
form  puflules,  are  probably  certain  circum- 
flances  of  the  fkin,  that  determine  more  or 

lefs 


aS  PRACTICE 

lefs  of  the  variolous  matter  to  flick  in  it,  or 
to  pafs  freely  through  it. 

DXCIX. 

The  circumflance  of  the  fkin,  which  feems 
to  determine  the  variolous  matter  to  flick  in 
it,  is  a  certain  flate  of  inflammation,  depend- 
ing much  upon  the  heat  of  it  :  Thus  we  have 
many  inflances  of  parts  of  the  body,  from  be- 
ing more  heated,  having  a  greater  number  of 
puflules  than  other  parts.  In  the  prefent 
practice  of  inoculation,  in  which  few  puflules 
are  produced,  much  feems  to  be  owing  to  the 
care  that  is  taken  to  keep  the  fkin  cool.. 
Parts  covered  with  plaflers,  efpecially  with 
thofe  of  a  flimulant  kind,  have  more  puflules 
than  other  parts.  Further,  certain  circum- 
fiances,  fuch  as  adult  age,  and  full  living,  de- 
termining to  a  phlogiflic  diathefis,  feem  to 
produce  a  greater  number  of  puflules  ;  while 
the  contrary  circumflances.  have  contrary  ef- 
fects, 

DC. 

It  is  therefore  probable,  that  an  inflamma- 
tory flate  of  the  whole  fyflem,  and  more  par- 
ticularly of  the  fkin,  gives  occafion  to  a  great- 
er number  of  puflules  ;  and  the  caufes  of  this 
may  likewife  produce  mofl  of  the  other  cir- 
cumflances of  the  confluent  fmall  pox  ;  fuch 
as  the  period  of  eruption  ;  the  continuance  of 

the 


OF       PHYSIC.  27 

the  fever  ;  the  effufion  of  a  more  putrescent 
matter,  and  lefs  fit  to  be  converted  into  pus  ;. 
and  what  arifes  from  thence,  the  form  and  oth- 
er circumftances  of  the  puitules. 

BCL 

Having  thus  attempted  to  account  for  the 
chief  difference  which  occurs  in  the  flate  of 
the  fmall  pox,  we  fhall  now  try  the  truth  of 
our  doctrine,  by  its  application  to  practice. 

DCIL 

In  coniidering  the  practice,  we  view  it  flrft^ 
In  general,  as  fuited  to  render  the  difeafe  more: 
generally  benign  and  fafe,  and  this  by  the 
practice  of  inoculation. 

DCIII. 

It  is  not  neceffary  here  to  defcribe  the  op- 
eration of  inoculating  ;  and  what  we  name  the 
practice  of  inoculation,  comprehends  all  the 
feveral  meafures  which  precede  or  follow  that 
operation,  and  are  fuppofed  to  produce  its 
falutary  effects. 

Thefe  meafures  are  chiefly  the  following. 

1.  The  choofing  for  the  fubject  of  inocu- 
lation perfons  otherwife  free  from  difeafe,  and 
not  liable,  from  their  age  or  other  circum- 
ftances, to  any  incidental  difeafe. 

a.  The 


*S  PRACTICE 

2.  The  choofing  a  perfon  at  the  time  of 
life  mofl  favourable  to  a  mild  difeafe. 

3.  The  choofing  for  the  practice  a  feafon 
the  mofl  conducive  to  the  mildneis  of  the 
difeafe. 

4.  The  preparing  the  perfon  to  be  inocu- 
lated, by  abftinence  from  animal  food  forfome 
time  before  inoculation. 

5.  The  preparing  the  perfon  by  courfes  of 
mercurial  and  antimonial  medicines. 

6.  The  taking  care,  at  the  time  of  inocula- 
tion, to  avoid  cold,  intemperance,  fear,  or  oth- 
er circumftances  which  might  aggravate  the 
future  difeafe. 

7.  After  thefe  preparations  and  precautions, 
the  choofing  a  fit  matter  to  be  employed  in 
inoculation,  by  taking  it  from  a  perfon  of  a 
found  conflitution,  and  free  from  any  difeafe 
or  fufpicion  of  it ;  by  taking  it  from  a  perfon 
who  has  had  the  fmall  pox  of  the  mofl  be- 
nign kind  ;  and,  laflly,  by  taking  the  matter 
from  fuch  perfons,  as  foon  as  it  has  appeared 
in  the  puflules,  either  in  the  part  inoculated, 
or  on  other  parts  of  the  body. 

8.  The  introducing,  by  inoculation,  but  a 
fmall  portion  of  the  contagious  matter. 

9.  After  inoculation,  the  continuing  the 
vegetable  diet,  as  well  as  the  employment  of 
mercurial  and  antimonial  medicines  ;  and,  at 
the  fame  time,  frequently  employing  purga- 
tives. 

10.  Both  before  and  after  inoculation,  tak- 
ing care  to  avoid  external  heat,  either  from 

the 


OF     PHYSIC.  2.9 

the* fun,  artificial  fires,  warm  chambers,  much 
clothing,  or  being  much  in  bed  ;  and,  on  the 
contrary,  expofing  the  perfon  to  a  free  and 
cool  air. 

11.  Upon  the  appearance  of  the  eruptive  fe- 
ver, the  rendering  that  moderate  by  the  em- 
ployment of  purgatives  ;  by  the  uf£  of  cooling 
and  antifeptic  acids  ;  and  efpecially  by  expof- 
ing the  perfon  frequently  to  a  cool  and  even  a 
cold  air,  at  the  fame  time  giving  freely  of  cold 
drink. 

12.  After  the  eruption,  the  continuing  the 
application  of  cold  air,  and  the  ufe  of  purga- 
tives, during  the  courfe  of  the  difeafe,  till  the 
puflules  are  fully  ripened. 

DCIV. 

Thefe  are  the  meafures  propofed  and  prac- 
tifed  in  the  latefl  and  moft  improved  (late  of 
inoculation  ;  and  the  advantages  obtained  by 
the  whole  of  the  praclice,  or  at  leaft  by  moil 
of  the  meafures  abovementioned,  are  now  as- 
certained by  a  long  experience  to  amount  to 
this,  That,  in  ninety  nine  cafes  of  the  hun- 
dred, inoculation  gives  a  diftinct  fmall  pox 
only,  and  that  arfo  very  generally  of  the  mild- 
eft  form  ;  but  it  will  flill  be  ufeful,  for  the 
proper  conduct  of  inoculation,  to  confider  the 
importance  and  utility  of  the  feveral  meafures 
abovementioned,  that  we  may  thereby  more 
exactly  determine  upon  what  the  advantages 
of  inoculation  more  certainly  depend. 

DCV4 


30  P    R    A    C    T    I    C    E 


DCV. 

As  the  common  infection  may  often  feize 
perfons  labouring  under  another  difeafe, 
which  may  render  the  fmall  pox  more  violent,, 
it  is  obvious  that  inoculation  muft  have  a 
great  advantage,  by  avoiding  fuch  concur- 
rence. But  as  the  avoiding  fuch  concurrence 
may  often,  in  the  mean  while,  leave  perfons 
expofed  to  the  common  infection,  it  merits 
inquiry,  whether  every  difeafed  ftate  mould 
reftrain  from  the  practice  of  inoculation,  or 
what  are  the  particular  difeafes  that  mould  do 
fo.  This  is  not  yet  furEciently  afcertained  by 
obfervation ;  and  we  have  frequently  remark- 
ed, that  the  fmall  pox  have  often  occurred 
with  a  difeafed  ftate  of  the  body,  without  be- 
ing thereby  rendered  more  violent.  In  par- 
ticular, we  have  obferved,  that  a  fcrophulous 
habit,,  or  even  the  prefence  of  fcrophula,  did 
not  render  the  fmall  pox  more  violent  ;  and 
we  have  obferved  alfo,  that  feveral  difeafes  of 
the  fkin  are  equally  innocent.  I  am  of  opin- 
ion, that  they  are  the  difeafes  of  the  febrile 
kind,  or  ailments  ready  to  induce  or  aggravate 
a  febrile  ftate,  that  efpecially  give  the  concur- 
rence which  is  moil  dangerous  with  the  fmall 
pox.  I  dare  not  attempt  a*ny  general  rules  ; 
but  I  am  difpofed  to  maintain,  that  though  a 
perfon  be  in  a  difeafed  ftate,  if  that  ftate  be  of 
uncertain  nature  and  effect,  and  at  the  fame 
time  the  fmall  pox  be  exceedingly  rife,  fo  as 


OF       PHYSIC.  3* 

to  render  it  extremely  difficult  to  guard  againft 
the  common  infection,  it  will  always  be  fafer 
to  give  the  fmall  pox  by  inoculation,  than  to 
leave  the  perfon  to  take  them  by  the  common 
infection, 

BCVL 

Though  inoculation  has  been  pra&ifed  with 
fafety  upon  perfons  of  all  ages  ;  yet,  from  what 
has  acluaily  occurred  in  the  cafes  of  common 
infeclion,  and  from  feveral  other  confedera- 
tions, there  is  reaion  to  conclude,  that  adults 
are  more  liable  to  a  violent  difeafe  than  perfon3 
of  younger  years.  At  the  fame  time,  it  is  ob- 
ferved,  that  children,  in  the  time  of  their  firfi 
dentition,,  are  liable,  from  this  irritation,  to 
have  the  fmall  pox  rendered  more  violent ; 
and  that  infants,  before  the  time  of  dentition, 
upon  receiving  the  contagion  of  the  fmall  pox, 
are  liable  to  be  affecled  with  epileptic  fits, 
which  frequently  prove  fatal.  It  is  therefore, 
upon  the  whole,  evident,  that  though  circum- 
fiances  may  admit,  and  even  render  inocula- 
tion at  any  age  proper  ;  yet,,  for  the  moll  part, 
it  will  be  full  more  advifable  to  choofe  per- 
fons at  an  age,  after  the  firfl  dentition  is  over^ 
and  before  the  time  of  puberty. 

DCVII. 

Though  inoculation  has  been  pra&ifed 
with  fafety  at  every  feafon  of  the  year  ;  yet, 

as 


32  PRACTICE 

as  it  is  certain  that  the  cold  of  winter  may 
increafe  the  inflammatory,  and  the  heats  of 
fummer  increafe  the  putrefcent  date  of  the 
fmall  pox,  it  is  highly  probable  that  inocula- 
tion may  have  fome  advantage,  from  avoiding 
the  extremes  either  of  heat  or  cold. 

DCVIII. 

Although  the  original  temperament  and 
conftitutions  of  men  are  not  to  be  readily 
changed;  it  is  fufficiently  certain,  that  the 
conditions  of  the  human  body  may,  by  va- 
rious caufes,  in  many  refpects  be  occafionally 
very  much  changed  ;  and  therefore,  as  the  ufe 
of  animal  food  may  increafe  both  the  inflam- 
matory and  putrefcent  ftate  of  the  human 
body,  fo  it  rauft  render  perfons,  on  receiving 
the  contagion  of  the  fmall  pox,  lefs  fecure  a- 
gainfl  a  violent  difeafe  ;  and,  therefore,  inoc- 
ulation may  derive  fome  advantage  from  ab- 
flinence  from  animal  food  for  fome  time  be- 
fore the  inoculation  is  performed  ;  but  I  am 
of  opinion,  that  a  longer  time  than  that  ufual- 
ly  prefcribed  may  be  often  neceffary  ;  and  I 
am  perfuaded,  that  the  Scottifh  mothers  who 
avoid  giving  their  children  animal  food  till 
they  are  pafl  the  fmall  pox,  render  this  difeafe 
in  them  of  a  milder  kind. 

DCIX. 

I  cannot  deny  that  mercurial  and  antimo- 
nial  medicines  may  have  fome  effect  in  deter- 
mining 


OF       PHYSIC.  33 

mining  to  a  more  free  perfpiration,  and  there- 
fore may  be  of  fome  ufe  in  preparing  a  per- 
ion  for  the  fmall  pox  ;  but  there  are  many  ob- 
fervations  which  render  me  doubtful  as  to 
their  effect.  The  quantity  of  both  thefe 
medicines,  particularly  of  the  antimony,  com- 
monly employed,  is  too  inconfiderable  to  pro- 
duce any  effect.  It  is  true,  that  the  mercuri- 
als have  often  been  employed  more  freely  ; 
but  even  their  falutary  effects  have  not  been 
evident,  and  their  mifchievous  effects  have 
fometimes  appeared.  I  doubt,  therefore, 
upon  the  whole,  if  inoculation  derives  any 
advantage  from  thefe  pretended  preparatory 
courfes  of  medicines. 

DCX. 

As  it  has  been  often  obferved,  in  the  cafe 
of  almoft  all  contagions,  that  cold,  intemper- 
ance, fear,  and  fome  other  circumftances, 
concurring  with  the  application  of  the  conta- 
gion, have  greatly  aggravated  the  future  did 
eafe,  fo  it  muft  be  the  fame  in  the  cafe  of  the 
fmall  pox  ;  and  it  is  undoubted,  that  inoc- 
ulation muft  derive  a  great,  and  perhaps  its 
principal,  advantage,  from  avoiding  the  con- 
currences abovementioned. 

DCXI. 

It  has  been  commonly  fuppofed,  f  hat  inoc- 
ulation has  derived  fome  advantage  from  the 

choice 


34  PRACTICE 

choice  of  the  matter  employed  in  it  ;  hut* 
from  what  has  been  cbferved  in  DXCV,  it 
muff  appear  very  doubtful  if  any  choice  be 
neceffary,  or  can  be  of  any  benefit,  in  deter- 
mining the  ilate  of  the  difeafe. 


DCXIL 


It  has  been  fuppofed  by  fome,  that  inoc'o* 
lation  has  an  advantage,  by  introducing  a 
fmall  portion  only  of  the  contagious  matter  • 
But  this  reds  upon  an  uncertain  foundation. 
It  is  not  known  what  quantity  is  introduced 
hy  the  common  infection,  and  it  may  be  a 
fmall  quantity  only.  Although  it  were  larg- 
er than  that  thrown  in  by  inoculation,  it  is 
not  afcertained  that  the  circumftance  of  quan- 
tity would  have  any  effect.  A  certain  quan- 
tity of  ferment  may  be  neceffary  to  excite  fer- 
mentation in  a  given  mafs  ;  but,  that  quantity 
given,  the  fermentation  and  afTimilation  are 
extended  to  the  whole  mafs  ;  and  we  do  not 
find  that  a  greater  quantity  than  is  jufl  necef- 
fary, either  increafes  the  activity  of  the  fer- 
mentation, or  more  certainly  fecures  the  af- 
Timilation of  the  whole.  In  the  cafe  of  the 
fmall  pox,  a  confiderable  difference  in  the 
quantity  of  contagious  matter  introduced,  has 
not  discovered  any  effect  in  modifying  the 
difeafe, 

DCXTIL 


OF       PHYSIC.  35 


DCXIII. 

Purging  has  the  effect  of  diminifhing  the 
.activity  of  the  fanguiferous  fyflem,  and  of 
obviating  its  inflammatory  flate.  It  is  there- 
fore probable,  that  the  frequent  ufe  of  cool- 
ing purgatives  is  a  practice  attending  inocula- 
tion which  may  be  of  confiderable  advantage  ; 
and,  probably,  it  is  alfo  ufeful  by  diminifhing 
the  determination  to  the  fkin.  It  appears  to 
me,  that  mercurials  and  antimonials,  as  they 
are  commonly  managed,  are  ufeful  only  as 
they  make  a  part  of  the  purging  courfe. 

DCXIV. 

It  is  probable,  that  the  flate  of  the  fmall 
pox  depends  very  much  upon  the  Mate  of  the 
eruptive  fever,  and  particularly  upon  mode- 
rating the  inflammatory  flate  of  the  fkin  ;  and, 
therefore,  it  is  probable,  that  the  meafures 
taken  for  moderating  the  eruptive  fever  and 
inflammatory  flate  of  the  fkin,  afford  the 
greatefl  improvement  which  has  been  made  in 
the  practice  of  inoculation.  The  tendency  of 
purging,  and  the  ufe  of  acids,  for  this  pur- 
pofe,  is  fufficiently  obvious  ;  and  upon  the 
fame  grounds,  we  mould  fuppofe  that  blood-- 
letting might  be  ufeful ;  but  probably  this  has 
been  omitted,  for  the  fame  reafon  that  perhaps 
might  have  led  to  the  omiflion  of  other  reme- 
dies alfo  ;  which  is,  that  we   have  found  a 

more 


&6  PRACTICE 

more  powerful  and  effectual  one  in  the  appli- 
cation of  cold  air,  and  the  ufe  of  cold  drink. 
Whatever  doubts  or  difficulties  our  theory- 
might  prefent  to  us  on  this  Subject,  they  may 
be  entirely  neglected,  as  the  practice  of  In- 
doftan  had  long  ago,  and  the  practice  of  this 
country  has  lately,  by  a  large  and  repeated  ex- 
perience, ascertained  the  fafety  and  efficacy  of 
this  remedy  ;  and  as  it  may  and  can  be  more 
certainly  employed  with  the  practice  of  inoc- 
ulation, than  it  can  be  in  cafes  of  common  in- 
fection, it  mull  give  a  fingular  advantage  to 
the  former. 


DCXV. 

After  the  eruption,  when  a  few  pimples 
only  have  appeared  on  the  face,  the  continuing 
the  application  of  cold  air,  and  the  employ- 
ment of  purgatives,  has  indeed  been  the  prac- 
tice of  many  inoculators  ;  but,  I  think,  thefe 
practices  cannot  be  faid  to  give  any  peculiar 
advantages  to  inoculation  ;  for  when  the  ftate 
of  the  eruption  is  determined,  when  the  num- 
ber of  puftules  is  very  fmall,  and  the  fever  has 
entirely  ceafed,  I  hold  the  fafety  of  the  difeafe 
to  be  absolutely  afcertained,  and  the  further 
ufe  of  remedies  entirely  Superfluous.  In  fuch 
cafes,  I  judge  the  ufe  of  purgatives  to  be  not 
only  unneceffary,  but  that  they  may  be  often 
hurtful. 

DCXVI. 


OF       PHYSIC.  37 

DCXVI. 

I  have  thus  confidered  the  feveral  circum- 
fiances  and  practices  accompanying  inocula- 
tion, and  have  endeavoured  to  afcertain  the 
utility  and  importance  of  each.  Upon  the 
whole,  I  hope  I  have  fufficiently  afcertained 
the  general  utility  and  great  advantage  of  this 
practice,  efpecially  confiding  in  this,  that  if 
certain  precautions,  preparations,  and  reme- 
dies, are  of  importance,  all  of  them  can  be 
employed  with  more  certainty  in  the  practice 
of  inoculation  than  in  the  cafe  of  common 
infection. 

It  remains  now  that  I  mould  offer  fome  re- 
marks on  the  conduct  of  the  frnall  pox,  as  re- 
ceived by  infection,  or  even  when,  after  in- 
oculation, the  fymptoms  fhall  prove  violent. 
The  latter  fometimes  happens,  although  ev- 
ery precaution  and  remedy  have  been  em- 
ployed. The  caufe  of  this  is  not  well  known  ; 
but  it  appears  to  me  to  be  commonly  owing 
to  a  difpofition  of  the  fluids  to  putrefcency. 
But,  however  this  may  be,  it  will  appear,  that, 
not  only  in  the  cafe  of  common  infection,  but 
even' in  that  of  inoculation,  there  may  be  oc- 
cafion  for  fludying  the  conduct  of  this  difeafe, 
in  all  its  poffible  varying  circumftances. 

DCXVIL 

When,  from  the  prevailing  of  fmall  pox  as 

an  epidemic,   and  more  efpeciallv  when  it  is 

Vol.  II.  C  known 


38  PRACTICE 

known  that  a  perfon  not  formerly  affe&ed 
with  the  difeafe  has  been  expofed  to  the  in- 
fection, if  fuch  perfon  mould  be  feized  with 
the  fymptoms  of  fever,  there  can  be  little 
doubt  of  its  being  an  attack  of  the  fmall  pox  ; 
and  therefore  he  is  to  be  treated  in  every  re- 
fpecl  as  if  the  difeafe  had  been  received  by  in- 
oculation. He  is  to  be  freely  expofed  to  a 
cool  air,  to  be  purged,  and  to  have  cooling 
acids  given  liberally. 

DCXVIIL 

If  thefe  meafures  moderate  the  fever,  noth- 
ing more  is  neceflary  :  But  if  the  nature  of 
the  fever  attacking  a  perfon  be  uncertain  ;  or, 
if,  with  fufpicions  of  the  fmall  pox,  the  fymp- 
toms of  the  fever  be  violent  ;  or  even  if, 
knowing  the  difeafe  to  be  fmall  pox,  the  meaf- 
ures mentioned  DXCVII,  mall  not  mode- 
rate the  fever  fufficiently  ;  it  will  be  proper 
to  let  fome  blood  ;  and  this  will  be  more  ef- 
pecially  proper,  if  the  perfon  be  an  adult,  of 
a  plethoric  habit,  and  accuftomed  to  full  liv^ 

DCXIX. 

In  the  fame  circumflances,  we  judge  it  will 
be  always  proper  to  give  a  vomit,  as  ufeful  in 
the  commencement  of  ail  fevers,  and  more 
efpecially  in  this,  where  a  determination  to 

the 


OF      PHYSIC.  39 

the  flomach  appears  from  pain  and  fponta- 
neous  vomiting. 


DCXX. 

It  frequently  happens,  efpecially  in  infants, 
that,  during  the  eruptive  fever  of  the  fmall 
pox,  convulfions  occur.  Of  thefe,  if  only- 
one  or  two  fits  appear  on  the  evening  preced- 
ing the  eruption,  they  give  a  favourable  prog- 
noflic  of  a  mild  difeafe,  and  require  no  reme- 
dy ;  but  if  they  occur  more  early,  and  be  vio- 
lent and  frequently  repeated,  they  are  very 
dangerous,  and  require  a  fpeedy  remedy. 
For  this  purpofe,  bleeding  is  hardly  ever  of 
fervice  ;  bliftering  always  comes  too  late  ;  and 
the  only  remedy  I  have  found  effectual  is  an 
opiate  given  in  a  large  dofe. 

DCXXI. 

Thefe  are  the  remedies  neceftary  during  the 
eruptive  fever  ;  and  if,  upon  the  eruption,  the 
pimples  upon  the  face  be  very  few  and  dif- 
tinct,  the  difeafe  is  no  further  of  any  danger 
requires  no  remedies,  and  the  purgatives, 
which,  as  has  been  faid  before,  are  by  fome 
practitioners  continued,  prove  often  hurtful. 

But  when,  upon  the  eruption,  the  pimples 

on  the  face  are  very  numerous  ;   when  they 

are  not  diftinct.  ,•  and  efpecially,   when  upon 

the  fifth  day,  the  fever  does  not  iuffer  a  con- 

C  2  fiderable 


40  PRACTICE 

fiderable  remifhon  ;  the  difeafe  will  ftill   re*- 
quire  a  great  deal  of  attention. 

DCXXII. 

If,  after  the  eruption,  the  fever  mail  con- 
tinue, the  avoiding  heat,  and  the  continuing 
to  expofe  the  body  to  a  cool  air,  will  flill  be 
proper.  If  the  fever  be  confiderable,  with  a 
full  and  hard  pulfe,  in  an  adult  perfon,  a 
bleeding  will  be  neceffary  ;  and,  more  certain- 
ly, a  cooling  purgative.  It  is,  however,  fel- 
dom  that  a  repetition  of  the  bleeding  will  be 
proper,  as  a  lofs  of  flrength  does  ufually  come 
on  very  foon  ;  but  the  repetition  of  a  purga- 
tive, or  the  frequent  ufe  of  laxative  glyfters, 
is  commonly  ufeful. 

Dcxxni. 

When  a  lofs  of  ftrength,  with  other  marks 
of  a  putrefcent  tendency  of  the  fluids  appears, 
it  will  be  neceffary  to  exhibit  the  Peruvian 
bark  in  fub fiance,  and  in  large  quantity.  In 
the  fame  cafe,  the  free  ufe  of  acids,  and  of  ni- 
tre, is  ufeful  ;  and  it  is  commonly  proper  al- 
io to  give  wine  very  freely. 


From  the  fifth  day  of  the  difeafe,  onward 
through  the  whole  courfe  of  it,  it  is  proper  to 
.give  an  opiate  once   or  twice  a  day  ;   taking 

care, 


OF       PHYSIC.  41 

care,  at  the  fame  time,  to  obviate   coftivenefs 
by  purgatives  or  laxative  glyiters. 


DCXXV. 

In  a  violent  difeafe,  from  the  eighth  to  the 
eleventh  day,  it  is  proper  to  lay  on  blifters 
fucceffively  on  different  parts  of  the  body,  and 
that  without  regard  to  the  parts  being  covered 
with  puitules, 

DCXXVI. 

If,  in  this  difeafe,  the  tumour  of  the  fauces 
be  confiderable  ;  the  deglutition  difficult ;  the 
faliva  and  mucus  vifcid,  and  with  difficulty 
thrown  out  ;  it  will  be  proper  to  apply  blif- 
ters to  the  external  fauces,  and  to  employ  dil- 
igently detergent  gargles. 


DCX  XVII. 


During  the  whole  courfe  of  the  difeafe, 
when  any  confiderable  fever  is  prefent,  the 
frequent  exhibition  of  antimonial  medicines, 
in  naufeating  dofes,  has  been  found  ufeful  ; 
and  thefe,for  the  moil  part,  fuhiciently  anfwer 
the  purpofe  of  purgatives. 

C3  DCX  XVI  III 


42  PRACTICE 


DCXXVIIL 

The  remedies  mentioned  from  DCXXII^ 
to  DC XX VI,  are  thofe  frequently  neceffary, 
from  the  fifth  day  till  the  fuppuration  is  fin- 
ifhed.  But  as,  after  that  period,  the  fever  is 
fometimes  continued  and  increafed  ;  or,  as 
fometimes,  when,  after  there  has  been  little 
or  no  fever  before,  a  fever  now  arifes,  and 
continues  with  confiderable  danger  ;  this  is 
what  is  called  the  Secondary  Fever,  and  re- 
quires particular  treatment. 

DCXXIX. 

When  the  fecondary  fever  follows  the  dif- 
iincl;  fmall  pox,  and  the  pulfe  is  full  and  hard, 
the  cafe  is  to  be  treated  as  an  inflammatory  af- 
feclion,  by  bleeding  and  purging.  But,  if  the 
fecondary  fever  follow  the  confluent  fmall 
pox,  and  be  a  continuance  or  exacerbation  of 
the  fever  which  had  fubfifted  before,  it  is  to 
be  confidered  as  of  the  putrid  kind  ;  and  in 
that  cafe,  bleeding  is  improper.  Some  purg- 
ing may  be  neceffary ;  but  the  remedies  to  be 
chiefly  depended  on,  are  the  Peruvian  bark 
and  acids. 

When  the  fecondary  fever  firft  appears, 
whether  it  is  after  a  diftincl:  or  a  confluent 
fmall  pox,  it  will  be  ufeful  to  exhibit  an  anti- 
monial  emetic  in  naufeating  dofes,  but  in  fuch 
manner  as  to  produce  fome  vomitmg. 

DCXXX* 


OF       PHYSIC.  43 


DCXXX. 

For  avoiding  the  pits  which  frequently  fol- 
low the  fmall  pox,  many  different  meafures 
have  been  propofed ;  but  none  of  them  appear 
to  be  fufficiently  certain. 


G  4  G  H.  A  E, 


U  PRACTICE 


e   pi   a   p.      n 


of  the  CHICKEN    POX, 


DCXXXL 


1  HIS  difeafe  feems  to  de- 
pend upon  a  fpecific  contagion,  and  to  affect 
perfons  but  once  in  their  lives.  It  is  hardly 
ever  attended  with  any  danger  -,  but  as  it  feems 
frequently  to  have  given  occafion  to  the  fup- 
pofition  of  a  perfon's  having  the  fmall  pox 
twice,  it  is  proper  to  ftudy  this  difeafe,  and  to 
difdnguiih  it  from  the  genuine  fmall  pox, 

DCXXXIL 

*. 
This  may  be  generally  done   hy  attending 
to  the  following  circumilances. 

The  eruption  of  the  chicken  pox  comes  on 
with  very  little  fever  preceding  it,  or  with  fe- 
ver of  no  determined  duration. 

The 


O  F       PHTSI  ft  45 

The  pimples  of  the  chicken  pox,  more  quicks 
ly  than  thofe  of  the  fmall  pox,  are  formed  into 
little  veficles  or  puflules. 

The  matter  in  thefe  puflules  remains  fluid, 
and  never  acquires  the  colour  or  confidence 
of  the  pus  which  appears  in  the  puflules  of  the 
fmall  pox. 

The  puflules  of  the  chicken  pox  are  always 
in  threg  or  four  days  from  their  firffc  appear- 
ance, formed  into  crufls. 

See  Dr.  Heberden  in  Med,  TranfacV  Vol, 
I.:  art  xvii, 


W*.*2^  Cg  ;  e  H  &.-JE4 


4$  :SET    PRACTICE 


CHAP,        IIL 


©.-F    the    MEASLES. 


DCXXXIIL 


1  HIS  difeafe  alfo  depends 
upon-  a  fpecific  contagion,  and  affe&s  perfons 
but  once  in  their  lives. 

DCXXXIV. 

It  occurs  moil  frequently  in  children  ;  but 
no  age  is  exempted  from  it,  if  the  perfons 
have  not  been  fubjeeted  to  it  before, 

DCXXXV, 

It  commonly  appears  as  an  epidemic,  fi  rfl 
in  the  month  of  January,  and  ceafes  foon  af- 
ter the  fummer  folftice  ;  but  various  acci- 
dents, introducing  the  contagion  may  produce 
the  difeafe  at  other  times  of  the  year, 

DCXXXYI, 


OF      PHYSIC,  47 


DCXXXVL 

The  difeafe  always  begins  with  a  cold  ftage^, 
which  is  foon  followed  by  a  hot,  with  the  or- 
dinary fymptoms  of  thirft,  heat,  anorexia,, 
anxiety,  ficknefs,  and  vomiting ;  and  thefe 
are  more  or  lefs  confiderable  in  different 
cafes.  Sometimes  from  the  beginning,  the 
fever  is  fharp  and  violent  ;  often,,  for  the  firfb 
two  days,  it  is  obfcure  and  inconfiderable,  but 
always  becomes  violent  before  the  eruption^ 
which  ufually  happens  upon  the  fourth  day, 

DCXXXVII. 

This  eruptive  fever,  from  its  commence- 
ment, is  always  attended  with  hoarfenefs,  with 
a  frequent  hoarfe  dry  cough,  and  frequently 
with  fome  difficulty  of  breathing.  At  the 
fame  time,  the  eye  lids  are  fome  what  fwelled,., 
the  eyes  are  a  little  inflamed,  and  pour  out 
tears ;  and,  together  with  thefe  fymptoms^ 
there  is  a  coryza,  and  frequent  fneezing> 
For  the  moll  part,  a  conftant  drowftnefs  at- 
tends the  beginning  of  this  difeafe, 

DCXXXVIII, 

The  eruption,  as  we  have  faid,  commonly 
appears   upon  the  fourth   day  -3   fir  ft   on  the 
face,  and  fucccffively  on  the  lower  parts  of  the 
body.     It  discovers  itfeif  firft:  in  fmall  red' 
C  6  points  j  j 


48  PRACTICE 

points  ;  but,  foon  after,  a  number  of  thefe  ap- 
pear in  chillers,  which  do  not  arife  into  vifible 
pimples,  but  by  the  touch  are  found  to  be  a 
little  prominent.  This.is  the  cafe  on  the  face  ; 
but  on  other  parts  of  the  body,  the  promi- 
nence, or  reughnefs,  is  hardly  to  be  perceived. 
On  the  face  the  eruption  retains  its  rednefs, 
or  has  that  increafed  for  two  days  ;  but,  on 
the  third,  the  vivid  rednefs  is  changed  to  a 
browniih  red  ;  and,  in  a  day  or  two  more, 
the  eruption  entirely  difappears,  while  a 
meally  defquamation  takes  place.  During 
the  whole  time  of  the  eruption,  the  face  is 
fomewhat  turgid,  but  feldom  confiderably 
fwelled,. 

DCXXXIX. 

Sometimes,  after  the  eruption  has  appear- 
ed, the  fever  ceafes  entirely  ;  but  this  is  fel- 
dom the  cafe ;  and  more  commonly  the  fever 
continues,  or  is  increafed  after  the  eruption, 
and  does  not  ceafe  till  after  the  defquama- 
tion. Even  then  the  fever  does  not  always 
ceafe,  but  continues  with  various  duration 
and  effect. 

DCXL. 

Though  the  fever  happen  to  ceafe  upon 
the  eruption's  taking  place,  it  is  common  for 
the  cough  to  continue  till  after  the  defquama-, 
don,  and  -fome times  much  longer,. 

In- 


OF       PHYSIC.  49 

In  all  cafes,  while  the  fever  continues,  the 
cough  alfo  continues,  generally  with  an  in- 
creafe  of  the  difficulty  of  breathing  •  and  both 
of  thefe  fymptoms  fometimes  arife  to  a  degree 
that  denotes  a  pneumonic  affection.  This 
may  arife  at  any  period  of  the  difeafe  ;  but 
very  often  it  does  not  come  on  till  after  the 
defquamation  of  the  eruption. 

After  the  fame  period,  alfo,  a  diarrhoea 
frequently  comes  on,  and  continues  for  fome 
time. 

DCXLI. 

It  is  common  for  the  mealies,  even  when 
they  have  not  been  of  a  violent  kind,  to  be 
fucceeded  by  inflammatory  affections,  partic- 
ularly ophthalmia  and  phthifis, 

DCXLIL 

If  the  blood  be  drawn  from  a  vein  during 
the  mealies,  with  the  circumftances  neceffary 
to  favour  the  feparation  of  the  gluten,  this  al- 
ways appears  feparated,  and  lying  on  the  fur- 
face  of  the  craflamentum,  as  in  inflammatory 
difeafes* 

BCXLIII; 

For  the  moft  part  the  mealies,  even  when 
violent>  are  without  any  putrid  tendency  ;  but 
in. fome  cafes  fuch  a  tendency  appears3  both 

m 


&o  PRACTICE 

in  the  courfe  of  the  difeafe,  and  efpecially  af- 
ter the  ordinary  courfe  of  it  is  finifhed.      See 
Dr.  Watfon,  in  London  Med.  Observations,.. 
Vol.  IV.  art.  xi. 

DGX-LIV. 

From  what  is  delivered  (from  DCXXXVII>., 
to  DCXLII)  it  will  appear,  that  the  meafles 
are  diftinguifhed  by  a  catarrhal  affe6tion,  and 
by  an  inflammatory  diathelis  to  a  confidera- 
ble  degree;  and  therefore  the  danger  attend- 
ing them  arifes  chiefly  from  the  coming  on 
of  a  pneumonic  inflammation. 

DCXLV. 

From  this  coniideration  it  will  be  obvious^ 
that  the  remedies  efpecially  neceffary  are  thofe 
which  may  obviate  and  diminifh  the  inflam — 
matory  diathefis ;  and  therefore,  in  a  particu- 
lar manner,  bloodletting.  This  remedy  may 
be  employed  at  any  time  m  the  courfe  of  the 
difeafe,  or  after  its  ordinary  courfe  is  hniihed. 
It  is  to  be  employed  more  or  lefs  according 
to  the  urgency  of  the  fymptoms  of  feveiy 
cough,  and  dy fpncea  ;  and  generally  may  be 
employed  very  freely.  But,  as  the  fymptoms 
of  pneumonic  inflammation  feldom  come  on 
during  the  eruptive  fever  ;  and  as  this  fever 
is  fometimes-  violent  immediately  before  the 
eruption,  though  a  fufficiently  mild  difeafe  be 
ft®  follow-  ?  fo  bleeding  is  feldom.  very  neceffa— 


OF     PHYSIC.  51 

ry  during  the  eruptive  fever,  and  may  often 
be  referved  for  the  periods  of  greater  danger 
which  are  perhaps  to  enfue. 

DCXLVI. 

In  all  cafes  of  meafles,  where  there  are  no 
marks  of  putrefcency,  and  where  there  is  no 
reafon,  from  the  known  nature  of  the  epidem- 
ic, to  apprehend  putrefcency,  bleeding  is  the 
remedy  to  be  depended  upon  ;  but  afiiftance 
may  alfo  be  obtained  from  cooling  purgatives  ; 
and  particularly  from  blifiering  on  the  fidess 
or  between  the  moulders. 

DCXLVII. 

The  dry  cough  may  be  alleviated  by  the 
large  ufe  of  demulcent  pectorals,  mucilagin- 
ous, oily,  or  fweet.  It  may,  however,  be  ob- 
ferved,  with  refpecl  to  thefe  demulcents,  that 
they  are  not  fo  powerful  in  involving  and 
correcting  the  acrimony  of  the  mafs  of  blood 
as  has  been  imagined ;  and  that  their  chief 
operation  is  by  befmearing  the  fauces,  and 
thereby  defending  them  from  the  irritation  of 
a-crids,  either  arifing  from  the  lungs  or  diftilk 
kig  from  the  head. 

DCXLVriL 

For  moderating  and  quieting  the  cowgh  in 
this  difeafe,.  opiates  certainly  prove  the  moft 

effectual 


59  P   R   A   C  T   I    C   E 

effectual  means,  whenever  they  can  be  fafeljr 
employed,.  In  the  meafles,  in  which  an  in- 
flammatory ftate  prevails  in  a  confiderable 
degree,  opiates  may  be  fuppofed  to  be  mad- 
miflible  ;  and,  in-  thofe  cafes  in  which  a  high 
degree  of  pyrexia  and  dyfpncea  mow  either 
the  prefence,  or  at  leaft  the  danger,  of  pneu- 
monic inflammation,  I  think  that  opiates  might 
be  very  hurtful.  In  cafes,  however,  in  which 
the  dyfpncea  is  not  considerable,  and  where 
bleeding,  to  obviate  or  abate  the  inflammatory 
ftate,  has  been  duly  employed,  and  where  the 
cough  and  watchfulnefs  are  the  urgent  fymp- 
toms,  I  think  that  opiates  may  be  fafely  ex- 
hibited, and  with  great  advantage.  I  think^ 
further,  that,  m  all  the  exanthemata,  there 
is  an  acrimony  diffufed  over  the  fyftem5 
which  gives  a  confiderable  irritation ;  and,  for 
obviating  the  effects  of  this,  opiates  are  ufeful, 
and  always  proper,  when  no  particular  con« 
traindication  prevails. 

DCXLIX. 

When  the  defquamation  of  the  meafles  is 
finifhed,  though  there  mould  then  be  no  dif- 
order  remaining,  phyficians  have  thought  it 
neceffary  to  purge  the  patient  feveral  times^ 
with  a  view  to  draw  oft7  the  dregs  of  this  dif- 
eafe,  that  is,  a  portion  of  themorbific  matter 
which  is  fuppofed  to  remain  long  in  the  body, 
I  cannot,  rejedt.  this  fuppofition  ;  but,  at  the 
fame  time^.  cannot  believe^  that  the. remains  of 

the. 


OF       PHYSIC.  53 

the  morbific  matter,  difFufed  over  the  whole 
mafs  of  blood,  can  be  entirely  drawn  off  by 
purging  ;  and  it  appears  to  me,  that  to  avoid 
the  confequences  of  the  meafles,  it  is  not  the 
drawing  off  the  morbific  matter  which  we  need 
to  fludy,  fo  much  as  the  obviating  and  re- 
moving the  inflammatory  ftate  of  the  fyftem 
which  had  been  induced  by  the  difeafe.  With 
this  lafl  view,  indeed,  purging  may  ftill  be  a 
proper  remedy  ;  but  bleeding,  in  proportion 
to  the  fymptoms  of  inflammatory  difpofition, 
is  yet  more  fo. 

DCL. 

From  our  late  experience  of  the  benefit  of 
cold  air  in  the  eruptive  fever  of  the  fmall  pox,, 
fome  phyficians  have  been  of  opinion,  that 
the  practice  might  be  transferred  to  the  mea- 
fles ;  but  we  have  not  yet  had  trials  fufficienfc 
to  afcertain  this.  There  is  no  doubt  that  ex- 
ternal heat  may  be  very  hurtful  in  the  mea-.. 
fles,  as  in  moff.  other  inflammatory  difeafes  5 
and  therefore  the  body  ought  to  be  kept  in  a 
moderate  temperature  during  the  whole  courfe 
of  the  mealies  ;  but  how  far,  at  any  period  of 
the  difeafe,.  cold  air  may  be  applied  with  fafe- 
tyt  we  are  yet  uncertain.  Analogy,  though 
fo  often  the  refource  of  phyficians,  is,  in  gen- 
era],  fallacious  ;  and  further,  though  the  an- 
alogy with  the  fmall  pox  might  lead  to  the 
application  of  cold  air  during  the  eruptive  fe- 
ver of  the  meafles.,  the  analogy  with  catarrh 

feems 


54  PRACTICE 

feems  to  be  againll  the  practice.  After  the 
eruption  had  appeared  upon  the  fkin,  we  hav 
had  many  inftances  of  cold  air  making  it  difa 
pear,  and  thereby  producing  much  diforderi 
the  fyftem  ;  and  have  alfo  had  frequent  ex- 
amples of  fuch  diforder  being  removed  by  re- 
floring  the  heat  of  the  body,  and  thereby  a-* 
gain  bringing  forth  the  eruption. 


C  H  A  F. 


OF      PHYSIC.  55 


CHAP.         IV. 


of  the    SCARLET    FEVER, 


DCLI. 


IT  may  be  doubted  if  the 
fcarlet  fever  be  a  difeafe  fpecifically  different 
from  the  Cynanche  Maligna  above  defcribed. 
The  latter  is  almoft  always  attended  with  a 
fcarlet  eruption  5  and,  in  all  the  inflances  I 
have  feen  of  what  may  be  called  the  Scarlet 
Fever,  the  difeafe,  in  almoft  every  perfon  af- 
fe&ed,  has  been  attended  with  an  ulcerous 
fore  throat. 

DCLII. 

This  view  of  the  matter  may  create  fome 
doubt ;  but  I  am  ftill  of  opinion,  that  there  is 
a  fcarlet  fever  which  is  a  difeafe  fpecifically 
different  from  the  Cynanche  Maligna, 

Doctor  Sydenham  has  defcribed  a  fcarlet 
fevers  which  he  had  feen  prevailing  as  an  ep- 

idemic^ 


56  P  R   A   C   T   I   C   E 

idemic,  with  ail  the  circum fiances  of  the  fever-; 
and  eruption,  without  its  being  accompanied1 
with  any  affection  of  the  throat  ;  at  lead  he 
does  not  take  notice  of  any  fuch  affection^ 
which  fuch  an  accurate  obferver  could  not  fail 
to  have  done,  if  any  fuch  fymptom,  as  we  have 
commonly  feen  making  a  principal  part  of  the 
difeafe,  had  attended  thofe  cafes  which  he  had 
obferved.  Several  other  writers  have  defcrib- 
ed  the  fcarlet  fever  in  the  fame  manner,  and 
I  know  phyficians  who  have  feen  the  difeafe 
in  that  form  ;  fo  that  there  can  be  no  doubt  of 
there  being  a  fcarlet  fever  not  neceffarily  con- 
nected with  an  ulcerous  fore  throat,  and  there- 
fore a  difeafe  different  from  the  Cynanche 
Maligna, 

DCLIIL 

But,  further,  although  in  all  the  inflances 
of  fcarlet  fever  which  I  have  feen,  (and  in  the 
courfe  of  forty  years  I  have  feen  it  fix  or  feven 
times  prevailing  as  an  epidemic  in  Scotland), 
the  difeafe,  in  almofl  all  the  perfons  affect- 
ed, was  attended  with  an  ulcerous  fore  throaty 
or  was  what  Sauvages  names  the  Scarlatina 
Anginofa  ;  and  although,  infome  inflances  the 
ulcers  of  the  throat  were  of  a  putrid  and 
gangrenous  kind,  and  at  the  fame  time  the  dif- 
eafe in  all  its  fymptoms  refembled  very  exact- 
ly the  cynanche  maligna  ;  yet  I  am  fiill  per- 
fuaded,  that  not  only  the  Scarlatina  of  Sy- 
denham., but  that  even  the  Scarlatina  Angino- 


G F     P  HYSI  C.  57 

fa  of  Sauvages,  is  a  different  difeafe  from  the 
Cynanche  Maligna  ;  and  I  have  formed  this 
opinion  from  the  following  confiderations. 

DCLIV. 

ljly  There  is  a  fcarlet  fever  entirely  free 
from  any  affection  of  the  throat,  which  fome- 
times  prevails  as  an  epidemic  ;  and  therefore 
there  is  a  fpecific  contagion  producing  a  fcar- 
let eruption  without  any  determination  to  the 
throat. 

zdly>  The  Scarlatina,  which,  from  its  matter 
being  generally  determined  to  the  throat,  may 
be  properly  termed  Anginofa,  has,  in  many 
cafes  of  the  fame  epidemic,  been  without  any 
affection  of  the  throat  •  and  therefore  the  con- 
tagion may  be  fuppofed  to  be  more  efpecially 
determined  to  produce  the  eruption  only. 

§dlyt  Though  in  all  the  epidemics  that  I 
could  allege  to  be  thofe  of  the  Scarlatina  An- 
ginofa, there  have  been  fome  cafes,  which,  in 
the  nature  of  the  ulcers,  and  in  other  circum- 
ftances,  exactly  refembled  the  cafes  of  the 
Cynanche  Maligna  ;  yet  I  have  as  conftantly 
remarked,  that  thefe  cafes  have  not  been  a- 
bove  one  or  two  in  a  hundred,  while  the  reft 
have  all  of  them  been  with  ulcers  of  a  benign 
kind,  and  with  circumflances  hereafter  to  be 
defcribed,  fomewhat  different  from  thofe  of 
the  Cvnanche  Maligna. 

J  o 

Athly\  On  the  other  hand,  as  I  have  two  or 
three  times  feen  the  Cynanche  Maligna  epi-: 

demically 


58  PRACTICE 

demically  prevailing  ;  fo,  among  the  perfons 
affe&ed,  I  have  feen  inftances  of  cafes  as  mild 
as  thofe  of  the  Scarlatina  Anginofa  ufually 
are  ;  but  here  the  proportion  wasreverfed ;  and 
thefe  mild  cafes  were  not  one  fifth  of  the  whole, 
while  the  reft  were  of  the  putrid  and  malignant 
kind. 

Lajlly,  It  applies  to  the  fame  purpofe  to 
obferve,  that  of  the  Cynanche  Maligna,  moft 
of  the  inftances  terminate  fatally  ;  while,  on 
the  other  hand,  that  is  the  event  of  very  few 
of  the  cafes  of  the  Scarlatina  Anginofa. 

DCLV. 

From  thefe  confederations,  though  it  may 
appear  that  there  is  fome  affinity  between  the 
Cynanche  Maligna  and  Scarlatina  Anginofa, 
it  will  ftill  remain  probable  that  the  two  dif- 
eafes  are  fpecifically  different.  I  have  been 
at  fome  pains  to  eftablifh  this  opinion  ;  for, 
from  all  my  experience,  f  find,  that  thofe  two 
difeafes  require  a  different  treatment  ;  and  I 
therefore  now  proceed  to  mention  more  par- 
ticularly the  circumftances  of  the  Scarlatina 
Anginofa. 

DCLVL 

This  difeafe  commonly  appears  about  the 
beginning  of  winter,  and  continues  through- 
out that  feafon.  It  comes  on  with  fome  cold 
fhivering,   and  other  fymptoms  of  the  fever 

which 


OF      PHYSIC.  59 

-which  ufually  introduces  the  other  exanthe- 
mata. Butherethere  is  no  cough,  nor  the  other 
catarrhal  fymptoms  which  attend  the  meafles  ; 
nor  is  there  that  anxiety  and  vomiting  which 
commonly  introduce  the  confluent  fmall  pox, 
and  which  more  certainly  introduce  the  Cy- 
nanche  Maligna. 

Early  in  the  difeafe  fome  uneafinefs  is  felt 
in  the  throat ;  and  frequently  the  deglutition  is 
difficult,  generally  more  fo  than  in  the  Cy- 
nanche  Maligna.  Upon  looking  into  the  fau- 
ces, a  rednefs  and  fwelling  appear,  in  colour 
and  bulk  approaching  to  the  ftate  of  thefe 
fymptoms  in  the  Cynanche  Tonfillaris  ;  but 
in  the  Scarlatina,  there  is  always  more  or  Jefs 
of  fioughs,  which  feldom  appear  in  the  Cy- 
nanche Tonfillaris  ;  and  the  fioughs  are  com- 
monly whiter  than  thofe  in  the  Cynanche 
Maligna. 

While  thefe  appearances  are  difcovered  in 
the  fauces,  upon  the  third  or  fourth  day  a 
fcarlet  eruption  appears  on  the  flan,  in  the 
fame  form  as  defcribed  in  (CCCXIV.)  This 
eruption  is  commonly  more  confiderable  and 
univerfal  than  in  the  Cynanche  ;  but  it  fel- 
dom produces  a  remiffion  of  the  fever.  The 
eruption  for  the  mofl  part  remains  till  the 
third  or  fourth  day  after  its  firft  appearance  ; 
but  then  goes  off,  ending  in  a  mealiy  def- 
quamation.  At  this  time  the  fever  ufually 
fubfides  ;  and,  generally,  at  the  fame  time, 
fome  degree  of  fweat  comes  on. 

The 


6o  PRACTICE 

The  floughs,  on  the  fauces,  which  appeared 
early  in  the  difeafe,  continue  for  fome  days  ; 
but  then  falling  off,  difcover  the  fwelling  a- 
bated,  and  an  ulcer  formed  on  one  or  both 
tonfils  mowing  a  laudable  pus  ;  and  foon  af- 
ter the  fever  has  fubfided,  thefe  ulcers  heal 
up  entirely.  For  the  mofl  part  this  difeafe 
has  much  lefs  of  coryza  attending  it  than  the 
Cynanche  Maligna  ;  and,  when  there  is  a  co- 
ryza attending  the  Scarlatina,  the  matter  dif- 
charged  is  lefs  acrid,  and  has  not  the  fetid 
fmell  which  it  has  in  the  other  difeafe. 

In  the  Scarlatina,  when  the  eruption  has 
entirely  difappeared,  it  frequently  happens, 
that,  in  a  few  days  after,  the  whole  body  is  af- 
fected with  an  anafarcous  fwelling  ;  which, 
however,  in  a  few  days  more,  gradually  fub- 
fides. 

We  have  thus  defcribed  the  mofl  common 
circumilances  of  the  Scarlatina  Anginofa  ; 
and  have  only  to  add,  that,  during  the  time  of 
its  being  epidemic,  and  efpecially  upon  its 
flrfl  fetting  in,  there  are  always  a  few  cafes  in 
which  the  circumilances  of  the  difeafe  ap- 
proach very  nearly  to  thofe  of  the  Cynanche 
Maligna  ;  and  it  is  only  in  thefe  inftances  that 
the  difeafe  is  attended  with  any  danger. 

DCLVII. 

With  refpe£l  to  the  cure  of  this  difeafe, 
when  the  fymptoms  of  it  are  nearly  the  fame 
with   thofe  of    the     Cynanche    Maligna,  it 

requires 


OF     PHYSIC.  61 

requires  exactly  the  fame  treatment  as  directed 

in(CCCXVIL) 

DCLVIII. 

When  the  fcarlet  fever  appears  without  any 
affection  of  the  throat,  the  treatment  of  it  i> 
very  fimple,  and  is  delivered  by  Dr.  Syden- 
ham. An  antiphlogiftic  regimen  is  common- 
ly all  that  is  requifite  ;  avoiding,  on  one  hand, 
the  application  of  cold  air  ;  and,  on  the  other, 
any  increafe  of  external  heat. 

DCLIX. 

In  the  ordinary  ftate  of  the  Scarlatina  An~ 
ginofa,  the  fame  treatment  is,  in  moil  cafes, 
fufficient ;  but  as  here  the  fever  is  commonly 
more  confiderable,  and  there  is  likewife  an  af- 
fection of  the  throat,  fome  remedies  may  be 
often  neceffarv. 

DCLX. 

When  there  is  a  pretty  high  degree  of  fe- 
ver, with  a  full  pulfe,  and  a  confiderable 
fwelling  of  the  tonfils,  bleeding  is  very  prop- 
er, efpecially  in  adults  ;  and  it  has  been  fre- 
quently praciifed  with  advantage  ;  but  as, 
even  in  the  Cynanche  Tonfiilaris,  much 
bleeding  is  feldom  neceifary,  (CCCV)  j  fo,  in 
the  Scarlatina,  when  the  ftate  of  the  fever  and 
the  appearances  of  the  fauces  render  the  na- 

Vol,  II.  D  tare 


62  PRACTICE 

ture  of  the  difeafe  ambiguous,  bleeding  may 
be  omitted  ;  and,  if  not  altogether  avoided,  it 
fhould  at  leafx  not  be  large,  and  ought  not  to 
be  repeated. 

DCLXI. 

Vomiting,  and  efpecially  naufeating  dofes 
of  emetics,  notwithstanding  the  inflamed  ftate 
of  the  fauces,  have  been  found  very  ufeful 
in  this  difeafe.  An  open  belly  is  proper  in 
every  form  of  this  difeafe  ;  and  when  the 
naufeating  dofes  of  emetics  operate  a  little 
downwards,  thev  are  more  ferviceable. 


■7 


DCLXII. 


In  every  form  of  the  Scarlatina  Anginofa, 
through  the  whole  courfe  of  it,  detergent  gar- 
gles fhould  be  employed,  and  more  or  lefs  as 
the  quantity  of  Houghs  and  the  vifcid  mucus 
in  the  fauces  may  feem  to  require. 

DCLXIII. 

Even  in  the  milder  flates  of  the  Scarlatina 
Anginofa,  it  has  been  common  with  practi- 
tioners to  exhibit  the  Peruvian  bark  through 
the  whole  courfe  of  the  difeafe  ;  but  we  are 
allured,  by  much  experience,  that  in.fuch  cafes 
it  may  be  fafely  omitted,  though  in  cafes  any 
ways  ambiguous  it  may  not  be  prudent  to 
iiegle6l  this  remedy. 

DCLXI  V. 


OF       PHYSIC.  63 


DCLXIV. 

The  anafarcous  fwelling,  which  frequently 
follows  the  Scarlatina  Anginofa,  feldom  re- 
quires any  remedy  ;  and,  at  leaft,  the  purga- 
tives fo  much  inculcated,  and  fo  commonly 
exhibited,  foon  take  off  the  anafarca. 


B  2  CHAP. 


64  PRACTICE 

CHAP.         V. 

OF     THE     PLAGUE. 

Sect.        I9 

Of  the  Phenomena  of  the  Plague, 
DCLXV. 


X  HE  Plague  is  a  difeafe 
which  always  arifes  from  contagion  ;  which 
affefts  many  perfons  about  the  fame  time  ; 
proves  fatal  to  great  numbers  ;  generally  pro- 
duces fever  ;  and,  in  mod  perfons,  is  attended 
with  buboes  or  carbuncles. 

DCLXVI. 

Thefe  are  the  circumftances  which,  taken 
together,  give   the  character  of  the  difeafe  % 

but 


OF       PHYSIC.  65 

but  it  is  accompanied  with  many  fymptoms 
almoft  peculiar  to  itfeif,  that  in  different  per- 
fons  are  greatly  diverfified  in  number  and  de- 
gree, and  mould  be  particularly  fludied.  I 
would  wiih  to  lay  a  foundation  for  this  ;  but 
think  it  unfit  for  a  perfon  who  has  never  feen 
the  difeafe  to  attempt  its  particular  hiflory. 
For  this,  therefore,  I  mull  refer  to  the  au- 
thors v/ho  have  written  on  the  fubjecl:  ;  but 
allowing  thofe  only  to  be  confulted,  who  have 
themfelves  feen  and  treated  the  difeafe  in  all 
its  different  forms. 


DCLXVII. 

From  the  accounts  of  fuch  authors,  it  ap- 
pears to  me,  that  the  circumftances  which  par- 
ticularly diftinguilh  this  difeafe5,and  efpecially 
the  more  violent  and  dangerous  ilates  of  it, 
are, 

tjh>  The  great  lofs  of  flrength  in  the  ani- 
mal functions,  which  often  appears  early  in 
the  difeafe. 

2dlyt  The  flupor,  giddinefs,  and  confequent 
daggering,  which  refembles  drunkennefs,  or 
the  headach,  and  various  delirium  ;  which  are 
all  of  them-  fymptoms  denoting  a  great  diibr- 
der  in  the  functions  of  the  brain. 

%dly>  The  anxiety,  palpitation,  fyncope, 
and  efpecially  the  weaknefs  and  irregularity 
of  the  pulfe,  which  denote  a  confiderable  dif— 
turbance  in  the  aclion  of  the  heart. 

D  a  4thlyy  The 


66  PRACTICE 

4thly,  The  naufea  and  vomiting,  particu- 
larly the  vomiting  of  bile,  which  mows  an  ac- 
cumulation of  vitiated  bile  in  the  gall  bladder 
and  biliary  duels,  and  from  thence  derived 
into  the  interlines  and  ftomach  ;  all  of  which 
iymptoms  I  fuppofe  to  denote  a  confiderable 
fpafm,  and  lofs  of  tone,  in  the  extreme  veffels 
on  the  furface  of  the  body. 

§thly>  The  buboes  or  carbuncles,  which 
denote  an  acrimony  prevailing  in  the 
fluids.      And, 

Laftly,  The  petechias,  hemorrhagies,  and 
colliquative  diarrhoea,  which  denote  a  putref- 
cent  tendency  prevailing  to  a  great  degree  in 
the  mafs  of  blood. 

DCLXVIII. 

From  the  coniideration  of  all  thefe  fymp- 
toms,  it  appears,  that  the  plague  is  efpecially 
diffinguifhed  by  a  fpecific  contagion,  often 
fuddenly  producing  the  mofl  confiderable 
fymptoms  of  debility  in  the  nervous  fyftem 
or  moving  powers,  as  well  as  of  a  general  pu- 
trefcency  in  the  fluids  ;  and  it  is  from  the  con- 
iideration of  thefe  circumflances  as  the  prox- 
imate caufe,  that  I  think  both  the  prevention 
and  cure  of  the  plague  mud  be  directed. 

DCLXIX. 

If  this  difeafe  fhould  revilit  the  northern 
parts  of  Europe,  it  is  probable,  that,  at  the 

time, 


OF     PHYSIC,  67 

time,  there  will  be  no  phyfician  then  alive, 
who,  at  the  firfl  appearance  of  the  difeafe, 
can  be  guided  by  his  former  experience,  but 
mufl  be  inflru£led  by  his  ftudy  of  the  writers 
on  this  fubject.,  and  by  analogy.  It  is,  there- 
fore, I  hope,  allowable  for  me,  upon  the  fame 
grounds,  to  offer  here  my  opinion  with  refpect 
to  both  the  prevention  and  cure  of  this  dif- 
eafe, 

This  paragraph  was  written  before  I  had 
any  notice  of  the  plague  of  Mofcow  anno 
1771  ;  but  I  think  it  will  Hill  apply  to  the 
cafe  of  Greatbritain  and  of  many  other  north- 
ern dates.  > 


Sect.         II. 
Of  the  Prevention  of  the  Plague. 

DCLXX. 

'WITH  refpecl:  to  the  prevention  :  As  we 
are  firmly  perfuaded  that  the  difeafe  never  a- 
rifes  in  the  northern  parts  of  Europe,  but  in 
confequence  of  its  being  imported  from  fome 
other  country ;  fo  the  firft  meafure  neceffarv, 
is  the  magiftrate's  taking  care  to  prevent  the 
importation  ;  and  this  may  generally  be  done 
by  a  due  attention  to  bills  of  health,  and  to 
the  proper  performance  of  quarantines. 

D4  DCLXXL. 


SB  PRACTICE 


DCLXXI. 

With  refpect  to  the  latter,  we  are  perfuad- 
ed,  that  the  quarantine  of  perfons  may  fafely 
be  much  lefs  than  forty  days  ;  and,  if  this  were 
allowed,  the  execution  of  the  quarantine  would 
be  more  exact  and  certain,  as  the  temptation 
to  break  it  would  be  in  a  great  meafure   re- 


DCLXXII. 

With  refpect  to  the  quarantine  of  goods  ; 
it  cannot  be  perfect,  unlefs  the  fufpected 
goods  be  unpacked  and  duly  ventilated,  as 
well  as  the  other  means  employed  for  cor- 
recting the  infection  they  may  carry  ;  and,  if 
all  this  were  properly  done,  it  is  probable  that 
the  time  commonly  prescribed  for  the  quar- 
antine of  goods  might  alfo  be  fhortened. 

DCLXXIII. 

A  fecond  meafure,  in  the  way  of  preven- 
tion, becomes  requifite,  when  an  infection  has 
reached  and  prevailed  in  any  place,  to  pre- 
vent that  infection  from  fpreading  into  other 
places.  This  can  be  done  only  by  preventing 
the  inhabitants,  or  the  goods,  of  any  infected 
place,  from  going  out  of  it,  till  they  have  un- 
dergone a  proper  quarantine. 

DCLXXIV. 


OF       PHYSIC. 


DCLXXIV. 

The  third  meafure  for  prevention,  to  be 
employed  with  great  care,  is  to  hinder  the 
infection  from  fpreading  among  the  inhab- 
itants of  the  place  in  which  it  has  arifen. 
The  meafures  neceflary  for  this,  are  to  be  di- 
rected by  the  doctrine  laid  down  inLXXXII  ; 
and  from  that  doctrine  we  infer,  that  all  per- 
fons  who  can  avoid  any  near  communication 
with  infected  perfons,  or  goods,,  may  efcape 
the  infection.. 

DCLXXV. 

For  avoiding  fuch  communication,  a  great 
deal  may  be  done  by  the  magiflrate  ;  1.  By- 
allowing  as  many  of  the  inhabitants  as  are  free 
from  the  infection,  and  not  neceflary  to  the 
fervice  of  the  place,  to  go  out  of  it.  2.  By 
prohibiting  all  aflembiies,  or  unnecefTary  in- 
tercourfe,  of  the  people.  3.  By  taking  care 
that  neceflary  communications  be  performed 
without  contact.  4.  By  making  fuch  ar- 
rangements and  provifions  as  may  render  it 
eafy  for  the  families  remaining  to  (hut  thero- 
felves  up  in  their  own  houfes.  5.  By  allow- 
ing perfons  to  quit  houfes  in  which  an  infec- 
tion appears,  upon  condition  that  they  go  in- 
to lazarettoes.  6.  By  ventilating  and  purify- 
ing, or  destroying  at  the  public  expenfe,  all 
infected  goods.      Lafily,  By    avoiding  h.ofpi— ■ 

Vol,  2,  D5  tals* 


7o  PRACTICE 

tals,  and  providing  feparate  apartments  for  in- 
fected perfons. 

The  execution  of  thefe  meafures  will  re- 
quire great  authorit)/,  and  much  vigilance  and 
attention,  on  the  part  of  the  magistrate  ;  but 
it  is  not  our  province  to  enter  into  any  detail 
on  this  fubject  of  the  public  police. 

DCLXXVI. 

The  fourth  and  iafl  part  of  the  bufinefs  of 
prevention,  refpects  the  conduct  of  perfons 
neceffarily  remaining  in  infected  places,  ef- 
pecially  of  thofe  obliged  to  have  fome  com- 
munication with  perfons  infected. 

DCLXXVII. 

Of  thofe  obliged  to  remain  in  infected 
places,  but  not  obligecfto  have  any  near  com- 
munication with  the  rick,  they  may  be  preferv- 
ed  from  the  contagion  by  avoiding  all  near 
communication  with  other  perfons,  or  their 
goods  ;  and,  it  is  probable,  that  a  fmall  dif- 
tance  will  anfwer  the  purpofe,  if,  at  the  fame 
time,  there  be  no  ftream  of  air  to  carry  the 
effluvia  of  perfons,  or  goods,  to  fome  diftance. 

DCLXXVIII. 

For  thofe  who  are  neceffarily  obliged  to 
have  a  near  communication  with  the  fick,  it  is 
proper  to  let  them  know,  that  fome  of  the  moft 

powerful 


OF       PHYSIC.  71 

powerful  contagions  do  not  operate,  but  when; 
the  bodies  of  men  expofed  to  the  contagion 
are  in  certain  circumftances  which  render 
them  more  liable  to  be  affected  by  it,  or  when 
certain  caufes  concur  to  excite  the  power  of 
it ;  and  therefore,  by  avoiding  thefe  circum- 
flances and  caufes,  they  may  often  efcape  in- 
fection. 

DCLXXIX. 

The  bodies  of  men  are  efpecially  liable  to 
be  afTec~led  by  contagions,  when  they  are  any 
ways  confiderably  weakened  by  want  of  food, 
and  even  by  a  fcanty  diet,  or  one  of  little  nour- 
ifhment  ;  by  intemperance  in  drinking,  which, 
when  the  fcupor  of  intoxication  is  over,  leaves 
the  body  in  a  weakened  flate  ;  bv  excefs  in 
venery  ;  by  great  fatigue  ;  or  by  any  con- 
fiderable  evacuation. 

DCLXXX. 

The  caufes  which,  concurring  with  conta- 
gion, render  it  more  certainly  a6live,  are  cold,, 
fear,  and  full  living. 

The  feveral  means,  therefore,  of  avoiding 
or  guarding  againfl  the  action  of  cold  (XCIV,, 
to  XCVI)  are  to  be  carefully  ftudied. 

BCLXXXI. 

Againfl  fear  the  mind  is  to  be  fortified  as 
well  as  poflible,  by  infpiring  a  favourable  idea 

D  6  o£ 


72  PRACTICE 

of  the  power  of  prefervative  means  ;  by  de- 
flroying  the  opinion  of  the  incurable  nature 
of  the  difeafe  ;  by  occupying  mens'  minds  with 
bufmefs  or  labour  ;  and  by  avoiding  all  ob- 
jects of  fear,  as  funerals,  pairing  bells,  and  any 
notice  of  the  death  of  particular  friends. 

DCLXXXIL 

A  full  diet  of  animal  food  increafes  the  ir- 
ritability of  the  body,  and  favours  the  opera- 
tion of  contagion  ;  and  indigeflion,  whether 
from  the  quantity  or  quality  of  food,  has  the 
fame  effect. 

DCLXXXIII. 

Befides  giving  attention  to  obviate  the  fev- 
eral  circumftances  (DCX,  DCLXXIX,  to 
DCLXXXII)  which  favour  the  operation  of 
contagion,  it  is  probable  thatfome  means  may 
be  employed  for  ilrengthening  the  bodies  of 
men,  and  thereby  enabling  them  to  refill  con- 
tagion. 

For  this  purpofe,  it  is  probable,  that  the 
moderate  ufe  of  wine,  or  of  fpirituous  liquors, 
inay  have  a  good  effect.. 

It  is  probable  alfo,  that  exercife,  when  it 
can  be  employed,  if  fo  moderate  as  to  be  nei- 
ther heating  nor  fatiguing  to  the  body,  may 
be  employed  with  advantage. 

Perfons  who  have  tried  cold  bathing,  and 
commonly  feel  invigorating  efrec~h  from  it,  if 

they 


OF      PHYSIC,  73 

they  are  anywife  fecure  againft  having  already 
received  infection,  may  poffibiy  be  enabled  to 
refill  it  by  the  ufe  of  the  cold  bath. 

It  is  probable,  that  fome  medicines  alfo  may 
be  ufeful  in  enabling  men  to  refill  infection  ; 
but  amongll  thefe  I  can  hardly  admit  the  nu- 
merous alexipharmics  formerly  propofed  ;  01^ 
at  lea  ft,  very  few  of  them,  and  thofe  only  of 
tonic  power.  Amongfl  thefe  lafl  we  reckon 
the  Peruvian  bark  ;  and  it  is  perhaps  the  moil 
effectual.  If  any  thing  is  to  be  expected  from 
antifeptics,  I  think  camphire,  whether  inter- 
nally- or  externally  employed,  is  one  of  the 
moft  promifmg. 

Every  perfon  is  to  be  indulged  in  the  ufe 
of  any  means  of  prefervation  of  which  he  has 
conceived  a  good  opinion,  whether  it  be  a 
charm  or  a  medicine,  if  the  latter  be  not  di- 
rectly hurtful. 

Whether  iffuesbe  ufeful  in  preferving from, 
or  in  moderating  the  effects  of,  contagion,  I 
cannot  determine  from  the  obfervations  I  have 
yet  read. 

DCLXXXIV. 

As  neither  the  atmofphere  in  general,  nor 
any  confiderable  portion  of  it,  is  tainted  or 
impregnated  with  the  matter  of  contagions  ; 
fo  the  lighting  of  fires  over  a  great  part  of  the 
infected  city,  or  other  general  fumigations  in 
the  open  air,  are  of  no  life  for  preventing  the 
difeafe,  and  may  perhaps  be  hurtful. 

DCLXXXV. 


74  PRACTICE 


DCLXXXV. 

It  would  probably  contribute  much  to 
check  the  progrefs  of  infection,  if  the  poor  were 
enjoined  to  make  a  frequent  change  of  cloth- 
ing, and  were  fuitably  provided  for  that  pur- 
pofe  ;  and  if  they  were,  at  the  fame  time,  in- 
duced to  make  a  frequent  ventilation  of  their 
houfes  and  furniture. 


Sect.       III. 

Of  the  Cure  of  the  Plague. 

DCLXXXVI. 

IN  the  cure  of  the  plague,  the  indications 
are  the  fame  as  thofe  of  fever  in  general 
(CXXVI)  ;  but  here  they  are  not  all  equally 
necelfary  and  important. 

DCLXXXVII. 

The  meafures  for  moderating  the  violence 
of  reaction,  which  operate  by  diminiming  the 
action  of  the  heart  and  arteries  (CXXVIII), 
have  feldom  any  place  here,  excepting  fo  far 
as  the  antiphlogiftic  regimen  is  generally  prop- 
er. Some  phyficians,  indeed,  have  recom- 
mended. 


OF       PHYSIC.  75 

mended  bleeding  ;  and  there  may  occur  cafes 
in  which  bleeding  may  be  ufeful ;  but,  for  the 
mofl  part,  it  is  unneceffary,  and  in  many 
cafes  it  might  be  very  hurtful. 

Purging  has  alfo  been  recommended  ;  and, 
in  fome  degree,  it  may  be  ufeful  in  drawing 
off  the  bile,  or  other  putrefcent  matters  fre- 
quently prefent  in  the  interlines  ;  but  a  large 
evacuation  this  way  may  certainly  be  hurtful. 

DCLXXXVIII. 

The  moderating  the  violence  of  reaction, 
fo  far  as  it  can  be  done  by  taking  off  the 
fpafm  of  the  extreme  veffels  (CLI),  is  a  meaf- 
ure  of  the  utmoft  necefhty  in  the  cure  of  the 
plague  ;  and  the  whole  of  the  means  (CLII, 
to  CC)  fuited  to  this  indication  are  extremely 
proper. 

DCLXXXIX. 

The  giving  an  emetic  at  the  very  firft  ap- 
proach of  the  difeafe,  would  probably  be  of 
great  fervice  ;  and  it  is  likely,  that  at  fome 
other  periods  of  the  difeafe,  emetics  might  be 
ufeful,  both  by  evacuating  bile  abundant  in 
the  alimentary  canal,  and  by  taking  off  the 
fpafm  of  the  extreme  veffels. 

DCXC. 

From  fome  principles  with  refpecl:  to  fever 
in  general,  and  with  refpecl;  to  the  plague   in 

particular, 


;6  PRACTICE 

particular,  I  am  of  opinion,  that,  after  the  ex- 
hibition of  the  firfl  vomit,  the  body  Ihould  be 
difpofed  to  fweat  ;  which  ought  to  be  raifed 
to  a  moderate  degree  only,  but  continued  for 
at  lead  twenty  four  hours,  or  longer  if  the  pa- 
tient bear  it  eafiiy. 

DCXCL 

This  fweatinff  mould  be  excited  and  con- 
dueled  agreeably  to  the  rules  laid  down  in 
(CLXVIII.)  It  is  to  be  promoted  by  the 
plentiful  ufe  of  diluents,  rendered  more  grate- 
ful by  vegetable  acidvS,  or  more  powerful  by 
being  impregnated  with  fome  portion  of  neu-- 
tral  falts. 

DCXCIL 

To  fupport  the  patient  under  the  continu- 
ance of  the  fweat,  a  little  weak  broth,  acidu- 
lated with  juice  of  lemons,  may  be  given  fre- 
quently ;  and  fometimes  a  little  wine,  if  the 
heat  of  the  body  be  not  confiderable. 

DCXCIIL 

If  fudorific  medicines  are  judged  to  be  nec- 
effary,  opiates  are  the  moil  effectual  and  fafe ; 
but  they  Ihould  not  be  combined  with  aro- 
matics  ;  and  probably  may  be  more  effectual, 
if  joined  with  a  portion  of  emetics  and  of 
neutral  falts. 

DCXCIV. 


OF       PHYSIC.  77 


DCXCIV. 

If,  notwithstanding  the  ufe  of  emetics  and 
fudorifics,  the  difeafe  mould  Hill  continue, 
the  cure  muii  depend  upon  the  employment 
of  means  for  obviating  debility  and  putrefcen- 
cy  ;  and,  for  this  purpofe,  the  various  reme- 
dies propofedabove(frQmCCIstoCC  XXVI  I), 
may  all  be  admin iilered,  but  especially  the  ton- 
ics j  and  of  thofe  the  chief  are  cold  drink  and 
the  Peruvian  bark. 

DCXCV. 

In  the  cure  of  the  plague,  fome  attention  is 
due  to  the  management  of  buboes  and  car- 
buncles ;  but  we  do  not  touch  this,  as  it  be- 
longs to  the  province  of  furgery. 


CHAP. 


78  PRACTICE 


CHAP.         VI 


of  ERYSIPELAS,  or  St,  ANTHONY* 

FIRE, 


DCXCVI. 

In  CCLXXIV  I  mentioned 
the  diftinclion  which  I  propofed  to  make  be- 
tween the  difeafes  to  be  named  the  Erythema 
and  the  Eryfipelas  ;  and  from  thence  it  will 
appear,  that  Eryfipelas,  as  an  Erythema  fol- 
lowing fever,  may  have  its  place  here. 

DCXCVII. 


I  fuppofe  the  Eryfipelas  to  depend  on  a 
matter  generated  within  the  body,  and  which, 
analogous  to  the  other  cafes  of  exanthemata, 
is,  in  confequence  of  fever,  thrown  out  upon 
the  furface  of  the  body.  I  own  it  may  be  dif- 
ficult to  apply  this  to  every  particular  cafe  of 
eryfipelas  ;  but  I  take  the  cafe  in  which  it  is 
generally  fuppofed  to  apply,  that  of  the  ery- 
fipelas 


OF       PHYSIC.  79 

fipelas  of  the  face ;  which   I  fhall  therefore 
confider  here. 

DCXCVIII. 

The  Eiy fipelas  of  the  face  comes  on  with  a 
cold  fhivering,  and  other  fymptoms  of  pyrex- 
ia. The  hot  ftage  of  this  is  frequently  attend- 
ed with  a  confufion  of  head,  and  fome  de- 
gree of  delirium  ;  and  almoft  always  with 
drowfinefs,  or  perhaps  coma.  The  pulfe  is 
always  frequent,  and  commonly  full  and  hard. 

DCXCIX. 

When  thefe  fymptoms  have  continued  for 
one,  two,  or  at  moft  three  days,  there  appears, 
on  fome  part  of  the  face,  a  rednefs,  fuch  as 
that  defcribed  in  (CCLXXV)  as  the  appear- 
ance of  Erythema.  This  rednefs,  at  firft,  is 
of  no  great  extent  ;  but  gradually  fpreads 
from  the  part  it  firft  occupied  to  the  other 
parts  of  the  face,  commonly  till  it  has  afFeQed 
the  whole  ;  and  frequently  from  the  face  it 
fpreads  over  the  hairy  fcalp,  or  defcends  on 
fome  part  of  the  neck.  As  the  rednefs 
fpreads,  it  commonly  difappears,  or  at  leaft 
decreafes,  in  the  parts  it  had  before  occupied. 
All  the  parts  upon  which  the  rednefs  appears 
are,  at  the  fame  time,  afFecled  with  fome  fuell- 
ing, which  continues  for  fome  time  after  the 
rednefs  has  abated.     The  whole  face  becomes 

confiderably 


8o  PRACTICE 

confiderably  turgid  ;  and  the  eyelids  are  often 
fo  much  fwelled,  as  entirely   to  ihut  up  the 

eyes. 


DCC. 

When  the  rednefs  and  fwelling  have  proceed-, 
ed  for  fome  time,  there  commonly  arife,  foon- 
er  or  later,  bliiiers  of  a  larger  or  fmaller  flze, 
on  feveral  parts  of  the  face.  Thefe  contain  a 
thin  yellowim  or  almoft  colourlefs  liquor, 
which  fooner  or  later  runs  out.  The  furface 
of  the  fkin,  in  the  bliftered  places,  fometimes 
becomes  livid  and  blackifh  ;'  but  this  livor  fel- 
dom  goes  deeper  than  the  furface,  or  difcovers 
any  degree  of  gangrene  affecting  the  fkin. 
On  the  parts  of  the  face  not  afTecied  with  blif- 
ters,  the  cuticle  fuffers,  towards  the  end  of  the 
difeafe,  a  coniiderable  defquamation. 

Sometimes  the  tumour  of  the  eyelids  ends 
in  a  fuppuration. 


DCCI. 

The  inflammation  coming  upon  the  face 
does  not  produce  any  remiffion  of  the  fever 
which  had  before  prevailed  ;  and  fometimes 
the  fever  increafes  with  the  increafing  and 
fpreading  inflammation. 

DCCIL 


OF     PHYSIC.  8t 


DCCII. 

The  inflammation  ufually  continues  for 
eight  or  ten  days  ;  and  for  the  fame  time,  the 
fever  and  fymptoms  attending  it  alfo  con- 
tinue. 

DCCIII. 

In  the  progrefs  of  the  inflammation  the  de- 
lirium and  coma  attending  it  fometimes  go  on 
increafmg,  and  the  patient  dies  apoplectic  on 
the  feventh,  ninth,  or  eleventh  day  of  the  dif- 
eafe.  In  fuch  cafes,  it  has  been  commonly 
fuppofed  that  the  difeafe  is  tranflated  from 
the  external  to  the  internal  parts.  But  I  have 
not  feen  any  inftance  in  which  it  did  not  appear 
to  me,  that  the  affection  of  the  brain  was 
merely  a  communication  of  the  external  af- 
fection, as  this  continued  increafing  at  the 
fame  time  with  the  internal. 

DCCIV. 

When  the  fatal  event  does  not  take  place, 
the  inflammation,  after  having  affected  a  part, 
commonly  the  whole  of  the  face,  and  perhaps 
the  other  external  parts  of  the  head,  ceafes. 
With  the  inflammation,  the  fever  alfo  ceafes  ; 
and,  without  any  evident  crifis,  the  patient 
returns  to  his  ordinary  ftate  of  health. 

DCCVa 


82  PRACTICE 


DCCV. 

This  difeafe  is  not  commonly  contagious  ; 
but  as  it  may  arife  from  an' acrid  matter  ex- 
ternally applied,  fo  it  is  poflible  that  the  dif- 
eafe may  fometimes  be  communicated  from 
one  perfon  to  another. 

Perfons  who  have  once  laboured  under  this 
difeafe  are  liable  to  returns  of  it. 

DCCVI. 

The  event  of  this  difeafe  may  be  forefeen 
from  the  ftate  of  the  fymptoms  which  denote 
more  or  lefs  affeclion  of  the  brain.  If  neither 
delirium  nor  coma  come  on,  the  difeafe  is  fel- 
dom  attended  with  any  danger  ;  but  when 
thefe  fymptoms  appear  early  in  the  difeafe, 
and  are  in  a  confiderable  degree,  the  utmoft 
danger  is  to  be  apprehended. 

DCCVII. 

As  this  difeafe  often  arifes  in  the  part,  at 
the  fame  time  with  the  coming  on  of  the  py- 
rexia ;  as  I  have  known  it,  with  all  its  fymp- 
toms, arife  from  an  acrimony  applied  to  the 
part  i  as  it  is  commonly  attended  with  a  full, 
and  frequently  a  hard  pulfe  ;  as  the  blood 
drawn  in  this  difeafe  mows  the  fame  crufl  upon 
its  furf ace  ..that  appears  in  the  phlegmafias  ; 
and,  laitly,  as  the  fwelling  of  the  eyelids,  in 

this 


OF       PHYSIC.  83 

this  difeafe,  frequently  ends  in  a  fuppuration  ; 
fo,  from  thefe  confederations,  it  feems  doubt- 
ful if  this  difeafe  be  properly,  in  Nofology, 
feparated  from  the  Phlegmaiiae.  At  any 
rate,  I  take  the  difeafe  I  have  defcribed  to  be 
what  phyficians  have  named  the  Eryfipelas 
Phlegmonodes,  and  that  it  partakes  a  great 
deal  of  the  nature  of  the  Phlegmaiiae. 

DCCVIII. 


Upon  this  concluiion,  the  Eryfipelas  of 
the  face  is  to  be  cured  very  much  in  the  fame 
manner  as  phlegmonic  inflammations,  by 
bloodletting,  cooling  purgatives,  and  by  em- 
ploying every  part  of  the  antiphlogiftic  regi- 
men ;  and  our  experience  has  confirmed  the 
fitne  fs  of  this  method  of  cure. 

DCCIX. 

The  evacuations  of  bloodletting  and  purg- 
ing are  to  be  employed  more  or  lefs  according 
to  the  urgency  of  fymptoms,  particularly  thofe 
of  the  pyrexia,  and  of  thofe  which  mark  an 
affection  of  the  brain.  As  the  pyrexia  con- 
tinues, and  often  increafes  with  the  inflam- 
mation of  the  face  ;  fo  the  evacuations  men- 
tioned may  be  employed  at  any  time  in  the 
courfe  of  the  difeafe. 

DCCX. 


84  PRACTICE 


DCCX. 

In  this,  as  in  other  difeafes  of  the  head,  it 
is  proper  to  put  the  patient,  as  often  as  he 
ean  eafily  bear  it,  into  fomewhat  of  an  erecl; 
pofture. 

DCCXI. 

As  in  this  difeafe  there  is  always  an  exter- 
nal affection,  and  as  in  many  inflances  there 
is  no  other  ;  fo  various  external  applications  to 
the  part  affected  have  been  propofed  ;  but  aU 
moll  all  of  them  are  of  doubtful  efFe£L 
The  narcotic,  refrigerant,  and  aftringent 
applications,  are  fufpec~led  of  difpofmg  to 
gangrene  ;  fpirituous  applications  feem  to  in- 
cieafe  the  inflammation ;  and  all  oily  or  watery 
applications  feem  to  occafion  its  fpreading. 
The  application  that  feems  moll  fafe,  and 
which  is  now  moil  commonly  employed,  is 
that  of  a  dry  mealy  powder  frequently  fprin- 
kled  upon  the  inflamed  parts. 

DCCXII. 

An  Eryfipelas  Phlegmonodes  frequently 
appears  on  other  parts  of  the  body  befide  the 
face  ;  and  fuch  other  eryiipeiatous  inflamma- 
tions frequently  end  in  fuppuration.  Thefe 
cafes  are  feldom  dangerous.  At  coming  on, 
they  are  fometimes  attended  with  drowlinels, 

and 


OF       PHYSIC.  8s 

and  even  with  fome  delirium  ;  but  this  rarely 
happens ;  and  thefe  fymptoms  do  not  continue 
after  the  inflammation  is  formed.  I  have  never 
feen  an  inftance  of  the  tranllation  of  this  in- 
flammation from  the  limbs  to  an  internal  part ; 
and  though  thefe  innammations  of  the  limbs 
be  attended  with  pyrexia,  they  ieldom  require 
the  fame  evacuations  as  the  eryfipelas  of  the 
face.  At  firfl  they  are  to  be  treated  by  dry 
mealy  applications  only  ;  and  all  humid  ap- 
plications, as  fomentations,  or  poultices,  are 
not  to  be  applied,  till,  by  the  continuance  of 
the  difeafe,  by  the  increafe  of  fwelling,  or  by 
a  throbbing  felt  in  the  part,  it  appears  that  the 
difeafe  is  proceeding  to  fuppuration. 

BCCXIII. 

We  have  hitherto  confidered  eryfipelas  as 
in  a  great  meafure  of  a  Phlegmonic  nature  ; 
and,  agreeably  to  that  opinion,  we  have  prc- 
pofed  our  method  of  cure.  But  it  is  probable, 
that  an  eryfipelas  is  fometimes  attended  with, 
or  is  a  fymptom  of,  a  putrid  fever ;  and,  in 
fuch  cafes,  the  evacuations  propofed  above 
may  be  improper,  and  the  ufe  of  the  Peruvian 
bark  may  be  necefTary  ;  but  I  cannot  be  ex- 
plicit upon  this  fubje6t.,  as  fuch  putrid  cafes 
have  not  come  under  my  obfervation. 


Vol.  II.  E  CHAP. 


M  PRACTICE 


CHAP.         VIL 


#f  the  MILIARY    FEVER, 


DCCXIV. 

1  HIS  difeafe  is  faid  to  have 
been  unknown  to  the  ancients,  and  that  it  ap- 
peared, for  the  firft  time,  in  Saxony,  about 
the  middle  of  the  laft  century.  It  is  faid  to 
have  fpread  from  thence  into  all  the  other  parts 
of  Europe;  and,  fince  the  period  mentioned,  to 
have  appeared  in  many  countries  in  which  it 
had  never  appeared  before* 

DCCXV. 

From  the  time  of  its  having  been  firft  par- 
ticularly obferved,  it  has  been  defcribed  and 
treated  of  by  many  different  writers  ;  and  by 
all  of  them,  till  very  lately,  has  been  consid- 
ered as  a  peculiar  idiopathic  difeafe. 

It  is  faid  to  have  been  conftantly  attended 
with  peculiar  fymptoms.  It  comes  on  with 
a  cold  ftage,  which  is  often  confiderable.  The 
hot  flage   which  fucceeds,  is  attended  with 

great 


OF       PHYSIC.  87 

great  anxiety,  and  frequent  fighing.  The 
heat  of  the  body  becomes  great,  and  foon  pro- 
duces profufe  fweating ;  preceded,  however, 
by  a  fenfe  of  pricking,  as  of  pin  points,  in  the 
fkin  j  and  the  fweat  is  of  a  peculiarly  rank  and 
difagreeable  odour.  The  eruption  appears 
fooner  or  later  in  different  perfons,  but  at  no 
determined  period  of  the  difeafe.  It  feldom 
or  never  appears  on  the  face  ;  but  difcovers 
itfelf  firfb  upon  the  neck  and  bread,  and  from 
thence  often  fpreads  over  the  whole  body. 

DCCXVI. 

The  eruption  named  Miliary  is  faid  to  be 
of  two  kinds  ;  the  one  named  the  Red,  the 
other  the  White  Miliary.  The  former,  which 
in  Englilh  is  ftrictly  named  a  Rafh,  is  com- 
monly allowed  to  be  afymptomatic  affection  ; 
and  as  the  latter  is  the  only  one  that  has  any 
pretenfions  to  be  conildered  as  an  idiopathic 
difeafe,  it  is  this  alone  that  I  {hall  more  par- 
ticularly defcribe  and  treat  of  in  the  prefent 
chapter. 

DCCXVII. 

What  then  is  called  the  White  Miliary 
eruption,  appears  at  firtl  like  the  red,  in  very 
fmall  red  pimples,  for  the  moil  part  diftinct, 
but  fometimes  cluflered  together.  Their 
flight  prominence  is  diftinguifhed  better  by 
the  nnger  than  by  the  eye.  Soon  after  the 
E  2  appearance 


88  PRACTICE 

appearance  of  this  eruption,  and  at  leaft  on 
the  fecond  day,  a  fmall  veficle  appears  upon 
the  top  of  each  pimple.  At  firft  the  veficle 
is  whey  coloured  ;  but  foon  becomes  white, 
and  (lands  out  like  a  little  globule  on  the  top 
of  the  pimple.  In  two  or  three  days,  thefe 
globules  break,  or  are  rubbed  off  ;  and  are 
fucceeded  by  fmall  cruris,  which  foon  after 
fall  off  in  fmall  fcales.  While  one  fet  of  pim- 
ples takes  this  courfe,  another  fet  fucceeds  ;  fo 
that  the  difeafe  often  continues  upon  the  fkin 
for  many  days  together.  Sometimes  when 
one  crop  of  this  eruption  has  difappeared,  an- 
other, after  fome  interval,  is  produced.  And 
it  has  been  further  obferved,  that  in  fome  per- 
fons  there  is  fuch  a  tendency  to  this  difeafe, 
that  they  have  been  affected  with  it  feveral 
times  in  the  courfe  of  their  lives. 

DCCXVIII. 

This  difeafe  is  faid  to  affecl;  both  fexes,  and 
perfons  of  all  ages  and  conflitutions  ;  but  it 
has  been  obferved,  at  all  times,  to  affect  efpec- 
ially,  and  moil  frequently,  lying  in  women. 

DCCXIX.       „ 

This  difeafe  is  often  accompanied  with  vio- 
lent fymptoms,  and  has  frequently  proved  fa-' 
tal.  The  fymptoms  attending  it,  are,  how  ev- 
er, very  various.  They  are,  in  one  or  other 
initance,   all   the  feveral  fymptoms  attending 

febrile 


O  F     P  H  Y  S  I  C.  89 

febrile  difeafes  ;  but  I  cannot  find  that  any 
lymptom  or  concourfe  of  fymptoms  are  flead- 
ily  the  fame  in  different  perfons,  fo  as  to  fur- 
niffi  any  fpecific  character  to  the  difeafe. 
When  the  difeafe  is  violent,  the  moil  common 
fymptoms  are  phrenitic,  comatoie,  and  con- 
vullive  affections,  which  are  aifo  fymptoms  of 
all  fevers  treated  bv  a  very  warm  regimen. 


DCCXX. 

While  there  is  fuch  a  variety  of  fymptoms 
appearing  in  this  difeafe,  it  is  not  to  be  ex- 
peeled  that  any  one  particular  method  of  qui  -. 
can  be  propofed  ;  and  accordingly  we  find, 
in  different  writers,  different  methods  and 
remedies  prefcribed  ;  frequent  difputes  about 
the  moil  proper  ;  and  thofe  received  and 
praftifed  by  fome,  oppofed  and  rejected  by 
others. 


DCCXXI. 

I  have  thus  given  an  account  of  what  I  have 
found  delivered  by  authors  who  have  confide 
ered  the  white  miliary  fever  as  an  idiopathic 
difeafe  ;  but,  now,  after  having  often  obferved 
the  difeafe,  I  muft  fay  that  I  doubt  much  if 
it  ever  be  fuch  an  idiopathic  as  has  been  fup- 
pofed  ;  and  I  fufpecf  that  there  is  much  falla- 
cy in  what  has  been  written  on  the  fubjecl:. 

E  3  DCCXXIK 


go  PRACTICE 


DCCXXII. 

It  feems  to  me  very  improbable,  that  this 
fhould  have  been  really  a  new  difeafe  when  it 
was  firft  confidered  as  fuch.  There  appear 
to  me  very  clear  traces  of  it  in  authors  who 
wrote  long  before  that  period  ;  and  though 
there  were  not,  we  know  that  the  defcriptions 
of  the  ancients  were  inaccurate  and  imperfect, 
particularly  with  refpecl:  to  cutaneous  affec- 
tions ;  whilil  we  know  alfo  very  well,  that 
thofe  affections  which  ufually  appeared  as 
iymptomatic  only,  were  commonly  neglecled, 
or  confounded  together  under  a  general  ap- 
pellation* 

D.CCXXIII. 

The  antecedent  fymptoms  of  anxiety,  figh- 
ing,  and  pricking  of  the  {kin,  which  have 
been  fpoken  of  as  peculiar  to  this  difeafe,  are, 
however,  common  to  many  others  |  and,  per- 
haps, to  all  thofe  in  which  fweatings  are  forced 
out  by  a  warm  regimen. 

Of  the  fymptoms  faid  to  be  concomitant  of 
this  eruption,  there  are  none  which  can  be  faid 
to  be  conftant  and  peculiar  but  that  of  fweat- 
ing.  This,  indeed,  always  precedes  and  ac- 
companies the  eruption  ;  and,  while  the  mili- 
ary eruption  attends  many  different  difeafes, 
it  never,  however,  appears  in  any  of  thefe,  but 
after  fweating  ;  and,  in  perfons  labouring  un- 
der 


OF     PHYSIC.  gt 

der  thefe  difeafes,  it  does  not  appear,  if  fweat- 
ing  be  avoided.  It  is  therefore  probable,  that 
the  eruption  is  the  effect,  of  fweating ;  and 
that  it  is  the  produce  of  a  matter,  not  before 
prevailing  in  the  mafs  of  blood,  but  generat- 
ed, under  particular  circumftances,  in  the  fkin 
itfelf.  That  it  depends  upon  particular  cir- 
cumftances of  the  fkin,  appears  further  from 
hence,  that  the  eruption  feldom  or  never  ap- 
pears upon  the  face,  although  it  affects  the 
whole  of  the  body  befides  ;  that  it  comes 
upon  thofe  places  efpecially  which  are  more 
clofely  covered  ;  and  that  it  can  be  brought 
out  upon  particular  parts  by  external  appli- 
cations. 

DCCXXIV. 

It  is  to  be  obferved,  that  this  eruptive  dif- 
eafe  differs  from  the  other  exanthemata-  in 
many  circumftances  ;  in  its  not  being  conta- 
gious, and  therefore  never  epidemic  ;  that  the 
eruption  appears  at  no  determined  period  of 
the  difeafe  ;  that  the  eruption  has  no  deter- 
mined duration  ;  that  fucceffive  eruptions  -fre- 
quently appear  in  the  courfe  of  the  fame  fe- 
ver ;  and  that  fuch  eruptions  frequently  recur 
in  the  courfe  of  the  fame  perfon's  life. 

All  thefe  circumftances  render  it  extremely 
probable,  that,  in  the  miliary  fever,  the  mor- 
bific matter  is  not  a  fubfi (ling  contagion  com- 
municated to  the  blood,  and  thence,  in  corife- 
quence  of  fever  and  aftimilation,  thrown  out 
E  4  upon; 


$2  PRACTICE 

upon  the  furface  of  the  body ;  but  a  matter 
occafionally  produced  in  the  fkin  itfelf,  by 
fweating. 

DCCXXV. 

This  conelufion  is  further  rendered  proba- 
ble from  hence,  that,  while  the  miliary  erup- 
tion has  no  peculiar  fymptoms,  or  concourfe 
of  fymptoms,  belonging  to  it  ;  yet,  upon  oc- 
casion, it  accompanies  almofx  all  febrile  difeaf- 
es,  whether  inflammatory  or  putrid,  if  thefe 
happen  to  be  attended  with  fweating ;  and 
from  thence  it  may  be  preiumed,  that  the  mil- 
iary eruption  is  a  fymptomatic  afre£tion  only, 
produced  in  the  manner  we  have  faid. 

DCCXXVL 

But,  as  this  fymptomatic  affection  does  not 
always  accompany  every  inftance  of  fweating, 
it  may  be  proper  to  inquire,  what  are  the  cir- 
cumflances  which  efpecially  determine  this  e- 
ruption  to  appear  ?  To  this,  however,  I  can 
give  no  full  and  proper  anfwer.  I  cannot 
fay  that  there  is  any  one  circumftance  which 
in  all  cafes  gives  occalion  to  this  eruption  ; 
nor  can  I  fay  what  different  caufes  may,  in 
different  cafes,  give  occafion  to  it.  There  is 
only  one  obfervation  I  can  offer  to  the  pur- 
pofe  of  this  inquiry  ;  and  it  is,  that,  of  the 
perfons  fweating  under  febrile  difeafes,  thofe 
are  efpecially  liable  to  the  miliary  eruption, 

who 


OF       PHYSIC.  93 

who  have  been  previously  weakened  by  large 
evacuations,  particularly  of  blood.  This  will 
explain  why  it  happens  to  lying  in  women 
more  frequently  than  to  any  other  perfons  ; 
and  to  confirm  this  explanation,  I  have  re- 
marked, that  the  eruption  happened  to  women 
not  in  childbed,  but  who  had  been  much 
fubjecled  to  a  frequent  and  copious  menilru- 
ation,  and  to  an  almoft  conftant  fluor  albus. 
I  have  alfo  had  occaiion  to  obferve  it  happen 
to  men  in  fevers,  after  wounds  from  which 
they  had  fufrered  a  great  lofs  of  blood. 

Further,  that  this  eruption  is  produced  by 
a  certain  ftate  of  debility^  will  appear  proba- 
ble, from  its  often  occurring  in  fevers  of  the 
putrid  kind,  which  are  always  attended  with 
great  debility.  It  is  true,  that  it  alio  fome— 
times  attends  inflammatory  difeafes,  when  it 
cannot  be  accounted  for  in  the  fame :  manner  ■• 
but  I  believe  it  will  be  found  to  attend  efpec- 
ially  thofe  inflammatory  difeafes  in  which  the- 
fweats  have  been  long  protracted  or  frequent-,. 
ly  repeated,  and  which  have  thereby  produc- 
ed a  debility,  and  perhaps  a  debilitating  gu=« 
trid  diathefis. 

Bccxxvir... 

It  appears  fo- clearly  to  me  that  this  erup- 
tion is  always  a  fymptomatic  and  factitious  a£~ 
fe&ion,  that  I  am  perfuadedit  may  be  in  moil: 
cafes    prevented  merely   by  avoiding  fweats. 
Spontaneous  fweatings,  in  the  beginning    cf 

Vol.  2.,  E  5  -     difeafes^ 


94  PRACTICE 

difeafes,  are  very  rarely  critical ;  all  fweatings, 
not  evidently  critical,  mould  be  prevented  ; 
and  the  promoting  them,  by  increafing  exter- 
nal heat,  is  commonly  very  pernicious.  Even 
critical  fweats  mould  hardly  be  encouraged 
hy  fuch  means.  If,  therefore,  fpontaneous 
iwe^ts  arife,  they  are  to  be  checked  by  the 
coolnefs  of  the  chamber  ;  by  the  lightnefs  and 
loofenefs  of  the  bed  clothes  ;  by  the  perfons 
laying  out  their  hands  and  arms,  and  by  their 
taking  cold  drink  ;  and,  by  thefe  precautions, 
I  think  I  have  frequently  prevented  miliary 
eruptions,  which  were  otherwife  likely  to  have 
appeared,  particularly  in  lying  in  women, 

DCCXXVIII. 

But  it  may  happen,  when  thefe  precautions 
have  been  neglected,  or  from  other  circum- 
flances,  that  a  miliary  eruption  does  actually 
appear  ;  and  the  queftionwill  thenbe  put,  how 
the  cafe  is  to  be  treated  ?  It  is  a  queftion  of 
confequence,  becaufe  I  believe  that  the  matter 
here  generated  is  often  of  a  virulent  kind  •  it 
is  frequently  the  offspring  of  putrefcency  ,•  andj, 
when  treated  by  increafing  the  external  heat 
of  the  body,  it  feems  to  acquire  a  virulence 
which  produces  thofe  fymptoms  mentioned  in 
DCCXIX,  and  proves  certainly  fatal. 

It  has  been  an  unhappy  opinion  with  moll 
phyficians,  that  eruptive  difeafes  were  ready 
to  be  hurt  by  cold  ;  and  that  it  was  therefore 
neceflary  to  cover  up  the  body  very  clofely,  fo 

as 


OF       PHYSIC,  95 

as  thereby  to  increafe  the  external  heat.     We 
now  know  that   this  is   a  mi  flake n  opinion  ; 
that  increafmg  the  external  heat  of  the  body- 
is   very  generally  mifchievous  ;   and  that  fev- 
eral  eruptions  not  only  admit,  but  require  the 
application  of  cold  air.     We  are  now  perfuad- 
ed,  that  the  practice  which  formerly  prevailed, , 
in  the  cafe  of  miliary  eruptions,  of  covering 
up    the   body  clofe,   and  both  by    external 
means,   and  internal   remedies,    encouraging 
the  fweatings  which  accompany  this  eruption,, 
was    highly  pernicious,  and  commonly  fatal.. 
I  am  therefore  of  opinion,  even  when  a  milia- 
ry eruption  has  appeared,    that  in    all  cafes, 
where  the  fweating  is  not  manifeflly  critical, 
we  mould   employ   ail  the  feveral  means  of 
flopping  it  that  are  mentioned  above  ;  and    I 
have   fometimes  had  occafion  to  obferve,  that 
even  the   admiflion .  of  cool  air  was    fafe    and! 
ufefuh 

Dccxxrx. 

This  is,  in  general,  the  treatment  ofrrmiary 
eruptions  ;  but,  at  the  fame  time,  the  remedies 
fuited  to  the  primary  difeafe  are  to  be  employ- 
ed ;  and  therefore,  when  the  eruption  happens 
to  accompany  inflammatory  affections.,  and 
when  the  fulnefs  and  hardnefs  of  the  pulfe  or 
other  fymptoms  fhow  an  inflammatory  ftate : 
prefent,  the  cafe  is  to  be  treated  by  bloodlet-. 
ting,  purging,  and  other  antiphlogiflic.  rem- 
edies,. 

E.6  Wpom 


96  PRACTICE 

Upon  the  other  hand,  when  the  miliary 
eruption  attends  difeafes  in  which  debility  and 
putrefcency  prevail,  it  will  be  proper  to  avoid 
all  evacuations,  and  employ  tonic  and  antifep- 
tic  remedies,  particularly  the  Peruvian  bark, 
cold  drink,  and  cold  air. 

I  mall  conclude  this  fubjecl:  with  mention- 
ing, that  the  venerable  octogenarian  practi- 
tioner, de  Fifcher,  when  treating  of  this  fub- 
jecl:, in  laying  down  the  indications  of  cure, 
has  given  this  as  one  of  them  :  c  Excretionis 
*  periphericae   non  primariam   habere  ratio- 


CHAP. 


OF       PHYSIC.  97 


CHAP.         VIII. 


of  the    REMAINING    EXANTHE- 
MATA. 


URTICARIA,  PEMPHIGUS,  and  APHTHA, 


DCCXXX. 

1HE  Nettle  Rafh  is  a  name 
applied  to  two  different  difeafes.  The  one  is 
the  chronic  eruption  defcribed  by  Dr.  He- 
berden  in  the  Medical  Tranfa&ions,  Vol.  I. 
art.  xvii.  which,  as  not  being  a  febrile  diforder, 
does  not  belong  to  this  place.  The  other  is 
the  Urticaria  of  our  Synopfis,  which,  as  taken 
into  every  fyftern  of  Nofology  as  one  of  the 
Exanthemata  Febrilia,  is  properly  to  be  treat- 
ed of  here. 

DCCXXXI. 

I  have  never  obferved  this  difeafe  as  conta- 
gious and  epidemic;  and  the  few  fporadic  cafes 

of 


9*  PRACTICE 

of  it  wHIch  have  occurred  to  me,  have  feldom 
taken  the  regular  courfe  defcribed  by  authors. 
At  the  fame  time,  as  the  accounts  of  different 
authors  are  not  very  uniform,  and  hardly  con- 
fident, I  cannot  enter  further  into  the  confid- 
eration  of  this  fubject  ;  and  I  hope  it  is  not 
very  necefiary,  as  on  all  hands  it  is  agreed  to  be 
a  mild  difeafe,  and  fuch  as  feldom  requires  the 
ufe  of  remedies.  It  is  generally  fuflicient  to 
obferve  an  antiphlogifdc  regimen,  and  to  keep 
the  patient  in  a  temperature  that  is  neither- 
hot  nor  cold. 

DCCXXXIL 

The  Pemphigus,  or  Veficular  fever,  is  a 
rare  and  uncommon  difeafe,  and  very  few  in- 
fiances  of  it  are  recorded  in  the  writings  of  phy- 
ficians.  As  I  have  never  had  occafion  to  fee 
it,  it  would  be  improper  for  me  to  treat  of  it  ; 
and  I  do  not  choofe  to  repeat  after  others, 
while  the  difeafe  has  yet  been  little  obferved, 
and  its  character  does  not  feem  to  be  exactly 
afcertained.  Vid.  Acta  Helvetica,  vol.  ii.  p. 
260.  Synopf.  Nofolog.  vol.  ii;  p.  149. 

DCCXXXIII 

The  Aphtha,  or  Thrufh,  is  a  difeafe  better 
known  ;  and,  as  it  commonly  appears  in  in- 
fants, it  is  fo  well  underilood,  as  not  to  need 
our  treating  of  it  here.  As  an  idiopathic  dif- 
eafe,  affecting  adults3  I  nave  not  feen  it  in  this 

country  1 


OF       PHYSIC.  99 

country  ;  but  it  feems  to  be  more  frequent  in 
Holland  ;  and,  therefore,  for  the  ftudy  of  it,  I 
refer  to  Dr.  Boerhaave,  and  his  commentator 
Van  Swieten,  whofe  works  are  in  every  body's 
hands. 

DCCXXXIV. 

The  Petechia  has  been,  by  all  our  Nofolo- 
gifts,  enumerated  amongft  the  exanthemata  ; 
but  as,  according  to  the  opinion  of  mofl  phy- 
ficians,  it  is  very  juftly  held  to  be  always  a 
fymptomatic  afFe&ion  only,  I  cannot  give  it 
a  place  here. 


BOOK 


100 


BOOK 


IV. 


of      HEMORRHAGIC  8. 


CHAP. 


gf  HEMORRHAGY  in   GENERAL- 


DCCXXXV. 


IN  eftablifhing  a  clafs  or  or- 
der of  difeafes,  under  the  title  of  Hemorrha- 
gieSy  Nofologiils  have  employed  the  fingle 
circumllance  of  an  effuhon  of  red  blood,  as 
the  character  of  fuch  a  clafs  or  order.  By  this 
means,  they  have  aflbciated  difeafes  which  in 
their  nature  are  very  different  ;  but,,  in  every 
methodical  diftribution,  fuch  arbitrary  and 
unnatural  affociations  mould  be  avoided  as 
much  as  poflible.  Further,  by  that  manage- 
ment 


O  F     P  H  Y  S  I  C.  101 

ment  Nofologifls  have  fuppreffed  or  loft  fight 
of  an  eftablifhed  and  well  founded  diitin&ion 
of  hemorrhagies  into  Active  and  Pafhve. 

DCCXXXVI. 

It  is  my  defign  to  reftore  this  diflinction  ; 
and  I  mall  therefore  here,  under  the  title  of 
Hemorrhagies,  comprehend  thofe  on1)/  which 
have  been  commonly  called  Active,  that  is, 
thofe  attended  with  fome  degree  of  pyrexia  ; 
which  feem  always  to  depend  upon  an  increaf- 
ed  impetus  of  the  blood  in  the  veiTels  pouring 
it  out,  and  which  chiefly  arife  from  an  inter- 
nal caufe.  In  this  I  follow  Dr.  Hoffman, 
who  joins  the  active  hemorrhagies  with  the  fe- 
brile difeafes  ,♦  and  have  accordingly  eftablifh- 
ed thefe  hemorrhagies  as  an  order  in  the  clafs 
of  pyrexia.  From  this  order  I  exclude  all 
thofe  effufions  of  red  blood  that  are  owing  en- 
tirely to  external  violence ;  and  ail  thofe  which, 
though  arifing  from  internal  caufe s,  are,  how- 
ever, not  attended  with  pyrexia,  and  which 
feem  to  be  owing  to  a  putrid  fluidity  of  the 
blood,  to  the  weaknefs  or  to  the  erofion  of  the 
veffels,  rather  than  to  any  increafed  impetus 
of  the  blood  in  them. 

DCCXXXVII. 

Before  proceeding  to  treat  of  thofe  proper 
hemorrhagies  which  form  an  order  in  our 
Nofologyj  I  fhall  treat  of  active  hemorrhagy 

in 


io2  PRACTICE 

in  general ;  and  indeed  the  feveral  genera  and 
fpecies,  to  be  treated  of  particularly  afterwards, 
have  fo  many  circumflances  in  common  with' 
one  another,  that  the  general  confideration  to 
be  now  offered  will  prove  both  proper  and 
ufeful. 


Sect.        I. 
Of  the  Phenomena  of   Hemorrhagy, 

DCCXXXVIII. 

THE  phenomena  of  hemorrhagy  are  gen- 
erally the  following. 

Hemorrhagies  happen  efpecially  in  plethor- 
ic habits,  and  to  perfons  of  a  fanguine  tem- 
perament. They  appear  moil  commonly  in 
the  fpring,  or  in  the  beginning  of  fummer. 

For  fome  time,  longer  or  fhorter  in  differ- 
ent cafes,  before  the  blood  flows,  there  are 
fome  fymptoms  of  fulnefs  and  tenfion  about 
the  parts  from  v/hence  the  blood  is  to  iffue. 
In  fuch  parts  as  fall  under  our  viewy  there  are 
fome  rednefs,  fwelling,  and  fenfe  of  heat  or  of 
itching  ;  and  in  the  internal  parts,  from  which 
blood  is  to  flow,  there  is  a  fenfe  of  weight  and 
heat ;'  and,  in  both  cafes,  various  pains  are- 
often  felt  in  the  neighbouring  parts. 

DCCXXXIX, 


OF       PHYSIC.  103 


DCCXXXIX. 

When  thefe  fymptoms  have  fubfifted  for 
fome  time,  fome  degree  of  a  cold  ftage  of  py- 
rexia comes  on,  and  a  hot  ftage  is  formed  - 
during  which,  the  blood  flows  of  a  florid  col- 
our, in  a  greater  or  leffer  quantity,  and  contin- 
ues to  flow  for  a  longer  or  fhorter  time  ;  but 
commonly,  after  fome  time,  the  efFufion  fpon- 
taneoufiy  ceafes,  and  together  with  it  the  py- 
rexia alfo. 

DCCXL, 

During  the  hot  ftage  which  precedes  an 
hemorrhagy,  the  pulfe  is  frequent,  quick,  full, 
and  often  hard  ;  but,  as  the  blood  flows,  the 
pulfe  becomes  fofter  and  lefs  frequent. 

DCCXLI 

In  hemorrhagies,  blood  drawn  from  a  vein 
does,  upon  its  concreting,  commonly  fhow  the 
gluten  Separated,  or  a  emit  formed,  as  in  the 
cafes  of  Phlegmafiae. 

DCCXLIL 

Hemorrhagies,  from  internal  caufes,  hav- 
ing once  happened,  are  apt,  after  a  certain  in- 
terval, to  return ;  in  fome  cafes  very  often,  and 
frequently  at  Hated  periods. 

DCCXLIII, 


104  PRACTICE 


DCCXLIII. 

Thefe  are,  in  general,  the  phenomena  of 
hemorrhagy  ;  and  if  in  fome  cafes  all  of  them 
be  not  exquintely  marked,  or  if  perhaps  fome 
of  them  do  not  at  all  appear,  it  imports  only, 
that,  in  different  cafes,  the  fyflem  is  more  or 
lefs  generally  affecled  ;  and  that,  in  fome  caf- 
es, there  are  purely  topical  hemorrhagies,  as 
there  are  purely  topical  inflammations. 


t.  II. 


Of  the    Proximate     Cause    of   Hemgr- 

RKAGY. 


DCCXLIV. 

THE  pathology  of  hemorrhagy  feems  to  be 
fufficiently  obvious.  Some  inequality  in  the 
diftribution  of  the  blood,  occahons  acongeft- 
ion  in  particular  parts  of  the  fanguiferous 
fyflem  ;  that  is,  a  greater  quantity  of  blood  is 
poured  into  certain  veifels  than  their  natural 
capacity  is  fuited  to  receive.  Thefe  veifels 
become,  thereby  preternaturally  diftended  ; 
and  this  diflention,  proving  a  ilimulus  to 
them,  excites  their  a£tion  to  a  greater  degree 
than  ufual,  which,  pufhing  the  blood  with  un- 

ufual 


OF       PHYSIC. 


•°5 


ufual  force  into  the  extremities  of  thefe  veffels, 
opens  them  by  anaftomofis,  or  rupture  ;  and, 
if  thefe  extremities  be  loofely  fituated  on  ex- 
ternal furfaces,  or  on  the  internal  furfaces  of 
certain  cavities  that  open  outwardly,  a  quanti- 
ty of  blood  flows  out  of  the  body. 

DCCXLV. 

This  reafoning  will,  in  fome  meafure,  ex- 
plain the  production  of  hemorrhagy.  But  it 
appears  to  me,  that,  in  moft  cafes,  there  are 
fome  other  circumftances  that  concur  to  pro- 
duce it  ;  for  it  is  probable,  that  in  confequenoe 
of  congeftion,  a  fenfe  of  refinance  arifes,  and 
excites  the  aclion  of  the  Vis  Medicatrix  Na- 
turae ;  the  exertions  of  which  are  ufually  made 
by  the  formation  of  a  cold  ft  age  of  pyrexia, 
inducing  a  more  vigorous  a&ion  of  the  vef- 
fels ;  and  the  concurrence  of  this  exertion 
more  effectually  opens  the  extremities,  and 
occafions  the  flowing  out  of  the  blood. 

DCCXLVI. 

What  has  been  delivered  in  the  two  preced- 
ing paragraphs,  feems  to  explain  the  whole 
phenomena  of  hemorrhagy,  except  the  cir- 
cumflance  of  its  frequent  recurrence,  which  I 
apprehend  may  be  explained  in  the  following 
manner.  The  congeftion  and  confequent  ir- 
ritation being  taken  off  by  the  flowing  of  the 
blood  ;  this,  therefore,  foon  after,  fpontane- 

oufly 


io6         PRACTICE 

oufly  ceafes ;  but,  at  the  fame  time,  the  in- 
ternal caufes  which  had  before  produced  the 
unequal  diflribution  of  the  blood,  commonly 
remain,  and  mufl  now  operate  the  more  read- 
ily, as  the  overftretched  and  relaxed  veffels  of 
the  part  will  more  eafily  admit  of  a  congeft- 
ion  of  blood  in  them,  and,  confequently,  pro- 
duce the  fame  feries  of  phenomena  as  before, 

DCCXLVII. 


This  may  fufficiently  explain  the  ordinary 
return  of  hemorrhagy  ;  but  there  is  flill  an- 
other circumftance,  which,  as  commonly  con- 
curring, is  to  be  taken  notice  of ;  and  that  is, 
the  general  plethoric  fiate  of  the  fyftem, 
which  renders  every  caufe  of  unequal  diflri- 
bution of  more  confiderable  effect.  Though 
hemorrhagy  may  often  depend  upon  the  flate 
of  the  veffels  of  a  particular  part  being  favour- 
able to  a  congeflion's  being  formed  in  them  ; 
yet,  in  order  to  that  flate's  producirig  its  ef- 
fect, it  is  neceffary  that  the  whole  fyflem 
mould  be  at  leafl  in  its  natural  plethoric  con- 
dition ;  and,  if  this  mould  be  in  any  degree 
increafed  beyond  what  is  natural,  it  will  flill 
more  certainly  determine  the  effects  of  topical 
conformation  to  take  place.  The  return  qi 
hemorrhagy,  therefore,  will  be  more  cer- 
tainly occafioned,  if  the  fyflem  becomes  pre- 
ternaturally  plethoric  ;  but  hemorrhagy  has 
always   a  tendency   to  inxreafe  the  plethoric 

flate 


OF       PHYSIC.  107 

flate  of  the  fyfl  em,  and,  consequently,   to  oc- 
cafion  its  own  return. 

DCCXLVIII. 

To  fhow  that  hemorrhagy  does  contribute 
to  produce  or  increafe  the  plethoric  Pcate  of 
the  fyflem,  it  is  only  neceflary  to  obferve, 
that  the  quantity  of  lerous  fluids  being  given, 
the  flate  of  the  excretions  depends  upon  a  cer- 
tain balance  between  the  force  of  the  larger 
arteries  propelling  the  blood,  and  the  re  lift* 
ance  of  the  excretories  ;  but  the  force  of  the 
arteries  depends  upon  their  fulnefs  and  dif- 
tention,  chiefly  given  to  them  by  the  quanti- 
ty of  red  globules  and  gluten,  which  are,  for 
the  greatefl  pare,  confined  to  the  red  arteries  ; 
and  therefore,  the  fpoliation  made  by  an  hem- 
orrhagy, being  chiefly  of  red  globules  and 
gluten,  the  efFunon  of  blood  mult  leave  the 
red  arteries  more  empty  and  weak.  In  con- 
sequence of  the  weaker  a£lion  of  the  red  ar- 
teries, the  excretions  are  in  proportion  dimin- 
iflied  ;  and,  therefore,  the  ingefta  continuing 
the  fame,  more  fluids  will  be  accumulated  in 
the  larger  veflels.  It  is  by  this  means  that 
the  lofs  of  blood  by  hemorrhagies,  whether  ar- 
tificial or  fpontaneous,  if  within  certain  bounds, 
is  commonly  fo  foon  recovered ;  but,  as  the 
diminution  of  the  excretions,  from  a  lefs 
quantity  of  fluid  being  impelled  into  the  ex- 
cretories, gives  occafion  to  thefe  veflels  to  fall 
into  a  contracted  ftate ;  fo,  if  this  fliall  contin- 
ue 


icS  PRACTICE 

ue  long,  thefe  vefTels  will  become  more  rigid, 
and  will  not  yield  to  the  fameirnpellingforceas 
before.  Although  the  arteries,  therefore,  by 
new  blood  collected  in  them,  mail  have  recov- 
ered their  former  fulnefs,  tenfion,  and  force  ; 
yet  this  force  will  not  be  in  balance  with  the 
refiftance  of  the  more  rigid  excretories,  fo  as 
to  reftore  the  former  Hate  of  excretion  ;  and, 
confequently,  a  further  accumulation  will  take 
place  in  the  arteries,  and  an  increafe  of  their 
plethoric  ftate  be  thereby  induced.  In  this 
manner,  we  perceive  more  clearly,  that  hem- 
orrhagy,  as  producing  a  more  plethoric  ftate  \ 
of  the  fyftem,  has  a  tendency  to  occafion  its 
own  recurrence  with  greater  violence  ;  and, 
as  the  renewal  and  further  accumulation  of 
blood  require  a  determinate  time,  fo,  in  the 
feveral  repetitions  of  hemcrrhagy,  that  time 
will  be  nearly  the  fame  ;  and  therefore  the  re- 
turns of  hernorrhagy  will  be  commonly  at 
ftated  periods,  as  has  been  obferved  frequent- 
ly to  happen. 

DCCXLIX. 

I  have  thus  explained  the  nature  of  hem- 
crrhagy in  general,  as  depending  upon  fome 
inequality  in  the  diftribution  of  the  blood, 
occafioning  a  congeflion  of  it  in  particu- 
lar parts  of  the  fanguiferous  fyftem.  It  is  in- 
deed probable,  that,  in  moft  perfons,  the  fev- 
eral parts  of  the  fanguiferous  fyftem  are  in 
balance  with  one  another  ;  and  that  the  den- 

fitv, 


O  F       P  H  Y  S  I  C.  109 

'fit\r,  and  confequently  the  refiftatice,  in  the 
feveral  veffels,  is  in  proportion  to  the  quantity 
of  blood  which  each  mould  receive  ;  from 
whence  it  frequently  happens,  that  no  ine- 
quality in  the  diflribution  of  the  blood  takes 
place  in  the  courfe  of  a  long  life.  If,  howev- 
er, we  confider  that  the  fanguiferous  fyflem 
is  conflantly  in  a  plethoric  flate,  that  is,  that 
the  veffels  are  conflantly  diflended  beyond 
that  fize  which  they  would  be  if  free  from 
any  diflending  force,  we  mall  be  fatisfied  that 
this  Rate  may  be  readily  changed.  For  as, 
on  the  one  hand,  the  vefiels  are  elaflic,  fo  as  to 
be  under  a  conflant  tendency  to  contrail:  up- 
on the  withdrawing  of  any  part  of  the  diflend- 
ing force  ;  and>  on  the  other  hand,  are  not  fo 
rigid  but  that,  by  an  increafe  of  the  impetus 
of  the  blood  in  them,  they  may  be  more  than 
ordinarily  diflended  ;  fo  we  can  eafily  under- 
fland  how,  in  mofl  perfons,  caufes  of  an  in- 
creafed  contraction  or  diflention  may  arife  in 
one  part  or  other  of  the  fyflem,  or  that  an  un- 
equal diflribution  may  take  place  ;  and  how, 
in  anexquifitely  diflended  or  plethoric  fyflem, 
a  fmall  inequality  in  the  diflribution  of  the 
blood  may  form  thofe  congeflions  which  give 
occafion  to  hemorrhagy. 

DCCL. 

In  this  manner  I  endeavour  to  explain  how 
hemorrhagy  may  be  occafioned  at  any  period 
of  life,  or  in  any  part  of  the  body  ;  but  hem- 

Vol.  II.  F  orrhagies 


no  PRACTICE 

orrhagies  happen  in  -certain  parts  more  fre- 
quently than  in  others,  and  at  certain  periods 
of  life  more  readily  than  at  others  ;  and  there- 
fore, in  delivering  the  general  doctrine  of 
hemorrhagy,  it  may  be  required  that  I  mould 
explain  thofe  circumftances  which  produce 
the  fpecialities  mentioned  ;  -and  I  fhall  now 
attempt  it. 

DCCLI. 

The  human  -body,  from  being  of  a  fmall 
bulk  at  its  firft  formation,  grows  afterwards  to 
a  confiderable  fize.  This  increafe  of  bulk 
confifts,  in  a  great  meafure,  in  the  increafe  of 
the  quantity  of  fluids,  and  a  proportional  en- 
largement of  the  containing  veflels.  But,  at 
the  fame  time,  the  quantity  of  folid  matter  is 
alfo  gradually  increafed  ;  and,  in  whatever 
manner  we  may  fuppofe  this  to  be  done,  it  is 
probable  that  the  progrefs,  in  the  whole  of 
the  growth  of  animal  bodies,  depends  upon 
the  extenfion  of  the  arterial  fyftem  ;  and  fuch 
is  the  conftitution  of  the  fanguiferous  fyftem, 
that  the  motion  of  the  blood  in  the  arteries 
has  a  conftant  tendency  to  extend  them  in  ev- 
ery dimenfion. 

D.OCLII. 

As  the  ftate  of  the  animal  folid  is,  at  the 
firft  formation    of  the  body,    very  lax    and 
yielding  ;  fo  the  extenfion  of  the  fyftem  pro- 
ceeds, 


OF       PHYSIC.  in 

ceeds,  at  firft,  very  fa  ft  ,•  but,  as  the  extenfion 
gives  occafion  to  the  appofition  of  more  mat- 
ter to  the  folid  parts,  thefe  .are,  in  proportion 
to  their  extenfion,  conftantly  acquiring  a  great- 
er denfity,  and  therefore  giving  more  refift- 
ance  to  their  further  extenfion  and  growth. 
Accordingly,  we  obferve^  that  as  the  growth 
of  the  body  advances,  its  increafe,  in  any  giv- 
en time,  becomes  proportionally  lefs  and  lefs, 
till  at  length  it  ceafes  altogether. 

DCCLIII. 

This  is  the  general  idea  of  the  growth  of 
the  human  body,  till  it  attain  the  utmoft  bulk 
w  hich  it  is  capable  of  acquiring  ;  but  it  is  to 
be  remarked,  that  this  growth  does  not  pro- 
ceed equally  in  every  part  of  the  body  ;  it 
being  requilite  for  the  economy  of  the  fyftem, 
that  certain  parts  ftiould  be  firft  evolved,  and 
fhould  alfo  acquire  their  full  bulk  fooner  than 
others.  This  appears  particularly  with  re- 
fpecl;  to  the  head  ;  the  parts  of  which  appear 
to  be  firft  evolved,  and  fooneft  to  acquire  their 
full  fize. 

DCCLIV. 

To  favour  this  unequal  growth,  it  is  pre- 
fumed,  that  the  dimensions  or  the  laxitv  of 
the  veffels  of  the  head,  or  that  the  direction 
of  the  force  of  the  blood,  are  adapted  to  the 
purpofe  j  and  from  what  has  been  faid  in 
F  2  DC  CUT, 


112  P   K    A    C   T    I    C    E 

DCCLII,  it  will  alfo  certainly  follow,  that  as 
the  veflels  of  the  head  grow  fafteft,  and  foon- 
eft  acquire  their  full  fize,  fo  they  will  fooneft 
alfo  acquire  that  denfity  which  will  prevent 
their  further  extenfion.  While,  however,  the 
force  of  the  heart,  and  the  quantity  of  the  flu- 
ids, with  refpecl  to  the  whole  fyftem,  remain 
the  fame,  the  diftending  and  extending  pow- 
ers will  be  directed  to  fuch  parts  as  have  not 
yet  acquired  the  fame  denfity  and  dimenfions 
as  thofe  firft  evolved  ;  and  thus  the  diftending 
and  extending  powers  will  proceed  to  operate 
till  every  part  of  the  fyftem,  in  refpect  of  den- 
fity and  refiftance,  fhall  have  been  brought  to 
be  in  balance  with  -every  other,  and  till  the 
whole  be  in  balance  with  the  force  of  the  heart, 
fo  that  there  can  be  no  further  growth  in  any 
particular  part,  unlefs  fome  preternatural  cir- 
cum  fiance  fhall  happen  to  arife. 

DCCLV. 

In  this  procefs  of  the  growth  of  the  body, 
as  it  feems  in  general  to  depend  upon  a  cer- 
tain balance  between  the  force  of  the  heart  or 
diftending  power,  and  the  refiftance  of  the 
folids  ;  fo  it  will  appear,  that,  while  the  folids 
remain  very  lax  and  yielding,  fome  occafion- 
al  increafe  of  the  diftending  power  may  arife 
without  producing  any  very  perceptible  dis- 
order in  the  fyftem.  But,  it  will  alfo  appear, 
that,  in  proportion  as  the  diftending  power 
and  refiftance  of  the  folids  come  to  be  more 

nearly 


O  F       P  II  Y  S  I  C.  113 

nearly  in  exact  balance  with  one  another,  fo 
any  increafe  of  thediftending  power  will  more 
readily  produce  a  rupture  of  veffe 
do  not  eafily  yield  to  extenfton. 

DCCLVI. 


From  all  this,  it  mull  follow,  that  the  ef- 
fects of  any  unufually  plethoric  (late  of  the 
fyftem,  will  be  different  according  as  this  fhall 
occur  at  different  periods  of  the  growth  of 
the  body.  Accordingly,  it  is  evident,  that  if 
the  plethoric  Hate  ariies  while  the  head  is  yec 
growing,  and  while  the  determination  of  the 
blood  is  flill  more  to  the  head  than  to  the 
other  parts,  the  increafed  quantity  of  the 
blood  will  be  efpeciaily  determined  to  the 
head ;  and  as  there  alfo,  at  the  fame  time,  the 
balance  between  the  diftending  and  extending 
powers  is  moil  nearly  adjufled,  fo  the  deter- 
mination of  the  blood  will  moll  readily  pro- 
duce in  that  part  a  rupture  of  the  veffels,  or  an 
hemorrhagy.  Hence  it  is,  that  hemorrhagies 
of  the  nofe  fo  frequently  happen  in  young 
perfons  ;  and  in  thefe  more  readily,  as  they 
approach  nearer  to  their  acme,  or  full  growth  ; 
or,  it  may  be  faid,  perhaps  more  prop- 
erly, as  they  approach  nearer  to  the  age  of 
puberty,  when  perhaps,  in  both  fexes,  but  ef- 
peciaily in  the  female,  a  new  determination 
arifes  in  the  fyftem. 

F  a  DCCLVIL 


114  PRACTICE 


DCCLVII. 

The  determination  Qt  a  greater  quantity  of 
blood  to  the  veffels  of  the  head,  might  be  fup- 
pofed  to  occalion  a  rupture  of  veffels  in  other 
parts  of  the  head  as  well  as  in  the  nofe  ;   but 
inch  a  rupture  does  not  commonly   happen  ; 
becaufe,  in  the  nofe,  there  is,  for  the  purpofe 
of  fenfe,  a  confiderable  network  of  blood  vef- 
fels expanded  on  the  internal   furface  of  the 
noftrils,  and  covered  only  with  thin  and  weak 
teguments.     From  this  circumflance  it  isi  that 
upon  any  -increafed  impetus  of  the  blood  in 
the  veffels  of  the  head,    thofe  of  the  nofe  are 
mod  eahly  broken  ;  and  the  effufion  from  the 
nofe  taking  place,  it  not  only  relieves  the  oth- 
er extremities  of  the  external  carotid,  to  which 
the  arteries    of  the  nofe   chiefly   belong,  but 
relieves  alfo,  in  a  great  meafure,  the  fyftem  of 
the  internal  carotid.      For,  from  the  internal 
carotid,  certain  branches  are  fent  to  the  nofey 
are   fpread  out  on   its   internal   furface>  and 
probably  inofculated  with    the  extremities  of 
the  external  carotid;  fo  that,  whichfoever   of 
the    extremities  are  broken,   the   yif  der.iva- 
tionis  of  Haller  will  take  place  ;   the   effufion 
will  relieve  the  whole  fanguiferous  fyftem  of 
the  head  ;  and  the  fame  effufion  will  alfo  com- 
monly prevent  an   hemorrhagy  happening  at 
the,  fame  time  in  any  other  part  of  the  body. 


DCCLVIII. 


OF       PHYSIC.  11 


DCCLVIII. 

From  thefe  principles,  it  will  appear   why 
hemorrhagies  of  the  nofe,  fo  frequent  before 


rr 


no  ii 


the  period  of  puberty,  or  of  the  acme, 
happen  after  thefe  periods  ;  and  I  mud  ob- 
ferve  further,  that  although  they  fliould  oc- 
cur, they  would  not  afford  any  objection  to 
my  doclrine,  as  fuch  hemorrhagies  might  be 
imputed  to  a  peculiar  laxity  of  the  veileis  of 
the  nofe,  and  perhaps  to  a  habit  acquired  with 
lefpecl  to  thefe  veflels,  while  the  balance  of 
the  fyilem  might  be  otherwife  duly  adjufted. 

DCCLIX. 

When  the  procefs  of  the  growth  of  the 
body  goes  on  regularly,  and  the  balance  of 
the  fyftem  is  properly  adjufled  to  the  gradu- 
al growth  of  the  whole,  as  well  as  to  the  fuc- 
ceffive  growth  of  the  feveral  parts,  even  a  ple- 
thoric ftate  does  not  produce  any  hemorrhagv, 
or  at  leaft  any  after  that  of  the  nofe  ;  but  if, 
while  the  plethoric  ftate  continues,  any  ine- 
quality fhall  alfo  fubfift  in  any  of  the  parts  of 
the  fyftem,  congeftions,  hemorrhagic  or  in- 
flammatory, may  be  ftill  readily  formed. 

DCCLX, 

In  genera],  it  may  be  obferved,  that,  when 

the  feveral   parts  of  the  fyftem  of  the  aorta 

F  4  have 


n6   '  P   R   A    C   T    I    C   E 

have  attained  their  full  growth,  and  arc  duly 
balanced  with  one  another,  if  then,  any  con— 
iiderable  degree  of  plethora  remain  or  arife,. 
the  nicety  of  the  balance  will  be  between  the 
lyftems  of  the  aorta  and  pulmonary  artery,  or 
between  the  veffels  of  the  lungs  and  thofe  of 
all  the  reft  of  the  body.  And  although  the 
leffer  capacity  of  the  veiTels  of  the  lungs  is 
commonly  compenfated  by  the  greater  veloci- 
ty of  the  blood  in  them  ;  yet  if  this  velocity 
be  not  always  adjufted  to  the  necefiary  com- 
pensation, it  is  probable  that  a  plethoric  (late 
of  the  whole  body  will  always  be  efpecially 
felt  in  the  lungs  ;  and  therefore,  that  an  hem- 
orrhagy,  as  the  efrecl  of  a  general  plethora, 
may  be  frequently  occahoned  in  the  lungs, 
even  though  there  be  no  fault  in  their  con- 

o 

formation. 

BCCLXh 

In  fome  cafes,  perhaps,  an  hemorrhagy 
from  the  lungs,  or  an  hemoptyfis,  does  arife 
from  the  general  plethoric  ftate  of  the  body  ; 
but  an  hemoptyfis  more  frequently  does,  and 
maybe  expecled  to  happen,  from  a  faulty  pro- 
portion between  the  capacity  of  the  lungs  and 
that  of  the  reft  of  the  body. 

DCCLXII. 

When  fuch  a  difproportion  takes  place,  it 
will  be  evident  that  an  hemoptylis  will  efpec- 
ially 


OF     PHYSIC.  117 

ially  happen  about  the  time  that  the  body  is 
approaching  to  its  acme  ;  that  is,  when  the 
fyftem  of  the  aorta  has  arrived  at  its  utmofl 
extenfion  and  re  fi  fiance,  and  when,  therefore, 
the  plethoric  (late  of  the  whole  muft  especial- 
ly affecl  the  lungs, 

DCCLXIII. 

Accordingly  it  has  been  conftantly  obferv- 
ed,  that  the  hemoptyfis  efpecially  occurs 
about  the  time  of  the  body's  arriving  at  its 
acme  ;  but  I  mud  remark  alio,  that  the  hem- 
orrhagy  may  occur  fooner  or  later,  according 
as  the  balance  between  the  veffels  of  the  lungs, 
and  thofe  of  the  fyftem  of  the  aorta,  happens 
to  be  more  or  lefs  exacily  adjufted  to  one  an- 
other ;  and  it  may  therefore  of  ten  occur  much 
later  than  the  period  mentioned,  when  that 
balance,  though  not  quite  even,  is  however 
not  fo  ill  adjufted,  but  that  fome  other  con- 
curring caufes  are  neceffary  to  give  it  effech. 

BCCLXIW 

It  was  anciently  remarked  by  Hippocrates,, 
and  has  been  confirmed  by  modern  obferva- 
tion,  that  the  hemoptyfis  generally  occurs  in 
perfons  between  the  age  of  fifteen  and  that  of 
five  and  thirty  ;  that  it  may  happen  at  any 
time  between  theie  two  periods  ;  but  that  it 
feldom  happens  before  the  former,  or  after  the 

Vol.  2/  F  5  latter; 


ii8  PRACTICE 

latter  ;  and  it  may  be  proper  here  to  inquire 
into  the  reafon  of  thefe  two  limitations. 

DCCLXV. 

With  refpe6l  to  the  firft,  the  reafon  of  it 
has  been  already  explained  in  DCCLXII 
andDCCLXIII. 

With  refpecl  to  the  fecond  limitation,  I 
expect  that  the  reafon  of  it  will  be  underftood 
from  the  following  coniiderations. 

It  has  been  already  obferved,  that  the  ex- 
tenfion  and  growth  of  the  body  require  the 
plethoric  ftate  of  the  arterial  fyftem  ;  and 
nature  has  provided  for  this,  partly  by  the 
conftitution  of  the  blood  being  fuch,  that 
a  great  portion  of  it  is  unfit  to  pafs  into  the 
exhalants  and  excretories  ;  partly  by  giving 
a  certain  denfity  and  refiftance  to  the  feveral 
exhalants  and  excretories  through  which  the 
fluids  might  pafs  out  of  the  red  arteries  ;  and 
partly,  but  efpecially,  by  a  refiftance  in  the 
veins  to  the  free  paffage  of  the  blood  into 
them  from  the  arteries. 

DCCLXVI. 

With  refpecl  to  this  lafl  and  chief  cireum- 
flance,  it  appears  from  the  experiments  of 
Sir  Clifton  Wintringham,  in  his  Experiment- 
al  Inquiry,  that  the  proportional  denfity  of 
the  coats  of  the  veins  to  that  of  the  coats  of 
the  arteries,  is  greater  in  young  than  in  old 

animals ; 


OF       PHYSIC.  119 

animals  :   From  which  it   may  be    prefumed, 
that  the  refinance  to  the  pailage  of  the   blood 
from  the   arteries    into    the   veins,  is  greater 
in  young  animals  than  in  old ;  and,  while  this 
refiftance  continues,  the  plethoric  ftate  of  the 
arteries  muft  be  confiantly  continued  and  fup~ 
ported.      As  however  the  denfity  of  the  coats 
of  the  vefTels,  confiding  chiefly  of  a  cellular 
texture,  is  increafed  by  preffure  ;  fo,  in  pro- 
portion as  the  coats  of  the  arteries   are   more 
expofed     to     preffure    by     diftention     than 
thole  of  the  veins,    the  former,  in  the  prog— 
refs  of  the  growth  of«  the  body,  muft  increafe- 
much  more  in  denfity   than  the   latter;  and' 
therefore  the  coats  of  the  arteries,  in  refpecV 
of  denfity  and  refiftance,  muft  come  in  time, 
not  only  to  be  in  balance  with    thofe   of  the 
veins,  but  to  prevail  over  them  :  A  fa6t  which1 
is    fufficiently   proved  by  the  experiments   of 
the  above  mentioned  ingenious  author. 

By  thefe  means,  the  proportional  quanti- 
ties of  blood  in  the  arteries  and  veins  muft 
change  in  the  courfe  of  life.  In  younger 
animals,  the  quantity  of  blood  in  the  arteries 
muft  be  proportionally  greater  than  in  old 
ones  ;  but,  by  the  increafing  denfity  of  the 
arteries,  the  quantity  of  blood  in  them  muft: 
be  continually  diminifhmg,  and  that  in  the- 
veins  be  proportionally  increafing,  fo  as  at 
length  to  be  in  a  proportionally  greater  quan- 
tity than  that  in  the  arteries.  When  this 
change  happens  in  tht  proportional  quanti- 
ties of  the  blood; in  the  arteries  and  veins,,  it 
F  6.  mufi 


i2o  PRACTICE 

mud  be  evident  that  the  plethoric  flate  of  the 
arteries  will  be  in  a  great  meafure  taken  off ; 
and  therefore  that  the  arterial  hemorrhagy  is 
no  longer  likely  to  happen ;  but  that,  if  a 
general  plethoric  (late  afterwards  take  place 
in  the  fyflem,  it  muft  efpecially  appear  iri 
the  veins. 

DCCLXVII. 

The  change  I  have  mentioned  to  happen 
in  the  (late  of  the  arterial  and  venous  fyftems, 
is  properly  Tuppofed  to  take  place  in  the -hu- 
man body  about  the  age  of  thirty  five  ;  when 
it  is  manifefl  that  the  vigour  of  the  body, 
which  depends  fo  much  upon  the  fulnefs  and 
tenfion  of  the  arterial  fyfiem,  no  longer 
increafes  ;  and  therefore  it  is,  that  the  fame 
age  is  the  period,  after  which  the  arterial 
hemorrhagy,  hemoptyfis,  hardly  ever  ap- 
pears. It  is  true  there  are  inilances  of  the 
hemoptyfis  happening  at  a  later  period  ;  but 
it  is  for  the  reafons  given  (DCCLVIII), 
which  fhow  that  an  hemorrhagy  may  happen 
at  any  period  of  life,  from  accidental  caufes 
forming  conge flions,  independent  of  the  flate 
of  the  balance  of  the  fyftem  at  that  particular 
period. 

DCCLXVI. 

I   have  faid  (DCCLXVI),  that   if    after 
the  age  of  thirty  five,- a  general   and  preter- 
natural 


OF       PHYSIC.  i2i 

natural  plethoric  ft  ate  occur,  it  muft  efpec- 
ially  appear  in  the  venous  fyftem  ;  and  I  muft 
now  obferve,  that  this  venous  plethora  may 
alfo  give  occaiion  to  hemorrhagy. 

DCCLXIX. 

If  a  plethoric  ftate  of  the  venous  fyftem 
take  place,  it  is  to  be  prefumed,  that  it  will 
efpecially  and  in  the  firft  place  affect  the  fyf- 
tem of  the  vena  portarum,  in  which  the  mo- 
tion of  the  venous  blood  is  more  flow  than 
elfewhere;  in  which  the  motion  of  the  blood 
is  little  aftifted  by  external  compreffion ;  and 
in  which,  from  the  want  of  valves  in  the 
veins  that  form  the  vena  portarum,  the  mo- 
tion of  the  blood  is  little  affifted  by  the  com- 
preffion that  is  applied  ;  while,  from  the  fame 
want  of  valves  in  thofe  veins,  the  blood  is 
more  ready  to  regurgitate  in  them.  Wheth- 
er any  regurgitation  of  the  blood  can  pro- 
duce an  action  in  the  veins,  and  which  invert- 
ed or  directed  towards  their  extremities,  can 
force  thefe,  and  occaiion  hemorrhagy,  may 
perhaps  be  difputed  :  But  it  appears  to  me3 
that  an  hemorrhagy,  produced  by  a  plethor- 
ic ftate  of  the  veins,  may  be  explained  in 
another  and  more  probable  manner.  IT  the 
blood  be  accumulated  in  the  veins,  from  any 
interruption  of  its  proper  courfe,  that  accu- 
mulation muft  refill  the  free  paffage  of  the 
blood  from  the  arteries  into  the  veins.  This, 
again,  muft  produce  fome  congeftion  in  the 

extremities 


122  PRACTICE 

extremities  of  the  red  arteries,  and  therefore 
fome  increafed  action  in  them,  which  muft  be 
determined  with  more  than  ufual  force, 
both  upon  the  extremities  of  the  arteries,  and. 
upon  the  exhalants  proceeding  from  them  ; 
and  this  force  may  occafion  an  efFufion  of 
blood,  either  hy  anaftomohs  or  rupture*. 

DCCLXX. 

In  this  manner  I  apprehend  the  hemor— 
rhoidal  flux  is  to  be  explained,  fo  far  as  it 
depends  upon  the  flate  of  the  whole  fyflem. 
It  appears  mod  commonly  to  proceed  from 
the  extremities  of  the  hemorrhoidal  veffels; 
which  being  the  moft  dependent  and  diftant 
branches  of  thofe  veins  that  form  the  vena 
portarum,,  are  therefore  the  moil  readily  af- 
fected by  every  accumulation  of  blood  in  that 
fyflem  of  veins,  and  confequently  by  any 
general  plethora  in  the  venous  fyilem. 

DCCLXXL 

It  is  here  to  be  ohferved,  that  I  have  fpok- 
en  of  this  hemorrhagy  as  proceeding  from  the 
hemorrhoidal  veffels  only,  as  indeed  it  moil 
commonly  does  ;  but  it  will  be  readily  under- 
ilood,  that  the  fame  accumulation  and  refifU 
ance  to  the  venous  blood  may,  from  various 
caufes,  afFec~t  many  of  the  extremities  of  the 
vena  portaru  n,  which  lie  very  fuperficially 
upon  the  internal  furface  of  the  alimentary 

canaL 


OF      PHYSIC.  123 


6 

canal,    and  give  occafion  to  what  has  been 
called  the  Morbus  Niger  or  Melcena. 

DCCLXXII. 

Another  part,  in  which  an  unufually  ple- 
thoric ftate  of  the  veins  may  have  particular 
effecls,  and  occafion  hemorrhagy,  is  the  head. 
In  this,  the  venous  fyftem  is  of  a  peculiar  con- 
formation, and  fuch  as  feems  intended  by  na- 
ture to  give  there  a  flower  motion  to  the  ven^ 
ous  blood.  If,  therefore,  the  plethoric  ftate 
of  the  venous  fyftem  in  general,  which  feems 
to  increafe  as  life  advances,  fhould  at  length 
increafe  to  a  great  degree,  it  may  very  readily 
affect  the  venous  veflels  of  the  head,  and  pro- 
duce there  fuch  a  refiftance  to  the  arterial 
blood,  as  to  determine  this  to  be  poured  out 
from  the  nofe,  or  into  the  cavity  of  the  crani- 
um. The  fpecial  effect  of  the  latter  effufion 
will  be  to  produce  the  difeafe  termed  Apo- 
plexy ;  and  which,  therefore,  is  properly 
named  by  Doctor  Hoffman,  H<emorrhagia 
Cerebri :  And  the  explanation  of  its  caufe, 
which  I  have  now  given,  explains  well  why  it 
happens  efpecially  to  men  of  large  heads  and 
fhort  necks,  and  to  men  in  the  decline  of  life, 
when  the  powers  promoting  the  motion  of  the 
blood  are  much  weakened, 

DCCLXXIII. 

I  have  thus  attempted  to  give  '  the  hiftory 
of  the  plethoric    and  hemorrhagic .  dates  of 

the 


124  PRACTICE 

the  human  body,  as  they  occur  at  the  differ- 
ent periods  of  life  ;  and  hope  I  have  thereby 
explained,  not  only  the  nature  of  hemorrha- 
gy  in  general,  but  alfo  of  the  particular  hem- 
orrhagies  which  mofl  commonly  appear,  and 
as  they  occur  fucceffively  at  the  different  pe- 
riods of  life. 


Sect.     in. 

Of  the  Remote  Causes  o/Hemorrhagy. 

DCCLXXIV. 

IN  the  explrmation  hitherto  given, I  have 
efpecially  confidered  the  predifpofition  to 
hemorrhagy  ;  but  it  is  proper  alio,  and  even 
neceffary,  to  take  notice  of  the  occasional 
caufes,  which  not  only  concur  with  the  pre- 
difponent,  in  exciting  hemorrhagy,  but  may 
alfo  fometimes  be  the  fole  caufes  of  it. 

DCCLXXV.. 

Thefe  occafional  caufes  are, 

1.  External  heat,  which,  by  rarefying  the 
blood,  produces  Or  increafes  the  plethoric 
flate  of  the  body  ;  and  the  fame  heat,  as  giv- 
ing a  ilimulus  to  the  whole  fyftem,  mull  urge 
zny  particular  determinations  before  eftablifn- 


O  F    P  H  Ysrc.  12s 


ed,  ilili  further,  or  may  urge  to  excefs  any 
inequality,  otherwife  innocent ;  fo  that,  in 
either  way,  external  heat  may  immediately 
excite  hemorrhagies,  to  which  there  was  a 
predifpofition ;  or  may  form  congeilions 
where  there  were  none  before,  and  thereby  oc- 
ean on  hemorrhagy. 

2.  A  considerable  and  fudden  dimunition 
of  the  weight  of  the  atmofphere,  which  feems  to 
occafion  the  fame  effects  as  heat,  by  produc- 
ing alfo  an  expanfion  of  the  blood. 

3.  Whatever  increafes  the  force  of  trie  cir- 
culation,  and  thereby  the  velocity  of  the 
blood,  may  operate  in  the  fame  manner  as 
heat,  in  urging  not  only  previous  determina- 
tions with  violence,  but  alfo  in  urging  to  ex- 
cefs inequalities,  otherwife  innocent.  All  vi- 
olent exercife,  therefore,  and  efpecially  all 
violent  efforts,,  which,  not  only  by  a  larger 
and  longer  infpiration,  but  alfo,  by  the  fimul— 
taneous  action  of  many  mufcles  interrupting 
the  free  motion  of  the  blood,  impel  it  with  un- 
ufual  force  into  the  extreme  veflels  more  gen- 
erally, and,  according  to  the  different  pof- 
tures  of  the  body,  and  mode  of  the  effort,  into 
certain  veflels  more  particularly. 

Among  the  caufes  increafing  the  force  of 
the  circulation,  anger  and  other  violent  aclive. 
paffions  are  to  be  reckoned. 

4.  The  violent  exercife  of  particular  parts 
of  the  body.  If  thefe  are  already  affecled 
with  congeilions,  or  liable  to  them,  fuch  ex- 
ercife may  be  confidered  as  a  flimulus  applied 


126  PRACTICE 

to  the  veffels  of  that  particular  part.  Thus, 
any  violent  exercife  of  refpiration  may  excite 
hemoptyhs,  or  occafion   its  return. 

5.  The  poftures  of  the  body  increafmg  de- 
terminations,   or  ligatures  occahoning  accu- 
mulations of  the  blood  in  particular  parts  of 
the  body. 

6.  A  determination  into  certain  veffels  ren- 
dered habitual  by  the  frequent  repetition  of 
hemorrhagy  from  them. 

7.  Cold,  externally  applied,  as  changing 
the  diftribution  of  the  blood,  and  determin- 
ing it  in  greater  quantity  into  the  internal 
parts. 


SEC    TV        IVi 


Of  the  Cure   of  Hemorrhagy. 


DCCLXXVL 

HAVING  thus  confidered  the  proximate 
and  remote  caufes  of  hemorrhagy  in  general  j, 
our  next  bufmefs  is,  to  treat  of  the  cure  of  the 
difeafe  in  the  fame  manner. 

In  entering  upon  this  fubjeft,  the  firft 
queftion  which  prefents  itfelf,  is,  Whether 
the  cure  of  hemorrhagies  ought  to  be  at- 
tempted by  art,  or  if  they  mould  be  left  to  the 
conduct  of  nature  ? 

DCCLXXVII. 


OF       PHYSIC.  12; 

DCCLXXVII. 


The  latter  opinion  was  the  favourite  doc- 
trine of  the  celebrated  Dr.  Stahl,  and  his 
followers.  They  maintained,  that  the  hu- 
man body  is  much  difpofed  to  a  plethoric 
ftate  ;  and,  consequently,  to  many  diforders 
which  nature  endeavours  to  obviate  and  re- 
lieve by  exciting  hemorrhagy  :  That  this, 
therefore,  is  often  necenary  to  the  balance 
and  health  of  the  fyitem  :  That  it  is  accord- 
ingly to  be  generally  encouraged,  fometimes 
folicited,  and  is  not  to  be  fuppreffed,  unlets 
when  it  goes  to  great  excefs,  qr  happens  in 
parts  in  which  it  may  be  dangerous 


DCCLXXVIII. 


Much  of  this  doctrine  may  be  admitted. 
The  human  body,,  upon  many  occaflons,  be- 
comes preternaturally  plethoric ;  and  the 
dangerous  confequences  which  might  from 
thence  be  apprehended,  feem  to  be  obviated 
by  an  hemorrhagy  taking  place  :  And,  fur- 
ther, the  neceffity  of  hemorrhagy  often  ap- 
pears from  hence,  that  the  fuppreffion  of  it 
feems  to  occafion  many  diforders. 

All  this  feems  to  be  juft ;  but  in  the  con- 
clufion  drawn  from  it  there  is  a  fallacy. 

DCCLXXIX. 


128  PRACTICE 

DCCLXXIX. 

It  appears  to  me  certain,  that  hemorrrTagyj 
either  upon  its  fir  ft  attack,  or  upon  its  after- 
recurrence,  is  never  neceffary  to  the  health  of 
the  body,  excepting  upon  the  fuppofition, 
that  the  plethoric  Mate  which  feems  to  require 
the  evacuation,  cannot  be  o.therwife  prevent- 
ed or  removed;  and  as  I  imagine  itpoflible 
hy  other  means  to  prevent  or  remove  a  ple- 
thoric ftate,  fo  I  do'not  think  that  hemorrhagy 
is,  in  all  cafes,  neceffary.  In  general,  I  am 
of  opinion  that  hemorrhagy  is  to  be  avoided, 

i .  Becaufe  it  does  not  always  happen  in, 
parts  where  it  is  fafe. 

2.  Becaufe  often,  while  it  does  relieve  a 
plethoric  ftate,  it  may,  at  the  fame  time,  in- 
duce a  very  dangerous  difeafe . 

3.  Becaufe  it  may  often  go  to  excefs,  and 
either  endanger  life,  or  induce -a  dangerous 
infirmity. 

And,  laftly,  Becaufe  it  has  a  tendency  to 
increafe  the  plethoric  ftate  it  was  meant  to  re- 
lieve ;  to  occaiion  its  own  recurrence, 
(DCCXXI)  ;  and  thereby  to  induce  a  habit, 
which,  if  left  to  the  precarious  and  unequal 
operation  of  nature,  may,  from  the  frequent 
errors  of  this,  be  attended  with  much  danger. 

DCCLXXX. 

It  is  further  to  be  confidered,  that  hemor- 
rhagica do  not  always  arife  from  the  neceffities 

o£ 


O  F     P  H  Y  S  I  C.  129 

of  the  fyftem,  but  often  proceed  from  inci- 
dental caufes.  It  appears  to  me  that  all 
hemorrhagies  of  the  latter  kind  may  be  im- 
mediately fupprelFed,  and  the  repetition  of 
them,  as  it  induces  a  plethora,  and  a  habit 
not  otherwife  neceflary,  may  be  prevented 
with  great  advantage. 

DCCLXXXI. 

Upon  the  whole  of  this  fubje6t.,  I  conclude., 
that  every  preternatural  hemorrhagy,  or,  in 
other  words,  every  one  except  that  of  the 
menfes  in  females,  is  to  be  avoided,  and  es- 
pecially the  returns  of  it  prevented  ;  and  I 
therefore  now  proceed  to  mention,  how  hem- 
orrhagy, and  its  recurrences,  may,  and 
ihould  be  prevented. 

DCCLXXXII. 

From  the  principles  delivered  above,  it 
will  immediately  appear,  that  the  prevention, 
-either  of  the  firft  attacks,  or  of  the  returns  of 
hemorrhagy,  will  chiefly,  and  in  the  firft 
place,  depend  upon  the  preventing  or  re- 
moving any  conhderable  degree  of  a  plethoric 
ftate  which  may  -happen  to  prevail  in  the 
body.  It  is  true,  that,  where  the  hemorrhagy 
depends  upon  the  particular  conformation  of 
certain  parts,  rather  than  upon  the  general 
plethoric  ftate  of  the  whole  ;  the  meafures  for 
removing  or  preventing  the  latter,  may  not 

always 


130  PRACTICE 

always  be  fufficient  for  preventing  hemorrha- 
gy  :  But  at  the  fame  time  it  muft  be  evident, 
that  determinations  in  coniequence  of  the 
conformation  of  particular  parts,  will  always 
be  urged  more  or  lefs,  in  proportion  to  the 
greater  or  lefler  degree  of  the  plethoric  Hate  of 
the  whole  fyftem  ;  and,  therefore,  that,  even 
in  the  cafes  "depending  upon  particular  con- 
formation, the  preventing  or  removing  an  un- 
ufually  plethoric  ftate,  will  always  be  a  chief 
means  of  preventing  hemorrhagy.  It  is  fur- 
ther to  be  attended  to,  that  there  may  be  fev- 
eral  inequalities  in  the  balance  of  the  fyftem, 
which  may  have  little  or  no  efTecl  unlefs  when 
the  fyftem  becomes  preternaturally  plethor- 
ic ;  and  therefore,  that  in  cafes,  the  pre- 
venting or  removing  of  the  plethoric  ftate 
of  the  fyftemwiil  be  a  chief  means  of  prevent- 
ing the  firft  attacks,  or  the  returns  of  hemor- 
rhagy. It  now,  therefore,  remains  to  ex- 
plain, how  the  plethoric  ftate  of  the  fyftem  is 
to  be  prevented  or  removed. 

DCCLXXXIII. 

The  fluids  of  the  human  body  are  in  con- 
tinual wafte  by  the  excretions,  but  are  com- 
monly .  replaced  by  the  aliments  taken  in ; 
and  if  the  quantity  of  aliments  in  any  meafure 
exceed  that  of  the  excretions,  an  increafe  of 
the  quantity  of  the  fluids  of  the  body,  or,  in 
other  words,  a  plethoric  ftate,  muft  neceflarily 
arife.   This,  to  a  certain  degree,  is  requifite  for 

the 


OF       PHYSIC  131 

the  growth  of  the  hody  :  But  even  then,  if 
the  proportion  of  the  aliments  to  the  excre- 
tions be  greater  than  is  fuited  to  the  growth 
of  the  body  ;  and  more  certainly  frill,  if, 
after  the  growth  is  completed,  when  an 
equality  between  the  ingejia  and  the  excreta 
ihould  be  eftablifhed,  the  difproportion  flill 
continue,  a  preternaturally  plethoric  date 
mufl  arife.  In  both  cafes,  it  is  evident,  that 
the  plethora  mufl  be  prevented  or  corrected 
by  adjufling  the  ingefla  and  excreta  to  each 
other ;  which  generally  may  be  done,  either 
by  diminifhing  the  ingefla,  or  by  increafing 
the  excreta.  The  former  may  be  effected  by 
the  management  of  diet,  the  latter  by  the 
management  of  exercife. 

DCCLXXXIV. 

The  ingefla  may  be  diminifhed,  either  by 
giving  aliment  in  lefs  quantity  than  ufual,  or 
by  giving  aliments  of  a  lefs  nutritious  quality; 
that  is,  aliments  of  a  fubflance,  which,  under 
the  fame  bulk  and  weight,  contain  lefs  of  a 
matter  capable  of  being  converted  into  animal 
fluids,  and  more  of  a  matter  ready  to  pafs 
off  by  the  excretions,  and  consequently  lefs  of 
a  matter  to  be  retained  and  accumulated  m 
the  veffels. 

The  choice  of  aliments  fuited  to  thefepur- 
pofes,  mufl  be  left  to  be  directed  by  the  doc- 
trines of  the  Materia  Medica. 

DCCLXXXV. 


i32  PRACTICE 


DCCLXXXV. 

The  inreafing  of  the  excreta,  and  thereby 
diminishing  the  plethoric  ftate  of  the  fyftem 
is  to  beobtained  by  increafing  the  exer- 
cife  of  the  body  ;  and  generally  for  adjuft- 
ing  the  balance  between  the  ingefta  and  ex- 
creta, and  thereby  obviating  the  plethoric 
ftate,  it  is  neceffary  that  exercife,  in  a  due 
meafure,  be  very  conftantly  employed. 

DCCLXXXVI. 

The  obferving  abftinence,  and  the  em- 
ployment of  exercife,  for  obviating  or  remov- 
ing the  plethoric  flate  of  the  body,  were  for- 
merly confidered  pretty  fully,  when  treating 
of  the  gout,  (DXLVIil)  to  DLII) ;  fo  . 
that  the  lefs  is  neceffary  to  be  faid  here  :  And 
it  is  now  only  requifite  to  obferve,  that  the  fame 
doubts,  as  in  cafes  of  the  gout,  do  not  occur 
here  with  regard  to  the  fafety  of  thofe  meaf- 
ures,  which,  in  a  plethoric  flate  of  the  body 
difpofmg  to  hemorrhagy,  are  always  admif- 
fible  and  proper.  Here,  however,  it  is  to  be 
obferved,  that  fome  choice  in  the  mode  of  ex-, 
ercife  is  neceffary,  and  that  it  mould  be  dif- 
ferent according  to  the  particular  determina- 
tions which  may  happen  to  prevail  in  the  fyf- 
tem. In  general,  in  the  cafe  of  plethora  dif- 
pofmg to  hemorrhagy,  bodily  exercife  will 
always  be  hazardous,  and  geflation  more 
commonly  fafe. 

DCCLXXXVII. 


OF       PHYSIC.  133 


DCCLXXXVII. 

Artificial  evacuations  may  be  employed  to 
diminifh  the  plethoric  date  of  the  body  ;  and 
when,  at  any  time,  it  has  become  confidera- 
ble,  and  immediately  threatens  a  difeafe, 
thefe  evacuations  mould  be  made  to  the 
quantity  that  the  fymptoms  feem  to  require. 
But  it  is  conftantly  to  be  attended  to,  that 
bloodlettings  are  improperly  employed  to 
prevent  a  plethora,  as  they  have  a  tendency 
to  increafe  it  (DCCXXI);  and  as  they  re- 
quire to  be  often  repeated,  and  are  thereby 
apt  to  induce  a  habit  which  may  be  attend- 
ed with  much  danger. 

DCCLXXXVIII. 

While  a  plethora,  and  thereby  the  predif- 
pofition  to  hemorrhagy,  is  avoided,  or  re- 
moved, the  other  meafures  neceffary  for  pre- 
venting the  occurrence  of  this,  are  thofe  for 
avoiding  the  remote  caufes.  Thefe  have 
been  enumerated  in  (DCCLXXV)  •  and 
the  means  of  avoiding  them,  fo  far  as  within 
our  power,  are  fufficiently  obvious. 

DCCLXXXIX. 

Having  thus  mentioned  the  means  of  pre- 
venting either  the  fir  ft  attacks,  or  the  recur- 
rence, of  hemorrhagy  ;    I  muft  next  fay  how 

Vol,     II.  G  it 


ij4  PRACTICE 

it  is  to  be  managed  when  it  has  actually  come 
on. 

DCCXC. 


When  an  hemorrhagy  has  come  on  which 
appears  to  have  arifen  from  a  preternaturally 
plethoric  Hate,  or  from  fome  change  in  the 
balance  of  the  fanguiferous  fyftem,  no  meaf- 
ures  are  to  be  immediately  taken  for  fup- 
preffing  it  ;  as  we  may  expect,  that,  when 
the  quantity  of  blood  neceifary  for  the  re- 
lief of  the  fyff em  is  poured  out,  the  effufion 
will  fpontaneoufly  ceafe. 

DCCXCI. 

In  many  cafes,  however,  it  may  be  fuf- 
pecled,  that  the  quantity  of  blood  poured 
out,  is  not  exactly  in  proportion  to  the  ne- 
ceffities  of  the  fyftem,  either  for  relieving  a 
general  plethora  or  a  particular  conge  (lion, 
but  that  it  is  often  to  a  greater  quantity  than 
thefe  require.  This  we  fuppofe  to  happen 
in  confequence  of  an  inflammatory  diathefis 
prevailing,  and  of  a  febrile  fpafm  being 
formed ;  and  therefore  it  is  in  many  cafes ' 
proper,  as  well  as  for  the  moil  part  fafe,  to 
moderate  the  evacuation  ;  and  when  it  threat- 
ens to  go  to  excefs,  to  fupprefs  it  altogether. 

DCCXCIL 


O   F     P    H   Y   S   I   C.  135 


DCCXCII. 

An  hemorrhagy  may  be  moderated  by 
avoiding  any  irritation  that  might  concur  to 
increafe  it;  fo  that  every  part  of  the  anti- 
phlogiflic  regimen  is  to  be  obferved ;  in  par- 
ticular external  heat,  both  as  it  rarefies  the 
fluids,  and  ftimulates  the  folids,  is  to  be  care- 
fully avoided :  And  it  is  probable,  that  in  all 
cafes  an  hemorrhagy  may  be  fafely  moderated 
by  cool  air  applied,  and  cold  drink  exhibited „ 

DCCXCIII. 

A  fecond  means  for  the  fame  purpofe,  is 
the  ufe  of  refrigerant  medicines,  and  partic- 
ularly of  acids  and  nitre. 

DCCXCIV. 

A  third  means  which  has  been  frequently 
employed,  is  that  of  bloodletting.  The  pro- 
priety of  this  practice  may  be  doubtful,  as 
the  quantity  of  blood  poured  out  by  the  hem- 
orrhagy may  be  fuppofed  to  anfwer  the 
purpofe  of  an  evacuation  in  any  other  way  ; 
and  I  am  ready  to  allow,  that  the  practice 
has  been  often  fuperfluous,  and  fometimes 
hurtful,  by  making  a  greater  evacuation  than 
was  neceifary  or  fafe.  At  the  fame  time,  I 
apprehend  it  is  not  for  the  mere  purpofe  of 
evacuating,  that  bloodletting  is  to  be  prac- 
tifed  in  the  cure  of  hemorrhagy  ;  but  that  it 
G  2  is 


iq6  PRACTICE 


a 


is  further  neceffary  for  taking  off  the  inflam- 
matory diathefis  which  prevails,  and  the  fe- 
brile fpafm  that  has  been  formed.  Accord- 
ingly, in  the  cafe  of  hemorrhagy,  when  the 
pulfe  is  not  only  frequent  but  quick  and  full, 
and  does  not  become  fofter  or  flower  upon 
the  flowing  of  the  blood,  and  that  the  effu- 
fion  is  profufe,  and  threatens  to  continue  fo, 
it  appears  to  me,  that  bloodletting  may  be 
neceffary,  and  I  have  often  found  it  ufeful, 
It  feerns  probable  alfo,  that  the  particular  cir- 
cumftances  of  venefe&ion  may  render  it  more 
powerful  for  taking  off  the  tenfion  and  in- 
flammatory irritation  of  the  fyftem,  than  any 
gradual  flow  from  an  artery. 

DCCXCV. 

That  a  fpafm  of  the  extreme  veffels  has 
fhare.  in  fupporting  hemorrhagy,  appears  to 
me  probable  from  hence,  that  bliftering  has 
been  often  found  ufeful  in  moderating  and 
fuppreffmg  the  difeafe. 

DCCXCVI. 

Do  emetics  and  vomiting  contribute  to  the 
cure  of  hemorrhagy  ?  See  Dr.  Bryan  Rob- 
inson on  the  Virtues  and  Power  of  Med- 
icines. 

DCCXCVII. 

When  an  hemorrhagy  is  very  profufe,  and 
feems  to  endanger  life,  or  even  threatens   to 

induce 


OF       PHYSIC.  137 

induce  a  dangerous  infirmity,  it  is  agreed  on 
all  hands,  that  it  is  to  be  immediately  fupprefi- 
ed  by  every  means  in  our  power  ;  and  partic- 
ularly, that,  befides  the  means  above  -men., 
tioned  for  moderating  the  diieafe,  aflringents, 
internal  or  external  where  the  latter  can  be  ap- 
plied, are   to  be  employed  for  fuppreffing  it. 

DCCXCVIIL 

The  internal  aflringents  are  either  vegeta- 
ble or  foffil. 

The  vegetable  aflringents  are  feldom  very 
powerful  in  the  cure  of  any  hemorrhagic s, 
except  thofe  of  the  alimentary  canal. 

The  foffil  aflringents  are  more  powerful  ; 
but  fome  choice  amongfl  the  different  kinds 
may  be  proper, 

The  chalybeates,  fo  frequently  employed, 
do  not  appear  to  me  to  be  very  powerful. 

The  preparations  of  lead  are  certainly  more 
fo  ;  but  are  otherwife  of  fo  pernicious  a  qual- 
ity, that  they  mould  not  be  employed  ex- 
cept in  cafes  of  the  utmoft  danger.  The 
Tinclura  Saturnina,  or  Antiphthifica,  as  it 
has  been  called,  appears  to  be  of  little  effi- 
cacy ;  but  whether  from  the  fmall  portion  of 
lead  which  it  contains,  or  from  the  flate  in 
which  the  lead  is  in  it,   I  am  uncertain. 

The  foffil  aflringent  that  appears  to  me  the 
moll  powerful,  and  at  the  fame  time  the  mo  ft 
iafe,  is  alum, 

G3  DCCXCIX 


ISB  PRACTICE 


DCCXCIX. 

External  aftringents,  when  they  can  be  ap- 
plied, are  more  effectual  than  the  internal. 
The  choice  of  thefe  is  left  to  the  furgeons. 

DCCC. 

The  moil  powerful  of  all  aftringents  ap- 
pears to  me  to  be  cold,  which  may  be  em- 
ployed, either  by  applying  cold  water  to  the 
furface  of  the  body,  or  by  throwing  it  into 
the  internal  parts. 

DCCCL 

For  fuppreffing  hemorrhagies,  many  fu- 
perflitious  remedies  and  charms  have  been 
recommended,  and  pretended  to  have  been 
employed  with  fuccefs.  The  feeming  fuc- 
cefs  of  thefe,  however,  has  been  generally 
owing  to  the  byftanders'  miflakinga  fpontane- 
ous  ceaiing  of  the  hemorrhagy  for  the  effecl; 
of  the  remedy.  At  the  fame  time,  I  believe, 
that  thofe  remedies  may  have  been  fome- 
times  ufeful,  by  impreffing  the  mind  with 
horror,  awe,  or  dread. 

DCCCII. 

Upon  occafion  of  profufe  hemorrhagies, 
opiates  have  been  employed  with   advantage  ; 

and^ 


OF       PHYSIC.  139 

and,  when  the  fulnefs  and  inflammatory  di- 
athefis  of  the  fyilem  have  been  previoufly 
taken  off  by  the  hemorrhagy  itfelf,  or  by 
bloodletting,  I  think  opiates  may  be  em- 
ployed with  fafety. 

DCCCIIL 

For  reflraining  hemorrhagy,  ligatures  have 
been  applied  upon  the  limbs,  in  the  view  of 
retarding  the  return  of  the  venous  blood  from 
the  extremities ;  but  they  appear  to  me  to 
be  of  uncertain  and  ambiguous  ufe. 

DCCCIV. 

In  the  cafe  of  profufe  hemorrhagies,  no 
pains  are  to  be  taken  to  prevent  a  Deliquium 
Animi,  or  fainting,  as  the  happening  of  this 
is  often  the  mofl  certain  means  of  flopping  the 
hemorrhagy. 

DCCCV. 

Having  thus  delivered  the  general  docmne 
of  hemorrhagy,  I  proceed  to  confider  the 
particular  cafes  of  it.  It  may  perhaps  be  re- 
marked, that  I  have  marked  fewer  of  thefe 
than  are  commonly  enumerated  by  the  nofol- 
ogifts ;  but  my  reafons  for  differing  from 
thefe  authors,  muff  be  left  to  a  nofological 
difcuffion,  to  be  entered  into  elfewhere  more 
properly  than  here. 

G  4  CHAP- 


140  PRACTICE 


CHAP.       II. 


of    the    EPISTAXIS,     or     HEMOR. 
RHAGY    of    the    NOSE. 


DCCCVI. 


X  HE  date  of  the  veffels  upon 
the  internal  furface  of  the  nofe  being  fuch  as 
already  mentioned  (DCCLVII),  renders  an 
hemorrhagy  from  that  more  frequent  than 
from  any  other  part  of  the  body. 

DCCCVII. 


The  blood  commonly  flows  from  one  nof- 
tril  only  ;  and  probably  becaufe  an  hemor- 
rhagy from  one  veffel  relieves  the  congeflion 
in  all  the  neighbouring  vefFels. 

The  blood  flowing  from  both  noflrils  at 
the  fame  time,  ihows  commonly  a  more  con- 
fiderable  difeafe.  # 

DCCCVIII. 


OF       PHYSIC.  141 


DCCCVIII. 

This  hemorrhagy  happens  to  perfons  of  ev- 
ery conftitution  and  temperament,  but  moft 
frequently  to  thofe  of  a  plethoric  habit  and 
fanguine  temperament.  It  happens  to  both 
fexes,  but  moft  frequently  to  the  male. 

DCCCIX. 

This  hemorrhagy  may  occur  at  any  time 
of  life ;  but  moil  commonly  happens  to- 
young  perfons,  owing  to  the  ftate  of  the. bal- 
ance of  the  fyftem  peculiar  to  that  age,  as 
mentioned  in  (DCCLVI.) 

DCCCX. 

Although  generally  it  happens  to  perfons 
before  they  have  arrived  at  their  full  growth, 
and  more  rarely  afterwards  ;  yet  fome  times- 
it  happens  to  perfons  after  their  acme,  and 
during  the  ftate  of  manhood  :  And  it  mult 
then  be  imputed  to  an  unufually  plethoric 
ftate  of  the  fyftem  ;  to  an  habitual  determina- 
tion of  the  blood  to  the  veffels  of  the  nofe  • 
or  to^  the  particular  weal^nefs  of  thefe, 

DCCCXL 

In  all  thefe  cafes  the  difeafe  may   be  con- 

fidered  as  an  hemorrhagy  purely  arterial,  and 

Vol.  2  G  5  depending 


i&  PRACTICE 

depending  upon  an  arterial  plethora  ;  but  it 
fometimes  occurs  in  the  decline  of  life,  when 
probably  it  depends  upon  and  may  be  con- 
sidered as  a  mark  of  a  venous  plethora  of  the 
veffels  of  the  head.     See  DCCLXXII. 

DCCCXII. 

This  hemorrhagy  happens  alfo  at  any  pe- 
riod of  life>  in  certain  febrile  difeafes,  which 
are  altogether  or  partly  of  an  inflammatory 
nature,  and  which  mow  a  particular  deter- 
mination of  the  blood  to  the  veifels  of  the, 
head.  Thefe  difeafes  often  admit  of  a  folu- 
tion  by  this  hemorrhagy,  when  it  may  be 
properly  termed  critical. 

DCCCXIIL 

The  difeafe  fometimes  comes  on  without 
any  previous  fymptoms ;  particularly  when 
fbme  external  violence  has  a  mare  in  produc- 
ing it.  But  when  it  proceeds  entirely  from 
an  internal  caufe,  it  is  commonly  preceded 
hy  headachs,  rednefs  of  the  eyes,  a  florid  col- 
our of  the  face,  an  unufual  pulfation  in  the 
temples,  a  fenfe  of  fulnefs  about  the  nofe, 
and  an  itching  of  the  noflrils.  A  bound  bel- 
ly, pale  urine,  coldnefs  of  the  feet,  and  cold 
mivering  over  the  whole  body,  are  alfo  fome- 
times among  the  fymptoms  that  precede  the 
difeafe. 

DCCCXIV, 


OF       PHYSI  C.  143 


DCCCXIV. 

From  the  weaknefs  of  the  veffels  of  the  nofe, 
the  blood  often  flows  from  them  without  any 
confiderable  effort  of  the  whole  fyilem,  and 
therefore  without  any  obfervable  febrile  dis- 
order ;  which,  however,  in  many  cafes,  is^ 
in  all  its  circumftances,  very  difcernible. 


DCCCXV. 


An  hemorrhagy  of  the  nofe  happening  to 
young  perfons,  is,  and  may  generally  be,, 
confidered  as  a  flight  difeafe  of  little  confe- 
quence,  and  hardly  requiring  any  remedy. 
But,  even  in  young  perfons,  when  it  recurs 
very  frequently,  and  is  very  copious,  it  will 
require  particular  attention,  as  it  is  to  be 
confidered  as  a  mark  of  arterial  plethora  ;  and 
as  frequently  returning,  it  may  increafe  the 
plethoric  ft  ate  ;  which  in  a  more  advanced 
ftage  of  life,  may  give  the  blood  a  determina- 
tion to  parts  from  which  the  hemorrhagy 
would  be  more  dangerous,  All  this  will 
more  particularly  require  attention,  accord- 
ing as  the  marks  of  plethora,  and  of  particu- 
lar congeflion,  preceding  the  hemorrhagy,. 
are  more  considerable  ;  and  as  the  flowing  of" 
the  blood  is  attended  with  a  more  conhdera- 
ble  degree  of  febrile  diforder. 

G  6  .  DCCCXVL 


344 


PRACTICE 


DCCCXVI. 


When  the  epiflaxis  happens  to  perfons 
after  their  acme,  returning  frequently,  and 
flowing  copioufly,  it  is  always  to  be  confid- 
ered  as  a  dangerous  difeafe,  and  as  more 
certainly  threatening  the  confequences  men- 
tioned in  the  laft  paragraph. 

DCCCXVII. 

When  this  hemorrhagy  happens  in  the 
decline  of  life,  it  may  be  confidered  as  in  it- 
feif  very  faiutary  :  But  at  the  fame  time,  it  is 
to  be  coniidered  as  a  mark  of  a  very  dan- 
gerous flate  of  the  fyftem  ;  that  is,  as  a  mark 
of  a  very  flrong  tendency  to  a  venous  pleth- 
ora in  the  veffels  of  the  head  :  And  I  have 
accordingly  obferved  it  often  followed  by 
apoplexy,  palfy,  or  fuch  like  difeafes* 

DCCCXVIIL 

When  an  hemorrhagy  from  the  nofe  hap- 
pens in  febrile  difeafes,  as  mentioned  in 
DCCCXII,  and  is  in  pretty  large  quantity, 
it  may  be  confidered  as  critical  and  faiutary  ; 
but  it  is  very  apt  to  be  profufe,  and  even  in 
this  way  dangerous. 

It  upon  fome  occafions  occurs  during  the 
eruptive  fever  of  feveral  exanthemata,  and  is 
in  fuch  cafes  fometimes  faiutary  ;  but,  if  thefe 

exanthemata 


OF       PHYSIC  145 

exanthemata  be  accompanied  with  any  putrid 
tendency,  this  hemorrhagy,  like  artificial 
bloodlettings,  may  have  very  bad  effects. 

DCCCXIX. 

Having  thus  explained  the  feveral  circum- 
ftances  of  epiftaxis,  I  proceed  to  confider  the 
management  and  cure  of  it.  I  ufe  the  ex- 
preffion  of  management,  becaufe  it  has  been 
ufually  thought  to  require  no  cure,  but  that 
nature  mould  be  allowed  to  throw  out  blood 
in  this  way  very  frequently  ;  and  as  often  as 
it  appears  to  arife  from  internal  caufes,  that 
is,  from  a  ft  ate  of  the  fyftem  fuppofed  to  re- 
quire fuch  evacuation. 


DCCCXX. 

I  am  however  of  opinion,  for  the  reafons 
given  m  DCCLXXIX,  that  this  difeafe  is 
very  feldom  to  be  left  to  the  condu  61  of  na- 
ture ;  and  that  in  all  cafes  it  fhould  be  mode- 
rated by  keeping  the  patient  in  cool  air  ;  by 
giving  cold  drink  ;  by  keeping  the  body  and 
head  erecl: ;  by  avoiding  any  blowing  of  the 
nofe,  fpeaking,  or  other  irritation :  And> 
when  the  blood  has  flowed  for  fome  time, 
without  fhowing  any  tendency  to  ceafe,  a 
profufe  bleeding  is  to  be  prevented  by  meaf- 
ures  employed  to  flop  it,  fuch  as  preffing  the 
naftril  from  which  the  blood  flows*  warning 

the 


146  PRACTICE 

the  face  with  cold  water,  or  applying  this  to 
other  parts  of  the  body. 

DCCCXXI. 

Even  in  the  cafe  of  young  perfons,  where 
the  difeafe  is  leaif  hazardous,  and  even  in 
the  firfi  attacks,  I  judge  fuch  meafures  to  be 
proper  :  But  they  will  be  flill  more  proper 
if  the  difeafe  frequently  recurs  without  any 
external  violence  ;  if  the  returns  mail  happen 
to  perfons  of  a  habit  difpofed  to  be  plethoric; 
and  more  particularly,  if  the  marks  of  a  ple- 
thoric flate  appear  in  the  precedent  fymp- 
toms  (DCCCXIII.) 

DCCCXXII. 

Even  *  in  young  perfons,  if  the  bleeding 
be  very  profufe  and  long  continued,  and 
more  efpecially  if  the  pulfe  become  weak  and 
the  face  pale,  I  apprehend  it  will  be  proper 
to  fupprefs  the  hemorrhagy  by  every  means 
in  our  power.  See  DCCXCVII,  and  fol- 
lowing paragraphs. 

DCCCXXII!. 

Further,  in  the  fame  cafe  of  young  perfons, 
when  the  returns  of  this  hemorrhagy  become 
frequent,  and  efpeciaily  with  the  marks  of  a 
plethoric  habit,  I  trwnk  it  neceifary  to  employ 
fuch  a  regimen  as  may  prevent  a  plethoric 

ftate, 


OF       PHYSIC.  147 

Hate,  (DCCLXXXIII— DCCLXXXVII). 

At  the  fame  time,  care  mould  be  taken  to 
avoid  all  circumftances  which  may  determine 
the  blood  more  fully  to  the  velfels  of  the  head> 
or  prevent  its  free  return  from  them  ;  and., 
by  keeping  an  open  belly  to  make  fome  de- 
rivation from  them. 

DCCCXXIV. 

In  adult  perfons,  liable  to  frequent  returns 
of  the  epiftaxis,  the  whole  of  the  meafures 
propofed  (DCCCXXIII)  are  more  certain- 
ly and  freely  to  be  employed.  When  with 
the  circumftances  mentioned  in  DCCCXIII3 
the  tendency  to  a  profufe  hemorrhagy  ap- 
pears, a  bleeding  at  the  arm  may  be  proper, 
even  in  young  perfons ;  but  in  the  cafe  of  a- 
dults,  it  will  be  ftill  more  allowable,  and 
even  neceifary. 

DCCCXXV. 

In  perfons  of  any  age  liable  to  frequent 
returns  of  this  hemorrhagy,  when  the  meaf- 
ures propofed  in  DCCCXVII,  et  feq.  ihall 
have  been  neglected,  or  from  peculiar  cir- 
cumftances in  the  balance  of  the  fyftem,  ihali 
have  proved  ineffectual,  and  the  fymptoms 
threatening  hemorrhagy  (DCCCXXXVIII) 
fhall  appear,  it  will  then  be  proper,  by  blood- 
letting, cooling  purgatives,  and  every  pari: 
of  the  antiphlogiftic  regimen^  to  prevent  the 

hemorrhagy^ 


148  PRACTICE 

hemorrhagy,   or  at  leaft  to  prevent  its  being 
profufe  when  it  does  happen. 

DCCCXXVL 

In  the  circumftances  juft  now  mentioned 
(DCCCXXV),  the  meafures  propofed  are 
proper,  and  even  neceffary  ;  but  it  fhould 
at  the  fame  time  be  obferved,  that  thefe  are 
praclifed  with  much  lefs  advantage  than  thofe 
pointed  out  in  BCCCXXIV  :  Becaufe, 
though  thofe  fuggefted  here  may  prevent  the 
coming  on  of  the  hemorrhagy  for  the  prefent, 
they  certainly,  however,  difpofe  to  the  return 
of  that  plethoric  fiate  which  required  their  be- 
ing ufed  ;  and  there  can  be  no  proper  fecu- 
rity  againfl  returns  of  the  difeafe,  but  by  pur- 
fuingthe  means  propofed  in  BCCCXXIIJ. 

DCCCXXVIL 

When  the  hemorrhagy  of  the  nofe  hap- 
pens to  perfons  approaching  to  their  full 
growth,  and  when  its  returns  have  been  pre- 
ceded by  the  fymptoms  DCCCXIII,  it 
may  be  fuppofed,  that,  if  the  returns  can 
be  prevented  by  the  meafures  propofed  in 
DCCCXXV,  thefe  may  be  fafely  employed; 
as  the  plethoric  flate  induced  will  be  render- 
ed fafe,  by  the  change  which  is  foon  to  take 
place  in  the  balance  of  the  fyflem,  This, 
however,  cannot  be  admitted  ;  as  the  evacu- 
ations pra&ifed  upon  this  plan  will  have  all 

the- 


OF       PHYSIC.  149 

the  confequences  which,  I  have  already  ob- 
ferved,  may  follow  the  recurrence  of  the 
hemorrhagy  itfelf. 

DCCCXXVIIL 

When  the  hemorrhagy  of  the  nofe  mall 
be  found  to  make  its  returns  at  nearly  dated 
periods,  the  meafures  for  preventing  it 
(DCCCXXV)  maybe  pradifed  with  great 
certainty  ;  and,  upon  every  repetition  of 
bloodletting,  by  diminishing  the  quantity 
taken  away,  its  tendency  to  induce  a  pletho- 
ra may  be  in  fome  meafure  avoided.  When 
indeed,  the  repetition  of  evacuations  is  truly 
unavoidable,  the  diminimkig  them  upon 
every  repetition  is  properly  pra&ifed  :  But 
it  is  a  practice  of  nice  and  precarious  manage- 
ment, and  ftiould  by  no  means  be  trailed  to, 
fo  far  as  to  fuperfede  the  meafures  propofed  in 
DCCCXXV,  wherever  thefe  can  be  admit- 
ted. 

DCCCXXIX. 

When  the  hemorrhagy  of  the  nofe  hap- 
pens in  confequence  of  a  venous  plethora  in 
the  veflels  of  the  head,  as  in  DCCLXXII, 
the  flowing  of  the  blood  pretty  largely  may 
be  allowed,  efpecially  when  it  happens  after 
the  fuppreffion  or  ceafmg  of  the  menftruai 
or  hemorrhoidal  flux.  But  though  the  flow- 
ing of  the  blood  is,  on  its  fir  it  occurring,   to 

be 


i5o  PRACTICE 

be  allowed,  there  is  nothing  more  proper 
than  guarding  againft  its  returns.  This  is  to  be 
done  not  only  by  the  meafures  propofed  in 
DCCLXXXIII,  tt  feq.  but,  as  the  effeas 
of  a  plethoric  flate  of  the  veffels  of  the  head 
are  very  uncertain  ;  fo,  upon  any  appearance 
of  it,  and  efpecially  upon  any  threatening  of 
hemorrhagy,  the  plethora  is  to  be  removed, 
and  the  hemorrhagy  to  be  obviated  immedi- 
ately by  proper  evacuations,  as  bloodletting, 
purging,  and  iflues ;  or  by  reftoring  fup- 
preffed  evacuations,  where  this  can  be  done* 


CHAP. 


OF      PHYSIC.  151 


CHAP.       III. 


of    the  HEMOPTYSIS,  or   HEMOR- 
RHAGY  from    the   LUNGS. 


T9 


Of    the    Phenomena      and    Causes     of 
Hemoptysis. 


DCCCXXX, 


W'hEN,  after  fome  affec- 
tion of  the  breaft,  blood  is  thrown  out  from 
the  mouth,  and  is  brought  out  with  more  or 
lefs  of  coughing,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
it  comes  from  the  lungs  ;  and  this  generally 
afcertains  the  difeafe  of  which  I  am  now  to 
treat.  But  there  are  cafes  in  which  the  fource 
of  the  blood  fpit  out  is  uncertain  ;  and  there- 
fore fome  other  considerations^  to  be  mention- 
ed 


152  PRACTICE 

ed  hereafter,  are  often  neceffary  to  afcertain 
the  exiflence  of  an  hemoptyfis. 

DCCCXXXI. 


The  blood  veffels  of  the  lungs  are  more  nu- 
merous than  thofeof  any  other  part  of  the  bo- 
dy of  the  fame  bulk.  Thefe  veffels  of  the  larg- 
eft  fize,  as  they  arife  from  the  heart,  are  more 
immediately  than  in  any  other  part  fubdivid- 
ed  into  veffels  of  the  fmalleft  fize  ;  and  thefe 
fmall  veffels  fpread  out  near  to  the  internal 
furfaces  of  the  bronchial  cavities,  are  fituated 
in  a  loofe  cellular  texture,  and  covered  by  a 
tender  membrane  only  :  So  that,  confidering 
how  readily  and  frequently  thefe  veffels  are 
gorged  with  blood,  we  may  underftand  why 
an  hemorrhagy  from  them  is,  next  to  that  of 
the  nofe,  the  mofl  frequent  of  any ;  and  par- 
ticularly, why  any  violent  ftiock  given  to  the 
whole  body  fo  readily  occafions  an  hemop- 
tyfis. 

DCCCXXXII. 


An  hemoptyfis  may  be  occafioned  by  ex- 
ternal violence,  at  any  period  of  life  ;  and  I 
have  explained  above  (DCCLX),  why,  in 
adult  perfons,  while  the  arterial  plethora  ftill 
prevails  in  the  fyflem,  that  is,  from  the  age  of 
fixteen  to  that  of  five  and  thirty,  an  hemop- 

tvfis 


OF      PHYSIC.  153 

tyfis  may  at  any  time  be  produced,  merely 
by  a  plethoric  ftate  of  the  lungs. 

DCCCXXXIIL 

But  it  has  been  alfo  obferved  above, 
(DCCLXIj,  that  an  hemoptyfis  more  fre- 
quently arife's  from  a  faulty  proportion  be- 
tween the  capacity  of  the  veffels  of  the  lungs 
and  that  of  thofe  of  the  reft  of  the  body. 
Accordingly  it  is  often  a  hereditary  difeafe> 
which  implies  a  peculiar  and  faulty  confor- 
mation. And  the  difeafe  alfo  happens  es- 
pecially to  perfons  who  difcover  the  fmaller 
capacity  of  their  lungs,  by  the  narrownefs  of 
their  cheft,  and  by  the  prominency  of  their 
moulders  ;  which  laft  is  a  mark  of  their  hav- 
ing been  long  liable  to  a  difficult  refpisation. 

DCCCXXXIV. 

With  thefe  circumftances  alfo  the  difeafe 
happens  efpecially  to  perfons  of  a  fanguine 
temperament;  in  whom  particularly,  the  ar- 
terial plethora  prevails.  It  happens  likewife 
to  perfons  of  a  ilender  delicate  make,  of 
which  a  long  neck  is  a  mark  ;  to  perfons  of 
much  fenfibility  and  irritability,  and  therefore 
of  quick  parts,  whofe  bodies  are  generally 
of  a  delicate  ftru&ure  ;  to  perfons  who  have 
been  formerly  liable  to  frequent  hemorrha- 
gies  of  the  nofe ;  to  perfons  who  have  fuffer- 
ed  a  fuppreffion  of  any  hemorrhagy  they  had 

formerly 


i54  PRACTICE 

formerly  been  liable  to,  the  mod  frequent 
inftance  of  which  is  in  females  who  have  fuf- 
fered  a  fuppreffion  of  their  menftrual  flux  ; 
and,  laftly,  to  perfons  who  have  fuffered  the 
amputation  of  any  confiderable  limb. 

DCCCXXXV. 

In  mod  of  thefe  cafes  (DCCCXXXIV), 
the  difeafe  happens  efpecially  to  perfons 
about  the  time  of  their  coming  to  their  full 
growth,  or  foon  after  it,  and  this  for  the  rea- 
sons fully  fet  forth  above. 

DCCCXXXVI. 

From  all  that  has  been  faid  from  < 
DCCCXXXI  to  DCCCXXXV,  the  pre- 
diTponent  caufe  of  hemoptyfis  will  be  fuffi- 
ciently  underilood,  and  the  difeafe  may  hap- 
pen from  the  mere  circumftance  of  the  pre- 
difponent  caufe  arifmg  to  a  confiderable  de-  _ 
gree.  In  the  predifpofed,  however,  it  is 
often  brought  on  by  the  concurrence  of  va- 
rious occafional  and  exciting  caufes.  One  of 
thefe,  and  perhaps  a  frequent  one,  is  exter- 
nal heat ;  which,  even  when  in  no  great  de- 
gree, will  bring  on  the  difeafe  in  fpring,  and 
the  beginning  of  furnmer,  while  the  heat  ra- 
refies the  blood  more  than  it  relaxes  the  folids 
which  had  been  before  contracted  by  the 
cold  of  winter.  Another  exciting  caufe  is  a 
fudden  dimunition  of  the  weight  of  the  atmof- 

phere? 


O  F     P  H  Y  S  I  C.  155 

phere,  efpecially  when  concurring  with  any 
effort  in  bodily  exercife.  This  effort,  too, 
alone,  may  often,  in  the  predifpofed,  be  the 
exciting  caufe  ;  and  more  particularly,  any 
violent  exercife  of  refpiration.  In  fhort,  in 
the  predifpofed,  any  degree  of  external  vio- 
lence alfo  may  bring  on  the  difeafe. 


DCCCXXXVII. 

Occafioned  by  one  or  other  of  thefe  caufes 
(DCCCXXXVI),  the  difeafe  comes  on  with 
a  fenfe  of  weight  and  anxiety  in  the  chefl, 
fome  uneafmefs  in  breathing,  fome  pain  of 
the  breafl  or  other  parts  of  the  thorax,  and 
fome  fenfe  of  heat  under  the  flernum  ;  and 
very  often,  before  the  difeafe  appears,  a 
faltifh  tafle  is  perceived  in  the  mouth. 


DCCCXXXVIIL 

Immediately  before  the  appearance  of 
blood,  a  degree  of  irritation  is  felt  at  the  top 
of  the'larynx.  To  relieve  this,  a  hawking  is 
made,  which  brings  up  a  little  blood,  of  a 
florid  colour,  and  fomewhat  frothy.  The  ir- 
ritation returns  ;  and,  in  the  fame  manner, 
more  blood  of  a  like  kind  is  brought  up,  with 
fome  noife  in  the  windpipe,  as  of  air  palling 
through  a  fluid. 

DCCCXXXIX* 


156  PRACTICE 


DCCCXXXIX. 

This  is  commonly  the  manner  in  which  the 
hemoptyfis  begins ;  but  fometimes  at  the  very 
firft  the  blood  comes  up  by  coughing,  or  at 
leaft  fomewhat  of  coughing  accompanies  the 
hawking  jull  now  mentioned. 

DCCCXL. 

The  blood  ifluing  is  fometimes  at  firft  in 
very  fmall  quantity,  and  foon  difappears 
altogether :  But,  in  other  cafes,  efpecially 
when  it  repeatedly  occurs,  it  is  in  greater 
quantity,  and  frequently  continues  to  appear 
at  times  for  feveral  days  together.  It  is  fome- 
times profufe  ;  but  rarely  in  fuch  quantity  as 
either  by  its  excefs,  or  by  its  fudden  fuffbca- 
tion,  to  prove  immediately  mortal.  It  com- 
monly either  ceafes  fpontaneoufly,  or  is  flop- 
ped by  the  remedies  employed. 

DCCCXLI. 

When  blood  is  thrown  out  from  the 
mouth,  it  is  not  always  eafy  to  determine  from 
what  internal  part  it  proceeds ;  whether  from 
the  internal  furface  of  the  mouth  itfelf,  from 
the  fauces,  or  adjoining  cavities  of  the  nofe, 
from  the  ftomach,  or  from  the  lungs.  It  is 
however,  very   neceffary  to    diftinguifh  the 

different . 


O  F     P  H  Y  S  I  C.  157 

different  cafes ;  and,  in  moft  inftances,  it 
may  be  done  by  attending  to  the  following 
confiderations. 


DCCCXLII. 

When  the  blood  fpit  out  proceeds  from 
fome  part  of  the  internal  furface  of  the 
mouth  itfelf,  it  comes  out  without  any  hawk- 
ing or  coughing  :  And  generally,  upon  in- 
fpe&ion,  the  particular  fource  of  it  becomes 
evident. 


DCCCXLIII. 

When  blood  proceeds  from  the  fauces, 
or  adjoining  cavities  of  the  nofe,  it  may  be 
brought  out  by  hawking,  and  fometimes  by 
coughing,  in  the  manner  we  have  defcribed 
in  DCCCXXXVII  and  DCCCXXXIX; 
fo  that,  in  this  way,  a  doubt  may  arife  con- 
cerning its  real  fource.  A  patient  often  lays 
hold  of  thefe  circumftances  to  pleafe  himfelf 
with  the  opinion  of  its  coming  from  the  fau- 
ces, and  he  may  be  allowed  to  do  fo  :  But  a 
phyfician  cannot  readily  be  deceived,  if  he 
confider,that  a  bleeding  from  the  fauces  is  more 
rare  than  one  from  the  lungs  ;  that  the  former 
feldom  happens  but  to  perfons  who  have  been 
before  liable  either  to  an  hemorrhagy  of  the 
nofe,  or  to  fome  evident  caufe  of  erolion  ; 
and,   in  moil  cafes,  by  looking  into  the  fau- 

Vol.  II.  H  ces, 


158  P   R    A   C   T   I    C    E 

ces,  the  diflillation  of  the  blood,  if  it  comes 
from  thence,  will  be  perceived. 

DCCCXLIV. 

When  blood  proceeds  from  the  lungs,  the 
manner  in  which  it  is  brought  up  will  com- 
monly fhow  from  whence  it  comes  :  But  in- 
dependent of  that,  there  are  may  circumftanc- 
es  which  may  occur  to  point  it  out,  fuch  as  the 
period  of  life,  the  habit  of  body,  and  other 
marksofapredifpofition(DCCCXXXIII— 
DCCCXXXV);  and,  together  with  thefe, 
the  occafional  caufes  (DCCCXXXVI)  hav- 
ing been  immediately  before  applied. 

DCCCXLV. 

When  vomiting  accompanies  the  throw- 
ing out  of  blood  from  the  mouth,  as  vomit- 
ing and  coughing  often  mutually  excite  each 
other  ;  fo  they  may  be  frequently  joined, 
and  render  it  doubtful,  whether  the  blood 
thrown  out  proceeds  from  the  lungs  or  from 
the  ftomach.  We  may,  however,  generally 
decide,  by  conhdering,  that  blood  does  not 
fo  frequently  proceed  from  the  ftomach  as 
from  the  lungs  :  That  blood  proceeding  from 
the  ftomach  commonly  appears  in  greater 
quantity,  than  when  it  proceeds  from  the 
lungs ;  that  the  blood  proceeding  from  the 
lungs  is  ufually  of  a  florid  colour,  and  mix- 
ed with  a  little  frothy  mucus  only  ;   whereas 

the 


OF      PHYSIC.       159 

the  blood  from  the  flomach  is  commonly  of  a 
darker  colour,  more  grumous,  and  mixed 
with  the  other  contents  of  the  flomach  : 
That  the  coughing  or  vomiting,  according  as 
the  one  or  the  other  firft  arifes  in  the  cafes  in 
which  they  are  afterwards  joined,  may  fome- 
times  point  out  the  fource  of  the  blood  ;  and, 
laftly,  that  much  may  be  learned  from  the 
circumftances  and  fymptoms  which  have  pre- 
ceded the  hemorrhagy. 

Thofe  which  precede  the  hemoptyhs 
enumerated  in  DCCCX XXVII,  are  mod 
of  them  evident  marks  of  an  affection  of  the 
lungs,  And,  on  the  other  hand,  the  hema- 
temefis,  or  iffuing  of  blood  from  the  flomach, 
has  alfo  its  peculiar  fymptoms  and  circum- 
ftances preceding  it  ;  as,  for  inflance,  fome 
morbid  affection  of  this  organ,  or  at  leafi 
fome  pain,  anxiety,  and  fenfe  of  weight,  re- 
ferred diflin£tly  to  the  region  of  the  flomach. 
To  all  this  may  be  added,  that  the  vomiting 
of  blood  happens  more  frequently  to  females 
than  to  males ;  and  to  theformer,in  confequence 
of  a  fuppreffion  of  their  menflrual  flux  : 
and,  by  attending  to  all  thefe  confiderations 
(DCCCXLII— DCCCXLV),  the  prefence 
of  the  hemoptyhs  may  commonly  be  fuffi- 
ciently  afcertained. 


H  2  Sect. 


i6o  PRACTICE 


E    C    T, 


II, 


Of  the   Cure    of  Hemoptysis, 


DCCCXLVL 


THIS  difeafe   is  fometimes  attended  with 
little  danger  ;    as,    when  it   happens   to  fe- 
males in     confequence  of   a   fuppreffion  of 
the     menfes ;     when,     without    any    marks 
of  a  predifpofition,  it  arifes  from  external  vio- 
lence ;    or  when,  from  whatever  caufe  arifing, 
it  leaves  behind  it  no  cough,    dyfpncea,  or 
other  affection  of  the  lungs.     Even  in  fuch 
cafes,  however,  a  danger  may  arife  from  too 
large   an  wound  being  made  in  the  veffels  of 
the  lungs  ;  from  a  quantity  of  red  blood  be- 
in<r  left  to  ftagnate  in  the  cavity  of  the  bron- 
chia ;  and  particularly  from  any  determina- 
tion of  the  blood  being  made  into  the  veffels 
of  the  lungs,  which,  by  renewing  the  hemor- 
rhagy,    may  have  dangejous    confequences. 
In  every    inftance  therefore  of  hemoptyfis, 
the  effufion  is  to  be  moderated  by  the  feveral 
means  mentioned  DCCXCII  to  DCCXCV. 


DCCCXLVII. 


OF       PHYSIC.  161 

DCCCXLVII. 

Thefe  meafures  are  efpecially  necefTary 
when  the  hemoptyfis  arifes  in  confequence  of 
predifpofition  ;  and  in  all  cafes  where  there  is 
the.  appearance  of  a  large  effulion,  or  where 
the  hemorrhagy  frequently  returns,the  etfufion 
is  not  only  to  be  moderated,  but  to  be  entire- 
ly flopped,  and  the  returns  of  it  prevented 
hy  every  means  in  our  power.  See 
DCCXCVII,  and  following. 

DCCCXLVIII. 

To  flop  an  hemoptyfis,  or  prevent  the 
returns  of  it,  two  medicines  have  heen  fre- 
quently employed  ;  neither  of  which  I  can 
approve  of.  Thefe  are,  chalybeates,  and  the 
Peruvian  bark.  As  both  of  them  contribute 
to  increafe  the  phlogiflic  diathefis  of  the  fyf- 
tem,  they  can  hardly  be  fafe  in  any  cafe  of 
aclive  hemorrhagy,  and  I  have  frequently 
found  them  hurtful. 

DCCCXLIX. 

As  the  hemoptyfis,  which  happens  in  con- 
fequence of  predifpofition,  is  always  attend- 
ed with  a  phlogiflic  diathefis ;  and,  as  the 
badconfequences  of  the  difeafe  are  efpecially 
to  be  apprehended  from  the  continuance  of 
that  diathefis  ;  fo  this  is  to  be  induflrioufly 
taken  off  by  bloodletting,  in  greater  or  fmall- 
H3  er 


162  PRACTICE 

er  quantity,  and  more  or  lefs  frequently  re- 
peated, according  as  the  fymptoms  mall  di- 
rect. At  the  fame  time,  cooling  purgatives 
are  to  be  employed,  and  every  part  of  the 
antiphlogiftic  regimen  is  to  be  ftrictly  enjoin- 
ed. The  refrigerants  may  alfo  be  adminif- 
tered  ;  taking  care,  however,  that  the  acids, 
and  more  efpecially  the  nitre,  do  not  excite 
coughing. 

DCCCL. 

From  what  was  obferved  in  DCCXCV, 
it  will  appear,  that  biiftering  upon  the  bread 
or  back  may  be  a  remedy  of  hemoptyiis, 
when  it  is  prefent  ;  and  that  iffues  in  the 
fame  places  may  be  ufeful  in  preventing  the 
recurrence  of  it  when  it  has  ceafed. 

DCCCLI. 

The  avoiding  of  motion  is  generally  a  prop- 
er part  of  the  antiphlogiftic  regimen  ;  and 
in  the  hemoptyiis,  nothing  is  more  neceffary 
than  avoiding  bodily  exercife :  But  fome 
kinds  of  geftation,  as  failing,  and  travelling 
in  an  eafy  carriage  on  fmooth  roads,  have 
often  proved  a  remedy. 

DCCCLII. 

Such  is  the  treatment  I  can  propofe  for  the 
kemoptyfis,    confidered  merely  as  an  hemor- 

rhagy  ; 


O  F     P  H  Y  S  I  C.  165 

rhagy  :  But  when,  in  fpite  of  all  our  pre- 
cautions, it  continues  to  recur,  it  is  often 
followed  by  an  ulceration  of  the  lungs,  and  a 
phthilis  pulmonalis.  This,  therefore,  I  mull 
now  proceed  to  confider;  but,  as  it  arifes 
alfo  from  other  caufes  befides  the  hemoptyfis, 
it  mufl  be  treated  of  with  a  more  general 
view. 


H  4  CHAP. 


164  PRACTICE 


CHAP.        IV. 


of  the  PHTHISIS  PULMONALIS,  on 
CONSUMPTION  of  the  LUNGS. 


T.  I. 


Qf  the   Phenomena    and    Causes  of  the 
Phthisis  Pulmonalis. 


DCCCLIIL 


IHE  Phthifis  Pulmonalis  I 
would  define  to  be,  An  expectoration  of  pus 
or  purulent  matter  from  the  lungs,  attended 
with  a  he£tic  fever. 

As  this  is  the  principal  fpecies  of  phthifis, 
I  fhall  frequently  in  this  chapter  employ  the 
general  term  of  phthifis,  though  ftri6tly 
meaning  the  phthifis  pulmonalis. 

DCCCLIV, 


OF       PHYSIC.  16 


DCCCLIV. 

I  have  met  with  fome  inflances  of  an  ex- 
pectoration of  purulent  matter,  continuing 
for  many  years,  accompanied  with  very  few 
fymptoms  of  hectic,  and  at  leafl  without  any 
hectic  exquifitely  formed  :  But,  in  none  of 
thefe  inflances,  were  the  perfons  fo  entirely 
free  from  fymptoms  of  hectic,  as  to  form 
any  exception  to  the  general  definition. 

DCGCLV. 

In  every  inflance  of  an  expectoration  of 
pus,  I  prefume  there  is  an  ulceration  of  the 
lungs.  The  late  Mr,  de  Haen  is  the  only 
author  that  I  know  of  who  has  advanced  an- 
other opinion,  and  has  fuppofed,  that  pus 
may  be  formed  in  the  blood  veffels,  and  be 
from  thence  poured  into  the  bronchia?.  Ad- 
mitting his  fact,  I  have  attempted  an  expla- 
nation of  the  appearance  of  pus  without  ul~ 
ceration  in  CCCXLIX  :  But,  after  all,  I  can- 
not help  fufpecting  the  accuracy  of  his  ob- 
fervations  ;  muff  entirely  reject  his  explana- 
tion of  them  ;  muff  however  allow,  that  we 
(fill  want  facts  to  fupport  the  explanation  I 
have  offered  ;  and  doubt  much  if  it  will  ap- 
ply to  any  cafe  of  phthifis.  For  thefe  reafons 
I  flill  conclude,  agreeably  to  the  faith  of  all 
other  directions,  and  the  opinions  of  all 
phyficians,  that  the  fymptoms  mentioned  if| 

Vol.  2,  H  5  our 


166  PRACTICE 

our  definition  depend  always  upon  an  ulcer, 
ation  formed  in  the  lungs; 


DCCCLVI. 

It  has  fometimes  happened,  that  a  catarrh 
was  attended  with  an  expectoration  of  a  mat- 
ter fo  much  refembling  pus,  that  phyficians 
have  been  often  uncertain  whether  it  was 
mucus  or  pus,  and  therefore  whether  the 
difeafe  was  a,  catarrh  or  a  phthifis.  It  is  oft- 
en of  confequence  to  determine  thefe  quef- 
tions  ;  and  it  appears  to  me  that  it  may  be 
generally  done,  with  fufficient  certainty, 
from  the  following  confiderations,  of  which 
each  particular  is  not  always  fingly  decifive, 
but  when  they  are  taken  together  can  hardly 
deceive  us. 

1.  From  the  colour  of  the  matter  ;  as  mu- 
cus is  naturally  tranfparent,  and  pus  always 
opake.  When  mucus  becomes  opake,  as  it 
fometimes  does,  it  becomes  white,  yel- 
low, or  greenifh  ;  but  the  iafl  mentioned  col- 
our is  hardly  ever  fo  remarkable  in  mucus  as 
in  pus. 

2.  From  the  confidence;  as  mucus  is 
more  vifcid  and  coherent,  and  pus  lefs  fo,  and 
may  be  faid  to  be  more  friable.  When  mu- 
cus is  thrown  into  water,  it  is  not  readily  dif- 
fufed,  but  remains  united  in  uniform  and  cir- 
cular manes:  But  pus,  in  the  fame  circum- 
stances, though  not  readily  diffufed,  does  not 

remain 


OF       PHYSIC.  167 

remain  fo  uniformly  united,  and  by  a  little 
agitation  is  broken  into  ragged  fragments. 

3.  From  the  odour;  which  is  feldom  per- 
ceived in  mucus,  but  frequently  in  pus.  It 
has  been  propofed  to  try  the  odour  of  the 
matter  expectorated^  by  throwing  it  Upon 
live  coals  :  But  in  fuch  a  trial  both  mucus  and 
pus  give  out  a  difagreeable  fmell,  and  it  is 
not  eafy  to  diftinguifh  between  them. 

4.  From  the  fpecific  gravity  compared 
with  water  ;  and,  indeed,  it  is  ufual  for  the 
mucus  of  the  lungs  to  fwim  on  the  furface  of 
water,  and  for  pus  to  fink  in  it.  But  in  this 
we  may  fometimes  be  deceived;  as  pus 
which  has  entangled  a  great  deal  of  air  may 
fwim,  and  mucus  that  is  free  from  air  may  link. 

5.  From  the  mixture  which  is  difcernible 
in  the  matter  brought  up  :  For  if  a  yellow  or 
greenifh  matter  appears  furrounded  with  a 
quantity  of  tranfparent  or  lefs  opake  and  lefs 
coloured  matter,  the  more  ftrongly  coloured 
matter  may  be  generally  confidered  as  pus  ; 
as  it  is  not  eafy  to  underftand  how  one  por- 
tion of  the  mucus  of  the  lungs  can  be  very 
confiderably  changed,  while  the  reft  of  it 
is  very  little  fo,  or  remains  in  its  ordinary  flate. 

6.  From  the  admixture  of  certain  fubflances 
with  the  matter  thrown  out  from  the  lungs. 
To  this  purpofe  we  are  informed  by  the  ex- 
periments of  -the  late  Mr.  Charles  Darwin  : 
a.  That  the  vitriolic  acid  diffolves  both  mu- 
cus and  pus,  but  mo  ft  readily  the  former  : 
That,  if  water  be  added  to  fuch  a  folutioxi  of 

H  6  mucus. 


i6S  PRACTICE 

mucus,  this  is  feparated,  and  either  fwims  on 
the  furface,  or,  divided  into  flocculi,  is  fuf- 
pended  in  the  liquor ;  whereas,  when  water 
is  added  to  a  like  folution  of  pus,  this  falls  to 
the  bottom,  or  by  agitation  is  diffufed  fo  as 
to  exhibit  an  uniformly  turpid  liquor,  b. 
That  a  folution  of  the  cauftic  fixed  alkali,  af- 
ter fome  time,  diffolves  mucus,  and  generally 
pus  ;  and,  if  water  be  added  to  fuch  folu- 
tions,  the  pus  is  precipitated,  but  the  mucus 
is  not.  From  fuch  experiments  it  is  fuppof- 
ed,  that  pus  and  mucus  may  be  certainly  dif- 
tinguifhed  from  each  other. 

From  the  expectoration's  being  attended 
with  a  he£tic  fever.  A  catarrh,  or  expecto- 
ration of  mucus,  is  often  attended  with  fever ; 
but  never,  fo  far  as  I  have  obferved,  with 
fuch  a  fever  as  I  am  prefently  to  defcribe  as  a 
hectic.  This,  in  my  opinion,  is  the  moll 
certain  mark  of  a  purulent  ftate  in  fome  part 
of  the  body  ;  and  if  others  have  thought  dif- 
ferently, I  am  perfuaded  that  it  has  been 
owing  to  this,  that,  prefuming  upon  the  mor- 
tal nature  of  a  confirmed  or  purulent  phthifis, 
they  have  confidered  every  cafe  in  which  a 
recovery  happened,  as  a  catarrh  only  :  But, 
that  they  may  have  been  miftaken  in  this,  mail 
be  ihown  hereafter. 

DCCCLVII. 

Having  thus   confidered   the  firfl  part   of 
the  character  of  the  phthifis  pulmonalis  as  a 

mark 


OF       PHYSIC.  i6g 

mark  of  an  ulceration  of  the  lungs  ;  and  hav- 
ing juft  now  faid,  that  the  other  part  of  the 
character,  that  is,  the  he&ic  fever,  is  a  mark 
or  indication  of  the  fame  thing  ;  it  is  proper 
now  to  confider  this  here,  as  I  had  with 
that  view  omitted  it  before  (LXXIV). 

DCCCLVIII. 

A  hectic  fever  has  the  form  of  a  remittent, 
which  has  exacerbations  twice  every  day. 
The  fir  ft  of  thefe  occurs  about  noon,  fome- 
times  a  little  fooner  or  later  ;  and  a  flight  re- 
miffion  of  it  happens  about  five  afternoon. 
This  laft  is  foon  fucceeded  by  another  exacer- 
bation, gradually  increafing  till  after  mid- 
night :  But  after  two  o'clock  of  the  morning, 
a  remiffion  takes  place,  which  becomes  more 
and  more  confiderable  as  the  morning  ad- 
vances. The  exacerbations  are  frequently 
attended  with  fome  degree  of  cold  fhivering  j 
or  at  leaft,  the  patient  is  exceedingly  fenfible 
to  any  coolnefs  of  the  air,  feeks  external 
heat,  and  often  complains  of  a  fenfe  of  cold, 
when,  to  the  thermometer,  his  fkin  is  preter- 
naturally  warm.  Of  thefe  exacerbations, 
that  of  the  evening  is  always  the  moll  con- 
fiderable. 

DCCCLIX. 

It  has  commonly  been  given   as    a  pari- 
of  the  character  of  a  he&ic  fever,  that  an  ex- 
acerbation 


i7o  P  R  A  C  T  I   C  E 

acerbation  of  it  commonly  appears  after  the 
taking  food ;  and  it  is  true  that  dinner, 
which  is  taken  at  noon  or  after  it,  does  feem 
to  occafion  fome  exacerbation.  But  this 
mull  not  make  us  judge  the  midday  exacer- 
bation to  be  the  effect  of  eating  only ;  for  I 
have  often  obferved  it  to  come  on  an  hour 
before  noon,  and  often  fome  hours  before 
dinner ;  which,  in  this  country  at  prefent,  is 
not  taken  till  fome  time  after  noon.  It  is  in- 
deed to  be  obferved,  that  in  aimofl  every 
perfon,  the  taking  food  occafions  fome  de- 
gree of  fever  :  But  I  am  perfuaded  this  would 
not  appear  fo  confiderable  in  a  hectic,  were  it 
not  that  an  exacerbation  of  fever  is  prefent 
from  another  caufe  ;  and  accordingly,  the 
taking  food  in  the  morning  has  hardly  any 
fenfible  effed. 

DCCCLX. 

I  have  thus  defcribed  the  general  form  of 
hectic  fever  ;  but  many  circum fiances  attend- 
ing it  are  further  to  be  taken  notice  of.    x 

The  fever  I  have  defcribed  does  not  com- 
monly fubufl  long,  till  the  evening  exacer- 
bations become  attended  with  fweatings ; 
which  continue  to  recur,  and  to  prove  more 
and  more  profufe  through  the  whole  courfe 
of  the  difeafe. 

Almcft  from  the  firft  appearance  of  the 
hectic,  the  urine  is  high  coloured,  and  depos- 
its  a   copious    branny    red  fedimenr,  which 

hardly 


OF       PHYSIC.  171 

hardly  ever  falls  clofe   to  the  bottom  of  the 
veffel. 

In  the  hectic,  the  appetite  for  food  is  gen- 
erally lefs  impaired  than  in  any  other  kind  of 
fever. 

The  third  is  feldom  confiderable  •  the 
mouth  is  commonly  moift ;  and  as  the  difeafe 
advances,  the  tongue  becomes  free  from  all 
fur,  appears  very  clean  ;  and,  in  the  advanced 
flages  of  the  difeafe,  the  tongue  and  fauces 
appear  to  be  fomewhat  inflamed,  and  become 
more  or  lefs  covered,  with  aphthae. 

As  the  difeafe  advances,  the  redveffels  of  the 
adnata  of  the  eye  difappear,  and  the  whole 
of  the  adnata  becomes    of  a    pearly    white. 

The  face  is  commonly  pale  ;  but,  during 
the  exacerbations,  a  florid  red,  and  an  almofl 
circumfcribed  fpot,  appear  on  each  cheek. 

For  fome  time,  in  the  courfe  of  a  hectic, 
the  belly  is  bound  ;  but,  in  the  advanced 
flages  of  it,  a  diarrhoea  almofl  always  comes 
on,  and  continues  to  recur  frequently  during 
the  reft  of  the  difeafe,  alternating  in  fome 
meafure  with  the  fweatings  mentioned  above. 

The  difeafe  is  always  attended  with  a  debil- 
ity, which  gradually  increafes  during  the 
courfe  of  it. 

During    the    fame    courfe    an   emaciation 
*  takes  place,  and  goes  to  a  greater  degree  than 
in  almofl  any  other  cafe. 

The  falling  off  of  the  hairs,  and  the  adunque 
form  of  the  nails,  are  alfo  fymptoms  of  the 
want  of  nouriihment. 

Towards 


i;2  PRACTICE 

Towards  the  end  of  the  difeafe,  the  feel 
are  often  affected  with  oedematous  dwellings. 

The  exacerbations  of  the  fever  are  feldom 
attended  with  any  headach,  and  fcareely  ever 
with  delirium. 

The  fenfes  and  judgment  commonly  remain 
entire  to  the  very  end  of  the  difeafe  ;  and  the 
mind,  for  the  mofl  part,  is  confident  and  full  ' 
of  hope. 

Some  days  before  death,  a  delirium  comes 
on,  and  commonly  continues  to  the  end. 

DCCCLXL 

The  hectic  .  fever  now  defcribed 
(DCCCLVIII,  DCCCLIX)  as  accompany- 
ing a  purulent  ftate  of  the  lungs,  is  perhaps 
the  cafe  in  which  it  mofl  frequently  appears  ; 
but  I  have  never  feen  it  in  any  cafe,  when 
there  was  not  evidently,  or  when  I  had  not 
ground  to  fuppofe,  there  was  a  permanent 
purulency  or  ulceration  in  fome  external  or 
internal  part.  It  was  for  this  reafon  that  in 
LXXIV,  I  concluded  it  to  be  a  fymptomatic 
fever  only.  Indeed,  it  appears  to  me  to  be 
always  the  effect  of  an  acrimony  abforbed 
from  abfcefles  or  ulcers,  although  it  is  not 
equally  the  effect  of  every  fort  of  acrimony  i 
for  the  fcorbutic  and  cancerous  kinds  often 
fubfift  long  in  the  body  without  producing  a 
hectic.  What  is  the  precife  ftate  of  the  acri- 
mony producing  this,  I  cannot  determine,  but 

it 


OF.    PHYSIC.  173 

it  feems  to  be  chiefly  that  of  a  vitiated  puru- 
lency. 

DCCCLXII. 

However  this  may  be,  it  appears,  that  the 
be&ic's  depending  in  general  upon  an  acrimo- 
ny, explains  its  peculiar  circumftances.  The 
febrile  ftate  feems  to  be  chiefly  an  exacerba- 
tion of  that  frequency  of  the  pulfe,  which  oc- 
curs twice  every  day  to  perfons  in  health,  and 
may  be  produced  by  acrimony  alone.  Thefe 
exacerbations,  indeed,  do  not  happen  without 
the  proper  circumftances  of  pyrexia  ;  but  the 
fpafm  of  the  extreme  veffels  in  a  he&ic  does 
not  feem  to  be  fo  confiderable  as  in  other  fe- 
vers ;  and  hence  the  ftate  of  fweat  and  urine 
which  appears  fo  early  and  fo  conftantly  in 
hectics.  Upon  the  fame  fuppofition  of  an 
acrimony  corrupting  the  fluids,  and  debilitat- 
ing the  moving  powers,  I  think  that  moft  of 
the  other  fymptoms  may  alfo  be  explained, 

DCCCLXIIL 

Having  thus  confidered  the  characleriftical 
fymptoms  and  chief  part  of  the  proximate 
caufe  of  the  phthifis  pulmonalis,  I  proceed  to 
obferve,  that  an  ulcer  of  the  lungs,  and  its 
concomitant  circumftance  of  he&ic  fever,  may 
arife  from  different  previous  affections  of  the 
lungs  ;  all  of  which  however  may,  in  my 
opinion,  be  referred  to  five  heads  ;    that  is, 

1.  To 


i74  PRACTICE 

l.  To  an  hemoptyfis  ;  2.  To  a  fuppuration 
of  the  lungs  in  confequence  of  pneumonia  j| 
3.  To  catarrh  ;  4.  To  afthma  ;  or,  5.  To  aj 
tubercle.  Thefe  feveral  affections,  as  caufesl 
of  ulcers,  fhall  now  be  confidered  in  the  or-1 
der  mentioned. 

DCCCLXIV. 

It  has  been  commonly  fuppofed,  that  an 
hemoptyfis  was  naturally,  and  almoft  neceffa- 
rily,  followed  by  an  ulcer  of  the  fungs.  But 
I  will  prefume  to  fay,  that,  in  general,  this  is 
a  miflake  ;  for  there  have  been  many  inftances 
of  hemoptyfis  occafioned  by  external  violence, 
without  being  followed  by  any  ulcer  of  the 
lungs  ;  and  there  have  alfo  been  many  in- 
ftances of  hemoptyfis  from  an  internal  caufe, 
without  any  confequent  ulceration.  And 
this  too  has  been  the  cafe,  not  only  when  the 
hemoptyfis  happened  to  young  perfons,  and 
recurred  for  feveral  times,  but  when  it  has 
often  recurred  during  the  courfe  of  a  long 
life.  It  is  indeed  eafy  to  conceive,  that  a 
rupture  of  the  veffels  of  the  lungs,  like  that  of 
the  veffels  of  the  nofe,  may  be  often  healed, 
as  the  furgeons  fpeak,  by  the  fir  ft  intention. 
It  is  probable  therefore,  that  it  is  an  hemop- 
tyfis in  particular  circumftances  only,  which 
is  neceiTarily  followed  by  an  ulcer  ;  but  what 
thefe  circumftances  are,  it  is  difficult  to  deter- 
mine. It  is  poffible,  that  merely  the  de- 
gree of  rupture,  or  frequently  repeated  rup- 
ture 


OF       PHYSIC.  175 

ture  preventing  the  wound  from  healing  by 
the  firft  intention,  may  occafion  an  ulcer  ;  or 
it  is  poffible  that  red  blood  effufed,  and  not 
brought  up  entirely  by  coughing,  may,  by 
flagnating  in  the  bronchiae,  become  acrid,  and 
erode  the  parts.  Thefe  however  are  but  fuppo- 
litions,  not  fupported  by  any  clear  evidence. 
And,  if  we  confider  that  thofe  cafes  of  he- 
moptyfis  which  follow  the  predifpofition 
(DCCCXXXII— DCCCXXXV)  are  thofe 
efpecially  which  end  in  phthifis,  we  fhall  be 
led  to  fufpecl;  that  there  are  fome  other  cir- 
cumftances  which  concur  here  to  determine 
the  confequence  of  hemoptyfis,  as  I  (hall 
hereafter  endeavour  to  mow. 

DCCCLXVi 

Any  fuppofition,  however,  which  we  can 
make  with  refpecl;  to  the  innocence  of  an 
hemoptyfis,  muft  not  fuperfede  the  meafures 
propofed  above  for  its  cure  ;  both  becaufe  we 
cannot  certainly  forefee  what  may  be  the  con- 
fequences  of  fuch  an  accident,  and  becaufe 
the  meafures  above  fuggefted  are  fafe  ;  for, 
upon  every  fuppofition,  it  is  a  diathefis  phlo- 
giftica  that  may  urge  on  every  bad  confe- 
quence to  be  apprehended. 

DCCCLXVI. 

The  fecond  caufe  of  an  ulceration  of  the 
lungs,  to  be  confidered,  is  a  fuppuration 
formed  in  confequence  of  pneumonia. 

DCCCLXVII. 


176  PRACTICE 


DCCCLXVII. 

From     the      fymptoms     mentioned      in  1 
DCCCLVIII,    DCCCLIX,    it    may    with  1 
reafon  be  concluded,  that  an  abfcefs,  or,  as  it 
is  called,  a  vomica,  is  formed  in  fome  part  of 
the  pleura,  and  molt,  frequently  in  that  por- 
tion of  it  inverting  the  lungs.     Here  puru- 
lent matter  frequently  remains  for  fome  time,  , 
as  if  inclofed  in   a  cyft  ;  but  commonly  it  is  , 
not  long  before  it  comes  to  be  either  absorb- 
ed, and  transferred  to  fome  other  part  of  the  : 
body  ;  or  that  it  breaks  through  into  the  cav- 
ity of  the  lungs,  or  into  that  of  the  thorax.   In  1 
the  latter  cafe,  it  produces  the  difeafe  called  1 
empyema ;  but  it  is  only  when  the  matter  is  i 
poured  into  the  cavity  of  the  bronchiae,   that 
it  properly  conftitutes  the  phthifis  pulmona- 
lis.     In  the  cafe  of  empyema,  the  chief  cir- 
cumftances  of  a  phthifis  are  indeed  alfo  pref- 
ent ;  but  I  {hall  here  confider  that  cafe  only 
in  which  the  abfcefs  of  the  lungs  gives  occa^ 
fion  to  a  purulent  expectoration. 

DCCCLXVIII. 

An  abfcefs  of  the  lungs,  in  confequence  of 
pneumonia,  is  not  always  followed  by  a 
phthifis  :  For  fometimes  a  hectic  fever  is  not 
formed ;  the  matter  poured  into  the  bronchiae 
is  a  proper  and  benign  pus,  which  is  frequent- 
ly coughed  up  very  readily,   and  fpit  out ; 

andj 


OF      PHYSIC.  177 

and,  though  this  purulent  expectoration 
fhould  continue  for  fome  time,  yet  if  a  hectic 
does  not  come  on,  the  ulcer  fopn  heals,  and 
every  morbid  fymptom  difappears.  This  has 
happened  fo  frequently,  that  we  may  conclude, 
that  neither  the  accefs  of  the  air,  nor  the  con- 
ftant  motion  of  the  lungs,  will  prevent  an  ul- 
cer of  thefe  parts  from  healing,  if  the  matter 
of  it  be  well  conditioned.  An  abfcefs  of  the 
lungs,  therefore,  does  not  neceffarily  produce 
the  phthifis  pulmonalis  ;  and  if  it  be  followed 
by  fuch  a  difeafe,  it  muft  be  in  confequence 
of  particular  circumilances  which  corrupt  the 
purulent  matter  produced,  render  it  unfuitable 
to  the  healing  of  the  ulcer,  and  at  the  fame 
time  make  it  afford  an  acrimony,  which,  be- 
ing abforbed,  produces  a  he&ic  and  its  con- 
fequences. 

DCCCLXIX. 

The  corruption  of  the  matter  of  fuch  ab- 
fceffes  may  be  owing  to  feveral  caufes  ,-  as, 
l.  That  the  matter  effufed  during  the  in- 
flammation, had  not  been  a  pure  ferum  fit  to 
be  converted  into  a  laudable  pus,  but  had 
been  united  with  other  matters  which  pre- 
vented that,  and  gave  a  confiderable  acrimony 
to  the  whole  :  Or,  2.  That  the  matter  effuf- 
ed, and  converted  into  pus,  either  merely  by 
a  long  ftagnation  in  a  vomica,  or  by  its  con- 
nexion with  an  empyema,  had  been  fo  cor- 
rupted as  to  become  unfit  for  the  purpofe  of 

pus, 


i;8  PRACTICE 

pus,  in  the  healing  of  the  ulcer.  Thefe  feem 
to  be  poffible  caufes  of  the  corruption  of  mat- 
ter in  abfcelfes,  fo  as  to  make  it  the  occafion 
of  a  phthifis  in  perfons  otherwife  found  ;  but 
it  is  probable  that  a  pneumonic  abfcefs  does 
efpecially  produce  phthifis  when  it  happens 
to  perfons  previoufly  difpofed  to  that  difeafe, 
and  therefore  only  as  it  concurs  withfome  oth- 
er caufes  of  it. 


DCCCLXX. 

The  third  caufe  fuppofed  to  produce 
phthifis,  is  a  catarrh  ;  which  in  many  cafes 
feems,  in  length  of  time,  to  have  the  expecto- 
ration of  mucus  proper  to  it,  gradually  chang- 
ed into  an  expectoration  of  pus  ;  and  at  the 
fame  time,  by  the  addition  of  a  hectic  fever, 
the  difeafe,  which  was  at  firft  a  pure  catarrh, 
is  converted  into  a  phthifis.  This  fuppofi- 
tion,  however,  is  not  eafily  to  be  admitted. 
The  catarrh  is  properly  an  affection  of  the 
mucous  glands  of  the  trachea  and  bronchia?, 
analogous  to  the  coryza,  and  lefs  violent  kinds 
of  cynanche  tonfillaris,  which  very  feidorn 
terminate  in  fuppuration.  And  although  a 
catarrh  mould  be  difpofed  to  fuch  termina- 
tion, yet  the  ulcer  produced  might  readily 
heal  up,  as  it  does  in  the  cafe  of  a  cynanche 
tonfillaris  ;  and  therefore  mould  not  produce 
a   phthifis. 

DCCCLXXI. 


OF       PHYSIC.  179 


DCCCLXXI. 

Further,  the  catarrh,  as  purely  the  effect  of 
cold,  is  generally  a  mild  difeafe,  as  well  as  of 
fhort  duration  ;  and  of  the  numerous  inflances 
of  it,  there  are  at  moil  but  very  few  cafes 
which  can  be  faid  to  have  ended  in  phthifis. 
In  all  thofe  cafes  in  which  this  feems  to  have 
happened,  it  is  to  me  probable  that  the  per- 
fons  affected  were  peculiarly  predifpofed  to 
phthifis.  And  the  beginning  of  phthifis  fo 
often  refembles  a  catarrh,  that  the  former  may 
have  been  miftaken  for  the  latter.  Befides, 
to  increafe  the  fallacy,  it  often  happens  that 
the  application  of  cold,  which  is  the  mofl  fre- 
quent caufe  of  catarrh,  is  alfo  frequently  the 
exciting  caufe  of  the  cough  which  proves  the 
beginning  of  phthifis. 

DCCCLXXII. 

It  is  to  me,  therefore,  probable,  that  a 
catarrh  is  very  feldom  the  foundation  of 
phthifis  ;  but  I  would  not  pofitively  affert 
that  it  never  is  fo  ;  for  it  is  poffible  that  the 
cafes  of  a  more  violent  catarrh  may  have 
joined  with  them  a  pneumonic  affection, 
which  may  end  in  a  fuppuration  ;  or  it  may 
happen  that  a  long  continued  catarrh,  by  the 
violent  agitation  of  the  lungs  in  coughing, 
will  produce  fome  of  thofe  tubercles   which 

are 


180  PRACTICE 

are  prefently  to   be  mentioned  as  the  moft 
frequent  caufe  of  phthifis* 


DCCCLXXIII. 

It  muft  be  particularly  obferved  here,  that 
nothing  faid  in  DCCCLXXII,  mould  allow 
us  to  neglecl;  any  appearance  of  catarrh,  as  is 
too  frequently  done  ;  for  it  may  be  either  the 
beginning  of  a  phthifis,  which  is  miflaken  for 
a  genuine  catarrh  ;  or  that  even  as  a  catarrh 
continuing  long,  it  may  produce  a  phthifis, 
as  inDCCCLXXII. 


DCCCLXXIV. 

Many  phyficians  have  fuppofed  an  acrimo- 
ny of  the  fluids  eroding  fome  of  the  velfels  of 
the  lungs,  to  be  a  frequent  caufe  of  ulceration 
and  phthifis.  But  this  appears  to  me  to  be  a 
mere  fuppofition  ;  for  in  any  of  the  inftances 
of  the  production  of  phthifis  which  I  have 
feen,  there  was  no  evidence  of  any  acrimony 
of  the  blood  capable  of  eroding  the  veffels. 
It  is  true,  indeed,  that  in  many  cafes  an  acri- 
mony fubfifting  in  fome  part  of  the  fluids,  is 
the  caufe  of  the  difeafe  ;  but  it  is  at  the  fame 
time  probable,  that  this  acrimony  operates  by 
producing  tubercles,  rather  than  by  any  di- 
rect erofion. 

DCCCLXXV. 


OF       PHYSIC,  181 


DGCCLXXV. 

It  has  been  mentioned  in  DCCCLXIII, 
that  an  afthma  may  be  confidered  as  one  of 
the  caufes  of  phthifis  5  and  by  afihma  I  mean, 
that  fpecies  of  it  which  has  been  commonly 
named  the  Spafmodic.  This  difeafe  frequent- 
ly fubfifls  very  long  without  producing  any 
other,  and  may  have  its  own  peculiar  fatal 
termination,  as  ihall  be  explained  hereafter. 
But  I  have  feen  it  frequently  end  in  phthifis ; 
and  in  fuch  cafes  I  fuppofe  it  to  operate  in 
the  manner  above  alleged  of  catarrh  ;  that  is, 
by  producing  tubercles,  and  their  confe- 
quences,  which  fhall  be  prefently  mentioned. 

DCCCLXXVI. 

I  come  now  to  confide r  the  fifth  head  of 
the  caufe  of  phthifis,  and  which  I  apprehend 
to  be  the  moil  frequent  of  any.  This  I  have 
faid,  in  general,  to  be  tubercles  ;  by  which 
term  are  meant,  certain  fmall  tumours,  which 
have  the  appearance  of  indurated  glands. 
Diffeclions  have  frequently  mown  fuch  tuber- 
cles formed  in  the  lungs  ;  and  although  at 
firft  indolent,  yet  at  length  they  become  in- 
flamed, and  are  thereby  changed  into  little  ab- 
fceffesj  or  vomicae  ;  which  breaking,  and 
pouring  their  matter  into  the  bronchiae,  give 
a  purulent  expecloration,  and  thus  lay  the 
foundation  of  phthifis . 

Vol.  II.  I  DCCCLXXVIL 


82  PRACTICE 


DCCCLXXVII. 

Though  the  matter  expe&orated  upon  thefe 
occafions  has  the  appearance  of  pus,  it  is  fel- 
dom  that  of  a  laudable,  kind  ;  and,  as  the  ul- 
cers do  not  readily  heal,  but  are  attended 
with  a  hec~Hc  fever,  for  the  moft  part  ending 
fatally,  I  prefume  that  the  matter  of  the  ul- 
cers is  imbued  with  a  peculiarly  noxious  ac- 
rimony, which  prevents  their  healing,  and 
produces  a  phthifis  in  all  its  circumstances, 
as  mentioned  above. 

DCCCLXXVIIL 

It  is  very  probable  that  the  acrimony  which 
thus  difcovers  itfelf  in  the  ulcers,  exifled  be- 
fore and  produced  the  tubercles  themfelves, ; 
and  it  is  to  this  acrimony  that  we  mull  trace 
up  the  caufe  of  the  phthifis  following  thefe 
tubercles.  This  acrimony  is  probably,  in 
difFerent  cafes,  of  different  kinds  ;  and  it  will 
not  be  eafy  to  determine  its  varieties  :  But  to 
a  certain  length  I  mall  attempt  it, 

DCCCLXXIX. 

In  one  cafe,  and  that,  too,  a  very  frequent 
one,  of  phthifis,  it  appears,  that  the  noxious 
acrimony  is  of  the  fame  kind  with  that  which 
prevails  in  the  fcrophula.  This  may  be  con- 
cluded from  obferving,  that  a  phthifis,  at  its 

ufual 


OF       P  H  Y  S  I  C.  183 

sifual  periods,  frequently  attacks  perfons  born 
of  fcrophulous  parents  ;  that  is,  of  parents 
ivho  had  been  affecled  with  fcrophula  in  their 
younger  years  :  That  very  often,  when  the 
phthifis  appears,  there  occur  at  the  fame  time 
ibme  lympathic  tumours  in  the  external 
parts  ;  and  very  often  I  have  found  the  tabes 
mefenterica,  which  is  a  fcrophulous  affection, 
joined  with  the  phthifis  pulmonalis.  To  all 
this  I  would  add,  that5  even  when  no  fcrophu- 
lous affection  has  either  manifeftly  preceded 
or  accompanied  a  phthifis,  this  laft,  however, 
mofl  commonly  afTe&s  perfons  of  a  habit  re- 
fembling  the  fcrophulous  •  that  is,  perfons  of 
a  fanguine,  or  of  a  fanguineo  melancholic 
temperament,  who  have  very  fine  ikins,  rofy 
complexions,  large  veins,  foft  flefh,  and  thick 
upper  lip  :  And  further^  that  in  fuch  perfons 
*he  phthifis  comes  on  in  the  fame  manner 
that  it  does  in  perfons  having  tubercles,  as 
-fliall  be  immediately  explained. 

DCCCLXXX. 

Another  fpecies  of  acrimony  producing  tu- 
bercles of  the  lungs,  and  thereby  phthifis 
may  be  faid  to  be  the  exanthematic.  It  is 
well  known,  that  the  fmall  poxfometimes,  and 
more  frequently  the  meafles,  lay  the  founda- 
tion of  phthifis.  It  is  probable  alfo,  that  oth- 
er exanthemata  have  the  fame  effect.  ;  and 
from  the  phenomena  of  the  difeafe,  and  the 
diileclions  of  perfons  who  have  died  of  it,  it  is 
I  2  probable, 


i84  PRACTICE 

probable,  that  all  the  exanthemata  may  occa- 
Hon  a  phthifis,  by  afFording  a  matter  which 
in  the  firfb  place  produces  tubercles. 

DCCCLXXXI. 

Another  acrimony,  which  feems  fometimes 
to  produce  phthifis,  is  the  fiphylitic  :  But 
whether  fuch  an  acrimony  produces  phthifis 
in  any  other  perfons  than  the  previoufly  dif- 
pofed,  does  not  appear  to  me  certain. 

DCCCLXXXII. 

What  other  fpecies  of  acrimony,  fuch  a§ 
from  fcurvy,  from  pus  abforbed  from  other 
parts  of  the  body,  from  fuppreffed  eruptions, 
or  from  other  fources,  may  alio  produce  tuber- 
cles and  phthifis,  I  cannot  now  decide,  but 
mufl  leave  to  be  determined  by  thofe  who 
have  had  experience  of  fuch  cafes. 

DCCCLXXXIIL 

There  is  one  peculiar  cafe  of  phthifis,  which 
from  my  own  experience  I  can  take  notice 
of.  This  is  the  cafe  of  phthifis  from  a  calca- 
reous matter  formed  in  the  lungs,  and  cough- 
ed up,  frequently  with  a  little  blood,  fome- 
times with  mucus  only,  and  fometimes  with 
pus.  How  this  matter  is  generated,  or  in 
what  precife  part  of  the  lungs  it  is  feated,  I 
acknowledge  myfelf  ignorant.     In  three  cafes 

of 


OF       PHYSIC.  185 

of  this  kind  which  have  occurred  to  me,  there 
was  at  the  fame  time  no  appearance  of  ftony 
or  earthy  concretions  in  any  other  part  of  the 
body.  In  one  of  thefe  cafes,  an  exquifitely 
formed  phthifis  came  on,  and  proved  mortal  : 
While  in  the  other  two,  the  fymptoms  of 
phthifis  were  never  fully  formed  ;  and  after 
fome  time,  merely  by  a  milk  diet  and  avoid- 
ing irritation,  the  patients  entirely  recovered. 

DCCCLXXXIV. 

Another  foundation  for  phthifis,  analogous, 
as  I  judge,  to  that  of  tubercles,  is  that  which 
occurs  to  certain  artificers  whofe  employments 
keep  them  almofl  conitantly  expofed  to  duft  j 
fuch  as  ftonecutters,  millers,  flaxdreffers,  and 
fome  others.  I  have  not  obferved  in  this 
country  many  inftances  of  phthifis  which 
could  be  referred  to  this  caufe  ;  but,  from 
Ramazzini,  Morgagni,  and  fome  other 
writers,  we  muff  conclude  fuch  cafes  to  be 
more  frequent  in  the  fouthern  parts  of  Europe. 

DCCCLXXXV. 

Befides  thefe  now  mentioned,  there  are 
probably  fome  other  caufes  producing  tuber- 
cles, which  have  not  yet  been  afcertained  by 
obfervation  ;  and  it  is  likely,  that  in  the  ftate 
of  tubercles  there  is  a  variety  not  yet  account- 
ed for  :  But  all  this  mufl  be  left  to  future  ob- 
fervation and  inquiry. 

1 3  DCCCLXXXVI. 


186  PRACTICE 


DCCCLXXXVL 

-  It  has  been  frequently  fuppofed  by  phyfi- 
cians,  that  the  phthifis  is  a  contagious  difeafe  ; 
and  I  dare  not  affert  that  it  never  is  fuch  : 
But  in  many  hundred  inftances  of  the  difeafe 
which  I  have  feen,  there  has  been  hardly  one 
which  to  me  could  appear  to  have  an  fen  from 
contagion.  It  is  poffible,  that  in  warmer  cli- 
mates the  effects  of  contagion  may  be  more 
difcernible. 

After  having  faid  that  a  phthifis  arifes  from 
tubercles  more  frequently  than  from  any  oth- 
er caufe  ;  and  after  having  attempted  to  affign 
the  variety  of  thefe,  I  now  proceed  to  men- 
tion the  peculiar  circumflances  and  fymptoms 
which  ufually  accompany  the  coming  on  of 
the  difeafe  from  tubercles. 

DCCCLXXXVII. 

A  tuberculous  and  purulent  ftate  of  the 
lungs  has  been  obferved  in  very  young 
children,  and  in  fome  others  at  feveral  differ- 
ent periods  before  the  age  of  puberty  and  full 
growth  ;  but  inftances  of  this  kind  are  rare  ; 
and  the  attack  of  phthifis,  which  we  have  reau 
fon  to  impute  to  tubercles,  ufually  happens  at 
the  fame  period  which  I  have  affigned  for  the 
coming  on  of  the  hemoptyfis. 

DCCCLXXXVIIL 


OF     P  H  Y  S  I  (X  187 


DCCCLXXXVIII. 

The  phthifis- from- tubercles  does  alfo  gen- 
erally  afFecl  the  fame  habits  as  the  hemopty- 
fis  ;  that  is, .perfons  of  a  (lender  make,  of  long 
necks,  narrow  chefts,  and  prominent  ihoul- 
ders  :  But  very  frequently  the  perfons  liable 
to  tubercles,  have  lefs  of  the  florid  counte- 
nance, and  of  the  other  marks  of  an  exqui- 
sitely fanguine  temperament,  than  the  per- 
fons liable  to  hemoptyhs. 

DCCCLXXXIX. 

This  difeafe,  arihng  from  tubercles,  ufually 
commences  with  a  flight  and  fhort  cough, 
which  becomes  habitual,  is  often  little  remark- 
ed by  thofe  affecled,  and  fometimes  fo  little  as 
to  be  absolutely  denied  by  them.  At  the  fame 
time  their  breathing  becomes  eahly  hurried 
by  any  bodily  motion,  their  body  grows  lean- 
er, and  they  become  languid  and  indolent. 
This  Rate  fometimes  continues  for  a  year,  or 
even  for  two  years,  without  the  perfons  mak- 
ing any  complaint  of  it,  excepting  only  that 
they  are  afFecled  by  cold  more  readily  than 
ufual,  which  frequently  increafes  their  cough, 
and  produces  fome  catarrh.  This,  again, 
however,  is  fometimes  relieved  ;  is  fuppofed 
to  have  arifen  from  cold  alone  -  and  therefore 
gives  no  alarm  either  to  the  patient  or  to  his 
I.4,  friends^ 


188  PRACTICE 

friends,  nor  leads  them  to  take  any  precau- 
tions. 

DCCCXC. 

* 
Upon  one  or  other  of  thefe  t  occafions  of 
catching  cold,  as  we  commonly  fpeak,  the 
cough  becomes  more  confiderable  ;  is  partic- 
ularly troublefome  upon  the  patient's  lying 
down  at  night  ;  and  in  this  flate  continues 
longer  than  is  ufual  in  the  cafe  of  a  fimple 
catarrh.  This  is  more  efpecially  to  call  for 
attention,  if  the  increafe  and  continuance  of 
cough  come  on  during  the  fummer  feafon. 

DCCCXCI. 

The  cough  which  comes  on  as  in 
DCCCLXXXIX,is  very  often  for  alongtime 
without  any  expectoration  ;  but  when,  from 
repeatedly  catching  cold,  it  becomes  more 
conftant,  it  is  then  at  the  fame  time  attended 
with  fome  expectoration,  which  is  moll  con- 
fiderable in  the  mornings.  The  matter  of 
this  expectoration  becomes  by  degrees  more 
copious,  more  vifcid,  and  more  opake  ;  at 
length  of  a  yellow  or  greenifh  colour,  and  of 
a  purulent  appearance.  The  whole  of  the 
matter,  however,  is  not  always  at  once  entire- 
ly changed  in  this  manner  ;  but,  while  one 
part  of  it  retains  the  ufual  form  of  mucus,  an- 
other fuffers  the  changes  now  defcribed. 

DCCCXCII. 


OF       PHYSIC.  189 

DCCCXCII. 

When  the  cougTTincreafes,  and  continues; 
very  frequent  through  the  night,  and  when, 
the  matter  expectorated  undergoes  the  chang- 
es I  have  mentioned,  the  breathing  at  the 
fame  time  becomes  more  difficult,  and  the 
emaciation  and  weaknefs  go  on  alfoincreafmg. 
In  the  female  fex,  as  the  diieafe  advances,  and 
fometimes  early  in  its  progrefs,  the  menfes 
ceafe  to  flow  ;  and  this  circum fiance  is  to  be 
confidered  as  commonly  the  effect,  although 
the  fex  themfelves  are  ready  to  believe  it  the 
fole  caufe  of  the  difeafe. 

DCCCXCIII. 

When  the  cough  comes  on  as  iw 
DCCCLXXXIX,  the  pulfe  is  often  natural, 
and  for  fome  time  after  continues  to  be  fo  ; 
but  the  fymptoms  have  feldom  fubfifled  long 
before  the  pulfe  becomes  frequent,  and  fome- 
times to  a  conn  der  able  degree,  without  much 
of  the  other  fymptoms  of  fever.  At  length, 
however,  evening  exacerbations  become  re- 
markable ;  and  by  degrees  the  fever  affumes 
the  exquifite  form  of  heclic,  as  defcribed  in 
DCCCLVIIL— DCCCLX, 

DGGCXCIV. 

It  is  feldom  that  the  cough,  expectoration,, 
and  fever,  go  on  increafmg,    in  the  manner 
Vol.  2,  I.  5  now/ 


jgo  P   R   A   C   T   I    C    E 

now  defcribed,  without  fome  pain  being  felt 
in  fome  part  of  the  thorax.  It  is  ufually  and 
moil  frequently  felt  at  firft  under  the  fternum, 
and  that  efpecially,  or  almofl  only,  upon  occa- 
fion  of  coughing  :  But  very  often,  and  that 
too  early,  in  the  courfe  of  the  difeafe,  a  pain 
is  felt  on  one  fide,  fometimes  very  conftantly, 
and  fo  as  to  prevent  the  perfon  from  lying 
eafily  upon  that  fide  ;  but  at  other  times  the 
pain  is  felt  only  upon  a  full  infpiration,  or 
upon  coughing.  Even  when  no  pain  is  felt, 
it  generally  happens  that  phthifical  perfons 
cannot  lie  eafily  on  fome  one  of  their  fides 
without  having  their  difficulty  of  breathing 
increafed,  and  their  cough  excited. 

DCCCXCV. 

The  phthifis  begins,  and  fometimes  pro- 
ceeds to  its  fatal  iffue,  in  the  manner  defcribed 
from  DCCCLXXXIX,  to  DCCCXCV, 
without  any  appearance  of  hemoptyfis.  Such 
cafes  are,  indeed,  rare  ;  but  it  is  very  common 
for  the  difeafe  to  advance  far,  and  even  to  an 
evident  purulency  and  hectic  flate,  without 
any  appearance  of  blood  in  the  fpitting  :  So 
that  it  may  be  affirmed,  the  difeafe  is  fre- 
quently not  founded  in  hemoptyfis.  At  the 
fame  time,  we  muff  allow,  not  only  that  it 
fometimes  begins  with  an  hemoptyfis,  as  is 
faidin  DCCCLXIV  ;  but  furthur,  that  it- 
feidom  happens  that  in  the  progrefs  of  the 
difeafe  more  or  lefs  of  an  hemoptyfis  does  not 

appear. 


G  F       PHYSIC.  191 

appear.  Some  degree  of  blood fpitting  does, 
indeed,  appear  fometimes  111  the  ft  ate  men- 
tioned DCCCLXXXIX,  DCCCXCIII,  bin 
more  commonly  in  the  more  advanced  (lages 
of  the  difeafe  only,  and  particularly  upon  the 
firft  appearance  of  purulency.  However  this 
may  be,  it  is  feldom,  in  the  phthifis  from  tu- 
bercles, that  the  hemoptyfis  is  confiderable, 
or  requires  any  remedies  different  from  thole 
which  are  otherwifcneceifary  for  the  ltate  of 
the  tubercles., 

DCCCXCVI. 

Ihave  now  defcribed  afucceffion  of  Symp- 
toms which,  in  different  cafes,  occupy  more 
or  lefs  time.  In  this  climate  they  very  often 
take  up  fome  years,  the  fymptoms  appearing 
efpecially  in  the  winter  and  fpring  ;  common- 
ly becoming  eafier,  and  fometimes  almoff  dis- 
appearing, during  the  fummer  :  But  returning 
again  in  winter,  they  at  length,  after  two  or 
diree  years,  prove  fatal,  towards  the  end  of, 
fpring  or  beginning  of  fummer. 

DCCCXCVII. 

In  this  difeafe.  the  prognofis  is  for  the  moft  • 
part  unfavourable.  Of  thofe  affected  with  it, , 
the  greater  number  die  ;  but  there  are  alfo  » 
many  of  them  who  recover  entirely, .  after 
having  been  in  very  unpromiiing  circum- 
ftances.  What  are,  however,  the  circum-- 
1.6  (lances- 


292  PRACTICE 

fiances  more  certainly  determining  to  a  happy 
or  to  a  fatal  event,  I  have  not  yet  been  able  to 

afcertain. 


DCCCXCVIIL 

The  following  aphorifms  are  the  refult  of 
my  observations. 

A  phthifis  pulmonalis  from  hemoptyfis,  is 
more  frequently  recovered  than  one  from  tu- 
bercles. 

An  hemoptyfis  not  only  is  not  always  fol- 
lowed by  a  phthifis,  as  we  have  faid  above 
(DCCCLXIV)  ;  but  even  when  followed  by 
an  ulceration,  the  ulceration  is  fometimes  at- 
tended with  little  of  heclic,  and  frequently 
admits  of  being  foon  healed.  Even  when  the 
hemoptyfis  and  ulceration  have  happened  to 
be  repeated,  there  are  inflances  of  perfons  re- 
covering entirely  after  feveral  fuch  repetitions. 

A  phthifis  from  a  fuppuration  in  confe- 
quence  of  pneumonic  inflammation,  is  that 
which  moll  rarely  occurs  in  this  climate  ;  and 
a  phthifis  does  not  always  follow  fuch  fuppu- 
ration, when  the  abfcefs  formed  foon  breaks 
-and  difcharges  a  laudable  pus  :  But,  if  the  ab- 
fcefs continue  long  fhut  up,  and  till  after  a 
confiderable  degree  of  he£lic  has  been  form-  , 
ed,  a  phthifis  is  then  produced,  equally  dan- 
gerous as  that  from  other  caufes. 

A  phthifis  from  tubercles  has,  I  think,  been 
recovered  :  But  it  is  of  all  others  the  moll 

dangerous 


OF       PHYSIC.  193 

dangerous  ;  and,  when  arifingfrom  a  hereditab- 
ly taint,  is  almoft  certainly  fatal. 

The  danger  of  a  phthifis,  from  whatever 
caufe  it  may  have  arifen,  is  mofl  certainly  to 
be  judged  of  by  the  degree  to  which  the  hec- 
tic and  its  confequences  have  arrived.  From 
a  certain  degree  of  emaciation,  debility,  pro- 
fufe  fweating,  and  diarrhoea,  no  perfon  re- 
covers. 

A  mania  coming  on,  has  been  found  to  re- 
move all  the  fymptoms,  and  fometimes  has 
entirely  cured  the  difeafe  ;  but,  in  other  cafes, 
upon  the  going  off  of  the  mania,  the  phthifis 
has  recurred,  and  proved  fatal. 

The  pregnancy  of  women  has  often  retard- 
ed the  progrefs  of  a  phthifis  ;  but  commonly 
it  is  only  till  after  delivery,  when  the  fymp- 
toms of  phthifis  return  with  violence,  and  foon 
prove  fatal. 


Sect.        IL 

Of  the    Cure   of  Phthisis. 

DCCCXCIX. 

FROM  what  has  been  juft  now  faid,  it 
will  readily  appear,  that  the  cure  of  the  phthifis 
pulmonalis  muft  be  exceedingly  difficult  ;  and 
that  even  the  utmofl  care  and  attention  in  the 

employment 


194 


PRACTICE 


employment  of  remedies  have  feldom  fuc- 
ceeded.  It  may  be  doubtful  whether  this 
failure  is  to  be  imputed  to  the  imperfection 
of  our  art,  or  to  the  abfolutely  incurable  na- 
ture of  the  difeafe.  I  am  extremely  averfe 
in  any  cafe  to  admit  of  the  latter  fuppofition, 
and  can  always  readily  allow  of  the  former  ; 
but,  in  the  mean  time,  muff  mention  here 
what  has  been  attempted  towards  either  curing 
or  moderating  the  violence  of  this  difeafe. 

DCCCC. 

It  mud  be  obvious,  that,  according  to  the 
different  circumftances  of  this  difeafe,  the 
method  of  cure  muft  be  different.  Our  firfl 
attention  mould  be  employed  in  watching  the 
approach  of  the  difeafe,  and  preventing  its 
proceeding  to  an  incurable  ft  ate. 

In  all  perfons  of  a  phthifical  habit,  and  ef- 
pecialiy  in  thofe  born  of   phthifical  parents, , 
the  flighted   fymptoms  of  the    approach    of 
phthifis,  at  the  phthifical  period  of  life,  ought, 
to  be  attended  to. 

DCCCCI, 

When  an  hemoptyfis  occurs,  though  it  be 
not  always  followed  with  ulceration  and,' 
phthifis,  thefe,  however,  are  always  to  be  ap- 
prehended ;  and  every  precaution  is  to  be 
taken  againfl  them.  This  is  efpecially  to  be. 
done  by  employing  every  means  of  moderat- 


OF       PHYSIC.  195 

ing  the  hemorrhagy,  and  of  preventing  its  re- 
turn, direaed  in  DCCCXCII,  et  feq.  and 
thefe  precautions  ought  to  be  continued  for 
feveral  years  after  the  occurrence  of  the 
hemoptyfis. 

DCCCCII. 

The  phthifis  which  follows  a  fuppuration 
from  pneumonic  inflammation,  can  only  be 
prevented  with  certainty,  by  obtaining  a  ref- 
olution  of  fuch  inflammation.  What  may  be 
attempted  towards  the  cure  of  an  abfcefs  and 
ulcer  which  have  taken  place,  I  mall  fpeak  of 
hereafter. 

DCCCCIII. 

I  have  faid,  it  is  doubtful  if  a  genuine  ca- 
tarrh ever  produces  a  phthifis  ;  but  have  al- 
lowed that  it  pombly  may  ;  and  both  upon 
this  account,  and  upon  account  of  the  ambi- 
guity which  may  arife,  whether  the  appearing 
catarrh  be  a  primary  difeafe,  or  the  efFecl:  of  a 
tubercle,  I  confider  it  as  of  confequence  to 
cure  a  catarrh  as  foon  as  poflible  after  its  firft 
appearance.  More  efpecially  when  it  fhall 
linger,  and  continue  for  fome  time,  or  fhall, 
after  fome  intermiffion,  frequently  return,  the 
cure  of  it  mould  be  diligently  attempted. 
The  meafures  requifite  for  this  purpofe  fhall 
be  mentioned  afterwards,  when  we  come  to 
treat  of  catarrh  as  a  primary  difeafe  ;  but,  in 

the 


t96  PRACTICE 

the  mean  time,  the  means  neceffary  for  pre- 
venting its  producing  a  phthifis  fhall  be  men- 
tioned immediately,  as  they  are  the  fame  with 
thofe  I  mail  point  out  as  neceffary  for  pre- 
venting a  phthifis  from  tubercles. 

DCCCCIV. 

The  preventing  of  a  phthifis  from  afthma 
mufl  be,  by  curing,  if  poflible,  the  afthma  ;  or 
at  leaft  by  moderating  it  as  much  as  may  be 
done  ;  and  as  it  is  probable  that  afthma  occa- 
fions  phthifis,  by  producing  tubercles,  the 
meafures  neceffary  for  preventing  phthifis 
from  afthma,  will  be  the  fame  with  thofe  necef- 
fary in  the  cafe  of  tubercles,  which  I  am  now 
about  to  mention. 

DCCCCV. 

I  confider  tubercles  as  by  much  the  moft 
frequent  caufe  of  phthifis  ;  and  even  in  many 
cafes  where  this  feems  to  depend  upon  he- 
moptyfis,  catarrh,  or  afthma,  it  does  however 
truly  arife  from  tubercles.  It  is  upon  this 
fubject,  therefore,  that  I  fhall  have  occafion 
to  treat  of  the  meafures  moft  commonly  requi- 
fite  for  curing  phthifis. 

DCCCCVI. 

When,  in  a  perfon  born  of  phthifical  pa- 
rents, of  a  phthifical  habit,  at  the  phthifical 

period 


O  F     P  H  Y  S  I  C.  197 

period  oflife,  the  fymptomsDCCCLXXXIX, 
in  the  Spring,  or  beginning  of  fummer,  fhall 
appear  in  the  flighteft  degree,  we  may  pre- 
fume  that  a  tubercle,  or  tubercles,  either  have 
been  formed,  or  are  forming  in  the  lungs  ;  and 
therefore,  that  every  means  we  can  devife  for 
preventing  their  formation,  or  for  procuring 
their  resolution,  mould  be  employed  imme- 
diately, even  although  the  patient  himfelf 
ihould  overlook  or  neglect  the  fymptoms,  as 
imputing  them  to  accidental  cold. 

DCCCCVII. 

This  is  certainly  the  general  indication  ; 
but  how  it  may  be  executed  I  cannot  readily 
fay.  I  do  not  know  that,  at  any  time,  phy- 
ficians  have  propofed  any  remedy  capable  of 
preventing  the  formation  of  tubercles,  or  of 
refolving  them  when  formed.  The  analogy 
of  fcrophula,  gives  no  affiflance  in  this  matter. 
Infcrophula  the  remedies  that  are  feemingly  of 
moft  power  are,  fea  water,  or  certain  mineral 
waters  ;  but  thefe  have  generally  proved  hurt- 
ful in  the  cafe  of  tubercles  of  the  lungs.  I 
have  known  feveral  inflances  of  mercury  very 
fully  employed  for  certain  difeafes,  in  perfons 
who  were  fuppofed  at  the  time  to  have  tuber- 
cles formed,  or  forming,  in  their  lungs  ;  but 
though  the  mercury  proved  a  cure  for  thofe 
other  difeafes,  it  was  of  no  fervice  in  prevent- 
ing phthifis,  andinfome  cafes,  feemed  to  hur- 
ry it  on. 

DCCCCVIIL 


198         P   R  A   C   T   I   C   E 


DCCCCV1II. 

Such  appears  to  me  to  be  the  prefent  ftate 
of  our  art,  with  refpecl;  to  the  cure  of  tuber- 
cles ;  but  I  do  not  defpair  of  a  remedy  for  the 
purpofe  being  found  hereafter.  In  the  mean 
time,  all  that  at  prefent  feems  to  be  within 
the  reach  of  our  art,  is  to  take  the  meafures 
proper  for  avoiding  the  inflammation  of  tu- 
bercles. It  is  probable  that  tubercles  may 
fubfift  long  without  producing  any  diforder  ; 
and  I  am  difpofed  to  think,  that  nature  fome- 
times  refolves  and  difcuffes  tubercles  which.  . 
have  been  formed  ;  but  that  nature  does  this 
only  when  the  tubercles  remain  in  an  unin- 
flamed  ftate  ;  and  therefore,  that  the  meafures 
neceffary  to  be  taken  are  chiefly  thofe  for  a- 
voiding  the  inflammation  of  the  tubercles.. 

dccccix. 

The  inflammation  of  a  tubercle  of  the  lungs 
is  to  be  avoided  upon  the  general  plan  of  a- 
voiding  inflammation,  by  bloodletting,  and 
by  an  antiphlogi flic  regimen ;  the  chief  part  of 
which,  in  this  cafe,  is  the  ufe  of  a  low  diet. 
This  fuppofes  a  total  abftinence  from  animal 
food,  and  the  ufing  of  vegetable  food  almoft 
alone  ;  but  it  has  been  found,  that  it  is  not 
neceffary  for  the  patient  to  be  confined  to 
vegetables  of  the  weaken1  nourifhment,  it  be- 
ing: 


OF       PHYSIC.  199 

ing  fufficient  that  the  farinacea  be  employed, 
and  together  with  thefe,  milk. 

DCCCCX. 

Milk  has  been  generally  confidered  as  the 
chief  remedy  in  phthifis,  and  in  the  cafe  of 
every  tendency  to  it  ;  but  whether  from  its 
peculiar  qualities,  or  from  its  being  of  a  lower 
quality,  with  refpe£t  to  nourifhment,  than  any 
food  entirely  animal,  is  not  certainly  deter- 
mined. The  choice  and  adminiflration  of 
milk  will  be  properly  directed,  by  confidering 
the  nature  of  the  milk  of  the  feveral  animals 
from  which  it  may  be  taken,  and  the  particu- 
lar ftate  of  the  patient  with  refpecf.  to  the  pe- 
riod and  circumftances  of  the  difeafe,  and  to 
the  habits  of  his  ftomach  with  refpecl  to  milk. 

DCCCCXI. 

A  fecond  means  of  preventing  the  inflam- 
mation of  the  tubercles  of  the  lungs,  is,  by  a- 
voiding  any  particular  irritation  of  the  affect- 
ed part,  which  may  arife  from  any  violent  ex- 
ercife  of  refpiration  ;  from  any  confiderable 
degree  of  bodily  exercife  ;  from  any  pofition 
of  the  body  which  flraitens  the  capacity  of 
the  thorax  ;  and,  laftly,  from  cold  applied  to 
the  furface  of  the  body,  which  determines  the 
blood  in  greater  quantity  to  the  internal  parts^ 
and  particularly  to  the  lungs. 

DCCCCXI1. 


*oo  PRACTICE, 


DCCCCXII. 

From  the  laft  mentioned  confideration,  the 
application  of  cold  in  general,  and  therefore 
the  winter  feafon,  in  cold  climates,  as  dimin- 
ifhing  the  cutaneous  perfpiration,  is  to  be  a- 
voided  ;  but  more  particularly,  that  applica- 
tion of  cold  is  to  be  fhunned  that  may  fup- 
prefs  perfpiration,  to  the  degree  of  occasioning 
a  catarrh,  which  confifts  in  an  inflammatory 
determination  to  the  lungs,  and  may  therefore 
moft  certainly  produce  an  inflammation  of 
the  tubercles  there. 

By  confidering,  that  the  avoiding  heat  is  a 
part  of  the  antiphlogiftic  regimen  above  rec- 
ommended, and  by  comparing  this  with  what 
has  been  juft  now  faid  refpe&ing  the  avoiding 
cold,  the  proper  choice  of  climates  and  fea- 
fons  for  phthifical  patients  will  be  readily  un- 
derftood. 

DCCCCXIII. 

A  third  means  of  avoiding  the  inflamma- 
tion of  the  tubercles  of  the  lungs  confifts,  in 
diminifhing  the  determination  of  the  blood  to 
the  lungs,  by  fupporting  and  increafing  the 
determination  to  the  furface  of  the  body  $ 
which  is  to  be  chiefly  and  mdft  fafely  done 
by  warm  clothing,  and  the  frequent  ufe  of  the 
exercifes  of  geftation. 

DCCCCX1Y* 


OF       PHYSIC.  201 


DCCCCXIV. 

Every  mode  of  geflation  has  been  found  of 
ufe  in  phthifical  cafes  ;  but  riding  on  horfe- 
back,  as  being  accompanied  with  a  great  deal 
of  bodily  exercife,  is  lefs  fafe  in  perions  liable 
to  an  hemoptyhs.  Travelling  in  a  carriage, 
unlefs  upon  very  fmooth  roads,  may  alfo  be 
of  doubtful  effect  ;  and  all  the  modes  of  gef- 
tation  that  are  employed  on  land,  may  fall 
fhort  of  the  effecls  expecled  from  them,  be- 
cause they  cannot  be  rendered  fufnciently 
conflant :  And  therefore  it  is  that  failing,  of 
all  other  modes  of  geflation,  is  the  mofl  effec- 
tual in  pneumonic  cafes,  as  being  both  the 
fmoothefl  and  mofl  conflant. 

It  has  been  imagined,  that  fome  benefit  is 
derived  from  the  flate  of  the  atmofphere  upon 
the  fea  :  But  I  cannot  find  that  any  impreg- 
nation of  this  which  can  be  fuppofed  to  take 
place,  can  be  of  fervice  to  phthifical  perfons. 
It  is  however  probable,  that  frequently  fome 
benefit  may  be  derived  from  the  more  mode- 
rate temperature  and  greater  purity  of  the  air 
upon  the  fea. 

DCCCCXV. 

In  order  to  take  off  any  inflammatory  de- 
termination of  the  blood  into  the  veffels  of  the 
lungs,  bliflers  applied  to  fome  part  of  the 
thorax  may  often  be  of  fervice  ;  and  for  the 

fame 


202  PRACTICE 

fame  purpofe,  as  well  as  for  moderating  the 
general  inflammatory  (late  of  the  body,  iffues 
of  various  kinds  may  be  employed  with  ad*» 
vantage. 

DCCCCXVI. 

The  feveral  meafures  to  be  purfued  in  the 
cafe  of  what  is  properly  called  an  Incipient 
Phthifis,  have  now  been  mentioned  ;  but  they 
have  feldom  been  employed  in  fuch  cafes  in 
due  time,  and  have  therefore,  perhaps,  feldom 
proved  effectual.  It  has  more  commonly 
happened,  that  after  fome  time,  an  inflame 
mation  has  come  upon  the  tubercle,  and  an 
abfcefs  has  been  formed,  which  opening  into 
the  cavity  of  the  bronchiae,  has  produced  an 
ulcer,  and  a 'confirmed  phthifis. 

DCCCCXVIL 

In  this  (late  of  matters,  fome  new  indica~ 
tions  different  from  the  former  may  be  fup« 
poled  to  arife  ^  and  indications  for  preventing 
abforption,  for  preventing  the  effects  of 
the  abforbed  matter  upon  the  blood,  and 
for  healing  the  ulcer,  have  been  actually 
propofed.  I  cannot  find,  however,  that 
any  of  the  means  propofed  for  executing 
thele  indications,  are  either  probable  or  have 
proved  effectual.  If,  upon  fome  occafions, 
they  have  appeared  to  be  ufeful,  it  has  been 
probably  by  anfwerinz  fome  other  intention. 

While 


OF      P  H'Y   S  I   C.  203 

While  no  antidote  againft  the  poifon  which 
efpecially  operates  here,  feems  to  have  been 
as  yet  found  out,  it  appears  to  me,  that  too 
great  a  degree  of  inflammation  has  a  great 
mare  in  preventing  the  healing  of  the  ulcer 
which  occurs  ;  and  fuch  inflammation  is  cer- 
tainly what  has  a  great  fhare  in  urging  on  its 
fatal  confequences.  The  only  practice,  there- 
fore, which  I  can  venture  to  propofe,  is  the 
fame  in  the  ulcerated  as  in  the  crude  ftate  of 
a  tubercle  ;  that  is,  the  employment  of  means 
for  moderating  inflammation,  which  have 
been  already  mentioned  DCCCCIXe£  feq. 

DCCCCXVIII. 

The  balfamics,  whether  natural  or  artificial, 
which  have  been  fo  commonly  advifed  in 
cafes  of  phthifis,  appear  to  me  to  have  been 
propofed  upon  no  fufficient  grounds,  and  to 
have  proved  commonly  hurtful.  The  re  fin- 
ous  and  acrid  «fubftance  of  myrrh,  lately  rec- 
ommended, has  not  appeared  to  me  to  be  of 
any  fervice,  and  in  fome  cafes  to  have  proved 
hurtful. 

DCCCCXIX. 

Mercury,  fo  often  ufeful  in  healing  ulcers, 
has  been  fpecioufly  enough  propofed  in  this 
difeafe  ;  but  whether  that  it  be  not  adapted  to 
the  particular  nature  of  the  ulcers  of  the  lungs 
occurring  in  phthifis,  or  that  it  proved  hurt- 
ful 


$04  PRACTICE 

fill  becaufe  it  cannot  have  effect  without  ex- 
citing fuch  an  inflammatory  Mate  of  the  whole 
fyftem,  as,  in  a  hectic  flate,  muft  prove^very 
hurtful,  I  cannot  determine.  Upon  many 
trials  which  I  have  feen  made,  it  has  proved 
of  no  fervice,  and  commonly  has  appeared  to 
be  manifeftiy  pernicious. 

DCCCCXX. 

The  Peruvian  bark  has  been  recommended 
for  feveral  purpofes  in  phthifical  cafes  ;  and 
is  faid,  upon  fome  occafions,  to  have  been  ufe- 
ful :  But  I  have  feldom  found  it  to  be  fo  ; 
and  as  by  its  tonic  power  it  increafes  the 
phlogiftic  diathefis  of  the  fyftem,  I  have  fre- 
quently found  it  hurtful.  Tn  fome  cafes, 
where  the  morning  remiffions  of  the  fever 
were  confiderable,  and  the  noon  exacerbations 
well  marked,  I  have  obferved  the  Peruvian 
bark  given  in  large  quantities,  have  the  effect 
of  flopping  thefe  exacerbations,  and  at  the 
fame  time  of  relieving  the  whole  of  the  phthif- 
ical fymptoms  ;  but  in  the  cafes  in  which  I 
obferved  this,  the  fever  mowed  a  conftant 
tendency  to  recur  ;  and  at  length  the  phthif- 
ical fymptoms  alfo  returned,  and  proved 
quickly  fatal. 

DCCCCXXI. 

Acids  of  all  kinds,  as  antifeptic  and  refrig- 
erant, are  ufeful  in  cafes  of  phthifis  ;    but  the 

native 


OF     PHYSIC.  205 

native  acid  of  vegetables  is  more  ufeful  than 
thefoffilacids,asit  can  be  given  in  much  larger 
quantities  and  may  alio  be  given  more  fafely 
than  vinegar.  bein£  lefs  liable  to  excite  cous;h- 
ing. 

DCCCCXXII. 

Though  our  art  can  do  fo  little  towards  the 
cure  of  this  difeafe,  we  muft,  however,  palli- 
ate the  uneafy  fymptoms  of  it  as  well  as  we 
can.  The  fymptoms  efpecially  urgent,  are 
the  cough  and  diarrhoea.  The  cough  may 
be  in  fome  meafure  relieved  by  demulcents 
(DCCCLXXIII)  :  But  the  relief  obtained 
by  thefe  is  imperfect  and  tranfitory  ;  and  very 
often  the  ftomach  is  difturbed  by  the  quanti- 
ty of  oily,  mucilaginous,  and  (wett  fubflances; 
which  are  on  tfyefe  occafions  taken  into  it, 
\ 

riccccxxin. 

The  only  certain  means  of  relieving  the 
cough,  is  by  employing  opiates.  Thefe,  in- 
deed, certainly  incVeafe  the  phlogiflic  diathefis 
of  the  fydem  ;  but  commonly  they  do^  not 
fo  much  harm  in  this  way,  as  they  do  fervice 
by  quieting  the  cough,  and  giving  deep. 
They  are  fuppofed  to  be  hurtful  by  checking 
expectoration  :  But  they  do  it  for  a  fhort  time 
only  ;  and,  after  a  found  fleep,  the  expecto- 
ration in  the  morning  is  more  eafy  than  ufual. 
In  the  advanced  ftate   of  the  difeafe,  opiates 

Vol.  II.  K  ~ieem 


206  PRACTICE 

feem  to  increafe  the  fweatings  that  occur  ;  but 
they  compenfate  this,  by  the  eafe  they  afford 
in  a  difeafe  which  cannot  be  cured. 

DCCCCXXIV. 

The  diarrhoea  which  happens  in  the  ad- 
vanced ftate  of  this  difeafe,  is  to  be  palliated 
by  moderate  aftringents,  mucilages,  and  o- 
piates. 

Rhubarb,  fo  commonly  prefer ibed  in  every 
diarrhoea,  and  all  other  purgatives,  are  ex- 
tremely dangerous  in  the  colliquative  diar- 
rhoea of  hectics. 

Frefh  fubacid  fruits,  fuppofed  to  be  always 
laxative,  are  often,  in  the  diarrhoea  of  hectics, 
hy  their  antifeptic  quality,  very  ufeful. 


C  H  A  P. 


OF      PHYSIC  207 


CHAP.        V. 


x>f  the  HEMORRHOIS;  or  of  the 
HEMORRHOIDAL  SWELLING 
and  FLUX. 


L 


'€/   the   Phenomena    and  Causes  of  the 
Hemorrhois, 


DCCCCXXV. 

A  DISCHARGE  of  blood 
From  fmall  tumours  on  the  verge  of  the  arms, 
is  the  fymptom  which  generally  conftitutes  the 
Hemorrhois  ;  or,  as  it  is  vulgarly  called,  the 
Hemorrhoidal  Flux.  But  a  difcharge  of 
blood  from  within  the  anus,  when  the  blood 
is  of  a  florid  colour,  mowing  it  to  have  come 
from  no  great  diftance,  is  alfo  confidered  as 
the  fame  difeafe  ;  and  phylicians  have  agreed 
in  making  two  cafes  or  varieties  of  it,  under 
K  2  the 


2o3  PRACTICE 

the  names  of  External   and  Internal  Hem- 
orrhois. 

DCCCCXXVI. 

In  both  cafes  it  is  fuppofed  that  the  flow  of 
blood  is  from  tumours  previoufly  formed, 
which  are  named  Hemorrhoids,  or  Piles  ;  and 
it  frequently  happens,  that  the  tumours  exifl 
without  any  difcharge  of  blood  ;  in  which 
cafe,  however,  they  are  fuppofed  to  be  a  part 
of  the  fame  difeaie,  and  are  named  Hemor- 
rhoides  Caecae,  or  Blind  Piles. 

DCCCCXXVil. 

Thefe  tumours,  as  they  appear  without  the 
anus,  are  fometimes  feparate,  round,  and 
prominent,  on  the  verge  of  the  anus  ;  but 
frequently  the  tumour  is  only  one  tumid  ring, 
forming,  as  it  were,  the  anus  pufhed  without 
the  body. 

DCCCCXXVHI. 

Thefe  tumours,  and  the  difcharge  of  blood 
from  them,  fometimes  come  on  as  an  afFeclion 
purely  topical,  and  without  any  previous  dif- 
order  in  other  parts  of  the  body  ;  but  it  fre- 
quently happens,  even  before  the  tumours 
are  formed,  and  more  efpecially  before  the 
blood  flows,  that  various  diforders  are  felt  in 
different  parts  of  the  body,  as  headach,  verti- 
go 


OF       PHYSIC.  209 

go,  flupor,  difficulty  of  breathing,  ficknefs, 
colic  pains,  pain  of  the  back  and  loins ;  and 
often,  together  with  more  or  fewer  of  thefe 
fymptoms,.  there  occurs  a  confiderable  degree 
of  pyrexia. 

The  coming  on  of  the  difeafe  with  thefe 
fymptoms,  is  ufually  attended  with  a  fenfe  of 
fullnefs,  heat,  itching,  and  pain  in  and  about 
the  anus. 

Sometimes  the  difeafe  is  preceded  by  a  dis- 
charge of  ferous  matter  from  the  anus;  and 
fometimes  this  ferous  difcharge,  accompanied 
with  fome  fwelling,  feems  to  be  in  place  of 
the  difcharge  of  blood,  and  to  relieve  thofe 
diforders  of  the  fyftem  which  we  have  men- 
tioned. This  ferous  difcharger  therefore,,  has 
been  named  the  Hemorrhois  Alba* 

DCCCCXXIX. 

In  the  hemorrhois,  the  quantity  of  blood 
difcharged  is  different  upon  different  occa- 
fions.  Sometimes  the  blood  flow3  only  upon 
the  perfon's  going  to  flool  ;  and  commonly  in 
larger  or  lefler  quantity,  follows  the  difcharge 
of  the  fasces.  In  other  cafes,  the  blood  flows 
without  any  difcharge  of  fasces  ;  and  their, 
generally,  it  is  after  having  been  preceded  by 
the  diforders  abovementioned,  when  it  is  alfo 
commonly  in  larger  quantity.  This  difcharge 
of  blood  is  often  very  confiderable  ;.and,  by 
the  repetition,  it  is  often  fo  great,  as  we  could 
hardly  fuppofe  the  body  to  bear  but  with  the 
K  3  hazard 


210  PRACTICE 

hazard  of  life.  Indeed,  though  rarely,  it  has 
been  fo  great  as  to  prove  fuddenly  fatal.. 
Thefe  confiderable  difcharges  occur  efpecially 
to  perfons  who  have  been  frequently  liable  to 
the  difeafe.  They  often  induce  great  debili- 
ty ;  and  frequently  a  leucophlegmatia,  or 
dropfy,  which  proves  fatal. 

The  tumours  and  difcharges  of  blood  in 
this  difeafe,  often  recur  at  exactly  dated 
periods. 

DCCCCXXX. 

It  often  happens,  in  the  decline  of  life,  that 
the  hemorrhoidal  flux,  formerly  frequent,, 
ceafes  to  flow  ;  and,  upon  that  event,  it  gen- 
erally happens  that  the  perfons  are  affeded 
with  apoplexy  or  palfy. 

DCCCCXXXI. 

Sometimes  hemorrhoidal  tumours  are  af- 
fected with  confiderable  inflammation  ;  whicha 
ending  in  fuppuration,  gives  occafion  to  the 
formation  of  fiftulous  ulcers  in  thofe  parts. 

DCCCCXXXII. 

The  hemorrhoidal  tumours  have  been  often 
confidered  as  varicous  tumours,  or  dilatations 
of  veins  ;  and  it  is  true,  that  in  fome  cafes  va*. 
ricous  dilatations  have  appeared  upon  diffec- 
tion.    Thefe,  however,  do  not  always  appear  ; 

and 


OF       PHYSIC.  211 

and  I  prefume  it  is  not  the  ordinary  cafe,  but 
that  the  tumours  are  formed  by  an  effufion  of 
blood  into  the  cellular  texture  of  the  inteftine- 
near  to  its  extremity.  Thefe  tumours,  es- 
pecially when  recently  formed,  frequently 
contain  fluid  blood  ;  but,  after  they  have  re- 
mained for  fome  time,  they  are  commonly  of 
a  firmer  fubftance. 


dccccxxxiii. 

From  a  confideration  of  their  caufes,  to  be 
hereafter  mentioned,  it  is  fufficiently  proba- 
ble, that  hemorrhoidal  tumours  are  produced 
by  fome  interruption  of  the  free  return  of 
blood  from  the  veins  of  the  lower  extremity 
of  the  re£lum  ;  and  it  is  poffible,  that  a  con- 
fiderahle  accumulation  of  bloody  in  thefe  veins, 
may  occafion  a  rupture  of  their  extremities, 
and  thus  produce  the  hemorrhagy  or  tumours 
I  have  mentioned.  But,  considering  that  the 
hemorrhagy  occurring  here,  is  often  preceded 
by  pain,  inflammation,  and  a  febrile  ftate,  as 
well  as  by  many  other  fymptoms  which  fhow 
a  connexion  between  the  topical  affeftionand 
the  ftate  of  the  whole  fyftem,  it  feems  proba- 
ble that  the  interruption  of  the  venous  blood, 
which  we  have  fuppofedtotake  place,  operates 
in  the  manner  explained  in  DCCLXIX  ;  and 
therefore,  that  the  difcharge  of  blood  here  is 
commonly  from  arteries. 

K  4         DCCCCXXXIV. 


2t2  PRACTICE 


DCCCCXXXIV. 

Some  phyficians  have  been  of  opinion,  that 
a  difference  in  the  nature  of  the  hemorrhois, 
and  of  its  effects  upon  the  fyflem,  might  a- 
rife  from  the  difference  of  the  hemorrhoidal 
veffels  from  which  the  blood  iflued.  Eut  it  ap- 
pears to  me,  that  hardly  in  any  cafe  wecandif- 
tinguifh  the  veffels  from  which  the  blood  flows  ; 
and  that  the  frequent  inofculations  of  both 
the  arteries  and  veins  which  belong  to  the 
lower  extremity  of  the  redlum,  will  render  the 
effects  of  the  hemorrhagy  nearly  the  fame, 
from  whichsoever  of  thefe  veffels  the  blood 
proceed. 

DCCCCXXXV. 

In  DCCLXIX,  I  have  endeavoured  to  ex- 
plain the  manner  in  which  a  certain  ftate  of 
the  fanguiferous  fyftem  might  gi-ve  occafion 
to  an  hemorrhoidal  flux  ;  and  I  have  no  doubt, 
that  this  flux  may  be  produced  in  that  man- 
ner. I  cannot,  however,  by  any  means  admit, 
that  the  difeafe  is  fo  often  produced  in  that 
manner,  or  that,  on  its  firft  appearance,  it  is 
fo  frequently  a  fyfiematic  affection,  as  the 
Stahlians  have  imagined,  and  would  have  us 
to  believe.  It  occurs  in  many  perfons  before 
the  period  of  life  at  which  the  venous  pletho- 
ra takes  place  ;  it  happens  to  females,  in 
whom  a  venous  plethora,   determined  to   the 

hemorrhoidal 


OF       P  H  Y  S  I  C.  213 

hemorrhoidal  veffels,  cannot  he  fuppofed  j  and 
it  happens  to  both  fexes,  and  to  perfons- of  all 
ages,  from  caufes  which  do  not  afFecl;  the  fyi- 
tem,  and  are  manifeftly  fuited  to  produce  a, 
topical  affection  only. 

DCCCCXXXVI. 

Thefe  caufes  of  a  topical  affection  are,  in  the 
fir  ft  place,  the  frequent  voiding  of  hard  and 
bulky  fasces,  which,  not  only  by  their  long 
ftagnation  in  the  rectum,  but  efpecially  when 
voided,  muft  prefs  upon  the  veins  of  the  anus^, 
and  interrupt  the  cdurfe  of  the  blood  in  them.. 
It  is  for  this  reafon  that  the  difeafe  happens  fo 
often  to  perfons  of  a  flow  and  bound  belly. 

DCCCCXXXVIL 

From  the  caufes  juft  now  mentioned,  the 
difeafe  happens  efpecially  to  perfons  liable  to 
fome  degree  of  a  prolapfus  ani.  Almoft  eve- 
ry perfon  in  voiding  faeces  has  the  internal 
coat  of  the  reclum  more  or  lefs  protruded 
without  the  body  ;  and  this  will  be  to  a  great- 
er or  leifer  degree,  according  as  the  hardnefs 
and  bulk  of  the  fasces  occafion  a  greater  or 
leifer  effort  or  prefTure  upon  the  anus.  While 
the  gut  is  thus  pufhedout,  it  often  happens^, 
that  the  fphincler  ani  is  contracted  before  the 
gut  is  replaced  ;  and,  in  confequence  thereof, 
a  ftrong  conftriction  is  made,  which  preventing 
the  fallen  out  gut  from  being  replaced,  and  as 

Voii.  2.  K  5  the.:' 


2i4  PRACTICE 

the  fame  time  preventing  the  return  of  blood 
from  it,  occafions  its  being  confiderably  fwell- 
ed,  and  its  forming  a  tumid  ring  round  the 
anus. 

DCCCCXXXVIII. 

Upon  the  fphincler's  being  a  little  relaxed> 
as  it  is  immediately  after  its  Itrong  contrac- 
tion, the  fallen  out  portion  of  the  gut  is  com- 
monly again  taken  within  the  body  ;  but,  by 
the  frequent  repetition  of  fuch  an  accident, 
the  fize  and  fullnefs  of  the  ring  formed  by  the 
fallen  out  gut,  is  much  mcreafed.  It  is  there- 
fore more  flowly  and  difficultly  replaced  ;  and 
in  this  confifts  the  chief  uneafinefs  of  hemor- 
rhoidal perfons. 

DCCCCXXXIX. 

As  the  internal  edge  of  the  ring  mentioned, 
is  neceflarily  divided  by  clefts,  the  whole  often 
affumes  the  appearance  of  a  number  of  dif- 
tin6l  fwellings ;  and  it  alfo  frequently  happens, 
that  fome  portions  of  it,  more  confiderably 
fwelled  than  others,  become  more  protube- 
rant, and  form  thofe  fmall  tumours  more 
ilriclly  called  Hemorrhoids,  or  Piles. 

DCCCCXL. 

From  confidering  that  the  preffure  of  faeces, 
and  other  caufes  interrupting  the  return  of 

yenous 


OF      P   II  Y   S  I   C.  215 

venous  blood  from  the  lower  extremity  of  the 
rectum,  may  operate  a  good  deal  higher  up  in 
the  gut  than  that  extremity,,  it  may  be  eafily 
underftood  that  tumours  may  be  formed 
within  the  anus  ;  and  probably  it  alfo  hap- 
pens, that  fome  of  the  tumours  formed  with- 
out the  anus,  as  in  DCCCCXXXIX,  may 
continue  when  taken  within  the  body,  and 
even  be  increafed  by  the  caufes  juft  now  men- 
tioned. It  is  thus  that  I  would  explain  the 
production  of  internal  piles,  which,  on  account 
of  their  fituation  and  bulk,,  are  not  protruded 
on  the  perfon's  going  to  (tool,  and  are  often,, 
therefore,  more  painful..  The  fame  internal 
piles  are  more  efpecially  painful,  when  af- 
fected by  the  hemorrhagic  effort  defcribed  im 
DCCXLV  and  DCCLXIX. 

DCCCCXLL 

The  production  of  piles  is  particularly  il-^ 
Initiated  by  this,  that  pregnant  women  are 
frequently  affected  with  them.  This  is  to 
be  accounted  for  partly  from  the  preffure  of 
the  uterus  upon  the  rectum,  and  partly  from 
the  coftive  habit  to  which  pregnant  women 
are  ufually  liable.,  I  have  known  many  in- 
ftances  of  piles  occurring  for  the  firft  time 
during  the  Hate  of  pregnancy  ;  and  there  are 
few  women  that  have  born  children  who  are 
afterwards  entirely  free  from  piles.  The 
Stahlians  have  commonly  afferted,  that  the 
male  fex  is  more  frequently  affected  with  this 
K.6,  difeafe 


216  P    R    A    C    T    I    C    E 

difeafe  than  the  female  •  but  in  this  country  I 
have  confiantly  found  it  otherwife. 

DCCCCXLII. 

It  is  commonly  fuppofed,  that  the  frequent 
life  of  purgatives,  efpecially  of  thofe  of  the 
more  acrid  kind,  and  more  particularly  of  al- 
oetics,  is  apt  to  produce  the  hemorrhoidal  af- 
fection ;  and  as  thefe  purgatives  ftimulate 
chiefly  the  great  guts,  it  feems  fufficiently 
probable  that  they  may  excite  this  difeafe. 

DCCCCXLIII. 

I  have  now  mentioned  feveral  caufes  which 
may  produce  the  hemorrhoidal  tumours  and 
flux  as  a  topical  affection  only  ;  but  muft  ob- 
ferve  farther,  that  although  the  difeafe  appears 
firft  as  a  purely  topical  affection,  it  may,  by 
frequent  repetition,  become  habitual  ;  and 
therefore  may  become,  connected  with  the 
whole  fyflem,  in  the  manner  already  explain- 
ed, with  refoect  to  hemorrha^y  in  general,  in 
DCCXLVIII. 

DCCCCXLIV. 

The  doctrine  now  referred  to  will,  it  is  ap- 
prehended, apply  very  fully  to  the  cafe  of 
the  hemorrhoidal  flux  ;  and  will  the  more 
readily  apply,  from  the  perfon  who  has  been 
once  affected  being  much  expofed  to  a  re- 
newal 


OF     PHYSIC.  217 

newal  of  the  caufes  which  fir  ft  occafioned  the 
.difeafe  ;  and  from  many  perfons  being  much 
expofed  to  a  congeftion  in  the  hemorrhoidal 
veftels/in  confequence  of  their  being  often  in 
an  eredr.  pofition  of  the  body,  and  in  an  exer- 
cife  which  pufhes  the  blood  into  the  depend- 
ing veffels,  while  at  the  fame  time  the  efFecls 
of  thefe  circumftances  are  much  favoured  by 
the  abundance  and  laxity  of  the  cellular  tex- 
ture about  the  re6lum. 


DCCCCXLV. 

It  is  thus  that  the  hemorrhoidal  flux  is  fo 
often  artificially  rendered  an  habitual  and  fyf- 
tematic  affection  ;  and  I  am  perfuaded,  that 
it  is  this  which  has  given  occafion  to  the 
Stahlians  to  confider  the  difeafe  as  almoft 
univerfally  fuch. 

DCCCCXLVI. 

It  is  to  be  particularly  obferved  here,  that 
when  the  hemorrhoidal  difeafe  has  either  been 
originally,  or  has  become,  in  the  manner  juft 
now  explained,  a  fyflematic  affection,  it  then 
acquires  a  particular  connexion  with  the 
ftomach,  fo  that  certain  affections  there  ex- 
cite the  hemorrhoidal  difeafe,  and  certain 
Hates  of  the  hemorrhoidal  affection  excite  dis- 
orders of  the  ftomach. 


It 


2i8  PRACTICE 

It  is  perhaps  owing  to  this  connexion  that 
the  gout  fometimes  affects  the  rectum.  See 
DXXV. 


Sect.         II. 


Of  the  Cure  of  Hemorrhoidal    Affec- 
tions.. 


DCCCCXLVIL 

ALMOST  at  all  times  it  has  been  an  opin- 
ion amongfl  phyficians,  and  from  them  fpread 
arnongft  the  people,  that  the  hemorrhoidal 
flux  is  a  falutary  evacuation  which  prevents- 
many  difeafes  that  would  -otherwife  have  hap- 
pened ;  and  that  it  even  contributes  to  give 
long  life.  This  opinion,  in  later  times,  has-, 
been  efpecially  maintained  by  Dr.  Stahl  and 
his  followers  ;  and  has  had  a  great  deal  of  in- 
fluence upon  the  practice  of  phyfic  in  Ger- 
many. 

DCCCCXLVIII. 

The  queftion  #rifes  with  refpect  to  hemor- 
rhagy  in  general,  and  indeed  it  has  been  ex- 
tended fo  far  by  the  Stahlians.  I  have  ac- 
cordingly confidered  it  as  a  general  queftion, 
(DCCLXVII— DCCLXXX)  ;    but  it  has 

been 


OF       PHYSIC.  219 

been  .more  efpecially  agitated  with  regard  to 
the  difeafe  now  under  our  confideration  : 
And  as  to  this,  although  I  am  clearly  of  opin- 
ion, that  the  hemorrhois  may  take  place  in 
confequence  of  the  general  ftate  of  the  fyflem 
(DCCLXIXjj  or,  what  is  Hill  more  frequent, 
that  by  repetition  it  may  become  connected 
with  that  general  ftate  (DCCCCXLIII),  and 
in  either  cafe  cannot  be  fuppreffed  without 
great  caution  ;  I  muft  beg  leave,  notwithstand- 
ing this,  to  maintain,  that  the  firfl  is  a  rare 
cafe,  that  generally  the  difeafe  fir  ft  appears  as 
an  affeftion  purely  topical  (DCCCCXXXV,, 
DCCCCXLII),  and  that  the  allowing  it  to 
become  habitual  is  never  proper.  It  is  a  nafty 
difagreeable  difeafe,  ready  to\  go  to  excefs3„ 
and  to  be  thereby  very  hurtrul,  as  well  as 
fometimes  falal.  At  beft  it  is  liable  to  acci- 
dents, and  thereby  to  unhappy  confequences. 
I  am  therefore  of  opinion,  that  not  only  the 
firft  approaches  of  the  difeafe  are  to  be  guard- 
ed againft  ;  but  even  that  when  it  has  taken 
place  for  fome  time,  from  whatever  caufe  it 
may  have  proceeded,  the  flux  is  always  to  be 
moderated,  and  the  neceflity  of  it,  if  poffible> 
fuperfeded. 

DCCCCXLIX. 

Having  delivered  thefe  general  rules,  I 
proceed  to  mention  more  particularly,  how 
the  difeafe  is  to  be  treated,  according  to  the 

different 


22o  PRACTICE 

different  circumftances  under  which  it  may 
appear. 

When  we  can  manifeftly  difcern  the  firft 
appearance  of  the  difeafe  to  arife  from  caufes 
acting  upon  the  part  only,  the  ftricteft  atten- 
tion mould  be  employed  in  guarding  againfl 
the  renewal  of  thefe  caufes. 

DCCCCL. 

One  of  the  moft  frequent  of  the  remote 
caufes  of  the  hemorrhoidal  affe&ion,  is  a  flow 
and  bound  belly,  (DCCCCXXXVI)  :  And 
this  is  to  be  conftantly  obviated  by  a  proper 
diet,  which  each  individual's  own  experience 
mufl  direct  ;  or,  if  the  management  of  diet  be 
not  effectual,  the  belly  mufl  be  kept  regular 
by  fuch  medicines  as  may  prove  gently  laxa- 
tive, without  irritating  the  rectum.  In  mofc 
cafes  it  will  be  of  advantage  to  acquire  a  hab- 
it with  refpect  to  time,  and  to  obferve  it- 
exactly. 

DCCCCLL 

Another  caufe  of  hemorrhois  to  be  efpec- 
ially  attended  to,  is  the  prolapfus  or  protru- 
fion  of  the  anus,  which  is  apt  to  happen  on  a 
perfon's  having  a  ftool  (DCCCCXXXVII.) 
If  it  fhall  occur  to  any  confiderable  degree, 
and  at  the  fame  time  be  not  eafily  and  imme- 
diately replaced,  it  moft  certainly  produces 
piles,  or  increafes  them  when  otherwife  pro- 
duced. 


OF       PHYSIC.  221 

duced.  Perfons  therefore  liable  to  this  pro- 
lapfus,  mould,  upon  their  having  beenatftool, 
take  great  pains  to  have  the  gut  immediately 
replaced,  by  lying  down  in  a  horizontal  pof- 
ture,  and  preffing  gently  upon  the  anus,  till 
the  reduction  fhall  be  completely  obtained. 

DCCCCLIL 

When  the  prolapfus  of  which  I  fpeak  k 
occafioned  only  by  voiding  hard  and  bulky 
faeces,  it  mould  be  obviated  by  the  means 
mentioned  in  DCCCCL,  and  may  be  thereby 
avoided.  But  in  fome  perfons  it  is  owing  to 
a  laxity  of  the  rectum  ;  in  which  cafe  it  is 
often  moll  confiderable  upon  occafion  of  a 
loofe  frool ;  and  then  the  d^feafe  is  to  be  treat- 
ed by  aftringents,  as  well  as  by  proper  arti- 
fices for  preventing  the  falling  down  of  the 
gut. 

DCCCCL1II. 

Thefe-are  the  means  to  be  employed  upon 
the  firft  approaches  of  the  hemorrhoidal  af- 
fection ,-  and  when  from  neglect  it  fhall  have 
frequently  recurred,  and  has  become  in  fome 
rneafure  eftablifhed,  they  are  no  lefs  proper. 
In  the  latter  cafe,  however,  fome  other  means 
are  alfo  neceffary.  It  is  particularly  proper 
to  guard  againft  a  plethoric  flate  of  the  body  ; 
confequently,  to  avoid  a  fedentary  life,  a  full 
diet,  and  particularly  intemperance  in  the  ufe 

of 


222  PRACTICE 

of  ftrong  liquor  ;  which,  as  I  fhould  have  ob- 
ferved  before,  is,  in  all  cafes  of  hemorrhagy> 
of  the  greater!  influence  in  increasing  the  dif— 
pofition  to  the  difeafe. 

DCCCCL1V. 

I  need  hardly  repeat  here,  that  exercife  of 
all  kinds  mufl  be  a  chief  means  of  obviating 
and  removing  a  plethoric  flate  of  the  body  ; 
but  upon  occafion  of  the  hemorrhoidal  flux 
immediately  approaching,  both  walking  and 
riding,  as  increafing  the  determination  of  the 
blood  into  the  hemorrhoidal  veffels,  are  to 
be  avoided.  At  other  times,  when  no  fuch 
determination  has  been  already  formed,  thofe 
modes  of  exercife  may  be  very  properly  em- 
ployed. 

DCCCCLV. 

Cold  bathing  is  another  remedy  that  may 
be  employed  to  obviate  plethora,  and  prevent 
hemorrhagy  ;  but  it  is  to  be  ufed  with  cau- 
tion. When  the  hemorrhoidal  flux  is  ap- 
proaching, it  may  be  dangerous  to  turn  it 
fuddenly  afide  by  cold  bathing  :  But  during 
the  intervals  of  the  difeafe,  this  remedy  may 
be  employed  with  advantage  ;  and  in  perfons 
liable  to  a  prolapfus  ani,  the  frequent  warning 
of  the  anus  with  cold  water  may  be  very 
\ifeful. 

DCCCCLVX. 


OF       PHYSIC.  223 


DCCCCLVI. 

Thefe  are  the  means  for  preventing  the  re- 
currence of  the  hemorrhoidal  flux  ;  and  in  all 
cafes,  when  it  is  not  immediately  approaching, 
they  are  to  be  employed.  When  it  has  actu- 
ally come  on,  means  are  to  be  employed  for 
moderating  it  as  much  as  poffible,  by  the 
perfons  lying  in  a  horizontal  pofition  upon  a 
hard  bed  ;  by  avoiding  exercife  in  an  erect 
pofture  ;  by  uiing  a  cool  diet  ;  by  avoiding 
external  heat  ;  and  by  obviating  the  irritation 
of  hardened  faeces  by  the  ufe  of  proper  laxa- 
tives, (DCCCCL).  From  what  has  been 
faid  above,  as  to  the  being  careful  not  to  in- 
creafe  the  determination  of  the  blood  into  the 
hemorrhoidal  veiTels,  the  propriety  of  thefe 
meafures  mufl  fufficiently  appear  ;  and  if  they 
were  not  fo  generally  neglected,  many  perfons 
would  efcape  the  great  trouble,  and  the  va- 
rious bad  confequences  which  fo  frequently 
refult  from  this  difeafe. 


DCCCCLVII. 

With  refpect  to  the  further  cure  of  this 
difeafe,  it  is  almofl  in  two  cafes  only,  that 
hemorrhoidal  perfons  call  for  the  affiftance  of 
the  phyfician.  The  one  is  when  the  affec- 
tion is  accompanied  with  much  pain  ;  and  of 
this  there  are  two  cafeSj  according  as  the  pain 

h  appens. 


224  PRACTICE 

happens  to  attend  the  external  or  the  inter- 
nal piles. 

DCCCCLVIIL 

The  pain  of  the  external  piles  ari  fes  efpec- 
iaily  when  a  confiderable  protrufxon  of  the 
reclum  has  happened  ;  and  when,  continuing 
unreduced,  it  is  ftrangled  by  the  conflri&ion 
of  the  fphincler  ;  while,  at  the  fame  time,  no 
bleeding  happens,  to  take  off  the  fwelling  of 
the  protruded  portion  of  the  interline.  Some- 
times an  inflammation  fupervenes,  and  greatly 
aggravates  the  pain.  To  relieve  the  pain  in 
this  cafe,  emollient  fomentations  and  poultices 
are  fometimes  of  fervice  ;  but  a  more  effectual 
relief  is  to  be  obtained  by  applying  leeches 
to  the  tumid  parts. 

DCCCCLIX. 

The  other  cafe  in  which  hemorrhoidal  per- 
fons  feek  affiflance,  is  that  of  exceffive  bleed- 
ing. Upon  the  opinion  fo  generally  received 
of  this  difcharge  being  falutary,  and  from  the 
obfervation  that  upon  the  difcharge  occurring 
perfons  have  fometimes  found  relief  from  va- 
rious diforders,  the  moft  part  of  perfons  liable 
to  it  are  ready  to  Jet  it  go  too  far  ;  and  indeed 
the  Stahlians  will  not  allow  it  to  be  a  difeafe, 
unlefs  when  it  has  actually  gone  to  excefs.  I 
am,  however,  well  perfuaded,  that  this  flux 
ought  always  to  be  cured  as  foon  as  poflible. 

DCCCCLX* 


h 


OF       PHYSIC.  225 


DCCCCLX. 

When  the  Sifeafe  occurs  as  a  purely  topical 
affe&ion,  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  pro- 
priety of  this  rule  ;  and,  even  when  it  has  oc- 
curred as  a  critical  difcharge  in  the  cafe  of  a 
particular  difeafe,  yet  when  this  difeafe  (hall 
have  been  entirely  cured  and  removed,  the 
preventing  any  return  of  the  hemorrhois  feems 
to  be  both  fafe  and  proper. 

DCCCCLXI. 

It  is  only  when  the  difeafe  arifes  from  a 
plethoric  (late  of  the  body,  and  from  a  flag- 
nation  of  blood  in  the  hypochondriac  region  ; 
or  when,  though  originally  topical,  the  difeafe, 
by  frequent  repetition,  has  become  habitual, 
and  has  thereby  acquired  a  connexion  with 
the  whole  fyftem,  that  any  doubt  canarifeas  to 
the  fafety  of  curing  it  entirely.  Even  in  thefe 
cafes,  however,  I  apprehend  it  will  be  always 
proper  to  moderate  the  bleeding ;  left  by  its 
continuance  or  repetition,  the  plethoric  ftate 
of  the  body,  and  the  particular  determination 
of  the  blood  into  the  hemorrhoidal  veffels,  be 
increafed,  and  the  recurrence  of  the  difeafe, 
with  all  its  inconveniences  and  danger,  be  too 
much  favoured. 

DCCCCLXIL 


226  PRACTICE 


DCCCCLXII. 

Further,  even  in  the  cafes  ftated 
(DCCCCLXI),  in  fo  far  as  theplethoric  ftate 
of  the  body,  and  the  tendency  to  that  ftate, 
can  be  obviated  and  removed,  this  is  always 
to  be  diligently  attempted  ;  and  if  it  can  be 
executed  with  fuccefs,  the  flux  may  be  entire- 
ly fuppreffed. 

DCCCCLXIII. 

The  Stahlian  opinion,  that  the  hemorrhoid 
dal  flux  is  only  in  excefs  when  it  occafions 
great  debility,  or  a  leucophlegmatia,  is  by  no 
means  juft  ;  and  it  appears  to  me,  that  the 
fmallefl  approach  towards  producing  either  of 
thefe,  fhould  be  confidered  as  an  excefs,  which 
ought  to  be  prevented  from  going  farther. 

DCCCCLXIV. 


In  all  cafes  therefore  of  excefs,  or  of  any 
approach  towards  it,  and  particularly  when 
the  difeafe  depends  upon  a  prolapfus  ani 
(DCCCCLI),  I  am  of  opinion  that  aftringents* 
both  internal  and  external,  may  be  fafelyand 
properly  employed  ;  not  indeed  to  induce  an 
immediate  and  total  fuppreffion,  but  to  mod- 
erate the  hemorrhagy,  and  by  degrees  to  fup- 
prefs  it  altogether,  while  at  the  fame   time 

meafures 


OF      PHYSIC.  227 

meafures  are  taken  for  removing  the  neceffity 
of  its  recurrence. 

DCCCCLXV. 

When  the  circumftances  (DCCGCXLVI) 
marking  a  connexion  between  the  hemorrhoi- 
dal affection  and  the  ftate  of  the  ftomach  oc- 
cur, the  meafures  necelfary  are  the  fame  as  in 
the  cafe  of  atonic  gout. 


C.H  A  P. 


228  PRACTICE 


CHAP.         VI. 


of  the  MENORRHAGIA,  or  the 
IMMODERATE  FLOW  of  the 
MENSES. 


DCCCCLXVL 

xSlOOD  difcharged  from  the 
vagina  may  proceed  from  different  fources  in 
the  internal  parts  :  But  I  here  mean  to  treat 
of  thofe  difcharges  only,  in  which  the  blood 
may  be  prefumed  to  flow  from  the  fame  fourc- 
es that  the  menfes  in  their  natural  ftate  pro- 
ceed from  ;  and  which  difcharges  alone,  are 
thofe  properly  comprehended  under  the  pref- 
ent  title.  The  title  of  Metrorrhagia,  or 
h&morrhagia  uteri,  might  comprehend  a  great 
deal  more. 

DCCCCLXVIL 

The  menorrhagia  may  be  corifidered  as  of 
two  kinds  ;  either  as  it  happens  to  pregnant 
and  lying  in  women,  or  as  it  happens  to 
women  neither  pregnant  nor  having  recently 
"born  children.     The   firft  kind,  as  connected 

with 


OF       PHYSIC.  229 

with  the  circumflances  of  pregnancy  and 
childbearing,  (which  are  not  to  be  treated  of 
in  the  prefent  courfe),  I  am  not  to  confider 
here,  but  mall  confine  myfelf  to  the  fecond 
kind  of  menorrhagia  only. 

DCCCCLXVIII. 

The  flow  of  the  menfes  is  confidered  as  im- 
moderate, when  it  recurs  more  frequently, 
when  it  continues  longer,  or  when,  during  the 
ordinary  continuance,  it  is  more  abundant 
than  is  ufual  with  the  fame  perfon  at  other 
times. 

DCCCCLXIX. 

As  the  moil  part  of  women  are  liable  to 
fome  inequality  with  refpeel:  to  the  period, 
the  duration,  and  the  quantity  of  their  menf- 
es ;  fo  it  is  not  every  inequality  in  thefe  re- 
fpecls  that  is  to  be  confidered  as  a  difeafe  ; 
but  only  thofe  deviations,  which  are  exceffive 
in  degree,  which  are  permanent,  and  which 
induce  a  manifeft  Hate  of  debility. 

DCCCCLXX. 

The  circumflances  (DCCCCLXVIII, 
DCCCCLXIX)  are  thofe  which  chiefly  con- 
ftitute  the  menorrhagia  :  But  it  is  proper  to 
obferve,  that  although  I  allow  the  frequency, 
duration,   and  quantity  of  the  menfes  to  be 

Vol.  II.   '  L  judged 


*30  PRACTICE 

judged  of  by  what  is  ufual  with  the  fame  in- 
dividual at  other  times  ;  yet  there  is,  in  thefe 
particulars,  fo  much  uniformity  obfervable  in 
the  whole  of  the  fex,  that  in  any  individual 
in  whom  there  occurs  a  confiderable  devia- 
tion from  the  common  meafure,  fuch  a  devia- 
tion, if  conflantly  recurring,  may  be  confider- 
ed  as  at  leafl  approaching  to  a  morbid  ftate, 
and  as  requiring  moftof  the  precautions  which 
I  mall  hereafter  mention  as  neceffary  to  be 
attended  to  by  thofe  who  are  actually  in  fuch 
a  {late. 

DCCCCLXXI. 

However  we  may  determine  with  refpe£fc 
to  the  circumftances  DCCCCLXVIII, 
DCCCCLXIX,  it  mult  frill  be  allowed,  that 
the  immoderate  flow  of  the  menfes  is  efpecial- 
ly  to  be  determined  by  thofe  fymptoms  af- 
fecling  other  functions  of  the  body,  which  ac- 
company and  follow  the  difcharge. 

When  a  larger  flow  than  ufual  of  the 
menfes  has  been  preceded  by  headach,  giddi- 
nefs,  or  dyfpncea,  and  has  been  ufhered  in  by 
a  cold  ft  age,  and  is  attended  with  much  pain 
of  the  back  and  loins,  with  a  frequent  pulfe,. 
heat,  and  thirft,  it  may  then  be  confide  red  as 
preternaturally  large. 

DCCCCLXXII. 

When,    in   confequence   of    the    circum- 
ftances DCCCCLXVIII— DCCCCLXXI, 

and 


O   F     P   H   Y  S   I   C.  231 

and  the  repetition  of  thefe,  the  face  becomes 
pale;  the  pulfe  grows  weak;  an  unufual 
debility  is  felt  in  exercife  ;  the  breathing  is 
hurried  by  moderate  exercife  ;  when,  alfo,  the 
back  becomes  pained  from  any  continuance 
in  an  erecl:  pofture  ;  when  the  extremities  be- 
come frequently  cold  ;  and  when  in  the  even- 
ing the  feet  appear  affected  with  cedematous 
fwelling  ;  we  may  from  thefe  fymptoms  cer- 
tainly conclude,  that  the  flow  of  the  menfes 
has  been  immoderate,  and  has  already  induc- 
ed a  dangerous  ftate  of  debility, 


DCCCCLXXIIL 


The  debility  thus  induced,  does  often  dis- 
cover itfelf  alfo  by  affections  of  the  ftomach, 
as  anorexia  and  other  fymptoms  of  dyfpepfia  ; 
by  a  palpitation  of  the  heart,  and  frequent 
faintings  ;  by  a  weaknefs  of  mind  liable  to 
ftrong  emotions  from  flight  caufes,  efpecially 
when  fuddenly  prefented. 

DCCCCLXXIV* 

That  flow  of  the  menfes,  which  is  attended 
with  barrennefs  in  married  women,  may  be 
generally  confidered  as  immoderate  and  mor- 
bid. 

L2  DCCCCLXXV. 


s>32  P   R   A  -C   T  I   C   E 

DCCCCLXXV. 

Generally,  alfo,  that  flow  of  the  menf- 
es  may  be  confidered  as  immoderate,  which 
is  preceded  and  followed  by  a  leucorrhcea. 

DCGCCLXXVI. 

I  treat  of  menorrhagia  here  as  an  active 
hemorrhagy,  becaufe  I  confider  menftruation, 
in  its  natural  ftate,  to  be  always  of  that  kind  ; 
and  although  there  mould  be  cafes  of  menor- 
rhagia which  might  be  confidered  as  purely 
paffive,  it  appears  to  me  that  they  cannot  be 
ib  properly  treated  of  in  any  other  place. 

DCCCCLXXVII. 

Themenorrhagia(DCCCCLXVIII,e^.) 
lias  for  its  proximate  caufe,  either  the  hemor- 
rhagic effort  of  the  uterine  veflels  preternatu- 
rally  increafed,  or  a  preternatural  laxity  of  the 
extremities  of  the  uterine  arteries,  the  hemor- 
rhagic effort  remaining  as  in  the  natural  (late. 

DCCCCLXXVIII. 

The  remote  caufes  of  the  menorrhagia 
may  be,  i/2,  Thofe  which  increafe  the  plethora 
ic  ftate  of  the  uterine  veflels  ;  fuch  as  a  full 
and  nourifhing  diet,  much  flrong  liquor,  and 
frequent  intoxication.  s.dly%  Thofe  which 
determine  the  blood  more  copiou.fly  and  for- 
cibly 


OF       PHYSIC.  233 

cibly  into  the  uterine  veffels ;  as  violent  {train- 
ings of  the  whole  body  ;  violent  fhocks  of  the 
whole  body  from  falls  ;  violent  flrokes  or  con- 
tufions  on  the  lower  belly  ;  violent  exercife, 
particularly  in  dancing  ;  and  violent  paflions 
of  the  mind.  $dly,  Thofe  which  particularly 
irritate  the  veffels  of  the  uterus ;  as  excefs  in 
venery  ;  the  exercife  of  venery  in  the  time  of 
menflruation  ;  a  coftive  habit,  giving  ocean  on 
to  violent  ftraining  at  ftool  ;  and  cold  applied 
to  the  feet.  £thly9  Thofe  which  have  forcibly 
overftrained  the  extremities  of  the  uterine  vef- 
fels ;  as  frequent  abortions  ;  frequent  child- 
bearing  without  nurfmg  ;  and  difficult  tedious 
labours.  Or,  laftiy,  Thofe  which  induce  a 
general  laxity  ;  as  living  much  in  warm  cham- 
bers, and  drinking  much  of  warm  enervating 
liquors,  fuch  as  tea  and  coffee. 

DCCCCLXXIX. 

The  effe6ts  of  the  menorrhagia  are  pointed 
out  in  DCCCCLXXII,  DCCCCLXXIII, 
where  I  have  mentioned  the  feveral  fymp- 
toms  accompanying  the  difeafe,  and  from 
thtle  the  conlequences  to  be  apprehended  will 
alfo  readily  appear. 

DCCCCLXXX. 

The  treatment  and  cure  of  the  menorrha- 
gia muff  be  different,  according  to  the  differ- 
ent caufes  of  the  difeafe. 

L3  In- 


234  PRACTICE 

In  all  cafes,  the  firft  attention  ought  to  be 
given  to  avoiding  the  remote  caufes,  whenever 
that  can  be  done  ;  and  by  that  means  the  dif- 
cafe  may  be  often  entirely  avoided. 

When  the  remote  caufes  cannot  be  avoided, 
or  when  the  avoiding  them  has  been  neglect- 
ed, and  therefore  a  copious  menftruation  has 
come  on,  it  fhould  be  moderated  as  much  as 
poffible,  by  ab flaming  from  all  exercife,  either 
at  the  coming  on  or  during  the  continuance  of 
the  menftruation  ;  by  avoiding  even  an  erecl: 
pofture  as  much  as  poffible  ;  by  fhunning 
external  heat,  and  therefore  warm  chambers 
and  foft  beds  ;  by  ufing  a  light  and  cool  diet  ; 
hy  taking  cold  drink,  at  leafl  as  far  as  former 
habits  will  allow ;  by  avoiding  venery  ;  by 
obviating  coftivenefs,  or  removing  it  by  laxa- 
tives that  give  little  flimulus. 

The  fex  are  commonly  negligent,  either  in 
avoiding  the  remote  caufes  or  in  moderating 
the  firft  beginnings  of  this  difeafe.  It  is  by 
fuch  neglect  that  it  fo  frequently  becomes  vi- 
olent, and  of  difficult  cure  ;  and  the  frequent 
repetition  of  a  copious  menftruation,  may  be 
confidered  as  a  caufe  of  great  laxity  in  the  ex- 
treme vefleis  of  the  uterus. 

DCCCCLXXXI. 

When  the  coming  on  of  the  menftruation 
has  been  preceded  by  fome  diforder  in  other 
parts  of  the  body,  and  is  accompanied  with 
pains  of  the  back,  refembling  parturient  pains, 

together 


OF       PHYSIC.  235 

together  with  febrile  fymptoms,  and  when  at 
the  fame  time  the  flow  feems  to  be  copious, 
then  a  bleeding  at  the  arm  may  be  proper, 
but  it  is  not  often  neceffary  ;  and  it  will  in 
moil  cafes  be  fufficient  to  employ,  with  great 
attention  and  diligence,  thofe  means  for  mod- 
erating the  difcharge  which  have  been  men- 
tioned in  the  lafl  paragraph. 

DCCCCLXXXII. 


When  the  immoderate  flow  of  the  menfes 
fhall  feem  to  be  owing  to  a  laxity  of  the  veffels 
of  the  uterus,  as  may  be  concluded  from  the 
general  debility  and  laxity  of  the  perfon's 
habit ;  from  the  remote  caufes  that  have  occa- 
fioned  the  difeafe  (DCCCCLXXVIII) ; 
from  the  abfence  of  the  fymptoms  which  de- 
note increafed  action  in  the  veffels  of  the  ute- 
rus (DCCCCLXXI)  ;  from  the  frequent  re- 
currence of  the  difeafe  ;  and  particularly  from 
this,  that  in  the  intervals  of  menflruation  the 
perfon  is  liable  to  a  leueorrhcea  ;  then  in  fuch 
cafe  the  difeafe  is  to  be  treated,  not  only  by 
employing  all  the  means  mentioned  in 
DCCCCLXXX,  for  moderating  the  hemor- 
rhagy,  but  alfo  by  avoiding  all  irritation,  eve- 
ry irritation  having  the  greater  effect  in  pro- 
portion as  the  veffels  have  been  more  lax  and 
yielding.  If,  in  fuch  a  cafe  of  laxity,  it  fhali 
appear  that  fome  degree  of  irritation  concurs, 
opiates  may  be  employed  to  moderate  the  diu 
L4  charge  5 


236  PRACTICE 

charge  ;  but  in  tiling  thefe,  much  caution  is 
requifite. 

If,  notwithftanding  thefe  meafures  having 
been  taken,  the  difcharge  mall  prove  very 
large,  aftringents  both  external  and  internal 
may  be  employed.  In  fuch  cafes,  may  fmall 
doles  of  emetics  be  of  fervice  ? 

DCCCCLXXX1II. 

When  the  menorrhagia  depends  on  the  lax- 
ity of  the  uterine  veffels,  it  will  be  proper,  in 
the  intervals  of  menftruation,  to  employ  tonic 
^remedies ;  as  cold  bathing  and  chalybeates. 
The  exercifes  of  geftation,  alfo,  may  be  very 
ufeful,  both  for  ftrengthening  the  whole  fyf- 
tem,  and  for  taking  off  the  determination  of 
the  blood  to  the  internal  parts. 

DCCCCLXXXIV. 

The  remedies  mentioned  in  thefe  two  laft 
paragraphs,  may  be  employed  in  all  cafes  of 
jnenorrhagia,  from  whatever  caufe  it  may 
have  proceeded,  if  the  difeafe  mail  have  al- 
ready induced  a  confiderable  degree  of  debil- 
ity in  the  body. 


CHAP, 


OF      PHYSIC.  237 


CHAP.         VII. 


of  the  LEUCORRHCEA,  FLUOR  AL- 
BUS,  or  WHITES. 


DCCCCLXXXV. 

XLVERY  ferous  or  puriform 
difcharge  from  the  vagina,  may  be,  and  has 
been  comprehended  under  one  or  other  of  the 
appellations  I  have  prefixed  to  this  chapter. 
Such  discharges,  however,  may  be  various  ; 
and  may  proceed  from  various  fources,  not 
yet  well  afcertained ;  but  I  confine  myfelf  here 
to  treat  of  that  difcharge  alone  which  may  be 
prefumed  to  proceed  from  the  fame  veffels5 
which,  in  their  natural  ftate,  pour  out  the 
menfes. 

dcccclxxxvi; 

I  conclude  a  difcharge  from  the  vagina  to 
be  of  this  kind  ;  1.  From  its  happening  to 
women  who  are  fubject  to  an  immoderate 
flow  of  the  menfes,  and  liable   to  this  from 

Vol.  2.  L  5  caufes 


238  PRACTICE 

caufes  weakening  the  veflels  of  the  uterus. 
2.  From  its  appearing  chiefly,  and  often  only, 
a  little  before,  as  well  as  immediately  after,  the 
flow  of  the  menfes.  3.  From  the  flow  of  the 
menfes  being  diminifhed,  in  proportion  as  the 
leucorrhcea  is  increafed.  4.  From  the  leu- 
corrhcca  continuing  after  the  menfes  have  en- 
tirely ceafed,  and  with  fome  appearance  of  its 
obferving  a  periodical  recurrence.  5.  From 
the  leucorrhcea  being  accompanied  with  the 
effe&s  of  the  menorrhagia(DCCCCLXXII, 
DCCCCLXXIIL)  6.  From  the  difcharge 
having  been  neither  preceded  by,  nor  accom- 
panied with,  fymptoms  of  any  topical  affec- 
tions of  the  uterus.  7.  From  the  leucorrhcea 
not  having  appeared  foon  after  communica- 
tion with  a  perfon  who  might  be  fufpe&ed  of 
communicating  infection,  and  from  the  firft 
appearance  of  the  difeafe  not  being  accom- 
panied with  any  inflammatory  affection  of  the 
pudenda. 


DCCCCLXXXVII.  x 


The  appearance  of  the  matter  difcharged 
in  the  leucorrhcea,  is  very  various  with  re- 
fpeft  to  confiflence  and  colour  ;  but  from 
thefe  appearances,  it  is  not  always  poflible  to 
determine  concerning  its  nature,  or  the  partic- 
ular fource  from  whence  it  proceeds. 

DCCCCLXXXVJII. 


OF       PHYSIC.  239 


DCCCCLXXXVIIL 

The  leucorrhcea,  of  which  I  am  to  treat,  as 
afcertained  by  the  feveral  circum  fiances 
(DCCCCLXXXVI)  feems  to  proceed  from 
the  fame  caufes  as  that  fpecies  of  menorrba- 
gia  which  I  fuppofe  to  arife  from  the  laxity 
of  the  extreme  veffels  of  the  uterus.  It  ac- 
cordingly often  follows  or  accompanies  fuch 
a  menorrhagia  ;  but  though  the  leucorrhcea 
depends  chiefly  upon  the  laxity  mentioned, 
it  may  have  proceeded  from  irritations  induc- 
ing that  laxity,  and  feems  to  be  always  in- 
creafed  by  any  irritations  applied  to  the 
uterus,. 

DCCCCLXXXIX. 

Some  authors  have  alleged,  that  a  variety 
of  circumflances  in  other  parts  of  the  body 
may  have,  a  fhareJn  bringing  on  and  in  con- 
tinuing this  affection  of  the  uterus  now  under 
confideration  ;  but  I  cannot  difcover  the  real- 
ity of  thofe  caufes  ;  and  it  feems  to  me,  that 
this  leucorrhcea,  excepting  in  fo  far  as  it  de- 
pends upon  a  general  debility  of  the  fyflem,  is 
always  primarily  an  affection  of  the  uterus  1 
and  the  affections  of  other  parts  of  the  body 
which  may  happen  to  accompany  it,  are  for 
the  moft  part  to  be  confidered  as  effects,  rath- 
er than  as  caufes, 

l  6  Decccxc:. 


240  PRACTICE 


DCCCCXC. 

The  effects  of  the  leucorrhcea  are  much  the 
fame  with  thofe  of  menorrhagia  ;  inducing  a 
general  debility,  and  in  particular,  a  debility 
in  the  functions  of  the  ftomach.  If,  however, 
the  leucorrhcea  be  moderate,  and  be  not  ac- 
companied with  any  confiderable  degree  of 
menorrhagia,  it  may  often  continue  long 
without  inducing  any  great  degree  of  debility, 
and  it  is  only  when  the  difcharge  has  been 
very  copious  as  well  as  conftant,that  its  effects 
in  that  way  are  very  remarkable. 

DCCCCXCL 

But,  even  when  its  effects  upon  the  whole 
body  are  not  very  confiderable,  it  may  ftill  be 
fuppofed  to  weaken  the  genital  fyftem  ;  and  it 
feems  fufficiently  probable  that  this  difcharge 
may  often  have  a  fhare  in  occafioning  barren- 
nefs. 

DCCCCXCII. 

The  matter  difcharge d  in  the  leucorrhcea, 
is  at  firft  generally  mild  ;  but  after  fome  con- 
tinuance of  the  difeafe,  it  fometimes  becomes 
acrid  ;  and  by  irritating,  or  perhaps  eroding, 
the  furfaces  over  which  itpaffes,  induces  vari- 
ous painful  diforders. 

DCCCCXCIIL 


OF       PHYSIC.  241 


DCCCCXCIII. 

As  I  have  fuppofed  that  the  leucorrhoea 
proceeds  from  the  fame  caufes  as  that  fpecies 
of  menorrhagia  which  is  chiefly  owing  to  a 
laxity  of  the  uterine  vefTels,  it  mull  be  treated, 
and  the  cure  attempted,  by  the  fame  means 
as  delivered  in  DCCCCLXXXII,  for  the 
cure  of  menorrhagia,  and  with  lefs  referve  in 
refpecl;  of  the  ufe  of  aftringents. 

DCCCCXCIV. 

As  the  leucorrhcea  generally  depends  upon 
a  great  lofs  of  tone  in  the  vefTels  of  the  uterus, 
the  difeafe  has  been  relieved,  and  fometimes 
cured  by  certain  ftimulant  medicines,  which 
are  commonly  determined  to  the  urinary  paf- 
fages,  and  from  the  vicinity  of  thefe  are  often 
communicated  to  the  uterus.  Such,  for  ex- 
ample, are  cantharides,  turpentine,  and  other 
balfams  of  a  fimilar  nature. 


CHAP. 


242  PRACTICE 


CHAP.       VIII 


of  the  AMENORRHCEA,  or  IN- 
TERRUPTION  of  the  MENSTRU. 
AL  FLUX. 


DCCCCXCV. 


Whatever,  in  a  fyfiem 

of  methodical  nofology,  may  be  the  fitted 
place  for  the  amenorrhcea,  it  cannot  be  im~ 
proper  to  treat  of  it  here  as  an  object  of  prac- 
tice, immediately  after  having  confidered  the 
menorrhagia. 

DCCCCXCVI. 

The  interruption  of  the  menftrual  flux  is  to 
be  confidered  as  of  two  different  kinds  ;  the 
one  being  when  the  menfes  do  not  begin  to 
flow  at  that  period  of  life  at  which  they  ufual- 
ly  appear  ;  and  the  other  being  that  when,  af- 
ter they  have  repeatedly  taken  place  for  fome 
time,  they  do,  from  other  caufes  than  concep- 
tion, ceafe   to   return  at  their  ufual  periods  : 

The 


O  F     P  H  Y  S  I  C.  243 

The  former  of  thefe  cafes  is  named  the  retention, 
and  the  latter  the  fupprejfion,  of  the  menfes. 

DCCCCXCVII. 

As  the  flowing  of  the  menfes  depends  upon 
the  force  of  the  uterine  arteries  impelling  the 
blood  into  their  extremities,  and  opening 
thefe  fo  as  to  pour  out  red  blood  ;  fo  the  in- 
terruption of  the  menftmal  flux  mufl  depend, 
either  upon  the  want  of  due  force  in  the  a&ion 
of  the  uterine  arteries,  or  upon  fome  preter- 
natural refiftance  in  their  extremities.  The 
former  I  fuppofe  to  be  the  mod  ufual  caufe 
of  retention,  the  latter  the  moft  common  caufe 
of  fuppreffion  ;  and  of  each  of  thefe  I  fhall 
now  treat  more  particularly* 

DCCCCXCVIII. 

The  retention  of  the  menfes,  the  emanjio 
menjium  of  Latin  writers,  is  not  to  be  confid- 
ered  as  a  difeafe  merely  from  the  menfes  not 
flowing  at  that  period  which  is  ufual  with 
moft  other  women.  This  period  is  fo  differ- 
ent in  different  women,  that  no  time  can  be 
precifely  affigned  as  proper  to  the  fex  in  gen- 
eral. In  this  climate,  the  menfes  ufually  ap- 
pear about  the  age  of  fourteen  ;  but  in  many 
they  appear  more  early,  and  in  many  not  till 
the  fixteenth  year  ;  in  which  lafl  cafe  it  is  oft- 
en without  any  diforder  being  thereby  occa- 
fioned.     It  is  not  therefore  from  the  age  of 

the 


244  PRACTICE 

the  perfon,  that  the  retention  is  to  be  confid- 
ered  as  a  difeafe ;  and  it  is  only  to  be  connder- 
ed  as  fuch,  when,  about  the  time  the  menfes 
ufually  appear,  fome  diforders  arife  in  other 
parts  of  the  body  which  may  be  imputed  to 
their  retention  ;  being  fuch  as,  when  arifing 
at  this  period,  are  known  from  experience  to 
be  removed  by  the  flowing  of  the  menfes. 

DCCCCXCIX. 

Thefe  diforders  are,  a  fluggifhnefs  and  fre- 
quent fenfe  of  laflitude  and  debility,  with  va- 
rious fymptoms  of  dyfpepfia  ;  and  fometimes 
with  a  preternatural  appetite.  At  the  fame 
time  the  face  lofes  its  vivid  colour,  becomes 
pale,  and  fometimes  of  a  yellowilh  hue  ;  the 
whole  body  becomes  pale  and  flaccid  ;  and 
the  feet,  and  perhaps  alfo  a  great  part  of  the 
body,  become  affected  with  cedematous  fwell- 
ing.  The  breathing  is  hurried  by  any  quick 
or  laborious  motion  of  the  body,  and  the  heart 
is  liable  to  palpitation  and  fyncope.  A  head- 
ach  fometimes  occurs;  but  more  certainly 
pains  of  the  back,  loins,  and  haunches. 


M, 


Thefe  fymptoms,  when  occurring  in  a  high 
degree,  conilitute  the  chlorofisof  authors,  hard- 
ly ever  appearing  feparate  from  the  retention 
of  the  menfes  ;  and,  attending  to  thefe  fymp- 
toms, 


OF      PHYSIC.  245 

toms,  the  caufe  of  this  retention  may,  I  think, 
be  perceived. 

Theie  fymptoms  manifeftly  mow  a  confid- 
erable  laxity  and  flaccidity  of  the  whole  fyf- 
tem  ;  and  therefore  give  reafon  to  conclude, 
that  the  retention  of  the  menfes  accompany- 
ing them,  is  owing  to  a  weaker  a£tion  of  the 
veffels  of  the  uterus  ;  which  therefore  do  not 
impel  the  blood  into  their  extremities  with  a 
force  fufficient  to  open  thefe,  and  pour  out 
blood  by  them. 

MI. 

How  it  happens  that  at  a  certain  period  of 
life  a  flaccidity  of  the  fyflem  arifes  in  young 
women  not  originally  affected  with  any  fuch 
weaknefs  or  laxity,  and  of  which,  but  a  little 
time  before,  they  had  given  no  indication, 
may  be  difficult  to  explain  ;  but  I  would  at- 
tempt it  in  this  way. 

As  a  certain  ftate  of  the  ovaria  in  females, 
prepares  and  difpofes  them  to  the  exercife  of 
venery,  about  the  very  period  at  which  the 
menfes  firft  appear,  it  is  to  be  prefumed  that 
the  ftate  of  the  ovaria  and  that  of  the  uterine 
veffels  are  in  fome  meafure  connected  togeth- 
er ;  and  as  generally  fymptoms  of  a  change  in 
the  ftate  of  the  former  appear  before  thofe  of 
the  latter,  it  may  be  inferred,  that  the  ftate  of 
the  ovaria  has  a  great  fhare  in  exciting  the  ac- 
tion of  the  uterine  veffels,  and  producing  the 
menftmal  flux,  But,  analogous  to  what  hap- 
pens 


246  PRACTICE 

pens  in  the  male  fex,  it  may  be  prefumed, 
that  in  females  a  certain  ftate  of  the  genitals  is 
neceffary  to  give  tone  and  tenfion  to  the 
whole  fyflem  ;  and  therefore  that,  if  the  ftim- 
uius  arifmg  from  the  genitals  be  wanting,  the 
whole  fyfiem  may  fall  into  a  torpid  and  flac- 
cid Mate,  and  from  thence  the  chlorous  and 
retention  of  the  menfes  may  arife. 

MIL 

It  appears  to  me,  therefore,  that  the  reten- 
tion of  the  menfes  is  to  be  referred  to  a  certain 
flate  or  afFeclion  of  the  ovaria  :  But  what  is 
precifely  the  nature  of  this  affection,  or  what 
are  the  caufes  of  it,  I  will  not  pretend  to  ex- 
plain ;  nor  can  I  explain  in  what  manner  that 
primary  caufe  of  retention  is  to  be  removed. 
In  this,  therefore,  as  in  many  other  cafes, 
where  we  cannot  affign  the  proximate  caufe  of 
difeafes,  our  indications  of  cure  mull  be  form- 
ed for  obviating  and  removing  the  morbid  ef- 
fects or  fymptoms  which  appear. 

Mill. 

The  effects,  as  has  been  faid  in  M,  confifl 
in  a  general  flaccidity  of  the  fyftem,  and  con^ 
fequently  in  a  weaker  a£lion  of  the  velfels  of 
the  uterus  ;  fo  that  this  debility  maybe  con^ 
fidered  as  the  more  immediate  caufe  of  the  re- 
tention. This,  therefore,  is  to  be  cured  by 
reftoring  the  tone  of  the  fyftem  in  genera], 

and 


OF      PHYSIC.  m 

and  by  exciting  the  action  of  the  uterine  vef- 
fels  in  particular. 

MIV. 

The  tone  of  the  fyflem  in  general  is  to  be 
reftored  by  exercife,  and,  in  the  beginning 
of  the  difeafe,  by  cold  bathing.  At  the  fam^ 
time,  tonic  medicines  may  be  employed  ;  and 
of  thefe  the  chalybeates  have  been  chiefly  rec- 
ommended. 

MV. 

The  action  of  the  veflels  of  the  uterus  may 
be  excited  : 

lit,  By  determining  the  blood  into  them 
more  copioufly  ;  which  is  to  be  done  by  de- 
termining the  blood  into  the  defcending  aor- 
ta, by  purging,  by  the  exercife  of  walking,  by 
friction,  and  by  warm  bathing  of  the  lower 
extremities.  It  is  alfo  probable  that  the  blood 
may  be  determined  more  copioufly  into  the 
hypogaftric  arteries  which  go  to  the  uterus,  by 
a  comprefiion  of  the  iliacs  ;  but  the  trials  of 
this  kind  hitherto  made  have  feldom  fuc- 
ceeded. 

MVL 

2dly,  The  action  of  the  uterine  veffels  may 
be  excited  by  ftimulants  applied  to  them. 
Thus  thofe  purgatives  which  particularly 
Simulate   the  inteftinum    rectum,   may  alfo 

prove 


*4&  PRACTICE 

prove  ftimuiant  to  the  uterine  veffels  con- 
nected with  thofe  of  the  rectum.  The  exer- 
cife  of  venery  certainly  proves  a  ftimulus  to 
the  veffels  of  the  uterus  ;  and  therefore  may 
be  ufeful  when,  with  propriety,  it  can  be  em- 
ployed. The  various  medicines  recommend- 
ed as  ffimulants  of  the  uterine  veffels,  under 
the  title  of  Emmenagogues,  have  never  ap- 
peared to  me  to  be  effectual ;  and  I  cannot 
perceive  that  any  of  them  are  poffeffed  of  a 
fpecific  power  in  this  refpecl;.  Mercury,  as 
an  univerfal  ftimuiant^  may  a6l  upon  the  ute- 
rus, but  cannot  be  very  fafely  employed  in 
chlorotic  perfons.  One  of  the  moft  powerful 
means  of  exciting  the  action  of  the  veffels  in 
every  part  of  the  fy  ftem  is,  the  electrical  fhock ; 
and  it  has  often  been  employed  with  fuccefs 
-for  exciting  the  veffels  of  the  uterus. 

MVII. 

The  remedies  (Mill — MVI)  now  men- 
tioned, are  thofe  adapted  to  the  retention  of 
the  menfes  ;  and  I  am  next  to  confider  the 
cafe  oifupprejion.  In  entering  upon  this,  I 
mull  obferve,  that  every  interruption  of  the 
flux,  after  it  has  once  taken  place,  is  not  to  be 
confidered  as  a  cafe  of  fuppreffion.  For  the 
flux,  upon  its  firfb  appearance,  is  not  always 
immediately  eftablifhed  in  its  regular  courfe  ; 
arid  therefore,  if  an  interruption  happen  foon 
after  the  firft  appearance,  or  even  in  the  courfe 

of  the  firft,  or  perhaps  fecond  year  after,  it 

may 


OF     PHYSIC.  2491 

may  often  be  confidered  as  a  cafe  of  retention, 
efpecially  when  the  difeafe  appears  with  the 
fyrnptoms  peculiar  to  that  flate. 

MVIII. 

Thofe  which  may  be  properly  confidered 
as  cafes  of  fuppreffion,  are  fuch  as  occur  after 
the  flux  has  been  for  fome  time  eftablifhed  in 
its  regular  courfe,  and  in  which  the  interrup- 
tion cannot  be  referred  to  the  caufes  of  re- 
tention (Mil,  Mill)  but  muftbe  imputed  to 
fome  refiftance  in  the  extremities  of  the  vef- 
fels  of  the  uterus.  Accordingly,  we  often 
find  the  fuppreffion  induced  by  cold,  fear,  and 
other  caufes  which  may  produce  a  conftric- 
tion  6f  thefe  extreme  veftels.  Some  phyfi- 
cians  have  fuppofed  an  obftru cling  lentor  of 
the  fluids  to  occafion  the  refiftance  now  men- 
tioned :  But  this  is  purely  hypothetical,  with- 
out any  proper  evidence  of  the  facl:  ;  and  it  is 
befides,  from  other  confiderations,  improba- 
ble. 

MIX. 

There  are  indeed  fome  cafes  of  fuppreffion 
that  feem  to  depend  upon  a  general  debility 
of  the  fyftem,  and  confequently  of  the  veffels 
of  the  uterus.  But  in  fuch  cafes,  the  fuppref- 
fion always  appears  as  fymptomatic  of  other 
afFe&ions,  and  is  therefore  not  to  be  confider- 
ed here, 

MX, 


ago  PRACTICE 


MX. 

The  idiopathic  cafes  of  fuppreflion  (M  VI 1 1) 
feldom  continue  long  without  being  attended 
with  various  fymptoms  or  diforders  in  differ- 
ent parts  of  the  body  ;  very  commonly  aris- 
ing from  the  blood  which  mould  have  paffed 
by  the  uterus,  being  determined  more  copious- 
ly into  other  parts,  and  very  often  wich  fuch 
force  as  to  produce  hemorrhagies  in  thefe. 
Hence  hemorrhagies  from  the  nofe,  lungs, 
ftomach,  and  other  parts,  have  appeared  in 
confequence  of  fuppreifed  menfes.  Befides 
thefe,  there  are  commonly  hyfleric  and  dyf- 
peptic  fymptoms  produced  by  the  fame  caufe  ; 
and  frequently  colic  pains,  with  a  bound 
belly. 

MXL 

In  the  idiopathic  cafes  of  fupprefhon, 
(MVIII)  the  indication  of  cure  is  to  remove 
the  conftri&ion  affecting  the  extreme  veffels 
of  the  uterus ;  and  for  this  purpofe  the  chief 
remedy  is  warm  bathing  applied  to  the  region 
of  the  uterus.  This,  however,  is  not  always 
effectual,  and  I  do  not  know  of  any  other 
remedy  adapted  to  the  indication.  Befides 
this,  we  have  perhaps  no  other  means  of  re- 
moving the  conflriclion  in  fault,  but  that  of 
increafing  the  action  and  force  of  the  veffels 
of  the  uterus,  fo  as  thereby  to  overcome  the 

refiftance 


OF       PHYSIC.  251 

refiftance  or  conftri&ion  of  their  extremities, 
This  therefore  is  to  be  attempted  by  the  fame 
remedies  in  the  cafe  of  fuppreffion,  as  thofe 
prefcribed  in  the  cafes  of  retention  (MIV — 
MVI).  The  tonics,  however,  and  cold  bath- 
ing (MIV)  feem  to  be  lefs  properly  adapted 
to  the  cafes  of  fuppreffion,  and  have  appeared 
to  me  of  ambiguous  effect. 

MXII. 

It  commonly  happens  in  the  cafes  of  fup- 
preffion, that  though  the  menfes  do  not  flow 
at  their  ufual  periods,  there  are  often  at  thofe 
periods  fome  marks  of  an  effort  having  a  ten- 
dency to  produce  the  difcharge.  It  is  there-' 
fore  at  thofe  times  efpecially  when  the  efforts 
of  the  fyftem  are  concurring,  that  we  ought  to 
employ  the  remedies  for  curing  a  fuppreffion  5 
and  it  is  commonly  fruitlefs  to  employ  them 
at  other  times,  unlefs  they  be  fuch  as  require 
fome  continuance  in  their  ufe  to  produce 
their  effects. 

MXIII. 

Nearly  fimilar  to  the  cafes  of  fuppreffion^ 
are  thofe  cafes  in  which  the  menfes  flow  after 
longer  intervals  and  in  leffer  quantity  than  u- 
fual  ;  and  when  thefe  cafes  are  attended  with 
the  diforders  in  the  fyftem  (MX)  they  are  to 
be  cured  by  tfre  fame  remedies  as  the  cafes  of 
entire  fuppreffion. 

MXIV. 


«5.2  PRACTICE 


MXIV. 

It  may  be  proper  in  this  place  to  take  no* 
tice  of  the  dyfmenorrhea,  or  cafes  of  menft  ru- 
ction in  which  the  menfes  feem  to  flow  with 
difficulty,  and  are  accompanied  with  much 
pain  in  the  back,  loins,  and  lower  belly.  We 
impute  this  diforder  partly  to  fome  weaker 
action  of  the  veffels  of  the  uterus,  and  partly, 
perhaps  more  efpecially,  to  a  fpafm  of  its  ex- 
treme veifels.  We  have  commonly  found 
the  difeafe  relieved  by  employing  fome  of  the 
remedies  of  fuppreflion  immediately  before 
the  approach  of  the  period,  and  at  the  fame 
time  employing  opiates. 


CHAP, 


O  T       PHYSIC.  253 


CHAP.         IX. 


of     SYMPTOMATIC     HEMORRHA- 
GES. 


MXV. 


I 


HAVE  thought  it  very  irru 
proper  in  this  work,  to  treat  of  thofe  morbid 
affections  that  are  almoft  always  fymptomatic 
6f  other  more  primary  difeafes ;  and  this  for  fev- 
eral  reafons,  particularly  becaufe  it  introduces  a 
great  deal  of  confufion  in  directing  practice, 
and  leads  phyficians  to  employ  palliative 
meafures  only.  I  fhall  here,  however,  devi- 
ate a  little  from  my  general  plan,  to  make 
fome  reflections  upon  fymptomatic  hemor- 
rhagies. 

MXVI. 

Thehemorrhagies  of  this  kind  that  efpecia.- 
ly  deferve  our  notice,  are  the  Herhatemefis,  or 
Vomiting  of  Blood ;  and  the  Hematuria,  or 
the  Voiding  of  Blood  from  the  urinary  paf- 
fage.     Upon  thefe  I  am  here  to  make  fome  re^ 

Vol.  II.  M  marks; 


t54         PRACTICE 

marks  ;  becaufe,  though  they  are  very  gener- 
ally fymptomatic,  it  is  poflible  they  may  be 
fome times  primary  and  idiopathic  affections  ; 
and  becaufe  they  have  been  treated  of  as  pri- 
mary difeafes  in  almofl  every  fyftem  of  the 
practice  of  phyfic. 


Sect.        I. 

,JDf   the   Hematemesis,  or    Vomiting  of 
Blood, 


MXVIL 

I  HAVE  faid  above  (in  DCCCCXLV)  in 
what  manner  blood  thrown  out  from  the 
mouth  may  be  known  to  proceed  from  the 
ftomach,  and  not  from  the  lungs  ;  but  it  may 
be  proper  here  to  fay  more  particularly,  that 
this  may  be  certainly  known,  when  the 
blood  is  brought  up  manifeflly  by  vomiting 
without  any  coughing  ;  when  this  vomiting 
has  been  preceded  by  fome  fenfe  of  weight, 
anxiety,  and  pain,  in  the  region  of  the  flomach; 
when  the  blood  brought  up  is  of  a  black  and 
grumous  appearance,  and  when  it  is  manifeii- 
\y  mixed  with  other  contents  of  the  flomach^ 
we  can  feldom  have  any  doubt  of  the  fource 
from  whence  the  blood  proceeds,  and  there- 
fore of  the  exiilence  of  the  difeafe  we  treat  of. 

MXVIIL 


OF      PHYSIC.  a55 


MXVIli. 

We  mull  allow  it  to  be  poffible  that  a 
^plethoric  flate  of  the  body  from  general  caufes 
may  be  accompanied  with  caufes  of  a  peculiar 
determination  and  afflux  of  blood  to  the 
ftomach,  fo  as  to  occafion  an  hemorrhagy 
there,  and  thence  a  vomiting  of  blood  ,*  and 
in  fuch  a  cafe  this  appearance  might  be  con- 
fidered  as  a  primary  difeafe.  But  the  hiftory 
of  difeafes  in  the  records  of  phyfic,  afford  lit- 
tle foundation  for  fuch  a  fuppofition  ;  and  on 
the  contrary,  the  whole  of  the  inftances  of  a 
vomiting  of  blood  which  have  been  recorded, 
are  pretty  manifeftly  fymptomatic  of  a  more 
primary  affection. 

Of  fuch  fymptomatic  vomitings  of  blood, 
the  chief  inftances  are  the  following. 

MXIX. 

One  of  the  moll:  frequent  is  that  which  ap- 
pears in  confequence  of  a  fuppreffion  of  an  e- 
vacuation  of  blood  which  had  been  for  fome 
time  before  eftablifhed  in  another  part  of  the 
body,  particularly  that  of  the  menftrual  flux 
in  women. 

MXX. 

There  are  inftances  of  a  vomiting  of  blood 

happening  from  the  retention  of  the  menfes  : 

M  2  But 


t$6  P  R  AC   T  I   C   E 

But  fuch  inilances  are  very  uncommon  ;  as  a 
retention  of  the  menfes  rarely  happens  in  con- 
fequence  of,  or  even  with,  a  plethoric  flate  of 
the  body  ,•  and  as  rarely  does  it  produce  that, 
or  the  hemorrhagy  in  queflion. 

There  are  inftances  of  a  vomiting  of  blood 
happening  to  pregnant  women  ;  that  might 
therefore  alfo  be  imputed  to  the  fuppreffion 
of  the  menfes,  which  happens  to  women  in 
that  flate.  There  have  indeed  been  more  in- 
ftances of  this  than  of  the  former  cafe  ,-  but 
the  latter  are  ftill  very  rare  ;  for  although  the 
blood  which  ufed  to  flow  monthly  before  im- 
pregnation, is,  upon  this  taking  place,  retain- 
ed, it  is  commonly  fo  entirely  employed  in 
dilating  the  uterine  vefTels,  and  in  the  growth 
of  the  foetus,  that  it  is  feldom  found  to  pro- 
duce a  plethoric  ftate  of  the  body,  requiring 
a  vicarious  outlet. 

The  vomiting  of  blood,  therefore,  that  is 
vicarious  of  the  menftrual  flux,  is  that  which 
commonly  and  almofl  only  happens  upon  a 
fuppreffion  of  that  flux,  after  it  had  been  for 
fome  time  eftabliihed. 

MXXI. 

When  fuch  a  fuppreffion  happens,  it  may 
be  fuppofed  to  operate  by  inducing  a  plethor- 
ic flate  of  the  whole  body,  and  thereby  occa- 
fioning  hemorrhagy  from  other  parts  of  it  ; 
and  hemorrhagies  from  many  different  parts 
»f  the  body  have  been  obferved  by  phyficians 

as 


OF       PHYSIC.  557 

as  occurring  in  confequence  of  the  fuppreilion 
we  fpeak  of.  It  is  however  the  great  variety 
of  fuch  hemorrhagies,  that  leads  me  to  think, 
that  with  the  plethoric  ftate  of  the  whole  body 
there  mud  be  always  fome  peculiar  circum- 
flances  in  the  part  from  which  the  blood  flows, 
that  determines  its  afflux  to  that  particular, 
often  Angularly  odd,  part ;  and  therefore,  that 
fuch  hemorrhagies  may  from  thefe  circurn- 
ftances  occur  without  any  confiderable  pleth- 
ora at  the  fame  time  prevailing  in  the  whole 
fyftem. 

MXXII.    * 

It  is  to  be  obferved,  that  if  we  are  to  expe6t 
an  hemorrhagy  in  confequence  of  a  fuppref- 
fion  of  the  menfes  inducing  a  plethoric  (late 
of  the  fyftem,  we  mould  expect  efpecially  an 
hemoptyfis,  or  hemorrhagy  from  the  lungs, 
as  a  plethora  might  be  expected  to  mow  its  ef- 
fects efpecially  there  ;  and  accordingly,  upon 
occafion  of  fuppreffed  menfes,  that  hemorrha- 
gy occurs  more  frequently  than  any  other  : 
But  even  this,  when  it  does  happen,  neither 
in  its  circumflances  nor  its  confequences,  leads 
us  to  fuppofe,  that  at  the  fame  time  any  con- 
fiderable or  dangerous  plethora  prevails  in  the 
body. 

MXXIII. 

Thefe  confiderations  in  MX XI,  MXXII, 

will,   I  apprehend,  apply  to  our  prefent  fub^ 

M  3  jea  ; 


253  PRACTICE 

ject  ;  and  I  would  therefore  allege,  that  a 
hematemefis  may  perhaps  depend  upon  par- 
ticular circumftances  of  the  ftomach  deter- 
mining an  afflux  of  blood  to  that  organ,  and 
may  therefore  occur  without  any  considerable 
or  dangerous  plethora  prevailing  in  the  fyf- 
tem.  What  are  the  circumftances  of  the 
ftomach,  which,  upon  the  occafion  mentioned, 
may  determine  an  afflux  of  blood  to  it,  I  can- 
not certainly  or  clearly  explain  •  but  prefume 
that  it  depends  upon  the  connexion  and  con- 
fent  which  we  know  to  fubfift  between  the  u- 
terus  and  the  whole  of  the  alimentary  canal.,, 
and  efpecially  that  principal  part  of  it  the 
ftomach, 

MXXIV. 

From  ihefe  reflections,  we  may,  I  think, 
draw  the  following  conciufions* 

I.  That  the  hematemefis  we  fpeak  of  is 
hardly  ever  a  dangerous  difeafe. 

II.  That  it  will  hardly  ever  require  the 
remedies  fuited  to  the  cure  of  active  hemor- 
rhagy  »  and  at  lead  that  it  will  require  thefe 
only  in  thofe  unufual  cafes  in  which  there  ap- 
pear ftrong  marks  of  a  general  plethora,  and 
in  which  the  vomiting  of  blood  appears  to  be 
confiderably  aftive,  very  profufe,  and  fre- 
quently recurring. 

III.  That  a  vomiting  of  blood  from  fup- 
prefTed  menfes,  ought  feldom  to  prevent  the 
ufe  of  thefe  remedies  of  amenorrhoea,  which 

might 


OF     PHYSIC.  259 

might  be  improper  in  the  cafe  of  an  aftive  id- 
iopathic hemorrhagy. 

MXXV. 

Another  cafe  of  fymptomatic  hematemefis 
quite  analogous  to  that  already  mentioned,  is 
the  hematemefis  following,  and  feemingly 
depending  upon,  tl*e  fuppreffionof  an  hemor- 
rhoidal flux,  which  had  been  efiablifhed  and 
frequent  for  fome  time  before. 

This  may  perhaps  be  explained  by  a  gen- 
eral plethoric  flate  induced  by  fuch  a  fup- 
preffion  ^  and  indeed  fome  degree  of  a  ple- 
thoric date  m-uft  in  fuch  a  cafe  be  fuppofed  to 
take  place  ;.  but  that  fuppofition  alone  will 
not  explain  the  whole  of  the  cafe  ;  for  a  gen^ 
era!  plethora  would  lead  us  to  expect  an  he- 
mop  tyfis(  MX  XI  I)  rather  than  an  hemateme- 
|is  ;  and  there  is  therefore  forriething  ftill 
wanting,  as  in  the  former  cafe,  to  explain  th£ 
particular  determination  to  the  flomach. 

Whether  fuch  an  explanation  can  be  got 
from  the  connexion  between  the  different  parts 
of  the  fanguiferous  velfels  of  the  alimentary 
canal,  or  from  the  connexion  of  the  whole  of 
thefe  veifels  with  the  vena  portarum,  I  fhail 
not  venture  to  determine.  But  in  the  mean 
time  I  imagine,  that  the  explanation  required 
is  rather  to  be  obtained  from  that  connexion 
of  the  flomach  with  the  hemorrhoidal  affe&ion 
that  I  have  taken  notice  of  in  DCCCCXLVI. 

M  4  MX'XVI. 


a6o  PRACTICE 


MXXVI. 

However  we  may  explain  the  hematemefis 
occafioned  by  a  fuppreffion  of  the  hemorrhois, 
the  confiderations  in  MXXI,  MX XI I,  will 
apply  here  as  in  the  analogous  cafe  of  hemaU 
emefis  from  fuppreifed  menfes  ;  and  will 
therefore  allow  us  alfo  to  conclude  here,  that 
the  difeafe  we  now  treat  of  will  feldom  be 
dangerous,  and  will  feldom  require  the  fame 
remedies  that  idiopathic  and  aclive  hemorrha- 
gy  does. 

MXXVII. 

The  cafes  of  hematemefis  already  mention- 
ed, may  be  properly  fuppofed  to  be  hemor- 
rhagies  of  the  arterial  kind  ;  but  it  is  probable 
that  the  ftomach  is  alfo  liable  to  hemorrhagies 
of  the  venous  kind.    (DCCLXVIII). 

In  the  records  of  phyfic  there  are  many  in- 
ftances  of  vomitings  of  blood,  which  were  ac- 
companied with  a  tumefied  fpleen,  which  had 
compreffed  the  vas  breve,  and  thereby  pre- 
vented the  free  return  of  venous  blood  from 
the  ftomach.  How  fuch  an  interruption  of 
the  venous  blood  may  occafion  an  hemorrha- 
gy  from  either  the  extremities  of  the  veins 
themfelves,  orfromthe  extremities  of  their  cor- 
refpondent  arteries,  we  have  explained  above 
in  DCCLXIX,  and  the  hiflories  of  tumefied 
fpleens  comprefling  the  vafa  brevia,  afford  an 

excellent 


OF       PHYSIC.  261 

excellent  illuflration  and  confirmation  of  our 
^■oftrine  on  that  fubje6t,  and  render  it  fuf- 
ficiently  probable  that  vomitiaigs  of  blood 
often  arife  from  fuch  a  caufe. 

MXXVIII. 

It  is  alfo  poffible,  that  an  obftru&ion  of  the 
liver  refilling  the  free  motion  of  the  blood  in 
the  vena  portarum,  may  fometimes  interrupt 
the  free  return  of  the  venous  blood  from  the 
veffels  of  the  ftomach,  and  thereby  occafion  a 
vomiting  of  blood  ;  but  the  inftances  of  this 
ate  neither  fo  frequent  nor  fo  clearly  explain- 
ed as  thofe  of  the  former  cafe. 

MXXIX.  \ 

Befide  thefe  cafes  depending  on  the  Mate  of 
the  liver  or  fpleen,  it  is  very  probable  that 
other  hemorrhagies  of  the  ftomach  are  fre- 
quently of  the  venous  kind. 

The  difeafe  named  by  Sauvages  Melasna, 
and  by  other  writers  commonly  termed  the 
Morbus  Niger  (DCCLXXII),  confining  in 
an  evacuation  either  by  vomiting  or  by  flool, 
and  fometimes  in  both  ways,  of  a  black  and 
grumous  blood,  can  hardly  be  otherwife  oc- 
cafioned,  than  by  a  venous  hemorrhagy  from 
fome  part  of  the  internal  furface  of  the  ali- 
mentary canal. 

It  is,  indeed,  poffible,  that  the  bile  may 
fometimes  put  on  a  black  and  vifcid  appear-; 

Vox..  2.  .  M  z  ance. 


262  PRACTICE 

ance,  and  give  a  real  foundation  for  the  appel- 
lation of  an  Atra  Bilis  :  But"  it  is  certain,  that 
inftances  of  this  are  very  rare  ;  and  it  is  high- 
ly probable,  that  what  gave  occafion  to  the 
notion  of  an  atra  bilis  among  the  ancients,  was 
truly  the  appearance  of  blood  poured  into  the 
alimentary  canal  in  the  manner  I  have  men- 
tioned -,  and  which  appearance  we  know,  the 
blood  always  puts  on  when  it  has  ftagnated 
there  for  any  length  of  time.  I  fuppofe  it  is 
now  generally  thought,  that  Boerhaave's  no- 
tion of  fueh  a  matter  exifting  in  the  mafs  of 
blood,  is  without  any  foundation  ;  whilft,  by 
directions  in  modern  times,  it  appears  very 
clearly,  that  the  morbus  niger  presenting  fuch 
an  appearance  of  blood,  always  depends  upon 
the  efTulion  and  flagnation  I  have  mentioned, 

MXXX. 

From  this  account  of  the  melaena  it  will 
appear,  that  vomitings  of  blood  may  arife  in 
confequence  of  blood  being  poured  out  in  the 
manner  I  have  mentioned,  either  into  the  cav- 
ity of  the  ftomach  itfelf,  or  into  the  fuperior 
portions  of  the  interlines,  from  whence  mat- 
ters often  pafs  into  the  ftomach. 

MXXXI. 

Both  in  the  cafe  of  the  malaena,  and  in  the 
analogous  cafes  from  affections  of  the  fpleen  or 
liver,  it  will   appear,   that  the  vomitings  of 

blood 


OF     „P  H  Y  S  I  C.  263 

blood  occurring  mud  be  confidered  as  fymp- 
tomatic  affections,  not  at  all  to  be  treated  as  a 
primary  active  hemorrhagy,  but  by  remedies, 
if  any  fuch  be  known,  that  may  refolve  the 
primary  obftructians. 

MXXXII. 

I  believe  I  have  now  mentioned  almofl  die 
whole  of  the  caufes  producing  an  hematemefis ; 
and  certainly  the  caufes  mentioned,  are  thofe 
which  moil  commonly  give  occaiion  to  that 
fymptom.  Poffrbly,  however,  there  may  be 
fome  other  caufes  of  it,  fuch  as  that  fingular 
one  mentioned  by  Sauvage  of  an  aneurifm  of 
the  aorta  burfting  into  the  ftomach  ;  and  it  is 
poflible,  that  fome  difeafes  of  other  contiguous, 
parts,  which  have  become  clofely  adhering  to 
the  ftomach,  may  fometimes,  by  a  rupture  in^ 
to  the  cavity  of  the  ftomach,  pour  blood  into 
it,  which  is  afterwards  rejected  by  vomiting. 
It  is  poffible  alfo,  that  abfceifes  and  ulcera- 
tions of  the  ftomach  itfejf,  may  fometimes 
pour  blood  into  its  cavity  to  be  thrown  up  by 
vomiting. 

I  did  not  think  it  neceffary,  among  the 
fymptomatic  vomitings  of  blood,,  to  enumerate 
thofe  from  external  violence,  nor,  what  is  an- 
alogous to  it,  that  which  arifes  from  violent 
draining  to  vomit  ;  wThich  la ft,  however,  is 
much  more  rare  than  might  be  expected;.  In< 
either  of  thefe  cafes  the  nature  of  the  difeafe 
cannot  be  doubtful,  and  the  management  of  it 
M6  willi 


264  PRACTICE 

will  be  readily  under  flood  from  what  has  been 
delivered  above  with  refpeft  to  moderating 
and  retraining  hemorrhagy  in  general. 


t.        II. 


Of  the  Hematuria,    or  the  Voiding  of 
Blood  from  the  Urinary  Passage. 


MXXXIII. 

IT  is  alleged,  that  an  hematuria  has  occur- 
red without  any  other  fymptom  of  an  affec- 
tion of  the  kidneys  or  urinary  pafTages  being 
prefent  at  the  fame  time  ;  and  as  this  happen- 
ed to  plethoric  perfons,  and  recurred  at  fixed 
periods,  fuch  a  cafe  has  been  fuppofed  to  be 
an  inftance  of  idiopathic  hematuria,  and  of  the 
nature  of  thofe  aclive  hemorrhagies  I  have 
treated  of  before. 

MXXXIV. 

I  cannot  pofitively  deny  the  exiftence  of 
fuch  a  cafe  ;  but  mult  obferve,  that  there  are 
very  few  inftances  of  fuch  upon  the  records 
of  phyfic  ;  that  none  have  ever  occurred  to 
my  obfervation,  or  to  that  of  my  friends  ;  and 
that  the  observations  adduced  may  be  falla- 
cious, as  I  have  frequently  obferved  an  hema- 
turia 


OF       PHYSIC.  265 

turia  without  fymptoms  of  other  affe&ion  of 
the  kidney  or  urinary  paflages  being,  for  the 
time,  prefent  ;  whilft,  however,  fits  of  a  neph- 
ralgia calculofa  having,  before  or  foon  after, 
happened,  rendered  it  to  me  fufhciently  prob- 
able, that  the  hematuria  was  owing  to  a  wound 
made  by  a  (lone  prefent  in  fome  part  of  the 
urinary  paflages. 

MXXXV. 

The  exiftence  of  an  idiopathic  hematuria 
is  further  improbable,  as  a  general  plethora  is 
more  likely  to  produce  an  hemoptyfis 
(MX XI I),  and  as  we  do  not  well  know  of 
any  circumftances  which  might  determine 
more  particularly  to  the  kidneys.  An  idio- 
pathic hematuria,  therefore,  muft  certainly  be 
a  rare  occurrence  ;  and  inftances  of  fympto- 
matic  affections  of  the  fame  kind  are  verv 
frequent. 

MXXXVI. 

One  of  the  moft  frequent  is,  that  hematuria 
which  attends  the  nephralgia  calculofa,  and 
feems  manifeflly  to  be  owing  to  a  flone 
wounding  the  internal  furface  of  the  pelvis  of, 
the  kidney  or  of  the  ureter.  In  fuch  cafes, 
the  blood  discharged  with  the  urine  is  fome- 
times  of  a  pretty  florid  colour,  but  for  the 
moft  part  is  of  a  dark  hue  ;  the  whole  of  it  is 
fometimes  diffufed  or  diffolved,  and  therefore 

entirely 


266  PRACTICE 

entirely  fufpended  in  the  urine  j  but  if  it  is  in 
any  large  quantity,  a  portion  of  it  is  depofited 
to  the  bottom  of  the  veffel  containing  the 
voided  blood  and  urine.  On  different  occa- 
fions  the  blood  voided  puts  on  different  ap- 
pearances. If  the  blood  poured  out  in  the 
kidney  has  happened  to  Magnate  for  ibme 
time  in  the  ureters  or  bladder,  it  is  fometimes 
coagulated,  and  the  coagulated  part  is  after- 
wards broken  down  into  a  grumous  mafs  of  a 
black  or  dark  colour,  and  therefore  gives  the 
fame  colour  to  the  urine  voided  ;  or  if  the 
quantity  of  broken  down  blood  is  fmalj,  it 
gives  only  abrownifhurine  refembling  coffee. 
It  fometimes  alfo  happens,  that  the  blood 
ftagnating  and  coagulating  in  the  ureters>  take& 
the  form  of  thefe  veflels,  and  is  therefore  voided 
under  the  appearance  of  a  worm  >.  and  if  the- 
coagulated  blood  happens  to  have,  as  it  may 
fometimes  have,  the  gluten  Separated  from  the 
red  globules,  thefe  wormlike  appearances 
have  their  external  furface  whitifh,  and  the 
whole  feemingly  forming  a  tube  containing  a 
red  liquor.  I  have  fometimes  obferved  the 
blood  which  had  feemingly  been  coagulated 
in  the  ureter,  come  away  in  an  almoft  dry 
j&ate,  refembling  the  half  burnt  wick  of  a 
candle. 

Mxxxvir. 

Thefe  are  the  feveral    appearances   of  the 
blood  voided  in  the  hematuria  calculofa,  when 

it 


OF       PHYSIC.  267 

it  proceeds  efpecially  from  the  kidneys  or  u- 
reter  ;  and  many  of  the  fame  appearances  are 
obferved  when  the  blood  proceeds  only  from 
the  bladder  when  a  ftone  is  lodged  there  ;  but 
the  attending  fymptoms  will  commonly  point 
out  the  different  feat  of  the  difeafe. 

In  one  cafe,  when  a  quantity  of  blood  from 
the  kidney  or  ureter  is  coagulated  in  the  blad- 
der, and  is  therefore  difficultly  thrown  out 
from  this,  the  pain  and  uneafinefs  on  fuch  an 
occafion  may  appear  chiefly  to  be  in  the  blad- 
der, though  it  contains  no  ftone  ;  but  the  an- 
tecedent fymptoms  will  commonly  difcover 
the  nature  of  the  difeafe. 

MXXXVIII. 

In  any  of  the  cafes  of  the  hematuria  calcu- 
lofa  it  will  hardly  be  neceflary  to  employ  the 
remedies  fuited  to  an  active  hemorrhagy.  It; 
will  be  proper  only  to  employ  the  regimen  fit 
for  moderating  hemorrhagy  in  general,  and, 
particularly  here  to  avoid  every  thing  or  cir- 
cumflance  that  might  irritate  the  kidneys  or 
ureters.  Of  fuch  cafes  of  irritation  there  is 
none  more  frequent  or  more  confiderable  than 
the  prefence  of  hardened  faeces  in  the  colon  ;. 
and  thefe  therefore  are  to  be  frequently  remov- 
ed, by  the  frequent  ufe  of  gentle  laxatives.. 

MXXXIX. 

The  hematuria  calculofa  may  be  properly 
confidered  as  a  cafe  of  the  hematuria  violenta  ; 

and 


268  PRACTICE 

and  therefore  I  fubjoin  to  that  the  other  in~ 
fiances  of  hematuria  from  external  violence  ; 
fuch  as  that  from  external  contufion  on  the 
region  of  the  kidney,  and  that  from  the  vio- 
lent or  long  continued  exercife  of  the  mufcles 
incumbent  on  the  kidneys.  An  inflance  of 
the  latter  caufe  occurs  efpecially  in  riding. 

MXL 

It  may  alfo  be  confidered  as  a  cafe  of  the* 
hematuria  violenta,  when  the  difeafe  occurs 
in  confequence  of  the  taking  in  of  certain  ac- 
rid fubflances,  which  pafs  again  efpecially  by* 
the  urinary  paffages  ;  and,  by  inflaming  and 
fwelling  the  neck  of  the  bladder,  bring  on  a 
rupture  of  the  over  diflended  blood  veffels, 
and  give  occafion  to  a  bloody  urine.  The, 
rnofl  noted  inflance  of  this  is  in  the  effec~l  of 
cantharides  in  a  certain  quantity,  any  way  in- 
troduced into  the  body.  And  poffibly  fome 
other  acrids  may  have  the  fame  efTe£l. 

MXLI. 

Befide  thefe  moil  frequent  inflances  of 
hematuria,  which  cannot  be  confidered  as  id- 
iopathic hemorrhagies,  there  are  fome  other 
inflances  of  hematuria  mentioned  by  authors, 
that  are  flill  however  manifeflly  fymptomat- 
ic ;  fuch  as  a  difcharge  of  blood  from  the  u- 
rinary  paffages,  in  confequence  of  a  fuppref- 
iion  of  either  the  menflrual  or  hemorrhoidal 

flux. 


OF      PHYSIC.  269 

flux.  Thefe  may  be  confidered  as  analogous 
to  the  hematemefis  produced  by  the  like  cauf- 
es  ;  and  the  feveral  reflections  made  above  on 
that  fubje6t.,  will,  I  think,  apply  here,  and 
particularly  the  conclufions  formed  in 
MXXIV.  Inftances,  however,  of  either  of 
thefe  cafes,  and  efpecially  of  the  firft,  have 
been  extremely  rare. 

MXLIL 

Of  fuch  fymptomatic  hematuria  there  is 
however  one  inftance  deferving  notice  ;  and 
that  is,  when  a  fuppreffion  of  the  hemorrhoi- 
dal flux,  either  by  a  communication  of  vef- 
fels,  or  merely  by  the  vicinity  of  parts,  occa- 
fions  a  determination  of  the  blood  into  the 
veffels  of  the  neck  of  the  bladder,  which  in 
confequence  of  a  rixis  or  anaftomofis,  pour 
out  blood  to  be  voided  either  with  or  without 
the  urine.  This  cafe  is  what  has  been  named 
the  Hemorrhoides  Veficas  ;  and  with  fome 
propriety,  when  it  ismanifeflly  an  evacuation 
vicarious  of  what  had  before  been  ufually 
made  from  the  reclum.  With  refpecl  to  the 
management  of  the  hemorrhoides  veficae,  I 
would  apply  the  whole  of  the  do&rines  that 
I  have  delivered  above,  with  refpecl;  to  the 
cure  of  the  proper  hemorrhoidal  affection. 

MXLIII. 

There  remains  ftill  to  be  mentioned  one 
other    inftance  of    fymptomatic   hematuria, 

whicli 


*7o  PRACTICE 

which  is  that  which  happens  in  the  cafe  of  con- 
fluent and  putrid  fmall  pox,  aswellasinfeveral 
other  inftances  of  putrid  difeafes.  The  blood, 
in  fuch  cafes,  may  be  prefumed  to  come  from 
the  kidneys  ;  and  I  apprehend  that  it  comes 
from  thence  in  confequence  of  that  fluidity 
which  is  always  produced  in  the  blood  ap- 
proaching to  a  putrid  ftate.  Such  hematuria,, 
therefore,  is  not  to  be  confidered  as  a  fymp- 
torn  of  any  afTeclion  of  the  kidneys,  but  merely 
as  a  mark  of  the  putrefcent  ftate  of  the  blood, 

MXLIV. 

In  certain  difeafes  the  urine  is  difcharged 
of  fuch  a  deep  red  colour,  as  to  give  a  fuf- 
picion  of  its  being  tinged  by  blood  prefent  in 
it  ;  and  this  has  given  oecaiion  to  Sauvages, 
amongflthe  other  fpecies  of  hematuria,  to  mark 
the  hematuria  fpuria,  and  the  hematuria lateri- 
tia;  both  of  which,  however,  he  fuppofes  to  be 
without  any  blood  prefent  in  the  urine.  In 
many  cafes  it  is  of  importance,  in  afcertaining 
the  nature  of  a  difeafe,  to  determine  whether 
the  red  colour  of  urine  be  from  blood  prefent 
in  it,  or  from  a  certain  ftate  of  the  falts  and 
oils  which  are  always  in  greater  or  lelfer  pro- 
portion conftituent  parts  of  the  urine  ;  and 
the  queftion  may  be  commonly  determined 
by  the  following  considerations. 

It  has  been  obferved  above,  that  when  any 
considerable  quantity  of  blood  is  voided  with 
the  urine,  there  is  always  a  portion  of  it  de- 
posited 


OF      PHYSIC.  271 

pofited  at  the  bottom  of  the  veflel  containing 
the  voided  blood  and  urine  ;  and  in  fuch  a 
cafe  there  will  be  no  doubt  in  attributing  the 
colour  of  the  urine  floating  above  to  fome 
part  of  the  blood  diffufed  in  it.  The  quef- 
tionx  therefore,  with  refpecl  to  the  prefence 
of  blood  in  the  urine  can  only  occur  when  no 
fuch  depofition  as  I  have  mentioned  appears  ; 
and  when  the  blood  that  may  be  fuppoled  to 
be  prefent  is  diiTolved  or  diffufed,  and  there- 
fore entirely  fufpended  in  the  urine.  In  this 
cafe  the  prefence  of  the  blood  may  be  com- 
monly known,  1  ft,  By  the  colour  which  blocd 
gives,  different  from  any  urine  without  blood 
that  I  have  ever  feen  ;  and  I  think  a  little  ex- 
perience will  enable  mofl  perfons  to  make 
this  diftin&ion.  2diy,  By  this,  that  the  pref- 
ence of  blood  always  diminifhes  the  transpar- 
ency of  the  urine  with  which  it  is  mixed  ;  and 
it  is  very  feldom  that  urine,  though  very 
high  coloured,  lofes  its  tranfparency  ;  at  leaft 
this  hardly  ever  appears,  if  the  urine  is 
examined  when  recently  voided.  3dly,  When 
urine  has  blood  mixed  with  it,  it  tinges  a 
piece  of  linen  dipped  into  it  with  a  red  colour^ 
which  the  higheft  coloured  urine  without 
blood,  never  does.  4th! y,  High  coloured  urine 
without  blood,  upon  cooling,,  and  remaining 
at  reft  in  a  veflel,  almoft  always  depofites  a 
lateritious  fediment ;  and  if  upon  any  occafion 
bloody  urine  fhould  depofite  a  fediment  that 
may  be  of  a  portion  of  the  blood  formerly  dif- 
fufed in  it,  the   difference,  however,  may  be 

difcerned 


fi72  PRACTICE 

difcerned  by  this,  that  the  fediment  depofited 
by  urine  without  blood,  upon  the  urine's  be- 
ing again  heated,  will  be  entirely  rediffolved, 
which  will  not  happen  to  any  fediment  from 
blood.  Laflly,  we  know  no  flate  of  urine 
without  blood,  which  fhews  any  portion  of  it 
coagulable  by  a  heat  equal  to  that  of  boiling 
water ;  but  blood  diffufed  in  urine  is  ftill  co- 
agulable by  fuch  a  heat  ;  and  by  this  teft, 
therefore,  the  prefence  of  blood  in  urine  may 
be  commonly  afcertained. 


BOOK 


*73 


,   B     O     O     K         V. 


of    PROFLUVIA,   or  FLUXES, 
with  PYREXIA. 

MXLV. 

FORMER  nofologifls  have 
eilablifhed  a  clafs  of  difeafes  under  the  title  of 
Fluxes,  or  Profluvia ;  but  as  in  this  clafs  they 
have  brought  together  a  great  number  of  dif- 
eafes, which  have  nothing  in  common,  ex- 
cepting the  fingle  circumftance  of  an  increas- 
ed difcharge  of  fluids,  and  which  alfo  are,  in 
other  refpe&s,  very  different  from  one  anoth- 
er ;  I  have  avoided  fo  improper  an  arrange- 
ment, and  have  diftributed  moll  of  the  dif- 
eafes comprehended  in  fuch  a  clafs  by  the  nof- 
ologifls, into  places  more  natural  and  proper 
For  them.  I  have,  indeed,  ftill  employed 
here  the  general  title  ,•   but  I  confine   it  to 

fuch 


274  PRACTICE 

fuch  fluxes  only  as  are  conftantly  attended 
with  pyrexia,  and  which  therefore  neceifarily 
belong  to  the  clafs  of  difeafes  of  which  I  am 
now  treating. 

Of  the  fluxes  which  may  be  confidered  as 
being  very  conftantly  febrile  difeafes,  there 
are  only  two,  the  catarrh  and  dyfentery  ;  and 
of  thefe  therefore  I  now  proceed  to  treat. 


CHAP. 


O  F     P   H  Y  S  I  C.  275 


CHAP, 


©f    the    CATARRH, 


MXLVI, 


X  HE  catarrh  is  an  increafed 
excretion  of  mucus  from  the  mucous  mem- 
brane of  the  nofe,  fauces,  and  bronchi ae,  at- 
tended with  pyrexia. 

Practical  writers  and  nofologifts  have  dif- 
tinguifhed  the  difeafe  by  different  appella* 
tions,  according  as  it  happens  to  affecl:  thofe 
different  parts  of  the  mucous  membrane,  the 
one  part  more  or  lefs  than  the  other  :  But  I 
am  of  opinion,  that  the  difeafe,  although  af- 
fecting different  parts,  is  always  of  the  fame 
nature,  and  proceeds  from  the  fame  caufe. 
Very  commonly,  indeed,  thofe  different  parts 
are  affected  at  the  fame  time  ;  and  therefore 
there  can  be  little  room  for  the  diflin&ion 
mentioned. 

The  difeafe  has  been  frequently  treated  of 
under  the  title  of  Turn's,  or  Cough  ,•  and  a 

cougb# 


276  PRACTICE 

cough,  indeed,  always  attends  the  chief  form 
of  catarrh,  that  is,  the  increafed  excretion 
from  the  bronchiae  ;  but  a  cough  is  fo  often  a 
fymptom  of  many  other  affections,  which  are 
very  different  from  one  another,  that  it  is  im*» 
properly  employed  as  a  generic  title. 

MXLVIL 

The  remote  caufe  of  catarrh  is  moil  com- 
monly cold  applied  to  the  body.  This  ap- 
plication of  cold  producing  catarrh,  can  in 
many  cafes  be  diflin&ly  ObTerved ;  and  I  be*- 
lieve  it  would  always  be  fo,  were  men  ac- 
quainted with,  and  attentive  to,  the  circum- 
fiances  which  determine  cold  to  a6l  upon  the 
body.     See  XCIV—  XCVI. 

From  the  fame  paragraphs  we  may  learn 
what  in  fomeperfons  gives  a  predifpofition  to 
catarrh, 

MXLVilL 

The  difeafe,  of  which  I  am  now  to  treat, 
generally  begins  with  fome  difficulty  of  breath- 
ing through  the  nofe,  and  with  a  fenfe  of 
fome  fulnefs  flopping  up  that  paffage.  This 
is  alfo  often  attended  with  fome  dull  pain  and 
a  fenfe  of  weight  in  the  forehead,  as  well  as 
fome  fliffnefs  in  the  motion  of  the  eyes.  Thefe 
feelings,  fometimes  at  their  very  firfl  begin- 
ning, and  always  foon  after,  are  attended  with 
the  diflillation  from  the  nofe  ;  and  fometimes 

from 


OF       PHYSIC.  277 

from  the  eyes,  of  a  thin  fluid,  which  is  often 
found  to  be  fomewhat  acrid,  both  by  its  tafte, 
and  by  its  fretting  the  parts  over  which  it 
pafles. 

MXLIX. 

Thefe  fymptoms  conftitute  the  coryza  and 
gravedo  of  medical  authors,  and  are  common- 
ly attended  with  a  fenfe  of  laffitude  over  the 
whole  body.  Sometimes  cold  miverings  are 
felt,  at  leaft  the  body  is  more  fenfible  than  u- 
fual  to  the  coldnefs  of  the  air  ;  and  with  all 
this  the  pulfe  becomes,  efpecially  in  the  even- 
ings, more  frequent  than  ordinary. 


ML. 

Thefe  fymptoms  feldom  continue  long  be-* 
fore  they  are  accompanied  with  fome  hoarfe- 
nefs,  and  a  fenfe  of  roughnefs  and  forenefs  in 
the  trachea,  and  with  fome  difficulty  of  breath- 
ing, attributed  to  a  fenfe  of  flraitnefs  of  the 
chef!,  and  attended  with  a  cough,  which 
feems  to  arife  from  fome  irritation  felt  at  the 
glottis.  The  cough  is  generally  at  firft  dry, 
occafioning  pains  about  the  cheft,  and  more 
efpecially  in  the  breaft.  Sometimes,  togetfu 
er  with  thefe  fymptoms,  pains  refembling 
thofe  of  the  rheumatifm  are  felt  in  feveral 
parts  of  the  body,  particularly  about  the  neck 
and  head.     While  thefe  fymptoms  take  place, 

Vol.  II.  N  the 


278  PRACTICE 

the  appetite  is  impaired,    fome  thirfl  arifes, 
and  a  general  laffitude  is  felt  over  all  the  body. 

MLI. 

Thefe  fymptoms  (MXLVIII— ML)  mark 
the  violence  and  height  of  the  difeafe  ;  which, 
however,  does  not  commonly  continue  long. 
By  degrees  the  cough  becomes  attended  with 
a  copious  excretion  of  mucus ;  which  is  at 
firft  thin,  but  gradually  becoming  thicker,  is 
brought  up  with  lefs  frequent  and  lefs  labori- 
ous coughing.  The  hoarfenefs  and  forenefs 
of  the  trachea  likewife  going  off,  the  febrile 
fymptoms  abating,  the  cough  becoming  lefs 
frequent,  and  with  lefs  expectoration,  the  dif- 
eafe foon  after  ceafes  altogether. 

MLIL 

Such  is  generally  the  courfe  of  this  difeafe, 
which  is  commonly  neither  tedious  nor  dan- 
gerous ;  but,  upon  fome  occafions,  it  is  in  both 
refpecls  otherwife.  A  perfon  affe&ed  with 
catarrh  feems  to  be  more  than  ufually  liable 
to  be  affected  by  cold  air  ;  and  in  that  condi- 
tion, if  expofed  to  cold,  the  difeafe,  which 
feemed  to  be  yielding,  is  often  brought  back 
with  greater  violence  than  before  ;  and  is  ren- 
dered not  only  more  tedious  than  otherwife 
it  would  have  been,  but  alfo  more  dangerous 
hy  the  fupervening  of  other  difeafes. 

MLIIL 


OF       PHYSIC.  279 


MLIII. 

Some  degree  of  the  cynanclie  tonfillaris 
often  accompanies  the  catarrh  ;  and,  when  the 
latter  is  aggravated  by  a  frefh  application  of 
cold,  the  cynanche  alfo  becomes  more  violent 
and  dangerous,  in  confequence  of  the  cough 
which  is  prefent  at  the  fame  time. 

MLIV. 

When  a  catarrh  has  been  occafloned  by  a 
violent  caufe  ;  when  it  has  been  aggravated 
by  improper  management  ;  and  efpecially 
when  it  has  been  rendered  more  violent  by 
frefh  and  repeated  applications  of  cold,  it  oft- 
en paffes  into  a  pneumonic  inflammation  at- 
tended with  the  utmoft  danger. 


MLV. 

Unlefs,  however,  fuch  accidents  as  thofe  of 
MLII — IvlLIV,  happen,  a  catarrh,  in  found 
perfons  not  far  advanced  in  life,  is,  I  think, 
always  a  flight  difeafe,  and  attended  with 
little  danger.  But,  in  perfons  of  a  phthifical 
difpofition,  a  catarrh  may  readily  produce  an 
hemoptyfis,  or  perhaps  form  tubercles  in  the 
lungs  ;  and  more  certainly,  in  perfons  who 
have  tubercles  already  formed  in  the  lungs, 
an  acGidental  catarrh  may  occalion  the  inflam- 
N  .2  mat  ion 


*8o  PRACTICE 

mation  of  thefe  tubercles,  and  in  confequence 
produce  a  phthifis  pulmonalis. 


MLVI. 


In  elderly  perfons,  a  catarrh  fometimes 
proves  a  dangerous  difeafe.  Many  perfons, 
as  they  advance  in  life,  and  efpecially  after 
they  have  arrived  at  old  age,  have  the  natur- 
al mucus  of  the  lungs  poured  out  in  greater 
quantity,  and  confequently  requiring  a  fre- 
quent expectoration.  If  therefore  a  catarrh 
happen  to  fuch  perfons,  and  increafe  the  af- 
flux of  fluids  to  the  lungs,  with  fome  degree 
of  inflammation,  it  may  produce  the  peri- 
pneumonia notha,  which  in  fuch  cafes  is 
very  often  fatal.  See  CCCLXXVI— 
CCCLXXXII. 


MLVII. 

The  proximate  caufe  of  catarrh  feems  to  be 
an  increafed  afflux  of  fluids  to  the  mucous 
membrane  of  the  nofe,  fauces,  and  bronchise, 
along  with  fome  degree  of  inflammation  af- 
fecting thefe  parts.  The  latter  circumftance 
is  confirmed  by  this,  that  in  the  cafe  of  ca- 
tarrh, the  blood  drawn  from  a  vein,  common- 
ly exhibits  the  fame  inflammatory  crufl  which 
appears  in  the  cafe  of  phlegmafiae. 

MLVIIL 


OF       PHYSIC.  281 


MLVIII. 

The  application  of  cold  which  occaflons  a 
catarrh,  probably  operates  by  diminifhing  the 
perfpiration  ufually  made  by  the  {kin,  and 
which  is  therefore  determined  to  the  mucous 
membrane  of  the  parts  above  mentioned.  As 
a  part  of  the  weight  which  the  body  daily 
lofes  by  infenfible  evacuation,  is  owing  to 
an  exhalation  from  the  lungs,  there  is  proba- 
bly a  connexion  between  this  exhalation  and 
the  cutaneous  perfpiration,  fo  that  the  one 
may  be  increafed  in  proportion  as  the  other 
is  diminiihed  :  And  therefore  we  may  under- 
fland  how  the  diminution  of  cutaneous  per- 
fpiration, in  confequence  of  the  application  of 
cold,  may  increafe  the  afflux  of  fluids  to  the 
lungs,  and  thereby  produce  a  catarrh. 

MUX. 

There  are  fome  obfervations  made  by  Dr. 
James  Keil  which  may  feem  to  render  this 
matter  doubtful  ;  but  there  is  a  fallacy  in  his 
obfervations.  The  evident  efFefts  of  cold  in 
producing  coryza,  leave  the  matter  in  general 
without  doubt ;  and  there  are  feveral  other 
circumftances  which  fhow  a  connexion  be- 
tween the  lungs  and  the  furface  of  the  body. 

N3  MLX. 


282  PRACTICE 


MLX. 

Whether,  from  the  fuppreffion  of  perfpira- 
tion,  a  catarrh  be  produced  merely  by  an  in- 
creafed  afflux  of  fluids,  or  whether  the  matter 
of  perfpiration  be  at  the  fame  time  determin- 
ed to  the  mucous  glands,  and  there  excite  a 
particular  irritation,  may  be  uncertain  ;  but 
the  latter  fuppofition  is  fufficiently  probable. 

MLXI. 

Although,  in  the  cafe  of  a  common  catarrh, 
which  is  in  many  in  (lances  fporadic,  it  may  be 
doubtful  whether  any  morbific  matter  be  ap- 
plied to  the  mucous  glands ;  it  is,  however, 
certain,  that  the  fymptoms  of  a  catarrh  do 
frequently  depend  upon  fuch  a  matter  being 
applied  to  thefe  glands  ;  as  appears  from  the 
cafe  of  meailes,  chincough,  and  efpecially 
from  the  frequent  occurrence  of  contagious 
and  epidemical  catarrh. 

MLXII. 

The  mention  of  this  lafl  leads  me  to  ob- 
ferve,  that  there  are  two  fpecies  of  catarrh,  as 
I  have  marked  in  my  Synopfis  of  Nofology. 
One  of  thefe,  as  I  fuppofe,  is  produced  by 
cold  alone,  as  has  been  explained  above  ;  and 
the  other  feems  manifeftly  to  be  produced  by 
a  fpecific  contagion. 

Of 


OF       PHYSIC.  283 

Of  fuch  contagious  catarrhs,  I  have  point- 
ed out  in  the  Synopfis  many  inftances  occur- 
ring from  the  14th  century  down  to  the  pref- 
ent  day.  In  all  thefe  inftances  the  phenom- 
ena have  been  much  the  fame  ;  and  the  dif- 
eafe  has  always  been  particularly  remarkable 
in  this,  that  it  has  been  the  mod  widely  and 
generally  fp reading  epidemic  known.  It  has 
feldom  appeared  in  any  one  country  of  Eu- 
rope, without  appearing  fuccefhvely  in  every 
other  part  of  it ;  and  in  fome  inftances,  it  has 
been  even  transferred  to  America,  and  has 
been  fpread  over  that  continent,  fo  far  as  we 
have  had  opportunities  of  being  informed. 

MLXIII. 

The  catarrh  from  contagion  appears  with 
nearly  the  fame  fymptoms  as  thofe  mentioned 
MXLV1II — ML.  It  feems  often  to  come 
on  in  confequence  of  the  application  of  cold. 
It  comes  on  with  more  cold  fhivering  than 
the  catarrh  ariiing  from  cold  alone,  and  foon- 
er  mows  febrile  fymptoms,  and  thefe  likewife 
in  a  more  considerable  degree.  Accordingly, 
it  more  fpeedily  runs  its  courfe,  which  is  com- 
monly finiihed  in  a  few  days.  It  fometimes 
terminates  by  a  fpontaneous  fweat ;  and  this, 
in  fome  perfons,  produces  a  miliary  eruption. 
It  is,  however,  the  febrile  ftate  of  this  difeafe 
efpecially,  that  is  fmifhed  in  a  few  days  ;  for 
the  cough,  and  other  catarrhal  fymptoms,  do 
frequently  continue  longer;  and  often,  when 
N  4  they 


a84  PRACTICE 

they  appear  to  be  going  off,  they  are  renewed 
by  any  frefh  application  of  cold. 

MLXIV. 

Confidering  the  number  of  perfons  who 
are  affe&ed  with  catarrh,  of  either  the  one 
fpecies  or  the  other,  and  efcape  from  it  quick- 
ly without  any  hurt,  it  may  be  allowed  to  be 
a  difeafe  very  free  from  danger  ;  but  it  is  not 
always  to  be  conlidered  as  fuch  ;  for  in  fome 
perfons  it  is  accompanied  with  pneumonic  in- 
flammation. In  the  phthifically  difpofed,  it 
often  accelerates  the  coming  on  of  phthifis  ; 
and  in  elderly  perfons,  it  frequently  proves 
fatal  in  the  manner  explained  above,  MLIV 
and  MLVI. 

MLXV. 

The  cure  of  catarrh  is  nearly  the  fame, 
whether  it  proceed  from  cold  or  contagion  ; 
with  this  difference,  that  in  the  latter  cafe, 
remedies  are  commonly  more  neceffary  jthan 
in  the  former. 

In  the  cafes  of  a  moderate  difeafe,  it  is 
commonly  fufiicient  to  avoid  cold,  and  to  ab- 
ftain  from  animal  food  for  fome  days  ;  or  per- 
haps to  lie  a  bed,  and,  by  taking  frequently 
of  fome  mild  and  diluent  drink  a  little. warm- 
ed, to  promote  a  very  gentle  fweat  ;  and  af- 
ter thefe  to  take  care  to  return  very  gradually 
only,  to  the  ufe  of  the  free  air. 

MLXVL 


OF       PHYSIC.  285 


MLXVI. 

When  the  difeafe  is  more  violent,  not  only 
the  antiphlogiflic  regimen  mufl  be  exactly 
obferved,  but  various  remedies  alfo  become 
neceffary. 

To  take  off  the  phlogiflic  diathefis  which 
always  attends  this  difeafe,  bloodletting,  in  a 
larger  or  fmaller  quantity,  and  repeated  ac- 
cording as  the  fymptoms  fball  require,  is  the 
proper  remedy. 

For  reftoring  the  determination  of  the  flu- 
ids to  the  furface  of  the  body,  and  at  the  fame 
time  for  expeding  the  fecretion  of  mucus  in 
the  lungs,  which  may  take  off  the  inflamma- 
tion of  its  membrane,  vomiting  is  the  moil  ef- 
fectual means. 

For  the  latter  purpofe,  it  has  been  fuppof- 
ed,  that  fquills,  gum  ammoniac,  the  volatile 
alkali,  and  fome  other  medicines,  might  be 
ufeful  :  But  their  efficacy  has  never  appeared 
to  me  to  be  conflderable  ,*  and,  if  fquills  have 
ever  been  very  ufeful,  it  feems  to  have  been 
rather  by  their  emetic,  than  by  their  expecto- 
rant powers. 

When  the  inflammatory  affections  of  the 
lungs  feem  to  be  considerable,  it  is  proper, 
befides  bloodletting,  to  apply  blilters  on  fome 
part  of  the  thorax. 

As  a  cough  is  often  the  moil  troublefome 
eircumftance   of  this  difeafe,    fo  demulcents; 

Vol.  2.  N  5  tmy 


s86  PRACTICE 

may  be  employed  to  alleviate  it.  See 
CCCLXXIII. 

But,  after  the  inflammatory  fymptoms  have 
much  abated,  if  the  cough  mould  ftill  contin- 
ue, opiates  afford  the  moil  effectual  means  of 
relieving  it  ;  and,  in  the  circumftances  juft 
now  mentioned,  they  may  be  very  fafely  em- 
ployed.    See  CCCLXXV. 

After  the  inflammatory  and  febrile  ftates 
of  this  difeafe  are  almoft  entirely  gone,  the 
moft  effectual  means  of  difcufling  all  remains 
of  the  catarrhal  affe&ion,  is  by  iome  exercife 
©fgeflation  diligently  employed. 


CHAP. 


OF       PHYSIC.  287 


CHAP.         II. 


gf    the    DYSENTERY. 


MLXVII. 

JL  HE  dyfentery  is  a  difeafe  in 
which  the  patient  has  frequent  (tools,  accom- 
panied with  much  griping,  and  followed  by  a 
tenefmus.  The  (tools,  though  frequent,  are 
generally  in  fmall  quantity  ;  and  the  matter 
voided  is  chiefly  mucus, ,  fometimes  mixed 
with  blood.  At  the  fame  time,  the  natural 
faeces  feldom  appear  ,•  and,  when  they  do,  it 
is  generally  in  a  compact  and  hardened  form.. 

MLXVIII.. 


This  difeafe  occurs  efpecially  in  fummer 
and  autumn,  at  the  fame  time  with  autumnal 
intermittent  and  remittent  fevers  ;  and  with 
thefe  it  is  fometimes  combined  or  complicat- 
ed. 

N6  MLXIX, 


83  PRACTICE 


MLXIX. 


The  difeafe  comes  on  fometimes  with  cold 
fhiverings,  and  other  fymptoms  of  pyrexia  ; 
but  more  commonly  the  fymptoms  of  the  top- 
ical affection  appear  firfh.  The  belly  is  cof- 
tive,  with  an  unufual  flatulence  in  the  bowels. 
Sometimes,  though  more  rarely,  fome  degree 
of  diarrhoea  is  the  firft  appearance.  In  moft 
cafes  the  difeafe  begins  with  griping,  and  a 
frequent  inclination  to  go  to  (tool.  In  indulg- 
ing this,  little  is  voided  ;  but  fome  tenefmus 
attends  it.  By  degrees  the  (fools  become  more 
frequent,  the  griping  more  fevere,  and  the  te- 
nefmus more  confiderable.  Along  with  thefe 
fymptoms  there  is  a  lofs  of  appetite  ;  and  fre- 
quently ficknefs,  naufea,  and  vomiting,  alfo 
afTe&ing  the  patient.  At  the  fame  time  there 
is  always  more  orlefs  of  pyrexia  prefent,  which 
is  fometimes  of  the  remittent  kind,  and  ob- 
ferves  a  tertian  period.  Sometimes  the  fever 
is  manifeftly  inflammatory,  and  very  often  of 
a  putrid  kind.  Thefe  febrile  (rates  continue 
to  accompany  the  difeafe  during  its  whole 
courfe^  efpecially  when  it  terminates  foon  in 
a  fatal  manner.  In  other  cafes,  the  febrile 
(late  almoft  entirely  difappears,  while  the 
proper  dyfenteric  fymptoms  remain  for  a  long 
time  after. 

-     MLXX. 


OF       PHYSIC  289 


MLXX. 

In  the  courfe  of  the  difeafe,  whether  of  a 
fhorter  or  longer  duration,  the  matter  voided 
by  flool  is  very  various.  Sometimes  it  is 
merely  a  mucous  matter,  without  any  blood, 
exhibiting  that  difeafe  which  Dr.  Roderer  has 
named  the  morbus  mucqfus,  and  others  the 
dyfenteria  alba.  For  the  moll  part,  however, 
the  mucus  difcharged  is  more  or  lefs  mixed 
with  blood.  This  fometimes  appears  only  in 
(freaks  amongft  the  mucus  ;  but  at  other  times 
is  more  copious,  tinging  the  whole  of  tlie 
matter  difcharged  ;  and  upon  fome  occafions 
a  pure  and  unmixed  blood  is  voided  in  con- 
siderable quantity.  In  other  refpe&s,  the 
matter  voided,  is  varioufly  changed  in  colour 
and  confidence,  and  is  commonly  of  a  ftrong 
and  unufually  fetid  odour.  It  is  probable,, 
that  fometimes  a  genuine  pus  is  voided  ;  and 
frequently  a  putrid  fanies,  proceeding  from 
gangrenous  parts.  There  are  very  often 
mixed  with  the  liquid  matter  fome  films  of  a 
membranous  appearance,  and  frequently  fome 
fmall  maffes  of  a  feemingly  febaceous  matter. 

MLXXI. 

While  the  ftools  confiding  of  thefe  various 
matters,  are,  in  many  inilances,  exceedingly 
frequent,  it  is  feldom  that  natural  faeces  ap- 
pear in  them  ;   and  when  they  do  appear,  it 

is. 


290  PRACTICE 

is,  as  I  have  mentioned,  in  the  form  of  fcyba- 
la,  that  is,  in  fomewhat  hardened,  feparate 
balls.  When  thefe  are  voided,  whether  by 
the  efforts  of  nature,  or  as  folicited  by  art, 
they  procure  a  remifnon  of  all  the  fymptoms, 
and  more  efpecially  of  the  frequent  ftools, 
griping,  and  tenefmus. 

MLXXII. 


Accompanied  with  thefe  circumftances,  the 
difeafe  proceeds  for  a  longer  or  a  ihorter  time. 
When  the  pyrexia  attending  it  is  of  a  violent 
inflammatory  kind,  and  more  efpecially  when 
it  is  of  a  very  putrid  nature,  the  difeafe  often 
terminates  fatally  in  a  very  few  days,  with  all 
the  marks  of  a  fupervening  gangrene.  When 
the  febrile  ftate  is  more  moderate,  or  difap- 
pears  altogether,  the  difeafe  is  often  protract- 
ed for  weeks,  and  even  for  months  ;  but,  even 
then,  after  a  various  duration,  it  often  termin- 
ates fatally,  and  generally  in  confequence  of 
a  return  and  considerable  aggravation  of  the 
inflammatory  and  putrid  ftates.  In  fome 
cafes,  the  difeafe  ceafes  fpontaneoufly  ;  the 
frequency  of  ftools,  the  griping,  and  tenefmus, 
gradually  diminifhing,  while  natural  ftools 
return.  In  other  cafes,  the  difeafe,  with  mod- 
erate fymptoms,  continues  long,  and  ends  in  a 
diarrhoea,  fometimes  accompanied  with  lien- 
teric  fymptoms. 

MLXXIII. 


OF      PHYSIC.  391 


MLXXIII. 

The  remote  caufes  of  this  difeafe  have  been 
varioufly  judged  of.  It  generally  arifes  in 
furnmer  or  autumn,  after  confiderable  heats 
have  prevailed  for  fome  time,  and  efpecially 
after  very  warm  and  at  the  fame  time  very  dry 
ftates  of  the  weather  ;  and  the  difeafe  is  much 
more  frequent  in  warm,  than  in  cooler  cli- 
mates. It  happens,  therefore,  in  the  fame 
circumftances  and  feafons  which  confiderably 
afFecl;  the  ftate  of  the  bile  in  the  human  body  ; 
but  as  the  cholera  is  often  without  any  dyfen- 
teric  fymptoms,  and  copious  difcharges  of  bile 
have  been  found  to  relieve  the  fymptoms  of 
dyfentery,  it  is  difficult  to  determine  what 
connexion  the  difeafe  has  with  the  ftate  of  the 
bile. 

MLXXIV. 

It  has  been  obferved,  that  the  effluvia  from 
very  putrid  animal  fubftances,  readily  afFecl; 
the  alimentary  canal  ;  and  upon  fome  occa- 
fions  they  certainly  produce  a  diarrhoea  ;  but, 
whether  they  ever  produce  a  genuine  dyfen- 
tery, I  have  not  been  able  to  learn  with  cer- 
tainty. 

MLXXV. 

The  dyfentery  does  often  manifeflly  arife 
from  the  application  of  cold,  but   the  difeafe 

is 


292  PRACTICE 

is  always  contagious  ;  and,  by  the  propagation 
of  fuch  contagion,  independent  of  cold,  or 
other  exciting  caufes,  it  becomes  epidemic  in 
camps  and  other  places.  It  is,  therefore,  to 
be  doubted,  if  the  application  of  cold  does 
ever  produce  the  difeafe,  unlefs  where  the 
fpecific  contagion  has  been  previoufly  receiv- 
ed into  the  body  :  And  upon  the  whole,  it  is 
probable,  that  a  fpecific  contagion  is  to  be 
coniidered  as  always  the  remote  caufe  of  this 
difeafe, 

MLXXVI. 


Whether  this  contagion,  like  many  others, 
be  of  a  permanent  nature,  and  only  mows  its 
effects  in  certain  circumilances  which  render 
it  active,  or  if  it  be  occafionally  produced,  I 
cannot  determine.  Neither,  if  the  latter  fup- 
pofition  be  received,  can  I  fay  by  what  means 
it  may  be  generated.  As  little  do  we  know 
any  thing  of  its  nature,  confidered  in  itfelf  ; 
or  at  moft  this  only,  that,  in  common  with 
many  other  contagions,  it  appears  to  be  com- 
monly of  a  putrid  nature,  and  capable  of  in- 
ducing a  putrefcent  tendency  in  the  human 
body.  This,  however,  does  not  at  all  explain, 
its  peculiar  power  in  inducing  thofe  fyrnptoms 
which  properly  and  eilentiaily  conflitute  the 
difeafe  of  dyfentery.     (MLXVIIj. 


MLXXVII. 


OF      PHYSIC.  293 


MLXXVII. 

Of  thefe  fymptoms  the  proximate  caufe  is 
ftill  obfcure.   The  common  opinion  has  been, 
that  the  difeafe  depends  upon  an  acrid  matter 
received  into,  or  generated  in  the  interlines 
themfelves,  exciting   their  periftaltic  motion, 
and  thereby  producing   the   frequent  (tools 
which  occur  in  this  difeafe.     But  this  fuppo- 
fition  cannot  be  admitted  ;  for,  in  all  the  in- 
fiances  known  of  acrid  fubftances  applied   to 
the  interlines  and  producing  frequent  ftools, 
they  at  the  fame  time  produce  copious  ftools, 
as  might  be  expected   from    acrid  fubftances 
applied  to  any  length  of  the  interlines.      This, 
however,    is  not   the  cafe  in  dyfentery  ;   in 
which  the  ftools,  however  frequent,  are  gen- 
erally in  very  fmall  quantity,  and  fuch  as  may 
be  fuppofed  to  proceed  from  the  lower  parts 
of  the  rectum  only.     With  refpecl:  to  the  fu- 
perior  portions  of  the  interlines,  and  particu- 
larly thofe   of  the  colon,  it  is  probable  they 
are   under  a   preternatural   and  confide rable 
degree  of  conftri6tion  :  For,  as  I  have  obferv- 
ed  above,  the  natural  fasces  are  feldom  void- 
ed ;  and  when  they  are,  it  is  in  a  form  which 
gives  reafon   to  fuppofe,  they  have  been  long 
retained  in  the  cells  of  the  colon,  and  confe- 
quently  that  the  colon  had  been  afFe6ted  with 
a  preternatural  conftriclion.   This  is  confirm- 
ed by  aimoft  all   the   diffe&ions  which  have 
been  made  of  the  bodies  of  dyfenteric  patients, 

in 


294  P  R  A   C  T  I   C  £ 

in  which,  when  gangrene  had  not  entirely 
deilroyed  the  texture  and  form  of  the  parts, 
confiderable  portions  of  the  great  guts  have 
been  found  affected  with  a  very  confiderable 
conftriction. 

MLXXVIII. 

I  apprehend,  therefore,  that  the  proximate 
caufe  of  dyfentery,  or  at  leafl  the  chief  part 
of  the  proximate  caufe,  confifts  in  a  preternat- 
ural confiri6tion  of  the  colon,  occasioning  at 
the  fame  time  thofe  fpafmodic  efforts  which 
are  felt  in  fevere  gripings,  and  which  efforts, 
propagated  downwards  to  the  rectum,  occa- 
sion there  the  frequent  mucous  flools  and  te- 
nefmus.  But,  whether  this  explanation  fhall 
be  admitted  or  not,  it  will  flill  remain  certain, 
that  hardened  faeces  retained  in  the  colon  are 
the  caufe  of  the  griping,  frequent  flools,  and 
tenefmus  ;  for  the  evacuation  of  thefe  fasces, 
whether  by  nature  or  by  art,  gives  relief  from 
the  fymptoms  mentioned  ;  and  it  will  be  more 
fully  and  ufefully  confirmed  by  this,  that  the 
moil  immediate  and  fuccefsful  cure  of  dyfen- 
tery is  obtained  by  an  early  and  conftant  at- 
tention to  the  preventing  the  conftri6tion,  and 
the  frequent  ftagnation  of  fasces  in  the  colon, 

MLXXIX. 

In  this  manner  I  have  endeavoured  to  as- 
certain the  proximate  caufe  of  dyfentery,  and 

therefore 


OF      PHYSIC  295 

therefore  to  point  out  alfo  the  principal  part 
of  the  cure,  which,  from  want  of  the  proper 
view  of  the  nature  of  the  difeafe,  feems  to 
have  been  in  feveral  refpects  fluctuating  and 
undetermined  among  practitioners, 


MLXXX. 

The  moil  eminent  of  our  late  practition- 
ers, and  of  greatefl:  experience  in  this  difeafe, 
feem  to  be  of  opinion,  that  the  difeafe  is  to 
be  cured  mo  ft  effectually  by  purging  aflidu- 
ouily  employed.  The  means  may  be  vari- 
ous ;  but  the  mofl  gentle  laxatives  are  ufually 
fufficient ;  and  as  they  mufl  be  frequently  re- 
peated, the  mofl  gentle  are  the  rnofl  fafe  ;  the 
more  efpecially  as  an  inflammatory  flate  fo 
frequently  accompanies  the  difeafe.  What- 
ever laxatives  produce  an  evacuation  of  nat- 
ural faeces,  and  a  confequent  remifhon  of  the 
fymptoms,  will  be  fufficient  to  effectuate  the 
cure.  But  if  gentle  laxatives  mall  not  pro- 
duce the  evacuation  now  mentioned,  fome 
more  powerful  medicines  mufl  be  employed  ; 
and  I  have  found  nothing  more  proper  or 
convenient  than  tartar  emetic,  given  in  fmall 
dofes,  and  at  fuch  intervals  as  may  determine 
their  operation  to  be  chiefly  by  ftool.  Rhu- 
barb, fo  frequently  employed,  is  in  feveral  re- 
fpects amongfl  the  mofl  improper  purga- 
tives. 

MLXXXI. 


tg6  PRACTICE 


MLXXXI. 

Vomiting  has  been  held  a  principal  remedy 
in  this  difeafe  ;  and  may  be  ufefully  employ- 
ed in  the  besrinning^of  it,  with  a  view  to  both 

a  jo  * 

the  ftate  of  the  flomach  and  of  the  fever  ;  but 
it  is  not  neceflary  to  repeat  it  often  ;  and  un- 
lefs  the  emetics  employed  operate  alfo  by  ftool, 
they  are  of  little  fervice.  Ipecacuanha  feems 
to  poffefs  no  fpecific  power  ;  and  it  proves 
only  ufeful  when  fo  managed  as  to  operate 
chiefly  by  ftool. 

MLXXXIL 

For  relievirig  the  conftriction  of  the  colon, 
and  evacuating  the  retained  faeces,  glyfters  may 
fometimes  be  ufeful;  but  they  are  feldom  fo 
effectual  as  laxatives  given  by  the  mouth  ;  and 
acrid  glyfters,  if  they  be  not  effectual  in  evac- 
uating the  colon,  may  prove  hurtful  by  ftim- 
ulating  the  rectum  too  much. 

MLXXXIII. 

The  frequent  and  fevere  griping  attending 
this  difeafe,  leads  almoft  neceffarily  to  the  ufe 
of  opiates,  and  they  are  very  effectual  for  the 
purpofe  of  relieving  from  the  gripes  ;  but  by 
occafioning  an  interruption  of  the  action  of 
the  fmall  guts,  they  favour  the  conftriction 
of  the  colon,  and  thereby  fometimes  aggravate 

the 


O  F     P  H  Y  S  I  C.  297 

the  difeafe  ;  and  if  at  the  fame  time  the  ufe 
of  them  fuperfede  in  any  meafure  the  em- 
ploying of  purgatives,  it  commonly  does  much 
mifchief  ;  I  believe  it  indeed  to  be  only  the 
neglecl  of  purging  that  renders  the  ufe  of  o- 
piates  very  neceffary. 


MLXXXIV. 

When  the  gripes  are  both  frequent  and  fe- 
vere,  they  may  fometimes  be  relieved  by  the 
employment  of  a  femicupium,  or  by  a  fomen- 
tation of  the  abdomen,  continued  for  fome 
time.  In  the  fame  cafe,  the  pains  may  be 
relieved,  and,  as  I  think,  the  conftriclion  of 
the  colon  may  be  taken  off,  by  blifters  applied 
to  the  lower  belly. 

MLXXXV. 

At  the  beginning  of  this  difeafe,  when  the 
Fever  is  any  way  considerable,  bloodletting,  in 
patients  of  tolerable  vigour,  may  be  proper 
and  neceffary ;  and,  when  the  pulfe  is  full 
and  hard,  with  other  fymptoms  of  an  inflam- 
matory difpofition,  bloodletting  ought  to  be 
repeated.  But,  as  the  fever  attending  dyfen- 
tery  is  often  of  a  putrid  kind,  or  does,  in  the 
courfe  of  the  difeafe,  become  foon  of  that  na- 
ture, bloodletting  mull  be  employed  with 
great  caution. 

MLXXXVI. 


298         PRACTICE 

MLXXXVI. 

1 

From  the  account  now  given  of  the  nature 
of  this  difeafe,  it  will  be  fufficiently  obvious, 
that  the  ufe  of  aflringents  in  the  beginning  of 
it  muft  be  abfolutely  pernicious. 

MLXXXVII. 

Whether  an  acrid  matter  be  the  original 
caufe  of  this  difeafe,  may  be  uncertain  ;  but 
from  the  indigeftion  and  the  ftagnation  of  flu- 
ids in  the  fiomach  which  attend  the  difeafe,  it 
may  be  prefumed,  that  fome  acrid  matters 
are  conftantly  prefent  in  the  llomach  and  in- 
terlines, and  therefore  that  demulcents  may 
be  always  ufefully  employed.  At  the  fame 
time,  from  this  confederation  that  mild  oily 
matters  thrown  into  the  inteftines  in  confider- 
able  quantity  always  prove  laxative,  I  am  of 
opinion  that  the  oleaginous  demulcents  are 
the  moil  ufeful. 

MLXXXVIII. 

As  this  difeafe  is  fo  often  of  an  inflammato^. 
ry  or  of  a  putrid  nature,  it  is  evident  that  the 
diet  employed  in  it  mould  be  vegetable  and 
acefcent.  Milk  in  its  entire  ftate  is  of  doubt- 
ful quality  in  many  cafes  ;  but  fome  portion; 
of  the  cream  is  often  allowable,  and  whey  is 
always  proper. 

In 


OF      PHYSIC.  299 

In  the  firft  ftages  of  the  difeafe,  the  fweet 
and  fubacid  fruits  are  allowable,  and  even 
proper.  It  is  in  the  more  advanced  ftages 
only  that  any  morbid  acidity  feems  to  prevail 
in  the  ftomach,  and  to  require  fome  referve 
in  the  ufe  of  acefcents.  At  the  beginning  of 
the  difeafe,  abforbents  feem  to  be  fuperfluous ; 
and  by  their  aflringent  and  feptic  powers  they 
may  be  hurtful. 

MLXXXIX. 

When  this  difeafe  is  complicated  with  an 
intermittent  fever,  and  is  protracled  from  that 
circumftance  chiefly,  it  is  to  be  treated  as  an 
intermittent,  by  adminiftering  the  Peruvian 
bark,  which,  however,  in  the  earlier  periods 
of  the  difeafe,  is  hardly  to  be  admitted. 


PART 


OfJfe 


W0M4 ,  OV 


e/V  &wo(i4  zJJu&ai&s \ 


MXC. 


N  a  certain  view^  almoft  th« 
whole  of  the  difeafes  of  the  hu- 
man body  might  be  called 
Nervous  :  But  there  would 
be  no  ufe  for  fuch  a  general 
appellation  ;  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  it  feems  improper  to  limit  the  term,  in 
the  loofe  inaccurate  manner  in  which  it  has 
been  hitherto  applied,  to  hyfleric  or  hypo- 
chondriacal diforders,  which  are  themfelves 
hardly  to  be  defined  with  fufEcient  precifion. 


MXCI. 


In   this   place   I 


Under  the  title  of  Neuroses,  all 
Vol,  II. 


propofe  to  comprehend, 

thofe   pre- 

O  ternatural 


302         practice 

ternatural  affe&ions  of  fenfe  Or  motion  which 
are  without  pyrexia,  as  a  part  of  the  primary 
difeafe  ;  arid  all  thofe  which  do  not  depend 
Upon  a  topical  affection  of  the  organs,  but 
upon  a  more  general  affection  of  the  nervous 
fyfiem,  and  of  thofe  powers  of  the  fyftem  up- 
on which  fenfe  arid  motion  more  efpecially 
depend, 

MXCIL 

Of  fuch  difeafes  I  have  efiablifhed  a  clafsi 
under  the  title  of  Neuroses,  or  Nervous 
Diseases.  Thefe  I  again  diftinguifh,  as 
they  confifti  either  in  the  interruption  and  de- 
bility of  the  powers  of  fenfe  and  motion,  or 
in  the  irregularity  with  which  thefe  powers 
are  exercifed  5  and  have  accordingly  arranged 
them  under  the  four  orders  of  Comdta,  Adyna*> 
mix,  Spa/mi,  and  Vejani<ey  to  be  defined  as  we 
proceed  to  treat  of  them  more  particularly  <> 


BOOK 


30$ 


BOOK         I. 


~**o&$&$m£2^m«^ 


OF  COMATA  ;    0R3    OF  THE    LOSS    OF 

VOLUNTARY  MOTION. 


^^^^^mw^^^^ct&m^ 


MXCIII. 

UNDER  this  title  are  com- 
prehended thofe  affe£lions  which  have  been 
commonly  called  the  Soporofe  difeafes  ;  but 
they  are  moll  properly  diftinguifhed  by  their 
confifting  in  fome  interruption  or  fuppreffion 
of  the  powers  of  fenfe  arid  voluntary  motion, 
or  of  what  are  called  the  animal  functions. 
Thefe  are  indeed  ufually  fufpended  in  the 
time  of  natural  fleep  :  But  of  all  the  difeafes 
to  be  comprehended  under  our  title,  fleep,  or 
even  the  appearance  of  it,  is  not  conftantly  a 
fymptom.  Of  fuch  difeafes  I  can  mark  and 
properly  explain  two  genera  on^  which  come 
under  th^  titles  of  Apoplexy  and  Palfy: 

O  2  CHAP. 


304  PRACTICE 


CHAP,         I. 


t)F     APOPLEXY* 


MX  CIV. 


Apoplexy  is  that  difeafe 

in  which  the  whole  of  the  external  and  inters 
hal  fenfes,  and  the  whole  of  the  voluntary 
motions,  are  in  fome  degree  abolifhed  ;  while 
refpiratioii  and  the  a€lion  of  the  heart  contin- 
ue to  be  performed.  By  its  being  an  affec- 
tion of  the  whole  of  the  powers  of  fenfe  and 
bf  voluntary  motion,  we  diftinguifh  it  from 
Palfy  ;  and  by  its  being  with  the  continuance 
of  refpiration  and  the  action  ef  the  heart,  it  is 
diftinguifhed  from  Syncope-.  I  have  further 
added  to  the  ordinary  definition  of  apoplexy^ 
that  the  abolition  of  the  powers  of  fenfe  and 
motion  is  ih  fome  degree  only  •  meaning  by 
this  to  imply,  that,  under  the  title  of  Apo- 
plexy, are  here  comprehended  thofe  difeafes 
which,  as  differing  from  it  in  degree  only, 
cannot,  with  a  view  either  to  pathology  or 
practice,  be  properly  diftinguifhed  from  it  i 

Such 


OF       PHYSIC,  305 

Such  are  the  difeafes  fometimes  treated  of  un- 
der the  names  of  Car  us,  Cataphora,  Coma,  and 
Lethargies. 

MXCV. 

Apoplexy,  in  all  its  different  degrees,  mod 
commonly  arTe&s  perfons  advanced  in  life, 
and  efpecially  thofe  above  lixty  years  of  age. 
It  moft  ufually  affecls  perfons  of  large  heads 
andfhort  necks,  perfons  of  a  corpulent  habit, 
perfons  who  have  palTed  an  indolent  life  and 
ufed  a  full  diet,  and  efpecially  thofe  who  have 
indulged  in  frequent  intoxication.  Men  who 
have  long  laboured  under  a  frequent  and  co- 
pious difcharge  of  blood  from  the  hemorrhoi- 
dal velfels^  upon  either  the  luppreffion  or 
fpontaneous  cealingof  that  difcharge,  are  par- 
ticularly liable  to  be  affected  with  apoplexy. 

MXCYL 

This  difeafe  frequently  comes  on  very  fud- 
denly  :  But  in  many  cafes  it  is  preceded  by 
various  fymptoms,  fuch  as  frequent  fits  ofgid- 
dinefs,  frequent  headachs,  a  hemorrhagyfrom 
the  nofe,  fome  tranfitory  interruptions  of  fee- 
ing and  hearing,  fome  falfe  vifion  and  hear- 
ing, fome  tranfitory  degree  of  numbnefs  or  lofs 
of  motion  in  the  extremities,  fome  faltering  of 
the  tongue  in  fpeaking,  a  lofs  of  memory,  a 
frequent  drowfmefs,  and  frequent  fits  of  in~ 
cubus. 

0  3  MXCVIL 


go6  PRACTICE 

MXCVII, 

An  attention  to  thefe  fymptoms,  and  to  the 
predifponent  circumftances  (MXCV),  will 
often  enable  us  to  forefee  the  more  violent  aU 
tacks  of  this  difeafe, 

MXCVIII. 

When  the  difeafe  comes  on  fuddenly  to  a 
confiderabie  degree,  it  has  been  frequently 
obferved  to  have  been  immediately  induced 
by  violent  exercife  ;  by  a  full  and  long  con- 
tinued infpiration  ;  by  a  fit  of  anger  ;  by  much 
external  heat,  efpecially  that  ariiing  from  a 
crowded  affembly  of  people  ;  by  warm  bath- 
ing ;  by  intoxication  ;  by  long  ftooping  with 
the  head  down  ;  and  by  a  tight  ligature  about 
the  neck.  The  difeafe  has  been  remarked  to 
make  its  attacks  moft  frequently  in  the  fpring 
feafon,  and  efpecially  when  the  vernal  heat 
fuddenly  fucceeds  to  the  winter  cold. 

MXCIX. 


The  fymptoms  denoting  the  prefence  of 
this  difeafe  will  be  fufrlciently  known  from 
the  definition  given  MXCIV.  Although  the 
whole  of  the  body  is  affe&ed  with  the  iofs  of 
fenfe  and  motion,  it  fometimes  takes  place 
more  upon  one  fide  of  the  body  than  the  oth-  | 
er  ;   and,   in  that  cafe,  the   fide  lead  affected  ' 

with 


OF     PHYSIC,  307 

with  palfy  is  fometimes  affected  with  convul- 
iions.  In  this  difeafe  there  is  often  a  dertor- 
ous  breathing  ;  and  this  has  been  faid  to  be  a 
mark  of  the  mod  violent  date  of  the  difeafe  : 
But  it  is  not  always  prefent  even  in  the  mod 
complete  form,  or  mod  violent  degree  of  the, 
difeafe. 


Ma 

The  proximate  caufe  of  this  difeafe  may  be> 
in  genera],  whatever  interrupts  the  motion  of 
the  nervous  power  from  the  brain  to  the  muf- 
cles  of  voluntary  motion  j  or,  in  fo  far  as  fenfe 
is  affecled,  whatever  interrupts  the  motion  of 
the  nervous  power  from  the  fentient  extreme 
ities  of  the  nerves  to  the  brain. 


MCL 

Such  an  interruption  of  the  motions  of  the 
nervous  power  may  be  occafioned,  either  by 
forae  compreffwn  of  the  origin  of  the  nerves,  or 
by  fomething  deftvoying  the  mobility  of  the 
nervous  pow$r\  Both  thefe  caufes  we  mufl 
treat  of  more  particularly  ;  and,  fird,  of  that 
of  compreflion^  feemingly  the  mod  frequent 
occafion  of  apoplexy,  and  perhaps  the  occa- 
fion  of  all  thole  apoplexies  arifmg  from  inter-* 
nai  caufes* 


O  4  MCI!* 


3o8  PRACTICE 


MCII. 

The  lofs  of  fenfe  and  motion  in  particular 
parts  of  the  body>  may  be  occafioned  by  a 
compreffion,  either  of  the  origin  of  certain 
nerves  only,  or  of  the  fame  nerves  in  fome 
part  of  their  courfe  from  the  brain  to  the  or- 
gans of  fenfe  and  motion.  Such  cafes  of  par- 
tial compreffion  will  be  more  properly  con- 
fidered  hereafter  ;  and  the  affection  I  am 
now  to  treat  of  being  general,  it  mufl  depend 
upon  a  very  general  compreffion  of  the  origin 
of  the  nerves,  or  medullary  portion  of  the 
brain  ;  and  therefore,  this  more  general  com- 
preffion only  is  to  be  confidered  here. 

MCIII. 

This  compreffion  of  the  origin  of  the 
nerves,  or  medullary  portion  of  the  brain, 
may  be  produced  in  different  ways  ;  as, 

i.  By  external  violence  fracturing  and 
preffing  in  a  part  of  the  cranium. 

2.  By  tumours,  fometimes  foft,  fometimes 
bony,  formed  in  different  parts  of  the  brain, 
or  in  its  membranes,  and  becoming  of  fuch  a 
bulk  as  to  comprefs  the  medullary  fubflance 
of  the  brain. 

3.  By  the  blood  accumulated  in  the  blood- 
veffels  of  the  brain,  and  diflending  them  to 
fuch  a  degree  as  to  comprefs  the  medullary 
portion  of  the  fame. 

4-  By 


OF-    PHYSIC.  309 

4.  By 'fluids  effufed  in  different  parts  of 
the  brain,  or  into  the  cavity  of  the  cranium, 
and  accumulated  in  fuch  quantity  as  ,0  occa- 
fion  the  compreflion  we  treat  of. 

And,  as  to  this  la  ft,  it  is  to  be  remarked 
here,  that  the  fluids  effufed  may  be  of  two* 
kinds  ;  that  is,  they  may  be  either  a  portion 
of  the  common  mafs  of  blood,  poured  oul 
from  red  veffels  ;  or  a  portion  of  ferum  or 
colourlefs  fluid,  poured  out  chiefly  by  exha- 
lants.. 

MCIV. 

Of  thefe  feveral  caufes  of  compreflion,  the 
firfl  is  not  to  be  conudered  here,  becaufe  the 
removing-  it  does  not  belong  to  our  province  ; 
and  the  confideration  of  the  fecond  may  be 
omitted,  as  in  moft  inflances  it  is  neither  to 
be  difcerned  nor  cured  by  any  means  yet 
known.  The  third:  and  fourth  caufes  of 
compreflion,  as  they  are  die  moft  frequent, 
and  are  alfo  moft  properly  the  fubje£h  of  our 
art,  fo  they  are  thofe  which  deferve  our  par- 
ticular attention  •  and  we  fhall  therefore  en- 
deavour to  trace  them  further  back  in  the  fe- 
ries  of  caufes  which  may  produce  them. 

MCV.. 

Both  the  ftates  of  over  distention  and  cf 
effufion,  may  be  produced  by  whatever  in- 
creases the  afflux  and  impetus  of  the  blood  m 

Vol.  2,  O  5  the* 


3io  PRACTICE 

the  arteries  of  the  head  ;  fuch  as  violent  exer- 
cife,  a  violent  fit  of  anger,  external  heat  ap- 
p!ied,  or  any  ilrong  preflure  upon  the  de- 
fending aorta. 

MCVI. 

But  both  thefe  flates  of  over  distention  and 
of  effufion,  may  alfo  and  feem  to  be  more 
frequently  produced  by  caufes  that  operate 
by  preventing  the  free  return  of  the  venous 
blood  from  the  veffels  of  the  head  to  the  right 
ventricle  of  the  heart. 

MCVII. 

The  venous  vefFels  of  the  brain  are  of  a 
conformation-  and  diftribution  fo  peculiar,  as 
lead  us  to  believe,  that  Nature  intended  to 
retard  the  motion  of  the  blood,  and  accumu- 
late it  in  thefe  veffels ;  and  therefore, even  very 
irnall  additional  refiflances  to  the  motion  of 
the  blood  from  thefe  towards  the  right  ventri- 
cle of  the  heart,  may  flill  more  readily  accu- 
mulate the  blood  in  them.  Such  accumula- 
tion will  moil  readily  happen  in  advanced 
life,  when  the  venous  fyilem  in  general  is  in 
a  plethoric  flate,  and  when  this  plethora  takes 
place  efpeciaHy  in  the  venous  veffels  of  the 
brain.  It  will,  in  like  manner,  be  moil  apt 
to  occur  in  perfons  whofe  heads  are  large 
with  refpecl  to  the  reil  of  the  body  ;  and  in 
perfons  of  a  fhort  neck,  which  is  unfavourable 

to 


of    phy  s  r  e.       gtp 

to  the  return  of  the  venous  blood  from  the 
head.  The  accumulation  of  blood  in  the 
venous  vefl'els  of  the  brain,  will  alfo  be  moil 
likely  to  occur  in  perfons  of  a  corpulent  habit, 
either  becaufe  thefe  may  be  confidered  to  be 
in  a  plethoric  ftate,  or  becaufe  obefity,  by  oc- 
cafioning  a  cornpreflion  of  the  bloodvefTels- 
in  other  parts  of  the  body,  more  readily  fills 
thofe  of  the  brain,  which  are  entirely  free 
from  any  fueh  cornpreflion. 

MCVIIL 

Thefe  are  the  circumftances  in  the  con  Mi- 
tution  of  the  body,  which,  producing  a  flow- 
er motion  and  return  of  the  venous  blooct 
from  the  vefTels  of  the  head,  favour  an  accu- 
mulation and  diflention  in  them;  and  we  now 
proceed  to  mention  the  feveral  occafional 
caufes,  which,  in  every  perfon,  may  directly 
prevent  the  free  return  of  the  blood  from  the 
veffels  of  the  head  towards  the  heart.  Such 
are, 

1.  Stooping  down  with  the  head,  or  other 
fituations  of  the  body  in  which  the  head  is 
long  kept  in  a  depending  Mate,  and  in  which 
the  gravity  of  the  blood  increafes  the  afflux  of 
it  by  the  arteries,  and  oppofes  the  return  of  ifc 
by  the  veins. 

2.  A  right  ligature  about  the  neck,  which- 
compreffes  the  veins  more  drongly  than  the 
arteries. 

0  6  3,  Any 


3i2  PRACTICE 

3.  Any  obftruclion  of  a  confiderable  num- 
ber of  the  veins  carrying  the  blood  from  the 
head,  and  more  efpecially  any  confiderable 
obftru&ion  of  the  afcending  vena  cava* 

4.  Any  confiderable  impediment  of  the 
free  paflage  of  the  blood  from  the  veins  into 
the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart ;  and  it  is  com- 
monly by  this,  and  the  immediately  preceding 
circiim fiance,  that  polypous  concretions  in 
the  cava,  or  right  ventricle,  are  found  to  occa- 
fion  apoplexy. 

5.  The  return  of  blood  from  the  veins  of 
the  head  towards  the  heart,  is  efpecially  inter- 
rupted by  every  circumftance  that  produces  a 
more  difficult  tranfmiffion  of  the  blood  through 
the  veifels  of  the  lungs.  It  is  well  known, 
that,  at  the  end  of  every  expiration,  fome  in- 
terruption is  given  to  the  free  tranfmiffion  of 
the  blood  through  the  lungs  ;  and  that  this  at 
the  fame  time  gives  an  interruption  to  the 
motion  of  the  blood  from  the  veins  into  the 
right  ventricle  of  the  heart.  This  clearly  ap- 
pears from  that  regurgitation  of  the  blood  in 
the  veins  which  occafions  the  alternate  heav- 
ing and  fubfiding  that  is  perceived  in  the 
brain  of  living  animals  when  the  cranium  is 
removed,  and  which  is  obferved  to  be  fyn- 
ehronous  with  the  alternate  motions  of  refpi- 
ration.  From  this  we  readily  perceive,  that 
whatever  occafions  a  difficulty  in  the  tranf- 
miffion of  the  blood  through  the  lungs,  mufl 
alfo  interrupt  the  free  return  of  the  venous 
blood  from  the  veffels  of  the  head ;  and  mufl 

therefore 


OF       PHYSIC.  313 

therefore  favour,  and  perhaps  produce,  an  ac- 
cumulation of  blood,  and  an  over  diftention 
in  thefe  veffels. 

It  is  further  to  be  obferved,  that  as  a  very- 
full  infpiration,  continued  for  any  length  of 
time,  occalions  fuch  an  interruption  of  the 
free  tranfmidion  of  the  blood  through  the 
lungs,  as  produces  a  fufFufion  of  face,  and  a 
manifest  turgefcence  of  the  blood  veiTels  of 
the  head  and  neck  ;  fo  every  full  and  long 
continued  infpiration  may  occafion  an  accu- 
mulation of  blood  in  the  veffels  of  the  head, 
to  a  very  confiderable  degree.  Thus,  as  ev- 
ery ftrong  exertion  of  the  mufcular  force  of 
the  body  requires,  and  is  attended  with,  a 
very  full  and  long  continued  infpiration,  we 
thence  learn  why  the  violent  exertions  of 
mufcular  force  have  been  fo  often  the  imme- 
diate or  exciting  caufes  of  apoplexy. 

It  may  alfo  be  remarked,  that  corpulency 
and  obefity  feem  to  operate  very  much,  by 
occafioning  a  more  difficult  tranfmiffion  of 
the  blood  through  the  veffels  of  the  lungs.  It 
appears,  that  in  fat  perfons,  from  the  compref- 
fion  of  the  bloodveffels  in  many  parts  of  the 
body,  the  veffels  of  the  lungs  are  thereby 
kept  very  full ;  fo  that  upon  the  lead  increafe 
of  bodily  motion,  which  fends  the  blood  fader 
into  the  lungs,  a  more  frequent  and  laborious 
refpiration  becomes  in  fuch  persons  imme- 
diately neceffary  This  (hows,  that,  in  fuch 
perfons,  the  blood  is  not  freely  tranfmitted 
through  the  lungs  ;  a  circumftance  which,  as 

in 


314  PRACTICE 

in  other  inftances,  mud  give  a  con (lant  refin- 
ance to  the  return  of  blood  from  the  veflels 
of  the  head,  and  therefore  favour  or  occaiion 
an  accumulation  of  blood  in  them. 

Is  the  motion  of  the  blood  in  the  veflels  of! 
the  head  rendered  flower  by  ftudy^  care,  and' 
anxiety  ? 


MCIX. 


It  is  to  be  obferved  further,  that  thefe  fev^ 
eralcaufes  (MCV— MCVIII)  of  a  preteiv 
natural  fulnefs  in  the  blood vefTels  of  the  brain, 
may  produce  apoplexy  in  different  ways,  ac- 
cording as  the  fulnefs  takes  place  in  the  arte- 
ries  or  in  the  veins. 


MCX. 

Accordingly,  firjh>  the  increafed  afflux  of 
blood  into  the  arteries  of  the  brain,  and  an  in* 
creafed  aclion  in  thefe,  may  either  occafion  a 
rupture  of  their  extremities,  and  thereby  aif 
effufion  of  red  blood  producing  compreflion  ; 
or  the  fame  afBux  and  increafed  aclion  may 
occafion  an  increafed  exhalation  from  their 
extremities,  of  a  ferous  fluid,  which,  it  not  as 
quickly  reabforbed,  may  foon  accumulate  in 
fuch  quantity  as  to  produce  compreflion. 

MCXll 


OF       PHYSIC.  315 


MCXI. 

Secondly,  The  plethoric  ftate  of  the  venous 
veffels  of  the  brain,  may  operate  in  three  dif- 
ferent ways. 

1.  The  fulnefs  of  the  veins  may  give  fuch 
refiftance  to  the  blood  flowing  into  them  from 
the  arteries,  as  to  determine  the  impetus  of 
the  blood  to  be  fo  much  greater  upon  the  ex- 
tremities of  the  arteries  as  to  occafion  a  rup- 
ture of  thefe,  and  confequently  an  efFufion  of 
red  blood,  or  the  Hamorrhagia  cerebri,  which 
Hoffman  conliders  as  a  frequent  caufe  of 
apoplexy,  and  which  we  have  before  explain- 
ed in  DCCLXXII. 

2.  Whilft  the  fame  refiftance  to  the  blood 
flowing  from  the  arteries  into  the  veins,  in- 
creafes  the  impetus  of  the  blood  in  the  former, 
this  may,  without  occafioning  rupture,  in- 
creafe  the  exhalation  from  their  exhalant  ex- 
tremities, and  produce  an  efFufion  of  a  ferous 
fluid  ;  in  the  fame  manner  as  fuch  refiftance 
in  the  veins  produces  hydropic  effufions  in 
other  parts  of  the  body. 

3.  If  we  may  fuppofe,  as  no  lymphatics 
have  been  yet  difcovered  in  the  brain,  that 
the  ordinary  abforbents  are  not  prefent  there, 
and  that  the  exhaled  fluids  are  abforbed  or 
taken  up  by  the  extremities  of  the  veins ; 
this  will  fhow  Mill  more  clearly  that  a  refift- 
ance to  the  motion  of  the  blood  in  the  veins 
of  the  brain,  may  readily  produce  an  accumu- 
lation 


3t6  PRACTICE 

lation  of  ferous  fluid  in  its  cavities,  and  con« 
fequently  a  compreflion  producing  apoplexy* 

MCXII. 

Be  fides  thefe  cafes  of  apoplexy  from  a£- 
flux  in  the  arteries,  or  refinance  in  the  veins,, 
an  effufion  of  ferum  may  happen  from  two 
other  caufes.  The  one  is  a  relaxation  of  the 
exhalants,  as  in  other  cafes  of  hydropic  dia- 
thefis  prevailing  in  the  body  ;  and  it  is  not 
unufual  for  a  general  drop fy  to  end  in  apo- 
plexy. The  fecond  is  an  over  proportion  of 
watery  parts  in  the  mafs  of  blood,  which  is 
therefore  ready  to  run  off  by  the  exhalants,  as 
in  the  cafe  of  an  ifchuria  renal  is  ;  which  when 
it  proves  incurable,  very  commonly  termin- 
ates in  apoplexye 

MCXII  I. 

We  have  now  mentioned  the  feveral  caufes 
of  apoplexy  depending  upon  compreflion  ; 
and  from  the  whole  it  will  appear,  that  the 
moft  frequent  of  all  thefe  caufes  is  a  plethoric 
flate,  or  an  accumulation  and  congestion  of 
blood  in  the  venous  vefTels  of"  the  head,  ope- 
rating,, according  to  its  degree,  in  producing 
over  diflention  or  effufion.  The  frequent 
operation  of  fuch  a  caufe  wi;l  efpecially  ap- 
pear from  a  confide  ration  of  the  predifponent 
eircumftances  (MXCV),  and  from  the  ante- 
cedent fymptorns  (MXCVI). 

MCXIV, 


O  F     P  H  Y  S  I  C.  317 


MCXIV. 

From  the  view  I  have  now  given  of  the 
caufes  of  apoplexy  arifing  from  compreffion, 
it  will  readily  appear  that  there  is  a  founda- 
tion for  the  common  diftin&ion  of  this  dif- 
eafe  into  the  two  kinds  of  Sanguine  and  Se- 
rous. But  this  diftin&ion  cannot  be  very 
ufefully  applied  in  practice,  as  both  kinds 
may  often  depend  on  the  fame  caufe,  that  isy 
a  venous  plethora,  and  therefore  requiring 
very  nearly  the  fame  method  of  cure.  The 
only  diftin&ion  that  can  be  properly  made  of 
apoplexies  from  compreffion>  is  perhaps  the 
diftinclion  of  ferous  apoplexy,  into  that  de^- 
pendingonthe  plethora  mentioned  MCXIII, 
and  that  depending  upon  hydropic  diathefis 
or  an  over  proportion  of  water  in  the  blood 
(MCXII)  ;  the  former  caufes  giving  a  prop- 
er idiopathic,  the  latter  only  a  fymptomatic, 
difeafe. 

MCXV. 

Befide  the  caufes  now  mentioned,  occa- 
fioning  apoplexy  by  compreffion,  I  allege 
there  are  other  caufes  producing  the  fame 
difeafe,  by  dire&ly  deftroying  the  mobility 
of  the  nervous  power.  Such  caufes  feem  to 
be  the  mephitic  air  arifing  from  fermenting 
liquors,  and  from  many  other  fources  ;  the 
fumes  arifing  from   burning   charcoal  ;    the 

fumes 


3i8  PRACTICE 

fumes  of  mercury,  of  lead,  and  of  fome  other 
metallic  fubftances  ;  opium,  alcohol,  and 
many  other  narcotic  poifons  :  To  all  which  I 
would  add  the  power  of  cold,  of  concuflibn, 
of  electricity,  and  of  certain  paflions  of  the 
mind. 

MCXVI. 

None  of  thefe  poifons  or  noxious  powers 
feem  to  kill  by  acting  firfl  upon  the  organs  of 
refpiration,  or  upon  the  fanguiferous  fyiiem  ; 
and  I  believe  their  immediate  and  direcl:  ac- 
tion to  be  upon  the  nervous  power,  xleftroying 
its  mobility,  becaufe  the  fame  poifons  mow 
their  power  in  deftroying  the  irritability  of 
mufcles  and  of  the  nerves  connected  with 
them,  when  both  thefe  are  entirely  feparated 
from  the  reft  of  the  "body. 

MCXVII. 

It  appears  to  me  probable,  that  the  apo- 
plectic flate  in  fome  degree  accompanying,. 
and  almoft  always  fucceeding,  an  epileptic 
paroxyfm,  does  not  depend  upon  compref- 
fion,  but  upon  a  certain  ftate  of  immobility 
of  the  nervous  power,  produced  by  certain 
circumftances  in  the  nervous  fyftem  itfelf, 
which  fometimes  feem  to  be  communicated 
from  one  part  of  the  body  to  another,  and 
at  length  to  the  brain. 


MCXVIII, 


OF      PHYSIC.  319 


MCXVIII. 

The  fame  obfervation  may  be  made  with 
refpect.  to  many  inftances  of  hyfleric  parox- 
yfm  ;  and  the  circumftances,  both  of  epilep- 
tic and  hyfleric  paroxyfms,  ending  in  coma, 
or  a  degree  of  apoplexy,  lead  me  to  think, 
that  alfo  the  apoplexy  proceeding  from  retro- 
cedent  or  atonic  gout  is  of  the  fame  kind,  or 
that  it  depends  upon  an  immobility  of  the 
nervous  power,  rather  than  upon  compreffion, 

MCXIX, 

It  may  indeed  happen,  that  as  the  apo- 
plectic and  gouty  predifpofitions  do  often 
concur  in  the  fame  perfon  ;  fo  it  may  confe- 
quently  happen,  that  the  apoplexy  coming 
upon  gouty  perfons,  may  fometimes  depend 
upon  compreffion  ;  and  defections  may,  ac- 
cordingly, difcover  that  the  circumftances  of 
fucfr  a  caufe  had  preceded. 

But,  m  many  cafes  of  apoplexy  following  a 
retrocedent  or  atonic  gout, no  fuch  antecedent 
or  concomitant  circumftances,  as  commonly 
occur  in  cafes  of  compreffion,  do  diftinclly  or 
clearly  appear  ;  while  others  prefent  them- 
felves,  which  point  out  an  affection  of  the 
nervous  power  alone. 

MCXA\ 


320  PRACTICE 

MCXX. 

With  refpecl:,  however,  to  the  circum- 
flances  which  may  appear  upon  the  direction 
of  perfons  dead  of  apoplexy,  there  may  be 
fbme  fallacy  in  judging,  from  thofe  circum- 
fiances,  of  the  caufe  of  the  difeafe.  What- 
ever takes  off  or  diminifhes  the  mobility  of 
the  nervous  power,  may  very  much  retard 
the  motion  of  the  blood  in  the  veffels  of  the 
brain  ;  and  that  perhaps  to  the  degree  of  in- 
creafing  exhalation,  or  even  of  occafioning 
rupture  and  effufion  ;  fo  that,  in  fuch  cafes, 
the  marks  of  compreffion  may  appear,  upon 
direction,  though  the  difeafe  had  truly  de- 
pended on  caufes  deftroying  the  mobility  of 
the  nervous  power.  This  feems  to  be  illus- 
trated and  confirmed  from  what  occurs  in, 
many  cafes  of  epilepfy.  In  fome  of  thefev 
after  a  repetition  of  fits,  recovered  from  in. 
the  ufual  manner,  a  fatuity  is  induced,  which 
commonly  depends  upon  a  watery  inunda- 
tion of  the  brain  :  And  in  other  cafes  of  epi- 
lepfy, when  fits  have  been  often  repeated 
without  any  permanent  confequence,  there 
happens  at  length  a  fatal  paroxyfm  ;  and  up- 
on diflec"r.ion  it  appears,  that  an  efFuiion  of 
blood  had  happened.  ^  This,  I  think,  is 
to  be  confidered  as  a  caufe  of  death,  not 
as  a  caufe  of  the  difeafe  ;  for  in  fuch  cafes^ 
I  fuppofe  that  the  difeafe  had  diminifh- 
ed  the  action  of  the  veflels  of  the  brain, 
and  thereby  given  occaiion  to  a  flagnation, 

which; 


OF      PHYSIC.  321 

which  produced  the  appearances  mentioned. 
And  I  apprehend  the  lame  reafoning  will  ap^ 
ply  to  the  cafes  of  retrocedent  gout,  which;, 
by  deflroying  the  energy  of  the  brain,  may 
occafion  fuch  a  flagnation  as  will  produce 
rupture,  effufion,  and  death  ;  and  in  fuch  a 
cafe,  the  appearances  upon  diffe&ion  might 
lead  us  to  think  that  the  apoplexy  had  de- 
pended entirely  upon  compreffion. 

MCXXL 

The  fevefal  caufes  mentioned  in  MCXVj 
aire  often  of  fuch  power  as  to  occafion  imme- 
diate death  ;  and  therefore  have  not  com- 
monly been  taken  notice  of  as  affording  in-* 
fiances  of  apoplexy  ;  but,  as  the  operation  of 
the  whole  of  thefe  caufes  is  fimilar  and  anal- 
ogous, and  as  in  mofl  inflances  of  the  opera- 
tion of  thefe  caufes  an  apoplectic  flate  is  man- 
ifeflly  produced,  there  can  be  little  doubt  in 
confidering  mofl  of  the  iriflances  of  their  ef- 
fects as  cafes  of  apoplexy  >  and  therefore  fuch 
as  fall  properly  under  our  confideration  here* 

MCXXII. 

This  difeafe  of  apoplexy  is  fometimes  en- 
tirely recovered  from  ;  but  more  frequently 
it  ends  in  death,  or  in  a  hemiplegia.  Even 
when  an  attack  of  the  difeafe  is  recovered 
from,  we  generally  find  it  difpofed  to  return  ; 
mnd  the  repeated  attacks  of  it  almoft  always, 

fooner 


PRACTICE 

fooner  or  later,  bring  on  the  events  we  have 
mentioned* 

MCXXIII. 

The  feveral  events  of  this  difeafe,  in  health5 
deaths  or  another  difeafe;  may  be  expected 
and  forefeen  from  a  confideration  of  the  pre- 
difponent  circumftances  (MXCV)  ;  of  the 
antecedent  fymptoms  (MXCVI)s  of  the  ex- 
citing caufes  (MXCVIII);  of  the  violence 
and  degree  of  the  fymptoms  when  the  difeafe 
has  come  on  (MXCIV) ;  of  the  duration  of 
the  difeafe  ;  and  of  the  effects  of  the  reme- 
dies  employed. 

MCXXIV. 

From  the  great  danger  attending  this  dif- 
eafe when  it  has  come  on  (MCXXII),  it  will 
readily  appear,  that  our  Care  mould  be  chief- 
ly directed  to  the  prevention  of  it.  This,  I 
think,  may  be  ofteii  done  by  avoiding  the  re- 
mote and  exciting  caufes  ;  and  how  this  may 
be  accomplifhed,  will  be  dbvious  from  the 
enumeration  of  thofe  caufes  given  above 
(MXCVIII.)  But  itwillalfo  appear  from 
what  is  faid  above,  that  the  prevention  of  this 
difeafe  will  efpecially  depend  upon  obviating 
the  predifponent  caufe  ;  which;  in  moil  cafes, 
feems  to  be  a  plethoric  date  of  the  bloodvef- 
fels  of  the  brain.  This,  I  think,  may  be  ob- 
viated by  different  means ;  and,  in  the  firft 

place/ 


OF       PHYSIC.  323 

place,  by  a  proper  management  of  exercife 
and  diet. 


MCXXV* 

The  exercife  ought  to  be  fuch  as  may  fup- 
port  the  perfpiration,  without  heating  the 
body  or  hurrying  refpiration  •  andi  therefore^ 
commonly  by  fome  mode  of  geftation.  In 
perfons  not  liable  to  frequent  fits  of  giddi- 
hefs,  and  who  are  accuftorhed  to  riding  on 
horfeback,  this  exercife  is,  of  all  others,  the 
beft.  Walking,  and  fome  other  modes  of 
bodily  exercife,  may  be  employed  with  the 
reflri&ions  juft  now  mentioned  ;  but  in  old 
inen,  and  in  men  of  corpulent  habits,  bodily 
fexercife  ought  always  to  be  very  moderate, 

MCXXVL 

In  perfons  who  pretty  early  in  life  mow 
the  predifpofition  to  apoplexy,  it  is  probable 
that  a  low  diet,  with  a  good  deal  of  exercife^ 
might  entirely  prevent  the  difeafe ;  but,  in 
perfons  who  are  advanced  in  life  before  they 
think  of  taking  precautions^  and  are  at  the 
fame  time  of  a  corpulent  habit,  which  gen- 
erally fuppofes  their  having  been  accuflom- 
ed  to  full  living,  it  might  not  be  fafe  to  put 
them  upon  a  low  diet ;  and  it  may  be  enough 
that  their  diet  be  rendered  more  moderate 
than  ufual,  efpecially  with  refpecl  to  animal 

food; 


824    -     PRACTICE 

food  ;  and  that,   at  fupper,  fuch  food  fhould 
be  abftained  from  altogether. 

In  drinking,  all  heating  liquors  are  to  be 
abftained  from,  as  much  as  former  habits  will 
allow  ;  and  the  fmalleft  approach  to  intoxi- 
cation is  to  be  carefully  fhunned.  For  ordi- 
nary draught,  fmall  beer  is  to  be  preferred  to 
plain  water,  as  the  latter  is  more  ready  to  oc- 
cafion  coftivenefs,  which  in  apoplectic  hab- 
its is  to  be  carefully  avoided.  The  large  ufe 
of  tobacco  in  any  fhape,  may  be  hurtful ;  and 
except  in  cafes  where  it  has  been  accuftomed 
to  occafion  a  copious  excretion  from  the  head, 
the  interruption  of  which  might  not  be  fafe, 
the  ufe  of  tobacco  Ihould  be  avoided  ;  and 
even  in  the  circumfiance  mentioned,  where 
it  may  be  in  fome  meafure  neceffary,  the  ufe 
of  it  mould  at  leaf!  be  rendered  as  moderate 
as  poffible* 

MCXXVIL 

^Evacuations  by  ftool  may  certainly  con- 
tribute to  relieve  the  plethoric  flate  of  the 
veffels  of  the  head  ;  and)  upon  an  appear- 
ance of  any  unufual  turgefeence  in  thefe, 
purging  will  be  very  properly  employed  : 
But,  when  no  fuch  turgefeence  appears,  the 
frequent  repetition  of  large  purging  might 
weaken  the  body  too  much  ;  and,  for  pre- 
venting apoplexy,  it  may  for  the  moft  part 
be  enough  to  keep  the  belly  regular,  and 
father   Open,  by   gentle  laxatives.      In  the 

fummer 


OF       PHYSIC.  325 

fummer  feafon,  it  may  be  ufeful  to  drink,  ev- 
ery morning,  of  a  gentle  laxative  mineral 
water,  but  never  in  large  quantity. 


MCXXVIII. 

In  the  cafe  of  a  plethoric  flate  of  the  fyf- 
tern,  it  might  be  fuppofed  that  bloodletting 
would  be  the  moll  effectual  means  of  dimin- 
lining  the  plethora,  and  of  preventing  its  con- 
fequences  :  And,  when  an  attack  of  apoplexy 
is  immediately  threatened,  bloodletting  is  cer- 
tainly the  remedy  to  be  depended  upon  ;  and 
blood  mould  be  taken  largely,  if  it  can  be 
done,  from  the  jugular  vein,  or  temporal  ar- 
tery. But,  when  no  threatening  turgefcence 
appears,  the  obviating  plethora  is  not  ju~ 
dicioufly  attempted  by  bloodletting,  as  we 
have  endeavoured  to  demonflrate  above, 
DCCLXXXVII.  In  doubtful  circum- 
ftances,  leeches  applied  to  the  temples,  or 
fcarifications  of  the  hind  head5  may  be  more 
iafe  than  general  bleedings, 

MCXXIX. 

When  there  are  manifefl  fymptoms  of  a 
plethoric  (late  in  the  veffels  of  the  head,  a  fe- 
ton,  or  pea  i#ue,  near  the  head,  may  be  very 
ttfeful  in  obviating  any   turgefcence   of  the 

VoL.  II.  p  MCXXX 


326  PRACTICE 


MCXXX. 

Thcfe  are  the  means  to  be  employed  for  pre~ 
venting  the  apoplexy  which  might  arife  from 
a  plethoric  ftate  of  the  veffels  of  the  brain  j 
and  if,  at  the  fame  time,  great  care  is  taken  to 
•avoid  the  exciting  Cattfes  (MXCVIII),  thefe 
means  will  be  generally  fuccefsfuh 

In  the  cafes  proceeding  from  other  caufes 
(MCXV),  as  their  application  is  fo  imrne^ 
diately  fucceeded  by  the  difeafe,  they  hardly 
allow  any  opportunity  for  prevention. 

MCXXXI. 

For  the  Cure  of  apoplexies  from  internal 
caufes,  and  which  I  fuppofe  to  be  chiefly 
thofe  from  compreflion,  the  ufual  violence 
and  fatality  of  it  require  that  the  proper  rem- 
edies be  immediately  and  largely  employed. 

The  patient  is  to  be  kept  as  much  as  pof- 
fible  in  fomewhat  of  an  erect  pofture,  and  in 
cool  air  ;  and  therefore  neither  in  a  wrarm 
chamber,  nor  covered  with  bed  clothes,  nor 
furrounded  with  a  crowd  of  people, 

MCXXXII. 

In  all  cafes  of  a  full  habit,  and  where  the 
difeafe  has  been  preceded  by  marks  of  a  ple- 
thoric (late,  bloodletting  is  to  be  immediately 
employed,  and  very  largely.     In  my  opin^ 

io% 


OF       PHYSIC.  327 

ion,  it  will  be  moll  effectual  when  the  blood 
is  taken  from  the  jugular  vein  ;  but,  if  that 
cannot  be  properly  done,  it  may  be  taken 
from  the  arm.  The  opening  of  the  temporal 
artery,  when  a  large  branch  can  be  opened, 
lb  as  fuddenly  to  pour  out  a  confiderable 
quantity  of  blood,  may  alfo  be  an  effectual 
remedy  ;  but,  in  execution,  it  is  more  uncer- 
tain, and  may  be  inconvenient.  It  may  be 
in  fome  meafure  fupplied,  by  cupping  and 
lcarifying  on  the  temples  or  hind  head. 
This,  indeed,  mould  feldom  be  omitted  ;  and 
thefe  fcarifi cations  are  always  preferable  to 
the  application  of  leeches. 

With  refpect  to  every  mode  of  bloodlet- 
ting, this  is  to  be  obferved,  that  when  in  any 
cafe  of  apoplexy,  it  can  be  perceived  that  one 
fide  of  the  body  is  more  affected  with  the  lofs 
of  motion  than  the  other,  the  bloodletting,  if 
pofhble,  mould  be  made  on  the  fide  oppofite 
to  that  mofl  affected. 


Mcxxxin. 

Another  remedy  to  be  employed  is  purg*. 
ing,  to  be  immediately  attempted  by  acrid 
glyfters  ;  and  at  the  fame  time,  if  any  power 
of  fwallowing  remain,  by  drailic  purgative's 
given  by  the  mouth,  Thefe,  however,  leil 
they  may  excite  vomiting,  mould  be  given 
in  divided  portions  at  proper  intervals. 

P  2  MCXXXIV. 


PRACTICE 


MCXXXIV. 

Vomiting  has  been  commended  by  fome 
•practitioners  and  writers  ;  But,  apprehending 
that  this  might  impel  the  blood  with  toe 
much  violence  into  the  veffels  of  the  head,  I 
have  never  employed  it, 

MCXXXV-* 

Another  remedy  to  be  immediately  em- 
ployed  is  bliftering ;  and  I  judge  that  this  is 
more  effectual  when  applied  to  the  head,  or 
near  to  it*  than  when  it  is  applied  to  the  low- 
er extremities*  This  remedy  I  do  not  con- 
fider  as  a  ftimulant,  or  capable  of  making 
any  confiderable  revulfion  :  But,  applied  to 
the  head,  1  fuppofe  itufeful  in  taking  off  the 
hemorrhagic  difpofition  fo  often  prevailing 
there* 

MCXXXVI. 

tt  has  been  ufual  with  practitioners,  to- 
gether with  the  remedies  already  mention- 
ed, to  employ  ftimulants  of  various  kinds  : 
But  I  am  difpofed  to  thirik  them  generally 
hurtful  ;  and  they  muff  be  fo,  wherever  the 
fulnefs  of  the  veffels,  and  the  impetus  of  the 
blood  in  thefe,  is  to  be  diminiftied;  Upon 
this  principle  it  is  therefore  agreed,  that  ftim- 
ulants are  absolutely  improper  in  what  is  fup- 

pofed 


OF      P  HY  S  I  C,  329 

pofed  to  be  a  fanguine  apoplexy  ;  but  they 
are  commonly  fuppofed  to  be  proper  in  the 
ferous.  If,  however,  we  be  right  in  alleging- 
that  this  alfo  commonly  depends  upon  a  ple- 
thoric fiate  of  the  bloodveiTels  of  the  brain, 
ftimulants  muft  be  equally  improper  in  the 
one  cafe  as  in  the  other, 

M-cxxxvm. 

It  may  be  argued  from  the  almoft  univerfal 
employment  of  flimulants,,  and  fometimes 
with  feeming  advantage^  that  they  may  not 
be  fo  hurtful  as  my  notions  of  the  caufes  of 
apoplexy  lead  roe  to  fuppofe.  But  this  ar- 
gument is,  in  feveral  refpe&s,  fallacious  ;  and 
particularly  in -this,,  that  in  a  difeafe  which, 
under  every  management,  often  proceeds  fo 
quickly  to  a  fatal  termination,  the  effecls  of 
remedies'-are  not  to  be  eafily  afcertained* 

MCXXXVIII. 

I  have  now  mentioned  the  feveral  remedies 
which  I  think  adapted  to  the  cure  of  apo- 
plexy arifing  from  compreflion,  and  ihould 
next  proceed  to  treat  of  the  cure  of  apoplexy 
arifing  from  thofe  caufes  that  directly  deftroy 
the  mobility  of  the  nervous  power.  But 
many  of  thofe  caufes  are  often  fo  pcc/erful, 
and  thereby  fo  fuddenly  fatal  in  their  effects, 
as  hardly  to  allow  of  time  for  the  ufe  of  rem- 
edies-; axid-fuch  cafes  therefore  have  been  fo 
P  j  feldom 


330  PRACTICE 

feldom  the  fubje&s  of  pra&iee,  that  the  prop- 
er remedies  are  not  fo  well  afcertained  as  to, 
enable  me  to  fay  much  of  them  here. 


MCXXXIX. 

When,  however,  the  application  of  the 
caufes  (MCXV)  is  not  fo  powerful  as  imme- 
diately to  kill,  and  induces  only  an  apoplectic 
ffate,  Tome  efforts  are  to  be  made  to  obviate 
the  confequences^  and  to  recover  the  patient  • 
and  even  in  fome  cafes  where  the  caufes  re- 
ferred to,  from  the  ceafmg  of  the  pulfe  and  of 
refpiration,  and  from  a  coldnefs  coming  upon 
the  body,  have  induced  an  appearance  of 
death  ;  yet,  if  thefe  appearances  have  not 
continued  long,  there  may  be  means  of  re- 
covering the  perfons  to  life  and  health.  I 
cannot,  indeed,  treat  this  fubje6r.  completely  ; 
but  for  the  cure  of  apoplexy  from  leveral 
of  the  caufes  mentioned  MCXV,  fhall  offer 
the  following  general  directions. 

l.  When  a  poifon  capable  of  producing 
apoplexy  has  been  recently  taken  into  the 
ftomach,  if  a  vomiting  fpontaneoufly  arifes,  it 
is  to  be  encouraged  ;  or,  if  it  does  not  fpon- 
taneoufly come  on,  a  vomiting  is  to  be  imme- 
diately excited  by  art,  in  order  that  the  poifon 
may  fee  thrown  out  as  quickly  as  poflible. 
If,  however,  the  poifon  has  been  taken  into 
the  ftomach  long  before  its  effecls  have  ap- 
peared, we  judge   that,   upon  their  appear., 

ancej 


OF       P  H  Y  SI  C.  331 

ance,  the  exciting  of  vomiting  -vviil-be  ttfelefe 
and  may  perhaps  be  hurtful. 

2.  When  the  poifon  taken  into  the  flom- 
ach,  or  otherwife  applied  to  the  body,  *h as  al- 
ready induced  an  apopleclic  flate,  as  thofe 
caufes  do  commonly  at  the  fame  time  occa- 
lion  a  ftagnation  or  flower  motion  of  the 
blood  in  the  veifels  of  the,  brain  and  q£i  the 
lungs,  fo  it  will  generally  be  proper;  to  relieve 
this  congeflion  by  taking  fome  blood  from 
the  jugular  vein^  or  from.  the.  veins,  of  the 
arm. 

3.  Upon  the  fame  fuppofition  of  a  con- 
geflion in  the  brain  or  lungs,  it  will  generally 
be  proper  to  relieve  it  by.  means  of  acrid 
glyfters  producing  fome  evacuation  from  the 
interlines,. 

4.  When  thefe  evacuations  by  bloodletting 
and  purging  have  been  made,  the  various 
flimulanfes  which  have  been  commonly  pro- 
pofed  in  other  cafes  of  apoplexy,  may  be  em- 
ployed here  with  more  probability  and  fafe- 
ty.  One  o£  the  mod  effectual  means  of 
roufing-  apoplectics  of  this  kind  feems  to 
be  throwing,  cold  water  on  feveral  parts  of 
the  body,  or  wafhing  the  body  all  over  with 
it. 

5.  Although  the  poifon  producing  apo- 
plexy happens  to  be  fo  powerful  as  very  foon 
to  occafion  the  appearances  of  death  above 
mentioned  ;  yet  if  this  flate  has  not  contin- 
ued long,  the  patient  may  often  be  recover- 
able ;  and  the  recovery  is   to  be  attempted 

P  4.  by 


332  PRACTICE 

by  the  fame  means  that  are  directed  to 
be  employed  for  the  recovery  of  drowned 
perfons,  and  which  are  now  commonly 
knpwn. 


CHAP. 


OF      P  H  Y  S  I  C.  3|3 


G    H    A    p.       II; 


of       P    A     Ii    S     E, 


MCXL 


PALSY  is  a  difeafe "confift-. 
lofs  of  the  power  of  voluntary  mo- 
tion, but  afFec~Hng  certain  parts  of  the  body, 
only,  and  by  this  it  is  diftinguifhed  from  ap- 
oplexy (MXCIV).  One  of  the  mo  ft  fre- 
quent forms  of  palfy  is  when  it  affects  the 
whole  of  the  mufcles  on  one  fide  of  the 
body  ;  and  then  the  difeafe  is  named  a  ..He-* 
miplegia. 

MCXL1: 

* 

The  lofs  of  tlie  power  of  voluntary  motion 
may  be  owing  either  to  a  morbid  affeclion  of 
the  mufcles  or  organs  of  motion,  by  which  they  - 
are  rendered  unfit  for  motion ;  or  to  an  inter- 
ruption of  the  influx  of  the  nervous  power  in- 

Vox,  2.  P'5  ,  to 


334  PRACTICE 

to  them,  which  is  always  neceflary  to  the  mo- 
tions of  thofe  that  are  under  the  power  of 
the  will.  The  difeafe,  from  the  firft  of  thefe 
xaufes,  as  confiding-  in  an  organic  and  local 
affection,  we  refer  entirely  to  the  clafs  of  lo- 
cal difeafes.  I  am  here  to  confider  that  dif- 
eafe only  which  depends  upon  the  interrupt- 1 
ed  influx  of  the  nervous  power ;  and  it  is  to 
this  difeafe  alone  I  would  give  the  appella- 
tion of  Palfy.  A  difeafe  depending  on  an 
interrupted  influx  of  the  nervous  power,  may 
indeed  often  appear  as  merely  a  local  affec- 
tion ;  but  as  it  depends  upon  an  affection  of 
the  moft  general  powers  of  the  fyftem,  it 
cannot  be  properly  feparated  from  the  fyfle- 
ma  tic  affe&ions^ 


MCXLII. 

In  palfy,  the  lofs  of  motion  is  often  ac- 
companied with  a  lofs  of  fenfe  :  But  as  this 
is  not  conftantly  the  cafe,,  and  as  therefore  the 
lofs  of  fenfe  is  not  an  effential  fymptom  of 
palfy,  1  have  not  taken  it  into  my  definition 
(MCXL)  ;  and  I  fhall  not  think  it  neceffary 
to  take  any  further  notice  of  it  in  this  treatife  ; 
becaufe,  in  fo  far  as  it  is  in  any  cafe  a  part  of 
the  paralytic  affection,  it  muft  depend  upon 
the  fame  caufes,  and  will  be  cured  alfo  by  the 
very  fame  remedies,  as  the  lofs  of  motion,. 

MCXLIIL 


OFF  H  Y  S  IC.  335 

MCXLIIL 

The  palfy  then,  or  lofs  of  motion,  whicK. 
is  to  be  treated  of  here,  may  be  diflinguifhed 
as  of  two  kinds  ;  one  of  them  depending  upr 
on  an  affection  of  the  origin  of  the  nerves  m 
the  brain,  and  the  other  depending  upon  an 
affection  of  the  nerves  in  fome  part  of  their 
courfe  between  the  brain,  and  ]  the  organs  of 
motion.  Of  the  latter,, as  appearing  in  a  very 
partial  affection,. ,  I  am  not  to  fpeak  particu- 
larly here;  I  fhall  only  treat  of  the  more 
general  paralytic  afFe&ions,  and  efpecrally  of 
the  hemiplegia  (MCXLj.  At  the  fame  time 
I  expecl,  that  what  I  mall  fay  upon  this  fub- 
je6l  will  readily  apply  to  both  the  pathology 
and  practice  in;:  the  cafes  of  affections  more 
limited. . 

MCXLIV, 

The  hemiplegia  (MCXL)  ufually  begins 
with,  or  follows,  a  paroxyfm  of  apoplexy  ; 
and  when  the  hemiplegia,  after  fubfifting  for 
fome  time,  becomes  fatal,  it  is  commonly  by 
palling  again  into  the  ftate  of  apoplexy. :  The 
relation  therefore  or  affinity  between  the  two. 
difeafes,  is  fufficiently  evident ;  and  is  further 
ftrongly  confirmed  by  this,  that  the  herni-- 
plegia  comes  upon  perfons  of  the  fame  con- 
ftitution  (MXCV),  and  is  preceded  by  the 
P  6  fame 


336  P   R  A  C   T   t  C  £ 

fame  fymptoms  (MXCVIII),  that  have  been 
taken  notice  of  with  refpect  to  apoplexy. 

MCXLV. 

When  a  fit  of  apoplexy  has  gone  ofF,  and 
there  remains  a  flate  of  palfy  appearing  as  a 
partial  affection  only,  it  might  perhaps  be 
fuppofed  that  the  origin  of  the  nerves  is  in  a 
great  meafure  relieved  ;  but  in  fo  far  as  com- 
monly there  ftill  remain  the  fymptoms  of  the 
lofs  of  memory,  and  of  fome  degree  of  fatu- 
ity, thefe,  I  think,  mow  that  the  organ  of  in- 
tellect, or  the  common  origin  of  the  nerves, 
is  ftill  confiderably  affected. 

MCXLVI. 

Thus,  the  hemiplegia,  from  its  evident 
connexion  with,  and  near  relation  to  apo- 
plexy, may  be  properly  confidered  as  de- 
pending upon  like  caufes ;  and  confequently, 
either  upon  a  compreflion  preventing  the 
flow  of  the  nervous  power  from  the  brain  in- 
to th^  organs  of  motion,  or  upon  the  applica- 
tion of  narcotic  or  other  powers  (MCXV) 
rendering  the  nervous  power  unfit  to  flow  in 
the  ufual  and  proper  mannen 

MCXLVII. 

We  begin  with  considering  the  cafes  de- 
pending upon  compreffion, 

The 


OF       PHYSIC.  337 

The  compreflion  occafioning  hemiplegia 
may  be  of  the  fame  kind,  and  of  all  the  dif- 
ferent kinds  that  produce  apoplexy  ;  and 
therefore  either  from  tumour,  over  diftention, 
or  efFufion.  The  exiftence  of  tumour  giving 
compreffion,  may  often  be  better  difcerned  in 
the  cafe  of  palfy  than  in  that  of  apoplexy,  as 
its  effects  often  appear  at  firfi  in  a  very  par- 
tial affe&ion. 


MCXLVIIL 

The  other  modes  of  compreffion,  that  is,  of 
over  diftention  and  efFufion,  may,  and  com- 
monly do,  take  place,  in  hemiplegia  j  and 
when  they  do,  their  operation  here  differs 
from  that  producing  apoplexy,  by  its  effects 
being  partial,  and  on  one  fide  of  the  body 
only. 

It  may  feem  difficult  to  conceive  that  an 
over  diftention  can  take  place  in  the  veffels 
on  one  fide  of  the  brain  only  r  but  it  may  be 
underftood  :  And  in  the  cafe  of  a  palfy 
which  is  both  partial  and  tranfitory,  it  is  per* 
haps  the  only  condition  of  the  veffels  of  the 
brain  that  can  be  fuppofed.  In  a  hemiple- 
gia, indeed,  which  fubfifls  for  any  length  of 
time,  there  is  probably  always  an  efFufion, 
either  fanguine  or  ferous  :  But  it  is  likely  that 
even  the  latter  mult  be  fupported  by  a  re- 
maining congeftion  in  the  bloodveffels. 

MCXLIX. 


333  PRACTICE 


MCXLIX. 

That  a  fanguine  effufion  can  happen  with- 
out becoming  very  foon  general,  and  thereby 
occafioning  apoplexy  and  death,  may  alio 
feem  doubtful -:  But  diffeclions  prove  that  in 
facl.  it  does  happen  occafioning  palfy  only  ; 
though  it  is  true,  that  this  more  commonly 
depends  uponan  efFuiion  of  ferous  fluids  and  • 
©f  this  only. 

MCL. 

Can  a  palfy  pccafioned  by  a  compreil 
lion  remain,  though  the  compreffion  be  re- 
moved ? 

MCLI. 

From  what  has  been  faid  MCXLIV,  it 
will  be_obvious,   that  the  hemiplegia  may  be 
prevented  by  all  the  feveral  means  propofed: 
MCXXY  etfcq.  for   the  prevention  of  apo- 
plexy. 

MCLIL 

Upon  the  fame  grounds,  the  Cure  of  pal- 
fy mufi  be  very  much  the  fame  with  that  of 
apoplexy  (MCXXX  et/eq.);  and  when 
palfy  has  begun  as  an  apoplexy,  it  is  prefunii- 
ed,  that,  before  it  is  to  be  confidered  as  palfy, 

ad 


OF       P  H  Y  S  I  C.  339 

all  thofe  feveral  remedies  have  been  employ- 
ed. Indeed,  even  when  it  happens  that  on 
the  firft  attack  of  the  difeafe  the  apoplectic 
Hate  is  not  very  complete,  and  that  the  very 
£rft  appearance  of  the  difeafe  is  as  a  hemi- 
plegia, the  affinity  between  the  two  difeafes 
(MCXLIV)  is-  fuch  as  to  lead  to  the  fame 
remedies  in  both  cafes*  This  is  certainly 
proper  in,  all  thofe  cafes  in  which  we  can  with 
much  probability  impute  the  difeafe  to  com- 
preffion  ;  and  it  is  indeed  feldom  that  a 
hemiplegia  from  internal  caufes  comes  on  but 
with  a  confiderable  affection  of  the  internal,, 
and  even  of  the  external  fenfes,  together  with 
other  marks  of  a  comprefTion  of  the  origin  of: 
the  nerves. 


MCLIIfc 

Not  only,  however,  where  the  difeafe  can 
be  imputed  to  comprefTiom,  but  even  where 
it  can  be  imputed  to  the  application  of  nar- 
cotic powers,  if  the  difeafe  come  on  with 
the  appearances  mentioned  at  the  end  of  laft 
paragraph,  it  is  to  be  treated  in  the  fame 
manner  as  an  apoplexy  by  MCXXXI — 
MCXXXIX. 


MCLIV. 

The  cure  of  hemiplegia,  therefore,  on  its 
firft  attack,  is   the  fame^  or  very  nearly  the 

fame* 


$gg  P   R   A   C   T   I   C  E 

fame,  with  that  of  apoplexy  :  And  it  feem? 
requifite  that  it  mould  be  different  only,  #'. 
When  the  difeafe  has  fubfifted  for  fome 
time ;  2.  When  the  apoplectic  fymptoms,  or 
fchofe  marking  a  con  fide  r  able  compreflion  of 
the  origin  of  the  nerves,  are  removed  •  and 
particularly,  3.  When  there  are  no  evident 
marks  of  compreflion,  and  it  is  at  the  fame 
time  known  that  narcotic  powers  have  been 
applied. 

MCLV... 


In  all  thefe  cafes,  the  queflion  arifes^ 
Whether  ftimulants  may  be  employed,  or 
how  far  the  cure  may  be  entirely  trufted  to 
fuch  remedies  ?  Upon  this  queflion,  with 
refpecl:  to  apoplexy,  I  have  offered  my  opin- 
ion in MGXX XVI.  And;  with  refpecl:  to 
hemiplegia,  I  am  of  opinion,  that  ftimulants 
are  almoft. always  equally  dangerous  as  in  the 
cafes  of  complete  apoplexy  ;  and  particular- 
ly, 1.  In  all  the  cafes  of  hemiplegia  fticceed- 
ing  to  a  paroxyfm  of  complete  apoplexy  ;  2. 
Irr  all  the  cafes  coming  upon  perfons  of  the 
temperament  mentioned  in  MXCV,  and  after 
the  fame  antecedents  as  thofe  of  apoplexy 
(MCXVI);  and,  3.  In  all  the  cafes  coming 
on  with  fymptoms  of  apoplexy  from  com- 
preflion. 

MCLVI. 


OF       PHYSIC.  341 


MCLVI. 

It  is,  therefore,  in  the  cafes  MCLIV  only, 
that  flimulants  are  properly  admiffible  :  And 
even  in  the  two  firft  of  thefe  cafes,  in  which  a 
plethoric  ftate  of  the  bloodveffels_of  the  brain 
may  have  brought  on  the  difeafe,  in  which  a 
difpofition  to  that  ftate  may  ftill  continue,  and 
in  which  even  fome  degree  of  congeftion  may 
ftill  remain,  the  ufe  of  ftimulants  muft  be 
an  ambiguous  remedy  ;  fo  that  perhaps  it  is 
in  the  third  of  thefe  cafes  only  that  ftimulants 
are  clearly  indicated  and  acjmiftible. 

MCLVII. 

Thefe  doubts  with  refpecl  to  the  ufe  of 
flimulants,  may  perhaps  be  overlooked  or 
difregarded  by  thofe  who  allege  that  ftimu- 
lants have  been  employed  with  advantage 
even  in  thofe  cafes  (MCLV)  in  which  I  have 
iakl  they  ought  to  be  avoided. 

MCLVIII. 

To  compromife  this  contrariety  of  opinion, 
I  muft  obferve,  that  even  in  the  cafes  of  hemi- 
plegia depending  upon  comprefiion,  although 
the  origin  of  the  nerves  be  fo  much  compreff- 
ed  as  to  prevent  fo  full  a  flow  of  the  nervous 
power  as  is  neceftkry  to  mufcular  motion,  yet 

it 


342        .PRACTICE 

it  appears  from  the  power  of  fenfe  ftill  re- 
maining, that  the  nerves  are,  to  a  certain  de- 
gree, ftill  pervious  ;  and  therefore  it  is  pof- 
iible  that  ftimuiants  applied,  may  excite  the 
energy  of  the  brain  fo  much,  as  in  fome  meaU 
ure  to  force  open  the  comprefTed  nerves,  and 
to  mow  fome  return  of  motion  in  paralytic 
mufcles.  Nav,  further,  it  may  be  allowed, 
that  if  thefe  ftimuiants  be  fuch  as  acl;  more 
upon  the  nervous  than  upon  the  fanguiferous 
fyftem,  they  may  poflibly  be  employed  with- 
out  any  very  hurtful  confequence. 

MCLIX. 

But  ftill  it  will  be  obvious,  that  although 
certain  ftimuiants  a6t  chiefly  upon  the  ner- 
vous fyftem,  yet  they  alfo  a&  always  in  fome 
meafure  upon  the  fanguiferous ;  fo  that,  when 
they  happen  to  have  the  latter  effe&  in  any 
confiderable  degree,  they  may  certainly  do 
much  harm ;  and  in  a  difeafe  which  they  do 
not  entirely  cure,  the  mifchief  ariiing  fron> 
them  may  not  be  difcerned. 

MCLX. 

Whilfl  the  employment  of  ftimuiants  is  fo 
often  an  ambiguous  practice,  we  may  perhaps 
go  fome  length  towards  afcertaining  the  mat- 
ter, by  considering  the  nature  of  the  feveral' 
ftimuiants  which  may  be  employed,  and  fome* 


OF       PHYSIC.  343 

of  the  circumftances  of  their  adminiflration. 
With  this  view,  therefore,  I  fhall  now  men- 
tion  the  feveral  ftimulants  that  have  betn 
commonly  employed,  and  offer  fome  remarks 
upon  their  nature  and  ufe. 

MCLXI. 

They  are  in  the  firfl  place  to  be  diilin- 
guifhed  as  external  or  internal.  Of  the  firfl 
kind,  we  again  diflinguiih  them  as  they  are 
applied  to  particular  parts  of  the  body  only, 
or  as  they  are  more  generally  applied  to  the 
whole  fyflem.      Of  the  firfl  kind  are, 

i.  The  concentrated  acids  of  vitriol  or  ni- 
tre ;  involved,  however,  in  oily  or  uncluous 
fubflances,  which  may  obviate  their  cor- 
rofive,  without  deftroying  their  flimulant 
power. 

2.  The  volatile  alkaline  fpirits,  efpecially 
in  their  cauflic  flate  ;  but  involved  alfo  in 
oils,  for  the  purpofe  jufl  now  mentioned. 

3.  The  fame  volatile  fpirits  are  frequently 
employed  by  being  held  to  the  nofe,  when 
they  prove  a  powerful  flimulus  to  the  nervous 
fyflem ;  but  it  is  at  the  fame  time  probable, 
that  they  may  alfo  prove  a  flrong  flimulant 
to  the  bloodveffels  of  the  brain. 

4.  A  brine,  or  flrong  folution  of  fea  fait. 

5.  The  effential  oils  of  aromatic  plants,  01? 
of  their  parts. 

6.  The  effential  oils  of  turpentine,  or  of 
other  fuch  refmous  fubflances. 

7.  The 


344  PRACTICE 

7;  The  diflilled  oils  of  amber,  or  of  other 
bituminous  foffils. 

8.  The  rectified  empyreumatic  oils  of  an- 
imal or  vegetable  fubftances. 

9.  Various  vegetable  acrids,  particularly 
muftard. 

10.  The  acrid  matter  found,  in  feveral  in- 
fects, particularly  cantharides. 

Some  of  thefe  ftimulants  may  be  either  ap- 
plied in  fubflance  5  or  may  be  diffolved  in 
ardent  fpirits,  by  which  their  fiimulant  pow- 
er may  be  increased,  or  more  conveniently 
applied. 

MCLXIL 

The  greater  part  of  the  fubftances  now 
enumerated  fhow  their  fiimulant  power  by 
inflaming  the  fkin  of  the  part  to  which  they 
are  applied  ;  and  when  their  application  is 
fo  long  continued  as  to  produce  this  effecl:, 
it  interrupts  the  continuance  of  their  ufe ; 
and  the  inflammation  of  the  part  does  not 
feem  to  do  fo  much  good  as  the  frequent 
repetition  of  a  more  moderate  ftimulus, 

MCLXIII. 

Analogous  to  thefe  ftimulants  is  the  fling- 
ing of  nettles,  which  has.  been  frequently 
commended. 

Among  the  external  ftimulants,  the  me- 
chanical one  of  friction  with  the  naked  hand,. 

the.- 


OF      PHYSIC.  345 

the  flefh  brufli,  or  flannel,  is  juftly  to  be 
reckoned.  Can  the  impregnation  of  the 
flannels  to  be  employed,  with  the  fumes  of 
burning  maflic,  olibanum,  &c.  be  of  any 
fervice  ? 

MCLXIV, 

With  refpectto  the  whole  of  thefe  external 
flimulants,  it  is  to  be  obferved,  that  they  af- 
feel  the  part  to  which  they  are  applied  much 
more  than  they  do  the  whole  fyflem,  and 
they  are  therefore  indeed  fafer  in  ambiguous 
cafes  ;  but,  for  the  fame  reafon,  they  are  of 
kfs  efficacy  in  curing  a  general  affe&ion* 

MCLXV* 

The  external  applications  which  may  be 
applied  to  affe6l  the  whole  fyflem,  are  the 
powers  of  heat  and  cold,  and  of  electricity. 

Heat,  as  one  of  the  moil  powerful  flimu- 
lants of  the  animal  economy,  has  been  often 
employed  in  palfies,  efpecially  by  warm  bath- 
ing. But  as,  both  by  ftimulating  the  folids 
and  rarefying  the  fluids,  this  proves  a  ftrong 
flimulus  to  the  fanguiferous  fyflem,  it  is  often 
an  ambiguous  remedy  5  and  has  frequently 
been  manifeflly  hurtful  in  palfies  depending 
Upon  a  congeflion  of  blood  in  the  veffeis  of 
the  brain.  The  mod  certain,  and  therefore 
the  mofl  proper  ufe  of  warm  bathing  in  pal- 
&es,  feems  to  be  in  thofe  that  have  been  oc- 

cafioned 


34^  PRACTICE 

cafioned  by  the  application  of  narcotic  pow- 
ers. Are  the  natural  baths  more  ufeful  by 
the  matters  with  which  they  may  be  naturally 
impregnated  ? 

MCLXVI. 

Cold  applied  to  the  body  for  any  length 
•of  time,  is  always  hurtful  to  paralytic  per- 
fons  ;  but  if  it  be  not  vefry  intenfe,  nor  the 
application  long  continued,  and  if  at  the  fame 
time  the  body  be  capable  of  a  brifk  reaction, 
fuch  an  application  of  cold  is  a  powerful 
ftimulant  of  the  whole  fyftem,  and  has  often 
been  ufeful  in  curing  palfy.  But,  if  the 
power  of  reaction  in  the  body  be  weak,  any 
application  of  cold  may  prove  very  hurtful. 

MCLXVII. 

Electricity,  in  a  certain  manner  applied,  if 
certainly  one  of  the  moil  powerful  ftimulants 
that  can  be  employed  to  adl  upon  the  ner* 
vous  fyftem  of  animals  ;  and  therefore  much 
has  been  expecled  from  it  in  the  cure  of  paU 
fy.  But,  as  it  ftimulates  the  fanguiferous  as 
well  as  the  nervous  fyftem,  it  has  been  often 
hurtful  in  palfies  depending  upon  a  compref* 
lion  of  the  brain  ;  and  efpecially  when  it  has 
been  fo  applied  as  to  acl;  upon  the  veffels  of 
the  head.  It  is  fafer  when  its  operation  is 
confined  to  particular  parts  fomewhat  remote 
from  the  head  ;  and,  further,  as  the  operation 

of 


OF       P  H  Y  S  I  C.  347 

of  electricity,  when  very  ftrong,  can  deflroy 
the  mobility  of  the  nervous  power,  I  am  of 
opinion,  that  it  is  always  to  be  employed  with 
caution,  and  that  it  is  only  fafe  when  applied 
with  moderate  force,  and  when  confined  to 
certain  parts  of  the  body  remote  from  the 
head.  It  is  alfo  my  opinion,  that  its  good 
effects  are  to  be  expected  from  its  repetition 
rather  than  from  its  force,  and  that  it  is  par- 
ticularly fuited  to  the  cure  of  thofe  palfies 
which  have  been  produced  by  the  application 
of  narcotic  powers. 

MCLXVIII. 

Amongfl  the  remedies  of  palfy,  the  ufe  of 
exercife  is  not  to  be  omitted.  In  a  hemiple- 
gia, bodily  exercife  cannot  be  employed  ;  and 
in  a  more  limited  affection,  if  depending  up- 
on a  compreffion  of  fbme  part  of  the  brain,  it 
would  be  an  ambiguous  remedy  :  But,  in  all 
cafes  where  the  exercifes  of  geftation  can  be 
employed,  they  are  proper ;  as,  even  in  cafes 
of  compreffion,  the  ftimulus  of  fuch  exercife 
is  moderate,  and  therefore  fafe  ;  and,  as  it  al- 
ways determines  to  the  furface  of  the  body,  it 
is  a  remedy  in  all  cafes  of  internal  congeflion, 

MCLXIX, 

The  internal  flimulants  employed  in  palfy 
&re  various,  but  chiefly  the  following. 

i.Tbe 


34&  PRACTICE 

1.  The  volatile  alkaline  falts,  or  fpirits,  as 
they  are  called,  are  very  powerful  and  diffu* 
five  ftimulants,  operating  efpecially  on  the 
nervous  fyftem  ;  and  even  although  they  op*, 
erate  on  the  fanguiferous,  yet>  if  given  in  fre- 
quently repeated  fmall  rather  than  in  large 
dofes,  their  operation  being  tranfitory,  is  tol- 
erably fafe. 

2.  The  vegetables  of  the  clafs  named  Te*. 
tradynamia,  are  many  of  them  powerful  dif- 
fufive  ftimulants  ;  and  at  the  fame  time,  as 
quickly  palling  out  of  the  body,  and  therefore 
of  tranlitory  operation,  they  are  often  em- 
ployed with  fafety.  As  they  commonly  prove 
diuretic,  they  may  in  this  way  alfo  be  of  fer*. 
vice  in  fome  cafes  of  ferous  palfy. 

3.  The  various  aromatics,  whether  em* 
ployed  in  fubftance,  in  tincture,  or  in  their 
effiential  oils,  are  often  powerful  ftimulants  5 
but  being  more  adhefive  and  inflammatory 
than  thofe  laft  mentioned,  they  are  therefore^ 
in  all  ambiguous  cafes,  lefs  fttfe* 

4.  Some  other  acrid  vegetables  have  been 
employed  ;  but  we  are  not  well  acquainted 
with  their  peculiar  virtues,  or  proper  ufe. 

5.  Some  refmous  fubftances,  as  guaiacum, 
and  the  terebinthinate  fubftances,  or  their  ef- 
fential  oils,  have  been,  with  fome  probability, 
employed ;  but  they  are  apt  to  become  in- 
flammatory. Decoctions  of  guaiacum,  and 
fome  other  fudorifics,  have  been  directed  to 
excite  fweating  by  the  application  of  the 
fumes  of  burning  fpirit  of  wine  in  the  la^ 

conicum, 


OF      PHYSIC.  349 

conicum,  and  have  in  that  way  been  found 
ufeful. 

6.  Many  of  the  fetid  antifpafmodic  medi- 
cines have  been  frequently  employed  in  pal- 
fy  ;  but  I  do  not  perceive  in  what  manner 
they  are  adapted  to  the  cure  of  this  difeafe, 
and  I  have  not  obferved  their  good  effects  in 
any  cafes  of  it. 

7.  Bitters,  and  the  Peruvian  bark,  have 
alfo  been  employed  ;  but  with  no  propriety 
or  advantage  that  I  can  perceive. 

MCLXX. 

With  refpecl;  to  the  whole  of  thefe  internal 
flimulants,  it  is  to  be  obferved,  that  they  fel- 
dom  prove  very  powerful  ;  and  wherever 
there  is  any  doubt  concerning  the  nature  or 
ftate  of  the  difeafe,  they  may  readily  do 
harm,  and  are  often  therefore  of  ambiguous 
ufc. 


Vol.  It  D  BOOK 


35© 


BOOK        II. 

m  ADYNAMIC,  or  DISEASES  con- 
sisting in  a  WEAKNESS  or  LOSS 
of  MOTION  in  either  the  VITAL 
or  NATURAL  FUNCTIONS, 

CHAP.        L 

oi  SYNCOPE,  or  FAINTING,     * 

UCLXKh 

X  HIS  is  a  difeafe  in  whicK 
fhe  aftion  of  the  heart  and  refpiration  be- 
come confiderably  weaker  than  ufual,  or  irl 
which  for  a  certain  time  thefe  functions  ceafe 
altogether. 

MCLXXIIs 


OF      PHYSIC.  351 


MCLXXIL 

Phyfuians  having  obferved  that  this  affec- 
tion occurs  in  different  degrees,  have  endeav- 
oured to  diftinguifh  thefe  by  different  appel- 
lations :  But  as  it  is  not  poffible  to  afcertain 
theie  different  degrees  with  any  precifion,  fo 
there  can  be  no  ftricl:  propriety  in  employing 
thofe  different  names  ;  and  I  mail  here  com- 
prehend the  whole  of  the  affe&ions  of  this 
kind  under  the  title  of  Syncope. 

MCLXXHL 

This  difeafe  fome'times  comes  on  fuddenlv 
to  a  confiderable  degree,  but  fometimes  alfo 
it  comes  on  gradually  ^  and  in  the  latter  cafe, 
it  ufually  comes  on  with  a  fenfe  of  languor, 
and  of  anxiety  about  the  heart,  accompanied 
at  the  fame  time,  or  immediately  after,  with 
fbme  giddinefs,  dimnefs  of  nght>  and  found- 
ing in  the  ears.  Together  with  thefe  fymp- 
toms,  the  pulfe  and  refpiration  become  weak  ; 
and  often  fo  weak*  that  the  pulfe  is  Icarcely 
to  be  felt,  or  the  refpiration  to  be  perceived  ; 
and  fometinies  thefe  motions,  for  a  certain 
time,  ceafe  altogether.  While  thefe  fymp^. 
toms  take  place,  the  face  and  whole  furface  of 
the  body  become  pale,  arid  more  or  lefs  cold 
according  to  the  degree  and  duration  of  the 
paroxyfm.  Very  commonly,  at  the  begin- 
ning of  this,  and,  during  its  continuance,  a 
Q  2  cold 


352  PRACTICE 

cold  fweat  appears,  and  perhaps  continues, 
on  the  forehead,  as  well  as  on  fome  other 
parts  of  the  body.  During  the  paroxyfm* 
the  animal  functions,  both  of  fenfe  and  mO~ 
tion,  are  always  in  fome  degree  impaired,  and 
very  often  entirely  fufpended.  A  paroxyfm 
of  fyncope  is  often,  after  fome  time,  fponta- 
fceoufly  recovered ^from  ;  and  this  recovery 
is  generally  attended  with  a  fenfe  of  much 
anxiety  about  the  heart. 

Fits  of  fyncope  are  frequently  attended 
with,  or  end  iti,  Vomiting  $  and  fometimes 
with  convulfions,  or  an  epileptic  fit* 

MCLXXIV. 

Thefe  afe  the  phenomena  in  this  difeafe  ? 
and  from  every  vi^.w  of  the  greateft  part  of 
them,  there  cannot  be  a  doubt  that  the  prox- 
imate caufe  of  this  difeafe  is  a  very  weak  or  a 
total  cealing  of  the  action  of  the  heart.  But 
it  will  be  a  very  difficult  matter  to  explain  iri 
what  manner  the  feveral  remote  caufes  ope^ 
rate  in  producing  the  proximate  caufe.  This* 
however,  I  mall  attempt,  though  with  that 
diffidence  which  becomes  m6  in  attempting  a 
fubjeft  that  has  riot  hitherto  bten  treated  with 
much  fuccefs. 

*MCLXXtV, 

The  remote  caufe  of  fyncope  may*  in  the 
fir  ft  place,  be  referred  to  two  general  heads; 

The 


OF      PHYSIC.  353 

The  one  is,  of  thofe  caufes  exiiling  and  act- 
ing  in  the  brain,  or  in  parts  of  the  body  re- 
mote from  the  heart,  but  acting  upon  it  by 
the  intervention  of  the  brain.  The  other 
general  head  of  the  remote  caufes  of  fyncope> 
is  of  thofe  exifting  in  the  heart  itfelf,  or  in 
parts  very  immediately  connected  with  it,  and 
thereby  acting  more  directly  upon  it  in  pro- 
ducing this  difeaie. 


MCLXXV. 


In  entering  upon  the  confederation  of  the 
■foft  fet  of  thofe  caufes  (MCLXXIV),  I  muft 
ailume  a  proposition  which  I  fuppofe  to  be 
fully  eftabliihed  in  Fhyfiology.  It  is  this  : 
That,  though  the  mufcular  fibres  of  the  heart 
be  endowed  with  a  certain  degree  of  inherent 
power,  they  are  flifl,.  for  fuch  action  as  is  nee.* 
effary  to  the  motion  of  the  blood,  veiy  con- 
stantly dependent  upon  a  nervous  power  fent 
into  them  from  the  brain.  At  lead  this  is 
evident,  that  there  are  certain  powers  acting 
primarily,,  and  perhaps  only  in  the  brain, 
which  influence  and  varioufly  modify  the  ac- 
tion of  the  heart.  I  fuppofe,  therefore,  a 
force  very  conftantly  during  life  exerted  in 
the  brain,  with  refpedt  to  the  moving  fibres 
of  the  heart,  as  well  as  of  every  part  of  the 
body  ;  which  force  I  fhall  call  the  Energy  of 
the  Brain ;  and  which  I  fuppofe  may  be,  on 
Q  3  different 


SH  PRACTICE 

different  occafions,  ftronger  or  weaker  with 
refpecl:  to  the  heart. 

MCLXXVI, 

Admitting  thefe  proportions,  it  will  be  ob- 
vious, that  if  I  can  explain  in  what  manner 
the  firft  fet  of  remote  eaufes  (MCLXXIV) 
diminifh  the  energy  of  the  brain,  I  lhall  at  the 
fame  time  explain  in  what  manner  thefe  eauf- 
es occafi  on  a  fyncope. 

MCLXXVII. 

To  do  this,  I  obferve,  that  one  of  the  moll 
evident  of  the  remote  eaufes  of  fyncope  is  a 
hemorrhagy,  or  an  evacuation  of  blood, 
whether  fpontaneous  or  artificial.  And  as  It 
is  very  manifeft  that  the  energy  of  the  brain 
depends  upon  a  certain  fulnefs  and  tenlion  of 
its  bloodveffels,  for  which  nature  feems  to 
have  induflrioufiy  provided  by  fuch  a  con- 
formation of  thofe  bloodveffels  as  retards  the 
motion  of  the  blood  both  in  the  arteries  and 
veins  of  the  brain  ;  fo  we  can  readily  per- 
ceive, that  evacuations  of  blood,  by  taking  off 
the  fulnefs  and  tenfion  of  the  bloodveffels  of 
the  brain,  and  thereby  diminifhing  its  energy 
with  refpecl:  to  the  heart,  may  occafion  a  fyn- 
cope. In  many  perfons,  a  fmall  evacuation 
of  blood  will  have  this  effect ;  and  in  fuch 
cafes  there  is  often  a  clear  proof  of  the  mari- 
ner in  which  the  caufe  operates,  from  this  cir- 

cumftance, 


OF       PHYSIC.         355 

eumftance,  that  the  effeft  can  be  prevented 
by  laying  the  body  in  a  horizontal  pofture  ; 
which,  by  favouring  the  afflux  of  the  blood 
by  the  arteries,  and  retarding  the  return  of  it 
by  the  veins,  preferves  the  neceffary  fulnefs 
of  the  veffels  of  the  brain. 

It  is  farther  to  be  remarked  here,  that  not 
only  an  evacuation  of  blood  occafions  fyn- 
cope,  but  that  even  a  change  in  the  diflribu- 
tion  of  the  blood,  whereby  a  larger  portion  of 
k  flows  into  one  part  of  the  fyftem  of  blood- 
veflels,  and  confequently  lefs  into  others,  maf 
occafion  a  fyncope.  It  is  thus  I  explain  the 
fyncope  that  readily  occurs- upon- the  evacu- 
ation of  hydropic  waters,  which  had  before 
filled  the  cavities  of  the  abdomen-  or  thorax. 
It  is  thus  alfo  I  explain  the  fyncope  that 
iometimes  happens  on  bloodletting,  but  which 
does  not  happen  till' the  ligature  which  had 
been  employed  is  untied,  and  admits  a  larger 
afflux  of  blood  into  the  bloodveflels  of  the 
arm.  Both  thefe  cafes  of  fyncope  fhow,  that 
an  evacuation  of  blood  does  not  always  occa- 
fion the  difeafe  by  any  general  efFecl;  on  the 
whole  fyftem3  but  often  merely  by  taking  off 
the  requisite  fulnefs  of  the  bloodveflels  of  the 
brain. . 

MCLXXVIII. 

The  operation  of  fome  others  of  the  remote 

caufes  of  fyncope,  may  be  explained  on  the 

following  principles.     Whilfl  the  energy  o£ 

G-4  ^um 


356  PRACTICE 

the  Brain  is,  upon  different  occafions,  mani- 
feftly  flronger  or  weaker,  it  feems  to  be  with 
this  condition,  that  a  flronger  exertion  of  it  is 
neceffarily  followed  by  a  weaker  ftate  of  the 
fame.  It  feems  to  depend  upon  this  law  in 
the  conftitution  of  the  nervous  power,  that 
the  ordinary  contraction  of  a  mufcle  is  always 
alternated  with  a  relaxation  of  the  fame  ;  that, 
unlefs  a  contraction  proceeds  to  the  degree  of 
fpafm,  the  contracted  ftate  cannot  be  long 
continued  :  And  it  feems  to  depend  upon 
the  fame  caufe  that  the  voluntary  motions, 
which  always  require  an  unufual  increafe  of 
exertion,  occafion  fatigue,  debility,  and  at 
length  irrefiilible  fleep. 

Frorn  this  law,  therefore,  of  the  nervous 
power,  we  may  underftand,  why  a  fudden 
and  violent  exertion  of  the  energy  of  the 
brain  is  fometimes  followed  by  fuch  a  dimi- 
nution of  it  as  to  occafion  a  fyncope  ;  and  it 
is  thus  I  fuppofe  that  a  violent  fit  of  joy  pro-. 
duces  fyncope,  and  even  death.  It  is  upon 
the  fame  principle  alfo,  I  fuppofe,  that  an  ex- 
quifite  pain  may  fometimes  excite  the  energy 
of  the  brain  more  ftrongly  than  can  be  fup- 
ported,  and  is  therefore  followed  by  fuch  a 
diminution  as  mud  occafion  fainting.  But 
the  effect  of  this  principle  appears  more  clear- 
ly in  this,  that  a  fainting  readily  happens  up- 
on the  fudden  remiffion  of  a  confiderable 
pain  ;  and  thus  I  have  feen  a  fainting  occur 
upon  the  reduction  of  a  painful  diflocation. 

MCLXXIX. 


O  F       PHYSI  C.  357 

MCLXXIX. 

It  feems  to  be  quite  analogous  when  a  fyn- 
cope  immediately  happens  on  the  finifhing  of 
any  great  and  long  continued  effort,  whether 
depending  on  the  will,  or  upon  a  propenfity  ; 
and  in  this  way  a  fainting  fometimes  happens 
to  a  woman  on  the  bearing  of  a  child*  This 
may  be  well  illuflrated  by  obferving,  that  in 
perfons  already  much  weakened,  even  a  very 
moderate  effort  will  fometimes  oecancn  faint- 
ing. 

MCLXXX. 

To  explain  the  operation  of*  forne  other 
caufes  of  fyncope,  it  may  be  obferved,  that  as 
the  exertions  of  the  energy  of  the  brain  are 
efpecially  under  the  influence  of  the  will,  fo 
it  is  well  known  that  thofe  modifications  of 
the  will  which  are  named  Paflions  and  Emo- 
tions, have  a  powerful  influence  on  the  ener- 
gy of  tjie  brain  in  its  actions  upon  the  heart, 
either  in  increafing  or  dimimfhmg  the  force 
of  that  energy.  Thus,  anger  has  the  former,, 
and  fear  the  latter  effe£l  ;  and  thence  it  may 
be  underftood  how  terror  often  occalions  a 
fyncope  fometimes  of  the  moll  violent  kind, 
named  Afphyxia,  and  fometimes  death  itfelf. 

Vol.  2;  Qs  MCLXXXL 


358  PRACTICE 


MCLXXXI. 

As,  from  what  I  have  juft  mentioned  it 
appears,  that  the  emotions  of  defire  increafe, 
and  thofe  of  averfion  diminifh,  the  energy  of 
the  brain  ;  fo  it  may  be  underflood,  how  a 
ftrong  averfion,  a  horror,  or  the  feeling  which 
arifes  upon  the  fight  of  a  very  difagreeable  ob- 
ject, may  occafion  fainting.  As  an  example 
of  this,  I  have  known  more  than  one  inftance 
of  a  perfon's  fainting  at  the  fight  of  a  fore  in 
another  perfon. 

MCLXXXIL 

To  this  head  of  horror  and  difguft,  I  refer 
the  operation  of  thofe  odours  which  in  certain 
perfons  occafion  fyncope.  It  may  be  fup- 
pofed,  that  thofe  odours  are  endowed  with  a 
directly  fedative  power,  and  may  thereby  oc- 
cafion fyncope  ;  but  they  are,  many  of  themv 
with  refpecl;  to  other  perfons,  evidently  of  a 
contrary  quality  :  And  it  appears  to  me,  that 
thofe  odours  occafion  fyncope  only  in  thofe 
perfons  to  whom  they  are  extremely  difa- 
greeable. 

MCLXXXIir. 

It  is,  however,  very  probable,  that  among 
the   caufes  of  fyncope,  there  are  fome  which, 
analogous  to  all  thofe  we  have  already  men- 
tioned, 


CF       F  H:  Y  S  I  C.  35^ 

tioned,  aft  by  a  directly  feda.tive  power  :  And' 
fuch  may  either  be  difrufed  in  the  mafs  of 
blood,  and  thereby  communicated  to  the 
brain  j  or  may  be  only  taken  into  the  ftom- 
ach,  which  fo  readily  and  frequently  commu- 
nicates its  affections  to  the  brain. 

MCLXXXIV.. 

Having  now  enumerated,  and,  as  I  hope, 
explained,  the  moil  part  of  the  remote  caufes 
of  fyncope,  that  either  operate  immediately 
upon  the  brain \  or  whofe  operation  upon 
other  parts  of  the  body  is  communicated  to 
the  brain,  it  is  proper  to  obferve,,  that  the 
mod  part  of  thefe  caufes  operate  upon  certain 
perfons  more  readily  and  more  powerfully 
than  upon  others;,  and  this  circumftance, 
which  may  be  confidered  as  the  predifponent 
caufe  o£  fyncope.,  deferves  to  be  inquired 
into. 

It  is,  in  the  firff  place,  obvious,  that  the 
operation  of  fome  of  thofe  caufes  depends  en- 
tirely upon  an  idiofyncrafy  in  the  perfons 
upon  whom  they  operate  j  which,  however, 
I  cannot  pretend  to  explain.  But,  in  the 
next  place,  with  refpect  to  the  greater  part  of 
the  other  caufes,  their  effects  feem  to  depend 
upon  a  temperament  which  is  in  one  degree 
or  other  in  common  to  many  perfons.  This 
temperament  feems  to  confiil  in  a  great  de- 
gree of  fenfibili ty  and  mobility,,  arifing  from 
a,  ilate  of  debility,  fometimes  depending  upon 
C>  6  original 


fi6o  PRACTICE 

original  conformation,  and  fometimes  pro- 
duced by  accidental  occurrences  in  the  courfe 
of  life. 

MCLXXXV. 

The  fecond  fet  of  the  remote  caufes  of  fy n- 
cope  (MCLXXIV),  or  thofe  acting  directly 
upon  the  heart  itfelf,  are  certain  organic  af- 
fections of  the  heart  itfelf,  or  of  the  parts  im- 
mediately connected  with  it,  particularly  the 
great  veffeJs  which  pour  blood  into  or  imme- 
diately receive  it  from  the  cavities  of  the 
heart.  Thus  a  dilatation  or  aneurifm  of  the 
heart,  a  polypus  in  its  cavities,  abfceffes  or 
ulcerations  in  its  fubftance,  a  clofe  adherence 
of  the  pericardium  to  the  furface  of  the  heart, 
aneurifms  of  the  great  veflels  near  to  the 
heart,  polypus  in  thefe,  and  oflifications  in 
thefe  or  in  the  valves  of  the  heart,  are  one  or 
other  of  them  conditions  which,  upon  direc- 
tion, have  been  difcovered  in  thofe  perfons 
who  had  before  laboured  under  frequent 
iyncope. 

MCLXXXVI. 

It  is  obvious,  that  thefe  conditions  are  all 
of  them,  either  fuch  as  may,  upon  occafion, 
difturb  the  free  and  regular  influx  into,  or 
the  free  egrefs  of  the  blood  from,  the  cavities 
of  the  heart ;  or  fuch  as  may  otherwife  dif- 
turb its  regular  action,  by  fometimes  inter- 
rupting 


OF       PHYSIC.  36* 

rupting  it,  or  fometimes  exciting  it  to  more 
violent  and  convulfive  action.  The  latter  is 
what  is  named  the  Palpitation  of  the  Heart, 
and  it  commonly  occurs  in  the  fame  perfons 
who  are  liable  to  fyncope. 

MCLXXXVII. 


It  is  tMs,  as  I  judge,  that  leads  us  to  per- 
ceive in  what  manner  thefe  organic  affections 
of  the  heart  and  great  veffels  may  occafion 
fyncope  :  For  it  may  be  fuppofed,  that  the 
violent  exertions  made  in  palpitations  may 
either  give  occafion  to  an  alternate  great  re- 
laxation (MCLXXVIII),  or  to  a  fpafmodic 
contraction ;  and  in  either  way  fuipend  the 
action  of  the  heart,  and  occafion  fyncope.  It 
feems  to  me  probable,  that  it  is  a  fpafmodic 
contraction  of  the  heart  that  occafions  the  in- 
termiffion  of  the  pulfe  fo  frequently  accom- 
panying palpitation  and  fyncope. 

MCLXXXVIIL 


Though  it  frequently  happens  that  palpi- 
tation and  fyncope  arife,  as  we  have  faid,  from 
the  organic  affections  above  mentioned,  it  is 
proper  to  obferve,  that  thefe  difeafes,  even 
when  in  a  violent  degree,  do  not  always  de- 
pend on  fuch  caufes  acting  directly  on  the 
heart,  but  are  often  dependent  on  fome  of 

thofe 


362  PRACTICE 

fchofe  eaufes  which  we  have  mentioned  abovs 
as  acting  primarily  on  the  brain. 

MCLXXXIX. 

I  have  thus  endeavoured  to  give  the  pa- 
thology of  fyncope  ;.  and  of  the  cure  I  can 
treat  very  fhortly. 

The  cafes  of  fyncope  depending  on  the 
fecond  fet  of  eaufes  (MCLXXIV),.and  fully 
recited  inMCLXXXV,  I  fuppofe  to  be  gen- 
erally incurable  ;  as  our  art,  lb  far  as  I  know, 
has  not  yet  taught  us  to  cure  any  one  of  thofe 
feveral  eaufes  of  fyncope  (MCLXXXV). 

The  cafes  of  fyncope  depending  on  the 
firflfet  of  eaufes  (MCLXXIV),  and  whofe 
operation  I  have  endeavoured  to  explain  in 
MCLXXVII  ttfeq.  I  hold  to  be  generally 
curable,  either  by  avoiding  the  feveral  occa- 
fional  eaufes  there  pointed  out,  or  by  correct- 
ing the  predifponent  eaufes  (MGLXXXIV). 
The  latter,  I  think,  may  generally  be  done 
hy  correcting  the  debility  or  mobility  of  the 
fyitem,  by  the  means  which  I  have  already 
had  occalion  to  point  out  in  another  place,, 


CHAR 


OF       PHYSIC.  363 


CHAP.       II, 


of  DYSPEPSIA,  or  INDIGESTION, 


MCXC. 


A.  WANT  of  appetite,  a 
fqueamifbnefs,  fometimes  a  vomiting,  fudden 
and  tranfient  difTentions  of  the  ftomach,  eruc- 
tations of  various  kinds,  heartburn,  pains  in 
the  region  of  the  ftomach,  and  a  bound  belly, 
are  fymptoms  which  frequently  concur  in  the 
fame  perfon,  and  therefore  may  be  prefumed 
to  depend  upon  one  and  the  fame  proximate 
caufel  In  both  views,  therefore  they  may  be 
confidered  as  forming  one  and  the. fame  dif- 
eafe,  to  which  we  have  given  the  appellation 
of  Dyfpepjia-y  fet  at  the  head  of  this  chapter, 

MCXCL 

But  as  this  difeafe  is  alfo  frequently  a  fee- 
ondary  and  fympathic  affection,,  fo  the  fymp- 
toms above  mentioned  are  often  joined  with 

many 


364  P  R   A   C  T   I   C  E 

many  others  ;  and  this  has  given  occafion  to 
a  very  confufed  and  undetermined  defcrip- 
tion  of  it,  under  the  general  title  of  Nervous 
Difeafes,  or  under  that  of  Chronic  Weaknefs. 
It  is  proper,  however,  to  diftinguifh  ;  and  I 
apprehend  the  fymptoms  enumerated  above 
are  thofe  effential  to  the  idiopathic  affection 
I  am  now  to  treat  of. 


MCXCII. 

It  is  indeed  to  be  particularly  obferved, 
that  thefe  fymptoms  are  often  truly  accom- 
panied with  a  certain  flate  of  mind  which 
may  be  confidered  as  a  part  of  the  idiopathic 
affection  :  But  I  fhail  take  no  further  notice 
of  this  fymptom  in  the  prefent  chapter,  as  it 
will  be  fully  and  more  properly  confidered 
in  the  next,  under  the  title  of  Hypochon- 
driasis. 

MCXCIIL 

That  there  is  a  diffincl:  difeafe  attended  al- 
ways with  the  greater  part  of  the  above  fymp- 
toms, is  rendered  very  probable  by  this,  that 
all  thefe  feveral  fymptoms  may  arife  from  one 
and  the  fame  caufe  ;  that  is,  from  an  imbe- 
cility, lofs  of  tone,  and  weaker  action  in  the 
mufcular  fibres  of  the  ftomach  :  And  I  con- 
clude therefore,  that  this  imbecility  may  be 
confidered  as   the   proximate   caufe   of  the 

difeafe 


OF       PHYSIC-  365 

difeafe   I  am  to  treat  of  under  the  name  of 
Dyfpepfia. 

MCXCIV. 

The  imbecility  of  the  ftomach,  and  the 
confequent  fymptoms  (MCXC),  may,  how- 
ever, frequently  depend  upon  fome  organic 
affection  of  the  ftomach  itfelf,  as  tumojar, 
ulcer,  or  fcirrhofity  ;  or  upon  fome  affection 
of  other  parts  of  the  body  communicated  to 
the  flomach,  as  in  gout,  amenorrhcea,  and 
fome  others.  In  all  thefe  cafes,  however,  the 
dyfpeptic  fymptoms  are  to  be  confidered  as 
fecondary  or  fympathic  affections,  to  be  cur- 
ed only  by  curing  the  primary  difeafe.  Such 
fecondary  and  fympathic  cafes  cannot,  in- 
deed, be  treated  of  here  :  But  as  I  prefume 
that  the  imbecility  of  the  ftomach  may  often, 
take  place  without  either  any  organic  affection 
of  this  part,  or  any  more  primary  affection  in 
any  other  part  of  the  body  j  fo  I  fuppofe  and 
expect  it  will  appear,  from  the  confideration 
of  the  remote  caufes,  that  the  dyfpepfia  may 
be  often  an  idiopathic  affection,  and  that  it 
is  therefore  properly  taken  into  the  fyftem  of 
methodical  Nofology,  and  becomes  the  fub-* 
ject  of  our  confideration  here, 

MCXCV. 

There  can  be  little  doubt,  that,  in  moil 
cafes,  the  weaker  action  of  the  mufcular  fibres 

of 


366  PRACTICE 

of  the  ftomach,  is  the  mod  frequent  and  chief 
caufe  of  the  fymptoms  mentioned  in  MCXC  ; 
but  I  dare  not  maintain  it  to  be  the  only 
caufe  of  idiopathic  dyfpepfia.  There  is, 
pretty  certainly,  a  peculiar  fluid  in  the  flom- 
ach  of  animals,  or  at  leaft  a  peculiar  quality 
in  the  fluids,  that  we  know  to  be  there,  upon 
which  the  folution  of  the  aliments  taken  into 
the  ftomach  chiefly  depends  :  And  it  is  at  the 
fame  time  probable,  that  the  peculiar  quality 
of  the  diffolving  or  digefting  fluids  may  be 
varioufly  changed,  or  that  their  quantity  may 
be,  upon  occafion,  diminifhed.  It  is  there- 
fore fufficiently  probable,  that  a  change  in 
the  quality  or  quantity  of  thefe  fluids  may 
produce  a  confiderable  difference  in  the  phe- 
nomena of  digeflion,  and  particularly  may 
give  occafion  to  many  of  the  morbid  appear- 
ances mentioned  in  MCXC. 

MCXCVI. 

This  feems  to  be  very  well  founded,  ancj 
points  out  another  proximate  caufe  of  dyf- 
pepfia befide  that  we  have  already  affigned  :. 
But,  notwithstanding  this,  as  the  peculiar  na- 
ture of  the  digeftive  fluid,  the  changes  which 
it  may  undergo,  or  the  caufes  by  which  it 
may  be  changed,  are  ail  matters  fo  little 
known,  that  I  cannot  found  any  practical 
doctrine  upon  any  fuppofition  with  refpect 
to  them  ;  and  as,  at  the  fame  time,  the  imbe- 
cility of  the  ftomach,  either  as  caufing  th-a 

change. 


OF       PHYSIC.  367 

change  in  the  digeftive  fluid,  or  as  being  in- 
duced by  that  change,  feems  always  to  be 
prefent,  and  to  have  a  great  (hare  in  occafion- 
ing  the  fymptoms  of  indigeflion  ;  fo  I  fhall 
Hill  confider  the  imbecility  of  the  flomach  as 
the  proximate  and  almoft  fole  caufe  of  dyf- 
pepfia.  And  I  more  readily  admit  of  this 
manner  of  proceeding  ;  as,  in  my  opinion, 
the  doctrine  applies  very  fully  and  clearly  to 
the  explaining  the  whole  of  the  practice  which 
experience  has  eflablifhed  as  the  moil  fuccefs- 
ful  in  this  difeafe. 

MCXCVII. 

Confidering  this,  then,  as  the  proximate 
caufe  of  dyfpepfia,  I  proceed  to  mention  the 
feveral  remote  caufes  of  this  difeafe  ;  as  they 
are  fuch,  as,  on  different  occafions,  feem  to 
produce  a  lofs  of  tone  in  the  mufcular  fibres 
of  the  flomach.  They  may,  I  think,  be  con. 
fidered  under  two  heads.  The  Jirjl  is,  of 
thofe  which  act  directly  and  immediately  up- 
on the  flomach  itfelf  :  The  fecond  is,  of  thofe 
which  act  upon  the  whole  body,  or  particular 
parts  of  ity  but  in  confequence  of  which  the 
flomach  is  chiefly  or  almofl  only  affected. 

MCXCVIII. 

Of  the  firfl  kind  are, 

1.  Certain  fedative  or  narcotic  fub fiances 
taken  into  the  flomach ;  fuch  as  tea,  coffee, 

tobacco, 


368  PRACTICE 

tobacco,  ardent  fpirits,  opium,  bitters,  aro- 
matics,  putrids,  and  acefcents. 

2.  The  large  and  frequent  drinking  of 
warm  water,  or  of  warm  watery  liquids, 

3.  Frequent  furfek,  or  immoderate  reple- 
tion of  the  ftomach. 

4.  Frequent  vomiting,  whether  fpontane- 
oufly  arifing,  or  excited  by  art* 

5.  Vtry  frequent  fpitting,  or  rejection  of 
faliva* 

MCXCIX. 

Thofe  eaufes  which  a&  upon  the  whole 
body,  or  upon  particular  parts  and  functions 
of  it,  are, 

1.  An  indolent  and  fedentary  life. 

2.  Vexation  of  mind,  and  diforderly  paf- 
Jions  of  any  kind, 

3.  Intenfe  ftudy,  or  clofe  application  tc* 
bufinefs  too  long  continued. 

4.  Excefs  in  venery. 

5.  Frequent  intoxication  ;  which  partly 
belongs  to  this  head,  partly  to  the  former. 

6.  The  being  much  expofed  to  moift  and 
cold  air  when  without  exercife. 

Though  the  difeafe>  as  proceeding  from  the 
laft  fet  of  caufesy  may  be  confidered  as  a 
fymptomatic  affection  only  5  yet  as  the  affec- 
tion of  the  ftomach  is  generally  the  firft,  al- 
ways the  chief,  and  often  the  only  effect 
which  thefe  eaufes  produce  or  difcover,  I 
think  the  affection  of  the  ftomach  may  be 

confidered 


OF       PHYSIC.  369 

considered  as  the  difeafe  to  be  attended  to  in 
practice  ;  and  the  more  properly  fo,  as  in 
many  cafes  the  general  debility  is  only  to  be 
cured  by  reftoring  the  tone  of  the  ftomachj, 
and  by  remedies  firfl  applied  to  this  organ. 

MCCI, 

For  the  cure  of  this  difeafe,  we  form  three 
feveral  indications  5  a  prefervative,  a  paliative^ 
and  a  curative. 

The  Jirjl  is,  to  avoid  or  remove  the  remote 
caufesjuftnow  enumerated. 

The  fecond  is,  to  remove  thofe  fymptoms 
which  efpecially  contribute  to  aggravate  and 
continue  the  difeafe.     And> 

The  third  is,  to  reffcore  the  tone  of  the 
ftomach ;  that  is,  to  correct  or  remove  the 
proximate  caufe  of  the  difeafe. 

MCCIL 

The  propriety  and  neceflity  of  the  firfl  in^ 
dication  is  fufficiently  evident,  as  the  contin-* 
ued  application,  or  frequent  repetition  of 
thofe  caufes*  muft  continue  the  difeafe  ;  may 
defeat  the  ufe  of  remedies  5  or,  in  fpite  of 
thefe,  may  occafion  the  recurrence  of  the  dif- 
eafe. It  is  commonly  the  neglect  of  this  in- 
dication which  renders  this  difeafe  fo  fre- 
quently obftinate*  How  the  indication  is  to 
be  executed,  will  be  fufficiently  obvious  from 
the  confideration  of  the  feveral  caufes  :  But 


370  PRACTICE 

it  is  proper  for  the  practitioner  to  attend  to 
this,  that  the  execution  is  often  exceedingly- 
difficult,  becaufe  h  is  not  eafy  to  engage  men 
to  break  in  upon  eflablifhed  habits,  or  to  re- 
nounce the  purfuit  of  pleafure  ;  and  partic- 
ularly, to  perfuade  men  that  thefe  practices 
are  truly  hurtful  which  they  have  often  prac*. 
tifed  with  feeming  impunity. 

Mcciii. 

The  fymptoms  of  this  difeafe  which  efpec- 
ially  contribute  to  aggravate  and  continue  it, 
and  therefore  require  to  be  more  immediate- 
ly corrected  or  removed,  are,  firft,  the  crudi- 
ties of  the  ftorriach  already  produced  by  the 
difeafe,  and  discovered  by  a  lofs  of  appetite, 
by  a  fenfe  of  weight  and  uneafinefs  in  the 
ftomach,  and  particularly  by  the  eru&atiori 
of  imperfectly  digefted  matters. 

Another  fymptom  to  be  immediately  cor* 
reded,  is  an  umifual  quantity,  or  a  higher 
degree  than  ufual,  of  acidity  prefent  in  the 
llomach,  difcovered  by  various  difordefs  in 
digeflion,  and  by  other  effects  to  be  men- 
tioned afterwards. 

The  third  fymptom  aggravating  the  dif- 
eafe, and  otherwife  in  itfelf  urgent,  is  coftive- 
hefs,  and  therefore  conftantly  requiring  to  be 
relieved. 

MCCIV. 

Thtjirjl  of  thefe  fymptoms  is  to  be  reliev- 
ed by  exciting  vomiting ;  and  the  ufe  of  this 

remedy* 


OF      P  H  Y  S  I  G.  371 

remedy,  therefore,  ufually  and  properly  be- 
gins the  cure  of  this  difeafe.  The  vomiting 
may  be  excited  by  various  means,  more  gen- 
tle or  more  violent*  The  former  may  an- 
fwer  the  purpoie  of  evacuating  the  contents 
of  the  ilomach  :  But  emetics,  and  vomitings 
may  alfo  excite  the  ordinary  action  of  the 
flomach  ;  and  both,  by  varioufly  agitating 
the  fyflem,  and  particularly  by  determining 
to  the  furface  of  the  body,  may  contribute  to 
remove  the  caufes  of  the  difeafe.  But  thefe 
latter  effects  can  Only  be  obtained  by  the 
ufe  of  emetics  of  the  more  powerful  kind, 
Rich  as  the  aritimonial  emetics  efpecially  are?, 

MCCV, 

The  fecond  fymptom  to  be  palliated,  is  ah 
excefs  of  acidity,  either  in  quantity  or  quali- 
ty, in  the  contents  of  the  flomach.  In  man 
there  is  a  quantity  of  acefcent  aliment  almoft 
conftantly  taken  in,  andi  as  I  think,  always 
undergoes  ail  acetous  fermentation  in  the 
flomach  ;  arid  it  is  therefore  that,  in  the  hu- 
man flbrtiach,  and  in  the  fiomachs  of  all  ani- 
mals unrig  vegetable  food,  there  is  always 
found  an  acid  prefent.  This  acid,  however, 
is  generally  innocent,  and  occafioris  no  difor- 
der,  unlefs  either  the  quantity  of  it  is  very 
large,  or  the  acidity  proceeds  to  a  higher  de- 
gree than  ufual.  But,  in  either  of  thefe  cafes* 
the  acid  occafions  various  diforders,  as  flat- 
'ttlency*  eruftation,  heartburn,  gnawing  pains 

of 


372  PRACTICE 

of  the  ftomach,  irregular  appetites  and  crav- 
ings, loofenefs,  griping,  emaciation,  and  debil- 
ity. To  obviate  or  remove  thefe  effects  ag- 
gravating and  continuing  the  difeafe,  it  is  not 
only  neceffary  to,  correct  the  acid  prefent  in 
the  ftomach  ;  but,  efpecially  as  this  acid 
proves  a  ferment  determining  and  increafing 
the  acefcency  of  the  aliments  afterwards  taken 
in,  it  is  proper  alfo,  as  foon  as  poffible,  to  cor- 
rect the  difpofition  to  excefiive  acidity. 

MCCVL 

The  acidity  prefent  in  the  ftomach  may  be 
corrected  by  the  ufe  of  alkaline  falts,  or  ab«- 
forbent  earths  ;  or  by  fuch  fubftances,  con- 
taining thefe,  as  can  be  decompofed  by  the 
acid  of  the  ftomach.  Of  the  alkalines,  the 
cauftic  is  more  effectual  than  the  mild  ;  and 
this  accounts  for  the  effects  of  lime  water. 
By  employing  abforbents,  we  avoid  the  excefs 
of  alkali*  which  might  fometimes  take  place. 
The  abforbents  are  different,  as  they  form  a 
neutral  more  or  lefs  laxative  ;  and  hence  the 
difference  between  magnefia  alba  and  other 
abforbents.  It  is  to  be  obferved,  that  alka- 
lines  and  abforbents  may  be  employed  to  ex- 
cefs ;  as,  when  employed  in  large  quantity, 
they  may  deprive  the  animal  fluids  of  the  acid 
neceffary  to  their  proper  compofition» 

MCCVIL 

The  difpofition  to  acidity  may  be  obviate 
ed  by  avoiding  acefcenfc  aliments,  and  ufing 

animal 


OF      PHYSIC.  373 

animal  food  little  capable  of  acefcency.  This, 
however,  cannot  be  long  continued  without 
corrupting  the  ftate  of  our  blood  ;  and  as  veg- 
etable food  cannot  be  entirely  avoided,  the 
excefs  of  their  acefcency  may  in  fome  meaf- 
ure  be  avoided,  by  choofing  vegetable  food 
the  lead  difpofed  to  a  vinous  fermentation, 
fuch  as  leavened  bread  and  well  fermented 
liquors,  and,  inftead  of  frefh  native  acids,  em- 
ploying vinegar. 

MCCVIII. 

The  acid  arifing  from  acefcent  matters  in  a 
found  ftate  of  the  ftomacb,  does  not  proceed 
to  any  high  degree,  or  is  again  foon  involved 
and  made  to  difappear  :  But  this  does  not  al- 
ways happen  ;  and  a  more  copious  acidity,  or 
a  higher  degree  of  it,  may  be  produced,  either 
from  a  change  in  the  digeflive  fluids^  become 
•lefs  fit  to  moderate  fermentation  and  to  cover 
acidity,  or  from  their  not  being  fupplied  in 
due  quantity.  How  the  former  may  be  oc- 
cafioned,  we  do  not  well  underfland  ;  but  we 
can  readily  perceive  that  the  latter,  perhaps 
the  former  alfo,  may  proceed  from  a  weaker 
adiion  of  the  mufcular  fibres  of  the  ftomach. 
In  certain  cafes,  fedative  pailions,  immediately 
after  they  arife,  occafion  the  appearance  of 
acidity  in  the  ftomach  which  did  not  appear 
before ;  and  the  ufe  of  Itimulants  often  cor- 
rects or  obviates  art  acidity  that  would  other- 
wife  have  appeared.  From  thefe  confidera- 
tions,  we  conclude,  that  the  production  and 
fubfiflence  of  acidity  in  the  ftomach,  is  to  be 

Vol.  II.  R  efpecially 


3?4  PRACTICE 

efpecially  prevented  by  reftoring  and  exciting 
the  proper  action  of  it,  by  the  feveral  means 
to  be  mentioned  hereafter. 

MCCIX, 

But  it  is  alfo  to  be  further  obferved,  that; 
though  there  are  certain  powers  in  the  ftom- 
ach for  preventing  a  too  copious  acidity,  or  a 
high  degree  of  it,  they  are  not  however  always 
fumcient  for  preventing  acefcency,  or  for  cov- 
ering the  acidity  produced  ;  and  therefore,  as 
long  as  vegetable  fubftances  remain  iri  the 
ftomach,  their  acefcency  may  go  on  and  ih- 
creafe.  From  hence  we  perceive*,  that  a  fpec- 
ial  caufe  of  the  excefs  of  acidity  may  be,  the 
too  long  retention  of  acefcent  matters  in  the 
ftomach  ;  whether  this  may  be  from  thefe 
matters  being  of  more  difficult  folution,  or 
from  the  wealcnefs  of  the  ftomach  more  (low- 
ly difchar£irt£  its  contents  into  the  duodenum, 
or  from  fome  impediment  to  the  free  evacu- 
ation of  the  ftomach  by  the  pylorus.  The 
latter  of  thefe  caufes  we  are  well  acquainted 
with,  in  the  cafe  of  a  fcirrhous  pylorus*  pro- 
ducing commonly  the  higheft  degree  of  acid- 
ity. In  all  the  iiiftarlces  of  this  fcirrhofity  I 
have  met  with,  I  have  found  it  incurable  : 
But  the  firft  of  thefe  caufes  is  to  be  obviated 
by  avoiding  fuch  aliments  as  are  of  difficult 
folution  ;  and  the  fecond  is  to  be  mended  by 
the  feveral  remedies  for  exciting  the  action  of 
the  ftomach,  to  be  mentioned  afterwards, 

MCCXe 


OF       PHYSIC.  3.7.5 

MCCX. 

The  third  fymptom  commonly  accompa- 
nying dyfpepfia,  which  requires  to  be  imme- 
diately removed,  is  coftivenefs.  There  is  fo 
much  connexion  between  the  feveral  portion^ 
of  the  alimentary  canal  with  refpect  to  the  pe- 
ri ftaltic  motion,  thatj  if  accelerated  or  retard- 
ed in  any  one  part,  the  other  parts  of  it  are 
commonly  affected  in  the  fame  manner.  Thu's, 
■as  the  brifker- action  of  the  ftomach  mult  ac- 
celerate the  action  of  the  inteftines,  fo  the 
-flower  action  of  the  inteftines  muft  in  fome 
■meafure  retard  that  of  the  flomach.  It  is 
therefore  of  confequence  to  the  proper  action 
of  the  flomach,  that  the  periftal tic  motion  of  the 
inteftines  determining  their  contents  down- 
wards, be  regularly  continued  •  and  that  'all 
coftivenefs,  or  interruption  of  that  determina- 
tion, be  avoided.  This  may  be  done  by  the 
various  means  of  exciting  the  action  of  the  in- 
teftines :  But  it  is  to  be  obferved  here,  that  as 
every  confiderable  evacuation  of  the  inteftines 
weakens  their  action,  and  is  ready  therefore 
to  induce  coftivenefs  when  the  evacuation  is 
over  ;  fo  thofe  purgatives  which  produce  a 
large  evacuation,  are  urlfit  for  correcting  the 
habit  of  coftivenefs.  This,  therefore,  fhould 
be  attempted  by  medicines  which  do  no  more 
than  folicit  the  inteftines  to  a  more  ready  dif- 
charge  of  their  prefent  contents,  without  either 
hurrying  their  action,  or  increafmg  the  excre- 
tions made  into  their  cavity  ;  either  of  which 
effects  might  produce  a  purging.  There  are, 
R  2  I  think. 


876  PRACTICE 

I  think,  certain  medicines  peculiarly  proper 
on  this  occafion,  as  they  feem  to  flimulate  ef« 
pecially  the  great  guts,  and  to  a£t  little  on  the 
higher  parts  of  the  inteftinal  canal. 

MCCXI. 

We  have  thus  mentioned  the  feveral  means 
T>f  executing  our  iecond  indication  ;  and  I 
proceed  to  the  third,  which  is,  as  we  have 
faid,  the  proper  curative ;  and  it  is  to  reftore 
the  tone  of  the  flomach,  the  lofs  of  which  we 
confider  as  the  proximate  caufe  of  the  difeafe, 
or  at  lead  as  the  chief  part  of  it.  The  means 
of  fatisfying  this  indication  we  refer  to  two 
heads.  One  is,  of  thofe  means  which  operate 
directly  and  chiefly  on  the  flomach  itfelf ;  and 
the  other  is,  of  thofe  means  which,  operating 
upon  the  whole  fyflem,  have  their  tonic  ef- 
fects thereby  communicated  to  the  flomach. 

MCCXII. 

The  medicines  which  operate  directly  on 
the  flomach,  are  either  ftimulants  or  tonics. 

The  ftimulants  are  faline  or  aromatic. 

The  faline  are  acids  or  neutrals. 

Acids  of  all  kinds  feem  to  have  the  power 
of  ftimulating  the  flomach,  and  therefore  oft- 
en increafe  appetite  ;  But  the  native  acids,  as 
liable  to  fermentation,  may  otherwife  do  harm, 
and  are  therefore  of  ambiguous  ufe.  The  acids, 
therefore,  chiefly  and  fuccefsfully  employed, 
are  the  vitriolic,  muriatic,  and  the  diftilled  acid 
of  vegetables,  as  ft  is  found  in  tar  water,  which 
are  all  of  them  antizymics, 

The 


OF       PHYSIC.  377 

The  neutral  falts  anfwering  this  intention, 
are  efpecially  thofe  which  have  the  muriatic 
acid  in  their  compofition,  though  it  is  pre- 
fumed  that  neutrals  of  all  kinds  have  more  or 
Jefs  of  the  fame  virtue. 

Mccxin. 

The  aromatics,  and  perhaps  fome  other 
acrids,  certainly  ftimulate  the  ftomachj  as 
they  obviate  the  acefcency  and  flatulency  of 
vegetable  food  :  But  their  ftimulus  is  tranfi- 
tory  ;  and  if  frequently  repeated,  and  taken 
in  large  quantities,  they  may  hurt  the  tone  of 
the  ftomach. 

MCCXIV. 

The  tonics  employed  to  ftrengthen  the 
ftomach  are  bitters,  bitters  and  aftringents 
combined,  and  chalybeates. 

Bitters  are  undoubtedly  tonic  medicines, 
both  with  refpe£t  to  the  ftomach  and  the  whole 
fyflem  :  But  their  long  continued  ufe  has 
been  found  to  deftroy  the  tone  of  the  florn- 
ach,  and  of  the  whole  fyflem ;  and,  whether 
this  is  from  the  mere  repetition  of  their  tonic 
operation,  or  from  fome  narcotic  power  join- 
ed with  the  tonic  in  them,  I  am  uncertain. 

MCCXV. 

Bitters  and  aftringents  combined,  are,  prob- 
ably, more  effectual  tonics  than  either  of  them 
taken  fingly  ;  and  we  fuppofe  fuch  a  com- 
bination to  take  place  in  the  Peruvian  bark  ; 
which  therefore  proves  a  powerful  tonic,  both 
R  3  with. 


378  PRACTICE 

with  refpecfc  to  the  ftomach  and  to  the  whole 
fyftem.  But  I  have  fome  ground  to  fufpecl^ 
that  the  long  continued  ufe  of  this  bark  may* 
like  bitters,  deftroy  both  the  tone  of  the  ftom-* 
ach  and  of  the  whole  fyftem. 

MCCXVI. 

Chalybeates  may  be  employed  as  tonics  in 
various  forms,  and  in  confiderable  quantities* 
with  fafety.  They  have  been  often  employ- 
ed in  the  form  of  mineral  waters,  and  feem- 
ingly  with  fuccefs  :  But  whether  this  is  owing 
to  the  chalybeate  in  the  compolition  of  thefe 
waters,  or  to  fome  other  circumftances  attend- 
ing their  ufe,  I  dare  not  pofifcively  determine  j 
but  the  latter  opinion  feems  to  me  the  more 
probable, 

MCCXVIL 

The  remedies  which  ftrengthen  the  flom- 
ach, by  being  applied  to  the  whole  body,  are, 
exercife  and  the  application  of  cold. 

As  exercife  ftrengthens  the  whole  body,  it 
muft  alfo  ftrengthen  the  ftomach  ;  but  it  does 
this  alfo  in  a  particular  manner,  by  promot- 
ing perfpiration,  and  exciting  the  action  of 
the  veffels  on  the  furface  of  the  body,  which 
have  a  particular  confent  with  the  mufcular 
fibres  of  the  ftomach.  This  particularly  ex- 
plains whv  the  exercifes  of  geftation,  though 
not  the  moft  powerful  in  ftrengthening  the 
whole  fyftem,  are,  however,  very  powerful  in 
ftrengthening  the  ftomach  ;  of  which  we  have 
a  remarkable  proof  in  the   effects  of  failing. 

In 


OF       PHYSIC.  379 

In  ftrengthening  the  general  fyftem,  as  fatigue 
muft  be  avoided,  fo  bodily  exercife  is  of  amu 
biguous  ufe  ;  and  perhaps  it  is  thereby,  that 
riding  on  horfeback  has  been  fo  often  found 
to  be  one  of  the  moil  powerful  means  of 
ftrengthening  the  flomach,  and  thereby  of 
curing  dyfpepfia. 

MCCXVIII. 

The  other  general  remedy  of  dyfpepfia,  h 
the  application  of  cold  :  Which  may  be  in 
two  ways  ;  that  is,  either  by  the  application 
of  cold  air,  or  of  cold  water..  It  is  probable, 
that,  in  the  atmofphere  conftantly  furround- 
ing  our  bodies,  a  certain  degree-  of  cold,  con- 
fiderably  lefs  than  the  temperature  of  our 
bodies  themfelves,  is  neceffary  to  the  health 
of  the  human  body.  Such  a  degree  of  cold 
feems  to  ftrengthen  the  vefTels-  on  the  furface 
of  the  body,  and  therefore  the  mufcular  fibres 
of  the  ftomach.  But,  further,  it  is  well  known, 
that  if  the  body  is  in  exercife  fufficient  to  fup- 
port  fuch  a  determination  to  the  furface,  as  to 
prevent  the  cold  from  producing  an  entire 
conftriftion  of  the  pores  ;  a  certain  degree  of 
cold  in  the  atmofphere,  with  fuch  exerciie, 
will  render  the  perfpiration  more  confider- 
able..  From  the  fliarp  appetite  that  in  fuch 
circumftances  is  commonly  produced,  we  can 
have  no  doubt,  that  by  the  application  of 
fuch  cold,  the  tone  of  the  flomach  is  confider- 
ably  (trengthened.  Cold  air,  therefore,  ap- 
plied with  exercife,  is  a  mofc  powerful  tonic 
with  refpect  to  the  flomach  ;  and  this  explains 
R  4  why* 


380  PRACTICE 

why,  for  that  purpofe,  no  exercifes  within 
doors,  or  in  clofe  carriages,  are  fo  ufeful  as 
thofe  in  the  open  air. 

MCCXIX. 

From  the  fame  reafoning,  we  can  perceive,, 
that  the  application  of  cold  water,  or  cold 
bathing,  while  it  is  a  tonic  with  refpecl;  to  the 
fyftem  in  general,  and  efpecially  as  exciting 
the  action  of  the  extreme  veffels,  mud  in  both 
refpe&s  be  a  powerful  means  of  ftrengthening 
the  tone  of  the  ftomach. 

MCCXX. 

Thefe  are  the  remedies  to  be  employed  to- 
wards a  radical  cure  of  idiopathic  dyfpepfia ; 
and  it  might  be,  perhaps,  expected  here,  that 
I  fhould  treat  alfo  of  the  various  cafes  of  the 
fympathic  difeafe.  But  it  will  be  obvious  that 
this  cannot  be  properly  done  without  treating 
of  all  the  difeafes  of  which  the  dyfpepfia  is  a 
fymptom,  which  cannot  be  proper  in  this 
place.  It  has  been  partly  done  already,  and 
will  be  further  treated  of  in  the  courfe  of  this 
work.  In  the  mean  time,  it'  may  be  proper 
to  obferve,  that  there  is  not  fo  much  occafion 
for  diftinguifhing  between  the  idiopathic  and 
fympathic  dyfpepfia,  as  there  is  in  many  oth- 
er cafes  of  idiopathic  and  fympathic  difeafes. 
For,  as  the  fympathic  cafes  of  dyfpepfia  are 
owing  to  a  lofs  of  tone  in  fome  other  part  of 
the  fyftem,  which  is  from  thence  communi- 
cated to  the  flomach  ;  fo  the  tone  of  the  flom- 
ach reflored,  may  be  communicated  to  the 

part 


OF       PHYSIC.  38X 

part  primarily  affected;  and  therefore  the 
remedies  of  the  idiopathic  may  be  often  ufe- 
fully  employed,  and  are  often  the  remedies 
chiefly  employed,  in  fympathic  dyfpepfia. 

MCCXXI. 

Another  part  of  our  bufmefs  here  might  be 
to  fay,  how  fome  other  of  the  urgent  fymp- 
toms,  befides  thofe  above  mentioned,  are  to  be 
palliated.  On  this  fubject,  I  think  it  is  enough 
to  fay,  that  the  fymptoms  chiefly  requiring 
to  be  immediately  relieved;  are  flatulency, 
heartburn,  other  kinds  of  pain  in  the  region 
of  the  ftomach,  and  vomiting.. 

The  dyfpeptic  are  ready  to  fuppofe  that 
the  whole  of  their  difeafe  confifts  in  a  flatu- 
lency. In  this  it  will  be  obvious  that  they  are 
miftaken ;  but,  although  the  flatulency  is  not 
to  be  entirely  cured,  but  by  mending  the  im- 
becility of  the  ftomach  by  the  means  above 
mentioned;,  yet  the  flatulent  diftention  of  the 
ftomach  may  be  relieved  by  carminatives,  as 
they  are  called,  or  medicines  that  produce  a 
difcharge  of  wind  from  the  flomach  ;.fuch  are 
the  various  antifpafmodics,  of  which  the  moft 
effectual  is  the  vitriolic  aether. 

The  heartburn  may  be  relieved  by  abforb- 
ents,  antifpafmodics,  or  demulcents. 

The  other  pains  of  the  ftomach  may  be 
fometimes  relieved  by  carminatives,  but  moil 
certainly  by  opiates* 

Vomiting  is  to  be  cured  moft  effectually  by 
opiates  thrown  by  injection  into  the  anus. 

Vol.  2„  R-5  G  H  A  P. 


382 ,  PRACTICE 

CHAP.         III. 

0?  HYPOCHONDRIASIS,  or  the  HY- 
POCHONDRIAC AFFECTION,  com- 
monly called  VAPOURS  or  LOW 
SPIRITS. 

MCCXXII. 

I  N  certain  perfons  there  is  a 
flate  of  mind  diflinguifhed  by  a  concurrence 
of  the  following  circumflances  :  A  languor, 
liflleffnefs,  or  want  of  refolution  and  activity 
with  refpecl;  to  all  undertakings  ;  a  difpofition 
to  ferioufnefs,  fadnefs,  and  timidity  ;  as  to  all 
future  events,  an  apprehenfion  of  the  worft 
or  mofl  unhappy  flate  of  them  ;  and  there- 
fore, often  upon  flight  grounds,  an  apprehen- 
fion of  great  evil.  Such  perfons  are  particu- 
larly attentive  to  the  flate  of  their  own  health, 
to  every  the  fmallefl  change  of  feeling  in  their 
bodies ;  and  from  an)/  unufual  feeling,  per- 
haps of  the  flightefl  kind,  they  apprehend 
great  danger,  and  even  death  itfelf.  In  ref- 
pecl; to  all  thefe  feelings  and  apprehenfions, 
there  is  commonly  the  mofl  obflinate  belief 
and  perfuafion. 

MCCXXIII. 

This  flate  of  mind  is  the  Hypochondriacs 
of  medical  writers.  See  Linnaei  Genera  Mor- 
borom,  Gqu,  j6.   et   Sagari  Syftema  Symp- 

tomaticurn, 


OF      PHYSIC.  aS.3' 

tomaticum,  Ciafs  XIII.  Gen.  5.  The  fame 
ftate  of  mind  is  what  has  been  commonly  call- 
ed Vapours  and  Low  Spirits.  Though  the 
term  Vapours  may  be  founded  on  a  falfe  the— 
ory,  and  therefore  improper,  I  beg  leave,  for: 
a  purpofe  that  will  immediately  appear,  to 
employ  it  for  a  little  here. 

MCCXXIV. 

Vapours,  then,  or  the  ftate  of  mind  def~ 
cribed  above,  is,  like  every  other  ftate  of  mind,, 
connected  with  a  certain  ftate  of  the  body, 
which  mult  be  inquired  into  in  order  to  its 
being  treated  as  a  difeafe  by  the  art  of  phyfia. 

MCCXXV. 

This  ftate  of  the  body,  however,  is  not  very 
eafiiy  ascertained  :  For  we  can  perceive,  that 
on  different  occaiions  it  is  very  different ;  va- 
pours being  combined  fometimes  with  dyf- 
pepfia,.  fometimes  with  hyfteria,  and  fome- 
times with  melancholia,  which  are  difeafes 
feemingly  depending  on  very  different  ftates 
of  the  body. 

MCCXXVI. 

The  combination  of  vapours  with  dyfpep- 
fm  is  very  frequent,  and  in  feemingly  very 
different  circumftances.  It  is,  especially,, 
thefe  different  circumftances  that  I  would 
w-ifti  to  afcertain  ;  and  I  remark,  that  they  are 
manifeftly  of  two  different  kinds.  Firft,  as 
the  diieafe  occurs  in  young  perfons  of  both; 
R  6  fexes. 


384  PRACTICE 

fexes,  in  perfons  of  a  fanguine  temperament, 
and  of  a  lax  and  flaccid  habit.  Secondly,  as 
it  occurs  in  elderly  perfons  of  both  fexes,  of 
a  melancholic  teffl^erament,  and  of  a  firm 
and  rigid  habit. 

MCCXXVII. 

Thefe  two  different  cafes  of  the  combina- 
tion of  vapours  and  dyfpepfia,  I  confider  as 
two  diftincl  difeafes,  to  be  diftinguifhed  chief- 
ly by  the  temperament  prevailing  in  the  per- 
fons affected. 

As  the  dyfpepfia  of  fanguine  temperaments 
is  often  without  vapours  ;  and  as  the  vapours, 
when  joined  with  dyfpepfia  in  fuch  tempera- 
ments, may  be  confidered  as,  perhaps,  always 
a  fymptom  of  the  affection  of  the  ftomach  ; 
fo  to  this  combination  of  dyfpepfia  and  va- 
pours, I  would  flill  apply  the  appellation  of 
Dyfpepfia*  and  confider  it  as  ftri&ly  the  dif- 
eafe  treated  of  in  the  preceding  chapter. 

But  the  combination  of  dyfpepfia  and  va- 
pours in  melancholic  temperaments,  as  the 
vapours  or  the  turn  of  mind  peculiar  to  the 
temperament,  nearly  that  defcribed  above  in 
MCCXXII,  are  effentiaj  circumftances  of  the 
difeafe  ;  and  as  this  turn  of  mind  is  often  with 
fewa  or  only  flight  fymptom s  of  dyfpepfia  ; 
and,  even  though  the  latter  be  attending,  as 
they  feem  to  be  rather  the  effects  of  the  gen- 
eral temperament,  than  of  any  primary  or 
topical  affe&ion  of  the  ftomach  ;  I  confider 
this  combination  as  a  very  different  difeafe 

from 


OF       PHYSIC.         385 

from  the  former,  and  would  apply  to  it  ftricV 
ly  the  appellation  of  Hypochondria/is. 

MCCXXVffl 

Having  thus  pointed  out  a  diftin&ion  be- 
tween Dyfpepfia  and  Hypochondriacs,  I  fhall 
now,  ufmg  thefe  terms  in  the  ftri&  fenfe  above 
mentioned,  make  fome  obfervations  which 
may,  I  think,  illuflrate  the  fubjecl:,  and  more 
clearly  and  fully  eftablifh  the  diftin&ion  pro- 
pofed. 

MCCXXIX. 

The  dyfpepfia  often  appears  early  in  life, 
and  is  frequently  much  mended  as  life  ad- 
vances :  But  the  hypochondriacs  feldom  ap- 
pears early  in  life,  and  more  ufually  in  more 
advanced  years  only  ;  and  more  certainly  Mill, 
when  it  has  once  taken  place,  it  goes  on  in- 
creafing  as  life  advances  to  old  age. 

This  feems  to  be  particularly  well  illuftrat- 
ed,  by  our  obferving  the  changes  in  the  ftate 
of  the  mind  which  ufually  take  place  in  the 
courfe  of  life.  In  youth,  the  mind  is  cheer- 
ful, active,  rafh,  and  moveable  :  But  as  life 
advances,  the  mind  by  degrees  becomes  more 
ferious,  flow,  cautious,  and  fteady  ;  till  at 
length,  in  old  age,  the  gloomy,  timid,  diftruft- 
ful,  and  obftinate  ftate  of  melancholic  temper- 
aments, is  more  exquifitely  formed.  In  pro- 
ducing thefe  changes,  it  is  true,  that  moral 
caufes  have  a  fhare ;  but  it  is  at  the  fame  time 
obvious,  that  the  temperament  of  the  body 
determines  the  operation  of  thefe  moral  cauf- 


386  PRACTICE 

es,  fooner  or  later,  and  in  a  greater  or  leffer 
degree,  to  have  their  effects.  The  fanguine 
temperament  retains  longer  the  character  of 
youth,  while  the  melancholic  temperament 
brings  on  more  early  the  manners  of  old  age. 

MCCXXX. 

Upon  the  whole,  it  appears,  that  the  ftate  of 
the  mind  which  attends,  and  efpecially  diftin- 
guilhes  hypochondriacs,  is  the  effect  of  that 
fame  rigidity  of  the  foiids,  torpor  of  the  ner- 
vous power,  and  peculiar  balance  between  the 
arterial  and  venous  fyftems  which  occur  in 
advanced  life,  and  which  at  all  times  take 
place  more  or  lefs  in  melancholic  tempera- 
ments. If  therefore  there  be  alfo  fomewhat 
of  a  like  (late  of  mind  attending  the  dyfpep- 
fia which  occurs  early  in  life  in  fanguine  tem- 
peraments and  lax  habits,  it  mull  depend  up- 
on a  different  ftate  of  the  body,  and  probably 
upon  a  weak  and  moveable  flate  of  the  ner- 
vous power., 

MCCXXX  I. 

Agreeable  to  all  this,  in  dyfpepfia,  there  is 
more  of  fpafmodic  affection,  and  the  affection 
of  the  mind  (MCCXXII)  is  often  abfent,  and, 
when  prefent,  is  perhaps  always  of  a  {lighter 
kind  :  While,  in  hypochondria fis,  the  affec- 
tion of  the  mind  is  more  conftant,  and  the 
fymptoms  of  dyfpepfia,  or  the  affections  of 
the  ftomach,  are  often  abfent,  or,  when  pref- 
ent, are  in  a  flighter  degree* 

I  believe 


OF       PHYSIC.  3&7 

I  believe  the  affection  of  the  mind  is  com- 
monly different  in  the  two  difeafes.  In  dyf- 
pepfia,  it  is  often  languor  and  timidity  only, 
calily  difpelled  ;  while  in  hypochondriafis,  it 
is  generally  the  gloomy  and  rivetted  appre- 
henflon  of  evil. 

The  two  difeafes  are  alfo  diftinguifhed  by 
fome  other  circumftances.  Dyfpepfia,  as  I 
have  faid,  is  often  a  fymptomatic  affection  ; 
while  hypochondriafis  is,  perhaps,  always  a 
primary  and  idiopathic  difeafe. 

As  debility  may  be  induced  by  many  dif- 
ferent caufes,  dyfpepiia  is  a  frequent  difeafe ; 
while  hypochondriafis,  depending  upon  a  pe- 
culiar temperament,  is  more  rare. 

MCCXXXII. 

Having  thus  endeavoured  to  diftinguifh  the 
two  difeafes,  I  fuppofe  the  peculiar  nature  and 
proximate  caufe  of  hypochondriafis  will  be 
underftood  ;  and  I  proceed  therefore  to  treat 
of  its  cure. 

So  far  as  the  affections  of  the  body,  and  par- 
ticularly of  the  ftomach.  are  the  fame  here  as 
in  the  cafe  of  dyfpepfia,  the  method  of  cure 
might  be  fuppofed  to  be  alfo  the  fame  ;  and 
accordingly  the  practice  has  been  carried  on 
with  little  diftinc~t.ion  :  But  I  am  perfuaded 
that  a  diftinclion  is  often  neceffary. 

MCCXXXIII. 

There  may  be  a  foundation  here  for  the 
fame  preservative  indication  as  firft  laid  down 

in 


38a  PRACTICE 

in  the  cure  of  dyfpepfia  (MCCII)  ;  but  I  can- 
not treat  this  fubjecl  fo  clearly  or  fully  as  I 
could  wifh,  becaufe  I  have  not  yet  had  fo 
much  opportunity  of  obfervation  as  I  think 
neceflary  to  afcertain  the  remote  caufes  ;  and 
I  can  hardly  make  ufe  of  the  observations  of 
others,  who  have  feldom  or  never  diftinguifh- 
ed  between  the  two  difeafes.  What,  indeed, 
has  been  faid  with  refpecl;  to  the  remote  cauf- 
es of  melancholia,  will  often  apply  to  the  hy- 
pochondriafis,  which  I  now  treat  of ;  but  the 
fubjecl:  of  the  former  has  been  fo  much  in- 
volved in  a  doubtful  theory,  that  I  find  it  dif- 
ficult to  felecl  the  fa£fo  that  might  properly 
and  ftri&ly  apply  to  the  latter.  I  delay  this 
fubjecl:,  therefore,  till  another  occafion  ;  but 
in  the  mean  time  trull,  that  what  I  have  faid 
regarding  the  nature  of  the  difeafe,  and  fome 
remarks  I  mall  have  occafion  to  offer  in  con- 
fidering  the  method  of  cure,  may  in  fome 
meafure  fupply  my  deficiency  on  this  fubjecV 
of  the  remote  caufes. 

MCCXXXIV. 

The  fecond  indication  laid  down  in  the  cure 
of  dyfpepfia  (MCCI)  has  properly  a  place 
here  ;  but  it  is  frill  to  be  executed  with  fome 
diftin&ion. 

MCCXXXV. 

An  anorexia,  and  accumulation  of  crudities 
in  the  ftomach,  does  not  fo  commonly  occur 
in  hypochondriacs  as  in  dyfpepfia ;  and  there- 
fore vomiting  (MCCIV)  is  not  fo  often  nec- 
eflary in  the  former  as  in  the  latter. 

MCCXXXVI. 


OF       PHYSIC.  389 

MCCXXXVI. 

The  fym-ptom  of  excefs  of  acidity,  from  the 
flow  evacuation  of  the  ftomach  in  melanchol- 
ic temperaments,  often  arifes  to  a  very  high 
degree  in  hypochondria fis  ;  and  therefore,  for 
the  fame  reafon  as  in  MCCV,  it  is  to  be  ob- 
viated and  corrected  with  the  utmoft  care. 
It  is  upon  this  account  that  the  feveral  an- 
tacids, and  the  other  means  of  obviating  acid- 
ity, are  to  be  employed  in  hypochondriacs,, 
and  with  the  fame  attentions  and  confidera- 
tions  as  in  MCCVI,  and  following  ;  with  this 
reflection,  however,  that  the  exciting  the  ac- 
tion of  the  ftomach  there  mentioned,  is  to  be 
a  little  differently  underftood,  as  fhall  be  here- 
after explained. 

MCCXXXVII. 

As  coftivenefs,  and  that  commonly  to  at 
considerable  degree,,  is  a  very  conftant  attend- 
ant of  hypochondriacs,,  fo  it  is  equally  hurt- 
ful as  in  dyfpepfia.  It  may  be  remedied  by 
the  fame  means  in  the  former  as  in  the  latter^ 
and  they  are  to  be  employed  with  the  fame 
reftriclions  as  in  MCCX. 

MCCXXXVIII. 

It  is  efpecially  with  refpecfc  to  the  third  in- 
dication laid  down  in  the  cure  of  dyfpepfia 
(MCCI),  that  there  is  a  difference  of  practice 
to  be  obferved  in  the  cure  of  hypochondriacs  ; 
and  that  often  one  directly  oppofite  to  that  in 
the  cafe  of  dyfpepfia,  is  to  be  followed. 

MCCXXXIX. 


390  PRACTICE 


MCCXXXXX, 

In  dyfpepfia,  the  chief  remedies  are  the  to- 
nic medicines,  which  to  me  feem  neither  nec- 
effary  nor  fafe  in  hypochondriafis  ;  for  in  this 
there  is  not  a  lofs  of  tone,  but  a  want  of  activ- 
ity that  is  to  be  remedied. 

Chalybeate  mineral  waters  have  commonly 
been  employed  in  hypochondriafis,  and  feem- 
ingly  with  fuccefs.  But  this  is  probably  to 
be  imputed  to  the  amufement  and  exercife 
ufually  accompanying  the  ufe  of  thefe  waters, 
rather  than  to  the  tonic  power  of  the  fmall 
quantity  of  iron  which  they  contain.  Per- 
haps the  elementary  water,  by  favouring  the 
excretions,  may  have  a  fhare  in  relieving  the 
difeafe, 

MCCXL. 

Cold  bathing  is  often  highly  ufeful  to  the 
dyfpeptic,  andx  as  a  general  ftimulant,  may 
fometimes  feem  ufeful  to  the  hypochondriac ; 
but  it  is  not  commonly  fo  to  the  latter ;  while, 
on  the  other  hand,  warm  bathing,  hurtful  to 
the  dyfpeptic,  is  often  extremely  ufeful  to  the 
hypochondriac^ 

MCCXLL 

Another  inftance  of  a   contrary  practice 
neceifary  in  the  two  difeafes,  and  illuftrating 
their  refpeclive  natures,  ist  that  the  drinking 
tea  and  coffee  is  always  hurtful  to  the  dyf- 
peptic^ 


OF      PHYSIC.  391 

peptic,  but  is  commonly  extremely  ufeful  to 
the  hypochondriac. 

MCCXLII. 

Exercife,  as  it  flrengthens  the  fyftem,  and 
thereby  the  ftomach,  and  more  efpecially,  as, 
by  increafing  the  perfpiration,  it  excites  the 
action  of  the  ftomach,  it  proves  one  of  the 
mod  ufeful  remedies  in  dyfpeplia  ;  and  fur- 
ther, as,  by  increafing  the  perfpiration,  it  ex- 
cites the  activity  of  the  ftomach,  it  likewife 
proves  an  ufeful  remedy  in  the  hypochondria 
afis.  However,  in  the  latter  cafe,  as  I  (hall 
explain  prefently,  it  is  ftiil  a  more  ufeful  rem- 
edy by  its  operation  upon  the  mind  than  by 
that  upon  the  body. 

MCCXLIII. 

It  is  now  proper  that  we  proceed  to  con- 
fider  the  molt  important  article  of  our  prac- 
tice in  this  difeafe,  and  which  is,  to  confider 
the  treatment  of  the  mind  ;  an  affection  of 
which  fometimes  attends  dyfpepfia,  but  is  al- 
ways the  chief  circumftance  in  hypochondria- 
fis.  What  I  am  to  fuggeft  here,  will  apply 
to  both  difeafes  ;  but  it  is  the  hypochondriacs 
that  I  am  to  keep  moft  conftantly  in  view. 

MCCXLIV. 

The  management  of  the  mind,  in  hypo- 
chondriacs, is  often  nice  and  difficult.     The 

firm 


392  PRACTICE 

firm  perfuafion  that  generally  prevails  in  fucft 
patients,  does  not  allow  their  feelings  to  be 
treated  as  imaginary,  nor  their  apprehenfion 
of  danger  to  be  considered  as  groundlefs, 
though  the  phyfician  may  be  perfuaded  that 
it  is  the  cafe  in  both  refpec\s.  Such  patients, 
therefore,  are  not  to  be  treated  either  by  rail- 
lery or  by  reafoning. 

It  is  faid  to  be  the  manner  of  hypochon- 
driacs to  change  often  their  phyfician  ;  and 
indeed  they  often  do  it  confidently  :  For  a 
phyfician  who  does  not  admit  the  reality  of 
the  difeafe,  cannot  be  fuppofed  to  take  much 
pains  to  cure  it^  or  to  avert  the  danger  of 
whach  he  entertains  no  apprehenfion. 

If  in  any  cafe  the  pious  fraud  of  a  placebo^ 
be  allowable,  it  feems  to  be  in  treating  hypo- 
chondriacs ;  who,  anxious  for  relief,  are  fond 
of  medicines,  and,  though  often  difappointed^ 
will  ftill  take  every  new  drug  that  can  be  pro* 
pofed  to  them. 

MCCXLV. 

As  it  is  the  nature  of  man  to  indulge  every 
prefent  emotion,,  fo  the  hypochondriac  cher- 
iihes  his  fears,  and,  attentive  to  every  feeling^ 
finds  in  trifles  light  as  air  a  ftrong  confirma- 
tion of  his  apprehenfions.  His  cure  there- 
fore depends  efpecially  upon  the  interrup- 
tion of  his  attention,  or  upon  its  being  di- 
verted to  other  objecis  than  his  own  feel- 
ings. 

MCCXLVI. 


OF       PHYSIC.  393 


MCCXLVI. 

Whatever  averfion  to  application  of  any 
kind  may  appear  in  hypochondriacs,  there  is 
nothing  more  pernicious  to  them  than  abfo- 
lute  idlenefs,  or  a  vacancy  from  all  earner}; 
purfuit.  It  is  owing  to  wealth  admitting  of 
indolence,  and  leading  to  the  purfuit  of  tran- 
fitory  and  unsatisfying  amufements,  or  to 
that  of  exhaufting  pleafures  only,  that  the 
prefent  times  exhibit  to  us  fo  many  inflances 
of  hypochondriacifm. 

The  occupations  of  bufinefs  fukable  to 
their  circumflances  and  fituation  in  life,  if 
neither  attended  with  emotion,  anxiety,  nor 
fatigue,  are  always  to  be  admitted,  and  per- 
filled  in  by  hypochondriacs.  But  occupa- 
tions upon  which  a  man's  fortune  depends, 
and  which  are  always  therefore,  objects  of 
anxiety  to  melancholic  men  ;  and  more  par* 
ticularly  where  fuch  occupations  are  expofed 
to  accidental  interruptions,  disappointments, 
and  failures,  it  is  from  thefe  that  the  hypo- 
chondriac is  certainly  to  be  withdrawn. 

MCCXLVII. 

The  hypochondriac  who  is  not  neceflarily, 
by  circumflances  or  habits,  engaged  in  bufi- 
nefs, is  to  be  drawn  from  his  attention  to  his 
own  feelings  by  fome  amufement. 

The  various  kinds  of  fport  and  hunting,  as 
purfued  with  fome  ardor,  and  attended  with 

exercife„ 


§94  PRACTICE 

exercife,  if  not  too  violent  are  amongft  the 
moil  ufefuL 

All  thofe  amufements  which  are  in  the 
open  air,  joined  with  moderate  exercifes  and 
requiring  fome  dexterity,  are  generally  of  ufe. 

Within  doors,  company  which  engages  at- 
tention, which  is  willingly  yielded  tOj  and  is 
at  the  fame  time  of  a  cheerful  kind,  will  be 
always  found  of  great  fervice. 

Playi  in  which  fome  Hull  is  required,  and 
where  the  (lake  is  not  an  object  of  much 
anxiety,  if  not  too  long  protracted^  may  often 
be  admitted. 

In  dyfpeptics,  however,  gaming,  liable  to 
fudden  and  confiderable  emotions,  is  danger- 
ous ;  and  the  long  continuance  of  it,  with 
night  watching,  is  violently  debilitating.  But 
in  melancholicsj  who  commonly  excel  in  ikill, 
and  are  lefs  fufceptible  of  violent  emotions, 
it  is  more  admiffiblej  and  is  often  the  only 
amufement  that  can  engage  them. 

Mufic,  to  a  nice  ear,  is  a  hazardous  amufe- 
t^ient,  as  long  attention  to  it  is  very  fatiguing. 

•MCCXLVIil. 

It  frequently  happens,  that  amufements  of 
every  kind  are  rejected  by  hypochondriacs  ; 
and  in  that  cafe,  mechanical  means  of  inter- 
rupting thought  are  the  remedies  to  be  fought 
for. 

Such  is  to  be  found  in  briflc  exercife,  which 
t-eqjuires  fome  attention  in   the  conduct  of  it. 

Walking 


OF       PHYSIC.  395 

Walking  is  feldom  of  this  kind  ;  though,  as 
gratifying  to  the  reflleffnefs  of  hypochondri- 
acs, it  has  fometimes  been  found  ufefuL- 

The  required  interruption  of  thought  is 
beft  obtained  by  riding  on  horfeback,  or  in 
driving  a  carriage  of  ariy  kind. 

The  exercife  of  failing,  except  it  be  in  an 
open  boat,  engaging  fome  attention,  does  very 
little  fervice. 

Exercife  in  an  eafy  carriage^  in  the  direction 
of  which  the  traveller  takes  no  part,  unlefs  it 
be  upon  rough  roads,  or  driven  pretty  quicks 
ly^  and  with  long  continuance,  is  of  little  ad^ 


vantage. 


MCCXLIX, 

Whatever  exercife  may  be  employed,  it 
will  be  moft  effectual  when  employed  in  the 
purfuit  of  a  journey  ;  firft,  becaufe  it  with- 
draws a  perfon  from  many  obje6ls  of  urteafi- 
nefs  and  care  which  might  prefeht  themfelves 
at  home  ;  fecondly,  as  it  engages  in  more  con- 
ftant  exercife,  and  in  a  greater  degree  of  it 
than  is  commonly  taken  in  airings  about 
'home  ;  and,  laftly,  as  it  is  constantly  prefent- 
irlg  new  objecls  which  call  Forth  a  perfon's 
attention. 

MCCL. 

In  our  fyftem  of  Nofology  we  have,  next 
Id  Hypochondriafis,  placed  the  Chlorous,  be- 
caufe 


89s 


PRACTICE 


caufe  I  once  thought  it  might  be  confidered 
as  a  genus,  comprehending,  befides  the  Chlo- 
rofis  of  Amenorrhcea,  fome  fpecies  of  Ca- 
chexy :  But,  as  I  cannot  find  this  to  be  well 
founded,  and  cannot  diftin&ly  point  out  any 
fuch  difeafe,  I  now  omit  confidering  Chloro- 
fis  as  a  genus  here ;  and,  as  a  fymptom  of 
Amenorrhcea,  I  have  endeavoured  before  to 
explain  it  under  that  title. 


/ 


3bjjtt  JVframs 


nv^. 


IN  TME  CUSTODY  OF  THE 

BOSTON     PUBLIC   LIBRARY. 


SHELF    N° 

ADAMS 


a^iU 


ij 


FIRST       LINES 


OF        THE 


PRACTICE  of  PHYSIC 


**?*&fr&^&%®^&^-~~ 


1    Y 

WILLIAM    CULLEN,    M,  IX 

Profeflbr  of  the  Praftice  of  Phyfic  in  the  Univerfity  of  Edinburgh  5 

Firft  Phyiician  to  his  Britannic  Majefty  for  Scotland  ; 

Fellow  of  the  Royal  College  of  Phyficians  of  Edinburgh  1 

Of  the  Pvoyal   Societies  of  London  and  of  Edinburgh, 
Of  the  Royal  Society  of  Medicinq  of  Paris,  &c.  &c.  &c, 

A       NEW       EDITION. 

From  the  Laft  British  Edition, 

IIevised,  Corrected  and  Enlarged,  by  the  Author, 


IN      THREE      VOLUMES, 


Vol.    III. 


printed  at  WORCESTER*  Massachusetts 
by    ISAIAH    THOMAS. 

Sold  at  his  Bookstore  in  WORCESTER,  and  by  him  arid 
Company   in   BOSTON. 


MDCCXC. 


&riu-i 


CONTENTS 
of    VOL.    III. 

PART  II. 

BOOK       III. 

Page 

Of  spasmodic  af- 
fections, without  FEVER  9 


SECT. 


I. 


Of the  Spasmodic  Affections  of  the 
Animal  Functions  -  11 

Chap.  I.     Of  Tetanus  ~         -..;         13 

Chap.  II.     Of  Epilepfy  ~  33 

Chap.  III.     Of  the  Chorea,  or  Dance 


of  St.  Vitus 

SECT, 


66 


II, 


Of  the  Spasmodic  Affections  of  the. 
Vital  Functions  -  70- 

Chap* 


iv  CONTENTS. 

Page 

70 


Chap.  IV.*    Of  the  Palpitation  of  the 
Heart  -''•"- 


Chap.  V.    Of  Dyfpnoea,  or  Difficult 
Breathing  -  -  75 

Chap.  VI.     Of  Aflhma  -  79 

Chap.  VII.     Of   the    Chincoitgh,    or 

Hoopingcough  94 


SECT.         III. 

Of  the  Spasmodic  Affections  in  the 
Natural  Functions  -  109 

Chap.  VIII.     Of  the  Pyrofis,  or  what 
is  named  in  Scotland  the  Water  Brafh  109 

Chap.  IX.    Of  the  Colic  ~  114 

Chap.  X.    Of  the  Cholera  -  126 

Chap.  XI.    Of  Diarrhoea,  or  Loofe- 
nefs  -  -  -  132 

Chap. 

*  Though  I  have  thought  it  proper  to  divide  this  book, 
into  feftions,  I  think  it  neceffary,  for  the  convenience  of 
references,  to  number  the  chapters  from  the  beginning. 


CONTENTS,  v 

Page 

Chap.  XII.    Of  the  Diabetes        -         153 

Chap.  XIII.    Of  the  Hyfteria,  or  the- 
Hyjleric  Difeafe  -  -  160 

Chap.  XIV.    Of  Canine  Madnefs  and 
Hydrophobia  -  -*-  168 

BOOK         IV. 

of  VESANIiE,.OR  of  the  DISOR- 
DERS of  the  INTELLECTUAL 
FUNCTIONS  -  -  17* 

C     H     A     P;        I0 

Of  Ves ax  1  m  in  general        -        m  171 

CHAP.         II. 
0/Mania,  or  Madness  m  igsje 

CHAR         III.. 

Of  Melancholy,  and  other  forms  of 
Jnfanity  ■  ~  -  m  20S 

A  2  PA  R  X 


vi  CONTENTS. 

Page 

PART         III. 
of  CACHEXIES  -     .       -  221 

BOOK         I. 
of  EMACIATIONS  -  223 

BOOK         II. 

of  INTUMESCENTI.E,  or  GEN- 
ERAL SWELLINGS  -  239 

CHAP.         I. 

0/Adipose  Swellings  ~  241 

CHAP.        II. 

Of  Flatulent  Swellings         -  246 

CHAP.        III. 

Of  Watery   Swellings,  or  Drop- 
sies -  -  «-  200 

Sea.  I.    Of  Anafarca  -  277 

Sea. 


CONTENTS.  vii 

Page 

Se6b.  II.  Of theHydrothoraxtor  Drop- 
fy  of  the  Breafl         -  -  296 

Se&.  III.    Of  Af cites,  or  Dropfy  of  the 
Lower  Belly  -  -  304 

CHAP.         IV. 

0/General  Swellings,  arifing  from 
an  increafed  Bulk  of  the  whole  Sub- 
stance of  particular  Parts        -         311 

Of  Rachitis,  or  Rickets  -  312 

BOOK         III. 

OF  THE  IMPETIGINIS,  OR  DEPRAV- 
ED  HABIT  with  AFFECTIONS 

OF    THE  SKIN  -  -  328 

CHAP.         I. 


Of  Scrophula,  or  the  King's  Evil       329 

/ 

CHAP.         II. 


O/Siphylis,  or  the  Venereal  Dis- 
ease -  -  -  -  344 

CHAP. 


vm 


CONTENTS, 


CHAP; 

III. 

Page 

0/ScURVY 

- 

363 

CHAP. 

IV. 

O/Jaundice 

• 

378 

FIRST 


7 

'    FIRST      LINES 


OF        T  H 


PRACTICE    of    PHYSIC. 


>  *s  »*«  jjixaX5Gf3(^CCt€e«cc9ooc«.--.- 


PART      II. 
BOOK 


III, 


of  SPASMODIC  AFFECTIONS, 
without  FEVER. 

MCCLI. 


NDER  this  title  I  am  to 
comprehend  all  the  difeafes 
which  confifl  in  motu  ab- 
normi ;  that  is,  in  a  preter- 
natural ftate  of  the  contrac- 
tion and  motion  of  the  muf- 


any  part  of  the  body. 


cular  or  moving  fibres  in 


MCCLIL 


io  PRACTICE 


MCCLII. 

It  will  hence  appear,  why,  under  this  title, 
I  have  comprehended  many  more  difeafes 
than  Sauvages  and  Sagar  have  comprehended 
under  the  title  of  Spafmi,  or  than  Linnaeus  has 
done  under  the  title  of  Motorii.  But  I  ex- 
pecl;  it  will  be  obvious,  that,  upon  this- occa- 
sion, it  would  not  be  proper  to  confine  our  view 
to  the  affeQions  of  voluntary  motion  only ;  and 
if  thofe  Nofologift s  have  introduced  into  the 
clafs  of  Spafmi,  Palpitatio  and  Hyfteria,  it 
will  be  with  equal  propriety  that  Afthma,  Col- 
ica,  and  many  other  difeafes,  are  admitted. 

MCCLIII. 

It  has  been  hitherto  the  method  of  our  No- 
fologifls  to  divide  the  Spafmi  into  the  two 
orders  of  Tonici  and  Clonici,  Spaftici  and 
Agitatorii ;  or,  as  many  at  prefent  ufe  the 
terms,  into  Spafms  ilri&ly  fo  called,  and 
Convulfions.  I  find,  however,  that  many, 
and  indeed  moll;  of  the  difeafes  to  be  confid- 
ered  under  our  title  of  Spafmodic  Affections, 
in  refpecl:  of  Tonic  or  Clonic  contractions, 
are  of  a  mixed  kind  :  And,  therefore,  I  can- 
not follow  the  ufual  general  divifion  ;  but 
have  attempted  another,  by  arranging  the 
feveral  Spafmodic  Difeafes  according  as  they 
affect  the  feveral  functions,  Animal,  Vital,  or 
Natural. 

SECT. 


OF       PHYSIC.  it 


SECT.        I. 

of  the  SPASMODIC  AFFECTIONS  o? 
the  ANIMAL  FUNCTIONS. 

MCCLIV. 

Agreeable  to  the  lan- 
guage of  the  ancients,  the  whole  of  the  dif- 
eafes  to  be  treated  of  in  this  fe&ion  might  be 
termed  Spafmi ;  and  many  of  the  moderns 
Continue  to  apply  the  term  in  the  fame  man- 
ner :  But  I  think  it  convenient  to  diftinguifh 
the  terms  of  Spafm  and  Convuljion,  by  apply- 
ing the  former,  ftric-tly  to  what  has  been  call- 
ed the  Tonic  ;  and  the  latter,  to  what  has 
been  called  the  Clonic  Spafm.  There  is  cer- 
tainly a  foundation  for  the  ufe  of  thofe  dif- 
ferent terms,  as  there  is  a  remarkable  differ- 
ence in  the  ftate  of  the  contraction  of  moving 
fibres  upon  different  occafions.  This  I  have 
indeed  pointed  out  before  in  my  treatife  of 
Phyfiology,  but  muft  alfo  repeat  it  here. 

MCCLV. 

In  the  exercife  of  the  feveral  functions  of 
the  animal  economy,  the  contractions  of  the 
moving  fibres  are  excited  by  the  will,  or  by 
certain  other  caufes  fpecially  appointed  by 
nature  for  exciting  thofe  contractions  j  and 

thefe 


12  PRACTICE 

thefe  other  caufes  I  name  the  natural  Caufes. 
In  a  flate  of  health,  the  moving  fibres  are 
contracted  by  the  power  of  the  will,  and  by 
the  natural  caufes  only.  At  the  fame  time 
the  contractions  produced  are  in  force  and 
velocity  regulated  by  the  will,  or  by  the  cir- 
cumflances  of  the  natural  caufes  ;  and  the 
contractions,  whether  produced  by  the  one 
or  the  other,  are  always  foon  fucceeded  by  a 
flate  of  relaxation,  and  are  not  repeated  but 
when  the  power  of  the  will  or  of  the  natural 
caufes  is  again  applied. 

MCCLVI. 

Such  are  the  conditions  of  the  a£Hon  of 
the  moving  fibres  in  a  flate  of  health ;  but  in 
a  morbid  flatej  the  contractions  of  the  mufcles 
and  moving  fibres  ordinarily  depending  upon 
the  will  are  excited  without  the  concurrence 
of  the  will,  or  contrary  to  what  the  will  in- 
tends ;  and  in  -the  other  functions  they  are 
excited  by  the  a£lion  of  unufual  and  unnat- 
ural caufes.  In  both  cafes,  the  contractions 
produced  may  be  in  two  different  flates. 

The  one  is,  when  the  contractions  are  to  a 
more  violent  degree  than  is  ufual  in  healthy 
and  aret  neither  fucceeded  by  a  fpontaneous 
relaxation,  nor  even  readily  yield  to  an  ex- 
tenfion  either  from  the  aclion  of  antagonifl 
mufcles,  or  from  other  extending  powers  ap- 
plied. This  flate  of  contractions  is  what  has 
been  called  a  Tonic  Spafm,  and  is  what  I  fhall 
name  limply  and  ilric~lly  a  Spafm* 

The 


OF       PHYSIC.  13 

j 

The  other  morbid  ftate  of  contraction  is, 
when  they  are  fucceeded  by  a  relaxation,  but 
are  immediately  again  repeated  without  the 
concurrence  of  the  will  or  of  the  repetition  of 
natural  caufes,  and  are  at  the  fame  time  com- 
monly, with  refpecl:  to  velocity  and  force^ 
more  violent  than  in  a  healthy  ftate.  This 
ftate  of  morbid  contraction  is  what  has  been 
named  a  Clonic  Spafm,  and  what  I  fhall  name 
limply  and  ftri&ly  a  Convulfion. 

In  this  fection  I  fhall  follow  nearly  the  ufual 
divifion  of  the  fpafmodic  difeafes  into  thofe 
confifting  in  Spafm,  and  thofe  confirming  in 
Convulfion  5  but  it  may  not  perhaps  be  in 
my  power  to  follow  fuch  divifion  exactly. 


Chap.       L 

&f '       T     E     T     A    N     U 

MCCLVIL 


BOTH  Nofologifls  and  Practical  Writers 
have  diflinguifhed  Tetajiic  complaints  into 
the  feveral  fpecies  of  ^Tetanus,  Opiftho- 
tonos,  and  Emprofthotonos  ;  and  I  have  in 
my  Nofology  put  the  Trifmus,  or  Locked 
Jaw,   as  a  genus   diflincl  from  the  Tetanus, 

Vol.  II h  B  All 


M  PRACTICE 

All  this,  however,  I  now  judge  to  be  irn-* 
proper  ;  and  am  of  opinion,  that  all  the 
feveral  terms  mentioned,  denote,  and  are 
applicable  only  to,  different  degrees  of  one  and 
the  fame  difeafe  ;  the  hiftory  and  cure  of 
which  I  fhall  endeavour  to  deliver  in  this 
chapter. 

MCCLVIII, 

Tetanic  complaints  may,  from  certain  cauf- 
fes,  occur  in  every  climate  that  we  are  ac-* 
quainted  with  ;  but  they  occur  moil  fre- 
quently in  the  warmefl  climates,  and  moffc 
commonly  in  the  warmeft  feafons  of  fuck 
climates.  Thefe  complaints  affect  all  ages, 
fexc^y  temperaments,  arid  complexions.  The 
caufes  from  whence  they  commonly  proceed, 
are  cold  and  moifture  applied  to  the  body 
while  it  is  very  warm, and  efpecially  the  fudden 
viciflitudes  of  heat  and  cold.  Or,  the  difeafe 
is  produced  by  punctures,  lacerations,  or  oth- 
er lefions  of  nerves  in  any  part  of  the  body. 
There  are,  probably,  fome  other  caufes  of 
this  difeafe  ;  but  they  are  neither  diftin6Uy 
known,  nor  well  afcertained.  Though  the 
caufes  mentioned  dOj  upon  occafion,  affecl;  all 
forts  of  perfonSi  they  feem  however  to  attack 
perfons  of  middle  age  more  frequently  than 
the  older  or  younger,  the  male  fex  more  fre- 
quently than  the  female,  and  the  robuft  and 
Vigorous  more  frequently  than  the  weaker. 

MCCLXX-* 


O  F  .    P  H  Y  S  I  C.  15 


MCGLIXv 

If  the  difeafe  proceed  from  cold,  it  com* 
monly  comes  on  in  a  few  days  after  the  ap- 
plication of  fuch  cold  ;  but,  if  it  ariie  from  a 
puncture  or  other  lefion  of  a  nerve,  the  difeafe 
does  not  commonly  come  on  for  many  days 
after  the  lefion  has  happened,  very  often  when 
there  is  neither  pain  nor  uneafinefs  remaining 
in  the  wounded  or  hurt  part,  and  very  fre- 
quently when  the  wound  has  been  entirely 
healed  up. 

MCCLX. 

The  difeafe  fometimes  comes  on  fuddenly 
to  a  violent  degree,  but  more  generally  it  ap-*. 
proaches  by  flow  degrees  to  its  violent  ftatefc 
In  this  cafe  it  comes  on  with  a  fenfe  of  ftifF- 
neis  in  the  back  part  of  the  neck,  which,  grad^. 
ually  increafmg,  renders  the  motion  of  the 
head  difficult  and  painful.  As  the  rigidity 
of  the  neck  comes  on  and  increafes^  there  is 
commonly  at  the  fame  time  a  fenfe  of  un- 
eafinefs felt  about  the  root  of  the  tongue  .; 
which,  by  degrees*  becomes  a  difficulty  of  fwal- 
lowing,  and  at  length  an  entire  interruption  of 
it.  While  the  rigidity  of  the  neck  goes  on  in- 
creafmg, there  arifes  a  pain,  often  violent  at 
the  lower  end  of  the  flernum,  and  from  thence 
mooting  into  the  back.  When  this  pain 
arifes,  all  the  mufcles  of  the  neck,  and  partic* 
,  B  2  ularly 


x6  PRACTICE 

ularly  thofe  of  the  back  part  of  it,  are  imme* 
diately  affected  with  fpafm,  pulling  the  head 
ftrongly  backwards.  At  the  fame  time,  the 
mufcles  that  pull  up  the  lower  jaw,  which  up- 
on the  flrft  approaches  of  the  difeafe  were  af- 
fected with  fome  fpaftic  rigidity,  are  now  gen- 
erally affected  with  more  violent  fpafm,  and 
fet  the  teeth  fo  clofely  together  that  they  do 
■not  admit  of  the  fmalJeft  opening. 

This  is  what  has  been  named  the  Locked 
JaWy  and  is  often  the  principal  part  of  the 
difeafe.  When  the  difeafe  has  advanced  thus 
far,  the  pain  at  the  bottom  of  the  fternum  re- 
turns very  frequently,  and  with  it  the  fpafms 
T)f  the  hind  neck  and  lower  jaw  are  renewed 
with  violence  and  much  pain.  As  the  difeafe 
thus  proceeds,  a  greater  number  of  mufcles 
come  to  be  affected  with  fpafms.  After  thofe 
of  the  neckj  thofe  along  the  whole  of  the 
fpine  become  affected,  bending  the  trunk  of 
the  body  Wrongly  backwards  ;  and  this  is 
5what  has  been  nafned  the  Opijlhotonos. 

In  the  lower  extremities,  both  the  flexor 
&nd  extenfor  mufcles  are  commonly  at  the 
fame  time  affe6ted,  and  keep  the  limbs  rigidly 
extended.  Though  the  extetifors  of  the  head 
and  back  are  ufually  the  mofl  ftrongly  affect- 
ed, yet  the  flexors,  or  thofe  mufcles  of  the 
iieck  that  pull  the  head  forward,  and  the 
mufcles  that  mould  pull  down  the  lower  jaw^ 
are  often  at  the  fame  time  ftrongly  affected 
With  fpafm.  During  the  whole  of  the  dif- 
eafe^  the  abdominal  mufcles  are  violently  af- 

feae<l 


OF       PHYSIC.  17 

fe&ed  with  fpafm,  fo  that  the  belly  is  ftrong- 
]y   retracted,   and  feels   hard    as   a  piece  of. 
board. 

At  length  the  flexors  of  the  head  and  trunk 
become  fo  ftrongly  affected  as  to  balance  the 
extenfors,  and  to  keep  the  head  and  trunk 
ftraight,  and  rigidly  extended,,  incapable  of 
being  moved  in  any  way ;.  and  it  is  to  this 
ft  ate  the  term  of  Tetanus  has-been  ftricYly  ap- 
plied. At  the  fame  time,  the  arms,  little  af- 
fected before,  are  now  rigidly  extended  ;  the 
whole  of  the  mufcles  belonging  to  them  being 
afTecled  with  fpafms^  except  thofe  that  move 
the  fingers,  which  often  to  the  laft  retain  fome 
mobility.  The  tongue  alfo  long  retains  its 
mobility  •.  but  at  length  it  alfo  becomes  af- 
fected with  fpafms,  which,,  attacking  certain  of 
its  mufcles  only,  often  thruft  it  violently  out 
h^twc^n  the  teeth. 

At  the  height  of  the  difeafe,  every  organ 
of  voluntary  motion  feems  to  be  affected  ; 
and  amongft  the  reft,  the  mufcles  of  the  face. 
The  forehead  is  drawn  up  into  furrows,  the 
tyest  fometimes  diftorted,  are  commonly  rigid, 
and  immoveable  in  their  fockets  ;  the  nofe  is 
drawn  up,  and  the  cheeks  are  drawn  back- 
wards towards  the  ears,  fo  that  the  whole 
countenance  expreffes  the  moil  violent  grin- 
ning. Under  thefe  univerfal  fpafms,  a  vio- 
lent convulfion  commonly  comes  on,  and 
puts  an  end  to  life. 

B3  MC.CLXJi. 


PRACTICE 


MCCLXL 

Thefe  fpafms  are  every  where  attended 
with  moil  violent  pains.  The  utmoft  vio- 
lence of  fpafm  is,  however,  not  conftant  ;  but, 
after  fubfifting  for  a  minute  or  two,  the  muf- 
cles  admit  of  fome  remiffion  of  their  contrac- 
tion, although  of  no  fuch  relaxation  as  can 
allow  the  aclion  of  their  antagonifts.  This 
remiffion  of  contraction  gives  alio  fome  re- 
miffion of  pain  ;  but  neither  is  of  long  dura- 
tion. From  time  to  time,  the  violent  con- 
tractions and  pains  are  renewed  fometimes 
every  ten  or  fifteen  minutes,  and  that  often 
without  any  evident  exciting  caufe.  But 
fuch  exciting  caufes  frequently  occur  ;  for 
almoft  every  attempt  to  motion,  as  attempt- 
ing a  change  of  poflure,  endeavouring  to 
fwallow,  and  even  to  fpeak,  fometimes  gives 
occafion  to  a  renewal  of  the  fpafms  over  the 
whole  body. 

MCCLXII. 

The  attacks  of  this  difeafe  are  feldom  at- 
tended with  any  fever.  When  the  fpafms 
are  general  and  violent,  the  pulfe  is  contract- 
ed, hurried,  and  irregular  ;  and  the  refpira- 
tion  is  affected  in  like  manner  :  But,  during 
the  remiffion,  both  the  pulfe  and  refpiration 
ufually  return  to  their  natural  flate.  The 
heat  of  the  body  is  commonly  not  increafed  ; 

frequently 


OF       PHYSIC.  19 

frequently  the  face  is  pale,  with  a  cold  fweat 
upon  it  ;  and  very  often  the  extremities  are 
cold,  with  a  cold  fweat  over  the  whole  body. 
When,  however,  the  fpafms  are  frequent  and 
violent,  the  pulle  is  fometimes  more  full  and 
frequent  than  natural  ;  the  face  is  flufhed, 
and  a  warm  fweat  is  forced  out  ever  the  whole 
body. 

MCCLXIII. 


Although  fever  be  not  a  conftant  attendant 
of  this  difeafey  efpecially  when  arifing  from  a 
lefion  of  nerves  -%  vet,  in  thofe  cafes  proceed- 
ing from  cold,  a  fever  fometimes  has  fuper- 
vened,  and  is  faid  to  have  been  attended  with 
inflammatory  fymptoms,  Blood  has  been 
often  drawn  in  this  difeafe^  but  it  never  ex- 
hibits any  inflammatory  cruft ;  and  all  ac- 
counts feem  to  agree,  that  the  blood  drawn 
feems  to  be  of.  a  loofer  texture  than  ordinary, 
and  that  it  does  not  coagulate  in  the  ufuai 
manner, 

MCCLXIV. 

In  this  difeafe  the  head  is  feldom  affected 
with  delirium,  or  even  confufion  of  thought, 
till  the  lad  ft  age  of  it  ;  when,  by  the  repeated 
(hocks  of  a  violent  diftemper,  every  function 
of  the  fyftem  is  greatly  difordered. 

B  4  MCCLXV* 


so  PRACTICE 


MCCLXV. 

It  is  no  Iefs  extraordinary,  that,  in  this  vi- 
olent difeafe,  the  natural  functions  are  not 
either  immediately  or  confiderably  affefted. 
Vomitings  fometimes  appear  early  in  the  dif- 
eafe, but  commonly  t*hey  are  not  continued  ; 
and  it  is  ufual  enough  for  the  appetite  of 
hunger  to  remain  through  the  whole  courfe 
of  the  difeafe  ;  and  what  food  happens  to  be 
taken  down,  feems  to  be  regularly  enough  di- 
gefted.  The  excretions  are  fometimes  affecl:- 
ed,  but  not  always.  The  urine  is  fometimes 
fuppreffed,  or  is  voided  with  difficulty  and 
pain.  The  belly  is  coftrve  ;  But,  as  we  have 
hardly  any  accounts  excepting  of  thofe  cafes 
in  which  opiates  have  been  largely  employed, 
it  is  uncertain  whether  the  coftivenefs  has 
been  the  erfecl;  of  the  opiates  or  of  the  difeafe. 
Jn  feveral  inflances  of  this  difeafe,  a  miliary 
eruption  has  appeared  upon  the  fkin  ;  but 
whether  this  be  a  fymptom  of  the  difeafe,  or 
the  effecl:  of  a  certain  treatment  of  it,  is  unde- 
termined. In  the  mean  while,  it  has  not  been 
obferved  to  denote  either  fafety  or  danger,  or 
to  have  any  effect  in  changing  the  courfe  of 
the  diftemper. 

MCCLXVI. 

This  difeafe  has  generally  proved  fatal ; 
and  this  indeed  may  be  juflly  fuppofed  to  be 

the 


©  F       P  H  Y  S  P-C.  2i 

the  confequence  of  its  nature  :  But,  as  we- 
know,  that,  till  very  lately,  phyficians  were 
not  well  acquainted  with  a  proper  method  of 
cure  ;  and  that,  fince  a  more  proper  method 
has  been  known  and  praclifed,  many  have  re- 
covered from  this  difeafe  ;  it  may  be  therefore 
concludedj  that  the  fatal  tendency  of  it  is  not 
fo  unavoidable  as  has  been  imagined. 

In  judging  of  the  tendency  of  this  dneafe, 
in  particular  cafes,  we  may  remark,  that,  when 
arifing  from  lefions  of  the  nerves,  it  is  com- 
monly more  violent,  and  of  more  difficult 
cure,  than  when  proceeding  from  cold  ;  that 
the  difeafe  which  comes  on  fuddenly,  and 
advances  quickly  to  a  violent  degree,  is  al- 
ways more  dangerous  than  that  which  is  flow- 
er in  its  progrefs. ,  Accordingly,  the  difeafe 
often  proves  fatal  before  the  fourth  day  ;  and, 
when  a  patient  has  paifed  this,  period,  he  may 
be  fuppofed  to  be  in  greater  fafety,  and  in 
general  the  difeafe  is  the  fafer  the  longer  it 
has  continued.  It  is,  however,  to  be  partic- 
ularly obferved,  that,  even  for  many  days 
after  the  fourth,  the  difeafe  continues  to  be 
dangerous  $  and  even  after  fome  confiderable 
abatement  of  its  force,  it  is  ready  to  recur 
again  with  its  former  violence  and  danger. 
It  never  admits  of  any  fudden,  or  what  may 
be  called  a  critical  folution  ;  but  always  re- 
cedes by  degrees  only,  and  it  is  often  very 
long  before  the  whole  of  the  fymptoms  dis- 
appear. 

Vox,  3.  B5  MCCLXVIL 


22  PRACTICE 


MCCLXVII. 

From  the   hi  (lory  of  the  difeafe  now  des- 
cribed, it  will  be  evident,  that  there  is  no  room 
for  diftinguifhing  the  tetanus,  opifthotonos,  and 
trifmus  or   locked  jaw,   as  different  fpecies  of 
this  difeafe,  fince  they  all  arife  from  the  fame 
caufes,   and  are   almofl  conflantly  conjoined 
in  the  fame  perfon.      I   have  no  doubt   that 
the  emprojlhotonos  belongs  alfo  to  the    fame 
genus  ;  and  as   the  ancients   have  frequently 
mentioned  it,  we  can  have  no  doubt  of  its 
having  occurred  :  But,  at  the  fame  time,  it  is 
certainly  in  thefe  days  a  rare  occurrence  ;  and, 
as  I  have  never  feen  it,  nor  find  any  hiflories 
in  which  this  particular  date  of  the  fpafms  is 
faid  to  have  prevailed,  I  cannot  mention  the 
other  circum fiances  which  particularly  attend 
it,  and  may  diftinguifh  it  from  the  other  va- 
rieties of  tetanic  complaints. 

MCCLXVIII. 

This  difeafe  has  put  on  ftill  a  different  form 
from  any  of  thofe  above  mentioned.  The 
fpafms  have  been  fometimes  confined  to  one 
fide  of  the  body  only,  and  which  bend  it 
ftrongly  to  that  fide.  This  is  what  has  been 
-named  by  Sauvages  the  Tetanus  Lateralis, 
and  by  fome  late  writers  the  Pleurojlhotonos. 
This  form  of  the  difeafe  has  certainly  appear- 
ed very  feldom  ;  and,  in  any  of  the  accounts 

given 


a  F      F  H  Y"  S  I  c.  §31 

given  of  it,  I  cannot  find  any  circumftances 
that  would  lead  me  to  confider  it  as  any  other 
than  a  variety  ot  the  fpecies  already  mention- 
ed, or  to  take  further  notice  of  it  here, 

MGCL.XIX.. 

The  pathology  of  this  difeafe  I  cannot  in 
aaay  meafure  attempt  ;  as  the  flruclure  of 
moving  fibres,. the  (late  of  them  under  differ- 
ent degrees  of  contraction,  and  particularly 
the  flate  of  the  fenforium,  as  -  variously  deter- 
mining the  motion  of  the  nervous  power,  are 
all  matters  very  imperfectly,  or  not  at  all, 
known  to  me-.  In -fuch  a  fituation,  therefore, 
the  endeavouring  to  give  any  rules  of  prac- 
tice, upon  a  fcientific  plan,  appears  to  me  vain 
and' fruitless  ;  and  towards  directing  the  cure 
of  this  difeafe,  we  mufl  be  fatisfied  with  hav- 
ing learned  fomething  ufeful  from  analogy,, 
confirmed  by  experience.  -f 

mcclxx;. 

When  the  difeafe  is  known  to  arife  from 
the  lefion  of  a  nerve  in  any  part  of  the  body, 
the  firft,  and,  as  I  judge,-  the  moil  important 
flep  to  be  taken  towards  the  cure,  is,  by  &very 
poffible  means  to  cut  o  17  that  pare  from  all 
communication  with  the  fenforium,  either  by 
cutting  through  the  nerves  in  their  courfe.  or 
perhaps  by  deflroying,  to  a  certain  length, 
their  .affected  part  or  extremity. 

'   BG  MCCLXXi;. 


24  PRACTICE 


MCCLXXI. 

P  When  the  cure  of  the  difeafe  is  to  be  at- 
tempted by  medicine,  experience  has  taught 
us  that  opium  has  often  proved  an  effectual 
remedy  ;  but  that,  to  render  it  fuch,  it  mud 
be  given. in  much  larger  quantities  than  have 
been  employed  in  any  other  cafe  ;  and  in 
thefe  larger  quantities,  it  may,  in  this  difeafe, 
be  given  more  fafely  than  the  body  has  been 
known  to  bear  in  any  other  condition.  The 
practice  has  been,  to  give  the  opium  either  m 
a  folid  or  a  liquid  form,  not  in  any  very  large 
dofe  at  once,  but  in  moderate  dofes,  frequent- 
3y  repeated,  at  the  interval  of  one,  two,  three, 
or  more  hours,  as  the  violence  of  the  fymp- 
toms  feems  to  require.  Even  when  large 
quantities  have  been  given  in  this  way,  it  ap- 
pears that  the  opium  does  not  operate  here  in 
the  fame  manner  as  in  moll  other  cafes  ;  for, 
though  it  procure  fome  remiffion  of  the 
fpafms  and  pains,  it  hardly  induces  any  fleep, 
or  occafions  that  ftupor,  intoxication,  or  de- 
lirium, which  it  often  does  in  other  circum- 
ftances,  when  much  fmaller  quantities  only 
have  been  given.  It  is  therefore  very  prop- 
erly obferved,  that,  in  tetanic  affections,  as 
the  opium  fhows  none  of  thofe  effects  by 
which  it  may  endanger  life,  there  is  little  or 
no  reafon  for  being  fparing  in  the  exhibition 
x>f  it ;  and  it  may  be  given,  probably  fhould 

be 


OF       PHYSIC.  25 

be  given,  as  largely  and  as  faft  as  the  fymp- 
toms  of  the  difea-fe  may  feem  to  demand. 

It  is  particularly  to  be  obferved,  that 
though  the  firft  exhibitions  of  the  opium  may 
have  produced  fome  remiflion  of  the  fymp- 
toms,  yet  the  effe&s  of  opium  do  not  long 
continue  in  the  fyftem  ;  and  this  difeafe  be- 
ing for  fome  time  ready  to  recur,  it  is  com- 
monly  very  neceffary,  by  the  time  that  the  ef- 
fects of  the  opium  given  may  be  fuppofed  to 
be  wearing  off,  and  efpecially  upon  the  lead 
appearance  of  a  return  of  the  fpafms,  to  re- 
peat the  exhibition  of  the  opium  in  the  fame 
quantities  as  before.  This  practice  is  to  be 
continued  while  the  difeafe  continues  to  fhow 
any  difpofition  to  return  ;  and  it  is  only  after 
the  difeafe  has  already  fubfifted  for  fome 
time,  and  when  confiderable  and  long  contin-- 
ued  remiffions  have  taken  place,  that  the  dof- 
es  of  the  opium  may  be  diminifhed,  and  the 
intervals  of  exhibiting  them  be  more  confid- 
erable, 

MCCLXXII. 

The  adminiftering  of  opium  in  this  man- 
ner, has  in  many  cafes  been  fuccefsful  i  and 
probably  would  have  been  equally  fo  in 
many  others,  if  the  opium  had  not  been  toa 
fparingiy  employed,  either  from  the  timidity 
of  practitioners,  or  from  its  exhibition  being 
prevented  by  that  interruption  of  deglutition 
which  fo  often  attends  this  difeafe,  This  lat- 
ter 


.26  PRACTICE 

-ter  circumftance  directs,  that  the  medicine 
ihould  be  immediately  and  largely  employed 
upon  the  firft  approach  of  the  difeafe-,  before 
the  deglutition  becomes  difficult  ;  or  that,  if 
this  opportunity  be  loft,  the  medicine,  in  fuf- 
iicient  quantity,  and  with  due  frequency, 
Ihould  be  thrown  into  the  body  by  gly ften; 
which,  however,  does  not  feem  to  have,  been 
hitherto  often  praclifed. 

MCCLXXIIL 

It  is  highly  probable,  that,  in  this-  difeafe*, 
the  interlines  are  affected  with  the  fpafrr.  that 
prevails. fo  much  in  other  parts-of  the  fyftem  ; 
and  therefore,  that  coftivenefs  occurs  here  as 
a  fymptom  of  the  difeafe.  It  is  probably  alfo 
increafed  by  the  opium,,  which  is  here  fo 
largely  employed  ;  and,  from  whichever  of 
thefe  caufes  it  arifes,  it  certainly  muft  be  held 
to  aggravate  the  difeafe,.  and  that  a  relaxation 
of  the  inteftinal  canal  will  contribute  to  a  re- 
laxation of  the  fpafms  elfewfrere.  This  con- 
fideration  directs  the  frequent  exhibition  of 
laxatives  while  the  power  of  deglutition  re- 
mains, or  the  frequent  exhibition  of  glyfters 
when  it  does  not  ;  and  the  good  effects  of 
both  have  been  frequently  obferved. 

MCCLXXIV. 

It  has  been  with  fome  probability  fuppof- 
ed>  that  the  operation  of  opium  in  this  dif- 
eafe. 


O   F      P   II   Y    S   I   C.  27 

cafe,  may  be  much  affifted  by  joining  with  it 
fome  other  of  the  mod  powerful  antifpafmod- 
ics.  The  molt  promifing  are  mufk  and  cam- 
phi  re  ;  and  fome  practitioners  have  been  of 
opinion,  that  the  former  has  proved  very  ufe- 
ful  in  tetanic  complaints.  But,  whether  it  be 
from  its  not  having  been  employed  of  a  gen- 
uine kind,  or  in  fumcient  quantity,  the  great 
advantage  and  propriety  of  its  ufe  are  not  yet 
clearly  afcertained.  It  appears  to  me  prob- 
able, that  analogous  to  what  happens  with 
refpecl;  to  opium,  both  mufk  and  camphire 
might  be  employed  in  this  difeafe,  in  much 
larger  quantities  than  they  commonly  have 
been  in  other  cafes. 

MCCLXXV. 

Warm  bathing  has  been  commonly  em- 
ployed as  a  remedy  in  this  difeafe,  and  often 
with  advantage  ;  but,  fo  far  as  I  know,  it  has 
not  alone  proved  a  cure  ;  and,  in  fome  cafes, 
whether  it  be  from  the  motion  of  the  body 
here  required,  exciting  the  fpafms,  or  from 
the  fear  of  the  bath,  which  fome  perfons  were 
feized  with,  I  cannot  determine  ;  but  it  is  al- 
lowed, that  the  warm  bath  hath  in  fome  cafes 
done  harm,  and  even  occafioned  death.  Par- 
tial fomentations  have  been  much  commend- 
ed, and,  I  believe,  upon  good  grounds  :  And 
I  have  no  doubt  but  that  fomentations  of  the 
feet  and  legs,  as  we  now  ufually  apply  them 
in  fevers,  might,  without  much  ftirring  of  the 

patient^ 


38  PRACTICE 

patient,  be  very  affiduoufly  employed  with 
advantage. 

MCCLXXVL 

Unctuous  applications  were  very  frequent- 
ly employed  in  this  difeafe  by  the  ancients  : 
And  fome  modern  practitioners  have  confid- 
ered  them  as  very  ufefuh.  Their  effects, 
however,  have  not  appeared  to  be  confidera- 
ble  ;  and,  as  a  weak  auxiliary  only,  attended 
with  fome  inconvenience,  they  have  been 
very  much  neglected  by  the  Britifh  prac- 
titioners. 

MCCLXXVII.. 


Bleeding  has  been  formerly  employed  in 
this  difeafe;  but  of  late  it  has  been  found 
prejudicial,  excepting  in  a  few  cafes,  where, 
in  plethoric  habits,  a  fever  has  fupervened. 
In  general,  the  ftate  of  men's  bodies  in  warm 
climates  is  unfavourable  to  bloodletting  ;  and, 
if  we  may  form  indications  from  the  flate  of 
the  blood  drawn  out  of  the  veins,  the  ilate  of 
this  in  tetanic  difeafes  would  forbid  bleeding 
in  them. 

MCCLXXVIIL 


Bliftering  alfo  has  been  formerly  employed 
in  this  difeafe  ,*  but  feveral  practitioners  affert, 

that 


OF       PHYSIC.  29 

that  bliflers  are  conftantly  hurtful,  and  they 
are  now  generally  omitted. 

MCCLXXIX. 

Thefe  are  the  practices  that  hitherto  have 
been  generally  employed  ;  but  of  late  we  are 
informed  by  feveral  Weflindia  practitioners, 
that  in  many  inilances  they  have  employed 
mercury  with  great  advantage.  We  are  told, 
that  it  mufl  be  employed  early  in  the  difeafe  ; 
that  it  is  moil  conveniently  adminiftered  by 
undlion,  and  mould  be  applied  in  that  way 
in  large  quantities,  fo  that  the  body  may  be 
foon  filled  with  it,  and  a  falivation  raifed, 
which  is  to  be  continued  till  the  fymptoms 
yield.  Whether  this  method  alone  be  gen- 
erally fufficient  for  the  cure  of  the  difeafe,  or 
if  it  may  be  afiifted  by  the  ufe  of  opium,  and 
require  this  in  a  certain  meafure  to  be  joined 
with  it,  I  have  not  yet  certainly  learned. 

MCCLXXX. 

I  have  been  further  informed,  that  the  te- 
tanus, in  all  its  different  degrees,  has  been 
cured  by  giving  internally  the  Piflelaeum  Bar- 
badenfe,  or,  as  it  is  vulgarly  called,  the  Bar- 
badoes  Tar.  I  think  it  proper  to  take  notice 
of  this  here,  although  I  am  not  exactly  in- 
formed what  quantities  of  this  medicine  are 
to  be  given,  or  in  what  circumftances  of  the 
difeafe  it  is  moll  properly  to  be  employed. 

*  MCCLXXX. 


3o  PRACTICE 


*MCCLXXX. 

In  the  former  edition  of  this  work,  among 
the  remedies  of  tetanus  I  did  not  mention  the 
ufe  of  cold  bathing  ;  becaufe,  though  I  had 
heard  of  this,  I  was  not  informed  of  iuch  fre- 
quent employment  of  it  as  might  confirm  my 
opinion  of  its  general  efficacy  ;  nor  was  I  fuf- 
ficiently  informed  of  the  ordinary  and  proper 
adminiftration  of  it.  But  now,  from  the  in- 
formation of  many  judicious  practitioners 
who  have  frequently  employed  it,  I  can  fay, 
that  it  is  a  remedy  which  in  numerous  trials 
has  been  found  to  be  of  great  fervice  in  this 
difeafe  ;  and  that,  while  the  ufe  of  the  am- 
biguous remedy  of  warm  bathing  is  entirely 
laid  afide,  the  ufe  of  cold  bathing  is  over  the 
whole  of  the  Weftindies  commonly  employ- 
ed. The  adminiftration  of  it  is  fometimes 
by  bathing  the  perfon  in  the  fea,  or  more  fre^- 
quently  by  throwing  cold  water  from  a  bafon 
or  bucket  upon  the  patient's  body,  and  over 
the  whole  of  it  :  When  this  is  done,  the  body 
is  carefully  wiped  dry,  wrapped  in  blankets, 
and  laid  abed,  and  at  the  fame  time  a  large 
dofe  of  an  opiate  is  given.  By  thefe  means 
a  confiderable  remiffion  of  the  fymptoms  is 
obtained  ;  but  this  remiffion,  at  firfl,  does  not 
commonly  remain  long,  but  returning  again 
in  a  few  hours,  the  repetition  both  of  the  bath- 
ing and  the  opiate  becomes  neceflary.  By 
thefe  repetitions,  however,  longer  intervals  of 

eafe 


OF       PHYSIC.  3* 

cafe  are  obtained,  and  at  length  the  difeafe  is 
entirely  cured  ;  and  this  even  happens  fome- 
times  very  quickly.  I  have  only  to  add,  that 
it  does  not  appear  to  me,  from  any  accounts 
I  have  yet  had,  that  the  cold  bathing  has  been 
fo  frequently  employed,  or  has  been  found  fo 
commonly  fuccefsful  in  the  cafes  of  tetanus  in 
confequence  of  wounds,  as  in  thofe  from  the 
application  of  cold. 

MCCLXXXI. 

Before  concluding  this  chapter,  it  is  proper 
for  me  to  take  fome  notice  of  that  peculiar 
cafe  of  the  tetanus,  or  trifmus,  which  attacks 
certain  infants  foon  after  their  birth,  and  has 
been  properly  enough  named  the  Trifmus 
Nafcentium.  From  the  fubjecls  it  afFe&s,  it 
feems  to  be  a  peculiar  difeafe  :  For  thefe  are 
infants  not  above  two  weeks,  and  commonly 
before  they  are  nine  days,  old  ;  infomuch 
that,  in  countries  where  the  difeafe  is  fre- 
quent, if  children  pafs  the  period  now  men- 
tioned, they  are  conlidered  as  fecure  againfl 
its  attacks.  The  fymptom  of  it  chiefly  taken 
notice  of,  is  the  trifmus,  or  locked  jaw,  which 
is  by  the  vulgar  improperly  named  the  Fall- 
ing of  the  Jaw.  But  this  is  not  the  only 
fymptom,  as,  for  the  moft  part,  it  has  all  the 
fame  fymptoms  as  the  Opisthotonos  and  Te- 
tanus ftri&ly  fo  called,  and  which  occur  in 
the  other  varieties  of  tetanic  complaints  above 
defcribed.  Like  the  other  varieties  of  teta- 
nus, 


32  PRACTICE 

nus,  this  is  moil  frequent  in  warm  climates  ; 
but  it  is  not,  like  thole  arifing  from  the  appli- 
cation of  cold,  entirely  confined  to  fuch  warm 
climates,  as  inftances  of  it  have  occurred  in 
moft  of  the  northern  countries  of  Europe. 
In  thefe  latter  it  feems  to  be  more  frequent  in 
certain  diflri&s  than  in  others  ;  but  in  what 
manner  limited,  I  cannot  determine.  It 
feems  to  be  more  frequent  in  Switzerland  than 
in  France.  I  am  informed  of  its  frequently 
occurring  in  the  Highlands  of  Scotland  ;  but 
I  have  never  met  with  any  inftance  of  it  in 
the  low  country.  The  particular  caufes  of  it 
are  not  well 'known  ;  and  various  conjectures 
have  been  offered  ;  but  none  of  them  are  fat- 
isfying.  It  is  a  difeafe  that  has  been  almoft 
conftantly  fatal  ;  and  this,  alfo,  commonly  in 
the  courfe  of  a  few  days.  The  women  are  fo 
much  perfuaded  of  its  inevitable  fatality,  that 
they  feldom  or  never  call  for  the  affiftance  of 
cur  art.  This  has  occaiioned  our  being  little 
acquainted  with  the  hiftory  of  the  difeafe,  or 
with  the  effects  of  remedies  in  it.  Analogy, 
however,  would  lead  us  to  employ  the  fame 
remedies  that  have  proved  ufeful  in  the  other 
cafes  of  tetanus  ;  and  the  few  experiments 
that  are  yet  recorded,  feem  to  approve,  of 
fuch  a  practice. 


Chap, 


OF       PHYSIC.  33 

Chap.       II. 

Of        E  P   I    L   E   P   S   Y, 

MCCLXXXIL 

IN  what  feilfe  I  ufe  the  term  Convuljion^  I 
have  explained  above  in  -MCCLVI. 

The  convulfions  that  affect  the  human 
body  are  in  feveral  refpects  various  •  but  I 
am  to  confider*here  only  the  chief  and  moft 
frequent  form  in  which  they  appear,  and 
which  is  in  the  difeafe  named  Epilepfy.  This 
may  be  defined,  as  confiding  in  convulfions 
of  the  greater  part  of  the  mufcles  of  voluntary 
motion,  attended  with  a  lofs  of  fenfe,  and 
ending  in  a  Hate  of  infenfibility  and  feeming 
-fleep. 

MCCLXXXIII. 

The  general  form  or  principal  circum- 
ftances  of  this  difeafe*  are  much  the  fame  in 
all  the  different  perfons  whom  it  affects.  It 
comes  by  fits^  which  often  attack  perfons 
feemingly  in  perfect  health  j  and,  after  lafi- 
ing  for  fome  time,  pafs  off,  and  leave  the  per- 
fons again  in  their  ufual  flate*     Thefe  fits  are 

fometimes 


34  PRACTICE 

fometimes  preceded  by  certain  fymptotris, 
which,  to  perfons  who  have  before  experienc- 
ed fuch  a  fit,  may  give  notice  of  its  approach, 
as  we  fhall  hereafter  explain  •  but  even  thefe 
preludes  do  not  commonly  occur  long  before 
the  formal  attack,  which  in  mofl  cafes  comes 
on  fuddenly  without  any  fuch  warning. 

The  perfon  attacked  lofes  fuddenly  all  fenfe 
and  power  of  motion  ;  fo  that>  if  (landing,  he 
falls  immediately,  or  perhaps,  with  convul- 
lions,  is  thrown  to  the  ground.  In  that  fit- 
tiation  he  is  agitated  with  violent  convulsions, 
variouily  moving  his  limbs  and  the  trunk  of 
iris  body.  Commonly  the  limbs  on  one  fide 
of  the  body,  are  more  violently  or  more  con- 
fiderably  agitated  than  thofe  upon  the  other* 
In  all  cafes  the  mufcles  of  the  face  and  eyes 
are  much  affected,  exhibiting  various  and  vi- 
olent diflortions  of  the  countenance.  The 
tongue  is  often  affected,  and  ihruil  out  of  the 
mouth ;  while  the  mufcles  of  the  lower  jaw 
are  alfo  affected  ;  and,  {hutting  the  mouth 
with  violence  while  the  tongue  is  thru  ft  out 
between  the  teeth,  that  is  often  grievoufly 
wounded. 

While  thefe  coii'vul'lions  continue,  there  is 
commonly  at  the  fame  time  a  fiothy  moiuure 
iffuing  from  the  mouth.  Thefe  convulfions 
have  for  fome  moments  fome  remiffions,  but 
are  fuddenly  again  renewed  with  great  vio- 
lence. Generally,  after  no  long  time,  the 
convulfions  ceafe  altogether  ;  and  the  perfon 
for  fome  time  remains  without  motion,  but  in 

a  ftate 


OF       PHYSIC.  35 

a  ftate  of  abfolute  in  fen  ability,  and  under  the 
appearance  of  a  profound  fleep,  After  fome 
continuance  of  this  Teeming  fleep,  the  perfon 
ibmetimes  fuddenly,  but  for  the  moft  part  by 
degrees  only,  recovers  his  fenfes  and  power  of 
motion  ;  but  without  any  memory  of  what 
had  parted  from  his  being  firft  feized  with 
the  fit,  During  the  convuliions,  the  pulfe 
and  refpiration  are  hurried  and  irregular  ; 
but,  when  the  convulfions  ceafe,  they  return 
to  their  ufual  regularity  and  healthy  ftate. 

This  is  the  general  form  of  the  difeafe  ;  and 
it  varies  only  in  different  perfons,  or  on  dif- 
ferent occafions  in  the  fame  peribn,  by  the 
phenomena  mentioned  being  more  or  lefs  vi- 
olent, or  by  their  being  of  longer  or  fhorter 
duration. 

MCCLXXXiV. 

With  refpecl  to  the  proximate  caufe  of  this 
difeafe,  I  might  fay,  that  it  is  an  affection  of 
the  energy  of  the  brain,  which,  ordinarily  un- 
der the  direction  of  the  will,  is  here,  without 
any  concurrence  of  it,  impelled  by  preternat- 
ural caufesi  But  I  could  go  no  farther  :  For, 
as  to  what  is  the  mechanical  condition  of  the 
brain  in  the  ordinary  exertions  of  the  will,  I 
have  no  diftincl;  knowledge  ;  and  therefore 
mult  be  alfo  ignorant  of  the  preternatural 
ftate  of  the  fame  energy  of  the  bram  under 
the  irregular  motions  here  produced.  To 
Corms  therefore,  the  indications  of  a  cure,  from 

a  knowledge 


36  PRACTICE 

a  knowledge  of  the  proximate  caufe  of  this 
difeafe,  I  mufl  not  attempt ;  but,  from  a  dili- 
gent attention  to  the  remote  caufes  which  firfl 
induce  and  occafionally  excite  the  difeafe,  I 
think  we  may  often  obtain  fome  ufeful  direc- 
tions for  its  cure.  It  fhall  therefore  be  my 
bufinefs  now,  to  point  out  and  enumerate 
thefe  remote  caufes  as  well  as  I  can. 

MCCLXXXV. 

The  remote  caufes  of  epilepfy  may  be  con*, 
fidered  as  occafional  or  predifponent.  There 
are,  indeed,  certain  remote  caufes  which  a6fc 
independently  of  any  predifpolition  ;  but,  as 
we  cannot  always  diflinguifh  thefe  from  the 
others,  I  fhall  confider  the  whole  under  the 
ufual  titles  of  Occafional  or  Predij ponent. 

MCCLXXXVL 

The  occafional  caufes  may,  I  think,  be 
properly  referred  to  two  general  heads ;  the 
firft  being  of  thofe  which  feem  to  a&  by  di- 
rectly ftimulating  and  exciting  the  energy  of 
the  brain  ;  and  the  fecond,  of  thofe  which 
teem  to  a&  by  weakening  the  famek  With 
refpecl  to  both,  for  the  brevity  of  expreffing  a 
fa  ft,  without  meaning  to  explain  the  manner 
in  which  it  is  brought  about,  I  fhall  ufe  the 
terms  of  Excitement  and  Collapfe.  And. 
though  it  be  true,  that  with  refpecl  to  fome 
of  the  caufes  I  am  to  mention,  it  may  be  a 

little 


OF       PHYSIC.  37 

little  uncertain  whether  they  acl;  in  the  one 
way  or  the  other,  that  does  not  render  it  im- 
proper for  us  to  mark,  with  refpeft  to  others, 
the  mode  of  their  operating,  wherever  we  can 
do  it  clearly,  as  the  doing  fo  may  often  be  of 
life  in  directing  our  practice. 

MCCLXXXVII. 

Firft,  then,  of  the  occafional  caufes  acling 
by  excitement  :  They  are  either  fuch  as  aft 
immediately  and  directly  upon  the  brain  it- 
felf ;  or  thofe  which  are  firft  applied  to  the 
other  parts  of  the  body,  and  are  from  thence 
communicated  to  the  brain. 

MCCLXXXVin. 

The  caufes  of  excitement  immediately  anal 
directly  applied  to  the  brain,  may  be  referred 
to  the  four  heads  of,  1.  Mechanical  Stimu- 
lants ;  2.  Chemical  Stimulants  ;  3.  Mental 
Stimulants ;  and,  4.  The  peculiar  Stimulus 
of  Over  Diftention. 

MCCLXXXIX. 

The  mechanical  flimulants  may  be,  wound- 
ing inftruments  penetrating  the  cranium,  and 
entering  the  fubftance  of  the  brain  ;  or  fplin- 
ters  of  a  fractured  cranium,  operating  in  the 
fame  manner ;  or  fharp  pointed  offincations, 
either  arifmg  from  the  internal  furface  of  the 

Vol.  III.  C  cranium. 


38  PRACTICE 

cranium,  or  formed  in  the  membranes  of  the 
brain. 

MCCXC. 

The  chemical  ftimulants  (MCCLXXXVIII) 
may  be  fluids  from  various  caufes  lodged  in 
certain  parts  of  the  brain,  and  become  acrid 

by  ftagnation  or  otherwife. 

MCCXCL 

The  mental  irritations  acling  by  excite- 
ment, are,  all  violent  emotions  of  the  aclive 
kind,  fuch  as  joy  and  anger.  The  firfl  of 
thefe  is  manifeftly  an  exciting  power,  acting 
Itrongly,  and  immediately,  on  the  energy  of 
the  brain.  The  fecond  is  manifeftly,  alio,  a 
power  acting  in  the  fame  manner.  But  it 
mufl  be  remarked,  that  it  is  not  in  this  man- 
ner alone  anger  produces  its  effects  :  For  it 
acts,  alfo,  flrongly  on  the  fanguiferous  fy  item, 
and  may.  be  a  means  of  giving  the  ftimulus  of 
over  diftention  ;  as,  under  a  fit  of  anger,  the 
blood  is  impelled  into  the  vefTels  of  the  head 
with  violence,  and  in  a  larger  quantity. 

MCCXCIL 

Under  the  head  of  Mental  Irritations,  is  to 
be  mentioned,  the  fight  of  perfons  in  a  fit  of 
epilepfy,  v/hich  has  often  produced  a  fit  of  the 
like  kind  in  the  fpe&aton     It  may,  indeed,  be 

a  queflionj 


OF       PHYSIC.  39 

A  queflion,  Whether  this  effect  be  imputable 
to  the  horror  produced  by  a  fight  of  the  feem- 
ingly  painful  agitations  of  the  limbs,  and  of 
the  distortions  in  the  countenance  of  the  epi- 
leptic perfon  ;  or  if  it  may  be  afcribed  to  the 
force  of  imitation  merely  ?  It  is  poffible,  that 
horror  may  fometimes  produce  the  erfecl  : 
But  certainly  much  may  be  .imputed  to  that 
propenfity  to  imitation,  at  all  times  fo  power- 
ful and  prevalent  in  human  nature  ;  and  fo 
often  operating  in  other  cafes  of  convullive 
diforders,  which  do  not  prefent  any  fpeclacle 
of  horror. 

MCCXCIII. 

Under  the  fame  head  of  Mental  Irritation* 
I  think  proper  to  mention  as  an  inftance  of  it, 
the  Epilepfia  Simulata,  or  the  Feigned  Epi- 
lepfy,  fo  often  taken  notice  of.  Although 
this,  at  firft,  may  be  entirely  feigned,  I  have 
no  doubt  but  that  the  repetition  renders  it  at 
length  real.  The  hiftory  of  Quietifm  and  of 
Exorcifms  leads  me  to  this  opinion  ;  and 
which  receives  a  confirmation  from  what  we 
know  of  the  power  of  imagination,  in  renew- 
ing epileptic  and  hyileric  fits. 

MCCXCIV. 

Income  now  to  the  fourth  head  of  the  irri- 
tations applied  immediately  to  the  brain,  and 
which  I  apprehend  to  be  that  of  the  Over  Dif- 
€  2  tention 


40  PRACTICE 

tention  of  the  bloodveffels  in  that  Organ. 
That  fuch  a  caufe  operates  in  producing  epi- 
lepfy, is  probable  from  this,  that  the  diffe&ion 
of  perfons  dead  of  epilepfy,  has  commonly 
di (covered  the  marks  of  a  previous  conge flion 
in  the  bloodveffels  of  the  brain.  This,  per- 
haps, may  be  fuppofed  the  effecl:  of  the  fit 
which  proved  fatal  :  But  that  the  congeflion 
was  previous  thereto,  is  probable  from  the 
epilepfy  being  fo  often  joined  with  headach, 
mania,  pal fy,  and  apoplexy  5  all  of  them  dif- 
eafes  depending  upon  a  congeftion  in  the 
veffels  of  the  brain.  The  general  opinion 
receives  alfo  confirmation  from  this  circum- 
stance, that,  in  the  brain  of  perfons  dead  of 
epilepfy,  there  have  been  often  found  tumours 
and  effufions,  which,  though  feemingly  not 
fufficient  to  produce  thofe  difeafes  which  de- 
pend on  the  compreflion  of  a  confiderable 
portion  of  the  brain,  may,  however,  have 
been  fufBcient  to  comprefs  fo  many  veffels  as 
to  render  the  others  upon  any  occafion  of  a 
more  than  ufual  turgefcence,  or  impulfe  of 
the  blood  into  the  veffels  of  the  brain  more 
liable  to  an  over  diftention. 

MCCXCV. 

Thefe  confiderations  alone  might  afford 
foundation  for  a  probable  conjecture  with 
rcfpecl  to  the  effects  of  over  diftention.  But 
the  opinion  does  not  reft  upon  conjecture 
alone.  That  it  is  alfo  founded  in  fadr.,  ap- 
pears 


OF       PHYSIG,  41 

pears  from  hence,  that  a  plethoric  flate  is  fa- 
vourable to  epilepfy  ;  and  that  every  occa- 
fional  turgefcence,  or  unufual  impulfe  of  the 
blood  into  the  veffels  of  the  brain,  fuch  as  a 
fit  of  anger,  the  heat  of  the  fun,  or  of  a  warm 
chamber,  violent  exercife,  a  furfeit,  or  a  fit  of 
intoxication,  are  frequently  the  immediately 
exciting  caufes  of  epileptic  fits. 

MCCXCVI. 

I  venture  to  remark  further,  that  a  piece  of 
theory  may  be  admitted  as  a  confirmation  of 
this  doctrine.  As  I  have  formerly  maintain- 
ed, that  a  certain  fulnefs*  and  tenfion  of  the 
veffels  of  the  brain  is  neceffary  to  the  fupport 
of  its  ordinary  and  conftant  energy,  in  the 
distribution  of  the  nervous  power ;  fo  it  muil 
be  fufficiently  probable,  that  an  over  disten- 
tion of  thefe  bloodvelfels  may  be  a  caufe  of 
violent  excitement. . 

MCCXCVII. 

We  have  now  enumerated  the  feveral  re- 
mote or  occafional  caufes  of  epilepfy,  acting 
by  excitement,  and  acting  immediately  upon 
the  brain  itfelf.  Of  the  caufes  acting  by  ex- 
citement, but  acting  upon  other  parts  of  the 
body,  and  from  thence  communicated  to  the 
brain,  they  are  all  of  them  impreffio'ns  pro- 
ducing an  exquifite  or  high  degree  either  of 
pleafure  or  pain. 

C  3  Impreflions 


42  PRACTICE 

Impreffions  which  produce  neither  the  one 
nor  the  other,  have  hardly  any  fuch  effe&s  ; 
unlefs  when  fuch  impreffions  are  in  a  violent 
degree,  and  then  their  operation  may  be  con- 
fidered  as  a  mode  of  pain.  It  is,  however,  to 
be  remarked,  that  all  ftrong  impreffions  which 
are  fudden  and  furprifmg,  or,  in  other  words, 
unforefeen  and  unexpected,  have  frequently 
the  efFe£r.  of  bringing  on  epileptic  fits. 

MCCXCVIII. 

There  are  certain  impreffions  made  upon 
different  parts  of  the  body,  which  as  they 
often  operate  without  producing  any  fenfa- 
tion,  fo  it  is  uncertain  to  what  head  they  be- 
long :  But  it  is  probable  that  the  greater  part 
of  them  acl  by  excitement,  and  therefore  fall 
to  be  mentioned  here.  The  chief  inftances 
are,  The  teething  of  infants  ;  worms  ;  acidity 
or  other  acrimony  in  the  alimentary  canal  ; 
calculi  in  the  kidneys  j  acrid  matter  in  ab~ 
fcefTes  or  ulcers  ;  or  acrimony  diffufed  in  the 
mafs  of  blood,  as  in*the  cafe  of  fome  conta- 
gions. 

MCCXCIX. 

Phyficians  have  found  no  difficulty  hi 
comprehending  how  direcl;  flimulants,  of  a 
certain  force,  may  excite  the  aclion  of  the 
brain,  and  occafion  epilepfy  ;  but  they  have 
hitherto  taken  little  notice   of  certain  caufes 

which 


OF       PHYSIC.  43 

which  manifeftly  weaken  the  energy  of  the 
brain,  .and  act,  as  I  fpeak,  by  coilapfe. 
Thefe,  however,  have  the  effect  of  exciting 
the  action  of  the  brain  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to 
occafion  epilepfy.  I  might,  upon  this  fub- 
ject,  fpeak  of  the  vis  medicatrix  natura ;  and 
there  is  a  foundation  for  the  term  :  But,  as  I 
do  not  admit  the  Stahlian  doctrine  of  an  ad- 
min iftering  foul,  I  make  ufe  of  the  term  only 
as  expreffinga  fact,  and  would  not  employ  ti 
with  the  view  of  conveying  an  explanation  of 
the  manner  in  which  the  powers  of  coilapfe 
mechanically  produce  their  effects.  In  the 
mean  time,  however,  I  maintain,  that  there 
are  certain  powers  of  coilapfe,  which  in  effect 
prove  itimulants,  and  produce  epilepfy. 

MCCC. 

That  there  are  fuch  powers,  which  may  be 
termed  I ndireS  Stimulants,  I  conclude  from 
hence,  that  feveral  of  the  caufes  of  epilepfy 
are  fuch  as  frequently  produce  fyncope, 
which  we  fuppofe  always  to  depend  upon 
caufes  weakening  the  energy  of  the  brain 
(MCLXXVI).  It  may  give  fome  difficulty 
to  explain,  why  the  fame  caufes  fometimes 
occafion  fyncope,  and  fometimes  occafion  the 
reaction  that  appears  in  epilepfy  ;  and  I  mall 
not  attempt  to  explain  it :  But  this,  I  think, 
does  not  prevent  my  fuppofing  that  the  ope- 
ration of  thefe  caufes  is  by  coilapfe.  That 
there  are  fuch  caufes  producing  epilepfy,  will, 
C  4  I  think, 


44  P  R  A   C   T   I   C   E 

I  think,  appear  very  clearly  from  the  partic- 
ular examples  of  them  I  am  now  to  mention, 

MCCCI. 

The  firft  to  be  mentioned,  which  I  fuppofe 
to  be  of  this  kind,  is  hemorrhagy,  whether 
fpontaneous  or  artificial.  That  the  fame  he- 
morrhagy which  produces  fyncope,  often  at 
the  fame  time  produces  epilepfy,  is  well 
known  ;  and  from  many  experiments  and 
observations  it  appears,  that  hemorrhagies  oc- 
curring to  fuch  a  degree  as  to  prove  mortal,, 
feldom  do  lb  without  firft. producing  epilepfy. 

MCCCIL 

Another  caufe  acting,  as  I  fuppofe,  by  col- 
lapfe,  and  therefore  fometimes  producing  fyn- 
cope "and  fometimes  epilepfy,  is  terror;  that 
is,  the  fear  of  fome  great  evil  fuddenly  prefent- 
ed.  As  this  produces  at  the  fame  time  a  fud- 
den  and  conhderable  emotion,  (MCLXXX), 
fo  it  more  frequently  produces  epilepfy  than 
fyncope. 

MCCCIII. 

A  third  caufe  acting  by  collapfe,  and  pro- 
ducing epilepfy,  is  horror  ;  or  a  flrong  aver- 
fion  fuddenly  raifed  by  a  very  difagreeable 
fenfation,  and  frequently  arifing  from  a  fym- 
pathy  with  the  pain  or  danger  of  another  per- 

fon. 


OF       PHYSIC,  45 

fan.  As  horror  is  often  a  caufe  of  fyncope, 
there  can  be  no  doubt  of  its  manner  of  ope- 
rating in  producing  epiiepfy  ;  and  it  may 
perhaps  be  explained  upon  this  general  prin- 
ciple, That  as  defire  excites  action  and  gives 
activity,  fo  averfion  reftrains  from  action,  that 
is,  weakens  the  energy  of  the  brain  ;  and, 
therefore,  that  the  higher  degrees  of  averfion 
may  have  the  effecls  of  producing  iyncope  or 
epiiepfy. 

MCCCIV. 

A  fourth  fet  of  the  caufes  of  epiiepfy, 
which  I  fuppofe  aifo  to  acl  hy  coilapfe,  are 
certain  odours,  which  occafion  either  fyncope 
or  epiiepfy  ;  and,  with  refpecl  to  the  former, 
I  have  given  my  reafons  (MCL  XXXII)  for 
fuppofing  odours  in  that  cafe  to  a£i  rather  as 
difagreeable  than  as  fedative,  .  Thefe  reafons 
will,  I  think,  alfo  apply  here  ;  and  perhaps 
the  whole  affair  of  odours  might  be  confider- 
ed  as  inftances  of  the  effe6f.  of  horror,  and 
therefore  belonging  to  the  laft  head. 

MCCCV. 

A  fifth  head  of  the  caufes  producing  epi- 
iepfy by  coilapfe,  is  the  operation  of  many 
fubftances  confidered,  and  for  the  mofl  part 
properly  confidered,  as  poifons.  Many  of 
thefe,  before  they  prove  mortal,  occafion  epi- 
iepfy. This  effecl,  indeed,  may  in  fome  cafes 
be  referred   to   the  inflammatory  operation 

Vol.  3,  C  5  which 


46  PRACTICE 

which  they  fometimes  difcover  in  the  flomach 
and  other  parts  of  the  alimentary  canal  j  but, 
as  the  greater  part  of  the  vegetable  poifons 
mow  chiefly  a  narcotic,  or  ftrongly  fedative 
power,  it  is  probably  by  this  power  that  they 
produce  epilepfy,  and  therefore  belong  to  this 
head  of  the  caufes  acling  by  collapfe. 

MCCCVI. 

Under  the  head  of  the  remote  caufes  pro- 
ducing epilepfy,  we  mud  -now  mention  that 
peculiar  one  whofe  operation  is  accompanied 
with  what  is  called  the  Aura  Epileptica. 
This  is  a  fenfation  of  fomething  moving  in 
fome  part  of  the  limbs  or  trunk  of  the  body, 
and  from  thence  creeping  upwards  to  the 
head  ;  and  when  it  arrives  there,  the  perfon 
is  immediately  deprived  of  fenfe,  and  falls  in- 
to an  epileptic  fit.  This  motion  is  defcribed 
by  the  perfon's  feeling  it  fometimes  as  a  cold 
vapour,  fometimes  as  a  fluid  gliding,  and 
fometimes  as  the  fenfe  of  a  fmall  infect  creep- 
ing along  their  body  ;  and  very  often  they 
can  give  no  difxincl:  idea  of  their  fenfation, 
otherwife  than  as  in  general  of  fomething 
moving  along.  This  fenfation  might  be  fup- 
pofed  to  arife  from  fome  affection  of  the  ex- 
tremity or  other  part  of  a  nerve  acted  upon 
by  fome  irritating  matter  ;  and  that  the  fen- 
fation, therefore,  followed  the  courfe  of  fuch, 
a  nerve  :  But  I  have  never  found  it  following 
diilinclly   the  eourfe  of  any  nerve  ;  and  it 

generally 


OF       P  H  Y  S  I  C.  47 

generally  feems  to  pafs  along  the  teguments. 
It  has  been  found  in  fome  inflances  to  arife 
from  lbmething  preffing  upon  or  irritating  a 
particular  nerve,  and  that  lometimes  in  con- 
fequence  of  contufion  or  wound  :  But  in- 
{lances  of  thefe  are  more  rare  ;  and  the  more 
common  confequence  of  contufions  and 
wounds  is  a  tetanus.  This  latter  effecl; 
wounds  produce,  without  giving  any  fenfa- 
tion  of  an  aura  or  other  kind  of  motion  pro- 
ceeding from  the  wounded  part  to  the  head  ; 
while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  aura  producing 
epilepfy  often  arifes  from  a  part  which  had 
never  before  been  affected  with  wound  or  cen- 
turion, and  in  which  part  the  nature  of  the 
irritation  can  feldom  be  difcovered. 

It  is  natural  to  imagine  that  this  aura  epi- 
leptica  is  an  evidence  of  fome  irritation  or  di- 
rect ilimulus  afting  in  the  part,  and  from 
fhence  communicated  to  the  brain,  and  fhould 
therefore  have  been  mentioned  among  the 
caufes  acting  by  excitement  ;  but  the  re- 
markable difference  that  occurs  in  feemingly 
like  caufes  producing  tetanus,  gives  fome 
doubt  on  this  fubjeft. 

MCCCVIL 

Having  now  enumerated  the  occasional 
caufes  of  epilepfy,  I  proceed  to  confider  the 
predifponent.  As  fo  many  of  the  above 
liientioned  caufes  aft  upon  certain  perfons, 
and  not  at  all  upon,  others,  there  muit  be  fup- 
C6  pofed 


48  PRACTICE 

pofed  in  thofe  perfons  a  predifpofition  to  this 
difeafe  :  But  in  what  this  predifpofition  con- 
fills,  is  not  to  be  eafily  afcertained. 

MCCCVIII. 

As  many  of  the  occafional  caufes  are  weak 
impreffions,  and  are  applied  to  moft  perfons 
with  little  or  no  effect,  I  conclude,  that  the 
perfons  affected  by  thofe  caufes  are  more  ea- 
fily moved  than  others  ;  and  therefore,  that, 
in  this  cafe,  a  certain  mobility  gives  the  pre- 
difpofition. It  will,  perhaps,  make  this  mat- 
ter clearer,  to  mow,  in  the  firfl  place,  that 
there  is  a  greater  mobility  of  conftitution  in 
fome  perfons  than  in  others. 

MCCCIX. 

This  mobility  appears  moft  clearly  in  the 
Hate  of  the  mind.  If  a  perfon  is  readily  elat- 
ed by  hope,  and  as  readily  deprefTed  by  fear, 
and  paffes  eafily  and  quickly  from  the  one 
ftate  to  the  other  ;  if  he  is  eafily  pleafed,  and 
prone  to  gaiety,  and  as  eafily  provoked  to 
anger,  and  rendered  peevifh  ;  if  liable,  from 
flight  impreffions,  to  ftrong  emotions,  but  te- 
nacious of  none  ;  this  is  the  boyifh  tempera- 
ment, qui  colligit  ac  ponit  iram  temere>  et  mu- 
tator in  horas  ;  this  is  the  varium  et  mutabile 
f <zmina  ;  and,  both  in  the  boy  and  woman, 
every  one  perceives  and  acknowledges  a  mo- 
bility of  mind.  But  this  is  neceffarily  con- 
nected 


* 


OF       PHYSIC.  49 

ne&ed  with  an  analogous  ftate  of  the  brain  ; 
that  is,  with  a  mobility,  in  refpett  of  every 
impreffion,  and  therefore  liable  to  a  ready  al- 
ternation of  excitement  and  collapfe,  and  of 
both  to  a  confiderable  degree. 

MCCCX. 

There  is,  therefore,  in  certain  perfons,  a 
mobility  of  conflitution,  generally  derived 
from  the  ftate  of  original  ftamina,  and  more 
exquifite  at  a  certain  period  of  life  than  at 
others  ;  but  fometimes  arifmg  from,  and  par- 
ticularly modified  by,  occurrences  in  the 
courfe  of  life. 

MCCCXI. 

This  mobility  confifts  in  a  greater  degree 
of  either  fenfibility  or  irritability.  Thefe 
conditions,  indeed,  phyficians  confider  as  fo 
neceffarily  connected,  that  the  conflitution 
with  refpecl:  to  them,  may  be  confidered  as 
one  and  the  fame  :  But  I  am  of  opinion  that 
they  are  different ;  and  that  mobility  may" 
fometimes  depend  upon  an  increafe  of  the 
one,  and  fometimes  on  that  of  the  other.  If 
an  action  excited,  is,  by  repetition,  rendered 
more  eafily  excited,  and  more  vigoroufly  per- 
formed, I  confider  this  as  an  increafe  of  irri- 
tability only.  I  go  no  farther  on  this  fubjeft 
here,  as  it  was  only  neceffary  to  take  notice 
of  the  cafe  juft  now  mentioned,  for  the  pur- 

pofe 


50  PRACTICE 

pofe  of  explaining  why  epilepfy,  and  convul- 
sions of  all  kinds,  by  being  repeated,  are  more; 
eafily  excited,  readily  become  habitual,  and 
are  therefore  of  more  difficult  cure. 

MCCCXII. 

However  we  may  apply  the  dift.inc~t.ion  of 
fenfibility  and  irritability,  it  appears  that  the 
mobility,  which  is  the  predifponent  caufe  of 
epilepfy,  depends  more  particularly  upon  de- 
bility, or  upon  a  plethoric  (late  of  the  body. 

MCCCXIII. 

What  fhare  debility,  perhaps  by  inducing 
fenfibility,  has  in  this  matter,  appears  clearly 
from  hence,  that  children,  women,  and  other 
perfons  of  manifeft  debility,  are  the  moft  fre- 
quent fubjecls  of  this  difeafe. 

MCCCXIV. 

The  effects  of  a  plethoric  ftate  in  difpofmg 
to  this  difeafe  appears  from  hence,  that  ple- 
thoric perfons  are  frequently  the  fubjecls  of  it : 
That  it  is  commonly  excited,  as  I  have  faid 
above,  by  the  caufes  of  any  unufual  turgef- 
cence  of  the  blood  ;  and  that  it  has  been  fre- 
quently cured  by  diminifhing  the  plethoric 
ftate  of  the  body. 

That  a  plethoric  ftate  of  the  body  ihould 
difpofe   to  this  difeafe,  we   may  underftand 

from 


OF      PHYSIC.  51 

from  feveral  confiderations.  1/?,  Becaufe  a 
plethoric  ftate  implies,  for  the  moft  part,  a 
laxity  of  the  folids,  and  therefore  fome  debil- 
ity in  the  moving  fibres.  2dly,  Becaufe,  in 
a  plethoric  ftate,  the  tone  of  the  moving  fi- 
bres depends  more  upon  their  tenfion,  than 
upon  their  inherent  power  :  And  as  their  ten- 
fion depends  upon  the  quantity  and  impetus 
of  the  fluids  in  the  bloodveffels,  which  are 
very  changeable,  and  by  many  caufes  fre- 
quently changed,  fo  thefe  frequent  changes 
mufl  give  a  mobility  to  the  fyftem.  %dlyy 
Becaufe  a  plethoric  ftate  is  favourable  to  a 
congeftion  of  blood  in  the  velfels  of  the  brain, 
it  muft  render  thefe  more  readily  affected  by 
every  general  turgefcence  of  the  blood  in  the 
fyftem,  and  therefore  more  efpecially  difpofe 
to  this  difeafe. 

MCCCXV. 

There  is  another  circumftance  of  the  body 
difpofmg  to  epi^epfy,  which  I  cannot  fo  well 
account  for ;  and  that  is,  the  ftate  of  fleep  : 
But  whether  I  can  account  for  it  or  not,  it 
appears,  in  fact,  that  this  ftate  gives  the  dif- 
pofition  I  fpeak  of ;  for,  in  many  perfons  lia- 
ble to  this  difeafe,  the  fits  happen  only  in  the 
time  of  fleep,  or  immediately  upon  the  per- 
fon's  coming  out  of  it.  In  a  cafe  related  by 
De  Haen,  it  appeared  clearly,  that  the  difpo- 
iition  to  epilepfy  depended  entirely  upon  the 
ftate  of  the  body  in- fleep. 

MCCCXVL 


52  PRACTICE 


MCCCXVI. 

Having  thus  confidered  the  whole  of  the 
remote  caufes  of  epilepfy,  I  proceed  to  treat 
of  its  cure,  as  I  have  laid  it  is  from  the  con- 
fideration  of  thofe  remote  caufes  only  that  we 
can  obtain  any  directions  for  our  practice  in 
this  difeafe. 

1  begin  with  obferving,  that  as  the  difeafe 
may  be  confidered  as  fympathic  or  idiopathic, 
I  muft  treat  of  thefe  feparately,  and  judge  it 
proper  to  begin  with  the  former. 

MCCCXVII. 

When  this  difeafe  is  truly  fympathic,  and 
depending  upon  a  primary  affection  in  fome 
other  part  of  the  body,  fuch  as  acidity  or 
worms  in  the  alimentary  canal,  teething,  or 
other  limilar  caufes.  it  is  obvious,  that  fuch 
primary  affections  muft  be  removed  for  the 
cure  of  the  epilepfy  ;  but  it  is  not  our  bufu 
nefs  here  to  fay  how  thefe  primary  difeafes 
are  to  be  treated. 

MCCCXVIII. 

There  is,  however,  a  peculiar  cafe  of  fym- 
pathic epilepfy ;  that  is,  the  cafe  accompa- 
nied with  the  aura  epileptica,  as  defcribed  in 
MCCCVI,  in  which,  though  we  can  perceive 
by  the  aura  epileptica  arifing  from  a  particu- 
lar 


OF       PEYSIG,  53 

Jar  part,  that  there  is  fome  affection  in  that 
part ;  yet,  as  in  many  fuch  cafes  we  cannot 
perceive  of  what  nature  the  affe&ion  is,  I  can 
only  offer  the  following  general  directions. 

lft,  When  the  part  can  with  fafety  be  en- 
tirely deftroyed,  we  mould  endeavour  to  do 
fo  by  cutting  it  out,  or  by  deftroying  it  by 
the  application  of  an  aclual  or  potential 
cautery.. 

2dly,  When  the  part  cannot  be  properly 
deftroyed,  that  we  mould  endeavour  to  cor- 
rect the  morbid  affeclion  in  it  by  bliftering,  or 
by  eftablifhing  an  ifTue  upon  the  part. 

%dlyy  When  thefe  meafures  cannot  be  exe- 
cuted, or  do  not  fucceed,  if  the  difeafe  feems 
to  proceed  from  the  extremity  of  a  particular 
nerve  which  we  can  eafily  come  at  in  its 
courfe,  it  will  be  proper  to  cut  through  that 
nerve,  as  before  propofed  on  the  fubje&  of 
tetanus. 

4ihly,  When  it  cannot  be  perceived  that 
the  aura  arifes  from  any  precife  place  or 
point,,  fo  as  to  direct  to  the  above  mentioned 
operations  ;  but,  at  the  fame  time,  we  can 
perceive  its  progrefs  along  the  limb  ;  it  fre- 
quently happens  that  the  epilepfy  can  be  pre- 
vented by  a  ligature  applied  upon  the  limb, 
above  the  part  from  which  the  aura  arifes  : 
And  this  is  always  proper  to  be  done,  both 
becaufe  the  preventing  a  fit  breaks  the  habit 
of  the  difeafe,  and  becaufe  the  frequent  com- 
preflion  renders  the  nerves  lefs  fit  to  propa- 
gate the  aura, 

MCCCXIX. 


54  PRACTICE 


MCCCXIX. 

The  cure  of  idiopathic  epilepfy,  as  I  have 
faid  above,  is  to  be  directed  by  our  knowledge 
of  the  remote  caufes.  There  are  therefore 
two  general  indications  to  be  formed  :  The 
flrfl  is,  to  avoid  the  occafional  caufes  ;  and 
the  fecond  is,  to  remove  or  correct  the  pre- 
difponent. 

This  method,  however,  is  not  always  pure- 
ly palliative  ;  as  in  many  cafes  the  predifpo- 
nent  may  be  confidered  as  the  only  proximate 
caufe,  fo  Gur  fecond  indication  may  be  often 
confidered  as  properly  curative. 

MCCCXX. 

« 

From  the  enumeration  given  above,  it  will 
be  manifeft,  that  for  the  moll  part  the  occa- 
fional caufes,  fo  far  as  they  are  in  our  power, 
need  only  to  be  known,  in  order  to  be  avoid- 
ed ;  and  the  means  of  doing  this  will  be  fuf- 
ficiently  obvious.  I  mall  here,  therefore,  of- 
fer only  a  few  remarks, 

MCCCXXI; 

One  of  the  mofl  frequent  of  the  occafional 
caufes  is  that  of  over  diftention  (MCCCXIV), 
which,  fo  far  as  it  depends  upon  a  plethoric 
ftate  of  the  fyftem,  I  mall  fay  hereafter  how 
it  is  to  be  avoided.     But  as,  not  only  in  the 

plethoric^ 


OF       PHYSIC.  55 

plethoric,  but  in  every  moveable  conftitution, 
occafional  turgefcence  is  a  frequent  means 
of  exciting  epilepfy,  the  avoiding  therefore 
of  fuch  turgefcence  is  what  ought  to  be 
moll  conflantly  the  object  of  attention  to  per- 
fons  liable  to  epilepfy. 

MCCCXXII. 

Another  of  thc^nofl  frequent  exciting  cauf- 
c?s  of  this  difeafe  are,  all  ftrong  impreiiions 
fuddenly  made  upon  the  fenfes  ;  for  as  fuch 
imprefhons,  in  moveable  conftitutions,  break 
in  upon  the  ufual  force,  velocity,  and  order 
of  the  motions  of  the  nervous  fyftem,  they 
thereby  readily  produce  epilepfy.  Such  im- 
preffions  therefore,  and  efpecialiy  thole  which 
are  fuited  to  excite  any  emotion  or  paffion  of 
the  mind,  are  to  be  mofc  carefully  guarded 
againft  by  perfons  liable  to  epilepfy. 

MCCCXXIIL 

In  many  cafes  of  epilepfy,  where  the  pre- 
difponent  caufe  cannot  be  corrected  or  re- 
moved, the  recurrence  of  the  difeafe  can  only 
be  prevented,  by  the  ftri&eft  attention  to 
avoid  the  occafional  ;  and  as  the  difeafe  is 
often  confirmed  by  repetition  and  habit,  fo 
the  avoiding  the  frequent  recurrence  of  it  is 
of  the  utmofl  importance  towards  its  cure. 

Thefe  are  the  few  remarks  I  have  to  offer 
with  refpecl  to  the   occafional  caufes  -,  and 

mull 


$6  PRACTICE 

mull  now  obferve,  that,  for  the  moft  part,  the 
complete,  or,  as  it  is  called,  the  Radical  Cure, 
h  only  to  be  obtained  by  removing  or  cor- 
recting the  predifponent  caufe. 

MCCCXXIV. 

I  have  faid  above,  that  the  predifponent 
caufe  of  epilepfy  is  a  certain  mobility  of  the 
fenforium  ;  and  that  this  depends  upon  a 
plethoric  ftate  of  the  fyflem,  or  upon;  a  cer- 
tain ftate  of  debility  in  it. 

MCCCXXV. 

How  the  plethoric  ftate  of  the  fyftem  is  to 
be  corrected,  I  have  treated  of  fully  above  in 
DCCLXXXIII  etfeq.  and  I  need  not  re- 
peat it  here.  It  will  be  enough  to  fay,  that  it 
is  chiefly  to  be  done  by  a  proper  manage- 
ment of  exercife  and  diet ;  and,  with  refpecl: 
to  the  latter,  it  is  particularly  to  be  obferved 
here,  that  an  abflemious  courfe  has  been  fre- 
quently found  to  be  the  moil  certain  means 
of  curing  epilepfy. 

MCCCXXVI. 

Confidering  the  nature  of  the  matter  pour- 
ed out  by  iffues,  thefe  may  be  fuppofed  to  be 
a  conflant  means  of  obviating  the  plethoric 
flate  of  the  fyftem  ;  and  it  is,  perhaps,  there- 
fore, that  they  have  been  fo  often  found  ufe- 

ful 


G  F       PHYSIC.  w 

ful  in  epilepfy.  Poffibly,  alfo,  as  an  open 
iflue  may  be  a  means  of  determining  occafion- 
al  turgefcences  to  fuch  places,  and  therefore- 
of  diverting  them  in  fome  meafure  from  their 
aclion  upon  the  brain  ;  fo  alfo,  in  this  man- 
ner, ifTues  may  be  ufeful  in  epilepfy. 

MCCCXXVII. 

It  might  be  fuppofed  that  bloodletting 
would  be  the  moft  effectual  means  of  correct- 
ing the  plethoric  ftate  of  the  fyftem  ;  and 
fuch  it  certainly  proves  when  the  plethoric 
ftate  has  become  conuderable,  and  imme- 
diately threatens  morbid  effects.  It  is  there- 
fore, in  fuch  circumftances,  proper  and  necef- 
fary  :  But  as  we  have  faid  above,  that  blood- 
letting is  not  the  proper  means  of  obviating  a 
recurrence  of  the  plethoric  ftate,  and,  on  the 
contrary,  is  often  the  means  of  favouring  it ; 
fo  it  b  not  a  remedy  advifable  in  every  cir- 
cumftance  of  epilepfy.  There  is,  however,  a 
cafe  of  epilepfy  in  which  there  is  a  periodical 
or  occafional  recurrence  of  the  fulnefs  and 
turgefcence  of  the  fanguiferous  fyftem,  giving 
occafion  to  a  recurrence  of  the  difeafe.  In 
fuch  cafes,  when  the  means  of  preventing 
plethora  have  been  neglected,  or  may  have 
proved  ineffectual,  it  is  abfolutely  neceffary 
for  the  practitioner  to  watch  the  returns  of 
thefe  turgefcences,  and  to  obviate  their  effects 
by  the  only  certain  means  of  doing  it,  that  is, 
by  a  large  bloodletting. 

MCCCXXVIIL 


58  PRACTICE 

MCCCXXVIII. 

The  fecond  caufe  of  mobility  which  we 
have  affigned,  is  a  ftate  of  debility.  If  this  is 
owing,  as  it  frequently  is,  to  original  con- 
formation, it  is  perhaps  not  poffible  to  cure 
it ;  but  when  it  has  been  brought  on  in  the 
courfe  of  life,  it  poffibly  may  admit  of  being 
mended  ;  and,  in  either  cafe,  much  may  be 
done  to  obviate  and  prevent  its  e£Fe£fo. 

MCCCXXIX. 

The  means  of  correcting  debility,  fo  far  as 
it  can  be  done,  are,  The  perfon's  being  much 
in  cool  air  ;  the  frequent  ufe  of  cold  bath- 
ing ;  the  ufe  of  exercife,  adapted  to  the 
ftrength  and  habits  of  the  perfon  ;  and,  per* 
haps,  the  ufe  of  aflringent  and  tonic  medi- 
cines. 

Thefe  remedies  are  fuited  to  ftrengthen  the 
inherent  power  of  the  folids  or  moving  fibres  I 
But  as  the  ftrength  of  thefe  depends  alfo  up- 
on their  tenfion,  fo  when  debility  has  pro- 
ceeded from  inanition,  the  ftrength  may  be 
reftored,  by  reftoring  the  fulnefs  and  tenfion 
of  the  veffels  by  a  nouriming  diet  ;  and  we 
have  had  inftances  of  the  propriety  and  fuc- 
cefs  of  fuch  a  practice* 

MCCCXXX* 


O  F       PHYSIC.  59 


MCCCXXX. 

The  means  of  obviating  the  effects  of  de- 
bility, and  of  the  mobility  depending  upon 
it,  are  the  ufe  of  tonic  and  antifpafmodic  rem- 
edies. 

The  tonics  are,  Fear,  or  fome  degree  of 
terror  ;  aftringents  ;  certain  vegetable  and 
metallic  tonics  ;  and  cold  bathing. 

MCCCXXXI. 

That  fear,  or  fome  degree  of  terror,  may 
be  of  ufe  in  preventing  epilepfy,  we  have  a 
remarkable  proof  in  Boerhaave's  cure  of  the 
epilepfy,  which  happened  in  the  Orphan-, 
houfe  at  Haerlem.  See  Kauu  Eoerhaave's 
treatife,  entitled  Impetum  Faciens,  §  406.  And 
we  have  met  with  feveral  other  inftances  of 
the  fame. 

As  the  operation  of  horror  is  in  many  ref- 
pe6ts  analogous  to  that  of  terror,  feveral  feem- 
ingly  fuperflitious  remedies  have  been  em- 
ployed for  the  cure  of  epilepfy  j  and,  if  they 
have  ever  been  fuccefsful,  I  think  it  muft  be 
imputed  to  the  horror  they  had  infpired, 

MCCCXXXII. 

Of  the  aftringent  medicines  ufed  for  the 
cure  of  epilepfy,  the  moft  celebrated  is  the 
Difcus  quercinus,  which,  when  given  in  large 

quantities,, 


6o  PRACTICE 

quantities,  may  poflibly  be  ufeful ;  but  I  be- 
lieve it  was  more  efpecially  fo  in  ancient 
times,  when  it  was  an  object  of  fuperftition. 
In  the  few  inftances  in  which  I  have  feen  it 
employed,  it  did  not  prove  of  any  effect. 


MCCCXXXIIL 


Among  the  vegetable  tonics,  the  bitters  are 
to  be  reckoned  :  and  it  is  by  this  quality  that 
I  fuppofe  the  orange  tree  leaves  to  have  been 
mfeful :  But  they  are  not  always  fo» 


■MCCCXXXIV, 


The  vegetable  tonic,  which  from  its  ufe  in 
analogous  cafes  is  the  mofl  promifing,  is  the 
Peruvian  bark  ;  this,  upon  occafion,  has  been 
ufeful,  but  has  alfo  often  failed.  It  is  efpec- 
ially adapted  to  thofe  epilepfies  which  recur 
at  certain  periods,  and  which  are  at  the  fame 
time  without  the  recurrence  of  any  plethoric 
ftate,  or  turgefcence  of  the  blood ;  and  in 
fuch  periodical  cafes,  if  the  bark  is  employed 
iome  time  before  the  expected  recurrence,  it 
may  be  ufeful  :  But  it  mud  be  given  in  large 
quantity,  and  as  near  to  the  time  of  the  ex^. 
peeked  return  as  poffible. 

MCCCXXXV* 


G  F      P  II  Y  S  I  C.  61 


MCCCXXXV. 


The  metallic  tonics  feem  to  be  more  pow^ 
erful  than  the  vegetable,  and  a.  great  variety 
of  the  former  have  been  employed. 

Even  arfenic  has  been  employed  in  the 
cure  of  epilepfy  ;  and  its  tife  in  intermittent 
fevers  gives  an  analogy  in  its  favour. 

Preparations  of  tin  have  been  formerly  rec- 
ommended in  the  cure  of  epilepfy,  and  in  the 
cure  of  the  analogous  difeafe  of  hyileria  ;  and 
feveral  confederations  render  the  virtues  of 
tin,  with  refpecl  to  thefe  diieafes,  probable  : 
But  I  have  had  no  experience  of  its  ufe  in 
fuchcafes. 

A  much  fafer  metallic  tonic  is  to  be  found 
in  the  preparations  of  iron  ;  and  we  have 
ieen  fome  of  them  employed  in  the  cure  of 
epilepfy,  but  have  never  found  them  to  be 
effectual.  This,  however,  I  think,  may  be 
imputed  to  their  not  having  been  always  em- 
ployed in  the  circumilances  of  the  difeafe, 
and  in  the  quantities  of  the  medicine,  that 
were  proper  and  neceffary. 

tacccxxxvx. 

Of  the  metallic  tonics,  the  moft  celebrated 
and  the  moil  frequently  employed  is  copper, 
under  various  preparation.  What  prepara- 
tion of  it  may  be  the  moil  effectual,   I   dare 

Vol,  III.  D  not 


62  PRACTICE 

not  determine ;  but  of  late  the  cuprum  WM» 
moniacum  has  been  frequently  found  fuc- 
cefsful. 

MCCCX  XXVII. 

Lately  the  flowers  of  zinc  have  been  rec- 
ommended by  a  great  authority  as  ufeful  in 
all  convulfive  diforders  ;  but  in  cafes  of  epi*. 
lepfy,  I  have  not  hitherto  found  that  medicine 
ufefuh 

MCCCXX  XVIII. 

There  have  been  of  late  fome  inftances  of 
the  cure  of  epilepfy  by  the  accidental  ufe  of 
mercury  ;  and  if  the  late  accounts  of  the  cure 
of  tetanus  by  this  remedy  are  confirmed,  it 
will  allow  us  to  think  that  the  fame  may  be 
adapted  alfo  to  the  cure  of  certain  cafes  of 
epilepfy. 

"MCCCX'XXIX. 

With  refpecl:  to  the  employment  of  any  of 
the  above  mentioned  tonics  in  this  difeafe,  it 
muft  be  obferved,  that  in  all  cafes  where  the 
difeafe  depends  upon  a  conftant  or  occafional 
plethoric  {fate  of  the  fyftem,  thefe  remedies 
are  likely  to  be  ineffectual ;  and  if  fufficient 
evacuations  are  not'  made  at  the  fame  time3 
thefe  medicines  are  likely  to  be  very  hurtful. 

MCCCXL, 


OF      P  H  Y  S  I  C.  6j 


MCCCXL* 

The  other  fet  of  medicines  which  we  hav^ 
mentioned  as  fuited  to  obviate  the  effects  of 
the  too  great  mobility  of  the  fyftem,  are  the 
medicines  named  antifpafmodics,  Of  thefe 
there  is  a  long  lift  in  the  writers  on  the  Ma- 
teria Medica,  and  by  thefe  authors  recom- 
mended for  the  cure  of  epilepfy.  The  great- 
er part,  however,  of  thofe  taken  from  the  veg- 
etable kingdom,  are  manifeftly  inert  and  in- 
fignificant.  Even  the  root  of  the  wild  vale- 
rian hardly  fupports  its  credit* 

MCCCXLL 

Certain  fubflances  taken  from  tlie  animal 
kingdom  feem  to  be  much  more  powerful : 
And  of  thefe  the  chief,  and  feemingly  the 
moft  powerful,  is  mulk;  which,  employed  in 
its  genuine  (late,  and  in  due  quantity,  has 
often  been  an  effectual  remedy. 

It  is  probable  alfo,  that  the  oleum  animate, 
as  it  has  been  named,  when  in  its  pureft  ftate, 
and  exhibited  at  a  proper  time,  may  be  an  ef- 
fectual remedy. 

MCCCXLIL 

In  many  difeafes,  the  moil  powerful  anti- 
fpafmodic  is  certainly  opium  •  but  the  pro- 
priety of  its  ufe  in  epilepfy  has  been  difputed 
D  2  among 


64  PRACTICE 

among  phyficians.  When  the  difeafe  de- 
pends upon  a  plethoric  ftate  in  which  bleed- 
ing may  be  neceflary,  the  employment  of 
opium  is  likely  to  be  very  hurtful ;  but,  when 
there  is  no  plethoric  or  inflammatory  ftate 
prefent,  and  the  difeafe  feems  to  depend  upon 
irritation  or  upon  increafed  irritability,  opium 
is  likely  to  prove  the  mod  certain  remedy. 
Whatever  effe&s  in  this  and  other  convulfive 
diforders  have  been  attributed  to  the  hyofcy- 
amus,  mufl  probably  be  attributed  to  its  pof- 
fe  fling  a  narcotic  power  fimilar  to  that  of 
opium. 

MCCCXLIII. 

With  refpecl:  to  the  ufe  of  antifpafmodics, 
it  is  to  be  obferved,  that  they  are  always  moft 
ufeful,  and  perhaps  only  ufeful,  when  em- 
ployed at  a  time  when  epileptic  fits  are  fre- 
quently recurring,  or  near  to  the  times  of  the 
acceflion  of  fits  which  recur  after  confiderable 
intervals, 

MCCCXLIV. 

On  the  fubjecl:  of  the  cure  of  epilepfy,  I 
have  only  to  add,  that  as  the  difeafe  in  many 
cafes  is  continued  by  the  pow^rof  habit  only, 
and  that  in  all  cafes  habit  has  a  great  fhare  in 
increafmg  mobility,  and  therefore  in  contin- 
uing this  difeafe  ;  fo  the  breaking  in  upori 
fuch  habit,  and  changing  the  whole  habits  of 

the 


OF       PHYSIC.  65 

the  fyftem,  is  likely  to  be  a  powerful  remedy 
in  epilepfy.  Accordingly,  a  confiderable 
change  of  climate,  diet,  and  other  circum- 
ftances  in  the  manner  of  life,  has  often  proved 
a  cure  of  this  difeafe.. 


MCCCXLV. 

After  treating  of  epilepfy,  I  might  here 
treat  of  particular  convulfions,  which  are  to 
be  diftinguiihed  from  epilepfy  by  their  being 
more  partial  :  That  is,  affecting  certain  parts 
of  the  body  only,  and  by  their  not  being  at- 
tended with  a  lofs  of  fenfe,  nor  ending  in  fuch 
a  comatofe  Hate  as  epilepfy  always  does,, 

MCCCXLVK. 

Of  fuch  convulfive  affections  many  differ- 
ent inftances  have  been  obferved  and  record- 
ed by  phyficians.  But  many  of  thefe  have 
been  manifeftly  fympathic  affections,  to  be, 
cured  only  by  curing  the  primary  difeafe  up- 
on which  they  depend,  and  therefore  not  to 
be  treated  of  here  :  Or,  though  they  are  fuch 
as  cannot  be  referred  to  another  difeafe,  as 
many  of  them  however  have  not  any  fpecific 
character  with  which  they  occur  in  different 
perfons,  I  mull  therefore  leave  them  to  be 
treated  upon  the  general  principles  I  have 
laid  down  with  refpect  to  epilepfy,  or  fhall  lay 
down  with  refpect  to  the  following  convulsive 
D  3  diforder ; 


66  PRACTICE 

diforder  ;  which  as  having  very  conftantly  in 
different  perfons  a  peculiar  character,  I  think 
neceflary  to  treat  of  more  particularly. 


Chap.       III. 
Of  the  Chorea  or  Dance  of  St.  Vitus3 

MCCCXLVII. 

THIS  difeafe  affe&s  both  fexes,  and  al- 
moft  only  young  perfons.  It  generally  hap- 
pens from  the  age  of  ten  to  that  of  fourteen 
years.  It  comes  on  always  before  the  age  of 
puberty,  and  rarely  continues  beyond  that 
period. 

MCCCXLVIIL 

It  is  chiefly  marked  by  convulfive  motions, 
fomewhat  varied  in  different  perfons,  but 
nearly  of  one  kind  in  all ;  affecting  the  leg 
and  arm  on  the  fame  fide,  and  generally  on 
one  fide  only. 

MCCCXLIX. 

Thefe  convulfive  motions  commonly  fir  ft 
affect  the  leg  and  foot.     Though  the  limb  be 

at 


OF       PHYSIC.  67 

at  reft,  the  foot  is  often  agitated  by  convulfive 
motions,  turning  it  alternately  outwards  and 
inwards.  When  walking  is  attempted,  the 
affected  leg  is  feldom  lifted  as  ufual  in  walk- 
ing, but  is  dragged  along  as  if  the  whole  limb 
were  paralytic  ;  and  when  it  is  attempted  to 
be  lifted,  this  motion  is  unfleadily  performed, 
the  limb  becoming  agitated  by  irregular  con™ 
vulfive  motions. 

MCCCL. 

The  arm  of  the  fame  fide  is  generally  af- 
fected at  the  fame  time  ;  and,  even  when  no 
voluntary  motion  is  attempted,  the  arm  is  fre- 
quently agitated  with  various  convulfive  mo- 
tions. But  especially  when  voluntary  mo- 
tions are  attempted,  thefe  are  not  properly 
executed,  but  are  varioufly  hurried  or  inter- 
rupted by  convulfive  motions  in  a  direction 
contrary  to  that  intended.  The  rnofl  com- 
mon inftance  of  this  is  in  the  perfon's  at- 
tempting to  carry  a  cup  of  liquor  to  his 
mouth,  when  it  is  only  after  repeated  efforts, 
interrupted  by  frequent  convulfive  retractions 
and  deviations,  that  the  cup  can  be  carried  to 
the  mouth. 

MCCCLI. 

It  appears  to  me,  that  the  will  often  yields 
to  thefe  convulfive  motions,  as  to  a  propen- 
sity, and  thereby   they  are  often  increafed, 
'  D  4  while 


68  PRACTICE 

while  the  perfon  affecled  feerns  plea  fed' with, 
increasing  the  furprife  and  amufement  which 
his  motions  occafion  in  the  byftanders. 


MCCCLIL 

In  this  difeafe  the  mind  is  often  affecled 
with  fome  degree  of  fatuity  ;  and  often  mows 
the  fame  varied,  defultory,  and  caufelefs  emo- 
tions which  occur  in  hyiteria. 

MCCCLIII. 

Thefe  are  the  moll  common  circumftances- 
of  this  difeafe  ;  but  at  times,  and  in  different 
perfons,  it  is  varied  by  fome  difference  in  the 
convulfive  motions,  particularly  by  thefe  af- 
fecting the  head  and  trunk  of  the  body.  As 
in  this  difeafe  there  feem  to  be  propensities  to 
motion,  fo  various  fits  of  leaping  and  running 
occur  in  the  perfons  affecled  ;  and  there  have 
been  inflances  of  this  difeafe,  confifling  of 
fuch  convulfive  motions,  appearing  as  an  epi- 
demic in  a  certain  corner  of  the  country.  In 
fuch  inflances,  perfons  of  different  ages  are 
affecled,  and  may  feem  to  make  an  exception 
to  the  general  rule  above  laid  down  ;  but  Hill 
the  perfons  are,  for  the  mod  part,  the  young 
of  both  fexes,  and  of  the  more  manifeflly 
moveable  constitutions. 

MCCCLIV. 


OF       PHYSIC.  69 

MCCCLIV. 

The  method  of  curing  this  difeafe  has  been 
varioufly  propofed.  Dr.  Sydenham  propof- 
ed  to  cure  it  by  alternate  bleeding  and  purg^ 
ing.  In  fome  plethoric  habits  I  have  found 
fome  bleeding  ufeful ;  but  in  many  cafes  I 
have  found  repeated  evacuations,  efpecially 
by  bleeding,  very  hurtful. 

In  many  cafes,  I  have  found  the  difeafe, 
in  fpite  of  remedies  of  all  kinds,  continue  for 
many  months ;  but  I  have  alfo  found  it  often 
readily  yield  to  tonic  remedies,  fuch  as  the 
Peruvian  bark,  and  chalybeates. 

The  late  Dr.  De  Haen  found  feveral  per- 
fons  labouring  under  this  difeafe  cured  by  the 
application  of  electricity. 


Vox.  3.  D  5  SECT. 


70  PRACTIC  E 


SECT.         II. 


®f  the  SPASMODIC  AFFECTIONS  of 
the  VITAL  FUNCTIONS. 


II    A    P.         IV, 


Of  the  Palpitation  of  the  Heart. 


MCCCLV. 

1  HE  motion  thus  named  is  a 
contra&ion  or  fyftole  of  the  heart,  that  is  per- 
formed with  more  rapidity,  and  generally  alfo 
with  more  force  than  ufual ;  and  when  at  the 
fame  time  the  heart  ftrikes  with  more  than 
ufual  violence  againft  the  infide  of  the  ribs> 
producing  often  a  confiderable  found. 

MCCCLVI. 

This  motion,  or  palpitation,  is  occafioned 
by  a  great  variety  of  caufes,  which  have  been 

recited 

*  Though  I  have  thought  it  proper  to  divide  this  book 
into  fe&ions,  I  think  it  necefiary,  for  the  convenience  of 
references,  to  number  the  chapters  from  the  beginning. 


OF       P    K    Y   S    I   C.  71 

recited  with  great  pains  by  Mr.  Senac  and 
others  ;  whom,  however,  I  cannot  follow  in 
all  the  particulars  with  fufnxient  difcernment, 
and  therefore  (hall  here  only  attempt  to  refer 
all  the  feveral  cafes  of  this  difeafe  to  a  few 
general  heads. 

MCCCLV1I. 

The  firft  is  of  thofe  arififtg  from  the  appli- 
cation of  the  ufual  flimulus  to  the  heart's  con- 
traction ;  that  is,  the  influx  of  the  venous 
blood  into  its  cavities,  being  made  with  more 
velocity,  and  therefore,  in  the  dune  time,  in 
greater  quantity  than  ufual.  It  feems  to  be 
in  this  manner  that  violent  exereife  occafions 
palpitation. 

MCCCLVIIL 

A  fecond  head  of  the  cafes  of  palpitation, 
is  of  thofe  arifing  from  any  refiftance  given 
to  the  free  and  entire  evacuation  of  the  ven- 
tricles of  the  heart.  Thus  a  ligature  made 
upon  the  "aorta  occafions  palpitations  of  the 
moll  violent  kind.  Similar  refinances,  either 
in  the  aorta  or  pulmonary  artery,  may  be 
readily  imagined  ;  and  inch  have  been  often 
found  in  the  dead  bodies  of  perfons  who, 
during  life,  had  been  much  affe£ted  with  pal- 
pitations. 

To  this  head  are  to  be  referred  all   thofe 

cafes  of  palpitation  arifing  from  caufes  pro- 

D  6  duciiig 


72  PRACTICE 

ducing  an  accumulation  of  blood  in  the  great 
vefTels  near  to  the  heart. 


MCCCLIX. 

A  third  head  of  the  cafes  of  palpitation,  is 
of  thofe  arifing  from  a  more  violent  and  rapid 
influx  of  the  nervous  power  into  the  mufcular 
fibres  of  the  heart.  It  is  in  this  manner  that 
I  fuppofe  various  caufes  acting  in  the  brain, 
and  particularly  certain  emotions  of  the  mind, 
occafion  palpitation. 

MCCCLX. 

A  fourth  head  of  the  cafes  of  palpitation, 
is  of  thofe  arifing  from  caufes  producing  a 
weaknefs  in  the  action  of  the  heart,  by  dimin- 
iming  the  energy  of  the  brain  with  refpect  to  it. 
That  fuch  caufes  operate  in  producing  palpi- 
tation, I  prefume  from  hence,  that  all  the  fev- 
eral  caufes  mentioned  above  (MCLXXVII 
etfeq.)  as  in  this  manner  producing  fyncope, 
do  often  produce  palpitation.  It  is  on  this 
ground  that  thefe  two  difeafes  are  affections 
frequently  occurring  in  the  fame  perfon,  as 
the  fame  caufes  may  occafion  the  one  or  the 
other,  according  to  the  force  of  the  eaufe  and 
mobility  of  the  perfon  acted  upon.  It  feems 
to  be  a  law  of  the  human  economy,  that  a 
degree  of  debility  occurring  in  any  function, 
often  produces  a  more  vigorous  exertion  of 

the 


OF       PHYSIC.  73 

the  fame,  or  at  lead  an  effort  towards  it,  and 
that  commonly  in  a  convullive  manner. 

I  apprehend  it  to  be  the  convullive  action, 
frequently  ending  in  fome  degree  of  a  fpafm, 
that  gives  occafion  to  the  intermittent  pulfe 
fo  frequently  accompanying  palpitation. 

MCCCLXL 

A  fifth  head  of  the  cafes  of  palpitation  may 
perhaps  be  of  thofe  arifing  from  a  peculiar 
irritability  or  mobility  of  the  heart.  This, 
indeed,  may  be  confidered  as  a  predifponent 
caufe  only,  giving  occafion  to  the  a&ion  of 
the  greater  part  of  the  caufes  recited  above. 
J3ut  it  is  proper  to  obferve,  that  this  predifpo- 
fition  is  often  the  chief  part  of  the  remote 
caufe  ;  infomuch  that  many  of  the  caufes  pro- 
ducing palpitation  would  not  have  this  effecl; 
but  in  perfons  peculiarly  predifpofed.  This 
head,  therefore,  of  the  cafes  of  palpitation, 
often  requires  to  be  diftinguifhed  from  all 
the  reft. 

MCCCLXII. 

After  thus  marking  the  feveral  cafes  and 
caufes  of  palpitation,  I  think  it  neceffary,  with 
a  view  to  the  cure  of  this  difeafe,  to  obferve, 
that  the  feveral  caufes  of  it  may  be  again  re- 
duced to  two  heads.  The  fhft  is,  of  thofe 
confifting  in,  or  depending  upon,  certain  or- 
ganic affections  of  the  heart  itfelf,  or  of  the 

great 


74  PRACTICE 

great  veffels  immediately  connected  with  it. 
The  fecond  is,  of  thofe  confiding  in,  or  de- 
pending upon,  certain  affe&ions  fubfifiing 
and  acting  in  other  parts  of  the  body,  and  act- 
ing either  by  the  force  of  the  caufe,  or  in  con- 
fequence  of  the  mobility  of  the  heart. 

MCCCLXIII. 

With  refpecl;  to  the  cafes  depending  upon 
the  fir  ft  fet  of  caufes,  I  muft  repeat  here  what 
I  faid  with  refpecl;  to  the  like  cafes  of  fyncope, 
that  I  do  not  know  any  means  of  curing 
them.  They,  indeed,  admit  of  fome  pallia- 
tion, Jirji,  by  avoiding  every  circumftance 
that  may  hurry  the  circulation  of  the  blood  ; 
andyfecondly,  by  every  means  of  avoiding  a 
plethoric  ftate  of  the  fyftem,  or  any  occafion- 
al  .turgefcence  of  the  blood.  In  many  of 
thefe  cafes,  bloodletting  may  give  a  tempo- 
rary relief :  But  in  fofar  as  debility  and  mo- 
bility are  concerned,  in  fuch  cafes  this  reme- 
dy is  likely  to  do  harm, 

MCCCLXIV. 

With  refpecl:  to  the  cafes  depending  upon 
the  other  fet  of  caufes,  they  may  be  various, 
and  require  very  different  meafures  :  But  I 
can  here  fay  in  general,  that  thefe  cafes  may 
be  confidered  as  of  two  kinds  ;  one  depending 
upon  primary  affections  in  other  parts  of  the 
body,  and  acling  by  the  force  of  the  particu- 
lar 


OF      PHYSIC.  75 

lar  caufes  ;  and  another  depending  upon  a 
ftate  of  mobility  in  the  heart  itfelf.  In  the 
firfl  of  thefe,  it  is  obvious,  that  the  cure  of 
the  palpitation  mud  be  obtained  by  curing 
the  primary  affection  ;  which  is  not  to  be 
treated  of  here.  In  the  fecond,  the  cure  mud 
be  obtained,  partly  by  diligently  avoiding  the 
occafional  caufes,  partly  and  chiefly  by  cor- 
recting the  mobility  of  the  fyftem,  and  of  the 
heart  in  particular  ;  for  doing  which  we  have 
treated  of  the*proper  means  elfewhere. 


Chap, 


Of   Dyspnoea^  or  Difficult   Breath- 
ing. 


MCCCLXV. 

THE  exercife  of  refpiration,  and  the  or- 
gans of  it,  have  fo  conftant  and  confiderable 
a  connexion  with  almofl  the  whole  of  the 
other  functions  and  parts  of  the  human  body, 
that  upon  almofl  every  occafion  of  difeafe, 
refpiration  muft  be  affected.  Accordingly 
fome  difficulty  and  diforder  in  this  function, 
are  in  fact,  fymptoms  very  generally  accom- 
panying difeafe. 

MCCCLXVL 


76  PRACTICE 


MCCCLXVI. 

Upon  this  account,  the  fymptom  of  diffi- 
cult breathing  deferves  a  chief  place  and  an- 
ample  confederation  in  the  general  fyftem  of 
Pathology  ;  but  what  fhare  of  confi deration  it 
ought  to  have  in  a  treatife  of  Practice,  I  find* 
it  difficult  to  determine. 

MCCCLXVII. 

On  this  fubjecl,  it  is,  in  the  firfb  place  nee- 
^ffary  to  diftinguifh  between  the  fymptomatic 
and  idiopathic  affections  ;  that  is,  between 
thofe  difficulties  of  breathing  which  are  fymp- 
toms  only  of  a  more  general  afFe£tion,  or  of  a 
difeafe  fubfi fling  primarily  in  other  parts  than 
the  organs  of  refpiration,  and  that  difficulty 
of  breathing  which  depends  upon  a  primary 
afFedtion  of  the  lungs  themfelves.  The  va- 
rious cafes  of  fymptomatic  dyfpncea  I  have 
taken  pains  to  enumerate  in  my  Methodical 
Nofology,  and  it  will  be  obvious  they  are 
fuch  as  cannot  be  taken  notice  of  here*. 

MCCCLXVIII. 

In  my  Nofology  I  have  alfo  taken  pains  to 
point  out  and  enumerate  the  proper,  or  at 
leaft  the  greater  part  of  the  proper,  idiopathic 
cafes  of  dyfpncea  ;  but  from  that  enumeration 
it  will,  I  think,  readily  appear,  that  few,  and 

indeed 


OF      PHYSIC.  77 

indeed  hardly  any,  of  thefe   cafes  will  admit 
or  require  much  of  our  notice  in  this  place. 

MCCCLXIX. 

The  Dyfpncea  Sicca,  /pedes-,.  2d,  the  Dyf- 
pncea  Aerea,fp.  %d,  the  Dyfpncea  Terrea,fp- 
4th,  and  Dyfpncea  Thoracica,  fp.  ytht  are 
fome  of  them  with  difficulty  known,  and  are 
all  of  them  difeafes  which  in  my  opinion  do- 
not  admit  of  cure.  All,  therefore,,  that  can 
be  faid  concerning  them  here  is,  that  they  may 
admit  of  fome  palliation  ;  and  this,  I  think, 
is  to  be  obtained  chiefly  by  avoiding  a  ple- 
thoric ftate  of  the  lungs,  and  every  circum- 
fiance  that  may  hurry  refpiration. 

MCCCLXX. 

Of  the  Dyfpncea  Extrinfeca,  fp.  Sth,  I  can 
fay  no  more,  but  that  thefe  external  caufes 
marked  in  the  Nofology,  and  perhaps  fome 
others  that  might  have  like  effects,  are  to  be 
carefully  avoided  ;  or,  when  they  have  been 
applied,  and  their  effects  have  taken  place, 
the  difeafe  is  to  be  palliated  by  the  means 
mentioned  in  the  laft  paragraph* 

MCCCLXXL 

The  other  fpecies,  though  enumerated  as 
idiopathic,  can  hardly  be  confidered  as  fuch, 
or  as  requiring  to  be  treated  of  here. 

The 


78  PRACTICE 

The  Dyfpncea  Catarrhal^,  fp.  ifty  may  be 
-confidered  as  a  fpecies  of  catarrh,  and  is  pret- 
ty certainly  to  be  cured  by  the  fame  remedies 
as  that  fpecies  of  catarrh  which  depends  rath- 
er upon  the  increafed  afflux  of  mucus  to  the 
bronchiae,  than  upon  any  inflammatory  flate 
in  them. 

The  Dyfpncea  Aquofa^fp.  §ih%  is  certainly 
to  be  confidered  as  a  fpecies  of  dropfy,  and  is 
to  be  treated  by  the  fame  remedies  as  the 
other  fpecies  of  that  difeafe. 

The  Dyfpncea  Pinguedinofa,  fp.  6th,  is  in 
like  manner  to  be  confidered  as  a  fymptom 
or  local  effect  of  the  Polyfarcia,  and  is  only 
to  be  cured  by  correcting  the  general  fault  of 
the  fyftem. 

MCCCLXXII. 

From  this  view  of  thofe  idiopathic  cafes  of 
dyfpncea,  which  are  perhaps  all  I  could  prop- 
erly arrange  under  this  title,  it  will  readily 
appear  that  there  is  little  room  for  treating  of 
them  here  :  But  there  is  flill  one  cafe  of  dif- 
ficult breathing,  which  has  been  properly 
diftinguifhed  from  every  other  under  the  title 
of  AJlhma  ;  and  as  it  deferves  our  particular 
attention,  I  fhall  here  feparately  confider it. 


Chap, 


OF       PHYSIC.  79 

Chap.        VI. 
Of  Asthma. 

MCCCLXXIII. 

THE  term  of  Afthma  has  been  commonly 
applied  by  the  vulgar,  and  even  by  many 
writers  on  the  Practice  of  Phyfic,  to  every 
cafe  of  difficult  breathing,  that  is,  to  every 
fpecies  of  Dyfpncea.  The  Methodical  No- 
iblogifts,  alfo,  have  diftinguiihed  Afthma  from 
Dyfpncea  chiefly,  and  almoft  folely,  by  the 
former  being  the  fame  affeclion  with  the  lat- 
ter, but  in  a  higher  degree.  Neither  of  thefe 
applications  of  the  term  feems  to  have  been 
correcl;  or  proper.  I  am  of  opinion,  that  the 
term  Afthma  may  be  moft  properly  applied, 
and  fhould  be  confined,  to  a  cafe  of  difficult 
breathing  that  has  peculiar  fymptoms,  and 
depends  upon  a  peculiar  proximate  caufe, 
which  I  hope  to  affign  with  fufficient  certain- 
ty. It  is  this  difeafe  I  am  now  to  treat  of, 
and  it  is  nearly  what  Practical  Writers  have 
generally  diftinguiihed  from  the  other  cafes 
of  difficult  breathing,  by  the  title  of  Spas- 
modic Afthma,  or  of  Afthma  convulfivum  ,• 
although,  by  not  diftinguiihing  it  with  fuf- 
ficient 


So  P  R   A   C   T  I   C   E 

ficient  accuracy  from  the  other  cafes  of  Dyf- 
pncea,  they  have  introduced  a  great  deal  of 
confufion  into  their  treatifes  on  this  fubject 

MCCCLXXIV. 

The  difeafe  I  am  to  treat  of,  or  the  Afth- 
ma  to  be  ftri&ly  fo  called,  is  often  a  heredi- 
tary difeafe.  It  feldom  appears  very  early  in 
life,  and  hardly  till  the  time  of  puberty,  or 
after  it.  It  affecls  both  fexes,  but  moil  fre- 
quently the  male.  I  have  not  obferved  it 
to  be  more  frequent  in  one  kind  of  tempera- 
ment than  in  another ;  and  it  does  not  feem 
to  depend  upon  any  general  temperament  of 
the  whole  body,  but  upon  a  particular  consti- 
tution of  the  lungs  alone.  It  frequently  at- 
tacks perfons  of  a  full  habit ;  but  it  hardly 
ever  continues  to  be  repeated  for  fome  length 
of  time  without  occafioning  an  emaciation  of 
the  whole  body. 

MCCCLXXV. 

The  attacks  of  this  difeafe  are  generally  in 
the  night  time,  or  towards  the  approach  of 
night ;  but  there  are  alfo  fome  inftances  of 
their  coming  on  in  the  courfe  of  the  day.  At 
whatever  time  they  come  on,  it  is  for  the  mofl 
part  fuddenly,  with  a  fenfe  of  tightnefs  and 
ftri&ure  acrofs  the  breaft,  and  a  fenfe  of 
ftraitnefs  in  the  lungs  impeding  infpiration. 
The  perfon  thus  attacked,  if  in  a  horizontal 

fituation, 


OF      PHYSIC.  81 

fituation,  is  immediately  obliged  to  get  into 
fomewhat  of  an  erecl  pofture,  and  requires  a 
free  and  cool  air.  The  difficulty  of  breath- 
ing goes  on  for  fome  time  increafing  ;  and 
both  infpiration  and  exfpiration  are  perform- 
ed flowly,  and  with  a  wheezing  noife.  In 
violent  fits,  fpeaking  is  difficult  and  uneafy. 
There  is  often  fome  propenfity  to  coughing, 
but  it  can  hardly  be  executed. 

MCCCLXXVL 

Theie  fymptoms  often  continue  for  many 
hours  together,  and  particularly  from  mid- 
night till  the  morning  is  far  advanced.  Then 
commonly  a  remiffion  takes  place  by  degrees  ; 
the  breathing  becomes  lefs  laborious  and  more 
full,  fo  that  the  perfon  can  fpeak  and  cough 
with  more  eafe  ;  and,  if  the  cough  brings  up 
fome  mucus,  the  remiffion  becomes  imme- 
diately more  considerable,  and  the  perfon 
falls  into  a  much  wilhed  for  fleep. 

MCCCLXXVIL 

During  thefe  fits  the  pulfe  often  continues 
in  its  natural  ft  ate  5  but  in  fome  perfons  the 
fits  are  attended  with  a  frequency  of  pulfe, 
and  with  fome  heat  and  third:,  as  marks  of 
fome  degree  of  fever.  If  urine  be  voidea  at 
the  beginning  of  a  fit,  it  is  commonly  in  con- 
fiderable  quantity,  and  with  little  colour  or 
•edourj  but,  after  the  fit  is  over,  the  urine 

voided 


82  PRACTICE 


> 


voided  is  in  the  ordinary  quantity,  of  a  hig 
colour,  and  fometimes  depofites  a  fediment. 
In  fome  perfons,  during  the  fit  the  face  is  a 
little  flufhed  and  turgid  ;  but  more  common- 
ly it  is  fomewhat  pale  and  fhrunk. 


MCCCLXXVIIL 

After  fome  deep  in  the  morning,  the  pa- 
tient, for  the  reft  of  the  day,  continues  to  have 
more  free  and  eafy  breathing,  but  it  is  feldom 
entirely  fuch.  He  ftill  feels  fome  tightnefs 
acrofs  his  breaft,  cannot  breathe  eafily  in  a 
horizontal  poflure,  and  can  hardly  bear  any 
motion  of  his  body,  without  having  his 
breathing  rendered  more  difficult  and  uneafy* 
In  the  afternoon  he  has  an  unufual  flatulency 
of  his  ftomach,  and  an  unufual  drowfinefs  j 
and,  very  frequently^  thefe  fymptoms  precede 
the  firft  attacks  of  the  difeafe.  But,  whether 
thefe  fymptoms  appear  or  not,  the  difficulty 
of  breathing  returns  towards  the  evening  j 
and  then  fometimes  gradually  increafes,  till  it 
becomes  as  violent  as  in  the  night  before  :  Or 
if,  during  the  day,  the  difficulty  of  breathing 
has  been  moderate,  and  the  perfon  gets  fome 
ileep  in  the  firfl  part  of  the  night,  he  is,  how- 
ever, waked  about  midnight,  or  at  fome  time 
between  midnight  and  two  o'clock  in  the 
morning  ;  and  is  then  fuddenly  feized  with  a 
fit  of  difficult  breathing,  which  runs  the  fame 
courfe  as  the  night  before. 

MCCCLXXIX. 


OF       PHYSIC,  83 


MCCCLXXIX. 

In  this  manner  fits  return  for  feveral  nights 
Tuccefiively  ;  but  generally,  after  fome  nights 
paffed  in  this  way,  the  fits  fuffer  more  con- 
siderable remiflions.  This  efpecially  hap- 
pens when  the  remiflions  are  attended  with  a 
more  copious  expectoration  in  the  mornings, 
and  that  this  continues  from  time  to  time 
throughout  the  day.  In  thefe  circumftances, 
afthmatics,  for  a  long  time  after,  have  not 
only  more  eafy  days,  but  enjoy  alfo  nights  of 
entire  fleep,  without  the  recurrence  of  the 
difeafe, 

MCGCLXXX. 

When  this  difeafe,  however,  has  once  taker! 
^place  in  the  manner  above  defcribed,  it  is 
ready  to  return  at  times  for  the  whole  of  life 
after.  Thefe  returns,  however,  happen  with 
different  circumftances  in  different  perfons* 

MCCCLXXXI, 

In  fome  perfons  the  fits  are  readily  ex- 
cited by  external  heat,  whether  of  the 
weather  or  of  a  warm  chamber,  and  par- 
ticularly by  warm  bathing.  In  fuch  perfons 
fits  are  more  frequent  in  fummer,  and  parties 
ularly  during  the  dog  days,  than  at  other 
colder  feafons.     The  fame  perfons  are  alfo 

readily 


84  PRACTICE 

readily  affected  by  changes  of  the  weather  $ 
efpecially  by  fudden  changes  made  from  a 
colder  to  a  warmer,  or,  what  is  commonly  the 
fame  thing,  from  a  heavier  to  a  lighter  atmof-  ' 
phere.  The  fame  perfons  are  alfo  affected 
hy  every  circumftance  ftraitening  the  capaci- 
ty of  the  thorax,  as  by  any  ligature  made,  or 
even  by  a  plafter  laid,  upon  it ;  and  a  like  ef- 
feci  happens  from  any  increafed  bulk  of  the 
ftomach,  either  by  a  full  meal,  Or  by  air  col- 
lected in  it.  They  are  likewife  much  affect- 
ed by  exercife,  or  whatever  elfe  can  hurry  the 
circulation  of  the  blood. 

MCCCLXXXlL 

As  afthmatic  fits  feem  thus  to  depend  upon 
Tome  fulnefs  of  the  veffels  of  the  lungs,  it  is 
probable  that  an  obftruction  of  perfpiration, 
and  the  blood  being  lefs  determined  to  the 
furface  of  the  body,  may  favour  an  accumu-. 
lation  in  the  lungs,  and  thereby  be  a  means 
of  exciting  aflhma.  This  feem s  to  be  the 
cafe  of  thofe  afthmatics  who  have  fits  mofl 
frequently  in  the  winter  feafor%  and  who  have 
commonly  more  of  a  catarrhal  affection  ac- 
companying the  aflhma ;  which  therefore  oc- 
curs more  frequently  in  winter,  and  more 
manifeflly  from  the  application  of  cold. 

MCCCLXXXIII. 

Befide  thefe  cafes  of  aflhma  excited  by  heat 
or  cold,  there  are  others,  in  which  the  fits  are 

efpecially 


OF       PHYSIC,  85 

^fpecially  excited  by  powers  applied  to  the 
nervous  fyftem  ;  as  by  paflions  of  the  mind, 
by  particular  odours,  and  by  irritations  of 
fmoke  and  duft. 

That  this  difeafe  is  an  affeclion  of  the  ner- 
vous fyftem,  and  depending  upon  a  mobility 
of  the  moving  fibres  of  the  lungs,  appears 
pretty  clearly  from  its  being  frequently  con- 
nected with  other  fpafmodic  affections  de- 
pending upon  mobility  ;  fuch  as  hyfteria,  hy- 
pochondriacs, dyfpepfia,  and  atonic  gout. 

MCCCLXXXIV* 

From  the  whole  of  the  hiflory  of  afthma 
now  delivered,  I  think  it  will  readily  appear, 
that  the  proximate  caufe  of  this  difeafe  is  a 
preternatural,  and  in  fome  meafure  a  fpaf- 
modic, conftri&ion  of  the  mufcular  fibres  of 
the  bronchi ae  ;  which  not  only  prevents  the 
dilatation  of  the  bronchias  neceffary  to  a  free 
and  full  infpiration,  but  gives  alfo  a  rigidity 
which  prevents  a  full  and  free  exfpiration. 
This  preternatural  conftri&ion,  like  many 
other  convulfive  and  fpafmodic  affeclions,  is 
readily  excited  by  a  turgefcence  of  the  blood, 
or  other  caufe  of  any  unufual  fulnefs  and  dif- 
tention  of  the  veffels  of  the  lungs. 

MCCCLXXXV. 

This  difeafe,  as  coming  by  fits,  may  be  gen*. 

erally  diftinguifhed  from  moft  other  fpecies 

Vol.  III.  E  of 


86  PRACTICE 

of  dyfpncea,  whofe  caufes  being  more  con-» 
ftantly  applied,  produce  therefore  a  more 
conftant  difficulty  of  breathing.  There  may, 
however,  be  fome  fallacy  in  this  matter,  as 
ibme  of  thefe  caufes  may  be  liable  to  have 
abatements  and  intenfities,  whereby  the  dyf» 
pncea  produced  by  them  may  feem  to  come 
hy  fits  -  but  I  believe  it  is  feldom  that  fuch 
"fits  put  On  the  appearance  of  the  genuine 
ailhmatic  fits  described  above.  Perhaps, 
however,  there  is  ftill  another  cafe  that  may 
give  more  difficulty  ;  and  that  is,  when  fev- 
eral  of  the  ^caufes,  which  we  have  affigned  as 
caufes  of  feveral  of  the  fpecies  of  difficult 
breathing  referred  to  the  genus  of  Dyfpnoea, 
may  have  the  effect  of  exciting  a  genuine 
ailhmatic  fit.  Whether  this  can  happen  to 
any  but  the  peculiarly  predifpofed  to  afthma, 
I  am  uncertain  ;  and  therefore,  whether,  in 
any  fuch  cafes,  the  afthma  may  be  confidered 
as  fymptomatic  ;  or  if,  in  all  fuch  cafes,  the 
afthma  may  not  ftill  be  confidered  and  treated 
as  an  idiopathic  difeafe. 

MCCCLXXXVL 

The  afthma,  though  often  threatening  im* 
mediate  death,  feldom  occafions  it ;  and  many 
perfons  have  lived  long  under  this  difeafe* 
In  many  cafes,  however,  it  does  prove  fatal  j 
fometimes  very  quickly,  and  perhaps  always 
at  length.  In  fome  young  perfons  it  has 
ended  foon,  by  occafioning  a  phthifis  pulmo-* 

0alisa 


OF      PHYSIC.  87 

nalis.  After  a  long  continuance,  it  often  ends 
in  a  hydrothorax  ;  and  commonly,  by  occa- 
fioning  fome  aneurifm  of  the  heart  or  great 
veflels,  it  thereby  proves  fatal. 

MCCCLXXXVIL 

As  it  is  feldom  that  an  afthma  has  been  en- 
tirely cured  ;  I  therefore  cannot  propofe  any 
method  of  cure  which  experience  has  "approv- 
ed as  generally  fuccefsful.  But  the  difeafe 
admits  of  alleviation  in  feVeral  refpecls  from 
the  ufe  of  remedies  ;  and  my  bufinefs  now 
iliall  be  chiefly  to  offer  fome  remarks  upon 
the  choice  and  ufe  of  the  remedies  which 
have  been  commonly  employed  in  cafes  of 
^aflhma, 

MCCCLXXXVIII. 

As  the  danger  of  an  aflhmatic  fit  arifes 
chiefly  from  the  difficult  tranfmiffion  of  the 
blood  through  the  veffels  of  the  lungs,  threat- 
ening fuffocation  ;  fo  the  moft  probable  means 
of  obviating  this  feems  to  be  bloodletting ;  and 
therefore,  in  all  violent  fits,  practitioners  have 
had  recourfe  to  this  remedy.  In  firft  at- 
tacks, and  efpecially  in  young  and  plethoric 
perfons,  bloodletting  may  be  very  necefTary, 
and  is  commonly  allowable.  But  it  is  alfo 
evident,  that,  under  the  frequent  recurrence 
of  fits,  bloodletting  cannot  be  frequently  re- 
peated without  exhaufting  and  weakening  the 
E  2  patient 


8S  PRACTICE 

.patient  too  much.  It  is  further  to  be  ob- 
served, that  bloodletting  is  notfoneceffary  as 
anight  be  imagined,  as  the  paffage  of  the  blood 
through  the  lungs  is  not  fo  much  interrupted 
as  has  been  commonly  fuppofed.  This  I 
particularly  conclude  from  hence,  that,  in- 
Head  of  the  fuffufion  of  face,  which  is  the 
ufual  effect  of  fuch  interruption,  the  face,  in 
-afthmatic  fits,  is  often  fhrunk  and  pale.  I 
conclude  the  fame  alfo  from  this,  that,  in 
afthmatic  fits,  bloodletting  does  not  com- 
monly give  fo  much  relief  as,  upon  the  con- 
trary fuppofition,  might  be  expected. 

MCCCLXXXIX. 

As  I  have  alleged  above,  that  a  turgefcence 
of  the  blood  is  frequently  the  exciting  caufe 
of  afthmatic  fits,  fo  it  might  be  fuppofed,  that 
a  plethoric  ftate  of  the  fyftem  might  have  a 
great  {hare  in  producing  a  turgefcence  of  the 
blood  in  the  lungs  ;  and  efpecially,  therefore, 
that  bloodletting  might  be  a  proper  remedy 
in  afthma.  I  allow  it  to  be  fo  in  the  firft  at- 
tacks of  the  difeafe  :  But  as  the  difeafe,  by 
continuing,  generally  takes  off  the  plethoric 
flate  of  the  fyftem  ;  fo,  after  the  difeafe  has 
continued  for  fome  time,  I  allege  that  blood- 
letting becomes  lefs  and  lefs  neceflary. 

MCCCXC, 

Upon  the  fuppofition  of  afthmatics  beins 
in  a  plethoric  ftate,  purging  might  be  fuppof 

ec 


OF       PHYSIC.  frg- 

ed  to  prove  a  remedy  in  this  difeafe  :  But, 
both  becaufe  the  fuppofition  is  not  common- 
ly well  founded,  and  becaufe  purging  is  fel- 
dom  found  to  relieve  the  veffels  of  the  thorax, 
this  remedy  has  not  appeared  to  be  well  fuit- 
ed  to  afthmatics  ;  and  large  purging  has  al- 
ways been  found  to  do  much  harm.  But  as 
afthmatics  are  always  hurt  by  the  flagnation 
and  accumulation  of  matters  in  the  aliment- 
ary canal,  fo  coftivenefs  mult  be  avoided,  and 
an  open  belly  proves  ufefuL  In  the  time  of 
fits,  the  employment  of  emollient  and  mode- 
rately laxative  glyflers  has  bQen  found  to  give 
confiderable  relief. 

MCCCXCI. 

As  a  flatulency  of  the  flomach,  and  other 
fymptoms  of  indigeftion,  are  frequent  attend- 
ants of  aflhma,  and  very  tTOublefome  to  afth- 
matics ,•  fo,  both  for  removing  thefe  fymp- 
toms, and  for  taking  off  all  determination  to 
the  lungs,  the  frequent  ufe  of  gentle  vomits  is 
proper  in  this  difeafe.-  In  certain  cafes, 
where  a  fit  was  expected  to  come  on  in  the 
courfe  of  the  night,  a  vomit  given  in  the 
evening  has  frequently  feemed  to  prevent  iu 

MCCCXCII-. 

Bliflering  between  the  fhoulders,  or  upon 

the  breaft,  has  been  frequently  employed  to 

relieve  afthmatics  ;  but  in  the  pure  fpafmodic 

E  3  aflhma 


90  PRACTICE 

afthma  we  treat  of  here,  I  have  rarely  found 
blifters  ufeful,  either  in  preventing  or  reliev- 
ing fits. 

MCCCXCIIL 

IfTues  are  certainly  ufeful  in  obviating  pleth- 
ora ;  but  as  fuch  indications  feldom  arife  irr 
cafes  of  afthma,  fo  iffues  have  been  feldom, 
found  ufeful  in  this  difeafe. 

MCCCXCIV. 

As  afthmatic  fits  are  fo  frequently  excited 
by  a  turgefcence  of  the  blood,  fo  the  obviating 
and  allaying  of  this  by  acids  and  neutral  falts, 
'feems  to  have  been  at  all  times  the  object  of 
practitioners.    See  Floyer  on  the  Afthma. 

MCCCXCV. 

Although  a  plethoric  ftate  of  the  fyftem 
may  feem  to  difpofe  to  afthma,  and  the  occa- 
fional  turgefcence  of  the  blood  may  feem  to 
be  frequently  the  exciting  caufe  of  the  fits  ; 
yet  it  is  evident,  that  the  difeafe  muft  have 
arifen  chiefly  from  a  peculiar  conftitution  in 
the  moving  fibres  of  the  bronchiae,  difpofing 
them  upon  various  occafions  to  fall  into  a 
ipafmodic  conftri6lion  ;  and  therefore,  that 
the  entire  cure  of  the  difeafe  can  only  be  ex- 
pected from  the  correcting  of  that  predifpofi- 
tion,  or  from  correcting    the    preternatural 

mobility 


OF       PHYSIC.  91 

mobility  or  irritability  of  the  lungs  in  that 

refpedt. 

MCCCXCVL 

In  cafes  wherein  this  predifpofition  de- 
pends upon  original  conformation,  the  cure 
muit  be  difficult,  and  perhaps  impoflible  »  but 
it  may  perhaps  be  moderated  by  the  ufe  of 
antilpafmodics.  Upon  this  footing,  various 
remedies  of  that  kind  have  been  commonly 
employed,  and  particularly  the  fetid  gums  ; 
but  we  have  not  found  them  of  any  consid- 
erable efficacy,  and  have  obfervedthem  to  be 
fometimes  hurtful  by  their  heating  too  much. 
Some  other  antifpafmodics  which  might  be 
fuppofed  powerful,  fuch  as  mufk,  have  not 
been  properly  tried.  The  vitriolic  ether  has 
been  found  to  give  relief,  but  its  effects  are 
not  lafting. 

MCCCXCVIL 

As  in  other  fpafmodic  affe£Hons,  fo  in  this, 
the  moil  certain  and  powerful  antifpafmodic 
is  opium.  I  have  often  found  it  effectual, 
and  generally  fafe  ;  and  if  there  have  arifen 
doubts  with  refpe6r.  to  its  fafety,  I  believe  they 
have  arifen  from  not  diftinguifhing  between 
certain  plethoric  and  inflammatory  cafes  of 
dyfpncea,  improperly  named  Afthma,  and 
the  genuine  fpafmodic  afthma  we  treat  of 
here. 

E  4  MCCCXCVIIL 


9*  PRACTICE 


MCCCXCVIII. 

As  in  many  cafes  this  difeafe  depends  upon 
a  predifpofition  which  cannot  be  corrected  by 
our  art,  fo  in  fueh  cafes  the  patient  can  only 
efcape  the  difeafe  by  avoiding  the  occafional 
or  exciting  caufes,  which  I  have  endeavoured 
to  point  out  above.  It  is,  however,  difficult 
to  give  any  general  rules  here,  as  different 
aflhmatics  have  their  different'  idiofyncrafies 
with  refpecl  to  externals.  Thus,  one  aflh- 
matic  finds  himfelf  eafieft  living  in  the  midfl 
of  a  great  city,  while  another  cannot  breathe 
but  in  the  free  air  of  the  country.  In  the 
latter  cafe,  however,  molt  aflhmatics  bear  the 
air  of  a  low  ground,  if  tolerably  free  and  dry\ 
better  than  that  of  the  mountain. 

MCCCXCIX. 

In  diet  alfo,  there  is  fome  difference  to  be 
made  with  refpecl;  to  different  aflhmatics. 
None  of  them  bear  a  large  or  full  meal,  or 
any  food  that  is  of  flow  and  difficult  folution 
in  the  flomach  ;  but  many  of  them  bear  an- 
imal food  of  the  lighter  kinds,  and  in  mode- 
rate quantity.  The  ufe  of  vegetables  which 
readily  prove  flatulent,  are  always  very  hurt- 
ful. In  recent  afthma,  and  efpecially  in  the 
young  and  plethoric,  a  fpare,  light,  and  cool 
diet  is  proper,  and  commonly  neceffary  ;  but, 
after  the  difeafe  has  continued  for  years,  aflh- 
matics. 


0  F       P  H  YSIC.  Q3 

matics  commonly  bear,  and  even  require,  a 
tolerably  full  diet,  though  in  all  cafes  a  very 
full  diet  is  very  hurtful. 

Mecca 

In  drinking,  water,  or  cool  watery  liquors, 
is  the  only  fafe  and  fit  drink  for  afthmatics  ; 
and  all  liquors  ready  to  ferment,  and  become 
flatulent,  are  hurtful  to  them.  Few  afthmat- 
ics can  bear  any  kind  of  ftrong  drink  ;  and 
any  excefs  in  fuch  is  always  very  hurtful  to 
them.  As  afthmatics  are  commonly  hurt  by 
taking  warm  or  tepid  drink ;  fo,  both  upon 
that  account  and  upon  account-  of  the  liquors 
weakening  the  nerves  of  the  ftomach,  neither 
tea  nor  coffee  is  proper  in  this  difeafe. 

MCCCCI. 


Afthmatics  commonly  bear  no  bodily  mo- 
tion eafily  but  that  of  the  moil  gentle  kind. 
Riding,  however,  on  horfeback,  or  going  in  a 
carriage,  and  efpecially  failing,  are  very  often 
ufeful  to  afthmatics. 


Vol.  3,  E  5 


HAP, 


9i  PRACTICE 

Chap.       VII, 
Of  the  Chincough,  or  Hoopingcough. 

MCCCCII. 

THIS  difeafe  is  commonly  epidemic,  and 
manifeftly  contagious.  It  feems  to  proceed 
from  a  contagion  of  a  fpecific  nature,  and  of 
a  fmguiar  quality.  It  does  not,  like  moil 
other  contagions,  necefTarily  produce  a  fever ; 
nor  does  it,  like  moft  others,  occafion  any 
eruption,  or  produce  otherwife  any  evident 
change  in  the  ftate  of  the  human  fluids.  It 
has,  in  common  with  the  catarrhal  contagion, 
and  with  that  of  the  meafles,  a  peculiar  de- 
termination to  the  lungs  ;  but  with  particular 
effe&s  there,  very  different  from  thofe  of  the 
other  two  ;  as  will  appear  from  the  hiftory  of 
this  difeafe  now  to  be  delivered. 

MCCCCIII. 

This  contagion,  like  feveral  others,  affe&s 
perfons  but  once  in  the  courfe  of  their  lives  ; 
and  therefore,  neceffarily,  children  are  moft 
commonly  the  fubje&s  of  this  difeafe  :  But 
there  are  naany  inftances  of  it  occurring  in 

perfons 


OF       PHYSIC.  95 

perfons  considerably  advanced  in  life  ;  though 
it  is  probable,  that  the  further  that  perfons 
are  advanced  in  life,  they  are  the  lefs  liable 
to  be  affected  with  this  contagion. 

MCCCCIV. 

The  difeafe  commonly  comes  on  with  the 
ordinary  fymptom;  of  a  catarrh  arifmg  from 
cold  ;  and  often,  for  many  days,  keeps  entire- 
ly to  that  appearance  ;  and  I  have  had  in- 
fiances  of  a  difeafe  which,  though  evidently 
arifing  from  the  chincough  contagion,  never 
put  on  any  other  form  than  that  of  a  com- 
mon catarrh. , 

This,  however,  feldom  happens ;  for,  gen- 
erally, in  the  fecond,  and  at  fartheft  in  the 
third  week  after  the  attack,  the  difeafe  puts 
on  its  peculiar  and  characleriflic  fymptom,  a 
convulsive  cough.  This  is  a  cough  in  which 
the  exfpiratory  motions  peculiar  to  coughing 
are  made  with  more  frequency,  rapidity,  and 
violence,  than  ufual.  As  thefe  circum fiances, 
however,  in  different  inftances  of  coughing, 
are  in  very  different  degrees  ;  fo  no  exacl; 
limits  can  be  put  to  determine  when  the  cough 
can  be  ftri&ly  faid  to  be  convulfive  ;  and  it 
is  therefore  efpecially  by  another  circumflance 
that  the  chincough  is  difiinguifhed  from  every 
other  form  of  cough.  This  circumflance  is, 
when  many  exfpiratory  motions  have  been 
convulfively  made,  and  thereby  the  air  is  in 
great  quantity  thrown  out  of  the  lungs,  a  full 
E  6  infpi ration 


96  PRACTICE 

infpiration  is  neceffarily  and  fuddenly  made  ; 
which,  by  the  air  ruining  in  through  the  glot- 
tis with  unufual  velocity,  gives  a  peculiar 
found.  This  found  is  fomewhat  different  in 
different  cafes,  but  is  in  general  called  a 
Hoop  ;  and  from  it  the  whole  of  the  difeafe 
is  called  the  Hoppingcough.  When  this  fo- 
norous  infpiration  has  happened,  the  convul- 
sive coughing  is  again  renewed,  and  continues 
in  the  fame  manner  as  before,  till  a  quantity 
of  mucus  is  thrown  up  from  the  lungs,  or  the 
contents  of  the  flomach  are  thrown  up  by 
vomiting.  Either  of  thefe  evacuations  com- 
monly puts  an  end  to  the  coughing,  and  the 
patient  remains  free  from  it  for  fome  time 
after.  Sometimes  it  is  only  after  feveral  al- 
ternate fits  of  coughing  and  hooping  that  ex- 
pectoration or  vomiting  takes  place  ;  but  it 
is  commonly  after  the  fecond  coughing  thai 
thefe  happen,  and  put  an  end  to  the  fit. 

MCCCCV. 

When  the  difeafe,  in  this  manner,  has  tak- 
en its  proper  form,  it  generally  continues  for 
a  long  time  after,  and  generally  from  one 
month  to  three ;  but  fometimes  much  longer, 
and  that  with  very  various  circumftances. 

MCCCCVI. 

The  fits  of  coughing  return  at  various  in- 
tervals, rarely  obferving  any   exacl;  period. 

They 


OF       PHYSIC.  07 

They  happen  frequently  in  the  courfe  of  the 
day,  and  more  frequently  ftill  in  the  courfe  of 
the  night.  The  patient  has  commonly  fome 
warning  of  their  coming  on  ;  and,  to  avoid 
that  violent  and  painful  concuffion  which  the 
coughing  gives  to  the  whole  body,  he  clings 
fall  to  any  thing  that  is  near  to  him,  or  demands 
to  be  held  fail  by  any  perfon  that  he  can 
come  at. 

When  the  fit  is  over,  the  patient  fomethnes 
breathes  fail,  and- feems  fatigued  for  a  little 
after  :  But  in  many  this  appears  very  little  ; 
and  children  are  commonly  fo  entirely  re- 
lieved, that  they  immediately  return  to  their 
play,  or  what  elfe  they  were  occupied  in 
before. 

MCCCCVIL 

If  it  happens  that  the  fit  of  coughing  ends 
in  vomiting  up  the  contents  of  the  ftomach, 
the  patient  is  commonly  immediately  after 
feized  with  a  flrong  craving  and  demand  for 
food,  and  takes  it  in  very  greedily^ 

MCCCCVIII. 

At  the  firft  coming  on  of  this  difeafe,  the 
expectoration  is  fometimes  none  at  all,  or  of 
a  thin  mucus  only  ;  and  while  this  continues 
to  be  the  cafe,  the  fits  of  coughing  are  more 
violent,  and  continue  longer  :  But  commonly 
the  expectoration  foon  becomes  confiderable, 

and 


98  PRACTICE 

and  a  very  thick  mucus,  often  in  great  quan- 
tity, is  thrown  up  ;  and  as  this  is  more  readily 
brought  up,  the-fits  of  coughing  are  of  fhorter 
duration. 

MCCCCIX. 

The  violent  fits  of  coughing  frequently  in- 
terrupt the  free  tranfmiflion  of  the  blood 
through  the  lungs,  and  thereby  the  free  re- 
turn of  blood  from  the  veffels  of  the  head. 
This  occafions  that  turgefcence  and  fuffufion 
of  face  which  commonly  attends  the  fits  of 
coughing,  and  feems  to  occafion  alfo  thofe 
eruptions  of  blood  from  the  nofe,  and  even 
from  the  eyes  and  ears,  which  fometimes 
happen  in  this  difeafe. 

MCCCCX. 

This  difeafe  often  takes  place  in  the  man- 
ner we  have  now  described,  without  any  py- 
rexia attending  it  ;  but,  though  Sydenham 
had  feldom  obferved  it,  we  have  found  the 
difeafe  very  frequently  accompanied  with  py- 
rexia, fometimes  from  the  very  beginning,  but 
more  frequently  only  after  the  difeafe  had 
continued  for  fome  time.  When  it  does  ac- 
company the  difeafe,  we  have  not  found  it 
appearing  under  any  regular  intermittent 
form.  It  is  conftantly  in  fome  degree  pre£- 
ent ;  but  with  evident  exacerbations  towards 
evening,  continuing  till  next  morning. 

MCCCCXI. 


OF      PHYSIC.  99 

tyfCCCCXI. 

Another  fymptom  very  frequently  attend- 
ing the  chincough,  is  a  difficulty  of  breath- 
ing ;  and  that  not  only  immediately  before 
and  after  fits  of  coughing,  but  as  conftantly 
prefent,  though  in  different  degrees  in  differ- 
ent perfons.  I  have  hardly  ever  feen  an  in- 
ftance  of  a  fatal  chincough,  in  which  a  con- 
fiderable  degree  of  pyrexia  and  dyfpncea  had 
not  been  for  fome  time  conftantly  prefent. 


MCCCCXIL 

When  by  the  power  of  the  contagion  this 
difeafe  has  once  taken  place,  the  fits  of  cough- 
ing are  often  repeated,  without  any  evident 
exciting  caufe  :  But,  in  many  cafes,  the  con- 
tagion may  be  confidered  as  giving  a  predif- 
pofition  only ;  and  the  frequency  of  fits  de- 
pends in  fome  meafure  upon  various  exciting 
caufes  ;  fuch  as,  violent  exercife  ;  a  full  meal ; 
the  having  taken  in  food  of  difficult  folution  ; 
irritations  of  the  lungs  by  duft,  fmoke,  or  dif- 
agreeable  odours  of  a  ftrong  kind  ;  and  efpec- 
ially  any  confiderable  emotion  of  the  mind. 

MCCCCXIII. 

Such  are   the  chief  circumftances  of  this 
difeafe,   and  it  is  of  various  event  ;  which, 

however, 


loo  PRACTICE 

however,  may  be  commonly  forefeen  by  at- 
tending to  the  following  confiderations. 

The  younger  that  children  are,  they  are  in 
the  greater  danger  from  this  difeafe  ;  and'  of 
thofe  to  whom  it  proves  fatal,  there  are  many 
more  under  two  years  old  than  above  it. 

The  older  that  children  are,  they  are  the 
more  fecure  againft  an  unhappy  event ;  and 
this  I  hold  to  be  a  very  general  rule,  though 
I  own  there  are  many  exceptions  to  it. 

Children  born  of  phthifical  and  afthmatic 
parents  are  in  the  greateft  danger  from  ■•this 
difeafe. 

When  the  difeafe,  beginning  in  the  form  of 
a  catarrh,  is  attended  with  fever  and  difficult 
breathing,  and.  with  little  expectoration,  it 
often  proves  fatal,  without  taking  on  the  form 
of  the  hoopingcough ;  but,  in  mofl  of  fuch 
cafes,  the  coming  on  of  the  convulfive  cough 
and  hooping,  bringing  on  at  the  fame  time  a 
more  free  expectoration,  generally  removes 
the  danger. 

When  the  difeafe  is  fully  formed,  if  the  fits 
are  neither  frequent  nor  violent,  with  mod- 
erate expectoration,  and  the  patient,  during 
x  the  intervals  of  the  fits,  is  eafy,  keeps  his  ap- 
petite, gets  fleep,  and  is  without  fever  or  dif- 
ficult breathing,  the  difeafe  is  attended  with 
no  danger;  and  thefe  circumftances  becoming 
daily  more  favourable,  the  difeafe  very  foon 
,  fpontaneoufly  terminates. 

An   expectoration,   either  very  fcanty   or 
very  copious,  is  attended  with  danger  5  efpec- 

ially 


OF      PHYSIC.  loi 

ially  if  the  latter  circumftance   is  attended 
with  great  difficulty  of  breathing. 

Thofe  cafes  in  which  the  fits  terminate  by 
a  vomiting,  and  are  immediately  followed 
by  a  craving  of  food,  are  generally  without 
danger. 

A  moderate  hemorrhagy  from  the  nofe 
often  proves  falutary  ;  but  very  large  hemor— 
rhagies  are  generally  very  hurtful. 

This  difeafe  coming  upon  perfons  under ■■& 
ftate  of  much  debility j  has  very  generally  an 
unhappy  event,. 

The  danger  of  this  difeafe  fometimes  arifes 
from  the  violence  of  the  fits  of  coughing,  oc- 
cafioning  apoplexy,  epilepfy,  or  immediate 
fuffocation  :  But  thefe  accidents  are  very 
rare  ;  and  the  danger  of  the  difeafe  feems 
generally  to  be  in  proportion  to  the  fever  and 
dyfpncea  attending  it_ 

MCCCCXIV. 

The  cure  of  this  difeafe  has  been  always 
confidered  as  difficult,  whether  the  purpofe 
be  to  obviate  its  fatal  tendency  when  it  is  vi- 
olent, or  merely  to  ihorten  the  courfe  of  it 
when  it  is  mild.  When  the  contagion  is  re- 
cent, and  continues  to  act,  we  neither  know 
how  to  correct,  nor  how  to  expel  it ;  and 
therefore  the  difeafe  neceffarily  continues  for 
fome  time  :  But  it  is  probable,  that  the  con- 
tagion in  this  as  in  other  inftances  ceafes  at 
length  to  acl: ;  and  that  then  the  difeafe  con- 

tinuesj 


102  PRACTICE 

tinues,  as  in  other  convulfive  affe&ions,  by 
the  power  of  habit  alone. 


MCCCCXV. 

From  this  view  of  the  matter  I  maintain, 
that  the  practice  muft  be  different,  and  adapt- 
ed to  two  different  indications,  according  to 
the  period  of  the  difeafe.  At  the  beginning 
of  the  difeafe,  and  for  fome  time  after,  the 
remedies  to  be  employed  muft  be  fuch  as  may- 
obviate  the  violent  effects  of  the  difeafe,  and 
the  fatal  tendency  of  it ;  but,  after  the  difeafe 
has  continued  for  fome  time,  and  is  without 
any  violent  fymptoms,  the  only  remedies 
which  can  be  required  are  thofe  which  may 
interrupt  its  courfe,  and  put  an  entire  Hop 
to  it  fooner  than  it  would  have  fpontaneoufly 
ceafed. 

MCCCCXVI. 

For  anfwering  the  firft  indication.  In  ple- 
thoric fubjects,  or  in  others,  when  from  the 
circumftances  of  the  cough  and  fits  it  appears 
that  the  blood  is  difficultly  tranfmitted  through 
the  lungs,  bloodletting  is  a  neceffary  remedy  • 
and  it  may  be  even  neceffary  to  repeat  it,  es- 
pecially in  the  beginning  of  the  difeafe  :  But, 
as  fpafmodic  affections  do  not  commonly  ad- 
mit of  much  bleeding,  fo  it  is  feldom  proper 
in  the  chineough  to  repeat  this  remedy  often. 

Mccccxvir. 


OF       PHYSIC.  103 


MCCCCXVII. 

As  coftivenefs  frequently  attends  this  dif- 
eafe,  fo  it  is  neceffary  to  obviate  or  remove 
it  by  laxatives  employed  ;  and  keeping  an 
open  belly  is  generally  ufeful  :  But  large 
evacuations  in  this  way  are  commonly  hurt- 
ful. 

MCCCCXVIII. 

To  obviate  or  remove  the  inflammatory  de- 
termination to  the  lungs  that  fometimes  oc- 
curs in  this  difeafe,  bliftering  is  often  ufeful, 
and  even  repeated  bliftering  has  been  of  fer- 
vice  ;  but^fiues  have  not  fo  much  effecl:,  and 
mould  by  no  means  fuperfede  the  repeated 
bliftering  that  may  be  indicated.  When 
blifters  are  proper,  they  are  more  effectual 
when  applied  to  the  thorax,  than  when  ap- 
plied to  any  diftant  parts. 

MCCCCXIX. 

Of  all  other  remedies,  emetics  are  the  moft 
ufeful  in  this  difeafe  ;  both  in  general  by  in- 
terrupting the  return  of  fpafmodic  affe&ions, 
and  in  particular  by  determining  very  power- 
fully to  the  furface  of  the  body,  and  thereby 
taking  off  determinations  to  the  lungs.  For 
thefe  purpofes,  I  think,  full  vomiting  is  fre- 
quently to  be  employed ;  and,  in  the  inter- 
vals 


to*  P   R   A   C   T   I   C    E 

vals  neceffary  to  be  left  between  the  times  of 
full  vomiting,  naufeating  doffes  of  the  anti- 
monial  emetics  may  be  ufeful.  I  have  never 
found  the  fulphur  auratum,  fo  much  praifed 
by  Cloflius,  to  be  a  convenient  medicine,  on 
account  of  the  uncertainty  of  its  dofe  ;  and 
the  tartar  emetic  employed  in  the  manner  di- 
rected by  the  late  Dr.  Fothergill,  has  appear- 
ed to  be  more  ufeful. 

MCCCCXX. 

Thefe  are  the  remedies  to  be  employed  in 
the  firfl  ftage  of  the  difeafe  for  obviating  its 
fatal  tendency,  and  putting  it  into  a  fafe  train. 
But  in  the  fecond  ftage,  when  I  fuppofe  the 
contagion  has  ceafed  to  aft,  and  that  the  dif- 
eafe continues  merely  by  the  power  of  habit, 
a  different  indication  arifes,  and  different 
remedies  are  to  be  employed. 

MCCCCXXI. 

This  difeafe,  which  often  continues  for  ar 
long  time,  does  not,  in  my  opinion,  continue 
during  the  whole  of  that  time  in  confequence 
of  the  contagion's  remaining  in  the  body,  and 
continuing  to  aft  in  it.  That  the  difeafe  does 
often  continue  long  after  the  contagion  has 
ceafed  to  aft,  and  that  too  by  the  power  of 
habit  alone,  appears  to  me  probable  from 
hence,  that  terror  has  frequently  cured  the 
difeafe  ;  that  any  confiderable  change  in  the 

Hate 


OF       PHYSIC.  105 

-flate  of  the  fyftem,  fuch  as  the  coming  on  of 
the  fmall  pox,  has  alfo  cured  it ;  and,  laftly, 
that  it  has  been  cured  by.  antifpafmodic  and 
tonic  medicines  ;  whilft  none  of  all  thefe 
means  of  cure  can  be  fuppofed  either  to  cor- 
rect or  to  expel  a  morbific  matter,  though  they 
are  evidently  fuited  to  change  the  ftate  and 
habits  of -the  nervous  fyftem. 


MCCCCXXII. 

From  this  view  we  are  directed  to  the  in- 
dication that  may  be  formed,  and  in  a  great 
meafure  to  the  remedies  which  may  be  em- 
ployed in  what  we  fuppofe  to  be  the  fecond 
ftage  of  the  difeafe.  It  may  perhaps  be  al- 
leged, that  this  indication  of  fhortening  the 
courfe  of  the  difeafe  is  not  very  important 
or  neceffary,  as  it  fuppofes  that  the  violence 
or  danger  is  over,  and,  in  confequence,  that 
the  difeafe  will  foon  fpontaneoufly  ceafe. 
The  laft  fuppofition>  however,  is  not  well 
founded  ;  as  the  difeafe,  like  many  other  con- 
vulfive  and  fpafmodic  affections,  may  con- 
tinue for  a  long  time  by  the  power  of  habit 
alone,  and  by  the  repetition  of  paroxyfms 
may  have  hurtful  effects  ;  more  efpecially  as 
the  violence  of  paroxyfms,  and  therefore  their 
hurtful  effects,  may  be  much  aggravated  by 
various  external  caufes  that  may  be  accident- 
ally applied.  Our  indication,  therefore,  is 
proper ;  and  we  proceed  to  confider  the  fev- 

eral 


io6  PRACTICE 

eral  remedies  which  may   be    employed  to 
anfwer  it. 

MCCCCXXIII. 

Terror  may  poffibly  be  a  powerful  rem- 
edy, but  is  is  difficult  to  meafure  the  degree 
of  it  that  fhall  be  produced  ;  and,  as  a  flight 
degree  of  it  may  be  ineffeftual,  and  a  high 
degree  of  it  dangerous,  I  cannot  propofe  to 
employ  it. 

MCCCCXXIV. 

The  other  remedies  which  we  fuppofe  fuit- 
ed  to  our  fecond  indication,  and  which  in- 
deed have  been  frequently  employed  in  this 
difeafe,  are  antifpafmodics  or  tonics. 

Of  the  antifpafmodics,  caflor  has  been  par- 
ticularly recommended  by  Dr.  Morris ;  but 
in  many  trials  we  have  not  found  it  effectual* 

With  more  probability  mufk  has  been  em- 
ployed :  But  whether  it  be  from  our  not  hav* 
ing  it  of  a  genuine  kind,  or  not  employing  it 
in  fuffieiently  large  dofes,  I  cannot  determine  | 
but  we  have  not  found  it  commonly  fuccefs- 
ful.  Of  antifpafmodics,  the  molt  certainly 
powerful  is  opium  :  And  when  there  is  no 
confiderable  fever  Or  difficulty  of  breathing 
prefent,  opium  has  often  proved  ufeful  in 
moderating  the  violence  of  the  chincough  $ 
but  I  have  not  known  it  employed  fo  as  en- 
tirely to  cure  the  difeafe* 

If 


OF       PHYSIC.  107 

If  hemlock  has  proved  a  remedy  in  this 
difeafe,  as  we  muft  believe  from  Dr.  Butter's 
accounts,  1  agree  with  that  author^  that  it  is 
to  be  confidered  as  an  antifpafmodic.  Upon 
this  fuppofition,  it  is  a  probable  remedy  ;  and 
from  the  accounts  of  Dr.  Butter  and  fome 
others,  it  feems  to  have  been  often  ufeful  : 
but,  in  our  trials,  it  has  often  difappointed  us, 
perhaps  from  the  preparation  of  it  not  having 
been  always  proper. 


MCCCCXXV. 

Of  the  tonics,  I  confider  the  cupmofs,  for- 
merly celebrated,  as  of  this  kind  $  as  alio  the 
bark  of  the  mifletoe  :  But  I  have  had  no  ex- 
perience of  either,  as  I  have  always  trufted  to 
the  Peruvian  bark.  I  confider  the  ufe  of 
this  medicine  as  the  molt  certain  means  of 
curing  the  difeafe  in  its  fecond  flage  ;  and 
when  there  has  been  little  fever  prefent,  and 
a  fufficient  quantity  of  the  bark  has  been  giv* 
en,  it  has  feldom  failed  of  foon  putting  an 
end  to  the  difeafe. 


MCCCCXXVL 

When  convulfive  diforders  may  be  fup^ 
pofed  to  continue  by  the  force  of  habit  alone^ 
it  has  been  found  that  a  confiderable  change 

in 


io8  PRACTICE 

in  the  whole  of  the  circumflances  and  manner 
of  life  has  proved  a  cure  of  fuch  difeafes ;  and 
analogy  has  applied  this  in  the  cafe  of  the 
chincough  fo  far,  that  a  change  of  air  has 
been  employed,  and  fuppofed  to  be  ufeful. 
In  feveral  inftances  I  have  obferved  it  to  be 
fo  ;  but  I  have  never  found  the  effects  of  it 
durable,  or  fufficient  to  put  an  entire  flop  to 
the  difeafe. 


SECT, 


OF       PHYSIC.       ,    109 


SEC     T.         Ill, 


x)F  the  SPASMODIC  AFFECTIONS  in 
the  NATURAL  FUNCTIONS. 


C  h  a  p.      VIII. 


^Of  the  Pyrosis,  or  what  is  named  in  Scotland 
the  Water  Brash. 


MCCCCXXVII. 

1  HE  painful  fenfations  re- 
ferred to  the  ftomach,  and  which  are  proba- 
bly occafioned  by  real  affections  of  this  organ, 
are  of  different  kinds.  Probably  they  proceed 
from  affections  of  different  natures,  and  mould 
therefore  be  diftinguifhed  by  different  appel- 
lations ;  but  I  muff  own  that  the  utmoft  precif- 
ion  in  this  matter  will  be  difficult.  In  my  effay 
towards  a  methodical  Nofology,  I  have,  how- 
ever, attempted  it.  For  thofe  pains  that  are 
either  acute  and  pungent,  or  accompanied 
with  a  fenfe  of  diflention,  or  with  a  fenfe  of 
conftriction,  if  they  are  at  the  fame  time  not 
attended  with  any  fenfe  of  acrimony  or  heat, 
Vol.  III.  F  I  employ 


no  PRACTICE 

I  employ  the  appellation  of  Gaflrodynia. 
To  exprefs  thofe  painful  or  uneafy  fenfations 
which  feem  to  ariie  from  a  fenfe  of  acrimony 
irritating  the  part,  or  from  fuch  a  fenfe  of 
heat  as  the  application  of  acrids,  whether  ex- 
ternally or  internally  applied,  often  gives,  I 
employ  the  term  of  Cardialgia  ;  and  by  this 
I  particularly  mean  to  denote  thofe  feelings 
which  are  expreffed  by  the  term  Heartburn 
in  the  Englifh  language.  I  think  the  term 
Soda  has  been  commonly  employed  by  prac- 
tical writers  to  exprefs  an  affection  attended 
with"  feelings  of  the  latter  kind. 

MCCCCXXVIIL 

Befide  the  pains  denoted  by  the  terms  Gaf- 
lrodynia, Periadynia,  Cardialgia,  and  Soda, 
there  is,  I  think,  another  painful  fenfation 
different  from  all  of  thefe,  which  is  named  by 
Mr.  Sauvages  Pyrofis  Suecica ;  and  his  ac- 
count of  it  is  taken  from'  Linnaeus,  who  names 
it  Cardialgia  Sputatoria.  Under  the  title  of 
Pyroiis  Mr.  Sauvages  has  formed  a  genus,  of 
which  the  whole  of  the  fpecies,  except  the 
eighth,  which  he  gives  under  the  title  of  Py- 
rofis Suecica,  are  all  of  them  fpecies  of  the 
Gaftrodynia  or  of  the  Cardialgia ;  and  if  there 
is  a  genus  to  be  formed  under  the  title  of  Py- 
rofis, it  can  in  my  opinion  comprehend  only 
the  fpecies  I  have  mentioned.  In  this  cafe, 
indeed,  I  own  that  the  term  is  not  very  prop- 
er ;  but  my  aver  (ion  to  introduce  new  names 

has 


OF       PHYSIC.  in 

has  made  me  continue  to  employ  the  term  of 
Mr.  Sauvages. 

MCCCCXXIX. 

The  Gaftrodynia  and  Cardialgia  I  judge  to 
be  for  the  moil  part  fymptomatic  affections ; 
and  therefore  have  given  them  no  place  in 
this  work  :  But  the  Pyrofis,  as  an  idiopathic 
difeafe,  and  never  before  treated  of  in  any 
fyftem,  I  propofe  to  treat  of  here. 

MCCCCXXX.  * 

It  is  a  difeafe  frequent  among  people  in 
lower  life  ;  but  occurs  alfo,  though  more 
rarely,  in  people  of  better  condition.  Though 
frequent  in  Scotland,  it  is  by  no  means  io 
frequent  as  Linnaeus  reports  it  to  be  in  Lap- 
land. It  appears  moft  commonly  in  perfons 
under  middle  age,  but  feldom  in  any  perfons 
before  the  age  of  puberty.  When  it  has 
once  taken  place,  it  is  ready  to  recur  occa- 
fionally  for  a  long  time  after  ;  but  it  feldom 
appears  in  perfons  confiderably  advanced  in 
life.  It  affects  both  fexes,  but  more  frequent- 
ly the  female.  It  fometimes  attacks  pregnant 
women,  and  fome  women  only  when  they  are 
in  that  condition.  Of  other  women,  it  more 
frequently  affects  the  unmarried  ;  and  of  the 
married,  moft  frequently  the  barren.  I  have 
had  many  inftances  of  its  occurring  in  women 
labouring  under  a  fluor  albus. 

F2  MCCCCXXXL 


112  PRACTICE 


MCCCCXXXI. 

The  fits  of  this  difeafe  ufually  come  on  in 
the  morning  and  forenoon,  when  the  ftomach 
is  empty.  The  firft  fymptom  of  it  is  a  pain 
at  the  pit  of  the  ftomach,  with  a  fenfe  of  con- 
Unction,  as  if  the  ftomach  was  drawn  towards 
the  back  ;  the  pain  is  increafed  by  railing  the 
body  into  an  erect  pofture,  and  therefore  the 
body  is  bended  forward.  This  pain  is  often 
very  fevere  ;  and,  after  continuing  for  fome 
time,  it  brings  on  an  eructation  of  a  thin  wa- 
tery fluid  in  confiderable  quantity.  This 
fluid  has  fometimes  an  acid  tafte,  but  is  very 
often  abfolutely  infipid.  The  eructation  is 
for  fome  time  frequently  repeated  ;  and  does 
not  immediately  give  relief  to  the  pain  which 
preceded  it,  but  does  fo  at  length,  and  puts  an 
end  to  the  fit. 

MCCCCXXXII. 

The  fits  of  this  difeafe  commonly  come  on 
without  any  evident  exciting  caufe ;  and  I 
have  not  found  it  fteadily  connected  with  any 
particular  diet.  It  attacks  perfons  ufing  an- 
imal food,  but  I  think  more  frequently  thofe 
living  on  milk  and  farinacea.  It  feems  often 
to  be  excited  by  cold  applied  to  the  lower  ex- 
tremities ;  and  is  readily  excited  by  any  con- 
fiderable emotion  of  mind.  It  is  often  with- 
out any  fymptoms  of  dyfpepfia. 

MCCCCXXXIII. 


OF       PHYSIC.  113 

MCCCCXXXIIL 

The  nature  of  this  affe&ion  is  not  very  ob- 
vious ;  but  I  think  it  may  be  explained  in 
this  manner  :  It  feems  to  begin  by  a  fpafm  of 
the  mufcular  fibres  of  the  ftomach  ;  which  is 
afterwards,  in  a  certain  manner,  communicat- 
ed to  the  bloodveiTels  and  exhalants,  fo  as  to 
increafe  the  impetus  of  the  fluids  in  thefe  vef- 
fels,  while  a  conft riclion  takes  place  on  their 
extremities.  While  therefore  the  increafed 
impetus  determines  a  greater  quantity  than 
ufual  of  fluids  into  thefe  veffels,  the  conuric- 
tion  upon  their  extremities  allows  only  the 
pure  watery  parts  to  be  poured  out,  analo- 
gous, as  I  judge,  in  every  refpecl:,  to  what 
happens  in  the  diabetes  hyftericus. 

MCCCCXXXIV. 

The  practice  in  this  difeafe  is  as  difficult  as 
the  theory.  The  paroxyfm  is  only  to  be  cer- 
tainly relieved  by  opium.  Other  antifpaf- 
modics,  as  vitriolic  ether  and  volatile  alkali, 
are  fometimes  of  fervice,  but  not  conftantly 
fb.  Although  opium  and  other  antifpaf- 
modics  relieve  the  fits,  they  have  no  efFecl;  in 
preventing  their  recurrence.  For  this  pur- 
pofe,  the  whole  of  the  remedies  of  dyfpepfia 
have  been  employed  without  fuccefs.  Of  the 
ufe  of  the  nux  vomica,  mentioned  as  a  rem- 
edy by  Linnaeus,  I  have  had  no  experience. 

F  -3  C   -K     A    g. 


*i4  PRACTICE 


P. 


IX. 


Of  the  Colic. 

MCCCCXXXV. 

THE  principal  fymptom  of  this  difeafe,  n 
a  pain  felt  in  the  lower  belly.  It  is  feldom 
fixed  and  pungent  in  one  part,  but  is  a.  pain- 
ful diflention  in  fome  meafure  fpreading  over 
the  whole  of  the  belly  ;  and  particularly  with 
a  fenfe  of  twilling  or  wringing  round  the 
navel.  At  the  fame  time,  with  this  pain,  the 
navel  and  teguments  of  the  belly  are  frequent- 
ly drawn  inwards,,  and  often  the  mufcles  of 
the  belly  are  fpafmodically  contracted,  and 
this  in  feparate  portions,  giving  the  appear- 
ance of  a  bag  full  of  round  balls. 

MCCCCXXXVI. 

Such  pains,  in  a  certain  degree,  fometimes 
occur  in  cafes  of  diarrhoea  and  cholera  ;  but 
thefe  are  lefs  violent  and  more  tranfitory,  and 
are  named  Gripings.  It  is  only  when  more 
violent  and  permanent,  arid  attended  .with 
coftivenefs,  that  they  conftitute  colic.  This 
is  alfo  commonly  attended  with  vomiting, 

which 


OF       PHYSIC.  115 

which  in  many  cafes  is  frequently  repeated, 
especially  when  any  thing  is  taken  down  into 
the  ftomach  ;  and  in  fuch  vomitings,  not  only 
the  contents  of  the  flomach  are  thrown  up, 
but  alfo  the  contents  of  the  duodenum,  and 
therefore  frequently  a  quantity  of  bile* 

MCCCCXXXVIL 

In  fome  cafes  of  colic,  the  periftaltie  mo- 
tion is  inverted  through  the  whole  length  of 
the  alimentary  canal,  in  fuch  a  manner  that 
the  contents  of  the  great  guts,  and  therefore 
flercoraceous  matter,  is  thrown  up  by  vom- 
iting ;  and  the  fame  inverfion  appears  ftill 
more  clearly  from  this,  that  what  is  thrown 
into  the  re&um  by  giyfter  is  again  thrown  out 
by  the  mouth.  In  thefe  circumilances  of  in- 
verfion the  difeafe  has  been  named  Ileus,  or 
the  Iliac  Paffion  ;  and  this  has  been  fuppof- 
ed  to  be  a  peculiar  difeafe  diftincl:  from  colic ; 
but  to  me  it  appears  that  the  two  difeafes  are 
owing  to  the  fame  proximate  caufe,  and  have 
the  fame  fymptoms,  only  in  a  different  degree, 

MCCCCXXXVIIL 

The  colic  is  often  without  any  pyrexia  at- 
tending it.  Sometimes,  however,  an  inflam- 
mation comes  upon  the  part  of  the  interline 
efpecially  affecled  ;  and  this  inflammation 
aggravates  all  the  fymptoms  of  the  difeafe, 
being  probably  what  brings  on  the  moft  con- 
F  4  fiderabie 


n6  PRACTICE 

fiderable  inverfion  of  the  periftaltic  motion  • 
and,  as  the  ftercoraceous  vomiting  is  what 
efpecially  diflinguifhes  the  ileus,  this  has  been 
confidered  as  always  depending  on  an  inflam- 
mation of  the  inteftines.  However,  I  can  af- 
firm, that  as  there  are  inflammations  of  the 
inteftines  without  ftercoraceous  vomiting,  fo 
I  have  feen  inftances  of  ftercoraceous  vomit- 
ing without  inflammation  j  and  there  is  there- 
fore no  ground  for  diftinguifhing  ileus  from 
colic,  but  as  a  higher  degree  of  the  fame  af- 
fection. 

MCCCCXXXIX. 

The  fymptoms  of  the  colic,  and  the  diffec*. 
tions  of  bodies  dead  of  this  difeafe,  fhow  very 
clearly  that  it  depends  upon  a  fpafmodic  con- 
ftri&ion  of  a  part  of  the  inteftines  ;  and  that 
this  therefore  is  to  be  confidered  as  the  prox- 
imate caufe  of  the  difeafe.  In  fome  of  the 
diffe&ions  of  perfons  dead  of  this  difeafe,  an 
intus  fufception  has  been  remarked  to  have 
happened  •  but  whether  this  be  conftantly 
the  cafe  in  all  the  appearances  of  ileus,  is  not 
certainly  determined. 

MCCCCXL. 

The  colic  has  commonly  been  confidered  as 
being  of  different  fpecies,  but  I  cannot  follow 
the  writers  on  this  fubje£r.  in  the  diftinctions 
they  have  eftablifhed.     So  far,  however,  as  a 

difference 


OF       PHYSIC.  117 


difference  of  the  remote  caufe  conflitutes  a 
difference  of  fpecies,  a  diftinftion  may  per- 
haps be  admitted  ;  and  accordingly  in  my 
Nofology  I  have  marked  feven  different  fpe- 
cies :  But  I  am  well  perfuaded,  that  in  ail 
thefe  different  fpecies  the  proximate  caufe  is 
the  fame,  that  is,  a  fpafmodic  conftricl:ion  of 
a  part  of  the  inteflines  ;  and  confequently, 
that  in  all  thefe  cafes  the  indication  of  cure 
is  the  fame,  that  is,  to  remove  the  conftric- 
tion  mentioned.  Even  in  the  feveral  fpecies 
named  Stercorea,  Callofa,  and  Calculofa,  in 
which  the  difeafe  depends  upon  an  obftruc- 
tion  of  interline,  I  am  perfuaded  that  thefe 
obftruclions  do  not  produce  the  fymptoms  of 
colic,  excepting  in  fo  far  as  they  produce  fpaf- 
modic conff  ri&ions  of  the  interlines  ;  and 
therefore,  that  the  means  of  cure  in  thefe 
cafes,  fo  far  as  they  admit  of  cure,  muff  be 
obtained  by  the  fame  means  which  the  gen- 
eral indication  above  mentioned  fuggefts.. 


MCCCCXLL: 


The  cure,  then,  of  the  colic  univerfally,  is 
to  be  obtained  by  removing  the  fpafmodic 
conftriclions  of  the  inteflines  ;  and  the  rem- 
edies fuited  to  this  purpofe  may  be  referred 
to  three  general  heads  : 

i .  The  taking  off  the  fpafm  by  various  an- 
tifpafmodic  powers. 

Vol.  3,  F  5  2.  The 


n8  PRACTICE 

2.  The  exciting  the  action  of  the  inteftines 
by  purgatives. 

3.  The  employing  mechanical  dilatation. 

MCCCCXLII. 

Before  entering  upon  a  more  particular  ac- 
count of  thefe  remedies,  it  will  be  proper  to 
obferve,  that  in  all  cafes  of  violent  colic,  it  is 
advifeable  to  pra&ife  bloodletting  ;  both  as  it 
may  be  ufeful  in  obviating  the  inflammation 
which  is  commonly  to  be  apprehended>  and 
even  as  it  may  be  a  means  of  relaxing  the 
fpafm  of  the  interline.  This  remedy  may 
perhaps  be  improper  in  perfons  of  a  weak 
and  lax  habit,  but  in  all  perfons  of  tolerable 
vigour  it  will  be  a  fafe  remedy  ;  and  in  all 
cafes  where  there  is  the  leaft  fufpicion  of  an 
inflammation  actually  coming  on,  it  will  be 
abfolutely  neceffary.  Nay,  it  will  be  even 
proper  to  repeat  it  perhaps  feveral  times,  if, 
with  a  full  and  hard  pulfe,  the  appearance  of 
the  blood  drawn,  and  the  relief  obtained  by 
the  firfl  bleeding,  fhall  authorife  fuch  repe- 
tition, 

MCCCCXLIII. 

The  antifpafmodic  powers  that  may  be 
employed,  are,  the  application  of  heat  in  a 
dry  or  humid  form,  the  application  of  blif- 
ters,  the  ufe  of  opium,  and  the  ufe  of  mild 
oils. 

The 


OF       PHYSIC.  11.9 

The  application  of  heat,  in  a  dry  form,  has 
been  employed  by  applying  to  the  belly  of 
the  patient  a  living  animal,  or  bladders  filled 
with  warm  water,  or  bags  of  fubfbnces  which 
long  retain  their  heat  ;  and  all  thefe  have 
fometimes  been  applied  with-  fuccefs  ;  but 
none  of  them  feem  to  me  fo  powerful  as  the 
application  of  heat  in  a  humid  form. 

This  may  be  employed  either  by  the  im~ 
merfion  of  a  great  part  of  the  body  in  warm 
water,  or  by  fomenting  the  belly  with  cloths 
wrung  out  of  hot  water.  The  immerfion  has 
advantages  from  the  application  of  it  to  a 
greater  part  of  the  body,  and  particularly  to 
the  lower  extremities  :  But  immerfion  cannot 
always  be  conveniently  pra£iifed,  and  fomen- 
tation may  have  the  advantage  of  being  long- 
er continued  ;  and  it  may  have  nearly  all  the 
benefit  of  immerfion,  if  it  be  at  the  fame  time 
applied  both  to  the  belly  and  to  the  lower 
extremities. 


MCCCCXLIY. 

From  confidering  that  the  teguments  of  the 
lower  belly  have  fuch  a  connexion  with  the 
inteflines,  as  at  the  fame  time  to  be  affected 
with  fpafmodic  contractions,  we  perceive  that 
blifters  applied  to  the  belly  may  have  the  ef- 
fect of  taking  off  the  fpafms  both  from  the 
mufcles  of  the  belly  and  from  the  inteflines  ; 
and  accordingly,  blifte ring  has  often  been  em- 
F  6  ployed 


i2o  PRACTICE 

ployed  in  the  colic  with  advantage.  Anal- 
ogous to  this,  rubefacients  applied  to  the  belly- 
have  been  frequently  found  ufeful, 

MCCCCXLV. 

The  ufe  of  opium  in  colic  may  feem  to  be 
an  ambiguous  remedy.  Very  certainly  it 
may  for  fome  time  relieve  the  pain,  which  is 
often  fo  violent  and  urgent,  that  it  is  difficult 
to  abftain  from  the  ufe  of  fuch  a  remedy.  At 
the  fame  time,  the  ufe  of  opium  retards  or 
fufpends  the  periftaltic  motion  fo  muchy  as  to 
allow  the  interlines  to  fall  into  conflri£tions  ; 
and  may  therefore,  while  it  relieves  the  pain, 
render  the  caufe  of  the  difeafe  more  obflinate. 
On  this  account,  and  further  as  opium  pre- 
vents the  operation  of  purgatives  fo  often  nec- 
effary  in  this  difeafe,  many  practitioners  are 
averfe  to  the  ufe  of  it,  and  fome  entirely  re- 
ject the  ufe  of  it  as  hurtful.  There  are, 
however,  others  who  think  they  can  employ 
opium  in  this  difeafe  with  much  advantage. 

In  all  cafes  where  the  colic  comes  on  with- 
out any  previous  coflivenefs,  and  arifes  from 
cold,  from  paflions  of  the  mind,  or  other 
caufes  which  operate  efpecially  on  the  ner- 
vous fyflem,  opium  proves  a  fafe  and  certain 
remedy;  but  in  cafes  which  have  been  pre- 
ceded by  long  coflivenefs,  or  where  the  colic, 
though  not  preceded  by  coflivenefs,  has  how- 
ever continued  for  fome  days  without  a  flool, 
■fo-that  a  ftacmation  of  fasces  in  the  colon  is  to 

be 


OF       PHYSIC.  i2i 

be  fufpe&ed,  the  ufe  of  opium  is  of  doubtful 
efFeft.  In  fuch  cafes,  unlefs  a  ftool  has  been 
firft  procured  by  medicine,  opium  cannot  be 
employed  but  with  fome  hazard  of  aggravat- 
ing the  difeafe.  However,  even  in  thofe 
circumftances  of  coflivenefs,  when,  without 
inflammation,  the  violence  of  the  fpafm  is  to 
be  fufpe&ed,  when  vomiting  prevents  the  ex- 
hibition of  purgatives,  and  when  with  all  this 
the  pain  is  extremely  urgent,  opium  is  to  be 
employed,  not  only  as  an  anodyne,  but  alfo 
as  an  antifpafmodic,  necefTary  to  favour  the 
operation  of  purgatives  ;  and  may  be  fo  em- 
ployed, when,  either  at  the  fame  time  with 
the  opiate,  or  not  long  after  it,  a  purgative 
can  be  exhibited. 

Is  the  hyofciamus,  as  often  fhowing,  along 
with  its  narcotic,  a  purgative  quality,  better 
fuited  to  this  difeafe  than  opium  ? 


MCCCCXLVI. 

It  is  feemingly  on  good  grounds  that  fev- 
eral  practitioners  have  recommended  the  large 
ufe  of  mild  oils  in  this  difeafe,  both  as  anti- 
fpafmodics  and  as  lssxatives  ;  and,  where  the 
palate  and  ftomach  could  admit  them,  I  have 
found  them  very  ufeful.  But  as  there  are 
few  Scottifh  ftomachs  that  can  admit  a  large 
Bfe  of  oils,  I  have  had  few  opportunities  of 
employing  them* 

-M-CCCCXLVIL 


122  PRACTICE 


MCCCCXLVIL. 

The  fecond  fet  of  remedies  adapted  to  the 
cure  of  colic,  are  purgatives  ;  which,  by  ex- 
citing the  action  of  the  inteftineSj  either  above 
or  below  the  obftru&ed  place,  may  remove 
the  conftri6Hon  ;  and  therefore  thefe  purga- 
tives may  be  given  either  by  the  mouth,  or 
thrown  by  glyfter  into  the  anus.  As  the  dif- 
eafe  is  often  feated  in  the  great  guts  ;  as  glyf- 
ters,  by  having  a  more  fudden  operation,  may 
give  more  immediate  relief ;  and  as  purga- 
tives given  by  the  mouth  are  ready  to  be  re- 
jected by  vomiting  ;  fo  it  is  common,  and  in— 
deed  proper,  to  attempt  curing  the  colic  in 
the  fir  ft  place  by  glyfters.  Thefe  may  at  firft 
be  of  the  mildeft  kind,  confifting  of  a  large 
bulk  of  water,  with  fome  quantity  of  a  mild 
oil ;  and  fuch  are  fometimes  fufficiently  effi- 
cacious :  However,  they  are  not  always  fo  ; 
and  it  is  commonly  neceffary  to  render  them 
more  powerfully  ftimulant  by  the  addition  of 
neutral  falts,  of  which  the  mod  powerful  is 
the  common  or  marine  fait.  If  thefe  faline 
glyfters,  as  fometimes  happens,  are  rendered 
again  too  quickly,  and  on  this  account  or  oth- 
erwife  are  found  ineffectual,  it  may  be  proper, 
inftead  of  thefe  falts,  to  add  to  the  glyfters  an 
infufion  of  fenna,  or  of  fome  other  purgative 
that  can  be  extracted  by  water.  The  anti- 
monial  wine  may  be  fometimes  employed  in 
glyfters  with  advantage.    Hardly  any  glyfters 

are 


OF      PHYSIC. 


12! 


are  more  effectual  than  thofe  made  of  turpen- 
tine properly  prepared.  When  all  other  in- 
jections are  found  ineffectual,  recourfe  is  to 
be  had  to  the  injection  of  tobacco  fmoke  ; 
and,  when  even  this  fails,  recourfe  is  to  be 
had  to  the  mechanical  dilatation  to  be  men- 
tioned hereafter. 

MCCCCXLVIII. 

As  glyfters  often  fail  altogether  in  relieving 
this  difeafe,  and  as  even  when  they  give  fome 
relief  they  are  often  imperfect;  in  producing  a 
complete  cure  ;  fo  it  is  generally  proper,  and 
often  neceffary,  to  attempt  a  more  entire  and 
certain  cure  by  purgatives  given  by  the  mouth. 
The  more  powerful  of  thefe,  or,  as  they  are 
called,  the  Draftic  Purgatives,  may  be  fome- 
times  neceffary  ;  but  their  ufe  is  to  be  avoid- 
ed, both  becaufe  they  are  apt  to  be  rejected 
by  vomiting,  and  becaufe  when  they  do  not 
fucceed  in  removing  the  obftruction  they  are 
ready  to  induce  an  inflammation.  Upon  this 
account  it  is  ufual,  and  indeed  proper,  at  leafl 
in  the  firft  place,  to  employ  the  milder  and 
lefs  inflammatory  purgatives.  None  have 
fucceeded  with  me  better  than  the  cryftals  of 
tartar,  becaufe  this  medicine  may  be  conve- 
niently given,  in  fmall  but  repeated  dofes,  to 
a  considerable  quantity  ;  and  under  this  man- 
agement it  is  the  purgative  leafl  ready  to  he 
rejected  by  vomiting,  and  much  lefs  fo  than 
the  other  neutral  falts.  If  a  flronger  purga- 
tive 


124  PRACTICE 

tive  be  required,  jalap,  properly  prepared,  is 
lefs  offenfive  to  the  palate,  and  fits  better  up- 
on the  ftomach,  than  moft  other  powerful 
purgatives.  On  many  occafions  of  colie, 
nothing  is  more  effectually  purgative  than  a 
large  dofe  of  calomel.  Some  practitioners 
have  attempted  to  remove  the  obftruction  of 
the  interlines  by  antimonial  emetics  exhibited 
in  fmall  dofes,  repeated  at  proper  intervals  ; 
and  when  thefe  dofes  are  not  entirely  rejected 
by  vomiting,  they  often  prove  effectual  pur- 
gatives. 

When  every  purgative  has  failed,  the  ac- 
tion of  the  interlines  has  been  effe&ually  ex- 
cited by  throwing  cold  water  on  the  lower 
extremities.  . 


MCCCCXLIX. 


The  third  means  of  overcoming  the  fpafm 
of  the  interlines  in  this  difeafe,  is  by  employ- 
ing a  mechanical  dilatation  ;  and  it  has  been 
frequently  fuppofed  that  quickfilver,  given  in 
large  quantity,  might  operate  in  this  manner. 
I  have  not,  however,  found  it  fuccefsful ;  and 
the  theory  of  it  is  with  me  very  doubtful. 
Some  authors  have  mentioned  the  ufe  of  gold 
-and  filver  pills,  or  balls,  fwaliowed  down  ;  but 
1  have  no  experience  of  fuch  practices,  and  I 
cannot  fuppofe  them  a  probable  means  of 
relief. 

MCCCCL. 


OF       PHYSIC.  125 


MCCCCL. 

Another  means  of  mechanical  dilatation, 
and  a  more  probable  meafure,  is  by  injecting 
a  large  quantity  of  warm  water  by  a  proper 
fyringe,  which  may  throw  it  with  fome  force, 
and  in  a  continued  dream,  into  the  rectum. 
Both  from  the  experiments  reported  by  the 
late  Mr.  De  Haen,  and  from  thofe  I  myfelf 
have  had  occasion  to  make,  I  judge  this  rem- 
edy to  be  one  of  the  moil  powerful  and  ef- 
fectual. 

MCCCCLI. 

1  have  now  mentioned  all  the  feveral  means 
that  may  be  employed  for  the  cure  of  the 
colic,  confidered  as  a  genus  ;  but  before  I 
quit  this  fubject,  it  may  be  expected  that  I 
mould  take  notice  of  fome  of  the  fpecies 
which  may  feem  to  require  a  particular  con- 
fideration.  In  this  view  it  may  be  expected 
that  I  mould  efpecially  take  notice  of  that 
fpecies  named  the  Colic  of  Poitou,  and  par- 
ticularly known  in  England  by  the  name  of 
the  Devonftiire  Colic. 

MCCCCLII. 

This  fpecies  of  the  difeafe  is  certainly  a 
peculiar  one,  both  in  refpect  of  its  caufe  and 
its  effeas ;  but,  as  to  the   firft,  it  has  been 

lately 


126  PRACTICE 

lately  fo  much  the  fubjecl  of  inveftigation, 
and  is  fo  well  afcertained  by  the  learned  phy- 
ficians  Sir  George  Barker  and  Dr.  Hardy, 
that  it  is  unneceflary  for  me  to  fay  any  thing 
of  it  here. 

With  refpecl  to  the  cure  of  it,  fo  far  as  it 
appears  in  tlie  form  of  a  colic,  my  want  of  ex- 
perience concerning  it  does  not  allow  me  to 
fpeak  with  any  confidence  on  the  fubjecl  - 
but,  fo  far  as  I  can  learn  from  others,  k  ap- 
pears to  me,  that  it  is  to  be  treated  by  all  the 
leveral  means  that  I  have  propofed  above  for 
the  cure  of  colic  in  general. 

How  far  the  peculiar  efFecls  of  this  difeafe 
are  -to  be  certainly  forefeen  and  obviated,  I 
have  not  properly  learned  ;  and  I  mull  leave 
the  matter  to  be  determined  by  thofe  who 
have  had  fufficient  experience  in  it. 


Chap.         X; 

Of  the  Cholera. 
MCCCCLIII. 


IN  this  difeafe,  a  vomiting  and  purging 
concurring  together,  or  frequently  alternating 
with  one  another,,  are  the  chief  fymptoms*. 

The 


OF       PHYSIC.  127 

The  matter  reje&ed  both  upwards  and  down- 
wards appears  manifeflly  to  confift  chiefly  of 
bile. 

MCCCCLIV. 

From  this  laft  circumftance  I  conclude,,, 
that  the  difeafe  depends  upon  an  increafed 
fecretion  of  bile,  and  its  copious  effuhon  into 
the  alimentary  canal  ;  and,  as  in  this  it  irri- 
tates and  excites  the  motions  above  mention- 
ed, I  infer,  that  the  bile  thus  effufed  in  larger 
quantity  is  at  the  fame  time  alfo  of  a  more 
acrid  quality.  This  appears  likewife  from 
the  violent  and  very  painful  gripings  that  at- 
tend the  difeafe,  and  which  we  can  impute 
only  to  the  violent  fpafmodic  contractions  of 
the  interlines  that  take  place  here.  Thefe 
fpafms  are  commonly  communicated  to  the 
abdominal  mufcles,  and  very  frequently  to 
thofe  of  the  extremities. 

MCCCCLV. 

In  the  manner  now  defcribed,  the  difeafe 
frequently  proceeds  with  great  violence,  till 
the  ftrength  of  the  patient  is  greatly,  and  often 
fuddenly,  weakened  ;  while  a  coldnefs  of  the 
extremities,  cold  fweats,  and  faintings,  coming 
on,  an  end  is  put  to  the  patient's  life,  fome- 
times  in  the  courfe  of  one  day.  In  other 
cafes  the  difeafe  is  lefs  violent,  continues  for  a 
day  or  two,  and  then  ceafes   by  degrees  ; 

though 


128  PRACTICE 

though  fuch  recoveries  feldom  happen  with- 
out the  afliftance  of  remedies. 

MCCCCLVI. 

The  attacks  of  this  difeafe  are  feldorn  ac- 
companied with  any  fymptoms  of  pyrexia  ;f 
and  though,  during  the  courfe  of  it,  both  the 
pulfe  and  refpiration  are  hurried  and  irregu- 
lar, yet  thefe  fymptoms  are  generally  fo  en- 
tirely removed  by  the  remedies  that  quiet  the 
fpafmodic  affections  peculiar  to  the  difeafe, 
as  to  leave  no  ground  for  fuppofing  that  it 
had  been  accompanied  by  any  proper  py- 
rexia. 

MCCCCLVII. 

This  is  a  difeafe  attending  a  very  warm 
Hate  of  the  air  ;  and,  in  very  warm  climates, 
it  may  perhaps  appear  at  any  time  of  the 
year  :  But  even  in  fuch  climates  it  is  mofl 
frequent  during  their  warmeft  feafons  ;  and 
in  temperate  climates,  it  appears  only  in  the 
warm  feafons.  Dr.  Sydenham  confidered 
the  appearances  of  this  difeafe  in  England 
to  be  confined  to  the  month  of  Augufl  ; 
but  he  himfelf  obferved  it  to  appear  fome- 
times  towards  the  end  of  fummer,  when  the 
feafon  was  unufually  warm  ;  and  that,  iri 
proportion  to  the  heat,  the  violence  of  the 
difeafe  was  greater.  Others  have  obferved 
that  it  appeared  more  early  in  fummer,  and 

always 


OF       PHYSIC.  129 

always  fooner  or  later,  according  as  the  great 
heats  fooner  or  later  let  in. 

MCCCCLVIIL 

From  all  thefe  circumflances,  it  is,  I  think, 
very  evident,  that  this  difeafe  is  the  effect  of  a 
warm  atmofphere,  producing  fome  change  in 
the  ftate  of  the  bile  in  the  human  body  :  And 
the  change  may  confift,  either  in  the  matter 
of  the  bile  being  rendered  more  acrid,  and 
thereby  fitted  to  excite  a  more  copious  fe- 
cretion  ;  or,  in  the  fame  matter,  its  being 
prepared  to  pais  off  in  larger  quantity  than 
ufual. 

MCCCCLIX. 

It  has  been  remarked,  that  in  warm  cli- 
mates and  feafons,  after  extremely  hot  and 
dry  weather,  a  fall  of  rain  cooling  the  atmof- 
phere feems  especially  to  bring  on  this  dif- 
eafe ;  and  it  is  very  probable  that  an  ob- 
ftru&ed  perfpiration  may  have  alfo  a  fhare  in 
this,  though  it  is  alfo  certain  that  the  difeafe 
does  appear  when  no  change  in  the  temper- 
ature of  the  air,  nor  any  application  of  cold, 
has  been  obferved. 

MCCCCLX. 

It  is  poflible,  that,  in  fome  cafes,  the  heat 
of  the  feafon  may  give  only  a  predifpofition, 

and 


130  PRACTICE 

and  that  the  difeafe  may  be  excited  by  certain 
ingefta  or  other  caufes ;  but  it  is  equally  cer- 
tain, that  the  difeafe  has  occurred  without 
any  previous  change  or  error,  either  in  diet, 
or  in  the  manner  of  life,  that  could  be  ob- 
ferved. 


MCCCCLXL 

The  Nofologifts  have  constituted  a  Genus 
under  the  title  of  Cholera,  and  under  this 
have  arranged  as  fpecies  every  affeftion  in 
which  a  vomiting  and  purging  of  any  kind 
happened  to  concur.  In  many  of  thefe  fpe- 
cies, however,  the  matter  evacuated  is  not 
bilious  ;  nor  does  the  evacuation  proceed 
from  any  caufe  in  the  ftate  of  the  atmof- 
phere.  Further,  in  many  of  thefe  fpecies 
alfo,  the  vomiting  which  occurs  is  not  an  ef- 
fential,  but  merely  an  accidental  fymptom 
from  the  particular  violence  of  the  difeafe. 
The  appellation  of  Cholera  therefore  Ihould, 
in  my  opinion,  be  confined  to  the  difeafe  I 
have  defcribed  above  ;  which  by  its  peculiar 
caufe,  and  perhaps  alfo  by  its  fymptoms,  is 
very  different  from  all  the  other  fpecies  that 
have  been  affociated  with  it.  I  believe  that 
all  the  other  fpecies  arranged  under  the  title 
of  Cholera  by  Sauvages  or  S  agar,  may  be 
properly  enough  referred  to  the  genus  of  Di- 
arrhoea ;  which  we  are  to  treat  of  in  the  next 
chapter. 

The 


OF      PHYSIC.  131 

The  diftin&ion  I  have  endeavoured  to 
eftablifh  between  the  proper  Cholera,  and 
the  other  difeafes  that  have  fometimes  got 
the  fame  appellation,  will,  as  I  judge,  fuper- 
fede  the  queflion,  Whether  the  Cholera,  in 
temperate"  climates,  happens  at  any  other 
feafon  than  that  above  affigned  ? 

MCCCCLXII. 

In  the  cafe  of  a  genuine  cholera,  the  cure 
of  it  has  been  long  eftablifhed  by  experience. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  difeafe,  the  evacu- 
ation of  the  redundant  bile  is  to  be  favoured 
by  the  plentiful  exhibition  of  mild  diluents, 
both  given  by  the  mouth,  and  injected  by  the 
anus  ;  and  all  evacuant  medicines,  employed 
in  either  way,  are  not  only  fuperfluous,  but 
commonly  hurtful. 


MCCCCLXIII. 

When  the  redundant  bile  appears  to  be 
fufficiently  warned  out,  and  even  before  that, 
if  the  fpafmodic  affections  of  the  alimentary 
canal  become  very  violent,  and  are  commu- 
nicated in  a  confiderabie  degree  to  other  parts 
of  the  body,  or  when  a  dangerous  debility 
feems  to  be  induced,  the  irritation  is  to  be 
immediately  obviated  by  opiates,  in  fufficient- 
ly large  dofes,  but  in  fmail  bulk,  and  given 
either  by  the  mouth  or  by  glyfter. 

MCCCCLXIV. 


132  PRACTJCE 

MCCCCLXIV. 


Though  the  patient  be  in  this  manner  re*  . 
lieved,  it  frequently  happens,  that  when  the 
operation  of  the  opium  is  over,  the  difeafe 
fhows  a  tendency  to  return  ;  and,  for  at  leaft 
fome  days  after  the  firft  attack,  the  irritabili- 
ty of  the  interlines,  and  their  difpofition  to 
fall  into  painful  fpafmodic  contractions,  feem 
to  continue.  In  this  fituation,  the  repetition  j 
of  the  opiates,  for  perhaps  feveral  days,  may 
come  to  be  neceffary  ;  and  as  the  debility 
commonly  induced  by  the  difeafe  favours  the 
difpofition  to  fpafmodic  affections,  it  is  often 
ufeful  and  neceffary,  together  with  the  opiates, 
to  employ  the  tonic  powers  of  the  Peruvian 
bark. 


Chap.       XI. 
Of  Diarrhoea  or  Looseness. 

MCCCCLXV. 

THIS  difeafe  confifts  in  evacuations  by 
flool,  more  frequent  and  of  more  liquid  mat- 
ter than  ufual.  This  leading  and  chara&er- 
iftic  fymptom  is  fo  diverfified  in  its  degree,  in 
its  caufes,  and  in  the  variety  of  matter  evac- 
uated, 


OF       P  H  Y  S  I  C>  133 

nated,  that  it  is  almofl  impoflible  to  give  any 
general  hiflory  of  the  difeafe. 


MCCCCLXVI. 

It  is  to  be  diftinguifhed  from  dyfentery,  by 
not  being  contagious  ;  by  being  generally 
without  fever  ;  and  by  being  with  the  evacu-> 
tion  of  the  natural  excrements,  which  are,  at 
leaft  for  fome  time,  retained  in  dyfentery. 
The  two  difeafes  have  been  commonly  diftin- 
guifhed  by  the  gripings  being  more  violent  in 
the  dyfentery  ;  and  they  are  commonly  lefs 
violent  and  lefs  frequent  in  diarrhoea  :  But 
as  they  frequently  do  occur  in  this  alfo,  and 
fometimes  to  a  confiderable  degree,  fo  they 
do  not  afford  any  proper  diflin6tione 

MCCCCLXVII. 

A  diarrhoea  is  to  be  difliriguifhed  from 
cholera  chiefly  by  the  difference  of  their  cauf- 
es  ;  which,  in  cholera,  is  of  one  peculiar  kind  ; 
but  in  diarrhoea  is  prodigioufly  diverfified,  as 
we  fhall  fee  prefently.  It  has  been  common 
to  diftinguifh  cholera  by  the  evacuation  down- 
wards being  of  bilious  matter,  and  by  this  be« 
ing  always  accompanied  with  a  vomiting  of 
the  fame  kind  ;  but  it  does  not  universally 
apply,  as  a  diarrhoea  is  fometimes  attended 
with  vomiting,  and  even  of  bilious  matter. 

Vol.  III.         G  MCCCCLXVIIL 


134  PRACTICE 

MCCCCLXVIII. 

The  difeafe  of  diarrhoea,  thus  difliriguifh- 
ed,  is  very  greatly  diversified ;  but  in  all  cafes, 
the  frequency  of  flools  is  to  be  imputed  to  a 
preternatural  increafe  of  the  periflaltic  mo- 
tion in  the  whole,  or  at  leafl  in  a  confiderable 
portion,  of  the  inteflinal  canal.  This  increaf- 
ed  action  is  in  different  degrees,  is  often  con- 
vulfive  and  fpafmodic,  and  at  any  rate  is  a 
motus  ahnormis  :  For  which  reafon,  in  the 
Methodical  Nofology,  I  have  referred  it  to 
the  order  of  Spafmi,  and  accordingly  treat  of 
it  in  this  place. 

MCCCCLXIX. 

Upon  the  fame  ground,  as  I  confider  the 
difeafe  named  Lientery  to  be  an  increafed 
periflaltic  motion  over  the  whole  of  the  in-* 
teflinal  canal,  arifing  from  a  peculiar  irrita- 
bility, I  have  confidered  it  as  merely  a  fpecies 
of  diarrhoea.  The  idea  of  a  laxity  of  the  in- 
teflinal canal  being  the  caufe  either  of  lientery, 
or  other  fpecies  of  diarrhoea,  appears  to  me 
to  be  without  foundation,  except  in  the  fingle 
cafe  of  frequent  liquid  flools  from  a  palfy  of 
the  fphinfttr  ani. 

MCCCCLXX. 

The  increafed  action  of  the  periflaltic  mo*, 
tion,  I  confider  as  always  the  chief  part  of  the 

proximate 


OF       PHYSIC. 


35 


proximate  caufe  of  diarrhoea  :  But  the  dif- 
eafe  is  further,  and  indeed  chiefly,  diverfified 
by  the  different  caufes  of  this  increafed  ac- 
tion ;  which  we  are  now  to  inquire  into. 


MCCCCLXXI. 

The  feveral  caufes  of  the  increafed  a£Hon 
of  the  inteflines  may  be  referred,  I  think,  in 
the  firf#  place,  to  two  general  heads. 

The  Jirfi  is,  of  the  difeafes  of  certain  parts 
of  the  body  which,  either  from  a  confent  of 
the  inteflines  with  thefe  parts,  or  from  the  re- 
lation which  the  inteflines  have  to  the  whole 
fyflem,  occafion  an  increafed  aclion  in  the 
inteflines,  without  the  transference  of  any 
flimulant  matter  from  the  primary  difeafed 
part  to  them. 

The  fecond  head  of  the  caufes  of  the  in- 
creafed a£lion  of  the  inteflines  is  of  the  flim- 
uli  of  various  kinds,  which  are  applied  direct- 
ly to  the  inteflines  themfelves, 


MCCCCLXXII 


That  affections  of  other  parts  of  the  fyflem 
may  afFec"l  the  inteflines  without  the  transfer- 
ence or  application  of  any  flimulant  matter, 
we  learn  from  hence,  that  the  paffions  of  the 
mind  do  in  fome  perfons  excite  diarrhoea. 

G  2  MCCCCLXXIII. 


36  PRACTICE 


MCCCCLXXIII. 

That  difeafes  in  other  parts  may  in  like 
manner  affe6l  the  inteflines,  appears  from  the 
dentition  of  infants  frequently  exciting  diar* 
rhcea.  I  believe  that  the  gout  often  affords 
another  inflance  of  the  fame  kind  ;  and  prob* 
ably  there  are  others  alfo^  though  not  well 
afcertained. 


MCCCCLXXIV. 

The  ftimuli  (MCCCCLXXI)  which  may 
be  applied  to  the  inteflines  are  of  very  various 
kinds  ;  and  are  either, 

1 .  Matters  introduced  by  the  mouth. 

2.  Matters  poured  into  the  inteflines  by 
the  feveral  excretories  opening  into  them. 

3.  Matters  poured  from  certain  preternat- 
ural openings  made  into  them  in  certain  di£* 
eafes. 

MCCCCLXXV. 

Of  thofe  (MCCCCLXXIV,  1.)  introduc- 
ed by  the  mouth,  the  firfl  to  be  mentioned  are 
the  aliments  commonly  taken  in.  Too  great 
a  quantity  of  thefe  taken  in,  often  prevents 
their  due  digeflion  in  the  flomach  ;  and  by 
being  thus  fent  in  their  crude,  and  probably 
acrid,  flate  to  the  inteflines,  they  frequently 
excite  (Jiarrhcea* 

The 


OF       PHYSIC. 


■37 


The  fame  aliments,  though  in  proper  quan- 
tity, yet  having  too  great  a  proportion,  as  fre- 
quently happens,  of  faline  or  faccharine  mat- 
ter along  with  them,  prove  flimulant  to  the 
inteflines,  and  excite  diarrhoea. 

But  our  aliments  prove  efpecially  the  cauf- 
es  of  diarrhoea,  according  as  they,  from  their 
own  nature,  or  from  the  weaknefs  of  the  ftom- 
ach,  are  difpofed  to  undergo  an  undue  de- 
gree of  fermentation  there,  and  thereby  be- 
come flimulant  to  the  inteflines.  Thus  acef- 
cent  aliments  are  ready  to  produce  diarrhoea ; 
but  whether  from  their  having  any  direclly 
purgative  quality,  or  only  as  mixed  in  art 
over  proportion  with  the  bile,  is  not  well  de=* 
termined. 

MCCCCLXXVX^ 

Not  only  the  acefcent,  but  alio  the  putrefl 
cent  difpofition  of  the  aliments,  feems  to  oc- 
cafion  a  diarrhoea  ;  and  it  appears  that  even 
the  effluvia  of  putrid  bodies^taken  in  any  way 
in  large  quantity,  have  the  fame  effect. 

Are  oils  or  fats,  taken  in  as  a  part  of  our 
aliments,  ever  the  caufe  of  diarrhoea  ?  and  if 
fo,  in  what  manner  do  they  operate  ? 

MCCCCLXXVII. 

The    other    matters    introduced    by   the 

mouth,  which  may  be  caufes  of  diarrhoea,  are 

thofe  thrown  in  either  as  medicines,  or  poi- 

G  3  fons 


138  PRACTICE 

fons  that  have  the  faculty  of  ftimulating  the 
alimentary  canal.  Thus,  in  the  lift  of  the 
Materia  Medica,  we  have  a  long  catalogue  of 
thofe  named  purgatives  ;  and  in  the  lift  of 
poifons,  we  have  many  poffeffed  of  the  fame 
quality.  The  former,  given  in  a  certain, 
quantity,  occafion  a  temporary  diarrhoea  ; 
and  given  in  very  large  dotes,  may  occafion  it 
in  excefs,  ancLcontinue  it  longer  than  ufual, 
producing  that  fpecies  of  diarrhoea  named  a 
Hypercatharfis. 

MCCCCLXXV1II. 

The  matters  (MCCCCLXXIV,  2.)  pour- 
ed into  the  cavity  of  the  interlines  from  the 
excretories  opening  into  them,  and  which  may 
occafion  diarrhoea,  are  either  thofe  from  the 
pancreatic  or  biliary  duct,  or  thofe  from  the 
excretories  in  the  coats  of  the  interlines  them- 
felves. 

MCCCCLXXIX. 


What  changes  may  happen  in  the  pancre- 
atic juice,  I  do  not  exactly  know  ;  but  I  fup- 
pofe  that  an  acrid  fluid  may  iffue  from  the 
pancreas,  even  while  flill  entire  in  its  ftruc- 
ture ;  but  more  efpecially,  when  it  is  in  a  fup- 
purated,  fchirrous,  or  cancerous  flate,  that  a 
very  acrid  matter  may  be  poured  out  by  the 
pancreatic  duel:,  and  occafion  diarrhoea. 

MCCCCLXXX. 


OF       P  H  Y  S  I  C.  139 

MCCCCLXXX. 


We  know  well,  that  from  the  biliary  duel 
the  bile  may  be  poured  out  in  greater  quan- 
tity than  ufual ;  and  there  is  little  doubt  of 
its  being  alfo  fometimes  poured  out  of  a  more 
than  ordinary  acrid  quality.  It  is  very  prob- 
able, that  in  both  ways  the  bile  is  frequently 
a  caufe  of  diarrhoea. 

Though  I  have  faid  above  that  diarrhoea 
may  be  commonly  diflinguifhed  from  chol- 
era, I  muff  admit  here,  that  as  the  caufes  pro- 
ducing that  Hate  of  the  bile  which  occalions 
cholera,  may  occur  in  all  the  different  poflible 
degrees  of  force,  fo  as,  on  one  occafion,  to 
produce  the  moil  violent  and  diflinclly  mark- 
ed cholera ;  but,  upon  another,  to  produce 
only  the  gentler!  diarrhoea  ;  which,  however, 
will  be  the  fame  difeafe,  only  varying  in  de- 
gree :  So  I  think  it  probable,  that  in  warm 
climates,  and  in  warm  feafons,  a  diarrhoea  bil- 
iofa  of  this  kind  may  frequently  occur,  not  to 
be  always  certainly  diflinguifhed  from  chol- 
era. 

Hqwever  this  may  be,  it  is  fufficiently 
probable,  that,  in  fome  cafes,  the  bile,  with- 
out having  been  a6led  upon  by  the  heat  of 
the  climate  or  feafon,  may  be  redundant  and 
acrid,  and  prove  therefore  a  particular  caufe 
of  diarrhoea. 

G4  MCCCCLXXXI. 


140  PRACTICE 

MCCCCLXXXL 

Befide  bile  from  the  feveral  caufes  and  in 
the  conditions  mentioned,  the  biliary  duel: 
may  pour  out  pus,  or  other  matter,  from  ab~ 
fceffes  in  the  liver,  which  may  be  the  caufe  of 
diarrhoea,. 

Practical  writers  take  notice  of  a  diarrhoea 
wherein  a  thin  and  bloody  liquid  is  difcharg- 
ed  ;  which  they  fuppofe  to  have  proceeded 
from  the  liver,  and  have  therefore  given  the 
difeafe  the  name  of  Hepatirrhcea  :  But  we 
have  not  met  with  any  inftance  of  this  kind  ; 
and  therefore  cannot  properly  fay  any  thing 
concerning  it. 

MCCCCLXXXII. 

A  fecond  fet  of  excretories,  from  which 
matter  is  poured  into  the  cavity  of  the  intef- 
tines,  are  thofe  from  the  coats  of  the  interlines 
themfelves  ;  and  are  either  the  exhalants  pro- 
ceeding directly  from  the  extremities  of  ar- 
teries, or  the  excretories  from  the  mucous  fol- 
licles :  And  both  thefe  fources  occur  in  pro- 
digious number  over  the  internal  furface  of 
the  whole  inteftinal  canal.  It  is  probable 
that  it  is  chiefly  the  efFufion  from  thefe 
fources  which,  in  moil  inftances,  gives  the 
matter  of  the  liquid  ilools  occurring  in  diar- 
rhoea. 

MCCCCLXXXIIL 


OF       PHYSIC.  141 


MCCCCLXXXIII. 

The  matter  from  both  fources  may  be  pour- 
ed out  in  larger  quantity  than  ufual,  merely 
by  the  increafed  action  of  the  inteftines, 
whether  that  be  excited  by  the  paffions  of  the 
mind  (MCCCCXXII),  by  difeafes  in  other 
parts  of  the  fyftem  (MCCCCLXXI,  1.), 
or  by  the  various  ftimulants  mentioned 
MCCCCLXXV,  and  following  3  or  the 
quantity  of  matter  poured  out  may  be  in- 
creafed, not  fo  much  by  the  increafed  action 
of  the  inteftines,  as  by  an  increafed  afflux  of 
fluids  from  other  parts  of  the  fyftem. 

Thus,  cold  applied  to  the  furface  of  the 
body,  and  fuppreffing  perfpiration,  may  de- 
termine a  greater  quantity  of  fluids  to  the  in- 
terlines. 

Thus,  in  the  ifchuria  renalis>  the  urine  tak- 
en into  the  bloodveflels  is  fometimes  deter- 
mined to  pafs  off  again  by  the  interlines. 

In  like  manner,  pus  or  ferum  may  be  ab- 
sorbed from  the  cavities  in  which  they  have 
been  ftagnant,  and  be  again  poured  out  into 
the  interlines,  as  frequently  happens,  in  par- 
ticular with  refpecl  to  the  water  of  dropfies. 

MCCCCLXXXIV. 

It  is  to  be  obferved  here,  that  a  diarrhoea 
may  be  excited  not  only  by  a  copious  afflux 
of  fluids  from  other  parts  of  the  iyftem,   but 

Vol.  3.  G  5  like  wife 


142  PRACTICE 

likewife  by  the  mere  determination  of  various 
acrid  matters  from  the  mafs  of  blood  into  the 
cavity  of  the  inteflines.  Thus  it  is  fuppofed 
that  the  morbific  matter  of  fevers  is  fometimes 
thrown  out  into  the  cavity  of  the  inteftines, 
and  gives  a  critical  diarrhoea  :  And  whether 
I  do  or  do  not  admit  the  doctrine  of  critical 
evacuations,  I  think  it  is  probable  that  the 
morbific  matter  of  the  exanthemata  is  fre- 
quently thrown  upon  the  interlines,  and  oc~ 
cafions  diarrhoea. 

MCCCCLXXXV. 

It  is  to  me  further  probable,  that  the  pu- 
trefcent  matter  diffufed  over  the  mafs  of  blood 
in  putrid  difeafes,  is  frequently  poured  out 
by  the  exhalants  into  the  inteftines,  and 
proves  there  the  caufe,  at  leaft  in  part,  of 
the  diarrhoea  fo  commonly  attending  thef& 
difeafes. 

MCCCCLXXXVI. 

Upon  this  fubjecl;  of  the  matters  poured 
into  the  cavity  of  the  inteftines,  I  have  chief- 
ly confidered  them  as  poured  out  in  unufual 
quantity  :  Eut  it  is  probable  that,  for  the  moft 
part,  they  are  alfo  changed  in  their  quality, 
and  become  of  a  more  acrid  and  ftimulant 
nature  ;  upon  which  account  efpecially  it  is, 
that  they  excite,  or  at  leaft  increafe,  a  diar- 
rhoea, 

MCCCCLXXXVIL 


OF       PHYSIC. 


MCCCCLXXXVII. 

How  far,  and  in  what  manner,  the  exha- 
lant  fluid  may  be  changed  in  its  nature  and 
quality,  we  do  not  certainly  know  :  But  with 
refpecl:  to  the  fluid  from  the  mucous  excre- 
tories,  we  know,  that,  when  poured  out  in 
tmufual  quantity,  it  is  commonly,  at  the  fame 
time,  in  a  more  liquid  and  acrid  form  5  and 
may  prove,  therefore,  conliderably  irritating. 

MCCCCLXXXVIII. 

Though  the  copious  efFufion  of  a  more 
liquid  and  acrid  matter  from  the  mucous  ex- 
cretories,  be  probably  owing  to  the  matter 
being  poured  out  immediately  as  it  is  fecreted 
from  the  blood  into  the  mucous  follicles, 
without  being  allowed  to  flagnate  in  the  lat- 
ter, fo  as  to  acquire  that  milder  quality  and 
thicker  confidence  we  commonly  find  in  the 
mucus  in  its  natural  ftate  ;  and  although  we 
might  fuppofe  that  the  excretions  of  a  thin 
and  acrid  fluid  fhould  always  be  the  effecT;  of 
every  determination  to  the  mucous  follicles, 
and  of  every  ftimulant  applied  to  them;  yet 
it  is  certain,  that  the  reverfe  is  fometimes  the 
cafe  ;  and  that,  from  the  mucous  follicles, 
there  is  frequently  an  increafed  excretion  of 
a  mucus,  which  appears  in  its  proper  form  of 
a  mild,  vifcid,  and  thickifh  matter.  This 
commonly  occurs  in  the  cafe  of  dyfenterv  • 
G  6  and 


144  PRACTICE 

and  it  has  been  obferved  to  give  a  fpecies  of 
diarrhoea,  which  has  been  properly  named  the 
Diarrhoea  Mucofa. 

MCCCCLXXXIX. 

A  third  fource  of  matter  poured  into  the 
cavity  of  the  interlines,  and  occafioning  diar- 
rhoea (MCCCCLXXIV,  3.),  is  from  thofe 
preternatural  openings  produced  by  difeafes 
in  the  interlines  or  neighbouring  parts.  Thus 
tht  bloodveflels  on  the  internal  furface  of  the 
interlines  may  be  opened  by  erofion,  rupture, 
or  anaftomohs,  and  pour  into  the  cavity  their 
blood,  which,  either  by  its  quantity  or  by  its 
acrimony,  whether  inherent,  or  acquired  by 
ilagnation,  may  fometimes  give  a  diarrhoea 
evacuating  bloody  matter.  This  is  what  I 
think  happens  in  that  difeafe  which  has  been 
called  the  Meltena  or  Morbus  Niger. 

MCCCCXC. 

Another  preternatural  fource  of  matter 
poured  into  the  cavity  of  the  interlines,  is  the 
rupture  of  abfceffes  feated  either  in  the  coats 
of  the  interlines  themfelves,  or  in  any  of  the 
contiguous  vifcera,  which,  during  an  inflamed 
Hate,  had  formed  an  adhefion  with  fome  part 
of  the  interlines.  The  matter  thus  poured 
into  their  cavity  may  be  various  ;  purulent, 
or  fanious,  or  both  together,  mixed  at  the 
.fame  time  with  more  or  lefs  of  blood ;  and 

in 


OF       PHYSIC.  145 

in  each  of  thefe  dates  may  be  a  caufe  of  diar- 
rhoea. 

MCCCCXCI. 

Amongfl  the  flimuli  that  may  be  directly 
applied  to  the  interlines,  and  which,  by  in- 
creafing  their  periftaltic  motion,  may  occafion 
diarrhoea,  I  mult  not  omit  to  mention  worms, 
as  having  frequently  that  effect. 

MCCCCXCII. 

I  mull  alfo  mention  here  a  Hate  of  the  in- 
terlines, wherein  their  periftaltic  motion  is 
preternaturally  increafed,  and  a  diarrhoea 
produced  ;  and  that  is,  when  they  are  affect- 
ed with  an  erythematic  inflammation.  With 
refpedl  to  the  exiftence  of  fuch  a  (late,  and  its 
occafioning  diarrhoea,  fee  what  is  faid  above 
in  CCCXCVIII  and  following.  Whether 
it  is  to  be  confidered  as  a  particular  and  dif- 
tin6l  cafe  of  diarrhoea,  or  is  always  the  fame 
with  fome  of  thofe  produced  by  one  or  other 
of  the  caufes  above  mentioned,  I  have  not 
been  able  to  determine. 

MCCCCXCIII. 

Laflly,  by  an  accumulation  of  alimentary 
or  of  other  matter  poured  into  the  cavity  of 
the  interlines  from  feveral  of  the  fources  above 
mentioned,  a  diarrhoea  may  be  efpecially  oc- 

cafioned 


146  PRACTICE 

cafioned  when  the  abforption  of  the  la&eals, 
or  of  other  abforbents,  is  prevented,  either  hy 
an  obftruclion  of  their  orifices,  or  by  an  ob- 
ftru&ion  of  the  mesenteric  glands,  through 
which  alone  the  abforbed  fluids  can  be  trans- 
mitted. 

In  one  inflance  of  this  kind,  when  the  chyle 
prepared  in  the  ftomach  and  duodenum  is 
not  abforbed  in  the  courfe  of  the  interlines, 
but  paries  off  in  confiderable  quantity  by  the 
anus,  the  difeafe  has  been  named  Morbus  Ccel- 
iacus,  or  fimply  and  more  properly  Cceliaca  • 
which  accordingly  I  have  confidered  as  a  fpe- 
cies  of  diarrhoea. 

MCCCCXCIV. 

I  have  thus  endeavoured  to  point  out  the 
various  fpecies  of  difeafe  that  may  come  un- 
der the  general  appellation  of  Diarrhoea  ;  and 
from  that  enumeration  it  will  appear,  that 
many,  and  indeed  the  greater  part  of  the  cafes 
of  diarrhoea,  are  to  be  confidered  as  fympa- 
luetic  affeclions,  and  to  be  cured  only  by 
curing  the  primary  difeafe  upon  which  they 
depend  ;  of  which,  however,  I  cannot  prop- 
erly treat  here.  From  our  enumeration  it 
will  alfo  appear,  that  many  of  the  cafes  of  di- 
arrhoea which  may  be  confidered  as  idiopath- 
ic, will  not  require  my  faying  much  of  tKem 
here.  In  many  inflances,  the  difeafe  is  af- 
certained,  and  alfo  the  caufe  amgned,  by  the 
condition  of  the  matter  evacuated ;  fo  that 

what 


OF      PHYSIC.  147 

what  is  neceffary  to  correct  or  remove  it  will 
be  fufficiently  obvious  to  practitioners  of  any 
knowledge.  In  ihort,  I  do  not  find  that  I 
can  offer  any  general  plan  for  the  cure  of  di- 
arrhoea ;  and  all  that  I  can  propofe  to  do  on 
this  fubjecl:,  is  to  give  fome  general  remarks 
on  the  practice  that  has  been  commonly  fol- 
lowed in  the  cure  of  this  difeafe. 


MCCCCXCV. 

The  practice  in  this  difeafe  has  chiefly  pro- 
ceeded upon  the  fuppofition  of  an  acrimony 
in  the  fluids,  or  of  a  laxity  in  the  fimple  and 
moving  fibres  of  the  interlines  ;  and  the  rem- 
edies employed  have  accordingly  been,  Cor- 
rectors of  particular  acrimony,  general  de- 
mulcents, evacuants  by  vomiting  or  purging, 
aftringents,  or  opiates.  Upon  each  of  thefe 
kinds  of  remedy  I  ihall  now  offer  fome  re* 
marks, 

MCCCCXCVI. 

An  acid  acrimony  is,  upon  feveral  occa- 
fions,  the  caufe  of  diarrhoea,  particularly  in 
children  ;  and  in  fuch  cafes  the  abforbent 
earths  have  been  very  properly  employed. 
The  common,  however,  and  promifcuous  ufe 
of  thefe,  has  been  very  injudicious  ;  and 
where  there  is  any  putrefcency,  they  mull  be 
hurtful. 

MCCCCXCVII, 


148  PRACTICE 


MCCCCXCVII. 

The  cafes  in  which  there  is  a  putrid  or  pu~ 
trefcent  acrimony  prevailing,  have  been,  I 
think,  too  feldom  taken  notice  of ;  and,  there- 
fore, the  ufe  of  acids  too  feldom  admitted. 
The  acrimony  to  be  fufpe&ed  in  bilious  cafes, 
is  probably  of  the  pu trefcent  kind. 

MCCCCXCVIII. 

The  general  correctors  of  acrimony  are  the 
mild  diluents  and  demulcents.  The  former 
have  not  been  fo  much  employed  in  diarrhoea 
as  they  ought ;  for,  joined  with  demulcents, 
they  very  much  increafe  the  effects  of  the 
latter  :  And  although  the  demulcents,  both 
mucilaginous  and  oily,  may  by  themfelves  be 
ufeful,  yet  without  the  aftiftance  of  diluents 
they  can  hardly  be  introduced  in  fuch  quan- 
tity as  to  anfwer  the  purpofe. 

MCCCCXCIX. 

As  indigeflion  and  crudities  prefent  in  the 
flomach,  are  fo  often  the  caufe  of  diarrhcea, 
vomiting  mufl  therefore  be  frequently  very 
ufeful  in  this  difeafe. 

In  like  manner,  when  the  difeafe  proceedsj 
as  it  often  does,  from  obftrucled  peripiration, 
and  increased  afflux  of  fluids  to  the  interlines, 
vomiting  is  perhaps  the  mofl  effectual  means 

of 


OF      PHYSIC.  149 

of  reftoring  the  determination  of  the  fluids  to 
the  furface  of  the  body. 

It  is  poffible  alfo,  that  vomiting  may  give 
fome  inverfron  of  the  periftaltic  motion,  which 
is  determined  too  much  downwards  in  diar- 
rhoea ;  fo  that  upon  the  whole  it  is  a  remedy 
which  may  be  very  generally  ufeful  in  this 
difeafe. 

MD. 

Purging  has  been  fuppofed  to  be  more  unk 
verfally  neceffary,  and  has  been  more  gen- 
erally praclifed.  This,  however,  in  my  opin- 
ion, proceeds  upon  very  miflaken  notions 
with  refpecl  to  the  difeafe  ;  and  fuch  a  prac- 
tice feems  to  me  for  the  mod  part  fuperflu- 
ous,  and  in  many  cafes  very  hurtful.  It  goes 
upon  the  fuppofition  of  an  acrimony  prefent 
in  the  interlines,  that  ought  to  be  carried  out 
by  purging  :  J3ut,  if  that  acrimony  has  either 
been  introduced  by  the  mouth,  or  brought 
into  the  interlines  from  other  parts  of  the 
body,  purging  can  neither  be  a  means  of  cor- 
recting nor  of  exhaufling  it  ,*  and  muft  rather 
have  the  efFe61  of  increafing  its  afflux,  and  of 
aggravating  its  effects.  From  whatever  fource 
the  acrimony  which  can  excite  a  diarrhoea 
proceeds,  it  may  be  fuppofed  fufficient  to 
evacuate  itfelf,  fo  far  as  that  can  be  done  by 
purging  ;  and  as  in  cholera,  fo  in  the  fame 
kind  of  diarrhoea,  it  will  be  more  proper  to 
aflift  the  evacuation  by  diluents  and  demul- 

centSj 


150  PRACTICE 

cents,   than  to  increafe  the  irritation  by  pur- 
gatives. 

MDL 

If,  then,  the  ufe  of  purgatives  in  diarrhoea 
may  be  confidered,  even  when  an  acrimony  is 
prefent,  as  fuperfluous,  there  are  many  other 
cafes  in  which  it  may  be  extremely  hurtful. 
If  the  irritability  of  the  interlines  fhall,  from 
affections  in  other  parts  of  the  fyflem,  or  other 
caufes,  have  been  already  very  much  increaf- 
ed,  purgatives  mull  necefTarily  aggravate  the 
difeafe.  In  the  cafe  of  lientery,  nobody 
thinks  of  giving  a  purgative  ;  and  in  many 
cafes  of  diarrhoea  approaching  to  that,  they 
muft  be  equally  improper.  I  have  already 
obferved,  that  when  diarrhoea  proceeds  from 
an  afflux  of  fluids  to  the  interlines,  whether 
in  too  great  quantity,  or  of  an  acrid  quality, 
purgatives  may  be  hurtful  ;  and  whoever, 
therefore  conliders  the  numerous  and  various 
fources  from  which  acrid  matter  may  be  pour- 
ed into  the  cavity  of  the  interlines,  will  readi- 
ly perceive,  that,  in  many  cafes  of  diarrhoea, 
purgatives  may  be  extremely  pernicious. 

There  is  one  cafe  in  particular  to  be  taken 
notice  of.  When,  from  a  general  and  acrid 
diffolution  of  the  blood,  the  ferous  fluids  run 
off  too  copioufly  into  the  cavity  of  the  intek 
tines,  and  excite  that  diarrhoea  which  attends 
the  advanced  ilate  of  he£tic  fever,  and  is  prop- 
erly called  a  Colliquative  Diarrhoea  ;  I  have, 

in 


OF       PHYSIC.         151 

in  fuch  cafes,  often  feen  purgatives  given  with 
the  moil  baneful  effects. 

There  is  ftill  another  cafe  of  diarrhoea  in 
which  purgatives  are  pernicious  ;  and  that  is, 
when  the  difeafe  depends,  as  we  have  alleged 
it  fometimes  may,  upon  an  erythematic  in- 
flammation of  the  inteflines. 

I  need  hardly  add,  that  if  there  be  a  cafe 
of  diarrhcea  depending  upon  a  laxity  of  the 
folids,  purgatives  cannot  there  be  of  any  fer- 
vice,  and  may  do  much  harm.  Upon  the 
whole,  it  will,  I  think,  appear,  that  the  ufe  of 
purgatrves  in  diarrhcea  is  very  much  limited  5 
and  that  the  promifcuous  ufe  of  them,  which 
has  been  fo  common,  is  injudicious,  and  often 
pernicious.  I  believe  the  practice  has  been 
chiefly  owing  to  the  ufe  of  purgatives  in  dyf- 
enteric  cafes,  in  which  they  are  truly  ufeful ; 
becaufe,  contrary  to  the  cafe  of  diarrhcea, 
there  is  in  dyfentery  a  confiderabie  conftric- 
tion  of  the  inteflines. 

MDII. 

Another  fet  of  remedies  employed  in  diar- 
rhoea are  aflringents.  There  has  been  fome 
hefitation  about  the  employment  of  thefe  in 
recent  cafes,  upon  the  fuppofition  that  they 
might  occafion  the  retention  of  an  acrid  mat- 
ter that  fhould  be  thrown  out.  I  cannot, 
however,  well  underftand  or  aflign  the  cafes 
in  which  fuch  caution  is  neceffary ;  and  I 
.think  that  the  power  of  aflringents  is  feldom 

fo 


152  PRACTICE 

fo  great  as  to  render  their  ufe  very  danger- 
ous. 

The  only  difficulty  which  has  occurred  to 
me,  with  refpeft  to  their  ufe,  has  been  to 
judge  of  the  circumftances  to  which  they  are 
efpecially  adapted.  It  appears  to  me  to  be 
only  in  thofe  where  the  irritability  of  the  in*, 
teflines  depends  upon  a  lofs  of  tone  :  And 
this,  I  think,  may  occur  either  from  the  de- 
bility of  the  whole  fyftem,  or  from  caufes  act- 
ing on  the  inteftines  alone.  All  violent  or 
long  continued  fpafmodic  and  convulfive  af- 
fections of  the  inteftinal  canal  neceiTarily  in- 
duce a  debility  there  ;  and  fuch  caufes  often 
take  place,  from  violent  irritation,  in  colic^, 
dyfer^ery,  cholera,  and  diarrhoea. 

MDIII. 

The  laft  of  the  remedies  of  diarrhoea  that 
remain  to  be  mentioned  are  opiates.  The 
fame  objections  have  been  made  to  the  ufe  of 
thefe,  in  recent  cafes  of  diarrhoea,  as  to  that 
of  aftringents  ;  but  on  no  good  grounds  :  For 
the  effect  of  opiates,  as  aftringent,  is  never 
very  permanent ;  and  an  evacuation  depend- 
ing upon  irritation,  though  it  may  be  for 
fome  time  fufpended  by  opiates,  yet  always 
returns  very  foon.  It  is  only  by  taking  off 
irritability  that  opiates  are  ufeful  in  diarrhoea  £ 
and  therefore,  when  the  difeafe  depends  upon 
an  increafe  of  irritability  alone,  or  when, 
though  proceeding  from  irritation,  that  irri- 
tation 


OF      P  H  Y  S  I.C.  153 

tation  is  corre&ed  or  exhaufled,  opiates  are 
the  moft  ufeful  and  certain  remedy.  And 
though  opiates  are  not  fuited  to  correct  or  re- 
move an  irritation  applied,  they  are  often  of 
great  benefit  in  fufpending  the  effects  of  that 
irritation  whenever  thefe  are  violent :  And, 
upon  the  whole,  it  will  appear,  that  opiates 
may  be  very  frequently,  and  with  great  pro- 
priety, employed  in  the  cure  of  diarrhoea. 


Chap.       XII. 
Of  the  Diabetes, 

M.DIV. 

THIS  difeafe  confifts  in  the  voiding  of  an 
unufually  large  quantity  of  urine. 

As  hardly  any  fecretion  can  be  increafed 
without  an  increafed  a&ion  of  the  veffels  con- 
cerned in  it,  and  as  fome  inftances  of  this  dif- 
eafe are  attended  with  afFeclions  manifeftly 
fpafmodic,  I  have  had  no  doubt  of  arranging 
the  diabetes  under  the  order  of  Spafrni. 

MDV. 

This  difeafe  is  always  accompanied  with  a 
great  degree  of  third,  and  therefore  with  the 

taking 


\ 


154  PRACTICE 

taking  in  of  a  great  quantity  of  drink.  This 
in  fome  meafure  accounts  for  the  very  extra- 
ordinary quantities  of  urine  voided  :  But 
ftill,  independent  of  this,  a  peculiar  difeafe 
certainly  takes  place ;  as  the  quantity  of  urine 
voided  does  almofl  always  exceed  the  whole 
of  the  liquids,  and  fometimes  the  whole  of 
bothfolids  and  liquids,  taken  in. 

MDVL 

The  urine  voided  in  this  difeafe  is  always 
very  clear,  and  at  firft  fight  appears  entirely 
without  any  colour ;  but  viewed  in  a  certain 
light,  it  generally  appears  to  be  {lightly  tinged 
with  a  yellowifh  green,  and  in  this  refpecl;  has 
been  very  properly  compared  to  a  folution  of 
honey  in  a  large  proportion  of  water, 

Examined  by  the  tafte,  it  is  very  generally 
found  to  be  more  or  lefs  fweet ;  and  many  ex- 
periments that  have  now  been  made  in  dif- 
ferent inflances  of  the  difeafe  mow  clearly 
that  fuch.  urine  contains,  in  confiderable 
quantity,  a  faccharine  matter  which  appeals 
to  be  very  exactly  of  the  nature  of  common 
fugar. 

MDVII. 

Doctor  Willis  feems  to  me  to  have  been 
the  firft  who  took  notice  of  the  fweetnefs  of 
the  urine  in  diabetes,  and  almoft  every  phy- 
fician  of  England  has  fince  taken  notice  of 

the 


OF       PHYSIC.  155 

the  fame.  It  is  to  be  doubted,  indeed,  if 
there  is  any  cafe  of  idiopathic  diabetes  in 
which  the  urine  is  of  a  different  kind. 
Though  neither  the  ancients,  nor,  in  the  oth- 
er countries  of  Europe,  the  moderns,  till  the 
latter  were  directed  to  it  by  the  Engliih,  have 
taken  notice  of  the  fweetnefs  of  the  urine,  it 
does  not  perfuade  me,  that  either  in  ancient 
or  in  modern  times  the  urine  in  diabetes  was 
of  another  kind.  I  myfelf,  indeed,  think  I 
have  met  with  one  inftance  of  diabetes  in 
which  the  urine  was  perfectly  infipid  ;  and  it 
would  feem  that  a  like  obfervation  had  oc- 
curred to  Dr.  Martin  Lifter.  I  am  perfuad- 
ed,  however,  that  fuch  inftances  are  very  rare ; 
and  that  the  other  is  by  much  the  more  com- 
mon, and  perhaps  the  almoft  univerfal  occur- 
rence. I  judge,  therefore,  that  the  prefence 
of  fuch  a  faccharine  matter  may  be  confidered 
as  the  principal  circumftance  in  idiopathic 
diabetes ;  and  it  gives  at  lead  the  only  cafe 
of  that  difeafe  that  I  can  properly  treat  of 
here,  for  I  am  only  certain  that  what  I  am 
further  to  mention  relates  to  fuch  a  cafe, 

MDVIII. 

The  antecedents  of  this  difeafe,  and  conse- 
quently the  remote  caufes  of  it,  have  not  been 
well  ascertained.  It  may  be  true  that  it  fre- 
quently happens  to  men  who,  for  a  long  time 
before,  had  been  intemperate  in  drinking  $ 
that  it  happens  to  perfons  of  a  broken  confti- 

tutionj, 


156  PRACTICE 

tutipn,  or  who,  as  we  often  exprefs  it,  are  in 
a  cachectic  (late  ;  that  it  fometimes  follows  in- 
termittent fevers  ;  and  that  it  has  often  oc- 
curred from  excefs  in  the  drinking  of  min- 
eral waters.  But  none  of  thefe  caufes  apply- 
very  generally  to  the  cafes  that  occur  :  Such 
cafes  are  not  always,  nor  even  frequently,  fol- 
lowed by  a  diabetes  ;  and  there  are  many  in- 
ftances  of  diabetes  which  could  not  be  refer- 
red to  any  of  them.  In  moll  of  the  cafes  of 
this  difeafe  which  I  have  met  with,  I  could 
not  refer  it  to  any  particular  caufe. 

MDIX. 

This  difeafe  commonly  comes  on  flowl}^ 
and  almoft  imperceptibl)^  without  any  pre- 
vious diforder.  It  often  arifes  to  a  confider- 
able  degree,  and  fub  fills  long  without  being 
accompanied  with  evident  diforder  in  any 
particular  part  of  the  fyflem.  The  great 
thirfl  which  always,  and  the  voracious  appe-* 
tite  which  frequently,  occurs  in  it,  are  often 
the  only  remarkable  fymptoms.  Under  the 
continuance  of  the  difeafe,  the  body  is  often 
greatly  emaciated  ;  and  a  great  weaknefs  alfo 
prevails.  The  pulfe  is  commonly  frequent ; 
and  an  obfcure  fever  is  for  the  mofl  part  preu 
ent.  When  the  difeafe  proves  fatal,  it  gen- 
erally ends  with  a  fever,  in  many  circum- 
fiances,  particularly  thofe  of  emaciation  and 
debility,  refembling  a  hectic. 

MDX, 


OF       PHYSIC.  157 

MUX. 

The  proximate  caufe  of  this  difeafe  is  not 
certainly  or  clearly  known.  It  feems  to  have 
been  fometimes  connected  with  calculous  af- 
fections of  the  kidneys  ;  and  it  is  poffible, 
that  an  irritation  applied  there  may  increafe 
the  fecretibn  of  urine.  It  perhaps  often  does 
fo ;  but  how  it  fhould  produce  the  iingular 
change  that  takes  place  in  the  Rate  of  the 
urine,  is  not  to  be  eafily  explained.  It  cer- 
tainly often  happens,  that  calculous  matters 
are  long  prefent  in  the  urinary  paffages,  with- 
out having  any  fuch  effect  as  that  of  produc- 
ing diabetes  in  any  {fiape. 

Some  have  fuppofed  that  the  difeafe  oc- 
curs from  a  relaxed  flate  of  the  fecretory  vef- 
fels  of  the  kidneys  ;  and  indeed  the  directions 
of  perfons  who  had  died  of  this  difeafe  have 
mown  the  kidneys  in  a  very  flaccid  ftate. 
This,  however,  is  probably  to  be  confidered 
as  rather  the  effect  than  the  caufe  of  the 
difeafe. 

That  no  topical  affection  of  the  kidneys  has 
a  (hare  in  producing  this  difeafe,  and  that  a 
fault  in  the  affimilation  of  the  fluids  is  rather 
to  be  blamed,  I  conclude  from  hence,  that 
even  the  folid  food  taken  in,  increafes  the 
quantity  of  the  urine  voided,  at  the  fame  time 
with  an  increafe  of  the  faccharine  matter 
above  mentioned. 

Vol.  III.  H  MDXL 


138  PRACTICE 


MDXI. 

The  diabetes  has  been  fuppofed  to  be  ow* 
ing  to  a  certain  date  of  the  bile  ;  and  it  is 
true,  that  this  difeafe  has  fometimes  occurred 
in  perfons  who  were  at  the  fame  time  affe&ed 
with  difeafes  of  the  liver  :  But  this  concur- 
rence does  not  often  take  place  ;  and  the  dia- 
betes frequently  occurs  feparately  from  any 
affeclion  of  the  liver.  In  twenty  inflances  of 
diabetes  which  I  have  feen,  there  was  not  in 
any  one  of  them  any  evident  affection  of  the 
liver. 

The   explanation  that  has  been  offered  of  i 
the  nature  and  operation  of  the  bile,  in  pro-* 
ducing  diabetes,  is  very  hypothetical,  and  no 
wife  fatisfying. 

MDXII. 

As  I  have  already  faid,  I  think  it  probable^ 
that  in  moil  cafes  the  proximate  caufe  of  this 
difeafe  is  fome  fault  in  the  affimilatory  powers^ 
or  in  thofe  employed  in  converting  aliment- 
ary matters  into  the  proper  animal  fluids. 
This  I  formerly  hinted  to  Dr.  Dobfon,  and  it 
lias  been  profecuted  and  publifhed  by  him ; 
but  I  muft  own,  that  it  is  a  theory  embarrafT- 
ed  with  fome  difficulties  which  I  cannot  at 
prefent  very  well  remove. 

MDXIII1 


OF      PHYSIC.  159 

MDXIII. 

The  proximate  caufe  of  diabetes  being  fo 
little  known  or  afcertained,  I  cannot  propofe 
any  rational  method  of  cure  in  the  difeafe. 
From  the  teftimony  of  feveral  authors,  I  be- 
lieve that  the  difeafe  has  been  cured  :  But  I 
believe  alfo,  that  this  has  feldom  happened  ; 
and  when  the  difeafe  has  been  cured,  I  doubt 
much  if  it  was  effected  by  the  feveral  reme- 
dies to  which  thefe  cures  have  been  afcribed. 
In  all  the  inftances  of  this  difeafe  which  I  my- 
feif  have  feen,  and  in  feveral  others  of  which 
I  have-been  informed,  no  cure  of  it  has  ever 
been  made  in  Scotland,  though  many  inftances 
of  it  have  occurred,  and  in  mod  of  them  the 
remedies  recommended  by  authors  have  been 
diligently  employed.  I  cannot,  therefore, 
with  any  advantage,  enter  into  a  detail  of  thefe 
remedies  ;  and  as  the  difeafe,  together  with 
its  feveral  circumftances,  when  they  mall 
hereafter  occur,  is  likely  to  become  the  fub- 
ject  of  diligent  inveftigation,  I  avoid  going 
farther  at  prefent,  and  judge  it  prudent  to 
fufpend  my  opinion  till  I  fhall  have  more  ob- 
fervations  and  experiments  upon  which  I  can 
form  it  more  clearly. 


He  Chap, 


i6o  PRACTICE 


C    H    A    F.  XIII, 


Of  the  Hysteria,  or  the  Hysteric  Dis* 
ease. 


MDXIV. 

THE  many  and  various  fyrriptoms  whicfe 
have  been  fuppofed  to  belong  to  a  difeafe  un^. 
der  this  appellation,  render  it  extremely  dif- 
ficult to  give  a  general  character  or  definition 
xjfit.  It  is,  however,  proper  in  all  cafes  to 
attempt  fome  general  idea  ;  and  therefore,  by 
taking  the  moil  common  form,  and  that  con* 
currence  of  fymptoms  by  which  it  is  princi- 
pally diflinguifhed,  I  have  formed  a  charac- 
ter in  my  fyflem  of  Methodical  Nofology,  and 
ihall  here  endeavour  to  illuftrate  it  by  giving 
a  more  full  hiflory  of  the  phenomena. 

MDXV. 

The  difeafe  attacks  in  parOxyfms  or  fits. 
Thefe  commonly  begin  hy  fome  pain  and  ful- 
iiefs  felt  in  the  left  fide  of  the  belly.  From 
this  a  ball  feems  to  move  with  a  grumbling 
noife  into  the  other  parts  of  the  belly  ;  and, 
making  as  it  were  various  convolutions  there^ 
feems  to  move  into  the  ftomach  |  and  more 

diftin&ly 


OF       PHYSIC.  161 

eliftin&ly  ftill  rifes  up  to  the  top  of  the  gullet, 
where  it  remains  for  fome  time,  and  by  its 
preffure  upon  the  larynx  gives  a  fenfe  of  fuf- 
fbcation.  By  the  time  that  the  difeafe  has 
proceeded  thus  far,  the  patient  is  affected 
with  a  ftupor  and  infenfibility,  while  at  the 
fame  time  the  body  is  agitated  with  various 
convulfions.  The  trunk  of  the  body  is 
wreathed  to  and  fro,  and  the  limbs  are  va- 
rioufly  agitated ;  commonly  the  convulfive 
motion  of  one  arm  and  hand,  is  that  of  beat- 
ing, with  the  clofed  fift,  upon  the  bread  very 
violently  and  repeatedly.  This  ftate  contin- 
ues for  fome  time,,  and  has  during  that  time 
fome  remiffions  and  renewals  of  the  convul- 
live  motions  ;  but  they  at  length  ceafe,  leav- 
ing the  patient  in  a  ftupki  and  feemingly 
fleeping  ftate.  More  or  lefs  fuddenly,  and 
frequently  with  repeated  fighing  and  fobbing, 
together  with  a  murmuring  noife  in  the  belly, 
the  patient  returns  to  the  exercife  of  fenfe  and 
motion,  but  generally  without  any  recollec- 
tion  of  the  feveral  circumftances  that  had 
taken  place  during  the  fit. 

MDXVI. 

This  is  the  form  of  what  is  called  an  hyjlerk 
paroxyfm,  and  is  the  moft  common  form  ;  but 
its  paroxyfms  are  confiderably  varied  in  dif- 
ferent perfons,  and  even  in  the  fame  per-fon 
at  different  times.  It  differs,  by  having  more 
or  fewer  of  the  circumftances  above  mention- 
Id  3  ed  ; 


i6«  PRACTICE 

ed  ;  by  thefe  circumftances  being  more  or 
lefs  violent ;  and  by  the  different  duration  of 
the  whole  fit. 

Before  the  fit,  there  is  fometimes  a  fudden 
and  unufually  large  flow  of  limpid  urine.  At 
the  coming  on  of  the  fit,  the  flomach  is  fome- 
times affe&ed  with  vomiting,  the  lungs  with 
confiderahle  difficulty  of  breathing,  and  the 
heart  with  palpitations.  During  the  fit,  the 
whole  of  the  belly,  and  particularly  the  navel, 
is  drawn  flrongly  inwards  ;  the  fphin&er  ani 
is  fometimes  fo  firmly  conflricfed  as  not  to 
admit  a  fmall  glyfter  pipe,  and  there  is  at  the 
fame  time  an  entire  fuppreffion  of  urine. 
Such  fits  are,  from  time  to  time,  ready  to  re- 
cur ;  and  during  the  intervals,  the  patients  are 
liable  to  involuntary  motions,  to  fits  of  laugh- 
ing and  crying,  with  fudden  tranfitions  from 
the  one  to  the  other ;  while  fometimes  falfe 
imaginations,  and  fome  degree  of  delirium, 
alfo  occur. 

MDXVIL 

Thefe  affeclions  have  been  fuppofed  pecu- 
liar to  the  female  fex  ;  and  indeed  they  moil 
commonly  appear  in  females  :  But  they  fome- 
times, though  rarely,  attack  alfo  the  male 
fex  ;  never,  however,  that  I  have  obferved,  in 
the  fame  exquifite  degree. 

In  the  female  fex,  the  difeafe  occurs  efpec- 
ially  from  the  age  of  puberty  to  that  of  thirty 
live  years ;  and  though  it  does  fometimes,  yet 

very 


OF       PHYSIC.  163 

very  feldom  appears  before  the  former  or 
arter  the  latter  of  thefe  periods. 

At  all  ages,  the  time  at  which  it  moft  read- 
ily occurs  is  that  of  the  menftrual  period. 

The  difeafe  more  efpecially  affects  the  fe- 
males of  the  moll  exquifitely  fanguine  and 
plethoric  habits,  and  frequently  affecls  thofe 
of  the  moft  robuft  and  mafculine  conilitu- 
tions. 

It  affecls  the  barren  more  than  the  breed- 
ing women,  and  therefore  frequently  young- 
widows. 

It  occurs  efpecially  in  thofe  females  who 
are  liable  to  the  Nymphomania  ;  and  the 
Nofologifls  have  properly  enough  marked 
one  of  the  varieties  of  this  difeafe  by  the  title 
of  Hyjieria  Libidinofa. 

In  the  perfons  liable  to  the  fits- of  this  dif- 
eafe, it  is  readily  excited  by  the  paffions  of 
the  mind,  and  by  every  confiderable  emotion, 
efpecially  thofe  brought  on  by  furprife. 

The  perfons  liable  to  this  difeafe  acquire 
often  fuch  a  degree  of  fenfibility,  as  to  be 
flrongly  affected  by  every  impreffion  that 
comes  upon  them  by  furprife. 

MDXVIII. 

In  this  fiiftory,  there  appears  to  be  a  con- 
currence of  fymptoms  andcircumfiances  prop- 
erly marking  a  very  particular  difeafe,  which 
I  think  may  be  diftinguifhed  from  all  others. 
It  feems  to  me  to  have  been  improperly  con- 
H  4  fidered 


164  PRACTICE 

fidered  by  phyficians  as  the  fame  with  fome 
other  difeafes,  and  particularly  with  hypo- 
chondriafis.  The  two  difeafes  may  have 
fome  fymptoms  in  common,  but  for  the  mod 
part  are  conhderably  different. 

Spafmodic  affe£lions  occur  in  both  difeaf- 
es ;  but  neither  fo  frequently,  nor  to  fo  great 
a  degree,  in  hypochondriacs  as  in  hyfteria. 

Perfons  liable  to  hyfteria  are  fometimes  af- 
fected at  the  fame  time  with  dyfpepfia.  They 
are  often,  however,  entirely  free  from  it ;  but 
I  believe  this  never  happens  to  perfons  af- 
fected with  hypochondriacs. 

Thefe  different  circum (lances  mark  fome 
difference  in  the  two  difeafes  ;  but  they  are 
fliil  more  certainly  diftinguifhed  by  the  tem- 
perament they  attack,  and  by  the  time  of  life 
at  which  they  appear  to  be  moil  exquilitely 
formed. 

It  has  been  generally  fuppofed,  that  the 
two  difeafes  differ  only  in  refpe6l  of  their  ap- 
pearing in  different  fexes.  But  this  is  not 
well  founded  :  For  although  the  hyfteria  ap- 
pears moil:  commonly  in  females,  the  male 
lex  is  not  absolutely  free  from  it,  as  I  have 
obferved  above  ;  and  although  the  hypochon- 
driafis  may  be  moft  frequent  in  men,  the  in- 
fiances  of  it  in  the  female  fex  are  very  common. 

MDXIX. 

From  all  thefe  confederations,  it  muft,  I 
think,  appear^  that  the  hyfteria  may  be  very 

well, 


OF       PHYSIC.  165 

well,  and  properly,  diftinguifhed  from  hypo- 
chondriafis. 

Further,  it  feems  to  me  to  have  been  with 
great  impropriety,  that  almofl  every  degree  of 
the  irregular  motions  of  the  nervous  iyftem 
has  been  referred  to  the  one  or  other  of  thefe 
two  difeafes.  Both  are  marked  by  a  pecu- 
liarity of  temperament,  as  well  as  by  certain 
fymptoms  commonly  accompanying  that ;  but 
fome  of  thefe,  and  many  others  ufually  mark- 
ed by  the  name  of  nervous  fymptoms,  may, 
from  various  caufes,  arife  in  temperaments 
different  from  that  which  is  peculiar  to  either 
hyfteria  or  hypochondriacs,  and  without  be- 
ing joined  with  the  peculiar  fymptoms  of  ei- 
ther the  one  or  the  other  difeafe  :  So  that  the 
appellations  of  Hyfteric  and  Hypochondriac 
are  very  inaccurately  applied  to  them.  Un- 
der what  view  thefe  fymptoms  are  otherwife 
to  be  confidered,  I  am  not  ready  to  deter- 
mine ;  but  muft  remark,  that  the  appellation 
of  Nervous  Difeafes  is  too  vague  and  unde- 
fined to  be  of  any  ufeful  application. 

MDXX. 

Having  thus  endeavoured  to  diflinguifh 
hyfteria  from  every  other  difeafe,  I  mall  now 
attempt  its  peculiar  pathology.  With  refpecl; 
to  this,  I  think  it  will,  in  the  firft  place,  be 
obvious,  that  its  paroxyims  begin  by  a  con- 
vulfive  and  fpafmodic  affection  of  the  alimen- 
tary canal,  which  is  afterwards  communicated 

Vol.  3.  H  5  to 


166  PRACTICE 

to  the  brain,  and  to  a  great  part  of  the  nervous 
i'yftem.  Although  the  difeafe  appears  to  be- 
gin in  the  alimentary  canal,  yet  the  connexion 
which  the  paroxyfms  fo  often  have  with  the 
menftruai  flux,  and  with  the  difeafes  that  de- 
pend on  the  Hate  of  the  genitals,  fhows,  that 
the  phyhcians  have  at  all  times  judged  rightly 
in  confidering  this  difeafe  as  an  afFeQion  of 
the  uterus  and  other  parts  of  the  genital 
fyRem. 

MDXXI. 

With  regard  to  this,  however,  I  can  go  no 
farther.  In  what  manner  the  uterus,  and  in 
particular  the  ovaria,  are  affected  in  this  dif- 
eafe ;  how  the  affection  of  thefe  is  communi- 
cated, with  particular  circumftances,  to  the 
alimentary  canal ;  or  how  the  affection  of  this, 
riling  upwards,  afPecls  the  brain,  fo  as  to  oc- 
cafion  the  particular  convulfions  which  occur 
in  this  difeafe,  I  cannot  pretend  to  explain. 

But  although  I  cannot  trace  this  difeafe  to 
its  firft  caufes,  or  explain  the  whole  of  the 
phenomena,  I  hope,  that  with  refpecl  to  the 
general  nature  of  the  difeafe,  I  may  form  fome 
general  conclufions,  which  may  ferve  to  direct 
our  conducl  in  the  cure  of  it. 

MDXXII. 

Thus,,  from  a  confideration  of  the  predifpo- 
ment  &nd  oecafional  caufes,  it  will,  I  think,  ap- 
pear, 


OF       PHYSIC.  167 

pear,  that  the  chief  part  of  the  proximate 
cauie  is  a  mobility  of  the  fyftem,  depending 
generally  upon  its  plethoric  (late. 


MDXXIIL 


Whether  this  difeafe  ever  arifesfrom  a  mo- 
bility  of  the  fyftem,  independent  of  any  pie- 
thoric  ftate  of  it,  I  cannot  pofitively  deter- 
mine ;  but  in  many  cafes  that  have  fubfifted 
for  fome  time,  it  is  evident  that  a  fenfibilitv, 
and  confequently  a  mobility,  are  acquired, 
which  often  appear,  when  neither  a  general 
plethora  can  be  iuppofed  to  fubfiil,  nor  an 
occafional  turgefcence  to  have  happened. 
However,  as  we  have  fhown  above,  that  a  dif- 
tenrion  of  the  veffels  of  the  brain  feems  to  oc- 
cafion  epilepfy,  and  that  a  turgefcence  of  the 
blood  in  the  veffels  of  the  lungs  feems  to  pro- 
duce afthma  ;  fo  analogy  leads  me  to  fuppoiey 
-that  a  turgefcence  of  blood  in  the  uterus, 
or  in  other  parts  of  the  genital  fyftem,  may 
occafion  the  fpafmodic  and  convulfive  mo- 
tions which  appear  in  hyfteria.  It  will,  at 
the  fame  time,  be  evident,  that  this  affeclion 
of  the  genitals  muft  efpecially  occur  in  ple- 
thoric habits  ;  and  every  circumflance  men- 
tioned in  the  hiftory  of  the  difeafe  ferves  to 
confirm  this  opinion  with  refpee"!  to- its  prox- 
imate caufe. 

H6  MDXXIV. 


63  PRACTICE 


MDXXIV. 

From  this  view  of  the  fubjecT:,  the  analogy 
of  hyfieria  and  epilepfy  will  readily  appear  ; 
and  why,  therefore,  I  am  to  fay  that  the  indi- 
cations of  cure  are  the  fame  in  both. 

As  the  indications,  fo,the  feveral  means  of 
anfwering  them,  are  fo  much  the  fame  in  both 
difeafes,  that  the  fame  obfervations  and  di- 
rections, with  regard  to  the  choice  and  em- 
ployment of  thefe  remedies,  that  have  been 
delivered  above  on  the  fubjecl;  of  epilepfy, 
will  apply  pretty  exa6lly  to  hyfieria  ;  and 
therefore  need  not  to  be  repeated  here, 


Chap.        IX. 
0/Ca»ine  Madness  and  Hydrophobia. 

MDXXV. 

THIS  difeafe  has  been  fo  exa£tly  and  fully 
defcribed  in  books  that  are  in  every  body's 
hands,  that  it  is  on  no  account  necefTary  for 
me  to  give  any  hifiory  of  it  here  ;  and  with 
refpect  to  the  pathology  of  it,  I  find  that  I 
can  fay  nothing  fatisfying  to  myfelf,  or  that  I 
can  expecl;  to  prove  fo  to  others.     1  find  alfo, 

with 


OF       PHYSIC.  169 

with  refpeft  to  the  cure  of  this  difeafe,  that 
there  is  no  fubjecl  in  which  the  fallacy  of  ex- 
perience appears  more  flrongly  than  in  this. 
From  the  moft  ancient  to  the  prefent  times, 
many  remedies  for  preventing  and  curing  this 
difeafe  have  been  recommended  under  the 
fanction  of  pretended  experience,  and  have 
perhaps  alfo  kept  their  credit  for  fome  time  : 
But  fucceeding  times  have  generally,  upon  the 
fame  ground  of  experience,  deftroyed  that 
credit  entirely  ;  and  mod  of  the  remedies  for- 
merly employed  are  now  fallen  into  abfolute 
neglect.  In  the  prefent  age,  fome  new  rem- 
edies have  been  propofed,  and  have  expe- 
rience alleged  to  vouch  for  their  efficacy  ;  but 
many  doubts  ftill  remain  with  refpe6l  to  this  : 
and  though  I  cannot  determine  in  this  matter 
from  my  own  experience,  I  think  it  incum- 
bent on  me  to  give  the  beft  judgment  I  can 
form  with  refpecl;  to  the  choice  of  the  reme- 
dies at  prefent  recommended. 

MDXXVI. 

I  am,  in  the  fir  ft  place,  firmly  perfuaded, 
that  the  moft  certain  means  of  preventing  the 
confequences  of  the  bite,  is  to  cut  out,  or  oth- 
erwife  deftroy,  the  part  in  which  the  bite  has 
been  made.  In  this  every  body  agrees  ;  but 
with  this  difference,  that  fome  are  of  opinion 
that  it  can  only  be  effectual  when  it  is  done 
very  foon  after  the  wound  has  been  made,  and 
they  therefore  neglect  it  when  this  opportu- 
nity 


i7o         PRACTICE,     Sec. 

nity  is  miffed.  There  have  been,  however, 
no  experiments  made  proper  to  determine 
this  matter  :  And  there  are  many  confidera- 
tions  which  lead  me  to  think,  that  the  poifon 
is  not  immediately  communicated  to  the  fyf- 
tem  ;  and  therefore,  that  this  meafure  of  de- 
ftroying  the  part  may  be  pra&ifed  with  ad- 
vantage, even  many  days  after  the  bite  has 
been  given. 

MDXXVII. 

Whilfl  the  ftate  of  our  experience,  with 
reipeel:  to  feveral  remedies  now  in  ufe,  is  un- 
certain, I  cannot  venture  to  affert  that  any 
of  thefe  is  abfolutely  ineffectual  ;  but  I  can 
give  it  as  my  opinion,  that  the  efficacy  of 
mercury,  given  very  largely,  and  pern  fled  in 
for  a  long  time,  both  as  a  means  of  prevent- 
ing the  difeafe,  and  of  curing  it  when  it  has 
actually  come  on,  is  better  fupported  by  ex- 
perience than  that  of  any  other  remedy  now 
propofed,  or  commonly  employed. 


BOCK 


l7i 


BOOK  IV. 

of  VESANLE,  or  of  the  DISOR- 
DERS of  the  INTELLECTUAL 
FUNCTIONS. 

CHAP.         I. 

©E    VESANIiE     IN     GENERAL. 

MDXXVIII. 

1  HE  Nofologifts,  Sauvages 
and  Sagar,  in  a  clafs  of  difeafes  under  the 
title  of  Vesani^e,  have  comprehended  the 
two  orders,  of  Hallucinationes  or  Falfe  Per- 
ceptions, and  of  Morofitates  or  Erroneous 
Appetites  and  Paflions  ;  and  in  like  manner, 
Linnaeus  in  his  clafs  of  Men  tales,  corres- 
ponding to  the  Vefanise  of  Sauvages,  has  com- 
prehended the  two  orders  of  Imaginarii  and 

Patheiiciy 


17*  PRACTICE 

Pathetici,  nearly  the  fame  with  the  Halluci- 
nationes and  Morofitates  of  that  author. 
This,  however,  from  feveral  considerations, 
appears  to  me  improper  ;  and  I  have  there- 
fore formed  a  clafs  of  Vefaniae  nearly  the 
fame  with  the  Paranoic  of  Vogel,  excluding 
from  it  the  Hallucinationes  and  Morofitates, 
which  I  have  referred  to  the  Morbi  Locales. 
Mr.  Vogel  has  done  the  like,  in  feparating 
from  the  Paranoias  the  falfe  perceptions  and 
erroneous  appetites  ;  and  has  thrown-  thefe 
into  another  clafs,  to  which  he  has  given  the 
title  of  Hyperaeithefes. 

MDXXIX. 

It  is  indeed  true,  that  certain  hallucinationes 
and  morofitates  are  frequently  combined  with 
what  I  propofe  to  confider  as  ftrictly  a  vefa- 
nia  or  an  erroneous  judgment  ;  and  fome- 
times  the  hallucinationes  feem  to  lay  the  foun- 
dation of,  and  to  form  almoft  entirely,  the 
vefania.  But  as  moft  part  of  the  hallucma^ 
tiones  enumerated  by  the  Nofologifls  are  af- 
fections purely  topical,  and  induce  no  other 
error  of  judgment  befide  that  which  relates  to 
the  fingle  object  of  the  fenfe  or  particular  or- 
gan affected  ;  fo  thefe  are  certainly  to  be  fep- 
arated  from  the  difeaies  which 'confift  in  a 
more  general  affection  of  the  judgment. 
Even  when  the  hallucinationes  conftantly  ac- 
company or  feem  to  induce  the  vefania,  yet 
being  fuch  as  arife  from  internal  caufes,  and 

may 


OF       PHYSIC.  173 

may  be  prefumed  to  arife  from  the  fame  caufe 
as  the  more  general  affection  of  the  judgment, 
they  are  therefore  to  be  confidered  as  fymp- 
toms  of  this  only. 

In  like  manner  I  judge  with  refpect  to  the 
morofitates,  or  erroneous  paflions,  that  ac- 
company vefania  ;  which,  as  confequences  of 
a  falle  judgment,  mud  be  confidered  as  arifmg 
from  the  fame  caufes,  and  as  fymptoms  only, 
of  the  more  general  affection. 

There  is,  indeed,  one  cafe  of  a  morofitas 
which  feems  to  induce  a  vefania,  or  more  gen- 
eral affection  of  the  judgment ;  and  this  may 
lead  us  to  confider  the  vefania,  in  this  cafe,  as 
a  fymptom  of  an  erroneous  appetite,  but  will 
not  afford  any  good  reafon  for  comprehend- 
ing the  morofitates  in  general  under  the  ve- 
faniae,  confidered  as  primary  difeafes. 

The  limitation,  therefore,  of  the  clafs  of 
Vefanias  to  the  lefions  of  our  judging  fac- 
ulty, feems  from  every  confideration  to  be 
proper. 

The  particular  difeafes  to  be  comprehend- 
ed under  this  clafs,  may  be  diftinguifhed  ac- 
cording as  they  affect  perfons  in  the  time  of 
waking  or  fleeping.  Thofe  which  affect  men 
awake,  may  again  be  confidered,  as  they  con- 
fift  in  an  erroneous  judgment,  to  which  I 
fhall  give  the  appellation  of  Delirium  ;  or  as 
they  con  fill  in  a  weaknefs  or  imperfection  of 
judgment,  which  I  fhall  name  Fatuity.  I  be- 
gin with  the  confideration  of  Delirium. 

MDXXX. 


74  PRACTIC   E 


MDXXX, 

As  men  differ  greatly  in  the  foun chiefs  and* 
force  of  their  judgment,  fo  it  may  be  proper 
here  to  afcertain  more  precifely  what  error  or 
imperfection  of  our  judging  faculty  is  to  be- 
confrdered  as  morbid,  and  to  admit  of  the  ap- 
pellations of  Delirium  and  Fatuity.  In  do- 
ing this,  I  fhall  firft  confider  the  morbid  errors 
of  judgment  under  the  general  appellation  of 
Delirium,  which  has  been  commonly  employ- 
ed to  denote  every  mode  of  fuch  error. 

MDXXXI. 

As  our  judgment  is  chiefly  exercifed  in 
difcerning  and  judging  of  the  feveral  relations 
of  things,  I  apprehend  that  delirium  may  be 
defined  to  be, — In  a  perfon  awake,  a  falfe  or 
miftaken  judgment  of  thofe  relations  of  things, 
which,  as  occurring  mofl  frequently  in  life, 
are  thofe  about  which  the  generality  of  men 
form  the  fame  judgment  ;  and  particularly 
when  the  judgment  is  very  different  from 
what  the  perfon  himfelf  had  before  ufually 
formed. 

MDXXXII. 

With  this  miftaken  judgment  of  relations 
there  is  frequently  joined  fome  falfe  percep- 
tion of  external  objects,  without  any  evident 

fault 


OF      PHYSIC.  175 

fault  in  the  organs  of  fenfe,  and  which  feems 
therefore  to  depend  upon  an  internal  caufe  ; 
that  is,  upon  the  imagination  arifing  from  a 
condition  in  the  brain  prefenting  objects 
which  are  not  actually  prefent.  Such  falfe 
perceptions  muft  neceffarily  occafion  a  de- 
lirium, or  an  erroneous  judgment,  which  is 
to  be  confidered  as  the  difeafe. 

MDXXXIII. 

Another  circumftance,  commonly  attend- 
ing delirium,  is  a  very  unufual  adociation  of 
ideas.  As,  with  refpecl  to  moil  of  the  affairs 
of  common  life,  the  ideas  laid  up  in  the  mem- 
ory are,  in  moft  men,  affociated  in  the  fame 
manner  ;  fo  a  very  unufual  aflociation,  in  any 
individual,  muft  prevent  his  forming  the  or- 
dinary judgment  of  thofe  relations  which  are 
the  mod  common  foundation  of  aflociation  in 
the  memory  :  And  therefore  this  unufual  and 
commonly  hurried  afTociation  of  ideas,  usual- 
ly is,  and  may  be  confidered  as,  a  part  of  de- 
lirium. In  particular  it  may  be  confidered 
as  a  certain  mark  of  a  general  morbid  affec- 
tion of  the  intellectual  organs,  it  being  an  in- 
terruption or  perverfion  of  the  ordinary  ope- 
rations of  memory,  the  common  and  necef- 
fary  foundation  of  the  exercife  of  judgment. 

MDXXXIV. 

A  third  circumftance  attending  delirium, 
is  an  emotion  or  paffion,   fometimes  of  the 

angry, 


176  PRACTICE 

angry,  fometimes  of  the  timid  kind  ;  and 
from  whatever  caufe  in  the  perception  or 
judgment,  it  is  not  proportioned  to  fuch  caufe, 
either  in  the  manner  formerly  cuflomary  to 
the  perfon  himfelf,  or  in  the  manner  ufual 
with  the  generality  of  other  men. 


MDXXXV. 

Delirium*  then,  may  be  more  fhortly  defin- 
ed,— In  a  perfon  awake,  a  falfe  judgment 
arifing  from  perceptions  of  imagination,  or 
from  falfe  recollection,  and  commonly  pro- 
ducing difproportionate  emotions. 

Such  delirium  is  of  two  kinds  ;  as  it  is  com- 
bined with  pyrexia  and  comatofe  affections ; 
or,  as  it  is  entirely  without  any  fuch  combi- 
nation. It  is  the  latter  cafe  that  we  name  In- 
fanity  ;  and  it  is  this  kind  of  delirium  only 
that  I  am  to  treat  of  here. 


MDXXXVI. 

Infanity  may  perhaps  be  properly  confid- 
ered  as  a  genus  comprehending  many  differ- 
ent fpecies,  each  of  which  may  deferve  our 
attention  ;  but  before  proceeding  to  the  con- 
fideration  of  particular  fpecies,  I  think  it 
proper  to  attempt  an  invefligation  of  the 
caufe  of  infanity  in  general. 

MDXXXVIL 


OF       PHYSIC.  177 


MDXXXVII. 

In  doing  this,  I  fhall  take  it  for  granted,  as 
demonftrated  elfewhere,  that  although  this 
difeafe  feems  to  be  chiefly,  and  fometimes 
folely,  an  affection  of  the  mind  ;  yet  the  con- 
nexion between  the  mind  and  body  in  this 
cafe  is  fuch,  that  thefe  affections  of  the 
mind  muft  be  coniidered  as  depending 
upon  a  certain  flate  of  our  corporeal 
part.  See  Halleri  Prim.  Lin.  Phyuolog. 
§dlxx.  SeeBoerhaaviilnft.Med.  §dlxxxi. 
pcxcvi. 

MDXXXVIIL 

Admitting  this  propofition,  I  muft  in  the 
next  place  affume  another,  which  I  likewife 
fuppofe  to  be  demonftrated  elfewhere.  This 
is,  that  the  part  of  our  body  more  immediate- 
ly connected  with  the  mind,  and  therefore 
more  efpecially  concerned  in  every  affection 
of  the  intellectual  functions,  is  the  common 
origin  of  the  nerves  ;  which  I  fhall,  in  what 
follows,  fpeak  of  under  the  appellation  of  the 
Brain. 

MDXXXIX. 

Here,  however,  in  affuming  this  laft  prop- 
ofition,  a  very  great  difficulty  immediately 

prefents 


i;8  PRACTICE 

prefents  itfelf.  Although  we  cannot  doubt 
that  the  operations  of  our  intellect  always  de- 
pend upon  certain  motions  taking  place  in 
the  brain  (fee  Gaub.  Path.  Med.  §  523) ;  yet 
thefe  motions  have  never  been  the  objects  of 
our  fenfes,  nor  have  we  been  able  to  perceive 
that  any  particular  part  of  the  brain  has  more 
concern  in  the  operations  of  our  intellect  than 
any  other.  Neither  have  we  attained  any 
knowledge  of  what  fhare  the  feveral  parts 
of  the  brain  have  in  that  operation ;  and 
therefore,  in  this  fituation  of  our  fcience,  it 
mull  be  a  very  difficult  matter  to  difcover 
thofe  ftates  of  the  brain  that  may  give  occa- 
lion  to  the  various  llate  of  our  intellectual 
functions. 

MDXL. 

It  may  be  obferved,  that  the  different  Hate 
of  the  motion  of  the  blood  in  the  veffels  of  the 
brain  has  fome  Ihare  in  affecting  the  opera- 
tions of  the  intellect ;  and  phyficians,  in  feek- 
ing  for  the  caufes  of  the  different  ftates  of  our 
intellectual  functions,  have  hardly  looked  fur- 
ther than  into  the  ftate  of  the  motion  of  the 
blood,  or  into  the  condition  of  the  blood  it- 
felf :  But  it  is  evident  that  the  operations  of 
the  intellectual  functions  ordinarily  go  on, 
and  are  often  confiderably  varied,  without 
our  being  able  to  perceive  any  difference  ei- 
ther in  the  motions  or  in  th-e  condition  of 
the  blood. 

MDXLL 


OF      PHYSIC.  179 


MDXLI. 

Upon  the  other  hand,  it  is  very  probable 
that  the  ftate  of  the  intellectual  functions  de- 
pends chiefly  upon  the  ftate  and  condition  of 
what  is  termed  the  Nervous  Power,  or,  as  we 
fuppofe,  of  a  fubtile  very  moveable  fluid,  in- 
cluded or  inherent,  in  a  manner  we  do  not 
clearly  underftand,  in  every  part  of  the  me- 
dullary fubftance  of  the  brain  and  nerves,  and 
which  in  a  living  and  healthy  man  is  capable 
of  being  moved  from  every  one  part  to  every 
other  of  the  nervous  fyftem. 

MDXLII. 

With  refpeO:  to  this  power,  we  have  pretty 
clear  proof  that  it  frequently  has  a  motion 
from  the  fentient  extremities  of  the  nerves  to*» 
ivards  the  brain,  and  thereby  produces  fenfa- 
tion  ;  and  we  have  the  fame  proof,  that  in 
confequence  of  volition  the  nervous  power 
has  a  motion  from  the  brain  into  the  mufcles 
or  organs  of  motion.  Accordingly,  as  fenfa- 
tion  excites  our  intellectual  operations,  and 
volition  is  the  effect  of  thefe,  and  as  the  con- 
nexion between  fenfation  and  volition  is  al- 
ways by  the  intervention  of  the  brain  and  of 
intellectual  operations  ;  fo  we  can  hardly 
doubt,  that  thefe  latter  depend  upon  certain 
motions,  and  the  various  modification  of  thefe 
motions,  in  the  brain. 

MDXLIII, 


i8o  PRACTICE 


MDXLIII. 

To  afcertain  the  different  ftates  of  thefe 
motions  may  be  very  difficult ;  and  phyfu 
cians  have  commonly  confidered  it  to  be  fo 
very  myfterious,  that  they  have  generally  def- 
paired  of  attaining  any  knowledge  with  re- 
gard to  it :  But  I  confider  fuch  abfolute  def- 
pair,  and  the  negligence  it  infpires,  to  be  al- 
ways very  blameable  ;  and  I  fhall  now  ven- 
ture to  go  fome  length  in  the  inquiry,  hoping 
that  fome  fteps  made  with  tolerable  firmnefs 
may  enable  us  to  go  flill  further. 

MDXLIV. 

To  this  purpofe,  I  think  it  evident,  that  the 
nervous  power,  in  the  whole  as  well  as  in  the 
feveral  parts  of  the  nervous  fyftem,  and  par- 
ticularly in  the  brain,  is  at  different  times  in 
different  degrees  of  mobility  and  force.  To 
thefe  different  ftates,  I  beg  leave  to  apply  the 
terms  of  Excitement  and  Collapfe.  To  that 
ftate  in  which  the  mobility  and  force  are  fuf- 
ficient  for  the  exercife  of  the  functions,  or 
when  thefe  ftates  are  any  way  preternaturally 
increafed,  I  give  the  name  of  Excitement  ; 
and  to  that  ftate  in  which  the  mobility  and 
force  are  not  fufficient  for  the  ordinary  exer- 
cife of  the  functions,  or  when  they  are  dimin- 
ifhed  from  the  ftate  in  which  they  had  been 
before,  I  give  the  name  of  Collapfe.     I  beg, 

however, 


OF       PHYSIC.  181 

however,  it  may  be  obfcrved,  that  by  thefe 
terms  I  mean  to  exprefs  matters  of  fa6i  only* 
and  without  intending,  by  thefe  terms,  to  ex- 
plain the  circumflance  or  condition,  mechan- 
ical or  phyfical,  of  the  nervous  power  or  fluid 
in  thefe  different  Hates. 

MDXLV. 

That  thefe  different  dates  of  excitement 
and  collapfe  take  place  on  different  occafions, 
muft,  I  think,  be  manifefl  from  numberlefs 
phenomena  of  the  animal  economy  :  But  it  is 
efpecially  to  our  prefent  purpofe  to  obferve, 
that  the  different  Rates  of  excitement  and  col- 
lapfe, are  in  no  inftance  more  remarkable, 
than  in  the  different  flates  of  waking  and 
fleeping.  In  the  latter,  when  quite  com- 
plete, the  motion  and  mobility  of  the  nervous 
power,  with  refpe£l  to  the  whole  of  what  are 
called  the  Animal  Functions,  entirely  ceafe, 
or,  as  I  would  exprefs  it,  are  in  a  (late  of  col- 
lapfe ;  and  are  very  different  from  the  flate  of 
waking,  which  in  healthy  perfons  I  would  call 
a  flate  of  general  and  entire  excitement. 

MDXLVI. 

This  difference  in  the  Hates  of  the  nervous 
|)Ower  in  fleeping  and  waking  being  admitted, 
I  muft  in  the  next  place  obferve,  that  when 
thefe  flates  are  changed  from  the  one  into  the 
other,  as  commonly  happens  every  day,  the 

Vol.,  III.  I  change 


i.8a  PRACTICE 

change  is  hardly  ever  made  inflantaneoufly, 
but  almoft  always  by  degrees,  and  in  fome 
length  of  time  onlv  :  And  this  may  be  ob- 
ferved  with  refpeQ  to  both  fenfe  and  motion. 
Thus  when  a  perfon  is  falling  afleep,  the  fen- 
fihilitv  is  gradually  diminifhed  :  So  that,  al- 
though fome  degree  of  fleep  has  come  on, 
flight  impreffions  will  excite  fenfation,  and 
bring  back  excitement ;  which  the  fame,  or 
even  ftronger  impreffions,  will  be  infufncient 
to  produce  when  the  ftate  of  fleep  has  con- 
tinued longer,  and  is,  as  we  may  fay,  more 
complete.  In  like  manner,the  power  of  vol- 
untary motion  is  gradually  diminifhed.  In 
fome  members  it  fails  fooner  than  in  others ; 
and  it  is  fome  time  before  it  becomes  general 
aad  confiderable  over  the  whole. 

The  fame  gradual  progrefs  may  be  remark- 
ed in  a  perfon' s  coming  out  of  fleep  :  The 
ears  in  this  cafe  are  often  awake  before  the 
eyes  are  opened  or  fee  clearly,  and  the  fenfes 
are  often  awake  before  the  power  of  voluntary 
motion  is  recovered ;  and  it  is  curious  to  ob- 
ferve,  that,  in  fome  cafes,  fenfations  may  be 
excited  without  producing  the  ordinary  affo- 
ciation  of  ideas.     See  Mem.  de  Berlin,  1752. 

MDXLVII. 

From  ail  this,  I  think  it  will  clearly  ap- 
pear, that  not  only  the  different  Rates  of  ex- 
citement and  collapfe  can  take  place  in  differ- 
ent degrees,   but  that  they  can  take  place  in 

different 


OF       PHYSIC.  183 

different  parts  of  the  brain,  or  at  leaff,  with 
refpeft  to  the  different  functions,  in  different 
degrees. 

As  I  prefume  that  almoft  every  perfon  has 
perceived  the  gradual  approach  of  fleeping 
and  waking,  I  likewife  fuppofe  every  perfon 
has  obferved,  that,  in  fuch  intermediate  (late 
of  unequal  excitement,  there  almoft  always 
occurs  more  or  lefs  of  delirium,  or  dreaming, 
if  any  body  choofes  to  call  it  fo.  There  are 
in  this  ftate  falfe  perceptions,  falfe  affociations, 
falfe  judgments,  and  disproportionate  emo- 
tions ;  in  Ihort,  all  the  circumftances  by  which 
I  have  above  defined  delirium. 

This  clearly  ffiows  that  delirium  may  de- 
pend, and  I  fhall  hereafter  endeavour  to  prove 
that  it  commonly  does  depend,  upon  fome 
inequality  in  the  excitement  of  the  brain  ; 
and  that  both  thefe  affertions  are  founded  on 
this,  that,  in  order  to  the  proper  exercife  of 
our  intellectual  functions,  the  excitement 
muft  be  complete,  and  equal  in  every  part  of 
the  brain.  For  though  we  cannot  fay  that 
the  veftiges  of  ideas  are  laid  up  in  different 
parts  of  the  brain,  or  that  they  are  in  fome 
meafure  diffufed  over  the  whole,  it  will  follow 
upon  either  fuppofition,  that  as  our  reason- 
ing or  intellectual  operations  always  require 
the  orderly  and  exact  recollection  or  memory 
of  affociated  ideas  ;  fo,  if  any  part  of  the 
brain  is  not  excited,  or  not  excitable,  that  rec- 
ollection cannot  properly  take  place,  while  at 
the  fame  time  other  parts  of  the  brain,  more 
I  2  excited 


i34  PRACTICE 

excited  and  excitable,  may  give  falfe  percep. 
tions,  affociations,  and  judgments. 

MDXLVIII. 

It  will  ferve  to  illuflrate  this,  that  the  coU 
lapfe  in  lleep  is  more  or  lefs  complete  ;  or 
that  the  fleep,  as  we  commonly  fpeak,  is  more 
or  lefs  profound  :  And  therefore,  that  in 
many  cafes,  though  fleep  talces  place  to  a  con- 
iiderable  degree^  yet  certain  impreffions  do 
itill  take  effect,  and  excite  motions,  or,  if  you 
will,  fenfations  in  the  brain  ;  but  which  fen- 
f  aliens,  upon  account  of  the  collapfed  ft  ate 
of  fo  great  a  part  of  the  brain,  are  generally 
of  the  delirious  kind,  or  dreams,  confifling  of 
falfe  perceptions,  affociations,  and  judgments> 
that  would  have  been  corrected  if  the  brain 
had  been  entirely  excited. 

Every  one,  I  believe,  has  obferved,  that  the 
moil  imperfect  fleeps  are  thofe  chiefly  attend- 
ed with  dreaming  <  that  dreams,  therefore, 
xnoft  commonly  occur  towards  morning,  when 
the  complete  flate  of  fleep  is  palling  away  ; 
and  further,  that  dreams  are  moll  commonly 
excited  by  flrong  and  uneafy  impreffions 
made  upon  the  body. 

I  apprehend  it  may  alfo  be  an  illuflratiott 
ef  the  fame  thing,  that,  even  in  waking  hours, 
we  have  an  inflance  of  an  unequal  flate  of  ex- 
citement in  the  brain  producing  delirium. 
Such,  I  think,  occurs  in  the  cafe  of  fever.  In 
this,  it  is  manifefi,  that  the  energy  of  the 

brain* 


OF       PHYSIC.  185 

brain,  or  its  excitement,  is  confiderably  di- 
roinimed  with  refpecx  to  the  animal  functions : 
And  it  is  accordingly  upon  this  ground  that 
I  have  explained  above,  in  XLV,  the  delir- 
ium which  fo  commonly  attends  fever..  To 
what  I  have  there  faid  I  (hall  here  only  add, 
that  it  may  ferve  to  confirm  my  docirine,  that 
the  delirium  in  fever  comes  on  at  a  certain 
period  of  the  difeafe  only,  and  that  we  can 
commonly  difcern  its  approach  by  a  more 
than  ufual  degree  of  it  appearing  in  the  time 
of  the  patient's  falling  into  or  coming  out  <f§ 
fleep.  It  appears,  therefore,  that  delirium, 
when  it  firft  comes  on  in  fever,  depends  upon 
an  inequality  of  excitement ;  and  it  can  hard- 
Iv  be  doubted,  that  the  delirium  which  comes 
at  length  to  prevail  in  the  entirely  weakened 
ftate  of  fevers,  depends  upon  the  fame  caufe 
prevailing  in  a  more  confiderabie  degree. 

MDXLIX. 

From  what  has  been  now  delivered,  I  hope 
it  will  be  fufficiently  evident,  that  delirium 
may  be,  and  frequently  is,  occasioned  by  an 
inequality  in  the  excitement  of  the  brain. 

How  the  different  portions  of  the  brain 
may  at  the  fame  time  be  excited  or  collapfed 
in  different  degrees,  or  how  the  energy  of  the 
brain  may  be  in  different  degrees  of  force, 
with  refpecl;  to  the  feveral  animal,  vital,  and 
natural  functions,  I  cannot  pretend  to  ex- 
plain i  but  it  is  fufficiently  evident  in  facl,, 
I  3  that 


i86  PRACTICE 

that  the  brarn  may  be  at  one  and  the  fame 
time  in  different  conditions  with  refpedt.  to 
thefe  functions.  Thus  in  inflammatory  dif- 
eafes,  when  by  a  ftimulus  applied  to  the  brain 
the  force  of  the  vital  functions  is  preternat- 
urally  increafed,  that  of  the  animal  is  either 
little  changed,  or  confiderably  diminished. 
On  the  contrary,  in  many  cafes  of  mania,  the 
force  of  the  animal  functions  depending  al- 
ways on  the  brain,  is  prodigioufly  increafed, 
while  the  flate  of  the  vital  function  in  the 
heart  is  very  little  or  not  at  all  changed.  I 
rauft  therefore  fay  again,  that  how  difficult 
foever  it  may  be  to  explain  the  mechanical  or 
phyfical  condition  of  the  brain  in  fuch  cafes, 
the  facls  are  fufhcient  to  ihow  that  there  is 
fuch  an  inequality  as  may  clifturb  our  intel- 
lectual operations. 


MDL 


I  have  thus  endeavoured  to  explain  the 
general  caufe  of  Delirium  ;  which  is  of  two 
kinds,  according  as  it  is  with,  or  without,  py- 
rexia. Of  the  firft  I  take  no  further  notice 
here,  having  explained  it  as  well  as  I  could 
•above  in  XLV. 

I  proceed  now  to  coriiider  that  delirium 
which  properly  belongs  to  the  clafs  of  Vefa- 
niae,  and  which  I  fhall  treat  of  under  the  gen-- 
era!  title  of  Infanity. 

MDLI. 


OF       P  H  Y  S  I  C.  187 

MDLI. 

In  entering  upon  this  fubjecl;,  it  imme- 
diately occurs,  that  in  many  inftances  of 
infanity,  we  find,  upon  diffe&ion  after 
death,  that  peculiar  circumflances  had  tak- 
en place  in  the  general  condition  of  the 
brain.  In  many  cafes,  ft  has  been  found  of 
a  drier,  harder,  and  firmer  confidence,  than 
what  it  is  ufually  of  in  perfons  who  had,  not 
been,  affected  with  that  difeafe.  In  other 
cafes,  it  has  been  found  in  a  more  humid> 
foft,  and  flaccid  date  -,  and  in*  the  obferva- 
tions  of  the  late  Mr.  Meckel,*  it  has  been 
found  confiderably  changed  in  its  denfity  or 
fpecifjc  gravity.  Whether  thefe  different 
ftates  have  been  obfervecl  to  be  uniformly  the 
fame  over  the  whole  of  the  brain,  I  cannot 
certainly  learn  ;  and  I  fufpe£r.  the  diffe&ors 
have  not  always  accurately  inquired  into  this 
circumftance  :  But  in  feveral  inftances,  it  ap- 
pears that  thefe  Hates  had  been  different  in 
different  parts  of  the  brain  ;  and  inftances  of 
this  inequality  will  afford  a  confirmation  of 
our  general  doclrine. 

The  accurate  Morgagni  has  obferved,  that 
m  maniacal  perfons  the  medullary  portion  of 

the 

*  Memoir,  de  Berlin  pour  l'annee  1764.  It  appeared 
in  many  inftances  of  infane  perfons,  that  the  medullary 
fub {lance  of  the  cerebrum  was  drier,  and  of  a  lefs  fpecif- 
ic  gravity,  than  in  perfons  who  had  been  always  of  a 
found  judgment, 

1 4 


188  PRACTICE 

the  brain  is  unufually  dry,  hard,  and  firm  : 
And  this  he  had  fo  frequently  obferved,  that 
he  was  difpofed  to  confider  it  as  generally  the 
cafe.  But  in  moil  of  the  particular  inftances 
which  he  has  given,  it  appears,  that,  for  the 
moil  part,  while  the  cerebrum  was  of  an  un- 
ufually hard  and  firm  confi Hence,  the  cere- 
bellum was  of  its  ufual  foftnefs,  and  in  many 
of  the  cafes  it  was  unufually  foft  and  flaccid. 
In  fome  other  cafes,  Morgagni  obferves,  that 
while  a  part  of  the  cerebrum  was  harder  and 
firmer  than  ordinary,  other  parts  of  it  were 
pre ternatur ally  foft. 

MDLII. 

Thefe  obfervations  tend  to  confirm  our 
general  do&rine  :  And  there  are  others  which 
I  think  will  apply  to  the  fame  purpofe. 

Upon  the  diffeclion  of  the  bodies  of  per- 
fons  who  had  laboured  under  infanity,  various 
organic  affections  have  been  difcovered  in 
particular  parts  of  the  brain  ;  and  it  is  fuf- 
ficiently  probable,  that  fuch  organic  affections 
might  have  produced  a  different  degree  of 
excitement  in  the  free  and  affected  parts,  and 
muff  have  interrupted  in  fome  meafure  the 
free  communication  between  the  feveral  parts 
of  the  brain,  and  in  either  way  have  occafion- 
ed  infanity. 

There  have  occurred  fo  many  inftances  of 
this  kind,  that  I  believe  phyficians  are  gen- 
erally  difpofed    to    fufpect   organic    lenons. 

of 


OF       PHYSIC.  189 

of  the  brain  to  exifl  in  almofl  every  cafe  of 
mfanity. 

MDLIII. 

This,  however,  is  probably  a  miflake  :  For 
we  know  that  there  have  been  many  inftancea. 
of  mfanity  from  which  the  perfons  have  en- 
tirely recovered ;  and  it  is  difficult  to  fup- 
pofe  that  any  organic  lefions  of  the  brain  had 
in  fuch  cafe  taken  place.  Such  tranfitory 
cafes,  indeed,  render  it  probable,  that  a  flate 
of  excitement,  changeable  by  various  cauf- 
es,  had  been  the  caufe  of  fuch  in  fiances  of 
infanity.. 

MDLIV. 

It  is  indeed  further  afferted,  that  in  many 
inilances  of  infane  perfons,  their  brain  had 
been  examined  after  death,  without  fhowTing 
that  any  organic  lefions  had  before  fubfifled 
in  the  brain,  or  finding  that  any  morbid  flate 
of  the  brain  then  appeared.  This,  no  doubt, 
may  ferve  to  fhow,  that  organic  lefions  had 
not  been  the  caufe  of  the  difeafe  ;  but  it  does 
not  allure  us  that  no  morbid  change  had  tak- 
en place  in  the  brain  :  For  it  is  probable,  that 
t\\Q  diffe6lors  were  not  always  aware  of  its  be- 
ing the  general  condition  of  hardnefs  and  den- 
iity,  as  different  in  different  parts  of  the  brain, 
that  was  to  be  attended  to,  in  order  to  -discov- 
er the  caufe  of  the  preceding  difeafe  ;   and 

Vol.  3.  I'| 


i9o  PRACTICE 

therefore  many  of  them  had  not  with  this 
view  examined  the  ftate  of  the  brain,  as  Mor- 
gagni  feems  carefully  to  have  done. 

MDLV. 

Having  thus  endeavoured  to  inveftigate  the 
caufe  of  infanity  in  general,  it  were  to  be 
wilhed  that  I  could  apply  the  d6ctrine  to  the 
diftinguiihing  the  feveral  fpecies  of  it,  accord- 
ing as  they  depend  upon  the  different  ftate 
and  circumftances  of  the  brain,  and  thereby 
to  the  eftablifhing  of  a  fcientific  and  accurate- 
ly adapted  method  of  cure.  Thefe  purpofes, 
however,  appear  to  me  to  be  extremely  diffi- 
cult to  be  attained  ;  and  I  cannot  hope  to 
execute  them  here.  AH  I  can  do  is  to  make 
fome  attempts,  and  offer  fome  reflections, 
which  further  obfervation,  and  greater  fagaci- 
ty,  may  hereafter  render  more  ufefuL 

MDLVI. 

The  ingenious  Dr.  Arnold  has  been  com- 
mendably  employed  in  diftinguiihing  the  dif- 
ferent fpecies  of  infanity  as  they  appear  with 
refpecl  to  the  mind  ;  and  his  labours  may 
hereafter  prove  ufeful,  when  we  ihall  come 
to  know  fomething  more  of  the  different  ftates 
of  the  brain  correfponding  to  thefe  different 
ftates  of  the  mind  ;  but  at  prefent  I  can  make 
little  application  of  his  numerous  diftin&ions. 
It  appears  to  rue  that  he  has  chiefly  pointed 

out 


OF       PHYSIC.  i9t 

out  and  enumerated  diftin&ions,  that  are 
merely  varieties,  which  can  lead  to  little  or  no 
variety  of  practice  :  And  I  am  efpeciaily  led 
to  form  the  latter  conclufion,  becaufe  thefe 
varieties  appear  to  me  to  be  often  combined 
together,  and  to  be  often  changed  into  one 
another,  in  the  fame  perfon  ;  in  whom  we 
mull  therefore  fuppofe  a  general  caufe  of  the 
difeafe,  which,  fo  far  as  it  can  be  known,  muft 
eftablifh  the  pathology,  and  efpeciaily  direel: 
the  practice. 

MDLVIL 

In  my  limited  views  of  the  different  ftates 
of  infanity,  I  muff  go  on  to  confider  them  un- 
der the  two  heads  of  Mania  and  Melancholia  : 
And  though  I  am  fenfible  that  thefe  two  gen- 
era do  not  comprehend  the  whole  of  the  {pe- 
des of  infanity,  I  am  not  clear  in  affigning 
the  other  fpecies  which  may  not  be  compre- 
hended under  thofe  titles.--  I  mail,  however, 
endeavour,  on  proper  cceafions  as  I  go  along, 
to  point  them  out  as  well  as  I  can. 


16  CHAP. 


192  PRACTICE 

CHAP.       II. 
of  MANIA,  or  MADNESS. 

MDLVIII. 

1  HE  circumftances  which  I 
have  mentioned  above  in  MDXXXV,  as 
conflituting  delirium  in  general,  do  more 
efpecially  belong  to  that  kind  of  it  which  I 
mail  treat  of  here  under  the  title  of  Man  i  a. 

There  is  fometimes  a  falfe  perception  or 
imagination  of  things  prefent  that  are  not ; 
but  this  is  not  a  conftant,  nor  even  a  frequent, 
attendant  of  the  difeafe.  The  falfe  judgment, 
is  of  relations  long  before  laid  up  in  the  mem- 
ory. It  very  often  turns  upon  one  fingle 
fubjecl; :  But  more  commonly  the  mind  ram- 
bles from  one  fubjecl;  to  another,  with  an 
equally  falfe  judgment  concerning  the  mofl 
part  of  them  ;  and  as  at  the  fame  time  there 
is  commonly  a  falfe  aflbciation,  this  increafes 
the  confufion  of  ideas,  and  therefore  the  falfe 
judgments.  What  for  the  moft  part  more 
efpecially  diftinguiihes  the  difeafe,  is  a  hurry 
of  mind,  in  purfuing  any  thing  like  a  train  of 
thought,   and  in  running  from  one  train  of 

thought 


OF       PHYSIC.         193 

thought  to  another.  Maniacal  perfons  are 
in  general  very  irafcible  ;  but  what  more  par- 
ticularly produces  their  angry  emotions  is, 
that  their  falfe  judgments  lead  to  fome  action 
which  is  always  pufhed  with  impetuofity  and 
violence  ;  when  this  is  interrupted  or  reftrain- 
ed,  they  break  out  into  violent  anger  and  fu- 
rious violence  againft  every  perfon  near  them, 
and  upon  every  thing  that  ftands  in  the  way 
of  their  impetuous  will.  The  falfe  judgment 
often  turns  upon  a  miftakert  opinion  of  fome 
injury  fuppofed  to  have  been  formerly  re- 
ceived, or  now  fuppofed  to  be  intended  :  And 
it  is  remarkable,  that  fuch  an  opinion  is  often 
with  refpecl;  to  their  former  dearefl  friends 
and  relations ;  and  therefore  their  refentment 
and  anger  are  particularly  directed  towards 
thefe.  And  although  this  fhould  not  be  the 
cafe,  they  commonly  foon  lofe  that  refpecl; 
and  regard  which  they  formerly  had  for  their 
friends  and  relations.  With  all  thefe  cir- 
cumftances,  it  will  be  readily  perceived,  that 
the  difeafe  mud  be  attended  very  conftantly 
with  that  incoherent  and  abfurd  fpeech  we 
call  raving.  Further,  with  the  circumfrances 
mentioned,  there  is  commonly  joined  an  un- 
ufual  force  in  all  the  voluntary  motions  •  and 
an  infenfibility  or  refi  fiance  of  the  force  of 
all  impreffions,  and  particularly  a  refinance  of 
the  powers  of  fleep,  of  cold,  and  even  of  hun- 
ger ;  though  indeed  in  many  infiances  a  vo- 
racious appetite  takes  place. 

MDLIX, 


194  PRACTIC   E 

MDLIX. 

It  appears  to  me,  that  the  whole  of  thefe 
circumftances  and  fymptoms  point  out  a  con- 
fiderable  and  unufual  excefs  in  the  excite- 
ment of  the  brain,  efpecially  with  refpett  to 
the  animal  functions  •  and  it  appears  at  the 
fame  time  to  be  manifeftly  in  fome  meafure 
unequal,  as  it  very  often  takes  place  with  ref- 
pe6l  to  thefe  functions  alone,  while  at  the 
fame  time  the  vital  and  natural  are  common- 
ly very  little  changed  from  their  ordinary 
healthy  ftate. 

MDLX. 

How  this  excefs  of  excitement  is  produced, 
it  may  be  difficult  to  explain.  In  the  va- 
rious instances  of  what  Sauvages  has  named 
the  Mania  Metaftatica,  and  in  all  the  inftances 
I  have  mentioned  in  my  Nofology  under  the 
title  of  the  Mania  Corporea>  it  may  be  fup- 
pofed  that  a  morbid  organic  affection  is  pro- 
duced in  fome  part  of  the  brain  ;  and  how 
that  may  produce  an  increafed  or  unequal 
excitement  in  certain  parts  of  it,  I  have  en- 
deavoured to  explain  above  in  MDLII.  But 
I  muff  at  the  fame  time  acknowledge,  that 
fuch  remote  caufes  of  mania  have  very  rarely- 
occurred  ;  and  that  therefore  fome  other  cauf- 
es of  the  difeafe  mufl  be  fought  for. 

The 


OF       PHYSIC.  195 

The  effe&s  of  violent  emotions  or  paffions 
of  the  mind  have  more  frequently  occurred 
as  the  remote  caufes  of  mania  ;  and  it  is  {Ef- 
ficiently probable,  that  fuch  violent  emotions, 
as  they  do  often  immediately  produce  a  tem- 
porary increafe  of  excitement,  fo  they  may, 
upon  fome  occaiions  of  their  permanent  in- 
herence or  frequent  repetition,  produce  a 
more  confiderable  and  more  permanent  ex- 
citement, that  is,  a  mania. 

With  refpect  to  thofe  caufes  of  mania 
which  arife  in  confequence  of  a  melancholia 
which  had  previoufly  long  fubfifted  ;  whether 
we  confider  that  melancholia  as  a  partial  in- 
sanity, or  as  a  long  perfifting  attachment  to 
one  train  of  thinking,  it  will  be  readily  per- 
ceived, that  in  either  cafe  fuch  an  increafe  of 
excitement  may  take  place  in  fo  confiderable 
a  degree,  and  in  fo  large  a  portion  of  the 
brain,  as  may  give  occafion  to  a  complete 
mania, 

MDLXI. 

Thefe  confiderations  with  regard  to  the  re- 
mote caufes  appear  to  me  to  confirm  Suffi- 
ciently our  general  doctrine  of  increafed  and 
unequal  excitement  in  the  mania  which  I 
have  defcribed  above  ;  but  I  mufl  own,  that 
I  have  not  exhaufted  the  fubjecl;,  and  that 
there  are  cafes  of  mania  of  which  I  cannot  af- 
fign  the  remote  caufes  :  But  although  I  can- 
not in  all  cafes  explain  in  what  manner  the 

mania 


ig6  PRACTICE 

mania  is  produced,  I  prefume,  from  the  ex- 
planation given,  and  efpecially  from  the 
fymptoms  enumerated  above,  to  conclude, 
that  the  difeafe  defcribed  above  depends  up- 
on an  increafed  excitement  of  the  brain  ;  an 
opinion  in  which  I  am  the  more  confirmed, 
as  I  think  it  will  point  out  the  proper^method 
of  cure.  At  leaft  I  think  it  will  mofl  clearly 
explain  the  operation  of  thofe  remedies,  which, 
fo  far  as  I  can  learn  from  my  own  experience 
and  that  of  others,  have  proved  the  mofl:  fuc- 
cefsful  in  this  difeafe  ;  and,  to  illuftrate  this, 
I  now  enter  upon  the  confederation  of  thefe 
remedies,  and  to  make  fome  remarks  uoon 
the  proper  manner  of  employing  them. 

MDLXII. 

Reftraining  the  anger  and  violence  of  mad'-, 
men  is  always  neceffary  for  preventing  their 
hurting  themfelves  or  others  :  But  this  re- 
flraint  is  alfo  to  be  confidered  as  a  remedy. 
Angry  paffions  are  always  rendered  more  vi- 
olent by  the  indulgence  of  the  impetuous 
motions  they  produce  ;  and  even  in  madmen 
the  feeling  of  reflraint  will  fometimes  prevent 
the  efforts  which  their  paffion  would  otherwife 
occaflon.  Reflraint,  therefore,  is  ufeful,  and 
ought  to  be  complete  ;  but  it  mould  be  exe- 
cuted in  the  eafiefl;  manner  poffihle  for  the  pa-' 
tient,  and  the  flrait  waiftcoat  anfwers  every 
ptirpofe  better  than  any  other  that  has  yet 
been  thought  cf.     The  retraining  madmen 

by 


OF       PHYSIC.  i97 

by  the  force  of  other  men,  as  occafioning  a 
conftant  flruggle  and  violent  agitation,  is 
often  hurtful.  Although,  on  many  occafions, 
it  may  not  be  fafe  to  allow  maniacs  to  be  up- 
on their  legs  or  to  walk  about,  it  is  never  de- 
firable  to  confine  them  to  a  horizontal  fitua- 
tion  ;  and  whenever  it  can  be  admitted,  they 
fhould  be  more  or  lefs  in  an  erect  pofture. 
Although  there  may  be  no  fymptoms  of  any 
preternatural  fulnefs  or  increafed  impetus  of 
blood  in  the  veffels  of  the  brain,  a  horizontal 
pofture  always  increafes  the  fulnefs  and  ten- 
fion  of  thefe  veffels,  and  may  thereby  increafe 
the  excitement  of  the  brain. 

MDLXIII. 

The  reftraint  mentioned  requires  confine- 
ment within  doors,  and  it  fhould  be  in  a  place 
which  prefents  as  few  objects  of  fight  and 
hearing  as  poffible  ;  and  particularly,  it  mould 
be  removed  from  the  objects  that  the  patient 
was  formerly  acquainted  with,  as  thefe  would 
more  readily  call  up  ideas  and  their  various 
affociations.  It  is  for  this  reafon  that  the 
confinement  of  madmen  fhould  hardly  ever 
be  in  their  ufual  habitation  ;  or  if  they  are, 
that  their  apartment  fhould  be  ftripped  of  all 
its  former  furniture.  It  is  alfo  for  the  mofl 
part  proper,  that  maniacs  fhould  be  without 
the  company  of  any  of  their  former  acquaint- 
ance •  the  appearance  of  whom  commonly 
excites  emotions   that    increafe    the   difeafe. 

Strangers 


19S  PRACTICE 

Strangers  may  at  firft  be  offenfive  ;  but  in  a 
little  time  they  come  to  be  objects  either  of 
indifference  or  of  fear,  and  they  mould  not 
be  frequently  changed. 

MDLXIV. 

Fear  being  a  paffion  that  diminifhes  excite- 
ment, may  therefore  be  oppofed  to  the  excefs 
of  it ;  and  particularly  to  the  angry  and  iraf- 
cible  excitement  of  maniacs.  Thefe  being 
more  fufceptible  of  fear  than  might  be  ex- 
pected, it  appears  to  me  to  have  been  com- 
monly ufeful.  In  molt  cafes  it  has  appeared 
to  be  neceffary  to  employ  a  very  conflant  im- 
predion  of  fear  ;  and  therefore  to  infpire  them 
with  the  awe  and  dread  of  fome  particular 
perfons,  efpecially  of  thofe  who  are  to  be  con- 
ftantly  near  them.  This  awe  and  dread  is 
therefore,  by  one  means  or  other,  to  be  ac- 
quired ;  in  the  firft  place,  by  their  being  the 
authors  of  all  the  reftraints  that  may  be  occa- 
fionally  proper  ;  but  fometimes  it  may  be 
neceffary  to  acquire  it  even  by  ftripes  and 
blows.  The  former,  although  having  the  ap- 
pearance of  more  fe verity,  are  much  fafer 
than  ftrokes  or  blows  about  the  head.  Nei- 
ther of  them,  however,  fhould  be  employed 
further  than  feems  very  neceffary,  and  fhould 
be  trufted  only  to  thofe  whofe  discretion  can 
be  depended  upon.  There  is  one  cafe  in 
which  they  are  Superfluous ;  that  is,  when  the 
maniacal  rage  is  either  not  fufceptible  of  fear, 

or 


OF      PHYSIC.  199 

or  incapable  of  remembering  the  objects  of 
it ;  for  in  fuch  inftances,  flripes  and  blows 
would  be  wanton  barbarity.  In  many  cafes 
of  a  moderate  difeafe,  it  is  of  advantage  that 
the  perfons  who  are  the  authors  of  reftraint 
and  puniffiment  mould  be  upon  other  occa- 
fions  the  beltowers  of  every  indulgence  and 
gratification  that  is  admiffible;  never,  however, 
neglecting  to  employ  their  awe  when  their 
indulgence  mail  have  led  to  any  abufe. 

MDLXV. 

Although  in  mania,  no  particular  irritation 
nor  fulnefs  of  the  fyftem  feem  to  be  prefent, 
it  is  plain,  that  the  avoiding  all  irritation  and 
means  of  fulnefs  is  proper  ;  and  therefore, 
that  a  diet  neither  ftimulating  nor  nourifhing 
is  commonly  to  be  employed.  As  it  may 
even  be  ufeful  to  diminifh  the  fulnefs  of  the 
fyftem,  fo  both  a  low  and  a  fpare  diet  is  likely 
in  moll  cafes  to  be  of  ferviee. 

MDLXVI. 

Upon  the  fame  principle,  although  no  un- 
ufual  fulnefs  of  the  body  be  prefent,  it  may 
be  of  advantage  to  diminifh  even  its  ordinary 
fulnefs  by  different  evacuations. 

Bloodletting,  in  particular,  might  be  fup- 
pofed  ufeful ;  and  in  all  recent  cafes  of  ma- 
nia it  has  been  commonly  praclifed,  and  I 
think  with  advantage  ;  but   when  the  difeafe 

has 


200  PRACTICE 

has  fubfifted  for  fome  time,   I  have  feldom 
found  bloodletting  of  fervice.     In  thofe  in* 
ilances  in  which  there   is  any  frequency  or 
fulnefs  of  pulfe,  or  any  marks  of  an  increafed 
impetus  of  the   blood  in   the  vefTels   of   (he 
head,  bloodletting  is  a  proper  and  even  a  nec- 
effary  remedy.      Some  practitioners,   in   fuch 
cafes,  have  preferred  a  particular   manner  of 
bloodletting,  recommending  arteriotomy,  fear-  ', 
ifying" the  hind  head,  or  opening  the  jugular 
vein  ;  and  where  any  fulnefs  or  inflammatory 
difpoiition  in  the  vefTels  of  the  brain,  is  to  be 
fufpe&ed,  the  opening  of  the  vefTels  neareft 
to  them  is  likely  to  be  of  the  greateft  fervice.. 
The  opening,  however,  of  either  the  temporal 
artery  or  the  jugular  vein  in  maniacal  perfons- 
is  very  often  inconvenient ;  and  it  may  gen- 
erally be  fufficient  to  open  a  vein  in  the  arm, 
while  the  body  is  kept  in  fomewhat  of  an 
ereel;   pofture,  and  fuch  a  quantity  of  blood: 
drawn  as  nearly  brings  on  a  deliquium  animi,. 
which  is  always  a  pretty  certain  mark  of  fome 
diminution  of  the  fulnefs  and  tenfion  of  the- 
vefTels  of  the  brain. 

MDLXVII. 

For  the  fame  purpofe  of  taking  off  the  ful- 
nefs and  tenfion  of  thefe  vefTels  of  the  brain, 
purging  may  be  employed  ;  and  I  can  in  no 
other  view  underftand  the  celebrated  ufe  of 
hellebore  among  the  ancients.  I  cannot, 
however,  fuppofe  any  fpecific  power  in  hel- 
lebore ; 


OF       PHYSIC.  201 

lebore  ;  and  can  by  no  means  find  that,  at 
leafl  the  black  hellebore,  is  fo  efficacious  with 
us  as  it  is  faid  to  have  been  at  Anticyra.  As 
coftivenefs,  however,  is  commonly  a  very  con- 
ftant  and  hurtful  attendant  of  mania,  purga- 
tives come  to  be  fometimes  very  necefTary  ; 
and  I  have  known  fome  benefit  obtained  from 
the  frequent  ufe  of  pretty  draftic  purgatives. 
In  this,  however,  I  have  been  frequently  dif- 
appointed  ;  and  I  have  found  more  advantage 
from  the  frequent  ufe  of  cooling  purgatives, 
particularly  the  foluble  tartar,  than  from  more 
draftic  medicines. 


MDLXVIIL 


Vomiting  has  alfo  been  frequently  employ*, 
ed  in  mania  ;  and  by  determining  powerfully 
to  the  furface  of  the  body,  it  may  pofhbly  di- 
minifh  the  fulnefs  and  tenfion  of  the  veiled 
and  thereby  the  excitement  of  the  brain ;  but 
I  have  never  carried  the  ufe  of  this  remedy  fo 
far  as  might  enable  me  to  judge  properly  of 
its  effe&s.  Whether  it  may  do  harm  by  iiru 
pelling  the  blood  too  forcibly  into  the  velfels 
of  the  brain,  or  whether  by  its  general  agita- 
tion of  the  whole  fyftem  it  may  remove  that 
inequality  of  excitement  which  prevails  in 
mania,  I  have  not  had  experience  enough  to 
tletermine, 

MDLXIX, 


102  PRACTICE 


MDLXIX. 

Frequent  (having  of  the  head  has  been 
found  of  iervice  in  mania,  and  by  promoting 
perfpiration  it  probably  takes  off  from  the 
excitement  of  the  internal  parts.  This,  how- 
ever, it  is  likely,  may  be  more  effectually  done 
by  bliftering,  which  more  certainly  takes  off 
the  excitement  of  fubjacent  parts.  In  recent 
cafes  it  has  been  found  ufeful  by  inducing 
fleep  ;  and  when  it  has  that  effect,  the  repe- 
tition of  it, may  be  proper  :  But  in  maniacal 
cafes  that  have  lafted  for  fome  time,  bliftering 
has  not  appeared  to  me  to  be  of  any  fervice  ; 
and  in  fuch  cafes  alfo  I  have  not  found  per- 
petual Milters,  or  any  other  form  of  iffue, 
prove  ufeful. 

MDLXX. 

As  heat  is  the  principal  means  of  firil  ex- 
citing the  nervous  fyftem,  and  eftablifhing  the 
nervous  power  and  vital  principle  in  animals  ; 
fo,  in  cafes  of  preternatural  excitement,  the 
application  of  cold  might  be  fuppofed  a  prop- 
er remedy  :  But  there  are  many  inftances  of 
maniacs  who  have  been  expofed  for  a  great 
length  of  time  to  a  confiderable  degree  of 
cold  without  having  their  fymptoms  anywife 
relieved.  This  may  render  in  general  the 
application  of  cold  a  doubtful  remedy  ;  but 
it  is  at  the  fame   time  certain,   that  maniacs 

have 


OF       PHYSIC.  203 

have  often  been  relieved,  and  fometimes  en- 
tirely cured,  by  the  ufe  of  cold  bathing,  es- 
pecially when  adminiftered  in  a  certain  man- 
ner. This  leems  to  confifl,  in  throwing  the 
madman  into  the  cold  water  by  furprife  ;  by 
detaining  him  in  it  for  fome  length  of  time  ; 
and  pouring  water  frequently  upon  the.  head, 
while  the  whole  of  the  body  except  the  head 
is  immerfed  in  the  water ;  and  thus  managing 
the  whole  procefs,  fo  as  that,  with  the  affifl- 
ance  of  fome  fear,  a  refrigerant  effect  may  be 
produced.  This,  I  can  affirm,  has  been  often 
ufeful ;  and  that  the  external  application  of 
cold  may  be  of  fervice,  we  know  further,  from 
the  benefit  which  has  been  received  in  fome 
maniacal  cafes  from  the  application  of  ice  and 
fnow  to  the  naked  head,  and  from  the  appli- 
cation of  the  noted  Clay  Cap. 

Warm  bathing  alfo  has  been  recommended 
by  fome  practical  writers  ;  and  in  fome  rigid 
melancholic  habits  it  may  poffibly  be  ufeful, 
or  as  employed  in  the  manner  prefcribed  by 
fome,  of  immerfmg  the  lower  parts  of  the 
body  in  warm  water,  while  cold  water  is  pour- 
ed upon  the  head  and  upper  parts.  Of  this 
practice,  however,  I  have  had  no  experience  ; 
and  in  the  common  manner  of  employing 
warm  bathing  I  have  found  it  rather  hurtful 
to  maniacs. 

MDLXXL 

According  to  my  fuppofition  that  the  dif- 
eafe  depends  upon  an  increafed  excitement  of 

the 


204  PRACTICE 

the  brain,  efpecially  with  refpeft  to  the  ani- 
mal functions,  opium,  fo  commonly  powerful 
in  inducing  fleep,  or  a  confiderable  collapfc 
as  to  thefe  functions,  mould  be  a  powerful 
remedy  of  mania.  That  it  has  truly  proved 
fuch,  I  believe  from  the  teftimony  of  Bernard 
Huet,  whofe  practice  is  narrated  at  the  end 
of  Wepferi  Hiftoria  Apoplecticorurn.  I 
leave  to  my  readers  to  ftudy  this  in  the  work 
I  have  referred  to,  where  every  part  of  the 
practice  is  fully,  and,  as  it  appears  to  me,  very 
judicioufly  delivered.  I  have  never  indeed 
carried  the  trial  fo  far  as  feems  to  be  requifite 
to  an  entire  cure  :  But  I  have  frequently  em- 
ployed in  fome  maniacal  cafes,  large  dofes  of 
opium  ,•  and  when  they  had  the  effect  of  in- 
ducing fleep,  it  was  manifeilly  with  advan- 
tage. At  the  fame  time,  in  fome  cafes,  from 
doubts,  whether  the  difeafe  might  not  depend 
upon  fome  organic  lefions  of  the  brain,  when 
the  opium  would  be  fuperfluous  ;  and  in  oth- 
er cafes,  from  doubts,  whether  there  might 
not  be  fome  inflammatory  affection  joined 
with  the  mania,  when  the  opium  would  be 
hurtful,  I  have  never  pufhed  this  remedy  to 
the  extent  that  might  be  neceflary  to  make  an 
entire  cure. 

MDLXXII. 

Camphire  has  been  recommended  as  a  rem^ 
edy  of  mania,  and  there  are  in  Ranees  alleged 
of  its  having  performed  an  entire  cure.     As 

k 


O   F      P  H  Y   S  I   C.  205 

it  appears  from  the  experiments  of  Beccaria 
that  this  fubftance  is  pofTeffed  of  a  fedative 
and  narcotic  virtue,  thefe  cures  are  not  alto- 
gether improbable  :  But  in  feveral  trials,  and 
even  in  large  dofes,  1  have  found  no  benefit 
from  it  ;  and  excepting  thofe  in  the  Philo- 
fophical  Tranfa&ions,  N°  400,  I  have  hard- 
ly met  with  any  other  teftimonies  in  its  fa- 
vour. 

MDLXXIIL 

I  have  been  informed  that  fome  maniacs 
have  been  cured  by  being  compelled  to  con- 
flant  and  even  hard  labour  ;  and  as  a  forced 
attention  to  the  conduct,  of  any  bodily  exer- 
cife,  is  a  very  certain  means  of  diverting  the 
mind  from  purfuing  any  train  of  thought,  it 
is  highly  probable  that  fuch  exercife  may  be 
uieful  in  many  cafes  of  mania. 

I  muff  conclude  this  fubjecl;  with  obferv- 
ingy  that  even  in  feveral  cafes  of  complete  ma- 
nia, I  have  known  a  cure  take  place  in  the 
courfe  of  a  journey  carried  on  for  fome  length 
of  time. 

MDLXXIV. 

Thefe  are  the  remedies  which  have  heen 
chiefly  employed  in  the  mania  that  has  bten 
above  defcribed,  and  I  believe  they  have  been 
employed  promifcuoufly  without  fuppofing 
that  the   mania  was  to  be  diftinguifhed  into 

Vol.  III.  K  different 


2o6  PRACTICE 

different  fpecics.  Indeed  I  am  not  ready  to 
fay  how  far  it  is  to  be  fo  diftinguifhed,  but  I 
fhall  offer  one  obfervation  which  may  poffibly 
merit  attention. 

It  appears  to  me,  that  there  are  two  differ- 
ent cafes  of  mania  that  are  efpecially  different 
according  to  the  original  temperament  of  the 
perfons  whom  the  difeafe  affects.  It  perhaps 
occurs  moil  frequently  in  perfons  of  a  melan*. 
cholic  or  atrabilarian  temperament  ;  but  it 
certainly  does  alfo  often  occur  in  perfons  of 
that  very  oppofite  temperament  which  phy- 
iicia^ns  have  named  the  Sanguine.  Accord- 
ing as  the  difeafe  happens  to  occur  in  perfons 
of  the  one  or  other  of  thefe  temperaments,  I 
apprehend  it  may  be  confidered  as  of  a  differ- 
ent nature  ;  and  I  believe,  that  accurate  ob- 
fervation, employed  upon  a  funicient  number 
of  cafes,  would  difcern  fame  pretty  conflant 
difference,  either  of  the  fymptoms,  or  at  leafl 
of  the  flate  of  fymptoms,  in  the  two  cafes.  I 
imagine  that  falfe  imaginations,  particular 
averfions  and  refentments,  are  more  fixed  and 
fteady  in  the  melancholic  than  in  the  fan- 
guine  ;  and  that  fomewhat  inflammatory  is 
more  commonly  joined  with  mania  in  the 
fanguine  than  in  the  melancholic.  If  fuch 
difference,  however,  does  truly  take  place,  it 
will  be  obvious^  that  it  may  be  proper  to 
make  fome  difference  alfo  in  the  practice.  I 
am  of  opinion,  that  in  the  mania  of  fanguine 
perfons,  bloodletting  and  other  antiphlogiftic 
rneafures   are  more  proper,  and  have  been 

more 


OF       PHYSIC.  207 

more  ufeful,  than  in  the  melancholic.  I 
likewife  apprehend  that  cold  bathing  is  more 
ufeful  in  the  fanguine  than  in  the  melanchol- 
ic :  But  I  have  not  had  experience  enough  to 
afcertain  thefe  points  with  fufhcient  confi- 
dence. 

I  have  only  to  add  this  other  obferva'tion, 
that  maniacs  of  the  fanguine  temperament  re- 
cover more  frequently  and  more  entirely  than 
thofe  of  the  melancholic, 


K2  CHAP. 


2q8  PRACTICE 


C     H     A     P.         III. 


•of  MELANCHOLY,  and. other  fqr^-s 
of  INSANITY. 


MDLXXV. 

Melancholy  has  been 

commonly  confidered  as  a  partial  infanity  | 
and  as  fuch  it  is  defined  in  my  Nofology  ; 
£ut  I  now  entertain  doubts  if  this  be  alto- 
gether proper*  By  a  partial  infanity,  I  un- 
derfland  a  falfe  and  miitaken  judgment  up- 
on one  particular  fubjecl;,  and  what  relates  to 
it ;  whilff,  on  every  other  fubjecl,  the  perfon 
afrecled  judges  as  the  generality  of  other  men 
do.  Such  cafes  have  certainly  occurred  ; 
but,  I  believe*  few  in  which  the  partial  infan- 
ity is  flriclly  limited.  In  many  cafes  of  gen- 
eral infanity  j  there  is  one  fubjecl:  of  anger  or 
fear,  upon  which  the  falfe  judgment  more  par- 
ticularly turns,  or  which  is  at  leafc  more  fre- 
quently than  any  other  the  prevailing  object 
of  delirium  s  And  though,  from  the  incon- 
iiftency  which  this  principal  object  of  delirium 
muff  producej  there  is  therefore  alfo  a  great 
deal  of  infanity  with  resrard  to  moil  other  oh- 
jects ;  yet  this  lafl  is  in  very  different  degrees, 
both  in  different  perfons,  and  in  the  fame  per- 
fon 


OF       PHYSIC.  209 

fon  at  different  times.  Thus  perfons  con- 
fidered as  generally  infane,  will,  however,  at 
times,  and  in  fome  cafes,  pretty  conftantly 
judge  properly  enough  of  prefent  circum- 
flances  and  incidental  occurrences  ;  though, 
when  thefe  objects  engaging  attention  are  not 
prefented,  the  operations  of  imagination  may 
readily  bring  back  a  general  confufion,  or  re- 
call the  particular  objecl:  of  the  delirium. 
From  thefe  confi  derations,  I  am  inclined  to- 
conclude,  that  the  limits  between  general  and 
partial  infanity  cannot  always  be  fo  exactly 
affigned,  as  to  determine  when  the  partial  af- 
fection is  to  be  confidered  as  giving  a  peculiar 
fpecies  of  difeafe,.  different  from-  a  more  gen- 
eral infanity. 

MDLXXVL 

When  infanity,  neither  finely  partial,  nor 
entirely  nor  conftantly  general,  occurs  in  per- 
sons of  a  fanguine  temperament,  and  is  at- 
tended with  agreeable.,  rather  than  with  angry 
or  gloomy  emotions,  I  think  fuch  a  difeafe 
muft  be  confidered  as  different  from  the  Ma- 
nia defcribed  above  ;  and  alfo,  though  par- 
tial, mull  be  held  as  different  from  the  proper 
Melancholia  to  be  mentioned  hereafter. 

MDLXXVII. 

Such  a  difeafe,  as  different  from  thofe  de- 
fcribed MDLIV,  requires,  in  my  opinion,  a 
K  3  different 


2io  PRACTICE 

different  adminiftration  of  remedies  ;  and  it 
will  be  proper  for  me  to  take  particular  no- 
tice of  this  here. 

Although  it  may  be  neceifary  to  reflrain 
fuch  infane  perfons  as  we  have  mentioned 
MDLXXVlJftm  purfuing  the  objeas  of 
their  falfe  imagination  or  judgment,  it  will 
hardly  be  requifite  to  employ  the  fame  force 
of  reftraint  that  is  neceifary  in  the  impetuous 
and  angry  mania.  It  will  be  generally  fuf- 
iicient  to  acquire  fome  awe  over  them,  that 
may  be  employed,  and  fometimes  eyen  be 
neceifary,  to  check  the  rambling  of  their  imag- 
ination, and  incoherency  of  judgment. 

MDLXXVIIL 

The  reftraint  jufl  now  mentioned  as  necef- 
fary  will  generally  require  the  patient's  being 
confined  to  one  place,  for  the  fake  of  exclud- 
ing the  objects,  and  more  particularly  the 
perfons,  that  might  excite  ideas  connected 
with  the  chief  objects  of  their  delirium.  At 
the  fame  time,  however,  if  it  can  be  perceiv- 
ed there  are  objects  or  perfons  that  can  call 
off  their  attention  from  the  purfuit  of  their 
own  difordered  imagination,  and  can  fix  it  a 
little  upon  fome  others,  thefe  lad  may  be  fre- 
otuently  prefented  to  them  :  And  for  this  rea- 
ion,  a  journey,  both  by  its  having  the  effecl;  of 
interrupting  all  train  of  thought,  and  by  pre- 
fenting  objects  engaging  attention,  may  often 
be  ufeful.     In  fuch  cafes  alio,  when  the  in- 

fanity3 


OF       PHYSIC.  211 

fanity,  though  more  efpecially  fixed  upon  one 
miflaken  fubjeel:,  is  not  confined  to  this  alone, 
but  is  further  apt  to  ramble  over  other  fub- 
je6ts  with  incoherent  ideas,  I  apprehend  the 
confining  or  forcing  fuch  perfons  to  fome 
conftant  uniform  labour,  majgprove  an  ufe- 
ful  remedy. 

MDLXXIX. 

When  fuch  cafes  as  in  MDLXVI  occur  in 
fanguine  temperaments,  and  may  therefore 
approach  more  nearly  to  Phrenitic  Delirium  j 
fo,  in  proportion  as  the  fymptoms  of  this  ten- 
dency  are  more  evident  and  considerable, 
bloodletting  and  purging  will  be  the  more 
proper  and  neceffary, 

MDLXXX. 

To  this  fpecies  of  infanity,  when  occurring 
in  fanguine  temperaments,  whether  it  be  more 
or  lefs  partial,  I  apprehend  that  cold  bathing 
is  particularly  adapted  ;  while,  in  the  partial 
infanity  of  melancholic  perfons,  as  I  fhall 
mow  hereafter,  it  is  hardly  admiffible. 

MDLXXXI. 

Having  thus  treated  of  a  fpecies  of  infan- 
ity, different,  in  my  apprehenfion,  from  both 
the  Mania   and  Melancholia,   I   proceed   to 
K  4  confidcr 


212  PRACTICE 

confider  what  Teems  more  properly  to  belong 
to-thislaft. 

MDLXXXII. 

The  difeafe  which  I  name  Melancholia  is 
very  often  a  partial  infanity  only.  But  as  in 
many  inftanccs,  though  the  falfe  imagination 
©r  judgment  feems  to  be  with  refpecl  to  one 
fubjecl;  only  ;  yet  it  feldorn  happens  that  this 
does  not  produce  much  inconfiilency  in  the 
other  intellectual  operations  :  And  as,  between 
a  very  general  and  a  very  partial  infanity, 
there  are  all  the  poffible  intermediate  de- 
grees ;  fo  it  will  be  often  difficult,  or  perhaps 
improper,  to  diftinguifh  Melancholia  by  the 
character  of  Partial  Infanity  alone.  If  I 
mifiake  not,  it  mufl  be  chiefly  diftinguifhed 
by  its  occurring  in  perfons  of  a  melancholic 
temperament,  and  by  its  being  always  attend- 
ed with  fome  feemingly  groundlefs,  but  very 
anxious,  fear. 

MDLXXXIIL 

To  explain  the  caufe  of  this,  I  mufl  ob- 
ferve,  that  perfons  of  a  melancholic  tempera- 
ment are  for  the  moft  part  of  a  ferious  thought- 
ful difpofition,  and  difpofed  to  fear  and  cau- 
tion, rather  than  to  hope  and  temerity.  Per- 
fons of  this  call  are  lefs  moveable  than  others 
by  any  impreflions ;  and  are  therefore  capa- 
ble of  a  clofer  or  more  continued  attention  to 

one 


OF       PHYSIC.  213 

one  particular  object,  or  train  of  thinking. 
They  are  even  ready  to  be  engaged  in  a  con- 
ftant  application  to  one  fubject ;  and  are  re- 
markably tenacious  of  whatever  emotions 
they  happen  to  be  affected  with. 

MDLXXXIV. 

Thefe  circumPtances  of  the  melancholic 
character,  feem  clearly  to  ihow,  that  perfons 
flrongly  affected  with  it  may  be  readily  feiz- 
ed  with  an  anxious  fear  ;  and  that  this,  when 
much  indulged,  as  is  natural  to  fuch  perfons, 
may  eafily  grow  into  a  partial  infanity. 

MDLXXXV. 

Fear  and  dejection  of  mind,  or  a  timid  and 
defponding  difpofxtion,  may  arife  in  certain 
ftates,  or  upon  certain  occafions,  of  mere  de- 
bility :  And  it  is  upon  this  footing,  that  I  fup- 
pofe  it  fometimes  to  attend  dyfpepfia.  But 
in  thefe  cafes,  I  believe  the  defpondent  dif- 
pofition  hardly  ever  arifes  to  a  confiderable 
degree,  or  proves  fo  obilinately  fixed  as  when 
it  occurs  in  perfons  of  a  melancholic  tern- 
perament.  In  thefe  laft,  although  the  fear 
proceeds  from  the  fame  dyfpeptic  feelings  as  in 
the  other  cafe,  yet  it  will  be  obvious,  that  the 
emotion  may  rife  to  a  more  confiderable  de- 
gree ;  that  it  may  be  more  anxious,  more  fix- 
ed, and  more  attentive  ;  and  therefore  may 
exhibit  all  the  various  circumiiances  which  I 

Vol,  3,  K  5  have 


214  PRACTICE 

have  mentioned  inMCCXXIIto  take  place 
in  the  difeafe  named  Hypochondriasis," 

MDLXXXVL 

In  confidering  this  fubjeft  formerly  in  did 
tinguiftiing  Dyfpepfia  from  Hypochondriafis, 
although  the  fymptoms  affe&ing  the  body  be 
very  much  the  fame  in  both,  and  even  thofe  afJ 
feeling  the  mind  be  fomewhat  fimilar,  I  found 
no  difficulty  in  diftinguifhing  the  latter  difeafe, 
merely  from  its  occurring  in  perfons  of  a  mel-  I 
ancholic  temperament.     But  I  muft  now  ac- 
knowledge, that  I  am  at  a  lofs  to  determine  ' 
how  in  all  cafes  hypochondriafis  and  melan- 
cholia maybe  diftinguifhed  from  one  another,, 
whilft  the  fame  temperament  is  common  to 
both. 

MDLXXXVII. 

I  apprehend,  however,  that  the  diftin&ion 
may  be  generally  ascertained  in  the  following 
manner. 

The  hypochondriafis  I  would  confider  as 
being  always  attended  -with  dyfpeptic  fyrnp*- 
toms  :  And  though  there  may  be,  at  the  fame 
time,  an  anxious  melancholic  fear  arifmg  from 
the  feeling  of  thefe  fymptoms ;  yet  while  this 
fear  is  only  a  miftaken  judgment  with  refpeel; 
to  the  Hate  of  the  perfon's  own  health,  and  to 
the  danger  to  be  from  thence  apprehended,  I 
would  flill  confider  the  difeafe  as  a  hypochon- 
driafis, 


OF      PHYSIC.  215 

driafis,  and  as  diftinft  from  the  proper  melan- 
cholia. But  when  an  anxious  fear  and  def- 
pondency  arifes  from  a  miitaken  judgment 
with  refpecl  to  other  circumftances  than  thofe 
of  health,  and  more  efpecially  when  the  per- 
fon  is  at  the  fame  time  without  any  dyfpep- 
tic  fymptoms,  every  one  will  readily  allow 
this  to  be  a  difeafe  widely  different  from  both 
dyfpepfia  and  hypochondriacs  ;  and  it  iss 
what  I  would  flricrly  name  Melancholia. 


MDLXXXVIIL 


In  this  there  feems  little  difficulty  :  But  as 
an  exquifitely  melancholic  temperament  may 
induce  a  torpor  and  flownefs  in  the  action  of 
the  ftomach,  fo  it  generally  produces  fome 
dyfpeptic  fymptoms  ;  and  from  thence  there 
may  be  fome  difficulty  in  diftinguiming  fuch 
a  cafe  from  hypochondriafis*  But  I  would 
maintain,  however,  that  when  the  characters 
of  the  temperament  are  ftrongly  marked  ;  and 
more  particularly  when  the  falfe  imagination 
turns  upon  other  fubjecls  than  that  of  healthy 
or  when,  though  relative  to  the  perfon's  own 
body,  it  is  of  a  groundlefs  and  abfurd  kind  ; 
then,  notwithstanding  the  appearance  of  fome 
dyfpeptic  fymptoms,  the  cafe  is  flill  to  be 
confidered  as  that  of  a  melancholia,  rather 
than  a  hypochondriacs. 

K  6  MDLXXXIX. 


16  PRACTICE 


MDLXXXIX. 

The  difeafe  of  melancholia,  therefore,  man- 
ifeftly  depends  upon  the  general  temperament 
of  the  body  :  And  although,  in  many  perfons, 
this  temperament  is  not  attended  with  any 
"lorbid  affection  either  of  mind  or  body  ;  yet 
when  it  becomes  exquifitely  formed,  and  is 
in  a  high  degree,  it  may  become  a  difeafe  af- 
fecting both,  and  particularly  the  mind.  It 
will  therefore  be  proper  to  confider  in  what 
this  melancholic  temperament  efpecially  con- 
fills  ;  and  to  this  purpofe,  it  may  be  obferv- 
ed,  that  in  it  there  is  a  degree  of  torpor  in  the 
motion  of  the  nervous  power,  both  with  ref- 
pe£fc  to  fenfation  and  volition  ;  that  there  is. a 
general  rigidity  of  the  fimple  folids  ;  and  that 
the  balance  of  the  fanguiferous  fyftem  is  up- 
on the  fide  of  the  veins.  But  all  thefe  cir- 
cum fiances  are  the  directly  oppofite  of  thofe 
of  the  fanguine  temperament  ;  and  muft 
therefore  alfo  produce  an  oppofite  ftate  of 
mind. 

MDXC. 

It  is  this  ftate  of  the  mind,  and  the  ftate  of 
the  brain  correfponding  to  it)  that  is  the  chief 
objecl  of  our  prefent  coniideration.  But 
what  that  ftate  of  the  brain  is}  will  be  fuppof- 
ed  to  be  difficult  to  explain  ;  and  it  may  per- 
haps feem  rafh  in  me  to  attempt  it. 

I  will, 


OF      PHYSIC, 


l7 


I  will,  however,  venture  to  fay,  that  it  is 
probable  the  melancholic  temperament  of 
mind  depends  upon  a  drier  and  firmer  tex- 
ture in  the  medullary  fubftance  of  the  brain  ; 
and  that  this  perhaps  proceeds  from  a  certain 
want  of  fluid  in  that  fubftance,  which  appears 
from  its  being  of  a  leffer  fpecific  gravity  than 
ufual.  That  this  ftate  of  the  brain  in  melan- 
cholia does  actually  exift,  I  conclude,  Jirjt, 
from  the  general  rigidity  of  the  whole  habit  ; 
and,  fecondly,  from  duTec~t.ions,  mowing  fuch 
a  ftate  of  the  brain  to  have  taken  place  in  ma- 
nia, which  is  often  no  other  than  a  higher  de- 
gree of  melancholia.  It  does  not  appear  to 
me  anywife  difficult  to  fuppofe,  that  the  fame 
ftate  of  the  brain  may  in  a  moderate  degree 
give  melancholia  •  and  in  a  higher,  that  ma- 
nia which  melancholia  fo  often  panes  into  ; 
efpecially  if  I  fliall  be  allowed  further  to  fup- 
pofe, that  either  a  greater  degree  of  firmnefs 
in  the  fubftance  of  the  brain  may  render  it 
fufceptible  of  a  higher  degree  of  excitement, 
or  that  one  portion  of  the  brain  may  be  liable 
to  acquire  a  greater  firmnefs  than  others,  and 
confequently  give  ocean  on  to  that  inequality 
of  excitement  upon  which  mania  fo  much  de- 
pends. 

MDXCL 

I  have  thus   endeavoured  to  deliver  what 
appears  to  me  moft  probable  with  refpecl  to 
the  proximate  caufe  of  "melancholia  ;  and  al- 
though 


2iS  PRACTICE 

though  the  matter  fhould  in  fome  refpecls  re- 
main doubtful,  I  am  well  perfuaded  that  thefe 
obfervations  may  often  be  employed  to  direct 
our  practice  in  this  difeafe,  as  I  (hall  now  en- 
deavour to  fhow. 

MDXCIX. 

In  molt  of  the  inftances  of  melancholia,  the 
mind  is  to  be  managed  very  much  in  the  fame 
manner  as  I  have  advifed  above  with  regard 
to  hypochondriacs  ;  but  as  in  the  cafe  of 
proper  melancholia,  there  is  commonly  a  falfe 
imagination  or  judgment  appearing  as  a  par- 
tial infanity,  it  may  be  further  neceffary  in 
fuch  cafes  to  employ  fome  artifices  for  cor- 
recting fuch  imagination  or  judgment. 

MDXCIIL 

The  various  remedies  for  relieving  the  dyf- 
peptic  fymptoms  which  always  attend  hvpo- 
chondriafis,  will  feldom  be  either  requifite  or 
proper  in  melancholia. 

There  is  only  one  of  the  dyfpeptic  fymp* 
toms,  which,  though  there  mould  be  no  oth- 
er, is  very  conftantly  prefent  in  melancholia, 
and  that  is  coftivenefs.  This  it  is  always 
proper  and  even  neceffary  to  remove  •  and  I 
believe  it  is  upon  this  account  that  the  ufe  of 
purgatives  has  been  found  fo  often  ufeful  in 
melancholia.  Whether  there  be  any  purga- 
tives peculiarly  proper  in  this  cafe,  I  dare  not 
pofitively  determine  ;  but  with  refpecl:  to  the 

choice 


OF      PHYSIC.  219 

choice  of  purgatives  in  melancholia,  I  am  of 
the  fame  opinion  that  I  delivered  above  on 
this  fame  fubjecl;  with  refpecl;  to  mania. 

MDXCIV. 

With  refpecl:  to  other  remedies,  I  judge 
that  bloodletting  will  more  feldom  be  proper 
in  melancholia  than  in  mania  ;  but  how  far 
it  may  be  in  any  cafe  proper,  muft  be  deter- 
mined by  the  fame  confiderations  as  in  the 
cafe  of  mania. 

MDXCV. 

The  cold  bathing  that  I  judged  to  be  fo 
very  ufeful  in  feveral  cafes  of  infanity,  is,  I 
believe,  in  melancholia,  hardly  ever  fit  to  be 
admitted  ;  at  leaft  while  this  is  purely  a  par- 
tial affeclion,  and  without  any  marks  of  vio- 
lent excitement.  On  the  contrary,  upon  ac- 
count of  the  general  rigidity  prevailing  in  mel- 
ancholia, it  is  probable  that  warm  bathing 
may  be  often  ufeful . 

MDXCVL 

With  refpecl:  to  opiates  which  I  have  fup- 
pofed  might  often  be  ufeful  in  cafes  of  mania, 
I  believe  they  can  feldom  be  properly  em- 
ployed in  the  partial  infanities  of  the  melan- 
cholic, except  in  certain  inftances  of  violent 
excitement,  when  the  melancholia  approach- 
es nearly  to  the  ftate  of  mania. 

MDXCVII, 


aso       PRACTICE,   Sec. 

MDXCVII. 

• 
In  fuch  cafes  of  melancholia  approaching 
to  a  (late  of  mania,  a  low  diet  may  fometimes 
be  neceiTary  ;  but  as  the  employing  a  low  diet 
aimoft  unavoidably  leads  to  the  ufe  of  vege- 
table food,  and  as  this  in  every  torpid  ftate  of 
the  flomach  is  ready  to  produce  fome  dyfpep-  ; 
tic  fymptoms,  fuch  vegetable  food  ought,  in 
moderate  cates  of  melancholia,  to  be  ufed 
with  fome  caution. 

Though  exercife,  as  a  tonic  power,  is  not- 
proper  either  in  hypochondriasis  or  melan- 
cholia ;  yet,  with  refpeft  to  its  effecls  upon 
the  mind,  it»may  be  extremely  ufeful  in  both, 
and  in  melancholia  is  to  be  employed  in  the 
fame  manner  that  I  have  advifed  above  in  the 
cafe  of  hypochondriahs. 

MDXCVIIL 

Having  now  delivered  my  doctrine  with 
refpecf  to  the  chief  forms  of  infanity,  I  fhould 
in  the  next  place  proceed  to  confider  the 
other  genera  of  Amentia  and  Oneirodynia, 
which  in  the  Nofology  I  have  arranged  un- 
der the  order  of  Velaniae  :  But  as  I  cannot 
pretend  to  throw  much  light  upon  thefe 
fubjecls,  and  as  they  are  feldom  the  objefts 
of  practice,  I  think  it  allowable  for  me  to  pafs, 
them  over  at  pre  Cent  ;  and  the  particular  cir- 
cumftances  of  this  work  in  fome  meafure  re- 
quires that  I  mould  do  fo. 

PART 


Of    Q?acA 


acneceiej* 


MDXCIX. 

NDER  this  title  I  propofe  to 
eftabliih  a  clafs  of  difeafes, 
which  confift  in  a  depraved 
Hate  of  the  whole,  or  of  a  con- 
fiderable  part,  of  the  habit  of 
the  body,  without  any  prima- 
ry pyrexia  or  neurons  combined  with  that 
Hate. 

MDC. 

The  term  Cachexy  has  been  employed  by 
Linnaeus  and  Vogel,  as  it  had  been  formerly 
by  other  authors,  for  the  name  of  a  particular 
difeafe  ;  But  the  difeafe  to   which  thefe  au- 
thors 


222         PRACTICE,  Sec. 

thors  have  affixed  it,  comes  more  properly 
under  another  appellation;  and  the  term  of 
Cachexy  is  more  properly  employed  by  Sau- 
vages  and  Sagar  for  the  name  of  a  clafs.  In 
this  I  have  followed  the  laft  mentioned  no- 
fologifts,  though  I  find  it  difficult  to  give 
fuch  a  character  of  the  clafs  as  will  clearly 
apply  to  all  the  fpecies  I  have  comprehended 
under  it.  This  difficulty  would  be  flill  great- 
er, if,  in  the  clafs  I  have  eftabliihed  under 
the  title  of  Cachexies,  I  were  to  comprehend 
aH  the  difeafes  that  thofe  other  nofologifls 
have  done  ;  but  I  am  willing  to  be  thought 
deficient  rather  than  very  incorrect.  Thofe 
difficulties,  however,  which  flill  remain  in 
methodical  nofology,  muft  not  affect  us  much 
in  a  treatife  of  practice.  If  I  can  here  prop- 
erly diftinguifh  and  defcribe  the  feveral  fpe- 
cies that  truly  and  moll  commonly  exift,  I 
fhall  be  the  lefs  concerned  about  the  accuracy 
of  my  general  clarification  :  Though  at  the 
fame  time  this,  I  think,  is  always  to  be  at- 
tempted ;  and  I  fhall  purfue  it  as  well  as  I 
can. 


BOOK 


223 


BOOK  L 


of    EMACIATIONS. 
MDCI. 

Emaciation,  or  a  con- 

fiderable  diminution  of  the  bulk  or  plump- 
nefs  of  the  whole  body,  is  for  the  moft  parfc 
only  a  fymptom  of  difeafe,  and  very  feldom 
to  be  confidered  as  a  primary  and  idiopathic 
afFe&ion.  Upon  this  account,  according  to 
my  general  plan,  fuch  a  fymptom  might  per- 
haps have  been  omitted  in  the  Methodical 
Nofology  :  But  both  the  uncertainty  of  con- 
cluding it  to  be  always  fymptomatic,  and  the 
confiftency  of  fyftem,  made  me  introduce  in- 
to the  Nofology,  as  others  had  done,  an  order 
under  the  title  of  Marcores ;  and  this  renders 
it  requifite  now  to  take  fome  notice  of  fuch 
difeafes. 

MDCIL 


224  PRACTICE 


MDCII. 

Upon  this  occafion,  therefore,  I  hope  it 
may  be  ufeful  to  invefligate  the  feveral  caufes 
of  emaciation  in  all  the  different  cafes  of  dif- 
eafe  in  which  it  appears.  And  this  I  attempt,!, 
as  the  fiirefh  means  of  determining  how  far  it 
is  a  primary,  or  a  fymptornatic  affeclion  only  -| 
and  even  in  the  latter  view,  the  mve  {ligation] 
may  be  attended  with  fome  advantage. 

MDCII  I. 

The  caufes  of  emaciation  may,  I  appre- 
hend, be  referred  to  two  general  heads  ;  that 
is,  either  to  a  general  deficiency  of  fluid  in 
the  veiTels  of  the  body>  or  to  the  particular 
deficiency  of  the  oil  in  the  cellular  texture  of. 
it.  Thefe  caufes  are  frequently  combined 
together ;  but  it  will  be  proper,  in  the  firfl 
place,  to  confider  them  feparately. 

MDCIV. 

As  a  great  part  of  the  body  of  animals  tgl 
made  up  of  veffels  filled  with  fluids,  the  bulk 
of  the  whole  muff  depend  very  much  on  the 
fize  of  thefe  veffels,  and  the  quantity  of  fluids 
prefent  in  them  :  And  it  will  therefore  be 
fufficiently  obvious,  that  a  deficiency  of  the 
fluids  in  thefe  veffels  muff,  according  to  its 
degree,  occafion  a  proportionate   diminution 

of 


O  F      P  H  YSIC.  225 

of  the  bulk  of  the  whole  body.  This,  how- 
ever, will  appear  flill  more  clearly,  from  con- 
fidering  that  in  the  living  and  found  body  the 
veffels  every  where  feem  to  be  preternaturally 
diftended  by  the  quantity  of  fluids  prefent 
in  them  ;  but  being  at  the  fame  time  elaflic, 
and  conflantly  endeavouring  to  contract 
themfelves,  they  muft,  on  the  withdrawing  of 
the  diftending  force,  or,  in  other  words,  upon 
a  diminution  of  the  quantity  of  fluids,  be  in 
proportion  contracted  and  diminifhed  in  their 
fize  :  And  it  may  be  further  obferved,  that 
as  each  part  of  the  vafcular  fyftem  communi- 
cates with  every  other  part  of  it ;  fo  every  de- 
gree of  diminution  of  the  quantity  of  fluid,  in 
any  one  part,  muff  in  proportion  diminifh 
the  bulk  of  the  vafcular  fyfiem,  and  conse- 
quently of  the  whole  body. 

MDCV. 


The  diminution  and  deficiency  of  the  fluids 
may  be  occafioned  by  different  caufes  :  Such 
as,  firft,  by  a  due  quantity  of  aliments  not  be- 
ing taken  in  •  or  by  the  aliment  taken  in,  not 
being  of  a  fufficiently  nutritious  quality.  Of 
the  want  of  a  due  quantity  of  aliment  not  be- 
ing taken  into  the  body,  there  is  an  inftance 
in  the  Atrophia  laBantium  Sauvagefii,  fpecies 
3  ;  and  many  other  examples  have  occurred  of 
emaciation  from  want  of  food,  occafioned  by 
poverty,  and  other  accidental  caufes. 

With 


B26  PRACTICE 

With  refpeft  to  the  quality  of  food,  I  ap. 
prehend  it  arifes  from  the  want  of  nutritiou; 
matter  in  the  food  employed,  that  perfons  liv- 
ing  very  entirely  on  vegetables  are  feldom  oi 
a  plump  and  fucculent  habit. 

MDCVL 


A  fecond  caufe  of  the  deficiency  of  fluid; 
may  be,  the  aliments  taken  in  not  being  con- 
veyed to  the  bloodveffels.  This  may  occur 
from  a  perfon's  being  affected  with  a  frequem 
vomiting ;  which,  rejecting  the  food  foon  aftei 
it  had  been  taken  in,  mult  prevent  the  necef. 
fary  fupply  of  fluids  to  the  bloodveffels. 

Another  caufe,  frequently  interrupting  the 
conveyance  of  the  alimentary  matter  into  the 
bloodveffels,  is  an  obflru6lion  of  the  conglo* 
bate  or  lymphatic  glands  of  the  mefentery, 
through  which  the  chyle  mull  neceffarily  pafi 
to  the  thoracic  duel:.  Many  inflances  of  ema- 
ciation, feemingly  depending  upon  this  caufe, 
have  been  obferved  by  phyficians,  in  perfons 
of  all  ages,  but  efpecially  in  the  young.  It 
has  alfo  been  remarked,  that  fuch  cafes  have 
moft  frequently  occurred  in  fcrophulous  per- 
fons,  in  whom  the  mefenteric  glands  are  com- 
monly affec~led  with  tumour  or  obftru&ion, 
^and  in  whom,  generally  at  the  fame  time, 
fcrophula  appears  externally.  Hence  the 
Tabes  fcrophulofa  Synop.  Nofolog.  vol.  ii.  p. 
266  :  And  under  thefe  I  have  put  as  fynon- 
ames  Tabes  glandularis  %  fp.  10  ;  Tabes  mef en- 
ter ica, 


OF       PHYSIC.  227 

■terica,  fp.  9  ;  S  crop  hula  mef enteric  a,  fp.  4  ; 
Atrophia  infantilis  >  fp.  13  ;  Atrophia  rachit- 
ica>  fp.  8  ;  Tabes  rachialgica,  fp.  16.  At  the 
fame  time,  I  have  frequently  found  the  cafe 
occurring  in  perfons  who  did  not  fhow  any 
external  appearance  of  fcrophula,  but  in 
whom  the  mefenteric  obflruclion  was  after- 
wards discovered  by  diiTec~Hon.  Such  alfo  I 
fuppofe  to  have  been  the  cafe  in  the  difeafe 
Frequently  mentioned  by  authors  under  the 
title  of  the  Atrophia  infantum.  This  has  re- 
ceived its  name  from  the  time  of  life  at  which 
it  generally  appears  5  but  I  have  met  with  in- 
fiances  of  it  at  fourteen  years  of  age  afcer- 
tained  by  difTection.  In  feveral  fuch  cafes 
which  I  have  feen,  the  patients  were  without 
any  fcrophulous  appearances  at  the  time,  or 
at  any  period  of  their  lives  before. 

In  the  cafe  of  phthifical  perfons,  I  fhall 
hereafter  mention  another  caufe  of  their  ema- 
ciation ;  but  it  is  probable  that  an  obftruction 
of  the  mefenteric  glands,  which  fo  frequently 
happens  in  fuch  perfons,  concurs  very  power- 
fully in  producing  the  emaciation  that  takes 
place. 

Although  a  fcrophulous  taint  may  be  the 
moll  frequent  caufe  of  mefenteric  obftruc- 
tions,  it  is  fufficiently  probable  that  other 
kinds  of  acrimony  may  produce  the  fame,  and 
the  emaciation  that  follows. 

It  may  perhaps  be  fuppofed,  that  the  in=- 
terruption  of  the  chyle's  palling  into  the 
bloodveffels  majv  be  fometimes  owing  to  a 

fault 


228  PRACTICE 

fault  of  the  abforbents  on  the  internal  furface 
of  the  interlines.  This,  however,  cannot  be 
readily  afcertained  :  But  the  interruption  of 
the  chyle's  palling  into  the  bloodveffels  may 
certainly  be  owing  to  a  rupture  of  the  tho- 
racic duel; ;  which,  when  it  does  not  prove 
foon  fatal,  by  occalioning  a  hydrothorax, 
mufl  in  a  Ihort  time  produce  a  general  ema- 
ciation. 


MDCVII. 


A  third  caufe  of  the  deficiency  of  the  fluids 
may  be  a  fault  in  the  organs  of  digeflion,  as 
not  duly  converting  the  aliment  into  a  chyle 
fit  to  form  in  the  bloodveifels  a  proper  nu- 
tritious matter.  It  is  not,  however,  eafy  to 
afcertain  the  cafes  of  emaciation  which  are  to 
be  attributed  to  this  caufe  ;  but  I  apprehend 
that  the  emaciation  which  attends  long  fub- 
filling  cafes  of  dyfpepfia,  or  of  hypochondri- 
asis, is  to  be  explained  chiefly  in  this  way, 
It  is  this  which  I  have  placed  in  the  Nofol- 
ogy  under  the  title  of  the  Atrophia  debilium  ; 
and  of  which  the  Atrophia  nervofa,  Sauv.  fp* 
i,  is  a  proper  inflance,  and  therefore  put  there 
as  a  fynonime.  But  the  other  titles  of  Atro- 
phia lateralis,  Sauv.  fp.  15,  and  Atrophia  fen~ 
His,  Sauv.  fp.  11,  are  not  fo  properly  put 
there,  as  they  mufl  be  explained  in  a  differ- 
ent manner. 

MDCVIII. 


OF       PHYSIC.  229 


MDCVIII. 

A  fourth  caufe  of  a  deficiency  of  the  fluids 
in  the  body,  may  he  exceiiive  evacuations 
made  from  it  by  different  outlets  ;  and  Sau- 
vages  has  properly  enumerated  the  following 
fpecies,  which  we  have  put  as  fynonimes  un- 
der the  title  of  Atrophia  inanitorum  ;  as, 
Tabes  nutricum,  fp.  4,  Atrophia  nuiricim,  fp, 
5,  Atrophia  a  Uucorrhxa^  fp.  4,  Atrophia  ah 
alvijluxuy  fp.  6,  Atrophia  a  ptyalifmo,  fp.  j, 
and  laftly,  the  Tabes  d  fanguijluxu  ;  which, 
it  is  to  be  obferved,  may  arife  not  only 
Nfrom  fpontaneous  hemorrhagies  or  accidental 
wounds,  but  alfo  from  bloodletting  in  too 
large  a  quantity,  and  too  frequently  re- 
peated. 

Upon  this  fubject  it  feems  proper  to  ob- 
ferve,  that  a  meagre  habit  of  body  frequently 
depends  upon  a  full  perfpiration  being  con- 
ftantly  kept  up,  though  at  the  fame  time  a 
large  quantity  of  nutritious  aliment  is  regu- 
larly taken  in. 

MDCIX. 

Befides  this  deficiency  of  fluids  from  evac- 
uations by  which  they  are  carried  entirely  out 
of  the  body,  there  may  be  a  deficiency  of  fluid 
and  emaciation  in  a  confiderable  part  of  the 
body,  by  the  fluids  being  drawn  into  one  part, 
or  collected  into  one  cavity  ;  and  of  this  we 

Vol.  III.  L  have 


230  PRACTICE 

have  an  inftance  in  the  Tabes  a  hydrope,  Sauv. 
fp.  5. 

MDCX. 

In  the  Methodical  Nofology,  among  the 
ether  fynonimes  of  the  Atrophia  inanitorum  I 
have  fet  down  the  Tabes  dorfalis  ;  but  wheth- 
er properly  or  not,  I  at  prefent  very  much 
doubt,  In  the  evacuation  confidered  as  the 
caufe  of  this  tabes,  as  the  quantity  evacuat- 
ed is  never  fo  great*  as  to  account  for  a  gen- 
eral deficiency  of  fluids  in  the  body,  we  mull 
feek  for  another  explanation  of  it.  And 
whether  the  effects  of  the  evacuation  may  be 
accounted  for,  either  from  the  quality  of  the 
fluid  evacuated,  or  from  the  fingularly  ener- 
vating pleafure  attending  the  evacuation,  or 
from  the  evacuation's  taking  off  the  tenfion 
of  parts,  the  tenfion  of  which  has  a  nngular 
power  in  fupporting  the  tenfion  and  vigour 
of  the  whole  body,  I  cannot  pofitively  deter- 
mine ;  but  I  apprehend  that  upon  one  or 
other  of  thefe  fuppofitions  the  emaciation  at- 
tending the  tabes  dorfalis  mull  be  accounted 
for ;  and  therefore  that  it  is  to  be  confidered 
as  an  inftance  of  the  Atrophia  debilium>  rather 
than  of  the  Atrophia  inanitorum. 

MDCXI. 

A  fifth  caufe  of  a  deficiency  of  fluids  and 
of  emaciations  in  the  whole  or  in  a  particular 

part 


OF       PHYSIC.  231 

part  of  the  body,  may  be  the  concretion  of  the 
fmall  veffels,  either  not  admitting  of  fluids,  or 
of  the  fame  proportion  as  before  ;  and  this 
feems  to  me  to  be  the  cafe  in  the  Atrophia 
fenilis,  Sauv.  fp.  2.  Or  it  may  be  a  pally  of 
the  larger  trunks  of  the  arteries  rendering 
them  unfit  to  propel  the  blood  into  the  fmall- 
er  veffels  ;  as  is  frequently  the  cafe  of  para- 
lytic limbs,  in  which  the  arteries  are  affecled 
as  well  as  the  mufcles.  The  Atrophia  late- 
ralis) Sauv.  ip.  15,  feems  to  be  of  this  nature. 

MDCXII. 

A  fecond  general  head  of  the  caufes  of 
emaciation  I  have  mentioned  in  MDCII  to 
be  a  deficiency  of  oil.  The  extent  and  quan- 
tity of  the  cellular  texture  in  every  part  of 
the  body,  and  therefore  how  confiderable  a 
part  it  makes  in  the  bulk  of  the  whole  is  now 
well  known.  But  this  fubflance,  in  different 
circumftances,  is  more  or  lefs  filled  with  an  oily 
matter  ;  and  therefoi-e  the  bulk  of  it,  and  in 
a  great  meafure  that  of  the  whole  body,  muff 
be  greater  or  lefs  according  as  this  fubflance 
is  more  or  lefs  filled  in  that  manner.  The 
deficiency  of  fluids,  for  a  reafon  to  be  imme- 
diately explained,  is  generally  accompanied 
with  a  deficiency  of  oil  :  But  phyficians  have 
commonly  attended  more  to  the  latter  caufe 
of  emaciation  than  to  the  other,  that  being 
ufually  the  mofl  evident ;  and  I  mall  now  en- 
deavour to  affign  the  feveral  caufes  of  the 
L  2  deficiency 


£32  PRACTICE 

deficiency  of  oil  as  it  occurs  upon  different 
occafions. 

MDCXIII. 

The  bufinefs  of  fecretion  in  the  human 
body  is  in  general  little  underftood,  and  in  no 
inftance  lefs  fo  than  in  that  of  the  fecretion 
of  oil  from  blood  which  does  not  appear  pre- 
vioufly  to  ha\'e  contained  it.  It  is  poffible, 
therefore,  that  our  theory  of  the  deficiency  of 
oil  may  be  in  feveral  refpe&s  imperfect ;  but 
there  are  certain  fa£fo  that  may  in  the  mean 
time  apply  to  the  prefent  purpofe. 

MDCXIV. 

Firft,  it  is  probable,  that  a  deficiency  of  oil 
may  be  owing  to  a  ftate  of  the  blood  in  ani- 
mal bodies  lei's  fitted  to  afford  a  fecretion  of 
oil,  and  confequently  to  fupply  the  wade  of  it 
that  is  conflantly  made.  This  ftate  of  the 
blood  muft  especially  depend  upon  the  ftate 
of  the  aliments  taken  in,  as  containing  lefs  of 
oil  or  oily  matter.  From  many  obfervations 
made,  both  with  refpecl  to  the  human  body 
and  to  that  of  other  animals,  it  appears  pretty 
clearly,  that  the  aliments  taken  in  by  men  and 
domeftic  animals,  according  as  they  contain 
more  of  oil,  are  in  general  more  nutritious, 
and  in  particular  are  better  fitted  to  fill  the 
cellular  texture  of  their  bodies  with  oil.  I 
might  illuflrate  this,  by  a  minute  and  partic- 
ular 


OF       PHYSIC.  233 

ular  consideration  of  the  difference  of  ali- 
mentary  matters  employed  ;  but  it  will  be 
enough  to  give  two  inftances.  The  one  isr 
that  the  herbaceous  part  of  vegetables,  does- 
not  fatten  animals,  fo  much  as  the  feeds  of 
vegetables,  which  manifeftly  contain  in-  any 
given  weight  a  greater  proportion  of  oil ;  and' 
a  fecond  inftance  is,  that  in  general  vegetable 
aliments  do  not  fatten  men  fo  much  as  animal 
food,  which  generally  contains  a.  larger  pro- 
portion of  oil. 

It  will  be  obvious,  that  upon  the  fame 
principles  a  want  of  food,  or  a  lefs  nutritious1 
food,  may  not  only  occafion  a  general  defi- 
ciency of  fluids  (MDCIV),  but  muft  alfo  af- 
ford lefs  oil,  to-  be  poured  into  the  cellular 
texture.  In:  fuch  cafes,  therefore,  the  ema- 
ciation produced,  is  to  be  attributed  to  both, 
thefe  general  caul'es. 

MDCXV. 

A  fecond  cafe  of  the  deficiency  of  oil  may 
be  explained  in  this  manner.  It  is  prettv 
manifeft,  that  the  oil  of  the  blood  is  fecreted 
and  depohted  in  the  cellular  texture  in  great- 
er orleffer  quantity,  according  as  the  circula- 
tion of  the  blood  is  fafler  or  flower  ;  and 
therefore  that  exercife,  which  haftens  the  cir- 
culation of  the  blood,  is  a  frequent  caufe  of 
emaciation.  Exercife  produces  this  effect  in 
two  ways,  iff,  By  increafing  the  perfpira- 
tion,  and  thereby  carrying  off  a  greater  quan^ 
L  3  tity 


234  PRACTfCE 

tity  of  the  nutritious  matter,  it  leaves  lefs  of 
it  to  be  depofited  in  the  cellular  texture  ; 
thereby  not  only  preventing  an  accumulation 
of  fluids,  but,  as  I  have  faid  above,  caufmg  a 
general  deficiency  of  thefe,  which  mufl  alfo 
caufe  a  deficiency  of  oil  in  the  cellular  tex- 
ture. 2diy,  It  is  well  known,  that  the  oil  de- 
pofited in  the  cellular  texture  is  upon  many 
occafions,  and  for  various  purpofes  of  the 
economy,  again  abforbed,  and  mixed  or  dif- 
fused in  the  mafs  of  blood,  to  be  from  thence 
perhaps  carried  entirely  out  of  the  body  by 
the  feveral  excretions.  Now,  among  other 
purpofes  of  the  accumulation  and  reabforp- 
tion  of  oil,  this  feems  to  be  one,  that  the  oil  is 
requihte  to  the  proper  action  of  the  moving 
fibres  in  every  part  of  the  body  ;  and  there- 
fore that  nature  has  provided  for  an  absorp- 
tion of  oil  to  be  made  according  as  the  a&ion 
of  the  moving  fibres  may  demand  it.  It  will 
thus  be  obvious,  that  the  exercife  of  the  muf- 
cular  and  moving  fibres  every  where,  mufl 
occafion  an  abforption  of  oil  ;  and  conse- 
quently that  fuch  exercife  not  only  prevents 
the  Secretion  of  oil,  as  has  been  already  faid, 
but  may  alfo  caufe  a  deficiency  of  it,  by  oc- 
casioning an  abforption  of  what  had  been 
depofited  ;  and  in  this  way,  perhaps  especial- 
ly, does  it  produce  emaciation. 

MDCXVI. 

A  third  caSe  of  the  deficiency  of  oil  may 
occur  from  the  following  caufe.     It  is  prob- 
able, 


OF       PHYSIC.  235 

able,  that  one  purpofe  of  the  accumulation  of 
oil  in  the  cellular  texture  of  animals  is,  that 
it  may,  upon  occalion,  be  again  abforbed 
from  thence,  and  carried  into  the  mafs  of 
blood,  for  the  puipofe  of  enveloping  and  cor- 
recting any  unufual  acrimony  arifmg  and  ex- 
ifting  in  the  date  of  the  fluids,.  Thus,  in 
moft  inltances  in  which  we  can  difcern  an 
acrid  ffate  of  the  fluids,  as  in  fcurvy,  cancer, 
fyphiiis,  poifonSj  an^  feveral  other  diieafes, 
we  find  at  the  fame  time  a  deficiency  of  oil 
and  an  emaciation  take  place  ;  which,  in  my 
apprehenfion,.  mufi  be  attributed  to  the  ab- 
forption  of  oil,  which  the  prefence  of  acrimo- 
ny  in  the  body  excites. 

It  is  not  unlikely  that  certain  poifons  intro- 
duced into  the  body,  may  fubfifl  there  ;  and, 
giving  occaiion  to  an  abforption  of  oil,  may 
lay  a  foundation  for  the  Tabes  a  veneno,  Sauy. 
fp.  17. 

MDCXVIL 

A  fourth  cafe  of  emaciation,  and  which  I 
would  attribute  to  a  fudden  and  confiderable 
abforption  of  oil  from  the  cellular  texture,  is 
that  of  fever,  which  fo  generally  produces 
emaciation.  This  may  perhaps  be  in  part 
attributed  to  the  increafed  perfpiration,  and 
therefore  to  the  general  deficiency  of  fluids 
that  may  be  fuppofed  to  take  place  :  But 
whatever  fhare  that  may  have  in  producing 
the  effect.,  we  can,  from  the  evident  fhrinking 
L  4  and 


236  PRACTICE 

and  diminution  of  the  cellular  fuhftance, 
wherever  it  falls  under  our  obfervation,  cer- 
tainly conclude,  that  there  has  been  a  very 
confiderable  abforption  of  the  oil  which  had 
been  before  depofited  in  that  fubftance.  This 
explanation  is  rendered  the  more  probable 
from  this,  that  I  fuppofe  the  abforption 
mentioned  is  neceiTarily  made  for  the  purpofe 
of  enveloping  or  correcting  an  acrimony, 
which  manifestly  does  in  many,  and  may  be 
iufpeQed  to  arife  in  all,  cafes  of  fever.  The 
moft  remarkable  inflance  of  emaciation  oc- 
curring in  fevers,  is  that  which  appears  in  the 
cafe  of  hectic  fevers.  Here  the  emaciation 
may  be  attributed  to  the  profufe  fweatings 
that  commonly  attend  the  difeafe  :  But  there 
is  much  reafon  to  believe,  that  an  acrimony 
aifo  is  prefent  in  the  blood  ;  which,  even  in 
the  beginning  of  the  difeafe,  prevents  the  fe- 
cretion  and  accumulation  of  oil  ;  and  in  the 
more  advanced  ftates  of  it,  mud  occalion  a 
more  confiderable  abforption  of  it  ;  which, 
from  the  fhrinking  of  the  cellular  fubftance, 
feems  to  go  farther  than  in  almofl  any  other 
inflance. 

Upon  the  fubjecl;  of  emaciations  from  a  de- 
ficiency of  fluids,  it  may  be  obferved,  that 
every  increafed  evacuation  excites  an  abforp- 
tion from  other  parts,  and  particularly  from 
the  cellular  texture  ;  and  it  is  therefore  prob- 
able, that  a  deficiency  of  fluids,  from  increaf- 
ed evacuations,  produces  an  emaciation,  not 
only  by  the  wafle  of  the  fluids  in  the  vafcu- 

lar 


OF       PHYSIC.  237 

lar  fyflem,  but  alfo  by  occasioning  a  confiden- 
able  abforpticn  from  the  cellular  texture. 


MDCXVIII. 

I  have  thus  endeavoured  to^  explain  the 
feveral  cafes  and  caufes  of  emaciation  ;  but  I 
eould  not  profecute  the  coniideration  of  thefe 
here  in  the  order  they  are  let  down  in  the 
Methodical  Nofology.  In  that  work  I  was 
engaged  chiefly  in  arranging  the  Species  of 
Sauvages  ;  but  it  is  my  opinion  now,  that  the 
arrangement  there  given  is  erroneous,  in  both 
combining  and  ieparating  fpecies  improper- 
ly :  And  it  feems  to  me  more  proper  here  to 
take  notice  of  difeafes,  and  put  them  together, 
according  to  the  affinity  of  their  nature,  rath- 
er than  by  that  of  their  external  appearances. 
I  doubt,  if  even  the  diftinclion  of  the  Tabes 
and  Atrophia,  attempted  in  the  Nofology, 
will  properly  apply  ;-  as  I  think  there  are 
certain  difeafes  of  the  fame  nature,  which 
fometimes  appear  with,  and  fometimes  with- 
out, fever, 

MDCXIX. 


After  having  coniidered  the  various  cafes 
of  emaciations,  I  fhould  perhaps  treat  of  their 
cure  :  But  it  will  readily  appear,  that  the 
greater  part  of  the  cafes  above  mentioned  are 

Vol,  3,  .     L  5  purely 


s38         PRACTICE,  Sec. 

purely  fymptomatic,  and  confequently  that 
the  cure  of  them  mull  be  that  of  the  primary 
difeafes  upon  which  they  depend.  Of  thofe 
cafes  that  can  anywife  be  confidered  as  idio- 
pathic, it  will  appear  that  they  are  to  be  cur- 
ed, entirely  by  removing  the  remote  caufes  ; 
the  means  of  accomplifhing  which  mult  be 
fufliciently  obvious. 


BOOK 


;-39 


BOOK  IL 

of  INTUMESCENTL3E,  or  GENER-- 
AL  SWELLINGS. 

MDCXX.. 

1  HE  fwellings  to  be  treated 
of  in  this  place,  are  thofe  which  extend  over 
the  whole  or  a  great  part  of  the  body  ;  or 
fuch  at  leaft,  as,  though  of  fmall  extent,  are 
however  of  the  fame  nature  with  thofe  that 
are  more  generally  extended. 

The  fwellings  comprehended  under  this  ar- 
tificial order,  are  hardly  to  be  diftinguifhed 
from  one  another  otherwife  than  by  the  mat- 
ter they  contain  or  confift  of  :  And  in  this 
view  I  have  divided  the  order  into  four  fec- 
tions,  as  the  fwelling  happens  to  contain,  ify 

L  6  Oil  ; 


240  PRACTICE 

Oil ;  2d,  Air  ;  3 d,  A  watery  fluid  5  or,  4th, 
As  the  increafed  bulk  depends  upon  the  en- 
largement of  the  whole  fubftance  of  certain 
parts,  and  particularly  of  one  or  more  of  the 
abdominal  vifcera. 


CHAP. 


OF       PHYSIC.  241 

CHAP.       I. 
of  ADIPOSE  SWELLINGS, 

MDCXXI. 

1  HE  only  difeafe  to  be  men* 
tioned  in  this  chapter,  I  have,  with  other  No- 
fologifts,  named  Polyfarcia  ;  and  in  Englifh 
it  may  be  named  Corpulency,  or,  more  ftricl- 
ly,  Obefity ;  as  it  is  placed  here  upon  the 
common  fuppofition  of  its  depending  chiefly 
upon  the  increafe  of  oil  in  the  cellular  texture 
of  the  body.  This  corpulency,  or  obefity,  is 
in  very  different  degrees  in  different  perfons, 
and  is  often  confiderable  without  being  con- 
fidered  as  a  difeafe.  There  is,  however,  a 
certain  degree  of  it,  which  will  be  generally 
allowed  to  be  a  difeafe  ;  as,  for  example, 
when  it  renders  perfons,  from  a  difficult  ref- 
piration,  uneafy  in  themfelves,  and,  from  the 
inability  of  exercife,  unfit  for  discharging  the 
duties  of  life  to  others  :  And  for  that  reafon  I 
have  given  fuch  a  difeafe  a  place  here.  Many 
phyficians  have  confidered  it  as  an  object  of 
practice,  and  as  giving,  even  in  no  very  high 
degree,  a  difpofition  to  many  difeafes  ;  I  am 
of  opinion  that  it  mould  be  an  object  of  prac- 
tice 


242  PRACTICE 

tice  more  frequently  than  it  has  been,  and 
therefore  that  it  merits  our  confideration 
here. 

MDCXXIL 

It  may  perhaps  be  alleged,  that  I  have  not 
been  fufficiently  correct,  in  putting  the  difeafe 
of  corpulency  as  an  intumefcentia  pinguedi- 
nofa,  and  therefore  implying  its  being  an  in- 
crease of  the  bulk  of  the  body  from  an  accu- 
mulation of  oil  in  the  cellular  texture  only. 
I  am  aware  of  this  objection  :  And  as  I  have 
already  faid,  that  emaciation  (MDCII)  de- 
pends either  upon  a  general  deficiency  of  flu- 
ids in  the  vafcular  fyflem,  or  upon  a  deficien- 
cy of  oil  in  the  cellular  texture  ;  fo  I  mould 
perhaps  have  obferved  farther,  that  the  cor- 
pulency, or  general  fulnefs  of  the  body,  may 
depend  upon  the  fulnefs  of  the  vafcular  fyf- 
tem  as  well  as  upon  that  of  the  cellular  tex- 
ture. This  is  true  ;  and  for  the  fame  reafons 
I  ought,  perhaps,  after  Linnaeus  and  Sagar, 
to  have  fet  down  plethora  as  a  particular  dif- 
eafe, and  as  an  inftance  of  morbid  intumef- 
cence.  I  have,  however,  avoided  this,  as  Sau- 
vages  and  Vogel  have  done  ;  becaufe  I  ap- 
prehend that  plethora  is  to  be  confidered  as  a 
ftate  of  temperament  only,  which  may  indeed 
difpofe  to  difeafe  ;  but  not  as  a  difeafe  in  it- 
felf,  unlefs,  in  the  language  of  the  Stahlians, 
it  be  a  plethora  commota,  when  it  produces  a 
difeafe  accompanied  with   particular  fymp- 

toms, 


OF      PHYSIC.  243 

foms,  which  give  occafion  to  its  being  diftin- 
guifhed  by  a  difFerent  appellation.  Further,, 
it  appears  to  me,  that  the  fymptoms  which 
Linnaeus,  and  more  particularly  thofe  which 
Sagar  employs  in  the  character  of  plethora, 
never  do  occur  but  when  the  intumefcentia 
pinguedinofa  has  a  great  fhare  in  producing 
them.  It  is,  however,  very  neceffary  to  ob- 
ferve  here,  that  plethora  and  obefity  are  gen- 
erally combined  together ;  and  that  in  fome 
cafes  of  corpulency  it  may  be  difficult  to  de- 
termine which  of  the  caufes  has  the  greateil 
ihare  in  producing  it.  It  is  indeed  very  pof- 
fible  that  a  plethora  may  occur  without  great 
obefity  ;  but  I  apprehend  that  obefity  never 
happens  to  a  considerable  degree  without  pro- 
ducing a  plethora  adfpatium  in  a  great  part 
of  the  fyftem  of  the  aorta,  and  therefore  a 
plethora  ad  molem  in  the  lungs,  and  in  the 
veflels  of  the  brain. 

MDCXXIII. 

In  attempting  the  cure  of  polyfarcia,  I  am 
of  opinion,  that  the  conjunction  of  plethora 
and  obefity,  in  the  manner  juft  now  men- 
tioned, mould  be  conftantly  attended  to  ;  and 
when  the  morbid  effects  of  the  plethoric  hab- 
it are  threatened,  either  in  the  head  or  mngs, 
that  bloodletting  is  to  be  pra&ifed  :  But  at 
the  fame  time  it  is  to  be  obferved,  that  per- 
fons  of  much  obefity  do  not  bear  bloodletting 
well ;    and  when  the  circumftances  I  have 

mentioned 


244  PRACTICE 

mentioned  do  not  immediately  require  it,  the  jl 
practice  upon   account   of  obefity   alone,    is  i| 
hardly  ever  to  be  employed.     The   fame  re- 
mark is  to  be  made  with  refpecl;  to  any  other  I 
evacuations   that  may  be   propofedl  for  the  $ 
cure  of  corpulency  :   For  without  the   other 
means  I  am  to  mention,  they  can  give  but  a 
very  imperfect  relief ;  and,  in  fo  far  as  they 
either  empty  or  weaken  the  fyftem,  they  may 
favour  the  return  of  plethora,  and  the  increafe 
of  obefity,, 

MDCXXIV. 

Polyfarcia,  or  corpulency,  whether  it  de- 
pend upon  plethora  or  obefity,  whenever  it 
either  can  be  confidered  as  a  difeafe,  or 
threatens  to  induce  one,  is  to  be  cured,  or  the 
cffe&s  of  it  are  to  be  obviated,  by  diet  and 
exercife.  The  diet  muft  be  fparing  ;  or 
rather,  what  is  more  admiffible,  it  muft  be 
fuch  as  affords  little  nutritious  matter.  It 
mull  therefore  be  chiefly,  or  almoft  only,  of 
vegetable  matter,  and  at  the  very  utmoft  of 
milk.  Such  a  diet  mould  be  employed,  and 
generally  ought  to  precede  exercife  ;  for  obe- 
fity does  not  eafily  admit  of  bodily  exercife  ; 
which  is,  however,  the  only  mode  that  can  be 
very  effectual.  Such,  indeed,  in  many  cafe?, 
may  feem  difficult  to  be  admitted  ;  but  I  am 
of  opinion,  that  even  the  moft  corpulent  may 
be  brought  to  bear  it,  by  at  firft  attempting  it 
very  moderately,  and  increafing  it  by  degrees 

very 


OF       PHYSIC.  245 

very  flowly,  but  at  the  fame  time  perfiiling  in 
iuch  attempts  with  great  conftancy. 

MDCXXV. 

As  thefe,  though  the  only  effectual  meaf- 
ures,  are  often  difficult  to  be  admitted  or  car- 
ried into  execution,  fome  other  means  have 
been  thought  of  and  employed  for  reducing 
corpulency.  Thefe,  if  I  miflake  not,  have 
all  been  certain  methods  of  inducing  a  faiine 
ftate  in  the  mafs  of  blood  ;  for  fuch  I  fuppofe 
to  be  the  effects  of  vinegar  ana!  of  foap,  which 
have  been  propofed.  The  latter,  I  believe, 
hardly  paffes  into  the  bloodveffels,  without 
being  refolved  and  formed  into  a  neutral  fait, 
with  the  acid  which  it  meets  with  in  the  flom- 
ach.  How  well  acrid  and  faiine  fubftances 
are  fitted  to  diminifh  obefity,  may  appear 
from  what  has  been  faid  above  in  MDCXV. 
What  effects  vinegar,  foap,  or  other  fub- 
ftances employed,  have  had  in  reducing  cor- 
pulency, there  have  not  proper  opportunities 
of  obferving  occurred  to  me  :  But  I  am  well 
perfuaded,  that  the  inducing  a  faiine  and  acrid 
ftate  of  the  blood,  may  have  worfe  confe- 
quences  than  the  corpulency  it  was  intended 
to  correct  ;  and  that  no  perfon  fhould  hazard 
thefe,  while  he  may  have  recourfe  to  the  more 
fafe  and  certain  means  of  abftinence  and  ex- 
ercife. 

CHAP. 


246  PRACTICE 

CHAP.         II. 
of  FLATULENT  SWELLINGS. 

MDCXXVI. 

1  HE  cellular  texture  of  the 
human  body  very  readily  admits  of  air,  and 
allows  the  fame  to  pafs  from  any  one  to  every 
other  part  of  it.  Hence  Emphyfemata  have 
often  appeared  from  air  collected  in  the  cel- 
lular  texture  under  the  fkin,  and  in  feveral 
other  parts  of  the  body.  The  flatulent  fwell- 
ings  under  the  fkin,  have  indeed  mod  com- 
monly appeared  in  confequence  of  air  imme- 
diately introduced  from  without  :  But  in 
fome  inflances  of  flatulent  fwellings,  efpec- 
ially  thofe  of  the  internal  parts  not  commu- 
nicating with  the  alimentary  canal,  fuch  an 
introduction  cannot  be  perceived  or  fuppof- 
ed ;  and  therefore,  in  thefe  cafes,  fome  other 
caufe  of  the  production  and  collection  of  air 
muft  be  looked  for,  though  it  is  often  not  to 
be  clearly  afcertained. 

In  every  folid  as  well  as  every  fluid  fub- 
ftance  which  makes  a  part  of  the  human  body, 
there  is  a  confiderable  quantity  of  air  in  a 
fixed  ftate,  which  may  be  again  reilored  to 

its 


OF       PHYSIC.  247 

its  elaflic  flate,  and  feparated  from  thofe  fub- 
(lances,  by  the  power  of  heat,  putrefaction, 
and  perhaps  other  caufes  :  But  which  of  thefe 
may  have  produced  the  feveral  inftances  of 
pneumatofis  and  flatulent  fwellings  that  have 
been  recorded  by  authors,  I  cannot  pretend 
to  afcertain.  Indeed,  upon  account  of  thefe 
difficulties,  I  cannot  proceed  with  any  clear- 
nefs  on  the  general  fubject  of  pneumatofis  ,• 
and,  therefore,  with  regard  to  flatulent  fwell- 
ings, I  find  it  neceffary  to  confine  rnyfeif  to 
the  confideration  of  thofe  of  the  abdominal 
region  alone  ;  which  I  mail  now  treat  of  un- 
der the  general  name  of  Tympanites. 

MDCXXVII. 

The  tympanites  is  a  fwelling  of  the  abdo- 
men ;  in  which  the  teguments  appear  to  be 
much  flretched  by  fome  diftending  power 
within,  and  equally  flretched  in  every  poflure 
of  the  body.  The  fwelling  does  not  readily 
yield  to  any  prefTure  ;  and  in  fo  far  as  it  does, 
very  quickly  recovers  its  former  ftate  upon 
the  prefTure  being  removed.  Being  flruck,  it 
gives  a  found  like  a  drum,  or  other  flretched 
animal  membranes.  No  fluctuation  within 
is  to  be  perceived  :  And  the  whole  feels  lefs 
weighty  than  might  be  expected  from  its  bulk. 
The  uneafmefs  of  the  diflention  is  commonly 
relieved  by  the  difcharge  of  air  from  the  ali- 
mentary canal,  either  upwards  or  down- 
wards. 

MDCXXVIIL 


248  PRACTICE 


MDCXXVIII. 

Thefe  are  the  characters  by  which  the  tym- 
panites may  be  diftinguifhed  from  the  afcites 
or  phyfconia  ;  and  many  experiments  mow, 
that  the  tympanites  always  depends  upon  a 
preternatural  collection  of  air,  fomewhere 
within  the  teguments  of  the  abdomen  :  But 
the  feat  of  the  air  is  in  different  cafes  fome- 
what  different ;  and  this  produces  the  differ- 
ent fpecies  of  the  difeafe. 

One  fpecies  is,  when  the  air  collected  is 
entirely  confined  within  the  cavity  of  the  ali- 
mentary canal,  and  chiefly  in  that  of  the  in- 
terlines. This  fpecies,  therefore,  is  named 
the  Tympanites  intejlmalis,  Sauv.fp.  1.  It 
is,  of  all  others,  the  moil  common  ;  and  to  it 
efpecially  belong  the  characters  given  above. 

A  fecond  fpecies  is,  when  the  air  collected 
is  not  entirely  confined  to  the  cavity  of  the 
interlines,  but  is  aifo  prefent  between  their 
coats  ;  and  fuch  is  that  which  is  named  by 
Sauvages  Tympanites  enter  ophyf odes  >  Sauv.  fp. 
3.  This  has  certainly  been  a  rare  occurrence  ; 
and  has  probably  occurred  only  in  confe- 
quence  of  the  tympanites  intejlinalis,  by  the 
air  efcaping  from  the  cavity  of  the  interlines 
into  the  interfaces  of  the  coats.  It  is,  how- 
ever, poflible  that  an  erofion  of  the  internal 
coat  of  the  interlines  may  give  occafion  to  the 
air,  fo  conflantly  prefent  in  their  cavity,  to 
efcape   into   the   interfaces    of   their    coats* 

though 


OF       PHYSIC.  249 

though  in  the  whole  of  their  cavity  there  has 
been  no  previous  accumulation. 

A  third  fpecies  is,  when  the  air  is  collected 
in  the  fac  of  the  peritonaeum,  or  what  is  com- 
monly called  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen,  that 
is,  the  fpace  between  the  peritonaeum  and  vif- 
cera ;  and  then  the  difeafe  is  named  Tympa- 
nites ahdominalis  y  Sauv.  fp.  2.  The  exiftence 
of  fuch  a  tympanites,  without  any  tympanites 
intejiinalis,  has  been  difputed  ;  and  it  certain- 
ly has  been  a  rare  occurrence  :  But  from  fev- 
eral  diffeclions,  it  is  unqueftionable  that  fuch 
a  difeafe  has  fometimes  truly  occurred. 

A  fourth  fpecies  of  tympanites  is,  when  the 
tympanites  intejiinalis  and  ahdominalis  are 
joined  together,  or  take  place  at  the  fame 
time.  With  refpecl:  to  this,  it  is  probable 
that  the  tympanites  intejiinalis  is  the  primary 
difeafe  ;  and  the  other,  only  a  confequence 
of  the  air  efcaping,  by  an  eroiion  or  rupture 
of  the  coats  of  the  mteftines,  from  the  cavity 
of  thefe  into  that  of  the  abdomen.  It  is  in- 
deed pofTible,  that  in  confequence  of  erofion 
or  rupture,  the  air  which  is  fo  conftantly  pref- 
ent  in  the  inteftinal  canal,  may  efcape  from 
thence  in  fuch  quantity  into  the  cavity  of  the 
abdomen,  as  to  give  a  tympanites  ahdominalis, 
whilfl  there  was  no  previous  considerable  ac- 
cumulation of  air  in  the  inteftinal  cavity  it- 
felf ;  but  I  have  not  facts  to  afcertain  this  mat- 
ter properly. 

A  fifth  fpecies  has  alfo  been  enumerated. 
It  is  when  a  tympanites  ahdominalis  happens 

to 


250  PRACTICE 

to  be  joined  with  the  hydrops  af cites  ;  and 
fuch  a  difeafe  therefore  is  named  by  Sauvages 
Tympanites  afciticus,  Sauv.  fp.  4.  In  mofl 
cafes  of  tympanites,  indeed,  fome  quantity  ol 
ferum  has,  upon  direction,  been  found  in  the 
fac  of  the  peritonaeum ;  but  that  is  not  enough 
to  conftitute  the  fpecies  now  mentioned  ;  and 
when  the  collection  of  ferum  is  more  confid- 
erable,  it  is  commonly  where,  both  from  the 
caufes  which  have  preceded,  and  likewife 
from  the  fymptoms  which  attend,  the  afcites 
may  be  conlidered  as  the  primary  difeafe  ; 
and  therefore  that  this  combination  does  not 
exhibit  a  proper  fpecies  of  the  tympanites. 

MDCXXIX. 

As  this  laft  is  not  a  proper  fpecies,  and  as 
fome  of  the  others  are  not  only  extremely 
rare,  but  even,  when  occurring,  are  neither 
primary,  nor  to  be  eafily  diftinguimed,  nor, 
as  considered  in  themfelves,  admitting  of  any 
cure,  I  lliall  here  take  no  further  notice  of 
them;  confining  myfelf,  in  what  follows,  to 
the  confideration  of  the  mofl  frequent  cafe, 
and  almofl  the  only  object  of  practice,  the 
tympanites  intejlinalis, 

MDCXXX. 

With  refpecl:  to  this,  I  cannot  perceive  thai- 
it  arifes  in  any  peculiar  temperament,  or  de- 
pends upon  any  predifpofition,  which  can  be 

difcerned. 


OF      PHYSIC.  251 

difcerned.     It  occurs  in  either  fex,   at  every 
age,  and  frequently  in  young  perfons. 


MDCXXXI. 

Various  remote  caufes  of  it  have  been  af- 
figned  :  But  many  of  thefe  have  not  common- 
ly the  efFe£l  of  producing  this  difeafe  ;  and 
although  fome  of  them  have  been  truly  ante- 
cedents of  it3  I  can  in  few  inftances  difcover 
the  manner  in  which  they  produce  the  dif- 
eafe, and  therefore  cannot  certainly  afcertain 
them  to  have  been  caufes  of  it. 

MDCXXXII. 

The  phenomena  of  this  difeafe  in  its  feveral 
flages  are  the  following. 

The  tumour  of  the  belly  fometimes  grows 
very  quickly  to  a  confiderable  degree,  and 
feldom  in  the  flow  manner  the  afcites  com- 
monly comes  on.  In  fome  cafes,  however, 
the  tympanites  comes  on  gradually,  and  is 
introduced  by  an  unufual  flatulency  of  the 
llomach  and  interlines,  with  frequent  bbrbo- 
rygmi,  and  an  uncommonly  frequent  expul- 
fion  of  air  upwards  and  downwards.  This 
ftate  is  alfo  frequently  attended  with  colic 
pains,  efpecially  felt  about  the  navel,  and  up- 
on the  fides  towards  the  back  ;  but  generally 
as  the  difeafe  advances,  thefe  pains  become 
lefs  confiderable.     As  the  difeafe  advances, 

there 


2$e  PRACTICE 

there  is  a  pretty  conflant  defire  to  difcharge 
air,  but  it  is  accomplished  with  difficulty  ;  and 
when  obtained,  although  it  give  fome  relief 
from  the  fenfe  of  diftention,  this  relief  is  com- 
monly tranfient  and  of  fhort  duration.  While 
the  difeafe  is  coming  on,  fome  inequality  of 
tumour  and  tenfion  may  be  perceived  in  dif- 
ferent parts  of  the  belly  ;  but  the  diftention 
foon  becomes  equal  over  the  whole,  and  ex- 
hibits the  phenomena  mentioned  in  the  char- 
acter. Upon  the  firft  coming  on  of  the  dif- 
eafe, as  well  as  during  its  progrefs,  the  belly 
is  bound,  and  the  faeces  difcharged  are  com- 
monly hard  and  dry.  The  urine,  at  the  be- 
ginning, is  ufually  very  little  changed  in 
quantity  or  quality  from  its  natural  (late  :  But 
as  the  difeafe  continues,  it  is  commonly  chang- 
ed in  both  refpecls  ;  and  at  length  fometimes 
a  ftranguary,  and  even  an  ifchuria,  comes  on. 
The  difeafe  has  feldom  advanced  far,  before 
the  appetite  is  much  impaired,  and  digeftion 
ill  performed  ;  and  the  whole  body,  except 
the  belly,  becomes  confiderably  emaciated. 
Together  with  thefe  fymptoms,  a  thirfl  and 
uneafy  fenfe  of  heat  at  length  come  on,  and  a 
confiderable  frequency  of  pulfe  occurs,  which 
continues  throughout  the  courfe  of  the  dif- 
eafe. When  the  tumour  of  the  belly  arifes 
to  a  confiderable  bulk,  the  breathing  becomes 
very  difficult,  with  a  frequent  dry  cough. 
With  all  thefe  fymptoms  the  ftrength  of  the 
patient  declines  ;  and  the  febrile  fymptoms 
daily  increaiing,  death  at  length  enfues,  fome- 
times 


OF       PHYSIC.  253 

times  probably  in  confequence  of  a  gangrene 
coming  upon  the  interlines. 

MDCXXXIII. 

The  tympanites  is  commonly  of  fome  du- 
ration,  and  to  be  reckoned  a  chronic  difeafe. 
It  is  very  feldom  quickly  fatal,  except  where 
fuch  an  affection  iuddenly  arifes  in  fevers. 
To  this  Sauvages  has  properly  given  a  differ- 
ent appellation,  that  of  Meteor ifmus ;  and  I 
judge  it  may  always  be  confidered  as  a  fymp* 
tomatic  affection,  entirely  diftincl;  from  the 
tympanites  we  are  now  confidering. 

MDCXXXIV. 

The  tympanites  is  generally  a  fatal  difeafe^ 
feldom  admitting  of  cure  ;  but  what  may  be 
attempted  in  this  way,  I  mail  try  to  point 
out,  after  I  ihall  have  endeavoured  to  explain 
the  proximate  caufe,  which  alone  can  lay  the 
foundation  of  what  may  be  rationally  attempt- 
ed towards  its  cure. 

MDCXXXV. 

To  afcertain  the  proximate  caufe  of  tym- 
panites, is  fomewhat  difficult.  It  has  been 
fuppofed  in  many  cafes,  to  be  merely  an  un-* 
common  quantity  of  air  prefent  in  the  ali^ 
mentary  canal,  owing  to  the  extrication  and 
detachment  of  a  greater  quantity  of  air  than 

Vol,  III.  M  ufual 


2§4  PRACTICE 

ufual  from  the  alimentary  matters  taken  in,  \\ 
Our  vegetable  aliments,  I  believe,  always  un~  j 
dergo  fome  degree  of  fermentation  ;  'and  in  ii 
confequence,   a   quantity  of  air  is  extricated 
and  detached  from  them  in  the  flomach  and; 
interlines  :  But  it  appears,  that  the  mixture  I 
of  the  animal  fluids  which  our  aliments  meet  ti 
with  in  the   alimentary  canal^  prevents  the 
fame  quantity  of  air  from  being  detached  from 
them  that  would  have  been  in  their  fermen-  u 
tation  without  fuch  mixture  ;  and  it  is  prob- 
able that  the  fame  mixture  contributes  alfo  to  | 
the  reabforption  of  the  air  that  had  been  be- 
fore in  fome  meafure  detached.     The  extri-  I 
cation,  therefore,   of  an  unufual   quantity  of 
air  from  the  aliments,  may,  in  certain  circum* 
fiances,  be  fuch,  perhaps,  as   to  produce  a  \ 
tympanites ;  fo  that  this  difeafe  may  depend  : 
upon  a  fault  of  the  digeflive  fluids,  whereby 
they  are  unfit  to  prevent  the  too  copious  ex- 
trication of  air,  and  unfit  alfo  to  occafion  that  | 
reabforption  of  air  which  in  found  perfons  \ 
commonly  happens.     An  unufual   quantity 
of  air  in  the  alimentary  canal,  whether  owing 
to  the  nature  of  the  aliments  taken  in,  or  to 
the  fault  of  the  digeflive  fluid*  does  certainly 
fometimes  take  place  ;  and  may  poflibly  have, 
and  in  fome  meafure  certainly  has,  a  fhare  iri 
producing  certain  flatulent  disorders  of  the  aU 
irnentary  canal ;  but  cannot  be  fuppofed  to 
produce  the  tympanites^  which  often  occurs 
when  no  previous  diforder  had  appeared  in 
the  fyflem,     Even  in  thofe  cafes  of  tympan- 
al tes 


OF       PHYSIC.  255 

nites  which  are  attended  at  their  beginning 
with  flatulent  diforders  in  the  whole  of  the 
alimentary  canal,  as  we  know  that  a  firm  tone 
of  the  inteftines  both  moderates  the  extrica- 
tion of  air,  and  contributes  to  its  reabforption 
or  ready  expulfion,  fo  the  flatulent  fymptoms 
which  happen  to  appear  at  the  coming  on  of 
a  tympanites,  are,  in  my  opinion,  to  be  refer- 
red to  a  lofs  of  tone  in  the  mufcular  fibres  of 
the  inteftines,  rather  than  to  any  fault  in  the 
•digeftive  fluids, 

MDCXXXVI. 

Thefe,  and  other  confiderations,  lead  mc 
to  conclude,  that  the  chief  part  of  the  proxi- 
mate caufe  of  tympanites,  is  a  lofs  of  tone  in 
the  mufcular  fibres  of  the  inteftines.  But 
further,  as  air  of  any  kind  accumulated  in  the 
cavity  of  the  inteftines  fhould,  even  by  its 
own  elafticity,  find  its  way  either  upwards  or 
downwards,  and  fhould  alfo,  by  the  affiftance 
of  infpiration,  be  entirely  thrown  out  of  the 
body  ;  fo,  when  neither  the  reabforption  nor 
the  expulfion  takes  place,  and  the  air  is  accu- 
mulated fo  a?y  to  produce  tympanites,  it  is 
probable  that/the  paflage  of  the  air  along  the 
■courfb  of  the  inteftines  is  in  fome  places  of 
thefe  interrupted.  This  interruption,  how- 
ever, can  hardly  be  fuppofed  to  proceed  from 
any  other  caufe  than  fpafmodic  conftri&ions 
in  certain  parts  of  the  canal ;  and  I  conclude, 
therefore,  that  fuch  conftridiions  concur  as 
M  2  part 


£5$  PRACTICE 

.part  in  the  proximate  caufe  of  tympanites. 
Whether  thefe  fpafmodic  conflriclions  are  to 
be  attributed  to  the  remote  caufe  of  the  dif- 
eafe,  or  may  be  confidered  as  the  confequence 
of  fome  degree  of  atony  firfl  arifmg,  I  cannot 
with  certainty,  and  do  not  find  it  necefTary  to 
determine. 

MDCXXXVII. 

Having  thus  endeavoured  -to  afcertain  the 
proximate  caufe  of  tympanites,  I  proceed  to 
treat  of  its  cure ;  which  indeed  has  feldom 
fucceeded,  and  almoft  never  but  in  a  recent 
difeafe.  I  muft,  however,  endeavour  to  fay 
what  may  be  reafonably  attempted  ;  what  has 
commonly  been  attempted  ;  and  what  at- 
tempts have  fometimes  fucceeded  in  the  cure 
of  this  difeafe* 

MBCXXXVlIt. 

It  muft  be  a  firfl  indication  to  evacuate  the 
<air  accumulated  in  the  inteilines  :  And  for 
this  purpofe  it  is  neceffary  that  thofe  conftric- 
tions,  which  had  efpecially  occafioned  its  ac- 
cumulation*  and  continue  to  interrupt  its  paf- 
fage  along  the  courfe  of  the  inteftines,  Ihould 
be  removed.  As  thefe,  however,  can  hardly 
be  removed  but  by  exciting  the  periflaltic 
motion  in  the  adjoining  portions  of  the  intef- 
tines, purgatives  have  been  commonly  em- 
ployed ;  but  it  is  at  the  fame  time  agreed, 

that 


OF       PHYSIC. 


57 


that  the  more  gentle  laxatives  only  ought  to 
be  employed,  as  the  more  draflic,  in  the  over 
flretched  and  tenfe  flate  of  the  interlines,  are 
in  danger  of  bringrinor  on  inflammation. 

It  is  for  this  reafon  alfo,  that  glyflers  have 
been  frequently  employed  ;  and  they  are  the 
more  neceflary,  as  the  fasces  collected  are  gen- 
erally found  to  be  in  a  hard  and  dry  flate. 
Not  only  upon  account  of  this  flate  of  the 
faeces,  but,  farther,  when  glyflers  produce  a 
confiderable  evacuation  of  air,  and  thus  ihow 
that  they  have  fome  effect:  in  relaxing  the 
fpafms  of  the  inteflines,  they  ought  to  be  re- 
peated very  frequently ; 


MDCXXXLX. 


In  order  to  tale  off  the  conflridlions  of  the 
inteflines,  and  with  fome  view  alfo  to  the  car- 
minative effects  of  the  medicines,  various  an- 
tifpafmodics  have  been  propofed,  and  com- 
monly employed  %  but  their  effects  are  fel- 
dom  confiderable,  and  it  is  alleged  that  their 
heating  and  inflammatory  powers  have  fome- 
times  been  hurtful.  It  is,  however,  always* 
proper  to  join  fome  of  the  milder  kinds  with 
both  the  purgatives  and  glyflers  that  are  em- 
ployed ;  and  it  has  been  very  properly  advif- 
ed  to  give  always  the  chief  of  antifpafmodics, 
that  is,  an  opiate,  after  the  operation  of  pur- 
gatives is  finifhed. 

M  3  MDCXL. 


358  PRACTICE 


MDCXL. 

In  confederation  of  the  overflretched,  tenfe, 
and  dry  ftate  of  the  interlines,  and  efpecially 
of  the  fpafmodic  conflriclions  that  prevail,  fo- 
mentations and  warm  bathing  have  been  pro- 
pofed  as  a  remedy  ;  and  are  laid  to  have  been 
employed  with  advantage  :  But  it  has  been 
remarked,  that  very  warm  baths  have  not 
been  found  fo  ufeful  as  tepid  bath&  long  con- 
tinued* 

MDCXLI, 

Upon  the  fuppofition  that  this  difeafe  de- 
pends efpecially  upon  an  atony  of  the  ali- 
mentary canal,  tonic  remedies  feem  to  be 
properly  indicated.  Accordingly  chalybe- 
ates,  and  various  bitters,  have  been  employ- 
ed ;  and,  if  any  tonic,  the  Peruvian  bark 
might  probably  be  ufeful. 

MDCXLXI. 

But  as  no  tonic  remedy  is  more  powerful 
than  cold  applied  to  the  furface  of  the  body, 
and  cold  drink  thrown  into  the  flomach  ;  fo 
fuch  a  remedy  has  been  thought  of  in  this  dif- 
eafe. Cold  drink  has  been  conftantly  pre-, 
fcribed,  and  cold  bathing  has  been  employed 
with  advantage  ;  and  there  have  been  feveral 
in  fiances  of  the  difeafe  being  fuddenly  and 

entirely 


OF       PHYSIC.  259 

entirely  cured  by  the  repeated  application  of 
inow  to  the  lower  belly. 

MDCXLIII. 

It  is  hardly  neceffary  to  remark,,  that,  in 
the  diet  of  tympanitic  perfons,,  all  forts  of  food 
ready  to  become  flatulent  in  the  flomach  are 
to  be  avoided  ;  and  it  is  probable,  that  the 
fofTil  acids  and  neutral  falts,  as  antizymics*. 
may  be  ufeful. 

MDCXLIV, 

In  obfl'inate  and  defperate  cafes  of  tym- 
panites, the  operation  of  the  paracentesis  has 
been  propq  feci  :  But  it.  is  a  very  doubtful 
remedy,  and  there  is  hardly  any  teflimony  of 
its  having  been  pracl.ifed  with  fuccefs.  It 
muit  be  obvious,  that  this  operation  is  a  rem- 
edy fuited  efpecially,  and  almofl  only,  to  the 
tympanites  abdominalis.;  the  exiflence  of  which, 
Separately  from  the  intej!.inalis>  is  very  doubt- 
ful, at  leaft  not  eafily  afcertained.  Kven  if 
its  exigence  could  be  afcertained,  yet  it  is  not 
very  likely  to  be  cured  by  this  remedy  :  And 
how  far  the  operation  might  be  fafe  in  the 
tympanites  intefiinalisy  is  not  yet  determined 
hy  any  proper  experience. 


M  4  C  H  A  K 


a5o  PRACTICE 


CHAP.         III. 


•  f  WATERY  SWELLINGS,  or  DROP- 
SIES. 


MDCXLV. 

A  PRETERNATURAL  col- 
lection of  ferous  or  watery  fluids,  is  often 
formed  in  different  parts  of  the  human  body  ; 
and  although  the  difeafe  thence  arifing  be 
diflinguifhed  according  to  the  different  parts 
which  it  occupies,  yet  the  whole  of  fuch  col- 
lections come  under  the  general  appellation 
of  Dropfies,  At  the  fame  time,  although  the 
particular  inftances  of  fuch  collection  are  to 
be  diflinguifhed  from  each  other  according  to 
the  parts  they  occupy,  as  well  as  by  other  cir- 
cumflances  attending  them  ;  yet  all  of  them 
feem  to  depend  upon  fome  general  caufes, 
very  much  in  common  to  the  whole.  Before 
proceeding,  therefore,  to  confider  the  feveral 
fpecies,  it  may  be  proper  to  endeavour  to  af- 
fi gn  the  general  caufes  of  dropfy. 

MDCXLVI. 

In  perfons  in  health,  a  ferous  or  watery 
fluid  feems  to  be  conflantly  poured  out,   or 

exhaled 


OF       PHYSIC.  261. 

exhaled  in  vapour,  into  every  cavity  and  in- 
terflice  of  the  human  body  capable  of  receiv- 
ing it  ;  and  the  fame  fluid,  without  remaining 
long  or  being  accumulated  in  thefe  fpaces, 
feems  conflantly  to  be  foon  again  absorbed 
from  thence  by  veflels  adapted  to  the  pur~ 
pofe.  From  this  view  of  the  animal  econo- 
my, it  will  be  obvious,  that  if  the  quantity 
poured  out  into  any  fpace,  happens  to  be 
greater  than  the  abforbents  can  at  the  fame 
time  take  up,  an  unufual  accumulation  of  fe- 
rous  fluid  will  be  made  in  fuch  parts  ;  or 
though  the  quantity  poured  out  be  not  more 
than  ufual,  yet  if  the  abforption  -be  anywife 
interrupted  or  diminifhed,  from  this  caufe  al- 
fo  an  unufual  collection  of  fluids  may  be  qg- 
cafioned^ 

Thus,  in  general,,  dropfy  may  be  imputed 
to  an  increafed  effufion,  or  to  a  diminiihed 
abforption  ;  and:  h  therefore  proceed  to  in- 
quire into -the.  feveral  caufes.  of  thefe, 

MDGXLVII:. 

An  increafed  effufion  may  happen,  either 
from  a  preternatural  increafe  of  the  ordinary 
exhalation,  or  from  the  rupture  of  veflels  car- 
rying, or  of  facs  containing,  ferous  or  watery 
fluids. 

MDCXLVIIL 

The  ordinary  exhalation  may  be  increafed 

by  various  caufes,  and  particularly  by  an  in- 

Vol.  3,  M  5-  terruption 


262  PRACTICE 

terruption  given  to  the  free  return  of  the  ve- 
nous blood  from  the  extreme  veffels  of  the 
body  to  the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart.  This 
interruption  feems  to  operate  by  refilling  the 
free  paffage  of  the  blood  from  the  arteries  into 
the  veins,  thereby  increafing  the  force  of  the 
arterial  fluids  in  the  exhalants,  and  confe- 
quently  the  quantity  of  fluid  which  they 
pour  out. 

MDCXLIX. 

The  interruption  of  the  free  return  of  the 
venous  blood  from  the  extreme  veffels,  may 
be  owing  to  certain  circumftanees  affecting 
the  courfe  of  the  venous  blood  ;  very  fre- 
quently, to  certain  conditions  in  the  right 
ventricle  of  the  heart  itfelf,  preventing  it  from 
receiving  the  ufual  quantity  of  blood  from 
the  vena  cava ;  or  to  obftru6t.ions  in  the  veffels 
of  the  lungs  preventing  the  entire  evacuation 
of  the  right  ventricle,  and  thereby  hindering 
its  receiving  the  ufual  quantity  of  blood  from 
the  cava.  Thus,  a  polypus  in  the  right  ven- 
tricle of  the  heart,  and  the  offification  of  its 
valves,  as  well  as  all  coniiderable  and  perma- 
nent obftruclions  of  the  lungs,  have  been 
found  to  be  caufes  of  dropfy. 

MDCL. 

£t  may  ferve  as  an  illuflration  of  the  ope- 
ration of  thefe  general  caufes,  to  remark,  that 

the 


OF       P  H  Y  S  I  C.  2S3 

the  return  of  the  venous  blood  is  in  fome 
meafure  refitted  when  the  pofture  of  the  body- 
is  fetch  as  gives  occafion  to  the  gravity  of  the 
blood  to  oppofe  the  motion  of  it  in  the  veins,, 
which  takes  efFec"!  when  the  force  of  the  cir- 
culation is  weak  ;  and  from  whence  it  is  that 
an  upright  pofture  of  the  body  produces  or 
increafes  ferous  fwellinsrs  in  the  lower  extreme 
ities. 

MDCLL 

Not  only  thofe  caufes  interrupting  the  mo- 
tion of  the  venous  blood  more  generally,  but3 
farther,  the  interruption  of  it  in  particular 
veins,  may  likewife  have  the  effecl:  of  increas- 
ing exhalation,,  and  producing  dropfy.  The 
mod  remarkable  inftance  of  this  is,  when  con- 
fiderable  obftru£tions  of  the  liver  prevent  the 
blood  from  flowing  freely  into  it  from  the 
vena  portarum  and  its  numerous  branches ; 
and  hence  thefe  obftructions  are  a  frequent 
caufe  of  dropfy. 

MDCLIL 

Scirrhoflties  of  the  fpleen  and  other  vifcera^ 
as  well  as  the  fcirrhofity  of  the  liver,  have 
been  confidered  as  caufes  of  dropfy  ;  but  the 
manner  in  which  they  can  produce  the  di[- 
eafe,  I  do  not  perceive,  except  it  may  be 
where  they  happen  to  be  near  fome  confid- 
erable  vein,  by  the  compreflion  of  which  they 
may  occafion  fome  degree  of  afcites  ;  or,  by 
M  6  compreffing 


2t*4  PRACTICE 

compreffing  the  vena  cava,  may  produce  an 
anafarca  of  the  lower  extremities.  It  is  in- 
deed true,  that  fcirrhofities  of  the  fpleen  and 
other  vifcera,  have  been  frequently  dif cover- 
ed in  the  bodies  of  hydropic  perfons  :  But  I 
believe  they  have  been  feldom  found  unlefs 
when  fcirrhofities  of  the  liver  were  alfo  pref- 
ent  ;  and  I  am  inclined  to  think,  that  the 
former  have  been  the  effects  of  the  latter, 
rather  than  the  caufe  of  the  dropfy  ;  or  that, 
if  fcirrhofities  of  the  other  vifcera  have  ap- 
peared in  hydropic  bodies  when  that  of  the 
liver  was  not  prefent,  they  muff  have  been 
the  effects  of  fame  of  thofe  caufes  of  dropfy 
to  be  hereafter  mentioned  ;  and  confequently 
to  be  the  accidental  attendants,  rather  than 
the  caufes,  of  fuch  dropfies. 

MDCLIIL 

Even  in  fmaller  portions  of  the  venous 
fyftem,  the  interruption  of  the  motion  of  the 
blood  in  particular  veins  has  had  the  fame  ef- 
fect. Thus,  a  polypus  formed  in  the  cavity 
of  a  vein,  or  tumours  formed  in  its  coats,  pre- 
venting the  free  palTage  of  the  blood  through 
it,  have  had  the  effect  of  producing  dropfy 
in  parts  towards  the  extremity  of  fuch  veins. 

MDCLIV. 

But  the  caufe  moft  frequently  interrupting 
the  motion  of  the  blood  through  the  veins  is, 
the  compreifion  of  tumours  exiiling  near  to 

them  j 


OF      PHYSIC.  265 

them  ;  fuch  as  aneurifms  in  the  arteries,  ab- 
fceffes,  and  fcirrhous  or  fteatomatous  tumours 
in  the  adjoining  parts. 

To  this  head,  may  be  referred,  the  com- 
preffion  of  the  descending  cava  by  the  bulk 
of  the  uterus  in  pregnant  women,  and  the 
compreffion  of  the  fame  by  the  bulk  of  water- 
in  the  afcites  ;  both  of  which  compreffions  fre- 
quently produce  ferous  fwellings  in  the  lower 
extremities. 

MDCLV, 

It  may  be  fuppofed,  that  a  general  preter- 
natural  plethora  of  the  venous  fyflem  may 
have  the  effect  of  increafing  exhalation  ;  and 
that  this  plethora  may  happen  from  the  fup- 
preffion  of  fluxes,  or  evacuations  of  bloody 
which  had  for  fome  time  taken  place  in  the 
body,  fuch  as  the  menftrual  and  hemorrhoidal 
fluxes.  A  dropfy,  however,  from  fuch  a 
caufe,  has  been  at  leaft  a  rare  occurrence  ; 
and  when  it  feems  to  have  happened,  I  fliould 
fuppofe  it  owing  to  the  fame  caufes  as  the 
fuppreflion  itfelf,  rather  than  to  the  plethora 
produced  by  it^ 

MDCLVL 

One  of  the  moil  frequent  caufes  of  an  in- 
creased exhalation,  I  apprehend  to  be  the 
laxity  of  the  exhalant  vefTels.  That  fuch  a 
caufe  may  operate,  appears  probable  from 
this,  that  paralytic  limbs,  in  which  fuch  a  lax- 
ity 


266  PRACTICE 

ity  is  to  be  fufpe&ed,  are  frequently  affe&ed 
with  ferous,  or,  as  they  are  called,  cedematous 
fwellings. 

But  a  much  more  remarkable  and  frequent 
example  of  its  operation  occurs  in  the  cafe  of 
a  general  debility  of  the  fyilem,  which  is  fo 
often  attended  with  dropfy.  That  a  general 
debility  does  induce  dropfy,  appears  fuffi- 
ciently  from  its  being  fo  commonly  the  confe- 
quence  of  powerfully  debilitating  caufes  ; 
fuch  as  fevers,  either  of  the  continued  or  in- 
termittent kind,  which  have  lafled  long  ;  long 
continued  and  fomewhat  exceffive  evacuations 
of  any  kinds  ;  and,  in  fhort,  almofl  all  difeafes 
that  have  been  of  long  continuance,  and  have 
at  the  fame  time  induced  the  other  fymptoms 
of  a  general  debility. 

Among  other  caufes  inducing  a  general  de- 
bility of  the  fyftem,  and  thereby  dropfy,  there 
is  one  to  be  mentioned  as  frequently  occur- 
ring, and  that  is,  intemperance  in  the  ufe  of 
intoxicating  liquors  ;  from  whence  it  is  that 
drunkards  of  all  kinds,  and  efpecially  dram 
drinkers,  are  fo  afFecled  with  this  difeafe. 

ivIDCLVII. 

That  a  general  debility  may  produce  a  lax- 
ity of  the  exhalants,  will  be  readily  allowed  ; 
and  that  by  this  efpecially  it  occasions  drop- 
fy, I  judge  from  thence,  that  while  mod  of 
the  caufes  already  mentioned  are  fuited  to 
produce  dropfies  of  particular  parts  only,  the 

date 


OF       PHYSIC.  267 

itate  of  general  debility  gives  rife  to  an  in- 
creafed  exhalation  into  every  cavity  and  in- 
terftice  of  the  body,  and  therefore  brings  on  a 
general  difeafe.  Thus,  we  have  feen  effu- 
iions  of  a  ferous  fluid  made,  at  the  fame  time, 
into  the  cavity  of  the  cranium,  into  that  of 
the  thorax  and  of  the  abdomen,  and  likewife 
into  the  cellular  texture  almoft  over  the  whole 
of  the  body.  In  fuch  cafes,  the  operation  of 
a  general  caufe  difcovered  itfelf,  by  thefe  fev- 
eral  dropfies  increafmg  in  one  part  as  they 
diminifhed  in  another,  and  this  alternately  in 
the  different  parts.  This  combination,  there- 
fore, of  the  different  fpecies  of  dropfy,  or 
rather,  as  it  may  be  termed,  this  univerfal 
dropfy,  muft,  I  think,  be  referred  to  a  general 
caufe  ;  and  in  moft  inflances,  hardly  any  oth- 
er can  be  thought  of,  but  a  general  laxity  of 
the  exhalants.  It  is  this,  therefore,  that  I  call 
the  hydropic  diathefis  ;  which  frequently  ope- 
rates by  itfelf ;  and  frequently,  in  fome  meaf- 
ure,  concurring  with  other  caufes,  is  efpecial- 
ly  that  which  gives  them  their  full  effeft. 

This  ftate  of  the  fyftem,  in  its  firft  appear- 
ance, feems  to  be  what  has  been  confidered  as 
a  particular  difeafe  under  the  name  of  Cachexy  ; 
but  in  every  inftance  of  it  that  has  occurred 
to  me,  I  have  always  confidered,  and  have  al- 
ways found,  it  to  be  the  beginning  of  general 
dropfy. 

MDCLVIII. 

The  feveral  caufes  of  dropfy  already  men- 
tioned   may  produce    the  difeafe,  although 

there 


268  PRACTICE 

there  be  no  preternatural  abundance  of  ferous 
or  watery  fluid  in  the  bloodvelTeL; ;  but  it  is 
now  to  be  remarked,  that  a  preternatural 
abundance  of  that  kind  may  often  give  occa- 
fion  to  the  difeafe,  and  more  efpecially  when 
fuch  abundance  concurs  with  the  caufes  above 
enumerated. 

One  caufe  of  fuch  preternatural  abundance 
may  be  an  unufual  quantity  of  water  taken 
into  the  body.  Thus  an  unufual  quantity  of 
water  taken  in  by  drinking,  has  fometimes  oc- 
cafioned  a  dropfy.  Large  quantities  of  water, 
it  is  true,  are  upon  many  occafions  taken  in  ; 
and  being  as  readily  thrown  out  again  by 
flool,  urine,  or  perfpiration,  have  not  pro- 
duced any  difeafe.  But  it  is  alfo  certain, 
that,  upon  fome  occafions,  an  unufual  quan- 
tity of  watery  liquors  taken  in  has  run  off  by 
the  feveral  internal  exhalants,  and  produced 
a  dropfy.  This  feems  to  have  happened,  ei- 
ther from  the  excretories  not  being  fitted  to 
throw  out  the  fluid  fo  faff  as  it  had  been  taken 
in,  or  from  the  excretories  having  been  ob- 
ilrucl;ed  by  accidentally  concurring  caufes. 
Accordingly  it  is  faid>  that  the  fudden  taking 
in  of  a  large  quantity  of  very  cold  water,  has 
produced  dropfy,  probably  from  the  cold 
producing  a  con&riclion  of  the  excretories. 

The  proportion  of  watery  fluid  in  the  blood 
may  be  increafed,  not  only  by  the  taking  in  a 
large  quantity  of  water  by  drinking,  as  now 
mentioned,  but  it  is  pofTible  that  it  may  be  in- 
creafed alfo  by  water  taken  in  from   the  at- 

mofphere 


OF      PHYSIC.  269 

mofphere  by  the  {kin  in  an  abforbing  or  im- 
bibing ftate.  It  is  well  known  that  the  fkin 
may  be,  at  leaft,  occaiionally  in  fuch  a  ftate  ; 
and  it  is  probable,  that  in  many  cafes  of  be- 
ginning dropfy,  when  the  circulation  of  the 
blood  on  the  furface  of  the  body  is  very  lan- 
guid, that  the  ikin  may  be  changed  from  a 
perfpiring,  to  an  imbibing,  ftate  ;  and  thus, 
at  leaft,  the  difeafe  may  be  very  much  in- 
creased. 

MDCLIX. 

A  fecond  caufe  of  a  preternatural  abund- 
ance of  watery  fluids  in  the  bloodvefTels,  may 
be,  an  interruption  of  the  ordinary  watery  ex- 
cretions ;  and  accordingly  it  is  alleged,  that 
perfons  much  expofed  to  a  cold  and  moift  air 
are  liable  to  dropfy.  It  is  alfo  faid,  that  an 
interruption,  or  conflderable  diminution,  of 
the  urinary  fecretion,  has  produced  the  dif- 
eafe :  And  it  is  certain,  that,  in  the  cafe  of  an 
ifchuria  renalis,  the  ferofity  retained  in  the 
bloodvefTels  has  been  poured  out  into  fome 
internal  cavities,  and  has  occafioned  dropfy. 

MDCLX. 

A  third  caufe,  of  an  over  proportion  of  fe- 
rous  fluid  in  the  blood  ready  to  run  off  by  the 
exhalants,  has  been  very  large  evacuations  of 
blood,  either  fpontaneous  or  artificial.  Thefe 
evacuations,  by  abftracung  a  large  proportion 

of 


270  PRACTICE 

of  red  globules  and  gluten,  which  are  the 
principal  means  ,of  retaining  ferum  in  the  red 
veffels,  allow  the  ferum  to  run  off  more  read- 
ily by  the  exhalants  :  And  hence  dropfies- 
have  been  frequently  the  confequence  of  fuch 
evacuations. 

It  is  poffibie  alfo,  that  large  and  long  con- 
tinued iffues,  by  abftra  cling  a  large  propor- 
tion of  gluten,  may  have  the  fame  effect.. 

An  over  proportion  of  the  ferous  parts  of 
the  blood,  may  not  only  be  owing  to  the  fpo- 
liation  juft  now  mentioned,  but  may,  I  appre- 
hend, be  Iikewife  owing  to  a  fault  in  the  di- 
gefting  and  aflimilating  powers  in  the  ftomach 
and  other  organs ;  whereby  they  do  not  pre- 
pare and  convert  the  aliments  taken  in,  in 
fuch  a  manner  as  to  produce  from  them  the 
due  proportion  of  red  globules  and  gluten  ; 
but,  ftill  continuing  to  fupply  the  watery 
parts,  occafion  thefe  to  be  in  an  over  propor- 
tion, and  confequently  ready  to  run  off  in  too- 
large  quantity  by  the  exhalants.  It  is  in 
this  manner  that  we  explain  the  dropfy,  fo 
often  attending  chlorous  :  Which  appears  al- 
ways at  firft  by  a  pale  colour  of  the  whole 
body,  fhowing  a  manifeft  deficiency  of  red 
blood  ;  which  in  that  difeafe  can  only  be  at- 
tributed to  an  imperfect  digeflion  and  affim-> 
ilation. 

Whether  a  like  imperfection  takes  place  in' 
what  has  been  called  a  Cachexy,  I  dare  not 
determine.  This  difeafe  indeed  has  been 
commonly  and  very  evidently  owing  to  the 

general 


OF       P  H  Y  S  I  €.  271 

general  caufes  of  debility  above  mentioned  : 
And  it  being  probable  that  the  general  debil- 
ity may  affect  the  organs  of  digefiion  and  af- 
fimilation  ;  fo  the  imperfect  flare  of  thefe 
functions,  occafioning  a  deficiency  of  red 
globules  and  gluten,  may  often  concur  with 
the  laxity  of  the  exhalants  in  producing 
dropfy. 

MDCLXI. 

Thefe  are  the  feveral  caufes  of  increafed 
exhalation,  which  I  have  mentioned  as  the 
chief  caufe  of  the  efFufion  producing  dropfy  ; 
but  I  have  like  wife  obferved  in  MDCXLVII, 
that  with  the  fame  effect;,  an  efFufion  may  alfo 
be  made  by  the  rupture  of  veffels  carrying 
watery  fluids. 

In  this  way,  a  rupture  of  the  thoracic  du&, 
has  given  occafion  to  an  effulion  of  chyle  and 
lymph  into  the  cavity  of  the  thorax  ;  and  a 
rupture  of  the  la£leals  has  occafioned  a  like 
efFufion  into  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen  ;  and 
in  either  cafe,  a  dropfy  has  been  produced. 

It  is  fufficiently  probable,  that  a  rupture 
of  lymphatics,  in  confequence  of  ftrains,  or 
the  violent  compreflion  of  neighbouring  muf- 
cles,  has  occafioned  an  efFufion  ;  wThich,  be- 
ing diffufed  in  the  cellular  texture,  has  pro- 
duced dropfy. 

It  belongs  to  this  head  of  caufes,  to  remark, 
that  there  are  many  inftances  of  a  rupture  or 
crofion  of  the  kidneys,  ureters,  and  bladder 

of 


z72  PRACTICE 

of  urine  ;  whereby  the  urine  has  been  pour- 
ed into  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen,  and  pro- 
duced an  afcites. 

MDCLXII. 

Upon  this  fubjecl:,  of  the  rupture  of  vefleis  : 
carrying,  or  of  veficles  containing,  watery  flu- 
ids, I  muft  obferve,  that  the  difteclion  of  dead 
bodies  has  often  mown  veficles  formed  upon  I 
the  furface  of  many  of  the  internal  parts  ;  and 
it  has  been  fuppofed,  that  the  rupture  of  fuch 
veficles,  commonly  named  Hydatidest  together 
with  their  continuing  to  pour  out  a  watery 
fluid,  has  been  frequently  the  caufe  of  dropfy * 
I  cannot  deny  the  poilibility  of  fuch  a  caule, 
but  fufpec~t.  the  matter  muft  be  explained  in  a 
different  manner. 

There  have  been  frequently  found,  in  al- 
mofl  every  different  part  of  animal  bodies,, 
collections  of  fpherical  veficles,  containing  a 
watery  fluid  ;  and  in  many  cafes  of  fuppofed 
dropfy,  particularly  in  thofe  called  the  pre- 
ternatural encyfled  dropfies,  the  {welling  has 
been  entirely  owing  to  a  collection  of  fuch 
hydatides.  Many  conjectures  have*  been 
formed  with  regard  to  the  nature  and  pro- 
duction of  thefe  veficles ;  but  the  matter  at 
laft  feems  to  be  afcertained.  It  feems  to  be 
certain,  that  each  of  thefe  veficles  has  within 
it,  or  annexed  to  it,  a  living  animal  of  the 
worm  kind ;  which  feems  to  have  the  power 
of  forming  a  veficle  for  the  purpofe  of  its  own 

economy 


OF       PHYSIC.  273 

economy,  and  of  filling  it  with  a  watery  fluid 
drawn  from  the  neighbouring  parts  :  And 
this  animal  has  therefore  been  properly  named 
by  late  naturalifts,  the  Taenia  hydatigtna. 
The  origin  and  economy  of  this  animal,  or  an 
account  of  the  feveral  parts  of  the  human 
body  which  it  occupies,  I  cannot  profecute 
further  here  ;  but  it  was  proper  for  me,  in  de- 
livering the  caufes  of  dropfy,  to  fay  thus  much 
of  hydatides  :  And  I  muft  conclude  with  ob- 
ferving,  I  am  well  perfuaded,  that  moll  of  the 
inftances  of  preternatural  encyfted  dropfies 
which  have  appeared  in  many  different  parts 
of  the  human  body,  have  been  truly  collec- 
tions of  fuch  hydatides ;  but  how  the  fwell- 
ings  occafioned  by  thefe  are  to  be  diflinguiih- 
ed  from  other  fpecies  of  dropfy,  or  how  they 
are  to  be  treated  in  practice,  I  cannot  at  pres- 
ent determine, 


MDCLXIIL 


After  having  mentioned  thefe,  I  return  to 
confider  the  other  general  caufe  of  dropfy, 
which  I  have  faid  in  MDCXLVI  maybe, 
An  interruption  or  diminution  of  the  abforp- 
*ion  that  mould  take  up  the  exhaled  fluids 
from  the  feveral  cavities  and  interftices  of  the 
body  ;  the  canfes  of  which  interruption,  how- 
■^ever^  are  not  eafily  ascertained. 

MDCLXIV* 


274  PRACTICE 


MDCLXIV. 

It  feems  probable,  that  abforption  may  be 
diminifhed,  and  even  ceafe  altogether,  from  a 
lofs  of  tone  in  the  abforbent  extremities  of 
the  lymphatics.  I  cannot  indeed  doubt  that 
a  certain  degree  of  tone  or  active  power  is 
neceffary  in  thefe  abforbent  extremities ;  and 
it  appears  probable,  that  the  fame  general  de- 
bility which  produces  that  laxity  of  the  ex* 
halant  vefTels,  wherein  I  have  fuppofed  the 
hydropic  diathefis  to  confift,  will  at  the  fame 
time  occafion  a  lofs  of  tone  in  the  abforbents ; 
and  therefore  that  a  laxity  of  the  exhalants 
will  generally  be  accompanied  with  a  lofs  of 
tone  in  the  abforbents  ;  and  that  this  will 
have  a  fhare  in  the  production  of  dropfy. 
Indeed  it  is  probable  that  the  diminution  of 
abforption  has  a  confiderable  fhare  in  the 
matter  ;  as  dropfies  are  of  «:n  cured  by  med- 
icines which  feem  to  operate  by  exciting  the 
action  of  the  abforbents. 

MDCLXV. 

It  has  been  fuppofed,  that  the  abforption 
performed  by  the  extremities  of  lymphatics 
may  be  interrupted  by  an  obftru&ion  of  thefe 
VefTels,  or  at  leaf!  of  the  conglobate  glands 
through  which  thefe  vefTels  pafs.  This,  how- 
ever, is  very  doubtful.  As  the  lymphatics 
have    branches     frequently    communicating 

with 


OF       PHYSIC. 


*75 


with  one  another,  it  is  not  probable  that  the 
obftru&ion  of  any  one,  or  even  feveral  of 
thefe,  can  have  any  conftderable  efFecl;  in  in- 
terrupting the  abforption  of  their  extremities. 
And  for  the  fame  reafon,  it  is  as  little  prob- 
able that  the  obftruction  of  conglobate  glands 
can  have  fuch  an  efFecl: :  At  leafl  it  is  only  an 
obflruc~lion  of  the  glands  of  the  mefentery, 
through  which  fo  confiderable  a  portion  of 
the  lymph  pafFes,  that  can  pofiibly  have  the 
efFecl:  of  interrupting  abforption*  But  even 
this  we  mould  not  readily  fuppofe,  there  be- 
ing reafon  to  believe  that  thefe  glands,  even 
in  a  confiderably  tumefied  ftate,  are  not  en- 
tirely obftm&ed  :  And  accordingly  I  have 
known  feveral  inflances  of  the  moil  part  of 
the  mefenteric  glands  being  confiderably  tu- 
mefied, without  either  interrupting  the  tranf- 
tniffion  of  fluids  to  the  bloodvefFels,  or  occa- 
fioning  any  dropfy. 

.  An  hydropic  fwelling,  indeed,  feems  often 
to  afFect  the  arm  from  a  tumour  of  the  axil- 
lary gland  :  But  it  feems  to  me  doubtful, 
whether  the  tumour  of  the  arm  may  not  be 
owing  to  fome  compreffion  of  the  axillary 
vein,  rather  than  to  an  obflruclion  of  the 
lymphatics. 

MDCLXVI. 

A  particular  interruption  of  abforption  may 
fee  fuppofed  to  take  place  in  the  brain.  As 
tio  lymphatic  veffels  have  yet  very  certainly 

been 


27G  PRACTICE 

been  difcovered  in  that  organ,  it  may  be 
thought  that  the  abforption,  which  certainly 
takes  place  there,  is  performed  by  the  extrem-i 
ities  of  veins,  or  by  veffels  that  carry  the  fluid 
directly  into  the  veins  ;  fo  that  any  impedi- 
ment to  the  free  motion  of  the  blood  in  the 
veins  of  the  brain,  may  interrupt  the  abforp- 
tion there,  and  occafion  that  accumulation  of 
ferous  fluid  which  fo  frequently  occurs  fromi 
a  congeftion  of  blood  in  thefe  veins.  But  I 
give  all  this  as  a  matter  of  conjecture  only. 

MDCLXVII. 

Having  thus  explained  the  general  caufes 
of  dropfy,  I  mould  proceed,  in  the  next  place> 
to  mention  the  feveral  parts  of  the  body  in 
which  ferous  collections  take  place,  and  fo  to 
mark  the  different  fpecies  of  dropfy  :  But  I 
do  not  think  it  necefTary  for  me  to  enter  into 
any  minute  detail  upon  this  fubject.  In  many 
cafes,  thefe  collections  are  not  to  be  afcertain- 
ed  by  any  external  fymptoms,  and  therefore 
cannot  be  the  objects  of  practice  ;  and  many 
of  them,  though  in  fome  meafure  difcernible, 
do  not  feem  to  be  curable  by  our  art.  I  the 
more  efpecially  avoid  mentioning  very  par- 
ticularly the  feveral  fpecies,  becaufe  that  has 
already  been  fufficiently  done  by  Dr.  D. 
Monro,  and  other  writers,  in  every  body's 
hands.  I  muft  confine  my felf  here  to  the 
confideration  of  thofe  fpecies  which  are  the 
moil  frequently  occurring  and  the  moll  com- 
mon 


OF       PHYSIC.  «77 

mon  obje&s  of  our  practice  ;  which  are,  the 
Anafarca,  Hydrothorax,  and  Afcites  ;  and 
each  of  thefe  I  fliall  treat  in  fo  many  feparatc 
fe&ions. 


Sect*         I. 

Of  Anasarca, 

MDCLXVIIL 

THE  Anafarca  is  a  fwelling  upon  the  fur*. 
face  of  the  body,  at  firft  commonly  appearing 
in  particular  parts  only,  but  at  length  fre- 
quently appearing  over  the  whole.  So  far  as 
it  extends,  it  is  an  uniform  fwelling  over  the 
whole  member,  at  firft  always  foft,  and  read- 
ily receiving  the  preffure  of  the  finger,  which 
forms  a  hollow  that  remains  for  fome  little 
time  after  the  preffure  is  removed,  but  at 
length  rifes  again  to  its  former  fulnefs.  This 
fwelling  generally  appears,  firft,  upon  the 
lower  extremities  ;  and  there  too  only  in  the 
evening,  difappearing  again  in  the  morning. 
It  is  ufually  more  confiderable  as  the  perfon 
-has  been  more  in  an  erect  poflure  during  the 
day  ;  but  there  are  many  inftances  of  the  ex- 
ercife  of  walking  preventing  altogether  its  oth- 
erwife  ufual  coming  on.  Although  this 
fwelling  appears  at  firft  only  upon  the  feet 

Vol.  III.  N  and 


278  PRACTICE 

and  about  the  ankles  ;  yet  if  the  caufes  pro- 
ducing it  continue  to  aft,  it  gradually  extends 
upwards,  occupying  the  legs,  thighs,  and 
trunk  of  the  body,  and  fometimes  even  the 
head.  Commonly  the  fwelling  of  the  lower 
extremities  diminifhes  during  the  night ;  and 
in  the  morning,  the  fwelling  of  the  face  is 
moft  confiderable,  which  again  generally  dis- 
appears alrnoft  entirely  in  the  courfe  of  the 
day. 

MDCLXIX. 

The  terms  of  Anafarca  and  Leucophlegmatia 
have  been  commonly  confidered  as  fynony- 
mous  ;  but  fome  authors  have  propofed  to 
confider  them  as  denoting  diftinc~l  difeafes. 
The  authors  who  are  of  this  laft  opinion  em- 
ploy the  name  of  Anafarca  for  that  difeafe 
which  begins  in  the  lower  extremities,  and  is 
from  thence  gradually  extended  upwards  in 
the  manner  I  have  jufl  now  defcribed ;  while 
they  term  Leucophlegmatia,  that  in  which  the 
fame  kind  of  fwelling  appears  even  at  firft 
very  generally  over  the  whole  body.  They 
feem  to  think  alfo,  that  the  two  difeafes  pro- 
ceed from  different  caufes  ;  and  that,  while 
the  anafarca  may  arife  from  the  feveral  caufes 
in  MDCXLVIII— MDCLIX,  the  leuco- 
phlegmatia proceeds  efpecially  from  a  defi- 
ciency of  red  blood,  as  we  have  mentioned  in 
MBCLX  et  feq.  I  cannot,  however,  find 
any  proper  foundation  for  this  diftindlion. 

For 


OF"    PHYSIC.  279 

For  although  in  dropfies  proceeding  from  the 
caufes  mentioned  in  MDCLX  ebfeq.  the  dif- 
cafe  appears  in  fome  cafes  more  immediately 
affecting  the  whole  body  ;  yet  that  does  not 
eflablifh  a  difference  from  the  common  cafe 
of  anafarca  :  For  the  difeafe,  in  all  its  circum- 
ftances,  comes  at  length  to  be  entirely  the 
fame ;  and  in  cafes  occafioned  by  a  deficiency 
of  red  blood,  I  have  frequently  obferved  it  to 
come  on  exactly  in  the  manner  of  an  anafar- 
ca, as  above  defcribed. 

MDCLXX. 

An  anafarca  is  evidently  a  preternatural 
collection  of  ferous  fluid  in  the  cellular  tex- 
ture immediately  under  the  fkin.  Some- 
times pervading  the  fkin  itfelf,  it  oozes  out 
through  the  pores  of  the  cuticle  ;  and  fome- 
times,  too  grofs  to  pafs  by  thefe,  it  raifes  the 
cuticle  in  blifters.  Sometimes  the  fkin,  not 
allowing  the  water  to  pervade  it,  is  compreff- 
ed  and  hardened,  and  at  the  fame  time  fo 
much  diftended,  as  to  give  anafarcous  tu- 
mours an  unufual  firmnefs.  It  is  in  thefe 
laft  circumflances  alfo  that  an  erythematic 
inflammation  is  ready  to  come  upon  anafar- 
cous fwellings. 

MDCLXXI. 

An  anafarca  may  immediately  arife  from 

any  of  the  feveral   caufes   of  dropfy  which 

■  N  2  act 


280  PRACTICE 

aft  more  generally  upon  the  fyftem  :  And 
even  when  other  fpecies  of  drop  iy,  from  par- 
ticular circumftances,  appear  firft  j  yet  when- 
ever thefe  proceed  from  any  caufes  more  gen- 
erally affecting  the  fyflem,  an  anafarca  foon- 
er  or  later  comes  always  to  be  joined  with 
them. 

MDCLXXIL 

The  manner  in  which  this  difeafe  common-* 
ly  firft  appears,  will  be  readily  explained  by 
what  I  have  faid  in  MDCL  refpe&ing  the 
effects  of  the  pofture  of  the  body.  Its  grad- 
ual progrefsj  and  its  affecting,  after  fome  time, 
not  only  the  cellular  texture  under  the  fkin, 
but  probably  alfo  much  of  the  fame  texture 
in  the  internal  parts,  will  be  underflood  part- 
ly from  the  communication  that  is  readily 
made  between  the  feveral  parts  of  the  cellular 
texture  $  but  efpecially  from  the  fame  general 
caufes  of  the  difeafe  producing  their  effects 
in  every  part  of  the  body.  It  appears  to  me, 
that  the  water  of  anafarcous  fwellings  is  more 
readily  communicated  to  the  cavity  of  the 
thorax,  and  to  the  lungs,  than  to  the  cavity  of 
the  abdomen,  or  to  the  vifcera  contained 
in  it. 

MDCLXXIIL 

An  anafarca  is  alinoft  always  attended  with 
a  fcareity  of  urine  j  and  the  urine  voided,  is, 

from 


OF       PHYSIC.         281 

from  its  fcarcity,  always  of  a  high  colour ;  and 
from  the  fame  caufe,  after  cooling,  readily  lets 
fall  a  copious  reddifh  fediment.  This  fcar- 
city of  urine  may  fometimes  be  owing  to  an 
obllruction  of  the  kidneys  ;  but  probably  is 
generally  occafioned  by  the  watery  parts  of 
the  blood  running  off  into  the  cellular  tex- 
ture, and  being  thereby  prevented  from  pafT- 
ing  in  the  ufual  quantity  to  the  kidneys. 

The  difeafe  is  alfo  generally  attended  with 
an  unufual  degree  of  third  ;  a  circumflance  I 
would  attribute  to  a  like  abflraclion  of  fluid 
from  the  tongue  and  fauces,  which  are  ex- 
tremely fenfible  to  every  diminution  of  the 
fluids  in  thefe  parts, 

iMDCLXXIV. 

The  cure  of  anafarca  is  to  be  attempted' 
upon  three  general  indications. 

1.  The  removing  the  remote  caufes  of  the 
difeafe. 

2.  The  evacuation  of  the  ferous  fluid  al- 
ready collected  in  the  cellular  texture. 

3.  The  reftoring  the  tone  of  the  fyftem,  the 
lofs  of  which  may  be  confidered  in  many  cafes^ 
as  the  proximate  caufe  of  the  difeafe. 

MDCLXXV. 

The  remote  caufes  are  very  often  fuch  as 

had  not  only  been  applied,  but  had  alfo  been 

removed,  long  before  the   difeafe  came  on.. 

N  3  Although, 


282  PRACTICE 

Although,  therefore,  their  effecls  remain,  the 
caufes  themfelves  cannot  be  the  obje&s  of 
practice  ;  but  if  the  caufes  Hill  continue  to 
be  applied,  fuch  as  intemperance,  indolence, 
and  fome  others,  they  muft  be  removed.  For 
the  mofl  part,  the  remote  caufes  are  certain 
difeafes  previous  to  the  dropfy,  which  are  to 
be  cured  by  the  remedies  particularly  adapt- 
ed to  them,  and  cannot  be  treated  of  here. 
The  curing  of  thefe,  indeed,  may  be  often 
difficult ;  but  it  was  proper  to  lay  down  the 
prefent  indication,  in  order  to  mow,  that 
when  thefe  remote  caufes  cannot  be  remov- 
ed, the  cure  of  the  dropfy  muft  be  difficult, 
or  perhaps  impoffible.  In  many  cafes,  there- 
fore, the  following  indications  will  be  to  little 
purpofe  ;  and  particularly,  that  often  the  ex- 
ecution of  the  fecond  will  not  only  give  the 
patient  a  great  deal  of  fruitlefs  trouble,  but 
commonly  alfo  hurry  on  his  fate. 

MDCLXXVI. 

The  fecond  indication  for  evacuating  the 
collected  ferum,  may  be  fometimes  executed  * 
with  advantage,  and  often,  at  leafl,  with  tem- 
porary relief.  It  may  be  performed  in  two 
ways.  Firft,  by  drawing  off  the  water  di- 
rectly from  the  dropfical  part,  by  openings 
made  into  it  for  that  purpofe  :  Or,  fecondly, 
by  exciting  certain  ferous  excretions  ;  in  con- 
fequence  of  which,  an  abforption  may  be  ex- 
cited in  the  dropfical  parts,  and   thereby  the 

ferum 


OF       PHYSIC.  283 

ferum  abforbed  and  carried  into  the  blood- 
veffels,  may  afterwards  be  directed  to  run  out, 
or  may  fpontaneoufly  pafs  out,  by  one  or  oth- 
er of  the  common  excretions. 

MDCLXXVII. 

In  an  anafarca,  the  openings  into  the  drop- 
fical  part  are  commonly  to  be  made  in  fome 
part  of  the  lower  extremities  ;  and  will  be 
moil  properly  made  by  many  fmall  punctures 
reaching  the  cellular  texture.  Formerly, 
confiderable  incifions  were  employed  for  this 
purpofe  :  But  as  any  wound  made  in  drop- 
fical  parts,  which,  in  order  to  their  healing, 
mufl  neceffarily  inflame  and  fupp urate,  are 
liable  to  become  gangrenous  ;  fo  it  is  found 
to  be  much  fafer  to  make  the  openings  by 
fmall  punctures  only,  which  may  heal  up  by 
the  firft  intention.  At  the  fame  time,  even 
with  refpect  to  thefe  punctures,  it  is  proper 
to  obferve,  that  they  mould  be  made  at  fome 
diftance  from  one  another,  and  that  care 
mould  be  taken  to  avoid  making  them  in  the 
moft  depending  parts. 

MDCLXXVIII. 

The  water  of  anafarcous  limbs  may  be 
fometimes  drawn  off  by  pea  ifTues,  made  by 
cauftic  a  little  below  the  knees  :  For  as  the 
great  fweliing  of  the  lower  extremities  is  chief- 
ly occafioned  by  the  ferous  fluid  exhaled  into 
N  4  the 


284  PRACTICE 

the  upper  parts  conftantly  falling  down  to 
the  lower ;  fo  the  iflues  now  mentioned,  by 
evacuating  the  water  from  thefe  upper  parts, 
may  very  much  relieve  the  whole  of  the  dif- 
eafe.  Unlefs,  however,  the  iflues  be  put  in 
before  the  difeafe  is  far  advanced,  and  before 
the  parts  have  very  much  loft  their  tone,  the 
places  of  the  iflues  are  ready  to  become  af- 
fected with  gangrene. 

Some  practical  writers  have  advifed  the 
employment  of  fetons  for  the  fame  purpofe 
that  I  have  propofed  iflues ;  but  I  apprehend, 
that  fetons  will  be  more  liable  than  iflues  to 
the  accident  juft  now  mentioned. 

MDCLXXIX. 

For  the  purpofe  of  drawing  out  ferum  from 
anafarcous  limbs,  blifters  have  been  applied 
to  them,  and  fometimes  with  great  fuccefs  ; 
but  the  bliftered  parts  are  ready  to  have  a 
gangrene  come  upon  them.  Bliftering  is 
therefore  to  be  employed  with  great  caution  ; 
and  perhaps  only  in  the  circumftances  that  I 
have  mentioned  above  to  be  fit  for  the  em- 
ployment of  iflues. 

MDCLXXX. 

Colewort  leaves  applied  to  the  ikin,  readily 
occafion  a  watery  exfudation  from  its  furface  ; 
and  applied  to  the  feet  and  legs  affected  with 

anafarca, 


OF       PHYSIC-  28$ 

anafarca,  have  fometimes  drawn  off  the  water 
very  copioufly,  and  with  great  advantage. 

Analogous,  as  I  judge,  to  this,  oiled  filk 
hofe  put  upon  the  feet  and  legs,  fo  as  to  fhut 
out  all  communication  with  the  external  air, 
have  been  found  fometimes  to  draw  a  quanti- 
ty of  water  from  the  pores  of  the  fkin,  and  are 
faid  in  this  way  to  have  relieved  anafarcous 
fweilings  :  But  in  feverai  trials  made,  I  have 
never  found  either  the  application  of  rhefe 
hofe,  or  that  of  the  colewort  leaves,  of  much 
ferv  ice. 

MDCLXXXI. 


The  2d  means  propofed  in  MDCLXXVX 
for  drawing  off  the  water  from  dropfical 
places,  may  be  the  employment  of  emetics,, 
purgatives,  diuretics,  or  fudorifics* 

MDCLXXXII. 

As  fpontaneous  vomiting  has  fometimes 
excited  an  abforption  in  hydropic  parts,  and 
thereby  drawn  off  the  waters  lodged  in  them, 
it  is  reafonable  to  fuppofe  that  vomiting  ex- 
cited by  art  may  have  the  fame  effeel;  •  and 
accordingly  it  has  been  often  praclifed  with 
advantage.  The  praclice,  however,  requires 
that  the  flrong  antimonial  emetics  be  em- 
ployed, and  that  they  be  repeated  frequently 
after  lhort  intervals. 

Vol.  3.  N5  MDCLXXXIII. 


286  PRACTICE 


MDCLXXXIII. 

Patients  fubmit  more  readily  to  the  u(e  of 
purgatives,  than  to  that  of  emetics ;  and  in- 
deed they  commonly  bear  the  former  more 
eafily  than  the  latter.  At  the  fame  time, 
there  are  no  means  we  can  employ  to  pro- 
cure a  copious  evacuation  of  ferous  fluids 
with  greater  certainty  than  the  operation  of 
purgatives  ;  and  it  is  upon  thefe  accounts 
that  purging  is  the  evacuation  which  has  been 
moft  frequently,  and  perhaps  with  moft  fuc- 
cefs,  employed  in  dropfy.  It  has  been  gen- 
erally found  neceffary  to  employ  purgatives 
of  the  more  draftic  kind  ;  which  are  common- 
ly known,  and  need  not  be  enumerated  here. 
I  believe  indeed,  that  the  more  draftic  pur- 
gatives are  the  moft  effectual  for  exciting 
abforption,  as  their  ftimulus  is  moft  readily 
communicated  to  the  other  parts  of  the  fyf- 
tem  ;  but  of  late  an  opinion  has  prevailed, 
that  fome  milder  purgatives  may  be  employ- 
ed with  advantage.  This  opinion  has  pre- 
vailed particularly  with  regard  to  the  cryftals 
vulgarly  called  the  Cream  of  Tartar,  which  in 
large  dofes,  frequently  repeated,  have  fome- 
times  anfwered  the  purpofe  of  exciting  large 
evacuations  both  by  ftool  and  urine,  and  has 
thereby  cured  dropfies.  This  medicine,, 
however,  has  frequently  failed,  both  in  its 
operation  and  effects,  when  the  draftic  pur- 
gatives have  b^Gti  more  fuccefsful. 

Practitioners 


OF      PHYSIC.  287 

Practitioners  have  long  ago  obferved,  that, 
in  the  employment  of  purgatives,  it  is  requi- 
fite  they  be  repeated  after  as  fhort  intervals 
as  the  patient  can  bear  ;  probably  for  this 
reafon,  that  when  the  purging  is  not  carried 
to  the  degree  of  foon  exciting  an  abforption, 
the  evacuation  weakens  the  fyftem,  and  there- 
by increafes  the  afflux  of  fluids  to  the  hy- 
dropic parts  0. 

MDCLXXXIV. 

The  kidneys  afford  a  natural  outlet  for  a 
great  part  of  the  watery  fluids  contained  in 
the  bloodveflels  ;  and  the  increafing  the  ex- 
cretion by  the  kidneys  to  a  coniiderable  de- 
gree, is  a  means  as  likely  as  any  other  of  ex- 
citing an  abforption  in  dropfical  parts.  It  is« 
upon  this  account  that  diuretic  medicines  have 
been  always  properly  employed  in  the  cure  of 
dropfy.  The  various  diuretics  that  may  be 
employed,  are  enumerated  in  every  treatife  of 
the  Materia  Medica  and  of  the  Pra£Hce  of 
Phyfic,  and  therefore  need  not  be  repeated 
here.  It  happens,  however,  unluckily,  that 
none  of  them  are  of  very  certain  operation  •■ 
neither  is  it  well  known  why  they  fometimes 
fucceed,  and  why  they  fo  often  fail  ;  nor  why 
one  medicine  mould  prove  of  fervice  when 
another  does  not.  It  has  been  generally  the 
fault  of  writers  upon  the  Practice  of  Phytic, 
that  they  give  us  inftances  of  cafes  in  which 
certain  medicines  have  proved  very  efhca- 
N  6  Icioiis. 


288  PRACTICE 

cious,  but  negka  to  tell  us  in  how  many  oth- 
er inftances  the  fame  have  failed. 

MDCLXXXV. 

It  deferves  to  be  particularly  obferved  here, 
that  there  is  hardly  any  diuretic  more  certain- 
ly powerful  than  a  large  quantity  of  common 
water  taken  in  by  drinking.  I  have  indeed 
obferved  above  in  MDCLVIII,  that  a  large 
quantity  of  water,  or  of  watery  liquors,  taken 
in  by  drinking,  has  fometimes  proved  a  caufe 
of  dropfy  ,•  and  practitioners  have  been  for- 
merly fo  much  afraid  that  watery  liquors  tak- 
en in  by  drinking  might  run  off  into  dropfical 
places  and  increafe  the  difeafe,  that  they  have 
generally  enjoined  the  abftaining  as  much  as 
poflible,  from  fuch  liquors.  Nay,  it  has  been 
further  afferted,  that  by  avoiding  this  fupply 
of  exhalation,  and  by  a  total  abftinence  from 
drink,  dropfies  have  been  entirely  cured. 
What  concluiion  is  to  be  drawn  from  thefe 
fa6ls  is,  however,  very  doubtful.  A  dropfy 
arifmg  from  a  large  quantity  of  liquids  taken 
in  to  the  body  has  been  a  very  rare  occurrence ; 
and  there  are,  on  the  other  hand,  innumerable 
inflances  of  very  large  quantities  of  water  hav- 
ing been  taken  in  and  running  off  again  very 
quickly  by  ftool  and  urine,  without  produc- 
ing any  degree  of  dropfy.  With  refpect  to 
the  total  abftinence  from  drink,  it  is  a  practice 
of  the  moil  difficult  execution  ;  and  therefore 
has  hc&n  fo  feldom  prac/iifed,  that  we  cannot 

poffibly 


OF       PHYSIC.  289 

poffibly  know  how  far  it  might  prove  effectu- 
al. The  practice  of  giving  drink  very  fpar- 
ingly  has  indeed  been  often  employed  :  But 
in  a  hundred  inftances,  I  have  feen  it  car- 
ried to  a  great  length  without  any  manifeft 
advantage  :  while,  on  the  contrary,  the  prac- 
tice of  giving  drink  very  largely  has  been 
found  not  only  fafe,  but  very  often  effectual 
in  curing  the  difeafe.  The  ingenious  and 
learned  Dr.  Millman  has,  in  my  opinion,  been 
commendably  employed  in  reftoring  the  prac- 
tice of  giving  large  quantities  of  watery  liquors 
for  the  cure  of  dropfy.  Not  only  from  the 
inftances  he  mentions  from  his  own  practice,, 
and  from  that  of  feveral  eminent  phyficians 
in  other  parts  of  Europe,  but  alftx  from  many 
inftances  in  the  records  of  phyfic,  of  the  good 
effects  of  drinking  large  quantities  of  mineral 
waters  in  the  cure  of  dropfy,  I  can  have  no 
doubt  of  the  practice  recommended  by  Di\ 
Millman  being  very  often  extremely  proper, 
I  apprehend  it  to  be  efpecially  adapted  to 
thofe  cafes  in  which  the  cure  is  chiefly  at- 
tempted by  diuretics.  It  is  very  probable., 
that  thefe  medicines  can  hardly  be  carried  in 
any  quantity  to  the  kidneys  without  being  ac- 
companied with  a  large  portion  of  water  ;  and 
the  late  frequent  employment  of  the  cryftals 
of  tartar  has  often  mown,  that  the  diuretic 
effects  of  that  medicine  are  almoft  only  re- 
markable when  accompanied  with  a  large 
quantity  of  water  ;  and  that  without  this,  the 
diuretic  effects  of  the  medicine  feldom  ap- 
pear. 


290  PRACTICE 

pear.  I  fhall  conclude  this  fubjecl;  with  ob~ 
ferving,  that  as  there  are  fo  many  cafes  of 
dropfy  absolutely  incurable,  the  practice  now 
under  confideration  may  often  fail,  yet  in 
moil  cafes  it  may  be  fafely  tried  ;  and  if  it 
appear  that  the  water  taken  in  paffes  readily 
by  the  urinary  fecretion,  and  eipecially  that 
it  increafes  the  urine  beyond  the  quantity  of 
drink  taken  in,  the  practice  may  probably  be 
continued  with  great  advantage  :  But,  on  the 
contrary,  if  the  urine  be  not  increafed,  or  be 
not  even  in  proportion  to  the  drink  taken  in, 
it  may  be  concluded,  that  the  water  thrown 
in  runs  off  by  the  exhalants,  and  will  augment 
the  difeafe. 

MDCLXXXVI. 

Another  fet  of  remedies  which  may  be  em- 
ployed for  exciting  a  ferous  excretion,  and 
thereby  curing  dropfy,  is  that  of  fudorirics. 
Such  remedies,  indeed,  have  been  fometimes 
employed  :  But  however  ufeful  they  may 
have  been  thought,  there  are  few  accounts  of 
their  having  effected  a  cure  ;  and  although  I 
laave  had  fome  examples  of  their  fuccefs,  in 
mod  inftances  of  their  trial  they  have  been 
ineffectual. 

Upon  this  fubjecl:  it  is  proper  to  take  notice 
of  the  feveral  means  that  have  been  propofed 
and  employed  for  difTipating  the  humidity  of 
the  body  ;  and  particularly  that  of  heat  ex- 
ternally applied  to  the  furface  of  it.     Of  fuch 

applications 


OF       PHYSIC.  291 

applications  I  have  had  no  experience;  and 
their  propriety  and  utility  mull  reft  upon  the 
credit  of  the  authors  who  relate  them.  I 
fhall  offer  only  this  conjecture  upon  the  fub- 
jecl :  That  if  fuch  meafures  have  been  truly 
ufeful,  as  it  has  feldom  been  by  the  drawing 
out  of  any  fenfible  humidity,  it  has  probably 
been  by  their  reftoring  the  perfpiration,  which 
is  fo  often  greatly  diminished  in  this  difeafe  ; 
or,  perhaps,  by  changing  the  ftate  of  the  fkin5 
from  the  imbibing  condition  which  is  alleged 
to  take  place,  into  that  of  perfpiring. 

MDCLXXXVII. 

When,  by  the  feveral  means  now  men- 
tioned, we  fhall  have  fucceeded  in  evacuating 
the  water  of  dropfies,  there  will  then  efpecial- 
ly  be  occafion  for  our  third  indication ;  which 
is,  to  reftore  the  tone  of  the  fyftem,  the  lofs 
of  which  is  fo  often  the  caufe  of  the  difeafe. 
This  indication,  indeed,  may  properly  have 
place  from  the  very  firft  appearance  of  the 
difeafe  ;  and  certain  meafures  adapted  to  this 
purpofe  may,  upon  fuch  firft  appearance,  be 
employed  with  advantage.  In  many  cafes  of 
a  moderate  difeafe,  I  am  perfuaded  that  they 
may  obviate  any  future  increafe  of  it. 

MDCLXXXVIII. 

Thus,  upon  what  is  commonly  the   firft 
fymptom  of  aaafarca,  that  is,  upon  the  ap- 
pearance 


292  PRACTICE 

pearance  of  what  are  called  Oedematous 
Swellings  of  the  feet  and  legs,  the  three  rem- 
edies of  bandaging,  friction,  and  exercife, 
have  often  been  ufed  with  advantage. 

MDCLXXXIX. 

That  fome  degree  of  external  compreffion 
is  fuited  to  fupport  the  tone  of  the  veffels,  and 
particularly  to  prevent  the  effects  of  the 
weight  of  the  blood  in  dilating  thofe  of  the 
lower  extremities,  muft  be  fufriciently  evident ; 
and  the  giving  that  compreffion  by  a  bandage 
properly  applied,  has  been  often  ufeful.  In 
applying  fuch  a  bandage,  care  is  to  be  taken 
that  the  compreffion  may  never  be  greater  on 
the  upper  than  on  the  lower  part  of  the  limb  ; 
and  this^  I  think,  can  hardly  ever  be  fo  cer- 
tainly avoided,  as  by  employing  a  properly 
conftructed  laced  flocking. 

MDCXC. 

Friction  is  another  means  by  which  the  ac- 
tion of  the  bloodvefTels  may  be  promoted,  and 
thereby  the  ftagnation  of  fluids  in  their  ex- 
tremities prevented.  Accordingly,  the  ufe  of 
the  flem  brufh  has  often  contributed  to  dif- 
ctifs  oedematous  fwellings.  It  appears  to  me, 
that  friction,  for  the  purpofes  now  mention- 
ed, is  more  properly  employed  in  the  morn- 
ing, when  the  fwelling  is  very  much  gone  off, 
than  in  the  evening,  when  any  considerable 

degree 


OF       PHYSIC.  293 

decree  of  it  has  already  come  on.  I  appre- 
hend alfo,  that  friction  being  made  from  be- 
low upwards  only,  is  more  ufeful  than  when 
made  alternately  upwards  and  downwards. 
It  has  been  common,  inftead  of  employing 
the  flefh  brum,  to  make  the  friction  by  warm 
and  dry  flannels  ;  and  this  may  in  fome  cafes 
be  the  mod  convenient :  But  I  cannot  per- 
ceive that  the  impregnation  of  thefe  flannels 
with  certain  dry  fumes  is  of  any  benefit. 

MDCXCI. 

With  refpecl:  to  exercife,  I  mufl  obferve, 
that  although  perfons  being  much  in  an  erect 
poflure  during  the  day,  may  feem  to  increafe 
the  fwelling  which  comes  on  at  night ;  yet  as 
the  action  of  the  mufcles  has  a  great  mare  in 
promoting  the  motion  of  the  venous  blood,  fo 
I  am  certain,  that  as  much  exercife  in  walk- 
ing as  the  patient  can  eafily  bear,  will  often 
prevent  that  cedematous  fwelling  which  much 
Handing,  and  even  fitting,  would  have  brought 
on. 

MDCXCII. 

Thefe  meafures,  however,  although  they 
may  be  ufeful  at  the  coming  on  of  a  dropfy, 
whofe  caufes  are  not  very  powerful,  will  be 
often  infufficient  in  a  more  violent  difeafe  ; 
and  fuch  therefore  will  require  more  powerful 
remedies.      Thefe  are,    exercife    and    tonic 

medicines ; 


294  PRACTICE 

medicines  ;  which  may  be  employed  both 
during  the  courfe  of  the  difeafe,  and  efpecial- 
ly  after  the  water  has  been  evacuated. 


MDCXCIII. 


Exercife  is  fuited  to  aflift  in  every  function 
of  the  animal  economy,   particularly  to  pro^ 
mote  perfpiration,  and  thereby  prevent  the 
accumulation  of  watery  fluids  in  the  body. 
I  apprehend  alfo,  that  it  may  be  the  molt  ef- 
fectual means  for  preventing  the  fkin  from 
being  in  an  imbibing  flate  ;  and,  as  has  been 
hinted  above  on  the  fubjecl;  of  Emaciation 
(MDCVII),  I  am  perfuaded,  that  a  full  and 
large  perfpiration  will  always  be  a  means  of 
exciting  abforption  in  every  part  of  the  fyf- 
tem.       Exercife,    therefore,    promifes  to    be 
highly  ufeful  in  dropfy  •  and  any  mode  of  it 
may  be  employed  that  the  patient  can  moft 
conveniently  admit  of.     It  mould,  however, 
always  be  as  much  as  he  can  eafily  bear ;  and 
in  anafarca,  the   fhare  which  the  exercife  of 
mufcles  has  in  promoting  the  motion   of  the 
venous  blood,  induces  me  to  think  that  bodi- 
ly exercife,  to  whatever  degree  the  patient 
can  bear  it,  will  always  be  the  moll  ufeful. 
From  fome  experience  alfo,  I  am  perfuaded, 
that  by  exercife  alone,  employed  early  in  tha 
difeafe,  many  dropfies  may  be  cured. 

MDCXCIV* 


OF       PHYSIC.  295 

MDCXCIV. 

Befides  exercife,  various  tonic  remedies  are 
properly  employed  to  reftore  the  tone  of  the 
fyftem.  The  chief  of  thefe  are,  chalybeates, 
the  Peruvian  bark,  and  various  bitters. 
Thefe  are  not  only  fuited  to  reftore  the  tone 
of  the  fyftem  in  general,  but  are  particularly 
ufeful  in  ftrengthening  the  organs  of  diges- 
tion, which  in  dropfies  are  frequently  very 
much  weakened  :  And  for  the  fame  purpofe 
alfo  aromatics  may  be  frequently  joined  with 
the  tonics. 

MDCXCV. 

Cold  bathing  is  upon  many  occafions  the 
moll  powerful  tonic  we  can  employ  ;  but  at 
the  beginning  of  dropfy,  when  the  debility  of 
the  fyftem  is  confiderable,  it  can  hardly  be 
attempted  with  fafety.  After,  however,  the 
water  of  dropfies  has  been  very  fully  evacu- 
ated, and  the  indication  is  to  ftrengthen  the 
fyftem  for  preventing  a  relapfe,  cold  bathing 
may  perhaps  have  a  place.  It  is,  at  the  fame 
time,  to  be  admitted  with  caution  ;  and  can 
fcarcely  be  employed  till  the  fyftem  has  oth- 
erwife  recovered  a  good  deal  of  vigour. 
When  that  indeed  has  happened,  cold  bath- 
ing may  be  very  ufeful  in  confirming  and 
completing  it. 

MDCXCVI, 


zgS  PRACTICE 

MDCXCVI. 

In  perfons  recovering  from  dropfy,  while! 
trie  feveral  means  now  mentioned  for  ftrength-, 
ening  the  fyftem  are  employed,  it  will  be 
proper  at  the  fame  time  to  keep  conftantly  in 
view  the  fupport  of  the  watery  excretions  ; 
and  confequently  the  keeping  up  the  perfpi- 
ration  by  a  great  deal  of  exercife,  and  contin- 
uing the  full  flow  of  the  urinary  excretions 
by  the  frequent  ufe  of  diuretics. 


t.         II. 


Of  the  Hydrothorax,  or  Dropsy   of  the 
Breast. 


MDCXCVII. 


THE  preternatural  collection  of  ferous 
fluid  in  the  thorax,  to  which  we  give  the  ap- 
pellation of  Hydrothoraxy  occurs  more  fre- 
quently than  has  been  imagined.  Its  pref- 
ence,  however,  is  not  always  to  be  very  cer- 
tainly known  ;  and  it  often  takes  place  to  a 
confiderable  degree  before  it  be  difcovered. 

MDCXCVin. 


OF      PHYSIC.  297 


MDCXCVIII. 

Thefe  collections  of  watery  fluids  in  the 
thorax,  are  found  in  different  fituations6 
Very  often  the  water  is  found  at  the  fame 
time  in  both  facs  of  the  pleura,  but  frequent- 
ly in  one  of  them  only.  Sometimes  it  is 
found  in  the  pericardium  alone  ;  but  for  the 
mofl  part  it  only  appears  there  when  at  the 
fame  time  a  collection  is  prefent  in  one  or 
both  cavities  of  the  thorax.  In  fome  inflances, 
the  collection  is  found  to  be  only  in  that  cel- 
lular texture  of  the  lungs  which  furrounds 
the  bronchia?,  without  there  being  at  the 
fame  time  any  effufion  into  the  cavity  of  the 
thorax. 

Pretty  frequently  the  water  collected  con* 
fids  chiefly  of  a  great  number  of  hydatides 
in  different  lituations  ;  fometimes  feemingly 
floating  in  the  cavity,  but  frequently  con- 
heeled  with  and  attached  to  particular  parts 
of  the  internal  furface  of  the  pleura* 

MDCXCIX. 

From  the  collection  of  water  being  thus  in 
Various  lituations  and  circumftances,  fymp** 
toms  arife  which  are  different  in  different 
cafes  ;  and  from  thence  it  becomes  often  dif- 
ficult to  afcertain  the  prefence  and  nature  of 
the  affection.  I  (hall,  however,  endeavour 
here  to  point  out  the  moft  common  fymp- 

toms* 


298  PRACTICE 

toms,  and  efpecially  thofe  of  that  principal! 
and  moil  frequent  form  of  the  difeafe,  when 
the  ferous  fluid  is  prefent  in  both  facs  of  the 
pleura,  or,  as  we  uiually  fpeak,  in  both  cav- 
ities of  the  thorax. 

MDCC. 

The  difeafe  frequently  comes  on  with 
fenfe  of  anxiety  about  the  lower  part  of  the 
flernum.  This,  before  it  has  fubfifled  long, 
comes  to  be  joined  with  fome  difficulty  of 
breathing  ;  which  at  firft  appears  only  upon 
the  perfon's  moving  a  little  falter  than  ufual, 
upon  his  walking  up  an  acclivity,  or  upon  his 
afcending  a  flaircafe  :  But  after  fome  time, 
this  difficulty  of  breathing  becomes  more  con- 
ftant  and  confiderable,  efpecially  during  the 
night,  when  the  body  is  in  a  horizontal  fitua- 
tion.  Commonly,  at  the  fame  time,  lying 
upon  one  fide  is  more  eafy  than  upon  the 
other,  or  perhaps  lying  upon  the  back  more, 
eafy  than  upon  either  fide.  Thefe  circum- 
ftances  are  ufually  attended  with  a  frequent 
cough,  that  is  at  firft  dry  ;  but  which,  after 
fome  time,  is  accompanied  with  an  expecto- 
ration of  thin  mucus. 

With  all  thefe  fymptoms,  the  hydrothorax 
is  not  certainly  difcovered,  as  the  fame  fymp- 
toms often  attend  other  difeafes  of  the  breaft. 
When,  however,  along  with  thefe  fymptoms, 
there  is  at  the  fame  time  an  cedematous  fwell- 
ing  of  the  feet  and  legs,  a  leuccphlegmatic 

palenefs 


OF       PHYSIC.  299 

palenefs  of  the  face,  and  a  fcarcity  of  urine, 
the  exiftence  of  a  hydrothorax  can  be  no 
longer  doubtful.  Some  writers  have  told  us, 
that  fometimes  in  this  difeafe,  before  the  fuell- 
ing of  the  feet  comes  on,  a  watery  fwelling  of 
the  fcrotum  appears  ;  but  I  have  never  met 
with  any  inftance  of  this. 


MDCCI. 

Whilft  the  prefence  of  the  difeafe  is  fome- 
what  uncertain,  there  is  a  fymptom  which 
fometimes  takes  place,  and  has  been  thought 
to  be  a  certain  charafteriftic  of  it  ;  and  that 
is,  when,  foon  after  the  patient  has  fallen 
afleep,  he  is  fuddenly  awaked  with  a  fenfe  of 
anxiety  and  difficult  breathing,  and  with  a 
violent  palpitation  of  the  heart.  Thefe  feel- 
ings immediately  require  an  ere£r.  pofture  ; 
and  very  often  the  difficulty  of  breathing  con- 
tinues to  require  and  to  prevent  fleep  for  a 
great  part  of  the  night.  This  fymptom  I 
have  frequently  found  attending  the  difeafe  ; 
but  I  have  alfo  met  with  feveral  inflances  in 
which  this  fymptom  did  not  appear.  I  muft 
remark  further,  that  I  have  not  found  this 
fymptom  attending  the  empyema,  or  any  oth- 
er difeafe  of  the  thorax  ;  and  therefore,  when 
it  attends  a  difficulty  of  breathing,  accompa- 
nied with  any  the  fmalleft  fymptom  of  drop- 
fy,  I  have  had  no  doubt  in  concluding  the 
prefence  of  water  in  the  cheft,  and  have  al- 
ways 


3oo  PRACTICE 

ways  had  my  judgment   confirmed   by  the 
fymptoms  which  afterwards  appeared. 


MDCCII. 

The  hydrothorax  often  occurs  with  very 
few,  or  almoft  none,  of  the  fymptoms  above 
mentioned ;  and  is  not,  therefore,  very  cer- 
tainly difcovered  till  fome  others  appear. 
The  mod  decihve  fymptom  is  a  fluctuation 
of  water  in  the  cheft,  perceived  by  the  patient 
himfelf,  or  by  the  phyfician,  upon  certain 
motions  of  the  body.  How  far  the  method 
propofed  by  Auenbrugger  will  apply  to  af~ 
certain  the  prefence  of  water  and  the  quantity 
of  it  in  the  chef!,  I  have  not  had  occafion  or 
opportunity  to  obferve. 

It  has  been  faid,  that  in  this  difeafe  fome 
tumour  appears  upon  the  fides  or  vupon  the 
back  ;  but  I  have  not  met  with  any  inflance 
x)f  this.  In  one  inflance  of  the  difeafe,  I 
found  one  fide  of  the  thorax  confide rably  en- 
larged, the  ribs  ftanding  out  farther  on  that 
fide  than  upon  the  other. 

A  numbnefs  and  a  degree  of  palfy  in  one 
or  both  arms,  has  been  frequently  obferved  to 
attend  a  hydrothorax. 

Soon  after  this  difeafe  has  made  fome  prog* 
refs,  the  pulfe  commonly  becomes  irregular, 
and  frequently  intermitting  :  But  this  hap* 
pens  in  fo  many  other  difeafes  of  the  breafl, 
that  unlefs  when  it  is  attended  with  fome 

other 


OF       PHYSIC.  301 

other  of  the  above  mentioned  fymptoms  it 
cannot  be  confidered  as  denoting  the  hydro- 
thorax. 

MDCCIIL 

This  difeafe,  as  other  dropfies,  is  commonly 
attended  with  thirft  and  a  fcarcity  of  urine, 
to  be  explained  in  the  fame  manner  as  in  the 
cafe  of  anafarca  (MDCLXXIIIj.  The  hy- 
drothorax,  however,  is  fometimes  without 
thirft,  or  any  other  febrile  fymptom  •  al- 
though I  believe  this  happens  in  the  cafe  of 
partial  affections  only,  or  when  a  more  gen- 
eral affection  is  yet  but  in  a  flight  degree. 
In  both  cafes,  however,  and  more  efpecially 
when  the  difeafe  is  confiderably  advanced, 
fome  degree  of  fever  is  generally  prefent ; 
And  I  apprehend  it  to  be  in  fuch  cafe,  that 
the  perfons  affected  are  more  than  ufually 
fenfible  to  cold,  and  complain  of  the  coldnefs 
of  the  air  when  that  is  not  perceived  by  oth- 
er perfons. 

MDCCIV. 

The  hydrothorax  fometimes  appears  alone, 
without  any  other  fpecies  of  dropfy  being 
prefent  at  the  fame  time  :  And  in  this  cafe 
the  difeafe,  for  the  moll  part,  is  a  partial  af- 
fection, as  being  either  of  one  fide  of  the 
thorax  only,  or.being  a  collection  of  hydatides 
in  one  part  of  the  cheff.     The  hydrothorax, 

Vol.  III.  O  however, 


302  PRACTICE 

however,  is  very  often  a  part  of  more  univer- 
fal  dropfy,  and  when  at  the  fame  time  there 
is  water  in  all  the  three  principal  cavities  and 
in  the  cellular  texture  of  a  great  part  of  the 
body.  I  have  met  with  feveral  inftances,  in 
which  fuch  univerfal  dropfy  began  fir  ft  by  an 
effufion  into  the  thorax.  The  hydrothorax, 
however,  more  frequently  comes  on  from  an 
anafarca  gradually  increaung  ;  and,  as  I  have 
faid  above,  the  general  diathefis  feems  often 
to  affect  the  thorax  fooner  than  it  does  either 
the  head  or  the  abdomen. 

MDCCV. 

This  difeafe  feldom  admits  of  a  cure,  or 
even  of  alleviation,  from  remedies.  It  com- 
monly proceeds  to  give  more  and  more  diffi- 
culty of  breathing,  till  the  action  of  the  lungs 
be  entirely  interrupted  by  the  quantity  of 
water  effufed  ;  and  the  fatal  event  frequently 
happens  more  fuddenly  than  was  expected. 
In  many  of  the  inftances  of  a  fatal  hydrotho- 
rax, I  have  remarked  a  fpitting  of  blood  to 
come  on  feveral  days  before  the  patient  died* 

MDCCVI. 

The  caufe  of  hydrothorax  is  often  mani- 
feuly  one  or  other  of  the  general  caufes  of 
dropfy  pointed  out  above  :  But  what  it  is 
that  determines  thefe  general  caufes  to  act 
more  efpecially  in  the  thoraxi  and  particular-* 

!y 


OF       PHYSIC.  303 

ly  what  it  is  that  produces  the  partial  collec- 
tions that  occur  there,  I  do  not  find  to  be  ea~ 
fily  afcertained. 

MDCCVII. 

From  what  has  been  faid  above,  it  will  be 
evident,  that  the  cure  of  hydrothorax  mull 
be  very  much  the  fame  with  that  of  anafarca  5 
and  when  the  former  is  joined  with  the  latter 
as  an  effect  of  the  lame  general  diathefis,  there 
can  be  no  doubt  of  the  method  of  cure  being 
the  fame  in  both.  Even  when  the  hydrotho- 
rax is  alone,  and  the  difeafe  partial^  from  par- 
ticular caufes  acting  in  the  thorax  only,  there 
can  hardly  be  any  other  rheafures  employed, 
than  the  general  ones  propofed  above.  There 
is  only  one  particular  meafure  adapted  to  the 
hydrothorax  ;  and  that  is,  the  drawing  off  the 
accumulated  waters  by  a  paracentefis  of  the 
thorax. 

MDCCVIil. 

To  what  cafes  this  operation  may  be  moll 
properly  adapted,  I  find  it  difficult  to  deter- 
mine. That  it  may  be  executed  with  fafetyj 
there  is  no  doubt  ;  and  that  it  has  been  fome- 
times  practiied  with  fuccefs,  feems  to  be  very 
well  vouched.  When  the  difeafe  depends 
upon  a  general  hydropic  diathetic  it  cannot 
alone  prove  a  cure,  but  may  give  a  temporary 
relief  $  and  when  other  remedies  feem  to  be 
O  2  employed 


304  PRACTICE 

employed  with  advantage,  the  drawing  off 
the  water  may  very  much  favour  a  complete 
cure.  I  have  not,  however,  been  fo  fortu- 
nate as  to  fee  it  praclifed  with  any  fuccefs  ;  and 
even  where  it  was  molt  promifing,  that  is,  in 
cafes  of  partial  affection,  my  expectations  have 
been  difappointed  from  it. 


in, 


Of  Ascites,   or  Dropsy    of  the    Lower 
Belly. 


MDCC1)C> 

THE  name  of  Af cites  is  given  to  every  col- 
lection of  waters  caufing  a  general  fwelling 
and  diftention  of  the  lower  belly  ;  and  fuck 
collections  are  more  frequent  than  thofe 
which  happen  iri  the  thorax* 

MDCCX. 

The  collections  in  the  lower  belly^  like  thofe 
of  the  thorax^  are  found  in  different  fitua- 
tions.  Moil  commonly  they  are  in  the  fac  of 
the  peritonaeum,  or  general  cavity  of  the  ab- 
domen :  But  they  often  begin  by  facs  formed 
upon,  and  connected  with,  one  or  other  of 
the  vifcera;  and  perhaps  the  mo  ft  frequent 

inftanccs 


OF       PHYSIC.         305 

inflances  of  this  kind  occur  in  the  ovaria  of 
females.  Sometimes,  the  water  of  afekes  i& 
found  entirely  without  the  peritonaeum,  and 
between  this  and  the  abdominal  mufclei. 

MDCCXI. 

Thefe  collections  connected  with  particular 
vifcera,  and  thofe  formed  without  the  perito- 
naeum^ form  that  difeafe  which  authors  have 
termed  the  encyfled  dropfy,  or  hydrops  faccaius. 
Their  precife  feat,  and  even  their  exiflence, 
is  very  often  difficult  to  be  afcertained.  They 
are  generally  formed  by  collections  of  hy~ 
datides* 

MDCCXIL 

In  the  mod  ordinary  cafe,  that  of  abdom- 
inal dropfy,  the  fweliing  at  firfl  is  in  fome 
meafure  over  the  whole  belly,  but  generally 
appears  mofl  confiderabie  in  the  epigaflrium. 
As  the  difeafe,  however,  advances,  the  fweli- 
ing becomes  more  uniform  over  the  whole. 
The  diflention,  and  fenfe  of  weight,  though 
confiderabie,  vary  a  little  according  as  the 
poflure  of  the  body  is  changed;  the  weight 
being  felt  the  mofl  upon  the  fide  on  which 
the  patient  lies,  while  at  the  fame  time  on  the 
oppofite  fide  the  diflention  becomes  fome- 
what  lefs.  In  almofl  all  the  inflances  of  al- 
cites,  the  fluctuation  of  the  water  within,  mar 
be  perceived  by  the  practitioner's  feeling,  and 
O  3  fome titn^s 


306  PRACTICE 

fometimes  by  his  hearing.  This  perception 
of  fluctuation  does  not  certainly  diftinguifh 
the  different  ftates  of  drop fy  ;  but  ferves  very 
well  to  diftinguifh  dropfy  from  tympanites, 
from  cafes  of  phyfconia,  and  from  the  flate  of 
pregnancy  in  women. 

MDCCXIII. 

An  afcites  frequently  occurs  when  no  other 
fpecies  of  dropfy  does  at  the  fame  time  ap- 
pear ;  but  fometimes  the  afcites  is  a  part  only 
of  univerfal  dropfy,  In  this  cafe,  it  ufually 
comes  on  in  confequence  of  an  anafarca,  grad- 
ually increafing ;  but  its  being  joined  with 
anafarca,  does  not  always  denote  any  general 
diathefis,  as  for  the  mofl  part  an  afcites  foon- 
erw  later  occafions  cedematous  fwellings  of 
the  lower  extremities.  When  the  collection 
©f  water  in  the  abdomen,  from  whatever 
caufe,  becomes  considerable,  it  is  always  at- 
tended with  a  difficulty  of  breathing  :  But 
this  fymptom  occurs  often  when,  at  the  fame 
time,  there  is  no  water  in  the  thorax.  The 
afcites  is  fometimes  unaccompanied  with  any 
fever  ;  but  frequently  there  is  more  or  lefs  of 
fever  pre  fen  t  with  it.  The  difeafe  is  never 
considerable,  without  being  attended  with 
thirft  and  a  fcarcity  of  urine. 

MDCCXIV. 

In  the  diagnofis  of  afcites,  the  greateft  dif- 
ficulty that  occurs,  is  in  difcerning  when  the 

water 


OF       PHYSIC.  307 

water  is  in  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen,  or  when 
it  is  in  the  different  Rates  of  encyfted  dropfy 
above  mentioned.  There  is,  perhaps,  no  cer- 
tain means  of  afcertaining  this  in  all  cafes ; 
but  in  many  we  may  attempt  to  form  fome 
judgment  with  regard  to  it. 

When  the  antecedent  circum fiances  give 
fufpicion  of  a  general  hydropic  diathefis  ; 
when  at  the  fame  time  fome  degree  of  dropfy 
appears  in  other  parts  of  the  body  ;  and  when, 
from  its  firft  appearance,  the  fwelling  has  been 
equally  over  the  whole  belly,  we  may  gen- 
erally prefume  that  the  water  is  in  the  cavity 
of  the  abdomen.  But  when  an  afcites  has 
not  been  preceded  by  any  remarkably  cachec- 
tic ftate  of  the  fyftem,  and  when  at  its  begin- 
ning the  tumour  and  tenlion  had  appeared  in 
one  part  of  the  belly  more  than  another,  there 
is  reafon  to  fufpecl;  an  encyfted  dropfy;  Even 
when  the  tenhon  and  tumour  of  the  belly 
have  become  general  and  uniform  over  the 
whole  ;  yd  if  the  fyftem  of  the  body  in  gen- 
eral appear  to  be  little  affected  ;  if  the  pa- 
tient's ftrength  be  little  impaired  ;  if  the  ap- 
petite continue  pretty  entire,  and  the  natural 
fleep  be  little  interrupted  j  if  the  menfes  in 
females  continue  to  flow  as  ufual ;  if  there  be 
yet  no  anafaica  ;  or,  though  it  may  have  al- 
ready taken  place,  if  it  be  ftill  confined  to  the 
lower  extremities,  and  there  be  no  leucophleg- 
matic  palenefs  or  fallow  colour  in  the  counte- 
nance ;  if  there  be  no  fever,  nor  fo  much 
thirft,  or  fcarcity  of  urine,  as  occur  in  a 
O  4.  more 


308  PRACTICE 

more  general  affection  ;  then,  according  as 
more  of  thefe  different  circumftances  take 
place,  there  will  be  the  ftronger  ground  for 
fuppoling  the  afcites  to  be  of  the  encyfted 
kind. 

The  chief  exception  to  be  made  from  this 
as  a  general  rule,  will,  in  my  opinion,  be  when 
the  afcites  may,  with  much  probability,  be 
prefumed  to  have  come  on  in  confequence  of 
a  fcirrhous  liver ;  which,  I  apprehend,  may 
occafion  a  collection  of  water  in  the  cavity  of 
the  abdomen,  while  the  general  fyftem  of  the 
body  may  not  be  otherwife  much  affected. 


MDCCXV. 


With  refpect  to  the  cure  of  afcites  when  of 
the  encyfted  kind,  it  does  not,  fo  far  as  I  know, 
admit  of  any.  When  the  collection  of  water 
is  in  the  abdominal  cavity  alone,  without  any 
other  fpecies  of  dropfy  prefent  at  the  fame 
time,  I  apprehend  the  afcites  will  always  be 
of  difficult  cure  ;  for  it  may  be  prefumed  to 
depend  upon  a  fcirrhofiry  of  the  liver,  or  oth- 
er confiderable  affection  of  the  abdominal  vif- 
cera,  which  I  conceive  to  be  of  very  difficult 
cure,  and  therefore  the  afcites  depending  up- 
on them.  At  the  fame  time,  fuch  cafes  may 
often  admit  of  a  temporary  relief  by  the  par- 
acentefis. 

MDCCXVI. 


OF       PHYSIC.  309 


MDCCXVI. 

When  the  afcites  is  a  part  of  univerfal  drop- 
fy,  it  may,  as  far  as  other  cafes  of  that  kind 
can,  admit  of  a  cure  ;  and  it-will  be  obvious, 
that  fuch  a  cure  muff  be  obtained  by  the  fame 
means  as  above  propofed  for  the  cure  of  gen- 
eral anafarca. 

It  frequently  happens,  that  the  afcites  is  at- 
tended with  a  diarrhoea  •  and,  in  that  cafe, 
does  not  admit  of  the  ufe  of  purgatives  fo 
freely  as  cafes  of  anafarca  commonly  do.  It 
is  therefore  often  to  be  treated  by  diuretics 
almoft  alone. 

The  diuretics  that  may  be  employed,  are 
chiefly  thofe  above  mentioned  ;  but  in  afcites, 
a  peculiar  one  has  been  found  out.  It  is  a 
long  continued  gentle  friclion  of  the  (kin  over 
the  whole  of  the  abdomen,  by  the  fingers 
dipped  in  oil.  This  has  fometimes  been  ufe- 
ful  in  exciting  an  increafed  flow  of  urine  ;  but 
in  molt  of  the  trials  of  it  which  I  have  known 
made,  it  has  failed  in  producing  that  effecl. 

MDCCXVII. 

The  afcites  admits  of  a  particular  means 
for  immediately  drawing  off  the  collected 
waters  ;  and  that  is  the  well  known  operation 
of  the  paracentefis  of  the  abdomen.  In  what 
cjrcum  fiances  of  afcites  this  operation  can 
mod  properly  be  propofed,    it  is   difficult  to 

Vol,  3.  O  5  determine: 


3io  PRACTICE 

determine  ;  but,  fo  far  as  I  can  judge,  it  mufl 
be  regulated  by  very  much  the  fame  confid- 
erations  as  thofe  above  mentioned  with  regard 
to  the  paracentefis  of  the  thorax. 

The  manner  of  performing  the  paracentefis 
of  the  abdomen,  and  the  precautions  to  be 
taken  with  refpeft  to  it,  are  now  fo  commonly 
known,  and  delivered  in  fo  many  books,  that 
it  is  altogether  unneceffary  for  me  to  offer  any 
directions  upon  that  fubjecl;  here  ;  efpecially 
after  the  full  and  judicious  information  and 
directions  given  by  Mr.  Bell,  in  the  fecond 
volume  of  his  Syjiem  of  Surgery. 


CHAP, 


OF      PHYSIC.  *u 


CHAP.         IV. 


of   GENERAL  SWELLINGS,  arising 

FROM      AN      INCREASED     BIJLK    OF     THE 

whole  SUBSTANCE  of   particular 
PARTS. 


MDCCXVIII. 

UPON  the  fubjeas  of  this 
chapter,  feveral  nofological  difficulties  occur, 
and  particularly  with  refpecl  to  admitting  the 
Phyfconia  into  the  order  of  General  Swellings. 
At  prefent,  however,  it  is  not  neceffary  for 
me  to  difcufs  this  point,  as  I  am  here  to  omit 
entirely  the  confideration  of  Phyfconia  ;  both 
becaufe  it  can  feldom  admit  of  any  fuccefsful 
practice,  and  becaufe  I  cannot  deliver  any 
thing  ufeful  either  with  regard  to  the  patholo- 
gy or  practice  in  fuch  a  difeafe. 

MDCCXIX. 

The  only  other  genus  of  difeafe  compre- 
hended under  the  title  of  the  prefent  chapter, 
is  the  Rachitis  ;  and  this  being  both  a  proper 
example  of  the  clafs  of  Cachexy ,  and  of  the 
O  6  order 


312  PRACTICE 

order  of  Intumefcentice  or  General  Swellings, 
I  fhall  offer  fome  obfervations  with  regard 
to  it. 

0/Rachitis,  or  Rickets. 

MDCCXX. 

THIS  difeafe  has  been  fuppofed  to  have 
appeared  only  in  modern  times,  and  not  above 
two  hundred  years  ago.  This  opinion,  not- 
withstanding it  has  been  maintained  by  per- 
fons  of  the  moft  refpeclable  authority,  ap- 
pears to  me,  from  many  confiderations,  im- 
probable ;  but  it  is  a  point  of  too  little  confe- 
quence  to  detain  my  readers  here.  The  only 
application  of  it  which  deferves  any  notice  is^ 
that  it  has  led  to  a  notion  of  the  difeafe  having 
arifen  from  the  lues  venerea,  which  had  cer- 
tainly made  its  firfl  appearance  in  Europe 
not  very  long  before  the  date  commonly  af- 
figned  for  the  appearance  of  rachitis  :  But  I 
fhall  hereafter  mow,  that  the  fuppofed  con- 
nexion between  the  Siphylis  and  Rachitis  is 
without  foundation. 

MDCCXXI. 

In  delivering  the  hiftory  of  the  Rickets,  I 
muft,  in  the  firfl  place,  obferve,  that  with  re[-. 
pe£l  to  the  antecedents  of  the  difeafe,  every 
thing  to  be  found  in  authors  upon  this  fub- 
je6l,  appears  to  me  to  reft  upon  a  very  un- 
certain 


OF       PHYSIC.  313 

certain  foundation.  In  particular,  with  ref- 
peel;  to  the  ftate  of  the  parents  whole  offspring 
become  affe&ed  with  this  difeafe,  I  have  met 
with  many  in  (lances  of  it,  in  children  from 
feemingly  healthy  parents  ;  and  have  met 
likewife  with  many  inftances  of  children  who 
never  became  affe&ed  with  it,  although  bora 
of  parents  who,  according  to  the  common  ac- 
counts, fhould  have  produced  a  rickety  ofF- 
fpring  :  So  that,  even  making  allowance  for 
the  uncertainty  of  fathers,  I  do  not  find  the 
general  opinion  of  authors  upon  this  fubjeel; 
to  be  properly  fupported. 

MDCCXXII. 

The  difeafe,  however,  may  be  juftly  con- 
fidered  as  proceeding  from  parents  ;  for  it 
often  appears  in  a  great  number  of  the  fame 
family  :  And  my  obfervation  leads  me  to 
judge,  that  it  originates  more  frequently  from 
mothers  than  from  fathers.  So  far  as  I  can 
refer  the  difeafe  of  the  children  to  the  ftate  of 
the  parents,  it  has  appeared  to  me  mofl  com- 
monly to  arife  from  fome  weaknefs,  and  pretty 
frequently  from  a  fcrophulous  habit,  in  the 
mother.  To  conclude  the  fubjeel;,  I  muft  re- 
mark, that  in  many  cafes  I  have  not  been  able 
to  difcern  the  condition  of  the  parents,  to 
which  I  could  refer  it. 

When  nurfes,  other  than  the  mothers,  have 
been  employed  to  fuckle  children,  it  has  been 
fuppofed  that  fuch  nurfes  have  frequently 

given 


314  PRACTICE 

given  occafion  to  the  difeafe  :  And  when 
nurfes  have  both  produced  and  have  fuckled 
children  who  became  rickety,  there  may  be 
ground  to  fufpecl:  their  having  occafioned  the 
difeafe  in  the  children  of  other  perfons :  But 
I  have  had  few  opportunities  of  afcertaining 
this  matter.  It  has  in  fome  meafure  appear- 
ed to  me,  that  thofe  nurfes  are  moft  likely  to 
produce  this  difeafe,  who  give  infants  a  large 
quantity  of  very  watery  milk,  and  who  con- 
tinue to  fuckle  them  longer  than  the  ufual 
time.  Upon  the  whole,  however,  I  am  of 
opinion,  that  hired  nurfes  feldom  occafion 
this  difeafe,  unlefs  when  a  predifpofition  to 
it  has  proceeded  from  the  parents. 

MDCCXXI1I. 

With  regard  to  the  other  antecedents,  which 
have  been  ufually  enumerated  by  authors  as 
the  remote  caufes  of  this  difeafe,  I  judge  the 
accounts  given  to  be  extremely  fallacious  ; 
and  I  am  very  much  perfuaded,  that  the  cir- 
cumftances  in  the  rearing  of  children,  have 
lefs  effecl;  in  producing  rickets  than  has  been 
imagined.  It  is  indeed  not  unlikely,  that 
fome  of  thefe  circumftances  mentioned  as  re- 
mote caufes  may  favour,  while  other  circum- 
ftances may  refill,  the  coming  on  of  the  dif- 
eafe ;  but  at  the  fame  time,  I  doubt  if  any  of 
the  former  would  produce  it  where  there  was 
no  predifpofition  in  the  child's  original  con- 
ftitution.     This  opinion  of  the  remote  caufes, 

I  have 


OF       PHYSIC, 


3*5 


I  have  formed  from  obferving,  that  the  dif- 
eafe  comes  on  when  none  of  thefe  had  been 
applied  ;  and  more  frequently  that  many  of 
them  had  been  applied  without  occafioning 
the  difeafe.  Thus  the  learned  Zeviani  al- 
leges, that  the  difeafe  is  produced  by  an  acid 
from  the  milk  with  which  a  child  is  fed  for 
the  firft  nine  months  of  its  life  :  But  alrnoft 
all  children  are  fed  with  the  fame  food,  and  in 
which  alfo  an  acid  is  always  produced  ;  while, 
at  the  fame  time,  not  one  in  a  thoufand  of  the 
infants  fo  fed  becomes  affected  with  the  rick- 
ets. If,  therefore,  in  the  infants  who  become 
afFe&ed  with  this  difeafe,  a  peculiarly  noxious 
acid  is  produced,  we  rauft  feek  for  fome  pe- 
culiar caufe  of  its  production,  either  in  the 
quality  of  the  milk,  or  in  the  conftitution  of 
the  child ;  neither  of  which,  however,  Mr. 
Zeviani  has  explained.  I  cannot  indeed  be- 
lieve that  the  ordinary  acid  of  milk  has  any 
fhare  in  producing  this  difeafe,  becaufe  I 
have  known  many  inflances  of  the  acid  being 
produced  and  occafioning  various  diforders, 
without,  however,  its  ever  producing  rickets. 
Another  of  the  remote  caufes  commonly 
affigned,  is  the  child's  being  fed  with  unfer- 
mented  farinaceous  food.  But  over  the  whole 
world  children  are  fed  with  fuch  farinacea, 
while  the  difeafe  of  rickets  is  a  rare  occur- 
rence :  And  I  have  known  many  inflances 
where  children  have  been  fed  with  a  greater 
than  ufual  proportion  of  fermented  farinacea, 
and  alfo  a  greater  proportion  of  animal  food, 

without 


316  PRACTICE 

without  thefe  preventing  the  difeafe.  In  my 
apprehenfion,  the  like  obfervations  might  be 
made  with  refpect  to  mod  of  the  circum- 
flances  that  have  been  mentioned  as  the  re- 
mote caufes  of  rickets. 

MDCCXXIV. 

Having  thus  offered  my  opinion  concern- 
ing the  fuppofed  antecedents  of  this  difeafe,  I 
proceed  now  to  mention  the  phenomena  oc- 
curring after  it  has  actually  come  on. 

The  difeafe  feldom  appears  before  the 
ninth  month,  and  feldom  begins  after  the 
fecond  year,  of  a  child's  age.  In  the  interval 
between  thefe  periods,  the  appearance  of  the 
difeafe  is  fometimes  fooner,  fometimes  later  ; 
and  commonly  at  firft  the  difeafe  comes  on 
flowly.  The  firft  appearances  are  a  flaccidity 
of  the  flefh,  the  body  at  the  fame  time,  becom- 
ing leaner,  though  food  be  taken  in  pretty 
largely.  The  head  appears  large  with  refpetl; 
to  the  body  ;  with  the  fontanelle,  and  per- 
haps the  futures,  more  open  than  ufual  in 
children  of  the  fame  age.  The  head  contin- 
ues to  grow  larger  ;  in  particular,  the  fore- 
head becoming  unufualiy  prominent ;  and  at 
the  fame  time  the  neck  continues  flender,  or 
feems  to  be  more  fo,  in  proportion  to  the 
head.  The  dentition  is  flow,  or  much  later 
than  ufual ;  and  thofe  teeth  which  come  out, 
readily  become  black,  and  frequently  again 
fall  out.     The  ribs  lofe  their  convexity,  and 

become 


OF       PHYSIC.  317 

become  flattened  on  the  fides ;  while  the  fter- 
num  is  pufhed  outward,  and  forms  a  fort  of 
ridge.  At  the  fame  time,  or  perhaps  fooner, 
the  epiphyfes  at  the  feveral  joints  of  the 
limbs  become  fwelled  ;  while  the  limbs  be- 
tween the  joints  appear,  or  perhaps  actually 
become,  more  flender.  The  bones  feem  to 
be  every  where  flexible,  becoming  varioufly 
diflorted  ;  and  particularly  the  fpine  of  the 
back  becoming  incurvated  in  different  parts 
of  its  length.  If  the  child,  at  the  time  the 
difeafe  comes  on,  had  acquired  the  power 
of  walking,  it  becomes  daily  more  feeble  in 
its  motions,  and  more  averfe  to  the  exertion 
of  them,  lofing  at  length  the  power  of  walk- 
ing altogether.  Whilfl  thefe  fymptoms  go 
on  increafing,  the  abdomen  is  always  full,  and 
preternaturally  tumid.  The  appetite  is  often 
good,  but  the  flools  are  generally  frequent 
and  loofe.  Sometimes  the  faculties  of  the, 
mind  are  impaired,  and  flupidity  or  fatuity 
prevails  ,•  but  commonly  a  premature  fenfi- 
bility  appears,  and  they  acquire  the  faculty 
of  fpeech  fooner  than  ufual.  fat  the  firfh 
coming  on  of  the  difeafe,  there  is  generally  no 
fever  attending  it ;  but  it  feldom  continues 
long,  till  a  frequent  pulfe,  and  other  febrile 
fymptoms,  come  to  be  conflantly  prefent. 
With  thefe  fymptoms  the  difeafe  proceeds,  and 
continues  in  fome  inflances  for  fome  years  ; 
but  very  often,  in  the  courfe  of  that  time,  the 
difeafe  ceafes  to  advance,  and  the  health  is 
entirely  eftablifhed,  except  that  the  diflorted 

limbs 


318  PRACTICE 

limbs  produced  during  the  difeafe  continue 
for  the  reft  of  life.  In  other  cafes,  however, 
the  difeafe  proceeds  increafing  till  it  has  af- 
fected almoft  every  function  of  the  animal 
economy,  and  at  length  terminates  in  death. 
The  variety  of  fymptoms  which  in  fuch  cafes 
appear,  it  does  not  feem  neceffary  to  enume- 
rate, as  they  are  not  effential  to  the  conftitu- 
tion  of  the  difeafe,  but  are  merely  confe- 
quences  of  the  more  violent  conditions  of  it. 
In  the  bodies  of  thofe  who  have  died,  various 
morbid  affections  have  been  difcovered  in  the 
internal  parts.  Moft  of  the  vifcera  of  the 
abdomen  have  been  found  to  be  preternatur- 
ally  enlarged.  The  lungs  have  alfo  been 
found  in  a  morbid  Mate,  feemingly  from  fome 
inflammation  that  had  come  on  towards  the 
end  of  the  difeafe.  The  brain  has  been  com- 
monly found  in  a  flaccid  ftate,  with  effufions 
of  a  ferous  fluid  into  its  cavities.  Very  uni- 
verfally  the  bones  have  been  found  very  foft, 
and  fo  much  foft  en  ed  as  to  be  readily  cut  by 
a  knife.  The  fluids  have  been  always  found 
in  a  diffolved  ftate,  and  the  mufcular  parts 
very  foft  and  tender ;  and  the  whole  of  the 
dead  body  without  any  degree  of  that  rigidity 
which  is  fo  common  in  almoft  all  others. 

MDCCXXV. 

From  thefe  circumftances  of  the  difeafe,  it 
feems  to  confift  in  a  deficiency  of  that  matter 
which  fhould  form  the  folid  parts  of  the  body. 

This 


OF       PHYSIC.  319 

This  efpecially  appears  in  the  faulty  Hate  of 
offification,feerningly  depending  upon  the  de- 
ficiency of  that  matter  which  mould  be  depof- 
ited  in  the  membranes  which  are  deflined  to 
become  bony,  and  fhould  give  them  their  due 
firmnei  and  bony  hardnefs.  It  appears  that 
this  ma-tter  is  not-  fuppiied  in  due  quantity  ; 
but  that  in  place  of  it,  a  matter  fitted  to  in- 
creafe  their  bulk,  particularly  in  the  epiphy- 
{esy  is  applied  too  largely.  What  this  defi- 
ciency of  matter  depends  upon,  is  difficult  to 
be  afcertained.  It  may  be  a  fault  in  the  or- 
gans of  digeflion  and  affimilation,  which  pre- 
vents the  fluids  in  general  from  being  prop- 
erly prepared  ;  or  it  may  be  a  fault  in  the  or- 
gans of  nutrition,  which  prevents  the  fecretion 
of  a  proper  matter  to  be  applied.  With  ref- 
pe6l  to  the  latter,  in  what  it  may  confift,  I 
am  entirely  ignorant,  and  cannot  even  difcern 
that  fuch  a  condition  exifls  :  But  the  former 
caufe,  both  in  its  nature  and  exiflence,  is 
more  readily  perceived  ;  and  it  is  probable 
that  it  has  a  confiderable  influence  in  the 
matter  ;  as  in  rachitic  perfons  a  thinner  flats 
of  the  blood,  both  during  life  and  after  death, 
fo  commonly  appears.  It  is  this  flate  of  the 
fluids,  or  a  deficiency  of  bony  matter  in  them, 
that  I  confider  as  the  proximate  caufe  of  the 
difeafe  ;  and  which  again  may  in  fome  meaf- 
ure  depend  upon  a  general  laxity  and  de- 
bility of  the  moving  fibres  of  the  organs  that 
perform  the  functions  of  digeflion  and  affim- 
ilation. 

MDCCXXVI. 


32Q  PRACTICE 


MDCCXXVI. 

There  is,  however,  fomething  (till  wanting 
to  explain,  Why  thefe  circumftances  difcover  i 
themfelves  at  a  particular  time  of  life,  and 
hardly  ever  either  before  or  after  a  certain 
period ;  and  as  to  this  I  would  offer  the  fol- 
lowing conjectures.  Nature  having  intended 
that  human  life  mould  proceed  in  a  certain 
manner,  and  that  certain  functions  ihould  be 
exercifed  at  a  certain  period  of  life  only  ;  fo 
it  has  generally  provided,  that  at  that  period, 
and  not  fooner,  the  body  ihould  be  fitted  for 
the  exercife  of  the  functions  fuited  to  it.  To 
apply  this  to  our  prefent  fubjecl:,  Nature 
feems  to  have  intended  that  children  ihould 
walk  only  at  twelve  months  old  ;  and  accord- 
ingly has  provided,  that  againft  that  age,  and 
no  fooner,  a  matter  ihould  be  prepared  fit  to 
give  that  firmnefs  to  the  bones  which  is  necef- 
fary  to  prevent  their  bending  too  eaiily  under 
the  weight  of  the  body.  Nature,  however, 
is  not  always  fleady  and  exact  in  executing 
her  own  purpofes  ;  and  if  therefore  the  prep- 
aration of  bony  matter  ihali  not  have  been 
made  againft  the  time  there  is  particular  oc- 
cafion  for  it,  the  difeafe  of  rickets,  that  is,  of 
foft  and  flexible  bones,  muft  come  on  ;  and 
will  difcover  itfelf  about  the  particular  period 
we  have  mentioned.  Further,  it  will  be 
equally  probable,  that  if  at  the  period  men- 
tioned the  bones  fhaU  have  acquired  their 

due 


OF       PHYSIC.  321 

due  firmnefs,  and  that  nature  goes  on  in  pre* 
paring  and  fuppiying  the  proper  bony  matter, 
it  may  he  prefumed,  that  againft  the  time  a 
child  is  two  years  old,  luch  a  quantity  of  bony 
matter  will  be  applied,  as  to  prevent  the  bones 
from  becoming  again  foft  and  flexible  during 
the^reft  of  life  ;  unlefs  it  happen-,  as  indeed  it 
fometimes  does,  that  certain  caufes  occur  to 
walli  out  again  the  bony  matter  from  the 
membranes  in  which  it  had  been  depoflted* 
The  account  I  have  now  given  of  the  period 
at  which  the  rickets  occur,  feems  to  confirm 
the  opinion  of  its  proximate  caufe  being  a 
deficiency  of  bony  matter  in  the  fluids  of  the 
body. 

MDCCXXVII. 

It  has  been  frequently  fuppofed,  that  a 
Tiphylitic  taint  has  a  ihare  in  producing  rick- 
ets ;  but  fuch  a  fuppofition  is  altogether  im- 
probable. If  our  opinion  of  the  rickets  hav-* 
ing  exifted  in  Europe  before  the  fiphylis  was 
brought  into  it,  be  well  founded,  it  will  then 
be  certain  that  the  difeafe  may  be  occafioned 
without  any  fiphylitic  acrimony  having  a 
mare  in  its  production.  But  further,  when 
a  fiphylitic  acrimony  is  tranfmitted  from  the 
parent  to  the  offspring,  the  fymptoms  do  not 
appear  at  a  particular  time  of  life  only,  and 
commonly  more  early  than  the  period  of  rick- 
ets ;  the  fymptoms  alfo  are  very  different 
from  thofe  of  rickets,   and  unaccompanied 

with 


322  PRACTICE 

with  any  appearance  of  the  latter  ;  and,  laftly, 
the  fymptoms  of  fiphylis  are  cured  by  means 
which,  in  the  cafe  of  rickets,  have  either  no 
effect,  or  a  bad  one.  It  may  indeed  poffibly 
happen,  that  fiphylis  and  rickets  may  appear 
in  the  fame  perfon  ;  but  it  is  to  be  confidered 
as  an  accidental  complication  :  And  the  very 
few  inftances  of  it  that  have  occurred,  are  by 
no  means  fufficient  to  eflablilh  any  necelfary 
connexion  between  the  two  difeafes. 


MDCCXXVIII. 

With  refpecl;  to  the  deficiency  of  bony 
matter,  which  I  coniider  as  the  proximate 
caufe  of  rickets,  fome  further  conjectures 
might  be  offered  concerning  its  remote  cauf- 
es  :  But  none  of  them  appear  to  me  very  fat- 
isfying  ;  and  whatever  they  might  be,  it  ap* 
pears  to  me  they  rauft  again  be  refolved  into 
the  fuppofition  of  a  general  laxity  and  debil- 
ity of  the  fy  (term 

MDCCXXIX. 

It  is  upon  this  fuppofition  almoft  alone  that 
the  cure  of  rickets  has  entirely  proceeded* 
The  remedies  have  been  fuch  efpecially  as 
Were  fuited  to  improve  the  tone  of  the  fyftem 
in  general,  or  of  the  ftomach  in  particular  : 
And  we  know  that  the  latter  are  not  only 
fuited  to  improve  the  tone  of  the  ftomach  it- 

felf; 


OF       PHYSIC.  323 

felf,  but  by  that  means  to  improve  alio  the 
tone  of  the  whole  fyftern. 

MDCCXXX. 

Of  tonic  remedies,  one  of  the  mod  prom« 
ifmg  feems  to  have  been  cold  bathing ;  and  I 
have  found  it  the  moll  powerful  in  preventing 
the  difeafe.  For  a  long  time  paft,  it  has  been 
the  practice  in  this  country,  with  people  of 
all  ranks,  to  warn  their  children  from  the  time 
of  their  birth  with  cold  water  ;  and  from  the 
time  that  children  are  a  month  old,  it  has 
been  the  practice  with  people  of  better  rank 
to  have  them  dipped  entirely  in  cold  water 
every  morning  :  And  wherever  this  practice 
has  been  pur  rued,  I  have  not  met  with  any 
inftance  of  rickets.  Amongfl  our  common 
people,  although  they  warn  their  children 
with  cold  water  only,  yet  they  do  not  fo  com- 
monly practice  immerfion  :  And  when  a- 
mongfl  thefe  I  meet  with  initances  of  rickets, 
I  prefcribe  cold  bathing ;  which  accordingly 
has  often  checked  the  progrefs  of  the  difeafe, 
and  fometimes  feems  to  have  cured  it  en- 
tirely. 

MDCCXXXL 

The  remedy  of  Ens  Veneris,  recommended 
by  Mr.  Boyle,  and  fince  his  time  very  uni- 
verfally  employed,  is  to  be  confidered  as  en-* 
tirely  a  tonic  remedy*     That  or  fome  other 

preparation 


324  PRACTICE 

preparation  of  iron  I  have  almoft  conflantly 
employed,  though  not  indeed  always  with 
fuccefs.  I  have  been  perfuaded,  that  the  ens 
veneris  of  Mr.  Boyle,  notwithstanding  his 
giving  it  this  appellation,  was  truly  a  prepa- 
ration of  iron,  and  no  other  than  what  we  now 
name  the  Flores  Martiahs :  But  it  appears, 
that  both  Benevoli  and  Buchner  have  em- 
ployed a  preparation  of  copper ;  and  I  am 
ready  to  believe  it  to  be  a  more  powerful  to- 
nic than  the  preparations  of  iron. 

MDCCXXXIL 

Upon  the  fuppofition  of  tonic  remedies 
being  proper  in  this  difeafe,  I  have  endeav- 
oured to  employ  the  Peruvian  bark  :  But 
from  the  difficulty  of  adminiftering  it  to  in- 
fants in  any  ufefui  quantity,  I  have  not  been 
able  to  difcover  its  efficacy  ;  but  I  am  very 
ready  to  believe  the  teftimony  of  De  Haen  ; 
upon  this  fubjecl. 

MDCCXXXIIL 

■ 
Exercife^  which  is  one  of  the  moft  power-  | 
ful  tonics,  has  been  properly  recommended 
for  the  cure  of  rickets ;  and  as  the  exercife  of 
geftation  only  can  be  employed,  it  mould  al- 
ways be,  with  the  child  laid  in  a  horizontal 
fituation  ;  as  the  carrying  them,  or  moving 
them  in  any  degree  of  an  erect  pofture^  is 
Very  apt  to  occafion  fome  diflortion.     It  is 

extremely 


OF      PHYSIC.  325 

extremely  probable,  that,  in  this  difeafe,  fric- 
tion with  dry  flannels  may  be  found  an  ufeful 
remedy. 

MDCCXXXIV. 

It  is  alfo  fufficiently  probable,  that  the  a- 
voiding  of  rnoifture  is  not  only  advifeable,  but 
may  likewife  be  of  fervice  in  the  cure  of  this 
difeafe. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  a  certain  diet  may 
contribute  to  the  fame  end  ;  but  what  may 
be  the  moil  eligible,  I  dare  not  determine. 
I  have  no  doubt  that  leavened  bread  may  be 
more  proper  than  unfermented  farinacea  ; 
but  I  cannot  find  any  reafon  to  believe  that 
flrong  beer  can  ever  be  a  proper  remedy. 

Practitioners  have  been  divided  in  opinion 
concerning  the  ufe  of  milk  in  this  difeafe. 
Zeviani,  perhaps  from  theory,  condemns  the 
ufe  of  it ;  but  Benevoli  employed  it  without 
its  impeding  the  cure  of  the  difeafe.  This 
lafl  I-  have  often  remarked  in  the  courfe  of 
my  own  practice.  As  it  is  difficult  to  feed 
children  entirely  without  milk  ;  fo  I  have 
commonly  admitted  it  as  a  part  of  the  diet  of 
rickety  children  ;  and  in  many  inltances  I  can 
affirm,  that  it  did  not  prevent  the  cure  of  the 
difeafe.  In  cafes,  however,  of  any  appear- 
ance of  rickets,  and  particularly  of  a  flow 
dentition,  I  have  difTuaded  the  continuance 
of  a  child  upon  the  breaft  ,•  becaufe  the  milk 
of  women  is  a  more  watery  nourifhment  than 

Vol.  Iir.  P  that 


326  PRACTICE 

that  of  cows  :  And  I  have  efpecially  difTuad- 
«d  the  continuing  a  child  upon  the  bread, 
when  I  thought  the  nurfe  gave  rather  too 
much  of  fuch  a  watery  nourifhment ;  for,  as 
has  been  above  mentioned,  I  have  had  fre- 
quent occanon  to  fufpecl;,  that  the  milk  of 
fuch  nurfes  has  a  tendency  to  favour  the  com- 
ing on  of  rickets. 


MDCCXXXV. 


Befides  the  remedies  and  regimen  now 
mentioned,  practitioners  have  commonly  em- 
ployed in  this  difeafe,  both  emetics  and  pur-* 
gatives.  When  the  appetite  and  digeftion 
are  confiderably  impaired,  vomiting,  if  nei- 
ther violent,  nor  frequently  repeated,  feems 
to  be  of  fervice  5  and  by  a  moderate  agita- 
tion  of  the  abdominal  vifcera,  may  in  fome 
meafure  obviate  the  ftagnation  and  conse- 
quent fwelling  that  ufually  occur  in  them. 

As  the  tumid  flate  of  the  abdomen,  fo  con- 
flan  tly  to  be  met  with  in  this  difeafe,  feems 
to  depend  very  much  upon  a  tympanitic  af- 
fection of  the  interlines  ;  fo,  both  by  obviat- 
ing thisa  arid  by  deriving  from  the  abdominal 
vifcera,  frequent  gentle  purgatives  may  be  of 
fervice.  Zeviani,  perhaps  properly,  recom- 
mends in  particular  rhubarb  ;  which,  befides 
its' purgative  quality,  has  thofe  alfo  of  bitter 
and  aftringento 

MDCCXXXVL 


OF      PHYSIC.  327 


MDCCXXXVI, 

I  have  now  mentioned  mofl  of  the  reme- 
dies commonly  employed  by  the  practitioners 
of  former  times  ;  but  I  mull  not  omit  men- 
tioning fome  others  that  have  been  lately  fug- 
gelled.  The  late  Mr.  De  Haen  recommends 
the  teflacea  ;  and  allures  us  of  their  having 
been  employed  with  fuccefs  :  But  in  the  few 
trials  which  I  have  had  occafion  to  make^ 
their  good  effects  did  not  appear. 

The  late  Baron  Van  Swieten  gives  us  one 
inflance  of  rickets  cured  by  the  ufe  of  hem- 
lock ;  but  I  do  not  know  that  the  practice 
lias  been  repeated. 


h  BOOK 


328 


^5> 


BOOK         III. 

®f  the  IMPETIGINIS;  or  DEPRAV- 
ED HABIT,  with  AFFECTIONS 

OF  THE  SKIN. 

MDCCXXXVII. 

I  F I  N  D  it  difficult  to  give 
any  fufficiently  correct  and  proper  character 
of  this  order.  The  .difeafes  comprehended 
under  it,  depend,  for  the  mod  part,  upon  a 
depraved  fiate  of  the  whole  of  the  fluids^ 
producing  tumours,  eruptions,  or  other  pre- 
ternatural  affections  of  the  flcin.  Although 
it  be  extremely  difficult  to  find  a  general 
character  of  the  order  that  will  apply  to  each 
of  the  genera  and  fpecies,  I  fhall  here  treat 
of  the  principal  genera  which  have  been 
commonly  comprehended  under  this  order* 
and  which  I  have  enumerated  in  my  No- 
fology. 

CHAP, 


OF       PHYSIC.  329 


CHAP,       L 


of   SCROPHl^LA,   or    the    KING 
EVIL. 


MDCCXXXVIIL 

1  HE  character  of  this  difeafe 
I  have  attempted  in  my  Nofology  :  But  it 
will  be  more  properly  taken  from  the  whole 
of  its  hiftory,  now  to  be  delivered. 

MDCCXXXIX. 

It  is  commonly,  and  very  generally,  a  he- 
reditary difeafe  ;  and  although  it  fometimes 
may,  yet  it  rarely  appears,  but  in  children 
whofe  parents  had  at  fome  period  of  their 
lives  been  affe£led  with  it.  Whether  it  may 
not  fail  to  appear  in  the  children  of  fcrophu- 
lous  parents,  and  difcover  itfelf  afterwards  in 
their  offspring  in  the  fucceeding  generation, 
I  cannot  certainly  determine  ;  but  believe 
that  this  has  frequently  happened.  It  ap- 
pears to  me  to  be  derived  more  commonly 
from  fathers  than  from  mothers  ;  but  whether 
this  happens  from  there  being  more  fcrophu- 
?  3  lous 


330  PRACTICE 

lous  men  than  fcrophulous  women  married,  I 
am  not  certain. 

With  refpecl  to  the  influence  of  parents  in 
producing  this  difeafe,  it  deferves  to  be  re- 
marked, that  in  a  family  of  many  children, 
when  one  of  the  parents, has  been  affected 
with  fcrophula,  and  the  other  not ;  as  it  is 
ufual  for  fome  of  the  children  to  be  in  confti- 
tution  pretty  exactly  like  the  one  parent,  and 
others  of  them  like  the  other  ;  it  commonly 
happens  that  thofe  children  who  moft  refem- 
ble  the  fcrophulous  parent  become  affected 
with  fcrophula,  while  thofe  refembling  the 
other  parent  entirely  efcape. 

MDCCXL. 

The  fcrophula  generally  appears  at  a  par- 
ticular period  of  life.  It  feldom  appears  in 
the  fir  ft,  or  even  in  the  fecond  year  pf  a 
child's  life  ;  and  mod  commonly  it  occurs 
from  the  fecond,  or,  as  fome  allege,  and  per- 
haps more  properly,  from  the  third,  to  the 
feventh  year.  Frequently,  however,  it  dis- 
covers itfelf  at  a  later  period  ;  and  there  are 
inflances  of  its  firfl  appearance,  at  every  pe- 
riod till  the  age  of  puberty  ;  after  which, 
however,  the  firfl  appearance  of  it  is  very  rare, 

MDCCXLI. 

When  it  does  not  occur  very  early,  we  can 
generally  diflinguifh  the  habit  of  body  pecu- 
liarly 


OF       PHYSIC.  331 

liarly  difpofed  to  it.  It  mofl  commonly  af- 
fecls  children  of  foft  and  flaccid  habits,  of  fair 
hair  and  blue  eyes ;  or  at  leaft  affecls  thofe 
much  more  frequently  than  thofe  of  an  op- 
polite  complexion.  It  affecls  efpecially  chil- 
dren of  fmooth  fkins  and  rofy  cheeks  ;  and 
fuch  children  have  frequently  a  tumid  upper 
lip,  with  a  chop  in  the  middle  of  it ;.  and  this 
tumour  is  often  confiderable,  and  extended  to 
the  columna  nali  and  lower  part  of  the  nof- 
tril-s.  The  difeafe  is  fometimes  joined  with, 
or  follows  rickets  ;  and  although  it  frequently 
appears  in  children  who  have  not  had  rickets 
in  any  great  degree,  yet  it  often  attacks  thofe 
who  by  a  protuberant  forehead,  by  tumid 
joints,  and  a  tumid  abdomen,  ihow  that  they 
had  fome  rachitic  difpofition.  In  parents 
who,  without  having  had  the  difeafe  them- 
felves,  feem  to  produce  fcrophulous  children, 
we  can  commonly  perceive  much  of  the  fame 
habit  and  conftitution  that  has  been  jufl:  now 
defcribed. 

Some  authors  have  fuppofed  that  the  fmall 
pox  has  a  tendency  to  produce  this  difeafe  ; 
and  Mr.  De  Haen  aiTerts  its  following  the  in- 
oculated, more  frequently  than  the  natural, 
fmall  pox.  This  laft  pofition,  however,  we 
can  confidently  affirm  to  be  a  miftake  ;  al- 
though it  mufl  be  allowed,  that  in  facl;  the 
fcrophula  does  often  come  on  immediately 
after  the  fmall  pox.  It  is,  however,  difficult 
to  find  any  connexion  between  the  two  dif- 
eafes.  According  to  my  obfervation,  the  ac- 
P  4  cident 


332  PRACTICE 

cident  only  happens  in  children  who  have 
pretty  manifeftly  the  fcrophulous  difpofition  ; 
and  I  have  had  feveral  inftances  of  the  nat- 
ural fmall  pox  coming  upon  children  affe&ed 
at  the  fame  time  with  fcrophula,  not  only 
without  this  difeafe  being  any  ways  aggravat- 
ed by  the  fmall  pox,  but  even  of  its  being  for 
iome  time  after  much  relieved. 

MDCCXLII. 

The  fcrophula  generally  fhows  itfelf  firft  at 
a  particular  feafon  of  the  year ;  and  at  fome 
time  between  the  winter  and  fummer  folflice  ; 
but  commonly  long  before  the  latter  period. 
It  is  to  be  obferved  further,  that  the  courfe  of 
the  difeafe  is  ufually  connected  with  the  courfe 
of  the  feafons.  Whilfl  the  tumours  and  ul- 
cerations peculiar  to  this  difeafe,  appear  firft 
in  the  fpring,  the  ulcers  are  frequently  healed 
up  in  the  courfe  of  the  fucceeding  fummer, 
and  do  not  break  out  again  till  the  enfuing 
fpring,  to  follow  again  with  the  feafon  the 
fame  courfe  as  before. 

MDCCXLIII. 

Frequently  the  firft  appearance  of  the  dif- 
eafe is  the  tumid  and  chopped  lip  above  men- 
tioned. Upon  other  occafions  the  firft  ap- 
pearance is  that  of  fmall  fpherical  or  oval  tu- 
mours, moveable  under  the  fkin.  They  are 
foft,    but    with  fome    elafticity.       They   are 

without 


OF       PHYSIC.  333 

without  pain  ;  and  without  any  change  in  the 
colour  of  the  fkin.  In  this  flate  they  often 
continue  for  a  long  time  ;  even  for  a  year  or 
two,  and  fometimes  longer.  Moll  commonly 
they  firft  appear  upon  the  fides  of  the  neck 
below  the  ears  ;  but  fometimes  alfo  under  the 
chin.  In  either  cafe,  they  are  fuppofed  to 
affect,  in  thefe  places  the  conglobate  or  lym- 
phatic glands  only  ;  and  not  at  all  the  falivary 
glands,  till  the  difeafe  is  very  greatly  advanced. 
The  difeafe  frequently  affecls,  and  even  at 
firft  appears  in,  other  parts  of  the  body.  In 
particular,  it  affecfs  the  joints  of  the  elbows 
and  ankles,  or  thofe  of  the  fingers  and  toes. 
The  appearances  about  the  joints  are  not 
commonly,  as  elfewhere,  fmall  moveable 
fwellings  ;  but  a  tumour  alrnoft  uniformly 
furrounding  the  joint,  and  interrupting  its 
motion. 

MDCCXLIV. 

Thefe  tumours,  as  I  have  faid,  remain  for 
fome  time  little  changed  ;  and,  from  the  time 
they  firft  appeared  in  the  fpring,  they  often 
continue  in  this  way  till  the  return  of  the  fame 
feafon  in  the  next,  or  perhaps  the  fecond  year 
after.  About  that  time,,  however,  or  perhaps 
in  the  courfe  of  the  feafon  in  which  they  firft 
appear,  the  tumour  becomes  larger  and  more 
fixed  ;  the  fkin  upon  it  acquires  a  purple, 
feldom  a  clear  rednefs  :  But  growing  redder 
by  degrees,  the  tumour  becomes  falter,  and 

Vol.  3.  P  5  allows 


334  PRACTICE 

allows  the  fluctuation  of  a  liquid  within  to 
be  perceived.  All  this  procefs,  however, 
takes  place  with  very  little  pain  attending  it. 
At  length  fome  part  of  the  fkin  becomes  paler; 
and  by  one  or  more  fmall  apertures  a  liquid 
is  poured  out. 

MDCCXLV. 

The  matter  poured  out  has  at  firfl  the  ap- 
pearance of  pus,  but  it  is  ufually  of  a  thinner 
kind   than   that  from  phlegmonic  abfceffes  ; 
and  the  matter  as  it  continues  to  be.  difcharg- 
ed,  becomes  daily  lefs  purulent,   and  appears 
more  and  more  a  vifcid  ferum,  intermixed 
with  fmall  pieces  of  a  white  fubflance  refem- 
bling  the  curd  of  milk.     By  degrees  the  tu- 
mour almofl  entirely  fubfides,  while  the  ulcer 
opens  more,  and  fpreads  broader  ;  unequally, 
however,  in  different  directions,  and  therefore 
is  without  any  regular  circumfcription.     The 
edges   of  the  ulcer  are  commonly   flat  and 
fmooth,  both  on  their  outfide  and  their  inner 
edge,  which  feldom  puts  on  a  callous  appear- 
ance.    The  ulcers,  however,  do  not  generally 
fpread  much,  or  become  deeper ;  but  at  the 
fame  time  their  edges  do  not  advance,  or  put 
on  any  appearance  of  forming  a  cicatrix. 

MDCCXLVI. 

In  this  condition  the  ulcers  often  continue 
For  a  long  time  ->  while  new  tumours,  with  ul- 
cers 


OF       PHYSIC.  335 

cers  fucceeding  them  in  the  manner  above 
defcribed,  make  their  appearance  in  different 
parts  of  the  body.  Of  the  firfl  ulcers,  how- 
ever, fome  heal  up,  while  other  tumours  and 
ulcers  appear  in  their  vicinity,  or  in  other 
parts  of  the  body  :  And  in  this  manner  the 
difeafe  proceeds,  fome  of  the  ulcers  healing 
up,  at  lead  to  a  certain  degree,  in  the  courfe 
of  iummer,  and  breaking  out  again  in  the  fuc- 
ceeding  fpring  :  Or  it  continues,  by  new  tu- 
mours and  ulcers  fucceeding  them,  in  the 
fpring  feafon,  making  their  appearance  fuc- 
ceilively  for  feveral  years.  • 

MDCCXLVII. 

In  this  way  the  difeafe  goes  on  for  feveral 
years  •  but  very  commonly  in  four  or  five 
years  it  is  fpontaneouily  cured,  the  former 
ulcers  being  healed  up,  and  no  new  tumours 
appearing  :  And  thus  at  length  the  difeafe 
ceafes  entirely,  leaving  only  fome  indelible 
efchars,  pale  and  fmooth,  but  in  fome  parts 
fhrivelled ;  or,  where  it  had  occupied  the 
joints,  leaving  the  motion  of  thefe  impaired, 
or  entirely  deflroyecl. 

MDCCXLVII!. 

Such  is  the  mofl  favourable  courfe  of  (his 

difeafe;  and  with  us,   it   is  more  frequently' 

fuch,  than  otherwife  :   But  it  is  often  a  more 

violent,  and  fometimes  a  fatal   malady.      In 

P  6  thefe 


336  PRACTICE 

thefe  cafes,  more  parte  of  the  body  are  at  the 
fame  time  affe&ed  ;  the  ulcers  alfo  feeming 
to  be  imbued  with  a  peculiarly  fharp  acrimo- 
ny, and  therefore  becoming  more  deep,  erod- 
ing, fpreading,  as  well  as  feldomer  healing  up. 
In  fuch  cafes,  the  eyes  are  often  particularly 
affe&ed.  The  edges  of  the  eyelids  are  affect- 
ed with  tumour  and  fuperficial  ulcerations  ; 
and  thefe  commonly  excite  obftinate  inflam- 
mation in  the  adnata,  which  frequently  pro- 
duces an  opacity  of  the  cornea. 

When  the  fcrophula  efpecially  affects  the 
joints,  it  Sometimes  produces  there  confidera- 
ble  tumours  ;  in  the  abfceffes  following  which, 
the  ligaments  and  cartilages  are  eroded,  and 
the  adjoining  bones  are  affected  with  a  caries 
of  a  peculiar  kind.  In  thefe  cafes,  alfo,  of 
more  violent  fcrophula,  while  every  year  pro- 
duces a  number  of  new  tumours  and  ulcers, 
their  acrimony  feems  at  length  to  taint  the 
whole  fluids  of  the  body,  occafioning  various 
diforders  ;  and  particularly  a  he£lic  fever, 
with  all  its  fymptoms,  which  at  length  proves 
fatal,  with  fometimes  the  fymptoms  of  a 
phthifis  pulmonalis. 

MDCCXLIX. 

The  bodies  of  perfons  who  have  died  of 
this  difeafe  (how  many  of  the  vifcera  in  a  very 
morbid  ftate  j  and  particularly  moil  of  the 
glands  of  the  mefentery  very  much  tumefied, 
and  frequently  in  an  ulcerated  ftate.  Com- 
monly 


OF       PHYSIC.  337 

monly  alfo  a  great  number  of  tubercles  or 
cyfts,  containing  matter  of  various  kinds,  ap- 
pear in  the  lungs. 

MDCCL. 

Such  is  the  hiftory  of  the  difeafe ;  and  from 
thence  it  may  appear,  that  the  nature  of  it  is 
not  eafily  to  be  afcertained.  It  feems  to  be  a 
peculiar  arrecliori  of  the  lymphatic  fyftem  ; 
and  this  in  fome  meafure  accounts  for  its  con- 
nexion with  a  particular  period  of  life.  Prob- 
ably, however,  there  is  a  peculiar  acrimony 
of  the  fluids  that  is  the  proximate  caufe  of  the 
difeafe  ;  although  of  what  nature  this  is,  has 
not  yet  been  difcovered.  It  may  perhaps  be 
generally  difFufed  in  the  fyftem,  and  exhaled 
into  the  feveral  cavities  and  cellular  texture  of 
the  body;  and  therefore,  being  taken  up  by  the 
abforbents,  may  difcoveritfelf  efpecially  in  the 
lymphatic  fyftem.  This,  however,  will  hard- 
ly account  for  its  being  more  confined  to  that 
fyftem,  than  happens  in  the  cafe  of  many  oth- 
er acrimonies  which  may  be  fuppofed  to  be  as 
generally  difFufed.  In  fhort,  its  appearance 
in  particular  conftitutions,  and  at  a  particular 
period  of  life,  and  even  its  being  a  hereditary 
difeafe,  which  fo  frequently  depends  upon  the 
tranfmiflion  of  a  peculiar  conftitution,  are 'all 
of  them  circumftances  which  lead  me  to  con- 
clude, upon  the  whole,  that  this  difeafe  de- 
pends upon  a  peculiar  conjlitution  of  the  lym- 
phatic fyjlem, 

MDCCLL 


338  PRACTICE 

MDCCLI. 

It  feems  proper  to  obferve  here,  that  the 
fcrophula  does  not  appear  to  be  a  contagious 
difeafe  ;  at  leafl  I  have  known  many  inftances 
of  found  children  having  had  frequent  and 
clofe  intercourfe  with  icrophulous  children 
without  being  infecled  with  the  difeafe.  This 
certainly  fhows,  that  in  this  difeafe  the  pecu- 
liar acrimony  of  it  is  not  exhaled  from  the 
furface  of  the  body,  but  that  it  depends 
efpecially  upon  a  peculiar  conflituti-on  of  the 
fyltem. 

MDCCLII. 

Several  authors  have  fuppofed  the  fcroph- 
ula to  have  been  derived  from  the  venereal 
difeafe  ;  but  upon  no  jufl  grounds  that  I  can 
perceive.  In  very  many  inftances,  there  can 
hardly  be  any  fufpicion  of  the  parents  pro- 
ducing this  difeafe  having  been  imbued  with 
liphylis,  or  with  any  liphylitic  taint ;  and  I 
have  known  feveral  examples  of  parents  con- 
veying fiphylis  to  their  offspring,  in  whom, 
however,  no  fcrophulous  fymptoms  at  any 
time  afterwards  appeared.  Further,  the 
fymptoms  of  the  two  difeafes  are  very  differ- 
ent ;  and  the  difference  of  their  natures  ap- 
pears particularly  from  hence,  that  while  mer- 
cury commonly  and  readily  cures  the  fiphy- 
lis, 


OF      PHYSIC.  339 

lis,  it  does  no  fervice  in  fcrophula,  and  very 
often  rather  aggravates  the  difeafe. 


MDCCLIII. 

For  the  cure  of  fcrophula,  we  have  not  yet 
learned  any  practice  that  is  certainly  or  even 
generally  fuccefsful. 

The  remedy  which  feems  to  be  the  moil 
fuccefsful,  and  which  our  practitioners  efpec- 
ially  truft  to  and  employ,  is  the  ufe  of  mineral 
waters ;  and  indeed  the  warning  out,  by  means 
of  thefe,  the  lymphatic  fyftern,  would  feem 
to  be  a  meafure  promifmg  fuccefs  :  But  in 
very  many  inftances  of  the  ufe  of  thefe  waters, 
I  have  not  been  well  fatisfied  that  they  had 
fhortened  the  duration  of  the  difeafe  more 
than  had  often  happened  when  no  fuch  rem- 
edy had  been  employed. 

MDCCLIV. 

With  regard  to  the  choice  of  the  mineral 
waters  tnoft  fit  for  the  purpofe,  I  cannot  with 
any  confidence  give  an  opinion.  Almoft  all 
kinds  of  mineral  waters,  whether  chalybeate, 
fulphureous,  or  faline,  have  been  employed 
for  the  cure  of  fcrophula,  and  feemingly  with 
equal  fuccefs  and  reputation  :  A  circumflance 
which  leads  me  to  think,  that,  if  they  are  ever 
fuccefsful,  it  is  the  elementary  water  that  is 
the  chief  part  of  the  remedy. 

Of 


340  PRACTICE 

Of  late,  Tea  water  has  been  efpecially  rec- 
ommended and  employed ;  but  after  nume- 
rous trials,  I  cannot  yet  difcover  its  fuperior 
efficacy. 

xMDCCLV. 

The  other  remedies  propofed  by  practical 
writers  are  very  numerous  ;  but,  upon  that 
very  account,  I  apprehend  they  are  little  to 
be  trufted  ;  and  as  I  cannot  perceive  any  juft 
reafon  for  expecting  fuccefs  from  them,  I  have 
very  feldom  employed  them. 

Of  late,  the  Peruvian  bark  has  been  much 
recommended  :  And  as  in  fcrophulous  per- 
fons  there  are  generally  fome  marks  of  laxity 
and  flaccidity,  this  tonic  may  poffibly  be  of 
fervice  ;  but  in  a  great  variety  of  trials,  I 
have  never  {ecn  it  produce  any  immediate 
cure  of  the  difeafe. 

In  feveral  inftances,  the  leaves  of  coltsfoot 
have  appeared  to  me  fo  be  fuccefsful.  I  have 
ufed  it  frequently  in  a  flrong  deco&ion,  and 
even  then  with  advantage  ;  but  have  found 
more  benefit  from  the  expreffed  juice,  when 
the  plant  could  be  had  in  fomewhat  of  a  fuc- 
culent  ftate,  foon  after  its  fir  ft  appearance  in 
the  fpring. 

MDCCLVI. 

I  have  alfo  frequently  employed  the  hem- 
lock, and  have  fometimes  found  it  ufeful  in 

difcufling 


OF       PHYSIC.  341 

difcufling  obftinate  fwellings  :  But  in  this,  it 
has  alfo  often  dilappointed  me  ;  and  I  have 
not  at  any  time  obferved  that  it  difpofed 
fcrophulous  ulcers  to  heal. 

I  cannot  conclude  the  fubjecl;  of  internal 
medicines  without  remarking,  that  I  have 
never  found,  either  mercury  or  antimony,  in 
any  fhape,  of  ufe  in  this  difeafe  ;  and  when 
any  degree  of  a  feverifh  flate  had  come  on,  the 
ufe  of  mercury  proved  manifestly  hurtful. 

MDCCLVII. 

In  the  progrefs  of  fcrophula,  feveral  exter- 
nal medicines  are  requifite.  Several  applica- 
tions have  been  ufed  for  difcufling  the  tu- 
mours upon  their  firfl  coming  on  ;  but  hith- 
erto my  own  practice,  in  thefe  refpecls,  has 
been  attended  with  very  little  fuccefs.  The 
folution  of  faccharum  faturni  has  feemed  to 
be  ufeful ;  but  it  has  more  frequently  failed  : 
And  I  have  had  no  better  fuccefs  with  the 
fpiritus  Mindereri.  Fomentations  of  every 
kind  have  been  frequently  found  to  do  harm  ; 
and  poultices  feem  only  to  hurry  on  a  fup- 
puration.  I  am  doubtful  if  this  laft  be  ever 
praclifed  with  advantage  ;  for  fcrophulous 
tumours  fornetimes  fpontaneoufly  difappear, 
but  never  after  any  degree  of  inflammation 
has  come  upon  them  ;  and  therefore  poul- 
tices, which  commonly  induce  inflammation, 
prevent  that  difcufiion  of  tumours,  which 
might  otherwife  have  happened. 

Even 


342  PRACTICE 

Even  when  fcrophulous  tumours  have  ad- 
vanced towards  fuppuration,  I  am  unwilling 
to  haft  en  the  fpontaneous  opening,  or  to  make 
it  by  the  lancet  ;  becaufe  I  apprehend  the 
fcrophulous  matter  is  liable  to  be  rendered 
more  acrid  by  communication  with  the  air, 
and  to  become  more  eroding  and  fpreading 
than  when  in  its  inclofed  (late. 

MDCCLVIII. 

The  management  of  fcrophulous  ulcers 
has,  fo  far  as  I  know,  been  as  little  fuccefsful 
as  that  of  the  tumours.  Efcharotic  prepara- 
tions, of  either  mercury  or  copper,  have  been 
fometimes  ufeful  in  bringing  on  a  proper  fup- 
puration, and  thereby  difpofing  the  ulcer  to 
heal  ;  but  they  have  feldom  fucceeded,  and 
more  commonly  they  have  caufed  the  ulcer 
to  fpread  more.  The  efcharotic  from  which 
I  have  received  moil  benefit  is  burnt  alum  ; 
and  a  portion  of  that  mixed  with  a  mild  oint- 
ment, has  been  as  ufeful  an  application  as  any 
I  have  tried.  The  application,  however,  that 
I  have  found  mod  ferviceable,  and  very  uni- 
verfally  admiflible,  is  that  of  linen  cloths 
wetted  with  cold  water,  and  frequently  chang- 
ed when  they  are  becoming  dry,  it  being  in- 
convenient to  let  them  be  glued  to  the  fore. 
They  are  therefore  to  be  changed  frequently 
during  the  day  ;  and  a  cloth  fpread  with  a 
mild  ointment  or  plafter  may  be  applied  for 
the  night.     In  this  practice  I  have  fometimes 

employed 


OF       PHY  SJ  C.  343 

employed  fea  water  :  But  generally  it  proved 
too  irritating  ;  and  neither  that  nor  any  min- 
eral water  has  appeared  to  be  of  more  fervice 
than  common  water. 

MDCCLIX. 

To>  conclude  what  I  have  to  offer  upon  the 
cure  of  fcrophula,  I  muft  obferve,  that  cold 
bathing  feems  to  have  been  of  more  benefit: 
than  any  other  remedy  that  I  have  had  occa- 
sion to  fee  employed. 


CHAP. 


344  PRACTICE 


CHAP.         II. 


of    SIPHYLIS,    or    the    VENEREAL. 
DISEASE. 


MDCCLX. 


AFTER  practitioners  havej 
had  fo  much  experience  in  treating  this  dif-i 
eafe,  and  after  fo  many  books  have  been  pub- 
lifhed  upon  the  fubjecl;,  it  does  not  feem  nee- 
efTary,  or  even  proper,  for  me  to  attempt  any 
full  treatife  concerning  it ;  and  I  Ihall  there- 
fore confine  myfelf  to  fuch  general  remarks, 
as  may  ferve  to  illuftrate  fome  parts  of  the 
pathology  or  of  the  practice. 

MDCCLXI. 

It  is  fufficiently  probable,  that,  anciently, 
in  certain  parts  of  Alia,  where  the  leprofy 
prevailed,  and  in  Europe  after  that  difeafe 
had  been  introduced  into  it,  a  difeafe  of  the 
genitals,  refembling  that  which  now  common- 
ly arifes  from  fiphylis,  had  frequently  appear- 
ed :  But  it  is  equally  probable,  that  a  new 
difeafe,  and  what  we  at  prefent  term  Siphylis, 
was  firft  brought  into  Europe  about  the  end 

of 


OF      PHYSIC.  345 

of  the  fifteenth  century  ;  and  that  the  diftem- 
per  now  fo  frequently  occurring,  has  been 
very  entirely  derived  from  that  which  was 
imported  from  America  at  the  period  men- 
tioned. 

MDCCLXII. 

This  difeafe,  at  leaft  in  its  principal  circum- 
fiances,  never  arifes  in  any  perfon  but  from 
fome  communication  with  a  perfon  already 
affected  with  it.  It  is  moil  commonly  con- 
tracted in  confequence  of  coition  with  an  in- 
fected perfon  ;  but  in  what  manner  the  in- 
fection is  communicated,  is  not  clearly  ex- 
plained. I  am  perfuaded,  that  in  coition,  it 
is  communicated  without  there  being  any 
open  ulcer  either  in  the  perfon  communicat- 
ing or  in  ihe  perfon  receiving  the  infection  ; 
but  in  all  other  cafes,  I  believe  it  is  never 
communicated  in  any  other  way  than  by  a 
contact  of  ulcer,  either  in  the  perfon  com- 
municating, or  in  the  perfon  receiving  the 
infection. 

MDCCLXIIL 

As  it  thus  arifes  from  the  contact  of  partic- 
ular parts,  fo  it  always  appears  firft  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  parts  to  which  the  in- 
fecting matter  had  been  immediately  applied ; 
and  therefore,  as  mod  commonly  contracted 

by 


346  PRACTICE 

by  coition,  it  generally  appears  firfl  in  the 
genitals. 

MDCCLXIV. 

After    its    fir  ft    appearance   in    particular  i 
parts,  more   efpecially  when   thefe    are   the 
genitals  of  either  fex,  its  effects  for  fome  time  | 
feem  to  be  confined  to  thefe  parts  ;  and  in*  i 
deed,  in  many  cafes,  never  extends  further. 
In  other  cafes,  however,  the  infecting  mat- 
ter paffes  from  the  parts  firfl  affected,  and 
from  the  genitals  therefore,  into  the  bloodveC- 
fels  ;  and  being  there  diffufed,  produces  dif- 
orders  in  many  other  parts  of  the  body. 

From  this  view  of  the  circumflances,  phy- 
ficians  have  very  properly  diftinguifhed  the 
different  ftates  of  the  difeafe,  according  as 
they  are  local  or  are  more  univerfal.  To  the 
former,  they  have  adapted  appellations  fuited 
to  the  manner  in  which  the  difeafe  appears  ; 
and  to  the  other  the  general  affection,  they 
have  almofl  totally  confined  the  appellations 
of  SiphyliSy  Lues  Venerea,  or  Pox,  In  the  re- 
marks I  am  now  to  offer,  I  mail  begin  with 
considering  the  local  affection. 

MDCCLXV. 

This  local  affection  appears  chiefly  in  the 
form  of  gonorrhoea  or  chancre. 

The  phenomena  of  gonorrhoea  either  upon 
its  firfl  coming  on  or  in  its  after  progrefs,  or 

the 


OF       PHYSIC.  347 

the  fymptoms  of  ardor  urinae,  chordee,  or 
others  attending  ity  it  is  not  neceflary  for  me 
to  defcribe.  I  mail  only  here  obferve,  that 
the  chief  circumftance  to  be  taken  notice  of, 
is  the  inflamed  Mate  of  the  urethra,  which  I 
take  to  be  infeparable  from  the  difeafe. 

MDCCLXVL 

In  thefe  well  known  circumftances,  the 
gonorrhoea  continues  for  a  time  longer  or 
fhorter,  according  to  the  conftitution  of  the 
patient  ;  it  ufually  remaining  longefl  in  the 
mofl  vigorous  and  robuft,  or  according  to  the 
patient's  regimen,  and  the  care  taken  to  re*, 
lieve  or  cure  the  difeafe.  In  many  cafes,  if 
by  a  proper  regimen  the  irritation  of  the  in* 
flamed  Rate  is  carefully  avoided,  the  gonor^ 
rhcea  fpontaneoufly  ceafes,  the  fymptoms  of 
inflammation  gradually  abating,  the  matter 
difcharged  becoming  of  a  thicker  and  more 
vifcid  confiftence,  as  Well  as  of  a  whiter  coU 
our  ;  till  at  length,  the  flow  of  it  ceafes  alto- 
gether ;  and  whether  it  be  thus  cured  fpon- 
taneoufly, or  by  art,  the  difeafe  often  exifls 
without  communicating  any  infection  to  the 
other  parts  of  the  body. 

MDCCLXVII. 

In  other  cafes,  however,  the  difeafe  having 
b^en  neglected,  or  bv  an  improper  regimen 
aggravated,  it  continues  with  all  its  fymptoms 

for 


348  PRACTICE 

for  a  long  time  ;  and  produces  various  other 
diforders  in  the  genital  parts,  which,  as  com- 
monly taken  notice  of  by  authors,  need  not 
be  defcribed  here.  I  fhall  only  obferve,  that 
the  inflammation  of  the  urethra,  which  at  firft 
feems  to  be  feated  chiefly,  or  only,  in  its  an- 
terior parts,  is  in  fuch  neglected  and  aggravat- 
ed cafes  fpread  upwards  along  the  urethra, 
even  to  the  neck  of  the  bladder.  In  thefe 
circumftances,  a  more  confiderable  inflam- 
mation is  occafioned  in  certain  parts  of  the 
urethra  ;  and  confequently,  fuppuration  and 
ulcer  are  produced,  by  which  the  venereal 
poifon  is  fometimes  communicated  to  the  fyf- 
tem,  and  gives  rife  to  a  general  fiphylis. 

MDCCLXVIII. 

It  was  fome  time  ago  a  pretty  general  fap- 
pofition,  that  the  gonorrhoea  depended  al- 
ways upon  ulcers  of  the  urethra,  producing  a 
difcharge  of  purulent  matter  ;  and  fuch  ul- 
cers do  indeed  fometimes  occur  in  the  manner 
that  has  been  juft  now  mentioned.  We  are 
now  aifured,  however,  from  many  diffections 
of  perfons  who  had  died  when  labouring  un- 
dei  a  gonorrhcea,  that  the  difeafe  may  exifl, 
and  from  many  confiderations  it  is  probable 
that  it  commonly  does  exift,  without  any 
ulceration  of  the  urethra  ;  fo  that  the  dis- 
charge which  appears,  is  entirely  that  of  a 
vitiated  mucus  from  the  mucous  follicles  of 
the  urethra. 

MDCCLXIX. 


OF       PHYSIC.         349 


MDCCLXIX. 

Although  mofl  of  the  fymptoms  of  gonor- 
rhoea fhould  be  removed,  yet  it  often  happens 
that  a  mucous  fluid  continues  to  be  discharg- 
ed from  the  urethra  for  a  long  time  after,  and 
fometimes  for  a  great  part  of  a  perfon's  life. 
This  difcharge  is  what  is  commonly  called  a 
Gleet.     - 

With  refpect  to  this,  it  is  proper  to  ohferve, 
that  in  fome  cafes,  when  it  is  certain  that  the 
matter  difcharged  contains  no  venereal  poifon, 
the  matter  may,  and  often  does  put  on  that 
puriform  appearance,  and  that  yellow  and 
greenifh  colour,  which  appears  in  the  difcharge 
at  the  beginning  and  during  the  courfe  of  a 
virulent  gonorrhoea.  Thefe  appearances  in 
the  matter  of  a  gleet  which  before  had  been 
of  a  lefs  coloured  kind,  have  frequently  given 
occafion  to  fuppofe  that  a'frefh  infection  had 
been  received  :  But  I  am  certain  that  fuch 
appearances  may  be  brought  on  by,  perhaps^ 
various  other  caufes ;  and  particularly,  by  in- 
temperance in  venery  and  drinking  concur- 
ring together.  I  believe,  indeed,  that  this 
feldom  happens  to  any  but  thofe  who  had  be- 
fore frequently  laboured  under  a  virulent 
gonorrhoea,  and  have  more  or  Jefs  of  gleet 
remaining  with  them  :  But  I  mud  alfo  ob- 
ferve,  that  in  perfons  who  at  no  period  of  their 
life  had  ever  laboured  under  a  virulent  gon- 
orrhoea, or  any  other  fymptom  of  fiphylitic 

Vol.  Ill,  Q  affeclion, 


350  PRACTICE 

fifFe&ion,  I  have  met  with  inflances  of  dif- 
charges  from  the  urethra  refembling  thofe  of 
ti  virulent  gonorrhoea. 

The  purpofe  of  thefe  observations  is,  to 
•fuggeft  to  praclitioners  what  I  have  not  found 
diem  always  aware  of,  that  in  perfons  labour- 
ing under  a  glttt,  Such  a  return  of  the  appear- 
ances of  a  virulent  gonorrhoea  may  happen 
without  any  new  infection  having  been  re- 
ceived, and  consequently  not  requiring  the 
treatment  which  a  new  infection  might  per. 
haps  demand.  When  in  the  cure  of  gonor- 
rhcea  it  was  the.  practice  to  employ  purgatives 
•very  frequently,  and  fometimes  thofe  of  the 
draflic  kind,  I  have  known  the  gleet,  or  Spu- 
rious gonorrhoea,  by  fuch  a  practice  much  in- 
creased, and  long  continued,  and  the  patient's 
constitution  very  much  hurt.  Nay,  in  order 
more  certainly  further  to  prevent  mi  flakes,  it 
is  to  be  obferved,  that  the  Spurious  gonorrhoea 
is  fometimes  attended  with  heat  of  urine,  and 
Some  degree  of  inflammation  ;  but  thefe 
Symptoms  are  Seldom  considerable,  and,  mere- 
ly by  the  afhftance  of  a  cool  regimen,  com** 
monly  difappear  in  a  few  days. 

MDCCLXX, 

With  refpecl;  to  the  cure  of  a  virulent  gor»a 
orrhoea,  I  have  only  to  remark,  that  if  it  be- 
true,  as  I  have  mentioned  above,  that  the 
difeafe  will  often,  under  a  proper  regimen,  be 
fpontaneouily  cured  ;  and  that  the  whole  of 

•the 


OF       PHYSIC.  351 

the  virulent  matter  may  be  thus  entirely  dif- 
charged  without  the  afhftance  of  art ;  it  would 
feem  that  there  is  nothing  required  of  prac- 
titioners, but  to  moderate  and  remove  that 
inflammation  which  continues  the  difeafe,  and 
occafions  all  the  troublefome  fymptoms  that 
ever  attend  it.  Trie  fole  bufinefs  therefore 
of  our  art  in  the  cure  of  gonorrhoea,  is  to 
take  off  the  inflammation  accompanying  it: 
And  this  I  think  may  commonly  be  done,  by 
avoiding  exercife,  by  ufing  a  low  and  cool 
diet,  by  abftaining  entirely  from  fermented 
and  fpirituous  liquors,  and  by  taking  plenti* 
fully  of  mild  diluent  drinks, 

MDCCLXXI. 

The  heat  of  urine,  which  is  fo  troublefome 
in  this  difeafe,  as  it  arifes  from  the  increafed 
fenfibility  of  the  urethra  in  its  inflamed  flate ; 
fo,  on  the  other  hand,  the  irritation  of  the 
urine  has  the  effecl;  of  increafing  the  inflam- 
mation, and  is  therefore  to  be  removed  as  foon 
as  poflible.  This  can  be  done  mofh  effectu- 
ally by  taking  in  a  large  quantity  of  mild 
watery  liquors.  Demulcents  may  be  em- 
ployed ;  but  unlefs  they  be  accompanied  with 
a  large  quantity  of  water,  they  will  have  little 
-efFecl:.  Nitre  has  been  commonly  employed 
as  a  fuppofed  refrigerant  :  But,  from  much 
obfervation,  I  am  convinced,  that  in  a  fmall 
quantity  it  is  ufelefs,  and  in  a  large  quan- 
tity certainly  hurtful  ;  and,  for  this  rea« 
Q  2  fon, 


352  PRACTICE 

fon,  that  every  faline  matter  pafling  with  the 
urine  generally  gives  fome  irritation  to  the 
urethra.  To  prevent  the  irritation  of  the 
urethra  arifing  from  its  increafed  fenfibility, 
the  injection  of  mucilage  or  of  mild  oil  into 
it  has  been  praclifed  ;  but  I  have  feldom 
found  this  of  much  fervice. 

MDCCLXXII. 

In  gonorrhoea,  as  coftivenefs  may  be  hurt- 
ful, both  by  an  irritation  of  the  fyftem  in  gen- 
eral, and  of  the  urethra  in  particular,  as  this 
is  occafioned  always  by  the  voiding  of  hard- 
ened fasces  ;  fo  coftivenefs  is  to  be  carefully 
avoided  or  removed  ;  and  the  frequent  ufe  of 
large  glyfters  of  water  and  oil,  I  have  found 
of  remarkable  benefit  in  this  difeafe.  If 
glyfters,  however,  do  not  entirely  obviate  cof- 
tivenefs, it  will  be  neceflary  to  give  laxatives 
by  the  mouth:  Which,  however,  fhould  be 
of  the  mildeft  kind,  and  mould  do  no  more 
than  keep  the  belly  regular  and  a  little  loofe, 
without  much  purging. 

The  practice  of  frequent  purging,  which 
was  formerly  fo  much  in  ufe,  and  is  not  yet 
entirely  laid  aiide,  has  always  appeared  to  me 
to  be  generally  fuperfluous,  and  often  very 
hurtful.  Even  what  are  fuppofed  to  be  cool- 
ing purgatives,  fuch  as  Glauber's  fait,  foluble 
tartar,  and  cryftals  of  tartar,  in  fo  far  as  any 
part  of  them  pafs  by  urine,  they,  in  the  fame 
manner  as  we  have  faid  of  nitre,  may  be  hurt- 
ful r 


OF       PHYSIC.  353 

ful  ;  and  fo  far  as  they  produce  very  liquid 
(tools,  the  matter  of  which  is  generally  acrid, 
they  irritate  the  rectum,  and  confequently  the 
urethra.  This  laft  effect,  however,  the  acrid, 
and  in  any  degree  draflic  purgatives,  more 
certainly  produce. 

MDCCLXXIII. 

In  cafes  of  a  gonorrhoea  attended  with  vi- 
olent inflammation,  bloodletting  may  be  of 
fervice  ;  and  in  the  cafe  of  perfons  of  a  robuft 
and  vigorous  habit,  in  whom  the  difeafe  is 
commonly  the  moil  violent,  bloodletting  may 
be  very  properly  employed.  As  general 
bleedings,  however,  when  there  is  no  phJo-- 
giflic  diathefis  in  the  fyflem,  have  little  effect 
in  removing  topical  inflammation  ;  fo  in  gon- 
orrhoea, when  the  inflammation  is  confidera- 
ble,  topical  bleeding  applied  to  the  urethra 
by  leeches,  is  generally  more  effectual  in  re- 
lieving the  inflammation, 

MDCCLXXIV. 

When  there  is  any  phymofis  attending  a 
gonorrhoea,  emollient  fomentations  applied 
to  the  whole  penis  are  often  of  fervice.  In 
fuch  cafes  it  is  neceffary,  and  in  all  others 
ufeful,  to  keep  the  penis  laid  up  to  the  belly, 
when  the  patient   either  walks  about   or  is 


fitting 


Q  3  MDCCLXXV. 


354  PRACTICE 


MDCCLXXV. 

Upon  crcalion  of  frequent  pirapifm  and 
chordee,  it  has  been  found  ufeful  to  apply  to 
the  whole  of  the  penis  a  poultice  of  crumb  of 
bread  moiftened  with  a  flrong  folution  of 
fugar  of  lead.  I  have,  however,  been  often 
difappointed  in  this  practice,  perhaps  by  the 
poultice  keeping  the  penis  too  warm,  and 
thereby  exciting  the  very  fymptoms  I  wifhed 
to  prevent.  Whether  lotions  of  the  external 
urethra  with  a  folution  of  the  fugar  of  lead, 
might  be  ufeful  in  this  cafe,  I  have  not  prop- 
erly tried,, 

MDCCLXXVI. 

With  refpecl;  to  the  ufe  of  injections,  fo 
frequently  employed  in  gonorrhoea,  I  am 
perfuaded,  that  the  early  ufe  of  aflringent  in- 
jections is  pernicious ;  not  by  occafioning  a 
iiphylis,  as  has  been  commonly  imagined  ; 
but  by  increafing  and  giving  occafion  to  all 
the  confequences  of  the  inflammation,  partic- 
ularly to  the  very  troublefome  fymptoms  of 
fwelled  tefticles.  When,  however  the  difeafe 
has  continued  for  fome  time,  and  the  inflam- 
matory fymptoms  have  very  much  abated,  I 
am  of  opinion,  that  by  injections  of  moderate 
aftringency,  or  at  leafl  of  this  gradually  in- 
creafed,  an  end  may  be  fooner  put  to  the  dif- 
eafe than  would  otherwife  have  happened  ;' 

and 


OF       PHYSIC.  355 

and  that  a  gleet,  fo  readily  occurring,  may  be 
generally  prevented. 

MDCCLXXVII. 

Befides  the  ufe  of  aftringent  injections,  it 
has  been  common  enough  to  employ  thofe  of 
a  mercurial  kind.  With  refpect  to  thefe,  al- 
though I  am  convinced  that  the  infection 
producing  gonorrhoea*,  and  that  producing 
chancres  and  fiphylis,  are  one  and  the  fame  * 
yet  I  apprehend,  that  in  gonorrhoea  mercury 
cannot  be  of  ufe  by  correcting  the  virulence 
of  the  infection  ;  and  therefore  that  it  is  not 
univerfaily  neceffary  in  this  difeafe.  I  am 
perfuaded,  however,  that  mercury  applied  to 
the  internal  furface  of  the  urethra,  may  be  of 
ufe  in  promoting  the  more  full  and  free  dif- 
charge  of  virulent  matter  from  the  mucous 
glands  of  it.  Upon  this  fuppofition,  I  have 
frequently  employed  mercurial  injections  ; 
and,  as  I  judge,  with  advantage  ;  thofe  injec- 
tions often  bringing  on  fuch  a  Hate  of  the 
confiftence  and  colour  of  the  matter  difcharg- 
ed,  as  we  know  ufually  to  precede  its  fpon- 
taneous  ceafing.  I  avoid  thefe  injections, 
however,  in  recent  cafes,  or  while  much  in- 
flammation is  ft  ill  prefent ;  but  when  that  in- 
flammation has  fomewhat  abated,  and  the 
difcharge  notwithstanding  flill  continues  in  a 
virulent  form,  I  employ  mercurial  injections 
freely.  I  employ  thofe  only  that  contain 
mercury  entirely  in  a  liquid  form,  and  avoid 
O  4  thofe 


356  PRACTICE 

thofe  which  may  depofite  an  acrid  powder  in 
the  urethra.  That  which  I  have  found  moil 
uieful  is  a  folution  of  the  corrolive  fublimate 
in  water  ;  fo  much  diluted  as  not  to  occafion 
any  violent  fmarting,  but  not  fo  much  diluted 
as  to  give  no  fmarting  at  all.  It  is  fcarce 
necefTary  to  add,  that  when  there  is  reafon  to 
fufpedl  there  are  ulcerations  already  formed 
in  the  urethra,  mercurial  injections  are  not 
only  proper,  but  the  only  effectual  remedy 
that  can  be  emplpyed. 

MDCCLXXVIIL 

With  regard  to  the  cure  of  gonorrhoea,  I 
have  only  one  other  remark  to  offer.  As 
moil  of  the  fymptoms  arife  from  the  irritation 
of  a  ftimulus  applied,  the  -effects  of  this  irri- 
tation may  be  often  leffened  by  diminifhing 
the  irritability  of  the  fyftem  ;  and  it  is  well 
known,  that  the  moft  certain  means  of  accom- 
pliihing  this  is  by  employing  opium.  For 
that  reafon,  I  confider  the  practice  both  of 
applying  opium  directly  to  the  urethra,  and 
of  exhibiting  it  by  the  mouth,  to  be  extremely 
ufeful  in  moft  cafes  of  gonorrhoea. 

MDCCLXXIX. 

After  thus  offering  fome  remarks  with  ref* 
pecTto  gonorrhoea  in  general,  I  might  pro- 
ceed to  confider  particularly  the  various  fymp- 
toms which  fo  frequently  attend  it ;  but  it 

does 


OF       PHYSIC  357 

does  not  feem  neceffary  for  me  to  attempt 
this  after  the  late  publications  of  Dr.  Foart 
Simmons,  and  of  Dr.  Schwediaur,  who  have 
treated  the  fubject.  fo  fully,  and  with  fo  much 
difcernment  and  fkill. 


MDCCLXXX. 

The  other  form  of  the  local  afFe&ion  of 
fiphylis,  is  that  of  chancre.  The  ordinary 
appearance  of  this  I  need  not  defcribe,  it  hav- 
ing been  already  fo  often  done.  Of  the  few- 
remarks  I  have  to  offer,  the  firft  is,  that  I  be- 
lieve chancres  never  appear  in  any  degree 
without  immediately  communicating  to  the 
blood  more  or  lefs  of  the  venereal  poifon  : 
For  I  have  conftantly,  whenever  chancres 
had  appeared,  found,  that  unlefs  mercury  was 
immediately  given  internally,  fome  fymptoms 
of  a  general  fiphylis  did  certainly  come  on 
afterwards ;  and  though  the  internal  ufe  of 
mercury  mould  prevent  any  fuch  appearance, 
it  is  flill  to  be  prefumed  that  the  poifon  had 
been  communicated,  becaufe  mercury  could 
acl:  upon  it  in  no  other  manner  than  as  dif- 
fused in  the  fluids. 


MDCCLXXXL 

It  has  been  a  queflion  among  practitioners, 

tipon  the  fubjecl;  of  chancres,  Whether  they 

Vol.  3,  Q  5  may 


353  PRACTICE 

may  be  immediately  healed  up  by  applications 
made  to  the  chancres,  or  if  they  mould  be  left 
open  for  fome  time  without  any  fuch  appli- 
cation ?  It  has  been  fuppofed,   that  the  fud- 
den  healing  up  of  chancres  might  immediate- 
ly force  into  the  blood  a  poifon  which  might 
have  been  excluded  by  being  discharged  from 
the  chancre.     This,  however,  is  a  fuppofition 
that  is   very  doubtful  ;   and,  upon   the  other 
hand,  I  am  certain,  that  the  longer  a  chancre 
is  kept  open,  the  more  poifon  it  perhaps  gen- 
erates, and  certainly  fupplies  it  more  copioufly 
to  the  blood.     And  although  the  above  men- 
tioned fuppofition  were  true,  it  will  be  of  little 
confequence,  if  the  internal  ufe  of  mercury, 
which  I  judge  neceiTary  in  every  cafe  of  chan- 
cre, be  immediately  employed.     I  have  often 
ieen  very   troublefome   confequences  follow 
from  allowing  chancres  to  remain  unhealed  ; 
and   the   fymptoms  of  general  iiphylis  have 
always  teemed  to  me  to  be  more  confiderable 
and  violent  in  proportion   as  chancres   had 
been   fufFered    to   remain    longer   unhealed. 
They  mould  always,  therefore,  be  healed  as 
foon  as  poffible ;  and  that,  by  the  only  very 
effectual  means,  the  application  of  mercurials 
to  the  chancre  itfelf.     Thofe  that  are  recent, 
and  have  not  yet  formed  any  confiderable  ul- 
cer, may  often  be  healed  by  the  common  mer- 
curial ointment ;  but  the  moil  powerful  means 
of  healing  them  has  appeared  to  me,  to  be  the 
application  of  red  precipitate  in  dry  a  powder. 

MDCCLXXXII. 


OF       PHYSIC.  359 


MDCCLXXXII. 

When,  in  confequence  of  chancres,  or  of 
the  other  circumftances  above  mentioned,  by 
"which  it  may  happen  the  venereal-  poifon  has 
been  communicated  to  the  blood,  it  produces 
many  different  fymptoms  in  different  parts  of 
the  body,  not  neceflary  to  be  enumerated  and 
defcribed  here,  that  having  been  already  done 
by  many  authors  with  great  accuracy. 

MDCCLXXXIII. 

Whenever  any  of  thofe  fymptoms  do  in  any 
degree  appear,  or  as  foon  as  it  is  known  that 
the  circumflances  which  give  occalion  to  the 
communication  of  the  venereal  poifon  have^ 
taken  place,  I  hold  the  internal  uie  of  mercu- 
ry to  be  immediately  neceflary  ;  and  I '  am 
well  perfuaded,  that  mercury  employed  with- 
out delay,  and  in  fufficient  quantity,  will  pret- 
ty certainly  prevent  the  fymptoms  wlfich 
would  otherwife  have  foon  appeared,  or  will 
remove  thofe  that  may  have  already  difcover- 
ed  themfelves.  In  both  cafes,  it  will  fecure 
the  perfon  from  any  future  confequences  of 
fiphylis  from  that  infection. 

MDCCLXXXIV. 

This  advice  for   the   early  and  full   life  of 

mercury,  I  take  to  be  the  moil  important  that 

Q  6  can 


360  PRACTICE 

can  be  given  with  refpecl;  to  the  venereal  dif- 
eafe  :  And  although  I  mufl  admit  that  the 
virulence  of  the  poifon  may  be  greater  in  one 
cafe  than  in  another,  and  even  that  one  con- 
flitution  may  be  more  favourable  than  anoth- 
er to  the  violence  of  the  difeafe  ;  yet  I  am 
thoroughly  convinced,  that  moil  of  the  in- 
ilances  which  have  occurred  of  the  violence 
and  obftinacy  of  fiphylis  have  been  owing 
very  entirely  to  the  neglect  of  the  early  ap- 
plication of  mercury. 

'MDCCLXXXV. 

Whatever  other  remedies  of  fiphylis  may 
be  known,  or  may  hereafter  be  found  out,  I 
cannot  pretend  to  determine  ;  but  I  am  well 
perfuaded,  that  in  moil  cafes  mercury  prop- 
erly employed  will  prove  a  very  certain  and 
effectual  remedy.  With  refpecl;  to  others 
that  have  been  propofed,  I  mall  offer  this  re- 
mark only,  that  I  have  found  the  decoction 
of  the  mezereon  contribute  to  the  healing  of 
ulcers  which  feemed  to  have  refilled  the  pow- 
er of  mercury. 

MDCCLXXXVI. 

With  regard  to  the  many  and  various  prep- 
arations of  mercury,  I  do  not  think  "it  necef- 
fary  to  give  any  enumeration  of  them  here,  as 
they  are  commonly  very  well  known,  and 
have    been    lately  well  enumerated  by   Dr. 

Schwediaur. 


OF      PHYSIC.  361 

Schwediaur.  The  choice  of  them  feems  to 
be  for  the  moft  part  a  matter  of  indifference  ; 
as  I  believe  cures  have  been,  and  flill  may  be, 
effected  by  many  different  preparations,  if 
properly  adminiftered.  The  proper  admin- 
iftration  feems  to  confift^r/Z,  In  the  choofing 
thofe  preparations  which  are  the  leaft  ready 
to  run  off  by  ftool ;  and  therefore  the  appli- 
cations externally  by  un&ion,  are  in  many 
cafes  the  moft  convenient.  2dly,  In  employ- 
ing the  unction,  or  in  giving  a  preparation  of 
mercury  internally,  in  fuch  quantity  as  may 
fhow  its  fenfible  effects  in  the  mouth.  And, 
gdly,  without  carrying  thefe  effects  to  a  great- 
er length,  In  the  continuing  the  employment 
of  mercury  for  feveral  weeks,  or  till  the  fymp- 
toms  of  the  difeafe  fhall  have  for  fome  time 
entirely  difappeared.  I  fay  nothing  of  the 
regimen  proper  and  neceffary  for  patients  dur- 
ing the  employment  of  mercury,  becaufe  I 
prefume  it  to  be  very  well  known. 

MDCCLXXXVII. 

Amongft  the  other  preparations  of  mercu- 
ry, I  believe  the  corrofive  fublimate  has  often 
been  employed  with  advantage  :  But  I  believe 
alfo,  that  it  requires  being  continued  for  a 
longer  time  than  is  neceffary  in  the  employ- 
ment of  other  preparations  in  the  manner 
above  propofed  ;  and  I  fufpect.  it  has  often 
failed  in   making  a  cure,   becaufe  employed 

while 


362  PRACTICE 

while  perfons  were  at  the  fame  time  expofed 
to  the  free  air. 

MDCCLXXXVIII. 

Upon  thefe  points,  and  others  relative  to 
the  administration  of  mercury,  and  the  cure 
of  this  difeafe,  I  might  offer  fome  particular 
remarks  :  But  I  believe  they  are  generally 
underflood  ;  and  it  is  enough  for  me  to  fay 
here,  that  if  practitioners  will  attend,  and  pa- 
tients will  fubmit,  to  the  general  rules  given 
above,  they  will  feldom  fail  of  obtaining  a 
certain  and  fpeedy  cure  of  the  difeafe. 


C  H  A  P. 


OF       PHYSIC.  363 


CHAP.         III. 


of    SCURVY, 


MDCCLXXXIX. 

1  HIS  difeafe  appears  fo  fre- 
quently, and  the  effects  of  it  are  fo  often  fatal, 
in  fleets  and  armies,  that  it  has  very  properly 
engaged  the  particular  attention  of  phyficians, 
It  is  indeed  furprifing  that  it  had  not  fooner 
attracted  the,  efpecial  notice  both  of  ftatefmen 
and  phyficians,  fo  as  to  have  produced  thofe 
meafures  and  regulations  that  might  prevent 
the  havock  which  it  fo  often  occafions.  Within 
thefe  lafl  fifty  years,  however,  it  has  been  fo 
much  attended  to  and  ftudied,  that  we  might 
fuppofe  every  circumftance  relating  to  it  fo 
fully  and  exactly  ascertained,  as  to  render  all 
further  labour  upon  the  fubject.  fuperfluous. 
This  perhaps  may  be  true  ;  but  it  appears  to 
me,  that  there  are  Hill  feveral  circumffances 
regarding  the  difeafe  not  agreed  upon  among 
phyficians,  as  well  as  different  opinions  form- 
ed, fome  of  which  may  have  a  bad  efFecl:  upon 
the  practice  :   And  this   feems   to   me   to  be 
fo  much  the  cafe,  that  I  hope  I   mall   be  ex- 
cused in  endeavouring  here  to  ftate  the  facts 

as 


3^4  PRACTICE 

as  they  appear  to  me  from  the  bed  authorities, 
and  to  offer  remarks  upon  opinions  which 
may  influence  the  practice  in  the  prevention 
and  cure  of  this  difeafe* 

MDCCXC. 

With  refpecl;  to  the  phenomena  of  the  dif- 
eafe,  they  have  now  been  fo  fully  obferved, 
and  fo  accurately  defcribed,  that  there  is  no 
longer  any  doubt  in  difcerning  the  difeafe 
when  it  is  prefent,  or  in  diftinguifhing  it  from 
almoft  every  other  ailment.  In  particular,  it 
feems  now  to  be  fully  determined,  that  there 
is  one  difeafe  only,  intitled  to  the  appellation 
of  Scurvy  ;  that  it  is  the  fame  upon  the  land 
as  upon  the  fea  ;  that  it  is  the  fame  in  all 
climates  and  feafons, as  depending  everywhere 
upon  nearly  the  fame  caufes ;  and  that  it  is 
not  at  all  diverfified,  either  in  its  phenomena 
or  its  caufes,  as  had  been  imagined  fome  time 
ago. 

MDCCXCI. 


The  phenomena  of  fcurvy,  therefore,  are 
not  to  be  defcribed  here,  as  it  has  been  fo  fully 
and  accurately  done  elfewhere ;  and  I  fhall 
only  endeavour  to  afcertain  thofe  facts  with 
refpecl;  to  the  prevention  and  cure  of  the  dif- 
eafe which  feem  not  yet  to  be  exactly  agreed 
upon.  And,  firfl,  with  refpecl;  to  the  ante- 
cedents 


OF      PHYSIC.  365 

cedents  that  may  be  confidered  as  the  remote 
caufes  of  the  difeafe. 

MDCCXCII. 

The  moft  remarkable  circumflance  among!! 
the  antecedents  of  this  difeafe  is,  that  it  has 
moft  commonly  happened  to  men  living  very 
much  on  falted  meats  ;  and  whether  it  ever 
arife  in  any  other  circum fiances,  is  extremely 
doubtful.  Thefe  meats  are  often  in  a  putres- 
cent fiate ;  and  to  the  circumflance  of  the 
long  continued  ufe  of  animal  food  in  a  pu- 
trefcent  and  fomewhat  indigeflible  flate,  the 
difeafe  has  been  efpecially  attributed.  Wheth- 
er the  circumflance  of  the  meat's  being  falt- 
ed, has  any  efFec~l  in  producing  the  difeafe, 
otherwife  than  by  being  rendered  more  indi- 
geflible, is  a  queftion  that  remains  flill  in  dif- 
pute. 

MDCCXCIII. 

It  feems  to  me,  that  the  fait  concurs  in  pro- 
ducing the  effecT: ;  for  there  is  hardly  any  in* 
fiance  of  the  difeafe  appearing  unlefs  where 
falted  meats  had  been  employed,  and  fcarcely 
an  example  where  the  long  continued  ufe  of 
thefe  did  not  produce  it :  Befides  all  which, 
there  are  fome  inflances  where,  by  avoiding 
falted  meats,  or  by  diminiiliing  the  propor- 
tion of  them  in  diet,  while  other  circumflances 
remained  much  the  fame,  the  difeafe  was  pre- 
vented 


266,  PRACTICE 

vented  from  appearing.  Further,  if  it  may 
be  admitted  as  an  argument  upon  this  fubje6l, 
I  mall  hereafter  endeavour  to  fhow,  that  the 
large  ufe  of  fait  has  a  tendency  to  aggravate 
and  increafe  the  proximate  caufe  of  fcurvy. 

MDCCXCIV. 

It  mud  however  be  allowed,  that  the  prin- 
cipal circumftance  in  caufing  fcurvy,  is  the 
living  very  much  and  very  long  upon  animal 
food,  efpecially  when  in  a  putrefcent  flate  ; 
and  the  clear  proof  of  this  is,  that  a  quantity 
of  frefh  vegetable  food  will  always  certainly 
prevent  the  difeafe. 

MDCCXCV. 

While  it  has  been  held,  that,  in  thofe  cir- 
cumflances  in  which  fcurvy  is  produced,  the 
animal  food  employed  was  efpecially  hurtful 
by  its  being  of  difficult  digeflion,  this  opinion 
has  been  attempted  to  be  confirmed,  by  ob- 
serving, that  the  reft  of  the  food  employed  in 
the  fame  circumflances  was  alfo  of  difficult 
digeflion.  This  is  fuppofed  to  be  efpecially 
the  cafe  of  unfermented  farinacea  which  fo 
commonly  makes  a  part  of  the  fea  diet.  But 
I  apprehend  this  opinion  to  be  very  ill  found- 
ed ;  for  the  unfermented  farinacea,  which  are 
in  a  great  proportion  the  food  of  infants,  of 
women,  and  of  the  greater  part  of  mankind, 
can  hardly  be  fuppofed  to  be  food  of  difficult 

digeflion  ; 


OF       PHYSIC.  367 

digeftion  :  And  with  refpeft  to  the  produ&ion 
of  fcurvy,  there  are  fa6ts  which  fhow,  that 
unfermented  farinacea,  employed  in  large 
proportion,  have  had  a  confiderable  effecl;  in 
preventing  the  difeafe. 


MDCCXCVI. 

It  has  been  imagined,  that  a  certain  im- 
pregnation of  the  air  upon  the  fea  had  an  ef- 
fect in  producing  fcurvy.  But  it  is  altogeth- 
er improbable  :  For  the  only  impregnations 
which  could  be  fufpe£ted,  are  thofe  of  inflam- 
mable or  mephitic  air ;  and  it  is  now  well 
known,  that  thefe  impregnations  are  much 
lefs  in  the  air  upon  the  fea  than  in  that  upon 
the  land  ;  befides,  there  are  otherwife  many 
proofs  of  the  falubrity  of  the  fea  air.  If, 
therefore,  fea  air  have  any  effecl:  in  producing 
fcurvy,  it  mull  be  by  its  fenfible  qualities  of 
cold  or  moifture. 


MDCCXCV1I. 

That  cold  has  an  efFecl  in  favouring  the 
production  of  fcurvy,  is  manifeft  from  hence, 
that  the  difeafe  is  more  frequent  and  more 
confiderable  in  cold  than  in  warm  climates 
and  ieafons ;  and  that  even  warm  clothing 
has  a  confiderable  effect  in  preventing  it, 

MDCCXCVIII. 


368  PRACTICE 


MDCCXCVIII. 

Moifture  may  in  general  have  an  effec"!  in 
favouring  the  production  of  fcurvy,  where 
that  of  the  atmofphere  in  which  men  are 
placed  is  very  confiderable  :  But  the  ordinary 
moifture  of  the  fea  air  is  far  from  being  fuch. 
Probably  it  is  never  confiderable,  except  in 
the  cafe  of  unufual  rains ;  and  even  then,  it 
is  perhaps  by  the  application  of  moifture  to 
the  bodies  of  men  in  damp  clothing  only 
that  it  has  any  fhare  in  the  production  of 
fcurvy.  At  the  fame  time,  I  believe  there  is 
no  inftance  of  either  cold  or  moifture  produc- 
ing fcurvy,  without  the  concurrence  of  the 
faulty  fea  diet. 

MDCCXCI'X. 

Under  thofe  circumftances  which  produce 
fcurvy,  it  'commonly  feems  to  occur  moil 
readily  in  the  per  fans  who  are  the  leaft  exer- 
cifed  ;  and  it  is  therefore  probable,  that  con- 
finement and  want  of  exercife  may  have  a 
great  fhare  in  producing  the  difeafe. 

MDCCC. 

It  appears  that  weaknefs,  in  whatever  man- 
ner occafioned,  is  favourable  to  the  produc- 
tion of  fcurvy.  It  is  therefore  probable,  that 
unufual  labour  and  fatigue  may  often  have 

fome 


OF       PHYSIC.  369 

fome  fliare  in  bringing  it  on  :  And  upon  the 
fame  account,  it  is  probable,  that  fadnefs  and 
defpondency  may  induce  a  weaknefs  of  the 
circulation  ;  and  thereby,  as  has  been 
remarked,  favourable  to  the  production  of 
fcurvy. 

MDCCCL 

It  has  alfo  been  obferved,  that  perfons  neg- 
ligent in  keeping  their  fkin  clean  by  warning 
and  change  of  clothing,  are  more  liable  than 
others  to  be  affected  with  fcurvy, 

MDCCCII. 

Several  of  thefe  caufes,  now  mentioned, 
concurring  together,  feem  to  produce  fcurvy ; 
but  there  is  no  proper  evidence  that  any  one 
of  them  alone  will  produce  it,  or  that  all  the 
others  uniting  together  will  do  it,  without  the 
particular  concurrence  of  the  fea  diet.  A- 
longft  with  this,  however,  feveral  of  the  other 
circumftances  mentioned,  have  a  great  efFecl: 
in  producing  it  fooner,  and  in  a  more  confid- 
erable  degree,  than  would  otherwife  have  hap- 
pened from  the  diet  alone. 

MDCCCIII. 

From  this  view  of  the  remote  caufes,  it  will 
readily  appear,  that  the  prevention  of  the  dif- 
eafe  may  in  fome  meafure  depend  upon  the 

avoiding 


37o  PRACTICE 

avoiding  of  thofe  circumftances  which  we 
have  enumerated  as  contributing  to  bring  on 
the  difeafe  fooner  than  it  would  otherwife 
come  on.  At  the  fame  time,  the  only  effectu- 
al means  will  be,  by  avoiding  the  diet  of  fak- 
ed meats  ;  at  leafl  by  lelfening  the  proportion 
of  thefe,  and  ufmg  meat  preferved  otherwife 
than  by  fait ;  by  ufing  in  diet  any  kind  of  ef- 
culent  vegetable  matter  that  can  be  obtained ; 
and  efpecially  by  ufmg  vegetable  matters  the 
moll  difpofed  to  acefcency,  fuch  as  malt ; 
and  by  drinking  a  large  quantity  of  pure 
water. 

MDCCCIV. 

The  cure  of  fcurvy  feems  now  to  be  very 
well  afcertained  ;  and  when  the  neceffary 
means  can  be  obtained,  the  difeafe  is  com- 
monly removed  very  quickly.  The  chief 
means  is  a  food  of  frefh  and  fucculent  vegeta- 
bles, and  thofe  almofl  of  any  kind  that  are 
at  all  efculent.  Thofe  moil  immediately  ef- 
fectual are  the  acid  fruits,  and,  as  being  of  the 
fame  nature,  all  fort  of  fermented  liquor* 

MDCCCV* 

The  plants  named  alkalefcenty(uch  as  thofe 
of  the  garlic  tribe  and  of  the  tetradynamiae* 
are  alfo  particularly  ufeful  in  the  cure  of  this  I 
xlifeafe ;  for,  notwith (landing  their  appellation*  j 
they  in  the  firfl  part  of  their  fermentation  un*. 

dergo ' 


OF       PHYSIC.  371 

dergo  an  acefcency,  and  feem  to  contain  a 
great  deal  of  acefcent  matter,  At  the  fame 
time,  they  have  generally  in  their  compofition 
an  acrid  matter  that  readily  palfes  by  urine, 
probably  by  perfpiration  ;  and  by  promoting 
both  excretions,  are  ufeful  in  the  difeafe.  It 
is  probable,  that  fome  plants  of  the  coniferous 
tribe,  fuch  as  the  fpruce  fir,  and  others  poffefF-. 
ed  of  a  diuretic  power,  may  like  wife  be  of 
fome  ufe. 


MDCCCVL 

It  is  fufficiently  probable,  that  milk  of  every 
kind,  and  particularly  its  productions  whey 
and  butter  milk,  may  prove  a  cure  of  this 
difeafe. 

MDCCCVII. 

It  has  been  common  in  this  difeafe  to  em- 
ploy  the  foffil  acids  ;  but  there  is  reafon  to 
doubt  if  they  be  of  any  fervice,  and  it  is  cer- 
tain they  are  not  effectual  remedies.  They 
can  hardly  be  thrown  in  in  fuch  quantity  as 
to  be  ufeful  antifeptics  ;  and  as  they  do  not 
feem  to  enter  into  the  compofition  of  the  an- 
imal fluids,  and  probably  pafs  off  unchanged 
by  the  excretions,  fo  they  can  do  little  m 
changing  the  flate  of  the  fluids, 

MDCCCVIII, 


372  PRACTICE 


MDCCCVIII. 

The  great  debility  which  conftantly  attends 
fcurvy,  has  naturally  led  phyficians  to  employ 
tonic  and  ftrengthening  medicines,  particular- 
ly the  Peruvian  bark ;  but  the  efficacy  of  it 
feems  to  me  very  doubtful.  It  is  furprifing 
how  foon  the  ufe  of  a  vegetable  diet  reflores 
the  flrength  of  fcorbutic  perfons  ;  which 
feems  to  fhow  that  the  preceding  debility  had 
depended  upon  the  flate  of  the  fluids  ;  and 
confequently,  till  the  found  Hate  of  thefe  can 
be  reflored,  no  tonic  remedy  can  have  much 
efFe£l  :  But  as  the  Peruvian  bark  has  little 
power  in  changing  the  flate  of  the  fluids,  fo 
it  can  have  little  efFecl  in  fcurvy. 

MDCCCIX. 

I  fhall  conclude  my  obfervations  upon  the 
medicines  employed  in  fcurvy,  with  remark- 
ing, that  the  ufe  of  mercury  is  always  mani- 
feftly  hurtful. 

MDCCCX. 

After  having  obferved  that  both  the  pre- 
vention and  cure  of  this  difeafe  are  now  very 
well  known,  it  may  feem  unneceffary  to  enter 
into  much  difcuffion  concerning  its  proximate 
caufe  :  But  as  fuch  difcuffions  can  hardly  be 
avoided,  and  as   falfe  opinions  may  in  fome 

meafure 


OF      PHYSIC.  373 

meafure  corrupt  the  practice,  I  fhall  venture 
to  fugged  here  what  appears  to  me  mod  prob- 
able upon  the  fubjecl. 

MDCCCXI. 

Notwithstanding  what  has  been  afTerted  by 
fome  eminent  perfons,  I  trufl  to  the  concur- 
ring teflimony  of  the  molt  part  of  the  authors 
upon  the  fubjecl;,  that  in  fcurvy  the  fluids 
fuffer  a  confiderable  change. 

From  thefe  authors  we  learn,  that  in  the 
blood  drawn  from  the  veins  of  perfons  la- 
bouring under  the  fcurvy,  the  craffamentum 
is  different  both  in  colour  and  confidence 
from  what  it  is  in  healthy  perfons  ;  and  that 
at  the  fame  time  the  ferum  is  commonly 
changed  both  in  colour  and  tafte.  The  ex- 
cretions alfo,  in  fcorbutic  perfons,  fhow  a 
change  in  the  date  of  the  fluids.  The  breath 
is  fetid  ;  the  urine  is  always  high  coloured, 
and  more  acrid  than  ufual  ;  and  if  that  acrid 
exfudation  from  the  feet,  which  Dr.  Hulme 
takes  notice  of,  happens  efpecially  in  fcorbutic 
perfons,  it  will  be  a  remarkable  proof  to  the 
fame  purpofe.  But  however  this  may  be, 
there  is  evidence  enough  that  in  fcurvy  the 
natural  ftate  of  the  fluids  is  confiderably 
changed.  Further,  I  apprehend  it  may  be 
confidently  prefumed  from  this,  that  the  dif- 
eafe  is  brought  on  by  a  particular  nourifhment 
introduced  into  the  body,  and  is  as  certainly 
cured  by  the  taking  in  of  a  different  diet.     In 

Vol.  III.  R  the 


374  PRACTICE 

the  latter  cafe,  the  diet  ufed  has  no  other  evi« 
dent  operation,  than  that  of  giving  a  particu- 
lar ftate  and  condition  to  the  fluids. 


MDCCCXII. 

Prefuming,  therefore,  that  the  difeafe  de^ 
pends  upon  a  particular  condition  of  the 
fluids  of  the  body,  the  next  fubje6t  of  inquiry 
is,  What  that  condition  may  be  ? 

With  this  view,  I  muft  obferve,  that  the  an- 
irnal  economy  has  a  fingular  power  of  chang- 
ing acefcent  aliments,  in  fuch  a  manner  s  as  to 
render  them  much  more  difpofed  to  putre* 
faction  ;  and  although,  in  a  living  ftate,  they 
hardly  ever  proceed  to  an  actually  putrid 
Hate  ;  yet  in  man,  whofe  aliment  is  of  a  mixed 
kind,  it  is  pretty  certain  that  if  he  were  to 
live  entirely  upon  animal  food,  without  a  fre- 
quent fupply  of  vegetable  aliment,  his  fluids 
would  advance  further  towards  putrefaction 
than  is  confiftent  with  health.  This  advance 
towards  putrefaction  feems  to  confift  in  the 
production  and  evolution  of  a  faline  matter 
which  did  not  appear  in  the  vegetable  ali- 
ment, and  could  not  be  produced  or  evolved 
in  it,  but  by  carrying  on  its  fermentation  to  a 
putrefactive  ftate.  That  this  faline  ftate  is 
conftantly  in  fome  meafure  produced  and 
evolved  by  the  animal  procefs,  appears  from 
this,  that  certain  excretions  of  faline  matter 
are  conftantly  made  from  the  human  body, 

2LT\d 


OF       PHYSIC.         375 

and  are  therefore  prefumed  neceffary  to  its 
health. 

From  all  this,  it  may  be  readily  underfloodf 
how  the  continual  ufe  of  animal  food,  efpec- 
ially  when  already  in  a  putrescent  (late,  with^ 
out  a  mixture  of  vegetable,  may  have  the  ef- 
fect of  carrying  the  animal  procefs  too  far, 
and  particularly  of  producing  and  evolving  a 
larger  proportion  of  faline  matter.  That  fuch 
a  preternatural  quantity  of  faline  matter  does 
exift  in  the  blood  of  fcorbutic  perfons,  appears 
from  the  Hate  of  the  fluids  above  mentioned. 
It  will  be  a  confirmation  of  all  this  to  obferve, 
that  every  interruption  of  perfpiration,  that 
is,  the  retention  of  faline  matter,  contributes 
to  the  production  of  feurvy ;  and  this  inter- 
ruption is  efpecially  owing  to  the  application 
of  cold,  or  to  whatever  elfe  weakens  the  force 
of  the  circulation,  fuch  as  the  negle6t  or  want 
of  exercife,  fatigue,  and  defpondency  of  the 
mind.  It  deferves  indeed  to  be  remarked 
here,  that  one  of  the  firft  effects  of  the  feurvy 
once  induced,  is  very  foon  to  occafion  a  great 
debility  of  the  fyftem,  which  occafions  of 
courfe  a  more  rapid  progrefs  of  the  difeafe. 
How  the  ftate  of  the  fluids  may  induce  fuch  a 
debility  is  not  well  underftood  ;  but  that  it 
does  depend  upon  fuch  a  flate  of  the  fluids, 
is  rendered  fufficiently  prefumable  from  what 
has  been  faid  above  with  regard  to  both  the 
c&ufes  and  the  cure  of  feurvy. 

R  2  MDCCCXIIL 


376  PRACTICE 


MDCCCXIIL 

It  is  poffible,  that  this  debility  may  have  a 
great  fhare  in  producing  feveral  of  the  phe- 
nomena of  fcurvy  i  but  a  preternaturally  fa- 
line,  and  confequently  diffolved  ftate  of  the 
blood,  will  account  for  them  with  more  prob~ 
ability ;  and  I  do  not  think  it  neceflary  to 
perfons  who  are  at  all  accuflomed  to  reafon 
upon  the  animal  economy,  to  explain  this 
matter  more  fully.  I  have  only  to  add,  that 
if  my  opinion  in  fuppofing  the  proximate 
caufe  of  fcurvy  to  be  a  preternaturally  faline 
ftate  of  the  blood,  be  at ^all  founded,  it  will  be 
fufficiently  obvious,  that  the  throwing  into 
the  body  along  with  the  aliment  an  unufual 
quantity  of  fait,  may  have  a  great  fhare  in  pro- 
ducing the  difeafe.  Even  fuppofing  fuch  fait 
to  fuffer  no  change  in  the  animal  body,  the 
effect  of  it  may  be  confiderable  ;  and  this  will 
be  rendered  ftill  more  probable,  if  it  may  be 
prefumed,  that  all  neutral  falts,  confifting  of  a 
fixed  alkali,  are  changed  in  the  animal  body 
into  an  ammoniacal  fait ;  which  I  apprehend 
to  be  that  efpecially  prevailing  in  fcurvy.  If 
I  be  at  all  right  in  concluding,  that  meats, 
from  being  falted,  contribute  to  the  produc- 
tion of  fcurvy,  it  will  readily  appear,  how  dan- 
gerous it  may  be  to  admit  the  conclufion 
from  another  theory,  that  they  are  perfectly 
innocent, 

MDCCCXIV. 


OF      PHYSIC.  377 

MDCCCXIV. 

Having  thus  endeavoured  to  explain  what 
relates  to  the  cure  of  fcurvy  in  general,  I 
judge  it  proper  to  leave  to  other  authors, 
what  relates  to  the  management  of  thofe 
fymptoms  which  require  a  particular  treat- 
ment. 


R  3  CHAP. 


378  PRACTICE 

CHAP.        IV. 
of  JAUNDICE. 

MDCCCXV. 

I  HAVE  here  paffed  over  fev- 
eral  of  the  titles  in  my  nofology,  becaufe  they 
are  difeafes  not  of  this  Ifland.  In  thefe, 
therefore,  I  have  no  experience  ;  and  with- 
out that,  the  compiling  from  other  writers  is 
always  extremely  fallacious.  For  thefe  rea- 
fons  I  omit  them  ;  and  Ihall  now  only  offer 
fome  remarks  upon  the  fubjecl:  of  jaundice, 
the  laft  in  order  that  I  can  poffibly  introduce 
in  my  courfe  of  Lectures. 

MDCCCXVI. 

The  jaundice  conlifts  in  a  yellow  colour  of 
the  fkin  over  the  whole  body,  and  particular- 
ly of  the  adnata  of  the  eyes.  This  yellow 
colour  may  occur  from  different  caufes  :  But 
in  the  jaundice,  hereafter  to  be  more  exactly 
charadlerifed,  I  judge  it  to  depend  upon  a 
quantity  of  bile  prefent  in  the  mafs  of  blood  ; 
and  which,  thrown  out  upon  the  furface, 
gives  its  own  proper  colour  to  the  fkin  and 
eyes, 

MDCCCXVIL 


OF       PHYSIC.  379 

MDCCCXV1L 

That  the  difeafe  depends  upon  this,  we 
know  particularly  and  certainly  from  the 
caufes  by  which  it  is  produced.  In  order  to 
explain  thefe,  I  muft  obferve,  that  bile  does 
not  exift  in  its  proper  form  in  the  mafs  of 
blood,  and  cannot  appear  in  this  form  till  ic 
has  palled  the  fecretory  organ  of  the  liver; 
The  bile  therefore  cannot  appear  in  the  mafs 
of  blood,  or  upon  the  furface  of  the  body, 
that  is,  produce  jaundice  from  any  interrup- 
tion of  its  fecretion  ;  and  accordingly,  if  jaun- 
dice does  appear,  it  mud  be  in  confequence 
of  the  bile,  after  it  had  been  fecerned,  being 
again  taken  into  the  bloodvellels. 

This  may  happen  in  two  ways ;  either  by 
an  interruption  of  its  excretion,  that  isy  of  its 
paflage  into  the  duodenum,  which  by  accu- 
mulating it  in  the  biliary  veffels,  may  give  oc~ 
cafion  to  its  palling  again  into  the  bloodvef- 
fels ;  or  it  may  pafs  into  thefe,  by  its  being 
abforbed  from  the  alimentary  canal  when  it 
happens  to  be  accumulated  there  in  an  un- 
ufual  quantity.  How  far  the  latter  caufe  can 
take  place,  or  in  what  circumflances  it  does 
occur,  I  cannot  clearly  afcertain,  and  I  ap- 
prehend that  jaundice  is  feldom  produced  in 
that  manner. 

MDCCCXVIII. 

The   former   caufe   of  flopped   excretion 

may  be  underftood  more  clearly  ;  and  we 

R  4  have 


380  PRACTICE 

have  very  certain  proof  of  its  being  the  ordi- 
nary, and  indeed  almoft  the  univerfal  caufe 
of  this  difeafe.  Upon  this  fubjecl  it  will  be 
obvious,  that  the  interrupted  excretion  of  the 
bile  muft.  depend  upon  an  obftruclion  of  the 
ductus  communis  choledochus  ;  the  moft  com- 
mon caufe  of  which  is  a  biliary  concretion 
formed  in  the  gall  bladder,  and  from  thence 
fallen  down  into  the  duclus  communis,  it  be- 
ing at  the  fame  time  of  fuch  a  fize  as  not  to 
pafs  readily  through  that  duel:  into  the  duo- 
denum. This  duel  may  likewife  be  obftrucl- 
ed  by  a  fpafmodic  conftriclion  affecting  it  : 
And  fuch  fpafm  may  happen^  either  in  the 
duel:  itfelf,  which  we  fuppofe  to  be  contractile ; 
or  in  the  duodenum  preffing  the  fides  of  the 
duel;  clofe  together  ;  or,  laftly,  the  duel  may 
be  obftrucled  by  a  tumour  comprefling  it,  and 
that  arifing  either  in  the  coats  of  the  duel  it- 
felf, or  in  any  of  the  neighbouring  parts  that 
are,  or  may  come  to  be,  contiguous  to  it, 

MDCCCXIX. 


When  fuch  obftruclion  happens,  the  fe- 
creted  bile  muft  be  accumulated  in  the  biliary 
duels  ;  and  from  thence  it  may  either  be  ab- 
forbed  and  carried  by  the  lymphatics  into  the 
bloodveffels,  or  it  may  regurgitate  in  the  duels 
themfelves,  and  pafs  from  them  direclly  into 
the  afcending  cava.  In  either  way,  it  comes 
to  be  diffufed  in  the  mafs  of  blood  ;  and  from 

thence 


OF      PHYSIC.  381 

thence  may  pafs  by  every  exhalant  veffel,  and 
produce  the  difeafe  in  queflion. 

MDCCCXX. 

I  have  thus  fhortly  explained  the  ordinary 
production  of  jaundice  :  But  it  mufl  be  ob- 
served further,  that  it  is  at  all  times  accompa- 
nied with  certain  other  fymptoms,  fuch  as  a 
whitenefs  of  the  faces  alvma,  which  we  read- 
ily account  for  from  the  abfence  of  bile  in  the 
interlines  ;  and  generally,  alfo,  with  a  certain 
confiftence  of  the  faces,  the  caufe  of  which  it 
is  not  fo  eafy  to  explain.  The  difeafe  is  al- 
ways accompanied  alfo  with  urine  of  a  yellow 
colour,  or  at  leaft  with  urine  that  tinges  a 
linen  cloth  with  a  yellow  colour.  Thefe  are 
conftantly  attending  fymptoms  j  and  though 
not  always,  yet  there  is  commonly  a  pain  felt 
in  the  epigaftrium,  correfponding,  as  we  fup- 
pofe,  to  the  feat  of  the  du£fcus  communis., 
This  pain  is  often  accompanied  with  vomit- 
ing ;  and  even  when  the  pain  is  not  confid- 
erable,  a  vomiting  fometimes  occurs.  In 
fome  cafes,  when  the  pain  is  confiderable,  the 
pulfe  becomes  frequent,  full,  and  hard,  and 
feme  other  fymptoms  of  pyrexia  appear. 

MDCCCXXL 

When  the  jaundice  is  occafioned  by  tu~ 
rnours  of  the  neighbouring  parts  compreffing 
the  biliary  duel,  I  believe  the  difeafe  can  very 

Vol.  3.  R  5  feldom 


382  PRACTICE 

feldom  be  cured.  That  fuch  is  the  caufe  of 
jaundice,  may  with  fome  probability  be  fup- 
pofed,  when  it  has  come  on  in  confequence  of 
other  difeafes  which  had  fubfifted  long  before, 
and  more  efpecially  fuch  as  had  been  attend- 
ed with  fymptoms  of  obftru&ed  vifcera.  Even 
when  the  jaundice  has  fubfifted  long  without 
any  intermiflion,  and  without  any  pain  in  the 
epigaftrium,  an  external  compreffion  is  to  be 
fufpe&ed. 

MDCCCXXII. 

In  fuch  circumftances,  I  confider  the  dif- 
eafe  as  incurable  ;  and  it  is  almofl  only  when 
the  difeafe  is  occasioned  by  biliary  concretions 
obftru£ting  the  biliary  duel,  that  we  may  com- 
monly expect  relief,  and  that  our  art  may 
contribute  to  the  obtaining  it.  Such  cafes 
may  be  generally  known,  by  the  difeafe  fre- 
quently difappearing  and  returning  again  ;  by 
our  finding,  after  the  former  accident,  biliary 
concretions  amongft  the  fasces  ;  and  by  the 
difeafe  being  frequently  accompanied  with 
pain  of  the  epigaftrium,  and  with  vomitings 
arifing  from  fuch  pain. 

MDCCCXXIII. 

In  thefe  cafes,  we  know  of  no  certain  and 
immediate  means  of  expediting  the  paffage  of 
the  biliary  concretions.  This  is  generally  a 
work  of  time,  depending  upon  the  gradual 

dilatation 


OF       PHYSIC.  383 

dilatation  of  the  biliary  duel;  ;  and  it  is  i'ur- 
prifing  to  obferve,  from  the  fize  of  the  (tones 
which  fometimes  pafs  through,  what  dilata- 
tion the  duel:  will  admit  of.  It  proceeds, 
however,  fatter  or  flower  upon  different  occa- 
sions ;  and  therefore  the  jaundice,  after  a  va- 
rious duration,  often  ceafes  fuddenly  and 
fpontaneoufly.  It  is  this  which  has  given  rife 
to  the  belief,  that  the  jaundice  has  been  cured 
by  fuch  a  number  and  fuch  a  variety  of  dif- 
ferent remedies.  Many  of  thefe,  however,  are 
perfectly  inert,  and  many  others  of  them  fuch 
as  cannot  be  fuppofed  to  have  any  effeel;  in  ex- 
peding  the  paffage  of  a  biliary  concretion.  I.. 
fhall  here,  therefore,  take  no  notice  of  the  nu- 
merous remedies  of  jaundice  mentioned  by 
the  writers  on  the  Materia  Medica,  or  even  of 
thofe  to  be  found  in  practical  authors  ;  but 
(hall  confine  myfelf  to  the  mention  of  thofe 
that  may  with  probability  be  fuppofed  to  fa- 
vour the  paffage  of  the  concretion,  or  remove 
the  obftacles  to  it  winch  may  occur. 

MDCCCXXIV. 

In  the  treatment  of  this  difeafe,  it  is,  in  the 
firlt  place  to  be  attended  to,  that  as  the  dif- 
tention  of  the  biliary  duct,  by  a  hard  mafs 
that  does  not  eafily  pafs  through  it,  may  ex- 
cite inflammation  there  ;  fo,  in  perfons  of  tol- 
erable vigour,  bloodletting  may  be  an  ufeful 
precaution  j  and  when  much  pain,  together 
with  any  degree  of  pvrexia  occurs,  it  becomes 
R  6  an 


384  PRACTICE 

an  abfolutely  neceffary  remedy.  In  fome  in- 
fiances  of  jaundice  accompanied  with  thefe 
fymptoms,  I  have  found  the  blood  drawn 
covered  with  an  inflammatory  crufl  as  thick 
as  in  cafes  of  pneumonia. 

MDCCCXXV. 

There  is  no  means  of  pufhing  forward  a 
biliary  concretion  that  is  more  probable  than 
the  aclion  of  vomiting  ;  which,  by  compref- 
ling  the  whole  abdominal  vifcera,  and  partic- 
ularly the  full  and  diflended  gall  bladder  and 
biliary  veffels,  may  contribute,  fometimes 
gently  enough,  to  the  dilatation  of  the  biliary 
duel.  Accordingly  vomiting  has  often  been 
found  ufeful  for  this  purpofe  :  But  at  the 
fame  time  it  is  poflible,  that  the  force  exerted 
in  the  act.  of  vomiting  may  be  too  violent, 
and  therefore  gentle  vomits  ought  only  to  be 
employed.  And  either  when,  by  the  long 
continuance  of  the  jaundice,  it  may  be  fuf- 
pefted  that  the  fize  of  the  concretion  then 
paffing  is  large  •  or  more  efpecially  when  pain 
attending  the  difeafe  gives  apprehenfion  of 
inflammation,  it  may  be  prudent  to  avoid 
vomiting  altogether. 

MDCCCXXVI. 

It  has  been  ufual  in  the  jaundice  to  em- 
ploy purgatives  ;  and  it  is  poflible  that  the 
aclion  of  the  interlines  may  excite  the  aclion 

of 


OF      PHYSIC.  385 

of  the  biliary  du£b,  and  thus  favour  the  ex- 
pulfion  of  the  biliary  concretion  :  But  this, 
I  think,  cannot  be  of  much  effect,  and  the  at- 
tempting it  by  the  frequent  ufe  of  purgatives, 
may  otherwife  hurt  the  patient.  For  this 
reafon  I  apprehend,  that  purgatives  can  never 
be  proper,  excepting  when  there  is  a  flow 
and  bound  belly. 

MDCCCXXVII. 

As  the  relaxation  of  the  fkin  contributes  to 
relax  the  whole  fyflem,  and  particularly  to 
relieve  the  conftri&ion  of  fubjacent  parts  ; 
fo,  when  the  jaundice  is  attended  with  pain, 
fomentations  of  the  epigaflrium  may  be  of 
fervice. 

MDCCCXXVIII. 

As  the  folids  of  the  living  body  are  very 
flexible  and  yielding  ;  fo  it  is  probable,  that 
biliary  concretions  would  in  many  cafes  find 
the  biliary  duel  readily  admit  of  fuch  dilata- 
tion as  to  render  their  pafTage  through  it  eafy, 
were  it  not  that  the  diitention  occaiions  a 
preternatural  fpafmodic  contraction  of  the 
parts  below.  Upon  this  account,  opium  is 
often  of  great  benefit  in  jaundice  ;  and  the 
benefit  refulting  from  its  ufe,  proves  fufEcient- 
ly  the  truth  of  the  theory  upon  which  the 
ufing  of  it  has  been  founded. 

MDCCCXXIX. 


3$6      PRACTICE,    &c. 


MDCCCXXIX. 

It  were  much  to  be  wifhed,  that  a  folvent 
of  biliary  concretions,  which  might  be  ap- 
plied to  them  in  the  gall  bladder  or  biliary 
du&s,  was  difcovered  :  But  none  fuch,  fo  far 
as  I  know,  has  yet  been  found  ;  and  the  em- 
ployment of  foap  in  this  difeafe,  I  confider  as 
a  frivolous  attempt.  Dr.  White  of  York  has 
found  a  folvent  of  biliary  concretions  when 
thefe  are  out  of  the  body ;  but  there  is  not 
the  leaft  probability  that  it  could  reach  them 
while  lodged  within. 


INDEX 


INDEX 

TO  THE 

THREE       VOLUMES. 

N.  B.     The  Ciphers  refer  to  the  number  of  the  Paragraphs, 


Abscess,  250 

Abscesses  and  ulcers,  the  caufes  of  their  different 

ftates,  254 

Acids  employed  in  fever,  134 

refrigerant  in  fever,  134 

Action  of  the  heart  and  arteries,  how  increafed  for 
preventing  the  recurrence  of  the  paroxyfms  of  inter- 
mitting fever,  230 
Adynamic,                                                                    1171 
Amenorrhoea,  995 
from  retention,  996 
when  occurring,             998 
iymptoms  of,                  999 
caufes  of,                  icco—  2 
cure  of,                     1002-6 
irom    fuppreflion,  996 
when  occurring,      1008 
fymptoms  of,           1010 
caufes  of,           1008  —  9 
cure  of              iou-12 
Amentia,                                                                   1598 
Anasarca,                                                                 1668 
•he  character  of,                                             1668 
phenomena  of,                                          1668—73 
cure  of,                                                      1674—96 
diftinguiflied  from  Leucophkgmatia,          1669 

St, 


fr 


388  INDEX. 

St.  Anthony's  Fire.    See  Erythema. 

Antimonial  emetics,  employed  in  fevers,  igt 

their  different  kinds,  181 

the  adminiftration  of 

them  in  fevers,  183—186 

Antiphlogistic  Regimen,  129 

how  condu6ted,  130 
when  employed  in  inter- 
mittent fever,  234 
Antispasmodics,  employed  in  fevers,  152—187 
Aphtha,  733 
Apoplexy,  1094. 
diftinguifhed  from  palfy,  1094. 
diftinguifhed  from  fyncope,  1094 
predifponent  caufes  of,  1095 
exciting  caufes  of,                        1098— 1115— 16 
proximate  caufe  of,  1100— 21 
serosa,  proximate  caufe  of,  11 14 
>rognoftic,  1122 — 23 
frequently  ending  in  hemi- 
plegia, 1 1 22 
prevention  of,  11 24 
whether  fanguine  or  ferous,  flimulants 

hurtful  in  it,  "36—37 
from  powers  that  deftroy  the  mobility  of 

the  nervous  power,  n 38 
cure  of,  x  131—39 
Apyrexia,  24 
Ascites,  1709 
character  of,  1709 
its  various  feat,  1710— 11 
the  phenomena  of,  1712— 13 
its  particular  feat  difficultly  afcertained,  17x4 
the  cure  of,  17 15—17 
Asthma,  1373 
phenomena  of,  1375 
exciting  caufes  of,  1381 
proximate  caufe  of,  1384 
diftinguifhed  from  other  kinds  of  dyfpnoea,      1385 
fometimes  occafions  phthifis  pulmonalis,  1386 
frequently  ends  in  hydro! horax,  1386 
feldom  entirely  cured,  1387 
Astringents  employed  in  intermittent  fevers,  231 
joined  with  aromatics,  employed  in  in- 
termittent fevers,  231 
joined  with  bitters,  employed  in  inter- 
mittent fevers,  231 
Atrabilis,  1029 
Atrophia  ab  alvi  fluxu,  1607 
debilium,  1606 
inanitorum,  1607 

Atrophia, 


INDEX.  389 

Atrophia,  infantilis,  1605 

laclantium,  1605 

lateralis,  1606— ir 

a  leucorrhoea,  1607 

nervofa,  1606 

nutricum,  1607 

a  ptyalifma,  1607 

racHitica,  1605 

fenilis,  1606— n 

Aura  Epileptica,  1306 

B. 

Bitters  employed  in  intermittent  fevers,  231 
joined  with  aftringents,  employed  in  inter- 

mittents,  231 

Blistering,  its  effects,  189—197 
its  mode  of  operation  in  the  cure  of 

fevers,  190—194 

when  to  be  employed  in  fevers,  195 

where  to  be  applied  in  fevers,  196 

Bloodletting,  the  employment  of  it  in 

fevers,  138—143 

the  circumftances  directing  its  ufe 

in  fevers,  142 
the  administration  of  it  in  fevers,  243 
when  employed  in  intermittent 

fevers,  234 

C. 

Cachexies,  character  of  the  clafs,  1599 

Cachexy,  the  term,  how  applied  by  authors,  1600 

Calculus  renalis,  429 

Calx  nitrata  antimonii,  its  ufe  in  fevers,  183—185 

Canine  madness,  1525 

the  cure  of,  »5*S~ *S27 

Cardialgia,  1427 

Carditis,  383 

of  the  chronic  kind  383 

Carus,  1094. 

Cataphora,  1094 

Catarrh,  1046 

predifpofltion  to,  1047 

fymptoms  of,  1048 

remote  caufes  of,  1047 

proximate  caufe  of,  1057 

cure  of,  1065 

produces  phthifis,  1055 

pafTes  into  pneumonia,  1054 

produces  a  peripneumonia  notha,  1056 

Catarrh, 


39<>  INDEX, 

Catarrh,  contagious,  106; 

Catarrhus  suffocativus,  37^ 

Chancre,  method  of  treating,  1781 

Chicken  Pox,  631 

how  diftinguifhed  from  fmall  pox,  631 

Chincough,  140a 

contagious,  1401 

frequently  accompanied  with  fever,  141c 

phenomena,  3404 

prognoftic  in,  1413 

cure  of,  1414 

Chlorosis,  998 

Cholera,  1453 

fymptoms  of,  1453—56 

remote  caufes  of,  1458—60 

prox  mate  caufe  of,  1454 

cure  of,  1462—64 

Chorea,  1347 

phenomena,  1 347— 53 

cure  of,  1354 

Chronic  weaknefs,  1191 

Coeliaca,  1493 

Cold,  its  operations,  88 

abfolute,  88 

relative,  89 

its  general  eflfe&s  on  the  human  body,  90—91 

its  morbid  effects,  92 

moderates  the  violence  of  reaction  in  fever,  133 

its  tonic  power,  how  to  be  employed  in  fevers,      205 

Cold  drink,  an  ufeful  tonic  in  fevers,  206 

the  limitation  of  its  ule  in  fevers,  207 

air  applied  in  fevers,  208 

water  applied  to  the  furface  of  the  body  in 

fevers,  205—209 

Colic,  1435 

fymptoms  of,  1435—38 


proximate  caufe  of, 

1439 

cure  of, 

444  r 

Devonshire.    See  Colic  of  Poitou. 

of  Poitou, 

145* 

cure  of, 

1452 

Coma, 

1094 

Comata, 

1093 

Contagions, 

7S- 

their  fuppofed  variety, 

79 

Convulsions, 

"53 

Corpulency, 

1621 

Cynanche, 

300 

MALIGNA, 

3i* 

PAROTIDEA, 

33* 

fharyngea, 

33t 

Cynanche, 

N        D 


39* 


Cynanche,  tonsillaris,  301 

trachealis,  31s 

as  affe&ing  infants,       322—329 

the  cure  of  it,  33a 

Cystitis,  43* 

D. 

Days,  critical,  in  fevers,  107— 124 

noncritical,  113 

Death,  the  caufes  of,  in  general,  100 

the  diredt  caufes  of,  100 

the  indirect  caufes  of,  100 

the  caufes  of  rn  fever,  101 

Debility  in  fevers,  the  fymptoms  of,  104 

how  obviated,  202 

Delirium  in  general,  explained,  1529—50 

is  fever  ©f  two  kinds,  45 

or  insanity  without  fever,  I5S°~57 

Diabetes,  1504 

fymptoms  of,  1504—9 

remote  caufes  of,  1508 

proximate  caufe  of,  1510— 12 

cure  of,                                      —  1513 

DijETa  Aquea,  157 

Diarrhoea,  1465 

diftinguifhed  from  dyfentery,  1466 

diftinguifhed  from  cholera,  1467 

proximate  caufe  of,  1468 

remote  caufes  of,  1471—93 

cure  of,  1494— 1503 

biliosa,  1480 

COLLIQUATIVE,  1501 

MUCOSA,  1488 

Diathesis  phlogistica,  62—247 

how  removed,  266 

Diluents,  their  ufe  in  fevers,  154 — 15S 

Diseases,  the  dirtinguifhing  of  them,  how  attained,  2 

the  prevention  of  them,  on  what  founded,         3 

the  cure  of  them,  on  what  founded,  4 

Dropsies,  1645 

in  general,  the  caufe  of  them,  1646 

of  the  breaft.     See  Hydrothorax. 

of  the  lower  belly.    See  A/cites, 

Dysentery,  1067 

contagious,  1075 

remote  caufes  of,  1072 

proximate  caufe  of,  J°77 

cure  of,  1080 

ufe  of  mild  cathartics  to  be  frequently 

repeated  in  it,  1080 

Dysentery, 


39* 


N 


D 


E        X. 


Dysentery,  rhubarb  improper  in  it, 

Dysenteria  alba, 

Dysmenorrhoea, 

Dyspepsia, 

remote  caufes  of, 

proximate  caufe  of, 

cure  of, 

flatulence  in  it,  cure  of, 

heartburn  in  it,  cure  of, 

pains  of  itomach  in  it,  cure  of, 

vomiting  in  it,  cure  of, 

Dyspnoea, 


E. 


1080 
1070 
1014 
X190 
X198 
1193 

3201 
1221 
1221 
X22I 
1221 

*3«5 


Effluvia,  human,  85 

from  marfhes,  85 

Emaciations,  i6co 

caufes  of,  1602—18 

cure  of,  1619 

Emansio  mensium,  998 

Emetics,  fuited  to  the  cure  of  fevers,  174 

their  effecls,  176—180 

a  mean  of  removing  fpafm,  170 

the  adminiflration  of  in  fevers,  Z75 

their  ufe  in  intermittent  fevers,  130—233 

Emprosthotonos,  1267 

Enteritis,  404 

phlegmonic  or  erythematic,  404 

caufes  of,  407 

cure  of,  409 

Epilepsy,  ia8a 

phenomena  of,  1283 

proximate  caufe  of,  1284 

remote  caufes  of,  3285 

predifponent  caufes  of,  1310 

fympathic,  13 1$ 

cure  of,  1317 

idiopathic,  1316 

cure  of,  1 3 19 

Epjstaxis,  *o6 

the  caufes  of  it,  808 

the  various  circumftances  ©f,  807 — 818 

the  management  and  cure  of,  819—825 

Erysipelas,  »74 

of  the  face,  708 

fymptoms  of,  705 — 708 

prognofis  of,  7°6 

proximate  caufe  of,  697 

cure  of,  .      708—711 

phlegmonodes  in  different  parts  of  the  body,     71* 

Erysipelas, 


INDEX.  393 

Erysipelas,  attending  putrid  fever,  7J3 

Erythema,  274 

Exanthemata,  585 
Exercise,  ufeful  in  intermittent  fevers, 


%\j 


Fainting.    See  Syncope,  117* 

Fatuity,  J529 

Fear,  a  remote  caufe  of  fever,  97 

Fever,  * 

ftrictly  fo  called,  the  character  of,  8— 3a 

phenomena  of,  8 

remote  caufes  of,  are  of  a  fedative  nature,  36 

proximate  caule  of,  33 

atony  of  the  extreme  veflels,  a  principal  cir- 

cumftance  in  the  proximate  caufe  of  it,        43—- 44 
ipafm,  a  principal  part  in  the  proximate  caufe 

of  it,  40 

general  doctrine  of,  46 

the  caufes  of  death  in  it,  101 

the  prognofis  of,  99 

indications  of  cure  in,  126 

differences  of,  53 

continent,  28 

continued,  27 

inflammatory,  67 
miliary.    See  Miliary  Fever* 

nervous,  67 

bilious,  71 
fear  1  et .    See  Sea rlet  Fever. 

putrid,  72 

named  fynocha,  67 

iynochus,  69 

typhus,  67 

hectic,  74 

intermittent,  the  paroxyfms  of,  deferred,  10 

the  cold  ftage  of,  1 1 

the  hot  ftage  of,  1 1 

the  fweating  ftage  of,  1  x 

of  a  tertian  period,  25 

of  a  quartan  period,  25 

of  a  quotidian  period,  25 

caufed  by  marfh  effluvia,  84 

bile  not  the  caufe  of  it,  51 

cure  of,  228 

its  paroxyfms,  how  prevented,  229 

attended  with  phlogiftic  diathefis,    234 

attended  with  congeftion  in  the 

abdominal  viicei  a,  234 

remittent^  26 

Fluxes, 


394  I        N        D        E        X. 

"Fluxes,  without  fever >     See  Proflwvia. 
Fluor  albus.    See  Leucorrhcea. 
Fomentation  of  the  lower  extremities,  its  ufe  in 

fevers,  ig9 

Fomites  of  contagion,  8a 

Functions  intellectual,  diforders  of,  1528—29 

G. 

Gangrene  of  inflamed  parts,  the  caufe  of,  255—256 

marks  of  the  tendency  to,  257 

marks  of  its  having  come  on,  257 

Gastritis,  384 

phlegmonic  or  erythematic,  385 

phlegmonic,  the  feat  of,  385 

the  fymptoms  of,  386 

the  caufes  of,  387 

the  cure  of,  393 — 397 

erythematic,  how  difcovered,  400 

the  feat  of,  385 

the  cure  of,  401 

GAstrodynia,  1427 

Gleet,  1769 

Gonorrhoea,  176$ 

phenomena  of,  1767 — 69 

cure  of,  1770—78 

<5out,  the  character  of,  494 

a  hereditary  difeafe,  500 

diftinguifhed  from  rheumatifrri,  526 

predifponent  caufes  of,  493 — 500 

occasional  caufes  of,  502 — 505 

proximate  caufe  of,  52.7 — 533 

not  a  morbific  matter,  52.9 

Regular ;  defcribedj  506—518 

pathology  of,  533 

cure  of,  537—573 

no  effectual  or  fafe  remedy  yet  found 

for  the  cure  of  it,  539 

medicines  employed  for  it,  556 

whether  it  can  be  radically  cured,  540 
treatment  in  the  intervals  of  pirox- 

yfms,  54a 
treatment  in  the  time  of  paroxyfms,      560 

regimen  during  the  paroxyfms,  561 
external  applications,  how  far 

iafe,  568—569 
bloodletting  in  the  intervals  of 

paroxyfms,  553 
■ '- in  tire  time  of  parox- 
yfms, 563 
coftivenefs  hurtful,  5<9 

Gout* 


INDEX.  395 

Gout,  Regular,  laxatives  to  be  employed,  559 

effects  of  alkalines,  558 

effects  of  Portland  powder,  557 

Irregular,  518 

Atonic,                                                   .  574—579 

pathobgyof,  534 

cure  of,  580— 58s 

Ketrocedent,  522 

pathology  of,  535 

cure  of*  5S0— 58a 

Mi/placed,  523 

pathology  of,  536 

cure  of,  '  5S3— 584 

Tranjlated,  two  particular  cafes  of,  525 

H. 

H-EMATEMESIS,  2°I? 

arterial  and  venous,  1027 

from  obstructed  menftruation,  1020 

from  fuppreflion  of  the  hemorrhoidal 

flux,  1025 

irom  comprefiion  of  the  vafa  brevia, 

by  the  fpleen,  1017 

from  obfiruction  of  the  liver,  1028 

HEMATURIA,  3033 

idiopathic,  improbable,  2033—34 

calculofa,  J037 

cure  of,  j  038 

violenta,  3039 

from  fuppreflion  of  accuftomed  dif° 

charges,  1041 

putrida,  1043 

ipuria  et  lateritia,  3044 

HEMIPLEGIA,  3146 

caufes  of,  3341 

frequently  occafioned  by  apoplexy,  314$ 

frequently  alternates  with  apoplexy,        1 344 
cure  of,  r  3152 

fiimulants,  of  ambiguous  life  in,  3160 

ftimulants,  external,  in,  3i6x 

HAEMOPTYSIS, 

the  fymptoms  of,  838— S40 

the  cau/es  of,  760—63—830—836 

how  diftinguifhed  from  other  fpittiags 

of  blood,  841—45 

cure  of,  846—54 

HjEMORRHAGIA  UTERI,  966 

Hemorrhagy, 

aclive  or  pa  (live,  735 

.  character  ofj  736 

Hemorrhagy, 


396  INDEX. 

Hemorrhagy,  arterial,  74'4. 

venous,  768 
the  caufes  of  the  different  fpecies 

appearing  at  different  periods 

of  life,  750—773 
the  general  phenomena  of,  738—743 
the  remote  caufes  of,  774 
cure  of,  776 
whether  to  be  attempted 

by  art,  776—81 
prevention  of  the  firft  attacks,  or 

of  the  recurrence  of,  782— 789 

treatment  of  when  prefent,  789—805 

fymptomatic,  1015 

H-SMORRHOIDES  VESICA,  104a 
H^MORRHOiS, 

external  and  internal,  925 

phenomena  of,  9*5—931 

nature  of  the  tumours,  932 

caufes  of,  933—943 
acquire  a  connexion  with  the  fyf- 

tem,  943—944 
particularly  with  the  ftomach,  946 
cure  of,  947— 965 
Hepatirrhoea,  1481 
Hepatitis,  41a 
acute  and  chronic,  412 
acute,  the  fymptoms  of,  413—415 
combined  with  pneumonic  inflam- 
mation, 416 
remote  caufes  of  it,  416 
feat  of,  418 
various  exit  of  pus  produced  in,  421 
cure  of,  422 
chronic,  the  feat  of,  418 
how  difcovered,  423 
HOOPINGCOUGH.     See  Chincough.  1402 
Horror,  impreffion  ef,  employed  in  intermittent 

fevers,  231 

Human  effluvia,  the  caufe  of  fever,  81 

body,  its  temperature,  88 

body  has  a  power  of  generating  heat,  88 

Hydrophobia,  i525 

Hydrothorax,  1697 

where  feated,  1698 

fymptoms  of,  1701—03 

often  combined  with  univerfal 

dropfy,  1704 

proximate  caufe  of,  1706 

cure  of,  1707—08 

paracentefis  in  it,  when  proper,  1708 

Hypercatkarsis, 


N 


X. 


397 


Hypercatharsis, 
Hypochondriasis, 


Hysteria, 


phenomena  of, 

diftinguifhed  from  dyfpepfia, 

proximate  caufe  of, 

cure  of, 

treatment  of  the  mind  in, 


fymptoms  of, 

paroxylm  or  fit  defcribed, 

rarely  appears  in  males, 

how  diltinguifhed  from  hypochondri- 

afis, 
proximate  caufe  of, 
analogy  between  and  epilepfy, 
cure  of, 
libidinofa, 
Hysteric  difeafe.    See  Hjfterla. 


*477 

1222 
1222 
J226 
I230 
I232 
I244 

*5'4 
1515— 16 

1518— 19 
1522 
1523 


James's  powder,  its  ufe  in  fever, 
Jaundice, 

caufe s  of, 
cure  of, 
Icterus.    See  Jaundice. 
Iliac  paffion.    See  Ileus. 
Ileus, 
Impetiginis, 

character  of  the  order, 
Indigestion.    See  Dyfpepfia. 
Inflammation,  the  phenomena  of; 

internal,  the  mirks  of, 
the  ftate  of  the  blood  in, 
the  proximate  caufe  of, 
not  depending  upon  a  lentor 

of  the  blood, 
fpafm  the  proximate  caufe 

of, 
terminated  by  refolution, 
by  fuppuration, 
by  gangrene, 
by  fcirrhus, 
by  effufion, 
by  blifters, 
by  exludation, 
the  remote  caufes  of, 
the  cure  of  in  general, 

by  refolution, 

Vol,  III,  S 


0     l8* 
1815-16 

i8i6  —  2r 
z  823  —29 


1437 
'737 
*737 

*3jT 

236 

237 
239 

24  c 

243-248 
249 
250 
*5S 

2i9 
200 

26r 
263 
264 
264 


Inflammation, 


398  INDEX. 

Inflammation,  the  cure  of,  when  tending  to  fup- 
puratien,  268—76 

when  tending  to  gan- 
grene, 271 
Its  general  divisions,                               273 
more  ftriclly  cutaneous,                        274 
of  the  bladder.     See  Cyjlitis. 
of  the  brain.     See  Phrenitis. 
of  the  heart.     See  Carditis. 
of  the  interlines.     See  Enteritis* 
of  the  kidneys.     See  Nephritis, 
of  the  liver.     See  Hepatitis. 
of  the  lungs.     Set  Pneumonia. 
of  the  pericardium.    See  Pericarditis. 
of  the  peritonaeum.     See  Peritonitis, 
of  the  fpleen.     See  Splenitis. 
of  the  ftomach.     See  Gajlritis* 
of  the  uterus,  434 
Insanity,                                                                 1535 
caufes  of,                                                    *5S°-  57 
of  different  fpecies,                                          1557 
partial  and  general,  difference  of,                  1575 
Intemperance  in  drinking,  a  remote  caufe  of 

fever,  97 

Intermission  of  fever,  24 

Interval  of  fever,  24 

Intumescenti-E,  1620 

character  of  the  order,  x6a# 

K. 

King's  evil.    See  Scropbula. 


Leucophlegmatia, 

1669 

LeucorrHoea, 

9*| 

character  Of, 

98$ 

appearance  of  the  matter  difcharg 

ed  in, 

987—992 

the  caufes  oU 

98S 

the  effedts  of, 

990 

the  cure  of, 

993 

LlTHARGUS, 

1094 

Lientery, 

1469 

Looseness.    See  Diarrbcea. 

Mi 

Madness.    Set  Mania.         m   . 

CANlKE<    SceCmm  MA*.*, 


m 


INDEX, 


399 


Mania,  1558 

the  fymptoms  of,  1558 

the  remote  caufes  of,  1559— 6r 

the  treatment  of,  1562—74 

occurring  in  (anguine  temperaments,  1576 

in  fanguine  temperaments,  cure  of,  1577 

Marcores,  *  i6co 

Marsh  effluvia,  a  caufe  of  fever,  84 

Measles,  -633 

the  fymptoms  of,  637—643 

the  nature  of,  644 

the  cure  of,  645—650 

of  a  putrid  kind,  643 

Medicine,  the  institutions  of,  4 

Mel^ena,  1017 

Melancholia,  1575 

how  diftinguifhed  from  hypochon- 

driafis,  1587—88 

the  character  of,  1582—89 

the  proximate  caufe  of,  1590 

the  treatment  of,  J592—97 

Melancholic  temperament,  1230 

Melancholy.    See  Melancholia. 

Menorrhagia,  966 

active  or  paflive,  966 

when  a  difeafe,  968—75 

effects  of,  972 

proximate  caufe  of,  977 

remote  caufes  of,  978 

cure  of,         "  980 
Menses,  immoderate  flow  of 'them.    See  Menorrhagia. 
Metallic  tonics,  employed  in  intermittent 

fevers,  231 

salts,  refrigerant,  136 

Meteorismus,  1633 

Miasmata,  78 
Miliary  fever, 

the  general  hiftory  of,  714—715 

of  two  kinds,  red  and  white,  716 

white,  the  fymptoms  of,  717 — 71*9 

the  cure  of,  720 

Morbus  coeliacus,  1493 

mucosus,  1070 

NIGER,  IO29 

N. 

Nephritis,  416 

the  fymptoms  of,  426 

the  remote  caufes  of,  427 

the  care  of,  430. 

Nervous 


4co  INDEX* 

Nervous  Diseases.    See  Neurofes. 


Neuroses, 

1090 

Neutral  Salts,  diaphore;ic  in  fevers, 

159 

-161 

refrigerant  in  fevers, 
Nosology,  Methodical, 

O. 

Obesity,  when  a  difeafe, 

135 

2 

1611 

Oneirodynia, 

1598 

Ophthalmia, 

278 

memb  ran  arum, 

278 

its  different  de- 

grees, 

279 

—286 

its  remote  caufes, 

280 

the  cure  of, 

288 

—290 

tarfi, 

278 

the  cure  of, 

288 

—290 

Opiates,  employed  in  the  hot  ftage  of  intermittent 

fevers, 

233 

in  the  interval  of  intermittent  fevers, 

231 

Opisthotonos.     See  Tetanus. 
P. 
Palpitation  of  the  heart, 

1355 

the  phenomena  of, 

J  355 

the  caufes  of, 

1356 

the  cure  of, 

1363 

Palsy, 

1140 

diftinguiihed  from  apoplexy, 

1094 

caufe-s  of, 

1141 

Paracentesis  in  afcites,  when  to  be  attempted, 

1717 

in  hydrothorax,  when  proper, 

1708 

Paraphrenias, 

343 

Paroxysm  of  intermittent  fevers,  the  recurrence 

how  to  he  prevented, 

229 

Pemphigus, 

732 

Pericarditis, 

3^3 

Peripneumonia  notha, 

376 

fymptoms  of, 

379 

pathology  of, 

380 

the  cure  of, 

38i 

—382 

fome  of  i  he  fymptoms  ex- 

plained,  350 

Perifneumony,  342 

Peritonitis,                         _  3^4 

Peruvian  Bark,  not  a  fpecific,  213 

its  tonic  power,  214 

when  proper  in  fever,  215 

how  mod  effectually  employed,  216 

Peruvian 


N        D        E         X, 


401 


Peruvian  Bark,  the  administration  of,  in  intez> 

mittent  fevers,  232 

the  tonic  chiefly  employed  in  inter- 
mittent fevers,  2,32. 
Petechia,                                                                      734 
Phlegmasia,                                                                   235 
Phlegmom,                                                                       274 
Phrenitis,  291 
the  character  of,                                               293 
the  remote  caufes  of,  294 
the  cure  of,                                               295—299' 
Phrensy.     See  Phrenitis. 

Physic,  the  practice  of,  how  taught,  r 

the  theory  of,  how  to  be  employed,  4 

Physconia,  1-718 

Phthisis  pulmonalis,  the  general  character  of,  853 

always  with  an  ulceration  of 

the  lungs,  855 

the  pus  coughed  up  in,  how 

diltinguifhed  from  mucus,    856 
accompanied  with  heclic 

fever,  857 

the  various  caufes  of  it,  S63 

from  haemoptyfis,  864—865 

from  pneumonia,  866—869. 

from  catarrh,  870—873 

from  afthma,  875 

from  tubercles,  876— S8z 

from  calcareous  matter  in 

the  lungs,  884 

if  contagious,  886 

from  tubercles,  fymptoms- 

of,  889 

its  different  duration*  896^ 

the  prognofis  in,  897 

the  cure  of,  899—924 

the  treatment  of  when 
a  riling  from  tuber- 
cles, _  906—921. 
the  palliation  of  fymp- 

toms,-  922^-9^4 

Plague, 

the  general  character  of,  665 

phenomena  of,  665 

principal  fymptoms  of,  667 

proximate  caule  of,  663 

prevention  of,  670—685, 

cure  of,  686—695, 

IPleurisy,  341" 

Pleurosthqtonos.    See  Tetanus* 


Vol.  3, 


P^EUMQNJA* 


402  INDEX. 

Pneumonia,  or  pneumonic  inflammation,  334 

general  fymptoms  of,  335—339 

ieat  of,  34o-344 

proanofisof,  352 — 360 

cure  of,  361 

the  management  of  bloodletting  in 

the  cure  of,  362—367 

the  uie  of  purgatives  in,  370 

the  ufe  of  emetics  in,  371 

the  ufe  of  blifters  in,  372 
the  means  of  promoting  expectoration 

in,  373 

the  ufe  of  fweating  in,  374 

the  u(e  of  opiates  in,  375 

PoLysarcia,  when  a  difeafe,  1621 

cure  of,  1623—25 

Profluvia,  1045 

character  of  the  clafs,  1045 

Pulse,  the  ftate  of  the,  during  the  paroxyfm  of  an 

intermittent  fever,  12 
Purging,  its  ufe  in  continued  fevers,  144 
intermittent  fevers,  234 
Pus,  how  produced,  250 
Putrescency  of  the  fluids  in  fever,  the  fymp- 
toms of,  105 
the  tendency  to  in  fever,  how.  to  be 
corrected ,  222—226 
Pylorus,  scirrhous.    See  Dyfpepjia. 
Pyrexiae,  6 
character  of  the  clafs,  6 
orders  of  the  clafs,  7 
Pyrosis,  1427 
fymptoms  of,                                .  1431 
proximate  caufe  of,  1433 
remote  cauies  of,  1432 
cure  of,  1434 
Suecica  of  Sauvages,  1428 

Qu  1  k s y .    See  Cynanche* 

R. 

Rachitis,  *7l9 

its  origin,  1720 

remote  caufes  of,  J721  — 23 

phenomena  of,  i724 

proximate  caufe  of,  1725—28 

cure  of,  1729-36 

Reaction 


INDEX,  405 

Syphilis,  cure  of,  1783—8* 


Tabes  a  hydrope,  1609 

a  languifluxi*,  160S 

dorfalis,  16 10 

glandularis,  iS°6 

meienterica,  1606 

nutricum,  l6°8 

rachialgia,  1606 

fcrophulofa,  1606 

Tartar  emetic,  its  ufe  in  fevers,  185 

Tetanus,  1257 

remote  caufes  of,  I268 

cure  of,  **7° 

piffileum  Barbadenfe,  or  Barbadoes  tar,  in,    1280 

LATERALIS,  I268 

Tonic  medicines  employed  in  continued  fevers,  2,11 

intermittent  fevers,  231 

Toothach,  how  far  different  from  rheumatifm,   477—480 

fymptoms  of,  47s 

predifpofition  to,  48r 

remote  caufes  of,  4^J — 43a 

proximate  caufe  of,  483 

cure  of,  4S5— "491 

Trismus.    See  Tetanus. 

NASCENTIUM,  I281 

Tussis.     See  Catarrh. 

Tympanites,  the  charadter  of,  1627 

the  different  fpecies  of,  1628—30 

inteftinahs,  1628 

enterophy  lodes,  1628 

abdominalis,  1628 

afciticus,  1628 

phenomena  of,  1632 

proximate  caufe  of,  1635—36 

cure  of,  1637—44 

Typhus.    See  Fever. 

the  fpecies  of,  7° 


Vapours,  or  low  fpirits.     See  Hypochondriacs, 

Venereal  disease.     See  Syphilis. 

Venery,  excels  in,  a  remote  caufe  of  fever,  97 

Ve,sanue, 

in  general,  J52^ 

Vis  medicatrix  nature,  3s 

St.  Vitus's  dance.    See  Chorea, 

Vomiting 


4ob 


N 


X, 


Vomiting  of  blood.    See  Hamatemefis. 

effects  of  in  continued 
fevers, 
the  ufe  of  in  intermitting  fevers, 
Urine,  bloody.     See  Hematuria. 
Urticaria,  the  oiltory  and  treatment  of, 

W. 


17a,  173 
23°— 34 

730. 


Water  brash.    See  Pyrofis, 
Whites.     See  Leucorrhoea. 

Warm  bathing,  the  effects  of  in  fever,  198 

the  adminiftration  of  in  fevers,  199 

the  marks  of  the  good  effects,  2co 

Wine,  the  mod  proper  ftimulant  in  fevers,  218 

its  convenient  ufe  in  fevers,  219 

when  hurtful  ©r  ufeful  in  fevers,  22© 


