3.  6 


♦ 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2019  with  funding  from 
Wellcome  Library 


https://archive.org/details/b30526619 


TREATISE 

OF  THE 

HYPOCHON  DRI ACK 
HYS  TEDR,  I  C  K 

PASS  I O NS’ 

Vulgarly  call’d  the  Hypo  in  MEN  and 
Vapours  in  WOMEN; 

In  which  the  Symptoms,  €  ausf.s,  and  Cure 
of  tho'fe  Diseases  are  Jet  forth  after  a  Method 
'  imirely  new. 

The  whole  interfpersAf,  with  Inftriraire  DifcQun.es 

O  N  1'  H  E 

Real  ART  of  t  H  Y  S  I  C  K  it  felf 5 

And  Entertaining  Remarks  on-, the  Modern  Practice 

PHYSICIANS 


APOTHECARIES: 


Very  ufeful  to  all,  that  have  the  Misfortune  to  fraud  in 
need  ©f  either.  In  Three  Dialogues.  v 


By  B.  DE  M A  A' DEFILL  E,  M.  D. 

Scire  pot  eft  ate  s  herbarun? ,  ufiwtqae  medendi 
Maliiit ,  o  Mutas  agitare  ingiorius  drtes* 

Bneid.  Lib.  XTL 


j  LONDON:  Printed  and  Sold  by  Dryden  leach ,  in  EllioS s 
Court,  in  the  LiitJe-Old-Baity,  and  JT*  Toy  ter,  at  the  Ship 
i  n  Pa  ler-N offer- Lyt  vj.  1 7 1 1 .  1 


k  S  h  3 


r 


■  t'  •  ' 

.  W  f 


■ 


,3t  ‘4*; 


-  H 


Ill 


T  H  E 

PREFACE 

WHEN  the  crafty  Tempter  of  Man¬ 
kind  meditating  their  Ruine,  attack'd 
our  firft  Sire  in  his  Pride,  he  ftiew’d  himfelf 
profoundly  skill’d  in  Humane  Nature  $  from 
which  the  Vice  I  named  is  fo  infeparable 
that  it  is  itnpoffible  the  latter  fhould  be  ever 
entirely  deftroy’d,  as  long  as  the  firft  re¬ 
mains.  I  have  no  defign,  Reader,  to  tire 
you*  with  the  Catalogue  of  irretrievable 
Calamities,  it  has  been  the  occafion  of,  both 
before  and  fince  the  Creation  $  but  fhall  only 
obferve  to  you,  that  as  it  was  deftrufltive  to 
onexperienc’d  Adamr  by  bringing  Sicknefs 
iind  Death  upon  him,  foit  has  (till  continued 
:o  be  no  lefs  pernicious  to  his  forwarr/d 
Pofterky,  by  principally  obftrufting  the  pro- 
^refs  of  the  glorious  Art  that  fliould  teach 
he  Recovery  as  well  as  Prefervation  of 
dealth, 

I  *Tis  Pride  that  makes  the  Phyfician  a- 
fandon  the  fclid  Obfervation  of  never  er- 

v  "  •  A  2 ' 


rsng 


iv  The  (preface* 

ring  Nature  to  take  up  with  the  foofe  con* 
jectures  of  his  own  wand  ring  Invention,  that 
the  World  may  admire  the  Fertility  of  his 
Brain  $  and  ic  is  pride  in  the  Patient,  that 
makes  him  in  love  with  the  reafoning  Phy- 
(ician,  to  have  an  opportunity  of  (hewing 
the  depth  of  his  Penetration.  But  if  the 
reafons  that  are  often  given  by  the  one  and 
taken  for'  currant  by  the  other,  were  to  Be 
Oriffiy  examin'd  into,  it  would  almoft  in¬ 
duce  a  Man  of  Senfe  to  difown  his  Kind, 

and  make  him  blufh.  when  he  is  call’d  a  Ra*^ 

■  \  *  r 


tiona!  Creature. 

I  know  that  to  advance  this  Do&rine  is 
fwimming  againfi  the  Stream  in  our  fprightly 
talkative  Age,  in  which  the  filent  Experi¬ 
ence  of  Pains-taking  Praditioners is  ridicule], 
and  nothing  cried  up  but  the  witty  Specu¬ 
lations  of  Hypothetical  Doctors. 

In  vain,  fays  the  Learned  Baglivi  :  Nos 
latet  <£te*'ntmque  latebit  minima  ilia ,  ac  fub - 
tilis^  non  fohtm  a fen (ibas^  fed  ab  human  £ 
mentis  acic  prorfus  remat  a  jc!  id  arum  <eque  ae 
pui  damns  corporis  viventis  partium  texiura 
The  emphstical  Truth  is  loft  upon  the  Times, 
and  he.  miift  not  expeft  to  be  believed  by 
our  acute  Fhilofophers,  whole  Pride  won’t 
allow  that  it  is  pcffible  Nature  fhould  have 
recedes  beyond  the  reach  of  their  Sagacity 
and  'reckons  the  injurious  aflertion  an  Af 
I  rent  to  Humane  tlnderftanding. 

i  b 


The  ^Preface.  v- 

The  Ingenious  Sylvius  de  h  Bee  was  a 
Phyfician,  that  in  fearching  after  the  Caufes 
of  Di  (tempers  gave  no  fmall  liberty  to  his 
prolifiek  Fancy  5  yet  fpeaking  of  thofe,  I 
am  to  treat  of,  he  condefcenaed  to  lav, 
Cognitio  rernm  naturalium  omnium  ejl  ah  ex* 
perientia  per  fen  jus  facia  •  unde  can  fas  effeSfu- 
um  fic  compertoriim  exquirit  ratiocinate  one  con - 
caienata  ingenium  hnmannm.  De  veritats 
tamen  inventa  certus  effe  potejl  nemo  ;  niji 
pofquam  de  ft d  ratiocinationis  foUditate  Con* 
■firmatus  fuerit  per  eandem  experiential ,  ra* 
tiocinationem  prxdiCfam  ipfo  opere  confirm  an  do 
&  comprobando.  How  little  and  precarious 
a  ufe  at  this  rate  Reafoning  is  of  in  Phy- 
fick,  if  compared  to  the  abfolute  necdliry 
of  Experience,  even  by  the  confeffion  of  a 
Genius  To  fruitful  in  Suppofitions.  I  leave  ail 
j  lenhble  Men  to  judge. 

From  what  I  have  hinted,  I  don’t  queftion 
'but  feme  of  my  Readers  have  already  taken 
a  prejudice  againft  me:  But  let  me  b  g 
,  of  thofe  impatient  ones,  that  for  what  l 
have  faid  yet,  and  what  they  (tail  further 
fee  upon  this  Head  in  the  Firft  Dialogue, 
they  would  not  Centura,  or  by  way  of 
Fun  condemn  me  for  an  Enemy  to  Reafon, 
before  they  are  come  to  the  end  of  the  Se¬ 
cond,  and  I  (hall  have  fhevv’d  them  what 
fort  of  Reafoning  it  is,  I  fpeak  againft. 

A  Sodte 


VI 


The  ^Preface. 

Some  People,  I  know,  will  not  be  pleas’d 
with  what  is  faid  in  the  33d,  and  feme 
of  the  following  Pages  5  but  I  hope  no 
Candid  Reader  will  fufpeft  from  it,  that  I 
defign  peculiarly  to  reflect  upon  any  one 
Town  or  Country  more  than  another,  much 
lets  to  point  at  particular  Perfons.  The  Terms 
I  fpeak  in  are  general,  and  whoever  will  be 
pleafed  to  adapt  any  thing  of  it  to  himfelf 
is  more  officious,  than  I  defire  him  to  be. 
I  thought  it  neceffary  to  give  this  Caution, 
becaufe  I  would  have  no  body  imagine,  that 
I  had  Calculated  for  the  Meridian  of  London 
only,  what  is  equally  applicable  to  raoft 
great  Cities  in  Europe.  But  if  any  Body 
thinks  I  have  been  too  fevere  upon  my  own 
Profeffion  in  the  Firft^  let  him  read  on,  and 
he’ll  find,  that  I  have  abundantly  made 
them  amends  in  the  Third  Dialogue. 

The  next,  that  Ym  afraid  will  quarrel 
with  the  Performance,  will  be  fuch  Apo¬ 
thecaries  as  are  weak  enough  to  be  offended 
at  what  is  faid  by  a  Man  that  has  the  Bypo. 
I  confbfs,  they  may  meet  with  fome  things, 
that  cannot  claim  their  general  Approbation, 
and  are  fome  of  them  very  difohliging  to  the 
whole  Fraternity  $  but  if  they'll  coniider, 
how  profefs’d  an  Enemy  to  Phyfick,  and 
over  fond  of  Unlverfity-learning  Mifomedon 
(who  is  the  Man  that  exclaims  again!!  them) 


The  (preface .  vii 

is  reprefented  to  be  throughout  the  Book  $ 
they’ll  find,  that  without  (polling  his  Cha¬ 
racter  I  could  not  have  made  him  fpeak  c- 
therwife  than  he  does. 

When  I  (hall  have  fatisfied  all  thefe,  I  ex- 
peCt  others,  that  without  entring  into  the 
merits  of  the  Caufe,  or  examining,  whe¬ 
ther  the  deflexions  I  have  made  on  Phyfick, 
and  thofe  that  belong  to  it  are  juft  or  not, 
will  ask  me.  What  reafon  I  had  to  be  fa  full 
of  them  in  a  Treatife,  where  no  body  would 
look  for  them  ?  To  whom  l  make  this  am* 
fwer. 

Having  a  mind  to  publifh  my  Sentiments 
concerning  the  Diftempers  to  which  I  had 
more  particularly  applied  my  felf  for  feme 
Years,  I  conceived  e  it  would  be  lefs  Pre* 
fumption,  if  I  writ  by  way  of  Informa¬ 
tion  to  Patients,  that  might  labour  under 
them,  than  if  I  pretended  to  teach  other 
Practitioners,  that  profefs  to  Cure  them  as 
well  as  my  felf.  It  is  natural  to  think,  that  • 
this  made  me  more  follicitons  to  fatisfie  the 
firft,  than  concern’d,  how  it  (hould  be 
relifirfd  by  the  latter.  I  knew  the  Study  of 
Phyfick  to  be  very  Auftere  in  it  felf,  and 
that  the  praftical  Authors,  generally  writing, 
to  thofe  of  their  own  Profeflion,  were  very 
far  from  being  diverting  $  and  confidering 
that  the  tedious  Enumeration  of  Signs  and 

A  4  Caufes 


a 


Ym  The  Preface . 

Caufes  upon  the  Neck  of  one  another*  as 
well  as  the  frightful  heaps  of  different  Me¬ 
dicines,  found  in  thofe  that  have  treated  of 
the  Hyfcchondrlack  and  Hyflerich^  Paffions, 
muft  be  very  tirefome  and  difagreeabie  to 
People  that  feck  relief  in  a  Diftemper  of 
which  Impatience  is  one  of  the  fureft  Sym¬ 
ptoms*  I  refolv’d  to  deviate  from  the  ufual 
method,  and  make  what  I  had  to  fay  as 
palatable  as  i  could  to  thofe  I  had  in  view 
for  my  Readers*  To  this  end  looking  out  for 
fometbing  both  tenons  and  diverting  that 
might  imbelifo,  and  yet  not  be  too  remote 
from  the  Subject,  I  pitch'd  upon  the  Fhyficai 
Re  marks,  which  you  (hall  find  interwoven  with 
the  main  matter.  Acriora  orexim  excitant  cm- 
hamnmta.k nd  reflecting  on  the  great  Expence, 
the  Hypochondriaci  are  often  at,  both  for 
Fees  and  Medicines,  thought  nothing  could 
be  more  reafonably  pleafing  to  them,  than 
to  be  entertain’d  at  the  Coft  of  thofe,  that 
to  many  of  then]  have  been  fo  chargeable 
to  no  purpofe. 

But,  fay  the  jCrJticks,  If  yon  Write  for  . 
the  benefit  of  Patients,  why  don’t  yon 
come  down  to  their  Capacities?  Is  every 
body  bound  to  underhand  your  Phyfical 
Jargon  ?  And  if  you  muft  quote  Authors 
in  ft  range  Languages,  why  don’t  you  Tran- 
flate  them,  that  your  ©dentation  at  leaft 
might  not  be  prejudicial  to  thofe  vvhofe 

Ap- 


The  ^Preface.  ix 

Applaufe  you  would  Court  ?  In  reply  to 
thofe  angry  Gentlemen,  I  (hall  tell  them, 
that  it  was  Decency,  t  hat  forc’d  me  to  what 
they  complain  of:  And  that  confidering, 
who  the  Perfons  are,  that  compofe  the 
Dialogue,  to  oblerve  the  Rules  of  it,  I 
could  not  let  Mifomedon  talk  otherwife,  than 
a  Man  of  Learning,  that  had  made  Phyfick 
•his  particular  Study,  would  to  a  Phyficiau 
whom  he  confults  about  his  Diftemper. 
It  would  be  ridiculous  to  hear  two  Men 
difcourfing  together,  Tranflate  to  one  ano¬ 
ther,  what  both  are  lhppofed  to  under- 
ftand.  If  this  won’t  fatisfie  them,  I  mull 
refer  them  to  the  Second  Dialogue,  where 
they  (hall  fee,  that  it  is  not  inconfiftent, 
to  have  writ  to  Patients,  and  at  the  fame 
time  chiefly  defign’d  it  for  Men  of  fome 
Learning. 

But,  left  what  I  faid  laft  might  frighten  a- 
way  thofe  that  underftand  no  other  Lan¬ 
guage  but  their  own,  I  promife  all  Hypo- 

;  chondraical  People,  fthe  meaneft  of  which  I 
have  generally  found  Men  of  tolerable 
Senfe,)  thar,  pi  fling  by  the  Latin  and  all 
Pbyfical  terms,  what  they  (hall  find  in  plain 
Englilh,  will  be  fufficient  to  give  them  a 
greater  Infight  into  the  Nature  of  their  Di¬ 
ftemper  than  they  can  be  furnifh’d  with  any 
where  elfe>$  and  am  well  3 flut’d,  that  many 

fc  •  up 


x  The  (preface. 

upon  the  reading  of  this  Treatife  will  be 
able  to  penetrate  into  feme  firft  Caufes  of 

their  Affliction  that  were  hid  from  them 
before. 

In  treating  of  the  Hyfterick  Paffion,  and 
what  more  immediately  relates  to  the  Com¬ 
plaints  of  the  Fair  Sex,  I  have  like  wife  taken 
care  -y  that,  to  fit  it  for  their  perufal  nothing 
ftiould  be  crampt  with  Latin  5  to  render 
that  part  pleafant  and  entertaining  as  well  as 
plain  and  inftru&ive,  I  have  made  ufe  of  a 
third  Perfon,  and  introduced  a  Lady,  that 
feelingly  defcnbes  her  own  ailments,  and 
Circumftantially  relates  what  had  happen’d 
to  her  Daughter,  who  had  been  Hyfterick  for 
feveral  Years,  and  am  peri  waded  that  from 
the  Hiftorical  Account  which  Polytheca  gives 
of  both,  and  what  further  pailes  between 
her  felf  and  the  Phyfician  fhe  con  fill  ts  with, 
a  much  clearer  notion  may  be  had  of  the 
Diftemper  call’d  the  Vapours,  and  the  va¬ 
riety  of  Hyfterick  Fits,  than  from  a  bare  re¬ 
cital  of  different  Symptoms  confafedly  hud- 
led  together,  and  that  the  firft  even  to  Peo¬ 
ple  of  ordinary  Capacities  will  be  as  intelli¬ 
gible  as  any  that  are  extant  of  the  latter. 

It  will  eafily  appear,  that  Polytheca,  as 
well  as  her  Husband  and  Daughter  arc 
feign  d  Patients  of  my  own  Contrivance , 
but  be  affured  that  every  one  of  their  Com¬ 
plaints 


The  Preface.  xi 

plaints  were  firft  taken  from  Nature.  The 
inftances  I  give  are  fo  crouded  with  Symp¬ 
toms,  that  I  never  expeft  to  find  one  Per- 
fon,  whofeCafe  exactly  {hall  referable  any 
of  the  Three  j  and  as  I  have  only  fet  down 
the  Signs,  that  are  Obvious  and  Common  in 
the  Diftempers  I  treat  of,  fo  it  is  poffible, 
that  fome  Hyfterick  as  well  as  Hypochondriacal 
Perfons  may  be  troubled  with  fome  pecu¬ 
liar  Symptom  or  other,  that  is  not  to  be 
found  in  the  Book  j  but  whoever  has  read 
it  through,  and  in  fome  part  or  other  of  it 
not  met  with  three  or  four  Symptoms  ap¬ 
plicable  to  himfelf,  may  depend  upon  it, 
that  his  Affliftion  does  not  come  under  the 
denomination  of  either. 

In  thefe  Dialogues,  I  have  done  the  fame 
as  Seneca  did  in  his  OSavia,  and  brought  my 
felf  upon  the  Stage  $  with  this  difference, 
that  he  kept  his  own  Name,  and  I  changed 
mine  for  th2t  of  Philopirio,  a  Lover  of  Ex¬ 
perience,  which  I  (hall  always  profels  to  be : 
Wherefore  I  defire  my  fLeader  to  take  what¬ 
ever  is  fpoke  by  the  Petfon  I  named  la  ft,  as 
faid  by  my  felf  ^  which  I  entreat  him  not 
to  do  with  the  Part  of  Mijbmdon,  whom  the 
better  to  iiluftrate  his  Diftemper,  I  have 
made  guilty  of  fome  extravagant  Sallies, 
that  in  ftricfnefs  I  would  not  be  accountable 
for. 


I 


xii  The  (preface . 

I  am  like  wife  to  acquaint  my  Reader, 
that,  laying  hold  of  the  freedom  ufually 
taken  in  Dialogues,  I  have  in  two  or  three 
places  been  more  particular  as  to  my  own 
private  Affairs,  than  could  be  allow’d  of  in 
a  lefs  familiar  way  of  Writing  3  and  to  ob¬ 
viate  an  Objeftion,  that  might  be  made, 
Page  40,  I’ll  put  him  in  mind,  that  Phyfici- 
ans,  who  have  either  no  leifure,  or  no  in¬ 
clination  to  Write,  tho’  they  have  very 
great  Bufinefs,  where  they  are,  feldom  are 
celebrated  beyond  the  Countries  they  live  in. 
The  two  Populous  Cities  there  meant,  are 
Amjlerdam  and  Rotterdam  5  in  the  latter  of 
which,  the  Fhyfician  mention’d  in  the  fame 
Place,  lived  in  Repute  aboire  Thirty  Years, 
and  for  the  greateft  part  of  that  time  more 
in  Requeft  among  the  better  fort  of  People 
than  any  other  •  as  no  body  can  be  igno¬ 
rant  of,  that  lived  there  before  the  Year  92, 
and  knew  any  thing  at  all. 

From  a  Romancick  Pretence,  that  neg¬ 
lecting  their  private  Intereft,Men  ought  only 
to  labour  for  the  Good  of  Others,  it  is  be¬ 
come  the  fa  (hi  on  among  the  Cenforious  to 
give  the  name  of  §uack  Bills  to  all  the 
Writings  of  Phyficians,  by  which  it  is 
poffible,  that  befides  the  common  welfare 
of  the  People,  they  can  have  any  By-end 
of  encreafing  their  Reputation  and  promoting 

their 


The  Preface. 


Xlfl 


their  own  PraQrice :  and  I  am  not  fo  fill v  as 
to  imagine  that  I  mall  not  have  this  laid  to 
my  Charge,  efpecially  by  fuch,  as  (hall  think 
themfelves  gall’d  by  any  paiTage  in  the  Book  * 
but  as  at  this  rate  the  moft  Learned  Pra¬ 
ctitioners  rnuft  in  ftriftnefs  come  under  this 
Imputation,  or  elfe  that  of  Vain-glory,  if 
their  Works  came  out,  whilft  they  were 
Alive,  I  don’t  think  it  worth  my  while  to 
make  the  leaft  Apology  for  it.  If  a  Regular 
Phyfician  writing  of  a  Diftemper,  the  Cure 
of  which  he  particularly  profeffes,  after  a 
manner  never  attempted  yet,  be  a  Quack* 
becaufe  befides  his  Defign  of  being  inftru- 
ftive  and  doing  Good  to  others,  he  has  like- 
wife  an  aim  of  making  himfelf  more  known 
by  it  than  he  was  before,  then  I  am  one. 
The  common  good  and  Benefit  of  Mankind 
are  Stalking  horfes,  made  ufe  of  by  every 
body,  and  generally  moft  talk’d  of  by  thofe 
that  Jeaft  regard  them.  But  the  Men  of 
Senfe  of  our  clearsighted  Age  are  wifer 
than  to  expeCt  fuch  Heroick  flights  of  felf- 
denying  Virtue  from  their  fellow  Creatures, 
and  whoever  underftands  any  thing  of  a 
Green  knows  that  every  Bowl  mull:  have  a 


Biafs,  and  that  there  would  be  no  Playing 

Without  it. 

•  •  * 

Wherefore  as  Times  go,  and  the  World  is 
venerate,  I  don’t  think,  that  he  is  either 


o 


xiv  'The  preface. 

a  bad  Subjed  or  a  ufelefs  Member  of  Hu¬ 
mane  Society,  who,  without  detriment  to 
the  Publick,  ferves  his  own  Ends,  by  being 
beneficial  to  thole  that  employ  him :  More 
I  don’t  pretend  to  j  neither  would  I  have 
fcrupl’d  to  dired  the  Reader  to  my  Habita¬ 
tion,  if  I  made  my  conftant  abode  in  the 
City  5  but  as  I  live  with  my  Family  out  of 
Town,  inftead  of  dating  this  Epiftle  from 
my  own  Houle,  I  (hall  refer  him  to  the 
Bookfcllers  and  Printer,  named  at  the  bottom 
of  the  Title-Page,  from  whom  any  one  may 
always  learn  where  to  find  me. 


XV 


THE 


CONTENTS 


Of  the  Firft 


DIALOGUE 


Page 

MIfomedon  relates  the  Hifiory  of  his  Life.  3* 
His  firft  Complaints.  6. 

The  Advice  and  Reafons  of  a  learned  Galenift.  8* 
X he  bad  cfftfd  of  his  P  refer  ipt  ions.  I 1. 

How  it  was  redrefs’d.  1 3. 

The  Reafons  of  the  Galenift  refuted  by  a  Modern 
Phyfician.  14. 

The  method  of  Cure  he  preferibes  with  the  fuc- 
cefsofit.  1 6, 

Mifomedon  /  'Studies  in  Phyfick ,  the  Au¬ 
thors  he  began  with •  20. 

The  Symptoms  that  ajfiiffed  him  as  hh  Difiemper 
mcreas'd. 

A  fudden  relief  he  received  and  from  what .  2  ja 

Mifb- 


xvi  The  Contents. 

Page 

Mifomedon  relates  the  progrefs  of  his  Diftemper 
and  his  Studies .  26. 

His  Complaints  concerning  the  fallacioufnefs  of 
the  Art  of  Phyfick .  28* 

Philopirio^  Anjwer .  3*. 

I#  the  Practice  of  Phyfick  ought  to 

confifl*  3 2m 

Umars  in  the  choice  of  Phyficians ,  33* 

The  right  method  of  attaining  to  practical  know¬ 
ledge  in  Phyfick  obfervd  by  the  Ancients .  54. 
The  various  Arts  of  getting  into  practice  mad$  ufe 
of  by  the  Moderns .  36. 

Dr.  Baglivi  s  project  to  bring  the  Art  of  Phyfick 

to  greater  perfection.  38. 

How  every  Phyfician  ought  to  f apply  the  want  of 
its  being  executed.  40; 

Mifomedon  relates  fome  other  Symptoms  of  his 
Diftcmper.  41. 

Of  the  alteration  it  has  wrought  in  him .  42. 

An  Hypochondriacal  flight  concerning  a  fup- 
pos^d  contract  between  the  Soul  and  Body *  45* 
Philopirio  declines  making  ufe  of  any  Hypo - 

thefis,  47* 

Of  the  Empyrick  SeCt,  cind  their  Opinion  con¬ 
cerning  the  Art  of  Phyfick.  v  48. 

The  charge  againfl  the  Empericks  net  impar¬ 
tial.  49* 

Of  curing  Dijiempers  Immetho  die  ally.  <0. 

Qbfervation  of  greater  ufe  than  reafoning  in 
phfickT  v'  '  52. 

Whet 


The  Contents,  xvii 

Page 

What  in  firi&nefs  defer ves  the  name  o f  Reafon.  5  4. 

The  defgn  of  Galen’/  writing.  55. 

What  introduced  Reajoning  in  Phyjick •  5^# 

The  difcipline  obferv'd  among  the  Phyfieians  of 
the  Ancients .  57. 

The  great  difjerence  between  the  Speculative  and 
'Practical  part  of  Phyjick.  ,  59* 

The  evajive  manner  of  Prognoflicating  in  ufs 
among  the  Speculative  Phyfieians.  60 , 

An  infallible  Touch  [tone?  by  which  every  body 
may  judge  of  his  Phyfician s  Skill •  62. 

The  Slfdfulntfs  of  an  Old  Nurfe  in  the  SmalT 
Pox.  63. 

A  digrejjion  concerning  the  feveral  periods  of 
Diftempers.  64. 

The  great  advantage  of  Obfervation  made  by 
the  outward  Senfes •  6j. 

What  has  drawn  Phyfieians  from  the  true  rules 
of  Art *  7c. 


The 


xvin 


The  Contents. 


"The  Contents  of  the  Second 
DIALOGUE. 


Page 

E  Modern  Opinion  concerning  the  Sto - 
mac  hick,  Ferment*  74° 

ConcoBion  perform'd  without  the  help  of  heat  in 
Fijhef,  7  5^ 

Which  it  is  not  in  Humane  Creatures ,  76. 

The  various  Hypothefes,  concerning  the  Seat  of 
the  Hypochondriack  and  Hyfterick  Dif- 
eafes .  78* 

The  Hypothefis  of  Dr*  Sylvius  Dele  Roe.  79. 
The  Hypothefis  of  the  four  Humours 9  and  their 
proper  Purges.  80c 

The  Stomach  the  Seat  of  the  Hypochondriack 
Pajjion .  8k 

But  not  for  the  Reafons  of  either  Diodes  orDr . 

Highmore.  82* 

The  Body  compared  to  a  Still ,  by  Dr.  Willis.  85. 

’  That  Comparison  examined  into .  87. 

The  office  of  the  Spleen ,  according  to  Willis.  89. 
His  Opinion  refuted .  '  90. 

The  Hypothefis  0/  Velthufius,  concerning  the 
Splenetick  Ferment ,  9 1. 

His  Compliment  to  Hypochondriacal  People.93. 

The 


The  Contents, 


xix 

Page 


The  Hypochondriacal  Fajjton  called  the  Diff 
cafe  of  the  Learned  in  High-Dutch*  94* 
The  Anatomical  Obfervations  of  Velthufius,?#/** 
cerning  the  Spleen  Examined*  96, 

The  Analogy  between  the  Spleen  and  genital 
Parts  confided d .  99, 

Remarks  on  a  Treatlfe  of  Vapours,  101* 

The  ufe  of  fever  al  Vifcera  unknown  yet*  104,, 
The  manner  after  which  all  Hypothefes  are 
made  in  Phyfick •  105. 

An  Hvfterick  Cafe  defraying  the l all- cited  Hy* 
pothefis.  106. 

Dr  Sydenham’/  Opinion  concerning  the  caufe 
of  Vapours .  1 07* 

His  Shill  in  the  nature  of  Reisers^  and  candor . 

io8s 

Dr.  Bagli-viV  Injlrudion^  in  order  to  make  a 
lajling  Hypothecs.  109. 

The  reafon  why  all  Adronomers  agree  in  their 
Predations ,  tho s  in  their  Hypothefes  they 
differ IIO. 
The  Solution  of  the  Phenomena,  by  an  Hypo¬ 
thesis,  no  Argument  of  its  being  true r  ma 
X&e  ufeHypothefes  are  oftoAjlronomcrs.il  2 

The  Modern  Philofophy  compared  to  that  of  the 
Ancients *  1 1 } 

T&e  /afe  <?/*  a//  Hypothefes.  114, 

^  ^jyffion  concerning  Empyrical  practice,  j  1 6 . 

Philo- 


xx  The  Contents. 

Page 

Philopirio  /  motive  why  he  refufed  to  give 
Reafons .  1 1 8. 

What  fort  of  reafoning  to  he  allow’d  in  Phyfick • 

1 19. 

A  cnflom  in  Forreign  Dniverfities.  1 20* 

The  chief  Caufe  of  the  Hypochondriack  and 
Hyfterick  PaJJzons.  121 . 

FraSleal  Obfervations  of  Dr .  Tulpius  and 
Platerus.  I22e 

A  debate  concerning  the  Animal  Spirits  that  con • 
(iitute  the  Stomachic 4  Ferment .  124. 

T&  reafon  why  the  Animal  Spirits  mujl  differ  in 

Subtility .  1 2#« 

X6e  6W  and  Spirit's  compared  to  an  Artificers 
Skill  and  his  Tools .  128 

^  defnition  of  Thinking •  \  29. 

An  Effay  upon  the  action  of  recolle&ing  in  the 
Brain.  130, 

What  parts  may  be  influenced  in  their  Operations 
by  Thinking*  132, 

The  debate  on  the  Spirits  continued .  134. 

The  reafon  why  the  difference  in  the  degrees  of 
Spirits  is  inflfled  upon.  135, 

The  benefit  the  Blood  receives  from  ExercifeA'jS. 
Part  of  the  Spirits  when  made.  138c 

Why  we  cannot  enter  into  the  Mechanifm  of  our 
Bodies .  140, 

The  prbcdtartick  Caufe s  of  MifomedonV  Di- 
Jlemper .  *f  •  '  • ;  143. 

The 


The  Contents. 


xxi 

Page 


The  ill  Confequences  of  Excefs  in  Finery .  145, 
Mifomedon  x  invective  again (l  Love «  144* 

^  further  enquiry  into  the  Procatar&ick^  Caufes* 

145. 

The  Caufe  manifejled  from  the  Concurrence  of 
the  Symptoms.  148. 

Why  Men  of  Learning  are  more  fuhjetf  to  he 
Hypochondriacal  than  others .  1 49. 

Other  Procatartick  Caufes .  15CV 

Prognofiicky  to  he  made  on  Mifomedon  /  DT 
jlemper*  *  * 


The  Contents  of  the  Third 

v  • 

DIALOGUE. 


P  affians.  157* 

In  what  the  labour  of  the  Brain  conjifs.  158. 
Thought  compared  to  the  Sight .  159. 

A  digreffion  upon  Dreams.  160 . 

The  effects  of  Opium  ap##  the  Spirits .  162 : 

7 he  reafon  why  Hypochondriacal  People  are 
generally  Ingenious  „  164* 

A  definition  of  Wit*  Ibid. 


The  Contents. 


XXU 

Page 

An  enquiry  into  the  Caufes  that  difpofe  Women 
to  he  Hyfterick.  1 66. 

Errors  in  Diet  the  Caufe  of  the  deficiency  of 
Spirits .  167* 

The  office  of  the  Stomach .  1 70 

The  difference  between  Men  and  Women  as  to 
the  contexture  of  Spirits.  173, 

Women  exceed  Men  in  the  Elegancy  of  their 
Frame ,  Wit,  8 cc.  174, 

Hyfterick  Women  divided  in  two  Claffes.  175* 

Each  Clafs  dijlinuflt  confiderd .  176. 

The  effects  of  the  imbecility  of  Spirits  upon 
Children .  177. 

Why  the  greatefi  part  of  what  we  call  Wit  de¬ 
pends  upon  Education  and  Knowledge.  1  So. 

Horace  quoted  upon  that  account .  181. 

Recipe's  of  Laxatives  and  C&th articles  in  cafes 
of  an  habitual  Coflivenefs .  184. 

The  preparations  of  Anatomy  preferable  to  other 
Emetic  l{s.  18  6. 

The  Ignorance  of  the  Facultas  Medica  at  Paris. 

187. 

A  prefcription  of  Galen  to  confume  the  Spleen . 

188. * 

Several  other  prefcriptions  adapted  to  various 
Hypochondriacal  Cafes .  189. 

Furious  Symptoms  of  Vapours  in  Poly  thecal 
Cafe.  196. 

The  wrong  notion  feme  Men  have  of  the  V apours 
in  Women.  199. 

Polithe- 


1 


Thi  Contents. 


xxm 

Page 


Politheca  relates  the  Hijlory  of  her  Daughters 
Dijlemper*  20  1* 

Remedies  commonly  applied  in  Hyfterick  Fits . 

2©7<r 

Mifomedon’/  to  Polytheca  /  Apothe¬ 
cary*  208® 

The  variety  of  Fits  and  multitude  of  Symptoms 
comprehended  in  the  vpord  Hyfterick.  210* 

P rognofiieks  on  the  Cafe  lafi  mention  d.  212. 
A  long  debate  between  Mifomedon  and  Poly  theca 
on  the  Honefty,  Ability 9&c.  of  Apothecaries  in 
general .  213c 

London  as  proper  a  place  for  the  Study  of  Phyjtck 
as  either  Oxford  or  Cambridge.  219* 

An  Apothecary  well  qualified  equally  to  be  trufied 
with  the  mo  ft  able  Phyfician .  220* 

The  difference  between  Phyjicians  and  Apothe¬ 
caries  as  to  Education .  224® 

Of  the  Latin  the  generality  of  Apothecaries  are 
Majlers  of  228* 

The  reajon  why  the  Names  of  Medicines  are  made 
Myjlericus .  231. 

Gymnoflick  rules  prefcriPd  to  Mifomedon7/ 
Daughter*  235, 

Of  riding  on  Horfe-back^  and  chafing .  2  $6* 

The  great  ufe  of  [winging,  8cc«  238* 

Mifomedon  ctfrpx  at  a  pajfiage  in  Fuller*/  Me- 
dicina  Gymnaftica.  240. 

An  extravagant  Story  which  Plato  fat  hers  on 
Herodicus,  242® 

Pre~ 


xxiv  The  Contents. 

✓ 

Page 

Prefcriptions  for  Mifomedon.  245, 

Of  Fifh  Diet .  *  246, 

Other  Dietetic 4  Rules  to  the  fame,  24^. 

The  digcflion  of  thofe  Hypochondriack  Patients 
in  whofe  Stomachs  the  fewer  is  predominant-2  5 1 
The  great  benefit  to  be  receiv  d  from  Diet .  2^4. 
The  effe&s  of  Employment  and  early  rifing.  25  6» 
A  flight  of  Mifomedon  upon  Slumber*  2  5  7. 
Arcana  in  the  Cure  of  Hypochondriack  and 
Hyfterick  Difeafes .  258, 

The  reafens  why  Philopirio  adminifiers  his  own 
Medicines •  260 * 

Prefcriptions  for  Poly  theca.  265, , 

The  great  Injury  done  by  vinous  Spirits ,  8cc.  in 
the  Vapours .  2  66, 

The  operations  of  firong  Liquors  impenetrable. 270 
Theejfeffsofhard  drinking  ^Hypochondriacal 
People .  27 

perfection  the  greatefl  Cordial  in  the 
World ,  why  ineffectual  to  mmy .  274. 

When  the  Prefcriptions  of  Medicines  are  to  be 
communicated.  276. 

O  bfervations  relating  to  the  Cure  of  the  Di • 
ftempers  treated  op  277, 


ERRATA : 

PAGE  4*5- 1.  28.  read  makes,  p.  46. 1.  3.  after  invifible  put 
a  Comma,  p.  49. 1.  9.  for  meer  r.  p.  51.  1.  3.  r» 

CniMan,  p.  61.  1.  25.  1*.  xftoro  p»  87.  1.  i  3.  r.  un  fagot ,  p.  114* 
L  7,  r.  in  a  little,  p.  130. 1.  13.  r.  oar  Will,  p.  171. 1.  20.  r.of 
neceifaries,  p.  190.  1.  3.  for  §ij.  put  0ij.  p  204.  1.  22.  after 
Year  add,  they  returned,  p.  230. 1,  23.  dele  to.,  p,  280.  l.the 
third  after  credit,  add  flagitare. 


( « ) 


■  I  ■  ■■■  M 


THE  FIRST 

DIALOGUE 

BETWEEN 

Philopirio  a  Phyfician, 

AND 

Mifomedon  his  Patient. 

Mifomed.  -ir  Have  lent  for  you,  Doftor,  to 
I  confult  you  about  a  Diftem- 
JL  per,  of  which  I  am  very* 
well  affured,  I  {ball  never  be 

Cured. 

Philopir.  Whatever  your  Cafe  may  be. 
Sir,  it  is  a  great  misfortune,  you  entertain 
fo  ill  an  Opinion  of  it  5  but  I  hope,  your 
Difeafe  may  prove  lefs  defperate  than  your 
Fears. 

Mif, 


B 


(  z  ) 

Mif  It  is  neither  better  nor  worfe  than 
I  tell  you,  and  what  I  fay,  is  what  I  am 
convinc’d  of  by  Reafon,  and  not  a  fug- 
geftion  of  my  Fears:  But  you  think,  per¬ 
haps,  I  ra  a  Mad* Man,  to  fend  for  a  Phy- 
ficiao,  when  1  know  before- hand,  that  he 
can  do  me  no  good  :  Truly,  Dodor,  I  am 
not  far  from  it:  But  firCj  oi:  all,  Are  you 
in  hade, ’pray5  > 

Phi.  Not  in  great  hade  Sir. 

Mif.  I  am  glad  of  that  $  for  mod  of 
your  Profeffion  always  either  are,  or  at 
lead  pretend  to  be  in  a  great  hurry.  But 
tho’  you  are  at  leifure,  Can  you  hear  a  Man 
talk  for  half  an  Hour  together,  and,  per¬ 
haps,  not  always  to  the  purpofe,  without 
interrupting  him  ?  For  I  have  a  great  deal 
to  fay  to  you,  feveral  Queftions  to  ask 
you,  and,  know  I  (hall  be  very  tedious  5 
but  if  you  can  bear  with  me,  I’ll  confider 
your  Trouble,  and  pay  you  for  your  Time, 
and  Patience  both.  Can  you  day  an 
Hour  > 

Phk  Yes,  Sir,  or  longer,  if  there  he  oc- 
cafion.  .  t 

Mif.  Then, ’pray*  Sir,  fit  down.- —  I  did 
not  not  make  you  come  up  Stairs  becaufe 
I  keep  Chamber  my  felf,  for  Fm  abroad 
every  Day  •  but  I  thought  it  beft  to  Dif- 
courfe  you  in  my  Study,  becaufe  it  is  the 
quieted  Room  in  the  Houfe,  and  I  hate 

to 


V  1  ) 

to  be  difturb’d.  That  you  may  be  the  bete 
ter  acquainted  with  my  Diftemper,  I’ll  be¬ 
gin  with  you  ab  ovo^  and  give  you  as  fhort 
an  account  as  I  can,  how  I  have  paft  the 
greateft  part,  of  my  Life.  I  have  been 
very  irregular,  when  I  was  Young  5  but 
for  thefe  Seventeen  or  Eighteen  Years,  I 
have  lived  moderately  enough,  and  but 
feldom  been  guilty  of  any  excefs.  I  want^ 
ed  but  two  Months  of  being  One  and 
Twenty,  when  my  Father  Died  and  left  me 


Three  Hundred  a  Year  r  I  lived  then  at 


Oxford ,  but  upon  this  I  left  the  Univerfity, 
and  being  defign’d  for  the  Law,  to  perfect 
my  Studies  and  qualify  my  felf  for  the  Barg 
came  up  to  London,  where  not  being  ufed 
to  fee  fo  flulh  in  Gafh,  I  quickly  became 
Extravagant,  and  growing  weary  of  my 
crabbed  Authors,  at  laft  l  threw  by  the 
Books,  and  minded  nothing  but  my  Plea- 
fores  5  of  which  feme  were  very  Expenfive* 
I  went  to  fee  France ,  and  the  Low  Coun¬ 
tries,  and  coming  back  found,  that  by  my 
way  of  living  in  three  Years,  and  a  half, 
I  had  fo  far  out-run  the  Conftable,  that 
half  of  my  Eftate  was  hardly  fufficient  to 
Pay  my  Debts,  and  clear  the  remainder,' 
At  Five  and  Twenty  1  Married  5  my  Wife’s 
Fortune  paid  off  fome  Scores,  and  her  felf 
was  of  fuch  an  ingagiog  Temper,  that 
fine  wholly  took  up  my  Thoughts  1  1  left 

1  ‘  B  si 


(  4  ) 

all  ray  loafer  Company,  and  by  her  ma¬ 
nagement  was  Toon  reclaim’d  from  my  for¬ 
mer  Vices;  Love  and  Paftime  was  all  our 
Employment.,  from  Morning  till  Night  ^  we 
ftudy’d  nothing,  but  how  to  pieafe  and 
divert  one  another  :  Neither  of  us  could  be 
caird  Extravagant,  *yet  both  defired  to  live 
handfomly  3  my  Wife  admired  Cloaths, 
and  1  loved  good  Eating,  and  our  ne- 
ceffafy  Expences,  exceeded  twice  my  Income. 
I  knew  this  would  not  lad,  yet  it  never 
affeded  me  with  the  lead  Concern,  or  ever 
gave  mean  Hour’s  difquiet.  I  hated  the 
Law,  and  indeed  any  thing  of  bufinefs  3  if 
a  Place  had  offer’d,  1  would  have  purchas’d 
it  3  yet  I  was  always  remifs  in  looking  out 
for  one.  I  never  troubled  my  head  but 
with  juft  providing  what  we  wanted,  and 
my  Care  was  never  extended  beyond  my 
prefent  Occafions.  After  this  manner  ha^ 
ving  reduced  every  thing  into.  Money,  my 
whole  (ubftance  lafted  us  fix  Years,  during 
which  we  were  gay  and  contented,  and 
even  in  our  own  Thoughts  the  happieft 
Couple  in  the  Univerfe.  When  I  had  a- 
bout  Thirty  Pound  left,  ow’d  near  Three 
Hundred,  and  faw  no  propped  or  proba¬ 
bility  of  ever  having  any  more,  a  far  Re¬ 
lation  of  my  Mothers,  whom  I  had  hardly 
ever  heard  of,  died  above  a  Hundred  Miles 
offs  and  left  me  a  Thoufand  a  Year  in  Land, 

and 


V  /  / 

:  and  a  good  Eftate  in  Money.  Whether 
j  this  was  more  welcome,  or  feafonable  i 
!  leave  you  to  judge  :  Yet  fuch  an  evennefs 
>  © t  Temper  I  enjoy’d  at  that  time,  and  fo 
e  much  had  I  lived  to  my  mind  that  (a 
1  Coach  excepted,  which  I  fet  up  to  gratifie 
i  my  Wife)  it  hardly  made  any  vifible  alte¬ 
ration  in  my  manner  of  living.  When  I 
had  taken  PolTeflion  of,  and  was  entirely 
fettled  in  my  Eftate,  as  foon  as  I  had  lei- 
fure  ro  reflect  on  the  Condition  I  had  been 
in,  I  could  not  look  without  horror  on 
the  difmal  profpedt  of  Poverty  and  Want, 
to  which  I  rauft  in  a  very  little  time  inevi¬ 
tably  have  been  reduced,  had  not  propi¬ 
tious  Fortune,  as  it  were  by  a  Miracle,  fo 
unexpectedly  fnateh’d  me  from  the  fright¬ 
ful  Precipice.  I  was  often  amazed  at  the 
Tranquility,  or  rather  ftupid  Lethargy,  I 
had  been  in,  and  made  a  firm  Refolution 
to  be  at  leaf!:  fo  Prudent  for  the  future,  as 
not  to  negleft  the  management  of  my 
Affairs,  or  live  beyond  the  boundary  of 
my  Revenue. 

Among  other  things  of  Value,  which 
my  Kinfman  had  left  me,  there  was  a  hmd- 
fome  Collection  of  Medals,  and  the  greateft 
part  of  the  Library,  which  you  fee  here* 
I  had  al  ways  bore  a  great  refpeft  to  Learn¬ 
ing,  and  when  I  flung  up  the  Study  of  the 
Law*  I  (till  continued  an  admirer,  Hirna* 

B  |  titans 


(  o 

nioris  Literature,  and  in  my  greateft  idle- 
nefs,  Virgil  and  Horace ,  Terence  and  Plan - 
with  half  a  dozen  more  of  the  Clafjicfe 
made  always  a  great  part  of  my  Diversion. 
Whether  the  opportunity  of  evolving  fome 
fcarce  and  exquifite  Authors  invited  me  to 
the  purfait  of  Learning,  or  that  my  riper 
Years  led  me  to  more  folid  Pleafores,  I 
don’t  know,  but  within  a  few  Months 
after  my  new  A  equations,  I  became  a  .great 
lover  of  Reading,  and  by  degrees  fell  to 
hard  Study  5  but  notwithftanding  that  I 
was  very  intent  on  my  Books,  i  ftill  re¬ 
main'd,  as  I  had  always  been,  rei  Uxorie 
addiffijjiwm,  and  divided  my  Hours  inter 
Venerem  &  Mu  fas  5  after  this  manner  for 
four  or  five  Years  I  enjoy’d  abundance  of 
fatisfaftion,  and  thoJ  I  had  feetningly  more 
Care  upon  me,  pafs’d  away  my  time  ra¬ 
ther  more  contentedly  (ii  that  be  poilible) 
than  before.  As  to  my  Health,  I  was  near 
Seven  and  Thirty,  when  I  could  have  , 
boafted,  that  fince  the  Small-Pox,  which  I 
had  in  my  Infancy,  I  had  not  fufferd  an 
Hours  Illnefs,  or  endured  a  moments  Pain, 
and  applying  that  of  Seneca  to  my  felf, 
have  bragg’dj  that  I  had  always  been  happy  ; 
d*-  quod  eoufque  fine  morfu  animi  vitam 
tr  an  per  am . 

The  firft  Caufe  I  had  to  Complain  was, that 
now  and  then  I  began  to  be  troubled  with 

the 


(  7  ) 

the  Heart-burning,  which  in  a  little  time 
became  a  content  Companion  to  me: 
Chalk  and  Water  for  above  half  a  Year 
was  a  prefent  Cure,  then  I  ufed  Lozenges, 
made  up  of  Crabs- Eyes,  burnt  Ivory, 
Bole-Armenick,  &c.  thefe  like  wife  eas'd 
me  for  a  great  while,  whenever  I  took 
them  y  after  them  I  made  ufe  of  abundance 
of  other  things  recommended  in  that  Cafe, 
and  at  Hft  found  nothing  reliev'd  me  more 
than  the  chewing  of  Liquorice.  Hitherto 
I  had  only  Quack’d  with  my  felf,  and  the 
high  eft  I  had  confuted  was  our  Apothe¬ 
cary  in  ordinary.  I  perceived,  that  all  the 
Remedies,  I  had  taken,  were  only  Pallia¬ 
tive,  and  none  of  them  had  touch’d  the 
Caufe,  but  to  the  .contrary  I  greW  daily  v 
worfe,  and  the  Heart-burning  was  no  more 
the  only  Symptom  that  difturb’d  me.  After 
every  Meal  1  had  flufhings  in  my  Face  ^ 
all  Day  long  I  wa?  troubled  with  Wind 
and  fowre  Belches,  and  every  Morning  as 
long  as  I  was  Faftipg,  I  had  my  Mouth 
continually  fill’d  with  a  clear  infipid  Water, 
which  without  any  draining  came  off  my 
Stomachy  yet  notwitiiftandiog  all;  this  my 
Appetite,  was  good,  and  I  fiept  very  well. 
This  I  confefs  was  .the  reafon,-  that  I  had 
fc  long  flighted  my  Di  (temper  $  hut  as  it 
'  became  more  troublefome  than >  ordinary* 

I  feat  for  an  Eminent  Phyfician,  whom'  f 

B  4  knew 


(8) 

knew  to  be  a  Man  of  great  Learning. 
When  1  had  told  the  Doftor  my  Cafe  and 
anfwer’d  him  what.Queftions  he  thought 
fit  to  ask,  I  defired,  as  the  Prerogative  of 
a  Man  of  Letters,  that  I  might  be  acquaint¬ 
ed  with  the  Caufe  of  my  Diftemper,  and 
have  a  Rational  account  given  me  of  the 
Method  and  Prefcriptions  he  defign’d  I 
fhould  follow  :  Which  being  granted,  after 
a  fmall  Paufe,  I  was  inform’d  that  the  heat 
and  burning  all  along  the  Oefophagus ,  from 
which  the  Diftemper  feem’d  to  have  de¬ 
riv’d  the  Name  of  Heart-burning,  as  well 
as  the  Flufhings  in  my  Face  alter  Meals, 
were  certo  cert  ins ,  occafion'd  by  an  Intern- 
perks  he  pat  is  cal  id  a,  which  in  my  Cafe 
happen’d  to  be  accompanied  with  an  In- 
temp  eries  St  o mac  hi  frigid  a,  as  was  manifefic 
from  the  cold  Pztnita ,  which  [  voided  every 
Morning,  as  well  as  the  Wind,  fowre  Bel¬ 
ches,  and  other  ftgns  of  Indigeftion. 

As  to  the  Cure,  that  repeated  bleeding 
from  the  left  Salvatella  would  fatisfie  both 
Indications ,  and  to  ufe  his  own  terms,  utram - 
que  fere  paginam  abfolveret  5  for  that  by  this 
means  the  Fountain  of  heat,  the  Blood,  of 
which  my  Liver  had  too  much,  would  by 
way  of  Antifpafis  or  revulfion  be  drawn  from 
the  Right  fide,  which  was  enough  to  an- 
fwer  the  firft  Indication  :  Concerning  the 
fecond,  he  faid,  that  as  VenefeUion ,  in  ge¬ 
neral 


i 

/ 


(  9  ) 

neral,  both  by  the  Ancients  and  Moderns, 
was  allow’d  to  quicken  the  Blood,  fo  it 
would  procure  heat  to  that  fide,  where  the 
motion  was  made  5  which  confequently 
would  be  imparted  not  only  to  the  upper 
Orifice  of  the  Ventricle ,  to  which  alone 
the  Name  of  Stomachus  properly  belong’d, 
tho7  given  to  the  whole  Vijcus  -0  but  like- 
wife  to  the  Spleen,  which  both  as  to  its 
Office  and  Situation  was  to  the  Stomach 
as  a  Furnace  to  a  Copper,  for  which  reafon 
by  the  Ancients  it  had  al  ways  wifely  been 
call’d  Fames  veniriculi  :  He  told  me  more¬ 
over,  that  it  was  in  regard  to  that  heat 
adminiftring  Vifcus,  that  he  ordered  the 
opening  of  the  Salvatella ,  and  no  other 
Vein,  becaufe  according  to  Galen  and  o- 
thers,  which  he  named,  it  had  a  peculiar 
Influence  upon  the  Milt. 

Befides  bleeding,  my  Doftor  told  me,  I 
was  to  be  Purg’d,  that  by  expelling  the  Pi- 
tuilous  Humour,  per  inferior ar  it  might  be 
drawn  and  remov'd  as  far  as  poffible  from 
the  Stomach  $  that  to  this  end  he  would 
prefcribe  a  Bolus  of  Eleffuarium  e  Citris 
folutivum,  with  fome  Grains  of  the  Tro- 
chtfci  AlhanduU  5  having  told  me  the  In¬ 
gredients  of  the  Ele&uary,  he  fhew7d  me, 
how  this  Prefcriprion  would  likewife  an- 
fwer  every  Indication  5  that  firft  the  Con- 
ferves  of  the  Flowers  of  Violets  and  Bug- 


(  1  °  ) 

lofs,  as  well  as  the  Puhis  Diatragacmtfn 
frigidi^  would  infallibly  cool  my  Liver  $ 
fecondly,  that  the  Citron- Peal,  Ginger  and 
Fennel-Seeds  would  expel  the  Wind  that 
troubled  me,  and  warm  toy  Stomach,  whilft 
the  Diagridtum ,  Turpetb ,  and  Senna ,  which 
all  enter’d  that  judicious  Compofition, 
would  eliminate  the  Peccant  Matter,  and 
thirdly  that  pro  Stimtdo ,  he  added  the  irc- 
chifci  AlhanduU ,  in  regard  to  the  Pituita 
Viftida*  which  as  my  Diftemper  was  of 
feme  ftaoding,  it  was  to  be  fear’d,  would 
clofely  adhere  to  the  Inteftina ,  After  the 
Bleeding  and  Purging,  I  was  for  a  Fortnight 
or  three  Weeks  to  drink  the  Epfom  Waters* 
which  ex  fuperabimdmti  would  Refrigerate 
my  Liver  as  well,  as  conftantly  lead  forth 
the  Pitmtous  Matter  $  which,  from  my  Vi¬ 
cious  Confutation  he  fbrefaw,  would  con¬ 
tinue  to  be  bred  as  long  as  the  debility  of 
the  Faculias  ConcoUrix  of  my  Stomach  was 
not  wholly  remedied:  As  to  Diet  I  was  to 
be  contented  viUn  tenni ,  and  to  avoid  all 
things,  that  were  Fat,  Hot, or  Sour.  Having 
for  a  while  admired  theprofoundity  of  the 
venerable  old  Gentleman^  Skill,  by  which 
fo  dexferouOy  he  knew  at  once  to  take  care 
of  the  Heat. of  my  Liver,  and  the  Coldnefs 
of  my  Stomach,  I  gave  him  a  handfcme 
Fee ,  and  thank’d  him  for  his  Advice. 
When  he  was  gone  I  confefs,  that  I  did  not 

fo 


(  11  ) 

fo  much  as  queftion  my  Cure  5  hut  the 
more  I  confider’d  the  Wifdom  I  had  heard, 
the  more  1  wiftfd,  that  I  had  fent  for  him 
fooner,  thinking,  that  Hippocrates  himfelf 
had  certainly  never  acted  with  greater 
Judgment,  or  Sagacity.  The  next  Day  I 
lent  for  the  Surgeon  and  Apothecary  both, 
and  according  to  Prefcription  in  Eight  Days 
1  was  copioufly  Blooded  twice,  and  Pur¬ 
ged  four  times:  It  is  true,  that  by  this 
time  I  had  loft  my  Heart-burning,  and 
fowrenefs  I  complain’d  of  in  my  Stomach  $ 
but  inftead  of  it  I  had  a  pain  in  it,  which 
I  had  never  felt  before  :  I  was  as  much 
troubled  with  Wind  in  my  Bowels  as  ever, 
and  fo  Weak  and  Faint  that  1  could  hardly 
crawl  along,  yet  I  was  refolvM  to  follow 
Directions,  and  remembring  the  old  Penta¬ 
meter  3  Dtilcius  ex  ip  jo  fente  hibuntur  acptx.} 
went  to  Epfow  to  drink  the  Waters  to  the 
beft  advantage:  The  fir  ft  Day  l  drank  \m 
the  Pain  of  my  Stomach  was  pretty  much 
encreas’d,  the  fec.ond  I  had  quite  loft  my 
Appetite,  and  the  third  I  was  taken  with  a, 
violent  Leofenefs ;  in  which  I  obferved,  - 
that  whatever  I  voided  had  received  very 
little  alteration  in  either  my  Guts  or  Sto¬ 
mach  :  After  feven  or  eight  Stools,  which 
I  had  in  lefs  than  an  Hour  and  a  half,  I 
found  my  felf  fo  feeble  and  difpirited,  that 
I  could  keep  up  no  longer,  and  was  ready 

to 


(  1*  ) 

to  Swoon  away.  I  fent  for  the  firft  Phy- 
fician,  that  was  to  be  had,  and  begg  d  of 
him  to  ftop  my  Flux  5  but  he  told  me, 
that  it  was  againft  all  Rules  of  Art,  to  give 
Reftrin gents,  before  the  Caufe  was  re¬ 
moved,  and  hearing  that  I  underftood 
Latin ,  faid,  Evacuanda  funt  excrement  a  cc- 
cafionem  fubmini fir  anti  a,  I’ll  order  you  a 
gentle  Laxative;  as  foon  as  he  had  faid 
this  he  fat  down,  and  prefcrib’d  5  then 
took  his  Fee,  and  went  away.  His  Bill 
was  nothing  elfe  but  the  Deco&um  Senn* 
Geronis ,  and  Syrup  of  Rhubarb ,  but  feeing 
at  the  bottom,  Mifce ,  fiat  potio  Purgans , 
and  feeling  my  Strength  quite  fpent,  I  was 
afraid,  that  I  (hould  never  be  able  to  go 
through  it,  and  yet  thought  that  fomethiog 
was  to  be  done  very  fuddenly  •  whilft 
I  was  in  this  Perplexity,  comes  into  the 
Room  an  honeft  Gentleman,  that  Lodg’d 
in  the  fame  Houfe  as  I  did,  to  whom  the 
Night  before  I  had  related  the  courfe  I 
had  taken  5  having  ask’d  me,  how  I  did, 
and  look’d  firft  upon  the  Bill,  and  then 
upon  me,  he  flings  it  away  in  a  Pafiion, 
and  fays,  Pox  on  their  Purging  ^  I  think 
they  hare  done  that  fbfficiemly  already  ^ 
if  you’ll  be  ruled  by  me,  I’ll  be  bang’d  if 
I  don’t  fet  you  to  rights  before  Night  .* 
not  hearing  me  make  him  any  anfwer,  he 
took  my  filence  for  Confenr,  and  imme¬ 
diately 


.  (  *3  ) 

diately  call’d  for  a  Bottle  of  French  Claref, 
which  he  order’d  to  be  burnt  with  good 
(tore  of  Cinnamon,  Cloves  and  Mace,  and 
a  pretty  deal  of  Orange-Peel  $  whilft  this 
was  a-boiling  he  lent  for  fbrne  Syrup  of 
Quinces  to  fwceten  it,  and  when  it  was 
ready,  made  nic  take  half  a  Pint  of  it,  with 
a  very  brown  Toaft  well  rubb'd  with  Nut¬ 
meg,  and  flip  it  off  as  hot  as  I  was  able  to 
bear  it  5  an  Hour  after  I  repeated  the  fame 
Dofe,  and  two  Hours  after  that  I  took 
another.  It  is  not  to  be  exprefs’d,  what 
fudden  benefit  I  receiv’d  from  this  plain, 
and  Palatable  Medicine:  At  the  very  ta¬ 
king  of  the  firft  Dofe,  I  felt  my  Spirits  re¬ 
viv’d,  and  every  Limb  feem  d  to  recover 
Strength  :  The  fecond  check'd  tiiy  Loofe- 
nefs,  and  by  the  third  the  Pain  of  my  Sto¬ 
mach  was  quite  taken  off :  Three  or  Four 
Hours  after  my  Appetite  return’d,  I  eat 
half  a  Chicken  for  my  Supper,  and  Slept 
admirably  well  all  the  Night  long:  I  flayed 
at  Epfom  about  a  Month  longer,  but  did 
not  meddle  any  more  with  the  Waters 
thinking  that  I  had  learrf  d  by  dear  bough 
Experience  $  frigidam  non  nugis  mederi  do» 
loribMS  Stomachi  quam  oleum  extmguere  in* 
cendium ^  as  Erafmus  had  faid  fo  many 
Years  before  me,  and  by  the  help  of  a 
wholefome  and  noutifhing  Diet,  gentle  Ex- 
ercife,  and  the  moderate  ufe  of  the  bed 

Claret, 


n 


(  M  )  . 

Claret,  I  could  buy,  i  found  my  fdf  per¬ 
fectly  well  in  a  little  time,  thcf  1  never  again 
recover  d  that  Strength  and  Vigour,  which 
before  the  unmerciful  Bleeding  and  Purg¬ 
ing  I  had  been  poffefs’d  of. 

Being  come  back  to  London ,  I  continued 
in  tolerable  Health  for  feveral  Months,  the 
only  thing  I  complain'd  of  was  the  Old 
Difteraper,  the  Grumbling  in  my  Bowels, 
that  as  my  Appetite  encreas’d,  return’d  by 
degrees,  and  at  lad  didurb’d  me  both  Pull 
and  Fading  3  yet  for  a  Year  and  a  half 
or  near  two  Years  I  did  little  or  nothing  to 
it,  and  bore  the  inconveniency  of  it  with 
a  great  deal  of  Patience,  becaufe  from 
what  I  .had  undergone  once,  I  was  as 
much  afraid  of  Phyfick,  as  a  Child  ot  be¬ 
ing  whipt  5  till  by  over  perfwalion  of  my 
Wife,  I  again  confulted  one  of  the  mod 
Noted  Phyficians  about  Town.  I  told  him 
every  thing  t  knew  of  my  felf,  and  left 
out  nothing  of  what  I  have  faid  now. 
The  Gentleman,  I  fpeak  of,  was  of  the 
Modern  Opinion,  and  when  I  had  done. 
Ridicul’d  very  much  the  Method,  after 
which  I  had  been  treated  :  He  told  me  5 
that  the  Heat  of  my  Liver,  the  Coldnefs 
of  my  Stomach,  and  the  Spleen  being  a 
fames  Ventriculi ,  were  ail  Fopperies  alike  3 
Subterfugia ,  as  he  call’d  him,  ignorant'ue^ 
Figments,  that  had  never  had  any  evidence. 


.  •  C  l5  ) 

but  in  the  Brains  of  their  Inventors ;  good 
for  nothing,  bat  to  (hew  the  foiall  Know¬ 
ledge,  they  had  in  Anatomy :  As  to  Galen 
himfelf  .•  that  be  had  been  a  Conceited 
bufie  Body,  that  anili  garmlitate  plenus,  had 
foul’d  abundance  of  Paper  to  no  purpofe  $ 
that  he  left  us  nothing  of  any  Value  or 
certainty,  but  what  he  had  been  oblig'd 
for  to  Quintus  the  Empjrick.,  who  had 
been  his  Mafter  5  and  that  how  Magifteri- 
ally  foever  he  had  decreed  dc  uftt  pariimn^ 
he  never  had  feen  a  Human  Body  open’d 
in  his  Life.  As  a  lover  of  Antiquity,  I 
was  at  firft  very  much  fcandaliz’d  at  thefe 
Expreffions,  but  when  he  began  to  difcourie 
about  my  Diftemper,  the  Reafons  he  gave 
for  the  Caufe  of  it,  were  lb  agreeable,  the 
Hypothefis,  by  which  he  folv’d  every 
Symptom,  fo  eafie,  the  Indication  lor  the 
Cure  feem’d  fo  naturally  to  flow  from  it, 
and  whatever  he  faid  was  fo  Intelligible, 
that  I  was  prefemly  reconcil'd  with,  and 
conceiv’d  a  great  efteem  for  him.  He 
told  me,  that  the  part  affected  was  indeed 
the  Stomach  5  but  that  it  was  a  vulgar  Er¬ 
ror,  to  think,  that  there  was  great  heat  re¬ 
quired  for  the  Concoction  of  our  Food* 
fince  in  feme  Creatures  it  was  altogether 
perform’d  without,  as  was  evident  in  Fifties, 
in  whom  there  was  not  fo  much  as  any  per* 
ceptible  warmth  5  yet,  faid  he,  by  feeding 


(  u5  ) 

on  their  own  Species,  and  fwaliowing  one 
another,  it  is  plain,  that,  Bones  and  all, 
they  digeft  whole  Bodies,  fometimes  half 
as  big  as  themfelves,  without  the  help  of 
chewing,  and  confequently  are  endued 
with  a  ftronger  Conco&ion  than  other 
Animals  He  made  me  fenfible  3  firft,  that 
the  Aliment  in  every  Creature  was  di- 
gefted,  and  diflolv’d  by  means  of  a  certain 
adapted  Menfirmm ,  that  by  infinuating  it 
felf  into  the  Pores  was  able  to  break  the 
contexture  of  it  .*  Secondly,  that  this  Men- 
jlmum  did  not  ad  by  any  Mufcular  or  o- 
ther  Organick  Force,  but  an  Intcfiine  mo¬ 
tion  not  unlike  that  of  Yeft,  or  Leaven 
in  Dough,  from  which  Analogy  in  the 
Operation  it  had  received  the  fame  name 
in  Latin,  and  was  call’d  a  Ferment : 
Thirdly,  that  on  the  various  faults  of  this 
Ferment  all  manner  of  Indigeftions  de¬ 
pended.  I  was  pleas’d  with  the  clear 
Idea  I  had  of  my  Condition,  and  haften’d 
with  Alacrity  to  the  Rational  method, 
which  he  propos’d  to  put  me  in. 

The  firft  I  was  to  do,  was  to  take  an 
Emetick  Potion  or  two,  to  difcharge  the 
Vifcid  Saburra,  that  opprefs'd  my  Stomach  ; 
then  with  Chalyheats  and  other  powerful 
Alr.alicks  to  fubdue  the  fix’d  Acid  Salts , 
and  with  Carminatives  and  Sfecifick,  Sto- 
machicky ,  mix’d  with  Volatile  Salts,  en¬ 
deavour 


(  «7  )  •  /V 

deavour  to  Meliorate,  and  if  pcfHble  re- 
ftore  the  Ferment  to  its  Priftine  State.  I 
fhall  not  trouble  you  with  the  particulars 
of  what  I  took,  but  content  my  felf  with 
telling  you,  that  his  Medicines  were  as  well 
chofen,  as  his  method  was  juft,  arid  the 
Succefs  to  my  thinking  anfwerable  to  both 
for  in  lefs  than  a  Fortnight  all  the  Symp¬ 
toms  remitted,  and  after  three  Weeks  I 
had  nothing  left  to  complain  of :  I  did 
not  leave  off  fuddenly,  but  perfever’d  for 
a  confiderable  time  in  the  ufe  of  his  Pre¬ 
scriptions,  and  remain’d  well,  as  long  as  I 
continued  the  Medicines  5  but  imagining 
my  felf  Cured,  I  no  fooner  ceas’d  taking, 
but  my  Diftemper  return’d  even  fafter  than 
it  had  abated  before.  Prefently  I  bad  re- 
courfe  to  the  fame  Remedies,  and  was 
again  reliev’d,  but  no  longer  than  I  took 
them.-  And  after  this  manner  for  a  great 
while,  1  was  always  either  plagued  with 
the  Diftemper,  or  the  taking  of  Phyfick, 
which  I  thought  altnoft  as  bad  till  at 
laft  it  grew  fo  ftubborn,  that  the  fame  Re¬ 
medies,  that  had  done  me  fo  much  good 
before  became  utterly  ineffectual  ;  this 
made  me  very  Melancholick,  and,  what 
vex’d  me  moft,  was  that  my  Phyfician,  iit 
whom  I  fo  much  confided,  began  to  neg- 
leCt  and  flight  me  $  tho’  in  lefs  than  a 
Twelve  Month  he  had  received  above  an 

C  Hundred 


(  >8  ) 

Hundred  Guineas  in  Fees  of  me  ^  which 
in  a  Chronick  Difeafe,  where  -the  fame  Re¬ 
medies  are  for  ferae  time  continued,  and 
no  conftant  Attendance  is  required,  is  pretty 
Confidefable.  When  neither  his  former 
Prefcriptioos,  nor  the  various  changes  he 
put  upon  them  could  Eafe  nip,  and  all  his 
plaufible.  Reafons  for  altering  them  were 
quite  exhaufted,  I  perceived,  that  he  grew 
perfedbly  weary  of  oie.  I  could  now  but 
feldom  fee  him  5  when  he  came  he  was  al¬ 
io  hafte,  and  all  the  Comfort,  1  got  from 
him,  was  that  he  either  found  feme  fault 
with  my  Diet,  or  manner  of  living  ^  or 
elfe  charged  roe  with  omitting  what  he 
had  ordered  5  till  at  laft  being  Confcious 
that  I  had  never  been  more  regular  or  ob- 
ferving,  I  told  hinf ray  Thoughts  3  at  which 
pretending  to  be  offended  he  took  the  op¬ 
portunity  of  picking  a  Quarrel, and  ever  fince, 
tho9  often  defired,  utterly  refufed  to  fee 
me  any  more,  Jngravefcente  malo ,  1  ap¬ 
plied  my  fdf  to  another—  but  I  have  tired 
you  too  much  already,'  and  am  fenfible,  it 
is  unpardonable  to  trefpafs  fo  unreafonably 
upon  any  Man's  good  nature,  and  defire 
him  to  liften  to  fo  tedious  a  Tale. 

Phi.  Your  Story  is  fo  -  diverting,  that  I 
take  abundance  of  delight  in  it,  and  your 
Ingenious  way  of  telling  it,  gives  me  a 
greater  infight  into  yourDiftemper, than  you 

imagine  ** 


.•  ^  (  *9  ). 

imagine  :  Wherefore,  let  me  beg  of  yon 
to  go  on,  Sir,  I  am  all  attention,  and  (hall 
not  interrupt  you. 

Mif.  Being,  as  I  told  you,  abandon’d  by 
my  Phyfician,  I  went  to  another  $  and  after 
that  to  two  or  three  more,  without  follow¬ 
ing  any  of  their  Prefcriptions.  •  I  could 
never  hear  Bleeding  or  Purging  propofed 
to  me,  without  reflecting  on  what  my 
old  Galenijl  had  made  me  fuffer  before  ■ 
and  ail  the  Remedies  I  took  for  feme  time, 
were  only  what  I  pick’d  out  of  the  old 
Recipe's  of  him  I  ufed  laft :  For  making 
now  and  then  a  review  over  the  Bills,  he 
writ,  for  roe,  I  recollected  what  things  had 
eas’d  roe  the  lateft,  and  chofe  from  among 
them,  what  Mr.  Apothecary  and  my  felf 
thought  fitted  for  my  purpofe.  I  knew 
by  Experience,  that  nothing  of  what  he 
had  preferib’d,  tho’  it  ceas’d  working  to 
the  fame  ends,  would  ever  difeompofe  me  : 
This  made  me  value  his  Prefcriptions  as 
much,  as  I  had  efteem’d  his  Parts  before  .* 
Nay,  the  lofs  of  him  fo  much  affeCted 
me,  that  1  often  thought,  I  could  willing¬ 
ly  have  given  him  tripple  Fees  ;  if  he ' 
would  only  have  kept  his  Temper,  and 
invented  new  Reafons,  to  footh  my  fancy, 
tho’  he  had  done  nothing  to  my  Difeafe, 
But  I  had  a  1  mod  forgot  to  tell  you,  that 
ever  fince  the  Burnt- Claret  cured  me  of 

C  2  my 


X  »o  ) 

my  Liehteria  at  Rpfom ,  I  had  a  mind  to 
Study  Phyfick  5  that,  if  I  could,  get  no 
benefit  from,  I  might  at  lead  enter  into 
the  Fallacies  of,  fo  treacherous  and  in* 
fignificant  an  Art. 

But  being  befotted  to  the  Ancients,  - 1.  be¬ 
gan  very  immethddically.  For  above  two 
Years  together  l  read  Hippocrates,  Celias 
Anrelianus ,  Areims ,  Galen ,  Cel  fas  and  fe¬ 
vers!  other  Volumes  of  Greek  and  Roman 
Authors  without  any  great  advancement 
as  £0  Knowledge,  till  being  acquainted  with 
the  Phyficiao,  I  lately  mention’d,  I  was 
put  in  a  better  way,  went  fir  ft  thro7  two 
or  three  Modern  Anatomifts,  and  ilipt  no 
opportunity  of  feeing  publick  Difiedions, 
not  forgetting  in  the  mean  time  Harvms  de 
Gcneraiione  and  Bore  lifts  de  mot  ft  Animalium t 
with  fome  others,  that  made  me  underhand 
the  ©economy  as  well  as  the  Strudure  of  the 
Body.  Having  laid  this  foundation,  I  read 
with  great  avidity  the  inventive  Sylvius  do 
le  Roe,  and  faithful  Etmul/er ,  ■  and  of  our 
own  Nation  the  Speculative  Willis,  and 
pradieai  Sydenham . 

I  had  fin  idl’d  my  courfe  of  Anatomy, 
and  was  juft  enter’d  upon  the  Pradieai  Au¬ 
thors,  I  name  you,  when  fearful  of  com¬ 
mitting  my  Circa fs  to  new  Phyficians,  I 
made  life,;  as  I  told  you,  of  nothing  but 
the  Pr'efcripctons  of  the  old  one,  that  had 

torfaken 


(  *»  ) 

forfaken  me.  To  thefe  I  ftuck  for  above 
half  a  .Year  5  but  at  that  time,  when  as  1 
remember  I  was  newly  enter'd  into  my 
Forty  fourth  Year,  worfe  Symptoms  ftan> 

■  ing  every  Day,  myllinefs  vifibly  ehcreas’d  3 
for.  befides  the  unfiv.ory  Belchings,  and  con¬ 
tinually  Croaking  Borbmgmi ,  the  Phlogofes 
all  over,  and  the  gnawing  Pain*  rrs  well  as 
diftenfion  of  my  Stomach,  which  were  be¬ 
come  aim  off  habitual  to  me,  I  frequently 
had  ftrong  Pulfations  and  cruel  thumpings 
in  my  Belly,  efpecially  in  the  left  fide  of 
it :  I  often  Vomited  prefently  after  Meals, 
tho*  commonly  I  eat  voracioufly,  and  had 
slmoft  a  Canine  Appetite:  I  had  pricking 
and  fometimes  (hooting  pains  in  my  Bowels, 
in  which  like  wife  I  often  felt  Teefions, 
Snatciiings,  and  Convulfive  pullings The 
fame  I  had  now  and  then  in  my  Navel, 
as  if  that  part  of  ray  Belly  had  been  drawn 
downward  .•  At  fometimes  I  had  oppref- 
fions  at  my  Heart,  and  great  fqueezings  of 
the  Pr£cordia,  that  fafted  a  whole  Day, 
and  again  at  others  I  had  for  two  o~  three 
Days  together  ftrange  torments  in  my  Back 
and  Belly,  that  refernblcd  Cholick  and 
Nepbritick  Pains ;  the  fame  I  often  had  in 
my  Stomach  ^  and  1  have  thought  more 
1  than  once,  that  within  my  Trunk  and  all 
the  noble  Vifcera  it  contains,  I  felt  the  fame, 
that  thofcj  who  are  afflicted  with  the 

'  C  ]  Arthritis 


I 


( 1*  ) 

Arthritis  vaga,  compl  in  of  only  in  the 
joints  of  their  Limbs,  and  the  outlides  of 
them.  ■ 

Till  I  was  "Eight  or  Nine  and  Thirty 
my  Body  had  been  always  Lubrick,  and  l 
had  feldom  lefs  than-  Two  Stools  in  Four 
and  Twenty  Hours  3  but  then  this  good 
quality  left  me  by  degrees,  and  when  I 
was  One  and  Forty  I  hardly  had  one  :  Till 
growing  ftill  Conjugation's  alvi ,  I  had 
often  been  bound  for  two  or  three  Days 
together  5  yet  the  Coftivenefs  I  fpeak  of 
had  hitherto  given  me  little  or  no  diftur- 
bance  3  becaufe  gentle  Laxatives ,  efpecially 
thole,  that  are  proper  in  Tenjions ,  which 
you  call  Chalafiica,  had  feldom  fail’d  of 
removing  it  3  but  now  it  began  to  be  what 
1  dreaded  moll  3  becaufe  Nature  would 
bearken  no  longer  to  thofe  eafie  Medicines, 
and  all  Eccoprotica  were  ineffectual  3  be¬ 
sides  that,  ventre  claufo,  the  then  reigning 
Symptoms  inemdefeebant  vifiblyj  I  fay  the 
then  reigning  5  becaufe  I  never  was  with¬ 
out  three  or  four  of  thofe,  I  have  men¬ 
tion’d  3  or  elfe  if  they  remitted,  and  I  was 
pretty  eafie  in  my  Belly  and  Thorax,  in- 
fieal  of  them  I  had  violent  Head-  achs, 
which  till  I  was  Three  and  Forty  I  never 
had  been  troubled  with :  Tbefe  Pains  com¬ 
monly  were  llicceeded  with  Vertigo's,  and  f 
often  dagger'd  as  if  I  had  been  Drunk, 
f '  >’  efpecially* 


('Ll) 

efpecialJy,  if  I  look’d  up  hafHly  or  made 
i  any  other  quick  motion  of  a  fudden.  The 
clear  Water  I  u(ed  to  fetch  off  my  Sto¬ 
mach  in  the  Morning,  which  was  one  of 
the  earliest  Symptoms  I  complain’d  of5 
upon  my  taking  of  Tobacco  had  left  me* 
and  l  had  not  obferv’d  it  for  two  or  fhree 
Years  3  but  in  the  room  of  it  was  by  degrees 
come  upon  me  a  continual  Spitting,  which 
was  always  worfe,  when  I  was  mod  con- 
ftipated  3  but  yet,  what  I  wonder'd  at,  ne¬ 
ver  made  me  a  dry. 

When  the  Difeafe  was  got  up  into  my 
Head*  even  tho’  the  Pain  was  tolerable* 
I  always  was  troubled  with  fevere  watch¬ 
ings,  and  lay  toiling  whole  Nights  without 
clofing  my  Eyes,  and  if  I  did*  I  either 
Dream'd  of  being  Robb’d*  of  Murder, 
or  elfe  falling  from  a  Precipice,  Drown¬ 
ing*  or  that  1  was  bang'd.  Sure  Dido  T&d 
fomething  of  my  Didemper. 

Ann  a  Sor or  me  jufpenfam  infomma  fervent  ? 

The  fleeps  I  had  were  ever  di- 
fturb’d  and  wearied  indead  of  reviving 
me  3  I  generally  wak’d  out  of  ’em  in  a 
fright,  and  often  in  cold  Sweats.  When 
thefe  disorders  in  ip  pi  arce ,  &1  fede  anim£y 
had  laded  for  feme  time*  ftrange  roving 
thoughts  would  hide  through  ray  Brain, 

C  4  and 


(  M  )  " 

%n&  wild  as  well  ss  ridiculous  Fancies  ftole 
upon  me,  and  for  a  while  employ'd  my 
Imagination.  I  had  often  unaccountable 
apprehensions  of  things,  which,  tho’  one 
moment  I  thought  ’em  abfurd,  I  could 
hardly  conquer  the  next  with  all  my 
ftrength  of  Reafon.  Wdien  I  was  a  Minute 
at  quiet  and  ha‘d  leifure  io  refleft  upon  the 
mifery  of  my  Condition,!  was  touch’d  with 
an  unfpeakable  concern,  to  think  that  the 
cruel  Diftemper  had  now  likewife  invaded 
my  Soul,  as  before  it  had  tyranniz’d  over 
my  Body  only.  Thefe  disturbances  in  my 
Head  1  fddoin  fail’d  of,  when  I  was  more 
than  ordinary  Coftive,  which  !  was  fore  to 
be,  if  I  neglected  Purging  5  for  fomerimes 
in  a  Month  or  fix  Weeks,  I  have  had  no 
Stools,  but  what  were  provokM  by  ffrong 
Cathariickls^  that  by  canting  great  Tenjfons  in 
my  Bowels,  firft  tortured  tne  in  the  work¬ 
ing,  and  after  it  by  bcnuming  the  Fibres 
of  th e  lntejiina}  (but  up  my  Body  more  Per- 
tinacioufly,  than  they  found  it. 

If  ever  1  voided  any  thing  naturally,  f! 
mean  without  taking  Phyfick)  it  was  al¬ 
ways  blackifh,  and  hard  $  and  no  Excre¬ 
ments  came  away,  but  with  long  draining 
and  violent  Pain.  This  often  brought  the 
hemorrhoids  upon  me  ,  but  they  were  the 
internal,  ccec^^  &  furentes.  Think  not 
that  I  bore  all  this  without  feeking  out  for 
new  Remedies:  Sometimes  I  feat  for  two 

or 


.  f  *5.) 

of  three  Phyflciaps  at  a  time ;  when  any  of 
the  Pains-,  I  havd  mention’d ,  were  exceffiye,  ^ 
I  try’d  every  thing,  that  was  told  me  2 
Such  a  Syndrome  of  Evils  made  me  weary 
of  my  Life,,  and  when  the  Symptoms  be¬ 
gan  to  be  urgent,  all  my  former  dread  a- 
gainft  Phyfick  was  vantth’d.  ’Tis  incre¬ 
dible  what  Prefcriptions  I  have  fubmitred 
to,  and  what  naufeous  loads  I  have  taken 
in  vain  5  not  but  that  !  had  relief  by  fome 
Medicines,  but  none  for  above  two  Years* 
that  was  of  any  duration.  I  have  been 
tolerably  well  for  a  Week,  and  perhaps 
continued  a  Fortnight  without  being  very 
ill,  but  this  was  the  rnoft,  and  if  I  was  a 
whole  Day  altogether  at  eafe,  I  thought 
my  fe!f  in  Heaven;  till  after  having  been 
extremely  bad  for  Ten  Days  without  fo 
much  as  any  remiffion,  of  a  fudden,  by  a 
very  Copious  Flux  of  the  Hemorrhoids y 
which  had  never  run  before,  I  was  wonder¬ 
fully  reliev’d  5  whilft  this  Flux  lafted  I 
mended  every  Flour,  at  a  Weeks  end  I 
was  almoft  perfe&ly  well,  without  relap- 
ling  when  it  hope ;  This  happen’d  in  the 
Spring,  and  was  Nine  Years  ago  laff 
April , 

!  remain’d  in  tolerable  Health  all  the 
fucceeding  Summer,  and,*  to  prevent  the 
return  of  my  Difternper,  I  went  through  a 
5;ed  Courfe,  and  after  that  to 'the  Bath, 
where  I  drank  the  hot  Waters  the  whole 

Autumn 


(  **  ) 

[Autumn  Seafon  $  and  ufing  much  Exerdfe, 
efpecially  Riding,  I  continu’d  very  well : 
But  this  was  the  longed  in  ter  million  I 
ever  had;  finee  my  Diftemper  came  to  the 
height  to  this  Day.  By  that  time  l  had 
been  a  few  Weeks  return’d  from 'the  Bath, 
and  Winter  was  come  I  grew  worfe  again, 
but  as  the  Summer  before  had  been  more 
favourable  to  me,  than  any  I  have  liv’d 
after  it,  fo  that  was  the  eafieft  Winter  I 
have  had  ever  fince.  The  next  Summer  I 
was  indifferent,  had  fome  (harp  rubs,  but 
they  were  of  no  long  continuance,  and 
fomedmes  I  was  pretty  well  for  a  Month  3 
at  the  latter  end  of  it  I  obferv’d,  that  the 
Weather  began  to  have  a  great  influence 
upon  me:  The  Winter  that  fucceeded  it  I 
was  very  ill,  and  at  times  as  bad  as  ever. 
Thus  have  I  continued  much,  after  the 
fame  rate  riling  and  falling  for  thefe  Seven 
Tears  laft  pa  ft,  of  which  the  greateft  part 
I  have  been  ill,  fometimes  indifferent,  very 
farely  well,  but  often  extremely  bad  $  fo 
that  if  I  live  till  OBober  next  I  fhall  have 
been  Twelve  Years,  reckoning  from  the 
beginning  of  my  Forty  Fourth,  an  Hypc- 
chondriacus  Confirmatus.  When  I  am  at  heft 
I  am  a  Crazy  Valetudinarian ,  always  forced 
to  obferve  fo  drift  a  regularity  in  all  my 
Conduft,  as  well  as  my  Diet,  and  fo  nicely 
circumfpeft  in  every  thing  I  do,  that  I  can 

never 


(  *7  )  _ 

never  enjoy  even  that  fmali  Portion  of 
Health,  that  falls  to  my  ftiare,  and  I  fo 
feldoai  am  blefs’d  with :  The  leaft  trefpaft, 
nay  the  leaft  overfight  draws  on  roe  the 
word  of  Symptoms,  being  always  obliged 
either  to  fight  againft,  orelfe  labour  under 
my  'Diftemper  which  makes  my  Life  as 
miferable,  as  my  Confutation* 

As  to  the  Remedies  I  have  made  ufe  of 
the  greateft  part  of  that  time,  whether  the 
Effeft  has  been  good  or  bad,  I  am  as  much 
beholden  for  what  I  know  of  ’em  to  the 
Dead,  as  I  am  to  the  Living,  for  tho5  the 
i  increafe  of  my  Diftemper  foon  after  my 
I  Forty  Third  Year  would  not  for  a  great 
|  while  allow  me  to  read  much,  or  follow 
any  thing  of  either  Bufinefs  or  Diverfion; 
yet  after  that  violent  long  one,  I  never 
;  had  any  Illnefs,  that  without  intermiiiion 
lafted  for  fix  Months  together^  and  im- 
!  proving  every  interval  of  Eafe  I  have  fince 
ftudied  Phyfick  with  as  much  application, 
as  my  Strength  would  permit  me.  Having 
gone  through  the  Practical  Authors,  wkh 

I  which  as  I  told  you,  I  began,  i  went  over 
to  Fernelius ,  Senmrtus ,  Jacotius ,  Satins,  Va- 
rancLeusj  Zecchius ,  Thomas  a  Veiga7  Rive- 
rius ?  Forejlus >  and  feveral  others  of  the 
firft  rank  among  the  Learned  :  After  them 
1  I  confulced  thofe,  that  had  found  fault 
'  with  others,  as  Cardan,  SanBomus,  theVj- 
fo  .  ■*  '  lummoue 


(  IS  ) 


luminous. Mercatus,  Ferrerius,  See.  not  for¬ 
getting  the  excellent  Cautions  of  Ballonius* 
or  the  Animadverfiqns  of  the  Learn¬ 
ed  Sept  alius :  1  carefully  examin’d  every 
body,  that  had  any  ways  dwell’d  upon 
my  Diftemper,  efpecially  Clmdtnus ,  Agri- 
col  a  Martini  ,  Wedelius ,  Flartmannus^ 
Matihiolns ,  Doringius ,  Rhodius ,  Petrous 
Fifcherus ,  and  both  thofe  lower  Shelves : 
Seeing  that  the  Neoierici  often  confounded 
the  malum  Hypochondriacum  with  the  Scur¬ 
vy,  I  likewife  read  the  moil  valuable  of 
all  thofe*  that  had  purpofely  writ  of  the 
latter  $  as  Drawifins,  Horjiius ,  Eugalenus, 
Reufnerus ,  Lind  anus,  &c« 

As  to  Medicines  and  Prefcriptions,  I 
hav£  run  over  moft  cf  the  Pharmacopceds, 
that  are  exfiant,  efpecially  the  Augufiana, 
with  Z  we  l ferns,  that  Correfted  it}  I  have 
read  Scroderm,  Morel  Ins,  ££uercetanusf  & 
inflar  omnium ,  the  Sylva  Medic  a  of  Wal- 
therus :  But  how  fmall  is  the  reward  for 
evolving  fo  many  Voluminous  Authors, 
when  the  only  benefit  that  l  have  reaps 
from  my  Labour,  and  the  up  (hot  of  all 
my  Studies  in  Phyfick,  is,  that  I  know  it 
to  be  a  deceitful  Art,  that  is  never  to  be 
relied  on  !  for  if  weconfider,  how  ftrange- 
lv  the  greateft  Phyficians  have  difagreed  in 
the  moft  effentiai  Points  of  their  Art,  the 
multitude  of  Opinions*  Sects,  and  Factions 


that 


(  19  ) 

that  have  been' among  them  ,  their  hatred* 
animofities,  and  ridiculing  of  one  another. 
ProfeSo  non  fine  nota  G diems  tranfeat  quin 
rifu  exoifialur,  fays  van  Helmont  de  febnhus * 
If  alter'  that  we  obferve  bow  various  and 
oppofite  to  each  other,  their  Hypothecs 
have  been,  on  which  they  Jiave  built  all 
the  reft,  how  Precarious  the  beft  of  them 
are,  and  yet  how  ftrenuoufly  they  have  all 
been  defended  by  their  feveral  Authors, 
and  thofe  that  adhered  to  them,  every 
one  pretending  by  his  own  Syftem  exaftly 
to  folve  all  Phenomena ,  and  to  be  an  un» 
cootroulable  Expounder  of  the  Myfteries 
of  Nature,  .  which  yet  is  but  one  5  and 
without  doubt  has  always  been  the  fame. 
If  we  mind  how  Hyperbolical  their  Praifes, 
and  how  impudent  fame  of  their  affertions 
are,  which  they  have  left  us  upon  record 
of  the  Ufe,  and  Vertues  both  of  Simple- 
and  Compound  Medicines':  With  what 
feeming  Candour  and  fometimes  folenio 
Affeverations  they  profefs,  that  they’ll  ne* 
ver  fail  of  producing  the  effects,  which 
they  promife  of  them,  and  yet  how  often 
they  delude,  or  rather  how  feldorn  any 
of  them  anfwer  the  expedition  of  him 
that  tries  them  ;  How  much  they  differ  in 
the  very  Seats  as  well  as  Caofes  of 
Diftempers  5  how  notortoofly  they  con- 
tradid  one  another  to  this  Day,  even 

in 


.(  ) 

in  the  method  of  Curing,  which  is  the 
very  end  of  Phyfick  t,  and  this  not  only  in 
the  fame  Nations,  Univerficies  and  Cities, 
but  within  the  hearing’of  the  lame  Patients. 
If,  I  fay,  we  confider  all  this,  and  how 
little  their  grcateft  quarrels  are  likely  to  be 
decided,  we  may  conclude  that  the  Art  of 
Phyfick  is  no  more  to  be  depended  upon 
than  that  of  Aftrology,  and  that  even  the 
Learned  Profeffors  of  the  firft  have  rendred 
themielves  neither  lefs  ridiculous  or  more 
beneficial  to  the  Publick  than  the  Ignorant 
Pretenders  to  the  latter. 

Not  that  I  think  the  fault  lies  in  the 
Phyficians :  Many  are  Men  of  Senee  and 
Learning,  which  I  efteetn  and  honour, 
but  I  ant  perfwaded,  that  the  Art  it  felf 
is  Fallacious,  and  really  pity  thofe,  that 
have  taken  inch  vaft  pains,  as  the  Study  of 
it  requires,  to  fa  little  purpofe  in  the  main. 
1  beg  fbur  Pardon,  Philopmo,  for  the 
freedom  l  take  with  you,  I  fpeak  as  I 
think,  and  (hall  be  glad  to  be  convinced 
of  the  co  itmy,  wherefore  before  you 
give  me  your  Opinion  about  my-Diftemper, 
if  yeuil  take  the  trouble  of  (hewing  me 
that  there  i$  any  certainty  in  Phyfick,  erh 
t/iihi  wagnus  Apollo ,  and  I  (hall  hearken  to 
you  wi  h  as  much  attention,  as  you  have 
had  Patience  in  hearing  me. 

Phh 


* 


(  3*  ) 

Phi.  That  the  Arrogance  of  Phyficians  in 
general,  and  the  great  Knowledge,  which 
they  are  oblig’d  to  pretend  to,  are  deler- 
vedly  Cenfor'd,  and  Ridicul’d  by  all  Men 
of  Sene*,  that  examine  into  the  refult  of 
their  Praftice,  I  am  very  willing  to  allow, 
but  I  cannot  agree  with  you,  if  you  would 
charge  the  truly  Noble  and  Divine  Art  it 
felf  with  what  is  only  to  be  imputed  to 
the  Pride,  Avarice,  or  Lazinefs  of  thofe 
that  with  fo  much  haughtinefs  boaft  them- 
felves  to  be  the  ProfefTors  of  it,  when  in 
reality  they  negled  and  defpife  it. 

A  Young  Gentleman,  that  underftands 
Latin,  takes  his  Pleafure  at  fome  Univerfity, 
or  other,  for  Six,  or  Seven  Years,  in  which 
having  at  his  leifure  Hours  gone  through 
the  ufual  Stages  of  Logick,  natural  Philo- 
fophy,  Anatomy,  Botany,  and  perhaps 
Chymiftry,  he  learns  by  heart  all  the  Di- 
ftempers  from  Head  to  Foot,  incident  to 
humane  Bodies,  a  few  figns,  by  which  they 
are  known,  and  diftinguifh  d  from  one 
another,  and  what  Prognoftication  is  com¬ 
monly  made  upon  every  one  of  them, 
with  the  Method  of  Cure  and  fuch  Re¬ 
medies,  as  the  Author  he  reads  is  pleas’d  to 
infert  and  recommend  .•  The  Gentleman 
thus  inftrufted  being  honour’d  with  his 
Degree,  which  cannot  be  denied  him,  is 
ton  fill  red  in  the  tnoft  difficult  Cafes,  is  ready 

to 


'  .  .0.0- 

to  defend  his  Opinion  in  Mode  and  Figure 
againft  all  Oppofers,  and  thinks  himfelf 
qualified  to  be  Phyfician  to  the  greateft 
Monarch  in  the  Univerfe,  and  jet  it  is  cer¬ 
tain,  that  fuch  a  one  is  no  more  capable 
of  dilcharging  the  weighty  Office  of 
Phyfician,  than  a  Man,  that  ftiould  Study 
Opri  cks,  Proportions,  and  read  of  Paint¬ 
ing  and  mixing  of  Colours  for  as  many 
Years,  would  without  having  ever  touch’d 
a  Pencil,  be  able  to  perform  the  part  of  a 
good  Hiftory  Painter. 

I  own  that  the  Studies  I  have  named 
are  neceffary  for  all  young  beginners,  but 
they  only  make  up  the  Eafie,  the  Pleafant, 
the  Speculative  part  of  Pbyfick  :  The  Te¬ 
dious,  the  Difficult,  bat  the  only  ufelal, 
in  regard  of  others,  the  Pra&ica!  part  which 
is  not  attempted  by  many,  is  only  attain’d 
by  an  almoft  everlafting  attendance  on  the 
Sick,  unwearied  Patience,  and  Judicious 
as  well  as  Diligent  Obfervation. 

This  is  the  Art  it  felf,  to  which  all  the 
Studies  I  named  before  are  but  the  Proce- 
mhim  ;  This  the  Schola  Co  a,  and  the  great- 
eft  of  its  Members,  Hippocrates ,  with  lb  me 
few  of  his  followers  profefs’d  5  but  being 
too  fever  e,  unpleafing  and  tirefome,  it  has 
been  little  regarded  for  many  Ages,  and  it 
is  chiefly  to  the  Ancients  that  we  are  be¬ 
holden  for  what  we  know  of  it.  As 

the 


(  n  ) 

;i  the  World  grows  wifer,  Phyficians  of  later 
ij  times  have  found  out  more  Compendious 
i  ways  to  Renown  and  Riches  :  By  applying 
themfelves  particularly  to  Anatomy,  Chy- 
lj'  miftry,  &c.  and  writing  of,  or  performing 
fomething  with  accuracy  in  any  one  of 
!  the  (hallow  auxiliary  Arts,  that  all  together 
Compofe  the  Theory  of  Phyfick,  they 
know  how  to  infinuate  themfelves  into  the 
publick  Favour^  and  from  their  giving  proofs 
of  their  underftanding  one  inconfiderable 
\  branch  of  their  Art,  are  ftupidly  believ’d 
]  to  be  equally  skill’d  in  the  whole.  The 
1  great  Anatomift  that  Artfully  Diflefts  the 
!j  Dead  Body  of  a  Malefactor  (hall  be  trufted 
j  with  the  live  one  of  the  judge,  till  he  has 
fitted  it  for  his  purpofe.  The  witty  Phi- 

Ilofopher,  who  can  fo  exaftly  tell  you, 
which  way  the  World  was  made,  that  one 
would  think  he  muft  have  had  a  hand  in 
it,  Cares  all  Bifeafes  by  Hypothefis,  fright¬ 
ens  away  the  Gout  with  a  fine  Simile,  but 
oftner  reafons  a  trifling  Diftemper  into  a 

IConfumption.  Bat  fays  the  Botanift,  non 
verbis  fed  herbis :  Fie  that  by  the  colour 
and  fhape  of  Seeds  can  foretell  what  Leaves 
and  Flowers  the  Plants  will  produce  is  no 
Small  Phyfician,  and  muft  have  a  great  in¬ 
fight  into  the  Seeds  of  Difeafes ;  Being  fo  & 
well  acquainted' with  the  Virtues  of  all  the 
|  Simples,  he  knows,  without  doubt,  what 

D  will 

I  -  ’  "  V-'  "  v  ■  'f'.-  V  " 

\m  ■  •  - 


(  H  ), 

will  Cure  you,  if  God  has  created  if.  The 
boafting  Chymift  values  himfelf  above  the 
reft,  fince  by  the  force  of  Fire,  (he’ll  tell 
you)  and  his  Menfimum  he  exalts  the  Mi¬ 
nerals  to  a  higher  pitch  of  perfe&ion  than 
their  Soil  or  Climate  could  ever  have  rais’d 
them,  and  defpifing  the  efficacy  of  Simples, 
puts  Nature  her  felf  upon  the  rack  to  make 
her  confefs,  what  Medicines  (foe  has  within 
her. 

Mtfom.  Thefe  I  have  always  look’d  upon 
as  the  only  valuable  branches  of  Phyfick  : 
How  do  you  call  them  inconfiderable  ?  Can 
any  Man  pretend  to  a  Methodical  Practice 
without  them  ? 

Philop,  I  only  call  them  fo  in  refpeft  to 
the  main  Practice  it  felf,  and  would  by  no 
means  admit  of  a  Phyfician,  that  (hould 
not  be  vers’d  in  them  $  nay  I  would  have 
publick  Profefibrs,  that  fhould  not  only  in- 
fmed  others,  but  fpend  mod  of  their  Time 
in  making  new  Experiments,  and  if  poffibie 
further  difcoveries  in  every  one  of  thofe 
ufeful  Arts  ^  but  not,  that  People  fhould 
ridicuioufly  pretend,  that  for  having  more 
particularly  ftudied  and  taken  pains  in  any 
one  of  them,  they  underftood  the  practice 
of  Phyfick :  Such  as  are  defign’d  for  the 
1  Praftical  part  might  content  themfelves  with; 
learning  as  much  of  the  Theory  as  is  com¬ 
monly  taught  in  one,  ©r  at  mo  ft  two  Courfesr 

of 


(  35  ) 


of  each  Branch,  and  after  that  prefently  go 
over  to  fteddy  Obfervation,  which  to  per* 
fett  them  in  they  want  above  Twenty 
Lives  :  If  what  I  fay  feems  Hyperbolical 
and  you  would  have  an  ample  view  of  the 
fhortnefs  of  Life,  in  regard  to  the  length 
of  Time,  required  to  learn  the  Art,  caft 
your  Eye  on  the  Complaint  of  the  Divine 
Hippocrates  ^  that  prodigious  Man  after  he 
had  lived  fo  long,  and  made  fuch  an  in¬ 
conceivable  ufe  of  his  Time, was  yet  fo  Con- 
feious,  and  fo  full  of  the  Truth  of  it,  that 
he  had  not  the  power  to  begin  his  Apho- 
rifms,  the  very  Marrow  and  Quint  effence  of 
Practice,  without  difclofing  it:  l  bIG- 

*Tis  Obferva  ion,  plain  Ob- 
fervation  without  difeanting  or  reafbning 
upon  it  that  makes  the  Art,  and  all,  that 
negle&ing  this  main  point  have  drove  to 
itnbellifh  it  with  the  Fruits  of  their  Brain, 
have  but  crampt  and  confounded  if.  Si  ex~ 
cipias  enim ,  fays  a  Learned  Author,  Paucos 
illos  objervatoresj  qui  Cafus  Hiflorias  Me- 
dicas  diligenter ,  f dicker  &  ad  vivum  front,  ab 
ipfa  ret  natura  procedebantj  deferihendo ,  Afc- 
dicinz  pomceria  jitmmopere  ampliarunt^  ea  qu& 
reliqui  adjecere ,  faljam  theoriam ,  hnjuf* 
modi  ineptias  fpe&antid)  turbarunt  pot  ins  im¬ 
ps  diver  unique  itlius  progrejfus  quam  in  di¬ 
car  unt  aut  promovermt .  Where  fli all  you 
find  a  Phyfician  now  a® days,  that  makes 

D  z  that 


( ) 

that  ftay  with  his  Patients,  which  it  is 
plain,  the  /indents  muft  have  dene  to  make 
the  noble  Prognofticks  we  have  from  them. 
But  this  would  not  only  be  too  laborious, 
but  a  tedious  way  of  getting  Money  5  felf- 
intereft  now  gives  better  leffons  to  young 
Pbyficians.  If  you  are  not  extraordinary 
in  any  of  the  Branches  I  have  named,  ra¬ 
ther  than  t!  t  y on  fhould  fpeod  your  Time 
before  the  fquallid  Beds  of  poor  Patients, 
and  bear  with  the  unfavory  fmells  of  a 
crouded  Hofpital,  fliew  your  fell  a  Scholar, 
write  a  Poem,  either  a  good  one,  or  a  large 
one  $  Compofe  a  Latin  Oration,  or  do  but 
Tranflate  fomething  out  of  that  Language 
with  your  Name-  to  it.  If  you  can  do 
none  of  all  thefe,  Marry  into  a  good  Fa¬ 
mily,  and  your  Relations  will  help  you  in¬ 
to  Practice :  Or  elfe  cringe  and  make  your 
court  to  half  a  dozen  noted  Apothecaries, 
prcraife  ’em  to  prefcribe  loads  of  Phyfick, 
never  to  forget  the  Melodious  found  of 
Bolus ,  and  always  to  make  your  Bills  like 
the  Chimes. of  the  Exchange ,  Ring  with  a 
repet  at  ur  tertia  quaque  hora  :  Nay,  get  but 
in  favour  with  one  that  has  great  Bufinefs 
and  yours  is  done.  Otherwife  be  a  rigid 
Party-Man,  it  is  all  one,  Whig  or  Tory>  fo 
you  are  but  violent  enough  [of  either  fide  $ 
or  if  you  can  Chat,  and  be  a  good  Com¬ 
panion,  you  may  Drink  your  felf  into  Pra¬ 
ctice  3 


(  17  ) 

ftice  $  but  if  you  are  too  dull  for  what  I 
have  hitherto  named,  and  in  reality  good 
for  nothing,  you  muft  fay  little  and  he 
civil  to  all  the  World,  keep  a  fet  of  Coffee- 
Houfes,  obferve  your  certain  Hours,  and 
take  care  you  are  often  fent  for,  where  you 
are,  and  ask’d  for  where  you  are  not  5  bun 
tho’  in  them  you  are  forced  to  fit  idle  and 
loiter  away  your  time  all  day  long,  yet 
out  of  ’em  always,  Counterfeit  a  Man  that  is 
in  hafte  and  wanted  in  a  great  many  places  5 
as  for  the  reft  ftudy  what  Demea  faid  of 
his  Brother,  to  be  Clemens ,  plactdus^  nulli  os 
l<sdere ,  arridere  omnibus  5  contradift  no  body, 
never  open  your  Lips  without  a  Smile,  and 
give  no  peace  to  your  Hat, 

Thus  you  may  fee,  that  there  is  abun¬ 
dance  of  difference  between  the  Art  of 
Phyfick  and  the  Practice  of  Phyficians* 
Non  enim  jam  ( Indent  homines ,  ut  artis  quam 
profitentur  periti  pant ,  fed  ut  fuam  qualem- 
cunque  periti  am  aliis  care  vend  ant. 

Mifom.  What  I  have  ftudy’d  of  Phyfick, 
I  confefs  is  only  the  Theoretick  part,  and 
1  have  no  experience,  but  ..what  to  my 
Coft,  in  relation  of  toy  own  tllnefs,  I  havo 
learffd  upon  my  felf  ^  but  if  it  be  true, 
quod  utilitate  ho  minis  nil  debet  cjfe  ho  mini 
antiquius,  Why  (hould  any  Man  trouble  hiss 
head  with  what  he  could  not  compafs,  if 
he  had  twenty  Lives,  and  which  way  do 
■  .  |  '  fr-J  D  3  you 


(  ?8  ) 

you  judge  of  the  certainty  of  an  Art  that 
no  body  was  ever  Mafter  of  ? 

Philo .  Ex  ungue  leonem  :  From  the  lad¬ 
ing  truth  we  difcover  in  all  thofe  Rules, 
that  once,  tho1  many  Ages  ago,  have  been 
made  by  repeated  and  judicious  Experience. 
Mod  of  the  Dtagnoftick  Signs  and  Predicti¬ 
ons  on  every  Symptom,  which  Hippocrates, 
Celias  Aurcliams ,  and  a  few  more  Greeks 
have  left  us,  as  they  are  the  refult  of  folid 
Obfervation  will  continue  to  be  faithful 
guides  to  all  that  can  make  ufe  of  them, 
as  long  as  humane  Bodies,  and  Nature  it 
felf  remain.  As  for  the  Labour  and  Time 
requir’d  to  make  a  tolerable  Proficient  in 
Phyfick,  1  refer  you  to  the  Learned  Baglive , 
which  being  a  late  Author  of  Note,  I  don’t 
queftion  but  you  have  feen. 

Mifom .  I  have  read  him  aimed  as  foon 
as  he  came  out  ;  here  he  dands* 

Bhih  If  what  he  propofes  was  put  in 
praftice,  Phyfick  might  foon  be  improved, 
and  the  Rules  of  it  in  Twenty  or  Thirty 
Years  time  brought  to  a  great  perfection. 

Mifom.  But  what  Univerfity  would  be  at 
the  charge  of  keeping  fo  many  Phyficians  > 
For  I  think,  he  would  have  two  for  every 
Diftemper,  that  fhould  ftudy  nothing  elfe 
wfcifaeir  Life-time;  One  to  read  whatever 
lias  been  writ  of  it,  and  from  that  colled 
a!!  what  might  be  of  pradical  ufe,  another 

to 


{  19  ) 

to  be  conft&ntly  near  the  Patients  Bed-fiae, 
and  faithfully  fet  down  every  Symptom* 
nay  every  motion  he  di  fee  vers. 

Phil.  Not  only  fo :  But  fpeaking  of  him* 
that  is  to  attend  the  Sick,  and  confidering, 
what  he  is  to  do,  he  fays :  aperte  co?tjlat 
nnius  hominis  vitam  vix ,  ac  m  vix  quidem^ 
futuram  fatis  ad  unum  duntaxdt  morbum  per* 
fecle  illuflrandum.  From  thefe  joint  Obser¬ 
vations  he  would  have  em  draw  fhort  and 
diftinft  Conclufions  by  way  of  Aphorifms 
without  Art  or  Flourifh  to  ferve  for  hand** 
ing  Rules  in  Pradice,as  without  doubt  they 
would  be  to  all  Pofterity.  Before  this  is  done, 
it  is  not  to  be  expe&ed,  that  one  Man  (hould 
underftand  the  whole  Art,  which  Galen 
knew  very  well,  when  he  faid  5  Cum  enim 
uniu  t  hominis  vita  ad  omnium  invention 
turn  fufficere  nequeat  longi  temporis  ohjerva -» 
tiones  hijioria  colligit ,  ut  ejus  heneficio  tan* 
quant  ex  multis  tot  ftculorum  hominibus  units 
ejjiciatur  eruditijjimus. 

Mifom.  But  if  the  Phyficians  don’t  go 
fafter  about  making  Obfervations  than 
they  have  done  thefe  Twelve  or  Fourteen 
Hundred  Years,  and  we  mu  ft  have  none  to 
be  depended  upon  till  our  Univerfiries  put 
BaglivC s  Projeft  in  execution,  rhe  homo 
ernditijjinms  in  the  Practice  of  Phyfick, 
which  Galen  fpeaks  of  is  a  good  way  off 
yet,  and  J  believe,  that  our  Great  Grand** 

D  4  Children 


(40) 

Children  will  hardly  have  ever  the  happinefs 
to  fee  him. 

Phil.  1  am  afraid  fo  too :  Therefore  e- 
very  Phyfician,  that  would  difcharge  his 
Confidence,  ought  as  much,  as  he  can  in  his 
private  Capacity,  to  fupply  the  negled  of 
the  Publick,  and  wholly  apply  himfelf  to 
the  ftudy  of  one  Diftemper  only. 

Mifom .  I  confefs^  that,  hearing  the  Hy- 
pochondriack  and  Hyfte'rick  Paliions  were 
the  chief  of  your  pradice,  I  was  willing  to 
fee  you  for  that  reafoo. 

Phil .  Thefe  indeed  I  call  ray  Province. 

Mifom .  I  mud  tell  you,  as  Dawns  did  to 
Get  a  in  the  Phormio  :  Pr  ovine  jam  cep  fit 
dunam.  . 

Phil.  I  own ’t is  a  difficult  one  5  but  DU 
labor  thus  omnia  vendunt  5  Application  makes 
every  thing  eafie,  tho*  l  (liould  hardly  have 
ventur’d  upon  ir,  if  I  had  not  feen  feme- 
•  thing  of  it,  a  teneris ,  and  been  led  into  it 
by  the  long  experience  of  a  Father  before 
me,  who,  when  he  died  had  been  a  Phy¬ 
fician  above  38  Years,  in  two  very  Popu¬ 
lous  Cities,  and  as  he  had  feme  fuccefs  in 
the  Difterapers  we  ipeak  of,  at  the  very 
beginning  of  his  Prafti.ce,  tho?  it  was  general, 
fo  it  cannot  be  imagin’d,  but  that  through 
the  whole  courfe  of  it  he  muft  have  feen 
numbers  of  Patients  that  labour’d  under 
them. 

Mfom . 


:  (  4*  ) 

Mifom .  Since  we  are  fo  infenfibly  come 
back  to  what  I  Ail,  and  you  profefs  to 
Cure  $  with  your  leave  for  the  prefent  well 
have  no  more  of  Phyfick  than  as  it  relates 
to  my  Diftemper,  tfao*  I  am  mightily  pleas’d 
with  the  digreffion  we  made,  and  fhall  be 
very  glad  to  hear  you  enlarge  upon  the 
fame  fubjeft  at  another  time  *•  You  and  I 
muft  be  better  acquainted,  Philopirio  $  if 
your  Medicines  do  me  no  good,  I  am  fore* 
your  Company  will :  *  One  thing  above  the 
reft  I  admire  in  you,  and  that’s  your  Pa¬ 
tience,  which  muft  be  uoaffeded,  becaufe 
you  can  be  gay  in  the  exereife  of  it.  You 
can’t  imagine,  how  a  pertinent  lively  dift 
courfe,  or  any  thing  that  is  fprightly  re¬ 
vives  my  Spirits*  1  don’t  know,  what  it  is 
that  makes  me  fo,  whether  it  be  our  talking 
together,  the  Serenity  of  the  Air,  or  both  j 
but  1  enjoy  abundance  of  Pleafure,  and  this 
moment,  methinks,  I  am  as  well,  as  ever  I 
was  in  my  Life  :  The  beginning  of  J me  I 
have  obferv’d  for  feme  Years  always  agrees 
with  me,  very  well,  and  the  long  continu¬ 
ance  we  have  had  of  fine  Weather,  Ifanfie, 
has  done  me  a  great  deal  of  good  $  I  have 
been  very  ' eafie  thefe  Eight  Days  5  only 
laft  Night  l  had  a  pretty  fevere  fit  of  the 
Cholick.  How  ftrange  a  thing  is  this  Di« 
(temper  of  mine!  to  be  fo  extraordinary 
well  between  whiles,  as  I  am  now,  md 

fometinies 


'  (  4*  ) 

fometimes  to  be  plung’d  into  fucb  an  abyfs 
of  Mifery,  as  I  have  often  been  both  to 
Body  and  Mind  5  nay,  I  cannot  think  of 
any  part  of  me,  that  at  one  time  or  other 
has  not  been  affefted  by  it  :  For  Months  to¬ 
gether,  I  have  had  a  perpetual  founding 
and  ringing  in  my  Ears,  that  has  been  very 
troublefome,  and  when  it  lies  in  my  Head, 
I  have  fuch  a  dimnefs  in  my  Eyes,  as  if  I 
few  every  thing  through  a  Miflr,  tho’  other- 
wife  considering,  1  have  read  much  and  am 
near  Fifty  Five,  my  Sight  is  very  clear; 
When  I  am  at  the  beft  i  can  fee!,  that  the 
long  habit  of  my  Illnefs  has  chang’d  my 
very  Humour  :  Formerly  I  fear’d  nothing, 
and  had  the  conftancy  of  a  Man  -0  from 
what  I  have  related  you  may  gather  what 
Temper  I  was  of  bifldes  ^  but  now  I  am  full 
of  Doubts  and  Fears,  I’m  grown  peevifh 
and  fretfull,  irrefoluce,  fufpicious,  every 
thing  offends  me,  and  a  trifle  puts  me  in  a 
Paffion.  The  Name  of  Heautontimoru- 
menos  never  was  half  fo  applicable  to  any 
one,  as  it  is  to  me :  I  can  excruciate  my 
felf  for  all  manner  of  Evils,  paft,  prefenr, 
and  to  come,  I  told  you  the  State  I  was 
in,  when  my  KJnfman  died  :  This  often  runs 
in  my  Head  when  I  am  ID,  thcf  it  is  Four 
and  Twenty  Year  ag°:  Firft  I  am  angry 
with  my  felf  for  having  been  guilty  of 
fuch  unparalld’d  fopinenefs  as  I  was  5  then 

am 


(  4?  ) 

am  I  opprefs’d  with  the  tormenting  thoughts 
of  what  it  might  have  brought  me  to,  till 
I  fweat  again,  and  am  fometimes  frighten’d 
into  fuch  an  Agony,  as  if  all  the  Calamities 
that  could  have  been  expefted  from  it, 
were  in  reality  come  upon  me,  and  I  faw 
my  Wife  and  Children  that  Minute  beg¬ 
ging  for  Bread.  I’ll  give  you  another  in- 
ftance,  how  unaccountably  I  am  afflifted  by 
mere  Thoughts,  and  fometimes  work’d  up¬ 
on  even  by  non  entia . 

I  believe  my  Wife  is  a  very  honeft  Wo¬ 
man,  nor  have  I  ever  had  the  leaft  reafon 
to  think  the  contrary,  and  as  to  my  felf  I 
never  lay  with  any  other  befides  her  felf 
fince  I  had  her,  I  have  been  married  almoft 
Thirty  Years  5  and  tho’  before  that  I  have 
deferv’d  it,  yet  I  never  in  all  my  Life  had 
Gonnorhaa^  Bubo ,  or  any  other  the  leaft 
Veneral  Symptom,  and  have  always  been 
very  found 

- - in  partibus  ill  is , 

GJuas  finus  abfcondit — - 

As  Juvenal  calls  ’em :  Yet  it  is  no  longer 
ago,  than  laft  Winter,  that  I  could  not  be 
perfuaded,but  that  I  was  Pox’d  to  all  intents 
and  purpofes,  and  ’twas  a  thoufand  to  one 
that  I  was  not  Salivated  for  a  confiderable 
time  I  was  all  Day  long  examining  my 

Shins, 


(  44  ) 

Shios,  and  Forehead,  and  feeling  for  Nodes 
and  Tophi:  The  lofing  of  my  Nofe,  my 
Palate,  my  Eyes,  and  all  the  Fright  and 
ftiameful  Consequences  of  that  Difeafe  pof- 
fefs'd  my  fancy  for  Hours  together,  till 
the  horror  of  ’em  entring  deeper  into  my 
Soul,  has  fometimes  (truck  me  with  foch 
unfpeakable  Pangs  of  Grief,  as  no  Torture, 
or  Death  could  ever  be  able  to  imitate. 
"When  l  grew  better  I  found,  that  all  this 
had  been  occasion'd  by  reading  of  the  Lnesj 
when  I  began  to  be  Ill,  which  has  made 
me  refolve  itnce,  never  to  look  in  any 
Book  oi  Phyfick  again,  but  when  my  Head 
is  in  very  good  order. 

I  have  read  and  heard  of  Hundreds  of 
Melancholy  People,  that  had  as  many  fe- 
veral  Wfaimfeys,  and  imagining  to  be  what 
they  were  not,  (luck  clofe  to  the  abfurdities 
of  their  Fancies,  when  they  were  well  in 
every  thing  elfe,  or  at  lead:  in  tolerable 
Health  :  But  I  never  was  fo.  The  Diftur- 
bances  of  my  Brain  are  not  fo  lading,  and 
as  foon  as  they  are  paft  their  Zenith ,  I  have 
always  fhort  moments,  in  which,  when 
my  Soul  exerts  her  Felt  to  the  utmoft  of 
her  power,  I  can  judge  cf  things  as  they 
really  are.  Thefe  lucid  intervals  and  con- 
.  tinoal  relap!*  s  that  obfcure  them  in  the 
wane  of  a  Paroxifm  are  for  a  while  not 
unlike  the  alternations  of  Light  and  Dark- 


(  45  ) 

nefs,  in  the  Spring  5  the  latter  growing  ftill 
weaker  and  fhorter,  as  the  firft  encreafe, 
till  the  Diftemper  leaves  the  upper  Region, 
and  my  underftanding  is  clear’d  up  again. 
Hence  I  conclude,  that  however  my  Temper 
and  Conftitution  are  fpoil’d,  my  Reafon, 
even  when  I  am  at  the  worft,  is  only 
clouded  but  not  impair  d.  The  confidera- 
tion  of  this  has  often  been  a  Sol  amen  mi- 
feri£  to  me  in  the  midft  of  Pains  and  other 
i  Tsoubles.  It  is  certainly  a  comfort,  tho’  it 
is  a  poor  one,  when  I  compare  what  I  am 
now  to  what  I  was  before,  to  find,  that 
tho’  every  thing  elfe  is  infinitely  worfe, 
the  acumen  ingenii  (as  much  as  ever  I  wTas 
rnafter  of  )  the  Diving  particula  aur&  is  ftill 
the  fame,  and  my  judgment  rather  im¬ 
proved. 

Yet  this  is  a  frailty  of  Nature.  The 
Bodies  contract  with  the  Soul  muft  be  fup* 
pos’d  to  have  been  made  at  leaft  upon  an 
:  even  foot,  becaufe  the  firft  was  the  ElSer 
:  of  the  two,  and  without  doubt  both  equal- 
;  ly  engag’d  on  Terms  of  mutual  Affe&ion 
I  and  Affiftance  ;  But  would  you  fee  the 
|  Depth  of  Human  Pride  5  lock  on  the  un- 

I  charitable  Haughtinefs  of  Virtue  itfelf,  that 

II  make  us,who  are  the  Compound  of  the  two, 

;  barbaroufly  defpife  the  moft  endearing  half 

cf  our  felves,  that  fcorns  not  to  be  feen  : 
And  why  ?  Becaufe  ’tis  measly  born,  and 

will 


i 


( 4<5 )  :  j 

will  fall  to  decay  ,  whilft  it  obliges  us,  to 
be  over-fond  of  that  infuiting  furly  part, 
that  is  invisible  only,  becaufe  'tis  thought 
ot  great  Extraction,  and  hop* d  to  be  Im¬ 
mortal. 

Bat  I  (hall  talk  you  to  Death,  Philcpirio , 
and  I  can't  help  it ,  1  am  overjoy’d  at  the 
Health  I  am  in,  atis  Heaven  to  me  when  I 
think  how  perfectly  well  I  am  ^  but  then 
how  miferabie  on  the  other  fide  again  is 
the  Thought,  ot  harbouring  fome  where 
within  me,  tho*  now  I  feel  it  not,  a  vaft 
enormous  Monfter,  whofe  Savage  force  may 
in  an  inftant  bear  down  my  Reafon,  Judg¬ 
ment,  and  all  their  boafted  Strength  before 
it.  It  is  inconceivable,  that  when  I  per¬ 
ceive  my  Affii&ion  coming  upon  me,  I 
ihould  be  fo  fenfible  as  I  am,  that  the  Dan¬ 
gers  I  dread,  and  Sorrows  I  forefee,  are 
only  Chimera  s,  meer  Falfities,  and  nothing 
but  the  ImpoGtions  of  a  Diftemper  5  and  yet, 
as  it  encreafes,  fink  underneath  the  weight 
of  it,  tho*  arm’d  with  fo  much  Refolution 
againft  it.  I  know  it,  l  refift  it,  yet  I  can  t 
overcome  it  3  and  when  it  begins  to  be 
violent,  I  muft  apply  to  my  felf  in  fad 
earned,  what  Ph&dria  in  the  Eunuchus  faid 
on  a  foolifh  Occafion  :  Prudensjfciens^  vivus, 
vidcnfque  pereo. 

Phil.  I  could  hearken  to  you  with  plea- 
fure  for  Hours  together,  but  am  afraid 

you’ll  , 


(  47  ) 

you’ll  weary  your  felf:  l  would  not  have 
you  fpeak  with  fo  much  Spirit ,  you  foar 
too  high,  and  don’t  conjfult  your  Health. 

Mifom.  I  take  you  right,  and  thank  you  5 
but  i  find  my  felf  very  well  $  tho’  I  know, 
that  talking  with  fo  much  vehemence,  has 
difcompos’d  me  before  now  5  but  pray 
don’t  leave  me  yet ,  for  having  told  you 
concerning  my  Diftemper,  every  thing  that 
has  occurr’d  to  my  Memory,  I  am  now  full 
of  expe&ation,  to  hear  what  you  think 
both  of  that  and  me. 

Phil .  I  had  no  thoughts  of  going,  and 
am  ready  to  give  you  my  Sentiment  upon 
all  I  have  heard. 

Mifom.  One  word  before  you  proceed. 
You  are  without  doubt  acquainted  with 
all  the  Hypothefes  of  Note,  and  fo  am  I  : 
Wherefore,  that  I  may  underftand  you 
the  better,  I' beg  to  know  before-hand, 
whole  it  is,  you  go  by  in  the  explication  of 
Plypochondriocifm^  or  elfe  whether  you  have 
a  peculiar  one  of  your  own. 

Phil .  Indeed,  Mifomsdon^  I  don’t  make 
ufe  of  any. 

Mifom.  How  is  that  poffible  ?  Which 
way  can  you  reafon  about  the  Caufes  and 
Seat  of  the  Diftemper,  or  fo  much  as  folve 
the  leaft  of  the  Symptoms  that  attend 

it?  v  .  I 

Phil. 


(  4S  ) 

Phil.  I  don’t  pretend  to  reafon  aboet 
either  the  one  or  the  other  $  nor  did  I 
ever  drive  to  folve  any  of  its  Symptoms, 
©therwife  than  by  removing  them. 

Mifom.  Would  ever  Mao  of  Learning 
offer  to  Cure  Diftempers  of  that  compli¬ 
cated  difficulty,  as  the*  Hypochondriack 
Paffion  immethodically  after  the  manner 
of  Ignorant  Quacks  !  I  am  amaz'd  at  your 
Language,  and  of  all  the  Phyficians  I  have 
confulted,  which  is  not  a  few,  I  declare, 
that  I  never  had  one  from  whom  I  expect¬ 
ed  to  hear  what  you  faid  juft  now,  left 
than  from  your  felf.  Sh&am&  de  fpe  decidi  l 
What !  are  you  an  Empjrkk  ? 

Phil .  That  is  an  odious  Name,  efpecially 
in  England  5  but  then  you  know  that  the 
word  is  much  abus’d,  and  that  the  Empy- 
rieks  among  the  Phyficians  of  all  Ages  have 
been  as  famous  a  Sect  as  any,  that  ever 
.were  diftinguifh’d  by  a  Name  :  That  the 
firft  Author  of  it,  Beraclio* ,  was  a  Phyft- 
cianof  Renown,  and  abundance  of  his  Fol¬ 
lowers  Men  of  great  Parts  and  Learning. 
They  were  of  Opinion,  that  the  Art  of 
Phyfick  con  ft  ft  ed  in  down-right  Gbferva- 
tion,  and  a  world  of  Experience  5  and  that 
all  manner  of  reafoning  about  the  Caufes  of 
Diftempers,  and  being  Witty  in  deducing 
the  Symptoms  from  'em,  were  very  inffg- 
nificant  in  curing.  People  that  were  Sick  : 

c  So 


(  49  ) 

So  far  I  am  an  Emp prick  $  bat  then  there 
are  feveral  things  (aid  of  ’em,  that  are 
worfe,  as  their  denying,  that  the  Know¬ 
ledge  of  Natural  Things,  and  the  Body  it- 
(elf  were  any  ways  material  to  the  Profefe 
fion,  and  that  their  Experience,  as  an  Au¬ 
thor  (that  Preaches  up  very  much  for  Mo- 
deration  among  Phyficians)  calls  it,  was 
meer  Stupida ,  non  repetita ,  cafu  non  du&u 
invent a,  &  prorfus  Circumforama .  Here  I 
(hould  differ  from  them  5  bat  thcfe  Things 
are  partially  writ. 

Mifont.  Why  fo  } 

Phil .  Firft,  becaufe  it  is  Norlfence,  (fa* 
vidg  that  great  Man’s  favour)  to  fay,  they 
were  all  for  Experience,  and  at  the  fame 
time  not  for  repeated  Experience  :  Second* 
ly,  becaufe  it  is  iaconfiftent  with  the  Cha¬ 
rter  of  Men  of  Senfe,  which  ’tis  own’d 
they  had  among  them,  that  they  (hould 
have  had  no  manner  of  thought,  or  fore- 
caft  in  the  application  of  their  Experience® 
whether  they  had  been  Phyficians  or  not  $ 
for  at  that  rate,  if  they  had  given  any 
thing  with  Succefs  to  a  flrong  Man  of  Thir¬ 
ty,  in  a  Fever  of  only  of  one  Days  (land* 
ing,  it  muft  follow,  that  either  they  would 
have  given  the  fame  (1  fpeak  of  the  Dofb 
as  well  as  the  Medicine)  to  a  weakly  Child 
of  two  Years  Old,  that  hid  been  irl  on® 
for  Ten  Days  together  5  or  die,  if  they 

E  ftucfe; 


I 


(  50  ) 

fiuck  fo  dofe  to  their  Experience,  never 
adminiftred  the  fame  Medicine  again,  till 
they  had  met  with  another  ftrong  Patient 
of  Thirty,  agreeing  in  every  Circumftance 

with  the  former. 

There  is  no  Medium,,  if  what  is  faid  of 
them  he  laterally  true $  and  if  it  be  not,  as 
I  don’t  think  it  is,  we  can’t  tell  how  far 
their  Opinion  is  ftrain’d,  or  how  much  they 
may  have  been  abided.  The  Account  we 
have  of  them  ought  juftly  to  be  fufpedted, 
fcecaufe  it  comes  all  from  their  profefs’d 
Enemies,  and  chiefly  Galen,  the  moft  inve¬ 
terate  of  era  all,  as  is  plainly  to  be  been 
throughout  his  W orks«  So  much  for  Em- 

At  for  curing  Diftempers  i unmethodically  $ 
ftnce  it  is  equivocal,  I  muft  tell  you  in  the 
fir  ft  place,  that  f  am  none  of  the  Seft  call’d 
the  Methodic z, headed  by  Thejfdus  Thejfdicus , 
tho’  I  am  far  from  approving  of  every  thing 
that  Gden  has  writ  again  ft  them.  -Second¬ 
ly,  if  by  method  you  mean  a  certain  Rule, 
a  quo  deviure  paculnm  eft,  and  ask  me,  whe¬ 
ther  I  have  a  conftant  Theory,  by  which  I 
am  always  directed  in  the  Cure,  I  ftill  re¬ 
main  in  the  Negative :  But  if  now  you 
put  the  queftion,  whether  Men  of  Learning 
ever  offer’d  to  do  fo  >  I  anfwer.  Yes,  and 
not  to  Name  Paraceljns ,  Van  Helmont ,  Bon  • 
tche7  Craaneyznd  a  great  many  that  you 

might 


(  5*  )  1 

might  (hut  out  for  Ranglers,  as  they  were* 

I  innft  put  you  in  mind,  that  neither  Hip- 
p derates  himfelf,  the  Coany  Cuidian ,  or  other 
Schools,  nor  any  of  the  Phyfichns  of  Old 
Greece ,  which  without  difpute  were  the 
beft  that  ever  the  World  could  boaft  of, 
follow’d  any  Theory,  or  what  you  call 
Method  at  all  5  and  if  you  think  it  a  mi- 
ftery  how  they  could  do  without,  Baglivi 
will  unfold  it  to  you  $  who,  (peak  ng  of  the 
difference  between  the  Modern  Phyiiciahs* 
and  thofe  I  named,  has  thefe  Words,  quod 
nos  per  leges  Theori id  tUi  foh  mentis  ferfpi- 
cacitate ,  longo  ufu  Confer  mat  a  per  age  bant  ; 
which  was  worth  all  the  Theories  on 
Earth. 

Mifom.  But  I  don’t  think  it  Prudence 
for  every  body  to  follow  the  Steps  of  thofe 
prodigious  Men,  unlefs  they  were  likewife 
of  their  great  Gmius  and  Sagacity,  as  well 
as  laborious  and  indefatigable  Temper  5 
that  vaft  Stock  of  Obfervations,  it  is  probable 
they  had,  without  any  Coherence  or  Dif* 

;  politico  of  them  into  Gaffes,  would  make 
no  fmall  confufion  in  an  ordinary  Man’s 
I  Brains.  Order  helps  Memory,  and  even 
an  indifferent  Theory  muft  eafe  a  Phyflciant 
^  in  his  Praftice,  and  the  Art  of  Phyfick, 
f  which  you  complain  your  felf  is  too  great 
|  a  task  for  one  Man,  would  be  (till  mare 
?  difficult  without 

E  %  Phiti 


(  sO 

Phil.  As  to  general  Practice,  or  the 
whole  body  of  the  Art,  there  is  nodifpute 
but  all  the  Diftempers  incident  in  human 
Bodies  ought  to  be  fee  down  diftinftly,  and 
the  Obfervations  rang’d  under  the  feverai 
Pleads  they  belong  to  :  But  with  your  leave, 
this  is  not  the  Point  inQurftion  ;  as  much 
order  as  you  pleafe :  What  I  am  againfftis, 
the  Speculative  part  of  Pbyfick?  as  it  is  di- 
ftinft  from  the  Practical,  that  teaches  Men 
to  Cure  ail  manner  of  Diftempers  in  their 
Clofets,  without  ever  feeing  a  Patient  5  kis 
this  Product  of  fertile  Brains  to  divert  their 
.lazy  Owners,  the  early  Antients  knew  no¬ 
thing  of.  Jevain,  an  .Arabian ,  was  the  firft 
that  made  that  Diftioftion  5  for  which  an 
honed  Phyfician  of  the  fame  Country  has 
fince  claw’d  him  off,  as  he  deferv’d,  as  may 
be  feen  in  Averrhoes.  Believe  me,  Mifome - 
dov ,  *tis  all  a  Cheat,  it  is  the  Obfervations 
and  not  Reafons,  that  conftitute  the  Art, 
and  the  latter  are  no  more  neceffary  to  Phy- 
ficians,  than  f-alfe  Lights  to  Shop-keepers  ; 
which  we  know  are  only  contriv'd  to  make 
their  Goods  look  the  better. 

Mtfo'm*  1  don’t  deny  the  neceffity  of  Ob¬ 
fervations,  hot  you  fhail  never  perfuade 
rre,  that  the  Multitude  of  Obfervations, 
(which  the  more  they  are,  the  greater  you 
own  is  the.  Practitioners  Certainty)  can 

ever 


(  53  ) 

ever  hinder  him  from  giving  a  Reafon  for 
what  he  does., 

.Phil.  In  things  that  meerly  depend  upon 
Notions  yon  are  in  the  right,  but  it  is  other- 
wife  in  Arts  $  for  when  a  Man  has  no  other 
reafon  for  what  he  does,  than  his  j  iot  Go¬ 
fer  various,  it  is  impoffiblc,  that  he  can  give 
you  the  one  without  the  other  5  that  is,  he 
can  never  e  xplain  his  reifons  to  you,  11  n left 
he  could  likewife  communicate  to  you  h;s 
joint  obfervations,  which  are  his  Ski!!,  As 
for  Example  $  wliilft  your  Servant  went  ho 
tell  you,  [  was  come^  I  law  in  your  Parlour 
a  Head  of  Van  Dike  s,  which  I  would  (wear 
to,,  is  an  Original:  -  But  fhould  any  body, 
efpecially  -one  that  had  no  skid  in  Painting, 
ask  me,  why  1  would  be  fo  pofirive,  when 
it  might  be  a  Copy,  that  was  very  well 
done,  and  like  it,  and  I  was  either  to  give 
him  an  intelligible  reafon,  why  i  knew 
this  from  any  Copy  that  could  lie  made, 
which  yet  is  very  true,  or  elfe  to  be  bang’d  5 
I  muft  die  like  a  Fool. 

Mifom .  I  confefs  I  never  heard  better 
regions,  to  avoid  giving  any,  in  all  my 
Life. 

PhiL  You  are  witty  upon  me :  But  re¬ 
member,  what  you  faid  your  felt  not  a 
quarter  of  an  Boor  ago,  when  you  reflect¬ 
ed  on  the  Body’s  contrad  wiih  the  Sou!. 
Tis  certainly  Pride,  that  makes  us  fo  fond 

E  3  of 


j 


(  54  ) 

of  the  Idol  Reafon,  but  it  is  an  unaccount¬ 
able  dotage,  that  we  fhouid  hug  it  fo  clofe, 
as  to  let  it  flip,  and  ftill  continue  the  fame 
love  to  the  ftiadow  and  bare  appearance  of 
it,  Reafon  like  Truth  is  Angle,  and  there¬ 
fore  ought  to  have  a  folid  and  unfhakabie 
Foundation,  nothing,  of  which  the  Bafis  is  a 
fuppofition,  can  deferve  the  Name  3  and 
whatever  Confequences  are  drawn  from  an 
uncertainty,  may  be  good  Logick,  and  per¬ 
haps  witty  arguments,  but  cannot  be  call'd 
Rcafons.  In  the  time  of  Galen  who  was 
bred  an  Empyrick  and  the  Pupil  of  a  very 
great  Mafter,  the  Eminent  Phyficians  were 
honeft  pains-taking  drudges,  that  watching 
almoft  Day  and  Night  by  their  Patient's 
Bed  Tides,  ftuck  clofe  to  Obfervations,  and 
minded  nothing,  but  how  to  Cure  thofe 
that  were  committed  to  their  Care,  without 
a  thought  of  plea  ling  any  other  way.  This 
had  made  Phyfick  a  very  Auftere  Study  as 
well  as  Myfterious  to  ail  the  World  befides^ 
and  confequently  the  reafon  of  what  was 
done  to  the  Sick  was  as  unintelligble  to 
the  moft  fubtile  Philofopher  as  it  was  to 
the  greateft  Clown.  Galen  bimfelf  a  Man 
of  very  great  Senfe,  and  no  lefs.  Pride  9 
having  entertain'd  the  Ambition  of  railing 
'himfeif  above  any  of  his  Contemporaries, 
forefaw,  that  to  exceed  the  moft  skillful 
of  them  in  real  Knowledge,  would  be  a 

.  i,  ■  '  very 


(  55  ) 

very  difficult  task,  if  not  impoffible,  mi 
at  beft  a  tedious  work  of  endlds  labour  .• 
He  was  well  acquainted  with  the  fate  of 
Phyfick  and  the  Palate  of  his  Garrulous 
Age ,  and  found,  that  nothing  would  fooner 
eftablifli  his  Reputation,  than  his  Wit: 
Accordingly  he  left  the  Obfervations  to, 
them  that  liked  them,  and  fell  a  writing* 
as  fa  ft  as  a  Bird  could  Ayr  He  told  the 
World  that  Phyfick  was  a  rational  Art* 
that  they  were  Beetle-headed  Fellows,  that 
could  not  make  it  intelligible,  and  pre« 
fently  gives  them  Reafons,  fucfa  as  they 
were,  for  every  individual  thing  he  could 
think  on.  This  took  wonderfully  with  the 
People  of  thole  Days  $  feeing  his  Reafons 
were  fo  well  accepted,  he  writ  on  and 
ftuck  at  nothing  5  where  his  Wit  could  not 
help  him  out,  he  borrow’d  of  others : 
His  materia  Medica  he  took  from  Dio  fc  or  ides  ^ 
without  fo  much  as  naming  his  Name.* 
Where  he  had  his  Anatomy  I  don't  know, 
but  Vefalins ,  a  great  Anatomift,  proves  him 
in  no  lefs  than  106  places,  that  he  never 
faw  the  infide  of  a  human  Body  :  And 
yet  he  atEgn’d  every  part  its  Office  with 
as  little  Befitati on,  'as  if  he  had  made  them, 
or  at  leaf!  been  their  Major  domo.  This 
was  the  beginning  of  Peoples  reafoning 
about  Phyfick,  and  that  the  caufe  of  all  the 
Byjwihefes  we  have  had  fince,  the  belt  of 

E  4  which 


( 

which  will  be  always  defective  and  full  of 
Error. 

Mif.  From  what  firft  you  faid  of  the 
Arabian ,  that  divided  the  Art  in  Specula¬ 
tive  und  Practical,  and  now  of  Galenyw  hom 
I  know,  to  have  writ  with  abundance 
of  heat  againft  the  Empiricks,  Methodifts, 
&c.  I  find  you  would  infer,  that  the  Phy- 
ficians  did  not  begin  to  reafon  about  Phy- 
fick,  and  make  Hypotfaefes,  becaufe  they 
thought,  that  what  they  writ  was  true, 
and  would  be  of  fervice  to  their  Pofterity 
in  curing  the  Sick  5  but  to  ingratiate  them- 
felves  to  the  Ages  they  lived  in,  and  that 
they  did  not  fo  much  find  fault  with  others, 
to  have  things  mended,  as  to  eftablifh  their 
own  Reputations  upon  the  Ruins  of  thofe 
they  over-threw, 

Phil.  I  would  fo  5  But  above  all,  to  avoid 
the  unwholfome  as  well  as  tirefonie  office 
of  being  perpetually  near  the  Bedfide,  to 
obferve  every  motion  the  Patient  makes,  fo 
Unavoidable  to  a  Man,  that  would  be  skill’d 

in  morbls  acutis.  This  mu  ft  have  been  a 

•  * 

miferable  Confinement,  I  own  5  as  I  'do 
likewife,  that  it  has  been  none  of  the  lead: 
motives,  that  made  me  chiefly  apply  my 
felf  to  a  Chronick  Difeafe,  where  the  at¬ 
tendance  fhould  be  neither  fo  conftant,  nor 
fo  unpleafant. 


C  5T  ) 

Mif  An  Ingenuous  Confeffion:  For 
which  I  don’t  like  you  the  worfe.  But  if 
every  Patient  had  a  Phyfician  to  himfdf, 
they  mutt  have  had  abundance  of  them  £ 
yet  confidering,  that  among  the  Greeks  and 
Romans ,  the  People  of  any  Quality  always 
kept  them  in  their  Families,  and  that  many 
of  their  Slaves  were  brought  up  in  that  Art^ 
I  don't  wonder  fo  much  at  that,  as  I  do, 
which  way  they  got  their  Experience,  when 
they  flay'd  fo  long  with  one  Patient,  and 
often  throughout  the  whole  courfe  of  his 
Illnefs,  They  could  fee  but  a  few. 

JPhil.  As  they  had  done  with  one,  they 
went  to  another,  and  were  never  idle  :  The 
ftriftnefs  of  obferving  they  were  obliged  to, 
was  whilft  they  learn’d  their  Art,  tho’  that 
was  the  greateft  part  of  their  Lives  time  3 
and  thofe  that  lived  in  Rich  people’s  Fa¬ 
mily  s  were  generally  the  Difciples  of  fome 
chief  Phyfician,  that  taught  them  their 
bufinefs.  A  Man  would  have  been  laugh'd 
at  in  thofe  Days,  that  would  have  pretend¬ 
ed  to  Pradtife  Phyfick  ot  his  own  head, 
before  he  was  near  Threefcore,  or  at  lead 
above  Fifty  Years  of  Age :  Till  then  they 
only  follow’d  the  Directions  of  their  Ma¬ 
tters,  and  (erv’d  the  Sick  much  qjfcer  the 
manner  of  our  Nurfes:  But  fuch  as  had 
undergone,  and  happen’d  to  out-live  the 
fatigues  of  this  fevere  Difcipline  were  had 

in 


C  5g  ) 

In  great  Veneration,  and  almoft  ador’d? 
when  •once  they  fee  up  for  themfelves  $  For 
then  they  became  to  be  Matters  in  their 
turns,  and  not  only  vifited  the  Sick,  but 
likewlfe  took  an  opportunity  of  instructing 
their  Scholars  from  the  Cafes  they  had  in 
hand  $  as  the  pra&ical  Profeflbrs  of  Foreign 
Univerfities  now  teach  their  Students  in  the 
Kofpitals. 

Mif  Knowing  Philoprio  by  my  own 
reading,  that  moft  of  what  you  fay  is  true, 
I  begin  to  be  fomewhat  of  your  opinion, 
and  am  apt  to  think,  that  the  Art  it  felf 
may  yield  fome  very  good  rules  when  it  is 
well  cultivated,  and  that  the  diligent  and 
humble  obfervers  of  Nature  knew  abun¬ 
dantly  more  of  if,  than  all  the  Proud  and 
Lazy  Expounders  of  it,  that  have  ridicul’d 
*em  fince.—  I  fee  his  paft  Seven,  and  I  al¬ 
ways  Sup  half  an  Hour  after,  fo  that  now  I 
fhall  no:  have  time  to  hear  of  you,  what  I 
would  be  fatiified  in  5  but  I  can’t  blame 
you  for  that,  fince  my  own  talkative  hu¬ 
mour  and  Impertinence  in  asking  you  fo 
many  other  Queftions,  have  been  only  in 
fault*  yet  as  our.  Entertainment  has  been 
very  pleading  to  rue,  I  won’t  repent,  but 
only 'dvlire  you  to  come  again  to  morrow 
about  the  feme  Hour:  de  tuo  nil  decidet 
Philoprio  5  what,  time  I  make  you  lofe,  fhall 

be 


(  19  ) 

be  at  my  charge,  and  you’ll  never  find 
me  Stingy,  when  I  am  troublefome. 

Phil .  If  you  are  pleafed,  I  have  paft  my 
time  very  agreeably. 

Mif.  But  don’t  go  yc-t,  if  you  are  not  in 
hafte :  When  they  are  ready  below,  I  (hall 
have  my  Man  come  up  to  me  .•  if  you  can 
ftay  a  quarter  of  an  Hour  longer,  your 
Company  will  oblige  me. 

Phil.  With  all  my  heart,  half  an  Hour, 
if  you  pleale. 

Mif.  You  are  a  Man  after  my  own  heart , 
I  lhall  have  a  good  opinion  of  Phylick  at 
laft$  and  fo  far  I  promife  you,  that  I  am 
your  Convert  already,  that  henceforth  I’ll 
judge  no  more  of  a  Phylician’s  Skill  from 
his  having  a  very  good  Theory,  than  from 
his  Fencing  well  1  would  of  his  Courage: 
For  curing  the  Sick  in  reality  is  Fighting, 
when  doing  it  in  Speculation  is  no  more 
than  Fencing.  ' 

Phil.  I  won’t  allow  ic  to  be  fo  much, 
unlefs  you  mean  fuch  Fencing,  as  Squire 
Bickerfiaf  's  againft  the  Wall ;  and  then  I 
like  your  Simile :  For  as  the  old  Gentleman 
pulhing  either  in  Tierce  or  §nart,  or  what 
thruft  he  thinks  fit,  never  miffes  the  Man 
he  aims  at  $  fo  thefe  Speculative  Dodors, 
relying  either  on  one  Hypothefis  or  other, 
never  fail  of  hitting  what  Diftemper  they 
pleafe  5  and  the  Companion  is  the  more 


(  C°  ) 

juft,  becaufe  both  Parties  venture  with  e* 
qual  Confidence,  and  nleet  with  the  fame 
oppofition. 

A  Witty  Man  that  has  good  Language 
to  exprefs  himfelf,  and  is  tollerably  vers’d 
in  the  Theory  of  Phyfick,  may,  by  the 
help  of  a  well  contriv’d  Hypothesis,  find  out 
probable  Caufes,  floridly  account  for  every 
Symptom,  exaftly  tell  you  the  Indications 
that  are  drawn  from  them,  and  build  upon 
them  fuch  a  rational  method  of  Cure,  that 
even  Men  of  Senfe,  (hall  applaud,  and 
think  him  an  Oracle  in  Phyfick  5  thos  all 
this  while  he  knows  nothing  of  the  Art  it 
felf. 

.But  carry  him  once  to  a  Patient  of  Di- 
ftindion,  that  is  a  little  fearfull  of  himfelf, 
and  has  newly  been  attack’d  with  only  a 
flight  Fever  5  Let  him  fairly  be  fatisfied 
in  every  thing  that  he  defires  to  know,  and 
before  he  gives  his  Opinion,  if  he  plesfes, 
come  again  5  Then  put  feme  home  Que- 
ftions  to  him,  tho’  nothing,  but  what  the 
meaneftPradticioner  ought  to  know ;  As  what 
Alterationshecxpech  from  the  Medicines  he 
preferibes,  and  when  they  (hall  be  feen  ? 
When  the  Diftemper  will  be  at  the  height, 
and  whether  it  will  break  fhortly,  or  be 
of  long  continuance  ?  Put  I  fay  tfcefe 
queftions  to  him,  and,  by  his  evafive  an- 
fwers,  and  wavering  incertitude  you  11  fee, 

-  "  how 


(  6,  ) 

how  little  real  Skill  he  has.  Ask  him  di- 
reftiy.  Whether  the  Patient  will  live  or 
die?  If  he  has  cunning  this  will  puzzle 
him,  and  rather  than  give  you  a  fatis- 
faftory  anfwer,  he’ll  fly  for  refuge  to  Re¬ 
ligion,  tho’  he  never  fhew’d  any  before, 
and  tell  you,  it  you  urge  farther,  that  he 
thinks  it  prefumption  to  be  pofitive  in 
things  of  that  nature. 

Mif.  I  always  thought  this  the  fault  of 
the  Art  it  ftlf,  becaule  I  read  in  a  great 
many  pra&ical  Authors  :  In  progncfi  femper 
Cantus  ft  Medicns ;  or  fbmethidg  elfe  to  the 
fame  pur  pole. 

Phil,  No,  Mifomedon ,  This  is  no  Rule 
of  the  Art,  but  a  trick  of  the  f  hyficians , 
that  their  Ignorance  may  not  be  detefted: 
Of  the  fame  (lamp  is,  Z)t  honori  medici 
Confulatur,  which  is  fo  obvious  5  and  thefe 
cautions  are  commonly  ufed  by  thofe,  that 
teach  to  reafon  about  Diftempers  5  whole 
Pradice  is  more  built  cn  the  probability  of 
their  Hypothecs,  than  the  certainty  of  Ob» 
fervation-  This  is  riot  the  Language  of 
the  Ancients:  Judicium  difficile?  «  xiejme 
:  ’Tis  difficult  to  judge,  fays  Hippo* 
crates  :  F.Je  don  t  bid  them  prevaricate 
with  their  Judgment,  of  fay  little,  and 
take  care  not  to  difcovcr  their  blind- fide  5 
Which  is  the  Enghfli  of  Cantus  fit  Medi* 

CHS . 

Mifi 


(  ) 

Mif.  As  I  told  you  before,  I  am  off  of  the 
Reafons  3  but  is  it  notpoffible,  that  a  Block¬ 
head,  who  is  even  incapable  of  giving 
thcfe  little  Reafons  you  defpife,  may  pals 
for  a  skilful  Phyfician,  if  be  (hould  only 
feel  the  Pulfe,  look  dull,  fquat  down,  and 
write  a  Bill  ?  Pray  how  fhall  we  know 
them  afunder,  if  neither  of  them  is  to 
give  us  any  account  of-  his  Knowledge? 

Phil.  As  for  that,  Ler  him  be  Grave  or 
Airy,  Young  or  Old,  I’ll  give  you  an  in¬ 
fallible  Touch- Hone  to  try  him  by.  If  in 
any  acute  Diftemper  whatfoever  his  Pre¬ 
dictions  be  clear,  his  anfwers  not  doubtful, 
and  what  he  fays  be  true,  you  may  trult 
him  with  all  the  reft}  ft  /ecus,  non  3  and  the 
more  ample  and  circuniftantial  his  Predi- 
&ions  are,  depend  upon  it,  the  greater  is 
his  Skill.  This  is  an  Aphorifm,  that  will 
hold  good  in  all  Countries  and  all  Ages. 

Mif.  1  believe  it  may  3  and  your  talking 
of  this  makes  me  remember,  that  when 
you  faid  how  the  Junior  Phyficians  ferv’d 
in  the  manner  of  our  Nurfes,  I  was  going 
to  tell  you  a  Story,  which  fomething  then 
put  out  of  my  bead  again. 

It  is  now  near  Three  Years  ago,  that  my 
Son  had  the  Small-Pox  3  as  fbon  as  he  was 
taken  Ill,  we  were  afraid  that  it  might  be 
what  it  proved :  A  Phyfician  being  fent 
for,  he  told  us,  what  we  knew  very  well 

before^ 


'■s  ’ 


(  <5?  3 


before,  that  as  yet  there  was  nothing  to  be 
feen  to  the  contrary,  but  that  it  might  be 
the  Small-Pox,  that  the  Diftemper  being  fo 
brief,  as  it  was,  they  were  always  to  be 
fear’d  in  People,  that  had  never  had  them  5 
as  foon  as  the  Doftor  was  gone,  my  Wife’s 
Sifter,  who  is  the  Boy’s  Godmother,  per- 
fuaded  us,  to  fend  for  a  noted  Nurfe,  that 
for  Forty  Years  together  had  done  nothing 
elfe,  but  tending  People  in  this  Di (tem¬ 
per  }  the  Woman  comes,  looks  upon  him, 
and  prefsntly  tells  us,  that  it  would  be  the 
Small-Pox-  When  the  firft  fpot  appear’d, 
which  at  leaft  was  two  or  three  Days  after, 
fhe  faid,  that  they  would  be  the  Con¬ 
fluent,  and  a  very  Malignant  fort  $  the 
Youth  in  the  mean  time  was  very  Ill.  As 
they  came  out  he  feem’d  to  be  a  little  bet¬ 
ter,  yet  Nurfe  (hook  her  head,  faid,  he 
would  be  in  great  danger  of  his  Life,  and 
fending  now  for  a  Penny-worth  of  one 
thing,  and  then  for  Two  Penny-worth  of 
another,  had  the  cooking  o(  ,him  wholly 
to  her  felf  :  At  laft  he  grew  Delirious,  and 
his  Fever  fo  violent,  that  I  began  to 
blame  my  fslf  horridly  to  truft  the  only 
Son  I  had  to  an  Old  Woman,  tho’  hitherto 
whatever  (he  had  foretold,  was  come  to 
pafs.  A  Phyfician  was  fent  for  again  in  hafte, 
and  we  heard  of  abundance  of  Mifmanage- 
ments,  Bleeding  and  other  things,  that  had 

been 


(  <4  ) 

been  omitted  5  hfe  told  us,  that  the  Patient 
was  too  far  gone,  but  that  nothing  fhould 
be  left  undone,  that  Art  could  perform, 
the’  it  was  twenty  fo  one  if  he  recover'd. 
When  vre  thought  him  at  the  world,  all  of 
a  hidden  Nurfe  changed  her  Note,  and 
(aid,'  her  Life  for  his,  her  Mafter  would 
do  well,  as,  to  make  Chert  of  my  Story, 
he  did.  The  Doctor  triumph'd,  the  Apo¬ 
thecary  rejoye'd,  and  every  body  was 
pleas'd:  About  a  Twelvemonth  after,  ha* 
ving  feen  the  whole  Family  make  much  of 
the  Old  Woman  feveral  times,  I  happen'd 
to  talk  of  her  one  Day  to  my  Wife,  who 
hearing  me  fpeak  in  pr£ife  of  her  Predicti¬ 
ons,  confeftfd,  that,  by  perfuafion  of  her 
Sifter,  who  had  conjur'd  her  to  truft  ho 
body  elfe,  file  had  confeoted  to  the  throw¬ 
ing  away  of  every  ferap  of  the  Medicines, 
that  had  been  preferib’d  to  her  Son  y  who, 
as  (he  exprds  d  her  felf,  ow’d  his  Life  to 
no  body  but  God  and  Nurfe, 

PhiL  Hearing  you  fpeak  of  the  Small- 
Pox,  1  cannot  bat  obferve,  fir  ft,  how  the 
changes  of  the  Exanthemata,  or  rather 
the  Puftules  of  it,  lead  us  to  the 
Knowledge  of  the  alterations,  that  during 
the  Courfe  of  it  happen  within  5  how  the 
encrcafe,  ftateand  decreafe  of  the  Diftemper 
differ  to  time,  as  well  as  violence  according 
to  the  Number.  Magnitude,  and  colour  of 

tht 


(6$) 

the  Puftules  themfelves,  and  confequently 
how  much  the  Phyiicians  are  to  blame,, 
that  treat  them  all  a  like:  Secondly,  how 
what  we  know  of  the  certainty  of  the 
feveral  Periods  in  every  fort  is  owing  to 
the  vifible  dire&ions  we' receive  from  the 
Puftules  without,  and  the  Diftempers  be«* 
ing  more  Endemick  to  all  Europe ,  and 
oftner  Epidemick  in  moft  parrs  of  it  than 
any  one  Fever  befides,  and  confequently 
its  being  more  taken  notice  of;  Laftly 
how  all  this  jaftifies  the  Obfervations 
which  Galen  and  others  have  deliver’d  to 
us  concerning  the  expeftation  for  a  crifis 
and  defpumation,  with  the  whole  Do* 
ftrine  of  the  critical  Days,  in  all  Fevers, 
fo  much  ridicul’d  by  the  Modern  Phy- 
ficians,  becaufe  in  the  reft  they  have  no¬ 
thing  fo  notorious  to  direft  them  from 
without,  and  won't  take  the  Pains  of 
making  fufficient  Obfervations  to  under- 
ftand  and  diftiqguifh  the  feveral  fpecies  of 
them. 

Mifom .  How  come  you  to  think  well 
of  Galen  now,  when  it  is  not  long  ago3 
that  you  found  fo  much  fault  with  him  > 

Phil.  Galen ,  when  he  ftuck  clofe  to 
what  he  was  brought  up  in,  was  a  great 
Phyfcian,  and  all  his  Obfervations  I 
highly  value;  but  all  the  fulfome  ftuff, 

F  whicfe 


(  66  ) 

which,  with  fo  much  affurance,  he  would* 
againft  his  Confidence,  palm  upon  the 
World  for  reafons*  I  muft  look  upon 
with  much  Contempt. 

Mifom*  You  are  very  fevere :  Why  a- 
gainft  his  Confcience  ? 

Phil.  Becaufe  it  is  impoffible,  that  a 
Man  of  his  Senfe,  who  with  out  doubt  was 
confcious  of  his  own  deficiencies  in  A- 
natotny,  Oeconomy,  &c.  could  believe 
the  hundredth  part  of  what  he  has 
writ. 

Mifim.  But  you  don’t  tell  me,  how 
you  like  my  Son  s  Nurfe. 

Phil.  I  flhould  be  loth  to  truft  one  with 
the  Curing  of  Diftempers  no  better  quali¬ 
fied  than  his  Nurfe*  What  I  faid  of 
Prognofticks,  I  meant  of  Phyficians,  of 
whom  we  cannot  fuppofe,  but  if  they 
had  made  Judicious  Obfervations  as  long 
as  Nurfe  had  made  hers  at  random,  they 
would  in  that  time  have  likewife  got  a 
vaft  Experience  of  the  Juvantta  and  La- 
defitia  in  that  Diftemper ;  eipecially*  if 
they  had  had  the  Skill  in  the  Materia 
Medic  a ,  that  is  required  in  the  meaneft 
Praftitioners.  But  yet  your  Story  may 
ferve  to  illuftrate  what  I  have  faid  *  be¬ 
caufe  it  ffaews^  how  much  ftupid  Obfer- 

vation  it  felf*  even  that*  which  is  made 

• 


(*r) 

in  fpight  of  our  Teeth,  nobis  invitis , 
makes  us  knowing  in,  and  acquainted  with 
the  thing  we  are  forced  to  be  converfant 
with.  Every  body  knows  $  what  are 
Flax,  Yarn,  Silk,  Wool,  and  the  feveral 
Manufa&uries  made  of  them,  fo  far,  as 
:  readily  to  diftinguilh  them  from  other 
things.  Abundance  of  People  can  tell  you 
the  Names  of  feveral  Drugfters,  and  Dyers 
Wares,  when  they  fee  them :  But  what 
vaft  skill  is  not  required  to  underhand 
thefe  things  thoroughly?  What  curious 
I  and  particular  remarks  do  not  belong  to 
the  entire  knowledge  of  every  one  of 
them,  that  depend  upon  the  Senfes  ? 

'  Thofe  that  are  verfed  in  them,  how  foon 
by  Seeing  and  Feeling  them  do  they  enter 
into  the  Worth,  Goodnefs,  difference  of 
Sorts,  <&c.  of  them,  primo  intuitu  ?  This 
Skill  we  know  by  Experience  is  not  to  be 
learn’d,  but  by  conftantly  converfing  with, 
perpetually  handling,  and  viewing  the  fe- 
veral  Commodities  we  fpeak  of  for  Years 
together,  and  we  daily  fee,  the  craftieft, 
and  otherwife  mod  expert  Men,  that  fu- 
perficially  know  thefe  things,  by  making 
ufe  of  them,  impofed  upon  by  the  great- 
eft  Dunces,  that  deal  in  them. 

And  as  to  the  knowledge  of  Mankind  ; 
How  much  better  fhall  they  not  Judge  in 

El  <2  an 


/ 


(  6S  ) 

an  mftant  of  the  Wit,  Humours,  &c.  of 
People*  that  have  either  Travelled  or 
Lived  in  Populous  Cities,  and  have  feen 
variety  of 'Faces'  every  Day  5  than  thole* 
that  have  led  Studious,  Rural*  or  other- 
wife  retired  lives  ?  But  if  perhaps  a 
Witty  Man,  proud  of  his  Parts,  that  has 
always  lived  in  the  City  ftiould  think* 
that  this  is  more  due  to  a  naiura!  Genius, 
Sagacity,  and  Penetration,  than  to  life* 
practice  and  Experience*  let  him  go  into 
the  Country,  look  on  a  Flock  of  Four- 
fcore  or  a  Hundred  Sheep,  examine  them 
one  by  one,  and  make  what  Obfervations 
he  pleafes  $  let  him  repeat  this  every  Day* 
for  Two,  or  Three  Months,  nay  for  half 
a  Year  together,  and  he’ll  find  at  the  end 
of  it,  that  he  fhall  yet  be  far  from  know¬ 
ing  them  all  afunder,  when  at  the  fame 
time  the  Clown,  that  keeps  them,  fhall 
not  only  know  every  one  of  them  readily 
at  a  great  diftance,  but  likewife  think  the 
difference*  that  is  between  them,  fo  con- 
fiderable,  as  to  wonder  at  the  ftupidity  of 
thofe,  that  cannot  find  it  out  at  firft  view. 
Phyficians  bid  us  feel  the  Pulfe,  and  in- 
fpe£t  the  Tongue*  and  Urine  of  the  Pa¬ 
tient,  but  there  are  other  things  to  be 
taken  notice  of  in  the  Eyes  and  Face  of 
Sick  People*  that  cannot  be  exprefs’d*  and 


( 69 ) 

yet  yield  more  certain  Rules  for  Progno 
ftication,  to  thofe  that  are  vers’d  in  them. 
How  incomprehenfibly  nice  mutt  not  the 
movements  be  of  fome  Mufcles,  that  even 
Children,  when  they  are  acquainted  with 
us,  can  by  our  Countenances  difcover, 
whether  we  are  pleas’d,  or  out  of  hu¬ 
mour,  tho9  at  the  fame  time  we  (hall  nei¬ 
ther  Smile  nor  Frown  }  But  above  all  $ 
How  intelligible,  as  well  as  Copious,  is 
the  language  of  the  Eyes  to  thofe  that  are 
Matters  of  it  >  And  yet  it  is  palpable, 
that  our  Skill  in  thefe,  which  infenfibly 
becomes  habitual  to  us,  is  only  contracted 
from  a  conftancy  of  ufe,  and  unregarded 
frequency  of  Obfervations. 

Mifom.  I  am  convinced,  that  what  you 
would  infer  from  the  inttances  you  have 
given,  is  undeniable  5  for  when  we  fee, 
that  human  Skill  in  whatever  falls  under 
the  Senles,  cannot  he  improved,  much  lefs 
confummated,  but  by  Ufe,  Experience  and 
Practice  of  long  continuance  ^  it  is  unrea- 
fonable  to  think,  that  from  fo  general  a 
Rule,  Sick  People  (hould  be  the  only  ex¬ 
ception.  All,  1  can  fay  of  the  Art,  is, 
that,  confidering  the  length  of  time,  as 
well  as  the  places,  and  manner  in 
which  the  necefiary  Experience  in  Phyfick 
can  only  be  acquired,  there  is  among  all 
t  F  3  the 


1 


(  70  ) 

the  Arts  and  Sciences  no  Study  fo  difficult 
and  laborious, nor  Obfervations  fo  irkfome 
and  dreadful,  as  thofe,  that  are  required 
to  make  but  a  tolerable  Phyfician. 

Phil,  It  is  without  doubt  this  difficulty, 
and  irkfomenefs  of  the  Art,  that  has  de* 
terr’d  Praftioners  from  purfuing  the  true 
Rules  of  ir,  and  made  them  content  them- 
felves  with  either  plaufible  fuppofitions, 
and  amufing  differtations  about  the  whole, 
or  elfe  being  over  curious  in  its  eafie 
branches.  Mankind  is  naturally  impatient, 
and  when  with  all  our  endeavours  we  are 
not  able  in  a  confiderable  time  to  difcover 
a  Truth,  we  commonly  give  over  fearching 
after  it,  and  fall  into  pleafant  Difputes 
and  witty  Speculations  concerning  it  ^ 
neither  is  this  a  bare  affertion  of  my  own  5 
but  the  Dogma,  of  a  Man  of  general  Learn¬ 
ing,  that  in  knowledge  of  human  Affairs, 
and  political  Wifdom  has  had  few  his  e- 
quals,  I  mean  Sir  Francis  Bacon ,  who  fays, 
Voflquam  homines  de  veritate  invenienda  fe¬ 
me!  defperaverint ,  omnino  omnia  fiunt  lan - 
guidiora ,  ex  quo  ft,  nt  deflect  ant  potius  ad 
amcenas  difputationes ,  return  qua f dam 
peragrationes ,  quam  in  fever  it  ate  inquifnionis 
fe  fu fine  ant. 


(  71  ) 

Mifom.  Your  Quotation  is  very  a  pro- 
fos  3  but  I  hear  fomebody  coming  op 
Stairs,  my  Supper  I  fuppofe  is  ready,—* 
So  it  is. —  well  Vhilopirio ,  Ne  mihi  defis  in 
Craftinum . 

Phil.  Ne  quid  ambigas,  adero,  Mifi - 
medon,  vale . 

Mifom.  Mifera  eft  vahtudo7  cum  vale 
dicit  medicus . 

Phil.  Salutem  precatus  fum  3  me  valedixi 3 
iw/e. 

Mifom.  He#  ##402  caligant  medicorum 
preces  /  eg#  do  fidget .  Refpice . 

Phil.  jD#«x  placet  auditus ,  non  moror 
vifttm  3  pr£ierquam  quod  nobis  Jatis  funt 
cculatee  manus . 


Ty.  ' ;  ■ 

V '  ' 

■ 

. 


I 


K  ’  • 

\  / 


. 


|  l 

!■ 


/ 


(  7?  ) 


THE  SECOND 


DIALOGUE 


BETWEEN 


Philopirio  a  Phyfician, 


and 


Mifomedon  his  Patient. 


r  your  coming  again,  I  fee 
you  are  fatisfied  with  what  I 


did. 


Phil.  I  thought  you  very  generous, 
Mifomedon  Does  your  Health  continue  as 
well  as  the  fair  Weather  ?  How  are  you 
to  Day  ? 

Mifom.  I  had  a  pain  in  my  Stomach 
this  Morning,  but  now  I  am  well  again, 
only  more  troubled  with  Wind  than  1  was 


Yefterday. 


(  7  4  ) 

Yefterday.  Sed  ad  rent .  I  am  very  well 
pleas’d  with  the  Reafons  you  have  given 
me,  why  you  decline  following  any  Hy- 
pothefis,  and  that  for  the  future  I  may  the 
Iefs  rely  upon  them  my  felf,  I  (hall  be 
glad  if  you  will  (hew  me  the  Errors  and 
Fallacies  of  the  moft  probable  ones,  that 
have  been  made  to  explain  the  Hypo- 
chondriack  Paffion.  Firft  to  begin  with 
the  Bads  of  the  whole  Oeconomy  5  How 
do  you  relilh  what  my  Modern  Phyfician 
(as  I  call’d  him)  told  me,  about  Gon- 
co&ion  5  that  it  is  perform’d  by  virtue  of 
an  adapted  Ferment,  that  infinuating  it 
felf  into  the  Pores  of  the  Aliment  is  able 
to  break  the  Contexture  of  it,  and  not 
by  the  help  of  any  heat,  as  the  Ancients 
grofly  imagin’d?  This  Opinion,  which 
is  now  eftablilh’d,  and  almoft  generally 
receiv’d,  has  to  my  thinking  fo  great  a 
refcmblance  to  Truth, 'and  anfwers  fo  well 
all  the  Phenomena.  of  digeftion  in  every 
Creature,  that  I  believe  nothing  drawn 
from  folid  Reafon  or  Experience  can  be 
faid  again!!:  if. 

Phil.  That  there  is  a  Ferment,  or  at 
leaft  a  certain  Menftruum,  that  in  the  Sto¬ 
mach  Digefts  or  Concofts  our  Aliments  is 
more  than  a  fuppofition;  and  that  in 
Fillies  there  is  no  heat  affifting  in  this 

Ope- 


(  75  ) 

Operation  is  demonftrable  5  but  then  it  is 
as  plain,  that  this  Menftruum  in  Fifties  is 
more  powerful,  than  in  other  Creatures  ; 
it  we  confider,  how  often  not  only  Heads, 
Legs,  Arms,  and  whole  Quarters  of  Men, 
but  likewife  things  of  greater  Solidity  have 
been  found  in  the  Bellies  of  Sharks  and 
other  large  Fifties,  fometimes  intire  as  they 
were  fwallow’d,  and  fometimes  half  or 
more  confumed. 

Mifom.  I  have  often  admired  how  any 
Menftruum  fhould  be  of  that  force  as  to 
diffolve  human  Bones,  and  things  of  harder 
fubftance,  and  yet  not  be  Corrofive,  or 
affeft  even  the  Tongue  with  the  leaft  Acri¬ 
mony  •■)  nay  moft  Fifties  whether  raw  or 
boil’d,  have  nothing  about  them  ( the 
Call  excepted)  but  what  is  either  Sweet 
and  Lufcious,  Vifccus  and  Infipid,  or  at 
the  worft  of  an  Oily  tafte.  A  little  Fifti 
fwallows  a  lefs,  when  perhaps  the  Mo¬ 
ment  after  he  becomes  the  Prey  of  one, 
that  is  bigger,  and  ftill  the  laft  devourer 
meets  with  the  fame  fate,  if  he  comes  in 
the  way  of  thofe,  that  are  larger  than 
himfelf. 

Phil.  This  made  a  Merry  Gentleman 
compare  a  great  Fifh,  in  which  they 
found  a  pretty  large  one,  in  him  another, 
and  a  third  in  that,  to  a  Ne-ft  of  Boxes, 

where 


{  76) 

w here  the  larged  holds  all  by  faking  in 
one,  and  the  next  biggeft,  for  three  or 
four  following,  ftill  contains  a  lefs. 

Mifom.  This  is  what  I  think  fo  unac¬ 
countable  that  without  the  hdp  of  chew¬ 
ing,  or  any  great  ftrength  of  Mufcles,  a 
Ferment  fhould  confome  an  entire  Fifh 
without  doing  any  harm  to  what  mull 
needs  be  very  Homogeneous  to  it,  the  Belly 
of  the  Fifh,  that  contains  it- 

Phil.  We  muft  fay  of  their  Bellies 
what  the  Schola  Sdlermtanafays  of  Cheefe, 
Cafeus  eji  nequam^  quid  concoquit  omnia,  fe- 
qmm :  but  if  the  power  of  their  Fer¬ 
ment  was  yet  ftranger  than  it  is,  this  could 
only  fatisfie  us,  that  there  are  Ferments, 
that  are  able  to  digeft  the  Aliments  with¬ 
out  the  help  of  heat  5  but  it  is  far  from 
proving,  that  we  have  fuch  a  one  5  when 
experience  Chews  us  the  contrary.  Firft, 
we  find  that  all  cold  things  taken  in  quan¬ 
tity  offend  the  Stomach  and  damp,  if  not 
totally  deftroy,  the  Ferment.  Secondly, 
it  is  evident  that  Aromaticks,  and  fuch  as 
are  call’d  hot,  and  abound  with  fpirituous 
and  fiery  Particles,  comfort  the  Stomach, 
affwage  its  Pains,  and  cure  Indigeftions 
occafion’d  by  Cold  5  nay  becaufe  we  can¬ 
not  procure  heat  enough  to  it  otherwife, 
we  make  ufe  of  Fire  it  felf,  not  only  by 
/  a 


(  77  ) 


a  previous  Coftion  of  our  Food,  but  like* 
wife  by  Eating  it  whilft  it  is  hot. 

Mifcm*  This  may  be  more  out  of  Cu- 
ftoffi  than  any  Neceffity. 

Phil .  I  cannot  well  prove,  that  it  is  ab« 
folutely  neceffary ,  but  ask  them,  that  in 
Winter  are  expofed  to  the  Wet  and  Cold 
without  ufing  great  Exercife,  which  they 
receive  more  benefit  from,  a  Mefs  of  hot 
Vidiuals,  or  raw  Roots  and  Herbs?  And 
if  you  fay,  that  what  they  may  chafe  is 
more  to  gratifie  their  Palates  than  their 
Stomachs,  take  an  inftancc  from  the  com¬ 
mon  Diet  of  Children,  by  which  you’ll 
find  that  boifd  warm  Milk  generally  agrees 
well  with,  and  nourifhes  them,  when  the 
fame  Milk  raw  and  eat  cold  will  Gripe 
and  diforder  them  :  Every  body  knows, 
that  a  Glafs  or  two  of  good  Wine  to 
I  thofe  that  are  no  profefs’d  Drinkers,  whets 
i  the  Appetite  to  a  Proverb,  and  that  like- 
|  wife  the  Spirit  of  it  does  the  fame  to  An- 
cient  People,  in  whom  the  natural  beat 
[j  is  diminiflfd  :  But  I  appeal  to  yonr  own 
I  Experience  :  Remember  what  it  was,  that 
i  at  Epfom  had  encreafed  the  Pain  in  your 
f  Stomach  and  quite  deftroycl  your  Appe- 
i  tite,  as  w  ell  as  Digeftion,  and  then  think 
I  on  the  Remedy  that  cured  you. 


M  f0M, 


(  78  ) 

Mifom .  Yet  the  Hypothefis  of  the  heats 
being  the  caufe  of  Conco&ion  won’t  folve 
the  Phenomenon  of  the  Fillies,  more  than 
that  of  the  Ferment  anfwers  the  common 
Experience,  which  you  alledge. 

Phil.  That’s  true  5  and  therefore  they 
are  both  infufficient  (ingle,  at  lead  as  to 
our  Bodies.  But  of  Concoftion  more 
hereafter :  To  come  clofer  to  your  Di- 
ftemper,  let  us  firft  examine,  what  all  along 
has  been  believ’d  to  be  the  caufe  of  the 
Hypochondriac^  Paffion :  The  generality 
of  the  Ancients  accufed  the  Spleen,  but 
no  otherwife,  than  as  it  was  the  Office  of 
their  Atm  bills ,  or  Melancholy  •  except 
Diodes,  who  would  have  it,  that  in  this 
Diftemper  part  of  the  Ventricle  was  in¬ 
flamed  :  But  as  thefe  Opinions  are  not 
much  infilled  upon,  we’ll  fpend  no  time 
about  them. 

Some  of  the  Modern  would  lay  all  the 
fault  upon  the  Meferakk  Veffels,  others 
again  blame  nothing  but  the  empty  fpace, 
that  is  under  the  Diaphragm  between  the 
Stomach  and  the  Spleen  $  as  the  moft  pro¬ 
per  Nurfery,  as  well  as  Receptacle  for  the 
many  Winds  that  always  iofeft  the  Hy- 
poshondtiack  Patienti® 


t'  v  ■  V  ;  •  ■ 


(  79  ) 

Mtfom.  This  among  others  I  know  is 
the  Hypothefis  of  Fifcherus,  who  has  writ 
a  particular  T  reatife  of  the  Diftemper  ^  but 
neither  his  nor  a  great  many  more  could 
ever  give  me  any  Satisfaction  5  what  to 
me  feems  more  plaufible  is,  that  of  Sylvius 
de  le  Boe,  who  fays,  that  if  the  Caufe  be 
not  in  the  Stomach  itfelf,  it  cannot  be  re* 
mote  from  it,  and  thinks,  that  it  proceeds 
from  an  effervefcency  of  the  bilious  Hu¬ 
mour,  as  it  comes  out  of  its  DuCt  with  the 
pituitous  Humour,  it'  meets  in  the  intejli- 
num  duodenum ,  deducing  from  the  faults 
of  both,  and  the  fuperiority  of  either,  all 
the  different  Symptoms  that  are  complain’d 
of. 

Phil.  I  have  nothing  againfl:  his  Hypo, 
thefis,  as  to  the  folving  of  the  Phenome¬ 
na,  only  it  won’t  hold  good  in  the  Cure  5 
the  greateft  part  of  which  is  built  upon 
the  evacuation  of  that  peccant  Humour, 
which  of  the  two  is  moft  predominant  5 
for  if  the  Doctrine  of  the  four  Humours, 
as  well  as  the  diftinCt  Purges,  belonging 
to  each  of  them,  that  only  eliminate  a 
I  peculiar  Humour,  without  medling  with 
|the  reft,  fhould  be  erroneous ;  then  it  is 
i  Demonstration,  that  if  you  follow  bis 
Advice,  you  do  nothing. 


/ 


Mifom* 


(  So  ) 

Mifom*  And  that  I  am  afraid  it  is,  tho7 
none  was  ever  more  generally  or  longer 
eftablifh’d  5  as  to  my  felf,  I  eonfefs  [ 
could  never  find  out,  which  way  Tama¬ 
rinds  7  Rhubarb^  Aloes9  Scamtnony7  &c.  that 
are  call'd  Cholagoga ,  fhould  look  out  the 
Bilious  Humours  from  the  other,  and  with 
lo  much  dexterity  fend  them  packing 
without  offering  to  difturb  any  of  the 
reft.  I  can't  imagine,  but  that  Agaric 
Turbith ,  Rermodactyls^  and  Colloquintida , 
are  as  well  Menalagoga  and  Hydragoga7  a$ 
they  are  P hlegmagoga^  which  forfooth  is 
their  Titles  nay,  I  am  fure,  that  all  Ca • 
tharticky  (they  may  call  ’em  by  what  fine 
Names  they  pleafe)  will  purge  every  thing 
that  comes  in  their  way,  and  take  the  ve¬ 
ry  Flelh  from  your  Bones,  if  you  make 
them  ftrong  enough,  or  repeat  them  often. 
What  I  fay  I  fpeak,  as  van  Hehnont  by 
woful  experience,  who  when  they  had 
purg’d  him  feverely  to  Cure  the  Itch, 
fpeaking  of  himfelf,  faid  that,  he  had 
1  earn’d — -  Here  it  is  Page  52,  quod  Vhar- 
maca  purgantia  non  purgarent ,  ant  munda - 
rent  fed  putrefacerent  ;  quod  vividam  cor • 
poris  met  Jubflantiam  liquaffent ^  &  in  putri- 
laginem  refolvififent :  fihtod  indijferenter  con - 
taminarent  quicquid  quo  quo  modo  attingerent , 
five  cruor  ejfet  five  demum  ipfamet  caro  vi- 

ven's 


(*') 

wens?  non  an  fern  feleffiive  unum  pro  dio 
elicerent  &  J epara *  ent  :  quod  Contamina- 
turn  denotar et  juum  Contaminant  ejfe  me- 
rum  venenum  Corporis  hquefaffiivum  &  Pn- 
trefa&ivum  3  quod  contaminatum  propul fante 
naturJ  effluent.,  donee  its  Pharmaci  ex  ant  lata 
ejfet  :  Quod  hoc  Jieret  in  Jano  non  feem  at - 
que  in  £gro , 

Phi\  Van  Helmont  was  as  rafh,  as  lie 
was  witty  3  I  am  always  extreamly  pleas’d 
with  his  good  Senfe,  and  Energetick  v/ay 
of  writing,  but  have  often  wifhM  that 
his  R.eafons  had  been  better  back'd  with 
Obfervations,  than  I  have  found  fome  of 
them.  But  to  return  to  Sylvius :  We  may 
oblerve  of  him  that  he  was  a  Man  of 
Candour  5  for  however  he  made  this  Hy¬ 
pothec?,  he  feems  not  to  be  very  fond  of 
it,  fubmits  every  thing,  he  fays,  to  Ex¬ 
perience,  and  recommends  to  all  Phyficians, 
not  to  perftftin  an  Error,  if  they  find  that 
tthey  have  committed  any. 

What  I  think  moft  fuitable  to  the  Ob- 
fervadons  I  have  made,  and  consequently 
moft  probable,  is  the  Opinion  of  thole,*; 
that  abfolviog  the  Spleen,  Meferaick 
Veflels,  Bilious,  and  Pancreatick  juice, 
&c.  throw  all  the  fault  upon  the  Sto¬ 
mach, 


(  «*  ) 

Mifom.  Now  you  furprife  me  again : 
For  how  can  you  approve  of  no  Hypo- 
thefis,  and  yet  think  them  in  the  right, 
that  fuppofe  the  fault  to  be  in  the  Sto¬ 
mach  ? 

Phil.  Let  me  explain  my  felf.*  I  may 
know  one  to  be  an  ill  Man,  and  yet  have 
reafon  not  to  believe  feme  Crimes  that 
are  laid  to  his  charge :  So  here,  by  what 
I  know  from  Obfertation,  it  is  demon- 
ft r able  to  me,  that  the  caufe  of  Hypo- 
ehondriack  and  Hifterick  Difeafes  is  in  the 
Stomach*  and  yet  I  am  not  fatisfied  with 
what  is  faid  about  it  by  others,  when  they 
begin  to  particularize,  the1  they  are  of 
the  fame  Opinion  as  to  the  Vijcus  to  be 
blamed.  Diodes ,  as  I  have  already  faid, 
accufes  the  Stomach,  the  Learned  High- 
more  dees  the  fame, and  I  am  of  their  Opini¬ 
on  as  to  the  Vifcm  in  qneftion.  But  as  the 
fir  ft  fuppofes,  that  there  is  an  Inflammati¬ 
on  toward  the  lower  part  of  it  near  the 
P Horns  $  and  the  other,  that  the  Tone  of 
it  is  become  fo  loofe  and  flaccid,  that 
it  can  hardly  perform  its  Office,  and 
Concepts  the  Aliments  but  imperfedtly  5 
fo  f  have  Reafons  to  Diffent  from  both, 
becaufc  they  both  clafh  with  the  Obfer- 
vations  I  have  made. 

Mifow.  Willis ,  who  places  the  Diftem* 
per  among  the  Convuliive,  I  remember, 

refutes 


1 


I 


.  (  *o 

refutes  this  Highmore,  and  chiefly  for  not 
allowing  the  Spleen  to  be  of  any  other 
ufe  than  to  warm  and  cheriftl  the  Ven¬ 
tricle  :  What  he  fays  himfelf  of  Fermen¬ 
tation  I  like  wonderfully,  and  have  read 
feveral  pajffrges  in  that  Treatife  above 
Twenty  times  with  a  great  deal  of  de¬ 
light  5  the  Office  he  affigns  to  the  Spleen 
is  certainly  very  rational,  and  fometimes 
I  cant  help  thinking,  but  that  he  has  hit 
upon  the  true  Caufe  of  my  Diftemper :  I 
know  you  are  no  admirer  of  thofe  flights 
of  Invention  in  Phyfick*  but  I  muft  read 
a  paffage  or  two  of  the  Fifth  Chapter  to 
you :  I  have  lent  out  the  Latin ,  and  (hall 
make  ufe  o f  the  Tranflation :  What  can 
be  more  natural,  than  this  Analogy  be* 
tween  the  Body  and  a  Still  >  But  it  fee  ms 
to  mey  that  the  Brain  with  Sk&U  over  it>  and 
the  appending  Nerves7reprefent  the  little  Head 
dr  Glafs  Alemhick,  with  a  Spunge  laid  upon 
it ,  as  we  nje  to  do  for  the  highly  rectifying 
of  the  Spirit  of  Wine  :  For  truly  the  Blood 
when  rarified  hy  heat  is  carried  from  the 
Chimney  of  the  Heart  to  the  Head ,  even  as 
the  Spirit  of  Wine  boiling  in  the  Cucurbit , 
and  being  refolved  into  Vapours ,  elevated  in - 
to  the  Alembick  f  where  the  Spunge  covering 
i  all  the  opening  of  the  holc^  only  transmits  the 
more  penetrating  and  very  fubtile  Spirits ,  and 

G  %  carries 


(  *4  )  ■  ■  1 

carries  them  to  the  Snout  of  the  Alembick  - 
In  the  mean  tune  the  more  thick.  Particles 
are  flay'd  and  hindered  from  faffing:  Not 
unlike  this  manner  the  Blood  being  dilated 
into  the  Head ,  its  Spirituous ,  Volatil  and 
Subtle  Particles  being  refrain d  within ?  by 
the  Skull  and  its  iVlenynges ,  by  an  Ahm * 

bick-i  are  drunk  up  by  the  Spungy  fubflance  of 
the  Brain  and  there  being  made  more  noble 
or  excellent ,  .^re  derived  into  the  Nerves  as  fo 
many  Snouts  hanging  to  it.  Lower  he  lays. 
Since  we  treat  of  be  r  men  Is,  which  are  found 
in  • the  Animal  Body^we  may  here  opportunely 
enquire,  what  is  the  life  of  the  Spleen ?  con¬ 
cerning  which  at  good  things  are  Jaid  by 
fome  :  That  it  is  as  it  were  another  Liver, 
and  fervesfor  ihe  making  of  Blood  for  the 
Vifcera  of  ihe  lower  Belly  :  It  is  by  others 
reputed  to.,  be  of  a  mo  [I  vile  ufe $  that  it  is 
only  ihe  Sink,  or  j }alfesv  into  which  the  Yx- 
culencies,  of  the  Blood  are  cajl.  By  reafon 
of  its  ftruUure  we  make  this  fort  of  Conje  * 
■■Bure ,  becaufe  the  Arteries  do  carry  the  Blood 
to  this 3  and  the  Veins,  bring  it  away ,  neither 
any  other  thing  is  carried  in  or  convey  d  out , 
and,  for  that ?  its  fubflance  is  fil'd  with 
black  and  Stagnating  Bloody  it  feems  that  it 
is,  as  it  were,  a  St  ore- hoi; fe  for  the  receiving 
of  the  Earthy  and  Muddy  part  of  the  Blood , 
which  afterwards  being  exalted  in  the  na¬ 
ture 


(  8*  ) 


lure  of  a  Ferment,  is  carried-  back  to  the 
Shod  for  the  heating  of  it.  Wherefore 
while  the  Blood  being  carried  by  the  Arteries 
enters  ,  the  Spleen ,  f on/e  thing  is  drawn  from 
it)  to  wit,  the  Muddy  and.  Terre  fir  ial  Par¬ 
ticles  ;  which  are,  as  it  were ,  the  Dregs  and 
Caput  Mortuum  of  the  Blood  that  by  ibis 
means  the  whole  Mafs  of  the  Blood  might  b& 
freed  from  the  Melancholic k,  or  atrabilious 
Juice  5  which  is  Separated  in  the  Spleen ,  even 
as  the  Tellow  Bile  or  C holler  is  in  the  Liver  s, 
ivh  ere  fore  for  the  moji  part ,  the  Spleen  is  of 
a  blacl{  or  blewifh  c clour,  by  reajon  of  the 
F  leniencies  and  dregs  there  laid  up.  But 
as  this  Juice  depofted  in  the  Milt ,  or  Spleen 9 
is  not  altogether  unprofitable  t  bat  by  reajon 
■of  the  Plenty  of  fixed  Salts  is  of  a  vvy 
fermenting  nature 9  it  is  not  prefently  as  the 
\Choller  cafi'  into  the  Sink ?  but  it  is  farther 
cooked  in  the  Spleen ,  and  being  exalted  goes 
into  a  Ter  merit  ;  which  being  lajlly  com¬ 
mitted  to  the  Blood  promotes  its  motion  and 
volatilifation 3  wherefore  as  Something  is  drawn 
from  the  Blood !,  entring  the  Spleen  by  the 
;  Arteries ,  to  whs  the  crude  juice  of  M  da  ri¬ 
ch  oly  }  fo  f owe  thing  is  continually  added  to 
[the  fame,  flowing  back  through  the  Feins  y 
to  wit ,  the  fame  juice  concoUed  and  exalted 
into  the  nature  of  a  Ferment  :  Even  as  Chy » 

G  3  m  i  (is 


( *« ) 

ml  (Is  in  Drilling ,  that  the  Liquor  may  be 
made  better,  Jeparate  the  Spirituous  and  fubtile 
parts  from  the  Caput  Mortuum,  and  then 
four  them  on  again  }  and  this  work,  they  fo 
often  repeat  till  the  Caput  Mortuum  is  by 
frequent  Diflillation  volatiz>ed>  and  the  Li¬ 
quor  rightly  exalted  even  in  all  its  Par¬ 
ticles. 

Phil.  The  admirable  Willis  is  here  as  he 
is  every  where  full  of  wit$  his  Specula¬ 
tions  are  as  Sublime,  as  imagination  can 
carry  them,  and  the  contrivances  of  all 
he  fuppofes  are  mofi  Ingenious.  Tb.fe 
Simile* s  I  confefs  are  very  diw  rting  for 
People  that  have  nothing  elf-  t>  do: 
In  feme  of  our  Modern  Hyporhefes  there 
is  as  much  Wit  to  he  difeover’d  as  in  a 
tolierable  Play/  and  the  contrivance  of 
them  cofts  as  much  labour  }  what  pity  it  is 
tfaev  won't  cure  Sick  Peopled 

Mi  (am.  Is  it  not  very  natural  ?  What 
d’ye  think  of  it  > 

Phil.  Yes,  it  is  very  natural,  and  what 
I  think  of  it  HI  tell  you.  You  have  feen 
without  doubt  a  pretty  Simile ,  between 
a  yielding  Miftrifs  and  a  green  Faggot 
that’s  laid  upon  the  Fire*  the  weeping, 
and  crackling  in  the  Haroe  of  both  is  a 
happy  thought^  and  fo  are  the  Sponge  of 
the  Brain,  and  the  Nerves  for  Snouts  in 

the 


(  87  )• 

the  Alembick  of  Willfc^  but  fure  no  mor¬ 
tal  would  lay  any  ftrefs  upon,  or  look  for 
any  real  application  in  either.  Can  a 
Man  that  underftands  but  half  fo  much 
of  Anatomy  as  one  may  learn  at  aButcher’s- 
Stall,  think,  that  a  Woman  is  like  a  Fag¬ 
got,  or  the  infide  of  the  Body  like  a  Still. 
That  the  firft  of  the  Simile* s  is  an  Error 
you  might  have  been  convinced  of  from  a 
Song,  that  the  Boys  ufed  to  Sing  at  Paris , 
I  believe  piuch  about  the  time  that  you 
was  there,  it  began  :  lTy  a  bkn  de  U 
difference  d  une  femme  a  Fagot ,  &c.  and 
that  the  fecond  is  ialfe,  I  can  fhew  you 
prefently. 

Mifom.  If  the  making  of  Hypothecs  be 
very  eafie,  I  am  well  fatisfied  it  is  not 
very  difficult  to  Ridicule  them. 

Phil.  They  cannot  be  ridicul’d  fo  much 
as  they  deferve  it;  when  their  Authors 
would  have  us  draw  any  Confequences 
from  them  in  matters  of  the  higheft  mo¬ 
ment  5  but  if  you  are  in  earneft,  let  us 
once  examine  the  Simile ,  and  take  the 
Still  to  Pieces.  Firft,  What  Comparifbn 
-is  there  between  the  Fun&ion  of  the 
Heart,  the  great  Treafury  of  Blood  and 
life,  and  the  vile  Office  of  a  Chimney  > 

G  4 


Mifom- 


(  «  ) 

Mifoffl.  But  you  are  Captious,  Won’t 
you  ailow  of  either  Trope  or  Figure? 
By  Chimney  he  means  the  Furnace  that 
gives  the  Heat,  the  Fire  place  of  the 
Still. 

:  Phil  No,  Mifomedcn,  there  is  more 
Artifice  in  this  than  ye  are  aware  of; 
The  word  Chimney  is  made  ufe  of  de-  • 
fignedly,  to  hide,  as  much  as  pcffible5  the 
d  formity  of  the  Still :  For  the  Caput 
Mortuum  being  in  the  Spleen,  if  he  bad 
call’d  tire  Heart  the  Furnace,  as  he  ought 
to  have  done,  it  would  have  been  too 
pYsn,  that  he  had  made  the  Fire  between 
the  Head  and  bottom  of  the  Still.  But  if 
we  overlook  this,  what  tnuft  become  of 
the  Kidneys,  the  Liver,  the  Pancreas,  and 
all  the  reft  of  the  Entrails?  I  wonder  he 
did  not  make  a  pair  of  Bellows  of  the 
Lungs,  unlefs  he  was  afraid  of  fpoiling 
them  fo  near  the  Fires,  or  made  room 
m  his  Still  lor  the  Ventricle,  which  if  not 
the  chief,,  is  at  leaft  one  of  the  principal 
P/fcera ,  and  infinitely  more  neccflary  than 
the  Spleen.  The  Caput  Wiortuum  is  alvvaySx 
look’d  for  in  the  loweft  part  of  all  $  then 
why  fhould  he  grope  for  imaginary  dregs 
in  the  Spleen,  when  putting  his  hand  a 
little  lower  he  might  have  met  with  real 
ones?  But  what  muft  we  fay  to  all  the 

v  Four- 


.  (  b  ) 

Four-footed  Animals,  that  have  Hearts* 
Milts,  and  Brains,  as  well  as  vye$  whofe 
Heads  are  elevated  no  higher  than  their 
Rumps  5  it  they  are  Stills  two  }  confider- 
ing  that  the  Fire  is  in  the  middle,  and 
forces  the  Contents  as. much  one  way  as 
the  other,  it  is  an  even  bet,  in  which  of 
t  e  two. mod  Spirits  will  be  made  5  only 
thole  in  the  back  part  will  not  be  quite 
fo  fine,  becaufe  they  have  no  Spunge 
there. 

Good  God!  was  Wit  given  to  Man¬ 
kind  for  fuch  ignoble  purpofes,  as  that 
we  (hould  amufe  our  felves  with  it  where 
Health  and  Lite  are  at  ftake,  and  in  the 
midft  cf  Danger  make  a  mock  of  Nature, 
inftead  of  obferving  and  a  (lifting  her  > 
But  let  us  fee  what  Willis  faysot  theSp!een$ 
where  he  treats  of  the  Pajjio  Hypochon¬ 
driac  a.  Here  he  leaves  the  fimile,  and 
fays :  — — 'So  h  fcems,  that  the  Blood  being 
laid  up  in  the  Spleen ,  and  there  getting  a 
fournefs ,  as  it  were  by  Stagnation ,  puts  on  the 
nature  of  a  Ferment ,  whereby  indeed  the 
reft  of  the  Mafs  of  Bloody  and  perhaps  the 
other  Humours  are  actuated ,  and  as  it  were 

fpiriindifed  into  a  more  lively  Motion - 

of  which  let  us  examine  the  probability . 
Fir  ft,  there  are  no  Cavities  in  the  Spleen, 
but  the  Veffels  that  run  through  it,  in 
i,  thefe 


(  9°  ) 

thefe  the  Blood  will  not  Stagnate,  as 
long  as  it  is  fluid,  and  that  it  fhouid  any 
where  Co-agulate  naturally,  is  impoffible; 
for  as  Van  Helmonl  fays  very  well :  Vena 
fuum  Cruorem  etiam  in  Cadavers  retinent 
Jiuidum  con  fen  fit  fotius  Anatomise 0  Cruor  au~ 
tern  exir&venatus  mox  in  grnmnm  Concrefcit . 
Where  then  (hall  it  be  laid  up  till  it  is 
fowr  ?  For  to  retain  it  in  the  Parenchy - 
mat  the  fubftance  of  the  Spleen  it  felf, 
which  at  beft  can  only  be  confider’d  as  a 
Strainer,  is  keeping  Water  in  a  Sieve. 
But  Secondly,  If  we  fhouid  allow  him, 
that  it  may  be  kept  there  ^  let  him  give 
os  a  Reafon,  why  all  the  F&culexcie s 
of  the  Blood  fhouid  refort  to  the  Spleen 
only,  §nd  not  as  well  to  the  Liver,  or  o* 
ther  Parts,  unlefs  they  are  drawn  thither 
by  iome  pcultas  attra&ix ,  fo  much  ri« 
dicul’d  in  the  Ancients:  Qmves  enim  hu - 
mores j  fays  EUmtter ,  fpeaking  of  the 
Spleen,  Sicnti  in  reliqua  vifcera  pul  fit  mo- 
vtntm\  &  nnllus  naturalism  Corporis  par - 
tium  appctiins  pro  nutritions  earum  demon - 
firari  poiefi ,  Thirdly,  if  we  grant  that 
the  Blood  ftands  in  need  of  fomething  to 
fpiritualize,  and  make  it  brisk  more  in  a 
Mao  than  in  a  Boy,  which  is  yet  a  ftrange 
fuppofition,  how  and  which  way  fhall 
this  be  done  by  a  fowr,  or  as  lower 

he 


t 


(90 

be  calls  it, the  fharpnefs  and  aufterify  of  a 
Ferment  5  as  if  a  Man  was  to  fqueeze  an 
Orange  in  a  Cup  of  Ale  >  ,  What  notion 
at  this  rate  inuft  People  ‘  have  of  the 
Blood,  in  which  nothing  that’s  (harp  or 
fowr  can  be,  without  immediate  pre¬ 
judice  to  it,  as  from  all  the  Experiments 
'of  the  Chirurgia  inf-  for  in  is  manifeft  } 
Nay,  this  fowr  Ferment  would  offend 
even  the  Spleen  it  fe!f,  if  it  be  true,  as  ft 
is  very  probable,  what  Tachenius  in  Hip » 
pocr •  Chymic.  fays,  §>uod  omne  acidnm  ex¬ 
tra  ventriculum  nature  inimicum  ft.  ' 

Mind  how  plaufible  he  drives  to  make 
his  Hypothefis !  how  he  adapts  it  to  the  Pa¬ 
lates  of  5p!enetick  Patients,  where  he 
quotes  the  Opinion  of  Velthnfius ,  who  he 

fays  — - has  determined  as  highly  probable , 

a  Ferment  to  be  contain  d  in  this  inward  ; 
whereby  the  Jluggifh  Particles  of  the  B!.ood 
are  brought  into  a  fate  of  activity  ;  Becaufe 
taking  notice  that  in  Children  and  others  in - 
dued  with  a  Sanguine  temperament ,  and 
more  Fat ,  or  dull  habit  of  Body ,  §ven  as 
their  Manners  and  difpofiiion  of  Mind  were, 
inclined  to  Idlenefs ,  Softnefs  and  Dullnefs% 
fo  their  Spleen  was  ever  of  a  reddijh  colour % 
and  full  of  florid  Blood  like  the  Liver  % 
from  hence  he  concludes ,  that  the  Spleen 
but  little  performs  its  Office^  in  thefe ,  as  the 

Genital 


(  9r  ) 

Genital  Parts  before  ripe  Age,  or  in  thofe  of 
weak,  Loins  ;  but  on  the  contrary f  for  as 
much  as  Men  of  a  middle  Age7  and  chiefly 
thofe s  who  Are  of  a  fevere  Countenance  and 
of  a  lean  Body 9  as  in  them  appear  marks  of 
Cunning ,  Sagacity ,  Fortitude  and  Confianey  5 
fo  their  Spleen  is  found  to  be  of  a  livid or 
blmifl)  colour 5  and  imbrued  with  Blood*  as 
it  were ,  muddy  :  Further  he  argues  from 
hence ,  that  the  Blood  being  kept  long  in  the 
Spleen ,  as  in  a  Conduit  or  Receptacle ,  turns 
plainly  into  a  Ferment  5  by  which  its  re¬ 
maining  Mafs ,  being  from  thence  infpiredy 
is  made  more  fubtil,  and  begets  more  acute 
Spirits  both  in  the  Vital  and  in  the  Animal 
Kingdom 9  or  Government  3  for  he  fuppofes 
0  tr  Bodies  naturally  to  abound  with  too 
much  Humidity ,  by  which  indeed  the  Fun - 
•  clion  of  the  Barts,  and  many  of  the  Vi- 
fcera  are  very  much  dtdPd  :  But  that  the 
Spleen  does  communicate  to  the  Mafs  of 
Blood ,  folid,  firm  and  con fl ant  Parts ,  and 
not  c a fily  to  be  difijipated  5  and  that  thofe  do 
wipe  away  th&t  moiflnefs ,  and  with  it  carry 
away  in  form  me  a  Cure  that  foftnefs  from  the 
Blood  and  Spirits ,  which  is  predominant 
in  tender  Age  :  Almofi  after  the  fame  man¬ 
ner  as  the  Northern  Wind,  or  the  Eaflern 
Gales  fanning ,  and  immediately  penetrating 
the  Air 3  wilh  the  drinefs  and  Strength  of 

their 


(  91  ) 


their  Farts ,  breath  Health  and  Strength  to 
the  Air  and  to  our  Bodies  - — —This  is  what 
the  French  call  Raifonner  a  perte  de  vue , 
and  yet  methinks  it  is  engaging,  as  is  e- 
fpeeially,  what  lower  he  fays -which 
kind  of  Spleeny-Juice  being  dilated  to  the 
Brain ,  Jharpens  the  Animal  Spirits  and  raifes 
them  upy  being  jloathful ,  and  irritates  them 
into  quicks  motions ,  from  whence  it  is  com ® 
won\y  faid  the  Sharpnefs  and  Sagacity  of  the 
Mind  doth  proceed  from  the  Spleen,  and 
Splenetick  People  are  accounted  ingenious - — 
You  fee  Mifomedon ,  how  your  Witty  Men 
give  every  thing  a  Glcfs,  and  let  not  the 
leaf!  fhadow  of  Reafon  flip  that  can  affift 
them  .•  Proverbs,  Vulgar  fayings,  any 
thing  to  give  a  lift  to  an  Hypothefis  3 
but  how  high  a  Compliment  foever  what 
I  read  laft  may  appear  to  be  at  firft  view 
to  Hypochondriacks,  it  is  but  a  forry  one 
in  reality  >  to  put  them  in  mind  that  they 
are  beholden  for  their  brighter  parts  ftfae 
Divin#  particula  aura,  of  which  you  know 
Men  are  fo  fond)  to  a  fowr  Ferment 
made  from  the  Dregs  and  Muddy  part  of 
the  Blood,  by  Stagnating  in  fuch  an  ill 
look'd  Vtfcus  as  the  Spleen,  and  give' 
them  the  Mortification  of  thinking  their 
Wit  and  their  Diftemper  of  the  fame  O- 
figinak  Befides  that,  what  it  is  built 


UpoHj 


C  $>4  ) 

upon,  will  hardly  hold  Water  5  for  the 
word  Spleen  irvits  Figurative  Senfe  is  made 
ufe  of  to  exprefs  Paffion,  Malice,  Ran¬ 
cour,  and  a  Perverfly  Satyrical  Temper, 
rather  than  Sharpnefs  and  Sagacity  : 
What  Splenetick  People  are  counted  to 
be  I  won’t  difpute  ;  but  the  Epithet  it  > 
felf,  which  is  ever  taken  in  malam  partem, 
is  given  to  no  body  becaufe  he  is  Witty 
or  Ingenious;  but  for  being  Touchy, 
Wafpifb,  and  Unfociable,  always  denoting 
a  Vice,  and  not  a  Virtue  of  the  Mind  : 
Being  a  Foreigner  I  dare  not  be  very  po- 
fitive  in  what  concerns  the  Language  5 
yet  the  incomparable  Butler  feems  to  be 
of  my  fide  ;  where  he  fays  of  the  Pha- 
natick**  to  whom,  he  defigns  no  Pane- 
gyrick ;  that  they  are 

As  Peevifh  and  as  Splenetick 

As  Dog  dijlratf’,  or  Mcnky  Sick, 

But  to  (hew  you,  that,  I  would  not  dit 
oblige  my  Patients  more  than  Velthujius 
or  Willis,  I’ll  readily  allow  whatever  they 
Laid  of  their  Sharpnefs  and  Sagacity  ;  nay 
I’ll  add,  that  they  are  ofcner  Men  of 
Learning,  than  not ;  in  fo  much,  that  the 
Pajjio  Hypochondriac  a  in  High- Dutch  is 
call’d  SPtt  dMainteu  Brancfclsep&t,  the 

D.feafe 


-  (  95  ) 

Difeafe  of  the  Learned ;  becaufe  they 
are  more  fubjeft  to  it  than  other 
People.  If  the  Spleen  be  the  occafion 
of  all  this,  it  certainly  finds  them 
Books  too  :  I  urge  this  fo  far,  to  let  you 
fee  what  wrong  Conftru&ions  even  great 
Men  can  put  upon  things  to  ferve  an  Hy- 
pothefis.  Hypochondriac*!.  People  are  ge¬ 
nerally  Men  of  Senfe,  that’s  very  true : 
Not  that  the  Spleen  is  the  caufe  of  both, 
or  either  indeed  5  but  becaufe  Men  of 
Senfe,  efpecially  thofe  of  Learning,  are 
guilty  of  Errors,  that,  utilefs  they  are  of 
a  very  happy  Conftitution,  will  infal¬ 
libly  bring  the  Difeafe  upon  them,  finch  as 
Blockheads  can’t  commit,  for  all  Men  that 
continually  fatigue  their  Heads  with  In- 
tenfe  Thought  and  Study,  v/hilft  they 
neglect  to  give  the  reft  of  their  Bodies 
the  Exerdfe  they  require,  go  the  ready 
way  to  get  it,  as  by  undeniable  Argu¬ 
ments  I  (hall  demonftrate  hereafter :  So 
that  foft-headed  People  are  no  other  wife 
exempt  from  this  Difeafe,  than  Eunuchs 
are  from  Claps,  by  being  uncapable  of 
performing  what  may  occafion  it. 

Mifom.  But  what  can  you  fay  to  the 
Anatomical  Obfervations  5.  that  are  in  be¬ 
half  of  the  Hypothefis  ? 

Phil, 


i  •  - - 

(  96  )  ,  • 

Thih  Th at  I  h  ave  more  convincing  ones 
againfl  it  5  for  as  Vdthufius  and  others?  the 
mighty  Champions  for  the  Honour  of 
this  Vi  feus  will  have  it,  that  even  the 
fpwr  Ferment  of  the  Stomach  is  like- 
wife  borrow’d  from  the  Spleen,  fo  the 
latter  rouft  be  at  leaft  as  neceflary  an  Or¬ 
gan  as  the  firft  by  their  Hypothecs :  Then 
what  will  they  fay  of  all  the  Dogs  that 
have  had  thtir  Milts  cut  out  ^  as  Dievier- 
b'oek,  Etmuller  with  Fifty  more,  and  I 
my  felf  have  feen  more  than  once,  that 
Eat  as  vpraciotfly  digefted  as  well,  and 
as  far  as  I  could  lee?  were  asfenfible  Dogs 
as  their  Neighbours  )  Does  not  one  fuch 
an  inftance  deftroy  their  whole  Fabrick  ? 
But  not  to  infill:  upon  this,  and  make  it 
appear  what  Cobweb  reafons  they  de¬ 
pend  upon  ^  let  us  mind  the  Obfervations 
themfeives,  and  the  Confluences  they 
draw  from  them.  The  hinge  of  the 
whole  turns  upon  the  Spleens  not  per¬ 
forming  its  Office  in  Children  nor  foft- 
headed  People  5  becaufe  in  them  it  looks 
Red,  and  not  Livid,  as  it  does  in  Men  of 
fbarp  Senfe*  As  to  Children,  I  know  their 
Obfervation  is  very  true  :  But  neither  the 
Liver,  the  Kidneys,  nor  any  of  the  other 
Vifcera ,  r.or  the  Mufeles,  ihe  Flefh  it  felf 
are  of  fo  deep  a  colour  in  no  Animals, 

when 


(  97  ) 

when  they  ape  Young,  as  when  they  are 
come  to  their  full  growth/  Would  they 
conclude  from  this  likewife,  that  they  did 
not  perform  their  Office?  But  that  the 
fame  rednefs  of  Spleen  is  always  to  be 
found  in  flothful  foft-headed  People  I 
doubt  much  :  At  leaft  I  don’t  believe  that 
they  have  obferv’d  it  often  enough,  to  lay 
fo  much  ftrefs  upon  it:  But,  as  f  am  not 
able  to  contradift  them,  I  mud  allow 
whatever  they  can  make  of  it.  The  next, 
I  (hall  enquire  into,  is  what  we  are  to  un¬ 
derhand  by  the  Spleens  but  little  per¬ 
forming  its  Office:  In  order  to  which 
we’ll  divide  the  Functions  of  it  in  two 
parts  5  the  one,  to  receive  the  Dregs  from 
the  Blood,  and  the  other  to  Volatilize 
them  into  a  Ferment,  to  quicken  and  en¬ 
liven  the  Blood.  If  the  Spleen  in  thofe 
inftances  of  its  rednefs  performs  neither 
of  the  two  Functions,  then  what  becomes 
of  the  Dregs  of  the  Blood  ?  Which  way 
'!  does  the  Blood  get  rid  of  them  ?  And 
jj  where  are  they  laid  up  during  the  Nonage 
I  of  the  Spleen?  But  if  it  receives  the 
ij  Dregs,  and  is  only  deficient  in  volatilizing 
ii  them  into  a  Ferment,  and  fending  it  away 
i  into  the  Blood,  then  it  ought  to  be  more 
*  livid  in  them  than  in  adult  and  witty  Peo¬ 
ple  5  becaufe  it  keeps  all  the  Dregs:  Be- 
.  H  fid 


(  98  ) 

fides  that,  when  the  Spleen  would  be 
ftuffd  with  FtceS)  and  no  more  able  to 
receive  the  Recrements  of  the  Blood, 
which  (hould  be  forced  to  flow  back  into 
the  Neighbouring  branches  of  the  Cdliack 
Artery,  &c.  This  would  produce  the  fame 
Diftetnpers,  which  according  to  the  Hy- 
pothefis  and  Willis's  own  words  muft  fol¬ 
low  in  all  Stoppages  oi  the  Spleen, 

Mifom .  I  fee  very  well,  that  if  the 
Spleen  fhould  perform  one  part  of  its  Office 
to  the  full,  and  be  wholly  wanting  in  the 
other,  none  would  be  more  fubjeft  to  the 
Hypochondriack  Paffion,  than  Children, 
and  foft-headed  People,  which  I  fuppofe 
is  the  abfurdum ,  to  which  you  would 
bring  them :  But  Velthufius  fays  no  fuch 
thing,  and  only  concludes,  that  the  Spleen 
performs  its  office  but  little  5  that  is,  re¬ 
ceives  few  F&culencies ,  and  makes  little, „ 
or  but  an  imperfed  Ferment,  orelfe,  which] 
is  moft  probable,  lets  the  Facnlent  Blood, 
pafs  through  its  fubftance  without  altering; 
it  much. 

Phil.  Ill  anfwer  that'prefently :  But 
firft  let  us  look  into  the  merits  of  that:: 
fpecious  cotnparifon  between  the  non- per¬ 
formance  of  the  Genital  Parts,  and  that  oft 
the  Spleen.  The  Genital  Parts,  ’tis  very 
true,  don’t  perform  their  office  before  the 

Years 


(  99  ) 

|  Years  of  Puberty  $  but  then  they  are  ne* 

;)  ver  of  any  fervice  to  the  Blood  5  the 
I  Blood  depofits  nothing  in  them,  but 
|  what  it  had  better  to  keep  3  and  the 
3  lefs  they  are  made  ufe  of,  the  richer  that 
j  remains  $  for  it  is  undeniable,  that  no 
I  Fun&ion  depauperates  the  Blood, or  (hortens 
|  even  Life  it  felf  more  than  theirs.  The 
I  Spleen  on  the  other  fide  is  very  ufeful  to 
I  the  Blood,  and  according  to  their  Bypo* 

I  thefis,  the  Sink  where  it  empties  all  its 

I  filth  and  cleanfes  it  felf.  After  this!  mull: 
ask  you  or  any  Man  alive.  Whether  the 
Confequence  to  be  drawn  from  the  Analo¬ 
gy  that  is  between  them  can  run  other- 
wife  than  thus  ?  Becaufe  the  Blood  can 
it  be  eafie  under  the  non-performance  of  Or* 

I  gans,  than  only  Prey  upon  and  Rob  it  of 
f  its  moft  Balfamick  Parts,  therefore  it  may 
i  likewife  difpenfe  with  the  non-perform- 
j  ance  of  an  Organ  that  draws  the  dregs 
ti  from  and  cleanfes  it :  Which,  if  I  may 
1  be  allow’d  to  make  a  cornparifcn  in  my 
i  turn,  is  to  fay,  as  well  as  a  Man  may  be 
Twenty  Years  without  paying  Taxes,  fa 
well  he  may  live  the  fame  ;time  without 
!  (hitting  himfelf.  Now  for  your  objection  s 
Velthitfius  you  fay  makes  the  Spleen  per- 
form  its  Office  but  little,  which  may  be 
tmderftood  that  the  Feculent  Blood  paffes 

H  2  thro* 


/ 


(  l  OB  ) 

thro’  the  Spleen  without  receiving  any 
great  alteration,  and  if  fo,  all  my  fine  Con¬ 
clusions  come  to  nothing.  Very  well. 
But  the  F&culencies  pairing  through  the 
Spleen  with  fo  little  difturbance,  I  hope 
you’ll  allow  me,  that  they  fall  remain  m 
the  Blood  5  from  which  it  muft  follow, 
that  in  a  little  time  the  whole  Mafs  of  it 
will  be  Feculent,  unlefs  you  either  fuppofe, 
that  in  Children  and  foft»  headed  People, 
when  the  Blood  has  once  got  its  propor¬ 
tion  of  Fdces,  no  more  new  ones  will 
enter  into  it,  or  die,  which  is  the  laft 
fhift,  that  their  Blood  has  no  Dregs  at  all, 
or  at  leaft  very  few  in  comparifon  to  o- 
thers  5  fo  there's  another  advantage  to 
Fools  that  Erafmus  never  Dream’c  of, 
and  the  muddied:  and  moft  Fuliginous 
Blood  is  only  to  be  look’d  for  in  Men  of 
the  brighteft  Parts,  for  tl  e  fame  reafon, 
I  fuppofe,  as  the  Smoak  goes  to  the 
fairefh 

Mifom .  So  much  for.  WiUk  and  the 
Spleen  5  but  as  you  are  of  Opinion,  that 
the  Hypochondriac k  and  Hyjlerick  Paffions 
proceed  from  the  fame  Original,  what  do 
you  think  of  this  Treadle- of  Vapours  ? 

PhiL  It  is  forne  Years  ago,  that  I  read 
it  $  but  the  hint  of  the  Hypothefis  l  re¬ 
member  then  appear’d  to  roe  to  be  taken 


(  >°»  ) 

partly  from  Highmore  in  charging  the  Sto¬ 
mach,  and  partly  from  Willis  in  accufing 
the  Brain  ,  tho5  the  Author  makes  no  pre¬ 
tence  of  fiding.  with  either.  The  Symp¬ 
toms  bang  very  different,  as  well  as  many 
in  this  Diftemper,  it  is  no  fmall  difficulty 
to  folve  them  all  from  one  and  the  fame 
Caufe,  that  is,  from  either  Crudities  alone, 
or  elfe  the  irregularity  of  the  Spirits  with- 
lout  any  other  affiftance,  which  the  Au¬ 
thor  obferving  very  well,  explains  firft  as 
i  many  Phenomena  as  he  can  from  Crudities, 
land  afterwards  accounts  for  the  reft  from 
|  a  Deficiency  of  Spirits  as  the  Confequence 
3  of  thofe  Crudities,  which  to  me  feems 
)  very  natural,  and  therefore  I  think  the 
IHypothefis  very  ingenioufly  contrived. 

Mifom.  There  is  one  thing  in  this  Trea- 
itife  puzzles  me,  which  is  this :  The  An- 
i  thor  fays,  that  the  inordinate  motion  of 
j  the  Spirits  is  not  the  adequate  Caufe  of 
li  the  Difeafe ;  this  he  proves  from  the  na- 
j  tore  of  the  Remedies, which  all  Phyficians* 
even  the  very  Authors  and  Afferters  of 
that  Opinion,  prefcribe  in  this  Difeafe^ 
as  Spirit  of  Sal-Armoniack,  Spirit  of 
Urine,  &c.  wondering  that  fo  many  In- 
a  genious  Men  ftiould  act  fo  contrary  to  their 
Rea  fob,  or  Reafon  fo  contrary  to  their 
i  Experience  ^  becaufe  it  is  fo  manifeft,  that 
:  H  3  the 


(  10*  ) 

the  Medicines  he  (peaks  of  by  rend’ring 
the  motion  of  the  Spirits  more  violent 
muft  neceflarily  put  them  into  a  greater 
Confufion  :  In  all  this  I  think  he  is  much 
in  the  right  ^  but  then  here  again,  p.  51, 
he  fays,  Note  alfoy  that  when  I  fay  Crudities 
are  the  Caufe  of  this  Difeafe ,  I  do  not  deny 
hut  that  it  is  the  diforder  of  the  Spirit /, 
which  immediately  caufe s  the  Ccnvuljions  and 
fever al  other  Accidents •  However  1  think 
that  Crudities  ought  to  he  lool^d  upon  as  the 
Principal  and  Efficient  Caufe ,  and  this  dif 
order  of  the  Spirits  and  Symptoms  it  pro¬ 
duces  only  as  effe&s  which  flow  from  them . 
Here  I  think  the  fame  objedion  which 
the  Author  makes  againft  Willis  and 
Sydenham  (who  without  doubt  he  means 
by  the  AfTertors  of  that  Opinion)  holds 
Hkewjfe  good  againft  himfelf :  For  if  what 
he  fays  of  thofe  Remedies  be  true,  as  I 
think  it  is  unqueftionable,  let  the  diforder 
of  the  Spirits,  which  he  allows,  be  an  im¬ 
mediate  Caufe,  an  Effed,  or  what  he 
pleafes,  as  long  as  tfc|e  fame  diforder  pro¬ 
duces  Convulfions,  and  feveral  other  Ac¬ 
cidents,  and  is  prefect  in  moft  Hyfterick 
Fits,  it  muft  likewife  be  encreas’d  by  the 
Remedies  prefcrib’d  when  the  Patients 
are  in  them  and  all  the  Volatile  and  Spiri¬ 
tuous  Medicines  that  in  the  Paroxifm  are 

ufed 


(  »<n  ) 

ufed  to  make  the  Convulfions  and  feveral 
other  Accidents  ceafe,  will  confequently 
prolong  and  make  them  worfe. 

Phil .  It  is  eafie  to  cavil  at  particulars 
in  any  Hypothefis  $  but  then  it  is  as  eafie 
to  maintain  them.  I  know  it  is  a  received 
Opinion  now  adays,  that  a  Man  of  Senfe^ 
who  underftands  Anatomy,  and  fomething 
of  Mechanick  Rules  ought  to  penetrate 
into  the  manner  of  every  Operation  that 
is  perform’d  in  a  human  Body,  it  being 
but  a  mere  Machine  5  nay,  5tis  beneath  a 
Gentleman,  that  pretends  to  natural  Phi- 
lofophy  to  ignore  any  thing,  or  fo  much 
as  furmife,  that  it  (hould  be  in  Nature’s 
power  to  contrive  a  work,  for  which  he 
could  not  give  a  plaufible  reafon. 

Mifow .  You  fay  the  Hypothefis  is  inge- 
nioufly  contriv’d, and  may  be  eafily  defend¬ 
ed  $  but  yet  you  feem  to  diflke  fomething 
in  it.  If  the  fcruple  I  had  be  of  no  weight 
with  you,  what  have  you  to  object  againft 
it? 

Phil.  Nothing,  but  what  I  have  again!! 
all  Hypothefes  in  general  5  1  can’t  endure 
a  Man  fhould  make  a  formal  Defcription 
with  fo  many  Circumftances  to  make  you 
believe  it  is  true,  and  write  a  whole  Book 
upon  a  thing  which  he  is  furein  his  Con- 
fciencethat  he  knows  nothing  of.  We 

H  4  are 


(  !°4  ) 

are  altogether  in  the  Dark,  as  to  the  real 
ufe  the  Liver,  the  Milt,  and  Pancreas  are 
of  to  our  Bodies  5  nay,  wholly  ignorant 
of  their  feveral  Offices  other  wife  than  that 
they  are  Organa  Colatoria ,  through  which 
fomething  is  (train'd,  and  all  that  has  been 
faid  of  them  betide*,  by  the  moft  Saga¬ 
cious  Men  has  been  no  hing  but  Conje¬ 
ctures,  in  which  the  beft  Anatomifts 
could  yet  never  agree :  If  we  confider, 
with  how  little  certainty  we  can  fpeak  of 
Organs  fo  Confpicuous,  fuch  grofs  and 
large  Vifcera ,  is  it  not  amazing  to  fee 
feme  Men  made  of  no  other  Mold,  nor 
shifted  with  more  helps  in  Anatomy  than 
you  or  I,  fuppofe  themfelves  fo  well  ac¬ 
quainted  with  things  invifible  and  a U 
•  moft  incom  prehen  fible,  as  this  Author  does 
in  his  little  Book  >  Where  he  not  only 
traces  the  Animal  Spirits  through  the  un¬ 
known  Labyrinth  of  the  Brain,  even  to 
an  angle  of  incidence^  but  likewife  deter¬ 
mines  Thought  it  felf,  comprehending  the 
#very  Soul  in  the  Mechanifm  of  the  Body, 
as  plainly  appears  in  his  Mechanical  ex¬ 
plication  of  the  Cries  and  Groans,  that 
are  obferv’d  in  Hyfterick  Fits,  Speaking 
of  Nature’s  endeavouring  to  remove  by 
ftruggling  the  uneafie  heavinefs  the  Patients 
fee],  he  goes  on  thus,  Bat  the  Soul  finding 

th 


(  lo5  ) 

the  Body  unable  utterly  to  repel  this  Evil , 
and  that  it  is  beyond  her  power  to  conquer  ity 
foe  finks  under  her  Pain  and  Anguijh ,  and 
breaks  out  into  Cries  and  Groms  •  thereby  to 
■  intimate  to  them ,  that  are  about  us,  fie  wants 
their  aid ,  not  being  aide  by  all  the  trouble - 
fome  agitation  of  the  Lips  and  Tongue  to 
form  one  diflinff  word  to  demand  it. 
This  is  very  florid,  I  confds,  but  not  Ids 
extravagant  5  yet  well  to  be  maintain’d, 
becaufe  it  is  not  eafily  contfadi&ed  :  But 
|  I  never  ftand  upon  niceties  with  an  Hy- 
pothdi?  5  knowing  that  the  Authors  of 
them  think  it  very  immaterial,  what 
they  fuppofe,  lb  they  can  but  folve  the 
:  Phenomena  from  it.  Shall  I  tell  you  fin- 
cerely  how  the  generality  of  them  are 
',made  in  Phyfick  ? 

A  Man  that  has  a  mind  to  Compofe, 
and  have  the  honour  of  being  call’d  the 
Author  and  Inventor  of  an  Hypothefis; 
i|  firft  examines  thole,  that  upon  the  cafe 
I  in  queftion  have  been  made  before  him  5 
;|  by  his  reading  without  any  trouble,  he 
I:  becomes  acquainted  with  all  the  faults, 
J  which  the  latter  Suppofers  (till  have  found 
d  with  their  PredecelTors  5  and  having  heard 
1;  at  the  Univerfities,  and  among  Men  of 
I  Letters,  what  Objections  may  be  made  a- 
l;j  gainft  the  laft  of  all,  he  has  the  human 
|  Body, 


* 


(  10  6  ) 

Body,  the  whole  Microcofm  at  his  fervice, 
to  manage  it  as  he  pleafes,  till  he  cao  find 
out  fomethitsg  that  may  ferve  his  pur- 
pofe^  in  the  fearch  of  which  he  is  not  fo 
foiiiatous  to  dive  into  the  real  Caufe  of 
the  Diftemper,  as  he  is  to  find  out  fuch  a 
one,  as  his  Capacity  will  let  him  explain 
the  Symptoms  from:  Therefore  when¬ 
ever  I  meet  with  an  Hypothefls  I  firft  ex¬ 
amine,  whether  it  be  the  prodnd  of 
diligent  Oblervation,  or  a  Prolifick 
Brain,  and  after  that  I  judge  of  it  hy  the 
lump. 

Half  a  Year  ago  I  was  fern  for  very 
late  at  Night  to  a  Gentlewoman  near  Thirty, 
whom  I  found  in  Hyfterick  Fits  3  the  re¬ 
lation  they  gave  me  of  her,  was,  that  (he 
enjoyed  a  perfect  Health,  and  had  never 
been  Hyfterick  before  3  that  (he  was  gone 
to  Bed  in  good  order,  and  very  well  con¬ 
tented,  where  having  been  about  half  an 
Hour  {he  had  been  taken  as  1  faw  her: 
Wfailft  I  was  there  (he  recover’d,  and  com¬ 
plain’d  of  nothing  but  being  giddy.  The 
next  Morning  I  underftood  that  ftie  had 
flept  very  well,  after  I  had  left  her,  and 
endeavouring  to  find  out  what  might  have 
occafion’d  her  d border,  I  could  learn  no¬ 
thing  from  her,  but  that  the  Day  before 
£he  had  drank  of  feme  generous  Wine, 

more 


'  (  l°7  ) 

more  plentifully  than  (he  was  ufed  to  do 
tho’,  as  (he  thought,  not  to  excefs.  I 
have  feen  this  Gentlewoman  about  a  Fort¬ 
night  ago,  and  heard  from  her  own  Mouth, 
that  (he  has  continued  well  ever  fince. 
This  being  fad,  as  I  folemnly  declare  it  is, 
I  would  ask  what  room  there  can  be  in 
this  cafe  to  fufped,  that  either  Crudities 
©r  a  deficiency  of  Spirits  were  the  caufe 
of  her  difturbance  ?  Or  whether  it  can 
be  attributed  to  any  thing,  but  a  great 
[  plenty  of  Spirits  too  violently  agitated, 
s  and  confequently  a  confufion  of  them  > 
r  Which  latter  the  great  Sydenham  has  not 
j  in  his  Clolet,  but  in  his  pradice  obferv’d 
[  to  be  the  Internal  efficient  Caufe  of  all 
[  Hyfterick  and  Hypochondriacal  Difeafes  3 
*  Sydenham ,  I  fay,  that  candid  as  well  as 

I  expert  Phyfician,  whofe  juftly  delerv’d 
Encomium  you  may  read  in  this  Eminent 
Foreigner^  where  he  is  call’d  3  Artis  riojlr# 
creator  &  ornamentum?  qui  fepofitis  opim- 
onum  Com  mentis  ad  ohfervationes  prorfus  Je 
dedity  &  a  prima  aetate  ad  extremum  ufque 
fenium  cum  naturd  cohabitavit . 

Mifom.  But  do  you  think  Sydenham 
could  have  folv’d  all  the  Symptoms  irom 
that  Caufe  ? 


PhiL 


(  lo8  ) 

Phil.  So  as  to  fatisfie  bimlelf  I  believe 
not,  hot  I  dare  fay,  be  never  troubled  his 
bead  much  about  it,  and  throughout  his 
Works  you  may  fee,  how  immaterial  he 
thought  thofe  trifles  to  the  real  Practice 
of  Phyfick.  As  for  inftance;  thos  no  Man 
ever  writ  more  to  the  purpcfe  upon  Fe¬ 
vers  than  himfelf,  yet  concerning  the 
differences  of  periods,  peculiar  to  the  fe- 
veral  forts  of  Agues  and  Intermitting  Fe¬ 
vers,  he  ingenuoufly  tonfeffes,  that  he 
could  give  no  fatisfa&ory  reafon  for  it  ; 
yet  almoft  all  Phyficisnsbefides,that  write 
upon  the  fame  Subject,  pretend  to  give 
us  very  plaufitile  ones  :  What  can  be  the 
reafon  of  this  >  If  he  had  only  had  a 
a  mind  to  diflent  from  others,  Can  we 
think  that  a  Mao  of  his  Senfe  and  Learn¬ 
ing  could  not  have  made  feme  agreeable 
Conjefture  or  other,  as  well  as  the  reft 
had  done  before  him  ?  Tis  then  doubt- 
lefs  an  evidence  of  his  Candour  and  Sin¬ 
cerity,  that  would  not  let  him,  to  gain 
Applaufe  and  Reputation,  impofe  upon 
Posterity  by  afferting  what  he  was  not 
convinc’d  of  firft  from  his  own  Experience, 
or  appear  more  knowing  than  he  knew 
Iiimfelft  o  be. 

It  is  an  admirable  Inftru&ion  to  all 
Phyficians,  which  the  learned  Baglivi  gives 

us 


(  *°9  ) 

m  for  the  competing  of  a  lading  Hypo- 
thefis  3  having  firft  ftipulated  that  ic  muft 
by  no  means  be  drawn  from  our  own 
Fancies,  but  the  undoubted  Phenomena  of 
nature  it  felt,  he  bids  us  follow  the  Me¬ 
thod  of  Aftrooomers  whole  whole  Art, 
fays  he,  chiefly  confifts  in  this.  Firft  they 
obferve  diligently  the  Phenomena  of  the 
Celeftial  Bodies,  from  thence  afterwards 
they  afeend  into  Theories  exa&ly  deli¬ 
neated  after  a  Geometrical  manner  3  and 
when  they  have  Learnedly  examin’d,  and 
are  thoroughly  vers’d  in  thefe  things, 
they  are  able  to  fore  tel,  and  define  all 
the  Motions,  Sites,  Conjunctions,  &c.  of 
'thole  Bodies  with  all  the  certainty  imagi¬ 
nable  :  So  that  firft  they  take  care  of 
having  a  vaft  Train  of  Obfervations,  and 
then  they  compofe  a  Theory,  that  they 
may  give  a  plaofible  reafon  for  them  3 
and  the’  they  have  among  them  feveral 
Syftems  of  the  Heavens,  as  that  of  Fto- 
lomey 5  Copernicus,  Tycho  Brahe ,  that 

contradict,  and  clafli  with  one  another  5 
yet  in  foretelling  the  Phenomena  and  Mo¬ 
tions  of  the  Stars,  that  is,  the  computing 
of  the  Eciipfes,  and  various  A  fpeeb  of 
the  Planets,  they  cone  of  them  either 
differ  or  fail.  The  Myftcry  of  which 
matter  lies  in  this;  that  all  Aftrologers, 

tho* 


(  1 1  °  ) 

fcho*  every  one  of  ’em  conceives  a  The** 
ory  of  the  Stars,  peculiar  to  himfelf,  have 
drawn  tlrir  Theories  from  one  and  the 
fame  coniiant  Obfervation  of  the  Celeftial 
Bodies  3  for  whatever  one  has  obferv’d 
the  other  ftill  muft  have  obferv’d  the  fame. 
So  that  the  Reafons  they  can  give  of  what 
they  obferv’d,  and  the  Hypothefes  they 
are  able  to  build  upon  it,  confiding  only 
in  Opinion,  may  vary  and  be  all  fallacious* 
but  the  things  obferved  being  true,  the  In¬ 
ferences  that  are  drawn  from  them  by 
Rules  as  certain,  muft  always  be  the 
fame. 

I  am  extreamly  pleas’d  with  this  Ex¬ 
ample  :  For  befides  the  Illuftration  the 
Author  defign’d  it  for,  it  puts  me  in  mind 
of'  two  things,  which  I  can’t  forbear 
taking  *  notice  of :  The  firft  is,  that,  if  a 
Man,  whom  we’ll  fuppofe  fo  wholly  Ig¬ 
norant  in  Phyfick  and  Aftronomy,  as  not 
to  know  that  there  are  two  fuch  Arts  in 
being,  was  either  always  to  be  converfant 
with  the  Sick,  or  elfe  mind  the  Motions 
of  the  Stars,  and  dividing  his  time  be¬ 
tween  the  two  Studies,  tofpend  20  or  25 
Years  in  making  what  Obfervations  he 
could  in  both,  without  the  leaft  Inftru- 
ftion  of  Men  or  Books,  I  think  it  highly 
probable,  that  fuch  a  one,  tho’  a  Man  of 

an 


;• 


(  »»*  ) 

an  exquifite  Genius,  vers’d  in  Arithmetick, 
and  every  thing  elfe,  but  the  two  Arts  £ 
named,  would  not  believe  the  Knowledge, 
that  could  be  got  by  obferving  the  dif¬ 
ferent  motions  of  the  Celeftial  Bodies  more 
j  capable  of  ever  being  reduced  to  an  Art 
of  Rules  and  Certainty,  than  that  which 
might  be  acquired  by  likewife  obferving 
the  various  courfes  of  Diftempers  inci¬ 
dent  in  our  Terreftrial  ones. 

From  which  Confideration  I  infer  5 
that  it  is  as  yet  inconceivable,  to  what 
prodigious  pitch  human  Knowledge  in  all 
things,  that  fall  under  the  Senfes,  tho’ 
never  fo  changeable,  remote  or  irregular, 
may  be  carried  by  diligent  Obfervations, 
when  they  are  faithfully  tranfmitted  from 
one  to  another,'  and  without  intermiffion 
continued  for  feveral  Ages.  The  fecond 
;  is,  that  we  may  learn  how  weak  and  fal¬ 
lacious  a  proof  the  folution  of  the  Sym- 
;  proms  from  an  Hypothesis  muft  be  of  our 
being  acquainted  with  the  true  Gaufe  of 
a  Diftemper  3  when  from  this  Inftance  of 

IAftronomy  it  is  evident,  that  the  fame 
Vh^nomem  exaftly  anfwer  to  different  Hy- 
pothefis,  of  which  at  belt  only  one  can  be 
true. 


Mifm. 


/ 


(ill) 

Mifom .  But  I  think  this  is  rather  againft 
you  5  for  that  all  Aftronomers  of  what 
Hypothefis  foever  agree  in  their  Calcula¬ 
tions  Chews,  that  not  to  be  miftaken  it  is 
fufficient  to  have  one,  that  explains  the 
Phawomena* 

Phil.  So  it  is,  as  long  as  they  don’t  rea- 
fon  from  what  they  fuppofe,  and  then 
any  one  may  ferve  for  from  their  not 
erring  it  is  manifeft,  that  they  conclude 
nothing  but  from  their  Obfervations  by 
Rules  as  certain  $  whiift  the  Hypothefes 
only  make  a  (hew,  and  are  wholly  infigni- 
ficant. 

Mifom.  I  believe  with  you,  that  in  Phy- 
fick  as  well  as  Aftronomy,  what  is  oh- 
Cerv’d  is  of  greater  ufe  by  far?  thanwhat 
is  foppos’d,  yet  in  Natural  Philofophy  no¬ 
thing  is  to  be  done  without  an  Hypothefis. 
T ho’  1  am  pretty  well  wean’d  from  the  ado¬ 
ration  , I  formerly  paid  to  the  Ancients* 
I  (bill  have  a  great  refpeft  for  them:  Yet 
notwithftanding  the  praifes,  that  are  due 
to  thofe  Founders  of  Ans  and  Sciences,  a 
Man  of  Senfe  mu  ft  acknowledge, -that  the 
manner  of  explaining  Phenomena  both  a- 
bove  and  below  in  ufe  among  Modern 
Philofophers  has  more  Reafon  and  Solidity 
in  k  than  that  of  the  Ancients.  They 
knew  nothing  ct  Created  Thing®  farther 


(  «M  ) 

than  their  outward  Senfes  would  Tef  them 
penetrate  into  them.  Their  faculties  *t- 
traUrices ^ConcoB rices  &  expultrices  w  ith  all 
the  occult  qualities  were  very  poor  Solu¬ 
tions  to  thofe  of  Monficur  Des  Cartes , 
and  if  fince  Pythagoras ,  Plato,  or  Arijiotlei 
Men  had  not  made  ufe  of  their  rational 
part  and  exercis’d  their  Facility  of  ihink- 
ing  we  ffiuft  have  been  ignorant  of  her 
;  Operations  in  a  Thoufand  Inftances,  that 
now  we  can  very  well  account  for. 

PhiL  The  real  Knowledge  we  have  of 
Nature  beyond  the  Ancients,  that  we  are 
not  indebted  for  to  Obfervation,  would* 
I  believe,  upon  ftrict  Examination  not  a- 
mount  to  much  5  but  as  to  the  Explication 
of  her  Operations,  that  often  changes  with 
the  times,  and  looking  back  you  may  all 
along  obferve  a  faftiion  in  Philofophizing 

(as  much  as  in  wearing  of  deaths,  tho’  in 
the  firft  perhaps  it  lafts  longer,  than  in 
the  latter.  No  Hypothecs  ever  became 
famous  before  it  had  pleas’d  a  great  part 
I  of  the  learned  World,  and  ever  fince  Pa¬ 
radise  Mankind  has  had  the  fame  ftreogth 
of  Thought:  The  reft  depends  all  upon 
Experience  ^  wherefore  as  long  as  that  en- 
creafes,and  our  ficklenefs  continues,  it  is  nil- 
potllble  that  ever  a  Sy  Idem  or  Opinion  fhould 
be  generally  receiv’d,  or  I  aft  for  ever  5 

I  when 


(  114  ) 


when  I  hear  a  Man  lay  a  great  ftrefs  upon 
any,  I  divert  my  felf  with  the  Thoughts 
of  what  the  beft  of  them  have  met  with 
hitherto  ••  For  this  has  been  the  fate  of 
ail.  ' 

An  Hypothtfis  when  once  it  is  efta- 
blifh'd  a  little  time  becomes  like  aSovereign, 
and  receives  the  fame  homage  and  re- 
fpeft  from  its  Vaflals,  as  if  it  was  Truth 
it  felf :  This  continues  till  Experience  or 
Envy  difcovers  a  flaw  in  it :  Yet  unlefs  it 
be  a  great  Man  indeed,  that  finds  fault 
firft,  his  difcovery  is  only  anfwered  with 
contempt  for  a  while  :  But  when  another 
Hypothefis  is  broach’d,  (which  is  com¬ 
monly  foon  after)  that  not  having  the 
fault  of  the  former,  and  being  like  wife 
;  well  contriv’d,  gets  a  confiderable  num¬ 
ber  of  followers  5  Then  you  fee  all  that 
fought  under  the  banners  of  the  old  Hy- 
potbefis  briftle  up,  and  every  Man  of 
Note  amongft  them  thinks  himfelf  per- 
fonally  injured,  and  in  honour  obliged 
to  hand  by  it  with  his  Life  and  Fortune. 
Now  all  Arts  and  Sciences  are  ranfack’d, 
and  whatever  can  be  drawn  from  Wir, 
Eloquence,  or  Learning,  is  produced  to 
maintain  their  own  Leige  Hypothefis,  and 
deftroy  the  upftart  one,  and  the  whole 
Party  is  alarm’d  with  as  much  concern  as 
I  they 


/ 


they  are  in  a  Man  of  War,  when  they 
have  receiv’d  a  Shot  under  Water:  In  the 
;  mean  time  they  that  have  lifted  themfelves 
into  the  new  Hypothefis  are  not  idle,  and 
i  thus  both  Parties  enter  into  a  perfeft  ftate 
of  War  3  the  better  fort  fighting  with 
Arguments,  the  reft  with  perfonal  R.e- 
>  flections.  This  Play  is  generally  continued 
(fora  confiderable  time  with  a  great  deal 
3 of  violence;  and  I  have  obferv’d  as  much 
(hatred  and  animofity  between  the  Art- 
wfiottlians  and  Cartejians,  when  I  was  at 
i  Leiden,  as  there  is  now  in  London  between 
'High  Church  and  Low- Church. 

Mifont.  And  for  ought  I  know  with  as 
much  reafon; 

Phil.  If  the  new  Hypothefis  is  continu- 
ally  fupplied  with  Men  of  Senfe,  that 
izealoufly  efpoufe  its  caufe,  and  keeps  the 
((Field  till  fome  of  its  chief  Enemies,  and 
ithole  thatfirft  oppos’d  it  are  dead,  it  daily 
I  (gets  ground  till  it  triumphs  at  laft,  and 
iafcends  the  Throne  of  the  poor  old  one, 
ithat  like  an  Emeritus  in  Chelfey- College  is 
ijlaid  by  among  the  reft  of  the  maim’d  Hypo- 
thefes,  fenio  belloque  fra& a.  If  you  confult 
liiHiftory,  you’ll  find,  that  the  more  witty 
rand  talkative  the  Age  is,  the  more  fruit¬ 
ful  it  is  of  Sefts,  Opinions  and  Hypo- 
thefes :  If  you  would  know,  how  we 

I  3 


i 


(  »v5  ) 

come  by  fo  many  5  the  beft  Wits  lay  out 
their  Talents  that  way,  and  one  encou¬ 
raging  the  other,  make  it  as  catching  as 
the  Itch  :  So  that  you  may  apply  to  it 
what  Juvenal  fays  fotnewhere  upon  ano¬ 
ther  account  : 

^  dedit  ham  contdgio  labem*, 

Et  dabit  in  p lures  ^  jicut  grex  totus  in  agris 
ZJnitw  Jcabie  cadit ,  <&  por rigine  porci7 
ZJvaque  confpeSa  livorem  ducit  ab  uva, 

Mifom.  As  I  brought  you  upon  talking 
of  Hypothcfes ,  I  fuppofe  againft  your  In¬ 
clination,  fo  I  fee,  you  are  refolv’d  to  fit 
me  for  it,  and  defign  to  tire  me  with  them 
before  you  give  over  .*  Therefore  to  have 
done  .with  them  at  once,  rather  than  hold 
any  more  Arguments  about  them,  I’ll  fay,  I 
as  you’d  have  me,  that  they  are  only  I 
pieces  of  Wit,  mere  Jeux  d'  Efprit,  ftudy’d  I 
for  diverfion,  a.od  that  no  greater  ftrefs  I 
fliould  be  laid  upon  them  than  we  do  on  I 
Plays  and  Romances,  whcfe  Authors! 
ought  to  be  fuppofed  to  have  as  little  to  t 
do,  as  the  People  they  write  them  for.  r 
But  now  you  muff  refolve  me  one  thing,,  I 
which  I  have  had  a  mind  to  ask  you  a! 
great  while.-  Speaking  of  the  Emperickj 
Se£t  Yefterday  you  faid,  that,  if  they  had! 
*'•  1  held! 


( _**7  ) 

held  the  knowledge  of  the  Body  and 
Nature  immaterial  to  the  Art  of  Phyfick 
vou  would  differ  from  them :  But  as  Song 
as  you  'don’t  care  for  reafoning  about 
Pifterapers,  -  either  .  in  finding  out  the 
Caufes,  or  the  curing  of  them,  I  can’t  fee 
what  occafion  you  can  have  of  under- 
ftanding  any  thing  but  the  general  Pra¬ 
ctice  of  our  old  Women,  In  my  opinion 
a  Man  waors  but  little  Anatomy  to  pre- 
fcri  ea  Pen’ worth  of  Venice  Treacle  for  a 
Cold,  half  a  quarter  of  a  Pint  of  Linfeed- 
Oil  for  a  Pleurifie,  and  a  Spoonful  of  Ho¬ 
ney  for  the  Phtifick. 

Phil .  You  may  go  on  w:th  Whey  for 
the  Bloody  Flux,  Madder  for  the  Jaundice, 
Jefuits  Bark  for  Ague?,  and  Five  and 
Twenty  Medicines  more  of  the  fame 
Stamp  5  that  I  (hall  never  efteem  the  lefs 
for  being  common. 

Mifom .  I  don't  fpeak  againft  the  good- 
nefs  of  the  Medicines  $  but  it  is  certain, 
that  whoever  makes  ufe  of  them  thus  at 
random,  only  becaufe  they  have  often  done 
good,  builds  upon  a  very  ftupid  Experi¬ 
ence  If  you  grant  this,  as  I  don’t  fee 
how  you  can  avoid,  it,  then  pray  tell  me, 
what  Arts  are  there  required  more  to, make 
a  Phyfician  that  fhall  practife  after  that 
way,  than  what  you  may  often  find  in  a 

I  3  good 


(  Il8  ) 

good  Nurfe?  For  you  fay,  they  muft 
not  rely  upon  any  thing,  but  what 
is  within  the  reach  of  their  outward 
Senfes,  and  never  make  ufe  of,  or  at  leaft 
truft  to  their  Reafon. 

Phil.  Before  I  anfwer  dire&Iy,  I  beg 
leave  to  put  you  in  mind  of  what  is  al- 
moft  worn  thread-bare,  the  Simile  of  a 
crooked  Stick,  w’fakh  to  make  it  ftrait  we 
bend  to  the  contrary  fide.  When  you 
ask’d  me,  how  I  could  without  the  help 
of  fome  Eypothefis ,  or  other  reafon  about 
the  Symptoms,  Caufes,  &c .  of  Diftem- 
pers  3  becaufe  I  would  by  no  means  have 
you  expeft  from  me  thofe  nice  explica¬ 
tions  of  unfearchable  Nature,  which  your 
witty  Theorifts  rack  their  Brains  for  from 
a  bare  fuppofition,  I  anfwer’d  you  at  once, 
that  I  did  not  reafon  about  them  at  all  3 
but  now  I  have  fhew9d  you  the  demon- 
ftrable  error  of  the  Ingenious  People  of 
cur  Age,  who  are  fo  fond  of  their  parts, 
as  to  think,  that  befides  Anatomy  and 
Philofophy,  a  Man  of  Senfe  wants  no  o- 
ther  helps  to  penetrate  into  the  Caufes  of 
the  mcft  intricate  Diftempers3  if  he  is 
but  once  acquainted  with  the  Symptoms : 
Now  I  have  ihew’d  you  this,  I  fay,  I  (hall 
not  fcruple  to  tell  you  that  I  would  not 
make  a  ftep  without  Reafon  more  than 

thofe 


(  *1 9  ) 

thofe  Philofophers,  to  which  Title  I 
don’t  pretend  whatever  I  may  to  the  re¬ 
ality  of  its  meaning :  I  would  nor  have 
you  think,  that  I  fpeak  of  rhat  lofty  felf- 
fufficient  Reafon  that  boldly  truhs  to  its 
own  Wings,  and  leaving  Experience  far 
behind  mounts  upon  Air,  and  makes 
Conclufions  in  the  Skies  ^  what  I  make 
ufe  of  is  plain  and  humble,  nor  only  built 
upon,  but  1  kewife  f  trronndcd  with,  and 
every  way  limited  l  y  Gbfervadon,  from 
view  of  which  it  never  cares  to  ftir. 

As  to  the  ridiculous  and  unartful  man¬ 
ner  of  prefcribing,  with  which  you  feera 
to  charge  me,  I  thought,  that  by  demon- 
ftrating  what  Labour,  Induftry  and  Pa. 
tience  were  requifite  for  the  compofing  of 
a  faithful  Hiftory  to  every  Difeafe,  in 
order  to  cure  it,  I  had  taken  fufficient  care 
to  prevent  any  fufpicion  that  way. 

Mifom.  I  am  fuhfi  d,  and  thought  my 
felf  anfwer’d  as  foon  as  you  condefcend- 
ed  to  join  Reafon  to  Ohfervation.  For  as 
to  the  other  reafoning,  that  both  begins 
and  ends  in  fpeculation,  I  told  you  Yefter- 
day,  that  I  had  done  with  it  my  felf. 

If  I  had  known  your  mind  fooner  we 
fhould  not  have  fpent  half  the  time  in 
talking  of  Suppofitions,  tho’  I  am  not 
difpleas’d  with  having  ftarted  thofe  difr 

I  4  ficukies  - 


(  *ao  ) 

ficnltjes  a$  I  d?d  :  Becaufe  being  inftru&ed 
by  your  Anftf ers  i  know,  iha t  whatever 
you  thall  lay  about  the  Bypochondriack 
P  ffi  m,  (hill  now  have  more  ingreiliou  ' 
With  me,  than  it  wi  u!d  h  ve  hau  before, 
whether  r  concerns  the  DifKmper  in  ge¬ 
neral,  or  my  Cafe  in  particular. 

Phil.  It  15  the  cuftom  m  all  our  Foreign 
Univerinies  for  Students  in  all  Faculties, 
aft  r  having  pa/Vd  the  feveral  Examina¬ 
tions  they  are  to  undergo,  before  they 
take  their  Degree,  to  compcfe  and  defend 
agunft  all  that  will  oppofe  a  Thefts  or 
Deputation,  the  Theme  of  which  is  what 
they  are  pleas’d  to  chufe  themfelves,  and 
al  ways  feme  Head  pr  Point  relating  to 
-  the  Profdlion  they  belong  to. 

Mifom.  I  know  it :  They  are  Printed  5, 
and  being  neatly  Stitch  d  in  Covers  of 
Marble-Paper,  diftributed  among  the 
Scholars :  For  when  1  was  at  IJtrechty 
where  I  flay'd  but  three  Days,  there  hap- 
penM  to  he  a  Promotion  of  a  Doftor  in 
the  Civil  Law,  or,  as  they  call  it,  utrhfq 5 
juris  5  and  as  I  flood  in  the’  great  Audi¬ 
tory,  the  Candidate  himfelf,  with  both 
his  Paranymphs  (which  you  know  is  the 
Name  they  give  to  the  two  Gentlemen, 
his  Friends,  that  attend  him)  taking  me 
I  fuppofe  for  what  I  was,,  a  Stranger,  made 

way 


(  12  1  ) 

way  through  a  great  Oowd,  on  purpofe 
to  prefent  me  wish  one,  which  1  took  as  a 
great  favour  from  a  Man  whom  I  had  ne¬ 
ver  feen  before,  eipecially  in  a  Country, 
that  is  not  tam'd  for  manners,  The 
Thefts  [  remember  was  de  Codicillis. 

fchil.  Mine  was  de  i hyivfi  vitiaUr  which 
I  defended  at  Leyden  in  the  Year  1691 5 
Dr.  William  Sengueidus,  ProtefTor  of  the 
Ariftotelian  Philofcphy  >  bei  g  then  Re&or 
WUgnifuus.  My  reafon  of  telling  yen 
this,  which  other  wife  rnigh  idem  imperti- 
n:n  ,  is  becaafe  1  have  often  thought  it 
very  rema. table,  that  I  always  had  a  par¬ 
ticular  Eye  upon,  and  have  been  led, 
as  it  were,  by  inflinft  to  what  after¬ 
wards  to  me  appear’d  to  be  the  caufe 
of  the  Byfterick  and  Hypochondriack 
Paffions,  even  at  a  time,  when  I  had  no 
thought,  of  fingling  out  thefe  Diftempers 
for  my  more  particular  Study,  and  was 
only  defign’d  for  general  Practice,  as  o- 
ther  Phyficians  are. 

That  the  diforders  then  of  the  Chyli- 
fications  are  chiefly  the  Caufe  of  the  Di¬ 
ftempers  in  queftion,  I  fhall  endeavour  to 
prove,  and  io  order  to  it,  defire  your  at¬ 
tention  on  the  following  Gbfcrvations. 
Firft  from  Anatomy  we  know,  that  a- 
bundance  of  Nerves  end,  and  empty  them- 

felves 


(  122  ) 

felves  in  the  Stomach,  whofe  inner  Coat 
is  wholly  Nervous,  and  yet  not  allow’d  to 
have  any  Spontaneous  motion  of  its  own. 
Secondly  we  are  taught  by  daily  Experi¬ 
ence,  that  whatever  Food  is  craved,  and 
long’d  for  after  an  extraordinary  manner, 
the  fame,  tho’abfurd,  and  to  all  appea¬ 
rance  prejudicial,  is  generally  well  digefted 
even  in  thole  that  otherwife  are  but  of  a 
weak  Concoftion.  The  inftances,  that 
might  be  produced  in  Big- Belly  M  Women, 
Sick  People,  and  others,  to  confirm  this 
Aflertion  are  innumerable.  I  fhall  only 
put  you  in  mind  of  two  remarkable  ones, 
which  I  remember,  I  quoted  about  Twenty 
Years  ago  in  the  Thefts ,  I  juft  now  fpoke 
of.  The  firft  we  have  from  Dr.  Tulpius , 
a  noted  Phyfician  in  Holland,  who  has  an 
Obfervation  of  a  Woman  with  Child, 
that  being  prodigioufly  in  love  with 
Pickled-Herrings,  fed  on  them  daily  in 
great  quantities,  and,  before  her  longing 
was  fatisfied,  which  in  all  probability  mutt 
have  lafted  fome  Weeks,  had  eat  Fourteen 
Hundred  without  receiving  the  leaft  in¬ 
jury  by  them. 

Mifom .  A  very  good  Obfervation  for  a 
Dutchman ,  for  this  Tulpius  I  think  was 
likewife  a  Burger -Matter  of  Amflerdam . 


(  ) 

Phil*  He  was  fo,  and  an  Honed  pains- 
r  taking  practical  Phyfician,  which  is  as 
j  great  a  Character.  The  orher  is  to  be 
t  found  in  Phterns ,  who  relates,  that  a 
S  Girl  of  about  Seventeen,  had  fo  depraved 
i  and  perverfe  an  Appetite,  as  not  only  to 
i  fancy  but  likewife  to  eat  an  Onion,  that 
i  in  the  time  of  a  raging  Plague,  having 
f  been  applied  to  a  Peftilential  Boil*  and 
1  being  blacken’d  and  putrified  by  the  Poi- 
:  fonous  Exhalations  was  thrown  down  by 
I  the  Fire- fide.  The  Girl,  lays  he,  received 
no  hurt,  and  remain’d  free  from  a  Dif- 
I  eafe  otherwife  fo  Contagious. 

Next  to  Experience,  I  (hall  make  ufe 
*  of  what  is  the  refill t  of  it,  the  Teftimony 
of  Hippocrates ,  who  in  one  of  his  Apho- 
I  rifms  tells  us,  that  Aliments,  which  our 
Appetite  hands  enclined  to,  are  far  better 
digefted,  than  thofe  we  don’t  fanfie* 

;  From  thefe  Anatomical  and  Pra&ical  Ob- 
fervatiens  I  conclude  firft,  that  if  the 
Animal  Spirits,  which  continually  trickle 
down  into  the  Stomach  through  the  innu¬ 
merable  little  Nerves,  that  difeharge  them- 
felves  there,  do  not  wholly  compote 
("which  yet  nobody  can  difprove)  he 
!  Stomachick  ferment,  'Men fir  mm  >  or  what 
you  pleafe  to  call  it,  by  virtue  of  which 
our  Aliments  are  digefted,  they  at  leaft 

make 


(  'M  ) 

make  a  confiderable,  and  the  mofr  effential 
part  of  it.  Secondly  that  feme  of  the 
Spirits,  that  help  to  Conftitute  the  Fer¬ 
ment  are  of  a  greater  fubtilty,  and  more 
refin'd  than  the  reft  that  ferve  only  for 
Mufculary  motions,  and  other  actions  of 
force. 

Mi  font.  Since  you  are  to  conclude  no¬ 
thing  from  foppofition,  pray  what  Ana¬ 
tomical  Obfervation  have  you  to  prove 
this  latter  by  > 

Phil.  Be  pleas'd  to  examine  what  I 
have  faid,  and  you  11  find,  that  this  is  no 
more  than  a  neceflary  confequence  of  the 
Obfervations  already  mention’d.  When 
once  we  have  laid  a  folid  foundation  and 
have  feme  certainty  to  build  our  Argu¬ 
ments  upon,  it  is  then  that  we  may  boldly 
make  ufe  of  our  rational  faculty:  For  it 
is  impoffible,  that  keeping  to  the  ftridt 
rules  of  reafoniog  we  (liould  err  in  our 
Conclufions,  if  we  draw  them  only  from 
what  we  know  to  be  true.  The  Meta- 
phyfical  Principle  of  Monfieur  Des  Cartes , 
Cogito  ergo  Jim 5  is  a  very  good  one,  becaufe 
it  is  the  firft  truth,  of  which  a  Man  can 
well  before,  and  we  all  agree,  feme. few 
Atheifts  excepted,  that  matter  it  felf  can 
never  think,  how  elaborately  fine  foever 
it  may  be  fuppofed.  From  thefe  two 

Troths 


(  1*5  ) 

Truths  it  is  a  very  juft  inference  to  fay  5 
that  we  confift  of  a  Body  and  a  Souk 
How  they  reciprocally  work  upon  and  aT 
left  one  another,  Tis  true,  we  cannot  tell, 
and  whether  the  Soul  be  feated  in  fome 
particular  part  of,  or  is  diffus’d  through 
all  the  Brain,  the  Blood  or  the  whole  Bo¬ 
dy,  is  likewife  not  eafie  to  be  determined  : 
But  tho’  thefe  things  are  Myfterious  tons* 
yet  from  the  Experience  we  have  of  our 
Conipofition,  and  what  every  moment  we 
may  feel  within  our  felves,  we  can  after t 
not  only,  that  there  muft  be  an  im¬ 
mediate  Commerce  between  the  Body  and 
the  Soul  5  but  likewife  that  the  aftion  of 
thinking  in  which  all,  what  we  know  of 
the  latter,  confifts,  is  to  our  certain  know¬ 
ledge  perform'd  more  in  the  Head  than  it 
is  in  the  Elbow  or  the  Knee  :  From  this 
we  may  further  conclude,  that  as  the  Soul 
afts  not  immediately  upon  Bone,  Flefb, 
Blood,  &c.  nor  they  upon  that,  fo  there 
muft  be  fome  exquifitely  fmall  Particles, 
that  are  the  Internuncii  between  them,  by 
the  help  of  which  they  manifeft  them- 
felves  to  each  other* 

Mifom .  All  thefe  latter  Conclufions  I 
grant:  The  Internuncii,  you  fpeak  of,  are 
the  Animal  Spirirs,  and  that  they  are  the 
intermediate  Officers  between  the  Soul  and 

the 


(  ) 

the  groffer  parts  of  the  Body  no  Man 
denies  5  but  that  the  Spirits,  which  com- 
pofe  the  Stomach  ick  Ferment,  (hould  be  of 
a  finer  fort  than  thofe  by  whofe  affiffance 
the  Mufculaty  Motions  and  other  actions 
of  force  are  perform’d,  F  not  only  a  fup- 
pofition,  but  in  my  Opinion  a  ftrangely 
odd  one,  that  has  not  a  fhadow  of  Rea» 
fon  or  probability  in  it. 

Phil.  Do  you  think  it  a  natural  confe- 
querce  from  what  we  know  of  all  man¬ 
ner  of  filtring,  or  (train  mg,  that  fome 
of  the  Animal  Spirit*  muit  infinitely  dif¬ 
fer  from  others  in  finenefs  and  fublilty  > 

Mifom.  I  think  we  can  determine  no¬ 
thing  with  any  certainty  about  their 
bulk  or  fhape,  as  long  as  we  are  ignorant 
both  of  the  manner,  in  which  they  are 
feparated  trom  the  Biood,  and  the  Figure 
of  the  Pores,  through  which  they  are  to 
pals  and  don’t  know,  whether  they  are 
tranfcolated  through  the  Brain  from  the 
Arterial  Bio  d  carried  thither,  or  made 
by  Exhalation  from  the  whole  Mafs. 

Phil  Let  them  be  made  after  what  man¬ 
ner  you  can  fuppofe,  and  the  Pores  thro* 
which  they  pals  be  or  what  Figure  you 
Ihall  pleafe  to  imagine  them  ,  lo  they  be 
but  feparated  trom  the  Blood,  or  other 
Juices,  which  it  is  certain  they  are,  the 


'  zy 

(  \*7  ) 

fame  muft  happen  to  them,  what  is  ob- 
|  ferved  in  all  leffer  Particles,  that  are  Se¬ 
gregated  from  any  Mafs  or  Compofition 
whatfoever,  whether  they  be  lifted, 
{train’d,  or  evaporated,  unlefs  you’ll 
1  deny,  that  Nature  is  always  the  fame. 

How  vaft  is  the 4  difference  between  the 
(  Particles,  that  in  the  form  of  Smoak  are 
i  feparated  by  Fire  from  all  Gombuftible 
i  matters !  How  even  and  uniform  does 
1  the  fineft  fifted  Sand  appear  to  our  naked 
1  view,  and  yet  if  we  look  upon  a  fmall 
quantity  of  it  through  a  Microfcope,  we 
{hall  obferve  not  only  a  prodigious  variety 

i  of  fbapes,  but  likewife  innumerable  de- 
;  grees  from  feemingly  great  Pebbles  to  the 
li  fmalleft  Atoms,  in  the  bignefs  of  the 
i;i  parts  that  compofe  it  ••  The  fame  dif- 
:>  fetence  in  proportion  we  (hould  find  in 
ti  the  magnitude,  as  well  as  Figure  of  parts 

ii  in  Duft,  or  Pouders  reduced  to  the  moft 
•j  impalpable  Alcohol ,  if  we  had  better 
■■  Glaffes  and  could  arm  our  Eyes  more 
ij  ftrongly. 

Mifom.  But  tho’  I  fhould  grant  that 
it  among  the  Animal  Spirits  there  are  many 
:  degrees  of  fubtilty,  yet  I  cannot  fee, 

;j  whence  it  muft  follow,  that  fome  of 
if  thofe  which  help  to  conftitute  the  Sto¬ 
ll  machick  Ferment,  fhould  be  of  a  finer 
;  fort,  . 

. 

/■  * 

■  'V 


(  ) 

* 

fort,  thin  others,  that  ferve  for  more 
ignoble  Fun&icns. 

Phil.  Would  it  not  be  unreafonable  to 
furrnife,  that  the  Spirits,  which  are  im¬ 
mediately  employ’d  in  the  a dt  of  think¬ 
ing,  fhould  not  be  more  fubtile  than  thofe, 
that  continually  extend  the  feveral  Mufcles 
of  our  Legs  and  Thighs  in  walking  > 

Mifom.  If  matter  could  be  capable  of 
Thought,  there  wou;d  be  great  occafion 
for  ?he  Subiilization  of  the  Spirits,  I 
confefs  to  wind  them  up  to  fuch  a  pitch  5 
but  fore  you  forget,  that  Thought  is 
wholly  incorporeal,  and  is  perform’d  by 
the  Soul  it  felf. 

Phil .  1  haye  afferfed  already,  that  the 
Soul  confifts  in  thinking,  of  which  mat¬ 
ter  is  incapable,  and  do  not  fay  the  Spi¬ 
rits  that  think,  but  the  Spirits,  that  are 
employ’d  in  the  aft  of  thinking :  We 
mull:  confider  the  Sou!  as  the  Skill  of  an 
Artificer,  whilft  the  Organs  of  the  Body 
are  her  Tools  5  for  as  the  Body  and  its 
mo  ft  minute  Spirits  are  wholly  insignifi¬ 
cant,  and  cannot  perform  that  Operation, 
w  hich  we  call  thinking  without  the  Soul 
more  than  the  Tools  of  an  Artificer,  can 
do  any.  thing  without  his  Skill,  fo  th? 
Soul  cannot  exert  her  felf  without  the 
afliftance  cf  •  the  Orsanick  Body  more 

than 


(  I2<?  ) 

than  the  Artificers  Skill  can  be  put  in  exe¬ 
cution  without  the  Tools. 

!  Mifom .  How  then  can  the  Soul  whole 
Eflence  con  lifts  in  Thinking  continue  after 
(he  fhall  be  feparated  from  the  Body  > 
Phil.  This  I  confefs  is  very  my.fteriou$j 
and  whatever  the  fubulty  of  fome  acute 
Philofophers  may  pretend  to,  it  is  utterly 
incomprefaenfible,  and  would  be  contra¬ 
dictory  to  human  Realon,  that  when  the 
Body  is  dead  Thought  Ihould  remain,  if 
from  Principles  o f  Religion  we  were  not 
allured  of  the  Soul’s  Immortality,.  But 
as  ir.  is  very  immaterial  to  our  bufinefs  in 
hand,  what  the  Soul,  abftraft  from  the 
Body,  (ball  be  capable  of  in  that  ftate,< 
of  which  we  know  fo  little,  fo  let  us  at 
this  time  ccnfider  this  immaterial  being 
no  farther,  than  as  it  comes  within  our 
reach,  and  being  allied  with  matter,  is 
part  of  the  Compound  which  we  are: 
And  then  1  fay,  that  whilft  the  ftrift  union 
that  is  between  the  Body  and  the  Soul 
lifts,  and  they  continue  to  be,  as  it  were*  a 
mixture,  the  latter  cannot  aft  wi  hout  the 
sffiftance  of  the  firft ;  For  tho1  our 
thoughts  be  never  fo  Elevated  or  Meta- 
phyfical,  we  cannot  form  them  without 
Idea’s  of  Words,  Things,  or  joint  No¬ 
tions,  and  Thinking  only  confifts  in  a  va* 

1  ,  o  K  rioui 


(  H°  ) 

runts  difi  option  of  Images  received  be* 
fire * 

Mifim .  Then  you  would  have  this 
varioufly  difpofing  of  the  Images  to  be  the 
work  of  the  Spirits,  that  aft  under  the 
Soul  as  fo  many  Labourers  under  fome 
great  Architeft. 

PhiL  I  would  fo :  And  reflecting  on 
what  is  tradfafted  within  us,  it  feems  to 
me  a  very  diverting  Scene  to  think, 
when  we  drive  to  recolleft  fomething 
that  does  not  then  occur  5  how  nimbly 
tfaofe  volatil  Meflengers  of  ours  will  beat 
through  all  the  Paths,  and  hunt  every 
Enclofure  of  the  Organ  fet  afiie  for 
thinking,  in  queft  of  the  Images  we  want, 
and  when  we  have  forgot  a  Word  or  Sen¬ 
tence,  which  yet  we  are  fore  the  great 
Treafury  of  Images  received  our  Me¬ 
mory  has  once  been  charged  with,  we 
may  almoft  feel  how  feme  of  the  Spirits 
flying  through  all  the  Mazes  and  Meanders 
rommage  the  whole  fubftance  of  the  Brainy 
wfailft  others  ferret  themfelves  into  the 
inmoft  recedes  of  it  with  fo  much  eager- 
nefs  and  labour,  that  the  difficulty  they 
meet  with  fame  times  makes  us  uneafie, . 
and  they  often  bewilder  themfelves  in; 
their  fearch,  till  at  laft  they  light  by 
chance  on  the  Image  that  contains  what; 

they 


I 


l 


j 1 


( ,'■*?*  ) 

they  look’d  for,  or  elfe  dragging  it,  as 
it  were,  by  piece-meals  from  the  dark 
Caverns  of  oblivion,  reprefent  what  they 
can  find  of  it  to  our  Imagination. 

Mifom-  I  hope  you’ll  conclude  nothing 
from  this  Volatile  Oeconomy  of  the 
Brain,  of  your  own  making. 

Fhil.  t  don’t  intend  it,  and  only  hint¬ 
ed  at  the  moft  exquifite  Functions  of  the 
Spirits,  that  the  nicety  of  the  performance 
and  the  fwiftnefs  of  the  Execution  might 
convince  you  of  the  tranfcendent  fubtilty 
of  thofe  airy  velocious  Agents,  the  chief 
and  immediate  Miniften  of  Thought  5 
that  officiating  between  the  Soul  and 
grofler  Spirits  of  the  Senfes  have  always 
accefs  to  her  invifible  felf. 

After  this  1  (hall  put  you  in  mind  of 
two  things,  which  the  knowledge  we  have 
of  our  felves,  and  common  experience 
will  fuffer  no  body  to  be  ignorant  of. 
The  firft  is,  that  when  we  fee,  or  hear 
others  Difcourfe  of  things  that  are  ml\ y 
and  we  abhor,  the  very  thinking  on  them 
(hall  make  us  naufeate,  and  caufe  feme 
People  to  Vomit,  that  are  of  a  delicate 
contexture.  The  fecond  is,  that,  tho* 
we  are  in  perfect  Health,  and  have  what 
we  call  a  very  good  Stomach,  the  receiv¬ 
ing  of  any  furprifing  News,  that  nearly 

&  2  concerns 


(  1P  ) 

concerns  us,  either  a  very  joyful,  or  an 
tiom iconic  MefTage  (hall  damp  our  Ap¬ 
petite,  sod  in  an  inftant  take  away  the 
craving  ^define  we  had  to  Ear.  From 
tbefe  and  the  other  Obfervations  cited 
before,  I  think  it  is  evident,  that  the 
office  of  the  Stomach  is  very  much  in. 
fluenc‘d  by  Thought  it  felt,  and  confe- 
quently  the  Spirits  employed  in  this  Mi- 
niftry  are  of  the  fin-eft  fort,  which  is  all  I 
I  was  to  prove*  The  Kidneys,  Liver,  I 
Pancreas,  and  all  the  V  fcera,  but  efpe-  j 
dally  the  Spleen  and  Mefentery,  have  many  I 
Nerves  derived  to  them  from  the  Brain  5  I 
Mnd  yet  we  are  not  fenfible,  that  our  I 
Thoughts  tn  ke  the  Seaft  i'mpreffion  upon  I 
any  of  -heir  Fun&ions  ;  the  Heart  indeed  I 
Teems  influenc’d  by  thoughts  when  the  I 
Soul  is  moved  by  fome  ■  excels  of  Paffion,  I 
yet  this  never  happens  without  great  per-  I 
turhation  of  the  Spirits  in  general  $  but  I 
when  our  mind  is  calm,  and  we  can  think  I 
fedately'  none  ct  cur  inwards  are  fio  nice  I 
as  to  be  affected  in  their  Operations  by  1, 
the  fame  Images,  that  influence  the  Soul,  I 
but  only  the  Stomack  and  the  Organs  oft. 
Generation,  as  if  Nature  by  the  extraor-l: 
dinary  commerce  fhe  has  contriv’d  between  |' 
the  loo!,  and  tfaofe  parts,  would  fheww| 
ns  that  they  are  the  mo  ft  noble  of  the: 

whole: 


i  H;  ) 

whole  Body  ;  the  latter  being  as  neieffiry 
to  continue  the  whole  Species,  as  the  fir  ft 
I  is  to  preferve  every  individual  Per  fan, 
Mtfom.  I  doubt  you  confound  the  Ope¬ 
rations  of  the  Soul  with  the  Animal  fun- 
.  ftions  which  we  have  common  with  the 
Brutes  ;  The  Organs  of  Generation*  not 
being  fubjeft  to  the  Will,  aft  often  in 
deP'ig'.K  of  our  ntional  Soul,  and  the 
Lufrful  Thoughts,  that  excite  diforderly 
motions  in  them  are  the  effefts  of  Con* 
cnpifcence  and  the  Fkfh,  and  therefore 
call’d  carnal. 

'  Phiu  If  you  are  of  Opinion,  that  there 
is  but  one  Soul,  the  Thoughts  I  (peak  of* 
ij  which  you  are  pleafed  to  call  Carnal.,  muft 
1  of  neceffity  h  long  to  that  one,  notwith- 
ftanding  all  its  rationality  3  becaufe  as  we 
faid  before,  muter  cannot  think ;  but  if 
you  (fate  a  plurality  of  Souls,  the  worft 
of  ’em  will  ferve  my  purpofe  3  and  let 
thofe  Thoughts  be  the  aft  or  the  effefto-f 
the  Animal,  Senfitivfc,  or  what  Soul  yon 
j  pleafe,  we  (hall  never  differ  about  it:  For 
i  thus  much  1  know,  that  of  all  the  Ope- 
s  rations  that  are  perform'd  within  us,  the 
v  moft  elevated  and  refined  is  thinking  e 
From  whence  l  conclude,  Fir(f?  That 
[  thofe  parts  that  are  influenc'd  by  mere 
j  thinking  are  without  doubt  the  niceft* 

K  j  And, 

I 

■ 


y 


(  M4  ) 

And,  Secondly,  That  the  Spirits  that  are 
the  Internnncii ,  between  the  immaterial 
Thinking  fubfhnce,  and  thofe  parts  are 
none  of  the  courfeft,  and  this  is  all  I  fhall 
fay  upon  the  matter  $  for  I  have  no  mind 
to  engage  in  any  Difputes  about  the 
Sou!. 

Mtjom.  From  what  you  have  fa  id  I  am 
very  well  fatisfied,  that  the  Volatilization, 
and  greateft  Efficacy  of  the  Stomachick 
Ferment  depends  upon  the  Animal  Spirits, 
and  am  likewife  convinced,  that  continual 
thinking  fpends  abundance  of  thofe  Spi¬ 
rits,  and  confequently  is  apt  to  rob  the 
Ferment  of  its  due  5  but  I  cannot  fee  why 
you  fhould  take  fuch  extraordinary  pains 
to  prove,  that  the  Spirits  employ’d  in  thofe 
offices  are  of  greater  fubtilty  than  others. 
I  cannot  apprehend,  what  benefit  your 
affertion  is  to  receive  from  what  you  lay 
fo  great  a  ftrefs  upon  5  Eli  readily  allow 
that  the  deficiency  of  the  Animal  Spirits 
may  very  reafcnably  *caufe  Crudities,  and 
it  is  perhaps  not  improbable,  that  fome  of 
the  Spirits  confticucing  the  Ferment, 
which  feem  to  have  firft  been,  as  it  were, 
dipt  into  the  Fancy,  fhould  be  of  the 
finer  fort  $  but  why  will  you  infift  fo  much 
upon  this  latter  ? 

Phil 


(  m  ) 

Vhil  Becaufe  the  waftiog  of  the  coerfer 
Spirits,  does  not  produce  the  fame,  but 
quite  contrary  effefts :  Exercile,  which 
without  doubt  makes  a  great  confumption 
in  the  Animal  Spirits,  not  only  creates 
Appetite  and  helps  Digeliion,  but  likewife 
removes  Obftru&ions,  invigorates  the 
Blood,  and  ftrengthens  the  wnole  Body: 
Daily  experience  teaches  us  that  none  are 
more  Healthy,  omnibus  paribus ,  than  your 
labouring  People  that  come  home  weary 
every  Night,  and  confequently  have  much 
exhaufted  their  Spirits.  From  this  we 
may  fafely  conclude,  that  the  courier  Spi¬ 
rits,  when  once  they  are  feparated  from 
the  Blood,  by  remaining  in  the  Body  con* 
trad  a  fowrnefs,  or  feme  other  ill  quality, 
which  I  don  t  pretend  to  determine,  for 
which  reafon  Exercife  is  fo  neceffary  to  ail 
People,  that  uie  a  plentiful  and  nutritious 
Diet,  that  by  the  Mufculary  motions,  the 
Spirits,  which  from  their  Blood  are  fepa¬ 
rated  in  great  abundance,,  may  be  ,(hook 
off  and  eliminated  before  they  can  prove 
prejudicial. 

The  reafon  then  why  I  infift  upon  the 
difference  in  the  degrees  of  Spirits,  which 
naturally  flows  from  their  being  made  by 
feparation,  is  very  manifeft  from  the  Core 
as  well  as  Caufe  of  Hyfterick  and  Hypo- 

Si  4  chondriack 


(  n6  ) 

bbondriack  Difeafesr  For  if  the  Spirits 
were  all  of  equal  fubtilty  would  it  not 
be  r  diculcus,  firft  to  acc  fe  the  deficien¬ 
cy  of  ’em,  and  immediately  after  pre- 
f  rite  Exercife,  which  it  is  palpable  will 
exfouh  them  mere  ?  and  yet  that  every 
Body  blames  the  defeat  of  Spirits,  and 
like  wile  orders  Exercife  in  thefe  Diftem- 
pas  is  not  to  be  contradicted. 

Mifom.  What  you  fay  is  certainly  the 
g-caufi  Error  that  ever  was  broach'd  in 
Tbtfick.  Exercife  nee er  was  recommend- 
ed,  bee  nfi  ir  .fhould  confume  or  diffipate 
the  Spirits,  but  btcaufe  the  motion  of  the 
Mufeles  is  known,  to  contribute  much  to 
the  volatilization  of  the  Blood,  which 
being  Tluck  and  Torpid  hinders  the 
feparati  n  of  the  Spirits,  that  are  lock'd 
up  in  its  Mafs,  and,  as  it  were,  impri- 
fon’d  by  its  Vifcidity.  Great  Epicures 
generally  take  care  to  have  a  vent  for 
their  Spirits,  tho  otherwife  they  ftir  but 
little,  and  yet  they  are  often  fill’d  with 
grofs  Humours,  which  cannot  be  attri¬ 
buted  but  to  the  want  of  Exercife  and 
Mufculary  Motion,  that  by  agitating  the 
Blood,  would  promote  all  the  neceffary  ie- 
parauons  that  fhould  be  made  from  its  Mafs* 

PhiL  I  do  not  deny,  that  Exercife  and 
Mufculary  Motion  are  aflifting  to  the  Vo¬ 
latilization  of  the  Blood,  but  this  does 

no% 


(  M7  ) 

not  take  away  their  confamiog  abundance 
of  'he  Animal  Spirt iS.  As  <o  the  Spirits 
i  being1  (hut  up  by  the  Vifciditv  of  the 
Blood,  I  know  it  is  the  Opinion  of  a 
great  many  Modern  Phyficians  5  but  it  is 
an  extravagant  iuppofition,  very  incon- 
fift  nt  with  the  volatility  that  muft  of 
neceffi  y  belong  even  to  the  grofleft  of 
thofe  Particles,  that  can  come  under  the 
denomination  of  Spirits,  But  I  hate  to 
reafn  alter  this  wand  ring  manner,  where 
’  Nature  cannot  be  my  guide  :  Our  fh allow 
Underftandings  (hall  never  penetrate  into 
the  ftri  ftore  of  Farts  of  that  amazing  as 
well  as  myfterious  Compofition,  the  Ma(s 
of  Blood  5  and  therefore  I  t  us  not  launch 
out  into  any  further  Difpures  about  that 
incomprehenfible  mixture,  or  affert  any 
more  of  ir,  than  what  Obfervation  will 
allow  us. 

IMifom .  Good  P hiloprio  no  E canons,  by 
way  of  Cant;  If  you  can  deftroy  that 
fuppofitioo,  do,  otherwife  don’t  fpeak  a* 
sain  ft  ir. 

o 

Phil .  If  you  would  have  me  ffaew  you 
the  falfity  of  ir,  I  muft  fir  ft  ask  you, 
Whether  you  don’t  think  that  there  are 
more  Nutritious  Particles,  and  confequenf- 
ly  Spirits  in  the  tender  Flefh  of*  Animals, 
|  than  in  your  fruchu  horarii ,  or  Floors, 

Cole- 


(  l?8 ) 

Cole  worts,  Batter-Milk,  and  even  Bread 
it  (elf?  If  fo,  I  leave  all  the  World  to 
|odge5  whether  it  is  reafonable  to  fop- 
pofe,  that  Aliments  confiding  of  Volatile, 
Supple,  Balfamick  Particles,  that  are  eafiljr 
divided,  fhould  fill  the  Blood  with  more 
grofs  humours,  than  fuch  as  are  made  up 
of  Terreftrious,  Crude,  and  Stubborn 
Parts  ^  or  that  the  Blood  compos’d  of  the 
firft  fhould  more  Imprifon  the  Spirits,  than 
that  which  is  made  of  the  latter.  Be- 
fides,  that  great  part  of  the  Spirits  is 
made  before  the  Chyle  enters  into  the 
Blood,  not  only  after  it  has  paft  the 
Glandules  of  the  Inteftines,  and  is  in  the 
Lafteal  Vefiels  of  the  Mefentery,  but  be¬ 
fore  it  comes  out  of  the  Stomach. 

Mtfcm.  I  believe  you’ll  find  it  very  dif¬ 
ficult  to  prove  that  Afiertion. 

Phil-  Nothing  is  more  eafie.-  AiVhen  a 
Labouring  Man  that  has  work’d  hard  is 
difpirited,  and  aimoO:  faint  for  want  of 
Food,  How  foon  is  he  cured  by  Eating, 
before  the  Concoction  in  the  Stomach  can 
be  fa  id  to  begin  !  What  is  it,  that  fo  im¬ 
mediately  reftores  and  comforts  him,  but 
the  Spirits,  that  are  fepa rated  all  along 
from  the  Aliments,  not  only  before  they 
are  digefted,  but  before  they  are  fwal low’d* 

down, 


- 


(  M  9  ) 

down,  and  refrefh  him  in  the  very  aft  of 
Maftication  ? 

Mifom.  That  thefe  Steams  nourifti,  and 
refrefh  us  is  demonftrabie,  bet  I  don’t 
think,  that  becaufe  they  fly  up  £o  the 
Brain,  they  are  prefently  to  be  call’d  Ani¬ 
mal  Spirits.  ( 

Phil.  With  the  fame  right  as  the  Chyle 
is  call’d  Blood  as  foon  as  it  is  mix’d  with 
its  Mafs,  thos  before  either  of  them  are 
perfected,  there  is  more  required  than  moft 
People  imagine.  It  is  a  very  pitiful  no* 
tion  which  the  generality  of  Phdofophers 
and  Phyficians  have  ot  the  Animal  Spirits  § 
as  if  they  were  only  fome  diftinft,  uni¬ 
form,  fmall  Globulous  Particles,  that  with¬ 
out  Coherence  or  Dependance  upon  one 
another  move  together  in  company  5 
when  it  is  fo  notorioufly  vifible  to  the 
eye  of  Reafoo,  that  what  we  call  the 
Animal  Spirits  is  a  Compofition  of  various 
Parts,  that  have  a  Tone,  Grafts,  and  due 
Confiftency  belonging  to  them,  no  lefts  than 
the  Blood.  When  I  have  reflefted  on 
thefe  things,  and  how  much  there  might 
be  faid  of  them,  that  is  yet  untouch’d,  I 
have  often  wonder’d,  that  the  great  lovers 
of  ftuppoftiion,  in  this  our  reaftoning  Age, 
have  from  the  Exuberancy  of  their  Fan¬ 
cies  given  us,  not  whole  Syftems  and  Hy¬ 
potheses 


(  !4°  ) 

pothefes  of  the  mixture  of  Parts,  that 
the  Animal  Spirits  muff  of  neceffity  con- 
lift  of,  which  might  have  been  iefs  ridi¬ 
culous  than  the  pretence  of  Mechanically 
explaining  their  motions. 

Mifom .  Then  door  you  chink  all  the 
Operations  of  the  Body  to'  be  Mechani¬ 
cs  > 

Phil.  Yes,  and  not  only  fo,  but  I  be¬ 
lieve  she  fame  of  all  the  Works  of  Nature. 

I  believe  we  can  give  folid  reafons  for  the 
Structure  of  the  Bones,  and  fpeak  Me¬ 
chanically  of  the  fhape  as  well  as  motions 
of  the  Mufcles,  and  their  Antagonifts,  and 
of  a  great  many  other  things  that  fall  un¬ 
der  our  Senfes^  but  I  believe  like  wife, 
that  when  we  are  fo  wholly  ignorant  of 
the  Figure  and  Magnitude  of  Parts,  and 
as  unacquainted  with  the  Veffels  that  con¬ 
tain  them,  as  we  are  of  the  Spirits  and 
the  Brain,  it  is  irnpoffible  to  enter  into  the 
Meehan ifm  of  them,  at  leaft  fo  far  as  to 
determine  their  motions  to  an  Angle  of 
Incidence^  more  efpecially,  when  we  know 
them  to  be  fo  Minute  and  Volatile,  that  to 
feme  of  them  our  very  Bones  are  pe1  vious. 
There  are  no  doubt  certain  Rules '  in 
Nature  why  a  Horfe  comes  to  his  full 
growth  always  in  Six  Years,  and  a  Man  « 
hardly  in  One  and  Twenty.  If  we  could 


( '*.4* )  i  _  1  ‘ : 

undrefs  Nature,  and  penetrate  into  the 
firft  Elements  of  her  we  might  perhaps 
give  reafons  for  thofe  things,  hut  before 
we  can  do  that  I  (hall  always  laugh  at 
the  Ignorance  and  Vanity  of  rfiofe  that 
.pretend  to  it. 

Mifom.  When  I  interrupted  you,  you 
was  fpeaking  cf  the  mixture  of  Parts,  that 
the  Animal  Spirits  muft  confift  of:  I 
(hould  be  glad  to  hear  a  Syftem  of  cm. 

Phil.  For  that  you  raiaft  apply  your 
felf  to  the  witty  fpecelative  Phyficians, 
that  take  greater  delight  in  fappofidon 
than  I  5  fmce  I  told  you,  that  the  mixture 
of  the  Blood  was  unfearcbable,  you  may 
well  imagine,  that  I  think  that  of  the 
Spirits  to  be  as  much  more  fo,  as  the  Par¬ 
ticles  that  confthute  them  are  more  remote 
from  the  Seafes.  What  I  have  ftarted  a* 
bout  the  degrees  of  fubtilty  that  muft  be 
among  them,  fee  ms  to  me  as  I  told  you  a 
necedary  Cqnfequenee  applicable  *  to  all 
Particles  in  general,  that  are  made  by  Se¬ 
paration,  fo  that  I  have  fuppofecftiothing ; 
for  I  have  laid  no  manner  of  Orels  upon 
neither  the  difference  of  Elafticity  or  va¬ 
rious  Contexture  of  their  Parts,  which 
yet  that  therje.  are  is  undeniable,  it  we 
confider  that  to  them  belong  not  only 
Conftitution  and  bodily  Strength,  but 

likewife 


'  (40 

likewife  all  good  and  ill  tempers,  paffions 
of  the  mind,  Courage  and  Fear,  Wit  and 
Foolifhnefs,  &c. 

Mifom .  I  (hall  be  ever  obliged  to  you 
for  what  you  have  faid  laft :  Your  hinting 
to  me  thofe  niceft  qualifications  of  the 
Body,  which,  tho’  they  feem  to  belong  to 
the  Soul,  are  wholly  depending  upon  the 
various  Contexture  of  the  Mafs  of  Spirits, 
have  made  me  penetrate  into  the  divifi- 
bility  of  matter,  and  by  opening  the  vaft 
extent  of  it,  led  me  to  a  noble  Profpect 
of  Miracles  in  the  compofure  of  our 
Frame,  which  1  had  never  difcovered  be¬ 
fore. 

Phil.  I  am  glad,  that  at  laft  you  are  hap¬ 
pily  enter’d  into  aSentiment  of  things,  which 
words  cannot  exprefs  $  and  now  1  hope, 
looking  back  on  the  paflages  of  your  Life, 
you’ll  eafily  find  out  your  felt  the  Pro- 
catar&ick  Caufes  of  your  Diftemper.  The 
irregularities  of  your  Youth  having  led  the 
way  by  (baking  the  frame  ©f  your  Con¬ 
futation  $  The  firft  lean  accufe  is  your 
Marrying  young,  and  being  too  much  ad- 
difted  to  what  you  was  pleas’d  to  call  the 
res  uxoria :  It  is  incredible,  what  vaft 
treafures  are  infenfibly  conlu  ned  by  a  con* 
tinual  Ex  pence,  tho’  it  be  never  fo  little. 
1  know  very  well,  that  moft  Married  Peo¬ 
ple 


■ 

; 


[j 


\ 


r 

I 

i 

l 

! 


; 


(  l43  ) 

pie  flatter  themfelves  with  thinking,  that 
they  {efficiently  confult  their  Healths  if 
they  only  abftain  from  unlawful  Pleafures, 
how  in  temperately  foever  they  indulge 
their  Appetites,  where  the  ridiculous  no¬ 
tion  of  Duty  can  Palliate  the  extrava¬ 
gancy  of  their  Luff  5  but  i:  is  certain  that 
the  excef*  of  Legitimate,  and  what  we 
call  Chafte  Embraces,  proves  often  of  no 
lefs  fata!  confequence  as  to  fhe  utter  un¬ 
doing  our  Strength  and  Conftitution,  than 
the  impura  Venus  her  felf:  Yet  if  a  Mao, 
that  has  but  once  had  a  Gonorrhaa^  or 
any  other  flight  Venereal  Symptom,  hap¬ 
pens  to  grow  Old  before  his  time,  and  feels 
a  general  decay  of  Vigour  and  Manhood, 
he  is  apt  to  lay  all  the  blame  upon  the 
trifling  Infection,  which  perhaps  never 
haunted  him  above  two  or  three  Months; 
without  reflecting  on  the  prodigious  wafte 
he  has  made  of  his  Spirits  for  many  Years, 
by  taxing  himfdf  too  rigidly  with  the 
cruel  tribute  of  Benevolence  5  in  which 
Error  People  are  generally  upheld  by  the 
infinuatirsg  Artifice  of  defigning  Quacks, 
who  making  an  advantage  of  the  many 
and  different  Symptoms  of  the  Venereal 
Difeafe,  as  well  as  the  poffibility  of  its  re¬ 
maining  conceal’d  in  the  Body  for  many 
Years,  frighten  the  Credulous  with  a 

Thoufand 


(  *  44  ) 

Thoufand  frivolous  Stories,  and  not  will¬ 
ing  to  turn  any  Grift  from  their  Mill,  en¬ 
deavour  to  perfuade  the  World,  that 
every  Diftemper  is  the  Pox.  ' 

.  Mtfom .  I  have  long  fufpefted  that  Caufe 
my  felf  which  you  now  mention,  and  can 
but  Smile  at  the  Comical  way  we  have  of 
digging  our  own  Graves.  The  Hectick 
Fire  of  Conjugal  Love  is  without  doubt 
no  lefs  confuming,  tho’  more  How,  than 
the  more  raging  blafl.es  or  Ignominious 
Name,  and  the  fond  Paffion,  tho5  it  is 
pernicious  to  every  Condition  of  Life,  is 
yet  rooft  tnifchievous  to'  the  Married  State, 
becaufe  in  that  it  has  a  double  bait,  and 
the  foot  blog  our  Thoughts  with  the  Law- 
fulnefs  of  the  aft  is  no  lefs  inticing  to  de- 
ftruftion  than  the  Plea  fare  it  fell.  Oh  ! 
how  follicicaps  is  prudent  Nature  to 
maintain  her  felf  in  the  Succeffive  revo® 
lotions  of  every  Species  I  how  ftrangely 
are  the  rooft  Rational  Animals  impofed 
upon  to  their  own  undoing  by  that  Hygna, 
Love,  fo  as  to  believe  it  the  only  Sweet 
for  which  Life  is  valuable,  notwithftand- 
ing  the  innumerable  Calamities,  Difcafes 
and  Deaths  they  fee  it  has  brought  upon 
others?  Is  it  corn.prehenfble,  which  way; 
that  Sagacious  Creature  Man  fheuld  be 
guilty  of.  fo  much; folly 3  as  with  the  beft 


(  H5  ) 


and  moft  Balfamick  parts  of  his  Arterial 
Blood  daily  to  feed  an  infatiable  Monfter^ 
and  fuffer  it  luxurioufly  to  draw  the 
Marrow  from  his  Bones,  and  Vital  Strength 
from  every  part  lefs  folid,  till  by  its  de-* 
ftruCtive  breath  he  is  quite  enervated^ 
and  his  Conftitution  devour’d  ? 

PhiU  You  fpeak  with  the  Zeal  and  Wit 
dom  of  Fifty  Fivey  but  what  pity  it  is 
we  fhould  never  be  faving  before  our 
Stock  is  fpent !  Sera  eft  in  funclo  Parfimo * 
nia .  There  is  a  Seafon  in  which  we  can- 
not  believe,  that  the  Spirits,  fquander’d 
away  in  Venereal  Plea  fores,  cannot  be  re- 
ftor  d,  and  the  Lofles  that  were  fuftain’d 
are  irretrievable.  §>uod  qu£  a  Venere  fa£fa 
eft  fit  irreparabilis  uirium  ebchaujlio,  quia 
demit  de  innato  cordis  Spirit u,  fays  Van  HeU 


wont,  in  his  Fourth  Book  of  Fevers:  But 
this  Truth  makes  little  impreffion  upon  m 
at  Five  and  Twenty,  and  if  Youth  might 
return  to  Old  Age,  it  would  fcorn  to  come 
back  without  its  Follies  5  for  according  to 
Terence  it  is  but,  alia  £tate ,  quod  ad  omnia 
fapimus  retd? us,  and  not  before. 

The  next  that  has  exhaufted  and  fpoil’d 
the  Tone  of  your  Spirits,  was  the  labour 
of  the  Brain  in  that  Five  or  Six  Years  hard 
Study  commenced  foon  alter  your  Eftate 
was  £0  unexpectedly  fallen  to  you  5  and 

h 


(  I4<$  ) 

indeed  the  immoderate  Exercife  of  the 
Brain,  and  Excels  of  Venery  are  fo  gene¬ 
rally  the  occafioo  of  the  Hypochondri&ck 
Paffions  that  in  all  my  Experience  I  have 
hardly  met  with  any,  where  I  had  not 
Heafon  to  impute  the  Diftemper,  at  leaft 
partly,  to  either  of  thefe,  if  not  to  both : 

I  fpeak  of  Patients,  in  whom  the  Malady 
has  been  confirm'd.  It  was  then  the  wafte 
of  Spirits,  that  robbing  the  Stoma- 
chick  Ferment  of  what  was  required  for 
its  Volatilization,  occafton'd  thofe  fix'd 
Acid  Saits,  of  which  you  firft  complain  d: 
The  many  Abforbent,  and  Alkalick  Me¬ 
dicines  you  rook  would  have  removed 
your  grievance,  if  the  fault  had  not  been 
In  the  Spirits  3  yet  the  continual  taking  of 
them  as  well  as  the  remaining  Strength  of 
your  Conftitution  kindred  the  Crudities 
from  being  more  prejudicial,  and  in¬ 
ducing- further  Symptoms,  till  the  great 
and  prepofterous  Evacuation  of  .your 
Learned  Galemfi ,  quite  deftroying  the 
Tone  of  your  Blood  and  Spirits  compleat- 
ed  their  mine.  The  large  Bleedings  ha¬ 
ving  robb'd  you  of  your  Vital  hear,  and 
ftroog  Catharticks  benumb'd  your  Stomach 
and  Bowels  after  working,  it  was  no  won¬ 
der,  that  the  drinking  of  the  cold.  Wa¬ 
ters  totally  aboliftiing  their  Functions, 

brought 


mm 


(  *47  ) 

brought  the  Lienteria  upon  you  •  and 
confidering  the  Circumftances  you  were  in 
that  Morning  at  Epfom,  when  you  took 
the  burnt  Claret*  I  reckon  the  happieft 
chance,  that  ever  befel  you  (the  Death  of 
your  Kinfthan  not  excepted)  was  meeting 
with  the  Gentleman  that  prefcrib’d  it* 
When  the  Wine  and  Spices  had  reflored 
the  Tone  of  your  Stomach,  and  inteftines, 
and  the  Loofnefs  was  check’d,  your  Blood 
and  Juices  being  now  as  well  purified  of 
their  Dregs,  as  deprived  of  their  mere 
Ralfamick  Parts,  it  was  reafenab  e  to  think* 
that  by  giving  a  Relaxation  to  your 
Mind,  and  more  Exercife  to  your  Body* 
than  was  ufual,  remaining  in  the  Country 
Air*  and  ufing  a  laudable  Diet,  you  would 
in  a  manner  recover  your  Strength  2  The 
Enemy  however  was  left  behind,  and  from 
the  time  of  your  drinking  the  Waters  it 
is,  that  I  date  your  Diftemper  :  For  tho7 
you  enjoy’d  a  tolerable  Health  for  a  con- 
fiderable  time  after  $  yet  upon  every  dif* 
order,  that  has  fucceeded  it,  the  deficiency 
of  your  Spirits  has  uianifefted  it  felt  mare 
and  more. 

Mlfom .  It  is  very  ftrange,  and  fure  fd'iie- 
thing  belonging  to  my  Diftemper,  that 
whatever  resolution  f  take  up  againft  Phy- 
fiefeand  Fhyficians,  I  ftiould  always  heark- 

L  2  cm 


(  »4$  ) 

en  to  the  toft  comer*  It  is  without  doubt 
the  ardent  defire  we  have  for  our  welfare* 
that  in  fpight  of  our  Rcaion  makes  us  fo 
fond  of  believing :  I  find  my  felf  again 
perfwsded.,  and  tixP  I  have  often  fancy’d 
the  fame  in  vain?  yet  now  jnethinks  I  am 
convinced  of  the  real  Cauie,  not  only  of 
the  Crudities  and  their  grievous  Effects, 
hut  likewife  all  the  innumerable  other  Sym¬ 
ptoms,  that  have  ever  difturb’d  rne;  For 
thos  the  Enemy  has  now  withdrawn  his 
Forces  and  is  retired*  I  am  fenfible  that 
he  is  ftiil  lurking  within :  The  beating, 
throbbing*  and  fometknes  trembling  in  e- 
.very  part,  and  efpecially  the  fhakings  in 
my  Back,  which  I  fed  not  only  upon  fur- 
prfe  or  Paffion  5  but  even  the  lead  Emo¬ 
tion  of  my  mind  that  is  fudden,  now  Earn 
as  it  were  in  perfect  Health,  admonifhes 
me  continually  of.  my  precarious  Condi¬ 
tion,  and  gives  me  3  clear  Idea  of  the 
broken  contexture  of  my  Spirits. 

I  carr  now  folve  very  well  how  clofe 
ftudy  comes  to  difpofe  People  to  the  Hy- 
■pochondriack  Pafiion  $  but  v^hy  the  Ger¬ 
mans  (hoold  call  it  the  Difeafe  of  the 
Learned  ia  their  Language,  when  fo  many 
others  are  affti&ed  with  it,  I  can’t  con¬ 
ceive. 

mu 


i 


(  \49  ) 

Phil*  They  call  it  fo,  beeatife  amoeg 
the  Learned  there  is  a  greater  number 
troubled  with  it  than  you  can  find  m 
any  other  Qafs  of  Men  r  It  is  common 
among  them,  as  Hernias  among  Trumpe- 
i  '  ters,  and  tfaofe  that  break  Horfes  for  the 
j  great  Saddle,  Aflhmis  among  Hat  Maker% 
)  &c.  Non  quod  foli  liter  lays  EtmuUar% 
j  hoc  morho  ohnoxii  Jint .  fed  quod  plurimi  e& 
i  indo  vexantur  5  the  reafon  of  which  he 
1  thinks  to  be  their  (looping  and  fquee-zing 
1  the  Belly  againft  the  Books,  which  hinders 
i:  the  tree  dercent  of  the  Diaphragm^  and 
i  confequently  the  Circulation  of  the  Hu- 
1  moors, 

:  Mifom.  This  is  very  far  fetch'd  y  I 

i  wonder  what  E tmuller  would  fay  to  a 
Learned  Divine  of  my  Acquaintance,  who 
is  Hypochondriacal, and  yet  generally  frauds 
upright,  or  walks  when  he  Studies*  But  1 
think  this  High  German  Reafoo  not  worth 
the  refuting  5  what  you  have  faid  of  the 
labour  of  the  Brain,  by  which  the  fineft 
:  .Spirits  are  exhaefted  and  the  oegleff  of 
:  Exercife  by  which  the  groffer  Humours 
j  fhould  be  eliminated  is  very  Rational,  and 
1  a  better  Caufe  cannot  be  affignki,  there- 
\  fore  I  think,  it  fhould  hold  good  in  a!!, 

]  Learned  or  not  Learned,  that  commit  the 
fame  Errors, 

L  j  Phil 


(  »5°  ) 

Phil.  So  it  does  5  for  whether  a  Man 
has  an  Eftate  to  live  upon,  is  a  Merchant, 
an  Artift,  or  follows  any  other  Trade,  or 
Employment  that  allows  of  a  Sedentary 
Life,  fo  he  but  over-charges  his  Head  with 
Bufinefs,  and  keeps  the  reft  of  his  Body 
unaftive  $  it  is  certain,  that  he  bids  fair 
for  the  Diftemper  5  and  as  for  the  leaning 
the  Stomach  and  Procardia  againft  large 
Books,  Desks,  and  Tables,  tho’  it  is  not 
fufficient  to  be  an  Adequate  Caufe,  I  have 
had  reafon  in  a  great  many  to  fuipeft  it 
as  an  acceffary  one. 

Immoderate  Grief,  Cares,  Troubles,  and 
Difappointments  are  likewife  often  Con¬ 
comitant  Caufes  of  this  Difeafe  5  but  moft 
commonly  in  fuch,  as  either  by  Eftate, 
Benefices,  or  Employments  have  a  fuf¬ 
ficient  Revenue  to  make  themfelves  eafie: 
Men  that  are  already  provided  for,  or 
elfe  have  a  Livelyhood  by  their  Callings 
amply  fecured,  are  never  exempt  from  Sol- 
licit  udes,  and  the  keeping  not  only  of  Riches, 
but  even  moderate  Poffeffions  is  always 
attended  with  Care.  Thofe  that  enjoy 
}em  are  more  at  leifure  to  refledt,  befides 
that  their  Wifties  and  Defires  being  larger, 
themfelves  are  more  likely  to  be  offended 
at  a  great  many  pafiages  of  Life,  thaft 
People  of  lower  Fortunes,  who  have  fel- 


1 


I 


I 


(  *5*  ) 

dom  higher  Ends,  than  what  they  are  con¬ 
tinually  employ’d  about,  the  getting  of 
fbeir  Daily  Bread  $  which  it  they  accom- 
plifh  to  fatisfa&ion,  they  are  commonly 
pleas’d  and  happy,  becaufe  they  think 
themfelves  fo  j  if  not,  they  labour  under 
fuch  a  variety  of  Neceffities,  and  are  fo 
diverted  with  their  prefent  Circumftances, 
that  they  have  not  time  ftedfaftly  to  think 
00  one  thing,  and  confequently  the  vexa¬ 
tions  of  the  Mind  have  not  fo  great  art 
influence  over  them.  It*  was  unexpected 
Fortune,  that  firlt  made  you  in  love  with 
Bufinefs,  and  the  management  your  large 
Inheritance  required,  cured  you  of  your 
carelefs  Temper ;  Give  me  leave  tooblerve, 
that  if  you  had  been  reduced  to  the  Want 
that  threatned  you,  and  forced  to  main¬ 
tain  your  Family,  either  by  Copying, 
Hackney- Writing,  or  fome  other  miferable 
fhifr,  where  you  muft  have  work'd  ds 
pane  ad  panem,  and  always  lived  from  Hand 
to  Mouth,  I  am  of  Opinion,  that  your 
Diftemper  (if  it  had  ever  troubled  you 
at  all)  would  neither  fo  foon,  nor  fo  (e- 
verely  have  attack’d  you. 


L  4 


Jm 


(  »5*  ) 

You  have  been  tormented  with  more 
Symptoms  thin  ever  1  knew  any  one 
Pat  e  n,  and  >et  there  are  feveral  others 
as  Lypoihy tries,  Weaknefles,  Pains  in  the 
Arms,  Legs,  &c>  that  are  familiar  to  Hy¬ 
pochondriacal  People,  of  which  I  have 
net  heard  you  complain.  It  is  like- 
wife  obfervable  in  your  Cafe,  that  your 
Pa  ns  have  been  itfed  to  be  more  cruel, 
your  Fancy  lefs  difturbed,  and  the  inter¬ 
vals  of  Eafe  you  enjoy  in  the  Summer  of 
longer  continuance  than  they  are  gene¬ 
rally  found,  where  the  Diftemper  may ’be 
faid  to  be  arrived  to  the  higheft  de¬ 
gree. 

As  to  Prognofticks,  confidering  the 
many  Caufes,  that  have  concurr’d  to  the 
ruin.mg  the  Contexture  of  your  Spirits,  the 
long  duration  of  your  Diftemper,  and  the 
Violence  it  has  been  ofs  to  be  defumed 
from  the  vifible  Alterations  it  has  made 
in  your  very  Temper  and  Confutation , 
my  Sentiment  is,  that  an  entire  Cure,  fo  as 
never  to  Relapfe  into  any  of  the  Symp¬ 
toms,  that  are  become  habitual  to  you,  is 
never  to  be  expe&ed,  nor  your  your  pri- 
ftine  Vigour  is  ever  to  be  reftcred,  but  if 
your  Diftemper  be  Skilfully  managed,  and 
Prefcriptions  diligently  comply 7d  with,- 

your 


(  >5?  ) 

your  grievous  Pains,  the  Diforders  of  the 
Fancy,  and  habitual  Coftivenefs,  which 
influences  the  reft  may  be  removed,  the 
return  of  all  which  is  difmal  in  your  Af¬ 
fliction  prevented,  and  your  Life  again 
be  made  eafie  and  comfortable  :  Of  this 
I  can  aflure  you,  with  as  much  certainty, 
as  Mortals  can  make  promiies  to  one  ano¬ 
ther. 

Mifom.  I  fent  for  you  at  firft,  Vhilopno , 
only  out  of  Curiofity,  to  know  your  Sen¬ 
timents  concerning  the  Hypochondriac!! 
Pafiion,  without  any  defign  of  taking 
your  Advice,  much  lefs  your  Medicines, 
though  I  heard  you  prepared  and  Ad- 
miniftered  them  your  felf,  a  Practice  I 
have  always  coveted  in  a  regular  Phy- 
fician  5  but  what  you  have  told  me  of 
Phyfick  in  general,  and  the  Cadfes  of  my 
Diftemper  in  particular,  as  well  as  the 
Conftancy  with  which  I  fee  you  ftill  ad¬ 
here  to  Obfervadon  in  the  tracing  of  Na¬ 
ture,  and  the  uncommon  method  of  your 
reafoning  by  drawing  all  your  Arguments 
from  the  folid  Bafis  of  well  weigh’d  Ex¬ 
perience,  have  alter’d  my  Refolution,  and 
again  conquer  cl  that  Prejudice  I  have  fo 
often  taken  up  againft  Phyfick :  Where¬ 
fore,  to  (View  you. how  unwilling  I  am  to 
lofe  any  further  time,  and  with  how 

much 


.  (’54) 

,much  refignation  to  your  Skill,  and  can¬ 
dour,  I  confide  in  your  Protnifej  from  this 
moment  I  commit  my  felf  entirely  to 
your  Care,  without  enquiry  into  your 
method  of  Cure,  defiring  you  would 
let  me  have  this  very  Night  whatever 
you  think  proper,  with  neceflary  Dire¬ 
ctions  ;  to  morrow  I  (hall  have  a  Venifon- 
Pafty  for  Dinner,  of  which  if  you’ll  take 
part,  you’ll  oblige  me :  My  ufual  Hour 
is  One  $  againft  you  come,  for  your  In¬ 
formation,  I’ll  look  out  fome  of  the  Pre- 
fcriptions,  that  I  ufed  to  find  the  greateft 
benefit  by,  and  when  you  have  feen  them 
we’ll  talk  of  another  Patient,  I  have  in 
view  for  you. 

Phil.  You  load  me  with  Civilities,  Mi- 
fomedon ,  but  in  obedience  to  your  Com- 
jnands,  I’ll  take  care  of  the  Medicines  to 
Night?  and  wait  on  you  to  Morrow. 

Mifom.  Then  I’ll  detain  you  no  longer, 
and  expett  you  :  I  can  promife  you  no 
Formian,  nor  Chios  Wines,  but  excellent 
French  Claret : 


/ 


(  *55  ) 

- - quod  minimum  Faiernis 

Inviaet  uvis. 

if  f;  ,  / 

Phil.  Sufficit  5  at  liceat  cuppa  potare  Ma~ 

Mifom.  Liber  eris  :  non  enim  foleo  con - 
<s  vivas  urgere ,  Tempus  dixi ,  in 

>!  ntora  (is  rogo . 

Phil,  Tempejlivus  adero  $  nam  illhts  bora 
zj  ventrcm  femper  monitorem  habeo \ 

■  *'  ,  “ 

I 


THE 


'«-•>  s 


J 


\ 

J 


■  .  J  .  : 


* 


( 


(  *57  ) 


—  . . . — '  ■■ 

— - - — 


•  ■  THE  THIRD 

DIALOGUE 

BETWEEN 

Philopirio  a  Phyfician, 

Mifomedon  and  'Polytheca 

HIS. 

|  PATIENTS- 

!  Mifom.  ’"T"'  Hefe  are  the  Prefcripiions  I 
1  fpoke  of,  but  before  you 
j  look  on  them,  I  want  to  have  a  doubt 
i  or  two  refolv’d,  which  thinking  on  our 
!  Difcourfe  of  Yefterday,  I  ftarted  to  my 
:  feif  this  Morning,  concerning  what  you 
r  have  laid  down  as  the  chief  caufe  of  By- 

pochott* 


—  - 


(  »58  ) 

pochondriack  and  Hyfterick  Difeafes, 
The  firft  is  this  3  I  have  allow’d  you  that 
the  deficiency  of  Spirits  was  a  natural 
confequence  of  hard  Studies,  and  other 
labours  of  the  Brain  3  becaufe  it  could  not 
be  fuppofed,  but  that  great  quantities  of 
them  muft  be  eonfumed  by  thofe  difficult 
and  often  repeated  Employments  of  our 
Thoughts  3  but  upon  confidering  that  the 
a  ft  of  Thinking,  and  confequently  the 
labour  of  the  Brain  is  continual,  and  lafts 
without  intermiffion,  as  long  as  we  live  3 
I  can  fee  no  reafon,  why  in  the  fame 
Operation  the  Spirits  (hould  be  more  ex- 
haufted  at  one  time  than  they  are  at 
another. 

PM.  When  we  leave  'our  Fancy  at 
its  own  di(pofal,and,  as  it  were,  a  grazing, 
without  charging  the  Spirits  with  any 
particular  bufinefs,  they  may  be  juftly  (aid 
to  be  at  Play  3  and  therefore,  in  Men 
whole  Brains  are  not  ufed  to  be  idle,  this 
is  call’d  unbending  of  their  Thoughts,  or 
elfe  a  Relaxation  of  the  Mind  ;  but  when 
at  our  Soul’s  command  our  Thoughts  are 
determined  to  any  one  fubjeft,  and  thfe 
Volatile  Mefiengers  of  our  Will  dili¬ 
gently  employ’d  in  finding  out,  feparating, 
joining,  and  fitting  the  feveral  Images 
that  may  ferve  our  purpofe,  are  fent  with 

GU- 

}  '  '  ' 


(  *59  ) 

unconceivable  fwiftnefs  to  penetrate  every 
cranny  of  the  Brain,  then  certainly  our 
Spirits  are  at  work,  and  the  more  fix’d 
and  intenfe  our  Thoughts  are,  the  greater, 
without  doubt,  is  the  wafte  of  Spirits  :  It 
is  with  our  Thoughts,  as  it  is  with  our 
Eyes.  The  latter  we  keep  open  without 
any  trouble  all  Day  long,  and  if  we  walk 
abroad  we  fee  the  Houfes,  People,  Coaches, 
Streets  and  Horfes  all  at  once  3  but  this 
does  not  hurt  or  weary  the  Eyes  fo  much , 
as  when  we  contract  the  Sight,  and  dire¬ 
cting  it  to  a  particular  place,  keep  it  em¬ 
ploy'd  in  examining  fome  very  Minute 
Points ;  as  is  manifeft  in  Engravers,  Pain¬ 
ters  in  Miniature,  and  others  whofe  bufinels 

I  requiring  a  nicety  of  Sight,  generally 
prove  prejudicial  to  their  Eyes  3  and  daily 
Experience  ftiews  us  that  thofe,  who  Read 
and  Write  much,  are  fooner  forc’d  to  wear 
Speffocles  than  other  People. 

Mifom.  This  I  fuppofe  the  Phyficians  in 
4  Spain  take  for  granted  3  who,  tho*  they 
s  are  never  fo  Young,  hardly  ever  ftir  with- 
>  out  Spectacles,  and  have  them  fatten’d 
\  to  their  Heads  even  when  they  ride  a- 
I  broad. 

Phil.  I  don’t  queftion,  but  they  would 
\  hint  with  it  to  the  World,  that  the 


( I<!°  ) 

verity  of  their  Studies  and  Lucubrations 
'  has  impair'd  their  Sight. 

A Our  Thoughts  dont  ceafe  even  when 
we  are  a  deep,  but  then  the  Spirits,  not 
adiiiiniftring  any  Images  to  the  Soul  from 
the  outward  Senfes,  are  only  wandring  at 
leifure  about  the  Images,  that  are  within, 
and  commonly  the  moft  obvious  i  I  fpeak 
of  thefe  things,  according  to  the  impref- 
lions  they  make  upon  our  Minds,  and 
only  as  they  appear  to  be  to  our  Under- 
fending,  being  orherwife  well  a  flu  red, 
that  we  are  wholly  ignorant  of  the  real 
Oeconomy  of  the  Brain. 

Whilft  I  think  on  this,  1  cannot  forbear 
to  take  notice,  that  nothing  more  egregi- 
cufly  expofes  the  ridiculous  Vanity  of 
thefe,  that  pretend  to  explain  Mechani¬ 
cally  the  motions  of  the  Spirits,  than 
what  happens  to  us  in  our  Dreams.  In 
them  it  feeros  to  us,  that  our  Fancy  is  ei¬ 
ther  placidly  Toothed  or  frightfully  di-, 
fturb’d,  according  to  the  different  Images 
the  Spirits  chance  to  light  on  5  yet  Ex¬ 
perience  teaches  us,  that  our  having  either 
delightful,  or  elfe  troublefome  Dreams  is 
not  a  thing  fo  Fortuitous  as  the  gene¬ 
rality  of  People  imagine  ^  and  it  is  demon* 
ftrable,  that  it  depends  immediately  upon 
the  Tone  and  Contexture  of  the  Spirits, 


.("*') 

confequently  in  a  great  meafure  upon  thd 
difpofition  of  the  Body:  Overloading  the 
i  Stomach  at  Night,  even  when  we  are  in 
i  Health,  often  influences  our  Dreams  and 
triakes  the  Fancy  uneafie.  The  generality 
:  of  Hypochondriack  and  Hyfterick  People 
i  have  at  all  times,  either  difmal  and  con* 
i  fuTd  Dreams,  or  elfe  fuch  as  they  can 
[  but  feldom  and  faintly  remember.  I  wife 
the  Ingenious  Gentlemen,,  that  can  fo  Sa* 
gacioufly  penetrate  into  the  Mechanifm  of 
the  moft  Minute  Particles,  would  oblige 
I  us  once  with  a  Reafon,  why  all  Valetudi - 
^  mrians ,  in  whom  the  Contexture  of  Spi* 
i  rits  is  much  broke,  fhould  fo  often  the  Mi- 
i,  nute  they  fall  afleep  be  troubled  with  a 
(  Dream  of  finking  down,  or  falling  into  a 

IPit,  which  {hall  wake  and  often  make 
them  Tremble :  And  that  this  depends 
as  much  upon  the  Mechanifm  of  the  Bo 
r  dy,  as  any  Mufcular  motion  we  can  make^ 
is  certain  5  but  who  is  the  mighty  Man 
: that  can  enter  into  it?  ThoJ  it  is  n iani- 
bfefi,  that  this  Dream  is  more  peculiarly 
lithe  confequence  of  a  deficiency  of  Spirits 
| than  any  other '5  becaufe  it  likewise  hap- 
opens  to  People  in  Health  after  great  Eva- 
fcuations,  unufual  and  immoderate  Exer- 
Hcife,  efpecially  to  fuch.,  as  have  over¬ 


watched  or  wearied  themfeltes  with  Think¬ 


ing;. 


M 


(  \6i  )  1 

I  would  likewife  ask  thofe  clear  fight- 
ed  Philofophers,  that  pretend  to  difcover^ 
which  way  all  Medicines  are  oblig’d  to 
work  upon  human  Bodies,  to  give  us  an 
infight  into  the  manner  of  Operation, 
which  is  conftantly  obferv’d  of  Opium e 
Nay,  let  them  but  Mechanically  account 
for  one  Phenomenon  of  that  wonderful 
Charmer  of  the  Spirits,  I  mean  the  Sedate 
and  agreeable  Dreams,  which  a  little 
quantity  of  it  {hall  generally  occafion  in 
all  Healthy  People,  and  I’ll  not  trouble 
them  to  explain  any  other  Qualification  of 
that  Divine  Medicine. 

Mifom.  I  fee  your  Opinion  of  the  effe&s 
which  Opium  has  upon  the  Spirits,  is  con¬ 
trary  to  that  of  Willis ,  who  fays  it  kills 
and  deftroys  them,  and  fpeaks  of  its  Par¬ 
ticles  entring  the  Brain,  as  a  Man  would 
of  a  Flying  Army  that  furprifes  a  Frontier 
Country.  He  tells  us,  That  meeting  in  the 
Cortex  of  the  Brain ,  with  the  firft  party  of 
the  Animal  Spirits ,  they  defeat ,  or  rather 
deflroy  a  great  many  of  them>  that  are  in 
the  forlorn  hope  5  hy  which  means  afterwards 
the  remaining  Spirits  of  the  fame  Troop 
being  now  grown  weaker ,  retreat ,  and  feeing 
their  Emanation  is  Jlopt ,  fly  back,  toward  the 
middle  of  the  Brain  5  and  that,  whilfl  they 
are  withdrawing  themfdves  from  the  Battle ,, 

and 


(  '6l  ) 

and  marching  off,  the  refi  that  are  lodg’d 
in  the  Or  gam  of  Senfe,  as  in  fo  many  Watch - 
Towers,  having  lojl  their  Recruits,  im¬ 
mediately  follow  them,  and  leaving  their 
Guard  retire  to  take  their  refl. 

This  is  no  doubt  a  very  witty  Simile, 
but  to  fay  no  more  of  his  Poetical  Army 
of  Myrmidons,  nor  your  digreffion  upon 
Dreams,  I’ll  go  back  from  whence  £  ftarted, 
and  own  my  felf  anfwer’d  as  to  my  firft 
doubt.  What  you  have  faid  has  fully 
convinced  me,  that  tho'  our  Thoughts 
never  ceafe,  the  labour  of  the  Spirits 
requir’d  in  the  performance  of  them  is 
infinitely  greater  on  fome  occafions,  than 
it  is  upon  others  5  and  tho’  I  mud  own, 
that  I  don’t  know  what  Sleep  confifts  in 
exactly  j  yet,  from  the  Refrefhment,  Vi¬ 
gour  and  Strength  it  gives  to  our  Thoughts, 
I  now  dare  conclude  that  the  fineft  Spirits 
are  at  a  certain  eafe  in  it,  which  they  ne¬ 
ver  enjoy  whilft  we  are  awake.  The  wea- 
rinefs  of  our  Limbs  is  cured  by  fitting  of 
lying  dill,  and  the  groffer  Spirits  employ’d 
in  Mufcular  motion  may  be  in  a  great  mea- 
fure  recruited  by  Food  and  quietnefs  with¬ 
out  Sleep:  But  the  lofs  of  the  mod  fub- 
tile  Spirits,  always  officiating  between  the 
Soul  and  fome  of  the  Senfes,  and  more 
or  lefs  bulled  in  forming  fome  Thought 

M  2  or 


(  i  <4  ) 

or  other  whiift  we  are  awake,  cannot  be 
repaired  but  by  Sleep,  the  want  of  which 
we  fee  fcon  d’iforders  the  Brain,  and  con- 
fequently  the  Tone  and  whole  Contexture 
of  the  Spirits, 

Phil.  In  the  fame  Road  of  Thinking 
you’ll  find  the  Reafon,  why  Hypochon¬ 
driacal  People  are  generally  Ingenious 
without  the  afliftance  of  an  imaginary 
Ferment  of  the  Spleen,  which  as  we  have 
fhew'd  before,  fome  Phyficians  would 
have  to  be  the  Caufe  both  of  their  Wit 
and  their  Diftemper.*;  For,  as  Thinking 
confifts  in  a  various  Difpofition  of  the 
Images  received  $  fo  what  we  call  Wit  is 
nothing  but  an  aptitude  of  the  Spirits  by 
which  they  nimbly  turn  U9  and  dexter oujly 
difpofe  the  Images  that  may  ferve  cur  pur - 
pofe .  From  hence  it  follows,  that  if  witty 
Men  and  Blockheads  fpend  the  fame  time 
in  Thinking,  the  firft  muff  in  all  likely- 
liood  w.afte  ■  the  moft  Spirits :  Nay,  it  is 
unreafonable  to  fupp.ofe,.  that  the  flow 
and  heavy  Thinking  of  a  prow  fie  Thick* 
.Skull’d  Fellow,  fhouid  require  as  much 
Agility  and  Workmanlhip  of  the  Spirits, 
as  the  quick  and  fprightly  Thoughts  of  a 
dear-headed.  Ingenious  Man  5  and  to  me 
it  feerns  highly  probable,  that  there  is  no 
more  adion  or  greater  labour  perform’d 


(  w  ) 

in  the  Brain  of  the  firft,  when  he  is 
broad  awake  as  he  can  be,  than  there  is  in 
i  that  of  the  latter,  when  he  is  half  & 
'  Sleep. 

The  Thinking  then  of  Blockheads,  be- 
fides  that  they  feldom  delight  in  it,  can  do 
them  no  hurt,  beeaufe  it  does  not  exhauft 
the  Spirits,  and  they  are  almoft  as  fecure 
from  becoming  Hypochondriacal,  as  thofe, 
that  cannot  Write,  from  being  Pillory’d 
for  Counterfeiting  other  People’s  Hands. 

Mifom.  The  Hypochondriac*  are  obliged 
to  you  for  the  Compliment  5  but  I  can’t 
fee,  that  their  Wit  any  ways  difpofes  them 
to  the  Diftemper,  as  Learning  does  ^  the 
acquisition  of  which  adminifters  a  pal¬ 
pable  occafion  to  it. 

Phil.  I  do  not  fay  it  does :  Ingenuity 
only  makes  them  proper  fubjedts  for  the 
Difeafe  to  work  upon,  and  the  moft  Witty 
Men,  if  they  commit  no  excefs  in  thole 
things  that  exhauft  the  finer  Spirits,  but 
divert  themfelves  daily  with  hunting  the 
I  Tennis  Court,  or  other  brisk  Exercifes, 
will  be  as  exempt  from  the  Diftemper  as 
the  greateft  Loggerheads. 

Mifom .  The  other  fcruple  I  have  re- 
fpefts  more  particularly  the  caufe  of  the 
Hyfterick  Paffion  in  W omen  which  you 
fay  is  the  fame  with  that  of  the  Hypo* 

M  3  chon- 


( ) 

chondriack  Paffion  in  Men.  I  want  to 
know  j  fince  the  labour  of  the  Brain  has 
fo  great  a  hand  in  exhaufting  the  Spirits  in 
Men,  as  to  be  always  one  of  the  Proca- 
tartick  Caufes  of  the  Hypochondriack 
Paffion,  what  equivalent  you  can  name 
that  wafts  the  Spirits  in  Women,  and  is 
likewife  able  to  make  them  fubject  to 
the  Hyfterick  Paffion :  for  ftudying  and 
intenfe  thinking  are  not  to  be  alledged  as 
a  caufe  in  Women,  whom  we  know  (at 
leaft  for  the  generality  of  them)  to  be 
fo  little  guilty  of  it  5  and  yet  the  number 
of  Hyfterick  Women  far  exceeds  that  of 
Hypochondriack  Men.  What  is  it  that  fo 
much  confumes  the  Spirits  in  Girls  of 
Eighteen,  Sixteen,  nay,  Fourteen  and 
Younger  ? 

Phil •  The  difficulty  you  ftart  is  very 
material,  and  what  I  would  have  taken 
notice  of  my  felf,  if  we  had  treated  of 
the  Hyfterick  Paffion  ex  profejffo. 

\  To  find  out  the  Procatartick  Caufe  of 
the  deficiency  of  Spirits  in  Women,  and 
especially  young  Girls,  where  Cares,  Grief, 
or  Study  cannot  be  accufed,  we  muft  ob- 
ferve  that  there  are  two  Reafons,  why 
the  Spirits  are  deficient :  The  one,  that 
they  are  too  much  wafted,  when  they 
are  made,  and  the  other  that  there  is  no 

fufScient 


T 


(  167  ) 

fufficient  "quantity  made  of  them:  And 
after  this  you’ll  find,  that  in  all  Hyfterick 
as  well  as  Hypochondriack  Difeafes, where 
the  deficiency  of  the  Spirits  cannot  be  im¬ 
puted  to  the  firft,  it  is  always  owing  to 
the  latter.  Before  young  Girls  come  to 
be  Hyfterick,  you  ftiall  always  obferve, 
that  their  Blood  has  been  much  depau¬ 
perated  by  Agues,  Green-ficknefs,  or  other 
Cachexies,  whofe  Origins  may  generally 
be  derived  from  very  grofs  Errors  in  Diet, 
and  the  Blood  being  once  depauperated 
from  what  caufe  foever  it  is  impoffible, 
that  it  Ihould  yield  to  the  Brain  the  Spirits 
which  it  has  not. 

Mifom.  I  expe&ed  you  would  lay  the 
fault,  where  you  do  5  but  before  I  allow 
that  their  Diet  can  injure  them,  I  muft  put 
you  in  mind  of  what  you  faid  in  your 
Thefts  de  Chyloft  vitiata.  If  young  Wo¬ 
men  eat  Green-Fruit,  Oat  meal,  Chalk, 
Cinders,  &c.  it  is  a  certain  fign,  that 
they  have  a  fancy  for  them,  and  then  in 
confequence  of  what  you  have  faid  they 
can  do  them  no  hurt;  for  when  the  Ap¬ 
petite  is  depraved,  the  fame  fine  Spirits 
that  prompt  them  to  defire  the  Trafh,  will 
likewife  enable  the  Stomachick  Ferment  to 
digeft  it,  as  you  hive  demonftrated  in 
thofe  remarkable  Inftances  of  the  great 

M  4  quantity 


/ 


(  i6%) 

quantity  of  Herrings,  and  the  infe&ed 
'  Onion,  that  were  devoured  without  the 
leaft  injury  to  the  Parties  that  fancy  3d 
them.  ' 

Phil.  That  the  digeftion  in  every  body 
is  much  influenc’d  by  the  Appetite  is  un¬ 
deniable  :  But  the  Efficacy  ot  the  Spirits 
In  affifting  the  firft  is  only  proportionable 
to  the  greatnefs  of  the  impreffion  they  re¬ 
ceiv’d  from  the  latter  5  and  where  we  fee 
the  one  is  but  indifferent,  we  cannot  ex¬ 
pert  the  other  fhould  be  extraordinary. 
There  is,  a  vaft  difference  between  the 
violent  eagernefs  of  Longing,  and  the 
fanciful  hankering  after  Trafh,  generally 
obferv’d  in  Green Tick  Girls  3  of  whom  it 
cannot  be  fo  properly  faid,  that  they  long 
for  what  they  Eat,  as  that  by  degrees  they 
have  brought  themfdves  to  like  what  firft 
was  indifferent  to  them,  and  they  only 
tafted  out  of  wantonnefs.  * 

But  tho3  we  muft  not  think,  that  the 
force  of  the  Spirits  upon  the  Ferment  can 
be  excefiive,  but  where  the  impuile  of ’em 
upon  the  fancy  has  been  the  fame  5  yet  I 
would  not,  as  you  perhaps  imagine,  de¬ 
rive  the  Crudities  immediately  from  the 
Trafh  they  eat.  It  is  very  obvious,  that* 
young  Women  devour  a  World  ot  unripe 
poosberries,  Currants,  Apples,  &c 1  fo 

much 


(  1^9  ) 


much  as  altnoft  to  live  upon  nothing  elfe 
for  Weeks  together,  without  perceiving 
the  leaf!:  diforder  in  their  Stomach  or 
Bowels  all  that  time  5  but  then  I  have 
often  obfe-rv’d,  that,  notwithftanding 
they  had  not  felt  any  indifpofition  for  a 
great  while,  in  trad  of  time,  even  tho3 
they  mended  their  Diet,  they  became  Ca- 
chedick,  and  after  that  Hyfterick-  From 
this  Qbfervation,  which  all  Pfayficians  that 
have  feen  many  Hyfferick  Cafes  in  Young 
Women,  rauft  likewife  have  made,  it  is 
plain  that  the  Stomach  continu  s  to  per- 
I  torm  its  office,  tho*  the  Aliment  is  ira- 
[  proper,  as  long  as  the  Ferment  of  it  is 
t  fupplied  with  the  Spirits  it  requires  5  but 
1  that  whenever  they  fail  the  digeftion  is 
\  fpoiled,  though  our  Food  be  never  fo 
I  laudable. 


Mifom.  But  from  the  enfuing  illncfs  in 
thefe  cafes,  I  would  rather  judge,  that 
the  Trafh  they  Eat  had  not  been  well  di- 
gefted,  tho'  the  diforders  of  the  Stomach 
had  not  been  minded,  and  perhaps  not 
perceived  ^  for  it  the  Chyle  had  been 
good,  it  would  have  been  turn'd  into 
good  Blood,  which  the  Cachexies,  they 
are  brought  in  to,  evince  that  it  was 
not. 


Phil. 

H 


(  »7o  ) 

Phil.  No  faults  of  all  our  Oeconomy 
can  lefs  conceal  themfelves  from  us,  than 
thofe  of  the  Stomach ;  the  leaf!:  of  them 
are  foon  perceptible,  either  by  Vomiting, 
Pain,  Belches,  Tenfions,  Grumbling,  Laxi¬ 
ty  or  Denfity  of  the  Belly  5  and  you  may 
depend  upon  it,  that  where  none  of  thele 
Symptoms  appear,  the  Stomach  duly  per¬ 
forms  its  office.  We  can  ask  no  more  of 
the  Stomachick  Ferment,  than  that  itifinn- 
ating  it  felf  into  the  Pores  of  our  Ali¬ 
ments  it  diflolves  the  Contexture  of  them, 
and  makes  them  into  fuch  a  Pulp,  as  be¬ 
ing  afterwards  mix’d  with  the  Gall  and 
Pancreatick  Juice,  lhall  fuffer  its  fineft 
parts  by  the  Periftaltick  motion  to  be 
tranfcolated  through  the  Glandules  of  the 
Inteftines  into  the  Lafleal  Veflels :  This 
is  all  what  belongs  to  a  good  Chylifica- 
tion,  which  may  be  done,  and  yet  the 
Chyle  be  unfit  to  make  good  Blood,  if 
the  Aliments  are  improper  $  the  Stomach 
is  only  to  be  confider’d  as  a  good  Cook, 
who  may  drefs  every  thing  to  the  beft  ad¬ 
vantage,  but  cannot  make  the  Flefh  of  a 
Starv’d  Old  Cow  fo  Nutritious,  as  that 
of  a  Young  well-fed  Heifer.  If  the  Food 
when  we  Eat  it,  is  not  endued  with  a 
great  many  Balfamick,  Spirituous,  or  what 
we  call  nourifhing  Parts,  the  Blood  can¬ 
not 


(  *7.1  ) 


.  . 


I! 

j 


a 

t 

I 

3 

l 

: 


not  receive  them  from  it,  how  well  fo- 
ever  it  may  be  affimilated  with  its  Mafs. 

Mifom.  But  if  the  Blood  be  fo  poor 
and  void  of  Spirits  ^  that  no  fufficient 
quantity  can  be  feparated  from  it  to  ferve 
the  feveral  Functions  that  require  them  : 
How  comes  it  that  the  Brain  does  not 
fuffer  firft  of  all  by  this  Scarcity  >  Why 
is  the  Soul  her  felf  not  fenfible  of  it  > 
For  it  is  very  probable  that  the  very  aft 
of  thinking,  in  which  you  fay  fo  many 
of  the  fine  Spirits  are  employ’d  would  be 
immediately  interrupted,  or  at  leaft  im¬ 
pair’d  by  fuch  a  general  want  of  them, 
which  yet  we  don’t  perceive  it  is. 

Phil.  We  muff  believe  that  it  is  in  the 
Animal  Government  as  it  is  in  all  others  ; 
whatever  Poverty  the  Country  endures 
the  Court  has  always  plenty,  and  very 
rarely  is  deftitute  NecefTaries.  It  is  rea- 
fonable  to  think,  that  the  Soul,  who  has 
fuch  a  great  command  and  is  fo  Arbitrary 
over  the  Spirits,  will  have  them  if  they 
are  to  be  had  for  her  own  immediate  ufe, 
and  confequently  the  Brain,  where  fhe 
keeps  her  more  particular  refidence,  (hall 
be  the  laft  place  in  all  the  Body  that  wants 
them  $  and  yet  this  often  happens  in 
Hyfterick  Women,  when  any  thing  extra¬ 
ordinary  difturbs  them  j  for  upon  the 

leaft 


(  '71  ) 

leaft  violence,  that  hurries  any  quantity  of 
Spirits  another  way,  the  Brain  remains  un- 
fuppIyM,  as  is  manifeft  from  their  fainting 
Fits,  in  which  the  aft  of  Thinking  is  al¬ 
ways  more  or  lefs  impair’d. 

Thus  I  have  (hewn ;  that  the  want  of 
Spirits  in  Hyfterick  Women  may  often  be 
imputed  to  their  Diet^  in  which  the  ge¬ 
nerality  of  them  commit  fo  many  Errors : 
But  bsfides  thefe  their  idle  Life,  and  want 
of  Exercife  likewife  difpofe  them  to  the 
Difeafe,  but  above  all  the  innumerable 
diforders,  which  upon  account  of  the 
Menftrual  Flux,  and  the  whole  "Uterus 
they  are  fo  often  fubjeft  to. 

Mifom .  If  the  Chyle  be  but  Nutritious, 
and  the  Blood  is  fcockM  with  Spirits,  they 
will  be  feparated  from  it  in  a  fufficient 
quantity  to  fupply  the  Stomachick  .Fer¬ 
ment  :  So  that  as  long  as  they  take  care 
of  having  good  Food  according  to  your 
Notion,  it  will  be  well  digefted,  and  the 
Blood  will  continue  to  abound  with  Nu^ 
tritious  parts :  The  Confequence  of  which 
muft  be ;  that  thofe  Women  can  have  no 
defeft  in  their  Spirits,  unlefs  they  are 
wafted  by  fomething  extraordinary,  what¬ 
ever  Diftemper  they  may  otherwise  labour 
under. 

nn 


(  *7?  ) 

Phil.  This  perhaps  might  follow  from 
what  I  have  faid,  if  the  paucity  of  the 
Spirits  was  the  only  fault,  that  could  at¬ 
tend  their  Mafs.  For  thos  we  don’t  know, 
as  l  have  faid  already  what  Particles  that 
incomprehenfible  mixture  confifts  of,  yet 
it  is  certain,  that  the  Spirits  may  be  pec¬ 
cant  in  quality  as  well  as  quantity  5  and 
by  reafoning  d  fofteriori  we  are  fare  that 
they  rauft  have  a  Gratis,  Tone  and  Elafti- 
city  belonging  to  them,  as  well  as  the 
Blood.  When  People  in  Health  by  feme 
accident  fuffer  a  great  lots  of  Blood,  the 
Veffels  are  quickly  repienifhed,  and  the 
Blood  as  to  its  quantity  is  foon  reftor’d, 
but  the  quality  of  ic  is  not  fo  eafily  re¬ 
cover’d;  The  fame  may  be  faid  of  the 
Spirits,and  the  Conftitutive  parts  of  them  $ 
it  is  poffible  that  the  Body  may  abound 
with  both,  and  yet  each  of  the  mixtures* 
by  being  deftitute  of  fome  neceffary  Par¬ 
ticles  or  qualifications  be  very  imperfect. 
The  Mufcles  and  Tendons  in  Women  may 
confift  of  the  fame  number  of  Fibres,  and 
be  as  much  extended  with  Spirits,  as  they 
are  in  Men  ^  and  yet  how  vaft  is,  generally 
fpeaking,  the  difference  of  ftrength  that  is 
between  them  >  This  without  doubt  de¬ 
pends  only  upon  the  Elafticity  of  the  Spirits  5 
Women  are  not  -  of  that  rebuff  Confirm- 

tioo 


(  ‘74  ) 

tion  as  Men  are,  they  are  fooner  offended 
by  and  more  impatient  of  Heat,  Cold, 
and  other  injuries  5  they  have  not  that 
Conftancy,  Refolution,  and  what  we  call 
a  firmnefs  of  the  Mind,  which  yet  has  no¬ 
thing  to  do  with  it:  For  tho*  Grief,  Joy, 
Anger,  Fear,  and  the  reft  of  the  Pafflons 
make  greater  impreffions  upon  them,  and 
fooner  dilcompofe  their  Bodies,  yet  the 
qualifications,  in  which  we  excel  them  are 
only  owing  to  a  certain  Tone,  and  dif- 
pofitionof  the  Spirits,  and  no  ways  related 
to  the  Soul.  Their  immortal  fubftance  is 
without  doubt  the  fame  with  ours,  and  it 
is  only  the  Body  in  which  we  differ:  We 
are  of  a  ftronger,  but  they  of  a  more 
Elegant  compofure,  and  Beauty-  is  their 
attribute  as  Strength  is  ours:  Their  frame, 
tho  lefs  firm  is  more  delicate,  and  them- 
felves  more  capable  both  of  Pleafure  and 
of  Pain,  tho’  endued  with  lefs  conftancy  of 
bearing  the  excefs  of  either.  This  deli¬ 
cacy  as  well  as  imbecillity  of  the  Spirits 
in  Women  is  Confpicuous  in  all  their 
aftions,  thofe  of  the  Brain  not  excepted  : 
They  are  unfit  both  for  abftrufe  and  ela¬ 
borate  Thoughts,  all  ftudies  of  Depth, 
Coherence,  and  Solidity  that  fatigue  thd 
Spirits,  and  require  a  fteadinefs  andaffiduity 
of  thinking  ;  but  where  the  Advantages 


I 


(  *75  ) 

of  Education  and  Knowledge  are  equal, 
they  exceed  the  Men  in  Sprightlinefs  of 
”  Fancy,  quicknefs  of  Thought  and  off¬ 
hand  Wit  j  as  much  as  they  out-do  them 
in  fweetnefs  of  Voice,  and  Volubilty  of 
Tongue. 

Mifom.  I  believe  with  you,  that  the 
Tone  and  Elafticity  of  Spirits  in  Women 
ar.e  weaker,  than  they  are  in  Men  $  but  if 
their  tendernefs  and  Imbecillity  difpofe 
them  to  be  Hyfterick,  Why  does  it  not 
the  fame  in  Children  in  whom  the  Con¬ 
texture  is  yet  more  infirm  ? 

Phil.  T o  anfwer  this,  I  muft  divide  the 
Hyfterick  Women  into  two  Clalfes  5  a  di- 
ftin&ion,  which  tho’  it  is  very  obvious 
in  Practice,  and  as  material  to  the  Know¬ 
ledge  of  the  Caufe  in  each,  is  yet  gene¬ 
rally  overlook’d  by  Phyficians.  There  are 
Women,  in  whom,  befides  the  frequency 
of  Fits  and  the  diforders  of  the  Nerves, 
to  which  they  are  fubjed  without  any 
vifible  Caufe,  we  may  difeover  many 
Symptoms  of  lodigeftion,*  that  are  fa* 
miliar  to  them  even  when  the  Paroxyfm 
is  not  upon  them.  Thefe  are  the  Hyfte¬ 
rick  of  the  firft  Clafs;  but  then  there 
are  others  $  that  being  to  all  appearance 
in  perfed  Health,  upon  fome  accident  of 
Grief,  Paffion,  Surprife,  immoderate  drink¬ 
ing, 

\ 


» 


(  '76  )  1 

ing,  &c.  are  thrown  into  Convulfive- 
Fits  5  tfaefe  Women  as  foon  as  the  Fits 
are  off  are  well  again,  and  almoft  fare, 
that  they’ll  never  have  any  more,  urilefs 
fotne  new  Violence  difturbs  them  afrefti  : 
The  latter,  of  which  feveral  have  not  a 
Fit  in  many  Months,  others  are  Years 
without  them,  and  fome  have  but  one  or 
two  in  ail  their  Life,  I  call  Byfterick  of 
the  fecond  Ckfs.  v 

After  this  we’ll  examine,  how  much 
the  imbeciility  of  the  Contexture  of  Spi¬ 
rits  in  Women  contributes  to  the  Caufe  in 
either.  Firft  that  it  renders  them  all  ob¬ 
noxious  to  what  is  the  immediate  Caufe  of 
the  Diforders  in  the  Functions  of  the 
Brain,  and  Nerves  of  both,  which  is  a 
Confufion  of  the  Spirits,  is  as  evident^  as 
that  the  weaker  an  Army  is  the  fooner  it 
is  routed.  But  befides  this  confufion  of 
the  Spirits  to  make  the  Diftemper  habi¬ 
tual,  and  render  Women  Byfterick  of  the 
firft  Clafs,  there  is  required,  and  always 
obferv’d  another  Antecedent  Caufe  that 
is  able  to  bring  about  the  Confufion,  I 
fpeak  of,  without  the  affiftance  of  any  ex¬ 
ternal  Violence,,  and  this  is  the  deficiency 
of  the  finer  Spirits,  that  the  Sfomachick 
Ferment  buffers  by,  ot  which  I  have  faid 
fo much :  To  occafion  this, 'the imbeciility 


(  177  ):>  '  - 

of  them  is  likewife  fo  far  acceflary  *  tha£ 
where  there  is  any  thing  to  exhauft  the 
Spirits,  the  Weaknefs  of  their  Contexture 
makes  that  it  is  fooner  accompliftfd  5  and 
the  lefs  caufe  ferves  to  diffipate  and  de- 
ftroy  them:  One  Hours  intenfe  Thinking 
waftes  the  Spirits  more  in  a  Woman,,  than 
fix  in  a  Man.  i 

,  Having  thus  demonftrated  how  far  the 
weaknefs  of  the  Spirits  difpofes  Women 
to  the  Hyfterick  Paffion,  let  us  now  fee, 
what  eflfeft  the  fame  Caufe  muft  have  up¬ 
on  Children.  From  what  I  have  faid  it 
is  plain,  that  it  cannot  make  them  Hyfte¬ 
rick  of  the  firft  Clafs  5  becaufe  the  fineft 
Spirits  can  hardly  ever  be  deficient  in 
them  ;  For  in  the  firft  place,  if  we  ex¬ 
amine  whatever  may  confume  them,  we 
(hall  find  that  they  commit  nothing  to  ex¬ 
hauft  them.  The  a&ion  of  Thinking  is 
but  very  imperfect  in  them,  whilft  they 
are  very  Young,  and  even  when  they 
grow  up,  they  are  fo  diverted^  and  con¬ 
tinually  employ’d  by  the  glut  of  new 
Images,  which  the  Senfes  are  always 
crowding  in  upon  them,  that  it  is  impof- 
fible,  they  fhould  think  long  on  one 
thing  5  and  the  Organs  of  Generation  not 
performing  their  Functions  yet,  nothing 
is  confumed  that  way  5  fo  that  their  Stc^ 
macks  can  never  want, and  it  is  very  reafon* 

N  able 


(  */8  ) 

able  to  think,  that  proportionally  greater 
quantities  of  the  finer  Spirits  are  employ'd 
about  their  Ferment,  than  in  Adulc  Per- 
fons,  which  is  likewife  agreeable  to  all  the 
Obfervations  we  can  make  of  the  moft 
obvious  Phenomena. 

The  fecond  Caufe,  from  which  I  faid 
the  deficiency  of  Spirits  might  proceed, 
is  likewife  feldom  found  in  Children. 
The  noirilhing  Diet  commonly  provided 
for  them,  their  found  Sleeps,  and  florid 
Blood  y  but  above  all  their  (harp  Appetites 
and  quick  Digeftions,  fo  manifeft  from 
the  frequency  of  their  Meals,  and  Stools, 
leave  us  no  room  to  doubt,  but  that  in 
their  tender  Age  the  Spirits  are  more  co- 
pioufly  feparated  into  the  Brain,  than  they 
are  at  any  time  after  it. - - 

Mifom.  I  am  anfwer'd  as  to  the  firft 
Clals}  But  ought  not  the  weaknefs  of 
the  Contexture  of  the  Spirits,  which 
without  the  Concurrence  of  any  other 
Internal  Caufe  renders  all  Women  more 
or  lefs  liable  to  become  Hyfterick  of  the 
fecond  Clafs,  as  foon  as  any  Violence 
offers,  have  at  leaft  the  fame  Effects  upon 
Children,  in  whom  it  is  more  Con- 
fpicuous  ?  * 

*  Phil.  If  you  would  have  given  me  leave 
I  was  a  going  to  tell  you,  not  cfnly  that 
it  ought,  but  likewife  that  it  has ;  this  is 

the 


(  >79  ) 

the  reafon  why  Children  are  fo  much 
troubled  with  Fits.  In  them  they  are 
generally  the  fore-runners  of  the  Small -Pox, 
and  attendants  on  many  other  Fevers : 
Vaft  numbers  of  Infants  are  affli&ed  with 
I  them,  not  only  upon  Difcrafies  of  the 
I  Blood,  but  likewife  the  leaft  difturbance 
;  of  their  inward  Oeconomy  ;  and  Boys  as 
I  well  as  Girls,  of  Five  or  Six  Years  Old, 

!  and  upward,  are  often  Epileptick,  till  the 
!  Years  of  Puberty,  when  the  Contexture 
of  the  Spirits  growing  more  firm  they  are 
cured  by  Nature,  without  the  a  15 (lance  of 
any  Phyfick.  The  Fits  I  now  fpeak  of,  I 
I  know  are  not  call’d  Hyfterick,  but  they 
j  proceed  from  the  fame  Original,  and 
i  without  that  imbecillity  of  the  Contexture 
i  in  the  Spirits,  Children,  nay  Infants,  as 
well  as  the  Women,  which  I  call  Hyfte¬ 
rick  of  the  fecond  Clafs,  would  be  no 
more  fubjeft  to  Fits  than  Men. 

Mifom.  Your  Obfervations  on  the  va¬ 
rious  Contexture  of  the  Spirits,  ple.fe  me 
extremely  5  but  when  you  fpoke  of  Wo¬ 
men  and  the  Elegancy  of  their  F*ame,  I 
thought  that  I  heard  you  fay,  that  among 
other  things  they  exceeded  the  Men  in 
off-hand  Wit,  where  the  advantages  of 
Education  and  Knowledge  were  equaL 
Wit  according  to  your  own  Definition  in 
the  active  Senfe,  is  an  aptitude  of  the  Spi- 

N  %  rits, 

■ 


(  l  Bo  ) 

fits,  by  which  they  can  nimbly  turn  to  and 
dexter  on  fly  difpofe  the  Images  received  :  This 
aptitude  is  not  adventitious  but  the  gift 
of  Nature  5  then  what  are  Education  and 
Knowledge  to  Wit,  which  every  body 
knows  is  not  to  be  taught  ? 

Phil  More  than  is  commonly  imagin’d  ; 
For  it  is  evident,  that  the  aptitude  of  the 
Spirits,  which  you  call  a  Gift  of  Nature, 
is  no  more  fo,  than  the  aptitude  of  the 
Organs  of  Speech,  and  that  both  are  only 
to  be  attain’d  by  Imitation  and  Pra&ice, 
of  this  we  fee  Thoufand  inftances  every 
Day  in  Infants,  before  they  have  yet 
learn’d  to  Speak  or  Think  diftindly  5  in 
whom  it  is  fo  vifible,  that  driving  to  imi¬ 
tate  the  addons  of  others  by  degrees  they 
model  their  manner  of  Thinking,  as  well 
as  that  of  Speaking  by  what  their  Senfcs 
communicate  to  them  of  the  Thoughts 
and  Words  of  thofe  they  converfe  witfw 
What  Nature  can  bellow  confifts  only  in 
the  formation  and  quicknefs  of  Parts,  the 
reft  of  the  aptitude  depends  W’holly  upon 
Ufe  and  Example.  A  teneris  djfuefccre 
mdtum  eft,  is  as  true  of  the  manner  of 
Thinking,  as  it  is  of  any  thing  elfe. 

Mi-font,  Wouid  you  give  all  to  Edu¬ 
cation,  and  allow  nothing  for  Birth?  Isfi 
that  of  Horace  all  Fidion  ?  -  . 

Fortes] 


(  i8i  ) 


Fortes  creantnr  fortibns  &  bonis  $ 

Eft  in  Jnvencis ,  eft  in  eqnis  patrum 
Virtus  :  nec  imbdtem  feroces 
Progenerant  aquil£  columham . 

Phil.  You  leave  off  too  foom 

•  .  .< 

Do&rina  fed  vim  promovet  infitamy 
Rediqne  cultus  pe3ora  roborant . 

Horace  does  not  lay  greater  ft  refs  upon 
the  Birth  of  Drufus ,  than  his  Inftitution 
under  Auguftus  Cdfar  $  it  is  d  monftrable 
from  the  great  refemblance  between  Chil¬ 
dren  and  Parents,  nor  only  in  the  Linea¬ 
ments  and  Features,  but  Temper  and  Dif- 
eafes  that  feme  of  the  Spirits,  that  are 
mix'd  with  the  Seed  muft  contain  many 
things,  that  are  of  an  incemprehenfible 
nicety,  yet  whatever  it  be  it  can  only  be¬ 
long  to  the  Formation  of  the  Parts,  and 
the  little  it  can  influence  the  finer  Spirits, 

|  by  thd  force  of  early  example  may  be 
loon  over»ruFd,  as  we  may  learn  from  the 
fame  Horace  in  his  admirable  compa- 
rifon  between  Yhuth  and  a  new  Earthen 
Veffel. 


( [dorem 

S£no  femel  eft  imbnta  recens  fervabit  o~ 
Jefta  din. 

N  3 


If 


(  1 8  z  ) 

If  we  could  fo  exa&ly  judge  of  the 
gifts  of  Nature,  2s  to  chafe  two  Children 
of  equal  parts,  that  (if  you  will )  fhould 
like  wile  be  of  the  fame  Parents,  of  which 
the  one  fhould  be  brought  up  at  Court  in 
crouds  of  Witty  People,  and  the  other  in 
the  Country  among  a’ few  ftupid  Pea  fan  ts, 
it  would  quickly  convince  us,  that  the 
greateft  part  of  what  we  call  Wit  is  ad¬ 
ventitious  and  not  natural :  but  how 
infenfibly  we  copy  after  and  model  our 
felvcs  both  as  to  Thoughts  and  Actions, 
by  thofe  we  conveffe  with  is  evident  from 
the  innumerable  cautions  all  Moralifts  have 
given  us  againft  evil  Company. 

Cornmpunt  bonos  mores  colloquia  pravay 

Is  a  faying  of  that  Veracity,  that  tho’  a 
Heathen  Proverb,  St.  Paul  himfelf  has  not 
fcrupl’d  to  give  it  a  place  among  the 
Oracles  of  Eternal  Truth.  So  much  for 
the  aptitude  of  the  Spirits  $  as  to  the 
feeond  part  of  the  Definition,  the  Dex- 
troufiy  difpofing  the  Images  received, 
there  is  no  doubt,  but  the  aptitude  of  do¬ 
ing  this  would  be  very  infigiiificant,  or  at 
leaft  of  little  ufe,  where  the  Brain  has  not 
received  a  great  many  of  thofe  Images, 
in  which  and  the  retention,  of  them,  it  is 
certain  that  Knowledge  confifts* 

v  The 


i 


OTW  w-  ’  '  v*  '  't  w  :sry: :Wf . •• ; 5^-i. c.-.'  •*, •  '*v;  •  J  • ' 

,  (  '8,  ) 

The  brighter  pa^fs  then  (land  in  need 
of  Education  and  Knowledge,  before  the 
Operations  of  their  Brain  can  produce 
what  we  cali  Wit,,  and  it  is  commonly 
owing  to  tae  two  latter,  that  the  fiift  are 
render’d  Confpicuous  ^  for  how  little  we 
are  to  exp"£t  from  the  brisknefs,  and  agili¬ 
ty  of  the  Spirits  without  the  aptitude  of 
them,  and  a  fuffi  i~nc  (lock  of  Images  re¬ 
ceived,  is  plain  from  what  we  may  fre¬ 
quently  obferve  in  the  wild  roving  Ex- 
preffions  of  fprightiy  Children,  in  winch 
there  are  often  found  a  great  Vivacity  of 
Genius,  Ignorance,  and  Abfurdity  all  at 
once. 

Mi  font.  The  reafoa,  why  I  have  made 
you  lay  fo  much  on  account  of  the  Hy« 
fterick  Pa  (non  is  a  Daughter  of  mine, 
that  is  milerably  c'fiiifted  with  it,  and  the 
Patient  I  hinted  to  yc  u  Yeflerday,  fhe  is 
Forty  Miles  off,  but  my  Wife,  who  is 
very  much  troubled  with  Vapours  her 
fdf,  will  give  you  an  exaft  account  of 
her  Diftemper.  She  told  me,  that  as 
foon  as  fhe  could  difpatch  the  two  Ladies 
you  faw  at  Dinner,  fhe  would  come  up  to 
us  ^  in  the  mean  time  l  defire  you  would 
look  upon  fome  of  thefe  Recipes. — all 
thefe  are  Purging  when  firft  of  all  I  began 
to  be  Coftive  this  did  me  abundance  of 
good, 

N  4 


R:  Ptifpd 


(  1 84  ) 

ft  Pulps  paffular.  minor .  §ii. 
dr  an  duplicate  Mynficht . 

Salts  *ci  depur ati  a  gij 
Sem.  citri 

aurantior .  a  3p. 

Mi/ee  c.  /.  q.  Ele&*  amari  minor .  Ele$. 

This  would  ferve  me  for  Eight  or  Nine 
times  takings  at  laft  I  grew  weary  of 
Bolus* s  and  often  took  this  Potion. 

ft  Pajfular.  minor .  5ij* 

Coquantur  in  aquslib.  ii.  &  Colatursfir- 
Venti  adde  fol.  Sen  ns  §($. 

Cremor.  Tartari  5b 
Sent,  fsnic. 

Anifi  contufor  a  9ii.  , 

Colat.  adde  Syrup,  Rofac.  Solutiv.  Ct  Helle¬ 
bore  §ii. 

* 

Of  this  I  took  a  Wine-Glafs  full  twice 
a-Day$  and  fometimes  inftead  of  the 
Currants  I  had  it  made  with  Prunes } 
but  nothing  agreed  better  with  me  than 
this  Infufion. 

ft  Herbs  abfynth.  m.  iij. 

Centaur .  minor .  m.  ij. 

,  Cort.  rad.  hellebor.  nigri  $iij. 

L  Polypody  gpuercini  ip. 

*  CorU 


(■*5) 

^  « a--* 

Cort.  fraxin . 

Tartar,  albijjim  a  '  v 

Limatur .  martis  $iij. 

Spir.  falls  dulc.  gr .  xxv® 

Gallici  fb  v.w-^ 

All  thefe  are  Cathartick  Zfofe/s  and  Po¬ 
tions  that  I  have  made  ufe  of,  when  my 
Body  refus’d  to  obey  the  more  gentle 
Medicines :  1  can  recommend  but  few  of 
them,  becaufc  they  generally  put  me  to 
great  Mifery  3  what  I  have  the  lead  to 
complain  of  was, 

R  Magijl.  Scammon . 

Jalapp#  aagr .  x. 

Cretnor .  Tartar.  9ij. 

&?/.  Jovis  gr.  iv. 

Trochifc.  alhand.  gr.  i. 

Mi  fee  &  c*  f  q.  Diaprun.  lenitiv.  f.  Bolus 
qui  detur  ex  §vi.  deeodfi  fequentis * 

R  Baccar.  Jumper . 
lauri  aa  3i. 

Semin,  fcenic . 
anifi 

Carvi  aa  9ij. 

Fol.  fenn<e  f\)> 

Coquantur  in  aqu<e  fontan.  ?xij.  &  colalur • 

Solutiv . 

de  fpina  cervin a  aa 


This 


(  '*6 ) 

This  for  forae  Years  never  fail’d  of 
Purging  me,  and  injur’d  my  Bowels  lefs, 
than  other  prefcripcions  feemingly  more 
artful  $  but  this  as  all  other  Purges,  that 
ever  I  tried,  as  foon  as  it  had  done  work¬ 
ing,  lock’d  up  my  Body  as  much  as  it 
had  been  before,  and  it  is  above  Three 
Years  ago  that  I  have  left  off  all  Cathar- 
ticks :  1  find  far  greater  benefit  by  Eme- 
ticks  5  for  befidcs  that  they  always  eafe 
the  Pains  in  my  Stomach,  and  lower  Belly, 
I  have  obferved  that  the  Stools  they  pro¬ 
cure  are  lefs  offenfive  to  my  Bowels,  than 
the  belt  ol  Catharticks,  I  have  taken  all 
manner  of  Vomits,  gentle  and  ftrong  5 
from  Carduus  PolTet  to  the  helleborus 
albus.  Sometimes  I  have  fanfied  the  aja- 
rumj  and  have  made  uie  of  it  both  in 
Subftance  and  Infufion ;  but  neither  that 
nor  the  Oxymel  fcjlliticum,  Decoctum 
digitale,  Hypuecuanna,  or  any  other  Vomit 
has  done  me  half  the  good,  that  1  have 
conftantly  received  from  the  Antimonial 
ones;,  and  having  tried  all  of  them,  I 
now  ftick  clofe  to  that  old  falhion’d  Eme- 
tick,  the  Antimonial  Cup,  or  the  Infufion 
of  Vitrum  Antimonii.  This  I  prefer  to 
the  Sulphur  auratum  Antimonii ,  the  Regular 
Antimonii  martialis ,  Crocus  metallorum,  Mer- 
curius  vit n,  or  any  Emetick  Preparation 
whatever,  of  that  excellent  Mineral. 


(  *87  ) 

Phil.  It  is  beyond  diipute  that  the 
Antimonial  Vomits  taken  by  way  of  In- 
fufion  exceed  all  the  reft,  and  are  as  fafe 
as  any  $  which  has  made  me  often  won¬ 
der,  how  there  could  be  fo  much  Igno¬ 
rance  in  fo  great  an  Alfembly  of  Phy- 
ficians,  as  that  of  the  Facultas  Medicat 
at  Paris,  which  confifting  of  120  Mem¬ 
bers  did  not  only  forbid  the  ufe  of,  and 
banifh  from  the  Common-wealth  of  Phy- 
fick,  by  a  publick  Decree,  all  Antimo¬ 
nial  Infufions  as  Poyfonous  3  but  likewife 
made  a  great  buftle  to  have  this  wile  De¬ 
cree  confirm’d  by  Parliament,  as  at  their 
requeft  it  was  done  in  the  Year  15 66. 

Mifom.  But  a  Hundred  Years  after  they 
grew  wifer  3  for  the  fame  faculty  of  Phy- 
fick  had  it  repeal  d  in  the  Year  1 666, 
when  they  made  another  Decree,  by  which 
they  Voted  Antimonial  Infufions  very  fafe, 
and  ufeful,  as  you  may  fee  in.  the  Ephem; 
Gallic.  — - 

All  thefe  were  Prefcriptions  to  wafte 
or  leffen  my  Milt  3  for  about  Eight  Years 
ago  I  had  a  hard  Swelling  near  the  lower 
Orificeof  myStomach,and  beingperfwaded, 
it  was  my  Milt,  all  the  Medicines  I  took 
were  directed  that  way  5  nay,  once  I 
thought  that  I  found  a  great  deal  of  good 
•by  this. 


ft  Speciar 


(  >88  )  ; 

R  S peeler*  diacum.  §i. 

0  Depurati 

Rad.  Pirethri  aa^u 

01.  deft .  Cumini  gt.  iij. 

M.  F .  Pulv.  pro  tribus  dof. 

I  found  afterwards  that  all  but  the 
Radix  Pirethri ,  it  was  the  Diafpolyticon 
Galenic  by  which  Bartheletus  fays,  that  he 
has  cured  fo  many  Hypochondriacal  Peo¬ 
ple.  Here’s  another  Prefcription  of  Galen's 
by  the  ufe  of  which,  he  fays,  the  Milt  of 
a  Pig  was  confumed  in  Three  Days  time 
as  appear’d  by  its  being  open’d. 

R  FruU.  Eruc<e  ^iv. 

Piper  is  albi . 

Nardi  Syriac. 

Ammoniac .  aa  $ij. 

Arida  tundantur  &  cribreniur ,  ammonia- 
cum  aceto  Scyllitico  diffolvitur  &  pulveri 
additum  cogitur  in  trochifcos ,  qui  fimt 
drachm £  ponder e ,  danturque  ex  aceto  tnnlfo 
ad  drachma 

I  tried  it  a  Fortnight,  but  without  the 
leaft  Succefs,  for  the  Swelling  rather  en- 
creas’d  and  grew  harder,  which  made  me: 
conclude,  that  either  mine  was  not  the: 
Spleen,  or  elfe  that  Galen  §  Medicine  wa$» 

only 


j  only  good  for  Hogs.  The  method  that 
3  cared  me  then  was  this  ;  I  had  a  Fornen- 
1  tation  applied  to  the  place  afflicted,  three 
times  a-Day,  for  a  Week,  and  after  that  a 
Piaiiter  5  twice  a-Day  I  took  a  Bolus  out  of 
I  fome  Medicated  Wine,  and  within  a  Month 
the  hardnefs  and  Swelling  both  were  re¬ 
moved,  and  I  found  my  felf  much  better. 
Thefefour,  except  two  or  threePurges,were 
all  the  Prefcriptions  I  follow’d. 

R  Rad.  althe<e 

hyper,  act  §ij. 
abfynth . 

Ceterach  aa  §i. 

Cort.  rad.  Cappar. 

chamtfdr.  aa  |i. 

Fol.  Tam arifc. 

Puleg • 

Calamenth •  aa  m.  i. 

Semin .  lint 

an  if  or.  a  a  |B. 

Coquantnr  in  cerevifia  illupulat •  Jjbvi. 

aceti%\).  quocum  quam  calidifftme 
fomentetur  pars  afjeSa  ad  minimum  bis  indies . 


fcenugr<e 


R  Gummi  ammonlaci 
Galbani 
bdellii  aa  5ij, 

Sperm *  Ceti  5{ij. 


Sem. 


( 


(  »S>°  ) 

Sem.  Cumini  ; 

rut£  aa 

Salts  ammoniac .  $ij. 

P/V/j  naval. 

Cerce  flav.  aa.q.f, 

Dijfolvantur  gummata  cum  aceio  &  f.  a. 

Emplajl. 

R;  Rad .  Zedoar « 

CWf.  hellebor •  »/gri 

cappar. 

4  tamarifc. 

aurant >  a  a  p  j 

Summit  at.  abfynth. 

Ceterach  aa  31  ij. 

3ip« 

Chalyb.  prcep.  3vi. 

Flor.falis  *ci  51. 

M,  d*  C&  5^r.  abfynth.  Compof.  f. 

Eleff.  cujus  Dof.  3u  bis  ex  §iv.  fe- 

quentis. 

R:  Li  mature  Marti s  fviij. 

Rad .  £»#/.  Camp. 

Erjmg.  aa  |(3. 

Raphan .  r»/?. 

Gentian,  aa  sh 
Cert  Winter  an*  3vi. 

Cinamont.  §p. 

Mads 

CeUrach 


(  '9'  ) 

Ceterach  m .  ij, 

C  alaminth.  m.  i, 

Salis  Tartar .  3(3. 

gallic,  tb  vi.  Macer-  per  dies 
eBo*  Dof  tit  fupra. 

Pr  •  *  4 

Some  time  after  the  ufe  of  thofe  Me- 
dicines,  I  have  likewife  found  great  bene¬ 
fit  by  a  Decodion  and  Eleduary,  pre- 

ferib’d  me  by  an  Eminent  Phyfieian. 

» 

T&Rad*  Lapath.  acut.%  ij* 

Che  lid,  major. 

Sarfaparill.  aa  |i. 

Fol.  Scolopend.  m.  iL 
Flor.  genifice  m.  L 


Coquantnr  in  /.  q.  aquae  ferriarior.  dof  ft  \ 
ter  indies . 


R:  Corf.  Veruv -  5ij. 

Rad .  helleb .  nigri 
Zedoar.  aa  fu 
Ehor .  pulver. 

Owl  or,  s 

Corallor.  rubr.  aa  3  (3. 
&*/*/  abfynth . 

Genijl£  aa  31  j. 
Conferv ,  abfynth .  q , 
M.  K  E/eff.  chjus  dojis  9iv.  ex 
prrffcript. 


decoBi 

Here 


I 


(  *9*  ) 

'  t 

Here  is  a  Cache&ick  Powder,  which  I 
took  for  fix  Weeks  together,  Mornings 
and  Nights. 

ft  Marti s  pp 
Oculor .  s. 

Coral  Ur.  rubr . 

Charyoph. 

Macis, 

Nitri  aa  §ij. 

Rad-  pirethr.  31. 

M.  F,  Pulvis,  doj.  ex  haujlu  deco&i 
ceterach  in  aqua  ferrariorum, 

I  never  found  any  thing  of  greater 
Efficacy  againft  the  Sour,  and  Wind  in 
ray  Stomach,  than  what  I  read  to  you 
laft,  and  I  would  never  have  left  it  off, 
but  that  I  imagin'd  it  bound  me  up  ;  after 
that  I  remember  I  made  ufe  of  this  Ab* 
forbent  Ele&uary, 

ft  Conch •  pp *  |ifj. 

Oculor*  $. 

Lapid%  h<emat.  aa  |ip* 

Croci  Mart  is, 

Chryjl.  went*  aa\  i.  * 

Bol.  Armen. 

Antimon .  diaphor * 

* 

M. 


(  *91  ) 

M.  <&*  C,  S.  Confcrv.  flor.  gen  if}.  f 
EleHJ.  cujus  dofc  $i-  bis  indies, 

i  ,  v  * 

Thefe  likewife  did  me  good  $  but  I  am 
now  of  fuch  an  unhappy  Confutation, 
that  not  only  Aftringent,  and  Emplaftick 
Medicines,  but  likewife  Teftaceous  Pow¬ 
ders,  and  all  Ojlracodertnata'  make  me 
Coftive.  Laft  Winter  I  had  a  very  ftub- 
born  pain  in  my  Bowels,  that  at  laft  gave 
way  to  thefe  Prefcriptions. 

E c  Rad,  Angel ,  §ij. 

Fol.  rut£ 

lauru  aa  M*  ip, 

Flor •  Chamom .  m,  i. 

0 

Coqu .  in  fc  q.  aqu£  font.  &  colat.  |viij.  adde 
Vini  Antimonial.  5 ip. 

Sails  gemm£  9j). 

Trochif  alhand.  9 3. 

M.  F.  Cljfma. 

ft  Confcrv,  ant  anti  or,  3ij. 

Myrrh ,  Elebf, 

Sue  clni  flavi  a  a  gr\  x. 

Cafior.  gr.  vi. 

Sails  vol.  -y.vi  gr •  iv* 

QL  Fhereblnt,  9p» 

Mads  gt .  XX. 

ha  ft  dan  Lon  din,  gr,  i. 


O 


M.  K 


(  194  ) 

jM.  F.  Bolus  qui  propinetur  ex  de¬ 
coct  i  fequentis,  d*  repeiatur  quarts  quaqm 
bora* 


R  Flor>  Verbdfc . 

ChamomilL 
Hyperice  aa  m .  (3* 

Races  Juniper. 

Lauri  aa  3 ij. 

&///,  Fsnic • 

font  an. 

Vini  Malvat .  ^  |xjj. 

C  K  Decoct,  pro  vehiculo  Bol.prsfcript* 


X 


& 


I  took  the  Bolus  immediately  after  the 
Cly(ler7  and  repeated  it  twice  before  I  was 
eas’d.—  The  next  is  a  Prefcriprion  that  ;• 
have  recourfe  to  when  the  Pains  in  m; 
Head  are  violent,  ptjl  longam  alvt  Conjli 
pationem . 

Radatur  caput ,  &  applicetur  Emplajlr 
Jigon .  Mercurioy  ^fe  Betonicay  a .  y 
ad  integrum  caput .  jfeie  except a9  tegendum 
Defur  clyfma  fequens « 

4L 

R  0/.  Uni  rec .  lx- 
Trochifc.  alband .  5i. 

6W/1V  ge/#.  3i_i 

■  \  • 

M.  I 


(  '95  ) 

M.  E  Clyfma,  poji  operationem  cujus  Pro* 
pinetur  Vomitor .  ex  vim  antimon .  §i,  quo 
psraSo9 

ft  Cubebar.  9i. 

Caftoro  gr  x. 

zWrf/*  fucczni  gr.  v. 

Balf.  par  a! jit.  q.  j .  ^  Bolus'. 

Saffafr. 

Major  an. 

Betonic.  aa  m.  ip, 
jF/tfr.  Bor  if  mar. 

Lavendul.  pug .  ij. 

Coquantur  in  f.  q.  aqu£  comm .  &  hujus 
CoUtur £  §iv.  Tinffur#  MeUmpod, 

Vitriol.  Philofoph .  5, 

^  St  *c  hade  ^(3. 

M.  F.  Julap.  pro  vehicnlo  Boh  Pr&fcrip? * 
repet  end.  quart  a  quaque  bora. 

This  I  have  tried  feveral  times,  and  al¬ 
ways  with  fuccefs  as  for  that  part  $  but 
very  often  as  foon  as  the  pain  is  gone  oat: 
of  my  Head  it  returns  into  my  Bowels  3 
fo  that  inftead  of  curing  the  Diftemper  I 
only  change  the  Symptoms  of  it. 

Phil.  Mott  of  the  Bills  you  have  read 
are  very  Judicioufly  Wrir?  and  the  chief 
Ingredients  of  them  enter  all  the  Pie** 

O  2  fcriptions 


ft  Kafur. 
Serpyll. 


(  ) 


fcriptions  that  are  generally  recommended 
in  your  Diftemper,  by  the  raoft  Eminent 
Phyficians  of  Europe,  but  the  intricacy 
of  - - — 

MSfim.  With  your  leave  Philo pirio 
we  (hall  break  off  the  Difcourfe  we  are 
upon  for  a  quarter  of  an  Hour.  — ~j-jere 
my  Spoufe  is  come  to  give  you  an  ac¬ 
count  of  the  Byfterick  Cafe  I  told  you 
of* 


Polytheca .  You  Gentlemen  of  Learning 
make  ufe  of  very  comprehenlive  Expref- 
fions  5  the  word  Hyflerici ^  muft  be  of  a 
prodigious  latitude  to  fignifie  fo  many 
different  Evils,  unlefs  you  mean  by  it  a 
Difeafe,  that  like  the  Sin  of  Ingratitude 
includes  all  the  reft:  Whoever  Cures  me 
I  atn  fure  muft  encounter  with  half  a 
fcore  Diftempers  at  once,  for  befides  the 
Headach,  which  I  am  hardly  ever  with¬ 
out,  I  aro  always  either  troubled  with  the 
Cholick,  a  Pain  in  my  Back,  that  reaches 
quite  up  to  my  Shoulders,  or  elfe  a  trem¬ 
bling  at  my  Heart,  that  as  it  goes  off 
leaves  me  fo  weak  and  faint,  that  1  am 
forc'd  to  lit  down,  and  can  hardly  keep 
upright  in  my  Chair.  Sometimes  my  Spi¬ 
rits  are  opprefs’d  of  a  fhdden  with  an  un¬ 
accountable  fad.nefs,  and  I  feel  a  great 
weight  at  my  Heart  5  at  the  height  of  this 
anxiety  I  am  often  feiz*d  with  fuch  ter¬ 
rible 


(  *97  ) 

rible  fits  of  crying,  as  if  I  was  to  be  dip* 
folv’d  in  Tears,  by  which  yet  1  am  gene¬ 
rally  reliev’d;  Whilft  1  was  a  Child  I  was 
always  very  weakly,  but  about  my  Four¬ 
teenth  Year  I  began  to  alter  much  for  the 
better:  1  Married  at  Seventeen,  and  enjoy’d 
a  great  (hire  of  Health  many  Years  after : 

I  had  Ten  Children  before  1  was  Thirty, 
but  none  firsce :  When  I  was  Big  with 
the  laft  I  had  a  fall  from  a  Horfe,  which 
fo  much  diibrder’d  me,  that  every  body 
thought  I  would  have  Milca  ried,  yet  I 
went  out  my  Time,  but  had  a  very  fevere 
Labour ^  and  a  worfe  Lying  in  than  ever 
I  had  undergone  before }  fince  that  l  have 
had  abundance  of  Xllnefs,  -which  in  tradt 
of  time  has  (o  ruin'd  my  Conflitution, 
that  thefe  Eight  Years  laft  pair  1  nave 
never  been  well  for  two  Days  together. 
The  leaft  Cold,  which  I  am  very  apt  to 
catch  upon  every  cccafion,  in  Summer 
as  well  as  in  Winter,  makes  my  Head 
ready  to  fplit,  and  any  thing  of  Anger, 
Vexation,  Difa p pom t mentor  fuddenneife 
has  the  fame  eflfedh  Mis  incredible,  how 
watchful  I  am  forc’d  to  be  over  my  Temper, 
and  Behaviour^  for  1  am  not  only  in¬ 
fluenc’d  by  Sorrow  and  Surprife,  but  evert 
Mirth  will  difeompofe  me}  nay,  l  am  fo 
weak,  or  at  leaft  lo  fenftbly  touch’d  by 
all  that  happens*  that  when  any  thing 

0  3  "  is 


(  ipS  ) 

Is  faid  or  done  much  to  my  fatisfa&ion, 
it  often  fets  my  Back  a  working,  and 
makes  me  tremble  for  a  conhderable  time, 
and  I  am  almoft  afraid  of  being  pleas’d. 
I  feldom  have  any  Appetite,  and  what 
Wourifhment  l  take  is  more  out  of  a  Senfe 
1  have  of  my  Duty  to  feed  my  Body, 
than  any  real  defire  to  eat  $  but  if  at  any 
time  I  make  a  tolerable  Meal  it  is  a  great 
chance,  if  1  don’t  bring  it  all  up  again  $ 
no  body  certainly  has  a  colder  Stomach 
than  myflf. 

Mifom.  I  believe  fo  too,  or  elfe  the  hot 
Things  you  are  continually  a  taking  would 
have  burnt  it  up  before  now. 

Poljth .  I  cannot  help  your  refle&ing 
upon  me  for  it  5  but  I  am  well  allured, 
that  if  I  Should  negleft  my  felf,  and  was 
to  pifs  but  half  a  Day  without  fame  Cor» 
dial  or  other  to  keep  up  my  Spirits,  the 
Wind  would  fo  over-power  and  ftrangle 
me,  that  I  fh  mid  not  be  able  to  live. 

I  have  always  been  of  a  gay  Temper, 
ever  holding  up  my  head  as  long  as  I  was 
able,  and  as  idbn  as  the  Violence  of  my 
Di  emper  abates,  or  my  Pains  are  but 
tclerabie,  l  know  that  my  Countenance 
is  fo  deed  fuf  as  to  imke  People  th  nk  I 
am  in  perf ed  Health;  but  this  fraud  of  my 
Looks,  inftead  of  comforting  me  makes 
me  as  miferable  as  the  greatefi:  of  my  Suf¬ 
ferings  3 


(  '99  3 

i  ferings;  for  never  complaining  but  when 
|  I  am  extraordinary  Ill,  I  am  feldotn  re- 
l  garded,  before  I  am  ready  to  die.  The 
variety  of  Symptoms  I  am  haunted  with, 
f  and  the  iliort  remiffions  that  fucceed  them, 
l  are  all  conftrued  to  my  difadvantage  3 
I  whenever  I  difcover  a  quarter  part  of  what 
:  I  feel,  my  whole  Diiieraper  is  counted  a 
*  whimfey,  and  I  have  the  mortification  10- 
to  the  bargain,  of  palling  for  Fantaftical 
j  in  the  midft  of  fo  many  real  Evils.  I 
'  never  dare  fpeak  of  Vapours,  the  very 
1  name  is  become  a  Joke,  and  the  general 
1  notion  the  Men  have  of  them,  is,  that 
they  are  a  malicious  mood,  and  contriv’d 
Sullennefs  of  Willful,  Extravagant  and 
Imperious  Women,  when  they  are  denied, 

1  or  thwarted  in  their  unreafonahle  defires  3 
i  nay,  even  Phyfieians,  hecaufe  they  cannot 
I  Cure  them,  are  forc’d  to  ridicule  them  in 
their  own  Defence,  and  a  Woman,  that 
is  really  troubled  with  Vapours,  is  pitied 
by  none,but  their  unhappy  fellow  Sufferers, 
that  labour  under  the  fame  Afflidion. 

I  am  no  more  fond  of  Fhyficking  than 
other  People  5  but  Neceffity  has  no  Law, 
and  ydti  may  reafon  as  you  pieafe,  but  I 
(hall  never  be  perfwaded  that  any  thing  is 
prejudicial  to  me,  when  by  the  u(e  of  it 
I  always  receive  an  immediate  benefit, 

O  4  and 


(  200  ) 

and  am  at  Deaths  door  whenever,  to  hu¬ 
mour  others,  I  try  to  leave  it  off. 

Mifom.  I  have  no  mind,  my  Dear,  to 
deftroy  the  good  Opinion  you  have  ei¬ 
ther  of  the  Medicines  }ou  take,  or  Phar- 
nienio  the  Judicious  Apothecary,  that  fo 
plentifully  provides  them,  and  did  not 
imagine  you  wanted  any  other  advice  for 
your  ftlf  3  I  thought,  as  the  Do&or  knows, 
that  you  only  intended  to  confult  him 
about  your  Daughter. 

Pol  Neither  have  l  any  other  defigo. 
Pharmenio ,  whom  you  are  pleas’d  to  call 
Judicious  in  jeft,  is  a  Skilful-Man  of  great 
Experience,  that  underfrands  my  Conftitu- 
tion  thoroughly  3  he  is  of  Opinion  that 
I  am  incurable,  I  have  heard  the  fame  of 
Eminent  Phyficians  3  yet  he  has  the  Pa¬ 
tience  to  weigh  my  Complaints,  or  at  leaft 
the  good  manners  to  hear  them,  and  fel- 
dcm  fails  of  giving  me  eafe,  even  when 
I  am  at  the  worfc,  which  is  what  others, 
that  boafted  of  greater  Learning  either 
could  or  would  not  do 5  fo  that  I  (hould 
think  my  felf  unwife  to  leave  him.  — ■ 

As  to  the  reafon,  Do&or,  why  \  (poke 
fo  much  at  large  ct  my  Ailments,  it  was 
firft  for  my  own  Information  3  for  tho’ 
excefs  of  Grief,  as  the  lofs  of  Children", 
of  which  I  have  buried  Seven,  and  other 
furprifing  as  well  as  forrowful  accidents, 

have 


(  aoj  ) 

have  made  me  often  faint  away,  yet  I 
never  was  troubled  with  CoLivuIfions  or 
any  other  Fits,  that  return'd  periodically, 
which  are  the  greateft,  if  not  the  only 
grievance  my  Daughter  complains  of,  and 
therefore,  hearing  by  every  Body,  that 
our  Cafes  have  but  one  common  name  be¬ 
tween  them, arid  are  both  call’d  Hyfterick,  I 
would  have  ask’d  you  how  two  Diftempers, 
that  are  of  (uch  different  Symptoms,  and 
have  feemingly  fo  little  Affinity  with  one 
another,  could  come  under  the  fame  de¬ 
nomination, 

s 

Secondly,  I  thought  that  the  Know¬ 
ledge  of  my  Illnefs,  and  what  firft  occa- 
fion’d  it  might  be  of  ufe  to  you  in  tracing  „ 
that  of  my  Daughter,  becaufe  it  is  (he 
that  is  the  Child,  which  I  told  you  was 
my  laflr,  for  whom  I  am  to  ask  your  Ad¬ 
vice.  This  latter  indeed  was  ihe  chief 
motive  that  made  me  fay  any  thing  of  my 
felf,  and  without  it  l  would  not  have 
troubled  you  with  fo  much  impertinent 
fluff  of  my  own  3  for  my  Ailings  I  know 
are  very  trifling,  at  leaft  in  fome  Peoples 
Opinion,  But  as  to  my  Daughter.— 

Tbo’  I  had  a  miferable  time  of  her,  as 
I  told  you  already,  and  a  great  deal  of 
Illnefs  after  it,  yet  the  Girl,  as  (lie  was 
Born  very  well,  continued  Healthy,  and 
was  a  fine  thriving  Child.  She  bred  her 

Teeth 


(  201  ) 

Teeth  with  abundance  of  eafe,  and  did 
run  alone  fooner  by  a  quarter  of  a  Year, 
than  any  Child  I  ever  had  ;  about  her 
Fifth  Year  lhe  had  the  Small  Pox,  which 
were  very  favourable  to  her,  and  I  think 
fhe  has  had  Two  or  Three  Fits  of  Sick- 
nefs  belides  that  were  not  very  confider- 
able,  which  were  all  the  IHnefs  that  has 
attended  her  till  (he  was  Eleven  Years  Old ; 
when  about  the  middle  of  Angnfi,  having 
eaten  a  great  quantity  of  Mulberries  for 
two  or  three  Days  together,  fhe  was  taken 
with  a  Scowring,  which  being  ftopt  two 
or  three  times  return’d  as  often,  and  iafted 
till  the  latter  end  of  September.  She  had 
hardly  been  well  of  it  a  Week,  but  was 
feiz’d  with  a  Quartan-Ague  :  After  Eight 
or  Nine  Fits,  that  Ihook  her  very  much, 
by  great  perfwafion  (he  took  the  Bark, 
and  was  cured:,  within  a  Month  by  taking 
Cold  fhe  relaps’d,  and  having  had  four 
or  five  Fits  more,  rather  worfe  than  the 
former,  by  ufing  the  fame  remedy  file 
got  rid  of  it  the  fecond  time,  bat  (fill 
negle&ing  to  repeat  it  as  lhe  ought  to 
have  done,  it  always  came  again  and 
again,  and  held,  her  off  and  on  near  two 
Years  5  at  the  end  of  which,  from  a 
plump  well  look’d  Girl  fhe  was  become  a* 
mere  Skeleton,  and  had  no  more  colour 
than  this  Apron.  Five  or  Ox  Months  be¬ 
fore 


i  20?  ; 

fore  her  Ague  left  her,  her  Appetite, 
which  hitherto  had  been  good,  declin’d 
vifibly,  and  (he  began  to  complain  of  a 
fwimming  in  her  Bead,  which  daily  in® 
creating,  in  a  ftiort  time,  came  to  fuch  a 
height,  that  often,  unlefs  (he  caught  hold 
of  fomething,  it  would  throw  her  down. 

She  was  Thirteen  when  I  fent  her  into 
Northampton-Jhire,  where  the  had  not 
been  a  Week,  but  (he  loft  her  Ague*  In 
lefs  than  two  Months  I  heard,  that  (he 
was  much  mended,  and  had  a  very  good 
Stomach  $  (he  had  lived  there  near  a 
Twelvemonth,  and  I  made  no  queftion, 
but  (he  was  perfeftly  recover’d,  when  (he 
writ  me  word,  that  (he  was  grown  very 
tall  5  but  that  fince  the  giddinefs  in  her 
Head,  which  (he  formerly  ufed  to  com¬ 
plain  of,  had  left  her,  inftead  of  it  (he 
had  now  and  then  been  troubled  with 
fainting  Fits,  that  iafted  feveral  Minutes  5 
adding  as  an  excafe  tor  her  not  acquaint¬ 
ing  me  with  it  fooner,  that  the  Fits  % 
coming  upon  her  but  very  feldom  at 
firft,  (he  thought  that  as  her  Strength 
>  encreas’d  they  would'  have  wore  off', 

!  but  that  finding  them  to  become  more 
t  frequent,  and  grow  worre  every  Day, 

I  fhe  thought  it  her  Duty  not  to  conceal 
it  from  me  any  longer.  I  fent  for  her 
up  immediately,  and  wanted  for  no  Ad¬ 
vice  : 


(  ) 

vice :  Being  now  grown  wifer  her  felf, 
(lie  was  very  willing  to  take  whatever  was 
order'd  her,  and  followed  abundance  of 
Prcfcriptions,  but  found  no  manner  of 
benefit  by  any  thing  for  many  Months, 
and  her  Fits  continued  a  long  time  very 
affli&ing  to  her  5  when  they  held  her  but 
a  little  while  they  came  very  often,  and 
{he  had  fometimes  five  or  fix  of  'em  in  a 
Day  5  but  if  they  flay’d  away  longer 
than  ordinary  they  were  more  lafting,  and 
before  that  Winter  was  exfpired,  (he  has 
lain  in  them  Eight  or  Nine  Hours,  and 
been  fometimes  a  whole  Day,  before  (he 
'could  be  brought  quite  to  her  felf  again. 

As  foon  as  the  Seafon  was  come  I  lent 
her  to  the  Bath ,  which  together  with  the 
Medicines  fhe  took  there  gave  her  great 
relief,  and  every  body  thought  her  Fits 
had  left  her,  but  this  happinefs  was  of  no 
long  continuance,  for  in  lefs  than  a  quarter 
oi  a  Year,  and  at  times  fhe  has  been  as 
bid  fince  as  ever  fhe  was  before.  They 
were  uncertain  without  obferving  any  Pe¬ 
riod  all  along,  but  now  ever  fince  laft 
Michaelmas  (he  has  had  them  conftantly 
once  a  Month.  The  Fits  fhe  had  at  fir  ft 
of  all  ufed  to  give  her  little  or  no  warn¬ 
ing,  and  then  the  moment  they  went  off 
(lie  had  a  ftrange  fort  of  tafte  in  her 
Throat,  that  fne  could  not  compare  to  any 


( 

thing  (he  knew :  But  after  that,  before 
they  take  away  her  Senfes,  (he  feels  a 
great  oppreffion  at  her  Stomach,  a  grumb¬ 
ling  in  her  Bowels,  and  fomething  (he 
fays  iifes  up  in  her  Throat,  that  is  ready 
to  cfaeak  her,  which  is  prefently  followed 
by  a  fhortnefs  of  Breath  ;  (he  complains 
likewife  that  fomething  rowls  about  her 
Belly  as  big  as  both  her  Fids,  and  breaks 
abundance  of  Wind. 

But  the  uncertain  Fits  (he  had  before 
differ’d  very  much  from  the  Periodical 
ones  (he  has  now  every  Month  5  in  the 
former,  when  they  were  at  the  word, 
(he  was  as  cold  as  Clay,  her  Cheeks  were 
pinch’d  in,  her  Nodrils  drawn  together, 
and  with  her  Eyes  (hut,  and  a  livid  pale- 
nefs  fpread  all  over  her,  (he  lay  fo  mo- 
tionlefs,  that  we  could  hardly  perceive 
her  to  breathe,  and  often  thought  her 
Dead :  From  them  (he  recover’d  with 
Sighing,  after  which  the  open’d  her  Eyes, 
then  yawn’d  and  ftretch  d,  and  with  her 
Senfes,  her  warmth  return’d  by  degrees. 

In  .the  latter  (he  has  hardly  any  fuch 

Symptoms:  The  Cold,  that  at  the  b'> 

!]  ginning  of  them  feizes  her,  is  neither  fo 

violent  nor  fo  lading,  and  in  a  little  time 

fucceeded  by  an  intenfe  heat,  and  ftrong 

Convulsions:  In  her  Fits  die  Sweats  and  is 
- 

very  frcfh  colour’d, which  cut  of  them  die  is 

far  * 


(  20 6  ) 

hr  from.  She  (hrieks  out,  mutters  be¬ 
tween  her  Teeth,  and  makes  feveral 
ftraoge  Noifes,  which  once  I  thought 
like  the  Crowing  of  a  Cock.  W  hen  the 
ftrugfing  ceafes,  and  the  Fit  goes  off, 
(he  is  very  Sick,  and  prefently  after  it 
brings  up  great  quantities  of  a  Yellowifti 
Green  Stuff,  fo  (harp,  that  it  letches  the 
Skin  off  her  Mouth.  When  (he  has  quite 
recovered  her  Senfes  (he  is  fore  ail  over, 
and  as  weary  as  if  (he  had  walk’d  feveral 
Miles,  complains  of  great  Drought  and 
remains  hot  for  many  Hours  after :  When 
&11  thefe  Symptoms  have  left  her  (he  is 
feemingly  well,  and  has  an  indifferent 
good  Appetite,  till  within  a  Day  or  two 
again  of  the  next  Fit  $  for  then  her  Sto¬ 
mach  fails,  her  Sleep  is  difturb’d,  (he  has 
Cramps  in  feveral  places,  and  is  very 
much  blown  up  with  Wind:  All  the: 
time  between  her  Fits  (he  never  cares  to 
ftir,  yet  complains  of  nothing,  but  an  in- 
tenfe  co!dne(s,  as  if  there  lay  a  piece  oi 
Ice  in  the  back  part  of  her  Head,  which  I 
believe  I  forgot  to  tell  you  is  what  I  am 
often  troubled  with  my  felf. 

Miiotn .  I  always  was  in  hopes  as  (he 
came  to  maturity,  that  the  Fits  by  de¬ 
grees  would  have  left  her,  but  I  think 
(he  is  as  bad  as  ever  (he  was  ^  at  leaft  1 
can  find  no  alteration  in  her  for  the  better 

Poljth 


(  JO 7  ) 

Polytk  The  benefit  of  Nature  without 
doubt  would  make  feme  change  in  her, 
but  what  difheartens  me  moft  is,  that  (he 
never  bad  the  leaft  fign  of  it  yet,  tho* 
the  25th  of  laft  Month  (lie  was  Seventeen 
Years  old.  Some  will  have  it,  that  they 
are  nor  Firs  or  the  Mother,  but  the  Fall- 
ing-Sickneis,  and  that  (he’ll  never  be  cured  5 
others  fay,  (he  is  under  an  Evil  Tongue  5 
bot  whether  there  be  any  fuch  thing  or 
not  I  don’t  know.  She  has  clofely  all 
along  followed  the  Advice  of  fome  body 
or  other,  and  gone  through  feveral  Steel 
Cotirfes.  What  other  Medicines  (he  has 
taken  my  Husband  might  inform  you  5 
but  that  he  has  fo  much  to  do  with  his 
own  Diftemper,  he  has  not  time  to  mind 
any  body  elfe. 

Mifom.  I  never  charge  my  Memory  with 
particulars  of  what  People  take,  unlefs  I 
find  it  does  them  good.  1  know  that  (he 
has  had  feveral  DecoCHons  of  Mugwort, 
Feverfew,  Calaminth,  Rue,  Peony,  Peo¬ 
ny,  Pennyroyal,  and  fuch  like,  with 
Baths  of  the  fame,  (ometimes  (he  has  taken 
for  a  confiderable  time  Teftaceous  Pow¬ 
ders,  and  others,  with  Crabs-Eyes,  Red- 
Coral,  Volattl  Salt  of  Tartar,  Diapliore* 
tick  Antimony,  Bole- Armen ick ,  at  other 
times  Uterine,  and  Stomachick  Electuaries, 
with  Savin,  Nutmeg,  Myrrhe,  Saffron, 

Volatile 


(  208  ) 

Volatile  Salts,  Foetid  Oils,  <&c.  Feveral 
forts  of  Hyfierick  Pills,  but  all  to  li- tie  or  no 
pirpofe.  When  (he  was  at  the  Bath,  and 
had  the  longeft  intermiflion  o f  her  Fits 
fhe  ever  enjoy'd,  fioce  they  firft  took  her, 
I  remember  (he  had  a  Boh/s  prefcrib’d  her, 
which  I  thought  very  remarkable,  and 
was 


lx  t>,  JJtf  HU*  C/i* 

Pulv.  fecund,  human,  gr.  x. 
Cajlor.  gr.  vi. 

Croci  gr .  iv. 

Satis  Jovis  gr.  v. 

M  &  C-f  q*  Confer v.  ahfynth.f.  Bolus. 


This  fhe  took  twice  a  Day  in  Six  Odnees 
of  a  Decoftion  of  Black-Hellebore  and 
Briony-Roois,  Peny royal,  Rue  and  Mug- 
wort  $  and  at  the  fame  time  m  Regione 
Umbilici ,  file  wore  a  Plaifter  of  Galbanum 
C  'aracanna,  a  fa  fetid  a,  and  Oil  of  Taca - 
mahaca .  Thefe  Remedies,  tho’  fhe f  re¬ 
ceiv’d  benefit  from  them  at  fir  ft  ceas'd  to 
have  the  fame  effeft  upon  her,  when  once 
fhe  was  accuftom'd  to  them.  What  fhe 
has  made  ufe  of  lately  I  can’t  tell  $  for  it 
is  above  fix  Months  ago,  that  nsy  Wife 
has  left  the  whole  Care,  and  Management 
of  her  to  her  Apothecary,  who  i  fuppofe 

wont 


(  2  dp  ) 

wo’n’t  let  her  w#ftt  Medicines:  He  is  3 
famous  Man  among  the  Ladies,  for  making 
op  Things  very  palatable,  and  a  greaf 
lover  of  keeping  up  the  Spirits.  I  never 
yet  examin’d  any  liquid  that  came  from 
his  Houle,  but  it  tailed  of  Wine  or 
Brandy.- - 

'  Polyih.  I  know  thefe  Things  are  charge¬ 
able,  and  with  with  all  my  Heart,  tlu£ 
neither  your  Daughter  nor  my  feli  had 
any  occafion  to  put  you  to  fo  much  ex* 
pence. 

Mifm .  I  don’t  (peak  of  the  Charge* 
neither  would  I  grudge  any  thing 
that  is  neceffary  for  the  meaneft  Servant  I 
keep,  much  left  for  my  Wife  and  Children, 
Polytheca  3  but  I  think  it  is  an  odd  fancy 
that  People  mull  have  half  their  Diet  out 
of  the  Apothecaries  Shop.  Can  Wine  or 
Brandy  become  more  Cordial  by  being 
3  call’d  Alexipharmick,  or  receive  any  San¬ 
ction  by  being  balderdafh’d  with  two  of 
three  forts  of  Simple-Waters,  that  arc  e~ 
qually  infipid,  tho’  not  half  fo- clear,  as 
what  you  may  have  either  from. the  Pomp 
or  the  Sky  >  Or  do  you  think  that  a  Can¬ 
died  Syrup  of  two  Years  (landing,  be- 
3  caufe  it  comes  out  of  a  Galley-Pot,  thabhas 
a  fine  Label  on  the  outfide,  tho5  perhaps - 
it  is  Mouldy  within,  and  cover’d  with 
Furr  of  an  loch  thick*  is  more  wholefome 
...  P  w 


(  *»o  ) 

to  fweeten  any  thing  tith  than  double 
Refin’d  Sugar,  that  won’t  Hand  you  in  half 
a  quarter  of  the  Monej  ? 

Pdjth.  To  be  Having,  I  believe  is  a 
great  virtue ;  but  I  think  it  is  no  where 
fo  unfeafonable  as  in  the  recovery  of  ones 
Health  ,  as  to  the  goodrtds  of  Medicines, 

I  am  well  perfwaded,  that  no  body  has 
better,  or  is  more  nice  in  them  than  Phar- 
m&nio  ^  but  Phyfiek,  I  know,  Mifomedoa, 
is  a  Chapter  that  you  and  I  (hall  never 
agree  about.— Pray,  Doctor,  your  Opinioa 
of  my  Daughter,  What  rnuft  I  call  her 
Diftemper,  and  may  I  ever  expeft  to  fee 
bet  cured  > 

Phil.  As  to  the  Name,  Madam,  there’s 
no  manner  of  doubt  but  your  Daughters 
Cafe,  as  well  as  your  own,  tho*  they 
differ  much  from  one  another,  are  both 
Hyfterick.  This  Difeafe  manifefts  it  (elf 
not  fo  much  by  particular  Signs,  in  which 
it  differs  front  other  Diftempers,  as  by  the 
Complication  of  a  great  many,  that  are 
likewife  obferv’d  in  others  5  but  to  be  Hy¬ 
fterick,  it  is  fufficient  to  have  four  or 
five  of  them,  otherwife  the  Catalogue  of 
Symptoms,  belonging  to  it  is  fo  large, 
that  it  is  impoffible  one  Woman  (houid 
have  them  all ;  For,  befides  the  Com¬ 
plaints  you  have  mention’d,  Hyfterick 
People  are  frequently  troubled  with  an  ex- 

ceffive 


(  2il  ) 

ceffive  Pain  on  the  top  of  the  Head,  fri 
fo  fmall  a  compaG,  that  a  Shilling  would 
more  than  cover  it.  •  Some  have  hard 
Swellings  in  the  Face,  Hands,  Arms,  Legs, 
arid  Thighs  $  others  fpit  as  copioufly  as 
if  they  were  in  a  Salivation  for  Weeks  to¬ 
gether.  As  to  Fits  fothe  are  feized  with 
violent  Coughs  $  others  with  Hickups* 
and  abundance  of  Women  are  taken  with 
Convulfive  laughing.  There  are  Fits  that 
have  (hort  remilfions,  in  which  you  would 
think  the  Woman  was  a  going  to  recover, 
and  yet  laft  many  Hours.  Some  are  fd 
flight,  that  the  Patients  lofe  nothing,  but 
the  ufe  of  their  Legs,  and  Tongue,  and 
for  the  reft  remain  fenfible  5  others  again 
are  fo  violent,  that  they'  foam  at  the 
Mouth,  rave  and  beat  their  Heads  againll 
the  Ground  but  whether  they  referable 
an  Apoplex,  are  Only  fainting,  or  feetri 
to  be  Epileptick,  they  all  come  under  the 
denomination  of  Hyfterick,  if  the  Patients 
are  ever  affli&ed  with  any  of  the  other 
Symptoms  already  mention’d, efp:  cully  the 
ftrangling  in  the  Throat  from  wlfch  thi 
Diftemper  has  its  Latin  Name,  and  is  call'd 
in  Englijh  the  Suffocation  of  the  Womb, 
and  the  coldnefs  in  the  back  part  of  the 
Head ;  either  of  which  or  both  (notwith- 
{landing  moft  Phylickns  tell  us  that  thd 
Hyfterick  Paffion  has  no  Eathognomonick 

Pa  ^  SignS* 


{  212  ) 

Signs,  that  is  fuch  as  are  peculiar  to  this 
Difternper  and  no  other)  I  have  always 
obferv’d  Hyfterick  Women  complain’d  of 
at  one  time  or  other. 

My  Progno flicks  on  your  Daughters 
Aftiiftion  are  thefe.  What  you  fay  dis¬ 
heartens  you  is  the  greateft  reafon,  for 
which  I  expeft  her  recovery  :  For  tho* 
the  hot  Periodick,  and  Convulfive  Fits 
file  has  now,  are  generally  counted  very 
obfiinate,  and  more  difficult  to  be  over¬ 
come,  than  the  cold  uncertain  ones  with¬ 
out  motion,  fh;  had  before,  when  both 
are  abftra&ly  confider’d  in  themfelves,  yet 
if  we  examine  the  Stock  they  are  fprung 
from,  and  the  time,  in  which  they  con- 
ftaqtly  return,  we  fhali  find  by  feverai 
Circumftances,  that  Nature,  who  ftruggks 
with  the  Difternper,  has  already  gain’d 
upon  it,  and  points  at  the  relief  ffae  wants 
tocompkat  her  Conquer^  wherefore  if  the 
Lady’s  Youth  and  Strength  be  prudently 
affifted,  I  am  of  Opinion,  Madam,  that 
fiie’11  certainly  be  cured.  In  order  to  it, 
in  the  firft  place,  i  would  for  one  Month 
prefcribe  a  courfe  of  Exercife,  and  no  Me¬ 
dicines  at  all. 

Poljtfj.  A  Courfe  of  Exercife  f  and  na 
Medicines  at  all ! 

*  Mifom.  Yes,  my  Dear,  a  courfe  of  Ex¬ 
ercife,  and  no  Medicines  at  all-*-*  I  think 

it 


.  '  (  21  ?  ) 

it  is  very  good  Englifh  5  tho3  I  confefs> 
focfa  Language  never  came  from  an  Apo¬ 
thecaries  Mouth,  or  Phyficians  either,  that 
ever  was  twice  recommended  by  one,  and 
therefore  f  ought  not  to  think  it  firange*, 
if  you  don  t  apprehend  it  fo  readily, 

Poljth.  You  are  very  pleafant*  Mifome- 
don.  But  how  come  the  Apothecaries  in  > 
Or  muft  you  have  a  fling  at  them  right  or 
wrong  ?  Sure  there  are  honeft  Men  among 
them,  as  well  as  there  is  in  all  other 
Callings,  < 

Mifom .  So  there  may  for  ought  I  know,, 
tho3  no  People  of  any  other  Calling  lie 
under  fo  great  a  temptation  of  being  c- 
therwife  5  for  if  an  Apothecary's  bufinefs 
be  Selling  ©f  Medicines,  and  you  commit 
a  Patient  to  his  management,  it  is  plain  to 
me  that  he  is  left  to  himfelf  to  fell  him  as 
many  as  his  Confcience  will  allow  of,  and 
is  this  not  leading  him  into  a  vaft  Tempta¬ 
tion  ?  Certainly  the  People  that  trnft  to 
their  Advice  tfmft  be  either  Fools,  or 
think  that  the  Apothecaries  are  Saints , 
Pray  tell  me  what ‘Grocer.,  Druggrfr,  Lin- 
nen  or  •  Woollen  Draper,  Mercer,  Gold- 
fmith,  or  other  Tradefmah  of  the  mbft 
reputable  Employment,  you  can  name, 
would  you  put  that  Confidence  in,  that 
he  (liquid  fell  you,  as  much  of  his  Com¬ 
modity  as  he  thought  you  wanted  ?  It  is 
'  •  P  3  .  a 


)  *  ^ 

(  214  ) 

a  Truft  not  to  bz  repofed  in  Mortals.  They 
have  a  whole  Shop  ini!  of  Medicines,  of 
which  a  great  many  too  are  in  danger  of 
being  fpoiPd,  and  would  you  imagine, 
they  woVc  dirpcfe  of  them,  and  vent  as 
many  as  they  can  ?  Ought  -not  every  body 
to  promote  his  Trade? 

Toyth*  But,  good  Mifomsdon ,  May  I  not 
fay  the  fame  of  Phyfidans,  that  give  their 
own  Phyfick  }  Philopirio  is  not  much  ob¬ 
liged  to  you,  for  the  fine  harangue  you 
have  made. 

Mifom*  There  is  a  vaft '  difference  be¬ 
tween  Phyficians  and  Apothecaries  $  for 
in  the  firft  place  all  Phyficians  originally 
furmfiaed  their  Patients  with  what  now 
they  only  preferibe,  till  growing  weary  of 
the  trouble  they  gave  over  that  branch  of 
their  Employ  to  others  3  but  the  Apothe¬ 
caries  were  only  defign  d  to  be  their  Ser* 
vants,  and  Cook  whatever  they  ftiould 
order,  and  when  there  is  no  Phyfician  to 
preferibe  there  is  no  more  occafion  for  an 
Apothecary,  even  in  an  Hofpital,  than  at 
Church,  there  is  for  one  to  pull  the  Bel¬ 
lows  when  the  Organifiis  out  of  the  w7ay. 
Therefore  if  a  Phyfician  has  a  mind  to 
give  his  own  Medicines,  he  only  refumes 
what  his  Predeceffors  left  off,  either  out  of 
Pride  or  Lazinefs,  and  you  can  only 
t>Eme  him  for  medling  with  what  is 

thought 


(  **5  ) 

thought  to  be  beneath  him  3  but  an  Apo¬ 
thecary  that  prefcribes  commits  an  un¬ 
pardonable  Crime  $  becaufe  he  encroaches 
upon  his  Mailer,  and  undertakes  what  is 
infinitely  above  him, 

Poljitb.  Bat  all  this  is  nothing  to  the 
Truft,  yen  fay,  is  repofed  in  their  Honefty : 
Why  is  there  not  the  fame  danger  of  be¬ 
ing  aver-burdi  n’d  vrth  Pbyfick  from  a 
Phyfician  that  finds  his  own  Medicines, 
as  there  is  from  an  Apothecary  that  pre- 
feribes  them  himfelf? 

Mifom.  Becaufe  he  has  not  a  quarter 
part  of  the  opportunity.  A  Phyfician  don't 
come  but  where  he  is  call’d,  and  generally 
fpeaking  is  never  lent  for,  but  when  Peo¬ 
ple  are  very  Ill,  who  have  always 
done  with  him  as  foon  as  they  are  tole¬ 
rably  well  again :  He  does  not  haunt  your 
Hooks  with  impertinent  Vifits*  under 
pretence  of  which  he  can  vent  his  Me¬ 
dicines  among  fome  or  other  of  the  Fa¬ 
mily:  But  an  induftrious  Apothecary  ne¬ 
ver  waits  till  you  are  Sick,  if  you  are 
a  good  Cuftomer,  and  a  well  wither  to 
Phyfick  5  for  either  he  makes  a  frivolous 
Errand  to  enquire  after  what  is  his  only 
grievance/  your  Health,  or  elfe  comes  as 
if  he  thought  you  loft  your  Almanack, 
officioufly  to  put  you  in  mind  of  the  ap¬ 
proach  of  either  the  Spring  or  Fall,  and 

P  4  halving 


(  t\6  ) 

having  no  other  design  than  to  fell  his 
Ware,  tells  you  perhaps  fome  difmal  Ac¬ 
cidents  that  be f  1  fuch,  as  being  in  perfect 
Health,  neglected,  at  thofe  Seafons  to  di- 
ftdrb  their  Bodies  with  violent  Medi¬ 
cines. 

I  hope,  Madam,  yon  are  convinc'd  that 
Phyficians,  the’  they  adminifter  their  own 
Phyfick  have  ids  opportunity  than  Apo¬ 
thecaries  i  i  fcattering  it  among  the  Peo¬ 
ple,  efpecially  fuch  as  only  apply  them- 
lelves  to  the  Cure  of  one  Diftemper  $  fo 
that  what  I  faid  could  be  no  Reflection 
on  Philopirio ,  and  believe  me,  Polytheca , 
5tis  madnefs  to  truft  any  Tradefoian  with 
fuch  an  unlimited  Authority  of  I  can’t 
fay  ferving,  but  ranging  over  a  whole 
Family.—  -1  have  known  an  Apothecary 
in  an  idle  Afternoon  go  to  a  Perfon  of 
Quality’s,  where  they  made  ufe  of  him  ; 
There  happen’d  to  be  no  body  at  home 
but  Children  and  Servants,  that  from  the 
higheft  to  the  loweft  were  all  in  perfect 
Health  :  If  here  he  came  for  Bafinefs 
{you’ll  fay)  he  was  disappointed  3  but 
you  are  miftaken  the  Courteous  Gentle¬ 
man  wi  h  an  engaging  familiarity  accofts 
every  Servant  in  the  Boufe,  and  puts  off  a 
Purge  to  the  Cook,  a  Vomit  to  the  Butler, 
Box  of  Pills  to  one  of  the  Footmen, 
and  a  Pot  of  Lucaidlus  Balfam  to  old 

•Nurfe. 


(  tiy  ) 

Nurfe.  The  Children  absolutely  refuting 
to  take  any  Phyfick  at  leaft  inwardly,  he 
Coaxes  the  little  Matter  into  the  life  of  a 
charming  Dentifrice ,  and  a  fweet-fcented 
Collyrium  to  rinfe  his  Mouth  with  after 
it,  that  (hall  preferve  his  Teeth,  and  make 
them  look  like  Ivory,  tho’ he  was  to  eat 
nothing  hut  Sugar  and  Sweet-Meats  all 
Day  long  3  to  pretty  Mifs  he’ll  fend  a  Lo» 
tion  for  her  Hair,  and  a  Pafte  for  her 
Hands,  that  (hall  render  the  one  fo  bright 
as  Silver,  and  the  other  whiter  than  Snow, 
with  a  Beauty-waih  for  their  Maid,  that 
affifted  in  the  perfwading  of  them.  The 
affable  Gentleman  has  every  bodies  good 
word  :  The  Children  are  pleas’d,  the  Ser¬ 
vants  commend  him,  my  Lady  is  obliged 
to  him  $  and  Ten  to  One  but  the  firft  op¬ 
portunity  of  driving  that  way  her  Coach 
flops  at  his  Door,  and  (he  thanks  him  for 
the  care  he  took  of  her  Family  in  her 
ableoce. 

Tell  me,  pray,  if  a  Fifhmonger,  or 
Poulterer  (hculd  go  to  a  Cuftomer’s  Houle 
after  Dinner,  when  the  Mafter  and  Mi- 
ftrefs  were  abroad,  advife  the  Servants, 
the  one  to  a  fine  Salmon,  the  other  to 
a  Dozen  of  Turkey-Poults,  and  fend 
them  home  accordingly.  Would  you  not 
think  them  very  impudent  Pvafcals  >  Yet 
the  firft  is  equally  guilty  with  the  latter, 

their 


1 


( 118 ) 

their  Crime  is  the  fame,  and  all  fold  their 
Commodity  where  they  knew  it  was  not 
wanted  3  with  this  difference,  that  the 
Apothecary  got  more  Money  by  the  Trifl  s 
that  coft  him  little  or  nothing,  than  ei¬ 
ther  the  Poulterer  or  Fiflamonger,  by  fub- 
ftantial  Dainties  of  real  value. 

Polyth;  What  fome  poor  Fellows  might 
do  I  don’t  know  3  but  there  are  a  great 
many  Rich  Men  among  the  Apothecaries, 
that  would  fcorn  the  little  Tricks  you  talk 
of.  As  to  the  great  difference  you  make 
between  Phyficians  and  them,  I  am  ro 
judge  of  it  3  neither  can  I  tell  to  which 
of  them  the  Mafterfhip  belongs,  but  I  am 
credibly  inform’d  that  the  latter  could  buy 
the  former  over  and  over,  and  that  the 
difpute  was  between  a  Company  of  Weal¬ 
thy  Men,  and  a  Society  of  Beggars.  As 
to  the  Apothecary  I  truft  to,  he  is  none 
of  the  Vulgar  ones  ^Phdrm£»to  is  a  Man 
of  Subflance,  that  has  kept  his  Coach  many 
Years.  , 

Mifom.  So  had  the  Baker  you  turn’d  off 
Jafl  Winter,  becaufe  none  of  us  could  eat 
Tis  Bread.  A  Coach  is  a  very  weak  proof 
of  a  Man’s  Honefty,  that  comes  up  from 
Nothing  by  buying  and  felling  in  a  Trade, 
where  Knaves  have  a  great  latitude. 
Your  Daughter  has  had  the  Advice  of 
Eminent  Phyficians  that  coiild  do  her  no 

Good, 


(  2,5>  ) 

Good  ;  Vharmanio  has  all  along  made  up 
the  Medicines,  yet  after  them  he  takes  her 
in  hand  himfelf,  and  without  perceiving 
the  leaft  alteration  fends  her  loads  of  Me¬ 
dicines  Week  after  Week  (becaufe  he  is 
not  contradi&ed)  as  much  as  file  can 
fwallow :  I  don't  think  a  Man  of  extra¬ 
ordinary  Probity  would  continue  this  for 
fo  many  Months  in  a  Diftemper,  of  which 
he  muft  be  confcious,  that  he  knows  in¬ 
finitely  lefs,  than  thofe  that  have  tried 
their  Skill  upon  her  already  to  no  pur- 
pofe. 

Volyth.  This  is  your  old  Story  5  that 
Apothecaries  don’t  underhand  Phyfickj 
but  1  could  never  fee  the  impoffibility, 
why  an  Apothecary  that  applies  himfelf 
to  it,  (hould  be  lefs  capable  of  attaining 
to  the  knowledge  of  it,  than  any  body 

Ielfe.  All  the  Prefcriptions  go  through 
their  Hands,  they  make  them  up,  fee  the 
effed  of  them,  and  are  with  the  Patients, 
as  much,  if  not  more  than  the  Phyficians 
themfelves;  as  for  reading,  fare  they  may 
have  Books  too^  And  unlefs  there  is  a 
Charm  in  the  word  Univerjtiy ,  that  infpires 
People  with  Knowledge,  I  am  told  that 
as  for  publick  Difledions,  Hofpitals,  Phy- 
fick-Gardens  and  other  things,  that  are 
neceffary  to  the  Study  of  Phyfick,  a  Man 
may  meet  with  three  times  more  oppor- 
I  ■■■  a  .  ::  A*'  -  t unity 


(  220  ) 

tunity  of  improving  hitnfelf  hat  way, 
in  London ,  than  either  a  t  Oxford  or  Cam- 
bridge .  I  know  there  are  ftrange  hidden 
qualities  in  the  Air,  the  Soil,  a  d  he 
Water,  and  have  often  heard,  fhar  f  ane 
Places  yielded  Cheefe,  others  Butter, 
that  could  not  be  made  fo  good  any 
where  elfe,  tho  they  had  the  fame  Erne, 
and  to  all  appearance  better  Paftitre  5  I 
believe  the  fame1  of  brewing,/'  th'dh  they 
have  the  fame  Malt  3  bur  it  is  the  greateft 
Myftery  to  me  in  the  World,  that  it  fhould 
be  the  fame  with  the  learning  of  Arts  and 
Sciences,  tho*  they  have  the  fa  ne  oppor¬ 
tunity.  Therefore,  pray,  Philoplno  let 
me  have  it  out  of  your  own  Mouth, 
what  is  the  reafon,  that  a  Young  Gentle¬ 
man  of  Four  or  Five  and  Twenty  that 
has  lived  Seven  or  Eight  Years  at  Oxford , 
as  foon  as  he  comes  hither,  fhould  be  al¬ 
low'd  to  know  more  of  Sick-People,  than 
a  Man  of  above  Fifty,  that- has  daily  con* 
vers’d  with  them  in  arid  about  tins  Popu¬ 
lous  City,  and  been  in  good  Bufmefs  for  - 
25  or  30  Years  together.' 

Phil.  I  muff  begyrour  pardon,  Madam, 
if  1  don’t  ftudy  a  reafon  for  what  l  don't 
believe  my  felf :  I  am  altogether  of  your 
Opinion,  and  an  Apothecary  that,  being 
firft  well  vers’d  in  Anatomy,  Oeconomy, 
and  the  Hiftory  of  Difeafes,  has  feen  the 

Practice 


.(  111  ) 

Pra&ice  of  able  Phyfieians,  and  daily 
eonverfing  with  Sick  People  made  Ju¬ 
dicious  Obfervations  of  his  own,  for  20, 
or  25  Years,  I  would  defer  as  much  to 
in  matters  of  Fhyfick,  tho5  he  had  never 
been  Ten  Miles  out  of  London,  and  was 
wholly,  ignorant  of  Languages,  Poetry, 
Logick,  Philofophy,  and  every  branch  of 
the  Mat  hem  a  ticks,  Aritbmetick  not  ex-, 
cepted,  as  I  would  to  the  mod  Learned 
Profeffor,  that  had  practis'd  the  fame 
time  either  at  Oxford ,  Cambridge ,  Leiden , 
Montpellier ,  Altdorph ,  or  any  other  of  the 
mod  famous  llniverfities  for  Phyfick  in 
Chriftendcm. 

Mifom .  This  is  prevaricating,  my  Dear  : 
Philopirio  has  no  mind  to  difobiige  the 
Apothecaries  any  further,  than  by  ad- 
miniftring  his  own  Medicines,  and  there¬ 
fore  refuCes  to  come  to  the  point}  he  is, 
in  the  right,  that  he  would  defer  a  great 
deal  tofuch  an  Apothecary  as  he  defcribcs: 
And  if  he  had  added  Botany,  and  the 
Preparation  of  Medicines,  he  might  have 
faid  the  fame  of  a  Holier  or  a  Haber- 
daflier  of  Small- wares  5  the  quefiion  is 
not,  what  fuch  an  Apothecary  defer ves, 
but  where  he  is  to  be  found,  or  at  leaft 
what  probability  there  is  that  any  of 
them  fhould  be  Co  qualified ;  or  take  fuch 
pains  when  they  have  other  Fifh  to  fry. 

When 


(  III  ) 

When  a  Man  is  out  of  his  Time,  has  a 
Shop  to  look  after,  Servants  to  mind, 
Acquaintance  to  feek,  and  perhaps  a  Mi- 
ftrefs  to  Court,  or  a  Young  Wife  to  pleafe, 
and  a  Family  to  maintain  by  his  daily 
Profit  5  What  leifure  or  inclination  can 
you  fuppofe  he  will  have,  not  only  to 
begin,  but  go  through  a  Prolix,  Labo¬ 
rious  Study,  to  which  by  his  Trade  he  is 
as  great  a  Stranger  as  a  Colour-Grinder 
to  the  Art  of  Painting  ?  For  if  without 
any  Skill  in  Anatomy,  and  the  Biftory  of 
Dif-afes,  which  Vhilopirio  fpoke  of,  he 
pretends  to  jump  into  Practice,  he  is 
never  to  be  trufted,  and  tho'  he  had  feen 
Thoufands  of  Patients,  and  Ten  Thou- 
fand  Prefcriptions,  to  be  counted  as  im¬ 
pudent,  as  (to  keep  to  my  Simile)  a 
Colour-Grinder,  that  without  any  Skill  in 
Drawing  would  pretend  to  manage  a 
Pencil.  The  one  may  fee  the  firft  Stroaks 
Chalk’d  out,  prepare  the  Colours  h'tnfelf, 
and  afterwards  fee  his  Mafter  at  Work  : 
The  other  hear  the  Patients  examin’d, 
make  up  the  Medicines  himfelf,  and  ob- 
ferve  their  Effefts  ,  yet  neither  of  them 
without  being  firft  inftru&ed  in  the  vari¬ 
ous  Rules,  as  well  as  firft  Rudiments  of 
the  refpeftive  Arts,  (hall  enter  into  the 
Skill  of  either  the  Phyfician,  or  the 
Painter,  tho’  they  look’d  on  them  till 

Doom?- 


f 


C  ) 

Dooms-day.  What  pity  ’tis,  the  imita¬ 
tions  of  both  cannot  be  equally  expos’d  to 
view  j  that  the  unskilful  management  of 
the  one  might  be  as  confpicuous  as  would 
be  the  ridiculous  dawbing  of  the  o- 
ther  ! 

Polyth.  I  am  glad  you  are  pleas’d  with 
your  own  Difcourfe  ,  but  otherwife  there 
is  no  arguing  with  you  $  for  you  never 
keep  to  your  Text,  lnftead  of  giving  a 
reafon  why  it  is  better  to  have  Medicines 
from  a  Phyfician,  than  an  Apothecary  5 
you  talk  of  the  probability  of  what  Peo¬ 
ple  (hould  do  or  not,  when  they  are  fet 
up  for  themfelves.  I  don’t  underhand  the 
Rules  and  Rudiments  you  fpeak  of,  but 
if  they  are  not  at  leifure  to  learn  them 
when  they  are  out  of  their  Time,  they 
do  it  without  doubt  whilft  they  are  in  it  5 
or  elfe  what  do  they  ferve  it  for?  Are 
not  Apothecaries  as  well  as  Phyficians  all 
along  brought  up  to  Phyfick  ? 

Mifotn.  Yes,  to  bray  it  in  a  Mortar,  , 
but  not  to  Prescribe  it.  As  to  the  reafon 
you  fpeak  of,  I  did  not  queftion  but  con¬ 
vincing  you,  that  the  Phyficians  had  nofc 
the  fame  opportunity  of  putting  off  their 
Medicines  upon  all  occafions,  had  been  a 
fufficient  one  I  did  not  tell  you,  they 
were  honefter  than  the  Apothecaries,  and 
yet  fomething  ought  to  be  allow’d  for 

Prin- 


(  224  ) 

Principles  and  Education:  Even  in  the 
choice  of  a  Footman,  I  would  make  a 
difference  between  one,  that  had  lived  for 
Seven  or  Eight  Years  in  a  Bifhop’s  Family, 
and  another  that  had  ferv’d  the  fame  time 
among  the  P'ickeroons,  or  the  Pirates  of 
Maddgafcar  5  but  without  making  Devils 
of  the  one  more  than  Saints  of  the  ocher, 
to  judge  impartially  of  the  Morality  of 
both  $  let  us  take  a  view  of  the  difference, 
that  is  between  them,  both  as  to  the  Parts 
that  are  given  them,  and  the  Stages  they 
ad  upon,  in  order  to  Capacitate  them* 
feives  for  their  ieveral  Employments. 

APhyficiao  is  brought  up  among  Gen¬ 
tlemen,  and  from  the  moft  early  beginning 
of  his  Studies  is  treated,  and  every  way 
encouraged  to  behave  himfelf  as  fuch  : 
He  has  the  advantage  of  palling  his  Youth, 
where  Wit,  Learning,  and  good  Manners 
are  in  greater  efleetu,  and  the  bafe 
thought  of  Lucre,  more  defpis’d  than  any 
where  elfe,  and  whatever  may  afterwards 
debauch  the  Principles  of  his  generous 
Education,  he  is  ever  taught  to  dired  his 
Labours  to  a  noble  end,  the  Godlike  office 
of  re  faring  the  a-fftiSed*  * 

Ao  Apothecary  commencing  with  the 
feryile  drudgery  of  a  foot-bay,  is  bred  in 
a  paultry  Shop,  which  by  his  Labour  he 
Is  fir  ft  made  to  clean,  and  afterwards  to 

fur  ni  flic 


-  (  2M  ) 

furnifh.  If  he  be  not  a  Natural,  by  com¬ 
paring  the  Supine  negligence  of  his  Mafter 
in  the  difpenfing  of  Medicines,  which  he 
leaves  to  his  Servants,  to  the  uncommon 
Pains  he  takes  in  the  difpofing  of  them, 
in  which  he  is  wholly  employ’d  himlelf, 
he  foon  enters  into  the  main  drift  of  his 
Trade,  and  before  he  is  out  of  his  Time,  he 
is  not  only  made  perfed  both  by  Precept, 
and  Example  in  all  the  insinuating  Tricks 
and  other  vile  Artifices  in  vogue  among 
ordinary  Retailers,  but  likewife  imbued 
with  the  Barbarous,  as  well  as  fordid 
Craft  of  pinching  on  the  one  hand  the 
induftrious  Wretch,  that,  for  want  of  Em¬ 
ploy,  attempts  to  live  by  Simpling  5  and 
fqueezing  on  the  other  an  unreafonable 
profit  from  the  pittiful  Halfpenny  of  the 
moll:  Necefiitous. 

Polyth .  You  are  very  impartial  I  muff 
confefs  5  to  give  every  thing  the  worfi 
turn  your  Wit  will  let  you  in  fpeaking  o 
the  ode,  and  fet  a  handforile  Glofs  upor 
all  that  that  can  be  (aid  in  commenda  > 
tion  of  the  other,  without  a  Syllable  o 
the  Debaucheries  of  Youth,  and  th 
many  ill  Examples  they  meet  with  at  th 
Univerfities,  that  the  World  is  fo  eorr* 
vinced  of. 

Mifom.  Indeed,  Madam,  you  wrong 
ole  :  I  have  exaggerated  nothing,  or  made 

Q  toy 

"i  ■ 

V  ; 

y*  4  r 


(  2l6  ) 

any  Hyperbole  in  the  account  I  have 
given  of  either  5  and  the  reafon  that  the 
Phyfician’s  Education  has  an  agreeable  af- 
peft,  whilft  that  of  the  Apothecary  looks 
a  little  upon  thedifmal,  is,  becaufe  every 
thing  the  firft  meets  with  is  commendable, 
and  there  is  nothing  handfome  belonging 
to  the  latter.  If  I  had  touch’d  on  the 
diffolute  Lives  of  feme  Reprobates  at  the 
Univerfities,  and  mentioned  either  Oxford 
or  Cambridge,  What  rauft  I  have  faid  of 
London,  that  in  Corruption  of  Youth  ex¬ 
ceeds  all  the  Univerfities  in  Chriftendom  ? 
but  I  had  no  other  defign,  than  to  hint 
at  the  different  habit  each  of  them  muft 
have  acquired,  as  to  meannefs  or  gene- 
rofity  of  Spirit  from  the  Mafters  that 
taught  them,  and  the  Stations  they  were 
bred  in  5  and  had  no  mind  to  meddle 
with  the  Vices,  that  either  of  them  might 
be  Perfonally  guilty  of:  To  blacken  the 
one,  I  could  have  fpoke  of  the  badnefs 
of  Medicines,  and  their  undermining  of 
Phyficians,  and  if  I  would  have  favom’d 
the  other,  I  muft  have  traced  them  both 
from  their  Childhood,  Infancy  and  Birth, 
and  fhewn  the  difference  that  is  generally 
obferved  as  to  Circumftances  and  manner 
of  Living  between  People  that  can  afford 
their  Children  Univerfity  Learning,  and 
others  that  are  forced  to  put  them  out  to 

a 


(  2  27  ) 

a  Trade,  that  may  be  followed  with  littleS 
for  there  is  no  doubt*  but  the  Minds  like- 
wife  of  Children  are  even  in  their  tender 
Years  differently  influenced,  by  either  the 
Creditable  Plenty  of  the  one,  or  thd 
Sneaking  Mediocrity  of  the  other. 

Polyth.  There  is  no  heed  to  be  given  id 
what  you  fay  3  for  at  other  times  1  have 
heard  you  Rave  worfe  at  the  Pfayficians, 
than  now  you  Rail  againft  the  Apothe- 
caries,  and  I  am  perfwaded,  that,  if  you 
had  a  mind  to  change  fides,  you'd  foont 
find  matter  for  Satyr  on  the  fir  ft,  and  Pa~ 
negyrick  on  the  latter. 

Mifom.  Not  as  to  Education,  it  is  im* 
poffible* 

Polyth.  I  am  fare  you  would  firft  of  all 
havefaid,  j:hat  the  Apothecaries  are  brought 
up  Scholars,  and  laid  a  mighty  ftrefs  up¬ 
on  their  tmderftanding  Latin ,  the  Lan¬ 
guage  you  have  fuch  a  value  for  ;  in  the 
Second- — - — •  but  the  befi  of  it  is  they 
ftand  not  in  need  of  your  Praife,  more 
than  they  do  in  fear  of  your  Lafh  ;  The 
generality  of  the  World  pays  a  gteaf  de- 
ference  to  them  in  relation  to  Phyllck  § 
their  Advice  is  made  ufe  of  even  in  No¬ 
ble.  Families  with  Applaufe  5  many  of 
them  are  Eminent  Men,  and  in  thofe 
paultry  Shops  (as  you  call’d  them  with 
fo  much  SpleenJ  they  get  abundance  of 
Moneys  QL  2  Mifom 


(  ai8  ) 

Mifom.  That’s  what  all  other  Dealers 
complain  of,  that  they  get  fo  much  Mo¬ 
ney  by  laying  out  To  little  :  As  to  the 
Eminent  Men  they  have  among  them  , 
they  are  only  foin  refpeft  to  others  of  the 
fame  Trade  that  are  not,  and  what  can  be 
faid  of  that  is  no  Compliment  to  the  whole, 
as  I  fuppofe  you  defign’d  it  5  for  there  is  no 
Calling  or  Occupation  without :  There  are 
Eminent  Barbers,  and  without  doubt 
Eminent  Coblers,  but  that  is  nothing 
to  the  Credit  of  their  Employment.  The 
dignity  or  repute  of  Trades  is  not  de¬ 
rived  from  the  Pviches  of  private  Perfons, 
that  are  of  them  5  but  the  Excellency  of 
one  Trade  above  another  is  only  calcu¬ 
lated  by,  and  altogether  depends  upon,  the 
Sums  of  Money  given  with  Apprentices, 
and  the  Stocks  that  are  required  to  fet  up 
in  thofe  Trades:  And  in  regard  of  either 
they  can  hardly  be  reckon'd  among  the 
Shopkeepers  of  a  middle  rank,  at  leaft 
they  are  many  degrees  below  the  better 
fort  of  them  $  and  all  the  Eminency  they 
can  boaft  of  is,  that  for  fear  they  fhouid 
over-run  the  Country,  before  they  fan  be 
Free,  they  are  obliged  to  a  Years  Servi¬ 
tude  longer  than  6ther  Mechanicks. 

But  to  come  to  their  Latin^  which  you 
think  I  ought  to  lay  i  great  ftrefs  upon,1 
becaufe  I  efteem  it,  I  nxaft  inform  you  $ 

that 


(  2  2p  ) 

that  it  is  with  the  undemanding  of  thafc 
Language,  as  it  is  with  having  an  Eftate  ; 
there  are  feveral  degrees  ot  it :  Some 
People  have  a  fmali  Income,  they  can 
hardly  fubfift  upon  5  others  are  well  to 
pafs,  and  can  live  handfomIy$  a  third 
Clafs  are  very  Rich,  and  above  them  there 
are  Men  of  Princely  Revenues :  The  E* 
dates,  the  generality  of  Apothecaries 
poffefs  in  Latin^  are  of  the  lowed  de¬ 
gree. 

Volyth.  How  then  come  they  to  un¬ 
derhand  the  Phyficians  Bills  fo  readily* 
that  are  all  writ  in  Latin  .<? 

Mlfom.  The  Body  of  a  Bill  is  only  com¬ 
pos’d  of  Medicines,  they  have  in  their 
Shops,  and  contains  nothing  but  the 
Names  of  what  they  Sell :  The  only  dif¬ 
ficulty  they  can  meet  with  lies  in  the  Di¬ 
rections  at  the  bottom,  which  being  com¬ 
monly  very  fhort,  and  Studioufly  made, 
as  little  intricate  as  poffible,  are  eafily  un- 
derftood  by  the  pooreft  Schollar,  yet  I 
have  feen  them  puzzle  even  a  Whole- 
Sale  Apothecary,  when  by  inadvertency 
the  Phyfician  has  made  ufe  of  a  more 
elevated  Stile,  than  ought  to  be  Writ  in 
to  thofe  Latinids  5  as  to  the  words  them- 
felves  let  them  be  never  fo  hard,  they 
have  a  Dictionary  for  them  ^  which  is  as 
coadant  a  Shop  Companion  as  the  great 

Q  3  Mortar, 


(  *J0  ) 

Mortar,  thos  not  fo  much  in  fight ;  fo 
that  their  Bofinefs  does  not  require  them 
to  underhand  Latin  in  greater  ftri&nefs, 
than  Freeholders  are  obliged  to  be  Men  of 
Bftatfes. 

Polyth.  Nay,  Mifomdott 3  I  remember, 
that  formerly  I  have  heard  you  complain 
you  could  make  nothing  of  thofe  Bills  $ 
fo  that  they  muft  be  el  her  more  difficult, 
than  you  talk  of,  or  elfe  the  Apothecaries 
are  better  Schollars ’than  your  felf, 

Mljcm ,  I  centers,  that  before  I  knew 
any  thing  of  Phyfick  I  did  not  under¬ 
hand  them  3  but  this  was  not  for  want  of 
*  Latin,  but  becaufe  I  was  yet  unacquaint¬ 
ed  with  their  Short-hand,  a  few  Heathen 
Characters  they  have  borrow’d  from  the 
Aftrolcgers  and  Chymifts,  and  forne  a- 
bominable  terms  that  the  Phyficians,  in 
behalf  of  the  Apothecaries,  are  obliged 
to  conceal  the  meannefs  of  the  Ingre¬ 
dients  with  from  the  People  that  are  to 
pay  dear  for  them. 

Phil  But  give  me  leave  to  tell  you, 
that  you  put  a  wrong  conftrudion  upon 
what  is  done  with  a  good  intent.  A  great 
many  Patients  are  either  too  nicely  fquea- 
mifh,  or  elfe  unreafonably  fcrupulous  $ 
and  if  the  Prefcriptions  were  to  be  un- 
derftood  by  every  body,  fome  might  have 
a  prejudice,  others  an  averfion  again  ft 

Medicines, 


« 


(  ) 

Medicines,  that  yet  are  of  great  Vertue? 
and  therefore  inftead  of  making  ufe  of 
their  plain  Latin  Names,  they  are  forc’d 
to  wrap  op  feverai  things,  either  in  Greeks 
or  elfe  a  Circumlocution  5  fa  they  cal!  a 
Toad  Phyfalus ,  Quickfilver  Zibach  and  the 
Peruvian  or  jefuits-Bark,  China  Chin&JduL 
\ vis  Patrum ,  &c. 

Mifom-  That  excufe  may  pafs  upon 
thofe,  that  know  no  better  ^  but  what 
prejudice  have  People  againft  White»wine, 
that  in  Eater  s  P harmacofaa  it  muft  be 
call'd  Lenc<emis.  If  the  obfcurity  was  only 
invented  for  the  purpofe  you  mention,  it 
would  be  commendable,  and  I  would  not 
take  it  amifs  5  that  they  (hould  call  Old- 
Cheefe  PaUtyrus ,  and  Dog’s  Turd  Cyn§- 
cropus,  becaufe  a  great  many  People  have 
an  averfion  to  both  $  but  can  you  fay  the 
fame  of  Bran,  or  Spring*water,  that  the 
one  muft  be  call’d  Leptopityron ,  and  the 
other  Hydropege ,  and  Twenty  other  things 
that  are  as  innocent,  and  airaoft  as  cheap 
as  either  of  them,  and  yet  induftrioufly 
difguis’d  under  hard  terms,  that  a  Stranger 
to  their  Cant,  tho’  he  is  the  beft  Latinift 
in  the  World,  can  never  underftand,  un- 
lefs  he  is  like  wife  a  good  Grecian,  and 
fomething  of  a  Conjurer  befides }  ■  What 
reafon  can  a  Phyfician  have  of  writing 
CwfeSfio  Fracajivriiy  but  that  the  Name  of 

Q  4  v  '  DLtf* 


(  M1  ) 

Diafcordium  is  known  by  every  body  ? 
by  which  it  is  plain  that  all  the  injury  to 
be  fear’d  of  thefe  thing5,  if  underftood, 
refpedts  the  Apothecary,  and  not  the  Pa¬ 
tients.  If  you  ask  for  a  Drachm  of  any 
Ele&qary,  and  T wo  or  Three  things  more 
fingly,  the  Apothecary  (hall  perhaps  not 
have  the  impudence  to  demand  above  Six 
or  Eight  Pence  for  all  of  them,  tho’  then 
he  gets  half  in  half  5  but  if  by  the  Phy¬ 
sician’s  order,  in  Physical  Characters,  they 
are  put  together,  and  divided  in  two 
Bohifes 3  he’ll  not  only  fet  you  down  a 
Crown  for  them,  but  give  the  Phyfician 
an  ill  Name  if  he  (houl'd  order  them  to 
le  taken  in  Ale,  Wine,  Tea,  or  any  thing, 
that  yon  are  not  obliged  to  have  out  of  his 
Shop  5  becaufe  he  hinders  him  from  felling, 
where  it  might  handfomely  be  done,  two 
Vehicles  tor  Three  Shillings,  that  with 
the  Vials,  that  he'd  them,  feldom  ftand 
him  so  much  more  than  fo  many  Pence. 

But  if  you  think  I  don’t  do  them  juftice, 
pray,  my  Dear,  give  your  felf  the  trouble 
of  reading  this  little  Book,  -where  the 
Myftery  of  Compound  Medicines  as  to 
their  intrinfick  Value,  is  very  handfomely 
unfolded  :  It  is  the  work  of  an  Eminent 
PhyQcian,  Dr.  Pi/,  who  for  the  good  of 
the  Publick  has  (hewn  the  vaft  difference 
between  the  prime  Coff  that  Simples  are 


(  *3?  ) 

bought  at  from  the  Druggifts,  and  Herb- 
Women,  and  the  extravagant  rates,  they 
are  fold  at  by  the  Apothecaries,  when 
they  have  dilguis’d  them  in  mixtures  of 
fpecious  Titles.  It  is  very  diverting,  and 
a  Treatife  of  that  ufefulnefs,  that  no  bo¬ 
dy,  who  deals  much  with  Apothecaries 
thould  be  more  without,  than  Mer¬ 
chants  and  others  that  have  bufinefs  at 
the  Cuftom-Houfe,  and  employ  a  great 
many  Porters,  Carmen,  &c .  ought  to  be 
without  the  Book  of  Rates. 

Polyth.  It  may  be  fo,  but  I  have  other 
things  to  mind.' —  Oh  the  Tormenting 
and  Throbbing  Pain  I  feel  in  my  Head ! 
This  Minute  my  Brains  are  a  boiling,  and 
if  there  was  half  a  Dozen  of  Trunk-makers 
at  work  under  my  Skull,  I  don’t  think  I 
could  be  fenfible  of  more  Noife  and  Beat¬ 
ing  than  I  am.  I  can  ftay  no  longer, 
What  directions  you  leave  with  my  Hufc 
band,  or  elfe  in  Writing,  my  Daughter 
(hall  pun  dually  obferve,  I  beg  your 
pardon  Philopirio ,  for  my  rudenefs,  but  I 
am  forc’d  to  withdraw.  Oh !  the  mi- 
fery  of  - - 

Phil.  I  am  afraid  you  have  difobligd 
your  Lady,  and  made  her  leave  us  much 
fooner  than  ctherwife  fhe  would  have 
done. 


Mifow* 


(  234  ) 

Mifom.  How  ftrangely  can  a  Ditlemper 
alter  People  for  the  worfe!  She  was  once 
the  gayett  temper’d,  and  molt  obliging 
Woman  in  the  World,  and  now  (he  no¬ 
thing  bat  thwarts  and  cootradidfs  me.  I 
did  expeft  it  would  put  her  in  the  Va¬ 
pours,  if  I  fpoke  more  againft  the  Apo¬ 
thecaries  than  (he  could  anfwer. 

Phil. - ——denique  te  ipfttm 

Concute.- - 

Whilft  you  fpeak  of  your  Lady’s  Di- 
ftemper,  and  the  change  it  has  made  in 
her,  I  doubt  you  forget  that  you  have 
likewife  one  of  your  own,  of  which  you 
have  confeft  the  fame  ;  it  could  not  be 
to  pleafe  her,  that  with  fo  much  eagernefs 
you  fnatch’d  at  every  opportunity  of 
fpeaking  againft  the  Apothecaries  5  and 
indeed,  in  my  Opinion,  you  have  been  too 
fevere  upon  them.  If  they  were  all  as 
careful  of  providing  good  Medicines,  as 
I  know  fome  are,  the  dearnefs  of  them 
might  well  be  bore  with. 

But  it  is  a  general  Obfervation  that  the 
beloved  Theme  of  all  Hypockondriaci  is 
Satyr  j  which  I  know  is  worth  nothing 
unlefs  it  bites. 

Mifom.  I  have  charg’d  them  with  no¬ 
thing  but  what  is  litterally  true,  and  could 
have  laid  abundance  more  if  I  would  have 

come 


(  *?5  ) 

come  to  fome  particulars,  which  if  they 
vex  me  I  Ihall  one  day  or  other  acquaint 
the  Publick  with  5  but  l  have  tired  you 
with  that  fubjeft  already,  and  don’t  quefti- 
on  but  you  know  as  much  of  it  as  I  can 
tell  you,  and  fo  Vale  ant  PharmacopoU,  with 
the  Ambubajarum  Collegia,  and  the  reft  of 
the  fine  Company  Horace  puts  them  in.-— 
Pray  tell  me  now,  what  courfe  of  Exer- 
cife  you  would  have  my  Daughter  go 
through. 

Phil.  Let  her  every  Morning,  as  foon 
as  (he  rifes,  ("which  I  would  have  her  do 
before  Six)  be  fwung  for  half  an  Hour, 
then  Eat  her  Breakfaft,  and  get  on  Horfe- 
back  for  at  leaft  two  Hours,  either  Gal¬ 
lopping  or  Trotting  as  much  as  her 
Strength  will  permit  her.  Immediately 
after  this  let  her  be  undreft,  and  by  fome 
Nurfe  or  other  chafed  or  dry  rubb’d  for 
a  considerable  time,  till  her  Skin  looks  red, 
1  and  her  Flefh  glows  all  over :  Let  her  be¬ 
gin  to  repeat  the  fame  Exercifes  about 
Three  in  the  Afternoon,  and  after  Supper 
keep  upon  her  Legs  two  Hours  before  (he 
goes  to  Bed.  The  Swing  I  fpeak  of  may 
be  made  after  what  manner,  your  Daugh¬ 
ter  fancies  rnoft  5  that  which  they 
i  call  a  Flying- Horfe,  makes  a  very  agree- 

I  able  motion,  but  if  (he  be  apt  to  be  giddy, 

II  (he  may  fwing  in  a  Chair,  or  other  Seat 

to 


( 

to  which  (he  is  faftenM,  otherwife  a  Rope 
tied  with  both  ends  to  a  Beam  is  fuffi- 
cient :  However  ftrange  and  and  abfurd 
this  Prefcription  may  appear,  I  can  affine 
you  that  I  have  feen  admirable  effefts 
of  it. 

Mif&m.  What  you  recommend  is  no  new 
thing,  it  is  without  doubt  ™>i c# 
and  confequently  the  Swing  muft  be  ei¬ 
ther  the  fame  with,  or  elfe  an  equivalent 
for  the  Petaurus  of  the  Ancients. 

Phil.  I  am  not  much  concern’d  about 
either  the  Name  or  the  Original  of  Swing¬ 
ing,  tho  what  you  fay  of  it  expreffes  my 
meaning  very  well,  and  that  motion 
which  refembles  a  flying  in  the  Air,  is  the 
Exercife  I  require.  A  great  part  of  your 
Daughter’s  Difteroper  lies  in  the  Brain  and 
Nerves,  and  I  could  never  meet  with  any 
thing  fo  innocent,  that  was  half  fo  Effi¬ 
cacious  in  ftrengihning  and  reviving  the 
Spirits,  as  the  motion  I  fpeak  of. 

I  don’t  pretend  to  know  any  thing  of 
the  feat  of  Quartan-  Agues,  but  Experience 
teaches  us,  that  where  they*  are  of  long 
continuance,  they  generally  leave  obftru- 
ftions  of  the  Lower-belly  behin  1  them. 
That  this  was  your  Daughter  s  Cafe  is 
evident  from  the  Emaciated  as  well  as 
Cacheftick  Condition  it  had  reduced  her 
to.  Confidering  every  CircumfUnce,  tho’ 

her 


i 


-  (  ) 

her  Ague  has  left  her  Four  Years,  and  fhe 
gain’d  ftrength  fitice,  and  is  grown  Tall, 
it  is  highly  probable  to  think,  that  all 
the  Miferaic\  Veflels,  the  Glandules  of 
the  Intcflines ,  and  other  pafiages  are  not 
yet  entirely  clear’d  of  thofe  Morbifick  re¬ 
mainders,  and  it  is  certain,  that  to  remove 
thofe  obftinate  Stoppages  in  HjpogaJlno , 
there  is  not  a  more  effectual  Remedy  than 
Riding:  It  is  incredible  to  thofe  that 
have  not  obferved  it,  what  powerful  in¬ 
fluence  the  repeated  Succuffations  of  a 
Horfe  have  upon  thofe  Farts,  as  well  to 
Digeft,  as  to  Eliminate  whatever  Crude, 
or  otherwife  Peccant  Matter  they  may 
contain. 

The  chafing,  or  dry  rubbing,  I  fpeak 
of  does  not  only  Levigate  and  Beautifie 
the  Skin,  open  the  Pores,  and  promote 
Perfpiration  5  but  likewife  by  quickning 
the  Torpid  motion  of  the  Blood  in  the 
Capillary  Veflels,  it  enlivens  the  Circula¬ 
tion  of  its  whole  Mafs,  attenuates  the 
Lymphatick- Juice,  and  by  fqoeezing  it 
through  the  Fibres  of  the  Mufcies  is  a  vaft 
help  to  Nutrition. 

Mifom .  But  might  not  Marriage  be  as 
dFeftual  as  all  thefe  Exercifes  ? 

Phil.  Yes,  but  I  never  prescribe  an  un¬ 
certain  Remedy,  that  may  prove  worfe 
than  the  Difeafe  5  for  not  to  fpeak  of  the 

many 


I 


(  **8  ) 

many  inconveniencies,  the  advifiag  it 
often  puts  People  to  (prMerquam  quod 
jamam  aperit  nsquiti <z)  in  the  firft  place  it 
may  fail,  and  then  there  are  two  People 
made  unhappy  inftead  of  one$  Secondly 
it  may  but  half  Cure  the  Woman,  who 
liogring  under  the  remaininder  of  her 
Difeafe,  may  have  half  a  dozen  Children, 
that  (hall  all  inherit  it.  A  Phyfician  has 
a  publick  Truft  repofed  in  him:  His  Pre- 
fcriptions  by  affifting  fome  ought  never  to 
prejudice  others  ^  befides  that  a  Young 
Lady  has  no  reafon  with  the  fame  For¬ 
tune  to  exped  fuch  an  agreeable  Match, 
whilft  (lie  labours  under  fo  deplorable  an 
Infirmity,  as  if  (he  was  in  perfect  Health  5 
therefore  let  her  either  be  firft  Cured,  and 
then  Marry  without  being  injurious  to  her 
felf,  her  Husband,  or  her  Pofterity  ^  or 
elfe  remain  Angle  with  this  Comfort  at 
leaft  in  her  Affliction,  that  fhe  is  not  liable 
of  entailing  it  upon  others,  that  ftiould 
be  no  left  dear  to  her  than  her  felf. 

I  know  every  thing  that  can  be  faid  of 
the  Venereal  Ferment, the  power  it  has  over 
all  the  Fluids,  and  the  means  that  can 
rooft  effe&ually  raifeit  f  yet  from  frequent 
Obfervation  I  can  afiure  you,  not  only, 
that  the  Three  Exercifes  i  mention’d  are 
jointly  of  greater  Efficacy  upon  every  part 
of  the  body  as  to  enliven  it,  but  likewife 


(  2 39  )  ' 

that  the  repeated  motions  of  only  the  firft, 
even  as  to  the  exalting  of  the  Ferment  1 
fpeak  of  (which  perhaps  Teems  incredible) 
are  not  much  ioferiour  to  the  Amplexus 
Viriles  themfelves. 

Without  Marriage  then  you  may  de¬ 
pend  upon  it,  thefe  Exercifes  will  affifc  and 
revive  Nature,  which  in  your  Daughter 
has  of  late  been  fatigued  and  opprefs’d 
with  loads  of  Phyfick.  It  is  obfervable 
in  Spiders,  when  any  thing  befides  their 
Prey  falls  in  their  Nets, that  difturbs  them, 
they  don’t  ftrive  to  remove  it  with  their 
Legs,  becaufe  that  would  more  entangle 
it,  but  endeavour  to  get  rid  of  it  by 
continual  fhaking  of  their  Webs  which 
generally  prove  fuccefsful  ^  I  have  often 
thought  on  thofe  Infe&s,  when  I  have 
feen  the  variety  of  motion  alone  expel 
Heterogeneous  Particles,  and  remove  Di- 
ftempers,  which  to  outward  appearance 
more  likely  Remedies  would  have  fix’d  for 
ever,  and  render’d  incurable. 

If  you  would  be  further  fatisfied  of  the 
advantages  to  be  expected  from  the  Rules 
I  order’d,  fee  what  Sydenham  fays  of  Ri¬ 
ding,  or  in  {tar  omnium ,  read  Fullers  Me- 
dicina  Gymndjlica ,  where  the  power  of 
Exercife  in  the  Cure  of  fame  Chronic 
Diftempers  is  fet  forth  in  much  better 
Language  than  I  (hall  ever  be  Maffcer  of. 

,  '  s  Mifom* 


(  24°  ) 

Mtfom.  I  very  much  approve  of  your 
Preemptions,  for  I  naturally  hate  Phyfick, 
and  have  often  wonder’d,  that  all  Gym- 
naftick  Rules  are  fo  wholly  laid  afide  a- 
mong  us,  when  it  is  evident  that  thePhy- 
ficians  of  Old  Greece ,  whom  every  body 
owns  to  have  been  the  beft,  never  under¬ 
took  the  Cure  of  any  Distemper  either 
Chronick,  or  Acute,  without  $  tho’  con¬ 
sidering  the  warmth  of  their  Climate,  as 
well  as  the  Simplicity  of  their  Diet  over 
eurs,  they  feem  to  have  flood  in  lefs  need 
of  it  by  far  than  our  {elves.  What 
Sydenham  fays  of  Eliding,  I  remember 
very  well,  and  have  received  benefit  from 
it  more  than  once  my  felf :  The  other 
Author  you  recommend,  I  have  likewife 
perufed  two  or  three  Years  ago  5  tho’ 
long  before  that,  I  had  Read  the  Learned 
Mercurialis  3  who,  as  Le  Clerc  fays,  of  him, 
fearches  to  the  bottom  of  thofe  things. 
Fuller  has  writ  in  an  admirable  Stile,  and 
I  was  wonderfully  pleas’d  with  him,  till 

I  came  toward  the  latter  end - -  I’ll 

{hew  you  the  pailage,  here  it*  is,  p.  239. 
Sueronius  tells  us ,  that  Germanicus  w  s 
cured  of  a  Crurum  Gracilitas,  as  he  ex • 
prejfes  it ,  1  ftppofe  he  means  an  Atrophy, 
by  riding . 

■  -  \  I 

.f  "■  -  ( 


1 


2  4J 


1  would  have  every  body  make  the 
moil  of  his  Argument,  but  1  hate  a  Man 
Should  wilfully  pervert  the  plain  Senfe  of 
a  good  Author,  becaufe  it  fliould  ferve 
his  turn.  The  matter  of  fa  ft  is  this ,  Sue¬ 
tonius  defcn  bing  the  Per fon  of  Qermmicus , 
from  Head  to  Foot,  tells  u$,  that  in  his 
Youth  he  had  Spindle  Leg%  but  that  by 
frequent  Riding,  this  defect  had  been 
much  remedied.  From  this,  what  Mortal 
would  fuppofe  that  he  had  an  Atro¬ 
phy  > 

PhiL  This  is  a  piece  of  Criticifm,  of 
fmall  importance,  and  whether  Germani¬ 
cs  ever  had  an  Atrophy  or  nor,  is  very 
immaterial  to  the  fcope  of  Fuller  §  Book  5 
I  hope  fuch  a  fmall  miftake  could  never 
make  you  diflike  al!  the  reft. 

Mifom .  Truly  when  i  had  feeti  ibis  I 
threw  by  the  Book,  and  took  up  a  pre¬ 
judice  agi-inft  all  I  had  lik’d  before  :  c*  e/1 
outrer  U  chofe ,  I  hate  to  be  impos’d  upon, 
and  when  an  Author  to  perfwade 


m 


fSk 

w 


flies  beyond  what  the  thing  in  reality  wi 
bear.  I  have  done  with  him,  and  the 
more  Witty  and  Elegant  he  is,  the  more 


ireife 


in  vita  ejje  utile  y  tit  ne  quid  niitils*  E 
without  doubt,  is  good  for  ones  Health, 
where  People  can  bear  it,  but  f  dial!  ne¬ 
ver 


o 


C  M*) 

ver  believe  that  it  will  cure  all  Diftempers, 
or  ought  to  be  prefcrib’d  to  a  Man  in  a  Fe¬ 
ver  as  Herodicus  did,  who  firft  order'd 
.  Gymnaftick  Rules  by  way  of  Phyfick. 
Could  any  thing  be  more  extravagant 
than  what  Plato  relates  of  him,  that  he 
advised  fome  Patients  to  walk  from  A- 
thens  to  Megara,  which  was  Five  and 
Twenty  Miles,  and  as  foon  as  they  had 
touch  d  the  Walls  of  that  City,  to  come 
back  the  fame  way  without  flopping  a 
moment?  Would  ever  Mortal  expeft 
fnch  a  Prefcription  from  any  body  but  a 
Goilegiate  in  Bedlam  $  and  yet  this  wor¬ 
thy  Gentleman  was  the  Mafter  of  Hipo¬ 
crates,  that  you  make  all  fuch  ado  a- 
foout. 

Phil,  The  chief  Inflrudion  Hippocrates 
had  in  Phyfick,  was  from  Her ac tides,  his 
Father  5  that  he  learn’d  likewife  of  Hero* 
dims  is  true,  but  how  little  the  clear 
lighted  Pupil  follow’d  him  in,  or  ap¬ 
prov’d  of  the  Errors  of  his  Praftice,  may 
be  feen  in  the  Sixth  Book  of  his  Epide- 
micks,  where  he  blames  h  5  Mafter  for 
pretending  to  overcome  the  fatigue  of 
Sicknefs  with  another  fatigue,  and  fays, 
that  he  had  killed  leveral  that  were  ill  of 
Fevers,  by  too  much  walking,  wreftling, 
and  Fomentations.  It  is  beyond  difpute 
that  Herodicus  over  did  it  3  but  as  for  the 

ridiculous 


(  M3  ) 

ridiculous  Story  of  Plato,  it  is  to  all  ap* 
pearance,  as  the  Learned  Le  Clerc  fays, 
no  more  than  a  Calumny  upon  him*  to 
expofe  the  Phy  fid  a  ns  that  pr'efcrib'd  Gym- 
naftick  Ponies. 

Mifom.  But  do  you  think  they  will  be 
fufficient  to  Cure  my  Daughter v  of  her 
Fits  ? 

PkiL  I  don’t  intend  to  trufi  to  them 
.  alone.  By  that  (lie  has  continued  the 
Courfe  1  have  order’d,  and  her  Body  been 
freed  from  the  force  of  Phyfick  for  Three 
or  four  Weeks  I  (halide  a  great  alteration 
and  from  thence  be  able  to  Judge,  what 
further  Remedies  are  to  be  applied  3  a 
few  Internal  Medi  ines  perhaps  will  com¬ 
plete  the  Cure,  but  if  her  Cafe  Teems  to 
require  more,  I  (ball  betides  them  order 
Baths,  Fomentations,  and  perhaps 

Bleeding,  or  Cupping  according  to  the 
Indications  I  (hall  receive  from  Nature, 
ms  quo  vergit  duce^da  eft,  and  by  fitch 
management  her  Cacheftick  habit  (hall  be 
changed,  her  Blood  exalted,  and  all  the 
neceflary  Secretions  perform’d  :  Upon  the 
Eruption  of  the  Catamenia ,  her  whole 
Body  (hall  be  invigorated,  her  Countenance 
become  florid,  and  her  Fits  if  not  wholly 
ceafe,  every  note  vifibly  ditfiinifli,  both  as 
to  Strength  and  duration,  till  Youth  and 
Nature  thus  powerfully  affifred  of  all  odes 

K  2  fhall 


C  244  ) 

fhali  have  entirely  triumph’d  over  the  Du 
ft  cm  per  $  which,  futtimo  afpirante  mimine, 
I  dare  promife  will  be  accompliih’d  in  a 
few  Months,  not  only  in  your  Daughter, 
but  any  other  in  the  fame  Condition. 

Mifom.  I  wifh  you  fuccefs,  Philopirio , 
depend  upon  it  your  orders  (hall  be  pun¬ 
ctually  cotbply  cl  with— But  what  muft 
I  do  with  my  felf  ?  The  Vomit  I  took 
this  Morning  by  your  direction  has 
work’d  very  well  as  I  told  you  before  we 
came  up  y  my  Stomach  is  very  eafie,  and  I 
am  much  lefs  difmrb  d  with  Wind  in  my 
Bowels  than  I  was  Yefterday  3*  but  this  is 
no  more  than  what  I  am  us’d  to  :  Vomits 
always  relieve  me  for  the  prefen t. 

Phil.  I  would  have  you  take  two  more, 
refting  a  Day  after  each  3  then,  whiift  the 
Seafon  is  Co  favourable  take  the  benefit  of 
the  Country,  and  a  wholefome  Air.  As 
to  Reft  and  Exercife  follow  thefe  Rules  3 
Immediately  after  your  firft  Sleep,  what 
time  foever  you  may  wake,  rife,  but  never 
leave  your  Chamber  before  the  Sun  is  up  3 
an  Boor  after  take  your  Diverfion  upon 
forne  gentle,  but  merry  generous  Borfe, 
which  continue  as  your  Strength  and 
Pleafure  fhali  direOf  you3  the  fame  exer¬ 
cife  repeat  at  Five  in  the  Evening,  and 
after  Riding  both  Nights  *  and  Mornings 
make  ufe  of  a  warm  Bath,  with  Emollient 

Roots 


, (  *45  ) 

Roots  and  Herbs  5  before  Bed-time.,  walk 
half  an  Hour,  or  longer  if  you  can  5  the 
reft  of  your  Hours  relax  your  Mind  from 
Cares,  but  avoid  Idlenefs,  and  never  fuffer 
a  moments  time  to  lie  upon  your  Hands  5 
be  intent  upon  no  one  Bufinefs  above  an 
Hour,  nor  follow  any  Diveriion  above  two, 
and  let  part  of  every  Day’s  employment 
be  contriving  how  to  (pend  every  Hour 
of  the  next.  Let  your  Diet  be  Nutritious 
and  incffenfive,  and  your  Cookery  be 
firnplc,  natural,  and  I  won’t  fay  unartful, 
but  not  operofe.  As  for  Example,  Let 
your  FiCh  be  neither  Stew’d  or  Fried,  or 
your  Flcfh  be  otherwife  than  BroiPd  or 
■Roafted  5  and' neither  or  them  be  pre- 
vioufly  Salted.  If  you  love  Milliard,  the 
kecneft,  as  well  as  010ft  innocent,  is  that 
which  being  bak’d  and  pulveriz’d  is  made 
up  with  fair  Water  inftead  of  Vinegar: 
Befides  this,  make  ufe  of  no  manner  of 
Sauces  (Salt  and  Pepper  only  exceptedy 
but  plain  Butter  for  the  firft,  and  the  na¬ 
tural  Gravy  for  the  latter ;  Be  content 
with  one  Difa  at  every  Meal,  and  in  the 
choice  of  them  confult  your  Palate  ^  tho* 
if  you  can  equally  like  them,  in  your 
Cafe  Fifti  is  to  be-  preferr’d  to  f  lefh. 

Mijom .  I  am  glad  of  that,  for  I  arn  a 
great  lover  of  all  manner  oi  Fob.  and 

R  3  have 


(  2  4^  ) 

have  often  FancyM  that  it  agreed  with  me 
better  than  any  thing  elfe. 

PhU.  If  fo,  I  can  advife  you  to  a 
Di fh,  which  tho*  cheap,  and  in  England 
unregarded,  is  for  its  Goodnefs  of  in* 
eftimable  value  :  What  I  mean  is  Stock- 
Fifh,  a  kind  of  Cod  that  is  dried  without 
being  Salted, 

Milam,  Pro  Thefauro  Carbones . 

PhiL  I  expetted  you  would  laugh  at 
fitch  a  mean,  as  well  as  uncommon  Pre¬ 
scription  5  but  believe  me,  Mifomedon ,  no¬ 
thing  is  fo  eafie  of  Digeftion,  if  it  be  e- 
qually  Nourifhing.  But  this  is  not  alb 
It  powerfully  corrects  not  only  all  pec¬ 
cant  Acids  of  the  Stomach,  but  like  wife 
the  Acrimony  of  the  Blood,  and  fills  the 
Body  with  Volatile  as  well  as  Balfamick 
juices,  the  Fifh  I  fpeak  of,  and  Grout  or 
Burgoe,  make  up  almoft  the  whole  Diet 
of  the  Dutch  Sailers,  who  are  fully  as 
Rebuff,  and  for  the  generality  more  Heal¬ 
thy  at  Sea,  than  thofe  of  other  Nations 
that  are  fed  at  dearer  rates. 

As  to  the  rejifh  of  the  Mefs/l  own  it  is 
not  very  inviting  to  them  that  are  Stran¬ 
gers  to  it,  but  as  it  is  plain,  fo  it  is  alto¬ 
gether  inoffenfive  5  it  has  no  manner  of  ill 
Tafle,  and  lets  Smell  than  any  other  pre- 
ferv’d  Fifh  3  thofe  that  don’t  love  it,  only 
complain  that  it  is  Flat,  and  Infipid,  yet 

by 


(  2  47  ) 

by  others  that  efteem  it  (among  which  I 

have  known  many  Epicures,  and  Men  of* 
exquifite  Palates)  it  is  counted  not  only 
favoury,  hut  delicious,  and  is  generally 
more  coveted  than  any  thing  elfe,  by  all 
that  have  once  been  ufed  to  it,  if  they  are 
forced  to  be  any  confiderable  time  with¬ 
out, 

Mifom.  De  gujbi  non  eji  difyutandnm  : 

I  am  no  Dutch- Man  3  however  I  could  ufe 
my  felf  to  any  thing  it  it  was  for  my 
Health,  but  caru  imagine  what  rarity 
there  can  be  in  Stock-Filh  :  To  ftrong 
People  that  are  brought  up  to  hardfhip 
it  may  be  a  fufficient  Diet  to  keep  them 
alive,  and  perhaps  as  harmlefs  an  Aliment 
as  it  is  a  poor  one  3  but  what  is  that  to  be 
compar'd  to  the  noble  Nouriihment  there 
is  in  Salmon,  Lofefters,  Prawns,  or  well- 
fed  Silver-Eels,  Provocative  Oyfters,  or 
Luxurious  Cray  fifla  > 

Phil.  I  agree,  with  you,  that  the  latter 
are  not  only  of  a  more  grateful  and  de¬ 
ferable  flavour,  but  likewife  a  richer  and 
more  powerfully  Pveftorative  Food  than 
the  firft  a  Thoufand  times  3  but  then 
they  are  only  fit  for  People,  that  either 
are  in  tolerable  Health,  or  if  weak  and 
languishing,  at  lead:  labour  not  under 
fuch  a  mutinous  habit  of  deprav’d  Con- 
cordon  as  your  felf.  For  I  have  generally 
'*■  f\  4  found 


(  *48  ) 

found  that  to  tfaofe  who  are  much  in- 
fefted  with  Winds,  and  a  Vitriolick  fowre, 
the  generous  Food,  yen  fpeak  of  is  very 
offenfive,  which  I  have  but  rarely,  obferv’d 
of  the  coorfe  Mefs  1  recommended. 

It.  is  poffible  that  the  Salmon  .  Eels,  Oy- 
fters,  &c.  confiding  of  fine  traftable,  and 
altogether. Nutritious  Particles  require  (to 
be  converted  into  a  laudable  Coyle)  a 
more  gentle  Ferment  than  thole  Stomachs 
afford,  in  which  being  hurried  away  by 
the  violent  Acids  that  furround  them, 
they  are  for  want  of  an  adapted  Men- 
firmrn  turn’d  into  Crudities,  and  fo  only 
help  to  encreafe  the  turbulent  Sdburra  that 
involves  them :  Whfft  the  Stock- Fifla, 
in  which  the  Aliment  is  more  allay’d  with 
Grofsand  Terr  eft  rious  Parts,  is  more  able 
to  refift  thefe  Fleterogeneous  Acids,  and  by 
reafon  of  its  Vifcidity,  not  fo  foon  fore  d 
to  fubmit  to  the  foie  caufe  of  Winds,  the 
preternatural  Fermentations  they  meet 
with. 

But  f  would  not  have  you  lay  any 
ftrefs  upon  my  (hallow  reafonings,  which 
being  only  conjedural,  are  liable  to  be 
fallacious  5  this  is  certain,'  that  omnibus 
f&rihus,  in  the  Diftemper  we  treat  of,  as 
to  the  rnUm^  and  other  troublefcme  figns 
of  Indigeftion  after  Meals,  the  fit  ft  (hall 
be  always  more  complain'd  of  than  the 

latter. 


(  249  ) 

latter.  I  would  not  have  infilled  lo  much 
upon,  or  troubled  you  fo  long  with  fuch 
a  defpicable  trifle  as  this  may  feem  to  be, 
if  I  had  not  known  more  than  ordinary 
effects  of  this  neglected,  but  admirable 
Food,  both  from  my  own  and  Father’s 
Experience,  whom  I  have  heard  more 
than  once  declare,  that  to  the  ufe  of  it, 
he  had  often,  for  the  greateft  part,  afcrib’d 
the  Cure  of  Patients,  to  whom  he  had 
advifed  it,  in  feveral  harts  of  Cachexies, 
and  even  Con fum prions. 

Mifom.  I  (hall  certainly  try  it. 

Phil.  It  will  be  worth  your  while,  de¬ 
pend  upon  it,  if  once  you  can  get  a 
liking  to  it.*—  But  I  go  on. 

Let  your  Bread  be  thoroughly  baked, 
and  chufe  that  which  is  mod  Crufty,  or  if 
your  Teeth  will  let  you  eat  the  whited  fort 
of  Sea-Bifcuit,  the  life  of  which  is  of 
greater  efficacy  againffc  the  fowre  in  the 
Stomach,  than  moft  Powders  given  for 
that  purpofe.  Avoid  all  Malt  Liquors, 
and  inftead  of  Beer  drink  a  Decoftion  of 
jFmz<A- Barley,  with  a  few  Hops,  and  a 
great  deal  of  Liquorice  boil’d  frelh  every 
Day.  ■■  "P 

For  your  Breakfaft,  before  you  get  on 
Horfe-back,  take  a  fmall  Mefs  of  Water- 
Gruel,  Burgoe,  Panado,  or  Barley-Broth, 
to  which  you  may  add  a  Glafs  of  feme 

rich 


(  *yo  ) 

rich  Wine,  fuch  as  Malaga ,  Madera ,  or 
SAerry :  The  fame  you  may  repeat  after 
your  fifft  bathing,  or  inftead  of  it  take  a 
Glafs  of  Tent  and  a  Toaftc 

Nutritious  Suppers  I  have  often  Pre- 
fcrib’d  with  Succefs,  where  I  have  found 
a  deficiency  of  Spirits,  yet  in  your  Cafe 
I  am  utterly  againft  them*  I  would  not 
have  you  forbear  them  all  at  once,  but 
Eating  lefs  and  lefs  every  Night,  leave 
them  off  by  degrees. 

Mifom.  But  if  I  Eat  no  Suppers  I  (hall 
be  faintifti,  and  more  troubled  with  Wind 
than  I  am  now. 

Phil.  I  know  it,  if  you  fliould  take 
nothing  to  prevent  it,  but  thofe  Fears 
(hall  be  obviated  by  the  Cachcftick  Pow¬ 
ders  and  noble  Stomachick  I  fent  you, 
which  are  both  long  experienc’d  Medi¬ 
cines,  whofe  great  Efficacy  in  this  cafe  I 
can  entirely  rely  on. 

All  Hypochondriac r,  how  quick  feever 
the  Appetites  of  fome  may  be,  are  of  a 
very  flow  Digeftion.  Thofe  that  are  not 
troubled  with  Spontaneous’  Vomitings, 
generally  Eat  their  Suppers  before  their 
Dinners  are  half  digefted. 

Mifom.  How  flow  my  Digeftion  is  I 
can't  determine,  but  I  never  Supunlefs  my 
Stomach  hands  for  it  3  and,  pray  when 
;  '  Men 


(  M»  ) 

Men  are  hungry,  is  not  the  Indieatum 
Eating  ? 

Vhil.  Not  always,  when  their  Appetite 
is  part  of  their  Diftemper.  The  heavy 
loads  and  diftenfions  in  their  Stomachs, 
commence  immediately  after  Eating,  tho” 
the  tumultuous  agitations  in  them,  and 
unfavory  belchings  are  commonly  not  at 
the  worft,  till  Three,  Four,  and  fome- 
times  Five  Hours  after  their  Meals.  As 
foon  as  thefe  Symptoms  remit,  and  a  con- 
fiderable  Portion  of  the  Crude  Chyle  is 
mix’d  with  the  Gall  and  Pancreatick  Juice 
in  the  duodenum  $  the  miferjes  of  the  lower 
Belly  increafe,  and  impetuous  Winds  ra¬ 
vage  through  all  the  windings  of  the  In- 
teftines,  in  which  the  Tenfions  and  Spafms, 
Choiick-—  and  other  Pains  are  at  this  time 
generally  the  raoft  affii&tng,  and  the  i 
Borborigmi  the  loudeft,  Whilft  this  tern- 
peftuous  Scene  is  afting  round  the  Mefen- 
tery,  the  more  ftubborn  remainder  of  the 
ill  digefted  Pulp  that  is  left  behind  con¬ 
tinues  to  opprefs  the  Stomach,  and  being 
now  by  a  vitious  Fermentation,  become 
violently  (harp,  vellicates  the  Fibres  of  its 
inner  Tunick,  which  occafioning  a  gnaw¬ 
ing  uneafinefs  renders  the  Patients  both 
Hungry,  and  Maukifhly  Faintifh  by 
turns. 


9 


.  (  M 1  ) 

Mifom.  This  indeed  is  an  exad  De„ 
fcription  of  my  Oeconomy  in  particular. 

VhlL  WhiSft  they  are  eating  their  In- 
teftines  are  commonly  eafie,  and  all  the 
Evils  in  Hypogajlrio  are  the  leaft  torment¬ 
ing,  which  makes  them  as  foon  as  the 
latter  Symptoms  appear  fly  to  what  they 
know  will  Cure  them  for  the  prefent. 
They  eat  in  their  own  Defence,  and  are 
glad  of  the  opportune  y,  till  the  diftur- 
bances  in  their  Stomachs  returning,  they 
repent  of  the  fhort  lived  Remedy,  and 
thus  by  heaping  Meals  upon  one  soother, 
before  the  former  are  Conceded,  they  not 
only  feed  their  Diftemper  as  conftantly  as 
themielves,  but  like  wife  hinder  the  pofli- 
bility  of  being  Cured  3  for  in  thofe  Sto¬ 
machs  the  raoft  Nutritious  Food,  as  foon 
as  it  is  (wallow'd  muft  degenerate  into 
Crudities,  and  the  be  ft  of  Medicines  be 
loft  in  the  CortoGvc  Saburra  they  are  never 
without. 

Mifom.  A  miferable  Condition  !  when 
to  keep  themfelves  a-live,  Men  are  forc'd 
to  make  oft  of  a  Remedy  tbat-perpettiates 
their  Diftemper,  and  occafions  the  affii- 
dions  it  appeafes. 

Phil  No  Coftiveoefs  ever  becomes  ha¬ 
bitual,  but  a  flow  Digeftion  precedes  it, 
the  Signs  of  which  can  never  be  latent, 
for  the  Vidua  Is  remain  much  longer  in 

v  chofe 


(  *5*  ) 

thofe  Stomachs  than  in  others,  where  the 
Concoftion  is  perform’d  in  due  time,  as 
is  manifeft  from  the  favour  of  the  Belches, 
by  which  it  has  been  often  difcover’d  that 
feme  Aliments,  when  they  have  been  par¬ 
ticularly  difagreeable  to  the  Ferment  they 
met  with,  have  been  detained  without 
paffing  th ePilorns,  for  Two,  Three  Days 
and  longer  $  and  if  as  foon  as  this  flow- 
nef$  of  Conco&ion  was  perceivable  in 
your  felf  you  had  follow’d  the  Rules, 
which  now  I  endeavour  to  perfwade  you 
to,  it  is  not  probable  that  the  Denfity  of 
the  Belly,  and  many  other  Symptoms  of 
your  Diftemper  would  ever  have  come  to 
that  height,  at  which  they  have  often 
been  affliding. 

1 Mi  font,  Venter  non  habet  aures  :  It  is  a 
hard  Prefcri  prion,  that  People  fliould  not 
Eat  when  they  are  Hungry, 

Phil.  Be  allured  that  the  uneafmefs, 
which  fading  at  Nights  may  create  to  you 
cannot  be  compared  co  the  mighty  fervice 
it  (hall  be  of  in  the  removal  of  more 
troublefome  Complaints  3  neither  is  this  a 
Prefcription  for  Life,  as  foon  as  the  great 
diforders  of  your  Digeftion  (hall  be  re- 
drefs’d,  you  (hall  again  Eat  your  Suppers 
wish  9s  much  pleafure  as  ever  3  but  if  you 
cannot  leave  them  off  wholly,  let  them 
at  ieaft  be  diminiflfd,  abftain  from  FJefh, 

'  e  ’  and 


(  M4  ) 

•  and  let  them  be  as  {lender  and  as  inno¬ 
cent  as  your  Breakfafts.  It  is  not  always 
so  the  power  of  Pharmacy,  and  Exereife, 
to  Core  Didempers  that  yet  are  curable, 
unlefs  Distetick  Rules  are  brought  into 
their  affiftance.  Diet ,  fays  Le  Glerc,  was 
the  firfiy  the  principal)  and  fometimes  the 
only  Remedy  that  Hippocrates  made  ufe  of$ 
And  ffaall  we  lay  no  more  itrefs  upon  it, 
as  if  it  did  not  belong  to  the  Art  of  Pby- 
fick  ?  It  is  but  of  latter  Ages,  and  only 
fince  the  World  has  been  fo  much  im- 
pofed  upon  by  Bermedcal  Pretenders,  that 
the  Golden  Rules  of  it  have  been  look’d 
upon  as  inconsiderable  trifles  5  but  before 
we  rejeft  a  lefe  powerful  aid,  let  us  firft 
fee  the  mighty  performances  of  the  Her¬ 
culean  Medicines  they  bead  of,  that  in 
fmall  quantities,  and  few  Doles  are  to 
Cure  the  mod  inveterate  Didempers,  with¬ 
out  Rule  or  obfervance,  but  we  ought  to 
day  till  then,  Spem  pretto  quid  emimus  £ 
Why  ffaould  we  negleCt  the  eheapeft,  the 
eafieft,  and  mod  wholefome  maxims  of 
the  true  Art  of  Phyfick  fof  the  vain 
Promifes  of  lying  Chymids,  and  fuffer 
our  f elves  to  be  robb’d  of  known  Reme¬ 
dies  in  expectation  of  greater,  that  per¬ 
haps  are  never  to  come  ? 

Thoufands,  and  Ten  Thoufands  of 
Pounds  are  Yearly  thrown  away  upon 

Apo- 


C  *55  ) 

Apothecary  Ware,  in  this  City  alone,  to 
remove  what  might  be  more  effectually 
cured  by  Diet.  It  is  incredible  what  pro¬ 
digious  benefits  may  fometimes  be  received, 
efpecially  in  diforders  of  the  Stomach  from 
Abftinence  alone  j  and  it  is  certain,  that 
Millions  of  People  are  now  in  their  Graves, 
who  have  Died  of  Diftempers,  as  well 
Chronick  as  Acute,  thac  at  firft  of  all  one 
Nights  Faffing  might  have  prevented. 

Mifom.  I  am  perfwaded  that  what  you 
fay  is  true,  but  when  Mens  Reafons  are 
over-rul’d  by  their  Appetites,  they  ought 
to  be  more  pitied  than  blamed,  and  it 
cannot  be  denied,  but  that  he  who  kills 
faimfelf  by  Eating  when  he  is  Hungry, 
does  it  fe  defendendo.  Yet  how  trouble- 
fome  foever  I  may  find  your  latter  Pre- 
fcription,  affure  your  fell  that  all  your 
Orders  (hall  be  ftri&ly  obey’d. 

Phil.  Then  1  dare  promife  you  that  in 
a  little  time  you  (hall  fee  your  (elf  chang’d 
into  another  Man.  When  the  Vomits,  by 
entirely  cleanfing  the  firft  Paflages,  (hall 
have  made  way  for  the  Operation  of  the 
altering  Medicines,  and  your  abftinence 
from  Suppers,  give  them  leave  to  exert 
themfelves,  they  (hall  corroborate  your 
Stomach  and  Bowels,  and  give  new  Life 
to  the  Periftaltick  motion.  The  bathing 
(hall  remove  the  Tendons,  and  relax  the 

rigid 


(  *5<S  ) 

rigid  Fibres  of  your  Inteftiaes.  The 
noble  Exercife  of  Riding  fhail  not  only 
promote  Digeftjon,  and  ftrengthen  your 
Bqiy,  but  likewife  Compofe  and  Exhila¬ 
rate  your  Mind,  an^  all  of  them  together 
invigorate  both.  And  by  thefe  means  a 
Nutritious  Diet,  and -perhaps  the  addition 
of  feme  Chalybeats,  you  ffaall  in  a  few 
Weeks  find  your  Coftivenefs  wore  off, 
your  Conftitution  vifibly  mended,  and 
your  Blood  replenifli’d  with  Spirituous  as 
well  as  Balfamick  parts. 

Mifom .  But  I  forgot  to  tell  you  that 
alter  being  in  Bed,  even  when  I’m  at  the 
belt  I  often  lie  tc  fling  Two  or  Three 
Hours, before  lean  clofe  my  Eyes,  and  that 
my  firft  Sleeps  feldora  laft  longer  than  half 
that  time.  My  getting  up  fo  foon  as  you 
talk  of,  will  rob  me  of  the  moft  com¬ 
fortable  part  of  my  reft. 

Vhih  What  I  advife  is  not  to  hinder 
but  protraft  your  Sleeps.  Your  early 
riling  dial!  wipe  from  your  Spirits  a  cer¬ 
tain  drowfinefs,  which  is  commonly  the 
heavy  Companion  of  all  that  miftaking 
floth  to  be  the  equivalent  of  Sleep,  lie 
fbaking  in  their  Beds  nneafie  and  awake  5 
and  beingaflifted  with  the  conftant  variety 
of  your  Employments  all  Day  long,  make 
you  with  with  plea fu re  for  the  approach 
of  Night,  which  now  you  often  dread, 

v  for 


I 


(257) 

for  as  no  Hunger  is  more  commendable 
than  what  is  procured  by  Emptineis  and 
Fading,  fo  Exercife  and  Watching  are  the 
mod  natural  Preparatives  .to  Sleep.  The 
find  or  fecood  Day  perhaps  you  will  not 
yet  feel  the  Eflfefts  of  this  wholefome 
Prefcription^  but  after  that,  allure  your 
felf  that  you  fhall,  more  and  more,  begin 
to  long  for  Bed  time,  the  thoughts  of 
which  are  fo  tirefome  to  many,'  who  never 
are  fatigued  but  with  excefs  of  Eafe.  The 
means  I  order  (hall  draw-  upon  you,  to¬ 
ward  Evening,  an  agreeable  wearinefs,  the 
moving  Orator  of  fweet  repofe,  that  breath*- 
ing  Health  and  Peace  to  every  part,  per- 
fwades  the  Soul  to  red,  and  having  brib’d 
the  watchful  Spirits  from  their  Pods,  locks 
up  the  ungarded  Senles  in  charming  bonds 
of  Slumber. 

Mifom.  I  want  no  Rhetorick  to  encou¬ 
rage  me  ^  the  great  defire  I  have  of  being 
Cured  is  more  Eloquent  than  your  per- 
fwafion  :  I  would  bear  any  thing  to  be 
blefs’d  again  whh  thofe  found  Spontaneous 
Sleeps  1  formerly  enjoy’d.  Oh  Slumber ! 
Thou  perverfe  and  f  bo  I  i  fh  M  j  ft  re  fs  t  o  Ma  tx- 
kind,  that  none  can  live  without.  Why 
fhoold  you  be  fo  forward  to  the  poor 
and  thoughtlefs,  on  whom  you  deal  -u ri¬ 
fe  ught  for,  wbilft  you  are  tyrannically 
coy  to  more  deferving  Lovers  that  anxi- 
bully  court  you  ) 


S 


I 


(  M8  ) 

I  chearfully  confide  in  your  Knowledge* 
Vhilopmoj  wifhing  for  no  better  fuccefs 
than  my  obfervance  (hall  deferve,  and 
depend  upon  it,  if  the  event  proves  as 
happy  as  what  you  promife  of  it  feems 
reafonable,  you  fhall  never  find  me  un¬ 
grateful  :  What  I  do  now  is  only  to  pay 
you  for  the  trouble  I  have  given  you, 
and  the  time  you  have  fpent  with  me, — 
But  is  this  pray  the  general  method  you 
take  with  all  Hypcchondriacks,  mutatis 
mutandis ,  which  now  you  have  prefcrib’d 
to  me  > 

Phil.  Mutatis  mutandis  it  is  5  but  that 
is  all  in  all,  for  as  the  Symptoms  differ  fo 
I  alter  my  method,  and  I  never  faw  yet 
two  Hypochondriacal  Cafes  exactly  alike. 

Mifom .  Then  what  is  your  fecrefc  in  the 
Cure  of  this  difficult  Diftemper? 

Phil.  I  have  feveral :  As  firft  the  un¬ 
ci  erftanding  of  it  thoroughly  5  by  apply¬ 
ing  my  feif  particularly  to  it,  and  con- 
ftant  obfervation,  I  am  skill’d  in  all  the 
variations  of  it,  the  many  fhapes  and 
changes  by  which  it  often  impofes  upon 
others  that  are  lefs  acquainted  with  it 
than  my  felf.  Secondly  a  careful  and 
more  curious  Examination  than  is  required 
in  any  other  Diftemper,  not  only  to  pene¬ 
trate  into  the  Procatarcfick  Caufes,  but 
likewife  the  better  to  confute  the  Circum- 

1  »  / 

ftances  as  well  as  Idiofincrafy  of  every 

particular 


/  (  2S9  ) 

particular  Perfon  ;  fome  have  ftrangd  a* 
verfions  as  to  Diet  $  others  peculiar  anti¬ 
pathies  againft  fome  excellent  Remedies, 
and  every  whokforne  Exercife  fuits  not 
with  all  People.  A  third  fee  ret  which  I 
much  rely  upon  is  the  Art  of  diftinguifh* 
ing  between  the  efforts  of  Nature,  whom 
I  would  affift,  and  thofe  of  the  Diftenoper 
which  I  am  to  deftroy. 

Mifom.  But  I  meant  Medicines  when  I 
(poke  of  Secrets. 

Phil .  Then  I  iiioti  anfwer  you,  that  I 
have  none  but  what  I  am  always  willing 
to  impart  to  any  Patient j  as  generous  as 
your  (elf,  that  for  his  private  ufe  after 
having  received  fome  extraordinary  benefit 
from  it  asks  me  for  the  Prefcription  $  for 
the/  I  make  ufe.  of  Chyrnical  as  well  as 
Galenick  Preparations,  yet  I  have  none 
that  I  intend  either  to  magnifie  or  conceal 
tinder  the  fpecious  pretence  of  any  mighty 
Labour,  Coft,  or  extraordinary  -lyyjk^ 
they  require  5  no  Liquor  Al!\dleft ,  Arca¬ 
num  Corallinum ,  nor  other  Panacea* s  that 
can  work  Miracles  to  boaft  of. 

The' Medicines  I  am  poffefFd  of,  I  only 
value,  becaufe  I  am  entirely  acquainted 
with  the  Strength  and  Virtues  of  them*  * 
and^have  fome  to  confide  in  from  my 
ther’s  Experience,  as  well  as  ray  own,  upon 
all  Emergencies :  Moft  of  the  Ingredients 
that  tompofe  them  are  like  wife  no  more 

S.  2  thatf 


•  "... 


(  160  ) 

than  what ‘others  have  recommended  $  and 
all  the  Myftery  i  know  m  Pi  yiick,  as  to 
Remedies,  confifts  in  the  Choice  and  Ap¬ 
plication  of  them. 

Mifom.  Why  then,  fhce  ou  know  (as 
I  have  heard  you  fay)  \p  oecaries  that 
keep  good  Medicines,  will  you  adminiftcr 
them  your  feh  ? 

Phil.  To  get  by  them  as  they  would  $ 
What  warrantable  motive  can  1  have  to 
give  the  profit  of  my  Inheritance,  as  well 
as  Study,  and  Obfervation  to  others,  that 
perhaps  would  never  thank  me  for  it  > 

Mifom .  But  have  you  really  no  other 
reafon  ? 

Phil  I  thought  this  was  a  very  good 
bne,  for  a  Man  that  is  chiefly  confulted 
in  Chronick  Difeafes,  where  the  firft  pre- 
fcription  may  Cure,  and  if  it  be  followed 
a  Month  or  two,  the  Phyfician  that  gives 
nothing  but  his  Advice,  (hears  the  Hogs, 
and  the  Apothecary  the  Sheep.  I  could 
give  more  phufible  reafon 3  5  but  chufe  to 
mention  that  firft,  which  tho1  I  never 
named  it,  would  be  fufpedted hiofb 

What  I  told  you  of  Apothecaries  that 
provide  good  Medicines  is  very  true  5  but 
to  fay,  that  as  there  are  fuch,  there  are  like- 
wife  others  either  more  negligent  or  more 
fairing,  I  think  is  very  modeftly  fpoken, 
and  a' Phyfician  mu  ft  be  highly  valued  in¬ 
deed,  that  can  perfvvade  every  body  to 

leave 


( 

leave  his  own  Apothecary,  and  go  where 
he  direfts  them. 

Mifom.  Which,  you  would  fay,  is  in 
many  Cafes  the  fame,  as  if  they  had  all 
bad  Medicines.  I  confefs  there  is  no  Trade 
in  which  Men  have  lefs  encouragement  to 
be  honeft :  For,  in  the  firft  place,  if  a 
PhyOcian,  for  his  own  Reputation’s  fake, 
refufes  to  have  his  Bills  carried  to  every 
Shop,  and  is  of  that  Eminence,  that  he 
can  prefcribe  the  Apothecary  as  well  as 
the  Medicines,  he  fhall  be  ridicul'd,  call’d 
a  Humorift,  the  honeft  Men  he  trulls  to 
Hinder’d,- and  both  of  them  have  a  Hun¬ 
dred  Stories  father'd  upon  them,  as  falfe 
as  they  are  malicious,  by  the  reft  of  the 
Apothecaries  that  are  not  of  his  ch often 
number.  A  pretty  reward  for  a  Man’s  be¬ 
ing  honeft  at  his  own  Expence ! 

in  the  ftecond  ;  a  Mao  that  picks  his 
Drugs,  buys  the  beft  oi  every  thing  the 
Shops  afford,  and  wholly  employs  him- 
feif  in  carefully  diftpenflng  his  Medicines, 
according  as  his  cuftom  lies,  fhall  often  be 
obliged  to  reckon  Forty  per  Cent-  lefs  far 
things  of  the  fame  Name,  than  his  Neigh¬ 
bour,  who,  he  knows  buys  nothing  but 
rubbifh,  which  lie  leaves  a  Boy  to  jumble 
together.  At  this  rate  who  would  be  ho- 
neft  that  coull^ielp  it? 

If  the  Butcher  fends  os  home  (linking 
Meat,  or  the  Shooemaker  fells  us  bad  Le$- 

S  3  tfaer* 


(  ) 

Aer,  they  lofe  our  Cuftom,  becaiife  every 
body  can  judge  of  the  Irnpofition,  which 
mskes  them  honeft  in  their  own  defence  5 
but  whar  Obligation  lie  they  under  to  be 
fo,  quorum  fcelera  terra  tegit}  If  a  Patient 
be  loft  tor  want  of  good  Drugs,  Pray 
wfaofe  fault  is  it  >  Either  his  ime  was 
come,  or  the  Phyfidan  miftook  the  Di- 
ftemper,  (the  wifeit  Man  you  know  may 
err  but  as  for  the  Medicines  without 
doubt  they  were  made  up  according  to 
order  5  if  the  Man  be  Dead  he  mu  ft  be 
buried,  the  Apothecary  knows  nothing  of 
the  matter,  and  writes  Gut  his  Bill  as  mer¬ 
rily  as  the  Undertaker. 

Phil .  But  if  I  wave  all  this,  and  p 'fling 
the  fame  Compliment  upon  all,  which  I 
di4  upon  feme,  fuppofe,  that  it  is  impof- 
ible  for  any  of  them  to  have  bad  Me¬ 
dicines,  I  have  ftill  other  reafons  that 
oblige  me  to  be  my  own  Cook  5  my  manner 
of  preferring  is  fo  little  adapted  to  their 
profit,  that  if  they  were  civil  enough  not 
to  ridicule  they  could  at  leaft  never  like 
my 'Practice.  ;;--v  pj.j 

I  Keligioufly  believe  it  to  be  true  what 
Ar&oldus  Villanovams  faid  $  that  it  is 
cheat  to  life  Compound  Medicines,  where 
Simples  are  fufficient$  and  of  the  firft  I 
keep  not  above  Nine  or  Ten  ready  made 
by  me,  of  which  only  two  are  to  be  had 
in  the  Shops  j  the  reft  differing  in  form 

from 


(  ) 

from  any  in  the  Difpenfatory,  I  prepare 
my  felf.  That,  you'll  fay,  the  Apothe¬ 
cary  if  you  give  him  your  Prefcriptions, 
m  y  do  as  well  as  you.  I  own  it 5  but 
few  of  them  would  think  it  worth  their 
while,  efpecially  for  a  Phyfician  that  is 
not  hkely  to  bring  much  Grift  to  their 
M  is,  tho’  be  had  never  fo  many  Patients. 
Who  would  be  troubled  with  a  Man  that 
talks  of  Exercife  and  Diet,  and  is  a  mor¬ 
tal  Enemy  to  Phyfick,  where  it  is  poffible 
to  do  without? 

I  have  no  Opinion  of  Syrups,  or  Sim¬ 
ple  Waters  5  the  Medicines  I  give  are  ei¬ 
ther  always  taken  in  Coffee,  Tea,  Wine, 
Fair-water,  or  other  Liquors  that  are  fa¬ 
miliar  to  the  Patients,  and  generally  to  be 
had  at  their  Houfes,  or  near  hand  5  or  if 
any  particular  Vehicle  be  required,  I  pre- 
fcribe  a  Deco&ion,  or  Infufion  of  a  few 
Simples,  in  plain  Englifh,  which  every 
body  may  make  at  home,  or  have  done 
where  he  pleafes, 

Mifom .  This  indeed  is  prophaning  of 
Phyfick,  and  it  muft  found  abominably  in 
an  Apothecary's  Ear,  to  hear  a  Man  tell 
People  that  there  is  no  more  Skill  requir'd 
to  Boil  two  or  three  Roots  of  the  Field, 
and  as  many  handfuls  of  Phyfkal  Herbs, 
when  they  are  fold  where  to  have  them  5 
than  there  is  to  Boil  Carrots  or  Turneps, 
with  Coleworrs,  or  Sprouts  ^  and  that  a 
'  f-  "  ”  •  S  4  little 


(f  i<*4  ) 

little  Boy  may  do  it  as  well  in  Fair* water,  ; 
as  his  Serztulus  in  Hydropegg  :  •  Efpecially 
if  he  fhould  be  fo  wicked  as  to  add, 
what  your  Reprobates  in  Phyfick  affirm  to 
be  true,  that  by  doing  this  the  Patient 
may  often  fave  as  much  in  one  Morning 
as  will  buy  the  reft  of  the  Family  their 

Dinners. - <  I  cannot  exprefs  it  to  you, 

Philopirw,  how  much  I  am  pleas’d  with 
your  method.  I  wifti  my  Wife  had  ftajrd 
to  hear  us,  perhaps  it  might  have  con¬ 
verted  her;  I  love  the  Woman  very  well  $ 
What  do  you  think  of  her  ?  I  know  that 
fometimes  die  is  very  bad,  but  (lie  is  fel- 
dom  Conftipated,  and  the  leaft  Laxative 
in  the  World  moves  her,  I  can  t  think 
but  the  greateft  part  of  her  Diftemper  is 
Fancy. 

P/i/7.  I  generally  obferye,  that  People 
troubled  with  either  Hypo,  or  Vapours ,  to 
a  confiderable  degree,  never  think  others 
as  bad  as  themfelves,  and  yet  are  always 
wonderfully  offended,  if  their  own  Di¬ 
ftemper  be  any  ways  flighted. 

M-ifom.  There  is  a  great  deal  of  dif¬ 
ference  between  my  Wife  and  my  felt  ; 
when  Afflictions  are  fo  exceflive  as  mine 
often  are,  they  are  paft  Jefting  5  tho\  as 
if  it  was  sri  additional  Mifery  entail’d  up¬ 
on  them,  1  have  fevetal  times,  met  with 
things  that  way  fo  infolent,  and  inhuman  5 
fuod  vi x  a  mamhis  me  tempgravgrim*  When 


(  *65  ) 

I  have  had  a  Thoufand  Pains  about  me, 
and  been  devour'd  with  Grief  even  to 
Death,  I  have  had  a  healthy  Rafcal  full 
of  Eafe  and  Wantonnefs  come  up  to  me 
in  the  Street,  and  cry.  Well  Mifomedon , 
How  goes  the  Hypo  ?  with  a  Smile  in  his 
Countenance.  I  have  faid  nothing  and 
gone  my  ways,  but  I  could  have  knock’d 
him  down  with  all  my  Heart, 

Phil.  Thefe  things  are  provoking  : 
Therefore  I  would  have  you  believe  that 
your  Lady  s  Diftemper,at  leaft  before  her, 
ought  to  be  as  ferioufly  treated  as  your 
own,  without  meddling  with  the  degrees 
of  Mifery  in  either.  The  Coftivenefs  in¬ 
deed  is  one  of  your  greateft  grievances  5 
but  there  are  many  Hypochondriack  as 
well  as  Hyfterick  Patients,  that  are  very 
rarely  or  never  troubled  with  it,  and  yet 
very  miferable  otherwife. 

Mifom.  But  if  I  could  bring  her  over 
to  us,  Could  you  do  her  any  good  ? 

Phil  If  fne  would  ufe  Cold-bathing, 
and  ftir  pretty  much,  1  don’t  queftion,  but: 
the  drinking  of  Spa  w- water,  and  a  few 
Medicines  betides,  would  Cure  her 5  but 
not,  irniefs  (he  could  be  perfwaded  by 
flow  degrees  to  leave  off  the  pernicious, 
as  well  as  only  Palliative  Remedies,  that 
under  the  fpecious  Tides  of  Cordial ,  Re* 
ftor&tive  and  Attti-hyfterick,  have  fpoil’d 
the  Tone  of  her  Stomach  and  Inceftines, 


vr- 


(  l66  ) 

and  altnoft  utterly  ruin’d  her  Conftitutipn, 
I  mean  the  hot  Vinous  Liquors  By  the 
conftant  fipping  of  which  it  is  incredible 
how  many  have  been  dettroy’d, 

Mifom.  Yet,  tho  (he  has  tried  I  believe 
almoft  every  thing  that  is  to  be  taken  in 
Phyfick,  (he  finds  benefit  by  nothing  elfe : 
Nay  I  can  fee,  that  (he  is  worfe,  when  (he 
ftrives  to  forbear  them  $  but  fince  (he  mud: 
take  them,  I  am  lure,  that  no  brew’d  So - 
phifticated  Wine,  nor  any  Malt-Sugar,  or 
Cider-Spirit  can  be  compared  to  true 
Fm^-Winq,  and  the  beft  Brandy  5 

either  of  which  I  am  never  without  3  what 
I  complain  of  is  that  (he  will  think  nothing 
reviving,  but  what  in  mixtures  comes  from 
the  Apothecary,  who,  I’d  pawn  my  Life 
does  not  afford  fuch  Prices  for  Wine  or 
Brandy,  to  make  his  Slops  with,  as  I 
am  now  forced  to  give  to  have  them 
good; 

Phil.  That  Wine  as  it  comes  from  the 
Grape,  and  right  French- Brandy,  as  they 
are  more  grateful  to  the  Palate,  are  like- 
wife  lefs  offeofive  to  the  Stomach,  than 
what  you  named  after  them,  is  beyond 
difpute  5  but  whether  they  come  from  the 
Apothecary,  the  Vintner  or  the  Merchant, 
all  things  that  are  Spiriteus  and  Volatile, 
the  Salts  of  Hans-born,  Amber,  Urine,  &e. 
not  excepted,  are  deftru&ive  in  the  cafe"  we 
fpeak  of,  when  they  are  conftantly  taken. 

la 


(  2^7  ) 

In  the  Sublimation  of  Sal  Armoniac 4,  or 
any  other  Volatile  Salt  and  Steel,  Lapit 
Hematites,  or  other  Minerals,  that  are  not 
fo,  well  pulverized  and  blended  together 5 
it  is  obfervable  that  a  great  many  Particles 
of  the  latter  are  carried  to  the  very  top 
of  the  Alembick,  that  never  would  bav® 
got  thither  without  the  help  of  the  firft. 
What  we  fee  in  that  Sublimation  happens 
in  our  Bodies,  and  I  believe  that  all  Vo- 
latilia  and  Spirituofa ,  that  are  fo  foon  dif- 
fipated,  and  we  mix  with  our  juices,  when 
they  go  off  generally  fly  away  with  more 
than  their  own.  Whether  this  Analogy 
«wiil  pleafe  you  I  don’t  know,  neither 
would  I  conclude  any  thing  from  Specu¬ 
lation,  but  that  there  is  fome  fuch  thing 
is  notorious  from  Experience  $  which 
{hews  us,  that  all  FolatUia  and  Spirituofa , 
given  where  the  Spirits  are  deficient,  and 
of  a  weak  Contexture,  when  their  Strength 
is  fpent,  leave  the  People  worfe  than  they 
found  them  5  and  how  Refrefbing  and  Re- 
ftorative  foever  they  may  feem  the  mo¬ 
ment  they  are  taken,  the  Patients  are  al¬ 
ways  more  difpirited  after  them  3  which 
could  not  be,  if  by  them  they  were  not 
robfe’d  of  fomething. 

The  reafon,  why  in  Hyfterick  Cafes, 
and  other  Chronick  Deficiencies  of  the 
Spirits,  many  otherwife  Sober  and  Mo¬ 
derate  Perfons  have  fuch  aa  entire  de- 

pendance 


(  *6*  ) 

pendancc  upon  them,  is,  becaufe  they  al¬ 
ways  give  them  a  manifeft  and  prefent 
Relief  5  for  tho  the  height  ot  the  Com¬ 
fort,  they  give,  lafts  but  for  a  few  Moments ; 
yet,  as  the  Eafe  they  procure  does  not  leave 
them  again  all  at  once,  but  goes  off  gra¬ 
dually  as  the  ftrength  of  thofe  Liquors  is 
diffipated,  till  in  a  little  time  both  are 
vanifhed  3  the  certainty  of  the  benefit 
they  conftamly  receive  from  them  con¬ 
tinually  tempts  them  to  repeat  what  has  fo 
often  reviv’d  them  5  which  if  they  forbear 
longer  than  ordinary,  muft  without  doubt 
make  them  very  uneafie,  and  confequently 
worfe  3  and  this  latter  is  likewife  the  rea- 
fon,  why  it  is  fo  difficult  to  wean  them 
from  thofe  Draughts  of  Oblivion,  when 
once  they  have  got  a  habit  of  relieving, 
or  rather  doling  and  ftupifying  themfdves 
that  way  ;  for  meeting  with  nothing,  that 
gives  them  fuch  an  immediate  Eafe,  they 
never  have  the  patience,  to  be  fo  long 
without  them,  as  might  enable  them  to 
judge  of  left  prefentaneous  Remedies  that 
would  be  more  effectual* 

Mifom.  It  is  very  probable  that  thofe 
Spiritous  and  Volatile  Remedies  being 
blended  with  our  Mafs  of  Spirits,  may, 
as  they  are  diffipated, deftroy  feme  fine  Bai- 
famick  Particles  that  were  entangled  with 
them,  in  like  manner  as  in  the  Chymical 
Experiment,  you  alledge  the  Volatile  Salts 

\\\ 


,  (  2<59  ) 

in  flying  up,  carry  along  with  them  the 
molt  fufatile  Particles  ot  Steel,  &c.  they 
are  mix’d  with :  But  I  cannot  fee  why 
they  {hould  not  have  always  the  fame 
effeft  as  well  upon  thofe  that  are  unac¬ 
quainted  with  them  as  others  that  ufe 
them  conftantly. 

Phil .  It  is  manifeft  that  the  good  we 
receive  from  them  is  whilft  they  remain 
mix’d  with  our  Mafs  of  Spirits,  and  it  is 
as  evident  from  Experience,  that  they  are 
more  eafily  diffipated,  and  go  off  fconer 
in  the  latter  than  they  do  in  the  firft. 

Mifotn .  It  is  indeed  not  likely  that 
there  (hould  be  fo  many  beaten  Roads, 
and  fuch  ready  Paffages  to  fly  away  thro* 
in  People  that  are  Strangers  to  them,  as 
there  muft  be  in  thofe  that  continually 
make  ufe  of  them. 

Phil-  The  reafon  you  give  may  be  good 
for  ought  I  know :  Being  made  a  Pojleriori , 
it  cannot  miflead  us,  yet  it  is  far  from  be¬ 
ing  fatisfa&ory  to  me.  If  we  look  into 
the  feveral  effects  of  Wine  and  Brandy, 
and  the  variety  of  Symptoms  that  attend 
the  drinking  of  all  Intoxicating  Liquors, 
we  (hall  find  an  unwearied  diligence  in 
obferving  the  different  Phenomena  of  much 
greater  ufe  than  the  curious  endeavours  of 
explaining  them,  becaufe  we  are  altoge¬ 
ther  unacquainted  with  thofe  hardly  con¬ 
ceivable  Minuti#  of  the  Spirits,  that  ,  are 

the 


(  *7°  ) 

the  Conftitutive  parts  of  all  oar  Humours 
and  Inclinations,  and  cornequently  utter¬ 
ly  incapable  of  reafoning  upon  them.  The 
feveral  forts  of  Drunkennefs,  which  Horace 
attributes  to  the  fame  Cask, 

Sen  tu  querelas ,  Jive  geris  jocos , 

Sen  rixcim ,  &  in  Janos  amoves. 

Sen  faeilem  fia  tejla  j'cmnum* 

According  as  the  tempers  differ’d  of 
thofe  that  drank  of  it,  we  may  often 
meet  with  (tfao’  at  feveral  times  J  in  the 
fame  Perfons,  from  the  difference  of  the 
Inebriating  Liquors  thcmfelves.  He  that 
is  only  Dull  and  Sleepy,  after  Strong”  Ale, 
and  other  Male-Liquors  may  be  quarrel- 
fome  after  Brandy,  with  as  little  provo¬ 
cation  $  and  the  fame  Man  that  fill’d  with 
noxious  adulterated  Wine  abounds  in 
Complaints,  and  weeps  without  Caufe, 
fhali  often  fparkle  with  Mirth  and  be  fired 
with  Love,  after  drinking  of  fragrant 
P ontac,  or  fprightly  Champaign. 

Mifom •  I  do  not  wonder  that  the 
reafons  of  thofe  nicer  niiftinffions 
fhould  be  beyond  the  reach  of  our  Under- 
(landings,  when  even  the  ordinary  Ope¬ 
rations  of  Wine,  if  we  were  not  convinc’d 
of  them  by  faff,  would  exceed  all  hu¬ 
man  belief.  What  Philofopber  if  he  had 
not  feen  it  would  imagine,  that  a  Man  iri 
wretched  Circumftances,  who  neither 

pleas’d 


(  271  ) 

pleas’d  with  himfelf  nor  his  Company, 
fits  furly  and  demure  making  heavy  re¬ 
flexions  on  the  dark  refults  of  futurity, 
Ihould  by  a  few  draughts  to  which  he 
fubmits  with  fijence  and  regret,  in  lefs 
than  two  Hours  time  become  merry  and 
Facetious,  Courteous  and  Obliging? 

How  vaft  is  the  alteration !  all  his  fears 
and  diffidence  are  vaniffi’d,  his  moft  (lender 
hopes  receive  an  Air  of  certainty,  and  he 
wonders  that  he  could  ever  have  fo  much 
apprehended  the  firft  or  laid  fo  little  ftrefs 
upon  the  latter-  The  Stranger  he  makes 
his  Friend,  and  entrufts  him  with  Se¬ 
crets,  which  three  Hours  ago  he  would 
have  kept  from  his  Brother.  With  un¬ 
affected  freedom  he  fpeaks  to  thofe  he 
flood  in  awe  of  before  5  others  whom  he 
thought  below  his  Gonverfation,  he  e- 
fteems  as  valuable  Companions,  and  among 
all  that  are  with  him,  he  finds  a  Heaven 
of  Equality  as  well  as  Delight.  He  feels 
every  Glafs  add  vigour  to  bis  Body  and 
content  to  his  Mind,  and  the  more  he  re- 
fleXs  the  more  he  reckons  his  Condition 
to  be  envied,  whilft  all  he  can  fee  or  think 
on  is  meliorating,  and  the  whole  Creation 
mends  upon  his  Hands. 

Phil-  I  did  not  expeX  to  hear  a  Man  of 
your  Temperance  and  Sobriety  out  do 
even  Horace  himfelf,  in  the  praife  of 
Drunkennefs,  who  thought  it  fufficient  to 
fay  of  it  5  quod 


operate 


(  ) 

— — —  operta  recluditj 
Spes  jubet  ejfe  rdtas^  in  pr<e!ia  trudit  inermem. 
Sollicitis  animis  onus  eximit  3  addocet  artes  : 
F&cundi  cal  ices  quem  non  fee  ere  difertum  .<? 
ContraUa  quem  non  in  paupertate  folutum  f 

Mifom.  I  did  not  defign  an  Encomium 
upon  Drunkennefs,  but  oniy  to  relate  the 
effefts,  which  good  Wine  generally  has  up¬ 
on  all  People  in  Health  $  if  their  Tempers 
are  naturally  eafie,  and  not  over-rul’d  by 
any  predominant  Vice, 

Phil.  But  1  think  the  ftrangenefs  of  its 
Operation  more  Confpicuous  in  thofe,  that 
are  not  fo  well  qualified  5  for  it  is  not  only 
in  the  power  of  this  Vegetable  to  make 
the  Slave  fancy  himfelf  to  be  free,  the  Poor 
to  be  Rich,  the  Old  Young,  and  the  Mi- 
firable  Happy  5  but  it  likewife  actually 
mends  vifible  Impertefiions  5  renders  the 
Infirm  Strong,  the  Decrepit  Nimble,  and 
the  Stammerer  Eloquent  5  and  what  neither 
Circes  nor  Medea  s  Art  could  ever  perform  ; 
turns  Vices  into  Virtues,  and  by  the 
Charm  of  it,  the  Coward,  the  Co* 
vetoes,  the  Proud,  and  the  Morofe  become 
Valliant,  Generous.,  Affable,  and  good 
Hamoxihd. 

Mifom.  I  fee  you  won’t  be  behind  hand 
with  me  :  Yet  am  of  Opinion,  that  wi  at 
either  of  us  can  fry  of  it  muft  always  fall 
Chore  of  what  Horace  lias  left  us  upon  the 

fame 


,  (  m  ) 

fame  Subjeft*  I  don’t  mean  what  you 
repeated  from  his  Epiftle  to  Torquatus 5 
tho*  that  is  generally  cited  upon  the  oc- 
cafion.  Horace  was  a  general  Poet,  but 
his  greateft  Talent  did  not  lie  in  Heroicks  § 
ll  font  conjidertr  chacun  dans  [on  fort  1  It 
was  Lyrick  Verfe  in  which  he  excelfcl. 
Read  his  whole  Ode  to  Bacchus ,  and  fe- 
veral  others,  where  he  fpeaks  of  Wine?tha£ 
now  I  don’t  call  to  mind  : 

Tu  lent  tormentum  ingento  admoves 

V  hr  unique  duro :  Tu  japnntium 
Curas ,  &  arcanum  jocofo 
Confilium  retegis  Lyeeo  : 

Tn  fpem  reducis  mentibus  anxiis 

Virefque  :  &  addis  cornua  Pauperi , 

Poll  te  neque  iratos  trementi 
Regum  apices ,  neop  militum  -arm&^&c* 

This  is  a!  mo  ft  the  fame  with  what  you 
quoted  but  more  Poetical  and  more  Elegant. 

Phil .  I  am  no  Critick  5  but  well  allured 
that,  Poetical  Flights  apart,  the  innu¬ 
merable  mifchiefs  which  Wine,  as  it  is 
managed,  creates  to  Mankind,  far  exceed 
whatever  Horace ,  or  any  body  elfe  can 
fay  in  commendation  of  it. 

Mifom *  Let  them  look  to  it  that  abufe  it, 
I  don’t.  In  the  beginning  indeed  of  my 
Diftemper,  when  I  was  firft  flexed  with 
Melancholy  Thoughts,  I  have  fometimes 

T  taken 


(  *74  ) 

taken  Sanfluary  to  a  large  Dofe  of  Claret 
to  eafe  me  3  but  never  had  any  Relief  from 
it,  without  a  greater  punifhment  upon  the 
heels  of  it :  It  has  laid  my  Pains,  appeas’d 
my  Soul,  made  me  forget  my  Sorrows, 
and  fan  fie  over  Night,  that  all  my  Affli¬ 
ctions  had  left  me  3  but  the  next  Morning, 
before  the  ftrength  of  the  Charm  has  been 
quite  wore  off,  they  have  in  crowds  re¬ 
turn’d  upon  me  with  a  vengeance,  and  my 
felf  paid  dearly  for  the  deceitful  Cure.  ’Tis 
unfpcakable  in  what  Confufion  of  horror, 
guilt,  fear,  and  repentance  I  have  wak’d, 
in  what  depth  of  grief,  anguifh,  and  mi- 
fery  my  Spirits  have  been  funk,  or  how  for¬ 
lorn  and  deftitute  of  all  Hopes  and  Com¬ 
forts,  I  have  fometimes  thought  my  felf 
after  rhe  ufe  of  this  fallacious  Remedy. 

If  hard  Drinking  has  the  fame  effefl:  up¬ 
on  all  Hypochondriaci,  as  it  had  upon  me, 
it  will  loon  either  Deftroy,  or  Cure  them 
of  Intemperance  3  the  confequences  of 
which  are  the  fame  to  me  as  the  worft 
Symptoms  of  the  Diftemper,.  and  confe- 
quently  equally  dreadful  3  tho’  I  confefs3 
that  if  the  benefit,  which  it  is  in  my  power 
to  receive  from  Wine,  could  be  made  as 
durable  and  lading,  as  l  might  be  fure  of 
enjoying  it  for  a  (hort  time,  and  the  Spi¬ 
rits  of  it  as  fix’d  and  permanent,  as  I  know 
that  they  would  certainly  fupply  the  de- 
•  ficienCy  of  ray  own,  vyhilft  they  Should  be 

mix’d 


(  *77  ) 

mix’d  with  them  $  I  would  detire  no  better 
Cure,  than  what  my  Cellar  could  help  me 
to. 

Phil.  Wine  his  wrought  miraculousCures 
in  abundance  of  defperate  Cafes,  (of  which 
many  Hyfterick)  and  is  without  doubt, 
when  in  perfe&ion,  the  higheft  Cardial, 
and  greateft  Reftorative  to  the  Spirits,  that 
God  hitherto  has  communicated  to  Man¬ 
kind  $  but  it  is  only  fo  to  thofe,  that  are 
unacquainted  with,  or  at  leaft  make  no 
conftant  praftice  of  ufing  it  :  Upon  us  that 
either  out  of  Luxury,  Pride,  or  a  foolifti 
cuftom  have  brought  our  felves  to  Drink 
it  Daily,  and  made  it  part  of  cur  Diet  its 
Medicinal  Virtue,  at  leaft  the  greateft  Effi¬ 
cacy  of  it,  is  loft, 

Miforn .  Can  there  be  any  hurt  in  ufiog 
it  as  moderately  as  my  felt  ? 

Phil .  No  other  $  than  that  by  making  it 
familiar  to  your  Body,  you  deprive  your 
felf  of  the  greateft  Remedy  in  the  World, 
whenever  you  ftaod  in  need  ot  it.  I  know 
that  moft  People  in  plentiful  Circumftances 
would  Laugh  at  a  Man,  that  Should  advife 
them  now  and  then  to  forbear  Wine  for  a 
Fortnight  or  longer,  when  they  are  in  per¬ 
fect  Health  $  but  if  they  uhderftood  the 
real  advantages  accruing  from  fo  eafie  a 
Prachce,  the  greateft  of  the  Nad  n  would 
take  it  into  Confideration.  For,  bv  flies 
that  thofe  who  have  ufed  their  Bodies  to 


(  *7*  ) 

this  change,  may  often  Drink  a  large  Bot¬ 
tle  without  the  leaft  hurt  to  their  Confti- 
tution,  and  loon  redrefs  the  injuries  of  a 
Debauch  j  they  are  never  debarr’d  from  the 
benefit  which  in  many  cafes  Wine  can  give  5 
nor  liable  to  the  ill  Confequences  of  any 
occafional  abftinence  from  it:  Whereas 
they  that  have  accuftom’d  themfelves  to 
Drink  two  or  three  GlalTes  at  Dinner,  and 
as  many  at  Supper  conftantly,  receive  no 
manner  of  good  from  it,  and  endanger 
their  Health  when  they  leave  it  off 5  fo  that 
they  oblige  themfelves  to  follow  a  Cqjjrfe, 
of  which  the  continuance  can  be  of  no 
profit,  and  the  negleft  will  prove  preju¬ 
dicial  j  which  is  the  fame  as  entring  into 
Bond  without  the  leaft  Confideration. 

Whatever  Medicines  operate  inlenfibly 
ought  to  be  continued  for  a  great  while  5 
but  it  is  quite  contrary  with  thofe  that 
make  a  vifible  alteration  in  the  Body  :  Wine 
is  without  doubt  of  the  latter. 

Mifom.  Yet  in  the  quantity  I  take  it,  I 
am  never  fcnfible  of  any  Operation  of  it. 

T?hil.  This  is  no  fault  of  the  Medicine  ; 
but  a  certain  fign,  that  you  either  have 
made  it  too  familiar  to  your  Conftitution, 
orelfe  miftake  the  Dofe^  an  error  very 
common  in  Phyfick,  even  among  Men  of 
Skill,  of  which  I  fhall  be  glad  to  talk  with  • 
you  more  amply  at  another  time. 


(  *77  ) 

Mifom.  I  have  indeed  detain’d  yon  un- 
reafonably :  And  I  am  going  now  to  take 
my  Stomachick  Tindure,  of  which  and 
every  thing  that  does  me  good  I  (hall  claim 
the  Receipt  according  to  your  promife  5 
but  pray  iince  you  are  fo  Communicative, 
why  are  you  fo  fcrupulous  to  fay  what 
they  are  before  hand  ? 

Phil.  Becaufe  I  have  obferved ;  that 
when  People  who  have  found  many  Me¬ 
dicines  ineffectual,  meet  with  any  Ingre¬ 
dients  in  a  Prelcription,  that  are  either 
the  fame  with,  or  in  their  Opinion  lefs 
Efficacious  than,  what  they  have  already 
tried  to  no  purpofe,  they  often  take  up  a 
prejudice  againft  the  whole  Compofition. 
This  ought  to  be  prevented  in  all  Di- 
(tempers,  but  more  efpecially  thofe,  in 
which  the  Fancy  has  fo  great  a  (hare,  and 
the  leaft  trifle  is  of  moment.  I  am  not  only 
careful  of  the  IcliofjncraJis ,  but  likewise 
drive  to  fall  in  with  the  very  Humotrs 
and  Inclinations  of  my  Patients:  As  far 
Example,  as  (oon  as  I  heard  you  was  a 
Man  of  Learning  and  lov’d  Quotations 
from  Claffick  Authors,  I  anfwer’d  you  in 
your  own  Dialed,  and  often  drain’d  n:y 
felf  to  imitate,  what  in  you  is  natural ; 
I  would  not  have  talk’d  fo  to  a  modiflily 
Ignorant  Courtier,  that  would  call  it  per¬ 
haps  Pedantick. 


In 


(  ) 

In  Difeafes  of  the  Spirits  where  no 
violence  is  to  be  ufed,  every  thing  that 
can  help  ought  to  be  call'd  to  our  affift- 
ance*  upon  which  head  I  could  fay  abun¬ 
dance  if  my  time  would  permit  me  3  bjit 
to  explain  my  meaning  as  (hortly  as  pof- 
fible  I  (hall  with  your  leave  read  a  few 
Lines  to  you  of  the  late  Ingenious  Author 
before  you  3  who  certainly  look’d  more 
narrowly  into  the  nature  of  what  we  talk 
of  than  any  I  ever  met  with :  After  which 
I  (hail  beg  to  be  difmifs’d.  This  is  a  Di - 
flemper ,  fays  he  p.  x  42*  (/peaking  of  the  Hy¬ 
pochondriacal)  which  will  not  drivey  as  we 
fay ,  hut  if  kindly  treated  will  lead ,  that  isy 
will  not  be  expell’d  by  Purging y  Bleedings 
Sweating  or  the  like  3  but  mufl  be  treated  by 
more  gentle  and  leifurely  Methods  3  *fts  a 
Diflemper  of  the  Spirits  and  the  Vejfels  which 
immediately  convey  them  3  and  therefore  thofe 
mans,  by  which  they  are  more  immediately 
iffe&cd  are  the  mojl  likely  to  prove  beneficial . 
Here  it  ky  if  ever  f IriSly  true,  that  a  little 
matter  gives  the  turn  3  but  then  that  little  mat¬ 
ter  mujl  be  equally  applied  3  we  mufl  give  an 
tqual  lift  to  all  the  parts  of  the  Oeconomy  at 
ihe  fame  time . 

Mifom .  This  indeed  jumps  exactly  with 
your  Practice, and  might  ferve  to  ftrengthen 
my  Confidence  in  you  3  if  what  you  have 
laid  your  felf  before  had  been  lefs  fatif- 
fa&ory :  But  without  the  concurrence  of  the 

Opinion 


(  *7?  ) 

Opinion  of  any  other  I  am  fully  convinced  $ 
that  your  method  of  managing  the  Di- 
ftempers  we  have  treated  of,  is  moft  Ra¬ 
tional,  and  think  my  felf  extreamly  obliged 
to  you  for  the  Patience,  and  good  Hu¬ 
mour,  you  have  Ihew’d  not  only  in  fol- 
ving  andanfwering  the  many  doubts  I  have 
ftarted,  and  objections  I  have  made  $  but 
likewife  in  bearing  with  all  my  diffufive 
talk,  and  impertinent  digreflions. 

Phil.-  To  over  pay  a  Man  firft  and  thank 
him  afterwards,  I  know  is  the  height  of 
Civility  3  in  return  of  which  as  I  am,  vitio 
gentifque  meoque,  an  utter  ftranger  to  Com¬ 
pliments  5  and  yet  willing  to  fhew  you  how 
well  I  am  pleas’d  with  my  Afternoons  work} 
in  regard  as  well  of  your  Entertaining  Com¬ 
pany,  as  fplendid  reward,  I  ihall  only  fay 
ih  Ovid’s  words : 

Event  ant  rndii  fic  ntihi  ftps  dies! 

Mifom.  By  your  means,  1  believe,  I  (hall 
be  brought  at  laft  to  forfake  a  Remedy, 
that  to  my  Fancy  has  hitherto  always  re¬ 
liev’d  me. 

Phil.  What  is  that?  Wine? 

Mifom .  No:  It  is  what  no  Phyfician 
ever  prefcrib’d  to  his  Patient,  at  leaft  not 
heartily  ■— *  Non  audeo  eloqui.  Diving. 

Phil.  Non  mea  ejl  Divinatio ,  neque  Davrts 
fitm  neque  Oedipus.  Ejl  ne  quid  ohfceni  .<? 

Mifom.  Nihil  minus,  attamen [uteri pudet: 
dicam  in  aurem.  / 


(  *8o  ) 

PhiL  hoc  eft  :  Novo  Medico  gau» 
deni  ontnes  Hypochond  riaci :  fed  quod  rente-* 
alum  credit  fymptoma.  morbi  eft . 

Mifom.  Ergo  tmm  eft  toll  ere  •  qua  in  re 
qusfo  ut  ad  vigil ts* 

Phil.  Define  :  Prsfcrlptiones  noflr£  hoc 
tibi  cum  ceteris  ejfeffum  dahuntf  &  fifapeant 
eonatibus  Juperi 9  neque  ipfe  tibi  de[isy  prope - 
diem  pancratice  v  debit* 


FINIS. 


— — — — - - - ‘ - — 

1 

B  OOKS  Printed  for,  and  Sold  by  Wil¬ 
liam  Taylor,  at  the  Ship  in  Pater- 

|  nofter-Row. 

''  '  ‘  \ 

Folio , 

rM  E  Works  of  the  Right  Reverend  Father  in  God,  Ezekiel 
Lord  Bifhop  of  London-Derry. 

The  Works  of  Jofephus  the  Learned  and  Warlike  Jew. 

The  New  World  of  Words^  or  Univerfai  Enghjb  Dictionary, 
ie  Sixth  Edition,  Reviled,  Corrected,  and  Improved,  with  the 
ddition  of  near  twenty  Thoufand  Words  from  the  belt  Authors,, 
y  Edward  Philips,  Gent. 

:  Botanologia  :  The  Englijh  Herbal  ;  or,  Hihory  of  Plants,  con- 
.ining,  r.  Their  Names,  Greek ,  Latine  and  Englijh ,  z.  Their 
pfecies,  or  various  Kinds.  3.  Their  Defcriptions.  4.  Their 
laces  of  Growth.  5.  Their  Times  of  Flowering  and  Seeding^ 
Their  Qualities  or  Properties.  7.  Their  Specifications;  8.  Their 
'eparations,  Galenick  and  Chymick.  9.  Their  Virtues  and  Ufes. 
).  A  cdmpleat  FlonUgmm  of  all  the  choice  Flowers  cultivated  by 
hr  Fldrifts,  interfperled  through  the  whole  Work,  in  their  pro- 
rr  Places  ;  where  you  have  their  Culture,  Choice,  Increafe,  and 
ray  of  Management,  as  well  for  Profit  as  Delectation.  Adorned 
ith  exquifite  Icons  or  Figures  of  the  mod  confiderable  Species, 
prefenting  to  the  Life  the  true  Forms  of  thofe  feveral  Plants. 

ipe  whole  in  an  Alphabetical  Order.  By  JF.  Salmon ,  M.  D. 

IThe  Works  of  that  Learned  and  Judicious  Divine  Richard 
)oker ,  in  eightBooks,  of  the  Laws  of  Ecelefiaftical  Polity,  com¬ 
bated  out  of  his  own  Manufcripts.  Dedicated  to  the  King’s 
□ft  Excellent  Majefly,  Charles  II.  by  whofe  Royal  Father  (neat 
5  MartyrdomJ  the  former  five  Rooks  (then  only  eitant)  were 
mmended  to  his  dear  Children,  as  an  excellent  Means  to  fatisfy 
ivate  Scruples,  and  fettle  the  publick  Peace  of  this  Church  and 
ingdom.  To  which  are  added,  feveral  other  Treatifes  by  the 
ne  Author-  all  revifed  and  corrected  in  numberleis  Places  of  the 
I  mer  Edition,  by  a  diligent  Hand.  There  is  alfo  prefix’d  before 
5  Book,  the  Life  of  the  Author,  fame  time  written.  By  Ifa&c 
Ulton .  ,  * 

lAn  Hifforical  and  Critical  DiCiianary.  By  Monfieur  Bayle . 
inflated  into  Evglijh ,  with  many  Additions  and  Corrections, 
de  by  the  Author  himfelf,  that  are  not  in  the  French  Editions. 

4  Volumes; 

$uaM 


Books  Printed  for"' W.  Taylor. 


Quarto. 

Geodafia  :  or,  The  whole  Art  of  Surveying  and  Meafuring  Lane 
&C.  By  J.  Love ,  Philomath.  Note ,  This  Book  is  Reprinting ,  wit.Y 
confide-ralde  Additions ,  which  will  make  it  the  mojjt  comp  lent  Book  o, 
Surveying  extant . 

'Bp.  bjher’s  Body  of  Divinity.  The  8th  Edition,  with  Addi 

tions.  4,  •  t 

A  Commentary  on  St.  Peter.  By  the  mo  ft  Reverend  Father  id 
God  Robert  Leighton ,  late  Lord  Archbiibop  of  Glafcow . 

PraleRiones  Dheologica .  ^  eodem  Author  e. 

Analyfis  JEquationum  univer falls  ^  feu  ad  jEquationes  Algebraic  a 
vefolvendas  Methodus  general u  (A?  exp  edit  a,  ex  nova  infinitarum  Sd 
rieru'tn  Methodo ,  dedufta  ac  demonfir  at  a.  Editio  fecund  a ,  nff  accefjt' 
Appendix  de  Infinito  Infinitarum  Serierum  Progrejfu  ad  AEquationuv* 
Algebraic  arum  Radices  eiicieudas.  Cui  etiam  annexum  eft,  De  Spat:: 
reali ,  /cm  Ln  e  infinito  Conamen  Ma thematico- Met  aphyficunft  Author 
Jofepho  Raphfon ,  A-  M.  0s  Reg.  Soc.  Socio. 

Demonfiratio  de  Deo  p  five  Methodus  ad  Cognitionem  Dei  Naturalem 
brevis  ac  demonjlraiiva .  C«i  aceedunt  EpifioU  quad  am  mificellanea 
de  Anima  Natures  {A?  humor talit ate,  de  Veritate  Religionu  Chrifiiam 
de  Univerfo ,  Sfc.  Authore  Jofepho  Raphfon ,  J'.  Kf.  £/  /C^,  dor; 
iSboio.  , 

An  Univerfity  Oration  concerning  the  different  Fates  of  th; 
Chriilian  Religion,  fpoken  in  the  Publick  Act  of  the  Univerfity  c 
Geneva  the  nth  Day  of  May,  1708.  In  which  the  Apofioiical  In: 
lUtution  of  Epifcopacy  is  afferted,  Separation  on  the  account  c 
Ceremony  is  condemn’d,  and  an  univerfal  Conformity  of  the  Pro: 
te ftant  Churches  to  the  ancient  Difcipline  and  Worihip  is  wiihv 
for.  By  John  Alphonfus  Turretiv ,  Pallor,  Profeffor  of  Divinity  an: 
Ecclefiaiticai  Hillary,  and  Deputy  Keffor  of  the  Univerfity.  Th 
Second  Edition.  To  which  is  added,  3}r.  Nicholas  Thanks  to  M 
Turretin  ;  Written  by  Order  of  the  Society  for  Propagation,  fc; 
his  Oration  of  the  different  Fates,  dedicated  to  them. 

An  Oration,  of  compofmg  the  Differences  among  Protehants: 
wherein  the  Points  in  Controverfy  between  the  Lutherans  and  Cal 
vinifis  are  hated,  and  a  Method  of  Reconciliation  propoled,  &C* 
By  the  fame  Author.  » 

Mercurius  Theologian  :  or.  The  Monthly  I  nil  ruff  or ;  brief! 
explaining  and,  applying  all  Doffrines  and  Duties  of  Chriilian  Re 
iigion  that  are  neceffary  to  be  believed  and  ptaffifed  in  order  a 
Salvation.  By  a  Divine  of  the  Church  of  England.,  Vol.  lit.  treat 
of  the  following  Subjects  Of  Happineis,  of  Religion  and  Then 
logy,  of  human  Reaion,  of  Truth  and  Falfhood,  of  Good  and  Evii 
of  Certainty,  of  Law,  of  the  Law  of  Nature,  of  Duty,,  of  in 
teiipffuaf  Virtue,  of  Knowledge,  of  Faith,  of  Wifdom,  or  Pro 
deuce,  againii  Atheifm,  of  the  Spirituality  of  God,  of  the  Divin 
Attributes  in  General,  againii  Politheifm,  of  the  Immutability  0 
God,  of  the  infinity  of  God,  of  the  Immenfity  of  God,  of  thl 


Boobs  Printed  for  W.  Taylor; 

ternity  of  God,  of  the  Divine  Knowledge,  of  the  Wifdom  of 
!od,  of  the  Divine  Providence. 

The  Monthly  Voyages,  being  a  Colle&ion  of  Voyages  and  Tra- 
els  into  all  Parts  of  the  World,  with  the  Geography  and  Hido- 
y  of  every  Country.  Done  by  feveral  Hands,  and  none  of  them 
ver  before  printed  in  Englifb.  A  Work  very  curious  and  enter- 
lining. 

The  Merchant’s  Magazine,  or  TradefmaiTs  Treafury,  Con¬ 
fining,  { i)  Arithmetick.  (z)  Merchants  Accounts.  (3)  Book¬ 
eeping.  (4)  Maxims  concerning  Bills  of  Exchange,  &c.  (5)  The 
prt-ktters  to  and  from  Foreign  Countries,  gjV.  (6)  An  Account 
if  the  Commodities  of  Foreign  Countries.  (7)  A  Merchant  or 
frader’s  Dictionary,  and  Precedents  of  Merchants  Writings  ;  with 

I,  any  other  things  not  extant  before,  as  by  the  Table  of  Contents 
opear.  By  E.  Hatton ,  Gent. 

Atlas  Geographies  3  or,  A  com  pleat  Syflfem  of  Geography,  Aud¬ 
it  and  Modern.  Containing  what  is  of  moll  life  in  Bleau ,  Vare- 
us ,  Cellar ius ,  Cluverius ,  Baudiand ,  Brietius,  Sanfon ,  &c.  With 
e  Difcoveries  and  Improvements  of  the  belt  Modern  Authors  to 
is  time.  Illullrated  with  about  100  new  Maps,  done  from  the 
tell  Obfervations,  by  Herman  Moll,  Geographer.  And  many  0* 
er  Cuts  by  the  bed  Artills.  To  be  publidi’d  Monthly. 
'Bibliotheca  Anatoviica  Medica  Cbirurgica,  &c.  Containing  a  De- 
ription  of  the  feveral  Parts  of  the  Body,  each  done  by  fume  one 
.  more  eminent  Phyfician  or  Chirurgeon,  with  their  Difeafes  and 
$iires  :  Wherein  are  not  only  all  the  TraHs  of  Ufe  that  are  in  me 
U  Edition  of  Bibliotheca  Anatomica ,  lately  pubiilhed  by  Daniel 
trials  and  Jacob  Mangetus,  in  two  Volumes  in  Folio  3  but  an 
iiidition  alio  of  near  double  the  Number  of  other  Curious  Trade, 
inich  were  either  omitted  in  the  faid  Bibliotheca ,  or  have  been 
blifhed  fince  :  Some  of  them  mandated,  others  faithfully  a- 
idg’d,  very  few  of  which  were  ever  before  in  Englijb.  Hluftra- 
:|l  with  feveral  hundred  Figures,  done  by  the  bed  Artills,  and 
®>m  the  trued  Dedgns,  as  will  appear  from  the  Name  to  each, 
figure.  To  be  pubiilhed  Monthly. 

OBaajo  &  Duodecimo . 

fit 

JCulielrni  Nicholfii  Presbyteri  Defevjio  Ecclefia  Anglican ce:  In  qua 
mdicantur  omnia ,  qua,  ah  Adverfariis  in  Dothina ,  Cultu ,  Dij'ci- 
Mia  ejus,  improb antur.  Pr ami 'tiitur  Apparatus,  qui  Hiftori am  Tur - 
num,  e  SeceJjione  ab  Ecclejia  Anglic  ana,  exert  amm  coniinet. 

)j  De  Chrifco  imitando ,  contemnenaifq\  Mundi  l,ranitatibus  libellus 
■y\thore  Thoma  Kempijn ,  iibri  quatuor.  hiterprete  Sebajliano  Cajlel- 
Mie,  quorum  ultimus  eft  de  Ccena  Dominica . 

;jjk  Bridle  for  the  Tongue,  under  thefe  following  Heads  viz.  Of 
:iphane  atheidical  Difcourfe,  of-  Blafphemy,  of  ralh  and  vain 
1] earing,  of  Falfe-accudng,  or  bearing  Faife^witnefs,  of  Calutiw 
3hr  Slander,  of  Detraction,  or  Backbiting,  and  of  Tale-bearing 

J.  Reproof,  of  Cenforioufnefs,  or  ralh  judging,  of  Scoffing, 

I*  *  •  '  TV- 


a 


Books  Printed  for  W.  Taylor. 

Derifion  or  Mocking,  of  Contumely  or  Reproach,  of  Impreca¬ 
tion  or  Curfing,  of  Brawling,  Quarrelling,  or  Wrangling,  of  Dif- 
fun  illation  or  Deceit,  of  Flattery,  of  Lying,  Equivocation,  Pro- 
mife-breaking,  and  Difcovering  Secrets,  of  Talkativenefs,  Garru¬ 
lity,  or  vain  Babling,  of  Odentation,  or  Boafling,  of  QuerelduD 
net's  or  Murmuring,  of  fool ifh  Jetting,  of  obfcene  and  immodeft 
Talk.  By  Hemy  Hooton ,  M  A. 

The  Book  of  Common-Prayer*  and  A.dminidration  of  the  Sa¬ 
crament,  according  to  the  Ufe  of  the  Church  of  England,  with 
the  Pfalms  of  David  paraphrafed,  together  with  the  Lives  of  the 
Apodles,  and  an  Account  of  the  Original  of  the  Falls  and  Feads 
of  the  Church,  with  feveral  of  the  Rubricks  occafionally  ex¬ 
plain’d.  By  William  Nkbolls^  D.  D. 

Three  Ihort  Treatifes,  viz.  (i.)  A  mcdefl  Plea  for  the  Clergy. 
(2.)  A  Sermon  of  the  Sacerdotal  Benedidion.  (3.)  A  Difcourfe 
publifh’d  to  undeceive  the  People  in  the  Point  of  Tithes,  gfc. 
Formerly  printed,  and  now  again  publifhed,  by  Dr.  George  Hi  ekes 
in  Defence  of  the  Priedhocd  and  true  Rights  of  the  Church,  a- 
gaintt  the  llanderous  and  reproachful  Treatment  of  the  Clergy,  in 
a  late  Book  of  pernicious  and  blafphemous  Doctrines,  emitul’d. 
The  Rights  of  the  Church. 

Bibliotheca  Scriptorum  Ecclefvs.  Anglicans.  :■  or,  A  Colledion  o£l 
choice  Trads,  relating  to  the  Government  and  Authority  of  the; 
Church  ;  containing  one  of  Archbilhop  Bancroft's,  one  of  Dr., 
Harry  Lejly's ,  late  Bidiop  of  Down  in  Ireland,  two  of  Dr.  John 
Tearfon's,  Lord  Bifhop  of  Chefler ,  one  of  Mr.  Samuel  Hoard's,  Au¬ 
thor  of  God's  fove  to  Mankind  ;  one  of  Dr.  Thomas  Bayley's ,  with 
feveral  others.  Recommended  by  the  Reverend  Dr.  George  Hicks „ 
In  Ottavo. 

A  Thorough  Examination  of  the  Falfe  Principles  and 
Fallacious  Arguments  advanced  againlt  the  Chrittian  Churchi 
Prielt-hood  and  Religion,  in  a  late  pernicious  Book,  ironically  in¬ 
tituled,  The  Rights  of  the  Chriftian  Church  ajferted ,  See.  I11  a  Dia¬ 
logue  between  Demos  and  Hierarchia.  Humbly  offered  to  the  Con- 
federation  of  the  Nobility  and  Gentry  of  England,  by  Samuel  Hilf 
Redor  of  Kilmhigton,  and  Arch-Deacon  of  Wells. 

The  unworthy  Non-communicant.  A  Treatife  fhewing  the 
Danger  of  negledting  the  Bied'ed  Sacrament  of  the  Lord’s  Supper  ; 
Wherein  its  primitive  Pradice,  and  the  Reafons  of  its  Difeie  and 
Negled  are  fully  fet  forth,  what  are  meant  by  Eating  and  Drink¬ 
ing  unworthily,  and  Eating  and  Drinking  our  own  Damnation, 
are  made  plain  to  the  meaneft  Capacity,  all  the  mod  material 
Scruples  and  Objedions  commonly  urged  are  fully  anfwered,  to¬ 
gether  with  Forms  of  Prayers  before,  at,  and  after  the  Receiving 
of  the  Holy  Sacrament.  By  William  Smythies ,  late  Morning- Lectu¬ 
rer  at  St.  Michaels  Cornhill ,  London. 

An  Antidote  againd  the  pernicious  Errors  of  the  Anabaptids,, 
or  of  the  Dipping-Sed.  Wherein  the  Dodrines  and  Pradices  oi 
the  Church  of  England  in  relation  to  Infant-Baptifm,  are  briefly 
ludify’d  and  confirnfd  by  Holy  Scriptures  and  Reafon,  by  the 

.  anJi 

*  -1 


Books  Printed  for  W.  Taylor. 

V 

approved  Cuftom  of  Chriftians  in  all  Ages  fiiicc  the  Apoftles,  and 
jy  the  Judgment  of  all  the  Refonmed  Churches  of  Europe,  and 
ivherein  all  Obj^Xions  againft  it  are  fully  anfwered.  By  Marius 
D'AJjigny,  B.  D. 

i  Clam  Ufura  :  or,  A  Key  to  Intereft  both  Simple  and  Compound, 
Containing  Practical  Rules,  plainly  exprefs’d  in  Words  at  length - 
whereby  all  the  various  Cafes  of  Intereft  and  Annuities,  or  Leafes, 
ither  in  Pofteffionor  Reverfion,  and  purchafing  Free-hold  Eftates, 
£efc.  may  very  eafily  be  refolved,  both  by  the  Pen,  and  a  fmall  Ta¬ 
ble  of  Logarithms  hereunto  annexed,  for  all  Rates  of  Intereft, 
and  Times  of  Payments  whatfoever  ^  illuflrated  by  Variety  of  £x^ 
nmples.  To  which  is  added,  Rules  to  be  obferv’d  in  eftimating 
sthe  Value  of  Annuities  or  Leafes,  and  Infurances  for  Lives.  Alfo 
the  Bufinefs  of  Rebate  or  Difcompt,  and  the  Equation  of  Payments 
(very  ufeful  for  Merchants  and  other  Dealers)  is  here  rectify ’d  and 
truly  determined.  By  John  Ward. 

A  Compendium  of  Algebra ,  containing  plain  and  eafy  Rules,  for 
...le  fpeedy  attaining  to  that  Art,  exemplified  by  various  Problems, 
ilwith  the  Solution  qf  their  Equations  in  Numbers,  by  anew  and 
(general  Method  of  refolving  all  Kind  of /Equations  with  gre3t 
|  Eafe  and  Expedition,  very  different  from  all  others  yet  extant, 

[  Applied  to  fquaring  the  Circle,  making  of  Sines,  Tangents,  and 
Logarithms,  with  great  Facility.  Alfo  an  Appendix  concerning 
Compound  Intereft  and  Annuities.  The  fecond  Edition  corrected. 
By  John  Ward. 

"  The  Art  of  Speaking.  Written  in  French  by  Mejjieurs  Du  Port 
Royal  :'ln  purfuance  of  a  former  Treatife,  entituled,  The  Art  of 
{Thinking.  Render’d  into  Evgli/h.  The  fecond  Edition  correXed. 
Logick  ;  or,  The  Art  of  Thinking.  In  which,  befides  the  com- 
on,  are  contain’d  many  excellent  new  Rules,  very  profitable  for 
directing  of  Reafon,  and  acquiring  of  Judgment,  in  Things  as  well 
relating  to  the  InftruXion  of  a  Man’s  felf,  as  of  others.  In  four 
Parts;  (i.)  Confiding  of  RefleXions  upon  Ideas,  or  upon  the  firft 
perationof  the  Mind,  which  is  called  Apprehenfion,  &c.  (z.)  Of 
HCoiifiderations  of  Men  about  proper  Judgments,  fjc.  (g)  Of  the 
ijNature  and  various  kind  of  Reafoning,  &c.  (4th.)  Treats  of  the 

moft  profitable  Method  for  demonitrating  or  illudrating  any 
Truth.  To  which  is  added,  an  Index  to  the  whole  Book.  The 
Fourth  Edition,  corrected  and  amended. 

AP  raXical  Difcourfe  of  Repentance,  reXifying  the  Miflakes  a-, 
bout  it,  efpeeially  fuch  as  lead  either  to  Defpair  or  Prefumption, 
perfwading  and  direXing  to  the  true  PraXice  of  it,  and  demonilra- 
ting  the  Invalidity  of  a  Death-bed  Repentance.  By  William  Payne , 
D.  D.  zd  Edition, 

Collect  anea  Medic  a ,  The  Country  Phyfician  :  or,  A  choice  Col- 
leXion  of  Phyhck,  fitted  for  vulgar  Ufe,  Containing,  (*,)  A 
J|ColleXion  of  choice  Medicaments  of  all  Kinds,  Galenical  and 
JlChymical,  excerpted  out  of  the  moft  approv’d  Authors.  (1.)  Hi- 
hiftorica)  Obfervations  of  famous  Cures,  gathered  and  feleXed  out 

Fthe  Works  of  feveral  ModemPhyficians.  (3.)  Pylax.ce  Median* 

Fan 


Books  Printed  for  W.  Taylor. 

Tarsprima,  or  the  fitft  part  of  the  Cabinet  of  Speciiick,  Select,  and 
Practical,  Chymical  Preparations  made  ufe  of  by  the  Author. 
(4.)  Phylaxx  Medicine  pars  fecunda ,  or  the  fecond  Part  of  the  fame 
Cabinet,  long  fince  promifed  to  the  World,  now  made  publick 
for  the  general  Good  of  Mankind.  By  William  Salmon ,  M.  D. 

The  Declamations  of  Quintilian,  being  an  Exercitation  or  Praxis 
upon  his  Twelve  Books  concerning  the  Inftitution  of  an  Orator: 
Tranflated  from  the  bed  Edition  printed  at  Oxford,  By  a  learned 
Hand.  With  the  Approbation  of  feveral  eminent  Schoolmafiers  in 
the  City  of  London. 

A  brief  Concordance  to  the  Holy  Bible,  of  the  mod  ufual  and 
iifeful  Places  which  one  may  have  occafion  to  feek  for,  in  a  new 
Method.  By  Samuel  Clark ,  M.  A.  . 

A  Collection  of  Divine  Hymns  and  Poems  on  feveral  Occafions. 
By  the  Earl  of  Rofcommon,  Mr.  Dry  den,  Mr.  Dennis,  Mr.  Norris , 
Mrs.  Kath .  Phillips ,  Philomela ,  and  others.  Publifhed  by  Mrs. 
Singer  $  mod  of  them  never  before  printed. 

The  Phyfician’s  Pulfe- Watch,  or  an  Effay  to  explain  the  old 
Art  of  Feeling  the  Pulfe,  and  to  improve  it  by  the  Help  of  a 
Pulfe-Watch.  In  three  Parts.  (1.)  The  Old  Galenick  Art  of 
Feeling  the  Pulfe  is  defcribed,  and  many  of  its  Errors  corrected, 
the  true  Ufe  of  the  Pulfes,  and  their  Caufes,  Differences,  and 
Prognodications  by  them  are  fully  explain’d,  and  Directions  given 
for  feeling  the  Pulfe  by  the  Pulfe-Watch  or  Minute-Giafs.  (z.)  A 
Hew  Mechanical  Method  is  propos’d  for  preferving  Health,  and 
prolonging  Life,  and  for  curing  Difeafes,  by  the  Help  of  tfifc\ 
Pulfe-Watch,  which  fhews  the  Piilfes  when  they  exceed,  or  are 
deficient  from  the  Natural,  (g.j  The  Chine fe  Art  of  Feeling  the 
Pulfe  is  defcribed,  and  the  Imitation  of  their  Practice  of  Phyfick, 
which  is  grounded  on  the  Qbfervation  of  the  Pulfe,  is  recommen¬ 
ded.  To  which  is  added  an  Extra#  out  of  Andrew  Cleyer ,  concern¬ 
ing  the  Art  of  Feeling  the  Pulfe.  To  which  is  added,  A  Let¬ 
ter  concerning  the  Rupture  of  the  Lungs,  which  is  the  Caufe  of 
the  Aftthma  in  Mankind,  In  two  Volumes.  By  the  Learned 
John  Floyer ,  Knight. 

A  Supplement  to  Mr.  Samuel  Puffendorf's  Introduction  to  the 
Hillary  of  Europe ,  containing  a  fuccinct,  but  mod  exad  Hidorical 
Account  of  feveral  European  States  and  Countries,  not  inferted  in 
the  faid  Introduction ;  viz.  The  Lives  of  the  Popes,  the  Turkifh 
Empire,  an  Hillorical  Account  of  the  European  Tartars ,  and  the 
Cojfacks ,  With  fome  Hidorical  Obfer  vat  ions  of  Lapland  and 
Greenland ,  By  J.  C.  M.  D.  S.  Reg.  S.  who  obliged  the  World  with 
Pufendorfs  Introduction  and  Continuation. 

Bp.  Meveridge' s  Sermons  compleat,  in  Ten  Volumes,  Yol.  I, 
treats  of  the  true  Nature  of  the  Chrillian  Church,  the  Office  of 
jts  Miniders,  and  the  Means  of  Grace  adminidred  by  them,  ex¬ 
plain’d,  Vol.  II.  The  Being,  Love,  and  other  Attributes  of  God, 
as  our  Creator,  Redeemer,  and  Sanctifier,  illuftrated.  Vol.  Ill, 
The  Nature,  Perfon,  and  Offices  of  Chrid.  Vol.  IV.  The  Du¬ 
ties  and  Advantages  of  Ghridians*  Vol.  V.  Concerning  the  Glo- 

'  ’  '  ■'  7  .  "  '  r  ry 


Books  Printed  for  W- Taylor. 

ry  of  God,  and  the  Salvation  of  Men,  and  the  Means  of  advancing 
the  one  and  obtaining  the  other.  Among  which  is  the  celebrated 
Sermon  of  Refiitution.  Vol.  VI.  Concerning  the  Deaths  Refur- 
redion,  and  Afcenlion  of  Chrifi,  and  the  Millie  n  of  the  Holy 
Gholh  Vol.  VII.  On  Faith  and  Repentance.  Vol.  VIII,  On 
Chriftian  Holinefs.  Vol.  IX  The  Nature,  Extent,  and  Polity 
of  God’s  Kingdom  on  Earth,  with  other  Divine  Subjects.  Vol, 
X.  Sermons  on  feveral  Subjeds. 

- - His  private  Thoughts  upon  Religion,  digefled  into 

twelve  At  tides,  with  practical  Resolutions  formed  thereupon, 
written  in  his  younger  Years,  for  the  fettling  of  his  Principles, 
and  Condud  of  his  Life.  Printed  in  a  large  fair  Character.  The 
4th  Edition. 

- -  The  great  Neceffity  and  Advantage  of  publick  Prayer 

and  frequent  Communion.  Dehgn’d  to  revive  primitive  Piety  5 
with  Meditations,  Ejaculations  and  Prayers  before,  at,  and  after 
the  Sacrament.  The  Fourth  Edition.  To  be  had  both  in  a  large 
and  fmall  Charader. 

Adverfaria  3  or.  Truths  oppofed  to  fome  of  the  Falfhoods  con- 
tain’d  in  a  Book,  call’d,  The  Rights  of  the  Chriftian  Church  ajferted , 
&c.  By  Conyers  Place,  M.  A. 

The  true  Englijh  Revolution^,  or,  The  happy  Turn  rightly 
taken.  By  Conyers  Vlace ,  M.  A. 

The  FlorilVs  Vade-Mecum.  Being  a  choice  Compendium  of 
whatever  is  worthy  notice  that  hath  been  extant,  for  the  Propa¬ 
gation,  Raifing,  Planting,  Encreafing,  and  Preferving  the  rareft 
Flower^  and  Plants,  &c.  The  3d  Edition.  By  Samuel  Gilbert v 
phileremus. 

The  Compleat  Difliller,  or  the  v/hole  Art  of  Diltillation  pra- 
dically  Bated,  and  adorned  with  all  the  new  Modes  of  Working 
now  in  ufe.  In  which  is  contain’d  the  way  of  making  Spirits, 
Aqua  vita,  Artificial  Brandy,  gfc.  To  which  is  added,  Pharma- 
\  copeia  Spagjrica  Nova  3  or,  An  Helmontian  Courfe  3  being  a  De- 
'  feription  of  the  Philofophical  SaTArmoniack,  volatile  Salt  of 
'  Tartary,  and  Circulation  minus,  8cc.  The  id  Edition,  llluftrated 
with  Copper  Cuts.  By  JV.  T.  Worth. 

The  new  and  true  Art  of  Brewing,  Beer,  Ale,  and  other  Li» 
\  quors,  with  the  manner  of  ordering  of  them  fo  as  to  produce  the 
i  greaterf  Quantity  of  Spirits  in  Difiillation.  By  the  fame  Author. 

A  Critical  Hillory  of  the  Dodrines  and  Worlhips  (both  Good 
I  and  Evil)  of  the  Church,  from  AJam  to  our  Saviour  Jefus  Chrifi, 
I  giving  an  Account  of  the  Origin  of  all  the  Idolatries  of  the  ancient 
Pagans,  as  far  as  they  relate  to  the  Jewifh  Worfhip.  Written  in 
French  by  Mr.  Peter  Jurieu  3  and  faithfully  done  into  Englijh .  In 
Two  Volumes.  * 

The  Works  of  the  late  Reverend  and  pious  Mr.  Tho.  Gouge, 
colle&e d  into  one  Volume,  for  the  Ufe  of  Families,  gfr.  To 
which  is  prefix’d  the  Authors  Funeral  Sermon,  and  a  large  Ac¬ 
count  of  his  Life  and  charitable  Deeds,  by  Arch-Bifhop  Tillotfon . 


Forms 


]  ' 

Books  Printed  for  W.  Taylor. 

_  forms  of  Prayer  before,  at,  and  after  the  Receiving  the  Holy 
Sacrament.  Some  of  which  may  be  fitly  made  ufe  of  on  cither 
Occafions.  The  3d  Edition. 

Travels  through  Denmark  and  fome  Parts  of  Germany ,  by  way 
of  Journal,  in  the  -  Retinue  of  the  Englifb  Envoy  in  1702.  With 
Extracts  of  feveral  La\Vs  relating  to  the  abfolute  Power  of  the 
King,  Religion,  and  Civil  Government  of  the  Country;  Alfo 
an  Account  of  its  Forces,  and  what  Influence  it  has  on  its  Neigh¬ 
bours  ;  with  a  Map  of  the  Ifle  of  Huen. 

Lay-Baptifm  invalid  :  or,  An  Eflay  to  prove,  that  fuch  Bap- 
tiftn  is  null  arid  void,  when  adminiflred  in  Oppofition  to  the 
Divine  Right  of  the  Apoltolical  Succeilion  3  occafioned  chiefly 
by  the  Anti-Epifcopal  Ufurpatioris  of  our  Englifl)  Diffenting 
Teachers  The  fecond  Edition  corre&ed  and  enlarged  3  with  ah 
Appendix.  By  a  Lay  Hand.  To  which  is  prefixed  a  Letter  to 
the  Author,  by  the  Reverend  Geo .  Hickesi  D.  D. 

Motives  arid  Incentives  to  the  Love  of  Go d*  pathetically  dif- 
cours’d  of,  in  a  Letter  to  a  Frierid.  By  the  Honourable  Robert 
£oyle.  The  yth  Edition. 

— - — His  Medicinal  Experiments. 

- — —With  moll  of  his  other  Works. 

ATreatife  of  Foods,  in  general  :  Firfi ,  The  Difference  and  Choice 
which  ought  to  be  made  of  each  Sort  in  particular.  Secondly ,  The 
Good  and  III  Effetts  produced  by  them.  Thirdly ,  The  Principles 
wherewith  they  abound.  And,  Fourthly ,  The  Time ,  Age  and  Con- 
JHtution  they  fuit  with.  To  which  are  added,  Remarks  upon  each 
Chapter  ;  wherein  their  Nature  and  Ufes  are  explained,  according 
to  the  Principles  of  Chymiftry  and  Mechanifm.  Written  in  French * 
by  M.  Louis  Lemery,  Regent-Do&or  of  the  Faculty  of  Phyfick  at 
Paris ,  and  of  the  Academy  Royal  of  Sciences .  Now  done  into 
Englifb.  )  „ 

Plutarch's  Morals,  tranflated  from  th$  Greek9  by  feveral  Hands, 
in  Five  Volumes. 

Earl  of  Clarendons  Hiflory  of  the  Rebellion,  &c.  in  Six 
Volumes  ;  both  large  and  fmall  Paper. 

Archbilhop  Tillotfon's  Sermons,  in  fourteen  Volumes,  in  OClavo. 
Publifhed  by  Dr.  Barker. 

England’s  neweft  way  in  all  forts  of  Cookery*  Paltry,  and  all 
Pickles  that  are  fit  to  be  ufed.  Adorn’d  with  Copper  Plates,  fet- 
ting  forth  the  manner  of  placing  Diihes  upon  Tables  :  and  the4 
nevvefl  Fafhion  of  Mince  Pies.  By  Henry  Howard 9-  Free  Cook  of 
London,  and  late  Cook  to  his  Grace  the  Duke  of  Ormond ,  and  fince 
to  the  Earl  of  Salisbury ,  and  Earl  of  Jfinchelfea.  t  Likewife  the  bell 
Receipts  for  making  Cakes,  Mackroons,  Bifket,  Ginger-bread* 
French  Bread :  Asalfofor  Preferving,  Conferving,  Candying  and 
Drying  Fruits,  Confectioning  and  making  of  Creams,  Syllabubs* 
and  Marmalades  of  feveral  forts.  The  Second  Edition  with  Ad¬ 
ditions  arid  Amendments. 


/■ 


