p 2 arent 
ane sey? me gerhaiyaces 
es} + ae 

Ratyesietes cae 

% 


shisteT bie 
erent 
eee ope see stares 
+ atte 
nb bo Orat 
haa dite 


lesa iat 
aSaty Sosa) 
eyes 


ae) 
Shearer 
sree 6 
veesate 
EN We ere) 
Tere ey seeds 


. 
Tyee kaa 


eS 
hare 


pesepnne gas 
Pee 
. Shei nSie 


Cte 
Fielalel etal tene 
UR ee ae ieae! 


Spare Re eas 


oF erS A 


Aya 
sgt 
* 


ry 
le 


see 
peti ieee we? 
Bae 


3 


Bam 
Sy ioeoe) 
Potaes 


atelares 


ater, 


erater a 
aL Me ates shee STG ee ase nor ae4 
ME TGS Hd eeley 

Hbeis) STAT 
rs caterers ; oye 

ay 5 Perera be ie 


lag heath ne 

Tacit ratte 
t peibitah 
35 e peta 


va 
BALE eh 
rt 


res 


Be 


ees: 
Pepa Tecate 
tes ose i : 


Laat 
Heertene 
het 


< 
suet 
ale ae 


sseseiers 
ereretatee 
its re 
eae 


ates 
Pigta seep eae ese, 
seetse ea 


aes 
pee 
Bde 

soot 


‘ 
52h 
fa 


2 Ps 

ats pease 

SOE YASe Ie Or Se Ue od 

Sei epeistente 7 
1 476) 


bY 
* 


Be 


« 
£ 


hi 4; * i 
i peSdopirganonrcotaeh eek hau oat) 
4 


Sees t eadeoas 
elite 
oe sagt ie 
Wsppursrasaabetrolory 


9c 


1g150 regatsiaretan 
OH i ay ee neratwatares 
i ay ") 


TALS ap al® 
a it 
Peas 
4} 404 


ATS TER 
i 

teak it 
Pam 

sy Wieae be c5pas 

af seach . 7 ot eh 


25) rele nretere ae 
ieee eke petals: we es 


if saheleay 


rs sytsty 
seeect 


. 


aa apoes Me 
Sh 


seoteteast 
oe 


aeeeaat et 


¥2 
Mia tata? 
Ae 
sy a05 09049 


ppats] 
a tip 
4 hs 


18) 


ILTILPAPLLLBALEAAAAS 


oval Ordnance Wedical Library, 


JANUARY 10, 1815. 


(N The Time allowed for keeping each Book. 


aN) 
\ 
iS 


LRPBLEAR BA 


Kime ot a ee Pe 
W A Quarto or Octavo - - - - 2, Weeks. 
® Smaller Books - - - - - - 1 


VA 


N 
'\ N.B. If the Volume is not wanted by any other — 
Subscriber, the Period may be renewed. 


Wb 


LMM 


The undermentioned Fines are imposed for 
keeping Books beyond the Time specified. 


mArFolio. =. - 4 = * * “af 


i 


A Quarto or Octavo - - « 2d. 


A) each Day. 
\ i maller Books nee Se Re 


YL BBB a: 


— a . ——yeswr x a ——e a waa 


> 


‘3 i} Le a 

a 

; hoe oy : by 
i, 


A : 


Vin Ww 


OF THE 


NERVOUS TEMPERAMENT; 


BEING \ 


A PRACTICAL ENQUIRY 


INTO 


THE INCREASING PREVALENCE, PREVENTION, AND 
TREATMENT OF THOSE DISEASES 


’ COMMONLY CALLED 


NERVOUS, BILIOUS, STOMACH, AND LIVER 
COMPLAINTS; INDIGESTION; LOW 
SPIRITS; GOUT, &c. 


THE THIRD EDITION, WITH LARGE ADDITIONS. 


BY THOMAS TROTTER, M.D. 


LATE PHYSICIAN TO HIS MAJESTY’S FLEET UNDER THE COMMAND OF 
ADMIRAL EARL HOWE, K.G.; AND TO THE SQUADRONS COMe- 
MANDED BY ADMIRAL LORD BRIDPORT, K. B. ADMIRAL 
EARL ST. VINCENT, K.B. AND THE HONOURA= 
BLE ADMIRAL CORNWALLIS 35 
MEMBER OF THE ROYAL MEDICAL SOCIETY OF EDINBURGH; AN HO- 
NORARY MEMBER OF THE ROYAL PHYSICAL SOCIETY OF EDIN@ 
BURGH, OF THE MEDICAL SOCIETY OF ABERDEEN 5 AND 
FORMERLY PHYSICIAN TO TH OYAL HOSPI-= 
TAL AT HASLAR, &c. &c. 


Boundless intemperance 

In Nature is a tyranny: it hath been 

The untimely emptying of the happy throne, 

And fall of many kings. SHAKESPEAR, 


PRINTED BY EDW., WALKER, NEWCASTLE, 


FOR LONGMAN, HURST, REES, ORME, AND BROWN, LONDON, 


ee 


1812, 


« 


% i pa fp Scant . Seas ‘ thoes 
a VA Aieeakseraisou mene 
‘ ie onkad y ane wiht vie ; —. 4 


See rain Th: Weaay < 
AUDITS LET RR I se 
; Ye ; i) S Th : a i pete 


~ ~ 
‘ 


a ‘se 7003 pray ‘itt hc cmnactaat Ova" 
: eh BleaaREE Wee Met +0 TMG TAS, 


* 
Ae 
oa 


¥ 
a 
— 


=a 
o 


Pe Wie ty nalerengie renames oF se Daya ae : 


oS ati ee. wv yeaa” sorte B 
: - WO ofOprettAr | ones 
NS ge Ry <o ee 


: ; ren tee ita eee won nore: emer vee 
Es Jag : A * a ars aris Ht tn ones a eee rs Peak. oath at atk 
ee: < +A 


Be tite’) 7 ee: anrvoar POLE: ey 


al a, enloasiacbeltie: wdaws teaga sheiheiise ee an seth 
ee er 
Le a ee ps 

: : ot we ia wager + ¥ Sea ghy, 2 ci it 


= L2¥ide 0% pas gAceras an 


WA Re Cremer, ee ‘aes me 
>, | SEES bte¥ ©, oer ot Kite 


PREFACE 


TO THE 


SECOND AND. THIRD EDITIONS. 


Tur rapid sale of a large impression of this work 
having rendered another edition necessary, many 
important facts are now added, so as to make the 
history of the Nervous Constitution as full as the 
present state of knowledge will admit of. Since 
the publication of this book, I have been consult- 
ed by letter, from different parts of England, by a 
numerous list of nervous patients, who seem to 
have been much gratified by the explanation whieh 
is here given of these diseases. ‘These persons 
had been in the habit of consulting medical au- 
thors; but confessed they had never met with any 
account of their complaints that satisfied them, 
till they perused this work. I can now add with 
great pleasure that the whole have reeovered their 
health. 

My grateful thanks are justly due to those mem- 
bers of the profession, in London and other large 
towns, who have, with a liberality and benevo- 
lence worthy of their learning and eminence, so 
warmly recommended this treatise, as calculated 

a 


“ 


JA PREFACE. 


to produce much good in families of the nervous 
temperament. An opinion expressed with such 
disinterestedness, will amply secure my labours 
against the cavils of the ignorant and illiberal. 
Whoever is acquainted with the medical litera- 
ture of the present day, will perceive, that I have 
used no affected language in the introduction of 
the words “* Nervous TEMPERAMENT,” into my 
title. They are given on the highest authority, 
as referred to in the proper place; for I am ac- 
quainted with no name in medicine, under which 
f would sooner take shelter than that of Dr Gre- 
_ gory, of Edinburgh. As marking a peculiar state 
of body, the term is well adapted to comprehend 
that variety of anomalous symptoms, which cannot 
well be reduced to a generic difinition. Tt is a 
fact, that I think will be generally admitted by 
every physician who has attended to this class of 
diseases, that the treatment or cure, turns almost. 
entirely on the particular condition of the stomach, 
and accommodating medicine to the state of that 
organ. In female habits this is found to be stil] 
more the case than in males: and although it re- 
quires the most acute apprehension to detect the 
different traits of constitution, so as to suit the pre- 
scription to these, yet it appears to me, to reduce 
the practice to a very narrow compass, if the ex- 
hibition of articles of materia medica, is to be at all 
successful, The prevention, therefore, as operat- 
ing with more certainty on the human body, and 
effecting more lasting changes, will always be kept 


PREFACE, Vv 


in view by the prudent physician; while at the 
same time it has the advantage of being more fa- 
miliar to the capacity of the patient. In the 
course of my practice, an immense number of 
cases said to be ** diseased liver,” have been pre- 
sented tome. But according to the pathology on 
which my general doctrine is founded, I consider- 
ed nineteen out of twenty of the whole, to be no- 
thing more than that affection of the hepatic system, 
Midi accompanies an irritable and weak constitu- 
tion of bowels: and I think myself fully justified 
by the health which succeeded a treatment resting 
on these principles.* . But, as I profess no obsti- 
nate attachment to my own opinions, I shall gladly 
retract my errors, when pointed out.by those wha 
are more capable of observation; and most wil- 
Jingly shall I embrace improvement from whatever 
quarter it may come. On the whole, I have great 
reason to be satisfied with having directed my stu- 
dies to this enquiry: for what was originally. writ- 
ten as self defence,+ has in the end proved to be a 
Treatise on Nervous Disorders, ** There is a 
Providence that shapes our ends, rough hew them 
as we will.” SHAKESPEAR. 


Nene on Tyne, March 12, 1812. 


* The inquisitive vader will now find, 7d my doctrine of 
LIVER DISEASE, and the EFFECTS OF MERCURY, are supported by 
Dr Saunders of London, in an appendix to the last edition of 
his work on the Diseases of the Liver, 

+ Vide a Case of Gastrodynia, (Nervous Temperament) in 
Nos. 68 and 72, of the London Medical and Physical Journal, 
for 1804-5, 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 
Dep ICATION 0000 M'O08 F008 SHOES GHD OIE SOO OSB COS GEO SHE CEE ESO vil 


INTRODUCTION... 009 CAD O08 O08 G08 098 OVS O08 008 000 090008 cee Xill 


Cuap. I. The health of the savage state com- 
pared with modern times w..woveoreee 17 


Cuar. IL The medical description of the in- 
habitants of a large town or city ; 
being an analysis of sOCtetYy .0.00008 36 


Cuap. III. Remote causes of nervous diseases... 55 


Cuar. IV. Influence of these diseases on the cha- 
racter of nations, and on domestic 
happiness siniol vs tebinisieadienstiee ieoad 152 


Cuap. V. History and progress of these diseases 178 
Cuap. VI. The general doctrine of these diseases 214 


Cuapr. VII. Prevention and treatment y nervous 
diseases.. secsoosorese eee sovereceeees eee pstinve eeeee 25% 


APPENDIX OU titi $59 


DEDICATION. 


TO JAMES GREGORY, M. D. 


Professor of the Practice of Medicine in the Uni- 
wersity of Edinburgh, Sc. Sc. Sc. 


MY DEAR SIR, 


Iy requesting the sanction of your name to the 
present Work, with honest pride I acknowledge 
the many and great obligations you have conferred 
on the profession of medicine by your estimable 


- talents; but still more, by the manly spirit and 


dignified independence, with which, on all occa- 
sions, you have defended its rights, and maintain- 
ed its honours. At a time when avarice is making 
rapid’ advances to narrow its benevolence, and a 
servile compliance with the frivolous forms of 
fashionable life is degrading its duties, it must be 
grateful to every generous mind, to behold a no- 
bler example from the practical chair of the Uni- 
versity of Edinburgh. And should any merit be 
due to the following pages, it will be derived from 
b 


vill DEDICATION. 


the humble imitation of your zeal, integrity, and 
candour. Mankind have seldom been delighted 
with a picture of their infirmities ; and the physi- 
clan who warns his fellow mortals how to evade 
them, is liable to be considered rather as an offi- 
elous adviser than a welcome monitor. But if it is 
true, as I have said, that nervous diseases make 
up two-thirds of the whole-witlr which civilized so- 
ciety is infested, and are tending fast to abridge 
the physical strength and mental capacities of the 
human race,.it must be the duty of some person 
to sound the alarm, and to announce the danger 
however: unprofitable the task. 

The work, which I have now the honour to lay 
before the public, was written eighteen months 
ago: and though several authors have appeared on 
the same subject since that time, I do not find my 
labours anticipated. ‘The ground which I haye 
taken in the discussion, is in many respects new. 
This View or tHE Nervous ‘TEMPERAMENT may 
therefore be considered as the result of a more 
extensive field for experience than gener ally. falls 
to the lot. of every physician ; for it has been ac- 
quired by attendance on some thousands of cases 
in both sexes, under all the varieties of rank, em. 
ployment, age, situation, climate, &c. | 

I well remember, when I was young in the pro- 
fession, ne diseases puzzled me so much,as those 
of the nervous kind. I was every day committing; 
blunders: in vain I had recourse to books, for. 
books.could. not supply the deficiency, and Tyas 


7 


‘DEDICATION. ix 
frequently mortified with seeing my patients get 
worse under my treatmerit. ‘Time and much ex- 
perience only, were capable of correcting my er- 
rors. What first gave my practice consistency, 
was the careful study of the nervous tempera- 
ment; to mark what were its original peculiarities; 
what its propensities; and by what causes its 
diseases were drawn forth. I am rather apt to be- 
lieve, that most young men, in beginning their 
medical career, run great hazard of mistaking these 
éomplaints; as they only become apparent by a 
concourse of symptoms, that is extremely irregular 
and equivocal. And { have known more than 
one instance of nervous females having been treat- 
ed for typhus fever, to the great alarm of their 
families, when they were labouring under debility 
of body and mind, widely different in nature; and 
attended too by men who called themselves seniors 
in the practice. A prevailing contagion must be 
badly understood, when both physician and pa- 
tient become dupes of such unnecessary fears. I 
am, therefore, in hopes, that the method which I 
have taken in the following investigation, “will 
somewhat contribute to familiarize the junior 
members of the profession with the genius of ner-: 
vous disorders, and to guard them against mis- 
takes in the treatment. : 

But I have no hesitation in thinking, that my 
enquiry may be useful to general readers. We 
meet with numbers of persons in the world, who, 
though obstinate in refusing advice for their own. 

—b2 


x DEDICATION. 


health, are nevertheless very ready to comply with 
every precept that may correct the hereditary pre- 
dispositionsto disease in their offspring. Much of 
my animadversions on these disorders, is with a 
view to the prevention; and if parents and guar- 
dians will only interest themselves in the business, 
my trouble cannot be in vain. It is indeed a task, in 
the present stage of society, that well deserves the 
attention of every friend of his fellow-creatures, 
and his country. Great Britain has outstripped 
yival states in her commercial greatness: let u& 
therefore endeavour to preserve that ascendancy, 
which is so essential to our welfare in the con- 
vulsed condition of Europe, by the only means 
that can do it effectually. That is, by recurring 
to simplicity of living and manners, so as to check 
the increasing prevalence of nervous disorders ; 
which, if not restrained soon, must inevitably sap 
_ our physical strength of constitution ; make us an 
easy conquest to our invaders ; and ultimately con- 
vert us into a nation of slaves and ideots. 

_ It has been customary with writers on these dis- 
eases, to illustrate their subject with the anatomy 
and physiology of the parts concerned. But I 
see no necessity for this in the present enquiry ; 
and my sheets have unexpectedly swelled to a size 
that precludes the introduction of such matter. I 
must therefore refer my young readers to Dr 
Whytt on nervous disorders, and to the valuable 
volume of Dr Saunders on the.liver, for what they 


DEDICATION. De | 


may not find explained in common elementary 
treatises of anatomy and physiology. 

My plan is briefly this: a cursory view is given 
of the health of the savage state, in order ett the 
contrast with civilized wibikind may appear more 
striking. ‘The inhabitants of a large town are 
next described ; which may be construed into a 
kind of medical analysis of society: and this leads 
to an account of the remote causes, as found among 
refined modes of life and luxurious habits. A 
chapter follows on the influence which these disor- 
ders have on national character and domestic hap- 
pines. The history and progress of nervous dis- 
eases, with a general doctrine, or summary of the 
pathology, precede the prevention and method of 
treatment. 

On the whole there will be found little of what 
is called theory in this discusion: unshackled by 
any attachment to system, and unseduced by the 
Jove of novelty, I have endeavoured to delineate 
the Nervous TEMPERAMENT, as I have seen it in 
actual practice, and in a large intercourse with 
mankind, But in treating of a class of diseases 
out of the usual tract of enquiry, I am willing to 
confess, that many peculiarities may be observed, 
and some obscurities detected. I will make no 
apologies to my countrymen, for offering them my 
advice, on matters that so nearly concern their 
health: if the title of my book excites dislike, let 
them remember the perusal of it is voluntary, 
Nor will I insult their discernment, by any ful- 


Xi DEDICATION. 


some justification of my own motives and disinte- 
restedness: if I have acted the part of an honest 
man, that must answer for itself. 

But, sir, should you recognize any thing in these 
labours worthy of the medical school of Edinburgh, 
I shall be greatly overpaid. And as this may be 
the last time I shall appear before the public as an 
author, gratitude compels me to thank the profes- 
sion, both in this country and on the Continent, 
for the kind reception of my former studies, and 
the numerous testimonies given in their favour. 


T remain, my dear Sir, 
With the utmost regard, 
Your most faithful humble servant, 
T. TROTTER. 


Newcastle on Tyne, 
Nov. 8, 1806. 


INTRODUCTION. 


Tur last century has been remarkable for the in- 
crease of a class of diseases, little known in former 
times, and which had but slightly engaged the 
study of physicians prior to that period. They 
have been designated, in common language, by 
the terms, Nervous; Spasmopic; Bitious; In- 
DIGESTION; StoMACH CompLaINnts; Low Spirits; 
Vapours, &c. A generic definition of them, 
from their protean shape and multiform appear- 
ance, is almost impracticable. ‘They vary in every 
constitution, and assume in the same person, at 
different times of life, an inconstant assemblage of 
symptoms, : | 

In another work, when cursorily treating of 
these diseases, I have attempted to give a general 
character of them, and for want of a, better, I 
shall insert it here :—‘* Nervous feelings, nervous 
‘¢ affections, or weak nerves, though scarcely to 
‘* be resolved into technical language, or reduced 
‘* to a generic definition, are in the present day, 


« g, 
XIV INTRODUCTION. 


*¢ terms much employed by medical people, as 
«* well as patients; because the expression is 
‘< known to comprehend what cannot be so well 
‘© explained. An inaptitude to muscular action, 
<¢ or some pain in exerting it; an irksomeness, or 
‘¢ dislike to attend to business and the common 
* affairs of life; a selfish desire of engrossing the 
‘¢ sympathy and attention of others to the narra- 
‘* tion of their own sufferings ; with fickleness and 
‘* unsteadiness of temper, even to irrascibility ; and 
** accompanied more or less with dyspeptic symp- 
‘¢ toms, are the leading characteristics of nervous 
*¢ disorders ; to be referred in general, to debility, 
‘¢ increased sensibility, or torpor, of the alimen- 
‘¢ tary canal.” * 

In the present day, this class of diseases forms 
by far the largest. proportion of the whole, which 
come under the treatment of the physician.— 
Sydenham, at the conclusion of the seventeenth 
century, computed fevers to constitute two thirds 
of the diseases of mankind. But, at the beginning 
of the nineteenth century, we do not hesitate to 
affirm, that nervous disorders have now taken the 
place of fevers, and may be justly reckoned two 
thirds of the whole, with which civilized society is 
afflicted. Dr Cheyne who wrote about the year 
1733, in his work entitled the “* inglish Malady,” 
makes nervous disorders almost one third of the 
complaints of people of condition in England : 


* Mepicina Nautica. Vol. iii, Spasmodic Affections. 


INTRODUCTION. KY 


from which we are led to believe, they were then 
little known among the inferior orders. But from 
causes, to be hereafter investigated, we shall find, 
that nervous ailments are no longer confined te 
the higher ranks in life, but rapidly extending to 
the poorer classes. In this neighbourhood, as far 
as [am able to judge from my own experience, 
they are by no means limited to the rich: and it 
affords a melancholy picture of the health of the 
community, to observe this proportion so very 
large. It is probable the other countries of Europe 
do not exhibit such general examples of these dis- 
eases ; as many of their causes are to be traced to 
the peculiar situation of Britain; its insular varie- 
ties of climate and atmosphere ; its political insti- 
tutions and free government; and above every 
thing, its vast wealth, so diffused among all ranks 
of people. 


A 


VIEW 


OF THE 


NERVOUS TEMPERAMENT, 
Se. Sc. Se. 


CHAPTER I. 


The health of the savage state compared with 
modern times. 


Tue savage and civilized states of man, as 
may be observed in the earliest accounts 
of history, have been marked by physical 
traits of character, as well as moral: and 
though his diseases and his vices may be 
smaller in number in the one condition 
than in the other, they have nevertheless 
exhibited signs and. dispositions peculiar 
to themselves. Our rude ancestors, born, 
C2 


18 | 
and brought up in a hut or hovel, almost 
naked from infancy to manhood, and con-- 
stantly exposed to the weather, whether 
employed in agriculture, tending herds 
and flocks, or the more laborious pursuits: 
of hunting and fishing, had few bodily dis- 
orders.. Death, under such modes of liv- 
ing, is to be considered as the decay of 
nature’ some may fall by war, and a few 
by accidents; but none are’ brought to 
_ the grave by excess or debauch. It is no- 
torious. that all the savage tribes of the 
new continent, when compared with Eu- 
ropean manners, are observed to be chaste, 
temperate, and abstemious.* Tacitus, 
speaking of the manners of the Germans 
in his days, describes the convivial assem- 
blies of that people, where drinking fer- 
mented liquors was carried to the most 
ferocious degree of ebriety ; but no where 
does he mention their diseases as having 
sprung from this cause. ‘The favourite 
beverage among them seems to have been 
beer, which when duly prepared, is a whole- 
some drink. But their manner of living must 


_ * The inhabitants of some of the South Sea Islands 
are examples to the contrary.. 


19 


ina great measure have counteracted the 
effects of intoxication: such as the robust 
exercises, and their simple food, “ consist- 
ing of wild apples, fresh venison, curds and 
cream,’ and the like, none of which were 
calculated to oppress the stomach and hurt 
digestion, as we observe among full livers 
in modern times. Indeed it is to be re- 
marked every where, how much longer the 
jaborious porter and drayman, who get of- 
ten drunk, will continue their career, than 
the less-exercised gentleman: a proof that 
labour, by invigorating and hardening the 
body, makes it resist even the effects. of de- 
bauch. How soon would the morning 
dram of a Billingsgate fish-wife, destroy 
one of our high bred women of fashion ? 
The virtue of chastity was general among 
- the Germans: matrimony, it is said, was 
_ severely kept; and the intercourse of the 
sexes, before the body was full-grown, was 
strictly prevented. Here was one of the 
strongest securities of health ; as a contrary 
practice in this age, is one of the great 
causes of bodily decay. We are also told, 
that the large limbs and muscular form of 
the parents, were expressed in the shape of 
the children, Another proof of bodily 
C3 


20 

health was, that every mother was able to 
nurse her own child; the opposite to this 
parental office, is one of the lamentable 
failings of modern constitutions. It was 
part of the matrimonial contract, for the 
wife to share with the husband his labours 
and dangers, and to be his companion in 
peace and war. ‘This custom, of course, 
prevented all the evils of a sedentary life. 
In a country that held the marriage vow so 
sacred, adultery was seldom found ; and it 
was considered in so heinous a light, that 
neither beauty nor wealth could ever find 
the adulteress another spouse. Such was 
the healthful system of manners practised 
in the woods of Germany, which were the 
cradle of those laws that now govern this 
land of freedom. | 

The feudal system, which succeeded to 
the age which Tacitus describes, and which 
spread over Europe, was highly favourable 
to vigour of body, and by consequence to 
health. ‘The women were then accustom- 
ed to attend their husbands to the field, 
and to remain in sight of the battle; not 
only with a view to load them with praises 
and caresses at the conclusion; but to re- 
mind them of the protection due to wives 


2) 

cand children. Courage and valour, with 
such incentives would become invincible. 
All the pastimes and tournaments of those 
-days, were only kinds of palzestree for exer- 
cising the body, so as to enure it to martial 
fatigues. The females were constant spec- 
tators of these tilts and feats, and their 
presence did not fail to animate the brave; 
and it was the province of the fair to re- 
ward the victor, and confer the prize on 
the successful candidate. Now in the 
woods of Germany, where mothers of fa- 
milies shared with their husbands all the 
toils and privations of the field, such com- 
plaints as dzlous and nervous, must have 
been unknown, because ali the ‘causes 
which render them prevalent in this age, 
did not then exist. ‘They are the progeny 
of wealth, luxury, indolence, and intempe- 
rance, as they now appear. | 

In the eighteenth chapter of Genesis, we 
meet with some fine proofs of the simplicity 
of living among the patriarchs, which may 
be called the earliest stage of civilized so- 
ciety. When Abraham entertained the 
three angels in the plains of Mamre, he 
hastened to welcome them with all the 
tokens of a kind hospitality. Sarah his wife 

Cc 


22 


kneaded three measures of fine meal into 
cakes, and baked them upon the hearth. 
Abraham himself went to the herd, and 
fetched a calf tender and good, and gave 
it unto a young man to dress it. And he 
took butter and milk, and the calf which 
he had dressed, and set it before them, and 
they did eat: and he stood by under a 
tree, as if to watch when they wanted any 
thing. Again, when Lot entertained two 
angels, it is said, he made a feast, and 
baked unleavened bread. These banquets . 
for angels, so simply detailed in holy writ, 
would be considered poor fare for the epi- 
cures and gluttons of our times, who dine 
at a Lord Mayor’s feast, if we are to judge 
from the list of dainties, just published, of 
one of these entertainments. We are far- 
ther told, in the sacred volume, that Boaz 
invited Ruth to come at meal time, and 
eat bread, and dip her morsel in the vine- 
gar with the reapers ; and he reached her 
parched corn to eat. Our present labourers 
in the harvest would be sadly pinched with 
hunger before they would content them- 
selves with such simple fare. In the Iliad 
and Odyssey of Homer, we meet every 
where accounts of the like simplicity of 


23 


food and manners. When the foreign am- 
-bassadors came to treat with the Roman 
consul Dentatus, they found him at his 
farm dressing tutnips: a species of amuse- 
ment and economy that does not enter the 
budget of British statesmen. Where the 
earth is thinly peopled, and when com- 
merce has made no progress, mankind live 
chiefly in families: and their habits and 
employments uniformly inculcate tempe- 
rance and sobriety. Society and popula- 
tion must be far advanced, before luxurious 
living, and vicious customs, attain such 
growth as to enervate the human frame. 
The nervous system, that organ of sensa- 
tion, amidst the untutored and illiterate 
inhabitants of a forest, could receive none 
of those fine impressions, which, however 
they may polish the mind and enlarge its 
capacities, never fail’to induce a delicacy 
of feeling, that disposes alike to more acute 
pain, as to more exquisite pleasure. The 
timid dispositions are apt to increase in 
proportion to delicacy of feeling and debi- 
lity of frame. We see the truth of this 
fully exemplified, as we recede from the 
country to the town; from the occupation 
of the husbandman and farmer, to that of 


24, | 
the artisan and manufacturer; and from 
the rustic exposed to all the vicissitudes of . 
weather and season, to the recluse life of 
the citizen. The physician, of a cultivated 
understanding, who knows how to appre- 
ciate the resources of his art, in approach- 
ing the sick bed of any of these persons, 
would endeavour to investigate the marks 
and dispositions of body and mind, that 
give the peculiar cast of character to each, 
' before he would attempt to prescribe for 
their diseases. He would not confound 
the complaint of the slim soft-fibred man- 
milliner with that of the firm and brawny 
ploughman; nor would he mistake the 
nervous cramp of the delicate lady, for the 
inflammatory pleurisy of a nut-brown coun- 
try girl. If both expressed pain in the 
same spot or organ, he would, in consider- 
ation of original temperament, along with 
the concourse of symptoms, resolve into 
first principles what belonged to each con- 
stitution ; and thus analyze the morbid 
phenomena, so as to give a degree of cer- 
tainty to his indications of cure, and a de- 
cision to his practice, that would imsure 
success, if the disease was at all remedi- 
able. 


* 


25 


As the human being, im a state of pro- 
gressive improvement and _ civilization, 
quits his earthen-floored, straw-clad cot- 
tage on the skirts of the forest, or a creek 
of the ocean, where his time had been 
spent in hunting and fishing, for the town, 
where he is to turn himself to trade and 
manufacture, he necessarily undergoes a 
prodigious change of circumstances. He 
forsakes a mode of life that had been pre- 
sented to him by nature; and in adopting 
anew situation he becomes the creature of 
art. When occupied in hunting and fish- 
ing for support, exposure to the external 
air in winter and summer, gradually en- 
dued him with such hardihood and torpor, 
as to make him proof against the extremes 
of either cold or heat. His diet, well suit. 
ed for the purposes of nourishment, was 
sufficiently palatable, without any of those 
adventitious luxuries which cookery sup- 
plies. His blood and juices were not, 
therefore, inflamed or vitiated by highly- 
seasoned dainties ; and his sentient system, 
while it was fully excited for all the move- 
ments of vital energy, was never raised to 
excess by inordinate stimulation. By 
spending so large a portion of the day out 


| 26 
of doors, he enjoyed the full benefit of a 
pure and unpolluted atmosphere. ‘The 
muscular parts of the body becoming thus 
firm and flexile from constant exercise, all 
his motions are performed with strength, 
ease, and agility. His walk is marked by 
stability, and his running by swiftness. 
Having few avocations to engage his at- 
tention, he soon acquires uncommon dex- 
terity in all his gestures and actions. He 
ascends the mountain and precipice, or 
climbs the tree and rock, with equal safety 
and speed: the arrow from his bow is dis- 
charged with force, and sure of its mark : 
the dart and the javelin are alike unerring 
in his hands. He manages his hook and 
tackle, as well as his skiff, with surprising 
knowledge and address; and in the vari- 
ous attitudes of swimming, he is accom- 
plished, graceful, and unrivalled. ‘Though 
in his domestic transactions, he performs 
all the relative duties of husband, father, 
and son, he seems exempted from the 
turmoils and cares which these connec- 
tions necessarily bring with them in civi- 
lized society. The child is early instruct- 
ed to follow and imitate his parent in the 
sports and toils of the field, and soon learns 


27 
to earn his own subsistence. No painful 
emotions for his success in a busy world, 
harass or perplex the minds of the father 
and mother, for it does not depend on un- 
certain patronage or capricious friendships. 
But the young savage considers it a part 
of his filial engagements to share his board 
with his parents, when age and infirmity 
have unfitted them for labour. His passion 
for the sex is temperate, because it meets 
with no refined allurements, from dress, 
manners, or fashion, to inflame it beyond 
bounds. ‘Tacitus, speaking of the manners 
of the Germans, says, ‘ ‘They behave them- 
“<< selves with the strictest modesty, being 
<¢ debauched with no alluring objects, with 
‘no provocatives in banqueting.” Re- 
venge seems the only passion carried to 
extremes, to be attributed chiefly to a so- 
litary life. When the savage makes love, 
he is almost sure of a return: he is neither 
perplexed with doubts nor fears, nor tanta. 
lized by false hopes and promises. The 
damsel of the forest is a stranger to those 
airs and duplicities of the coquet and the 
prude, which characterise some of the sis- 
terhood in every great town. Hence the 
uncivilized being is free from all those 


28 
mental disquietudes, as well as bodily ail- 
ments, which are frequently brought on 
in both sexes, by disappointed love, and 
an ill-requited passion. ‘Thus health and 
vigor of body, with insensibility or passive 
content of mind, are the inheritance of the 
untutored savage; and if his enjoyments 
are limited, his cares, his pains, and his 
diseases, are also few. 

If then it be certain that the rude con- 
ditions of society furnish mankind with a 
hardihood of frame, that is susceptible of 
few diseases; let us examine man in the 
polished circle of life, occupied by pleasure, 
or busy in trade and manufacture. His. 
modes of living are in every respect the re- 
verse of the savage state: his body and 
mind are enervated by debilitating powers, 
that render him unfit for labour or great 
privations ; and his diseases acquire a more 
diversified train of phenomena. ‘The hus. 
bandman, in point of constitution, may be 
considered as a medium between the two 
extremes. By his active occupation, his. 
labour, and exposure in the external air, 
he partakes of the strength of the barbari- 
an; and a corresponding tone is given ta 
his nervous system: his mind is not dee 


29 

bauched by effeminacy ; while his tempe- 
rance and moderation secure him against: 
the disorders which prevail in fashionable 
hfe. | 

But as we pursue our enquiry among the 
inhabitants of large cities, we shall observe 
mankind divided into. an immense variety 
of persons ; all distinct by fortune, by busi- 
ness, and modes of living; and again, all 
these greatly influenced by original consti- 
tution and education. Among rustics, and 
still more among savages, there is an uni- 
versal sameness of character. For as the 
ambition or ingenuity of man finds out for 
him new employments; these, while they 
draw forth latent talents, call forth also new 
passions and desires: so that however much 
he may be styled the creature of habit, he 
is in many respects the creator of his own. 
temperament. The Indian paddling in his 
canoe ; or the Norwegian sculling his skiff, 
remain unchanged intheir manners; because 
they return at night to their family, and to 
intercourse with their kindred. But em. 
bark man at an early age in a large ship, 
such as an East or West Indiaman, to tra- 
verse the deep as a navigator and seaman, 
and you soon find that he changes to a dif: 


30 


ferent species of being, and exhibits traits 
of a profession, of the most singular kind, 
which differ from all others.* This new 
occupation while it distinguishes him from 
all the world beside, in gesture, manner, 
and address, bestows also a new disposition 
on his morbid state. Hus diseases, there- 
fore, show a particular genius and feature, 
such as are found only among his own class, 
and which spring from causes peculiar to 
the sea life, as scurvy, &c. 

It has been remarked by some acute po- 
litical arithmeticians, particularly the fa- 
mous Gregory King, that the marriages in 
London and other great towns, produce 
fewer children than those in the country. 
The reasons for this difference are very 
obvious: he gives examples of the fact, 
and then enumerates the causes, which are 
the following :t 


* Compare the character which I have drawn of 
the British seaman, in my preliminary discourse in the 
first volume of Mepicina Nautica, with the Indian 
in Robertson’s or Raynal’s History of America; or 
with the Bond-street Lounger, as pourtrayed in any 
modern comedy or novel. 

t+ See his Political Conclusions, printed in Cham- 
bers’s Estimate. 


* 


a) 


1. The more frequent fornications and 
adulteries. | 

2. A greater luxury and intemperance. 

_3. Greater intenseness to business. 

4. Unhealthfulness of the coal smoke. 

- (He ought to have added, impure air, 

from hot and crowded rooms.) 

5. Greater inequality of age between 
husbands and wives. | 

All these causes, beside many others, 
still hold good in the present times. His 
first and fifth reasons require some explana- 
tion, which can be done best at this part 
of my work. It will be allowed on all 
hands, to be the intention of nature, that 
years nearly equal should be joined in mar- 
riage: and were mankind left to themselves 
this would be the case. But art and fa- 
shion have become dictators to matrimony, 
in this venal age. The young man of the 
present day, must begin the world for him- 
self; and like a knight errant in romance, 
must fight his way to a fortune, before he 
dares to take a wife. It is too often the 
case, that the sordid parent winks at the 
‘son’s indiscretions with the sex, rather 
than consent that he should marry the wo- 
man he loves, without arich dower. And 

D 


$2 

while by this growing custom, a certain 
number of defenceless females are doomed 
to allthe horrors of prostitution, in order to 
gratify the passions of the young, and the 
avarice of the old, it is one grand step to 
the degeneracy of the species. It is thus 
the best years of manhood pass away be- 
fore marriage is thought of: it then be- 
eomes a convenience more than an equal 
attachment of the parties; and hence we 
frequently observe-a difference of thirty 
years and upwards, when the lady may be 
said to be rather the mistress, than the wife 
of her husband. Amidst these unnatural 
unions, it is pleasing to mention some ex- 
ceptions.. Many of the old noble families 
ef the nation, have within these few years, 
married at the prime of life. And it is to 
be remarked, that these marriages have all 
been noted for happiness and reciprocal af- 
fection: the men being all distinguished 
by worth and sobriety ; as the ladies are 
by their virtues, accomplishments and 
beauty. | 

When Gregory King made his observa- 
tions,. about the year 1696, London con- 
tained little more than one half the inhabi- 
tants it does at this day. Other great 


Ba 6) 
towns throughout the kingdom, have in- 
creased in like proportion. Now if such 
effects followed the city and town life in 
those times, how much greater must they 
be in the present. Certain it is, the phy- 
sician of the seventeenth century, had not 
the multitude of nervous cases to treat, 
which now occupy the profession. It is 
probable also, as far as experience goes, 
that the proportion of marriages, without 
children, and the number of miscarriages 
in married life, are greatly increased ; and 
these are chiefly confined to the town lady, 
or at least to people. of better condition. 
It was a remark of the sagacious King, 
that the system of agriculture in his days, 
was advancing to diminish the number of 
cottagers; but to increase the village, and 

still more the town. If such was the case 
a hundred years ago, how much more rea- 
son must there be now for the observation, 
when it is notorious, that some overgrown 
farmers possess capitals of twenty or thirty 
thousand pounds ; and engross lands that 
formerly supported twenty or thirty fami- 
lies! The middling class of countrymen 
are, by this practice, annihilated, forced 
to betake themselves to trade, and there 

D 2 


34 
is no degree of rank left between the af-- 


fluent farmer and his menial servants =: 
thus, © 


a-bold peasantry their country’s pride, . 
When once destroy’d can never be supplied. 
GoLDSMITH.. 


The lying-in state exhibits some of: the 
great disadvantages of refined life. ‘To the 
delicate, well-bred woman, it is always at--. 
tended with danger; and. the diseases 
which immediately follow, even a fortunate 
delivery, are often fatal.. The rude-eondi- 
tions are exempted from all these. The 
nervous system rendered strong and resist- 
ing, surmounts the various changes and 
evolutions of the birth, and subsequent lac- 
tation, without being much harassed or 
weakened in the struggle.. Bountiful na- 
ture, unfettered.in her operations, and left 
to herself, easily accomplishes her purpose. 
The robust rustic therefore attends her hus- 
band in the field in a few days; while the 
genteel lady is stretched on her couch, of- 
ten a prey to some nervous affection, but 
always slow in convalescence. 

_ Again, the wives of the countryman and 
savage seldom fail in being mothers of a 


35 


numerous offspring. Butsterility, or what 
is next to it, premature birth, are common 
evils in towns and cities. Ninety-nine 
-cases of abortion, out of the hundred, may 
be imputed to a relaxed nervous frame; 
either from hereditary debility, an impro- 
‘per education in childhood, or other causes 
that are known to weaken the nervous sys- 
tem. Does not every woman know how 
‘quickly frights and alarms bring on mis- 
carriages? In a vigorous constitution, ac- 
companied with a healthful set of nerves, 
such causes can do no. harm; but where 
the sensibility trembles at every breath, 
the state of pregnancy is attended with 
«constant terror and dread. 


D3 


36 


CHAPTER IL - 


The medical description of the inhabitants of « 
town or city; being an analysis of society. 


In order to bring detached facts into a ge- 
neral view, I shall divide the inhabitants 
of a large town into the following classes, 
and give a concise history of each, so far 
as it may be necessary to shew how busi- 
ness, customs, and manners, influence 
health. 


Class 1. Literary men. 
2. Men of business. 
3. The idle and dissipated. 
4, The artificer and manufacturer. 
5. Those employed in drudgery. 
6. Persons returned from the colo- 
nies. 
. The female sex, consisting of the 
higher, middling, and lower 
orders of women. 


bo f 


1. Literary men. The philosopher and 
man of letters, who devote most of their 


87 


time to study, must lead a sedentary life. 
The person who thinks and reflects much, 
must retire ; and retirement necessarily ab- 
stracts from exercise and amusement. ‘To 
be shut up in a close room, little exposed 
to a free and pure air out of .doors, soon 
induces a sallowness of countenance ; and 
as want of exercise accompanies this con- 
finement, the muscular power is diminish- 
ed, the fleshy parts grew soft and flabby, 
and general debility is the consequence. 
Few men attached to literary pursuits are 
active, strong, and athletic: as if study 
was incompatible with bodily exertion, the 
gesture of a thoughtful man.is always so- 
lemn ; and his pace and motions are mea- 
sured and uniform when he walks abroad. 
The posture of the body in.a studious man 
at his desk, is unfavourable to health. 
The lungs are seldom expanded by full in- 
spiration; and while the bronchial cells 
are not duly stimulated by the powerful 
influx of an oxygenized atmosphere, the 
whole pulmonary organs lose their vigour, 
and the blood that floridity which is. neces- 
sary for vital energy and a glowing com- 
plexion. All the secretions, and their ex- 
cretories, fall into inaction from want of 
D 4 


€ 


38: 

muscular motion. By little recreation, and 
no change of objects to relieve the atten- 
tion, the whole nervous system sinks into 
listlessness and inactivity. ‘The mind it- 
self, by pursuing one train of thought, and 
poring too long over the same subject, be- 
comes torpid to external agents: and an 
undue mental exertion seems to subtract 
from the body much of that stimulation 
which is required for many operations in 
the animal economy, particularly what be- 
longs to emotion and passion. ‘The pow- 
ers of digestion, with all the viscera sub- 
servient to them, partake in a particular 
manner of this derangement, and grow un- 
equal to their office. ‘The debility and in- 
activity which take place in the chylopoe- 
tic organs, re-act on the nervous part of 
the frame; and the faculties of intellect, 
as sympathizing in a great degree, with all 
these highly sensible bowels, are influenced 
by the general disorder. Hence the nu- 
merous instances of dy spepsia, hypochon- 
driasis and melancholia, in the —— 
character. 

But it is to be supposed, that all men 
who possess genius, and those mental qua- 
lifications which prompt them to literary 


39 


attainments and pursuits, are endued by 
nature with more than usual sensibility of 
nervous system. And there are moral 
causes to which they are exposed beyond 
others, that may have a large share in the 
production of their indispositions. The 
man who studies and writes for his bread, 
often depends on a precarious subsistence ; 
sometimes the cold charity of an insolent 
bookseller: a mind of fine feeling, under 
the pressure of these circumstances, must 
frequently undergo the most poignant suf- 
ferings. Such seem to be the chief causes 
which give a decided character to the pre- 
disposition and diseases of literary men. 
To this class properly belong all the Jearn- 
ed professions ; and all those who culti- 
vate the fine arts, either for a livelihood or 
amusement. — | we ie 
2. Men of business. The subjects of 
this class are very numerous in all our 
great towns. It includes all those engag- 
ed in trade: many of them, no doubt, 
have much active bodily exercise ; but that 
part of them confined to the counting- 
_ house and shop, cannot be said to enjoy 
the advantages of air and activity, as re- 
quisite for vigour of body. ‘The posture of 


40 


leaning over a desk, contracts the motion 
of the lungs, and impedes the functions of 
the stomach. These persons are common- 
Jy pale and. sallow, soft-fibred, and of a 
slender make. Not a few of them behind 
the counter, approach in external form to- 
wards the female constitution; and they 
seem to borrow from their fair customers 
an effeminacy of manners, and a smaliness 
of voice, that sometimes make their sex 
doubtful. Such degeneracies in corporeal 
structure, cannot fail of engendering a pre- 
disposition to diseases of the nervous kind. 
It is surprising to see and hear with what 
address and loquacity some of these Utile 
beings in London, set off their wares; as if 
there were a necessity for a vender of silk 
and muslin to be as soft as the commodity he 
deals in. You will perceive them to whee- 
dle the buyers of goods out of their money, 
by a kind of fascination. Yet it has often 
been matter of wonder to me,. how a lady 
of spirit can listen to the prattle of these 
manikins, without disgust ; more especially 
when it is considered that they have sup- 
planted the sex in an employment which is 
their birth-right, and are devouring that 
bread which belongs to thousands of poor 


4) 
“women, who are thereby consigned to a 
life of drudgery, if not of wretchedness. 

But the man of business, in this commer- 
cial age, is not always to be estimated a 
correct liver: luxury follows hard upon 
gain. However punctually the ledger may 
be kept in the fore part of the day, the ta- 
vern too often has its share of the evening. 
The person who has any thing to sell, very 
naturally praises the quality of his goods ; 
and as he has daily to dispose of the like 
assortment, he soon acquires a kind of 
phraseology and eloquence in making a 
bargain. ‘This sort of conversation is al- 
ways enlivened by something to drink: 
the vender knows well how liquor dilates 
the heart, so that if he can persuade his 
eustomer to drink a bottle of wine, he is 
almost sure of getting his price. This is 
what makes the trading town so full of ta- 
verns : hence those frequent instances of 
nervous and bilious complaints which fol- 
low habitual inebriation, to be daily met 
with in medical practice. 

Mankind when in pursuit of money, do 
not give themselves much trouble about 
intellectual attainments. The man of bu- 
siness however fortunate he may have been 


42 

in the acquisition of wealth, is therefore 
little fitted to enjoy retirement; for riches 
do not bring content. When he comes 
to retire he is of all men the least satisfied ; 
for his easy circumstances become the root 
of all his evils; and from having no longer 
any motive for action, he falls a certain 
prey to low spirits. ‘These are the persons 
in this age, when riches are so generally 
diffused, that make up the bulk of hypo- 
chondriacs in this country. So certain it 
is, that happiness in this state of being, 
rather consists in the pursuit, than in the 
possession of our object. 

All those employed in the public offices 
of government, and in the houses of trad- 
ing companies and banks, come within 
this class.: they are all distinguished by a 
sedentary method of life within doors ; and 
when they pass the middle age, are often 
troubled with indigestion and. low spirits. 

3. The.idle and dissipated. This is also 
a numerous class in every great town. 
These persons are the subjects of diseases 
which originate chiefly from excess and 
debauch ; and are not unfrequently spec- 
tacles of misery the most humiliating to 
human nature. Such disorders appear 


4S 
especially in the prime of life; often in 
early youth; and if they are not fatal be- 
fore forty, they introduce premature seni- 
lity, decrepitude and fatuity. A large city 
or town may be truly called a hot-bed for 
the passions: all the vices that more par- 
ticularly enervate the constitution and. in- 
jure health, can be there practised long 
without suspicion or restraint, and indulged 
to the utmost: thus the young and inex- 
_perienced are quickly initiated into every. 
fashionable folly, and a vortex of dissipa- 
tion. ‘The sexual appetite is prematurely 
excited by the numerous hordes of unfor- 
tunate women that are permitted to range 
the streets. The powers of procreation 
are thus weakened beyond recovery, be- 
fore the body has acquired its full stability 
and growth; and the vigor of constitution 
as well as the faculties of mind are shook 
to the very centre. When such debilitated 
beings have progeny, the sins of the fa- 
ther are visited upon the children, and they 
appear a race of invalids from their birth. 
The employment of males, as servants 
within doors, to do what might be better 
done by women, is one great means of e- 
nervating a large proportion of the commu- 


4.4: 

nity. Young countrymen are often brought 
into genteel families to fill these unmanly 
occupations. ‘They quickly degenerate in 
looks and strength. They are taught to 
dress like dolls or puppets, to please the 
fancies of their fashionable masters and 
mistresses, whose squeamish tastes would 
sicken at any thing robust coming’ near 
them. These footmen or lacqueys, are also 
exposed to the temptation of high living 
and drunkenness, and soon forget the sim- 
plicity of country fare and innocent man- 
ners. At atime when strong and athletic 
warriors are required to fight the battles of 
the nation, it-is a vile spirit in high life 
that encourages such degeneracy among 
men in the lower orders, and leaves the sex 
a prey to want, or to seek their bread in a 
brothel. 

But as there is a disease the peculiar 
scourge of unlawful embraces, so its effects 
on health are equally disgusting and dan- 
gerous. The inconsiderate young man 
who contracts this complaint, from deli- 
cacy often conceals his misfortune till it. 
has gained a degree of virulence not to be 
described. ‘This distress is frequently ag- 
gravated by mental sensibility; and fami- 


45 


lies and connexions are at once involved. 
in general calamity. In the advanced 
stage, hideous deformity of body is often 
the consequence ; but in all the gradations 
of this infection, a long and rigorous course 
of mercury is the ouly remedy to be de- 
pended on. Mercury, rendered antivene- 
real and poisonous by oxydation with the 
different acids, is considered a certain cure 
for syphilis; but its exhibition is sometimes 
fatal to the constitution, and constantly 
leaves behind it a weakened frame of 
nerves, and a disposition of stomach and 
bowels liable to spasmodic affections. 

All full livers and drunkards come with- 
in this class. Frequent surfeits from high- 
seasoned food; and frequent intoxication 
from vinous or spiritous potations, commit 
dreadful ravages on the body and mind. 
It is a misfortune in polished society, that 
many indulge in these excesses without 
thinking they are doing wrong ; and often 
sink into the grave by diseases of their 
own creating, without being warned of 
their misconduct. The disgusting pro- 
pensity to luxurious eating fortunately 
is seldom the case with the fair sex; but 
where it happens, a train of nervous and 


46 


bilious complaints are more certainly the 
consequence. ‘I’o devour a large quantity 
of food is only a bad habit ; most persons 
could be nourished with half what they 
feed on; so that not only temperance as 
to quality, but abstemiousness as to quan- 
tity, is one of the golden rules of health. 

4. ‘The artificer and manufacturer. The 
numbers of this class are daily increasing ; 
the natural effect of the vast commercial . 
wealth of the united kingdoms. The ar- 
tisan and manufacturer are not confined to 
the town ; for almost every village through: 
out the country possesses some branch of" 
manufacture. Here again all the effects 
of a sedentary life appear,—the uneasy 
posture. and unwholesome air. But many 
species of manufacture are unhealthful 
from noxious metallic fumes, to which the 
workmen are exposed, such as those of 
mercury, lead, copper, &c. The exhaust- 
ing heats of furnaces, smelting houses, la- 
boratories, ovens, boilers, &c. in different 
kinds of employments, have their diseases ; 
but the most noxious are those which fix 
on the nervous system. ‘Those trades also, 
where the articles wrought give out con- 
siderable quantities of ante gases, 


7 


from the decomposition of animal and 
vegetable matter, are insalubrious ; the 
workmen commonly look pale, sallow, and 
dejected. 

Such persons as are exposed to the heat 
of large fires in their labour, and undergo 
sudden changes of temperature, cannot 
fail of being soon exhausted in constitu- 
tion. As far as I have obtained informa- 
tion, it does not appear they live long. 
Their profuse perspirations, induced by 
hard work, as well as by great heats, give 
most of them a propensity to drinking. 
Were they always to quench their thirst 
by water only, the excessive labour might 
be borne for a length of time ; but the 
strongest malt liquors, often mixed with 
spirits, are the common drinks of men em- 
ployed near fires. 

But I have also met with many severe 
stomach complaints among forge-men, 
where there could be no suspicion of irre- 
gular living. ‘Twenty of this kind occur: 
red in the neighbourhood of Newcastle in 
the last three years, and some of the num- 
ber proved fatal. The standing posture, 
when long continued, is very hurtful to 

E 


48 


the bowels,-as often happens among, black- 
smiths. 

I do not find that the pitmen-in- the 
coal-mines in this district are liable to any 
particular diseases; when temperate in 
drinking, they commonly live to a great 
age. 

5. Those employed in drudgery.. This 
class is composed of both sexes ; they grow 
strong. and broad-shouldered from labour, 
provided it is chiefly out of doors. But.in 
this class we often. observe many addicted 
to drunkenness; and I much doubt if their 
work is ever so severe as to injure health, 
when they are-regular livers. 

In the town where I. now live, it is the 
custom for women of all ages to do much 
of the drudgery, which in other places, is 
done by men. Nothing appears so. dis- 
gusting in the eyes of strangers, as to see 
a woman carrying. a. quarter of beef,. or 
two, carcases of mutton, to. market; or 
serving bricklayers on the top of a-.house, 
while young men are employed in female 
business within doors. 

It may however be considered as a 4 fice, 
substantiated by the daily experience of 
physicians, that all the diseases which are 


4.9 


caused by hard labour, poverty, and want, 
are much easier of cure, than those which 
arise from indolence, luxury, and debauch. 
A constitution that has been weakened by 
subtraction of nourishment, may soon 
have its energies restored by suitable regi- 
men, diet, and medicine: but the frame 
that has been wasted of its vital powers, by 
excessive stimuli and debilitating pleasures, 
has seldom or never been brought to its 
former strength. 

6. Persons returned from the colonies. 
It is very common in the present times, 
for men brought up to business, to spend a 
number of years in the colonies, till they 
are able to return with fortunes. They 
may therefore be considered as a distinct 
class, in this enquiry. These persons 
bring with them to Britain, indelible marks 
of the effect of the climates they have lived 
in: dyspeptic complaints, and ail their 
nervous accompaniments, are the never- 
failing diseases of this enervated people. 
The tropical heat, and luxurious modes of 
living, are chiefly to be blamed in the pro- 
duction of such bilious and nervous ail- 
ments; and they have usually taken so 
deep a root in the constitution, that they 

k 2 


50 


are rather aggravated than relieved by our 
variable atmosphere. ‘The foggy weather, 
and fickle temperature of Britain, keep the 
feeble nerves of these relaxed frames in a- 
state of constant irritation. 

The diseases of tropical. climates, but 
particularly the fevers of some countries, 
weaken the nervous system, produce great 
mobility, and a disposition to spasmodic 
~complaints. Hence the chylopoeitic viscera,. 
but particularly the liver, become the seat 
of so many painful affections ; and the word 
Lilttous, has grown a theme of constant con- 
versation in England,. as well as'in the co- 
lonies. 

7. The female sex. Nature has endued 
the female constitution with greater deli- 
cacy and sensibility than the male, as des- 
tined for a different occupation in life. 
But fashionable manners have shamefully 
mistaken the purposes of nature ; and the 
modern system of education, for the fair 
sex, has been to refine on this tenderness 
of frame, and to induce a debility of body, 
from the cradle upwards, so as to make 
feeble woman rather a subject for medical 
disquisition, than the healthful companion 
of. our cares. ‘The medical literature. of 
the present day, affords abundant, but me- 


51 


lancholy proofs of the justness of this re- 
mark. Their whole tenor of living, and 
domestic economy, are at variance with 
health. The female infant before she can 
well crawl along the floor, is taught some 
employment that will encourage her to 
sit, to stoop, or to walk two-fold. ‘That it 
should be rude for an innocent young girl 
torun about with her brother, to partake 
of his sports, and to exercise herself with 
equal freedom, is a maxim only worthy of 
some insipid gossip, who has the emolu- 
ment of the family physician and apothe- 
cary solely in view. A man of fortune 
and wealth, when he builds a stable or a 
dog-kennel for his horses or hounds, takes 
care that these companions of his field- 
sports shall be duly preserved sound in 
wind and limb, by frequent exercise out 
-of doors, when he does not hunt. But in 
no part of his premises do you see.a gym- 
nasium for his children. If the ingenious 
arts are chiefly to be valued as they in- 
crease the sum of human happiness, we 
thus make it a misfortune to have a house 
over our heads, though it may shelter us 
from the frost, the tempest, and the rain ; 
for it too often becomes the means of de- 


ES 


52 


priving us of health, when it prevents ex- 
ercise and excludes pure air. But we in- 
dulge our boys to yoke their go-carts, and 
to ride on long rods, while little miss must 
have her more delicate limbs crampt by 
sitting the whole day dressing a doll. An- 
cient custom has been pleaded in favour 
of these amusements for boys, as we read 
in Horace: but it is no where recorded 
that the infancy of Portia, Arria, and 
Agrippina was spent in fitting clothes for 
a joint baby. 

All female employments that are per- 
formed in the sitting posture, injure health; 
and are hurtful in proportion to the early 
age in which they are begun. Few of the 
sex are entirely free from this habit. 

Women of very moderate fortune, and 
the wives and daughters of all reputable 
tradesmen in this country, may be said to 
indulge in most of the follies of their su- 
periors. They can have their hot close 
rooms, drink strong hyson, and keep late 
hours, as well as a dutchess. ‘The female 
constitution, therefore, furnished by na- 
ture with peculiar delicacy and feeling, 
soft in its muscular fibre, and easily acted 
upon by stimuli, has all its native tender- 


53 


ness increased by artificial refinements. 
“Hence the diseases of which we now treat, 
are in a. manner the inheritance of the fair 
sex: when-to these we superadd all the 
preposterous customs of fashionable life, 
need we wonder at the numerous instances 
of bad health and feeble existence, so often 
to be met with among them. 

One of the curses which was pronounc- 
ed against some of the Jewish mothers, is 
unfortunately realized: among many of our 
fair countrywomen. ‘ The tender and de- 
“¢ licate woman among you, which would 
“< not venture to set the sole of her foot up- 
‘* on the ground, for delicateness.and ten- 
“ derness, her eye shall be evil towards the 
* husband of ‘her bosom, and iowards her 
*¢ son, and towards her daughter.’ * 

No text in scripture, or any other book, 
ever conveyed'a more just censure on the 
indiscreet conduct of a parent to the off- 
spring. From having injured her own 
frame by refinements in living, the mother 
thus sows the seeds of disease in the con- 
stitutions of her children: hence a weak 
body, delicate nerves, and their conse- 


& 


* Deuteronomy, chap. xxxvili. v. 56. 
E 4 


54 


quence, a sickly existence, become here- 
ditary. Such may. be here called a fair 
interpretation of those emphatic expres- 
sions, ** Her eye shall be evil towards the 
“ husband of her bosom, and towards her 
** son, and towards her daughter ’”’ 


Cony 


& 


CHAPTER IIL. 
Remote causes of nervous diseases, 8c. 


"Tur remote causes of nervous diseases are 
chiefly to be sought for in populous towns ; 
and increase in proportion to the deviation 
from simplicity of living. ‘The state of ci- 
vilized mankind is thus exposed to causes 
of bad health, which have no power among 
rude nations, viz.: In 
Rico Aan, 
2, lixercise. 
3. Food. 
4, Cloathing. 
5. Passions of the mind. 
6. Intense study. 
7. Lactation. . 
8. Miscarriages and premature la- 
bours; &c. 
9. Climate. 
10. Medicine. 
1. Air. A pure atmosphere is of the 
first importance to sustain animal life in 


56 


full health and perfection. Mankind in 
the earliest ages of the world must have 
‘soon learned this. Although they had no 
knowledge of either the chemical qualities 
or the mechanical properties of common 
air, some particular deviation from the 
usual- standard, was reckoned the chief 
cause of epidemic fevers. ‘The senses in a 
great measure were the best tests of a taint- 
ed atmosphere, especially that of smell: 
and where large collections of animal and 
vegetable filth were found in a state of cor- 
ruption, offensive effluvia would be quickly 
detected, and would be avoided. But a 
more correct method of judging of the me- 
dium in which we breathe is now obtained 
from chemical philosophy; for indepen- 
dent of any noxious substance which may 
impregnate the atmosphere, as arising from 
the decomposition of animal or vegetable 
matter, or other sources, it is liable to be- 
come noxious to life, by whatever means 
the oxygen or respirable portion is destroy- 
ed, lessened, or abstracted. Such is the 
case when a number of persons are confi- 
ned in a small place; or where large fires 
are kept, and the doors and windows made 
too close. It is thus the city or populous 


57 
town is rendered less salubrious than the 
country. Narrow lanes, high buildings 
and houses, filthy kennels, small apart- 
ments, huge warehouses, manufacturing 
establishments, cellars under ground, con- 
sumption of fuel, and a large population, 
are so many sources whence the air is 
contaminated. The sun-shine scarcely 
beams on any window of a house in town: 
the ventilation of the upper parts of the 
building is imperfect ; but the lower stories, 
particularly what is under ground, can re- 
ceive no pure portion at all. The business 
of the whole inhabitants almost confines 
them within doors; so that the very com- 
plexion and countenance discover a citi- 
zen. It is familiar to people bred in great 
towns, to remark, how imperfectly all the 
trees and shrubs grow in their little gardens. 
Nothing but the foul atmosphere is to be 
blamed for this; for the richest soil cannot 
correct or prevent such rickety produc- 
tions. Animal growth labours under the 
same disadvantages as the vegetable tribe. 
A deficiency of colour, in old times, sug- 
gested to physicians the predominance of 
some humour in the body: and from this 
cause particular names of temperament 


58 


were assigned to different people. But we 
now impute a delicate look, and a pale 
face, to confinement within doors, and to 
‘breathing an impure air. That portion of 
the atmosphere which tinges the skin with 
‘a lively hue, and the blood with a florid 
colour, is known to be oxygen. Yet so un- 
natural and perverted are fashionable opi- 
nions on this subject, that a blooming com- 
plexion is thought to indicate low life and 
vulgarity in breeding. What a depraved 
mode of thinking! What a false standard 
for beauty; to prefer a sickly sallow hue 
of the countenance to the roses of health! 
And yet seek to imitate them by artificial 
means. ‘This wan and pallid complexion, 
or negation of colour, is always an indica- 
tion of debility, and usually accompanies 
bad health, from whatever cause, but chief- 
ly imperfect action of the digestive powers. 
The functions of respiration and digestion 
have therefore some dependence on one 
another. Some persons give the name of 
bilious to these sallow looks : but they cer- 
tainly often appear where there is no suffu- 
sion of bile; and in this stage are to bé 
imputed to deficient oxygenizement of the 
blood. 


oo 


- But it is the known effect of the oxygen- 
ous principle of the atmosphere, when duly 
inhaled from a current breeze, not only to 
saturate the blood with floridity, but to ex- 
hilirate the spirits in a high degree ; invi- 
gorate and redden the muscular fibre ; be- 
stow energy on every nerve, and call forth 
at once mental and corporeal strength. 
Most. persons must have taken notice of 
that languor, drowsiness, and dislike to 
motion, which are felt in a close, warm, 
and crowded room. Instances have come 
within our own observation, where the can- 
dies scarcely seemed to burn, and where 
one half of the company was yawning at 
the other, without knowing the cause. 
Should any philosopher, who might pity 
the somnolency of the party, attempt to 
open a sash by way of correcting the air, 
his politeness would be apt to give offence. 
What effect the popular lectures of Mr 
Davy, and those delivered in provincial 
towns, may have on such assemblies, time 
only can shew. A modern rout is certain- 
ly, one of the completest. examples of a 
warm crouded house. The good lady, who 
entertains for the evening, commonly thinks 
herself honoured in proportion to the num- 


60 - 
ber of visitors ; and the guests find them- 
selves supplied with every elegance, except 
a pure cool zephyr. ‘The warm full thea- 
tre, or dancing assembly, if not duly per- 
flated, like the rout, are so many marts of 
bad health.* Impure air saps the consti- 
tution by slow approaches; but no miner - 
more certainly carries his point at last. I 
hope Mr Davy t+ is duly attended by all 
those matrons who keep boarding schools 
for young ladies, in and near London. 

One of the great misfortunes which some 
species of manufacture have brought on 
this country, is the employment of chil- 
dren, before the body has attained its full 
growth. During infancy and childhood, 
and till the human frame has acquired its 
full stature, it would appear, that more 
pure air is required for the purposes of 
health than at a remoter period of life. 
The heart of the child much surpasses that 


* Persons who are fond of frequenting those un- 
wholesome crowds ought to be informed that nothing 
is so indelicate as to breathe respired air. To drink of 
the same cup is the height of politeness compared with 
this custom. 

+ Lecturer on Chemistry, at the New Institution, 
and highly celebrated for his discoveries in the science. 


61 


of the adult in the frequency of its pulsa- 
tions; and every movement of the body is 

more constant and quicker, so that it seems: 
to be never at rest, but during sleep. 

Hence the greater expenditure of vital air. 

The child who is early employed ina wool- 

len or cotton manufactory, is to the village 

plough-boy, what the town-lady is to the 

country girl. They are both examples of 
nature’s precepts being disobeyed: for to’ 
be stewed in foul air, is the same in effect, 

wherever it happens. — 

A warm unventilated nursery is a nui- 
sance of the first magnitude. Nurses and 
servants have too often the sole superin- 
dance of these apartments: fashionable 
mothers at least, as some may be justly 
called, seldom visit nurseries. Bad health, 
particularly among the delicate children, is 
too often brought on by a close sleeping 
place. It is only when the weather is ex- 
tremely cold, that a fire should be permit- 
ted in these apartments; for during the 
sleeping state, the body is not sensible of 
the deficient purity of air; and it may be 
substracted altogether, without any strug- 
gle being observed, and without the body 
being waked. Itis thus infants are so easi- 


62 


ly suffocated or overlaid: as the air be- 
comes more impure the stupor increases, 
till respiration stops; and the child is. al- 
ways found in the sleeping posture.* Sleep 
is not only the image of death, but it seems 
a step towards it. | 

The modern practice of confining child- 
ren to sleep ina crib, till they are three 
or four years of age, is highly commenda- 
ble: it has thus all the advantages of the 
breast to put it to sleep, and is in no dan- 
ger of being overlaid. ‘The size of the bed 
afterwards should still be proportionedtothe 
child; and-they should never be permitted 
to lie with a grown person. ‘The convul- 
sions of infants, which are purely a ner- 


* In 1801, while I resided: at: Plymouth Dock, a 
house adjoining, took fire, in an upper apartment of 
which, that had.no chimney, a poor woman with. eight 
children perished. They were all found in bed, in the 
sleeping posture ; and had been suffocated, from the 
flame surrounding the room, and exhausting the air, 
for no part of them was scorched. During the alarm 
no person thought of this poor family, otherwise the 
whole of them might have been easily rescued, for only 
a portion of the premises was consumed. It is proba- 
ble that none of them waked, as their cries would have 
been heard, the house being only of two low stories, 
and this garret room. 


63 
vous affection, we know to be often 
brought on by want of ventilation ; and 
we naturally expose them at a window for 
recovery, as we do with a lady fainting in 
a crowded room. 

A few years ago, the numerous deaths 
which happened in a foundling hospital in 
Dublin, made a great noise in this coun- 
try. On inguiry, it was found that foul 
air had the chief share in this uncommon 
mortality. Some hospitals in Paris, about 
the same time, were scenes of the like de- 
struction to infant life. Now children who 
survive these nurseries and hospitals, or 
dungeons as they may be called, are so 
stinted in their health, that they are unfit 
for every occupation that requires strength; 
and should they have families, hereditary 
debility and deformity are the lot of the 
ofispring. Of such vast importance is pure 
atmospheric air to the growth and health 
of the human body. 

The following instance of a shocking 
calamity, shews how necessary it is, for all 
descriptions of persons to be informed, 
that without a constant supply of pure air, 
life cannot be sustained. 

-In 1797-8, a small passage vessel be- 

F 


64 

longing to Southampton, had on board 
seventy men, women, and children, com- 
ing from Jersey ; among whom were many 
soldiers and their families. It began to 
blow fresh breezes, and for the safety of 
his sloop, the master laid the hatches over, 
and. covered them with a tarpaulin, which 
he battoned down, for better security. 
When the vessel: came within the isle of 
Wight, the hatches were opened, but, 
dreadful to be told! the whole of the pas- 
sengers were found dead!!! The master, 
who did all this through ignorance of the 
effects of foul air, became mad,:and died 
soon after. | 

2. Exercise. This assistant of health 
cattnot well-be said to form a part of the 
recreations.or amusements of a great town. 
The inhabitants have. neither been taught 
to wish for it, nor how to enjoy it. A 
formal walk before dinner to call.on a few 
friends, or to make some purchases at. a 
shop, bounds the travels and excursions of 
thousands of women in London, and other 
populous cities. If the streets are disa- 
ereeable to walk, or should the least. fa- 
tigue be felt, the remainder of the journey 
is performed in a coach. The male part 


65 


of the community do not much avail them- 
selves of greater advantages. Can a few 
strides to the office or counting house be 
deemed exercise? Or can a lounge in 
Bond-street be considered as a parade for 
masculine health? ‘The whole business of 
a town-life is transacted within doors: 
scarcely a house in London has an area at- 
tached to it sufficient for the sports of a 
child, where it may stretch its limbs, and 
ramble about. Where there is no space 
out of doors appropriated for the play and 
diversions of children, such as running, 
leaping, and wrestling, a manly vigour of 
body can never be acquired. The stature 
may, no doubt, attain its common height ; 
but can there be firmness of muscle, or 
energy of nerve in such a frame? Like 
the plant that is reared in a hot-house, it 
may grow tall and Jook fair, but the first 
gale of wind lays it low. The city child, 
like the dwarf, being denied the free mo- 
tion of its limbs, is secluded from play- 
mates of its own age, and soon imitates 
the manners of its seniors. It thus insen- 
sibly acquires a volubility of tongue, and 
fluency of speech, that appear like prema- 
ture talent of mind. But this early show 
F 2 


66 

of intellect, is not stable in its growth ; and 
such a youth seems to learn nothing after 

fourteen. But the child educated in the 
country, who. has no bounds set to his 

walks and sports, is indifferent to study and 
all mental acquirements: his great flow of 
spirits gives him constant amusement, and 

his good health keeps his limbs in continual. 
motion. ‘The body having thus copied the 

dictates of nature to its full growth, will 

be better prepared by the soundness of its: 
texture, for those intellectual recreations, 

of either elegance or utility, that are to be 
the future employment of life. The town 

and the country in this respect may be said 

to exchange commodities. The youth bred 

in the village will have the best chance for 

sound health and pure morals, and will find. 
the city the best mart for these virtues. 

But as a vigorous corporeal structure, as 

well as intellectual excellence, cannot re- 

‘main long in the town without degeneracy, 

perhaps not more than three generations ; 

so if these endowments are to be preserved 

in the same family, they are only to be re- 

cruited by resuming the habits and amuse- 

ments of a country life. 

~ Broad shoulders, a full chest, and mus- 


67 


cular limbs, are concomitants of exercise 
and labour; they mark what is called the 
brawny form. The limb or muscle that is 
often exercised and put in motion, expands 
from the influx of bleod that is thereby di- 
rected to its vessels ; which increased in- 
flux of blood distends the arteries and 
veins; supplies the fleshy parts with a 
larger proportion of nutriment, and ulti- 
mately adds bulk, firmness, and strength, 
to the moving fibre. During active mus- 
cular exercise there is a great expenditure 
of the fluids: the more aqueous and vola- 
tile are thrown off or exhaled, by sweat and 
insensible perspiration ; while an increase 
of appetite to supply the wasted juices, is 
a necessary effect of this expenditure. The 
organs of digestion also gain new vigour, 
and perform their office with more facility 
and expedition : the food assimilates more 
readily with the other secretions, and is 
propelled with greater rapidity along the 
intestinal tube. 

By competent exercise, the blood that 
returns to the heart from the extremities, 
is duly liberated of certain parts intended 
to be thrown off; and acquires in the 
lungs fresh qualities from the inspired at- 

FS 


68 


mosphere. It is probable this functfon 
of the pulmonary organs could not go on ~~ 
in a manner consistent with health, with- 
out some degree of agitation, such as we 
observe during the increased motion of 
the chest. It is thus exercise out of doors 
bestows on the countenance the animated 
bloom of health. The mental faculties re- 
ceive a like degree of energy from active 
bodily motion ; it shifts the train of thought 
from one object to another, forces new im- 
pressions on sensation, and a change of 
ideas is the consequence. 

All the nations of antiquity, of which 
we read, who trusted to the art of war for 
safety, found it expedient to train their 
youth to hardy and active exercises, for 
the purpose of making them soldiers. The 
Olympic games, Gymnasium, Palestra, 
Campus Martius, Circus, and Arena, were 
so many places appropriated to the diver- 
sions and shows of chariot-racing, horse- 
racing, running, wrestling, fencing, throw- 
ing the coit, &c. Without stated exhibi- 
tions of this sort, the inhabitants of large 
cities could not be well inured to bodily 
fatigue, or become athletic. It was also 
necessary to keep up emulation among 


69 


young men, and to grant-marks of distinc- 
tion to those who excelled in these achieve- 
ments. Xenophon, in drawing the cha- 
racter of a finished general, lays great 
stress on the pains taken by his hero to de- 
tach his officers on hunting parties, that 
they might learn to bear thirst, hunger, in- 
clement weather and danger.* He must 
know little of a military life, who weuld 
trust the defence of a country to a sedeu- 
tary people. All the qualifications of a 
soldier are wanting among such persons. 
What drilling or training could ever fit 
“such men to sleep with impunity on the 
wet turf, to bear cold, fatigue, and all the 
privations peculiar to actual war? 

_ Dr Gillies, in his animated description 
of the Olympic games and Gymnastic ex- 
ercises of the Greeks, says, ‘ Bodily 
“ strength and agility were accompanied 
** by health and vigour of constitution. 
‘¢ Their athletic hardiness bore without 
‘¢ inconvenience, the vicissitudes of cold 
‘*¢ and heat. Even in the scorching heat 
“ of July, (for that was the season of’ the 
«- Olympic games,) they received bare- 


* Cyropedia. 
vr 4 


7O 


“¢ headed the direct.rays.of the sun. And 
** the firm organization:acquired by perpe- 
“ tual exercise, counteracted: that. fatal 
‘* propensity, to vicious indulgence, too 
“¢ natural to their voluptuous climate, and 
“* produced: those inimitable models: of 
‘¢ strength..and beauty, which are so de- 
“ servedly admired in the precious remains 
“* of Grecian.statuary. There is.a courage 
“¢ depending on nerves and blood, which 
“* was improved to the highest pitch 
“© among the: Greeks.’’* 

If therefore exercise tends so:powerfully 
to strengthen the body and’ exalt: the cou- 
rage, how fatal to health must be the total 
privation of it? And: if there is one disease 
more than another that is indueed by indo- 
lence, by sloth, and want of active motion, 
it is that train of nervous weaknesses, 
which: puts on the form of every other 
complaint, and becomes one of the'greatest 
stings to humam happiness. 

3. Food. Luxurious living, joined: to 
other causes, has a manifest tendency to 
induce nervous and bilious derangement. 
When a large quantity of rich food is con- 


“* History of Greece, ‘chap. vi. 


hl 


sumed, heightened to the palate by all the 
arts.of cookery, more than nature demands. 
must be taken down. A variety of dishes 
also. invites. to inordinate appetite and glut. 
tony: The organs of digestion are thus 
oppressed and weakened by the surplus; 
the liver in particular is enlarged in its vo- 
lume: the blood is charged with a richer. 
quality, and every vessel and gland stimu- 
lated to excess. The nervous system is 
also preternaturally excited, and grows 
highly susceptible of stimulus, and’ easily 
affected in mind by pleasurable sensation. 
If a life of indolence is led under luxuriant 
diet, joined ‘to the liberal use of fermented’ 
liquors; together they form that habit which 
constitutes the voluptuary. It is charac- 
terised’ by a florid’ complexion, sparkling 
eyes, an unmeaning simper, softness of 
flesh, and fullness of blood, rather than 
obesity. ‘The mind is light, indolent, and 
indifferent to every thing but pleasure. A 
person of this ‘description'is perpetually in: 
pursuit of some selfish indulgence ; courts: 
the acquaintance of all who keep good 
tables; flatters the weak part of the sister-: 
hood, but shuns the society: of sensible wo- 
men ; and calls. philosophers insipid com- 


72 


panions, and disturbers of a party. Such 
@ man is remarkable for a great flow of 
spirits at the convivial board: but his 
round of delights is not lasting. He that 
laughs and drinks with every one, grows 
sad in time; and early decrepitude, and 
nervous debility, are his certain portion. 
As his youth was remarkable for good 
health and levity of disposition, so his age 
is tortured by low spirits and_ paralytic 
weakness. 

There are some persons of the nervous 
temperament, that are much addicted to 
high seasoned food, which I call luxurious 
living. This custom is often first acquir- 
ed by indulging in the use of hot articles, 
with a view to obviate flatulence, and 
other dyspeptic feelings ; but it insensibly 
gains ground, and by repetition it is con- 
firmed into habit ; and the excitability, or 
vital power of the stomach, is speedily ex- 
hausted and worn out. Such persons com- 
monly die of apoplexy, after a voracious 
repast, or linger a while under incurable 
palsies of the limbs and other organs, and 
idiotism. : 

When persons, after a course of hig 
living, are compelled to feed on a. less 


Wie: 


generous diet, we often meet with painful 
stomach complaints, and low spirits. In 
these cases the organs of digestion seem to 
be so much weakened by the previous ex- 
cess, that poor fare is unable to stimulate 
them to healthful action. Under such 
circumstances men are apt to seek relief 
from spiritous liquors, which quickly ter- 
minate existence, by aggravating all their 
complaints. 

The use of TEA in this country, as an ar- 
ticle of diet, comes under this head. ‘The 
consumption of the Chinese plant is enor- 
mous throughout the united kingdoms : it 
is a beverage well suited to the taste of an 
indolent and voluptuous age. To the glut- 
ton it affords a grateful diluent after a vo- 
racious dinner; and from being drunk 
warm, it gives a soothing stimulus to the 
stomach of the drunkard. But however 
agreeable may be its immediate flavour, 
the ultimate effects are debility and ner- 
vous diseases. ‘There may be conditions 
of health, indeed, where tea can do no 
harm, such as in the strong and athletic ; 
but it is particularly hurtful to the female 
constitution; to all persons who possess 
the hereditary predisposition to dyspepsia, 


74 


rand all the diseases with which it is asso- 
ciated; to gout, and to those who are 
naturally weak nerved. If this observation 
is just, we may account for many taking it 
with impunity, and holding out the dele- 
terious qualities of tea as a medical chi- 
mera, conjured up to magnify the import- 
ance of physic, and to frighten old women. 
Fine tea, where the narcotic quality seems 
to be concentrated, when taken in a strong 
infusion, by persons not accustomed to it, 
excites nausea and vomiting, tremors, cold 
sweats, vertigo, dimness of sight, and con- 
fusion of thought. In its more diluted 
state; sweetened with sugar, and softened 
by the judicious mixture of bland cream, it 
is grateful to the stomach, gives a soothing 
sensation as if it lulled pain, exhilirates 
the spirits, produces wakefulness, relieves 
fatigue; and from being taken down warm, 
promotes perspiration, and acts powerfully 
by the kidnies. 

But I have known a number of men and 
women subject to nervous complaints, who 
could not use tea in any form, without feel. 
img a sudden increase of all their unpleasant 
symptoms, particularly acidity of stomach, 
vertigo, and weakness of the eyes. ‘Though 


75 

fond of tea myself, I have sometimes beer 
obliged to leave it off, by suspecting that 
it added to my natural shortness of sight. 

As the use of this article in diet extends. 
among the lower orders of the community 
and the labouring poor, it must do the more 
harm. A man or woman who has to go 
through much toil or hardship, has need of 
substantial nourishment: but that is not 
to be obtained from an infusion of tea. 
And if the humble returns of their industry 
are expended on this leaf, what remains 
for the purchase of food better adapted to 
labour? In this case tea becomes hurtful, 
not only from its own narcotic quality, but 
because that quality acts with double force 
in a body weakened from other causes. 
This certainly is one great reason for the 
mecreased and increasing proportion of ner- 
vous, bilious, spasmodic, and stomach com- 
plaints, &c. appearing among the lower 
ranks of life. This fact has long been con- 
firmed to me in different countries, and 
among persons varying much in their em- 
ployments. I have lately met with many 
severe and obstinate cases among poor 
tradesmen and labourers, where it was plain 
they originated from this cause. I also 


76 


think that the use of tea often paves the 
way to habitual dram-drinking among this 
class of society, more ban among the bet- 
ter orders. 

It is worthy of remark, that the finer the 
tea, the more it contains of the pernicious 
quality ; hence the greens which are 
gathered in the bud, or before the leaves 
fully expand, have with that colour the 
strongest flavour. To sip frequently of 
green tea, produces wakefulness and gaiety 
of spirits: hence some literary men, who 
protract their studies to a late hour, use 
strong tea, like the late Dr Johnson, to 
keep them awake. It also possesses an 
emetic quality, on which account it can 
seldom be taken in the quantity to induce 
sleep. Dr Cullen, of Edinburgh, who was 
subject to gout, said, he never could take 
it without feeling some arthritic affection 
of his stomach; yet many dyspeptic peo- 
ple find it highly agreeable, while others 
feel immediate bad effects from indulging 
in it. | 
The nervous ailments of female constitu- 
tions, which are often, induced and aggra- 
vated by tea-drinking, in advanced age, 
are apt to terminate in palsy. And from 


te 

a concomitant torpor of the absorbent sys- 
tem of vessels, they also very frequently 
terminate in general dropsy. Coffee pos- 
sesses the narcotic principle ; but in a less 
degree than tea: the same diseases follow 
its use, though its hurtful quality is per- 
haps diminished by roasting. How far the 
hot water taken with tea and coffee, in- 
creases their deleterious effects on the sto- 
mach and nerves, may depend on natural 
temperament. Some persons are in the 
habit of drinking them very warm, while 
others prefer them at a lower temperature. 
The best degree I should think, about blood 
heat. 

A number of aromatic substances,. which 
include all the spices and peppers, as well 
as some other articles, are in common use 
as condiments of diet. It may be part of 
natural instinct, that food to be nourishing 
and agreeable, should be sapid. Yet the 
infant at the breast seeks no addition to 
his milky stream ; and it is doubtful to me, 
if any of the warm ingredients are useful. 
The tropical savage uses pepper with his 
vegetable meal, in great quantity. Now 
this kind of diet is watery and insipid. 
Without something savoury, he has na 


78 
pleasure in eating it ; and the stimulus of 
seasoning decomes necessary. But the 
European who imitates this custom, with 
his turtle and beef soup, while he is a resi- 
dent in the East or West Indies, errs egre- 
giously from the indications of nature. 
All dyspeptic persons are fond of hot ar- 
ticles. When I hear them call for Cayenne 
pepper at table, it is not difficult to find 
out their modes of living. It is a key to 
the temperament, and facilitates the physici- 
an’s inquiries. But plain fare, such as all 
dyspeptics ought to be fed on, needs no 
aid of this kind: and I differ widely 
from those medical authorities who ineul- 
cate the practice ; the whole of them ma- 
nifestly weaken the stomach. All the 
spices owe their warm pungency to a vo- 
latile oil: but as far as I have -correctly 
watched their effect, mstead of promoting 
digestion, they evidently disturb it. They 
float on the surface of the food, and irri- 
tate the cardia or upper orifice of the sto- 
mach, which has the immediate effect of 
inverting the motion of the muscular 
fibres ; and then the flatulence appears by 
rising upwards, and producing eructation. 
This belching is said to be salutary, though 


79 


proved to be a symptom of disease. If 
these articles are ever admissible at all, it 
must be in advanced. life, when the vigour 
of the stomach and intestinal canal grow 
naturally torpid and slow. Of themselves 
they yield nothing of the nourishing prin- 
ciple. Soy, catchup, and all the warm 
sauces, increasing daily in number, have 
the same pernicious effects. But when we 
hear of a dozen of large bacon hams be- 
ing melted down into a few pint bottles of 
condiments, that pamper and _ poison 
health, while they destroy what would 
have been wholesome food for numbers, it 
is a moral evil of great magnitude, and 
ought to be prevented. All the hot pep- 
pers have also the effect of hurting the 
teeth, by corroding the enamel. 

It is worthy of remark, that condiments 
of every kind, from custom, become very 
desirable, till at last no food is relished 
without them. But it is rather the palate 
than the stomach to which they are grate- 
ful. Some of the peppers are caustic, and. 
cannot fail of injuring, if not corroding the 
coats of the first passages. Even mustard, 
though one of the mildest of the condi- 
ment kind, is capable, in the form) of a 

G 


80 

sinapism, of vesicating the sole of the foot, 
over which is spread the thickest epidermis 
on the whole surface of the body. Must 
not such a substance be hurtful to the de- 
licate stomach? To mustard and pepper 
I have never accustomed myself, from in- 
fancy upwards ; and I remain a proof of the 
truth of my own doctrine, few persons being 
more exempt from dyspepsia. All these 
articles ought, therefore; to be denied to 
ehildren, which will be one grand step to 
make them dislike every hot ingredient in 
diet, when they grow up. Should brandy, 
or those waters which are impregnated with 
the kernel flavour, be mixed with sauces 
of any kind, it is evident they must be 
noxious. They are dangerous as being 
narcotics the most enticing of all articles 
applied to the taste ; and children that are 
early accustomed to such poisons, will run 
great hazard of ending their career as Sots 
and dram-drinkers. 

Food, that affords but: a slight sie as 
and whatever ismuch disposed to ascesency, 
is hurtful in weak stomachs. Hence the 
long or mordinate use of fruits predisposes 
to indigestion. The diseases in question 
are often met with in ladies of the Roman 


81 


catholic religion, induced partly by fasting, 
and partly by vegetable diet during Lent. 
There is no relief for such complaints, 
without a recourse to animal food, and 
other stimuli. 

4. Cloathing. In the present times, 
cloathing or dress is to be found in the ex- 
treme; either too much or too little. — It 
is a proof of the declining vigour of the 
human frame, when so many young men, 
in this age, are under the necessity of be- 
ing swaddled in flannel. An enervated 
state of body can alone want this assist- 
ance. But many of the fair sex have 
adopted a contrary practice: a few folds 
of fine muslin, so loosely put on, that the 
whole dress appears to be made for the 
purpose of being thrown aside, in an in- 
stant, like a cloak or ashawl. Cloathing 
the body ought to be regulated by the sea- 
son: but the rule must vary with the age, 
constitution, and habits of life. ‘There is 
an intimate connexion between the sto- 
mach and the surface of the body :* and 


* I lately had a young woman as a patient, subject 
to violent stomach complaints, who at different times, 
suffered the loss of the whole cuticle. She was restored 

G 2 


82 
as the former is the chief seat of nervous’ 
affections, what chills the skin suddenly, 
is apt to injure the bowels. Eruptions on 
the surface often free the stomach from 
painful. complaints; and the repulsion 
brings them back. This is often the case 
where warm cloathing has been hastily 
laid aside : we observe this sympathy par- - 
ticularly after wet feet, a fact which most 
delicate females know well. The lady of 
weak health, who may wish to display a fine 
ancle, should be very guarded how she 
throws off her warm socks. Many evils 
befal the sex from cold feet ; such as fol- 
low walking abroad with thin shoes im 
damp roads ; sitting long inactive, as in 
ehurches and theatres, &c. Ihave known 
some serious nervous ailments brought on 
by a young lady evading the orders of a 
judicious parent ; and, after being dressed, 
retiring privately to put off the additional pet- 
ticoat and under stockings, that she might 
dance more lightly. As my plan is to: 
make the female habit healthful by active 
exercise and pure air, so I would recom- 


to perfect health by medicine, and the surface of the 
dody is now smooth and even. 


83 


mend in addition to these precautions, the 
use of half boots, which, with a warm 
spencer, will secure the body, and enable 
the lady to walk abroad in most kinds 
of weather. | 

A few years ago a practice prevailed 
much among young women, of lacing their 
stays so tightly, as sometimes to impede 
the free motion of the ribs and lungs. 
have known instances where young guls 
have nearly expired in a crowded room, 
by straight lacing, and were only saved by 
the stays being suddenly divided by a pen- 
knife. The modern elegant improvements 
of female dress very. much correct. this 
practice; but I doubt much of tight lacing 
being entirely laid aside. I believe much 
bad. health has been induced by it: the 
stomach and other viscera have been so 
compressed as to bring on fainting fits, 
and the whole process of digestion dis- 
turbed. 7 

Personal cleanliness, being preserved by 
change of cloathing, may be mentioned 
under this head. Where it is neglected, 
from what has been said, it is to. be reck- 
oned among the causes of these diseases. 
That the skin may be pure and pervious, 

GB 


84 


it ought often to be washed ; perspiration 
cannot make its way through pores ob- 
structed with filth; it must therefore be 
washed off. The habit of personal cleanli- 
ness is best established when begun in in- 
fancy, and kept on through childhood and 
age. 

It may be worth while to observe, that 
it is sometimes of consequence to accom- 
modate the temperature of the water to 
the conditon of the surface. The face 
and hands will be liable to be chopped if 
this is not attended to: very cold water 
should not be used when the skin is warm ; 
nor warm water when the skin is chilled. 
Many a polished neck, face, and arm, have 
been spoiled by not attending to this rule. 
The same holds good, in going suddenly 
too near a fire, when coming out of a cold 
wind: or going into a frosty air too sud- 
denly from a hot room. ‘These ‘are not 
trifling matters: how many fine women 
have become nervous by having their beau- 
ty spoiled. 

5. Passions of the mind. The inter- 
course and communication between our 
material and immaterial parts, is a difficult 
and intricate subject to enter upon. Al] 


8 


Cr 


philosophers who have ventured to go be- 
yond the threshold of inquiry in this de- 
partment, have been bewildered, or return- 
ed no wiser than when they began. Nature 
seems to have endued particular portions 
of our frame with a more exquisite con- 
nection with our mental part; and subject 
to a closer sympathy with our passions. 
Many external signs correspond with our 
internal emotions. It is a difficult task, if 
at all possible, to wear the smile of glad- 
mess when the heart is sad. A nervous 
constitution is ill qualified to. disguise its 
- feelings. Persons accustomed to study the 
variations of feature in the human coun- 
tenance, such as physicians, sometimes 
acquire a wonderful expertness in. deve- 
loping the passions. This physiognomonic 
experience is of great utility to the prac- 
tice of medicine: it is the gift of genius; 
and in this respect, the physician like the 
poet, may be said to be “* nascitur non fit.” 
The want of this eminent quality of intel- 
‘lect, makes the laborious plodder a danger- 
ous visitor at the sick bed, particularly to 
the nervous patient: nature refuses to 
draw her veil aside to a clumsy observer, 
who, being denied access to her 1 vsteries, 
G 4 


86 
is very apt to pervert the purpose of what 
she discovers. 

But there is a species of sympathy among 
certain organs of our body, that points out 
a more intimate connection with the mind, 
than what is possessed by others. The 
lungs and heart, in the thorax; the sto- 
mach, intestines, liver, and all the viscera 
subservient to digestion, have an inate 
sympathy with our emotions. During 
strong impressions on the mind, the heart 
beats quick and tremulous, and is said to 
palpitate ; the motion of the ribs and dia- 
phragm grows irregular and involuntary ; 
and the action of the lungs so unequal as 
to make respiration hurried and convulsed ; 
hence sobbing, sighing, and panting take 
place. The effect of violent passions on 
the chylopoeitic viscera, is to destroy ap- 
petite, disturb digestion, invert the peristal- 
tic motion of the stomach and bowels, and 
render the alvine discharge variable and 
irregular. ‘The biliary secretion is also in- 
constant, and perhaps altered in quality : 
the hepatic, cystic, and common ducts, 
may be affected with spasms, inverted and 
obstructed; thus jaundice, and vomiting 


87 


of bile are no unfrequent attendants of vio- 
lent emotions. The ancients held the liver 
to be the seat of choler and jealousy, hence 
the poet says, 


Cum tu Lydia, Telephi 

Cervicem roseam, et cerea Telephi 
Laudas brachia, vee, meum 

Fervens difficili bili tumet jecur. 
Horace. 


The kidnies, ureters, and bladder, are 
all subject. to this sympathy, from similar 
causes 5 as appears by violent pains, stran- 
gury, and total suppression of urine: the 
colour of the urine is variable; and the 
quantity is sometimes profuse, at other 
times deficient. These affections of the 
urinary organs are among: the surest diag- 
nostics of nervous diseases. Onthe whole, 
all the more violent emotions strongly af- 
fect all these organs, which form a chain 
of feeling with one another, of a more ex- 
quisite kind, than is to be found in any 
other part of the system, or from any other 
disease. The degree of the effect on these 
parts, will be in proportion to the sensibi- 
lity of the temperament; and in many 
subjects we find hysteric fits, epilepsy, and 


88 


other convulsions, tetanus, menorrhagia, 
amenorrhea, &c. take place in an instant, 
from mental sympathy. 

One of the most common causes of ner- 
vous, bilious, and stomach complaints, is 
excessive, or long protracted grief. Mo- 
thers who have- lost children, particularly 
suffer under these painful affections, and of- 
ten date their first appearance from the 
death of a child. I believe the attachment 
of a mother to the infant, is by far the 
strongest of all human passions. Medical 
attendants are in the daily practice of see- 
ing these parental feelings exemplified. 
We read in Tacitus of a Roman mother 
dying by the rack, rather than discover the 
place where her son was concealed, during 
the contest between Otho and Vitellius. 
In some instances of maternal affliction, 
we have observed the faculties so power- 
fully oppressed by sorrow ; so absorbed in 
the contemplation of one object, that the 
mind appeared almost, or wholly uncon- 
scious of its own existence, and scarcely 
attended to a single external impression. 
In such cases the intervals of reason, or 
consciousness, were only to be marked by 
sighs, groans, and tears, as the expressions 


89 
of grief. Shakespeare has beautifully paint- 


ed this passion, in the lamentation of Cons 
stance for her son, in King John: 


Grief fills the room up of my absent child, 
Lies in his bed, walks up and down with me, 
Puts on his pretty looks, repeats his words, 
Remembers me of all his gracious parts, 
Stufis out his vacant garments with his form ; 
Then have I reason to be fond of grief? 

O Lord! my boy, my Arthur, my fair son ; 
My life, my joy, my food, my all the world. | 


Some such expressions as these might 
have been uttered by the mother of Sisera, 
when she heard of his death, if it did not 
at once deprive her of life. ‘The sacred 
historian describes in such glowing lan- 
guage her expectation of his return, that 
he-probably withheld the rest of the nar- 
rative, from finding terms unequal to ex- 
press the struggle of maternal feelings, in 
the transition from hope to despair.* When 


* The mother of Sisera looked out at a window, 
and cried through the lattice, why is his chariot so long 
in coming? Why tarry the wheels of his chariots ? 

Her wise ladies answered her; yea, she returned 
answer to herself, 

Have they not sped? Have they not divided the 
prey, to every man a damsel or two? To Sisera a 


90 


David received the account of Absalom’s 
death, he appears to have been so over- 
whelmed by it, as to be insensible'to a vic- 
tory that secured both his life and his crown. 
Was ever grief depicted in more plaintive 
measure than in his exclamation on this 
occasion? O my son Absalom, my son, my 
son Absalom: would God I had died for 
thee, O Absalom, my son, my son !* 

We cannot contemplate such violent in- 
stances of natural affection without suspi- 
cion of health being injured thereby ; and 
though not immediately apparent, the ef- 
fect will strike a quick observer in the event 
of disease. 

Next to these heart-rending emotions of 
parental sorrow, may be reckoned the ef- 
fects of disappointed love, on the sensible 
female frame. In the male sex the active 
pursuits of business or pleasure, more quick- 
ly supplant tender impressions; and men 
much sooner regain that mental tranquilli- 


prey of divers colours, a prey of divers colours of 
needle-work, of divers colours of needle-work on both 
sides, meet for the necks of them that take the spoil ? 
Judges v. 28—30. | 


* 2 Samuel viii. 33. 


OT 

ty which fits them for the busy scenes of 
life. This is not the case with the fair 
sex; for the influence on both body and 
mind, seems to be in proportion to the 
_ concealed struggle of attachment. The 
heart obtains relief in pouring forth its 
complaint, and acquires resolution when 
this is done: but the hidden passion burns 
the fiercer by being suppressed.* The 
separation of the parties, and long engage- 
ments that procrastinate marriage, are of- 
ten fatal to health. The condition of mind, 
alternately passed between hopes and fears, 
is worse than certain disappointment ; 
hence the state of suspence, to persons of 
nice sensibility, is always deemed the most 
tormenting. 

It is this conflict between attachment 
and secrecy, that has often given birth to 
the emphatic expression, “ dying of a 
broken heart.’ But such afflictions of 


* —___—-——- She never told her love, 
But let concealment, like a worm i’ the bud, 
Prey on her damask cheek : she pined. in thought ; 
And with a green and yellow melancholy, + 
She sat like patience on a monument, 
_ Smiling at grief. SHAKESPEARE. 
+ Here the poet has finely caught the pathology of love-sickness, 


92 


mind commonly, sooner or later, produce 
some disease of the nervous system, which 
quickly draws into consent the digestive 
organs, and others of equally acute sensi- 
bility. Hence a certain hue of the coun- 
tenance is said to mark melancholy and 
despair, which is brought on by vitiated 
digestion, and imperfect assimilation of the 
food. 

As the manners of the age must always 
materially influence diseases of the nervous 
class, so among their moral causes, ought 
to be reckoned religious melancholy, and 
enthusiasm; jealousy, avarice, insatiable 
revenge, boundless ambition, envy, misfor- 
tunes in business, and some species of 
pride. All these, in their various opera- 
tions on the human mind, excite extrava- 
gant hope, or abject depressions of spirit : 
in the issue, harass the nervous system ; 
produce watchfulness, or unrefreshing 
sleep ; engender tumultuous passions, im- 
pair the appetite, and disturb chylification. 
To these succeed spasmodic, bilious, and 
hypochondriacal complaints ; all of which 
center in the organs that prepare and assi- 
-milate the nourishment of the body. 

Some of the severest instances of thes¢ 


9S 

diseases, which have come under my care, 
were in officers: men endued with acute 
sensibility of mind, of fine parts, and with 
high notions of honour. They had been 
long tantalized by promises of promotion, 
and lived to see unworthy favourites put 
over their heads. Similar cases are too 
often met with among other conditions of 
life; where worth, virtue, and _ talents, 
must give place to wealth, servility, and 
intrigue. 

The passion of novel reading is intitled 
to a place here. In the present age it is 
one of the great causes of nervous disor- 
ders. The mind that can amuse itself with 
the love-sick trash of most modern compo- 
sitions of this kind, seeks enjoyment. be- 
neath the level of a rational being. It 
ereates for itself an ideal world, on the 
loose descriptions of romantic love, that 
leave passion without any moral guide in 
the real occurrences of life. Tothe female 
mind in particular, as being endued with 
finer feeling, this species of literary poison 
has been often fatal; and some of the most 
unfortunate of the sex have imputed their 
ruin chiefly to the reading of novels. How 
cautious then ought parents to be in guard- 


D4 


ing against the introduction of these ro- 
mances among their children; so caleu- 
lated to induce that morbid sensibility 
which is to be the bane of future happi- 
ness; which to prevent, is the task of a 
correct education; which first engender 
ardent passions, and then leave the mind 
without power to resist or subdue them. 
It is lamentable that three-fourths of these 
productions come from the pens of wo- 
men; some of whom are known to have 
drank deep of the fountams of pleasure 
and adversity. 

The drama is another hot-bed of this 
diseased sensibility. It has been long ago 
remarked, that few English comedies were 
sufficiently pure for the ear and eye of a 
chaste and virtuous woman. But if such 
scenes are to be found among them, the 
sentiments they express cannot be much 
improved from the mouths of some first- 
tate actresses, who live openly as kept 
mistresses. We are very little obliged by 
the late importation of a few loose German 
plays on the English stage. They are the 
offsprmg of a new school, and communicate 
poison in a new way; such poison as has 


95 


no antidote on the shelves of the | spore ; 
cary. : 
The modern general, pan ae gaming, is 
a frequent cause of nervous. affection, even. 
to mental.derangement. It, is an, heredi- 
tary vice in some families, where children 
are. introduced: to the card-table before 
they are half educated. . The country life 
as yet, has scarcely, tasted of this depravity. 
6, Intense. study., Severe mental appli- 
cation depresses the nervous. power : and 
whether, this, arises from. business or plea- 
sure, the ultimate .effect seems. much, the 
same. , Intense thought appears tosybtract 
a-greatishare of excitement from many'cor- 
poreal, organs: when. long. continued, or 
often indulged, it leaves them in a state of 
direct debility... Mathematical, studies, are 
said. to, have. this, effect, more, than. others ; 
and among, some,,intimate ‘friends I haye 
known these effects... » But it, is to be. ey , 
wneaa sciences, . are. pine e men, _of 
cool, judgment;; of deliberate. modes: of 
thinking, .not easily diverted from their 
pursuits,.and rather, of. a torpid nervous 
system. . Their, complaints therefore as- 
sume much of a hypochondriacal cast. 
H 


96 


Among people of a more mobile habit, se- 
vere study excites in the first passages, a 
disposition to spasm, and convulsive mo- 
tions, amounting frequently to what is call- 
ed the hysteric affection, or globus hystert- 
cus. The abdominal viscera particularly 
feel on these occasions: the’ strong exer- 
tions of the animal functions abstract or 
expend much of that energy or sensorial 
power, which ought to be alike diffused 
over the natural and vital actions. “The 
appetite flags; the bowels become slow ; 
flatulence and acidity supervene from im- 
perfect digestion; the bile is secreted in 
small quantity, and its flow into the duo- 
denuim often obstructed; dyspnoea isa 
common: attendant; ‘syncope not unfre: 
quently happens, and dejection of spirits 
to such a degree, as to réduce the philoso- 
pher to an idiot. Emaciation’ of body 
quickly follows this course of life; partly 
_ owing to vitiated sanguification, but per- 
haps also, from obstructions in the lacteals 
and mesenteric glands. The pallid colour 
of a hard thinker or severe student, may 
therefore be imputed to dyspepsia, or to 
de-oxygenized blood, from confinement 
within doors. Young men who are ardent 


4, 


in pursuit of knowledge, and greedy of li- _ 
terary fame, often lay the foundation for 
stomach complaints at the university, that 
are never afterwards to be overcome. 

Persons much attached to music, as be- 
ing furnished with acute nerves, and nice 
sensibility, and of a sedentary turn, are of- 
ten harassed by these diseases. This re- 
mark indeed, applies to all who may be 
considered as votaries of the fine arts. 
Such people, whether male or female, have 
commonly a predisposition to nervous dis- 
orders. | 

Ihave met with many obstinate cases 
among schoolmasters; in part to be attri- 
buted to confinement within doors, but 
chiefly to studious habits... But what is still 
more strange, I have even known them 
among shepherds, a class of men enjoying 
the purest air, but becoming nervous and 
hypochondriacal from an imactive solitary 
life, and a thoughtful mode of spending 
time, and reading abstruse subjects. 

7. Lactation or nursing. This office of 
the mother to the child, if the dictates of 
Nature deserve attention, ought to be con- 
sidered as a very salutary duty; for if we 
look to the natural state of mankind, we 

bs 


58 


find every mother able to perform it. The’ 
child-bearing part of life is usually healthy ;: 
and weakly females have their health im-. 
proved by becoming mothers. It must. 
therefore be owing to some deviation from 
the established rules of the animal econo- 
my, that so many women are to be found 
unequal to this task. It is the duty of the: 
husband to encourage the wife in the ex- 
ercise of this amiable attention to the in- 
fant ; and if he prevents it, he rends asun+ 
der one of the strongest ties of human af- 
fection.. Yet we often see mothers. so at- 
tached to the office of nurse, as to view the 
weaning of their child with horror: such 
feelings dignify human nature ; what a pity 
there should be found exceptions to their 
being general. 

It would appear to be the indication. of 
nature, to suckle the infant till it is nine 
months old, as corresponding with the 
time of gestation. At this age the child is 
capable of taking other nourishment for its. 
support.. But when the mother grows too 
delicate and weak for the office, it must be 
weaned sooner. ‘The complaints which 
are brought on by long suckling, are much: 
the same with those that follow frequent’ 


} 99 
abortions, and immoderate or irregular 
menstruation. ‘They are all of the nervous 
class. As the regular peculiarity of the 
sex is the best test of female health, so the 
vicarious lactation may be considered as a 
relief to the other organs, and thus benefi- 
cial. But when continued too long, the 
general frame is debilitated, and particu- 
larly the uterine system. ‘The strength of 
the woman is not reduced by -affording 
nourishment to the infant merely; it is the 
sympathy which subsists between the dif- 
ferent organs, that gives birth to morbid 
feelings, and the stomach and intestinal 
canal with many others are quickly drawn 
into consent. | 

Mothers who trust their children to hi- 
red wet nurses, would do well to inform 
themselves how far these women have 
weaned their own children with satisfac- 
tion. Few mothers, among the decent 
orders of women, can be supposed to leave 
their offspring without regret; and it may 
happen that the health of the other infant 
is liable to suffer in the conflict. Much 
pretended refinement often takes place 
about selecting a nurse free of disease: but 
what scrutiny can secure the suckling 

Bo? 


100 


against the bad effects of her passions? 
These must frequently sow the seeds of 
future indisposition, that may not be dis- 
covered till too late. A mild and serene 
condition of mind must be a valuable in- 
gredient in the character of a nurse; for 
which reason the nervous constitution 
should be avoided. On the whole, a hired 
nurse is only a lesser evil, that can by no 
means repay the offspring for the want of 
the mother’s breast. 

But nursing mothers among the lower 
orders of women, if they remain with their 
families, are often badly nourished : and if 
they feed much on tea, are subject to that 
species of consumption that is denominated 
nervous. ‘This is in fact a high degree of 
nervous exhaustion and debility, attended 
with many of the most painful symptoms.* 
To keep the child at the breast for eigh- 
teen months or two years, cannot be done 
without injury to the mother’s health. 
Yet this practice is frequent, and must be 
considered as a sad alternative to prevent 
the quick increase of a family. 


* All wet nurses ought to abstain from #ea. Next 
to spirits and malt liquors, it is the most hurtful to 
the suckling. 


101 


°8. Miscarriages and premature labours, 
&c. Few mothers who have suffered mis- 
haps during pregnancy, escape with im- 
punity. All miscarriages are attended with 
some degree of danger, and much bad 
health is with justice imputed to them. 
The wife who has prospects of being a 
mother, must undergo much mental dis- 
-tress at being disappointed, independent 
of all personal hazard. This species of 
‘anxiety is one great cause of one miscar- 
riage being so apt to succeed another, as 
the mind is tremblingly alive to every 
‘symptom that resembles the former. ‘This 
state naturally begets a nervous sensibility, 
‘which too often creates imaginary fears 
when there are none real. Long and se- 
vere labours, to which may be added some 
of the diseases of the puerperal season, are 
also to be considered as a frequent source 
of nervous disorders. Large evacuations 
of blood at that period are known to in- 
duce the most: violent hysteric paroxyms 
and other convulsions ; hence these affec- 
tions so commonly follow floodings during 
labour and after it. By reaped si 5 
The changes which take place in the 
breast and womb after the birth, very ma- 
H 4 


102 


terially affect the general system of nerves, 
These evolutions are marked by increased 
irritability, and fevers of the most acute 
kind are liable to supervene; and pomt 
out the necessity of a soothing regimen, 
tranquillity of mind, pure air, mild diet, 
open bowels, &c. If there is an hereditary 
predisposition, nervous ailments will of 
course more readily appear, and be aggra- 
vated by all improper treatment. 

9. Climate. In the description of the 
inhabitants of a large town, I have men- 
tioned persons returned from ‘the Kast 
and West Indies. Such persons are ‘re- 
markably subject to the diseases of which 
we now treat. The acute fevers of tropi- 
cal climates in a particular manner affect 
‘the stomach, bowels, and biliary secretion. 
The yellow fever of the West Indies de- 
rives its name, and part of its character, 
from the excessive flow of bile ; which not 
only tinges the serum of the blood, the 
urine, and skin, but in a manner inundates 
the intestines. No pain or tension in the 
region of the liver, accompanies this un- 
usual secretion; and the bile is taken up 
by the absorbents, enters the circulation, 
and produces yellowness of the surface, 


103 
without any obstruction of the ducts as in 
jaundice, for the feces are highly bilious. 
There seems to be little resemblance be- 
tween this endemic of the West, and the 
hepatitis of the East Indies. I would 
therefore call it, as has been done by one 
of the best writers on the subject, Cawsos.* 
In the hepatitis, an excessive biliary secre- 
tion is not mentioned... The West India 
fever is always rapid in its progress; but 
the liver disease of the East is often so 
chronic in its form, as to steal on imper- 
ceptibly for months, without pain sufficient 
to create uneasiness or alarm, though it 
may at last arrive at suppuration. They 
both affect chiefly young robust Europeans, 
new comers, who live full, and drink freely 
of vinous liquors. The same modes of 
living, we know, create hepatic diseases in 
England; and the analogy extends to 
other pampered animals, as the domestic 
fowl, turkey, and pig. Both diseases leave 
the digestive powers in a weakened condi- 
tion; and there are few who do not com- 
plain of a degree of dyspepsia after these 
attacks. But in a multitude of cases in 


* Dr Moseley on Diseases of the West Indies. 


104: 


which I have been consulted, by persons 
returned from India, it was doubtful to 
me, whether mercury exhibited as a reme- 
dy, or the disease itself, were to be most 
blamed for the production of dyspeptic af- 
fection. As far as I have been able to 
learn, from both written and verbal ac- 
counts, this complaint, so frequent on the 
Coromandel coast, ought to be treated 
with large bleedings, and copious active 
purgatives, in the very first attack. The 
quantity of blood to be taken, I think, 
ought not to be regulated by rules laid 
down by systematic writers for the inflam- 
matory fevers of this country ; if it is done 
at the proper period, it ought to be infinite- 
ly larger. If these evacuations have been 
neglected, or sparingly employed, sup- 
puration, torpor, or infarction of the liver, 
to a certainty succeed, which render the 
use of mercury indispensible. Where the 
disease assumes at first the chronic form, 
mercury is considered the only remedy. 
The phrase, “ chronic inflammation,” is a 
new term in medicine, and I think an im- 
proper one here. The less active hepatitis 
is still a febrile disease, only less marked ; 
for how can we suppose purulent matter 


105 
to be generated without those distinguish- 
ing phenomena that are characteristic of 
it? ‘The mercury in this case, I should 
suppose to act partly on the biliary pores 
and ducts, partly on the circulation of the 
liver, but chiefly on the absorbents of that 
viscus. These effects from mercury being 
so well known, why contend for it as a 
specific, in this oriental disease? It would 
therefore appear, that there is a period in 
hepatitis, when it is indicated and safe ; 
and as its stimulant powers are so evident, 
that must be, when the symptoms of ac- 
tive inflammation have subsided. We thus 
see how frictions in some nervous consti- 
tutions, must be the most eligible way to 
direct this medicine, as some authors con- 
tend. Yet mercury, nevertheless, at all 
times has a manifest action immediately 
on the nervous system; and if limits can 
be drawn to its exhibition m the different 
stages of hepatitis, care should be taken 
that the habit is not destroyed by it, and 
diseases worse than the original one pro- 
duced. But if this treatment deserves all 
the encomiums which have been given it, 
how comes it, that so many return to this 
country labourmg under the liver com- 


106 


plaint, as they call it, after having repeat- 
edly undergone the mercurial course ? 

The consequences of tropical fevers, 
will however be in a great measure pre- 
vented, as the affusion of cold water gets. 
into universal practice; and employed 
with the precautions directed by two great 
physicians of the present times, my late 
lamented friend, Dr Currie, and my learn- 
ed friend and neighbour, Dr Jackson, of 
the army. In the acute hepatitis it pro- 
mises to be an effectual remedy. Much 
reasoning has been employed on the cause 
and treatment of fever: but no certain 
method of cure was ever given to man- 
kind before the cold affusion. We can 
now readily admit that the sudden abstrac- 
tion of a great quantity of heat, by the 
shock, as it is called, dissevers in an in- 
stant those associated actions which con- 
stitute the febrile phenomena: or what is 
emphatically said, to cut the fever off at 
once. 

The hepatitis of the East Indies, as. af- 
fecting an organ so necessary to the ani- 
mal economy, may have thus a large share 
in the production of dyspeptic complaints. 

The effects of a warm climate on the 


107 


hepatic system, and producing a redun- 
dancy of bile, admit of much speculation. 
A warm summer in this country has a 
similar effect: im such a season, cholera 
and dysentery are common. Excessive 
heat may be regarded as it acts on the 
nervous and sanguiferous systems. It 
powerfully increases the sensibility of 
every part; and renders the mind more 
susceptible of pleasurable sensations. The 
muscular fibre becomes more irritable; 
and what are called spasmodic complaints, 
are more common in warm than in cold re- 
gions. Feversalso are more frequent than 
in Europe, in which the stomach is. much 
diseased, and bilious vomiting and a yel- 
low tinge of the tunica adnata are attend- 
ant symptoms. Insolation is the effect of 
the rays of the sun in a perpendicular di- 
rection, acting on the ‘sensorzum commune. 
The last degree of debility, with bilious 
vomiting, indicates this affection; just as 
we observe severe hurts or wounds of the 
head induce the same symptoms. Now. 
we explain these symptoms from the nice 
consent of parts; they prove the strong 
sympathy with which the chylopoeitie or- 
gans, by their office, are linked: with the 


108 


functions of the brain. The excessive 
heat is an exhausting power directly act- 
ing on the sensorium commune ; for com- 
pression of. the brain from blood or other 
causes, does not excite the same train of 
symptoms. We therefore draw the. con- 
clusion, that warm climates induce hepatic 
and stomach diseases, by primarily aftect- 
ing the nervous system. As far as heat 
affects the circulation of the blood, it seems 
to have little effect in bringing on nervous 
irritability, and is of inferior consideration 
in this inquiry. 

‘But while we blame the heat of the cli- 
mate for the production of nervous and bi- 
lious diseases among Europeans, we must 
also take into account their modes of liv- 
ing, so injurious to health. The most de- 
iibitating of all pleasures is by them indulg- 
ed to excess; and the passion seems to 
erow from what it feeds on. Highly sea- 
soned food, the large use of vinous liquors, 
and licentious manners, carry luxury to 
its utmost pitch. ‘The warmth of the cli- 
mate is therefore not to be singly blamed 
in engendering bilious and dyspeptic com- 
“plaints. dvs 
If persons who live in this way, remain 


109 

in a tropical country till they pass the me- 
ridian of life, and then return to Britain, 
they seldom enjoy good health. The cause 
of this is obvious. They ought therefore, 
if convenient, to pass their first winters in 
some of the southern provinces of France, 
or in Spain or Portugal; and thus accom- 
modate the constitution gradually to the 
great change of temperature. 

Some districts of country that are Ses 
swampy, and subject to fogs, commonly 
disagree with nervous and bilious people. 
And those seasons when the weather is va- 
riable, and liable to sudden transitions, are 
also hurtful. Many of their symptoms, 
particularly depression of spirits, increase 
under a cloudy atmosphere: hence ‘the 
glooms of November are proverbial for 
having this effect. | | 

10. Medicines.. All nervous persons 
are uncommonly fond of drugs; and they 
are the chief consumers of advertised re- 
medies, which they conceal from their me- 
dical friends. Among some well meaning 
people, this inordinate desire for medicine 
has frequently become of itself a disease. 
With many of them, physic to-be useful, 
must be clothed in mystery; and the mo- 


110 


ment a discovery is made of the, composi- 
tion; the confidence. is lost. .Medical at- 
tendants have too often brought this punish- 
ment,on themselvesi; Were).they: unani- 
mous in combating the prejudices of man- 
kind, by candour and openness of:conduct, 
by..a, fair avowal of the tmperfections of 
their art, and the honest confession. that 
articles of Materia, Medica form but a 
small portion of its resources; they would 
not so frequently see their commands dis- 
regarded, or learn that, their compounds 
have’ been thrown out of a window. This 
is the only way in which [can account for 
so many persons of good sense. and:discern- 
ment, consigning themselves. and. families 
into the hands of impudent and illiterate 
quacks.* vis ;tadmnsvo, to. amoo! 
It was ac saying ma avery sagacious 
professor .. of, medicine, .. to: his| / pupils, 
“young: gentlemen, if your medicines should 
do no good, take care that they do no 


* The duty on quack medicines at this time is-esti- 
mated:at upwards of 300,0001. annually. | From this it 
may be supposed that ignorant pretenders to medicine 
take not less than two millions out of the pocksts of 
the community! ~ 


Tit 


harm.”* When active medicines are long 
continued, and do not cure, it is very like- 
ly they may do mischief. But the remedy 
that cures one disease, if injudiciously ad- 
ministered, not unfrequently predisposes 
the body, and paves the way to another 
malady. I shall begin with 

Emetics. ‘The exhibition of emetics is 
often taken out of the hands of the medical 
profession ; and every good woman thinks 
herself competent to direct a vomit. Some 
people with delicate stomachs are in the 
habit of taking these articles, for every un- 
easy state of that organ, whichis construed 
into a foul stomach. But nothing can 
more certainly tend to weaken, nay para- 
lyze that viscus. ‘The operation itself’ ig 
painful and unnatural; for the act of vo- 
miting is to invert, and evacuate the con- © 
tents of the stomach the wrong way. ‘This 
cannot be done without medicines that are 
first highly stimulating : they pass through 
the stimulant stage of the process first; 
and when that is over, the fibres of the 
stomach being exhausted for a time, sick- 


* The first Dr Rutherford, Professor of Medicine 
in the University of Edinburgh. 
I 


172 


ness is the consequence, and vomiting stic> 


ceeds it.. This nausea is sometimes so se- 
vere, as to occasion fainting, and even con- 
vulsions; and the frequency of the pulse 
during the: operation is often so reduced as 
to give serious cause of alarm; ahd is at 
all times slower till the sickness is over- 
come. Such are the symptoms to be mark- 
ed during the emetic effects of tartarized 
antimony, vitriolated zinc, vitriolated mer- 
cury, ipecacuanha, squill, &c. If there- 


fore, this operation is too frequently resort- 


ed to, what is to be expected but ‘a weaken- 
ed, mobile, or torpid condition of the sto- 


mach, and every organ that fills a link in . 


the great chain of sympathy with it. The 
hurtful effect is also much increased by the 
copious draughts of warm water, taken to 
encourage the vomiting. 

At the time that James’s Powders were 
in general use, and when families were in 
the practice of taking that medicine as a 
preventive of fever, at stated periods, weak- 
ness of stomach and indigestion were often 
traced to this cause. Ignorant people are 


apt to consider many complaints, where 


the pulse is quick, as fevers, and fly to im- 
proper remedies. 


ee 


113 


But antimonial emetics require the ut- 
most caution in the exhibition to nervous 
people, and all who possess irritable 
bowels ; such as dyspeptic and gouty ; se- 
vere cramps, hysterics and diarrhoea, too 
commonly follow. They likewise encou- 
rage eructation ; and by inverting the gul- 
lets of some people, a kind of ruminating 
of the food takes place, a habit very dis- 
agreeable and disgusting... When we re- 
flect what a small portion of antimonial pre« 
paration is required to excite vomiting, we 
must be convinced of its uncommon acti- 
vity, and that it acts immediately on the 
nerves of the stomach.. The same guarded 
practice applies to all the metallic oxides, 
when used as emetics. What may at sea- 
sonable times be a valuable remedy, may 
thus, by being improperly directed, have 
the most baneful effects. Nervous patients 
are particularly subject to a kind of rising 
in the cardia, or upper orifice, a sort of in- 
verted motion in some of the muscular 
fibres, with distention, flatulence, and aci- 
_dity, that create vast sickness. But to have 
recourse to vomits for relief, would only 
ageravate the complaint. These persons 
are also more easily affected by disagree- 

Me 12 


114 

able objects, and bad smells, than others, 
which harass them not a little. As they 
grow acquainted with this frailty of their 
stomachs, they will rather study to avoid 
the causes, than trust to any article of me- 
dicine for relief. When constant vomiting 
has been brought on, in nervous stomachs, 
by whatever means, no complaint is more 
difficult to be restrained: some afflicting 
eases of this kind have come within my 
knowledge, in young persons, part of which 
terminated fatally. 

Pureatives.. This class of medicines, 
like the preceding, are too often directed 
by improper judges of their fitness. But 
the greatest harm 1s done in infancy and 
childhood, when parents run to the aid of 
physic for every trifling complaint, but 
chiefly for cutaneous affections. It is im- 
mediately decided that these spots are ow- 
ing to bad humours and foulness of the 
blood, and must be carried off by a purge. 
Such reasoning as this formerly prevailed 
among medical people; we cannot there- 
fore be surprised that persons not in the 
profession should still retain a little of the 
old leaven. Purgative medicines differ ex- 
tremely from one another; and if it is 2 


115 

nice point in medical practice to suit 
the purge to the nature of the complaint 
and peculiarity of constitution, it must be 
often dangerous to trust them in common 
hands. I was once called to visit a farmer 
who had taken two ounces of galtpetre, in- 
stead of Glauber’s salt. I found him in 
extreme pain about the stomach, with 
ghastly looks, an intermitting pulse, and 
cold sweats. A few minutes longer would 
have been too late to save him: by drink- 
ing plentifully of warm milk and water, 
and a brisk emetic, he was recovered. 
But I have known similar cases prove fatal. 

Confinement within doors, an uniform 
mode of living, and sedentary habits, are 
so commonly met with, among persons of 
the nervous temperament, that a consti- 
pated state of body is a general condition 
of their disease. Hence the frequent re- 
course to medicine for opening the bowels. 
Some of the most drastic purgatives, such 
as aloes and scammony, come at last to be 
in common use with them. ‘This custom 
soons begets a habit ; when the bowels are 
brought to that torpor and inactivity as 
never to be moved without. the aid of a 
drug. ‘The sensibility of the intestines is 


13s 


116 


thus, by degrees, worn out; the lacteals 
which take up the food, the mucous glands 
and exhalents, that pour forth fluids, as 
well as the nerves and muscular fibres, 
grow torpid: the consequence is the loss 
of the peristaltic power, and the bowels 
are apt to run into inverted motion, and 
spasmodic constriction, till a fatal cholic, 
an intusception, iliac passion, or cramp, 
close the scene. Painful diseases of the 
rectum, schirrus, hemorrhoidal tumours, 
and fistulee, too often render life miserable, 
from this ill-conducted practice. We have 
known families of children that underwent 
a course of purging twice a week ! 

But if mercury, in the form of calomel, 
or any other preparation of that metal, 
make part of these habitual purges, the 
consequences are always to be dreaded. 
Calomel is a favorite article with some 
physicians as a purgative, and from the 
minuteness of its dose, very desirable to 
the patient. It also operates quickly and 
briskly ; which, with nervous and dyspep- 
tic subjects, is matter of great satisfaction ; 
for their odd feelings and singular sensa- 
tions within, give the suspicion that they 
are full of obstructions and cannot be suf- 


117 


ficiently evacuated. Yet such instances of 
slow bowels are not to be considered as de- 
pending altogether on a local affection. 
They are joined with a general state of the 
body, and only to be radically cured by 
correcting the original evil. ‘Thus a long 
walk out of doors, and a little active exer- 
cise and recreation, will effect sometimes, 
what large doses of medicine are unable to 
- periorm. | 
But mercury is the most dangerous of ali 
frequent purges; it sooner exhausts the 
irritability and vital power of the intes- 
tines, than any other metallic oxide, ex- 
cept arsenic. It never fails in the end to 
add to the disease: it is peculiarly contra- 
indicated in the nervous temperament, 
from the mobile disposition of nerve; and 
its action on the bowels, very much re- 
sembles a state of dysentery, by producing 
the most violent contractions, gripes, and 
tenesmus. It thus frequently brings on 
prolapsus ani, a complaint te which per- 
sons of weak bowels are liable, and especi- 
ally women, who have experienced hard 
labours, and borne a number of children. 
Many volumes have been written on dis- 
eases, supposed to have originated from 
I 4 


118 


the use of mercury when given for the cure 
of lues venerea: yet strange to relate, its 
most common consequences, dyspeptic 
- and nervous affections, are scarcely men- 
tioned. * I firmly believe all the derange- 
ments which it occasions in the body, are 
small when compared with the injury done 
to the nervous system and digestive pow- 
ers. Some physicians and surgeons fly, 
even in common cases, to one of its most 
dangerous preparations, hydrar. mur. and 
seem to overlook its ultimate effects on 
the constitution. It has often been my 
lot to witness these effects in the practice 
of others: for of fifty thousand cases of the 
venereal disease, which I have attended, I 
am convinced, that not one of the num- 
ber ever required this acrid mercurial. 
Hemoptysis ending in phthisis, was a fre- 
quent sequel to this treatment. 


* A: little tract, “ on tur Use anp ABUSE oF 
Mercury,” has just been published by Dr Wilson; 
in. which he particularly notices its. hurtful effects. on 
the stomach and intestines, I am glad to observe, 
that his remarks are very much like my own. This 
essay appears to be only a prelude to more extensive 
disquisitions on the subject ; which I hope the learned 
author will follow up with his accustomed ability. 


119 


It is well known that miners and work- 
ers of this metal in the various arts, are, 
after a certain. time, subject to the most 
violent nervous afflictions, such as cholics, 
epilepsies, cramps, tremors, &c. and the 
last stage of these is palsy, in its most 
hideous form. In the silver mines of 


Spain, in South America, where mercury - 


is employed to separate the gold, the poor 
slaves seldom live three years, from being. 
exposed so much to its fumes. Hence to 
be sent to the mines implies the last de- 
gree of human punishment. As the lues 
venerea extends in society, and the exhibi- 
tion of mercury for its cure becomes every 
day more familiar with medical people, 
there is danger that they forget they have 
in their hands one of the most active mine- 
ral poisons, and extend its use to all those 
diseases that resist other remedies. In the 
hands of the ignorant and indolent of the 
profession it has done incalculable mischief. 
The ignorant man is neither capable of 
selecting its proper preparations for parti- 
cular conditions of body,, nor of knowing 
when. it is forbidden ; and he is unable to 
discern when it has done harm. The in- 
dolent among us, who. give themselves ne 


120 

care about the investigation of a distem- 
per, cannot be fit persons to prescribe an 
article, that injudiciously given, may de- 
stroy life. This remark does not merely 
apply to the vender of advertised remedies ; 
it comprehends many in private life, who, 
from deficient education, are not entitled 
to more confidence than the itinerant 
tribe. 

But there is a form of the diseases of 
which we now treat, in which mercury is 
said to act with undeniable efficacy ; name- 
ly, in what are called bitious complaints. 

The term belongs to common lan- 
guage; as such I have adopted it in my 
title; but it is not correct in a medical 
nomenclature. Some members of the pro- 
fession, to improve our vernacular idiom, 
have thought proper to give these ail- 


ments the name of liver complaints, as that 


organ is said to be their seat; but this 
term is equally undefined in a scientific 
view, as that of stomach complaits, so long 
applied to diseases of the digestive powers. 
The phrase bilious derives its origin from 
that tinge of the skin so ofien observed in 
dyspeptic persons, whoalso occasionally pass 


bile both upwards and downwards. Now | 


-_— Pat 
ee 


121 


bile appearing in these forms, being a na- 
tural secretion made by the liver, is to be 
considered as the effect, rather than the 
direct cause, of indisposition. In the pre- 
sent day, a dyspeptic person: no sooner 
complains of pain in the right hypchon- 
drium, than the liver is said to be diseased ; 
and a bilious suffusion of the surface, is 
considered an infallible symptom of the 
same viscus being affected; and the mer- 
curial process is immediately commenced. 
It is disgusting to hear this phraseology so 
common in the mouths of medical people. 
It is well known that jaundice itself is 
common enough, even during the mercu- 
rial treatment of lues venerea. 

We shall learn from a description of the 
nervous temperament, that persons subject 
to indigestion, to frequent discharges of 
bile, and spasmodic affections of the chylo- 
poetic organs, are endued with uncom- 
mon delicacy and irritability of the first 
passages ; and that this state is generally 
attended with great debility. Such a con- 
dition of the muscular fibres, in the oso- 
phagus, stomach and bowels, with all the 
canals which pour fluids into them, natu- 
rally makes the whole subject to reversed 


122 


motions, irregular contractions, increased 
sensibility in one part, and deficient pow- 
er, or torpor, in another. The state of 
the liver itself will partake of all these ir- 
regularities. Its secretion will sometimes 
be suspended, sometimes deficient. It will 
suffer stagnation in the biliary pores, and 
in allits ducts. Even when it flows freely 
into the duodenum, it will at one place be 
collectedin greater quantity than at another; 
sometimes retained, and at others flowing 
profusely ; and the slow or quicker motion 
of the bowels, will exhibit a proof of this 
inconstant passage of the bile in the alvine 
discharge; in its colour, its consistence, 
and foetor; while transient jaundice will 
also appear. 

The ducts may also be obstructed by 
biliary caleuli, over which mercury has no 
power. Indeed dyspeptic persons are very 
subject to these concretions, which are 
probably owing to some disposition in the 
bile itself. 

These commotions will frequently bring 
on epileptic and. hysteric convulsions, vio- 
lent cramps, and death. The mind strong- 
ly sympathises ; it is irritable, irresolute, 
timid, desponding, and. suffers more or less 


123 
such derangement in its relation of things, 
and in its perceptions, as amounts to a de- 
gree of delirium. This constitutes what, 
in common language, some persons call a 
bilious or nervous attack. 

This being our explanation of the biliary 
affection of the nervous temperament, it 
must be straining facts to the utmost, to 
find any analogy between it and the hepa- 
titis of the eastern hemisphere. How in- 
deed can any qualified observer of the 
phenomena of disease, compare the full 
robust habit of a young European, on the 
coast of Coromandel, with the weakly and 
delicate nervous lady of our climate? Yet 
the analogy, monstrous as it is, in the 
practice of some physicians, has been said 
to be correct ; and dyspeptic and hysteri- 
cal females, have, on the faith of this doc- 
trine, been tortured with mercurial cours- 
es, till their very teeth have been in ha- 
zard of dropping from their sockets, and 
their lives brought into danger; and this 
plan of treatment sometimes repeated, as 
the symptoms were found to recur. 

T hold it as an unquestionable fact, that 
a peculiar predisposition attends both dis- 
eases; and that local causes excite both. 


124: 


It appears from many particular symptoms, 
that a directly opposite state of the body 
prevails in the two complaints. How then 
can the same medicine be indicated in 
both? The icterus is not characteristic 
of hepatitis; nor is the capricious disposi- 
tion of the bowels, and the mental dis- 
quietudes of nervous affection, ever in- | 
cluded in the account of its symptoms. 
The analogy therefore between hepatitis 
and the dyspepsia of the nervous tempera- 
ment, has no foundation in pathology, and 
leads to no rational method of cure. ‘That 
the liver may be enlarged in these diseases, 
as well as from hepatitis, I readily admit : 
but such enlargement must be brought on 
in a very different manner. It must be 
chiefly owing to the debility of the hepatic 
nerves; by which means a torpor or kind 
of paralysis takes place; effusion of some 
kind may then happen in the parenchyma 
of the liver, which the lymphatics are not 
able to carry off. What are called tuber- 
cles of the liver, are most likely enlarged 
lymphatic glands and vessels ; this may be 
another cause of increased size. But it is 
probable also, that the secreted bile itself 
is frequently the cause of the great bulk, 


195 

from torpor of the por: béliarit and ducts. 
I believe however in dyspeptic habits, that 
such increased size of the liver is a rare 
disease; and when it does happen, it ought 
to be considered as an effect, not a prima- 
ry cause of indisposition. If, therefore, 
there is much nervous predisposition, mer- 
cury must doa great deal of harm, and 
add to the mischief. 

Some Persons have an opinion, that 
mercury acts immediately on bilious affec- 
tion, independent of evacuation ; but this 
is fanciful. A purge, in which calomel is 
combined with a cathartic, as it excites 
the duodenum in its passage, it also urges 
into action the different ducts which open 
into it; and the last evacuations of a mer- 
‘curial purge are commonly bilious. This 
increased action may, by sympathy, go 
farther; the port biliarit may feel it, and 
perhaps the whole viscus. Thus the liver 
may be purged, and excited to healthful 
action. But what one dose or two may 
effect, a third and fourth may destroy ; 
and by knowing the constitution of the pa- 
tient, we shall know when to stop. And 
as cramps and spasms, of the most painful 
kind, are part of these diseases, so mer- 


126 


curial purges, as I have often seen, cause 
great hazard of bringing them on. But 
there are many purgative articles, that in 
these cases, have all the good effects of 
mercury, without. the deleterious ones; 
and they ought to be preferred. Very ac- 
tive exercise will also, in many instances, 
supersede the use of medicine ; so great is 
the power of agitating the abdominal vis- 
cera, in promoting the due flow of bile. 

The hepatitis of the East Indies has been 
long considered a serious disease, and of- 
ten fatal; and as it has seldom yielded to 
a mild treatment, the exhibition of mer- 
cury is justified. But it cannot be denied, 
although this medicine is chiefly to be de- 
pended on, that even in India it has done 
infinite harm to the constitution. I there- 
fore embrace the opportunity of quoting 
the following passage from a modern Jour- 
nal. Itis given without the writer’s name, 
but the cautions which it inculcutes are of 
such great value in practice, that even 
anonymous authority renders it respecta- 
ble. 

Extract of a letter from a surgeon on the 
Madras establishment, dated the 22d Oc- 
tober, 1805.—** My last letter from =p 


&@ 


€6 


66 


C54 


6¢ 


(14 


&¢ 


G6 


(<4 


ee 


ce 


(74 


oe 


66 


€¢ 


6é 


6s 


ce 


oo 


ce 


~€6 


127 


gave me sad accounts of his health. He 
is suffering much from excessive use of | 
mercury ; and has had, he says, spasms 
of the diaphragm, and excruciating pains 
in his skin, bones, and head. It may be 
news to you, that mercury in this coun- 
try, when given in too large quantity, 
causes sufferings more dreadful than the 
disease for which it is a specific, and ex- 
perienced surgeons are cautious never 
to exceed in its employment. You ask 
me if the erythema mercuriale is fre- 
quent with us? Very lately a brother 
surgeon here had a case of it in his 
hospital which terminated fatally; and 
with the natives, who never can be made 
to cloath themselves sufficiently, or al- 
most at all, when under the use and in- 
fluence of mercury, this disease occurs 
frequently, and often proves destruc- 
tive.”’ 

If such are the effects of mercury in ro- 


bust constitutions, and in a climate pecu- 
culiarly favourable to its administration, 
what severities are we not to expect in 
weak nervous bowels, and in a condition 
of atmosphere, that in despite of every 
precaution, so often throws its activity on 


K 


123 


the first passages? It is to be heped the 
advice given in this extract will’ not be- 
lost on physicians and surgeons in Eng- 
land, who are so apt to resolve every pa- 
thological difficulty, into a liver complaint ; 
and pour in mercury ad infinitum. 

Mercury as a cathartic acts best in con- 
junction with jalap: a pill containing three 
grains of the latter to one-sixth of a grain 
of the former, purges moderately in a hale 
state of body.. I may be told in contra- 
diction to this, that a dram of calomel has 
been given-to a child; and half an ounce 
to an adult, in.a few days, without any bad 
efiect. But, because these patients were 
not destroyed, is the heedless administra- 
tion of so active a medicine to be justified 
by such proofs? I have seen persons sur- 
vive large doses of corrostve sublimate mer- 
cury and arsenis ; yet no judicious physi- 
cian will compare these recoveries with 
the limited doses of either article, adapted 
to the nature of temperament, and dis- 
eased state of his patient. 

Mercury’ being a medicine given in a 
great variety of preparations, has long been 
the chief ingredient im quack remedies. It 
is thus vended under the form of tincture, 


129 


drop, powder, pill, &c. An article of 
materia medica possessing such activity in 
some conditions of the living system, may 
be capable of producing great and salutary 
changes. But in effecting these, certain 
premises and indications are to be attend- 
ed to, to justify the exhibition: and the 
physician who does not give himself the 
trouble to consider these circumstances, 
may perform the part of an executioner. 
Mercury being particularly hurtful where 
the stomach and bowels are very irritable, 
is forbidden in gout and in the nervous. 
In those persons, frictions of the ointment 
lessen the danger. Hence it is improper 
in women and children; in those subject 
to epilepsy, or other convulsions; and. in 
every one, who may be liable to spasmodic 
complaints of any form. In states of tor- 
por and strength, it can be given with more 
safety: it is supposed to be the best remedy 
in glandular obstruction, if the attendant 
debility does not contra-indicate its use. 
But it is too often to be observed, that 
those who make most free with the exhi- 
bition of mercury, are the least qualified 
to guard against its bad effects in improper 
cases. 
K 2 


130 


It is very common for a long use of 
mercury in lues venerea, to produce mis- 
earriage, and most of the sexual weakness-. 
es, in women ; such as flooding, leucorrhoea 
(whites) spasms of the stomach and bowels, 
fainting fits, &c. But when these painful 
complaints and a ruined constitution are 
daily to be seen arising from the wanton: 
and injudicious exhibition of this medicine 
in pretended liver disease, does it not 
amount to more than culpable homicide ? 
Of all that I have seen of ignorance and 
inhumanity in the profession, in different’ 
situations of life, and in all parts of the 
globe, which it has been my lot to visit, 
nothing has appeared so justly to excite 
my indignation and pity as what I have 
witnessed on this subject. It has often 
amounted to torture and death, secundum 


artem ! 
I resided a few years ago in a naval sea- 


port, where I was often consulted for sto- 
mach and nervous complaints, by ladies, 
the wives and relatives of officers, and my 
other friends in the public service. Many 
of these females. had been residents in 
warm Climates. The great resemblance 
which the cases had to one another, excit- 


131 
ed no small degree of surprize at first, till 
I learned they had been all subjected to a 
similar mode of treatment. In short, they 
thad been patients of a physician of exten- 
sive practice in the neighbourhood, who 
prescribed mercury for every disease. Most 
of these women, among whom were some 
of great mental and personal accomplish- 
ments, had been kept for months or weeks 
under the influence of the medicine ; with 
their throats, mouths, and tongues so swoln 
and excoriated, and the teeth $0 loose, as 
*to confine them to a diet of slops. ‘Those 
who had no stomach complaints when they 
began this treatment, found them come on - 
after it ; and such as had been nervous and 
dyspeptic before, felt all their ailments ag- 
gravated. This physician, not -satisfied 
with the milder preparations, made a-com- — 
mon remedy of hydrar. mur. 

A practice not unlike to what d have 
just related, made some noise in ovr navy 
during the late war. A physician on a 
foreign station, took it into his head that 
all modern diséases originated from Syphi- 
lis. It was in vain that officers and sea- 
men pleaded innocefice : if'they were un- 
conscious of receiving infection themselves 


ims 


132 


they were told it must come from their 
parents, sometimes to many generations 
back. Few men could answer for their 
purity on these occasions: a mercurial 
course was therefore directed; not for 
days or weeks, but for years; for there 

was no safety but in continuing it at 
- intervals through life. A medicine of the 
kind, employed on such terms, could not 
fail to do harm: some of the most unfor- 
tunate stomach affections which ever came 
under my care, owed their cause to this | 
treatment; a few valuable men were 
brought to the grave by it, in the circle of 
my own acquaintance, where I suspected 
a schirrous pylorus. 

Mercury exhibited in quantity, either by 
the mouth or by friction, very quickly ex- 
cites an artificial fever, ushered in by chills, 
shivering, and a hot stage. The pulse be- 
comes frequent, at first full, but latterly 
weaker and quicker: want of appetite, 
nausea, and often vomiting, cOmmence ; 
restlessness and night sweats supervene 3 
the body bears the cold air ill; head-ach ; 
foetid breath; the bowels are commonly 
oppressed with flatulence, severe twitches, 
purging, tenesmus, and even bloody stools; 


133 


to these symptoms, debility and emacia- 
tion succeed; the tongue, mouth, and 
throat, inflame, swell, grow painful, and 
ulcerate, and the saliva is poured forth in 
a continual stream. During these: effects 
of mercury on the body, the mind becomes 
irritable and unequal, but generally low- 
spirited ; and after some time exhibits all 
those feelings, usually called nervous, in- 
ducing the hysteric affection, convulsions, 
and frequently the epileptic paroxysm it- 
self. It is therefore plain, that in the ner- 
* vous temperament, all the phenomena now 
described, must appear with greater vio- 
lence, as is observed in children and wo- 
men, and in all who have weak bowels. 
The constitutions of children, in point 
of debility and irritability, approach to the 
female habit of body: the nervous power 
is liable to irregular motions ; easily affect- 
ed by stimuli, and prone to convulsions. 
Hence mercury is apt to have dangerous 
effects upon them. With some medical 
people, as well as parents, this medicine is 
much employed as a vermifuge: it has the 
advantage of being easily disguised, and if 
joined with a purgative, acts very briskly, 
and commonly brings away many of the 
K 4 


134 


vermin. But worms being only the con- 
sequence of a weak. condition of bowels, 
mercury, when continued long, instead of 
correcting the cause, tends still more to 
debilitate the first passages, and lays the 
foundation for much ill health. I shall 
touch on this part further, in the treatment, 
as being intimately connected with my in- 
quiry. In the mean time, I cannot sufh- 
ciently reprobate the conduct of some per- 
sons in high life, who permit their names 
to be published in the hand-bills and ad- 
vertisements of an illiterate quack, whose 
worm medicine is known to be mercury, — 
and liable to be given in very unequal 
doses, from the nature of the composition. 

About twenty years ago, two children of 
a friend of mine, took calomel from the 
family apothecary, for worms. ‘The exact 
dose in which it was given I do not recol- 
lect; but the motions which it produced 
were innumerable. The family, during 
this process, were all at once alarmed, by 
the singular noise which the children made 
in their throats, with an unusual change of 
countenance and cast.of the eyes; which 
were quickly followed by violent agitations 
‘and contortions of body, and lastly convul- 


B45 


sions. In a few days these odd complaints 
disappeared, as the effects of the mercury 
abated: but the apothecary thought pro- 
per to repeat the calomel, obstinately con- 
tending that the fits were mere affectation, 
and not to be imputed to the medicine. 
The same effects however appeared after 
the second exhibition; the evacuations 
were not less profuse and debilitating, and 
the convulsions more frequent and severe. 
The moment one child was seized, the 
other was affected in like manner: so cer- 
tain was this kind of nervous sympathy, 
that there was a necessity for separating 
them, that they might not see or hear one 
another, and the fits went gradually off 
One of them, a young lady, has been long 
a martyr to the most painful nervous com- 
plaints; and I cannot help thinking that 
much of this indisposition was brought on 
by this vermifuge process. 

This mineral, after long use, besides ex- 
hausting the nervous energy, is known to 
affect the bones, and render them friable, 
just as they are found in rickets and in old 
age. A poison so subtle and active, thus 
consumes the vigor of body, and brings on 
premature senility. ‘These hideous effects 


136 


are most probably produced by the mercu- 
rial oxide first depraving the digestive 
powers, preventing assimilation of the 
chyle, and vitiating sanguification. On 
the whole, while mercury is capable of 
great good in the hands of the sagacious 
physician, when indiscriminately used by 
the ignorant of the profession, it must do 
incalculable mischief. 

Since this work was first published, the 
subject of biliary disposition, has under- 
gone much discussion among physicians. 
I have however seen no reason for altering 
either my opinion or practice. And I 
hisve often observed in those habits, vulgar- 
ly stiled dzliows, after mercury and other 
purgatives have failed, that a medicine, di- 
rected against the weakened stomach and 
bowels, has succeeded in procuring a re- 
gular discharge of bile; and as a conse- 
quence, a due alvine evacuation. Some of 
these cases afforded me a fine opportunity 
of convincing others, that sympathy be- 
tween the stomach and liver, by nervous 
communication, had more to do with the 
secretion and flow of the bile, than they 
were aware of. Dr Saunders, in an appen- 
dix to a new edition of his work on the li- 


137 

ver; and Dr Falconer in the Transactions 
of the Medical Society of London, vol. 1. 
part 1. have taken up this subject: and by 
arguments exactly like what I have offered, 
have called the attention of the profession 
to weigh the merits of the discussion. 

Bitters and aromatics. ‘These articles 
_ when well timed and directed with judg- 
ment, are valuable medicines in treating 
the diseases now under discussion. But 
like many of the other good things in life, - 
are too often misapplied, and thus tend to 
confirm what they were meant to remove. 
I here use the term dztters in a greater la- 
titude than is commonly done by writers 
on the materia medica, and include the ce- 
lebrated Peruvian bark, and those sub- 
stances which are allied to it, either in 
their effects or sensible qualities. Their 
office is to strengthen and stimulate. The 
cinchona (bark) itself is a medicine now- 
a-days in such general use, that there are 
few diseases to be met with in this country, 
in which it is not given at one period or 
another; and it is to be found in every fa- 
mily medicine chest. An article possess- 
ing so much active quality in the human 
body, as to be capable of suspending a se- 


138 


were ague-fit, cannot be deemed a passive 
remedy, or what ought to be trusted in 
every person’s hands. ‘The pharmaceuti- 
cal treatment of cinchona is also worthy of 
consideration. When duly prepared, and 
suited to the condition of stomach, its 
powers are invaluable; whereas admini- 
stered in an improper form, it may have 
most baneful effects. It is recommended 
_ by some authors in doses so large, as in our 
. practice were never seen expedient, or the 
stomach capable of retaining them. It is 
therefore to be suspected, that in certain 
diseases, pain, sickness, and vomiting su- 
pervene its use, and that the effects of op- 
pression about the stomach after a large 
dose, have not unfrequently brought on 
such a degree of torpor, as to terminate in 
death. On the coast of Africa, where in- 
termittents assume a more aggravated form 
than ever seen in Europe, I always found, 
upon an average, six drams of the powder 
given in eight doses, for four hours before 
the accession of the cold stage, at half an 
hour’s interval, have more effect than eigh- 
teen drams given in twenty-fours before the 
fit, This was a great saving of the medi- 


139 


eine, which is worthy of attention by naval 
or military surgeons on foreign stations. 

Nothing in the practice of physic can be 
more irksome than to see a poor patient 
struggling to get over his bitter potion: it 
ought at least to caution the physician 
against an unnecessary allowance of medi- 
cine, for it must often defeat its purpose. 
When convalescent myself of fever in the 
West Indies, I was ordered a dose of bark 
every hour; but such was my aversion to 
the medicine, and such the irritable state 
of my stomach, that the fourth dose always 
brought on sickness and vomiting, by which 
the whole was disgorged. I tried from day 
to day to go on with my quantum: it was | 
all in vain; and at last the very sight of 
bark made me sick. If such a school can- 
not teach a physician sympathy, I know 
not how it is to be done. 

Those articles, more strictly called dit- 
ters, require still more caution in the exhi- 
bition, as possessing the power of exhaust- 
ing the excitability of the stomach by long 
use. They impede fermentation in the 
prime vie, and correct acidity; these they 
‘effect chemically. When long continued, 
as in the history of the Portland powder 


840 


for gout, they are said to produce palsy 
and dropsy, and every species of nervous 
debility. There must therefore be a period 
when the good effects cease, and which 
careful observers will mark. If bark and 
bitters ace medicated by alcohol, in the 
form of tincture, it is obvious the hurtful 
effects, after a certain time, must be inevi- 


table. : 
The aromatic substances, among which 


may be reckoned all the spices.and volatile 
oils used in either diet or medicine, by re- 
petition become hurtful to the. stomach, 
whether as condiments, with food, or to 
cover the disagreeable flavour of some ar- 
ticles. These substances have, therefore, 
a limited time to do good, that their use 
may not become habitual. There is al- 
ways something wrong in those stomachs 
which hanker after hot ingredients: when 
these persons are served with watery pre- 
parations of medicine, they complain that 
they are too cold, and disagree with them ; 
but the moment a spiritous tincture is sub- 
stituted, there is little danger of its being 
refused. It is the duty of every honest 
physician to resist those cravings of his pa- 


[4] 


tient, and to endeavour all in his power to 
correct hurtful propensities. 

VecETaB_eE Acips. It isa well known 
fact, how much these acids weaken the or- 
gans of digestion. ‘They are often drank 
clandestinely by corpulent young women, 
to correct obesity, that they may preserve 
their shape. This is always accomplished 
at the expence of health : cramps and pains 
of the stomach, morbid acidity, and eruc- 
tations, bowel complaints, sallowness of 
complexion, nervous head-achs, fainting 
fits, amenorrhoea, fluor albus, strangury, 
&c. follow this practice, and death fre- 
quently happens. All persons subject to 
indigestion, the gouty and_ hysterical, 
know well from experience, the bad effects 
of native vegetable acids. ‘They may be 
supposed to act directly on the fibres of the 
stomach : but if they act chemically on the 
gastric juice and bile, they cannot fail of 
vitiating the chyle, preventing the assimi- 
lation of the different intestinal juices, and 
thus depraving the nourishment. But it 


may also be supposed, if not in some de- 


gree certified, that in passing the glands of 
the mesentery, they cause obstruction and 
enlargement of them, give a disposition to 


142 


scrophula, and otherwise injure the whole 
habit. Vegetable acids have thus a direct- 
ly opposite tendency to the mineral acids, 
such as the sulphuric, muriatic, and nitric, 
all of which have a share of reputation, m 
states of weakened digestion. 

Narcotics. These include ardent spi- 
tits, opium, and all those articles common- 
ly called anodynes, hypnotics, paregorics, 
&e. such as lactuca, bang, belladonna, 
hyosciamus, laurus cerasus, cicuta, &e. 
Of the effects of ardent spirits, in pro- 
ducing stomach and nervous complaints, I 
have treated largely in my Essay on 
Drunkenness, to which I refer the reader.* 
All the articles now enumerated, act very 
much alike on the human body. In small 
quantities, they induce vigor, activity and 
strength, and an increase of muscular 
power throughout the frame; at the same 
time are felt serenity, pleasure, and cou- 
rage of mind. In larger doses they bring 
on sleep, stupor and delirium; and when 
carried to the utmost quantity, insensibili- 
ty, apoplexy and death. It is of little mo-* 
ment in this inquiry, whether narcotics 


* Fourth Edition, Newcastle and London, 1812. 


143 


ought to be considered as directly or indi- 
rectly sedative. ‘They are forbidden in all 
inflammatory diseases, where they certain- 
ly do harm in the first stage: they gene- 
rally occasion constipation, but hyosciamus 
has a laxative quality. When long conti- 
nued, they are known to weaken the ner- 
vous system in a surprising degree; dis- 
posing to amentia, epilepsy, palsy, tremors, 
convulsions, melancholy, madness, &c. No 
«substances in nature more certainly injure 
the powers of digestion, and bring on all 
the severe symptoms of nervous infirmity. 
This effect of narcotics, is most likely pri- 
marily derived from the nerves of the sto- 
mach, with which they come first in con- 
tact, and from thence extended to the 
other viscera. Where there is a predispo- 
sition, or hereditary nervous temperament, 
or gout, the permanent use of them is still 
more quickly hurtful: in such states of the - 
body, they ought, like vinous spirits, never 
to be prescribed but from necessity. 
Opium, the noblest attribute of Medi- 
‘cine, so calculated by its powers to sweeten 
life, and suspend pain, when all earthly 
comforts avail nothing, has its limits in do- 
ing good. Itisa misfortune when it comes 
3 


144 

to be'dispensed by injudicious hands; for 
it is often prescribed by the most ignorant, 
in diseases where it is forbidden. The 
bodily complaints of the human race, when 
enervated by luxury and refinement, seem 
to produce more acute pain; at least. the 
temperate man is observed.to bear sickness 
with more patience and resignation, than 
those accustomed to indulgence. ‘The 
spirits are apt to flag, as if the mind had © 
no resting place. Opium alone gives re- 
lief, though it must feed the disease. Such 
persons seem to compound with their phy- 
sician for sound nights,.and days of ease ; 
and if he does not ‘comply he must be 
changed. Hardis the task imposed on the 
medical attendant ; he mustobey, or starve. 
The night draught thus becomes familiar 
in the family : the servant goes to.the apo- 
thecary for it with as little ceremony as he 
buys kitchen salt. He sees the shop boy 
count the drops into the phial, and when 
he gets home, narrates the composition of 
the placebo to the cook and the nursemaid. 
Not a domestic in the house but soon learns 
what a fine thing landanum is; and master 
swears he can get no rest without it. 

If such things did not exist, how comes 


145 


it that seven young women in this neigh- 
bourhood, within the last three years, 
should have known that a large dose of this 
tincture will kill. Two of the number ef- 
fected their purpose. I was called to visit 
another 1 in Percy-street; she had swallow- 
ed twelve drams of laudanum; but I ar- 
rived before it had been twenty minutes in 
her stomach, and by plentiful dilution with 
vinegar and water, followed by an active 
emetic, the bad efiects were prevented. I 
remained in the house till I was sure that 
every drop of the opium was discharged, 
and she did well. It appeared that these 
poor girls had become the dupes of design- 
ing men, and called for death to end their 
sufferings. Thus the dose of opium con- 
cludes what was begun in the circulating 
library. A little more secr ecy and discre- 
tion are certainly wanted in the general 
use of this dangerous narcotic. 

But there is reason to believe, that even 
medical men themselves, have, of late, en- 
tered too easily into the indiscriminate use 
of opium. He must be a. short-sighted 


physician that does not calculate upon the 


ultimate effects of his prescription: it is a 
weak excuse for getting quit of the impor- 
L 2 


146 

tunities of a patient, by complying with aw 
improper request, that may afford tempo- 
rary ease, at the expence of permanent 
health. In the nervous temperament it is 
particularly hurtful. Iam acquainted with. 
numbers of ladies that feel such horror at 
taking opium, as nothing can equal; and 
in every illness. they may labour under, 
constantly warn the medical visitor against 
giving it, as no disguise can make it agree- 
able to them. But when opium happens 
to be soothing to weak nerved people, from 
their quick sensations, it is apt to be the 
more craved for, and converted into habit. 
The langour and dejection which follow its 
operation, pave the way for the repetition 
of the dose, till general debility succeeds. 
frre such. constitutions, the exhibition of 
opium ought never to take place on slight 
occasions. Midwives, nurses, and other 
persons out of the medical profession, who 
dispense laudanum at random, ought to be 
solemnly warned against it.* 


*. A medical gentleman, in attending a young lady, 
to whom he was much attached, and who had a great 
dislike to opium, when that medicine was found neces- 
sary in her complaint, with great gallantry, he swal- 
lowed, in her presence, double the quantity he intended 


147 


“The opiwm-eaters in Turkey, are ‘the 
most pitiable objects in society. Their 
squalid looks and emaciated bodies, after a 
long course of this narcotic, evince how 
fatal its use is to the digestive organs, and 
how it prevents the due assimilation of 
nourishment. On dissection, the same ef- 
fects appear in the stomach, liver, and 
bowels, which follow a long course of ar- 
dent spirits. Like the dram-drinker also, 
when deprived of his wonted cordial, they 
are languid, faintish, low-spirited, nervous, 
and feeble. ‘Their limbs totter under 
them; their heads and hands tremble, and 
the very wind is in danger of eversetting 
them. ‘Their faculties seem exhausted, the 
memory fails, and the only remnant of in- 
tellect which they possess, appears in the 
frightful accounts which they give of their 
horrors, and the hypochondriacal glooms 
with which they are infested. No form of 
disease exhibits existence under a more de- 
plorable shape than the opiwm-eater and 
dram-drinker. ‘There is great reason for 
suspicion, that this drug is daily getting 


for her. But such were its effects, that he fell asleep 
en horseback, and had nearly broken his neck by a fall. 
1, 3 ’ 


148 


more into use as acordial, and privately con- 


sumed by numbers of persons. It is well 
adapted, from its preparation in tincture, 
to be carried about, and drank at pleasure. 
Its exhilirating quality creates a momenta- 
ry heaven for minds who find nothing but 
guilt and despair in their own reflections : 
hence it has grown so general in high life, 
and in fashionable circles. I am also of 
opinion that many sudden deaths are in 
the present times, occasioned by this drug, 
without exciting the least suspicion of its 
being taken. Those who accustom them- 
selves to the narcotic article called bang in 
the East Indies and in the Turkish domi- 
nions, are said to perish under diseases si- 
milar to those of the opium-eater. 

Tobacco is another narcotic in common 
use. Persons who are in the habit of chew- 
ing, snuffing, or smoking this Indian leaf, 
are not aware, that a few grains of it taken 


into the stomach, cause sudden death. Nay 


the smoke of it injected into the rectum, 
has frequently proved fatal. It acts power- 
fully on the nervous system, destroys the 
sensibility of the stomach; and it is ob- 
served that those who devour it in great 
quantity, die of apoplexy, palsy,and dropsy. 


149 


‘Poisons. All kinds of poison, so called, 
whether taken from the animal, vegetable, 
or mineral kingdom, if not immediately fa- 
tal, weaken or destroy the functions of the 
stomach, derange the nervous system, and 
bring on nervous diseases; so certainly 
are the digestive organs the first to suffer, 
and stand from their office as centinels of 
life. . 

Bieepinc. Numbers of persons labour- 
ing under nervous debilities, attribute the 
first appearance of their malady to large 
bleedings, or evacuations of blood from 
other causes. No fact is better known to 
the medical observer than that frequent 
convulsions are a common consequence of 
the large loss of blood. ‘The nice connec- 
tion between the circulating and nervous 
systems, cannot be well explained, but they 
act reciprocally on one another. It is 
equally clearly ascertained, that men or 
women of the nervous temperament, bear 
the loss of blood ill. Indeed it seldom or 
never happens, that their diseases indicate 
the practice: when done, it has commonly 
been through the ignorance of some stupid 
attendant. Abortions, and severe flood- 
ings after child-birth, are often traced as 

L 4 


150 


the beginning of painful and lingering ner- 
vous affections, that sometimes remain for 
life. | 
Reriections oN Mepicines. Physicians 
having wisely drawn the line between me- 
dicine and diet, the former can only be in- 
dicated in some of the diseased conditions 
of the body. There are a multitude of ar- 
ticles in materia medica, beyond what I 
have thought proper to animadvert on here, 
possessing equal activity to those enume- 
rated. Some of these may be supposed to 
have a chemical agency on both the solids 
and fluids; while others appear to act more 
immediately on our sentient parts. It is 
evident, then, from the most accurate ob- 
servations, that such substances ought to 
be exhibited with great caution, and their 
operations watched with the most punctual 
attention. Many of the metallic salts, the 
mineral acids, all the alkalis, some of the 
neutral salts, and many simple remedies 
taken from the vegetable kingdom, are of 
this description. ‘The nicest study of the 
physician must be that at the bed-side of 
his patient ; in observing the phenomena 
of disease ; developing the genius of a dis- 
temper; unfolding peculiarities of consti- 


151 


tution; selecting medicines for these indi- 
cations of cure, and discerning their action 
and appreciating their power, that he may 
be enabled to proceed on the same plan of 
treatment, or adopt another. Nature has 
endowed so few minds with that superior 
intelligence of being equal to this task, 
that we cannot be surprised when told, 
that medicine is still in many respects ‘* a 
conjectural art.’ Where men do not all 
possess the same sagacity, cultivated talents, 
and extensive acquirements, they must 
think and reason differently, on subjects 
which bear no resemblance to other human 
pursuits ; and concerning which no appeal 
can be made, without overstepping the 
bounds which divine Providence has pre- 
scribed for the ingenuity of mankind. 


CHAPTER LV. 


influence of these diseases on the character of na- 
tions, and on domestic happiness. 


Ir is a fact fully confirmed in the history 
of mankind, that a similarity of manners 
has marked all nations, in their progress 
from rudeness to refinement; in their rise 
and in their decline. An infant state is 
commonly poor: but from intercourse 
with its neighbours, it learns the advan- 
tages of a change of produce and commo- 
dities ; and this traffic soon gives spring to 
ingenuity, and birth to adventure. Amidst 
its articles of utility, it also imports some 
that are showy and elegant: the arts of 
inventing new sources of gain, being na- 
tural to the human mind, gradually ex- 
tend ; till luxury in all its shapes, appears 
in the manners, amusements, and govern- 
ment of every commercial people. The 
arms of imperial Rome subdued the world, 
and made that city the emporium of wealth 
and grandeur, drawn from all other nations. 


pS : ‘ i ath —_ a 
ee ee ee ee ee ee ee 


153 


Luxury, crimes, and irreligion, were soon 
the consequences of power overgrown, and 
riches unbounded. And this haughty, 
wicked people, when they had lost their 
moral virtue and dignity, and with these, 
their physical strength, became a prey to 
barbarous hordes ; who, undebauched by 
refined pleasures, found the enervated Ro- 
mans an easy conquest. Let Great Britain 
look to this example. The East and West 
Indies at this moment, are a theatre of 
oppression and slavery, to gorge her with 
commercial wealth; and a district of Africa, 
larger than Europe, is made a field of 
blood, to purchase the natives for cultiva- 
ting her colonies, whose produce only 
tends to weaken her manly character, and 
overwhelm her with nervous infirmities ! * 

The rise and fall of a large commercial 
town, may be taken as an example of'a na- 


* Since this work was printed, the Parliament of 
this country, after twenty years hesitation, has abolish- 
ed the hellish slave trade. This act was chiefly owing 
to Mr Fox making it a ministerial question. Thou 
persecuted statesman! this deed will embalm thy me- 
mory while christianity is our national religion; and 
thy meek spirit will find its reward in Abraham’s 


bosom ! 


154 


tion. From a few fishermen’s huts, on 
some river, or arm of the sea, it gradually 
extends and improves, till the exchange 
for business, and the theatre for amuse- 
ment, become its ornaments. A narrow 
port is by degrees, widened into a capacious 
harbour: and the warehouse, manufactory 
and shop, increase in proportion, till wealth 
and elegance dazzle in every lane and alley. 
The coffee-house, the inn, and the tavern, 
grow necessary appendages to business and 
pleasure: the morning begins with a bar- 
gain, and the evening closes with a ban- 
quet. . Then the rout commences, to teach 
the young the arts of gaming: and the — 
midnight masquerade initiates them into 
the wiles of intrigue. The riot disturbs 
sleep; the drunkard is seen staggering 
home, in danger of robbery and death; 
and the woman of the town, deserted by 
her destroyer, is seeking reprisals, and 
looking for prey in the streets. Now the 
hospital and bedlam appear in the suburbs ; 
the first to receive the poor, sick, and lame ; 
and the other to confine the more wretch- 
ed in mind. The physician and apothecary 
are seen gliding in their chariots, with re- 
tinues sometimes not much like men who 


155 


are conversant with human affliction, and 
enriched by the luxuries and vices of their 
fellow mortals. Morals and health are a- 
like committed in this vortex of wealth 
and dissipation. ‘The industrious man who 
began the world with a capital of fifty 
pounds, who rose at five, and went to bed 
at nine, who dined on a plain joint and 
pudding, and drank nothing stronger than 
table beer, does not find a fortune of fifty 
thousand pounds exempt him from gout 
and nervous torments. A crowded popu- 
lation multiples all contagious maladies, 
but especially fevers of the worst kind. 
Fashionable pleasures, such as towns only 
afford, are a fruitful source of weakness 
and pain: and drunkenness and mercurial 
courses, of themselves, produce more 
wretchedness and disorders, than the whole 
natural infirmities of life. Under these 
circumstances, the human frame must de- 
generate in both body and mind, as we 
see in modern Egypt, Turkey, and Italy. 
Thus flourishes the commercial town or 
state, till its wealth and effeminacy weigh 
it down; when it falls like Tyre or Alex- 
andria, like Corinth and Carthage, to be a 
retreat to robbers, and a den to wild beasts. 


156 


As we analyze the manners of society, 
and scrutinize those causes which lead to 
the diseases of which we treat, we observe 
their operation and influence to be very 
general, and daily increasing. Commer- 
cial Britain, enriched by manufacture and 
colonial wealth, when compared with her 
barbarous state, does not exhibit a nobler 
spirit of independence, or shew more for- 
titude in opposing French invasion, than 
what was done nineteen hundred years ago 
by our forefathers, in repelling the Roman 
legions. Our invaders were then obliged 
to build strong walls and ramparts to 
shelter them from the Britons:* but mo- 
dern Britons have erected Martello towers, 
projected the inundation of Essex, and 
hoarded up the current gold coin, as tokens 
of being afraid of the French. These 
alarms are to be considered as so many 
symptoms of a nervous temperament ap- 
pearing in our national character. Britain 
had no ships to oppose the landing of Juli- 
us Cesar; but at this moment she has a 
navy capable of fighting the whole fleets 
of Europe united; yet she trembles at a 


* The walls of Adrian and Severus. 


LS - 


flotilla of cock-boats! It is that puddle of 
corruption, the Stock Exchange; _ that 
Delphi of Plutus, where stock-brokers pay 
their vows, and expound prophecies, that 
has filled the nation with degenerate fears, | 
apprehension, and hypochondriacism. Eu- 
rope has been saved by the British navy 
from the fangs of French tyranny ; yet, | 
shameful to be told, after the fleets of 
France have been annihilated, we are now 
to be assailed by three thousand wherries, 
manned with blue devils / * 

If I am altogether correct in saying, 
that the xervous temperament is hereditary, 
and therefore the diseases which depend 


* The gentlemen of the Stock Exchange, as they 
denominate themselves, are projecting great things 
from the conquest of Buenos Ayres. Spain, humbled, 
degraded, pillaged by an imperial cut-throat, is almost 
blotted out of the map of Europe; which she owes to 
the gold and silver brought from the new world. Yet 
these gentlemen seem to entertain no fears for the like 
fate happening to Great Britain. Such is the patriot- 
ism of money-lenders !—Sept. 14, 1807. Itis to be 
hoped the melancholy accounts just received from the 
army in South America will be some check to the 
avarice of these stock-jobbers: this trading expedition, 
it now appears, is annihilated at the expence of 2000 


brave men! 


158 


upon it, liable to be extended to the off- 
spring, they must multiply in prodigious 
proportion. They appear in the present 
age to have acquired that growth, which 
nothing but a general revolution among 
all ranks of society can check. I may be 
told, that these diseases are not very dan- 
gerous, and very seldom produce death ; 
and it may be added, the bills of mortali- 
ty do not justify my conclusions. These 
arguments are easily answered. It is true, 
death is seldom put down to nervous dis- 
orders: but if constant pain, mental dis- 
quietude, and apprehension of dying, are 
to be considered as evils in this stage 
_of existence, then are nervous afflictions to 
be held as the chief cause of them. And 
it is to be remembered, that the most 
frightful part of the catalogue of diseases, 
such as apoplexy, palsy, madness, melan- 
choly, epilepsy, convulsions, colic, iliac 
passion, atrophy and dropsy, are often 
ushered in by nervous affection, before 
they assume their own character and 
shape. Physical strength of body cannot 
be long preserved under enervating modes 
of living: the stature and the mind must 
both diminish and degenerate. The poet 


L159 


says, fories creantur fortibus et bonis; and 
very aptly adds, 


deve nec imbellem feroces, 
Progenerant aquilz columbam. Hor. 


An eminent senator, Sir John Sinclair, 
has lately made some noble attempts to 
regenerate the physical strength of the 
country, by recalling mankind to agricul- 
tural life. His institution of a society for 
that purpose, under the authority of Parlia- 
ment, has already had considerable effect. 
Many noblemen and gentlemen, of great 
landed property, have seconded these pa- 
triotic views, and turned their attention ta 
this national object: a spirit of improve- 
ment has appeared in every county, and is 
daily increasing. No man who possesses 
the smallest spark of love for his country, 
but must wish full success to the under- 
taking. No truth in political economy is 
better proved, than that a nation of seden- 
tary people can never be a nation of heroes. 
We might, indeed, preserve all our manu- 
facturing establishments, and most of the 
fine arts, during the degeneracy of physical 
courage: but could an army of man-milli- 

M 


160 

ners defend the British islands against the 
ruffians of Bonaparte?* ‘The puny in 
habitants of Italy and Indostan are finer 
spinners of silk and cotton than English- 
men, because they are strangers to all the 
masculine virtues. Let us therefore be- 
ware how we extol too much the effeminate 
labours of the spindle and the loom. A 
commercial people merely, can never: be 
an independent’ nation. They owe’ to 
foreigners the consumption of their manu- 
factures; and when these chuse to do with- 
out them, or-to-buy them elsewhere, such 
a people must become bankrupts in finance. 
The glory and security of the united king- 
dom, must be to blend these pursuits, agri- 
culture: and commerce, in the national 
character. ! 

From the mperfect state of the medical 
histories, which have come to us from the 
early ages of the world, we are left much 
in the dark, how far luxurious living and 
effeminate customs affected. the health of 
nations. We are told of their vices and 
debaucheries arising to excess; and these 
seem to have generally been forerunners of 


* Non his juventus orta parentibus, &e. Hor. 


161 


their fall and decline. When the form of 
republican government in Rome, yielded 
to the tyranny of the Caesars, with it the 
republican virtues gave way to the vices of 
courts; and the Romans, soon after, lost 
their character for military prowess. It is 
therefore but fair to infer, that the faculties 
of soul, and the vigour of body, under- 
went immediate changes ; and that a train 
of diseases of a peculiar cast, sprang up 
among this debased people. Hence the 
modern enervated inhabitant of Italy must 
be very unlike the ancient warlike Roman. 
The youth of the one is spent in learning 
music, painting, and frippery: the other 
was early trained to bear fatigue, hunger, 
thirst, running, leaping, swimming, &c. 
Diseases of the same class could not, there- 
fore, exist, in constitutions so different in 
habit and predisposition. The sural life 
also occupied a considerable portion of 
time with the Roman worthies of the old 
republic. All the Latin classics abound 
with beautiful eulogies on rustic manners, 
scenery, and recreation, particularly Virgil, 
Horace, and Pliny the younger. The 
greatest man whom modern ages have 
produced, George Washington, was of this. 
M 2 


162 © 


school. How much nobler was it to retire 
from the command of a victorious army, 
after securing the independence of his 
country, for the study of nature in his 
own farm, than to live in a city to learn 
excise laws, and: squeeze taxes from indus- 
try, to pay profligate. favourites, and un-. 
profitable wars. How mean and contemp- 
tible the upstart emperor of France ap- 
pears, when compared with this truly 
christian hero, the friend and admiration of. 
human. kind !. 

Thediseases of a labouring and active: 
peasantry, or of those of any condition of 
mankind, exposed to the weather in all. 
seasons, are almost confined to the inflam- 
matory class; such as pleurisy, acute rheu- 
matism, catarrh, cynanche, &c. These 
depend on a vigorous vital power, a rigid 
fibre, and a florid dense blood > they are a 
directly opposite state of the system to 
what predisposes to nervous diseases. No 
kind of diet comes wrong to the stomach 
of a hale rustie ; the unleavened’ farinace- 
ous meal, or a draught of imperfectly fer- 
mented malt liquor, that would throw the 
dyspeptic and bilious citizen into a colic, 
he takes down with impunity. He is also 


163 


capable of braving fatigue, privation of 
‘food and sleep, and every other hardship, — 
‘ima manner that would soon destroy the 
town inhabitant. A nation that cannot 
recruit its soldiers from a robust and hardy 
peasantry, can never bring into the field 
an army able to endure the toils and ad- 
ventures of actual war.* 

_ Amidst the general effeminacy of man- 
ners, that is rapidly consuming the manly 
spirit and physical strength of this age, and 
which may ultimately annihilate all that is 
great in the character of Britons, it is some- 
what consoling to observe, that the seamen 
of the navy, that bulwark of our liberties, 
will be the last of the community to feel 
the effect of these enervating customs. 
The naval officer and seaman embark in 
their profession while boys, ‘before they 
can be acquainted with the seftening arts 
of the day. Hardship, danger, and priva- 
tion, are the lot of naval service: ‘to brave 
the weather, the season, and the climate, is 
their delight and their duty; which, for- 
tunately for their country, grow into habit. 


__* 8ee Dr Robert Jackson, the army physician, on 
this subject. 
M3 


164 


Hence they have little enjoyment among 
the common amusements of society, and 
feel that kind of life hang heavy upon them, 
which gives no birth to action and enter- 
prize. It is true a species of nervous dis- 
ease did make its appearance during the 
late war. It occurred among both officers 
and men; but was, by no means, a general 
malady.* The hard duty of a stupid block- 
ade had a chief share in its production. 
Statesmen, I believe, seldom or never 
read the medical history of fleets and 
armies. ‘They are afraid that such gloomy 
narratives would alarm conscience, and 
bring on fits of hypochondriacism.t Yet 


* Med. Nautica, vol. 3. 

+ The fate of the cow-pock inoculation in this coun- 
try, is a proof of the indifference of statesmen to the 
improvement of the health and safety of the communi- 
ty. It has been said, that the late minister refused to 
become a member of the society for encouraging vac- ~ 
cination : and his predecessor, the son of a physician, 
opposed the gift of 20,0001. to the immortal author of 
this matchless discovery, so that the grant was only 
10,0001.! The present ministers, it is to be hoped, will 
retrieve the credit of the nation, by bestowing the me- 
rited honours and rewards due to Dr Jenner. See al- 
so the fate of this discovery in a branch of the public ser- 
wice, Med. Naut. vol. 3. Since the first edition of this 


165 

‘by these means, they might be made wiser 
ministers, if not bettermen. The practice 
of blockade has crept much into our naval 
system of late; yet it was abhorred by 
Howe and Nelson, as inconsistent with the 
genius of our seamanship. But though it 
may be conducted with ease in the equal 
weather between the tropics, it can never 
be effective in the stormy seasens of Euro- 
pean seas. Such a mode of service is cal- 
culated to please underwriters and stock-— 
brokers, but it can never be acceptable to 
the officer and seaman. A duty so severe, 
without variety to give spring to adventure, 
benumbs the faculties, exhausts the bodily 
powers, and in habits predisposed, brings 
on a nervous irritability that shortens the 
span of life. 

It has been gravely asserted, and with 
much probability of truth, that during the 
reign of ferror in France, in the late revo- 
jution, a period marked by fury and blood 


work was published, a parliamentary gift of 20,0001. 
has been bestowed on my learned friend; in which 
grant Mr Chancellor Percival found himself in the m:- 
nority, to the eternal honour of the present House of 
Commons. | | 


M 4 


166 


beyond whatever was known in a civilized 
country, all diseases, usually called ner- 
vous, low spirits, or hypochondriacism, 
quickly disappeared. These diseases are 
so nearly connected with the tenor of the 
mind, that great commotions in the moral 
world may both induce and remove them. 
But if, as we contend, they are chiefly the 
offspring of a life of sloth and inaction, vio- 
Jent popular tumults, that rouse anarchy 
and ferocious passions, and let loose the 
furies among mankind, cannot fail of mak- 
ing strong impressions on the timid and de- 
sponding. All physicians conversant with 
these distempers, are aware, that a corre- 
sponding train of thought attends the bodi- 
ly disorder; and that it is a preliminary 
step to the cure, to infuse activity of mind, 
so as to force new ideas on the patient. 
We have heard of a fit of the gout being 
instantly cured by the alarm of fire ; and 
the person confined, throwing his crutches 
away to escape fromthe danger. Nervous 
persons, in different families, have been 
suddenly relieved by unexpected good for- 
tune coming upon their near relatives ; 
and the indisposition has again recurred by 
the return of a fresh disaster: and all 


ee ee eee ee ee ee 


167 
strong emotions while they last, have more 
or less the same effect in suspending or re- 
moving both the mental and corporeal ail- 
ment. 

The South Sea scheme of 1720, that bub- 
ble of commercial speculation, gives a curi- 
ous example of the English character. It 
was remarked at that time, that more in- 
stances of madness appeared, than at any 
former. period.* In short, numbers be- 
came maniacs, from the sudden wealth 
which fell to them: these were probably of 
the nervous temperament. ‘The transition 
was too great and quick for the sensibility 
of particular constitutions. ‘This scheme 
having soon failed, it is likely that hypo- 
chondriacism and low spirits would succeed 
to an equally sudden reverse of fortune ; 
but of this we are not told. 

A naval officer, while abroad in the late 
war, received a letter from his sister, telling 
him, that his ticket in the lottery had come 
up a prize of 20,0007. He was so elated 
with the news, that he became instantly 
delirious; leaped from a wardroom win- 
dow into the sea, and was drowned. The 


* Dr Mead. 


168 - 


Athenian soldier, who ran to the city co- 
vered with dust and blood, to announce 
the victory of Marathon, was so overpower- 
ed at the event, that he could only call out, 
“ Rejoice with the victors,’ and immediate- 
ly expired. In like manner the Roman 
mother died suddenly, on hearing that her 
son had survived the battle of Canne. It 
is probable all these persons were of the 
nervous temperament, from being subject 
to such violent emotions. Bad news, such 
as the death of wives and husbands, or of 
children, however suddenly told, or hap- 
pening unexpectedly, do not seem to ope- 
rate like excessive joy. Grief is slow in 
producing derangement of mind; and is 
nearer to what we call the mild delirium : 
while the frenzy of joy partakes more of 
the delirium ferox. I have observed some- 
thing like temporary insanity, in several 
officers, who had at once been elevated 
from extreme poverty to a fortune, by 
prize-money. Men who have been weal- 
thy, and afterwards reduced to indigence, 
often sink into despondency and low spirits. 
But it is also true, that persons who have 
unexpectedly received great riches or le- 
gacies, are apt to turn hypochondriacal by 


169 

being lulled into ease and security, and 
having no longer cause for action and en- 
terprize. I have known habitual drunken- 
ness in a family, that brought on some of 
the most afflicting nervous symptoms, com- 
pletely overcome on a signal ‘misfortune 
befalling a brother; and nothing beyond 
water used afterwards. Such a fact totally 
disproves the reasoning of those physicians, 
who tell us it is dangerous to subtract the 
stimulus all at once. The mind that is 
stable, by a firm nervous system, is little 
shook by the incidents of life: -whereas 
the fickle constitution of nerves bears un-. 
equally every vicissitude ; but sustains sor- 
row and disappointment, better than joy 
and good fortune. Thus the moral pro- 
pensities are to be learned from the physi- 
cal habit; and the peculiar genius of dis- 
eases, unfolded by the passions of the indi- 
vidual. 

The nervous temperament, abstractedly 
considered, is often the seat of dispositions, 
that appear in two extremes; and giving 
birth to passions of the most opposite kind. 
Under the government of a bad heart, it is 
ferociously cruel, or abjectly timid. When 
men possessing these traits of character, 


170 


‘happen to be armed with power, they be- 
come the scourges and butchers of man- 
kind. Such we suspect to have been the 
temperament of all those tyrants, whose 
reigns have been marked by murder and. 
outrage, in the history of nations,* ‘The 
present ruler of a neighbouring people, ap- 
pears to be a man answering to this de- 
scription. He is said to be subject, at 
times, to the deepest hypochondriacal 
glooms ; and while under their influence, 
his temper exhibits more of the demon 
than the human being. Jealous of his per- 
sonal safety, even to timidity, because he 
is aware that his plans of ambition are to 
be effected by blood, and accomplished by 
perfidy, he knows that he cannot be be- 
loved. Through slaughter and fraud, he 
has waded to a throne: and his obtaining 
the sceptre, was the signal to shut the gates 
of mercy against his species. <A stranger 
to every domestic enjoyment ; unsuscepti- 


* Such were Philip, Alexander, and Julius Cesar. 
Philip and Alexander were great drunkards, and con- 
sequently nervous, versatile, and dyspeptic. And Plu- 
tarch informs us, that Cesar was subject to violent 
head-achs, and frequent fits of epilepsy, a disease of the 
nervous temperament, 


—a——_ 


171 


ble of the tender passion; and aloof from 
all the temperate and soothing pleasures,. 
which sweeten the slumbers of a good man 
in power and prosperity, this arch-tyrant is 
said never to sleep two nights in the same _ 
bed, from the dread of assassination. When 
any sudden disaster befals his projects, 
without a single virtue to cheer his reflec- 
tions, he becomes his own tormentor : 
his bowels are wrung with spasms; the bi- 
lary ducts partake of the commotion ; and 
a jaundiced hue of the eye indicates to the 
spectator, the features of some devil that 
has usurped the human form. Under this 
sombre cast of countenance, his vindictive 
passions brood over crimes, and hatch plots, 
that he may find victims to glut his desire 
for blood. In such moods, he sends to the 
guillotine, incarcerates, or proscribes the 
devoted royalists of France ; anticipates in 
their fate the doom of Englishmen ; and 
feels in miniature that gratification, which 
he longs to experience by the invasion of 
Great Britain. History tells us of bad men 
that were born with teeth in their jaws, and 
of others, whose hearts were found hairy : 
such relations are amiable, even if they 
arose from the folly of superstition, as they 


172 


imply the hideousness and detestation of’ 
vice: and future ages may inquire with 
avidity, for the physiological structure of 
that breast which was so superlatively 
steeled, and possessed passions so transcen- 
dently cruel, above what is recorded of the 
common destroyers of mankind. 

At the head of a military banditti, and 
at a period. when the meek spirit of christi- 
anity ought to have sheathed the sword, 
he has converted civilized war into a 
system of murder and pillage. ‘The go- 
vernments of Europe, dwindled into do- 
tage, have fallen an easy prey to an in- 
triguing conqueror; who, like Philip, 
has accomplished by bribery, what he could 
not effect by arms. And one of the de- 
graded monarchies, in order to save itself 
from final ruin, has been mean enough to 
sacrifice a princess of its royal house, to the 
embraces of this blood-stained monster ; 
when in the extacy of blasphemy he was 
addressing heaven to give him progeny, 
that he might extend the career of his 
crimes to a future age. Such a connec- 
tion was not capable of softening a temper 
seared by fortune, and rendered callous 
by repetition of extraordinary luck; and 


173 


Spain, the present field of his ravages, 
has found her horrors multiplied beyond 
example; and the blood of her babes and 
her young women is now painting the last 
scene which murder and violence can in- 
flict on human nature ! 

But it must be unfortunate for any na- 
tion to be governed by a man of capricious 
temper, even though his passions are gen- 
tle and mild. A nervous statesman could 
not easily divest his public measures of 
some portion of his consitutional disposi- 
tions. He would at times view things 
through a false medium: and by judging 
from mistaken premises, would conduct 
the business of government with imbecility 
and supineness, and bring it into contempt. 
Every plan he devised would partake of 
the mood he happened to be in at the mo- 
ment: it would be liable to defeat, and 
exposed to opposition ; in hazard of being 
divulged before execution, and open to 
derision. ‘The morbid sensibility of a de- 
luded hypochondriac, might alarm a peo- 
ple by imaginary dangers ; and in the sea- 
son of disaster, might bring ruin on affairs 
by irresolution and despondency. By such 
men nations have been plunged into un- 


174 


necessary wars; and inglorious peace has 
been concluded, when advantageous terms 
might have been obtained. Men endued 
with an exquisitely nervous temperament, 
ought to be banished from the councils of 
all sovereigns, however respectable their 
talents; for consistency and fortitude are 
incompatible with their physical character. 
In the medical profession, the nervous 
temperament might also so affect the prac- 
tice of the physician, as to render it feeble, 
fluctuating, and irresolute. Diseases often 
take most unaccountable turns, not to be 
foreseen or prevented by human abilities. 
Such sudden changes not only require firm- 
ness of mind and address, on the part of 
the attending physician; but his conduct 
and example may so affect the patient, as 
to bring on a fatal despondency. Hence 
the value of confidence in the medical 
friend. -‘To a sick person, who thinks him- 
self in danger, nothing is so distressing, as 
to behold fear and distrust in the coun- 
tenance and deportment of his medical 
director: a nervous frame is therefore very 
inadequate to some situations of this office. 
But m the common transactions of life, 
nervous people are difficult to be managed. 


175 


Their tempers are fickle, their spirits un- 
equal, and their attachments equivocal. 
In business they are indecisive, unsteady, 
and impracticable. ‘Their friendships are 
often puerlish, and their resentments un- 
manly. - Amidst domestic connections, 
they are apt to teaze their relatives by the 
observance of trifles; while concerns of 
importance are frequently degraded by an 
ill-timed levity. Much of their time there- 
fore is spent in making concessions to 
others, for the inordinate ebullitions of 
passion; or in torturing themselves by 
groundless fears, or imaginary affronts. 
At one moment, you find them obsequious 
and compliant; grateful for correction, 
and gentle on being reminded of their duty. 
But this even tenor seldom lasts long ; and 
they grow impatient of contradiction, and 
furious from restraint. These transitions 
are commonly sudden: the same wavering 
_ and capricious principle of action, appears 
to direct alike the healthful and the morbid 
state. We behold them one day, taking 
leave of their friends with all the solemnity 
and earnestness of dying men; and in 
imagination suffering worse than death: 
while on the next, they will be seen plunged 
N 


176 
into dissipation, fascinated with pleasure, 
and attending every fashionable amuse- 
ment. 

On the other hand, the nervous tempera- 
ment is often found to bethe soilof numerous 
virtues : the noblest feelings are cherished 
here. Sensibility to excess marks the con- 
stitution ; and affliction cannot address it 
without meeting its sympathy. It is this 
degree of feeling, that too often makes it 
the sport and victim of passion. It loves 
and hates beyond bound. Henee those 
corroding sorrows, which sometimes over- 
take the most tender of all attachments, 
and which ultimately bring the possessor 


to the grave. In adverse circumstances. 


nervous people easily despond, and sink 
under misfortunes, which if opposed by pa- 
tience and firmness, might be happily over- 
eome. In this temperament of the sentient 
system, a genius for the elegant arts chiefly 
originates. ‘The poet, painter, and musi- 
cian, may be justly styled genus irritable 
vatum. We here meet with the whole ec- 
centricities of superior endowments, often 
blended with the most abject pursuits ; 
sublimity and debasement frequently mixed 
im the same eharacter. Cheyne, in his 


rage Poe ee 


Kee 

English Malady, facetiously remarks, “ 
*< seldom ever observed a heavy, dull, 
“ earthy, clod-pated clown much troubled 
“ with nervous disorders, or at least, not 
“¢ to any eminent degree; and I scarce be- 
‘«< lieve the thing possible, from the animal 
““ economy and the present laws of na- 
“¢ ture.’’—p. 180. 

On the whole the influence of these dis- 
eases is often great on national character, 
and domestic happiness. When wealth and 
luxury arrive at a certain pitch in any 
country, mankind cannot remain long sta- 
tionary in mental qualifications or corpo- 
real strength. Domestic peace is first in- | 
vaded by asperity of temper and turbulent 
passions. Vices and diseases are close at- 
tendants on riches and high living. All 
these gradually extend among the commu- 
nity ; and the circle widens, till it engulphs 
a whole people ; when polished society may 
be said to bring on its own dofage, and to 
dig its own grave / ; 


an 


LTS 


CHAPTER V. 


History and progress of these diseases. 


A. metuopicaL history of these diseases,. 
at least a narrative of the symptoms as 
they appear in succession, is almost im- 
possible. They assume such variety in 
form and manner, in different persons, that 
we look in vain for regular order. The. 
only thing certain and peculiar in their 
character is predisposition ; which may be 
divided into hereditary and acquired. 

1.. By hereditary predisposition is to be. 
understood. an original conformation of. 
body, transmitted from the parent to the 
offspring ; by reason of which, when par- 
ticular exciting causes are applied, a simi- 
lar train of morbid phenomena takes place. 
A predisposition may therefore appear 
long before any symptom of actual disease 
has shewn itself: as in the phthisically dis- 
posed, a person will be easily affected by 
weather and sudden changes of tempera-. 


179 


ture; and on slight occasions, liable to 
cough, hoarseness, tightness or stitches of 
the breast, &c. The hereditary disposi- 
tion to the diseases in question, may be 
marked in the first stages of infancy in 
many cases: in others not till a later pe- 
riod, or till particular causes bring forth the 
latent peculiarity. The child born of nerv- 
ous parents, that is to say, persons of weak 
digestive organs, and irritable nervous sys- 
tem, subject to bilious and spasmodic com- 
plaints, &c. will, at the breast, be very lia- 
ble to bowel affections, such. as cardial- 
gia, flatulence, constipation, or diarrhoea, 
gripes, yellow gum or jaundice, &c. ‘These 
will be apt to come on from slight occasi- 
ons, as when the milk of the nurse is affecte — 
ed, either by her passions or improprieties 
of diet, or when any thing has entered its 
food that is difficult of solution in the sto- 
mach. These causes will frequently ope- 
rate with such effect, and tosuch a degree, 
as to induce convulsions and death. 

As the child grows up, the tendency to 
these complaints will be more perceptible, 
on slight deviations from its regular modes 
of living. If it meet with badly ferment- 
ed bread, heavy pudding, eat too freely of 

NO 


180 

fruit, sweetmeats, pye-crust, all kinds of 
pastry, pound cake; or drink of cyder, 
perry, beer, wine, punch, &c. the stomach 
and bowels will be quickly disordered. 
At the same time a peevishness and fretful- 
ness of temper will appear, extreme irrita- 
bility, want of sleep, sleep disturbed, witli 
other nervous symptoms, till the offend- 
ing cause has been corrected in the first 
passages, 

In some of the diseases of infancy, sich 
a child will suffer more than other child- 
ren. At the teething period, it will be 
more likely to be seized with bowel disor- 
ders and convulsions: in the eruptive fever 
of the small pox, it will be more prone to 
these fits: and in the hooping cough, as 
being a spasmodic disease, the nervous in- 
fant will be a severe sufferer. Frights of 
all kinds, that ruffle the temper, and i impa- 
tience under bodily pain, will be attended 
with irritable passions. . Worms are the 
consequence of weak bowels and disorder- 
ed digestion; a child of this description 
will therefore be much troubled with 
worms, and generally their most trouble- 
some symptoms. . These symptoms will 
sometimes put on all the appearance of a 


181 

eonfirmed hydrocephalus internus, even to 
the last degree of strabismus. I have seen 
so many instances of recovery from this 
apparently hopeless state, that I am dis- 
posed to refer the whole to these intestinal 
vermin, or to some aggravated attack of 
stomach affection, depending on original — 
nervous predisposition. It appears indeed 
‘to me, froma multitude of cases, that this 
disease is purely the offspring of this tem- 
perament; and when fluid is found in the 
ventricles of the brain, it is to be consider- 
ed as the effect rather than the cause ; for 
death has often happened where no water 
could be detected.* 

At the age of puberty, if a female, it will 
be liable to be affected with that disease 
usually called chloresis ; which, besides so 
many symptoms of dyspepsia, combines 
with it the emansio mensium. ‘The chorea, 
or St. Vitus’s dance,. also appears about 
this age: and in numerous cases which I 
have seen of both complaints, [am dis- 
posed to think, that they never occur with- 
_. out manifest predisposition, and are there- 
fore to be considered rather as symptoms 
of the nervous temperament, than distinct 


* Vide Appendix. 
N4 


182 


diseases.* The changes which now take 
place in the constitution, conjoined to the 
quick growth of the body at the same time, 
will render this a most critical period. At 
this season, the nervous woman is first 
affected with hysterics; these added to 
many painful symptoms of increased irri- 
tability, will be apt to recur at distinct 
intervals, through life, particularly if un- 
married. Extreme delicacy of stomach, 
dyspeptic affections, and what are called 
bilious, dysuria, leucorrhoea, hemicrania, 
&c. with other nervous signs, will be the 
lot of this hereditary predisposition. 


The female that is born of gouty parents, | 


comes entirely within this description. 
The fact is notorious, that what is called 
regular gout, or gout shewing itself in the’ 
extremities of the body, seldom attacks the 
fair sex: and when it happens, the woman 
is marked by a more masculine form, or 
other external signs indicating this peculi- 


* J have at present a case of chorea under my care, 
in a lady of 14, whose voice is nearly gone; but I 
have no doubt of her perfect recovery. March, 1810. 
This young lady is now well. May, 1810. . I never 
knew a person die of this disease ; and it has given 
birth to much false importance in the profession, by 
disappearing after the use of pretended remedies. 


ee ah — 


et ee ee 


183 | 
arity. But even this will not explain why 
the female is so seldom affected with arth- 
ritic inflammation. Something may per- 
haps be sought in the generative faculty : 
the castratos are said to be exempt from 
gout: regular gout is very rare before the 
age of puberty ; and all the women whom 
I have known subject to inflammatory gout, 
except one, had never borne children. 
Gout, in all its shapes, is preceded by sto- 
mach affection; so also is the period. 
Again, the stomach recovers as the pain 
and inflammation fix in the joints; and if 
they prematurely recede, the affection of 
the stomach returns. It is the same with 
the period: when one goes on properly, 
the other declines in due time: and if cold, 
passions of the mind, or other causes, bring 
on a sudden stoppage, all the complaints of 
the digestive powers instantly recur. 

But as the dyspeptic symptoms which 
attend gout, are so much alike in both 
sexes, making allowance for the greater 
sensibility of the female, they strongly sup- 
port the idea, that the chylopoetic viscera 
are the original seat of this disease; and 
these the primary symptoms of gouty dia- 
thesis. The child therefore, who is born 
of arthritic parents, has in its constitution 


184 


what may be called the predisposition to 
nervous and bilious diseases. In infancy 
it is prone to-all stomach and bowel com- 
plaints from slight causes, as have been de- 
scribed, and these will be its attendants 
through life. Even the man of the gouty 
family will not be exempt from this dispo- 
sition to be dyspeptic and bilious, on every 
kind of excess or improper indulgence. 
In both sexes, they show a stronger ten- 
dency, as they appear early ; for that proves 
a weaker structure of the digestive powers, 
and greater debility of frame; just as gout 
is to be more dreaded in proportion to its 
attack at an early age. Thus the youngest 
votaries of Venus and Bacchus will run 
greater hazards of immature gout, and pre- 
mature decrepitude as a consequence. 

2. The other division of predisposition 
to these diseases, is the acquired predispo- 
sition, or what may be brought on by causes 
which especially weaken the frame of 
nerves, and the chylopoetic organs. This 
predisposition may take root, even during 
the earliest stages of infancy, in children 
born of the healthiest parents. The effects 
of the milk of an unwholesome nurse often 
lay this foundation. It may happen when 
the child is not sufficiently nourished ; 


EE On ee eR 


aut nog a a lk ee , 
Re a ae ee. ee ee ge ag Te ee en 


185 


where the nurse is much affected with the 
disorders herself; if she drink too freely 
of spiritous or fermented liquors, or be in 
the habit of taking opium or other drugs. 
Bad lodgings; impure air; hot rooms; 
chills from exposure to cold; washing the 
infant in water too cold or too hot; want 
of cleanliness; dosing it with hot things, 
whether spirits or aromatics; frequent opi- 
ates in any form to make it sleep; the use 
of tea; deficient exercise; sweetmeats; 
frequent recourse to medicines, such as 
emetics, and purgatives, but particularly 
calomel: and if these articles are often re- 
peated at any stage of childhood, unless 
competently prescribed, they must infalli- 
bly debilitate the stomach and bowels, and 
induce the diseases in question. To all 
these causes may be added, the effect which 
the furious passions .of some women have 
on the infant they suckle. But even chil- 
dren at an early age, are not beyond the 
reach of moral causes, particularly females, 
and these will often operate with great force 
on sensible minds. 

The girl whose health has been thus 
ruined by improper nursing in infancy, or 
bad treatment in childhood, will be apt te 


186 


suffer at puberty, and at the change of life. 
At the former period, violent hysteric and 
chlorotic affections will commence, and 
health will be precarious for a length of 
time. Such a woman will be generally 
liable to sterility from constitutional infir- 
mities; to abortion in the early months, 
and to premature births: these will often 
happen from slight causes ; and much dan- 
ger will be encountered during parturition 
and in the puerperal state. Other diseases 
of equal delicacy, which are too often the 
bane of female life, will be the portion of 
such a woman. ‘These girls acquire an in- 
active, sedentary turn in early age, which 
is seldom overcome; they seem to vege- 
tate rather than live, and but rarely reach 
to fifty years. When women of this kind 
of habit suckle their own offspring, or that 
of others, they ‘much injure the health of 
the infant as well as themselves: such 
children commonly die in great proportion 
under two years; and if they survive that 
age, it is with indelible marks of a puny 
and vitiated constitution. Among the 
poor in large towns, the proportion of 
deaths in infancy is great, chiefly owing to 
vicious nursing ; and much caused by that 


187 


nervous weakness brought on by the use of 
tea and spiritous liquors. 

The acquired predisposition is also the 
frequent effect of preceding diseases and 
confinement ; such as typhus fever, and 
all the fevers of tropical climates. Luxuri- 
ous living, and highly seasoned food, that 
weaken and exhaust the digestive powers : 
excess of animal pleasure; courses of ac- 
tive medicines long continued; suckling 
the babe till weakness and emaciation take 
place; severe labours; haemorrhages; dis- 
appointed love, revenge, or ambition ; con- 
finement in impure air; want of exercise; 
intense thought; long protracted grief; 
frights ; a long state of suspense in waiting 
the decision of some important event ; the 
improper use of opium; fumes of metals, 
as quicksilver, lead, or copper; spiritous 
liquors, and other narcotics; poisons of 
every kind in small doses; and in short 
whatever greatly disturbs or debilitates 
the whole nervous system and abdominal 
viscera. 

Wounds and injuries of the head, con- 
cussions of the brain, and whatever may 
induce effusion and. compression, so as to 

weaken the organs of sense and motion, or 


188 
render them unequal in their action, some- 
times bring on a nervous temperament, or 
at least pave the way to these diseases. 
These incidents are common enough | 
among our seamen and soldiers, and now 
and then to be met with in private life.* 

Having now fully described the: nature 
of predisposition under these forms, we are 
prepared to relate, what, in common lan- 
guage, goes by the name of a nervous com- 
plaint, or a bilious attack ; expressions fre- 
quently heard among all kinds of people. 
But without predisposition in some degree, 
it is to be presumed, that no person has at 
once been severely afflicted with these 
diseases. The two kinds of predisposition 
which have been investigated, constitute 
what modern physicians have called the 
Nervous TEMPERAMENT, for it is not men- 
tioned by old writers. 

A person subject to nervous or bilious 
complaints, has commonly some warning of 
an aggravation of the symptoms, or of an 
attack. Some uneven tenor of the spirits ; 


* Convulsions in the form of epileptic fits, are com- 
mon enough after organic lesions of the brain. They 
have been frequently relieved by the trepan. 


189 


something to ruffle the temper or passionis ; 
or some irregularity in diet, most frequent- 
ly precedes them. In the sex, these com- 
plaints, for the most part, commence near 
the period, and when not severe, decline 
with it. <A frequent desire of micturition, 
or a profuse discharge of limpid urine, very 
often ushers in the attack, in both sexes. 
The patient himself finds it difficult to 
describe his uneasy sensations, for want of 
language: he knows not with what symp- 
tom to begin, though he will answer the 
questions of the physician with sufficient 
correctness. The physician therefore, 
finds advantage in putting queries to the 
patient, as a few leading ones will often 
save both much embarrassment and con- 
versation. The mind is irritable, fickle, 
and apprehensive; at one moment, tenaci- 
ous of impressions, suspicious and jealous 
of contradiction; at another, hurrying 
from one thing to another: grave and gay 
by turns ; with fits of crying, laughing and 
incoherent talking; but seldom indulging 
in conversation that is unconnected with 
the consultation. The desire for food 
commonly fails; an unpleasant taste is 
perceived, which excites frequent spitting 3 


190 


sickness at stomach sometimes comes on 
very suddenly, with vomiting of green sour 
mucus, or of bilious matter. What is 
thrown up is often found so acrid and cor- 
rosive as to excoriate the throat and mouth, 
and slightly tinge silver; the fauces and 
tongue have been blistered from this cause, 
so as to appear full of pimples, or little ul- 
cers, that render mastication of the food 
painful, and deglutition impracticable. 
The bowels are generally irregular, either 
constipated or the contrary, and oppressed 
with flatulence. Acidity, eructations, and 
dyspnoea, spasmodic twitches about the 
breast, back and loins, accompany these 
feelings. It is often surprising to see the 
degree of inflammation of stomach at this 
time ; coming on suddenly, and remain- 
ing for hours. ‘The skin is dry, and con- 
stricted, or in profuse sweats; the whole 
surface of the body unusually cold, or un- 
commonly hot by turns; with vertigo, tre- 
mors, risings in the gullet, or eructation, 
and vast depression of spirits. The pa- 
tients are extremely sensible to the changes 
of weather, and bear easterly winds ill. 
The countenance is commonly downcast 
and sallow; and the white of the eye ex- 


191 


hibits, more or less, a bilious tinge. Few 
dyspeptic persons have at all times a clear 
complexion; indeed the looks are a sure 
criterion to judge of the habit. This suf- 
fusion of bile sometimes amounts to real 
jaundice, transitory, or more permanent ; 
and attended with pain about the epigas- 
tric region, extending upwards from the 
liver to the shoulder, and generally with 
constipation. These icteritial symptoms 
are speedily moved by laxatives, though 
brisk purges may be necessary, with which 
considerable quantities of inspissated bile 
and mucus are brought away, and also - 
hary calcul, called gall-stones, which some- 
times obstruct the ducts. 

Passions of the mind, or whatever great- 
ly and suddenly disturbs the digestive 
powers, bring on jaundice. But the sallow 
complexion of the nervous temperament, 
is not always expressive of bile being car- 
ried into the blood. It probably originates 
also from imperfect sanguification; and 
when the florid colour is deficient from sub- 
traction of oxygen, or oxygen not duly sup- 
plied. When the yellow tinge of the eye 
proceeds from bile, it may be detected by 
dipping a thread or linen rag into the urine, 

Q 


192 


which will be stained yellow.. I think wo-- 


men are much more liable than men, tothe 
spasmodic form of this complaint ; which 
may arise from their weaker state of bowels, 
and greater irritability of nervous system. 
The liver itself-is capricious in its office : 
we perceive at one time, a suspension of 
the biliary secretion, when no obstruction 
ef the ducts is to be suspected; and at 
another,. the bile is flowing in great profu- 
sion, so as to regurgitate by the pylorus, 
and be evacuated in quantity by vomiting ; 
while it passes by the other way in increas- 
ed proportion. Warm seasons are known 


to produce this effect on the. liver of ner- 


vous people.. 

A particular lassitude, listiessness, and. 
inaptitude to all kinds of motion, and men- 
tal. exertion, are common attendants of 
these affections. The patients will sit for 
hours in'the same posture, without paying 
the least attention to what is going on. 
around them. Even the calls of hunger 
are disregarded, and:without force they are. 
not roused from their reverie and ennuz, to- 
take food. ‘The hearing is often very a- 
cute; and sudden noise is apt to excite 
great agitation aad alarm: but dulness of 


138 
heartng, even to total deafness, is common 
enough in these complaints. 

Convulsive asthma, often recurring peri- 
odically, is to be enumerated among the 
attacks of these diseases. Indeed the true 
asthma is perhaps never met with, but in 
constitutions cf great nervous irritability. 
Such to a certainty must be that species of 
it which is induced by particular smells. 
I knew a lady, who was always seized with 
asthma, whenever rad. ipecac. was pound- 
ing in the shop; so sensible was she of this 
effect, that it was in vain to conceal from 
her what was going on in the mortar. 
Cases of this kind are also mentioned in 
the London Medical and Physical Jour- 
nals for January and June 1809, and April 
1810. 

When spasms assail the /idnies, there is 
often much acute pain in the loins; in- 
creased on moving the body, and lying on 
a soft feather bed; extending downwards 
by the ureter to the bladder, occasion- 
ing constant or very frequent desire to 
make water; producing the symptom call- 
ed strangury; sometimes with a pain of 
the mammez in women, or retraction and 
pain in the testes in men, and a numbness 

02 


194 
ofthe thigh and leg. The irritability in 
these parts is often so considerable, as to 
force blood from the passage of the urethra: 
the urine is even-at times totally suppressed, 
and obliged to be evacuated by a catheter. 
When the urime is made in small quantities, 
it is high coloured,: letting fall a copious 
muddy sediment; but at intervals it is 
voided in great profusion, and pale as com- 
mon water.* The urine not unfrequently 
deposits an uncommon quantity of mucous 
sediment, sometimes streaked with blood ; 
at other times more dark coloured and'even 
black. ‘The stools also, are occasionally, 


in aigreat measure, composed of mucous 


matter. I know some gentlemen who ex- 


perience these discharges on ‘every attack 


of indigestion; and independent of any 
preceding venereal affection. 

When great flatulence and distention ac- 
company these shades of the complaints in 
theurinary passages, a very uncouth appella- 
tion has been bestowed ‘on them, viz. windy 
gravel. ‘Though anodd kind of term, it 
would seem to convey a very emphatic 
meaning of the patient’s feelings. 


* Di@betes Hystericus. 


195 


Pain and fulness of the mamme in some 
‘women usually accompany the period: but 
these pains have at other times continued 
for months; and I have met with instan- 
ces, wherein the female was subjected to 
severe courses of medicine, under the idea 
of impending cancerous disposition. Such 
affections eften arise from pure nervous 
sympathy, and yield to proper treatment. 
I have also known swellings of the testes, 
and other pains of the male genitals, treat- 
ed by incautious medical people, as Lues 
Venerea; which to me appeared to origin- 
ate from a nervous temperament, and yield- 
ed to a treatment that strengthened the di- 
gestive powers. What is called seminal 
' weakness, is a part of these complaints, in 
which cases, delicate and ignorant persons 
are too apt to trust icncckieas in the hands 
of the most unprincipled of all quacks, % ill 
their health is completely ruined. 

Weakness of the eyes, even to total 
blindness, being a common attendant of 
nervous debility, has sometimes been mis- | 
taken for other diseases, and a mercurial 
course administered not only without relief, 
but adding to the malady. 

Though at times the appetite for food is 


03 


196 


deficient, yet at another time, it is excessive, 
and craving after many out-o-the-way things. 
Hence those longings that occasion great 
anxiety to the patients and all about them; 
as there is commonly a necessity for in- 
dulging them more or less. Deficient ap- 
petite, and other impediments to chylifica- 
tion, sometimes disappear on eruptions 
coming upon the skin, and alternate with 
them. It is commonly judged prudent not 
to repel these; as it is held dangerous to 
dry up issues at once, or any other drain. 
There is often acute pain about the re- 
gion of the stomach, bending the body for- 
ward; it gets the name of cramp, and is 
attended with vast dejéction of spirits, and 
syncope. This ought always to be consi- 
dered an alarming symptom; and I have 
generally found such cases terminate fatally 
ona sudden. But fainting fits otherwise 
indicate little danger: women frequently 
fall down without any warning, and recover 
in a few minutes as if nothing had happen- 
ed. It has been told of different persons 
remaining for a number days without ex- 
ternal signs of life; a situation which 
never came within my knowledge, and al- 
most exceeds my belief. Dr Cheyne re- 


197 


Jates the case of Colonel Townshend, who 
had such command over the vital func- 
tions, that he could suspend them at will, 
or die when he pleased, and recover again. 
In the company of another physician, he 
saw this officer go through the experiment 
and recover himself: but Col. T. did not 
long survive these interesting trials. | 

Worms are common enough in all stages 
of these diseases, but are particularly so 
among women and children, as the conse- 
quence of a weak condition of bowels and 
impaired digestion. The symptoms which 
point out the presence of worms in the body, 
are chiefly of the nervous kind; but urine 
of a chylous consistence and colour, or re- 
sembling milk, is seldom ‘known but from — 
this cause. Itching of the nose; gnashing 
the teeth; starting suddenly from sleep ; 
change of colour in the face; foul breath, 
&c. sometimes accompanied with fever and 
convulsions, all denote worms. 

It is probable that the disease called 
colic, is only an attack of these affections 
in a particular part of the intestines. The 
ileus, or iliac passion, is the last degree of 
this afflicting disorder; which consists of 
an inverted action of the whole intestinal 

O 4 


198. 


tube, so as even to evacuate clysters by the 
mouth. 

From the excessive thirst oy in 
some cases of nervous afiection, it would 
appear there must be at times an uncom- 
mon consumption of liquid in the stomach, 
whether from the increased action of the 
absorbents, or other causes. ‘This great 
absorption, in the first passages, is one way 
to explain the attending constipation; as 
the more fluid parts being taken up, the re- 
mainder is propelled with more difficulty. 
T knew a lady who was so tormented with 
polydipsia, that a pitcher of water was car- 
ried with her in her rides. — 

Uneasy flutterings, as they are called, 
about the breast, and palpitations, with the 


sense of a ball rising to the throat, and 


there giving the feeling of strangulation, 
form what has been named globus hystert- 
cus. In these the patient grows vertigi- 
nous, and blind, and falls down, often in 
violent agitations and convulsions, with 
loud screams, and looks expressive of hor- 
ror. This paroxysm is most apt to be 
brought on by surprise, a fright, or what- 
ever excites strong and sudden emotions : 
loss of voice, for a time, is a common con- 


Oe a a a eee ee ee 


199 


sequence. But vertigo continuing for days 
together, is not unusual, and it commonly 
attends some excessive degree of flatulence 
and acidity of stomach. This fit was long 
thought peculiar to the fair sex; but Dr 
Sydenham mentions it as occurring among 
men ; and it is certain that many males of 
very mobile habits, and gouty constitutions, - 
where there is great sensibility of the first 
passages, are very liable to it. I have 
known it in numberless instances among 
naval officers, especially those who had 
suffered in warm climates; and also among 
seamen, as told in my 3d volume of Med. 
Naut. 2d edition. : 

That species of convulsion called epzlep- . 
sy, can scarcely be said to differ from the 
hysteric affection, unless in its violence. 
They both occur in a similar temperament 
of body, and are brought on by the same 
causes; and it is agreed by physicians, 
that the necessary steps to the cure of both 
are alike; that is, to correct the predispo- 
sition. 

I have also seen a considerable number 
of cases of nervous affection, with all the 
signs which are said to mark angina pecto- 
ris. ‘This complaint has been thought te 


200 


accompany particular organic affections of 
the heart and large blood vessels; some of 
these I have seen, and they proved fatal. 
Of this kind was the case of the late Cap- 
tain Fisher, of the Powerful. But these 
organic derangements could not be the 
cause of the symptoms, in cases which 
quickly recovered under appropriate treat- 
ment. ‘Two of these I have met with in 
Newcastle. I cannot therefore help being 
of opinion, that the anomalous form of the 
diseases under discussion, renders it very 
probable, that they have often given cause 
for unnecessary alarm, as resembling what 
has been styled angina pectoris. Some 
forms of nervous affection bear so strong a 
resemblance to an ague, that I have fre- 
quently known them to be treated as such ; 
and violent remedies administered under 
the idea of their obstinacy. But a care- 
ful scrutiny of the predisposition is the best 
method for correcting the errors of the 
practice. 

It is not easy to combat the fancies and 
apprehensions of nervous people, when un- 
der strong paroxysms of their disease ; 
while these last, they are to be considered 
as alienations of mind, and treated accord- 


201 


ingly. In some situations fof this kind, 
the flatulence is unusually troublesome, and 
so fluctuating in its movements over the 
abdomen, that the sensation of air or wind, 
rising upwards te the brain, is among the 
most solemn beliefs of the patient. This 
fanciful idea has given birth to the phrase 
vapors, a name for weak nerves. ‘These 
vapors are therefore said to generate every 
thing in the brain that is terrific or ridicu- 
lous. Hence blue devils, ghosts, and hobgob- 
lins, have been conjured up to the affright- 
ed imagination of the patient; and bad 
men are said to suffer under their influ- 
ence, torments compared with the pains of 
hell: so faithful and certain are the admo- 
nitions of conscience! Sleep disturbed and 
harassed by dreams of the most frightful 
sort, such as falling down precipices, suf- 
fering shipwreck, being devoured by wild 
beasts, are common enough on these un- 
happy occasions. Some histories of the 
effects of vapors, are as old as the days of 
Galen. Are noct-ambult of the nervous 
* temperament ? | | 
Another train of tormenting symptoms 
are those head-aches which accompany 
nervous disorders. ‘Sometimes only one 


202 


side of the head is affected, and the pain 
receives the name of hemicrania: when it 
is in the forehead, and gives the sensation 
of a nail being driven into the bone, it has 
been called clavus hysiericus, as being pe- 
cular to the hysterical. But this last kind 
of pain is not more confined to women than 
the globus; males are also subject to it. 
A. nervous head-ache in the occiput, is 
often attended with a sense of coldness; 
as if very cold water, or a current of cold 
air, was poured upon the part. Vertigo, 
to such a degree as to make the patient fall 


down, dimness of sight, tinnitus aurium, 


partial or total deafness, are associated 
with these complaints. ‘These head-aches 
frequently seize persons at regular inter- 
vals, and have obtained the name of peri- 
odical head-aches. Accessions and inter- 
missions of pain, that acquire regular move- 
ments, must depend on some important 
law of the system ; and here they are pro- 
bably directed by the digestive process. A 
sensation of fulness of the blood vessels, 


also frequently attends nervous head-ache. ° 


This has led to the employment of blood- 
letting; but without much relief: and 


203 


often, with much increase of the pain, as 3 
consequence of loss of blood. 

To this class of symptoms may also be 
referred, that singular and obstmate pain 
of the face, called dolor facez, or tic dolo- 
reux, by the French. It is said to have 
been once cured by Dr Haighton of Lon- 
don, by dividing a branch of the fifth pair 
of nerves, which was supposed to be the 
séat of the pain. But medicine must 
become a bloody art indeed, if the organs 
of sense and motion are to become sub- 
jects of surgical operations. Flatulence, 
constipation, and nervous feelings, are 
known to be attendants of this. pain: it 
affects chiefly women, and those above 
thirty ; but it is not confined to a particu- 
lar spot of the face. It is doubtful to me, 
whether this tormenting affection is ever 
met with but m the nervous constitution ; 
at least in such only has it come under my 
observation. I cannot therefore see any 
reason for considering it a distinct disease ; 
for it has always been relieved by the ge- 
_neral method of cure, though it is apt to 
return. | 

Pains, cramps, and contractions of the 
joints and muscular parts,.are not uncom- 


204 


mon sytnptoms: but the most painful are 
those of the calves of the legs and soles of 
the feet. Ihave a patient now, a man 
of large size, who is drawn to one side, 
and the muscles of the abdomen contract- 
ed into irregular lumps. ‘This man is 
strongly affected with hypochondriacism, 
is jealous of his safety, and asks my ser- 
vants if they ever hear their master speak. 
of him.* He inherits the temperament 
from his mother. Coldness and numbness 
of the extremities, even to paralysis, some- 
times accompany the stomach affection of 
nervous people; but commonly yield te 
the remedies of the primary disease. 
Persons subject to these diseases. are very 
liable in advanced life to hamorrhoidal tu- 
mours, and procedentia recti; which at 
times are most afflicting symptoms, as they 
prevent all kinds of motion or exercise. 
These are too often the unfortunate conse- 
quences of frequent purgatives, especially 
of the mercurial and aloetic kind; which 


* This poor fellow, who lives 30 miles fram New- 
castle, lately asked me by letter, whether I thought he 
ought to go into a lunatic hospital, as he considered 
himself insane ? 


i?) 


205 


tend most to weaken the bowels and bring 
on a constant tenesmus. 

It is the nature of these diseases to per- 
vert the regular economy of both body and 
mind. We therefore frequently hear pa- 
tients express sensations, as if they had no 
bowels, and all was vacuum within them. A 
friend of mine of an exquisite nervous tem- 
perament, a clergyman and elegant scholar, 
expresses this sensation, as if half of his 
body was joined to the other like a wasp. 
So sensible are they at times to arterial 
pulsation, that they say they have pulses 
all over; and count the strokes of the 
heart without applying the fingers to an 
artery. 

When dyspnoea, with cough and hevaiies 
ness, is present, it is of considerable im- 
portance to distinguish how far these form 
a part of nervous indisposition, for phthisis, 
frequently supervenes without much cause- 
of suspicion. When irregularity of the pe- 
riod accompanies these pectoral symptoms, 
they become still more equivocal. Even 
the expectorated matter only helps to 
create doubts. But there is a kind of 
cough that has not inaptly been called ner- 
vous cough, which consists of 4 short hick, 


206 


something approaching to a hoop, and not 
attended with much fixed pain of the 
breast : nor does the difficulty of breathing 
which accompanies the nervous cough, 
give the sensation of so much fulness of 
the chest, or oppression; but rather a feel- 
ing that the cells of the lungs refuse to ad- 
mit the air. The nervous cough is also 
more affected by the passions than that of 
phthisical persons. ‘The family predisposi- 
tion will enable the physician to form a 
correct prognosis on most of these oc- 
casions. 

I have seen some obstinate hiccups, in 
both sexes, in these diseases, that resisted 
every thing that could be thought of; nor 
did they intermit, for some weeks, except 
during sleep. 

Fiyarephobia has been met with in these 
diseases, and where the dread of swallow- 
ing liquids was little short of what has been 
observed in canine madness. I believe m 
all situations where deglutition is difficult, 
when not owing to mechanical compression, 
it is found more painful to swallow liquids 
than solids. The hydrophobia of Rabies, 
is to be considered as a nervous symptom, 
expressive of the inverted action of the 


207 

osophagus and muscles of the pharynx. 
The dread of water is therefore to be eX, 
plained, from the impression which the 
mind receives on looking at the water, as 
associated with the act of swallowing it 
under the reversed motion of the muscular 
fibres which perform. deglutition. It must 
be nearly allied to the globus hystericus. It — 
_ isstrange that anatomists should took to the 
pharynx and gullet, for the seat of hydro- 
phobia; which must be imputed to the 
sensorium commune, and is not to be de- 
tected by dissection... I have however fre- 
quently known the throat so contracted, 
and the tongue so cumbersome in the 
-mouth, that nothing but slops. was taken 
down for months, under nervous indispo- 
sition. 3 ” 

_ In general, nervous persons are bad 
sleepers. In some cases sleep is neither 
felt nor wished for by the patient; whole 
nights being passed without it. But we 
have also seen a continual drowsiness and 
inclination to sleep, prevailing symptoms. 
If lying long in bed is much indulged, it is 
apt to terminate in a soporose disease ; for 
sleep, like other customs, grows upon us 
by use, and leads to fatal consequences. 

P 


208 


The state of the pulse in these disorders, 
fs as variable and inconstant as all the 
other sensations of the patient: It is some- 
times regular and equal, in conditions of 
great pain and suffering’: and at other times, 
is found uncommonly quick, unequal, ir- 
regular, and intermitting, wher the symp- 
toms are very moderate. It may be pre- 
sumed, from these affections being prima- 
rily seated in the nervous system, they 
only affect the vital functions at intervals. 
Ihave certainly known the pulse remain 
with little variation from health, in some 
fatal cases, till within a few hours of dis- 
solution. Yet nervous persons in general, 
have a quick pulse ; and in some in- 
stances it has been noticed’ at 200'in a 
minute.* Their senses being all uncom- 
monly acute, a sudden noise or start quick- 
ens the pulse, and produces palpitation in 
an instant. : 

But the most formidable aspect whichi 
these diseases assume, is when they have 
lasted so long, as to bring on fatuity, or 
imbecility of mind, melancholy, and mad- 
ness. Among drunkards in particular, 


* Whytt. 


209 


‘these kinds of termination are very cont: 
mon ; and we impute them to the disorga-» 
nization of the brain itself.* For in thesé 
cases, whatever causes an increased deter- 
mination of the blood to the head, increases 
the delirium ; this is observed particularly 
with regard to ardent spirit and opium. 
But nerwous people commonly die of apo- 
plexy, palsy, atrophy, dropsy or convul- 
siONs. 

Since the second edition of this work was 
published, I have been consulted in fifteen 
cases of mental derangement ; and the whole 
strongly marked as being of the Nervous 
Temperament. rom the first, I gave the 
relations hope of a speedy recovery, be- 
cause the peculiar traits of constitution 
were not difficult to be found out. ‘There 
were three females in the better rank of 
life ; five gentlemen of different ages, three 
of them students at Oxford and Cambridge; 
and the remainder country people. Moral 
causes had some share in these aberra- — 
tions of intellect, in most of the cases, and 
operating on the irritable mind of nervous 


* See the acceunt of the dissection. of inebriates, 
where the cerebrum was found diseased. 
Kssa on Drunkennegss, 2d Edition. 
Pp 2 


210 


subjects.. One of the students was brought 
from Oxford, for the purpose of my ads 
vice; all the others lived at no great dis-. 
tance from Newcastle. 

No part of my practice in nervous com- 
plaints, ever afforded me more confidenee 
in the doctrines supported in: these pages, 
than the recent instances ef insanity which 
I have had occasion to treat. They, with 
others, enable me to contend, that mad- 
ness is more often connected with disease 
in the bodily organs, than physicians have 
been willing to admit. But if my opinion 
is correct, it gives the consoling hope, that 
the treatment of the deranged mind, on 
these principles, will be more successful. 
Wherever insanity appears m a gouty fa- 
mily, it will, to a certainty, be of this cast, 
and may be easy of cure. I particularly 
give the instance of the character m an arth- 
ritic family, because it is more easily disco- 
vered there, than in other subjects. In my 
correspondence with nervous patients, in 
different parts of the kingdom, many of 
them speak of the desire for destroying 
themselves in the low and gloomy moments 
of their malady. Such feelings ought al- 
ways to be suspected, for they gener ally 


2 


‘precede mental derangement. This is a 
curious fact in the history of the human, 
mind, that in the incipient stage, self-de- — 
‘struction should be a prevailing idea: while 
the confirmed maniac almost never thinks 
of putting an end to his existence. _ 

One of these patients, an only son, was 
attended to my house, by his keeper, his 
father and mother; and an uncle and aunt. 
‘The disease was of six months standing, 
three of which had been spent in a mad- 
house. He was quite outrageous, and un= 
manageable. The evidence obtained from 
the relations, clearly proved the strong. 
nervous and stomach complaints that pre- 
vailed in the family, and still more strong- 
jy. marked in the young man. He was 
completely recovered in three weeks; had 
a slight relapse soon after; and has now 
been more than fifteen months in perfect 
health of body and mind. : 

Among the ancients, it is very common 
language to speak of medicines that purge 
melancholy. Now if certain cases of ma- 
nia, exhibit such marked disorder in the 
first passages, to clear the stomach and 
bowels, and emulge the biliary and pancre- 
| P23 


212 


atic ducts, by brisk purgatives, was, no 
doubt, a masterly practice. s 

These facts demonstrate in the most con- 
vincing manner, that mental affection, and 
mental derangement, form a part of that 
vast chain, which connects certain bodily 
organs more than others, with our intellec- 
tual part. It may thus be held as a law in 
the animal economy, that even articles of 
materia medica act-powerfully on the mind, 
through the medium of our nervous system. 
But I must here put an end to these reflec- 
tions, least I exceed the allotted bounds to 
this part of my doctrine. 

I have forborne to mention many of 
those idle stories, which some authors take 
delight in telling, as the effect of extrava- 
gant illusions of fancy, which nervous peo- 
ple are said to be subject to. I hold their 
whole complaints to have a real existence: 
and from whatever cause pain may arise, 
it is the province of the physician to em- 
ploy his art to subdue it; not to ruffle an 
irritable mind by unseasonable levity, or 
expose a morbid sensibility to insult and 
reproach. 

Dissections have not forwarded our 
knowledge of these diseases: and indeed 


213 


‘when we consider the nature of their symp- 
toms, symptoms flying from one organ to 
another in an instant, and thought suc- 
ceeding thought, with the rapidity of 
lightning, we are the more inclined to 
think that inspection of dead bodies will 
not improve our method .of cure. It is 
true, that the stomach, liver, pylorus, in- 
testines, mesentery, kidnies and bladder, 
and the wterine organs in females, have at 
times been found diseased; but such de- 
viations from the healthy state, must in 
general be secondary symptoms, the effect, 
not the cause, of these ailments. In the 
transitory jaundice of dyspeptics: or in 
the migrating cramps, globus, or strangury 
of the hysteric affection, what physician 
would look to organic lesions for their seat? 
Persons are known to die of the .most 
dreadful symptoms of these disorders, 
where nothing could be discovered by the 
knife :* which, with all other circumstan- 
ces attending them, confirms the belief, 
that their pathology is to be sought for in 
the nervous system; which will be our 
next task to investigate. | 


* Whytt on nervous diseases, 
P 4 


: CHAPTER VI. 
The general doctrine of these diseases. 


Tue most prominent parts of the charac- 
ter of these diseases are, that they occur 
chiefly under peculiar modes of living; 
are hereditary, and affect in a particular 
manner, the organs subservient to the pre- 
paration of nourishment. 

It appears from what has been said in 
the preceding chapters of this work, that 
they are unknown in the savage state; 
only rarely met with among rustics; but 
are to be found in abundance in large 
towns, or wherever luxurious habits have 
displaced simplicity of living. ‘They are 


so far to be classed among mental disor-— 


ders, that a disposition of mind, not easily to 
be defined, attends every degree and stage 
of them; beginning with uncommon 
sensibility to all impressions; peevish- 
ness of temper; irresolution of conduct ; 
sudden transitions from sadness to joy, 


215 


and the contrary; silent or loquacious ; 
officiously busy, or extremely indolent ; 
irrascible; false perceptions; wavering 
judgment; melancholy; madness: ex- 
hibiting m the whole, signs of deranged 
sensation. 

These diseases receive a stronger tines 
ture from the manners of the age, than any 
others to which the human frame is liable ; 
and when they appear in great numbers, as 
in the present day, they form an epoch in 
the physical and moral history of society ; 
so wide is their range, so important their 
influence on the state and condition of man- 
kind. I have seldom known any of those 
persons denominated Quakers, to have been 
severely troubled with nervous complaints. 
This testimony is at least honourable to 
these people ; and some proof of the good 
‘moral conduct and sobriety which prevail 
among them. 

The causes which produce nervous dis- 
eases, may be divided into two hinds, 
namely those which arise from the mind ; 
and those which arise from the body. Of 
the first kind, are all the disorders of the 
passions; of the second kind, all those 
causes which affect particular organs of the 


216 


body, that by their office, are intimately 
connected with the nervous system. Many 
of these causes, of both the mental and cor- 
poreal class, act for a length of time before 
they bring forth actual disease ; but this 
mode of operation would seem to happen 
only where there was no_ predisposition. 
They may therefore be said first to create 
predisposition, and when this is sufficiently 
done, a train of symptoms appears which 
constitutes real disease. 

To predisposition, whether hereditary 
or acquired, I give the name of nervous 
temperament, which is now to be considered 
as a permanent state of body, that cannot 
be easily changed, and will commonly re- 
main for life. ‘This temperament is to be 
observed in different shades and gradations, 
mixed with the other temperaments; but 
where it is exquisitely formed, it is known 
by the following signs: a sensible, irritable, 
and mobile condition of nerves ; by which 
different organs of the body, from slight 
causes, are urged into violent and involun- 
tary action ; and their motions and sympathy 
often reversed ; giving birth to false percep- 
tions and erroneous judgment; and some- 
times accompanied with pain of the acutest 


e 
— lee a a 


217 


kind. ‘This temperament is said to bear 
all evacuations ill, especially the loss of 
blood ; and also is easily injured by medi- 
cines of the rougher class; it is not very 
very liable to diseases of the inflammatory 
kind*, and. suffers in an uncommon manner 
from every excess of debauch. 

It is evident, from the history of these 
diseases, that where the nervous tempera- 
ment prevails, all the causes which operate 
upon it, bring forth motions and sensations 
very different from what is found in a 
healthful structure of nerves, in persons 
who are without the predisposition. ‘This 
is more exemplified in what may be called 
the mental causes, than in the corporeal. 
The moral evils of life are very much of a 
relative nature; their effects depend, in a 
great measure, on our capacity of feeling, 
for receiving them, or the fortitude which 
we are able to oppose to them. Thus, 
one man is condemned for sinking under 
adversity, as a proof of deficient virtue and 
spirit; while another is extolled for his 
courage, as a token that he possesses noble- 

ness of mind. Yet the physical trait of 


* Gregorii med. ther. conspect. vol. ii. chap. xxiii. 


218 


their temperaments will best decide with 
impartiality on their respective merits. 
The first may be a weak nertved being, 
and a good man; and the other, under 
apparent resolution of soul, may possess 
nothing beyond want of feeling. 

But this applies even to the corporeal 
causes. Let the two persons start toge- 
ther, to drink a bottle of ardent spirit in 
the twenty-four hours, for life. The ner 
vous man will, most likely, fmd his frame 
shook to pieces at the end of two weeks, 
er as many months; while the other will 
continue his potation for as many years. 
When the first dies, of weak nerves and 
tuberculous liver, at the end of three 
months, the other may still remain strong 
and hale. It may now be said that the 
first was a drunkard, and died jelo de se: 
but the survivor will have a chance of pre- 
serving his reputation for sobriety. Of so 
much importance is the study of tempera- 
ment in judging of the causes of these 
diseases. 

The living body possesses the faculty, 
if I may so call it, of receiving impressions, 
and retaining them, even to the hazard of 
its destruction. All predispositions are of 


219 


this kind. Whena person subject to gouty 
undergoes a long mercurial course for the 
cure of syphilis, he may not be always 
warned of the increase of predisposition, 
which he will infallibly acquire by this 
process ; though he may be duly told of 
the necessity for mercury to subdue the 
ether disease. And if it were left to his 
choice, he would still prefer the antisy- 
philitic regimen, and make the best he 
could of his gouty diathesis. If besides, 
he is attached to the bottle, or has con- 
tracted the habit of taking opium in large 
doses to ease his griping pains, he is going 
fast on to give the final blow to health; 
and the last degree of this is, the comple- 
tion of predisposition, or constant gout 
and nervous affliction. So that predzsposi- 
tion, in its various stages, is the medium 
between health and disease. A gentle- 
man subject to gout, weak nerves, and all 
their horrors, consulted me some time ago. 
He took his wine freely, and an opiate 
every night at bed-time. The last, he said, 
was to ease his spasms, and to give him 
rest. He was also of extremely slow 
bowels. I warned him of the dangerous 
habit he had got into; and in order to 


220 


save the remainder of his constitution, re- 
commended him to give up his bottle and 
his: laudanum immediately. But the con- 
flict was too great for’ his fortitude ;. he did 
not call upon me a second time. This 
man, I dare say, was both able and willing 
to pay a physician, provided he could find 
one to his mind. ‘That society must be 
undergoing the last degree of vitiation, 
where the faculty of medicine receives 
gold, and returns poison ! 

All those passions of the mind, which 
have been narrated among the causes, 
act immediately on the nervous system ; 
whence a train of sympathetic affections 
instantly commence throughout the whole 
body, but especially in the chylopoetic 
organs. And again, those causes which 
induce nervous disorders through the body, 
affect first the digestive and assimilating 
powers; and are from them reflected on 


the nervous system; whence commences - 


a train of inverted sympathies and false 

perceptions, which shew how far the men- 

tal part of us is concerned in this general 

tumult of sensation and motion. 

_* Why a station so exalted in the animal 
economy was given to the chylopoetic 


221 
viscera, we can only account for from the 
pre-eminence they occupy in preparing the 
nourishment of the whole system. ‘The ap- 
petite for food, the digestion if it, chylifica- 
tion, sanguification, and the nutriment de- 
rived therefrom, are among the most won- 
derful operations ofnature. One of the first 
instincts of our existence is the desire of 
food. Nay, it is probably the first, and 
coeval with the rudiments of the foetus. 
Some peculiar inherent power, not to be 
expressed by abstract terms, enables the 
vivified germ to draw nourishment from its 
nidus, the fluid which surrounds it. Every 
particle of the nutritive juices, elaborated 
by the maternal process, is attracted by 
the congenial sympathies of the embryo. 
These juices hold in solution what is to be 
the future solid, such as cellular mem- 
brane, muscle, tendon, bone, and zerve 
itself. ‘The nervous system, or sensorium, 
must be the basis and the prime director of 
this creative process, till the human form 
in all its parts is fully evolved. ‘The cir- 
culation of the blood, from the mother to 
the foetus, now commences, and continues 
the supply, though not by a direct conti- 
nuity of vessels. And the placenta, by 


é 


222 


oxygenizing the foetal blood, supplies the 
place of the future lungs. When the re- 
quired bulk is completed, the infant, en- 
dued with peculiar instinct, urges the 
womb. to expel it, which terminates. in the 
birth. The nourishment, which the ehild 
received from its mother before birth, is 
now to be prepared in part by its own or- 
gans. I say 2 pari, because milk isa sub- 
stance half animalized, and: nearly ready 
for assimilation. 

We thus comprehend ¢hree stages in ani- 
mal existence, where the manner of receiv- 
ing nourishment is varied. ‘Lhe first stage 
is limited to that early condition -of the 
germ, before the circulation of red blood can . 
be distinguished. The second stage com- 
mences. with the circulation of red blood, 
and terminates with the birth. The third 
stage begins with the birth, when the noy- 
rishment of the body is to be prepared. by 
the chylopoetic viscera, which continues 
through life. 

The human stomach is an organ endued 
by nature, with the most complex proper- 
ties of any in the body; and forming a 
center of sympathy between our corporeal 
and mental parts, of more exquisite quali 


223 


fications than even the brain itself. Yet 
the knife and eye of the anatomist do not 
discover the whole important station it 
holds in the economy : we must look to the 
living system for those nice connexions of 
cause and effect, and that source of associ- 
ation, which give it a relationship to so 
many organs, both in the healthy and dis- 
eased state. There are few diseases in 
which it does not participate: even slight 
blows upon it have proved fatal: but its 
wounds are to a certainty, mortal. In all 
those disorders whose seat is the nervous 
system, it particularly suffers. In fevers of 
every description the stomach is peculiarly 
affected; and till the febrile movements 
decline, the functions of this viscus are sus- 
pended. 

An organ intended for such important 
purposes in the animal economy, must re- 
ceive from the hand of Nature singular 
tokens of her favour. Hence we find all 
those viscera, which assist in preparing the 
chyle, and what is called the assimilation 
of the food, joined in a circle of nervous 
communication, of which the stomach is the 
centre. One portion of nerve is distributed 
over the whole; so that while they are all 

Q 


2294. 

employed in ‘one purpose, disorder cannot 
take place in any of them, without the 
whole being thrown into confusion. 

Anatomists have discovered an unusual 
share of nerves about the upper orifice of 
the stomach; from which it was thought 
by some philosophers to‘be the seat of the 
soul. Ss. 
The nerves of the stomach are derived 
from the par vagum, or eighth pair, which 
communicates with the great intercostal or 
sympathetic ; and by it, is connected with 
aimost every other nerve of the body. 
The semiilunar ganghon of the great sym- 
pathetic, supplies particularly the liver ; 
gall bladder and ducts; duodenum; pan- 
creas; spleen; jejunum.;- ileum ; and part 
of the colon, &c.: the renal glands; kid- 
nies, ureters, and bladder ; the womb, ova- 
ria, testes, &c. are all supplied by the same 
nerve ;' and joined by others from the lum- 
bar vertebrae.. “Fhe muscles of the pharynx, 
and trachea, those of the neck and lower 
extremities, are even connected by branches 
of this nerve. ‘The lungs, heart, and dia- 
phragm, being all furnished with nerves, 
which communicate with the great sympa- 
thetic, it would appear, that this nerve is 


225 


the grand link or chain, which connects the 
vital, animal, and natural functions with 
one another. 

When the great sympathetic enjoys its 
full health, all the organs to which it is dis- 
tributed will be found performing their dif- 
ferent offices with vigour, accompanied 
with pleasurable sensation. When the sto- 
mach has been replenished by a full meal, 
after some time, sleep supervenes, which 
is easy and sound; and with this com- 
mences the process of digestion ; the solu- 
tion and expulsion of the food from the 
stomach ; its mixture afterwards with bile, 
pancreatic juice, and intestinal mucus. 
Every pore, vessel, duct, or gland, that is 
engaged in this great business, contributes 
a share of soothing influence to the dor- 
mant animal functions; and the temperate 
man awakes refreshed and invigorated in 
body, with faculties equally clear and reno- 
vated. But the dyspeptic stomach exhi- - 
bits a very different train of phenomena. 
After the repast, sleep scarcely closes the 
eye-lids of the nervous man: a croud.of 
unpleasing ideas disturbs the mind; flatu- 
lence, acidity and borborrigmi, torment the 
body, digestion goes on imperfectly ; and: 

Q2 


226 
he wakes low, languid, and unrecruited 3 
sick at stomach, and without appetite for 
breakfast. 
The pathology of these diseases is there- 
fore to be chiefly sought in the functions 
of this nervous communication ; and most 


of the symptoms to be referred to the same. 


Thus in a dyspeptic condition of stomach, 
such as attends nervous complaints, it is 


not the muscular fibre alone of that organ 


that is to be considered as diseased ; but 
every gland and pore, exhalent or follicle, 
that separates either gastric juice or mu- 
eus; and consequently all the fluids are 
poured forth in a vitiated. state. The ap- 
petite will then be irregular, sometimes 
suppressed, sometimes voracious ; the aci- 
dity will increase so as to become painful ; 
the food will remain undigested, and un- 
easiness and inflation of stomaeh will 


succeed. Other viscera. will, by consent. 


of nerves, be also deranged in their respec- 
tive offices. The pancreas, its juice and 
duct are affected. The liver will secrete 
the bile in quantity and quality, both diffe- 
rent from its healthy state; and the ducts 
will be irregular in conveying it forward. 
The peristaltic motion of the intestines 


:, Se Se ee Ye 


2 
| 
: 


227 


‘will be inverted and inconstant; and cen- 
stipation er diarrhoea be the consequence. 
Even the kidnies, more remotely connect- 
ed, will discover indisposition, by the urine 
being voided turbid or pale, in spare or 
profuse quantity; sometimes with pain in 
the loins, ureters, bladder, testes, or mame 
mz. Those uneasy sensations which rise 
to the throat, and there give the idea of 
strangulation, often attend the stomach 
affection. The lungs expand with diffi- 
culty, the breast labours, the heart palpi- 
tates, the eyes grow dim, a giddiness comes 
on, confusion of thought and insensibility 
commence, and the patient often falls 
down convulsed.* ‘There is not a muscle 
or organ of the body that receives a single 
tendril of this sympathetic nerve, without 
partaking more or less, in these diseased 
feelings. 

But there are not two people who feel 
exactly alike, in a disordered condition of 
stomach: and this difference depends on 
causes so various, that the idiosyncrasy, or 
peculiarity of constitution, in every indivi- 
dual, must be sought for before it can be 


* Wysterics, and epilepsy, or falling sickness. 
Q 3 


228 


explained. Early habits, pursuits in life, 
modes of living, moral character, preced- 
ing diseases, amusements, professions, sea- 
sons, climate, &c. must all be taken into 
the account. Thus one person suffers by 
severe and obstinate head-aches; another 
is prone to hysteric or epileptic fits; some 
are afflicted with cramps and spasms of sto- 
mach; others by acidity aud flatulence. 
The liver and biliary ducts, with deficient 
secretion of bile, its increased quantity, or 
obstruction from spasm, mucus or gall- 
stones, and suffusion of the skin, are pecu- 
liar to one constitution : while bowel com- 
plaints, nephritic pains, urinary calculi, 
and strangury, harass another. Nervous 
females particularly suffer at the period ; 
in all irregularities of it, from whatever 
cause ; and in the puerperal state. Some 
persons sink more under dejection of spi- 
rits; while others exhibit sudden vicissi- 
tudes from high to low, and the contrary. 
Temporary insanity is more frequent with 
women than men; and it attends some 
of them during every pregnancy. Yet I 
hold all these, and many other shades of 
nervous indisposition, to be still one and 
the same disease. Nay, we frequently ob- 


a 


229 


serve the family peculiarity to be heredi- 
tary; and often distinguished by external 
signs, as the child happens to be like the 
father or mother. ‘The nervous power, in 
some persons, is precipitate in its move- 
ments, tumultuous and .convulsive, and 
gives a hurry to all their actions. Others 
again appear more sluggish and deliberate, 
where the nervous power is more torpid ; 
but it is at the same time liable to incon- 
stancy when under the nfipanee of diffe- 
rent passions. 

We know so.little of the nature of the 
-nervous power, that we can only judge. of 
the moral causes of nervous indisposition, 
from their effects. Some of the passions 
have received the name of .exciting,. and 
others that of depressing.; but their effects 
on the nervous temperament, seem much 
alike. The chief of the passions, such as 
anger, joy, grief, fear, &c. destroy. appetite, 
disturb digestion, prevent sleep, make 
the breast labour, and the heart palpitate ; 
render the mind fickle, timid, incapable of 
judging accurately, &c. Here is no proof 
that any of these passions weaken the 
nervous system; they only dissever that 
combination, or association of ideas, which 

Q 4 


230 


impresses the mind with pleasing objects ; 
and which disseverment to the mind is 
painful, and throws all the more sensible 
organs of the body into immediate disor- 
der. The mind and body being connect- 
ed by the nervous system, the same train of 
symptoms appear, when those causes are 
applied to the body, which first affect the 
chylopoetic viscera; such as a mercurial 
course, or a debauch with ardent spirit or 
‘opium. Now, what can be the reason, 
that these passions, or the articles just 
mentioned, have such extraordinary action 
on nervous people, while on others they 
have no such effect? I would explain the 
fact in this manner: the hereditary tem- 
perament is ‘supposed to inherit all the bad 
impressions of its progenitor, hoarded as 
it were in the structure of its nerves: in 
like manner the acquired temperament re- 
tains, or records as it may be termed, all 
the effects of vicious indulgence. ‘So that 
when any fresh gust of passion arises, or 
any luxurious stimulus is applied to any 
portion of the sympathetic nerve, these 
accumulate the quantum of predisposition ; 
and a nervous fit, or a bilious attack, is the 
immediate consequence of every new trou- 


231 


ble of mind, and of every recent debauch 
ofthe body. Thus the habit may become so 
completely nervous, or in other words, the 
predisposition may arrive at that height, 
that the faculties of the soul will be worn 
out, and fatuity take place; and the body 
will be so enervated as to be in a state 
of constant pain, tremor or convulsion. 
Such cases, in no small numbers, are cer- 
tainly to be seen every day, by medical ob- 
servers who possess discernment to appre- 
ciate experience. 

The operation of ardent spirit, which in- 
cludes wine and all fermented liquors, and 
of opium, if not all narcotics whatever, is 
much alike on the animaleconomy. They 
assail in the first place, the nervous system, 
and all other effects are secondary. The 
nerves of the stomach feel the first injury : 
but so intimately are these nerves connect- 
ed with the whole that supply the chylo- 
poetic viscera, that they are instantly drawn 
into consent. ‘The stomach, intestines, 
pancreas, liver and ducts, become thicken- 
ed, and grow torpid by long indulgence in 
these articles, and unequal to their func- 
tions. But it will not be doubted by any 
person who has attentively watched the ef- 


232 


fects of opium and ardent spirit, that all the 
early symptoms of indisposition which they 
create, are purely nervous, and extended 
by sympathy. I was formerly of opinion, 
that the enlarged liver was owing to the 
constringing power of the alkohol being 
spread from the duodenum to that viscus, 
through the ducts. But this explanation 
is not satisfactory: and opium, and other 
narcotics, cannot act by hardening the 
fibre or animal solid. The hepatic system 
must be injured by nervous communication 
and sympathy with the stomach. But if it 
is common in a severe disease, and after 
long continuance, for the liver of dyspep- 
tics to be found sometimes enlarged, where 
no vinous stimulus had been used, such a 
case must have been of nervous origin, to a 
certainty; and from this we have a right 
to conclude, that the diseased liver of 
drunkards is almost always of this kind, 
When the hepatic nerves are rendered 
weak, mobile, or torpid, by the excessive 
use of alkohol, it necessarily follows that 
this debility is extended to the whole sub- 
stance of the liver. There is no proof that 
an inflammatory stage and fever are always 
the consequence; on the contrary, I be- 


233 


lieve inflammation seldom happens. The 
hepatic system of inebriates does not ap- 
pear injured, till a very considerable de- 
gree of debility has taken place throughout 
the body: there is a general derangement 
before this assumes any signal mark of dis- 
ease ; and many of the worst symptoms are 
often present, when nothing beyond ner- 
vous affection can be suspected. Jaundice 
has too frequently been deemed a sign of 
enlarged liver; but it so happens that the 
jaundice of nervous people has little con- 
nection with the liver.*. The irritable, or 
torpid state of the duodenum and ducts, 
just as the nervous power happens to be 
deranged in them at the time, is the most 
common cause of biliary obstruction, and 
consequent jaundice. Nay the appearance 
of jaundice must often be a proof that the 
secreting office of the liver is perfect, 


* Within these four years, of rich and poor whe 
have consulted me, not less than 50 cases of supposed 
diseased liver, were of the number. Yet the treatment 
proved that no fixed hepatic affection was present. 
Many of these had their complaints aggravated by the 
previous use of mercury. A gentleman lately applied 
to me who was under a mercurial course for L. Y. 
during which jaundice supervened. 


234 


- During the inverted motion of the muscu- 
Jar fibres of the intestines, so peculiar to 
the nervous temperament, the opening of 
the duct that conveys the bile, from its sin- 
gular form, must be very liable to obstruc- 
tion. And this is thought to be the most 
common cause of icterus. 

But if the torpid and enlarged liver is 
thus proved to arise from nervous debility, 
must not the cure turn upon an invigorat- 
ing plan? The first step to this must be to 
remove the causes which brought it on; in 
the drunkard, let the bottle be laid aside 
entirely ; let such mental and corporeal 
stimuli be used as have a restorative quali- 
ty; and health must return, if it can be 
brought about by human means. 

But these principles apply with still more 
force where biliary obstructions infest the 
female constitution. The irritable nervous 
system, and delicate bowels of most wo- 
men, ought to make medical people consi- 
der well before they attempt violent, reme- 
dies, to overcome obstruction. ‘The true 
method of cure in weakened females, must 
be to strengthen the whole chylopoetic 

viscera, by such medicines as communicate 
_ permanent energy to the nervous system : 


A 


235 


to obviate slow bowels or diarrhoea, to cor- — 
rect acidity and flatulence; to attend to 

the quality and quantity of the food; to 
regulate the passions; to observe strict 
rules of air and exercise; to avoid cauti- 
ously every excess in stimulation, whether 
mental or corporeal: in short, to reverse 
all established habits, and to force a new 
train of actions upon the temperament. 1 
speak from much experience on this sub- 
ject: and it is admitted by the advocates 
for the mercurial course, that they have no 
certainty of the supposed liver affection be- 
ing removed ; but their patients are at in- 
tervals returning to the medicine; and we 
have known some instances where ladies of 
the nervous temperament were daken very 
unexpectedly out of their hands, by what was 
called the cramp of the stomach; a symp- 
tom that sometimes follows with a quick 
pace, the exhibition of mercury. These 
gentlemen must have often met with ob. 
struction and suppression of urine among 
nervous patients: yet it does not’ appear 
that they consider calomel the best relief 
to the kidnies and bladder. In fact, in 
most cases, of both jaundice and ischuria, 
we are to look to nervous sympathy for 


236 


their cause ; for they commence and dis- 
appear in general so suddenly, that local 
causes can scarcely be suspected. We 
might as well dissect the top of the osopha- 
gus for the cause of globus hystericus, as 
attempt to fix the pathology of these versa- 
tile movements, in the secreting or other 
organs; or inspect the brain of a hypo- 
chondriac for the picture of his blue devils. 
The migratory power which these affec- 
tions possess, of traversing every part of 
the body, is the inscrutable idioscyneracy of — 
the Nervous TempPrraMENT. 

A physician of our acquaintance, for 
many years was subject to dyspepsia, and 
conceived that he had a diseased liver, as 
he termed it. For twenty years he took 
calomel in large doses very frequently ; 
and all this time with a manifest increase 
of his complaint. The bowels however 
came to that torpid state, as to resist every: 
common laxative; and he at last got to 
the enormous quantity of thirty grains of 
calomel for a dose. I speak from his own 
authority. He became weak and emaci- 
ated, and at times suffered great pain; and 
sunk under the debility, which was to a 
certainty produced by the mercurial poi- 


237 


son; for when the body was opened no 
liver disease appeared ! | 
About eight months ago, a medical gen- 
tleman consulted me for various nervous 
and dyspeptic complaints. He said his li- 
ver was affected ; and he had taken calo- 
mel, at intervals, by the advice ofa neigh- 
bouring physician, for the last twelve 
years. He hada slight bilious look, and 
evidently possessed hereditary predispo- 
sition; was rather thin, and the bowels 
in a very irregular state. I recommended 
the usual strengthening plan, with horse 
exercise, arid abstinence from vinous li- 
quors, and opium, which he used freely. 
In a few weeks he got well, and recovered 
his flesh. In four months he felt some 
return of his indisposition, and resorted 
again to his calomel. But his bowels be- 
came more uneasy, and he felt a constant 
tenesmus. He came again to me, and he 
suspected when I saw him, an incipient 
ascites; nothing however appeared out- . 
wardly. Irepeated my former cautions to 
him about the use of mercury, for I look- 
ed upon it as the chief cause of his suffer- 
ings. He took the advice of two eminent 
physicians, at some distance from his home; 


238 


and they prescribed mercury. He began 
the plan recommended, and died in a few 
weeks ; in my opinion, with a constitution 
destroyed by this medicine. 

The mistaken pathology of these dis- 
eaes, it thus appears, had given birth to this 
unwarrantable use of mercury. Such cases 
cannot be made too public, in order to 
caution inconsiderate people against the 
indiscriminate administration of a medicine 
so capable of doing harm: the bowels of 
these gentlemen were evidently reduced by 
it to a state of palsy. 

But however afflicting the condition to 
which the body is often brought by ner- 
vous infirmity, the mental indisposition is 
the cause of greater misery. To enume- 
rate all the degrees of deranged intellect in 
these diseases, would be a difficult and use- - 
less task. They comprehend all that is ex- 
travagant in delusion, or absurd in fiction. 
The acute, but too often false perceptions 
of nervous people, are an apology for some 
of the stories we hear of apparitions, of mas 
gic, and of witchcraft, that have at differ- 
ent times imposed on the credulity of man- 
kind. Their deluded and vivid imagina- 
tions are capable of believing any thing ; 


239 


and instances of supposed supernatural 
agency, conceived in a dream, have often 
made such strong impressions on the mind, 
as to be attended by consequences of great 
importance, not only to the individual, but 
to the community. All jugglers and 
mountebanks find these persons an easy 
prey. The impostor Mesmer, who, about 
twenty-three years ago, exhibited his ta- 
lents in animal magnetism, by exercising 
nervous people at a kind of ordeal, which 
he had invented, found them answer all 
the purposes of his deceptions; and many 
well informed. men believed firmly in the 
truth of his doctrines. Yet the effects 
which were produced, were plainly owing 
to sympathy, and the power of imagina- 
tion ; just as we observe one nervous lady 
fall into a hysteric by looking at another 
in a fit; or like the two children mention- 
ed before.* : 

The temper of mind with nervous peo- 
ple, renders them very prone to what is 
called reverie. In the sunshine of their 
sensations, much of the time passes in con- 

* See the report of the ‘mariners appointed by the 
King of France. 

aA R 


240° 

templating imaginary pleasures, or what, ifr 
common language, is called, buclding castles 

in the air. And when they are roused from 

this fool’s paradise, they are very apt to fall 
into the other extreme, of low spirits and 

apprehensions. . So certainly does a corres 

ponding train-of thought follow every odd. 
feeling, in these whimsical disorders. - 

In the introductory part of this inquiry, 
we have given a cursory view of the savage 
state, so as to shew how favourable it is to: 
vigor aud health of body. We there ob- 
serve man to pass through existence with: 
wants so few, that he overcomes them by — 
his individual. exertions. The spot that — 
gave him birth, bounds his travels; and‘his 
knowledge is confined to the customs of 
his own tribe; so that if he has little call 
for bodily labour, he has still less for men- 
tal acquirements. His diseases are only — 
the infirmities and-decay of nature ; but of q 
the whole catalogue of ills which infest 
mortal life, he is least in danger of being _ 
afflicted with those ‘of the nervous class. 

But how different is man in the civilized 
world! He is obliged to undergo a kind of 
training how to live; to instruct him in 
what he owes to himself, and what to so« 


QA) 

ciety. Where the savage feels one want, 
the civilized being has a thousand. De- 
voted either to love or ambition, these im- 
press all his actions with extraordinary ve- 
hemence, perseverance, and enterprize. 
He is no sooner brought into the world, 
than he is taught to admire every thing 
that dazzles, glitters, or makes a noise. 
His very employment is play; and all his 
toys are either shining or sonorous. Flat- 
tery is the first expression addressed to 
dawning intelligence: he is called pretty, 
to make him a coxcomb; named good, till 
he becomes a hypocrite ; and learns to act 
the tyrant, by seeing every person afraid to 
disoblige him. Every thing within his view 
is calculated to prompt his desires and pro- 
voke his passions; no antidote is opposed 
to suppress the one or to moderate the 
other: and he finds example every where 
at variance with precept. If he is born the 
son of a rich man, he is still more unfortu- 
nate; as he will be caressed by more 
sycophants, and exposed to greater temp- 
tations: and to be born a prince, is to be 
‘the most unfortunate of mankind. 

The more complicated and various the 
jpleasures and business, which man is to 

R 2 


242° 


pursue in life, he will be the more liable to 
defeat and disappointment; and the more 
ardent his passions, they will the sooner 
terminate in exhaustion and disgust. The 
busy scene, therefore, leads quickest to sa- 
tiety : the retired circle preserves the long- 
est enjoyment. So that thousands of hu- 
man beings walk the round of gaiety and 


dissipation, for the certain reward of ner- 


vous debility. It is only at a particular 
stage of refinement, that these diseases re- 
ceive their birth: and when they exceed 


the sum of other disorders in a nation, 4 
they afford sure tokens, that that people is _ 
passing fast into dotage, and even under ~ 


apparent prosperity verging to decline, 


They multiply in prodigious proportion: — 
for besides the hereditary predisposition, ~ 
which descends to the offspring, they are 
daily gaining ground from acquired infirmi- — 
ties. When we thus contemplate with a 4 
philosophic eye, the rise and progress of a — 
nation, we observe a kind of physical ne- — 
cessity for the regeneration of mankind. 4 
A people polished and improved to the ut- _ 
most, cannot remain long stationary; it — 
must degenerate in body and mind. It — 


me 


243 | 

must fall into slavery under some powerful 
invader; or sink by some convulsion of 
nature; and, with all the arts and elegan- 
cies of life, return to the barbarism of its 
aborigines. Such a change of condition 
‘brings man back to pastoral and agricultu- 
ral habits; by which his sinews «will be 
newly strung, and his vigor of body reno- 
vated. And with these acquisitions of 
corporeal reproduction, the faculties of 
smind in ailatent state, will accumulate 
those powers and excellencies, that, in a 
future period, will exalt human nature to 
civilized perfection ; though still to be ex- 
posed in its turn to a similar decline. 

Although much stress has been laid on 
the imperfect state of the digestive and as- 
similating powers, in these diseases, yet we 
often find a considerable degree of obesity 
present, where the symptoms of indigesti- 
on prevail. But obesity is seldom a proof 
of strength; perhaps it oftener accom- 
panies weakness: and the indolent, inac- 
tive life, so often led by nervous people, 
must favour the deposition of fat. A spare, 
thin habit, is however a more frequent at- 
tendant on dyspeptic constitutions. The 

RS 


ZA44 


food may not only be badly prepared in 
the stomach, or vitiated by imperfect bile 
and pancreatic juice; the lacteals and me- 
senteric glands must also be diseased, some- 
times impermeable, and perhaps ulcerated. 
The quick evolution of acidity, in some of 
these cases, is surprising; it is no sooner 
corrected by alkalies or carbonate of lime, 
than fresh quantities are felt. ‘There is 
even reason to believe that some of the- 
intestinal secretions are so depraved at 
times, as to become acid immediately, the 
accumulation is so rapid. ‘The simple de- 
ficiency of bile cannot account for this, — 
unless the bile also loses its alkaline pro- 
perties, which I rather suspect it does in 
part. 

Acidity is not always accompanied with 
flatulence. The last symptom is peculiar 
to some constitutions; and it is most 
troublesome where sedentary habits are 
carried to excess, as in some females. 
The uncommon quantity of air sometimes 
extricated in the process of digestion, would 
make us suspect a large proportion of the 
food er water to undergo chemical decom- 
position. Some active exercise or quick 
agitation of the body affords the most cer- 


‘245 

“tain relief. ‘The frequent micturition, and 
-strangury, which attend nervous indiges- 
‘tion, prevail most when the stomach is 
loaded with acidity, and this points out the 
method of cure. I have not made any ex- 
periments on the urine in these cases; but 
it is likely, that the uric acid must appear 
In large proportion at that time. 

All derangements of the uterine system 
exemplify, in the most striking manner, the 
strong sympathy between the chylopoetic 
viscera, and these organs. ‘This is observed 
particularly at the age of puberty; at the 
period ; at the beginning of pregnancy ;* 


* Many of my contemporaries .at Edinburgh will 
‘recollect a case mentioned by Dr Cullen, in his lec- 
“tures on the practice of physic, that strongly proves 
the power of association during gestation. A lady in 
a hopeful way, found it necessary to have her robe 
‘made easier, and sent for her mantua-maker. But. in 
standing up to be measured, she grew so sick, that it 
was accomplished with great difficulty. The gown 
was brought home; and in attempting to try it on, the 
lady became so squeamish, that. the mantua-maker was 
obliged to desist, and leave her work to another time. 
A few days afterwards, another attempt was made to 
try it on; but now the very sight of the gown brought 
on sickness. It was determined to take the gown 
away, and to hang it up in a dark closet, not to bs 

3 R 4 


246 


in the puerperal state ; in suckling the in- 
fant too long ; at the change of life; inall 
conditions that affect the passions; and, 
more or less, in every complaint to which 
the female may be exposed. It must, there- 
fore, be of great importance in practice, 
that the physician should inform himself 
well, with respect to predisposition and 
temperament. We thus see on what irra- 
tional grounds the use of a class of medi- 
cines called emenagogues, was founded ; 
and how necessary it must be in uterine ob- 
tructions, to attend to the influence of that 
chain of sympathies on which they chiefly 
depend.* 

How far the class of nervous diseases is 
connected with gout, may, perhaps, re- 


seen. Even this precaution did not avail; the lady 
could not look at the closet, or pass near it, without 
feeling immediate sickness. It was therefore carried 
‘out of the house: and this extraordinary association 
remained till the lady got her bed. 

* J have seen many cases of young women where 
insanity supervened obstructed menses. In some it 
followed religious reverie and enthusiasm: in others it 
was connected with gloomy ideas of the Deity; but 
the most common cause, was the tender passion. The 
mental affection and the suppression usually subside 
vabout the same time, though not always. _ 


247 


quire much future experience to determine. 

But as far as the inflammatory symptoms 

are not co1icerned, the two affections ap- 

pear to be the same. They both depend 

on hereditary or acquired predisposition : 

the causes wliich produce them are entire- 
ly alike: these are chiefly luxurious habits, 

and the debilitating pleasures: all the dys- 
peptic ailments of the nervous frame ap- 

pear in the arthritic constitution. Every 
derangement of the biliary secretions par- 
takes, in each, of a similar disposition ; the 
state of the intestinal canal is subject to the 
like capricious vicissitudes in both; and 
also the urinary organs. The irritable feel-., 
ings, and hallucinations of mind, with 

which both subjects are affected, have an 
exact resemblance. Aind we observe, that 
the prevention and treatment of nervous 

indisposition and gout, are to be conducted 

on the same principles. 

No fact in medicine appears more clear, 
than that the female of every gouty family, 
inherits, in a high degree, the nervous tem- 
perament ; and is liable, from the general 
causes mentioned before, to suffer all the 

infirmities to which that temperament paves 
the way. This is exemplified by the ex- 


28 
hibition of mercury and antimony; in the 
use of narcotics, particularly tea, opium, 
and vinous spirit; in every improper in- 
dulgence in food or drink, and in the go- 
vernment of the passions. 

Gouty constitutions are known to be pars 
ticularly liable to urinary calculi. The 
uric acid, which has been found to form so 
dJarge a portion of these concretions, is, 
most likely, evolved during the depraved 
digestion and assimilation of the nourish- 
ment; and afterwards separated by the 
kidnies, and lodged there, or in the blad- 
der. It would be worth while to make ex- 
‘periments on the morbid acidity of a dys- 
peptic stomach; for there is great reason to 
think that it does not differ essentially from 
the uric acid. All the alkalies are given 
with advantage in these kinds of urinary 
calculi; and it is fair to allow their chief 
effect to be in correcting the acid in the 
first passages.* 

From what has been said, I shall hope 
to be justified in not attempting to divide 
these diseases into genera and_ species, 
which have little foundation in nature, and 


* See the French chemists on this subject. 


249 


are of no utility ina practical view. Com- 
bined in the definition of Nervous TEm- 
‘PERAMENT, they bear a near analogy and 
connection to one another. We thus ob- 
serve, the person who in youth possesses a 
mobile condition of nervous system, witha 
temper of mind depending on that, making 
him fickle, volatile, passionate, will in the 
advance of life, be less irritable ; but will 
still preserve so many traits of original 
character of habit, es still to justify the 
term. ‘The dyspeptic infirmities will also 
undergo modification, in proportion to the 
manner of living and moral habits. Hence 
melancholy and hypochondriacism seldom 
appear before the meridian, but more com- 
monly not till later in life. 

On the whole then, it is fair to conclude, 
that the pathology of these diseases is to be 
sought in the deranged sensations, and in- 
verted sympathies of the GREAT SYMPATHETIC 
NERVE; and in the zrregular action of all 
those organs to which it is distributed. 
The causes, therefore, whether moral or 
physical, exert their influence on this por- 
tion of the nervous system ; whose office. 
directs the most important operations in 
the animal economy, and binds together in 


250 


one great circle of feeling, actions and moe 
tions both distant and opposite. Hence a 
concourse of symptoms of the most extra- 
ordinary kind, that invert the usual func- 
tions of so many viscera; suspend their 
powers, or give to them new movements: 
by which means a train of false perceptions 
occupies the mind; and ideas the most 
monstrous and incongruous, supplant, for a 
while, all rational thought. In this reci- 
procal action between body and mind, in 


whatever part of the circle disease com- — 


mences, it is quickly communicated to all 
the others. For as bowel complaints — 
speedily affect the mind and depress the — 
spirits; so all violent emotions, in their 
turn, induce affections of the chylopoetic 
viscera, and raise such commotion through- 
out the sensitive system, as to bestow the 
nervous character on these diseases. 


251 


CHAPTER VII. 


Prevention and treatment. 


In giving a title to this chapter, I have 
been cautious in holding out too much 
confidence in medicine. The word cure, 
implies a certain and perfect recovery, 
without danger of the disease returning, a 
circumstance very doubtful here. But, ac- 
cording to what is meant by treatment, 1 

only lay down rules to regulate the prac- 
_ tice, so far as experience has approved. 
This has been the conduct usually observ- 
ed with my own patients: and as so much 
depends on their own discretion, it puts 
them on their guard, and reminds them 
how far they are to calculate on permanent 
health. 

It has been unfortunate for the medical 
profession, as well as patients themselves, 
that persons labouring under nervous dis- 
orders, have too much expected trom the 
prescription of the physician, and the shop 


252 


of the apothecary, what is only to be ob- 
tained from their own caution and circum- 
spection. We thus find most of them 
ready and greedy to swallow every medi- 
cine that is recommended; but stubborn 
and untractable in all that relates to break- 
ing in upon established habits and cus- 
toms; whether of luxurious living, deprav- 
ed appetites, indolence of body or mind, or 
vicious indulgence of any kind, inconsist- 
ent with health. Many of these habits, it 
is true, are so far interwoven with the con- 
stitution, as to make some changes almost 


impracticable: but as indisposition is so 


frequently brought on, or aggravated,. 
by the improper conduct of the patients 
themselves, the physician cannot be too 
much on his guard, in demonstrating to 
them all that belongs to their own go- 
vernment and demeanor. The medical 
adviser, therefore, who observes the most 
disinterestedness towards his friends, will 
often be the first man to be dismissed; 
while the selfish dissembler, however igno- 
rant, will become a favourite, and engross 
the emolument. On such an occasion, the 
virtuous mind of a liberal physician will 
know where to look for approbation. 


ee ee ee ee 


253 


This branch of medical practice has: 
commonly been reckoned one of the most: 
lucrative ; for the subjects of it are gene- 
rally found among the affluent: they are 
also seldom without some complaint that 
requires assistance; and they measure 
their comforts too often, by the quantity 
of medicine that is served up. Nervous 
people are, moreover, endued with acute 
feelings; liable to act from the first im- 
pression and impulse, and easily deceived 
by the designing and interested. And 
should they fall into the hands of a gossip- 
ing physician, or a wheedling apothecary, 
these personages become a kind of append- 
age to their establishment, # not fixtures, 
in their houses. Being singular in the se- 
lection of friends, they seldom mix in com- 
pany; sedentary from habit, they go little 
abroad; their amusements and recreations 
are thus limited, and such as possess the 
talent of bringing news, and telling a story, 
are at all times welcome guests. But as 
the tale of their own complaints engrosses so 
much of their conversation, a medical gos- 
sip, before all others, s the most accept- 
able. Nevertheless, let the nervous and 


2544 


valetudinary beware how they trust their 
health and their purse in such hands. 

The prevention of all diseases depends on 
a knowledge of their remote causes. 

If, in the former part of this inquiry, it 
has been found necessary to contrast the 
health of the savage state with that of the 
civilized condition of mankind, for the 
purpose of tracing causes from their origin, 
it does not follow, in prescribing regula- 
tions to the nervous and infirm, that we 
are to imitate the robust exercises of the 
barbarian, for the sake of strengthening the 
body, or to yield up the refinements of 
education and polished society, in order to 
subdue sensibility of mind. The lesson is 


only so far in joint, as it tends to confirm 


general truths by an appeal to facts, or to 
illustrate a precept by showing an example. 

In the present diseases, according to the 
history given, we admit a predisposition of 
body, without which, it is probable, they 
never appear. This predisposition may be 
either hereditary or acquired; to both we 
give the name i nervous temperament. 
What therefore relates to correcting and 
preventing predisposition, must begin with 
the earliest stages of infancy, and includes 


Pe ST ae Oe pe fig nat 
a Oe a eee 


255 


the whole rules of nursing and rearing chil- 
dren. : 

Man is so much the creature of habit 
and imitation, particularly with what be- 
longs to his food, air, exercise, and cloath- 
ing, that he may be moulded into any form 
we please. Nature has wisely provided 
milk for the infant, as best adapted to the 
delicate digestive organs and weak frame 
of early existence. This kind of food ought 
to be continued as long as it is capable of 
giving due support to the body. The mo- 
ther, if possible, ought to suckle the child 
till it is nine months old ; when cow’s milk 
may be substituted. And it is worthy of 
remark, that the fodder of the cow very 
-much affects the milk, such as grains and 
turnips, so much in use near great towns. 
The first article makes the milk disposed. 
to acescency ; and the turnips impregnate 
it with a disagreeable flavour, which comes 
from an oil in the tops and rind. Such 
qualities are hurtful to the stomachs of in- 
fants: and grass and hay are the natural 
food of this useful animal. 

A child that is to be brought up by the 
pan and spoon, as it is called, it is obvious, 
ought to have the milk in the best perfec- 

s 


256 

tion.. This is a practice which I am sorry 
to observe is sometimes too lightly giver 
into, in families.. I have weighed its me- 
rits fully, in rearing my only child in this 
way, to fulfil the last wishes ofan affec: 
tionate mother.. But,, though my darling 
boy has surmounted his: loss with the best 
possible health, I would not recommend 
this mode of nursing, on any terms, if it 
can be avoided.. Nothing can compensate 
to the infant for. the want of. the breast. 
About the third month, a little pounded 
biscuit, previously softened with a: little 
boiling water, may be added,.to give the 
milk consistence :. and from the. beginning, 
as-much brown sugar may be mixed, as to 
give it the. sweetness of mother’s milk. 
Sugar, it ought to be remembered, is a bad 
ingredient in the diet of infants. . 

The infant may be confined to milk for 


the first year; when a mess of. chicken, — 


veal, or mutton broth, may, be: given once 
a day, taking care to add nothing of the 
aromatic kind.. However, ifthe infant is 
much harassed with acidity, animal broths, 
such as gravy soups, are not only the best 
substitutes, but the best medicine. Aftex 
two years, the diet may be extended to a 


—— a re 


ie oF tied en ads 


257 


little solid animal food, some kinds of fish, 
and eggs, but still with a large proportion 
of milk. All pastry must be carefully 
shunned: sweatmeats of every sort are 
hurtful: every made dish, into which sea- 
sonings and sauces are put, ought to be 
avoided, as being a chief cause of stomach 
affections. All beers, ales, wines, and 
spirits, are excluded from this anti-dyspep- 
tic regimen. Puddings made of rice, or 
light bread, may be allowed ; but those of 
unfermented flour, have all the disadvan- 
tages of pastry. Cheese is gross food for 
children: and butter should be sparingly 
used. Vegetables may be eaten with ani- 
mal food; the child being allowed suffici- 
ent exercise out of doors, will always find 
them easy of digestion. ‘The object to be 
kept in view, in recommending for infancy 
and childhood, a diet sufficiently nourish- 
ing and easy of digestion, but at the same 
time, mild and bland, is, that the appetite 
may become accustomed to no high-sea- 
soned or luscious dishes; or the stomach 
inured to any hot or stimulating article. 
Were these rules strictly attended to in 
families subject to gout and nervous dis- 
eases, many scenes of misery and affliction 
$ 2 


258° 

might be prevented. It is a fact, to be 
daily observed, that the offsprings of these 
families, are, of all mankind, the most liable: 
to fali mto- habitual drunkenness, and the 
fove of luxurious feasting. Their feelings 
and.sensations are’ ofthat acute kind, that 
they easily receive the impression of stimu- 
lating articles, and are quickly susceptible 
of the-pleasure of taking them down. 

Tea’ and. coffee: are excluded from this 
diet, as possessing’ a narcotic quality : milk 
is the: best. breakfast ; but those who may 
incline for more’ variety, may use cocoa. 
Cocoa is a’ mild, wholesome, nutritive food, 
and.after a little perseverance, very grateful: 
to most people, and easy of digestion. . 

From what has been just delivered. on | 
the diet most proper for infants and chil- 
dren, grown-up persons will see reasons 
why they should prefer 2 similar conduct 
in the choice of their food. ‘This is indeed 
a serious evil with. most nervous and bili- 
ous people: they commonly indulge in 
high seasoned dishes, and’ use great quan- 
tities of hot sauces or peppers, for the pur- 
pose, it is thought, of overcoming the fla- 
tulent propensity of their stomachs. I 
have before condemned this custom : where 


1 


“250 


flatulence prevails, the stomach should se- 
ect plain fare, and that in small quantity ; 
and after a short rest take some active ex- 
-ercise, which will afferd certain relief. 

The value of air and exereise to health, 
is amply peinted outin the preceding parts 
of this work: attention to them ought to 
‘begin with early infancy. The child that 
is ever te attain due strength or-stability of 
frame, must be exercised -in the open air. 
The most spacious and well ventilated room: 
cannot supply the want of the external at- 
mosphere. A -degree of vigor and forti- 
tude of mind is insensibly acquired by be- 
ing exposed to the weather; while listless- 
ness and depression of spirits as constantly 
follow confinement within doors. Much 
of this mental exhiliration-must be derived 
from the objects which refresh the eyes. 
The sedentary life falls more to the lot of 
the girl than the bey, and is teo often en- 
couraged by those preposterous modes of 
education te which young females are ex- 
posed ; but certainly a sedentary life may 
be considered as the chief cause of female 
ill-health. I have heard a mother boast of 
her daughter being attended by jive mas- 
ters, in different branches of education, in 

8 3 


‘260 


‘the day, besides her task in the boarding 
‘school. What human body or mind, at the 
age of fifteen, is equal to such a trammel 
of study? Let -the discerning mother, 
therefore, reflect in time, onthe magnitude 
of the fault, if she bestow her daughter 
with a sickly constitution as:a dower, on 
her husband. -Can any evil in this world 
be worse than:constant bad health? How 
melancholy is the state of a family that 4s 
daily beset by an attending physician and 
apothecary’; ‘continually served with medi- 
eine; and a large proportion of mcome 
annually. consumed in support of its physi- 
cal retinue! 

Among children descended of nervous 
and bilious parents, itis a caution worthy 
of every well informed physician, to be 
guarded in the use of emetics, purgatives, 
opiates, and worm medicines. The last 
articles require particular animadversion. 
The fathers and mothers of such families, 
have too often been in the habit of using 
medical prescriptions on every slight occa- 
sion ; and very naturally think a similar 
practice necessary for the health of their 
children. | Worms can only be considered 
.as the consequence of a weak condition of 


261 

‘bowels; so that their prevention and cure 
in children, must turn on strengthening the 
the-viscera, and expelling the vermin. A 
brisk purgative is commonly employed for 
dislodging worms, and calomel has been 
the chief ingredient. But calomel ought 
never to be given alone; it is best to join 
it with jalap or rhubarb; though these ar- 
ticles by themselves are sufficiently power- 
ful. I usually give mag. ust. with the jalap 
or rhubarb, with a view to the dyspeptic 
state of stomach ; and follow this purge 
with gentle doses of bark, colomba, or any 
other suitable bitter. Nothing answers 
better than the sem. santon. or common 
wormseed. With all these I combine mag- 
nes. ust. or cret. prepar, as the bowels hap- 
pen to be slow or quick. Some chaly- 
beate, such as the red oxide, carbonas ferri, 
er lematura, may also be advantageously 
added. When these have been taken for 
eight or ten days, the brisk purge may be 
repeated. This plan may be continued for 
two or three weeks at a time: it will invi- 
gorate the digestive powers, and the gene- 
ral habit: and while it enables the bowels 
to expel the worms, it will prevent their 

generation, by removing the cause. No- 
S 4 


262 


thing can be more cruel than forcing the 
bowels of children by drastic purgatives, to 
evacuate worms : the most active will some- 
times fail in doing this; whereas the invi- 
gorating method is sure and safe, and. 
cures radically. 

What other precautions are necessary 
for the health of children, will appear suf- 
ficiently plain from what has been said on 
the causes of these diseases. ‘These causes 
must be avoided, ‘to insure success. The 
inhabitants of towns ought if possible, to 
place their children in the country for the 
benefit of education. It is not merely the 
pure air, and space for recreation.and ex- 
ercise, that .a .country «situation .aflords, 
which make it -preferable:; -ofher -conside- 
rations of equal weight, are to be taken 
into the account. ‘The habits which we 
are now combating, are the vices of artifi- 
cial life. And the love of nature is one of 
the best lessons to a young scholar; it 
checks every excess, and prescribes no- 
thing unwholesome to either body or mind. 
To see the grass spring, the plant shoot, 
and the flower blossom, are among the 
finest objects for contemplation. What 
Angenuous youth ever heard the bird sing, 


263 


the lamb bleat, or the heifer low, but 
warmed with emotions of a superior kind ? 
The beauties of landscape, more than any 
thing we view, purify the heart, refine the 
“taste, and warm the feelings. All is chear- 
ful, active, and healthful, because all is 
natural and innocent. Youth is the sea- 
son of life, to learn with advantage the 
value of nature’s productions, and pictu- 
resque scenery. If neglected then, the soil 
will groan under less amiable productions. 
To what an unfortunate change the pre- 
sent fashions are conforming mankind! 
The country houses of our nobility and 
gentry are empty till July. Thus the 
spring months, that season of joy through. _ 
out creation, passes unobserved by the af- 
fluent and gay. The souls of human be- 
ings, in this age of art, would seem to wish 
the sun to be darkened; they find no plea- 
sure but in the light of a lamp or a flam- 
beau. I feel for the rising generation, 
when I consider the effects of these over-. 
grown follies upon unexperienced minds. 

_ With respect to the prevention of these 
diseases in grown-up people, or what is the 
same thing, correcting the predisposition, 
no task in medicine has more difficulties to 


264 


surmount. It is not that it is impractica- 
ble; but the patients themselves are ‘sel- 
dom willing to submit to a code of rules 
for the direction of their health, and 
view with jealousy and pain every precept 
that is to subtract from their pleasures. 
What reward can encourage the slothful to 
activity? Who can teach the voracious 
glutton moderation in eating? Or what 
eloquence can persuade the habitual ine- 
briate to forsake his bottle? Nay how diffi- 
cult the task, to draw the nervous female 
from her tea! 

Where the predisposition is not heredi- 
tary, some of the causes which have been 
assigned, will generally be found to have 
brought it on. If these causes have been 
owing to any indiscretion of the patients 
themselves, to counteract them will be di- 
ficult in proportion to their inveteracy ; 
and the desires and passions which. give 
them effect. A habit is to break up, with- 
out which there are no hopes of relief. 
Every nervous person has some favourite 
pleasure to indulge. Articles of materza 
medica avail little, unless the patient forms 
the resolution to obey the injunctions of 
his physician. To begin new modes of 


265 

‘living; to go to bed soon and rise early; 
to drink water instead of wine; to labour 
and toil, and be exposed to the weather, 
after years spent in luxury and sloth, -are 
changes not likely to be heard with satis- 
faction, far less tobe practised with perse- 
verance, by an enervated voluptuary. Yet 
changes equally great must be effected, or 
there can be no recovery. 

The treatment of these diseases is a part 
of the physician’s duty, that differs much 
from the experience necessary to direct 
with success, the practice in most other 
distempers. Tor, however well he may be 
informed by preparatory studies, and how- 

ever stored with the resources of his pro- 
_ fession, something will still be wanting to 
insure a decisive method of cure, which 
even the sick-bed cannot supply. “This is 
the knowledge of character and of man- 
kind, which can only be learned by quick 
discrimination, and correct observations 
formed in the busy world. The living man, 
seen in his varied pursuits, can alone be- 
stow that knowledge on the physician. 
For this very reason, there are no disorders 
that so puzzle and confound the young and 
imexperienced ; and none so liable to be 


266 
misunderstood by the ignorant, or plodding 
part of the profession. 

The old maxim contraria contrariis me- 
denter, is better exemplified here, than in 
most other diseases. To change a state of 
body induced by long customs of living, 
or derived from nature itself, must be en- 
tered upon with fortitude and resolution. 
But even where no improper habits have 
been formed, changes and variations of re- 
gimen, that powerfully impress the nervous 
system, and call forth active passions of a 
different kind, will often be necessary to 
health. To the inhabitant of a town, a 
country life will offer many new objects to 
the senses, and afford the most salutary re- 
creations. But that this change of scene 
should operate with due force on the sen- 
tient part, it is not that a few weeks or 
months should be passed in a new situa- 
tion; if it can possibly be done, it ought 
to be for years; nay, in some instances it 
must be continued for life. And when 
such transitions of living are entered upon, 
whoever intends to practise them, must 
duly weigh the circumstances. The mind 
must not be left in astate of inaction, lest it 
should relapse into its old feelings, and be- 


267 


come the prey of former passions. Inmaking 
this transition from the city to the village, 
every person must be satisfied first, that he 
can employ his retirement without ennaz, and 
pass his time to advantage. The business 
of a farm is the natural avocation of a coun- 
try life. Agriculture in the present day is 
improved to the form of a science, and re- 
“quires a regular course of study from the 
books which contain it; and when com- 
bined with the practical part, it becomes a 
source of profitable and elegant pursuit. 
Every season brings with it something to 
be done; so that a mind disposed to be 
active, cannot want a motive: and the. 
sports of hunting, fowling, and fishing, will 
amply vary the hours which are devoted to 
relaxation. 

The small-circle of domestic duties, 
which many persons have to go through, 
exhibits such a sameness, that no recrea- 
tion can be derived from it; there is so 
little of variety, that the mind as well as the 
body, dwindles into a tenor of listless in- 
activity. Sufficient stimulus is wanting to 
rouse the languid faculties: and in such 
situations we meet with the most con- 
firmed habits of nervous affection. I 


268 
once knew a lady,. who for twenty years was 
never out of her room: at length, without 
any known cause, she ventured abroad, 
and returned to the full exercise of all her 
former duties of friendship and family 
affairs. Such cases are chiefly to be seen 
among people enjoying easy fortunes, whe 
had been formerly active, but are now 
without any of those urgent motives which 
preserve energy of mind, so conducive to 
health. ‘The public funds of this country 
are one great cause of those torpid habits 
of living ; where the security of property 
is so compleat, that any care about its 
safety is needless. A vast capital is by 
this means unproductive of any thing to 
the public, but is a source of bad health to 
itsowner. All enterprize is thus checked 
among a large part of the community, who 
become victims to diseased feelings, and 
to those kindred glooms which prey on 
still life. I have known some benevolent 
ladies of fortune, who, having no busy 
employment to fill up their time, took un- 
der their protection several: large families 
of children, among their poor neighbours.; 
and by administering to their wants, di- 
recting their education, and dispensing 


269 


cordials, medicines, and necessaries to the 
sick, made themselves a blessing to society : 
and by the ai, exercise, and recreation, 
which were required for the discharge of 
these good offices, they warded off all the 
unpleasant attacks of a delicate frame, and 
a nervous constitution. 

To the man of business and the artisan, 
who are necessarily confined to a town, I 
would reccommend, that as much time as 
possible, in their leisure hours, should be 
spent out of doors, in riding or rambling 
about the outskirts of their residence. 
This kind of exercise ought to be carried 
to a much greater length than has usually 
been advised ; it ought to be continued to 
the breaking out of a free sweat. ‘These 
persons must learn to brave the weather, 
and sally out in pursuit of their health and 
recreation, in despite of wind and rain: 
and their dress may at a cheap rate, be ac- 
commodated to the state of the atmosphere 
and season. ‘The distance from town, 
which may be necessary for these excur- 
sions, must be measured by the purity of 
the air, and the rusticity of the country: 
they must get beyond the effluvium of 
of smoke and mud. 


270 


When employed at the desk, men of bu- 
siness, and indeed all persons who write or 
read much, ought to use a standing pos- 
ture, to prevent the body from being bent, 
by which means the lungs and stomach, as 
welt as the whole abdominal viscera, wilf 
be free from compression. Want of exer- 
cise at all times impedes the free circula- 
tion of the blood, and the regular functions 
of the different bowels ; but compression 
of these organs, whether by tight lacing 
_ and swaddling, or by any unnatural posture 
long continued, has still more pernicious 
effects. A sitting posture is also extreme- 
ly hurtful to the urmary passages, and fa- 
vors the deposition of matter that brings 
on the disease called the stone. 

Exercise and recreation, of the kinds 
just mentioned, unfortunately cannot be 
employed by the town-bred female. In- 
deed the fashion of a town life, at this day, 
almost excludes the lady from every share 
of healthful exercise ; for it is not to be 
expected, that the fair sex can, by them- 
selves, frequent the public walks, or per- 
ambulate the adjoining fields, to breathe a 
purer atmosphere. In this age of manu- 
facture, trade and politics, the morning 


J 
4 
q 
: 
‘S 
; 


Sas 


hours of the gentleman are commonly spent 
- at the counting-house, the exchange, or the 
coffee-house ; so that the ladies must be sa- 
tisfied with a short visit of their male com- 
panions at the dinner table, which seems 
almost the only scene of intercourse be- 
tween the sexes. In what manner then is 
the city lady to preserve health, or regain 
it when lost? If she cannot look to a coun- 
try residence, her situation must be pi- 
tiable. 


As these diseases, from innate delicacy 
of frame, fall mostly on the fair sex, how 
cautious ought parents to be in selecting 
proper seminaries of education for their 
daughters. Many fathers and mothers, I | 
believe, still prefer boarding school tuition, 
to private instruction under their own eye. 
But I am here to speak chiefly, as it con- 

cerns the health of young ladies. Girls 

- are commonly sent to these houses, at a 

period of life when the constitution is to 

undergo some material changes, which re- 

quire the most attentive and delicate treat- 

ment. Now it so happens, that many of 
T 


272 


these boarding houses lodge thirty, forty, 
fifty, nay an hundred young ladies. “I am 
at a loss to conceive how any mistress of a 
school can do justice to so large aseminary 
of pupils. But I may be told, ‘assistants 
are kept in proportion to. the number of 
scholars. This is evading the question, 
not answering it: assistant teachers may 
answer all the purposes of school hours 
but do all these assistants possess the qua- 
lifications necessary for forming young 
minds to be amiable wives, affectionate mo- 
thers,-and accomplished women ? Scarcely.. 
A mistress of education is in the place of 
a parent: is'this maternal’duty then of so 
small importance that it admits of being 
deputed to the third degree? They must 
have cold hearts who think so. Every 
discerning mother knows well, that the 
smaller her family is, she can the better at- 
tend to the wants of her children. How 
then can a mistress of a boarding house, 
who officiates for a:livelihood only, do more 
than the natural guardian? The mere ac- 
quirements of learning are a small part of 
female education; it is the domestic vir- 
tues, and the retiring graces, which form 
the chief excellencies of woman. Which 


273 


of these fashionable. schools have given 
proofs to the world, that these are the stu- 
dies they mculcated ; and that their ma- 
trons are models for imitation, beyond the 
generality of mothers? . : 
In this country, it is little more satha a 
century, that daughters have been thought 
worthy of an improved education. So late- 
ly have we emerged from barbarism. Ever 
blessed be the memory of the amiable Mr 
Addison for this polish to society! It has 
not therefore yet crept into our. customs, 
to: honour female instruction with those 
marks of authority which distinguish public 
schools for boys... Preceptors bearing aca- 
demic degrees, and licensed by the learn- 
ed, are alone trusted to conduct.,.the edu- 
- -eation of youing men. . Whereas, any lady 
of tolerable. mediocrity im talents and ac- 
complishments, who .can. meet. with: the 
countenance and. support. of.a few well- 
“meaning friends in her neighbourhood, is 
deemed equal to direct a boarding school 
for young girls. . Books may be multiplied 
without number on female manners, if 
some check cannot be given to the custom 
of allowing their education to be conduct- 
ed by improper persons. One vicious se- 
T2 


274 


minary will do more harm than can be 
compensated by all the philosophers of the 
age. Hence the necessity of qualifymg 
the mother to mstruct her own children.: 
In a public boarding school ‘there 1s a 
very heterogeneous concourse of charac- 
ters. We there behold the daughters of 
persons of all ranks in life 5. of families of 
the most diseordant habits and sentiments ; 
many of these bringing abroad all the pre- 
judices of kindred; and perhaps not a few 
jabouring: under hereditary diseases, or 1m- 
becility of mind: all lodged, boarded and 
trained, under one roof. If imitation is 
one of the strongest propensities of our na- 
‘ture, is there not great hazard in such a 
collection of young people? Every good 
mother is cautious whom her daughters 
‘chuse as companions at home ; and can she 
be less jealous of their safety when abroad ? 
The best and worst of our habits receive a 
tincture of our associates, but particularly 
during youth. Such a school of yeung 
girls, all differing m rank, in fortune, in 
temper, m constitution, m passions, and in 
prospects in life, but liable to communicate 
follies, propensities and diseases, to one 


275 

another, must be considered as an impro- 
per assemblage. | 

All boarding schools ought to be situa- 
ted in the country; not-only for the sake 
of air and exercise, but that the young 
ladies may be cut off from gossiping visi- 
tors. ‘his will tend to secure health, by 
rendering the introduction of contagious 
diseases more difficult. Such a space of 
ground ought to. be laid open.as may be 
sufficient for amusement and play; and 
certain portions of the day allotted for 
walking, or more active sports, that those 
who are most sedentary may be forced to 
partake. An adjoining flower garden will 
be a motive for recreation to :some, while 
the taste may be improved by the study of 
Botany; a task peculiarly adapted to 
young ladies. Such avocations will train 
the female mind to the love of simplicity, 
and store it with that species of informa- 
tion, which affords food for reflection at a 
future day; and will fill up much of the 
leisure to be met with in the domestic 
scene.* The pupil of elegant Nature will 


* The young ladies in boarding schools, in this vi- 
<inity, who are instructed to the love of the animated . 
T 2 


276 

thus find a country walk as much the habit 
of life as her hours of sleep; and will not 
. be scared from it by a dirty road, ora 
lowering sky: a portion of time will always 
be due to exercise, that the faculties may 
be refreshed, and the eye feasted by the 
beauties of creation. And while her ner- 
vous aunts are moping their evenings over 
the card table, she will gather health by 
her chearful excursions ; and preserve her 
bloom of countenance by the only means 
that can give it an additional charm.— 
These ideas may, by some, be deemed a 
little romantic; but when I look to the 
sickly frame and miserable existence of a 
nervous patient, I can find an antidote 
against this species of criticism. 

The diet of these schools, I am much 
afraid, is often exceptionable.* And if 
their matrons are not too wise for advice, 
they will find many cautions necessary 


world, have now a. rich field for contemplation in’ the 
elegant volumes of our townsman, Mr Bewick. A 
work that does credit, not only to this BOY but to 
the age. 

* T have met with many very serious stomach cem- 
plaints among ladies, who dated their origin to the 
diet of a boarding school. 


2777 


with girls, nervous in themselves, and dee 
scended from nervous, bilious, and gouty 
parents. They will therefore find it of 
consequence to pay some attention to the 
physical traits of their pupils, that they 
may learn how to preserve health. Let 
them beware of encouraging hot, or high- 
ly seasoned dishes. ‘Tea and coffee ought 
to be excluded from their bill .of fare. 
Plain dressed meat; plain puddings; no 
pastry ; no cake or sweetmeats 5 water, or 
milk and water, with meals; fish with plain 
butter ; no vinous liquors, but when pre- 
scribed medically. A plentiful dairy will 
be a most valuable appendage to every 
boarding school: but above all, let them 
inculcate and be the examples of early 
hours in rising and going to bed. | 

I am one of these who consider the of- 
fice of superintending a female boarding 
school, as a station of great importance 
and responsibility: and officious friends 
should not be too. precipitate in recom- 
mending persons to fill it. It appears-to 
me of even greater moment than a teacher 
of boys, let their rank and consequence be 
what they may. The boys whose educa- 
tion may have been neglected, by future 

T 4 


278 


attention may be recovered: but the 

young lady whose manners have once re- 
ceived a wrong bias, is seldom restored to 
a simple and unaffected demeanor; and so 
it is with health also. ‘To married women 
only this business should be assigned ; and 
it ought to be given in preference, to one 
who has educated her own daughters. It 
will not be contended in opposition to this | 
opinion, that any one can be sensible of 
the mother’s duties, who has not stood in 
that relation herself. A good temper and 
benevolent dispositions must be essential 
ingredients in this character. These ani- 
madversions on female education and 
management cannot be called foreign to a 
treatise on nervous diseases. ‘They are the 
result of long -observation, and of much 
conversation on the subject, in different 
parts of the world, with many sensible wo- 
men, who had received a boarding school 
instruction, and often lamented the im- 
perfections to be found there. 

Dr Beddoes, in his Hygeia, has lately 
published some remarks on these institu- 
tions, and given accounts truly frightful 
of their internal economy. The medical 
attendants of these seminaries have hither- 


279 

to preserved a silence, not always com- 
mendable, when improvements for the sake 
of health appeared so necessary. It is 
fortunate for the progress of science, and 
the good of human kind, that such men as 
Dr Beddoes now and then rise up on the 
theatre of the world ; who, above the low 
trammels that fetter selfish beings, dare to 
combat prejudice and error, and expose 
the stupidity of rejecting improvement. 
But the first step to a wholesome reform 
in behalf of this most amiable part of crea- 
tion, must be to limit the number of pupils. 
Parents have it in their power to effect 
this, by sending their daughters to those 
schools only, whose numbers never exceed 
a family circle. | 

When we recommend air and exercise 
to our patients, the nature of what advan- 
tage we expect from them ought to be 
explained, that the due effect may be ob- 
tained. A number of people are too apt 
to think, that a short formal walk out of 
doors, at stated hours, is sufficient for this 
purpose. Nay, there are hundreds who 
think they have done great things if they 
go abroad for an hour or two in a close 
carriage. Such persons may be very much 


Z80 


pleased with medical admonitions; but 
they pay a poor compliment to their phy- 
sician, when they limit his directions to 
such forms. In a luxurious age, and in a 
country like England, wallowing in wealth, 
and rioting in indulgence, I am well aware 
how difficult and unthankful the task, to 
tell. people they are doing wrong, when 
they receive so much pleasure; and how 
hopeless the prospect of bringing them 
back to simplicity of manners, and sober 
modes of living, after unbounded gratifica- 
tion. I must however contend, in the 
prevention of these diseases as depending 
on predisposition, that the exercise ought 
to be of the most active kind, even to la- 
bour and fatigue ; and always till it pro- 
duces a moist skin, if not a profuse sweat. 
As these resolutions gain ground in the 
nervous temperament, the idle and trifling 
objections commonly made against season 
and weather, will soon, vanish. It is the 
certain effect of recreation out of doors, 
to exhilirate the mind, while it invigorates 
the body ; which soon gives birth to new 
feelings, new ideas, and active faculties. 
To a person accustomed to a warm close 
room, and seldom. moving beyond the 


281 


threshold, I conceive the influence of the 
external air, and sufficient gesticulation at 
the same time, to be a considerable step to- 
wards a reversed method of living. © 

~The value of exercise on horseback, is so 
well known, ‘that it may seem superfluous 
to mention it here. But in the prevention: 
and treatment of nervous and bilious dis- 
eases, it is supereminent. When it is be- 
gun with confidence, care should be taken 
that the ride may net grow irksome: by 
being constantly over the same road. A 
journey should therefore be frequently in- 
terposed; and some business to be trans- 
acted, kept in view. ‘The motion and ac- 
tion which are communicated by riding, to 
the organs of digestion and respiration, are 
of the most salutary kind. The stomach, 
_ by being duly compressed by the abdomi- 
nal muscles, has its contents, after being 
fully dissolved by the gastric liquor, expel- 
led at the proper time. Some persons will 
tell you, that it is hurtful to use exercise 
after a full repast: but that is the language 
of a pampered being, and of one who eats 
beyond what nature requires: how other- 
wise could the labourer rise to his work, 
with so short a rest after bis dinner? But 


‘282 


eustom has made it familiar to him, and 
he is satisfied with what will support him. 
Were every lover of good eating compel- 
led to walk a few miles immediately after 
dinner, he would soon learn moderation. 
By riding, the liver, with its sluggish cir- 
culation, its gall-bladder and ducts, is well 
pressed and agitated; so that the bile is 
secreted in proportion to the wants of the 
digestive process, and all its canals kept 
pervious. The peristaltic motion of the 
intestines is thus promoted with all the 
fluids ; and the lacteals in like manner per- 
form their office. The kidnies at the 
same time, as well as the bladder, dis- 
charge the urine to the last drop ; and no 
particle of sabulous matter is detained in 
either cavity, to become the nucleus of a 
future stone, as so often follows a life of 
indolence and sloth. The lungs being 
fully stretched and expanded, by the full 
inspiration of a pure atmosphere, the vivis 
fying oxygen is taken in, in due quantity, 
to afford strength and stimulus to the body, 
and activity to the intellectual faculties. 
Hence the heart is excited by the florid 
dense blood to strong contractions ; and the 
surface and extremities warmed and soft- 


283 


ened by a generous vital fluid; which, 
while it defends from a cold and fickle at- 
mosphere, keeps up a glowing perspirati- 
on, to the certain relief of every dyspeptic 
symptom. From these effects of equita- 
- tion arise chearful spirits, acute under- 
_ standing, good appetite, perfect digestion, 

sound and refreshing ‘sleep, and all the 
healthful and pleasurable sensations which 
flow from mens sana in corpore sano. 

The cold-bath is a common remedy with 

weakly people; and it is often resorted to 
by the nervous invalid. I rather wish to 
eonsider it as an athletic exercise than a 
‘medicine, I therefore introduce it under the 
prevention. Modern physicians have, how- 
ever, made greedy attempts to bring it under 
their control, and to point out how and 
when it ought to be used. But the rules 
which have been laid down for the prac- 
tice, and the explanations which have been 
given of its mode of action, are alike un- 
satisfactory. In the recent pubiication of 
Dr Buchan, on cold and warm bathing, 
_ the subject is treated more scientifically ; 
and his book ought to be carefully read 
by every person who resorts to a watering 
place. 


284 


When we look at the subjects who flock 
to the sea-side to use the cold bath, we find 
persons of every description, labouring un- 
der all the varieties of disease.’ It must 
therefore be either a universal remedy, or 


‘no remedy at all. Hence one speaks of it 


as a bracer, and giving tone to the’ solids. 
Another accounts for the good effects of 


it, from the shock it gives: anda third ex- 


plains it, by accumulating sensorial power, 
or excitability. Leaving all these gentle- 
men in full possession of their theories, I 
must beg to consider it chiefly as an exer- 
cise and amusement. A degree of reso- 
lution is required for the employment of 
cold bathing, which inspires courage ; for 
the time, it shifts the train of thought, and 
calls forth a considerable muscular exer- 
tion. On the sudden immersion of the 
body into the cold water, a quantity of heat 
is instantly given out, which gives what is 


called the shock ; and the temperature of 


the body is for the time reduced, at least 
so long as it remains in the water. ‘In or- 
der therefore to render it a salutary exer- 
cise, the water must be of a temperature 
suited to the vigor of body, or its habit 
of bearing cold. We thus suppose that 


285 


the season for cold bathing is limited to 
the summer months; for in winter the de- 
gree of cold which we require, can be ob- 
tained from the atmosphere. In thé act 
of dressing and undressing, the body is 
exposed naked to the air; I fancy this may 
be the means of hardening it a little to the 
weather, which is a good effect. 

‘Persons who are timid at first, if their 
fears decline as they go on, gain advantage 
from bathing. But those who never sur- 
‘mount the dread, cannot expect benefit 
from it. Much of the good, it would ap- 
pear, arises from the vigor and activity it 
calls forth. If the bather can swim, and 
use considerable exercise in the water, he 
may remain in it a length of time; but 
others cannot do this without danger of 
catarrh. After coming out, if the spirits 
are raised, the body agile, with a glowing 
warmth speedily succeeding on the skin, 
‘and fitness for muscular motion, with in- 
crease of appetite, the bath has done good. 
‘When a person is extremely apprehensive, 
he ought to begin bathing very gradually ; 
lave the body first gently, then try deeper 
water, till at last he can bear a plunge. To 
remain long chilly, low spirited, and with- 


286 


out appetite, are signs that the bath is 
hurtful. It must be cautiously tried by 
patients much reduced; and is most safe 
after convalescence, when the usual health 
returns. 

I am also of opinion, that those visits to 
watering places are highly beneficial to 
nervous people, by breaking in upon esta- 
blished habits, that uniform tenor of life 
which they commonly lead; shaking off 
indolent customs, and forcing them into 
company and chearful society. They are 
put out of their way, as the vulgar expres- 
sion is; and this very change of discipline 
is a great step to a cure: the more the 
etiquette, therefore, to be gone through, 
so much the better. 

In this age of refinement, while so many 
indulgencies creep in upon our domestic 
arrangements, it is surprising that baths 
do not become appendages to our houses. 
They are never thought of till the physi- 
cian orders them for the recovery of health. 
Yet there appears nothing more likely to 
conduce to the comfort of a family than a 
suite of baths; to which all the members 
of it might daily repair. 

Moderate exercise ought to be continu- 


287 


ed for some time after coming out of the 
_bath, so as to promote the glow, and en- 
courage perspiration: and the best time 
for using it is between breakfast and din- 
ner. Very weakly people may begin with 
72° of Fahrenheit; and reduce it as they 
find occasion, but it never should be 
brought below 54° of that scale. The em- 
ployment of the bath was a common cere- 
mony with the ancient Romans; and 
though frequently spoken of by Celsus, it 
does not appear to have been much of a 
medical regimen: but the cleanliness and 
purification of body, which flow from it as 
an ablution, must be allowed to be a grand 
defence to health. | 

The warm bath is another remedy in 
nervous and dyspeptic cases. In that kind 
of debility which is marked by a languid 
circulation of the blood, and a dry surface; 
less mobility of nervous system, or rather 
torpor of it ; less prone to violent emotion, 
and subject to coldness of the extremities, 
and general inactivity of muscular power ; 
in such cases the warm bath is often a cer- 
tain remedy. It ought to be practised twice 
a day; after which the body must be kept 
warm by such exercise as can be taken 

w 


288 


within doors; so that it may be gradually 
brought to the common atmosphere. This 
glow may be assisted by flannel cloathing. 
If the warm bath is tried in cold weather, 
the. transitions ought not to be great at 
once, either before or after its use. A 
range of baths of different degrees of heat, 
would best answer this purpose; where 
the patient might begin with 84°, and as- 
cend to 110° if necessary.. 

The warm bath is to be considered as a 
means for applying the stimulus of heat by 
immersion, when it would be improper to 
derive it from the atmosphere ; which can- 
not well be done in our latitudes, without 
at the same time injuring its respirable 
quality. It is of eminent advantage in that — 
harsh, impervious state of the skin, which 
often accompanies weak digestion; where 
the stomach and bowels become torpid 
from sympathy with the surface. No re- 
lief is obtained in such eases, if a free per- 
spiration does not follow: so liable are dys- 
pepsia, and the suppression of the cuticu- 
lar discharge, to alternate with one another. 
The soothing sensation which it gives, and 
serenity of mind which it inspires, are the 
index of the good effects of the warm bath. 


289 

But where these are not felt, but on the 
contrary an increase of dejection and weak- 
ness, they are proofs of its doing harm, and 
it must be given up. When the warm 
bath does not agree, it is surprising to see 
how quickly it debilitates ; so that it cannot 
be persisted in long with safety. I do not 
not presume to decide whether the natural 
thermal waters, such as Bath and Buxton, or 
the water heated by artificial means, ought 
to have the preference. But it ought to be 
remembered, that a journey to and from 
these places of public resort, must be ad- 
vantageous to an invalid: and the change 
of scene, chearful company, and gay a- 
musements, which they afford, cannot but 
be beneficial to the body and mind of a 
nervous patient. 

When employed as a physician of his 
majesty’s fleet, I made many attempts to 
get our naval hospitals furnished with suites 
of baths: but all my applications were in 
in vain. Few. public infirmaries in Eng- 
land, though some of them are well sup-. 
ported, can boast of these useful append- 
ages. Yet cold lavation of the body must 
be allowed one of the best Boats to 
health. 

U2 


290 
_ Mineral waters are another form of wa- 
ter conveying medicinal powers to the 
body. ‘They may be considered either un- 
der the prevention, or treatment, of ner- 
vous diseases. But they are more com- 
monly used by the infirm and convalescent, 
than by those labouring under severe dis- 
ease: they will therefore be noticed with 
most propriety in this place.. I shall have 


occasion to speak of some of their ingredi-- 


ents as medicines, under the treatment.. 
There can be no. doubt that the efficacy of 
mineral waters is very considerable in, many 
cases of indigestion, nervous debility, and. 
those variations of it, usually ealled bilious.. 
The jerruginous, or those impregnated 
with iron, are the most valuable: and 
where this principle happens to be joined 
in the same water, with some salt of a pur- 
gative quality, as that of Cheltenham, in 
certain nervous and dyspeptic habits they 
are peculiarly useful. Where occasional 
icteritial symptoms prevail, from obstruc- 
tion of the biliary ducts, whether from 
spasm, mucus, or other causes, which re- 
tard the peristaltic motion of the intestines 
by the bile being deficient, such combina- 
tions of iron and purgative salt, have the 


291 


‘pest effects ; as the laxative power of the 
one does not interrupt the invigorating — 
quality of the other. Iron dissolved in 
‘water by the chemistry of Nature, seems to 
act more powerfully by its extreme diffu- 
ion: and as in this state of solution, it is 
capable of circulating through the minutest 
vessels, its stimulant and strengthening 
powers are exerted on the remotest parts 
of the system. Much of the operation of 
chalybeates may be by chemical union with 
the fluids of the body, but there can be 
little doubt that they also directly stimu- 
late and excite the nervous substance. In 
those persons whose cold extremities and 
pale complexion indicate a languid circu- 
dation and poor blood, besides weak.diges- 
tion, chalybeate waters often perform won- 
ders. But where there is much colour on 
the surface, and a florid blood, I think them 
improper. | | 

There are however many casés of ner- 
vous indisposition, for which the waters 
impregnated with the sulphurated hydro- 
genous gas, and a neutral salt, are to be 
preferred: such are those of Harrogate and 
Moffat. Where cutaneous eruptions or 
defeedations, are troublesome, or apt to al- 

: D3 


299 


ternate with the dyspeptic and_bilious 
symptoms, these hepatised or sulphurous 
waters, seem the fittest. ‘They may also, 
at the same time, be used as a warm bath ; 
and their efficacy in this way is known to 
be considerable. These cutaneous dis- 
eases are probably much owing to the in- 
activity or torpor of the absorbents, .and 
perspiratory vessels, on the surface of the 
body, over which this kind of water has a 
manifest stimulant power. If have often 
seen similar good effects from a prescrip- 
tion imitating the wiagn throne: of these wa- 
ters. 

About the time the first edition of this 
work was going to press, a pamphlet, con- 
taining Observations on a Water strongly 
impregnated with szlphurated Hydrogen, 
that had been recently discovered at Dins- 
dale, near Darlington, in the county of 
Durham, by Dr PEAcock, fell into my 
hands. It appears, from a train of expe- 
riments, managed with equal address and 
ability, that éhiis water contains the sul- 
phurated hydrogen, in the proportion of 
32 to 19 of Harrogate; but is without 
any purging’ salt. Many trials had been 
made of its effects in stomach and bilious 


293 


‘complaints, and on those cutaneous deke- 
dations, that so frequently attend, or alter- 
nate with, affections of the viscera in nerv- 
ous people, and are narrated by Dr Pea- 
cocks. I can now bear testimony of its 
efficacy, in a number of cases in my own 
practice; some of which were of the. most 
‘unpleasant kind, and had obstinately re- 
sisted other remedies. -It is-a great ad- 
vantage to this water over the Spa of 
Harrogate, that it contains no muriate of 
soda: for in nervous cases, and in weak 
bowels, we often find neutral salts impro- 
per laxatives. But if a more brisk cathar- 
tic is required, in full habits and robust 
people, it is easy to add the salt in the 
proportion we please. | 
_ This well is likely to prove a great bless- 
ing to the north of England: and. the 
cases recording its efficacy, in the posses- 
sion of Dr Peacock, are now innumerable. 
The little work which has announced this 
signal discovery to the world, is highly 
honourable to the medical literature -of 
the present day; inasmuch as it shews the 
general diffusion of chemical knowledge as 
a handmaid of medicine: and a country 
philosopher has proved to his neighbour- 
U 4 


294 


hood, that a profession, instituted for the 
good of mankind, may be practised with 
talents and success, in a village, equally as 
inthe metropolis; while at the same time 
it is secured from the fashionable hypocrisy 
and craft, which pollute the medical cha- 
racter in the higher circles of life. 

But while I fully admit the medicinal 
effects of mineral waters in these diseases, 
I must still reserve a share of the credit, to 
the relaxation and amusement that are to 
be met with at these healthy and fashion- 
able resorts of company, ‘Taken together, 
and properly employed, they form a most 
important part in our preventive practice. 
I know not what would become of num- 
bers of families in this country, were it not 
for the enjoyment which is obtained, once 
in the year, at some popular watering place, 
The time of leaving home is wished for with 
impatience; and the avocations and en- 
gagements which delight them abroad, 
make up the chief theme of conversation 
till the season returns. 

Nervous people ought to clothe rather 
warm, and guard against variable weather. 
If they are accustomed to flannel next the 
surface of the body, it must be often shift- 


295 

ed: and the body ought to be wet-spung- 
ed, or sprinkled with cold water, every 
morning, then wiped dry with a hard 
towel. Persons who practise this mode of 
lavation daily, know that cheerful spirits, 
an agreeable warmth, keen appetite, and 
easy digestion, succeed to it. And when 
through indolence or forgetfulness, they 
happen to leave it off, their dyspeptic dis- 
position soon gains ground. ‘The feet of 
some nervous people are very liable to be 
cold ; but this occurs mostly with such as 
use no exercise; for the. sitting posture 
checks the circulation in the lower extre- 
mities, and also disposes them to swell. 
Stockings made of lamb’s wool, laced 
stockings, or at least flannel socks, elastic 
gaiters, and hair or cork soles, make the 
proper defence in winter, for the heels and 
feet: and while they prevent chilblains in 
frost, they insure the pleasure of recreation 
out of doors, when the ground is damp. 
But where one person receives an injury 
to health from damp ground and thick 
fogs, a thousand perish by loitermg within 

doors to avoid them. 
To such of the nervous temperament as 
complain much of head-ach and vertigo, in 


296 


full habits, with frequent heat and coldness 
of the head, accompanied with drowsiness 
and stupor; these symptoms in advanced 
life, are always to be dreaded. They par- 
ticularly attack drunkards and great eaters, 
who are corpulent, have large heads and 
short necks. Persons of this description 
must correct their modes of living, if they 
wish to avoid a sudden death. Low diet, 
with entire abstinence from spiritous and 
fermented liquors, and much active exer- 
cise, is the best regimen for health. Bleed- 
ing, cupping, and leeching the temples, 
are sometimes required: but these can 
only be considered as temporary remedies, 
for frequent blood-letting favours fulness 
of the vessels. The state of the bowels 
must be lax; the sleeping room airy and 
cool; suppers must be avoided; the sleep 
should not be long, and violent passions 
of the mind must be guarded against. 
Where nervous diseases have been 
brought on by affections ef the mind, mis- 
fortunes in life, or affliction of any sort, it 
is obvious they must be considered as par- 
taking more of a mental disorder. Change 
of scene in these cases, is commonly the 
first.step to the cure: as by removing the 


a a 
distance of all objects that have a tendency 
to refresh the memory, or cause association 
of ideas, that bring up gloomy reflections, 
you weaken the chain of sympathy, till it 
is gradually broken. It is the duty of re- 
lations and others, who may be intimately 
acquainted with the patient, to inform the 
physician minutely of every circumstance; 
for it must be in vain to prescribe for a 
mental disease, where we are kept in the 
dark concerning the cause. Every such 
case must have its appropriate. manage- 
ment, both on the part of the medical at- 
- tendant, and the inmates. Such hallucina- 
tions of mind are always to be regarded as 
threatening insanity or idiotism; and with- 
out a careful investigation of the antece- 
dents, ne physician can direct the treat- 
ment to.advantage, or pronounce the issue. 
It happens too often, that the early signs 
of mental disquietude, which discover 
themselves first by peevishness of temper, 
and irritable feelings, have been miscon- 
strued by relations: and a degree of harsh- 
ness sometimes has been exercised upon 
the patient, from a disbelief of his disorder, 
and not foreseeing to what it was tending. 
‘The subject in all respects requires infinite 


298 


address on the part of the physician: for 
petulant meddlers are more difficult to be 
managed than the deranged patient. To 
treat this stage of a serious malady with 
doubts of its existence would be deliberate 
cruelty. To mock their fears, however 
false, bespeaks coldness of affection; and 
I have often seen it bring on intemperate 
sallies of rage: flattery answers better, for 
they have less jealousy where there is no 
attempt at disputing they are right. But 
there are moral and physical causes 
prompting these feelings, with an im- 
pulse not to be resisted: and while the 
mind is occupied with such sensations, 
it is in vain to persuade the patient 
that they have no reality. When peo- 
ple with low spirits are to be cheared 
and recruited by conversation, it ought al- 
ways to be conducted with delicacy; and 
this can never be duly managed but by a 
person of intelligence. Ifthe mind at any 
time is ruffled by neglect, when it expect- 
ed sympathy, we run the hazard of seeing 
the whole regimen of health given up, and 
all confidence of attendance lost for ever, 
And when medicine is directed, every ar- 
sument must be employed to inspire hope 


Ss 


oo 


299 


of its virtues, and the certainty of its doing 
good. Here, as in maniacal cases, subjec- 
tion and restraint have been frequently 
carried too far; and the patients have been 
driven to despair, and ended their torments 
by suicide, rather than submit to the lash 
of their keepers. If insanity is purely a 
mental alienation, the method of cure must 
turn chiefly on a mode of discipline ad- 
dressed to the weakened powers of intel-. 
lect. Such persons ought never to be left 
alone; their train of thought should be 
constantly interrupted ; for by indulgence 
it acquires growth and retention. I do 
not see how corporal punishment can be 
admitted, where the reasoning faculties, 
have ceased to exercise their authority, and. 
where the living soul is not conscious of 
moral obligation. A physician who has 
to direct the treatment of maniacs, must 
live among them, that he may learn the 
genius of every individual case, if his dis- 
cipline is to conduce to their recovery. 
There are certain forms and customs of 
living, practised by men who are common- 
ly deemed models of temperance. The 
striking part of a regular life, is an exact. 
and. correct division of time. Every hour. 


300 


of the day has its appropriate task; and 
pleasure and dissipation never supplant 
business and duty. The temperate man 
goes to bed before a late hour, and uni- 
formly rises early. Hence early hours are 
another term for a regular and temperate 
mode of living: as the contrary bespeaks a 
life of frivolity and insignificance. Can 
any human being be in pursuit of noble 
and elevated honours, who is found in bed 
at eight or nine in the morning? Such a 
man never yet in the world, acquired the 
title of either good or great. It is there- 
fore one of the most unpardonable neglects 
of a family, where parents give the exam- 
ple of late hours to their children. What 
an insult to nature, to allow the sun to 
shine sfx hours above the horizon, before 
getting up! Late hours at night, and long 
in bed in the morning, are among the nurs- 
ing mothers of nervous complaints. A 
permanent and perfect cure is never to 
be accomplished, without forsaking these 
slothful habits: and to discard them is al- 
ways a part of my discipline. 

The diet of a temperate man, or such as 
wish to be free from nervous and bilious 
complaints, is plain food, and that in mo- 


301 


‘derate quantity. A person ought to rise 
from table, cheerful, active, and refreshed 
with what he has eaten; not oppressed, 
drowsy, or unfit for motion. Where great 
quantities of strong malt liquor, or wine, 
are taken with dinner, the stomach be- 
comes the more overloaded; and sleep is 
called for, to be relieved from the burthen, 
as an instinct of nature. An appetite not 
accustomed to high seasoned dishes, or 
savoury meat, selects for itself what is 
wholesome and easy of digestion. Beef or 
mutton are better than veal or lamb; 
roasted meat not overdone is preferable to 
boiled; but broths not too rich or super- 
seasoned with spices, ought to be a daily 
part of every temperate dinner. Nervous 
people complain of broths distending the 
stomach and occasioning flatulence; but 
this is the language of sloth; motion and 
exercise soon correct this kind of uneasi- 
ness; and when the stomach has been ac- 
customed to broths, no such effects can be 
perceived. ‘The legumina, such as peas 
and beans, must be sparingly used at all 
times; they load the bowels and render | 
them slow; and raw vegetables, as sallad 
and cucumber, are also improper. But 


302 

pot vegetables in moderate quantity, are all 
‘mild and wholesome to be used with meat.. 
Fish and poultry without rich sauces, may 
be allowed: and game on the same terms. 
All kinds of pastry and pye-crust are diffi- 
cult of digestion, and prone to fermenta- 
tion and acidity; they lie heavy on the 
stomach, according to the common phrase :. 
and bread, rice, and custard puddings, are 
the only articles of that class that should 
be eaten. Sound biscuit, and light well 
fermented bread, are to be used; leavened 
bread, or bread baked without yeast, in 
weak stomachs, produces acidity, heart- 
burn and flatulence.. Cocoa or milk, forms 
the mildest fare for breakfast, which ought 
to be taken soon after rising. <A very light 
meat supper is often necessary to amuse 
digestion: but gruels, sago, arrow-root, 
and such like, are improper, they run into 
fermentation, and partake of the nature 
of the unfermented farinacea. 

Water, or toast and water, is the best 
drink with meals; and milk and water at 
other times: cyder, perry, beer, and por- 
ter, create distension, flatulence, and heart- 
burn. The quantity of wine at, or after 
dinner, should be small, and that diluted 


303 


with water: Madeira, when genuine, is 
the purest wine, and best suited to a gouty 
or dyspeptic stomach. Shrub, sherbet, 
punch, and every thing into which an un- 
fermented acid enters, are improper drinks ; 
liqueurs, and spirits of every description, 
are to be considered as Syrens, that charm 
the road to destruction, and ought to be 
rigidly abstained from. : 
Nervous persons do best to dine off a 
few dishes ; and those of the simplest kind: 
two or three articles at most should bound 
their repast. They are, of all mankind, 
the most liable to surfeits ; and when they 
reflect, that the very weakest parts of their 
constitutions, are the digestive organs, 
they must either be sparing in their good 
things at table, or expect to be punished 
for their indiscretions. ‘There are few of 
the number, who have not had experience 
of this truth. jis | 
Having recommended a milk breakfast, 
I am aware that many objections will be 
opposed toit. Ihave been often told the 
stomach could not bear it. Ifa physician 
is pliant enough to yield to such excuses, 
he runs a poor chance of doing any good 
in.these disorders. ‘This is the common 
x 


304 


language of persons who have worn out 
the excitability of their stomachs, by strong’ 
green tea and other improprieties of diet. 
The soft bland milk does not convey to 
them that warmth which they have’ been 
accustomed to receive from more stimulat- 
ing fare. But let them be encouraged to 
persevere; and as-this alteration of break- 
fast, is only a part of a greater reversion in 
modes of living, it will not fail in the end 
to be agreeable. I must on that account 
caution them against any mixture of spirit, 
or ever spice; in their milk. But if' the 
acidity afterwards should be troublesome, 
they may with ease correct it by calcined 
magnesia, or fifteen grains of prepared 
powder of chalk, as the bowels may be slow 
or otherwise: To young women’ of. all 
ranks, the milk breakfast is peculiarly 
adapted.: and: F have the authority of Sy- 
denham,. that it is the best food for the 
gouty. ait 

From the experience’ which I have had, 
in some thousands of these cases, under all 
the variety in which they usually appear, I 
freely give it as my opinion, that the only 
means of cure lie in a total abstinence from 
every species of spirit or fermented liquor ; 


305 


from every thing that bears any analogy to 
them, such as tea, coffee, opium, and all 
other narcotics ; and to regulate the diet, 
cloathing, air, exercise, and passions, as be- 
comes a rational being. The improper use 
of these articles being the chief cause of 
nervous indisposition, it follows that no re- 
covery can be perfect, till they are zn toto 
_ discontinued. 

Attention to the state of the bowels forms 
an important part of the prevention: but 
if due regard is had to air, exercise, and 
diet, even habitual constipation may be 
overeome. What relates to its relief other- 
wise, will be noticed in the proper place ; 
but if the food can be so regulated as to 
supercede medicine, it is an important point 
gained. 

The whole of the precepts which have 
been delivered, as the means of prevention 
against this singular train of diseases, it will 
be readily perceived, turn upon a reversed 
mode of living, or changes opposed to for- 
mer habits ; and to bring our patients back 
to a simple regimen of food, air, exercise, 
&c. Our plans comprehend no favourite 
theories, nor any intricate doctrines; they 

x 2 


306 


aim at being natural, simple, and easy te 
be understood. 

Some striking instances of the beneficial 
effects of these rules, when entered upon 
with a determined spirit, have been proved 
_im my own practice. A few years ago, 
when it was my good fortune to be honour- 
ed with unbounded confidence by the naval 
service, 1 was consulted by some particu- 
lar friends, of great affluence, on the bad 
health of their wives, who, to the regret of 
all connected, had never been in that hap- 


py way, 


« Which ladies wish to be,. who love their lords.’* 


These ladies, after being married for seve- 
ral years without having children, devotees 
of fashionable life, and a prey to painful 
nervous disorders, are now the mothers of 
healthy boys and girls, and enjoy the best 
health imaginable. All these happy changes 
were effected by little assistance from me- 
dical prescription; they were brought 
about by reversed modes. of living. A. few 
visits to their town friends, and an equal 
number to a provincial assembly, are all 
that these once gay parties now see of the 
fashionable world. What married woman 


307° 

could refuse to quit a life of late hours, in- 
sipidity and dissipation, for such tokens of 
happiness and health? 

Change of climate is oné of those means 
_of relief in nervous cases, that may some- 
stimes be resorted to with great advantage. 
There aré nervous persons who are most 
sensibly affected by variable weather; 
where the transitions are quick, particular- 
Ty from settled and clear, to damp and 
foggy. The human nerves in such pa- 
tients are like barometers: it is thus the 
_ fall of the year, in November and Decem- 
ber, 1s proverbial for lowness of spirits and 
melancholy. A residence in Italy, or the 
south of France, for some time, may there- 
fore be useful to such as can affordit. But 
it must be remembered, if these persons 
return to Britain without having made 
great changes in the discipline of health, 
they must: expect fresh attacks of their 
complaints. A climate not too warm, 
where the atmosphere is clear, and the 
temperature equal, or not liable to ex- 
tremes, is chiefly to be preferred by such 
people. Here again the change of scene 
may have a powerful influence on the 
mind. 


0) 
a) 


608 

From the effects which these diseases 
are known to produce on the spirits, there 
is a moral regimen, as it may be.called, ne- 
cessary for our patients, and which must 
remain with themselves. The person whe 
is subject to nervous affections, can seldom 
promise himself long equality of health and 
spirits; these vicissitudes must often hap- 
pen, from causes which neither could be 
foreseen nor prevented, and sometimes 
when ‘least to be suspected. The mind, 
however, is not always prepared to combat 
sensations that impress it with ideas of 
dissolution ; otherwise it-could not so fully 
believe in imaginary horrors. It is a sin- 
gular fact, that.even men, whom I have 
known, renowned for valour and personal 
courage, and who have been familiar with 
danger, should sometimes be found among 
the number of those who .conceive such 
dread from indescribable feelings, and tor- 
_ ture themselves with a phantom. When 
these hallucinations are removed, the pa- 
tients .can condemn the. imbecility that 
created their fears; yet nevertheless,.on a 
next attack their apprehensions are renew- 
ed as strongly as ever. The judgment be- 
ing thus perverted for the time, the false. 


309 

perception is to be considered asa degree 
_ of delirium and temporary insanity. When 
the patient perceives the first approach of 
these odd feelings, he ought to turn his at- 
tention instantly to the recollection of such 
scenes and objects as ‘he has been accus- 
‘tomed to contemplate with much pleasure, 
and review with satisfaction: there let him 
rivet his memory, and if he can raise it to 
extacy, he will infalibly subdue the mor- 
bid associations, and the frightful images 
which they present to the mind. This 
kind of mental controul will be difficult at 
first: but we have known patients who 
became quite adepts in the practice of it, 
and secured themselves from .many painful 
struggles. It unfortunately happens in 
these moments, that bad actions and sub- 
jects of affliction are most apt to occupy 
the memory ; hence it is that wicked men 
are said to have suffered the pains of hell 
in this world. Some nervous people in. 
this state of derangement, have so magni- 
fied their own guilt, as to make formal con- 
fessions of crimes they never had the most 
distant idea of. committing. 

If when in company, any thing happens_ 
te -be said, which brings to recollection 

X 4 


310 


any distressing circumstance, the nervous 
invalid must. either retire, or the conver- 
sation must be changed. And such. of 
them as live much alone, must endeavour 
to regulate their train of thinking, so as 
to turn it quickly, the moment any thing 
disagreeable is called up to memory. I 
once witnessed a very affecting scene of 
this sort: a gentleman in company repeat- 
eda line from Cato,— 


‘*¢ Welcome my son; there lay him down my friends.” 


A lady in the room who had lost an only 
son ten years before, was immediately 
thrown into violent hysterics, that had 
nearly proved fatal. [he habit of break- 
ing up these associations gives a new relish 
to life; while the want of resolution makes 
nervous people so frequently their own 
tormentors. And when they acquire this 
manner of self-government, if I may so 
speak, it is surprising what confidence it 
gives to the mind.* | | 


* For the following anecdote of Dr Cullen, I am 
obliged to the late Mr Whale, rector of the grammar 
school of Kelso, an eminent scholar, who had lived in 
Hamilton, where Dr Cullen once practised. Dr Cul- 


Blt 

As mankind in these diseases, are se 
often the authors of their own misery, 
compunctious visilings of nature must fre- 
quently recur... In such conditions of ‘af- 
fliction, I do not see that it is at all out of 
character for the physician to administer 
even what is called spzritual comfort. A 
. medical friend, who may know the value of 
religious duties in his own life, cannot be 
an intrusive monitor at a time when dis- 
tress opens the avenues to the human heart; 
and when his professional visits necessarily 
‘attach confidence, which cannot be re- 
posed in a stranger, and who may be less 

. conversant in those failings that sometimes 


Jen was subject to gout, and possessed thereby the pre- 
disposition to nervous. affection, and often. suffered 
from demissio animi. He had a severe attack of low 
spirits, perhaps brought on by narrow circumstances, 
and great application to business and study; when he 
was surprised in his dackadasical mood, by a friend 
coming in—* I am very il indeed,” said the doctor. 
The gentleman endeavoured to divert him from his 
glooms: ‘Do you never build castles iw the airy by way 
of amusement, Doctor? ‘Oh no, I have not even 
strength for that.” Did you never imagine yourself — 
a great general, leading victorious armies to battle, and 
enjoying the triumph? * No, not even in imagination 
did I ever fancy myself a soldier !” 


32 


bend ‘the strongest. There are also cer- 
tain delicate situations with low spirited 

people, that make a formal visit from a 

clergyman impracticable, however much it 

may be wished for otherwise. I believe it 

is a common remark of the profession, that 

on the sick-bed, we observe more fortitude 

of mind among women, than is to be found 

among men. We must attribute this ex- 

cellence in the sex to superior virtue; and 

to their being educated more in domestic 

life, where religious and moral habits take 

deeper root, by being less corrupted from" 
intercourse with the world. 

Persons liable to these diseases, must be 
cautious how they plunge themselves into 
any affairs or business, where crosses or 
disappointments may irritate the temper. 
As they are commonly subject to sudden 
gusts of passion, a prudent and guarded 
command over them, is the only security 
for tranquillity of mind, and a smooth pas- 
sage through life. ‘The nervous frame 
must, therefore, trust to self regulation, in 
a great measure, for exemption from many 
painful affections, over which the powers 
of medicine have no controul. 

Having thus finishsd the means of pre- 


313 


vention for nervous diseases, or what may 
be called the mode for correcting the pre- 
disposition, it will readily appear that the 
whole of our precepts have an equal appli- 
cation against the arthritic diathesis. If 
gout can be prevented at all, it must be by 
a rigid adherence to simplicity of living ; 
whether in air, exercise, food, cloathing, 
passions of the mind, &c. and to avoid all 
excesses and debilitating pleasures which 
are known to enervate the general frame, 
or weaken the chylopoetic organs. Iknow 
of no distinction that can be drawn be- 
tween the habits of body that give birth to 
gout and to nervous diseases, beyond what 
has been said in the preceding part of this 
work; and it appears that the most suc- 
cessful prevention of both, will much de- 
pend on its being enforced from the birth, 
and continued through life. ‘The gouty 
constitution is certainly injured by every 
excess of stimulus, like the nervous tem- 
perament, but particularly by narcotics of 
all descriptions. If any fact more than 
another has been proved in my own prac- 
tice, it is that spiritous liquors, and all 
wines, with tea, opium, mercurial courses, 
and the sexual indiscretions, are the chief 


314 
eauses of the acquired predisposition that 
equally engenders both these diseases. 


et LE EEE IES DP 


_ [come now to the treatment, that may 
be called more strictly medical. And it 1s 
to be remembered, that the whole of the 
precepts, which have been delivered under 
the prevention, are to be duly attended to 
during the use of medicine; for unless re- 
gard is paid to them, articles of Materia 
Medica are not only of no avail, but may 
sometimes do much harm. 
Though I repose due confidence in me- 
dicine, when well timed, it is to be observ- 
ed, that here the practice is directed 
against a diseased state of sensation and 
motion, brought on by causes which exert 
a peculiar influence on the nervous sys- 
tem: causes which invert all the regular 
operations of a most complicated set of or- 
gans; and in the cure of which the com- 
mon resources of our art seem to lose their 
usual power. Those customs and _ habits 
which form as it wére a part of Nature in 
the living body, are to be counteracted by 


315 


reversions in diet, air, exercise, and even 
mental regimen, great in proportion to the 
morbid affections they are intended to 
overcome. In the body we observe symp- 
toms that counterfeit every other disease, 
forming a part of this assemblage; and in 
the intellectual functions we find dispro- 
portionate emotions and the most extrava- 
gan illusions. 

The indications of treatment may be di- 
vided into two heads, 7 


I. To strengthen the constitution : 
II. ‘To palliate particular symptoms. 


1. To prescribe for a class of diseases, so 
variable in appearance, and equivocal in 
their symptoms, requires a full share of ex- 
perience and discernment, and nota little 
patience in actual attendance. ‘The phy- 
sician must often take a very circuitous 
route to put questions to his patients, that 
he may learn the real genius of the dis- 
temper. He mustin many cases be guard- 
ed in his enquiries, lest he excite fears and 
suspicions in the irritable mind, which is: 
observant of every trifle, jealous of a whis- 


316 
per, and when once alarmed, however false- 
ly, not easily quieted again. 

I have generally found it the best way 
to be candid and open in my opinions with 
nervous people. It is the conduct which 
will insure most satisfaction in the end, 
whatever temporary embarrassment it may 
occasion. And I have never found it im- 
proper to inform them of every article of 
medicine prescribed, and to explain the ef- 
fect I expected from it. By these means 
they will not be taken by surprise; for if 
they find themselves: deceived once, their 
confidence will not be easily regained. 
This demeanor becomes the more necessa- 
ry, as they are very apt to listen to stories. 
of wonderful cures, and to pore over me- 
dical books, that they may compare the 
opinion of their physician with what they 
imbibe there. 3 

In the treatment, it is always to be con- 
sidered, how far these diseases are the pri- 
mary complaint, or zdiopathic ; or how far 
symptomatic, and excited by another dis- 
order. Wherever the body has been re- 
duced to great debility, the leading fea- 
tures of a nervous temperament when pre- 
sent, will appear : and the method of cure 


317 


for the original disease, must conjoin witli 
it the appropriate treatment of nervous af- 
fection. Many females, with a delicate and 
irritable nervous system, at the period, ex- 
perience more or less of these complaints ; 
and they subside with it. If they were 
even severe for the time, we are acquainted 
with the reason; and it would be improper 
to harass the patient with quantities of me- 
dicine for symptoms, that we know must. 
decline in a day or two, perhaps in as 
many hours. Similar cautions must be 
used, when from any cause the menses 
cease, and severe nervous affections su- 
pervene. This may happen from pregnan- 
cy; and the treatment must be guarded 
accordingly ; for all the signs of breeding 
are from sympathy between the uterine sys- 
tem, and the chylopoetic organs. The ly- 
ing-in state, even under the most fortunate 
circumstances, will, for the same reasons, 
be often marked by a recurrence of ner- 
vous complaints. In such situations it is 
impossible to lay down rules, as the prac- 
tice must vary according to the peculiari- 
ties attending, whether from severe and 
lingering labours; excessive. flooding ; 
puerperal ‘fever; improprieties of diet or 


318 


regimen ; passions of the mind ;_ milk fever, 
diseases of the breast, &c. all of which will 
bring forth nervous affections of the most 
afflicting kind, such as frequent syncope, 
cramps, convulsions, delirium, &c. I was 
lately called to visit a woman, when the 
midwife had taken away sixteen ounces of 
blood, under the idea that a pain of the 
side was a pleurisy: delirium commenced 
immediately, with violent convulsions ; and 
the patient died in forty-eight hours from 
the bleeding. In no conditions of a dis- 
eased state of body, are mistakes of the 
nature of a complaint, so liable to lead to 
fatal consequences as in the puerperal pa- 
tient. | 

Married women who have never borne 
children, it is said, are more liable than 
mothers to these diseases. "The nervous 
female commonly finds her health improv- 
ed when she becomes a parent; from 
which it may be fairly inferred that the 
child-bearing period is favourable to the 
constitution. _ Every intelligent mind 
knows well, whatever cares a family may 
bring with it, they are more than..over- 
balanced by the sweet solicitudes.of affec- 
tion which spring, from them. .. Hence 


319 


every wife wishes to be a mother: the 
want of children thus grows to a misfor- 
tune, and those motives for energy of 
mind are neglected. But if this misfor- 
tune has been owing to nervous indisposi- 
tion, brought on by any cause which has 
been assigned in these pages, if it be at all 
remediable, the means are obvious, and 
easy to be employed. 

‘When these diseases appear about the 
age of puberty, at a season when delicate 
changes take place in the system, we are 
then aware of the event, and can calculate 
upon their decline. ‘Their appearance at 
this time of life, is marked by a singular 
train of phenomena, all depending on a 
mobile condition of nervous power, as the 
body acquires the possession of new pas- 
sions and new faculties. The generic 
names of chorea and chlorosis, have been 
given to these diseases ; but I hold them 
nothing more than traits of the nervous 
temperament. Chorea, or St Vitus’s dance, 
commonly begins some years before the 
age of puberty ; and in both sexes it seems 
to decline as soon as the body has acquired 
its stability, and the sexual organs are 
fairly evolved. It consists of involuntary 

¥ 


320 


motions of the extremities, and sometimes 


of the muscles:of:the face, appearing like’ 
antic tricks: and” gesticulations ;- but there’ 
is also morevor: less of dyspepsia:. I have 
seen some“mstances where convulsions and 
delirium: of.a.singular. kind. attended this 


disease... 


The predominant symptoms of chlorosis 


are muscular debility, sallow skin, indicat- 


ing deficient oxygen in: the blood, and. 


great derangement of the chylopoetic or- 


gans, with. other symptoms of dyspepsia - 


and nervous affection.. There is common- 
ly a desire for eating dust, chalk, or lime, 
and. probably depending: on. excessive aci- 
dity im the first passages.. As this com- 
plaint chiefly appears about the age of pu- 
berty, it has justly been considered as hav- 
ing some connection with the evolution of 
the sexual system: and years of bad 
health. sometimes follow, before the men- 
strual discharge is duly established. With 
this all the dyspeptic symptoms disappear ; 
the mamme swell, and the countenance re- 
sumes its rosy colour; the body recovers 
its muscular strength, and the shape is. 
moulded into all the softness of form and 
beauty. But at the same time, it ought 


321 


to be remembered, that the male constitu- 
tion, at puberty, is also frequently subject 
“to chlorotic indisposition. As chorea and 
chlorosis indicate the presence of the ner- 
vous temperament, I have nothing particu- 
lar to offer on their treatment; it falls. en- 
tirely in with our general plan. These 
complaints are another confirmation of that 
intimate sympathy which subsists between 
the sexual organs, and the chylopoetic vis- 
cera. There can be nothing strange in 
these symptoms appearing in an aggravate. 
ed form at this age, where the nervous 
power is very mobile; for we find other 
symptoms sometimes at an earlier period, 
that are usually considered as the disease 
of riper years, namely, the fluor albus. I 
have at this moment two children of seven 
years of age, now convalescent of that com- 
plaint, with all the signs of hereditary ner- 
vous predisposition. __ | 
In directing forms of medicine for our 
patients, there is one rule must be care- 
fully attended to,—not to sicken the sto- 
mach by beginning with a large dose. If 
the digestive organs in their deranged state, 
are incapable of acting on the food, how 
much more may they be oppressed by a 
¥ 2 


322 


nauseous medicine. This article, as welf 
as the diet, must undergo the digestive 


process, if it is to be useful; and it is the 


business of pharmacy so to prepare it, that 
it may best answer this purpose. It is not 
that a medicine is to be sweetened to cover 
its bad taste, or warmed with spirits, that 


it may afford a grateful stimulus to an ex- . 


hausted stomach: it-must be. exhibited in 
a state wherein its powers may be most ef- 
fectually exerted on the nerves of* that or- 
gan}; or so easy of decomposition, as: to 
combine readily with the animal fluids, and 
yield its qualities to’ be conveyed by the 


circulation to remote parts. Cinchona, or 


Peruvian bark, so often prescribed in ner- 
vous and dyspeptic cases, has been some- 
times given to the amount of two ounces 
in substance in twenty-four hours; and 
because the stomach. did not reject this 
enormous load by vomiting, it has been 
triumphantly: exclaimed, that large doses 
only could’ do good. Such: a quantity 
could only ptoduce'torpor and insensibi- 
lity ; its active qualities could not be ex- 
erted as a medicine on the gastric nerves ; 
for what solvent in the stomach could ef- 


fect its decomposition? For my own part, 


323 

Thave never met with patients who could 
retain such quantities of bark. It appears _ 
to me much more rational to begin with 
small doses, and to watch its effects. 
Hence we learn that decoction and infu- 
sion will sometimes succeed, when the 
_ powder has failed. These forms seem to 
derive still further power, by being con- 
joined with some of the alkalies, the carbo- 
nate ef lime, (chalk,)or magnes. ust. all of 
‘which not only increase its activity, but 
-eause it to sit easy on the stomach. The 
pharmaceutical treatment of most of the 
bitters more or ‘less «resembles . that. of 
cinchona. 

It is sometimes necessary to premise a 
vomit or purge, or both, before the use of 
strengthening remedies, as the stomach 
and bowels in their irregular state are 
often loaded with phlegm and mucus to a 
surprising degree. Besides, the capricious 
flow of the bile into the duodenum is often 
the means-of rendering ‘different portions 
of the intestinal tube torpid, or irritable, 
as it happens; and an active purgative will 
always have considerable effect in restor- 
ing the equal motion of the bowels. As 
an emetic, I prefer the ipecacuanha, to be 

¥o 


324 


assisted by a weak infusion of camomile. 
As a gentle purgative I prefer rhubarb; 
and when a quicker one is required, I em- 
ploy pulv. jalap. With each of these I 
uniformly combine magnes. ust. kali or 
soda. —These not only correct acidity in 
the first passages, but also render the ac- 
tive parts of the other articles more certain 
in their operation; they also become sol- 
vents of the animal mucus so often accu- 
mulated there. 

After the prime vie are thus cleared, 
we may with safety begin the corroborant 
medicines; being always cautious in se- 
lecting and combining them with such sti-, 
mulant and adjuvant ingredients, as may 
make them easy to the stomach, and adapt- 
ed to the constitution. It is impossible to 
lay down rules for what is to be directed 
by experience in every individual case: 
but it will often happen, that the same ar- 
ticle which does harm under one ,formula, 
will be eminently useful in another. And 
in suiting the medicine to the exact con- 
dition of the stomach, the success of the 
practice will be more or less compleat. 
The physician will but too often find rea- 
son for remonstrating with his patient on 


325 


neglecting his injunctions, whether in air, 
diet, or exercise: .a watchful eye must 
therefore be kept.over the regimen, that _ 
medicine. may not, fall into unmerited. dis- 
-eredit. | 
The strengthening medicines which have 
been chiefly:employed in these diseases, 
-are tron, Peruvian bark, and bitters ; but 
‘sinc, copper, and even silver and lead, have 
-been used. And the mineral acids, sulphu- 
ric, nitric, and muriatic, have on some oc- 
casions been.deservedly praised in. many 
alyspeptic stomachs. 
Iron very properly is considered as the 
-first article.in this class. Its reputation is 
very ancient, and physicians have been uni- 
form in extolling its powers; they are cer- 
tainly in some shades of these diseases truly 
wonderful. ‘There are few of our patients 
whose habits of body contra-indicate its ex- 
hibition; but it is commonly forbidden 
where there is much strength and tension 
of muscular fibre, and a florid dense blood. 
Such a state of body is seldom met with 
among the nervous, bilious, and dyspeptic : 
but we have frequently been obliged to lay 
aside the use of chalybeates for the very 
reasons just assigned. , : 
i a 


326 


Sydenham, who seldom erred in prac- 
tice, preferred iron in its metallic or oxide 
state, to all its other preparations. I can. 
readily join in the praise which the English 
Hippocrates pronounced on this celebrated 
strengthener; but there are certainly con- 
ditions of the system in nervous diseases, 
in which some of its saline combinations 
are to be preferred. In some female ha- 
bits where there is vast disposition to aci- 
dity of stomach, the limatura ferri, and 
carbonas ferri, will act most powerfully. — 
And there is reason to suppose, that this 
very acidity of the prime vie, further oxi- 
dates the metal; by that means destroys 
itself, and leaves the iron in a more active 
state to strengthen the fibre, or to mix with 
the blood, and exert its efficacy on the 
whole circulation. But in cases where 
there is little or no acidity in the first pas- 
sages, the muriated tincture of iron, and 
vitriolated iron, have appeared to me to 
have manifest advantage. Again, in cases 
where there is much torpor, or as you may 
call it, sluggishness of fibre, and coldness 
of constitution, with acescency, then the 
ferrum ammonicale, .or the tincture made 
from it, are of superior efficacy. Some of 


327 


the most fortunate recoveries which ever 
occurred under my own prescription, were _ 


effected by the ferrum ammonicale. In _ 


these cases, violent pain of the gastric re- 
gion, occasional jaundice, flatulent colic, 
shifting spasms of the whole abdomen, vast 
acidity, vertigo and head-ach, &c. were the 
predominant symptoms. Yet most of these 
cases were reduced to the last degree of 
debility before I firstsawthem. Certainly 
in stomach and bilious complaints, under 
extreme weakness, very unexpected returns 
to health sometimes take place, by a fortu- 
nate change of medicine: it must there- 
fore be a point of nice discrimination in the 
practice, to suit the preparation of this me- 
tal, to the exact disposition of the disease, 
and the idiosyncrasy of constitution. 
When I employ chalybeates of any de- 
scription, it is usual with me to precede 
their use, for a few days, with some prepa- 
ration of bark or of bitters; and to conti- 
nue them for two or three weeks with the 
ferruginous medicine. After a short inter. 
val, they may be again renewed, as circum. 
stances require. In this manner the two 
articles will effect what neither of them can 
do alone. But I am of opinion, with many 


325 


‘other physicians, that ferruginous medi- 
‘eines of all kinds, ought to be continued for 
a length of time, if full benefit is to be de- 
rived from them. Even where the good 
effects are early apparent, they must not be — 
too soon laid aside: from three to six 
months are often required to insure all the 
good that may be obtained. All the dif- 
ferent forms of iron are apt to make the 
bowels slow; which with some patients is 
a. constant objection to their employment. 
Even the sagacious Sydenham went so far 
as to say that laxatives ought not to be 
given during their use, as weakening their 
efficacy. It is however to be remembered, 
the diet of Englishmen in his days, was not 
so full and pampering as in the present 
times. This opinion of Sydenham has 
however had very little weight with me: I 
not only interpose laxatives during the use 
of iron, but sometimes order a smart purge 
at intervals ; and so far am I from thinking 
that it weakens the power of the other me- 
dicine, I have always thought it necessary 
for securing its best efficacy. The office 
of the intestines must be preserved regular 
in such patients, if any good is to be done, 
The kali tartar. is perhaps the best purga- 


329 


tive article at this season; andit may have 
some action on the chalybeate that we can- 
not well explain. If, however, our regi- 
men of air and exercise is strictly complied 
with, there will be the less necessity for 
forcing the bowels by medicine. , 

When iron is adapted to the case, the 
good effects are first observed, in the de- 
cline of the dyspeptic feelings: the calls 
of appetite become more frequent; the 
food digests with more ease, and acidity 
and flatulence cease to be painful. At 
this time the colour of the face improves, 
and grows florid ; and the skin from being 
sallow and dry, becomes better coloured, 
soft, and perspirable; the alvine faeces are 
commonly tinged during the use of iron. 
With these changes, strength of body and 
alacrity of mind soon appear. In delicate 
females, some weakening sexual symptoms 
quickly decline. 

The indisputable Peri effects, which 
have so often resulted from a trial of the 
Bath waters, in many varieties of these 
diseases, render it almost certain, that. 
these have been produced by the ferru- 
ginous principle which, they possess: but — 

which is only effectual at the fountain, as 


$30 


it soon precipitates, and cannot be preserv- 
ed. As we perceive this metal, when arti- 
ficially managed, to effect surprising chan- 
ges in the animal economy, it is but fair 
to allow, that much more may be expect- 
ed from the fine chemistry of nature. It 
is in vain to deny this, because the Bath 
water contains an extremely minute por- 
tion of iron, discovered on analysis: the 
effect must rest on the activity of the in- 
gredient, whether in the state of oxide or 
not, not on its quantity. ‘The sensible 
qualities of the water, when drank on the 
spot, are highly ferruginous; and the sti- 
mulant power is so perceptible, that in 
some habits of body, it is dangerous; in- 
ducing temporary fever and vertigo, and 
in some instances apoplexy. The torpid 
habit is, therefore, most relieved by them ; 
persons worn down by the diseases and 
excesses of tropical climates; and those 
debilitated by luxurious and high living at 
home. ‘The regular hours, correct man- 
ners, and elegant pleasures of the company, 
at this fashionable place of resort, become 
the best antidotes in life, against licentious 
drunkenness: no wonder then the ener-. 
vated debauchee should return healthy, 


$31 

and sometimes reformed, from a course of 
Bath waters. But when nervous, bilious, 

and dyspeptic complaints depend, as they - 
often do, on a gouty diathesis, Bath waters 

are a sovereign remedy. The energy 

. which they quickly impart to the chylo- 
poetic organs, is soon extended over the 
whole frame; and all those anomalous 

symptoms, usually called flying gout, seem 

to rally to a point, and cease, when the af- 
fection comes to be fixed in the extrem? 
ties. Jam thus induced to mention these 
salutary springs, under the method of treat- 
ment. 

With respect to the effects of the pre- 
parations of zinc, copper, silver, and lead, 
which have been tried in these diseases, 
excepting the first, I have little experience 
of them. I have frequently combined the 
oxide of zinc with carbonas ferri, aud other 
forms of iron, certainly with great éffect ; 
but not more than what is daily seen dt 
iron by itself. A farmer lately brought his 
son to me, who by the description, had 
been subject for six weeks to fits three or 
four times in the day, that were epileptic. 
He said he was returning at night to his 
father’s house, and in a thunder storm was 


struck down by lightning. He was an 
hour and half in getting home, though not 
more than a mile from the place; and be- 
ing insensible, he did not know where he 
was till morning. I found he had an here- 
ditary nervous temperament, and many 
severe dyspeptic symptoms. I ordered 
iron, zinc, and cinchona, in the form of 
electuary. After the first three doses, the 
convulsions ceased: but he took his medi- 
cine only a fortnight, and the fits returned. 
He refused to go on with it, and I saw him 
no more. In this case I was guided im the 
practice, by the dyspeptic stomach and 
predisposition. Of the cuprum, argentum, 
et plumbum, I have no experience. ‘The 
iron is my grand safety. I fancy the re- 
sources of materia medica are sufficiently 
abundant at present; the best physician 
must be he who can best select, and best 
prepare what we now possess. 

The cznchona, or Peruvian bark, stands 
foremost in our list of medicines taken from 
the vegetable kingdom. No article of ma- 
teria medica has acquired equal reputation ; 
but it is the fate of this medicine, to be 
often dispensed from the hands of ignorant 
people, by whom neither the disease, not 


33S 


the nature of the bark, are understood ; 
and it must: frequently do harm. Some 
attention ought certainly to be paid to the 
manner in which it can be exhibited with 
most effect. The powder has been said to 
be the most, effectual form; but there are 
many stomachs that cannot bear it in sub- 
stance. If, therefore, small doses do not 
sit easy, the infusion or decoction must be 
tried; and it is the best way to begin even 
these ia small quantity. To exhibit the 
bark in tincture in these complaints, is 
an inconsistency in practice: it is no 
doubt very grateful to some stomachs, 
but let us remember we are pouring into 

the body one of those narcotics, that is 
daily. bringing nervous afflictions upon 
thousands. It is, however, sometimes ne- 
cessary to add a small proportion, to pre- 
serve the watery preparation from spoiling, 
It frequently happens that bark acts purga- 
tively, and passes rapidly through the 
bowels ;' and laudanum has been the com. 
mon corrector of its purgative quality. 
But I object to opium in any form, in 
these diseases, unless we are compelled by 
urgent pain. I have always found creta 
preparata ox teste prepar. sufficient for this 


334 


purpose: for it would appear, that this: 
effect of bark is chiefly to be met with 
in those subject to great acidity. I 
even find it necessary to combine am- 
monia with bark; as both chalk, mag- 
nesia, and the fixed alkalies, are some- 
times incapable’ of subduing the vast 
acidity in the first passages; and I think 
this is frequently one of the best ad- 
ditions to the other. In my own practice, 
I have long considered these anti-acids, 
when well-timed, as the cause of my suc- 
cess. With respect to aromatics, as adju- 
vants to either the bark or bitters, their 
good effects are very doubtful with me. I 
wish to exclude from medicine, as well as 
diet, every thing that is warming; and I 
have a strong suspicion that aromatics in- 
vert the action of the fibres of the cardia 
or upper orifice, and thereby occasion 
belching, which is falsely said to be useful. 

When the extract of bark is genuine and — 
recently prepared, it will be found, in some 
cases, to succeed, where milder forms of 
the medicine have failed. I have given it 
in both pill and solution with great effect. 
I combine the pill with a third of gently 
calcined soda; and I think, by thus con- 
verting the extract into a kind of soap, the 


~ 


bs he Re 


solution of it in the stomach is more cer- 
tain and equal, and the effect much in- 
creased. This form of pill answers very 
well with all the bitter extracts, such as 
gentian, camomile, &c. The distilled wa- 
ter of peppermint forms a good vehicle for 
the solution, and the extract mixes perfect- 
ly, when a due quantity of kali prepar. is 
triturated with it. | 
When bark or bitters produce constipa- 
tion, laxatives may be aptly joined with 
them. I prefer rhubarb and jalap, though 
I have no objection to kali tartar. 
_ Next in power to cinchona I reckon an- 


 gustura bark. This article has not been 


long in use in this country ; it is certainly 
a valuable addition to materia medica. It 
is a rougher medicine than the bark, and 
ought to be given in smaller doses; and in 
those stomachs where it sits easy, it acts 
powerfully in subduing dyspeptic symp- 
toms. It may be therefore proper to begin 
with infusion and decoction, joining to 
them magnesia ust. and the alkalies, as in 
the pharmaceutical treatment of bark. 
Angustura, from its astringency, is more 
apt to bring on constipation than bark, so 
that some of the milder laxatives, such as 
Z 


336 

kali tartar. may be advantageously taken 
with it: and for this reason it is better 
adapted to those cases of nervous affection, 
where a laxity of bowels forms part of the 
disease. It is also an excellent anthelmin- 
tic, and may be given to children subject 
to worms, in the morning fasting, tritu- 
rated with magnesia and soda, preceded 
and followed by a brisk purge, as directed 
before. | . 

The geniian root is perhaps one of the 
best pure bitters in this class of diseases. 
The compound infusion of the Pharmacopeia 
Londinensis, vel Edin: is the most advan-. 
tageous form to employ it, to which may 
be added magnes. ust. carbonate of lime, - 
or the alkalies. When bitters are first tried, 
they are apt to sicken some stomachs; but 
this should be remedied by lessening the 
dose. It is true that a pill of extract of 
gentian and soda, as directed before, is 
more easily taken; but I think by this 
change we lose considerably in the value 
of the medicine. All bitters seem to act 
most powerfully when largely diffused ; 
where there is much acidity as the effect 
- of fermentation of the food, with great fla- 
tulence from the same cause, they produce 
very sudden relief. It is known that bit- 


337 


ters chemically check the fermentation by 
some antizymic power, and correct acidity 
by the same means. I never permit the 
use of any of them beyond sixteen days at 
a time. iii 

Colomba root has become a favourite mes 
dicine in these diseases, with a number of 
physicians in this country. It is certainly 
a very agreeable bitter, but I think in ef- 
fect less than gentian. It has been said to 
be particularly useful in bilious cases; but 
it does not appear, even in that trait of the 
nervous temperament, that it surpasses 
other bitters, however successfully given, 
where there is much uneasiness from in- 
digestion, acid eructations, and distention. 
‘I would recommend the same pharmaceu- 
tical treatment of colomba, as mentioned 
of gentian. Camomile, santonicum, worm- 
wood, quassia, &c. are all of the bitter 
-class, and resemble one another in virtue. 
It is certainly an object in practice to chuse 
the most powerful, which is gentian. A 
very valuable addition is now made to this 
class by the sake latifolia, which answers 
well in decoction, to be taken with any of 
the ferruginous preparations. Articles of 
_.the growth of our own soil ought to be en- 
Z Qs 


338 
couraged by all medical people. See an: 
ingenious Lssay on this medicine, by Mr 
Wilkinson, of Sunderland. 

2. I come now to the second head of 
tr eatment, viz. To palliate particular symp- 
toms. ‘This is sometimes. a difficult task, in 
these diseases ; as what tends most to give’ 
immediate ease, is what must mevitably 
have the effect of increasing the predispo- 
sition, and endangering the return of the 
complamt in a more aggravated form. 
Such I conceive to be the effects of ardent 
spirit, opium, and all ether narcotics. To- 
a person who reflects properly on the hor- 
rid effects ef dram-drinking, nothing can. 
be so disgusting as to see spirits swallowed 
man undiluted state. It is therefore my 
solemn opinion, that they ought never to 
be resorted to on trifling occasions; for 
when often repeated, even im the hands of 
the most cautious, they cannot fail of in-. 
juring the stomach. They moreover un- 
dermine: health by favouring the attach- 
ment to spiritous liquors. And such is 
the effect of opium, that many women sub- 
ject to hysteria, are very apt to be seized 
with a fit, whenever they take a dose of 
Jaudanum. I have known numberless in- 
stances of this kind; even epilepsy is 


339 


sometimes the consequence. Other wo- 
men I am acquainted with, who never can 
use opium in any form, without a temporary. 
delirium of the most disagreeable kind, 
and followed by sickness at stomach still 
more distressing. These extraordinary 
effects chiefly arise from great mobility of 
nervous system. ‘Too much caution can- 
not therefore be bestowed, to avoid tem- 
porary palliatives, that must ultimately pro- 
duce permanent pain. 

In the course of my passage through the 
world, 1 have at different times known 
some fashionable women in high life, of 
the nervous temperament, who had got in- 
to the baneful habit. of using opium as a 
cordial. Some of them were so familiar 
with it, as to carry a vial of laudanum con- 
stantly with them: .a long evening could 
not be passed abroad without retiring to 
repeat the dose. ‘The consequence of all 
this, as must. be readily imagined, was con- 
tinual bad health. Though none of these 
ladies were beyond, middle age, yet they 
had all the looks of old women. It must 
be a grievous stain on the medical charac- 
ter, if such habits took their beginning 
from any inconsiderate practice of a medi- 

Z3 


340 


cal attendant. Iam afraid the profession 
is not free from this imputation. A man 
who carries for ever on his face the sleek 
simper of artful insignificance ; who has a 
bow and a smile ready for every person 
that addresses him, will be very apt to ac- 
commodate his prescription to a fashionable 
folly. , 
The first step to health is to avoid the 
cause of disease. But there are some phy- 
sicians who contend that it is hurtful for 
habitual drunkards to leave off the bottle 
at on-e. Were the habit of dram-drinking 
a salutary practice, there might be some 
truth in this dictatorial precept. Put as 
ardent spirit is a strong poison to both soul 
and body, and forms no part of that nou- 
rishment which can be converted into ani- 
mal matter, I have never been able, after 
the most unwearied application in the ex- 
ercise of my profession, to find a single 
fact in support of a doctrine so destructive 
of moral and physical health. Whenever 
I have known habitual ebriety completely 
overcome, it has been where all species of 
liquors were given up in toto from the first. 
The delirium which succeeds the pa- 
roxysm of ebriety, is of two kinds, the 
phrenic and the nervous. ‘The first bears 


S41 


bleeding and other evacuating means: the 
last is to be treated by stimuli. But wine 
or spirits should never be used; as bring- 
ing up to recollection the pleasing sensa- 
tions which precede drunkenness, and con- 
necting those associations which it is the 
province of medicine to break asunder. 
When there is much watchfulness, and lit- 
tle inclination for sleep, in the nervous de- 
lirium, opium in due doses must be given. 
But nature in this case, as in many others, 
with nothing beyond the usual stimuli. 
which accompany temperance, recovers 
the powers of reason: the conscious plea- 
sure of resuming sober habits, as a mental 
excitement, must be one of the best on 
such occasions. The treatment of phreni- 
tis does not belong to this work. 

The most painful symptoms which attend 
nervous indisposition, are those cramps and— 
spasms which particularly affect the sto- 
mach, bowels, kidnies, ureters and bladder. 
In the female subject they are most apt to 
occur at the period; and often commence 
in an instant. Such women ought to be 
careful about the state of the bowels and 
stomach at that time, with respect to the 
kinds of food, and the alvine discharge ; so 

Z 4 


G42 
as to obviate acidity, flatulence, &c. the 
painful companions of that state. The 
amenorrhoea, or suppression, from what- 
ever cause, is also remarkable for the recur- 
rence of these symptoms, which are seldom 
fully relieved till regularity is restored. 
_ The condition of mind is worthy of great 
attention at that time; for every ruffle of 
passion creates mischief. 

The warm gums, as they have been call- 
ved, have been long in use for these trouble- 
some pains, and other nervous affections. 

They have been administered in the form 
-of pul and tincture; not without some 
confidence being given to their unpleasant 
flavour, a singular way of prejudging the 
effects of a medicine. In nothing have I 
been more disappointed, than in the foetid 
gums; and where they have been appa- 
‘rently useful, it was probably from the 
spirit taken with them. Like aromatics, 
they cause eructation, which is said to be 
a good. effect; though it is my opimion 
that they invert the fibres of the cardia, 
which is improper. Asafcetida is the fore- 
most of this list: but it ought to be re- 
membered, that its tincture in the modern 
pharmacopeias, is made with alcohol ; and 
.a tea-spoonful or ‘two, however diluted, 


343 


comes to be a tolerable dram. Here the 
-alliaceous flavour is very strong, and im- 
pregnates the breath., In the form of ene- 
ma, I have, however, known the asafcetida 
very useful. Castor ol. animale, and musk, 
are prescribed for the same purpose as asa- 
foetida: but though they may possess a 
stimulant power, it 1s very trifling and tran- 
-sitory ; they are moreover, apt to disorder 
the stomach, and bring on vomiting. Cam- 
phor and ammonia are of much greater 
value in nervous pains; and their effects 
more permanent. Aither is also a com- 
mon remedy, and when joined with opium 
and ammonia, of great service. ‘This is a 
judicious mode of exhibiting laudanum, 
for a smaller quantity is required than 
when given alone. Valerian is another of 
the foetid tribe, frequently ordered in large 
quantity, to the manifest injury of the sto- 
mach. I believe it to be a very imert sti- 
mulant. As opium is known to produce 
a slow state of bowels, ext. hyosciami ni- 
gvi, which has a laxative quality, was long 
ago recommended by Dr Whytt in these 
disorders. We certainly by this. change 
get quit of some of the bad effects of the 
opium ; buthyosciamus extract must be re- 


344 


eently prepared to be active; and there is 
some difficulty in ascertaining the dose at 
once. | | 
But when pain and restlessness become 
urgent, and when common harmless reme- 
dies fail, there is no resource besides opium. 
We know its sovereign powers as an ano- 
dyne, and we must compound with its bad 
effects in the best manner we can. We 
eught to combine it with such articles as 
co-operate with it, such as ether and am- 
monia, and the best vehicle is the mist. 
camphor of the dispensatory. But it often 
happens that the stomach rejects the liquid 
medicine, and the dry opium may be sub- 
‘stituted. I prefer the mode by enema ; 
and we may combine diluted spirit, or 
‘some of the stronger white wines with it, 
such as Madeira or Sherry, to great ad- 
vantage. J have never been disappointed 
with a clyster of this sort. This also in a 
great measure prevents sickness at stomach 
afterwards. | 

Some other symptoms which come on — 
suddenly in nervous cases, such as vertigo 
and head-ache, palpitation and faintness, do 
not admit of such easy relief. They com- 
monly attend some disordered state of the 


345 


stomach and bowels, and to these the me- 
dical regimen must be directed.* The 
hysteric and epileptic paroxysms, are con- 

vulsions that sometimes give alarm of their 


* Iwas lately consulted in a remarkable case of 
palpitation, in a girl of eight years old. The motion 
was so violent it could be seen at a considerable dis- 
tance, and it was constant, though somewhat increased 
by violent exercise. It appeared hopeless, from the 
idea of organic affection in the heart: but the girl was 
in general bad health, and of a strongly marked ner- 
vous temperament. I therefore directed my advice to 
correct the predisposition, which was chiefly to the re- 
lief of the stomach. The next time I saw her, the 
complexion was entirely changed; she was grown flo- 
rid and beautiful, and full in flesh. I now think, ex- 
treme irritability in the heart, with nervous weakness, 
was the whole disease. Similar cases have come under 
my observation, but none so violent as this: yet it is 
surprising to see to what a height this symptom will 
arise in female habits. An appeal to the ruling tem- 
perament must therefore be always a safe resource to 
the physician. On the same principles, I have just 
dismissed, cured, a case of epilepsy, in a youth of six- 
teen, an apprentice in this town, which threatened to 


be permanent. He had no fit after he began his me- 


dicines. But in order to make great changes in his 
modes of living, I ordered him to the country, with 
many alterations in diet, &c. during the treatment. 
This complaint, I since find, is very common among 
young men confined in shops, many of whom have. 
applied to me. 


346 

approach; but at other times their attack 
is instant. We certainly possess no medi- 
cine that either prevents or shortens these 
convulsions. Ihave seen epilepsy check- 
ed by the ligature round the thigh, when 
the sense of the aura, as it is called, was 
ascending the thigh: but in other cases 
the ligature did not check the aura, or 
prevent the fit. ‘The only treatment which 
I can recommend here, is the whole rules 
of prevention ; which improve the health, 
by abridging the predisposition. If, as I 
contend, epilepsy is the offspring of the 
nervous temperament, the force of that 
must be lessened ; and all cures of this con- 
vulsion by any particular article, can have 
no real existence. 

Acidity and flatulence being two of the 
most painful symptoms attending these 
diseases, the common correctors are well 
known: they ought to be obviated as much 
as possible by diet, which has been suffici- 
ently explained. The aerated soda water 
has now become a fashionable morning 
draught for the cure of acidity, after a de- 
bauch of wine. It is really to be met with 
in coffee-houses, as if it had never been ma- 
nufactured by the apothecary, and it is hu- 
milating to the physical vigor of Britons to 


347 
see such degeneracy ; a medicine convert- 
ed into a tavern beverage! But it is worth: 
mentioning, that a long use of this water 
burts the stomach and kidnies, and pro- 
duces very serious cutaneous diseases, so 
as to injure the skin. 

The disease called T'ympany, is a com- 
mon attendant of nervous temperament. I 
have lately had occasion to see some ex- 
traordinary cases, one of which was of long - 
standing. ‘The treatment here, has in it 
nothing different from our general means 
of prevention and cure. 

I must beg leave to caution persons sub- 
ject to nervous and stomach complaints, 
about repelling eruptions on the skin, espe- 
cially of the face, by any severe means, 
These cutaneous affections are commonly 
associated with the dyspeptic disposition, 
and when imprudently forced from the sur- 
face, never fail to aggravate the internal 
disordet. The best way is to leave them 
to the general treatment. It is true, they 
are particularly disagreeable to women 3. 
but as they are a part of the original mala- 
dy, so they usually yield with it. Of this 
patients should be duly warned ; for many 
constitutions have been ruined by the use 
of those articles vended under the specious 


548 


names of creams, dews, honeys, &c. all of 
which contain mercury, lead, or. some 
powerful astringent, that repels the pimples 
at an improper period. When stomach 
complaints have been rendered more se- 
vere by this cause, the first and best relief 
is to recal them to the skin. The warm 
bath, particularly of salt or sulphur water, 
is one of the most effectual means. But 
some medicines of the sudorific class, such 
as camphor and ammonia, joined to bark 
and iron, with warmer clothing, and exer- 
cise continued to the sweating stage, will 
also: have considerable effect in restoring 
the eruption. | 

Morning sickness and vertigo are com- 
mon with some of these patients. They 
are felt immediately on standing erect, and 
sometimes bring on retching and faintness. 
These symptoms are chiefly to be imputed 
to the empty state of the stomach from 
long fasting. They are best reliéved by 
some tasty food, such as cold ham, cold 
tongue, &c. taken before-getting up. ° But 
warm tinctures and medicines of any sort 
ought never to be resorted to. By way of 
preventing this sickness, I commonly. di- 
rect a small supper of meat at going to bed, 
so as to amuse digestion, and breakfast im- 


349 

mediately on rising. In the early months 
of pregnancy, morning sickness is a trouble- 
some attendant: but as the cause cannot 
be corrected immediately, the only allevia- 
tion is watching the state df the stomach 
and bowels. | 

Want of sleep or wakefulness, is one of 
the most distressing companions of nervous 
affections: indeed some persons appear 
scarcely to sleep at all. Cold ablution of 
the whole body a little before, or imme- 
diately on going to bed, is one of the best 
means which I know, to procure refreshing 
sleep in these situations. Some people 
find great advantage from what has been 
called the air-bath ; that is to get out of 
bed, and walk to and fro in the room, quite 
naked, for ten or fifteen minutes. After 
growing warm in bed, drowsiness and sleep 
soon succeed this kind of noct-ambulation. 
But sufficient bodily exercise, with mode- 
rate mental recreation, is certainly the most 
salutary and natural mode of inducing 
sound repose. I think opium can scarcely 
be admitted here. The general warm- 
bath, semicupium, and pediluvium, may 
also be tried. 

The external applications which are em- 
ployed in cramps and pains, consist of blis- 


350 


ters; camphorated oil; ammoniated oil ; 
vitriolic ether; saponaceous. liniment ; 
mustard flour; warm flannels; bottles and 
bladders of warm water; hot bricks; fric- 
tion; dry cupping, &c. The last remedy 
is often found useful, where there is much 
pain, with coldness of the part; as by fa- 
vouring the influx of blood, and thereby. 
exciting heat, it proves stimulant. With 
the same intention, electricity is often em- 
ployed to advantage; and to this we may 
now add galvanism. The warm bath may 
also be considered a valuable remedy in 
local pain, and may be practised with. the 
restrictions formerly delivered. The va- 
pour bath, in effect, comes near the nature 
of the warm bath: but pediluvium being 
easier accomplished, generally supercedes 
both the others. 

The strangury, and other fs ah of 
the urinary passages, are best relieved by . 
the fixed alkalies, ammonia, zether, and cam- 
phor, exhibited in aq. menth. pip. with the 
milder bitters, and large dilution. ‘These 
symptoms are apt to accompany excessive 
acidity and flatulence of the first passages. 
I have known cases of this kind becoming 
truly alarming, from the great delicacy of 
the patient, This symptom is peculiarly 


351 

- frequent with women subject to the hyste- 
ric affection: active exercise in the open 
air is the best preventive. I know not if 
mucilage can have any effect here, beyond 
dilution from the water taken with it ; pat 
even that may be useful. 

The dyspnea and asthma, or diseased re- 
spiration, which accompany these com- 
plaints, are often troublesome. The flatu- 
lence of stomach frequently impedes the 
motion of the lungs and diaphragma, me- 
chanically ; but when the bronchie and 
air-cells are contracted, so as to make the 
breast labour, and induce a wheezing of 
breath and change of voice, they must be 
considered as sympathetic affections. Se- 
veral of the stimuli, such as xether and am- 
monia, are sometimes exhibited with suc- 
cess; but I would recommend the treat. 
ment to be directed against the disor- 
dered condition of stomach; which, if 
properly directed, will seldom fail of giv- 
ing relief. 

It remains for me to consider the treat- 
ment of the bowels, so generally ‘slow in 
persons of the nervous temperament. To 
preserve the alvine discharge regular, is an 
indispensible part of our office. The sto- 

2A 


552 


mach and bowels being the chief seat of 
nervous and bilious complaints, much of 
the inconvenience and pain occasioned by 
constipation is to be referred to their weak- 
ened state; joined to the scanty or vitiat- 
ed bile which is sent from the liver, as that 
organ partakes by association and sympa- 
thy with the intestinal tube. By an inver- 
sion of the action of the muscular fibres, 
the peristaltic motion 1s interrupted ; is tor- 
pid in one place, and increased in another ; 
which irregularity compresses the flatu- 
lence into particular portions of the canal ; 
creates distention, uneasiness, and pain; 
and very frequently gives the evacuation 
much difference in form, consistence, and 
colour. ‘These appearances sometimes im- 
press the patients and nurses with extra- 
ordinary dread and apprehension of the 
disordered state of the bowels. While the 
nervous power of the intestines thus acts 
tumultuously, and in insulated portions, 
violent constrictions are apt to happen, 
which give birth to the symptoms of colic : 
and at other times the mind is more parti- 
cularly alienated, and what is called hypo- 
_chondriacism and vapours, are the conse- 
quence. 


353 


It is devoutly to be wished that the 
bowels could be kept in due action, by 
diet and exercise, without the aid of medi- 
cine: but so many causes conspire to de- 
feat this purpose, that nothing is so diffi- 
cult to be accomplished. Such patients 
have generally long accustomed themselves 
to some purgative medicine, often one 
of the most improper kind; and it is not 
easy to convince them they have been do- 
ing wrong. Among these habitual purges, 
calomel and aloes are the most frequent-in 
use. As these articles, as well as all other 
cathartics, are not directed against the ra- 
dical cause of the evil, they can be consi- 
dered only as giving temporary relief. 
But mercury in any form cannot be long 
used by persons of weak viscera without 
harm: and aloes is a medicine of the dras- 
tic kind, that produces great irritation in 
the rectum, tenesmus, and is apt to bring 
on procedentia ani, piles, and fistulous 
sores. But purgatives of every descrip- 
tion, when frequently resorted to, exhaust 
the stomach and bowels, and never fail in 
adding to the cause of the complaint. It 
must, therefore, be a great misfortune 

2A2 


354 


where the body is never moved without 
the aid of medicine. — 

Such a habit as this ought to be early 
guarded against, where the disposition to 
costiveness is hereditary. This can be 
done only by a‘ strict attention to that re- 
gimen, which is enforced in the former part 
of this work. Parents alone can effect 
this. It must be grateful to every medi- 
cal attendant of a family, when it ts known 
that a predisposition to these diseases pre- 
vails, to remind the father and mother of 
the necessary rules of prevention. Such 
an office will reflect great honour on thé 
professional character, as it will prove an 
honest disregard of emolument, when the 
welfare of their friends, and society itself, 
is so deeply concerned. Where medicines 
are required daily for children, in the state 
of slow bowels, the prospect in advanced 
age must be dreadful. 

The diet, in the constipated state of body, 
ought to consist of a large proportion of 
fluid aliment ; in severe cases it ought to 
be entirely of this kind, with vegetables 
easy of solution. What solid butcher-meat 
is taken, must be masticated slowly before 
swallowed, which will promote the flow of 


355 


saliva, assist its comminution in the sto- 
mach, and facilitate its passage onwards. 
I am well aware that very great obstacles 
will be opposed to. these precepts: some 
will speak of their dislike to broths; others 
that soup disagrees with them; some will 
be afraid of borborrigmi, and others of 
their shape. But for the last two objec- 
tions, exercise, not physic, is a certain 
eure; and with respect to the two former, 
if health is of so little moment that no 
pleasure is to be sacrificed for it, things 
must remain as they are. The aoe mas of 
bread to be eaten must be very small ; 
pudding where flour forms a part, can be 
admitted ; custards and such like are al- 
lowed: all pastry is excluded ; and all the 
lecumina, such as peas and beans, are for- 
bidden. ‘These restrictions are directed, 
because whatever increases the bulk of the 
foecal mass, imposes a heavier load on the 
peristaltic motion of the intestines, and 
consequently a slower action. Where fruit 
AgTECS, it may be indulged in ad libitum, 
All vinous and spiritous liquors are to be 
given up, in conditions of torpid bowels : 
they all act by exciting the absorbents in 

the stomach and intestines; and thus de- 
; 2ZAS 


356 
prive the refuse of chylification of that 
fluid that makes it pass equally and easily 
along. 

We ought to begin with the milder laxa- 
tives first, and so ascend to the more ac- 
tive; to reap full advantage they must also 
be often changed. ‘The gentlest are man- 
na; tamarind infusion ; electuary of senna ; 
senna; rhubarb; tartarized kali; jalap; 
aloes; scammony; jalap and one tenth of 
calomel ; scammony and one tenth of ca- 
lomel, &c. | 

It is sometimes observed, that nervous 
and bilious people grow corpulent and full : 
this is generally owing to rich food and in- 
dolence; and it is a bad trait of the tem- — 
perament. Such persons, however, never 
bear bleeding well, even under some appa- 
rently inflammatory disposition. The best 
plan here, is to reduce the body by low 
living and exercise, if these can be accom- 
plished. But nervous persons are the most 
intractable of all good livers, and have less 
resolution to abridge their enjoyments. 
Fhey not only indulge in large quantity, 
but that is commonly seasoned to the 
highest degree of stimulus. For my own 
part I would sooner encounter the preju- 


357 


dices of any sick man, rather than those of 
a nervous glutton. Every surfeit brings 
additional trouble to the physician; and 
he will often hear the appetite complained 
of, when a single dinner ought to have 
made three. Nothing stands more in the 
way of a regular medical discipline than 
errors of this kind, and it is necessary to 
observe a sharp sighted jealousy over 
them. 


met SYN YR NW oe 


When, as has often happened, I have 
been consulted for cases, that seemed be- 
yond the reach of medical assistance, I 
have seen great advantage obtained by di- 
recting the treatment solely against the 
nervous predisposition. ‘This has frequent- 
ly happened in those desperate afflictions, 
the cancerous uterus and mamme; and I 
have sometimes thought, had the rules of 
practice been tried sooner, even in such si- 
tuations a cure might have been effected. 
A perfect knowledge of the temperament, 
in my opinion, forms the only basis for a 
successful treatment of all nervous and 

2A 4 


358 


pilious diseases so called; it leads us to, 
the fountain head; unfolds the source 
whence the evils flow, and puts us in 
possession of the only means for preven- 
tion and cure. 


APPENDIX, 


Contuining some remarks on stomach affections, gout 
and on the disease commonly called Hyprocr- 
pHatus Acutus, or * Internal Dropsy of the 
Brain.” 


Ix the earliest ages of medicine, and 
down to the present times, there seems to 
have been a prevailing wish among physi- 
cians, to fix on some general condition of 
body, as giving birth to a particular dis- 
ease; or to a peculiar train of morbid phe- 
nomena. ‘The terms moist and dry; cold 
and hot; phlegm, salt or sulphur; acid 
and alkaline; phlegmatic, sanguineous, 
atrabilious, melancholic, &c. are used, as 
denoting the deficiency, or excess, of some 
quality, principle, or humour, in the hu- 
man. body, on which depends the original 


360 

and certain character of a diseased state. 
A more perfect knowledge of the nervous 
system, as the fountain of sense and mo- 
tion, has introduced a more correct patho- 
logy ; hence we are enabled to explain 
the causes of disease, and the effects of 
remedies, with greater certainty. But till 
the laws of our sentient system became 
sufficiently known, the class of diseases 
treated of in this work, were scarcely at- 
tended to. If there is ever to be found 
in the practice of medicine, a sure conduct- — 
ing principle, it is to be derived from this 
source, as it unites the effect of both men- 
tal and corporeal causes on the human 
frame. ‘This, in fact, is nothing more than | 
what in common language is called the 
knowledge of the patient’s constitution : that 
is, the discovery of the peculiar tempera- 
ment, or idiosyncrasy of the sick person. 

It was on these principles, that this work 
was undertaken. And with a view to fur- 
nish the history of the Nervous TemprEra- 
MENT with every fact necessary for its il- 
lustration, I have analized the condition of 
savage and civilized society; which lays 
the foundation for the superstructure. In 
the one stage of society, nervous diseases 


— 


361 

have not been known; and in proportion 
to the advanced stage of the other, they 
will be found to prevail; and to increase 
and extend as their causes become gene- 
ral. This history, taken from actual ob- 
servation among mankind, if it is correct, 
as I conceive it to be, will give the appli- 
cation of the doctrine to the treatment and 
cure, a decided superiority over all its pre- 
decessors. ‘This has been daily exemplifi- 
ed in the practice. For instance, when 
consulted by a delicate female, for various 
sexual complaints, indigestion, and many 
nervous ailments, if I find she is descend- 
ed from gouty parents, I shall soon learn, 
that she possesses the character of the ner- 
vous temperament, in an exquisite degree. 
The treatment, therefore, must turn upon 
correcting those causes which act on the 
predisposition; such as passions of the 
mind, diet, air, exercise, &c. and along 
with these the use of such medicines as 
tend directly to strengthen the digestive 
powers, and to soothe the nervous influ- 
ence, which, by sympathy, is extended 
over all the suffering organs. 

- But an appeal to the ruling temperament 
is of still more value in the prevention of 


¢ 


$62 


these diseases, which depend on a pecu- 
liar trait of constitution. As a habit of 
body once confirmed, is difficult to be 
changed in a grown-up person; so this 
knowledge teaches us to begin in infancy, 
with our rules for meliorating the general 
frame: and if we cannot entirely supplant 
natural infirmities, we at least lessen them. 
The gout is one of the most painful 
maladies incident to human life: and as 
the subjects of it are commonly. persons. 
of fortune, or of better condition, so a 
great reward has been held out to the phy- 
sician who shall devise a successful plan of 
cure. This appears to be the very reason — 
why more pretended remedies have been 
published for gout, in different ages, than for 
any other disease. but it has so happened 
that these, panacea have never come from 
the hands of any eminent physician; but 
from empirics of the worst description. 
The intelligent medical philosopher will 
always be diffident of the powers of his 
art, in the cure of arthritis; because he 
knows it to be a disease. of the original, or 
acquired temperament: and that though 
it may now and then be expelled by some 
-active agent, it will again recur; for the 


5 


363 
action of remedies can only last for a given 
period: they cannot change the whole 
frame by their operation. This has been 
the constant tenor of all popular medicines 
for gout; and it will continue to be the 
fate with all that are yet to come. The 
trials of the French nostrum called L’ Eau 
Medicinale ad’ Husson, which have been 
recently made in England, amply confirm 
what [have just said. ‘This compound acts 
as a most violent purgative, causing such 
dejections by stool, as are produced by no 
other article. But from what I have seen 
and known of its operation, I am of opi- 
nion, that it is the last medicine that ought 
to be tried in a gouty constitution: indeed 
its credit can only remain in the hands of 
desperate adventurers. 

But it is not to gout only, that this mode 
of reasoning applies: it extends to all 
the diseases of the temperament. One 
train of symptoms may disappear for a 
time ; but unless something has been done 
by way of prevention, another concourse of 
complaints will succeed, as certainly de- 
pending on the original predisposition, as 
the preceding. It wassaid the “ Portland 
Powder,” changed the gout to apoplexy, 


364 


palsy and dropsy. ‘This could not be call- 
ed acure: it only aggravated the tempe- 
rament, and induced a worse disease. I 
have known a severe degree of intoxica- 
tion, from wine and ardent spirit, supplant 
gout, almost instantly. But what was the 
consequence? Painful nervous and stomach 
affections soon supervened ; and in their 
turn were to be expelled by the same 
means, till the constitution was destroyed ; 
and life terminated at 36, which under 
other circumstances, might have been pro- 
longed to 70. The Portland Powder was 
composed of strong bitters, and its use di- 
rected for the space of twelve months. In 
my own practice I have never seen any 
harm from bitters ; because I employ them 
in a way to obtain all their good effects, 
and to guard against their hurtful qualities. 
When judiciously combined, occasionally 
suspended, and modified in prescription, 
and alternated with other articles, they be- 
come the most valuable class of medicines 
in these diseases. The exhibition of Peru- 
vian bark, and many other articles of mate- 
ria medica, must be attended to in this — 
manner, if we are to obtain all the benefit 
they are capable of producing. I am of 


365 


opinion, that the action of these medicines 
begins on the nerves of the stomach: for 
if their pharmaceutical treatment is adapt- 
ed to the case, we soon find the digestion 
improve, the bowels become regular, the 
bile flow in due quantity, the urine change 
to a more healthful aspect and freely 
voided, head-aches subside, the breathing 
becomes soft, the skin open, the sleep 
sound and refreshing; and with these, the 
mind grows active, and the spirits rise. 
An advance to this degree of improve- 
ment, will often indicate the use of iron 
to confirm health: and its various forms 
require as much care and discernment in 
the selection, as the other articles: for 
one of its preparations may do harm, when 
another will accomplish the cure. 

The cure of chronic diseases, I believe, 
is most often successful, if we can improve 
the condition of the stomach. For its 
sympathy with the nervous system in ge- 
neral, and all important organs of the body, 
is so great, that the first step to health, is 
growing appetite and easy digestion. In 
old age, in particular, this fact is confirmed 
by daily observation. When the appetite 
of an aged person fails, and the bulk of the 


366 


body shrinks, or should emaciation to a 
certain degree take place, such a state of 
health is not improved without difficulty : 
but the best plan will be to support the 
digestive powers, by exciting desire for 
food ; thus affording strength and nourish- 
ment to the body, and leaving the issue to 
nature. | 

The merit of this work, as a “ Virw or 
tHe Nervous TEMPERAMENT,” consists in 
the confidence which is held out by rules 
of prevention ; as the precepts here deliver- 
ed, come home to the feelings of every 
sufferer, and are intelligible to every read- 
er. I well know the fallibility of all medi- 
cal reasoning on the cure of diseases. We 
may command the resources, but who 
among physicians, can secure the success 
of his art? 


In the preceding part of this View, I 
have cursorily mentioned the disease called 


HYDROCEPHALUS ACUTUS 3 
Or, Internal Dropsy of the Brain. 


A disease under this designation has 
been treated by different physicians, for 


367 


the last sixty years. But though its his- 
tory has been considerably enlarged, the 
exact condition of body, and a method of 
cure deduced therefrom, are still desiderata 
in the healing art. These will at once be 
my apology for introducing the subject 
into a view of the nervous temperament. 

The most prevailing opinion at present 
is, that it occurs in the scrophulous habit. 
But even if this were admitted, it throws 
no light on the production, or cure, of the 
malady. The effusion of a fluid, resem- 
bling that of other dropsies, into the ven- 
tricles of the brain, has no analogy with 
the general appearance of scrophula; and 
the symptoms attending have still less. 
That the disease has been often seen in 
scrophulous families, will be allowed: but 
that it is confined to this habit of body, I 
am not disposed to admit. _ 

It is much to be regretted, that the 
earlier writers on the disease, should ever 
have called it by the name of dropsy. The 
incurable nature of it was at once assented 
to by some, because absorbent vessels had 
never been discovered in the brain, and 
therefore the effused fluid could not be 
taken up. But, in the progress of inquiry, 

2B 


368 

it has been confirmed by dissection, that 
the same concourse of symptoms has been 
known, where no lymph was found in the 
ventricles after death. And again, the 
ventricles have been found inundated ; and 
yet the fatal disease had exhibited none of 
the characteristics of hydrocephalus. These 
facts soon gave birth to doubts on the hy- 
dropic affection being the radical cause of 
the phenomena, and increased action of 
the vascular system within the cranium, 
with a tendency to inflammation in the 
sensorium itself, was next resorted to as 
the cause. This doctrine too has only 
been partially supported: and later writers 
' would seem to attribute the whole to some 
derangement in the stomach, liver, and 
bowels. 

Ever since I considered myself capable 
of thinking impartially on medical subjects, 
Thave been dissatisfied with the opinions 
and practice of physicians in this disease ; 
and the experience of every case which 
has come under my care for the last four- 
teen years, has more and more confirmed 
ime in the opinion that the whole pheno- 
mena, from first to last, are purely ner- 
vous symptoms; and to be traced to that 


« 
$69 
state of predisposition, to which I have 
given the title of nervous temperament. 
Hydrocephalus internus has been classed 
as an acute disease, in opposition to the 
-more chronic form, where the bulk of the 
head becomes enormous from the gaping 
of the sutures, and the lymph being effused 
on the surface of the brain. If the term — 
acute is to be considered correct, because 
it commences with a febrile accession, I 
think very differently. The tremors, shi- 
verings, increased heat, and quick pulse, to 
be met with here, are no more febrile symp- 
toms than where they appear in other ner- 
vous affections. They want all the regula- 
rity, which strictly speaking, constitutes a 
febrile paroxysm: they occur at all times 
of the day and night, and their duration is 
uncertain. The infant labouring under 
the external form of hydrocephalus, seldom 
feels much uneasiness, and nervous symp- 
toms, such as convulsions, do not often ap- 
pear till near the close of the scene, and 
sometimes not even then. This is a proof 
that the mere bulk of water compressing 
the sensorium, has but a small share in 
producing violent movements of the ner- 
ZB2 


370 


vous power, without the aid of predisposi- 
tion. 

This disease is chiefly known in infancy. 
The exceptions to this general rule are 
few. The period of infancy is marked by 
great irritability of the nervous system ; 
much mobility of muscle; quick circula- 
tion of bloed ; and:a disposition to diseases 
of the alimentary | canal, and subservient 
viscera. All these are parts of a nervous 
temperament; which, if derived from fa- 
ther or mother, will, even at this period of 
life, give a more decided character to the 
predisposition. 

The disease has been observed to run in 
families. This is a well known. fact; be- 
cause more than one child have died of 
the complaint. I have known many in- 
stances of this kind myself,, Here is a 
strong proof. of an hereditary disposition : 
in all these cases, there was a nervous tem- 
perament on either, the father or mother’s 
side ; and in some of them, on both sides. 
The children of such parents die in great 
numbers in infancy + : they are, prone to 
convulsions; to violent attacks in, the sto- 
mach and bowels ; ; and often. die sud- 
denly without much previous indisposi- 


371 


tion. . Wherever this temperament 1S 
found, there may be observed, in the 
mind, rapid transitions of thought; quick 
and irritable passions: and in the body a 
peculiar tendency to disease in the first 
nesinges: from slight causes. | 

Dr Quin, in his inaugural dissertation, de 
hydrocephalo, Edin. 1777, is the first who 
speaks of inflammation in the brain being 
the precursor of the disease. Other phy- 
sicians since that period, have supported 
that opinion: but my own experience af- 
fords a very different result; and it is well 
known, that such affections of the diges- 
tive organs as accompany this ne 
are not seen in phrenitis. 

My attention to this disease, was first 
excited by a child of about three years old, 
the son of my servant, fourteen years ago. 
During my attendance, I was seized with 
a severe pectoral complaint, from exposure 
to cold in boats, that confined me to my 
room for some days. Inthe mean time, all 
the symptoms of extreme danger appeared 
in the boy, and no hope remained. ‘The 
squinting to an unusual degree, the dilated 
pupil, one eye fixed, convulsions, &c. in- 
dicated approaching death. I desired the 

2B 3 


372 


father to request the attendance of one of 
my friends in Plymouth dock, who visited 
the child, and considered it past all reco- 
very ; and therefore ordered nothing. ‘Two 
days after this I was able to quit the house: 

the child was still alive, and could swallow 
a little wine and water. I proceeded in 
the treatment with which I had begun: the 
bowels were again briskly emptied by rhu- 
barb and magnesia: and followed up by 
bark and magnesia, &c, in the most suit- 
able forms. The condition of the child 
was quickly changed for the better, and he 
recovered. It may be said, that in this 
case, there was no effusion in the brain, 
and therefore recovery took place. But if 
such a mode of reasoning is to be admit- 
ted here, it must hold good in all other dis- 
eases where dangeris apparent; and the 
whole practice of physic be of very nega- 
tive utility. My indications of cure from 
the first, were directed solely against the 
symptoms of uneasiness in the first pas- 
sages, without the least reference to the 
head-ache, or the state of the pulse. I 
knew the father to possess the nervous 
character in a high degree; and I con- 


378 


cluded, this also was the temperament of 
the son. | 

I am aware it may be argued, that 
worms might produce all these symptoms. 
But then will not this go a great way to 
decide the question, namely, that the 
symptoms of hydrocephalus internus are ex- 
actly the same, in every stage, with disor- 
ders of the alimentary canal. Worms, and 
other nervous affections, produce head- 
aches much like this disease: and strangury 
so called, is a common attendant of the 
whole. From the general appearances of 
the brain in infancy, as noted by anato- 
mists, there is some reason for believing, 
that effusion is more common, in many 
diseases of that age, than has been usually 
thought by physicians. The fluid found 
here, I therefore consider as invariably 
the effect, not the cause of indisposition. 

It is certain that this disease is of more 
frequent occurence than in former times: 
and this, [ consider some additional proof 
of the charactet which I wish to assign it. 
If therefore there is any validity in my argu- 
ments, it will continue to increase; and 
will keep pace with the increasing preva- 
Jence of nervous disorders. 

ZB 4 


374 


Since [ last resided in Newcastle, I have 
seen seven fatal cases of the disease in 
question. These were all in the stage of 
danger when I was called in: and in the 
whole number, I was satisfied from my in- 
quiries, that they belonged to families 
strongly marked by the nervous character. 

Within the last twelve months, I have 
_been consulted for five cases in the early 
stage of the complaint, that appeared to 
me as strongly indicating hydrocephalus 
internus, as were ever mentioned by 
writers. Some of the number exhibited 
signs of danger, such as the frequent con- 
vulsions, the insensible pupil, and one of 
them a partial strabismus. They all recover- 
ed, after a practice founded on the doctrine 
given in these pages. I have at present a 
boy of nine years of age, that I now consi- 
der convalescent, after having had many 
fits of general convulsions. . In these cases 
too, I have been satisfied the predisposition 
was purely nervous. 

The method of treatment in this com- 
plaint, is a strong proof of the presumption 
and imbecility of medical reasoning on a 
doubtful disease. In the practice of some, 
is to be seen a compleat course or routine 


375 


of the whole materia medica: and in a few 
cases, it is difficult to say, whether the dis- 
ease, or the medicines given, destroyed the 
infant. A melancholy instance of this 
kind is recorded in a popular medical jour- 
nal of the present day, from the West In- 
dies, where mercury was exhibited by a 
near connection of the patient. 

I admit with others, the propriety of ac- 
tive purges in this disease, and even at 
times, one of mercury. ‘The bowels, it is 
allowed, are loaded with offensive matter 
that must be evacuated: but the task of 
medicine does not end here. The charac- 
ter of these nervous affections is remarka- 
ble for the quick migration, if I may so call 
it, from one organ to another, of the dis- 
eased feeling. Itis in the head, face, eyes, 
ears, throat, lungs, heart, diaphragm, sto- 
mach, liver and ducts, intestines, kidnies, 
ureters, bladder, sexual organs, and every 
muscle, perhaps, in the space of a few 
hours ; so exquisite is the sympathy, so ra- 
pid the transitions. Yet in the whole of 
these changes and migrations, from organ 
to organ, the radical disease is still the 
same: and it exists in the nervous system 
as the fountain of sensation. When there- 


376 


fore, the bowels are loaded with offensive 
matter ; the contents of the stomach viti- 
ated by depraved gastric juice and mucus ; 
the liver and ducts impacted with retained 
and inspissated bile; what is to be consi- 
dered as the cause of all these derange- 
ments, but a diseased feeling, or the absence 
of healthful action and sensation, in the 
primary ruling power, or nervous influence 
of the different organs? A brisk purge will 
for the time carry off this colluvies: but if 
vou do not correct the diseased energy of 
the nerve, you must purge again: but take 
care that your active purges do not sweep 
life away with them. 

Here is the point in practice, in which 
I conceive I differ from those physicians 
who contend for a purgative plan of cure, 
and nothing beyond it. The purpose of 
this doctrine of temperament, is to look to 
the bottom. To the physician who has 
seen these affections on a large scale, must 
have often been noted the numerous pain- 
ful symptoms which arise from acidity of 
stomach. ‘This acidity is not to be consi- 
dered as only the relict of imperfect diges- 
tion, and a fermentative process in the 
food: it is connected with a diseased con- 


~ ike 


377 


dition of the glands and follicles which se- 
parate gastric juice and mucus ; and these 
parts as pouring out depraved fluids, to be 
cured, must be changed in their action. 
The same mode of reasoning, applies to the 
system of the liver: first, let its ducts be 
emulged by an active purgative ; and then 
correct the condition of the hepatic sys- 
tem, by medicines which act immediately 
on the stomach, and which by sympathy 
will be soon extended to the liver. In the 
execution of this part of practice, I have 
often seen great mistakes committed. In 
people called bilious, a long course of mer- 
curial purgatives, will so derange the diffe- 
rent fluids poured into the alimentary ca- 
nal, that they will turn to a black and 
pitchy looking substance, which too often 
encourages a repetition of the purge; 
whereas, a medicine directed to the sym- 
pathising nerves of the stomach would 
soon put all to rights. Instances of this 
kind, which I have seen, are innumerable. 
Here the effect was taken for the cause; 
and an effort of cure converted into an en- 
gine of torture, and perhaps of death. 

In this attempt to engraft the pathology 
of hydrocephalus internus on the nervous 


378 

system directly, I feel myself justified by 
observations made in a great variety of 
cases. ‘The disease itself, is still consider- 
ed a dangerous one; and the opinions of 
physicians on its nature and treatment, are 
alike fluctuating and uncertain. Should 
these animadversions contribute to clear 
the doubts. which obscure the proximate 
cause, and assist in furnishing rules for a 
more successful method. of cure, they will 
be matter of great satisfaction to me... 


¥ey FEND Be 


Newcastle : 
Printed by Edw. Walker. 


BOOKS 


Lately published by the same Author, and sold by 
. Longman and Co. 


1. 
MEDICINA NAUTICA: 
AN ESSAY ON THE DISEASES OF SEAMEN, 
COMPREHENDING THE HISTORY OF HEALTH IN THE 
GRAND FLEET, FROM 1793 To 1802. 


3 VOLS, 23s, SECOND EDITION. 


Il. 
OBSERVATIONS ON SCURVY, 
WITH A NEW CHEMICAL DOCTRINE OF THAT DISEASE. 


SECOND EDITION, 5s. 


III. 
MEDICAL AND CHEMICAL ESSAYS. 


SECOND EDITION, 4s. 


IV. 
SUSPIRIA OCEANIT: 


A MONODY 
ON THE DEATH OF ADMIRAL EARL HOWE, K. G. 2s. 
Vv. 
AN ESSAY, 
MEDICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, AND CHEMICAL, 


ON DRUNKENNESS, 


AND ITS EFFECTS ON THE HUMAN BODY 5 


BEING A COMMENTARY ON THE AUTHOR’S INAUGURAL 
DISSERTATION, 


PUBLISHED AT EDINBURGH, IN 178% 
FOURTH FDITION, 65, 


‘ A ds Se oh 
aE ORET 


KOR 


eae: ee 


ae " SEG 


wh? 


H ane SY deee.. ‘ : 
rstaa ante o. 


Bf ave 


a) | 7) 2 _ } . y, 
7 u 


- 
i 


¥ ,, ie i : 
r i. i a wu i ' } 7 1 A 
: ne | | 


oe 


ua 


, 
' Hsin rs 
pe ah 
ol Me : 


3 
Reena ties 


BPS eh vA, J . 
eit et f 
. ae % 7“ 
pitas ¥, r 4 ‘ 
ith 2 ‘ mt te , 
. , j vee fe ‘ 
3 : 4 Pa! ae put 
/ “4 a 
oe ad , 
iearare: Laney , - Fs 
etarttststates 333 ae sai ‘ 
. * sh {rin f* " 
Cae ets 4 Ny e f 
‘ ; 
7 , a 
“ f Pa 
Fee fs * - 
+ ’. f 
+ erty “ s, ne A 
etrstede, : arta ’ 
eee Smite ee 
* or _ J 
- a a% * 
ioee t ' { , 
Afiete tisterere e Cae F 
Gray Grapgcrnnc sear testis , : Mar ets 
5 Gat vet AM ? pi ee 
ican ; 2 
‘ - “ m a, af 
| ~ 
OE Po 98 the ee be “ t - . 
Te od G4 OSE Seyret aes > Y f - 
eteleTAl. skater 5 > 4 . " 
eae oe ; 
us Setetets : « 
iS tate ach ; 
Creer eed te 
© sehen * . 
* se ‘ r 4 i 
Pet oe eta . 
aetbratae ‘ : YY 
ehsphe aH 
raretteecedet rate. NN, Pie tian’ 
ru , 6. : 
Hae ; ost 5 a ve : 
Sibebee A ; 
Let tet or acy 7 . * F ' 
ee ate alae seers aT : P 
Coe 6 ore se AN oitee ‘ 
Ges me ; 
tt, BT PE AEG Ae "6 f 
Ae iss ears , ‘ a> 
ese 9 2gtse Sie 6tdce ster 
sent esis care toes 
ft eet o 2 
28 it 1eista%e ‘ P red 
peieasescee pA 
ees 
sgh 
(ee. 
oe cA 
Seat Ss ers d 
iH » 2 ; k 
Boat sty re ey % 
eps at , 3 
a 4 : ig 
: SHULT Matt ‘ 
eatee SEES ryt Potts : . ash M -{ 
eee verte vere) Ogu ne atat PPP eet ORE TTS FO ORE ST ot et Oda ae ars ‘ teres? : 
Lseesis tig ssecesetstatanecest tect Hes tccssreio Te Se tatatat ge ocateserb tht ae : : : 
ee PON oe | + \ mateo. ., 3 ae oy “Ral: 
Te ht : Pe ey ; Ch ARNE nt 
Ms thteetatieassieeentas ast ; coe’ 
toes ert yr . ’ ' 
Hare st urge othe Hs a5 ‘ 
ate sey . tes 4 
" spe Sah oa . 
aetetaray ars “0 
2. Otic ‘ 
‘* aa ar oe ot we eT IE Hot ITS : 
te mises se Sat eacia sts aitig he 
Jee wits ponuT cphatet as " ; 
: CHU Yi tat We ere ot Jee at wd . 
aie Beets 7a fea bots rate statics ata at 7 : 
Sfestaesatihs SSPE TUN DSP aR HTS 
Ceo ieep ats epinletaes) Me5t 4S State Hise yee he 
pe siauthetantnnsenintacnn Rese ait 
Dieroerett) Siebel teh Lis! dieieeteseatee 
Saieitars a Reena mien at a Saath, Preveysibsi reat 
Raises Cine tacateteatitecoststisytoeatacetite 
Sete eats sapied Baers Mt rt tae5! Fatatoe st ot 
rs SNM ote eecotsentsene ese HR TE . sash rare ae 
a Set Me YE oe SEE Set ae ee Ne SE y ae aga lee he Haare KAY 
bese ae Seat SESE PETE IE Me Ye ete Weve Brett: oehhaie ‘ 
eC a ; haiasttatat ae, + aiar ‘ 
GOOG) 4 A ErtseseoesenLe} tye te 
Seba atelat as scatadatasitataistacale cytes itaeat Hirst tat 
* * ae Cor ot ritataee 
ss Peniitessieees Reo esata 
. Pye eed ae i 4 
Steere ieve inner Aestitien 
3, nti Peles * ee setate 
rues stele attyepateee Bt 
peeete x eapieatat 
Reeves ii 
ete ‘ 
$} Bete 
eon as 
ie 
a us an 
: set 


elk, 
2523) 


a 
a tatete 
ity) oe Baer 

atseree (thet 

as ate 

aes . . a 7 

BouU * aaa 
; te x ate sits ste 

sdebadtdeatsteens atheist 


et aest 


CeeCiye 

ayeieyes eae 

Diana 
pees mitten 
PRRTeM HRN 

2 a 93 

es 


035 


het 
+ yeh 
ihetace 


‘* ° ve ‘ 
+ arte 

Biatatararstaeie. 

meet 


+.* - 
Pate tatets +e 
See ereretig) vast 
Catal Feta) 
praththeasetss * 
bistalsterertyestst 


eteas ‘ 
Teles eiasd tals arsterseataratate cat 
Ha Mn RO RH 
, elspa eed etataritutat 
+8 ‘ eines titelesates #453 


