K 


h  I'   '^^ 


*'A 


EX  LIBRIS 
HENRY  ROUSE  VIETS 


<?^  Harvard  Medical  Library 
in  the  Francis  A.  Countwav 
Library  of  Medicine  ^Xoston 


VERITAtEM  PER  MEDICIXAM  QUyCRAMUS 


OBSERVATIONS 

O  N    T  H  E 
•NATURE,   CAUSES,   and    CURE 

Of  thofc  Disorders  which  have  been  commonlv  called 

NERVOUS,  HYPOCHONDRIAC, 
or  HYSTERIC: 

To  which  are  prefixed  feme  Remarks  on  the 
Sympathy  of  the  Nerves, 

B  V 

ROBERT   WHYTT,   M.  D.  F.  R.  S. 

Late  Phyfician  to  his  Majefty,  Prefident  of  the  Royal 
College  of  Phyficians,  and  ProfefTor  of  Medicine  in 
the  Univerfity  of  Edinburgh, 

^vii.'KcL^ka,  'UTolflcc  Hippocrat.  de  aliment.  §  4. 

The  THIRD  EDITION, 


EDINBURGH: 

?iinted  for  T.  Becket,  and  P.  A.  De  Honbt>  London; 
and  J.  Balfour,  Edinburgh, 

M,DCC,LXVn. 


Ill 


PREFACE. 

THE  diforders  which  are  the  fubjec^ 
of  the  following  obfervations,  have 
been  treated  of  by  authors  under  the 
names  of  flatulent,  fpafmodic,  hypochon- 
driac, or  hyfleric*  Of  late,  they  have  al- 
fo  got  the  name  of  Nervous;  which  ap- 
pellation having  been  commonly  given  to 
many  fymptoms  feemingly  different,  and 
very  obfcure  in  their  nature,  has  often  made 
it  to  be  faid,  that  phyficians  have  beftow- 
ed.  the  Gharad:er  of  nervous  on  all  thofe 
diforders  whofe  nature  and  caufes  they 
were'  ignorant  of.  To  wipe  off  this  re- 
proach, and,  at  the  fame  time,  to  throw 
fome  light  on  nervous,  hypochondriac,  and 
hyfteric  complaints,  is  the  delign  of  the 
following  obfervations ;  which  are  alfo  in- 
tended to  fhew,  how  far  the  principles  laid 
down  in  my  Effay  on  the  vital  and  other 
Involuntary  motions ,  of  animals  may  be  of 
a  2  ufe 


lY  P  R  E  F   A  C  Ec 

life  in  explaining  tlie  nature  of  feveral  dif- 
eafes^  and  confequently  in  leading  to  the 
nicft  proper  method  of  cure  *. 

Since,  in  almolt  every  difeafe,  the 
nerves  fuffer  more  or  lefs,  and  there  are 
very  few  diforders  which  may  not,  in  a 
large  fen fc,  be  called  nervous ,  it  might  be 
thoudit  that  a  treatife  on  nervous  difeafes 
fhould  comprehend  almoft  all  the  com- 
plaints tp  which  the  human  body  is  liable, 
Tixe  defign,  however,  of  the  following  ob- 
fervations  is  far  different.  In  them,  it  is 
only  propofed  to  treat  of  thofe  diforders 
which  in  a  peculiar  fenfe  deferve  the  name 
of  nervous y  in  fo  far  as  they  are,  in  a  great 
mcafure,  owing  to  an  uncommon  delicacy 
or  unnatural  feniibilicy  of  the  nerves,  and 
are  therefore  obferved  chiefly  to  affetTt  per- 
ibns  of  fuch  a  conflitution.- 

As  many  of  thefe  complaints  depend  up- 
on that  fympathy  which  obtains  between 
the  various  pans  of  the  bodyy  it  feemed 

necefTary 

*  See  an  Efiay  on  the  vital,   &c.  motions,  edit,  i, 

p.  390.  .  '  , 


P  R  E  F  A  C  i:.  V 

necelTary  to  begin  with  fome  obfervations 
on  the  fympathy  of  the  nerves  ^  a  fubjei5t 
of  the  greatefl  importance  in  pathology  I 

In  reafoning  on  the  nature  and  caufes  of 
nervous  diforders,  I  have  endeavoured  to 
avoid  uncertain  hypotkefes;  and  therefore 
have  had  no  recourfe  to  any  imaginary 
flight  J  repercuflion,  difperfion,  confufion,  or 
jarring  contefl  of  the  animal  Ipirits;  for 
whofe  exiflence  we  have  only  probability, 
and  of  whofe  peculiar  nature  and  properties 
we  are  altogether  ignorant.  But  although 
the  minute  ftrufture  of  the  nerves,  the  na- 
ture of  their  fluid,  and  tbofe  conditions  on 
which  depend  their  powers  of  feeling  and 
communicating  motion  to  the  body,  lie 
much  beyond  our  reach ;  yet  w^  know  cer- 
tainly, that  the  nerves  are  endued  with 
feeling,  and  that  as  there  is  a  general  fym* 
pathy  which  prevails  through  the  whole 
fyflem,  fo  there  is  a  particular  and  very 
remarkable  confent  between  various  parts 
of  the  body.  From  this  fentient  and 
fympathetic  power  of  the  nerves,  - 1  have 

endeavoured 


.VI 


PREFACE. 


endeavoured  to  deduce  the  various  fymp- 
toms  of  the  nervous  kind:  and  have  thought 
it  better  to  ftop  fhort  here,  than  to  amufe 
myfelf  or  others  with  fubtile  fpeculations 
concerning .  matters  that  are  involved  ia 
the  greateft  obfcurity. 

If  it  Ihould  be  faid,  that  to  account  for 
difeafes  from  the  fenfibiiity  or  fympathy 
of  the  nerves,  while  we  know  not  whereia 
thefe  powers  confiil,  is  no  better  than  re- 
ferring them  to  a  faadtas  ijicognita,  or  to 
the  hypothetical  motions  and  counter-mo- 
tions of  the  animal  fpirits;  I  fliall  only  an- 
fwer,  that  although  we  cannot  explain  why 
grief  or  joy  ihould,  by  means  of  the  nerves, 
excite  a  greater  motion  than  ufual  in  the 
veiTels  of  the  lachrymal  glands;  )ret  it  is 
leading  us  to  the  truth,  and  advancing  one 
ilep  farther  in  our  knowledge,  to  fliew  that 
the  increafed  fecretion  of  tears,  occaGoned 
by  thofe  paffions  of  the  mind  proceeds 
from  this  caufe,  and  not  from  any  com- 
preiTion  of  the  lachrymal  glands  or  their 
ducts,  by  the  neighbouring  mufclesj  as  has 

been 


P   Jl   E   F    A  C   E.  vii 

been  commonly  imagined :  And,  to  afcend 
from  fmall  things  to  great,  although  Sir 
Ifaac  Newton  did  not  pretend  to  explain 
the  caufe  of  gravity,  yet  he  made  no  fmall 
improvement  in  phyfical  aflronomy,  when, 
from  this  principle  alone,  he  accounted 
for  the  various  motions  of  the  planets,  and 
baniflied  the  imaginary  vortices  of  Defcartes, 
which  had  been  contrived,  but  unfuccefs- 
fully,  to  explain  the  -phmomena  of  the  folar 
fyftem. 

In  the  practical  part,  I  have  confined 
myfelf  chiefly  to  what  experience  had  fug- 
gefted ;  and  have  only  advifed  fuch  re- 
medies as  I  have-  ufed  with  fuccels  myfelf, 
or  had  recommended  to  me  by  thofe  whom 
I  could  trufl. 

As  many  of  the  fubjeds  I  have  treated 
of,  are  not  a  little  obfcure,  it  cannot  be 
expeded  that  they  fliould  admit  of  as  clear 
an  explication  as  matters  that  are  lefs  in- 
tricate; and  this,  it  is  hoped,  will  make 
the  learned  in  the  profeflion  overlook  with 
candor  the  defects  which  may  be  found  in 

the 


mil  PREFACE. 

the  following  obfervations.  However,  if 
with  all  their  imperfections,  they  fhall  be 
of  any  ufe  m  conveying,  to  the  younger 
and  lefs  experienced  phyficians,  a  clearer 
notion  of  the  nature  of  thofe  diforders 
which  have  been  commonly  called  nervous, 
hypochondriac,  or  hyfteric,  or  in  any  cafe 
direct  them  more  happily  in  the  cure;  I 
fhall  have  my  aim,  and  be  fufficiently  re- 
warded in  the  fatisfadlion  of  thinking  that 
jny  labour  ha$  not  been  altogether  ufelefs 
to  the  public,  the  good  of  which  ought  to 
be  the  principal  view  of  every  writer. 

Hoc  opus,  hoc  ftudium,  parvi  properemu§ 

et  ampli. 
Si  patriae  volumus,  {i  nobis  vivere  ch^fi. 


Edinburgh,  Nov,  15;, 
1764. 


THE 

Q   N  T  E  N  T  S. 

C  H  A  p.    L 


Page^' 

Of  the  Jlru^kre,  nfe,  anJjympathy  oftU 

nerves  t 

G  HAP.    n. 

Of  nervous y  hypochondriac,  and  hyjieric 
diforders  in  general  84 

"The  moji  common  and  remarkable  nervous 
fymptoms  96 

CHAP.  m. 

Of  the  predifpofing  caufes  of  nervous ,  hy-^ 
pochondriac,  and  hyjieric  diforders         co^ 

CHAP.    IV. 

Of  the  general  occafwnal  caufes  of  nervous y 
hypochondriac^  and  hyjieric  diforders      140 
b  CHAP. 


t  CONTENTS. 

C  H  A  P.     V. 

Pag  I 

Of  the  particular  occaftonal  caufes  ofner- 

'VQWy  h-spochondriac^  andh'jfteric  dif or- 
ders I  ^^ 
C  H  A  P,     VI. 

Ohfervations  onfome  of  themojl  remark- 
able f^mptoms  of  the  nervous  t  hypochon- 
driac^  and  h)fleric  kind,  2 1 8 

I.  An  uncommon  fenfe  of  cold  or 

heat  in  different  parts  of  the 

bod'j  218 

II.  Pains  in  different  parts  of  the 
hod'^,   fiiddenlj  moving  from 

one  place  to  another  222 

III.  Hjjleric  faintings  and  convul- 
fions  224 

IV.  A  catalepfis  and  tetanus  228 

V.  Wind  in  thefomach  and  bowels       23a 

VI.  A  great  craving  for  food  233 

•       VII.  A  black  vomiting  235 

VIII.  A 


CONTENTS.  xi 

Page 

Vm.  Afudden  and  great  flux  of 

pale  urine  ^39 

IX.  J  nervous  atrophy  246 

X.  y^  nervous  orfpafmodic  afllima     252 

XI.  A  nervous  cough  258 

XII.  Palpitations  of  the  heart  278 

XIII.  The  pulfe  often  varying  in 
quicknefs,  flrength,  andfulnefs     279 

XIV.  Periodical  headachs  297 

XV.  A  giddinefs  300 

XVL   A  dimnefs  of  fight,  -without 

any  vifible  fault  in  the  eyes         302 

XVII.  Low  fpiritSf  melancholy t 

and  a  mania  303 

XVIII.  7he   incubus  or  night- 
mare /.  307 

b2  CHAP. 


sli  CONTENTS. 

CHAP.    VII. 

Page 

Of  the  cure  of  nervous,  hypochondriac, 
and  h-j ft  eric  diforders  321 

CHAP.     VIII, 

Of  the  Clin  of  fome  of  the  mof  remark- 
able nervous^  hypochondriac,  and  hyjie-  ~ 
ric  fymptoms,  428 

I.  Convulfive  motions,    or  fixed 
fpafms  of  the  mufcles,  428 

II.  Jiyfleric  faintings  with  convuh 
fions  457 

III.  A  violent  pain  ivith  cramps 

in  the  Jiomach  4(^2 

IV.  j^n  indigejiion  and  vomitings 

•with  pains  in  the  flomach  464 

V.  A  colic  of  the  hyjleric  or  flatu- 
lent kind  471 

yi.  Flatulence  in  the  flomach  and 

koweh  474 

VII,  A 


CONTENTS.  i^iii 

Page 

VII.  A  nervous    or    fpafmodic 
aflhma  ^^8 

VIII.  A  palpitation  of  the  heart  490 

IX.  An  immoderate  difcharge  of 

pale  urine  ^92 

X.  Periodical  headachs  ^cpS 
Jvl»  Low  Jpirits,  J04 


CHAP.     L 


Of  the  St  KV  CTV  RE,   Use,    md^YU-' 

P  A  T  H  Y    of //;^   N  E  R  V  E  S. 

BEFORE  we  enter  upon  the  fubje^t 
of  the  following  obfervations,  it  may 
be  proper  to  make  a  few  remarks  concern- 
ing the  flrudture,  ufe,  and  fympathy  of  the 
nerves. 

1.  The  nerves  are  thofe  fmall  cords^ 
which  riling  from  the  brain  and  fpinal 
marrow,'  are  diftributed  to  every  part  of 
the  body.  They  appear  to  be  no  more 
than  continuations  of  the  medullary  fub- 
flance  of  the  parrs  from  whence  they  pro- 
ceed, and  owe  their  flrength  and  firmnefs 
to  the  membranes  and  cellular  texture 
which  furround  them. 

2.  The  larger  nerves  (r.)  are  evident- 
ly compofed  of  many  fmaller  ones,   which 

A  ruB 


2      OF   THE    SYMPATHY 

run  parallel  to  each  other,  and  feem  to  be 
quite  diflindt  from  their  origin  to  their 
termination,  without  any  fuch  communi- 
cations between  their  branches,  as  are  ob- 
ferved  every  where  in  the  fyftem  of  arteries 
and  veins. 

3.  The  fmalleft  nervous  filaments  that 
can  be  traced  by  difletStion,  are  flill  com- 
pofed  of  lefler  threads;  fo  that  we  can  have 
no  idea  of  the  exility  of  a  fingle  nervous 
fibril. 

4.  Altho'  it  feems  probable  that  the 
nerves  (3.),  which  are  continuations  of  the 
medullary  fubftarice  of  the  brain  and  fpinal 
marrow,  derive  from  thence  a  fluid ;  yec 
the  extreme  fmallnefs  of  the  nervous  tubes, 
and  the  fubtility  of  that  fluid  which  they 
contain,  make  us  altogether  ignorant  of 
its  peculiar  nature  and  properties.  Nor 
do  we  know,  certainly,  whether  this  fluid 
ferves  only  for  the  nourifliment  and  fup- 
port  of  the  nerves,  or  whether  it  be  not 
the  medium  by  which  all  their  actions  are 
performed. 

5.  The 


OF    THE    NERVES.  3 

5.  The  nerves  communicate  fenfe  and 
a  power  of  motion  to  the  body. 

Since  opiim^  withouc  entering  the 
blood,  or  being  carried  to  the  feveral 
parts  of  the  body,  lelfens  or  deflroys  their 
powers  of  feeling  and  motion,  merely 
by  adling  on  the  extremities  of  the  nerves 
to  which  it  is  applied  *,  it  follows,  that 
the  nerves  mufl  be  the  inflru m en ts  of  fen- 
fation,  and  neceflary  for  performing  mo- 
tion. Many  other  experiments  and  ar- 
guments might  be  mentioned  to  the  fame 
purpofe  ;  but  as  this  agency  of  the  nerves 
is  a  point  generally  acknowledged,  it  would 
be  unnecelTary  to  enter  here  into  a  more 
particular  proof  of  it. 

6.  Altho'  every  part  of  the  body 
furnifhed  with  nerves,  has  either  more 
or  lefs  of  feeling  f ;  yet  there   are   only 

A  2  fome 

♦  See  Edinburgh  Phyfical  efTays,  vol.  2.  pi  304.  309. 
310.  &c. 

•J-  There  are  fome  exceptions  to  this,  fuch  as  the  bones 
and  cartilages,  which,  tho'  not  deftitute  of  nerves,  are 
yet,  in  a  natural  ftate,  infenfible. 


4      OF    THE    SYMPATHY 

fome  of  thofe  parts  whofe  flrudlure  ren- 
ders them  capable  of  motion,  viz,  the 
mufcles,  and  fnch  organs  as  are  in  part 
mufcular ;  and  the  blood-vefTels,  which, 
from  the  efFe(5ls  of  bliflers  and  other  Jli^ 
muli,  appear  evidently  to  be  poffeiTed  of 
irritability,  or  a  power  of  alternate  con- 
traction. 

7.  There  are  only  two  kinds  of  mo- 
tion obferved  in  the  bodies  of  living  a- 
nimals,  viz.  voluntary,  and  involuntary 
from  ftimuli.  In  order  to  the  perform- 
ance of  the  firfi^  the  nervous  power  is 
not  only  neceflary,  but  alfo  a  free  com- 
munication, by  means  of  the  nerves,  be- 
tween the  brain  and  the  parts  to  be  mo- 
ved. The  fecond  continues  for  fome  time, 
though  in  a  much  weaker  degree,  even 
in  thofe  mufcles  whofe  connexion  with 
the  brain  is  wholely  cut  off;  whence  it 
has  been  concluded,  that  this  kind  of  mo- 
tion is  independent  of  the  nerves,  and 
owing  to  fome  power  or  property  in  the 
mufcular  fibres  then^felves,  or  in  the  gluti- 
nous 


OF    THE    NERVES.         5 

jious  matter  connecting  the  elements  of 
which  they  are  compofed  *.  That  this 
conclufion,  however,  is  not  well  founded, 
I  have  formerly  fhewn  by  feveral  argu- 
ments and  experiments  f ;  and  fhall, 
therefore,  at  prefent  only  obferve,  that, 
lince  a  folution  of  opium,  by  affedling  the 
extremities  of  the  nerves  to  which  it  is 
applied,  and  without  being  received  into 
the  blood,  or  carried  to  the  brain  or 
mufcles,  deflroys,  not  only  the  power  of 
voluntary  motion  in  animals,  but  alfo  ren- 
ders their  mufcles  incapable  of  being  ex- 
cited into  contraction  by  the  flrongeft 
jiimuli  f  ;  it  evidently  follows,  that  invo- 
luntary, as  well -as  voluntary  motion,  de- 
pends upon  fome  power  or  influence  of  the 
nerves  ||. 

But 

*  Ada  Getting,  vol.  2.  p.  152.  &c, 

t  See  Edinb.  Phyfical  efiays,  vol,  2.  p.  309.  &c. ;  and 
Phyfiological  eflays,  edit.  2.  &c. 

X  See  Eflay  on  the  vital  motions  of  animals,  edit.  2. 
p.  418. 

I  See  this  argument  farther  fuirfued  in  Phyfical  eflays, 
vol,  J,  p.  304.  310.  &e. 


6       OF    THE    SYMPATHY 

But  be  this  as  it  will;  from  the  con- 
tinuance of  the  motion  of  the  heart,  and 
other  mufcles,  after  they  are  feparated 
from  the  body,  one  may  fafely  conclude, 
that  the  contrad:ion  of  irritated  mufcles  is 
not  owing  to  the  difleniion  of  their  hol- 
low fibres,  by  a  more  copious  influx  of  the 
nervous  fluid  at  that  time.  Does  this  fluid 
ad  in  fome  other  way  than  by  diflending 
the  mufcular  fibres?  or  is  it  only  neceflary 
to  keep  them  in  a  proper  flate  for  being 
adled  upon,  by  that  living  principle  from 
which  all  their  motions  are  to  be  derived  *  ? 

8.  As 

*  since  it  has  been  the  prevailing  opinion  among  phy- 
fiologifts,  that  the  contraftion  of  the  mufcles  is  owing  to 
the  dilatation  of  their  hollow  fibres,  by  a  greater  influx  of 
the  nervous  fluid  into  them,  it  may  not  be  amifs,  briefly, 
to  mention  the  principal  arguments  which  render  this  opi- 
nion, at  leaft,  very  improbable. 

I.  As  far  as  we  can  judge  from  experiments,  the  mufcles 
become  lefs  bulky  in  a  ftate  of  contraction  than  they  were 
before.  The  hearts  of  frogs,  when  taken  out  of  the  body, 
become  really  lefs  every  time  they  contraft,  and  their  con- 
traftion  feems  not  to  be  owing  to  an  inflation  of  their 
fibres  or  veflels,  but  to  the  particles  of  which  they  are 
compofed  approaching  nearer  to  on  another,  and  run- 
ning into  clofer  contaft. 

2.  The 


OF    THE   NERVES.         7 

8.  As  the  nerves  arc  continuations  of 
the  medullary  fubflance  of  the  brain  and 
fpinal  marrow,  it  is  probable  that  they 
are  partly  nourifhed  by  thofe  veflels,  which 

are 

2.  The  extraordinary  fmallnefs  of  the  nerves,  and  the 
very  flow  fecretion  and  motion  of  their  fluid,  makes  it  im- 
probable that  mufcular  motion  is  owing  to  the  diftenfioa 
of  the  fibres  of  the  mufcles  by  a  fudden  influx  of  that  fluid. 
Nor  have  we  any  reafon  to  think,  that  the  nervous  juice 
dilates  the  mufcular  fibres  by  means  of  any  rarefaction  or 
efi'ervefcence. 

3.  The  mufcles  grow  more  tendinous  by  age,  /.  e.  their  fi- 
bres towards  their  extremities  degenerate  into  folid  threads; 
and  this  happens  fooneft  when  the  mufcles  are  much  ufed; 
but  if  the  contradtion  of  a  mufde  were  owing  to  the  infla- 
tion of  its  fibres  by  any  fluid,  the  more  frequently  it  was 
moved,  it  would  be  the  lefs  apt  to  become  tendinous. 

4.  If  the  mufcular  fibres  are  hollow,  and  of  a  cylindrical 
form,  or  made  up  of  veficles,  it  may  be  demonftrated,  that 
they  cannot  be  rendered,  in  the  firft  cafe,  above  i,  and  ia 
the  fecond  above  i  part  fliorter,  by  the  influx  of  a  fluid  in- 
to their  cavities ;  but  we  know  that  the  difference  between 
thz  fphin^er  pupilla  and  ant,  and  the  Itomach  and  blad- 
der, in  their  greaceft  Hate  of  contradiion  and  diftenfion,  is 
much  more  than  any  of  thefe  proportions. 

5.  The  regular  alternate  contraction  of  the  hearts  of 
frogs,  for  five  or  fix  hours  after  decollation  and  the  de- 
ftrufSion  of  their  fpinal  marrow,  and  for  half  an  hour  or 

more 


8      OF    THE    SYMPATHY 

are  fpread  on  that  production  of  the  pia 
mater  which  furrounds  them,   in  like  man- 
ner as  the  brain   derives  its  nourifh^nent 
from  the  arteries  of  the  pia  mater.     If  this 
be  true,  we  may  readily  fee  why  the  nerves 
lofe  their  powers,  when  they  are  wholely 
deprived  of  the  arterial  blood;  and,    on 
the  other  hand,  retain  them,  in  fome  mea- 
fure,  after  the  brain  is  ofTified  or  petrified. 
It  has  been  thought  by  fome,  that  nu- 
trition is  chiefly  performed  by  means  of 
the  nervous  fluid,  becaufe  thofe  parts  whofc 
nerves  are  deflroyed,  or  wholely  deprived 

of 

more  after  they  are  feparated  from  their  bodies,  clearly 
proves,  that  an  influx  of  a  fluid  from  the  nerves  into  the 
mufcles,  is  not  neceffary  for  their  contraftion  :  for  altho* 
the  fpirits  remaining  in  the  nerves  of  the  heart  fliould  be 
iuppofed  to  occafion  a  few  contraftions  of  this  mufcle ;  yet 
they  cannot  be  fufficient  for  producing  feveral  thoufand 
diftenfions  of  its  hollow  fibres. 

The  above  arguments,  if  they  do  not  entirely  overthrow 
the  common  opinion,'  will,  at  leaft,  juftify  me  in  not  ha- 
ving recourfe,  in  the  following  treatife,  to  the  irregular 
motion,  increafed  derivation,  repercuffion,  confufion,  or 
hurry  of  the  animal  fpirits,  in  accounting,  for  the  fymp* 
toms  of  nervous,  hypochondriac,  and  hyfteric  diforders. 


OF    THE   NERVES.  9 

of  their  ufual  power,   are  obferved  to  be- 
come fmaller. 

But  whoever  conflders  the  inconcei- 
vable exility  of  the  nerves,  and  how 
(lowly  any  fluid  muft  be  derived  by  their 
means  from  the  brain*,  will  fcarcely  think 
that  the  nutrition  and  growth  of  the  body 
can  be  performed  in  this  way.  Nor  does 
the  withering  of  fuch  mufcles  as  are  to- 
tally palfied,  prove,  that  nutrition  is  ow- 
ing to  the  nervous  fluid  ;  for  we  know, 
from  certain  experiments  and  obfervations, 
that  the  motion  of  the  fluids  in  the  very 
fmall  vefTels  depends,  in  a  great  meafure, 
upon  the  influence  of  their  nerves;  and 
that,  when  this  is  wanting,  the  fluids 
either  do  not  circulate  at  all  through 
thofe  vefTels,  or,  at  leafl,  in  a  very  lan- 
guid manner:  whence  the  parts,  to  which 
they  belong,  collapfe,  and  are  not  proper- 
ly nourifhed  f . 

B  9.  Ouii 

*  See  Phyfiologlcal  Effays,  edit.  2.  p.  22.  &c, 
\  Ibid.  p.  49.  and  jo- 


lo     OF   THE   SYMPATHY 

9.  Our  bodies  are,  by  means  of  the 
nerves,  not  only  endowed  with  feeling, 
and  a  power  of  motion,  bat  with  a  re- 
markable fympathy,  which  is  either  gene- 
ral and  extended  through  the  whole  fy- 
ftem,  or  confined  in  a  greater  meafare  to 
certain  parts. 

10.  That  every  fen fibje  part  of  the 
body  has  a  fympathy  with  the  whole,  will 
fuihciently  appear  from  the  following  fad:s. 

Cold  water  thrown  on  any  part  of  the 
body  that  is  warm,  produces  a  fudden  con^ 
tradion  of  the  whole  velTels  and  pores  of 
the  fldn,  and  by  that  means  frequently  puts 
a  flop  to  fmall  hgemoi-rhages.  The  effluvia 
of  certain  fubflances  when  fmelled  to, 
inftantly  communicate  new  life  and  vigour 
to  the  whole  body,  while  others  affed 
fome  delicate  women  with  fainting  and 
convulfions.  By  means  of  different  mu^ 
fical  founds,  various  paflions  may  be  ex- 
cited or  calmed,  and  difeafes  are  faid  to 
have  been  fometimes  cured  *'»  By  dole- 
ful 

^  jHiiftoire  del'Acad.  Royale  des  fciences,  ann.  ipff 


OF    THE    NERVES.  ir 

ful  flories,  or  fliocking  fights,  delicate  peo- 
ple have  been  often  afFeded  with  fainting 
and  general  convullions*. 

When  the  brain  is  wounded,  inflamed, 
fuppurated,  or  otherwife  hurt,  almoft  every 
part  of  the  body  is  liable  to  fuffer,  and 
vomitings,  tremors,  convulfions,  palfies, 
&c.  often  enfue.  In  animals  newly  dead, 
the  whole  mufcles  of  the  trunk  and  ex- 
tremities are  ftrongly  convulfed,  when  a 
probe  is  pufhed  down  through  the  fpinal 
marrow. 

When  the  ftoraach  is  in  a  found  flate, 
and  digeftion  is  prpperly  performed,  the 
fpirits  are  good,  ^  and  the  body  is  light 
and  eafy ;  but  when  that  organ  is  out  of 
order,  a  languor,  debility,  melancholy, 
watchfulnefs,  or  troublefome  dreams,  the 
night-mare,  &c.  are  the  confequences. 
Grateful  food,  ilrong  wine,  or  other  fpiri- 

tuous 

*  Altho'  in  thefe  cafes,  the  changes  produced  in  the  bo- 
dy are  owing  to  the  paffions  of  the  mind,  yet  as  the  mind  is 
only  affefled  through  the  intervention  of  the  optic  and  audi- 
tory  nerves,  they  feem  proper  enough  inftances  of  the  gene- 
ral fympathy  that  extends  through  the  whole  nsrvoua  ff- 
ftem^ 


12     OF   THE    SYMPATHY 

tnous  liquors,  no  fooner  touch  the  flomach 
of  one  ready  to  faint  from  emptinefs,  than, 
they  communicate  new  life  and  llrength 
to  the  whole  bodv ;  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  feveral  poifons  occafion  violent  fick- 
nels,  vomiting,  fainting,  tremors,  convul^ 
lions,  ftupidity,  an  intermitting  pulfe,  dif- 
ficult breathing,  coldntfs  of  the  extremi- 
ties, and  other  fymproms.  A  fever,  deli- 
rmm,  and  violent  convulfions,  have  been 
produced  by  a  pin  flicking  in  the  coats  of 
theftomach*:  and  worms,  afFedling  eithei 
this  part  or  the  inteflines,  occafion  a  fur- 
prifing  variety  of  fyraptoms* 

Epileptic  fits  have  proceeded  from  a 
rough  bone  or  cartilaginous  fubflance,  ir- 
ritating the  nerves  of  the  great  toe,  or 
the  calf  of  the  leg;  and  the  wound  of  a 
tendon  or  nerve  has  been  the  caufe  of  a 
fever,  delirium,  tremors,,  violent  convul^- 
iions,  a  tetanus^  and  death. 

Many  more  examples  might  be  men- 
tioned, 

•  Hildan.  Centur.  2.  obfervat.  34. 


OF   THE  NERVES.        13 

tioned,  were  it  neceflary,  of  that  general 
iympathy  which  prevails  throughout  the 
whole  body.  But  there  is  nothing  which 
fets  this  matter  in  fo  clear  a  light  as  the 
jeffedls  of  opium :  for  a  folution  of  this  fub- 
fi:anceinje(5ted  into  the  great  gats  of  a  dog, 
in  a  few  minutes  brought  on  a  palfy  of 
his  pofterior  extremities,  attended  with  a 
flupor  and  convulfions  *.  Some  days  af- 
ter, a  like  folution  being  injecSted,  by  a 
perforation  through  the  teguments  into 
the  abdomen  of  the  fame  dog,  he  became 
almofl  inftantaneoufly  paralytic,  and  died 
in  a  few  minutes  f . 

A  folution  of  opium  inje(fl:ed  either  in- 
to the  flomach  or  inteftines  of  frogs,  or 
even  applied  to  the  mufcles  of  their  belly 
laid  bare,  produces  a  paralytic  weaknefs, 
a  flupor,  and  death  at  lail ;  althouo-h 
fuch  is  the  nature  of  thefe  animals,  that 
opium  does  not  kill  them  near  fo  foon  as 
it  does  dogs  J. 

Froj^ 

•  Edinburgh  Phyfical  eflkys,  vol.  2.  p.  297. 

f  Ibid.  p.  298. 

J  Edinburgh  Phyfical  effays,  vol.  2.  p.  281. 292. 


f4      OF   THE    SYMPATHY 

From  thefe  experiments  it  appears> 
that  not  only  thofe  nerves  to  which  o- 
fium  is  immediately  applied,  are  rendered 
incapable  of  performing  their  office  ;  but 
that  the  brain,  fpinal  marrow,  and  whole 
nervous  fyflem  are  afFe6ted  in  the  fame 
manner,  folely-by  the  aiStion  of  the  opium 
on  the  nerves  which  it  touches.  For  its 
effecfts  upon  dogs  are  too  inflantaneous  to 
allow  of  the  fuppofition,  that  the  more 
fubtile  parts  of  this  poifon  are  received  in- 
to the  blood,  and  by  that  means  are  con- 
veyed to  the  brain  :  and  in  frogs,  after 
the  heart  is  taken  out,  and  confequently 
a  flop  put  to  the  circulation,  yet  a  folu- 
tion  of  opium  injedted  into  the  ftomach, 
and  inteflines  has  the  fame  effedl  as  when 
thefe  animals  are  intiref. 

II.  Besides  this  general  confent  (lo.) 
which  prevails  throughout  the  whole  body, 
there  is  a  particular  and  very  remarkable 
fympathy  between  feveral  of  its   organs, 

by 

f  Edin.Phyf.  eflays,  vol.2,  p. 281.  andgos.;  and  Eflay 
on  the  vital  motions  of  animals,  edit.  2.  p.  413. 


OF    THE   NERVES.        15 

by  means  of  which,  many  operations  are 
carried  on  in  a  found  flate ;  and  pain,  con- 
vulfive  motions,  and  other  morbid  fymp- 
toms  are  often  produced  in  fuch  parts  as 
have  no  near  connection  with  thofe  that 
are  immediately  affecTjed. 

To  ill ull rate  this,  I  fhall  give  feveral 
inflances,  beginning  with  the  head,  and 
taking  the  parts  in  their  order  down- 
wards. 

(a)  The  Head.  Violent  pains  in  the 
head,  which  have  their  feat  mofl  com- 
monly in  the  membranes  of  the  brain  or 
perkranimn,  are  frequently  attended  with 
a  ficknefs  at  the'domach,  and  vomiting. 
The  fpafmus  qniais,  locking  of  the  jaws, 
and  an  univerfal  tetanus,  have  followed  a 
wound  of  the  left  fide  of  the  head,  by 
which  the  temporal  mufcle  was  divided  •>^. 
Light  and  noifc  are  ofFcnfive  both  to  the 
eyes  and  ears  in  fevere  headachs.    Wounds 

and 

*  Hildan.  Centur,  5,  obfervat.  9. 


t6      OF  THE    SYMPATHY 

and  contufions  of  the  brain  generally  oc 
cafion  bilious  vomitings.  Certain  impref- 
fions  made  on  the  fenforium  commune  by 
external  objed:s,  inftantly  give  the  eyes  ei- 
ther a  dull,  a  lively,  or  a  fierce  look. 

Grief,  vexation,  or  fear,  leflen  the 
fecretion  of  the  faliva,  deftroy  the  appe- 
tite, and  fometimes  occafion  a  loofenefs. 
The  great  confent  between  the  brain  and 
heart,  appears  from  the  fudden  and  re- 
markable effedts  of  the  paffions  on  the  lat' 
tcr. 

(^)  The  Eyes.  When  one  eye  is  af- 
fected with  an  inflammation,  a  catarad:,  or 
the  gittta  ferena^  the  other  is  often  foon 
after  attacked  with  the  fame  difeafe.  The 
contraction  of  the  pupil  is  not  owing  to 
light  acfting  as  a  Jlimulus  on  the  iriSy  but 
folely  to  the  fympathy  between  this  mem- 
brane and  the  retina  *.  There  is  fuch  a 
fympathy  between  the  two  pupils,  that, 

even 

*  See  an  Effay  on  the  vital  motions  of  animals,  edit, 


OF   THE   NERVES.  17 

even  in  a  gutta  ferenay  the  pupil  of  the 
morbid  eye  is  obferved  to  follow  the  mo- 
tions of  the  fomid  one.  We  fliut  both 
eye-lids,  whether  we  will  or  no,  as  often  as 
any  thing  threatens  to  hurt  either  eye.  A 
bright  light  coming  fuddenly  on  the  eyes 
fometimes  occafions  fneezing.  Hippocrates 
has  obferved j  that  the  unexpecfled  fight  of 
a  ferpent  will  make  the  countenance  pale*. 
The  fight  of  grateful  food  occafions  an 
uncommon  flux  of  the  faliva,  in  a  hungry 
perfon.  Yawning  and  vomiting  are  often 
catching. 

(c)  The  Ears.  The  noife  of  a  file  and 
other  harfti  founds  affed:  the  teeth  with 
an  uneafy  fenfation.  The  whetting  of  a 
knife  has  caufed  the  gums  to  bleed  f. 
Great  and  unexpe(^l:ed  founds,  fuch  as  the 
explofion  of  a  cannon  or  mullcet,  make  us 
inftantly  clofe  our  eye-lids.  As  the  ear  is 
C  fre- 

*  Lib.  de  humorlbus, 

t  Boyle's  Ufefulnefs  of  ejcperimental  pjiilof.  part  2.' 
p.  248. 


iB     OF   THE  SYMPATHY 

frequently  pained  when  the  fauces  are 
inflamed,  fo  an  irritation  of  the  mea-* 
tus  auditorius  will  often  excite  cough* 
ing,  and  fometimes  vomiting  *.  A 
conftant  pain  of  one  fide  of  the  head, 
with  a  numbnefs  of  the  left  arm  and  leg, 
a  fuppreflion  of  the  menfeff  and  epileptic 
fits,  have  all  been  occafioned  by  a  glafs- 
ball,  not  larger  than  a  pea,  (licking  in  the 
ear  f , 

(i)  The  Nose.  The  effluvia  of  hungry 
water,  or  fpirit  of  wine  drawn  ftrongly  in- 
to the  noftrils,  increafe  the  derivation  of 
the  falival  juice  into  the  mouth,  and  fome- 
times flop  a  tickling  cough.  The  fmell 
of  grateful  food  makes  the  faliva  flow 
when  one  is  hungry. "  Sternutatories  not 
only  increafe  the  fecretion  from  the  nofe, 
but  alfo  from  the  lachrymal  veffels.  Af- 
ter fmelling  to  volatile  falts,  or  eating  too 
much  flrong  muflard  with  one's  meat,   a 

pain 

*  Pechlln.  Obfervat.  med.  lib.  2.  No.  45. 
t  Hlldan.  Centur.  1.  obfervat.  4. 


OF  THE  NERVES.  19 

pain  is  often  felt  above  the  eye-brows ;  and 
it  is  obfervable,  that  after  taking  a  large 
draught  of  very  cold  water  in  winter,  that 
part  of  the  fore-head  immediately  above 
the  nofe  is  afFe(5ted  with  a  painful  fenfa- 
xion.  Acrid  fubflances  appHed  to  the  ol- 
factory nerves  bring  the  diaphragm,  in- 
lercoftal  and  abdominal  mufcles,  into  con- 
vulfive  m.otions. 

Mr  Boyle  mentions  feveral  who  were 
purged  by  fmelling  to  a  cathartic  medi- 
cine*; and  we  are  told,  that,  in  fome, 
the  effect  failed,  when,  from  a  coryza,  or 
obflrucFtion  of  the  membrane  of  the  nofe, 
the  olfa(ftory  nerves  hadrlbfl  their  power 
of  diflinguifhing  fniells. 

(e)  The  Teeth.  A  rotten  tooth  will 
fometimes  occafion  a  violent  pain  in  a 
found  one,  though  at  a  di fiance  from  it; 
and  the  pain  will  ceafe  as  foon  as  the  fpoilc 
tooth  is  drawn,  or  its  nerve  deflroyed.  A 
pain  in  the  teeth  often  afFeds  the  cheek- 
C  z  bone, 

*  Ufefulnefs  of  experimental  philof.part  2. p.  243. 


20       OF  THE   SYMPATHY 

bone,  one  fide  of  the  head,  the  throat, 
and  the  correfponding  ear.  Children,  from 
the  irritation  of  the  gums  in  teething,  are 
liable  to  vomiting,  purging,  a  cough,  a. 
fever,  and  convulfions. 

(/)  The  Trachea.  An  irritation  of 
the  windpipe,  or  any  of  its  fmall  branches, 
raifes  coughing,  or  a  convulfive  motion  of 
the  mufcles  employed  in  expiration ;  and 
a  naufea,  vomiting,  and  convulfions,  are 
fomctimes  the  confequence  of  a  violent  or 
}ong  continued  irritation  of  thefe  parts, 

(g)  The  Lungs.  The  fympathy  of 
the  lungs  with  the  diaphragm  and  inter-- 
cofcal  mufcles,  is  evident  from  their  mo^ 
tion,  even  in  ordinary  refpiration  ;  but  flill 
more  fo  in  the  laborious  breathing  which 
Is  always  the  confequence  of  a  difficult  paf^ 
fage  of  the  blood  through  the  pulmonary 
veiTels, 

(/;)  The  DiAPHRAGiM.     When  the  dia- 
phragm is  inflamed^  the  ftomach,  brain. 


OF  THE  NERVES.         21 

and  mufcles  of  the  face  are  aiFeded  by 
fympathy,  as  appears  from  the  delirium, 
vomiting,  and  rifut  Sardonims,  which  at- 
tend this  difeafe. 

{/)  The  Stomach  and  Intestines. 
A  difordered  ftate  of  the  ftomach  and  in- 
teftines,  with  wind  or  noxious  humours 
lodging  in  them,  will  fometimes  fo  afre(5l 
the  brain  as  to  deprive  people  of  their  rea- 
fon.  At  other  times,  the  fame  caufes  will 
produce  a  vertigo,  cephal^a,  hemicrania, 
clavtis  h^Jlericus,  palpitations,  intermiflions 
of  the  pulfe,  difficulty  of  breathing,  fud- 
den  flulhings  of  heat,  and  fweating,  &c. 
After  hard  drinking,  or  a  large  dofe  of 
Qpium,  the  eyes  lofe  their  luflure.  The 
headach,  after  a  debauch,  proceeds  chiefly 
from  the  flomach,  as  appears  by  the  re- 
moval of  the  pain  upon  drinking  a  few 
glaffes  of  flrong  wine»  The  diforder  of 
the  ftomach  will  fometimes  occafion  dira^ 
j]efs  of  fight  *.     I  know  a  lady,  to  whom 

every 

*  J-otnmii  Obfervat.  med.  lib.  3. 


22     OF  THE  SYMPATHY 

every  obje(5l  appears  as  if  covered  vv^ith  a 
thkk  fmoke,  as  often  as  her  flomach  is 
loaded  with  an  acid ;  and  who,  therefore, 
finds  vomits,  obforbent  powders,  and  bit- 
ters, her  beft  ophthalmic  medicines*  An- 
other lady,  with  tender  eyes,  feldom  has 
any  confiderable  pain  or  ficknefs  at  her 
ftomach,  without  her  head  being  affeded, 
and  her  eye-lids  or  eyes  becoming,  in  fome 
degree,  inflamed.  In  little  more  than  half 
an  hour  after  fwallowing  fifteen  or  twenty 
grains  of  the  extraBum  cicut£,  I  have  been 
often  affedted  with  a  weaknefs  and  daz^ 
zling  of  my  eyes,  together  with  a  giddineis 
and  a  debility  of  my  whole  body,  efpecially 
the  mufcles  of  my  legs  and  arms ;  fo  that, 
when  I  attempted  to  walk,  I  was  apt  to 
flagger  like  a  perfon  who  had  drunk  too 
much  ftrong  liquor. 

A  convulfive  motion  of  the  ftomach 
and  inteftincs  often  fpreads  to  the  throat, 
where  it  occafions  a  difficulty  of  brea-r 
diing,  and  a  fenfe  of  fulFocation :  On  the 
either  hand,  an  irritation  of  the  fauces  or 


OF  THE  NERVES.         23 

fhm"jnx  excites  vomiting.  A  naufea  or 
difagrecable  fenfation  in  the  flomach 
makes  the  pulfe  quicker  and  fmaller,  raifes 
a  fweat,  and  fometimes  greatly  increafes 
the  fecretion  of  the  faliva,  or  urine. 
When  the  flomach  is  empty,  and  afFeded 
with  a  fenfe  of  hunger,  the  falival  juice 
flows  much  more  copioufly  into  the  mouth 
than  after  a  full  meal,  or  when  the  natu- 
ral appetite  for  food  is  wanting.  An  in- 
flammation of  the  flomach  and  bowels  is 
attended,  in  the  beginning,  with  a  fhiver- 
ing  of  the  whole  body,  and  a  great  cold- 
nefs  of  the  hands  and  feet.  Long  conti- 
nued vomiting  and  purging  occafion  vio- 
lent cramps  of  the  mufcles  of  the  legs  and 
thighs ;  and  the  dry  belly-ach  brings  on  a 
paify  of  the  extremities.  A  tremor  of  the 
hands  is  often  lelTened  or  removed,  for  a 
while,  by  a  dram,  or  fome  flrong  wine ; 
and  this  efFed  is  owing  folely  to  the  adlion 
of  thefe  liquors  on  the  flomach,  and  not 
to  their  having  entered  the  blood,  which 
does  not  happen  fo  foon.     The  particular 

iympathy 


24     OF  THE  SYMPATHY 

fympathy  of  the  {lomach  with  the  dk- 
phragrn  and  abdominal  mufcles,  appears 
from  their  convulfive  motions  in  vomiting, 
and  in  the  hiccup.  A  violent  fpafmodic  pain 
in  the  flomach  or  inteftines  often  renders 
the  pulfe  much  flower  than  in  a  flate  of 
health. 

An  inflammation  of  the  inteftines  is  frc- 
qinently  attended  with  vomiting,  and  a 
fiippreflion  of  urine.  An  opijlhotomis  or  a 
tetanus  is  often  occafioned,  in  hot  climates, 
by  a  retention  of  the  mecoftmm,  or  other 
acrid  humours  in  the  bowels  of  infants. 
That  itching  of  the  nofe,  which  is  a  com- 
mon fign  of  worms,  feems  to  indicate  a 
particular  fympathy  between  this  part  and 
the  inteftines;  and  the  many  other  fymp- 
toms  produced  by  worms,  which  I  fliall 
have  occaiion  to  mention  afterwards,  fhew 
a  remarkable  and  extenfive  confent  be- 
tween the  firft  pafTages  and  many  other 
parts  of  the  body, 

(k)  Tlic 


OF  THE  NERVES.         25 

(k)  The  Liver.  Stones  irritating  the 
biliary  du(5ls  frequently  occafion  a  naufea 
and  vomiting.  An  inflammation  of  the 
liver  is  generally  accompanied  with  a  vo- 
miting and  the  hiccup,  and  often  with  a 
pain  between  the  vsrtebrc  6f  the  neck  and 
top  of  the  fhoulder.  In  a  fuppuration  of 
the  liver,  I  have  twice  feen  the  patients  af- 
fected with  a  numbnefs  and  debility  of  the 
right  arm,  thigh,  and  leg, 

(/)  The  Kidneys  and  Ureters.  A 
mufea,  vomiting,  coftivenefs,  and  infla- 
tion of  the  bowels,  are  often  produced  by 
an  inflammation  in  the  kidneys,  or  ftones  in 
the  ureters.  A  flone  in  the  pelvis  of  the 
kidney,  or  in  the  ureter y  fometimes  occa- 
fions  a  frequent  inclination  to  make  urine, 
and  a  heat  in  the  extremity  of  the  urethra. 
When  one  of  the  kidneys  is  inflamed,  lit- 
tle urine  is  feparated  by  the  other,  pro- 
bably on  account  of  a  fpafmodic  flric- 
ture  of  its  fecretory  veffels.  When  a  flone 
ispffing  through  ihtjircter,  the  teflicle  of 

D  th§ 


0.6      OF  THE  SYMPATHY 

the  fame  fide  is  fometimes  drawn  upwards^ 
and  fwells;  and  an  ereft  pofture  is  then 
painful. 

(m)  The  Bladder  and  Rectum.    An 
irritation  of  the  neck  of  the  bladder,  or 
extremity  of  the  redum,  is  the  caiife  of  a 
conftant   contraiStion    of    the    diaphragm 
and  abdominal  mufcleso     A  ftrangury  and 
ienefmus    mutually    occafion    each    other. 
The  pain   of  the  hemorrhoids   is  fome- 
times accompanied  with  a  ficknefs  at  the 
ftomach,  and  faintifhnefs.     A  (lone  or  ul- 
cer in  the  bladder  is  attended  with  a  fliarp 
pain  near  the  end  of  the  urethra^  efpecially 
after  making  water.      I   had  fome  years 
lince  a  patient  with  an  ulcer  in  the  blad- 
der, who,  when  he  pafTed  his  urine,  had 
not  only  a  violent  pain  in  the  point  of  the 
penis,    but   this  pain  defcended  down  his 
thighs  and  legs,   and  afFedcd  the  foles   of 
his  feet,  as  if  he  had  been  {landing  bare- 
footed on  burning  coals. 

[n)  The  Genitals  in  Men.     Af  the 
time  of  puberty,  not  only  the  voice,  but 

the 


OF  THE  NERVES.        27 

the  whole  body,  undergoes  a  fenfible 
change,  which  is  probably  owing  to  the 
pimulus  communicated  to  the  nerves  of 
the  genital  parts  by  i\\Qfemen\  for  we  cer- 
tainly know  that  other  Jiimuli,  applied  to  the 
nerves  of  the  nofe  or  flomach,  according 
to  their  nature,  will  either  inflantaneouily 
impiart  new  vigour  to  the  whole  body,  or 
fbon  bccafion  a  general  Jiupor  and  debility. 
It  is  owing  to  a  fympachy  with  the  glafii, 
that  the  veficulcs  feminaks  are  contra(5ted 
in  time  of  edition;  and,  when  the  mem- 
brane which  liries  the  lower  part  of  the 
urethra  is  flimiilated  by  the  femertj  the  ac- 
tekratores  urine  are  excited  into  convulfive 
iiiotidns, 

{0)  The  Uterus.  The  great  variety 
bf  fymptoms  in  the  hyileric  difeafe,  is 
the  reafon  why  a  more  extenfive  fympathy 
has  been  afctibed  to  the  womb  than  to  any 
bther  part,  except  the  brain.  But,  altho' 
thefe  fymptoms  proceed  from  the  womb 
much  lefs  frequently  than  has  been  imagin- 
D  z  cd; 


28      OF  THE  SYMPATHY 

ed ;  yet  the  vomiting  which  generally  ac* 
companies  an  inflammation  of  that  organ, 
the  naufea,  and  depraved  appetite  after  con- 
ception, the  violent  contraction  of  the 
diaphragm  and  abdominal  mufcles  in  de- 
livery, the  headach,  and  the  heat  and  pain 
in  the  back  and  bowels  about  the  time  of 
menflruation,  are  fufficient  proofs  of  the 
confent  between  the  uterus  and  feveral  o- 
ther  parts  of  the  body.  But  there  is  no 
part  fo  much  affeded  by  the  different  fhates 
of  the  womb  as  the  breads,  which  become 
more  turgid  before  every  appearance  of  the 
menfesy  and  fubhde  after  the  period  is  over. 
The  changes  that  happen  to  the  brealls 
in  time  of  pregnancy,  and  after  delivery, 
are  flill  more  remarkable. 

(/?)  The  Extremities.  Strait  Ihoes 
give  fouie  people  a  headach ;  while  fina- 
pifms  applied  to  the  foles  of  the  feet,  or 
blifters  to  the  legs,  often  lefTen,  and  fome- 
times  remove  a  deliriinn*  In  an  obftinate 
coftivenefs,  cold  water  thrown  on  the  feet 

and 


OF  THE  NERVES.         29 

and  legs  has  fometiraes  opened  the  body, 
after  many  other  remedies  had  failed.  By 
tickling  the  foles  of  the  feet,  not  only  the 
mufcles  of  the  legs,  but  of  the  whole  bo- 
dy, may  be  thrown  into  convulfions.  An 
opifthotomiSf  with  convulfions  returning  every 
day,  has  been  owing  to  a  wound  in  the  fole 
of  the  foot  by  a  nail*;  and  i\iq  fpafmus 
€)nkus  to  a  violent  pain  in  the  toes  f. 
The  locking  of  the  jaws  fometimes  hap- 
pen after  amputations  of  the  extremities, 
or  lacerations  of  the  nerves  or  membranes. 
Many  other  examples  of  fympathy, 
both  in  a  found  and  morbid  flate  of  the 
body,  might  be  mentioned;  but  the  above 
will  be  fufiicient  at  prefent,  as  I  (hall  have 
afterwards  frequent  occafion  to  touch  on 
the  fame  fubjed:. 

12.  All  fympathy  or  confent  fuppofes 
feeling,  and  therefore  mull  be  owing  to 

the 

*  Nova  Aft,  Acad.  Csfar.  natur.  curiof.  torn  i, 
p.  16. 

t  Hoffman.  Syftem.  med.  torn.  3.  feft.  i,  cap.  5. 
No.  30. 


^o     OF  THE  SYMPATHY 

the  nerves,  which  are  the  fole  mftrument^ 
of  fenfation  (5).     The  truth  of  this  feem¥ 
to  be  fully  evinced,  hf  the  following  expe- 
riment.    When  the  hinder  toes  of  a  froc^ 
are  wounded,  immediately  after  cutting  off 
its  head,   there  is  either  no  motion  at  all 
excited  in  the  mufcles  of  the  legs,  or  a 
very  inconfiderable  one.     But,  if  the  toes 
of  this  animal  be  pinched^   or  wounded 
with   a   pen-knife,  ten  or  fifteen  minutes 
after  decollation,   the  mufcles  not  only  of 
the  legs  and  thighs,  but  alfo  of  the  trunk 
of  the  body,  are,  for  the  moft  part,  ftrong- 
ly  convulfed,  and  the  frog  fometimes  moves: 
from  one  place  to  another.     In  this  cafe^ 
is  not  the  irritation  of  the  toes,  immedi- 
ately after  decollation^  rendered  inefFe(9:uai 
to  produce  any  motion  in  the  mufcles  of 
the  legs  and  thighs,  by  the  greater  pain 
occafioned  by  cutting  off  the  head?  And 
are  not  the  mufcles  of  the  pofterior  ex- 
tremities,  as  well  as  of  the  trunk  of  the 
body,    brought  into  adion  by  wounding 
the  toes  fifteen  minutes  after  decollation^ 

becaufe 


OF  THE  NERVES.         31 

becaiife  the  pain  produced  by  cutting  off 
the  head  is  now  fo  much  lelTened  as  noc 
jtQ  prevent  the  animal  from  feeling  very 
fenlibly  when  its  toes  are  hurt  ? 

But  further,   that  all  fympathy  is  ow» 

ing  tp  feeling,  and  confequently  proceeds 

froni  the  nerves,  appears  evident,  bccaufe 

the  changes  in  the  body,  occafioned  by 

the  fympathy  of  the  parts,  are  Hope  by 

whatever    afFefls  the   nervous   fyflem    fo 

flrongly  as    to  overcome   the   fenfations 

that  produce  thofe  changes.      Thus   the 

Jiiccup  is  ftopt  by  terror,  fear,  furprife,  or 

other  flrong   paflions.      An   irritation  of 

the  nofe  will  not  occafion  fneezing,  when 

the  firil,  eifort  to  fneeze  is  attended  with  an 

acute  pain  in  fome  of  the  mufcles  of  the 

back  or  fides^    from    a  rheumatic    caufe* 

Hungary  water,  or  volatile  fpirits,  drawn 

ilrongly  into  the  nofe,  will  often  frop  a 

pckling  cough ;  and  laudanum  taken  by  the 

fnouth,  or  given  in  a  clyfler,  by  weakening 

the  fentient  power  of  the  nerves,   vv^ill  lef- 

fen  or  remove  the  fymparhetic  vein i Ling 


a  riling 


32     OF  THE   SYMPATHY 

arifing  from  a  flone  in  the  kidney  or  u-^ 
retevy  and  the  violent  contradlions  of  the 
diaphragm  and  abdominal  mufcles  occa- 
£oned  by  a  tenefmus  ox  flrangury. 

Could  we  fuppofe  the  circulation  of 
the  blood  were  to  remain,  after  a  total 
abolition  of  the  fentient  powers  of  the 
brain  and  nerves,  there  would  be  no  more 
fympathy  between  the  parts  of  fuch  an  a- 
nimal  body  than  between  thofe  of  any 
hydraulic  machine.  As,  in  this  cafe,  the 
Hiotion  of  the  fluids  would  be  merely  me- 
ehanical,  fo  every  change  made  in  any  of 
its  parts  mufl  be  the  refalt  of  mecha- 
nifm  alone  ;  and  confequently  wholely  dif- 
ferent from  confent,  which,  as  it  depends 
upon  feeling,  cannot  be  explained  upon  me-- 
chanical  principles. 

13.  Those  fympathies  which  havebeen 
afcribed  by  fome  authors  to  the  tela  celiu^ 
kfa,  blood-vefTels,  membranes,  and  the 
iimilarity  of  parts,  if  duly  confidered,  will 
'appear  either  to  proceed  from  the  nerves, 

or 


OF    THE   NERVES.         33 

©r  not  to  deferve  the  name  of  confent  or 
fy  mpathy. 

With  regard  to  the  ceUular  membrane, 
as  in  a  natural  ftate  it  has  little  or  no  fenfibi- 
lity,  fo  it  mud,  of  all  other  parts,  be  the  leafl 
fubjecft  to  fympathetic  affections.  Its  cells 
have  every  v^^here  a  free  communication ; 
and  therefore  air,  water,  purulent  matter, 
or  other  huniours,  are  often  conveyed,  by 
their  means,  from  one  part  of  the  body  to 
another.  But  this  cannot  be  properly  re- 
ferred to  fympathy,  and  is  no  more  than 
what  happens  to  a  fpunge,  a  piece  of  fugar, 
or  other  porous  fubflances. 

The  fyftem  of  blood-vefTels  affords  us 
no  more  inftances  "of  true  fympathy  than 
the  tela  celhilofa,  except  what  may  be  ow- 
ino;  to  the  nerves  which  belong;  to  thefe 
vefTels.  The  changes  made  in  the  circula- 
tion, and  the  morbid  fymptoms  produced 
or  removed  by  the  force  of  the  blood  be- 
ing turned  upon  different  parts  of  the  body; 
the  abforption  of  the  venereal  contagion, 
of  pusy  or  other  humours,  and  their  tranf- 
£  lation 


34      OF  THE   SYMPATHY 

lation  to  diflant  parts,  are  not,  flridtly  fpeak^ 
ing,  inftances  of  confent,  but  arerfolely  the 
confequences  of  the  circulation  of  the 
fluids,  and  the  communication  between  the 
feveral  parts  of  the  vafcular  iyftem.  The 
changes,  indeed,  produced  in  the  motion 
of  the  blood,  and  in  the  various  fecretory 
organs,  by  different  afFedions  of  the  mind, 
are  undoubtedly  owing  to  fympathy  ;  not, 
however,  of  the  blood-vcflels,  but  of  thq 
brain  and  nerves,  as  will  appear  afterwards. 
The  various  inftances  of  confent  froni 
the  continuity  of  membranes  are,  ftrid:ly 
fpcaking,  owing  to  the  nerves  themfelvcs 
with  which  thofe  membranes  are  fupplied ; 
for,  were  they  deflitute  of  nerves  and  feeling, 
no  fuch  confent  could  happen.  If  the  heat 
and  pain  in  the  extremity  of  the  urethra^ 
from  a  flone  or  ulcer  in  the  bladder,  and  the 
itching  in  the  nofe,  from  worms  in  the 
inteilines,  and  fuch  like  fymptoms,  were 
owing  to  the  continuity  of  the  membranes 
effected,  the  gullet  ^iXidi  fauces  ought  to  fuf- 
fer  more  than  the  nofe  ;  and  the  lower 
or  middle  parts   of  the  itrethra>  iliould  be 

more 


OF    THE    NERVES.        35 

more  pained  than  its  extremity.  Further,  if 
thefe  inftances  of  fympathy  were  merely 
owing  to  the  continuity  of  membranes, 
why  does  not  the  bladder  fufFer  in  a  gomv' 
rlMUf  where  there  is  a  great  irritation  and 
pain  near  the  extremity  of  the  urethra  ? 

Although  a  deafnefs  has  been  fome- 
times  cured  by  purging,  this  no  more  ar- 
gues a  fympathy  between  the  ears  and  in- 
teftines,  from  the  continuity  of  the  mem- 
brane that  lines  them  *,  than  the  cure  of 
an  ophthalmia  by  the  fame  remedy  proves  a 
fympathy  between  the  eyes  and  bowels. 
The  efFedt  in  both  cafes  is  chieflv  owino;  to 
the  derivation  of  the  humours  from  the 
parts  affected  ;  and  hence  bliflering  the 
head  often  affords  a  more  fpeedy  relief,  in 
thofe  difeafes,  than  purging. 

Th  e  fympathy  between  the  breads  and 
the  uterus  has  been  derived  from  the  ii- 
milarity  of  their  flrnfture,  or  of  the  li- 
quors fecreted  by  them.  But  although 
thofe  parts  were  much  raorciimilar  in  thefe 
tefpeds  than  they  really  are,  yet,  if  there 
E  2  were 

*  Haller.  Prim.  lin.  phyflolog.  §  555. 


36      OF    THE  SYMPATHY 

were  no  connection  between  theai  by 
means  of  blood-velTels,  or  confent  by  means 
of  nerves,  it  would  be  difficult  to  conceive, 
how  the  condition  of  the  one  could  be  fo 
much  affe<n:ed  by  that  of  the  other  ;  and 
much  more  how  a  titillation  of  the  one 
Ihould  communicate  a  particular  fenfation 
to  the  other.  The  fimilarity  of  ftru^lure 
between  the  mufcles  of  the  legs  and  arms, 
between  the  tefticles,  and  between  the  pa- 
rotid glands,  is  confiderably  greater  than 
between  the  womb  andbreafts ;  and  yet  the 
former  have  no  fuch  fympathy  as  the  latter* 

14.  Although  it  may  appear,  from 
what  has  been  faid,  that  all  real  confenE 
between  the  different  parts  of  the  body  is 
owing  to  the  nerves;  yet  it  will  be  found 
very  hard  to  account  particularly  for  the 
various  inftances  of  fympathy,  either  in 
a  found  or  morbid  (late. 

The  prevailing  opinion  has  been,  that 
thefe  fympathies  are  owing  to  the  communi- 
cations between  the  nerves,  and  particularly 
to  the  connexion  which  the  intercoflals 
have  with  the  fifth,  fixth,  and  eighth  pairs, 

and 


OF    THE    NERVES.        ^.7 

and  with  alnioft  all  thofe  which   proceed 
from   the   fpinal  marrow  *.       Upon  this 

principle, 

*  Hippocrates  was  not  ignorant  of  a  general  fympathy 
between  the  parts  of  the  body ;  and  Galen  treats  particu- 
larly of  thofe  difeafes  which  arife  from  fympathy  or  con- 
fent :  but  he  was  fo  far  from  having  any  notion  that  fym- 
pathetic  aflFe(5tions  were  owing  to  the  nerves,  that  he  a- 
fcribes  thofe  hcadachs  which  do  not  proceed  from  any 
fault  in  the  head  to  vapours  afcending  from  the  Romach 
or  uterus  Succeeding  writers,  even  as  far  down  as 
Fernelius  and  Sennertus,  feem  to  do  little  more  than  copy 
what  Galen  had  faid  on  this  fubjeft.  Andreas  Lau- 
rentius,  who  wrote  about  the  year  1600,  afcribes  the  fym- 
pathy between  the  mamma  and  uterus,  partly  to  the  in- 
tercoftal  nerve,  which  fends  fbme  branches  to  the  orgaris 
©f  generation,  and  partly  to  the  vena  azygos,  which  ter- 
minates in  the  left  fpel-matic  vein.  He  deduces  the  vo- 
miting in'  a  nephritis  partly  from  the  nerves  which 
the  kidneys  have  from  the  ftomachic  plexus j  and  partly 
from  their  exterior  coat  being  a  continuation  of  that 
which  covers  the  bottom  of  the  ftomach.  Gafper  Bauchi- 
nus  derives  the  confent  between  the  noftrils  and  exterior 
parts  of  the  abdomen,  from  the  communication  between 
the  epigaftric  and  mammary  veins.  Riolan,  who  flou- 
riihcd  before  the  middle  of  the  feventeenth  century, 
has  not,  with  all  his  learning,  made  any  improvement  in 
the  dodrine  of  fympathy  ;  and  his  cotemporary  Riverius 
afcribes  fympathelic  difeafes  to  five  caufes,  viz.  the 
connedlion,  fituation,  vicinity,  or  fimilarity  of  the  parts,  or 
to  their  having  the  fame  kind  of  office.    Dr  Willis,  who 

l)ias 


38      OF    THE    SYMPATHY 

principle;  it  lias  been  thought  eafy  to  trace 
the  various  fympathies^  not  only  between 
the  feveral  parts  of  the  Momeiiy  but  alfo 
between  them  and  the  head,  neck,  thorax, 
and  extremities*  But,  however  plaufible 
this  theory  may  appear  at  firft  view,  and 
how  readily  foever  it  may  feem  to  explain 
many  remarkable  inflances  of  confent ;  yet 
a  more  ftrid  examination  will  ihew  it  to 
be  liable  to  infuperable  diiiicukies. 

.  (a)  Since  every  individual  nerve  ap- 
pears to  .be  quite  diflind;  from  every  o- 
ther,  not  only  in  its  rife  from  the  meduU 
lary  fubftance  of  the  brain  or  fpinal  mar- 
row, but  alfo  in  its  progrefs  to  that  part 
where  it  terminates  (2.),  it  follows,  that 
the  various  inflances  of  fympathy,  obfer- 

ved 

has  given  a  more  accurate  defcriptlon  of  the  brain  and 
nerves  than  any  anatomift  before  him,  endeavoured,  firft, 
to  explain  the  various  inflances  of  fympathy  between  the 
parts  of  the  body  from  the  connection  or  communication 
of  their  nerves.  This  doftrine  was  afterwards  further  il- 
luftrated  by  Vieuflens,  and  has  been  embraced  by  raoft  of 
the  later  writers. 


OF  THE  NERVES.  3^ 

ved  between  the  different  parts  of  the  body, 
cannot  be  owing  to  any  communicatiou 
ov  anajiomofis  of  their  nerves;  and  confe- 
quently,  that  it  can  be  here  of  no  ufe, 
minutely  to  inquire  into  the  numerous 
connections  which  the  intercoflal  nerves 
have  with  the  fifch,  fixth,  and  eighth  pairs, 
and  with  thofe  of  the  fpinal  marrow. 

But,  left  it  fhould  bealledged,  that  the 
courfe  of  the  nervous  filaments  in  the^^w- 
^lia  is  fo  intricate,  that  it  is  not  altogether 
clear,  whether  they  may  not  intermix  or 
communicate  with  one  another  in  their 
pafTage  through  thofe  bodies,  it  will  be 
neceffary  to  offer  fome  lefs  doubtful  argu- 
ments, for  proving  that  the  fympathy  of 
the  feveral  parts  does  not  depend  on  any 
union  or  amjlomofu  between  their  nerves, 

{h)  If  there  were  any  annjlomofuf  or  reaj 
communication  between  the  nerves  of  the 
fame  or  different  trunks,  either  in  the 
langlia  or  elfewhere,  it  is  natural  to  think, 
^hat  a  confufion  would  necelfarily  happen 

in 


40      OF    THE    SYMPATHY 

in  our  fenfations,  as  well  as  in  the  mo- 
tions of  our  feveral  mufcles ;  for  the  im- 
preffions  of  external  objects  would  be  com- 
municated, at  the  places  of  union,  to  other 
nerves  than  thofe  affetSled  ;  and  the  change 
produced  by  the  will  in  any  nerve,  at  its 
origin  in  the  brain  or  fpinal  marrow,  in 
order  for  moving  a  particular  mufcle, 
would  afled:  all  thofe  nerves  with  which 
it  has  any  communication  by  means  of 
the  ganglia  or  otherwife* 

{c)  It  does  not  appear,  that  there  is 
any  fympathy  between  the  nerves  that  arc 
derived  from  the  fame  trunk,  by  means 
of  the  membranes  that  furround  them. 
If  the  dura  mater  were  endowed  with  that 
degree  of  fenfibility,  and  with  thofe  powers 
of  ofcillation,  which  have  been  afcribed 
to  it  by  feveral  authors,  this  opinion 
would  not  appear  altogether  improbable ; 
but  as  the  membranes  of  the  brain,  and 
ihofe  produdions  of  them  which  furround 
|he  xierves,   feem,  in  a  natural  ftate,    to 

be 


OF    THE    NERVES.       41 

be  pofTefled  oiily  of  a  very  obtiife  kind  of 
feeling  *,  and  are  altogether  deftitute  of 
motion,  we  have  no  rcafon  to  afcribe  the 
various  inftances  of  fyrapathy  between,  the 
different  pares  of  the  body  to  their  feii- 
iibility  or  moving  power. 

(d)  We  obferve  a  remarkable  fympa- 
thy  between  many  parts  whofe  nerves 
have  certainly  not  the  fmalleft  communi- 
cation with  one  another.  Thus  the  dim- 
nefs  of  light  occafioned  by  a  diforder  of 
the  flomaeh,  the  naitfea  upon  feeing  o- 
thers  vomit,  and  the  flux  of  tile  faiha  in- 
to the  mouth  cf  a  hungry  perfon,  at  the 
light  of  favoury  food  f  j  are  proofs,  that 
F  the 

*  The  experiments  of  the  leariled  M.  de  Haller,  al" 
though  they  do  not  prove  thefe  membranes  to  be  whole- 
ly  infenfible,  yet  they  certainly  jQiew  them  to  have  nO 
painful  or  acute  feelittg  in  a  found  ftatfe.  Vid.  Adta  Got- 
lingen.  vol.  2   ;  and  Fhyfiological  EfTays,  edit.  2. 

f  In  thefe  inftances,  the  changes  in  the  fiomach  and 
lalivary  glands  are  prbduced  through,  the  intervention 
of  the  brain  and  fentient  principle  :  for  thinking  ftrong- 
i^  On  favoury  vlftuais,  or   dlfagreeable  medicines,  will 

have 


42      OF    THE    SYMPATHY 

the  iloQiach  and  faiivary  glands  fympa- 
thize  with  the  rrAna,  though  there  is  no 
comir  J  - : :  t   ~een   the  optic  nerres 

if  1  :  ;-.  A  (hadderin^  is  excited 
;        :  - :  13  jzds ;    and  yet  the  pf)rU9 

,   ::       :  ::::::-'  'trre,   after  it  leaves 
::-t    ::  t:      ::  appear  to  communis 

ci:£  .  .;„  :„c^,.  :.>  ^j^/?,  Eor  any  other 
rerve.  Alrhoogh  the  optic  nerves  imite 
at  the  ceUa  turcica^  jet  it  has  been  fhewn, 
that  their  fbr^  do  not  crois,  intermix,  or 
traly  c'  -  i  :i:e  with  each  other*; 
ECTeri-  :'-,  .  :;;  :  3  3  coniiderable  jympa- 
ihy  between  :r.e  two  eyes.  Although 
the  nerves  of  the  two  kidneys  do  not  ap- 
pear to  have  any  connedjon  with  each  o- 
ther ;  yet,  when  one  of  thefb  glands  is  in- 

^med 

%3ve  aietaSk  the  izBis.  tSeS&  oa  fame  pecfile  as  feeiing 
Aeau  Bat  hmet  zm  iea^nSSon  oa  tbc  opuc  nerve  caa^ 
hf  foeuss  o(  the  traia,  occafioa  Tcomiag,  aail  aa  ia- 
cTEaJed  ^^harge  of  the  CtKval  jiuce,  wbj  maj  coc  im- 
prciiaiu  oe  dbe  odker  n^nres  prcdoce  francos  ocber  i7m« 
paditis  m  tJ:e  iame  msnuier  ?  But  of  tins  iBore  hereafter, 
*  See  Ve!aJ.  Affl3£om  corp  homaa.  hb,  4-  cap.  4,  ; 
zsd  Sa££&r;c  Oif£7Ta£,  anaumi.  p.  6$, 


OF    THE    XERVE5.        43 

flimed  or  irriiired  by  a  ftone,  the  fecre- 
tion  from  the  other  is  freqoeDtly  mack 
diminiflied.  We  know  for  certain,  that 
the  dlfoent  fize  of  the  papil  in  dife-e&c 
lights  is  0  .;---  :3  1  coalent  between  the 
resina  and  miea;  :.  ;  :£  optic  nerres, 

and  thofe  belonging  to  :/;  -  i,  have  no 
communication  in  their  courie  from  the 
brain  to  the  eje.  Nor  can  any  lympathy 
•be  fuppoicd  to  arife  from  the  nerves  of  the 
teDca,  paffing  between  the  raiaa  and  iwaca 
cboroidedy  as  there  is  no  anajkmofis,  nor 
any  other  kind  of  union  betTreen  tbero. 
The  nene?  with  which  :he  ;,:;.;  c:  :::s 
two  evei  ;::;  i-raiihed  h  .  f  no  co!:!!!ec- 
don;   s::d  ret  we  f-i   :  z::.:  :rz:.:_:    :  f 

Almost  t::^  ^^::^c  :::„.^^ri  :f  :  :c  -^  -^y 
Ti::r  rr  ::::^::  into  convu'il  e  :":;  :  i. 
by  tickling;  :hf  f\rs  of  thf  ::;.  :  f 
ii^cs ;  Z2V,  :'  r  fid  of  this  W-.  :~::^ 
iorr.f  ?r::  f.  X:  ,  thefe  motions  can- 
dor :ci:j::ably  ht  cz:::.:zi  from  the  con- 
F  2  neiftioii 


44     OF    THE    SYMPATHY 

nedlion  of  the  intercoftal  nerves  with 
thofe  of  the  fpine ;  or,  if  tliey  could,  it 
would  follow  that  the  flomach  and  bowels 
fhould  fufFer,  at  leaft,  equally  with  the 
diaphragm  and  mufcles  of  the  trunk  of 
the  body, 

(e)  If  the  confent  between  the  vifcera 
,of  the  abdomen,  and  the  other  parts  of  the 
body,  be  owing  to  a  communication  of 
nerves,  by  means  of  the  intercoflals ;  why 
do  not  all  thofe  parts  fympathize  whofe 
nerves  are  either  derived  from,  or  com- 
municate with  the  intercoflals  ?  Why,  in 
the  nephritis f  does  the  flomach  fuifer  more 
than  the  inteftines  ?  and  why  are  not  the 
lungs  and  other  parts  at  all  afFecled  in  this 
difeafe  ?  Why  does  not  an  irritation  of 
the  bladder  from  a  ftone  commonly  oc- 
calion  a  naiifea  and  vomiting;  ilnce  the 
bladder,  as  well  as  the  kidneys,  has  its 
nerves  partly  from  the  eighth  pair  and  in- 
lercoftals?  Why  does  an  irritation  of 
fhe  nofe  occafion  fneezing  only,   and  not 

cough  ingj 


OF  THE  NERVES.         45 

coughing,  vomiting,  purging,  or  the  hic- 
cup ?  Why  does  not  a  blifter,  applied  from 
the  ear  to  the  top  of  the  flioulder,  bring 
on  a  convulfive  motion,  or  fome  other 
affedion  of  the  diaphragm  j  lince  the  con- 
nedtion  of  the  phrenic  nerves  with  the  2d 
and  3d  cervical  pairs  is  much  greater  and 
lefs  remote  than  witii  the  nerves  of  the 
pofe  ^  ? 

If  the  delirium  which  generally  attends 

au 

f  The  pain  between  the  vertelris  of  the  neck  and  top 
jof  the  fhoulder,  which  fometimes  attends  an  inflamma- 
tion of  the  liver  or  diaphragm,  has  been  afcribed  to  the 
jconnedion  between  the  ^phrenic  nerves  and  the  ad  and 
^d  cervical  pairs  :  But,  if  this  were  this  cafe,  why  fhould 
this  fymptom  be  fo  rargly  obferved  in  a  paraphrenitis 
as  to  be  omitted  by  moft  authors  ?  and  why  fhould  noc 
the  diaphragm  be  difturbed  in  its  motions  when  the 
2d  and  3d  pairs  of  cervical  nerves  are  irritated  by  blifters, 
the  extirpation  of  tumours,  or  other  caufes?  It  is  not 
eafy  to  fay,  what  may  be  the  caufe  of  that  pain  in  the 
neck  and  top  of  the  fhoulder  which  often  attends  a 
hepatitis;  but  there  feems  to  be  good  reafon  to  doubt 
pf  its  proceeding  from  any  connexion  betvi'een  the 
phrenic  and  2d  and  3d  cervical  nerves.  Somfe  of  the 
pldcr  phyficiaas  afcribed  this  fymptom  to  the  weight  cf 

She 


46      OF  THE  SYMPATHY 

an  inflammation  of  the  diaphragm  were 
owing,  as  has  been  alledged,  to  the  remote 
connexion  between  the  phrenic  and  fifth 
pair  of  nerves  which  fends  filaments  to  the 
dura  mater  ;  why  fhould  not  an  inflamma- 
tion of  the  lungs,  flomach,  and  inteftines 
be  attended  with  that  fymptom  as  often, 
and  in  a  greater  degree;  fince  the  fifth 
pair  of  nerves  hath  a  more  immediate  con- 
nevftion  with  the  intercoftal  than  with  the 
phrenic  nerves?  Why  does  an  irritation 
of  the  fphincElers  of  the  anus  or  bladder 
occafion  a  continued  contracftion  of  the 
diaphragm  and  abdominal  mufcles,  rather 
than  an  alternate  motion  of  thofe  parts, 
as  in  coughing  and  the  hiccup,  when  either 
the  trachea  or  left  orifice  of  the  flomach 
is  irritated  ?  Since  the  diaphragm  fympa- 
thizes  with  the  nofe,  lungs,  uterus^  reBimi, 
and  bladder,  why  do  not  thefe  parts  fuffer 

'  equally 

the  inflamed  and  fvvelled  liver  drawing  downwards,  and 
ftretching  the  membranes  that  line  the  thorax  fa  J. 

(a)  N.  Pifo  de  cognofcend.  et  curand.  raorb,  lib.  3., 
?3J>.  25. 


OF  THE  NERVES.         47 

equally  when  that  mufcle  is  inflamed,  or 
otherwife  violently  afFeifted?  If  the  fym^ 
pathy  between  the  nofe  and  diaphragm 
be  owing,  not  to  the  olfadlory  nerves,  but 
to  a  branch  of  the  fifth  pair  fent  to  the 
nofc,  why  do  not  fternutatories  excite 
convulfive  motions  of  the  mufcles  of  the 
face,  to  which  the  fifth  pair  is  diflributed, 
as  well  as  fpafms  of  the  diaphragm,  whofp 
nerves  can  have  only  a  remote  conne(5lion 
with  the  fifth  pair,  by  means  of  the  inter- 
coflals  *  ?  And  why  does  not  the  great 
irritation  of  fome  of  the  filaments  of  the 
fifth  pair  of  nerves,  in  the  toothach,  pro- 
duce the  convulfive  motion  of  fneezins:? 
If  the  flux  of  tears  occafioned  by  grief  or 

joy 

*  when  fneezing  Is  ftopt  hj  preffing  the  nofe  with 
one's  finger  and  thuiib  near  the  internal  angle  of  each 
eye ;  this  effedt  is  not  owing,  as  fome  have  thought,  to 
the  preffure  made  on  the  nerves  lent  to  the  nofe  from  the 
ophthalmic  branch  of  the  fifth  pair ;  for  fneezing  may  be 
ftopt  almoit  as  readily  by  preQjng  hard  with  one's 
fingers  on  the  forehead  In  both  cafes  fneezing  is  pre- 
vented in  the  fame  manner;  viz  by  the  uneafy  ienfation 
occafioned  by  ftrongly  preffing  on  the  brow  or  nofe. 


48      OF  THE   SYMPATHY 

joy  were  owing,  as  Dr  Willis  alledges/ 
to  the  communication  between  the  fifth 
pair  of  nerves  which  ferves  the  lachrymal- 
glands,  and  the  intercoflals  which  are  dif- 
tributed  to  the  prcecordia  * ;  why  do  not 
thofe  affediions  of  the  mind  produce  an 
increafed  excretion  of  the  falival  as  well 
as  lachrymal  juice?  If  the  difturbance  of 
the  motion  of  the  heart,  from  certain 
•founds,  were  owing,  as  VieufTens  imagines, 
to  the  feventh  and  eighth  pair  of  nerves 
being  partly  compofed  of  medullary  fibres, 
derived  from  a  particular  y^^/ai/wj  arifmg 
from  the  cerebellum  f ,  why  fhould  not  the 
mufcles  which  are  fupplied  with  nerves 
from  the  fixth  pair  and  the  portio  dura  of 
the  feventh,  be  equally  alfedled  ;  fince  their 
connection,  at  their  origin,  with  theportio 
mollis  is  not  lefs  than  that  of  the  eighth 
pair  J?  Or  why,  in  violent  palpitations 
of  the  heart,  are  not  the  auditory  nerves 
at  all  afFeded?  The  truth. is,  the  changes 

m 

*  Anatom.  cerebri,  edit,  in  410,  p,  288'. 
f  Neurograph.  lib.  3.  cap,  4. 
I  Id.  lib.  1.  cap.  12, 


OF  THE  NERVES.         49 

in  the  motion  of  the  heart  occafioned  by 
external  objects,  adting  either  on  the 
organs  of  fight  or  hearing,  are  not  owing 
to  any  communication  of  their  nerves 
with  thofe  of  the  heart,  bat  to  the  impref- 
fions  made  on  the  fenforium  commune ,  and 
the  affections  of  the  mind  excited  there- 
by *.  If  the  fympathy  between  the  dif- 
ferent parts  be  owing  to  their  nerves  be- 
ing derived  from  the  fame  trunk,  why  is 
there  not  the  fame  confent  between  the 
feveral  mufclcs  of  the  foot,  of  the  leg, 
and  of  the  thigh,  as  between  the  kidneys 
and  the  flomach,  or  between  the  nofe  and 
the  diaphragm?  Lajftly,  if  an  irritation 
of  the  alimentary  canal  in  hylteric  wo- 
men fometimes  produces  convulfions  of 
the  legs,  by  reafon  of  the  communication 
between  the  jntercoflals  and  the  two  lafl 
lumbar  nerves;  why  are  not  the  flomach 
and  bowels  fei^ed  with  fpafms  or  convul- 
£ve  motions,  from  the  violent  pain  of 
ihe  gout  in  the  knees,  ancles,  or  feet? 
G  Thef? 

*  §€«  below,  No.  17,    . 


50      OF  THE  SYMPATHY 

Thefe  queflions,  I  doubt,  will  fcarce  ad? 
mit  of  a  fatisfa(5lory  anfwer,  upon  the 
principle  of  fympathy  depending  on  the 
communication  or  connedlion  of  nerves, 

15.  If,  therefore,  the  various  inflances 
of  fympathy  cannot  be  accounted  for 
from  any  union  or  anajlomofis  of  the  nerves, 
in  their  way  from  the  brain  to  the  fevera! 
organs  ;  and  if  there  are  many  remarkable 
inflances  of  confent  between  parts  whofe 
nerves  have  no  connexion  at  all ;  it  fol- 
lows, that  all  fympathy  mufl  be  referred 
to  the  brain  itfelf  and  fpinal  marrow,  the 
fource  of  all  the  nerves. 

But,  for  a  more  dired  proof  of  this,, 
we  may  obferve,  that  the  confent  of  the 
feveral  parts  inftantly  ceafes,  when  theii* 
commanication  with  the  origin  of  the 
nerves  is  interrupted.  Thus,  though  the 
mufcular  coat  of  the  ftomach,  in  an  ani? 
inal  newly  dead,  is  excited  into  contrac- 
fion  by  irritation ;  yet  the  diaphragm  is 
jipways  afFeifled  by  this  ftimtiks.     In  like 

niannerj 


OF   THE  NERVES.        51 

manner,  when  any  of  the  mufcles  of  the 
legs  of  a  frog  arc  pricked,  mofl  of  the  mu- 
fcles -of  the  legs  and  thighs  contra<5l,  even 
after  cutting  off  its  head,  if  the  fpinal 
marrow  be  left  entire;  but  when  that  is 
deflroyedj  although  the  fibres  of  the  Si- 
mulated mufcle  are  affedled  with  a  weak 
tremulous  motion,  yet  the  neighbouring 
mufcles  remain  wholely  at  reft* 

FtTRtHER,  the  eifedis  of  pain,  and  of 
fear  and  other  paffions,  in  preventing  fe- 
veral  fympathetic  motions,  feera  to  iliew, 
that  the  caule  of  that  confent  which  ob- 
tains between  the  parts  of  animals  is  to 
be  referred  to  the  origin  of  the  nerves: 
and,  fince  certain  aifcvftions  of  the  mind, 
excited  by  the  adion  of  external  objeds 
on  the  organs  of  fenfe,  produce  extraor- 
dinary motions  and  other  effetfls  in  the 
body,  merely  by  affecting  the  brain;  why 
may  not  impreffions  made  on  the  nerves 
in  other  parts  produce  likewife,  through 
the  intervention  of  the  brdn,  various  mo- 
G  2  tions 


52     OF  THE  SYMPATHY 

tioHS  and  other  efFecfls  in  diflant  parts  of 
the  body  ?  The  analogy  is  obvious. 

Lastly,   Notwithftanding   the   many 
fympaihetic  motions  which  are  daily  ob- 
ferved,  by  phyficians,  to  arife  from  an  irri- 
tatioti  of  the  nerves  in  different  parts  of 
the  body ;  yet,  when   the  nerve  going  to 
any  mufde  is  irritated,  there  is  no  motion 
excited  in  any  part,  except  in  the  mufcle 
to  which  it  is  diflributed  *.     Does  it  not 
hence  appear   highly  probable,   that    the 
various  lympathetic    motions  of  animals 
produced  by  irritation,  whether  in  a  found 
or  morbid  ftate,   are  owing,  not  to  any 
union  or  conne^Slion  of  their  nerves,    but 
to  particular  fenfations  excited  in  certain 
oro;ansi  and  thence  communicated  to  the 
brain  or  fpinal  marr  w  ?  For,  if  this  were 
not   the  cafe,   why   fliould   not   the   dia- 
phragm,   for    exaniple,  be  convuifec;,   by 
irritating  the  nerves  that  go  to  the  blad- 
der and  intcflinum  reBiim^  as  wtrll  as  when 

thefe 

•  Memolres  fiir  la  nature  fenfible  et  irritable,  torn.  r. 
p.  237. 


OF  THE  NERVES.        53 

thefe  parts  themfelves  are  afFedted  by  an 
unu(ud\  Jlimulus  ? 

If  the  fympathies  obferved  between  the 
different  parts  of  the  body  be  owing  to  par- 
ticular fenfations  excited  in  them,  and 
thence  communicated  to  the  brain;  we 
may  eafily  fee  why  an  irritation  of  the  intejii" 
num  jejunum  does  not  affedl:  the  diaphragm 
fo  much  as  an  irritation  of  the  reBum  ;  for, 
tho'  the  jejunum  is  not  iefs  feniible  than  the 
return,  and  the  nerves  of  both  have  the 
fame  remote  connediion  with  the  nerves  of 
the  diaphragm  ;  yet  the  fenfations  excited  by 
the  fame  ftimuli  ading  on  the  jejunum  and 
reBum  are  very  different,  and  therefore  muft 
affecfl  the  brain  or  common  fenforium  diffe- 
rently. An  irritation  of  the  nerves  of  theface 
does  not  produce  any  fuch  convulfive  mo* 
tion  of  the  mufcles  of  refpiracion  as  hap- 
pens in  fneezing,  becaufe  it  does  not  occa- 
£on  that  ^//ziof  fcnf-ition  which  is  excited 
by  y?s!/wz// applied  to  the  nofe:  And  the  dia- 
phragm, which  is  brought  into  a  continued 
contradion  when    the  extremity  of  the 

re  Bum 


54     OF  THE   SYMPATHY 

reilum  or  neck  of  the  bladder  is-  painfully 
affedted,  is  agitated  with  alternate  convul- 
llons,  when  the  left  orifice  of  the  llomach 
Is  irritated,  becaufe  very  different  fenfations 
are  excited  by  an  irritation  of  thofe  parts. 

Further,  when  the  meatus  audi  tor  his 
is  irritated,  by  introducing  into  it  a  feather, 
or  any  fuch  fubftance  ;  an  inclination  to 
cough  is  often  excited,  efpecially  if  the 
membrane  of  the  trachea  has  been  rendered 
more  fenfible  than  ufual,  by  catching  cold : 
But,  when  the  meatus  audit  or  ins  is  violently 
pained,  in  confequence  of  an  inflammation 
in  it,  no  coughing  is  occafioned:  From 
which  it  follows,  that  the  fympathy  be- 
tween that  meatus  and  the  organs  of  refpi- 
ration  in  the  former  cafe  cannot  be  owino- 
to  any  conned:ion  between  their  nerves,  or 
Indeed  to  any  mechanical  caufe,  but  pro- 
ceeds from  a  particular  feeling,  and  mufl  be 
referred  to  iht  fenforium  commune.  In  like 
manner,  neither  an  acrid  injedion  of  a  fo- 
lution  of  the  corrofive  fublimate  in  water, 
Eor  the  introdudion  of  a  catheter  into  the 

urethrdf 


OF  THE   NERVES.        ^^ 

mrtbra,  occafions  any  alternate  conviilfive 
morions  of  the  mufculi  acceleratoyes  tiring ; 
altho'  the  femen,  which  ftinuilates  the  nerves 
of  the  urethra  much  more  gently,  produces 
this  efFedt,.  Laflly,  on  this  head,  altho' 
when  the  fides  or  foles  of  the  feet  are 
tickled,  the  body  is  often  thrown  into  con- 
vulfive  motions ;  yet  nothing  of  this  kind 
happens  when  thefe  parts  are  either  in- 
flamed QV  wounded :  From  which  it  evi- 
dently follows,  that  thofe  motions  are  oc- 
cafioned  by  the  particular  fenfation  excited 
by  the  tickling,  and  do  not  proceed  from 
any  fympathy  which  the  nerves  of  the 
Jldes  or  foles  of  the  feet  have  with  thofe 
of  the  other  parts  of  the  body,  in  confe- 
quence  of  any  connexion  between  them, 
1 6.  But  although,  from  what  has  be^n 
faid,  it  may  appear  probable,  that  all  ner- 
vous confcnt  proceeds  from  the  brain  ;  yet 
>ve  cannot  pretend,  from  this  principle,  to 
to  account,  in  a  fatisfadory  manner,  for 
all  the  various  inflances  of  fympathy  ob- 
foyable    in  the  bodies  of  animals  ;    lince 

rapAw 


3(>      OF   THE  SYMPATHY 

many  of  them  may  depend  on  fuch  a  date 
of  the  brain,  and  other  parts,  as  cannot 
be  the  objed  of  our  fenfes  *, 

The 

*  If  Itfiiould  be  objeiSed,  that  it  is  as  difficult  to  account; 
for  a  fympathy  between  the  nerves  at  their  origin  in  the 
brain,  as  in  their  courfe  to  the  feveral  parts  where  they 
happen  to  be  connefled  ;  I  anfwer,  that  the  purpofe  of 
thefe  obfervations  is  not  to  explain  how  the  different 
parts  of  the  body  can  be  endowed,  by  means  of  the  nerves, 
either  with  a  fentient  or  a  fympathetic  power,  but  to 
endeavour  to  trace  the  fympathy  of  the  nerves  to  its  true 
fource,  which  I  take  to  be  the  brain  and  fpinal  marrow. 
It  would  be  in  vain  to  inquire  further  into  this  matter, 
unlefs  we  knew  the  minute  ftrudure  and  connccflions  of 
the  feveral  parts  of  the  brain,  and  were  better  acquaint- 
ed with  the  laws  of  union  between  the  body  and  Ibul,  to 
•whofe  fentient  power  the  fympathy  of  the  nerves,  at 
their  origin,  muft  be  at  laft  referred  :  For,  if  confent 
fuppofes  feeling  (12.),  and  if  feeling  cannot,  any  mor© 
than  intelligence,  be  a  property  of  matter,  however  modi- 
fied ;  it  muft  follow,  that  fympathy  depends  upon  a  prin- 
ciple that  is  not  mechanical  ;  and  that,  to  fuppofe  It; 
may  be  owing  folely  to  the  particular  fituation,  arrange* 
ment,  or  connedion  of  the  medullary  fibres  of  the  brain, 
or  to  the  union  of  the  nerves  proceeding  from  it,  is  as 
unreafonable,  as  to  imagine  that  thought  may  be  the  re- 
fult  of  a  motion  among  the  particles  of  the  animal  fplritsj 
or  other  fubtile  matter  in  the  brain. 


OF    THE  NERVES.        57 

The  fympathy  between  every  indivi- 
dual nerve  and  the  whole  fyftem  *,  will 
be  readily  allowed  to  be  owing  to  the  me- 
diation of  the  brain,  and  not  to  any  con- 
nexion or  communication  among  the 
nerves  proceeding  from  it :  I  fhall,  how- 
ever, mention  one  experiment  as  the  mofl 
decifive  of  this  queflion. 

A  folution  of  opium,  applied  to  the  ab- 
dominal mufcles  of  a  frog  whofe  brain 
and  fpinal  marrow  had  been  deftroyed,  did 
not  ftop  the  motion  of  the  heart  near  fo 
foon  as  it  would  have  done,  if  the  brain, 
and  fpinal  marrow  had  been  entire  f .  A 
clear  proof,  that  the  power  of  opitm,  to 
deftroy  the  motion  of  thofe  parts  which 
it  does  not  touch,  is  owing  folely  to  the 
mediation  of  the  brain  and  fpinal  marrow, 
and  not  to  any  other  communication  a- 
mong  the  nerves. 

'Tis  true,  when  a   frog  is  deprived  of 
the  brain  and  fpinal   marrow,  upon  apply- 

H  ing 

•  See  No  lo.  above. 

t  See  Edinburgh  Phyfi^al  Eflkys,  vol.  3.  p.  283 — 288* 
and  p.  303. 


$S     OF    THE    SYMPATHY 

ing  a  folution  of  opium  to  the  abdominal 
mufcles,  its  heart  will  ceafe  from  motion 
fomewhat  fooner  than  it  would  otherways 
do  ;  but  this  eifedl:  is  not  to  be  afcribed  to 
the  action  of  the  opiuin  on  the  nerves 
which  it  touches,  but  to  fome  of  its  finer 
partsbeingtakenupby  the  abforbent  veins*, 
and  carried  with  the  blood  to  the  heart. 

That  life  and  vigour  which  is  al^ 
mod  inftantaneoufly  communicated  to  the 
whole  body,  by  volatile  fplrits  applied  to 
the  nofe,  or  cordial  medicines  received  into 
the  ftomach,  are,  like  the  efFedls  of  opium, 
to  be  referred  to  {omc  Jlitnuhis  or  impreflion 
communicated  to  the  brain  by  the  nerves 
of  the  nofe  and  ftomach.  A  dram  of 
brandy  adts  in  the  fame  manner,  when  it 
fettles  a  fliaking  of  the  hands ;  and  as 
thofe  epileptic  fits  which  are  occafioned 
by  fome  extraordinary  irritation  of  the 
nerves  of  the  arms,  legs,  or  toes,  do  not 
begin  till  after  a  certain  fenfation  has  htm 

propagated 

t  Ibid   p.  304.  and  305.;  aad  Pbyfiological  EjlTajS;^ 
l^dJI;.  2.  p.  305, 


OF    THE    NERVES.        59 

propagated  from  the  part  irritated  to  the 
head ;  we  may  fafely  conclude,  that  thefe 
fympathetic  motions  proceed  from  the 
brain,  and  not  from  any  conne(fi:ion  which 
the  nerves  of  the  parts  aifeded  can  have, 
by  means  of  the  intercoftals,  with  the 
other  nerves  of  the  body  *.  Nor  is  it 
more  furpriling,  that  an  uncommon  irri- 
tation of  any  fcnfible  part  fliould,  efpe- 
ciahy  in  thofe  of  a  delicate  frame,  produce 
convulfive  motions  of  almofl  the  whole 
body,  through  the  intervention  of  the 
brain,  than  that  opium  applied  to  the  nerves 
H  2  of 

*  Dr  Hilary  has  remarked  in  the  colica  pi^onum,th!Lt 
when  the  pain  in  the  bowels  has  continued  long,  and  at 
laft  begins  to  abate,  a  pain  in  the  fhoulJer-points,  and 
adjoining  mufcles,  comes  on,  with  an  unufual  fenfation 
and  tingling  along  the  fpinal  marrow,  that  foon  extends 
itfclf  from  thence  to  the  nerves  of  the  arms  and  legs  ; 
■which  members  firft  become  weak,  and  afterwards  quite 
paralytic.  Fid.  Hilary  on  the  Epidemical  difeafes  of  Bar- 
bado.es,  p.  184.  and  185.  Docs  not  this  oblervation  feem 
to  fhew,  that  the  palfy  of  the  extremities,  occafioned  by 
the  colica  pi^ionum,  is  not  owing  to  any  communication 
between  the  nerves  of  the  bowels  and  of  thofe  parts,  but 
proceeds  from  the  fpinal  marrow,  which  is  firft  affefted  I 


6o      OF    THE    SYMPATHY 

of  the  ftomach,  inteflines,  or  abdominal 
mufcles,  fhould  quickly  deftroy  the  powers 
of  feeling  and  motion,  thronghout  the 
whole  nervous  fyflem  *. 

17.  Nothing  makes  more  fud den  or 
more  furprifing  changes  in  the  body,  than 
the  feveral  paflions  of  the  mind.  Thefe;; 
however,  adl  folely  by  the  mediation  of 
the  brain,  and,  in  a  ftrong  light,  fhew  its 
fympathy  with  every  part  of  the   (yftem. 

Such  is  the  conflitution  of  the  animal 
frame,  that  certain  ideas  or  afFe(5lions  ex- 
cited in  the  mind  are  always  accompanied 
with  correfponding  motions  or  feelings  in 
the  body ;  and  thefe  are  owing  to  fome 
change  made  in  the  brain  and  nerves,  by 
the  mind  or  fentient  principle  "j"  :  but  what 
that  change  is,  or  how  it  produces  thofe 
cfFecfts,  we  know  not :  as  little  can  we  tell, 

why 

*  Vid.  Edinburgh  Phyfical  Effays,  vol.  2-  p.  303. 

f  By  the  fentient  principle,  I  underlland  the  mind 
or  foul  in  man,  and  that  principle  in  brutes  which  re- 
fembles  it.  Vid.  an  Eflay  on  the  vital  and  other  invo- 
luntary motions,  edit.  2.  p.  307 — 323. 


OF    THE    NERVES.       6i 

why  fhame  fhould  raife  a  heat  and  rednefs 
in  the  face,  while  fear  is  attended  with  a 
palenefs.  Thefe,  and  many  other  efFedts 
of  the  different  paffions,  mud  be  referred 
to  the  original  conftitution  of  our  frame, 
or  the  laws  of  miion  between  the  foul  and 
body. 

But  although,  in  thefe  matters,  wemuft 
confefs  our  ignorance  ;  yet,  from  what  we 
certainly  know  of  the  action  of  the  nerves, 
we  can  eafily  fee,  that  a  change  in  them 
may  occafion  many  of  thofe  effects  which 
are  produced  by  the  paffions. 

As  the  force  of  the  heart,  and  the  regu- 
larity with  which  it  contradls,  depend,  in. 
a  great  meafure,  on  the  flate  of  its  nerves, 
fo  does  the  adtion  of  the  arterial  fyllem 
in  carrying  on  the  circulation ;  and  parti- 
cularly thofe  alternate  contradtions  with 
which  the  minuter  vefTels  are  continually 
agitated,  and  to  which  the  motion  of  the 
fluids  in  them  is,  in  a  great  meafure, 
owing  *. 

The 

*  It  has  been  fliewn,  from  a  variety  of  fafts,  as  well 
as  from  analogy,  (PhyfiologicalEffays^edit.  2.  p.  35.  &c.) 


62      OF  THE  SYMPATHY 

The  other  mufcles  of  the  body  are  of- 
ten, by  an  uncommon  exertion  of  the  ner- 
vous power,  afFed:ed  either  with  alternate 
convulfive  motions,  or  a  continued  fpafm. 
It  is  reafonable,  therefore,  to  think,  that 
the  heart  and  vafcular  fyflem  may   fuffer 

in 

that  the  very  fmall  veflels,  to  which  the  diredl  force  of  the 
heart ^oes  not  feem  to  reach,  are  endowed  with  a  power 
of  motion  excited  by  ih^Jimulus  of  the  fluids,  as  the/ 
pafs  along ;  and  that  thefe  vibratory  or  ofcillatory 
motions  of  thofe  veflels  are  much  increafed,  when  they 
are  more  than  ordinarily  irritated,  or  when,  through 
ftrong  paffions  or  other  caufes,  the  nerves  are  greatly 
affeded. 

The  fpeedy  inflammation  of  the  eyes,  by  acrid  fubftan- 
ces,  the  inflammation  of  the  fkin  by  blifters  and  fma- 
pjfms,  and  the  increafed  fecretion  from  the  nofe  and 
falivary  glands,  when  ftimulating  fubftances  are  taken 
into  the  mouth,  or  applied  to  the  noflrils,  can  only  be 
accounted  for  from  an  increafed  motion  of  the  fmalJ  vef- 
fels  of  thofe  parts.  And  that  the  circulation  of  the 
fluids,  in  the  very  fmall  veflels  depends  greatly  on  fome 
influence  communicated  to  them  by  the  nerves,  appears 
from  Dr  Nuck's  having  obferved  the  fecretion  by  the 
glands  to  be  much  diminiflied,  or  entirely  ftopt,  after 
their  nerves  were  obftruded  or  comprefled  [a), 
{a)  Adenograph.  curiof,  p.  i6. 


OF  THE  NERVES.  63 

in  the  fame  manner ;  and  that,  when  the 
inflaence  of  the  nerves  is  much  weakened, 
or  in  fome  meafure  fufpended,  the  vefTels 
>vijl  be  relaxed,  the  circulation  will  become 
Jano-uid;  and  an  uniyerfal  debility  will  en- 
fue. 

The  increafed  force  of  the  heart,  and 
fomctimes  indeed  of  the  whole  mufcles  of 
the  body,  from  great  anger  or  rage,  is  to  be 
afcribed  to  a  flronger  exertion  of  the  ner- 
vous power ;  while  the  trembling  and  de-- 
bihty  produced  by  fear  arife  from  a  coi> 
trary  caufe. 

The  palpitation  of  the  heart  from  ter-» 
ror  feems  to  proceed  from  the  blood  re* 
turning  to  it,  in  too  great  a  quantity,  in 
confequence  of  a  fudden  fpafni  or  contract 
tion  of  the  veins.  It  is  alfo,  in  part,  occa-^ 
fioned  ^by  the  heart  being  rendered  more 
irritable,  or  being  otherwife  difturbed  by^ 
the  violent  agitation  of  the  nervous  fyftem. 

The  rednefs  and  glow  of  the  face  from 
a  fenfe  of  fliame  are  mod  probably  owing 
IP  an  increafed  jnotion  of  the  (inall  arte* 


64    OF  THE   SYMPATHY. 

ries  of  that  part ;  for  the  florid  colour  and 
fuddcn  warmth  feern  to  be  more  the  con- 
fequcnces  of  a  quicker  motion  of  the  blood 
in  thefe  vefTels,  than  a  flagnation  of  it 
from  any  compreffion  or  fpafm  of  the  veins, 
which  would  produce  but  a  livid  rednefs 
and  lefs  heat.  Befides,  we  know,  that  a 
greater  degree  of  rednefs  is  inflantly 
brought  on  the  eyes,  and,  in  a  fhort  time, 
on  the  fkin,  by  an  increafed  motion  of  their 
fmall  vefTels,  upon  the  application  ol  acrid 
fubflances  to  them. 

Some  grow  pale  upon  anger;  which 
efFed:  may  be  owing  to  a  fpafm,  or  con- 
tinued contraction  of  the  fmall  arteries  of 
the  face,  by  which  the  motion  of  the  blood 
in  them  will  be  retarded. 

Th  e  palenefs  from  fear  may  arife  from 
a  different  caufe,  viz,  a  deficiency  of  the 
nervous  power:  hence,  though  the  fmall 
vefTels  are  not  affedled  with  any  fpafm,  as 
in  anger;  yet  they  are,  in  a  great  meafure, 
deprived  of  their  alternate  contractions,  to 
which  the  motion  of  the  blood  in  them 

is 


OF    THE    NERVES.        63 

is  principally  owing.  But  the  more  than 
ufual  flow  of  the  blood  towards  the  heart, 
occafioned  by  terror,  feems  to  fhew,  that 
the  veins,  at  leail,  are  fuddenly  con  trad- 
ed. 

The  diminution  of  perfpiration  attend- 
ing fuch  paffions  as  affed  us  with  fadnels, 
may  be  owing  to  the  impaired  force  of 
the  heart  and  arteries:  and  the  diarrhcsa 
from  fear  may  be  a  confequence  of  ob- 
ftruded  perfpiration,  or  of  that  debiUty 
and  relaxation  which  fear  or  grief  is  ob- 
ferved  to  bring  on  the  alimentary  canal. 

The  increafed  fecretion  of  tears  from, 
grief,  and  the  great  flux  of  limpid  urine, 
which  is  often  occafioned  by  fear  or  vexa- 
tion, are  owing  to  an  increafed  motion, 
excited  by  thefe  paflions,  in  the  fniall  ar- 
teries and  excretory  duds  of  the  lachrymal 
glands  and  kidneys. 

The  dull  look  of  the  eyes  in  grief,  and 
their  lively  appearance  from  joy,  depend 
upon  a  diminution  or  increafe  of  the  mo- 
tion of  the  fluids  through  the  fm all  veflTels 

I  of 


66     OF    THE    SYMPATHY 

of  that  organ,  particularly  of  the  cornea, 
iij  cpnfequence  of  their  vibratory  motions 
being  leflened  or  augmented,  by  the  change 
which  thofe  different  paflions  produce  in 
their  nerves. 

It  would  be  eafy,  upon  the  fame  prin^ 
ciples,  to  account  for  various  other  effects 
produced  by  the  paflions;  but  what  is  al- 
ready faid  will  be  fufficient  for  Ihewing 
in  what  manner  we  can  reafoi;  upon  this 
fubjec% 

1 8.  Because  the  nerves  are  obferved, 
in  many  parts  of  the  body,  to  furround 
the  arteries  and  veins  like  fmall  cords;  it 
has  been  thought,  that  the  fudden  changes 
in  the  motion  of  the  fluids  made  by  the 
paflions,  are  owing  to  thefe  vefTels  being 
contraded  by  fuch  ligatures.  But  this 
opinion,  though  fupported  by  authors  of 
great  charadler  *,  will,  upon  a  further  in- 
quiry, appear  inconfiftent  with  what  we 
know  for  certain  of  the  nature  and  ufe  of 
the  nerves. 

JEyER'^ 

>  Willis,  VieuiTensy  &€» 


OF    THE    NERVES.        ij 

Every  part  endowed  with  a  power  of 
contra(ftion  owes  that  adtion  either  to  its 
mafcular  ftrudture,  or  to  its  elafticity; 
but  as  the  nerves  are  in  no  fenfe  mufcular, 
fo  they  have  been  proved  to  be  among  the 
leafl  elaflic  parts  of  the  body.  Further, 
in  a  natural  ftate,  the  nerves  lie  pretty 
loofe  in  that  cellular  fubflance  which  fur- 
rounds  the  arteries,  and  arc  never  on  the 
ftretch:  and,  upon  making  the  experi- 
ment, we  Ihall  find,  that  the  trunks  of 
thofe  nervous  branches  that  encompals 
the  large  arteries  and  veins,  muft  be  confi- 
derably  pulled  before  thefe  veffels  can  be 
fenfibly  contracted.  There  is  no  example 
of  any  motion  being  performed  by  a  con- 
travHiion  of  the  nerves,  whofe  action  does 
not  confifl  in  pulling,  or  in  growing  more 
tenfe  at  one  time  than  another,  but  in 
fupplying  the  mufcular  fibres  with  that 
influence  or  power  which  feems  to  be  im- 
mediately necelfary  for  their  contra<5lion. 

Lastly,  it  appears  from  experiments, 

that  the  nerves  are  utterly  incapable  of 

I  %  any 


6B     OF    THE    SYMPATHY 

any  fuch  contradioii  as  is  here  fuppofed. 
Nothing  occafions  a  more  fudden  or 
ftronger  exertion  of  the  nervous  power, 
than  an  irritation  of  the  brain,  fpinal  mar* 
row,  or  nerves ;  as  appears  from  the  vio- 
lent convulfions  in  the  mufcles  and  nm- 
fcular  organs,  when  thofe  parts  arc  in- 
jured: bur,  on  fuch  occafions,  it  has  never 
been  obferved,  that  the  nerves  themfelves 
became  fhorter,  or  underwent  any  fenfible 
change.  Nay,  the  illuftrious  M.  de  Hal- 
ler  has,  after  many  experiments,  juflly 
concluded,  that  the  nerves  are  not  endow- 
ed with  irritability,  or  a  power  of  contrac- 
tion, when  llimulated  *. 

But,  fuppofing  the   nervous   filaments 
could,  like  cords,  ftraiten  the  blood-vef- 

fcls, 

*  It  may  be  proper  here  to  take  notice,  that  although 
M'  de  Haller  had  embraced  the  dodrine  of  the  nervous 
lacquei,  and  faid  more  in  fupport  of  it  than  any  other 
author;  yet  he  has  candidly  given  up  this  opinion,  up- 
on finding  it  not  confirmed  by  any  of  thofe  numerous 
experiments  he  has  made  on  living  animals.  Vid.  Me- 
moires  fur  la  nature  fenfible  et  irritable,  tomi  i.  p.  238. 
and  239. 


OF  THE  NERVES.        69 

fcls,  as  feveral  writers  have  imagined  ;  yet, 
upon  rcfledlion,  we  Ihall  be  convinced,  that 
the  changes  produced  in  the  body  by  the 
feveral  paflions  cannot  be  explained  upon 
that  principle. 

Thus  the  rednefs  and  glow  of  the  face 
attending  a  confcioufnefs  of  ihame,  can- 
not be  owing  to  a  conftriction  of  the  tem- 
poral or  jugular  veins  by  the  nervous  cords 
furrounding  them  * ;  for  this  would  not 
raife  a  florid  colour,  but  a  rednefs  of  a  dif- 
ferent kind,  and  accompanied  but  with 
little  heat. 

In  like  manner,  a  compreflion  of  the 
veins  of  the  penis  by  the  nerves  will  not 
account  for  its  eredtion  f,  which  is  owing 
more  to  an  increafed  motion  of  the  blood 
in  the  arteries  than  to  any  obftruiStion  of 
its  veins  %.     Nor  is  it  lefs  credible,  that 

the 

*  Vieuflens  Neurograph.  lib.  3.  cap.  4. 

t  Duvernoy  in  Aft.  Pretropol.  torn*  2.  p.  379.  383. 
384. 

:|:  See  an  Eflay  on  the  vital  motions,  §  vi. ;  and  the 
celebrated  Albinus's  Annotationes  academicac,  lib,  2. 
cap.  i8. 


70      OF  THE  SYMPATHY 

the  fmall  arteries  of  the  penis  Ihould,  iri 
confequence  of  an  afFedtion  of  the  mind^ 
be  agitated  with  an  uncommon  motion^ 
than  that  the  fmell,  fight,  or  even  rcmem-* 
brance  of  grateful  food,  fhould  affedt  the 
falivary  veiTels  of  a  hungry  perfon  in  a 
jQmilar  manner. 

A  convullive  contra(flion  of  the  plexus 
renalis  occafioned  by  fear  might  render 
the  urine  limpid,  by  flraitening  the  fe- 
cretory  veflels  of  the  kidneys ;  but,  upon 
the  fame  principle,  it  ought  alfo  to  leffen 
its  quantity,  contrary  to  what  happens, 

I  fhall  only  add,  that  it  may  appear 
from  what  has  been  faid,  that  fuch  ex- 
preffions  as  the  incrcafed  motions,  convul- 
fions,  or  fpafmodic  contradlions  of  the 
nerves,  are  all  improper,  although  they 
have  been  frequently  ufed  by  many  learned 
writers. 

19,  There  are  many  of  the  m oft  re- 
markable fympathetic  motions,  both  in  a 
found  and  difeafed  ftate,  in  which  we  can 

plainly 


OF   THE   NERVES.         71 

plainly  perceive  a  wifq  intention.  Thus, 
ihe  contrad;ion  of  the  pupil  when  light 
offends  the  eyes,  aHd  of  the  eye-lids  when 
grofler  bodies  threaten  to  hurt  them  ;  the 
vomiting,  from  a. (lone  in  the  kidneys  and 
ureters  ;  the  coughing  occafioned  by  an 
irritation  of  the  meatus  auditorius ;  the 
continued  contraction  of  the  abdominal 
Kiufcles  and  diaphragm  in  a  tenefmiis^  a 
flrangury,  and  during  the  pains  in  labour; 
the  alternate  contradions  of  the  fame  mul^ 
eles  in  fneezing,  coughing,  and  in  the  hic^ 
cup  J  the  increafed  motion  of  the  organs  of 
refpiration  in  the  fit  of  an  aflhma  ;  the  co- 
pious fecretjon  of  tears  and  ilit  faliva,  when 
Simulating  fubftances  are  applied  to  the 
eyes,  or  taken  into  the  mouth  ;  and  the 
uncommon  flux  of  humours  to  every  part 
that  is  irritated.  All  thefe,  and  many 
more,  are  the  efforts  of  nature  to  free  the 
body  of  fomething  hurtful ;  and  are  fo 
many  inflances  of  that  principle  of  felf-^ 
prefervation  fo  confpiciious  in  all  animals. 
Tfhefe  motions,  therefore,  cannot,  in  my 

opinion^ 


72     OF  THE   SYMPATHY 

opinion,  be  referred  to  any  connexion  or 
communication  among  the  nerves,  but  to 
,  the  brain  itfelf,  and  to  that  fentient  ^m^ 
which  animates  our  whole  frame,  and 
which  endeavours,  at  all  times,  to  free 
the  body  from  whatever  occafions  pain  or 
uneaflnefs. 

Indeed,  when  thefe  efforts  are  unable 
to  expel  the  offending  caufe,  as  in  great 
inflammations  of  the  flomach,  or  when  a 
large  flone  is  lodged  in  the  kidneys  or 
bladder,  they  often  become  hurtful,  and 
incrcafe  the  pain  they  were  intended  to 
remove.  Nay,  as  in  many  other  in  (lances, 
the  befl  things  may,  by  excefs,  become 
the  worfl ;  fo  this  endeavour  to  free  the 
body,  or  any  of  its  parts,  from  what  is 
noxious,  is  fometimes  fo  llrong  and  im- 
petuous as  to  have  fatal  confequcnces. 
But,  in  general,  this  principle  of  preferva- 
tion  is  highly  ufeful,  fince  without  it  we 
fhould  often  cherifh,  within  our  bodies, 
fuch  caufes  as  would  fooner  or  later  end  in 
our  ruino 

Nor 


OF   THE  NERVES.         73 

Nor  can  we  confider  the  mind  as  a6l- 
iiig  either  igiiorantly  or  perverfely,  when 
k  fometimes  excites  fuch  motions  in  the 
body  as  increafe  its  own  pain,  and,  in  the 
end,  prove  more  hurtful  than  beneficial; 
for  thefe  motions  do  not  proceed,  as  the 
followers  of  Stahl  have  imagined,  from  any- 
rational  views  in  the  mind,  or  a  confci- 
oufnefs  that  the  welfare  of  the  body 
demands  them,  but  are  an  immedi- 
ate confequence  of  the  difagreeable  per- 
cepti(m  which  excites  it  into  action  *. 

20.  There  are  various  inflances  of  fym- 
pathy,  which  feem  to  be  chiefly  occafion- 
cd  by  the  vicinity  of  the  parts  f .     Of 

K  this 

*  See  this  pDint  further  illuftrated  in  an  Eflay  on  th^ 
vital  and  other  involuntary  motions  of  animals,  edit.  2. 
p.  315 321.  and  340 343. 

f  Parts  may  fuffer  from  vicinity,  altho*  their  nerves 
have  no  particular  fympathy  with  one  another.  Thus, 
pain  caufes  inflammation,  not  only  in  the  veflels  imme- 
diately affeded,  but  alfo  in  thofe  contiguous  to  them. 
Further,  any  confiderable  obftrudion,  though  attended 
with  little  or  no  inflammation,  may,  in  fome  cafes,  oc- 
cafion  fympathetic  affedions  in  the  neighbouring  parts. 


74      OF    THE  SYMPATHY 

this  kind  is,  perhaps,  the  confent  between 
the  neck  of  the  bladder  and  extremity  of 
the  reBum  s  whence  a  violent  tenefmus  and 
ftrangut^''  mutually  excite  each  other. 
The  vomiting  occafioned  by  an  inflamma- 
tion of  the  liver  ;  the  pain,  fwelling,  and 
inflammation  of  the  hand  and  arm,  from 
a  paronychia  ;  the  increafed  fenflbility  of 
the  retina^  from  an  inflammation  of  the 
conjufiBiva  or  cornea ;  the  pain  and  fwelling 
of  the  face  from  the  toothach,  and  the 
pain  in  the  ear  from  an  inflammation  of 
the  back  part  of  the  fauces  ;  the  fuppref- 
fion  of  urine  from  an  inflammation  of  the 
inteflincs  or  raefentery,   or  from  a  fevere 

nephritic 

by  changing  the  dlllribution  p£  the  blood  through  thip 
veflels  of  thofe  parts. 

■When  one  of  the  fingers  is  inflamed,  in  confequence 
of  a  wound  below  the  nail,  or  fome  acrid  matter  lodged 
there,  the  hand,  and  fometimes  the  arm,  may  become 
fwelled  and  inflamed,  not  only  by  means  of  the  pain» 
which  occafions  a  greater  derivation  of  flpids  to  the 
veflels  of  the  finger  and  hand,  but  alfo  from  a  kind  of 
inflammation  being  propagated  up  the  arm,  along  the 
?:oa£s  of  the  Derves  which  are  diflributed  to  the  fingers. 


OF   THE   NERVES.         75 

nephritic  paroxyf.ii  in  either  kidney  ;  the 
fympathy  between  the  larynx  and  phar^jnx, 
and  feveral  others,  may  be,  in  a  great  mea- 
fure,  owing  to  the  fame  caufe. 

To  this  head,  alfo,  may  be  referred 
thofe  fympathies  which  are  fometimes  oc- 
cafioned  by  hard  tumours  preffing  upon, 
or  irritating  the  nerves  that  are  contigu- 
ous to  them.  Thus,  a  hard  fwelUng  on 
one  fide  of  the  neck  has  occafioned  an 
uneafy  fenfation  near  the  end  of  the  radius, 
a  little  above  the  wrift :  and  the  fvvellino- 
and  drawing  up  of  the  tefticle,  from  a 
flone  defcending  through  the  ureter,  is 
probably  owing  to  an  irritation  of  the 
nerves  of  the  tefticle,  where  they  run  a- 
long  the  pfiaj  mufcle,  over  which  the  ure- 
ter pafFes.  But  it  may  be  proper  to  ob- 
ferve,  that  the  heavinefs  of  the  eyes,  and 
fleepinefs  after  a  full  meal,  drinking  large- 
ly of  flrong  liquors,  or  a  dofe  of  ophim, 
which  have  been  afcribed  to  the  compref- 
fion  of  the  third  pair  of  nerves,  by  the 
diftenfion  of  a  branch  of  the  carotid  ar- 
K  2  tery. 


*j^      OF  THE   SYMPATHY 

tery,  which  pafTes  over  them  near  theif 
origin  J  are  owing  folely  to  the  change  pro- 
duced in  the  nerves  of  the  flomach ;  whence 
the  fenfibility  of  the  whole  fyftem  is  im- 
paired. 

May  not  the  complaints  of  the  fto- 
mach  and  bowels,  from  a  fnpprellion  of  the 
menfes^  and  foon  after  conception,  be  ow- 
ing not  ouly  to  a  particular  fympathy  be- 
tween their  nerves,  but  partly  alfo  to  the 
change  made  in  the  quantity  of  the  blood 
thrown  upon  thefe  parts,  by  the  obflruc- 
tion  of  the  uterine  veflcls?  And  does  not 
the  fudden  relief  obtained  by  a  fmall  eva- 
cuation of  blood  from  the  hzemorrhoi- 
dal  veins,  fliew,  that  many  diforders  may 
be  either  occafioned  or  cured  by  a  fmall 
change  made  in  the  diflribution  of  the 
blood  to  the  different  parts  of  the  body  I 

The  pain  in  the  head,  fometimes  the 
confequence  of  wearing  flrait  fhoes,  is,  per- 
haps, rather  to  be  afcribed  to  a  greater  de- 
termination of  blood  to  the  veflels  of  the 
-pericranium,  than  to  any  particular  fympa- 
thy 


OF  THE  NERVES.        77 

thy  between  the  nerves  of  that  part  and 
the  feet.  And  the  efieifl  of  finapifms  ap- 
plied to  the  foles  of  the  feet,  in  leflening 
a  delirium,  is  chiefly  owing  to  the  pain 
they  excite*;  which,  by  affeding  the  whole 
nervous  fyftem,  lefTens  the  perception  of 
that  irritation  in  the  brain,  or  its  mem- 
branes, which  is  the  caufe  of  the  delirium  : 
and  hence  it  is  that  finapifms,  applied  to 
the  hams,  or  other  fenfible  parts,  have 
produced  the  fame  eiFeifts  as  when  laid  to 
the  feet. 

22.  Lastly,  in  morbid  cafes,  we  meet 
with  a  variety  of  anomalous  fympathies, 
which  we  can  neither  explain  from  the 
vicinity  of  the  parts^  the  connexion  or 
communication  between  their  nerves,  nor 
from  that  general  tendency  to  the  welfare 
and  prefervation  of  the  body,  which  is  fo 
obfervable  in  many  fympathetic  motions 
that  take  place  in  a  found  as  well  as  a  mor- 
bid flate. 

Of  this  kind  are  the  purging  from 
fmelling    to   a   cathartic  medicine ;    that 

pungent 


yB     OF  THE  SYMPATHY 

pnngcnt  fenfation  felt  on  the  top  of  the 
left  flioulder- blade,  when  a  pimple  a  little 
"below  the  out-fide  of  the  right  knee  was 
fcratched  * ;  that  burning  pain,  which, 
upon  making  water,  has  been*  felt  in  the 
foles  of  the  feet  by  a  perfon  affc(5led  with 
an  ulcer  in  the  bladder  ;  the  Jpafmuj  cynkus 
from  a  wound  in  the  foot,  and  the  lock- 
ing of  the  jaws  after  an  amputation. 
Thus,  what  reafon  can  be  given,  why, 
fometimes,  after  cutting  ofFan  arm  or  leg, 
thofe  mufcles  which  raife  ihe  lower  jaw 
Ihould  be  afleded  with  a  fpafm,  rather  than 
any  other  mufcles?  I  Ihall  allow,  that 
fome  fymptom  of  this  kind  might  be  ex- 
pe(5ted  from  the  irritation  of  the  nerves  of 
the  flump,  or  from  fome  acrid  humour 
abforbed  by  the  veiTels  of  the  fore,  and 
carried  to  the  brain ;  but,  in  either  cafe, 
why  do  the  temporal  and  malFeter  mufcles 
only  fufFer  ?  ^ 

I   think    it    moft  probable,     that   the 
anomalous  fympathies    above  mentioned, 

and 

•  Sec  Hales's  Statical  Effays,  vol.  2.  p.  60. 


OF  THE  NERVES.        79 

and  many  others,  whofe  caufe  appears  e- 
qually  obfcLire,  proceed  from  that  general 
fympathy  which  prevails  thro*  the  whole 
nervous  fyflem,  and  which,  in  certain 
cafes,  in  confequence  of  the  uncommon 
weaknefs  or  delicacy  of  a  particular  organ, 
makes  it  fufFer,  although  the  other  parts 
of  the  body  are  not  fenfibly  affedted.  The 
following  cafes,  compared  together,  will 
ferve  to  illuftrate  this, 

A  middle  aged  woman,  who  had  fpraiti* 
ed  her  right  foot  and  ancle,  fome  weeks 
after,  not  only  complained  of  a  pain  and 
ftiffncfs  in  thefe  parts,  but  alfo  felt,  tho* 
in  a  much  Jefs  degree,  a  tenfion  and  fore- 
nefs  over  her  whole  body.  On  the  other 
hand,  a  girl  of  nine  years  of  age,  as  often 
as  one  of  her  feet  was  extended,  fo  as  to 
bring  it  nearly  to  a  right  line  with  the  leg, 
and  confequently  greatly  to  ftretch  its 
ligam^ents  and  tendons,  was  inflantly  feized 
with  a  moil  violent  convulfive  cough, 
which  continued  without  intermiffion   as 

long 


go      OF  THE  SYMPATHY 

long  as  the  foot  was  kept  in  that  pofi-* 
tion. 

In  the  former  cafe,  it  will  readily  be  al^ 
lowed,  that  the  flifFnefs  and  forenefs  felt 
through  the  whole  body  proceeded  from 
that  general  fympathy  which  obtains  be^ 
tween  all  its  parts,  by  the  mediation  of  the 
brain,  which,  however,  would  not  have 
produced  fuch  an  effeifl:,  but  for  the  pecu* 
liar  delicacy  of  the  nervous  fyflem  in  that 
patient. 

In  the  latter  cafe,  the  convulfive  cough, 
occafioned  by  extending  the  foot,  could 
not  proceed  from  any  particular  fympa- 
thy between  this  part  and  the  lungs,  in 
confequence  of  any  connecftion  or  commu- 
nication between  their  nerves,  fince  the 
nerves  of  many  other  parts  have  an  equal 
or  greater  connecSlion  with  thofe  which 
ferve  the  feet.  This  convulfive  cough, 
therefore,  muil  be  afcribed  to  a  peculiar 
delicacy  or  uncommon  fenfibility  of  the 
lungs ;  whence,  in  confequence  of  that  ge- 
neral 


OF   THE  NERVES.        St 

neral  fympathy  which  prevails  through  the 
whole  nervous  fyftem,  they  were  afFedted 
with  a  difagreeable  fenfation,  as  often  ais 
the  ligaments  and  tendons  of  the  ancle  and 
foot  were  overflretched  ;  which,  however, 
produced  no   uneafincfs   nor   fympathetic 
motion  in  the  other  parts  of  the  body, 
becaufe  they  were  endued  with  no  fuch 
morbid  delicacy  or  uncommon  fcnfibility. 
As  a  further  proof  of  this,  I  knew  a 
woman  who  had  fo  delicate  a  flomach, 
that,  when  this  organ  was  more  than  ufual* 
ly  indifpofed,  fhc  was  apt  to  fall  a  retching 
as  often  as  flie  made  the  neceffary  effort 
to  pafs  water  ;   and  I  have  had  feveral  pa- 
tients afFe(n:ed,  in  confequence  of  a  viru- 
lent gonorrhoea,  with  a  gleet  and  a  tender- 
nefs,  and  fome  degree  of  forenefs  in  the 
urethra,  who,   as  often  as  they  drank  two 
or  three  glaffes  of  wine,  immediately  felt 
an   uncommon   uneafinefs    in    that    part. 
This    extraordinary   fympathy,    however, 
between  the  flomach  and  tirethra,    ceafed 
as  foon  as  the  latter  became  quite  found. 

h  Since 


82       OF  THE  SYMPATHY 

Si>fCE  we  obferve  that  only  thofp 
whofe  nervous  fyftem  is  remarkably  delir 
cate,  are  afFcdted  with  general  and  violer^t 
convulfive  motions  or  fpafms,  from  the 
padions  of  the  mind,  diforders  in  the  prifnte 
vi^,  and  other  caiafes;  have  we  not  reafon 
to  conclude,  when,  in  cpnfequence  of  an 
irritation  of  any  one  part,  an  uncommon 
fympathetic  motion  is  produced  in  a  diflant 
organ,  with  which  it  has  lefs  cpnpecStion, 
either  by  the  nerves  or  blood-veflels,  than 
with  many  other  parts  which  are  noways 
diflurbed;  that  fuch  fympathetic  motion 
is  owing  to  a  peculiar  dehcacy  or  mobility 
of  that  -organ ;  and  that,  were  the  other 
moving  organs  of  the  body  equally  deli-, 
cate  and  fenfible,  univerfal  or  at  leaft 
more  general  convulfions  or  fpafms  would 
have  been  the  confequence  ? 

But,  fuppofjng  we  could  neither  e3«- 
plain  fatisfadtorily,  nor  even  conjedure 
with  probability  concerning  the  caufe  of 
many  uncommon  and  anomalous  fympa* 
thies,  it  would  be  no  more  than  what  hap- 
pen? 


OF    THE    NERVES.        83 

pens  to  us  every  day,  in  our  inquires  into 
the  more  abftrufe  operations  of  nature. 
In  every  part,  even  of  the  inanimate 
world,  we  find  inexplicable  difficulties: 
What  wonder  then,  if,  in  the  human 
body,  a  fyllem  fo  curious,  fo  fubtile  and 
Compounded,  we  fhould  meet  with  many 
appearances  which  we  cannot  at  all  ac- 
count for?  The  farther  we  pufh  our  in- 
quiries into  nature,  the  more  fhall  we  be 
convinced  of  our  ignorance,  and  how  fraall 
a  portion  is  known  of  the  works  of  the 
Great  Creator  ! 

**  Scarcely  do  we  guefs  aright  at  the 
"  things  that  are  upon  earth,  and  with  la- 
**  hour  do  we  find  the  things  that  are  be- 
**  fore  us  *•" 


L  2  CHAP. 


*  Wifdom,  oap.  ix.  verf.  j6. 


OF   NERVOUS 


CHAP.    ir. 


Cy  Nervous,     Hypochondriac, 
and  H  Y  s  T  E  R  I  c  ^Diforders  in  generah 

THE  nerves,  like  the  other  parts  of 
the  body,  are  liable  to  various  dif- 
eafcs,  which  may  arife  from  a  fault  either 
in  their  coats,  their  medullary  fubflance, 
or  in  the  brain  and  fpinal  marrow,  from 
which  they  all  proceed. 

The  coats  of  the  nerves  may  be  ob- 
flrudled,  or  inflamed,  comprefTed  by  hard 
fwellings,  or  irritated  by  acrid  humours; 
With  regard  to  their  medullary  fubflance; 
if  a  fingle  nervous  filament,  exclufive  of 
the  membranes  furrounding  it,  be  an  ex- 
tremely fmall  canal,  we  may  conceive  it, 
according  to  the  different  ftates  of  the 
body,  to  be  endued  wdth  different  degrees 

of 


DISORDERS  IN  GENERAL.   85 

of  firmncfs  or  laxity,  whence  the  action 
of  the  nerves  may  perhaps  be  confiderably 
afFedied. 

This  nervous  canal  may  likewife  be 
o.bftru(5ted,  though  fuch  obftrudion  is  ra- 
ther more  likely  to  arife  from  fome  exter- 
nal caufe,  than  from  any  fwelling  in  the 
medullary  fubflance  of  which  its  fides  con- 
fifl,  or  from  the  vifcidity  of  the  fluid  it 
contains.  In  the  fniall  arterial  velTels 
obftru<5tions  may  often  happen  from  a 
fpafm ;  but  although  the  nerves  commu- 
nicate a  power  of  motion  to  other  parts, 
yet  it  does  not  appear  that  they  themfelves 
have  any  motion. 

If  the  medullary  part  of  the  nerves  be 
Cmple  and  not  made  of  vefTels,  hke  the  o- 
thcr  parts  of  the  body,  it  can  neither  be 
liable  to  obftrudlions  nor  inflammations, 
but  may  fulTer  greatly  from  the  irritation 
of  acrid  fubftances. 

With  refpecft  to  that  fluid  which  the 
nerves  are  fuppofed  to  contain,  as  we  are 
wholely  ignorant  of  its  na^ture,  both  in  a 

ibund 


S6  or    NERVOUS 

found  and  morbid  flate,  we  can  nevei^ 
know  when  the  difeafes  of  the  nerves  arifc 
from  a  fault  in  this  fluid,  although  their 
a(ftion  mull  be  coniiderably  affedted  when- 
ever  it  is  vitiated* 

When  the  brain  or  fpinal  marrow  is 
obftruifted)  comprelTed,  irritated,  or  other- 
wife  difeafed,  the  nerves  will  fuffer  almoft 
equally,  as  if  they  themfelves  were  primari- 
ly affeded. 

It  would  be  of  little  ufe  to  in£ft  fur- 
ther on  thofe  faults  in  the  brain  or  nerves 
which  may  produce  difeafes,  iince  the  fub- 
tility  of  thefe  parts  makes  it  often  inipof- 
lible  for  us,  either  before  or  after  death, 
to  difcover,  precifely,  from  what  caufe 
fuch  difeafes  proceed ;  nor  have  we  any 
figns  to  diflinguifh  from  one  another 
thofe  morbid  fymptoms  which  may  arife 
from  a  fault  in  the  coats,  the  medullary 
fubflance,  or  the  fluid  of  the  nerves.  But 
how  much  foever  we  may  be  in  the  dark 
about  the  immediate  caufes  of  the  difeafes 
of  the  nerves,  yet  their  efleds  may  all  be 

reduced 


DISORDERS  IN  GENERAL.  By 

reduced  to  fome  change  in  that  fenfibility 
or  moving  power  which  the  nerves  com- 
municate to  the  different  part  of  the 
body. 

The  fentient  power  of  the  nerves  may 
be  either  too  acute,  obtufe,  depraved,  or 
wholely  wanting  ;  and  that  power  in  them 
which  is  necelTary  for  mufcular  motion 
may  be  either  weakened,  or  quite  dellroyr 
ed, 

I.  (a)  When  the  feeling  of  the  nerves 
is  too  acute,  difagreeable  or  painful  fenfar 
tions,  and  violent  or  irregular  motions 
will  be  excited  in  the  body,  by  the  appli- 
cation of  fuch  fubftances  to  the  nerves  of 
the  different  organs,  as  in  a  more  healthy 
and  firmer  (late  would  either  occafion  lefs 
^ncafinefs  and  diflurbance,  or  none  at  all. 
Jn  fuch  a  condition  of  the  nervous  iyflem, 
the  paflions  of  the  mind,  errors  in  diet, 
and  changes  of  heat  and  cold,  or  of  the 
weight  and  humidity  of  the  atmofphere. 


85  OF    NERVOUS 

will  be  apt  to  produce  morbid  fymptoms ; 
fo  that  there  will  be  no  firm  or  long  con- 
tinned  (late  of  health,  but  almofl  a  con- 
flant  fucceflion  of  greater  or  lefs  com- 
plaints. 

(^)  On  the  other  hand,  when  either  the 
whole  nerves  or  a  part  of  them,  are  dcpri* 
ved  of  a  proper  degree  of  fenfibility,  al- 
though the  body  in  general  will  then  be 
lefs  apt  to  be  afetfted  by  the  caufes  above 
mentioned ;  yet,  as  fome  of  its  organs  will 
not  be  fufSciently  irritated  by  the  Jlimuli 
defigned  by  nature  to  excite  them  into  ac- 
tion, theadlion  of  thofe  parts  will  be  imper- 
feft.  Thus,  when  the  nerves  of  the  inte* 
ilines  are  lefs  difpofed  than  ufual  to  be  af- 
fected by  their  natural  Jiimuli,  the  irritation 
of  the  ahments,  air,  and  bile,  will  only 
be  able  to  raife  a  languid  periflakic  mo- 
tion, and  therefore  the  perfon  will  become 
coftive.  When  the  fenfibility  of  the  re- 
tina is  impaired,   objedts  are  feen  lefs  di- 

itindtlyi 


DISORDERS  IN  GENERAL.   89 

flindlly  ;  and  when  the  auditory  nerves  lofe 
fome  part  of  their  exquifite  fenfibility,  the 
ear  cannot  accurately  diflinguilh  the  va- 
rious mufical  founds. 

(c)  When  the  feeling  of  the  nerves  in 
any  of  the  organs  of  the  body  becomes 
unnatural  or  depraved,  the  mod  difagree- 
able  fenfations  and  alarming  fymptoms  are 
fometimes  raifed  by  the  application  of  fuch 
fubflances  as  in  a  found  fhate  would  pro- 
duce no  manner  of  difturbance :  And  hence 
we  may  undcrftand  the  furprifing  efFeds  of 
certain  fmells,  aliments,  and  medicines  on 
many  delicate  people. 

This  uncommon  or  depraved  feeling  of^ 
the  nerves  does  not  always  confill  in  a  more 
acute  fenfibility  ;  for  water  will  raife  vio- 
lent convulfions  in  a  hydrophobia,  whilil  the 
fauces  and  csfophagus  are  not  at  all  afFeded 
in  that  manner  by  folid  food ;  and  a  fmall 
quantity  of  honey  will  fometimes  occafion 
more  violent  gripes  than  many  of  the 
Uronger  purgatives. 

M  {d)  When 


§0  OF   NERVOUS 

(d)  When  any  of  the  nerves  lofe  theif 
power  of  feeling  entirely,  the  organs  or 
parts  to  which  they  are  diftributed  become 
quite  hifenfible.  When  the  whole  nerves 
of  the  organs  of  fenfe  and  voluntary  mo- 
tion are  thus  afFeded,  whilfl  the  heart  and 
fnufcles  of  refpiration  continue  to  adl,  vjf 
call  the  difeafe  an  Apoplexy. 

2.  (a)  A  greater  degree  of  that  power  ix\ 
the  nerves  which  i$  necelTary  for  motion 
can  only  give  more  force  and  fteadinefs  to 
the  mufcleSj  when  they  all  poITefs  it  in  an 
qqual  degree ;  the  increafe,  therefore,  of 
this  power  is  hardly  to  be  accounted  a  dift 
temper:  it  is  never  exerted,  except  in  con- 
fequence  of  an  effort  of  the  will>  of  fome 
afFeiftion  of  the  mind,  or  pf  the  aftion  of 
fome  fiimulus  on  the  brain  or  nerves ;  tQ 
the  two  lafl  of  which  are  to  be  afcribed 
all  the  depraved  and  irregular  motions  ob- 
ferved  in  the  body,  and  not  to  any  real 
depravation  of  the  nervous  power  itfelf, 
which  feems  only  to  occafion  difeafes,  when 


DISORDERS  IN  GENERAL.  9! 

it  is  either  weakened,  or  wholely  deflroy* 
ed.  Thus  a  tetanus  or  Unufual  fpafmodie 
tontradtioil  of  any  mufcle,  is  not  owing  to 
an  increafe  of  that  power  in  its  nerves 
which  is  iieceflary  for  mtifcular  motion,; 
but  to  an  extraordinary  exertion  of  it,  iii 
confeqaence  of  forae  uncommon  irritatibri 
Or  affedlion  of  the  brain  and  nerves. 

{h)  A  diminution  of  the  moving  power 
6f  the  nerves  produces  a  debility  of  the 
whole  body. 

[c)  A  total  want  of  this  power  occafioni 
fcithef  a  partial  or  univerial  palfy,  according 
as  only  a  few  of  the  nerves  or  the  whold 
iyfleni  is  afFe^ed.  "When  any  of  the  mu- 
fcle^ are  deprived  of  the  nervous  influence, 
they  are  not  only  rendered  paralytic,  buc 
ibon  after  become  fmaller  ;  becaufe  the  cir- 
culation of  the  fluids  cannot  be  carried  onj( 
as  iifual,  through  the  very  fmall  vefTels, 
when  they  are  deprived  of  the  nervous^ 
power  *. 

M  2  Buf 

*  See  above,  chap.  i.  No.  0; 


^d  OF   NERVOUS 

But  here  it  will  be  proper  to  obfervc, 
that,  as  there  is  fcarce  any  part  of  the  bo- 
dy without  nerves,  and  very  few  altoge- 
ther without  feeling,  the  nerves  mud  not 
only  faffer,  when  they  themfelves  or  the 
brain  and  fpinal  marrow  are  primarily  affed:- 
ed,  but  alfo  when  the  other  parts  are  dlf- 
cafed :  and  hence  the  difficulty,  perhaps 
theimpoflibility,  of  fixing  2.  ccn^m  criterion 
by  which  nervous  diforders  may  be  diflin- 
guifhed  from  all  others. 

All  difeafes  may,  in  fome  fenfe,  be 
called  affecflions  of  the  nervous  fyfteni,  be- 
caufe  in  almofl  every  difeafe  the  nerves 
are  more  or  lefs  hurt ;  and  in  confequence 
of  this  various  fenfations,  motions,  and 
changes,  are  produced  in  the  body.  How- 
ever, thofe  diforders  may,  peculiarly,  de- 
ferve  the  name  of  nervous,  which,  on 
account  of  an  unufual  delicacy  or  unnatu- 
ral ilate  of  the  nerves,  are  produced  by 
caufes,  which,  in  people  of  a  found  con- 
ftitution,  would  cither  have  no  fuch  effeds, 


or  at  kail  in  a  much  lefs  degree* 


To 


DISOPvDERS  IN  GENERAL.  95 

To  iiluftrate  this  by  a  few  examples. 
We  do  not  call  the  toothach  a  nervous  dif- 
eafe,  becaufe  the  nerves  of  the  teeth  are 
greatly  pained ;  but  if,  from  a  particular 
delicacy  of  conftitution,  the  patient  is,  by 
this  pain,  thrown  into  convulfions  and 
faintings,  we  call  thefe  fymptoms  nervous. 
An  obflrutftion  in  the  coats  of  the  flomach, 
or  other  hypochondriac  vifceray  is  not, 
flridly  fpeaking,  a  nervous  difeafe;  but  if  the' 
nerves  of  thefe  parts  are  fo  changed  from 
their  natural  (late,  that  low  fpirits,  melan- 
choly, or  madnefs,  are  the  confequence  of 
this  obflrudion,  then  thefe  fymptoms  de- 
fervethe  name  of  nervous,  i^gain,  altho'  the 
fever  excited  by  the  painful  inflammation 
of  the  finger  in  a  paronychias  and  the  fever 
and  vomiting  occafioned  by  a  nephritis,  2ir 
rife  from  the  fympathy  of  the  nerves  ;  yec 
fuch  fymptoms  are  not  commonly  account- 
ed nervous  diforders,  becaufe  they  do  not 
indicate  any  particular  unfound  ftate  of 
the  nerves,  and  happen,  in  fome  degree,  to 
every  one  labouring  under  a  parorqchia  or 

nephritis; 


94    ■   ■     OF    NERVOUS^ 

nephritis;  but  if  conviilfions  or  faintings  zrS 
added,  then  thefe  laft  fyniptoms,  being  the 
cffe(n:s  of  an  uncommon  delicacy  of  the 
nervous  fyftem,  may  be  juflly  called  ner* 
"joiiSi  In  like  manner,  the  convulfions 
fometimes  prec^eding  the  eruption  of  the 
fmali-pox  deferve  this  name,  becaufe  they 
only  feize  thofe  whofe  nervous  fyflem  is 
eafily  moved,  while  the  quick  pulfe,  and 
Gtlier  feverilli  fymptoms,  though  excited 
by  the  variolous  matter  a(5ling  as  2.Jiimulus 
on  the  nerves,  arc  not  reckoned  nervous.- 
To  conclude,  even  a  giata  ferena,  from  ^ 
tumour  preffing  upon  the  optic  nerve,  is 
notj  in  our  fenie,  fo  much  a  nervous  difeafe 
as  that  dimncfs  of  fight  which  is  fome- 
times dccafioned  by  a  diforder  of  the  flo- 
maeh  ;  for  the  caufe  now  mentioned  wiE 
produce  the  gutta  ferena  in  every  perfon  e-*- 
qually  ;  whereas  this  dimnefs  will  only  haj^- 
pen  to  fuch  as  have  a  peculiar  delicacy  of 
■  iierves. 

In  treating,  therefore,  of  nervous  difoT- 
derSj  I  ihail  confine  myfelf  chiefly  to  thofe 

eomplaint^' 


DfSORDERSIN  GENERAL.  95 

.complaints  which  proceed,  in  a  great  me^-» 
fure,  from  a  weak  or  unnatural  conftitution 
of  the  nerves ;  and  of  this  kind,  I  prefume, 
are  mofl  of  thofe  fymptoms  which  phyfi- 
cians  have  commonly  diflinguiflied  by  the 
liam.es  of  flatitkntf  fpafmodiCy  h-j^ochondviac^ 
or  h'jfierk. 

As  the  fagacious  Sydenham  has  juflly 
jobferved,  that  the  fli^pes  of  proteus,  or  the 
colours  of  the  cham^lcm^  are  not  more  nu^ 
inerous  and  inconflant,  than  the  varia-^ 
tions  of  the  hypochondriac  and  hyfleric 
difeafe  *;  fo  thofe  morbid  fymptoms  which 
have  been  commonly  caljed  nervous  are  fo 
many,  fo  various,  and  fo  irregular,  that  it 
would  be  extremely  hard,  either  rightly 
to  defcribe,  or  fully  to  enumerate  them. 
They  imitate  the  fymptoms  of  almoll  all 
other  difeafes ;  and  indeed,  there  are  few 
chronic  diftempers  with  which  they  are 
not  more  or  lefs  blended  or  intermixed. 
Hence  it  is^  that  the  late  celebrated  Dr 
Mead  fays  of  the  hypochondriac  aiTedlionj 

*  Sydenham,  oper,  epift.  ad  D.  Cole. 


96  OF    NERVOUS 

Non  unam  Jedem  hahet,  fed  morbus  t otitis  cor* 
poris eft*,  1  Ihall  not,  therefore,  under- 
take to  give  a  full  or  exacft  defcriptioii  of 
ihefe  diforders,  nor  pretend  to  exhibit  a 
complete  lift  of  all  the  morbid  fymptoms 
which  have  been  commonly  reckoned  of 
the  nervous,  hypochondriac,  or  hyfteric 
kind  ;  but  Ilia  11  content  myfelf  with  men- 
tioning the  following,  as  being  the  moft 
.common  and  remarkable. 

Wind  in  the  (loraach  and  inteftines, 
lieart-burning,  four  belchings,  fqueamifh- 
nefs,  and  vomiting  of  a  watery  ftuff,  tough 
phlegm,  or  a  black  liquor  like  the  grounds 
of  coffee;  want  of  appetite  and  indige- 
it  ion,  or  an  uncommon  craving  for  food 
and  quick  digeftion ;  a  debility,  faintnefs, 
and  fenfe  of  great  emptinefs  about  the 
flomach,  when  hungry;  a  ftrong  defire 
for  rare  or  uncommon  forts  of  food,  or 
for  thinafs  that  can  afford  no  nourifh- 
ment;  a  vifible  fwelhng  or  inflation  of  the 
llomach,     efpecially  after   eating;    fome- 

time§ 

f  jyjonita  etprascept.  raed.  cap.  17. 


DISORDERS  IN  GENERAL.    97 

times  a  fevere  pain  with  cramps  in  that 
vifcus ;  an  opprefHon  about  the  pracordia^ 
an  uneafy,  though  not  painful  fenfation 
about  the  ftomach,  attended  with  low 
Ipirits,  anxiety,  and  fometimes  great  ti- 
midity; flrong  pulfations  within  the  belly; 
fpafms  in  the  bowels,  and  diilenfions  of 
certain  portions  of  them;  violent  cholic 
pains ;  a  rumbling  noife  from  wind  parting 
through  the  inteftines;  the  body  fome- 
times too  lax,  oftener  bound;  pains  m 
the  back  and  belly,  refembling  thofe  of 
the  nephritic  kind  ;  a  fenfe  of  irritation 
and  heat  in  the  neck  of  the  bladder  and 
urethra,  with  a  frequent  deiire  to  make 
water ;  a  great  difcharge  of  limpid  urine ; 
at  other  times  a  frequent  fpitting. 

Sudden  iiufhings  of  heat  over  the 
whole  body,  fliiverings,  a  fenfe  of  cold  in 
certain  parts,  as  if  water  was  poured  on 
them,  at  other  times  an  unufual  glow ; 
flying  pains  in  the  arms  and  limbs ;  a 
troublefome  pain  in  the  back,  and  between 
the  fhoulders;  pains,  attended  with  a  hot 
N  fenfatioHj, 


^8  OF    NERVOUS 

fenfatidn,  fhifting  often  from  the  fides  oj^ 
back  to  the  interior  parts  of  the  abdomen  f 
Cr^mp5,  or  convulfivp  motions  of  the  mu- 
fcles,  or  of  a  fe\y  of  their  fibres;  fuddei; 
flartings  of  the  legs  arid  arms,  almo(t  con- 
iftant  involuntary  motions  of  the  mufcles 
of  the  neck  and  head,  or  arms  and  legs  i 
^  general  convulfion  afFedting,  at  onqe, 
the  ftomach,  bowels,  throat,  legs,  arms, 
and,  indeed,  almoft  the  whqle  members  of 
the  body,  in  which  the  patient  flruggles 
as  in  a  violent  epileptic  fit ;  long  faintings^ 
m  fome  cafes,  following  one  anoiher  aftej: 
piort  intervals. 

Palpitations,  or  trembling  of  the 
heart ;  the  pulfe  very  variable,  frequently 
natural,  fometimes  uncommonly  flow,  ancf 
at  other  times  quick,  oftener  fmall  than 
full,  and,  on  certain  occafions,  irregular  or 
intermitting;  a  dry  cough  with  difficulty 
of  breathing,  or  a  coni!:ri(5lion  of  the 
lungs,  fometimes  returnhig  periodically ; 
yawning,  the  hiccup,  frequent  fighings, 
?^nd  a  fenfe  of  fufFocation,  as  if  fi'om  a  ball 


DISORDERS  IN  GENERAL.    99 

or  lump  in  the  throat ;  iits  of  crying,  and 
cdnviilfive  laughing.  Although  in  the 
day-time  the  patients  are  generally  prect/ 
eool,  and  the  palfe  foaietimes  flower  thari 
natural ;  yet  in  the  night,  erpecially  in 
time  of  fl-eep,  hot  flulhings  often  fpread 
Over  aim  oil:  the  whole  body^  the  pulfe  be- 
comes quicker  ^nd  ftronger,  and  a  faint- 
nefs,  or  forae  degree  of  licknefs  at  the  flo- 
mach,  is  felt. 

A  giddinefs,  efpecially  after  rifing  up 
liaftily ;  pains  in  the  head,  fometintes  re- 
turning periodically;  a  violent  pain  in  a 
fmall  part  of  the  head,  not  larger  than  afc 
Ihilling,  as  if  a  nail  was  driven  into  it;  a 
fmging  in  the  ears ;  a  dimnefs  of  flght, 
and  appearance  of  a  thick  mift^  withoun 
ainy  vifible  fault  in  the  eyes.  Objei51:s  are 
fometimes  feen  double,  and  unufual  fmells 
are  pereeived;  obflinate  watchings,  attend- 
ed fometimes  with  an  uneaiinefs  whicli 
is  not  to  be  defcribed,  but  which  is  lefTen- 
ed  by  getting  out  of  bed  ;  diilurbed  fleep^ 
frightful  dreams,  the  night-marq;  fome- 
N  a  times 


too  OF    NERVOUS 

times  a  drowfinefs,  and  too  great  mclina-'. 
tion  to  fleep;  fear,  peevifhnefs,  fadnefs, 
defpair,  at  other  times  high  fpirits ;  wan- 
dering thoughts,  impaired  memory,  ridi^ 
culous  fancies ;  ftrange  perfuafions  of  their 
labouring  under  difeafes  of  which  they  are 
quite  free ;  and  imagining  their  complaints 
to  be  as  dangerous  as  they  find  them 
troublefome ;  they  are  often  angry  with 
thofe  who  would  convince  them  of  their 
mi  flake. 

Patients,  after  having  been  long  af- 
flirted  with  many  of  thefe  fymptoms,  (for 
all  of  them  never  happen  to  any  one  per- 
fon),  fometimes  fall  into  melancholy,  mad- 
nefs,  the  black  jaundice,  a  dropfy,  tym- 
pany, phtbifts  puhnomlis,  palfy,  apoplexy, 
or  fome  other  fatal  diftemper* 

Those  patients  who  are  liable  to  the 

above  complaints,  fome  of  which  deferve 

the  name  of  nervous  much  better  than  o- 

thers,    may    be    diflinguiihed   into  three 

.  clafTes. 

i.  Such: 


DISORDERS  IN  GENERAL.   lor 

1.  Such  as,  though  ufually  in  good 
health,  are  yet,  on  account  of  an  uncom- 
mon delicacy  of  their  nervous  fyflem,  apt 
to  be  often  afFeded  with  violent  tremors, 
palpitations,  faintings,  and  convuliive  fits, 
from  fear,  grief,  furprize,  or  other  paflions; 
and  from  whatever  greatly  irritates  or  dis- 
agreeably afFedls  any  of  the  more  fenfiblc 
parts  of  the  body. 

2.  Such  as,  befides  being  liable  to  the 
above  diforders  from  the  fame  caufes,  are 
almoft  always  more  or  lefs  troubled  with 
indigeflion,  flatulence  in  the  flomach  and 
bowels,  a  lump  in  the  throat,  the  clavui 
byftericus,  giddinefs,  flying  pains  in  the 
head,  and  a  fenfe  of  cold  in  its  back  part, 
frequent  fighings,  palpitations,  inquietude, 
fits  of  faUvation,  or  pale  urine,  (^c. 

3.  Such  as,  from  a  lefs  delicate  feel- 
ing or  mobility  of  their  nervous  fyflem 
in  general,  are  fcarce  ever  alFeded  with 
violent  palpitations,  faintings,  or  convul- 

five 


io^  OF    NERVOUS 

five  motions^  from  fear,  grief,  furprize,  of 
other  paflions;  biit^  on  account  of  a  diP- 
ordered  ftateof  the  nerves  of  the  ilomacli 
and  bowels,  are  feldoni  free  from  conl- 
plaints  of  indigeftion,  belching,  flatulence,^ 
tvanr  of  appetite,  or  too  great  craving,^ 
ceiiitivenefs,;  or  loofenefs,  fiulhings,  giddi- 
nefs,  opprertion  or  faintdcfs  about  the  pne- 
cordia,  low  fpirits^  difagreeable  thoughts^- 
watching  or  diflurbed  fieep,  i^c. 

The  complaints  of  the  firft  of  the  a- 
bove  dalles  may  be  called  fimply  nervous? 
tkofe  of  the  fecond,  in  •  compliance  with 
CLiftomj  may  be  faid  to  be  hyJIeriCi  and 
thofe  of  the  third,  hypochondriac. 

The  hypochondriac  and  hyfleric  diP 
ceafes  are  generally  confidered  by  phyficians 
as  the  fame ;  only  in  women  fach  difor- 
ders  have  got  the  name  of  hjJieriCy  from 
the  antient  opinion  of  their  feat  being  fole- 
\j  in  the  wombj  while  in  men,  they  were' 
called  hypochondriac y  upon  the  fuppofition, 
that  in   them   they  proceeded  from  fome 

faiils 


DISORDERS  IN  GENERAL.    103 

fault  in  thofe  vifccra  which  lie  under  th$ 
cartilages  of  the  ribs. 

The  learned  Hoffman,  difTenting  froni 
moil  of  the  latter  writers,  affirms  that  the 
hypochondriac  and  hyftcric  are  different 
djfeafes,  whether  we  regard  their  fy mp^ 
loms,  caufes,  or  termination*:  but  we 
cannot  agree  to  this  opinion,  as  their 
fymptoms  are  of  fo  iimilar  a  nature,  and 
as  the  hypochondriac  difeafe  is  not  more 
unlike  the  hyftcric  than  this  lall  is  ofteii 
unlike  to  itfelf.  It  is  true  that  in  women, 
hyfteric  fymptoms  occur  more  frequently,, 
and  are  of  [en  much  more  fudden  and  yio- 
Jent  than  the  hypochondriac  in  men;  bun 
this  circumdance,  which  is  only  a  confer 
quence  of  the  more  delicate  frame,  fcden- 
|:ary  life,  and  particular  condition  of  the 
womb  in  women,  by  no^  nieans  iliews  the 
two  difeafes  to  be,  ilriclly  fpeaking,  dif-^ 
ferent.  Nor  does  it  appear  more  reafon- 
able  to  pronounce  the  hyfterJc  diforder  of 
a  different  kind  from  the  hypochondriac  1 

becaufo 

*  Syflem,  rred.  torn.  3,  p.  4.  cap.  j,  §.  5,  et6. 


104  OF    NERVOUS 

becaufe  the  former  may  have  its  feat  fre» 
quently  in  the  uterus,  and  the  latter  in  the 
alimentary  canal,  than  it  would  be  to  dil^ 
tinguifh  the  hypochondriac  complaints  in* 
to  as  many  diiFerent  difeafes  as  the  caufes 
from  which  they  may  arife;  or  to  divide 
hyfteric  fits,  as  they  are  called,  in  women, 
into  nervous,  ftomachic,  and  hyfteric,  be- 
caufe they  often  proceed  from  violent  afi. 
fetftions  of  the  mind,  or  a  difordered  flate 
of  t,he  flomachy  a?  well  as  froip  a  f^ult  in 
the  uterus. 

But  further,  it  is  to  be  obferved,  thae 
in  women  the  fymptoms  commonly  called 
hyfleric  are  lefs  frequently  owing  to  the 
unfound  flate  of  the  womb,  than  to  faults 
fomewhere  elfe  in  the  body ;  for  virgins 
are  often  free  from  fuch  complaints,  while 
married  women,  and  even  thofe  who  bear 
children  with  eafy  labours,  are  fometimes 
afflided  with  them.  Add  to  this,  than 
women  who  are  regular,  and  have  no  ail^- 
ment  about  the  uterus,  do  not  always  efcape 
|:he  hyfleric  difeafe  ;  while  thofe  who  la^ 

hour 


DISORDERS  IN  GENERAL.  105 

hour  under  fcHirrous  tumours  and  other 
diforders  of  that  part,  are  often  not  affedt- 
ed,  at  leaft,  with  its  worft  fymptoms. 
Laftly,  in  thofe  who  have  long  and  great- 
ly fuffered  by  this  malady,  the  womb  af- 
ter death  has  frequently  been  obferved  to 
be  found. 

Upon  ttid  Whole,  ihefefore,  the  fym- 
ptoms of  the  hyfleiic  difeafe  in  womeit 
feem  only  to  differ  from  thofe  of  the  hy- 
pochondriac in  men,  in  fo  far  as  the  for- 
mer fometimes  proceed  from  the  uterus, 
and  are,'  oh  account  of  the  more  delicate 
frame  of  the  fex,  more  frequent  and  often 
more  violent  than  the  fymptoms  6i  the 
hypochondriac  aiFcd:ion  in  men. 

But  whether  thefe  two  difleriipers  be 
eonlidered  as  the  fame  or  diftindl,  iince 
the  fymptoms  of  both  are  fo  much  a-kin, 
ivc  (hall  coiifider  them  under  the  general 
ciiarader  of  Nervous;  and  begin  with 
inquiring  into  the  caufes  from  which  they 
iiiofl  commonly  proceeds 

O  The 


io6  OF  NERVOUS 

The  aiitient  phyficians,  with  feveral  of 
the  moderns,  have  agreed  in  placing  the 
fole,  or,  at  leafl,  the  chief  feat  of  the 
hyfteric  difeafe  in  the  womb  ;  but,  with 
regard  to  the  parts  afFeded  in  the  hypo- 
chondriac, the  opinions  have  been  various 
and  contradictory. 

Many  authors  have  afcribed  this  difor- 
def  in  men  to  obftru6lions  in  the  fpleen, 
liver,  and  mefentery :  Highmore,  to  a  vi- 
tiated Gonftitution  of  the  ilomach  *  : 
Willis,  to  an  indifpofition  of  the  brain  and 
nerves,  or  to  a  fault  of  the  fpirits :  Et- 
muller,  who  confounds  the  hypochondriac 
difeafe,  when  in  a  higher  degree,  with 
the  fcurvy,  has  written  a  diflertation  to 
prove  that  its  feat  is  not  in  the  fpleen,  but 
in  the  inreflines,  efpecially  in  that  part  of 
the  colon  which  lies  in  the  left  hypochon- 
dre,  in  which  the  excrements  often  Mag- 
nate, and  where  much  w^ind  is  pent  up  f ; 
Sydenham  afcribes  the  fame  di (temper  to 

aa 

*  ExefcitationeS  de  paffione  hyfter.  et  aSeilion.  hypo- 
choiidr.  f  Oper.  p.  1820. 


DISORDERS  IN  GENERAL.  107 

an  ataxy  or  confufion  of  the  fpirits  *  : 
Mandevillc,  to  a  difordered  chylification, 
and  a  deficiency  or  paucity  of  the  fpirits  -f- : 
Junckerus  makes  the  caufa  proxima  of  the 
hypochondriac  affection  to  confift  in  an 
obftrudted  motion  of  the  blood  in  the  vend 
fortarum  and  vifcera  connected  with  it  \  i 
Boerhaave  derives  it  from  an  atrabiliary 
humour  lodging  in  the  pancreas,  fpleen, 
flomach,  and  neighbouring  organs  §:  Hoif- 
rnan,  from  a  perverted  periftaltie  motion  of 
the  ftomach  and  inteftines**  :  And,  laftly, 
Dr  Cheyne  is  of  opinion,  that  all  great 
nervous  diforders  proceed  from  fome  glan^ 
dular  obftrucftion  in  the  ftomach,  bowels, 
liver,  fpleen,  mefentery,  or  ot^er  organs 
of  the  lower  belly  -\\, 

But 

*  Epift.  a4  D.  Cole. 

f  A  Treatife  of  the  hypochondriac  and  hyfteric  p^f- 
fions,  dialogues  i.  and  2. 
X  Junckeri  Confpedt.  medicinae,  p.  186. 
§  Aphorifm.  de  cognofcend.  morb.  §  10981 
*•  Syftern.  Med.  torn.  3.  part  3.  cap.  5. 
If  Englifh  malady,  part  2.  chap.  7. 


io8         OF  NERVOUS,  6^^, 

But  although  it  is  not  to  be  doubted, 
that  the  hypochondriac  and  hyfleric  af- 
fetftions  often  proceed  from  a  morbid  ftate 
of  the  alimentary  canal,  uterus^  or  other 
vifcera  of  the  abdomen ;  yet  as  there  are  fe- 
deral of  their  fymptoms  which  feem  inde- 
pendent of  any  diforder  in  thofe  parts,  and 
as  there  has  often  no  trace  of  thofe  difeafes 
appeared,  after  death,  in  any  of  the  ab- 
dominal organs,  it  feems  highly  probable, 
that  they  may  freq^uently  arife  from  fome 
lefs  vifible  fault  in  the  body. 

We  fhall  therefore  proceed  to  inquire 
into  the  moft  common  caufes  of  thofe  ner- 
vous, hypochondriac  or  hyfteric  fymp- 
toms abovje  mentioned,  treating  firft  of 
fuch  caufes  as  render  the  body  more  liable 
to  thefe  diforders ;  fecondly,  of  thofe 
which,  meeting  with  the  former,  acT:ually 
produce  them.  The  firft  have  been  called 
the  predifpofmg  caufes ;  the  fecond  the 
pccafional  caufes. 

CHAR 


CHAP.     IIL 

Of  the  Tredifpofing  Causes  of  Nervous^ 
Hypochondriac,  und  Pysterig 
Disorders. 

THESE   may  be   reduced   to   two^ 
viz,. 

I.  A  too  great  delicacy  and  fenllbility 
pf  the  whole  nervous  fyilem. 

II.  An  uncommon  weaknefs,  or  a  de- 
praved or  unnatural  feeling,  in  feme  of  the 
organs  of  the  body, 

I.  A  too  great  delicacy  and  fenfibility 
of  the  whole  nervous  fyftem  may  be  ei- 
ther natural,  that  is,  an  original  ddtdi  in 
the  conllitution,  or  produced  by  fuch  di^ 
pafes,  or  irregularity  in  living,  as  weaken 
|:he  whole  body,  efpecially  the  nerves^ 
:  Long 


no         OF  THE   CAUSES 

Long  or  repeated  fevers,  profufe  hsemor- 
rhages,  great  fatigue,  exceffive  or  long 
continued  grief,  luxurious  living  and  want 
of  exercife,  may  increafe  or  even  bring  oil 
fuch  a  delicate  Hate  of  the  nervous  fy* 
flem. 

As  the  whole  animal  frame  is  contrived 
with  the  greatefl  wifdom,  fo  we  cannot  but 
admire,  in  particular,  how  the  nerves, 
though  all  are  endowed  with  the  general 
fenfe  of  feeling,  have  yet,  in  different  organs, 
certain  fenfations  quite  different  from  each 
other,  and  are  perfccftly  well  adapted  to 
thofe  things  which  are  defigned  by  nature 
to  be  applied  to  them.  Thus,  for  example, 
as  pure  air  gives  no  uneafinefs  to  the  nerves 
of  the  wind-pipe,  and  is  refrefhing  to  thofe 
of  the  lungs ;  fo,  to  a  craving  flomach, 
wholefome  food  is  highly  grateful ;  but  air 
colledled  in  the  ftomach  feldom  fails  to  pro- 
duce a  difagreeable  fenfation;  and  not  on- 
ly folid  food,  but  even  the  mildcfl  liquids, 
falling  by  accident  into  the  wind  pipe,  bring 
pn  violent  fits  of  coughing,  which  do  not 

ceafe 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS,  iir 

ccafe  till  the  offending  caufe  is  removed. 
In  like  manner,  warm  blood,  which  does 
not  afTedt  the  heart  or  vafcular  fyflem  with 
any  difagreeable  fenfation,  occalions,  in 
the  ftomach,  faintnefs,  fevere  ficknefs,  and 
vomiting.  The  nerves  of  the  nofe,  tongue, 
and  ftomach,  are  all  endowed  with  fenfa- 
tions  of  different  kinds ;  whence  fome  fub- 
flances  very  ungrateful  to  the  palate  arc 
often  agreeable  to  the  ftomach.  Several 
fubftances  which  hurt  the  eyes,  give  no 
uneafinefs  to  the  alimentary  canal;  and, 
on  the  other  hand,  antimonial  wine,  or  an 
infufion  of  ipecacuanha  in  water,  which  nei- 
ther irritate  much  the  tongue  or  other  fen- 
fible  parts,  affed  the  ftomach  fo  difagree- 
ably  as  to  occafion  violent  vomiting. 

But  further,  as  the  nerves,  in  many  of 
our  organs,  have  very  different  feelings ; 
fo,  in  different  people,  or  even  in  the  fame 
perfon  at  different  times,  the  feeling  of  the 
fame  nerves  varies  confiderably,  and  is  more 
or  lefs  acute  or  blunt,  and  fometimes  un- 
natural or  depraved.     And  hence  it  is,  that 

the 


rt2     Gf  the  cAusfcS 

•the  very  fame  things  applied  to  the  fariic 
nerves,  or  organs^  have  very  different  effects,- 
according  to  the  conftitution  of  the  per- 
fons,  or  their  /late  of  health  at  the  time.- 

In  fome,  the  feelings,  perceptions^  and 
paflionS,  are  naturally  dull,  flow,  and  dif- 
ficult to  be  roufed  ;  in  others,  they  are 
very  quick  and  ealily  excited,  on  account 
of  a  greater  delicacy  and  fenflbility  of  the 
brain  and  nerves. 

'  All  children,  when  compared  with  a- 
dults,  have  their  nervous  fyftem  very  fen- 
fible  and  eafily  moved,  and  are  in  this  re- 
ipe(51:  fomewhat  like  thofe  grown  people 
who  are  liioft  fubjedt  to  the  higheft  nervous 
or  hyfleric  fy mptoras  :  And  hence  it  is 
that  children  are  fo  liable  to  convulfive  ficsf 
from  the  pain  of  teething,  from  worms, 
acrid  humours  in  their  flomach  or  bowels^ 
and  other  caufes,  whichj  in  people  of  a 
tnore  advanced  age,  and  lefs  fenfible  nerves, 
ivooid  produce  no  fuch  effects. 

A  delicate  or  eafily  irritable  nervous  fy= 
Hem  mufl  expofe  a  perfon  to  various  ail- 
ment s^ 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS,  n^ 

ments,    from    caufes   af?e(5ling   either  the 
body  or  mind,  too  flight  to  make  any  re- 
markable impreflion  upon  thofe  of  firmer 
and  lefs  fenfiblc  nerves.     Thus,  any  acci- 
dent occafioning  fudden  furprife,  will,  m 
many  delicate  people,  produce  ftrong  pal- 
pitations of  the  heart,  and  fometimes  faint- 
ing with  convulfions.   I  have  known  fome, 
even  men,  whofe  nervous  fyftems  were  fo 
delicate  and  moveable,  that    a   vomit,  a 
fmart  purge,  or  the  pain  raifed  by  a  bli- 
fter,  would  throw  them  into  convulflvc  fits. 
Nay,  there  was  lately  a  paralytic  patient 
in  the  Royal  Infirmary  here,  who  felt  a  re- 
markable uneafmefs  through  his  whole  bo- 
dy, when  it  was  charged  with  the  eledlrical 
fluid,  by  means  of  a  wire  held  in  his  hand, 
although  there  was  no  fhock  given  him, 
jior  any   fparks   drawn    from  him.     We 
are  told  of  a  lady,  who,  upon  hearing  the 
found  of  a  bell,  or  any  loud  noife,  ufed 
to  fall  into  fits  of  fwooning,   which  were 
fcarce  to  be  diflinguifhed  from  death  *: 
P  And 

*  igoyle's  Ufefulnefs  of  ejp.  philofophy,  part  2.  p.  248, 


114       OF  THE  CAUSES 

And  I  have  feen  the  pain  of  the  toothach 
throw  a  young  woman,  of  weak  nerves, 
into  convulfions  and  infenfibility,  which 
continued  for  feveral  hours,  and  returned 
upon  the  pain  becoming  again  more  acute  f. 

Sqmi; 

f  The  following  cafe,  communicated  to  qie  by  ]V|i? 
James  Spence  furgeon  In  Dunkeld,  is  a  remarkable  in-? 
fiance  of  the  many  violent  and  uncommon  fymptoms 
which  may  arife  from  a  fmall  caufe,  in  perfons  of  a  very 
delicate  nervous  fyltem. 

An  unmarried  woman  of  23  years  of  age,  immediately 
after  having  been  ftung  in  the  neck  by  a  bee,  felt  a  Iharp 
pain,  with  a  violent  itching  in  that  part*  and  over  the 
vhole  head  and  face,  which,  together  with  her  arms,  felt 
ftiff  and  fwelled.  In  a  few  minutes,  the  pain  fpread  t;o 
her  throat  and  then  to  her  ftomach,  occalioning  a  great 
anxiety  and  difficulty  of  refpiration.  At  this  time,  a 
large  dram  of  malt  fpirits  was  given  her,  which,  though 
it  was  immediately  vomited  up  again,  relieved  the  pain 
for  a  little ;  but  foop  after  it  was  felt  violently  in  the 
lower  belly,  and  was  lollowed  by  a  loofe  ftool.  She  com- 
plained now  of  an  uncommon  heat  in  her  face  and  head, 
and  of  a  great  faintnefs  :  Her  pulfe  was  fmall  and  irre- 
gular, h?r  tpngue  and  throat  dry,  her  extremities  cold, 
and  the  whole  body  afFeded  with  a  tremor.  After  taki^^g 
a  draught  of  warm  water,  and  having  the  part  that  was 
ftung  rubbed  wiiji  warm  oil  of  olives,  llie  was  put  to 

bed) 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  115 

Some  women,  from  a  too  great  delica- 
cy  or  feiifibility  of  the  nervous  fyflem, 
are,  after  conception,  fo  much  affected  with 
a  heat  and  uneafy  fenfation  in  their  back, 
colic-pains,  and  other  fymptoms,  as  to  be 
in  hazard  of  mifcarriage.     In  fuch  cafes, 
when  the  danger  neither  arifes  from  too. 
much  blood,  nor  too  great  a  laxity  of  the 
uterine  vefTels,    but   merely  from  an  un- 
common  weaknefs   and   delicacy    of  the 
nerves,  bleeding  will  do  harm,  and  aflrin- 
gent  and  cooling  medicines  will  prove  inef- 
fectual, whilfl  laudanum  given  from  time  to 
time,  in  proper  dofes,  will  produce  the  belt 
efFe(5ts  :  For,  by  leiTening  the  too  great  fen- 
fibility  of  the  nervous  fyftem,  it  not  only 
P  2  quiets 

bed,  and  fouad  confxderable  relief  from  flannel  cloths, 
wrung  out  of  a  hot  decodlion  of  fome  emollient  herbs, 
applied  to  the  abdomen  and  feet.  After  this,  a  draught 
with  fome  of  the  elixir  paregoricutn  foon  produced  a. 
profufe  fweat,  and  freed  her  from  :he  pain,  in.Iination 
to  vomit,  and  other  fymptoms,  Next  day  her  fkin  be- 
ing hot,  and  her  pulfe  full,  a  fweat  Vi^as  again  procured 
fey  a  draught  with  y^.  minder,  and  Jal.  vol  ammoTf.  and, 
before  the  evening,  fhe.  was  free  from  every  complaint. 


Ii6       OF  THE  CAUSES 

quiets  all  the  uneafy  fcnfations,  but  calms 
the  mind  itfelf,  and  renders  it  lefs  liable  to 
be  ruffled  by  flight  caafes. 

Women,  in  whom  the  nervous  fyflem 
is  generally  more  moveable  than  in  men, 
are  more  fubjed:  to  nervous  complaints, 
and  have  them  in  a  higher  degree.  On 
the  other  hand,  old  people,  in  whom  the 
nerves  have  become  lefs  fenfible,  are  little 
afflicted  with  thofe  diforders ;  nay,  Dr 
Cheyne  has  obferved,  that  an  advanced 
age  fometimes  proves  a  cure. 

Lastly,  Although  the  variolous  mat- 
ter in  the  blood,  by  hsJlimuJus^  frequently 
produces,  in  children,  con vulfions before  the 
eruption ;  yet,  in  grown  people,  whofc 
nerves  are  lefs  delicate,  this  iymptom  rare- 
ly, if  ever,  happens.  On  the  other  hand, 
people  whofe  folids  are  lefs  firm,  and  their 
nerves  more  delicate  and  ealily  aiFed:ed, 
although  fubjeOl:  to  many  complaints,  yet 
arc  feldom  attacked  with  ardent  fevers  or 
violent  inflammatorv  difeafes :  which  feems 

10 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  117 

to  be  chiefly  owing  to  the  weak  {late  of 
their  blood  and  vefTels. 

To  the  different  fenfibllity  of  the  nerves 
in  general,  or  at  leaft  of  thofe  of  the 
heart,  is  owing  in  a  great  meafure  the  va- 
riety of  the  c]^uicknefs  of  the  pulfe  in  heal- 
thy people.  A  late  phyfician  of  this  place 
told  me  of  one  of  his  patients  whofe  pulfe, 
in  a  healthy  ftate,  did  not  beat  above  38 
or  40  times  in  a  minute  :  And  I  know  a 
young  woman  whofe  natural  pulfe,  when 
jGtting,  is  rarely  under  120,  yet  has  no  com- 
plaint, and  feems  to  enjoy  goodhealth;  Near 
nine  years  ago,  when  I  attended  her  in  a 
fever,  her  pulfe  beat  upwards  of  1 80  in  a 
minute;  and  fhe  was,  at  that  time,  trou- 
bled with  the  gieatell  flartings  and  tre- 
mors 1  had  ever  feen :  Nay,  fo  very  irri- 
table was  her  heart,  that  after  the  fever 
was  much  abated,  and  when  in  a  horizon- 
tal poilure,  her  pulfe  beat  under  140;  by 
only  fitting  up  in  bed  for  a  little  while,  it 
became    fo  quick,    that  with   difficulty  I 

could 


ii8      OF  THE   CAUSES 

could  count  it ;  but,  after  repeated  trials, 
found  it  to  be  nearly  220  in  a  minute. 

Is  not  the  quicknefs  of  the  pulfe,  in 
children,  chiefly  owing  to  the  greater  fen- 
fibility  of  their  hearts?  and  does  not  the 
pulfe  generally  grow  flower  with  age,  be- 
caufe  the  heart  becomes  lefs  fenfible,  and, 
in  a  very  advanced  age,  perhaps  in  fome 
degree  callous?  Lafl:ly,  is  not  the  pulfe, 
CfSter is  paribus,  quicker  in  fmall  than  in  large 
animals,  chiefly  becaufe  the  nerves  are  en- 
dowed with  a  greater  degree  of  fenflbility 
in  the  former  than  in  the  latter  *  ? 

Since,  as  we  have  obferved,  the  nerves, 
in  the  diflerent  organs,  are  endowed  with 
various  kinds  of  feeling,  and  are  very  dif- 
ferently afle(51:ed  by  the  fame  things,  will 
not  morbid  humours  in  the  blood  be  more 
apt  to  produce  difeafes  in  thofe  parrs  whofe 
nerves  are  moft  flrongly  affeiSted  by  them, 
than  in  others  which  fufler  lefs  ?  And  may 

not 

*  The  flownefs  of  the  pulfe  in  larger  animals  is,  no 
doubt,  partly  owing  to  the  ventricles  of  their  heart,  on 
account  of  their  greater  capacity,  requiring  a  longer  tim® 
for  the  performance  of  their  feveral  motions. 


OFNERVOUS  DISORDERS  119 

not  this  be  partly  the  reafon  why,  in  cer- 
tain difeafcs,  fome  parts  of  the  body  are 
much  more  commonly  afFed:ed  than  others ; 
and  why,  in  fome  epidemics,  the  eyes, 
nofe,  ox  fauces,  and,  in  others,  the  breaft 
or  inreftincs,  are  mofl  apt  to  fuffer  ?  This 
alfo  may,  partly,  be  the  caufe  why  thofe 
organs  which  have  fuffered  by  fome  for- 
mer difeafes,  are  mofl  liable  to  be  attacked, 
when  the  body  is  feized  with  any  new  dif- 
order  ;  for  this  does  not  feem  to  be  owing, 
folcly,  to  the  weaknefs  of  the  veiTels,  but 
alfo  to  their  being  more  eafily  irritated  by 
any  acrimony  in  the  blood,  or  by  its  in- 
creafed  force.  Further,  it  may  be  proper 
to  take  notice  here,  that  the  different 
operations  of  various  medicines  are  not  fo 
much  owing  to  their  powers,  either  of  dil^ 
folving  the  blood,  or  changing  it  in  other 
refpeds,  as  to  the  particular  nature  of  the 
perves  of  the  different  organs  difpofing 
|:hem  to  be  very  differently  affecfled  by  the 
fe.me  kind  of  Simulating  fubftances. 

Thus 


^2®  OF  THE  CAUSES 

Thus  cathartic  medicines  applied  to  the 
belly  of  children,  in  the  form  of  a  plaifter, 
do  not  fenfibly  increafe  the  fecretion  from 
the  liver,  or  from  the  falivary  or  lachrymal 
glands  ;  but  they   fo  affeiEt  the  nerves  of 
the  inteflincs,  as  to  occafion  a  greater  flux 
of  humours  from  their  yefTels,  and  accele- 
rate the  periftakic  motion,  and  fo  bring  on 
a  purging :  And  this  does  not  feem  to  be 
owing  fo  much   to  the  finer  parts  of  thofe 
medicines  which  enter  the  blood,  and  may 
be  conveyed  with  it  to  the  bowels,  afl:ing 
immediately  on  their  nerves  or  fmall  veifels, 
as  to  a  particular  fympathy  between   the 
lierves  diilributed  to  the  teguments  of  th^ 
Momen  and  thofe  of  the  inteflincs;  other- 
wife  an  aloetic  plaifler  applied  to  the  bacl^ 
or  the  head  fnould  open  the  body  as  much 
^s  when  laid  to  the  belly.     Nitre,  which 
proves  often  highly  diuretic,  docs  not  feem 
to  afiedl  the  fecretions  of  the  other  glands 
remarkably.     The  finer  parts  of  caiitharides 
entering  the  blood  by  the  application  of 
l^liflers,  rarely  produce  vomiting  or  purging, 

or 


6f  nervous  disorders.  i2i 

or  difagreeably  a^ec^  any  pair,  except  the 
urinary  paflages,  where  the  nerves  are  Cd 
formed  as,  by  the  acrimony  of  the  flies,  to 
be  more  irfitated  than  thofe  of  the  other 
organs.  Nor  can  the  ftrangury  occafioned 
by  cantharides  be  owing,  as  fome  havt 
thought,  to  their  particles  hot  paffing  freely 
thro*  the  veflels  of  th6  kidneys  and  bladder  5 
fmee  the  vcfFcls  of  the  brain  are  mucli  fmal- 
ier  than  thefe,-  and  iince  the  kidneys  are 
not  near  fo  muth  affe(5led  by  them  as  the 
neck  of  the  bladder.  Does  hot  mercury, 
when  miied  With  x\\8  blood,  generally  in- 
creafe  the  fecretion  of  the  faliva  much 
more  thah  that  of  any  other  humour,  be- 
taufe  the  fmall  vefFels  of  the  faHva^ry  glands? 
are  more  ftrohgly  affet^^ed  hf  its  peculiaf 
pimuius  than  thofe  6f  any  other  fecretory 
organ?  Laftly,  does  it  not  appear,  froni 
what  ha'^  been  faid,  that  the  virtue  of  a 
medicine  which  is  fpecifically  to  promote 
the  fecretion  of  the  bile,  fimeri,  m"ioe,  or 
the  faliva^  mull  co'nfifi:  in  its^  being  pecu^ 
liarly  fitted  for  ftira dating,  and  eonfe- 
quently  increafmg  the  vibraigry  motions 


I2i         OF  THE  CAUSES 

of  the  fmall  fecreting  veiTels  of  the  Mvef, 
,kidneys,  tefticles,  or  falivary  glands,  more 
than  thofe  of  the  other  parts  ?  And  da  not 
•fuch  medicines  alone,  if  any  fuch  there  be, 
deferve,  in  a  flrid  fenfe,  the  name  of  Em- 
menagogue,  which  not  only  tend,  by  their 
-general  flimulating  or  attenuating  power, 
to  promote  the  menflrual  evacuation,  but 
alfo,  by  their  particular  quality,  are  fitted 
to  (timulate  the  nerves  and  velTels  of  the 
womb  more  than  thofe  of  any  other  vifcus? 

But,  to  return  from  this  digreilion ; 

II.  Besides  a  too  great  fenfibility  of 
the  nervous  fyflem  in  general,  there  is  of- 
ten an  uncommon  weaknefs  or  dehcacy,  or 
an  unnatural  or  depraved  feeling  in  various 
parts  of  the  body,  which  expofes  certain 
perfons  to  violent  and  fometimes  very  ex- 
traordinary affecSlions,  from  caufes  which 
would  fcarce  produce  any  difturbance  in 
people  of  a  found  conftitution. 

Thus,  feveral  delicate  women,  who 
could  eafily  bear  the  Uronger  fmeli  of  to- 
bacco. 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.   123 

bacco,  have  been  thrown  into  fits  by  muflv, 
ambergreafe,  or  a  pale  rofe,  which,  to  mofl 
people,  are  either  grateful,  or  at  lead  not 
difagreeable.  The  fmell  of  cheefe  has  al- 
moft  always  occafioned  a  bleeding  of  the 
nofe  in  fome  *•  Mr  Boyle  tells  of  a  noble- 
man who  was  apt  to  faint  away  when  tan- 
iy  was  brought  near  him  ;  and  there  lately 
lived  in  this  country  a  lady  who  was  af- 
iedtcd  with  a  general  uneafinefs,  as  often 
as  there  was  any  fellery  in  the  room  where 
fhe  fat.  The  fight  of  a  cat,  nay  even  the 
invifible  effluvia  from  that  animal,  have  oc~ 
cafioned  anxiety,  faintnefs  and  fweating  -['. 
J  had,  feveral  years  fince,  a  patient  who 
was  always  affetfted  with  an  itching  and  un- 
cafinefs  over  her  whole  body,  when  Ihe  ei- 
ther fwallowed  nutmeg,  or  applied  it  ex- 
ternally. There  have  been  fome  who  were 
ready  to  faint  when  they  fmelled  to  cin- 
namon :  And  Mr  Boyle  mentions  a  lady 
•vvho  had  fuch  an  antipathy  to  honey,  that 

*  Kaau  Boerhaave  Impet.  faciens,  §  409. 
t  Ibid. 


|24         P¥  THE  GAUSE§ 

a  little  of  i,t,  put  iato  a  poultice,  without 
her  knowledge,  and  laid  to  a  flight  wound, 
threw  her  into  great  diforder,  which  con- 
tinued until  that  application  w?ls  rernoved"^. 
J  knew  a  woman,  who,  foon  after  concep- 
tion, always  contraiSted  an  ^verfion  to  fnufF^ 
and  did  npt  j^ecover  her  tafle  for  it  until 
fome  time  after  her  deliveiy :  And  it  is  well 
known,  that,  m  time  of  pregnancy,  the 
nerves  of  the  ftomach  are  fo  much  change4, 
that  moft  women  are  then  troubled  with  a 
7tmfea,    vomiting,    or   depraved    appetite. 
Laflly,  certain  perfoos,  in  confequeTice  of 
an  uncommon  delicacy,   pr  unnaturaj  fen- 
fibility  of  the  nerves  which  terminate  in 
the  bronchia,    or  veficles   of  the  lungs,  arc 
apt  to  fuffer  an  afthmatic  fit  from  the  efiu- 
•via  of  particular  fubllances,  \yhich  produce 
no  fuch  effe(5t  on  thofe  whofe  pulmonary 
nerves  are  differently  difpofed. 

But    there  is  no  organ  of  phe  body». 
the  unnatural  Hate  of  whofe  nerves  is  fq 
frequently    the  caufe    of  nervous,    hypo- 
chondriac, 
f  Ufefulnefs  of  experimental  philofoph.  part  2.  p.  269. 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  125 

cbondriac,  and  hyfleric  diforders,  as  tli^ 
alimentary  canal,  efpecially  the  ftomach* 

An  uncommon  delicacy  of  the  nerves 
of  the  ftomach  and  inteilines,  which  may 
be  either  jn  a  great  meafure  natural  or 
brought  on  by  difeafes,  improper  aliment, 
irregular  living,  cxccdive  grief,  or  other 
caufes,  is  to  be  diftinguiflied  from  that 
acute  feeling,  or  increafed  fenlibility, 
which  is  the  confequcnce  of  an  inflamma- 
tion, or  of  an  aphthous  flate  of  thefe 
parts ;  fince  in  thefe  lad  cafes  every  acrid 
fubflance  gives  them  pain  ;  Whereas,  in  the 
former,  many  j.qfipid  and  feemingly  inno- 
cent aliments  produce  great  uneafinefs  in 
the  ftomach  and  bowel§  while  volatile 
fpirits,  flrong  wine,  brandy,  and  fpiceries, 
are  iiot  only  inoifenfive,  but  often  necef- 
fary  for  allaying  thofe  diforders,  which  are 
produced  in  the  firfl  pafTages  by  fuch 
caufes  as  would  fcarce  give  any  difturbance 
in  a  found  flate. 

Further,  this  morbid  or  delicate 
ft^te  of  the   flomach   and   bowels,   does 

not 


126         OF  THE  CAUSES 

not  confift  folely  in  their  weaknefs,  but 
chiefly  in  the  uncommon  dilpofition  of 
their  nerves,  which  have  a  feeling  very 
different  from  what  is  natural.  As  a  proof 
of  this,  we  obferve,  that  in  Inch  a  ftate 
of  the  alimentary  canal,  the  appetite  is 
often  not  only  good,  but  beef  and  mutton, 
even  when  failed  and  dried,  will  be  more 
calily  digefted,  and  give  lefs  difturbanee, 
than  many  vegetables,  which  in  healthy 
perfons  fit  much  lighter  on  the  flo- 
inach  *. 

It 

*  It  is  a  miftake  to  thinlc,  as  lome  have*  done,  that  ve-» 
getable  food  in  general  is  worfe  to  digeft  than  animal. 
The  contrary  feems  to  be  demonftrated  by  Walaeus's  eX' 
periments  on  dogs ;  from  which  it  appears,  that  bread 
and  herbs  are  much  fooner  digefted  than  butcher  nieat, 
even  by  thefe  animals  which  are  naturally  carnivorous ; 
the  former  remaining  in  the  ftomach  only  four  or  five 
hours,  and  the  latter  feven  or  eight.  Vid.  Epiji.  de  mot, 
chyl.  et  fang,  ad  Thorn.  Bartholin.  Agreeably  to  this,peQ- 
ple  whole  ftomach  and  inteftines  are  quite  found,  find 
themfelves  lighter,  and  much  fooner  hungry,  after  a 
fdlnner  of  white  bread,  herbs,  roots,  or  ripe  fruit,  than 
gn?  qf  beef,  mutton,  ot  park.    It  is  not  owing,  th«re- 

forcj 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  127 

It  is  furprifing  how  much  the  condi- 
tion of  the  flomach  and  inteflines,  and 
the  difpofition  of  their  nerves,  will  vary; 
even  in  the  fame  perfons,  at  different 
times. 

Thus  cabbage,  onions,  leeks,  and  o- 
ther  vegetables,  will  lie  long  on  the  flo- 
mach, and  occafion  flatulence  and  loofe 
ftools  in  many  who  formerly  found  no 
fuch  inconvenience  from  them  ;  and  the 
fame  thing  is  true  of  honey  and  other  ali- 
ments :  Nay,  Mr  Boyle  tells  us  of  a  perfoa 
who  was  more  violently  vomited  by  coffee 
than  crocus  metallorwny  or  other  ftrong  eme- 
tics ;  and  was  made  fick  even  by  the  fmell 
of  this  liquor,  as  he  palfed  by  a  cofFee- 
houfe,  altho'  formerly  he  ufed  to  drink  it 

without 

fore,  to  their  being  more  di£EcuIt  to  digeft,  or  their  re- 
maining Jonger  in  the  ftomach,  that  many  vegetable  ali- 
ments give  fuch  difturbance  to  fome  delicate  people,  but 
to  their  affeding  difagreeably  the  nerves  of  the  alimen- 
tary canal.  For  the  fame  reafon  it  is,  that  roafted  meat 
agrees  better  with  them  than  broth  or  boiled  meat,  and 
«Id  cheefe  than  new  prefTed  curds. 


128        OF  THE  CAU^Ei 

without  feeling  any  diragreeable  effects  *V 
In  fomc  people  the  (late  of  the  nerves  of 
the  floniach  is  fo  very  uncommon,  that 
laudanum^  inftead  of  relieving,  will  excite 
vomiting,  and  occadon  violent  craiilps  irf 
that  organ :  Nay,  there  have  been  perfon's 
with  whom  pills  of  opium  always  difagreecf 
when  newly  made  ;  but  occafioned  no  dif- 
turbance  after  being  kept  fome  weeks. 

That  many  of  thofe  complaints  which 
have  been  commonly  called  nervous,  pro- 
ceed in  a  great  meafure  fifom  a  particu- 
lar, unnatural,  or  depraved  fenfibility  of 
the  nerves  of  the  alimentary  caiid,  ap- 
pears evidently  from  this,  that  althoughj^ 
in  many  cafes,  the  ftomach  and  inteftines 
are  much  difeafed  ;  yet  the  patients  are  not 
afFeiSled  with  any  remarkable  nervous  or 
hypochondriac  fyraptoms,  while  others  are 
Greatly  troubled  with  thefe  complaints 
who  have  a  good  appetite,  a  quick  dige- 
ilion>  and  no  tough  phlegm  or  other 
noxious  humour  in  their  ftomach.     Add 

*  yfefukefs  of  exp,  philof.  part  2 .  p»  260.^ 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  129 

to  this,  although  children,  on  account  of 
the  great  fenfibility  of  their  nerves,  are 
liable  to  convulfive  diforders  and  other 
nervous  complaints ;  yet  they  are  rarely  af- 
fedted  with  the  hypochondriac  difeafe;  be- 
caufc  the  nerves  of  their  flomach  and  in- 
teitines  have  not  that  unnatural  or  de- 
praved feehng  which  is  common  in  this 
malady  ;  and  which,  when  it  is  on  cer- 
tain occafions  much  increafed  by  fome 
acrid  matter  in  the  blood  falling  on  them, 
becomes  not  only  the  predifpofing  caufe, 
but  conflitutes  the  hypochondriac  difeafe 
itfelf,  and  gives  rife  to  mofl  of  its  fymp- 
toms. 

In  a  weakly  and  delicate  or  an  unna- 
tural ftate  of  the  ftomach  and  bowels,  im- 
proper aliments,  excefs  in  eating  or  drink- 
ing, wind,  fharp  humours,  and  flrong  paf- 
fions,  fuch  as  grief,  anger,  and  the  like, 
will  occafion  much  more  violent  fymp- 
toms,  than  in  perfons  whofe  alimentary 
canal  is  firm  and  found.  Thus,  a  draught 
of  cold  water  will  inflantly  affed  fome 
R  very 


I30         OF  THE  CAUSES 

very  delicate  women  with  a  violent  paiil 
and  cramp  in  their  flomach  ;  and  the  fight 
of  one  vomiting,  or  of  certain  difagree- 
able  aliments,  or  medicines,  will  produce 
a  natifea,  and  even  vomiting,  in  perfons 
whofe  llomachs  are  eafily  moved.  Nay, 
in  fome  cafes,  fo  very  delicate  is  the  flate  of 
the  flomach,  that  turning  the  body  hafli- 
ly  in  bed,  or  raifmg  one's  felf,  wilh  imme- 
diately occafion  a  faintnefs,  giddinefs,  a 
2:eneral  weaknefs,  and  fometimes  an  in- 
chnation  to  vomit.  This  laft  fymptom 
has  been  remarked  by  Sydenham  in  hyfle- 
ric  women ;  and  I  have  had  feveral  pa- 
tients in  continued  fevers  who,  together 
with  an  uncommon  debility  and  faintnefs, 
were,  upon  the  fmallefl  motion  in  bed, 
feized  with  a  naiifea  and  retching  to  vo- 
mit. 

Further,  a  delicate  Hate  of  the  firll 
pafTages,  or  an  unnatural  fenfibility  of  their 
nerves,  not  only  difpofes  people  to  many 
complaints  in  thefe  parts,  but  the  whole 
nervous  fyflem  is  thereby  rendered  more 

moveable. 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  131 

moveable,   and  liable  to  be  affected  by  the 
flighted    caufes.      Thus,    I   have   known 
fome  women  of  a  delicate  frame,  in  whom, 
from  an  obflrudion  or  irregularity  of  the 
menftruay  the  nerves  of  the  flomach  had 
acquired   fuch    an   uncommon   fenfibility, 
that,  after  eating  freely  of  any  folid  meat, 
they  were  not  only  feized  with  a  pain  and 
licknefs  at  the  ftomach,    and  a  fenfe  of 
Cliffnefs  and  rigidity  in  the  trunk  of  the 
body,  but  fometimes  alfo  with  faintings, 
attended  with   a   quick  trembling    pulfe, 
and  flight  convulllons  of  the  mufcles  of 
the  legs  and  arms.      A  woman   of  a  deli- 
cate conftitution,   who  was  attacked  with 
a  quotidian  intermittent,  feven  weeks  af- 
ter child-bearing,  as  often  as  fhe  {wallow- 
ed fome  magnefia  alba,  felt  immediately  a 
kind     of    quivering    motion    propagated 
through  her  whole  body.     The  fame  per- 
fon,    as  often  as  flie  took  a   draught  of 
lime-water,    obferved    the   palms    of   her 
hands,  which  before  were  foft  and  moifl:, 
become  at  once  dry  and  hard.      It   was 
R  2  remarkable^ 


132         OF  THE  CAUSES 

remarkable,  that  neither  crabs  eyes,  nor 
chalk,  occafioned  any  fuch  uneafy  feeling 
as  the  magnefia  did. 

When   ray  flomach  and  bowels   have 
been  out  of  order,  and  affeded  with  an  un- 
eafy fenfation  from  wind,  I  have  not  only 
been  fenfible  of  a  general  debility  and  flat- 
nefs  of  fpirits,  but  the  unexpeded  opening 
of  a  door,  or  any  fuch  trifling  unforefeen 
accident,  has  inftantly  occaiioned  an  odd 
fenfation  about  my  heart,  extending  itfelf 
from  thence  to  my  head  and  arms,  and, 
in  a  lelfer  degree,  to  the  inferior  parts  of 
my  body.     At  other  times,  when  my  flo- 
mach is  in  a  firmer  flate,   I  have  no  fuch 
feelings,  or  at  leafl  in  a  very  fmall  degree, 
from  caufes  which  might  be  thought  more 
apt  to  produce  them. 

From  what  has  been  faid,  we  may  fee, 
that  faintings,  tremors,  palpitations  of  the 
heart,  convulfive  motions,  and  great  fear- 
fulnefs,  may  be  often  owing  more  to  the 
infirm  flate  of  the  firft  paflages,  than  to 
mj  fault   either   in  the  brain  or  heart* 

But 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  135 

But  it  would  be  unneceffary  to  infift  far- 
ther on  this  head,  as  the  powers  which 
the  alimentary  canal,  when  its  nerves  are 
difagreeably  afFeded,  miilT:  have  in  pro- 
ducing diforders  in  the  niofl  diflant  parts 
of  the  body,  cannot  be  doubted  of  by 
thofe  who  attend  to  that  wonderful  and 
widely  extended  fympathy  which  obtains 
between  it  and  almofl  the  whole  fyftem  *. 
What  has  been  faid  may  be  fufficient  to 
fhew,  how  much  a  delicate  or  unnatural 
ftateof  the  nerves  of  the  alimentary  canal 
mufh  difpofe  people  to  nervous,  hypochon- 
driac, and  hyfleric  complaints.  But  fur- 
ther, when,  through  the  fault  of  the  fto- 
niach  and  inteitines,  the  digeftion  is  im- 
perfeftly  carried  on,  the  ill  prepared  chyle 
may  lay  a  foundation  in  the  blood  for  ex- 
citing a  variety  of  nervous  fymptoms,  as 
will  afterwards  more  fully  appear. 

Since  the  llronger  or  Vv^eaker  efFe(5ls  of 
emetics  and  cathartics  mufl  depend  en- 
tirely 

*  See  above  chapter  i ,  No,  i  j , 


X34        C)F  THE  CAUSES 

tirely  on  rlie  difFerent  con (li cation  of  the 
nerves  of  the  primts  i?/V,  and  the  quantity 
of  mucus  defending  them,  it  is  eafy  to  fee 
that  the  dofes  of  thofe  medicines  can  nei- 
ther be  certainly  determined  by  the  ages 
nor  fizes  of  the  patients,  nor  by  the  quan- 
tity of  blood  in  their  velTels, 

It  is  owing  alone  to  the  different  fenfl- 
bility  which  the  nerves  of  the  alimentary 
canal,  in  difFerent  perfons,  have  of  vari- 
ous Jiimidi,  that  the  feveral  vomiting  and 
purging  medicines  have  fuch  difFerent 
efFed:s:  That  the  flrongeft  emetics  fcarce 
move  fome  people,  while,  in  others,  the 
niildeil  are  apt  to  have  too  great  an  ope- 
ration: That  a  few  grains  of  rhubarb 
ihall  purge  and  gripe  one  patient  feverely, 
and  a  drachm  of  the  fame  medicine  have 
no  fenfible  effed  on  another:  That  a 
drachm  and  a  half  of  foluble  tartar  iliall 
prove  a  ilronger  purgative  to  fome  than 
four  ounces  of  facred  tincture:  That 
children  <ir^  often  harder  to  purge  than 

fome 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  135 

fome  adiilcs  *:  That  warms,  tough 
phlegm,  and  other  noxious  humours,  lod- 
ging in  the  flomach  and  bowels,  produce 
very  different  effe^s  in  different  perfons; 
and  that  the  bark,  which  generally  makes 
the  body  coflive,  occafions  gripes  and  pur- 
ging in  fome.  And  is  it  not  to  be  afcribed 
chiefly,  if  not  folely,  to  the  different  con- 
flitution  of  the  nerves  in  different  animals, 
that  what  is  highly  noxious  to  fome,  proves 
vvholefome  food  to  others?  Thus^  the 
cicuta  aquatica,  which  is  eaten  by  goats 
without  any  harm  f,  is  a  deadly  poifon 
to  men  and  other  animals. 

Whfrein  confill  the  various  kinds 
and  degrees  of  fenfibility,  which  the  nerves 
of  the  alimentary  canal  and  other  organs 
poffels,    we  no  more  know,   than  we  do 

their 

*  It  is  here  to  be  obferved,  that  in  children  frequent- 
ly, and  alfo  fometimes  in  adults,  vomiting  and  pur- 
ging medicines  have  much  lefs  efFed  than  might  be  ez- 
pefted,  confidering  the  delicacy  of  their  nerves,  on  ac- 
count of  the  flomach  and  inteftines  being  lined  either 
with  a  great  deal  of  natural  mucus,  or  morbid  flime. 

t  Swencke  Differtat.  de  cicwt,  aquat.  Gefneri. 


t^6        OF  THE  CAUSES 

their  peculiar  flrudure,  or  how  they  come 
to  be  endued  with  fenfatioii  at  ail:  But 
that  the  particular  fenfibility  of  the  nerves 
of  the  gullet,  ftomach,  and  inteflines,  is 
often  greatly  changed  by  difeafes,  even 
when  the  nervous  fyilem  in  general  is  not 
much  altered,  we  know  from  experience*. 
Nor  is  there,  perhaps,  to  be  found  a 
flronger  inflance  of  this  than  in  the  hydro- 
phobia confequent  on  the  bite  of  a  mad 
dog;  where  the  purefl  water  excites  fuch 
convulfive  motions  of  the  gullet,  ilomach, 
diaphragm,  and  abdominal  mufcles,  that, 
after  a  few  attempts  to  fwallow  it,  the 
fight  of  any  fluid,  and  efpecially  if  it 
touches  the  patient's  lips,   will   inftantly 

afFea 

*  since  It  is  probable,  that  the  nerves  are  partly 
nouriftied  by  the  fluids  diftributed  to  that  produdlion  of 
the  pia  mater  which  furrounds  their  medullary  fub- 
ftance  ;  it  is  eafy  to  fee  that  the  nerves  of  a  particular 
organ  may  have  their  fenfibility  iccreafed,  diminifhed, 
or  otherwife  changed,  by  fluids  that  are  improper,  or  of 
an  acrid  nature,  being  fent  to  them ;  vrhen,  in  the  mean 
time,  the  brain  and  nervous  fyftem  in  general  may  be 
found,  and  fuffer  in  no  other  way,  but  by  fympathy 
with  that  organ  whofe  nerves  are  morbidly  affedcd. 


OF  NERVOUS  DrSORDERS.  137 

ifFe^H:  him  with  horror,  and  throw  him 
mto  violent  convulfions  and  vomitino;. 
In  fome  cafes  (although  thefe  more  rarely 
happen)  the  nerves  alfo  of  the  inteflines 
become  fo  far  depraved  in  their  feeling, 
that  liquors  can  no  more  be  admitted  by 
inje(51:ion  into  the  great  guts,  than  into  the 
ftomach  by  deglutition.  Nay,  it  fhould 
feem  that  fometimes  not  only  the  nerves 
of  the  alimentary  canal  a're  llrangely  al- 
tered in  this  difeafe,  but  alfo  thofe  of  the 
face,  and  perhaps  of  the  whole  furface  of 
the  body,  fince  we  are  told  of  hydropho* 
bic  patients  who  could  not  even  bear  a 
blafl  of  cool  air  *. 

How  this  change  is  produced  in  the 
nerves  of  the  firfl  paflageSj  or  other  parrs, 
in  the  hydrophobia^  or  in  what  it  confifts, 
is,  perhaps,  one  of  thofe  difficulties  which 
phyficians  may  defpair  of  being  ever  able 
to  explain.  One  thing,  however,  is  cer- 
tain, that,  in  men  as  well  as  doss  who 
S  have 

*  Philof.   Tranfa<fl.  abridged,  vol.    j,   p.  366.  j  and 
Aft,  Acad.  MoguutiD,  torn.  i.  p.  34;, 


138        OF   THE  CAUSES 

liave  died  of  that  difeafe,  the  gullet  anJ 
Homach  have  been  often  found  free  from 
any  vifible  inflammation ;  whence  the  di(^ 
gafe  muft  have  had  its  feat  either  m  the 
serves  themfelves,  or  in  veflels  fmaller  thaa 
thofe  which  carry  red  blood.  But  what- 
ever may  be  the  change  made  by  this  dif- 
temper  on  the  nerves  of  the  alimentary 
canal,  or  in  what  manner  foever  the 
canine  poifan  produces  this  change,  we 
know  that  if,  from  any  caufe,  the  nerves 
of  the  faucest  gullet,  and  flomach  fhould 
acquire  a  fenfibility  fomething  flmilar  to 
that  which  the  nerves  of  the  larynx  and 
trachea  are  naturally  endued  with,  the  molt 
violent  convulfive  motions  of  thofe  parts, 
and  retchings  to  vomit,  would  enfue,  upon 
attempting  to  fwallow  even  the  mildeft 
liquors.  In  this,  however,  the  fenfibility 
Gt  xhQ  fauces  2Lnd.  gullet,^  in  the  h^jdrophobia^ 
differs  from  that  of  the  lar^jux  and  trachea' 
in  a  natural  flate,  that  thefe  lafl  parts  fuffcr 
ilill  more  from  fol ids  than  liquors  of  a  mild 

nature  ^ 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  139 

nature;   whereas  the  former  are  difagree- 
ably  affected  by  liquids  alone. 

But  to  return.  As  a  too  great  feniibi- 
lity  of  the  nervous  fyftem  in  general,  or 
an  unnatural  delicacy  of  the  (tomach  and 
inteftines  or  other  organs  in  particular,  do 
not,  commonly,  of  tbemfclves  produce  thofe 
various  fymptoras  which  go  by  the  name 
of  nervous,  hypochondriac,  and  hylleric, 
I  come  next  to  inquire  into  thofe  feveral 
occafional  eaufes,  which,  meeting  with  the 
predifpofing  ones  above  mentioned,  may 
bnng  OE  this  numerous  train  of  difeafes. 


S  2  CHAP. 


I40  OF  THE  CAUSES 

CHAP.     IV. 

Of  the  general  occafional  Caufes  o/'  Ne  R  vo  u  s, 
Hypochondriac,    and   Hysteric 

Diforderh 


THESE  are  either  to  be  found  in 
the  blood,  or  they  have  their  feat 
in  feme  particular  organ  of  the  body.  The 
former  I  fhall  call  general,  ^he  latter,  par* 

ticular  occafional  caufes. 
1  HE  general  occafional  caufes  may  b^ 

reduced  to  three,  viz, 

1.  Some  morbid  matter  bred  in  the 
blood, 

n.    The    diminution    or  retention  of 
fome  accuflomed  evacuation. 

III.  The 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  141 

III.  The  want  of  a  fuilicient  quantity 
of  blood,  or  of  blood  of  a  proper  denfity. 

I.  Something  bred  in  the  blood,  and 
not  carried  off  by  any  of  the  excretories, 
difagreeably  afFedling  the  nerves,  as  often 
as  it  comes  into  contad  with  them ;  or 
forming  obftrudlions  in  the  fmall  veflels, 
and  producing  diiFerent  fymptoms,  accor-» 
ding  to  the  parts  it  attacks. 

That  many  of  the  fymptoms  common^ 
ly  called  nervous,  h'jpochondriac,  or  hyJieriCf 
are  frequently  owing  to  fome  noxious  mat- 
ter in  the  blood,  afFedling,  at  different 
times,  different  parts  of  the  body,  I  have 
been  fully  convinced  by  many  cafes  which 
have  occurred  in  mypracfticc;  but  fhall  on- 
ly mention  two,  which  feem  to  prove  this 
point  fufficiently. 

I.  A  boy,  of  ten  years  of  age,  of  a 
very  fenfible  nervous  fyftem,  who,  in  De- 
cember 1747,  had  been  feized  with  a  pal- 
pitation of  his  heart,  fell  from  his  horfe  a- 
t)oiit  the  beginning  of  January,     From  this 

time 


142  OF  THE  CAUSES    . 

time  the  palpitation  left  him;  but,  in  a 
few  days  after,  he  was  attacked  with  a  vio- 
lent headach,  returning  fonictimes  once  a- 
day,  at  other  tiqes  only  every  third  or 
fourth  day.  Duriijig  the  fit,  his  pulfe  be- 
came fmaller  and  quicker,  and  often  inter- 
mitted ;  his  feet  were  cold,  but,  by  the 
violence  of  the  pain,  a  plentiful  fweat  broke 
out  and  relieved  him.  As  thefe  headachs 
continued  to  increafe,  the  patient  loft  his 
flomach  and  flefh,  and  looked  pale.  By 
the  ufe,  chiefly,  of  an  ele(n:uary  of  the  bark 
and  valerian,  in  lefs  than  three  weeks  the 
pain  in  the  head  abated  greatly;  but  his 
appetite  grew  worfe,  and  he  often  com- 
plained of  a  naufea,  Thefe  fymptoms, 
however,  were  all  removed,  in  four  or  five 
days,  by  fome  warm  ftomachic  and  cor- 
dial medicines  ;  but  were  fucceeded  by  an 
intolerable  pain  a-crofs  the  middle  of  his 
belly,  which,  in  the  fpace  of  eight  days, 
returned  five  or  fix  times,  and  not  only  af- 
fected his  pulfe,  as  the  headach  had  done, 
but  fometimes  occafioned  a  di^culty  and 

paiA 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.    143 

pain  in  making  water.  This  pain  no  foon-r 
eriefc  his  bdly,  than  the  hcadach  return- 
ed with  greater  violence  than  ever,  fo 
that  the  boy  ufed  to  faint  in  fome  of  the 
word  paroxyfms.  It  had  no  certain  pe- 
riods, coming  fometimes  twice  a-day, 
fometimes  only  once  in  two  days,  and  was 
attended  with  a  fenfe  of  fuffocation  from 
wind,  and  a  lump  in  his  throat.  He  was 
eafieil  in  the  night  when  he  flcpt  or  lay 
quiet ;  but  any  confiderable  motion  of  his 
body  always  raifed  his  headach.  Before 
the  fits,  he  was  obferved  to  be  uncommon- 
ly lively,  and  difpofed  to  laugh.  On  the 
2 1  ft  of  February,  at  two  in  the  afternoon, 
he  was  feized  with  fits  of  involuntary  laugh- 
ter, between  which  he  complained  of  a 
ftrange  fmell,  and  of  pins  pricking  his  nofe; 
he  talked  incoherently,  ftarcJ  in  an  odd 
manner,  and  his  complexion  changed  to  a 
livid  colour  ;  immediately  after,  he  was  fei- 
zed with  convuHioas,  and  then  fell  into 
a  fainting  fit,  which  lafteJ  near  half  an 
hour.      When  his  pulfe,    breathing,  and 

fenfes 


144  OF  THE  CAU.^ES 

fenfes  returned,  he  complained  of  a  greaC 
coldnels  and  pain  in  the  back-part  of  his 
head,  and  vomited  his  dinner,  with  feme 
tough  phlegm.  At  this  time  his  appetite 
was  good,  and  afterwards  it  became  greater 
than  it  ufed  to  be  in  perfet^  health. 

On  the  9th  of  March,   fomc  purulent 

matter  was  difcharged  from  his  right  noflril, 

and  much  about  the  fame  time,   a  fmall 

quantity  more  came  from  the  right  ear; 

.after  which  he  had  fcarce  any  violent  fits 

-of  the  headach,  but  a  continued,  tho'  lefs 

fevere,  pain  in  the  back-part  of  the  head  ; 

which  being  greatly  increafed  by  motion, 

he  lay  conftantly  a-bed,  and  moflly  on  his 

back.     Altho'  he  had  a  confiderable  thirft, 

and  drank   plentifully;    yet,    during   the 

whole  month  of  March,  he  did  not  make 

above  fix  ounces  of  water  in  twenty-four 

hours,  and  never  fweated. 

About  the  beginning  of  April,  the  com- 
plaints of  his  head  were  fo  much  abated, 
that  he  could  bear  fitting  up  in  a  chair ;  he 
began  to  make  water  more  plentifully,  and, 

when 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.    145 

when  any  thing  ruffled  him,  voided  great 
quantities  of  quite  limpid  urine.  During 
the  month  of  May  he  continued  to  grow 
better  ;  and,  before  the  end  of  June,  he 
had  perfectly  recovered. 

In  February  1749,  ^^  began  to  com- 
plain of  a  conftant  headach,  which,  tho* 
more  painful  at  one  time  than  another,  yet 
was  never  fo  violent  as  it  had  been  the  year 
before,  nor  did  it  affedt  his  pulfe  or  fto- 
mach:  But  now  he  frequently  fa w  objedts 
double.  In  the  beginning  of  March,  fome 
purulent  matter  came  from  one  of  his  no- 
Itrils,  and  foon  after  the  headach  abated ; 
but  he  loft  his  appetite,  and  was  attacked 
with  a  pain  in  the  left  fide  of  his  belly, 
between  the  fhort  ribs  and  os  ilium,  confi- 
ned to  a  fpace  little  larger  than  the  breadth 
of  a  (hilling.  This  pain  was  often  fo  fe- 
vere,  as  to  make  him  ready  to  faint :  fome- 
times  it  fhifted,  and  then  he  was  leized 
with  fatiguing  fits  of  involuntary  laughter. 
His  head  was  always  eafy  when  the  pain  in 
his  belly  was  worft.  In  the  fummer  he  re- 
T  covered 


J46  OF  THE  CAUSES 

covered  his  health  as  in  the  year  before^ 
and  next  winter  complained  little  or  no- 
thing of  his  head,  but  for  fome  months 
had  a  weakness  and  painful  feeling  in  his 
left  eye,  when  expoied  to  the  leaft  light. 
As  there  was  no  inflimmation  in  this  eye, 
the  p-ain  feemed  to  be  owing  to  too  great 
a  fenfibility  of  the  retina. 

2.  An  unmarried  woman,  aeed  between 

'  CD 

25  and  30,  had  an  irregular  ague  in  Au- 
guft  and  September  1757,  of  which  no 
fymptoms  remained  in  0(5lober,  except  a 
fweating  every  other  day,  if  {he  lay  long 
in  bed.  1  his  fhe  prevented  by  getting  up 
before  breakfafl ;  but,  in  eight  or  ten  days 
after,  fhe  was  feized  with  a  tightnefs  in 
her  bread,  \Vhich  occafioned  a  cough,  but 
without  expectoration.  This  oppreffion  at 
ber  bread,  with  the  cough  increafing,  al- 
tho*  the  pulfe  was  good,  I  thought  it  pro- 
per to  make  her  lofe  eight  ounces  of  blood  ; 
but  neither  this  evacu.nion,  nor  a  Wilier 
afterwards  applied  to  her  back,  gave  any 
relief.     She  ufed  a  mixture  with  the  acctum 

fallitiacm^ 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.     147 

fdlUticumy  was  vomited,  purged  with  fa- 
cred  tincfture,  took  camphire,  caflor,  afa 
foctiday  and  lattddnitm^  with  very  little  bene- 
fit :  At  la|l,  about  the  beginning  of  No- 
vember, a  mulk  julep  taken  for  a  fortnight 
almoft  quite  freed  her  from  her  diforder. 

After  having  continued  during  the 
winter  in  pretty  good  health,  fhe  began,  ia 
April,  to  complain  of  pains  in  her  legs  and 
knees,  but  moftly  m  her  body.  Altho" 
her  pulfe  was  not  altered,  yet  twelve  oun- 
ces of  blood  were  taken  away,  which  had 
a  thin  fizy  ikin  of  a  blueifh  colour.  Some 
days  after,  the  pain  in  her  fides,  ftomach, 
Jiernum,  and  back  increafed,  {he  was  much 
troubkJ  with  wind  in  the  firft  pafTages,  and  • 
made  very  little  water.  The  fenfe  of  fuf- 
focation  and  dry  cough,  which  Ihe  had  ia 
Oclober,  returned  ;  and  fhe  was  feized, 
efpecially  in  the  evenings,  with  fuch  violent 
catchings  or  convulfive  motions  of  her  legs, 
thighs,  and  almofl  her  whole  body,  as  not 
only  to  fliake  the  bed,  but  the  room  in 
which  file  lay.  At  this  time,  ihe  was  vo- 
T  2  mitedii 


148  OF  THE  CAUSES 

rnited,  bliilered  on  the  back,   and  took 
draughts  oi Jp.  Mindcrer,  with  fal,  voh  am" 
mon,  but  without  any  advantage.     By  thq 
ufe,  however,  of  bolufes  of  camphire  and 
mull^,  with  fmall  dozes  of  laudanum  at  bed- 
time, fhe  got  pretty  free  from  the  catch^ 
ings  ;    and  the  tightnefs  and   dry  cough 
were  alfo  IclTened ;    but  the  pains  in  her 
fides,  bowels,  and  legs  continued  as  bad  as 
ever.     On  the  7th  of  May  fhe  complain^ 
ed  of  a  pain  and  fwclling  in  one  of  her 
arm-pits,  which  daily  increafed,   and  her 
pulfe,   which  had  generally  beat  only  bc^ 
tween  60  and  70  times  in  a  minute,  now 
exceeded  100.   Shelofl  ten  ounces  of  blood, 
which  was  very  fizy ;    emollient  fomenta- 
tions and  fuppurating  poultices  were  ap- 
plied   to    the   arm-pit  5    notwithilandiiig 
which,  the  pain  increafed  to  fuch  a  degree, 
that  fhe  was  obliged  to  take  every  night  a 
large  dofe   of   laudanum    to  procure  reft. 
From  the  time  this  fwelling  and  pajn  be^ 
gan  under  her  arm,  the  fenfe  of  fufFoca-^ 
lion,  thecough;^  the  other  pains  aiid  catch- 

ings 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  149, 

ings  ab  ted,  and  left  her  intirely,  about  the 
20th  of  May,  after  the  tumour  had  broke 
jind  difcharged  tome  bloody  matter,  Du* 
ring  both  iUnefles,  flie  continued  pcrfe(5tl7 
regular. 

From  thefe  two  cafes  it  appears,  that 
various  fymptoms  of  the  nervous  kind,  may 
be  owing  to  fome  morbid  matter  in  the 
blood,  occaiioning  different  complaints  ac- 
cording to  the  parts  upon  which  it  falls, 
even  when  there  is  no  reafon  to  fufpedl  any 
obftrudlion  in  the  vifcera  of  the  abdomen, 
or  fault  in  the  uterus.  In  the  firfl  cafe, 
it  is  not  eafy  to  fay,  what  gave  rife  to  the 
difeafe  ;  but,  in  the  fecond,  an  agueifh  dif- 
order  imprudently  checked,  leaving  a  taint 
in  the  blood,  produced  a  fenfe  of  fuffoca- 
tion,  the  dry  cough,  pains  in  various  part? 
of  the  body,  and  fpafmodic  contravftions  of 
the  mufcles ;  which  complaints  were  never 
jntirely  cured,  till  fome  noxious  matter  was 
difcharged  by  the  fuppuration  of  a  gland  in 
the  arm-pit.  Nor  can  it  appear  flrange, 
iJiat  fo  fmall  an  evacuation  fliould  purify 

the 


ISO  OF  THE  CAUSES 

the  blood,  and  relieve  the  patient,  when.  In 
the  plague  itfelf,  a  proper  fuppuration  of 
one  of  the  glands  of  the  neck,  arm-pit,  or 
groin,  will  prove  a  perfe^  cifis. 

As  a  further  proof,  that  complaints  of 
the  nervous  or  hyfteric  kind  often  proceed 
from  fome  morbid  humour  in  the  blood,  I 
have  frequently  ieen  them  relieved  by  an 
itching  between  the  toes,  red  puftles  ap^ 
pearing  on  the  breaft  and  belly,  or  fomc 
other  cutaneous  eruption. 

That  taint  or  morbid  matter  in  the 
blood,  which  occafions  many  fymptoms  of 
the  nervous  kind,  may  proceed  from  very 
different  caufes ;  fuch  as,  improper  food, 
a  fcorbutic  *  or  fcrophulous  habit,  fevers 
^hich  have  had  m^evk6t  crifes,  or  other 

difeafes 

f  By  fcorbutic  Is  not  here  meant,  that  fault  in  the 
blood  which  produces  the  true  fcurvy,  to  which  people  who 
live  at  fea  and  in  marfhy  places  are  fo  fubjedj-but  that 
liumour  which  has  been  commonly,  though  improperly, 
called  fcorbutic,  and  which,  when  it  is  carried  to  the 
fkin,  inftead  of  livid  blotches,  produces  dry,  fcurfy  e- 
ruptions,  fcabs,  tetters,  ^e.  and,  when  in  a  high  degree, 
jhe  lepra  Gracsrum, 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  151 

difeafcs  not  fully  cured,  efpccially  the  cuta- 
neous diforders;  when  the  morbid  matter, 
hiflead  of  being  thrown  off  by  the  fkin,  is 
reafllimed  into  the  blood,  and  depofited  on 
fonie  of  the  internal  parts.  But  by  far  the 
mod  frequent  taint  in  the  blood  affedling 
the  nerves,  is  an  arthritic  matter,  falling 
at  different  times  on  different  parts  of  the 
body. 

Araeteus  has  long  ago  taken  notice, 
iliat,  in  fome,  the  gout  wanders  through 
the  whole  body  *;  the  truth  of  which  ob- 
fervation  has  been  confirmed  by  later  wri- 
ters f,  and  would  have  been  more  care- 
fully 

•  Decaufiset  fignis  raorborum,  lib.  9.  cap.  12. 

••  f  Enimvero  ufu  medico  vel  parum  exercitatos,  hoC 
••  latere  nequit ;  arthritide  (praecipue  frigida,  inerti,  lan- 
*•  guida ;  maxime  vero  omnium  ea  fupprefla,  recufaque) 
*•  aegrotantes,  interdum  humeri,  pedoris,  dorfi,  lumbo- 
"  rum,  aliarumque  in  ambitu  corporis  partium  dtilore 
•'  vago  tanquam  rheumatico  ;  fepc  etiam  capitis  afFedli- 
"  bus,  more  prorfus  hyfterico ;  alias,  aliis  in  corpore  mali$ 
"  quafx  fcorbuticis  urgeri ;  faepiffirae  vero  valetudine  du- 
"  bia,  et  in  tempus  diuturnum  incerta,  et  neutra  efle. 
"  Qui  quldem  eoriim  flatus  ac  conditiones,  fenfa  re- 

raifllori 


152        OF  THE   CAUSES 

fully  attended  to  by  phyficians,  if  thofc 
fymptoms  which  arofe  only  from  an  imper- 
fect gout,  had  not  been,  for  the  moil  part, 
either  flurred  over,  under  thefpecious  name 
of  nervous,  without  any  particular  inquiry 
into  their  real  caufe,  or  confidered  merely 
as  the  effedts  of  the  hypochondriac  or  hy- 
lleric  difeafe,  or  of  the  fcurvy;  efpecially 
in  fuch  as,  having  never  had  a  regular  fit 
of  the  gout,  were  not  fufpedted  of  any  ar- 
thritic humour. 

Were  it  nccefTary,  many  cafes  might 
be  produced  to  fhew,  that  nervous,  hypo- 
chondriac, and  hyfteric  complaints  are  of- 
ten owing  to  an  imperfedt  gout  wandering 
through  the  body  ;  but  I  fliall  only  men- 


tion the  two  following. 


I.  A 


«»  miffiori  et  leniori  gradu  morbofae  natales  fuos  arthriti- 
**  CO  miafmati,  cceco,  in  corpus  fubrepenti,  et  eo  loci  clam 
•«  agenti,  fe  debere,  ultro  videntur  agnofcere  :  qulactiam 
«'  aliquando,  multos  poft  annos,  dublum  hunc  in  modum 
««  ados ;  tandem  apparente  paroxyfmo  arthridltis  Idoneo, 
*'  de  iftorum  origine  et  natura  malorum  arthritica  omnis 
**  fublata  dubitatio  eft."  Mufgrave  de  arthritide  anoma- 
la,  cap.  19.  p.  316. 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  155 

I.  A    gentleman  aged    58,    temperate, 
and  fubje6t  to  no  diilemper,  except  a  rhcu- 
matifm,  of  which,  for  fome  yearsj  he  had 
frequent  returns  in   his  loins,  in  Auguft 
1752,    after  a  fevere  fit  of  this  kind  had 
fuddenly  left  him,  was  feized  with  a  great 
depreffion  of  fpirits,  ofcen  attended  with  a 
iicknefs  at  the  ftomach,  and  a  particular 
fenfation  about  the  epigafiric  region,  which 
he  could  not   well  defcribe.     In   lefs  than, 
two  months,  by  proper  medicines  and  exer- 
cife,   he   got  free  from  thofe  complaints  ; 
but  had   not   long  enjoyed  good  health, 
when  he  began  to  feel,  frequently,  a  llighi: 
palpitation  of  his  heart,  which  was  attend- 
ed with  an  intermiflion  of  his  puife.    This 
was  fucceeded  by  the  IwnbagOy  ouring  which 
he  found    his  appetite  and  fpirits   better 
than  at  other  times,   and  indeed  as  good 
as  in  his  bed  health.     Afterwards,  he  had 
frequent  returns  of  the  diforder  about  his 
ilomach,   with  low  fpirits,  and  a   naufea, 
efpecialiy  in   the  morning  ;  and  complain- 
ed fometimes  of  a  difficuiry  of  breathing-, 
U         .  .     but 


154       <^F  THE  CAUSES 

but  without  any  cough  or  fpitting.     This 
perfon,  who  never  had  had  the  gout,  nor 
fufpedted  it,  being  told,  that  all  his  com- 
plaints were  owing  to  an  arthritic  matter, 
wandering  through  his  body,  fecmed  fur- 
prifed  at  fir  ft,  but  was  foon  after  convin- 
ced, by  a  (light   pain  and  inflammation, 
which  feized  one  of  his  great  toes  ;  and, 
during  the  few  days  it  lafted,  relieved  him 
from  his  lownefs  of  fpirits,  and  complaints 
of  his  ftomach.     He  was  for  feveral  years, 
both  before  and  after  this  fit  of  the  gout, 
afTeded  at  times  with  a  fmall  running  from 
the  tirethra,  and  a  pain  in  the  left  groin, 
which  fometimes  attacked   the  tefticle  of 
that  tide.     Thefe  fymptoms  I  confidered, 
as  well  as  the  others,  to  be  purely  arthritic, 
fince  he  had  never  in  his  life  had  any  vene- 
real infed:ion. 

Tea,  coffee,  and  all  flatulent  aliments, 
increafed  this  patient's  complaints.  Flefli- 
meats,  old  chcefe,  wine,  porter,  and  bit- 
ters with  the  bark,  fleel,  and  exercife,  e- 
fpccially  riding,  did  him  moft  fervice. 

2.  A 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  155 

2.  A  gentleman,  aged  40,  generally 
healthy,  who,  from  June  1752,  had  been 
troubled  with  pains  m  his  heels,  and  fome- 
times  in  the  middle  of  his  left  foot,  in  the 
end  of  May  1755,  about  feven  in  the  morn- 
ing, awaked  with  an  unufual  fenfation  in 
his  bread,  and  a  faintnefs,  but  without 
any  fickncfs  at  his  Homach,  or  fwimming 
in  his  head :  his  pulfe  was  furprifingly  ir- 
regular and  intermitting.  Twelve  ounces 
of  blood  were  taken  from  him,  which  had 
a  natural  appearance  ;  he  fw allowed  fome 
warm  wine  and  water,  y/>.  corn,  cerv,  tinB^ 
cajior,  and  a  folution  of  aj'a  fatida,  but 
without  any  remarkable  efFedt. 

Upon  getting  up,  and  walking  thro' 
the  room,  he  found  himfelf  quite  free 
from  a  pain,  which,  for  fome  months,  he 
had  felt  in  the  middle  of  his  left  foot.  A- 
bout  ten,  he  began  to  make  pale  urine, 
and,  in  five  hours,  voided  five  Englifh 
pints  of  it,  altho'  what  he  had  drunk  du- 
ring this  time  did  not  amount  to  half  that 
quantity.  About  noon,  partly  to  abate 
U  2  this 


J56      OF    THE   CAUSES 

this  immoderate  difcharge,  and  partly  to 
lefTen  the  too  gr^at  irritability  of  the  heart 
by  bracing  the  vifcera  of  the  lower  belly, 
he  girded  himfelf  very  tight  with  a  broad 
belt,  and,  in  three  or  four  minutes  after, 
the  languor,  and  that  unufual  fenfation 
within  his  breafl  ceafed  at  once,  and  his 
pulfe  becanie  regular  and  natural.  Next 
day  he  began  to  be  troubled  with  wind  in 
his  ftomach  and  bowels,  which  did  not  oc- 
cafion  any  fliarp  pain,  but  a  difagreeable 
fenfation  and  great  lownefs  of  fpirits. 

After  thefe  fymptoms  had  continued 
by  fits  for  four  or  five  days,  he  rode  out 
fome  miles  for  exercife,  and  returned  home 
entirely  free  from  his  complaints  ;  only,  by 
being  expofed  to  a  cold  eaft  wind,  he 
Caught  a  fwelling,  and  a  fmall  degree  of 
inflammation  in  one  of  his  tonfils.  Ha- 
ving fupped  as  ufual,  he  went  to  bed, 
and,  after  a  fhort  fieep,  waked  quite  free 
from  the  inflammation  in  the  throat,  but 
U'ith  a  great  fiintnefs,  attended  with  a  ve- 
ry quick  and  fmall  pulfe.     A  glafs  or  two 

of 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  157 

of  claret  and  a  bit  of  bread  removed  this 
faintnefs  for  the  time ;  and,  upon  its  return, 
it  was  cured  by  the  fame  remedy.  For 
fome  weeks  after,  he  was  much  troubled 
with  flatulencies  in  his  ftomach  and  bowels, 
with  low  fpirits  fometimes,  though  in  a 
much  lefs  degree  than  before,  and  did  not 
entirely  recover  his  health  and  flrength  in 
feveral  months.  The  pain  in  his  heels, 
which  he  had  felt  but  little  of  during  moll 
of  this  time,  returned  and  continued  pret- 
ty conflant  till  the  end  of  Augufl  1 757, 
•when  he  had  a  flight  fit  of  the  gout,  with 
a  fwelling  and  inflammation  in  his  right 
heel.  Since  that  period,  as  well  as  before  it, 
he  has  been  often  troubled  with  a  giddineis, 
and  flying  pains  in  his  head,  arms,  and 
hands,  frequent  pains  in  his  heels,  and  wind 
in  the  primas  i)i£* 

These  cafes  need  no  comment.  The 
fymptoms  with  which  the  patients  were  af- 
fedted  muft  have  proceeded  from  an  irregu- 
lar gout,  the  matter  of  which,  inftead  of 
going  to  the  extremities,   wandered  thro' 

the 


15^       OF  THE  CAUSES 

the  body.  The  flomach-complaints  could 
not  be  owing  to  any  tough  phlegm  or  o- 
ther  crudities ;  for  the  lafl  perfon  had  ne- 
ver, in  his  life,  thrown  up,  by  a  vomit, 
any  thing  of  that  kind ;  and  the  other,  who 
took  feveral  vomits  during  his  illnefs,  ne- 
ver appeared  to  have  much  of  a  foul  flo- 
mach ;  nay,  though  he  was  often  oppref- 
fed  with  a  fevere  ficknefs  and  a  naufea  in  the^ 
night  and  morning ;  yet  he  grew  eafy  be- 
fore dinner,  and  then  eat  with  as  good  an 
appetite  and  digeflion  as  in  his  befl  health. 
From  what  has  been  faid,  it  may  ap- 
pear, that  fome  morbid  matter  in  the  blood, 
cither  arthritic  or  of  another  kind,  may 
be  often  the  caufe  of  nervous  complaints. 
When  this  matter  is  carried  fmoothly  along 
with  the  blood,  without  forming  obftruc- 
tions  in  any  of  the  veflels,  or  irritating  the 
nerves,  it  gives  little  trouble.  When  it  re- 
niainsfixedin  theextremitics,  orthfe  mufcular 
parts  of  the  trunk  of  the  body,  it  will  only  oc- 
cafion  aching  pains  of  thegoutifh  or  rheuma- 
tic kind  :  but  when  it  is  depofited  on  fuch  of 

the 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  159 

the  vifcera  as  are  very  fenfiblc,  or  by  lym- 
pathy  are  apt  flrongly  to  afTeifl:  almoft  the 
whole  body,  it  may  produce  moil  of  thofe 
fymptoms  which  have  been  commonly 
called  nervous,  hypochondriac,  or  hyfteric  *. 
This  matter  may,  in  general,  a6t  either  by 
its  vifcidity  in  obflruding  the  fmaller  veP 
fels,  and  thereby  llretching  too  much  their 
fenfible  fibres  and  nervous  filaments,  or  by 
its  acrimony  in  difagreeably  afFeiSting  the 
extremities  of  thofe  nerves  which  it 
touches  j-. 

It  is  to  be  obferved,  however,  that  the 
kind  and  violence  of  the  fymptoms  occa- 

fioned 

♦  See  above,  p  97.  6^c. 

f  It  is  probable,  chat  the  morbid  matter  in  the  blood, 
producing  nervous  complaints,  j^enerally  proves  hurtful 
by  its  acrimony,  and  but  rarely  by  its  vifcidity  :  at  leaft 
WQ  know,  that  in  the  fmall  pox,  meaflss,  and  continued 
fevers,  an  acrimony  in  the  blood,  by  ftimulating  the 
brain  and  nerves,  frequently  produces  a  delirium,  tre- 
mors, twitchings,  convulfions,  and  other  nervous  fymp- 
toms: a.nd  the  horror /ebrilis,  or  (hivering  upon  the  at- 
tack of  a  fever,  is  rather  owing  to  a  fpafmodic  contrac- 
tion of  the  fmall  veflels,  than  to  an  obftrudlion  of  thera 
from  vifcid  blood. 


i6o        OF  THE  CAUSES 

Honed  by  this  morhijic  matter^  will  not  only 
be  different  according  to  the  parts  which 
it  affedts,  but  in  proportion  to  the  greater 
or  leiTer  natural  delicacy  or  fenfibility  of 
the  patient's  nerves. 

Hence  it  feems  to  be,  that  men  of  o- 
therways  heal  and  ftrong  conflitutions,  and 
fome  robafh  women,  are  liable  to  a  regular 
gout,  and  but  little  to  nervous  complaints. 
Their  firmer  fibres  and  lefs  delicate  nerves 
do  not  predifpofe  them  to  the  latter,  and 
the  flrength  of  their  digeflive  organs,  and 
vafcular  fyftem,  enables  them  to  throw  off 
the  arthritic  matter  on  the  extremities, 
by  which  means  the  body  is  cleared  of  it. 

Men  of  a  middle  conllitution,  between 
the  delicate  and  flrong,  are,  from  this 
morbid  matter,  affedted  with  pains  of  the 
cold  rheumatic  kind,  and  various  nervous 
fymptoms  in  a  leffer  degree ;  and  fometimes 
alfo  with  a  fit  of  the  true  gout.  But  in 
them  this  diilemper  is  not  commonly  fo 
completely  formed,  as  to  clear  the  habit 
of  the  arthritic  matter,   at  lead  for  any 

confideraUe 


i 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  161 

confiderable  time;  for  foon  after  the  im^ 
perfect  fit  of  the  gout  their  old  complaints 
begin  to  return. 

On  the  other  hand,  women  of  a  more 
deUcate  habit,  and  men  of  weak  fibres  and 
very  fenfible  nerves,  have  more  rarely  any 
diforder  like  the  true  gout;  either,  becaufe 
in  fuch  conflitutions  the  arthritic  matter 
is  imperfectly  formed ;  or,  what  is  more 
probable,  becaufe  the  vital  organs  are  un- 
able to  throw  it  off  upon  the  joints  and 
extremities.  Hence  this  morbid  caufe  in 
the  blood,  inftead  of  being  depofited  on 
the  aponeurofes,  tendons,  ligaments,  and 
membranes  of  the  feet,  hands,  or  other 
joints,  falls  upon  different  parts  of  the  body, 
and  produces  fymptoms  almofl  as  different 
as  are  the  parts  which  it  attacks.  Such, 
for  inflance,  are  the  flying  pains,  fpafmo- 
dic  contra(5lions,  and  ftidden  fenfations  of 
heat  and  cold  in  the  mufcles  and  exterior 
parts  of  the  body.  A  want  of  appetite,  or 
too  great  craving  and  faintnefs,  a  naufea  or 
^omitmg,  flatulent  fwellings,  horhor^gmiy 
X  watching, 


i62        OF  THE  CAUSES 

watching,  low  fpirits,  cramps,  convulfions« 
and  violent  pains  in  the  flomach  ancl 
bowels.  An  increafed  fecretion  of  faliva^ 
from  an  irritation  of  the  velTels  of  the  fa- 
livary  glands.  The  globus  h'^Jlericus  in  the 
gullet.  A  fpafmodic  ajlhma  in  the  lungs. 
Palpitations  and  irregular  motions  in  the 
heart.  An  excefUve  flow  of  pale  urine,  or 
fometimes  nephritic  pains  in  the  kidneyso 
A  hemkraniaf  the  clavus  hyJierk^Sy  of  floor- 
ing pains  in  the  head.  Befides  thefe,  | 
have  feen  many  other  fymptoms  occafipu-? 
ed  by  an  im perfect  or  an  irregular  gout, 
fuch  as  a  delirium  and  mania,  an  inflamma^ 
tion  in  one  of  the  tonfils,  a  troublefome 
dyfuriaji  a  violent  itching  between  the 
toes ;  a  fevere  pain  about  the  cartilagq 
enfiformis,  returning  twice  or  thrice  a-day, 
efpecially  upon  any  flrong  affection  of  the 
mind  or  effort  of  the  body,  and  fometimes 
attended  with  a  painful  fenfation  in  the 
middle  of  each  arm ;  a  fenfe  of  a  burning 
jheat  over  the  whole  furface  of  the  body, 

(pxcepi; 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  163 

except  the  legs,  while,  in  the  mean  time, 
the  flvin  was  fcarce  fenfibly  hotter  than  in 
a  ftate  of  health,  and  the  palfe  was  under 
80  in  a  minute.  In  one  patient,  1  met 
with  a  flight,  but  frequently  returning  go^ 
norrlma,  from  a  gouty  Humour  falling  on 
the  nerves  or  veffels  of  the  urethral  and; 
m  another,  an  uneafy  itchin^g  of  ihcfcro" 
tum»  I  have  feen  three  cafes  of  a  fllarp> 
pain  in  the  teflicles  from  the  fame  caufe* 
In  one  of  thefe,  there  was  a  confiderable 
fvveliifig  along  with  the  pain,  both  whicli, 
went  off  upon  the  gout  coming  into  both 
the  itdi> 

All  this  is  cbnfii-med  by  obferving, 
fhat  perfons  who  have  been  biit  little  trou^ 
bled  before  with  thofe  fymptoms,  com- 
moniy  called  nervous,  upon  the  rheumatic 
6r  rather  gouty  pains  leaving  their  feetj 
hands,  or  loins,  have  been  feixed  with  art 
Irregular  intermitting  pulfe,  giddinefsy  faint- 
tieft,  difiiculry  in  breathing,  ndiifed,  and 
fomiting-,  flatulence  in  the  fl:o'mac*h  and^ 
X  2  bowels. 


i64        OF  THE   CAUSES 

bowels,  depreflion  of  fpirits,  and  other 
fymptoras  of  the  like  kind*. 

Such  complaints,  if  the  patient  has 
never  had  the  gout,  are  generally  called 
nervous;  but,  if  he  has  been  fubjecl  to  it, 
are  readily  enough  afcribed  to  the  arthritic 
matter  leaving  the  extremities,  and  fixing 
■upon  the  ]\td.d.,  ot  vifcera  of  the  thorax  or 
belly. 

Th  I  s  diffetence,  however,  may  be  obfer- 

ved, 

*  As  the  arthritic  matter  affefllng  the  nerves  of  the 
ftomach,  not  only  occafions  the  fymptoms  now  mention- 
ed, but  fometimes  extraordinary  languors,  an  univerfal 
debility,  anxiety,  and  falntings ;  it  is  noways  improba- 
ble, that  the  fudden  death  of  feveral,  fubjed  to  a 
wandering  gout,  may  have  been  fometimes  owing  to  its 
afFeding  the  nerves  of  the  ftomach  at  once,  and  in  fo 
ftrong  a  manner,  as  not  only  to  oceafion  fainting,  but 
a  total  fufpenfion  of  the  motion  of  the  heart :  and  this 
xviJ!  appear  Itill  more  probable  by  oblerving,  that  fuch 
f  erfons  have  often,  immediately  before  their  death,  com- 
plained of  a  fliarp  pain  or  ficknefs  or  other  untifoal  fen- 
fatlon  in  their  itomach.  In  fuch  cafes,  the  caufe  of 
death  will  be,  in  vam,  fought  for  in  the  heart,  lungSj 
brain,  or,  indeed,  in  any  other  part  of  the  body ;  for 
the  arthritic  matter  affeding  the  Itomach  is  too  i'ubtii© 
to  be  feen,  although  adive  enough  to  deftroy. 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  165 

ved,  that  the  fymptoms  arifing  from  the 
rerroceflion  of  the  true  gout  are  generally 
more  violent,  than  thofe  which  are  occa- 
fioned  by  a  rheumatic  or  imperfed  arthri- 
tic humour  wandering  through  the  body. 

Upon  the  whole,  it  may  appear  that 
one  very  frequent  occalional  caufe  of  many 
nervous,  hypochondriac,  and  hyfteric  fym- 
ptoms, is  fomd  acrid  matter  in  the  blood, 
commonly  no  other  than  the  arthritic  hu- 
mour,   the  caufe  likewife  of  the  chronic 


rheumatifm  and  true  gout  *. 


It 


*  It  may  be  objedled,  that  nervous  and  hyfteric  contr 
plaints  cannot  be  owing  to  any  noxious  matter  in  the  blood 
or  finer  fluids,  fince  violent  pains  and  other  fymptoms  of 
this  kind,  are  obferveJ  to  Ihift  (o  fuddenly  from  one  place 
to  another,  that  we  can  fcarcely  conceive  this  to  be  owing 
to  the  tranflation  of  any  morbid  matter  But  altho'  here, 
as  well  as  on  many  other  occafions,  we  are  obliged  toowa 
our  ignorance,  yet  we  have  no  more  reafon  to  deny  thac 
nervous,  fpafmodic,  or  hyfteric  difordcrs  are  owing  to 
fome  acrid  humour  irritating  the  nerves  of  the  parts  af- 
fected, or  of  fome  other  parts,  with  which  they  have  a 
remarkable  fympathy,  than  that  the  gout  or  rheumatifm 
proceed  from  fuch  a  caufe,  becaufe  they  often  move  fud- 
denly from  one  place  to  another,  efpecially  upon  the  im- 
prudent 


i66         OF  tHfi  CAL/SES 

It  may  be  proper  to  obferve,  that,  aK 
tho'  a  gouty  humour  in  the  blood  may  be 
much  oftener  the  caufe  of  nervOiis  fyni- 
ptoms  ill  men  than  in  women ;  yet,  in  the 
latter,  many  complaints  of  this  kind  do 
certainly  flow  from  that  fdurce;  Of  this 
I  could  relate  many  inftances  which  have 

occurred 

prudent  application  of  topical  remedies.  When  the  gout 
leaves  the  head  or  ftomach,  and  immediately  feizes  the 
feet;  is  the  arthritic  matter,  virhich  affcdled  the  veffels  of 
the  former  parts,  ihftantly  carried  to  the  latter  ?  Or,  is 
it  not  more  reafonable  to  fuppofe,  that  the  gouty  mat= 
ter,  which  abounds  in  the  blood  or  finer  fluids,  as  fooii 
as  it  falls  particularly  on  tlie  feet,  by  exciting  a  great 
pain  there,  leflens  of  deftroys  the  diforder  in  the  ftomiach 
or  head  ;  and,  perhaps,  by  rertioving  forte  fp^fmodic 
contraSion  in  their  very  fmali  veffels,  allows  the  gouty 
inatter,  that  was  fixed  in  them,  td  pafs  thfough,  and 
mix  itfelf  virith  the  general  mafs  of  fluids  ?  It  is  further 
to  be  obferved,  that  many  fymptoms  of  the  nervous  or 
Jbyfteric  kind  feem  to  be  o^ing  not  to  any  acrid  matter 
immediately  irritating  the  parts  which  faffer,  but  only 
affefting  the  ftomach  and  inteltines ;  whence,  by  means 
of  their  remarkable  fympathy  with  moft  other  parts  of 
ihe  body,  a  variety  of  fymptoms  is  occafioned,  which 
either  increafe  or  abate,  or  iliift  from  place  to  place,  ac- 
cording as  the  nerves  of  the  firft  paffages  are  varioufiy 


,OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS,   167 

.occurred  in  niy  pracSlice  ;  but,  that  I  may 
not  be  tedious,  i  fhall  only  mention  one. 

A  lady  aged  60,  of  a  delicate  conftitu? 
tion,  and  who  had  been  often  liable  to 
.complaints  in  her  ftomach,  upon  her  be- 
coming free  from  flight  rheumatic  pains, 
which  fl^e  ufed  to  feel  in  her  arms,  began 
-to  b,e  affected  with  an  ave^don  to  food,  a 
fevere  ficknefs,  and  fometimes  a  vpmitins;; 
ati  acute,  or  burning  pain  in  her  flonjach, 
fometimes  fhifting  fron]  it  to  her  bowels; 
liatulence,  belching,  palpitations,  and  on 
fome  pccafions  a  fenfe  of  faintnefs  at  the 
jftomach,  or  a  difficuhy  of  breathing  :  Af- 
ter being  affetfled  witli  thefe  varioas  fym- 
ptoms,  which  fucceeded  one  another  with- 
out any  regularity,  for  three  or  four  weeks, 
or  longer,  they  generally  abated,  and  fome- 
times went  quite  off,  upon  fharp  pains 
.coming  into  the  thighs,  legs,  and  ixet, 
which  laft  not  only  felt  hot,  but  were  of- 
ten fwellcd.  I  fhall  only  add,  that,  as  in 
fhofe  women  who  were  quite  regular  as 
Jp  the  monthly  evacuation,    or  long  paft 

that 


168  OF  THE  CAUSES 

that  time  of  life  when  it  naturally  ceafes, 
I  have  found  hyfleric  complaints  to  be  ow- 
ing very  often  to  a  rheumatic  or  gouty 
humour  afFeding  them  ditferently  at  differ- 
ent times ;  fo  the  mofl  attentive  obferva- 
tion  has  convinced  me,  that  by  far  the 
nioll  frequent  caufe  of  the  hypochondriac 
difeafe  in  men  is  no  other  than  a  humour 
of  the  fame  kind  affecting  chiefly  the  nerves 
of  the  flomach  and  bowels,  which,  from 
an  original  weaknefs,  had  been  more  ex- 
pofed  to  its  attacks  than  the  other  parts 
of  the  body.  This  humour,  in  thofe  of  a 
melancholic  temperament,  befides  other 
fymptoms,  generally  occafions  watching, 
timidity,  a  great  deprefTion  of  fpirits,  and 
fometimes  very  uneafy  diflra^ing  thoughts. 
In  others,  of  a  different  conftitution,  the 
fame  caufe  produces  a  variety  of  complaints 
in  the  flomach  and  bowels,  and  other  parts 
of  the  body,  with  much  lefs  watching,  and 
without  any  great  degree  of  low  fpirits. 

The  arthritic  matter  may  be  bred,  ei-r 
ther  in  confequence  of  fome  hereditary  de- 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  169 

feS:  in  the  conflitution,  or  from  high  li- 
ving ;  whereby  the  ftomach  and  bowels  are 
fo  weakened,  or  loaded  wirh  rich,  heavy, 
or  hot  aliments,  as  to  convey  very  impro- 
per chyle  into  the  blood. 

Physicians  have  widely  differed  about 
the  nature  of  that  humour  which  is  the 
caufe  of  the  gout,  fome  making  it  tartare- 
ous  or  acid ;  others  urinous  or  alkaline. 
But,  fenfible  how  vain  all  fuch  difquiiicions 
are,  I  flidl  not  attempt  to  define  the  nature 
of  that  noxious  matter  in  the  blood,  fo  of- 
ten the  caufe  of  nervous,  hypochondriac, 
and  hyfteric  diforders,  further  than  as  I 
have  already  endeavoured  to  fliew,  that  it 
is  mofl  commonly  of  the  arthritic  kind : 
And  I  Ihall  now  add,  that  it  may  befome- 
times  a  fcorbutic  or  fcrophulous  taint,  or 
fome  other  fault  in  confequence  of  other 
difeafes  imperfedtly  cured.  Indeed,  there 
is  no  reafon  to  believe,  that  whatever  is 
hurtful  to  the  human  body  mufl  be  either 
acid  or  alkaline,  or  of  fome  other  known 
fpecies  of  acrimony.     What  is  the  acrimo- 

Y      *  ny 


tjQ         OF  THE  CAUSES 

ny  of  ipecacuanha,  antimonial  wine,  offemen 
hyofcyami,  opium,  rhiu,  myrtifolia  MonfpeU" 
(tea,  and  of  the  foots  of  the  cicuta  aquatica? 
JMoft  of  thefe  (ubftances  fhew  no  remark- 
able fharpnefs  or  pungency  to  the  taflc ; 
and  yet,  when  received  into  the  flomach, 
they  quickly  occafion  either  ftcknefs  and 
vomiting,  raving,  or  infeniibility,  epileptic 
fits,  or  even  death.  What  peculiar  acri- 
niony  have  th?  effluvia  of  muflc,  amber- 
greafe,  or  a  pale  rofe,  which  throw  fome 
delicate  women  into  hyfleric  fits?  In  like 
manner,  with  regard  to  that  morbid  matter 
in  the  blood,  the  caufe  of  fo  many  nervous 
complaints,  and  even  of  the  gout,  all  we 
know  is,  that  it  is  apt  to  flick  in  the  fmaller 
vefTels  ;  that  it  difagreeably  affedts  the 
nerves  as  often  as  it  falls  upon  them,  and 
thereby  occafions  various  fymptoms,  more 
or  lefs  violent,  according  to  the  greater  or 
lefTer  fenfibility  of  the  parts  affeclied,  and 
theconllitiition  of  the  patient:  But  in  what 
manner,  or  by  means  of  what  particular 
Icmd  of  acrimony,  it  produces  thefe  elfedls, 

ws 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS,  iji 

W'c  arc  yet  intirely  ignorant,  and,  indeed, 
likely  to  continue  fo. 

II.  A  fecond  occafional  caufe  exciting 
nervous  diforders,  may  be  the  retention  of 
fome  accuftomed  evacuation,  fuch  as  the 
menfes  or  haemorrhoids. 

The  naufeat  vomiting,  depraved  appetite, 
faintings,  and  other  complaints  to  which 
many  women  are  liable  for  fome  months 
after  conception,  fhew  that  a  change  of 
the  circulation  in  the  womb,  an  obftrudtion ' 
and  diftenfion  of  its  velTels,  or  whatever 
irritates  the  uterine  nerves,  may  produce 
many  of  thofe  fymptoms  commonly  called 
nervous  or  hyfteric*  The  fame  remark 
may  be  made  upon  the  various  diforders 
which  happen  upon  tlie  fupprefTion,  dimi^ 
nution,  or  irregularity  of  the  me^ifes,  and  at 
that  time  of  life  when  this  evacuation  cea- 
fes.  'Tis  true  thefe  complaints  are  much 
Icfs  remarkable  in  fome  than  in  others : 
Thus,  while  many  are  only  affe^fted  with  a 
natifea,  want  of  appetite,  flatulence  in  the 
Y  2  ilomach 


172  OF   THE  CAUSES 

ftomach  and  bowels,  a  cough,  difficulty  ia 
breathing,  headach,  or  flying  pains  thro* 
the  body;  there  are  others,  who,  befides 
feveral  of  thefe  fymptoms  in  a  higher  de- 
gree, are  alfo  fubjed  to  uncommon  hsGmor- 
rhages,  faintings,  and  violent  hyftericcon- 
vulfions,  on  account  of  a  greater  delicacy 
and  mobiliuy  of  their  nervous  fyilem. 

An  obltrudion  or  fuppreffion  of  the 
menjh  may  produce  nervous  or  hyfteric  dif- 
orders,  either  from  the  fympathy  of  the 
womb  with  the  other  parts,  from  a  redun- 
dancy of  blood,  or  from  the  retention  of 
fomething  hurtful  to  the  nerves. 

I.  That  many  parts  of  the  body  may 
be  afFe'fted  through  the  confent  of  their 
nerves  with  thofe  of  the  womb,  will  not 
appear  improbable,  after  what  has  been  faid 
of  the  remarkable  fympathy  that  takes 
place  between  the  various  parts  of  the  bo- 
dy *.  But  it  may  be  proper  to  obferve, 
that  when  the  menfes  are  obflru(fi:ed,  the 
ftomach   generally   fulfers   firfl,    and,    by 

means 

*  See  above,  chapter  i.  No  ii.  («?}. 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  173 

means  of  its  confent  with  almofl  every  part 
of  the  body,  gives  rife  to  many  of  the  com- 
plaints which  follow.  Thus  the  hyfteric 
convulfions  and  other  violent  fymptoms, 
which  are  fometimes  occafioned  by  a  fud- 
den  (loppage  of  the  menfes,  do  not  feem  to 
proceed  immediately  from  the  uterus^  but 
commonly  from  the  ftomach  and  bowels, 
whofe  nerves  are  iirfl  affected  cither  by  their 
fympathy  with  thofe  of  the  womb,  or  by 
the  blood,  which  fhould  have  been  difchar- 
ged  by  this  organ,  being  partly  turned  up- 
on the  alimentary  canal.     For, 

2.  Alt  ho'  it  is  probable  that  the  men- 
ilrual  evacuation  is  not  owing  to  a  general 
plethora,  or  increafe  of  the  mafe  of  blood 
at  the  end  of  every  month,  but  to  the  par- 
ticular flru(fture  of  the  womb  ;  yet  as  the 
body,  after  being  long  accuftomed  to  any 
regular  evacuation,  feldom  fails  to  fuffer 
from  a  floppage  of  it,  fo  it  is  not  to  be 
doubted,  that  in  women,  and  elpecially  in 
the  more  fanguine,  fome  degree  of  a  pie-* 
thora  may  be  often  the  confequence  of  a 

fuppreflion 


174         OF  THE  CAUSES 

fuppredion  of  the  menfes^  Agreeably  W 
this,  we  obferve,  that  bleeding  is  often  ther 
beft  remedy  for  the  complaints  incident  ta 
women  at  that  time  of  hfe  when  their 
courfes  leave  them. 

3,  If  we  conlider,  that,  by  means  of  the 
other  excretory  organs,  fome  humour  is 
thrown  off,  which,  if  retained,  would  prove 
noxious  to  the  body,  it  will  not  appear  al- 
together improbable  that  the  menftrual  e- 
"vacuation,  when  fupprefled,  may  become 
hurtful  by  its  quality  as  well  as  quantity; 
And  this  feems  to  be  confirmed,  by  thofc 
uncommon  has  morrh  ages  from  the  eyes,  ears, 
ends  of  the  fingers,  and  other  parts,  upon 
the  total  fuppreflion  of  the  menfes;  for  fuch 
haemorrhages  cannot  be  owing  to  a  general 
plethora  occafioning  too  great  a  diflenlion 
of  the  whole  vafcular  fyftem  :  Were  this 
the  cafe,  the  veflels  of  the  lungs,  and  other 
internal  parts  muft  burft  before  any  blood 
could  pafs  by  the  pores  of  the  ikin. 
When  one  runs  fafl,  or  walks  up  a  fteep 
hill,  the  force  of  the  blood  is  much  more 

increafed 


OF  NERVOUS  DISOPDERS.  175 

kcreafed  than  it  can  be  from  ^ny  plethora 
that  may  be  fuppofed  to  happen  to  women 
who  are  ob{lru<fted ;  and  yet  we  never  find 
that  violent  cxercife  makes  the  blood  ifllic 
from  the  points  of  the  fingers,  or  the  pores 
of  the  meatus  auditoriuSy  altho'  it  fometimes 
occafions  an  haemorrhage  from  the  lungs. 
Further,  if  a  general //^r/^or^  were  thecaufe 
of  thofe  uncommon  haemorrhages  which, 
happen  in  confequence  of  a  fuppredlon  of 
ihe  menfes,  bleeding  would  always  prevent 
them,  which,  however,  it  feldom  does. 
An  inftance  of  this  I  had  many  years  fince 
In  a  patient,  who,  tho'  fhe  had  loft  by  the 
lancet  about  forty  ounces  of  blood,  in  the 
fpace  of  a  month,  yet  continued  to  have 
a  fmall  hasmorrhage  from  the  left  ear, 
once  in  twelve  or  fourteen  days.  Another 
cafe,  no  lefs  remarkable,  was  that  of  a  wo- 
man aged  34,  who,  near  fix  weeks  after 
bearing  her  fecond  child,  to  which  fhe  gave 
fuck,  was  feized  with  a  pain  in  the  middle 
of  her  fore-arm  ftriking  down  to  the  mid' 
<3|e  finger  of  the  left  hand.     Next  day,  fhe 

fdc 


17^  OF  THE  CAUSES 

felt  a  pain  in  the  point  of  that  finger 
where  there  had  been  for  two  or  three  days 
.  a  red  fpot,  from  which  there  ilFued  about 
four  ounces  of  blood.  At  the  dillance  of 
24  hours,  file  loll  near  an  ounce  of  blood 
in  the  fame  manner  ;  and  notwithftanding 
fhe  was  blooded  once  and  again,  yet  for 
fome  days,  alniofl  at  the  fame  hour,  this 
hsemorrhage  returned,  but  always  in  fmaller 
quantity.  In  this  woman,  the  lochia  had 
flopt  foon  after  delivery. 

If  thefe  periodical  evacuations  of  blood 
cannot,  then,  be  accounted  for  from  a  ge- 
neral//^//'<?r^,  is  it  not  probable  that  when 
the  menfes  are  flopt,  fomething  hurtful  may 
be  retained,  which  falling  on  certain  parts, 
in  people  whofe  nervous  fyflem  is  cafily 
affeded,  may  throw  the  fmall  veffels  of 
thofe  parts  into  fuch  violent  alternate  con- 
tradions,  as  to  force  the  red  blood,  inflead 
of  the  thinner  fluids,  through  their  dilated 
orifices  ?  When,  in  this  manner,  the  offend- 
ing  matter  is  moflly  evacuated,  the  extra- 
ordinary motions  of  the  fmall  veffels,  and 

confequently 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  177 

confequently  the  flux  of  blood  from  them, 
will  ceafe  *. 

In  like  manner,  thofe  various  other 
complaints,  confequent  on  the  obflrudlion 
o^  x.\iQ  me?ifes,  may  be  often  owing  to  the 
quality  of  what  is  retained,  which  foon 
becoming  acrid,  difagreeably  afFedts  the 
nerves  of  thofe  parts  upon  which  it  falls. 

What  has  been  faid  of  obftruvfted  menfes 
as  the  caufe  of  nervous  diforders,  may  be, 
in  a  great  meafure,  applied  to  the  fuppref- 
fion  of  the  haemorrhoids,  in  fuch  as  have 
been  accuftomed  to  them :  and  it  may  not 
be  amifs,  when  treating  of  the  fupprellion 
of  the  menfa  and  haemorrhoids,  to  add  the 
difcharges  of  iiTues,  fetons,  or  other  old 
fores  fuddenly  dried  up,  as  producing  flmi- 
lar  effects.  Further,  fmce  cold  feet,  or 
cold  and  moillure  in  general,  by  {topping 
Z  the 

*  See  above,  chap.  i.  No.  17.  Alfo  Phyfiological 
eflays,  edit.  2.  p-  35.  c^^r.  where  I  have  endeavoured 
to  fliew,  by  a  variety  of  fadts,  that  the  fmall  vefTels, 
when  afFeded  with  any  unufual  fiimulus^  are  agitated 
with  uncommon  contraftions. 


178        OF   THE  CAUSES 

the  perfpiration,  is  obferved  ro  increafe 
nervous  diforders,  is  it  not  probable  that 
fome  acrid  matter  may  be  then  retained, 
which,  by  falling  on  the  ftomach  and  other 
internal  parts,  fometimes  gives  rife  to  ner'- 
vous,  as  well  as  to  other  morbid  fymptoms? 
Hence  we  find,  that,  during  the  dry  warm, 
weather  in  our  climate,  and  the  dry  and 
temperate  weather  of  hotter  countrleSj, 
the  nervous,  hyflerjc,  and  hypochondriac 
complaints  are  leis  frequent  than  at  other 
Umes, 

III.  A  third  general  occafional  caufe  of 
nervous  diforders  may  be,  the  want  of  a 
fufficient  quantity  of  blood,  or  of  blood  of 
a  proper  denlity:  and  hence  it  is,  that  an 
immoderate  flux  of  the  menfeSj  lochia,  and 
hemorrhoids,  or  any  other  great  has- 
morrhage,  will  often  occafion  violent  fymp- 
toms  of  this  kind. 

Hippocrates  has  obferved,  that  con- 
vulfions  may  arife  from  inanitiony  as  well 
as  repaion;  and  as  the  ilrength  and  firmr 

nefs 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  179 

liefs  of  the  whole  body  depend  upon  pro- 
per fluids,  and  a  due  quantity  of  them, 
may  not  very  irregular  and  flrange  difor- 
ders  happen  from  a  want  of  blood,  or 
from  a  too  watery  ftate  of  it,  efpecially 
in  thofe  Wbofe  nervous  fyilem  is  very  de- 
licate and  eaiily  affecfted?  For  when  there 
does  not  remain  in  the  vefTels  a.  quantity 
of  blood  fufficient  for  carrying  on  the  fe- 
vefal  fun(5tions  in  a  proper  manner,  the 
regular  circulation  of  all  the  fluids  niuft 
be  diflurbed,  and  the  diftribution  or  ex- 
ertion of  the  nervous  moving  power  will 
become  irregular. 

But,  in  whatever  way  great  lofs  of 
blood  may  give  rife  to  nervous  difeafes, 
we  are  fo  certain  of  the  fad,  from  experi- 
ence, that  perhaps  the  following  cafes,  in 
proof  of  it,  may  be  thought  fuperfluous. 

I.  A  young  gentleman  of  17  years  of 

age,  complaining  of  a  pain  in  his  right  fide 

after  a  fall  from  his  horfe,   was  blooded 

very  largely.     Some  days  after,  he  felt  a 

Z  2  coldnefs 


i8o        OF   THE   CAUSES 

coldnefs  in  his  flomach,    which  was  foos 
fuccceded  by  fits  of  violent  pain  and  fpafms 
in  that  part,    fometimes    lalling    twenty 
minutes,    or   half   an    hour,    at  a   time. 
Thefe  fymptonis  returned  after  no  regu- 
lar intervals,    but  generally  twice,    or  of- 
tener,  in  24  hours ;  and  gradually  increafed 
to  fuch  a  height,   that  the  patient  was  ob- 
liged to  be  held  down  in  bed  by  two  or 
three  people,  in  order  to  prevent  his  tear- 
ing his  hair,  and  doing  himfelf  other  mif- 
chief.     The  pain  and  cramps  were  always 
preceeded  with  a  ienfationof  coldnefs  in  the 
flomach,   and  frequently  went   off  in  an 
inflant.      Ginger    with    hot   brandy    fek 
cold  in   the  flomach  at   the  acceffion  of 
the  fit.     After  the  patient  had  fafFered  in 
this  manner  for  three  weeks,  the  diforder 
gradually  abated ;  and,  by  ufing  a  few  (lo- 
machic  medicines,  a  proper  diet,  and  exer- 
cife,  he  perfe(5lly  recovered. 

.  On  another  occafion,  after  lofing  a  good 
deal  of  blood,    he  was  attacked  with  the 

fame 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  i8i 

fame  fymptoms,  but  in  a  much  lefs  violent 
degree. 

2.  A  gentleman  between  40  and  ^o 
years  of  age  has  been  fubjed:,  for  thefe  1 3 
years  paft,  to  a  confiderable  flux  of  pale 
urine,  efpecially  in  the  night,  which  has 
fometimes  continued  for  two  or  three 
weeks,  and  has  not  been  flopt  without 
ufing  large  quantities  of  the  bark,  riding, 
and  other  remedies ;  and  this  has  generally 
happened  to  him  as  often  as  he  has  been 
obliged  to  be  blooded  to  any  confiderable 
quantity,  or  to  have  fweated  much,  and 
at  the  fame  time  to  have  lived  low  for  a 
few  days,  in  order  to  get  rid  of  a  cold, 
rheumatifm,  or  other  cafual  diforder. 

3.  A  gentlewoman,  in  whom  the  menfes 
flow  too  plentifully,  is  frequently  troubled 
with  a  gnawing  pain  and  fometimes  a  fla- 
tulent diftenfion  of  her  ftomach  when  Ihe 
is  not  with  child;  but,  during  the  time 
of  pregnancy,  (he  is  generally  free  of  any 
fuch  complaints. 

4.  In 


iBt         OF  THE  CAUSES 

4.  Tn  the  Philofophieal  tfanfadions. 
No.  174.  we  have  a  remarkable  cafe  by 
Dr  Cole,  of  a  Lady  fubjedt  to  hyflerics, 
who,  after  being  much  reduced  by  an  un- 
common lofs  of  blood  in  child-bearing, 
was  for  a  lonjg;  time  afFecflcd  with  violent 
periodic  convulfions,  accompanied  with  a 
great  flux  of  limpid  urine,  returning  ever/ 
fourth  or  fifth  day  at  a  certain  hour. 

Under  this  head  of  general  occafional 
caufes,  may  alfo  be  comprehended  watch- 
ing, great  fatigue,  and  exceilive  venery  j 
all  of  which  not  only  tend  to  break  the 
conftitution,  and  difpofe  the  body  to  ner- 
vous difeafes,  but  alfo  to  create  them,  e- 
fpecially  in  fuch  as  are  already  predifpofed 
to  them. 

Having  thus  far  treated  of  the  general 
occafional  caufes,  we  fhall  proceed  next  to 
mention  the  chief  of  thofe  occafional 
caufes  w^hich  we  call  particular,  from  their 
having  their  feat  in  certain  parts  of  the 
body. 

CHAP- 


[     iS3     1 


CHAP.     V, 

Of  the  particular  occafional  Caufes  0/*  N  e  r* 
vous.  Hypochondriac,  andiiY^ 
s  T  E  fi  I  c   Difordcrs, 


'T"  HESE  may  be  reduced  to  the  Gn 

following,  'viZf 

J,    Wind  ^  '      1      n         , 

/  m  the  ftomach, 

H.  A  tough  phlegm  >        ,      '    , 

\  and  bowels* 

HI.  Worms  -^ 

IV.  Aliments  improper  in   their  quan* 
tity  or  quality. 

V.  Scirrhous  or    other  ob{lrud:ions  in 
the  vifcera  of  the  lower  belly. 

VL  Violent  affections  of  the  mind, 

L  Wind 


i84       OF  THE  CAUSES 

I.  Wind  in  the  flomach  and  inteftines, 
though  of  itfelf  a  very  common  fymptoni 
in  nervous  diforders,  yet  deferves  a  place 
among  their  occaflonal  caufes,  as  giving 
rife  to  many  uneafy  fenfations.  Although 
^11  our  food  abounds  more  or  lefs  with 
air,  yet,  in  the  time  of  digeftion,  it  is  fel- 
dpm  feparated  in  fuch  a  quantity  as  to 
give  any  trouble,  unlefs  when  the  ftomach 
and  bowels  are  weak,  or  when  their  nerves 
are  endued  with  an  uncommon  fenfibility: 
i^ut,  in  fqch  circumftances,  the  complaints 
it  occaiions  are  various,  fuch  as  want  of 
appetite,  naiifea,  faintnefs,  low  fpirits, 
watching,  fwelling  of  the  flomach  and 
bowels,  violent  pains  in  them,  tightnefs 
and  oppreflion  about  the  pr^cordia^  diffi- 
cult breathing,  a  fenfation  of  a  weight  in 
the  ftomach,  belching,  the  globm  h^Jiericuu 
giddinefs,  fhooting  pains  in  the  head,  <^c. 
Nay,  I  have  frequently  felt,  in  myfelf,  a 
plain  connedtion  between  wind  in  the 
p'imds  viae  and  pains  in  my  legs  and  feet ; 
gnd  the  uneafy  fenfation  fometimes  as  it 

were 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS,  iSj 

ivere    GOming    and    going   between    thefe 
partSi 

The  manner  in  which  wind  produces 
fo  many  and  fiich  various  complaints,  ma/ 
be  underftood  from  its  diftending  the  do- 
mach  and  inteftines,  and  thereby  occafion- 
ing  fpafms  in  thofe  parts,  or  otherwife  dif- 
agreeably  afFe^fting  their  nerves,-  which 
iiave  fo  great  a  fympathy  with  the  other 
parts  of  the  body  *. 

A  a  HowEVERj 

*  See  above,  cKap.  i.  No.  ii. 

Some  have  imagined,  that  the  flatulence  produced  in 
ihe  ftomach  and  boweJs,  pafles  freely  by  means  of  the 
ablorbenc  veins  into  the  blood,  wiih  which  it  circulated 
through  the  body,  and  produces  a  variety  of  fymptomsy 
fuch  as  {hooting  pains  in  the  head,  the  damn  hyjlericuii 
Or  flying  pains  in  the  arms,  legs,  and  other  parts,  pal- 
pitations of  the  heart,  a  flattering  motion  of  fome  of 
the  fibres  of  the  voluntary  mufcies,  and  puffy  fvVeliingS 
below  the  {kin.  At  other  times,  when  thei^  caraplaintss 
ceale,  and  the  firft  paffages  fuffer  more  trooi  wind,  they 
luppofe,  that  the  flatulence  finds"  a  ready  way  from  the 
bloou  into  the  Itoraach  and  uiceftmes  by  their  pores  o^ 
exhaling  arteries  This  opinion,  luwever,  is  ill  found- 
ed J  for  experiments  made  on  animals  newly  dead  {hevv^ 
fchit  neither  the  itomash  nor  intellines,  nor  even  tha 


tU       OF  THE  CAUSES 

However,  it  may  be  proper  to  ob- 
fcrve,  that  the  effects  of  wind  in  the  fir£!: 
paflages  are  not  only  various  in  different 

perfons> 

perifonaumyV/hxch:  h  mmch  thinner,  are  pervious  to  elaflic 
air:  and  we  know,  froKi  ot  er  experiments,  that  capil- 
lary tubes,  or  abforbent  veffels,  do  not  attra«fl^  elaftic 
air  as  they  do  watery  fluids;  nay,  fmall  portions  of  air, 
when  they  get  into  luch  tubes,  prevent  their  attracting; 
any  more  of  other  fluids. 

In  hypochondriac  and  hyfteric  patients,  I  have  obfer- 
ved  little  fwellings  or  elevations  of  the  flsin,  of  a  pale 
colour,  and  ot  different  ftiapes  Thefe,  in  a  few  minutes 
acquired  their  full  fize,  and  after  half  an  hour  or  more 
•would  quickly  vanifli.  In  hyfteric  women  alfo,  we  meeE 
•with  fott  puffy  fwellings  below  the  fkin,  which,  bccaufe 
of  their  fudden  rifing  and  difappearance,  have,  by  fome, 
been  afcribed  to  wind  fhifting  from  one  part  of  the 
cellular  membrane  to  another.  But  this  is  no  ways  pro- 
bable :  and  both  thefe  puffy  fwellings,  and  tbofe  rifings 
of  the  Ikin,  feem  to  be  owing  to  the  fame  caufe,  viz.  an 
increafed  alternate  motion  of  the  fmall  arteries  of  the 
parts,  occafioned  by  an  uncommon  irritation  of  theni 
or  their  nerves ;  whence  there  muft  happen  an  effufion 
of  a  ferous  or  lymphatic  fluid  in  the  fpaces  of  the  te/a 
ee/hch/a,  or  in  the  interftices  of  the  fkin,  which,  asfoon 
as  the  extraordinary  motion  of  the  fmall  veffels  ceafes,. 
will  be  quickly  abforbed;  and  confequently  thofe  fwcl-  i 
lings  will  difappear. 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS  itj 

perfons,  but  in  the  fame  perfon  at  different 
limes.  In  people  whofe  ftomach  and 
bowels  are  in  a  found  (late,  if  wind  hap- 
pens to  be  colledled,  it  may  create  fome 
uneafmefs,  but  does  not  quicken  their 
pulfe,  or  affect  them  with  that  difagree- 
able  fenfarion,  anxiety  about  iht.  pracordia^ 
or  depreflion  of  fpirits,  fo  often  its  confe- 
quences  in  thofe  whofe  alimentary  canal 
js  endued  with  a  more  delicate  feeling. 
Kay,  the  fame  perfons  are,  at  diiferent 
times,  very  differently  affeded  by  wind, 
jufl  as  the  nerves  of  the  ftomach  and  in- 
teftines  happen  to  be  more  or  lels  fenfible, 
or  their  feeling  more  or  lefs  different  from 
v/hat  it  is  in  a  natural  ft  ate'  Thus,  when 
an  artliritic  or  rheumatic  humour  in  the 
blood  is  turned  upon  thofe  vifiera,  the 
wind  produces  a  much  more  uneafy  fenfa- 
tion  than  at  other  times. 

Further,  the  great  diftenfion  of  the 

inteftines,  and  fometimes  alfo  of  the  fto- 

macli  in  a  tympany,  without  thofe  uneafy 

complaints  that  attend  wind  in  hypochon- 

A  a  2  driac 


iBB      OF  THE   CAUSES 

driac  or  hyfleric  cafes,  fne ws,  that  unlefs 
there  be  a  particular  indifpofition  of  the 
nerves  of  thefe  organs,  flatulence  alone 
will  not  give  very  remarkable  difturbance. 

11.  A  tough  phlegm  in  the  flomach  anc| 
intellines. 

Patients  generally  imagine,  that  this 
is  produced  by  their  food,  which  they  be^? 
lieve  is  all  turned  into  phlegm  :  But  they 
are  miflaken  ;  for  while  the  ftomach  re- 
mains djfordered,  be  the  aliments  ever  fo 
little  of  a  glutinous  nature,  this  fubflance 
will  be  continually  generated. 

In  the  alimentary  canal,  befides  the  fine 
exhaling  arteries,  which  furnifli  the  ga- 
flric  and  inteflinal  lymph,  there  are  many 
fmall  glands,  which  fecrece  a  liquor  of  a, 
more  glutinous  nature.  In  a  found  flate, 
|:his  7micus  is  in  no  greater  quantity  than 
what  is  neceffary  to  defend  the  delicate 
nerves  of  thofe  parts  from  the  hear,  cold, 
acrimony,  or  attrition  of  the  food  ;  but 
^yhen  th.e  fecreting  velTels  have  loft  their 

tone, 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  189 

tone,  or  are  affeifted  with  an  unnatural 
fiimiihts,  not  only  the  mucous  glands,  but 
alfo  the  exhaling  arteries  may  throw  out, 
in  a  greater  quantity,  a  vifcid  fluid,  which, 
by  lying  fome  time,  may  acquire  flill  a 
greater  degree  of  cohefion. 

When  much  phlegm  is  collected  in  the 
Homach  and  inteftines,  their  nerves  are 
rendered  lefs  fenfible  cf  the  Jiimulus  of  the 
aliments,  their  abfoibent  veiTels  are  partly 
obflruded,  and  the  gaftric  and  inteftinal 
lymph  are  more  fparingly  fecreted,  or,  at 
leaft,  become  more  vifcid.  Hence,  the 
digeflion  and  abforption  of  the  finer  parts 
of  the  food  are,  in  a  great  meafure,  pre- 
vented ;  whilfl  this  phlegm,,  by  difagree- 
ably  aifedling  the  nerves  of  the  alimentary 
canal,  efpecially  when  they  are  in  a  delicate 
ilate,  occafions  want  of  appetite,  fome- 
times  an  unnatural  craving  for  food,  a 
nmifea,  flatulence,  gripes,  and  loofenefs, 
cold  and  hot  fits,  a  quick  pulfe,  weaknefs, 
faintings,    lownefs    of   fpirits,    fleepinefs, 

%hing, 


t^         OF  THE  CAUSES 

fighing,  eonvulfive  motions  *,  and  giddi- 
nefs.  Nay,  I  have  had  fome  patients 
who,  from  a  vifcid  phlegm  in  their  flo^ 
mach,  were  affecJTied  wich  a  flight  delirium^ 
and  had  their  eyes  hke  thole  of  people  in 
liquor. 

Nor  will  it  appear  flrange,  that  fo  ma- 
ny and  fuch  different  fymptoms  fhould 
proceed  from  a  diforder  in  the  llomach 
and  bowels  only,  if  we  attend  to  that 
fympathy  which  I  have  fo  often  mention- 
ed as  taking  place  between  them  and  che 
©ther  parts  of  the  body, 

JIT,    W0RM§ 


*  A  girl  aged  14,  who  had  been  troubled  with  the 
chorea  San£ii  Viti,  was  feized  with  the  meafles.  A  few 
4ays  after  her  recovery,  fhe  had  a  return  of  her  formep 
diftemper,  which,  after  it  had  continued  near  a  fort- 
night with  little  abatement,  notwithftanding  the  ufe  of 
feveral  medicines,  was  entirely  removed  in  a  few  days 
by  a  natural  loofenefs,  by  which  (he  voided  a  great  deal 
of  flimy  ftuff.  It  may  be  worth  remarking,  that,  du- 
ring the  continuance  of  this  eonvulfive  difoider,  hef 
appetite  was  much  greater  than  ufual. 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  191 

III.  Worms  in  the  firfl  pafTagcs,  efpe- 
cially  in  children,  are  frequently  the  caufe 
of  nervous  fymptoms,  fuch  as  great  cra- 
ving for  food,  inflations  of  the  alimentary- 
canal,  hiccup,  vomiting,  dry  cough,  dif- 
ficult breathing,  fighing,  irregularities  of 
the  pulfe,  palpitations,  tremors,  convul- 
iions,  epileptic  fits,  drovvfinefs,  raving,  in- 
fcnfibility,  6*^. 

Worms  produce  moft  of  thefe  {ymr 
ptoms,  by  preventing  the  proper  digeflioa 
of  the  food,  or  by  irritating,  with  their 
frequent  motions  or  biting,  the  lenfible 
nerves  of  the  ftomach  or  bowels,  whence 
every  other  part  may  be  aifeded  by  fym- 
pathy. 

Several  of  the  above  fymptoms  may 
alfo  be  occafioned  by  acrid  humours  in 
the  primes  vits ;  as  will  appear  by  the  fol- 
lowing cafe. 

A  boy  of  14  years  of  age,  on  the  12th 
of  January  1757,  was  feized  with  a  pain 
in  his  head  and  belly,   and  foon  after  be- 
came 


i9i         OF  THE  CAUSES 

came  delirious,  and  made  no  anfwer  wheii 
ipoke  to.     When    awake,    he  fometimes 
■cried  out  in  a  wild  manner,  as  if  comphin= 
ing,  or  praying  to  he  freed  from  his  trouble  j 
but  his  words  had  generally  licrle  connec- 
tion*     He  Ilept  well,  had  a  fliarp  appe- 
tite, was  not  coftive,   and  his  pulfe  was 
full    and    flow,    but    fomewhat   irreg-ular* 
Thefe  fymptoms  continued  till  the  i6th  of 
January,  when  I  faw  him  firfl:^  and  order- 
ed feven  ounces  of  blood  to  be  taken  away^ 
a  bliftcr  to  be  applied  between  his  flioul-- 
ders,    and  a  clyfler  to   be  injedled.      On 
the  17th,  no  better :  the  blifter  had  occa- 
floncd  a  ftranguary.     On  the  i8di,    took 
a  bolus  of  calomel  and  rhubarb ;  but  foon 
vomited  it  up  again.     On  the  19th,  fwal- 
Jowed  five  grains  of  calomel  at  bed-time, 
and  next  morning  had  three  flools,  after 
which    he    became    much    more    feniible, 
but  fl:ill  complained   of  his   head:    21ft, 
had  a  natural  flool,   in  which  were  two 
fmall  worms  of  the  afcatides  kind.     Upon 
this,  he  was  ordered  pdvis  Jlanniy  and  ano- 
ther 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  193 

tlier  dofe  of  calomel  and  rhubarb,  which, 
brought  away  a  great  deal  of  flime,  but 
no  worms.  On  the  25th,  he  was  free 
from  all  his  complaints. 

This  patient,  in  July  1758,  having 
had  a  return  of  the  fymptoms  above  men- 
tioned, he  was  blooded  without  any  be- 
nefit ;  but  was  greatly  relieved  by  a  dofe 
of  rhubarb  and  calomel,  and  entirely  cured 
by  a  repetition  of  it,  although  no  worms 
were  found  in  his  flools.  At  this  time, 
as  well  as  in  his  former  illnefs,  he  had  a 
greater  appetite  than  ufual,  efpecially 
when  the  difeafe  began  to  yield. 

IV.  Aliments  improper  in  their 
quantity  or  quality. 

The  mod  wholefome  food,  in  too 
great  a  quantity,  opprelTes  the  ftomach 
and  bowels,  is  not  properly  digefted,  but 
becomes  either  acid  or  putrid,  and  gene- 
rates much  wind ;  whence  the  nerves  of 
thofe  parts  being  difagreeabiy  affecfted,  a 
variety  of  complaints  are  produced. 

B  b  On 


194        OF  THE   CAUSES 

On  the  other  hand,  the  want  of  a  due 
quantity  of  aliments  occafions  faintnefs 
and  wind,  and,  in  time,  fo  niuch  weakens 
the  flomach  and  bowels,  as  to  render 
them  unfit  either  to  receive  or  to  digell 
what  is  necelTary  for  fiipporting  ,the 
body. 

But  altho'  food  be  taken  with  neither 
too  full  nor  too  fparing-  a  hand,  yet  ir§ 
quality  may  difpofe  it  to  produce  nervous 
diforders.  Thus  high  feafoned  and  heavy 
meats,  flrong  fauces  and  wines,  will  not 
only,  by  degrees,  enervate  the  tone  of  the 
flomach,  and  prevent  or  deflroy  the  natu- 
ral feeling  of  it&.  nerves,  but  will  corrupt 
the  blood,  perhaps  breed  the  arthritic  mat- 
ter, and  bring  on  a  difeafed  flate  of  the 
whole  body.  On  the  contrary,  a  watery 
and  flatulent  diet,  by  difagreeably  affecting 
the  nerves  of  the  firft  pafTages,  generating 
a  great  deal  of  wind,  and  not  affording 
proper  nourifhment,  will  be  the  caufe  of 
many  ailments. 

It 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  195 

It  is,  however,  to  be  obferved,  tliat 
aliments,  either  hartful  in. their  nature  o'r 
quantity,  will  chiefly  produce  nervous  fym- 
ptoms  in  thofe,  who,  from  th^'  pecuUar 
ftate  of  their  alimentary  canalj  are  moil  lia- 
ble to  fuch  diforders.      ,        .. 

ThuSj  wind  or  crudities  in  the  prini^ 
'vU,  occafioned  fiy  diet,  will  often  give  no 
great  uneafmefs  to  thofe  of  firm  nerves, 
and  whofe  flomach  and  bowels  are  ftrono-; 
but  in  more  delicate  people,  on  account  of 
the  particular  fenfibility  of  thefe  organs, 
fuchcaufes  will  either  excite  painful  fpafras, 
or  other  difagreeable  fenfations,  attended 
with  lownefs  of  fpirits. 

I  have  obferved  above,  that  in  fome  the 
flomach  becomes  fo  very  delicate,  that  even 
a  fudden  change  of  poflure  will  be  apt  to 
OGcafion  a  naufea  or  vomiting :  and  tliere 
are  others,  who,  when  their  flomach  is 
empty,  efpecially  after  a  late  error  in  diet, 
feel  ail  uneafy  craving,  faintnefs,  and  gid- 
dinefs,  which  fymptoms  are  almoil  as  cer- 
tainly reheved  by  a  little  folid  food,  or  a 
B  b  2  ^       glaf^ 


196  OF   THE  CAUSES 

glafs  of  wine,  as  pain  is  by  opium.  To 
this  faintnefs  and  difagreeable  fenfation  in 
the  flomach,  when  empty,  thofe  are  moft 
liable,  who,  belides  a  particular  weaknefs  of 
that  organ,  carry  an  arthritic  matter  in 
their  blood  frequently  affecting  it. 

V,  Scirrhous,  or  other  obllr unions 
in  the  flomach,  inteflines,  liver,  fpleen, 
pancreas,  mefentery,  uterus^  and  ovaria,  of- 
ten produce  fymptoms  of  the  hypochon- 
driac or  hyfleric  kind ;  fuch  as  want  of  ap- 
petite, naiifca,  cramps  in  the  flomach,  vo- 
miting fometimes  of  a  black  or  bloody 
coloured  matter,  flatulence  and  crudities  in 
the  firft  palFages,  hectic  heats,  cold  fweats, 
low  fpirits,  and  other  complaints,  more  or 
lefs  violent,  according  as  the  patient's 
nerves  are  more  or  lefs  delicate. 

Such  Gbfl:rud:ions  in  the  flomach  and 
bowels  feem  to  occafion  many  of  the  a- 
bove  effects,  by  hindering  the  free  circula- 
tion of  the  fluids  through  thefe  parts,  by 
afFeding  their  nerves  with  an  nneafy  fen- 
fation. 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  197 

fation,  and  by  preventing  digcflion.  In 
the  liver  and  fpleen,  by  impeding  the  fe- 
cretion  of  bile,  and,  by  their  weight,  oc- 
cafioning  a  difagreeable  fenfation,  not  only 
in  thefe,  but  the  neighbouring  parts  by 
fympathy  *.  In  the  mefentery,  by  pre- 
venting the  further  preparation  of  the 
chyle,  and  its  courfe  towards  the  thoracic 
du6t.  In  the  uterm  and  ovaria,  by  difturb- 
ing  the  functions  of  thefe  parts,  and  by  con- 
fent  affedting  the  flomach  and  bowels.  Fur- 
ther, hard  fweliings  in  the  uterus  or  other 
abdominal  vifcera,  by  irritating  fuch  nerves 
as  are  contiguous  to  them,  more  at  one 
time  than  another,  may  give  rife  to  fpaf- 
modic  contra(ftions  of  the  inteftines  in  fome 
parts,  and  flatulent  diftenllons  of  them  in 

others^ 

*  In  the  bodies  of  thofe  who  have  died  of  the  hypo- 
chondriac difeafe,  the  meleraic,  and  other  veins  which 
meet  to  form  the  vena  portarum,  have  been  often  found 
greatly  diftended  with  blood.  But  this  diftenfion  of  thofe 
veins,  if  any  thing  preternatural,  was  probably  only  a 
confequence  of  fome  obftrudion  in  the  liver,  and  not  to 
be  reckoned,  as  it  has  been  by  fome  authors,  the  caufe 
of  that  diftemper. 


198        OF  THE  C Alts ES 

otherSj  and  may  fo  afFecT:  the  whole  net^ 
vous  fyftem,  as  to  occafion  hyfleric  faint- 
ings  and  convulfions. 

As  obllradlions  in  the  flomach,  livery 
6^r.  may  be  often  the  caufe  of  low  fpirits, 
foj  on  the  other  hand,  melancholy,  or  long 
continued  grief,  frequently  gives  rife  to 
hypochondriac  and  hyfteric  complaints,  and 
fometimes  to  bbfl:ru(ftions  in  thofe  vifcera^ 
For  fuch  a  flate  of  the  mind  not  only  dif- 
orders  the  nerves  of  the  flomach,  liver,  and 
bowels,  and  occafions  a  want  of  appetite 
and  digeilion,  with  its  various  confcquen- 
ces;  but  by  means  of  the  agency  of  thofe 
nerves,  it  may  alfo  produce  in  fo  me  of  the 
fmall  veffels  of  thefe  vifcera  fuch  a  fixed 
fpafmodic  contraflion,  as  to  lay  the  foun- 
dation of  an  irrefolvable  obflruAion ;  in 
much  the  fame  manner  as  a  fudden  fright 
has  given  rife  to  2.fcirrhus,  and  afterwards 
to  a  cancer,  in  the  breaft.  Further,  the 
flow  interrupted  breathing,  and  the  feden- 
tary  life  of  thofe  who  are  much  affe(5ted 
with  grief,  will  make  the  fluids  more  apt 

to 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  199 

to  flagnate,  and  confequently  to  form 
obflrudlions  iq  the  fmall  veiTels  of  the  hy- 
pochondriac vifcera, 

I.  A  gentleman  aq:ed  60,  who  had  been 
above  three  years  fubjedl  to  cramps  and 
pains  in  his  ftomach,  want  of  appetite, 
belching,  fits  of  ficknefs  and  vomiting,  be- 
gan, in  fpring  1748,  to  tlirow  up  a  dark- 
coloured  Hquor  hke  coffee-grounds,  and  to 
void  the  fame  by  ftool.  In  the  end  of  A- 
pril  1749,  he  vomited  a  greater  quantity 
pf  this  black  fluff  than  ever,  and  foon  after 
he  threw  up  about  an  Englifli  quart  of 
blood,  moflly  clotted,  which  reduced  him 
fo  low,  that  he  never  recovered  his  fleih  or 
colour.  Throughout  the  fummer,  hecon- 
tinued  in  a  declining  way,  being  much 
opprelTed  with  belching,  ficknefs  at  the  1I0- 
mach,  and  frequent  retchings  to  vomit, 
tho'  rarely  bringing  up  any  thing  but  a 
tough  phlegm,  till  the  beginning  of  Oi5lo- 
ber,  when,  after  fevere  ficknefs,  he  one 
morning  vomited  a  great  deal  of  blackifh 
^coloured  fluff,  and  in  the  evening  a  confi- 

derable 


200        OF   THE  CAUSES 

derable  quantity  of  clotted  blood.    On  the 
i^th  of  this  month,   about  eleven  in  the 

•  forenoon,  after  retching  to  vomit,  he  com- 
plained fuddenly  of  a  fliarp  pain  below  the 
falfe  ribs  of  his  left  fide :  immediately  after 
which,  his  pulfe  began  to  fink,  and  he  died 
at  two  o'clock. 

His  body  being  opened,  the  coats  of  thq 
flomach  were  found  thick  and  fcirrhous  in 
feveral  parts,  efpecially  about  its  left  orifice. 
In  thofe  morbid  parts  feveral  fmall  ulcera- 
tions and  chops  were  obferved,   and  near 

.  the  bottom  of  the  flomach  a  hole  as  broad 
as  a  fliilling.  This  part,  which  had  been 
thinner  than  the  reft  of  the  flomach,  feems 
to  have  given  way  on  the  morning  before 
the  patient  died,  and  the  laceration  was 
probably  the  caufe  of  that  fliarp  pain  he 
complained  of  in  his  left  fide.  There  was 
nothing  in  the  flomach,  as  all  its  contents 
had  been  emptied  into  the  cavity  of  the 
abdomen. 

It  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  the  black- 
coloured    liquor,    which   this  patient  fre- 
quently 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  2or 

quently  vomited,  as  well  as  the  clotted 
blood,  came  from  the  velTels  of  thofe  fcir- 
Hious  parts  of  the  ftomach,  in  which  the 
fmall  ulcerations  and  chops  were  obferved. 
The  blood  that  oiizes  ilowly  into  the  flo- 
niach  from  very  fmall  veiFcls,  may  lie 
for  a  confiderable  time  before  it  is  thrown 
up,  and  acquire  a  dark  brown,  or  blackifli 
colour  ;  but  when  it  flows  in  greater  quan- 
tity, and  from  larger  velFels,  it  is  vomited 
up,  either  partly  coagulated,  or  quite  fluid, 
if  it  has  remained  only  a  very  little  time 
in  the  ilomach. 

It  may  be  proper  to  obferve,  that  the 
black  as  well  as  bloody  vomitings  were 
probably  increafed,  if  not  firft  occaiioned,  by 
the  frequent  emetics  which  the  patient  had 
taken  to  remove  the  ficknefs,  want  of  ap- 
petite, and  other  complaints  of  his  flo- 
mach  :  And  undoubtedly,  whenever  ifhere  is 
a  confirmed  fcirrhus  in  the  ilomach,  flrong 
vomits  muft  increafe,  exafperare,  or  inflame 
it,  and  probably  break  fome  of  the  veflels 
leading  to  the  tumor.  In  fuch  cafes,  there- 
C  c  fore. 


ao2         OF  THE  CAUSES 

fore,  inftead  of  ipecacuanha  and  antimo- 
nials,  the  patient  Ihould  ufe  nothing  but 
warm  water,  or  a  decodiion  of  camomile- 
flowers,  which  will  be  fiifficient  to  relieve 
the  flomach  when  foul,  without  occafion- 
ing-  fuch  violent  con vul five  contractions  in 
it,   as  the  flronger  emetics  do. 

2.  A  maiden  gentlewoman  about  30  years 
of  age,  in  September  1755,  began  to  com- 
plain of  want  of  appetite,  and  wind  in  her 
flomach,  and  loft  her  lleOi  and  ftrength. 
From  the  beginning  of  March  following, 
her  pulfe  became  quicker  than  natural,  and 
fhe  then  began  to  bring  up  every  thing  llie 
fwallowed,  two  or  three  hours  after;  and 
feldom  went  to  ftool  without  a  clyfter. 
When  her  flomach  was  empty  of  viduals, 
fhe  threw  up  tough  phlegm,  which,  a  few 
days  before  her  death,  was  mixed  with 
fome  blackifh  matter.  She  never  com- 
plained of  any  acute  pain,  but  only  of  an 
uneafinefs  and  tightnefs  about  the  flomach. 
Her  bowels  were  much  diftended  with  wind, 
which  gave  her  a  great  deal  of  trouble; 

and 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  203 

aiid  the  air  fliifting  frequently  from  one 
place  to  another,  produced  confiderablc 
fwelllngs,  which  could  be  eafily  felt  out- 
wardly. After  trying  various  medicines, 
to  little  purpofe,  ilie  died  about  the  end  of 
May. 

Upon  opening  her  body,"  the  colon  was 
obferved  to  be  much  contraifted  in  feveral 
places,  and,  in  the  right  lide,  to  adhere  to 
the  peritoiidsum  ;  but  the  chief  caufe  of  her 
complaints  and  death  appeared  to  be  a 
fcirrhous  tumour,  which  fpread  over  the 
whole /y/o'wj,  and  a  fmall  part  of  the  fto- 
mach  adjoining  to  it.  The  fides  of  the 
pylorus  confided  of  a  firm  cartilaginous  fub- 
ftance,  near  an  inch  thick,  and  the  pafFage 
was  fo  ftraitened  as  fcarcely  to  admit  a 
quill.  On  the  infide  of  the  pylorus  were 
found. fome  fmall  chops  and  inequalities, 
from  which,  as  I  imagine,  a  confiderable 
part  of  the  phlem  which  fhe  vomited  might 
come.  Be  that  as  it  will,  it  is  fcarce  to  be 
doubted,  that  the  black  coloured  fluff  was 
furnifhed  by  the  mouths  of  the  fmall  blood- 
C  c  2  vefTels 


204        OF   THE  CAUSES 

vefFels  in  thofe  ruptured  parts  of  the  pylorus. 
If  thefe  vefFels  had  been  larger,  this  matter 
would  have  had  more  of  a  dark  brown,  or 
reddilh  colour  ;  or  blood  itfelf,  either  fluid 
or  clotted,  would  have  fometimes  appeared. 
At  no  rate  could  this  matter  come  from 
the  liver,  for  that  part  was  found  ;  nor, 
fuppofing  it  otherways,  could  any  thing 
have  ealily  pafled  from  the  duodenum  into 
the  ilomach,  on  account  of  the  flraitnefs 
of  the  pylorus, 

3.  A  female  child,  which,  from  its  birthj 
had  been  afflicted  with  v/ind,  gripes,  and 
violent  convulfions,  died  at  the  age  of  five 
months,  after  many  remedies  had  been  ufed 
tmfucccfsfully.  Nothing  preternatural  was 
difcovered  upon  difTccliion,  e^vcept  a  portion 
of  the  colony  about  five  inches  in  length, 
q^uite  fcirrhous. 

4.  A  gentlewoman,  who  had  born  feve- 
ral  children,  and  had  been  generally  heal- 
thy,  in  the  59th  year  of  her  age,  ten  3^ears 
^cer  the  menfes  had  left  her,  began  to  com- 
plain 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  205 

plain  of  pains  in  her  back,  groins,  and 
belly,  above  the  os  piihis^  the  violence  of 
which  brought  on  the  fluor  alkis,  and  fre- 
quently a  difcharge  of  blood  from  the  va- 
gina, Thefe  pains  laded  ufually  five  or  fix 
hours,  and  returned  every  day  nearly  at  the 
fame  time.  During  the  fit,  ihe  had  always 
this  hasmorrhage,  but  at  other  times  the 
white  flax  only. 

Notwithstanding  the  ufe  of  feve- 
ral  medicines  for  twelve  or  fourteen  months^ 
her  complaints  were  increafed  ;  the  pains, 
which  now  began  in  her  legs  and  thighs 
and  rofe  to  the  lower  parts  of  her  belly, 
returned  regularly  every  morning  at  ten, 
and  were  fo  acute,  that  fhe  cried  out  al- 
nioft  the  whole  time  they  laded  ;  nor  had 
fhe  now  any  perfed  intervals  of  eafe.  Du- 
ring the  paroxyfm,  her  pulfe  was  fmall  and 
quick,  and  her  body  cold,  altho*  all  over 
in  a  fweat.  Her  pains  were  always  mofl 
fevere  and  lading  when  die  was  codive,  ' 
which  happened  often.  The  matter  dif- 
charged  from  the  vagina  had  no  odendve 
fuidl.   She  was  much  troubled  with  wind  in 

heF 


-Lo6  OF  THE  CAUSES 

her  ftomach  and  bowels.  While  the  fit  lafled, 
fhe  never  made  any  water,  but  fpit  a  great 
deal  more  than  ufual.  By  the  continuance 
of  h£r  difeafe,  fhe  gradually  wafted  away, 
and  at  laft  died. 

As  I  was  only  confulted  for  this  perfon 
at  a  diftance,  I  never  learned  whether  her 
body  was  opened  or  not ;  but  I  think  there 
can  be  Uttle  doubt,  that  almoft  all  her 
complaints,  and  particularly  the  (harp  pe- 
riodic pains  in  the  hypogaflric  region, 
were  owing  to  a  fcirrhus  m  the  uterus  be- 
ginning to  turn  cancerous. 

VI.  Violent  afFedions  of  the  mind. 

Nothing  produces  more  fudden  or 
furprifing  changes  in  the  body  than  vio- 
lent affections  of  the  mind,  whether  thefe 
be  excited  by  external  obje(5t3,  or  by  the 
cxercife  of  the  internal  fenfes.  Thus  dole- 
ful or  moving  ftories,  horrible  or  unex- 
pected fights  *,  great  grief,   anger,  terror, 

and 

*  It  is  fald,  that  the  great  Lord  Verulam  was  wont 
to  faiiit,  when  he  faw  an  ecHpfe  of  the  fun :  and  wc  are 

tol4 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  207 

and  other  paffions,  frequently  dccafion  the 
mofl  fudden  and  violent  nervous  fymp- 
toms.  The  ftrong  impreffions  made  in 
fuch  cafes  on  the  brain  and  nerves  often 
throw  the  perfon  into  hyfteric  fits,  either 
of  the  convulfive  or  fainting  kind.  Long 
continued  grief  and  anxiety  of  mind  weaken 
the  tone  of  the  ftomach,  deftroy  the  ap- 
petite and  digeflion,  occafion  thirft,  a 
white  tongue,  flatulence,  and  other  com- 
plaints *.  Great  fear  produces  palenefs  of 
the  countenance,  an  univerfal  debility  and 
ihaking,  palpitations  of  the  heart,  anxiety 
about  the  breaft,  quick  breathing,  and  a 
loofenefs,   or  a  large  difcharge  of  limpid 

urine. 

told  of  a  Lady,  who,  upon  looking  through  a  telefcope 
at  the  comet  of  1 68 1 ,  was  ftruck  with  fuch  terror,  that 
(he  died  in  a  few  days,  Pechlin.  Obfervat.  med.  lib.  3. 
©bferv.  23. 

*  *•  Qui  laborant  animi  pathemate,  potiffimum  corripi 
*'  folent  morbis  ventriculi,  ut,  inter  caetera,  obfervavi  in 
"  moerentibus,qai  conqueruntur  primo  de  languore  ven- 
*•  triculi,  mox  inappetentia,  oris  amaritie,  fiti  circa  horas 
*«  naatutinas,  cruditatibus,  flatibus,  et  tenfionibus  hyp«- 
*•  chondfiorum."    BagUvii  Opera,  410,  p.  565. 


2oS  OP  THE  CAUSES 

urine.  By  fudden  terror,  delicate  women' 
or  children  have  been  not  only  thrown 
into  fainting  and  convulfions,  but  rendered 
fubje^ft,  all  their  lifetime,  to  epileptic  fits* 
Anger  quickens  the  pulfe  and  refpiration, 
and  increafes  the  force  of  the  heart  :  hence 
it  has  been  immediately  followed  by  an 
uncommon  excretion  of  the  falivay  by  bi-^ 
lious  vomitings  *,  bleeding  at  the  nipples  f, 
and  a  rupture  of  fuch  veiTels  as  were  lately 
cicatrized.  In  women,  it  frequently  oc- 
cafions  fpafmodic  contradlions  in  the 
bowels,  and'  a  flatulent  or  hyfteric  cholic. 
Some  of  the  more  violent  paflions  have, 
all  at  once,  occafioned  a  kind  of  tetanus, 
or  catalepfy ;  fo  that  the  perfon  has  appear- 
ed liker  to  a  ftatue  than  to  any  thing  alive; 
nay,  excefTive  fear,  grief,  joy,  and  fhame 
have  been  fometimes  followed  by  fudden 
death. 

BoNETUs  has  recorded  the  cafe  of  a 

lady, 

*  Pcchlin.  lib.  3.  obfervat.  2^5. 

f  Stalpart,  Vander  Wiel.  cent..i.ohf.  74, 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  26t^ 

lady,  who,  among  other  hyfleric  fymp- 
toms,  owing  to  grief  and  difappoinrments, 
was  feized  with  frequent  fainting  fits,  which 
fometimes  lafled  half  an  hour*:  And,  fe- 
veral  years  ago,  I  had  a  patient,  who,  up- 
on the  unexped:ed  death  of  her  hufband, 
fell  into  fuch  fits,  generally  holding  her 
from  five  to  fifteen  minutes.  In  thefc 
faintings  flie  lay  like  a  dead  perfon,  with- 
out any  apparent  breathing,  or  motion  of 
the  bread ;  only  when  a  candle  was  held 
near  her  mouth,  the  flame  was  obferved 
to  move  a  httle.  Her  pulfe,  however, 
was  fcarce  changed,  only  fomewhat  flower 
and  feebler  than  ufuaU  She  came  out  of 
thefe  faintings  with  fighings  and  crying, 
and  generally  relapfed  into  them  in  little 
more  than  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  In  this 
way  fhe  continued  for  two  days, 

Baghvius  mentions  a  young  man  of 

Dalmatia,  who,  from  looking  at  a  perfon 

in  an  epileptic  fit,   was  himfelf  affecfted  in 

Dd  the 

*  Sepulchreto  anatom,  lib.  3.  §  33.  obf.  9. 


%tQ  OF   THE   CAUSES 

the  lame  manner  *:  And  it  has  frequently 
happened,  in  the  Royal  Infirmary  hercj 
that  women  have  been  fei^ed  with  hyileric 
fits,  from  feeing  others  attacked  with  them. 
But  one  of  the  moft  remarkable  inflances 
of  this  kind,  happened  in  the  Poor's  houfe 
fit  Haerlemj  in  the  time  of  the  learned  Dr 
Boerhaave,  and  is  recorded  by  his  nephew 
in  the  following  manner, 

*■  In  domo,  qua  pauperes  ex  eleemo^ 
fynis  publice  aluniur  in  civitate  Harlemenfij 
perterrita  paella  incidit  in  morbum  nervo^ 
rum  convulfivum,  certis  piroxyfmis  re^ 
duccm  I  adftantium  et  adjuvantium  in  earn 
intenta  itidern  corripitur  eodeni  morbo ; 
poftridie  altera,  deinde  tertia,  quarta,  iniQ 
fere  omnes,  tarn  pueri  quam  pueliae:  Status 
miferrimusl  Corripitur  hie,  corripitur  ilia, 
imo  fere  omnes  eodem  tempore,  dum  unum 
alter  afpicit,  profternuntur.  Medici  fo- 
iertes  fruftra  adhibent  quae  diktat  ars,  fa-' 
luberrima  anriepileptica  medicaniina.    Con- 

fugicur 

*  Praxis  Medica,  cap.  14.  §  2.    See  alfo  Natur.  ciiriar, 


OFNERVOUSDISORDERS.    :iit 

fugitur     tandem    ad     Boerhaavium,    qui, 
miferLiis    infdicis   paupermii    fortis,    petiic 
Harlenium,   et  dum   rem   exarajnat,   inva- 
dente  in   uniim   paroxyfmo,   vidit   convelli 
plures    fpecie   cpilepliae.      Datis   incafTum 
optimis  remediis  a  medicis  fapientibus,   en 
ad  imaginationem  ex  uno  in  alcerum  tra- 
diiclo    morbo^    rite    perpenfiSj    lianc   aver^ 
tendo,  credidit  polTe  coram  obtiiieri,  et  ob- 
tiiiuit*     Scilicet,  praemonitis  ephoris,  prae- 
fentibus  omnibus,  juffit  per  cameram  dif- 
poni  fornaces  portatiles,  prunis  ardentibus 
3n{lrutn:as,  atque  iis  imponi  ferreos  hamu- 
ios,    ad    certam  figuram    adaptatos ;    turn 
ita  mandavit:    Quia  omnia  fruCtra  forent, 
fe  aliud  nefcire  remedium,   quam,   lit  qui 
primus,    puer   foret    vel    puella,    infauilo 
morbi  paroxyfmo  arriperetur,  locus  quidani 
nudati  brachii  candeiice  ferro  ad  os  ufque 
inurcretur ;  utque  gravitate  pollebat  dicendi, 
perterriti    omnes    ad    crudele   remedium, 
dum   inilare  fentiunt  paroxyfmum,    omni 
mentis   intentione,  et  mecu  dolorificae  in- 
iiflionis,  eideni.  refiflunt  forcioris  oblatione 
D  d  2  *  iueae  j 


ais        OF  THE   CAUSES 

ideae :  et  certe  quantum  valeat  hie  ab  ob* 
jcifto  animae  intentae  revulfio,  docet  epi- 
Icpiia  diverfimode  curata,  ut  quidem  ipfe 
terror  eandem  fuftulerit,  febris  epidemr- 
ca,  quartana,  ptyalifmus,  matrimonium, 
-virga  *." 

There   is  a  difeafe  very  common  in 
the  Ifland  of  Zetland,    which    is  known 
there  by  the  name   of  the  convulfive  fits. 
It  begins  with  a  violent  palpitation  of  the 
heart ;   foon  after  which,  the  patients  fall 
to  the  ground,  unlefs  they  are  fapported ; 
their  arms  and  legs  are  alternately   con- 
tracted and  relaxed;  and,   in   fome  cafes, 
their  joints  become  fo  rigid  that  they  can- 
not be  bent.     Their  refpiraiion  feems  to 
be  difficult,  and  they  cry  terribly  while  the 
fit  lafts,  which  is  generally  lefs  than  a  quar- 
ter of  an  hour;    although,  in  fome  rare 
cafes,    it    has  continued    above  an    hour. 
This  diforder  feldom  attacks  married  wo- 
men ;  but  young  women,  and  even  girls  of 

twelve 

*  Abr.  Kaau   Boerhaave  Impet.  faclens  Hippocrati 
diduin«  §  406. 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  213 

twelve  or  ten  years  of  age,  are  liable  to  it. 
Some  boys  and  two  young  men  in  the 
illand  have  been  alfo  afFeifled  with  it.  In 
the  church  or  other  public  meetings,  as 
foon  as  any  one  is  feized,  all  fuch  as  have 
been  formerly  fubjeift  to  the  diflemper  are 
attacked  with  it,  which  often  occafions 
great  didurbance;  and  fome,  who  never 
had  thefe  fits,  have  been  alFedted,  upon  fee- 
ing or  even  hearing  the  noife  of  fuch  as 
are  feized  with  them. 

This  difeafe  does  not  feem  to  impair 
the  health  of  the  patients;  for  the  young 
women  fubjedt  to  it  are  generally  as  flrong 
and,  in  other  refped:s,  as  healthy  as  any 
in  the  ifland. 

We  have  feen  above  *,  that  there  is  a 
remarkable  fympathy,  by  means  of  the 
nerves,  between  the  various  parts  of  the 
body ;  and  now  it  appears  that  there  is  ^ 
flill  more  wonderful  fympathy  between  the 
nervous  fyflems  of  different  perfons,  whence 
various   motions    and    morbid   fymptoms 

-  arc 

*  See  chap-  i.  No.  lo,  and  ii. 


sr4  OF  THE  CAtJSE^ 

are  often  transferred  from  one  to  anothef^^ 
without  any  corporeal  contact  or  infedlion* 
In  thefe  cafes,  the  impreffion  made  up- 
on the  mind  or  fenforium  commune  by  feeing 
others  in  a  diforderedflate,  raifes,  by  means 
of  the  nerves,  fuch  motions  or  changes  in 
certain  parts  of  the  body  as  to  produce 
fimilar  afFeclions  in  them :  and  hence  it  is, 
that  the  fight  only  of  a  perfon  vomiting 
has  often  excited  the  fame  adlion  in  others ; 
that  fore  eyes  become  fometimes  infectious; 
that  yawning  is  propagated  from  one  per-* 
fon  through  a  whole  company,  and  thac 
convulfive  diforders  are  caught  by  looking 
on  thofe  who  are  affe6ted  with  them. 
Now,  although  Vv'e  cannot  explain  how 
different  impreffions  made  on  the  fenforium 
commune  jQiould  occafion,  by  means  of  the 
nerves,  thofe  various  changes  in  the  body; 
yet  that  the  nerves  are  really  capable  of 
producing  very  fudden  changes  in  the  cir- 
culation and  -diftribution  of  the  fluids, 
when  the  mJnd  is  varioufly  affecSted, .  we 
have  full  proof  in  that  rednefs  of  the  face 

which 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  215 

which  aGcompanies  a  fenfe  of  iliame,  that 
jncreafed  flux  of  the  faliva  which  happens 
to  a  hungry  perfon  upon  the  fight  of  grace- 
ful food,  and  that  plentiful  difcharge  of 
tears  vvhich  is  ofcen  produced  by  piteous 
objCifls  or  tragical  (lories. 

Thus  far  we  know,  from  certain  expe- 
rience, that,  when  the  nervous  fyfleni  is 
extremely  delicate,  a  fniall  impreflion  on 
any  of  the  organs  of  fenfe  will  often  throw 
the  whole  body  into  diforder.  For  ex- 
ample, I  have  known  people  of  weak  nerves^ 
fubjcdl  to  wind  in  their  flomach,  and  a 
fwimming  of  their  head,  who,  by  looking 
into  a  mirror  that  was  kept  conftantly 
moving  before  them,  became  fo  giddy,  as 
to  be  in  hazard  of  falling.  Others,  upon 
the  fudden  opening  of  a  door,  or  any  o- 
ther  unexpected  noife,  have  been  liable  to 
be  fcized  with  convulfions.  Nay,  there 
jiave  been  fome,  wi^^ofe  brain  and  organs 
of  fenfe  were  fo  fufceptible  of  impreffions, 
that  they  could  fcarce  abflain  from  imita^ 


tHig 


Si6  OF  THE  CAUSES 

ting  every  motion  andgeflure  they  fawper^ 
formed  by  others  *. 

On  the  other  hand,  jt  is  to  be  obferved, 
that  flrong  nervous  fymptoms  are  feldom 
occadoned  by  fear,  terror,  grief,  the  force 
of  imagination,  or  any  fudden  impreilion 
on  the  organs  of  fenfe,  in  perfons  whofe 
nerves  are  firm  and  lefs  fen£ble ;  but,  when 
the  contrary  is  the  cafe,  the  caufes  above 
mentioned  will  often  produce  the  moil  fud- 
den and  violent  hyfleric  fits,  or  convulfivc 
diforders,  without  any  fault  in  the  womb, 
alimentary  canal,  or  other  parts  of  the 
|?ody. 

To  conclude  our  obfervations  on  the 
^aufes  of  nervous  difeafea,  it  may  be  pro- 
per to  take  notice,  that  altho'  it  appears 
from  the  diiTedions  of  thofe  who  have, 
died  of  them,  that  the  ilomach  and  in- 
teflines,  liver,  fpleen,  omentum^  mefentery, 
or  uterus,  have  frequently  been  found  ob- 
ilrudted,  fcirrhous,  or  ocherwife  unfound  j 
yet,  as  in  many  other  cafes  of  the  fame 

diforders 

t  Philofophical  tranfafl:.  abrldg.  vol,  3.  p.  8. 


OF  NERVOUS  DISORDERS.  217 

diforders,  no  fuch  morbid  appearances 
have  been  obferved  in  the  body  afcer  death  i 
It  follows,  that  thefe  fymptoms  may  fre- 
quently  proceed  from  caufes  which,  elu- 
dino-  our  fenfes,  are  not  to  be  difcovered  by 
difledlion.  Nay,  obflrucT:ions,  fcinhi,  and 
other  diforders  of  the  vifceray  obferved  in 
thofe  who  have  died  after  fuffering  long 
from  nervous  ailments,  feem  fdmecimes  to 
have  been  the  confequences  of  a  long  fliate 
of  bad  healthj  rather  than  the  caufes  of  it ': 
Particularly,  by  the  frequent  attacks  of 
that  arthritic  or  other  morbid  matter  which 
is  often  the  caufe  of  thefe  diforders ;  and 
by  the  pains  and  fpafms  attending  therai 
fome  obflrudlions  may  at  length  be  formed 
in  thefmall  veiTels  of  the  flomach  or  neig-h- 
bouring  parts  j  to  which  every  new  return 
adds  a  little,  juil  as  new  inflammations  of 
the  cornea  always  increafe  fpecks  on  that; 
membrane.' 


CHAP, 


2x8      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 


CHAP.     VI. 

Qhfervations  on  fome  of  the  mojl  remarkahk 
Synptoms  of  the  Nervous,  Hypo- 
chondriac, aitd  YLy ST EKi  c  kind, 

N  uncommon  fenfe  of  cold  or  beat 
in  different  parts  of  the  body, 
fometimes  fuddenly  fucceeding  each  other. 
The  natural  heat  of  animal  bodies  is 
owing  to  the  regular  and  uninterrupted  cir- 
culation of  the  fluids*  As  this  degree  of 
heat,  however,  is  nearly  the  fame  in  every 
part  that  is  defended  from  the  external 
cold,  and  is  what  we  are  accuftomed  to, 
we  arc,  commonly,  no  more  eonfcious  of 
it  than  of  the  beating  of  the  heart, 
or  of  the  akernate  contraction  of  the  inte- 
llines.  But  as  often  as  there  is  a  more  ra- 
pid motion  of  the  fluids  through  the  whok 

body. 


NERVOUS    SYMPTOMS.        2ic> 

body,  or  only  in  the  fmaller  vefTels  of  fome 
part,  we  feel  a  greater  heat  than  the  natu- 
ral. In  like  manner,  a  fenfation  of  cold 
proceeds  from  a  diminiflied  circulation,  or 
a  flagnation  of  the  fluids  in  the  fmaller 
veffels. 

In  hypochondriac  and  hyfteric  cafes,  a 
quicker  or  flower  motion  of  the  fluids,  and 
confequently  an  unufual  fenfation  of  heat 
or  cold  in  the  veflels  of  the  head,  back, 
arms,  legs,  and  other  parts,  may  arife  ei- 
ther from  the  veflels  themfelves,  or  their 
fluids.  From  the  veflels,  when  thefe,  from 
fome  fault  or  irritation  of  the  nervous  fy- 
ftem,  or  from  fympathy  between  their 
nerves  and  thofe  of  the  flomach,  or  fome 
other  very  fenfible  parr,  are  either  thrown 
into  an  unufual  alternate  motion,  or  afle(fl- 
ed  with  a  continued  fpafraodic  flirivSture. 
From  the  fluids,  when,  by  their  acrimony 
or  vifcid  quality,  the  very  fmall  veflels  are 
dther  excited  into  uncommon  vibratory 
E  e  2  contradions 


2^20      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

contraclions  *,  or  become  in  a  great  mea- 
iijre  obflru6ted. 

It  is  obfervable,  that  in  thofe  parts  of 
the  body,  in  which  patients  complain  of 
an  unufual  heat  or  cold,  we  can  often, 
neither  by  om-  feeling,  nor  the  thermo- 
meter, difcover  a  greater  or  lefs  degree  of 
heat  than  in  the  neighbouring  parts,  where 
ihere  is  no  fucli  fenfation.  This  may  be 
owing  to  the  heat  or  cold,  in  fi]ch  cafes, 
beiDs;  felt  below  theikin  and  memhrana  adi- 
fofa^  viz.  in  the  mufcles ;  or  perhaps  a  vio- 
lent alternate  motion  excited  in  the  very 
fmall  velfels,  by  fome  acrid  iluid,  may  give 
a  fallacious  fenfe  of  heat  to  the  perfon, 
when  thete  is  really  no  greater  degree  of 
it,  as  far  as  can  be  difcovered  by  the  ther- 
jiiometer.  In  like  manner,  the  ilagnation 
of  ferae  yifcid  humour  in  the  fame  veiTels 
may  produce  a  fenfe  of  cold,  alt  ho'  the 
real  heat  is  little,  if  at  all  diniinifhed,   'Tis 

true, 

*  Th^t  acrid  humours  and  affsdions  of  the  brain  and 
nerves  naay  excite  a  violent  alternate  motion  in  the  fniali 
vefTels,  or  affect  them  with  a  continued  fpafm  or  tetaTius^ 
FS  have  fliewn  abovCj  chap.  i.  No.  17. 


NERVOUS    SYMPTOMS.        221 

true,  that  in  blufhing,  the  increafed  motion 
of  the  fluids  through  the  vefTels  of  the  face 
15  accompanied  with  a  glow ;  but  it  is  to 
be  confidered  that  the  increafed  motion 
here,  is  in  the  velTels  of  the  ildn,  and 
fuch  alfo  as  carry  red  blood,  which  feems 
more  apt  to  acquire  heat  by  friction  or 
-agitation,  than  the  thinner  fluids. 

The  fenfe  of  cold  and  fliivering  in  the 
beginning  of  mofl  fevers  and  inflammationSj, 
feems  not  to  be  owing,  as  fome  have  ima- 
gined, to  vifcid  fluids  flagnating  in  the 
fmall  cutaneous  veffels,  but  to  a  fpafmodic 
contradlion  of  thefe  veffels,  in  confequence 
of  that  irritation  which  the  nervous  fyftem 
fuffers  Irom  the  febrile y?i??Z2//7/J',  or  the  be- 
o-irmino:  inflammation.  However,  akho' 
all  fevers  proceed  from  irritation,  and  con- 
fequently  from  an  affeclion  of  the  nerves, 
and  many  fevers  of  the  low  kind  have  had 
the  name  of  nervous  peculiarly  beirowed 
on  them ;  yet  a  regular  intermittent  feems 
to  deferve  that  appellation  better  than  a!- 
mofl  any  other  fpecies  of  fever;  for  its  pa- 

roxyfms^ 


522      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

roxyfms,  like  thofe  of  the  epilepfy,  or  o- 
ther  convulfive  diforders,  are  owing,  not 
fo  much  to  any  fixed  obflrudtion  in  the 
vafcular  fyflem,  or  general  acrimony,  or 
vifcidity  of  the  mafs  of  fluids,  as  to  an  ir- 
ritation or  affection  of  the  nerves  of  fome 
particular  part,  fuch  as  the  ftomach  or  in- 
teflines ;  whence  the  whole  fyflem  fuffers 
by  fympathy,  and  a  fhivering  is  produced, 
which  is  fucceeded  by  a  hot  fit  and  fweat- 
ing,  that,  for  the  time,  removes  the  caufe 
of  the  difeafe.  And  as  an  intermittent  a- 
grees  with  epileptic  and  other  convulfive 
diforders  as  to  its  caufe,  fo  its  returning 
paroxyfms,  like  theirs,  may  be  often  pre- 
vented or  weakened,  by  raifing,  a  fhort 
time  before  the  approach  of  the  fit,  an  a- 
cute  pain  or  any  great  commotion  in  the 
body^ 

II.  Pains  in  different  parts  of  the  body, 
fuddenly  moving  from  one  place  to  ano- 
ther. 

These 


NERVOUS    SYMPTOMS.        223 

These  pains  are  fomething  a-kin  to 
thofe  of  the  rheumatic  kind,  but  generally 
have  their  feat  in  the  fkin,  membranes,  and 
mufcles,  and  not  in  the  ligaments  and  joints. 
Their  fhifting  fuddenly,  and  their  feeming 
fometimes  to  have  a  connection  with  the 
flatulent  complaints  of  the  flomach,  has 
induced  fome  phyficians,  as  well  as  the  pa- 
tient, to  afcribe  them  to  the  motion  of  air 
between  the  fldn  and  mufcles,  from  one 
part  of  the  body  to  another.  But  their 
true  caufe  feems  to  be,  either  fome  vifcid 
or  acrid  matter  flicking,  for  a  (hoiv  tune, 
in  the  fmall  veiTels  of  certain  parts,  and  ir- 
ritating them,  or  fpafmodic  contrac5lions  of 
thefe  vedels  from  a  fympathy  between  their 
nerves  and  thofe  of  the  flomach  and  inte- 
ilines,  or  fome  other  very  fenfible  part  *. 

From  the  fame  caufes  afFeifling  the  vef- 
fels  or  nerves  of  the  perkranimn,  or  other 
parts  of  the  head,  proceed  flying  pains  in 

this 

*  It  is  obfervable,  that  Diodes  Caryflius  mentions,  a- 
moDg  the  figns  of  diforders  of  the  belly,  pains  flying 
through  the  body,  without  any  appaxeat  caufg,  Wld, 
Epift.  ad  Regem  Antlgonum, 


224      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

this  part,  and  the  davus  hjfiericus,  which 
Sydenham,  who  imagined  the  hyfteric  dif- 
eafe  to  proceed  from  a  confuiioa  of  the  ani^ 
mal  fpirits,  afcribed  to  the  whole  fpirits  of 
the  body  being  contradted  into  a  fmall  part 
of  the  head,  and  producing  much  the  fame 
fenfation,  as  if  a  nail  were  driven  into  it  *. 
That  thofe  pains  in  the  head  often 
proceed  from  a  fympathy  with  the  fto- 
mach,  is  rendered  probable  by  the  violent 
vomiting  which  fometimes  accompanies  the 
clavus  hyjiericus,  and  by  obferving,  that 
people  much  troubled  with  wind  in  their 
ftomach,  and  flying  pains  in  their  head, 
are  not  fo  often  affeded  with  thefe  pains> 
when  they  are  free  from  the  flatulence. 

III.  Hysteric  faintings,  and  convul- 
fions. 

Many  hyfteric  women  are  liable  to  be 
feizcd  with  faintings,  during  which  they 
lie  as  in  a  deep  fleep ;  only  their  refpira-* 
lion  is  fo  low  as  fcarce  to  be  perceived. 

Other.V 

*  Sydenbami  Oper.  epift.  ad  D.  Cole, 


NERVOUS    SYMPTOMS.        225 

Others,  along  with  faiinings  of  this  kind, 
are  ulfeded  with  cacchings  and  flrong  cou« 
vtilfions. 

These  fits  come  on  differently  in  differ- 
ent patients ;  in  fome,  a  coldnefs,  attended 
v/ith  a  fenfe  of  ftiffhefs,  is  firft  perceived  in 
the  legs,  or  m  the  trunk  of  the  body ; 
after  this,  a  yawning  and  flretching  of  their 
armi ;  a  lownefs  of  fpirics,  with  an  oppref- 
fion  about  the  pruecordia  ;  the  flomach,  or 
fome  part  of  the  inteftines,  is  diflended  with 
wind ;  they  often  feel,  as  it  were,  a  ball  in 
their  throat  ;  their  breathing  becomes 
quick  ;  the  heart  flutters,  or  is  afFecled 
with  a  flrong  palpitation ;  a  giddinefs,  a 
noife  in  the  ears,  and  a  lofs  of  fight,  as 
well  as  of  the  other  fenfes,  fucceed,  toge- 
ther with  convLilfive  motions  of  the  extre- 
mities and  other  parts  of  the  body. 

Fits  of  this  kind  may  be  owing  to  va- 
rious caufes  ;  fuch  as, 

r.    An  irritation  of  the  nerves  of  the 

{lomach  or    inteflines,    from  wind,    acrid 

humours,  ar  other  caufes,  whence  the  whole 

F  f  fyftcm 


22^      OF  THE  MOST,  REMARKABLf 

iyftem  is  often  brought  into  confent.  Nor 
can  it  admit  of  any  doubt,  that  hyfteric 
fits  frequently  proceed  from  this  caufe^ 
fince  the  patients  are  often  fenfible  of  their 
beginning  with  an  tineafy  fenfation  in  thofe 
parts* 

2.  A  fudden  fupprefHon  of  the  menfei 
often  gives  rife  to  hyfleric  fits :  and  in  fome 
a  fatal  apoplexy,  a^ttended  with  a  violent 
fpafm  of  the  mufcles  of  iht  glottis,,  has  been 
the  confequence  of  the  menflrual  evacua- 
tion being  fuddenly  flopt  -^  as  in  the  follow- 
ing eafe. 

An  unmarried  woman,  aged  20,  of  ^ 
delicate  habit,  having  expofed  herfelf  to 
cold  at  the  return  of  the  monthly  period,^ 
was,  next  morning  at  four  o'clock,  fudden- 
ly fcized  with  a  fiupor,  and  a  difficulty  m 
fpeaking,  and  moving  her  limbs.  She  was^ 
foon  after  blooded,  and  a  blifler  was  applied 
between  her  fhoulders.  At  eight,  when  I 
firfl  faw  her,  fhe  could  neither  fpeak  nor 
fwallow  ;  fhe  then  laboured  under  a  hiccup, 
her  face  was  pale,  her  fkin  cold,  altho'  her 

pulfe 


NERVOUS    SYMPTOMS.        227 

|;ulfe  and  breathing  were  natural.  About 
half  an  hour  after  ten,  fhe  began  to  breathe 
with  labour,  and-  with  a  fnorting  noife. 
This  flruggle,  however,  efpecially  m  exfpi- 
ration,  did  not  arife  from  any  fault  in  the 
lungs  or  mufcles  of  refpiration,  but  from  a 
fpafm  of  thofe  mufcles  of  the  larynx  whicli 
ihut  x.h.t  glottis ;  and  it  came  by  fits,  whicli 
continued  three  or  four  minutes,  and  fooie- 
times  more.  In  the  intervals,  which  were 
fomewhat  longer  than  the  acceffions,  flie 
breathed  pretty  eafily.  The  oleum  fuccini 
held  to  the  nofe,  leflened  at  firfl  the  fpaP- 
niodic  contra^^lion  of  the  glottis^  and  made 
her  breathe  eafier.  She  was  blooded  again, 
and  had  a  purging  clyfter  injected.  About 
eleven,  the  fore-part  af  her  neck  around 
the  larynx,  and  under  the  flerno-maftoid 
mufcles,  was  much  fwelled,  as  if  the  cel- 
lular membrane  had  been  diflended  with 
air.  A  poultice  of  theriaca  and  camphire 
applied  to  this  fvvelling,  feemed  to  lelTen 
the  violence  of  the  fits  of  diihcult  refpira- 
Uon.  In  the  afternoon,  her  pulfe  beco* 
F  f  ^  ^i^^ 


328      OF   THE   MOST   REMARKABLE 

ming  quick  and  full,  and  her  Ikin  hot,  (he 
was  blooded  a  third  time;  but  notwith- 
jllanding  this,  and  other  remedies,  ftit  died 
that  night  at  ten  ;  eighteen  hours  after  flie 
was  firfl  taken  ill. 

3.  A  very  acute  pain  in  any  of  the  more 
fenfible  parts  of  the  body,  or  violent  affec- 
tions of  the  mind,  as  terror,  grief,  anger, 
ordifappointments,  will  fometimesfoflrong- 
ly  affec!!:  the  whole  nervous  fyftem,  as  to 
bring  on  hyileric  faintings,  with  convul- 
fions,  altho*  the  body  be  in  every  refpe^l 
healthful  and  found,  bating  the  too  great 
delicacy  or  fenfibility  of  the  brain  and 
nerves, 

IV.  A  catakpfis  and  tetavdis^ 

Of  all  the  nervous  or  fpafmodic  difof" 
ders,  there  is  none  more  furprifing  than  the 
camleffu  ot  Jlupor  vigiians,  as  it  is  called  by 
lerrielius  *.  In  this  the  patient  becomes 
either  wholely,  or  in  a  great  meafure,  in^ 
fenfible  of  what  is  doing  about  him,  and 

remains 

*  Patholog.  lib.  5.  cap.  g. 


NERVOUS    SYMPTOMS.        229 

remains   exadly   in    the    fame    poflure  in 

which  ho  was  firft  feized.     His  joints  are 

fomecimes  fo  ftiif,    that  they  can  fcarcely 

be  bent,   or,    if  they  are,    they  remain  in 

whatever  fit  nation   thev  are  placed.     I'he 

pulfe  is  often  low  and  irregular.     This  dif- 

eafe  may  be  owing  to  fome  violent  afFeiliou 

of  the   mind    difordering   the    brain    and 

nerves,    or  to  fome  acrid  matter  afFe^fcing 

them,  either  by  its  immediate  contact,  or 

by  fympathy  with  the  (lomach,  inteilines, 

uteniSy  or  fome  very  fenfible  parts.    To  the 

fame  general  caufes  are  likewife  to  be  afcri- 

bed  the  emprofthotonui  and  opiflhotonus,  '  and 

tetanus.     And  here  we   mud  reft;  for   to 

endeavour  to    explain     more  particularly, 

either  how  the  paflions,    or  an  irritation 

of  the  brain  or  other  fenfible  parts,   bring 

on  alternate  convulfions  or  fixed  fpafns  of 

the  mufcles,    would  be  to  no  purpofe,   till 

we  are  better  acquainted  with  the  ftru^lure 

of  thofe  organs,   and  with  that  caufe  which 

immediately    produces   their    contradion ; 

points  which  will,  probably,  for  ever  elude 

our 


g|0      OF  THE  MOST   REMARKABLE 

our  rcfearches.  All  we  know  is,  that 
whatever  irritates,  or  difagreeably  affects 
the  brain,  nerves,  or  any  of  the  more  fen- 
fible  parts,  occaflons  continued  fpafms  or 
convulfive  motions,  either  in  the  parts 
themfelves,  if  mufcular,  or  in  thofe  with 
which  they  have  any  confiderable  fympa-« 
thy ;  and  that,  when  the  nervous  fyftem  is 
deHcate,  or  the  irritation  great,  almoft  all 
the  mufcles  will  be  fometimes  agitated  with 
alternate  contractions,  or  afFedted  with  st 
tetanus  or  general  rigidity, 

V.  Wind  in  the  flomach  and  bowels. 
All  our  aliments,  efpecially  thofe  of 
the  vegetable  kind,  abound  with  air.  In 
the  time  of  digeftion,  part  of  this  air  is 
feparated,  and  produces  that  flatulence  or 
wind  in  the  itomach  and  bowels  with 
which  many  people  are  greatly  troubled. 
But  although  flatulence  arifes  from  our  ali- 
ments, fome  of  whicli  produce  it  more 
than  others,  yet  ftrong  ^nd  healthful  peo^ 
pie  are  feldom  troubled  with  wind,  unleis 

they 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.        23! 

they  either  over-load  their  flomach,  or 
fvvallovv  liquors  that  are  in  a  fermenting 
ftate,  and  confequently  full  of  elaftic  air« 
While,  therefore,  the  matter  of  flatulence 
proceeds  from  our  aliments,  the  caufe 
which  makes  air  feparate  from  them  in 
fuch  quantity,  as  to  occafion  uneafy  com- 
plaints in  the  prima  vi£,  is  almoft  always 
a  fault  there ;  for  when,  on  account  of  a 
weaknefs  of  the  flomach  and  bowels^  or 
an  unnatural  ftate  of  their  nerves,  the 
digeftion  does  not  go  on  properly,  not 
only  more  flatulence  is  produced,  but  lefs 
of  it  returns  again  to  a  fixt  Hate.  Fur- 
ther, when,  through  the  weaknefs  of  the 
coats  of  the  flomach  and  inteilines,  the 
prefTure  upon  its  contents  is  confiderably 
diminiihed,  the  air  emitted  by  the  aliments 
in  digefl:ion  will  not  only  be  in  greater 
quantity,  but  will  expand  itfelf  more  thart 
in  people  of  ftronger  organs.  Agreeably 
to  this,  it  is  obferved,  that  dogs  are  much 
troubled  with  wind  and  borborygmi,  after 
tying  the  eighth  pair  of  nerves,    which 

fends 


232      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

fends   many  branches    to  the   alimentary 
canal. 

Air  in  the  fbomach  being,  ofcen  hin- 
dered from  rifing,  by  a  flight  fpafm  of  the 
cardiity  or  lower  part  of  the  gullet,  either 
occaiions  an  inflation  of  that  organ,  with 
other  uneafy  fyniptoms,  or  paffes  into  the 
inteilines;  where,  joined  to  more  that  is 
generated  there,  it  diftends  them  in  fome 
places,  and  confequently  occafions  a  con- 
trai5lion  in  others.  Hence  pain;  and  when 
the  fpafm  gives  way,  the  air  rufliing 
through  a  narrow  pafTage  of  fome  of  the 
bowels,  makes  a  rumbling  noife  :  but  when 
the  fpafm  in  any  part  of  the  intcflines,  e- 
ipecially  the  colon,  is  greater,  or  lafls  long- 
er than  ufual,  the  air  is  more  and  more 
rarefied  by  the  heat  of  the  body,  whence 
their  coats  being  over-flretched,  great 
pain  is  occafioned,  which  is  often  attend- 
ed with  a  vomiting.  This  is  what  is  coni^ 
monly  called  a  fiatukm  or  /jjfleric  cholic. 
In  fome  cafes,  certain  parts  of  the  alimen- 
tary canal   are   affccfted    with'fuch  a  fixt 

fpafm  odic 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.        233 

fpafmodic  contradion,  that  fcarce  any  air 
pafTes  either  upward  ^  or  downward ;  and 
more  being  daily  generated,  the  ftotnach 
and  bowels  become  at  length  greatly  dif- 
tended,  or  a  tympany  is  produced.  In 
this  difeafe,  I  have,  feveral  times^  obferved 
the  fwelling  of  the  belly  fall  greatlyi  and 
the  difeafe  go  almofl  quite  otF,  while  ia 
the  mean  time  very  little  wind  was  difchar- 
ged.  This  IhewSj  when  the  alimentary 
canal  returns  to  a  found  flate,  that  not 
only  lefs  air  is  generated  from  the  food, 
but  what  has  been  produced  may  be  moil- 
ly  deftroyed  or  reduced  to  a  more  fixt  eoii- 
dicion. 

VI.  A  great  craving  for  food^ 
This  may  be  owing  to  fome  humour 
in  the  cavity  of  the  flomaeh  flimulating 
its  nerves,  or  to  thofe  nerves  being  fo 
ehangedi  that  they  are  almofh  always  af- 
feded  with  that  fenfation  we  call  hunger, 
unlefs  when  food  is  newly  taken  into  the 
ftomachi 

G  g  Doctor 


2  34      OF  THE  MOST  KEMARKABLE 

Doctor  Lower  has  obferved,  that 
hypochondriac  and  hyfleric  people,  are 
often  troubled  with  an  uncommon  hunger^ 
or  femes  canina  j  and  while  this  lafts,  they 
are  almofl  quite  free  from  other  com- 
plaints ;  but  that  their  ufual  ailments  re- 
turn with  their  natural  appetite.  In  other 
cafes,  however,  the  morbid  matter  afFei5l- 
ing  the  nerves  of  the  fbomach  in  hypo- 
chondriac and  hyfleric  patients,  fometimes 
occafions  a-  want  of  appetite  and  a  naiifea» 
In  like  manner,  the  true  gout,  when  turn- 
ed upon  the  flomach,  according  to  the  dif- 
ferent fenfibility  of  the  nerves  of  that 
organ,  or  its  being  more  or  lefs  fixed  upon 
thefe  nerves,  produces  very  different  efFe(fts; 
fuch  as,  an  oppreflion,  a  languor,  flatulence, 
want  of  appetite,  and  a  fenfe  of  coldnefs  in 
theftomach,  or  a  violent  pain  with  cramps 
and  vomiting, 

Th  e  malacia  and  pica,  common  to  wo- 
men with  child,  and  to  girls  aifeifled  with 
the  chlorofiSy  proceed  either  from  an  acid 
or  fome  other  acrid  humour  in  the  floniach, 

or 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS,         235 

or  from  its  nerves  being  fo  changed  by  the 
ftate  of  pregnancy,  as  to  produce  a  long- 
ing  for  certain  foods,  and  other  fubftances, 
which,  in  thefe  cafes,  are  generally  raofl 
grateful  to  the  tafte,  as  well  as  apt  to  re- 
medy the  diforder  of  the  flomach.. 

VII.  A  black  vomiting. 

Altho'  not  a  few  of  the  moderns,  fol- 
lowing the  opinion  of  the  antient  phyfi- 
clans,  have  fappofed  the  hypochondriac  dif- 
€afe  to  be  owing  to  an  atrabiliary  humour 
produced  in  the  ftomach,  liver,  or  fpleen  ; 
yer,  in  many,  hypochondriac  patients,  there 
is  no  fuch  humonr ;  and  where  it  is  obfer- 
ved,  it  is  only  a  fymptom  or  confequence 
of  that  difeafe,  but  not  its  original  caufe. 

Patients  who  have  been  long  af- 
flidled  with  violent  pains  and  cramps,  or  o^ 
ther  difordersin  their  ftomach,  often  throw 
lip  fome  dark  coloured  ftuif,  which  is  com- 
monly  nothing  bet  blood  that  has  loft  its 
colour ;  for  although,  when  blood  is  poured 
^nto  the  cavity  of  the  ftomach  in  a  large 
G  2:  2  ouantitVy 


1^6      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

quantity,  it  is  foon  vomited  either  in  its 
fluid  flate,  or  coagulated;  yet,  when  it 
ouzes  llowly  from  the  fmaller  vefTels,  it  lofes 
its  red  colour  by  lying  long,  and  when 
thrown  up,  refembles  the  grounds  of  coffee. 
This  kind  of  black  vomiting  is  generally 
owing  to  one  or  more  of  the  following 
caufes,  viz, 

1.  Violent  pain  or  cramps  in  the  fto- 
mach ;  the  firft  of  which  may  greatly  in° 
creafe  the  motion  of  the  fluids  in  the  fmali 
yefiels,  and  the  lail  may  fqueeze  the  glo^ 
bules  of  blood  throug-h  the  orifices  of  the 
fraall  arteries,  defigned  for  conveying  the 
gaflric  lymph,  only,  into  the  cavity  of  the 
ftomach. 

2.  Scirrhous  tumours  in  the  fto^ 
inach  beginning  to  ulcerate,  or  a  rupture 
of  fome  of  the  fmall  vcfFcls  leading;  to 
them  ^, 

*  Further,  fclrrlious  tumours  in  the  {loEiach,  by  ob- 
flru^ting,  in  a  great  meafure,  the  courfe  of  the  blood 

throughi 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.       237 

3.  A  fupreflion  of  the  menfes  or  ha^tnor? 
ihoids,  whence  the  blood  that  ufed  to  be 
evacuated  by  the  uterus  or  rcBmn  is  turned 
lipon  the  ftomach,  and  partly  difcharged 
^y  fome  of  its  exhaling  arteries, 

!         ■       ■         J 

.through  the  indurated  part,  may  occafion  a  more  copi- 
ous influx  of  this  fluid  into  the  neighbouring  vefltils  ; 
whence  the  orifices  of  fome  of  the  exhaiiag  arteries  ia 
tbe  villous  coat  of  the  ftomach  may  be  fo  dilated,  as  to 
allow  globules  of  red  blood  to  efcape  with  the  thinner 
humours.  This  fuppofition  is  rendered,  at  leaft,  not 
improbable  by  the  following  inftance  of  bloody  urine, 
occafioned  by  the  womb  prefling  upon  the  neighbouring 
parts  in  time  of  pregnancy. 

A  gentlewoman,  aged  19,  began,  in  the  fourth  month 
of  her  firft  pregnancy,  to  make  bloody  urine,  which  con- 
tinued till  within  fifteen  days  of  the  time  of  her  delivery. 
This  conftant  difcharge,  though  weakening,  yet  was 
not  attended  with  a  quick  pulfe,  nor  any  pain  in  the 
back  or  belly.  After  being  delivered,  fhe  recovered 
and  enjoyed  perfedt  health,  'till  about  three  or  four 
months  after  flie  had  conceived  again,  when  the  bloody 
urine  returned  and  continued,  as  formerly,  till  a  fort-? 
night  before  flie  was  brought  to  bed.  In  her  third 
pregnancy,  flie  was  affefted  in  the  fame  manner,  only 
flie  was  much  troubled  with  coftivenefs,  which  increafed 
The  other  dilorder  j  and  after  this  delivery,  before  fhe 

Ijecamf 


^38     OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

I  have  known  fome  hyfleric  patients  af- 
fedted  with  fevere   pains   and    Ipafms    in 

their 

became  again  with  child,  (he  had  fometimes  returns  of 
the  bloody  urine.  During  her  fourth  pregnancy,  which 
happened  in  the  2j:th  year  of  her  age,  the  fame  fymp*' 
torn  returned,  but  her  lofs  of  blood  was  now  greater 
and  more  conftant  than  ever ;  fo  that  fhe  complained 
of  great  weaknefs,  of  a  giddinefs  and  lofs  of  appetite  ; 
her  pulfe  was  quick  and  fmall,  and,  for  above  a  month 
together,  fhe  had  quotidian  feverifh  paroxyfms,  general- 
ly of  ten  or  twelve  hours  continuance.  About  the 
middle  of  the  ninth  month,  her  water  returned  to  the 
natural  colour  ;  but  after  lying  in  and  recovering  flow- 
Jy,  in  fix  or  feven  weeks  fhe  grew  as  ill  as  ever.  Her 
blood  was  now  become  fo  thin,  that  when  fhe  happen- 
ed to  cut  her  finger,  it  would  fcarcely  tinge  linen. 

This  difeafe,  to  which  this  perfon  feems  to  have  been 
predifpofed  by  a  laxity  of  the  vefiels  of  the  kidneys,  was 
mofl  probably  owing  to  the  preffare  of  the  womb  on  the 
iliac  arteries,  by  which  means   the  blood  was  thrown 
with  greater  force  upon  the  emulgents  ;  for,  if  the  caufe 
of  this  hsemorrhage  had  been  merely  the  fupprefllon  of 
the  jnenfes,   it  ought  to  have  appeared  much  fooner 
than  the  fourth  month.     But  however  that  may  be, 
the  patient  found  great  benefit  from  the  tinfJure  of 
rofes,  the  bark  with  elixir  of  vitriol,    a  ilrengthening 
plaifter,   and  a  diet  confifting  chiefly  of  mucilaginous 
fubflances,  gellles,  and  the  lighter  flefh-meats,  with  a 
little  claret. 


NERVOUS    SYMPTOMS.     239 

tlieir  bowels,  who  did  not  vomit  any  black 
fluiF,  but  often  pafTed  it  by  flool.  In 
this  cafe,  the  black  purging  was  owing  t» 
red  blood  making  its  way,  in  fmall  quan- 
tity, into  the  cavity  of  the  inteftines; 
for  that  this  atrabiliary  humour,  as  it  has 
been  called,  did  not  come  from  the  liver, 
I  was  convinced  by  obferving,  that  fucli 
patients  as  paifed  it  by  flool,  frequently 
vomited  up,  at  the  fame  time,  bile  of  a 
natural  colour.  However,  as  hypochon- 
driac and  hyfteric  patients  fometimes  throw 
up  a  dark  green  bihous  humour,  there 
may  be,  perhaps,  a  few  cafes,  in  which  a 
blackifh  liquor  coming  from  the  liver  or 
gall-bladder  may  pafs  from  the  duodenum 
into  the  flomach,  and  be  afterwards  dif- 
charged  by  vomiting, 

VIII.  A  fudden  and  great  flux  of  pale 
urine. 

This  is  reckoned  by  Sydenham  the 
pathognomic  lign  of  the  hypochondriac 

and 


i40      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

and  hyfleric  difeafe  *.  It  has  been  afcri- 
bed  by  Hoffman  to  a  fpafm  of  ilie  fpbm^er 
of  the  bladder  f  ;  and  by  Dr  Gheyne  to 
an  obflmdtion  of  the  perfpiration  J  ;  but 
without  fufficient  reafona 

The  real  proximate  caufe  of  this  fym- 
ptom  is  always  the  fame,  viz.  an  increafed 
motion,  together  with  fome  degree  of  con- 
llrid:ion  of  the  fecretory  veffels  of  the 
kidneys  ;  the  firfl  augments  the  quantity, 
and  the  fecond  occaiions  the  pale  colour 
of  the  water  :  Although,  it  mufl  be  own- 
ed, that  this  colour  is  principally  owiag 
to  the  quicknefs  of  the  fecretion  of  the 
urine  and  of  its  paffage  through  the  blad- 
der, before  the  finer  parts  are  abforbed, 
and  it  has  had  time  to  acquire  the  com- 
mon fmell  and  tafhey  as  well  as  colour  of 
that  fluid. 

The  caiifes  of  fuch  an  increafed  modoii 
of  the  fecretory  veffels  of  the  kidneys  may 
fee  deduced  to  the  following  ; 

r.  SUDDEff 
*  EpHl.  ad  D.  Cole. 

f  Syrtem.  med.  torn.  4.  part  3.  cap.  6.  §  16, 
4:  Englifh  Malady,  part  2.  chap.  9, 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.        24* 

1.  Sudden  or  violent  afFe6lions  of  the 
mind.  Thus  people  of  a  delicate  frame 
and  very  moveable  nerves  will,  foon  after 
a  fright,  anger,  or  vexation,  make  greac 
quantities  of  pale  water.  The  whole 
nervous  fyilem  being  in  fuch  cafes  violent- 
ly agitated,  the  fecretory  vcfTels  of  the 
kidneys  are  thrown  into  flronger  and 
quicker  alternate  contracT:ions  than  ufual, 
and  fo  make  a  larger  fecretion  of  urine. 
Add  to  this,  that  as  the  perfpiration  is 
generally  checked  by  diforders  of  the  mind, 
the  watery  parts  of  the  blood  will  be 
turned  more  upon  the  kidneys. 

2.  An  increafed  motion  of  the  renal 
vefTels  is  often  owing  to  fympathy.  Thus, 
as  pain  in  the  kidneys  produces  a  naufea 
and  vomiting,  fo  a  difagreeable  fenfation 
in  the  flomach  and  bowels  from  wind, 
crudities,  or  other  caufes,  frequently  af- 
fe<fls  the  vefTels  of  the  kidneys  with  fuch. 
an  increafed  alternate  motion,  as  greatly 
to  quicken  the  fecretion  of  urine.  Fur- 
ther, when  the  body  is  thrown  into  a  ,ge- 

H  h  -   neral 


242      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

neral  diforder,  which  happens  in  hyfceric 
£;.s,  the  nerves  of  the  kidneys  are  afFedted 
as  well  as  others ;  and  if  the  renal  veflels 
are- weaker  or  more  irritable  than  thofe  of 
the  other  glands,  the  fluids,  which  are  put 
into  violent  motions,  will  run  off  this  way 
in  th€  form  of  pale  water,  If  the  inteftines 
are  particularly  weak,  the  perfon  will  be, 
feized  with  a  purging. 

In  children  breeding  teeth,  the  irrita-^ 
tion  of  the  nerves  qf  the  gums  fonietimes 
aiiedts  the  kidneys  by  confent,  io  as  to  oc- 
cafion  a  confiderable  difcharge  of  urine  of 
this  kind, 

3.  Since  Sydenham  has  obferved,  that 
the  hyfteric  difeafe  docs  often  fclze  the 
kidneys,  and  occafion  a  pain,  like  that 
of  a  nephritic  paroxyfm  *,  may  not  that 
noxious  matter  in  the  blood  which  is  of-- 
ten  the  caufc  of  nervous  diforders,  be 
thrown  fometimes  in  fach  a  manner  on 
thofe  parts,    as,  though   not   to  produce 

pain, 

*  Eplft.  ad  D.  Cola. 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.        243 

pain,  yet  Co  to  jfhimulate  their  fecretoiy 
vcflels,  as  greatly  to  iiicreafe  the  quantity  of 
the  urine  ?  Nor  is  this  more  furprifu-ig,  than 
that  tlie  fame  matter  afFe<5ting  the  nerves 
of  the  flomjich  fhould  produce,  at  differ- 
ent times,  very  different  complaintSi  I 
have  met  with  feveral  inftances  of  a  great 
and  lonp--continued  flux  of  urine  from  an 

o 

arthritic  humour  turned  on  the  kidneys. 

Further,  fmce  a  floppage  of  urine^ 
\vith  a  pain  at  the  neck  of  the  bladder, 
does  in  fuch  patients  fometimes  proceed 
from  the  morbid  matter  producing  a 
fpafm  there  ;  may  not  a  diminiihed  fecre- 
tion  of  urine,  without  any  pain  in  the 
bladder  or  urethra,  be  owing,  in  fome 
cafes,  to  a  fpafmodic  contraction  of  the 
ureters,  or  fecretory  veffeis  of  tTie  kid* 
neys? 

I  have  had  patients,  who,  after  a  long 
fever,  or  fome  other  tedious  and  weakening 
diflemper,  made  a  great  quantity  of  pale 
water  in  the  night,  but  in  the  day- time 
r,o  more,  fomxCtimes  lefs,  than  ufual,  and 
H2  of 


244      OF  THE  MOST  REMAKKABLE 

of  a  natural  colour.      This  increafed  fe-^ 
cretion  did   not    generally  begin   at   any 
certain  hour  in  the  evening,  but  foon  af- 
ter going  to  bed  ;    and  in   the  morningj* 
after  getting  up,  it  gradually  abated.    Nay, 
a  sen  tie  man  who  had  been  in   ufe,    for 
ten  or  twelve  days,   to  make  from  four  to 
fix  Englifh  pints   of    pale   water    in    the 
night,    finding  himfclf   greatly  weakened 
thereby,  rcfolved  to  try  what  getting  out 
of  bed  would  do;  and  accordingly,  at  two 
in  the  morning,  after  having   that  night 
pafled  about  a  pint  and  a  half  of  urine  ac 
twice,  he  arofe  and  fat  up  for  two  hours, 
and  then  was  able  to  make  but  about  half 
a  gill.     After  this  he  went  to  bed  again, 
and,  in  two  hours  more,  made  near  three 
quarters  of  a  pint  of  pale  water.      This 
experiment  was  repeated  fome  nights  after 
with  the  fame  event. 

TfiosE  who  are  troubled  with  this  flux 
of  limpid  urine  in  the  night,  find  them- 
felves  flronger,  cooler,  and  in  the  befl  fpi- 
rits  in   the  evening,  at  which  time  tlieir 

pullc 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.         24^ 

pulfc  is  flowefl ;  but  foon  after  going  to 
bed,  their  pulfe  becomes  qaicker,  they  grow 
warmer,  and  begin  to  make  water  in  great 
quantity:  they  are  not  refreftied  with  fleep^ 
and,  in  the  morning,  they  feel  thirlly  and 
languid,  and  have  a  quicker  pulfe  than  at 
other  times. 

Th  I  s  excefs  of  pale  urine,  though  mofl 
incident  to  people  of  weak  nerves;  yet,  to 
diftinguifh  it  from  the  true  hy{\:enc  proflu- 
vium,  may  be  called   hed:ical  or  colliqua- 
tive, as  coming  in  the  place  of  thofe  night- 
fweats,  which  often  exhaufl  fuch  as  have 
had  their  velTels  weakened,  and  their  blood 
impoveriflied  by  fome  difeafe.     When  the 
vefTels  of  the  kidneys  are  relaxed,  and  yield 
too  eafily,   or  are  too  irritable,  the  fever 
raifed  in  the  night,  by  the  heat  of  the  bed, 
will  naturally  throw  off  the   humour  by 
them,  rather  than  by  the  pores  of  the  fkin : 
but,  in  the  day-time,  the  whole  body,  and 
the  loins  in  particular,   being  kept  cooler, 
the  blood  will  be  lefs  rarefied,     and  will 
move  with  lefs  force ;   whence  the  dilata- 
tion, 


t46      OF  tHE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

tion,  or  increafed  alternate  motion  of  thd 
tenal  veflels  will  abate,  and  confequently 
the  urine  will  be  leparated  in  much  lefs 
quantity. 

An  increafed  fecretion  of  the  faliva,  is^ 
like  the  copious  limpid  urine,  owing  to  ait 
tmufual  motion  of  thevefTels  of  thefalivary 
glands:  And  it  may  be  obferved,  that  in 
patients  whofe  falivary  veifels  are  weakefk 
and  mod  irritable,  a  falivacion  will  oftener 
happen,  while,  in  thofe  whofe  kidneys  are 
mod  apt  to  be  afleded  by  any  diforder  in 
the  body,  a  flux  of  pale  water  will  be  mors 
frequent* 

IX.  A  nervous  atrophy. 

A  marafmuSy  or  feniible  wafting  of  th<^ 
body,  not  attended  with  fweatings,  any 
confiderable  increafe  of  the  excretions  by 
urine  or  flool,  a  quick  pulfe  or  feverifh 
heat,  may  deferve  the  name  of  nervous: 
not  that  I  would  be  thought  by  this  to  in- 
linuate,  that  fuch  a  difeafe  proceeds  from 
a  diminillied  fecretion  of  the  animal  fpirits, 

or 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.        247 

or  from  their  vitiated  quality.  The  fluid 
of  the  nerves  does  not  feem  to  be  than 
mitritioiis  jidcc,  by  means  of  which  the  daily 
walle  of  the  body  is  repaired*;  and  we 
know  too  little  of  its  properties,  to  make  it 
the  foundation  of  our  reafoning  on  the  na*- 
rure  or  cure  of  difeafes.  i3ut  this  kind  of 
atrophy,  thoui^h  not  perhaps  owing  ta 
any  fault  in  thefj^irits,  or  even  in  the  brain 
or  nervous  fyftem  in  general,  may  yet  de- 
ferve  the  name  of  nervous,  as  it  feems- 
frequently  to  proceed  from  an  unnatural 
or  morbid  flate  of  th^  nerves  of  the  ilo^ 
piach  and  inteftines. 

The  influence  of  the  ftomach  in  the 
animal  oeconomy  is  greater  than  is  per- 
haps generally  imagined :  It  not  only  con^ 
tributes  to  the  digeilion  of  the  aliment, 
but  the  whole  fyftem  is  either  invigorated, 
or  affeded  with  a  languor,  according  to  the 
different  difpofltion  of  its  nerves.  By  pro- 
per food  the  nerves  of  the  llomach  are 
gratefully  ftimuiated,  and  the  whole  body 

is 

*  See  above,  chap,  i.  No.  9, 


S48      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLl^ 

is  thence  enlivened  and  flrengthened ;  fci 
that,  beiides  its  ufe  for  nutrition,  food  in 
the  ftomach  becomes,  on  account  of  its 
Jiimiihts,  altogether  neceiTary  in  fome  de- 
licate nervous  people,  for  keeping  np  the 
ftrength  of  the  body,  and  the  due  exercife 
of  all  its  functions :  and  hence  it  is,  that 
fpch  perfons  become  ofcen  faintilh  as  foon 
as  the  greateil:  part  of  the  food  has  pafTed 
into  the  inteftines;  that  (trong  broths, 
though  they  may  afford  as  much,  or  more 
riouriiliment  than  fome  kinds  of  fohd  meat, 
yet  do  not  f^tisfy  the  flomach,  at  lead  for 
any  confiderable  time,  or  enable  us  to  en- 
dure much  labour ;  and  that,  according 
lo  the  different  difpofition  of  the  nerves  of 
the  flomach,  different  aliments  are  mofh 
grateful  to  it^  ar^d  rnoil  inyigorating  to  the 
body. 

We  know,  that  an  unnatural  ftate  of 
the  nerves  of  the  fl:omach  may  either  pro-^ 
duce  a  craving  or  an  averiion  to  food;  that 
low  fpirits  and  melancholy  often  proceed 
from  that  caufe ;  nor  is  it  to  be  doubted, 

thaE 


NERVOUS    SYMPTOMS.        249 

that  when  the  nerves  of  the  ftomach  are, 
from  certain  caufes,  afFedled  in  a  manner 
fomcwhat  different,  an  indiiference  for  food, 
a  weak  digeflion,  a  languor  and  coldnefs, 
a  flow  pulfe,  and  wafting,  may  be  the  con- 
fequences  *. 

The  morbid  afFedlion  of  the  nerves  of 
the  ftomach,  by  fympathy,  impairs  the 
vigour  and  energy  of  the  whole  fyftem ; 
whence  the  motion  of  the  heart  and  cir- 
culation of  the  blood  will  become  flower 
and  more  languid,  the  body  will  be  depri- 
ved of  its  natural  heat,  and  be  afFe^fted  with 
I  i  a 

*  Long  continued  gtief,  and  other  paffions,  too  great 
application  of  mind,  a  gouty  humour,  or  the  morbid 
matter  of  fome  difeafe  imperfedlly  cured,  remaining  in 
the  body,  and  thrown  upon  the  ftomach,  as  well  as  o- 
ther  caufes,  may  bring  on  fuch  a  ({ate  of  the  nerves  of 
that  organ,  efpecially  in  thofe  whofe  nervous  fyftem  and 
alimentary  canal  are  naturally  too  delicate  and  fenfible. 
i  had  fome  time  lince  a  patient  fubjed  to  fits  of  the  gout 
at  the  dlftance  of  feveral  years,  who,  after  labouring 
under  fuch  an  atrophy  as  I  am  aoW  treating  of,  for  eight 
or  ten  months,  and  ufing  various  medicines  with  no  great 
benefit,  was  cured  by  a  return  of  the  gout  to  one  of  his 
great  toes. 


250       OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

a  general  weaknefs.  The  patient  decays' 
daily,  though  exhanlled  by  no  excellive 
evacuations,  becaufe  his  food  is  not  con- 
verted into  good  ehyle;  and  the  nutri- 
tious fluid  in  the  blood,  either  does  not  poP 
fefs  its  ufual  properties,  or,  on  account  of 
the  languid  manner  in  which  all  the  ope- 
rations of  the  body  go  on,  is  not  applied 
to  the  feveral  parts,  in  fach  a  way  as  to  re- 
pair the  wafte  they  daily  fuiFer.  Furtherjr 
the  watching  or  want  of  refrefhing  reft, 
and  low  fpirits  or  melancholy,  which  ge- 
nerally accompany  this  difeafe,  may  con- 
tribute to  prevent  the  proper  nutrition  of 
the  body. 

This  atrophy  is  generally  attended 
with  great  coftivenefs,  and  fometimes  with 
belchings,  and  other  figns  of  flatulence  in 
the  alimentary  canal.  In  fome  cafes,  the 
urine  does  not  exceed  the  natural  quantity, 
there  is  no  third,  and  the  tongue  is  clean. 
In  others,  the  difcharge  by  urine  comes 
at  length  to  be  confiderably  increafed,  a 

drought 


NERVOUS   SYMPTOMS.        251 

:drought  prevails,   and  the  patient   decays 
fader. 

The  piilfe  often  differs  little  from  what 
it  is  in  health,  except  that  it  beats  with 
Jefs  force.  In  fome,  it  has  a  fmall  degree 
ofquicknefs;  and  in  others,  it  becomes  a 
good  deal  flower  than  is  natural. 

After  a  nervous  atrophy  has  continued 
long,  and  reduced  the  patient  much,  ob- 
ftructions  fometimes  begin  to  be  formed 
in  the  lungs,  either  from  the  languid  cir- 
culation, or  the  fault  of  the  fluids ;  a  dry 
cough  comes  on,  the  pulfe  grows  quick, 
and  ahedic  fever  is  kindled,  which,  toge- 
ther with  the  original  difeafe  in  the  fl:o- 
mach,  increafes  the  decay,  and  haflens  the 
patient's  fate. 

Sometimes  this  difeafe,  after  it  has 
brought  the  patient  very  low,  takes  a  fud- 
den  turn,  without  any  apparent  caufe. 
The  patient,  who  had  little  inclination  to 
eat,  has  an  uncommon  craving  and  quick 
digeftion,  even  of  foUd  food,  which  ufed 
fo  lie  remarkably  heavy  on  his  flomach  : 
I  i  2  his 


ZS2      OF  THE  MOST  R£M.iRSABLE 

his  pulfe  bccoraes  quicker  than  natural,  and 
his  ikin  warm ;  his  veins,  which  were  con- 
ira<fled,  appear  fwelled  with  blood;  from 
being  low  fpirited,  he  becomes  more  chear- 
fhl,  and  daily  grows  ibonger  and  plum- 
per * :  all  which  effects  feem  to  proceed, . 
in  a  great  mcafure,  if  not  folcly,  from  fome 
change  in  the  nerves  of  the  ftomach  and 
bowels. 

In  other  caies,  this  diforder  goes  off  as 
llowly  as  it  came  on,  and  the  patient  does 
Bot  recover  fully  till  after  a  long  time. 

X.  A  nervous  or  ipafmodic  aJU^ma, 
EviRY  diJDCulcy  of  breathing,  which 
is  owing  to  a  fpafm  of  the  bronchial  vef- 
fds,  or  veiicles  of  the  lungs,  may,  in  a 
large  fenfe,  be  called  a  nervous  or  fpafmo- 
dic  Lijlkma;  but  as  in  mofl  afthmatic  ail- 
ments, where  the  lungs  are  obilruiteJ,  or 
loaded  with  phlegm,  there  is  generally 
more  or  leis  of  a  fpalinodic  contraction  ex- 
cited 

*  See  a  cafe  of  this  kiri.  ir  i  ;  :'^g  i^  ct  14  yeari 
ei  age,  delcribei  under  No.  15.  of  this  chaptsr. 


NERVOUS   SYMPTOMS.        253 

cited  in  the  air-velTels  of  the  lungs ;  I  ihould 
chufe  to  define  a  fpafmodic  afthma  to  be 
that  fpecies  of  difficult  breathing,  which 
is  not  owing  to  any  obftruction  in  the 
lungs,  or  load  of  humours  comprefling 
their  velTels,  but  to  an  uncommon  con- 
traction of  iheir  bronchial  tubes  and  ve» 
ficles,  whereby  they  do  not  yield,  as  ufual, 
to  the  preJGTure  of  the  air  in  infpiration. 

The  predifpofing  caufe  of  this  difeafe, 
Lz  a  particular  weaknefs  and  delicacy,  or 
fenfibihty  of  the  pulmonary  veffels  and 
r.erves,  which  renders  the  mufculo-tendi- 
neous  membrane,  connecting  the  annular 
cartilages  of  the  bronchia ^  liable  to  be  af- 
fected with  a  fpafmodic  contra'ftion  from 
fuch  occaiional  caufes,  as  in  a  found  (late 
of  the  lungs  v/ould  not  produce  this  effect. 

These  caufes  may  be  reduced  to  the 
following. 


I.  Any  acrid  or  noxious  matter  in  the 
blood,  whether  of  the  arthritic,  rheuma- 


tic, 


-54      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

tic,   or  forae  other  kind,   thrown  on  th^ 
lungs,  and  irritating  their  nerves. 

As  a  proof  of  this,  I  have  known  a  per- 
fon,  afFeaed  with  a  fit  of  the  fpafmodic 
njlhmay  fuddenly  relieved  by  a  gouty  pain 
in  his  great  toe,  and  become  worfe  after  a 
day  or  two^  when  this  pain  went  off. 

2.  Sympathy  with  the  flomach. 
When  the  nerves  of  this  organ  are  difagree^ 
ably  affected  by  wind,  phlegm,  or  crudi- 
ties, the  lungs,  if  they  are  more  than  ufual- 
ly  irritable,  often  fuffer  by  fympathy,  and 
are  feized  with  a  fpafm.  Further,  when, 
the  flomach  is  much  diflended  by  wind, 
it  may,  by  preffing  upoi;  the  diaphragm^ 
Increafe  an  aithmatic  fit. 

3.  As  hyfteric  fits  and  fpafmodic  cho- 
lies  are  often  occafioned  by  violent  affec- 
tions of  the  mind;  fo  I  have  known  fud- 
dcn  fear  bring  on  an  aflhmatic  paroxyfnij, 
in  a  woman  who  was  fubjed:  to  frequent 
attacks  of  this  difeafe. 

4.  A 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.        2$^ 

4.  A  fudden  diminution  of  the  perfpi- 
ration  or  contraiflion  of  the  cutaneous  vcf- 
fcls  from  cold,  may,  by  turning  the  hu- 
mours in  too  great  quantity  upon  the  lungs, 
occafion  a  fit.  The  cold  afFediing  the  cu- 
taneous nerves,  may  alfo,  by  fympathy, 
produce  fome  kind  of  fpafm  in  the  air-vef- 
fels  of  the  lungs. 

5.  Too  great  lofs  of  blood  will,  in  thofe 
who  have  very  delicate  or  irritable  lungs, 
be  fometimes  apt  to  produce  aflhmaiic  fits, 
rather  than  other  nervous  fymptoms  *. 

6.  Some  fixt  obflrud:ion  in  the  lung-s, 
which,  at  all  times,  makes  the  breathing 
fomewhat  lefs  free  than  in  perfedl  health, 
efpecially  if  any  confiderable  exercife  is 
ufed,  and  which,  when  fome  of  the  above- 
mentioned  caufes  concur,  produces  an  afth- 
matic  fit,  which,  indeed,  flridlly  fpeaking, 
is  of  the  mixt  kind.     And  here  it  may  be 

proper 

*  See  an  inftance  of  this  in  Dr  Barry's  treatlfe  on  the 
three  digeftions  and  difeharges  of  the  human  body, 
p.  294. 


25^      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

.proper  to  obferve,  that  among  the  many 
patients  liable  to  periodical  fits  of  the 
affhma,  there  are  but  very  few  who  have 
not  fome  obflrud:ion,  or  other  obflacle 
tonflantly  remaining  in  their  lungs;  (o 
that  a  true  nervous  or  fpafmodic  afthmct, 
Ivithout  any  other  fatilt  in  the  lungs  than 
an  uncommon  delicacy  or  irritability  of 
their  nerves,  is  a  difeafe  which  we  feldoni 
meet  with ;  and,  on  this  aceotmt,  I  have 
fubjoined  the  following  ca:fe« 

A  girl,  healthful,  well  made,  a;nd  of  i. 
feemingly  good  conftitutibn,  began,  at  the 
age  of  feven  years,  to  complain  of  a  pain 
at  the  lower  faft  of  the  fternum.  This 
pain,  which  returned  after  no  certain  in- 
tervals, became  gradually  more  fevere  du- 
ring the  fpace  of  near  two  years ;  after 
which,  in  place  of  it,  the  patient  began  to 
be  affected,  at  times,  with  a  diificulty  of 
breathing,  which  returned  frequently,  with- 
out obferving  any  certain  periods;  as  a 
week,  a  fortnight,  or  a  month,  would 
fometimes  interveen  between  the  fits.     She 

was 


NERVOUS    SYMPTOMS.        25^ 

was  generally  feized  with  the  fits  all  at 
once  ;  and  after  breathing  with  the  utmoft 
difficLiky  for  half  an  hour^  fometinies  more 
dian  an  honr,  ihe  would,  of  a  fudden,  be- 
come pcrfe(5liy  well,  and  fall  a  dancing  im^ 
mediately  after  with  her  companions.  Ic 
was  obfervable,  that  this  girl  had  no  com- 
plaint of  her  flomach,  no  cough,  nor  other 
apparent  fault  in  her  lungs  j  nor  did  ilie 
iifually  expectorate  phlegm  when  the  fit 
went  off;  and,  except  in  time  of  the  allh- 
niatic  paroxyfm,  breathed  vvith  the  fame 
eafe  as  any  perfon  in  pe-feift  health-  Af* 
ter  having  been  fubje<5t  to  ret  urns  of  this 
fpafmodic  aftbma  for  above  two  years,  fhe 
died  of  a  continued  fever,  in  which  her 
head  was  greatly  affected^ 

Was  this  diftemper  owing  to  foiite  mor-» 
bid  matter  in  the  blood,  which  firll  affect-* 
ed  the  parts  abotit  the  Jlernum,  or,  per- 
haps,  the  medinjtinum,  with  a  painful  fen- 
fation,  and  afterwards  faUing  on  the  lungs,, 
and  irritating  their  nerves,  occadbned  a. 
f^-^hVi^  or  true  cranip  of  their  aereal  vef- 
ILk  feis  I 


258      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

fels  ?  I  fhall  only  add,  that  fits  of  the  fpaf- 
modic  aflhma  are  fometimes  preceded  by  a 
great  difcharge  of  pale  urine ;  fo  that  the 
patients  can  foretbl  tliem  a  day  or  two  be- 
fore they  come  on. 

XI.  A  nervous  cough. 

A  cough  may  be  called  nerijotu,  when  it 
does  not  proceed  from  any  phlegm,  ob- 
ftru^tion  or  otlier  irri taring  caufe  in  the 
lungs  themfelves,  bat  from  fympathy  with 
fome  other  pirt  whofe  nerves  arc  difagree- 
ably  afFed-ed.  Of  this  kind  is  that  dry- 
cough  which  is  occaiioned  by  worms,  or 
by  teething  in  children.  A  cough  with 
very  unufual  fymptoms,  has  alfo  been  ow- 
ing to  water  in  the  pericardhiniy  and  other 
diforders  of  the  heart,  when  the  lungs 
themfelves  appeared  to  be  found.  But,  in- 
flead  of  making  any  further  obfervarions 
on  this  fubje6l,  I  fliall  give  a  particular 
account  of  a  very  extraordinary  cough  of 
the  truly  nervous  or  fympathetic  kind. 

A 


NERVOUS    SYMPTOMS.        259 

A  girl  aged  eight,  in  January  1760,  was 
feized  with  a  dry  cough,  which  continued 
for  two  or  three  months,  notwithftanding 
feveral  remedies  that  were  ufed  to  remove 
it.  In  October  followino;  the  cou2;h  return* 
ed  with  as  much  violence  as  before,  and 
with  this  difference  only,  that  it  was  rather 
more  fevere  when  fhe  fat  up  than  when  flie 
lay  in  bed.  Alt  ho*  her  fkin  was  cool,  her 
pulfe  fcarce  quicker  than  ufaal,  fomc  blood 
was  taken  away,  and  a  vomit  was  given, 
but  without  any  good  effed.  Upon  a  fu- 
fpicion  that  this  cough  might  be  owing  to 
worms  in  the  flomach  or  intcflines,  Ihe 
took  fome  powder  of  tin,  and  two  dofes  of 
rhubarb  with  calomel.  The  cough  ceafed 
in  eight  or  ten  days  after  ufing  thefe  me- 
dicines, altho'  no  worms  were  brouo;ht  a- 
v;ay  by  them. 

Towards  the  end  of  December  1760, 
this  girl,  after  having  been  in  good  health 
for  fix  or  feven  weeks,  was  again  feized 
with  a  dry  cough,  for  which  fhe  was  twice 
blooded  without  any  advantage;  but  fhe 
K  k  2  found 


t6o      OF  THE   MOST  REMARKABLE 

found  fouie  relief,  for  a  few  days,  by  a  bli^ 
iter  applied  to  her  back. 

About  |:he  middle  of  January,  the 
cough  became  more  conflant  and  fevere 
when  flie  fat  up,  but  never  affected  her  when 
fhe  lay  in  bed.  On  the  third  of  February 
when  I  was  called,  I  found  the  following 
ijmptoms, 

While  flie  lay  in  bed,  fhe  had  no 
cough,  no  difficulty  in  breathing,  nor  any 
pain  or  uneafmefs  in  her  breafi: ;  her  fl^iii 
was  cool,  her  tongue  moifh  and  clean,  her 
sppetite  good  \  and  fhe  was  as  chearful  as 
lafuaL  Her  pulfe  bpat  then  about  90  times 
in  a  minute;  it  was  of  a  moderate  fhrength, 
but  a  little  irregular,  When  fhe  fat  up  in 
bed,  her  pulfe  became  quicker  by  ten  or 
twelve  ftrokes  in  a  minute,  but  fbe  flill 
was  free  from  the  cough  and  every  other 
complaint  ;  and  in  this  pofture  file  conti- 
nued moil  part  of  the  day.  When  (hs, 
flood  cither  on  the  bed,  or  on  the  floor, 
or  ^vhen  flie  iat  on  the  bedfide  or  on  a 
chaitg  file  was  immediately  leized  with  thp 

coiigh^ 


NERVOUS   SYMPTOMS.        z6i 

coush,  wliicli  continued  without  intermif- 
iion,  till  file  lay  down  again.  The  cough 
was  dry  and  convulilve,  for  ihe  could  not 
reftrain  it  for  one  moment ;  it  was  attend- 
ed with  a  pain  in  the  fternum,  about  an 
inch  or  more  above  the  xiphoid  cartilage, 
which  pain  fhe  never  felt  in  any  degree 
when  flie  lay  down  or  fat  up  in  bed. 

When  f|iG  itood  on  her  ftti,  her  pulfe 
became  very  fmajl  and  irregular,  and  beat 
at  the  rate  of  200  times  in  a  minute. 

At  different  times,  in  the  months  of 
February  and  March,  I  frequently  repeated 
the  following  experiments  with  a  view  to 
difcover  more  of  the  nature  and  caufe  of 
this  uncommon  cough. 

1.  When  fhe  lay  on  her  back,  acrofs 
the  bed,  with  her  legs  hanging  over  it,  m.Q 
was  free  from  the  cough,  but  was  inime- 
^liately  troubled  with  it  v^Ahen  fhe  fat  up. 

2.  Wh  en  file  fat  up  in  the  bed,  or  fat 
pn  the  floor,  with  her  thighs  and  legs  in  a 

horizontal 


2^2      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABXE 

horizontal  poflure,  fhe  did  not  cough  at 
all. 

3.  When  fhe  fat  in  the  bed,  and  drew 
op  both  her  legs  as  clofe  as  fhe  could  to 
her  thighs,  fhe  was  then  attacked  with 
the  cough,  and  with  the  pain  in  her  breafl* 

4.  When  fhe  fat  in  her  bed  on  the 
boUter  and  pillow,  with  her  thighs  and 
legs  inclining  a  little  downwards,  fhe  had 
po  cough, 

5.  When  flie  kneeled  down,  either  on 
the  floor  or  in  the  bed,  with  her  body  e- 
ledt,  fhe  was  immediately  feized  with  the 
cough,  and  the  pain  in  her  breail, 

6*  When  fhe  lay  on  her  back,  with 
her  head  and  fhoulders  as  low,  or  a  little 
lower  than  her  body,  fhe  coughed  without 
intermifhon^  as  flie  did  alfo  in  an  ere^k 
poftnre. 

7.  In 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.        26^ 

7.  In  a  prone  pofture,  with  her  head 
as  low,  or  lower  than  her  body,  fhe  cough- 
ed incefTantly,  and  was  like  to  be  fufFoca- 
ted ;  but  as  foon  as  her  face  was  a  little 
raifed  and  fupported  on  the  bolfler  or  pil- 
low,  the  cough  ceafed. 

The  cough,  the  pain  in  her  brcafl, 
and  fenfe  of  fulFocation,  were  greater,  and 
and  her  pulfe  was  fmaller,  quicker,  and 
more  irregular,  when  her  head  was  low, 
than  when  ihe  flood  upright;  but  lying 
low  on  her  face  feemed  to  give  her  ftill 
greater  imeafuiefs  than  lying  low  on  her 
back. 

8.  She  lay  on  either  fide  with  cafe,  and 
without  coughing,  unlcfs  when  her  head 
was  as  low  or  lower  than  her  body. 

9.  When  fhe  fat  or  flood  with  her  feet 
in  warm  water,  fhe  had  neither  any  diffi- 
culty in  breathing,  nor  inclination  to  cough, 
nor  pain  in  her  breafl ;  but  fhe  coughed 

without 


2^4      ^^  THE   MOST  REMARKABLE 

without  intermiflion,  the  moment  her  feet 
were  taken  out  of  the  water. 

When  fhefat  with  her  feet  in  the  warm 
water,  her  pulfe  beat  120  tim.es  in  a  mi- 
nute ;  and,  when  fiianding  in  it^  between 
130  and  140  times*  When  fhe  ftept  out 
of  the  water,  and  flood  on  the  floor,  the 
cough  initantly  returned,  and  her  pulfe  rofe" 
to  200  in  a  minute* 

10.  When  the  heat  of  the  water  was 
reduced  (by  pouring  fome  cold  water  fiow-^ 
ly  into  it)  from  above  100  degrees  of  Fa- 
renheit's  fcale,  to  about  70,  the  cough  re- 
turned with  its  ufual  violence.;  and  akho' 
fhe  fat  in  a  chair,  her  pulfe  rofe  from  about 
120  to  near  T90,  and  became  fmall  and 
irregular.  After  this,  upon  gradually  add- 
ing: boiling;  water,  fo  as  to  raife  the  heaE 
of  the  bath  to  88  or  90  degrees,  the  cough 
flopt,  and  her  pulfe  became  fuller,  much 
flower  and  more  regular, 

21.  WHE^: 


NERVOUS   SYMPTOMS,        26$ 

il.  When  flie  coughed  the  nioft  voi- 
lently,  if  the  foles  of  her  feet  were  only- 
made  to  touch  the  warm  water,  fhe  grew 
immediately  eafy,  and  continued  fo  altho* 
her  feet  were  not  wholely  immerfcd. 

12.  When  one  of  her  feet  was  taken 
6ut  of  the  bath,  the  cough  was  not  pre- 
vented, by  increafing  the  quantity  of  warm 
water,  fo  as  to  make  it  not  only  cover  the 
other  foot,  but  alfo  a  good  part  of  the 
kg. 

13.  After  her  feet  had  been,  for  fome 
minutes,  in  water  heated  to  about  114  de- 
grees, one  of  them  was  taken  out  of  it, 
and  that  inftant  the  cough  returned  with 
its  ufual  violence ;  notwithftanding  that 
foot  and  ancle  continued,  for  fome  time, 
to  be  warmer  than  the  body  naturally  is, 
or  than  was  neceffary  to  prevent  coughing 
upon  putting  the  foot  into  the  warm  water. 

L  1  14.  When 


z66      OF  THE   MOST   REMARKABLE 

14.  When  one  of  her  legs  was  taken 
out  of  the  water  (warmed  to  about  96 
degrees)  and  wrapt  in  a  dry  or  wet  piece 
of  flannel  whnfe  heat  was  at  leafl  it 4. de- 
grees, file  coughed  as  ufual ;  but  was  relie- 
ved as  foon  as  her  foot  was  again  put  into 
the  warm  water, 

I  5.  When  her  feet  were  covered  with 
dry  land,  heated  to  above  no  degrees, 
fhe  coughed  with  the  fame  violence  fhe 
ufed  to  do  on  the  floor.  Nor  was  the 
cough,  either  when  fhe  fat  or  flood,  pre- 
vented by  the  flannel  wrung  out  of  hot  wa- 
ter, and  applied  round  her  feet  and  legs; 
altho'  an  equal  or  a  greater  degree  of  heat, 
was-,  by  this  means,  communicated  to  thcfe 
parts,  than  by  the  fediliivimn, 

16.  When  her  hands  were  dipt  in  warm 
water,  fhe  continued  as  free  from  the 
cough,  as  when  her  feet  were  bathed.  But 
a  bottle  filled  with  hot  water  and  held  be- 
tween her  hands,   had  no  fuch  effcd. 

17.  When 


NERVOUS   SYMPTOMS.        2^7 

17.  When  one  of  her  feet  was  taken 
out  of  the  bath,  altho'  the  hand  of  that 
or  the  other  fide  was  put  into  water  of  an 
equal  or  a  greater  heat,  fhe  coughed  with- 
out intermiflion  ;  but  as  foon  as  both  hands 
were  dipt  in  the  warm  water,  flie  coughed 
no  more. 

18.  I  made  her  breathe  over  the  flream 
of  hot  water,  when  one  of  her  feet  was 
taken  out  of  the  pediluvimn  ;  but  this  did 
pot  prevent  the  cough. 

19.  When  fhe  lay  with  her  head  as  low 
or  lower  than  her  body,  (No.  6.  and  7.), 
warm  water  then  applied  to  her  hands  01 
feet  had  no  efFed:  in  preventing  or  lefTen 
ing  the  cough  ;  but  in  every  other  poflure 
jt  kept  her  quite  eafy. 

20.  If  one  or  both  hands  were  dipt  in 
cold  water,  fhe  was  prefentjy  feized  with 
the  cough,  and  with  the  pain  in  her  bread, 
whether  fhe  lay  in  bed  or  fat  with  her  feet 

L  1  2  in 


.5.6S      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

in  warm  water.  The  fame  thing  happened 
when  her  palms  were  applied  to  a  quart 
bottle  of  cold  water  ;  with  this  difference, 
that  the  cold  water  inflantly  raifed  h^r 
cough ;  whereas  the  cold  bottle  took  two 
Qr  three  feconds  before  it  could  produce 
that  effe6t.  The  cough  was  ^Ifo  raifed  by 
applying  a  bottle  full  of  cold  water  to  her 
ftomach. 

21.  When  fhe  lay  with  her  legs  hang- 
ing over  the  bed-fide,  (No  i.),  fhe  began 
to  cough  as  foon  as  the  foles  of  her  feet 
tpuch^d  fome  cold  water. 

22.  The  putting  her  hands  in  cold  wa- 
ter, when  file  lay  in  bed,  not  only  excited 
the  cough,  but  raifed  her  pulfe  from  about 
90  to  above  180  flrokes  in  a  minute. 

These  experiments  were  often  repeated 
between  the  3d  of  February  and  the  8th 
of  March  ;  but  fome  time  after  this,  I 
found  the  following  difference  with  refpecH: 
tp  fome  of  the  above  mentioned  fymptomso 

23.  On 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.        2<5p 

23.  On  the  ifl  and4tli  of  April,  when 
ihe  lay  acrofs  the  bed  with  her  head  fup- 
ported  by  a  pillow,  and  her  legs  hanging 
over,  (No  r.),  ihe  was  immediately  attack* 
ed  with  the  cough,  and  her  pulfe,  became 
fo  fmall  and  quick,  that  I  could  not  exa»^^ 
]j  count  it ;  but  I  was  fure  it  did'not  beat 
lels  than  18  or  20  times  in  five  feconds: 
(No  9.).  Upon  raifing  her  legs,  fo  as  to 
bring  them  to  a  horizontal  pofture,  the 
cough  immediately  ceafed,  and  her  paife 
in  a  minute  after  beat  only  ten  times  in 
five  feconds.  As  foon  as  her  legs  were  al* 
lowed  to  hang  down  again,  the  cough  re-' 
jturned  with  its  ufual  violence. 

24.  On  the  5th  April,  by  putting  one 
of  her  hands  into  cold  water  when  a-bed, 
Ihe  was  feized  with  the  cough,  and  her 
pulfe  became  very  fmall,  and  beat  at  leafl 
20  times  in  five  feconds.     (No.  22.). 

Of  late,  ihe  felt  more  uneafinefs  and 
pain  in  her  breaft,  with  a  greater  fenfe  of 
fufix)cation,  when  Ihe  was  feized  with  the 

cough^ 


^70      OF   THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

cough,  either  upon  a  change  of  poflure, 
or  puttmg  her  hands  into  cold  water. 
And  her  pulfc,  which  ufed  to  be  about  90 
when  fhe  lay  in  bed,  was  now  at  96  in  a 
minute  :  but  her  Ikin  continued  cool,  fh& 
had  no  thirft,  and  her  appetite  was  good. 
It  will  be  proper  to  add,  that  fhe  has 
had  no  expectoration  from  the  beginning. 

From  the  above  fadls  it  appears, 
(a)  That  an  ered:  pofture  does  not  ex- 
cite the  cough,  unlefs  either  the  legs  or 
ihighs  be  much  bent,  or  in  a  depending  or 
perpendicular  Situation.  See  No.  i.  2.  3* 
4.   and  5.  above, 

(h)  That  a  depending  fituation  of  the 
legs  did  not,  at  firil,  occafion  the  cough, 
unlefs  when  the  body  was  erevEt;  but  after- 
wards, that  pofture  of  the  legs  had  this 
effedt,  altho'  the  body  lay  horizontal :  No. 
I.  and  23,  Her  pulfe  alfo  became  a  great 
deal  quicker  in  this  attitude  than  it  had 
formerly  been,  either  when  fhe  fat  up,  or 
when  fhe  flood  ;  Vv'bence  it  would  feem  that 
the  caufe  of  the  difeafe  had  been  gradually 

increafing 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.        271 

fiicrealing  from  the  third  of  February  to 
the  ifl  of  April :   No.  9.  10.  23.  and  24. 

(c)  That  when  the  head  and  fhoulders 
are  as  low,  or  lower  than  the  boJy,  the 
cough  is  Hill  more  fevere  than  when  ilie 
flood  upright :  N6.  7. 

(i)  From  the  experi  ^^cnts  already  rela- 
ted, 1  was  ready  to  imagine  that  the 
cough  might  be  Owing  to  fome  tumour  or 
other  fixed  caufe  in  the  breail:,  which,  in 
certain  poflures,  fo  (Irongly  irritated  that 
part  of  the  lungs  which  it  touched,  as  to 
occafion  a  conftant  convulfive  motion  of 
the  mufcles  of  refpiratidn  ;  but  the  follow- 
ing experiment,  which  I  frequently  repeat- 
ed, foon  didipated  this  theoretical  illufion. 

When  my  patient  lay  in  bed,  upon  ex- 
tending one  of  her  feet,  fo  as  to  bring  it 
nearly  to  a  right  line  with  the  leg,  ihe 
coughed  violently,  and  her  puife  rofe  from 
94  in  a  minute  to  18  in  five  feconds:  but 
when  her  hands  were  either  ftrongly  bent 
inwards,  or  extended  outwards,   or  when 

ihe 


272       OF  THE  MOST   REMARKABLE 

iTie  pulled  flrongly  or  raifed  a  coiifiderabk 
weight  with  them,   no  coughing  enfued. 

When  the  cough  was  raifed  by  flretch- 
ing  her  feet,  warm  water  applied  to  heif 
hands  immediately  put  a  Hop  to  it. 

From  this  experiment,  as  well  as  No.  23.' 
it  may  appear,  that  this  extraordinary 
cough  did  not  depend  on  any  fixed  obflruc- 
tion  or  tumour  (vithin  the  thorax  irritatinec 
the  lungs  in  certain  poftures.  But,  in  this 
patient,  the  nerves  of  the  lungs  feem  to 
have  been  endued  with  an  uncommon  de- 
gree of  fenfibility,  and  to  have  had  a  pecu- 
liar fympathy  with  the  legs  and  feet; 
whence,  as  often  as  they  were  in  a  depend- 
ing fituation,  or  the  nerves,  tendons,  and 
ligaments  at  the  ancles  were  flretched,  an 
uneafy  fenfation  was  felt  in  the  lungs,  which 
occalioned  an  inceflant  cough.  Altho'  the 
fympathy  between  the  lungs  and  the  other 
parts  appears  to  have  been  lefs  remarkable, 
yet  the  fhock  which  their  nerves  fuiFered 
from  cold  water,  (No.  20.  and  21.),  was 
fo  flrongly  felt  in  the  lungs  as  to  occafion' 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.        273 

a  pain  in   the  breafl,   together  with  the 
cough; 

When  the  head  and  fhoulders  were  low- 
er than  the  body,  the  cough  was  more  fe- 
vcre  than  in  any  other  lituation,  probably, 
becaufe  in  that  pofture  the  refpiration  is 
lefs  free,  and  the  blood  pafTes  with  more 
difficulty  thro*  the  lungs. 

(e)  Warm  water  did  not,  by  its  pref- 
fure  on  the  nerves  or  blood-vefTels  of  the 
feet,  prevent  the  cough,  becaufe  it  was 
excited  by  cold  water,  whofe  weight  is 
greater.  Neither  did  the  pcdiluvium  pro- 
duce this  effedt  by  its  heat  alone,  or  even 
by  its  heat  and  moifture  ;  for  fand  or  wec 
Hannel  of  an  equal  or  greater  degree  of 
iieat  applied  to  the  feet  did  not  prevent 
the  coiigh.     N°  15.  and  16. 

(/)  As  the  effeds  of  the  pedikmiim 
cannot  be  deduced  from  its  rarefying  the 
blood  by  its  heat,  neither  can  they  be  ow^ 
ing  to  any  derivation  of  this  fluid  towards 
the  inferior  extremities ;  becaufe  warm 
tyater>  whether  it  was  applied  to  the  hands 
Mm  or 


2  74       OF  THE  MOST  REMARK ABLi^ 

or  the  feet,  bad  the  fame  influence  m 
fhopping  the  ^cough  ;  and  as  foon  as  the 
foles  of  her  feet  touched  the  water,  the 
cough  ceafed.     N°  i6.  and  ii, 

(g)  It  remains^  therefore,  that  warm 
water,  by  its  particular  a(ftlon  on  the  ex- 
tremities of  the  nerves  to  which  it  is  ap- 
plied, renders  the  whok  fyftem  lefs  fenli- 
ble  of  any  irritation  j  whence  the  too  de- 
licate lungs  are  lefs  afFe(5|ed  in  confec^^uence 
of  their  fympathy  with  the  inferior  ex^ 
tremities  (d).  However,,  when  the  pa- 
tient lay  with  her  head  lower  than  her 
body,  the  v/arm  water  did  not  then  pre- 
vent the  cough  ;  becaufe,  in  that  polition,^ 
the  irritation  in  the  lungs  was  too  great  to 
be  wholely  removed  by  the  anodyne  power 
of  the  warm  water  i  And,  for  the  fame  rea- 
fon,  it  feems  to  have  been,  that  the  pedilu- 
viitm  did  not  prevent  the  pain  within  her 
bread  and  the  cough,  which  were  raifed  by 
dipping  her  hands  in  cold  water*  N°-6- 
7,  19.  and  20. 

(/;)  It 


KERVOUS  SYMPTOMS^        1275 

(/;)  It  appears  from  the  above  experi- 
ments, that  warm  water  afFedls  our  nerves 
very  differently,  not  only  from  a  dry  hear, 
but  alfo  from  warm  fleams,  or  cloths  dipt 
jn  hot  water  j  a  fa(5t  which  feems  not  to 
have  been  known,  or,  at  leail,  not  fufh- 
ciently  attended  to,  and  which,  perhaps, 
may  afford  fome  ufeful  hints  in  practice^ 
N°  14.  and  15. 

(i)  Since  warm  water,  applied  to  the 
nerves,  has  a  fuperior  anodyne"  effect,  not 
only  to  fubflances  that  are  warm  and  dry, 
but  even  to  warm  fleams  or  vapour ;  it 
is  eafy  to  fee,  how  clyflers  of  warm  wa- 
ter may  give  relief  in  pains  of  the  bowels 
and  other  abdominal  vifiera,  although 
they  do  not  communicate  more  heat  to 
the  great  guts  than  they  poffeiTed  be- 
fore. 

(k)  Lastly,  the  eifec^ls  of  the  v/arni 
water  in  this  cafe  appear  the  more  re- 
markable, as  a  pijl  confifling  of  half  a 
grain  of  opium,  and  three  grains  of  afa 
fostida,  given  every  evening  and  morning, 
M  m  2  for 


276      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

for  feyeral  days,  had  not  the  leaft  efFe(fl 
in  either  preventing  or  leflening  the 
coughc 

!3etween  the  20th  of  January  and 
the  25th  of  March,  a  variety  of  remedies 
were  prefcribed  for  this  patient,  without 
any  advantage,  viz,  vomits,  blifters,  and 
an  ifliie  between  the  fhoulders,  the  barks 
powder  of  tin,  rhubarb  with  calomel,  pills 
of  opium  with,  afaffetida,  bolufeg  of  theria- 
ca  with  camphire  and  valerian. 

Towards  the  end  of  March,  I  put  her 
on  a  courfe  of  pills  made  of  the  extradl  of 
hemlock,  which  fhe  qon tinned  for  two 
Hionths.  About  |;he  middle  qf  May  fhe 
began  to  have  lefs  pain  in  her  breaft,  and 
lefs  fenfe  of  fuffocarion  and  cqughing, 
when  (he  fat  up  out  of  bed,  or  walked 
through  the  room.  Upon  the  22d  of 
May,  thefe  complaints  left  her  altogether  | 
and  on  the  28th  of  that  month,  thf 
cough  was  neither  raifed  by  (landing  nqr 
walking,  nor  when  her  head  was  laid  low- 
er than  her  body :  Alfo  cold  water  applied 


to 


NERVOUS    SYMPTOMS.        277 

to  her  hands,  had  now  no  elFedl  in  exciting 
the  cough  or  pain  in  her  bread.     On  the 
30th  of  May,  after  walking  a  little  abroad, 
the  cough  returned  for   a  day  or  two. 
Upon  the  3d  of  June,   after  having  made 
a  journey  of  about  ten  Englifh  miles  in  a. 
chaife,    the  cough  attacked  her  with  as 
gre^t  violence  as  ever.     Being  now  fully 
convinced,  that  this  ailment  was  not  ow- 
ing to  any  fixt  obftradion  in  the  lungs, 
but  to  an  uncommon  delicacy  or  fenfibi- 
lity  in  their  nerves^  I  ordered  for  her  pills 
of  extraift  of  gentian  and  limatura  martis^ 
which  fhe  took  twice  a-day  for  about  ten 
weeks.      Towards  the  end  of  July,  the 
violence  of  the  cough  began    to   abate, 
and,    for  the  iirfl  eight  or  ten  days  of 
Augufl,    file    was  feldom    troubled    with 
it.     On  the  10th  of  Auguft,  it  returned 
and  continued  to  the   2d  of  September, 
when  it  left  her  entirely.     In  the  mopth 
of  November  following,  fhe  had  a  flight 
attack  of  the  cough  and  uneafinefs  in  her 
breallj  which  iymptoms  returned,  for  one 


$78      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

day,  in  September  1762,  fince  which  fhe 
has  been  very  rarely  affedted  with  them  in 
any  confiderable  degree.  It  was  obferved^j 
that  the  returns  of  her  cough  after  Sep- 
tember 1761  were  always  owing  to  her 
xifing  exercife  too  freely. 

XII.  Palpitations  of  the  heart. 

I.  In  thofe  whofe  nervous  fyftem  is 
eafily  moved,  any  fudden  and  ftrong  paf- 
iion,  but  efpecially  fear,  will  produce  pal- 
pitations, and  an  irregular  motion  of  the 
heart,  by  rendering  it  more  irritable,  and, 
at  the  fame  time,  by  forcing  upon  it  the 
venous  blood  in  greater  (^^uantity  than 
ufual  *. 

2.  The 


•  Fear  or  furprife  feems  to  occafion  a  fudden  contrac- 
tion of  the  x\^t/smis  venojusy  and,  perhaps,  alfo  of  the 
adjoining  trunks  of  the  venie  cava',  for  I  frequently 
feel,  upon  any  furprife,  a  fudden  contraction  about  my 
heart,  while  the  veins  in  my  hands  and  fingers  feel  as  if 
they  were  diftenaed  with  blood. 


NERVOUS    SYMPTOMS,        27^ 

2.  The  regular  motion  of  the  heart 
tnay  be  alfo  dillurbed  by  its  fympathy 
with  the  flomach,  when  this  organ  is 
difordered,  by  wind,  noxious  humours, 
worms,  or  other  caufes;  by  the  fupprei^ 
lion  of  forae  habitual  evacuation ;  by 
fome  acrid  matter  in  the  blood  falling 
on  the  heart  itlelf  *  ;  by  inflammations  or 
obftrudlions  in  it  or  the  pericardium,  and 
by  pol'jpi  or  oflified  valves ;  for  thefe  caules 
either  render  the  heart  more  irritable  than 
in  a  natural  flate,  or  diflurb  the  free  mo- 
tion of  the  blood  through  the  great  vef- 
fels  adjoining  to  it, 

XIII.  The  pulfe  often  varying  in 
quicknefs,  ftrength,  and  fulncfs,  not  only 
in  different  patients,  but  }r  the  fame  at 
different  times. 

To  account  for  thefe  variations  of  the 

pulfe,    it   will    be   fufficient   to    mention, 

briefly, 

*  T  have  ofcea  feen  palpitations,  which,  as  far  as  I 
could  judge,  were  owing  folely  to  sm  arthritic  humour 
affe(5tiflg  the  heart. 


8d      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 


2«d 


briefly,  the  general  caufes  of  a  flrong  and 
weak,  hard  and  foft,  qukk  and  flow 
pulfe^ 

r.  As  a  flrong  pulfe  is  owing  to  th6 
ventricles  of  the  heart  expelling,  with  a 
conliderable  force,  that  quantity  of  blood 
which  they  carl  contain  ;  fo  a  weak  pulfd 
may  proceed  from  a  debility  of  the  ven- 
tricles, whence  a  proper  impulfe  is  not  gi- 
ven to  that  fluid  ;  or  it  may  be  owing  to  ^ 
too  great  irritability  whereby  the  ventricle^ 
contrad:  before  they  are  fufficiently  filled  ; 
or  to  the  want  of  a  free  circulation  of  the 
blood  through  the  lungs,  whence  it  re- 
turns in  too  fmall  a  ftream  to  the  heart, 

2.  A  hard  pulfe  is  owing  either  to  a 
too  great  denfity  of  the  blood,  or  to  an 
obftrudion,  or,  oftener,  a  fpafmodic  con-^ 
tradlion  of  the  vafcular  fyfliem,  particularly 
the   capillary  arteries^  in  which   cafe  the 

blood 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS,        281 

tlodd  paffing  with  difficulty  into  the  veinSj' 
the  arteries  muft  feel  tenfe  and  hard  *. 

This  pulfe  often  occurs  in  pleuriHes,' 
^nd  other  inflammatory  difeafes.  It  is  to 
be  obferved,  however,  that  in  inflamma- 
tions of  fuch  parts  as  are  very  fenlible^ 
and  have  a  remarkable  fympathy  with  the 
heartj  while  the  pain  produces  a  kind  of 
fpafmodic  contrad:ion  of  the  arterial  {j- 
ftem,  it  often  renders  the  heart  fo  irri- 
table, that,  though  the  pulfe  feels  fome- 
what  hard,  yet  it  is  very  fmall ;  becaufe 
the  ventricles  contradt  before  they  are 
fufficiently  filled  with  the  returning  blood  r 
And  this  is  frequently  the  cafe  in  inflam- 
nvations  of  the  flomach,  bowels,  and  ute- 
tiis  f.  On  the  other  handy  when  the 
N  n  lungs^ 

*  I  have  known  fome  people,  whofe  pulfe.  In  a  na- 
tural ftate,  was  harder  than  that  of  moft  others  in  the 
greateft  inflammatory  difeafes.  It  is  not  probable,  that, 
in  fuch,  the  coats  of  the  arterial  fyftem  were  more  tenfe; 
and  the  paflage  from  the  arteries  into  the  veins  ftraitei* 
than  ufual. 

•-  Pbyfiological  EfTays,  edit.  2.  p,  66\' 


282      OF   THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

lungs  or  liver  are  inflamed,  the  pulfe  is 
generally  fofter  and  fuller,  becaufe  thefe 
parts  have  but  little  painful  feehng ;  and 
therefore  the  vafcular  fyftem  is  feldom 
afFeded  with  any  fpafm.  It  is,  howeyerj, 
to  be  obferved,  that  an  inflammation  of 
the  external  membrane  of  the  liver  or 
lungs,  is  attended  with  confiderable  pain 
and  a  hard  pulfe,  as  in  a  pleurily. 

3.  A  too  foft  pulfe  is  owing  either  to  a 
laxity  of  the  whole  vefl^els,  and  particular- 
ly of  the  capillary  arteries,  or  to  a  thinnefs 
or  watery  ilate  of  the  blood,  which  pafles 
into  the  veins  and  fecretory  veffels  fo  eafily, 
that  it  can  exert  little  of  its  force  in  dila- 
ting the  arteries. 

.  A  foft  pulfe  is  more  common  than  a  hard 
one  in  thofe  patients  who  are  fubjed:  to 
nervous  or  hyfleric  complaints;  becaufe 
too  thin  blood  and  a  laxity  of  the  vafcular 
fyftem  are  more  common  in  fuch,  than 
denfe  blood  and  a  too  great  tenfion  or  fpaf- 

modic 


NERVOUS    SYMPTOMS.        2S3 

modic  contradion  of  the  arteries,   which 
occafion  a  hard  pulfe. 

4.  A  pulfe  quicker  than  natural  muft 
be  owino;  to  one  or  more  of  the  following 
caufes,  viz,  an  increafe  of  the  flimulatin^ 
quality  of  the  blood,  its  quicker  return  to 
the  heart,  or  a  greater  degree  of  fenfibi- 
lity,  and  confequently  a  greater  aptitude 
for  motion  in  the  heart. 

[a)  The  ftimulating  quaUty  of  the 
blood  is  increafed,  by  its  becoming  too 
denfe  or  fizy,  by  external  heat,  by  frefh 
chyle,  fuch  efpecially  as  is  prepared  from 
animal  food,  or  acrid  and  heating  aliments^ 
and  by  the  mixture  of  any  noxious  hu- 
mours bred  in  the  body,  or  of  malignant 
or  poifonous  effluvia  received  from  the  air. 

[h)  The  blood  is  made  to  return  in 
greater  quantity  to  the  heart  by  all  kinds 
of  exercife,  fudden  fear,  and  other  ftrong 
paffions.  ' 

N  n  2  {c)  The 


^^4      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

(c)  The  fenfibility,  and  confequently 
die  irritability  of  the  heart  *,  is  increafed 
by  various  afFedtions  of  the  mind,  or  what- 
ever increafes  the  general  fenfibility  of  the 
nervous  fyftem,  by  fympathy  with  the  o- 
ther  parrs,  efpecially  the  ftomach  and  in- 
teflines,  when  thefe  are  pained,  or  afFeiflcd 
with  a  difagreeable  fenfation,  by  an  arthri- 
tic, fcorbutic,  or  fome  other  morbid  hu- 
mour thrown  upon  the  heart ;  and  by  ob- 
ilru6tions  and  inflammations  in  any  part  of 
the  body,  but  efpecially  in  the  lungs,  p,en'' 
cardiunti  or  in  the  heart  itfelf, 

5.  A  pulfe  flower  than  natural  mufl:  bq 
owing  either  to  a  diminution  of  the  flimu- 
iating  quality  of  the  blood,  its  flower  re- 
turn to  the  heart,  or  a  lefs  degree  of  fenfi- 
bility, or  aptitude  for  motion  in  that  organ. 

W  The 

f  See  Pliyfiological  EfTays,  edit.  2.  p.  185.  &c.  and 
p.  252.  &c.;  and  Edinburgh  Phyfical  ElTays,  vol.  2.  art= 
20.  p.  310.  &c.  where  it  is  proved,  from  undoubted  ex- 
periments and  obfervations,  that  the  irritability  of  xh% 
muicles  of  animals  depends  on  their  fenfibility. 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.        285 

(a)  The  flimiilating  quality  of  the 
Jjlood  is  leirened  by  external  cold,  by  too 
weak  or  too  fpare  diet ;  and  by  the  blood 
^eing  not  of  a  proper  denfity,  but  poor  and 
watery,  from  a  weaknefs  of  the  vafcular 
fyfteni.  Hence,  after  great  evacuations, 
the  pulfe  not  only  often  becomes  low,  but 
very  flow.  I  have  feen,  in  patients  reco- 
yerino;  from  fevers,  or  in  women  ten  or 
twelve  days  after  child-bearing,  the  pulfe 
fall  under  fifty  (Irokes  in  a  minute,  and  rife 
.afterwards  to  abom  feventy,  its  natural 
ftandard,  when  the  patients  were  flronger, 
and  their  veHels  fullera  In  fuch  cafes,  be- 
iides  the  poornefs  of  the  blood,  and  the 
iwant  of  a  fufficienr  quantity  of  it,  a  gene- 
ral languor  and  debility  of  the  whole  body 
probably  concurred  to  make  the  pulfe  fo 
-very  flov/. 

(b)  The  return  of  the  blood  to  the 
he-^rt  becomes  flower  when  the  body  is  at 
reft,  efpecially  in  a  horizontal  pofture,  and 
y/hen  the  mind  is  not  difturbed  by  paflipns. 

(0  The 


285      OF  THE  MOST   REMARKABLE 

(c)  The  fenfibility  and  irritability  of 
the  heart  are  leiTened  by  age,  deep  fleep, 
and  every  medicine  or  diflemper  that  im- 
pairs the  general  fenfibility  of  the  brain 
and  nervous  fyflem,  as  opium,  a  lethargy, 
coma,  apoplexy,  i^'c.  Further,  as  the  heart 
is  often  rendered  more  irritable  by  its  coh- 
fent  with  the  flomach  and  bowels,  when 
thefe  parts  are  difagreeably  afFecHied  by  wind, 
the  arthritic  matter,  or  other  caufes;  fo  its 
irritability  feems,  in  fome  cafes,  to  be  lelfen- 
cd  by  its  fympathy  with  thefe  parts,  when 
their  nerves  are  affedled  in  a  different  man- 
ner *.  Thus,  worms  or  vifcid  phlegm  in 
the  flomach  and  bowels,  or  a  violent  pain 
of  the  fpafmodic  kind  affeding  them,  will 
fometimes  make  the  palfe  much  flower  than 
natural,  as  well  as  irregular:  and  long  con- 
tinued grief,  melancholy,  or  low  fpirits,  by 
impairing  the  vigour  of  the  whole  nervous 
as  well  as  vafcular  fyflem,  may  render  the 

pulfe 

*  "  Venje plerumque  fatis  fano  corpore,   fi. 

««  ftomachus  infirmus  eft,  fubeunt  et  auiefcunt,"    Celfus 
de  medicina,  lib-  3.  cap,  6. 


NERVOUS    SYMPTOMS.        287 

pulfe  flower  than  in  its  natural  (late,  un- 
lefs  fome  morbid  caufe  quickens  the  motion 
of  the  heart. 

From  what  has  been  faid  of  the  caufes 
of  the  quicknefs,  flownefs,  flrength,  and 
fulnefs  of  the  pulfe,  it  will  eafily  appear, 
why,  in  nervous,  hypochondriac,  and  hy- 
lleric  diforders,  the  pulfe  is  ofteq  fo  dif- 
ferent, not  only  in  various  perfons,  but  in 
the  fame  perfon  at  different  times.  I  fhall, 
therefore,  only  add  a  few  inftances  of  the 
c&(^  of  thofe  ailments  in  making  the  pulfe 
quicker  or  flower  than  ufuaL 

(i.)  A  lady  aged  38,  who  had  loft  a 
great  deal  of  blood  in  child-bed,  on  the 
eighteenth  day  after  her  delivery,  at  fix  in 
the  morning,  was  feized  with  a  fliarp  pain 
above  the  os  pubis,  darting  towards  the 
anus.  This  pain  fometimes  extended  up- 
wards, and  then  over  to  the  right  fide  in 
the  direction  of  the  colon.  Notwithftand- 
ing  her  having  taken  twenty-five  drops  of 
laudanum,  flie  complained  of  a  naufea  and 

inclination 


2  88       OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

iiiclinatioii  to  vomiE  about  half  an  hour 
pafl  feven,  and  before  two  ill  the  afternoon 
ihe  voniiLed  fix  or  feven  times.  About 
eleven  in  the  forenoon,  having  had  a  clyfter 
adminlftered  with  afa  fwtidcif  Ih'e  had  twa 
flools,  and  palTed  a  great  deal  of  wind. 
Her  pulfe,  whichi  when  Ihe  was  taken  ill, 
beat  60  times  in  a  minute,  about  leven  in 
the  morning  began  to  grow  quicker,  and, 
before  two  in  the  afternoon,  rofe  to  130,' 
but  became  feebler  aiKi  finaller  in  propor- 
tion to  its  auicknefs.  At  this  time,  as 
fcarce  any  thing  would  flay  on  her  flo- 
mach,  a  broth-clyfler  was  inje(n:ed,  with  40- 
drops  of  laudanum  m  it:  After  which  fhe' 
lay  quiet  for  two  hours,  and  her  pulfe  came 
down  to  1 20.  From  four  in  the  afternoon  to 
len,  file  took  every  hour  fome  panada,  with 
a  little  claret  and  cinnamon,  by  which  her 
pulfe  was  reduced  to  100  in  a  rainnte,  and 
began  to  be  fuller.  After  this,  as  the  com- 
plaints in  her  flomach  and  bowels  decreafed,- 
her  pulfe  returned  to  its  natural  flrength 
and  llowncfs. 

A 


NERVOUS    SYMPTOMS,        289 

A  quick  pLilfe,  as  in  the  above  cafe,  is 
fcarefiilly  to  be  diftinguiHied  from  a  quick 
pulfe  occasioned  by  an  inflammation,  or  a 
common  fever.  In  the  former  it  is  fofc, 
and  neither  full,  hard,  nor  contracted;  ic 
becomes  fmaller  as  it  increafes  in  quicknefs; 
nor  is  it  commonly  attended  with  any  great 
heat  or  third;  but  the  fureft  mark  is,  that 
it  becomes  fiov/er  upon  eating  a  little  flefh- 
:£iieat,  drinking  a  glafs  of  claret,  or  ufuig 
fcaftor  and  opium:  all  which  are  hurtful 
when  the  pulfe  is  quickened  by  indamma- 
tionj  and,  for  the  moil  part,  in  fevers  till 
their  decline^ 

However,  it  may  be  proper  to  ohiferva 
that  a  quick  pulfe,  occaiioned  by  pain  front 
fpafms  or  wind  in  the  ilomach  or  bowels, 
inay,  efpecially  in  fuch  as  are  plethoric,  lip- 
bn  continuing  long,  change  its  nature,  and, 
from  being  merely  nervous  or  fpafmodic, 
become,  at  laft  inflammatory;  that  is  the 
tonfequence  of  an  inflammation  produced 
In  the  part  affected  with  pain, 

O  o  (2.)  Ah 


290      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

(2.)  An  unmarried  lady,  between  30 
and  40  years  of  age,  was  feized  with  a  fe- 
vere  pain  in  her  lower  belly,  and  had  been 
ill  of  it  near  two  days  before  I  was  called. 
I  found  her  pulfe  at  the  rate  of  7a  ilrokes 
in  a  minute,  and  of  a  natural  foftnefs.  I 
ordered  her,  at  bed-time,  25  drops  of  lau- 
danum with  as  many  grains  of  rhubarb.  She 
was  eafy  through  the  night,  but  next  morn- 
ing, when  the  efFedts  of  the  laudanum  were 
over,  and  the  rhubarb  had  begun  to  ope- 
rate, her  pains  returned  with  greater  vio- 
lence, and  file  had  two  ftools.  About 
noon,  the  pains  increafed,  and  then  her 
pulfe,  which,  in  the  morning,  had  been  juft 
as  the  day  before,  became  fmaller  and  flow- 
er, fo  that  at  two  in  the  afternoon  it  did 
not  beat  above  ^d  in  a  minute.  At  that 
time,  fhe  com^plained  of  a  lownefs,  and  a 
coldnefs  through  her  whole  body.  I  di- 
rev5led  her  to  take  fome  panada  with  wine 
and  nutmeg,  and  ordered  a  clyfler  with  fifty- 
drops  of  laudanum  in  it.  This  foon  re- 
moved the  pain,  and  reftored  the  pulfe  to 

its 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.        291 

its  natural  fuhiefs  and  quicknefs ;  the  cold- 
nefs  went  off,  and  her  ildii  grew  rather 
warmer  than  ufual. 

In  thefe  two  cafes,  we  fee,  from  the 
,  fame  general  caufe,  viz^  a  Iharp  pain  in  the 
bowels,  oppofite  effedts,  a  quick  pulfe  in 
the  firft,  and  a  flow  one  in  the  feconJ;  and 
by  the  fame  medicine  and  diet,  viz.  laii- 
damim,  panada,  and  wine,  we  find  the  pulfe 
made  flower  and  fuller  in  the  one,  and 
quicker  and  fuller  in  the  other.  What 
might  be  the  reafon  of  fuch  a  difference  is 
hard  to  fay:  Was  it  owing  to  the  different 
kind  of  Jlimuli  affecting  the  nerves  of  the 
bowels,  or  rather  to  the  different  conftitu- 
(ion  of  thefe  two  patients  ? 

An  acute  pain  in  any  part  generally 
brings  on  an  inflammation,  and  quickens 
the  pulfe,  but  in  people  fubje6t  to  nervous 
or  hyfleric  complaints,  a  violent  pain  in 
one  fide  of  the  head,  in  the  ftomach,  or 
inteftines,  often  renders  the  pulfe  flower 
3.nd  more  languid. 

When  pain  produces  inflammation,  it 
O  o  2  not 


2^2       OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

not  only  excites  the  vefTels  of  the  part  in- 
to flronger  and  more  frequent  alternate 
contraO:l:ions  than  ufual;  but  the  heart  and 
whole  arterial  fyftem  are,  by  fympathy, 
rendered  more  irritable.  On  the  contrary, 
when  an  irritation  or  pain  in  any  part  oc- 
cafions  a  fpafm,  or  continued  concrad;ion 
of  its  veilels,  no  inflammation  is  produced 
in  it ;  and  the  heart  and  vafcular  fyflem, 
being,  by  fympathy,  alfo  commonly  afFe(5t' 
ed  with  fome  degree  of  fpafm,  perforni 
their  akernate  motions  with  lefs  freedom 
and  readinefs ;  whence  the  pulfe  becomes 
flow,  fmall,  and  fometimes  irregular,  and 
the  whole  body  feels  cold. 

Does  then  the  difference  between  pain, 
with  or  without  inflammation,  confiil  in 
the  vefl^els  of  the  part  aflevn:ed  being  agita- 
ted, in  the  former  cafe,  with  an  uncommon 
alternate  contraction,  and  in  the  latter, 
with  a  continued  fpafm  ? 

When,  in  delicate  people,  w^e  meet 
>vith  pain  producing  a  quick  but  foft  and 
feeble  pulfe,  and  without  any  confiderablc 

increafe 


NERVOUS    SYMPTOMS.     293 

ancreafe  of  the  heat  jof  the  body,  we  may 
fuppofe  either  that  although  the  vefTels 
of  the  pained  part  be  affected  with  a  fpafm, 
yet  the  heart  does  not  fufFer  in  this  way, 
but  is  only  rendered  more  irritable  by  the 
pain;  or  that,  notwithftanding  thofe  vef^ 
iels  may  be  agitated  with  a  greater  alter- 
nate motion  than  ufual ;  yet,  on  account 
of  the  weak  flate  of  the  blood  or  laxity  of 
the  foiids,  fcarce  any  degree  of  inilamma- 
lion  is  produced « 

(3.)  A  gentleman  betwixt  30  and  4Q 
years  of  age,  who,  for  feveral  years,  had 
been  much  troubled  with  flatulent  com- 
plaints, was,  after  an  error  in  diet,  feized 
with  a  pain  about  the  middle  of  the  abdn^ 
men,  ftriking  into  his  back,  which  foon  ber 
came  fo  intolerable,  that,  after  having  vo- 
mited  up  feveral  dofes  oilaitdamim,  and  had 
clyfters  injected  to  no  purpofe,  he  was  ob- 
liged to  have  recourfe  to  the  fern ici/piiim  foi' 
felief.  His  pulfe,  which,  in  a  natural  ftate, 
pen  about  64  times  in  a  minute,  was,  by 

the 


2P4     OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

the  violence  of  the  pain,  reduced  to  44 
flrokes  in  that  time,  and  was,  befides,  fmall, 
feeble,  and  often  irregular.  The  warm 
bath  not  only  relieved  the  pain  in  the  bowels 
almofl  inftantaneoufly,  but  alfo  render- 
ed his  pulfe  full,  foft,  and  regular,  though 
fomewhat  quicker  than  it  ufed  to  be  when 
he  was  in  health.  Some  time  after  he  came 
out  of  the  warm  bath,  the  pains  returned 
with  confiderable  violence,  and  his  pulfe 
alfo  became  flow,  fmall,  and  irregular;  but 
upon  having  recourfe  to  it  again,  he  was 
immediately  made  eafy,  and  the  pulfe  re- 
turned nearly  to  its  natural  ftate. 

(4.)  A  youth  of  fifteen,  of  a  flrong 
make,  and  feemingly  healthy  conllitution, 
had,  for  fome  time,  been  fubjecft,  once  in 
fix  or  eight  weeks,  to  a  violent  pain  in  his 
belly,  with  an  apprehenfion  of  immediate 
danger.  During  the  time  he  was  mofl 
troubled  with  thefe  cholic  pains,  his  pulfe 
commonly  beat  only  fifty  times  in  a  minutej 
feut  as  foon  as,  by  the  ufe  of  laxatives,  and 

aromatig 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.        295* 

aromatic  bitters,  he  had  got  free  of  this 
complaint,  it  returned  to  its  natural  quick- 
nefs,  which  was  about  80  flrokes  in  that 
time. 

(5.)  Another' lad  of  14  years  of  age, 
of  a  thin  and  delicate  habit,  and  of  quick 
and  lively  feelings,  whofe  pulfe  in  health 
ufed  to  beat  between  70  and  80  times  in 
a  minute,  about  the  beginning  of  June 
1 757,  was  obferved  to  be  low-fpirited  and 
thoughtful,  to  lofe  his  appetite,  and  have 
a  bad  digeftion.  Although  he  loft  flefh 
daily,  yet  he  had  no  night-fweats,  no  ex- 
traordinary difcharge  of  urine,  and  was 
coftive.  His  tongue  was  clean,  his  ildn 
cooler  than  natural,  and  when  in  bed,  his 
pulfe  beat  only  43  times  in  a  minute ;  nay, 
about  the  middle  of  July,  when  reduced 
aim  oft  to  ll^in  and  bone,  his  pulfe,  in  a  ho- 
rizontal pofture,  did  not  exceed  39.  A- 
bout  the  end  of  Auguft,  his  diftemper  took 
a  fudden  turn  ;  he  then  began  to  have  fuch 
a  craving  for  food,  with  a  quick  digeftion, 

that 


2  9<$      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABM 

that  he  grew  faint  unlefs  he  eat  almofl  e- 
very  two  hours ;  he  had  two  or  three  (look 
a-day;  his  pulfe  beat  from  96  to  no;  his 
fl^in  was  warm,  and  his  veins,  which  fcarce 
tould  be  feen  before,  became  now  turgid 
with  blood.  The  ftrong  apprehenfions  he 
formerly  had  of  dying  left  him,  he  was  furc 
he  fliould  recover;  and  accordingly,  by  the 
middle  of  06loberj  he  was  plumper  than 
©ver  he  had  been  before.  Towards  the 
end  of  November,  his  appetite  became  mo- 
derate, and  his  pulfe  gradually  returned  to 
its  natural  ftate. 

It  was  obfervable,  that  the  pulfe  was 
flowefl  towards  the  evening,  and  generally 
of  a  proper  ftrength  and  fuinefs. 

Singe,  with  all  my  attention,  I  neither 
could  difcover  thecaufe  of  this  patient's  firfl 
complaints,  nor  of  the  fudden  and  contrary 
turn  which  they  took  afterwards;  I  fhalf 
not  pretend  to  reafon  on  his  cafe  ;  but  I 
thought  it  deferved  to  be-  mentioned,  as  a 
good  inftance  of  a  nervous  atrophy,  and  of 

the  effed:  of  fuch  diforders  in  making  the 

pulfe 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.       297 

pulfe  much    flower  than  ever  it  has  been 
obferved  in  a  natural  flate. 


XIV.  Periodical  headachs. 

These  either  afFed:  almoft  the  whole 
head,  efpecially  the  fore-part,  or  only  one 
fide  of  it;  fometimes  no  more  than  one 
of  the  eyes,  with  part  of  the  fore-head  and 
temple  of  the  fame  flde.  They  generally 
return  once  a-day,  nearly  at  the  fame  hour, 
and  as  regularly  as  the  fit  of  a  quotidian 
ague.  In  fome  cafes,  they  are  attended 
with  a  vifible  fwelling,  not  only  of  the  eye 
afFeded,  but  alfo  of  that  fide  of  the  fore- 
head. Sometimes  the  eye  feems  to  fink  with- 
in its  orbit:  at  other  times,  nothing  can 
be  obferved  but  that  the  eyes  want  their 
ufual  luflre,  and  look  as  if  the  perfon  had 
watched  long,  or  drunk  too  much. 

The  moft  common  caufes  of  periodic 
headachs  in  thofe  who  are  fubje(5l  to  ner- 
vous diforders,  are, 

Pp  lSym- 


2p8      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABL]^ 

r.  Sympathy  with  the  ftoraach,  by 
which  the  nerves  chiefly  of  the  fore-part  of 
the  head  fufFer ;  and  the  fniall  veflels  to 
which  they  are  diflributed  are  either  afFecSt- 
led  with  a  continued  fpafm,  or  agitated  with 
uncommon  alternate  contradlions  and  rela- 
xations ;  in  confequence  of  which  the  pa- 
tient feels  a  pain,  flraitnefs,  fulnefs,  and 
pulfatipn  about  the  fore-head  and  temples. 

2.  A  vifcid  or  acrid  humour  obftrudling 
pr  irritating  the  fmall  veflels  of  the /m^r^- 
niunif  niufcles  of  the  head,  or  dura  mater ^ 
and  confequently  affedting  the  nerves  of 
thofe  parts  with  a  painful  fenfation.  This 
may  be  often  no  other  than  a  rheumatic, 
gouty,  or  fcorbutic  humour  falling  chiefly 
on  the  head. 

3.  A  particular  weaknefs,  delicacy,  and 
fenfibility  of  the  nerves  of  thofe  parts  of 
the  head ;  whence,  from  fudden  changes 
pf  weather,  errors  in  diet,  fatigue  of  body, 
ilrong  pafnpns,  intenfe  application  of  mind^ 

iiippreilion 


I^ERVOUS    SYMPTOMS.        299 

fuppreflioii  of  ordinary  evacuations,  or  even 
frorii  (lighter  eaufes,  thefe  nerves  bein^  ea^ 
fily  fufceptible  of  pain,  the  fiiiall  vcffels  to 
which  they  are  diftributed  become  afFecfted 
either  with  violent  alternate  contra(5tions 
and  relaxations,  or  with  a  fixt  fpafoi.  This 
feenis  to  be  confirmed  by  dbferving,  that 
women  liable  to  thefe  periodic  headachs 
fufFer  mofl:  feverely  about  the  nienftrual 
periods ;  at  which  time  it  is  well  known, 
that  iffues  and  other  fores  become  generally 
more  painful  and  inflamed,  as  being  more 
irritable  arid  eafily  affected  than  the  other 
parts.  In  any  general  indifpolit  ion,  thofe 
parts  which  are  lead  firm  and  found  fufFer 
mofto 

How  thefe  headachs  iliouli  return  every 
day,  or  fometimes  once  in  two  days^,  is  ^ 
hard  queftion.  We  know,  that  intermit- 
ting fevers  bbferve  very  regular  periods: 
And  I  have  feen  epileptic  patients  have  fits 
once  or  twice  every  day,  or  once  in  two 
days,  almoft  precifely  at  the  fame  hour. 
Hyfterie  convulfions,  and  other  difeafes, 
P  p  2  have 


300      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

have  alfo  been  obferved  fometimes  to  bcf 
regularly  periodical. 

Does  the  morbid  matter  in  fuch  cafes^ 
after  being  dillodgcd   by  the  violence  of 
the  paroxyfm,   require  a  certain   time  be- 
fore it  is  again  colleded  or  depofited  on  the 
parts  affedled,  in  fuch  a  quantity  as  is  fuf- 
ficient  to  produce  a  new  fit?    Such  is  the 
obfcurity  of  nature  in  many  of  her  opera- 
tions, that  we  meet,  aim  oft  every  where, 
,  with  appearances  of  which  we   are  unable 
to  give  any  fatisfactory  explanation.  How- 
ever, both  in  natural  pbilofophy  and  me- 
dicine, it  is  often  fufficieiit,  at  ieafi:  for  the 
purpofes  of  life,  to  know  the  certainty  of 
fome  particular  phenomena,  altho'  we  can- 
not account  for  them  :    Suffcit,  ft  quid  fiat 
intelligajmiSf  etiamfi  quoinffiodo  qui dque  fiat  ig" 
,  noremtu,     Cicero* 

XV.  Agiddinefs. 

This  may  proceed  from  fome  of  the 
caufes  which  have  been  mentioned  above, 
as  producing  periodic  headachs,  efpecially 

when 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.        301 

when  they  afFedt  the  anterior  part  of  the 
brain  or  dura  mater*  . 

Many  people  of.  a  delicate,  nefvoiis^ 
and  vafcular  fyflem,  after  {looping  and 
fuddenly  raifing  their  head,  are  apt  to  be 
feized  with  a  vertigo,  which  is  fometimes 
accompanied  with  a  faintnefs^  In  this  cafe, 
the  veffeis  of  the  brain  being  too  weak> 
feem  to  yield  more  than  ufual  to  the 
weight  of  the  blood,  when  the  head  is  in- 
clined 5  and  afterwards,  when  it  is  fuddenly 
raifed,  and  the  blood  at  once  defcends  to- 
wards the  heart,  thofe  veffeis  do  not  con- 
tract faft  enough,  fo  as  to  accommodate 
themfelves  to  the  quantity  of  blood  re- 
maining  in  them :  At  the  fame  time  the 
brain j  on  account  of  its  too  great  fenllbili- 
ty,  is  more  affeded  than  ufual  by  any  fud- 
den  change  in  the  motion  of  the  fluids 
through  its  veffeis. 

It  feems  to  be  owing  to  an  uncommon 
delicacy  and  fenfibility  of  the  retina,  and 
indeed  of  the  whole  nervous  fyflem,  that 
fome  people  become  fo  giddy  as  to  be  in 

hazard 


pi      OT  THE  MOST  REMARKAJBLE 

hazard  of  falling,  if  they  look  fledfafll/ 
into  a  glafs  that  is  kept  conftantly  moving 
before  them,  or  at  any  object  that  is  turn* 
cd  fwiftly  rounds 

XVI.  A  dimnefs  of  flght^  without  any 
tifible  fault  in  the  eyes. 

This  fometimes  proceeds  from  the  flo» 
mach  * ;  in  which  cafe  the  patients  ar^ 
only  affeded  with  it,  at  particular  times, 
when  that  organ  is  out  of  order,  and,  by 
fympathy,  afiedks  the  reiina,  optic  nerves* 
or  that  part  of  the  brain  from  which  they 
take  their  rife.  I  know  a  lady  much  trou- 
bled with  a  fournefs  in  her  ftomach,  who^ 
when  this  increafes  to  a  greater  degree  than 
nfual,  fees  every  thing  indiftindlly,  as  if  a 
thick  fmoak  or  mift  was:  before  her  eyes  j 
nor  does  fhe  get  quite  free  of  this,  till, 
by  chalk,  or  crabs  eyes,  lime-water,  mag- 
nefia  alba^  vomits,  and  bitters,  flie  has  de- 
flroyed,  in  a  great  meafure,  the  acidity  in 
her  flomach. 

t 

*  See  Lomrau  Qbfervat.  mtd.  lib.  2, 


NERVOUS   SYBIPTOMS.       303 

I  had  fome  years  fiiice  a  patient  of  a 
¥€ry  delicate  nervous  fyilem,  whofe  eyes, 
when  his  ftomach  was  much  troubled  with 
acidity  and  flatulence,  were  fometimes  ren- 
dered fo  very  fenfible,  that  looking  fted- 
fallly  on  a  crimfon  colour,  or  coming  fud- 
denly  from  ^  bright  light  into  a  dark  room, 
or  from  this  lafl  into  the  fun-ihine,  would 
occafion  a  giddinels  and  pain  above  his 
eyes,  together  with  a  dimnefs  of  fight,  and 
a  bilious  vomiting. 

XVIL  Low  fpirits,  melancholy,  and  a 

I.  In  cafes  of  an  irregular  gout,  when 
the  arthritic  matter  falls  upon  the  flomach 
and  bowels,  it  frequently  produces  a  naufea, 
flatulence,  low  fpirits,  and  other  uneafy 
fymptoms.  In  fuch,  vi^ind  pent  up  in  the 
ilomach  or  inteftines  occafions  a  difagree- 
able,  tho'  not  painful  fenfation,  attended 
with  a  faintnefs,  languor,  and  dcpreilion  of 
p}ipd.     But  at  oiher  times^^  when  this  ar- 

thritic 


304      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

thritic  matter  has  left  thefe  parts,  we  may 
obfervc,  that  a  greater  degree  of  flatu- 
lence, occafioned  by  errors  in  diet,  will  have 
no  fuch  efFedt.  Low  fpirits,  therefore,  in 
hypochondriac  and  hyfleric  cafes,  may  be 
frequently  owing  to  forae  morbid  matter  in 
the  blood,  flatulent  and  improper  aliments, 
or  other  caufes  affecting  the  (tomach  and 
bowels  with  a  particular  fenfation  ;  which, 
tho'  not  painful,  neverthelefs  i?  attended 
"with  great  dejedion  of  pijnd, 

2.  Low  fpirits  may  be  occafloned  by 
obflrudlions  in  the  hypochondriac  vifcera^ 
viz,  the  (lomach,  liver,  6^^.  But  as  ob- 
ftrudions  often  happen  in  thofe  parts  with-* 
out  any  remarkable  deje(5lion  of  mind; 
whenever  they  are  attended  with  this  fyni-^ 
ptom,  it  muft  be  owing,  principally,  to 
the  nature  of  the  obftruding  matter,  or 
rather  to  a  particular  morbid  Hate  of  tha 
|ierve§  of  thofe  vifiera, 

3-  A 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMSo        305 

3.  A  mania,  and  the  higher  deg;rees  of 
melancholy,  may  proceed  from  fo'me  noxi- 
ous matter  in  the  blood,  carried  from  the 
vt/cera  of  the  lower  belly  6r  other  parts^ 
tvhere  it  was  chiefly  lodged,  to  the  brain* 
Of  this  I  fliall  give  an  inftance  or  twOj, 
that  fome  time  ago  occurred  in  my  prac- 
cice, 

(a)  A  gentlewomatt'  upwards  of  30^  yeif^ 
6f  age,  who  had  been  long  troubled  witK 
wind  in  her  ftomach  and  bowels,  indtge- 
ftion,  faintnefs,  languor,  palpitations,  and 
fudden  fits  of  terror,  with  a  pulfe  general-^ 
ly  quick,-  but  variable,  having  been  for 
fome  little  time  much  freer  from  thefd 
complaints  than  ufual,  on  the  24th  of  Au~ 
guft,  became  all  at  oncd  deprived  of  her 
reafon.  During  the  nights  and  in  the 
mornings,  ihe  talked  incoherently,'  but 
throughout  the  day,  fhe  had  fome  intei^ 
vals  of  reafon.  While  {hd  continued  in 
this  way,  her  puife  was  better  than'  ufual, 
an^d  fhe  was  quite  free  from  her  ordinary 
nervous  fymptoms.      She    had   ho  £harp 

Q,  q  paiji 


3o6      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

pain  in  her  head,  but  complained  of  an 
uneafy  fenfation  and  great  confufion  in 
it.  Being  coflive,  fhe  took  fome  aloetic 
pills ;  but  could  not  be  prevailed  on  to 
life  any  other  medicine.  However,  in  a 
few  days,  flie  grew  much  better,  and  by 
the  5tli  of  September  entirely  recovered 
the  ufe  of  her  reafon,  but  relapfed,  in 
fome  degree,  into  her  old  complaints  of 
flatulence,  indigeftion,  and  palpitation. 

[b)  A  gentleman  aged  between  iixty 
and  feventy,  after  having  been  for  fome 
years  free  from  the  gout,  began  to  have 
conftant  complaints  of  his  flomacli  and 
bowels,  and  at  lafl  was  feized,  all  at  once, 
with  a  delirmn,  which,  by  the  application 
of  finapifms  to  the  foles  of  his  feet,  wenc 
off  in  a  few  hours.  In  two  days  the  de- 
lirium returned,  when,  by  bliftering  his 
legs,  a  pain  came  into- one  of  his  great 
toes,  upon  v/hich  he  recovered  his  fenfes 
entirely.  In  this  manner  the  gouty  hu- 
mour moved  backv/ards  and  forwards,  be- 
tween  his  head  and   fcQiy    for  near  two 

month  Sy 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.  307 

months,  till  at  laft,  being  more  iixt  in 
the  brain,  it  brought  on  a  continued  and 
violent  madnefs,  which  no  remedy  could 
lefTen.  In  this  ftate  he  obftinately  refufed 
alnioft  every  kind  of  food,  and  died  in  a 
few  weeks. 

4.  Sudden  terror,  exceffive  grief,  or 
other  violent  paffions  of  the  mind,  in 
people  whofe  nervous  iyftem  is  very  delin- 
eate, may  afFecl  the  brain  io  as  to  pro^ 
duce  a  continued  majiia  or  melancholy. 
But  in  what  manner  the  paffions,  or  the 
morbid  matter  of  the  nervous  difeafes 
change  the  ftate  of  the  brain  or  common 
fenforium,  and  occafion  fuch  diforders,  is 
entirely  unknown. 

XVIII.  The  inaihus,  or  night-mare* 
In  this  difeafe  the  patient,  in  time  of 
iieep,  imagines  he  feels  an  uncommon 
oppreflion  or  weight  about  his  breafl  and 
ftomach,  which  he  can,  by  no  effort, 
Ihake  off;  but  groans,  and  fometimes  cries 
Ctq  2  out. 


goS      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

out,  though  oftener  he  attempts  to  fpeak 
hi  vain.  He  imagines  himfelf  to  be  ftrag- 
gling  with  flrong  men,  or  devils,  to.  be 
in  a  lioule  on  fire,  or  in  danger  of  being 
drowned  in  the  fea  or  fome  river.  In  at- 
tempting to  run  away  from  danger,  or 
cliinb  up  a  hill,  he  fancies  he  falls  back  as 
much  after  every  ftep  as  he  had  advanced 
before.  The  terror  excited  by  the  fright^ 
ful  ideas  attending;  the  nidit-mare  fome- 
times  occafions  a  tingling  of  the  ears,  and 
a  tremor  over  the  whole  body. 

This  diforder  has  been  commonly  fup^ 
pofed  to  proceed  from  a  flagnation  of  the 
blood  in  ihefmufcs  of  the  brain,  or  in  the 
veflels  of  the  lungs ;  or  from  too  gre^t  ^ 
quantity  of  blood  being  fent  to  the  head. 

The  horizontal  poflure  in  time  of 
lleep,  and  the  preffure  of  the  liomach 
upon  the  aorta,  in  a  fupine  fituation, 
have  been  thought  fulHcient  to  occafion 
a  more  then  uiual  diilenlion  of  the 
finufey  and  other  veflels  of  the  brain, 
•and  the  weight  of  the  heart  prcfling  an 

the 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS,         30^ 

ih.e  left  auricle  and  large  trunks  of  the 
pulmonary  veins,  may,  it  is  faid,  pre- 
vent the  eafv  return  of  the  blood  from 
the  lungs,  and  fo  produce  an  oppref- 
fion,  and  fenfe  of  weight  and  faffoca- 
tion  in  the  breaft  *.  But  not  to  enter  in- 
to a  particular  examination  of  thofe  o^ 
pinions,  which  are  far  from  being  fatis- 
fadiory,  I  fhall  only  obferve,  that,  if 
ihey  were  true,  fome  degree  of  the  night- 
mare ought  to  happen  to  every  perfoii 
that  lies  on  his  back,  efpecialiy  after  eat* 
ing  a  full  meal.  Further,  if  a  horizon- 
tal fituatiou  could  overcharge  the  brain 
with  blood,  fo  as  to  occafion  the  inaihus, 
how  comes  it  that  people,  who  remain 
for  fome  time  in  an  inverted  poitare,  do 
not  feel  this  difeafe  beginning  to  attack 
them  ?  And  why  does  a  flighter  degree  of 
the  night-mare  fometimes  feize  people  who 
fleep  in  an  ere6l  fituation  in  a  chair  f? 

As 

,*  See  Dr  Bond's  Eflay  on  the  incuhus,  chap.  2. 
■^  Something  of  this  kind  I  have  experienced  myfelf, 
not  only  after  eating,  but  alfo  before  fupper,  when  mj 
'ibmach  was  out  of  order,  and  troubled  with  wind. 


310      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

As  the  weight  of  the  flomach,  even  when 
filled  with  food,  can  have  fcarce  any  efFedt 
upon  the  motion  of  the  blood  in  the  aorta^ 
fo  the  prefTure  of  the  heart  is  by  much 
too  fmall  to  be  able,  fenfibly,  to  retard 
the  motion  of  that  fluid  in  the  pulmonary 
veins ;  otherways  people  exhaufled  by  te- 
dious difeafes,  who  generally  lie  on  their 
back,  would  be  conllantly  alFedted  with 
the  inaihus. 

We  know,  that  certain  medicines  or 
poifons,  worms,  and  even  corrupted  bile,  or 
other  humours,  by  difagreeably  afFedting 
the  nerves  of  the  flomach,  produce  an 
oppreflion  aboijt  the  prtecordia,  wild  ima^ 
ginations,  frightful  dreams,  raving,  and 
jnfenfibility  :  And  there  is  no  doubt,  that 
low  fpirits,  melancholy,  and  diflurbed  fleep, 
often  proceed  from  a  difordered  flate  of 
the  flomach.  Is  it  not  probable,  that 
the  night-mare  has  its  feat  chiefly  in  the 
fame  organ  ?  If  epileptic  fits  often  proceed 
from  the  flomach,  why  may  not  the  in- 
aikis,  which  has  been  confidered  by  Galen 

as 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.         311 

as  a  noilurnal  01  (lighter  epilepfy,  have 
its  feat  in  that  part  ?  People  -troubled  with, 
nervous  and  hypochondriac  ailments,  and 
who  have  delicate  or  flatulent  flomachs, 
are  more  fubjecft  than  others  to  this  dif- 
order.  A  heavy  or  flatulent  fupper  great- 
ly increafes  the  night-mare  in  thofe  who 
are  predifpofed  to  it.  The  fympathy  of  the 
fhomach  with  the  head,  heart,  lungs,  and 
diaphragm,  is  fo  remarkable,  that  there 
can  be  no  difficulty  in  fuppoiing  the  fe- 
veral  fymptoms  of  the  inciihus  to  arife  from 
a  difagreeable  afFeeS:ion  of  the  nerves  of 
that  organ. 

When  my  flomach  has  been  out  of 
order,  and  troubled  with  wind,  I  have 
often  perceived  a  flighter  incubus  feize  me 
before  I  was  fully  afleep,  the  uneafmels 
of  which  would  make  me  get  up  fudden- 
ly.  hs  foon  as  I  was  quite  awake,  I  was 
generally  fenfible  I  had  been  afFedted  with 
a  weight  and  uneafinefs  about  my  flomach, 
attended  with  a  faintnefs,  and  fome  fort 
of    opprefHon    or    fuifocaiion    about    my 

breaft^ 


312      O^  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

bread,  as  if  the  circulation  in  my  lungs 
had  been  a  good  deal  obftruv5ted.  Whild 
I  fat  up  in  bed,  or  lay  awake/  I  felr  no- 
thing of  thefe  fymptoms,  except,  perhaps, 
fome  degree  of  unealineft  about  my  (lo- 
rn aeh  ;  but  when  I  was  jufl  about  to  fal! 
aflecp,  they  began  to  return  again.  In 
this  way,  I  have  often  gone  on,  for  two 
hours  or  more,  in  the  beginning  of  the 
night.  At  lafl,  I  found,  that  a  dram  of 
bTandy  after  the  firft  attack,  kept  m« 
eafy  the  whole  night.  This  remedy  has 
never  failed  to  fucceed  with  me,  the  few 
times  I  have  had  occafion  to  try  it ;  for 
of  late,  (ince  my  flomach  has  been  pretty 
found,  I  have  feldom  felt  in  my  fleep  any 
of  thofe  uneafy  fenfations  which  refemble 
the  night-mare. 

From  what  has  been  faid,  it  feenis  pt-o- 
bable,  that  in  the  incubus  the  ftomach  h' 
conimonly  the  part  primarily  afFedtedr  I 
iky  commonly,  becaufe  fymptoms  like-  thofe 
of  the  night-mare  may  fometimes  arife 
with-out  any  fault  in  the  ilomach.     Thus, 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.        ^r; 

I  have  known  aflhmatic  patients,  whofe 
lungs  were  much  bbflruded,  who,  in  time 
of  lleep,  were  greatly  opprefled  with  a  fenfe 
of  fuffocation,  and  difturbed  with  uneafy 
dreams :  And  Dr  Lower  mentions  a  patient^ 
who,  though  he  eould  deep  pretty  eafily 
ivith  his  head  inclined  forward,  yet  in  the 
oppolite  fituation,  he  was  always  foon  a- 
waked  with  horrid  dreams  and  tremors  i 
the  caufe  of  which  appeared,  after  his 
death,  to  have  been  a  great  quantity  of  wa- 
ter in  the  ventricles  of  the  brain,^ 

Th  e  incubus  is  mofl  apt  to  feize  perfons 
when  lyiiig  on  their  back;  becaufe  in  this 
pofition,  on  account  of  the  ftomach  and  o- 
ther  abdominal  vifcera  preffing  more  upon 
the  diapliragriij  we  cannot  infpire  with  the 
fame  eafe,  as  when  w^e  fit  up,  or  lie  on  one 
Ude.  Further,  in  that  fituation  of  the 
body,  the  food  feems  to  lie  hea.vier  on  the 
flomach,  and  wind  in  it  does  not  efcape  fo 
readily  by  the  cefophagus  or  pylorus  as  in  an 
f^reifl  poilure,  when  thefe  palTages  are  higher 
R  r  than 


314      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

than  the  other  parts  of  the  flomach  *. 
We  are  only  affected  with  the  night-mare 
in  time  of  lleep,  becaufe  the  fcrangc  ideas 
excited  in  the  mind,  in  confeqaence  of  the 
difordered  ftate  of  the  fhomach,  are  not 
then  correded  by  the  external  fenfes,  as 
they  are  when  we  are  awake  f;  nor  do  we, 

by 

*  when  i  have  been  liable  to  be  attacked  with  a  fen- 
fation  of  faintnefs  at  my  ftomach,  I  have  found  it  always 
IrVorfe  u'hen  I  lay  on  my  back  in  the  night-time,  and  be- 
come better  vv'hen  I  got  out  of  bed,  or  fat  up  ia  it :  And 
a  middle  aged  woman  who,  in  the  morning  was  fre- 
quently fubjeft  to  faintings,  found  that  flie  could  prevenC 
them  by  getting  up  as  foon  as  Ibe  perceived  them  about 
to  come  on.  Further,  when  the  miliary  eruption  does 
not  come  out  properly  in  women  after  child-bearing, 
they  are  often  afFeded  with  a  fenfe  of  faintnefs,  and 
with  an  oppreffion  in  their  breathing,  which  fymptoms 
are  commonly  worfe  when  they  lie  on  their  back,  than 
when  they  fit  up  in  bed. 

f  I  had,  fome  years  fince,  a  patient  affedted  vvith  ZR 
eryfipelas  in  his  face,  who,  when  awake,  was  free  froto 
any  confufion  in  his  ideas ;  but  no  fooner  did  he  (hut  his 
eyes,  although  not  afleep,  than  his  imagination  began 
to  be  greatly  difturbed:  He  thought  himfelf  carried 
fwiftly  through  the  air  to  diftant  regions ;  and  fome- 
times  imagined 'his  head,  ar-ns,  and  legs,  to  be  fepa- 
rated  from  his  body,  and  to  ftj  of?  different  ways. 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.        315 

by  an  increafed  refpiration  or  other  mo- 
tions of  the  body,  endeavour  to  fhake  off 
any  beginning  uneafy  fenfation  about  the 
ftomach  or  breaft.  The  inciihiu  generally 
feizes  one  in  his  firfl:  lleep,  but  feldom  to^ 
wards  the  morning,  becaufe  at  this  time 
the  flomach  is  much  lefs  loaded  with  fpod^ 
than  in  the  beginning  of  the  night. 

If  the  night-mare  were  owing  to  a  ftag- 
nation  of  the  blood  in  the  lung's  from  the 
weight  of  the  heart,  or  in  the  fumfes  and 
other  vefTels  of  the  brain  from  the  horizon- 
tal pofture  of  the  body,  it  would  become 
o;rcater  the  longer  it  continued,  and  would 
fcarce  ever  go  off  fpontaneoufly:  But  we 
know,  that  this  difeafe,  after  afFefting  peo- 
ple for  fome  time,  often  gradually  ceafes, 
and  is  fucceeded  by  refrefliing  fleep ;  for  as 
foon  as  the  load  of  meat,  or  wind,  or  other 
caufe  difagreeably  afFeding  the  nerves  of 
the  flomach,  is  removed,  the  oppreffion 
and  weight  on  the  breaft,  wild  imagina- 
tions, frightful  dreams,  <^c,  vanifh,  as  all 
J:hefe  proceed  originally  from  the  diforder 
R  r  2  of 


31^      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

pf  the  ilomach.  It  is  worth  while,  how-^ 
eyer^  to  pbferve,  that  as  neither  wind, 
fough  phlegm,  nor  cr^dities  in  the  fto° 
inach,  do  ever  occafion  the  fymptoms  of 
the  hypochondriac  djfeafe,  unlefs  the  nerves 
pf  that  organ  be  indifpofed;  fo  neither  a 
iiorizontal  pofture,  lleep,  nor  heavy  fup- 
pers,  do  ever  produce  the  night-mare,  ac 
kail  in  any  confiderable  degree,  unlefs  the 
perfon  be  predifpofed  to  it  from  the  parti- 
cular condition  of  the  perves  of  his  fto- 
Hiach :  And  her.e  I  fhall  juft  remark,  that 
a  plethora,  as  well  as  other  caufes,  may  fo 
afeT:  the  nerves  of  the  ftomach  as  to  give 
life  to  the  incuhm.  Hence,  a  fuppreffioa 
of  the  menfcs  in  women  fometimes  occa- 
fions  thi?,  as  well  as  other  difordcrs  of  thac 
organ.  It  inufl,  however,  be  acknow- 
ledged, that  a  -plethora,  by  rendering  th^ 
circulation  through  the  lungs  lefs  free,  may 
help  to  produce,  or  a  lealfl  increafe,  the  op- 
preffion  of  the  breafl  in  the  night-mare; 
And  hence  it  is^,  perhaps,  that  young  men, 

who 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.        317 

who  abound  in  blood,  are  often  troubled 
with  this  diforder. 

It  has  been  obferved  above  ♦,  that  vio- 
lent or  long  continued  complaints  of  the 
nervous,  hypochondriac,  or  hylteric  kind, 
fometimes  terminate  in  an  apoplexy,  palfy, 
jaundice,    dropfy,    tympany,    or   pJnhifis, 
Now,  from  what  has  been  faid,  it  will  noi 
appear  ftrange,  that  the  brain  and  nerves 
may,  by  the  continuance  or  frequent  repe- 
tition of  fuch  Ihocks,  be  fo  weakened  or 
difordered,   that  not  only  fatuity,  a  deep 
nielancholy,   or  mania,  but  alfo  a  palfy  or 
an  apoplexy,  may  enfue.     Further,  as  ner- 
vous diforders  are  often   owing   to  fome 
morbid  matter  in  the    blood,   when  this 
leaves  the  flomach  and  inteflines,  or  other 
parts  where  it  ufed  chiefly  to  fix,   and  is 
thrown  in  a  great  raeafure  on  the  brain  or 
origin  of  the  nerves,  it  is  eafy  to  conceive, 
how  a  palfy  or  apoplexy  may  be  the  confe- 
quence. 

Again^  fince  hypochondriac   and  hy- 

llerig 

f  See  p.  log. 


3i8      OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE 

fleric  diforders  are  fometimes  occafioned 
by  obilruiflions  in  the  abdominal  vifiera^ 
'and  often  give  rife  to  them;  and  as  from  a 
bad  digeflion  the  chyle  mull  be  ill  prepa- 
red, it  will  appear  why  thofe  difeafes  do 
fometimes  terminate  m  the  jaundice  or 
dropfy. 

It  has  been  obferved  alfo,  that  patients 
much  afflidted  with  thofe  ailments  have  at 
length  fallen  into  a  fjmpanitesy  which  may 
be  thus  accounted  for.  I  have  fhown  a- 
bove,  that  the  great  predifpofing  caufe  of 
nervous,  hypochondriac,  and  hyfleric  dif- 
orders, is  a  particular  weaknefs  and  deli- 
cacy, or  uncommon  fenfibility  of  the  fto- 
mach  and  bowels;  whence,  froni  flight 
caufes,  they  are  often  aife(5i:ed  with  fpafms. 
Now,  when  the  fpafmodic  contradions  of 
the  alimentary  canal  do  not  continue  long, 
the  wind  that  was  pent  up  is  allowed  to 
move  from  one  place  to  another,  and  is  at 
lafl  expelled  either  upwards  or  downwards: 
put  when  the  flomach  and  inteftines,  by 
yeafon  of  their  weaknefs,  and  fmall,   but 

continued^ 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.        319 

continued,  fpafms,  have  been  inflated  by- 
flow  degrees,  the  irritation  occafioned  by 
this  diflenfion  increafes  the  fpafm  fo  much, 
that  the  air,  continually  generated  by  the 
aliment  in  time  of  digellion,  is  moftly  re- 
tained, or,  at  lead,  is  not  difcharged  in 
fuch  a  quantity  as  to  relieve  the  patient, 
or  fenfibly  to  diminifh  the  fweUing  of  the 
belly. 

Lastly,  a  phthifis  pulmonalis  may  alfo 
be  the  confequence  of  nervous  diforders, 
wheii  the  morbid  matter  producing  them 
falls  chiefly  upon  the  lungs;  or^^hen  the 
vitiated  chyle  or  blood  forms  obflrud:ion3 
in  that  organ. 

And  here  it  may  be  worth  obferving, 
that  while  the  morbid  matter  producing 
the  hypochondriac  difeafe,  chiefly  affedls 
the  flomach  and  bowels,  the  patients  are 
always  apprehenfive,  and  often  greatly  a- 
larmed  from  any  trifling  increafe  or  varia- 
tion of  their  complaints,  as  if  they  were  in 
immediate  danger  of  dying ;  but  after  this 
matter  has  left  its  old  feat,  and,  by  fixing 

on 


320      OF  THE  MOST   REMARKABLE 

on  the  lungs,  has  brought  on  an  incurable 
phthifiSf  they  generally  ceafe  to  be  appre- 
henlive  or  fearful,  and  cherifh  the  hopes  of 
life  to  the  lafl.  The  reafon  is,  that  when 
the  lungs  are  afFe^Eted,  there  are  no  fuch  un- 
cafy  feelings  excited  in  the  body,  nor  fear 
and  defpondency  in  the  mind,  as  when  the 
llomach  and  inteflines  fuffer,  which  are 
not  only  poiTelTed  of  a  much  more  delicate 
fenfibility  than  the  lungs,  but  have  alfo  a. 
more  remarkable  fympathy  with  the  brain, 
and  whole  nervous  fyllem. 


CB  AT. 


[      321       ] 


CHAP.     VII. 

Of  the  CvKE  <?/' Nervous,  Hypo- 
chondriac, md  Hysteri c 
Disorders. 

ALTHC  it  may  be  faid  in  general, 
that  thefe  diforders  are  more  trouble- 
fome  and  lafting  than  dangerous,  yet  as 
they  proceed  from  various  caufes,  the  dan- 
ger, as  well  as  the  cure,  muft  be  often  very 
dirferent.  Thus,  when  they  are  owing  to 
an  original  delicacy  of  the  whole  nerves,  or 
a  debility  of  thofe  belonging  to  the  flo- 
mach  and  inteftines,  they  feldom  prove 
quickly  fatal,  but  fcarce  ever  admit  of  a 
thorough  cure.  When  they  are  occafion- 
ed  by  an  arthritic  matter  in  the  blood, 
their  cure  will  be  aim  oft  as  difficult  as  that 
of  a  chronic  rbeumatifm,  or  of  the  gout 
iifelf ;  and  in  fuch  a  cafe,  perhaps,  the  beft 
S  f  that 


322        OF  THE   CURE  OF 

that  can  happen,  is,  that  the  morbid  mat^ 
ter  may  throw  itfelf  off,  by  regular  fits,  in 
the  extremities,  When  they  arife  from 
too  great  or  too  fmall  a  flux  of  the  menfes, 
if  the  litems  can  be  reftored  to  a  found 
Hate,  the  nervous  fymptoms  will  vanifh  of 
eourfe.  When  sreat  and  confirmed  fcir- 
rhous  obflruiStions  in  the  abdominal  vifcera 
are  the  caufes  of  hypochondriac  or  hyfleric 
complahits,  they  are  not  only  incurable, 
but  likely  to  prove  foon  fatal?  When 
they  proceed  from  worms,  phlegm  in  ihe 
flomach  and  bowels,  or  violent  aflfedtions 
of  the  mind,  they  may  be  often  and 
fometimes  fpeedily  cured.  Laftly,  when 
intemperance  in  eating  or  drinking  has 
brought  on  nervous  ailments,  they  may 
be,  almofh  always,  leflened,  and  fome- 
times cured,  by  a  proper  diet,  moderate 
exercife,    and  a  few  medicines. 

But  however  troublefome  and  oh- 
ftinate  nervous  difordcrs  often  may  be, 
|:hey  have  fome  advantages  attending  them ; 
for  the  weak  flare  of  the  blood  and  vafcu- 

lar 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS.     323 

lar  fyftem  in  many  of  thefe  cafes,  renders 
fuch  patients  much  lefs  fubjedt  to  inflamnia- 
tory  difeafes,  than  thofe  of  a  llronger  con- 
flitution. 

From  the  accomit  I  have  given  of  ner-^ 
vous,  hypochondriac,  or  hyfleric  diforders, 
it  will  appearj  as  has  been  already  obferved, 
that  their  cure,  far  from  being  the  fame, 
mufl  differ  according  to  the  various  caufes 
from  which  they  proceed:  and  that  the 
numerous  warm,  aromatic,  flimalating, 
and  foetid  medicines,  whicli  have  been  cal- 
led nervous,  or  antihyileric,  however  pro- 
per they  may  be  in  fome  cafes,  are,  never- 
thelefs,  hurtful  in  others. 

In  treating,  therefore,  of  the  cure  of 
thofe  difeafes,  I  (hall  not  attempt  to  lay 
down  any  general  method  to  anfwer  in  all 
cafes  or  circUmftances,  even  for  the  fame 
lymptoms;  but  fhall  endeavour  to  point 
out  that  particular  treatment  which  feems 
beft  fuited  to  the  cafe,  according  to  the 
various  caufes  from  which  it  may  arife. 

But,  before  I  proceed,  it  will  be  proper 
S  f  2  to 


324        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

to  obferve,  that  as  it  is  generally  in  the 
power  of  medicine  to  relieve,  it  is  frequents 
\y  beyond  the  power  of  art  to  eradicate  the 
diforders  we  now  treat  of;  and  therefore 
it  may  be  often  of  ufe  to  intimate  this  to 
our  patients,  efpecial'y  to  fuch  as  have  for- 
titude enough  to  bear  thofe  evils  which 
can  neither  be  wholely  prevented,  nor  fully 
cured.  It  is  further  necefFary  to  acquaint 
every  patient,  that  without  a  long  perfe- 
verance  in  a  courfe  of  medicines,  diet,  and 
exercife,  no  great  or  lading  benefit  can  be 
expected.  To  this  purpofe  is  the  follow- 
ing paflage  of  Montanus,  which  equally 
deferves  the  attention  of  fuch  patients  as 
are  afFecled  with  nervous  ailments,  and  of 
the  phyficians  who  undertake  their  cure*. 
*'  In  curatione  hujus  morbi  (fciz.  hypochon- 
*'  driaci)  non  licet  prsefinire  tempus  menfis 

"  unius,  aut  anni,  ficut  in  aliis  conting-at : 

fc>     • 

**  fed  oportet  in  toto  vitas  fus  tempore  cu- 
"  rationi  operam  dare ;  interdum  curationi, 
«'  interdum  pr^fervationi,  attendendo  ♦." 

The 

*  Confil.  230. 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS.       ^2$ 

The  general  intentions  in  the  cure  of 
nervous  diforders,  may  be  reduced  to  the 
two  following,  viz, 

I.  To  leflen  or  remove  thofe  predifpo- 
fing  caufes  in  the  body,  which  render  it  pe- 
culiarly liable  to  nervous  ailments. 

II.  To  remove  or  correcH:  the  occalional 
caufes,  which,  efpecially  in  fuch  as  are  prediP 
pofed,  produce  the  numerous  train  of  ner- 
vous, hypochondriac,  and  hyfleric  fymp- 
toms  mentioned  in  the  prcceeding  part  of 
this  work  *. 

I.  Th  e  great  predifpofing  caufe  of  ner- 
vous diforders  is,  as  1  have  fhown,  a  too 
great  delicacy  or  uncommon  feniibility  of 
the  nerves  in  general,  or  of  thofe  of  the 
flomach  and  inteftines,  or  other  organs  in. 
particular.  If  this  fault  in  the  conflitu- 
tion  could  be  ^ffeiTtually  cured,  we  fhould 
always  have  it  in  our  power  to  leffen  the 
violence  of-nervous  fymptoms  from  what- 
ever 

*  Sec  above,  p.  98.  6'e» 


326         OF  THE   CURE  OF 

€ver  caufe  they  might  arife,  and  to  preveni 
mofl  of  thofe  which  proceed  from  fudderi 
impreflions  made  on  the  mind.  But  when 
the  fault  in  the  nervous  fyftem,  alimentary 
canal,  or  other  parts,  is  original,  i,  e,  na- 
tural to  the  conftitution,  and  not  the  con- 
fequence  of  fome  difeafk  or  irregularity  in 
living,  it  does  not  admit  of  a  perfect  cure: 
The  utmofl:  that  can  be  done^  is  to  lelTen 
it. 

The  beft  remedies  to  anfwer  the  firjl  in-- 
tention  of  cure,  are  either  fuch  as  not  only 
llrengthen  the  flomach  and  bowels,  but 
the  whole  body,  or  thofe  which,  by  their 
peculiar  adlion  on  the  extremities  of  thofe 
nerves  to  which  they  are  applied,  leffen,. 
for  a  time,  the  too  great  fenfibility  of  the 
whole  fyftem* 

I.  The  remedies  which  have  been  found 
by  experience  to  communicate  greater 
ftrcngth  to  the  body  are, 

{a)  Bitters.     Of  thefe,  I  moft  com- 
monly 


NERVOUS   DISORDERS,      327 

monly  ufe  the  radix  gentians,  fummit cites 
centaurii  minoris,  and  cortices  aurantiorum ; 
the  two  farmer,  as  being  lefs  naufeous  and 
heating  than  many  of  the  other  bitters; 
and  the  laft,  partly  on  account  of  its  agree- 
able flavour.  Thefe  bitters  may  be  put  in- 
to any  of  the  ftronger  white  wines ;  but  if 
the  patient  be  troubled  with  acidity  in  the 
firfl  palTages,  they  ought  to  be  infufed  in 
brandy  or  boiling  water.  The  watery  in- 
fufion  will  be  rendered  more  agreeable  to 
many  flomachs,  by  adding  to  each  Englilli 
pint  of  it  three  ounces  of  the  aqua  cinna- 
momi  firtiSf  or  aqua  aromatica  of  our  Difpen- 
fatory  *. 

The  flrength,  as  well  as  the  dofe  of 
thefe  bitters,  mufl  be  adapted  to  the  con- 
ftitution  and  circum (lances  of  the  patient. 
If  they  heat  too  much,  they  mufl  be 
weakened,  or  taken  along  with  fome  drops 
of  the  elixir  of  vitriol  -j-.     When  bitters 

lie 

*  The  officinal  compofitions  mentioned  in  thefe  ob' 
fsrvations  are  always  underftood  to  be  thofe  of  tl^e  EdiQ- 
|?ijrgh  Difpenfatory,  unlefs  the  contrary  is  exprcfled. 

f  Mead  Monita  medica,  p.  109, 


328        OF   THE   CURE   OF 

lie  heavy  on  the  ftomach,  and  lelTen,  in- 
ftead  of  mending,  the  appetite,  they  ought 
to  be  omitted,  and  the  cure  mud  be  at' 
tempted  by  other  reaiedies. 

(b)  The  Bark.  This  is  more  ftrength' 
ening  and  lefs  heating  than  any  of  the  bit- 
ters. It  may  be  given  either  in  fubftance 
or  deco(ftion,  or  infufed  in  cold  or  boiling 
water,  in  lime-water,  wine,  brandy,  or 
rum. 

The  bark  in  fubftance,  frequently  dif- 
agrees  with  delicate  ftomachs,  and  occa- 
lions  ficknefs,  gripes,  and  fometimcs  a  loofe- 
nefs.  An  infufion  or  deco6tion  of  it  in 
water,  efpecially,  if  fome  grateful  aromatic, 
fuch  as  cinnamon  or  nutmeg,  be  added,  is 
lefs  apt  to  produce  thefe  efFe^ls;  but  when 
infufed  in  brandy,  with  fome  bitters  or  aro- 
raatics,  it  will  agree  well  with  moft  people. 
The  bark  in  fubftance  often  fits  lighter  on 
the  ftomach,  if  a  glafs  of  red  port  be  taken 
after  every  dofe  of  it;  and  the  gripes  and 
purging,  v/hich  it  occafions  in  fome,  may 

be 


NERVOUS   DISORDERS.    329 

be  certainly  prevented  by  adding,  for  a  few 
days,  the  confeBlo  Japonica  to  it ;  for  aftet 
the  flomach  and  bowels  have  been  accu- 
ftome'd  to  the  ufe  of  the  bark,  it  general- 
ly occafions  either  much  lefs  diflurbance, 
or  none  at  all. 

For  fevefzl  years  pafl,  I  have  frequently 
joined  the  bark  and  bitters  in  the  following 
form. 

k.  Cort.  Peruvian.  Piilv.  unc.  4. 
Rad.  Gentian. 

Cort,  Atirant   ana  unc.  i.  fs.  Mifce. 
Infunde  in  fpir.  vin.  Gall.  lib.  iv.  labalfieo  arend  peP 
dies  vi.  et  cola. 

Of  this  tincture,  I  generally  give  one 
table-fpoonfnl,  with  four  or  five  fpoonfuls 
of  water,  every  morning,  an  hour  and  a 
naif  before  breakfafl,  and  between  feveit 
and  eight  in  the  evening.  I  fometimes 
add  to  each  pound  of  this  tindlure,  an 
^uncc  or  more  of  the  fp.  lavend,  camp- 
which  improves  its  talle,  and  makes  it  fiL 
better  on  fome  flomachs* 

Tt  I 


330        OF   THE   CURE   OF 

I  have,  myfelf,  taken  the  above  tiii^tarc 
in  the  morning,  for  ei^ht  months  toge- 
ther, and  with  remarkable  advantage.  For 
three  or  four  years  before,  I  had  been  much 
troubled  with  wind  in  my  ftomach,  a  gid- 
dinefs,  and  fometiraes  a  faintnefs.  I  ob- 
ferved  in  the  morning,  foon  after  taking 
this  medicine,  a  grateful  fenfation  in  my 
ftomach,  accompanied  with  better  fpirits, 
than  I  had  at  any  time  through  the  day, 
or  than  I  ever  found  from  drinking  wine, 
even  when  I  ufed  it  freely.  I  have  order- 
ed this  tincture  to  many  patients,  who  have 
taken  it  for  two  or  three  months  fucceffive- 
ly,  and,  after  intermitting  it  for  Ibme 
time,  have  begun  again.  Moft  of  them 
have  found  benefit,  and  thofe  moil  who 
ufed  it  lono;efl.  The  cafes  were  chieflv 
weak  and  windy  ftomachs,  with  a  general 
delicacy  or  debility  of  the  nervous  fyflem  *. 

When 

*  A  married  lady  aged  40,  of  a  thin  habit  and  deli- 
cate nerves,  hal  been  complaining  for  fome  years  of  a 
general  weaknefs  and  feeblenefs  through  her  whole  body,- 

elpecially 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS.     331 

When  acids  do  not  difagree,  twenty  or 
thirty  drops  of  the  elixir  of  vitriol  may 
fometimes  be  taken  with  advantage  in  each 
dofe  of  the  tindlure.  This  elixir  taken 
twice  a-day,  in  this  or  a  larger  dofe,  in 
fpring  water  alone,  has  often  good  eiFed:s 
T  t  2  in 

cfpecially  in  her  limbs,  with  a  pain  fometimes  in  her  flo- 
mach  and  belly,  which  fhe  attributed  to  wind.  I  pre- 
fcribed  for  her  the  tindure  of  the  bark,  <bc.  which  ftie 
took  once  a-day  for  near  two  years,  intermitting  now 
and  then  a  week  or  ten  days.  It  had  a  moft  fenfible 
eifeft  in  ftrengthening  her,  and  never  failed  to  raife  her 
fpirits.  When,  after  intermitting  this  medicine  for  a 
longer  time  than  ufual,  her  old  complaints  have  begun 
to  return  in  a  lefs  degree,  a  few  dofes  of  it  have,  almofl: 
always,  put  her  to  rights  again.  Another  married  lady, 
aged  between  30  and  40,  of  a  delicate  nervous  fyftem, 
and  affedled  with  wind  in  her  ftomach,  giddinefs,  flying 
pains  through  her  body,  frequent  fits  of  loofenefs  in  a 
morning,  feeblenefs,  and  low  fpirits,  was,  by  the  ufe  of 
the  fame  tindlure  for  near  two  years,  (intermitting  it 
now  and  then  for  a  month  or  more  at  a  time),  cured,  in 
a  great  meafure,  of  all  her  complaints,  except  that  (he 
continued  fometimes  to  be  troubled  with  the  pains,  and 
fomething  of  the  low  fpirits,  though  in  a  much  lefs  de- 
gree than  formerly. 

Were  it  neceffary,  I  could  add  many  other  cafes  in 
which  the  fame  remedy  has  been  remarkably  ufeful. 


332        OF   THE  CURE  OF 

in  flrcDgthening  the  ftomach  and  refiqring 
a  decayed  appeuite ;  and  is  generally  ai; 
excellent  cooler  when  the  ft omach- com- 
plaints ^re  attended  with  any  degree  of  fe- 
brile heatj  third,  and  a  white  tongue. 

Althq'  the  bark  is  preferable>  as  ^ 
ilrengthener,  to  any  of  the  bitters,  yet  it 
does  not  wholely  fuperfede  their  ufe.  The 
bark  alone  will  not  fit  fo  Avell  on  many  fto- 
machs,  as  when  it  is  joined  with  an  agreer 
able  bitter;  and  I  think  I  have  found  more 
benefit  myfelf  from  the  above  tincture, 
than  from  the  bark  alone  either  in  fubftance 
or  deco6tion.  With  regard  to  the  fafety 
of  taking,  for  a  long  time^  the  bark,  a- 
gainft  which  many  have  had  great  pre- 
judices; I  can  fay,  that  I  do  not  recollect 
its  proving  hurtful  in  any  cafe  in  which  I 
have  ordered  it,  unlefs  where  it  happened 
to  cifagree  with  the  patiept's  |tomach» 
i\bout  fourteen  years  fnice,  I  fwallowed, 
in  fixteen  days,  near  four  ounces  of  it  ii; 
fubftance,  when  I  laboured  under  a  ca- 
larrhous  cough,   without  feeling  any  bad 

effedls 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS.     333 

efFedls  from  its  aflringent  quality.  In  a 
tertian  intermittent  attended  with  a  gou2:1i 
and  fpitting,  after  the  ufe  of  vomits  and 
feme  pectorals,  I  have  prefcribed  the  bark 
in  the  ufual  quantity,  without  the  bread 
being  any  ways  hurt  by  it.  I  have  had  re- 
peated experience  of  its  virtues  in  curing  a 
hoarfenefs  after  the  meafles,  unattende4 
with  a  fever  or  difficult  breathing;  and  in 
the  chincough,  when  given  early,  and  be- 
fore any  obftrudtions  are  formed  in  the 
lungs,  I  have  found  it  one  of  the  befl  re- 
medies. Laflly,  The  fuccefs  of  the  bark 
in  refolving  ipdolcnt  glandular  fweliings  *, 
may  fliew  that  it  is  not  pofTelTed  of  any 
j^onfiderable  obflruding  quality. 

{c)  Steel.  There  are  few  medicines 
that  fo  remarkably  ftrengthen  the  ilomach 
and  bowels,  and  indeed  the  whole  bodv. 
as  iron  and  its  preparations,  l^he  aflrin- 
gent quality  of  this  metal  \vas  not  un- 
known to  Diofcorides,   who  recommends, 

for 

f  See  Medical  inquiries  and  pbfervations,  vol,  %<, 


334        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

for  a  weaknefs  of  the  flomach  and  in- 
teftines,  water  in  which  a  red-hot  iron 
has  been  extinguiflied. 

The  fal  martis  was  in  great  efleem 
with  Riverius;  but  Sydenham  preferred 
the  filings  of  iron  to  all  its  prepara- 
tions*. 

The  filings  have  been  commonly  pre^ 
Icribed  from  five  to  fifteen  or  twenty 
grains  ;  but  although  this,  lafl  quantity 
will  heat  many  people,  yet  fo  different 
are  conflitutions,  that  fome  will  bear  a 
much  greater  dofe ;  nay,  I  know  a  gentle- 
man, who,  for  a  weaknefs  in  his  flomach 
and  indigeftion,  has  taken  every  day,  for 
fome  months  together,  about  230  grains 
of  the  filings  of  iron,  divided  into  three 
dofes.  It  is  obvious,  however,  that 
thefe  filings  wall  a£l  varioufly  as  they  are 
finer  or  coarfer,  and  according  to  the 
quantity  of  an  acid  in  the  flomach  and 
bowels.  They  fometimes  occafion,  e- 
fpecially  in  the  more  dehcate  conflitutions, 

*  Diflert.  epifiol,  ad  D.  Cole, 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS.    335 

a  diforder  in  the  firft  paffages;  in  which 
cafe  Sydenham  has  advifed  a  few  drops  of 
laudanum  to  be  taken  with  them  at  bed- 
time;  but  fifteen  grains  or  a  fcruple  of 
theriaca  will  have  as  good  or  a  better  ef- 
fea. 

Those  who  cannot  take  the  Umatura 
martis  will  often  bear  Mynficht's  tiniSture, 
the  chalybeate  wine,  and  Pyrmont  or 
other  fleel  waters  of  a  weaker  nature. 
I  know  a  lady  whom  fix  or  eight  grains 
of  the  filings  of  iron  will  purge  more 
flrongly  than  an  ordinary  dofe  of  rhubarb, 
and  yet  fifteen  or  twenty  drops  of  the 
tinBura  martis  Mynfichii  give  her  no  dif- 
turbance. 

I  fometimes  order  this  tindure,  or  the 
mars  faccharatus,  to  be  taken  at  the  fame 
time  with  the  tiidure  of  the  bark  and 
bitters  above  mencioned  ;  but  commonly 
I  advife  the  chalybeates  only  at  thofe 
times  yN\\Qii  the  patients  intermit  the  bit- 
ters. 

The 


ii6        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

Th  e  chalybeate  waters,  although  tlief 
contain  but  a  very  fiiiall  proportion  of 
iron,  are  often  obferved  to  have  remark- 
able effects  in  ftrengtheuing  the  body^ 
Particularly,  the  waters  of  Bath  in  Somer- 
fetfhire  have  been  of  great  ufe  to  many,* 
who,  from  a  weak  ftate  of  the  ftomacit 
and  bowels,  were  affecTred  with  low  fpirits 
and  other  nervous  complaints. 

It  may  be  worth  while  to*  obferve^ 
that  notwithftanding  the  remarkable  eP 
fe61:s  of  chalybeates  in  many  difcafes,  yet 
thele  medicines,  in  a  flate  of  folntioiiy 
or  in  a  faline  form,  do  not  feem  to  enter 
the  blood  ;  for  the  late;  ingenious  Dr 
Wright,  having  made  a  dog,  who  had 
fafted  36  hours,  fvvallow  a  pound  of  bread 
and  milk,  with  which  he  had  mixed  an 
ounce  and  a  half  of  fal  martis  diiFolved  in 
a  fufficient  quantity  of  water,  and  filtrated  j 
he  opened  the  dog  an  hour  after,  and  col- 
lected from  the  thoracic  duct  near  half 
an  ounce  of  chyle,  which  did  not  fufFer 
the  leail  change   of  colour  by  dropping 

into 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS. 


337 


Into  ic  a  tini5ture  of  galls  ;  alrhough  this 
fame  chyle,  after  |  of  a  grain  o^ fil  martis 
was  dilTolved  in  it,  acquired  a  deep  pur- 
ple colour  from  that  tincture  *. 

If  fal  martis  and  other  preparations  of 
iron  do  not  enter  the  blood,  it  is  obvious, 
that  they  may  produce  their  efFeiFts  folely 
by  ftrengthening  the  flomach  and  inte- 
ftines ;  whence  not  only  the  digellion  of 
the  aliment  will  be  better  performed,  but, 
by  means  of  that  remarkable  fympathy 
which  fubliits  between  the  alimentary  ca- 
nal and  the  whole  fyflem,  a  greater  de- 
gree of  vigour  will  be  communicated  to 
every  part  of  the  body :  for  there  is  no- 
thing more  certain,  than  that  we  feel  our- 
felves  either  vigorous  and  healthful,  or 
feeble  and  fickly,  as  the  nerves  of  the  flo- 
mach and  bowels  are  in  a  found,  or  an  in- 
firm ftate. 

The  above  medicines  [a,  h,  c,)  are  to 

be  ufed  not  for  days  or  weeks  only,  but 

U  Q  often 

*  See    Philofophical  Tranfaft.  for   1750,   vol,  50. 
part  2.  p.  595. 


33B        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

often  for  many  months  together,  other* 
wife  no  great  or  lading  benefit  is  be  ex- 
pelled from  them.  In  fome  cafes,  it  may 
be  necelTary  not  to  omit  tlieir  ufe,  whole- 
ly,  for  years ;  for  when  the  caufe  ot  any 
difeafe  is  deeply  rooted  in  the  conftitu- 
lion,  thofe  medicines  which  are  proper 
for  removing  it  muft  be  taken  almofl 
like  our  diet,  not  only  regalarly,  but  fof 
a  very  long  time. 

In  fuch  cafes,  it  may  Jbe  befl  to  take 
the  bark  and  bitters  chiefly  in  the  winter 
and  fpring-feafon,  intermitting  pheir  ufe 
now  and  then  for  a  week  or  two ;  and  ii| 
the  fummer  to  drink  either  fome  of  the 
phalybeate  waters  at  the  wells,  or  a  gill  or 
inore  of  the  Pyrmont  or  Hartfell-Spa  * 
|:hrice  a-day  on  ari  empty  flomach. 

The 


'^  The  HartfellSpa  is  s  water  which  iffues  from  a 
pipuntain  of  that  name  near  MqfFat  in  North  Britain. 
It  has  a  ftrorg  chalybeate  togethei'  with  an  aluminous 
t^fte,  is  much  faturated  with  iron,  and  feems  alfo  to 
contain  an  aluminous  fait.  It  is  deftitute  of  that  fpirif 
pbfefyable  in  the  i^yrmont  water  and  thofe  of  Spa  neac 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS    339 

(d)  The  cold  bath.  Nothing  perh^tps 
ilrengthens  the  nervous  (yfteiii  more  fen- 
ilbly,  or  gives  a  greater  fpring  to  all  the 
vellels,  than  cold  bathing  ;  for  although 
the  v;^ater  only  ad:s  immediately  on  the 
cutaneous  nerves  and  velTels,  yet  its 
llrengthening  power  is,  by  fyrcpathy,  com- 
municated to  the  inmofE  parts  of  the  bo- 
dy. The  cold  bath,  like  the  former  re- 
inedies,  ought  to  be  long  continued.  The 
tnofl  proper  feafons  for  it  are  the  Ipring^ 
iummer,  and  autumn.  It  is  enough,  efpe- 
cially  for  thofe  of  a  fpare  habit^  to  go 
into  the  cold  bath  three  or  four  times 
a  week  ;  but  as  it  tends  to  make  people 
thinner,  thofe  who  are  too  plump  may  ufei 
i£  daily;  "When  the  ftomaeh,  Hver,  or 
U  u  2  other 

Liege,  but  retains  its  virtues  Ibnger,  and  may  be  car- 
ried to  a  great  diftance  witiiout  being  lenfrbly  weaken- 
ed. It  is  a;n  excellent  ftrengthener,  and  has  often  been 
found  ferviceable  in  weakneffes  of  the  ftomaeh  and  in- 
teftines   with  indi^eftion   snd  fliitulerice       For  a  more 

O 

jsarticular  account  of  this  watei ,  fee  EfTays  Phyfical 
arid  literary,  vol.  i.  and  Philofoph.  TranfaS:.  vol.  50, 


'S 


40        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

other  vifcera  are  much  obllru6ted,  or  o*' 
therwife  very  unfound,  the  cold  bath  is 
improper,  lince  by  turning  the  blood  with 
more  force  than  ufual  upon  thefe  parts, 
it  may  increafe,  inltead  of  leiTening  the 
fatienfs  complaints* 

Many  inflances  might  be  given  of  the 
good  efedts  of  cold  bathino;  in  flrenorth- 
ening  people  of  delicate  conftitutions,  and 
making  them  lefs  fubjed:  to  nervous  ail- 
ments ;  but  as  fo  much  may  be  found  to 
this  purpofe  in  Sir  John  Floyer''s  hiflory 
of  cold  bathing,  I  fhall  only  obferve,  that 
I  have  known  it  of  great  fervice*to  feve- 
ral  women,  who,  chiefly  from  a  weaknefs 
of  their  nervous  fyflem,  were  very  liable 
to  fuffer  abortion ;  and  that  a  young  lady, 
whofe  nerves  feemed  to  have  a  very  great 
degree  of  fenlibility,  from  the  intolerable 
pain  which  Ihe  felt  from  -bliflers,  and 
from  the  very  uneaiy  fenfation  which  was 
occafioned  by  every  red  pimple  that  rofe 
on  her  face,  found  more  benefit  from  a 
long  courfe,  firfl  of  the  cold  bath,  and  af- 
terwards 


KERVOUS  DISORDERS.    341 

terwards  of  fea-bathing,  than  from  bark, 
bitters,  chalybeate  waters,  and  various  o- 
ther  remedies. 

To  prevent  miflakes,  it  may  be  proper 
to  mention  here,  that  while  I  recommend 
bitters,  the  bark,  elixir  of  vitriol,  chaly- 
beates,  and  cold  bathing,  as  the  belt 
ilrengtheners  of  a  delicate  nervous  fyflem, 
I  do  not  mean  that  all  thefe  arc  to  be 
ufed,  efpecially  at  once,  by  the  .fame  pa^ 
tient*  In  fome  cafes,  the  tind:ure  of  the 
bark  with  fome  bitters  will  be  fufficient. 
In  others,  more  benefit  may  be  found 
from  ft  eel  in  fubftanccj  or  from  the  chaly- 
beate waters  ;  and  fometimes  cold  bath- 
ing may  fucceed,  or  at  leaft  make  the 
cure  more  com  pleat,  after  internal  ftrength- 
cners  have  in  a  good  meafure  failed.  I 
fhall  only  add,  that  when  nervous  com- 
plaints, arifing  principally  from  a  delica- 
cy of  the  nervous  fyftem,  are  attended 
with  a  quick  pulfe  and  a  preternatural 
heat,  bitters  and  fteel  are  improper ;  but 
an  infufion  of  the  bark  in  cold   water, 

with 


342        OF  THE  CUIIE  OF 

with  elixir  of  vitriol,  will  often  proW 
ufefuL 

(e)  Air.  As  a  cool  and  dry  air  braces 
and  imparts  vigour  to  the  whole  body, 
fo  nothing  tends  more  to  relax  and  wea* 
ken  than  hoc  air,  efpecially  that  which  is 
rendered  fo  by  great  fires,  or  by  ftoves  iit 
fmall  rooms. 

When  the  fiomach  and  bowels  ars 
weak,  the  body  ought  to  be  well  guard- 
ed againfl  cold*  efpecially  in  winter,  by 
w^earing  a  thin  flannel  waiftcoat  next  the" 
Ikin  ;  for  this  will  keep  up  an  equal  per- 
fpiration,  and  defend  the  alimentary  ca- 
nal from  many  impreflions,  to  which  ii 
would  otherwife  be  fubjed:,  upon  every 
fudden  change  from  warm  to  very  cold 
"weather. 

(/)  Aliment*  The  food  ought  td 
be  nourifliing,  but  of  eafy  digeflion,  and 
fuited  to  the  fiomach  of  the  patient.  Fat 
meats  and  heavy  fauces  are  hurtful.  All 
excefs  is  to  be  avoided.  Valetudinarians' 
ought  never  to  eat  more  at  onee.  than  they 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS.    343 

can  digefl  with  eafe.  Every  rime  the 
flomach  is  over-loaded,  its  flrength  is  im- 
paired, and  its  nerves  are  difordered  ;  but 
when  one  eats  moderately,  not  only  the 
ftomach,  but  the  whole  body  is  invigo- 
rated and  repaired.  Above  all  things 
heavy  fuppers  ought  to  be  avoided,  fince 
the  flomach  is  more  apt  to  be  oppreiTed, 
with  the  fame  quantity  of  food,  in  a  ho- 
rizontal than  in  an  ered:  poflure ;  and 
fince  the  digeflion  goes  on  more  ilowly 
in  time  of  fleep,  than  when  we  are  a- 
wake. 

Wine  in  excefs  enfeebles  the  body,  and 
impairs  the  faculties  of  the  mind.  A  few 
glaifes  in  time  of  eating,  or  after  it,  may 
be  ufeful,  but  more  will  load  a  weak  llo-r 
mach,  and  retard  djgeflion.  The  bell  time 
10  drink  a  little  wine,  is  upon  an  empty  fto-^ 
mach  ;  for  the  liquor  being,  in  that  cafe, 
}efs  weakened  and  more  readily  applied  to 
the  nerves  there,  mud  have  the  greater 
seffecfl  in  ftrengthentng  them.  When  my 
flpmapli  has  been  weak,    and  when,  after 

having" 


344         O^^  ^^^  CURE  OF 

having  been  indifpofed,  I  had  hot  palms, 
was  languid,  and  apt  to  fweat  upon  motion, 
I  have  often  found  aiyfelf  much  better  for 
a  glafs  of  claret,  and  a  bit  of  bread,  an  hour 
pr  more  before  dinner ;  in  this  cafe,  the 
wine  cooled  mCj,  niade  my  pulfe  flo\ver, 
and  gave  me  more  fpirits  and  itreqgth,  I 
have  ordered  claret  in  the  fame  way  to  o- 
thers  before  dinner,  and  between  feven  and 
ci^ht  in  the  evening,  with  advantage. 
When  children  are  weakly,  have  a  tenden- 
cy to  the  feropbula,  or  are  inclined  to  the 
rickets ;  or  when  they  have  been  much  re-» 
duced  by  a  fit  of  teething,  I  find  a  little 
claret  once  or  twice  a  day,  upon  an  empty 
ftomach,  an  excellent  ftrengthener,  and 
the  beft  fuccedaneiim  to  the  bark,  which 
many  children  will  not  take. 

These  good  elTedts  of  wine  thus  ufed, 
feem  not  to  have  been  altogether  unknown 
to  Celfus,  who  tells  us,  *'  Si  quis  vero  fto- 
**  macho  hborat,  non  aquam,  fed  vinum 
««  calidum,  bibere  jejunus  debet  *.'* 

WiNl 
^  *  De  naedicina,  lib.  i.  cap.  8, 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS.     345 

Wine  in  general  is  preferable  to  malt- 
liquor,  as  being  lighter,  lefs  apt  to  ferment, 
and  lefs  flatulent.  For  common  drink, 
water  alone,  or  with  a  little  wine,  is  the 
lightefl  and  bed  ;  but  when  the  flomach 
and  bowels  are  troubled  with  acidity,  wa- 
ter mixed  with  a  fmall  proportion  of  rum 
or  brandy  is  greatly  preferable  to  wine  or 
inalt-liquor. 

Under  this  head,  it  may  not  be  impro- 
per to  obferve,  that  the  frequency,  now  a- 
days,  of  ftomach-complaints,  and  nervous 
ailments,  as  they  are  commonly  called, 
may  be  partly  owing  to  the  too  great  ufe  of 
tea.  I  once  imagined  tea  to  be  in  a 'great 
meafure  unjuftly  accufed  ;  and  that  it  did 
not  hurt  the  ftomach  more  than  an  equal 
quantity  of  warm  water;  but  experience 
has  fince  taught  me  the  contrary.  Strong 
tea  drunk  m  any  confiderable  quantity,  in 
a  morning,  efpecially  if  I  eat  little  bread 
with  it,  generally  makes  me  fainter  before 
dinner  than  if  I  had  taken  no  breakfaft 
^t  all;  at  the  fame  time  it  quickens  my 
X  X  pulfe. 


OF  THE  CURE  OF 

pulfe,  and  often  aiFe6ts  me  with  a  kind  of 
giddinefs.  Thefe  bad  effeds  of  tea,  are  mod 
remarkable  when  my  ftomach  is  out  of 
order, 

(g)  Exercise.  Exercife  is  of  fuch  ufe 
for  flrengthening  the  nervous  fyilem,  that, 
without  its  affiftance,  the  moil  powerful 
medicines  will  prove  often  inefFe\5tuaU 
Of  all  kinds,  riding  on  horfeback  has 
been  juftly  eileemed  thebeft:  It  has  been 
particularly  extolled  by  Sydenham  in  hy- 
pochondriac and  hyfteric  diforders.  It 
greatly  promotes  digeftion,  fanguification^ 
the  djflribution  and  fecretion  of  all  the 
fluids ;  and  flrengtheqs  the  whole  body, 
as  well  as  the  ilomach  and  bowels.  Ri- 
ding is  preferable  to  walking,  as  it  fhake? 
the  body  more  and  fatigues  it  lefs.  But 
it  is  proper  to  obferve,  that  any  great  ex- 
ercife, efpecially  riding  on  horfeback,  after 
a  full  meal,  will  diforder  the  ftpmach,  and 
retard  digeftion,  inftead  of  promoting  it. 

The 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS.     347 

The  ingenious  DrGilchrift  of  Dumfries 
has  recommended  failing,  as  a  kind  of  ex- 
ercife  well  adapted  to  the  cure  of  nervous 
complaints  arifmg  from  a  weak  llate  of  the 
blood  and  alimentary  canal,  and  has  given 
fome  inftances  of  its  good  effects  *.  But 
as  we  find  it  very  difficult  to  prevail  with 
any  patient  in  this  place  to  undertake  a 
long  fea-voyage,  I  can  fay  little  on  this 
head  from  my  own  experience.  However, 
I  have  not  only  been  well  informed,  that  a 
gentleman,  who  had  been  long  fubject  to 
epileptic  fits  at  land,  was  never  feized  with 
them  when  at  fea ;  but  a  young  gentleman, 
lately  my  patient,  who  had  a  very  delicate 
nervous  fyftem,  and  whofe  flomach  and  In- 
tellines  vvere  fo  micommonly  fenfible,  that 
a  fingle  ftool,  procured  even  by  the  elixir 
facruniy  made  him  faintifh ;  and  vomiting 
or  purging  was  almoft  fure  to  bring  on. 
fainting  fits  with  flight  convulfions :  This 
perfon,  I  fay,  had  his  conflitution  fo  chan- 
ged while  he  was  at  fea,  that  altho'  du- 
X  X  2  ring 

*  See  hi$  treatife  on  the  ufe  of  feii  voyages  in  medicine. 


34S         OF  THE  CURE  OF 

ring  a  voyage  of  four  or  five  weeks,  he 
vomited  much  every  day,  and  purged  fre- 
quently ;  yet  he  had  neither  any  taintings, 
nor  was  fenfible  of  any  particular  weaknefs 
in  his  flomach  or  bowels.  After  this  voy- 
age, he  had  no  return  of  thofe  fits  to 
which,  for  fome  time  before,  he  had  been 
liable,  till  at  the  diftance  of  eight  months, 
when  he  applied  a  blifler  to  the  under  part 
of  his  bread  ;  the  pain  of  which,  when 
the  plaifler  was  taken  off,  occalioned  faint- 
ings  with  flight  convulfions. 

Friction  of  the  legs,  arms,  trunk  of 
the  body,  and  abdomen^  with  a  flefli-brufli, 
with  flannel,  or  a  coarfe  linen-cloth,  is  a 
kind  of  exercife  that  flrengthens,  promotes 
the  circulation,  and  is  particularly  benefi- 
cial when  the  bowels  are  weak. 

Lying  too  long  in  bed  will  weaken  and 
relax,  while  early  rifing,  like  gentle  exer- 
cife or  cool  air,  will  brace  and  invigorate 
the  body, 

(h)  Amuse- 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS.      349 

(/;)  Amusement.  The  mind  ought 
to  be  diverted  and  kept  as  eafy  and  chear- 
ful  as  pollible  ;  fince  nothing  hurts  more 
the  nervous  fyftem,  and  particularly  the 
concodive  powers,  than  fear,  grief,  or 
anxiety. 

2.  But  as  the  remedies  (a^  ^,  d  d,  e^ 
fi  ^>  ^^)  above  mentioned,  however  pro- 
per for  mending  a  delicate  ftate  of  the 
nerves  in  general,  or  of  thofe  of  the  a* 
limentary  canal  in  particular,  muft  often 
be  ufed  a  confidcrable  time  before  they 
can  produce  any  great  efFetfts,  it  becomes 
frequently  necefTary  to  have  recourfe  to 
medicines  of  another  nature,  in  order  to 
palliate  thofe  uneafy  fymptoms  with  which 
nervous  and  hyflcrical  people  are  often  af- 
fected.    < 

The  principal  remedies  of  this  kind  arc 
the  following,  viz, 

[a)  Such  as  weaken,  during  the  time 
•f  their  operation,  the  fentient  power  of 

the 


%S^        Of  THE  CURE  OF 

the  nerves,  and  confequently  lefTen  thof^ 
pains,  irregular  motions,  or  fpafais,  which 
arife  from  any  unufual  irritation.  The 
chief  of  thefe  is  opium,  which,  when  ap- 
plied, in  fufficient  quantity,  to  the  nerves 
of  any  fenlible  parr,  not  only  lefTens  their 
power  of  feeling,  but,  by  fympathy,  alfo 
that  of  the  whole  fyllem  :  By  this  quality, 
it  often  gives  fudden  relief  in  many  violent 
diforders  of  the  nervous  and  hyfteric  kind* 
It  is  of  great  ufe  in  fixt  fpafms,  as  well  as 
in  alternate  convulfions  of  the  mufcles,  and 
in  pains  not  attended  with  inflammation  i 
In  a  weaknefs,  laffitude,  and  yawning,  oc- 
Gafioned  by  too  great  a  flux  of  the  menfes, 
in  flatulent  colics,  and  fometimcs  in  the 
true  fpafmodic  ajihma,  where  there  is  no 
cbftrudtion  in  the  lungs,  nor  phlegm  op- 
prefling  them.  When  given,  at  bed-time, 
to  the  quantity  of  a  grain,  or  a  grain  and 
a  half,  along  with  a  little  afa  fostida,  I  have 
frequently  fecn  it  lefl!en  that  refllefTnels, 
and  thafe  hot  flufhings  and  fick  fits  which 
many  hypochondriacal  people  are  liable  to; 

bu£ 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS,      351 

but  after  being  ufed  for  fome  time,  it  lofc5 
lhi§  effed  in  a  great  meafure,  unlefs  its  dofe 
be  increafed  from  time  to  time.  It  is  to 
be  obferved,  tliat  if  the  patient  be  in  any 
degree  plethoric,  bleeding,  or  fome  other 
^evacuation  opght  to  precede  the  liberal  ex- 
hibition of  opium;  for  this  will  make  its 
good  efFediS  more  certain  and  confpicuous^ 
and  will  prevent,  in  a  great  meafure,  any- 
bad  Gonfe(juences  that  it  might  ptherwife 
have. 

Altho'  opium  is  often  proper  fojr 
quieting  many  nervous  arid  hyfleric  fym-? 
ptoms,  from  whatever  caufe  they  may 
arife;  yet  it  is  peculiarly  ufeful,  wheu 
thofe  fymptoms  are  principally  owing  to 
an  extraordinary  delicacy  of  the  nervous 
fyflem. 

But  however  ufeful  opium  may  be  in 
many  cafes,  yet  we  often  meet  with 
patient^  who  receive  more  hurt  thaa 
benefit  from  it.  Some  are  aiFeiSted  with 
an  uncommon  faintnefs  and  languor  about 
fhe  prtecordia,  or    with    flartings;   others 

with 


352        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

with  a  ficknefs  and  vomiting,  or  a  violenc 
pain  with  cramps  in  the  flomach,  or  aa 
itching  over  the  whole  body,  erpe:iall7 
about  the  eyes  and  nofe.  In  fome  few, 
it  occafions  a  raving  and  madnefs* 

Alt  ho'  opium^  in  many  cafes,  cxhila^ 
rates,  inflead  of  occafioning  heavinefs  and 
f}eep,  yet  it  ought  rarely  to  be  given  to 
patients  who  are  low-fpirited  ;  for  however 
it  may  relieve  them  for  the  prefent,  yet  af- 
ter its  effects  are  over,  they  generally  be- 
come more  deprefTcd  than  before. 

Opium  given  too  largely,  and  too  long 
continued,  leffens  the  fenfibility  and  vigour 
of  the  whole  nervous  fyllem  ;  whence,  noc 
only  the  flrength  of  the  body,  but  alfo  the 
faculties  of  the  mind  are  confiderably  im- 
paired. 

Bu  T  notwithflanding  thefe  bad  effedts  of 
opium  when  too  liberally  ufed,  I  have  fel- 
dom  feen  any  mifchief  from  it,  as  a  pallia- 
tive, in  diiorders  arifing  from  a  too  great 
delicacy  of  the  nerves,  where  it  was  order- 
ed with  difcretion,  and  given  in  fmall  quan-» 

titie§ 


NERVOUS   DISORDERS.      353 

titles  at  firfl.  Nay,  in  this  way,  thofe 
who  fulFer  mofl:  from  opium  maybe-  brought 
at  length  to  bear  it  eafily ;  a  remarkable 
inftance  of  which,  I  lately  had  in  a 
middle-aged  lady,  whom  four  or  five 
drops  of  laudanum^  taken  by  the  mouth, 
affected  with  a  violent  pain  and  cramp 
in  her  flomach ;  and  fixteen  drops  in  a 
clyflcr,  tho*  it  did  not  occailon  thofe 
complaints,  made  her  delirious  for  twelve 
hours;  for  this  lady  having  afterwards 
begun  with  one  drop  of  laudanum,  gra- 
dually rofe  to  twenty-five ;  nay,  £he  has 
fometimes  taken  that  quantity  thrice  a 
day,  without  feeling  any  of  its  former 
bad  effeds.  In  cafes  of  great  ficknefs 
accompanied  with  a  pain  in  the  ftomach, 
and  frequent  vomiting,  when  the  patient 
could  not  bear  laudanum  inwardlv,  I  have 
ordered  three  or  four  tea-fpoonfuls  of  it 
to  be  rubbed  on  the  belly  and  region  of 
the  flomach,  afterwards  applying  to  thefe 
parts  a  piece  of  flannel  moiftened  with 
Hungary  water  made  hot.  The  effect  was^ 
Yy  that 


354         OF   THE   CURE   Of 

that  all  the  patient's  complaints  began  to 
abate  in  lefs  than  an  hour  after  the  appli- 
cation of  the  imidamim,  which  I  ordered 
to  be  repeated  at  the  diftance  of  fix  or 
eight  hours,  if  it  was  neceffary. 

There  is  one  inconvenience  which  fel- 
dom  fails  to  attend  the  continued  ufe  of 
opium,  viz.  coflivenefs,  which  is  bed  reme- 
died by  taking,  now  and  then,  an  aloetid 
pill,  or  fome  other  genrle  purgative.  Bat 
in  fome  cafes  of  pains  in  the  ftomach  and 
bowels,  with  indigeflion,  much  flatulence 
and  belching,  where  latidanumy  chiefly  thro' 
its  binding  quality,  did  not  anfwer  fo  well, 
I  have  found  very  good  effedls  from  the 
extradiim  hpfqami,-  given  from  a  grain  and 
a  half  to  three  or  four  grains  at  bed-time^ 
and  repeated  in  a  lefs  quantity  in  the  mor~ 
ning:  i  oraltho',  as  an  anodyne,  thepowxrs 
of  this  extrafl  are  much  inferior  to  thofe 
of  opium;  yet,  by  its  proving  often  laxative, 
it  becomes  preferable  to  it  in  feveral  cafes* 

(b)  Su  c  H 


NERVOUS   DISORDERS.      355 

(^)  Such  a.s,  by  afFe(5ling  the  nerves  in 
an  agreeable  manner,  and  perhaps  relaxing 
them,  lefTen  the  fenfe  of  pain,  and  often 
put  a  flop  to  tremors,  convulfions,  fpafms, 
and  an  uncommon  agitation  of  the  nervous 
fyftem.  Of  this  kind  are  the  warm  fcmi- 
■cupium,  pediluvium,  and  hot  fomentations, 
■which  are  frequently  ferviceable  in  cafes 
where  opium  would  be  improper ;  but  as 
they  all  tend  to  relax,  they  are  only  to  be 
ufed  by  delicate  people  as  palliatives  in 
urgent  cafes. 

(c)  SuGH  as,  by  their  peculiar  7?//;2z//;//, 
powerfully  aifdd  the  nerves,  fo  as  not  only 
to  render  them  lefs  fenfibleof  the  irritation 
arifing  from  various  morbid  caufes,  but  al- 
fo  to  communicate  to  them  fome  degree 
of  vigour,  at  leaft  for  a  fhort  time. 

Of  this  kind  are  camphire,  caftor,  mufic, 
and  the  fetid  gums.  The  firH  and  mod: 
remarkable  effeds  of  thefe  medicines  are 
owing  to  their  adlion  on  the  nerves  of  the 
ftomach ;  but  in  what  particular  manner 
Y  y  2  "  ihcf 


356         OF   THE   CURE   GF 

they  operate  on  thefe  nerves,  we  know  not. 
They  do  not  feem,  at  lead  mod  of  them, 
to  poiTefs  any  real  (lupifying  or  narcotic 
qtiality,  like  opium  and  other"  medicines  of 
that  clafs. 

Camphire  is  very  volatile  and  pene- 
trating; it  promotes  perfpiration,  and  fre- 
quently acTts  as  an  antifpafmodic;  it  fome- 
times  procures  fleep  in  fevers  attended  with 
raving,  w\\Gv.t  opium  would  prove  hurtful; 
and  I  have  found  it  of  good  ufe  in  render- 
ing more  quiet  and  compofed  fome  ma- 
niac and  melancholic  patients. 

Gamphire,  given  in  large  quantities  to 
different  animals,  produces  ileep,  fome- 
times  madnefs,  a  vomiting,  purging,  a  flux 
of  urine,  the  hiccup,  epileptic  convuiiions, 
and  death  *  ;  and  feveral  of  thefe  efrecHs 

are 

1*  Gommentar.  Bononienf.  topi.  4.  p.  199.  &c. 

The  following  cafe  was  fome  time  fmce  communi- 
cated to  me  by  a  friend. 

A  gentleman  defirous  of  knowing  ^yhat  efFefls  a  large 
dofe  of  camphire  would  have,  fwallowed  half  a  dram  of 
it  diffolved  in  a  little  oil  of  olives,  and  very  foon  after  per- 

ceive4 


NERVOUS   DISORDERS.      357 

are  fo  fudden,  that  they  mufl:  proceed  ra- 
ther from  the  immediate  aiflioa  of  the 
camphire  on  the  nerv^es  of  the  ftomach* 
than  from  its  being  mixed  with  the  blood. 
Ph  y  s  I  c  I  an  s  have  differed  widel  v  in 
their  opinions  concerning  the  nature  of 
camphire;  fome  iiaving  efleemed  it  hotj, 
others  of  a  refrigerating  nature.  But  as  it 
is  not  my  purpofe  to  enter  deeply  into  this 
difpute,  I  fhall  only  obferve,  that  altho% 
in  fome  cafes,  a  glafs  of  claret  or  port,  or 
even  a  dram  of  brandy,  will  render  the 
pulfe  flower  and  the  body  cooler ;  and,  in 
catarrhous  fevers,  bailard  peripneumonies, 

plearifieSj 

ceived  an  uncommon  but  not  dlfagreeable  glow  of  heat 
m  his  ftomach.  After  having  walked  abroad  for  half 
an  hour,  upon  looking  at  a  news-paper,  he  found  hini- 
felf  quite  incapable  to  underftand  what  he  read,  his 
bead  being  crowded  with  a  great  many  confufed  ideas. 
He  now  began  to  dagger  when  he  walked  :  and,  fome 
time  after,  a  dark  cloud  feeming  to  come  over  his  eyes, 
and  feeling  other  fymptoms  which  made  him  apprehend 
an  apople(flic  attack,  he  went  to  a  neighbouring  apothe- 
cary, with  a  view  to  get  fome  blood  taken  away;  but 
upon  going  into  the  open  z'lg,  all  thefs  fymptoms  began 
tp  abate  ;  and,  in  a  few  hours,  he  found  himfelf  in  hi§ 
ufiial  health,  without  the  afliftance  of  any  remedy. 


358         OF  THE  CURE  OF 

pleurifies,  and  anginas,  blifters  often  lefTen 
the  quicknefs  of  the  pulfe  remarkably;  ne* 
•verthelefs,  wine,  brandy,  and  blifters,  are, 
in   their   own  nature,    not    cooling,    but 
heating :  In  like  manner,  camphirc,  as  its 
effedis  in  the  mouth  and  on  the  jQdn  and 
the  eyes  Ihew,  is  naturally  heating;   but 
fometimes  it  may  cool,  by  lefTening  or  re- 
moving fome  diforder  in  the  body  which 
increafed  its  heat  and  quickened  the  pulfe« 
I  have  known  in  many  cafes,  a  confider- 
able  fenfe  of  heat  raifed  iji  the  ftomach, 
by  a  bolus  of  fix  or  feven  grains  of  cam- 
phire  well  mixed  with  a  fcruple  of  conferve 
of  rofes.     However,  altho' I  cannot  agree 
with  thofe  who  think  camphire  a  cooling 
medicine,  yet  I  do  not  look  upon  it  to  be 
fo  heating  as  fome  have  imagined.     Per- 
haps camphire  may  excite  a  lefs  degree  of 
heat  in  the  ftomach  |:han  in  the  mouth, 
or  even    than  when  applied  to  the  fkin ; 
for  we  know  that    the  fame   ftimulating 
fubftanccs  affed:  the  nerves  of  the  ftomach 
and  of  thefe  parts  very  differently. 

Castor, 


KERVOUS   disorders.      Z59 

Castor.  I  cannot  help  thinking  thd 
Virtues  of  this  medicine,  in  nervous  difor- 
ders,  are  lefs  than  nilny  have  imagined. 
When  given  from  twelve  to  twenty  grains, 
it  fometimes  procures  reft,  not,  as  I  ima-^ 
gine,  by  any  true  narcotic  quality  like  opi- 
um, but  by  lefTening  that  uneafy  fenfarion 
in  the  ftomach  from  wind,  which  is  often 
the  catife  of  watching:  and  indeed,  caflor 
feems  to  have  the  beft  effei^ts  on  thofe  pa- 
tients vi^hofe  complaints  are  in  a  great 
meafure  flatulent.  In  fome  cafes,  I  have 
thought  laudanum  had  a  better  effedt  when 
it  was  joined  with  cajiof  either  in  fubftance 
or  in  tindiure.  A  gentlewoman  aged  up- 
wards of  forty,  much  troubled  with  flatu- 
lence and  low  fpirits,  was  often  feized,  when 
llie  lay  to  fleep,  with  a  fenfe  of  faintnefs 
about  her  ftomach,  which  obhged  her  to 
fit  up,  and  often  prevented  her  from  get- 
ting reft  moft  of  the  night.  Twenty  drops 
of  laiidamim  made  her  drowfy,  but  did  not 
remove  the  faintnefs ;  this,  however,   was 

elfe(5led 


i^o         OF  THE  CURE  OF 

cfFecled  by  adding  to  it  a  tea-fpoonful  or 
two  of  the  tiriB.  cajlorei  compofita^ 

Musk  is  lefs  heating  than  cafior,  and 
may  be  given  in  cafes  where  neither  it  nor 
€pium  are  proper.  Altho'  the  fmell  of  muflc 
is  offenfive  to  many,  yet  I  have  fcarce  ever 
found  it  difagree  with  the  ftomach.  It  is 
chiefly  ufeful  in  the  fubfuhtis  tendimim  in 
fevers,  in  the  hiccup,  cramps  in  the  fto- 
mach, and  other  fpafmodic  diforders,  f 
have  tried  it  in  the  ehincough  and  the  true 
fpafmodic  ajlbma ;  but  it  was  given  in  too 
fmall  dofes  to  determine,  with  certainty, 
as  to  its  virtue  in  thefe  difeafes.  I'wo  or 
three  grains  of  muik  well  rubbed  with  a 
little  fugar,  and  mixed  with  half  a  table- 
fpoonful  of  mint-water,  will  fometimes  ftop 
the  vomiting,  occafioned  by  teething  in 
children.  The  good  effects  of  mullc  are  fre- 
quently lefs  confpicuous  from  its  being  noc 
genuine,  or  taken  in  too  fmall  dofes.  Ri- 
verius  mentions  it  as  having,,  in  his  time,- 
been  given  with  fucceh,  to  the  quantity 
€ff  thirteen  grains,  m  an  hyfteric  fit ;  and 

now 


'     NERVOUS   DISORDERS.      361 

now  it  is  com  moil  to  order  it  in  tills,  or 
a  larger  dofe,   three  or  four  times  a-day. 

Asa  foetida   is  the  flrongefl:  of  the 
fetid  gums,   and  almoll  the  only  one  that 
1  have  been  in  ufe  to  prefcribe  internally 
in  nervous  or  hyfleric  cafe^.     It  has  good 
cfFeds  in  flatulent  diforders,  and  fpafms  of 
the  alimentary  canal,   and  in  allhmatic  fits' 
that  are  either  owing  to  wind  in  the  fto- 
mach,   or  increafed  by  it.     In  cafes  where 
fudden  relief  is  wanted,  it  ought  to  be  given 
difTolved  in  fome  of  the  fimple  waters.     I 
have  often  given  with  advantage  pills  of 
afa  fktida,  p,  iii.  aloes  and  faL  mart,  an^ 
p,  i.    to   patients  who,    along  with  a  co- 
ilivenefs,   were  troubled  with  flatulent  pains 
working   up   from  their  bowels    to    their 
ftomach,    and  producing  ficknefs  and  vo- 
miring.     Thefe    pills    were   taken    every 
nightj  or  once  in  two  nights,  m  futh  quan- 
tity as  to  keep  the  body  gently  open.     Aft 
foaiida,  Wkc  cajlor,  fometimes  procures  fleep; 
it  gives   relief  in  fits  of  lownefs,    efpecially 
when  diflblved  in  fpirits,  or  joined  with  the 
Z  Z'  volatile 


3(52  OF   THE  CURE  OF 

volatile  fairs ;  but  a  too  frequent  repetition 
of  fuch  warm  medicines -hurts  the  ftomacll 
at  laft. 

When  nervous  or  hyfteric  complaints 
are  attended  tvith  a  quick  pulfe  and  a  feve-* 
rifh  heat,  the  fetid  gums,  camphire,  and  ca- 
jtor,  on  account  of  their  heating  quality, 
ought  to  be  given  very  fparingly,  or  not 
at  all.  They  are  much  better  adapted  to 
cafes  vv^here  the' pulfe  is  low  and  flow.  As 
we  do  not  know  the  particular  manner  in 
which  each  of  them  operates  on  the  nerves, 
fo  we  cannot  tell,  before  trial,  in  what 
conftitutions  they  will  feverally  be  moft 
fuccefsful.  Frequently,  one  of  them  will 
anfwer  where  another  has  failed :  nay,  fuch 
is  the  uncommon  difpofition  of  the  nerves 
of  the  ilomach  in  fome  cafes,  that  a  table- 
fpoonful  of  the  juice  of  lemons,  unmixed 
with  any  thing,  has  never  failed  to  relieve 
a  palpitation  of  the  heart,  after  many  of 
the  medicines  called  antihyfleric  had  been 
tried  in  vain:  And  agreeably  to  this,  we 
are  told  by  Riverius,  that  a  draught  or  a; 

elyfleF' 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS.       363 

dyfter    of  vinegar    and  water    has    often 
given  immediate  eafe  in  an  hyfleric  fit  *. 

It   is  to  be  remarked,  that  the  feveral 
medicines  mentioned  mider   this  head  (2. 
/?,  h,  c,)  are  chiefly  ferviceable  as  palliatives, 
for  leflening  or  removing  the  prefent  pain 
or  other  complaints  in  nervoos  and  hyfleric 
cafes,  but  not  for  giving  any  durable  (Irength 
to  the  body,  or  firmnefs  to  the  nerves,  up- 
on which  depends  the  radical  cure.     How- 
ever, when  thofe  diforders  do  not  proceed 
fo  much  from    a  general  debility  of  the 
nervous  fyflera,  as  from  a  morbid  or  unna- 
tural ftate  of  the  nerves  of  the  floraach,  or 
Ibme  other  part,  long  continued  palliation 
may  fometimes  make  a  cure;  for  while  the 
palliative  remedies  lefTen  the  bad  efFe^fls  of 
this  diforder  of  the  nerves,  nature,  either 
by  herfelf,    or    with  their   afliftance,    at 
length  expels  or  fubdues  the  morbid  caufe. 
Thus  obftinate  headachs,  as  well  as  feveral 
other  complaints  commonly  reputed  of  the 
nervous  kind,  have  been  cured,  after  other 
Z  z  2  remedies 

*  Praxis  medica,  lib.  15.  cap.  $, 


364        OF   THE  CURE  OF 

remedies  had  failed,  by  the  long  continued 
ufe  of  opiumf  as  will  appear  from  the  fol- 
lowing cafes,  which  were  communicated  to 
me  by  a  friend. 

N.  N.  aged  28,  healthy  and  flrong,  af-= 
ter  a  fea-voyage  of  three  months,  during 
which  he  was  almoft  conftantly  lick  at  the 
flomach,  but  never  vomited,  was  much  ex- 
pofed  to  cold  in  a  long  journey  he  made 
by  land.  At  this  time  fomething  hap- 
pened which  greatly  vexed  him,  and  foon 
after  he  began  to  be  affe(fl:ed  with  a  fixt 
pain  in  his  forehead,  which  increaling  by 
degrees,  at  lafl  fpread  over  his  whole  head. 
I  faw  him  firft,  about  two  years  after  the 
hcadach  began,  at  which  time  he  complain- 
ed of  a  condant  pain,  attended  with  a 
iveieht  and  heavinefs,  in  his  head;  he  had 
befides  fharp  flying  pains  in  different  parts 
of  it,  as  if  a  nail  had  been  driven  into 
them.  At  certain  times  the  headach  in- 
creafed  greatly,  and  was  attended  with  a 
quick  pulfe.  He  frequently  palled  great 
quantities  of  pale  water,  efpeciaily  in  vio- 
lent 


NERVOUS   DISORDERS.      365 

lent  fits  of  the  headach.  His  fleep  was  dif- 
turbed  with  frightful  dreams,  from  which 
he  ufed  fuddenly  to  awake  in  terror,  and 
with  a  fenfe  of  great  oppreflion.  He  was 
generally  low-fpirited,  fufpicious,  and  pee- 
\ifli,  though,  on  fome  occafions,  he  was 
uncommonly  chearful.  The  leafl  contra- 
didion  threw  him  into  a  fit  of  melancholy. 
He  felt  a  tenfion  about  his  eyes,  efpecially 
when  his  head  was  much  pained.  There 
was  fcarce  any  fecretion  of  mucus  from  his 
nofe;  and  fo  moveable  was  his  nervous 
iyflemj  that  if  he  retained  his  water  too 
Jong,  or  hurt  his  nofe  ever  fo  little,  by 
haflily  bringing  away  from  it  fome  of  the 
hardened  muau,  he  never  failed  to  have 
an  increafe  of  his  headach.  He  was  liable 
to  fits  of  ficknefs  at  his  flomach,  and  often 
threw  up  a  clear  watery  humour  without 
tafte  or  fmell.  He  was  generally  coftive, 
and  his  pulfe  good,  except  when  attacked 
with  the  violent  fits  of  pain  in  his  head, 
which  nothing  was  fo  apt  to  bring  on  as 
any  intenfe  thought  or  long-continued  ap- 
plication 


^6G        OF  THE   CURF   OF 

plication  of  mind.  **  Involunraria  penis 
**  eredtione,  cum  feminis  plerumque  emif- 
**  fione,  taai  die  quam  nocflu^  i^pe  tentatiis 
**  fuit." 

For  three  years  after  I  had  firfl  feen 
l}im  in  this  condition,  he  continued  under 
the  care  of  fome  phyiicians  of  charaifler  in 
Icaly,  who,  having  prefcribed  for  him  a 
variety  of  medicines  without  any  advan- 
tage, gave  him  up  as  incurable.  Upon 
this  I  told  him  one  remedy  flill  remained, 
y/hich  might  be  of  fervice,  viz,  opium;  and 
as  he  readily  agreed  to  my  ajdvice,  I  began 
with  giving  him  half  a  grain  every  nighc 
at  bed-time.  I  alfo  dilfolved  two  drams 
of  ilrained  opium  in  four  ounces  of  fpirit  of 
v/ine,  and  ordered  him  to  rub  a  little  of 
this  on  thofe  parts  of  his  head  which  were 
moft  pained.  The  dofe  ofi  opium  at  bed- 
time was  gradually  increafed  to  a  grain 
and  a  half,  and  fometimes  he  took  a  o-rain 
twice  a-day.  He  had  not  ufed  the  opium  a 
month  before  he  became  fenfibly  better, 
and  in  eight  or  ten  months  found  himfeif 
free  from  all  his  moft  troublefome  com^ 

plaints 9 


NERVOUS   DISORDERS.      367 

plaints.     After  this,  he  began  to  leflen  the 
dofe  of  the  opium,  and  to  take  it  only  once 
in  two  nights,    and  fometimes  feldomer. 
Only  when,   from   vexation  or  any  other 
caufe,  he  was  threatened  with  a  fit  of  the 
headach,  he  immediately  had  recourfe  to 
the  opium  in  a  larger  quantity.     He  was 
advifed  to  ufe  exercife  daily,  and  to  keep 
his  mind  as   eafy  and  chearful  as  pofllble. 
At  firft  he  drank  a  few  glafTes  of  wine  at 
his  meals ;  but,  after  he  had  taken  the  0- 
pium  for  fome  time,  he  found  that  a  fingle 
elafs  of  wine  heated  him,    and  made  his 
headach  worfe;  on  which  account  he  con- 
fined himfelf  to  water  alone.     The  third 
year  after  he  began  to  ufe  the  opium,   he 
was  fo  free  from  his  complaints,    that,  du- 
ring the  fpace  of  twelve  months,  he  did  not 
take  above  three  dofes  of  it. 

It  may  be  worth  while  to  remark,  that 
this  patient  was  fo  fenfible  of  any  change 
of  weather,  that,  by  a  general  feeling  of 
Weaknefs  and  inad:ivity,  and  of  pains  in  his 
joints,  he  could  have  told,  in  the  morning 

before 


368        OF  THE  CURE   OF 

before  he  got  out  of  bed,  that  the  weather 
was  moid  and  rainy,  or  the  winds  cafterly 
or  foutherlv. 

M.  N.   An  unmarried  woman  ajred  ^o. 
after  conliderable  vexation  of  mind,  beo-an 
to  be  feized  in  much  the  fame  manner  with 
the  above  patient,  and  had  taken  medicines 
for  five  years  to  little  purpofe.     The  chief 
lymptoms  were  a  conftant  and  fevere  pain 
over  her  whole  head,  efpecially  the  back- 
part,  a  fliffnefs  in  the  mufcles  of  the  neck, 
great  pain  and  loofenefs  of  her  teeth  ;  dil^ 
turbed  fleep,  frightful  dreamsy  low  fpirits, 
fhakings  and  tremblings  of  her  whole  body, 
cold  and  hot  fits  by  turns,  flulhings  in  her 
face,  flatulence  and  fwellingin  her  flomach, 
with  frequent  belchings,  ina<flivity,  lofs  of 
appetite,    flying   pains  all  over  her  body, 
and  inability  to    apply   with   attention   to' 
any  thing  ferious.     In  fummer   1759,  (he 
began  to  take  the  opmm  in  the  fame  way 
with  the  former  patient.     In  three  weeks 
fhe  found  herfelf  fomewhat  eafier,  and  af- 
ler  fix  weeks  was  much  better  in  every  re- 

fpcftv 


NERVOUS   DISORDERS.      369 

fped.  Her  headach  was  moflly  gone,  her 
teeth  were  free  from  pain,  and  firm,  her 
fleep  much  lefs  diflurbed,  and  the  fluflimgs 
and  fhakings  in  a  great  meafure  removed. 
For  about  two  weeks  after  flie  began  to 
take  the  opium^  fhe  was  troubled  with 
gripes,  which  however  went  off  after  being 
longer  ufed  to  this  remedy.  A  folution 
of  opium  in  fpirit  of  wine  was  often  appHed 
to  her  head  and  neck,  and  always  gave  her 
cafe. 

11.  With  regard  to  the  fecond  inten- 
tion  of  cure,  which  was  to  correct  or  re- 
move the  occafional  caufes  which,  efpcci- 
ally  in  fuch  as  are  predifpofed,  give  rife  to 
all  the  nervous,  hypochondriac,  and  hyfceric 
fymptoms ;  as  thefe  caufes  are  various,  the 
medicines  muil  be  olten  different :  Nay, 
what  is  proper  in  one  cafe,  may  be  liuiiful 
in  another. 

The  occafional  caufes  were  diflinguifli- 
cd  before  into  the  general  and  particular. 
A  a  a  The 


370        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

Th  e  general  caufes  were, 

1.  Some    morbid   matter  bred   in  the 
blood. 

2.  The  diminution   or   fupprefHon  of 
fome  habitual  evacuation. 

3.  The  want  of  a  fufficient  quantity  of 
blood. 

The  particular  caufes  were, 

1.  Wind  ^  •    .1      n  ^    u 

/  m  the  flomacll 

2.  Tough  phlegm    >        ,  , 

°       \  and  bowels. 

3.  Worms  J 

4.  Aliments   improper   in  their  na- 
ture or  quantity. 

5.  Obstructions,  frequently  of  the 
fcirrhous  kind,  in  the  abdominal  vifcera, 

6.  Sudden  and  violent  aiFedtions  of  the 
mind. 

In  order  therefore  to  treat  diflindly  of 
the  fecond  intention  of  cure,  it  will  be  ne- 
ceffary  to  mention  particularly  the  differeni 
remedies  which   are  moft  likely  to  lefTei 
or  remove  thefe  feveral  caufes. 

I.    SOM] 


NERVOUS    DISORDERS       371 

I.  Some  morbid  matter  in  the  blood. 

(d)  As  we  are  often  ignorant  of  the  na- 
ture of  that  matter  in  the  blood  which  is 
the  caufe  of  nervous  diforders,  fo  we  muft 
be  often  at  a  lofs  how  to  corre6t  or  expel 
it.  When  I  fufpedl  it  to  be  of  that  kind 
which  produces  the  arthritis  vaga,  from 
knowing  the  family-dillemper  of  the  pa- 
tient, his  conflitutlon,  and  manner  of  hfe, 
or  his  being  much  troubled  with  flying 
pains  in  his  head,  arms,  or  limbs,  I  rely 
moil  upon  a  proper  diet  an.  exerofe,  with 
the  tindiure  of  the  bark  and  bitters  men- 
tioned under  the  firft  intention  of  cure,  in 
order  to  prevent  the  generation  of  this 
matter;  or  gradually  to  fubdue  and  carry- 
it  off,  when  already  generated.  But  fup- 
poling  the  bark  and  bitters  had  no  power 
to  deftroy  the  arthritic  matter  in  the  blood, 
which  feems  mod  probably  to  be  the  cafe; 
yet,  by  flrengthening  the  flomach  and 
bowels,  they  may  not  only  retard  the  gene- 
ration of  more,  but  prevent,  in  a  great 
pieafure,  an  attack  upon  thefe  parts;  which 
A  a  a  2  are 


372        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

are  obferved  to  fufFer  moft,  when  from 
any  caiife  they  have  been  much  weaken- 
ed, or  otherwife  put  out  of  order. 

The  reputation  which  bitters  have  had 
in  gouty  cafes,  among  the  antient  as  well 
as  fome  of  the  modern  phyficians,  led  me 
to  think,  that  a  well  chofen  medicine  of 
this  kind  might  be  very  ufeful  in  nervous, 
hypochondriac,  or  hyfteric  complaints  from 
an  arthritic  matter  in  the  blood;  And  al^ 
though,  in  patients  in  the  decline  of  life, 
the  tindure  of  the  bark  and  bitters  has  of-' 
ten  failed  me;  yet  in  thofe  who  were  under 
forty  or  fifty,  I  have  found  it  do  more  fer- 
vice  than  any  other  remedy,  ' 

When  the  patients  are  liable  to  fits  of 
the  true  gout,  I  increafe  the  proportion  of 
the  rad,  gentian,  and  cort.  aurant,  in  the 
tindure,  adding  at  the  fame  time  fome 
nutmeg  or  ginger,  efpecially  if  the  flomach 
be  cold  and  flatulent.  In  this  cafe  alfo, 
the  tin6lure  may  be  taken  to  the  quantity 
of  two  table-fpoonfuls  twice  a-day. 

I  have  known  an  indigeflion  and  flatu- 
lence. 


NERVOUS   DISORDERS.       373 

knee,  with  a  pain  and  fickncfs  at  the  fto- 
mach  from  the  gout,  greatly  relieved,  after 
other  medicines  had  failed,  by  drinking, 
thrice  a-day,  fix  ounces  of  a  flrong  decoc- 
tion of  feveral  of  the  common  bitters*  in 
water:  And  a  gentleman  of  my  acquaint- 
ance, who  had  been  much  troubled,  for 
fifteen  years,  with  a  pain  in  his  flomach, 
has  been  cured  by  chewing  two  drams  of 
the  roots  of  gentian  daily.  This  kept  his 
body  open,  and  increafed  his  appetite;  ic 
began  to  give  him  eafe  in  a  few  days;  and 
when,  upon  omitting  ic,  the  pain  returned 
in  a  leiTer  degree,  it  was  quickly  removed 
by  having  recourfe  to  the  gentian  again. 

A  milk  diet  which  fometimes  has 
proved  a  radical  cure  for  the  gout  f,  has 
been  commended  by  Sydenham  in  certain 
hyfleric  cafes,  after  other  medicines  have 
failed  $.     I  can  fay  little  of  its  effedts  in 

either 

*  viz.  Rad.  gentian,  calom.  arooiat.  cort.  aurant, 
fummit.  abfynth.  centaur,  min.  card,  benedidt.  with 
fem.  carv. 

f  Celfus  de  medicina,  lib.  5.  cap.  24. 

$  PiiTert.  Epift,  ad  D.  Cole. 


374        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

either  cafe  from  my  own  experience,  Wc 
meet  with  few  patients  who  will  confine 
themfekes  to  this  diet,  and,  in  feveral  cafes, 
it  is  improper  to  advife  it.  About  eighteen 
years  ago,  I  had  a  patient  aged  48,  who, 
on  account  of  an  ulcer  in  his  lungs,  reftri^t- 
ed  himfelf  for  many  months  to  a  diet  of 
milk  and  vegetables  alone,  and  after  he  got 
free  from  that  difeafe,  continued  to  live  in 
this  way  for  feveral  years.  This  perfon, 
■^ho  was  of  a  very  full  habit,  and  had  been 
formerly  attacked  once  a-year,  at  lead, 
with  the  gout,  remained  free  froai  this  dif- 
temper  for  feven  or  eight  years,  that  is,  till 
fome  years  after  he  had'  returned  to  the 
life  of  ilelli-meats  and  fermented  liquors. 

Lime-water  isfaid  to  have  been  drunk 
fuccefsfully  by  feveral  gouty  patients  *.  I 
have  only  had  one  who  gave  it  a  decifive 
trial.  This  perfon  was  aged  about  fifty, 
and  had  for  feveral  years  been  fubjecH;  every 
winter  to  a  fmart  fit  of  the  gout.  In  Fe- 
bruary 

*  See  Alfton's  Differtation  on  quicklime  and  lim€-wa,si 
%<:t,  part  3. 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS.     375 

bruary  or  March  1758,  he  began  to  drink 
daily  an  Englifh  quart  of  lime-water,  living 
at  the  fame  time  very  temperately.     Be- 
fore the  end  of  the  iirft  year,  he  had  a  very 
flight  attack  of  the  gout :  about  the  end  of 
the  fecond  year,  he  had  rather  lefs  of  this 
difeafe;  but  after  he  had  continued  drink- 
ing  the   lime-water    conflantly    for    near 
three  years,  he  was  feized  with  a  fevere  and 
long  continued  fit  of  the  gout,  in  both  his 
hands  and  both  his  feet.     This  patient  ob- 
ferved,  that  the  lime-water,   when  drunk 
warm,   mended  the  ftace  of  his  fhomach 
when  it  was  difordercd  before  the  comino- 
on  of  a  fit  of  the  gout,  and  he  thought  ic 
had  a  good  efFe(5t  in  driving  this  difeafe  to 
the  extremities.     The   lime-water  agreed 
perfectly  well  with  him,  and  mended   his 
appetite. 

From  this  cafe  it  may  be  fairly  con- 
cluded, that  lime-water  does  not  radically 
cure  the  gout,  or  deftroy  the  arthritic  mat- 
ter in  the  blood,  although,  by  flrengthen- 
ing  the  flomach  and  inteflines  and  pre- 


venting 


376        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

venting  acidity  in  them,  it  may  render  the 
attacks  of  this  difeafe  lefs  frequent,  and  in 
fome  perfoDs  perhaps  lefs  fevere  ** 

When  lime-water  is  drunk  for  the  cure 
of  nervous  complaints  from  an  imperfedl 
gout,  it  ought  to  be  taken  to  the  quantity 
of  at  leafl:  an  Englifh  quart  daily ;  as,  ac 
firfl,  it  is  fometimes  apt  to  occafion  an  un-^ 
eafy  heat  in  the  flomach,  a  little  fweet 
milk  may  be  added  to  it;  but  afterwards 
it  is  better  to  drink  it  alone.  In  the  win- 
ter-feafon,  and  when  the  flomach  is  more 

difordered 

*  It  may  be  proper  to  mention,  that  a  patient  of  Df 
Clerk's,  phyfician  to  the  Royal  infirmary  here,  who  uied 
to  have  a  fevere  and  long-continued  fit  of  the  gout  once 
in  tvfo  years,  has  been  kept  free  from  this  diieafe  for 
near  three  years  paft,  by  drinking  off,  at  once,  an  Eng- 
lifh quart  of  lime-water,  every  forenoon  about  eleven 
o'clock.  The  lime-water  taken  in  this  way,  always 
purges  him  twice  or  thrice  about  three  o'clock  in  the  af- 
ternoon. But  as  this  perlbn  is  of  a  very  full  habit  of 
body,  it  is  probable  that  the  lime-water  has  proved  ufe« 
ful  to  him,  rather  by  that  daily  evacuation  which  ic 
occafions  by  ftool,  than  by  any  virtue  it  poffefles  of  de- 
ftroying  the  arthritic  matter  in  the  blood. 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS.      377 

<3ifordered  thanufual,  the  lime-water  ouo-ht 
to  be  drunk  nearly  blood-warm. 

Soap  has  been  propofed  by  the  late 
Dodtor  John  Glerk,  a  phyfician  of  diflin- 
guifhed  chara(5ter  in  this  place,  as  the  pro- 
per folvent  of  the  arthritic  matter  in  the 
blood  *.  It  has  fometimes  been  of  ufe  in 
old  rheumatifms,  and  may  be  properly  taken 
along  with  the  lime-water,  as  it  prevents 
coflivenefs  and  deflroys  acidities  in  the  ilo- 
mach  and  bowels. 

As  fome  perfons  fubjed:  to  the  true  gout 
have  found  great  benefit  from  drinking, 
twice  a-day,  about  a  gill  and  a  half  of  a 
ilrong  inftifion  of  tahfy  in  boiling  water, 
it  is  probable  the  faine  medicine  might  be 
nfeful  in  thofe  complaints  which  arife  from 
an  imperfedl  gout  affeding  the  ftomach 
and  other  parts.  But  of  this  I  can  fay 
nothing  certain  from  my  own  experience, 
not  having  had  any  patient  who  gave  the 
tanfy  a  fair  trial. 

B  b  b  Issues 

*        *  See  Dr  Prlngle's   Obfervat,  on  the  difeafes  of  the 
&rmy,  part  3.  chap.  2.  edit.  i. 


378        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

Issues  and  perpetual  blifters  have  beeii 
often  of  ufe  in  headachs,  and  in  the  fcia.tic 
or  chronic  rheumatifm  afFetTting  one  leg; 
but  I  have  not  found  theih  do  much  fer- 
vice  in  nervous  or  hypochondriac  com- 
plaints from'  an  arthritic  humour. 

(b)  I  have  obferved  above,'  that  com- 
plaints of  the  nervous  kind  fometimes 
proceed  from  that  kind  of  humour  in  the 
blood,  which  is  commonly,  but  improper- 
ly, called  fcorbuticj  an)  which,  when  ii 
is  thrown  out  on  the  lldn,  appears  in  the 
form  of  tetters,  fcurfy  eruptions,  or  the 
lepra  Gr^scorum.  In  this  cafe,  we  muft  en- 
deavour to  drive  the  morbid  humour  out- 
wards to  the  lldn,  by  vomits,  warm  flo- 
machics,  and  fudorifics ;  after  which  the 
radical  cure  mull  be  attempted  by  mild 
mercurials,  and  the  purging  mineral-waters. 

The  method  which  i  have  always  found 
fuccefsful,  at  lead  in  (lighter  cafes,  is  to 
give  twelve  grains  oi' ihe  pihil^  jEihiopic^e  e- 
very  night  at  bed-time,  and  every  other 

morn  in  2: 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS.       379 

fliorning;  a  dram  or  a  dram  and  a  half  of 
polychreft  fait  dilToived  in  an  Englifli  pint 
of  water  *.  The  fait,  befides  otherwife 
contributing  to  the  cure,  opens  the  body, 
and  prevents  the  pills  from  railing  a  faliva- 
tion,  which  they  are  fometimes  apt  to  do. 
Thefe  medicines  are  to  be  ufed  till  the 
fcurfy  or  leprous  eruptions  quite  difappear. 
When  theobflinacy  of  the  difeafe  requires 
it,  I  give  the  pills  both  morning  and  even- 

Alt  ho'  the  true  fcurvy  is  a  difeafe 
rarely  obferved,  except  hi  thofe  who  live 
at  fea,  or  in  marfhy  places ;  yet  we  fre- 
quently meet  with  patients  who  have  fome 
degree  of  a  fcorbutic  taint  in  their  blood, 
as  appears  from  their  fpungy  gums,  a  laf- 
fitude,  and  other  complaints.  I  have  had 
feveral  patients  of  this  conftitution,  who 
were  deeply  afFeded  with  the  hypochon- 
driac difeafe;  their  chief  fymptoms  were 
low  fpirits  or  melancholy,  watching,  flatu- 
B  b  b  2  I^nce, 

*  In  place  of  this  folution  of  the  polychreft  fait,  I 
iiave  fometimes  ordered  fea-water  to  be  drunk. 


38o        OF   THE    GURE   OF 

lence,  frequent  fpkting  of  the  falha,  a  bad 
digeflion,  flying  pains,  a  tightnefs  about 
the  pviscordiaf  a  dark  colour  and  troubled 
look.  I  have  never  fucceeded  in  curing 
any  of  thofe  patients;  but  a  long  courfe  of 
the  tin(^ure  of  the  bark  and  bitters  with 
^lixir  of  vitriol,  and  daily  exercife,  feem™ 
ed  to  agree  better  w\x.\i  them  than  any 
thing  elfe.  When  they  are  coftive,  I 
order,  once  in  two  or  tliree  days,  as  much 
foluble  tartar  as  is  necelTary  to  open  them 
gently, 

[c)  When  nervous  fyraptoms  are  oc- 
cafioned  by  fome  morbid  matter  remaining 
in  the  blood,  in  confequence  of  fome 
forrner  difeafe  imperfectly  cured  ;  we  muft 
have  recourfe  to  fuch  remedies  as  are  bed 
fuited  to  the  nature  of  that  difeafe  or  the 
circumftances  of  the  patient. 

That  humour  which  produces  therafli 
or  miliary  eruption,  when  it  falls  on  the 
internal  parts,  inftead  of  being  thrown  out 
upon  the  ,&in,  generally  occafions  a  great 

depreffiou 


NERVOUS   DISORDERS.      3G1 

deprefHon  of  fpirits,  anxiety,  and  faint nefsj, 
pale  water  and  watching,  and  fometimes 
raving  and  convulfions.  In  this  cafe,  I 
have  found  mod  advantage  from  the  v/arrri 
pcdiluvium,  or  warm  fomentations  applied 
to  the  feet  and  legs,  from  bhflers,  wine^ 
whey,  andbolufes  of  camphire,  fafFron,  and 
fak  of  hartfhorn.  When  in  the  mihary 
fever,  the  patients  are  much  opprefled  at 
the  ftomach,  and  complain  of  a  difficulty 
of  breathing,  a  gentle  vomit  of  ipecacuanha^ 
-  or  of  an  infufion  of  camomile,  often  gives 
relief. 

The  wzvm  pedihivhm:  and  fomentations 
often  procure  fleep,  and  give  fome  imme- 
diate eafe  to  the  patient ;  they  likewife 
contribute  to  promote  the  miliary  erup- 
tion, by  removing  that  tenfion  or  fpafmo- 
die  contradlion  of  the  cutaneous  vefTels 
which  frequently  retards  it.  Where  the 
patients  are  in  any  degree  plethoric,  bleed- 
ing will  often  not  only  nve  fome  prefcut 
relief,  but,  by  relaxing  in^^  vafcular  iy flem, 

will 


S8;i        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

will  alfo  contribute  to  the  expulfion  of  th$ 
morbid  matter  by  the  ildn. 

2.  When  nervous,  hypochondriac,  or 
hyfteric  fymptoms  proceed  from  a  diminu- 
tion of  fome  habitual  evacuation,  that 
evacuation  is  to  be  promoted  by  the  pro^ 
per  remedies. 

(i)  When  ihemenfeszre  obll:ru(51;ed,  we 
muft  endeavour  to  recal  them,  and,  till 
that  can  be  done,  the  rnoft  troublefome 
fymptoms  are  to  be  palliated.  There  are 
few  cafes  in  which  we  are  oftener  difap- 
pointed  than  in  bringing  back  the  month- 
ly evacuation,  after  it  has  been  long  fup- 
prefTed ;  and  the  medicines  proper  in  one 
cafe  may  prove  ineffe^ual  or  even  hurtful 
in  another. 

When  the  want  of  good  blood  is  the 
caufe  why  the  jnenfes  do  not  flow,  the  befl 
remedies  are  the  bark,  bitters,  and  fleel, 
together  with  a  nourilhing  diet,  and-  exer- 
cife.  After  the  patient  has,  by  thelfe 
means,  got  more  and  better  blood,  it  ought 

to 


Nervous  disorders.    3^^ 

lo  be  determined  to  the  uterus  by  frequent 
dofes  of  tinilura  facra,  and  by  making  the 
patient  fit  every  evening  over  the  (learns 
of  warm  water. 

If  a  plethora  ot  a  too  great  abundance 
of  blood  prevents  the  flux  of  the  nic '7 fes, 
bleeding,  efpecially  in  the  foot  or  at  the 
ancle,  and  gentle  purges,  will  prove  mofl 
cfFe(5tuaL 

When  the  thicknefs  or  vifcidity  of  the 
blood  hinders  it  from  making  its  way 
through  the  Uterine  veifels,  frequent  vo-- 
mits,  and  the  piklie  mercuriaks  laxantes,  or 
gentle  purges  with  calomel,  will  anfwer 
befl. 

Lastly,  when  the  fuppreflion  of  the 
mcnfes  has  been  owing  to  a  fpafmodic  con- 
tradion  of  the  uterine  vefTels,  in  confe- 
quencc  of  cold,  fome  violent  paflion,  or 
other  caufes,  the  chief  remedies  are  the 
warm  femicupium  and  pediluvhtm,  oily 
draughts,  and  pills  of  aloes,  afa  fojtida,  c^- 
traft  of  black  hellebore,  and  faffron.  A 
tlyfler  of  warm  water,  with  thirty  or  forty 

dropsr 


D 


4        OF  THE   CURE  OF 

drops  of  laudanum,  may  be  given,  in  th^ 
evening,  about  the  time  the  menfes  Ihould 
return; 

Obstinate  obftrudlions  of  the  month- 
ly evacuation  in  women,  have  fometimes 
httn  cured  by  eledrifying  them,  and 
drawing  the  fparks  chiefly  from  their 
thighs.  Bur  Dr  Clerk  informs  me,  that 
he  has  obferved  this  remedy  to  facceed 
befl  in  thofe  whofc  pulfe  was  fraall  and 
languid. 

Some  young  womeUj  about  the  timt 
of  the  return  of  the  menfes,  are  apt  to  be 
feizied  with  violent  pains  in  their  back  and 
belly,  with  faintings,  raving,  and  fome- 
times convulfions.  In  fuch  cafes,  the  warm 
femicupium  is  of  great  ufe ;  but  as  often 
this  cannot  be  readily  got,  I  have  gene- 
rally ordered,  with  fuccefs,  a  clyfler  of 
warm  water  with  fifty  drops  of  laiidanmn, 
and  a  lianncl  bag  with  the  emollient  herbs 
to  be  wrung  out  of  hot  water,  and  applied 
to  the  abdomen.  When  the  patient  hss 
feeen  coftivej  a  laxative   dyiler  with  afa 

frtlda 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS.      385 

fwtida  mufl  be  given  to  procure  a  flool,  be- 
fore the  anodyne  one  is  injected. 

In  the  intervals  between  the  returns  of 
the  menfeSy  in  order  to  render  the  patient  , 
lefs  liable  to  the  above-mentioned  com- 
plaints, I  have  advifed,  with  good  effect, 
the  frequent  ufe  of  the  warm  pediluviuniy 
fomedofes  oi  i\iQ.  pilules  rufi,  and  thofe  oily 
draughts  which,  in  this  cafe,  were  much 
commended  by  Sir  David  Hamilton*;  and 
which  1  have  alfo  found  of  good  ufe  in 
pains  of  the  bowels,  in  thofe  whom  the 
menfcs  had  left. 

I  have  fometimes  met  with  unmarried 
women,  who  were  liable  to  be  attacked 
with  faintings  and  convulsive  fits,  after  e^ 
very  period  of  the  menfes  was  over;  which 
feemed  to  be  owing  to  this  evacuation  be- 
ing lefs  copious  than  ufual.  In  a  cafe  of 
this  kind,  the  following  remedies  ufed  for 
two  or  three  months  proved  fuccefsful. 

Ccc  R, 

*  De  praxeos  regulis,  cap.  3, 


386        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

R.  Aloes  focrotin. 
Af.  fcetid. 

Extract,  hellebor.  nigr, 
Sal.  Mart. 

Croc.  Angi.  ana  drach.  i. 
Ellx.  proprietat,  q.  f.  ut  f.  pif.  gr.  iv. 
Quarum  capiat  v.  vel  vi.  alternis  nodlibus. 
R.  Rad.  Gentian.  ^ 

Calam.  aromat.  ana  unc.  i. 
Summit,  centaur,  min.  drach.  vi. 
Flor.  anthos,  drach.  ii.  •' 

M.  f.  materialia  infundenda,  per  hor.  vi,  in  aqu.  bul- 
lient.  lib.  iv.  colatur  adde 
Tinft.  Cort.  Peruvian,  unc.  x.   Mifce. 
Cape  unc.  iii.  bis  in  die. 

Along  with  thefe  medicines  ihepedilu' 
viim  v/as  ufed  every  night  at,  bed  rime. 

When,  in  the  decline  of  hfe,  the  menfes 
ceafe,  various  nervous  or  hylteric  fymp- 
toms  appear,  vi^hich  are  generally  klTened, 
and  fometimes  removed,  by  frequent  fmall 
bleedings,  gentle  flomachic  purges,  and 
ifliies. 

(b)  If  the  hcemorrhoidalllux  is  wanting 
in  thofe  who  have  been  sccuflomed  to  it, 
we  mufl  endeavour  to  recal  it  by  emollient 

fomentations, 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS.    387 

fomentations,  and  aloetic  medicines.  When 
thefe  or  other  remedies  prove  incfFedual, 
HoiFman  has  advifed  leeches  to  be  applied 
near  the  amis  once  a  month. 

{c)  Wh  en  eld  ulcers,  or  fores  too  quick- 
ly dried  up,  have  given  occafion  to  ner- 
vous diforders,  purgatives,  and  efpecially 
IfTues  or  a  feton,  will  be  mofl  fuccefsful  in 
carrying  ofF  that  humour  which  diflurbs 
the  body. 

(i)  Wh  en  pimples  or  other  eruptions 
on  the  face  have  been  fuddenly  repelled  by 
improper  applications,  violent  headachs, 
giddinefs,  ficknefs  at  the  flomach,  palpita- 
tions, and  other  nervous  fymptoms  have 
been  fometimes  the  confequence.  In 
fuch  cafes,  if  the  morbid  humour  cannot 
be  brought  back  to  the  face,  we  muft  try 
to  carry  it  off  by  perpetual  blifters  or  iifues 
in  the  head  or  neck-^^d  by  mercurial 
purges, 

C  c  c  2  3.  When 


388        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

3.  Wh  EN  nervous  or  hyftcric  complaints 
are  occafioned  by  a  want  of  blood,  in  con- 
fequence  of  an  immoderate  flux  of  the 
hemorrhoids,  menjes,  or  lochia;  the  cure 
confifls  in  retraining  thefe  evacuations, 
and  filling  the  velTeis  by  means  of  fuch  ali- 
ments as  are  light  and  nourifliing,  but  not 
heating.  In  the  mean  time,  the  violence  of 
the  fymptoms  mufl  be  abated  by  anodynes 
and  wine,  or  other  cordial  medicines.  A 
horizontal  pofture  is  here  of  confiderable 

ufe. 

The  medicines  which  I  have  found  moft 
fuccefsful  in  reftraining  an  immoderatQ 
flux  of  the  menfes,  are  the  tinBura  rofannriy 
terra  Japojiica,  alum,  opiums  and  elixir  of 
vitriol. 

I  have  fometimes  given  the  alum  mixed 
with  terra  Japonica  as  in  the pulvis  Jiypticus ^ 
but  of  late  I  have  prefcribed  it  m,ore  fre- 
quently, in  the  following  form,  as  being 
lefs  difagreeable  to  the  Itomach, 


^» 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS,    389 

fL.  Ladl.  recent,  bullient.  lib.  i. 

Alum.  rup.  pulverat.  drach.  i.  ad  drach.  i.  fs.  Mlfce 
ut  fiat  coagulum  ;  et  fero  colato  ad^e 

Sacchari  albl  unc.  i. 
Cape  unc.  iii.  (juater  in  dip. 

If  the  alum -whey  occafions  a  foiirnefs  in 
the  ilomach  with  a  cardialgiaj  a  fcruple  of 
crabs  eyes  or  prepared  oyiter-fliells  twice 
or  thrice  a-day  will  be  ufefuL  In  one 
cafe,  the  alum-whey  leflened  a  profluvhm 
menfium  after  the  patient  had  taken,  for 
fome  time,  forty  drops  of  the  tiu^iura  an- 
:i;pbtbif]ca  thrice  a-day,  without  any  benefits 
The  fame  medicine  alfo  cured  a  fiior  alum 
of  feveral  years  Handing. 

I  have  not  obferved  remarkable  eifedts 
from  the  bark,  in  flopping  hemorrhages. 
After  an  immoderate  flu>c  of  the  menfes 
had  refifled  that  medicine  taken  in  fub- 
ftance  for  near  a  fortnight,  ■  I  have  feen  ic 
yield  in  twQ  or  three  days  to  ft^ch  a  mixturq 
as  the  following, 

Jl.  Aqu.  menth.  unc.  vi. 

Cinnamom.  f  v.  unc.  il, 

Confect.  Japon.  drach.  vs. 

Syr.  limon.  unc.  ii.     Mifce. 
Clape  cochJ.  ii.  aXz  vel  6ta  oiiaque  hora. 


^90        OF   THE  CURE  OF 

To  remedy  the  coftivenefs  vvhieh  this 
mixture  generally  occaiions,  it  becomes 
necelTary  once  in  two  or  three  days  to  or-^ 
der  either  fome  rhubarb  or  ^  laxative 
clyller. 

The  bark,  which  is  more  remarkable 
for  its  flrengthening  than  aflringent  qua- 
lity, feems  to  be  lefs  adapted  for  flopping 
hasmorrhages,  than  for  refloring  flrength 
to  thofe  w4io  have  been  reduced  by  them. 
However,  it  is  often  very  proper,  not  only 
to  give  the  bark  after  the  flux  of  blood  is 
leflened,  but  alfo,  at  the  fame  time,  with 
fome  of  theftronger  aftringents. 

When  di profluvium  menfinm,  or  a  flood- 
ing after  abortion,  is  attended  with  or 
preceded  by  an  acute  pain,  not  inflamraa- 
itory,  in  the  lower  part  of  the  back  or  belly, 
and  returns  with  greater  violence ;  as  of- 
ten as  the  pain  returns  or  increafes,  opium 
will  prove  a  more  efFcLTiual  remedy  than 
any  of  the  aftringents,  as  happened  in  the 
following  cafe. 

Mrs,  D— -5  aged  betv/een  30  and  40, 

having 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS.     391E 

having  gone  abroad  too  foon  after  an  a- 
bortion  in  the  fourth  month  of  her  preg- 
nancy, was  feized  with  a  violent  pain  in  her 
back  and  the  lower  part  of  her  belly,  which 
returned  once  in  eighteen  or  twenty  hours, 
and  was  always  attended  with  an  exceilive 
flooding,  which  abated  when  the  pain  left 
her.  Having  been  called,  after  fhe  had 
ufed  feveral  aftringent  and  flrengthening 
medicines  with  very  little  advantage,  I  or- 
dered a  clyfler  of  fix  ounces  of  an  infufion 
of  dried  red  rofes  in  boiling  water  with  fifty, 
drops  of  laudanum,  to  be  given  every  nighc 
at  bed-time,  and  once  in  two  days  a  laxa^ 
live  clyfler  in  the  morning,  if  it  fhould  be 
'HecefTary.  After  the  firil  anodyne  clyfler, 
fhe  had  little  either  of  the  pain  or  flood- 
ing, and  after  the  third,  was  quite  cured 
of  both  thefe  complaints. 

LuDovicus  Septal lus*,  and  after 
him.  Sir  David  Hamilton  f,  has  commend- 
ed  a  ilrong   deco(5lion  of  bitter  orange- 

fkins, 

*  See  Anima.'verf.  med.  lib.  7,  art.  144, 
f  Oe  Pf-axTO^  re>i,ij]'",  cap.  3. 


S92        OF   THE  CURE  OF 

fldns,  as  a  mofl  efFedlual  remedy  in  a  pro" 
fluvium  menfium  ;  and  I  have  been  informed 
by  an  able  phyfician,  that  he  has  prefcri- 
bed  it  once  and  again  with  fuccefs  in  the 
following  manner: 

R.  Cort.  aurant.  Sevll.  recent,  integr.  vll. 

Coque  ex  aqu.  fontan.  lib.  iti.  ad  lib.  it. 

Colaturse  adde  facchar.  alb.  une.  i. 

Elix.  vitriol,  gutt.  Ix. 
Cape  cochl.  vi.  tertia  quaque  hofa. 

I  have  known  the  fluor  albus  cured,  in  a 
great  meafure,  by  a  courfe  of  fea-bathing, 
after  many  powerful  medicines  had  httn 
tried  in  vain.  The  fame  remedy,  in  the 
intervals  of  a  profluvium  menfium,  has  con- 
tributed muck  to  lefTen  that  flux ;  and  a 
lady  aged  between  40  and  50,  a  patient  of 
mine,  who  was  fo  much  diflrefled  with  the 
bleeding  piles,  that  fhe  rarely  went  to  ftool 
without  lolins  a  2:reat  deal  of  blood,  found 

Oct  ^ 

more  benefit  from  fea-bathing  than  from 
any  thing  elfe.  It  not  only  lefiened  the 
difcharge  of  blood  from  the  ha^morrhoidal 

veflels. 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS.     393 

Veflels,  but  foon  gave  her  a  better  appetite, 
more  ftrength,  and  a  frelher  colour. 

And  thus  much  may  ferve  for  the  cure 
of  the  general  occafional  caufes  of  nervous, 
hypochondriac,  and  hyfleric  diforders:  I 
come  next  to  mention  the  method  for 
leffening  or  removing  their  particular 
caufes,  viz^ 

I.   Wind  in  the  flomach  and  bowels* 

As  this  proceeds  either  from  a  debility 
or  fpafmodic  affe^lion  of  the  alimentary 
canal,  or  from  improper  aliments ;  the  re- 
medies for  performing  the  radical  cure  may 
be  found  under  the  firfl:  intention  of  cure 
above  *,  and  below  under  N*^  4.  where  the 
treatment  of  nervous  complaints,  ariiing 
from  errors  in  diet,  is  laid  down.  The 
medicines  proper  for  giving  immediate  re- 
lief for  the  uneafy  fenfations  occafioned  by 
flatulence,  will  be  mentioned  afterwards, 
when  I  come  to  treat  of  the  cure  of  fome 
D  dd  of 

*  See  above,  page  326,  6"^. 


394        OF  THE  CUKE  OF 

of  the  principal  fymptoms  of  the  nervous 
or  hyfteric  kind. 

2.  Tough  phlegm  bred  in  the  flomacli 
and  intellines. 

Th  e  cure  of  this  phlegm  is  often  tedi- 
ous and  difficult,  and,  in  many  cafes,  can 
by  no  means  be  obtained :  For  although, 
by  repeated  vomits,  we  may  clear  the  llo- 
mach  of  the  prefent  load;  yet  unlefs  that 
organ  is  fufficiently  ftrengthened  and  its 
fecretory  vefTds  reftored  to  a  found  flate, 
more  phlegm  will  be  continually  produced. 
Wherefore,  belides  frequent  vomits,  we 
mufl  have  recourfe  to  the  bark,  bitters, 
chalybeates,  animal  food,  and  exercife,  e- 
fpecially  riding  or  failing  *.  Repeated 
dofes  of  tinBura  rhabarbari  amara,  or 
elixir  facrum,  are  not  only  ufeful  for 
flrcngthening  the  flomach  and  bowels,  but 
for  carrying  down  and  evacuating  part  of 
the  phlegm  that  diforders  them.     I  have 

fometimes 

*  Si  vero  pituita  ftomachus  impletur,  utilis  navigatio. 
Celfus  de  medicina,  lib.  4.  cap.  5. 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS    395 

fometimes  thought  that  the  emplaftrum  flo- 
machicim  applied  to  the  epigaflric  region 
was  of  life. 

Those  who  are  apt  to  breed  much 
phlegm  in  their  ftomach,  generally  find  it 
neceflary  to  take  a  vomit  once  in  ten  days 
or  a  fortnight,  and  fometimes  oftener. 
When  a  vomit  of  ipecacuanha  is  taken,  ei- 
ther an  infufion  of  horfe-radifh  fhoald  be 
drunk,  or  a  litde  brandy,  or  powder  of 
niuflard,  fhould  be  added  to  ei^ch  draught 
of  the  warm  water;  for  thefe,  by  their 
warm  Jiimulus^  tend  to  invigorate  the  fto- 
mach, at  the  fjme  time  that  the  phlegm 
opprefling  it  is  evacuated. 

As  lime-water  dilfolves  ichth)ocollay  and 
other  glutinous  fubftances,  I  thought  it 
might  be  worth  while  to  try  what  efFecfl:  it 
would  have  on  the  tough  phlegm  bred  in 
the  ftomach.  With  this  view,  I  poured 
three  gills  of  lime-water  on  a  gill  of  that 
phlegm  newly  vomited  up,  and  mixed  them 
well  together :  at  firft,  the  phlegm  feemed 
tP  be  rendered  fomewhat  thicker  by  the 
D  d  d  3i  lime' 


396        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

lime-water;  but,  after  ftaiiding  five  or  fix 
hours,  it  was  quite  diflblved.  After  this, 
one  of  my  patients,  at  my  defire,  mixed  one 
part  of  very  tough  phlegm,  brought  up 
from  his  ftomach  by  a  vomit  in  the  even- 
ing, with  two  parts  of  lime-water ;  and 
upon  examining  this  mixture  next  morn- 
ing, he  found  the  phlegm  had  wholely 
loft  its  tenacity.  This  gentleman,  at  the 
fame  time,  mixed  fome  of  the  phlegm  with 
common  water;  but  after  ftanding  24 
hours,  it  retained  its  tenacity  in  a  great 
meafure,  although  it  was  rendered  thinner 
by  the  mixture  of  the  water. 

When  lime-water  is  ufed  with  a  view 
to  the  cure  of  phlegm  in  the  ftomach,  it 
fhould  be  drunk  to  the  quantity  of  near 
an  Englifli  pint  every  morning  upon  an 
empty  ftomach,  and  nothing  ihould  be 
taken  for  two  hours  after.  An  hour  and 
a  half  before  dinner,  and  as  long  before 
fupper,  half  a  pint  fliould  be  alfo  drunk. 

Further,  as  often  as  an  emetic  is  ufed, 
the  patient,  fome  time  after  its  operation 

is 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS.    397 

is  over,  fliould  firfl  of  all  take  a  draught  of 
lime-water,  which  in  this  cafe  will  act 
more  flrongly  in  difTolving  any  phlegm 
that  may  remain  in  the  flomach,  as  well 
as  in  bracing  its  relaxed  pores  and  vcfTels. 

When  together  with  a  tough  phlegm 
there  is  a  confiderable  degree  of  acidity  in 
the  flomach,  I  have  known  good  effe^Sls 
from  ten  grains  of  the  fal  ab/ynthii  or  Ml 
of  tartar  given  twice  a-day.  When  the 
flomach  is  quite  free  from  acidity,  the 
elixir  of  vitriol  may  be  of  ufe  to  flrengthen 
its  veflels,  although  it  has  no  effedl  in  dif* 
folving  the  phlegm, 

3.  Worms  in  the  flomach  and  inte- 
rlines. 

In  this  cafe,  while  we  palhate  the  mod 
troublefome  fymptoms,  we  mud  endea- 
vour to  deftroy  the  worms  by  fuch  anthel- 
mintic medicines  as  may  feem  bed  adapt- 
ed to  the  particular  ftate  of  the  patient. 
J  fliall  only  add  on  this  head,  that,  in 
fprne  cafes,  I  have  feen  good  eife^^s  from 


398        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

an  infufion  of  the  root  of  the  Indian- 
pink  *  ;  bur  this  remedy  is  certainly  much 
lefs  efficacious  here  than  in  South  Carolina, 
and  feems  to  lofe  a  great  deal  of  its  vir- 
tue by  being  long  kept. 

I  have  ordered,  with  good  fuccefs,  to 
fome  grown  perfons,  fix  drams  or  an 
ounce  of  Spanilli  foap  daily.  It  deftroys 
the  afcarides  as  well  as  the  round  and  flat 
worms.  Lime-water  has  been  much  com- 
mended as  an  anthelmintic  ;  but  it  will 
fcarcely  be  of  any  ufe,  except  when  the 
worms  are  lodged  in  the  flomach,  or  high 
up  in  the  inteflines;  for,  if  they  remain 
m  the  ilium  or  the  inferior  part  of  the 
jejunum,  the  lime-water  will  be  moflly  all 
abforbed  before  it  can  reach  them, 

4.  Aliments  noxiovis  from  their  qua^- 
lity  or  quantity. 

When  nervous,  hypochondriac,  or  hy- 
{leric  diforders  are  owing  to  this  caufe,  or 

increafed 

*  EiTays  phyfical  and  literary,  vol.  %, 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS.    399 

increafed  by  it,  a  proper  regulation  of  diet 
is  the  principal  remedy. 

(a)  If,  by  a  long  habit  of  eating  too 
little,  the  conco6live  powers  are  much 
weakened,  the  patient  muft,  by  flow  de- 
grees, increafe  the  quantity  of  his  ali- 
ment. 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  his  complaints 
have  been  occaiioned  by  excefs  in  eating 
and  drinking,  he  mufl  gradually  leiTen 
the  quantity,  till  he  has  reduced  himfelf 
within  the  bounds  of  flrid  temperance  j 
that  is,  he  muft  never  eat  fo  much  at  din- 
ner as  to  make  himfelf,  foon  after,  unfit 
to  go  about  any  bufmefs,  or  apply  him- 
felf to  any  ftudy  ;  and  he  muft  make  light 
fuppers,  or  none  at  all,  if  he  does  not  find 
his  dinner  dip-efted. 

I  have  known  fome  people  much  af- 
flidted  with  the  gout,  while  they  lived  too 
fully,  who  being  afterwards  reduced,  by  ne- 
ceflity,  to  a  fpare  diet,  got  quite  free  from 
that  diftemper :  And  indeed,  when  ner- 
vous 


400        OF  THE  CURE  OF  i 

Vous  ailiiients  have  been  owiog  to  high 
living,  or  an  arthritic  matter  in  the  blood, 
abstinence,  or  rather  moderation  in  eat- 
ing or  drinking,  is  of  the  greatell  confe- 
quence  in  the  cure. 

(b)  With  regard  to  the  quality  of  the 
food,  the  patients  ought  to  abftain  from 
all  heavy  and  fat  meats,  from  whatever 
they  find  hard  of  digeflion,  and  from  all 
flatulent  aliments. 

If  the  ftomach  and  bowels  have  been 
hurt  by  a  flatulent  diet,  greens,  roots, 
fruits,  and  whatever  is  apt  to  breed  muck 
wind,  ought  to  be  avoided  ;  and  the  pa- 
tient fhould  live  chiefly  on  bread,  rice, 
and  flelh-meats,  with  a  few  glafles  of  wine 
of  a  good  body  and  age,  and  not  apt  to 
turn  four. 

If  heavy  meats,  rich  fauces,  and  the 
too  free  ufe  of  wine  or  other  ilrono:  li- 
quors  have  hurt  the  ftomach  and  bowels, 
the  patient  ought  gradually  to  reduce 
himfelf  to  a  fmall  quantity  of  wine,  and 

cat 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS.    401 

eat  only  the  lighter  animal  fubllances 
plainly  drefled,  and  fuch  vegetables  as  are 
leafl  flatulent.  In  this  cafe,  a  diet  of 
milk  and  vegetables  alone  may  fometimes 
be  of  great  fervice,  which,  however,  muft 
not  be  gone  into  all  at  once,  but  very 
gradually  :  And  it  is  further  to  be  obfer- 
ved,  that  while  fome,  who  had  been  ac- 
cuflomed  to  animal  food  and  wine,  have 
found  great  benefit  by  abftaining  from 
them,  without  lofing  much  flrength,  or 
any  fpirits ;  there  have  been  others  of  a 
different  conftitution,  who  could  not  bear 
the  want  of  fuch  a  diet ;  and,  when 
wholely  confined  to  milk  and  vegetables, 
were  not  only  troubled  with  faintnefs  and 
lownefs  of  fpirits,  but  with  great  flatu- 
lence and  other  diforders  of  the  prm<e  via  : 
From  which  it  may  appear,  how  far  fome 
have  erred  in  recommending,  without 
fufficient  reflridlion,  a  diet  of  this  kind 
in  the  greateft  part  of  nervous  difor- 
ders. 

E  c  e  It 


402         OF  THE  CURE  OF 

It  may  be  obferved,  that  many  peo- 
ple who  have  weak  or  windy  flomachs, 
efpecially  fuch  as  are  liable  to  the  gotit, 
find  not  only  vegetables,  but  milk  to  agree 
bed  with  them,  when  they  take,  at  the 
fame  time,  fome  pepper  or  other  fpicery  : 
And  I  have  known  fome  perfons  fubject 
to  violent  attacks  of  the  gout  in  their 
llomach,  who  have  been  much  the  bet- 
ter for  fwallowing,  every  morning,  twelve 
or  fixteen  corns  of  white  pepper,  with  the 
water-gruel  which  they  took  for  break- 
fafl. 

That  abilinence  from  wine  and  flefh- 
meats,  and  a  diet  wholely  of  milk  and 
vegetables,  does  not  prevent  nervous  ail- 
ments, we  have  a  (Irong  proof  in  the 
poorer  fort  of  the  country-people  of  North 
Britain,  who,  though  they  live  on  milk, 
whey,  barley,  peafe,  and  oat-meal,  with 
coleworts,  potatoes,  and  other  vegetables, 
without  almoft  any  animal  food  or  fer- 
mented liquors,  are  neverthelefs  remark- 
ably fubjed  to  pains  in  their  flomach  and 

bowels, 


NERVOUS   DISORDERS.      403 

bowels,  flatulence,  and  other  con  plaints 
of  the  hypochondriac  or  hyfleric  kind 
conne(5led  with  it. 

Nay,  however  much  a  milk  and  ve- 
getable diet  may  be  of  ufe  in  fome  cafes, 
to  lelTen  or  remove  fuch  diforders  as  have 
been  the  confequences  of  hio;h  living;  yet, 
in  general,  it  is  certain  that  a  diet  of  this 
kind  is  more  apt  to  produce  flatulence  in 
the  firft  pafTasies  and  all  the  troublesome 
fymptoms  depending  upon  it,  than  a  diet 
confiding;  partly  of  vegetable  and  partly  of 
animal  food.  Nay,  even  milk  itfelf, 
which  holds  a  kind  of  middle  place  be- 
tween vegetable  and  animal  fabftances,  has 
been  obferved  by  Hippocrates,  to  be  hurt- 
ful to  thofe  who  are  much  fubje^^  to  wind 
in  their  bowels  *. 

Because  a  mixture  of  flefh-meats  with 
vegetable  fubftances  and  water,  kept  in  a 
heat  equal  to  that  of  the  human  body, 
has  been  obferved  to  ferment  fooner  and 
much  more  brifldy  than  thofe  vegetables 
E  e  e  2  and 

f  Aphor.  k&.  $.  No.  64. 


OF  THE  CURE  OF 

and   water  alone,    fome    have    concluded 
that  vegetable  and  animal  aliments  toge- 
ther will  produce  more  flatulence  in  the 
primae  vU  than  vegetables  alone :    But  it 
ought  to  be  confidered,  that  the  digeftion 
of  the  aliments  is  very  different  from  that 
change  which  happens  to  them  in  a  chy- 
mical  veflel ;  and  that,  as  the  produdioa 
of  flatulence  in  the  flomach  and  bowels 
is  chiefly  owing  to  a  weaknefs   of  thefe 
parts,  a  difordered  {late  of  their  nerves, 
or  fpafmodic  contradtions  in  them  ;   a  cer- 
tain proportion  of  animal  food,  by  invigo^ 
rating  the  alimentary  canal,  gratefully  af- 
feeling:  its  nerves,  and  renderino;  it  lefs  lia-? 
ble  to  irregular  motions  and  fpafms,  may 
occafion  lefs  flatulence   in   time  of  dige*; 
flion,  than  would  happen  from  vegetables, 
done. 

When  nervous  complaints  are  owing 
to  an  arthritic  matter,  a  diet  of  milk  and 
vegetables,  if  the  ftomach  can  bear  it, 
may,  by  deflroying,  or  rather  not  fur- 
iiiihing,  frefli  fupplics  of  that  matter,  efled' 


NERVOUS   DISORDERS.      405 

a  cure.  But  where  the  flomach,  from 
its  weaknefs,  or  the  peculiar  difpofition 
of  its  nerves,  cannot  bear  the  greatefl 
part  of  vegetable  aliments,  fuch  a  diet 
would  be  extremely  improper ;  vi^hilfl:  the 
lighter  animal  food,  in  fuch  quantity 
as  can  be  eafily  digefled,  will  not  only 
nourifh  and  ftrengthen  the  boily  more, 
but  will  a6t  as  an  anodyne  in  preventing 
or  allaying  many  complaints  of  the  flo- 
mach and  bowels. 

Upon  the  whole,  no  eonflant  rule  can 
be  given  as  w  the  kinds  of  food ;  for 
while  a  diet  chiefly  of  flelh-meats  anfwers 
well  with  fome,  others  live  belt  on  milk 
and  vegetables,  either  alone  or  with  a 
fmall  proportion  of  animal  food.  In  like 
manner,  with  regard  to  liquor,  fome  can- 
not do  without  wine,  while  water  alone, 
or  water  with  a  little  brandy  or  rum,  a- 
grees  befi:  with  others.  Every  valetudi- 
nary perfon  ought,  therefore,  to  keep  by 
thofe  kinds  of  meat  and  drink  which  he 
/inds  by  experience  to  be  lighteil  and  mod 

agreeable 


4o6        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

agreeable  to  his  ftomach.  But  whatever 
aliments  may  be  ufed,  moderation  iliould 
be  conflantly  obfcrved,  as  people  are  ge- 
nerally lefs  hurt  by  the  quality  than  by 
the  quantity  of  what  they  eat  and  drink. 

(c)  Wh  en  the  ftomach  and  inteflines 
have  been  much  hurt  by  high  living,  or 
weakened  by  flatulent  food,  befides  a  pro- 
per diet,  the  bark,  bitters,  chalybeates, 
and  exercife  *  will  be  often  necefTary  for 
giving  new  flrength  to  the  alimentary 
canal.  Gentle  vomits  and  (lomachic 
purges  may  alfo  be  of  ufe  to  cleanfe  the 
firft  paflages,  and  promote  the  natural  fe-- 
cretions  there. 

5.  Indolent  obflrudions,  chiefly  of 
the  fcirrhous  kind,  in  fome  of  the  abdo- 
minal vifiera. 

Obstructions  of  the  indolent  kind 
have   their   feat    either   in    the  fecretory 

tubes 

*  See  the  firft  intention  of  cure,    p.  325,  'i^c  above 
..{a)  {b)    {c)  &c. 


NERVOUS   DISORDERS.      407 

tubes  of  the  glands,  or  in  other  vefTels 
fnialler  than  thofe  which  carry  red  blood, 
in  the  glandular  follicles,  or  in  the  fpaces 
of  the  tela  cellulofa,  in  which  there  is  de- 
pofited,  by  the  exhaling  arteries,  a  fluid 
which  foon  becomes  too  thick  to  be  ta- 
ken up  by  the  abforbcnt  veins,  and  is 
daily  increafed  by  the  addition  of  new 
matter  of  the  fame  kind.  In  fome  cafes, 
the  vefTels  of  the  obftrutSled  part  are  fo 
changed  from  their  original  flate,  as  to 
feparate  from  the  blood  fluids  which, 
by  ftagnating  in  the  follicles  or  cellular 
fpaces,   acquire  a  cartilaginous  nature. 

It  is  generally  difficult  to  difcover  when 
nervous  or  hypochondriac  complaints  are 
owins:  to  fcirrhous  or  other  indolent  fwell- 
ings  in  the  coats  of  the  flomach  and  in- 
teflines,  or  in  the  other  abdominal  vif- 
cera,  unlefs  when  the  tumours  can  be  felt, 
which  is  feldom  the  cafe.  But  when  I 
meet  (efpecially  in  women  after  the  menfis 
have  left  them)  with  complaints  of  want 
of  appetite,  indigellion,  vomiting,  flatu- 
lence. 


4o8        OF  THE  CURE   Of 

lence,  and  pains  in  the  belly  which  have 
continued  long,  without  any  confiderablc 
intervals  of  eafe,  and  inftead  of  yielding 
to  medicines,  become  worfe  i  I  fufpedt 
fome  fixt  obflrudion  in  the  ftomach,  in- 
teflines,  or  neighbouring  parts,  efpecially 
if  the  patient  has  a  quick  pulfe,  without 
any  coniiderable  heat  or  thirft. 

When  hypochondriac  or  hyfleric  ail- 
ments are  owing  to  indulent  obftrud:ions, 
we  mufl  endeavour  to  refolve  them  by  de- 
grees, and,  in  the  mean  time,  palliate  the 
moll  troublefome  fymptoms  occaiioned  by 
them. 

(a)  There  are  few  remedies  of  great- 
er fervice  in  obftrudtions  of  the  indolent 
and  cold  kind  than  gentle  fridion.  It 
not  only  promotes  the  circulation  through, 
the  fmall  velTels,  but  tends  to  attenuate, 
and  increafe  the  abforption  of  the  matter 
flagnating  in  the  follicles,  or  extravafated 
in  the  fpaces  of  the  cellular  membrane  of 
the  obflruded  part.     1  have  had  inftances 

of 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS.    409 

of  incyfled  tumours  cured  by  long  conti- 
nued frkTrion  alone.  One  was  on  the 
upper  eye-lid,  about  the  fize  of  a  common 
cherry  and  of  the  fleatomatous  kind. 
Another  was  Htuated  in  the  memhrana 
adipofa  on  the  left  fide  of  the  abdomen  ;  ic 
was  biggar  than  one's  fifl,  pretty  foft,  and 
felt  like  the  fleatamas  or  atheromas.  It 
was  treated  with  nothing  but  friction  of  the 
part  twice  a-day  with  oleum  camphor atiinu 
For  the  firft  four  months  it  did  not  feem 
to  yield  ;  but  foon  after  it  began  to  leflen, 
and  went  oif  very  fad.  The  fmall  tu- 
mour on  the  eye-lid  was  rubbed  only  with 
the  faliva, 

(h)  Warm  fomentations  are  of  great 
ufe ;  they  not  only  relax  the  vefTels  and 
attenuate  the  obftrmfting  matter,  but  by 
their  warmth  promote  the  circulation  of 
the  fluids  through  the  obflrudled  part. 
They  will  often  either  refolve  indolent 
fwellings,  or  bring  them  to  a  fuppuration, 
when  internal  medicines,  without  their 
F  f  f  aiUflance^ 


410        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

afliflance,  would  do  little.  They  ought 
to  be  applied  every  morning  and  evening 
for  near  two  hours,  but  fhould  not  be  fo  hot 
as  to  be  in  hazard  of  inflaming  the  ikin  or 
making  it  too  tender.  I  generally  ufe  flan- 
nel-cloths wrung  out  of  hot  water  alone; 
and  fometimes,  in  place  of  this,  a  hot  de- 
coction of  wormwood  and  camomile  flowers 
or  of  the  tops  of  hemlock,  adding  to  it  a 
little  vinegar. 

It  is  obvious,  that  when  obfl:ru6tions  are 
deep  feated  in  the  abdomen^  neither  fridions 
nor  fomentations  will  have  fuch  remarkable 
elFeds  as  when  they  lie  in  the  tunica  cellulofa 
immediately  below  the  flcin., 

{c)  Gentle  vomits  and  purges  *  fre- 
quently repeated,  are  particularly  ufeful  in 
beginnino;  indolent  oblirudtions  of  the  ab- 
dominal  vifcera.     But  when  an  obflrudion 

in 

*  I  look  upon  the  good  effeds  of  fea-water  in  glandu- 
lar fvvellings  to  be  chicflj'  owing  to  its  purging  quality. 
When  it  does  not  prove  laxative,  but  makes  the  patient 
thirfty  and  hot,  no  good  is  to  be  expefled  from  it. 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS.      411 

In  the  flomach  is  fo  far  confirmed  as  to  be 
irrefolvable,  vomits,  efpecially  of  the 
f  flronger  kind,  may  prove  hurtful  by  irri- 
tating the  infar(5ted  part,  or  even  burlling 
fome  of  its  vefTels  •.  And  here  it  may  be 
remarked,  that  many  of  thofe  hot  and 
acrid  medicines,  commonly  prefcribed  in 
nervous  diforders,  muft  be  likewife  impro- 
per in  this  cafe,  lince  by  their  ilimulating 
quality,  they  will  be  more  apt  to  inflame 
and  exafperate,  than  to  leffen  or  refolve 
my  fcirrhous  obflrudtion. 

(d)  With  regard  to  thofe  internal  me- 
dicines commonly  called  deobftruent,  they 
can  have  little  or  no  effect,  when  the  ob- 
flrudling  matter  is  accumulated  in  the  fpaces 
of  the  te/a  celkiofa,  and  are,  therefore, 
chiefly  ufeful  in  thofe  obflrudions  whole 
feat  is  in  the  follicles  of  the  glands,  or  in 
the  fmall  veflels  themfelves. 

The  internal  deobftruent  medicines  which 

I  have  ufed  with  mofl  advantage,  are  the 

F  f  f  2  Tartarus 

*  See  above,  p.  201. 


412        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

tartarus  foluhilisy  fal  pol'jchrejim,  mercury, 
and  foap. 

I  give  the  foluble  tartar  from  drach, 
i.  fs.  to  drach.  iii,  or  half  an  ounce,  and 
the  polychreft  fait  from  fcrup.  ii.  to  drach. 
L  fs.  dilTolved  in  an  Englifh  pint  of  water, 
which  is  to  be  drunk  at  three  or  four 
draughts  every  morning  for  two  months 
or  longer. 

I  commonly  prefcribe  mercury  as  a  deob- 
Uruent,  either  in  the  form  of  the  piluk 
mercuriales  laxantes,  or  of  the  folution  of  the 
corrolive  fublimate.  To  prevent  thefe  me- 
dicines from  running  too  much  to  the 
mouth,  I  give  the  pills  only  once  in  two  or 
three  days,  and  when  the  folution  is  ufed,  I 
order  a  gentle  purgative  once  in  four  or  five 
days. 

Jn  glandular  fwellings  of  the  neck,  of 
the  flruraous  rather  than  the  true  fcirrhous 
kind,  I  have  feen  nothing  fucceed  fo  well  as 
a  courfe  of  the  bark,  in  fubftance  or  de- 
co6lion,  for  feveral  months  j  giving,  at 
the  fame  time,  every  fourth  or  fifth  night, 

fucl\ 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS.     413 

fuch  a  dofe  of  calomel  and  rhubarb,  or  of 
the  pihiliS  tnercuriales  laxantes,  as  may  purge 
the  patient  twice  or  thrice  next  mornings 
Nor  have  I  found  thefe  medicines  lefs  elH- 
cacious,  when,  together  with  indolent 
fwellings  and  a  fcrofulous  habit,  there  was 
a  confiderable  degree  of  fever;  as  in  the 
following  cafe, 

A  child  aged  7  years,  of  a  lax  and  fcro- 
fulous habit,  in  March  began  to  be  af- 
fedted  with  hard  fwellings  on  her  left  wrift 
and  one  of  her  legs,  and  with  a  foft  oede^ 
matous  fwelling  of  her  feet  and  hands ;  at 
the  fame  time,  her  tongue  was  foul,  her 
pulfe  quick,  and  her  ikin  hotter  than  na- 
tural. In  June  following,  when  Iwasfirfl 
called,  all  thefe  fymptoms  were  increafed^ 
fhe  was  much  emaciated,  and  her  pulfe  beat 
above  J  30  times  in  a  minute.  As  /he  had 
ufed  many  other  remedies  without  advan- 
tage, after  a  vomit  and  a  gentle  purge,  I 
prefcribed  a  decodtion  of  the  bark,  with 
fome  fpirit  of  vitriol,  to  be  taken  four  times 
a-day,  in  the  quantity  of  twQ  or  three  ta. 


414        or  THE  CURE  OF 

ble-fpoonfuls ;  and  once  in  five  or  fix  days 
a  dofe  of  rhubarb  with  calomel.  In  lefs 
than  four  weeks  after  fhe  began  tliis  courfe, 
her  pulfe  became  flower,  her  fkin  cooler, 
and  her  appetite  better ;  and,  at  the  end  of 
two  months,  fhe  was  almofl  q^uite  free  from 
all  her  complaints. 

When  glandular  fwellings  lie  immediate- 
ly under  the  flciu,  the  mercurial  ointment 
rubbed  into  the  part,  or  a  flrong  mercurial 
plaifler  applied  to  it,  has  fometimes  made 
a  cure.  A  gentleman,  aged  21,  had  one  of 
the  conglobate  glands  on  the  left  fide  of  his 
neck  fwelled  from  cold.  This  fwelling, 
which  was  without  pain,  increafed  gradual- 
ly, fo  that  at  the  end  of  three  months,  it 
had  acquired  the  fize  of  a  hen's  egg,  cut 
longitudinally  through  the  middle.  After 
he  had  ufed,  for  fix  weeks,  mercurial  purges, 
fomentations,  and  the  common  difcutient 
plaiflers  to  no  purpofe,  the  emplajirum  mer^ 
curiale  cum  tripUce  mercurio  was  applied  to 
ihe  part.  In  two  or  three  days  after,  he 
pegan  to  falivate,  and  for  a  week  continued 

to 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS.     415 

to  fpic  at  the  rate  of  an  Englifh  pint  a-day. 
After  this,  the  fpitting  decreafed  gradually, 
and  left  the  tumour  reduced  to  one  third 
of  the  fize  it  had  before.  The  warm  wea- 
ther of  fummer,  which  foon  followed,  car- 
ried off  what  the  mercurial  plaifter  had  left 
unrefolved. 

Among  the  deobflruent  medicines,  Spa- 
nifh  foap  deferves  a  principal  place.  Obfti- 
nate  glandular  fwellings  have  fometimes 
yielded  to  it  after  mercury  had  been  tried 
in  vain,  as  will  appear  from  one  of  the  fol- 
lowing cafes.  It  (hould  be  given,  daily, 
from  half  an  ounce  to  an  ounce  or  more, 
if  the  patient's  flomach  can  bear  fo 
much. 

I.  A.  M.  upwards  of  20  years  of  age, 
applied  to  me  in  April  1752  ior  a  fwelling 
in  the  epigaftric  region,  a  little  below  the 
cartilago  enfifoimis.  This  tumour  was  near 
as  large  as  one's  fifl,  and  felt  hard,  but 
without  pain:  It  was  evidently  under  the 
mufcles  and /m/o//if/^w,  and  as  it  fliifted  its 

place 


4i6         OF  THE  CURE  OF 

place  upon  the  patient's  turning  from  one 
fide  to  the  other,  I  conje(n:ured  its  feat  to 
be  in  the  omentum^  efpecially  as  it  was  at- 
tended with  no  diforder  in  the  ftoraach  or 
bowels. 

I  advifed  him  to  let  warm  water  fall  from 
a  confiderable  height  upon  the  fwelling; 
to  cover  it,  all  day,  with  a  piece  of  flannela 
to  ufe  the  pilulae  fcilliticdSf  and  drink  with 
them,  at  lead,  an  Englifh  quart  of  cow- 
whey  daily.  Some  time  after,  he  took  pills 
of  gum  ammom,  galban.  and  aloes,  but  with- 
out any  benefit ;  for  the  tumour  became 
larger,  and  when  he  fat  to  write,  which  his 
bufinefs  often  obliged  him  to  do,  he  fufFered 
much  uncalinefs  from  that  pofture.  On 
this  account,  I  fent  him  to  the  country  in 
the  end  of  July,  and  advifed  him  to  fwal- 
low,  every  day,  from  half  an  ounce  to  a 
whole  ounce  of  Spanifh  foap,  and  continue 
the  whey.  Towards  the  end  of  Odober 
he  returned  to  town  with  the  tumour  fenli- 
bly  diminiilied,  and  by  going  on  with  the 
foap  till  about  the  beginning  of  January, 

it 


NERVOUS   DISORDERS.      417 

it  was  fcarcely  to  be  felt.  He  then  left 
off  all  medicine,  and  has  been  ever  fince 
in  good  heakh,  without  any  fenfible  fwel- 
ling  or  hardnefs  about  the  part  firll  af- 
fected. 

2.  A  gentleman  aged  33,  afrer  having 
been  fubje6t,  for  feme  years,  to  rheumatic 
pains,  obferved,  in  March  1752,  an  indo- 
*lent  glandular  fwelling,  neither  foft,  nor 
yet  of  the  hardefl  kind,  on  the  right  fide 
of  his  neck,  immediately  above  the  clavi- 
cle. In  the  autumn  followino;  havino; 
txpefed  himfelf  to  cold  and  wet,  on  a  jour- 
ney, this  fweiling  became,  foon  after,  con- 
fiderably  larger.  lie  then  loft:  fome  blood, 
which  was  very  fizy ;  and  in  November  he 
iifed  fome  \vafm  difcutient  fomentationsj 
and  the  mercurial  laxative  pilis.  Thefe 
laft,  which  he  took,  once  in  two  days, 
for  about  three  weeks,  made  him  fpit  gent- 
ly, but  did  not  diminiih  the  tumour.  A- 
bout  a  fortnight  after  he  had  difcontinued 
the  piljSj,  he  began  to  take  three  djachms 
G  £  2  of 


4i8         OF  THE  CURE  Of 

of  foap  daily,  and  foon  doubled  that  quaii'^ 
tity.  -  In  three  weeks,  the  fvvelling  being 
fenfibly  diiiiinifhed,  he  was  encouraged  to 
continue  this  medicine;  but,  about  the 
middle  of  January,  having  catched  cold, 
he  was  feized  v/ith  a  diarrhea,  and  obliged 
to  omit  the  foap  for  above  a  fortnight. 
In  February,  foon  after  the  diarrhcea  left 
him,  he  began  to  be  troubled  with  a  violent 
itching  over  his  whole  ikin,  efpecially  when  * 
in  bed,  and  this  iymptom  increafing,  to- 
wards the  end  of  this  month,  he  was  ad- 
vifed  once  more  to  difcontinue  the  foap. 
At  this  time  the  tumour  was  reduced,  at 
leaft,  one  half,  fmce  the  middle  of  Decem- 
ber. 

On  accoirat  of  the  increafe  of  this  itch- 
ing and  other  complaints,  he  never  return- 
ed to  the  foap;  but  after  trying  a  variet 
of  other  medicines,  and  the  air  of  different^ 
climates,  in  vain,  he  died  in  Augull  1754. 

Since  people  affedted  with  the  (lone  of-- 
ten  take  foap  to  a  greater  quantity  than] 
this  patient  didj  without  any  complaint  cif| 

itchingyj 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS.     419 

^'Celling,  I  think  this  fyraptotn  cannot  be 
jultly  afcribed  to  that  niedicine;  efpeciall/ 
as  the  patient  had  nothing  of  it  for  he 
firfl  five  weeks  he  ufed  the  foap,  and  as  it 
came  on  after  a  diarrhosa  occafioned  by 
cold.  Neither  can  I  think  the  fwelling  m 
his  neck  wg-s  critical,  and  that  the  itching 
^nd  other  bad  fymptoms  were  owing  to  the 
matter  in  it  being  diflblved  by  the  foap, 
and  carried  into  the  blood;  becaufe,  in 
March  1752,  when  this  tumour  began,  the 
patient  had  no  particular  complaints;  and 
in  November,  when  k  was  become  fo  large 
as  to  be  broader,  tho'  not  fo  thick  as 
one's  fid,  his  health  vy^s  bad  and  his  blood 
iizy. 

Alt  ho'  I  have  prefcribed  foap  in  feve- 
ral  other  cafes  v/ithout  the  fame  fuccefs,' 
yet  as  many  glandular  fwellings  are  altoge- 
ther incurable,  foap,  if  it  ihould  be  found 
to  anfwer  in  two  cafes  out  of  ten,  oughf: 
£0  be  efteemed  a  valuable  medicine. 

If  it  ihall  be  objected  to  the  virtues  of 

foap  as  a  refolvent,  that  fcirrhous  tumours, 

G  g  g  ^  when 


420         OF  THE  CURE  OF 

when  cut  out  of  the  body,  are  not  difTolvec! 
by  being  unmerred  m  a  folution  of  it  in  wa- 
ter; I  anfwer,  that  foap,  in  difTolving  uri- 
nary concretions,  a61:s  like  other  chymical 
ii2enfirua;  but  in  refolving  obflru6led  glands, 
it  niufl:  be  affiiled  by  the  mqtion  communi- 
cated to  the  fluids  by  the  heart  and  arte- 
ries, which  it  may  probably  ftimulare  into 
Uroiiger  contractions,  and  thus,  as  well  as 
by  its  refolving  quality,  contribute  to  the 
cure.  But  further,  I  do  not  imagine  that 
foap  will  ever  dilfolve  a  uwc  fcirrhus  either 
in  the  body  or  out  of  it ;  I  only  expedl  that 
it  will  fometimes  remove  glandular  obflruc- 
tions  that  are  lefs  confirmed  and  of  a  fofter 
kind. 

Qu  I  CKSi  LVER  and  its  preparations,  al- 
tho'  among  the  moft  powerful  deobflruents, 
if  they  fail  of  reloWing  hard  fwellings,  are 
apt  to  HTiLate  and  inflame  them.  This  ef- 
fect has  been  generally  afcribed  to  the 
weight  of  the  mercurial  medicines,  but 
Irt^ithoiu  fuiflcient  reafon;  for  wheii  ten 
graii.s  of  calomel  have  raifedand  kept  up  a 

ialivation^ 


NERVOUS   DISORDERS.      42r 

faiivation,  in  fomc  perfons,  for  two  or  three 
weeks  together,  and  when  a  flight  fpitting 
lias  been  occafioned  by  a  grain  and  a  half 
of  corrofive  fublimate,  diflblved  in  fpirits 
and  taken  in  four  days,  it  is  plain  that  the 
addition  of  weight  to  the  mafs  of  blood,  in 
thefe  cafes,  miiil  have  been  fo  fmall,  that 
no  fenfible  change  in  the  circulation  could 
have  been  produced  by  it. 

Soap  has  not  only  this  advantage  ovei? 
mercury,  that  it  may  be  ufed  in  mofl  cafes, 
■without  irritating  and  inflaming,  and  con* 
fequently  without  any  hazard  of  changing 
a  icirrhous  fwelling  into  a  carcinomatous 
Qne,  but  it  does  not  melt  down  the  fluids 
and  reduce  the  flrength  like  mercurials. 

SoAp  feems  to  ad:  chiefly  by  its  detergent 
quality,  and  perhaps,  in  fome  cafes,  as  a 
true  diflblvent.  Every  one  knows  the  pro- 
perty of  a  folutipii  of  foap  for  cleaning  the 
ilvin :  And  if  a  patient  fwaliows  an  ounce 
of  foap  daily,  his  blood  will  in  time  become 
fo  faponaceous,  that  whilfl  it  circulates 
fhroDgh   the  half  obflruded  vefFels  of  a 

fwelled 


422        OF  THE  cure:  OF 

fwelled  gland,  it  may  infeiifibly  clear  away, 
and  carry  along  with  it  that  vifcid  matter, 
which,  by  adhering  to  the  infide  of  thefe 
vefTels,  in  a  great  meafure  lilled  up  their 
cavities. 

Of  late,  the  extrael  of  the  ckuta  has  been 
mnch  extolled  as  a  deobflruent  *  ;  but  al- 
tho'  I  have  tried  it,  as  well  as  the  powder 
of  hemlock,  in  feveral  hard  fwellings,  fome 
of  which  were  external,  and  others  fituated 
within  the  abdomen,  I  have  only  feen  it  do 
fervice  in  two  cafes,  one  of  which  was  a  large 

CD 

fcirrhous  fwelling  in  the  left  breaft,  and  the 
other  a  hardened  gland  in  the  neck.  Thp 
latter  was  removed  by  the  extrad:  of  thp 
cicuta  in  eight  months;  and  the  former, 
by  the  continued  ufe,  either  of  thij  medi- 
cine, or  of  the  powder  of  hemlock,  has 
not  only  been  kept  from  increafing  for  thefe 
four  years  pafl,  but  is  now  reduced  to  onp 
^hird  of  the  bulk  it  once  had, 

{e)  In 

*  See  Dr  Storck's  three  treatlfes  on  the  virtues  of  the 


■4m 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS.     423 

(e)  In  attempting  the  cure  of  obflruc- 
tions  in  the  vifcera,  befides  fome  of  the  re- 
medies above  mentioned,  it  will  be  proper 
to  order  a  diet  confifling  of  th^  ieait  fla- 
tulent vegetables,  weak  broths,  and  the 
lighter  meats.  Ripe  fruits,  if  they  do  not 
offend  the  ftomach  and  bowels  by  their  fla- 
tulence, may  be  ufeful  on  account  of  their 
faponaceous  or  refolving  quality  ;  as  alfo, 
goat  or  cow  whey,  efpecially  in  the  begin- 
iiing  of  fummer,  when  it  is  moft  impreg- 
nated with  the  virtues  of  the  grafs  and  o- 
ther  herbs.  The  patient's  drink  ought  to 
be  rather  tepid  than  cold,  and  the  befl  is 
either  water  alone,  or  mixed  with  a  little 
Rhenifh,  or  fome  other  light  white  wine. 

(/)  Exercise,  efpecially  riding,  is 
exceeding  ufeful,  not  only  to  prevent,  but 
to  remove  beginning  obftructions.  And 
here  it  may  be  proper  to  obferve,  that  as 
thofe  who  lead  a  fedentary  life,  efpecially 
the  lludious,  (who  in  reading  and  writing 
fit  fo  much  with  their  body  bent  forward), 

ar(? 


424        OF  THE   CURE  OF 

are  mofl  fubjefl  to  hypochondriac  diforders" 
and  obftrudions  ;  it  would  be'  of  great 
confequence  for  fuch  to  allote  fome  part  of 
the  day  for  exercife^  or  if  that  cannot  be 
done,  at  leaft,  to  read  or  write  moftly  {land- 
ing; in  which  poflure  the  abdominal  vifcera 
are  much  lefs  comprefTed  than  in  the  others 

i^g)  In  confiderable  obftrucftions  of  the 
vifcera,  if  the  patient  be  of  a  full  habit, 
fhe  cure  ought  to  begin  with  bleeding, 
which,  by  emptying  the  vefTels,  may  not 
only  tend  to  lefTen  the  obflruflion,  but 
siffift  the  adion  of  the  deobftruent  medi- 
cinesi 

(h)  Wh  I  l  ST  by  the  ufe  of  fome  of  the 
above  remedies,  we  aim  at  a  radical  cure^ 
we  muft  not  negle(5t  to  palliate  the  fymp- 
toms  which  fo  often  attend  thefe  ob- 
flru£tions.  This?  is  to  be  done  chiefly  by 
opiates,  and  by  the  le'^s  heating  carminatives 
and  nervous  medicineso  But  of  this  more 
hereafter, 

6.  Vro'- 


NERVOUS  DISORDERS.     425 
6.  Violent  afFeclions  of  the  mindo 

When  nervous  or  liyfteric  diforders  a- 
rife  from  this  caufe,  the  cure  confiflsj 

(a)  In  avoiding  all  difagreeable  and 
jQiocking  fights,  and  every  oGcafion  that 
may  be  apt  to  excite  violent  paflions,  or 
commotions  of  the  nervous  fyftem, 

(b)  In  ftrengthening  the  nerves,  fo  that 
the  mind  may  be  lefs  apt  to  be  flrongly 
aiFecled,  either  by  inTpreffions  from  exter- 
nal objecSls,  or  by  fuch  ideas-  as  arife  purely 
from  reflection  ;  the  befl  medicines  for  this 
purpofe  are  the  bark,  bitters,  fteel,  the  cold 
bath,  and  exercife,  with  proper  aliment  ?• 
concerning  all  which,  fee  the  firfl  inten- 
tion of  cure  *^ 

(f)  Nervous  diforders  occafioned  by 

ftrong  impredions  on  the  mind,    are  ofte^ 

prevented,'  lefTened,  or  cured  by  exciting  o-' 

H  h  h  tber 

*  Page  325,  kc.  above.; 


42&       OF  THE  CURE  OF 

tlier  fenfatioiis  or  paflions  of  a  fuperior 
force.  Of  this  we  had  a  remarkable  in^ 
ilance  in  the  cure  performed  by  Boerhaave^ 
on  the  boys  and  girls  in  the  poorVhoufe 
at  Haerlem  *.  Epileptic  fits  have  been 
cured  by  whipping  f,  Convuliions  from 
the  toothacli  are  removed  by  blifters  ;  vo- 
miting has  been  flopt  by  putting  the  hand^ 
fuddenly  in  cold  water  ;  and  a  common  hic- 
cup is  inflantly  cured  by  whatever  excites 
furprizc,  or  flrongly  engages  the  attention- 

(d)  Nervous  or  hyfleric  affedions  from 
a  concealed  or  difappointed  paffion,  are 
better  cured  by  the  fruition  of  the  object  J  ;; 

or, 

•  See  above,  p.  211. 

f '  Kaau  Boerhaave,  ImpfiE.  faciens  Hippocrat.  dl& 
§  406. 

In  theHiftoIre  de  Tacaclemie  royaje  des  fciences  17523 
there  is  an  account  of  a  girl  who  was  cured  of  epileptic 
fits  arifing  from  melancholy,  by  firing  a  gun  at  her  bed>- 
fide,  juft  as  flie  was  coming  out  of  one  of  the  parosyfmsi 

I  A  remarkable  inftance  of  this  we  have  in  a  young 
man,  who,  from  a  difappointment  in  marriage,  was  fud- 
denly felzed  with  a  catalepJtSi.  fo  that  he  remained  for  a 


NERVOUS   DISORDERS.      427 

or,  if  this  cannot  be  obtained,  by  proper 
diet,  amufements,  and  by  opiates,  efpeciaJly 
at  bed-time,  for  compoflng  the  mind  and 
procuring  ileep,  than  by  the  wl^ole  clafs 
of  nervous  medicines. 

Having  thus  far  treated  of  the  cure  of 
the  feveral  caufes  of  nervous,  hypochon- 
driac, and  hyfteric  diforders,  I  fliall  con- 
clude thefe  obftrvations  with  mentioning 
particularly  the  remedies  mod  proper  for 
removing  or  palliating  fome  of  their  mod 
||-oijblefome  fymptoms. 


Uhhz  CHAP. 


whole  day  in  jiis  chair,  in  the  fame  pofture,  without  the 
leaft  motion  or  feeming  attention  to  any  thing  about  him  : 
Nay,  his  whole  body  became  as  ftifF  as  if  he  had  been 
frozen.  However,  no  fooner  was  he  told  with  a  loud 
voice,  that  he  was  to  have  his  beloved  objeft,  than  wa- 
Jjing  as  out  of  a  deep  fleep,  Jie  fprung  from  his  feat,  and 
recovered  at  once.  See  Tulpii  Obfervatipnes  medic^Sj 
^b,  I.  obfery.  22. 


izB        OF   THE   GURE   OF 


G  H  A  P.     VIIL 

Of  the  Cure  of  fame  of  the  moft  remarkahk 
Nervous,  Hypochondriac,  ami 
Hysteric  S-jmptoms* 


Onvulsive    motions,    or  fix£ 
fpafms  of  the  mufcles. 

Tpiese  are  either  general,  afFeding  al« 
mofl  the  whole  body,  or  confined  to  one. 
or  a  few  mufcles  or  organs.  As  they  often 
arife  from  very  diifeient  caufes,  their  radi- 
cal or  prophylactic  cure  mull  confift  in  the 
removal  or  prevention  of  thofe  caufes  *. 

But 

*  In  fo  far  as  they  may  proceed  from  fome  peccant 
matter  in  the  blood,  from  phlegm,  acrid  humours,  worms, 
or  wind  in  the  floraach  and  inteftines,  from  a  great  lofs 
of  blood,  an  obflruaion  of  the  vienfes,  or  afFeftions  of 
the  mind,  their  radical  cure  is  to  be  found  in  the  pre- 
seeding  chapter. 


NERVOUS   SYMPTOMS.       429 

But  as  the  immediate  caiife  is  in  every 
cafe  the  fame,  viz,  fomething  that  irri- 
tates the  brain  or  nerves,  or  afFedls  them 
with  a  difagreeable  fenfation,  their  pallia- 
five  or  temporary  cure  will  be  beft  efFecled 
by, 

(i)  Such  medicines  as  by  their  flupi-» 
fying  or  narcotic  quality  leiTen  the  fend- 
bility  of  the  brain  and  nervous  fyftem  *. 

In  continued  fpafms,  as  well  as  alternate 
convulfive  contratTiions  of  theflomach  and 
inteftines,  nothing  gives  fo  fudden  or  fo 
fenfible  relief  as  opiates ;  which  are  often 
not  lefs  efficacious  when  the  other  mufcies 
^re  fpafmodically  aifeded.  In  that  fpecies 
of  the  tetanus  called  opiJihotomiSf  as  well  as 
that  which  is  confined  to  the  lower  jaw, 
opium  is  the  principal  remedy  f ;  and  as 
the  hydrophobia  is  only  a  violent  conviilfion 
of  the  gullet  and  {lomach,  <6'^.  arifing  from 
jhe  difagreeable  fenfation  excited  by  any 

li(jui4 

f  See  above,  p.  349,  &c. 

I  See  Medical  inquiries  aj^d  obfervatlon:,  vol.  i. 


43d         OF  THE  CURE   OF 

liquid  touching  the  fauces^  or  by  the  eiForc 
the  patient  makes  to  fwallov/  them,  opium 
in  large  dofes,  efpecially  if  given  by  way 
of  a  clyfcer,  and  repeated  at  proper  inter- 
vals, would  probably  be  found,  at  lead, 
the  bcfl  palliative  *. 

Convulsive  fits  of  the  flighter  kind, 
which  returned  daily  at   a  certain  time, 

havfe 

*  Altho'  this  reafonmg  feems  to  be  much  confirmed 
1>7  the  cure  of  Dr  Nugent's  patient,  (See  his  Effiy  on  the 
hydrophoUa)  ;  yet,  in  this  cafe,  as  mulk  and  other  remer 
4ies  were  ufed  as  well  as  opiates,  it  may  be  doubted  whe- 
ther the  former  had  not  fonae  confiderable  fhare  in  the 
curci  It  were  to  be  wifheJ,  therefore,  that  fuch  as  fiiall 
have  opportunities,  would  make  a  fair  trial  of  opium  a- 
Jone  in  the  hydrophobia. 

About  the  20th  of  Auguft  1761,  a  farmer's  fervant 
near  Norham  in  Northumberland,  three  weeks  after  ha- 
.ving  been  bit  by  a  mad  dog,  became  delirious,  had  vio- 
lent fpafms,  a  dread  of  water,  and  other  fymptoms  come 
raon  in  fuch  cafes,  He  was  treated  by  Mr  Dawfon  fur^i 
geon  in  Coldftream  according  to  Dr  Nugent's  method, 
and  recovered  fo  quickly  as  to  be  able  to  be  employe4 
in  reaping  the  corn  before  the  middle  of  September. 

He  was  blooded,  took  every  three  hours  mufk  and  cinr 
nabar  with  honey  in  a  bolus,  and  a  pill  of  opium.  A 
plalfter  oi galbanwn  with  half  an  ounce  of  opitwi  was  aps 
p?ied  to  the  throat  and  neck. 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.      43? 

liave  been  prevented  by  giving  opimn  an 
hour  or  more  before  that  time.  But  in 
an  epileptic  patient,  who  was  feized  every- 
day about  two  in  the  morning,  the  fits  • 
were  neither  prevented  nor  fenfibly  lelTened 
by  forty  or  fifty  drops  of  laudanum,  w^hich 
I  ordered  him  to  take,  for  feveral  nights, 
about  two  hours  before  the  return  of  the 
£t. 

It  is  to  be  obferved,  that,  in  curing  or  . 
palliating  violent  fpafms  or  convullive  mo=? 
tions,  opiates  mufl  be  given  in  larger  dofes 
than  ufual,  and  repeated  more  frequently  ^ 
for  here,  as  in  cafes  of  acute  pain,  the  pa- 
tients bear  thefe  medicines  much  better 
than  in  health. 

In  fome  cafes,  efpecially  v/here  the  vef- 
fels  are  full,  bleeding  and  other  evacua- 
tions ought  to  precede  the  free  ufe  of  0^ 

(2.)  Such  medicines  as,    though  not 
endued  with  a  narcotic  quality,  are  found 
Ivy  experience  to  be  ufeful  in  fpafms  and  al- 
ternate 


43£         OF  THE  CURE  OF 

ternate  convulfions  of  the  mufcles,  and 
feem  to  produce  their  good  efFe(5ts  by  that 
Jiimuhis  which  they  communicate  to  iht 
nerves,  efpecially  of  the  ftomach  and  in-^ 
teflines.  Of  this  kind  are  camphire,  cajlor^ 
Biuilc,  afafcetida,  the  Jpiritus  ^thereusy  fpirit 
of  hartlhorOj  ^c,  ** 

A  dram  of  brandy,  by  {Simulating  the 
nerves  of  the  ftomach,  will  almofl  inftant- 
ly  lefTen  a  tremor  of  the  hands,  and  in 
fome  cafes  make  the  pulfe  flower  :  And  do 
not  other  ilimulating  medicines,  in  fome 
fach  way^  remove  a  palpitation  of  the  hearty 
and  other  convulfive  motions,  as  well  as 
iixed  fpafms  of  the  mufcles  l  Thefe  effects 
may  happen  equally,  whether  thofe  medi- 
cines excite,  in  the  nerves,  an  agreeable  or 
an  unpleafant  or  painful  fenfation.  Thus 
a  elafs  of  warm  wine  with  cinnamon  and 
nutmeg,  and  a  mixture  with  aquapukgii  or 
ruUy  tinc5ture  of  cajlor  and  afa  faouda,  will 
often  have  fimilar  effecfts  in  flatulent  and 
fpafmodic    afFedions    of   the    alimentary 

canal; 

*  See  above,  p.  355. 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.      433 

canal ;  and  we  ihall  fee  below,  that  blifters 
and  other  painful  applications  are  fome- 
times  ufeful  in  removing  fpafms  and  coii- 
vulfive  motions, 

(3.)  Such  remedies  as  relax,  and  at 
the  fame  time  affed;  with  an  agreeable 
fenfation  the  mufcular  fibres  and  nerves,, 
rendering  them  thereby  lefs  liable  to  fuffer 
from  irritation ;  viz.  the  warm  bath,  fe- 
miatphim  and  pediluvium^  emollient  clyfters, 
and  warm  fomentations  applied  to  the  feet 
and  legs,  or  other  parts  of  the  body*. 
To  this  clafs  alfo  we  may  perhaps  refer 
vensefection,  which,  by  emptying  the  vef- 
fels,  produces  a  general  relaxation.  But 
whatever  be  in  this,  we  know  from  certain 
experience  that  it  has  often  very  fudden 
and  remarkable  t^^dis  in  lefTening  or  re- 
I^oving  fpafms  and  convulfive  motions. 

Olaus  Borichius  mentions  a  young 

woman  liable  to  a  periodic  hiccup,  which 

returned  regularly   about   the  fame   time 

1  i  i  once 

f  See  above,  p.  353, 


434         GF  THE   CURE   OF 

once  a -year,  who,  afrer  other  remedies  ha4 
proved  ineffedual,  was  always  cured  by 
bleeding  largely  at  the  arm.  It  was  ob- 
fervable,  that  this  hiccup  was  not  lefTened 
by  the  mcnfss  flowing  plentifully  during  the 
time  the  patient  was  alfeded  with  it  ^. 

The  warm  bath  afFe(f|:s  the  nerves  witl| 
an  agreeable  fenfation,  removes  fpafms  in 
the  fmail  vefTels,  promotes  an  equable  cir-? 
culation,  gently  expands  the  fluids,  and 
confequentiy  fills  the  whole  vefTels  of  the 
body.  But  in  whatever  manner  the  v/arm 
bath  and  fomentations  may  ad,  their 
power  in  giving  often  immediate  relief 
from  violent  pain,  and  preventing  or  allay- 
ing fpafms  and  cqnvuliive  motions,  has 
been  fufficiently  afcertained  by  experience. 
However,  as  the  ufe  of  the  warm  pedihi" 
vhim  and  fomentations  applied  to  the  feet 
and  legs,  in  fevers  attended  with  a  delirium^ 
tremors,  and  cpnvulflons  f ,   may  not  be  fq 

generally 

*  Ada  Hafnienfia,  1671,  and  1672,  §  73, 
f  The  fuccefs  which  fomenting  the  legs  had  in  a  cafe 
pf  tjiis  kind,  was  communicated  to  me  about  feven  years 

fmce 


NERVOUS   SYMPTOMS.      435 

generally  known,  I  fliall  give  fomc  inflances 


of  their  sood  efFeifts 


t> 


(a)  Mrs  — — ;  aged  23,  bn  Saturday, 
the  third  day  after  being  delivered  of  her 
child,  vv:3S  feized  with  a  coldnefs  and  fhiver- 
ing,  filcceeded  by  a  hot  fit  and  fweating. 
Next  dav  file  w.is  better  ;  but  after  a  reft- 
lefs  night  between  Sunday  and  Monday, 
her  llcin  felt  hot  and  dry,  arid  her  pulfe  was 
quicker.  Yitx  urine,  which  before  had 
been  of  a  natural  colour,  wa§  now  limpid 
and  in  too  great  quantity.  On  Tuefday 
lier  pulfe  was  much  quicker  than  ever^  viz. 
at  136  flrokes  in  a  minute,  but  not  fulh.. 
She  became  apprehenfive  of  dying,  and, 
after  fome  fits  of  uheafy  breathing,  fell  in- 
to a  kind  of  hyfteric  fainting,  which  did 
hot  affed  the  pulfe,  although  her  breitth- 
ing  was  fcaree  percept ible*  During  this 
I  i  i  2  fit, 

fince  by  my  learned  and  Ingenious  friend  Dr  John  Pringle 
phyfician  to  her  Majefty,  The  Do6lor  mixed  \  part  of 
vinegar  with  the  water;  whereas  1  have  always  ufed  hoc 
Water  alone. 


436        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

fit,  which  lafled  about  an  hour  and  a  quar- 
ter, fhe  fighed  and  moaned  frequently. 
About  mid-night,  fhe  was  very  reftiefs,  her 
arms  and  head  were  convulfed,  and  fhe  be- 
came quite  delirious.  This  day  a  rafh, 
which  had  come  out  on  Monday,  had  in 
a  great  meafure  difappeared.  All  this  time 
the  lochia  continued,  though  in  a  fmaller 
quantity  than  ufual.  Hitherto  diluents, 
diaphoretics,  clyflers,  fmall  dofes  of  cam- 
phi  re,  laudanum,  bliflers  to  the  legs,  and 
iinapifms  to  the  foles,  had  had  no  effedl. 
On  Wednefday,  the  delirium  increafed:  At 
noon  two  leeches  were  applied  to  each 
temple,  and  foon  after,  becoming  toler- 
ably fenfible,  flie  faid  fhe  found  herfelf 
mucheafier:  But,  about  eight  in  the  even- 
ing, fhe  grew  more  delirious  than  ever,  cry- 
ing out  in  a  diftraded  manner,  and  was  fo 
flrongly  convulfed,  that  with  difficulty  flie 
could  be  kept  in  her  bed  by  two  flrong  per- 
fons  employed  for  that  purpofe.  At  this 
time,  I  ordered  large  pieces  of  flannel 
wrung  out  of  hot    water  to    be    wrapped 

round 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.      437 

round  her  feet  and  legs.  This  application, 
which  was  renewed  once  in  fifteen  or 
twenty  minutes,  and  continued  near  three 
hours,  had  a  mofl  happy  effect ;  for  her  de^ 
lirium,  and  flruggling  to  get  up,  foon  be- 
gan to  abate;  fhe  fell  afleep  at  eleven,  and 
did  not  awake  till  two  in  the  morning, 
when  ihe  was  quite  calm  and  fenfible ;  after 
this  flie  flept  near  three  hours  more,  and 
was  pretty  eafy  and  clear  in  her  head  all 
Thurfday,  till  the  evening,  when  the  deli- 
rium returned  in  a  lefs  degree.  But  this 
fymptom  being  foon  removed  by  frefh  fo- 
mentations, fhe  paflcd  a  good  night,  and 
gradually  recovered,  without  any  return  of 
the  raving,  fainting,  or  convulfions. 

{b)  R.  B.  a  boy  aged  eleven,  was  feized 
with  a  hcadach  and  fever.  Monday,  he 
complained  of  a  fharp  pain  in  his  right 
fide,  on  which  account  near  eight  ounces 
of  blood  were  taken  from  him.  On  Tues- 
day, his  head  was  eafier,  but  the  pain  in 
the  fide  continued ;  his  pulfe  beat  120  times 

m 


43^        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

in  a  minute.  This  evening,  a  blifter  wal 
applied  to  the  right  fide.  Next  morning,^ 
the  pain  was  much  abated,  but  a  flight  de- 
iirium  began^  and  increafed  towards  the 
evening,  when  his  pulfe  was  about  130V 
though  no-ways  full.  Leeches  were  ap- 
plied 10  the  temples,  and  poultices  to  the 
feet.  On  Thurfday  mornings  the  delirium 
and  fever  continuing,  his  head  was  friaved,- 
and  afterwards  fomented  with  cloths  wrung 
out  of  hot  water.  This  made  him  fome- 
what  drowfy  and  calmer  for  a  fhort  time  j 
but  about  mid-day,  his  pulfe  became  (quick- 
er, (harper,  and  fmaller^  and  the  delirium  m-^ 
creafed.  At  three  afternoon  he  was  quite 
infenfible,  had  a  fuhfidtus  tendivium  with 
catchings,  and  his  pulfe,  which  was  fmallj 
beat  near  150  times  in  a  minute.  In  this 
flate,  I  ordered  his  feet  and  legs  to  be  im- 
mediately fomented,  as  in  the  preceding 
cafe:  the  efFed  was,  that  he  fell  foon  a- 
ileep  and  waked  at  four  o'clock,  fomewhat 
calmer,  and  with  a  little  fweat  on  hi^  ikin,; 
The  fomentations  were  renewed;  he  ilept 

again. 


1 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS. 

again,  and  about  fix  in  the  evening  he  was 
jiiuch  lefs  delirious,  and  his  pulfe  did  not 
exceed  124.  At  eight  o'clock,  the  legs 
were  fomented  agaiq,  for  a  confiderablc 
time.  He  had  feveral  good  naps  during 
the  night,  and,  Friday  morning,  was  per- 
fedly  fenfible,  with  a  pulfe  at  96.  From 
this  time  he  recovered  daily,  without  any 
return  of  the  fever  oy  deiirmm^ 

(c)  A  middle-aged  man,  who  was  feized 
with  a  continued  fever,  in  a  fevv  days  be- 
came delirious,  had  a  c^uick  and  very  fmall 
pulfe,  a  parched  tongue,  flufliings  in  his 
face,  and  twitchings;  and  be  paifed  his  u- 
fine  infenfibly.  He  was  treated  with  the 
common  remedies,  and  had  a  blifter  applied 
between  his  Ihoulders,  but  with  little  ad- 
vantage. My  advice  being  aflced  about  the 
8th  or  9th  day  of  the  difeafe,  I  ordered  his 
legs  and  feet  to  be  fomented  with  flannel 
wrung  out  of  hot  water.  This,  in  a  little 
time,  put  him  afleep;  and,  next  day,  his 
pplfe  was  fuller  and  lefs  quick,  tlie  delirium 

was 


440  OF  THE  CURE  OF 

was  abated,  his  tongue  was  moifler,  and  z 
gentle  fweat  came  on.  After  this,  the  fe- 
ver decreafed  gradually,  and  the  patient  re- 
covered. 

Having  found  fuch  benefit  from  the 
warm  fomentations,  in  fevers  attended  with 
a  delirium,  tremors,  and  fpafms,  I  thought 
it  might  be  worth  while  to  make  trial  alfo 
of  the  warm  pediluvium  in  fuch  cafes;  and 
I  foon  found  this  to  have  the  fame,  but 
more  powerful  effects  than  the  fomenta- 
tions :  for,  in  fome  cafes,  when  thefc  laft  had 
failed  to  leiTen  the  toffing.  raving,  and  con- 
vullions,  the  pediliivium  fucceeded,  not  only 
in  the  time  the  patient  ufed  it,  but  its  ef- 
feds  continued  a  good  while  after ;  and 
when  they  ceafed,  it  was  renewed  again 
with  the  fame  advantage  as  before.  In 
fome  cafes,  I  have  ordered  the  feet  and  legs 
to  be  put  in  warm  water  four  or  five  times 
in  2A  hours,  and  to  continue  in  it  from  half 
an  hour  to  near  a  hour  at  a  time,  unlefs  the 
patients  became  faintifh? 


(«)  A. 


J 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.    441 

(a)  A  lady,  aged  about  20,  on  the  fourth 
4a.y  after  being  delivered  of  her  firfl  child, 
l^egan  to  be  feverifli,  and  could  not  fleep. 
After  this  fhe  became  very  delirious,  talked 
conflantly,  had  fometimes  tremors,  and  was 
fp  reftiefs,  that  for  two  days  /he  had  not 
Jain  one  minute  in  the  fame  poflure,  and 
was  with  difliculiy  kept  in  bed  by  two  or 
three  nurfes.  On  the  loth  day  after  her 
delivery,  when  I  firil  faw  her,  the  fymptoms 
now  mentioned  were  all  increafed  ;  flie  was 
now  quite  filent,  and  Teemed  to  underfland 
nothing  that  was  faid  to  her;  her  pulfe, 
which  was  but  of  a  moderate  (trength,  beat 
above  150  times  in  a  minute.  Nay  once, 
when  Ihe  was  more  agitated  than  ufual,  it 
rofc  to  180  flrokes  in  that  time,  and  becam<? 
withal  very  fmall.  As  fhe  had  been  bloods 
cd  and  bliftered,  and  ufed  feveral  other  re- 
medies without  advantage,  I  ordered  her 
feet  and  legs  to  be  put  immediately  into 
the  warm  pediluvwm,  which  was  done  by 
making  her  fit  up  on  the  bed-fide.  At  firfl, 
it  rc<juired  two  people  to  keep  her  feet  in 
KHk  the 


44^        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

the  water ;  but,  in  lefs  than  a  quarter  of  an 
hour,  fhe  grew  calmer,  and  made  little  mo- 
tion either  with  her  legs  or  any  other  pare 
of  her  body.  After  ufing  the  pediluvium 
for  half  an  hour,  ihe  was  put  to  bed,  but 
foon  began  to  grow  as  refllels  as  formerly; 
upon  which  account  w^arm  fomentations 
were  applied  to  her  legs  and  feet,  and  re- 
newed from  time  to  time  for  near  twQ. 
hours,  but  without  any  benefit »  I  there- 
fore thought  it  bed  to  renew  the  pediluvwm, 
which  was  ufed  at  this  time  for  a  full  hour; 
it  foon  made  her  fit  quiet,  and  after  fhe 
was  put  to  bed,  altho'  fhe  did  not  fall  a^ 
ileep,  yet  Ihe  lay  feveral  hours  without 
tofling  as  ufual,  and  her  pulfe  was  reduced 
to  136.  As  often  as  llie  began  to  be  any 
ways  reftlefs,  the  pediluvium  was  renewedo 
After  ufing  it  the  fourth  time,  flie  got  feve- 
ral fliort  naps,  was  lefs  delirious^  and  hef 
pulfe  only  made  1 20  ftrokes  in  a  minute; 
irom  this  time  [viz,  the  eleventh  day  after 
her  delivery)  the /f^i/z«!w;//;;,  which  was  never 
|:epeated  above  twice  in  24  hours,  procured 

her 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.     443 

her  better  and  lefs  interrupted  reft,  and  \eC- 
fened  all  her  bad  fymptdms ;  fo  that  in  two 
days  more  fhe  was  quite  free  from  the  deli- 
rium,  and  her  pulfe  did  not  exceed  90  in  a 
minute. 

(b)  A  gentleman  aged  40,  after  ha- 
ving had  a  continued  fever  feven  or  eight 
days,  began  to  rave,  and  the  delirium  in- 
creafed  fo  much,  that  about  the  nth  day, 
he  could  not  be  kept  in  bed  ;  nor  would 
allow  either  fomentations,  blifters,  or  ii- 
napifms  to  be  applied  to  his  legs  or  feet, 
in  this  condition,  I  advifed  to  take  him 
but  of  bed,  as  often  as  he  infifted  upon 
riling,  and,  while  he  fat  up,  to  keep  his 
feet  and  legs  in  Warm  Water.  Between 
feven  and  half  an  hour  paft  eleven  in  the 
evening,  he  was  feven  times  out  of  bed, 
and  as  often  ufed  the  pediluvium  for  about 
a  quarter  of  an  hour,  or  longer,  at  a  time. 
Before  midnight  the  hurry  of  his  fpirits 
began  to  abate,  he  talked  lefs,  and  feemed 
drowfy.  In  the  firft  part  of  the  night  he 
K  k  k  a  ilept; 


444        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

flept  a  little,  and  towards  the  morning,  he 
flept>  three  hours  at  once.  His  pulfe  was 
now  reduced  from  120  to  too  flrokes  in  a 
minute;  and  from  this  time  the  delirium  de- 
creafed  gradually  for  fever al  days,  and  he 
recovered. 

[c)  Having  been  called  to  A.  A.  aged 
30,  in  a  continued  fever,  with  inflamed  eyes, 
and  fo  violent  a  delirium  that  he  could  not 
be  kept  in  bed;  I  ordered  him  to  be  takeii 
up,    and  to  have  his  feet  and  legs  put  in 
warm  water   for    twenty    minutes.     This 
was  done  thrice  in  the  fpace  of  thirteen 
hours;  and  it  always  lefTened  his  raving, 
made  him  quieter,  and  procured  fleep  after 
he  went  to  bed.     Next  day,  he  became  a 
good  deal  comatous,  and  his  eyes  were  ra- 
ther more  Inflamed ;  but  the  day  after,  he 
grew  more  fenfible,  his  eyes  looked  better, 
and  his  pulfe  had  fallen  from  about  170, 
(which   was   its    quicknefs    when   at    the 
woril),  to  1 2§  ftrokes  in  a  minute.     After 
this,  he  recovered  gradually. 

{d)  Another 


KERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.      4/4 

(d)  Another  patient,  aged  25,  in  s^ 
continued  fever^  with  a  pulfe  above  140, 
inflamed  eyes,  and  a  violent  delirium,  fo 
that  two  firong  men  had  been  employed  to 
keep  him  in  bed,  recovered  after  being 
taken  up  thrice,  and  having  his  feet  and 
legs  kept  in  warm  water  for  above  twenty 
minutes  each  time.  The  warm  water  al- 
ways lelTened  the  delirium,  and,  after  he 
returned  to  bed,  made  him  to  fall  afleep. 

Instead  of  adding  more  cafes,  I  Ihall 
only  obferve,  that  I  have  faved  more  pa- 
tients who  appeared  to  be  in  great  danger, 
in  the  delirious  flate  of  a  fever,  by  the  fo- 
mentations, and  efpecially  by  the  warmt 
pediluvium,  than  by  any  other  remedy :  and, 
even  in  thofe  cafes  where  thefe  applica- 
tions were  infuificient  to  compleat  the  care^ 
they  almoft  always  gave  fome  prefent 
relief,  by  making  the  patients  fomewhac 
quieter  and  difpoiing  them  to  ileep. 

The  fomentations  and  warm  bath  to 
the  feet  are  particularly  ufeful  in  fevers, 
where  the  brain  and  nervous  iyitem  are 

much 


OF  THE  CURE   OF 

much  irritated.  In  cafes  where  the  eyet 
are  inflamed,  they  will  anfwer  better,  if  the 
patient  has  been  bled  ar  the  temples  with 
leeches,  before  their  application.  When 
the  fick  cannot  bear  the  pediluvhim  in  an 
eredt  poflure,  I  order  their  legs  to  be  put 
over  the  fide  of  the  bed,  fo  as  they  may 
be  immerfed  in  the  warm  water ;  the  heat 
of  which  fliould  not  be  lels  than  i  oo  de- 
grees of  Farenheit's  fcale. 

I  fhall  only  add  on  this  fubjed,  that  I 
have  found  the  warm  femiaipiumy  or  pedi- 
iuviumy  the  befl  remedy  for  thofe  convuU 
iions  which  fometimes  precede  the  eruption 
of  the  fmall  pox;  and  for  that  general 
tremor  of  the  whole  body  which  often 
happens  towards  the  end  of  that  difeafe^ 
when  the  puflules  ^re  of  a  very  bad  kind* 
But  to  return, 

(4.)  In  convulfive  motions  or  fpafms, 
fuch  remedies  are  often  ufeful,  as,  by  pain- 
fully afFedling  the  nerves  of  fome  part  of 
the  body  that  is  found,  in  a  great  meafnre 

lefieii 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.     447 

JelTen  or  deflroy  the  fenfeof  that  irritatioii 
which  was  the  caufe  of  thofe  fymptoms  *• 
Of  this  kind  are  blifters,  acrid  cataplafms, 
dry  cupping,  fridion,  and  the  cold  bath. 

About  feventeen  years  fince,  a  womai^ 
aged  20,  was  feized  with  an  alternate  mo- 
non  of  the  abdominal  mufcles.  In  the 
night,  when  in  bed,  flip  was  pretty  free 
from  this  ailment ;  but,  through  the  day, 
thofe  mufcles  were  aim  oft  conftantly  in 
motion,  and  it  was  not  in  her  power  to  re- 
flrain  them  in  the  fmalleft  degree.  After 
flie  had  tried  many  medicines  without  any 
benefit,  J  ordered  a  circular  blifter  of  about 
eight  inches  diameter  to  be  appUed  to  the 
abdomen.  This  put  a  flop  to  the  cotivu^ 
five  motions  for  feveral  days;  and  although 
they  returned  afterwards,  they  were  much 
weaker  and  lefs  frequent,  and  in  a  fhort 
time,  they  ceafed  entirely,  without  the 
afli fiance  of  any  medicine,  except  a  few 
dofes  of  camphire. 

In  cafes  where  epileptic  covulfions  took 

j;heif 

f  Hippocrat,  Aphor.  lib.  3,  No.  46. 


448        OF  THE  CURE  OP 

their  rife  from  an  uneafy  fenfation  in  fome 
part  of  the  arm  or  leg,  I  have  found  bliflcrs 
applied  to  thefe  parts  the  beft  remedy.  1% 
may  be  proper,  however,  to  obferve,  that, 
in  people  whofc  nerves  are  uncommonly 
delicate  and  fenfible,  it  is  often  better  to 
attempt  the  cure  of  convulllve  motions  or 
Ipafms  by  opiates,  mulk,  camphire,  and  the 
vvarm  bath  or  pediluvium,  than  by  blifters, 
which  fometimes  do  harm  by  the  violent 
pain  which  they  occafion. 

I  have  found  dry  cupping  not  only  ufe- 
f\il  in  convuliive  contractions  of  the  mu- 
fclcs  *,  but  alfo  in  removing  recent  rheu- 
matic pains  from  cold,  where  there  was  no 
fever ;  nay,  in  older  pains  of  this  kind,  I 
have  feen  patients  relieved,  at  leaft  for  fomc 

time, 

^  A  man  aged,  about  50,  "who  had  for  many  years^ 
teen  conftantJy  afflifled  with  an  alternate  motion  of  the 
ipufcles  pf  his  head  and  neck,  found  more  benefit  from  dry 
cupping  along  the  back  part  of  the  neck  and  fi^oulders, 
t^an  from  apy  other  remedy.  It  is  true  indeed,  the  good 
cffefts  of  this  application  lafted  only  for  a  few  days ;  but^^ 
fcad  the  diforder  been  lefs  fixt,  it  is  probable,  that  re* 
n§ated  cupping  mighit  have  made  a  pe^-fed  cure« 


NERVOUS   SYMPTOMS.      449 

time,  by  this  remedy.  I  order  the  cup- 
ping glafs  to  be  applied  to  the  pained  part 
and  all  round  it,  and  let  it  flick  each  time 
three  or  four  minutes,  or  till  it  falls  off. 
The  fuclion  is  often  fo  (Irong  as  to  occa- 
iion  fmall  efFufions  of  blood  below  the  fcarf- 
ll^in.  The  good  effeds  of  dry  cUpping  do 
not  proceed  folely  from  the  pain  it  occa- 
fions,  which  is  not  very  confiderable ;  but 
chiefly  from  the  change  it  makes  in  the 
circulation  of  the  blood  through  the  fub- 
cutaneous  parts:  for,  while  the  cupping 
glafs  remains  fixed,  the  blood  which  ufed 
to  be  fcnt  to  the  parts  below,  is,  in  a  good 
hieafure,  derived  into  the  velTels  of  the 
membrana  adipofa  and  flcin ;  and,  even  for 
fome  time  after,  the  motion  of  the  fluids 
through  thefe  parts  continues  to  be  greater 
than  ufual,  on  account  of  that  irritation 
and  flight  degree  of  inflammation  which  is 
generally  occafioned  by  cupping. 

The  cold  bath  is  often  ufeful  in  curing 

thofe  cohvulfions  which  go  by  the  name 

of  St  Vitus's  dance:  And  cold  water  thrown 

L  1  i  on 


450        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

on  a  perfon  labouring  under  the  hydrophohU 
has  enabled  him,  for  fome  time,  to  drink 
pretty  freely  *.  W^as  not  this  efFedt  owing 
to  the  ftrong  impreffion  made  on  the  ner- 
vous fyilem  by  the  cold  water,  which,  in 
fome  meafure,  deftroyed  or  leiTened  the 
unnatural  feniibility  of  the  nerves  of  the 
fauces  and  gullet  l  For  the  inability  to 
fwallow  liquids  in  the  hylrophobia  is  not 
owing  to  a  palfy  of  the  throat,  as  fome 
authors  of  great  character  have  thought, 
but  folely  to  the  difagreeabie  fenfation  ex- 
cited in  ihe  fauces  and  gullet,  by  the  touch 
of  water  and  other  fluids,  which  raife  as 
great  fpafms  and  convuliive  contra(9:ions 
in  thofe  parts  and  the  ftomach,  as  they 
do  in  the  mufcles  of  refpi ration,  when,  by 
an  accident  in  fwallowlng,  they  get  into 
the  trachea, 

(5.)  Fear,    furprife,    attention,   or  o- 
ther  flrong  aitedions  of  the  mind,  will  fre- 
quency 

*  See  Mead  on  poiions,  edit.  5.  paa^,  rPa.  and   Van 
Swieten.  Comment,  in  Aphor.  Boer haave,  torn.  3.  p.  576* 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.     451 

quently  put  a  flop  to  convulfive  motions 
and  fpafms,  and  fometimes  fucceed  after 
other  remedies  have  failed,  as  in  the  fol- 
lowing cafe. 

A  girl  aged  eight,  in  the  beginning  of 
September  1759,  was  feized  with  an  al- 
ternate motion  of  the  majfeter  and  tempo- 
ral mufcles,  for  which  no  caufe  could  be 
afTigned.  This  motion  exadly  imitated 
the  pulfation  of  the  heart.  Only  thofe 
mufcles  were  con  traded  and  relaxed  above 
J40  times  in  a  minute,  while  the  heart 
did  not  make  above  90  ftrokes.  Their 
contradions  were  all  of  equal  flrength, 
-and  the  intervals  between  them  were  alfo 
equal.  When  the  patient  preffed  the 
teeth  of  the  lower  jaw  flrongly  againit 
thofe  of  the  upper  one,  by  a  voluntary 
contra(5lion  of  the  majfeter  and  temporal 
mufcles,  their  convulfive  motions  were 
much  lels  remarkable  ;  and  when  fhe  pull- 
ed down  the  lower  jaw  as  much  as  fhe 
could,  and,  by  the  continued  adion  of 
its  mufcles,  kept  it  in  this  fituation,  the 
L  1 1  2  majfeter 


452        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

majjeter  and  temporal  miifcles  were  n®, 
ways  convulfed.  Before  I  faw  this  patient, 
Ihe  had  been  bliftered  upon  the  courfe  of 
the  afFetfted  mufcles,  which  leflened  their 
convulfive  motions,  while  the  bliftered 
parts  continued  to  run,  but  no  longer.  I 
ordered  plaifters  of  the  emplajlrum  antihy^ 
Jierimm  with  fome  opium  to  be  applied 
where  the  blifters  had  formerly  been, 
Thefe  were  kept  on  no  longer  than  two 
days,  during  which  time  the  convulfions 
were  weaker  and  lefs  frequent,  not  being 
repeated  above  50  or  60  times  in  a  mi- 
nute ;  however,  in  a  day  or  two  after  the 
removal  of  thefe  plaifters,  the  convulfive 
contractions  became  as  ftrong  and  as  fre-" 
quent  as  ever.  Brimftone,  in  powder, 
was  rubbed  on  the  temples  and  cheeks 
without  any  yifible  elfect.  Sufpeding 
that  this  convulfive  diforder  might  per- 
haps proceed  from  worms,  1  prefer i bed  a  • 
holus  of  rhubarb  with  calomel,  which  the 
girl  obftinaiely  refufing  to  take,  her  fa- 
ther went  to  fetch  a  horfe-whip  to  beat 

her. 


NERVOUS   SYMPTOMS.      453 

ker.  The  fear  of  this  afFe^fled  her  fo 
ftrongly,  that,  without  the  bolus,  the  con-? 
VQlfions  of  the  majjeter  and  temporal  muf? 
cles  inftantly  ceafed ;  and  have  never  re- 
turned fince,  except  once  ©n  the  occafion 
of  a  fright,  when  they  continued  near  an 
hour,  and  then  went  off  without  any  re- 
jnedy. 

Celsus,  m  the  fpcifmiis  q mens y  recon> 
inends  pouring  on  the  patient's  head  warm 
fea-water  and  fulphur  *  :  And  a  roll  of 
brimflone,  held  in  the  hand,  is  frequently 
ufed,  now  a-days,  as  a  cure  for  cramps  or 
lixt  fpafms  of  the  mufcies ;  and  1  have 
known  it  fucceed  in  feveral  cafes.  The 
fnapping  of  the  brimftone,  which  often 
happens,  has  been,  by  fome,  afcribed  to 
the  electrical  fire  being  difcharged  in  great 
quantity  out  of  the  body  ;  but  without 
any  reafon.  The  truth  is,  that  a  roll  of 
pure  brimflone  held  in  the  hand  w^hen 
warm,  will  frequently  break,  whether  the 
perfon  be  afFe<^ed  with  the  cramp  or  not ; 

and 

f  De  mediclna,  lib.  4.  cap.  2, 


454        Of  THE  CURE  OF 

and  the  fame  thing  happens  to  brimflonc, 
when  placed  before  the  fire  in  a  heat  equal 
to,  or  a  little  greater  than  that  of  the  hu- 
man body.  I  am,  therefore,  of  opinion, 
that  brimflone  cures  fpafms  not  by  any 
medical  virtue ;  but  that  its  effeds  are  to 
be  afcribed  to  the  patient's  attention  *  and 
faith,  or  rather  to  the  furprize  occafioned 
by  the  roll  fnapping  in  his  hand :  And  as 
a  confirmation  of  this,  I  have  known  fome 
affetfted  with  the  cramp,  who,  having 
been  informed  that  the  breaking  of  the 
brimflone  was  owing  to  the  heat  of  thq 
Jiand,  mifled  of  a  cure, 

(6.)  Convulsive  motions  or  fpafms  are 
often  prevented  or  cured  by  compreffion, 
which  braces  and  renders  firmer  fuch  part^ 

of 

*  I  have  been  often  cured  of  a  fliglst  hiccup  by  look- 
ing Iledt'aftly,  for  two  or  three  minutes,  on  the  impref- 
fion  upon  a  (hilling,  or  any  other  coin  :  And  1  know  a 
Jady  who,  though  very  liable  to  hyfteric  fits,  is  never 
afFedled  with  them,  or  even  (lighter  complaints,  when 
^ny  of  her  children  happen  to  be  dapgeroufly  iO, 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.    4^5 

of  the  body  as  are  moft  fabjed  to  them* 
Thus  cramps  in  the  legs  are  prevented 
by  tight  bandages ;  and  when  convulfions 
arife  from  a  flatulent  diftenfion  of  the  in- 
teflines,  or  from  fpafms  beginning  in  them, 
they  may  be  often  leifened  or  cured  by 
making  a  pretty  flrong  compreffion  upon 
the  abdomen  by  means  of  a  broad  belt.  The 
Baron  Van  Swieten  mentions  the  cafe  of 
a  young  lady,  whofe  legs,  thighs,  and 
belly,  were  kept  tight  with  rollers  for  fe- 
veral  months,  in  order  to  prevent  convulr 
fions,  which,  from  an  uncommon  delica- 
cy of  her  nerves,  fhe  was  frequently  fub- 
jev^  to*.  Epileptic  fits,  which  take  their 
rife  from  a  peculiar  fenfation  in  fome  part 
of  the  legs  or  arms,  may  be  kept  off  by 
making  a  tight  ligature  about  thefe  mem- 
bers as  foon  as  that  fenfation  begins,  or, 
at  lead,  before  it  has  reached  the  fuperior 
pans  of  the  body. 

To    the    remedies    already    mentioned 
may  be  added  the  bark,  which  has  fome- 

times 

*  Comme'-t.  in  Aphor.  Bosrhaave,  torn.  i. 


OF  THE  eURE   OF 

times  cured  periodic  convulfioiis  after  ch 
ther  medicines  had  failed  *. 

I  fhall  only  obferve  ftirtlief,  tliat^  when 
fpafms  or  convulfive  motions  arife  from 
fliarp  humours  in  the  flomach  and  inte- 
jftines,  nothing  will  procure  any  lafting 
relief  till  thefe  are  either  correfted  f  or  ex- 
pelled X" 

II.  Hy^ 

*  See  Philofoph.  tranfaft.  No.  174.' 

f  A  young  man  under  20  years  of  age,  in  a  contU 
nued  fever,  was  affeded  with  a  ftrong  delirium  and  coa- 
vulfions  of  his  face,  throat,  and  almoft  all  the  parts  of 
his  body,  particularly  his  a;rms  and  legs.  At  the  fame 
time,  he  complained  of  a  great  internal  heat  and  thirft. 
After  having  Seen  in  this  way  for  two  or  three  days,  He 
had  a  fweet  orange  given  him,  which  he  eat  greedily, 
and,  calling  always  for  more,  confumed  near  two  dozea 
of  them  ifi  two  days.  After  he  began  to  eat  the  oranges^ 
the  convulfions  abated,  and  went  quite  off  in  three 
days. 

J  For  the  following  cafe,  in  which  violent  convulfive 
fits  were  removed  by  repeated  vomits,  I  ani  obliged  ta 
Dr  John  Gardiner,  phyfician  in  this  place. 

A  young  woman  of  17  years  of  age,  of  a  delicate  con» 
ftitution,  after  having  been  a  good  deal  fatigued,  was 
feized,  on  the  20th  of  July,  with  convulfions  of  almoft 
every  part  of  her  body,  which  continued  about  five  mi- 

Bines  2 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.     457 
II.  Hysteric  faintings  with  convul- 


lions. 


If  the  pulfe  he  full,  or  the  patient  any 

ivays  plethoric,  fome  blood  Ihould  be  ta- 

M  m  m  ken 

iiutes ;  after  which  flie  fainted  away,  and  the  convui- 
fions  ceafed  ;  but  upon  her  recovery,  the  convulfive  mo- 
tions of  her  arms,  and  the  rnufcles  of  refplration,  return- 
ed. Thefe  convulfions  having  continued,  except  in  urn's 
6f  fl^ep,  to  the  did,  When  1  was  called,  I  ordered  a  bolus 
of  ten  grains  of  mufk  to  be  taken  every  three  or  fouf 
hours,  with  tv/o  table-fpbonfuls  of  a  rnufk  julep.  On 
the  2 2d,  23d,  and  24th,  fhe  was,  fevefal  times,  free 
from  ?he  convulfions  for  half  an  hour,  or  fometinies  an 
hour  :  But,  upon  the  kaft  rioife  in  the  room,  or  any 
thing  that  dccafiohed  fdrprize,  they  returned.  The 
drawing  the  curtain  of  her  bed,  or  the  lifting  the  latch 
of  the  door,  ufed  to  haVe  this  efFed.  Nay,  although  (he 
faw  hef  fifters  going  to  open  or  fiiut  the  door,  or  to 
handle  the  tea-cups,  and  therefore  exped:ed  to  hear  fome 
-Uttie  noife  ;  yet  fo  powerful  was  the  imprefll'on  made  by 
k  on  her  nerves,  that  by  no  effort  could  fhe  prevent  the 
convulfions  from  coming  on. 

In  order  to  lefTen  this  uncomm'on  fenfibility  of  the 
nervous  fyftem,  camphire  was  added  to  the  muilv-bolusi, 
and  fhe  took  12  drops  oi  laudanum  in  a  difh  of  valerian 
tea  five  or  fix  times  in  24  hours.  After  this,  the  inter- 
-hh  between  th?  convulfions  became  longer  |  but  when 

thtf 


458        OF   THE   CURE   OF 

ken  away ;  after  which,  we  may  endea- 
vour to   roiife  her  by   the  fmoak   of  afa 
fitida  or  burnt  feathers,  or  by  oleum  fuccini 

and 

they  returned,  they  were  more  fevere.  Although  her 
nienjes  czvnt  on  the  27 th  at  the  ufual  time,  her  fym- 
ptoms  did  not  abate.  After  this  flus  ceafed,  fhe  had  a 
blifter  applied  between  her  fhoulders,  fhe  ufed  a  folu- 
tion  oi  afa  fostida,  and  had  the  laudanum  incrsafed  to  a 
hundred  drops  a-day. 

On  the  3  ift  of  July,  (^e  began  to  be  feized  with  faint- 
ings,  for  about  five  minutes  at  a  time  ;  and  foon  after 
this,  the  convillfions  became  univerfal,  and  attacked  her 
from  twelve  to  eighteen  times  a-day  In  regular  pa- 
roxyfms,  which  lafted  two  or  three  minutes.  In  the 
night,  file  was  almoft  always  free  from  them.  I  thea 
prefcribed  for  her  an  ounce  of  the  bark,  half  an  ounce 
of  valerian,  and  a  drachm  of  eaftor,  to  be  made  with  fy- 
rup  of  white  poppies  into  an  eledbaary,  of  which  flie  took 
the  fize  of  a  nutmeg  three  or  four  times  a-day  ;  at  the 
fame  time,  the  laudanum  and  bolufes  of  mufk  were  con- 
tinued. After  the  3d  of  Auguft,  Ihe  was  attacked 
w  ith  fevere  afthmatic  fits,  which,  together  with  her 
faintings  and  convulfions,  often  made  the  number  of 
parosyfms  amount  to  thirty  in  a  day  :  Some  days  after 
this,  upon  the  convulfions  leaving  her,  fne  was  feized 
with  continued  fpafn^s  in  hsr  arms,  legs,  and  thighs  j 
after  which  fiie  fometimes  complained  of  a  fmall  degree 
of  pain  and  confufioa  in  her  hsad. 


NERVOUS   SYMPTOMS.      459 

and  fpirit  of  hartfliorn  dropt  011  cotton, 
and  put  into  the  noftrils.  Thefe  medi- 
cines, by  the  fiirong  and  fudden  impreflion 
they  make  on  the  very  feniible  nerves  of 
the  nofe,  not  only  tend  to  excite  the  fe- 
veral  organs  into  a6lion,  but  to  lefTen  or 
deftroy  the  difagreeablc  fenfation  in  that: 
part  of  the  body  which  brought  on  the 

M  m  m  2  fir. 

Her  pulfe  during  all  thcfe  complaints,  feldom  exceed- 
ed So  ftrokes  In  a  minute,  nor  were  there  any  appear- 
ances of  her  ftomach  being  difordered.  However,  on 
the  9th  of  Auguft,  I  prefcribed  a  vomit  of  ipecacu- 
anha, which  made  her  throw  up  a  great  deal  of  dark 
greenifli  and  very  bitter  bile  ;  about  an  hour  after  this, 
ilie  was  attacked  with  one  of  the  convulfive  fits,  but  had 
no  more  of  them  that  day.  On  the  loth  of  Auguft,  {he 
had  twelve,  and  on  the  nth,  fourteen  of  thefe  fits. 
Upon  the  12th,  in  the  morning,  (he  took  another  vomit, 
which  was  alfo  repeated  on  the  13th.  Each  time  fiie 
threw  up  a  good  deal  of  bile,  and  had  no  fit  on  either 
of  thefe  two  days.  On  the  14th,  fhe  took  a  decodlion 
of  tamarinds  with  fenna,  which  purged  her  five  or  fix 
times,  and  in  the  evening  fhe  was  attacked  fix  times  with 
the  convulfions  and  fainting  fits.  On  the  15th  their 
number  was  almofl:  double  to  that  of  the  preceeding 
day;    but  on  the  i6th,  when  the  vomit  was  repeated, 


460        OF   THE  GURE   OF 

iir.  With  the  fame  view,  hot  bricks  may 
be  applied  to  the  foles  of  the  feet  ;  and 
the  legs,  arms,  and  belly  may  be  ftrongly 
rubbed.  But  there  is  no  remedy  which  I 
have  found  fo  efFed:ual  in  removing  hyileric 
faintings  with  convulfions,  as  the  warm 
fediluvhm ;  for,  after  many  other  things  had 
been  tried  to  no  purpofe,  I  have  feen  the 
patients  reflored  to  their  fenfes,  almofl  in- 
ftantly,  by  putting  their  feet  ^nd  legs  in 
water  a  little  more  than  blood-warm :  And 
it  was  remarkable,  that  upon  difcontinuing 
the  pcdiluvium  too  foon,  the  fainting  and 
catchings  often  returned  in  a  lefs  degree,  and 

thp 

fhe  efcaped  them  altogether.  Every  other  day  for  a 
week,  file  took  a  vomit  of  pulv.  ipecacuanha  gr.  v.  and 
iart.  etnet.gr.  i.  and  at  night,  fometimes,  a  fmall  dofe 
of  elixir  facrum  ;  by  which  means,  before  the  begin- 
ning of  September,  flie  got  quite  free  from  the  fainting 
fits  and  convulfions. 

It  was  obfervable,  that,  during  her  illnefs,  in  the  inter- 
vals of  the  fits,  Ihe  was  often  very  chearful,  and  fome- 
times jocofe ;  but  after  fhe  recovered,  fhe  becanije 
grave,  thoughtful,  and  fomewhat  morofe,  'which  y;^s 
htc  natural  difpofition. 


NERVOUS   SYMPTOMS.      46c 

the  pulfe  became  fmaller  and  irregular.  In 
a  ^tw  cafes,  where  the  patients  were  ple- 
thoric, and  the  convulfions  very  flrong, 
■the  pedihivmm  has  failed. 

Wi^RM  water  thus  ufcd  is  noc  only  the 
fpeediell,  but  the  fafeft  cure  for  hyfleric 
faintings;  while  flrong  volatile  fpirits  held 
to  the  nofe  are  apt  to  throw  fome  very 
delicate  women  into  more  yiplent  convulr 
iions. 

In  cafe  of  coHivcnefs,  a  laxative  clyfter 
with  afa  f(Etida  \N\\\  be  proper;  and,  as  foou 
as  the  patient  can  fwallow,  two  tabl.e-fpoon- 
fuls  of  a  folution  of  afa  fcstida,  or  fomp 
cordial  j ulep,  may  be  given. 

After  the  fit  is  over,  the  radical  cure 
nvtift  vary  according  to  the  different  caufes 
from  which  it  may  proceed.  However, 
fuch  medicines  will  commonly  be  found 
mofh  efficacious  as  flrengthen  the  alimen- 
jtary  canal  and  the  whole  nervous  iyflem. 
An  antihyfleric  plaifler  applied  to  the  ab- 
domen has  been,  in  fome  cafes,  ufeful ;  as 
^Ifo  gentle  vomits  and  flomachic  purges, 

III.  A 


462        OF  THE   CURE  OF 

III.  A  violent  pain  with  cramps  in  the 
(lomach. 


The  method  which  I  have  found  mofl 
faccefsful  in  this  cafe,  is,  to  make  the  pa- 
tient, if  there  be  any  inclination  to  vomit, 
take  fome  draughts  of  warm  water  to  clears 
Jiis  ftomach.  After  this,  I  order  a  clyfter 
of  fix  ounces  of  water  and  from  50  to  2q 
drops  of  laudanum.  This  is  much  furer 
than  laudanum  given  by  the  mouth,  which 
is  often  vomited  up ;  and,  in  fome  cafe§ 
jncreafes  the  pain  and  fpafms  in  the  fto- 
inach. 

If  the  pain  and  cramps  return  with  great 
violence,  after  the  effedts  of  the  anodyne 
clyfter  are  over,  I  order  another  to  be 
given,  with  an  equal  or  larger  quantity  of 
laudanum;  and,  once  in  four  hours,  two 
table-fpoonfuls  of  fuch  a  julep  as  th^  fol- 
lowingc 


R 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.    463 

R  Mofch.  fcrup.  ii. 
optirae  teratur  cum 
Sacchar.  alb.  drach.  Ii. 

Dein  adde 
Mucilag,  gum.  Arab.  unc.  fs. 
Aqu.  cinnamom.  f.  v. 

menth.  piper,  ana  unc,  ii, 
aromat.  drach.  vi. 
M.  f.  a. 

If  the  patient  has  been  coflive,  a  laxa- 
tive clyfter  muft  be  given  before  the  ano-* 
dyne  ones. 

The  anodyne  balfam  rubbed  into  the 
flomach  and  the  warm  femicupium  are  of-* 
ten  ufeful.  After  the  pain  and  cramps 
have  been  removed,  the  emplaftrum  amiby-- 
Jlcriatm  applied  to  the  epigaftric  region 
has  fometimes  contributed  to  prevent  their 
return. 

In  ail  very  violent  or  lading  pains  of 
the  ftomach,  fome  blood  ought  to  be  taken 
away,  unlefs  the  weaknefs  of  the  patient 
makes  it  improper;  for  this  evacuation 
will  always  leffen  the  danger  of  an  inflam- 
mations, 


OP  THE  CURE  OF 

marion,  and  can  feldom  do  any  confidef- 
able  harm. 

When  the  pain  of  fpafms  in  the  fto- 
mach  proceed  from  a  iuppreflioh  of  the 
menfes,  ven^fetflion  is  of  great  ufe.  If  they 
are  owing  to  the  true  gout,  befidfes  iauda^' 
mm  and  muilc,  fpiceriesy  and  fome  of  the 
flronger  cordial  waters,  or  a  large  dram  of 
brandy  or  rum,  will  be  neceflary,  together 
with  bliflers  to  the  ancles. 

IV.  An  indigeftion  and  vomiting,  with 
pains  in  the  flomacho 

1 .  Wh  en  thefe  complaints  proceed  from 
noxious  humours  in  the  ftomach,:  the  belt 
remedies  are  vomits  and  gentle  ilomachic 
purges  ;  together  with  elixir  of  Vitriol,  or 
the  teflaceous  powders,  according  to  the 
different  nature  of  thofe  humours.^ 

2.  When,  from  fcirrhous  obflruflions 
in  the  alimentary  canal,  we  can  do  littlfe 
more  than  to  palliate  by  means  of  gratefiil 
Itomachic  medicines,  and  opiates.     Hovf^- 

ever,- 


NERVOUS    SYMPTOMS.      ^(.^ 

fever,  in  cafes  of  this  kind,  a  fmall  glafs  of 
Spa  or  Vermont  water,  frequently  repeated, 
has  fometimes  flaid  on  the  flomach,  when 
every  thing  elfe  has  been  thrown  dp. 

When  there  is  a  fcirrhoas  obftriicftion 
in  the  coats  of  the  ftomach  near  the 
p-^lorusy  this  palTage  is  often  fo  mucli  flrait- 
ened,  that  only  the  thinner  part  of  the  ali- 
ment can  get  into  the  duodenum  ;  while  the 
more    folid   part,  after  remaining  feveral 

hours    in  the   florxiach,    and    occafioning- 

fc> 

heart-burning  and  ficknefs,  is  at  laft  dif^ 
charged  by  vomiting.  Patients  in  this  ii- 
tuation  always  find  themfelves  ealieft, 
when  they  ufe  only  the  thinner  kinds  of 
dliments,  fuch  as  light  broths,  milk,  pana- 
da, fago,  falep,  and  the  hke, 

3.  When  a  flclaiefs  and  pain  in  the  flo- 
mach, with  vomiting  foon  after  eating,  are 
owing  to  a  too  great  delicacy,  or  an  unna- 
tural fenfibility  of  the  nerves  of  the  flo- 
mach, either  in  cdnfequence  of  an  irregu- 
larity of  the  mmjlrua^  or  of  fome  acrid  hu- 
N  n  n  mour 


466        Of'  THE  CURE  GF 

nionr  in  the  blood  falling  on  thofe  nerves  i 
wliile  we  palliate  with  agreeable  cordials 
and  aromaties,  we  mud  endeavour  to 
llrengthen  the  ftomach  by  the  bark,  bit- 
ters, chalybeates,  and  exercife*  But,  in 
cafes  of  this  kind,  I  have  found  nothing, 
produce  fuch  immediate  good  effedts,  as 
hudanum  given  an  hour  or  more  before' 
dinner  or  Ripper, 

[a)  An  unmarried  gentlewoman,  ageJ 
44,  irregular  as  to  the  menfeSy  was  feized 
with  a  pain  in  her  ftomach,  and  foon  af- 
ter every  meal  became  fick,  and  vomited 
what  Ihe  had  cat.  After  having  been  in 
this  way  for  eight  or  ten  days,  Ihe  took  a 
vomit  of  ipecacuanha^  feveral  dofes  of  the 
elixir  facrumy  and  tin^ura  rhaharhari  amara; 
ihe  alfo  ufed  warm  claret  with  cinnamon 
and  nutmeg,  and  a  julep  of  pepper-mint- 
watcr  with  x.htfpirit.  volat.  okof^  but  with- 
out any  advantage.  As  ihe  ilept  ill,  I  ad-* 
Yifed  her  to  take  twenty  drops  of  laudanum 
at  bed-time,  which  made  her  reft  better  in 

the 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.     467 

the  night,  but  did  nor  leflen  the  vomiting 
the  following  day.  Next  night  I  defired 
her  to  take  the  laudanum^  not  at  bed-time, 
but  an  hoiir  before  fupper.  The  iirfl  dofe, 
in  this  way,  prevented  her  vomiting  after 
fupper,  and  next  day  after  breakfall ;  but 
llie  threw  up  her  dinner  as  ufual.  How- 
jcver,  by  increafing  the  laudmumy  before 
fupper,  to  twenty-five  drops,  in  three  or 
four  days  Ihe  got  free  of  the  pain  and  fick- 
jiefs  at  her  ftoraach,  as  well  as  of  the  vo- 
fniting  after  meals. 

[h)  A  married  lady,  aged  about  30,  af- 
ter having  been,  for  fome  time,  irregular 
as  to  the  monthly  evacuation,  upon  eating 
freely  of  aim  oil  any  kind  of  meat,  but  e* 
fpecially  fuch  as  lay  heavy  on  her  flomach, 
was  apt  to  \)C  afFeded  with  iicknefs,  faint- 
ings,  and  flight  convulfive  motions,  attend^ 
ed  with  a  fmall  irregular  and  quick  pulfe, 
and  a  Goldnefs  of  her  whole  body.  After 
Ihe  had  ufed  vomits,  the  bark,  bitters,  fa- 
C:red  dixir,  and  various  grateful  flomachic 
N  n  n  ^  niedj-? 


468         OF  THE  CURE  OF 

in edicines  to  little  purpofe,  I  advifed  her  to 
take  fome  laudanum  every  day,  an  hour  or. 
two  before  dinner.  Having  been  formerly 
much  accuftomed  to  this  medicine,  Ihe  be- 
gan v^^ith  thirty-five  drops,  and  foon  in- 
creafed  them  to  fifty  or  fixty.  The  laii^ 
damm,  in.flead  of  making  her  drowly,  gave 
her  better  fpirits,  and  enabled  her  to  eat  at 
dinner  as  ufual,  without  being  afFe6ted  with 
Hcknefs  or  faintings  after  it.  She  con- 
tinued the  ufe  of  the  laudanum  in  this 
way  pretty  conftantly  for  five  or  fix  weeks. 
Some  days,  when  fhe  had  neglected  the 
laudanum  before  dinner,  if  fhe  took  it  as 
foon  as  file  began  to  be  uneafy  after  eat^ 
ing,  it  foon  lefFened  the  ficknefs  at  her  fto- 
jnach,  and  prevented  the  faintings  and  con" 
yulfive  motions. 

[c)  Another  married  lady,  aged  a« 
bout  thirty,  who  had  been  often  troubled 
>vith  a  pain,  a  fournefs,  and  wind  in  her  flo- 
mach,  and,  when  thefe  left  her,  with  aflh- 
matic  fits,  complained  of  a  lump  in  her 

throaty 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.     469 

ihroat,  Hatulence,  and  fucli  a  weaknefs  of 
her  ftomach  and  ipdigeflion,  that  every 
kind  of  food  occalioned  pain,  ficknefs,  and 
vomiting,  except  bread  and  wine,  or  a 
very  little  boiled  or  roafted  chicken.  Af^ 
ter  trying  the  bark,  vomits,  facred  elixir^ 
and  exercife,  with  fcarce  any  benefit,  I 
jdefired  her  to  take  fome  laudanum  an  hour 
before  dinner.  Although  fhe  did  not  ex- 
ceed fixteen  drops,  yet  fhe  always  eat  her 
dinner  better,  and  digefled  it  with  the 
fame  eafe  as  when  fhe  was  in  health;  nor 
did  flie  find  any  inconvenience  from  the 
/audanum,  except  that  it  made  her  thirily 
in  the  afternoon, 

4.  In  fome  cafes,  I  have  known  a  pain 
In  the  ftomach  with  vomiting,  after  eat- 
ing, cured  by  foap  taken  daily  to  the 
quantity  of  ttvo  drachms;  in  other  cafes, 
half  a  pint  of  tepid  lime-water,  drunl^; 
thrice  a-day,  has  anfwered  better  than  the 
foap. 

EN  a  heat  and  forenefs  in  the  fto- 

juaCi-i 


470        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

mach  arife  from  an  acid,  the  teftaceous 
powders  ought  to  be  taken  freely.  They 
have  alfo  cured,  at  lead  for  the  time,  fome 
who,  upon  drinking  a  glafs  of  wine,  have 
felt  in  their  ftomach  a  burning  heat  in^ 
llantly  fpreading  through  almoft  their 
whole  body. 

Several  perfons  have  found  great  re- 
lief from  a  pain  in  the  ftomach,  both  be^ 
fore  and  after  eating,  by  taking  a  large 
draught  of  warm  water,  with  a  little  wine 
or  brandy  in  it. 

In  the  2d  volume  of  the  Medical  Inquiries 
and  Obfervations,  we  have  an  account  of 
a  violent  pain  in  the  region  of  the  right 
kidney  in  one  patient,  and  of  a  pain  in  the 
ftomach  in  another,  immediately  relieved 
by  a  draught  of  equal  parts  of  fountain-? 
water  boiling  and  Pyrmont  or  Batl?  water. 
But  I  imagine  the  relief  procured  in  thefe 
cafes  was  rather  owing  to  the  warmth  of 
the  liquor  than  any  virtue  in  the  P'jrmont 
or  Bath  water ;  for  a  patient  of  mine  near 
eighty  years  of  age,  who,    after  having 

been 


fvTERVOtJS   SYMPTOMS      471 

teen  Idng  fubjec^:  to  bloody  urine,  came  at 
lafl  to  have  an  ulcer  in  his  bladder,  found 
his  pains  always  much  lefTened,  and  fome^ 
times  almofl  quite  removed,  by  drinking 
largely  of  Arabic  emulfion,  rea,  milk  and 
water,  or  weak  broth,  a  good  deal  more 
than  blood-warm.  As  the  good  efFed  of 
thefe  warm  li(Juors  was  always  immediate, 
it  mufl  have  been  owing  folely  to  their 
adlion  on  the  nerves  of  the  flomach.  We 
know  that  warm  water  applied  externally 
often  eafes  internal  pains ;  it  is  no  wonder 
then,  that  warm  llq.uors  received  into  the 
flomach,  a  part  much  more  feniible  than 
the  Ikin,  and  whofe  nerves  have  a  remark- 
able fympathy  with  almofl  every  part  of 
the  body,  fhould  have  equal  or  more  power- 
ful effeds  in  relieving  pains,  even  in  fuch 
parts  as  are  Bot  immediately  eonned:ed 
with  it* 

V.  A  colic  of  the  hyileric  or  flatuleni* 
kind* 

If  the  patient  be  coflive,  as  is  almofl 

always 


47^      OF  THE  Cure  OF 

always  the  cafe,  the  body  mull  be  opened 
by  laxative  clyflers,  to  which  a  drachm  or 
two  of  afafmtida  may  be  added.  If  there 
are  violent  vomitings,  after  feveral  draughts 
of  toail  and  water,  a  mixture  ought  to  be 
given  of  fait  of  wormwood,  lemon-juice, 
and  pepper-mint   water  *,  together   with 

laiidamimi 

*  The  draughts  of  fait  of  wormwood  and  juice  of  Ie= 
mons  are  obferved,  in  a  great  meafure,  to  lofe  their 
power  of  flopping  a  vomiting,  when  they  are  not  fwal- 
Sowed  in  the  aft  of  effervefcence  :  And  is  not  their  fupe- 
rior  anti-emetic  power,  in  this  ftate,  owing  to  their  ma- 
king a  much  ftronger  impreflion  upon  the  nerves  of  the 
iftomach,  while  they  continue  to  emit  their  fixt  air,  and 
when  all  -their  parts  are  in  violent  motion,  than  after 
Saturation,  when  they  can  adl  only  by  their  faline  qua- 
lity ?  For,  while  the  nerves  of  the  ftomach  are  affedkd 
with  this  bri&  and  unufual  JlimuliiSy  that  difagreeable 
fenfation  which  produced  the  vomiting  muflr  be  leiTened 
®r  deftroyed.  And  is  it  not  the  effeft,  which  thofe 
draughts  fometimes  have  in  preventing  the  attack  of  in- 
termittent fevers,  to  be  afcribed  folely  to  their  adion  oa 
th'e  very  fenfible  nerves  of  the  ftomach,  and  not  to  any 
fudden  change  which  they  may  be  fuppofed  to  produce 
in  the  nature  of  the  humours  contained  in  the  prima 
v'lds?  Further,  are  not  many  of  thole  mineral- waters 
which  contain  a  good  deal  of  fixt  air  and  iparkle  in  the 

glaO, 


NERVOUS   SYxMPTOMS.        473 

laudanum.  However,  tbefe  draughts  are 
often  iriefTecStual,  and  in  fome  few  patients 
the  vdmitiilg  is  increafed  hf  the  laiidamini. 
In  fach  cafes  I  have  always  fdcceeded,  by 
ordering  a  clyiler  of  fix  ounces  of  water, 
with  fifty,  fixty,  or  even  eighty  drops  of 
laudanum;  and  when  no  thorough  paflage 
tould  be  procured,  1  gave,  by  favour  of  this 
opiate,  fome  pills  of  aloes  with  calomel ; 
which  paffing  into  the  intellines  before  the 
vomiting  returned,  generally  procured  a 
plentiful  evacuation  by  flool,  which,  either 
wholely,  or  in  a  great  meafure,  removed 
the  difeafe. 

If  the  purging  pills  fail  to  6peri  the  bo- 
dy,   and    the  pain  and  vomiting  return, 
another  anodyne  clyfter  mull  be  given,  and 
fodn  after  it,    a  larger  dofe  of  the  pills ; 
O  o  o  arid 

giafs,  much  more  grateful,  as  well  as  invigorating  to  the 
ftomach  when  drunk  at  the  wel!,  than  after  they  have; 
ftood  for  fome  time  in  an  open  veffeJ,  becaufe  in  this  laft 
cafe  they  have,  together  with  their  fixt  air,  loft  their 
power  of  gratefully  ftimulating  the  nerves  of  the  ft»» 
mach  ? 


474        OF  THE  CURE   QF 

and  a  little  before  the  time  thefe  pills  may 
be  expected  to  work,  the  patient  ihould 
go  into  the  warm  bath.  In  patients  of  a 
full  habit,  efpecially  if  the  pain  be  very 
great,  fome  blood  ought  to  be  taken  away. 
To  prevent  the  frequent  return  of  hy- 
fteric  colics,  an  antihyfteric  plaifler  apphed 
to  the  ahdomcttj  a  dofe  of  the  facred  tinc- 
ture or  elixir  once  a-week,  and  exercife, 
efpecially  riding,  will  be  found  ufeful.  A 
milk-diet  has  fometimes  cured  thofe  who 
have  been  much  afflicted  with  thofe  colics ; 
and  the  fulphureous  water  of  Moffat,  drunk 
for  two  or  three  months  in  the  fummer  has, 
in  fome  cafes,  made  their  returns  much  lefs 
frequent. 

VI.  Flatulence  in  the  flomach  and 
bowels  *. 

The  medicines  mod  proper  in  com- 
plaints of  this  kind-,  are  either  fuch  as  pro- 
cure 

•  I  have  often  found  great  benefit  in  flatulent  com- 
plaints of  the  ftomach  and  bowels,  from  fi  equent  rubbing 
of  the  legs  with  a  flelh  brufli. 


NERVOUS   SYMPTOMS.      473^ 

cure  fpeedy  relief  by  expelling  the  wind, 
or  thofe  which,   by  flrengthening  the  ali- 
inencary  canal,  leiTen  its  generation.     A- 
inong  the  former,  I  have  found  none  more 
efficacious  than  the  fpiritus  £thcreus  and  lau- 
danum,  I  commonly  give  the  laudanum  in  a 
mixture  of  peppermint  water  and  tincture  of 
caJloVy  ox  fpirittis  nitri  dulcis.    In  fome  cafes, 
in  place  of  this,  I  prefcribe  opium  in  pills  with 
afafostida^  And  here  it  may  be  worth  while 
to  obferve,  that   the  good  efFedts  of  opi- 
ates are  equally  confpicuous,  whether  the 
flatulence  be  contained  in  the  flomach  or 
inteftincs;  whereas  thofe  warm  medicines 
commonly  called  carminative,  do  not  often 
give  immediate  relief,  except  when  the  wind 
is  in  the  flomach. 

With  regard  to  the  fpiritits  athereuSy  I 
have  frequently  feen  very  good  efFeds  from 
it  in  flatulent  complaints;  of  which  Ifhall 
content  myfelf  with  giving  one  inflance.  A 
lady  aged  between  40  and  50,  about  the 
time  the  menfiswere  leaving  her,  found  her 
belly  increafe  fo  much  in  bulk,  that,  for 
O  o  o  2  feme 


6^€        0F   THE  CURE   OF 

forne  time,  ihe  fnfpe^fted  herfelf  to  be  vvitli 
child.     In  the  morning,    fhe  was  often  fq 
much  fwelled  about  the  ftomach,  as  not  to 
be  able  to  bear  her  flays,  or  breathe  freely. 
She  ufed  a  variety  of  medicines,  but  no- 
thing gave  fuch  immediate  relief  as  a  tea- 
fpoonful  of  i\\G  fpiritus (stheveus,  mixed  with 
I  wo  table-fpoon  fills  of  water.     This  always 
made  her  bring  up  a  good  deal  of  wind, 
and  lelFened  theilraitnefs  and  fwellinsf  about 
her  ftomach. 
-  In  gouty  cafes,   the  fpirkiu  <ethereus,  a 
dram  of  French  brandy,  or  of  the  aqua  aro^ 
matica,  and  ginger,  either  in  fubftance,  or 
infufed  in  boiling  water,  are  among  the  bed; 
medicines  to  expel  wind. 

When  the  cafe  of  flatulent  patients  is 
fuch  as  to  make  it  improper  to  give  theni 
warm  medicines  inwardly,  a  plaifter  made 
of  equal  parts  of  the  emplajintm  antih'^Jieri' 
cum  and  fiomachiaim  may  be  applied  to  the 
flomach  or  belly  with  advantage ;  or  four 
or  five  tea-fpoonfuls  of  the  following  lini- 
ment; 


NERVOUS   SYMPTOMS.      477 

Bient  may  be  well  rubbed  on  thefe  parts  at 
fe^ed-dme. 

R.  Balf.  anodyn.  Batean.  unc  ?. 
01.  mac.  par  exprefT.  unc.  fs. 
menth.  drach.  ii.     Mifce. 

Th  e  remedies  moft  proper  for  flrengtlir 
ening  the  ftomach  and  bowels,  and  con- 
fequently  for  lefTening  the  producfllon  of 
flatulence,  are  the  bark,  bitters,  chaly*, 
heates,  and  exercife.  In  ilatu|ent  cafes,  I 
add  to  the  tindture  of  the  bark  and  bitters, 
which  I  have  fo  oft^n  recoip mended,  fome 
nptriieg  or'  ginger.  And  when  I  prefcribe 
ihe  filings  of  iron,  I  join  them  with  the 
pilvis  diaromaton.  When  windy  complaints 
,^re  ai:ji:ended  with  coflivenefs,  nothing  an- 
iwers  better  than  four  or  five  of  the  fol- 
lowing pills  every  other  night  at  bed-time: 

R.  Af  foetid,  dj-ach.  ii. 
Aloes  focotrin. 
Sal.  Mart. 

Rad.  zinzlber.  ana  drach.  i. 
^lis,  proprletat.  q,  f.  ut.  f.  pil.  gr.  iy,' 


47^         OF  THE  CURE  OF 

On  the  other  hand,  when  the  body  is 
too  open,  twelve  or  fifteen  grains  of  rhu- 
barb, with  half  a  drachm  or  two  fcruples 
of  the  confeffio  Japonicay  given  every  other 
evening,  will  have  very  good  efFecfts, 

In  thofe  flatulent  complaints  which  come 
on  about  the  time  the  menfes  ceafe,  repeat- 
ed fmall  bleedings  often  give  more  relief 
than  any  other  remedy. 

With  regard  to  diet,  I  fhall  only  ob- 
ferve,  that  tea  and  all  flatulent  aliments  arc 
to  be  avoided  ;  and  that,  for  drink,  water 
with  a  little  brandy  or  rum  is  not  only 
preferable  to  malt  liquor,  but  in  nioft  cafe§ 
alfo  to  wine. 

VII.  A  nervous  or  fpafmodic  ajihina, 

(i)  In  the  true  fpafmodic  ajlhma,  where 
there  is  no  fixed  obflrudion  in  the  lungs, 
nor  any  load  of  phlegm  opprefling  them,  the 
iits  are  beft  relieved  by  bleeding  and  opium. 
If  the  patient  be  of  a  full  habit,  we  may 
bleed  largely ;  if  othcrwife,  we  mull  either 

take 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.       479 

take  away  little  blood,  or  omit  this  eva- 
cuation altogether. 

The  opium  may  be  given  either  in  the 
form  of  the  elixir  paregoricunif  or  in  fuch 
a  draught  as  the  following. 

» 

R,  Aqu.  menth.  unc.  i.  {$. 
Laud,  liquid. 

Sp.  volat.  oleof  ana  gutt*  xxv. 
Syr.  commun.  drach.  ii.     Mlfce. 

Sir  Richard  Blackmore  tells  of  a  phyfl- 
cian,  much  affedted  in  the  winter-time  with 
a  dry  ajlhma,  who  every  morning  took  thirty 
drops  of  laudanum^  without  which  he  found 
himfelf  unable  to  go  abroad  about  his  bu- 
linefs. 

Nor  are  opiates  lefs  fuccefsful  when  a 
true  fpafmodic  afthma  arifes  from  fympathy 
with  the  flomach,  than  when  the  nerves 
of  the  lungs  are  themfelves  primarily  af- 
fedcd  *. 

That 

*  A  gentleman,  aged  25,  after  having  taken  mercury 
for  feveral  weeks,  on  accouat  of  a  venereal  diforder,  be- 
came 


48©  OF  THE  CURE  0# 

That  fenfe  of  faintnefs  about  the  flo'^ 
niach,  with  a  frequent  iighing  and  a  difR^' 
eulty  of  breathing,  with  which  woment  af- 
ter child-bearing  are  fometimes  affedleJ, 
when  the  miliary  eruption  does  not  come 
properly  out,  are  often  lefTened  or  removed 
by  a  dofe  of  the  elixir  paregoricwn^  or  a 
bolus  of  caflovy  faL  corn,  cerv,  and  opium. 

In  the  true  fpafmodic  ajihma,  efpecially 
when  it  is  owing  to  wind  in  the  (tomach 
atid  bowels,  or  increafed  by  this,  a  folu- 
tion  of  afu  fceiida,  the  tinfture  of  caflor; 
and  fpirit  of  hartfliorn,  are  often  ufcful,  al- 

tho' 

came  peevifli  becaufe  of  his  confinement,  and  would  eat 
no  meat  for  upwards  of  twenty-four  hours,  but  drank 
largely  of  whey  and  water-griiel.  In  the  afternooii  he 
began  to  be  affedted  with  a  difficulty  of  breathing,  unat- 
tended with  any  cough  or  fpitting.  The  tincture  of  ca- 
Jior,  fpirit  of  hartfhorn,  and  other  medicines,  which  were 
j^refcribed,  gave  very  little  relief;  and  the  afthmatic  fie 
becoming  much  worfe  about  midnight,  a  draught  with' 
twenty  drops  of  laudanum  was  oi'dered.  This  foon  lef- 
fened  the  difficulty  of  breathing  fo  much,  that  he  fell 
sifleep,  and  next  morning  awaked  in  a  great  meafure  free 
from  this  complaint,  which,  after  eating  fome  broiled 
chicken  fer  dinner,  left  him  iatirely. 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.     481 

tho*  their  antifpafmodic  virtue  is  much  lefs 
than  that  of  opium,. 

(2.)  When  an  afihma  of  the  fpafmodie 
kind  is  occaiioned  by,    or  attended  with 
fome  fixed  obllruftions  in  the  lungs,   or  a 
coniiderable  accumulation  of  humours  in 
them,  we  muft  ufe  a  method  of  cure  fome- 
ivhat  different  from  the  above.    Fbr  altho' 
bleeding  is  equally  ufeful,  arid  often  more 
liecefTary  here,  than  in  the  true  fpafmodic 
afthma ;  yet  opiates  are  hot  to  be  given  tb 
lefFen  the  fitS^  till  after  the  lungs  have  been 
fufHciently  cleared  by  evacuations  and  atte- 
tiuating  medicines.     A  large  blifler  between 
the  flioulders  is  of  excellent  ufe  to  promote 
expectoration  and  relieve  the  lungs.     Vo* 
mits  are  likewife  proper,    but  cannot  be 
fafely  given,  till  after  the  aflhmatic  fit  be- 
gins to  abate.     In  fome  patients,  a  purge 
of  manna  and  glauber  fait,    or  of  foluble 
tartar,   almofl  always  leffens  or  carries  off 
the  fit :  while  in  othersj  who  have  weaker 
bowels,  whatever  purges  brifkly,  whether  it 
P  pp  be 


4S2        OF  THE   CURE  OF 

be  food  or  medicine,  is  apt  to  bring  on,  dt 
at  leafl  to  increafe  the  fit. 

For  prefent  relief,  I  commonly  give 
fpirit  of  hartfhorn  or  compounded  tincfture 
of  cafior,  dilated  with  a  fuilicient  quantity 
of  water.  With  the  fame  view  alfo,  a  ta- 
ble-fpoonful  of  a  folution  of  equal  parts  of 
gum  ammoniac,  and  a/a  fsstida  in  penny- 
royal water,  may  be  taken  five  or  fix  times 
in  twenty-four  hours. 

A  draught  of  water,  with  •§  part  of  vi- 
negar, and  fweetened  with  honey  or  fogar, 
often  gives  confiderable  relief  in  afthmatic 
fits  'f  altho'  fuch  is  the  difference  of  con- 
llitutions,  that  I  have  met  with  fome  per- 
fons  whofc  breathing  was  always  made  worfe 
by  acids  of  every  kind. 

Those  afthmatic  patients  whofe  fto- 
mach  and  bowels  are  weak,  and  much  trou- 
bled with  flatulence,  do  better  with  the 
lighter  flefh-meats  and  a  little  wine,  than 
with  a  milk  and  vegetable  diet ;  and  the 
folution  of  gum  ammoniac^  with  acetiimfcil' 
litiaim^  or  the  pHuk  Jallitki^^  do  jiot  com-* 

monly 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.      483 

fiioiily  agree  fo  well  with  them  as  the  afafa;^ 
tida  and  volatile  alkaline  falts. 

When  elderly  pcrfons  have  been  feized 
with  an  aflhmatic  paroxyfm  from  the  gouc 
attacking  the  lungs,  I  have  fomid  moft  bene- 
fit from  bliflers  applied  between  the  fhonlders 
and  to  the  legs,  and  from  bolufes  of  gum 
ammomac,  fal.  vol,  amnion,  and  camphire, 
given  twice  or  thrice  a-day. 

(3.)  To  prevent  the  return  of  the  fits  in 
the  true  fpafmodic  afihma,  we  muft  enJea- 
vom:  to  flrengthen  the  lungs  and  whole 
nervous  fyflem  by  means  of  the  bark^  cha- 
lybeates,  elixir  of  vitriol,  a  proper  diet, 
country-air,  and  riding. 

A  flannel  waiilcoat  next  the  ikin,  or  a 
large  piece  of  ;Sannel  wore  on  the  breafl, 
has  contributed  to  prevent  the  frequent  re- 
turn of  aflhmatic  fits. 

The  patients  fhould,  above  all  things, 
avoid  eating  or  drinking  fo  much  at  once 
gs  to  burden  their  flomach, 

P  p  P  2  In 


484       OF  THE  CURE  OF 

In  the  mixed  aj%ma,    the  bark  muft  be 
ufed  with  more  caution,   efpecially  if  the 
lungs  be  confiderably  qbflru^ed,  or  loaded 
>vith  phlegm  ;  and  the  cure  muft  be  chiefly 
attempted  by  ifllies  in  the  back  and  arms, 
pr  a  feton  in  the  fide;  and  by  other  medi- 
cines th^t  tend  to  remove  the  obftrudlion 
in  the  pulmonary  veiFels,  or  jeffen  the  flu.^ 
of  humours  to  thein  ;   of  this  kind  arg  the 
pilulis  fciUitic^i  taken  in  fuch  quantity  as  to 
]ceep  the  body  always  open  ;  pills  of  garlic 
and  fpap ;  the  juice  of  forty  or  fifty  milk- 
ped(s  in   two    or    three  table-fpoonfuls  of 
French  white  wine,  Rhenifh,  or  cyder,  ta- 
ken twice  a-day ;  and  crude  mercury,  or 
quickfilver  pills,  which  have  fometimes  cuf 
red  aflhmatic  aijments  after  other  remedies 
had  failed, 

A$  not  only  diiferent  patients  are  relie- 
ved by  different  remedies,  but  the  fame  pa- 
tients, from  a  change  in  their  conititution, 
or  in  the  nature  of  the  diforder,  ofcen  reir 
quire  a  confiderable  change  in  their  medi; 
pines  and  diet,  it  may  not  be  amifs  to  add 

the 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.     485 

ilie  foUovvino;  cafe  of  one  who  has  been  1od<£ 
fubje(n:  to  fevere  aflhmatic  fits, 

A  gentleman,  aged  about  forty,  of  a 
fpare  make,  lively,  healthy,  and  iifmg  a 
great  deal  of  exercife,  one  day,  after  too 
great  an  exertion  of  his  flrength,  began  to 
feel  a  pain  in  his  bread  about  the  Jlermm* 
Two  years  after  this,  he  was  at  times  af- 
fecfted  with  a  difficulty  of  breathing;  which 
continued  to  increafe  for  feveral  years,  and 
was  generally  attended  with  a  great  flux  of 
humours  upon  his  lungs,  and  aconfiderable 
cxpe(Sloration  of  a  thick  phlegm.  In  violent 
iits,  he  found  the  mofl  immediate  relief 
from  bleeding  and  bliflering ;  and  he  ufed" 
•with  advantage  vomits  of  ipecacuanha  with 
the  Qxymel  fcilliticum,  2.nd  the  pilule  fciUi- 
tic(S,  or  a  folution  of  gum  ammoniac  with 
acetum  fcillitkum.  He  abflained  for  feverai 
years  from  wine,  malt-liquor,  and  all  flelli- 
meats,  except  chicken ;  and  often  made  his 
dinner  of  bread  and  butter-milk  only,  He^ 
frequently  found  his  breathing  made  eafierj, 


48^        OF   THE   CURE   OF 

by  drinking  water  with  a  litde  vinegar  fe* 
veral  times  through  the  day. 

After  he  had  fufFered  much  by  many 
violent  attacks  of  this  diforder,  he  began  to 
complain  of  wind  in  his  flomach ;  and,  up- 
on vomiting,  difcharged  a  good  deal  of 
tough  phlegm.  His  body  became  likewife^ 
too  open,  and  whatever  food  or  medicine 
increafed  this  difpofition  was  hurtful  to  him. 
The  fq^uill-pills  and  the  lac  ammoniammy  with 
the  aeetum  fcillitiaimy  did  not  now  agree 
near  fo  well  with  him,  or  do  him  fo  much 
fervice  as  the  compound  tindture  of  cafior^ 
or  a  folution  of  afaf(stida  with  a  little  faL 
voL  ammon,  in  penny-royal  or  mint-water: 
And  a  bit  of  broiled  meat,  with  too  or 
three  glalTes  of  claret  after  his  meals,  agreed 
better  with  him  than  vegetable  food  or 
watery  liquors  alone  ;  but  he  found  it  bed  to 
eat  little  at  a  time,  and  often.  Now  alfo 
he  found  great  benefit  from  the  bark,  not 
only  in  the  intervals,  but  alfo  in  the  decline 
of  the  fits.  He  took  it  in  deco6lion,  with 
four  ounces  of  the  tindure  added  to  each 

pound, 


NERVOUS   SYMPTOMS.      487 

pound,  to  the  quantity  of  two  tablc-fpoon- 
fuls  four  times  a-day;  and,  fo  far  from  find- 
ing it  increafe  his  wheezing  or  difficulty  of 
breathing,  lie  thought  it  often  leflened 
them,  and  prevented  or  broke  the  force  of 
fmaller  paroxyfms. 

Soon  after  he  became  fubjed  to  fits  of 
loofenels,  he  began  to  fpit  lefs  than  he  had 
done  for  fevcral  years  before;  and  then  I 
obfervcd  that  blifters,  which  run  longer  with 
him  than  with  mofl  people,  did  him  leis 
fervice  than  formerly,  when  he  had  a  great- 
er expetftoration  and  no  tendency  to  a  loofe- 
iiefs.  During  the  violence  of  the  worfl  fits, 
he  fometimes  almofl  lofes  his  fight,  nor  is 
he  then  able  to  coiigh  till  they  begin  to 
abate.  At  firfl  he  brings  up  a  little  tough 
phlegm  with  great  difficulty ;  but  as  the 
conflridion  in  the  lungs  leflens,  he  expec- 
torates more  freely. 

For  fome  years  he  had  more  frequent 
returns  of  his  difeafe  in  fiimmer  and  autumn 
than  in  winter ;  fudden  changes  of  wea- 
ther, cold,  OF  fatigue,  bring  on  the  afibma^ 

which 


488        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

which  he  can  fometimes  foretell  by  the  pale-* 
nefs  of  his  urine.  Flatulent  aliments,  and 
whatever  purges  him  much,  will  now,  in 
his  beft  health,  occafion  a  flight  fit.  Al- 
the'  he  has  been  often  free  from  any  vio- 
lent attack  for  two  or  three  months,  yet 
he  feldom  breathes  in  the  night  fo  freely  as 
one  in  perfect:  health.  His  pulfe  is  often 
fmall,  his  extremities  cold,  and  face  livid, 
during  a  fevere  fit«  After  bleeding,  his 
pulfe  becomes  fuller  and  quicker,  but  does 
not  return  to  its  natural  flownefs  till  his 
breathing  is  free.  The  fits  are  generally 
over  in  two  or  three  days,  fometimes  they 
laft  eight  or  ten;  and,  after  yielding  in 
part,  return  a  fecond  time  with  more  vio- 
lence. He  is  commonly  worft  in  the  even- 
ino'  or  in  the  night ;  and  has  fometimes 
exacerbations  in  the  evening  and  morning. 
The  paroxyfms  of  late  arc  almofl  alway^ 
attended  mih.  complaints  of  flatulence  in 
his  flomach,  and  he  finds  relief  as  often  as 
he  brings  up  wind.  The  remedies  which 
jn  this  flate  have  been  of  molt  fervice  td> 

his 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.     489 

Kis  (lomach  are  the  bark,    a   folution  of 
afafactida,  the  cmplaftrum  antih^ftericum  ap- 
plied to  the  epigaflric  region,   and  the  diet 
of  flelh-meats  with  claret.     A  bit  of  mut- 
ton chop  has  often  given  him  reUef  in  lefTex 
fits    of  bad  breathing.      Obferving,    that, 
even  in  the  intervals  of  the  fits,   he  often 
breathed  with  difficulty  about  three  or  four 
in  the  afternoon,   he  eat  a  little  mutton- 
chop,    beef-ftake,    or  broiled  chicken   be- 
tween eight  and  nine  in  the  morning,  and 
dined   between   one   and   two  on  panada 
with  a  little  claret,  or  fomething  equally 
light.     By  this  means  he  found  the  whee- 
zing and  difficulty  of  breathing  in  the  af- 
ternoon always  much  leiTened,   and  fome- 
times    prevented   altogether.       He    often 
4rank  near  two  thirds  of  a  bottle  of  claret 
4aily,  but  feldom  took  above  a  quarter  of 
a  pint  of  it  at'once.     By  this  diet,  and  the 
conftant  ufe  of  the  bark,    for  above  two 
months,  firfl  in  tinL^iure  and  decoction,  and 
afterwards  in  fubflance,  he  not  only  brea- 
ijied  more  eafily  at  all  times,  but  was  kept 

Qjl  q  much 


GF  THE  GURE  OF 

much  longer  free  from  the  afthmatic  fits 
than  ufual,  not  haying  had  an  attack  of 
this  kind  worth  mentioning^  from  the  be- 
ginning of  Npvember  till  the  April  or  May 
following  ;  notvvithflanding  his  having  been 
alFeded  feveral  times,  during;  the  winter^ 
months,  with  a  cough  and  a  conliderabk 
expedoration  of  thick  phlegm,     . 

yill.   A  palpitation  of  the  hearts 

(r.)  When,  from  a  weak  or  diforderecj 
flate  of  the  flomach,  the  heart,  by  fympa- 
thy,  is  rendered  fo  irritable  as  from  very 
flight  caufes  to  be  liable  to  ftrong  palpita- 
tions, the  nipft  proper  remedies  are,  the 
tincture  of  the  bark  and  bitters,  and  mo? 
derate  exercife.  |f  there  be  any  rioxiou? 
Jiumoiirs  lodging  in  the  ftomach,  vomit^ 
will  be  proper  ;  and,  \f  the  patient  be  any 
ways  coftive,  a  table- fpoonful  of  the  facred 
dixir  may  be  given  once  in  two  or  three 
pightSo 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.     49J 

Fok  prefcnt  relief,  fpiric  of  hart  (ho  rn^ 
the  tindura  cajlorei  compofita,  fpiritus  £the^ 
reusi  and  opiates,  generally  anfwcr  befl. 

(2.)  When  palpitations  proceed  front 
the  goaty  matter  aiFe(5ling  the  heart,  we 
t)nght  to  trufl  thieily  to  warm  flomachic 
laxatives;  to  camphire,  the  volatile  falts, 
the  warm  pediluvium^  blifters  applied  to  the 
legs,  or  finapifms  to  the  foles  of  the  feet^ 
and  to  bleeding,  if  the  patient  be  of  a  full 
habit; 

(3.)  When  palpitations  arife  from  the 
fuppreffion  of  fome  habittial  evacuation  5 
if  this  cannot  be  feftored,  the  redundanc 
humours  are  to  bt  carried  off  by  fmall 
bleedings,  gentle  piirgcs;  diaphoretics,-  of  * 
liTues, 

(4.)    Lastly,    when  palpitations  arc? 

6wing  to  polypi  in  the  heart  itfelf,   or  iil 

the  great  blobd-veffels  opening  into  ft,   to 

secretions  of  the  perkardimn  to  the  heart, 

C^q  q  2  ofTified 


492        OF  THE  CURE  OP 

ofUfied  valves,  or  fuch  like  caufes,  the 
difcafe  may  be  looked  upon  as  incurable ; 
fince  hitherto  we  know  of  no  medicines 
which  can  remove  thefe  caufes.  However, 
fome  relief  may  be  procured  by  frequent 
fmall  bleedings,  gentle  purges,  and  a  cool- 
ing attenuating  light  diet;  at  the  fame 
time,  avoiding  all  vifcid,  incraffating,  and 
heating  aliments,  and  every  kind  of  exer- 
cife  that  too  much  quickens  the  motion  of 
the  blood. 

IX.  An  immoderate  difcharge  of  pak 
urine. 

As  I  have  observed  above  *,  that  the 
proximate  caufe  of  that  great  difcharge  of 
pale  water,  to  which  liyileric  people  are 
frequent])^  liabk,  is  an  increafed  motion  of 
the  fecretory  velTels  of  the  kidneys  ;  fo 
there  is  no  medicine  that  will  generally 
leflen  it  fo  foon  or  fo  remarkably  as  opium  f  j 

but 

*  See  chapter  6.  No.  8. 

f  Altho'  in  fome  flatulent  or  fpafmodic  cafes,  opiu7?t 
often  praves  one  of  the  beft  diuretics,  yet  it  has  a  contrary 

effea, 


NERVOUS  symptoms;      493 

but  as  ophmi  does  not  flrengthen  the  kid* 
neys,  nor  remove  the  feveral  remote  cau- 
fes  of  this  increafed  fecretion,  other  reme- 
dies are  required  to  prevent  its  freq^uent  re- 
turns. 

Those  which  have  fucceeded  befl  with 
me  are  the  bark,  either  in  fubflance  or 
decodlion,  with  fome  cinnamon  added  to 
it ;  fmall  dofes  of  the  tinBura  rhabarbari 
amari  cum  vino,  once  in  three  or  or  four 
nights;  moderate  exercife  on  horfe-back, 
or  in  a  chaife,  and  a  diet  confiding  chiefly 
of  rice,  fago,  falep,  and  the  lighter  flelh- 
meats  roafted,  together  with  a  few  glafTes 
of  claret  or  red  port  after  meals. 

In  cafts,  where  the  flux  of  pale  urine 
is  attended  with  hedtical  heats,   I  add  to 

the 


effeft.when,  on  account  of  an  uncommon  irritation  of  the 
nerveus  fyftem,  the  urine  is  fecreted  in  too  great  quan- 
tity. I  know  an  elderly  lady,  who  is  frequently  hot  and 
uneafy  in  the  night,  and  paffes  a  great  deal  of  pale  wa- 
ter, whom  a  dofe  of  laudanum,  at  bed-time,  always  re- 
lieves, in  a  great  meafure,  of  this  flux,  altho'  it  feldora 
procures  her  good  reft. 


494       ^F  THE  CURE  OF 

the  above  remedies  the  tinBurd  rofartim,  of 
dixir  of  vitriol. 

When  the  iricreafed  fecretion  is,  in  ^ 
great  mcafafe,  owing  a;  parciculaf  debility 
of  the  kidneys/  a;  flannel-fliirt  will  fome-^ 
times  lefTen  the  quantity  of  the  urine,  by 
increafing  the  perfpifationo 

A  tight  belt  about  the  loins,'  or  i 
ilrengthening  plaifter  applied  to  them,  ha^ 
"been  attended  with  remarkable  effeds,  as- 
will  appear  by  tlje  following  cafes., 

(r.j  A  gentleman  near  to  40;  y^ears  of 
ige,'  troabled  with  wind  in  his  flomach,' 
and  with  gomy  pains  in  his  feet,  in  Au-^ 
guft  17^3;,-  was  attacked  with  fits  of  fick- 
Befs  at  his  ftomach,  attended  with  a  quick- 
tit^s  of  piilfe,  for  whidi  he  lay  in  bed  and 
fweated  fof  feveral  days.  After  this,  he 
began  to  make  great  quantities  of  pale 
water,  infomuch  that  in  the  night  he 
commonly  ufed  to  pafs  near  an  EngUfh- 
pint  every  two  hours.  After  getting  upj- 
the  quantity  began  to  lelTenp   and  conti- 

imtA 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.      495 

nxied  to  diminifh  ^s  the  dzy  advanced, 
Notvvithftandiiig  the  ufe  of  the  bark,  con- 
ferve  of  rofes,  alum,  and  feveral  other  me- 
dicines, for  near  a  fortnight,  this  flux  of 
urine  increafed,  and,  for  the  two  laft  days^ 
it  had  been  made  almoft  as  plentifully  iq. 
the  day  as  in  the  night.  From  a  fufpi- 
cion  that  this  profufe  fecretion  might  ar 
rife  either  from  a  laxity  or  weaknefs  of  the 
renal  veflels,  or  from  their  being  affeded 
^ith  an  uncommon  alternate  motionj, 
about  two  in  the  afternoon,  a  broad 
pofting  belt  was  put  about  the  belly  an4 
Joins,  as  tight  as  the  patient  could  bear  it  i 
And  altho'  all  that  morning,  and  the  day 
before,  he  had  made  every  two  hours  at 
Jeafl  three  gills  of  urine,  aim  oft  as  clear 
as  rock-water ;  yet,  afcer  the  belt  was 
pn,  he  voided  none  for  above  four  hours, 
and  then  not  quite  half  a  pint.  About 
ten  at  night,  he  pafTed  much  the  fame 
quantity;  but  not  being  able  to  fuffer  the 
l^elt  in  bed,  it  was  removed,  and  the  flux 
pf  urine  j-eturned  in  the  night-time^  tho- 

not 


OF  THE  CURE  OF 

not  to  that  degree  it  had  done  for  feveral 
nights  before.  From  this  time,  by  kcep^ 
ing  to  the  belt,  riding  out  in  a  chaife,  and 
returning  to  the  ufe  of  light  fiefh-meats, 
which,  on  account  of  a  quicknefs  in  his 
pulfe  and  great  thirft,  he  had  almoft 
wholely  abflained  from,  the  flux  of  urine 
daily  lelTened,  and  the  patient  recover'- 
ed. 

(2)  A  gentleman,  upwards  of  30  years 
of  age,  after  having  been  in  a  flow  fever, 
attended  with  rheumatic  pains,  for  ten  or 
twelve  days,  began  (November  20.  1745) 
to  make  a  great  deal  of  pale  water,  and 
chiefly  in  the  night-time.  This  diforder, 
notwithftanding  the  ufe  of  the  bark,  tinc^ 
tura  rofaruniy  and  other  remedies,  conti- 
nued without  any  fenflble  abatement  till 
the  24th  of  December,  when  a  large 
plaifler  of  the  emplaftmm  dcfenfivum  being 
applied  to  the  os  facrum  and  loins,  had  fo 
good  an  effeft,  that,  on  the  night  follow- 
ing, he  made  no  water  till  after  he  had 

been 


JSTERVOdS  SYMPTOMS.      497 

been  three  hours  in  bed;  though,  for 
fome  time  before,  he  had  feldom  lain  an 
hour  and  a  half  without  a  call.  The  Se- 
cond night,  he  was  above  four  hours  in 
bed  before  he  was  difturbed,  and  the  quan^ 
tity  of  urine  through  the  whole  night 
did  not  exceed  five  gills ;  whereas,  for  fe- 
veral  weeks  before,  it  had  commonly  a^ 
mounted  to  three  Englilh  pints  a-night, 
and  fometimes  to  much  more.  In  lels 
than  a  week,  from  the  time  he  had  ap- 
plied the  plaifter,  the  urine  returned  to 
its  natural  colour  and  quantity,  and  the 
patient  foon  recovered  his  ftrength. 

The  fame  gentleman,  in  November 
1750,  after  a  fever  and  cough,  was  again 
attacked  with  his  old  diflemper,  upon 
which  he  had  immediately  recourfe  to 
the  emplajirum  defenftvumy  which,  though 
it  feemed  fomewhai  to  reflrain  the  flux, 
for  the  firfl  night,  yet  had  no  efFed;  af- 
terwards. But  it  is  to  be  obferved,  that, 
m  this  relapfe,  neither  the  bark  nor  the 
R  r  r  other 


49B        OF  THE  CURE  OP 

other  flrengtheners  had  been  ufed  before 
the  plaifler. 

(3.)  Mr  J.  P.  aged  above  50,  after  a 
tedious  fever  in  July  1758,  began  to  make 
in  the  night  great  quantities  of  pale  wa- 
ter, which  much  retarded  his  recove- 
ry. After  ufing  the  bark,  claret,  and 
other  remedies,  I  advifed  him  to.  ap-» 
ply  to  his  loins  the  fame  ftrengthening 
plaifler  which  I  had  found  fo  ferviceable 
to  the  laft  mentioned  patient ;  by  means 
jof  which,  the  flux  was  in  a  few  days  fen- 
fibly  diminifhed,  although  not  quite  flopt 
for  feveral  weeks. 

X.  Periodical  headachs. 

(i.)  When  thefe  arife  from  a  difor- 
dered  flate  of  the  ftomach,  the  befl:  me- 
dicines are  vomits,  flomachic  laxatives, 
and  bitters.  If  there  is  an  acid  in  the 
ftomach,  the  teftaceous  powders,  magnefia 
filbff  or  hme-water,  will  be  of  great  ufe. 

(2.)  When 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.     499 

(2.)  When  periodic  headachs  proceed 
from  a  rheumatic  or  gouty  humour  afFe6t- 
ing  the  fmall  vefTels  or  nerves  of  the  peri- 
cranhmij,  or  other  parts  of  the  head ;  the 
propereil  remedies  are  blifters  applied  to 
the  head  or  legs ;  iffues  in  the  head  or 
neck ;  the  warm  pediluviwn,  with  dry 
fridion  of  the  legs  and  feetj  and  frequent 
dofes  of  facred  tindure  *. 

In  a  voilent  pain  of  the  head  from  a 
rheumatic  humourj  after  feveral  other  re- 
medies had  failed,  I  have  feen  good  ef-^ 
fe(5ts  from  fifteen  or  twenty  grains  of  gum ^ 
guaide,  with  ten  grains  offal,  vol,  ammon^ 
given  in  a  bolus  at  bed-time,  and  repeated 


for  feveral  nights. 


Rfr2  The 


*  The  following  elFedl  of  an  eXtfaordinai*y  dofe  of 
|acred  tindure  was  communicated  to  me  by  a  phyfician 
of  character.  A  lady,  afilided  with  a  rheumatic  pain 
in  her  head,  by  miftake  drank  over  night,  at  oace,  near* 
an  Englilh  pint  of  facred  tinfture.  Next  day,  ihe  purged 
feven  times,  aad,  for  three  days  after,  falivated,  as  if 
(he  had  taken  mercury  ;  but  was  entirely  cured  of  the 
pain  ^pf  her  head. 


500        OF  THE  CURE  Of 

The  pidvis  foL  afari,  ufed  as  a  ilernilta* 
tory,  has  fometimes  cured  obftinate  head- 
achs,  by  making  a  large  evacuation  from, 
the  veffels  of  the  nofe. 

(3)  When  periodic  or  frequently  return- 
ing pains  of  the  head  are  owing  to  a  pe- 
culiar weaknefs  or  delicacy  of  the  nerves  of 
that  part,  rendering  them  liable  to  be  af*  *' 
fe(fted  by  flight  eaufeSj  we  mufl  attempt  to 
relieve  the  patients  by  the  bark,  chalybeates, 
moderate  exercife,  and  daily  wafhing  of  the 
head  with  cold  water.      Here  alfo  fome 
of  thofe  medicines,  commonly  called  ner- 
vous, may    be  of  ufe,    fuch  as  camphircj 
mufk,  and  valerian.     The  lalT:  of  thde  has 
been  commended   as  a  kind  of  Ipecific  in 
obflinate  hemicranias  * ;  and  I  have  found 
it  ferviceable  in  removing  a  confulidn  of 
the  head,  with  which  an  epileptic  patient^ 
of  very   delicate  nerves,  was  aim  oil  con- 
flantly  afFecHied,  as  well  as  in  leiTening  o^r 
protra<5ting  the  returns  of  the  convuldvte 

fits* 

f  See  Fordycc  de  hemlcranla. 


Nervous  symptoms.  501 

fits.  The  valerian,  in  this  cafe^  was  given 
in  the  form  of  an  elcduary,  and  to  the 
quantity  of  three  drachms  daily. 

(4.)  When  headachs  are  regular  as  td 
their  periods,  vomits  fhould  be  given  an 
hour  and  a  half,  or  two  hours,  before  the 
returns  of  the  fits>  and  the  bark  between 
them. 

I  have  known  a  violent  hemicrania,  which, 
returned  regularly  at  a  certain  time  of  the 
day,  in  a  good  meafure  prevented  by  taking 
the  following  draught,  an  hour  before  the 
coming  on  of  the  pain* 

R.  Laud,  liquid,  gutt.  xl, 
Tin<ft.  ipecacuan.  gutt.  xlr* 
Sp.  Minderer.  unc.  fs, 
Aqu.  rofar.  unc.  i. 
Sacch.  alb.  drach.  ii.    Mlfce.' 

Th  IS  medicine,  while  it  lefTens  the  pain^ 
fcldom  fails  to  raife  a  plentiful  fweat. 

(5.)  When  headachs,  whether  regu- 
larly periodic  or  not,  arile  from  a  fuppref- 

lion 


^o2        OF  THE  CURE  OF^ 

fion  of  the  menfes,  we  mufl  endeavour  iS 
refbore  this  evacuation;  but  if  that  cannot 
be  done,  bleeding,  efpecially  at  the  ancles, 
perpetual  bliflers  or  ifTues  in  the  head  or 
jncck,  and  laxatives,  are  the  bed  remedieSc 

(6.)  When  the  returning  pain  has  been 
attended  with  a  fweHing  of  the  part,  after 
other  medicines  had  failed,  mercurial  laxa- 
tive pills  have  fucceeded  *. 

(7.)  To 

*  A  iady,  betweeii  25  and  30  years  of  age,  6f  a  thin 
habit,  and  delicate  conftitution,  was  feveral  years  fince 
attacked  with  a  hemicra7iia,  Vvhich  returned  commonly 
every  afternoon  ;  at  which  time,  that  part  of  her  fore- 
head, which  was  afFeded,  was  often  fenfibly  fwelled. 
She  kept  a  perpetual  bliftcr  on  her  head  for  many  months, 
tifed  facred  elixir  and  tindure,  pulvis  afari  as  a  flernuta- 
tory,  and  other  remedies,  without  any  benefit;  info' 
much,  that  after  a  twelvemonth,  her  complaint  was 
rather  worfe  than  ever.  She  was  then  advifed  to  take 
from  twelve  to  fixteen  grains  of  the  pilule  mercuriaies 
laxante^  every  other  night.  By  the  ufc  of  thefe  pills,  a 
gentle  falivation  was  raifed,  and  kept  up  for  about 
twelve  days,  which  entirely  removed  the  headach  j  nor 
has  flie  had  any  retuin  of  it  fince. 

Another  perfon,  between  40  and  50  years  of  age, 

having 


NERVOUS   SYMPTOMS.      503 

(7.)  To  relieve  prefent  pain  in  violent 
periodic  beadacbs,  the  beft  remedies  are^^ 
the  warm  pediluviumf  flannel  cloths  wrung 
put  of  hot  water,  or  a  hot  decodtion  of 
rofemary,  and  applied  to  the  fliaved  head  ; 
the  fpirints  <€thereus  applied  in  the  hollow 
of  one's  hand  to  the  pained  part,  and  kept 
there  for  fomc  minutes ;  large  dofes  of 
latidaimm ;  and,  in  fome  cafes,  leeches  put 
to  the  temples. 

CpLD  water  will  give  eafe  in  fome  headi 
achs,  while  hot  applications  do  moft  fervice 
in  others.  In  like  manner,  fhaving  the 
head  relieves  fome  patients,  but  is  hurtful 
to  others. 

It  may  be  proper  to  obferve,  that  in  all 
violent  headachs,  we  ought  to  begin  the 
cure  with  bleeding,  either  by  applying 
leeches  to  the  temples,  or  opening  the  ar- 
tery there.     If  the  patient  be  plethoric,  a 

larger 

having  a  conftant  headach  with  a  fwelliiig  about  the 
occiptity  was  cured  by  the  fame  remedy,  but  without: 
pifmg  any  falivation. 


594        OF  THE  CURE  OF 

larger  quantity  of  blood  may  be  taken  from 
the  jugular  vein. 

Moderate  exercife  is  generally  ufeful 
in  periodic  headachs,  from  which  foever  of 
the  foregoing  caufes  they  may  arife ;  but 
the  proper  time  for  it  is,  in  the  intervals  of' 
of  the  fits, 

XI.  Low  fpirits. 

Hypochondriac  and  hyfleric patients, 
are  commonly  afFed:ed  with  this  complaint, 
in  a  greater  or  lefs  degree.  In  general, 
exercife  and  the  cold  bath  are  among  the 
befl  remedies.    But  to  be  more  particulars 

(i.)  When  low  fpirits  are  owing  to  a 
weak  ftate  of  the  nerves  of  the  flomach 
and  bowels,  the  tincture  of  the  bark  and 
bitters,  chalybeates,  aromatics,  a  proper* 
diet  *,  and  riding,  will  do  mofl  fervice. 

(2.)  When  they  arife  from  obflrucftiops: 
in  the  hypochondriac  vifcet:a,  ox  a  foulness 

of 

*  See  above,  p.  342.  &Co 


NERVOUS   SYMPTOMS.      505 

of  the  flomach  and  inteftines,  the  moft 
proper  medicines  are,  aloetic  purges,  Har- 
rowgate  waters,  and  foluble  tartar.  I  com- 
monly prefcribe  the  foluble  tartar  in  the 
following  manner, 

R.  Tart,  folub.  dradh.  ii.  ad  urtc.  fs. 
Solve  in  aqu.  fontan.  unc.  viii. 
Cui  adde  aqu.  cinnamom.  f.  v,  < 

Syr.  violar.  ana  unc.  i.    Mifce, 

This  folution  is  to  be  taken  at  two  or 
three  draughts,  cither  every  morning,  or 
only  once  in  two  days^  and  to  be  continued 
for  fe vera!  weeks. 

PocT^OR  Muz2EL  has  publifhed,  fome  * 
years  (ince,  feveral  in  fiances  of  the  fuccefs 
of  the  foluble  tartar  in  madnefs  and  me- 
lancholy, in  cafes  of  low  fpirits,  I  have 
found  it  cool  the  patients,  difpofe  them  to 
jQeep,  and  quiet  the  hurry  of  their  fpirits; 
but  it  fometiiiies  becomes  hurtful,  by  in- 
crealing  flatulence,  and  occaiioning  a  faint- 
nefs :  and,  as  far  a^  I  have  obferved,  the 
foluble  tartar  is  more  ufeful  in  maniac  or 
melancholic  diforders,  proceeding  from 
S  f  s  noxious 


5o6        OF  THE   CURE  OF 

noxious  humours  in  the  primds  w,  than  lii 
thofe  which  are  owing  to  a  fault  in  the 
brain. 

(3.)  When  low  fpirits  proceed  from  a 
fuppredion  of  the  menfes  or  hsemorrhoids  j 
if  rhefe  evacuations  cannot  be  reflored, 
fome  others  mufl  be  fubilituted  in  their 
place;  but  nothing  has  fuch  fudden  good 
€lFe(5ts  as  bleeding  *. 

(4.)  Lastly, 

*  A  gentlewoman,  aged  fifty,  foon  after  the  menfes 
had  left  her,  was  feized  with  a  cough,  and  fometimea 
with  a  flight  hamoptoe.  This  laft  fymptom  went  off  in 
a  few  months,  but  the  cough  lafted  above  three  years ; 
and  upon  its  ceafing,  fhe  began  to  be  niuch  troubkd 
with  wind  in  her  fiomach,  low  fpirits,  a  confufion  ia 
her  head,  and  a  want  of  fleep.  In  this  condition  fhe 
continued  forfeveral  months  ;  during  which,  thefe  com- 
plaints increafed,  notwithftanding  the  free  ufe  of  warm, 
carminative,  aromatic,  chalybeate,  and  antihyfteric  me- 
dicines. A  blifter  applied  to  her  head  leffened  the  con- 
fufion hi  it,  and  procured  her  better  reft  for  a  few 
nights.  Believing  that  as  the  cough  was,  in  feme  mea- 
furc,  a  confequence  of  the  fupprefilon  of  the  menfesy  {o 
the  wind  in  the  ftomach  and  low  fpirits  were  owing  to 
the  nerves  of  this  organ  being  difordered  by  that  matter 

which 


NERVOUS  SYMPTOMS.     507 

(4.)  I^ASTLY,  When  low  fpirits  or  me- 
lancholy have  been  owing  to  long-con- 
tinued grief,  anxious  thoughts,  or  other 
diftrefs  of  the  mind,  nothing  has  done 
more  fervice  than  agreeable  company,  daily 
exercife,  efpecially  travelling,  and  a  va- 
riety of  amufements. 


which  ufed  to  be  thrown  off  by  the  lungs ;  although 
her  pulfe  was  neither  full  nor  quick,  I  ordered  ten 
ounces  of  blood  to  be  taken  from  the  arm ;  immediately- 
after  which,  her  fpirits  were  relieved,  the  confufion  in 
her  head  and  watching  were  removed,  and  the  flktu- 
Icnt  fymptoms  were  much  lefTened. 

This  perfon  afterwards,  upon  the  return  of  the  fame 
fymptoms,  has  found  bleeding  do  her  more  fervice  than 
gny  other  remedy, 


THE    END. 


■*  - 


IN        p        E        X, 

A. 

Afiedions.     See  Anger,  Fear,  Grief,  Mind,  Pafllons. 
Air,  cool  and  dry,  ufeful  for  nervous  people,  342 
Alinaents,  improper  either  iU  quality  or  quantity,  give  ril^_ 

to  nervous  diforders,  193 — 196.  398 — 406 
» >      '  abound  vsrith  air,  230  , 

— — what  kinds  oioft  proper  for  people  fubjed  to  ner<° 

voos  complaints,  342 — 346 
Amufement,  its  ufe  in  nervous  complaints,  349 
Anajlojnofts  of  the  nerves,    fympathy  not    owing    to    it, 

38.  39.  i::c. 
Anger,  why  it  increafes  the  motion  of  the  heart,  i3c,  63 
— — —  fome  grow  pale  with  it,  64 
« a  great  degree  of  it  gives  rife  to  violent  nervou; 

fymptoms,  206    207 
Afa  foetida,  its  utility  in  nervous  difeafes,  36 1 
Afihniaf  a  nervous  or  fpafmodic  one,  252—258 

its' cure,  478 — 490 

flannel  ihirt  fometimes  prevents  its  returns,  482 

■■  cafe  pf  a  remarkable  one,  485 — 490 

Ajtrophy,  a  nprypus  one,  246 — 252 

'  B. 

Bark  (Peruvian)  ifs  ufe  in  the  cure  of  nervous  complaiats, 

328—333 
— — -— —  in  glandular  fwcllings,  412,  415^. 

j^^th,  (cold)  Its  efficacy  in  the  cure  of  nervou?  difeafes, 

339^342    449 
TT— T-  (warm)  its  utility  in  neryouscompJaints,  35  5.  434-44J 
*  B?e, 


INDEX. 

Bee,  remarkable  effects  from  its  fting,  114.    Notes, 

Bed,  lying  long  in  it  relaxes  the  body,  384 

Belt,  a  tight  one  about  the  loins,  fometimes  r^Enoves  an  im* 

moderate  flux  of  pale  urine,  494 
Bitters,  their  efficacy  In  the  cure  of  nervous  difordersr, 

326 — 328 
Bladder,  its  fympathy  with  other  parts,  26 
Blifters,  fometimes  remove  convulfive  motions,  446.  447 
Blood,  the  effeds  of  a  want  of  a  fufficient  quantity  of  it, 

I7&~i82 

-  . of  a  morbid  matter  in  it,  371.  ^c. 

Blood-veflels,  poflefled  of  irritability,  4 

-, — — _—  fympathy  not  owing  to  them,  32.  ^c, 

Blulhing,    See  Shame. 

IBoerhaave,  a  remarkable  cure  of  his  in  the  epilepfy,  a  10 

Brain,  when  hurt,  or  ipflamed,  produces  tremors,  convul-? 

fions,  <bc.  II 

5 fympathy  between  it  and  other  organs,  15.  16 

,  and  fpinal  marrow,  the  fource  of  fympathy,  j^o.  (sc^ 

Brandy,  a  dram  of  it  leflens  or  removes  a  tremor  in  thg 

hands,  23.  58 

u.  ■   .    . cures  the  incubus  or  night*mare,  313 

Breads,  their  fympathy  with  the  womb,  28.  3^ 
Brimftone,  a  roll  of  it  held  iji  the  hand  rerpoves  cramps, 

fired  fpafms,  &c.  453 

C. 

Camphire,  Its  ufe  in  nervous  diforders,  356 — 359 
-— — —  different  opinions  concerning  it,  357 
Cafes,  of  a  fprained  foot  and  ankle,  79 
-■       of  convulfions  from  ftretching  out  one  leg  In  a  line 
with  the  foot,  79.  89 

CafeSk 


INDEX. 

Caics,  of  a  retching  upon  making  the  effort  to  pafs  water,  8x 
— —  of  remarkable  effefts  from  th«  fling  of  a  bee,  114. 

Notes, 
•— —  of  morbid  matter  in  the  "blood,  14T^='I49 
— -^ —  of  a  gouty  matter   wandering    through   the  body, 

153  —  157-  167 
— —  of  the  effects  of  great  lofe  of  blood,  177—182 

of  worms,  191 — 193 

• of  fchirrous  obftrudions  in  the  ftomach  and  inteftines, 

199 — 206 
' — —  of  nervous  complaints  from  grief,  209.  ^i8 
• ■  of  convulfions  from  an  obftrudion   of  the  menfes^ 

226.  227 
— —  of  bloody  urine,  237.  238.     Notes* 
— «—  of  a  fudden  and  great  flux  of  pale  urine,  243.  244 
gr,  ---1  of  a  true  nervous  or  fpafmodic  afthma,  256 
' ■'  of  a  remarkable  cough  of  the  nervous  or  fympatht- 

tic  kind,  259 — 278 

■  ■         of  remarkable  variations  in  the  pulfe,  287-^2^^ 
- of  a  mania i  305.  306 

f  ■   ■   of  nervous  complaints  cured  by  the  bark,  330.  33I, 

Notess 
•< ■'  of  the  effedls  of  a  large  dofe  of  Camphire,  '^^S,  35:7. 

Notes. 
of  the  effefls  of  caftor,  359. 

■'  of  a  fixed  pain  in  the  head  cured  by  opium,  364-^369 

of  a  gout  mitigated  by  lime-water,  374 

•— —  of  hard    glandular    fwellings    cured  by  the    bark, 

413.  414 

■  •  by  mercurial  ointment,  414.  415 

— — 'I  by  foap,  415 — 418 

Cafts, 


I      N      D      E      X. 

Gafes,  of  convdlfions,  hyftcric  faintings,  isc.  cured  hj  vrsirm 

fomentations,  435 — 445 

> by  blifters,  447. 

■ by  eating  an  orange,  456.     Nstei, 

'  by  vomits,  457 — 460.     Notes. 

— —  of  vomiting  and  indigeftion  cured  by  opium,  466  469 

-     ■  ■■■  of  a  remarkable  ajihmay  485.  490 

■■'        of  an  immoderate  flux  of  pale  urine  cured  by  a  tight 

belt  about  the  loins,  494 — 496 

— • — ^ by  the  emplajirum  defenjvum,  496 — 498 

■■        of  a  hemicrania  cured  by  pilula  mercuriales  laxanteSf 

502.  503.     Notes. 
Caftor,  its  efficacy  in  nervous  diforders,  359 
Catalepfts,  of  it,    228—230 
Chlorofis,,  thecaufeof  it,  234 
Cicuta,  eaten  by  goats  without  harm,  135 

_. its  ufe^in  indolent  fchirrous  fwelHngs,  422 

Cold,  an  uncommon  fenfe  of  it  in  different  parts,  a  fym** 

ptom  of  nervous  dlforders,  218 — 222 
Colic,  of  the  cure  of  a  flatulent  fpafmodic  one,  470—^474 
Coltca  pidonum,  a  remark  of  Dr  Hilary's  on  it,  59.     Notes^ 
Comprefiion,  convulfive  motions  cured  by  it,  45:4.  455 
Confent.     See  Sympathy. 
Convulfions,  often  brought  on  by  fhocking  fights,  1 1 

.     M       from  flight  caufes,  123 

,.  — infedious,  209.  210 

■■  —  defcription  of  a  remarkable  fpecies  of  them  m 

the  ifland  of  Zetland,  213 

»  a  fymptom  of  nervous  difeafes,  224 — 228 

————— their  caufe,  225.  226. 
cure,  428 — 457 


Cough,  a  nervous  one  a  frequent  fymptom  of  nervous  dif- 

orders,  258—278 

Coughj, 


INDEX. 

Cough,  a  full  hiftory  of  an  extraordinary  one,  of  the  truly 

nervous  or  fympathetlc  kind,  259 — 278 
Cupping  (dry)  ufeful  in  convnifive  motions,  448 
Cure  of  nervous  difcirders,    321 — 427.     See  NervoUs  dif- 

orders. 

D. 

iSiaphragm,  its  fympathy  with  other  parts,  20.  21. 
iDiet.     See  Aliments,  Food. 

E. 

Ears,  their  fympathy  with  the  teeth  and  other  organs,  17 
Effluvia  of  certain  fubftances  communicate  new  life  and  vi- 

gour  to  the  body,   10 
EieflricaJ  fluid,  a  remarkable  Uneafinefs  felt  through  the 

whole  body  by  it,   113 
Emplajirum  defenjivum,  an  immoderate  flux  of  pale  urine 

cured  by  it,  496.  497 
Evacuations,  the  retention  of  accuftomed  ones,  an  occafional 

caufe  of  nervous  difeafes,  171 — 178 
Exercife,  utility  of  it,  346 — 348 

.^ riding  the  beft  fpecies  of  it,  346.  423.  424 

Extremities.     See  Hands,  Feet. 

Eyes,  fympathy  betwixt  them,  and  other  organs,  16.  17 

fore  ones  infedtioUs,  214 

Eye-brows,  a  pain  fometimes  felt  above  them  after  fmelling 

to  volatile  falts  or  eating  muftard,  18.   19 

F. 
Fear,  why  it  produces  trembling,  debility,    palpitation  of 

the  heart,  e^c.  63.  207. 
—~ —  epileptic  fits  cured  by  it,  210.  450.— 45:2 

T  1 1  Feetj 


INDEX. 

Feet,  their  fympathy  with  other  parts,  28.  29 

convulfions  occafioned  by  tickling  their  folcs,  43.  ^^ 

Fevers,  fhivering  in  them  accounted  for,  221 

^-.  regular  intermittent    one,   moft  properly  nervous, 

221.  222 
Fits  (epileptic)  fometimes  occafioned    by  an  irritation  of 

the  great  toe,  1 2 

. ._- infeflious,  209.  210 

Flannel  waiftcoat,  fliould  be  worn  in  winter  by  people  of 
a  weak  ftomach  and  bowels,  342 

.^ fometimes  prevents  the  returns  of  an  afthma,  483 

Flatulence.     See  Wind. 

Fluid  (nervous)  we  are  ignorant  of  its  nature,  2.  85 

r_ nutrition  not  performed  by  it,  8.  9 

Food,  vegetable  food  not  worfe  to  digeft  than  animal,  126, 
Notes. 

„  effedls  of  different  foods  on  the  ftomach,  127.  ijc. 

.  improper,  gives  rife  to  nervous  complaints,  193 — 196 

abounds  with  air,  230 

. .  a  great  craving  for  it,  a  fymptom  of  nervous  difor- 

ders,  233 

, what  kinds  bed  for  people  fubjeci:  to  nervous  com- 
plaints, 343 — 346 

Fridion,  its  ufe  in  indolent  obftrudlions,  408.  409 

— in  convulfive  motions,  446.  447 

Frogs,  experiments  on  them,  13.  30.  57 

G. 

Genitalia,  their  fympathy  with  other  parts,  26.  27 
Giddmefs,  a  fymptom  of  nervous  difeafes,  300 — 302 
Gilchrift  (Dr)  recommends  failing  for  nervous  diforders,  347 

Globus 


INDEX. 

Clohus  hyjlericus.    Sge  Convulfions,  Nervous  diforders,  i:sc. 
Gout,  the  matter  of  it  wandering  through  the  body,  gives 

rife  to  various  complaints,   151  — 161 
f—~  women  not  fo  fubjed  to  it  as  men,   161.   166 
— —  phyficians  differ  about  the  nature  of  it,  169 
'. an  irregular  one  occafions  low-fpirits,  ijc,  303 

mitigated  by  a  milk-diet,  374 

• r —  by  lime- water,  374 

Grief,  leflens  the  fecretion  of  the  faliva,  i;c.   16 

why  it  increafgs  the  fecretion  of  tears,  65 

why  the  eyes  look  dull  by  it,  65.  66 

' occafions  nervous  complaints,  198.  206.  207 

Cums,  whetting  a  knife  fometimes  makes  ^hem  bleed,  17 

H. 

Htetnorrhoids,  a  fuppreffion  of  them  occafions  nervous  dif- 
orders, 177 
Haller,  his  experiments  on  the  membrapes  of  the  brain,  <bQ* 

41.     Notes. 
Hands,  their  fyrapathy  with  other  parts,  28.  29 
Hartfel  fpaw,  its  qualities,   338.  339.     Notes. 
Head,  parts  that  have  a  fympathy  with  it,   15.   16.  224 
Headach  (periodical)    a    fymptom    of  nervous    diforders, 

297—300 
_ giddinefs  in  it,  another  fymptoni,  300 — 30? 

— — — '-  often  removed  by  Ifllies,  378 

-^ of  the  cure  of  it,  4981 — 504 

Heart,  its  motions  may   be  varied  by  impreffions  o»  the 
mind,  48.  49 

fear  occafions  a  palpitation  of  it,  63.  65 

Heart, 


INDEX, 

Heart,  palpitations  of  it,  a  fymptom  of  nervous  complaints, 
278.  279. 

. cure  of  a  palpitation  of  it,  490 — 492 

Heac,an  unufual  Jenle  of  it  in  different  parts,  a  fymptom  of 
nervoui  diforders,  218^222 

Hilary  (Dr)   a  remark  of  his  on  xht  colica  piSIonmn,   59. 
Notes. 

Hoffman  makes  the  hypochondriac  and  hyfteric  difeafes  dif- 
ferent,  103 

Hydrophobia,  remarkable  fenfibility  of  the  nerves  in  it,   136 

^  cured  by  opium,  429.  430.     Notes. 

Hyofciami  extradinn,  its  good  effeds  in  nervous   difeafes, 

354 
Hypochondriac   diforders,  of  them  in  general,  84— 2i8« 

See  Nervous  diforders. 

Hyfteric  diforders.     See  Ibid-. 

. faintings,  a  fymptom  of  nervous  difeafes,  224-22C 

I. 

/«ir«3Mj;,  or  night-mare,  of  it,  307 — -319 

■ its  fymptoms,  307.   308 

' not  owing  to  a  ftagnation  of  the  blood  in  ihejimifes 

of  the  brain,  but  to  flatulence  in  the  ftomach  and  in- 

teftines,  308 — 310.  (be. 
— often  cured  by  a  dram  of  brandy,  312 

Indigeftion,  remc'-'les  for  it,  464 — 471 

Inteftines,  their  fyinpathy  with  other  parts,  21 — 25 

Iffues,  of  ufe  in  headachs,  be.  378 

K. 
Kidneys  and  ureters,  their  fyrapathy  with  other  organs, 
25.  26 

Litse- 


INDEX, 

L. 

Lime-water,  a  gout  mitigated  by  it,  374 

r- diflblves  a  tough  phlegm  in  the  ftomach  and 

inteftines,  395.   396 
Liver,  an  inflammation  in  it  often  attended  with  a  pain  ia 

the  top  of  the  fhoulder,  25.  45.     Notes,  78 
obftrudions  in  it,  foraetimes  the  caufe,  fometimes  the 

efFedof  low-fpirits,  198 
Lungs,  their  fympathy  with  the  diaphragna  and  intercoftaj 

mufcles,  20 

M. 

Malacia,  the  caufe  of  it,  234 

Mania,  a  fymptom  of  nervous  difeafes,  303 — 307 

r- ■  of  the  cure  of  it,  504 — 507 

Mater  {dura)  poffeffed  only  of  an  obtufe  feeling,  41 
Melancholy.     See  Low-fpirits. 
Membranes,  fympathy  not  owing  to  them,  32.  40 
Menfes,  when  obftrudted,  a  caufe  of  nervous  complaints, 
172 

■  probably  not  owing  to  a  plethora,   173 
Milk-diet,  a  gout  mitigated  by  it,   374 

M'nd,  impreffions  on  it  produce  variations  in  the  motions  of 
the  heart,  48.  49 

■  certain  ideas   in  It    always   accompanied   with  cor- 
refponding  feelings  or  motions  in  the  body,  60 

— —  eflFeds   of  the   different  paflions  of  it  on  the  body. 


61.  62.  ^c.  , 

- —  violent  affedions  of  it  give  rife  to  nervous  difeafes, 

206 — 217 
' great  attention  of  it  fometinaes  removes  convulfions, 

^-f.  450—452 

Motions 


INDEX. 

Motions  of  animals,  of  two  kinds,  voluntary  and  involua- 
tary  from  Jlimuli,  4 

Mufcles,  contraflion  of  hollow  ones  not  owing  to  their  di- 
latation by  the  nervous  fluid,  6.     Notes. 

, — : intercoftal,  their  fympathy  with  the  lungs,  20 

Mufic,  various  paffions  may  be  excited  or  calmed,  and  dif- 
eafes  fometimes  cured  by  it,  i  o  ^ 

Mufk,  its  ufe  in  nervous  diforders,  360,  361 

N. 
Nature,  its  operations  difficult  to  be  inveftigated,  82 
Nerves,   their  ftrufture,  ufe,  and  fympathy,  i — 84 

k.^ defcription  of  them,  i.  2.  i)C. 

»— our  ignorance  of  the  nature  of  their  fluid,  2 

.  communicate  fenfe  and  motion  to  the  body,  3 

—  their  fenfation blunted  or  deftroyed  by  opium,  3.  5 

.  though  diftributed  to  every  part,  only   fome    of 

thefe  parts  capable  of  motion,  3.4 
.^ both  voluntary  and  involuntary  motions  depend  oa 


their  influence,  4.  5 

probably  nourilhed  by  the  veflels  of  the  pia  maters 

8.   136.     Notes. 

nutrition  not  performed  by  their  fluid,  8.  9 

communicate  fympathy    or  confent  through  the 


whole  fyftem,  10.  29.  30 
.  fympathy  not  owing  to  their  a«^y?(5»z^/,  38.  39. 

but  mufl;  be  referred  to  the  brain  and  fpinal  marrow, 

50 

— changes  in  them  may  produce  effedsfimilar  tothofe 

produced  by  the  paffions,  61 

Nerves, 


INDEX. 

Nerves,  changes  in  them  not  owing  to  the  conftrI(flIon  of  the 

arteries,  66 
■  liable  to  various  difeafes,  84 

our  ignorance  of  the  caufcs  of  their  difeafes,  86       - 

-,- the  effeas  of  their  difeafes  owing  to  changes  in  ■ 

their  fenfibility,  86.  87 

their  effefts  when  too  acute,  87.  88 

. when  too  blunt,  88.  89.  91 

.  ,^ when  unnatural  or  depraved,  89 

>. ___— ~ —  when  deprived  of  feeling  altogether,  90  - 

— _^ when  too  ftrong,  90.  91. 

when  their    moving  power  b  totally- 
wanting,  91 

-  difficulty  of   diftinguifliing  their  difeafes  from  o- 


thers,  92 
have    different   fenfations    in    different     organs, 

110.  118 
their  feeling  varies  in  different  people,  and  even  in 


the  fame  perfon  at  different  times,  1 1 1 

of  children  very  fenfible,  112 

— . —  varieties  of  the  pulfe   in  healthy  people  owing  to 


their  different  fenfibility,   117 
their  fenfibility  greatly  changed  by  difeafes,  136 


Nervous  Disorders,  of  them  in  general,  84 — 218 
■  difficulty  of  diftinguifhing  them  from  others,  92 

,.  defined,  92.  ^c. 

— thsir  mofl  common  fymptoms,  (^d — 100 

— diftinguifhed  intoclaffes,  lor.   102 

hyfteric  and  hypochondriac  generally  confidered  as 

the  fame  difeafes,  102.  105 

Nervous 


1      N      D      E      X„ 

Nervous  difofders,  opinions  of  diflFerent  authors  concerning 
the  caufe  of  the  hylleric  difeafc  in   men  and  womenj 
I 06 — 108 
-^— —  Predisposing  Causes  of  them,  109 — 140 
m  -  ift,  too  great  fenfibility  of  the  nervous  fyftem^ 

109.  no 
i,  2d,  uncommon  weaknefs  in  various  parts  of 


the  body,  122 — 140 

General  Occasional  CuAsEsOf  them,  140-182 

i ift,  fome  morbidmatter  in  theblood,  141-171 

2d,  the  retention  of  accuftomed  evacuation,s, 


171—182 
3d,  wantof  a  fufficieiii  quantity  of  good  blood, 


178—182 
Particular    OccAsioNAt    Causes    of  them, 


183—218 
ift,    wind    in    the    ftomach    and    inteftines. 


184—188 

—  2di  a  tough  phlegm  in  the  ftorriach  and  in- 


teftines, 188 — 191 

3d,  worms  in  the  prim^  iii£,  191— -193 


. =_—  4th,  improper  aliments,   193 — 196 

_- — —  5th,  fchirrous  obftrudions   in  the  inteftines^- 

liver,  fpleen,  <bc.   196 — 206 

-  6th,  violent  affedtions  of  the  mind,  206 — 217 


_.        Observations  on  fome  of  the  moft  remarkable 

Symptoms  of  them,  218 — 320 

ift,  an  uncommon  heat  or  cold  in  different 


parts  of  the  body,  218 — 222 

-  2d,  pains  fuddenly  fhiftlng  from  one  place  ta 


another,  222 — 224 

3d. 


INDEX. 

■— 3d,  hyfteri:     faintings     and      convulfions, 

224 — 228 

4th,  -xcatalepjis  and  tetanus,  228' — 230 

■  5th,  wind  in  the  ftooiach  or  bov/els,  230--233 

6th,  a  great  craving  for  food,  233  —  235 

7th,  a  black  vomiting,  235 — 239 

8th,  a  fudden   and  great  flux  of  pale  urine, 

239—246 

9th,     a  nervous  fl/;-(7/iAy,  246 — 252 

—  loth,  anervousor  fpafmodic^/^OTtf,  252-25S 

iith,  a  nervous  cough,  258 — 27S 

I2th,  paJpitations  of  the  heart,  278.  279 

-   13th,  variations  in  the  pulfe,   279 — 207 

14th,  periodical  headachs,  297 — 300 

— ~  15th,  giddinefs,  300 — 302 

x6th,  dimnefs  of  fight   without  any  vlfiblc 


fault  in  the  eyes,  302.  303 
: 17th,  low-fpirits,  melancholy,  and  3  manias 


303—307 

i8th,  the /«<7ai5z^j- or  night-mare,  307 — 319 

— \^^\\i  phthjjis puhnonalis,  319.  320 

Cure  of  them,  321 — 427 

Firft  intention  of  cure.  To  lefTen  or  remove  the 


Predisposing  Causes,  325 

■ —  Remedies  for  the  firft  intention  : 

■  Bitters,  326 — 328 

the  bark,  328 — 333 

~-  fteel.  333—339 

-....  cold  bath,  339.  342 

air,  342 

-—.^ -. aliment,  342—346 

^"-^  tx  u  —^T—  esercifes 


INDEX. 

'  exercife,  346 — 34S 

amufement,  349 
■  opium,  350—355 
.  pediluvium  and  fetniciiplujn,  355 
•  camphlre,   356 — 359 

-  caftor,  359.  360 

-  mufk,  360.  361 


'—  a  fa  foetida,   361 

~  Second   intention.    To    corred  or  remove  the 


Occasional  Causes,  369 
Occafional  caufes  divided   into  General  and 


Particular,  370 

.  Remedies  for  the  general  occafional  caufes: 

ift,  feme    morbid     matter    in  the  blood. 


371—382 


diet,  exercife,  bark,  bitters,  373.  382 

milk-diet,  373 
.  lime-water,  374 — 37^ 
•  foap,  377 


_ iffues,  378 

. piluU  JEthiopica,  378.  379 

. pediluvium,  380.   381 


™». 2d,  diminution  of  accuftomed  evacuatlonsj 

382—393 
menfss,  haemorrhoids y  &c.  if  obftruflied. 


muft  be  recalled,  382.  isc. 
immoderate  fluxes  of  the  nienfes,  lochias 


^c.  rcuft  be  ftopt,  588.  <bc. 

— ,  Remedies  for  the  Particular  caufes,  viz, 

-.     ■  ift,  wind  in  the  ftomach   and  bowels,  393. 


See  Firft  intention  of  cure,  p.  326 

-i...  2dj 


INDEX. 

2d,  tough  phlegm  in  the  ftomach  and  in- 


teftines,  394 
vomits,  bark,  bitters,  394 — 397 


3d,    worms,  397 

■■ anthelmintics   of   various  kinds,  397, 

. 4th,  aliments  noxious  from  their  quality  or 

quantity,  398 — 406 
— if  from  their  quantity,  it  mud  be  gra- 


dually leffened,  399.  400 
heavy,    fat,    and    flatulent    aliments 


hiuft  be  abftained  from,  400.  6'(r. 

5th,  indolent  fchirrousobftruflions,  406-425 

___— fridion,  408.  409 

__:_; warm  fomentations,  409,  410 

gentle  vomits  and  purges,  410.  411 

. tartarus foluhilisy  mercury,  ^c.  412. 

foap,  415 — 422 

: cicuta,  422 

exercife,  423.   424 

Cure  of  the  moft  remarkable  nervous  Symptoms, 


428—507: 
I  ft,  convulfive  motions  or  fixed  fpafms  in   the 

mufcles,  428 — 457 

camphire,  caftor,  he  432 

fe/niczipiu7n,  pediluviumy  he.  435' 434*445 

— , blifters,  cataplafms,  he.  446 — 450 

: fear,  furprife,  or   any  thing  that  fixes  the 


attention,  450 — 453 
compreffion,  454.  455 


ad,     hyfteric     faintings,      with      convulfions* 

457—462 

— -  ■  ftimu- 


I      N      D      E      1. 

-  ftimulating  medicines,    458 

—  pediluviam,  460 


3d,    violent  cramps  in  the  ftomach,  462—464 
4th,  vomiting  and  indigeftion,  464 — 47 1 

laudanum,  <i;c.  ^66 — 469 

foap,  469 


—  Pyrmont  or  Bath-water,  470.  471 


5th,  a  colic   of  the  flatulent   or  hyfteric  kind, 

471—474 

,  . 5—  clY^^tSf  afa  foetida,  laudanum,  &c.  ^'12-4'j^ 


— 6th,  flatulence     in    the    ftomach    and    bowels^ 

474—478 

laudanum,  fpiritus  athersus,  ^c.  475 

bark,  bitters,  ^c.    477 

^th,  a  nervous  or  fpafmodic  ^>^w^,  478—490 

' —  optum,  elixir paregoricum,  6'c.  479.  480 

the  bark,  484 

8th,  palpitations  of  the  heart,  490 — 492 

„.,^  I,-.  !■  ..M^   bark,  bitters,  <bc.  according  to  the  caufe. 


490—492 
'  9th,   an   immoderate  difcharge  of  pale    urine^ 


492—498 
._„_^  opium,  492 


a  tight  belt  about  the  loins,  494 

■  ejnplajirum  defenjivum,  496 

loth,  periodical  headachs,  498 — 504 

■  vomits,  bitters,  498 

pediluvium,  499 

bark,  cbalybeates,  <bc.  500 

-  nth,  low-fpirits,  504 — 507 

.— —  tartarus  foluiilis,  ^c%  505 

Nervous 


INDEX. 

Nervous  fluid.  See  FJuId. 
t^ight-mare.  See  Incuhus. 
Nofe,  its  fympathy  with  other  organs,  i8 

itching  of  it,  a  fymptom  of  worms  in  the  inteftine^, 

24.  34 

O* 

ObftrU(n:lons.     See  Ha.morrhoids,  Menfes,  Schirrous. 
Opium,  deftroys  or  leiFens  the  power  of  feeling,  3.  5.  31.  32 
»■  efFeds  of  a  folution  of  it  injeded  into  dogs   and 

frogs,  13,  Si'  58 

. its  utility  in  nervous  complaints,  350 — 3^5 

«__ i.  ^j^ro/^ij^/^  cured  by  it,  429.  430.     Notes, 

m. vomiting  and  indigeftion  cured  by  it,  466—469 

— fpafmodic  ajihma  cured  by  it,  479.  480 

■  ■ —  an  Immoderate  flux  of   pale  urine  cured  by    it 


494 


Pains  fuddenly  Ihiftlng  from-  one  place  to  another,  a  fym- 
ptom  of  nervous  difeafes,  222 — 224 

Palpitation  of  the  heart,  of  the  cure  of  it^  490 — 492 

Paffions,  why  melancholy  ones  dimlnifh    the  perfpiration, 
65 

'  their  eiFeds  not  owing  to  a  conftridion  of  the  ar- 

teries by  the  nerves,  66.  <bc. 

when  violent,  give  rife  to  fudden  and  dangerous 


nervous  fyraptoms,  206.  207=  307 
Pediluvium,  utility  of  it  in  nervotJs  complaints,  355.  380. 

381.   434 445.  460.  499. 

Pefiiff 


INDEX. 

Penis,  eretSlon  of  it  not  owing  to  the  conapreffion  of  Its 

veins,  69 
Phlegm,  (tough  one  in  the  ftomach  and  inteftinesj  a  caiife 

of  nervous  complaints,   188 — 191 
P hthifis pulmonalis t  of  it,  319.  g^d 
Pica,  the  caufeofit,  234 
Plethora,  menfes  not  owing  to  it,  173 
Pulfe,  varieties  of  it  in  healthy  people  owing  to  the  difTer- 

ent  fedfibility  of  their  nerves,   1 1 7 
t its  quicknefs  in  children  ov^ing  to  the  greater  fenfibi- 

lity  of  their  nerves,  118 
^         variations  in  it,    a  fymptom    of  nervous   difeafes, 

279—297 

the  caufes  of  thefe  variations,  280.  6"^. 

Pupil,  its  diflFerent  fize  in  diiferent  lights  owing  to  the  fym- 

pathy  between  the  retina  and  uvea,  43 
Pyrmont  water,  its  qualities  examined,  470 

R. 

Reiium,  its  fympathy  with  other  parts,  26 
Riding,  the  beft  fpecies  of  exercife,  346 

S. 

Sailing,  its  ufe  in  nervous  difeafes,  347 

Sal  martis.     See  Steel. 

Saliva,  flows  copioufly  on  the  fight  of  grateful  food,  17, 
18.  70.  215 

^  flows  more  plentifully  when  hungry  than  after  a 

meal,  23 

Schirrous  obftruftlons  in  the  intellines,  <^c,  give  rife  to  ner- 
vous complaints,  196 — 206 

Scorbutic 


INDEX. 

Scorbutic  humour  defined  and  explained,  150 

matter  in  the  blood,  378.  379 

Semen,  mtifculi  acceleratores  urina  alternately  convulfed  by 

its  Jlimulus,   55 
Seiniciiphun.     See  Warm  Bath. 
Shame,  why  accompanied  with  a   rednefs  and  glow  of  the 

face,  63.  69.  215.  221 
Sight,  diranefs  of  it  without  any  vifible  fault  in  the  eyes,  a 

fymptom  of  nervous  complaints,  302.  303 
sights  (unexpeded).     See  Surprife. 

Soap,  recommended  by  Dr  Clark  as  a  fplvent  of  an  arthritic 
matter  in  the  blood,  377 

itsufe  in  hard  fwellings,  415 — 422 

Spaw  (Hartfel)  its  qualities,  338.339.    Notes. 
Spinal  marrow,  animals  newly  dead  convulfed  when  a  probe 
is  puflied  into  it,  11 

— it  and  the  brain  the  fource  of  fympathy,  50^ 

<bc. 
Spirits  (low)  fometimes  the  caufe,  and  fometimes  the  effe6: 
pf  obftrudions  in  the  ftomach,  liver,  i^c.   198 

-: — a  fymptom  of  nervous  difeafes,  303 — 307 

—  ■—      cure  of  low-fpirits,  504 — 507 

Steel,  its  efficacy  in  the  cure  of  nervous  diforders,  333-339 
Stimulus y  the  fmall  veffels  excited  into  motion  by  it,  61, 

Notes- 
Stomach,    the  body  differently  affeded  according  to  the 
ftate  of  it,  II.  12.  'be. 

•- effefls  of  opium  injeded  into  it,  13 

-r ficknefs  in  it  often  attended  with  a  pain  in  the 

head,  15 

Stomach, 


INDEX. 

Stomach,  Its  fympathy  .Vith  other  parts,  21 — 25,  133, 
224 

— — .  unnatural  feeling  of  its  nerves,  the  moft  fre- 
quent caufe  of  nervous  difeafes,  124,  <bc. 

— ftate  of  it  often  various  in   the  fame  perforj. 


127 

effefls  of  different  foods  on  it,  127.  128.  6'c. 

when  out  of  order,    trifling  agcidents  produce? 


bad  effefls,  131.  132 

—  different  ftate  of  it  in  different  perfons,  the  rea- 


fon  why  they  are  fo  differently  affefted  by  the  fame  fub' 
ftances,  134 
—  wind  in  it  the  caufe  of  nervous    complaints. 


184—188 
««___ —  tough    phlegm  in  it  another    frequent    caufe, 


188—191 
fchirrous  obflrudlions  in  it  another  caufe,  199. 


206.  236 
wind    in  it;,    a  fyroptom    of   nervous  difeafesj, 


230—233 
r —  a  great  craving  for  food,    another  fymptom, 


233—235 

_        —  cure  of  violent  pains  or  cramps  in  it,  462-464 
— of  flatulence  in  it,  474 — 478.     See  Nervous 


diforders. 
Stories,  moving  ones,  give  rife  to  violent  nervous  fymptoms, 

206.  207 
Suppers,  heavy  ones,  fhould  be  avoided,  343 
Surprife,  often  the  caufe  of  violent  nervous  fymptoms,  206 

207 

Surprife, 


i 


INDEX. 

Surpnfe,  convulfions  fomfiiriraes  cured  by  it,  45-0.  452 

Sympathy  of  the  nerves,  1 84 

every  part  fympathifes  with  the  whole,  10.  i;c. 

'■ —  a  particular  one   fubfifts  betwixt  feveral  organs, 

14—29 
fuppofes  feeling,   and   therefore   owing  to   the 

nerves,  29.  30 
; '  not  owing  to  the  membranes,  blood-vefTels,  (be. 


32  _ 

__•___  various  opinions  concerning  it,  37.    Notes,  3S 

— .  not  owing  to  anajjomojis,  38.   39.  uc 

takes  place  among  parts  n6t  connefted  by  nerves, 


41 

muft  be  referred  to  the  brain  and  fpinal  marrow, 

: final  caufes  of  the  raofl:  remarkable  fympathetic 


motions,  70 

■    '    fometimes  occafioned  by  vicinity  of  parts,  "-* 
■'  anomalous  fyrapathies  in  morbid  cafes,  77 

-— — betwixt  the  nervous  fyftems  of  diiFerent  perfons. 


210 — 213 

5!ymptoms,  obfervations  en  feme  of  the  moft  remarkable 

ones  in  nervous  difcafes,  218 — 320.     See  Nervous  dif- 
orders. 

T. 

Tartar,  a  folutioii  of  it  ufeful  in  lovz-foirits,  a  rsar.ia,  <^c, 

505 
Tea,  its  bad  effe(5ts  on  the  nerves,  345 
Teeth,  their  fympathy  v.-ith  other  organs,  ic,  20] 


INDEX. 

Tela  cellulofa,  fympathy  not  owing  to  it,  32 

Tendons,  eiFedls  of  wounding  them,  12 

Terror.     See  Fear,  Surprife,  ^c. 

Tetanus,  a  fymptom  of  nervous  diforders,  228 — 23$ 

Toothach,  fomecitnes  occafions  convulfions,  114 

Trachea^  its  fympathy  with  other  parts,  20 

U. 
Ureters,  their  fympathy  with  other  parts,  25.  26. 
Urine,  a  fudden  and  great  flux  of  pale  urine,  a  fymptom  <?* 
nervous  difeafes,  239 — 246 

. of  the  cure  of  it,  492 — 49S 

Uterus,  its  fympathy  with  other  parts,  27.  28.  35 

V. 
Veffels  (fmall)  excited  Into  motion  by  the  Jlimulus  of  theip 

fluid,  61.     Notes. 
yomiting  infedlious,   17.214 
a  black  vomiting  a  fymptom  of  nervous  diforders, 

235—239 
— — — --  cure  of  vomiting  and  indlgedion,  464— 471 


Voyage.     See  Sailing. 

W. 
Warm  Bath.     See  Bath, 
V/acer  (cold)  fuddenly  contradls  the   vefTels,  and  pores  gf 

the  flcin,  10 
Wind,  in  the  ftomach  and  inteftines,  a  caufe  of  nervous  dif- 
orders, 184 — 188 

effefts  of  it  various  in  the  fame  and  in  different  per- 

Ibns,  186.  1 87 

Wind, 


I    .N      D      E      X, 

SVind,  a  fymptom  of  nervous  difeafes,  230 — 233 
——— the  caufe  of  the  i«tfa^aj  or  night-mare,  312.  isc, 

m its  cure,  474—478 

"Wine,  beft  onan  empty  ftomach,  343 

iWomen,  more  fubjed  to  nervous  diforders  than  men,  116 

•— — —  fometimes  affedted  with  convuliions  from  flight 

caufes,  123.  124 
Worms,  itching  of  the  nofe,  a  fyraptom  of  them,  24 

give  rife  to  nervous  complaints,  191 — ip^ 

»-■  remedies  for  them,  397.  398 

y. 

pawning,  infeflious,  17.  21^^ 


"■Mi 


COUNTWAY   LIBRARY    OF   MEDICIKE 

RC 
3hO 

W62 
1767 

RARE   BOOKS   DEPARTMENT 


