'V 


i 


-  *j 


>C*x 


1*'-V\ 


DESMOND. 


VOL.       1. 


DESMOND. 


N 


O 


E        L, 


IN   TWO    VOLUMES. 


B   Y 


CHARLOTTE      SMITH. 


VOLUME      I. 


DUBLIN: 

PRINTED      FOR       P.   WOGAN,       P.    BYRNF,      J.     MOORE,     W. 

M'kENZIE,      H.   COLBERT,     A.    GRUEBER,     B.   DORNIN, 

J.  JONES,    J.   RICE,    W.   JONES,    J.   MEHAIN, 

G.  DRAPER,      R     M'aLLISTER 

G.  F0LINGS8Y. 


M.DCC.XCII. 


Digitized  by  tine  Internet  Arcliive 
in  2010  with  funding  from 
Duke  University  Libraries 


Iittp://www.arcliive.org/details/desmondnbvelintw01smit 


v./ 


PREFACE. 


I  N  fending  Into  the  world  a  work  fo 
unlike  thofe  ot  n:iy  former  writings,  which 
have  been  honored  by  its  approbation,  I 
feel  fome  degree  of  that  apprehenfion 
which  an  Author  is  fenfible  ot  on  a  firfl. 
publication. 

This  arifes  partly  from  my  doubts  of 
fucceeding  fo  well  in  letters  as  in  narra- 
tive ;  and  partly  from  a  fuppofuion,  that 
there  are  Readers,  to  whom  the  fiditious 
occurrences,  and  others  to  whom  the  po- 
litical remarks  in  thele  volumes  may  be 
difpleafing. 

a  3  To> 


ii  PREFACE.^ 

To  the  firft  I  beg  leave  to  fuggefl,  that 
in  reprefenting  a  young  man,  nourifh- 
ing  an  ardent  but  concealed  paflion  for 
a  married  woman ;  I  certainly  do  not 
mean  to  encourage  or  juftify  fuch  at- 
tachments ;  but  no  delineation  of  cha- 
radler  appears  to  me  more  interefting, 
than  that  of  a  man  capable  of  fuch  a 
paflion  fo  generous  and  difinterefted  as 
to  feek  only  the  good  of  its  objedl ; 
nor  any  ftory  more  moral,  than  one  that 
reprefents  the  exiflence  of  an  a£Fed;ion  fo 
regulated. 


As  to  the  political  paflages  difperfed 
through  the  work,  they  are  for  the  moft 
part,  drawn  from  converfations  to  which 
I  have  been  a  witnefs,  in  England  and 
France,  during  the  laft  twelve  months* 
In  carrying  on  my  ftory  in  thofe  coun- 
tries, and  at  a  period  when  their  political 
fituation  (but  particularly  that  of  the  lat- 
ter) is  the  general  topic  of  difcourfe  in 
both  J  I  have  given  to  my  imaginary  cha- 
jra(flers  the  arguments  I  have  heard  on 
both  fides  i  and  if  thofe  in  favor  of  one 
party  have  evidently  the  advantage,  it  is 
not  owing  to  my  partial  reprcfentation, 
bat  to  the  predominant  power  of  truth 

and 


^     P    R    E    F    A    C    E.  iii 

and  reafon,  which  can  neither  be  altered 
nor  concealed'. 


But  women  it  is  faid  have  no  bufinefs 
with  politics — Why  not  ? — Have  they  no 
intereft  in  the  fcenes  that  are  ading 
around  them,  in  which  they  have  fathers, 
brothers,  hufbands,  Tons,  or  friends  en- 
gaged ? — Even  in  the  commonefl:  courfe 
of  female  education,  they  are  expe£led 
to  acquire  fome  knowledge  of  hiftory ; 
and  yet,  if  they  arc  to  have  no  opinion  of 
what  is  paflmg,  it  avails  little  that  they 
fhould  be  informed  of  what  has  pajftd,  in 
a  world  where  they  are  fubje(5l  to  fuch 
mental  degradation  ;  where  they  are  cen- 
fured  as  affecting  mafculine  knowledge  if 
they  happen  to  have  any  underflanding  ; 
or  defpifed  as  infignificant  triflers  if  they 
have  none. 


Knowledge,  which  qualifies  women  to 
fpeak  or  to  write  on  any  other  than  the 
mofl  common  and  trivial  fubjefls,  is 
fuppofed  to  be  of  fo  difficult  attainment, 
that  it  cannot  be  acquired  but  by  the  fa- 
crifice  of  domeftic  virtues,  or  the  negle(5t 
of  doaieftic  duties. — — /  however  n\\j 
fafely  fay,  that  it  was  in  the  obfervance, 
not  in  the  breach  of  duty,  /  became  an 

Author  i 


iv  PREFACE. 

Author  ;  and  it  has  happened,  that  the 
circumftances  which  have  compelled  me 
to  write,  have  introduced  me  to  thofe 
fcenes  of  life,  and  thofe  varieties  ol"  cha- 
rader  which  I  fhould  otherwife  never 
have  feen  :  Tho'  alas!  it  is  from  thence, 
that  I  am  too  well  enabled  to  defcribc 
from  immediate  obfervation, 


"  The    proud    man's   contumely,   th'  oppreflbrs- 

vrong  ; 
The  laws  delay,  the  infolence  of  office." 


Bur,  while  in  confequence  of  the  af- 
fairs of  my  family,  being  moft  unhap- 
pily in  the  power  of  men  who  feem  to 
exercife  all  thefe  with  impunity ,  I  am  be- 
come an  Author  by  proft'Jfwfi,  and  feel 
every  year  more  acutely,  "  thai  hope 
delayed  maketh  the  heart  Jick'^  I  am 
fenfible  alfo  (to  ufe  another  quotation) 
that 

-'*  Adverfity — 


Tho'  iike  a  toad  ugly  and  venomous, 
Wears  yet  a  precious  jewel  in  its  head." 


For  it  is  to  my  involuntary  appearance 
in  that  charader,  that  I  am  indebted, 
for  all  that  makes  my  continuance  in  the' 

world 


PREFACE.  w 

world  defirablc ;  all  that  foftens  the  rigor 
of  my  dcftiny  and  enables  me  to  fuftain 
it :  I  mean  friends  among  thofe,  who, 
while  their  talents  are  the  boaft  of  their 
country,  are  yet  more  refpedable  for  the 
goodnefs  and  integrity  of  their  hearts. 


Among  thefe  I  include  a  female  friend, 
to  whom  I  owe  the  beautiful  little  Ode 
in  the  laft  volume-,  who  having  written 
it  for  this  work,  allows  me  thus  publicly 
to  boafl  of  a  friendfhip,  which  is  the 
pride  and  plcafure  of  my  life. 


If  I  may  be  indulged  a  moment  longer 
in  my  egotifm,  it  fhall  be  only  while  I 
apologize  for  the  typographical  errors  of 
the  work,  which  may  have  been  in  fome 
meafure  occafioned  by  the  detached  and 
hurried  way,  in  which  the  (heets  were 
fometimcs  fent  to  the  prefs  when  I  was  at 
a  diftance  from  it ;  and  when  my  atten- 
tion was  din:ra(5ted  by  the  troubles, 
which  it  feems  to  be  the  peculiar  delight 
of  the  perfons  who  are  concerned  in 
the  management  of  my  children's  affairs, 
to  inflid  upon  me.  With  all  this  the 
Public  have  nothing  to  do :  but   were  it 

proper 


Ti  PREFACE. 

proper  to  relate  all  the  difadvantages 
from  anxiety  of  mind  and  local  circum- 
flances,  under  which  tbefc  volumes  have 
been  compofed,  fuch  a  detail  might  be 
admitted  as  an  excufe  for  more  material 
errors. 


For  that  afperity  of  remark,  which 
will  arife  on  the  part  of  thofe  whofe 
political  tenets  I  may  offend,  I  am  pre- 
pared ;  thofe  who  objed  to  the  matter, 
will  probably  arraign  the  manner,  and 
exclaim  againft  the  impropriety  of 
making  a  book  of  entertainment  the 
vehicle  of  political  difcuffion.  I  am  how- 
ever confcious  that  in  making  thefe  flight 
/ketches,  of  manners  and  opinions,  as 
they  fluduated  around  me  ;  I  have  not 
facrificed  truth  to  any  party — Nothing 
appears  to  me  more  refpettable  than 
national  pride ;  nothing  fo  abfurd  as 
national  prejudice — And  in  the  faithful 
reprefenration  of  the  manners  of  other 
countries,  fureiy  Engliflimen  may  find 
abundant  reafon  to  indulge  the  one, 
while  they  conquer  the  other.  To  thofe 
ho\yever  who  (till  cherifli  the  idea  of  our 
having  a  natural  enemy  in  the  French 
nation  ;  and  that  they  are  ftill  more  na- 
turally our  foes,  becaufe  they  have  dared 

to. 


PREFACE. 


vu 


to  be  freemen,  I  can  only  fay,  that  again  ft 
the  phalanx  of  prejudice  kept  in  conftant 
pay,  and  under  (tri<5t  difcipline  by  intereft, 
the  flight  Ikirmifliing  of  a  novel  writer 
can  have  no  effedt :  we  fee  it  remains 
hitherto  unbroken  againft  the  powerful 
efforts  of  learning  and  genius — though 
united  in  that  caufe  which  mujl  finally 
triumph — the  caufe  of  truth,  reafon,  and 
humanity. 


CHARLOTTE  SMITH. 


London> 
June  20, 1792. 


DESMOND. 


LETTER    I. 
TO    MR.    BETHEL. 

June  9,  1790. 

YOUR  arguments,  my  friend,  were  decifive; 
and  fince  I  am  now  on  my  way— I  hardly  know 
whither,  you  will  be  convinced  that  I  attended 
to  them;  and  have  determined  to  relinquifh  the 
dangerous  indulgence,  of  contemplating  the 
perfections  of  anobjedt,  that  can  never  be  mine. 
Yes ! — I  have  torn  tnyfelf  from  her  ;  and,  with- 
out betraying  any  part  of  the  anguifli  and  regret 
1  felt,  I  calmly  took  my  leave  ! — It  was  five  days 
Ego,  the  morning  after  fhe  had  undergone  the 
fatiguing  ceremony  of  appearing,  for  the  firft 
time  fince  her  marriage,  at  court  on  the  birth- 
night. — 

I  had  heard  how  univerfally  fhe  had  been  ad- 
mired, but  {he  feemed  to  have  received  no  plea- 
fure  from  that  admiriition— and  I  felt  involun- 
tarily pleafed  that  (he  had  not. — Her  hufband — 
I  hate  the  name — Verney  ;  had  already  efcaped. 
from  the  confinement,  which  this  ceremony  of 
their  appearances  had  for  a  day  or  two  impofed 
upon  him  :  and  was  gone  to  I  know  not  what 
races ;  Ihc  named  the  place  faintly  and  reluc- 
tantly when  I  afked  after  him  ;  and  I  did  not 
repeat  thequeftion  ;  there  was  however  another 
queftion  which  I  could  not  help  alking  myfelf  ; 

Vol.  I.  B  docs 


2  DESMOND. 

does  this  man  deferve  the  lovely  Geraldine  ? — • 
Alas! — I  know  he  does  not ;   cannot:   the  fport 
o(  every  wild  propenfity  or  rather  of  every  pre- 
vailing fafhion,  (for  it  is  to  thit  he  facrifices  ra- 
ther than   to  his  own   inclinations)  I  have  too 
much  reafon  to  bt;lieve  he  will  diiTipate  his  for- 
tune,  and  render  his  wife  miferable. — But  is  it 
poiTible  flie  can  love  him? — Oh,  no  !  — it  is  furely 
not  pofljble  —  when  through  the  mild  grace  and 
fometimes  tendernefs  of  her  manner,   1   remark 
the  flrcngth  and  clearnefs  of  her  underftanding  ; 
when-  I  obferve,  how  immediately  fhc  fees    the 
ridiculous,  and  how  quickly  her  ingenuous  and 
liberal  mind  itrinks  from  vice  and  folly  -I  be- 
lieve it  impoffible  that  the  hour  can  be  far  dif- 
tant,  if  indeed  it  is  not  already  arrived  ;  when 
the  flowers,   with  which   the  mercenary   hands 
of  her  family^  drefTed  the  chains   they  impofed 
upon  her,  will  be  totally  faded  ;  and  when,  what 
ever  affedlion  fhe  now  feels  for  him,  if  any  does 
exift,  will   be  dtftroyed  by   the  conviction  of 
Verney's  unworthinefs  — Ah  !   where  will  then 
an  heart,  like  hers,  find  refuge  againft  the  hor- 
rors of  fuch  a  dtdiny — would  to   heaven  I   had 
become  acquainted  with  her   before  that  defliny 
was  irrevocable — or  that  i  had  never  known  her 
at  all. 

When  I  was  admitted  to  her  drefling-rooin 
the  lall  time  1  faw  her — -fhe  was  reading;  and 
,  laid  down  her  book  on  my  entrance  — I  was  ill, 
or  had  appeared  fo  to  her;  when  1  had  i'ttn  her 
a  few  days  before — flie  fcemed  now  to  recolle<5l 
it  with  tmder  interefl: — and  when,  in  anfwering 
her  enquiries,  I  told  her  I  intended  going  abro^id 
for  fome  months  >  I  fhculd  have  thought — had 
I  dared  to  indulge  the  flattery  of  fancy — that  fhe 
heard  it  v;ith.  concern,  "  we  ihall  not  tbeo  fee 

you 


DESMOND.  3 

you  this  year  in  Kent,"  faid  fhe,  "  I  am  very 
forry  for  it,"—- fhe  piufcd  a  moment,  and  addedj 
with  one  of  thofe  fmiles  which  give  fuch  pecu- 
liar charms  to  her  countenance,  "  but  I  hope 
you  will  regain  your  health  and  fpirits — and  I 
think  we  (hall  certainly  have  you  among  us  again 
in  the  (hooting  feafon." — I  know  not  what  was 
the  matter  with  me,  but  1  could  not  anfwer  her^ 
and  the  converfation  for  fome  moments  dropped. 

She  refumed  it  after  another  fliort  filence,  and 
afked  me  when  I  had  feen  her  brother? — He 
talks,  "  faid  (he,"  of  going  to  the  Continent 
alfo  this  fummer,  and  I  wifh  you  may  meet  him 
there — your  acquaintance  could  not  fail  of  be- 
ing advantageous  in  any  country,  but  particu- 
larly a  foreign  country,  to  a  young  man  fo  new 
to  the  world  as  he  is ;  and  one,  fo  unfettled  ia 
all  his  plans,  from  temper  and  habit,  that  I  am 
ever  in  pain  left  he  (hould  fall  into  thofe  errors, 
which  I  every  day  fee  fo  fatal  to  thofe  who  enter 
into  the  world  unexperienced  like  him — without 
a  guide. — Should  you  happen  to  meet  with  him 
abroad,  I  am  fure  you  have  friendlhip  enough 
for  us  all,   to  diredt  him," — 

1  feized  v/ith  avidity  an  opportunity  of  being 
ferviceable  to  any  one  who  belongs  to  her — I  had 
not  feci\  Wavcrly  for  fome  time,  and  imagined 
he  was  gone  back  to  Oxford  ;  but  I  aiTured  her, 
that  if  Mr.  Waverly  could  make  it  convenient 
to  go  when  I  d^d  to  Paris,  1  fhould  be  extremely 
glad  to  be  ufcful  to  him,  and  happy  in  his  com- 
pany. 

Pleafed  with  the  earneft  manner  in  which  I 
fpoke,  ihe  became  more  un-referved  on  this  fub- 
jedt.  "  You  know  a  little  of  my  brother,"  faid 
fhe,  **  but  it  is  impoffible,  on  (b  flight  an  ac- 
quaintance, to  be  aware  of  the  peculiarities  of  his 
B  2  temper 


^  DESMOND. 

temper — peculiarities  that  give  me  fo  many  fears 
on  his  account.  It  is  not  his  youth,  or  the  ex- 
penfive  ftyle  in  which  he  lets  out,  that  difquieC 
me  fo  much  as  that  uncommon  indecifion  of 
mind,  which  never  allows  him  to  know  what  he 
will  do  a  moment  before  he  a6ls ;  and  fome  how 
or  other  he  always  continue^,  after  long  debates 
and  repeated  changes,  to  adopt  the  very  worft 
fcheme  of  thofe  he  has  examined.  I  may  fay  to 
you  that  this  defedt  originated  in  the  extreme 
indulgence  of  his  parents-.— a  very  confiderable 
part  of  my  father's  eftate  would  have  gone  into 
another  branch  of  the  family,  had  he  not  had  a 
fon — and  it  happened  his  fix  eldeft  children 
were  daughters,  fo  that  when  this  long- wifhed- 
for  and  only  fon  was  born,  he  became  of  more 
confequence  to  my  father  and  mother  than  the 
reft  of  their  family:  and  we,  his  th/ee  fifJers, 
who  furvived,  have  through  our  lives  hitherto 
uniformly  feen  our  intereft  yield  to  his. — But, 
believe  me,  we  (hould  never  have  murmured, 
(at  leaft  1  can  aniwtr  for  myl'elf) — at  whatever 
facrificcs  have  been  made,  had  they  contributed 
to  render  him  really  and  permanently  happier, 
but  the  continual  enquiries  that  were  made  of 
■what  he  would  do,  and  what  he  would  like,  while 
nothin  T  was  ever  offered  to  him  but  variety  of 
gratification,  have,  I  think,  coincided  with  his 
natural  temper  to  produce  that  coniinual  inabi- 
lity, to  puriue  any  fiudy  or  even  any  plealure 
fleadily. — My  father's  death,  and  his  being  of 
a^e,  have  rendered  him  mafter  of  himfelf  and  his 
fo)  tune  ;  but  he  cannot  refolve  what  to  do  with 
either  of  them,  and  my  apprehenfions  are,  that 
he  will  fall  into  the  hands  of  thofe  who  will  de- 
termine for  him,  anddifpnfe  of  both,  rather  for 
their  own  advantage  than  for  his.  I  have  there- 
fore 


DESMOND.  5 

fore  encouraged,  as  much  as  poilible,  hishalf- 
formed'inclination  to  go  abroad  —  but  he  tallcs 
fo  vaguely  about  it,  and  varies  (o  much  in  his 
projedts,  that  I  doubt  whether  he  will  ever  exe- 
cute any  of  them. — If  you  really  would  allow 
him  to  accompany  you — yet  I  know  not  hov/  to 
alTcit,  yourfociety  would  perhaps  determine  him 
to  the  journey,  and  prevent  his  meeting  any  of. 
thofe  inconveniencies  to  which  young  travellers 
are  expofed." 

I  believe  my  lovely  friend  mi  (look  the  expref» 
fion  which  my  eager  acquiefcence  threw  into  my. 
countenance,  for  what  might  be  produced  by  the 
embarraflmentj  of  wilhing  to  efcape  with  civi* 
lity  from  an  unwelcome  propofal — for  (he  hcfi- 
tated — yet,  without  giving  me  time  to  reply, 
fald,  "  but  perhaps  I  am  taking  a  very  improper 
liberty  with  you — I  ought  to  have  recollected, 
that  in  this  expedition  you  have  probably  a  party, 
to  which  any  addition  maybe  unwelcome;  and 
that  you  have  fo  flight  an  acquaintance  with  my 
brother" —  "   v^ 

I  interrupted  her. — '*  It  is  enough  for  me, 
that  he  is  your  brother — that  alone  would  make 
me  wifh  to  render  him  every  fervice  in  my  power 
— even  if  I  had  never  feen  him." — 1  had  faid 
more  than  I  ought;  more  than  I  intended  to  fay. 
— 1  felt  inftantly  conicious  of  it,  and  I  now  con- 
fufedly  hurried  intoprofeffionsof  perfonal  regard 
for  Waverly,  far  enough  from  being  fmcere; 
and  affurances,  that,  as  1  went  for  change  of  air 
and  fcene,  which  my  health  and  fpirits  required, 
1  fhould  make  no  party,  iinhfs  it  was  with  one 
friend,  to  whom  my  fociety  might  be  ufeful — 
"  and  when  that  friend,"  adJed  J,  '*  is  your 
brother." — 1  was  relapfing  faft  into  the  fully,  of 
which,  but  a  moment  before,  I  repented. — i  faw 

her 


dj  D    E    S    M    O    N    B. 

h^r  change  coTour,  and  for  the  firft  time  fince 
the  rile  of  this  attachment — which  v/ill  end  only 
with  my  life — I  had  faid,  what  to  a  vain  woman 
might  have  betrayed  it. 

Geraldinefeemed  now  felicitous  to  change  the 
converfation,  but  this  I  would  not  do,  till  1  had 
made  her  promife  to  write  to  her  brother,  as 
foon  as  (he  could  learn  where  he  was;  and  men- 
tion to  hi:Ti  my  intended  journey,  and  my  rea- 
dinefs  to  begin  it  with  him  immediately. 

1  afiured  her,  that  if  I  met  Waverly  before 
I  left  London,  1  would  endeavour  to  fix  his  de- 
parture with  me,  and  giving  her  my  addrefs,  that 
he  might  write  to  me  at  Margate,  reludantly, 
and  with  pangs,  fuch  as  are  felt  only  when 
"  foul  and  body  part" — I  bade  her  adieu  ! 

She  looked  concerned,  and  gave  me  her  lovely 
hand,  which  I  dared  not  prefs  to  my  lips — but, 
as  trembling,  I  held  it  in  mine,  fhc  wifhed  me 
health  and  happinefs,  a  pleafant  journey,  and  a 
profperous  reiurn,  in  that  foul-foothing  voice 
which  I  always  hear  with  undefcribable  emo- 
tions.—  More  tremuloufly  fweet  than  ufual,  it 
flill  vibrates  in  my  ears,  and  1  ftili  repeat  to 
myfelf  her  la(l  words—"  Farewell,  Mr.  DcC- 
mond,  may  all  i'elicity  attend  you." 

Now,  you  will  call  this  wrong,  ridiculous, 
and  romantic. — But  fpare  your  remonitrances, 
dear  Bethel,  fince  i  obey  you  in  elTcntials,  and 
am  going  from  England,  rather  becaufe  you  de- 
fire  It,  than  bc'caufe  I  am  convinced  that  fuch  an 
afFe£tion  as  1  feel  ought  to  be  eradicated. — Do 
you  know  againft  how  many  vices,  and  how 
many  follies,  a  paffion,  fo  pure  and  ardent  as 
mine,  fortifies  the  heart  ? — Are  you  fure  that 
tlie  tviis  you  reprefent  as  attending  it,  are  not 
purely   imaginary,  while  the  good   is  real  ? — { 

expe6lj 


D   t:   S   M  O   N  D.  7 

expe<51,  however,  a  heavy  le£ture  for  all  this, 
and  ii  were  better  not  to  add  another  word  on 
the  fubjecl. 

Your's  ever,  with  true  regard, 

LIONEL    DESMOND, 


I  forgot  to  add,,  that  though  my  journey  is 
certainly  decided  upon,  becaufc  I  hope  to  find, 
in  the  prefent  political  tumult  in  France,  what, 
may  intcreft  and  divert  my  attention;  yet, 
I  will  not  fail  to  deliver  to  your  relations  the 

letter  you  endoled  in  your  lafl and  to  avail 

myfelf  of  it  as  an  introduflion  to  Mrs.  Fairfax, 
and  her  family,  as  foon  as  I  arrive  at  iMargate. 
—You  imngine,  that  the  charm^  of  one  or  other 
of  your  fair  coufins  will  have  pov.'er  enough  to 
drive,  from  my  heart,  an  inclination  which  you 
fo  entirely  difapprove — though  I  am  too  well 
convinced  of  the  inefHcacy  of  the  recipe,  I  try 
it  you  fee  —  in  deference  to  your  opinion — jiiftas 
a  patient,  who  knows  his  difeafe  to  be  incurable, 
fubmits  to  the  prefcription  of  a  phyfician  he 
efteems, — As  foon  as  I  have  delivered  my  cre- 
dentials you  ihall  hwr  from  me  again. 


L  E  T- 


O  &    E    S    M    O   N    Dr 

LETTER    II. 

TO    MR.    DESMOND, 

Hartfield,  June  ij,   1790- 

YES  .' — you  have  really  given  an  inftance  of 
extreme  prudence — and,  in  confequcnce  of  it, 
you  will,  I  think,  haveoccafion  to  exert  another 
virtue,  which  is  by  no  means  the  moft  ennlnent 
among  thofe  you  pofFefs  ;  the  virtue  of  patience, 
■ — So  ! — you  have  really  undertaken  the  delight- 
ful office  of  bear-leader — becaufe  the  brother  of 
your  Geraldine  cannot  take  care  of  himfelf — 
and  this  you  call  fetting  about  your  cure,  while 
you    continue  to   difpute,  whether   it  be  wife 

to  be   cured  or   no^ and,  while  you  argue 

that  a  pailion  for  another  man's  wife  may 
fave  you  from  abundance  of  vice  and  folly, 
you  flrengthen  your  argument  to  be  fure  won- 
derfully, by  commitiing  one  of  the  greatcftads 
of  folly  in  your  power. — And  as  to  vice,  1  hold 
it,  my  good  friend,  to  be  a  great  advance  towards 
it,  when  you  betray  fyrnptoms  (which  no  wo- 
man can  fail  to  underhand)  of  this  wild  and 
romantic  pafiion  of  yours,  or,  as  you  fenumen- 
tallytermit,  this  ardent  and  pure  attachment — 
an  attachment  and  an  arrangement  1  ihmk  are 
the  terms  now  in  ufe,  I  beg  pardon  if  I  do  not 
always  put  them  in  the  right  place. 

But  ierioufly — do  you  know  what  you  have 
undertaken  in  thus  engaging  yourfclf  with  Wa- 
vcrly  ? — and  can  you  bear  to  be  made  uneafy  by 
the  caprices  of  a  man  who  is  of  twenty  minds 
in  a  momenr,  without  ever  being  in  his  right 
mind.— Ycur  only  chance  of  efcaping,  as  you 

have 


DESMOND.  9 

have  now  managed  the  matter  is,  that  he  will 
never  determine  whether  he  fhall  go  with  you  or 
no. — Some  fcampering  party  will  be  propofed 
to  a  cricket  match  in  HampQiire,  or  a  race  in 
Yorkfhire  ;  one  friend  will  invite  him  to  a  ball 
in  the  Weft  of  England,  and  another  to  fee  a 
boxing  match  in  the  neighbourhood  of  London  : 
and  while  he  is  debating  whether  he  fliall  make 
any  of  thefe  engagements,  or  which,  or  go  to 
France  with  you,  you  wiil  have  a  very  fair  op- 
portunity of  leaving  him — unlefs  (which  from 
the  ftyle  of  your  laft  letter  I  do  not  expc£l)  you 
fhould  yourfelf  change  your  refolution  on  the 
beft  grounds;  and  find  your  romantic  and  your 
patriotic  motive  for  a  journey  to  France,  con- 
quered at  once  by  the  more  powerful  enchant- 
ments of  one  of  my  fair  coufins. 

While,  from  your  fortune  being  entrufted  to 
my  management  by  your  grandfather  till  you 
were  five-and- twenty,  1  confidered  myfelf  as 
your  guardian,  I  forbore  to  recommend  to  either 
of  thefe  young  women,  becaufe  they  were  my 
relations — But  now  as  you  are  mafter  alike  of 
yourfelf  and  of  your  eftate,  yet  are  ftill  willing 
to  attend  (at  leaft  you  fay  you  are)  to  the  opinion 
of  a  friend  who  has  lived  fourteen  years  longer 
in  the  world  than  you  have.  1  am  defirous  that 
you  fhould  become  acquainted  with  them,  and 
that  you  fhould  judge  fairly,  fmce  that  muft  lie 
to  judge  favourably,  of  women  who  are  fo  uni- 
verfally  and  juftly  admired;  who  certainly  are 
moft  highly  accompliftied  :  and  have  fortunes  to 
ailift  whoever  they  marry,  in  fuppoi  ting  them  in 
that  rank  of  life  to  which  they  will  do  fo  mucii 
honour — this  you  call  an  extraordinary  ftyle  of 
advice,  from  a  man  who,  in  the  noon  of  l.fe, 
has  renounced  that  world,  whofe  attradions  he 
B  5  lecom- 


•1©  DESMOND. 

recommends  to  you  ;  but  that,  at  hardly  hine- 
and-thirty,  I  have  no  longer  any  reli(h  for  it, 
arifes,  not  from  general  mifanthropy,  but  from 
particular  misfortune,  and  againft  thofe  calami- 
tics  of  domeftic  life  that  have  embittered  my  days, 
I  vi'ifli  to  guard  yours — by  giving  you  fome  of 
my  dearly-bought  experience. 

You  have  talent?,  youth,  health,  perfon  and 
fortune — a  good  heart  and  an  ardent  imagination 
— thefe,  my  dear  Defmond,  are  advantages  v^xy 
rarely  united,  and  when  they  do  meet,  all  the 
firft  are  too  often  loft  by  the  fatal  and  irregular 
indulgence  of  the  laft.  This  is  what  I  fear  for 
you — but  my  lecture  muft:  terminate  with  my 
paper — my  good  wifhes  ever  follow  you  ;  let  me 
bear  from  you  foon — and  believe  me  e\er 

Yours, 

E.  BETHEL, 


L  E    i- 


D    r  3-  K'  OK   D.  II 

LETTER    IJI. 
TO     MR.     BETHEL. 

Margate,  June  16,  lygo. 
MY  vifit  to  your  friends  is  paid,  and  1  mef 
fuch  a  reception  as  I  might  expe6l  from  your  re- 
commendation— would  I  could  tvll  you,  that  it 
has  anfwered  all  the  friendly  expeclation*:,  or 
rather  hopes,  you  formed  of  it :  but  you  expe^ 
an  ingenuous  account  of  my  ffntiments  in  re- 
g-ird  to  thefe  ladies  ;  and  you  fhall  hive  them. 

Mrs,  Fairfax  has  been  certain'y  a  very  fine 
woman,  and  even  now  has  perfon-J  advantages 
enough  to  authorife  her  retaining  thofe  prettn- 
fions,  which  it  is  eafy  to  fee  fbe  v/ould,  with 
extreme  reludtance,  entirely  refign,— It  is  hovi'- 
ever  but  jiiftice  to  add,  tlia:  her  unwillingnefs 
to  fade,  does  not  influence  her  to  keep  back  the 
period  when  it  is  fit  her  daughters  fhould  bloom 
' — fhe  rather  runs  into  the  contrary  extreme; 
and  with  folicitudc,  which  her  maternal  affec- 
tion renders  rather  an  amiable  weaknefs,  fiie  is 
always  buftling  about,  to  ftiew  them  to  the  beft 
advant-^jjip  -,  and,  as  (he  is  perfectly  convinced 
that  they  are  the  moft  accomplifhed  young  wo- 
men of  the  age,  fo  fhe  is  very  deiirous  of  im- 
prefling  that  conviction  on  all  her  acquaintance 
« — for  the  reft  I  believe  fhe  may  b^  a  very  good 
woman  ;  and  I  have  only  to  object  to  a  little  too 
much  parade  about  it  ;  and  th;.t  flie  talks  rather 
too  loud — and  rather  too  lon^;. 

My  firft    introduiTtion  to  her  was  not  at  h?r 
own    houfe,    for   entering    one  of  the   libraries 
about  two  o'clock  on   Thurfday  noon,  i  ob- 
B  6  fervedy. 


12  DESMOND. 

ferved,  that  the  attention  of  the  few  people  who 
fo  early  in  the  feafon  affembled  there,  was  en- 
grofled  by  a  lady  who  was  relating  a  very  long 
ftory  about  herfelf,  in  a  tone  of  voice,  againft 
which,  whatever  had  been  the  fubjecl,  no  de- 
gree of  attention  to  any  other  could  have  been 
a  defence.  I  was  compelled  therefore,  inftead 
of  reading  the  paper  where  I  was  anxious  to  fee 
French  news,  to  join  the  audience  who  were 
hearing — how  her  leafe  was  out,  of  an  houfe  (he 
had  in  Harley-ftrcet,  and  all  the  converfation 
lield  between  herfelf,  her  landlord,  and  her  at- 
torney about  its  renewal.  But  how  at  laft  they 
could  not  agree  ;  an.i  fo  {lie  had  taken  another  in 
Manchefter  Square,  which  {lie  defcribed  at  full 

length "  The    Ducheff,"    continued    (he, 

*'  and  lady  Lindwes,  and  lady  Sarah,  were  ali 
fo  delighted  when  they  found  1  had  determined 
upon  it — and  lady  Sufan  affurcd  me  it  would 
delay  at  leaft  her  winter's  journey  to  Bath — 
Oh!  my  dear  Mrs.  Fairfax,  faic  lady  Sufan,  you 
have  no  notion  now,  how  exceflively  happy  we 
{hall  all  be,  to  have  you  fo  near  us — and  your 
fvveet  girls  ! — their  fociety  is  a  delightful  acqui- 

fition Mifs  Fairfax's  finging  is  charming, 

and  I  fo  doat  upon  Anaftatia's  manner  of  read- 
ing poetry,  that  I  hope  we  (hall  fee  a  great  deiil 
of  both  of  them." — 

Though  I  at  once  knew  that  this  was  the  lady 
to  whom  i  VI  as  fortunate  enough  to  have  a  letter 
of  recommendation  in  my  pocket,  it  was  not 
eafy  with  all  that  mauvais  konte  with  which  you 
fo  frequently  accufe  me,  to  find  a  favourable 
moment  to  make  my  buw  and  my  fpeech,  be- 
tween the  end  of  one  narrative  and  the  beginning 
of  another,  with  fuch  amazing  rapidity  did 
they  follow  each  other  :  and  I  fiiould  have  re- 
tired 


DESMOND.  13 

tired  without  having  been  able  to  feizeany  fuch 
lucky  interval,  if  this  inexhauftible  ftream  of 
eloquence  had  not  been  interrupted  by  the  fud- 
den  entrance  of  a  young  man  who  feemed  to  be 
one  of  Mrs.  Fairfax's  intimate  acquaintance, 
and  who  faid  he  came  to  tell  her,  that  a  raffle, 
in  which  flie  was  engaged  at  another  (hop,  was 
full,  and  that  her  daughters  had  fent  him  to  de- 
fire  fhe  would  come.  '*  There  is  nobody  now, 
madam,  to  throw,"  faid  this  gentleman,  "  but 
you  and  I  ;  and  Mifs  Anaftatia  being  the  higheft 
number,  thinks  fhe  {hall  win  the  jars — but  as 
for  me,  I  cannot  go  back  this  morsiing,  for  I 
am  engaged  to  ride" — "  Oh,  but  I  defire  you 
will,"  replied  Mrs.  Fairfax,  "  it  wont  take 
you  up  a  minute,  and  I  will  have  it  decided  — 
for  I  hate  fufpencc." — *'  Yes,  madam,"  faid 
another  gentleman  who  had  been  among  the 
lifteners,  "  you  may  hate  it — but  there  is  no- 
thing that  VVaverly  loves  fo  much,  if  one  may 
judge  by  the  difficulty  he  always  makes  about 
deciding  upon  every  thing — and  if  the  determi- 
nation of  the  raffle  depends  upon  him,  yoa  will 
hardly  know  who  the  jars  are  to  belong  to  this 

feafon." "  I   protefl:,  Jack    Lewis,"  cried 

Waverly,  whom  I  now  immediately  knew, 
though  his  cropped  hair  and  other  fingulafities 
of  drefs  had  at  firft  prevented  my  recolle£ling 
him — **  I  proteft  you  do  me  injuftice — I  am 
the  (leadieil  creature  in  life — and  I  would  go 
now  willingly — but  upon  my  foul  I'm  paft  my 
appointment." 

"  And  what  fignifies  your  appointment  r" 
replied  the  other. — "  What  fignifies  whether 
you  keep  it  or  no?" — Why,  that's  true,"  an- 
fwered  my  futur-  fellow-traveller,  "  to  be  fure 
it  is  of  no  great  confequence,  neither — ^o  if  you 

.defire 


14  D    E    S    M    O    N    I>. 

defire  it,  I'll  go  with  you,  Ma'am,  though  really 
I  hardly  know." — He  was  beginning  to  hefitate 
again,  but  iMrs.  Fairfax  took  him  at  his  word^ 
and  they  went  out  together  ;  however,  before 
they  had  reached  the  place  where  the  pofTeflion 
of  the  China  jars  wa^  to  be  decided,  I  faw  Wa- 
verly  leave  the  lady,  and  go  I  fuppofe  to  keep 
the  engagement,  which  he  allowed  a  moment 
before  was  of  no  conlequence.  As  for  myfelf, 
as  foon  as  I  recovered  from  the  effecfts  of  the 
firft  impieflion  made  by  Mrs.  Fairfax's  oratory, 
which  perhaps;  the  weaknefs  or  irritab  lity  of 
my  nerves  rendered  more  forcible  than  it  ought 
to  be,  I  colledled  courage  enough  to  follow  her; 
atrd  in  a  momentary  paufe  that  fuccecded  her 
lofing  her  raffle,  which  would  now  have  been, 
finally  fettled  (he  faid,  had  Waverly  been  pre- 
fent,  I  advanced  and  delivered  your  letter. 

She  received  it  moft  gracioufly  ;  and  even  re- 
tired from  the  groups  (he  was  engaged  in,  to 
read  it.  I  took  that  opportunity  of  addrefling 
mylelf  to  Mifs  Fairfax,  who  is  certainly  a  very 
pretty  woman  ;  fhe  feemed  however  cold  and 
referved  ;  and,  I  thought,  put  on  that  fort  of 
air  whch  fays — ♦'  i  don't  kndw.  Sir,  whether 
you  are  in  ilyle  of  life  to  claim  my  notice." — 
Thefe  little  doubts,  however,  which  I  readily 
forgave^  were  immediately  diffipated,  when  htr 
mother  appeared  with  your  letter  in  her  hand — 
and  faid,  '*  Margarette,  my  dear,  this  is  Mr. 
Defmond — the  friend  and  ward  of  Mr.  Bethel, 
I  am  fure  you  will  be  as  rejoiced  as  I  am  in  this 
opportunity  of  being  honoured  with  his  acquain- 
tance."— ^1  faw  inftantly,  that  the  young  lady  re- 
colleded,  in  the  friend  and  ward  of  Mr.  Bethel, 

a  man  of  large,  independent  foriune. The 

moft  amiable  exprciiion  of  complacency    was 

immediately. 


DESMOND.  15 

Immediately  conveyed  into  her  countenance  ; 
and,  as  1  attended  her  and  lier  mother  home, 
I  perceived  that  two  or  three  gentlemen,  who 
came  with  her  alfo,  and  towards  whom  fhe  had 
before  been  lavifh  of  hei  finiles,  were  now  al- 
moft  negledted,  while  Iht;  w  as  io  good  as  to  at- 
tend only  to  me. — At  the  door  of  their  lodgings 
I  took  my  leave  of  them,  after  receiving  the 
very  obliging  invitation  to  dine  with  them  the 
nextday.  Analtatia  was  not  with  them.  Mifs 
Fairfax  told  me,  that,  as  foon  as  fhe  had  thrown 
for  the  jars,  (he  went  home,  '*  for  Anaftatia, 
faid  (he,  is  exct /lively  fond  of  reading  and  re- 
citing—and, her  reading  maftcr,  a  celebrated 
a£tor  at  one  of  the  theatres,  happening  to  be 
here  by  accident,  fhe  would  not  lofe  the  oppor- 
tunity of  receiving  a  lefTon.  "  She  dees  excel, 
afiuredly,  faid  the  elder  lady,  in  thofe  accom- 
plilhmentf,  as  Mr.  ]3efmond,  I  think  will  fay, 
when  he  hears  her." — lexprfffed  my  fati;fa£tion 
at  the  profpe6t  of  being  fo  gratified,  and  then 
took  my  leave. 

Yeiterday  morning  I  favv  Waveily,  who 
feemed  to  embrace,  with  avidity,  the  projedt  of 
going  with  me  to  Paris — I  reprcfented  to  him 
the  necefhty  of  his  knowing,  piecifely,  his  own 
mind,  as  i  cannot  remain  here  more  than  four 
or  five  days. — He  allures  me,  that  nothing  can 
prevent  his  going,  and  that  he  will  infiantly  fet 
about  making  preparations. — Indetd,  my  good 
friend,  you  were  too  k\erc  upon  him. —  He  is 
young,  and  quite  without  experience,  but  he  feeirvS 
to  have  a  good  difpoiition,  and  an  underftanding 
capable  of  improvement. — There  is  too,  a  family 
reiemblance  to  his  ftfter,  which,  though  flight,  and 
rather  a  flying  than  a  fixed  likenefsj  intertits  me 
for  him;  and  in  diort,  lam  more  defircus  ofcur- 
•ing  than  of  reckoning:  his  fault?.  He 


l6  D    E    S    M    O    N    I>. 

He  dined  with  Mrs.  Fairfax  yeftertlay,  where 
I  was  alfo  invited,  and  where  a  party  of  nine  or 
ten  were  afTembled.  The  captivating  fifters  dif- 
playt-d  all  their  talents,  and  1  own  they  excel  in 
almofl  every  accomplifliment. — I  have  feldom 
feen  a  finer  figure  taken  altogether,  than  the 
younger  fifter,  and  indeed,  your  defcription  of 
the  perfonal  beauty  of  both,  was  not  exaggera- 
tion.— To  their  acquirements,  I  have  already 
donejuftice:  yet,  I  am  convinced,  that,  with 
all  thefe  advantages,  my  heart,  were  it  totally 
free  fiom  every  other  impreflion,  would  never 
become  devoted  to  either. 

It  Vi'ould  be  nonfenfe  to  pretend  to  give  rea- 
fons  for  this. —With  thefe  caprices  of  the  ima- 
gination, and  of  the  heart,  you  have  allowed 
that  Reafon  has  very  little  to  do. 

One  objection  however,  to  my  pretending  to 
either  of  thefe  ladies,  would  be,  that  every  de- 
gree cf  excellence  on  which  you  feeni  to  dwell. 
—  Always  furrounded  by  admiring  multitudes  ; 
or,  prailifing  thofe  acccmpliiliments  by  which 
that  admiration  is  acquired,  they  feem  to  be  in 
danger  of  forgetting  they  have  hearts — appearing 
to  feel  no  preference  for  any  perfon,  but  thofe  who 
have  the  fandion  of  faftion,  or  the  recommen- 
dation of  great  property  ;  and,  affluent  as  they 
are  themfclves,  to  confider  only  among  the  men 
that  furround  them,  who  arc  the  likelieft  to 
jaife  them  to  higher  aiSuence  or  fupcrior  rank. 

Of  this  1  had  a  fpecimen  yefterday — ^Waverly 
fetms  to  have  an  inclination  for  Mifs  Fairfax, 
and  as  he  and  I  were  the  two  young  men  in  the 
party  of  yefterday,  who  feemed  the  moft  worthy 
the  notice  of  the  two  young  ladies,  I  was  (o 
fortunate  as  to  be  ailowed  to  entertain  Mifs 
Anafiatia,  while  WaverJy  was  engaged  in  ear- 

neft 


DESMOND.  17 

neft  difcourfe  by  Mifs  Fairfax,  who  put  on  all 
thofe  fafcinating  airs  which  ftie  fo  well  knows 
how  to  affume. — I  faw  that  poor  Waverly  was 
confidering  whether  he  {hould  not  be  violently 
in  love  with  her,  or  adhere  to  the  more  humble 
beauty,  for  whom  he  had  been  relating  h\^  pen- 
chant to  mc  a  few  hours  before,  when  the  door 
fuddenly  opened,  and  a  tall  young  fellow,  very 
d'rty,  and  apparently  very  drunk,  was  (hewn 
into  the  room. — The  looks  of  all  the  ladies  tef- 
tified  their  fatisfadtion  :  and  they  all  eagerly 
exclaimed,  "  Oh  !  my  lord,  when  did  you  ar- 
rive, who  expe£led  you  ? — how  did  you  come  ?" 
— Without,  however,  attending  immediately  to 
thefe  queftions,  he  fhook  the  two  young  ladies* 
hands,  called  them  familiary  by  their  Chriftian 
names  :  and  then  throwing  himfelf  at  his  length 
on  a  fopha,  he  thus  anfwered— *'  Came  ! — why, 
curfe  me  if  1  hardly  know  how  1  came  here — 
for  1  have  not  been  in  bed  thefe  three  nights- 
Why,  J  came  with  Davers,  and  Lenham,  and 

a  parcel  of  us, We  were  going  to  fettle  a 

wager  at  Tom  Felton's — But,  rat  me,  if  I 
know  why  the  plague  we  came  through  this 
damned  place,  twenty  miles  at  Icaft  out  of  our 
way. — How  in  the  devil's  name  do  ye  contrive 
to  live  here,  why,  here  is  not  a  foul  to  be  feen?" 
— Then,  without  waiting  for  an  anfwer  to  this 
elegant  exordium,  he  fuddenly  fnatched  the  hand 
of  the  eldelt  Alifs  Fairfax,  who  fat  near  him, 
and  cried,  "  hut,  by  the  Lord,  my  fweet  Peggy, 
you  look  confoundedly  handfome — curfe  me  if 
you  don't. — By  Jove,  I  believe  I  fhall  be  in 
lovt  witn  you  myielf. — What  ! — fo  you  have 
got  out  of  your  megrims  and  ficknefs,  eh  ! — 
aiid  are  quite  well,  you  dear  little  toad  you, 
?hP" — The  Ibfl  and  fmiling  anfwer  which  the 

lady 


is  DESMOND. 

lady  gave  to  an  acldrefs  fo  impertinently  familiar,, 
convinced  nne  (he  was  not  difpleafed  with  it :  the 
mother  feemed  equally  fatisfied  ;  and  I  hw^  that 
even  the  fentimenta!  Anaftatia  forgot  the  critique 
on  the  laft  fafiiionable  novel,  with  which  flie 
had  a  moment  before  been  obliging  me  ;  and 
caft  a  look  of  folicitude  towards  that  part  of  the 
room,  where  this  newly-arrived  vifitor,  whom 
they  called  Lord  Newminfter,  was  talking  to 
her  fifter  in  the  ilyle  of  which  I  have  given  you 
an  example — while  poor  Waverly,  who  had  at 
cnce  loft  all  his  confequence,  fat  filentand  mor- 
tified, or  if  he  dsfUdently  attempted  to  join  in 
the  converfation,  obtained  no  notice  from  the 
lady,  and  only  a  dare  of  contemptuous  enquiry 
from  the  lord, — As,  notwithftanding  the  favor 
1  had  found  a  few  hours  before,  I  now  feemed 
to  be  finking  faft  into  the  fame  infignificance,  I 
thought  it  better  to  avoid  a  continuance  of  fuch 
mortitication,  by  taking  my  leave;  Waverlv,  as 
he  accompanied  me  home,  cnald  hardly  conceal 
his  vexation — yet  was  unwilling  to  fliew  it  : 
Vvhile  I  doubt  net  but  Mrs.  Fairfax  and  the 
young  ladies  we  happily  entertained  the  reft  of 
the  evtning  by  the  delcdtable  converfation  of 
Lord  I\'ewminfter. 

I  ftiajl  probably  write  once  more  from  hence.. 

Your's,  ever  and  truly, 

L.  D. 


L  E  T= 


D    E    S    M    O    K    D.  ig 

LETTER      IV. 

TO    MR.    DESMOND. 

Hartfitid,  June  to,   1790. 

I  AM  forry  my  prefcription  is  not  likely  to 
fucceed;  1  had  perCuadedmyfelf  that  the  youngeft 
of  my  fair  coufins  was  the  likeliefl:  of  any  wo- 
man of  my  acquaintance,  to  become  the  objefl 
of  a  reafonable  attachment. — Surely  Defmond 
you  are  faftidious — you  expert  what  you  will 
never  find,  the  cultivated  mind  and  polilhed 
manners  of  refined  fociety,  with  the  fimplicity 
and  unpretending  modefty  of  retired  life — they 
are  incompatible — they  cannot  be  united  ;  and 
this  model  of  pcrfe6tion,  which  you  have  ima- 
gined, and  can  never  obtain,  will  be  a  fuurce  of 
unhappinefs  to  you  through  life. 

I  told  you  in  2  former  letter,  that  I  would 
endeavour  to  give  you  a  little  of  my  dearly- 
bought  experience. You  know  that  I  have 

been  unhappy ;  but  you  are  probably  quite  unac- 
quainted with  the  fources  from  whence  that  un- 
happinefs originates — in  relating  them  to  you  I 
may  perhaps  ccnvnce  you,  that  ignorance  and 
fimplicity  are  no  fecuritiesagainft  theevils  which 
you  fecm  to  apprehend  in  domeftic  life  ;  and 
that  the  woman,  who  is  fuddenly  raifed  from 
humble  mediocrity  to  the  gay  fcenes  of  faihiona- 
ble  fplendor,  is  much  more  likely  to  be  giddily 
intoxicated  than  one  who  has  from  her  infancy 
been  accuftomed  to  them. 

At  one  and  twenty,  and  at  the  clofe  of  a  long 
minority,  which  had  been  palled  under  the  care 
of  very  CACelient  guardians,  1  became  mailer  of 

a  very 


aO  1>    E    S    M    O    Pi    I>. 

a  very  large  fum  of  ready  money,  and  an  eftate 
the  largeft  and  beft  conditioned  that  any  gentle- 
man pofTefl'ed  in  the  country  where  it  lay. — I 
was  at  that  time  very-  unlike  the  fober  fellow  I 
now  appear — and  the  moment  I  was  free  from 
the  reftraint  of  thoi'e  friends,  to  whofe  guardian- 
Tnip  my  father  had  left  me,  I  rufhed  into  all  the 
diffipation  that  was  going  forward,  and  became 
one  of  the  gayeft  men  at  that  time  about  town. 

With  fuch  a  fortune  it  was  not  difficult  to 
be  introduced  into  "  the  very  firft  world." — 
The  llluilrious  adventurers  and  titled  gamblers,, 
of  whom  that  world  is  compofed,  found  me  an 
admirable  rubje6l  for  them  j  while  the  women, 
who  were  then  either  the  mod  celebrated  orna- 
ments of  the  circle  where  1  moved,  or  were  en- 
deavouring to  become  fo,  were  equally  felicitous, 
to  obtain  my  notice — and  the  unmarried  part  of 
them  feemed  generoufly  willing  to  forget  my 
want  of  title  in  favour  of  my  twelve  or  thirteen, 
thoufand  a  year. — I  had,  however,  at  a  very  early 
period  of  my  career,  conceived  an  affe<Sl;ion,  or 
according  to  your  phrafe,  an  ardent  attachment 
to  a  married  woman  of  high  rank, — but  1  had  at, 
the  fame  time  feen  enough  of  them  all,  to  de- 
termine never  to  marry  any  of  them  myfelf. 

Two  years  experience  confirmed  me  in  this- 
refolution,  but  by  the  end  of  that  time  I  was  re- 
lieved from  the  embarraiiinents  of  a  large  pro- 
perty.—  In  the  courfe  of  the  firfl-,  the  tun  and 
the  hazard  table  had  dlfburthened  m.e  of  all  my 
ready  money  ;  and,  at  the  conclulion  of  the  i"e- 
cond,  m.y  eltate  was  reduced  to  fomething  leis 
than  one  half. — I  then  found  that  I  was  not,  by, 
above  one  half,  fo  great  an  obje£t  to  my  kmd 
friends  as  I  bad  been — and,  when  foon  after- 
wards 1   was  compelled   to  pay  five,  thoufand. 

pounds 


DESMOND.  21 

pounds  for  my  fentimental  attachment — when 
the  obliging  world  reprefented  mv  affiirs  infi- 
nitely worfe  than  they  were,  and  I  became  afraid 
of  looking  into  them  myfelf,  I  found  the  period 
rapidly  approaching  when  to  this  circle  I  fliould 
become  no  obje£t  at  all. 

My  pride  now  effected  that,  which  common 
fenfe  had  attempted  in  vain  ;  and  I  determined 
to  quit  a  fociety  into  which  I  {hould  never  have 
entered.  ■  I  went  down  to  my  houfe  in  the 
county  where  almoft  all  my  eftate  lay  ;  fent  for 
the  attorney  who  had  the  care  of  my  property, 
and  with  a  fort  of  defperate  refolution  refolvcd 
to  know  the  worft. 

This  lawyer,  whofe  father  had  been  fteward 
to  mine,  and  to  whom  at  his  death  the  fteward- 
fliip  had  been  given  by  my  guardians,  was  a 
clearheaded,  aftive  and  intelligent  man:  and 
when  he  law  himfelf  entrufted  with  fuller  pow- 
ers to  a6t  in  my  bufinefs  than  he  had  till  then 
pofleflVd,  hefet  about  it  fo  carneftly  and  aflidu- 
oufly,  that  he  very  foon  got  fuccefsfully  through 
two  law  fuits  of  great  importance  :  raifed  my 
rents  without  oppreffing  my  tenants — difpofed 
of  fuch  timber  as  could  be  fold  without  preju- 
dice to  the  principal  eftate — fold  ofFpart  of  what 
was  mortgaged  to  redeem  and  clear  the  reft  ; 
and  fo  regulated  my  affair?,  that  in  a  few 
months,  from  the  time  of  his  entlrelv  undertak- 
ing them,  I  found  myfelf  relieved  from  every 
embarraftment,  and  ftill  poflefled  of  an  eftate  of 
more  than  five  thoufand  pounds  a  year.  The 
feven  that  1  had  thrown  away  gave  me  however 
fome  of  the  fevere  pangs  that  are  inflicted   by 

mortified  pride. Nabobs   and  rich   citizens 

became  the  oflentatious  pofleffojs  of  manors 
and  royalties  in  the  fame  county,  which  were 

once 


22  DESMOND. 

once  mine  ;  and  fomeof  my  eflates— dilates  that 
had  been  in  my  family  fince  the  conqueft,  now 
lent  their  names  to  barons  by  recent  purchafe, 
and  dignified  mulhroom  nobility, 

I  fled  therefore  from  public  meetings,  where 
I  only  found  objeils  of  felf-roproach,  and  made 
acquaintance  with  another  fet  of  people,  among 
whom  I  was  ftill  confidered  as  a  man  of  great 
fortune ;  and  where  I  found  more  attention, 
and,  as  I  believed,  more  friendfhip  than  I  had 
ever  experienced  in  fuperior  focieties. 

More  general  information  and  more  under- 
{landing  I  certainly  found;  and  none  of  my  new 
friends  pofiefTed  a  greater  fliare  of  both  than  my 
folicitor,  Mr.  Stam.ford — he  had  defervedly  ob- 
tained my  confidence,  and  I  was  now  often  at 
his  houfe,  which  his  family  feemed  to  vie  in  try- 
ing, to  render  agreeable  to  me. 

His  wife  was  pleafing  and  good  humoured, 
and  he  had  feveral  filters,  fome  married,  and  two 
fmgle,  who  occafionajly  vifitad  at  his  houfe  ;  and 
it  was  not  difficult  to  fee,  that  in  the  eyes  of  the 
latter,  Mr.  Bethel,  with  his  reduced  fortune, 
was  a  man  of  greater  confequence  than  he  had 
ever  appeared  to  the  high  born  damfeis  among 
whom  he  had  lived  in  the  meridian  of  his  prol- 
perity. 

I  was  not  however  flattered  by  their  attention 
or  attracted  by  their  coquetry — they  were  pretty 
-enough,  and  not  without  (enfey  but  they  had 
both  been  very  much  in  London  ;  and  I  thought 
too  deeply  initiated,  if  not  into  very  fafliionable 
focieties,  yet  into  the  ftyle  of  thofe  which  catch. 
With  imitative  emulation,  the  manners  and  ideas 
thofe  focieties  give. — Mr.  Stamford  feemed  de- 
firous  of  giving  both  thcfe  ladies  a  chance  of 
fuccefs    wjth    me,    for    they    were    alternately 

brought 


DESMOND.  2J 

brouo-ht  forward  for  about  twelve  months 

at  the  end  of  which  time  they  were  both  per- 
haps convinced  that  they  had  neither  of  them 
any  great  profpcil  of  it,  for  then  the  family 
of  a  widow  fiftcr  was  invited,  none  of  whom 
I  had  ever  feen,  or  hardly  heard  mentioned  be- 
fore. 

The  father  of  this  family,  a  lieutenant  in  the 
army,  had  married  the  eldeft  of  Siamford's  fif- 
ters,  when  he  was  recruiting  in  the  town  where 
(he  then  lived — by  which  he  fo  greatly  difobliged 
the  friends  on  whom  he  depended,  that  though 
he  had  a  very  large  family,  they  never  afforded 
him  afterwards  the  leaft  ailiftance  ;  and  about  two 
years  before  the  period  I  now  fpeak  of,  he  had 
died  at  Jamaica,  leaving  his  widow  and  {even 
children,  with  very  little  more  than  the  penfioii 
allowed  by  Government  to  fubfift  upon. — Of 
thefe  children  the  two  eldefl:  were  dauahters  ; 
who,  from  the  obfcure  village  their  mother  was 
compelK'd  to  inhabit  in  VV^les,  were  now  come 
to  pafs  the  winter  at  the  houfe  of  their  uncle  in 

a  large  provincial  town. On  entering  one 

morning  Stamford's  parlour,  in  my  ufual  fami- 
liar way,  1  was  ftruclc  with  the  fight  of  two 
very  young  women  who  were  at  work  there  ; 
the  elder  of  whom  was,  I  ihoughr,  the  moit 
peifect  beauty  I  had  ever  feen. — When  I  met 
Stamford,  I  exprefled  my  admiration  of  the 
young  perfon  1  had  jufl  parted  from,  and  en- 
quired who  {be  was  — he  told  me  fhe  was  his 
n;ece,  and  briefly  related  the hiftory  of  his  fifter's 
family. 

At  dinner,  as  Stamford  invited  me  to  flay,  I 
could  not  keep  my  eyes  from  the  contemplation 
of  Louifa's  beauty,  which  the  longer  I  beheld 
it,  became  more  and  more  fafcinating  j  the  un- 

iiiFccled 


24  DESMOND. 

,affe£ied  innocence  and  timidity  of  her  manners, 
rendered  her  vet  more  intereftino; — fhe  Icnew 
merely  how  to  read  and  write  :  and  had,  till  now, 
never  been  out  of  the  village,  whither  her  mo- 
ther had  retired  when  fhe  was  only  fix  or  feyen 
years  old — and  her  total  unconfcioufnefs  of  the 
beauty  fhe  fo  eminently  poirefTed,  rivetted  the 
fetters  which  that  beauty,  even  at  the  firft  inter- 
view, impofed. 

Her  uncle  was  not,  however,  fo  blind  to  the 
impreifion  I  had  received  ;  yet  he  managed  fo 
vvell,  that,  without  any  appearance  of  artifice 
on  his  part,  I  was  every  day  at  the  houfe  ;  and, 
in  a  week,  I  was  gone  an  whole  age  in  love.  I 
foon  made  propofals,  which  were  accepted  with 
tranfport.  I  married  the  beautiful  Louifa — and 
was  for  fome  time  happy. 

Mr.  Stamford  had  immediately  the  whole 
management  of  my  fortune,  in  the  improvement 
of  which,  he  had  now  fo  much  interrft;  and 
in  his  hands  it  recovered  itfelf  fo  faft,  that,  tho' 
I  made  a  very  good  figure  in  the  country,  I  did 
not  ejcpend  more  than  half  my  income — The 
money  thus  faved,  Stamford  put  out  to  the  bed 
advantage — and  1  faw  myfeif  likely  to  regain 
the  loft  confequence  I  fo  much  regretted  :  a 
fooliih  vanity,  to  which  I  facrificed  my  real  feli- 
city. 

Stamford,  who  had  all  the  latent  ambition 
that  attends  confcious  abilities,  a^  a  man  of  bu- 
finefs,  had,  till  now,  felt  that  ambition  repreffed 
by  the  little  probability  there  was  of  his  ever 
reaching  a  more  elevated  fituaiion. — But  he  faw 
and  irritated  the  mortified  pride  which  I  very  ill 
concealed — and,  by  degrees,  he  communicated 
to  me,  and  taught  me  to  adopt  thofe  projeds, 
by  whicn    he  told  me   I  iliould   not  only    be 

relieved 


DESMOND.  25 

relieved  from  this  uneasy  fcnfation,  but  rifs 
to  greater  confequcuce  than  1  had  ever  pof- 
fcffed.— 

"  YouhavetalentSjfaidhe,  and  ought  toexert 
them. — In  thefe  times,  any  thing  may  be  done 
by  a  man  of  abilities,  who  has  a  feat  in  Parlia- 
ment. Take  a  feat  in  the  Houfe  of  Commons, 
and  a  feilion  or  two  will  open  to  you  profpedts 
greater  than  thofe  you  facrificed  in  the  early 
part  of  your  life." — I  took  his  advice,  and  the 
i'oilowing  year,  inftead  of  felling,  at  a  general 
election,  the  two  feats  far  a  borough  v^hich  be- 
longed to  me,  I  filled  qne  myfelf,  and  gave  the 
other  to  Stamford,  who,  confcious  as  he  wasof 
poileflxng  thofe  powers,  which,  in  a  corrupt  go- 
vernmenr,  are  always  ea;j;erly  bought,  had  long 
been  folicitous  to  quit  tiie  narrow  walk  of  a 
country  attorney,  and  mount  aHage  where  thofe 
abilities  would  have  fcope. 

In  confequence  of  this  arrangement,  I  took 
3  large  houfe  in  town  ;  where  Stamford  and  his 
family  had  apartments  for  tbe  iirft  four  or  five 
months. — At  the  end  of  that  time,  he  bad  ma- 
naged fo  well,  that  he  hired  one  for  himfelf. — 
Artful,  aiSlive,  and  indefatigable,  with  a  tongue 
very  pljPufible,  and  aconfcience  very  pliant,  he 
Toon  became  a  very  ufeful  man  to  the  party  who 
had  purchafed  him.  Preferments  and  fortune 
crowded  rapidly  upon  him,  and  Stamford,  the 
country  attorney,  v/as  foon  forgotten,  in  Stam- 
ford the  confident  of  minifters,  and  the  compa- 
nion of  peers. 

I  was  not,  however,  entirely  without  acqui- 
ring fome  of  the  advantages  he  had  taught  me 
to  expect — I  obtained,  by  v/hat  1  now  blufh  to 
think  of,  (giving  my  voice  in  diredu  oppofition 
to  my  opinion  and  my  principles,)  a  place  of 

Vol.  I.  C  fix 


26  DESMOND. 

fix  hundred  pounds  a  year:  which,  though  it 
did  little  more  than  pay  the  rent  of  my  houfe  in 
town,  was,  as  Mr.  btamford  affuied  me,  the 
foretafte  of  fuperior  advantages. —  But,  long  be- 
fore the  clofe  of  this  feffion  of  Parliament,  I 
difcovered,  that  far  from  being  likely  to  recover 
the  fortune  I  had  diflipated,  I  wa^,  in  faiSt,  a 
confiderable  h)fer  in  pecuniary  matters. — Alas! 
I  was  yet  endeavouring  to  Ihut  my  eyes  againft 
the  fad  conviction,  that  I  had  fullained,  a  yet 
heavier  and  more  irreparable  lofs  ;  domeftic  hap- 
pinefs,  and  the  afFe<Slion  of  my  wife. 

Dazzled  and  intoxicated  by  fcenes  of  which 
(he  had  till  then  had  no  idea,  Louifa,  on  our 
firft  coming  to  town  entered,  with  extreme  avi- 
dity into  the  diffipation  of  London — and  I  in- 
dulged her  in  ir,  from  the  filly  pride  of  fhewing 
to  the  women  among  whom  I  had  formerly  lived, 
beauty  which  eclipfed  them  all. — They  afFefled 
todifdain  the  little  rultic,  whom  they  malicioufly 
reprefented  as  being  taken  from  among  the 
loweft  of  the  people. — The  admiration  however 
with  which  fhe  was  univerfally  received  by  the 
men,  amply  revenged  their  malignity,  but,  while 
it  mortihed  them,  it  ruined  me. 

Louifa  lived  now  in  a  conftant  fuccefiion  of 
flattery,  by  which  perhaps  a  ftronger  mind  might 
have  become  giddy. — Shehadprincesat  her  toilet 
and  noblemen  at  her  feet  every  day,  and  from 
them  {he  foon  learned  to  imagine,  that  had  fhe 
been  feen  before  (he  threw  herfelf  away  on  me, 
there  was  no  rank  of  life,  however  exalted,  to 
which  fuch  charms  might  not  have  given  her  pre- 
tenfions. — That  love,  which  till  this  fatal  period 
{he  feemed  to  have  for  me — that  gratitude  of 
which  her  heart  had  appeared  fo  full  (for  I  had 
provided  for  a'l   her  family)  even  her  affection 

for 


DESMOND.  27 

for  her  children,  was  drowned  in  the  Intoxicat- 
ing draughts  of  flattery,  which  were  every  day 
adminiilered  to  her — and  when  the  time  came 
for  our  returning  into  the  country,  (he  returned 
indeed  with  me,  but  I  carried  not  back  the  in- 
genuous, unafFeifled,  Louifa;  whofe  fimplicity, 
rather  than  her  beauty,  had  won  my  heart.- 
Ah  !  no  1 — I  faw  only  a  fine  lady  eager  for  admi- 
ration ;  willing  to  purchafe  it  on  any  terms,  and 
fullen  and  difcontented  when  fhe  had  not  thofe 
about  herfrom  whom  (he  had  beenfo  accuftomed 
to  receive  it, — That  happinefs  was  loft  to  me  for 
ever.  I  had  long  been  confcious,  but  I  flill 
hoped  to  preferve  my  honor — and  that  1  might 
detach  my  wife  from  thofe  by  whofe  afliduity  it 
feemed  to  be  the  moft  endangered,  I  determined  to 
make  a  journey  into  Italy. — She  neither  pro- 
moted or  objected  to  the  fcheme,  but  a  few  days 
before  that,  which  I  had  fixed  on  to  begin  our 
journey,  (he  left  thehoufe,  and  put  herfelf  un- 
der the  prote(5lion  of  a  man  who  difgraces  the 
name  he  bears. 

I  purfued  the  ufual  courfe  in  thcfe  cafes;  I 
challenged  and  fought  with  him — 1  was  (lightly, 
and  he  was  dangeroully  wounded ;  and  by  way 
of  further  fatisfadtion  I  heard,  that  my  wife  at- 
tended him  in  his  iJlnefs,  and  as  foon  as  he  was 
able  to  travel,  accompanied  him  to  the  South  of 
France. 

I  then  thought  of  purfuing  that  method  of 
vengeance,  which  had  fome  years  before  been 
fuccefsfully  employed  againft  myfelf,  and  had 
begun  the  preliminary  fteps  towards  if,  when 
Stamford,  the  now  profperous  uncle  of  my  wife, 
undertook  to  difTuade  me — he  reprefented  to  me 
that  any  money  I  could  obtain,  would  only  be 
confidered  as  the  price  of  my  diflionour — and 
C  2  that 


28  DESMOND. 

that  fuch  a  publication  of  mifcondu(5l  in  the 
mother  of  my  children  would  be  very  injurious 

to  them,  particularly  to  my  little  girl that 

therefore  it  would,  upon  every  account,  be  bet- 
ter tofufFcr  him  to  negociatean  accommodation 
with — I  Hopped  him  fliort,  without  hearing  to 
its  clofe,  this  infamous  and  infuking  propofal — 
and  defired  him  to  leave  my  houfe  ;  no  longer 
doubting,  from  comparing  this  with  other  in- 
ftances  that  now  occurred  to  me,  that  he  had 
fold  the  perfon  of  his  niece  to  her  feducer,  with 
as  mnch  fang  froid  zs  he  had  before  fold  his  own 
confcience  to  the  minifter. 

ImprefTed  by  this  opinion,  and  being  too 
well  convinced  of  the  futility  of  thofe  chimerical 
plans  with  which  he  had  lured  me  from  inde- 
pendence and  felicity,  I  determined  never  more 
to  hold  converfe  with  him  :  and  to  divert  myfelf, 
as  foon  and  as  completely  as  poffible  of  all  regret, 
for  a  worthlefs  and  ungrateful  woman. — I  there- 
fore tonic  all  my  affairs  into  my  own  hands,  acr 
cepted  the  chiltern  hundreds,  and  felling  my  f?4t 
for  the  remairider  of  the  feven  years,  i  r^figrted 
at  once  my  place  at  court,  and  my  place  in  par- 
liament; for  by  the  latter  I  now  felt,  that  I  had 
unworthily  obtained  the  former. — Then,  letting 
the  family  houfe  wherel  had  refided  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Stamford,  I  fettled  myfelf  at  this 
fmaller  place  ;  the  only  property  1  poiTefs  at  a 
diftance  from  my  native  county. 

Here  1  have  now  lived  nearly  eight  years,  and 
between  the  education  of  my  children,  and  the 
amufement  afforded  me  by  my  farm,  I  hope  I 
fhall  end  thofe  years  at  leaffc  not  fo  unhappily  as 
they  began. — Of  the  woman  once  fo  beloved,  I 
can  now  think  with  forrow  and  pity  rather  than 
refentment,  for  flie  is  dead— —and  1  wi(h  her 

errors 


DESMOND.  29 

errors  to  be  forgotten  and  forgiven  by  the  world, 
as  1  have  forgiven,  though  1  cannot  forget  them. 
■ — Though  releafcd  by  her  death  from  any  matri- 
monial engagement,  1  have  no  intention  again 
to  hazard  my  happinefs,  but  apply  all  my  time 
in  improving  the  remains  of  my  eftate  for  my 
fon;  to  render  him  worthy  to  enjoy  it — and  to 
educate  my  daughter  in  fuch  a  manner,  that 
although  fhe  promifes  to  pollefs  her  mother's 
beauty,  fhe  may  not  be  its  vidiim. — For  this 
purpofe  it  will  foon  become  neceflary  for  me  to 
quit  occafionally  the  folitude  where  1  have  re- 
gained my  peace,  and  return  to  thofe  fcenes 
among  which  I  loft  it;  for  I  am  determined  my 
little  Louifa  fhall  fee  the  world  before  (he  is  fet- 
tled in  it;  that  (he  may  learn  to  enjoy  it  with 
moderation,  or  refign  it  with  dignity. 

In  looking  forward,  my  dear  friend,  to  this 
period,  now  not  very  remote,  I  have  thought 
that  a  wife  of  yours  would  be  the  perfon  to 
whom  I  fliould  beft  like  to  entruft  fo  precious 
acharge  as  my  charminggirl  on  her firft entrance 
into  life. — Thus  you  fee  that  I  had,  in  recom- 
mending a  wife  to  you,  no  very  juft  claim  to  the 
difintereftednefs  of  which  1  have  foniCtimes 
boafted — but  fo  goes  the  world.  I  have  tired 
myfelf,  and  exhaufted  my  fpirits,  by  this  detail 
of  what  I  always  avoid  recalling,  when  it  can 
ferve  no  purpofe  but  to  renew  fruitlefs  regret — 
May,  however,  the  narrative  which  has  coft 
me  fome  pam,  ferve  to  convince  you,  that  fuch 
women  as  the  two  Fairfaxes,  are  much  lefs 
likely  to  facrifice  their  honour  on  the  altar  of 
vanity,  than  the  rural  damfel  from  the  Welch 
mountains  or  northern  fells.  I  hope  to  hear 
from  you,  as  you  promife,  once    more  before 

you  depart It  is    impoffible   to  help    again 

C  3  offering 


30  D  Er  s  u  o  n  j>. 

offering  my  congratulation  on  your  fortunate 
choice  of  Waverly  for  a  travelling  companion 
—  nor  can  I  avoid  admiring  the  efFeft  of  family 
I  tie  fiefs. 

Adieu  !  your's  ever, 

E.   BETHEL, 


LET- 


D    E    S    M    6    N    D.  31 

LETTER      V. 
TO    MR.     BETHEL. 

June  25,  1790. 

YOU  are  very  good  to  have  taken  fo  much 
trouble,  and  to  have  entered  on  a  detail  fo  pain- 
ful to  yourfelf  for  my  advantage — be  aflured, 
my  good  frienJ,  1  feel  all  my  obligations  to  you 
on  this,  and  on  innumerable  occafions  j  and  that 
I  fhould  pay  to  your  opinion  the  utmofl  defe- 
rence were  not  my  marrying  novi^,  perhaps  my 
ever  marrying  at  all,  quite  out  of  the  queftion 
—for  I  believe  I  (hall  never  have  an  heart  to 
beftow,  and.  without  it  I  can  never  folicit  that 
love,  which,  fo  circumftanced,  I  can  neither, 
deferve  nor  repay. 

You  tell  me,  Bethel,  that  I  vainly  expe<n  to 
meet  the  cultivated  mind  and  poliQied  manners 
of  refined  ibciety,  united  with  the  fimple  and 
unpretending  modcfty  of  retired  life,  while  the 
idea  1  have  thus  drelTed  up  as  a  model  of  perfec- 
tion, will  embitter  ail  my  day« — It  will  indeed! 
—but  it  is  not  the  fearch  that  will  occupy,  or 
the  idea  that  will  perfecute  me — it  is  the  reality, 
the  living  original  of  this  fair  idea^  which  1 
have  found — and  found  in  pofleflion  of  another 
— yes  my  friend — Geraldine  unites  thefe  per- 
fections— and  adds  to  them  fo  many  others,  both 
of  heart  and  underftanding,  that  were  her  per- 
fon  only  an  ordinary  one,  I  could  not  have 
known  without  adoring  her.  I  will  not,  how- 
ever, dwell  upon  this  topic — for  it  is  one  on 
which  you  do  not  hear  me  with  pleafure,  and  it  is 
C  4.  not 


32  DESMOND. 

not  fit  that  /  indulge  myfelf  in  what  I  feel  while 
I  write  about  her — though  I  can  only  do  fa 
while  I  write  to  you,  for  no  other  perfon  on 
earth  fufpeiSts  this  attachment,  nor  do  I  ever 
breathe  her  name  to  any  ear  but  yours. 
■  1  force  myfelf  from  this  fubjtdl  then  ;  though 
there  is  not  in  the  world  another  that  really  fixes 
my  attention  an  inftant;  not  one  that  has  any 
momentary  attraction,  unlefs  it  be  the  tran fac- 
tions in  France. — I  am  waiting  here  for  Wa- 
verly,  who  is  gone  to  Bath,  to  take  leave  of  his 
mother;  a  rarafure  which,  on  her  writing  to 
him  to  defire  it,  he  adopted  with  only  two  de- 
bates—whether  he  Ihould  go  round  by  London, 
to  bid  adieu  to  his  dear  Nancy,  a  nymph  who 
lives  at  his  expence  ;  or  proceed  dire<5i!y  to 
Bath.— As  I  fortfaw  that  his  dear  Nancy  might 
chufe  to  vifit  the  Continent  too  ;  or  might  ap- 
prehend hisefcape  from  her  chains,  and  there- 
fore prevent  his  going  himfelf,  I  moft  ftrongly 
enforced  the  necelTity  of  his  obeying  his  mo- 
ther's fummons  in  the  quickeft  way  poflible  ; 
declaring  to  him,  that,  if  he  detained  me  above 
a  week,  I  muft  abfolutely  go  without  him. — 
This,  as  he  is  now  very  eager  for  the  journey, 
and  fpeaks  no  French,  fo  that  he  would  be 
fuhjedt  to  many  difficulties  in  travelling  alone, 
at  length  determined  him  to  go  ftraight  to  Bath 
and  return  immediately  ;  on  which  conditions 
1  agreed  to  wait  a  week  where  I  am,  though, 
fince  I  niuft  go,  1  am  extremely  impatient  to 
be  at  Paris — and  would  have  made  this  facrifice 
of  time  to  nothing  but  the  fervice  of  Geraldine 
in  ferving  her  brother. 

Since  i  wrote  to  you  lad,  I  have  pafTed  part 
o"S  feveral  days  with  Mr.  Fairfax's  family, 
without  feeing  caufe  to  change  my  opinion  of  any 

part 


DESMOND.  33 

part  of  it. — But  all  my  obfervations  tend  rather 
to  confirm  that  which  1  formed  on  my  firft  in- 
trodudtion. — The  foolifli  vanity,  whence  origi- 
nates fo  many  ftratagems  to  heighten  their  ccn- 
fequence,  that  afFediation  which  carries  them 
into  the  fnperior  ranks  of  life,  to  applaud  and 
flatter  there,  that  they  may  acquire,  in  their 
turn,  greater  fuperiority  over  that  clafs  where 
fortune  has  placed  them,  and  be  looked  up  to 
as  the  ftandards  of  elegance  and  fafliion,  becaufe 
they  life  fo  much  with  the  nobility,  and  the  fa- 
crifices  they  are  ever  ready  to  make  of  their  own 
dignity,  in  order  to  obtain  this;  fuch  condud}, 
I  fay,  has  fomething  in  it  fo  weak  and  fo  mean, 
that  no  accomplifhments,  beauty  or  fortune 
could  tempt  me  to  connedl  myfelf  with  a  wo- 
man who  had  been  educated  in  fuch  a  courfe  of 
unworthy  prejudice.-— Surely,  my  friend,  if  you 
have  ever  remarked  this  mal  de  families  you, 
who  have  not  much  reafon  to  venerate  the  in- 
fluence of  ariftocracy  in  fociety,  would  not  have 
fuppofed  that  either  of  thefe  ladies,  even  if  they 
would  deign  to  accept  my  fortune  in  apology  for 
my  being  only  Mr.  D^fmond,  (with  hardly  a 
remote  alliance  to  nobility)  could  have  given 
me  in  marriage  that  felicity,  which  I  am  fure 

you  wilh  I  may  find. You   have  probably, 

therefore,  fufFered  this  trait  of  charactt-r,  thouf^h 
it  ftrongly  pervades  the  whole  family  to  efcape 
you. 

Yefterday  morning  Mifs  Fairfax  was  fo  ob- 
liging as  to  invite  me  to  be  of  a  party  (he  had 
made  to  ride  out :  or  rather  allowed  me  to  at- 
tend her,  together  with  Waverly  and  another 
gentleman,  who  neither  of  them  came — I  how- 
ever waited  on  her  by  her  own  appointment  at 
the  hour  of  breakfaft,  and  found  her  fitting  at 
C  5  the 


34  DESMOND. 

the  tea-table  with  her  mother,  her  fifter,  and 
the    Lord  Newminllerj  who,  notwithftanding 
his  complaints  of  the  dulnefs  of  the  place,  had 
returned  hither  after  having  fettled  his  wager. — 
He  was  ftretched  upon  a  fopha — with  boots  on 
— a  terrier  lay  on  one  fide  of  him,  and  he  occa- 
fionally  embraced  a  large  hound,  which  licked 
his  face  and  hands,  while  he  thus  addreffed  it. 
— "  Oh  !    thou    dear    bitchy — thou    beautiful 
bitchy — damme,  if  I  don't  love  thee  better  than 
my  mother  or  my  fifters." — Then,  by  a  happy 
tranfition,  addrefTing    himfelf  to    the   youngelt 
Miis  Fairfax,  he  added,  *'  Statia,  my  dear,  tell 
me  if  this  is  not  a  divinity  of  a  dog — do  you 
know  that  I  would  not  part  with  her  for  a  thou- 
fand    guineas."     "  Here   Tom,"  fpeaking   to 
the  fcrvant  who  waited,  '*  give  me  that  choco- 
late and  that  bread  and  butter" — the  man  obey- 
ed, and  the  noble  gentleman  poured  the  choco- 
late over  the  plate,  and  gave  it  altogether  to  the 
divinity   of  a  dog — "  was  it  hungry  ?"  cried 
he — *'  was  it  hungry,  a  lovely  dear  ?  —  I  vi'ould 
rather  all  the  old  women  in  the  country  fhould 
faft  for  a  month,  than  thou  (houldeft  not  have 
thy  belly- full." — The  ladies,  far  from  appear- 
ing to  think  this  fpeech  unfeeling  or  ridiculou?, 
were  lavifh  in  their  praifes  of  the   animal  ;  and 
Mifs    Fairfax,  who  feems  more  dtfirous   than 
her  filler  to  attract  the  attention  of  its  v.-orthy 
-  owner,  faid,  "  my  Lord,  do  you  think  fne  has 
had  enough  .'' — (hall  I  give  her  fome  more  cho- 
colate ? or  fend  for  a  plate  of  cold  meat  ?" 

She  then  carelltd  the  favourite,  and  fed  it  from 
her  fair  hands  ;  while  I,  who  had  been  afilent 
and  unnoticed  fpedator  ftnce  my  hrft  entrance, 
contemplated  with  more  pity  than  wonder,  this 
fapient  member  of  our  legiflature  :  who  having, 

at 


DESMOND.  35 

at  length,  fatlsfied  the  importunity  of  one  of  the 
objedts  of  his  folitude,  turned  to  the  o:her,  and 
hugging  it  with  more  afFedtion  than  he  would 
probubly  have  (hewed  to  the  heir  of  his  titles, 
he  cried,  *'  my  poor  dear  Venom  when  will  you 
pup  ?  —  i^^ggy  !  —  will  you  have  one  of  her  pup- 
pies ? — they  are  the  very  bell  breed  in  England. 
— Damme  now,  do  you  know,  my  curfed  fellow 
of  a  groom  loft  me  the  brother  to  this  here  bitch 
a  weeic  or  two  ago — and  be  curfed  to  his  ftupid 
Ibul — and  now  I  have  got  none  but  Venom  left 
of  that  there  breed."     At   this  period   his  la- 
mentation was  fuddenly  fufpended  by  the  doors 
being  opened  ;  and  the  entrance  of  a  figure  who 
gave  me  the  idea  of  a  garden  roller  fet  on   its 
end,   and    fupported   by   two   legs  :   I    found  it, 
however,  on  a  fecond  view,  a  peribn  I  had  often 
feen  ;   and  immediately  recognized  to  be  Gene- 
ral Wallingford  ;  who,  as  foon  as  he  could  re- 
cover his  breath,  which   feemed  to  have  been 
lod  for  a  moment  by  exertion   and   agitation,, 
thus  began  : 

'*  So  Madam  ! — fo  ! — this  is  aflonilhing — 
this  laft  news  from  Fran.e. — 7  his  decree  fills 
up  the  meafure  of  that  madnefs  and  folly  which 
has  always  marked  thecondudlof  that  beggarly 
fet  who  call  themfeves  the  National  AfTembly! 
—  The  evil  is  however  now  fo  great,  that  it 
muft,  it  muft  abfolutrly  cure  itfclf  5  this  decree 
is  decifive — they  have  crulhed  themfelves." — 
Mrs.  Fairfax  now  enquired  what  it  was  ?. 
*«  Why — i  have  letters,.  Madam,"  replied  the 
General,  "  from  my  friend  Langdale,  who  was 
palTing  through  Paris  on  his  way  to  Italy,  (for 
as  to  making  any  ftay  there  now,  it  is  impoHible 
for  a  man  of  fafhion  fo  far  to  commit  himftlf  as 
to. ftay.  in  fuch  a  fcene  of  vulgar  triumph  and 

popular 


36  DESMOND. 

popular  anarchy)  Langdale,  faw  too  much  of  it 
in  three  days  ;  and  his  laft  letters  dates,  that  by 
a  decree  pafled  the  nineteenth  of  June,  thefe 
low  wretches,  this  coUedion  of  dirty  fellows, 
have  abolifhed  all  titles,  and  abolilhed  the  very 
name  of  nobility." — "  The  devil  they  have  ?" 
cried  Lord  Newminfter,  raifing  himfelf  upon 
his  elbow,  and  interrupting  a  tune  he  had  been 
humming,  amezzavce;  ''  th^  devil  they  have? 
— then  1  vvifh  the  King  and  the  Lords  may 
fmafli  them  all — and  be  curfed  to  them — I  wifh 
they  may  all  be  fent  to  hell — now  damme — do 
you  know  if  I  was  King  of  France  for  three 
days,  1  would  drive  them  all  to  the  devil  in  a 
jiffy." 

The  more  fagacious  General  caft  a  rueful 
look  at  the  wife  and  gallant  projector  of  an  im- 
pofiible  exploit  :  and  then,  without  attempting 
to  demonftrate  its  impradlicability,  he  began 
very  gravely  to  defcant  on  the  (hocking  confe- 
quences  of  this  decree.  Sentiments  in  which 
Mrs.  Fairfax  very  heartily  joined. — ^'  !t  will 
be  impolfible,  I  fear,"  faid  the  General,  "  at 
leali,  for  fome  time,  for  any  man  of  fafhion  tore- 
fide  plcafantly  at  Paris,  which  I  am  extremely 
forry  for,  for  it  is  a  place  I  always  ufed  to  love 
very  much  ;  and  I  had  great  inclination  to  pafs 
the  autumn  there. — -For  my  part,  I've  never  ob-- 
ferved,  but  that  the  people  had  liberty  enough— 
'  Quite  as  m.uch,  1  am  convinced,  as  thofe  wrong- 
headed,  ignorant  wretches,  that  form  thecanaillc 
ought  to  have,  in  any  country;  'tis  a  very  ter- 
rible thing  when  that  corrupt  mafs  gets  the 
upper  hand,  in  any  country;  but,  in  the  pre- 
fent  inftance,  the  mifery  is,  that  certain  perfon* 
among  even  /es  gens  comme  il  faut^  fhould  be 
abiurd  and  fenfelefs  enough  to  encourage   tfae 

brutes. 


DESMOND.  3:7 

brutes,  by  afFei^ing  a  ridiculous  patriotifm,  and 
calling  themfelves  the  friends  of  the  people." 

**  Rot  the  people," — cried  the  noble  Peer: 
*'  I  wifli  they  were  all  hanged  out  of  the  way, 
both  in  France  and  here  too. — What  bufinefs 
have  a  fet  of  blackguards  to  have  an  opinion 
about  liberty,  and  be  curfed  to  them  ?  Now 
General  I'll  tell  you  what,  if  1  was  a  French 
nobleman  now,  and  had  to  do  with  them,  damme 
if  I  did  not  fhew  the  impudent  rafcals  the  dif- 
ference.  By  Jove,   Sir,   I'd  fet  fire  to  their 

aflembly,  and  mind  no  more  (hooting  them  all, 
than  if  they  were  fo  many  mad  dogs." 

Though  it  was  ufcd  on  behalf  of  his  own 
fyftem  of  politics,  the  extreme  ignorance  and 
abfurdity  which  this  language  betrayed,  made 
the  General  decline  anfvvering  or  approving  it; 
but  he  was  infinitely  attentive  to  the  mere  pa- 
thetic lamentations  of  Mrs.  Fairfax,  which  were 
thus  exprciled.  — "  Well !  I  re.lly  think,  my 
dear  General,  that  in  my  whole  life,  1  never 
■was  (o  (hocked  at  any  thing,  as  at  what  you 
tell  me  :  Heavens  '  how  my  fympaihifing  heart 
bleeds,  when  I  reflecfl  on  the  numbers  of  amiable 
people  of  rank,  compelled  thus  to  the  cruel  ne- 
ce/Tity  of  refigning  thofe  ancient  and  honorable" 
names  which  diltinguifhed  them  from  the  vulgar 
herd  !  and  who  are  no  longer  marked  by  their 
titles  from  that  canaille  with  which  it  is  fo  odious 
to  be  levelled. — 7  hy  might,  in  my  mind,  as 
well  have  robbed  them  of  their  property,  and 
have  turned  them  out  to  perilh  in  the  ftreets,  if 
indeed  that  is  not  done  already." 

"  No  j"  replied  the  General  "  that  has  not 
.lappcned  yet,  but  doubtlefs  it  will  ,  and,  in- 
deed, they  might  as  well  have  done  it  at  once, 
for  they   have  mads  Paris  fo  infupportuble  to 

people 


38  DESMOND'. 

people  of  fafhion,  that  itmuft,  of  courfe,  be- 
come a  mere  defert. — Nobody  of  any  elegance 
of  manners  can  exift,  where  tradefmen,  attor- 
nies,  and  mechanics  have  the  pas. — The  fplen- 
dour  of  that  beautiful  capital  is  gone  :  the  glory 
of  the  noblejje  is  vanillied  for  ever. 

*'  Come,  come,  my  dear  General,"  anfwered 
the  lady,  *'  let  us  hope  not ;  a  counter-revolu- 
tion may  fet  all  to  rights  again,  and  we  may 
live  to  fee  thefe  vulgar  people  punifhed  for  their 
ridiculous  ambition,  as  they  deferve.  My  heart, 
however  bleeds  to  a  degree  for  the  noblejje.,  par- 
ticularly for  two  moft  intimate  friends  of  mine, 
women  of  the  higheft  rank,  who  are,  without 
doubt,  included  in  this  univerfal  btjule'verfement. 
— It  was  only  this  laft  winter,  when  one  of  them, 
la  Duchefie  de  Miremont,  who  was  then  in 
England,  you  know,  faid  to  me — Ah!  ma  ires 
chere  i^  ires  aimable  madame  Fairfax.,  je  vous  en 
reponds  que — 

The  Lady,  had  in  an  inftant,  forgotten  the 
calamities  of  her  foreign  friends  in  her  eager- 
jiefs  to  difplay  her  own  confequence;  but  I 
found  it  impoliible  to  attend,  with  patience,  to 
the  reft  of  the  dialogue  between  her  and  the 
General,  and  was  meditating  how,  with  the 
leaft  appearance  of  rudenefs,  1  could  make  my 
efcape,  when  Mifs  Fairfax's  horfes  were  brought 
to  the  door,  and  my  fervant  immediately  after- 
wards arrived  with  mine- — She  rofe  to  go  ;  and 
turning  towards  Lord  Newminller  faid,  v./ith 
extreme  foftnels— "  Does  not  your  Lordfhip 
ride  this  morning  ?"  >'  No,  my  dear  Pegg," 
anfwered  he,  yawning  in  her  face  as  he  fpoke  ; 
*'  I  cannot  undertake  the  fatigue,  for  I  was  up 
at  eight  o'clock  to  lee  a  iet  too  between  the 
Ruffian   and  Big   Ben.,  who  are  to  fight  next 

week 


DESMOND.  39 

week  for  a  thoufand. — I  fparred  a  little  myfelf, 
and  now  I'm  damned  tired,  and  fit  for  nothing 
but  a  lounge;  perhaps  I  may  meet  you  in  my 
phaeton  an  hour  hence  or  fo,  that's  juft  as  the 
whim  takes  me." — The  Lady  then,  in  the  fame 
gentle  tone  cried — "  Oh  creature  !  equally  idle 
and  ferocious  !" — while  he  folded  his  arms,  and 
re-fettling  himfvlf,  with  his  two  dogs  upon  the 
fopha,  declared,  that  he  felt  himfelf  difpofed  to 
take  a  nap. 

The  old  General,  more  gallant  and  more 
ad^ive,  notwithftanding  his  gout  and  his  fize, 
jiow  led  Mifs  Fairfax  to  her  horfe  ;  and,  as  he 
affifted  her  to  mount  it,  he  feemed  to  whifper 
lome  very  tender  fentence  in  her  ear  ;  if  I  could 
guefs  by  the  peculiar  cxprefiion  of  his  features, 
while  1  had  nothing  to  do  but  to  wait  while  all 
this  paffed,  and  when  the  ceremony  was  finiflied, 

to  ride  filentiy   awiiy  by  her  fide. We  had 

hardly,  however,  quitted  the  town,  when  the 
young  Lady  thus  began  : — **  This  is  really  very 
frightful  news,  Mr.  Defmond,  that  General 
Wallingford  has  brought  us  to-day. — Do  you 
not  tliink  it  extremely  lliocking  ?"  '*  No,  Ma- 
dam, not  at  all  j  1  own  myfelf  by  no  means 
maflerof  the  fubjed)^,  but  from  all  I  do  kncw\  I 
feel  myfelf  much  more  difpofed  to  rejoice  at, 
than  to  lament  it." 

"  ImpofTible,  Mr.  Defmond  ! — Surely  I  mif- 
underftand  you  !  —  What  !  are  you  difpoled  to 
rejoice  that  nobility  and  fafliion  are  quite  de- 
ftroyed  ?" 

*'  I  am  glad  that  oppreffion  is  deftroyed  j 
that  the  power  of  injuring  the  many  is  taken 
from  the  few. — Dear  Madam,  are  you  aware  of 
the  evils  which,  in  confequence  of  the  feudal 
fyftem,  exifttd  in  France?  A  fyftcm  formed  in 

the 


4©  DESMOND. 

the  blindefl:  periods  of  ignorance  and  prejudice; 
which  gave  to  the  noblejfe^  not  only  an  exemp- 
tion from  thofe  taxes  which  crufhed  the  people 
by  their  weight,  but  gave  to  the  pofl'eflbrs  of 
le$  terres  titrh,  every  power  to  impoverifh  and 
deprefs  the  pealant  and  the  farmer;  on  whom, 
after  all,  the  pro  perity  of  a  nation  depends.— 
That  thefe  powers  are  annihilated,  no  generous 
mind  can  furely  lament." 

"  1  hope,"  replied  Mifs  Fairfax,  with  more 
afperity  than  I  thought  my  humility  deferved — 
*'  I  hope,  Sir,  I  am  not  ungenerous,  nor  quite 
ignorant,  neither,  of  the  hiftory  of  France  — 
But  I  really  muft  own,  that  I  cannot  fee  the 
matter  in  the  light  vou  do. — Indeed,  lean  fee 
nothing  but  the  moft  horrid  cruelty  and  injuf- 
tice."— 

*'  In  calling  a  man  by  one  name,  rather  than 
by  another  !-^My  dear  Mifs  Fairfax,  the  cruelty 

and   injuftice  muft  furely  be  imaginary." • 

*'  Not  at  all,  in  my  opinion ^  Sir,"  retorted  my 
fair  antagonift. — "  A  title  is  as  much  a  perfon's 
property  as  his  eftate  ;  and,  in  my  mind,  one 
might  as  well  be  taken  away  as  another — And 
to  lofe  one's  very  birth-right,  by  a  mob  too,  of 
vulgar  creatures. — Good  Heaven  !  I  declare  the 
very  idea  is  exceflively  terrific  ;  only  fuppofe  the 
Englifo  mob  weie  toget  fucha  notion,  and  in  fome 
.odiousriot,  begin  the  fame  fort  of  thing  here  !" 

"  Perhaps,"  replied  I  (ftill,  I  afl'ure  you, 
fpeaking  with  the  utmoft  humility)  "  perhaps 
there  never  may  exifl  here  the  fame  caufe  ;  and, 
therefore,  the  e^e<^  will  not  follow.— Our  no- 
bility are  lefs  numerous  ;  and,  till  within  a  kw 
years,  that  titles  have  became  fo  very  common, 
they  were  all  of  that  defcription  which  could  be 
ranked  only  with  the  haut  noblejje  of  France  ; 

they 


DESMOND.  41 

they  are  armed  with  no  powers  toopprefs,  indi- 
vidually, the  infcnor  onitT  of  men  ;  they  have 
no  vaflals  but  ihofe  whofe  fervice  is  voluntary;  and, 
upon  the  whole,  are  fo  different  a  b(jdy  of  men 
from  that  which  was  once  the  nobility  of  France, 
£S  to  admit  no  very  juft  comparifon,  and  no 
great  probability  of  the  fame  fteps  ever  being 
taken,  to  annihilate  their  titles;  though  they 
pofiefs,  in  their  right  of  hereditary  legiflacion, 
a  ftrong,  and  to  many,  an  obnoxious  feature 
which  the  higher  ranks  in  France  never  pof- 
fefled. — However,  we  will,  if  you  pleafe,  and 
merely  for  the  fake  of  converfation,fuppofe  that 
the  people^  or,  if  you  pleafe,  the  vulgar^  took 
it  into  their  heads  to  level  all  thofe  diftindlions 
that  depend  upon  names — I  own  I  fee  nothing 
in  it  fo  very  dreadful,   it  might  be  endured." 

"  Yes,  by  favages  and  brutes,  perhaps," 
replied  the  Lady,  with  anger  flafliing  from  her 
eyes,  and  lending  new  eloquence  to  her  tongue, 
**  but  I  muft  fay,  that  I  never  expedled  to  hear 
from  a  man  of  fafliion,  a  defence  of  an  a6l  fo 
(hamefully  tyrannous  and  unjuft,  exercifed  over 
their  betters  by  the  fcum  of  the  people  ;  an  zSt 
that  muft  deftroy  all  the  elegance  of  manners, 
all  the  high  polifh  that  ufed  to  rendet  people, 
in  a  certain  ftyle,  fo  delighful  in  France.  By 
degrees,  i  fuppofe,  thofe  who  can  endure  to  flay 
in  a  country  under  fuch  a  dercftable  fort  of  go- 
vernment, will  become  as  rude  and  difgufling 
as  our  common  country  'Squires." 

I  faw  by  the  look  with  which  this  fpeech  was 
delivered,  that  /was  decidedly  a  corainon  coun- 
try 'Squire. — '*  Unhappily,"  replied  1,  '•*■  my 
dear  Mifs  Fairfax,  the  race  of  men  whom  you 
call  common  country  'Squires,  are  alinoft,  if 
not  entirely  annihilated  in  i-ngland  j  though  na 
3  decree 


42  DESMOND". 

decree  has  pafTed  againft  them — A  total  change 
of  manners  has  effected  this."  I  was  going  on, 
but  with  great  vivacity  fhe  interrupted  me. — 

*'  So  much  the  better,  Sir,  they  will  never 
be  regretted." — 

"  Perhaps  not,  Madam,  and  as  we  are  merely 
arguing  for  the  fake  of  converfation,  let  me  juft 
fuppofe  that  the  fame  thing  might  happen,  if  all 
thofe  who  are  now  raifcd  above  us  by  their 
names,  were  to  have  no  other  diftin£iion  than 
their  merits. — Let  me  afk  you,  would  the  really 
great,  the  truly  noble  among  them  (and  that 
there  are  many  fuch  nobody  is  more  ready  to  al- 
low) be  lefs  beloved  and  revered  i/  they  were 
known  only  by  their  family  names?  On  the 
other  hand,  would  the  celebrity  of  the  men  of 
ton  be  much  reduced  ?  For  example,  the  noble- 
man I  had  the  honour  of  meeting  at  your  houfe 
to-day. — He  is  now,  I  think,  called  Lord  HeW' 
minfter.  Would  he  be  lefs  agreeable  in  his 
manners,  lefs  refined  in  his  convtrfation,  lefs 
learned,  lefs  worthy,  lefs  refpf£table,  were  he  un- 
happillycompelled  to  be  called,  as  his  father  was 
before  he  bought  his  title,  Mr.   Grantham?" 

I  know  not  whether  it  was  the  matter  or  the 
manner  that  ofFended  my  beautiful  anftocrate, 
but  fhe  took  this  fpeech  molt  cruelly  amifs,  and 
mofl  inhumanely  determining  to  avenge  herfelf 
upon  me  ;  (he  replied  with  fymptoms  of  great 
indignation  in  her  countenance,  "  That  fhe 
was  iT\x\y  forry  to  fee  the  race  of  mere  country 
'Squires  did  flill  exif)-,  and  that,  among  thofe 
where,  from  fortune  and  pretenfions,  fhe  fhould 

leaft  have  imagined  they  would  be  found. 

(This  was  me. )  That  as  to  Lord  Newminfler, 
by  whatever  name  he  might  at  any  time  be 
called,  fhe  fhould,  for  her  part,  always  fay  and 

think, 


DESMOND.  43 

think,  that  there  were  few  who  fo  completely 
filled  the  part  of  a  man  of  real  fafliion  among 
the  nobility  ;  and  not  one,  in  any  rank  of  life, 
who,  in  her  mind,  pofTefled  a  twentieth  part  of 
his  good  qualities. 

The  manner  in  which  this  was  uttered,  was 
undoubtedly  meant  to  crufh  at  once,  and  for 
ever,  all  the  afpiring  thoughts,  that  I,  prefum- 
ing  on  the  ftrength  of  my  fortune,  might  per- 
adventure  have  dared  to  entertain. — Over- 
whelmed by  the  pretty  indignation,  as  much  as 
by  the  unanfwerable  arguments  of  my  angry 
goddefs,  I  began  to  confider  how  I  might  turn 
or  drop  difcourfe  where  I  was  fo  likely  to  fufFer 
for  my  temerity,  when  I  was  relieved  by  the  ap- 
pearance of  a  carriage,  at  a  diftance,  which,  {he 
faid,  {he  knew  to  be  Lord  Newminfter's  phae- 
ton ;  and,  without  any  further  ceremony  than 
{lightly  wi{hing  me  good-morrow,  (he  centered 
away  to  meet  it — leaving  me,  as  flowly  I  trotted 
another  way,  to  congratulate  my  country  en  the 
pure  notions  of  patriotic  virtue  with  which  even 
its  women  are  imprefi'edj  and,  on  fuch  able 
fupporters  of  its  freedom,  as  Lord  Newminfter 
in  the  upper,  and  General  Wallingford  in  the 
lower  Houfe. — Alas  !  my  oppofite  principles, 
however  modeftly  and  diffidently  urged,  have 
loft  me,  as  i  have  fince  found,  for  ever,  that 
favour,  which  without  being  a  man  of  fafhion, 
I  was  once  fo  happy  as  to  enjoy  from  your  fair 
relations  :  for  whenever,  in  the  courfe  of  the 
next  two  or  three  days,  I  happened  to  meet 
them,  I  was  {lightly  noticed,  that  1  apprehend 
our  acquaintance  will  end  here. — Condole  with 
me,  dear  Bethel  j  and,  to  make  fome  amends, 
let  me  foon  hear  from  you. 

I  have 


44  DESMOND. 

I  have  had,  very  unexpe£^edly,  a  letter  firem 
Mr.  Dangby,  my  mother's  fole  furviving  bro- 
ther ;  who,  abforbed  in  his  own  fmgular  no- 
tions and  amufements,  has  hardly  feemed  to  re- 
colle(5t  me  for  many  years. — He  has  heard,  I 
know  not  how  (for  I  have  long  had  i>o  other 
communication  with  him,  thsi.  writing  him  an 
annual  letter,  with  an  annual  prefent  of  game 
and  venifon  fmce  J  became  of  age)  that  I  am 
going  to  France  ;  and  he  ftrongly  remonftrates 
upon  the  danger  I  fhall  incur  if  I  do,  both  to  my 
perfon  and  my  principles. — He  entreats  me  not 
to  try  fuch  a  hazardous  journey  ;  and  hints,  that 
his  fortune  is  too  large  to  be  defpifed — i  don't 
know  what  this  fuddcn  fit  of  folicitude  means, 
for  though  I  am  the  only  relation  he  has,  1  never 
had  any  reafon  to  think  I  fhould  benefit  by  his 
fortune ;  and  your  care,  my  dear  Bethel,  has 
prechided  the  neceffi*y  of  my  defiring  it.  I  fhall 
anfwer  him  with  great  civility,  however,  but 
certainly  make  no  alteration  in  my  plan* 

Adieu!  my  friend  — fail  not  to  write  if  you 
bear  any  thing  of  the  family  of  Verney. 

Your's  ever, 

LIONEL    DESMOND, 


LET- 


DESMOND.  45 

LETTER       VI. 
TO    MR.     BETHEL. 

'  Calais,  July  4,   1790. 

I  HAD  waited  for  Waverly  the  week  I  had 
promifed  to  wait — the  laft  day  of  that  week  was 
come  :  and  I  was  going  to  enquire  for  a  paflage 
to  Calais  or  Dunkirk,  when  I  met  Anthony, 
his  fervant,  in  the  ftreet.  The  poor  fellow  was 
covered  with  duft,  and  feemed  half  dead  with 
fatigue;  '*WeH  Anthony  where  is  your  mafteri"' 
**  Qh  !  lord  fir,"  anfwered  he,  "  my  mafter 
has  changed  his  mind  about  going  to  France, 
and  fent  me  poft  from  Stamford  in  Lincoln* 
fhire,  Sir,  where  he  is  gone  with  fome  other 
gentlemen  to  an  houfe,  one  Sir  James  Dey- 
bourne  has  juft  by  there; — Sir,  I  have  hardly 
been  off  the  faddle  for  above  iix-and- thirty 
hours  ;  and  we  had  no  fooner  got  dov/n  there, 
than  mafler  fent  me  off  poft  to  )our  honor  ;  to 
let  you  know.  Sir,  that  he  could  not,  no  how 
in  the  world,  go  to  Paris  with  you  at  this 
time." — 

*'  But  did  he  not  write  ;"  "  why,  no  Sir,  he 
was  going  to  write  I  believe,  but  fomehow  his 
friends  they  perfuaded  him  there  was  no  need  of 
it;  fo,  Sir,  he  called  me,  and  bid  me,  that  I 
fhould  deliver  the  meflage  to  you,  about  his  not 
coming,  the  fooneft  1  pofllbly  could  :  and  fo, 
Sir,  I  fet  off  diredly,  and  he  told  me  to  fay  that 
he  (hould  write  in  a  very  little  time  ;  and  he 
hoped  he  faid,  that  I  would  make  hafte,  to  pre- 
vent your  honor's  waiting  for  him." 

1  had  at  this  moment  occafion  to  recolleif^, 
how  neatly  Waverly  was  related  to  Geraldine  ; 
to  prevent  my  feeling  fome  degree  of  anger  and 

refent- 


46  DESMOND. 

T«fentment  towards  him. — I  fent,  however,  his 
poor  haraffed  fervant  to  my  lodgings,  where  I 
ordered  him  to  refrefh  himfelf  by  eating  and 
fleeping  ;  and  then  went  to  fee  about  my  paf- 
fage  to  France. 

I  afterwards  fauntered  into  one  of  the  libra- 
ries, and  took  up  a  book  ;  but  my  attention 
was  foon  diverted,  by  a  very  plump,  fleck,  fhort, 
and,  altogether,  a  moft  orthodox  figure  ;  whofe 
enormous  white  wig,  deeply  contrafted  by  his 
peony-coloured  face,  and  confequential  air,  de- 
clared him  to  be  a  dignitary,  very  high,  atleaft 
in  his  own  efteem. — On  his  entrance  he  was 
very  refpedlfully  faluted  by  a  little  thin  man  ia 
black  ;  whofe  fnug  well-powdered  curls,  hum- 
ble demeanor,  and  cringing  addrefs,  made  me 
fuppofe  him  either  a  dependent  on  the  plump 
doiSlor,  or  one  who  thought  he  might  benefit  by 
his  influence — for  he  not  only  refigned  the  newf- 
paper  he  was  reading,  but  buftled  about  to  pro- 
cure others  ;  —  while  his  fuperior,  noticing  him 
but  little,  fettled  himfelf  in  his  feat,  with  a  ma- 
gifterial  air — put  on  his  fpedacles,  and  took 
out  his  fnuff-box  ;  and  having  made  thefe  ar- 
rangements, he  began  to  look  over  the  paper  of 
the  day;  but  feeing  it  full  of  intelligence  from 
Prance,  he  laid  it  down,  and, 

"  As  who  fliould  fay  I  am  Sir  Oracle," 

he  began  an  harangue,  fpeaking  flowly  and 
through  his  nofe. 

"  *Tis  an  uneafy  thing,"  faid  he,  "  a  very 
uneafy  thing,  for  a  man  of  probity  and  princi- 
ples to  look  in  thefe  days  into  a  newfpaper. — 
Greatly  muft  every  fuch  man  be  troubled  to 
read  of  the  proceedings  that  are  going  forward 

ia 


DESMOND.  47 

in  France. — Proceeding?,  which  muft  awaken 
the  wrath  of  heaven  ;  and  bring  down  upon 
that  perfidious  and  irreverent  people  its  utmoft 
indignation." 

I'he  little  man  took  the  opportunity  the  fo- 
lemn  clofe  of  this  pompous  oration  gave  him,  to 
cry — '*  very  true,  Dodtor,  your  obfervation  is 
perfedly  juft  ;  things  to  be  fure  have  juft  now 
a  very  threatening  appearance."  '*  bir,"  re- 
fumed  the  grave  perfonage,  "  it  is  no  appear- 
ance^ but  a  very  (hocking  redlity.  They  have 
done  the  moft  unjuft  and  wicked  of  all  adlions 
in  depriving  the  church  of  its  revenues.— 
'Twere  as  reafonable.  Sir,  for  them  to  take  my 
birth-right  or  your's." 

"  I  thought,  Dodor,"  faid  a  plain  looking 
man,  who  had  attended  very  earneftly  to  the 
beginning  of  this  dialogue — *'  I  thought,  that 
the  revenues  and  lands  of  the  church,  being  the 
property  of  the  ftatc,  they  might  be  diredled  by 
it  into  any  channel  more  conducive,  in  the  opi- 
nion of  that  ftate,  to  its  general  good  ;  and 
that  it  appearing  to  the  National  AiFembly  of 
France,  that  this  their  property  was  unequally 
divided;  and  that  their  bifhops  lived  like 
princes,  while  their  curates  *  had  hardly  the 
means  of  living  like  men, — I  imagined " 

"  You  imagined,  Sir  ? — And  give  me  leave 
to  alk  what  right  you  have  to  imagine  ? — or 
what  you  know  of  the  fubjcdt  ! — The  church 
lands  and  revenues  the  property  of  the  itate  ! — 
No,  Sir — I  affirm  that  they  are  not — That  they 
are  the  property  of  the  pofleflbrs,  as  much.  Sir, 
as  your  land  and  houfes,  if  you  happen  to  have 
any,   are  your's." 

**  Not  quite  (o^  furely,  my  good  Dodor," 
replied    the  gentleman    mildly — "  My    houfes 

*  Curees-retSors. 

and 


48  DESMOND. 

and  lands — ifj  as  you  obferve,  I  happej>  to 
have  any,  were-  piababiy  either  acquired  by 
my  own  iiidiiftry,  or  were  my  birth-right. — 
Now  Sir" — He  would  have  proceeded,  but 
the  Divine^  in  an  angry  and  fupercilious 
•manner  interrupted  him — *'  Sir,  I  wont  ar- 
gue, I  wont  commit  myfelf,  nor  endeavour  to 
convince  a  perfon  whofe  principles  are,  1  fee, 
fundamentally  wrong. — But  no  man  of  fenfc 
will  deny,  that  when  the  prefent  body  of  French 
clergy  took  upon  them  their  holy  funiiions — 
that  then  they  became,  as  it  were,  born  again 
' — and— and — and  by  their  vows — " 

*'  But,  my  worthy  Sir,  ihofe  vows  were 
vows  of  poverty. — They  were  vows,  by  which, 
far  from  acquiring  temporal  goods;  the  means 
of  worldly  indulgencies,  they  exprefsly  re- 
i\ounced  all  terreftrial  delights,  and  gave  them- 
felves  to  a  life  of  mortification  and  humility.— 
Now,  it  is  very  certain,  that  many  of  them  not 
only  polTeiTed  immenfe  revenues,  wrung  from 
the  hard  hands  of  the  peafant  and  the  artificer, 
but  ailually  expended  thofe  revenues. — Not  in 
relieving;  the  indigent,  or  encouraginj  the  in- 
duftrious  j  but  in  gratifications  more  worthy 
the  diflblute  followers  of  the  meretricious  fcarlet- 
clad  lady  of  Babylon,  than  the  mortified  difci- 
ples  of  a  fimple  and  pure  religion."  Then,  as 
if  difdaining  to  carry  farther  an  argument  in 
which  he  had  fo  evidently  the  advantage  againft 
the  proud  petulance  of  his  adverfary,  the  gentle- 
man walked  calmly  away,  while  the  Doi^tor, 
fwelling  with  rage,  cried,  "  I  don't  know  who 
that  perfon  is,  but  he  is  very  ignorant,  and  very 
ill-bred." — "  'Tis  but  little  worth  your  while, 
Dodlor,"  cried  the  acquiefcent  young  man,  **  to 
eater  into  controverfial  difcourfe  with  perfons 

fo 


DESMOND.  49 

fo  unworthy  of   the  knowledge  and   literature 
which  you  ever  throw  into  your  convcifation." 

*'  It  is  not,  Sir,"  anfwercd  the  Doctor  ;  '*  it 
were  indeed  a  woeful  warte  of  the  talent  with 
which  it  has  pleafed  heaven  to  entrufl:  me,  to 
contend  with  the  utheiftica!  pietendcrs  to  phiio- 
fophy,  that  obtrude  themftrlves  but  too  much 
into  fociety.  —  However,  Sir,  a  little  time  will 
fhew  that  1  am  right,  in  aflerting,  thit  a  nation 
that  pays  no  more  regard  to  the  facied  order, 
can  never  profper  : — but,  tliat  fuch  hnnible  fa* 
crilciious  robberv,  as  that  wretched  anarchy, 
for  I  cannot  call  it  government,  has  bien  guilty 
of,  will  draw  down  calamities  upon  the  mifera- 
ble  people  ;  and  that  the  evil  fpirit,  which  is  let 
Joofe  among  them,  will  prompt  them  to  deluge 
their  country  with  blood,  by  deftroying  each 
other." 

"  So  much  the  better,  Dodor,"  cried  a  fat, 
bloated  figure,  in  a  brown  ridin'y  wi»,  a  red 
waii^coit,  and  boots — "  fo  much  the  better— I 
heartily,  for  my  parr,  wifh  they  may."  This 
philanthropic  perfonage,  who  had  till  now  been 
talking  with  an  old  lady  about  the  price  of  foals 
and  mackarel  that  morning  at  market,  now 
quitted  his  feat,  and  fquatting  himfelf  down 
near  the  two  reverend  genileu.en,  proceeded 
bnfkly  in  his  difcourfe,  as  if  perfcvSlly  confcious 
of  its  weight  and  energy. — "  Yts  Doctor,  I 
vote  for  their  cutting  one  anothcrs  throats,  and  fo 
faving  us  the  trouble — The  fooncr  they  fee 
ab'jut  it,  the  better  I  /hall  be  pleaftd,  for,  as  for 
my  parr,  I  deteft  a  Frenchman,  and  always  did.^ 
— You  muft  know,  that  hft  funiiier,  I  went 
down  to  Brighton,  for  I  always  go  every  fum- 
mer  to  fome  of  thefv?  kind  of  waterin^^  plar^s.— 
So,  as  I  wasobferving,  I  went  down  to  Bri;ih- 

VoL.  I.  D  ton 


50  TJ    E    S    M    O    N   D. 

'ton  in  the  month  of  Auguft,  which  is  the  beft 
part  of  the    feafon,    becaufe  of  the   wheat-ears 
being  plenty  ;  but,  I  dont  know  how  it  happen- 
ed, I  had  an  ugly  feci  in  my  ftomach  :   what  was 
the  meaning  of  it  I  could  not  tell:  but,  I  quite 
loft  n:\y  relifh  for  iny  dinner,  and  fo  I  thought  it 
proper  to  confult  a  phyfician  or  two  on  the  cafe  ; 
and  they  advif-d  me  to  try  if  a  little  bit  of  a  fail 
would  not   fet   things  to  rights  ;    and  told  me, 
that  very  likely,   if  I   went  over   the   water,    I 
Ihould  fuid  my  app' tite. — So,  Sir,  I  determined 
to  go,   for  riding  did  me  no  goo'l  at  all  ;   and  fo 
of  courfel  was  a  liltie  uneafy.  —  So,  Sir,  I  even 
went  over  the  herring  pond.  — I  was  as  fick  as  a 
hctrfe,   to  be  fuie,  all  night  ;    but  however,   the 
next   morning,    when    we    landed    on    1  rench 
ground,   there  was   I   tolerably  chirruping,   and 
pretty  wtll  dilpofed  for  my  breakfaft.— Oh,  ho! 
tninks  I,  this  will  liufwcr,  I  believe. —  However, 
Ithougiit  I    would   lay   by  for  dinner,   for   the 
Monfieur  at  the  inn  told  us  he  could  let  u^  have 
game   and    fiCii. —  But  lord,   Sir,    mod  of  their 
provifions  are  nothing  to  be  compired  fo  ours; 
and  what  is  good  they  ruin  by  th>?!r  vile  manner 
of  dielfing  ii. — Why,   Sir,   we   h  id  for  dinner 
foiiie  fouls-   the  fiiieft  I  evtr  faw,   but  they  were 
fried    in  bad  lard  ;    and  then,   Sir,   for  the  par- 
tridges,    there    was   neither    game    gravy,    nor 
poivrrade,  nor  even  bread  faucc. —  Faith,   I  had 
enoiJtih  of  them  and   their  cookery^  in  one  day  j 
fd.  Sir,  the  next  morning  I  embarked  again  for 
Old  England.     However,  upon   the  whole,   the 
tiling  itfelf  anfvered  well  enough,  for  m)   ap- 
petite was  almoll  at  a  par,    as  1  may  fay,  when 
I  came  home.     But   for  }Our  French,   1  never 
defire  to  fet  eytis  on  any  of  them  again  —  and 
indeed,  fof  mv  part,  I  am  free  to  fay,  that  if  the 

whole 


e 


DESMOND.  51 

whole  race  was  extirpated,  and  we  were  in  pof- 
fcflion  of  their  country,  as  in  jiiftice  it  is  certain 
we  ought  to  be,  why,  it  would  be  fo  much  the 
better — VVefhould  maice  a  better  hand  of  it  in 
fuch  a  country  as  that  a  great  deal.  — I  under- 
hand, that  one  of  the  things  thcfe  fellows  have 
done  fince  they  have  got  the  notion  of  liberty 
into  their  head«,  has  been,  to  let  loole  all  the 
taylors  and  tinkers  and  frifleurs  in  their  coun- 
try, to  dcftroy  as  much  game  as  they  pleafe. 
Now,  Sir,  what  a  pity  it  is,  th^t  a  country 
where  there  is  fo  much,  is  not  ours,  and  our 
game-laws  in  force  there.  —  And  then  their 
wne  ;  I  can't  fay  I  ever  faw  a  vineyard,  be- 
caufe,  as  I  obferved,  I  did  not  go  far  enough  up 
the  country  :  but,  no  doubt,  we  fhould  manage 
that  matter  much  better;  and,  upon  the  whole, 
confidering  we  always  were  their  ma(hr«,  my 
opinion  is,  that  it  would  be  right  and  proper  for 
our  minirtry  to  take  this  opportunity  of  falling 
upon  them,  while  they  are  weakening  each 
other  ;  and,  if  they  will  have  liberty,  give  theni 
a  little  tafte  of  the  liberty  of  us  Englillimen  ; 
for,  of  themfelve?,  they  can  have  no  right  no- 
tion of  what  it  is — and,  take  my  word  for  it,  its 
the  meereft  folly  in  the  world  for  them  to  think 
about  it. — No,  no  ;  none  but  tnglirnmen,  free- 
born  Britons,  either  underftand  it  or  defcrve 
it." 

Such  was  the  volubility  and  vehemence  with 
which  this  fpeech  was  made,  that  the  Doctor 
could  not  find  any  opportunity  to  interrupt  it.— 
Whatever  were  his  opinion  of  the  politics  of  the 
orator,  he  feemed  heartily  to  coii  cide  with  him 
in  the  notions  he  entertained  on  the  important 
fcience  of  eating.  He  therefore  (though  with 
an  air  of  reflraint,  and  as  if  he  would  cautioufly 
D   2  guard 


54  DESMOND. 

guard  his  dignity  from  the  too  great  familiarity 
with  whcii  the  other  Teemed  to  approach  him) 
e-ntered  into  another  diO'crtatioii  on  the  French 
revolution,  anathematifing  all  its  pr(Je6t"rs  and 
upholders,  with  a  zeal  which  fcrnulphus  might 
envy  ;  and,  in  (carce  lefs  charitable  terms, 
branding  thtni  v/ith  the  imputation  of  every 
hit'eous  vice  he  could  co!le6t,  and  ending  a 
very  long  oration  with  a  pious  and  chriitian 
denu^nciati^  n  of  battle  And  murder,  pcftiknce 
and  famine  here,  and  ctermd  torments  here.tfter, 
for  all  who  imagined^  aided,  or  commended 
fuch  an  abomination. 

I'he  gentleman  who  had  vifited  France  for' 
the  reftoration  of  his  appetite  (and  who  had 
formerly,  as  I  learned  afterwards,  kept  a  ta- 
vern in  London,  and  was  now  retired  upon  a 
fortuf.e)  feemed  unable  oi*  unwilling  to  diftin* 
S,ui(h  declamation  rrom  argument,  or  prejudice 
from  reafon — He  appeared  to  be  dtlighttd  by 
the  furious  eloquence  of  the  churchtnat),  whcm 
he  Ihook  heartily  by  the  hand. — '*  Doctor,'* 
cried  he,  "  I  am  always  rejoictd  to  meet  with 
gentlemen  of  your  talents  and  capacity  ;  you 
are  an  honour  to  our  e(li.bliftimeni ;  what  )ou 
have  faid  is  quite  convincing  indeed  j  ftrong, 
unanfwerable  argument :  I  hear.iiy  wifli  fome 
of  my  acquaintance,  who  pretend  to  He  advo- 
cates for  French  liberty,  were  to  hear  \  ou — I 
believe  they'd  foon  be  pur  to  anon-plus — You'd 
be  quite  too  much  for  them,  I'm  furc.  Pray, 
!>■  cVor,  "ive  me  leave  to  aft,  what  liay  do  you 
tnean  to  make  In  this  place  ?  1  fh.dl  be  proud  to 
cultivate  the  honour  of  your  acquaintance  ;  if 
}'ou  are  here  next  we-k,  will  \ou  do  me  the  fa- 
vour to  dine  with  me  on  Wednefday — I've  a 
chicken- turtle,  which  promifes  Vi-ell — the  firft 

I've 


P    E    S    M    O    N    D.  53 

I've  rpceiv'L'u  this  feafon,  from  what  I  call  my 
XVcft-Indian  f.irm  }  a  little  patch  of  properly  X 
puichaied,  a  few  years  fince,  in  Jamaica. — A» 
to  the  dielling  of  turtles,  I  always  fte  to  that 
myftlf,  for  I  am  extremely  particular;  though, 
i  muft  fay,  my  negro  fellow  is  a  very  excelieiil 
hand  at  it — 1  have  lent  him  more  than  once  to 
perform  for  fome  great  people  at  t'other  end  of 
the  town. — if  you'll  do  m;;  the  pleafure,  Doc- 
tor, to  take  a  dinner  with  me  1  (hall  be  glad  ; 
and,  indeed,  befides  the  favour  ot  your  company, 
I  would  fain  have  the  four  or  five  fnends  that 
I've  invited  for  that  day,  to  hear  a  little  of  your 
opinion  upon  thefe  faid  French  matters." 

Though  the  Dodtor  had,  till  now,   hefitated 
and  leemed    to  doubt  whether  he  did  not  de- 
fcend  too  much   from  his  elevated  fuperioiity> 
in  encouraging  the  forwaidnefs  of  his  new  ac- 
quaintance ;    this    propofal,   flattering  at  once 
his  pride   and   his  appetite,   was   irrcfiflible. — 
He,  therefore,  relaxing  from  the  air  of  arrogant 
dignity   he  ufually  woic,  accepted    very  graci- 
ouily  of  the  invitation  t.)  afUil  in  devoui  ing  the 
chicken-tuitle,     and    then    thcf?    two    worthy 
champions  of  British  f.ii;h  and  BritiHi  liberty, 
entered   into  converfation   on   matters,   which, 
feem  as  it  fhould,  were  neither  laft  nor  leaft  in 
their  efteem.      This  was   an    enquiry   into  the 
good  thi.igs  for  the  table,  that  weie  to  be  found 
in    the    neighbourhood  ;    in   praife   of   many  of 
whch,   tiiey    were  extremely  eloquent. —  ihe 
J3oitor  complained  of   the  fcarcuy  of  venifon, 
but  added,  that  he  expc6ted  an  excellent  haunch 
in  a  few  days,  horn  a  nobleman,   his  friend  4nd 
patron  ;   ot   which,    Mr.  "Sldebottom    (for  fuch 
was   the  n-ime  ot   this   newly  acquired    friend) 
was  rtqueded  to  partake. — This  requell:  was, 

of 


54  DESMOND. 

ofcourfe,  readily  afiented  to,  and  they,  at  length 
left  the  Shop  together,  having  fettled  to  ride  to  a 
neighbouring  farm  houfe,  v/here  Mr.  Sidebot- 
tom  aHined  the  Doftor,  that  he  hd  difcovered 
fome  delicate  fat  ducks  and  pigeons,  of  peculiar 
fize  and  flavour.  — "  1  even  queftion,"  faid  he, 
•'  whether  there  will  not  be,  in  about  a  week's 
time,  fome  nice  turkey  pov/ts. — The  good  wo- 
man is  very  clever  about  her  poultry,  and  if  file 
has  had  tolerisbie  luck  fmce  I  faw  her,  they 
muft  now  he  nearly  fit  for  thf  difh." — In  this 
pleafing  hope,  the  two  genclcmen  departed  to- 
gether ;  I  fallowed  them  at  a  little  diftance,  and 
faw  them  accoflcd  by  a  thin,  pale  figure  of  a 
woman,  with  one  infant  in  her  arms  and  ano- 
ther following  her  ;  her  drefs  was  not  that  of  a 
beggar,  yi::t  it  befpoke  extreme  indigence  ;  I 
fanctfd  ihe  was  a  fo  eigner,  and  my  idea  was 
confiimed  when  I  heard  her  fpeak  ;  fhe  fiepped 
flowlj,  and,  asitfeemed,  iri'ioluttly,  towards 
the  two  profperous  men,  who  were  going  in 
fearch  of  fat  ducks  and  early  turkeys  j  and,  in 
impeifedt  Knglifh,  began  to  relate,  that  fhe 
was  a  widow,  and  in  great  diftrefs,  **  A  wi- 
"  dow,"  cried  Mr.  Sidebottom,  "  why  you 
are  a  Frenchwoman  5  what  have  you  to  do 
here  ?  and  why  do  you  not  go  back  to  your 
€>wn  country  ?  This  is  the  time  there  for  beg- 
-  gars — they  have  got  the  upper  hand.  Go,  go, 
miftrefs  ;  get  back  to  your  own  country." — 
The  poor  woman  anivvered,  that  fhe  had  tra- 
velled towards  Dover  with  her  two  children,  in 
hopes  of  getting  a  paffage  to  France  ;  but  that 
they  having  been  ill  on  the  road,  her  little  ftock 
of  money  was  exhaufted  ;  *'  and  therefore," 
faid  fhe,  "  I  was  advifed  to  come  hither,  Sir, 
in  hopes    of  procuring,    by    the  generofity  of 

the 


D    £    S    M    O    N    D.  55 

the  company  who  frequent  this  place,  where- 
withal to  pay  my  pafl'age  to  France;  for  unlefs 
1  can  produce  enough  for  that  purpofe,  no  com- 
mander of  a  veflel  will  take  me." 

"  And  let  me  tell  you,  they  very  properly 
refufe,"  faid  Mr.  Sidebottom,  "  you  had  no 
bufinefs  that  1  know  of  in  England,  but  to  take 
the  bread  out  of  the  mouth  of  our  own  people  ; 
and  now  I  fuppofe  you  are  going  to  join  the  fifK 
women,  and  i'uch  like,  who  are  pulling  down 
the  king's  palaces." — Ihe  unhappy  woman  caft 
a  look  of  anguifh  on  her  children,  and  was 
quietly  relinquifhing  this  hopelefs  application, 
when  the  Dodtor,  more  alive  to  the  tender  foli- 
citations  of  p'ty  than  Mr.  Sidebottom,  put  his 
hand  into  his  pocket,  and  then  in  a  nafal  voice 
and  in  a  magifterial  manner,  thus  fpoke : 
**  Woman!  though  I  have  no  doubt  but  that 
thou  art  a  creature  of  an  abandoned  condufl, 
and  that  thefe  children  are  bafe  born  j  yet,  be- 
ing a  flranger  and  a  foreigner,  I  have  fo  much 
univerfal  charity,  that,  unworthy  as  I  believe 
thee,  1  will  not  fhut  my  heart  againft  thy  peti- 
tion. If  thou  art  an  impoRor,  and  wickedly 
impofeft  upon  that  charity,  fo  much  the  worfe 
for  thee  J  1  do  my  duty  in  beftowing  it,  and  the 
wrong  refts  with  thee!  Here!  Here  is — lix- 
pence  !  which  I  give  thee  towards  thy  paillige! 
Go,  therefore,  depart  in  peace  ;  and  let  me  not 
have  occafion  to  reprove  thee  to  morrow  for 
lingering  about  the  ftreets  of  this  place  :  where, 
as  people  of  fortune  and  confideration  come  for 
their  health,  they  ought  not  to  be  diflurbed  and 
difgufted  by  the  fight  of  objedls  of  mifery.  I 
don't  love  to  fee  beggars  in  thefe  places  ;  their 
importunity  is  injurious  to  the  nerves. — Let  me 
hear  of  you  no  more — Our  laws  oblige  us  to  pro- 
vide for  no  poor  but  our  own."  The 


^,6  D    B    S    M    O    N    D. 

The   IDoft.^.r  leaving  thus   fulfilled  two  great 
ciuties  of  his  proftffior,  thofe  of  giving  advice, 
2ncl  pivirijT  alni<,  ftruttedaw:^y  with  the  worthy 
Mr    Sidebottom;   who   wifely   confidered    that 
the  liiiiipikc  through  which  he  muft  pafs  in  his 
lour  after  good  di(ht-s,  W(uld  demand  thf'  Imall 
money  he  haii  about  him,  he  therefore  (orebore 
lo  add  to  the  bounty  of  the  Dodtor  towards  the 
unfortunate   pttitioner,  who,  feeling  fome  de- 
gree of  alarm  from  the  remonliranceflit  imper- 
feilly  underlh)od,  reiiiained  for  a  momentgazing 
■on  the  fix- pence,  which  fhe  yet  held  in    her 
hand.     She  then   riafped  the   youngeft  of  her 
children  to  her  bread,  took  the  hand  of  the  other 
2S  he  clung  to  her  gov/n,  and  burft  into  t-ars. 
In  a  moment,  however,  {he  dried  her  eyes,  and, 
leaning  againtl  the  rails  of  the  parade,  file  caft 
a  defpairing  Ir.ok   towards  the  gay  gro'-ps  who 
were  pailing,   yet   feemed   exanuning   to  which 
of  thf-ni   Oie    might   apply    with   mofl   hope  of 
f'jccefs.      f\t  this  moment  I  approached  nearer 
to  ht  r  i  but  (he  did  not  fee  me  till  i  fpcke  to  her 
in  French,  and  inquired,  how  1  could  afTift  her. 
The  voice  of  kindnefs,  in   her  ov/n  language, 
was   fo   fooihing,  and   1   fear  fo  new,   that   Ihe 
was   for  lome   motDents  unable  to  anfwer  me  j 
the  fimpl.citv  of  the    narrative  w  tfi    which  fhe 
at  length  fdtisned  my  inquiry,  convinced  me  of 
the  truth  of  all  ibe  related. 

She  told  me,  that  her  hufoand,  the  fon  of  a 
reputable  trad- fman  at  Amiens,  had  married 
her,  thedaugh^ccr  of  a  very  inferior  one,  againll 
his  father's  poll  five  injUn<£l:ions,  who  had  there- 
upon difmified  him  ftom  t!vc  huflneCs  to  which 
he  had  been  brought  up,  and  left  him  to  the 
world.  I'hat  thus  deflitute,  with  a  wile,  and 
foon  afterwards  a  child  to  fupport,  he  had  ac- 
cepted 


D    £    S    M    O   .V    t).  57 

cepted  the  offer  of  an  Engllfti  gentleman  fo  ac- 
company him  to  England,  "  where  he  behavfd 
ff)  well,"  continued  ihe,  **  that  his  mafler,  who 
was  a  good  man,  became  much  his  friend,  and 
hearing  he  had  in  France  a  wife  and  child,  whom 
he  loved,  he  not  only  gave  leave,  but  money  to 
have  us  fetched  over.  Some  months  ■^hcv,  Sir, 
the  gentleman  married  a  very  rich  lady  from  the 
city,  who  wifhed  him  to  part  with  his  French 
fervant ;  but  though  he  prevailed  upon  her  lo 
let  him  keep  a  perfon  who  h^d  been  very  faith- 
ful to  him,  the  lady  never  liked  him.  In  lefs 
than  a  twelvemonth  after  his  marriage,  my  liuf- 
band's  mafler  was  taken  ill  of  a  fever  and  died. 
My  hufband  fat  up  with  him  many  night«,  and 
by  the  time  his  mafter  was  carried  to  the  grave, 
he  fell  ill  himfelf  of  the  fame  diftemper;  and 
his  lady  being  afraid  of  the  infection,  hurried 
him  out  of  the  houfe  to  the  lodging  where  X 
and  my  children  lived.  There  he  lay  dreadfully 
ill  for  three  weeks,  during  which  time  the  lady 
fent  a  phyiician  to  him  once  or  twice,  but  after- 
wards went  into  the  country,  and  thought  no 
more  about  him  ;  fo  that  we  had  nothinf:  toftip- 
port  this  cruel  illnefs,  but  what  my  hufoand 
!iad  faved  in  his  fervice  ;  which,  with  a  wife 
and  two  children  to  keep  out  of  his  wages,  to 
be  fure,  could  not  be  much.  He  "ot  throu^^h 
the  fever,  Sir,  but  it  had  fo  ruined  his  blood, 
that  he  went  almoft  immediately  into  a  decrne  j 
and  it  is  now  three  weeks  fince  he  died,  leaving 
me  quite  deftitute  with  thL^fe  two  children.  I 
applied  for  help,  in  this  my  iiunoft  diftrefs,  to 
the  widow  of  his  late  mafter,  in  whofe  fervice 
he  certainly  loft  his  life.  After  waiting  a  great 
while  for  an  anfwer,  fhe  fent  a  gentleman  lo  me 
with  a  guinea,  which  vva>-,  fhe  (aid,  i.il  fhe 
D  5  fhoaUl 


58  DESMOND. 

fhould  ever  do  for  me  ;  and  fhe  advifed  me  to 
get  back  to  France.  This,  by  the  afliftance  of 
the  gentleman  that  brought  me  this  money,  who 
touched  with  pity  for  my  fituaticn,  raifed  for 
me,  among  his  friends,  above  a  guinea  more, 
1  attempted  to  do  ;  but  on  the  road  my  children 
tell  fick,  and  my  money  was  all  expended  in 
procuring  them  afliftance  :  fo  that  now  I  have 
no  means  of  reaching  France,  where,  if  1  could 
once  get,  I  hope  my  parents,  poor  as  they  are, 
would  receive  me,  and  that  I  fhould  be  able 
fome  way  or  other  to  earn  my  bread  and  my 
children's." 

I  hope  it  is  unneceflary  to  fay,  that  I  imme- 
diately fet  the  widow's  heart  at  eafe  on  this 
fcore  ;  and  undertook  to  pay  for  her's  and  her 
children's  conveyance. 

Yefterday  evening  then  I  embarked.  The 
,wind  was  againft  us,  and  the  fea  ran  extremely 
high;  but  1  was  impatient  to  be  gonej  and 
though  the  mafter  doubted  whether  he  could 
crofs  to  Dunkirk,  I  was  impatient,  and  preflVd 
him  to  gee  under  iveigh,  which  he  did,  nctwith- 
fUnding  the  unprumiiuig  appearance  of  the  wea- 
ther. 

I  fat  upon  deck,  looking  towards  the  fhore, 
when  I  faw,  though  we  were  by  this  tinit  at  a 
coi\fiderable  di (lance  fiom  it,  a  gioup  of  people 
,  who  feemed  to  be  making  fignals  to  the  men  in 
the  veflel.  I  bade  the  mailer  obferve  them,  and 
he  diiiinguiflied,  by  hisgLl's,  a  boat  attempting  to 
put  oil,  in  which  he  told  me  he  imagined  fome 
other  pafTcngers,  who  had  arrived  alter  we  had 
come  on  board,  might  be.  He  requeued,  there- 
fore, that!  would  give  him  leave  to  lay  to  and 
wait  for  it,  which  1  readily  granted  ;  and  as  the 
waves  were  new  extremely  high,  we  continued, 

with 


DESMOND.  59 

with  fome  apprehenfions,  to  watch  the  boat, 
which  was  a  very  fmall  one,  and  which  often  en- 
tirely difappeared. 

At  length  by  the  great  exertion  of  the  fiflier- 
men  who  were  in  it,  the  boat  came  along  fide, 
and  one  of  the  men  hailing  the  mafter,  told  hina 
he  had  brought  a  gentleman  and  his  twofervants, 
who  wer»  but  juft  arrived  from  London  in  great 
hafte,  for  a  pafTage  to  France. 

Three  rueful  figures  did  indeed  appear  in  the 
boat ;  and  in  the  firft  of  them  that  was  helped 
up  the  fide  of  the  veffel,   I  recognifed  Waverly ! 

Sick  to  death,  wet  to  the  fkin,  and  1  believe, 
not  a  little  frightened  by  the  tofling  of  the  boat, 
he  tould  not  immediately  anfwer  the  queftions  1 
put  to  him.  At  length  he  told  me,  that  the  day 
after  he  had  fent  off  Anthony  he  altered  his 
mind,  and  fet  out  poft  to  overtake  me  before  I 
failed.  "  But  now,  faid  he,  I  wifh  fomehow 
1  had  not  come  till  next  v/eek ;  for  fetting  off 
in  fuch  a  hurry,  I  have  not  brought  my  horf«s 
and  carriages  as  I  intended  ;  and  have  only  that 
portmanteau  of  cloaths  with  me."  I  was  almoft 
tempted  to  tell  him  he  had  then  better  return 
on  fliore,  and  wait  for  the  accommodation  he 
thus  regretted  ;  but  I  thought  of  Geraldine, 
and  detefting  myfelf  for  my  petulence,  began 
to  condole  with,  inftead  of  blaming  the  half- 
drowned  Waverly,  whom  I  immediately  advifed 
to  change  his  cloaths  and  go  to  bed,  for  he  fuf- 
fcred  extremely  from  the  motion  of  the  vcffel, 
and  again  wifhed  himfelf  on  fhore.  On  the 
facre,  however,  to  which,  in  Icfs  turbulent 
weather,  a  little  encouragement  might  have  fent 
him,  he  had  now  no  inclination  to  venture,  but 
took  my  advice  and  retired  to  the  cabin;  from 
whence  Anthony  came  up  in  a  few  moments 
with  a  letter  in  his  hand,  which  he  laid  his  maf- 

ter 


60  DESMOND. 

ter  had  forgot  to  giv^e  me.  I  looked  at  the  di- 
rection— ic  was  the  writing,  the  elegant  VvTitins, 
cfGeraldine.  I  opened  it  with  trembling  hands, 
and  a  palpitating  heart.  Heavens!  does  fhe 
write  to  me  ?  Dare  1  hope  fiie  remembers  me? 
— I  have  employed  every  moment  fmce  in  read- 
ing and  in  copying  it,  that  you  may  fee  how 
elegantly  fhe  writes,  though  I  cannot  part  with 
the  original.  With  what  delight  I  retrace  every 
word  file  has  written  j  with  what  tranfport  kifs 
the  fpaces  between  the  lines,  where  her  fingers 
have  pafTed.  But  you  have  no  notion  of  all  this, 
and  will  fmile  contemptuoufly  at  it,  as  boyifii 

and  romantic   folly. My  dear  liethel,  why 

fii'iuld  we  call  folly  that  which  hallows  fuch 
happincfs,  fincc,  after  all  our  wifdom,  our  feli- 
city depends  merely  on  the  imagination?  I  feel 
lighter  and  gayer  hnce  I  have  been  in  pofTeflion 
of  this  dear  letter,  the  firft  1  ever  received  from 
her  I  Waverly's  little  foibles  difappear before  its 
powerful  infiutnce.  It  ads  like  a  tali  man,  and 
liides  his  faults,  half  of  which  I  am  ready  to 
think  virturs,  fince  without  his  indccifion  I 
ihoulu  never  have  received  it.  Oh  !  with  what 
zeal  w:ll  '  endeavour  to  execute  the  ch.^rge  my 
any-tlic  friend  irlvee  rne  to  w.itch  over  the  con- 
duct  of  her  brother.  He  is  really  not  a  bad 
young  man  i  and  i  particularly  rejoice  at  his 
— i)eing  here,  as  1  have  learned  from  him,  this 
nioinine-,  that  the  people  vviih  whom  he  went 
from  Bath  inco  LincolnfViire  arc  ganibleis, 
who  have  won  a  conildeuble  fum  of  money  of 
b.m.  From  fuch  adve.'Uurcs,  1  hope  to  fave 
h!rr;  in  future  ,  and  admitting  it  poflible  that  his 
ujifeitled  temper  may  fomeiimes  occafion  me 
1.  me  trouble,  I  fhall  rem.ember  that  he  is  the 
Iroiher  of  iiiV  adorable  GeraldiiiC,  and  the  tafic 

will 


DESMOND.  6 1 

will  become  a  plcafure. — Farewell,  my  frienr!, 
you  know  my  addrefs  at  Paris,  i  (hall  go  on  this 
evening  to  Amiens,  where  I  fliall,  perhaps,  be 
detained  a  day  by  the  affairs  of  mv  poor  protegee 
and  her  children,  who  mud  be  put  into  Tome  way 
of  fubfiftence  before  1  leave  them. 

1  am,  ever,  my  dear  Beihel, 

Faithfully  your'?, 

LIONEL  DESMOND. 


L  E  T- 


62  O    £    S    M    O    K   D. 


LETTER      VII. 


Paris,  Jul/  19,  1790. 

I  H  AV  F^  now,  my  dear  Bethel,  been  fome 
days  in  this  capita!,  without  having  had  time  to 
write  to  you  ;  (o  deeply  has  the  animating  fpec- 
tacle  of  the  J4.th,  and  the  converfation  in  which  I 
have  been  fince  engaged,  occupied  my  atten- 
tion.—  1  can  now,  however,  aflure  you — and 
with  the  mort:  heart-felt  fatisfa6lion,  that  nothing 
is  more  unlike  the  real  flate  of  this  country, 
than  the  accounts  which  have  been  given  of  it 
in  En<i;land  :  and  that  the  fan2;uinarv  and  fero- 
cious  democracy,  the  fcenes  of  anarchy  and 
confufion,  which  we  have  bad  fo  pathetically 
defcribed  and  lamented,  have  no  exiftence  but 
in  the  malignant  fabrications  of  thofe  who  have 
been  paid  for  their  miireprefentations. 

That  it  has  been  an  cbjeit  with  our  govern- 
ment to  employ  fucn  men  ;  men,  whofe  bulinpfs 
U  is  to  ftifle  truths,  which  though  unable  to 
deny,  tht-y  are  unwilling  to  admit  ;  is  a  proof, 
that  they  bdieve  the  delufion  of  the  people  ne- 
celTary  to  their  own  views  ;  and  have  recourfe 
to  thefe  miferab'e  expedients,  to  impede  a  little 
the  progrefs  of  that  light  which  they  fee  rifing 
upon  the  world.  You  know  I  was  always  in- 
terefted  in  this  revolutionj  (you  fometimes 
thought  too  warmly)  and  I  ovvoj  that  till  I  came 

hither, 


DESMOND.  63 

hither,  I  was  not  fufficiently  mafter  of  the  fub- 
je6t,  to  be  able  to  anfwer  thole  doubts  which 
you  often  raifed,  as  to  the  permanency  of  the 
new  fyftem  in  France — But  1  think,  that  can- 
did and  hberai  as  you  are  ;  and  with  fuch  prin- 
ciples of  univerfal  philanthropy  as  you  pofiefs, 
I  (hall  now  have  no  difficulty  in  making  you  as 
warmly  anxious,  as  I  am,  ior  the  fuccefs  of  a 
caufe  which,  in  its  confcquence,  involves  the 
freedom,  and,  of  courfe,  the  happinefs,  not 
merely  of  this  great  people,  but  of  the  univerfe. 
I  had  letters  of  introdu6iion  to  feveial  gentle- 
men here  ;  among  others,  to  the  ci-  Levant  Mar- 
quis de  Montfleuri — A  man,  m  whom  the  Hre 
of  that  ardent  imagination,  fo  common  among 
his  countrymen,  is  tempered  by  found  reafon; 
and  a  habit  of  reflection,  very  unufual  at  his 
time  of  life,  to  a  native  of  any  country,  but 
particularly  to  one  of  this,  wh-.re  corruption 
has  long  been  a  fyrtem,  from  the  iufluei.ce  of 
which,  it  was  hardly  poffible  for  young  men  of 
property  and  title  to  efcape. — Montflturi,  how- 
ever, though  born  a  courtier,  is  one  of  the 
fteadieft  friends  to  the  people — and  it  is  from 
him  that  1  have  heard  a  detail  of  the  proi^refs  of 
this  great  event,  on  which,  1  believe  you  may 
depend  j  and  I  will,  in  my  two  or  thue  next 
letters,  relate  it  in  his  own  woids. 

In  the  mean-time,  my  friend,  I  have  infinite 
pleafure  in  dcfcnbing  to  you  the  real  Jtate  of 
Paris,  and  its  neighbc  urhood  —  Where  there  is 
not  only  an  excellent  police,  but  where  the  na- 
tural gaiety  of  the  pe<  pie  now  appears  without 
any  reitraint,  and  yer,  certainly,  without  any 
diforder. — Where  the  utmoft  care  is  taken  o'f 
the  lues  of  the  commonalty,  of  whom  a  great 
number  pel ifb-d  yearly  in  Pans,  by  the  furious 
manner  jn   which  the  carriages  of  the  ncblejfe 

were 


6^  DESMOND. 

were  driven  through  the  ftreets,  where  there  are 
no  accommodations  for  the  foot  paflenger — ?.nd 
where  the  proud  and  unfeeling  pcffefibrs  of  thofe 
fplendid  equipages  (the  difappearance  of  which 
has  been  fo  much  lamented  in  England)  have 
been  known  to  feel  their  rapid  wheels  crufhing 
a  fellow  creature,  v/itb  emotions  fo  far  from 
thofe  of  humanity,  as  to  have  faid,  "  tant  mieux^ 
il y  a  toujour s  ojfez  de  ces giuux* ^  Is  it  not  na- 
tural for  a  people,  who  have  been  thus  treated, 
to  retaliate  with  even  more  ferocity  than  has 
been  imputed  to  them  ? — and  can  it  appear  fur- 
prizine,  tiiat  when  the  remark  has  been  made, 
that  there  are  now  fewer  magnificent  carriages 
in  the  ftreets  of  Paris  than  there  were  formcily, 
ihey  have  anfwtrid,  **  mails  il  y  en  a  encore 
trcpY' 

One  of  the  greatcft  complaints  which  the  dif- 
contented  here  have  made — One,  on  which  the 
eloquent  dfclaimcis  among  us  have  the  moft 
loudly  infifted,  is  the  levelling  principle  which 
the  revclutiuniiiS  have  purfutd. — Certainly,  it 
is  a  great  misfortune  to  the  nobility  to  be  de- 
prived of  the  invaluable   privilege  of  believing 


*  *'  So  much  the  better,  there  are  always  enough  of  thofe 
fhabby  ra!cal>  " 

!  know  nrt  \«.heiher,  in  the  nurneroas  aneccictet  of  this  kind, 
th.ii  have  been  colleiie.',  it  has  ever  btcn  rtlated,  thai  a  very 
-few  years  fince,  a  ynunfr  Frt  nchn^an  of  fufhion — one  of  "  the 
very  Tirfl  world,"  was  driving  through  the  llreet=  of  ParK,  with 
an  Lrg'.fhman,  hit  acouainiante,  in  a  tahric.'et,  in  the  rue  S\ 
Honor),  which  is  always  extremi  ly  crowdeci,  hi^  horfe  thievs 
do.vn  a  poor  nan.  and  the  wheeU  gi'ing  ove:  his  n  ck,  k  Ued 
him  on  the  fpot — The  Englifluraa,  with  all  the  emoti>»ft5  «)f 
terror.  nitU'-d  on  fuch  an  inc  oe.'.i,  ciied  out — Good  Gcd,  you 
have  killed  ihe  man  !— The  chorictcer  drove  tn  ;  faying,  with 
all  poflible  l"ng  fniJ — *'  Eh  bieti,  lant  fis  four  /«<" — Well 
ther.j  fo  muth  the  v.'orle  for  him. 

-f   "  B^t  ihett  ifc  iii'l  too  rri^ny." 

themfelvcs 


DESMOND,  65 

thcnifclves  of  a  fuperior  fpecies,  and  to  be  com- 
pellfd  to  learn  that  they  art  men. 

1  was  afTurerl,  in  London,  that  I  (hould  find 
Paris  a  ('efirt-.— How  true  fuci'j  an  afleition  i!=) 
]tt  the  public  walk^,  and  public  ipcctacles  vvit- 
nefs  J  places,  where  luch  numbers  affl-mble,  as 
are  hardl)'  ever  feen  colleded  in  London,  ^unlefs 
on  very  extraordinary  occa(ionsj)  yet,  where 
et'cn  in  the  pi  efcnt  hour,  wh'  n  the  ferment  of  the 
public  mind  cannot  h.vt  lubfided,  there  is  na 
diforder,  no  tumult,  nor  even  that  degree  of 
difturbance,  which  the  moft  trifling  popular 
whim  txciies  among  us. 

It  is,  howevei,  at  thefe  places,  the  peopje 
are  to  be  fcen,  and  not  their  opprtfTors. —  And 
if  it  is  ujily  ihe/e  latter  that  conft  tutes  an  in- 
habited cc'Untry,  Paris  will  remain,  perhaps, 
(leferted,  in  the  eyes  of  thofr-  who  are  ^'efcriced 
by  LJeneral  Wallirigford  and  Mrs.  Fairfax — as 
'■'-  people  of  fafhion" — les  gens  ccmme  il  faut — 
While  the  philofopher,  the  philaiuhropili,  the 
citizen  of  the  world;  whole  comprciienfive  mind 
takes  a  more  fubiiii^e  view  of  human  natyre  than 
he  can  obtain  from  the  heiphts  of  Verfaiiles  or 
St,  James's,  rejoices  at  the  fpedtacle  which 
every  where  prefents  itielf  of  newiy-difFuled 
happinefs,  and  hails  his  feliow  man,  dilcncum- 
bered  of  tiioff  paltry  diftindions  that  dtbaled 
and  difguifed  him. 

Such  a  man — with  heart-felt  fatisfadicn  re- 
peals that  energetic,  and  in  let^ard  to  this 
country,  prophetic  fentence  of  our  immortal 
poet. 

"  Methinks  I  fee  in  my  mind  a  noble  and 
puifiant  nation,  touring  herfelf  like  the  ftrcng 
man  after  fleep  j  and  fhaking  her  invincible 
locks  . — Methinks  I  fee  her,  an   eagle  mewing 

her 


66-  DESMOND. 

her  mighty  youth,  and  kindling  her  undazzled 
eyes  at  the  t'ull  mid  day  be-^m  ;  purging  and  un- 
fcaling  her  long  abuied  tight  at  thefoun  z'la  t'.f.  If 
of  heavenly  radiance,  while  the  whole  flock  of 
timorous  tsnd  nnify  birds,  w'vh  thofe  that  love 
the  tw;light,  fluiter  about,  amazed  at  what  Ihe 
means  arid  in  iheir  envious  gabble,  would 
prognofticite  a  year  of  fedt*  and  Ichiims*."— 
Afti  r  this,  my  friend,  1  w  11  n(  w  add  a  word  of 
my  own.— M  V  next  letter  w  '1  ^ive  \  ou  fome  of 
the  converfation  of  ^yIonlfleurl.  When  (hall  I 
hear  from  you.  -  And  when  will  you  indulge  me 
With  fome  account  of  your  neighb  mrs. — Pray 
forget  not  what,  even  in  this  fcene,  is  ftill  neareft 
the  heart 

Of  your's, 

L.  DESMOND, 


*  MiltoD  OD  the  liberty  of  unlicenfed  printing. 


LET- 


DESMOND.  67 


LETTER      Vm. 


TO    MR.    BETHEL. 


Paris,  July  io,  1790. 

MONTFLEURT,  with  whom  I  have 
pafied  many  pleafant  and  inHrud^ive  hours  fince 
I  have  been  here,  has  defired  me  to  go  with  him 
to  his  eftate  on  the  banks  of  the  Loire,  about 
fifteen  miles  from  Lyons,  where  bufinefs  will 
foon  call  him.  From  thence,  he  propofes  taking 
me  to  the  chateau  of  his  unclf.  the  ci-devant 
Count  d'Hautevillc  in  Auvergne,  where  i  am 
to  witnels  the  pangs  of  aiiftocracy,  reludtantly 
and  proudly  yielding  to  a  necelfity  which  it  exe- 
crates ;  and  my  friend,  afterwards,  accompa- 
nies me  to  Marfeilles,  where,  I  believe,  I  fhall 
embark  foi  Italy,  or,  pt^ihaps,  for  the  Archi- 
pelago— 1  know  n.)t  which — It  depends  on  I 
know  not  what.  (There  is  a  fentence  a  little 
in  the  Waverly  ftyle) — 1  was,  however,  going 
to  fay,  that  it  depends  on  the  Itate  of  my  mind, 
whether    my  abfcnce   from  England   (hall    be 

longer  or  fhorter  ; If  1  could  return  to  fee 

Geraldine 


69  DESMOND. 

Geraldine  happy,  and  not  to  regret  that  ftie  is 
happy  with  Vtiney. — If  I  could  fi°tl,  when  1 
behold  her,  all  thdt  difmtcrened  afTectiun,  which 
the  purity  of  her  ch^radtcr  oii^ht  to  inf^.  le, 
without  forming  wi/hes  ami  hopes  that  ferve  only 
to  torment  me,  1  would  return  thiough  Ii.  ly  in 
a  few  months  to  Lngjand. —  V  ou  tell  me  abitnce 
will  effect  all  this,  and  reftore  me  lo  reafon. — 
I  rather  hope  it  than  believe  it;  and  even, 
amidft  this  intert-fting  fccne,  1  catch  my l'=^lf  con- 
tinually c.irryin.j  my  thoughts  to  hn^idnd  ;  and 
imagining  where  Cjerald;ne  I'^—and  enquiring 
whether  Ihe  has  not  new  fources  of  uneafinefs 
in  tliC  encrealing  diffipation  of  her  hufband. 

W  hat  attradlions  for  me  has  her  very  name. — 
It  is  with  difficulty  i  recall  my  pen,  and  my 
wandering  ipirits,  to  tndeavour  to  ficoiledt, 
whether  I  told  you  how  much  difturbed  poor 
Waverl)  was  at  the  French  poft-hor(es  and  car- 
riages, wifh  which  we  travelled  from  Dunkirk  j 
and  how  often  he  curled  his  improvident  hafte, 
which  had  madt  him  (et  out  without  his  own 
horfes  and  carriage**. — At  Abbeville,  he  feemed 
ftrongly  difpofed  to  have  i'ent  Anthony  back  to 
have  fetched  them;  and,  at  Amiens,  Ibll  more 
inclined  to  return  and  bring  them  himlelt  ;  nor 
had  he  quite  fettled  the  debate  when  I  came 
back  from  an  abfence,  that  was  occafioned  by 
the  fettlement  of  mj  poor  protegee  and  her  chil- 
dren, which  i  managed  with  Itfs  difficulty  than 
I  expected.  — All  this  trifling  1  could  bear  from 

Wavcrly,    and    forgive   it    as'boyifh   folly. 

But  it  provokes  tny  ipleen  to  fee  a  fellow  have 
no  more  idea  of  the  impt-rtaiice  of  the  prtfent 
period  in  France — if  ever  he  can  be  brought  to 
think  about  it  at  all,  it  is  only  to  raife  a  debate, 
whether  be  fiiould  have  refigned  his  title  calmly, 

had 


•DESMOND.  69 

had  he  been  a  French  nobleman  ? — which  ufually 
terminates  in  the  wife  clecLration,  that  he  (hould 
have  thought  it  a  litde  hard. 

Now  will  you  pique  yurfelf  upon  your  faga- 
city  in  forefceinj  that  I  (hould  be  fometimes 
peevilh  at  the  foibles  of  my  fellow-traveller  j  it 
is,  however,  merely  a  tranfitory  difpleafure,  and 
one  th'iug'  t  of  Geraldine  diflipates  it  at  once. — 
Since  We  ha^e  been  at  Paris,  there  is  fo  much 
to  enia»e  him  that  he  has  been  verv  little  wiih 
me  ;  and  here  are  feveral  Englimmen  of  his 
acquamtancp,  who  have  taken  the  trouble  of 
de-iding  for  him,  off  my  hands;  all  my  care 
being  to  help  to  keep  him,  as  much  as  poflible, 
from  ihe  gaming  houies,  in  obedience  to  his 
fifter's  wifhes,  which  are  my  laws. 

While  he  faunters  away  his  time  in  a  morning 
in  the  Palais  Royal^  and  in  the  evening  at  the 
theatre*;,  and  in  fuppers  with  the  adtrefles,  I 
am  deeply,  and  more   deeply  interefled   by  the 

politics  of  the  country. Montfleuri   pafles 

much  of  his  time  with  me;  and,  therefore,  I 
will  give  you  a  fkctch  of  his  character  and  his 
hiftory. 

He  is  now  about  five-and-thirty,  a  fine  manly 
figure,  with  a  countenance  ini^enuous  and  com- 
manding.—  He  has  been  a  fop,  and  ftill  retains 
a  fomethuig  of  it  in  his  drefs  and  manner,  but 
it  is  veiy  little  v'fi  'le,  and  not  at  all  difgufting  i 
perhaps,  lefs  fo  than  that  negligence  which 
many  of  his  countrymen  have  lately  affc£ted,  as 
if  determined,  in  trifles,  as  well  as  in  matters 
of  more  confequence,  to  chai^ge  characters 
with  us.  1  he  father  of  Monrfleuri  died 
in  America,  and  as  an  only  Ion,  he  was  the 
darling  of  his  mother;  who,  being  anxious 
that  her  daughters,  of  whom  Ihe  had  four,  mii^ht 

not 


JO  DESMOND. 

not  be  an  incumbrance  on  an  eftate  which  his 
father  had  left  a  good  d^aJ  embarrafled,  compel  led 
the  f.'cond  and  the  younijeft  of  them  to  become 
nuns;  and  married  the  eldeft  and  the  third,  who 
were  remarkably  beautiful,  to  the  jfirft  men  who 
offered —Montfleuri  had  no  fooner  the  power  by 
the  new  rt-gulations,   than  he  took  his  young- 
eft  fifter,  who  is  not  yet  eighteen,  from  the  con- 
vent, where  {he  was  on  the  point  of  taking  the 
vows  j  and,  to  the  fecond,  who  has  taken  them, 
he  offers  an  eftablifhment  in   his  own  houfe,  if 
file  will  leave  her   monaftery,   which  is  near  his 
eftate  in  the  Lvonois. — To  conquer  her  fcruples 
and  to  prevail   upon  her  to  return  to  his  houfe, 
is  part  of  his  immediate  bufincfs  in  that  coun- 
try — His  mother,  whole  miitaken   zeal  he  re- 
veres, and  for  vvhofe  fondnefs,   however  unjuO, 
he  is  grateful,    has  been  dead  a  few  months,  and 
left  him  at  liberty  to  follow  the  generous  dictates 
of  his  heart. 

It  is  not  fo  eafy  for  him  to  break  the  cruel 
bonds  which  that  fatal  partiality  put  on  his  other 
fifter  ;  1  mean  the  third,  for  the  tldeft  i":  a  wi- 
dow,—  I'his  [bird  filler,  who  is  called  Madame 
de  iJoifbelle,  Iha.e  feen  j  and,  in  finding  her 
a  very  lovely  and  intertfting  woman,  have,  with 
extreme  concern,  tieard  that  her  hufband  is  one 
of  the  nioft  worthUfs  charadtcrs  in  France  ; 
where,  howev- r,  he  is  not  at  prefent,  being  a 
fier  arijhcrute^  and  havmg  quitted  his  country 
lathtr  ihan  behold  it  fr;'e. 

Mau.:me  de  Boifbcile,  is  now,  therefore,  at 
the  hotel  cf  her  brotncr,  with  IVIademoilelle 
Montfleuri,  his  younger  lifter  ;  and  ihey  <.ie  togo 
with  us  to  Monifl.uri  in  a  few  days. 

I  was  jefterday  with  Monifieu!i  at  a  vifit  he 
n)ade  to  a  family  of  lalhion,  where,  in  the  even- 


DESMOND.  71 

ing,  people  of  all  parties  aflcmble ;  and  where 
the^lal^y  of  the  houfe  piques  herfelf  upon  being 
a  bel  efprity  and  giving  to  her  guefts  the  utmoll 
freedom  of  converfaiion.  When  we  went  in, 
a  young  abbe.^  who  feemed  to  have  an  excellent 
opin  on  of  his  own  abilities,  was  defcanting  on 
the  injuftice  of  what  had  been  done  in  regard 
to  the  clergv. — The  fneering  tone  in  which 
he  defcribed  the  National  Affembly,  by  the 
name  of  "  ces  Mcffieurs  qui  ont  pris  la  peine 
de  nous  reformer,^'*  and  the  turn  of  his  dif- 
courle,  made  it  evident,  that  under  a  conrtrained 
or,  at  leaft,  an  afFeilrd  moderation  and  cano'our, 
he  concealed  principles  the  moft  inimical  and 
malignant  to  the  revolution. — His  difcourie  was 
to  this  efFe6l. 

*'  In  every  civilized  country,  there  is  no 
doubt  of  the  fupremacy  of  the  church;,  more 
efpecially  in  this,  where,  ever  fince  the  baptifm 
of  Clovis,  it  has  made  one  of  the  great  princi- 
ples of  the  ftate. — .All  ecclefiaftical  property, 
therefore,  ought  undoubt  dly  to  be  facred  j 
and,  to  invade  it,  is  to  commit  facrilege. 
I  will  nor  go  into  fcriptiiral  proofs  of  this  axiom, 
I  will  only  fpealc  of  the  immorality  and  injuftice 
of  thofe  meafures  which  have  been  taken  aaainfl 
It.  It  is  well  known,  that  much  of  the  reve- 
nues of  the  church  ?.riie  from  gifts  ;  from  lega- 
,  cies  given  by  Clovis  and  his  pious  fucceffbrs  ; 
or,  by  other  htgh  and  iHuftrious  perfons,  to 
raife  houfes  of  p:e;y,  where  the  reclufe  and 
religious  might  pray  for  the  repofe  of  the  fouls 
of  thele  (.minent  perfoii*. —  lo  fulfil  thefe  pur- 
porfes,  a  certain  number  of  men,  renouncing 
the  honours  and  cmoJuments  of  the  world,  have 

*  Thofe  gentlemen  v.- ho  have  taken  the  trouble  to  reform  us. 

given 


^2  DESMOND. 

given  their  lives  to  this  holy  occupation  ;  and 
is  it  not  juft  theyihould  enjoy  the  lot  they  have 
thus  chcfen  in  peace?  Is  it  not  juft  that,  if  they 
have  reOgned  the  pleafures  of  this  world,  they 
fbould  be  allowed  its  necefTarieSj  while  they  are 
fmoothing  the  paiTage  to,  or  fecuring  the  happi- 
nefs  of  the  other,  for  thofe,  who  truft  to  their 
fandity  and  their  prayers  ? — Befides,  permit  nae 
to  remark,  that  many  of  the  monaftic   eftates 
have  been  wafte  lands,  which  have  been  culti- 
vated and  reclaimed  by  their  former  poflefTors  ; 
that,  among  the  various    focieties   of  religious 
men,   many  have  well  earned  their  fupport,   by 
undertdking  the  education  of  youth,  while  others 
have  been  employed   in  the  charitable  office   of 
redeeming  flaves  from  captivity. — Perhaps  there 
mijiht  be  fome  little  difproportion  between  the 
emoluments  poflVfied  by  the  fuperior  and  inferior 
cler""y  ;   but  it  was  always  poflihle  for  thefe  lat- 
ter to  rife  by  their  zeal  and  good  conduci:;   and, 
I  muft  be  permitted  to  think,  that  rr.rjjleitrs  nos 
reformateurs^  have  not  enough  confidcred  wh.it 
thev   were  doing  j   when  inliead   of  re(ftif\ine, 
with  a  tender  hand,  any  little  errors  in  the  eccle- 
fiaftic^il  order,   they   have   deftroyed  it ;   inftead 
of  pruning  the  tree,   they  have  torn  it  up  fc^rci- 
bly  by  the  roots. -^If  the  nation   wz.^-  dijirelfed 
in  its'revenues,  by — by — by    1  knov?  not  what 
caufe,  the  clergy  offered  four  hundred   millions 
of  livres*  towards  its  afnftancc — a  generous  and 
noble  olfer,  which  ought  to  have  been  accept- 
ed."— The  abbe  ce  Jed  fpeaking  with  the  air  of 
a  man,   who  thought  he  had  not  only  produced 
arguments,  but  fuch  as  it  would  be  impolMble 

*  Making  upwards  of  fixteen  and  an  half  millions  fteiling. 

to 


to  controvert.— —•Montfleuri,  however,  who 
fccmcd  of  another  opinion,  thus  anfwered  him. 

**  You  have  afTerted,  Sir,  that  in  all  civi- 
lized countries,  the  church  forms  a  fupreme 
branch  of  the  legiflature. — This  is  furely  not  the 
fad:  I  will  not,  however,  enter  into  a  difcuf- 
fion  of  how  far  it  is  fo  in  other  countries,  or 
hswfar  it  ought  to  be  fo  in  any,  but  reply  to  the 
arguments  which  you  have  deduced  from  its 
power  in  our  own. — You  muft  allow  me  to  re- 
mark, that  the  antiquity  of  an  abufe  is  no  rea- 
fon  for  its  continuance — And  if  the  enormous 
wealth  of  the  clergy  be  one,  it  ought  not  to  be 
perpetuated,  unlefs  better  reafons  can  bebrought 
in  its  favour,  than  that  it  com  nenced  at  the  con- 
verfion  and  baptifm  of  Clovis  ;  who,  guilty  of 
horrible  enormities,  and  ftainej  with  blood,  was 
taught  to  hope,  that,  by  eretSting  churches,  and 
endowing  tflonafteries,  the  pardon  of  heaven 
might  be  obtained  for  his  crimes:  and,  in  doing 
fo,  he  certainly  did  not  make  a  bad  bargain  for 
himfelf ;  for  it  coft  hlra  only  that  of  which  he 
robbed  his  fubjedh.  It  was  with  their  toil  and 
mifery  he  thus  purchafed  the  abfolution  which 
the  monks  gave  him  for  murder  and  oppreffion 
— It  was  their  tears,  and  their  blood,  that  ce- 
mented the  edifices  he  raifed*. 

I  believe  the  fame  may  be  faid  of  the  foun- 
dations made  by  thofc  mon.irchs,  whom  you  call 
his  pious  fucceflbrs.  The  weak  bigot  Louis 
the  Seventh — the  ferocious  fanguinary  monfter 
Louis  the  Eleventh,  are,  I  fuppofe,  among  the 
moft  eminent  of  the  lift. — —Of  what  efficacy 
thofe  prayers  might  be,  that  were  thus  obtainedj, 

*  Some  fentences  here  arc  drawn  from  a  little  Prepch  pa«' 
phlet,  entitled  *■'  Ltttrr  «mx  Arijirtbtotrate  Fran^itiP 

Vol,  L  E  I  fliaiv 


74 :  DESMOND. 

I  ihall  fay  nothing,  fince  that  is  matter  of  opi- 
nion.— It  is   plain,  however,  that   the  nation 
does  not  now  believe  them  ufeful  to  its  welfare, 
and  therefore,  with  great  propriety,  turns  into 
another  channel,  that  wealth,  which  it  no  longer 
deems  beneficial  in  this.     I  think  you  will  not 
deny  that  the  moft  ufeful  of  the  clergy  are  the 
cures^  who  live   on   their  cures;   whofe  time 
fhould  be  given  up  to  the  really  chriftian  and 
pious  purpofes  of  inftrudling  the  poor,  vifiting 
the  fick,  and  relieving  the  temporal  neceflities 
of  their  parifhioners,  by  fuch  means  as   they 
poflefs ;  though  it  too  often  happened  that  they 
had  hardly  wherewithal  to  fupply  themfelves 
with  the  necefTarics  their  humble  manner  of  life 
required. — An  error,  in  the  diftribution  of  mo- 
ney appropriated  to  the  church,  which   in  the 
prefent  fyftem,  will,  I  apprehend,  be  remedied. 
I  cannot  agree  with  you,  that  the  tree  is  torn 
up  by  the  roots:  I  fhould  rather   fay,  that  its 
too  luxuriant  branches,  which  prevented   the 
production  of  wholefome   fruit,  are  reformed  ; 
and  the  whole  reduced  nearer  to  the  proportion, 
which  may  fecure   it  from,  being  deflroyed  by 
the  ftorms  that  pafs  by,  through  the  difpropor- 
tion  of  its  head. — You  have,  Sir,  declined  en- 
tering into  thofc  fcriptural  proofs  of  their  facred 
naturej  which  you  intimated  were  to  be  brought 
in  fupport  of  the  ancient  eftablifhments;  a  for- 
^tunate  circumflance  for  me,  as  on  that  ground 
I  muft  have  felt  my  inferiority. — But,  from  what 
I  know  of  the  fubjcdt,  1  have  always  fuppofed, 
that  whatever  fpiritual  refemblance  there  might 
be  between  the  primitive  fathers  of  the  church 
and  their  prefent  fuccefTors,  there  was  certainly 
very  little  in  their  temporal  conditions.     It  docs 
not  appear  ever  to  have  been  the  expcdlation  of 

the 


DESMOND.  7^; 

the  faints  and  martyrs,  that  thofe  who  followed 
them  in  their  holy  calling,  fhould  become  tem- 
poral princes,  or  poflefs  fuch  immenfe  revenue* 
as  the  higher  clergy  enjoyed  in  this  country,  of 
whom,  you  know.  Sir,  that  there  were  fome 
whofe  yearly  incomes  amounted  to  eighty,  an 
hundred,  two,  three,  four  hundred  thoufand 
livres  a  year. 

As  to  that  ranlc  of  them  who  lived  in  coji- 
vents,  I  will  not  enquire  whether  piety  or  idle- 
ncfs  decided  their  vocation — I  will  believe  that 
it  may,  in  numerous  initances,  have  been  the 
former  motive — and  that  in  others,  the  unhappy, 
or  the  guilty,  might  feek,  in  thefe  retreats,  (bel- 
ter from  the  mil'eries  of  life,  or  leifure  to  make 
their  peace  with  heaven. — But  men,  carried  into 
religious  retirements  by  fuch  motives,  would 
probably  be  content  with  mere  iiecefl'aries  of. 
life,  which  are  not  taken  from  thenij  it  is  not 
therefore  thefe  men  who  complain.— To  the 
monks,  I  am  difpofed  to  al'ow  all  you  can  urge 
in  their  favour,  as  to  thee  diication  of  youth,  and 
the  redemption  of  prifon  r«,  though  thefe  me- 
rits, and  particularly  theljtter,  have  been  much 
difputed  (probably  from  the  mifreprefentation  that 
have  been  made  of  the  manner  of  executing  thefe 
charges) — I  will  go  farther,  and  enumerate  one 
obligation  the  world  owes  them,  which  you  have 
over-looked,  or  do  not  think  it  of  confequence 
enough  to  mention. — I  mean,  that  to  them  wc 
are  indebted  for  the  prefervation  of  thofe  pre- 
cious relicts  of  antiquity,  which,  but  for  the 
fecurity  which  fuperltition  enabled  them  to  give, 
would  have  perifhed  in  the  ferocious  rurbultnce 
of  the  dark  ages.  Bat,  Sir,  with  all  the  difpo- 
fition  imaginable^  to  allow  the  monaflic  infti- 
tuiion  all  the  honour  they  can  aflume,  I  ftiU 
E  a  tanno» 


76  X>   B   S   M   O   N   D. 

cannot  be  of  opinion  that  the  good  works  they ' 
have  given  birth  to,  even  in  their  utmoft  ex- 
tent, balance  the  various  evils  which  ihefe  com- 
munities occaHon  to  the  nation  that  fupports 
them.  As  to  the  mendicant  orders,  furely  the 
fuppreflion  of  them  cannot  be  complained  of.— 
The  vow  of  poverty  taken  by  capucins^  recollets, 
&c.  &c.  may  now  be  executed  in  humble  pri- 
vacy, for  which  the  ftate  will  provide  during 
the  lives  of  thofe  have  taken  thefe  vows,  and 
they  will  no  longer  be  in  a  degraded  condition 
of  life,  which  muft  be  a  continual  tax  to  the 
pious,  while  it  gave  to  the  light-minded  a  fub- 
jc<Sl  of  ridicule,  and  to  the  indifferent,  of  dif*- 
guft.  I  need  hardly  infifl  on  the  miferies  to 
which  monadic  vows,  made  at  a  time  of  life 
when  no  civil  contrail  would  be  binding,  have 
condemned  individuals  of  both  fexes. — Wretch- 
es, who  having  thus  thrown  themfelves,  yet 
living,  into  the  tomb,  have  afterwards  exifted 
only  to  curfe  their  being. — I  will  not  retouch 
the  difgufting  pidturcs  that  have  been  fo  fre- 
quently exhibited,  of  the  wretchednefs,  or  the 
vices  that  have  prophaned  thefe  dark  recefles, 
built  for  far  other  purpofes ;  nor  enlarge  upon 
the  deluges  of  blood,  the  variety  of  tortures  by 
which  the  monks  have  eftablifhed  their  power 
over  the  ignorance  and  apprehenfions  of  man- 
kind.— What  then  (hould  prevent  a  nation  from 
re-afTuming  grants ;  which,  admitting  they  were 
originally  given  to  good  purpofes,  have  long 
fince  been  perverted  ?  Certainly,  Sir,  you  can- 
not aflert,  that  le  haut  clergiy  the  higher  rank  of 
ecclefiaftics  in  our  day,  whofe  declined  authority 
and  leflened  revenues  you  regret,  refemble,  in 
any  inllance,  thofe  apoftles  who  profefied  po- 
verty  and    humility,  and  went    about   doing 

good  ? 


»  «   S   M   O    N    D.  77 

good  ?— Thoirgh  I  am,  on  the  other  hand,  ready 
to  admit  of  their  refemblance  to  their  more  im- 
mediate, though  ftill  remote  predeceflbrs,  the 
bi(hops  who  lived  as  long  ago  as  the  reign  ot 
Louis  le  Debonnair.  One  of  our  hiftorians* 
fpeaks  of  them  as  being,  at  that  period,  *'  men 
who  were,  for  the  moft  part,  become  great  lords, 
poflefling  vail  domains  and  many  vairalsj  and, 
while  they  governed  the  minds  of  the  people, 
entirely  devoted  to  a  court. — Men,  whofe  am- 
ple revenues  enabled  them  to  gratify  every 
wordiy  inclination,  and  to  enjoy  luxuries 
whch  foon  made  them  lofe  fight  of  their  fpiri- 
t\in\  duties,  and  negled  their  original  vocati- 
on.  — 

A  young  man,  whom  I  had  not  till  now  no- 
ticed, took  advantage  of  a  paufe  to  interrupt 

Montfleuri "  Well,"  faid  he,  in  Englifh, 

•*  and  what  then?  it  proves  that  thofe  worthies 
knew  how  to  live  ;  and,  1  am  forty  with  all  my 
foul,  that  their  lucceflbrs,  the  old  bucks  of  our 
own  times,  are  thrown  out  as  they  are. — When 
I  was  at  Paris  laft,  1  was  always  fure  of  a  convert 
at  the  table  of  an  archbifhop,  and  an  excellent 
table  it  was  ;  then,  at  that  time,  there  were 
many  of  the  haut  clerge  who  gave  comfortable, 
and  even  elegant  cftabliihments  to  two  or  three 
pretty  women,  to  whofe  parties  one  was  always 
welcome. — Now  there  is  an  end  of  all  that— 
the  poor  bifhops  are  gone  upon  their  travels,  and 
their  chere  amies  upon  the  town  ;  which,  in  re- 
gard to  its  fociety,  I  am  fure  is  very  far  from 
being  improved  j  for,  inllead  of  the  agreeable 


♦  MUlot. 

fort 


78  DESMOND. 

fort  of  people  one  ufed  to  converfe  with,  one- 
now  only  meets  queer  fellows;  who  bore  one  to 
death  with  long  preachments  about  their  free- 
dom, their  eonftitution,  and  the  rights  of  the 
people  ;  and,  after  all,  I  don't  fee  that  any  of 
thefe  things  are  much  changed  for  the  better.— 
As  to  people,  that  is,  the  canaille^  of  whofe  hap  - 
pinefs  there  is  fomuch  talk,  I  don't  think,  my- 
felf,  that  they  are  fo  much  happier  than  they 
were  before  ;  indeed,  1  have  heard  it  aiErmed 
by  thofe  who  are  much  more  interefted  in  the 
matter,  and  more  acquainted  with  it  than  I  am, 
that  ihey  are  nor  at  all  happier  fince  this  boafted 
revolution,  nor  at  all  better  off."— 

Montfleuri,  who  had,  I  faw,  conceived  a 
very  mean  opinion  of  ihis  individual,  of  a  na- 
tion be  loves  and  efteems,  anfwered  very  calmly 
—  **  The  objection  you  have  made,  Sir,  to  the 
redutfl;ion  of  the  higherclergy;  the  evils  you  have 
deduced  from  it  are  certainly  moft  convincing. 
— In  regard,  however,  to  the  opinions  which 
have,  you  fay,  been  delivered  by  good  judges  of 
the  fubje£t  on  the  happinefs  of  the  people;  per- 
haps, the  beft  way  of  afcertaining  the  juftice  of 
thofe  remarks,  would  be  to  refer  you  to  the  peo- 
ple themfelves,  as  being  alone  competent  to  de- 
cide. 

**  Enquire  of  them,  whether  they  are  not 
better  for  bemg  relieved  from  the  taille,  from 
the  gahe/ley  from  the  impofts  levied  at  the  gates 
of  every  town,  on  every  neceflary  of  life;  for 
the  relief  they  have  obtained  from  thofe  bur- 
thens that  were  inipofed  upon  them,  becaufe 
they  were  poofi  while  their  illuftnous  compa- 
triots 


D  f  S  M  O  N  o.  79 

friots  were  exempt,  becaufe  they  were  noble.* 
A(k  the  aged  pcafant,  who  is  no  longer  able  to 
labour  for  his  own  fubfiftence  ;  afk  the  mother  of 
a  group  of  helplefs  children,  if  they  are  not  the 
happier  for  being  afi'ured,  that  the  Ton,  the  huf- 
band,  on  whom  their  exiftence  depends,  cannot 
now  be  torn  from  the  paternal  cottage;  and,  to 
execute  fome  ambitious  fcheme  of  a  weak  king 
or  a  wicked  minirter,  be  enrolled  againft  their 
inclination  in  a  mercenary  army  ? — Let  the  fol- 
d;er,  who  is  now  armed  for  the  defence  of  his 
country,  a  country  fenfible  of  the  value  of  the 
blood  he  is  ready  to  ihed  for  its  freedom,  tell 
you  whether  he  is  not  happier  for  the  confciouf- 
nefs  that  he  cannot  be  compelled  to  carry  de- 
vaftation  into  another  land  as  a  Have,  but  fhall 
hereafter  guard  his  own  as  a  fieem:i:>i  a!k  the 
hufbandman,  whofe  labours  were  coldly  and 
relu^antly  performed  before,  when  ihtfermiers- 
gtneral^  and  the  intcndants  of  the  provinces, 
devoured  two-thirds  of  their  labour,  if  they  do 
not  proceed  more  willingly  znd  more  profpe- 
roufly  to  cultivate  a  foil  from  whence  xhoiz  lo- 
cufts  are  driven  by  the  breadth  of  liberty  ?  En- 
quire of  the  citizen,  the  mechanic-,  if  he  repofes 
not  more  quietly  in  his  houfe  from  ihe  certainty 
that  it  is  not  now  liable  to  be  entered  by  the 
marechaujfies^  and  that  it  is  no  longer  poffible 
for  hi.T»  to  be  forcibly  taken  out  of  it  by  zlettre 
de  cachet.,  in  the  power  of  a  minifter,  or  his  fe- 
cretary,  his  fecretary's  clerk,  or  his  miftrefs  ? 
Let  the  voice  of  common  fenfe  anfwer,  whether 
the  whole  nation  has  gained  nothing  in  its  dig- 

•  Ce  gouvernement  ferait  digne  des  Hottentot?,  /^y/  Vol- 
taire, daos  lequel  il  leiolt  pcniis  a  un  ctriain  nombre  d'hom* 
rnes  de  dire,  c'eft  a  ceux  qui  trav'aillent  a  payer— Nous  ne  de» 
voirsrien  payer,  parceque  nous  fommes  oiiits. 

nity^ 


So  DESMOND. 

nity,  by  obtaining  the  right  of  trial  by  jury,  by 
the  reform  in  the  courts  of  judicature;  where, 
it  is  well  known,  that  formerly,  every  thing 
was  given  to  money  or  to  favour,  and  to  equity 
and  juftice,  nothing  ?— As  to  the  prejudice  that 
allthefe  alterations  have  been  to  the  manners  of 
fociety,  to  that,  indeed,  I  have  nothing  to  fay. 
I  muft  lament  that,  in  fhaking  off  the  yoke,  wc 
have  been  fo  long  reproached  for  wearing,  we 
have  not  taken  care  to  preferve,  unfaded,  all 
thofe  elegant  flowers  with  which  it  was  deco* 
rated.  The  complaint,  perhaps,  is  well  found- 
ed, for  I  have  heard  it  before  ;  and,  particularly 
from  the  ladies  of  your  country,  Sir  ;  to  whom, 
1  am  afraid,  the  name  of  a  Frenchuian  will 
hereafter  give  no  other  idea  than  that  cf  a  fa- 
vage;  a  misfortune  which,  as  I  greatly  admire 
the  Englifh  ladies,  nobody  can  niore  truly  regret 
than  1  fhall.— But  I  fhall  tire  you,  Sir,  by  ihus 
dwelling  on  a  fubjedt  which  you  have  jufloblerved 
is  very  ennuyanl ;  and,  therefore,  wjU  leave  you 
to  Monfieur  I'Abbe  de  Bremont,  whcfe  ideas, 
on  public  matters,  feem  more  happily  to  meet 
your  own." 

Montfietiri  tlien  v/alfred  away,  and,  with  me, 
joined  the  paity  ui  tlie  lady  of  the  houle,  who 
was  at  play  in  another  room.— Ihe  converfa- 
tion,  round  the  table,  took  another  turn,  and  we 
foon  afterwards  went  away ;  and,  as  the  evening 
was  warm,  ftrolled  into  the  Luxembourg  Gar- 
dens, where  my  friend  continued,  as  1  will  relate 
in  a  future  letter,  to  fpeak  on  the  predifpofing 
caufes  of  the  revolution — and  on  its  eiFedls. 

I  am  fo  late  now,  as  to  the  poft,  that  I  have 
only  time  to  entreat  you  to  write  to  me  imme- 
diately, that  I  may  receive  your  letter  before  I 

leave 


DESMOND.  8l 

leave  Paris,  which  will  be  within  thefe  fif- 
teen days. — The  ten  laft  have  pafTed  without 
my  receiving  a  fingle  line  from  you, — Adieu  ! 
dear  Bethel, 

Your*s  truly, 

LIONEL  DESMOND. 


L  jE  X. 


82  DESMOND. 


LETTER    IX. 


TO     MR.     BETHEL, 


Paris,  Auguft  4,  1 790, 

I  T  is  very  uneafy  to  me,  my  dear  Bethel,  to 
be  fo  long  without  hearing  from  you. — 1  am 
willing  to  believe,  that  you  are  abfent  from 
Hartfield,  and  wandering  with  my  little  friends, 
Harry  and  Louifa,  on  one  of  your  ufual  fum- 
iner  tours  ;  and  that,  therefore,  you  have  not 
received  my  letters,  and  know  not  whither  to 
direct. — I  would,  indeed,  rather  believe  any 
thing  than  that  you  have  forgotten  me,  unlefs 
it  be,  that  illncfs  has  prevented  your  writing, 
Waverly  has  had  only  two  letters  from  his 
youngeft  After  fince  he  left  England  j  and  they 
hardly  mention  the  Verney  family,  as  Fanny 
Waverly  is  with  her  mother  at  Bath,  where 
they  ufually  refide. 

Were  my  heart  lefs  deeply  interefted  for  my 
friends  in  England,  I  fhould  be  quite  abforbed 
in  French  politics  ;  £nd,  could  thofe  friends  be 
even  for  a  little  while  fupplied  by  foreign  con- 
nections, 


DESMOND.  83 

ne£lions,  the  family  of  Moiitfleuri  would  be 
that  where  I  fliould  chufe  to  feek.  them. — But 
the  tender  iotereft  1  feel  for  fome  individuals  in 
England,  no  time,  no  change  of  fcene  can  wea- 
ken j  my  heart 

•*  Siill  to  my  country  turns  with  cejfelels  pain, 
And  drags  at  each  remove  a  lengihening  chain. '"• 

I  will  not  indulge  this  train  of  thought;  it 
will  be  better  to  continue  to  relate  the  converfa- 
tion  I  had  with  Montfleuri  in  the  latter  part  of 
that  evening,  of  which  I  defcribed  the  beginning 
in  my  laft  letter. 

As  we  walked  together  towards  the  Luxem- 
bourg Gardens,  he  afked  me  if  I  knew  the 
young  Englifhman,  whofe  argument,  in  defence 
of  the  enormous  revenues  of  ihe  bifhops,  was 
fo  very  convincing. — "  Not  even  by  name," 
anfwered  I  ;  "  and  fo  far  I  am  from  wifhing  to 
enquire,  that  I  would  1  could  forget  having 
heard  fuch  frivolous  folly  in  my  native  lan- 
guage."— Montfleuri  fmiled  at  the  warmth  with 
which  I  fpoke.  '*  I.  can  forgive,"  faid  he, 
*'  the  {hort  view  of  an  unexperienced  boy  juft 
come  from  his  college,  or  the  trifling  inconfe- 
quence  of  a  mere  petit  maitre^  who  knowing 
nothing  beyond  what  the  faunterers  in  a  coffee- 
houfe,  or  the  matrons  of  a  card-table  have  taught 
him  to  repeat  by  rote  ;  talks  merely  as  a  child 
recites  his  lelFon,  without  being  capable  of  af- 
fixing one  idea  to  the  fentences  he  utters. — Such 
people  are  perfedtiy  harmlefs,  or  rather  bring 
into  ridicule  the  caufe  they  attempt  to  defend j 
but,  .when  1  meet,  as  loy  often  i  have  done. 


»  Coldf-uUh. 

En  !ifl.- 


©4  D    E    S    M   O   N    D. 

Engli(hmen  of  mature  judgment  and  folid  abi- 
lities, fo  loft  to  all  right  principles  as  to  depre- 
ciate, mifreprefent,  and  condemn  thofe  exerti- 
ons by  which  we  have  obtained  that  liberty  they 
afFedl  fo  feduloufly  to  defend  for  themfelves ; 
when  they  declaim  in  favour  of  an  hierarchy  fo 
fubverfive  of  all  true  freedom,  either  of  thought 
or  adlion,  and  fo  inimical  to  the  welfare  of  the 
people,  and  pretend  to  blame  us  for  throwing 
off  thofe  yokes,  which  would  be  intolerable  to 
themfelves,  and  which  they  have  been  accuf- 
tomed  to  ridicule  us  for  enduring :  I  ever  hear 
them  with  a  mixture  of  contempt  and  indigna- 
tion, and  reflect  with  concern  on  the  power  of 
national  prejudice  and  national  jealoufy,  to 
darken  and  pervert  the  underftanding. 

"  All,  however,  that  I  have  ever  heard  from 
fuch  men,  has  ferved  only  to  prove  to  me,  either 
that  they  fear  for  their  own  nation  the  too  great 
political  confequence  of  ours,  when  our  conftii- 
tution  fhall  be  eftablifhed  ;  or  know  and  dread, 
that  the  light  of  reafonthus  rapidly  advancing, 
which  has  fiiewn  us  how  to  overturn  the  mafly 
and  cumbrous  edifice  of  defpotifm,  will  make, 
too  evident,  the  faults  of  their  own  fyftem  of 
government,  which  it  is  their  particular  intcreft 
to  fkreen  from  refearch  and  reformation. — Bat 
how  feeble  are  all  the  endeavours  of  this  polrti- 
cai  jealoufy  on  one  hand,  and  the  yet  obftinate 
piejudices  of  papal  fuperftition  on  the  other,  to 
obfcure  this  light  in  its  irrefiftible  and  certain 
progrefs ;  more  rapid  and  more  brilliant  from 
the  vain  attempt  to  intercept  and  impede  it. — ■ 
**  Nefentezvouspas"  fays  Voltaire  very  juftly 
i — **  Ne  fentez  vous  pas^  que  ce  qui  eji  jujle^  clair^ 
ivHent^  eji  naturdUmsni  t  tfpi£ii  de  tout  le  rnonde^ 

^  que 


D    E    S    M    O    N    D*  85 

fcf  que  des  chimeres  ne  peuventpas  tojoun  s'attlrer 
la.meTtu  veneratian?*** 

The  fudden  change  that  has  taken  place  in 
this  country,  from  the  moft  indolent  fubmiffion 
to  a  defpotic  government,  to  the  adoption  of 
principles  of  more  enlarged  liberty  than  your 
nation  has  ever  avowed,  appeared  (o  aftonifh- 
Ing,  and  fo  unaccountable,  to  thofe  who  beheld 
the  event  at  a  diflance,  that  they  believed  it 
could  not  be  permanent.  Our  national  charac- 
ter, a  chara^er  given  us  by  Caefar,  and  which 

we  are  laid  ftill  to  retain That  vehement, 

fierce,  and  almoft  irrefif^ible,  in  the  beginning 
of  an  aftion,  we  are  foon  repulfed  and  difmayed 
—Encouraged  the  perfuafion,  that  the  revolu- 
tion would  prove  only  a  violent  popular  com- 
motion j  and  that  when  our  firft  ardour  was 
abated,  the  fpirit  of  our  ancient  government, 
taking  advantage  of  this  well-known  difpofition 
of  the  French  people,  would  gradually  refume 
its  influence ;  and  perhaps,  by  a  few  conceffions 
of  little  confequence,  induce  us  to  fubmit  again 
to  that  fyftem,  which  a  momentary  frenzy  had 
fufpended.  But  I,  who,  though  as  diffipated 
as  moft  men,  was  neither  an  unobferving  or 
difmterefted  fpecSator  of  what  was  paffing,  have 
for  fome  years  feen,  that  our  government  was 
approaching  rapidly  to  its  diflolution,  and,  that 
many  caufes  unknown,  and  unfufpecSled,  were 
filently  uniting  to  accelerate  its  ruin, 

*'  The  advocates  for  defpoiifm  confider  the 
reigns  of  Henry  the  Fourth,  and  Louis  the 
Fourteenth,  as  evidences  in  favor  of  their  fyf- 

*  Are  you  not  fenfible,  that  what  is  juft,  clear,  and  evident, 
muft  be  natuially  attended  to — Aud  tlwt  chimeras  caanot  »1- 
Ya^s  be  held  in  reneraiion  ? 

tem : 


J^6  O   E   S   M   O  K  D. 

tem  ;  but  allowing,  that  the  former  was  an  ex- 
cellent man,  and   worthy  to  be  entrufted  with 
the  power  of  governing  a  great  people   (which 
can  hardly  be  allowed  to  Louis  the  Fourteenth), 
what  a  black  and  hideous  lift  of  regal  monfters 
may  be  brought  to  contrail  the  molt  favourable 
pidtures  tnat  can  be  drawn  of  thefe  monarchs. 
The   various  murders  and  aflaffinations  which 
{lain  the  annals  of  the  lad  princes  of  the  Houfe 
of  Valoisj  and,  above  all,  the  maflacre  of  St. 
Bartholemew,    rcfledt   difgrace    on    a    nation, 
which,  even  at  that  dark  period,  could  tolerate 
and  obey  fuch  forocious  tyrants,  andftill  more, 
on  the  fanguinary  fuperftition  whicn  gave  them 
a  pretence  to  commit  thefe  enormities.     The 
fame  bigotry,  however,  delivered   his   infuJted 
country  from  the  laft  of  this  odious  race*;  but 
it  oppofed,  in  his  fucccflbr,  a  man  who  fcemed 
born  for  the  political   falvation  of  his  people, 
and  who  became  afterwards  the  beft  king  that 

France  ever  boafted. Brought  up  like  the 

mountaineers,  over  whom  only  it  was  once 
likely  he  fliould  reign,  his  heart  had  never  been 
hardened,  nor  his  frame  enervated  by  the  flat- 
teries or  luxuries  of  a  court. — He  had  not  been 
taught,  that  to  be  born  a  king  is  to  be  born 
fomething  more  than  man. 

*'  The  admirable  difpofitions  he  had  received 
from  nature,  were  fo  much  improved  in  the 
rigid  fchool  of  adverfity,  in  which  fo  many 
years  of  his  life  were  palled,  that  his  charader 
was  fixed,  and  profperity  and  power  could  not 
deftroy  thofe  fentiments  of  humanity  and  good- 
nefs  which  made  him,  throughout  his  whole 
leign  (even  amidll  the  too  libtral  indulgence  of 

«  Henry  the  Third. 

fomc 


DESMOND.  87 

fome  weaknefTes  and  errors)  confider  the  happi> 
nefs  of  his  people  as  the  firft  objedl  of  his  go- 
vernment. But  his  life  was  embittered,  and  his 
endeavours  for  the  good  of  his  fubjedts  conti- 
nually oppofed,  by  the  reftlefs  fufpicion,  and 
encroaching  ambition  of  the  priefts  of  that  reli- 
gion, to  which,  to  fave  the  efFufion  of  his  peo- 
ple's blood,  he  was  a  reluctant,  and  perhaps, 
not  a  very  fincere  convert.  Till  at  length  the 
fame  execrable  fanaticifm  raifed  againft  him  the 
murderous  hand  of  Ravaillac,  and  with  him 
periflied  the  hopes  of  France  j  a  nation  that, 
had  he  lived,  would  probably  have  pofTefled 
profperity  and  happinefs,  with  a  confiderablc 
portion  of  political  liberty. 

*'  The  treafurc  that  the  wife  oeconomy  of  the 
Due  de  Sully  had  amafTed  for  him,  to  carry  on 
his  projects,  which  would  have  fecured  a  long 
and  univerfal  peace,  were  inftantly,  on  his  death, 
diflipated  among  the  hungry  and  (elfifli  nobility 
that  furrounded  his  widow*. 

"  The  early  part  of  the  reign  of  the  weak 
and  peevifh  bigot  his  fon,  Louis  the  Thirteenth, 
was  marked  by  a  faint  attempt  to  rcftore  fome- 
thing  like  a  voice  to  the  people,  by  a  convoca- 
tion of  les  etais  generauxf. 

*'  But  this  was  rather  an  effort  of  the  nobi- 
lity againft  the  hated  power  of  the  Italian  favou- 
rites, the  Conchinis,  than  meant  to  reftore  to 
the  people  any  part  of  their  loft  rights. 

"  The  whole  of  this  reign  was  rendered  odious 
by  the  continual  wars  on  the  fubjedl  of  religion^ 

*  Mary  of  Medicis. 

+  The  laft  «flemlly  of  that  defcriptioo  ihat  was  calied.in 
France.   , 
•  ■'       .  V/hich 


which  deluged  the  country  with  blood;  by  the 
fa£lions,  which  exifted  even  in  the  family  of  the 
prince  upon  the  throne;  where  the  mother  was 
armed  againft  her  fon,  the  fon  againft  his  mo- 
ther ;  and  the  brothers  againft  each  other. — All 
pradifing,  in  turn,  every  artifice  that  perfidy 
and  malignity  could  imagine;  and  facrificing 

every  thing  to  their  own  worthlefs  views. 

When  to  thefe  ruinous  circumftances  was  added 
an  ambitious  ariftocracy,  ready  on  every  occa- 
iion  to  take  advantage  of  the  weaknefs  of  the 
monarch,  and  the  difcord  in  his  councils,  it  is 
eafily  feen  that  nothing  but  the  refolute  courage, 
and  ftrong  talents  of  Richelieu  could  have  pre- 
vented the  total  dcftruiSlionof  France  as  a  mo- 
narchy; it  would,  but  for  him,  have  been  bro- 
Jcen  into  fmail  republics,  and  fmall  principali- 
ties; the  firft  would  have  been  pofleffed  by  the 
Huguenots,  and  the  latter  by  the  principal  no- 
bility; who,  whenever  they  oppoied  the  court, 
and  flew  into  rebellion,  revolted  not  againft  mea- 
fures,  but  men. — It  was  the  favourites  of  Louis 
the  Thirteenth  that  provoked  them,  and  not  the 
cncreafing  oppreffion  of  the  people. — The  un- 
happy and  plundered  people,  who  equally  the 
victims  of  the  monarch,  the  nobles,  and  the 
priefts,  were  pillaged  and  deft  toyed  by  them  all. 
But  the  thick  cloud  of  ignorance  which  co- 
vered Europe,  was  yet  but  flowly  and  partially 
rolling  away:  it  was  during  this  period  that 
Galileo  was  imprifoned  in  Italy*  for  his  difco- 
veries  in  aftronomy  ;  and  that  the  Defcartes 
was  accufed  of  impiety  and  atheifoi. 

*  '•  There  I  vifited,"  fays  Milton,  '*  the  ceiebrited  Gali- 
leo, then  poor  and  old,  and  a  long  tirDe  a  prifoner  in  the  dwa- 
geon  of  the  Inquil'tion,  for  daring  to  think otherwife  in  aftro- 
nomy than  hi*  FrAOcilcan  and  DomicicaQ  licenlers  thought." 

«  The 


DESMOND*  89 

"  The  reign  of  Louis  the  Fourteenth  was 
more  propitious  to  knowledge. — His  encourage- 
ment of  fcience  and  literature  has,  in  the  im- 
mortality it  has  conferred  upon  him,  led  many 
writers  to  forget  the  oftentatious  defpot,  in  the 
munificent  patron. — Fafcinated  by  his  manners, 
dazzled  by  the  magnificence  of  his  public  works, 
and  elated  by  his  victories,  his  people  felt  for 
him  the  moft  enthufiaftic  attachment,  and  loved 
even  his  vices;  vices  which  the  fervile  crowd 
of  nobles  around  him,  found  it  their  iniereft  to 
imitate  and  applaud  ;  while  the  priefts  alfo  made 
their  advantage  of  thefe  errors,  obtaining  by 
them  the  means  of  diilating  to  a  man  who  waft 
at  once  a  libertine  and  a  cievoti.-~-'ThQ  revoca- 
tion of  the  editSt  of  Nantz  ;  the  cruel  and  ab- 
furd  perfecution  of  the  Proteftants,  were  among 
the  follies  that  they  led  him  to  commit  j  and 
depopulaUtd    and     impoverished    his    country, 
which,  at  his  death,  fnon  after  tlic  clofe  tjf  an 
unfucccfsful  war,  was  in  a  ftate  of  almolt  total 
bankruptcy  ;  yet,  fo   bigotted  were  we  then  to 
the  fyftem  of  paiTive  obtdience,  fo  attached  ta 
unlimited  monarchy,  that  throughout  the  long 
reign  of  his"  great-grandfon,*  the  murmurs  of 
the  people  were  feeble  and  difregarded  ;   though 
their   burthens   were   intolerable,  though   they 
were  impofed  by  a  prince  who,  without  any  of 
the  virtues  of  his  predecefibr,  had  more  than  his 
vices;  and,  though  the  fums  thus  extorted  from 
the  hard  hands  of  patient  induUry,  were  either 
expended  in  difgraceful  and  ill- managed   wars, 
or  hviflied  in  the  debaucheries  of  the  molt  prof- 
ligate courtf  that  modern  isurope  hag  beheld. 


♦  Louis  the  Fifteenth. 

f  See  U  Vie  privee  dc  Louis  XV. 


From 


^0  DESMOND. 

,^From  the  infamous  means  that  to  fupport  all 
this,  were  then  pra6lifed  to  raife  money  ;  from 
the  heavy  impofts  that  were  then  laid  on  the 
country,  France  has  never  recovered  j  but  per- 
haps, in  the  difcontents  which  thefe  opprefTions 
created,  filent  and  unmarked  as  they  were,  the 
foundation  was  laid  for  the  univerfal  fpirit  of 
revolt,  to  which  flie  is  now  indebted  for  her 
freedom. 

*'  In  the  mean-time,  the  progrefs  of  letters, 
which  Louis  the  Fourteenth  h;id  encouraged, 
was  infenfibly  difpelling  that  ignorance  that 
aJone  could  fecuie  this  blind  obedience. — The 
prefident,  Montefquieu  had  done  as  much  as  a 
writer,  under  a  defpot,  dared  to  do,  towards  de- 
veloping the  fpirit  of  the  law;-,  and  the  true  prin- 
ciph;S  of  govcinfoenti  ari'i,  though  the  multi- 
tud,  heeded  not,  or  underftood  not  his  abftradT; 
reafaning,  he  taught  thofe  to  think,  who  gra- 
dually difleminated  his  opinions,  Voltaire  at- 
tacked defpotifm  in  all  its  holds,  with  the  powers 
of  refiftlefs  wit. —  Roufleau  with  matchlefs  elo- 
quence :— and,  as  thefe  were  authors  who,  to 
the  force  of  reafon,  added  the  charms  of  fancy, 
they  were  univerfally  read,  and  their  fentiments 
were  adopted  by  all  clafles  of  men. 

^'  The  political  maxims  and  oeconomical 
fyftems  of  Turgot,  and  the  application  of  thef3 
principles  by  Mirabeau,  excited  a  fpirit  of  en- 
quiry, the  refult  of  which  could  not  fail  of  being 
favourable  to  the  liberties  of  mankind;  and 
fuch  was  the  difpofition  of  the  people  of  France, 
when  the  ambitious  policy  of  our  miniftry  fent 
our  foldiers  into  America  to  fupport  the  En- 
glifh  colonifts  in  their  refiftance  to  the  parent 
ftatc." 

I  here 


DESMOND.  91 

1  here  interrupted  my  friend,  by  remarking, 
that  (o  deep  is  the  refentment  which  the  Engli/h 
ftill  entertain  againft  his  nation  for  this  inter- 
ference, that  I  had  heard  many  rejoicing  over 
the  moft  unpromifing  picture  they  could  draw 
of  the  prefent  ftate  of  France}  and,  when  they 
have  imagined  the  country  deluged  with  blood, 
and  perifliing  by  famine,  have  faid — '*  Oh  !  the 
French  defcrve  it  all  for  what  they  did  againft 
us  in  America." — 

"  And  yet,  my  dear  Sir,'*  anfwered  Mont" 
fieuri,  *'  thefe  good  countrymen  of  your's  are 
a  little  inconfiderate  and  inconfiftent:  inconfi- 
deratc  in  not  reflecting,  that  the  interference 
which  feems  fo  unparclonahle,  was  the  ^^t  of  the 
cabinet,  not  of  the  penple,  who  had  no  choice, 
hut  went  to  be  fi^ot  ac  for  the  liberties  of  Ame- 
I'ica,  without  having  any  liberty  of  their  own  i 
and,  inconfirtcnt  inafniuch,  as  they  row  ex- 
claim againft  the  refolution  we  have  mace  to  <^e-» 
prive  our  monarchs  of  the  power  of  mf.king 
war;  a  power  which  they  thus  complain  has 
been  fo  unwarrantably  exerted-— Thefe  are  fome 
of  the  many  abfurdities  into  which  a  refolution 
to  defend  a  pernicious  fyftem,  betrays  its  ableft 
advocates.  However,  our  court  has  found  its 
punifbment  ;  blinded  by  that  reftlefs  defire  of 
conqueit,  and  their  jealoufy  of  the  hnglifh, 
which  has  ever  marked  its  politics,  our  govern- 
ment did  not  reflect  that  they  were  thus  tacitly 
encouraging  a  fpirit  fubvtrfive  of  all  their 
views  ;  nor  foreiee,  that  the  men  who  were  fent 
out  to  aflifl  in  the  prefervation  of  American 
freedom,  would  foon  learn  that  they  wtre  de- 
graded by  being  themfelves  flaves  ;  and  would 
return  to  their  native  country  to  feel  and  to  aflerC 
their  right  to  be  themfelves  free. 

«  I  was 


'*  I  was  then  a  very  young  man ;  but  my 
father,  who  was  a  colonel  in  the  regiment  of 
Naflau,  and  who  died    in  America,  took  me 
with  him  in  defpite  of  the  tears  and  entreaties 
of  my  mother  — 1  faw  there  fuch  fcenes  as  have 
kft  an  indelible  impreiTion  on  my  mind,  and 
an  utter  abhorrence  for  all  who,  to  gratify  their 
own  wild  ambition,  or  from  even   worfe  mo- 
tives, can  deliberately  animate  the  human  race 
to  become  butchers  of  each  other.-— Above  all, 
it  has  given  me  a  deteftation  of  civil  war,  for 
the  fierceft  animofity  with  which    the  French 
and  Englifh  armies  have  met  in  the  field,  was 
mildnefs  and  friendfhip   in   comparifon  of  the 
ferocity   felt  by    the  Englifh  and   Americans, 
men  fpeaking  the  fame  language,  and  originally 
of  the  fame  country,  in  their  encounters  with 
each  other.     I  faw,  amidft  the  almoft  undifci- 
plined  Americans,  many  inftances  of  that  en- 
ll.ul'iaftic    courage   which  animates   men    who 
contend  for  ail  that  is  dear  to  them,  againft  the 
iron  hand  of  injuftice  i  and,  1  faw  thefe  exer- 
tions made   too  often  vain,  againft  the  difci- 
plincd  mercenaries  of  defpotifm  j  who,  in  learn- 
ing  to  call  them   rebels,  feemed   too  often  to 
have  forgotten  that  they  were  men.     How  little 
did  I  then  imagine,  that  a  country  which  feem- 
ed to  be  devoted  to  deftrudtion,  could  ever  be 
in  fuchaftate  as  that  in  which  I  have  fince  be- 
held it, — Yes,  my  friend,  I  revifited  this  coun- 
try two  years  fmce,  in   which   fourteen   years 
before  1  had   ferved  as  an   enfign,  when  it  was 
the  feat  of  war. — 1  fee  ic  now  recovered  of  thofe 
wounds,  which  its  unnatural  parent  hoped  were 
mortal,  and  in  the  moit.flounihing  ftate  of:po- 
llticai  heakh^ 

"  What 


D  t  IT  M  d   R   O.  91 

**  What  then^ecomes  of  the  polittcat  credtt 
of  thofe  who  prognofticated,  that  her  produc- 
tions would  be  unequal  to  her  wants ;  her  le- 
giilatures  to  her  government.— I  know  not  how 
far  the  mother-country  is  the  worfe  for  this  dif-  - 
union  with  her  colonies — but,  I  am  fure,  they 
are  the  better ;  and  nothing  is  more  falfc  than 
that  idea  of  the  veteran  ftatefman,  that  a  coun- 
try under  a  new  form  of  government,  is  deftr- 
tute  of  thofe  who  have  ability  to  dire6l  it.— 
That  they  may  be  unlearned  in  the  deteflable 
chicane   of  politics,  is   certain  j  but  they  are 
alfo  uncorrupted  by  the  odious  and  pernicious 
maxims  of  the  unfeeling  tools   of  defpotifm ; 
honeft   minifters   then,    and   able   negociators 
will  arife  with   the  occafion.— They  have  ap- 
peared  in  America;  they   are  rifing  in  France 
— they  have,  indeed,  arifen ;  and,  when  it  is 
feen  that  talents  and  application,  and   not  the 
fmile  of  a  miftrefs,  or  a  connexion  with  a  pa- 
raiite,  give  claims  to  the  offices  of  public  truft  j 
men   of  talents  and  application  will  never  b» 
wanting  to  fill  mem." 

Montfleuri  here  paufed  z  moment;  and  a 
fentence  of  Milton's,  of  whom  you  know  I 
am  an  inceflant  reader,  immediately  occurred 
to  me  as  extremely  applicable  to  what  he  had 
been  faying  ;  I  repeated  it  to  him  in  Englifh, 
which  he  underftands  perfe€^}y  well. 

"  For,  when  God  (hakes  a  kingdom,  with 
{Irong  and  healthful  commotions,  to  a  general 
reforming,  it  is  not  untrue  that  many  fedlaries 
and  falfe  teachers  are  then  bufieft  in  feducing: 
but  yet  more  true  it  is,  that  God  then  raifes, 
to  his  own  work,  men  of  rare  abilities  and 
more  than  common  indufkry  ;  not  only  to  look 
back  and  revife  what  hath  been  taught  hereto- 
fore. 


9+ 


D  B  S  M  O  N  0. 


fore,  but  to  gain  further,  and  go  on  feme 
new  and  enlightened  fteps  in  the  difcovery  of 
truth."* 

Here  our  conference  was  ended  for  this  time, 
at  lead,  on  politics.     We  took  a  few  turns 
among   the    happy    groups   who   were   either 
walking,   or  fitting,   to  enjoy  the  moft  beau- 
tiful moon-light  evening  I  ever  remember  to 
have  feen  j  and  I  then  returned  to  my  hotel,  and 
went  to  my  repofe,  determined  to  indulge  the 
pleafing  hope  of  having  letters  from  England 
on  the  morrow,  as  it  was  poft  day  j  but,  I  am 
again    moft  feverely   difappointed. — Waverly, 
however,  has  letters  from  his  fifters — they  lay 
on  the  table  in  the  room  where  we  ufually  fit, 
for  he  is  gone  with,  I  know  not  what  party,  to 
Chantilly. — I   fee  that  one  of  them  is  directed 
by  the  hand  of  Geraldine.— — I  have  taken  it 
up  an  hundred  times,  and  laid  it  down  again— 
It  is  fealed  with  an  impreifion  of  the  Verney 
arms — it  is  heavy,  and  feems  to  contain  more 
than  one  or  two  fheets  of  paper  j  perhaps  there 
is  a  letter  in  it  for  me. — Yet,  why  fhould  I  , 
flatter  myfelf  ? — The  other  letter  is  from  Fanny 
Waverly — I  recolledl  her  hand,  for  it  a  little  re- 
fembles  her  fifter's. — Would  to  heaven  Waverly 
was  come  back — He  went  on  a  fudden,  and  named 
no  time  for  his  return  ;  and  my  time,  ihefe  laft 
two  days,  has  been  waflcd  in  the  moft  uneafy 
expectation ;  for  1  can  think  of  nothing  but  the 
purport  of  thefe  letters. — If  they  aflure  me  of 
the  health  and  content  of  Mrs.   Verney,  for  I 
will  try  to  break  myfelf  of  calling  her  Geral- 
dine   (becaufe  I  always^  long  to  add  my  to  that 
beloved  name) — I  will  endeavour  to  account, 

*  Miltoaontbe  Liberty  of  unliccnfed  Priating. 

deaf 


D   E  S   M   O  K  D.  9^ 

dear  Bethel,  for  your  filence,  by  believing  that 
you  are  travelling  with  your  children;  and  kt 
out  as  cheerfully  as  I  can,  with  Montfleuri  and 
his  fifters,  on  Monday,  which  is  the  day  fixed 
for  our  departure. — I  hoped,  a  few  days  ago, 
that  I  had  determined  Waverly  to  go  with  us, 
but  he  has  fince  made  fome  new  acquaintance, 
and  has  probably  fome  new  fchemes. 

Adieu  !  You  know  me  to  be  ever 

moft  faithfully  your's, 

LIONEL  DESMOND. 


L  E  T. 


^S  B  t  S  M  O  M  D. 


LETTER    X. 


Montfleuri,  Augufl  29,   1 790. 

AFTER  being  once  more  compelled  to 
change  my  plan  on  account  of  the  indecifion  of 
Waverly,  who  did  not  return  to  Paris  till  fome 
days  after  he  had  written  to  me  to  fay  he  fhould 
be  there  j  he  arrived,  and  I  faw  thefe  letters, 
which  alone  would  have  induced  me  to  wait. — 
But  I  was  extremely  mortified  to  find,  that  in- 
ilead  of  an  account  of  Geraldine  herfelf,  it  was 
only  a  long  letter  about  health  and  prudence, 
which  Mrs.  Waverly,  who  has  the  gout  herfelf, 
has  employed  her  daughter  to  write  for  her  to 
her  fon.  In  a  poflfcript,  however,  (he  adds 
fome  trifling  commiffions  on  her  own  account, 
which,  as  Waverly  fet  out  the  next  day  for 
Rheims,  with  the  fame  fcampering  party  with 
whom  he  was  juit  returned  from  Chantilly,  he 
left  for  me  to  execute  :  judge  whether  I  did  not 
undertake  them  with  pleafure,  with  delight,  and 
whether  I  regretted  the  two  days  longer  that 
were  thus  pafied  in  her  fervice  at  Paris. — This 
circumftance  gave  me  an  opportunity  of  writing 
to  her. — And  fo,  my  dear  Bethel,  I  (hall  have 
a  letter  from  her  befoie  I  quit  this  place,  whi- 
ther 1  have  entreated  her  to  dire<^.  Do  not 
now  give  me  one  of  your  grave,  cold  ]c<5lures — 
1  and 


DESMOND.  97 

and  blame  me  for  the  inconfiftency  of  flying 
from  my  country  to  conquer  a  paflion  which  | 

ftill  take  every  opporluiiity  of  cherirtiing. 

Without  this  afi^'eclion,  1  feel  that  my  life  would 
fjnlc  into  taftelefs  apathy;  and  1  cannot,  my 
rigid  Mentor,  difcover  the  immorality  of  it,  in 
its  prefent  form.  Oit  the  contrary,  I  am  con- 
vinced, that  my  apprehenfioris  of  rendering 
myfelf  unworthy  of  the  efteem,  which,  I  now 
believe,  Geraldine  feels  for  me,  aiSrs  upon  me 
as  a  fort  of  fecond  confcience. — What  ought 
iiot  that  man  to  attempt,  who  dares  hope  ever 
to  become  worthy  of  her  heart?— But  I  dare 
not;  nor  do  I  ever  truft  myfelf  with  fo  pre- 
fumptuous  a  thought. — Her  friendfhip,  her  ef- 
teem, may  be  mine — But  I  am  getting  into  re- 
gions, where  your  cold  and  calm  philofophy 
cannot,  or  will  not  follow  me. 

I  return,  therefore,  to  mere  matter  of  fadl  ; 
and  to  thank  you  for  your  long-expedted  and 
long  wiihed-for  letter. — It  is  tolerably  inter- 
fperfed  with  ledures,  my  goad  friend — but  I 
thank  you  for  them,  becaufe  I  know  they  are 
the  eftiifions  of  anxious  friendfhip — and  liiil 
more,  [  thank  you  for  the  account  you  give  me 
of  yourfelf,  your  children,  and  all  other  friends, 
for  whom  you  think  i  am  interefted,  except  the 
V^erneys,  whpm  you  cruelly  leave  out  of  the 
lirt — and  relative  to  them,  therefore,  I  form 
many  uneafy  conjettures,  fo  that,  inftead  of 
faving  me  from  pain,  you  have  inflidled  it  ;  my 
appiehenfjons,  probably,  go  beyond  the  truth; 
but  Geraldine  is  unhappy,  I  know  {he  is. — in 
-every  Knglifti  newfpaper  that  I  have  feen  fince 
1  left  London,  there  is  fome  account  of  Ver- 
ney's  exploits  upon  the  turf — and  of  his  win- 
nings or  his  lolings. — Some  of  Waverly's  ac- 

•VoL.  I,  F  quaintance, 


^8  S   £   S   M   O   N   0. 

qualntance,  whom  I  accidentaHy  ceriverftjd 
with  at  Paris,  fpoke  of  him  in  terms  of  high 
approbation,  as  to  ufe  their  own  cant,  **  a  de- 
vilifli  dafhing  fellow — a  good  fellow"' — and  fuch 
epithets  as  convinced  me  he  is  facrificing  the 
happinefs  of  that  lovely  woman  to  the  glory  of 
being  talked  of— —The  only  fpecies  of  fame 
which  feems  to  give  him  any  pleafure. 

I  am  now  at  Montfleuri,  in  the  Lyonois.— 
Had  I  not  felt,  as  I  travelled  hither,  a  ftrange, 
uneafy  fenfation,  which  I  acknowledged  to  be 
a  weaknefs,  in  refle(Sting  on  the  encreafing  dif- 
tance  between  me  and  Geraldine;  and  had  I 
not  very  uneafy  apprehenfions  about  her  brother, 
who  is  gone  with  a  fet  of  very  diflipated  boys, 
they  hardly  know  whither  themfelves,  my  jour- 
ney to  this  place  would  have  been  one  of  the 
moft  agreeable  I  ever  made. 

1  have  twice  before  trav^elled  the  direct  road 
from  Paris  to  Lyons. —  Montfleuri,  who  is  the 
moft  cheerful  companion  in  the  world,  has  him- 
felf  a  great  tafte  for  rural  beauty,  and  there- 
fore, though  every  part  of  this  country  is,  of 
courfe,  well  known  to  him,  he  had  particular 
pleafure  in  turning  out  of  the  road  to  (hew  me 
any  view,  or  building,  which  he  thought  worth 
my  obfervation.  Our  journey,  by  this  means, 
was  of  eight  days  continuance' — and  eight  days 
have  been  feldom  more  pleafantly  pafled. 

I  have  faid  very  little  hitherto  of  Montfleuri's 
two  fifters,  who  are  with  us  j  and  who  are  by 
no  means  objedls  to  be  pafled  in  frlence,  in  ihie 
account  you  wi(h  to  have  of  my  wanderings. — 
Though  I,  you  know,  "  bear  a  charmed  heart," 
and  therefore  cannot,  like  our  friend  Melthrope, 
ertliven  my  narrative  with  details  of  my  own 
paffions  for  a  fprightly  French  woman,  or  ah 

eleeant 


DESMOND.  Q9 

elegant  Italian.  I  am  perfuaded,  that  were  I 
to  be  (hewn,  in  fucceflion,  the  moft  celebrated 
beauties  of  all  the  kingdoms  through  which  I 
(hall  pafs,  I  thus  fliould  ftill  apoftrophife  Ge- 
raldine : 

•'  I  fcorn  the  beauties  common  eyet  adore. 

The  more  I  view  them— feel  thy  charm*  the  more.** 

But  I  am  talking  of  her  inftead  of  Madame  de 
Boifbelie,  who  is  very  beautiful  and  very  un- 
happy, two  circumftances  that  cannot  fail  to 
make  her  extremely  interefting  ;  perhaps  fhe  is 
rendered  yet  more  fo  by  the  unfailing  variety  of 
her  manner. — There  are  times  when  her  natu- 
rally gay  fpirits  fink  under  the  preflure  of  mis- 
fortune ;  fometimcs  her   ill-afix)rted   marriage, 
which  has  put  her   into   the  power  of  a  man 
altogether  unworthy  of  her ;  the  embarraflment 
of  his  affairs,  and  the  uncertainty  of  her  fate» 
recur  to  her  in  all  their  force;  and  (he  efcapes 
from  company,  if  it  be  poiTibl^,   to  hide  the 
languor  and  depreiRon  fhe  cannot  conquer. — 
During  our  journey,  however,  this  was  not 
eafily  done,  and  1  often   remarked  with  pain, 
thefe   cruel  refletStions  fill   her  fine  eyes  with 
tears,  and  force  deep  fighs  from  her  bofom. — ■ 
But  this  difpofition  was  as  a  palling  cloud  obfcur- 
ing  the  brilliancy  of  the  fummer  fun.  —  The  mo- 
ment her  attention  is  diverted  from  this  mourn- 
ful and  ufelcfs  contemplation,  by  fome  naw  oh- 
je£l,  or  yields  to  the  tender  raillery  of  her  bro- 
ther, who  is  extremely  fond  of  her,  the  gayeft 
fmiles   return  again   to  her  exprefiive  counte- 
nance ;  her   eyes   regain  their   luftre,  and   Gm 
pafles  almoil  inftantaneoufly  from  languid  de- 
jeition,  to  moft  brilliant  vivacity. — Without 
F  2  having 


lOO  DESMOND, 

having  ever  had  what  we  call  a  good  education, 
Jofephine  (for  I  have  learned  from  her  brother, 
and  at  her  own  defire,  to  drop  the  former  appel- 
lation of  Madame  de  Boifbelle)  Jofephine  has 
much  of  that  fort  of  knowledge  which  makes 
her  a  pleafant  companion  ;  and  a  fund  of  native 
wit,  which,  though  it  is  rather  fparkling  than 
impreflive,  renders  her  converfation  very  de- 
lightful.— She  has  a  pretty  voice,  and  plays  well 
on  the  harp. —Yet  all  the  does  has  fo  much  of 
national  characfler  in  it,  that  it  would  become 
only  a  French  woman,  and  1  think  I  fhould  not 
admire  one  of  my  own  countrywomen,  who 
poflTcfTLd  exadly  the  perfon,  talents  and  manners 
of  my  friend's  hder.  —  I  do  not  know  whether 
you  perfeclly  underfland  me,  but  i  underftand 
myfelf;  though,  perhaps,  I  do  not  explain  my- 
felf  clearly. 

The  little  mild  Julie  is  yet  too  young  to  have 
any  very  decided  chara(3:er. — The  religious 
prejudices  which  Ihe  received  in  her  early  in- 
fancy (for  at  nine  years  old  her  mother, deter- 
mined to  make  her  a  nun)  have  funk  fo  deeply 
in  her  mind,  that  I  much  doubt  whether  they 
will  ever  be  erafed.  Ihis  has  given  to  her  dif- 
pofition  a  melancholy  cafl,  which,  though  it 
renders  her,  perhaps,  interefting  to  ftrangers, 
her  brother  fees  with  concern.—  I  perceive  that 
there  is,  at  time-,  a  very  painful  flruggle  in  her 
mind,  between  her  wifh  to  obey  and  gratify 
him  in  entr.'-ing  iut®  the  world,  and  her  fears  of 
ofFending  Heaven  by  having  failed  to  renounce 
it;  and,  i  am  afraid,  there  are  moments  which 
an/  abfurd  bigot  might  take  advantage  of,  to 
perfuade  her,  that  fne  fliouid  yet  return  to  that 
ftate  whither  Heaven  has  fummoned  her, 

Julie,. 


DESMOND.  101 

-  Julie,  however,  is  extremely  pretty,  though 
quite  in  another  ftyle  of  beauty  from  her  fiHcr. 
• — VVaverly  admired  her,  on  firft  feeing  her,  as 
much  as  it  is  in  his  nature  to  admire  any  wo- 
man ;  and,  for  three  days,  I  fancied  it  poffible 
that  the  fair  and  pcnfive  nun  might  tix  this 
vagrant  fpiiit.  I  even  began  to  confider,  how 
(if  the  affair  fhould  become  more  ferious)  Ge- 
raldine,  as  much  as  fhe  wifhes  her  brother  mar- 
ried, would  approve  of  his  chufing  a  woman 
of  another  country,  and  another  religion  from 
his  own ;  and,  I  had  fettled  it  with  myfelf,  to 
give  no  encouragement  to  the  progrels  of  his 

attachment,    till    1   knew    her  fentiments. 

I  might,  however,  have  faved  myfelf  all  my 
wife  refolutions,  for  Waverly  immediately  af- 
terwards making  fome  fortunate  additions  to  his 
number  of  Lngliih  acq'jsirjtance  (Mr.  Chet- 
wood,  the  able  advocate  for  cpiicopalian  luxury 
is  one)  has  fince  pailed  all  his  time  among 
them  ;  and  feems  to  have  loft,  in  their  company, 
every  impreffion  that  the  gentle  Julie,  and  hef 
fafcinating,  though  very  impertct^n.  Engliih,  had 
made. — He  has  promifed,  either  to  come  hither 
within  ten  days,  or  to  meet  me  at  Lyons  in 
the  courfe  -of  a  fortnight  ;  but  I  do. not  expedl 
that  he  will  do  either  the  one  or  the  other, 

I  do  not  know  whether  you  love  ttie  dtfcrip- 
tion  of  places,  or  whetlier  I  am  very  well  qua- 
lified to  undertake  it,  it  you  do. — However,  I 
will  endeavour  to  give  you  an  idea  of  the  habi- 
tation of  Montflcuri,  and  of  the  country  round 
it,  where  his  liberal  and  enlightened  fpirit  has, 
ever  fince  he  became  his  own  mafler,  been  oc- 
cupied in  foftening  the  har{h  features  of  that 
fyjUm  of  government^  to  ivhich  only  the  poverty  and 

mifery 


J02  D    B    S   M    O    N    D. 

mifery  of  fuck  a  country  as  this  could^  at  any  ttme^ 
he  owing. 

The  chateau  of  Montfieuri  is  an  old  building, 

but  it  is  neither  large  nor  magnificent for 

having  no  predilection  for  the  gothic  gloom  in 
which  his  anceftors  concealed  their  greatnefs, 
he  has  pulled  down  every  part  of  the  original 
i^rudlurc,  but  what  was  a<£tually  ufeful  to  him- 
felf;  and  brought  the  houfe,  as  nearly  as  he 
couldj  into  the  form  of  ot^.e  of  thofe  houfe?, 
which  men  of  a  thoufand  or  twelve  hundred  a 
year  inhabit  in  England. 

its  lituation  is  the  \x\oi\  delicious  that  luxuri- 
ant fi;ncy  could  imagine. — It  ftands  on  a  gentle 
rife,  tiie  river  there,  rather  broad  than  deep, 
makes  almofl  a  circuit  round  it  at  the  difiance 
of  near  half  a  mile. — The  oppofite  banks  rife 
Trrimcd-atc;y  on  the  fouth  fje  into  ftcep  hills  o( 
fantaHic  forms,  clothed  with  vines.  —  They 
arc  naturally  indeed,  little  more  than  rocks  ;  but 
wherever  the  foil  was  deficient,  theinduftryof 
ihe  labourers,  who  are  in  that  diftridt  the  tenants 
of  Montfieuri,  has  fupphed  it;  and  the  wins 
produced  in  this  little  mountainous  traft  is  par- 
ticularlydelicious.  Thefe  pointed  hills  fuddenly 
finlc  into  a  valley,  or  rather  a  narrow  pafs, 
which  thro*  tufts  of  Cyprus  that  grow  among  the 
rocks,  gives  a  very  fingular  view  into  the  coun- 
try beyond  them. — Another  chain  of  hills  then 
Tife  i  and  thefe  laft  were  the  property  of  a  con- 
vent of  monks,  whofe  monaftery  is  not  more 
than  a  mile  from  the  houfe  of  my  friend. — In 
the  culture  of  thefe  two  adjoining  ridges  of 
vineyards,  may  be  ken  the  efi^e(Sls  of  the  ma- 
nagement of  the  different  mafters  to  whom  they 
belong. — The  peafantsoa  the  domain  of  Mont- 
fieuri are  happy  and  profperous,  while  in  the 

line 


O    B    S    M   O    N    p.  103 

line  of  country  immediately  adjoining  to  his, 
though  the  good  fathers  have  taken  tolerable 
care  of  their  vineyards,  has  every  where  el(e 
the  appearance  of  being  under  a  languid  and 
relu(5tant  cultivation. — On  the  top  of  one  of 
the  higheft  of  thefe  hills  is  the  ruin  of  a  large 
ancient  building,  of  which  the  country  people 
tell  wonderful  legends.  1  have  never  yet  ex- 
plored it,  but  it  is  a  fine  obje£l  from  the  win- 
dows of  this  houfe  ;  and  I  rejoice,  that  Mont- 
fleuri,  who  has  purchafed  the  eflate  of  the  con- 
vent, will  now  be  able  to  preferve  it  in  its  pre- 
fent  romantic  form,  from  the  farther  depreda- 
tions of  the  neighbouring  hinds,  who,  when- 
ever their  fears  yielded  to  their  convenience, 
were  in  habits  of  carrying  away  the  materials 
for  their  own  purpofes;  and  have,  by  thofe 
ttieans,  done  more  than  time  towards  d.-flroying 
this  monument  of  aniiquity. — I,  who  love,  )<iu 
knoW)  every  thing  ancient,  unlefs  it  be  ancient 
prejudices,  have  entreated  my  friend  tc  preferve 
this  ftru£lure  in  its  prefent  ibte — than  which, 
nothing  can  be  more  pifturefque  :  when  of  a 
fine  glowing  evening,  the  aimoft  perpendicular 
hill  on  which  it  ftands  is  refle«5i:ed  in  the  unruf- 
fled bofom  of  the  broiid  river,  crowned  with 
thefe  venerable  remains  half  mantled  in  ivy,  and 
other  parafytical  plants,  and  a  few  cyprefTes, 
which  grow  here  as  in  Italy,  mingling  their 
fpiral  forms  among  the  mafles  of  ruin. 

The  whole  of  me  ground  between  the  houfe 
and  the  river,  is  the  paternal  eftate  of  Mont- 
fleuri.— It  is  now  divided,  the  lower  grounds 
into  meadows,  and  the  higher  into  corn  inclo- 
fures,  nearly  as  we  feparate  our  fields  in  En- 
gland.— The  part  mofl  immediately  adjoining  to 
the  houfe  he  has  thrown  into  a  paddock,  and 
QUt  thgfe  Jong  avenues,  which  in  aimoft  every 

dirt<Stion 


I04  I)    £    S    M    O    N    D. 

«iirci^inn  pointed  towards  the  hcufe  into  groups 
of  trees  :  breaking  as  much  as  poiiible  the  lines 
they  would  yet  defcribe,  by  youn^  plantations 
of  i'uch  trees  as  are  ihe  moli:  likely,  by  their 
quick  growth,  to  overtake  them  in  a  few  years. 
—  B<it,  i  am  not  quite  Cure,  that  I  do  not  wifh 
be  had  icft  one  vifta  of  the  beautiful  and  grace- 
'flil  Spanifh  cheftnut  remninini;. — I  know  this 
ben3)S  a  very  gnthic  ar.d  exploded  tafte,  but 
fuch  is  the  force  of  t-arly  irnprefTions,  that  I 
have  ftill  an  aftViSiion  for  *'  the  bowed  roof— 
the  cathtdral-hke  folemniiy  of  long  lines  of  tall 
trees,  whofe  topmod  hougns  are  interlaced  with 
each  other. — i  do  not,  however,  defend  the  pu- 
rity of  my  f-i  ft*?  in  this  in  (lance;  for  nature  cer- 
tainly ntvf  r  planted  trees  in  direcl  lines.  —  But 
I  accv"unt  for  my  prcudeciion,  by  the  kind  of 
per.five  and  'nuhincholy  pleaiure  i  \iftd  to  feel, 
when  in  my  childhood  and  early  youth,  J  walked 
aloile^  in  a  long  avenu?  of  srbeai,  which  led 
frncn  a  very  wild  and  woody  part  of  the  weald 
of  K!^•nt,  to  an  old  houfe  my  father,  at  that 
period  of  my  life,  inhabited.  I  remember  the 
cry  of  the  wood  pecker*,  or  yaffils,  as  we  call 
tlicrn  in  that  country,  going  to  rooft  in  a  pale 
autumnal  evening,  anfwered  by  the  owls,  which 
in  great    numbers  inhabit    the   deep    forert-like 

giejis  that  hiy   behind  the  avenue. 1  fee  the 

moon  riimgflnwly  over  the  dark  mafs  of  wood, 
-and  the  oppofitc  hills,  tinged  vvith  purple  from 
llie  lad  refleclicn  of  the  fun,  which  was  funk 
b.^'iiiid  ihem.-*— — 1  recail  the  fenfations  I  felr, 
w  hfii,  as  the  (ilver  leaves  of  the  afpin'  tiem.bied 
in  th-'  lowed  breeze,  or  flowly  feJ!  to  the  ground 
before  aie,  i  became  half  fnghter.ed  at  the  en- 
creafing  obfcurity  of  the  •objeifis  around  me, 
.ind  have  dUnoO.  perfuadcd  mvielf  that  the  grey 

trunks 


DESMOND.  105 

trunks  of  thefe  old  tree?,  and  the  low  murmur 
of  the  wind  among  thtir  branches,  were  the  dim 
forms,  and  hollow  fighs  of  fome  fupcrnatural 
brings;  and  at  length,  afraid  of  looking  behind 
me,  I  have  hurried  breathlefs  into  the  houfe. 

No  fuch  forabie  tints  as  thefe,  however, 
fhade  the  environs  of  A'lontfleuri's  habitation. 
Ever  fince  he  became  mafter  of  this  place, 
which,  till  then  had  been  very  mijch  negledted, 
he  has  been  endeavouring  to  bring  it  as  near  as 
polTible  to  ihofe  plans  of  comfort  and  conve- 
nience which  he  faw  were  followed  in  England, 
and  of  which,  it  muft  be  acknrwledged,  the 
French,  in  general,  have  not  hitherto  had  much 
idea.  In  this  purfuit,  he  has  fucceeded  much 
better  than  I  ever  faw  it  done  in  France  before  ; 
and  were  it  not  for  a  few  obftinate  and  promi- 
nent features  that  belong;  to  PVench  buildings, 
which  it  is  almoft  impoflible  for  him  to  remove, 
it  would  be  eafy  for  me.  to  imagine  myfelf  ia 
fome  of  the  moft  beautiful  parts  of  England. — 
A  little  fancy  would  convert  the  vineyard?  into 
hop- gardens  (if  hops  could  be  fuppofed  to  grow 
on  fuch  eminences)  ;  nor  would  they  be  much 
injured  by  the  comparifun  ;  for,  when  the  vine 
of  either  is  in  leaf,  the  hop,  fcen  at  a  diftance, 
has  the  moft  agreeable  appearance. — At  other 
times,  neither  the  one  cr  the  other  are,  as  lar 
as  the  beauty  of. the  landfcap-e  is  confidered, 
very  defirable  objecls. 

At  this  feafon,  however,  when  the  peafantry 
around  the  chateau  of  Montfleuri  are  prepar- 
ing for  the  vintage — when  the  people,  h^ppy 
from  their  nacural  difpofition,  the  eSeCt  of  loil 
and  climate — happy  in  a  generous  and  confide- 
rate  mafter  ;  (and  now  more  rationallv'happy, 
from  the  certainty  they  enjoy,  that  nochingcs 
F  5'  can 


I©6  DESMOND. 

can  put  them,  as  once  it  might  have  done,  into 
the  power  of  one  who  may  not  inherit  his  vir- 
tues) when  they  are  making  ready  to  avail 
themfelves  of  this  joyous  feafon.  The  expref- 
fion  of  exaltation  and  content  on  their  animated 
faces,  is  one  of  my  moft  delicious  fpeculati- 
ons. 

Montfleuri,  whofe  morality  borders,  perhapff^ 
a  little  on  epicurifm,  imagines,  that  in  this 
world  of  ours,  where  phyfical  and  unavoidable 
evil  is  very  thickly  fown,  there  is  nothing  fo 
good  in  itfelf,  or  fo  pleafing  to  this  Creator  of 
the  world,  as  to  enjoy  and  difFufe  happinefs.' — 
He  has  therefore,  whether  he  has  refided  here 
or  no,  made  it  the  buGnefs  of  his  life  to  make 
his  vafTals  and  dependents  content,  by  giving 
them  all  the  advantages  their  condition  will  al- 
low.— The  effect  of  this  is,  that  inftead  of 
fqualid  figures  inhabiting  cabins  built  of  mud, 
without  windows  or  floors,  which  are  feen  in 
too  many  parts  of  Frante  (and  which  muft  con- 
tinue to  be  feen,  till  the  benign  influence  of 
liberty  is  generally  felt).  The  peafantry  in  this 
domain  refemble  both  in  their  own  appearance,- 
and  in  the  comfortable  look  of  their  habitations, 
thofe  who.'e  lot  has  fallen  in  thcfe  villages  of 
England*,  where,  the   advantages  of   a  good 

landlord, 

**  The  Englifh  have  a  cuftom  of  arrogantly  bo  ifting  of  the 
f  rtunate  fituation  ot  ihe  common  people  of  England.— But  ie» 
(S'ofe,  who,  ■with  an  onpottnnity  of  oblervation,  have  evei  had 
sB^nquiriog  eye  anri  a  feeling  heart  on  this  iubje£\,  lay  whe- 
ther this  pride  is  v»eli  f-oundtd.  At  the  pieftoi  pricer  of  the 
retjuifites  of  mere  exHlence,  a  labouier,  with  a  wife  ami  four 
or  five  chiidi'en,  wh;)  has  only  liis  l.ibour  to  Jepcnil  upon,  can 
tiiJte  nbihhig  lutbiead,  and  na  always  a  fufficicncy  of -that. 

Too  certain  it  is,  li.at  (to  Jay  nothing   of  the  mileries 

cf   the   Loi)do;i    pcop,    too  eviiknt  to    every   one   who  palTet' 
Ifroojj'fc  tht  llfCetsj  ti.e.e  ti«  ivaoy,  vtty   ir.any  parts  of  the 

couniry, 


DESMOND.  IC7 

landlord,  a  favourable  fjtuation  for  employment, 
or  an  extenfive  adjoining  common,  enable  the 
Jabourers  to  pofiefs  fonicthing  more  than  the 
mere  necejfaries  of  life,  and  happily  counteracSt 
the  cfFe6ts  of  thofe  heavy  taxes  with  which  all 
thofe  neceflaries  of  life  are  loaded. 

Oh  !  my  friend  !  let  thofe  of  our  foidifant 
great  men  who  love  power,  and  who  are,  with 
whatever  reludlance,  compelled  at  length  to  fee, 
and  the  hour  is  very  rapidly  approaching,  when 
ufurped  power  will  be  tolerated  no  longer:  — 
Let  them,  if  nothing  but  the  delight  of  govern- 
ing will  facisfy  tliem,  have  recourfe  to  the  me- 
thod Montfleuri  has  purfued ;  and  then,  the 
beft  and  fincereft  of  all  homage,  the  homage  of 
grateful  hearts  may  be  theirs. — I  am  convinced, 
that  not  even  the  family  pride  which,  in  feudal 
times,  actuated  the  Iri£h  and  Scottidi  clans,  could 
produce,  in  the  caufe  of  their  chieftains,  a  zeal  fo 
ardent  and  fo  fteady,  as  that  with  which  the  de- 
pendents of  MontHeuii  would  defend  him  at 
home,  or  follow  him  into  the  field,  were  there 
occafion  for  either. 

It  is,  indeed,  a  fmgular  fight,  to  obferve  the 
mutual  attachments  that  exili  between  this  gay 
and  voldtile  man,  and  his  neighbours,  whom 
he  will  not  allow  to  be  called  dependents,  fince 
no  beings,  he  fays,  capable  of  procuring  their 
own  fubfiftence   are  dependent. He  enters, 


country,  where  the  Isbourer  has  not  a  fubfiflerce  even  Avheri 
in  con'lant  work,  and-where,  in  tale.-!  of  ^:l..kre^^,  ili^  coiuiiiion 
is  deploralile  iniied — realizi  d  in  ihe  mtlaneboi) ,  but  joll  pic- 
ture, (ii»wn  in  Knox's  KfTay,  Nj.  150,  etitil-^ii,  "  A  Remedy 
for  Dil'conieni." — Yet  we  are  always  affecting  to  talk  of  ihe 
mifery  af'd  beggary  of  the  Fitiich— And  nuw  jinpuie  ih^t 
mdery,  though  v/e  welisjiow  it  txiftvd  befoie,   to  ihe  revolu- 

tiuR, To  the   vtiy  ,aufe  that  ',\ili  in  a  very  few  yeais  re- 

ruove  it. 

however, 


1C8  DESMOND. 

hciwevcr,  wiih  rational  but  warm  folicitude  into 
the  intertils  ot  the  humblefl  of  them,  and  fi-iould 
not,  hefiiys.be  happy  if  there  was  among  them 
nn  aching  heart  which  he  had  negltdted  to  put 
at  eafe,  whenever  it  depended  on  him. 

'Jhe  neighbourhood,  however,  of  the  feigt?cry 
which  belongs  to  the  monks,  was,  til!  now,  a 
great  impediment  to  all  the  plans  which  his  be- 
nevuKnce  fuggefled  to  him. — Thcfe  reverend 
fathers  encouraged  in  idlenef?,  thofe  whom 
Monifleuri  was  endeavouring  to  lender  induf- 
Irious  ;  and,  the  alms  givcii  aw:iy  at  the  gates 
of  the  convent,  without  affording  a  fuiiicient 
or  permanent  fupport  to  the  poorer  clafs  of  his 
people,  was  yet  enough  to  give  theni  an  excufe 
for  indolence,  and  a  habit  of  negle6iing  to  ('  ck 
their  ov.n  fubfiftrnce  ;  in  many  other  inftances 
too,  the  influence  of  the  monks  has  counteradU 
ed  th;it  of  Montficuri. — It  is  not  quite  three 
years  fmce  he  h^fr  near  a  thrd  of  the  adults,  and 
a  fourth  of  tiie  ch'ldrtn  of  his  villages,  by  a 
Uial.gnant  fmall-pox  that  broke  out  i^mong 
them  J  for  the  monks  had  taught  the  people  to 
htlieve,  that  inoculation,  which  he  had  long 
earntllly  wiHied  to  introduce,  was  an  impious 
prefumption  offenfive  to  heaven. 

I  ht:f{'  men,  however,  are  now  difperied  j 
thofir  who  adhere  to  the  monaflic  vows,  aie  gone 
inro  other  ccramuniries  ;  others  have  taken  ad- 
vantage of  the  late  change  to  return  to  that 
world  which  they  had  reluiili-ntly  rencunctd  j 
"  and  one  only,  among  two-and- twenty,  accept- 
ed the  ofler  which  iVIontfleuri  nvade  lo  thofe 
whom  he  thought  the  mofl:  rclpciiable  atiTong 
theiT^  ;  and  whom  he,  therefore,  vv;(hcd  to  fave 
from  .'iny  inconvcnimcies  that  might  attend  an 
•  )moJuntary  removal  — 1  his  propo/a!  was  to  fit 

lip 


DESMOND. 


IC9 


up  one  of  tbe  wings  of  tl^e  houfe  (which  he 
had  dclUiied  for  other  purpofcs)  for  the  rc-ception 
of  thofe  whochofeto  ftay  ;  and  of  fupplyingto 
them,  at  his  own  expence,  every  gratification 
to  which  tiicy  had  been  accuftomed,  that  their 
reduced  income  did  noten.ible  th^m  to  enjoy. — 
Moft  of  thofe  to  whom  thi'^  generous  offer  was 
m.ide,  treated  it  either  with  refcntment  or  icorn  : 
father  Cypriano,  a  Portuguei'e,  who  has  loft  ;>.ll 
attachment  to  his  own  country,  or  for  fome 
reafoii  or  other  does  not  willi  to  return  to  it, 
accipied  the  propofed  accommc'dation,  with 
fome  httle  changes,  according  to  a  plan  of  his 
own.  —  He  tuld  Montfleuri,  that  though  he  had 
no  great  attachment  to  any  of  the  members  of 
tbe  (bciety,  yet  that  there  would  be  fomething 
particularly  comfortlefs  in  refiding  alone,  where 
he  had  been  accuftomed  to  fre  (o  many  of  his 
brethren  around  him  ;  and  that,  though  he  in 
real  ty  courted  folilude  in  prcre;ence  to  fociety, 
it  was  not  exactly  there  he  wifhci  to  enjoy  it  ; 
but,  that  if  Monifieurl  would  allow  the  work- 
men employed  about  the  houl'e  to  raife  for  him, 
in  a  lequeflered  fpot  which  he  pointed  out,  a 
fort  of  hermitage  after  a  plan  of  his  own,  he 
would  be  happy  to  avail  himielf  of  his  bounty, 
and  to  end  his  days  on  his  eftate.  —  1  nei.d  hardly 
fay,  that  my  friend  moil  readily  acceded  to  his 
vyiihes;  and,  during  his  late  abfence,  father 
Cypriano  has,  on  the  rocky  holders  of  the  river, 
wnichare  there  concealed  bv  fome  of  •  he  thickcft 
woods  i  have  fLcn  in  France,  built  an  he;  mitage 
oxadily  correfponding  to  the  ideas  I  had  firmed 
of  thofe  fort  of  habitations  from  Don  Qii'Xi;te 
or  Gil  Bias. — It  IS  partly  an  excavation  in  the 
hard  land  rock  that  rifes  above  the  river  5  if  is 
lituaied  about  two  hundred  yards  from  it,  and  is 

partly 


no  D    E    5    M    O    hf   D. 

partly  compofed  of  hard  wood,  which  fupports 
the  roof,  and  enlarges  the  fcite  of  the  building 
(if  building  it  may  be  called.)  The  outward 
room  is  paved  with  flat  ftones,  and  the  inner  is 
boarded  j  there,  is  his  little  bed,  his  crucifix, 
and  two  chairs. — The  other  apartment  contains 
only  a  table  j  the  feats  of  turf  and  mofs,  that 
furround  it,  and  a  fort  of  recefs  where  he  puts 
his  provifions,  which  are  furniflied  him  daily 
from  Montfleuri,  with  an  attentive  liberality, 
of  which  the  good  anchoret  even  complains, 
though  he  never  refufes  it.— Montfleuri  tells  me 
that  ihere  is  fomething  Angular  in  the  hiftory  of 
this  venerable  man,  with  which  he  is  not  ac- 
quainted ;  but  that,  as  he  feems  very  commu- 
nicative, he  will  endeavour,  fome  day  when  we 
are  together,  to  engage  him  in  an  account  of 
his  life. 

This  anchoret,  as  a  being  to  which  we  are 
never  accuftomed  (unlefs  it  be  to  a  hired  or  to  a 
wax  hermit  in  fome  of  our  gardens)  has  led  me 
away  ftrangely  from  what  1  was  going  to  tell 
you  of  the  ufe  to  which  Montfleuri  has  deftined 
the  diflblved  monafl:ery. 

He  has  fitted  it  up  as  an  houfe  of  induftry  ; 
not  to  confine  the  poor  to  work,  for  he  abhors 
the  idea  of  compulfion,  but  to  furnifh  with  eafy 
and  ufeful  employment,  fuch  as  by  age,  or  in- 
firmity, or  infancy,  are  unfitted  for  the  labour 
of  the  fields. — And  h:re  he  a]fo  means  that  the 
"robuft  peafant  may,  when  the  rigour  of  the  fea- 
fon,  or  any  other  circumftance  deprives  him  of 
occupation  abroad,  find  fomething  to  do  within; 
nothing,  however,  in  the  way  of  manufadlures 
is  ti>  be  atiempted,  farther  than  ftrong  coarfe 
articles,  ufeful  to  themfelves,  or  in  the  cultue 
of  the  efiate. — 1   think  the  ficetch  Montfleuri 

has 


DESMOND.  Ill 

has  given  me  of  his  plan  an  admirable  one;  it 
is  yet  only  in  its  firft  infancy;  but,  if  it  fuc- 
ceeds,  as  I  am  furc  it  muft,  1  will  eftablifti  fuch 
an  houfe  on  my  own  eftate,  whenever  I  fettle 
there. 

Whenever  I  fettle  there! — Ah  !  Bethel,  that 
expreflion  recalls  a  thoufand  painful  ideas  from 
which  I  have  been  vainly  trying  to  efcape.-— 
Alas ;  I  fhall  never  fettle  there  !  or,  if  ever  I 
do,  it  will  be  as  a  folitary  and  infulated  being, 
whofe  pleafures  will  foon  become  merely  animal 
and  felfifh,  becaufe  there  will  be  none  to  (hare 
them.— A  being  who,  though  weary  of  the 
world,  will  find  no  happinefs  in  quitting  it. — 
Methinks  I  fee  myfelf  rambling  at  four  or  five- 
and-fifty,  over  grounds  which  I  fhall  have  none 
to  inherit;  and  furveying,  with  the  dull  eye  of 
torpid  apathy,  improvements  which,  when  I 
am  gone,  there  will  be  none  to  admire  j  and 
which  will  then,  perhaps, 

"  Pafs  to  a  fcrivener,  or  a  city  knight." 

Yes,  I  (hall  be,  I  doubt  not,  that  forlorn 
and  felfifli  being,  an  old  batchelor ;  one,  who 
having  no  dearer  ties  to  fweeten  his  weary  ex- 
iftence,  is  furrounded  by  hungry  para/itical  re- 
lations, or  is  governed  in  his  fecond  childhood 
by  his  houfe- keeper. 

You  will  fmile,  I  fuppofe,  at  this  apoftrophe, 
and  would  even  laugh,  when  you  know  the 
moment  at  which  it  occur? — when  the  lovely, 
the  bewitching  Jofephine  herfelf,  is  waiting  for 
me  to  walk  with  her;  and,  **  in  ihtle  ip(>iu\e 
plains,  under  this  genial  fun,  where,  at  this 
inllant,  all  flefh  is  running  our,  piping;,  fi  'oling, 
and  dancing  to  the  vintage,  and  every  flep  ihat  s 

taicen, 


112  DESMOND. 

taken,  the  judgment  is  furprifed  by  the  imagi- 
nation."*—  How  fiial)  I  refill  her? — The  firft 
grapes  are  to  ^e  gathered  in  a  {ew  days  on  the 
oppofite  hills;  the  peafants  Tinging  the  liveliefl 
airs,  have  been  this  evenmg  carrying  up  their 
implements  for  this  delightful  operation  ; — Julie 
and  nei  brother  are  gone  already  to  fee  them;  and 
Jofephine  fent  me,-a  few  moments  fmce,  a  note, 
in  which  fhe  gaily  reproaches  me  for  want  of 
gallantry  in  thus  making  her  wait  this  lovely 
evening.  Oh  !  were  it  but  Geraldine  who  ex- 
pected me  !  —  were  it  Geraldine  who  waited  for 
me,  to  lend  her  my  arm  in  this  little  expedition. 
—I  have  once  or  twice,  as  Madame  de  i>oifbclle 
ha*  been  walking  with  me,  tried  to  fancy  her 
Geraldine,  and  particularly  when  flie  has  been 
in  her  plaintive  moods.  I  have  caught  founds 
that  have,  for  a  moment,  aided  my  defire  to  be 
deceived  — IJut,  as  the  lady  herfelf  could  not 
guefs  what  made  me  io  filcnt  and  inattentive, 
fome  fudden  etciittierie  not  at  all  in  harmony 
with  my  tetlings;  fome  trait,  in  the  charatfter 
of  her  country  has  fuddenly  difTol/ed  the  charm, 
and  awakened  me  to  a  full  fenie  of  the  lolly  i 
was  guilty  of. 

.  Bj!  i  ice,  at  this  mom.ent,  Jqfephine  her/elf, 
who  conJ-lccnds  to  beckon  to  me,  and  to  tx- 
prefs  her  impatience  at  my  delay.  —  Farewell, 
my  friend,  I  Ihall  hardly  write  ..gain  from  hence. 

Ever  your's  n^ofl  faithfully, 

LIONEL  DESMOND. 

*  Sterne. 


LET- 


DESMOND.  113 


LETTER      Xr. 


TO    MR.    DESMOND. 


Hartfjeld,  September  20, 

**  I  N  thofe  fpcriive  plains,  and  under  this 
genial  fun,  where,  at  this  iniiant,  all  flefh  is 
Turning  out  piping,  fiddling,  ind  dancing  to 
the  vintage  j  and  every  ftep  that  is  taken,  the 
judgment  is  furprifed  by  the  imagination." — 
With  the  lovely  Jofephine  beckoning  to  you  as 
you  fit  at  your  window  !  — and  reproaching  you 
for  want  of  gallantry  !  — 

Bravo,  my  friend  ! — This  will  do — I  fee, 
that  though  my  firft  advice  did  not  fucceed,  my 
fecond  infallibly  will. — "  Go,  fcaich  in  Eng- 
land for  fome  object  worthy  of  thofe  affections 
which,  placed  as  they  are  now,  can  only  rferve 
to  render  you  miferable — Or  \i  that  dots  not  do 
— if  you  ;ire  become,  through  the  influence  of  this 
romantic  attachment,  too  faftidious  for  reafon- 
able  happinefs  —  go  abroad,  dilltpate  vour  ideas, 
inllead  of  fuffering  them  to  dwell  .continually 
en  a  hopcltfb  purfuit ;  and  you  will  find  chanse 

of 


1)4  DES^MONP. 

of  place  and  variety  of  fcenes  are  the  befl  re- 
medies for  every  difeafe  of  the  mind." — Thus 
I  preached ;  and  I  now  value  niyfelf  on  the 
fuccefs  of  my  prefcription,  though  I  did  not 
forefee  this  kind  Jofephine,  who  will  undoubt- 
edly perfedl  the  cure. — At  your  age,  my  good 
friend,  a  lovely  and  unfortunate  woman — who 
probably  tells  you  all  her  diftrefles — who  leans 
on  your  arm,  and  whole  voice  you  endeavour 
to  fancy  the  tender  accents  of  Geraldine — will, 
I  will  venture  to  prophecy,  foon  ceafe  topleafe 
you,  notwithlianding  you  "  bear  a  charmed 
heart,"  only  in  the  femblance  of  another. — And 
as  to  any  engagements,  you  know,  fuch  as  her 
having  a  hufband,  and  fo  forth,  thofe  little  im- 
pediments '*  make  not  the  heart  fore"  in  P^rance. 
In  ikort,  1  look  upon  your  cure  as  nearly  per- 
fected, and  by  the  time  this  letter  reaches,  you, 
I  doubt  not,  but  that  you  wiii  have  begun  to 
woiider  how  you  could  cvtr  take  up  fuch  a  no- 
tion, as  of  an  (Unchangeable  and  immortal  paf- 
lion,  which  is  a  thing  never  heard  or  thought 
of,  but  by  the  tender  novel  writer,  and  their 
gerule  readers.— Madame  de  Boifbellefeems  the 
Woman  in  the  world  beft  calculated  to  win 
you  from  the  abfurd  fyftem  you  had  built ;  and 
had  you  been  a  defcendant  of  Lord  Chefter- 
field's,  and  his  fpirit  prefided  over  your  delHny, 
he  could  hardly  have  led  you  to  a  fcene  fo  fa- 
vourable to  diflultory  gallantry,  and  fo  fatal  to 
the  immortality  of  your  attachment,  as  the  houfe 
of  Montfteuri. 

Thus,  believing  your  cure  certain,  I  venture 
to  tell  you  what  1  know  of  Verney. — You  will 
ftill,  perhaps,  receive  it  with  concern;  but  it 
will  no  longer  awaken  your  quixotifm. — You 
wili  nat,  I  think,  iiovy  offer  yeniey  half  your 

eftate 


DESMOND.  115 

eftate  to  fave  his  wife  from  an  uneafy  moment 
or  ftrip  yourfelf  of  nine  or  ten  thoufand  pounds 
to  fupply  his  deficiencies  at  Newmarket,  where 
the  next  meeting  would  probably  create  the 
lame  deficiency,  and,  of  courfe,  the  fame  ne- 
ccflity. 

Verney,  then,  I  am  forry  to  fay,  has  at  length 
parted  with  his  eftate  in  this  country:  I  am 
more  forry  to  fay,  that  he  has  parted  with  it  to 
Stamford,  to  whom,  as  1  have  been  lately  in- 
furmed,  it  has  been  long  mortgaged. 

The  frnal  fettlenient  of  this  matter,  which 
has,  I  find,  been  fometime  in  agitation,  has 
happened  only  within  this  month  j  and  in  con* 
fequcnceof  it,  Mr.  Stamford,  or,  1  fliould  ra- 
ther fay,  Sir  Robert  Stamford,  for  he  is  almoft 
as  lately  raifed  to  the  dignity  of  a  Baronet,  took 
poftelfion,  about  ten  days  iince,  of  the  houfe, 
wliich  he  bought  ready  furni{}K<l,  and  he  is,  for 
the  prcfent,  living  there  with  bis  family,  i  am 
not,  as  you  will  eiifily  believe,  much  delighted 
with  this,  either  on  his  own  account,  or  be- 
caufe  of  the  ftyle  of  living  which  he  will  intro- 
duce into  the  country.  A  very  frnall  part  of  his 
grounds  adjoins  to  my  wood-lands. — He  is  faid 
to  be  a  very  great  favage,  in  regard  to  game  ; 
and  though  I  care  very  little  myfelf  about  that 
perpetual  fubje^t  of  country  contention,  it  will 
be  very  difagreeable  to  me  to  have  my  tenant 
fubjedt  to  the  vexations  of  this  petty  tyrant. — 
1  do  not  know  whether  i  have  told  you  of  the 
places  he  now  enjoys,  nor  how  they  have  en- 
abled him  to  encreafe  the  fplcndor  of  his  ap- 
pearace,  or  the  luxury  of  his  table,  by  which 
he  llrengthens  his  intereft.  In  the  latter,  he  is 
faid  to  excel,  from  talents  and  tafte ;  and  that 
more  good  dinuers   have  of  late  been  eaten  at 

his 


Jl6  DESMOND. 

his  houfe  for  the  benefit  of  the  Engli/h  govern- 
ment, by  ihofe  who  are  intrufted  to  carry  it  on, 
than  have  tver  before  been  prepared  tor  the  like 
purpofes,- — He  is  luppofed  to  be  one  of  thofe 
fortunate  perfon«,  who  being  deep  in  the  fecrct, 
are  enabled  to  take  advantage  of  every  fludiua- 
tion,  to  which  the  proceedings  of  miniftry  give 
rife,  in  the  value  of  the  public  funds;  and  by 
this  means  principally,  to  have  fecured  beyond 
the  reach  of  fortune,  that  weahh  which  he  has 
fo  rapidly,  anti,  in  the  apprehenfion  of  many 
people,  fo  wonderfully  accumulated. — He  has 
already,  fince  his  immediate  neighbourhood 
gives  him  aconfiderable  degree  of  intereft  with 

the  tradefmen  of  W ,  bee©  courting  their 

favor,  with  a  meannefs,  equal  to  that  arrogance 
with  which  he  treats  all  who  are,  or  may  be,  his 
equals;  and  from  whom  he  expe<Sls  rotning 
equal  to  the  cringing  fervility  with  which  he 
fawns  upon  bis  titled  friends,  and  thofe  who 
have  helped  to  raife  him  to  his  prefent  feat;  or 
the  junto,  by  whofe  united  Itrcngth  he  means 
to  keep  it.— 

I  have  forgot  poor  Verney's  afFairs  in  my  ac- 
count of  this  great  man:  but  i  own  the  inci- 
dent of  bis  coming  into  this  neighbourhood 
has  vexed  me,  more,  perhaps^  than  it  ought 
to  do. —  1  ftiall  not  feel  it  very  pleafant  to  ablent 
myfelf  from  thofe  public  meetings,  which,  as 
a  mdgiftratc,  I  have  thought  it  my  duty  to  at- 
tend, becaufe  Sir  Robert  will  now  rske  the  chair 
on  account  of  his  new  rank. — Ytt,  certainly, 
I  (hall  as  little  like  to  meet  a  man,  by  whom  i 
know  I  have  been  grofsly  and  irreparably  in- 
jured ;  and  whofe  private  and  public  character 
are  equally  hateful  i?o  me.— -To  him,  I  may  well 
addrels  the  lines  of  Shakefpeare, 

.   '«  Vour 


ESMOND.  117 

"  Your  heart 


*'  Is  cranmed  wiih  arrogancy,  Ipleen,  and  pride; 
"  You  have  by  fortune,  and  your  friends  high  favor, 
"  Gone  lightlv  o'er  low  fleps — and  now  are  mounted 
"  Where  po'.vers  are  your  retainers." 

I  believe,  my  friend,  it  is  a  weaknefs  to  be 
difturbed  at  fucli  a  man. — I  will  name  him  theiv 
no  more  ;  but  proceed  to  tell  yoa  all  I  know  far- 
ther of  Verney,  which  is  merely,  that  the  money 
he  received  from  Sir   Robert,  more  than   what 
his  eftale  was  already  mort2;ased  for  (which  did 
not  amount  to  above  fix  thoufand  pounds)  was 
Immediately  paid  away  to  fatisfy  debts  of  honor; 
and  that  he  is  now  raifing  money  on  his  northern 
e.ftates,  in  which   he  finds  fome  difiiculties  on 
account  of  his  wife's  fettlements.     This  I  hear 
from  fuch  authority,  that   I   cannot  doubt  the 
truth  of  it. — I  enquired  of  my  informer,  why, 
if  Verney  had  difchargedy«f/;  confiderable  debts 
of  honor  by  this  laft  tranlaclion,  he  had  imme- 
diate occafion  to  encumber  his  Yo|-kniire  c{-' 
tates  ? — My  acquaintance  laughed  at  my  calling- 
fix   thoufand  pounds   a   confiderable  debt,  andA 
told  me,  that  if  that  fum  had   paid  all  the  de-. 
mands  that  were  the  moft  immediately  prefllng 
on  his  friend  Verney,  which  he  knew   they  did 
not,  that  he  would  have  occafion  for  at  k^aft  as 
much  again  for  the  October  meeting;  and  there- 
fore, was  trying  to  raife  all  he  wanted  at  one?. — 
This  was  faid  by  no  means  in  the  way  of  a  fe-' 
cret,  or,  as  of  a  defign   of  which  Verney  had' 
any  notion  of  being   afhamed  ;   and    the  young 
man  who  related  it   to  me,  and  who  is  one  of 
the  fet   to  which  he  belongs,  fpoke  of  it  rather 
as  complaining,  tiiai  it  w^f,  a  confounded  fliame, 
that  as  Verney  had  married  a  girl  of  no  fott'jne, 
or  next  to  none,  he  Ihould  have  been  drav.?n  in 

to 


Il8  D  £   S   KI   O   N   D. 

to  make  fuch  an  unreafonable  fettlement  upon 
her,  as  prevented  his  raifing  money  upon  his 
eftates.  I  am  very  forry  for  Mrs.  Verney,  but 
I  have  long  forefeen  this. — She  will,  undoubt- 
edly, have  too  much  firmnefs  of  mind,  and  at- 
tention to  the  intereft  of  her  children,  to  give 
up  her  fettlement  j  and  it  will  always  afford  the 
family  a  certain  degree  of  affluence. — You  may 
alTure  yourfelf,  that  were  the  whole  treafuresof 
the  Eaft  to  find  their  way  into  the  pocket  of 
her  hufband,  he  would  finally  poflefs  no  more, 
for  there  is  nothing  but  the  impoflibility  of  part- 
ing with  it,  that  can  ever  keep  any  property 
whatever  in  his  pofleffion. 

So  much,  dear  Defmond,  for  private  news 
from  England  ;  as  for  public  news,  you  proba- 
bly receive  it  from  thofe  who  are  better  qualified 
than  I  am  to  fpeak  upon  it. — -You  know  I  am 
not  by  any  means  partial  to  your  prefent  ar- 
rangements ;  yet,  as  I  do  not  yet  fee  the  fuccefs  of 
the  new  modes  of  government  that  have  been 
taken  up  in  France,  I  am  not  fanguinely  look- 
ing out  for  changes,  as  you  feem  to  be.— Per- 
haps this  coldnefs  is  owing  to  the  obfervations  I 
made  in  my  (hort  and  unfortunate  political  ca- 
reer.— I  faw  then  fuch  decided  felfiflinefs  in  all 
parties,  fo  little  fincerity,  fo  little  real  concern 
for  the  general  good  in  any,  that  it  impreft  me 
with  an  univerfal  miftruft  of  ail  who  profefs  the 
fcience  of  politics. — Your  friend,  Montfleuri, 
however,  ieems  to  be  fincere. — But  for  many 
of  thofe  whom  the  abbe  termed  mejjieurs  les  re- 
formateurs,  they  appear  to  me  to  be  wavering 
and  divided  in  their  councils,  and  breaking  into 
parties,  which  occasions  me  again  to  entertain 
iome  doubts  of  the  permanency  of  the  revolu- 
tion.— '1  am  Geruinly  a  warm  friend  to  its  prm- 

ciplest 


D   E   «    M   O   N   D«  119 

crples. — I  only  hefitate  to  believe,  that  there  is 
fteadinefs  and  virtue  enough  exifting  among  the 
leaders,  to  apply  thofe  principles  to  pradlice.— 
I  conclude,  therefore,  as  I  began,  with  a  quo- 
tation from  Sterne — and  I  fay  with  uncle  Toby 
— "  I  wifli  itmay  anfwer." 

I  have  no  expectation  of  hearing  from  you 
very  foon  again,  as  from  your  laft  letter,  this 
feems  likely  to  be  long  in  reaching  you. — But 
I  am  perfuaded,  that  the  intereft  you  take  in 
French  politics  on  one  hand  j  and,  on  the  other, 
the  intereft  the  fair  Jofephine  takes  in  your's, 
will  reftore  to  you  your  gay  fpirits — and  to  me 
my  rational  friend. 

You  know  I  remain,  ever, 

Moft  faithfully  your's, 

£.  BETHEL. 


LET- 


J  20  D    E    S    M    O    N    D. 


LETTER    XII.* 


TO    MR.     BETHEL. 


Hautevllle,  in  Auvergne, 
Sept,   14,   1790. 

RELUCTANT  LY— Oh  !  how  reluc- 
tantly, I  quitted,  three  days  fince,  the  cheerful 
abode  of  Montfleuri,  where  every  countenance 
beamed  with  pleafure  and  content,  for  this 
mournful  refidence. — A  refidence,  where  mor- 
tified and  dircomfited  tyranny  feems  to  have 
taken  up  its  fullen  ftation;  and  with  impotent 
indignation  to  colour  with  its  own  gloomy  hand 
every  furrounding  object. — — The  Comte 
d'Hauteville  is  the  brother  of  Monifleuri's  mo- 
ther: and  though  they  are  as  cppofite  in  their 
principles,  and  in  their  temperi,  as  light  and 
darkncfs,  Montfleuri  has  io  much  refpett  for 
his  uncle,  and  io  much  goodnefs  of  heart,  as  to 
fulfil  a  promife  he  required  of  him,  when  the 
latter  left  Paris,  that  he  would  come  to  him  for 

*  "Written  before  the  receipt  of  ihe  foregoing. 

ten 


DESMOND.  121 

ten  days. — Unable  to  endure  a  country,  where 
his  power,  and  as  he  believes,  his  confequence 
isdiminifhed,  Monfieurd'Hauteville  is  preparing 
to  quit  France. — His  nephew  thinks  he  can 
difluade  him  from  this  refolution,  and  reconcile 
him  to  the  terrible  misfortune  of  being  free 
among  freemen,  inftead  of  being  a  petty  tyrant 
among  flaves — While  the  Comte  himfelf  enter- 
tained hopes  that  he  could  convert  his  nephew, 
or,  at  leaft,  leflen  his  extravagant  zeal  for  that 
odious  democratic  fyftem  he  has  embraced.— 
That  both  will  fail  in  thefe  their  expectations, 
is  already  very  evident. — 1  mufl:  give  you,  how- 
ever, a  fketch  of  our  journey,  and  of  our  re- 
ception, to  enable  you  to  form  fome  idea  of  this 
place,  and  of  its  pofl'eiTor. 

We  fet  out  in  my  chaifc — neither  of  us  in 
very  gay  fpirits,  though  thofe  of  Montfleuri 
are  not  very  eafily  deprefled.  But  our  taking 
leave  of  Jofephine  and  Julie,  who  faw  their 
brother  depart  with  tears,  though  he  is  fo  fooii 

to  return  ; the  melancholy  which  he  knew 

hung  over  this  houfe,  and  perhaps  the  heavy 
atmofphere,  which  juft  then  prevailed,  contri- 
buted to  make  him  penfive,  and  from  the  fame 
caufes  that  render  a  Frenchman, of  his  difpofition 
grave,  an  Englifiiman  naturally  feels  difpofed 
to  hang  himfelf.  I  had,  befides  the  additional 
vexation  of  leaving  the  houfe  of  Montfleuri, 
without  having  received,  as  I  expected,  a  letter 
from  Mrs.   Verney  during  my  ftay  there. 

The   beginning   of  our  journey,  therefore, 

was  difmal  enough. Towards  evening,  we 

flopped  at  the  convent  where  Montfleuri's  other 
fitter  is  a  profefTed  nun.  I  was  not  permitted 
to  fee  her ;  but  he  returned  in  worfe  fpirits  than 
he  fet  out,  exclaiming  againft  the  odious  fuper- 

Voi,.  I.  G  ftition. 


121  DESMOND. 

fiition,  that  had  condemned  fo  amiable  a  young 
woman,  to  fo  many  years  of  rigid  confinement, 
(forfhe  is  a  Carmelite)  and  has  given,  he  fays, 
to  her  mind,  a  tindure  of  fadnefs,  which  he 
fears  it  will  always  retain.  When  he  comes 
back,  it  is  to  be  decided,  whether  or  no,  fhe 
quits  her  convent. — He  has  a  fmal!  property 
near  the  little  town  of  Aique-mont,  where,  as 
he  had  fome  bufinefs  to  fettle,  we  remained  all 
night;  and  where,  I  have  occafion  again  tore- 
mark,  the  afFe6lion  which  all  who  are  connedt- 
ed  with  him  feel  for  Montfleuri. — We  did  not 
quit  Aiquemont  till  late  the  following  day. — 
The  weather  was  fo  unuCually  warm,  that  we 
travelled  flowly,  and  it  was  the  evening  ofyelter- 
day  before  we  approached  the  end  of  our  journey. 

The  country  through  which  we  travelled, 
v/as,  in  many  parts,  beautifully  romantic  ;  but, 
within  about  three  leagues  of  the  chateau 
d'Hauteviile,  it  opens  into  one  of  thofe  exten- 
five  plains  that  are  very  frequent  in  Normandy, 

though  not  fo  ufual  in  this  part  of  France. ■ 

Over  thefe  dead  flats,  a  ftraight  road  ufually 
runs  for  many  miles,  and  the  dull  unitorrnity  of 
the  profpc£l  is  broken  only  by  the  rows  of  pear 
or  apple  trees,  which  are  planted  upon  it  in  va- 
rious directions. 

A  few  plantations  of  vines  had  here  an  even 
lefs  pleafnig  effect. — In  fome  of  them,  however, 
people  were  at  work  ;  but  we  no  longer  heard 
the  cheerful  fongs,  or  faw  the  gay  faces  that  we 
had  been  accuftomed  to  hear  and  fee  in  the 
Lyonois. — At  length,  Montfleuri  pointed  out 
to  me,  at  the  extremity  of  this  extenfive  plain, 
the  woods,  which  he  faid  furrounded  the  habi- 
tation of  his  uncle. — The  look  of  even  ill  ma- 
naged cultivation  foon  after  ceafed  j  and  over  a 

piece 


DESMOND.  123 

piece  of  ground,  which  wasgrafs,  where  it  was 
not  mole-hills,  and  from  whence  ail  traces  of 
a  road  were  obliterated,  we  approached  to  the 
end  of  an  avenue  of  beech  trees  ;  they  were 
rather  the  ruins  of  trees  ;  for  they  had  loft  the 
beautiful  and  graceful  forms  nature  originally 
gave  them,  by  the  frequent  application  of  the 
ax  J  and  were,  many  of  them,  little  better  than 
ragged  pollards. 

A  few  draggling  trees  of  other  kinds,  that 
had  been  planted  and  neglected,  were  mingled 
among  the  rows  of  beech  on  either  fide;  but 
were,  for  want  of  proteftion,  "  withering  in 
leaflefs  platoons." — Not  a  cottage  arofe  to  break 
the  monotony  of  this  long  line  of  disfigured  ve- 
getation.— Nothing  like  a  lodge,  animated  by 
the  cheerful  refidence  of  a  pcafant's  family, 
marked  its  termination  ;  but  the  paling,  which 
had  once  divided  it  from  the  plain,  had  either 
fallen  down  for  want  of  repairing,  or  had  been 
carried  away  by  the  country  people  for  fuel,  in 
a  country  where  it  feemed  to  be  particularly 
icarce. 

Slowly,  and  through  a  miferable  road,  we 
traverfed  this  melancholy  avenue,  without  fee- 
ing, for  fome  time,  a  human  crgature. It 

feemed  to  lengthen  as  we  went,  and  had  already 
lafted  above  a  mile  and  a  quarter,  when  we  cb- 
ferved  a  figure  quickly  walking  towards  us, 
with  a  gun  on  his  fhoulder,  whom  I,  at  firft, 
fuppofed  to  be  the  Count  himfelf.  The  man 
feemed,  by  his  ftep  and  manner,  to  be  in  eager 
purfuitof  fomething  ;  but  I  could  perceive,  by 
his  a£tion,  that,  on  obferving  an  Englifh  chaife, 
he  changed  the  objedl  of  his  attention,  and  ad- 
vanced towards  us  in  a  fort  of  trot,  which,  from 
G  2  his 


124  DESMOND. 

his  lank  figure  and  grotefque  habit,  had  a  very 
ridiculous  efFedl:. 

Under  a  full  drefs  coat,  of  a  reddifli  brown, 
and  had  once  been  lined  with  fattin,  appeared  a 
waiftcoat  of  gold-floweied  brocade,  the  flaps 
reaching  to  his  knees,  and  made,  I  am  perfuad- 
ed,  in  the  reign  of  Louis  ci  devant  le  Grand. — 
What  appeared  of  his  breeches,  under  this  mag- 
nificent jujie  au-corps^  was  of  red  velveret, 
forming  a  happy  contrafl  to  a  pair  of  black 
worfled  {lockings. — The  little  hair  which  grew 
on  each  fide  of  his  temples  had  been  compelled, 
jn  defpite  of  its  reluctance  and  incapability,  to 
afTume  the  form  of  curls,  but  they  feemd  to 
have  fled,  d^un  rnanihe  la  plus  cpiniatre  dri  monde 
from  his  ears  ;  a  little  hat,  like  what  I  recollect 
having  feen  in  caracature  prints,  under  the  name 
oi .Chapeau  a  le  Nevernois,  covered  the  rell:  of 
his  head  ;  but  this,  as  he  approached  us,  was 
depofited  under  his  arm,  notwithftanding  the 
incumbrarce  of  his  gun. 

"  This  is  a  curious  fellow,"  faid  Montfleuii 
to  me,  as  I  approached  him,  *'  he  is  my  uncle's 
confidential  fervant,  and  more  fingularly  origi- 
nal than  his  mafter — A  tremendous  ariftocrate, 
and  miferable  at  the  lofs  of  dignity  which    he 

believes  he  has  fuftained." 1  hen  adJreffing 

himfelf  to  the  man,  who  was  by  this  time  very 
near  us,  "  Aha  1  my  old  friend.  La  Maire," 
cried  he,  *'  how  are  you? — How  is  Monfieur 
d'Hauteville  ?" — The  old  man,  not  at  all  fatis- 
fied  with  the  manner  of  this  addrefs-,  ftepped 
back,  laid  his  hand  on  his  breaft,  and,  with  a 
cold  and  formal  bow,  replied,  **  that  he  had 
the  honour  to  afl^ure  Monfieur  le  Marquis  de 
Montfieuri,  that  Monfeigneur  le  Comte 
d'Hauteville  was  as  well  as,  under  the  prefent 
3  melancholy 


DESMOND.  125 

melancholy  circumftanccs  of  the  kingdom,  any 
true  Frenchman  could  be." — There  was  (ome- 
thing  (o  very  ludicrous  in  the  method  and  mat- 
ter of  this  anfwer,  that  Montfieuri  did  not  at- 
ttrnpt  t'lrefift  his  violent  inclination  to  laugh — 
an  impolitenefs  in  which  I  could  as  little  forbear 
to  join. — "  Well,  well,  Monfieur  le  Maire," 
cried  Montfleuri,  "  I  am  glad  to  hear  my  uncle 
is  only  indifpofed  from  his  national  concerns — 
So  open  the  chaife  door,  my  old  friend,  and  I 
will  walk  up  to  the  houfe  with  this  Englifh 
gentleman,  who  has  been  fo  good  as  to  accom- 
parw  me." 

Le  Maire  turned  his  little  fierce  black  eyes 
upon  me,  as  Montfleuri  announced  me  to  be  an 
Hnglifhman,  and,  with  a  look  which  1  could 
not  mifmrerpret,  muttered  fomething  as  with  a 
jerk  he  (hut  the  chaife  door — '*  Ah  cxirfe  thofe 
Englifh,  no  good  ever  comes  where  they  are." 

*'  Well,  but  Le  Maire,"  faid  Montfleuri, 
what  are  you  fhooting  at  this  time  in  the  even- 
ing ?  what  were  you  To  eagerly  purfuing  when 
we  firft  faw  you?" — **  Partridges,  Monfieur 
le  Marquis,  partridges  j  I  faw  a  great  number 
of  them  fetding  round  the  houfe  juffc  now, 
young  ones,  h.trdly  able  to  fly,  and  1  was  re- 
folviid  not  one  of  them  (hould  efcape." 

*'  Mais  a  quoi  boncela?"  enquired  Mont- 
fleuri, "•  of  what  ufe  will  that  be,  fince  if  they 
are  fo  young  they  are  unfit  to  eat  ?" 

'■^  A  qjoi  bon  Monfieur  le  Marquis?"  re- 
plied the  old  dumeftic,  very  indignantly; 
*  '*■  Alais  c'eft  que  je  ne  veux  pas,  qu'iJ  y  refte, 

dans 

*  Why  is  it,  becaule  I  would  not  have  remain  on  the  whole 
eftatr,  one  fingle  partridge  for  thole  beggarly  rogues  oF  the 
*ilh|^e,  who  have  the  inf.imou»  li'jert>  of  killing  the  birds  on 

my 


126  DESMOND. 

dans  ie  domaine  un  feul  perdrix  pour  ces  gueux 
du  village  ;  qui  ont  la  liberie  infdme  de  chaffer 
fur  les  terresde  Monleigneur  ie  Comted'Haute- 
ville — Ah  !  je  les  epargnerai  bitn,  ces  marauds, 
3a,  la  peine  de  prendre  legibier,  &  fije  les  recon- 
terai,  je  lerai  bien  leur  affaire." 

"  Mais  comment  leur  affaire  ?"  faid  Mont- 
fleuri. — "  Eh  !  Monfieurle  Marquis,"  anfwer- 
fd  Le  Maire,  '*  c'cff  que  je  pourrais  bien,  don- 
ner  quelque  coups  de  fuiil  a  ces  coquins." 

**  Tu  as  done  une  vocation  decide  pour  la 

lanterne?" *'  Soit,  Monfieur  le  Marquis, 

j'aimerai  mieux  etre  pendu  par  ces  gens  detef- 
tables,  moi,  que  de  vivre  ou  ils  font  mes  egaux, 
Sc  ou  ils  vont  a  la  chaffe."  **  You  fee,  now," 
faid  Montfleuri,  turning  to  me,  "  the  ftyle 
which  even  the  domeftics  of  the  n o b/ej/e  zti'um^d 
towards  the  peafantry  and  common  people.— 
'Ihis  fellow  has  imbibed  all  the  infolent  confe- 
quence  of  thofe  among  whom  he  has  lived  j  and, 
though  roturier  himfelf  conceives,  that  he  de- 
rives from  the  honor  of  being  the  idle  valet  to  a 
nobleman,  a  right  to  defpife  and  trample  on 
ths  honert  man  who  drav/s  his  fubfiftence  from 
the  ground  by  independent  induftry."  By  this 
time  we  were  arrived  at  the  gateof  the  courdhon- 
nfur,  which  is  furroundedon  three  fides  by  the 
chateau. — There  bad  once  been  a  ftraight  walk, 
leading  from  the  termination  of  the  avenue  to  the 

my  lord's  grounds.  I'll  I'pare  them  ihe  trouble,  rafcals  at  they 
are,  of  taking  game  ;  and,  if  1  met  the.i. — I  (hould  do  their 
bufineis." 

'  "  But  how  do  their  buCnels?"  "  Why,  Monfieur  le  Mar- 
quis, peihaps  I  might  fiie  a  tew  fii  it  among  thofe  fcouBdrels." 
— "■'  You  have,  then,  a  decided  call  ior  exhibtng  on  the  Ian- 
thorn  poll  ?" — "  Beit  lb:  1  had  rather  be  hanged  than  live 
where  thole  fellows  aie  my  equalt,  and  kave  the  hberty  ot 
hunting." 

fteps 


D    li    S    M    O    N    D.  127 

fteps  of  the  houfe,  but  it  was  now  covered  with 
thirties  and  nettles;  the  fleps  were  overgrown 
with  green  mofs,  and  when  the  great  door 
opened  to  let  us  in,  it  Teemed  an  operation  to 
which  it  was  entirely  unaccuftomcd. 

Le  Maire,  however,  extremely  folici^tous  for 
the  dignity  of  his  mafter,  had  hurried  in  before 
us,  and  fent  one  fervant  to  wait  at  this  door, 
and  a  fecond  to  fhew  us  the  way  to  the  apart- 
ment where  Monfeigneur  was  to  receive  us. — 
This  was  in  i.  falle  a  cornpognie^  on  the  firft  floor, 
where,  after  pafling  through  three  other  cold 
and  half  furniflied  rooms,  we,  at  length,  ar- 
rived.— The  Count,  who  is  a  handfome  man, 
above  fixty,  received  me  with  cold  politenefs  ; 
his  nephew  with  a  fort  of  fullen  kindnefs :  it 
feemed  as  if  he  at  once  embraced  him  as  a  rela- 
tion, and  repulfed  him  as  an  enemy. — About 
half  an  hour  after  our  arrival,  I  heard  that  the 
Count  was  to  fend,  the  next  day,  a  courier  to 
Clermont,  by  whom  I  might  difpatch  letters  to 
England. — I  had  this  and  two  or  three  others  to 
write  ;  and,  I  thought  that  it  was  better  to  let 
the  Count  and  his  nephew  begin  their  political 
controverfy  without  the  prefenceof  a  third  per- 
son ;  for  thefe  reafons,  as  foon  as  fupper  was 
over,  which  was  very  ill  drefied,  and  ferved  ir» 
very  dirty  plate,  1  defired  to  be  conducted  to 
tny  apartment.  Having  mounted  a  very  broad 
fbirc.ifeof  brick  and  wood,  and  pafled  through 
a  long  corridor,  which  feemed  to  lead  to  a  part 
of  the  houfe  very  remote  from  that  I  had  left, 
I  was  fhewn  into  a  fort  of  ftate  bed-chamber  ; 
one  of  thofe  v.'here  comfort  had  formerly  been 
facrificed  to  fplendour,  but  which  now  poflciled 
neither  the  one  nor  tlie  other  :  and,  on  opening 
the  door,  1  was  fenfible  of  that  damp,  mufly 

fmcll, 


128  DESMOND. 

fniiel],  which  is  ufuaHy  perceived  in  rooms  that 
have  been  1-ng  unfrequented. 

The  wainfcoting  was  of  cedar,  or  fome  other 
brown  wood,  finely  carved  ;  the  hangings  of  a 
dull  and  d.irk  blue  Lyon's  damafk;  a  high  ca- 
nopy bed  of  the  fame,  ftood  at  one  end  of  the 
room,  and,  at  the  other,  was  a  very  large  glafs 
reaching  from  the  ceiling  to  the  floor;  but 
M'hich,  by  the  Tingle  candle  I  had,  ferved  only 
to  reflect  the  deep  gloom  that  every  obje£t  offer- 
ed.— A  great  projedting  chimney  of  blood  co- 
loured marble,  over  which  another  mirror  fup- 
ported  a  large  carved  trophy,  reprefcnting  the 
aims  of  the  family;  a  red  marble  table,  and 
(our  or  five  high-backed,  fluffed  chairs,  covered 
with  blue  velvet,  completed  the  furniture  of  the 
room;  which,  floored  as  it  was  with  hexagon 
bricks,  compofed,  altogether,  oneof  themoft 
funeral  apartments  i  ever  remember  to  have 
been  in. 

i  fat  down,  however,  and  wrote  my  letters  j 
but  having  done  them,  1  felt  no  inclination  to 
ileep,  and  therefore,  opening  the  croife'e,  1  leaned 
upon  the  railing,  which,  in  houfes  built  as  this 
is,  forms  a  clumfy  fort  of  balcony  to  every  win- 
dov*'. — The  day  had  been  unufually  clofe  and 
fultry,  and  with  the  night,  the  thunder  ftorm, 
produced  by  the  heated  atmofphere,  approached. 
— I  now  heard  it  mutter  at  a  diftance,  and  foon 
after  faw,  from  the  fouth-weft,  the  moft  vivid 
lightening  I  ever  remarked,  breaking  from  thofe 
niajeftic  and  deeply-loaden  clouds,  which  the 
-brightnefs  of  the  moon  above  them  made  very 
viiible. — In  a  country  fo  level  as  that  is,  for 
many  miles  round  the  chateau  d'iiauteville,  the 
horizon  is,  of  courfe,  great  and  uninterrupted, 
and   I   faw   to  advantage   the  progrefs  of  the 

ftorm  i 


DESMOND.  129 

ftorm  ;  a  fpeflacle  I  have  always  had  great  plea- 
fure  in  contemplating. 

When  the  imagination  foars  into  thofc  re- 
gions, where  the  planets  puifue  each  its  deftined 
courfe,  in  the  immenfity  of  fpace — every  planer, 
probably,  containing  creatures  adapted  oy  the 
Almightv,  to  the  refidencc  he  has  placed  them 
in  ;  and  when  we  refledl,  that  the  fmalleft  of 
thefe  is  of  as  much  confequence  in  the  univerfe, 
as  this  world  of  cur's  j  how  puerile  and  ridicu- 
lous do  thofe  purfuits  appear  in  which  we  are  fo 
anxioufly  bufied  ;  and  how  infignificant  the 
trifles  we  toil  to  obtain,  or  fear  to  lofp.  None 
of  all  the  little  cares  and  troubles  of  our  Ihort 
and  fragile  exiftence,  feem  worthy  of  g;ving  us 
any  real  concern — and^  perhaps,  we  never  truly 
poflefs  the  reafon  we  fo  arrogantly  boaft,  till  we 
can  thus  appreciate  the  real  value  of  the  objects 
around  us. 

Heaven  knows,  my  dear  Bethel,  that  I  am 
far  enough  from  enjoying  this  philofophic  tran- 
quility.—  1  have  entiufted  you  with  my  waking 
refledlions — D.ire  1  afk  your  indulgence  for  the 
wild  wanderings  of  my  mind,  when  reafon  re- 
figned  her  feat  entirely  to  "  thick-coming  fan- 
cies." 

The  hurricane  had  entirely  fubfided,  and  the 
rain-drops  fell  flowly  from  the  roof,  I  rtill  con- 
tinued at  the  window,  for  my  thoughts  were 
fled  to  LngKmd,  and  I  had  only  a  confufed  re- 
colle6lion  of  where  I  was  j  till  I  found  myfelf 
extremely  cold,  and  turning,  faw  my  candle  ex- 
piring in  the  focket.  I  then  recolleded,  that 
it  was  time  to  go  to  my  bed,  and  to  feek  in 
fleep,  relief  againft  the  uneafy  thoughts  thathad 
dwelt  upon  my  mind  about  Geraldinc.  On 
looking,  however,  towards  it,  it  again  feemed 
G5  fo 


230  DESMOND. 

fo  comfortlefs  and  gloomy,  that  I  fancied  it 
damp  ;  and  though  no  man  poflelTes  a  conftitu- 
tion  more  fortified  againft  fuch  accidents,  or 
cares  lefs  about  them,  1  had  no  inclindtion  to 
undrefs  myfelf,  or,  though  I  was  weary,  to 
llcep  ;  I  v/ifhed  for  a  book,  but  I  happened, 
contrary  to  my  ufual  cuftom,  not  to  have  one 
in  the  i'mall  portmanteau  1  had  brought  from 
Montfleuri  ;  and  having  nothing  to  divert  my 
attention  from  the  cold  gloom  that  furrounded 
me,  I  became  tired  of  hearing  the  dull  murmurs 
of  the  finking  wind  howl  along  the  corridor— 
and  I,  at  length,  determined  to  try  to  fleep. 

Still,  however,  the  notion  of  the  dampnefs 
of  the  bed  detering  me  from  entering  it,  I  took 
only  my  coat  ofF,  and  wrapping  myfelf  in  a 
flannel  powdering  gown,  1  threw  myfelf  on  the 
embroidered  counterpane,  and  foon  after  funk 
into  forgetfulnefs.  1  know  you  tvill  fay  I  am 
as  weakly  fuperftitious  as  a  boarding- fchool 
mifs,  or  as  **  the  wifeft  aunt  telling  the  fiddeft 
tale"  to  a  circle  of  tired  and  impatient  auditors. 
■■ — I  am  confcious  of  all  this,  yet  I  cannot  help 
relating  the  ftrange  phantoms  that  haunted  my 
imagination. 

1  believed  myfelf  at  the  fame  window  as 
where  1  ftood  to  obferve  the  ftorm;  and,  that 
in  the  Count's  garden,  immediately  beneath  it, 
I  faw  Geraldine  expofed  to  all  its  fury. — Her 
hufband  feemed  at  firft  to  be  with  her,  but  he 
difiippeared,  1  know  not  how,  and  fiie  was  left 
expofed  to  the  fury  of  the  contending  elements, 
which  feemed  to  terrify  her  lefs  on  her  own  ac- 
count, than  on  that  of  three  children,  whom  {he 
clafpcd  to  her  bofom,  in  all  the  agonies  of  ma- 
ternal apprehenfion,  and  endeavoured  to  fhelter 
from  the  encreafing  fury  of  the   tempeft. — I 

haftened. 


DESMOND.  131 

haftened,  I  flew,  with  that  velocity  we  poflefs 
only  in  dreams,  to  her  afiiftance  :  I  preffed  her 
eagerly  in  my  arms — I  wrapt  them  round  her 
children — — 1  thought  flie  faintly  ihanlced  me; 
told  me,  that  for  herfelf  my  care  wa-  ultlefs, 
but  that  it  might  protect  rht-m.-  She  was  as 
cold  as  marble,  and  I  rtcolledt  having  remark- 
ed, that  (lie  refembied  a  beautiful  Itatue  of 
Niobe,  done  by  an  Italian  fculptor,  which  I 
had  admired  at  Lyons. 

While  1  was  entreating  her  to  accept  of  my 
protedion,  and  to  go  mto  the  houfe,  I  fuddenly, 
by  one  of  thofe  incongruities  fu  ulual  in  fleep, 
fancied  I  faw  her  extended,  pale,  and  apparently 
dymg  on  the  bed,  which  i  had  objected  to  go 
into,  wiih  the  leaft  of  her  chMdren,  a  very 
young  infant  dead  in  her  arms. — Diftracted  at 
luth  a  figlu,  I  feized  her  hand — I  implored  her 

to  Ipealt    to  me She  opened  languidly  thofe 

lovely  eyes,  which  1  have  (o  ofien  gazed  on 
with  tranfpor-. — they  were  glazed  and  neavy— 
yet,  1  thought,  they  exprtiied  tendernel-  and 
pity  for  me — while,  in  a  low,  tremulous  voice 
— Ihe  bade  me  adieu  ?— adieu,  for  ever! 

1  now  fhrieked  in  frantic  terror — I  tried  to 
recall  her  to  life  by  my  wild  exclamations — I 
would  have  warmed,  in  my  bofom,  the  cold 
hand  I  neld,  when  (he  gently  drew  it  from  me, 
and  pointing  to  her  two  children,  whom  I  now 
faw  itanding  by  the  fide  of  the  bed,  clinging  to 
a  young  woman,  who  was,  1  fancied,  Fanny 
Waverly,  Ihe  faid,  in  a  yet  lower  and  moie 
mournful  tone — *••  Defmond  !  —  if  you  ever  truly 
loved  me,  it  is  there  you  mult  fhew  your  affec- 
tion."— I  then  faw  the  lalt  breath  tremble  on 
thofe  lovely  lips — it  was  gone — Geraldine  was 
loft  for  ever  !— And,  jn  an  agony  of  defpair, 

fuc 


132  DESMOND. 

fuch  as,  thank  Heaven,  I  never  was  confcious 
of  vi'aking;  I  threw  myfelf  on  the  ground. — 
The  Violence  of  this  ideal  emotion  reftored  me 
to  myfelf. — I  awoke — my  face  bathed  in  tears, 
and  in  fuch  confufion  of  fplrits,  that  it  was  long 
before  1  could  recall  myfelf  to  reafon,  and  to  a 
clear  conviction,  that  all  this  was  only  a  dream. 
So  ftrong  was  the  impreflion,  that  1  dared  not 
hazard  feeling  it  again  by  fleeping. — I  theiefore 
put  on  my  great  coat,  and  as  the  moon  now 
fhone  in  unclouded  radiance,  1  went  down  into 
the  garden,  and  wandered  among  the  bofquets 
and  treiUage  that  make  its  formal  ornaments. — 
Still  the  figure  of  Geraldine  purfued  me,  fuch 
as  I  had  feen  her  in  this  diftrcfling  vifion — Still 
I  heard  her  voice  bidding  me  an  eternal  adieu  ! 
—  I  would  have  given  the  world  to  have  had 
fome  human  being  to  have  fpoken  to,  that  thefe 
imaginary  founds  of  plaintive  forrow  might 
have  vibrated  in  my  ears  no  longer,  but  1  was 
afhamed  of  awakening  Montfleuri,  had  1  known 
where  to  have  found  him — And  my  fervant 
Warley,  I  bad  left  at  Montfleuri,  to  bring  my 
letters  after  me. 

1  continued,  therefore,  to  traverfe  this  me- 
lancholy garden — Sometimes  refolving  to  con- 
quer my  weaknefs,  and  return  to  my  bed,  and 
thfn  (hrinking  for  the  apprehenfions  of  being 
again  liable  to  the  terror  I  had  juft  experienced. 
At  length,  I  heard  the  clock  of  the  church 
ftrike  three — I  followed  the  found  for  two  or 
three  hundred  paces,  through  a  cut  walk  that 
led  from  the  garden  towards  it,  and  entering 
"^the  church-yard,  which  is  the  cimet'iere  of  a 
large  village,  I  was  again  (truck  with  a  circum- 
ftance  that  had  before  appeared  particulaily  dif- 

maK 


DESMOND.  133 

mal.  I  mean,  that  there  are  in  France  no 
marks  of  graves,  as  in  England, 

*'  Where  heaves  the  tuif  in  many  a  mouldering  heap," 

Here  all  is  level  — and  forgetfulnefs  Teems  to  have 
laid  her  cold  oblivious  hand  on  all  who  reft  within 
thefe  enclofures. 

No  object  appears  in  the  mou'-nful  fpotl  was 
now  contemplating,  but  a  crofs,  on  which  a 
dead  Chrift  painted,  and  reprefenting  life,  as 
clofely  as  poflible,  was  fufpended  ;  the  moon- 
beams falling  directly  on  this,  added  to  the 
dreary  horrors  of  the  fcenc. — I  ftood  a  few  mo- 
ments looking  on  it,  and  tht^n  was  roufed  from 
my  mournful  reverie  by  the  found  of  human 
voices,  and  of  horfcs  feet. — Iliftened,  and  found 
thefe  (bunds  came  from  the  farm-yard,  which 
was  only  two  or  three  hundred  paces  before  me. 
—  Hither  i  gladly  found  my  way,  and  faw  the 
vine-dreflers,and  people  employed  in  the  making 
•wine,  preparing  for  their  work,  and  going  to 
gather  the  grapes  while  the  dew  was  yet  on 
them.  Rejoiced  to  find  fomebody  to  fpeak  to, 
1  entered  into  converfation  with  them,  and  for 
a  moment  dilfipated  my  ideas — I  followed  them 
to  the  vine-yard,  affilted  in  their  labours,  and 
was  equally  allonilhed  and  pleafed  to  hear,  how 
rationally  thefe  unenlightened  men  conffdered 
the  blefiing  of  their  new-born  liberty,  and  with 
what  manly  fiimnefs  determined  to  preferve  it. 

There  was  among  them  a  Breton,  who  ap- 
peared to  have  more  acutenefs  and  knowledge 
than  the  reft  ;  with  him,  1  fliall  take  an  oppor- 
tunity of  having  farther  difcourie. 

It  is  now  one  o'clock  at  noon. — I  have  had 
an  hour's  converfation  with  Montfleuri — I  have 

paid 


IJ4-  »   E    S    M    O   N   Er. 

paid  my  morning  compliments  to  the  Count-— 
I  have  bten  amuled  with  the  ridiculous  anger  of 
I^e  Maire,  whom  M  .'ntfleuri  has  been  pro- 
voking to  diiplay  it,  on  the  fubject  of  the  abo- 
lifhed  titles — Y^t,  even  after  all  this,  the  im- 
preffion  1  received  in  my  fleep  is  not  diiTipated 
—Yet,  I  am  certainly  not  fuperftitiou-. — [ 
have,  afTuredly,  no  faith  in  dreams,  which  are> 
I  know,  but 

*'  The  children  "f  an  idle  brain, 

*'  Begot  of  D'  thing  but  vain  phanfafy, 

♦'  And  more  intonllant  than  the  vagrant  wind«."* 

I  fhal!  hear  from  Kngland,  perhaps,  to-mor- 
row, or  Friday,  and  then  be  able  to  laugh  at  my 
wealcnefs,  as  mucn  as  vou  h  ive  probably  done 
in  reading  this.  I  hear  the  Count's  courier  is 
ready  to  fet  out  for  Clermont.  1  muft,  there- 
fore, haltily  bid  you,  dear  Bethel,  adieu! 

LIONEL  DESMOND. 


♦  Shakefpeare. 


LET- 


DESMOND,  135 


♦LETTER     XIL 


TO    MR.    BETHEL. 


Hauieville  in  Auvergne,  Sept.  30,  1790. 

MONTFLEURI  came  into  my  room  yef- 
tefterday  moring  with  letters  in  nis  hand,  whict 
he  had  juft  received  from  his  own  houie — x 
afked  eagerly  for  mine,  but  there  were  none, 
and  my  ft-rvant  yet  remains  waiting  for  them.— 
I  exprefled,  perhaps  too  forcibly,  what  1  felt — 
impatience  and  difappointment;  when  Mont- 
fleuri,  as  foon  as  thefe  emotions  had  a  little 
fubfided,  afked  me  gaily,  "  whether  1  had 
many  near  and  dear  relations  in  England,  for 
whofe  health  I  was  fo  extremely  folicitous  as  to 
injure  my  own  by  my  anxiety  ?" — I  replied, 
*'  that  though  1  had  very  few  relations,  and 
with  thofe  few  feldom  correfponded,  yet,  that 
1  had  friends  to  whom  1  was  warmly  attached." 
— "  And  fome  lovely  and  fond  woman  alfo,  I 
fancy,"  intenufued  he^  *'  for,  my  dear  Def- 

•Wiit'.en  before  the  receipt  of  Bethel's  laft  letter. 

mond 


136  DESMOND. 

mond,  thefriendfhip,  however  greaf,  that  fub- 
fifts  between  perfons  of  the  fame  fcx,  creates 
not  thefe  violent  anxieties. — Ah  !  my  good 
friend,  I  fancy  you  are  a  very  fortunate  fellow^ 
—  As  to  my  tv/o  fifters,  they  feem,  by  their  let- 
ters, to  be  quite  enchanted  with  you  ;  and  Jo- 
fephine  (whofe  tears,  indeed,  at  our  parting,  I 
did  not  before  attribute  all  to  my  own  account) 
declares  in  this  let'er,  that  if  I  do  rot  foon  re- 
turn with  my  Englifh  friend,  fhe  and  Julie  muft 
rejoin  us  here,  notwirhftanding  their  diflike  to 
this  melancholy  place  ;  for,  that  fince  we  have 
left  Montfleuri,  it  is  become  fo  extremely /r/^,?, 
that  they  are  half  dead  with  lalfitude  znA ennui. 
You  remember,  I  dare  fay,  hearing  fine  fenti- 
mental  fpeeches  from  Jofephine  about  the 
charms  of  folitude  and  the  beauties  of  nature. — 
Now  nature  was  never  more  beautiful  than  it  is 
at  this  moment  in  the  I  yonois,  yet  is  my  gentle 
Tofephine  moft  marvelloufly  difcontent.  I^Gi- 
mond,  do  tell  me  how  you  manage  to  bewitch  the 
women  in  this  manner?" 

I  was  neither  gay  enough  to  enjoy  this  rail- 
lery, or  coxcomb  enough  to  believe  that  Ma- 
dame de  Boifbelle  regrettt-d  meat  Montfleuri.-— 
Indeed,  I  raihtr  felt  hurt  at  her  brother's  fpeak- 
ing  of  her  thus  lightly;  but  with  him  this  vi- 
vacity is  conltituiional. — He  has  befides,  from 
education,  habit,  and  principles,  much  freer 
notions  than  1  have  about  w^omen. — He  again 
enquired  of  me  of  what  nature  was  my  Englifh 
attachment — a  queftion  I  declined  anfwering; 
for  the  name  of  Geraldme  is  not  to  be  prophan- 
ed  by  his  fufpicions,  or  even  his  conjectures. — 
Were  I  to  fav  that  my  paffion  for  her  is  as  pure 
and  holy  as  that  of  a  fond  brother  for  a  lovely 
and  amiable  filler,  which  I  am  almoji  fure  it  is, 

he 


©ESMOND.  137 

he  would  turn  my  Platonifm  into  ridicule;  or, 
if  he  could  be  perluaded  to  believe  that  (uch  a 
paflion  exifts,  he  would  think  that  fhe  Vi'as  a 
prude,  and  that  I  am  an  idcot ;  and  to  thi?, 
though  I  can  forgive  it,  becaufe  he  does  not 
know  Geraldine,   I  will  not  expofe  myfelf. 

1  heartily  with  the  time  fixed  for  our  (lay  here 
was  expired — 1  am  wcaiy  of  the  place — The 
frigid  magnificence  in  which  we  live  is  very 
dull,  and  the  perpetual  arguments  between  the 
Count  and  his  Nephew,  are  fometimes,  at 
leaft,  diftreffing. — The  former,  with  that 
haughty  obftinacy  that  endeavours  to  fet  itfelf 
abuve  the  reafon  it  cannot  combat,  defends, 
with  afperity  and  anger,  thofe  prejudices,  in 
obedience  to  which  he  is  about  to  quit  his  coun- 
try—Though  could  he  determine  to  throw  them 
off,  he  might  undoubtedly  continue  at  home, 
as  much  refpedted,  and  more  beloved  than  ever 
he  was  in  the  meridian  of  his  power. 

1  he  dialouges,  which  he  is  fond  of  holding 
with  Montfleuri,  have  not  unfrequently  been 
carried  on  with  fo  much  warmth  on  his  fide,  as 
to  alarm  me,  left  they  fhould  produce  an  open 
rupture  ;  for  what  the  old  Count  wants  in  found- 
nefs  of  argument,  he  makes  up  in  heat  and  de- 
clamation.— His  nephew,  however,  has  fo 
much  good  temper,  and  fuch  an  habitual  ref- 
pe£t  for  him,  that  he  never  fuffers  himfelf  to  be 
too  much  rufiied  ;  and  d'Hauteville,  after  the 
moft  violent  of  thefe  contentions,  is  under  the 
neceffity  of  recollecting,  that  it  is  on  his  ne- 
phew he  muft  depend  for  the  care  of  his  pecu- 
niary concerns  (a  matter  to  which  he  is  by  no 
means  indifferent)  when  he  goes  into  the  volun- 
tary exile  to  which  he  chufes  to  condemn  him- 
felf. He  alfo  recollects,  that  he  owes  to  Mont- 
fleuri 


138  DESMOND. 

fleuri  a  confiderable  fum  of  money,  part  of  his 
mother's  fortune  j.  which,  together  with  the  ar- 
rcar  of  intereft  he  has  always  evaded  paying  by 
the  chicanery  of  the  old  laws ;  and,  he  now 
fears,  that  when  equal  jaftice  is  eftabliflied,  this 
claim  may  be  revived  and  enforced  by  Mont- 
fleuri. — Thus  it  is  rather  intereft  than  affinity 
that  prevents  his  breaking  with  his  nephew; 
and  that  compels  him,  with  averted  and  reluc- 
tant ears,  to  hear  thofe  truths  which  Mont- 
fieuri  fpeaks  to  him,  with  the  fame  coolnefs, 
and  as  much  diverted  of  confiderations  of  per- 
fonal  intereft,  as  his  nephew  would  fpeak  be- 
fore a  Conclave  of  cardinals,  or,  if  it  could  be 
colledled,  of  emperors. 

To-day,  after  dinner,  Montfleuri  happened 
to  be  abfent,  and  the  Count  taking  advantage  of 
it,  began  to  talk  to  me,  whom  he  wifhes  to 
win  over  to  his  party,  on  the  fubject  nearell  his 
heart — the  abolition  of  all  titular  diftin£tions  in 
France — He  went  back  to  the  earlieft  records 
of  the  kingdom  to  prove  what  I  never  doubted 
—the  antiquity  of  tides,  as  if  that  were  an  ir- 
refragable proof  of  their  utility. — "  My  God, 
Sir  !"  cried  he,  "is  it  poffible — that  you — that 
you — who  are,  without  doubr,  yourlelf  of  no- 
ble blood"—"  Pardon  me.  Sir,  faid  I,  for  in- 
terrupting you,  but  if  that  be  of  any  weight  in 
the  argument  you  are  going  to  ufe,  it  is  necef- 
fary  to  tell  you,  your  fuppoution  is  erroneous 
— I  am  not  noble. — My  anceltors,  fo  far  as  I 
ever  traced  them,  which  is  indeed  a  very  little 
way,  were  never  above  the  rank  of  plain  coun- 
try gentlemen  j  and,  I  am  afraid,  towards  the 
middle  of  the  laft  century,  iofe  even  that  dig- 
nity in  a  miller  and  a  farmer." — "  Well,  Sit," 
continued  the   Count,  in  whofe  elteem  i   had 

gained 


D    E    S    M    O    N    D.  139 

gained  nothing  by  this  humble  ciifclofure  of 
my  origin. — '*  Well,  Sir,  however  that  may 
have  been — you  are  now,  I  underftand,  from 
the  Marquis,  my  nephew,  a  man  of  large  for- 
tune and  liberal  education — and  therefore,  in 
your  own  country,  where  nohlejfe  is  not  To  much 
infifled  upon,  you  have,  undoubtedly,  mixed 
much  with  men  of  high  birth,  and  eminent 
confidcration." — '*  Really,  Sir,  you  do  me  ar^ 
honor  in  that  fuppofition,  to  which  1  am  not 
very  well  entitled.  With  u«,  it  is  true,  that  a 
conl^derable  fortune  is  a  paiTport  to  futh  fociety; 
and  had  I  found  any  fatisfaiticn  in  enlifting  my- 
felf  under  the  banners  of  either  of  thofe  parties, 
who  are  always  contending  for  the  good  of  old 
Kngland,  I  might  have  been  admitted  among 
the  old  and  middle  aged,  who  are  bufied  in  ar- 
ranging the  affairs  of  the  public  ;  or  among  the 
young,  who  are  yet  more  bufy  in  difarranging 
their  own.  But  having  no  tafte  for  the  fociety 
of  either  the  one  or  the  other,  I  can  boafl  of 
only  one  titled  friend  in  my  own  country;  and 
he  Is  a  man  whom  1  love  and  honor  for  the  vir- 
tues of  his  heart,  not  for  the  fplendor  of  his  fi- 
tuation— Poflciling  an  illuftrious  name  and  a 
noble  fortune,  he  has  a  dignity  of  mind,  and  a 
fenlibility  of  heart,  which  thofe  advantages  not 
unfrequently  deftroy.  Could  we,  among  our 
numerous  nobility,  boafl  of  many  fuch  men, 
their  conduit  wou  d  be  a  ftronger  argument  in 
favor  of  tlie  advantages  of  a  powerful  arifto- 
cracy,  than  the  moit  dazzling  Ihew  of  a  birth- 
day exhibition,  or  the  moll  plauhbie  vindi- 
cation of  titu'ar  diftindtions  that  we  have  ever 
yet  heard. — There  may,  for  ought  1  know, 
be  others  equallv  refptctable  for  their  private 
virtues,  but  they  have  not  fallen  within  my  obfer- 
vation;  and  judging,  therefore,  of  the   greater 

part 


140  DESMOND. 

part  of  them  through  the  medium  of  public  re- 
port,   I    have   felt  no    with  to   approach  them 
nearer."     **   However  you  may  think  of   indi- 
viduals,  Sir,"  faid  the  Count,  "  you  furely  are 
not  fo  blinded,  fo  infatuated,  by  the  dod^rines 
that   have  obtained    moft    unhappily    for  this 
country,  as  not  to  feel  the  necelTiiy  that  this  or- 
der of  men  fiiould  exilK — You  muft  know,  that 
the  wifdom  of  our  ancient  kings   created  this 
drftindtion,  that  is  to  fay,  they  thought  it  expe- 
dient to  raife  the   brave  and  valiant  above  the 
common  level  of    mankind,     by   giving  them 
badges  and  titles  of  honor,  in  order  to  mark  and 
perpetuate  their  glorious  deeds,  and  ftimulate, 
to  emulation,    their  illuftrious   pofterity — now 
—  if  thefe  well-earned  rev/ards  are  taken  from 
their  defcendants — if  thefe  facred  diftmdiions  be 
annihilated,  and  the  names  of  heroes   paft,  be 
erafed   from   the  records  of  mankind — I  aflert, 
that  there  is  an  end,  not  only  of  juftice,  but  of 
emulation,  fubordination — all   that  gives  fafety 
to  property,  or  grace  to  fociety — and  the  world 
will  become  a  chaos  of  confufion  and  outrage. 
—What  ! — (hall  a  man   of  trade,  a  ncgociant, 
an  upilart  dealer  in  wine,  or  wood,  or  fugar, 
or  cloth,  approach  one  in  whofe  veins,  perhaps, 
the  blood  of  our  Lufignans  and  lancreds  cir- 
culares. —  The  fame  blood    which,    in   the   de- 
fence of  our   holy  religion,   was  fhed  in  Palef- 
tine. —  I  fay,  {hall  a   mufhroom,  a   fungus,  ap- 
proach thefe   illuftrious  defcendants  of  honored 
anceftors,     and   fay,    "  Behold,   Oh  !    man    of 
-high  defcent,  1  am  thy  equal,  my  country  de- 
clares it  !" 

Indignation  here  artefted  the  eloquence  it  had 
produced,  and  gave  me  an  opportunity  of  fay- 
ing, "  My  dear  Sir,  the  united  voices  of  com- 
mon 


DESMOND.  141 

mon  fenfc,    nature,    and  reafon,    declared   all 
this  long  ago,  though  it  is  only   now  you  are 
compelled  to  hear  them.     As  to  the  degradation 
of  Mejftfurs^  the    prefent   defcendants  of  your 
Lufignans  and  Tancreds,  if  it  be  a  degradation 
to  be   accounted  only  men,  I  really   am  much 
concerned  for  them  ;  but    for  the  ill   efFeits  it 
otherwife   produces,  inafmuch  as  fuch  motives 
fail  as    might  excite  them    to  equal  thefe  their 
great    progenitors,    I    cannot   underftand    that 
there  is  in  that  refpt(5l  much  to  regret. — The 
days  of  chivalry   will  never,  I   apprehend,  re- 
turn i  the  ravings  of  a  fanatic  monk  will  never 
again  prevail  on  the  French  to  make  a  crufade. 
. — Nay,  added  I,  fmiling,  there  feems  but  little 
probability  that  they  will  foon  be  called  upon  to 
take  arms,  in  a  caufe  which  has  in  later  times 
appeared  of  greater  moment — 1   mean,  refcuing 
what  one  of  your  writers  calls  U'vain  honneur  du 
pavilion*^    from   the  arrogant  fuperiority  of  us 
prefumptuous    iflanders.      The    real     value  of 
both    thefe  objects,  for  which  fo   much   blood 
has  been  wafted,  feems  to  be  better  underftood, 
the  real  inteieft  of  humanity  to  appear   in  its 
proper   light.     Since,  therefore,  we  no  longer 
have  occafion  to  follow  the  example  of  thofe  he- 
roes who  have  bled  for  either— Why  contem- 
plate them   with  fuch  blind  reverence?   i  fup- 
pofe,  Sir,  youwiUnot  fay,  that  the  frantic  ex- 
peditions to  the  Holy  Land,  preached  by  Peter 
the  Hermit,  anfwered    any  other   purpofe  than 
to  depopulate  and  impoverifli  your  country  and 
mine.      Nor  will    you    maintain,    that  either 
France  or  England  have  gained  any  thing  but 

*  The  vain  honor  of  the  flag,  which,  till  within  a  few  years, 
•the  Englifh  have  always  infjlled  on  having  ftruck  to  them  in 
ithe  Narrow  Seas. 

taxes 


142  DESMOND. 

taxes  and    poverty   by  the  continual  wars  with 
which   we    have   been    harafling    each    other, 
through  a  fucceffirn  of  ages.     Surely  then  it  is 
time  to  recall  our  imaginations   from  thefe  wild 
dreams  of   fanaticifm   and    heroifm — Time  to 
remove  the  gorgeous  trappings,  with  which  we 
have  dreft  up  folly,    that   we  might   fancy   it 
glory. — The  tinfel  ornaments  we  have  borrow- 
ed as  the  livery  of  this  phantom,  are  become 
tarnifhed    and    contemptible — Let    not  regret 
then,  that  the  hand  of  fober  reafon   tears  off 
thefe  poor  remaining  (Tireds,  with  which  virtue 
difdains  to  attempt  encreafing  its  genuine   luf- 
tre  ;  with  which  felfiihners  and  foi'Iy  mujl  fail 
lo  hide  their    real    deformity. — Have   patience 
with  me  yet  a  moment — while  I  afk — v/hether 
you  really  think,  that  a  dealer  in  wine,  or  in 
wood,  in   fugar,  or  cloth,  is  not  endued  with 
the  fame  facukiesand  feelings  as  the  defcendant 
of  Charlemagne;    and    whether  the  accidental 
advantages  of  being  able  to  produce  a  long  pe- 
digree (which,  notwithftanding  the  infinite  vir- 
tue afcribed  to  matrons  of  antiquity,  is,  I  fear, 
often  very  doubtful)  ought  to  give  to  the  noble 
who  pofleires  it,  a  right  to  confider  every  lower 
rank  of  men  as  being  of  an  inferior  and  fubor- 
dinante  fpecies" — 

**  So,  Sir" — angrily  burfl  forth  the  Count 
— "  So,  Sir ! — I  muft,  from  all  this,  conclude, 
that  you  confider  your  footman  upon  an  equa- 
lity with  yourfelf. — Why  then  is  he  your  foot- 
man *  ?'; 

"  Becaufe — though  my  footman  is  certainly 
fo  far  upon  an  equality  with  me,  as  he  is  a  man, 
and  a  free-man;  there  muft  be  a  diftindlion  in 

*  This  argument  has  been  called   unanfwerable. 

local 


DESMOND.  143 

local  circumftances  ;  though  they  neither  ren- 
der me  noble,  or  him  bate — I  ttappen  to  be 
born  heir  toconfiderable  eftates  ;  it  is  his  chance 
to  be  the  Ion  of  a  labtmrer,  living  on  thofe  ef- 
tates. — I  have  occafion  for  his  fervicts,  he  has 
occafion  for  the  money  by  which  I  purchafe 
them  :  in  this  compadt  we  are  equal  fo  far  as 
we  are  free. — I,  with  my  property,  which  is 
money,  buy  his  property,  which  is  time,  fo 
long  as  he  is  willing  to  fell  it. — 1  hope  and  be- 
lieve my  footman  feels  himfelf  to  be  my  fellow- 
man  ;  but  I  have  rot,  therefore,  any  apprehen- 
fion  that  inftead  of  waiting  behind  my  chair,  he 
will  fit  down  in  the  next. — He  was  born  poor — 
but  he  is  not  angry  that  I  am  rich — fo  long  as 
my  licbes  are  a  benefit  and  not  an  oppreffion  to 
him. — He  knows  that  he  never  can  be  in  myfi- 
tuation,  but  he  knows  alfo  that  I  can  amend 
his. — If,  however,  inftead  of  paying  him  for 
his  fervices,  1  were  able  to  fay  to  him,  as  has 
been  done  by  the  higher  clafies  throughout  Eu- 
rope, and  is  (till  in  too  many  parts  of  it — "  you 
arc  my  vafial — vou  were  born  upon  my  effate — 
you  are  my  property — and  you  muft  come  to 
work,  fight,  die  for  me,  on  whatever  condi- 
tions I  pleafe  to  impofe; — my  fervant,  who 
would  very  naturally  perceive  no  appeal  againft 
fuch  tyrannical  injuftice,  but  to  bodily  prov.^efs 
would,  as  he  is  probably  the  moflr  athletic  of 
the  two,  difcoyer  that  fo  far  from  being  com-^ 
pelled  to  ftand  on  fuch  terms  behind  my  chair, 
he  was  well  able  either  to  place  himfelf  in  the 
next,  or  to  turn  me  out  of  mine, — *  *  Ceux  qui 

difent 

•*'  Thbfe  who  fay  that  all  men  are  equal,  fay  tliat  which  is 
ptrfeftly  true;  if  they  mean  that  all  men  have  an  equal  right 
to  perfonal  and  mental  Jibetty  ;  to  their  refjieilive  pioperties; 

and 


144  D    E    S    M    O    N    D» 

difent  que  tous  les  hommes  font  egaux,'  fays 
Voltaire — ''Ceux  qui  difent  que  tous  les  hom- 
mes font  egaux,  difent  la  plus  grande  verite, 
s'ils  entendent  que  tous  les  hommes  ont  un  droit 
egala  la  liberte,  a  la  propriete  de  leurs  biens, 
&  a  la  protection  des  loix. — lis  fe  tromperaienr 
beaucoup,  s'ils  croyaient  que  les  hommes, 
doivent  etre  €gaux  par  les  emplois,  puifqu'ils 
ne  le  font  pas  par  leurs  talens." 

"  Voltaire !"  impatiently  exdaimed  the 
Count,  "  why  always  Voltaire  ? — one  is  per- 
fectly ftunned  with  the  falfe  wit  and  infiduous 
mifreprefentations  of  that  atheiftical  fcribbler." 

Againft  the  defender  of  the  family  of  Calas  ; 
the  protedlor  of  the  Sirvens  ;  the  bcnefadtor  of 
all  mankind,  whom  he  pitied,  feived,  and 
laughed  at ;  the  Count  now  moft  furioufly  de- 
claimed, in  along  and  angry  fpeech,  which,  as 
it  pofTelled  neither  truth  or  argument,  1  have 
forgot.— Towards  the  clofe  of  it,  however,  he 
had  worked  himltlf  into  fuch  a  ftate  of  irrita- 
tion, that  he  feemed  on  the  point  of  forgetting 
that  on  which  he  fo  highly  values  hitnfclf — 
Les  manihes  de  la vieille  cour. 

The  entrance  of  a  man  of  the  church,  whofe 
diminiftied  revenues  had  yet  had  no  effedt, 
either  in  reducing  his  figure,  or  fubduing  his 
arrogance,  made  a  momentary  diverfion  in  my 
favour. 

But  the  Count  was  now  heated  by  his  fub- 
je6l :  and,  being  reinforced  with  fo  able  an  aux- 
iliary, he  returned  to  the  charge. — He  related 
the  fubjcCt   of  our   controverfy   to  his   friend, 

and  to  the  prote<f\inn  of  the  laws:  but  they  would  be  ss  cer- 
tainly wrong  in  believing  that  men  ought  to  be  equal  in  trullf, 
in  employments,  fince  niiture  has  not  made  them  equal  in  ihtir 
tilentj." 

who. 


U    E    S    M    O    N    D»  145 

who,  whik  he  fpolce,   furveyed   me  with   fuch 
looks,  as  one  of  the  holy  lirotheihood  of  the  In- 
quifition  may  be  fLppoled   to  throw  on  the  un- 
happy culprit  whom  he  is   aboiit  to  condemn  to 
the  flames  on  the   next  autodefe. — in  a  n^anner 
psculiar,  I    truft,   to   la   v'lelle  cour  ecclcfiajltque^ 
he  gave   me    to  unuei  (bnd,  that    he   confidertd 
me  as  an    ignorant   atheidical    boy  ;  and,  that 
his  abhorrence  of  my    principles   was  equalleij 
only  by  his  contempt  for  my  country  and    my- 
felf.— *'  Voltaire,"  faid  he,'  '^  Voltaire^  Mun- 
iieur  L'Anglois'  is  a  wretch  with   whofe  natiie 
I  fully  not  my  mind  ;  a  monfter  whofe  pernici- 
ous  writings  have  overturned  the  religion   and 
the  government  of  his  country."     The  manner 
in  which  this  was  faid,  brought  to  my  mind  aa 
exprellion  which  Voltaire  puts   himfelf  into  the 
mouth  of  fuch  a  character. — "  Ah  1  nous  feri- 
ous  les  maitres  du   mcnde,  fans  ces  coquins  de 
gens  d'efprit."  *     I    continued   to  liilen  to  the 
difcourfe  which  the  Count   now  refumed  j  the 
pujpot  of  which  was  to  convince   me,  that  the 
decree  of  the  nineteenth  of  May,  was  fubver- 
five   of  all   order,  and  ruinous  alike  to  the  dig- 
nity   and    happinefs  of  a  Hate.  —  At  length   he 
rtopped   CO  recover  his   breath,  and  gave  me  an 
opportunity   of   faying,  "  if,    Sir,    I  might  be 
once   more  permitted  to  qu;;te  fo  obnoxious  an 
author  f  as  him   of  whom  we   have  juft  been 
fpeaking,  I  ihouid  fay,  that  *'  Lc  nom  eft  in- 
different;   il  n'y  a  que   le  pouvoir  qui   ne  le  foit 
pa&.:J:" — If  the  nav\e  of  vobUJfe  was  fo  connedled 

*  "  Ah  !  we  Il>ou!d  be  maftrr*  of  the  world,  were  it  not  for 
thofe  ralcal!)  wits." 

"f-  Voltaire. 

X  The  name  u  immateriii ;  it  ii  tho  power  only  that  is  of 
tonfequence. 

Vol.  I.  H  wi^.h 


14-6  DESMOND. 

^ith  the  poiuer  of  oppreflion,  that  they   could 
not   be  divid  d,  the  nation  had  a   right  to  take 
away   both  ;    if  "otherwire)    it   might,  perhaps, 
have   been   politic  to    have  divided    them,  and 
have  left  to  the  French   patricians,  thefe  founds 
on  which  they  feem   to  feel   that   their  confe- 
qucncc  depends  ;  together  with   the  invaluable 
privileges  of  having  certais^n  fymbols  painted  on 
their    coaches,  or    woven   on    (heir   furniture; 
and  of  dreffins;  their  domeflics  in  one  way  rather 
than  in  another.  —A  great  people  who  had  every 
thing  on  which    its   freedom  and  its   profperity 
depended    to  confider,    mul^    furely  have    fcen 
fuch  obje£ls  as  thefe  with  fo  much  indifference, 
that  had  they  not  been   evidently  obnoxious  to 
the  fpirit  of  reform,  they  would  have  left   thenli 
to  the  perfons  who  fo  highly  value  them  ;   per-* 
fons  who  refolve  to  quit  their    country  becaufe 
fhey  are  no  longer  to  be  enjoyed   in  it.-^The 
framers  of  the  nev/  conftitution,  had  they  not 
been  well  convinced   of  the  inefficacy  of  mere 
palliation^  would    nor,    certainly,  by   deflroying 
thefe  diftincStions    (matters  in   themfdves   quite 
inconfequential)  have  raifed   againft  the  fabrick 
Cliey  were   planning,  the  unextinguifliable  rage 
and  hatred  of  a  great  body  of  men  ;  but  would 
have  left  them  in   quiet  pofl'effion  of  thefe   bau- 
bles fo  ncceHary  to  their  happinefs." 

*'  Hold,  Sir,"  cried  the  Count,  whofe  im* 
patience-tould  no  longer  be  reftrained^"  Hold, 
Sir,  and  do  not  fpeak  ihus contcmptuoufly  I  en- 
treat you,  of  an  advan-r£g«  which  it  is  very  truly 
faid,  no  man  undervalues  who  is  pofTelled  of  it. 
-—You,  Sir,  have  owned  that  your  family  is 
roturier — How  then,  and  at  your  time  of  life, 
when  the  real  value  of  fbjedts  cannot  have  been 
liaught  you   by  exptricjice  ;   bow   then   can   you 

pretend 


D    E    S    M    O    K    D.  147 

pretend  to  judge  of  that  which  is  appreciated  by 
the  wifdom  of  age?,  and  has  been  held  up  as 
the  reward  of  heroic  virtues. — Baubles  ! — Is  it 
thus  you  term  the  name  a  man  derives  from  his 
ilhiftrious  anceftors — Bauble  ! — are  the  ho  ors 
handed  down  to  me,  from  the  firft  d'HauteVille, 
who  lived  under  Louis  le  Grosy  the  fixth  in  de- 
fcent  from  Charlemagne,  to  be  thus  contuma- 
cioufly  defcribed  by  the  upftart  politics  of  mo- 
dern reformers." 

I  was  really  concerned  to  fee  the  poor  man 
fo  violently  agitated,  and  replied,  "  My  dear 
Sir — I  allow  much  to  the  pride  derived  from  an  = 
ceftry — Where  the  dignity  of  an  houfe  has  been 
fupported,  as  I  doubt  not,  but  that  you  have 
fupported  yours  ;  but  let  me  on  the  other  fide 
fay,  that  there  are  but  too  many  who  certainly 
inherit  nor,  with  their  names,  the  vi  tues  of 
their  progenitors.  You  recollecl  a  maxim  of 
Rochefaucauh's  on  this  fubjeit,  which,  as  I 
remember  to  have  heard,  that  he  is  a  favourite 
author  of  your's,  you  will  allow  me  to  bring 
forward  in  fupport  of  my  argument — '*  Les 
grands  noms  abaiflcnt  au  lieu  d'e.ever,  ceux  qui 
ne  favent  pas  les  foutenir*."  Befides,  how 
nuny  are  there,  both  in  your  country  and  mine, 
who  are  called  noble,  who  cannot,  in  facfl,  re- 
fer to  the  examples  of  a  long  line  of  anceftry, 
to  animate  th  m,  by  example,  to  dignified  con- 
duct.—How  ve^v  nianv,  who  owe  to  money, 
a, id  not  hereditary  merit,  the  right  they  afl'ume 
^to  louk  dOA-n  on  the  reft  of  the  world.  It  ii 
tfU',  tnai  for  the  moft  part,,  that  world  repays 
their  contempt ;  and  it  is  from  the  vulgar  only, 

*  "■  Great   namt-s   degrade,  inlead   of  ri'fin^,    tbofe    who 
knr  w   mt    how  to  lonport  chein;" — Max  tns   94,  dc  Ro;hc- 

fdUCdtllt. 

H  2  who 


I^B.  D    £    S    M    O    K    D. 

who  venerate  a  new  coronet,  which  is  generally 
*'  twice  as  big  as  an  old  on/' — that  they  receive 
even  the  '*  knee  homage,  this  valued  appendage 
gives  them.  "  Les  Rois  font  des  homnics 
-comme  des  pieces  de  monnoie;  ils  les  font  va- 
loir  ce  qu'ils  veulent,  h  Ton  eft  force  de  les  re- 
cevoir,  felon  leurs  cours,  &  non  pas  felon  leur 
veritable  prix  *." 

^'  Let  fuch  men,  then,"  faid  Monfieur 
d'Hauteville,  "  let  fiich  be  erafed,  with  all  my 
heart,  from  the  catalogue  of  noble  names.  —  In- 
deed, it  i«  well  known,  that  ic^  never  confidered 
fuch  as  belonging  to  our  order. — I  argue  not 
.about  them — but  for  thofe,  whofe  blood  gives 
them  pretenfions  to  different  treatment. — Ah  ! 
Monfieur  Defmond,  >f  it  were  poflible — but  it 
is  not — for  you  to  underftand  my  feelings,  you 
would  comprehend,  how  utteily  impoflible  it  is 
for  me,  at  my  time  of  life,  to  continue  in  this 
loft  and  debafed  country,  to  drag  on  an  ex- 
jftence,  from  which  every  thing  valuable  is 
gone,  and  which  is  confequently  expofed  to  in- 
dignity and  fcorn — Would  they  not  erafe  my 
iirms  ?  change  my  defcription  ?  tear  down  the 
trophies  of  my  houfe?" — Thefe  ideas  feemed 
fo  deeply  to  affedl  the  Count,  that  his  refpirgti- 
on  again  became  affetSted  ;  his  eyes  appeared^to 
be  ftarting  from  his  head  j  and  he  aflumed  f© 
much  the  look  of  a  man  on  the  point  of  be- 
coming infane,  that  1  thought  it  more  than  time 
to  conclude  a  converfation,  that  I  ftiould  not 
have  continued  fo  long,  had  he  not  feemed  t« 
dcfire  it. 

*  Kings  pive  value  to  men  as  ihey  Ho  to  coin;  they  mark 
iht-m  with  what  ftamp  they  pleafe  ;  and  ihe  world  leceives 
itieni  accoriiing  lo  inib  imagimry  ert'mate,  and  not  accorilinjj 
It)  Lheir  ical  silu*. — Ro.hcfaucauli,  Msxii.e  10. 

With 


DESMOND.  149 

With  inveterate  prejudice,  thus  fondl]^ 
nurfed  from  early  youth,  it  werehopelefsto  con- 
tend— In  the  mind  of  Monfieur  d'Hautevillc, 
this  notion  of  family  confequence  is  fo  interwo- 
ven, fo  aflbciated  with  all  his  id&as,.  that,  as 
the  ivy  coeval  with  the  tree,  at  lengthy  deliroys 
its  vital  principle,  this  fentiment  now  predo- 
minates to  the  cxtindlion  of  reafon  itfelf — 
"  Thefe  prejudices,"  fays  an  eminent  living, 
writer*,  **  arife  from  what  are  commonly  called 
falfe  views  of  things,  or  improper  airociatlons- 
of  ideas,  which,  in  the  extreme,  become  deli- 
rium, or  madnefs  j  and  is  confpicuous  to  every 
pcrfon,  except  to  him,  who  actually  labours- 
under  this  diforder  of  mind." 

I  withdrew,  therefore,  as  foon  as  I  could, 
iag  Monfieur  d'Hautevillc  with  his  friciid ; 
who,  1  am  fu;e,  had  his  looics  pofilfil-d  thj 
power  imputed  to  thnfc  of  the  Balilifk,  would 
tiien  have  concluded  my  adventures. — As  I 
pafied  through  the  1-ifk  ami  room,  and  turned 
my  eyes  on  the  drawing  of  a  great  gemalogica'. 
tree,,  vi/hich  covers  one  fide  of  it,  1  could  i.ot 
help  philofophizmg  on  the  infinite  variety  of  the 
mi'des  ot  ihinking  among  mankind — The  dif- 
feren<e  briween  my  consideration  of  fuch  an 
object,  tnd  that  bcflowed  on  it  by  Monfieur 
d'l::auceville,  Uruck  me  forcibly.  Had  1  fuch 
a  yellow  fcroU,  though  it  defcribed  my  delcent 
from  Adam  or  Noah,  from  a  knight  of  the 
fla.iung  lab'-e,  or  a  king  of  the  Weft  Saxons 
—  I  fliould  probably,  on  the  firft  occaf;on 
that  fuch  a  material  was  wanted,  cut  it 
into  angular  flips,  and  write  directions  on 
the  back  of  thefe  parchment  flireds,  for  the 
phcafants  and  hares  that  I  fend  to  my  friends — 

•  I*ri^e/'»  Lewers  to  a  Philofophicil  Unbelitver. 

WWle 


15®  D    E    S    Al    O    N    D. 

While  Monfeigneur  le  Comte  d'Hauteville  is 
going  to  leave  his  native  country,  becaufe  the 
vifionary  honor  he  derives  from  this  record,  are 
not  oflenfibly  allowed  him  in  it — Exclaimino-, 
poor  man  !  to  the  National  Aflembly,  "  Oh  ! 
ye  have — 

*'  From  my  own  windows  torn  my  houfliold  coat  ; 
"  Raz'iloiit    my  imprt^fs;  leaving  me  no  figrj 
"  To  ihew  the  worlJ  I  an«  a  gentleman  !* 

I  here  conclude  this  long  letter,  though  I 
fliall  not  feai  it  to  night,  becaufe  I  have  here 
much  time  on  my  hands,  and  cannot  employ  it 
belter  than  in  writing  to  you  ;  and  becaufe,  I 
hope  to  difpach  by  the  fame  conveyance  that 
takes  this,  an  anfwer  to  thofe  which  I  hope  to 
have  fr"m  you — for  furely,  my  fervant  will  be 
here  to-morrow  or  Tuefday,  with  the  letters 
that  I  have  fo  long  expe<?ied  to  be  directed  to  the 
chateau  de  Montfleuri,  from  England  :  and 
wiiich  1  now  await,  with  hourly  and  increafing 
impatience. 

Vale — Vale  et  me  ama^ 

L.  DESMOND. 


•  Shakefpeare's  Richard  the  Second. 


LET. 


D    £    S    M    O   N    Q.  151 


LETTER    XIV,* 


TO    MR.    BETHEL, 


Haufeville,  in  Auvergnc, 
Oa.  z,   1790. 

D  I  D  I  not  name  to  you  a  Breton,  who  had 
fomething  in  his  air  and  manner  unlike  others 
of  the  peafantry  ? — Whenever  I  have  obferved 
him,  he  Teemed  to  be  the  amufemcnt  of  his  fel- 
low labourers  ;  there  was  an  odd  quaint  kind  of 
pleafantry  about  him  i.  and  I  wiflied  to  enter 
into-  converfation  with  him^  which  I  had  yef- 
terday  evening  an  opportunity  of  doing.  ■  • 
"  You  are  not  of  this  part  of  France,  my 
friend  ?"  faid  I — "  No,  Monfieur — I  am  a  Bre- 
ton— And  now,  would  return  into  my  own 
country  again,  but  that,  in  a  fit  of  impatience, 
at  the  exceffive  impofitions  I  laboured  under, 
I  fold  my  little  property  about  four  years  ago, 
and  now  muft  continue  to  '*  courir  !e  monde, 
&  de  vivre  comme  il  plaroit  a  Dieu" — Sterne 
has,  1  think,  tranflated  that  to  be  upon  nothing. 

•  Written  before  the  receipt  of  Btthers  hftktter. 

My 


152  DESMOND. 

My  acquaintance  did  not  appear  to  be  fond  of 
fuch  meagre  diet.  '*  But,  pray,"  faid  I,  "  ex- 
plain to  me,  what  particular  oppreiEons  you 
had  to  complain  of,  that  drove  you  to  fo  def- 
perate,  and  as  it  has  happened,  fo  ill-timed  a 
refolution." 

"I  believe, "replied  he,  "that  I  am  naturally  of 
a  temper  a  little  impatient;  and  it  was  not  much 
qualified  by  making  a  campaign  or  two  againft  the 
Englifh  ;  the  firft  was  in  a  fliip  of  war,  fitted  out 
at  St.  Male's — or,  in  other  words,  Monfieur,  a 
privateer;  for  thou?h  I  was  bred  a  fail  or,  and 
loved  fighting  well  enough,  I  was  refiifed  even 
as  Enfigne  de  vaijjeau*^  on  board  a  king's  fhip, 
hccnnje  I  was  not  a  gentkrnan — My  father,  how- 
ever, had  a  pretty  Jitilc  eftate,  which  he  inhe- 
rited from  his  great,  great  grandfather — But  he 
h  -d  an  elder  Ton,  ;ir.d  I  was  to  fcramble  through 
the  world  as  we'l  as  I  couid — They  wanted, 
indf  ec),  to  make  me  a  monk  ;  but  I  had  a  mortal 
aveifion  x.o  that  metierf,  and  thought  it  better 
to  run  the  rifque  of  getting  my  head  taken  off 
by  a  cannon  bail,  than  to  fhave  it  — My  firft 
.debu;t  was  not  very  fortunate — We  fell  in  with 
an  tinglifh  frigate,  with  whom,  though  it  was 
hopelefs  enough  to  contend,  we  exchanged  a 
few  (hot,  for  the  honor  of  our  country;  and 
one  of  thofe  we  were  favored  with  in  return, 
tore   off  the  flefh  from   my  right  leg,  vMthout 

breaking    the   bone The    wound    was  bad 

enough,  but  the  Englilh  furgeon  fewed  it  up, 
and  before  we  landed,  I  was  (o  well  as  to  be 
fent  with  the  reft  of  our  crew  to  the  prifcwi  at 
Winchefter— I  had  heard  a  great  deal   of  the 

*  Anfwering,  I  lielierc,  to  our  «iW(hIpi3ien. 
■f  Trade — profeffioB. 

humanity 


D    E    S    W  O   N    D.  J  53 

humanity  of  the  Englifti  to  their  prifoners,  and 
fiipnofed  I  might  bear  my  fate  without  much 
murniuring ;  but  we  were  not  treated  the  better 
for  belonging  to  a  privateer. —  1  he  prifon  was 
over-crowded,  and  very  unheahhy — The  provi- 
fions,  I  believe,  might  be  liberally  allowed  by  your 
government,  but  they  were  to  pafs  throuj^li  the 
hands  of  fo  many  people,  every  one  of  which  had 
their  advantage  out  of  them,  that,  before  they^ 
were  dirt  ributed  in  the  prifon,  there  was  but  little^ 
reafon  to  boaftof  the  generofity  of  your  count- y- 
mer^.  To  be  fure,  the  wifdom  ar^d  humanity 
of  war  is  very  remarkable  in  a  fcene  like  this, 
where  one  nation  fhuts  up  five  or  fix  thoufand 
of  the  fubjei51s  of  another,  to  be  fed  by  contract 
while  they  live;  and  when  thev  die,  which  two- 
thirds  of  the  number  fcldom  fail  to  do — to  be 
buried  by  contract-- — Yes'  —  out  of  nine-md- 
twenty  of  us  poor  devils,  u  ho  were  taken  in  our 
little  privateer,  fourteen  died  within  three  weeks  i 
among  whom,  was  a  relation  of  mine,'  a  gallant 
fellow,  who  had  been  in  the  former  wars  with 
the  Knglifh,  and  ftood  the  hazards  of  many  a 
bloody  day — He  was  an  old  man,  but  had  a 
conftitution  fo  enured  to  hardships,  and  the 
changes  of  climate,  that  he  feemed  likely  to  fee 
many  more — A  vile  fever  that  lurked  in  the 
prifon  feized  him— My  hammock  (for  we  were 
flung  in  hammocks,  one  above  another,  in  thofe 
great,  miferable  rooms,  which  compofe,  what 
they  fay  is,  an  unfininifhed  palace)  was  hung 
above  his,  and  when  he  fomid  himiVU"  dyincr, 
he  called  to  me  to  come  to  him — "  'Fis  all  over 
with  me,  my  friend,"  faid  he — "  N'impyrte  one 
muft  die  at  feme  time  or  other,  but  i  fliould  ' 
have  liked  it  better  by  a  cannon  ball  —  Nothings 
however,  vexes  me  more  in  this  bufinefs,  than 
ti  5  that 


154  DESMOND. 

that  I  have  been  the  means  of  bringing  you 
hither  to  die  in  this  hole — (for,  in  fad,  it  was 
by  his  advice,  I  had  entered  on  board  the  pri- 
vateer) However,  it  may  be,  you  will  out-live 
this  confounded  place,  and  have  another  touch 
at  thefe  damned  Englifli."  National  hatred, 
that  flrange  and  ridiculous  prejudice  in  which 
my  poor  old  friend  had  livei',  was  the  laft  fen- 
fation  he  felt  in  death  —  He  died  quietly  enough, 
in  a  few  moments  afterwards,  and  the  next  day 
I  faw  him  tied  up  between  two  boards,  by  way 
of  the  coffin,  which  was  to  be  provided  by  con- 
tract; and  depofited  in  \.\\t  fojfe  that  furrounded 
ourpiifon,  in  a  grave,  dug  by  contrail,  and  of 
courfe  very  fhallovi',  in  which  he  was  covered 
wiih  about  an  inch  of  mold,  which  was  by  con- 
tradt  alio,  put  over  him,  and  {<i\tv\.  other  pri- 
foners,  who  died  at  the  fame  time  ! — My  youth, 
and  a  great  flow  of  animal  fpirits,  carried  me 
through  ihis  wretched  fcene — And  a  youn^  of- 
ficer, who  was  a  native  of  the  fame  part  of 
Britan^',  and  who  was  a  prifoner  on  parole,  at 
a  neighbouring  town,  procured  leave  to  vifit  the 
priffin  at  Winchefter,  and  enquired  me  out— 
lie  -gave  me,  though  he  could  command  very 
iittle  mf  ney  himfelf,  all  he  had  about  him,  to 
afliif  me  in  procuring  food,  and  promifed  to  try 
if  he  could  obtain  for  me  my  parole,  as  he  knew 
my  parents,  and  was  concerned  for  my  fituaticn 
— But  his  intenticns,  in  my  favor,  were  Toon 
fruilrated,  for,  on  the  appearance  of  the  com- 
bined fleets  in  the  Channel,  the  Fjench  officer>-, 
who  were  tliought  too  near  the  coaif,  were  or- 
dered away  to  Northampton,  while,  very  foon 
ar:crwarc!s,  a  number  of  Spaniards,  who  had 
a.tiong  them  a  fever  of  a  moft  malignant  fort, 
Vere  lent  to  the  prifon   ahcady  ovcr-crcwded, 

and 


DESMOND.  155 

and  death  began  to  make  redoubled  havock 
among  its  wretched  inhabitants— Of  fo  dire  a 
nature  was  thedifeafe  thus  imported,  that  while 
the  bodies  that  were  thrown  over-board  from 
the  Spanifti  fleet,  and  driven  down  by  the  tide 
on  the  coafts  of  Cornwall  and  Devonfhire,  car- 
ried its  fatal  influence  into  thofe  countries,  the 
prifoners,  who  were  fent  up  from  Plymouth, 
difTeminated  deftrudion  in  their  route,  and 
among  all  who  approached  them  ;  thus  becom- 
ing the  inftruments  of  greater  mifchief,  than  the 
fword  and  the  bayonet  could  have  executed  — 
Not  only  the  miferable  prifoneis  of  war,  who 
were  now  a  mixture  of  French,  Spanifli,  and 
Dutch  perifhed  by  dozens  everv  day  ;  but  the 
foldiers  who  guarded  them,  the  attendants  of  the 
prifon,  the  phyfical  men  who  were  fent  to 
adminifter  medicines,  and  foon  afterwards,  the 
inhabitants  of  the  town,  and  even  thofe  of  the 
neighbouring  country  began  to  fufFer — Then  it 
was  that  your  government  perceing  this  blejjitig 
of  ivar  likely  to  extend  itfclf  rather  too  far, 
thought  proper  to  give  that  attention  to  it, 
which  the  calamities  of  the  prifoners  would 
never  have  excited.  A  phyfician  was  fent  down 
by  Parliament,  to  examine  into  the  caufes  of 
this  fcourge  ;  and  in  confequence  of  the  im- 
poiubilitv  of  flopping  it  while  fuch  numbers 
were  crowded  together,  the  greater  part  of  the 
French,  whom  hcknefs  had  fpared,  were  dif- 
mifTed,  and  I,  among  others,  returned  to  my 
ovvn  country.  I,  foon  after,  not  difcouraged  by 
what  had  befallen  me,  ente;ed  on  board  another 
privateer,  which  had  the  good  fortune  to  captuie 
two  Welt-India  fliips  richly  laden,  and  to  br-ng 
them  fafely  into  I'Urient,  where  we  difpcfed  of 
their  cargoes ;  and  my  ftiare  was  h  confidera- 

ble, 


156  D    E    S    r%I    O    N   D. 

ble,  that  I  determined  to  quit  the  Tea,  and  re- 
turn to  my  friend? — When,  in  purfuance  of 
this  rcfolution,  I  arrived  at  home,  I  found  my 
father  and  elder  brother  had  died  during  my  ab- 
fence;  and  1  took  pofTeffion  of  the  little  eftate 
to  which  1  thus  became  heir,  and  began  to  think 
rnyfelf  a  perfon  of  Tome  confequence.  In  com- 
mencing country  gentleman,  1  fat  rnyfelf  down 
to  reckon  all  the  advantages  of  my  fituation 
— An  extenfive  tradl  of  warte  land  lay  oti  one 
f.de  of  my  little  domain — On  the  other,  a  forefl- 
—My  fields  abounded  with  game — a  river  mn 
thrcugh  them,  on  which  I  depended  for  a  fupply 
of  fifh  ;  and  1  determined  to  make  a  little  war^ 
ren,  and  to  build  a  dove  cote.  I  had  Under- 
gone hardfliips  enough  to  give  me  a  perfe(St;  re- 
Jiih  for  the  good  things  now  within  my  reach  *, 
and  I  refolved  mcft  pioufly  to  enjoy  them — But 
I  was  foon  diftuibed  in  this  agreeable  reverie-*— 
1  took  the  liberty  of  firing  one  morning  at  a 
covey  of  partridges,  that  were  feeding  in  my 
corn  J  and  having  the  fame  day  caught  a  brace 
of  trout,  1  was  fitting  down  to  regale  rnyfelf  on 
th«fe  dainties,  when  I  received  the  following 
notice  from  the  neighbouring  feigneur,  with 
whom  1  was  not  at  all  aware  that  I  had  any 
thing  to  do. 

*'  The  mcft  high  and  mofl  powerful y^/^«^«r, 
Monfergneur  Raoul-Phillippe-Jofeph-Alexan- 
dre-Caefar  Erifpoe,  Baron  de  Kermanfroi,  fig- 
nifies  to  Louis- John  de  Merville,  that  he  the 
{z\d  fergnrar  is  in  quality  of  Lord  Paramount, 
is  to  all  intents  and  purpofes  invcfted  with  the 
tok  right  and  property  of  the  river  running 
through  his  frcf,  together  with  all  the  fifh 
therein ;  the  rpfties,  reeds,  and  willows  that 
grow  iti  or  r.9ar  the  fiiid  river;  2II  trees  and 

plants 


D    E   S    M    O    N    D.  157 

plants  that  the  fiid  river  waters;  and  all  the 
iflands  and  aits  within  it — Of  all  and  every  one 
of  which  the  high  and  mighty  lord,  Raoul-Phil- 
lippe-Jof-  ph-Alexander-Ccefar  Erifpoe,  Baron 
de  Kermanfroi,  is  abfolute  and  only  proprietor 
— Alfo,  of  all  the  birds  of  whaifoever  nature 
or  fpecies,  that  have,  fhall,  or  may,  at  anytime 
fly  on,  or  acrofs,  or  upon,  the  faid  fieforfeignemy. 
—And  all  the  hearts  of  chafe,  of  whatfoever 
defcription,  that  have,  (hall,  or  may  be  found 
upon  it."«— In  fhort.  Sir,  it  concluded  with  in-^ 
forming  me,  the  faid  Louis- Jean,  that  if  I,  at 
any  time,  dared  to  fifh  in  the  river,  or  to  fhoet 
a  bird  upon  the  faidyf^/",  of  which  it  feems  my 
little  farm  unluckily  made  part,  I  fhould  be  de- 
livered into  the  hands  of  juftice,  and  dealt  with 
according  to  the  utmoft  rigor  of  the  offended 
laws.  To  be  fure,  1  could  not  help  enquiring 
within  myfelf  how  it  happened,  that  I  had  no 
right  to  the  game  thus  fed  in  my  fields,  nor 
the  fi{h  that  fwam  in  the  river  ?  and  how  it  was, 
that  heaven,  in  creating  thefe  animals,  had 
been  at  work  only  for  the  grczt  feigneurs  /  ——' 
What!  is  there  nothing,  faid  I,  but  infeds  and 
reptiles,  over  which  man,  not  born  noble,  may 

exercife  dominion? From  the  wren  to  the 

eagle  J  from  the  rabbit  to  the  wild-boar;  from 
the  gudgeon  to  the  pike — all,  all,  it  feems,  are 
the  property  of  the  great.  'Twas  hard  to  ima- 
gine where  the  power  originated,  that  thus  de- 
prived all  other  men  of  their  rights,  to  give  to 
thofe  nobles  the  empire  of  the  elements,  and  the 
dominion  over  animated  n-^ture  ! — However,  I 
refledted,  but  I  did  not  refift;  and  fincc  I  could 
no  longer  bring  myfelf  home  a  dinner  with  my 
gun,  I  thought  to  confole  myfelf  as  well  as  I 
could,  with  the  produce  of  my  farm -yard  ;  and 

1  con- 


158  DESMOND. 

I  conftrufled  a  fmall  enclofed  pigeon-houfc, 
from  whence,  without  any  offence  to  my  noble 
neighbour,  1  hoped  to  derive  feme  fupply  for 
my  taole — But,  alas!  the  comfortable  and  re- 
tired ftate  of  my  pigeons  attra<Sted  the  ariftocra- 
tic  envy  of  thufe  of  the  fame  fpecies,  who  inha- 
bited the  fpacious  manorial  dove-cote  of  Mon- 
feigneur;  and  they  were  fo  very  unreafonable 
as  to  cover,  in  immenfe  flocks,  not  only  my 
fields  of  corn,  where  they  committed  infinite 
depredations,  but  to  furround  my  farm-yard, 
and  monopolize  the  food  with  which  1  fupplied 
my  own  little  colledlion,  in  their  inclofures. 
As  if  they  were  inftindtively  allured  of  the  pro- 
tediion  they  enjoyed  as  belonging  to  the  feigneur 
Raoul-Phillippe- J<'feph-Alexander-Ca;lar  liri- 
fpce.  Baron  de  Kermanfroi  ;  my  menaces,  and 
the  {houts  of  my  fervants,  were  totally  difre- 
garded  ;  till,  at  length,  I  yielded  too  haflily  to 
my  indignation,  and  threw  a  ftone  at  a  flight  of 
them,  with  fo  much  effect,  that  I  broke  the  leg 
of  one  of  thcfe  pigeons  ;  the  confcquence  of 
which  was,  that  m  half  an  hour,  four  of  the 
gardes  de  chajje*  of  Monfeigneur  appeared,  and 
funinioned  me  to  declare,  if  I  was  not  aware, 
that  the  wounded  bird  which  they  produced  in 
evidence  againft  me,  was  the  property  of  the 
fz\d  Jeignair  ;  and  without  giving  me  time  either 
to  acknowledge  m.y  crime,  or  apologize  for  if, 
th  y  ftiot,  by  way  of  retaliation,  the  tame 
pigf^ons  in  my  enclofurgs,  and  carried  me  away 
to  the  chateau  of  the  moft  high  and  puiffant 
feigneur  Raoul  -  Phiilippe  -Jofeph  -  Alexander- 
C'selar  hrifpc  e.  Baron  de  Kermanfroi,  to  anfwer 
for  the  aflauli  I  had  thus  committed  on  the  per- 

♦  Game  keep  r?, 

fon 


D   E    s    M    O    N   D.  159 

fon  of  one  of  his  pigeons — There  I  was  interro- 
gated by  the  Fi(c;il,  who  was  making  out  a  prO' 
ces  verbal',  and  reproved  fevercly  for  not  know- 
ing or  attending  to  the  fad^,  fo  univerfally  ac- 
knowledged by  the  laws  of  Britany,  that  pigeons 
and  rabbits  were  creatures  peculiarly  dedicated 
to  the  fervice  of  the  nobles  ;  and  that  for  a  vaf- 
fal,  as  I  was,  to  injure  one  of  them,  was  an 
unpardonable  offence  againft  the  rights  of  my 
lord,  who  might  inflicSt  any  punifliment  he 
pleafed  for  my  tranfgrelFion — That  indeed,  the 
laws  of  Beauvoifis  pronounced,  that  fuch  an 
ofFence  was  to  be  punifhed  with  death  ;  but 
that  the  milder  laws  of  Britany  condemned  the 
offender  only  to  corporal  punifhment,  at  the 
mercy  of  the  lord — Jn  (hort,  Sir,  I  got  off  this 
time  by  paying  a  heavy  Hne  to  Monfeigneur 
Raoul  -  Phillippe  -  Jofeph  -  Alexander  -  Caefar, 
Erifpoe,  Baron  de  Kermanfroi,  who  was  ex- 
treiviely  neceflitous,  in  the  midft  of  his  great- 
nefs.  —  Soon  afterwards,  Monfeigneur  difcovered 
that  there  was  a  cttain  fpot  upon  my  eftate, 
where  a  pond  might  be  made,  for  which  he 
found  that  he  had  great  occafion  j  and  he  very 
modeftly  fignified  to  me,  that  he  ftiould  caufe 
this  piece  of  ground  to  be  laid  underwater,  and 
that  he  would  either  give  me  a  piece  of  ground 
of  the  fixme  value,  or  pay  me  for  it  according 
to  the  eftimation  of  two  perfons  whom  he  would 
appoint  J  but,  that  in  caie  1  refufed  this  juft  and 
liberal  offer,  he  (hould,  as  Lord  Paramount, 
and  of  his  own  right  and  authority,  make  his 
pond  by  flooding  my  ground  according  to  law. 
**  1  felt  this  propofal  to  be  inconfiltent  with 
every  principle  of  juftice — In  this  fpot  was  an 
old  oak,  planted  by  the  firft  de  Merville,  who 
had  bought  the  eftate — It  was  under  its  fhade 
2  that 


l6o  DESMOND. 

that  the  happieft  hours  of  my  life  hzi  paflVcf, 
while  I  was  yet  a  child,  and  it  had  been  held  in 
veneration  by  all  my  family — 1  determined  then 
to  defend  this  favourite  fpot ;  and  I  haftened  to 
a  neighbouring  magiftrate,  learned  in  the  law 
— He  confidered  my  cafe,  and  then  informed 
me,  that,  in  this  inftance,  the  laws  of  Briiany 
were  filent,  and  that  therefore,  their  deficiency 
muft  be  fupplied  by  the  cuftpms  and  laws  of  the 
neighbouring  provinces — The  lawr.  of  Maine 
and  Anjou,  faid  he,  decide,  that  the  feigneur  of 
the  Jief^  may  take  the  grounds  of  his  vaflal  to 
make  ponds,  or  any  thing  elfe,  orrly  giving  him 
another  piece  of  ground,  or  paying  what  is 
equivalent  in  meney — As  precedent^  therefore,, 
decides,  that  the  fame  thing  may  be  done  in 
Britany,  I  advife  you,  Louis-Jean  de  Merville,. 
to  fubmit  to  the  laws,  and  on  receiving  payment, 
to  give  up  your  land  to  Monfeigneur  Raoul- 
Phillippe  -  Jofeph-  Alexander-  Gsefar  Erifpoe-, 
Baron  de  Kermanfroi. 

"It  was  in  vain  I  reprefented  that  I  had  a- 
particular  tafte,  or  a  fond  attachment  to  this 
ipot.  My  man  of  law  told  me  that  a  vaflal  had 
no  right  to  any  tafte  or  attachment,  contrary  to 
the  fentiments  of  his  lord — And,  alas! — in  a 
few  hours,  I  heard  the  hatchet  laid  to  my  bet* 
loved  oak — My  fine  meadow  was  covered  with 
water,  and  became  the  receptacle  for  the  carp, 
tench,  and  eels  of  Monfeigneur — And  remon  - 
ftrances  and  complaints  were  in  vain  ! — Thefe^ 
were  only  part  of  the  grievances  I  endured  from 
my  unfortunate  neighbourhood  to  this  powerful 
Baron,  to  whom,  in  his  miferable  and  half  fur- 
nifhed  chateau.^  1  was  regularly  fummoned  todo  - 
homage  **  upon  faith  and  oath" — Till  my  op- 
prefiions  becoming  more  vexatious  and  infupport- 

able, 


DESMOND.  l6t 

able,  I  took  the  defperate  rcfolution  of  felling 
my  eftate,  and  throwing  myfelf  again  upon  the 
wide  world — Paris,  whither  I  repaired  with  the 
money  for  which  I  fold  it,  was  a  theatre  fo  new, 
and  fo  agreeable  to  me,  that  I  could  not  deter- 
mine to  leave  it  till  I  had  no  longer  the  means 
left  of  playing  there  a  very  brilliant  part ;  when 
that  unlucky  hour  arrived,  I  wandered  into  this 
country,  and  took  up  my  abbde  with  a  relation^ 
a  farmer,  who  rents  feme  land  of  Monfeigneur 
the. Count  d'Hautcville,  and  here  I  have  lemain- 
cd,  at  times,  working,  but  oftener  philofophizing, 
and  not  unfreqiiently  regretting  my  (!ear  oak, 
ati'I  tho  finft  agreeable  vifions  that  I  indulged  on 
t^.king  pcOeflion  of  my  little  farm,  before  I  was 
aware  of  the  confcqutnce^  of  being  a  vafTal  of 
Monfeigneur  Raoul-PhillipjK- Jofeph-Ak-xan- 
dcr-Cxfar  Krirp(.ie,  Baron  de  Kt.TmiUifroi,  and 
indeed  fometinits  repentirfg  that  I  did  not  wait 
a  little  longer,  u'hen  thtr  revolution  wouiil  h.ive 
protedttd  me  againft  the  tyranny  oi  my  very 
illuftrirus  neighbour." 

De  Jvlerville  here  ended  his  narrative,  every 
wordof  Vv'hich  1  found  to  be  true  ;  and  i  could  not 
but  marvel  at  the  ignorance  or  effrontery  of  thofe 
who  afiert  thjt  the  noblejp  of  France  either  pof- 
(t-^fci^  no  powf  rs  inimical  to  the  general  rights  of 
mankind,  or  poflrlling  fuch,  forbore  to  exert 
them.  The  former  part- of  his  life  beats  tefti- 
mony  to  the  extreme  benefits  accruing  from  wary 
end  cannot  but  roife  a  wijh^  that  the  power  of  doing 
fuch  extenfivc  gocd  to  mankind,  arid  renewing  fcenes 
fo  very  much  to  the  honor  of  reofonable  beings^  rr.ay 
never  be  taken  from  the  princes  and  potentates  of  the 
earth.  I  thus  endeavour,  dear  Bethel,  by  en- 
tering into  the  interefts  of  thofe  I  am  with,  to 
call  off  my  thoughts  from  my  own,  or  I  fhould 

find 


j62  D   E   S   M   O   M   0. 

find  this  very  long  f,)acc  of  time,  in  which  i 
have  failed  to  receive  letters  from  England,  al- 
moft  infuppoi table. 

At  the  very  moment  I  complain,  I  fee  my 
fervant  Warham  approaching  the  houfe — I  fly, 
impatiently,  to  receive  news  of  Geraldine,  of 
you,  of  all  I  love}  a  ^  hope  to  have  a  long,  a 
very  long  letter  to  write,  in  anfwer,  to  morroWj 
to  thofe  I  expedt  froin  you — We  go  baclc  to 
Montfleuri  the  nex*  day,  this  will  therefore  be 
the  lail  pacquet  you  will  receive  from  hence. 


LIONEL  DESMOND. 


JJote.  The  latter  part  of  this  narrative  Is  a  fort  of  (rcz 
tranfl-.tion  of  parts  of  a  little  pamphlet,  entitled,  ''  Hiftoire 
d'un  malheureux  VafTal  df  Bretagne,  ecrite  par  lui-ineme," 
in  which  the  excfflVve  tbufes  to  which  the  feudal  fyftem  ^avc 
birth,  are  detailed. 


LET- 


D    B    S    M    O    M    D.  163 


LETTER    XV.* 


TO    MR.    BETHEL. 


Montfleuri,  0(5lober  10,  1790. 

WHAT  did  I  fay  to  you,  dear  Bethel,  tn 
my  letter  of  the  29th  of  Auguft,  that  has  given 
you  occafion  to  rally  me  fo  unmercifully  about 
Madame  de  Boifbeile  j  and  to  predidl  my  cure^ 
as  you  call  it — 1  cannot  now  recoUtdl  the  con- 
tents of  that  letter,  but  of  this  I  am  fare,  that 
I  never  was  more  fondly  attached  to  the  lovely 
woman,  from  whom  my  deltiny  has  divided  me, 
than  at  this  moment;  or  ever  faw  the  perfec- 
tions of  other  women  with  more  indifference— 
Were  it  poflible  for  you,  my  friend,  to  compre- 
hend the  anguirti  of  heart  which  I  have  felt  ever 
fince  your  laft  letieis  gave  me  fuch  an  account 
of  the  fituation  of  Verney's  afF.iirs — You  might 
be  convinced,  that  time,  abfence,  and  diftance, 
have  had  no  fuch  effedt  in  altering  my  fenti- 


•  Anfwer  to  letter  XI. 

ments ; 


164  DESMOND. 

ments;  and  that  the  fifter  of  my  friend  Montfitun, 
were  fhe  even  as  partial  to  me,  as  fome  trifling 
occurrences  I  have  related,  may  have  led  you  to 
imagine,  can  never  be  to  me  more  than  an 
agreeable  acquaintance — far  from  being  able  to 
detach  my  mind  from  the  idea  of  Geraldine's 
fituation — I  have  undergone  continual  raillery 
from  Montfleuri,  for  my  extreme  dejeilion, 
ever  fince  I  heard  it — If  thefe  diilrefling  fcenes 
fhould  become  yet  more  alarming,  1  fhall  return 
to  hngland — There  I  ihall,  at  lead,  learn  the 
progrefs  of  that  ruin,  which,  though  I  cannot 
wholly  prevent,  I  may,  perhap;^,  fof'ten  to  her, 
for  whofe  fake  alone,  I  dep'cate  its  arrival — 
Reitkfe  and  wretched,  I  left  Hautevilic,  hardly 
confcious  of  the  progrefs  of  my  journey j  and 
fmce  i  came  hither,  have  h;id  a  return  of  that 
lurking  fever  which  made  my  htaUh  one  pre- 
tence for  my  quitting  LngUnd. 

Montfleuri  is  not  here,  but  was  detained  by 
Ivufinefs  at  Aiguemont — [  expe<3  him  to-mor- 
row ;  and  (hull  then  determine  whether  to  b-  nd 
my  courfe  fouthward  with  him,  or  northv^ard, 
on  my  return  to  England.  1  cannot  cefcnbe 
to  you  htivv  wretched  I  am — Surtl)-,  you  never 
loved,  or  you  would  not  ridicule  fcelmgs  fo 
acute  as  nnne- — Nor  would  you  fuppofe  that  I 
ihould  ihink,  about  my  fortune,  if  the  facrifice 
of  any  part  of  it  could  fccure  the  peace  and 
competence  of  a  being  for  whom  i  could  lay 
down  my  life.  I  intended  to  have  continued  a 
little  narrative  of  all  that  happens  to  me — of  the 
perfons  I  meet — and  of  the  converfatii^n  I  hear 
—but  your  raillery  has  changed  my  purpofc. 
Of  whom  can  I  fpeak  here,  but  of  Jofephine 
and  Julie;  and  if  I  tell  you  that  they  wept  with 
picture  pn  my  arrival,  and  have  fince  exerted 

them- 


B    E.  S  M   O    K    D.  165 

themfelves,  with  unccafing  folicitlicle,  to  divert 
the  melancholy  they  cannot  but  perceive — You 
would  again  renew  that  ftrain  of  ridicule  about 
the  former,  which  1  To  little  like  to  hear — This 
prevents  my  telling  you  of  a  walk  which  Jo- 
iephine  engaged  me  to  take  with  her  laft  night 
to  the  ruin  on  the  hill,  of  which,  1  believe,  I 
gave  a  flight  defcription  in  fome  former  letter — 
nor  will  I,  for  the  fame  reafon,  relate  the  con- 
verfation  that  pafled  there — When  (eating  her- 
felf  on  a  piece  of  a  fallen  column,  fhe  began, 
after  a  deep  figh,  and  with  eyes  fwimming  in 
tears,  to  relate  to  me  the  occurrences  of  her 
unfortunate  life. 

Could  I  help  liftening  to  fuch  a  woman?— 
Could  I  help  fympathizingin  forrows  which  (he 
fo  well  knows  how  to  defcribe? — Alas  !  when 
{he  complains  that  her  mother  betrayed  her  into 
marriage  with  a  man,  for  whom  it  was  impof- 
fible  (he  ever  could  either  feel  love  or  eftecm — 
"When  (he  dwells  on  all  the  miferies  of  fuch  a 
conneftion,  on  the  bitternefs  with  which  her 
life  is  irrecoverably  dafhed — The  fnniliarity  of 
her  fate  to  that  of  Geraldine,  awakens  in  my 
mind  a  thoufand  fubjedls  of  painful  recoUedtion, 
and  fruitlefs  regret — My  tears  flow  with  hers; 
and  {he  believes  thofe  emotions  arife  from  ex- 
treme fenfibility^  which  are  rather  excited  by 
the  fituation  of  my  own  heart. 

This  kind  of  converfation  fo  entirely  en- 
groffed  us  laft  night,  that  I  heeded  not  the  pro- 
grefs  of  time;  and  the  fun  had  been  for  fome 
time  funk  behind  thofe  diftant  mountains  that 
bound  the  extenfive  profpe6t  from  the  emi- 
nence we  were  upon,  before  I  recol!e<Sled  that 
we  had  a  river  to  crofs,  and  a  very  long  walk 
home. 

When 


l66  DESMOND. 

When  thefe  circumftances  occurred  to  me, 
I  fuddenly  propofed  to  Madame  de  Boifbelleto 
return— She  had  then  been  Ihedding  tears  in 
fileiice,  ( >T  fome  mortients,  and  ftarting  from 
the  melancholy  altitude  in  which  fhe  fat,  (he 
tonic  my  ha  id,  and  gently  preffing  it,  faid,  as  I 
led  her  among  the  mafleso'"  he  fallen  buildings 
that  impe.ed  our  path — "  To  the  unhappy,  fym- 
pathy  and  tendernefs,  like  your's,  is  fo  fe- 
ducii;g,  that  1  have  even  trefpafled  on  the  in- 
dulgence your  pity  (eems  willing  to  grant  me  — 
I,  perhaps,  have  too  tedioufly  dwelt  on  incurable 
clamiiies,  and  called  off  your  thoughts  too 
loa-i  from  pleafantcr  fubje£ls  and  happier  wo- 
men!"-  1  anfwcred — (not,  I  own,  without 

more  emotion  than  1  wiflied  to  have  Ihewn)  that 
I  had  indeed  liflened  .... 

Dear  Bethel,  I  here  broke  off,  on  receiving 
intelligence  that  a  meflenger  from  Marfeilles 
had  a  pacquet  to  deliver  to  me.  I  hurried  to 
meet  him,  and  received  from  a  man  fent  ex- 
prt^fs,  the  leiier  I  enclofe,  from  Anthony,  Wa- 
verly's  old  fervant. 

As  I  am  not  fure  that  my  prefencc  in  En- 
gland can  be  ufcful  to  Gerald ine,  and  have  fome 
hoaes  that  at  Marfeilles,  it  may  yet  fave  her 
brother,  I  lliall  therefore  haften  thither ;  but, 
at  the  earneft  entreaty  of  the  ladies  of  this  fa- 
mily, I  (hall  wait  till  noon  to  morrow,  by 
which  time  Montfleuri  will  certainly  be  return- 
ed. I  have  therefore  difpatched  my  fervant  to 
the  next  port  houfe  to  order  four  horfes  hither 
to-nio>row— I  have  no  hope  that  Waverly  will 
yield  to  reafon,  but  his  fluttuating  charadler, 
which  is  uluaily  fo  much  againfl:  him,  is  here 
my  only  relianve — Diredt  your  letters,  till  you 
hear  from  me  again,  to  the  care  of  iVlelfieurs 

Duhamel 


DESMOND.  167 

Duhamel  Mnd  Bergot,  at  Marfeilles  ;  and  do 
not,  I  befeech  you,  my  dear  friend,  trifle  with 
my  unllappinef^,  but  g  ve  me  as  exadl  an  account 
a6  you  can  coiled  of  V  erney's  affairs.  As  loon 
as  polhble  1  hope  to  hear  from  you. 

Your's  afFe<Slionalely,  ever, 

LIONtL  DESMOND. 


LET. 


J  68  D    E    S    M    O    K    D. 


LETTER     XVI/ 


TO  LIONEL  DESMOND,  ESQUIRE. 
SiR. 

Marfiiles,  Oiflr.  7ih,   1790. 

HOPING  you  will  excufc  this  freedom — 
this  is  to  let  you  know,  that  Mafter  changed 
his  mind  as  to  joining  your  honors  party  at  my 
lord  the  Count  of  Hottevills  as  he  promifed 
faithfully,  and  inftead  thereof,  fet  out  with  the 
gentlemen  as  he  was  with  for  this  place  ;  where 
they  have  introduced  him  to  a  family  as  is  come 
to  fettle  near  here  fince  the  troubles  in  the  capi- 
tol ;  which  is,  a  mother,  a  fon  and  two  daugh- 
ters. And  mafter  have  lived  with  this  family 
all's  one  as  if  it  were  his  home — 1  know  no 
harm  of  the  females — they  are  handfome  young 
women — that  is  the  two  daughters  :  but  the  fon, 
tho  he  appears  fo  grand  and  fafliinabJe,  is  as  I 
hear  a  fort  of  fiiarping  chap— or  what  we  call 

•  Indoffd  in  the  foregoieg. 

-   i4 
I 


DESMOND.  169 

in  England  a  black  legs — He  has  won  a  good 
deal  of  money  of  mafter,  as  1  have  leafon  to 
think;  but  that  does  not  altogether  fignify  fo 
much  as  the  intention  they  have  perfuadcd  him 
into  amongft  them,  to  marry  one  of  the  mam- 
felles ;  which  if  fomething  does  not  happen  to 
make  him  change  his  mind  he  will  certainly  do 
out  of  hand  —  1  can  afTure  you  honour'd  Sir,  I 
never  knew  mafter  fo  long  in  the  fame  mind 
ever  fince  I  have  been  in  liis  fervice  as  upon 
this  occacion — And  I  thought  proj-er  to  let  yoti 
know,  hecaufe  I  am  certain  that  my  old  ladj', 
nor  no  part  of  his  relation?  could  like  of  this 
thing,  and  particularly  his  Jtfter  Mrs.  Verney, 
who  faid  fo  much  to  him  in  my  hearing  about 
being  drawn  in  to  marry,  and  advifed  him  by 
all  means  to  confult  you,  before  ever  he  refolved 
upon  any  fcheme  whatever — I  vva>  fo  bold  as  to 
tell  this  to  my  mafter,  who  was  not  angry  in- 
deed with  me,  as  he  is  a  very  good  natured  gen- 
tleman :  but  he  afk'd  if  fo  be  1  thought  that  he 
was  to  be  always  a  child  iji  leading  ftrings. 

I  thought  it  beft,  feeing  this  affair  is  ftill 
going  on  to  advertife  your  honor  of  it;  and  if 
you  think  it  proper  to  put  an  end  thereto  by 
your  hinterference  I  think  there  is  no  time  to 
be  loft. 

From  Sir  .        , 

Your  dutiful  humble  fervant 

to  command 

ANTHONY  BOOKER, 

Vol.  I.  I  LET- 


170  DESMOND. 


LETTER    XVII. 


TO  MISS  WAVERLY  AT  BATH, 


Upper  Seymour  Street,  Nov.  10,  1790. 

WHY  did  I  flatter  myfdf,  deareft  Fanny, 
that  the  numberlefs  diftrefles  which  have  lately 
furrounded  me,  would  either  bring  with  them 
that  calm  refignatioa  which  fhould  teach  me  to 
bear,  or  that  total  debility  of  mind  that  fliould 
make  me  forget  to  feel  all  their  poignancy. — Is 
it,  that  I  fat  out  in  life  with  too  great  a  (hare  of 
fenfibility  ?  or  is  my  lot  to  be  particularly 
wretched  ?  —  Every  means  1  take  to  fave  myfelf 
from  pain  —  to  fave  thofe  I  love — on  whom,  in- 
deed, my  happinefs  depends,  lerves  only  to  ren- 
der me  moie  mifcrable. — How  ill  I  have  fuc- 
ceeded  in  regard  to  my  brother,  the  enclofcd 
-letter  wi!l  too  well  explain  ! 

Why  did  I  ever  involve  DcfaionJ  in  the 
hnpelcfs  t  ,fk  of  checking  his  coiiducL  —  I  am 
(o  didreiTed,  fo  hurt,  that  it  is  with  the  utmolb 
diiiic'jlty    i    v/rite.  —  .iowever,   as   the  generous 

•  exertions 


DESMOND.  171 

exertions  of  this  excellrnt  ycunp;  man  have,  for 
the  prtfcnt,  rtfcued  my  broihcr  from  the  atSlual 
commiflian  of  the  folly  he  metiitated,  though 
perhaps  at  the  expcnce  of  a  mofl  valuable  life, 
you  will  communicate  to  my  mother  this  very 
unfortunate  altair,  and  dchre  her  diredlions  iti 
regard  to  recalling  her  fon. 

Perhaps  1  ought  to  fay  all  this  to  her  myftlf; 
but  I  am  really  fo  ihiikcn  by  this  inte!Iigcnre, 
that  it  is  not  without  great  difficulty  I  can  wri  c 
to  you. — My  fortitude,  which  you  have  of  late 
been  accuftomed  to  compliment,  has,  I  know 
not  why,  quite  forfaken  me  now;  and,  me- 
thinks,  1  could  bear  any  thing  better,  than  that 
fuch  a  man  as  Defmond  (heuld  be  fo  great  a 
fufFerer  from  his  generous  attention  to  a  part  of 
my  family. 

1  have  been  very  ill  ever  fincc  the  receipt  of 
this  melancholy  letter;  and,  it  is  only  to-dav, 
though  I  received  it  on  Thurfday,  that  I  hav^ 
had  ilrcngth  enough  to  forwnrn  it  to  vcu. —  [ 
am  now  fo  near  being  confined,  that  the  people 
\>ho  are  coUecSlcd  about  me,  weary  me  with 
their  troublcfome  care,  and  will  not  Jet  me  have 
a  moment  to  myfelf. 

It  would  have  been  a  comfort  to  me,  ry 
Fanny,  toha\c  had  vour  company  at  this  time; 
but  I  know  that  this  incident  will  add  to  the  rp- 
luSVance  \\ith  which  my  mother  would  have  be- 
fore borne  your  abfence  from  her ;  and,  thfr^- 
fore,  1  will  not  again  name  it,  nor  fuffer  myfelf 
to  make  tliofe  complaints,  in  which  ivg  ( I  meaa 
the  unhappy)  too  frequently  indulge  ourfelves, 
without  conlidering  that  this  querulous  weak- 
nefs  i"?  pcinful  to  othrrs ;  and,  to  ourfelvec,  un, 
availing  :  — for,  alas!  it  cures  not  the  evils  it 
dffcribfc:-. 

!  2  As 


174  DESMOND. 

As   to   Mr.   Verney,  he  has   never  been   at 
harrie  fince  the   October  meeting,  nor  have  I 

ever  heard   from  him. His  friend,  Colonel 

Scarfdale,  called  at  niy  door  on  Tuefday,  and 
was,  by  accident,  admitted. —  He  made  a  long 
vifit,  and  talked,  as  ufiial,  in  a  ftyle  which  i 
fuppofe  1  might  admire  (hnce  all  the  world  al- 
lows him  to  be  very  charming)  if  I  could  but 
underftand  what  he  means.  However,  though  I 
am  fo  taftelefs  as  not  to  difcover  the  perfections 
of  this  wonderful  being,  I  endured  his  conver- 
fation  from  three  o'clock  till  half  paft  five;  in 
hopes,  that  as  he  is  fo  much  conne£lcd  with 
Mr.  Verney,  I  might  learn  from  him  where 
my  hufband  is. — But  he  laughed  ofF  all  my  en- 
quiries unfeelingly  enough  j  and,  all  I  could 
collctSl  was,  that  Mr.  Verney  is  now,  or  at  leaft 
was  a  icw  days  fmce,  at  the  houfe  of  one  of 
their  mutual  friends  in  Yorkfhire. — I  anticipate 
the  remark  you  will  make  upon  this — You  who 
are  fo  little  inclined  to  fpare  his  follies,  or,  in- 
deed, thofe  of  any  of  your  acquaintance  ;  and, 
it  is  too  true,  that  when  he  is  at  home,  it  makes 
no  other  difference  to  me  than  that  of  deftroy- 
ing  my  peace  without  promoting  my  happinefs. 
— i  check  my  pen,  however — and  when  I  jook 
at  my  two  lovely  children,  I  blame  myfelf  for 
being  thus  betrayed  into  complaints  agamll  their 
father. — Ajas !  v.'hy  are  our  pleafures,  our  tafles, 
our  views  of  life  fo  difFerent? — But  1  will  ftifle 
thefe  murmurs;  aiid,  indeed,  I  would  molt  wil- 
lingly dr(>p  this  hopelefs  fubjett  for  ever.  Let 
me  return  to  one  that  gives,  at  leaft,  more  fa- 
vourable iceds  oi  human  nature,  though  it  can 
only  be  productive  of  pain  to  me — I  mean — to 
poor  Drfm(;nd. — Oh  !  Fa/iny,  what  a  heart  is 
his!  —  How   noble    is    that    diJdain   of  p-^rfonal 

d.inger. 


D    E    S    M    O    N    D.  173 

danger,  when  mlngleil  with  fuch  manly  tender- 
iiefs  —  luch  generous  fenfibility  for  the  feelings 
of  others ! — When  we  faw  fo  much  of  him  in 
Kent  thefirfl  year  of  my  marriage,  we  ufed,  I 
remember,  to  have  little  difputes  about  him — 
but  they  were  chilJifll.  Do  you  not  recollect 
that  when  I  contended  for  Lavatcr's  fyllem,  I 
introduced  him  in  lupport  of  my  argument?  — 
His  was  the  moft  open,  in2;enuous  countenance 
I  had  ever  fcen  ;  and  his  manners,  as.  well  as  all  I 
could  then  know  of  his  heart  and  his  temper, 
were  exz£i\y  fuch  as  that  countenance  indicated. 
You  then,  in  the  mere  fpirit  of  contradidlion, 
ufed  to  fay,  that  this  ingenuous  expreflion  was 
often  loft  in  clouds  for  whole  hours  together ; 
and  that  you  believed  this  paragon  was  a  fullcy 
fort  of  an  animal. — Did  you  ever  believe  that 
fuch  a  ftrikine:  inflance  of  difinterefted  kindnefs 
towards  your  own  family  wouid  fo  connrm  my 
-opinion? — Yet  while  I  write  he  fuffers — per- 
haps dies !  the  vidlim  of  tliat  generous  and 
exalted  fpirit  which  led  him  to  hazard  his  life, 
that  he  might  fulfil  a  promife  I,  who  have  fo 
little  a  right  to  his  friendfhip,  drew  from  him— 
A  promife  that  he  would  be  attentive  to  the 
conduct  of  my  brother  ! 

Indeed,  Fanny,  when  my  imagination  fets- 
him  before  me  woundtd,  in  pain,  perhaps  in 
danger  (and  it  is  an  image  1  have  hardly  loft  for 
a  moment  fince  the  receipt  of  vhis  cruel  intelli- 
gence) I  am  io  very  milerable,  that  all  other 
anxieties   of  my   life,   multiplied   as   they   have 

lately  been,  are   unheeded  and  unfair. But 

why  ftiould  I  write  thus- why  hazard  com- 
municating to  you,  my  dear  iirter,  a  portion 
of  that  pain  from  which  1  cannot  myfelf  et- 
cape  ? 

I  will 


1^4  DESMOND. 

I  will  bid  you  good  night,  my  Fanny.  It  is 
now  fix-and-thiriy  hours  fmce  1  have  clofed  my 
eyes— I  will  try  to  fleep,  a.nd  to  forget  how  very 
very  long  it  will  be  before  i  can  hear  again  from 
Marfeilles. 

Write  to  rnc  I  conjure  you — tell  me  what 
are  my  mother's  inttntions  as  to  fending  for  my 
brother  home.  And  be  allured  of  the  tender 
afFedion  cf  your 

GERALDINE  VERNEY. 


P.  S.  Did  you  ever  hear  cf  this  M*dsmc 
de  Buifbtllc  ?  and  do  you  know  whcthti  ilic  is 
a  uiduw  or  married?— Young,  middle  aged  ur 
Old  ?  —  She  is  fiHer  to  Mr.  Defmond's  favourite 
I'rench  fiiend,  Montfieuri ;  and,  if  fhe  has  any 
heart,  muft  hi.ve  exquifite  pleafure  in  foftening, 
to  fuch  a  man  as  Defmond,  the  long  hours  of 
pain  and  confinement. — I  fuppofe  he  has  for- 
gotten that  I  read  French  tolerably  j  however, 
perhaps,  it  was  better  to  let  the  furgeon  write. 
—How  miferable  is  the  fufpence  I  muft  endure 
till  the  arrival  of  the  next  letters. 


LET- 


»    t"    S    M    0    N'    D.  1-5 


LETTER      XVUL* 


TO    MRS.    VKRNEY. 


MA  D  A  M, 

IT  is  at  the  rcqueff  of  Mr.  Dcfrr.r-nd,  that 
I  takcthelibertyof  addrcfiing you.  f^i'>-  anxiety, 
on  your  account,  has  never  torfaken  him  in  the 
midft  of  what  have  been  certainly  very  acute 
fufterings  ;  not  unattended  with  danger. 

Jt  may  be  necefTary  to  enter  into  a  detail  of 
the  caufes  that  prevent  his  writing  himfelf,  on 
a  fubjedt,  which  nothing  but  the  impraifticabi- 
lity  of  his  doing,  would,  1  am  fure,  induce  him 
to  entrufl  to  a  flranger. 

It  is  now  four  days  fince  I  received  a  fum- 
mons  to  attend,  at  the  diftance  of  three  miles 

♦  Enclofcd  in  ihe  foregoing  to  Mifs  Waverly. 

from 


Ijb  ©ESMOND. 

from  the  cit)*,  an  Englifli  gentleman,  who  hail, 
on  that  morning,  been  engaged  in  an  affair  of 
honor.  I  had  not  till  then  the  honor  of  know- 
ing Mr.  Defrnond — whom  I  found  very  terribly 

wounded  by  a  piltol  fhot  in  the  right  arm. > 

I'hc  ball  eutering  a  little  below  the  elbow,  had 
run  only  broken,  but  fo  (battered  tlie  bone,  that 
i  am  afraid  the  greatell  (kill  cannot  anfwer  the 
ct-nfequences.  —  Befidcs  this,  there  was  a  bullet, 
•from  the  nrft  brace  of  piftols  which  were  fired, 
lodged  in  the  right  flioulder,  which,  though  it 
was  fo  ficuated  as  to  be  extraiSted  without  much 
cliiEculty,  greatly  encreiifes  the  inflammation, 
and  of  courfe,  the  hazard  of  the  other  wound, 
■where  the  finews  are  fo  torn,  and  the  bone  in 
iuch  a  flate,  that  the  ball  could  not  be  taken 
out  without  great  pain.  I  did  all  that  could  be 
done,  and  iVlr.  Defrnond  bore  the  operation 
vviih  the  calmefl  fortitude.  1  left  him  at  noon, 
in  what  1  thought  as  favourable  a  way,  as  was 
pi^ifible,  under  Iuch  circumfVances  ;  yet  1  found, 
on  my  return  in  the  evening,  that  he  had  a 
great  deal  of  fever  ;  and  I  am  concerned  to  fay, 
ibis  fymptom  has  ever  fince  been  encreafing. — 
1  hough  much  is  certainly  to  be  hoped  for, 
irom  the  youth,  conftitution,  and  patience  of 
the  fufi'erer — I  can  by  no  means  fay  I  am  cer- 
tain of  a  fortunate  event. 

The  difpute,  in  confcquence  of  which  this 
difagreeable  accident  happened,  originated,  I 
'find,  about  y^^ur  brother,  Mr.  Wavcrly  ;  who, 
entangled.by  the  artifices  of  a  family  well  known 
IH  this  country,  had  engaged  to  marry  one  of 
the  -young  ladies — a  ftep  which  was  thought,  by 
^ir.   Defrnond,  as    indeed    it    was    uaiverfaJly^ 

very    indifcreet. T  he   interference  of  Mr. 

De(aiond 


DESMOND,  177 

Dcfm^nd  to  prevent  k,  brought  upon  hrm  the 
refentment  of  t!>e  ladles  brotlier,  the  young 
Chevalier  »de  -Stt.   Eloy  ;  and  the  duel  enfued. 

I  found,  very  early  in  the  courfe  of  my  at- 
tendance, that  the  mind  of  my  patient  was  as 
much  aftedted  as  his  body  ;  and  that  thegreateft 
pain  he  felt,  was  from  being  rendered  incapable 
of  writing  to  you,  madam. — He  at  length  aflced 
if  I  would  be  fo  -good  as  to  write  what  he 
would  dictate,  as  it  was  the  only  way  by 
which  he  <:-ould  communicate  his  fituation  to 
you.  His  advice  is,  that  the  relations  of  Mr. 
Waverly  recall  him  immediately  to  England. 
He  is  now  at  Avignon,  but  notwithftanding 
what  has  happened,  Mr.  Defmond  fecnis  lo 
think  him  by  no  means  fecure  from  the  artifices 
of  a  family  that  has  gained  fuch  an  afcendancy 
over  him. — I  made  notes  with  my  pencil,  as  i 
fat  by  his  bedfide,  and  indeed  promifed  to  ad- 
here to  the  words  he  dictated  ;  but  I  think  it 
my  duty,  midam,  in  this  cafe,,  to  tell  you  my 
real  fentiment?,  and  not  to  palliate  or  difguife 
my  apprehenfions. — As  foon  as  the  affair  hap^ 
pened,  I  fenr,  by  Mr.  Defmond's  defire,  an 
account  of  it  to  his  friend,  whofe  houfe,  in 
the  Lyonois,  he  had,  I  found,  lecently  left  \ 
and  to  day  this  friend,  Monfieur  de  Moniflcuri, 
arrived  here  exprefs,  with  his  fifter,  Madame 
de  Boifbelle. —  They  both  feem  extremely  inte- 
refted  for  the  health  of  my  patient,  and  have 
attencfed  him,,  ever  f;nce  their  arrival,  with  un- 
ceafing  aiTiduity.  —  He  appears  pleafed  and  re- 
lieved by  their  prefence;  and  indeed  I  imagined 
that  he  would  rather  have  employed  one  of  them 
to  have  the  honor  of  writing  to  you  ;  but  he 
faid  Monfieur  de  Montfleuri  could  write  but 
little  Englilh,  and  his  fifter  none. 

I  5  I  believe, 


176  D    E    S    M    O    It  O. 

I  believe,  madam,  tha^t  to  receive  the  honor 
of  your  commands,  vi^ould  be  particularly  gra- 
tifying to  my  patient,  of  whom  I  moft  fincerely 
wifh  that  I  may  be  enabled,  in  a  fev^  days,  to 
fend  you  a  better  account. 

I  am,  madam. 

Your  moft  obedient, 

and  moft  humble  fervant, 

WILLIAM  CARMICHAEL.. 


L  K  T- 


I 


■t 


O    £    S    M    9    N    D.  179' 


LETTER     XIX. 


TO    MR.    D  E  S  M  G  N  D. 


Baih,  Nov.  15,  1790. 

I  NEVER  was  fo  diftrefled  in  my  life,  liiy 
dear  Defmond,  as  I  was  at  the  account  of  your 
accident ;  which  I  received  yefterday  from  Mifs 
Waverly. — I  came  hither  about  ten  days  ago  by 
the  advice  of  my  friend  Banks,  who  thinks  the 
waters  will  decide,  whether  the  fomething  I 
have  about  me  is  gout  or  no ;  and  thought  of 
nothing  lefs  than  of  receiving  intelligence  here, 
that  you  lie  dangeroufly  wounded  at  or  near 
Marfeilles,  in  a  quarrel  about  Waverly. — This 
is  no  time  to  prcaclt  to  you. — But  1  beg,  that 
immediately  upon  the  receipt  of  this  letter,  you 
vy^ill  let  me  know  if  I  can  be  of  any  ufe  to  you  ; 
and,  if  1   can,  bc'afTured   that  nothing  ftiiri 

.     .  preveiit 


prevent  my  coming  to  you  inftantly.  I  hope 
you  know,  that  I  am  not  one  of  thofe  who  can. 
With  great  compofure,  talk  over  and  lament 
their  friends  misfortunes,  without  ftirring  a 
finger  to  help  them. — My  life,  which  has  long 
afrorded  me  no  enjoyment  worth  the  trouble  of 
living  for,  is  only  of  value  to  me,  as  it  may  be 
ufetul  to  ray  children,  and  the  very  few  friends 
I  love. — You  oncf,  I  remember,  on  an  occa- 
ficn  of  much  lefs  importance,  fcrupled  to  fend 
for  me  bccaufe  you  faid  you  knew  it  was  in  the 
midft  of  harveft  ;  —  it  is  now  in  the  midft  of 
the  wheat  feafon  ;  yet,  you  fee,  I  am  at  Bath  ; 
and,  if  a  trifling,  half-formed  complaint,  which 
is  not  ferious  enough  to  have  a  name,  could 
bring  me  thus  far  from  home,  furely  the  fervice 
of  my  friend  Dcfmond  would  carry  me  much — 
much  farther. 

1  fhall  be  extremely  uneafy  till  I  hear  from 
you,  and  would,  indeed,  fee  out  diredily,  if  I 
could  imagine  you  are  as  ill  as  Mifs  VVaverly 
repjefents  you.  — But  ibefides  that,  her  account 
is   inconfiRent    and    incoherent.      I    know    all 

-^ifils  love  a  duel,  and  to  lament  over  the  dear 
jjgallant  creature  who  fuffers  ijj  it. — This  little 
jwild  girl  fee.ms  half  frantic,  aiid  ,does   nothing 

'•4>ut  talk  to  every  .body  ahu.ut  yoju,  in  which  (he 
JSiCws  more  gratitude  than  difc.reitiori. — Your 
-unr.le,  Danby,  who  is  here  on  his  ufual  au- 
,tua  nal  vifit,  has  heard  of  your  fame  j  and  came 
buftling  up  toraein  the  cotFec-Boufe  this  morn- 
ing, ti)  tell  me,  that  alJ  he  bad  forefeen  as  the 
cofjfequence  of  your  imprudejit  jouxney  to 
France,  was  come  to  pafs  j  that  you  were  af- 
faffini.ted  by  a  party  v^hom  your  politics  h.ad 
offended  ;  and  would  probably  loie  your  Jife  in 
confequeiacc  pf  yojar.fjpoliih  i^gc  for  a  fooliih 

revolu- 


DESMOND.  jSi 

revolution. — I  endeavoured,  in   vain,  to  con- 
vince him  that   the  afFair  happened   in  a  mere 
jjrivate  quarrel — a  quarrel  with   an  avanturUr^ 
in  which  you  had  engaged  to  fave  a  particular 
friend  from  an   improper  niarriage. — The  old 
Major  would  not  hear  me. — He  at  length  grant- 
ed, that  infteadof  being  afraflin:ited,  yon  might 
have  fought,  but  that  IHH  it   muft   have  been 
about  politics ;  and,  to  do  him  juttice,  he  judges 
of  others  by  himfelf,  which  is  the  only  way  a  man 
can  judge. — Very  certain  it  is,  nav,  he  openly 
protcfies  it,  that  he  never  loved  any  body  well 
enough  in  his  life,  to  give  himfelf,  on  their  ac- 
count, one   quarter  of  an   hour's   pain. — The 
public  intererts  him  as  little — he  declares,  that 
he  is  perfectly  at  eafe,  and  therefore,  cares  not 
who  is  otherwife  j  and  as  to  all   revolutions, 
or  even  alteration?,  he  has  a  mortal  averfion 
to  them. — Mifs  Waverly  tells  me  (he  has  writ- 
ten to  you,  by  defire  of  her  mother,  to  thank 
you    for   your   very   friendly   interpofition,  and 
has  given  you  an  account  of  all  your  connexions 
in  England. — This  I  am  very  ferry  for,  becaufe 
I  am  afraid  fhe  can  give  you  no  account  of  the 
Verney  family  that  will  not  add  to  the  prefent 
deprefiion  of  your   fpirits ;  indeed  (he  cannot, 
with  truth,  fpeak.  of  their  fituation  favourably  j 
and,  if  truth  could  fay  any  thing  good  of  Ver- 
ney,   Mifs    Waverly   feems    little    difpofed    to 
repeat  it.  —  She  is  naturally  fatirical,   and   hates 
Verney,   to    whom    (he    thinks   her    fifter   has 
been  facrificed  j  fo,  that  when«ver  they   meet, 
it  is  with  difpieafnre  on  her  fide,  and  with  con- 
temptuous   indifFerence   on   his  : — but   Fanny, 
whenever  fhe  has  an  oppoitunity  of  fpeaking  of 
him,  takes    care    that    the   dark   (hades    ot   his 
chara<iter  (hall  have  all  their  foree. — Allow,  my 

2  ^21 


l82  D    E    S    M   O   t^   D. 

dear  Defmond,  fomething  for  this  in  the  ac- 
count you  may,  perhaps,  hear. — Let  me  have 
early  intelligence  of  you  I  conjure  you  ;  and  I 
again  beg  you  to  remember,  that  you  may  com- 
mand the  prefence,  as  in  any  other  way,  the 
bcft  ferviccs  of  ^ 

Your's  moft  faithfully, 

E.  BETHEL. 


LET-- 


DESMOND.  183 


LETTER    XX. 


TO    MR.    BETHEL. 


Marfellles,  29th  Not.  1790. 

I  U  S  £  another  hand,  my  dear  friend,  to 
thank  you  for  your  letter  of  the  fourteenth, 
which  reached  me  yefterday. — Your  attentive 
kindnefs  in  offering  to  come  to  me,  I  (hall  ne- 
ver forget :  though  I  do  not  avail  myfelf  of  it, 
becaufe  I  know  fuch  a  journey  can  be  neither 
convenient  or  agreeable  to  you ;  and  becaufe  it 
is  in  your  power,  and  in  yours  only,  to  a6t  for 
me  in  England,  in  an  affair  on  which  the  tran- 
quility of  my  mind  depends.  Tranquillity— 
without  which,  the  progrefs  of  my  cuie  will 
be  flow  ;  and  that  fingle  reafon  will,  I  am  per- 
fuaded,  be  enough  to  reconcile  you  in  the  tafk 
1  now  folicit  you  to  engage  in. 

A  letter  from  Mifs  Waverly,  which  I  re- 
ceived by  the  feme  pofl  that  brought  yours, 
1  has 


184  DESMOND. 

has  rendered  me  more  than  ever  wretched. 

Good  heavens 4  in  what  a  fituation  is  the  wo- 
man, fo  juftly  adored  by  your  unhappy  friend, 
at  a  moment  when  he  cannot  fly  to  her  aflif- 
tance  ! — She  had  Jain-in  only  ten  days,  when 
her  fitter  wrote  to  me. — There  are  two  execu- 
tions in  the  houfe,  one  for  fixteen  hundred,  the 
other  for  two  thoufand  three  hundred  pounds. 
Verney  is  gone,  nobody  knows  whither.  And 
Geraldine,  in  fuch  a  fituation,  has  no  father, 
brother,  or  friend  to  fupport  her. — Yet  the  na- 
tural dignity  of  her  mind  has,  it  fbould  feem, 
never  forfak.en  her. 

A  h'ttle  before  her  confinement  fhe  wrote  to 
thank  me  for  my  fiiendfhip  for  her  brother,  and 
to  deplore  its  confequcnces — (Oh,  Bethel  !  for 
how  much  more  fuffering  would  not  her  tender 
gratitude  overpay  rre)  but  of  herfelf,  oi  her 
own  uneafinefs,  fhe  faid  nothing  j  nor  fhould 
I  have  Jcnown  it  but  fc>f^  Fanny  Waverly  ; 
whom  her  mother  has,  at  length,  fent  to  the 
fuffering  angel,  aud  who  has  given  me  a  dread- 
ful detail  of  the  fuppofed  fituation  of  Verney 's 
^a^.iirs—  I  fay  fuppofed,  becaufe  there  is  nor 
thing  certainJy  known  from  himifelf^  acd  thefe 
debts  weje  only  difcovered  by  the  entrance  of 
the  fheriiF's  ofijctr?'.  I  cannot  reft,  my  dear 
Bethel,  whilfl  Geraldine  is  thus  diftreffed.  My 
iboiights  are  conflantly  employed  upon  the 
means  of  relievin,g  her;  but  a  cripple  as  1  am, 
and  fo  far  from  England,  1  miift  depend  on  ycu 
to  aflift  me.  Since  then  you  were  fo  good  as  to 
ofFtr  to  come  nirher,  I  hope  and  believe  you 
wiU  not  hefitiite  to  take  a  fliorter  journey,  much 
more  conducive  to  my  repcfe,  even  than  the 
fatisfatf  ion  o.  feeing  you. — Go,  I  befeech  you, 
to  London — enquire  into  the  nature  of  thefe 

debts  i 


DESMOND.  185 

debts;  and,  at  all  events,  difcharge  them ;  but 
concealing  carefully  at  whofe  entreaty  you  take 
this  trouble;  even  concealing yourfelf,  if  it  be 
pofliblc — I  fend  you  an  order,  on  my  banker, 
for  five  thoufand  pounds,  and  if  twice  the  fum 
be  wanted  to  reftore  to  Geraldine  her  houfe, 
and  a  little,  even  tranfient  rcpofe,  I  fljould 
think  it  a  cheap  purchafe. 

Do  not  argue  with  me,  dear  Bethel,  about 
this— but  hear  me,  when  I  moft  folemnly  af- 
fure  you,  that  far  from  meaning  to  avail  myfelf 
of  any  advantage  which  grateful  fenfibility 
might  give  me  over  fuch  a  mind  as  her's,  it  is 
not  my  intention  flie  fhall  ever  know  of  the 
tranlaition  ;  and  I  entreat  you  to  manage  it  for 
nie  accordingly.  While  1  find  her  rife  every 
moment  in  my  e/ieem,  I  knoiv  that  I  am  becom- 
ing— alas?  am  already  become  unworthy  hers. 
—  Do  not  alk  me  an  explanation  ;  I  have  faid 

more  than  I  intended— but  let  it  go. 7^he 

grcatefi:  favor  you  can  do  me,  Bethel,  is  to 
execute  this  commiflion  for  me  as  expeditioufly 
as  poffible,  and  it  will  give  you  pleafure  to  hear, 
that  i  am  fo  much  better  than  my  furgeon  ex- 
pe£ted,  from  the  early  appearances  of  my  wound, 
that  it  is  probable  I  fhall  be  able  to  thank  you 
with  my  own  hand,  for  the  friendly  commiflion 
I  now  entreat  you  to  undertake.  I  am  already 
able  to  move  my  fingers,  though  not  to  guide  a 
pen.  iVly  arm  however,  is  yet  in  fuch  a  ftatt^ 
as  renders  it  very  imprudent,  if  not  impoflible 
for  me,  to  leave  the  fkilful  man,  who  has,  con- 
trary to  all  probability  and  expectation,  faved 
jt  from  amputation;  which,  at  firft,  feemed 
almoft  unavoidable.  Montfleuri  wifhes  that 
I  may  remove  to  his  houfe,  in  the  Lyonois,  as 
a  jort  of  firil  ftage  towards  England  i  but  I 

have 


l86  t)    E    S    M    O    N    L». 

have  been  already  too  much  obliged  to  him, 
and  his  filler,  Madame  de  Boi(belle.  He  at- 
tended me  himfelf  day  and  night,  while  there 
was  fo  much  danger,  as  Mr.  Carniichael  ap- 
prehended, for  many  days  after  the  accident; 
and  fince  he  has  been  abfent,  his  fifter,  has 
with  too  much  goodnefs  given  me  her  conftant 
attention. — Montfleuri  has  been  to  Paris,  and 
returned  only  yefterday.     He  fees  my  uneafinefs 

fjnce  the  receipt  of  Mifs  Waverly's  letter 

Madame  de  Boifbelle  too  fees  it,  and  what  is 
worfe,  my  medical  friends  perceive  it,  from 
the  ftate  of  my  wound  ;  fo  that  as  it  is  imp-nffi- 
bli  fur  me,  my  dear  friend,  either  to  conceal  or 
conquer  it,  my  fjle  dependence  for  cither  peace 
of  nvnd,  or  bodily  health,  is  on  your  friendly 
eftdeavours  to  remove  it. 

How  long,  how  very  long,  will  the  hours 
feem  that  mu[l  intervene  before  I  can  hear  that 
this  is  done  ;  and  what  fhall  I  do  to  beguile 
them?  Montfleuri  tali-is  to  me  of  politics,  and 
exults  in  the  hope  that  all  will  be  fettk'd  advan- 
tageoufly  for  his  country,  and  without  blood- 
flied  ;  I  rejoice,  moft  fmcerely  rejoice,  in  this 
profpeft,  (o  favourable  to  the  belt  interefts  of 
humanity  ;  but  I  can  no  longer  enter  with 
cagernefs  into  the  detail  of  thofe  mezfures  by 
which  it  is  to  be  realized. — One  predominant 
fenfation,  excludes  for  the  prefent,  all  the  lively 
JBtereft  I  felt  in  more  general  concerns,  and 
while  Mrs.  Verney  is  '  but  it  is  not 

necefiary,  furely  to  add  more  on  this  topic — 
No,  my  dear  Bethel,  you  will,  on  fuch  an  oc- 
cafion,  enter  into  my  feelings  from  the  genero- 
ilty  of  your  own  heart,  and  what  ever  that 
little  touch  of  mifanthropy,  which  you  have 
acquired,  my  lead  you  to  think  of  human  na- 
ture^ 


DESMOND.  187 

ture  in  general — you  will  after  my  afleverations  on 
this  fubjeiSl,  and  I  hope,  after  what  you  know 
of  me,  do  juftice  as  well  to  the  difintercfted 
nature  of  my  love,  as  to  the  finccrity  of  that 
friendfhip,  with  which, 

I  ever  remain, 

moil  affedlionately  yours, 

LIONEL  DESMOND. 


LET, 


D    E    3    M    O    N    G. 


LETTER     XXT. 


TO    MR.    DESMOND, 


London,  Dec.  17,  1790. 

THE  moment  I  received  your  letter,  I 
haftenod  from  Bath,  where  I  then  wa«,  to 
London;  determined  to  execute  your  comnnf- 
fion  to  the  beft  of  my  p©wer,  though  1  neither 
approved  it,  or  knew  very  well  how  to  fet  about 

it. Do    not   imagine,     however,    my     dear 

Defmond,  that  I  have  a  nund  (o  narrowed  by 
a  long  converfe  with  the  world,  or  an  heart  (o 
hardened  by  too  much  knowledge  of  its  inhabi- 
tants, as  to  blame  the  liberality  of  your  fenti- 
ments,  or  be  infenhble  to  the  pleafure  of  indul- 
ging them.. But    here   there   is  a  fatal   and 

jnfeparable  bar  to  the  fuccefs  of  every  attempt 
you  can  make  to  befriend  Mrs.  Verney  and  her 
children;  and  the  facility  with  which  Verney 
finds  himfelf  delivered  from  one  difficulty,  only 
ferves  to  encourage  him  to  plunge  into  others, 
liH  total  and  irretrievable  ruin  iliall  overtake 
hira» 

I  was 


DESMOND.  189 

I  was  aware  of  all  the  difficulties  of  the  taflc 
vou  fet  me  ;  for  it  was  by  no  means  proper  that 
the  fmalleft  fufpicionfliould  arife  as  to  the  quar- 
ter from  whence  the  money  came  that  paid  ofF 
thofe  demands,  which  muft  otherwife  have 
brought  all  the  effedls  Verney  had  at  his  town- 
hnufe  to  fale  within  a  very  (hort  time. — I  have  a 
friend  in  the  law  who,  to  great  acutenefs,  adds 
that  moft  rare  quality,  in  an  attorney,  of  ftri<Sl 
integrity — To  him  I  confided  the  bufinefs,  and 
he  has  managed  it  fo  well,  that  Mrs.  Verney  is 
again  in  an  uninterrupted  pofTeiTion  of  her 
houfe  ;  and  believes,  as  does  Verney  himfelf, 
that  Mrs.  Waverly  advanced  the  moneys  but 
keeps  it  concealed  left  it  fliould  fubjfft  her  to 
future  demands.  Of  the  means  by  whicn  all 
this  was  done,  I  need  not  enter  into  a  detail — 
You  will  be  fatisfied  to  know  it  is  done,  and 
that  the  pride  and  delicacy  of  Geraldine  have 
not  fufi-ered. — You  will  be  better  pleafed,  per- 
haps, to  hear  fomething  of  herfelf. — 1  thought 
1  might  call  there  as  an  acquaintance  j  and 
though  I  received  intelligence  at  the  door,  that 
Mrs.  Verney  was  not  well,  and  faw  no  company 
but  her  own  family,  I  fent  up  my  name,  and 
was  immediately  admitted. 

1  found  her  in  her  dreiling-room,  fo  pale,  ft 
languid,  fo  changed  from  the  lovely  .blooming 
Geraldine  of  four  years  fince,  that  I  behe)d  her 
with  extreme  concern. — Yet  however  unwilling 
I  am,  my  friend,  to  encourage  in  you  the  growth 
of  a  paffion  productive  on  all  fides  of  mifery,  l 
1  am  compelled  to  own,  that  this  charming  wo- 
man, in  the  pride  of  early  beauty,  never  ap- 
peared to  me  fo  interefting,  fo  truly  lovely,  as 
at  the  moment  I  faw  her. — In  her  lap  lay  fleep- 
ing  the  litt4e  infant  of  a  month  old — The  boy  of 

which 


190 


DESMOND. 


which  I  have  heard  you  fpeak  with  Co  much 
fotidnefs,  fat  on  the  carpet  at  her  feet,  and  the 
girl  on  the  lopha  by  her. — In  anfwer  to  my 
compliments,  fhe  faid  with  a  fweet,  yet  melan- 
choly fmile — "  This  is  very  good  indeed,  Mr. 
Bethel,  and  like  an  old  friend.-—  How  are  your 
two  fweet  children — are  they  in  town  with 
you  ? — [t  would  give  me  great  pleafure  to  fee 
them." — I  anfwered  her  enquiries  about  Harry 
and  Louifa  in  the  ufual  way;  and  Cas  then, 
with  a  fort  of  anxiety  ia  her  manner,  for  which 
I  could  eafily  account,  talked  for  a  moment  on 
the  common  topics  of  the  day  j  which  almoft 
unavoidably  led  me  to  fpeak  of  France. — She 
fighed  when  I  firft  named  it  ;  and,  with  a  faint 
blufh,  exclaimed — "  Ah  !  Mr.  Bethel  !  how 
can  I  think  of  France  without  feeling  the  acu- 
teft  pain,  when  it  inftanily  brings  to  my  mind 
what  has  fo  lately  happened  there  to  our  excel- 
lent friend,  Mr.  Defmond  ?" — A  deeper  colour 
wavered  for  a  moment  on  her  cheek  ;  her  voice 
t'^'embliid  ;  but  (he  feemed,  by  an  effort,  to  re- 
prefs  her  emotion,  and  continued — "  Were 
you  not  a  moft  candid  and  generous  minded 
man,  Mr.  Bethel,  I  fhould  fear  that  you  would 
almofl  hold  me  in  averfion,  for  having  been, 
however  unintentionally,  the  caufe  of  your 
friend's  very  dreadful  accident  :  believe  me, 
nothing  In  my  whole  life,  (and  it  has  not  cer- 
ta  nly  been  a  fortunate  life,j  has  ever  given  me 
fo  muci  concern  as  this  event.  All  who  love 
Mr.  DeTmond  (and  there  are  few  young  men  fo 
univerfally  and  defervedly  belov(d)  muft  deteli 
the  very  name  of  thofe  who  were  the  means  of 
hazardinj;  a  life  fo  valuable,  and  of  expofing 
him  (o  lulfer  fuch  pain  and  conhnemcnt  ;  pf^r- 
hips   fuch  lafting  inconvenience — for  I  fear'* — 

ai>d 


DESMOND.  191 

and  her  voice  faultered  (o  as  to  become  almoft 
inarticulate — **  I  fear  it  is  far  from  being  cer- 
tain that  he  will  ever  be  reflored  to  the  ufe  of 
his  hand." 

That  idea  feemed  fo  diftreffing  to  her,  that 

(he  looked  as  if  flie  was  ready  to  faint. 1 

haftened,  you  may  be  aflured,  to  relieve  her 
apprehenfions  >  and  aflured  h-er,  that  not  only 
your  hand  would  be  well,  but  that  you  thought 
yourfelf  infinitely  overpayed  for  the  inconveni- 
ence you  had  fuftained  in  your  rencounter  with 
the  Chevalier  de  St.  Eloy,  fince  you  had  been 
the  means  of  faving  her  brother  from  a  mar- 
riage fo  extremely  improper  :  then,  to  detach 
her  thoughts  from  what  I  fawthey  moft  pain- 
fully dwelt  upon,  your  hazard  and  fufFerings,  I 
gave  her  an  account  I  had  learned  from  Mr. 
Carmichael*  of  the  family  of  St.  Eloy;  and,  as 
1  found  this  ftill  affected  her  too  much,  becaufe 
it  excited  her  gratitude  anew,  towards  you,  by 
whofc  interference  Waverly  had  cfcaped  from  a 
connexion  with  it,  I  made  a  tranfition  to  the 
affairs  of  France  :  and  knowing  how  well  fhe 
could  talk  on  every  fubje<^,  had  a  wifh  to  draw 
her  out  on  this. 

The  little  I  could  obtain  from  her  would 
have  convinced  me,  had  I  needed  fuch  convic- 
tion, of  the  ftrcngth  of  her  underftandingi,  and 
that  rcdtitude  of  heart,  which  is  fo  admirable 
ind  fo  rare.  Yet,  with  ali  this,  there  is  no 
prelumption  ;  none  of  that  anxiety  to  be  heard, 
or  that  diclatorial  tone  of  converfation  that  has 
fo  often  difgufted  and  repulfed  me,  in  women 
who  either  have,  or  affetSl  to  have,  a  fuperiority 
of  underlhnding. — Geraldine  aft'ecls  nothing  ; 

*  In  a  leuer  that  doci  net  «ppear, 

and, 


tgi  DESMOND. 

and,  far  from  appearing  folicitous  to  be  confidered 
as  an  oracle,  (he  faid,  with  an  enchanting  fmile, 
towards  the  clofe  of  our  converfation — "  I 
know  not  how  I  have  ventured,  Mr.  Bethel,  to 
(peak  fo  much  on  a  fubjeit,  which  I  am  very 
willing  to  acknowledge,  I  have  had  no  oppor- 
tunity of  knowing  well. — Mr.  Vcrney,  you 
know,  is  no  politician,  or  if  he  were,  he  would 
hardly  deign  to  convcrfe  on  that  topic  with  a 
woman — for  of  the  underftandings  of  all  wo- 
men he  has  the  moft  contemptible  opinion  j  and 
fays,  '  that  we  are  good  for  nothing  but  to 
make  a  (hew  while  v/e  are  young,  and  to  be- 
come nurfes  when  we  are  old.' — 1  know  that 
more  than  half  the  men  in  the  world  are  of  his 
opinion  ;  and  that  by  them,  what  fome  cele- 
brated author  has  faid,  is  generally  allowed  to 
be  true — that  a  woman  even  of  talents  is  only 
confidered  by  man  with  that  fort  of  pleafure 
■with  which  they  contemplate  a  bird  who  fpeaks 
a  few  words  plainly — I  believe  it  is  not  exactly 
the  expreflion,  but,  however,  it  is  the  fenfe  of 
it  i  and,  I  am  afraid,  is  the  general  fenfe  of  the 
world." 

I  could  not  forbear  interrupting  here,  to  afTure 
her  that  if  fuch  an  opinion  was  genera),  mine 
was  an  exception  ;  for  that  1  was  convinced, 
ignorance  and  vanity  were  mvjch  more  fatal  to 
that  happinefs  which  every  man  feeks,  or  ought 
to  feek,  when  he  marries,  than  that  knowledge 
which  has  been  infidioufly  called  unbecoming 
in  women. — I  was  going  on,  fori  found  myfelf 
abfolutely  unable  to  quit  her,  when  her  hufband 
and  the  Lord  Newminfter,  whom  you  defcribed 
to  me  at  Margate  fome  months  fince,  entered 
the  room  together. 

Verneyj 


n  E  3  M  o  N  n»  i<5j 

Vcrncy,  who  ha?  naturdlly  a  wild,  unfcttled 

look,  really  (hocked  inc. To  an  emaciated 

figure  and  unheahhy  coudtenance,  were 
added  the  difgufting  appearance  of  a  dtbauch 
of  liquor  not  flept  off;  and  clothes  not  fwice 
changed. — The  other  tnan  was  in  even  a  worfe 
ft  ate  ;  but  as  he  was  not  married  to  Gcraldine, 
I  looked  at  him  only  with'  pity  and  difgiiftj 
while,  towards  Verney,  I  felt  fomething  like 
horror  and  deteftation. 

Geraldine  turned  pale  when  he  was  an- 
nounced ;  and  faid,  in  a  low  voice,  as  he  came 
into  the  room—*'  This  is  very  unexprded,  I 
have  feen  Mr.  Verney  only  once  for  thefe  laft 

five  weeks" 1  would  have  retired,  but  fhe 

added,  with  an  half-ftifledfigh-"  Oh!  no!  do 
not  go,  you  hear  he  has  his  friend  Newminfler 
with  him,  and  probably  will  not  ftay  five  mi- 
nutes.— But  if  be  [hould,"  added  flie,  as  if 
fearing  fhe  had  fpoken  too  much  in  a  tone  of 
regret  and  complaint — **  if  he  {hould,  he  will, 
1  am  fure,  be  happy  to  fee  his  old  friend  Mr, 
Bethel." 

At  this  inftani  Lord  Newminffer,  followed 
by  Verney,  entered. — The  ("ormsr  appeared  llu- 
pid  fi;om  the  efFe6ls  of  his  hi\  night,  or  rathsi;^ 
morning's  caroufal;  but  Verney,  who  had  ju^ 
heard  that  the  credit. irs,  who  had  the  executi- 
on'-, in  his  houfe,  wcreptiH,  and  the  bailiffs  witii- 
drawn,  was  not  in  a  hiiinour  to  be  reftrved,  or 

even  confiderato. Without  Tpeaking   to  bis 

wife,  he  Clicok  hands  v/itb  ine,  and  cried—- 
"  Damme,  Bethel,  how  long  is  it  tince  1  favv 
you  \di\  ?  1  thought  you  tvert-  ^one  to  kingdom 
come.— Here's  Newmmiier  and  I,  we  came 
only  lafl  night  fron»  hi?  hcafe  in  Norfolk.— 
Damme,  we  came  to  raije  r^<  kvhv'  t--.>.^s  ther  ; 
Vol,  I.  }•:  foi 


194  DESMOND. 

■for  I  have  had  the  Philiftines  in  my  houfe,  and 
be  curfed  co  them,  who  had  laid  violent  hands 
on  all  my  goods  and  chatties,  except  my  wife 
and  her  brats;  but  fome  worthy  foul,  I  know 
not  who,  has  fent  them  off. — I  wifh  1  could 
find  out  who  is  (o  damned  generous,  I'd  try  to 
touch  them  a  little  for  the  ready  I  want  now." 
Oh  !  could  you  have  feen  the  countenance 
of  Geraldine,  while  this  fpeech  was  uttering! 
— fhe  was  paler   than  ever;  and  was,  I  faw, 

quite  unable  to  continue  in   the  room (he 

therefore  rofe,  and  faying  her  little  boy  was 
awake,  who  had  continued  to  fleep  in  her  lap 
during  our  converfation,  fhe  walked  apparently 
with  very  feeble  fteps  out  of  the  room  ;  the  two 
other  children  following  her — "  away  with  ye 
all,"  cried  the  worthlefs  brute  their  father, 
*'  there,  get  ye  along  to  the  nurfery,  that's  the 
proper  place  for  women  and  children." — The 
jook  that  Geraldine  gave  him,  as  {he  pafled  to 
the  door,  which  1  held  open  for  her,  is  not  to 
be  defciibed — it  was  contempt,  ftifled  by  con- 
cern— it  was  indignatioi  fubdued  by  fhame  and 
forrovv. — *'  Good  morning  to  you,  Mr.  Be- 
thel," lai-ifhe,  as  Ihe  went  by  me — *'  I  know  not 
how  to  thank  you  enough  for  this  friendly  vifir, 
or  can  1  fay  hov/  much  my  obligation  will  be  in- 
creafed,  if  you  will  have  thegoodnefs  to  repeat 
it  ;  pray  let  me  fee  you  again  before  you  leave 
London." — I  afTured  her  I  would  wait  on  her 
with  pleafure  ;  and  I  felt  extremely  unhappy 
as  the  door  clofed  after  her,  and  1  faw  her  no 
more. — 

"  Well,  now  Bethel,"  faid  the  hufband, 
*'  let  me  talk  to  you  a  little  ;  tell  me — are  not 
your  horfes  at  Hall's,  at  Hyde  Park  Corner?" 
I  anfwercd,  "  yes ;" — "  aye?  then  you're  the 

man 


DESMOND.  195 

fiian  I  want ; — you've  got  a  hellifb  clever  trot- 
ting mare,  one  of  the  niceft  things  I've  feen  a 
long  time; — have  you  a  mind  to  fell  her  ?" 
.  *'  Certainly  no." 

s:  **  I  am  forry  for  it,  for  I  want  juft  fuch  a 
thing.  Don't  you  remember  a  famous  trotting 
galloway  I  had,  two  years  ago,  that  1  bought 
at  Tatterfal's,  that  would  go  fifteen  miles  within 
the  hour — ^^I've  loft:  him  by  a  curfed  accident, 
and  1  want  one  as  fpeedy — damme.  Bethel,  I'll 
give  you  a  hundred  for  your  little  mare,  and 
I'll  be  curs'<l  if  that  is  not  fifty  more  than  (he's 
worth." 

"  I  ihall  not  fell  the  mare,  Mr.  Verney," 
smfwered  L,  very  coldly,  fo  let  us  talk  of  fome- 
thing  elfe. — Pray  tell  me,  what  is  this  fl:ory 
which  you  touched  upon,  a  little  unfeelingly  I 
thought,  before  your  wife,  of  an  execution  in 
your  houfe." 

*'  An  execution — by  heaven  I'd  two,  and  that 
old  tv/addler,  mother  Waverly,  for  the  firft  time 
in  her  life,  has  done  a  civil  thing,  for  (he  paid 
them  off  the  other  day — If  my  wife  had  nat 
lain- in  though  I  fuppofe,  and  been  fo  much 
alarmed  as  they  told  me  flie  was,  fo  that  the 
good  old  gofllp,  was  afraid  of  the  confequenqes, 
I  believe  fhe'd  have  feen  me  at  the  devil  before 
{he'd  have  drawn  her  purfe-ftrings;  fo'twas  well 
timed,  and  now  I  only  wifh  (he'd  keep  the  child, 
for  I'd  encumbrances  enough  of  fmall  children 
before." 

"  Good  God,'^  Swj  faid  I,  "  is  it  poflible 
that  having  married  fuch  a  woman  as  Mrs. 
Verney,  and  having  fuch  lovely  and  promifing 
children,  you  can  negle£l  the  one,  and  call  the 
other  encumbrances." 


196  DESMOND. 

**  Poh,"  replied  he  carelefsfy,  '*  I  don't  neg- 
Ie£l  her — but  children — when  one  has  a  houfe 
full  of  them,  as  I  think  1  am  likely  to  have, 
pull  confounded  hard;  and  as  to  their  pro- 
niifmg,  I  know  nothing  that  they  proTriife,  but 
to  grow  up,  to  pull  harder  ftill,  and  find  otit 
that  I  am  in  their  way  before  I  have  any  mind 
to  relinquifh  the  enjoyments  of  this  life." 

'*  Why  then,  ft  nee  you  muft  have  been 
aware  of  all  thefe  contingencies,  did  you  mar- 

"  Why  wh;.t  a  fenftlefs  quc{li«n  !  becaufe 
I  was  a  green-horn,  drawn  in  by  a  pretty  face, 
and  a  iine  figure.  '1  heold  woman,  her  mother, 
had  the  art  of  Jezebel,  and  I  was  a  raw  boy 
from  College,  and  fancied  it  very  knowing  to 
marry  a  girl  that  all  the  young  fellows  of  my 
acquaintance  reckoned  fo  confounded  hand- 
fome;  befidcs,  a  man  muft  marry  at  fome  time 
or  other." 

*'  That,"  faid  the  Peer,  who  feemed  fud- 
denly  awaked  from  his  flupor,  by  a  pofition  fo 
contrary  to  his  fentiments — *'  that  I  deny — 'tis 
a  damned  folly,  and  nobody  in  his  fenfes  will 
commit  it.""  He  then  talked  in  a  manner  too 
grofs,  and  too  ofFcnfive,  for  me  to  repeat  upon 
paper;  and  concluded  with  exprefling  his  pity 
for  poor  Verney  ;  and  proteftmg,  that  for  his 
own  part,  though  he  (aw  half  the  f  fhionable 
girls  in  town  angling  f(^r  him,  he  fbuuld  keep 
nis  neck  out  of  (uch  a  diimncd  yoke. 

I  reprefled  the  contempt  and  indignation 
which  It  was  impoflibic  to  help  feelings  and  ad- 
rfrefling  the  illuftrious  orator-r-"^  It  is  unfortu- 
nate, my  Lord,  faid  1,  that  thefe  are  your  fert- 
timents,  fince  by  them,  the  world  is  likely  to 
be  deprived   of  the   worth  you    might  tranfniif 

for 


©ESMOND.  JC)7 

for  its  general  benefit,  and  your  country,  \n 
particular,  of  talents,  which    might   adorn    its 

legiflature. Your  Lord(hip's  cotemporaries 

niuft,  I  am  fure,  refledl  with  concern  on  the 
'little  profpeft  there  thus  remains,  that  your  vir- 
tues and  abilities  will  not  defcend  to  dignify  the 
future  annals  of  the  Britifh  fenate." 

"  Oh  I  the  devil  may  take  the  Britifh  fcnatc 
for  me,"  anfwered  hz,  *'  I  never  put  my  head 
Into  it,  but  when  I  am  fent  fjr  on  feme  paints 
thattheieare  doubts  about;  and  then,  indeed, 
1  go,  if  miniftry  defire  it:  but  otherwife,  I 
don't  care  a  curie  for  their  drained  politics . — * 
As  long  as  I  keep  the  reverfion  ot  the  hnecures 
my  father  got  for  me,  and  two  or  three  little 
fnug  additions  I've  had  given  me  fince  for  the 
borough  intercft  I'm  able  to  carry  them  ;  not 
one  fingle  guinea  do  1  care  fur  thtir  panics  or 
their  projedts." — Then  fuddenly  difmifTing  the 
fubject,  this  hereditary  patriot  turned  to  his 
friend  Verney,  and  faid — "  Well,  but  Dickjf 
boy,  what's  the  hour — as  you'ye  paid  your 
humble  duty  to  Madam,  {hould  we  not  be  off? 
— .I've  ordered  my  horfes  to  be  at  my  own  do<St 
at  fix,  and  I  have  promifed  Cavcrsfield  to  be 
with  him  by  half  paft  feven  to  dinner — We 
muft  not  bilk  him,  as  h?  has  made  the  party  on 
purpofc  for  us."  "  J  am  ready,  replied  Verney, 
for  X  fhall  not  drefs  at  home."  He  then  aroie, 
as  if  he  was  going,  but  Mifs  Waverly,  who 
had  been  out  the  former  part  oi  the  morning, 
now  entered,  and  while  I  fpoke  to  her,  Mr. 
Verney  called  to  his  (ervant  to  give  him  lome 
diredions  about  his  clothes,  and  Lord  Newmin- 
ftcr  ftretchcd  himfelf  on  the  fopha  and  went 
ver/  comj>ofi:dl]r  to  fleep. 

To 


tgS  DESMOND. 

'I^o  any  young  woman,  however  flight  may 
,be  her  pretennons,  the  marked  ncgle£l  of  a 
man  of  Lord  Newminfter's  age  is  ufually  fuffi- 
eiently  mortifying:  but  to  Fanny  V/averiy, 
who  has  been  accullomed  to  exceflive  flattery 
and  adulation  ever  fince  flie  left  the  nurfery, 
this  rude  inattention  mufl:  have  appeared  infup- 
portably  infulting,  and  I  forgave  the  little  afpe- 
ritytlierc  i^as  in  her  manner,  when  (he  faid  to 
me  witli  a  fmile  of  indignant  contempt,  and 
pointing  to  Newminfter,  who  was,  I  really  be- 
lieve, in  a  found  fleep — "  An  admirable  fpe- 
cimen  of  the  manners  of  a  modern  man  of  fa- 
fhion/' 

Verney,  who  had  been  giving  dire^ions  to 
bis  fervant  at  the  door  of  the  room,  now  return- 
ed to  it — *'  Aha  !  little  Fanny,"  faid  he,  "  are 
you  there? — How  doft  do,  child? — Plchoop» 
hohoop,  Newminfter,  it  is  time  to  go,  my  lad 
— ^come,  let  us  be  off." 

*•  Have  you  feen  your  wife,  Sir  ?"  faid  Mifs 
Waverly  very  gravely — '*  Yes,  my  dear  Mi  fa 
Frances,"  replied  he  in  a  drawling  tone  of 
?pimickry,  **  /  bave  feen  my  wife,  looking  for 
all  the  world  like  Charity  and  herthree  children 
•over  the  door  of  an  hofpitaL — " 

*'  She  fliould  not  only  /ooi  Charity,"  retorted 
Fanny  fmartly,  "  but  feei  it,  or  fhe  would 
^ever  be  able  to  endure  your  monftrous  btha- 
.viour." 

"  Pretty  pettifh  little  dear,"  cried  he  "  how 
this  indignation  animates  your  features — Anger, 
Mifs  Fanny,  renders  you  abfolutely  piquant — 
My  wife  now — my  grave,  folemn,  fage  Ipoufe, 
is  not  half  fo  aga^ant  with  her  chari'y  and  all 
her  virtues."  ■  .■j\,-.  , : .  / 

"  That 


DESMOND.  199 

*'  That  (he  poflefTcs  all  virtue?,  Sir,  muft  be 
her  merit  folely,  for  never  woman  had  fo  poor 
encouragement  to  cherifh  any — \V  hen  one  ccn- 
fiders  that  (he  fnfftrs  youf  her  charity  cannot  be 
doubted  :  her  faithy  in  relying  upon  you,  is 
alfo  exemplary  ;  and  one  laments  that  (o  con- 
neiSted,  (he  can  have  nothing  to  do  with 
Hope—" 

Fanny  Waverly  then  left  the  room,'  and  as 
I  was  going  before  (he  came  in,  I  now  bowed 
(lightly  to  the  two  friends  and  went  out  at  the 
fam»^  time. — When  we  came  into  the  next  room 
fhe  (lopped,  and  would  have  fpoke,  but  her 
heart  was  full — flie  fat  down,  took  out  her 
handkerchief,  and  burft  into  tears. 

'*  1  beg  your  pardon,  Mr.  Bethel,"  faid  fhe, 
fobbing,  "  but  I  cannot  command  myfelf, 
when  1  refledl  on  the  fituation  cf  my  poor  fifter 
and  her  children}  when  1  meet  that  unfeeling 
man,  and  know,  too  well,  what  niulv  be  the 
confequence  of  his  condud." 
•  She  was  prevented  by  her  emotion  from  pro- 
ceeding, and  I  took  that  opportunity  of  faying, 
**  There  is  nothing  new  I  hope,  my  dear  Mifs 
Waverly  ?  nothing,  jufr  at  this  moment,  to  give 
you  deeper  concern,  or  more  uneafy  apprehen- 
Jions  for  Mrs.   Verney  ?" 

*'  Oh  !  no,"  replied  (lie,  *'  nothing  very 
new — fince  the  two  executions  w  hich  have  been 
liere  this  fortnight,  cannot  be  called  very  recent 
circumllances  j  they  were  paid  off  by  I  know 
not  what  means j  and  the  officers  who  were  in 
polTeffion  of  tlie  efFe^fls,  difmilfed  only  yellerJay, 
yet  to-day  this  unhappy  man  returns  ;  and  re- 
turns with  an  avowed  intention,  as  his  conhd-^n- 
tial  fervant  has  been  faying  below,  toraife  mort: 
money.     Oh  !  Mr,  Bethel,  could  you  imar;ine 

^  all 


3tOO  D    E    s    M    O    N    E>. 

all  my  filler  has  endured  in  this  frightful  period, 
during  which  fhe  has  only  once  feen  her  huf- 
band — could  you  imagine  what  foe  has  endured, 
and  have  witnefTcd  the  fortitude,  the  patience, 
the  courage  fhe  has  Ihewn,  while  fuffering  not 
only  pain  and  weaknefs,  but  all  the  horrors  of 
dreading  the  approach  of  ruin  for  her  children! 
you  would  have  faid,  that  the  remembrance  of 
that  perfonal  beauty,  forivhich  (he  has  bieen  fo 
celebrated,  was  loft  and  eclipfed  in  the  admira- 
tion raifed  by  her  underftanding." 

**  In  my  fhort  conference  with  her,"  anfwer- 
ed  I,  **  all  this  was  indeed  vifible,  and  could 
not  efcape  the  obfervation  of  one  already  im- 
preffed  with  the  hightft  opinion  of  your  ufle'r 
from  the  report  of  Mr.  Defmond." 

At  the  jiame  of  Defmond,  a  deep  blufli  over- 
fpread  the  face  of  the  fair  Fanny.  Not  fuch 
as  thdt  which  wavered  for  a  moment  oil 
the  faded  cheek  of  her  lovely  fifter,  when 
the  blood,  for  a  moment,  forfaking  the  heart, 
was  recalled  thither  by  a  confcioufnefs  that  it 
fliould  not  exprefs  too  warmly  the  fentiments 
that  fent  it  forrh — Fanny's  blufo  fpoke  a  diffe- 
rent, chough  not  Icfs  expreflive  language,  and 
tlie  tears  tbat  wtre  trembling  in  her  eyes,  were 
a  moment  checked  whilt  iTie  clafped  her  hands 
togi^thrr,  and  cried  eagcily — ^^  Defmond! — 
Oh  !  how  i  adore  the  very  name  of  Defmond  ! 
— To  him — ^lo  your  noble  friend  it  is  owing, 
Mr.  Bethel,  that  while  i  lament  the  fate  of  a 
fifter,  1  do  not  weep  over  the  equally  miferable 
deftiny  of  a  brother." 

1  have  feen  Fanny  Waverly  in  the  ball-rooms 
at  Bath  admired  by  the  men,  and  envied  by  the 
women  J  and,  with  all  the  triumphant  con- 
fcioufnefs of  beauty,  enjoying  the  voluntary  and 

invalun- 


DESMOND.  201 

invo1«ntary  tribute  thus  paid  to  her ;  but  I  never 
till  now  thoi'tjht  her  fo  handfonie,  for  I  never 
till  now  thought  her  interefting — So  much  more 
attraction  does  unafFc<5ted  ft-nfibility  lend  to  per- 
fonal  perfection,  than  it  acquires  from  the  giddy 
flattering  airs,  infpired  by  frjfifh  vanity — Yes, 
indeed,  my  friend,  Fanny  Waverly  is  a  very 
charming  young  woman,  and  I  was  fo  much 
pleafed  with  every  thing  (he  faid  of  you,  and 
of  her  own  family  during  the  reft  of  our  fiiort 
converfation,  that  I  have  fince  indulged  myfelf 
in  fancying  that  k  is  not  at  all  impolfible  for 
you  to  transfer  to  her  the  afFedion,  which  while 
you  feel  it  for  her  fifter,  cannot  fail  to  render 
you  unhappy,  and  which,  pcihaps,.  may  be  at- 
tended with  fatal  confequences  to  the  object  of 
your  love. — If  your  attachment  to  Geraldine  is 
really  as  pure  and  difinterefted  as  you  have  often 
called  it,  it  might  equally  exift  were  you  the 
hufband  of  her  fifter,  and  fuch  an  alliance 
would  put  it  much  more  in  your  power  than  it 
can  ever  be  otherwife,  to  befriend  and  afllft  her 
and  her  children — But  I  know  this  is  an  afi'air 
in  which  you  will  tell  me  the  heart  is  not  to  be 
commanded,  and  therefore  1  wiM  no  longer  dwell 
upon  it,  th<jn  to  repeat,  that  were  you  to  fee 
Fanny  Waverly  now,  you  would  ."link  hez  not 
inferior  t©  I.er  h-fterin  perfonal  beauty,  ^though 
1  own  it  is  of  a  difFereiu  charailcr,)  and  you 
v^ould  be  convinced  that  ihe  i*  not  as  )ou  once 
behcved,  deftiiute  of  that  feminine  tendcrnefs, 
without  which  I  a'rte  with  )Ou,  that  mere 
beauty  is  p')werleis. 

And  now,  my  dear  Defmond,  let  me  fpeak 

of  the  *'  thick-coming  fancies,"  with    wh-.ch 

you  fo  ftrangcly  t-ormented   yourfelf  at   Hjute- 

ville — 1  have  been  fo  much  aLrmcd   by    vour 

K  5  ace;  J  eat 


202  ^  DESMOND. 

accident  fince,  and  have  had  fo  mai)y  fubjcfls 
on  which  to  think  and  write,  that  1  have  not 
touched  upon  your  dream,  which  you  furely 
are  not  fuperftitious  enough  to  dwell  upon— 
You,  who  are  lb  little  fubjeclto  the  indulgence 
of  prejudice,  and  who  are  not  unfrequtntly 
ridiculing  others  for  being  too  deeply  imprefl'ed 

*'  With  all  the  curfe  an;)  all  the  pried  has  taught." 

But  why  is  it  that  the  ftrongeft  minds — thofe 
who  dare  examine  whatever  is  offered  to  them 
with  acute  reafon,  and  who  reject  all,  however 
it  may  be  fanclioned  by  cullom,  or  rendered 
venerable  by  time,  that  reafon  refufcs  to  accede 
to,  fhall  yet  fink  under  the  influence  of  images 
impreflcd  on  the  brain  by  a  difturbed  digellion,. 
or  a  quickened  circulation?  Alas!  my  friend,, 
there  appears  to  be  a  ftrange  propenfity  in  hu- 
man nature  to  torment  itfelf,  and  as  if  the  phy- 
iical  inconveniencies  with  which  we  are  fur- 
rounded  in  this  world  of  ours  were  not  enough, 
we  go  forth  conftantly  in  fearch  of  mental  and 
imaginary  evils — This  is  no  v/here  fo  remarka- 
ble as  among  thofe  who  are  In  vvliat  we  call  af- 
fluence and  profperity — Kow  many  of  my  ac- 
quaintance who  have  no  wifh,  which  it  is  not 
immediately  in  their  power  to  gratify,  fuffer 
their  imaginations  to  "  play  fuch  tricks  with 
them,  (I  ufe  an  expreflibn  of  Dr.  Johnfon's, 
whofe  imagination  was  furely  not  exempt  from 
the  charge)  that  they  are  really  more  unhappy 
and  more  truly  objects  of  companion  than  the 
labourer,  who  lives  only  to  work,  and   wor'cs 

only  to  live? 1  do  not  however,  my  dear 

friend,  mean  to  fay,  that  you  are  one  of  thefe— 
\ouf  adiive   fpirit  and   feeling  heart,  fecures 

vou 


DESMOND.  2C3 

you  for  ever  againft  thispalfy  of  the  mind — but 
perhaps,  from  the  charge  of  indulj^ing  other 
extravagancies,  you  are  not  wholl)'  exempt — 
'Jhis  attachment  to  Mrs.  Vcrney,  which  has 
given  a  peculiar  colour  to  your  life  for  three 
years,  and  which  you  flill  chcrifli  as  if  your 
exiflcnce  were  to  become  infipid  without  it,  is 
furely  a  wealcnefs  and  an  impropriety,  wh  ch 
fuch  an  underftanding  as  yours  ought  to  fiial;e 
off. — But  I  wil!  fay  no  more  on  a  topic  that  is, 
I  know,  irkfome  to  you,  and  indeed,  1  am  too 
apt  to  offer  advice  to  thofe  I  eftcem,  without 
fufficiently  confidering,  that  we  none  of  us  love 
to  take  what  we  are  all  fo  eager  to  give — !  can- 
rot  however,  drop  the  fubjec^  without  remark- 
ing, that  when  in  the  fame  letter  you  cicfcribe 
your  rtfledtions  on  the  puerility  and  ijiconfe- 
quence  of  the  objects  that  mankind  are  fo 
anxioufly  occupied  in  obtaining,  and  in  the  next 
page  relate  the  terrors  occafioned  by  a  dream, 
the  fainted  fhadow  of  thofe  fleeting  fhadcs, 
which  it  feems  i'o  abfurd  to  be  moved  by  ;  J  can 
only  repeat,  as  one  is  continually  compelled  to 
do — Alas  !  poor  human  nature  ! 

You  have  obliged  me  very  much  by  the 
Sketches  you  have  fent  me  of  the  people  you 
have  converfed  with,  and  the  fcenes  to  which 
you  have  been  witnefs. — In  anfwer  to  your  re- 
marks and  narratives,  I  obferve,  that  it  is  an 
incontrovertible  truth  allowed  even  by  thole 
who  have  written  proteffedly  againft  it,  that  a 
revolution  in  the  government  of  France  was 
abfolutely  neceffary ;  and,  that  it  has  been  ac- 
complifhed  at  lefs  expence  of  blood,  than  any 
other  event,  I  will  not  fay  of  equal  magnitude, 
(for  I  know  of  none  fuch  in  the  annals  of  man-' 
kind)  but  of  fuch  a  nature,  evcrcoft  before,  is 

alfa 


204  DESMOND. 

a\fo  a  pefition  that  the  hardeft  prejudice  muft> 
in  delpjte  of  mifrepre  fen  tat  ions,  allow;  but 
while  1  contempl.ue,  with  infinite  fatisfaftion, 
this  great  and  noble  effort  for  the  univerfal 
fights  of  the  human  race,  I  behold,  with  ap- 
prehenfion  and  difquiet,  (uch  an  hoft  of  foes 
arife  to  render  it  abortive,  that  I  hardly  dare 
indulge  thofe  hopes  in  which  you  are  fo  fan- 
guine,  that  uncemented  by  blood,  the  noble 
and  fimply  fnajeftic  temple  of  liberty  will  arife 
on  the  fcite  of  the  barbarous  ftrudure  of  gothic 
tlefpotifm. 

To  fay  nothing  of  thofe  doubts  which  have 
arifen  from  the  want  of  unanimity  and  fteadi- 
nefs  among  thofe  who  are  immediately  entruftcd 
with  its  conftruilion,  1  rtfie<^  with  fear  on  the 
force  that  i3  united  to  impede  its  completion, 
or  deftroy  it  when  complete.  Not  only  al!  the 
defpots  ot  Europe,  from  thofe  dealers  in  human 
blood,  the  petty  princes  of  Germany,  to  the 
Sanguinary  witch  of  all  the  K  ufTias,  but  the  go» 
vernmcnis,  which  are  yii  called  Umitted  menar- 
itiesy  and  even  thofe  vhich  ft  ill  pafs  as  repub- 
lics— in  every  one  of  thefe  the  governments, 
Wijl  we  know,  pay  the  venal  pen,  and  the  mer- 
cenary fwordag.Jnft  it— fome  openly  j  the  others 
3K  far  as  they  dare,  without  roufing,  too  dan- 
gerpvflyj  the  indignation  of  thtii  own  fubje£ls 
—  In  all  ihefe  ftates,  there  are  great  bodies  of 
people,  whofe  intcrell,  which  is  what  wholly 
Jtcides  their  opit.ion,  is  diametrically  oppofite 
to  all  rtform,  and,  of  courfe,  to  the  reception 
of  thofe  truths  which  may  promote  it — Thefe 
bodies  are  formed  of  the  ariftocracies,  their  re- 
lations, dependtnis,  and  parafittrs,  a  nulmerous 

and  formiiiablf  phalanx Hierarchies,   whofe 

Uurnin^  and  eloquence  are  n.Uurklly  exerted  in  a 

caufe 


D    B  S    M    O    N   O.  205 

caufe  which  involves  their  very  cxiftence.  An 
immenfe  number  of  placemen  and  penfioners^ 
who  fee  that  thedifcuffion  of  political  queflions, 
leads  inevitably  to  fhew  the  people  the  folly  and 
injuilicc  of  their  paying  by  heavy  taxes  for 
imaginary  and  non-exifting  fervices — Crowds 
of  lawyers,  who,  wereequal  juftice  once  cflab- 
li(hed,  could  not  be  enriched  and  ennobled  by 
explaining  what  they  have  themfelves  continued 
to  render  inexplicable — And  laft,  not  Iea(V,  % 
very  numerous  defcription  of  people,  who,  be- 
ing from  their  participation  of  thefe  en^oluments, 
from  family  poffeffions,  or  from  fticcefsful  com- 
merce, at  eaie  themfelves,  indolently  acquiefce 
in  evils  which  do  not  affedt  them,  and  who, 
when  mifery  is  defcribed,  or  oppreffion  com- 
plained of,  fay,  "  What  is  all  this  to  us,  we 
fufFer  tKither  ?  and  why  (hould  we  be  difturbed 
for  thnfe  who  do?"—"  Chi  ben  fta,  non  fi 
mouve*,*'  fays  the  Italian  proverb.— -In  ihort, 
my  friend,  I  do  not,  as  feme  politicians  have 
affe^led  to  do,  doubt  the  virtue  of  the  French 
nation,  and  fay  ibty  are  too  corrupt  to  be  rege- 
nerated—  I  doubt  rather  that  huropean  ftates  in 
general,  will  not  lufFer  them  to  throw  off  the 
corruption,  but  unite  to  perpetuate  to  them 
what  tiKy  either  do  fubmit  to,  or  are  willing  to 
fuhmil  to  themfelves — I  rather  fear,  that  liberty 
having  been  driven  away  to  the  new  world,  will 
eftablUh  there  her  glorious  empire — and  to  Eu- 
rope, funk  in  luxury  and  efferriinacy — ener- 
vated and  degenerate  Europe  will  return  no 
more. 

Let  me,  dear  Defmond,  hear  foon  from  your 
•wn  hand,  that  )ou  are  content  with  the  fuc- 

•  Thofe  who  are  well  fituaud  d«fire  not  to  move. 

Cffs 


206  DESMOND. 

cefs  of  my  negotiation,  and  with  this  long  ac- 
count of  thofe  for  whom  you  are  interefted. — 
Let  me  learn  alfo  your  future  defigns,  as  to  re- 
turning to  England,  or  ftaying  on  the  Conti- 
nent, and  above  all,  that  you  continue  to  be- 
lieve me,  with  fmcere  attachment, 

Your's,  afFc£tionately, 

E.  BETHEL. 

Continue,  I  beg  of  you,  to  write  by  another 
hand  till  you  can  ufe  your  own,  and  let  me  have 
the  fl'ietches  of  fuch  converfation  as  you  may 
have  during  your  convalefcencc — I  mean  thofe 
on  political  or  general  topics,  and  not,  of  courfe, 
the  more  refined  ^1)6  fentlmental  d'\z\og\\zs  which 
you  may  hold  with  Madame  de  Boijbelle — hy  the 
way,  1  do  not  quite  underftand  what  you  mean 
by  faying  in  your  laft:  letter,  that  you  become 
every  day  more  unworthy  thceflreem  of  Geral- 
dine — You  jurely  think  very  humbly  of  yourfelf.^ 


LET- 


y 

»    E    s    M    O    N    D.  207 


LETTER      XXII. 


Marfeilles,  8tli  Jan.   ijgt. 

THE    firft  letter  I  was  able  to  write,  was 

toGeraldine — This,  my  dear  Bethel,  is  thefe- 
cond  ;  and  it  is  with  extieme  pleafure  I  thank 
you  for  your  immediate  attention  to  my  requell, 
and  the  propriety  with  which  you  feeni  to  have 
conducted  fo  troublefome  a  commiflion — I  thank 
you  too  for  your  long  letter,  and  the  account, 
painful  as  it  is,  of  the  fcene  you  faw  at  Verney's 
— Gracious  heaven  !  why  is  it,  that  fuch  a 
cruel  facrifice  was  ever  made  ?  But  I  dare  not 
t.'uft  myfelf  on  this  fubjevfi,  and  have  made  an 
hundred  refolutions  never  to  mention  it  more; 
yet,  how  avoid  writing  on  what  conflanily  oc- 
cupies niy  mind? — how  difmifs  from  thence, 
even  for  a  moment,  what  weighs  fo  heavy  on 
my  heart  ?  Let  me,  liowever,  allure  you  Bethel, 
that  though  I  have  no  hope,  I  had  almoft  faid 
no  wifn,  ever  to  be  more  to  this  lovely,  injured 
woman,  than  a  fond,  afFeilionaie  b'ot  ler — 
yet,  that  I   will  never  niuiry  fanny  Wavcrly. 

I  believe 


208  DESMOND. 

I  believe  that  the  advantageous  pi<3urc  you  have 
drawn  of  her  is  not  a  flattering  one — 1  admire 
her  perfon,  and  think  well  of  her  underftanding 
— The>fymptcms  of  fcnfibiJity  and  of  attach- 
ment to  her  lifter  whi  h  you  difcovered  in  her, 
certainly  add  thofe  attra<3ions  to  her  character, 
in  which,  I  know  not  why  it  appeared  to  me  to 
be  dcfe(fiive — -—If  I  had  a  brother  whom  1 
loved,  and  whom  I  wifhed  to  fee  happ  ly  mar- 
ried, it  would  be  to  Fanny  Waverly  I  fhould 

wifti  to  direct  his  choice But  for  myfelf — = 

No,  Bethel,  it  is  now  out  of  the  queftion  ;  we 
will  fpeak  of  it  then  no  more  j  but  I  will  haften 
to  thank  you  for  thofe  parts  of  your  long  and 
welcome  letter  that  were  meant  lo  detach  my 
thoughts  from  thofe  fources  of  painful  and 
fruitlefs  regret,  which  1  am,  perhaps,  too  fond 
of  cherifhing— Fain,  very  fain  would  1  ihake 
them  ofF,  my  friend,  but  i  cannot— «nay,  I  am 
denied  the  confolation  of  talking  to  you  on  pa- 
per of  all  I  feel— 1  have  often  been  very  un- 
happy, but  1  never  was  qute  fo  wretched  as  I 
am  at  this  moment.  My  anxiety  for  the  fate  of 
Geraldine  tears  me  to  pieces,  and  I  cannot  re- 
turn to  England  immediately,  where  1  fhould, 
at  leaft,  be  relieved  from  the  long  and  infiip- 
portable  hours  of  fufpence  which  the  diftanec 
now  obliges  me  to  undergo — If  1  could  not 
fee  her,  at  leaft  I  could  hear  once  or  twice  a 
week  of  her  fituation,  and  might,  perhaps,  be 
fo  fortunate  as  to  ward  off  fome  of  thole  mif- 
fortunes  to  which  from  her  hulband's  conduiSl 
fhe  is  hourly  expofed.  Do  nor,  however,  be 
alarmed  on  account  of  my  healtn ;  1  believe  I 
could  now  travel  without  anyhazar  ',  but  there 
are  circumftances  which  render  it  difficult  for 
me  to  quit  this  part  ot  France  immediately. — 
My  friend  Montlleuri  prefl'es  me  extremely  to 

return 


return  for  fome  time  to  his  houfe,  and  I  once 
propofed  doing  fo,  but  now  I  cannot  do  that, 
but  ftiall,  1  believe,  as  foon  as  I  am  quite  well 
enough  to  be  difmifl'ed  from  the  care  of  Mr. 
Carmichael,  go  by  flow  journies  towards  Swit- 
zerland, and  from  thence  to  Italy — This,  how- 
ever, depends  upon  events  j  and  you  will  fee  by 
the  manner  in  which  this  is  written,  that  I  do 
not  at  prefent  boaft  of  fo  perfect  a  reftoration 
to  health  as  to  make  any  immediate  determina- 
tion necefTary. 

I  perfedlly  agree  with  you  in  the  flatement  you 
have  made  of  thofe  caufes  which  has  made  many 
of  the  Englifli  behold  the  French  revolution  with 

relu£tance,  and  even  abhorrence, To  thoie 

caufes  you  might  have  added  themifreprefentati- 
ons  that  have  been  fo  induftrioufly  propagated; 
all  the  tranfient  mifchicf  has  been  exaggerated  ) 
and  we  hive  in  the  overcharged  picflure  loft  fight 
of  the  great  and  permanent  evils  that  have  been 
removed — All  the  good  has  been  concealed  or 
denied,  and  the  former  government,  which  we 
ufed  to  hold  in  abhorrence,  has  been  fpoken  of 
with  prsifc  and  regret — This  is  by  no  means 
wonderful,  when  we  confider  how  m.iny  among 
ourfelves  are  afraid   of  enquiry,  and    tremble  at 

the   idea  of  inno\ation How    many  of  the 

French,  with  whom  we  converfe  in  England, 
Are  avanturiersj  who  feize  this  op^  ortunity  to 
avail  thcmfelves  of  imaginary  con1equ<-nce,  and 
defcribe  ihemfelves  as  men  fufFeiing  for  their 
loyal  adherence  to  their  king  ;  and  ..s  having 
loft  their  all  in  the  caufe  of  injured  loyalty— 
We  believe  and  pity  them,  taking  ail  their  la- 
mentable ftoiies  for  granted — whereas  the  truth 
is,  that  no  property  has  been  forcibly  taken 
ffom  its  poileft'Qrs — none  is  intended  to  be  taken 

—and 


2l6  DESMOND. 

— and  thefe  men  who  defcribe  themfelves  as 
robbed,  had,  many  of  them,  nothing  to  lofe — 
Half  the  Knglifh,  however,  who  hear  of  thofe 
fiditious  diftrelTes,  are  intereiied  in  having  them 
credited,  and  cry,  "  Thefe  are  the  blefled  ef- 
fe£ls  of  a  revolution  .' — Thefe  private  injuries 
arife  from  the  raihnefs  and  folly  of  touching 
the  fettled  conftitution  of  a  country  !" — While 
others,  too  indolent  toafkeven  the  fimple  quef- 
tion — ^'  Is  this  true? — are  the  individuals  thus 
injured  r"  fhrink  mto  themfelves,  and  fay, 
*'  Well !  1  am  fure  we  have  reafon  to  be  thanii.- 
ful  that  there  is  no  fuch  thing  among  us." 

But  though  I  have  long  been  thoroughly 
aware,  both  of  the  interefted  prejudice,  and 
indolent  apathy,  which  exifts  in  England,  i 
own  I  never  expecled  to  have  feen  an  elaborate 
treatife  in  favor  of  defpotifm  written  by  an  £n- 
glifhmanj  v/ho  has  always  been  called  one  of 
the  moft  fleady,  as  he  undoubtedly  is  one  of 
the  moft  able  of  thofe  who  are  efteemed  the 
friends  of  the  people — Ynu  will  eafily  compre- 
hend that  I  allude  to  the  book  lately  publiihed 
by  Mr.  Burke,  which  I  received  three  days 
fmce  from  England,  and  have  read  once. 

I  will  not  enter  into  a  difcuffion  of  it,  though 
the  virulence  as  well  as  the  mifreprcfentation 
with  which  it  abound^,  lays  it  alike  open  to 
ridicule  and  contradi6lion— Abufive  declmna- 
tion  can  influence  only  fuperficial  or  prepollelled 

underftanding Thofe   who  cannot,  or  who 

will  not  fee,  that  fine  founding  periods  are  not 
arguments — that  poetical  imagery  is  not  matter 
of  fail.  I  forefee  that  a  tbcufaad  pens  lui/l  leap 
frotn  ths'ir  JiandiJ}:)es  (to  parody  a  fublimc  {t\\- 
tence  of  his  own)  to  ar.fwer  fuch  a  book — I 
forefee  that  ic  wiH  cal!  fo;th  all  the  talents  that 

are 


DESMOND.  211 

are  yet  unbought  (and  which,  I  trulV,  are  un- 
purchafeablt)  in  t  ngland,  and  therefore  1  re- 
juice  that  it  has  btcn  written,  fiiicc,  far  from 
iinallv  injuring  the  caufc  of  truth  and  rea!on 
againft  which  Mr.  Burke  is  fo  inveterate,  it 
will  awaken  every  advocate  in  tbt-.r  defence. 

One  of  the  moft  ftriking  of  Uioie  well-drcflld 
abfurdities  with  which  lie  infults  the  under- 
ftanding  of  his  country,  is  chat  which  forcibly 
reminds  me  of  the  arguments  in  favor  of  abfo- 
lute  power,  brought  by  bir  Robert  Fihrier  in 
that  treatife,  of  which  Locke  deigned  to  tntcr 
into  a  refutation — This  advocate  of  unlimited 
government  derives  the  origin  of  monarchies 
from  Adam,  and  aflerts,  that  *'  Man,  not  be- 
ing born  free,  could  never  have  the  liberty  to 
chufe  either  governors  or  formsof  government." 
He  carric:,  however,  his  notion  of  this  inca- 
pacity farther  than  Mr.  Burke;  according  to 
him,  man,  in  general,  having  been  born  in  a 
ftate  ct  fervitude  fince  Adam,  can  never  in  any 
cafe  have  had  a  right  to  chufe  in  what  way  he 
would  be  governed — Mr.  Burke  feems  to  air 
low  that  iume  fuch  right  might  ha\e  exifted 
among  Engiifhmen,  previous  to  the  year  1688, 
but  that  then  they  gave  it  up  for  themielves  and 
their  poftenty  for  ever. 

It  was  miglitily  the  fafhion  when  I  left  Eng- 
land, ;or  the  enemies  of  the  revolution  in 
France,  to  treat  all  that  was  advanced  in  its 
favor,  as  novelties — as  the  flimfy  fpeculations 
of  unpra6lifed  politicians — or  the  artful  mifrer 
prefentations  of  men  of  defperate  fortunes  and 

^vild  ambition. Precedent,  however,   which 

kems" gaining  ground,  and  ufurping  the  place 
of  common  fenfe  in  our  ccurts,  may  here  be 
united  with  found  rcafon — if  reafun  be  allowed  t^ 

thofe 


212  DESMOND. 

thofe  great  men  towards  whom  we  have  hoca 
taught  to  look  with  acquiefcence  and  venera- 
tion. 

**  When  fafhion,'*  fays  Locke,  "  has  once 
Ain<5lioned  what  folly  or  craft  began,  cuftom 
makes  it  facred,  and  it  will  be  thought  impu- 
dence or  madncfs  to  contradict  or  queftion  it." 
This  impudence  and  madnefs  feems  by  the  ve- 
nal crew,  whofc  intereft  it  is  that  no  quejiions 
fhould  arife,  to  be  imputed  to  sW  who  venture 
to  defend  the  condud  of  the  patriots  flrugglmg 
for  the  liberties  of  France  ;  Mr.  Burke  now 
loads  them  with  the  imputation,  not  only  of 
impudence  and  madncfs,  but  with  every  other 
crime  be  cai>  imagine,  and  involves  in  the  (ame 
venture,  thofe  of  his  own  countrymen,  v-ho 
have  d.ired  to  rejoice  in  liie  fr.'dom  of  France, 
and  to  fupport  the  caufe  of  political  and  civil 
liberty  throughout  the  world.  Now,  without 
committing  myfelf  to  enter  into  any  thing  like 
an  argument  with  fo  redoubtable  an  adverfary  j 
and  with  a  view  foleiy  to  cfcape  the  cenfure  of 
broaching  novelties.^  let  me  quote  a  fentence  in 
Locke  on  Civil  Government,  which  among 
the  few  books  I  have  accefs  to,  I  happen  to 
have  procured,  in  fpeaking  of  conquefV,  he 
fays, 

*••  This  concerns  not  their  children,  (the 
children  of  the  conquered)  for  lince  a  fdther 
hath  not  in  himfelf  a  power  over  the  life  and 
liberty  of  his  child,  no  aGl  of  his  own  can  pof- 
ilbly  forfeit  it;  fo  that  the  children^  whatever 
may  have  happened  to  the  fatners,  are  free 
raen  ;  and  the  abfoiute  power  of  the  conquered 
reaches  no  farther  than  the  perfons  of  Che  men' 
who  were  fubdued  by  him,  and  dies  with  them, 
uid  ihould  be  govern  tiiem  as  ilavcs,  fubjeded 

to 


DESMOND.  tlj 

to  his  abfohite  power,  he  has  no  fuch  right  of 
dominion  over  their  children — he  can  have  no 
power  over  them  but  by  their  own  tonfent ;  and 
lie  has  no  lawful  authority  while  force,  not 
choice,  compels  them  to  fubmiflion." 

If  conqueftdoes  not  bind  pofterity,  fo  neither, 
can  compact  bind  it.  Mr.  Burke  does  not  di- 
rectly aff^rt  whatever  difpofition  he  fhews  to  do 
io^  that  nothing  can  be  changed  or  amended  in' 
the  conftitution  of  England,  becaufe  the  fa- 
mily who  now  are  on  the  throne  derive  their 
facred  right  (through  a  bloody  and  broken  fuc- 
ceflion)  from  William  the  baftarei  of  Norman- 
dy ;  but  he  maintains,  that  every  future  altera- 
tion, however  necelFary,  is  become  impoffiblc, 
fince  the  compact  made  for  all  future  genera- 
tions, between  the  Prince  of  Orange,  and  the 
felf-ele£le^l  Parliament  who  gave  him  the  crown 
in  1688 — So,  that  if  at  any  remote  period  it 
(hould  happen,  what  cannot  indeed  be  imme- 
diately apprehended,  that  the  crown  fhould  de- 
fcend  to  a  prince  more  profl  gate  than  Charles 
the  Second,  without  his  wit;  and  morecarelefs 
of  the  welfare  and  profperity  of  his  people 
than  James  the  Second,  without  his  piety;  the 
Englifb  muft  fubmit  to  whatever  burthens  his 
vices  (hall  impofe — to  whatever  yoke  the  ty- 
ranny of  his  favourites  fhallinfli(f^j  becaufex\iey 
arc  bound  by  the  compadt  of  1688,  to  alter 
nothing  that  the  conftitution  then  framed,  bids 
thf  m  ^nd  their  children  fubmit  to  ad  infinitum.. 

1  have  been  two  days  writing  this  letter,  ^tfktk 
a  weak  and  trembling  hand,  1  now,  therefore, 
dear  Bethel,  bid  you  adieu  !  1  entreat  you  to 
write  to  me  as  often  as  poflible,  for  if  1  quit 
this  place,  your  letters  will  follow  me. — 1  re- 
commcnd  10  you,  as  the  moft  cffential  kindhef^ 

jou 


'214  DESMOND. 

you  can  do  me,  to  attend  to  that  intered,  which 
is  infinitely  dearer  to  me  than  my  own,  and 
with  repeated  acknowledgments  of  all  your 
kindnefs  on  a  thoufand  other  occafions,  but 
above  all  on  the  laft.  I  entreat  you  ever  to  be- 
lieve me 

Your's  moft  gratefully  and 

affectionately, 

LIONEL  DESMOND, 


f^ 


L  £  T- 


DESMOND.  215 


LETTER      XXIIL 


TO     MRS.     V  E  R  N  E  Y. 


Bath,   luh  Feb.  1791. 

I  WA  S  uiieafy,  my  dear  Sifter,  at  your  not 
writing,  and  fince  you  have  written,  I  am  more 
uneafy  flill.  The  account  you  give  me  of 
yourfelf  and  the  baby  frighten  me — Dreary  as 
the  feafon  i?,  1  now  join  with  you  in  wifhing 
you  in  the  country — I  beg  your  pardon  if  my 
frankncfs  ofFends  you;  but  I  cannot  help  fay- 
ing, you  know  too  well,  that  your  hufband 
really  cares  not  where  you  are,  and  will  not  op- 
pofe  your  going  if  you  defire  it,  but  will,  pro- 
bably, be  glad  to  have  ycu  out  of  the  way — 
My  dear  Geraldine,  it  gives  me  the  fevered 
pain  to  be  compelled  to  write  thus,  and  to  break 
the  injunction  you  have  fo  often  laid  on  me, 
not  to  fpeak  my  thoughts  fo  freely  of  Verney — 
Your  health  is  at  ftake,  and  I  forget  every  thing 
elfe.  After  all,  what  do  1  fay,  that  you  have 
not  yourfelf  faid  internally  a  thoufand  tirries, 
though  your  delicate  fenfeof  duty  (duty  tofuch 

a  manl} 


2l6  DESMOND, 

a  man  !)  makes  you  acquiefcein  patleirt  filenre, 
under  injuries  that  would  have  made  nineteen 
women  in  twenty  fly  out  of  his  houfe,  and  plav 
the  deuce  in  abfolute  defperation  ? — How  is  it 
pofltble  that  you  can  help  being  confcious  of 
your  perfcdtions,  and  of  his  deferving  them  fo 
little? — Can  you  fail  to  feel,  and  to  compare? 
•—It  is  impofRble  but  that  you  muft  at 

That  fate  repine. 


"  Which  threw  •  pciirl  before  a  fwine." 

There  is  a  quotation  from  me,  which  you  will 
allow  to  be,  at  leaft,  a  novelty.  It  will  hardly, 
however,  procure  my  pardon  for  its  pertncfs, 
and  therefore,  I  pray  you,  my  dear  Geraldine, 
to  forgive  me ;  or,  if  you  are  a  little  hungry, 
I  will  learn  to  bear  it,  if  you  will  but  exert 
yourfelf  (if  exertion  be  neceflary)  to  go  into  the 
country  and  be  well. 

Ton  io  not  fay  a  word  of  Mr.  Defmond,  and 
/can  think  and  talk  of  nobody  elfe — In  hopes 
of  hearing  fomething  of  him,  I  have  endu-ed 
the  mifery  of  long  converfation  with  that  odd 
©Id  animal  his  uncle  Major  Danby — The  for- 
mal twaddler  loves  to  tell  long  ftories',  and  can 
feldom  get  any  body  to  hear  them,  unlefs  he 
can  feize  upon  fome  ftranger  who  does  not 
know  him,  iind  thefe  becoming  every  day  more 
Scarce,  be  has  taken  quite  a  fancy  to  me,  be- 
caufe  he  finds  I  liften  to  him  with  uncommon 
patience,  and  do  not  yawn  above  once  in  ten 
ininutes.  The  goflipping  people  here  (of  which 
heaven  knows  there  arc  plenty)  have  already 
obfervfd  our  tite-a  tite^  and  begin  to  whifper 
to  each  other  that  iVIifs  Waverly  has  hook'd  the 
rich  old  M;jyr — 1  like  of  alU*things  liiat  they 
jftjouid  bclit'-e  it,  and  am  ia  hopes  of  being  in 

the 


DESMOND.  217 

the  Loftdon   papers  very  foon,  among  the  trea- 
ties of  marriage. — What   do   you   think   DcC- 
mond  would  fay  to  it  ? — Do  you  think  he  would 
like  fuch  a  fmart  young  aunt  i* — Poor  fellow! — • 
I  have  not  been  able  to  get  at  much  intelligence 
about  him,  and  what  I  have  heard  is  very  pain- 
ful—  His   uncle  has  only  heard    lately,  that  his 
health  is  much  impaired  by  long  confinement, 
and  that  he  is  yet  unable  to  travel  towards  Eng- 
land ;  but  1  hope  the  old  croker  made  the  worft 
of  it  to  me — He  perfills  in  Aiying,  that  his  ne- 
phew could  not  have  met  with  fuch  an  accident 
in   England,   as    if  people   here  did   not   flioot 
one  another  every  day,   for  reafons  of  much  Icfs 
moment,  or  for  no  reafon  at  all — But  though  I 
have  attempted,  whenever  he  would  hear  me, 
to  rep.efent  this,  ai.d  to  explain  and  dwell  upon 
the  generofity  of  Dcfmond's  conduv?^,  1   have 
not  yet  fucceedsd   in  convincing   him,  that  it 
was  friendfh'p  to  my  brother,  and  not  any  po- 
litical matter  that  inv...lv(.'d   his  nephew  in  this 
difp\Jte — The  gnoJ  Major,  indeed,  cannot  com- 
prehend how  friendfhip  ihould   lead  another  to 
incur  danger,  for  he  hjd  never  in  his  life  that 
fort  of  feeiing,  which  tliould  make  him  gc  half 
a  n)!le  out  of  his  way  to  ferve  any  body.      Ti:is 
I   hav^  frequently  heard  from  thofe  who  knev/ 
him   as  a   young  irtanj   and  I  believe  fenfibility 
a-nd  philanthropy  arf  qualities   that   do  not  en- 
creafe  with  year*; — He   retaiiis  now   nothing  of 
the    ingenuous  freedom   of  the  foldier,  but   all 
th^   hiiTdnefs   which   a   military  life  fometinics 
giver,  and  in  quitring   it,  he  k. eps   only   the 
worit  part  of  a  profoflion,  that  is  laid  to  make 
b^d  men  worfe-^l  don't  know  why  1  have  faid 
io  much  about  him,  unlcfs  it  is  becaufe  I  have 
noihiuo    to  fay   of  Defmond,  and    vet   cannot 
Vol.  I.  L  cnurely 


2l8  DESMOND. 

entirely  quit  the  fubjeiSl — He  provoked  me  this 
morning  in  the  pump-room,  by  {landing  up,  and 
in  his  fharp,  loud  voice,  giving  an  account,  to 
two  or  three  people  that  were  Grangers  to  him, 
of  the  accident  that  had  happened  to  his  ne- 
phew in  France.  An  old,  upright  woman, 
who  was,  I  immediately  faw,  a  titled  goflip, 
liflened  for  fome  time  very  attentively,  and 
then  enquired,  in  a  canting  fort  of  whine,  if 
the  affair  had  not  been  owing  to  the  troubles? — 
The  Major,  delighted  to  have  a  Lady  Bab 
Frightful  intereft  herfelf  in  his  ftory,  began  it 
again,  and  I  ran  out  of  the  place,  half  deter- 
mined, that  not  even  the  wifh  1  cannot  help 
feeling  to  hear  now  and  then  of  Defmond  from 
him,  (hoLild  tempt  me  again  to  enter  into  con- 
verfation  with  this  ftory-telling  old  bore. 

My  mother,  who  generally  agrees  totheopi-. 
rion  of  her  acquaintance,  if  they  happen  to  be 
rich,  and  who  is  not  unwilling  to  have  the  obli- 
gation DefT!ond  has  laid  us  all  under,  lightened 
by  fuppofing  fonie  part  of  the  quarrel  with  the 
Chevalier  de  St.  tloy,  to  have  originated  in  a 
difference  of  political  opinion,  really  encourages 
the  Major  in  his  notion,  and  when  they  get  to- 
gether, I  lofe  my  patience  entirely.  To  your 
enquiry,  how  my  mother  is  in  health,  I  can 
afTure  you,  i  have  not  feen  her  fo  well  thefe  laft 
eighteen  months,  and  fhe  is  now  fo  often  in 
company,  is  at  fa  many  card  parties  abroad, 
and  has  fo  many  pariii  s  at  home,  that,  without 
having  been  much  mifl'ed,  1  mignt  have  ftaid 
with  you  much  longer  ;  however,  I  did  what 
appeared  to  us  to  be  my  duty  in  returning,  and 
1  muft  not  regret  it,  though  very  certain  it  is, 
that  all  the  maternal  atfedtions  of  my  mother 
are  more  than  ever  engrofled  by  her  fon — She  is 

ncMT 


DESMOND.  2.9 

now  impatiently  expeiSing  his  arrival,  and  quef- 
tioning  every  body  (he  fees,  about  the  probable 

length  of  his  voyage   from    Leghorn It  is 

amazing  to  me,  that  with  all  this  tendernefs 
and  anxiety  for  him,  (lie  feels  no  gratitude,  or 
fo  little,  towards  the  man,  without  whofe  inter- 
pofition,  he  would  never  have  returned  at  all 
—I  alfo  wonder  it  does  not  occur  to  her,  that 
it  is  far  from  being  ccrfain  he  did  embark  at 
Leghorn  the  time  he  propofed  to  do  fo  —  P'or 
myfelf,  I  {hould  not  be  at  all  furprized  to  hear 
from  him  at  Rome,  nor  intleed,  to  learn  that 
he  was  again  the  captive  of  Mademoifelle  de 
St.  Eioy — Let  me  not,  however,  my  fivter, 
add  anticpitated  to  the  real  evils  with  vvhicli 
you  feem  deftined  lo  contend— All  will  yet  be 
well — Defmond  will  return  in  perfefl  health, 
and  brighter  days  await  us.  Let  me  hear  frogi 
you  at  Icaft  twice  a  week,  and  believe  me  ever, 
with  true  afFc^ion,  your 

FANNY. 


LETTER     XXIV. 
TO   MISS   WAVERLY. 

Sheen,  near  RiclimonJ,  Feb,  19,    1791. 

I  H  A  V  E  delayed  anfwering  your  letter 
my  Fanny,  till  to-day,  though  I  have  been  in 
pofieflion  of  it  above  a  week,  languor  alone 
would  not  have  caused  this  omiflion,  but  I  have 
been  bulled  in  my  little  removal  to  a  lodginc^  I 
have  taken  here,  as  Dr.  Warren  declared'' it *to 
be  neceflary,  both  on  my  own  account,  and  on 
that  of  the  mfant  I  fuckle,  that  I  ihonld  remove 
from  London.  Mr.  Verncy,  I  know  not  why, 
refolutely  oppofed  my  going  into  Yorkfhire, 
L  2  nor 


2^0-  DESMOND. 

nor  could  my  entreaties,  or  the  opinion. of  the 
phyfician,  obtain  any  other  anfwer  than  that 
my  going  thither  would  be  inconvenient  to  him 
■ — I  have,  alas  !  no  longer  the  houfe  in  Kent  to 
which  1  was  (o  attached,  and  therefore,  rather 
becaufe  it  is  my  duty  to  try  to  live  than  becaufe 
I  wi(b-  to  live — rather  for  the  fake  of  my  poor 
children  than  my  own — I  employed  a  friend  in 
this  neighbourhood  to  look  out  for  apartments 
for  me,  v/here  I  could  have  accommodations 
for  my  three  children,  three  fervants,  and  my- 
felt — fuch  he  fortunately  found  in  a  tolerably 
plcafant  fituation,  and  at  a  reafonable  price,  a 
conrideration  lo  which  I  muff  no  longer  be  in- 
difFtrent. 

Small,     however,    as   the   difference  is,     be- 
tween my  living  here  or  in  Seymour- flreer,  and- 
careiefs  of  my  being  cither  at  one  place  or  ano- 
ther, as  you    too  j  iftly  obferve  Mr.  Verney  to 
he;   1   own  I  remarked,  and   remarked  with  re- 
doubled an^uifli    of  heait,  that   this    additionil 
expence,  thou'^h    pro;iounced    to   l>e  abfolutely 
neceiTary  to  my  exiftence,  and  that  of  his  child, 
is  fubmittcd  to  with  rtludlance  by  Mr.  Verney 
• — I  check  myfelf,  Fanny — I  will  not  murmur 
— and  I  will  even   reprove  you,  my  fii^er,  for 
encouraging   me   in     thofe    repi-nings,    which, 
though  1  cannot   always    reprefs,  I  know   it    is 
vvio.ng  to  indulgr — Do  not,   my  love,   te^ch  me 
to    yield    too    eafily    to     a    feiifibility    of  evils, 
w.J;iicb,  fince  they  are  without  remedy,   it  is  bet- 
ter to  bear  wiih  equality  of  mind,  and  with  re- 
Tignation   of  tieari — A'as  !   mine  is. but  too  apt 
to   feel  aH    the  miferifs  of   its   ^ciiiny— but  my 
children  and   m.y.duty.m.uft    and  fVall    teach  ma- 
ta  fub,m,it    unreplningly    to  fulfil  the  latter,  for 
the  fake  of  the  former— ?  IVheii    innocent  imiies 
repay  ms^.for  many  hours  of  anxiety,,  and  while 
I  they 


DESMOND.  2H 

they  are  well   around   me,  I  believe  I   can  bear 
any  ihino. 

YoLi  conrl.>'<o  y<^u,  Iciter  cr.eeitul!y,  my 
I'anny,  as  if  you  would  diflipate  the  concern 
which  the  former  part  of  it  mufi:  give  me  on  ac- 
count ci  Mr.  Defmond — Alas  !  the  former  part 
is  all  real,  and  the  latter  only  the  proplietic 
hope  of  a  fanguine  imagination — "  Defmond 
will  return  in  perfeft  health,  and  brighter  days 
await  us." — If  he  {bould  riot  return,  or  not  re- 
turn in  perfect  health  ' — Amiable  as  Mr.  iJel- 
mond  is,  and  interefting  as  he  muft  be  to  every 
one  of  his  a<:quaintance,  i  certainly  ihould  not 
feel  fo  extremely  anxious  about  hini,  (as  my 
folicitude  for  my  ch;idien,  is  as  much  as  I  sai 
well  sble  tobfiir)  were  it  not  far  the  unhappy 
circumfhince  ih.  t  continually  haunts  me — I 
mean,  that  I  involved  him  in  this  f;\ta]  affair, 
and  that  whatever  ill  cor.fequei.ces  finally  at- 
tend it,  win  be  imputable  fuiely  to  me — li  is 
this,  and  this  only,  that  renders  me  more  un- 
happy about  him  than  you  or  any  of  his  otiier 
friinds  have  reafon  to  be,  however  great  your 
regard  (or  him,  and  it  is  this,  that,  if  the 
event  fliould  in  any  v.'ay  be  injurious  to  him. 
Will  ovcrcaft  my  days  With  regret  and  anguifh 
that  mult  be  all  my  own,  for  rione  CTtn  Ihare, 
becaufe  none  can  f<?el  i;  as  I  fh;ili — Mow  hght- 
ly  you  can  talk,  my  dear  girl,  of  his  unile, 
even  a  moment  after  naming  the  intelligence 
you  have  coile£ted  from  him  about  i^ein.ond, 
but ^at/^  have  no  reafon  to  reproach  your(elf  tor 
/j/V  misfortune — your  heart  is  noi  weighed  down 
by  any  of  your  own — You  cannot,  and  indeed 
ought  not  to  look  forward  as  I  do,  to  fceiies  of 
future  forrow — long,  vejy  long,  may  it  be,  be- 
fore you  may  be  compelisd  to  do  it — or  rather, 

may 


222  DESMOND. 

may  nothing  but  rich  and  luxuri&'it  profpects 
ever  offer  th  -rcfelves  to  the  eyes  of  my  Fanny. 

But  I  beleech  you  lu  chccU  yaup  vivacity 
v/hen  you  mett  Mr.  Danby,  and  be  content  to 
liften  to  his  iirefome  ftories  a  little  longer,  if 
liftetiing  to  them  is  the  tax  you  noufi  pay  for 
hearing  of  hisnephev,,  /  could  atten'i  to  the 
mofl:  tedious  legend  with  which  felf-confe- 
quence  ever  perftcuted  patience,  were  I  but  fure 
thai  fome  authentic  infofmation,  as  to  the  real 
ilate  of  DciiriOini's  ht-alth,  would  clofe  the  nar- 
rative;  fuch  information,  without  any  tax  be- 
ing demanded  for  it,  I  ufed  to  obtain  from  his 
friend  Mr.  Bethel,  but  I  have  now  no  means  of 
feeing  him,  as  he  is  g<.>ne  bacic  to  his  houfe  in 
Kent,  that  houfe  fo  ncir  the  place  which  I  can- 
not help  regreiting — Had  it  not  been  fold,  I 
tould  have  gone  ihitiier  now,  1  might  have 
f.cn  Mr.  Bethel  continually,  he  is  an  excellent 
nian,  and  is  fo  much  attached  to  Defmond, 
lilat  it  is  plcafant  to  hciir  him  fpeak  of  him,  in- 
deed he  is  the  only  perfon  vvho  does  juftice  to 
thufe  noble  qualities  of  heart  and  underllanding 
that  Defmond  fo  eminently  pc^fleiles,  but  of 
which  three  parts  of  the  v/orld  know  not  the 
value. 

Yet  I  know  not  whether  it  was  only  my  be- 
ing myielf  in  dreadfully  low  fpirits,  when  I  laft 
faw  Air.  Bethel,  or  whether  he  was  himfelf  in 
a  dirtrcded  (iate  of  mind,  but  methought  he 
fpoke  in  a  very  reluctant  and  defponding  way 
about  Defmond,  thoijgh  he  afTured  me  that  he 
was  entirely  out  of  danger  of  any  kind  from  the 
wound,  and  that  the  lofs  of  the  ufe  of  his  hand 
was  nu  longer  apprehended — But  i  found  Mr. 
Bethel  knows  nothing  certainly  of  Defmond's 
iuiure  intentions;  and  if  he  did  not  deceive  me 
aboui  his  health,  there  is  alTuredly  Ibuie  other 
.    "  circum- 


DESMOND.  223 

circumftance  relating  to  him  that  makes  Bethel 
uaealy — He    Ciid  much  of^  tlie  friciidlliip  Mon- 
iieur  de  Montfleuri  had  fhewn  to  Dcfmond  in 
attending  him,  and  of  his  fiftcr  too  ;  that  Ma- 
dame de'Boifbeile,  who  has,  it  is  faid,   been  his 
nurCc  the  whole  time.      I  fuppofcd,   when  I  firft 
heard  of  her  attendance  on  Mr.  Defrnond,   that 
file  had  been  a  widow,  as  it  Teemed  unlikely  fhe 
could  otherwife  have  been  fufTicieuily  at  liberty 
for  fuch  an  exertion  of  friendihip,   but  Mr.  Be- 
thel  informed  me  (lie  is  n;i>rried,  but  very  un- 
happily, and  that  her  hufbaiid,  a  bankrupt  both 
in  fame   and  fortune,  is   an   emigrant,  and   is 
either  in   Germany    or    England — Mr.  Bethel 
fays   the  lady,    who   is  extremely  beautiful,  is 
now  entirely     dependant    on    tiie   Marquis    de 
Montfleuri    her    brother,     whom     llie    cannot 
oblige  more  than  by  the  attention  ihi:  has  fhevi^ 
to  his  friend — Ho-ff  fortunate  ihe   is  in  having 
fuch  a  brother,  how  doubiy  for:ana;e  in  being 
allowed  to  (hew  her  gratitude  to  him,   by  giv- 
ing h^T /j/iir'y  attendance  to  fuch  a  man  as  DqC- 
mond  —  Beautiful  and  accompliined  as  Mr.  Be- 
thel   defcribes   htr  to  be,  metis ii>ks  I  envy  her 
nothing   but  the    opportunity    Ihe    has  had  to 
foothe  tiis  hours  of  pain  and  confinement.     1 
ufed  to   think  once,  that   Dcftnond    had  a  very 
friendly  regard  for  me,  but  now,  in  how  diffe- 
rent a   light  he   mull  conhder    us  —  /  have  been 
the  caufe  of  his  fufferings — it   has  been  the  en- 
viable lot  of  Madame  de  Boifbcjle  to  foften  and 
alleviate   them — Mr.  Bethel    fays    he  caljs   her 
Jofephine — If  her  good  fortune  Ihould  ftiil  pre- 
vail, and   her  hufband  fnould  not  return  from 
the  hazarCous   exploits  in    which,   it  is  laid,  his 
political  principles  are  likely  to  engage  him,  (he 
will,  perhaps,  become /j/i  J ofephint,  for  1  have 
perfuadcd  myfclf  that  his  long  ftay  in  Fiance  is 

n«w 


224  n    E    S    M    G    N    D. 

now  more  owing  to  the  tender  gratitude  he  muft 
feel  for  this  l.idy,  than  to  any  necefiity  ht  is  in, 
on  account  of  indifpofiUun,  to  remain  there. 

And  now  my  Funny,  indeed,  I  cannot  con- 
clude without  availing  my.rjfof  my  elder/hip 
once  more,  to  entreat  that  yuu  would  confider 
whether  it  would  not  be  better  to  check  that 
flippancy  with  which  you  are  too  apt  to  accuf- 
tom  yourfelf  to  fpeak  of  our  mother.  Admit- 
ting that  fhe  has  the  fo'bles  you  reprefent,  of 
courting  the  rich — of  being  too  partial  to  her 
fon,  it  is  not  her  children  v/ho  {hould  point 
them  out  to  the  obfeivation  and  ridicule  of 
others—Believe  me,  my  fifter,  there  is  nothing 
lb  injurious  to  that  dfJicate  fennbility  which 
you  realty  pofTefs,  as  indulging  this  petulance 
— By  degrees,  it  will  become  habitual,  and  the 
iittlc  afp^'fitie^',  which  you  h'ow  g've  vvay  toon- 
Jv,  -'erhrips,.  a\  '.Vi-i;;.+g  or  in  fpuaklng  to  nic, 
Will  fcon  be  lb  (nuch  matter  of  courfc  ihat  ynu 
will  forget  their  tendency,  and  , be  inrerkfibifi  of 
their  impropriety — It  is  true,  that  I  have  not 
l:ved  fo  much  longer  in  the  v/orld  as  to  be  able 
to  fpeak  much  froin  experience;  but,  from  the 
J'lttle  1  have  feen  of  that  world  more  than  y-'i< 
bave,  I  think  I  may  venture  to  aflert,  that 
where  families  are  divided  among  themfelves — ■ 
I  mean,  where  the  father  or  mother  difagree  with 
th€  children,  or  the  brothers  and  fifters  with  each 
other,  ther€  is  fomething  very  wrong  among 
them  all,  and  I  proteft  to  you,  that  were  I  a 
man,  not  beauty,  wir,  and  fortune  united, 
{hould  eno;ape  mc;  to  marry  a  woman  who  {liew- 
ed  a  want  of  duty  and  gratitude  towards  either 
of  her  parent^,  but  particularly  towards  her 
mother — Were  I  madly  in  love,  1  am  con- 
vaicedy  that  any    thing  like   tb«  ridicule  of  a 

daughter 


D    E    S    M    C    N    D.  225 

daughter  fc»   direfled,  vvuuld    produce  a  radical 
and  immediate  cure. 

Here  let  me  drop  the  fubjeil,  I  hope  fof  ever, 
and  to  begin  one  that,  I  trult,  will  make 
amends  for  any  little  pain  this  may  ha  e  in- 
flicted ;  let  me  tc'l  you,  that  fince  I  have  been 
he:e,  I  have  found  my  health  and  that  of  my 
babv,  fenubly  anend,  and  that  I  now  hop?  I 
Ciali  not  be  compelled  to  wean  him,  though  I 
am  not  happy,  though  1  know  1  never  can  be 
fo,  I  have,  at  le-ift,  obtained  a  trartiient  calm. 
The  agitation  occafioned  by  tlve  late  painful 
events,  is  gradually,  though  llovvly  fubfiding; 
I  can  now  return  to  my  books  with  attention 
lefs  difUaci-ed,  and  have  been  reading  a  defcrip- 
tion  of  fome  of  the  fouthern  parts  of  Kurope, 
particularly  of  the  Lyonois,  &c. — -I  Ihould  like 
extremely  to  fee  thofe  accounts  wnich  I  find 
Mr.  Defmond  fends  to  his  fiiend  Bethel,  be- 
caufe  he  has  fo  much  talle,  and  is  fo  intelligent 
a  traveller — ["here  was  no  poflibility  you  know 
of  afking  in  plain  terms  for  this  indulgence,  I 
hinted  it  as  much  a?  I  dared,  though  Bethel 
did  not,  or  perhips  would  not  undcriiand  me — 
But  to  return  to  myfvlt,  and  what  you  would 
think  melancholy,  thougn  it  is  not  to  are  an  un- 
pleafai^  way  of  paliiag  my  time  —  Dreary  as  the 
ieafon  \et  i_s  1  hjve  b-i'tik-n  myf.lf  to  my  foii- 
tary  walks  in  the  filds  that  furround  this  houfe, 
which,  for  a  fituation  fo  near  Lon.Jon,  is  ex- 
tremely pleafant,  and  quiie  retired- — I  find  the 
perfect  fecJulion,  the  uninterrupted  tranqiiil- 
lity  i  enjoy  now,  fo(ii.hiiig  to  myfpirits,  and  of 
courfe,  bsnefijial  to  my  health,  if  1  do  but  hear 
favourable  accounts  from  the  contin-'nt,  and 
nothing  iitw  haoiJens  embarra{/i»jg  in  tlie  peca- 
niary  affairs  oT  Mr.  Verney,  I  lliall  oc  f>>on  re- 
ftored  10  as  cheeffal  a  {bte  as  i  atn  now  iik  ly 
L  5  ever 


^26  DESMOND. 

ever  to  enjoy — Alfift  the  progrefs  of  my  refto- 
r^tion,  my  deareft  Fanny,-  by  frequent  letters, 
iince  I  cannot  have  the  delight  of  your  company, 
and  cheer  with  your  vivacity,  which  I  love 
(even  in  reproving  its  wildeft  Tallies. ) 
Your  affectionate 

GERALDINE. 
I  had  but  jufl  fealed  my  letter,  when  a  pac- 
qu.t  was  brought  me  from  Defmond  himfeJf — 
Ye?,  my  Fanny,  a  letter  written  with  his  own 
hand,  and  not  with  fo  much  apparent  wealc- 
neis  as  one  would  imagine — I  hope  there  is  no- 
thing improper  in  the  exce/Iive  pleafure  this  let- 
ter gives  me — Gratitude  can  furely  never  be 
wrong,  or  if  it  can  be  carried  to  excefs,  its  excefs 
is  here  pardonable — 1  know  not  what  1  would 
fay,  my  fpiriis  are  fo  fluttered— This  welcome 
letter  has  been  very  long  incoming,  1  will  fend 
you  a  copy  of  it  in  a  poll  or  two  — Hcavcu  biefs 
i'.iij  my  Fanny. 


LETTER      XXV. 

TO    MP.     DESMOND. 

HartfielJ,  March  i8th,  1791. 
J  VV  A  S  in  hopes,  my  dear  Defmond,  that 
long  before  this,  i  fnould  have  fpoken  to  you 
once  more  in  England,  inftead  of  diredting  to 
you  in  Switzerland.  Your  letter  of  the  30th 
J-:.r:.ary  *,  bade  me  fanguincly  hope  this,  I 
therefore  forbore  to  write  ;  but  inftead  of  feeing 
)ou  reftored  to  health,  to  tranquillity,  and 
your  country,  1  receive  a  melancholy  letter 
hifCii  the  pays  de  l^aucl — Ytt  you  aflure  me  that 

*  Which  dcct  act  appea/. 

your 


DESMOND.  227 

your  arm  no  longer  reoiincls  you  of  your  acci- 
dent, and  I  truft  to  your  afTurances,  as  well  as 
to  the  evidence  of  your  handwiiting — You  tell 
me  alfo,  that  your  health  is  much  amended, 
why  then,  my  friend,  this  extraordinary  de- 
preflion  of  fpiHts  ? — I  own  I  am  made  uneafy, 
extremely  uneafy,  in  obferving  it,  and  cannot 
help  lamenting  that  your  time,  your  talent?, 
and  your  temper,  are  thus  wafted  and  deftroyed 
—Is  it,  that  this  fatal  paffion  ftill  obfcures  your 
days  ?  or  is  there,  as  indeed  I  ftrongly  fufpe6l, 
is  there  fome  other  fource  of  unealinefs  more 
recent,  to  which  I  am  a  ftranger  ?  It  has  been 
a  rule  with  me,  even  while  you  were,  in  fome 
meafure,  under  my  guardianfhip,  never,  dear 
Defmond,  to  intrude  upon  you  with  officious 
enquiries,  nor  to  afk  more  of  your  confidence 
than  you  chofe  to  give  me  —  Friendfhip,  like 
the  fcrvice  of  heaven,  fhouid  be  perfc6l  free- 
dom ;  yet  forgive  me,  if  for  once  I  intrude 
upon  your  referve  with  curioiity  that  arifes  folcly 
from  my  regard  for  you — Is.  there  in  this  any 
circumftance,  the  pain  of  which  1  can  remove  ? 
if  there  is,  I  will  be  fatisfied  with  fuch  a  partial 
communication  as  may  enable  me  to  be  of  ufe 
to  you,  without  enquirin_f  into  particulars  you 
may   wifh  to  conceal. 

I  fend  you,  with  other  books,  one  that  now 
engroiles  ail  the  converfation  of  this  country, 
which,  from  its  boldnels  and  fingularity  alone, 
and,  written  as  it  is,  by  an  obfcure  individual*, 
calling  himfelf  the  fubjecl  of  another  govern- 
ment, could  never  have  attradled  fo  much  at- 
tention, or  have  occafioned  to  the  party  whofe 
principles  it  decidedly  attacks,  fuch  general 
alarm,  if  there  had  not  been  much  found  fenfe 
ia  it,  however  bluntly  delivered —As  I  had  ra- 
*  P«iae, 

ther 


228  n    E    S    M    O    K   B. 

ther  hear  your  opinion  of  it,  than  give  you  my 
own,  1  will  leave  the  difcufiion  of  politics,  to 
tell  you  of  what  pafTes  among  your  acquaint- 
ance— This  neighbourhood  is  almoft  vvhollv 
occupied  by  the  improvements  which  Sir  Robert 
Stamford  is  makiog  at  Linwell,  the  place  fo 
regretted  by  Mrs.  Verney — The  beautiful  little 
wood  which  overfliidovved  the  clear  and  rapid 
rivulet,  as  it  haftens  through  thefe  grounds  to 
join  the  Medway,  has  been  cut  down,  or  at 
leaft  a  part  of  it  only  has  been  fuffered  to  remain, 
as  what  he  calls  a  collateral  fecurity  againft  the 
iiorth-eaft  wind,  to  an  immenfe  range  ef  forc- 
ing and  fucceilion  houfes,  where  not  only 
pines  are  produced,  but  where  different  build- 
ings, and  different  degrees  of  heat,  are  adapted 
to  the  ripening  cherries  in  March,  and  peaches 
•in  April,  wil;h  almoft  every  other  fruit  out  af 
its  natural  courfe — Ihe  hamadryades,  to  whom 
I  remember,  on  your  firft  acquaintance  with 
the  Verney  family,  you  addrefs  lome  charming 
lines  of  poetry,  becaufe  it  was  under  their  pro- 
tection you  firil  beheld  Geraldine  j  the  hama- 
dryades  are  driven  from  the  place  which  is  nov^r 
occupied  by  culinary  deities  —  The  water  now 
ferves  only  to  fupply  the  gardeneis,  or  to  ftag- 
nate  in  ltev^5  for  the  fattening  of  carp  and 
tench  ;  heaps  of  manure  pollute  the  turf,  and 
rows  of  reed  fences  divide  and  disfigure  thcfe 
beautiful  grounds,  th  tt  were  once  lavvns  and 
•coppices — Every  thing  is  iacrificed  to  ihe  lux- 
uries of  the  table;  and  the  country  neighbours, 
•though  niany  of  them  polilii'ed  ihe  ulual  ele- 
gancies ani  fupe;fluities  of  modern  life  btfcre, 
aie  compelled  to  hide  their  diminiflicd  head-s, 
when  Sir  Rob.Mt  Stanford  gives  an  eiiteriain- 
ment — Riches,  however,  unworthily  acquiie  ', 
a;ed  fure  pai]^>ort  to  the  '*  mouth  h^unjr,"  not 

only 


D    E   ^    M    O    N    D.  229 

only  of  the  conrKnon  herd  of  thofe  who  are  call- 
ed *'  gentlemen  and  ladies,"  but  to  the  titled 
and  the  high  born,  who,  while  they  court  new- 
rifen  opulence,  envy,  and  yet  defpife  the  up- 
ftart  who  has  obtained  it — 1  never  meet  this 
great  man  myTelf,  as  our  former  conne£tions, 
and  our  pr^fent  edrangement,  are  fo  generally 
known,  that  we  are  never  invited  together,  but 
he  is  almoft  always  the  fubjedt  of  difcourfe,  at 
parties  where  I  do  go^  and  always  fpoken  of 
with  wonder ;  for  hardly  a  week  paiTes  in  which 
fome  new  improvement  in  luxury  does  not  ex- 
cite admiration  at  his  boundlefs  expence, 
which,  from  fuch  a  man,  is  /uppofed  to  be  fup- 
ported  by  a  great  fortune,  for,  as  he  has  raifed 
himfelf,  itfeems  ui>likely  that  he  fhouldfo  little 
underftand  the  value  of  money,  as  to  iquander  it 
thus  profufely,  if  he  had  r^ot  a  great  deal  of  rt. 
To  thofe,  who  are  more  in  the  fecret,  all  this 
ought  not  perhaps  to  be  wonderful ;  yer,  though 
I  know  the  very  extent  of  Stafmord's  abilities, 
and  know  that  he  has  nothing  like  eminent  ta- 
lents, though  perhaps  an  acute  and  active  mind  4 
]  have,  I  own,-  now  and  then  been  tempted  to 
wonder  av  his  extraordinary  and  rapid  ri<e,  and 
have  joined  the  old  ladies,  who  talk  him  over, 
in  pronouncing  him  a  wondtrfully  lucky  man — • 
When  1  hear  of  the  ofteniation  with  winch  he 
difplays  thofe  acquifitions,  which  are  beyond 
the  reach  of  others — When  I  am  told,  tha-t  men 
of  the  firlt  rank  come  to  eat  his  good  things, 
and  praife  his  {kill  in  colle^itlng  them — When 
1  learn  that  the  M'nilier  f^nds  for  him  exprels, 
and  that  no  rcfolution  of  importance  is  adopted 
without  conlulting  him — And  recollect  how 
very  few  years  are  pafled  Hnce  be  vvas'a  country 
Airorney,    2nd   rode    more  miles   for    half-a- 

crown 


230  DESMOND. 

crown  than  a  poftillion— I   cannot  always  re- 
prefs  a  degree   of  aftoniftiment,  and  fay. 

*'  We  kn  ,w  the  thing  is  neither  new  nor  rarcj 
*'  But  wonder  how  the  devil  it  got  there  !*" 

It  s  pleafant  enough  to  hear  the  converfation 
that  fometimes  pais  about  this  man  at  the  din- 
ner and  tea  tables — The  awe  that  the  fuperi- 
ority  of  riches  creates,  reprefl'es  the  malignity 
that  envy  engenders,  though  with  fo  much  dif- 
ficulty reprefles  it,  that  it  is  every  moment  ob- 
liquely appearing — For  my  own  part,  I  regard 
this  man  with  fo  much  contempt,  that  the  only 
pain  I  now  feel  from  his  refiding  in  my  imme- 
diate neighbourhood,  arifes  from  my  regret  for 
the  lofs  of  Mrs.  Vern.'y,  whole  fociety  inc'ecd, 
1  had  not  learned  to  reliih  when  1  was  deprived 
of  it.  This  confeflion  is  imprudent,  perhaps, 
my  friend,  and  encouraging  that  unhappy  pre- 
pofleflion  which  I  have  always  blamed,  but 
truth  extorts  it  from  me,  and  the  more  1  fee  of 
the  ufual  dull  round  ol  country  vilits  and  coun- 
try converlation,  the  more  I  regret  the  time, 
when  1  was  fure  to  find  at  Linwell,  a  woman, 
who,  to  the  foftnefs  of  manners  of  her  own 
fex,  unites  a  Itrength  of  undertianding,  whieh 
we  believe  peculiar  to  ours,  and  wh':>,  with  fo 
capabi'-.  a  head,  has  a  heart  fo  admirably  tender 
— You  will  be  alarmed,  perhaps,  Defmond,  at 
th«  warmth  of  my  panegyric,  and  fancy,  that 
in  endeavouring  to  cure  you,  1  have  myfelf 
caught  the  iut.:ction— But  be  at  peace,  my 
friend,  on  that  fcore — though  Geraldine, 
in  the  two  lafi:  converfations  1  had  with  her, 
has  made  me  a  fincere  convert  to  an  alilrtion  of 
your's,  which  1  ufcd  to  deny,  that  he,  who 
has  once  feen  ai\d  loved  her,  could  never  divert 
himielf  of  his  atuchment,  yet.  I  am  no  longer 
*  Pope. 

liabk 


DESMOND.  231 

liable  to  feel  this  fatal  infatuation  in  the  excefs 
you  do,  and  am  only  fenfible  of  fuch  regard  for 
her,  as  a  father  or  brother  might  feel — I  own, 
that  even  thj  depreflion  of  fpirit  which  her  un- 
happy marriage  occahons,  is  not  without  its 
charms — but  when  1  fee  her  llruggling  to  pal- 
liate what  he  will  not  allow  her  to  conceal,  the 
wild  abfurdities  and  ruinous  follies  of  her  huf- 
band — when  I  fee  her  mild  endurance  of  inju- 
ries, and  that  her  patience  and  fweetnefs  are 
vainly  endeavouring 

To  fpread 


"  A  guardian  glory  rouad   her  ideoi's  head  *." 

1  feel  refpeit  bordering  on  adoration,  and  fet 
her  above  Oclavia,  or  any  of  the  fair  examples 
in  ancient  ftory — Yes  !  my  dear  Defmond,  I 
not  only  acquit  you  of  folly,  but  have  more  than 
once  caught  myfelf  build mg  for  your  delightful 
chateaux  en  Ejpagne^  which,  however,  i  will 
not  feed  your  iick  fancy  by  Iketching,  for  Ver- 
ney's  lite,  nbtwithftanding  his  irregularities,  is 
a  very  good  one,  and  it  were  therefore  much 
wifer  in  me  to  direct  yuur  thoughts  to  the  for- 
mer and  more  rational  advice  I  gave  you,  when 
-I  exprelled  my  hopes,  that  you  might  in  time 
carry  your  affedlions  to  the  very  lovely  and  ani- 
mated Fanny  VVaverly,  who,  if  I  am  any  judge 
of  the  female  heart,  from  the  countenance,  and 
the  manner,  would  not  let  you  defpair,  and 
who,  as  (he  is  very  far  from  fufpetiting  your 
partiality  to  her  filter,  perhaps,  puts  down  to 
her  own  account  the  extraordinary  exertions  of 
friendfhip  which  you  have  made  for  her  family, 
in  becoming  the  travelling  friend  of  her  brother. 
I  do  not  hear  that  Waverly  has  yet  made  his 
appearance  in  tngland,  though  i  have  enquired 
«1  feveral  of  my  acquaintance,  who  are  lately 
*  Hay  ley. 

come 


221  DESMOND. 

come  from  Bath,  and  who  tell  me  that  his  mo- 
ther, Mrs.  Waverly,  is  diftreffed  by  his  long 
delay,  and  the  uncertciinty  of  what  is  become  of 
him  J  that  (he  is  compelled  to  have  a  party 
with  her  all  day,  who  engage  her  at  cards,  in 
order  to  detach  her  mind  from  this  infupportable 
anxiety — Fortunate  refource  ! — How  thefe 
good  folks  are  to  be  envied,  who  can,  in  tran- 
quillity folace,  in  afflidion,  confole  themfelves 
with  a  rubber!  *'  A  blefling  on  him,"  quoth 
Sancho,  *•*  who  fitft  invented  the  thing  called 
fleep,  it  covers  a  man  over  like  a  cloak" — A 
bleffing,  fay  1,  on  hitn  who  hrft  invented  thofe 
two  and-fifty  fquares  of  panned  paper — 1  hey 
blunt  the  arrows  of  afflidiion,  ^■^  and  reconcile 
man  io  his  lot*." 

While  the  elder  lady  of  the  Waverly  family 
is  thus  diverting  the  pangs  of  maternal  dif- 
quietude,  and  the  younger  trying  to  think  lefs 
of  a  certain  fentimental  v^anderer,  by  fluting, 
to  ufe  her  own  phrafe,  with  all  tt\e  fmartefl  men 
at  Bath,  who  affiduoufly  furround  her — Geral- 
dine  remains  in  perfeft  retirement  at  a  lodging 
near  Richmond,  with  her  children,  and  only 
two  fervants — ftie  has  no  carriage  with  her,  and 
never  goes  out  butt  ©  walk  with  her  little  ones; 
and  having,  wifely,  declined  all  vifitors,  (he 
has  not,  1  hope,  yet  learned  that  all  Verney's 
tewn-carriages  and  horfes,  cxctrpt  only  a  polt- 
chaife,  which  fo.'nchody  re-pufcbafed  for  him, 
are  lately  fold  —  Ae  is  himfelf  gone  into  York- 
fhire,  whither  heabfolutely  rcfufed  to  fufter  her 
to  go,  when  country  ar  was  prefcribed  for  her 
health,  and  it  is  reported,  and  I  feur  with 
truth,  that  he  has  eftabliihed  an  hunt  there,  of 
which  he  bears  the  great  ft  {hare  of  theeKpvnce, 
though  it  is  faid    to   be   at  the  joint  charge  of 

himfelf. 


DESMOND.  233 

himfclf,  Lprd  Newminfter,  and  Sir  James 
Dcybournc.  The  arrar.'^jement  at  Moorefly 
Park,  is  r:,id  (Apd  ftill  1  believe  with  too  much 
foundation)  to  confift  of  three  of  the 
molt ^  celebrated  courtezans,  who  are  at  this 
tiii-.c  the  moft  fafliionable,  and  of  courfe,  the 
mofl:  expcnfive — Every  one  of  thefe  illuftriouc 
perfonagcs  appropriating  one  of  thefe  ladies 
for  the  t;mc  of  thtir  refidencc.  This  has  been 
going  on  ever  fince  the  month  of  January,  and 
is  to  £n*l  only  v>'ith  the  hunting  feafon  —  You 
will  wonder,  perhaps,  how  I  got  at  all  this  iil- 
telligcncf,  but  my  folichude  for  Geraldine 
conquers  the  diCike  I  have  to  enter  into  that 
fort  of  (t;nvcrfaiion  whith  is  called  goflippingj 
and  I  happen  to  have  an  nc'cjujiintance  at  W— , 
a  fpinftrr,  fomewhat  pafl'eci  the  bloom  of  life^ 
and  who,  very  much  ag^ainO  her  inclination^, 
h?.s  hitherto  remained  uniapped  by  carelTcs, 
un-b-vkr-t  iii'  .yfion  by  ttuder  falutaiions  *, 
hut,  though  without  fortune,  ihe  is  of  a  goo4 
fr'.rni'y,  ar.i.]  being  illii-d  to  f^.>roe  gre<!t  people, 
and  aaving  coiuriytd  to  cmke  hert'eif  uf.fui  to 
ctherr,  jQie  is  received  alternately  at  feveral 
fiiHiionible  houfes.  v^'liere  (he  flutters  the  lords 
and  ladies  ;  fits  with  the  young  niiHes  while 
their  makers  are  with  them  ;  and  reads  aloud 
to  the  blind  or  Tick,  dowager,  who  loves  a  newf. 
paper  or  a  novel;  but  though  {he  is  thus  three 
parts  of  the  year  among  her  iiluftrious  friends, 
(he    chufes    always  to    referve   a    home,  which 

happens  to  be  a  fmall,  neat  lodging  at  W , 

where  ihe  has   been   many  years  an  occaflonal 
inhabitant. 

Now  it  chanced,  that  when  firft  Geraldine 
was  married,  and  came  a  lovely,  blooming 
creature   of  ei^htee^i    into  this  neighbourhood, 

*  Sterne. 

this 


234  DESMOND. 

this  Mif,  Elford,  was  among  her  carlieft  vifi- 
tors. — It  is  faid,  that  a  young  and  handfome 
married  woman  is  generally  an  objed  of  diflike 
to  ladies  who  are 

*'  Wiiheiingon    the  virgin  thorn, 
'*  In  fir.gie  bletrtdnels.*" 

but  Mifs  Elford,  as  if  to  contradi£l  Co  invidious 
an  alTertion,  was  feen  to  take  a  peculiar  and 
lively  intereft  in  the  welfare  of  her  dear  friend 
Mrs.  Verney  (for  a  dear  friend  fhe  foon  be- 
came), and  her  good  humour,  which  had  be- 
fore been  but  little  remarked,  became  now  very 
eminent — the  change  was  accounted  tor  partly 
by  the  acquifition  (he  had  made  of  fo  pleafant  an 
acquaintance  as  Mrs.  Verney,  whofe  houfe 
within  a  mile  of  the  town,  was  extremely  con- 
venient to  her,  and  whofe  coach  and  fervants 
were  rJways  at  her  command,  and  partly  by  the 
fuppofed  attention  of  a  very  handfon\e  clergy- 
man, who  having  two  years  befoie  given  up  a 
feliowfhip  at  Oxlord  to  marry  a  very  pretty  wo- 
man, whom  he  paffionately  loved,  had,  within 
twelve  months  \oH  her,  and  now  had  accepted 
a  curacy  at  a  diftance  from  the  fcene  of  his  pad 
hanpinefs  and  misiortune,  and  in  atten-.ptiiig  to 
dinipate  his  grief,  had  mixed  much  in  the  fo- 
ciety  of  the  neighbourhood,  and  had  appeared 
particularly  ple?.K-d  in  that  of  Mils  Klford,  who 
paffcd  for  ''a  mo  it  fenfible  woman." — When 
Verney  fettled  at  Linwell,  this  gentleman,  Mr. 
Mulgrave,  was  continually  at  the  houfe  where 
Mifs  Elford  ficquently  refided  alfo,  and  where 
(efpecially  after  Verney  gave  him  a  living, 
whicti  happened  to  fall  at  that  time)  it  was  fup- 
poftd  iheir  intended  uniun  was  rapidly  advanc- 
ine  to  its  conclufion  j  when  fuddenly,  Mr» 
Mulgrave  grew  cold  and  referved,  and  the  mor- 
*  Sbr»kefpeare. 

tified 


DESMOND.  235 

tified  Mifs  El  ford  loft  once  more  the  profpe6l  of 
an  immediate  and  fortunate  eftablifhment. 

Though,  till  then,  Mrs.  Verney  had  been, 
in  her  cftimation,  the  beft,  fweeteft,  dearelt 
Ero»t..r.  :.,  »i,„  ,.,,.ij,  .u^  ia,/r-^<Tive  fondntfs  of 
Mils  Klford  declined  from  this  moment ;  and  aS 
fhe  could  not  fuffer  herfelf  to  think  that  (he  had 
been  premature  in  reckoning  on  the  imprellion 
file  had  made  on  Mr.  Mulgrave,  or  that  fhe 
wanted  the  captivating  talents  neceirary  to  fix 
that  impreffion  when  it  tvas  made-,  ihe  took  it 
into  her  head  that  Mr.  Mulgrave  had  conceived 
an  improper  aftedlion  for  Mrs.  Verney,  and 
though  there  was  probably  not  the  leaft  grounds 
for  this  idea,  fhe  has  cherilhed  it  ever  fince, 
and  confequencly  hates  Geraldine,  with  an  in- 
veterate malignity,  which  no  other  caufe  could 
raife,  or  could  fuftain — Still,  however,  ihe  con- 
ceals this  hateful  fentiment  under  the  fembiance 
of  friend(hip— She  laments,  moft  pathetically, 
the  hard  fate  of  "  that  fwect  woman" — Sheds 
crocodile  tears  over  the  ruinous  extravagancies 
of  Verney  (of  which,  however,  (he  has  always 
the  earlieft  intelligence),  and  tells  every  body 
iiow  long  fhe  fore  fa  w  thde  fatal  propenfitics  in 
the  hufband  of  her  charming  friend  before  they 
broke  out — talks  of  the  vanity  of  all  fublunary 
plans  of  happincfs,  and  thanks  her  good  God  I 
—for  having  placed  her  lot,  where  (he  is  not  ex- 
pofed  to  theic  heart-rending  viciffitudes. —  This 
good  little  gentlewomen,  then,  great  part  of 
whofe  life,  1  really  believe,  pafles  in  colleding 
and  difperfuig  accounts  of  the  failures,  failings, 
faults,  and  follies  of  her  acquaintance,  has  been 
of  late  more  than  ufually  active  ;  and  as  fhe 
finds  i  liften  to  her  with  a  greater  degree  of  at- 
tention than  1  ufed  to  afford  her,  and  is  i\pt 
awaie  of  the  motive  I  have  for  doing  fOf  1  fee 

Ihe 


236  DESMOND. 

(he  entertains  a  tboufand  wandering  fancies  re- 
lative to  my  afliduity,   and  eagerly  exerts  herfelf 

to  obtain  its  continuance 1  am  a   widower, 

about  her  own  age — I  have  children  who  may 
want  the  care  of  fuch  a  difcreet  Derron— I  m^y 
^,:£jr  j^r.L^  a  liiiionai  companion  —  Of  alithele 
confiderations,  it  is  really  wonderful  to  remark 
the  eifecft:,  and  to  obferve  he.  .v  amiable,  difcreet, 

and  realbnable  my  prude  affects  to  be 1  am 

forry  to  encourage  hopes,  vvhicii  I  am  afraid  I 
cannot  even  for  your  fervice,  my  dear  Defmond, 
realize,  but  as  I  have  no  other  means  of  obtain- 
ing fuch  intelligence  as  you  war:*:,  and  fuch  as 
indeed  itppears  to  me  abfalutely  necelfary  to 
enable  eithes-  of  us  to  nillft  in  difpcriui^^  rhofe 
heavy  clouds  of  calamity  that  ,are  continuaily 
han^itig  over  her,  for  whom  we  ?re  both  fo 
atixious—l  hope  I  am  jul^ili'd  in  availing  my- 
(cif  of  the  infuriiiation  ('■/  readily  given  me  by 
my  neighbour—I  wifli  I  co'.ild  add  th-it  ti^e  pic- 
ture I  have  6rA\va  of  Verney's  ccnducl,  owes 
its  darkeft  touches  to  the  fnarp  hands  of  malig- 
nant envy,  through  which  it  has  paiT^d — But 
on  enquiring  of  other  people,  who  are  quite 
difmterefted,  and  who  really  admire  and  regret 
the  lovely  victim  of  his  follies,  the  circumftances 
and  proceedings  of  Vcrney  are  reprefented  in 
the  fame  way. 

,  I  have  had  within  this  laft  week  fome  fymp- 
toms  that  threaten  a  return  of  the  gout  (if  gout 
it  be)  that  has  fo  long  hung  about  me,  and  as 
my  friend  Banks,  on  whofefkill  1  have  a  great 
reliance,  perfxfts  in  faying,  that  my  future  en- 
joyment of  life  depends  on  my  having  a  regular 
£t,  i  (hall,  if  thefe  flying  complaints  are  not 
foon  dilfipated,  go  again  to  Bath,  as  foon  as  my 
lent  corn  is  in  th^  ground,  which  three  weeks 
will  complete— We  have  hitherto  had  a  re- 
markable 


DESMOND.  237 

markable  fine  feafon,  and  my  farming  is  likely 
to  go  on  molt  piofperoufly — Harry  is  doing  well 
at  Winchci*!,  and  the  maftcrs  r.Ture  me  he  will 
be  a  very  citvt;r  fellow — I  (hall  take  Louifa  with 
me,  and  put  her  to  fchool  at  Bath  for  the  time 
1  continue  there,  which  will  probably  be  three 
months — Long,  long  before  that  time,  my  dear 
Defmond,  1  hope  to  hail  your  return  to  Eng- 
land, and  to  tell  you  perfonally,  how  truly  I  am 

Your  attached  and  faithful, 

ERASMUS  BETHEL. 


LETTER      XX  VL 

TO    MR.     BETHEL. 

Laufanne,  April  lo'h,  ^ypr. 
YOUR  letter,  with  a  packet  'of  banks, 
reached  me  here,  my  friend,  by  fhe  hands  ef 
our  old  acquaintance  Aflibv,  who  t:ok  th*cm  up 
on  his  way,  and  delivered  them  f^.fely  to  me 
three  days  ago — How  fliall  I,  how  nu^ht  I  to 
reply  to  fuch  friendly  enquiries,  fuch  generous 
offers  as  your's  ? — I  can  find  no  words  that  an- 
fwer  my  idea  of  all  1  ought  to  fay  to,  thank, 
you— none  that  feem  adequate  to  excufe  that 
w.int  of  confidence,  perhaps  you  will  think  of 
gratitude,  which  I  muft  feem  to  fhew,  when 
I  fay,  tiiat  though  I  am  very  certainly  noft  un- 
happy, it  is  impoiTible  fir  me  to  avail  myfelf  of 
your  friend  (hip  towards  the  alhviition  of  my 
u.ihappjnef?,  impoirible  for  me  even  to  commur 
picate  Its  iburce — Notice  not,  therefore,  my 
defpondence,  my  dear  Bethel,  its  caufe  cannot 


238  DESMOND. 

be  removed,  and  whatever  may  be  its  confe- 
quences,  be  aflured  that  I  deferve  them  all — 
Every  word  I  write  on  this  fubjedt  gives  me  in- 
exprejf!ible  pain,  and  therefore,  I  know  you  will 
pardon  my  befeeching  you  not  to  renew  the  to- 
pic, aflu ring  you rfelf,  that  if  at  Any  future  time,  I 
can  properly  take  advantage  of  your  counfel,  and 
your  friendfhip,  there  is  not  on  earth  the  man 
to  whom  I  would  fo  readily  apply. 

I  will  not,  hovvever,  in  any  inftance  deceive 
you.  My  late  accident,  my  prefent  ftatc  of 
health,  are  neither  of  them  thecaufeof  my  re- 
maining abroad — The  uneafinefs  1  fufFer  is  not 
folely  on  account  of  Gerald ine,  though  your 
laft  letter  has  encreafed  and  rendered  almoft  in- 
fupportable  the  folicitude  I  feel  for  her — yet 
amidft  all  the  anguiiTi  with  which  my  mind 
dwells  on  the  calamities  that  furround  her,  it  is 
moft  foothing  and  confolatory  to  hear  from 
vourfelf  that  flie  has  found  a  friend  in  you  j 
and  that,  being  a  convert  to  the  united  power 
of  goodnefs,  underftanding,  and  beauty,  you 
have  been  taught  by  their  invincible  attraction^ 
to  pity,  and  even  to  approve  the  attachment 
you  were  To  lately  difpofcd  to  condemn  and  ridi- 
cule, and  which  you  fo  lately  and  undefervcdly 
gave  me  credit  for  having  conquered. 

In  lodgings  at  Sheen,  with  only  her  children 
with  her  ! — one  of  the  houfes,  that  in  which 
fhe  ufed  to  delight,  fold — the  other,  the  ancient 
houfe  of  her  hufband's  family,  inhabited  by  his 
courtezans,  and  his  diflblute  companions  ! 

Yet  amid  all  this,  inftead  of  returning  evil 
for  evil,  what  is  her  conduct  ? — (he  goes  to  a 
cheap  retirement ;  ihe  is  occupied  only  in  the 
care  of  her  children  ;  inftead  of  the  retaliation 
which  wc  fee  fo  ufually  adopted  by  young  and 

beautiful 


DESMOND,  239 

beautiful  women,  whofe  hufbands  negleiSl  and 
ill  treat  them,  it  feems  as  if  her  patient  fvveet- 
nefs  encreafed  in  proportion  to  the  provocation 
ftie  receives.  Accurfed  be  he,  who  (hall  at- 
tempt to  degrade  a  charadler  fo  noble,  to  fully 
a  mind  fo  angelic — Never  will  I  be  that  man- 
But  if  I  continue  in  this  ftrain,  I  (hall  get  into 
thofe  regions  of  heroics,  that  are,  you  hy^  be- 
yond the  reach  of  your  reafonable  and  calm 
comprehenfion ;  fo  we  will  talk  of  fomething 
elfej  and  m  order  to  convince  you  that  I  can 
occafionally  play  the  Mentor,  inftead  of  being 
always  your  Telemachus,  I  am  going  to  give 
you  fomething  very  like  a  lecture — My  dear 
Bethel,  vk'hy  do  you  fuffet  thar  Sir  Robert 
Stamford  to  occupy  and  inflame  to  refentment 
a  mind  like  your's — When  you  regret,  that  the 
place  where  I  fiilt  faw  Geraldine,  and  where  I 
have  fo  often  repeated 

"  Benedetto  fia  'Igiorna,  e'l  mefe,  e  Tanno 
E  la  flagion  e'l  tetnpo,  e  I'ora  e'l  punto, 
E'l  bel  paele,  e'l  loco  ov'io  fui  giunto 
Da  duo  begli  occhi,  che  legato  m'hanno.*''' 

I  underftand  all  your  friendly  emotions,  and 
rejoice  that  you  enter  with  fuch  enthufiafm  into 
thofe  feelings  which,  till  you  were  more  ac- 
quainted with  Geraldine,  you  treated  as  roman- 
tic puerilities — but  when  the  fungus  growth  of 
this  arrogant  upftart  has  fo  much  fhare  in  your 
indignation,  1  am  hurt,  that  the  elevated  fpirit 
of  my  friend  can  be  ruffled  by  a  bein^  fo  utterly 
contemptible. 

**  Small  thiagt  make  mean  men  proud. "f" 

*  Petrarch. 
"f  ^hakelpeanlb 

Caa 


240  O    E    S    M    O    N    D.    . 

Can  you  then  wonder,  that  to  fuch  a  man,  his 
fudden,  and,  as  he  well  knows,  his  undeferved 
exaltation  is  matter  of  oftentaiious  triumph  r 
but  does  it  make  him  refpedtable  in  the  world  f 
and  does  not  even  the  bafeft  part  of  that  world, 
while  it  courts,  defpife  him  ?— Leave  him  then, 
my  friend,  to  ^wdjS.^  in  fwinifti  excefs,  fums, 
which  he  has  earned  by  doing  dirty  work,  at 
the  expence  of  thofe  who  are  now  called  the 
''  fwinifh  multitude,*"  hundreds  of  whom 
m^'ht  be  fed  by  the  fuperfluities  of  his  luxurious 
tab!':  —  l^eave  him  to  the  wretched  adulation  of 
the  favviiing  parafue,  who  can  ftoop  to  admipc"^ 
his  Rne  places,  and  be  repaid  by  the  delicacies 
of  h'ls  table,  i^eave  him  to  be  an  example  of 
hbvi?  liitle  merit  is  required  in  oar  country  to 
reach  the  higheft  poftS  of  proht  and  confidence 
— an  example  ofa  placeman  filling  uCelefs  places 
- — of  a  penhoner  paid  for  the  mifchief  he  has 
airift.ed  ia  doing  to  the  nation,  whole  govi^rnors 
have  thus  rewarded  him— But  let  \\o\  your  mind, 
polTeifinj:,  as  it  doe?,  all  the  upright  principles, 
the  generous  independence,  that  once  ch'araiSte- 
rifed  the  Englilh  genlkman,  be  difturbed  by 
the  difguftrng  infolence  of  fuch  a  being,  while 
y6u  feel,  that  the  humblelt  labourer  who  culti- 
vates your  ground,  is  a  more  honeft  and  a  more 
refpcctable  man. 

Ih  reading  the  book  you  fent  me,  which  1 
have  yet  had  only  time  to  do  fuperficially,  I  am 
fdr.cibly  (Iruck  with  truth<!,  thai  either  were  not  ' 
fee-n  before,  or  were  (by  men,  who  did  not  wifh 
to  acknowledge  them)  carefully  reprelled  ;  they 
are  bluntly,  fometimes  coarfely  delivered,  but 
it  is  oiien  impoflible  to  refufe  immediate  LuTent 

■\  Vide  Mr.  Burke's  dclcription  of  ibe  people. 

to 


DESMOND.  241 

to  thofe  which  appear  the  boldeft  ;  im|ioiTib!c  to 
deny,  that  many  others  have  been  accedi-d  to, 
when  they  were  Ipoken  by  men,  to  whofe  au- 
thority we  have  paid  a  kind  of  prefcHptive  obe- 
dience, though  they  now  liave  called  forth  fuch 
clamour  and  abufe  againft  the  author  of  "  the 
Rights  of  Man." — My  other  letters  from  Eng- 
land are  filled   with  accounts  of  the   rage  and 
indignation  which  this   publication  has  excited 
— I  pique  myfelf,  however,  on  having,  in  my 
former  letter,  cited  againft  Burke  a  fentence  of 
Locke,  which  contradi6is  as  forcibly  as  Paine 
has  contradicted  one  of  his  moft  abfurd  pofitions 
— I   know,  that  where  found    argum  nt  fail'^, 
abxifivc  declamatio  1  is  always  fubftiiuted,  and 
that  it  often  filences  wh-^re  it '  annot  convince — 
I   know  too,  that  where  the   politics  are  ob- 
noxious, rccourle  is  always  had  topcrfonal  de- 
traction ;  1  therefore  wonder  not,,  that  on  your 
fide  the  wa^er,  thofe  whoareavcrfe  to  the  politics 
of  Paine,   will  declaim  inftead  of  arguing;  and 
thofe  who   feel    the  force  of  his  abilities,  will 
villify  his  private  life,  as  if  that  was  any  thing 
to  the  purpofe;   i    do,  however,   wonder,  that 
thefe  angry   2nt;igon:fts  do  not   recolle6l,  that 
the  clamour  they   raife,   ferves   only   to  prove 
their  fears  ;  and  that  'i  the  writings  of  this  man 
are,  as  they  would  reprefent,  deftitute  of  truth 
and    found    argnmeiu,   they    mnii   be    quickly 
configiicd  TO  contempt  and  oblivion,  and  could 
neither  be  th;  mfelves  t^^e   fubjedl:  of  alarm,  or 
render  their   author  art  object   of  invcfli(y;irioa 
and  abhorrence  ;  but  the  truth  is  that,  whatever 
may  be  his  private  life,   [with  which  I  cannot 
iiHtierftaiul,  that  the  public  ha\e  any  conceiw) 
he  comes  as  a  {jolltical  wricer,  under  the  dcfcrip- 
♦.if-n  given  of  a  controvertill  bv  the  acute  author, 
Vol.  I.  M        '  to 


242  DESMOND. 

to  whom  Monfieur  d'Hauteviile  has  fo  terrible 
an  averfion. 

*'  A  t'on  jamais  vu  un  plus  abominable 
homme  ?  il  expofe  les  chofes  avec  un  fidelity 
fi  odieufe  ;  il  met  fous  les  yeux  le  pour  &  le 
■centre  avec  un  imparlialite  fi  lache  ;  il  eft  d'un 
clairte  fi  intolerable,  qu'il  met  les  gens  qui 
n'ont  que  le  fens  commun,  en  etat  de  douter,  & 
niemc  de  juger.*" 

I  frequent  no  fociety  here  willingly,  as  I  find 
my  mind  by  no  means  in  a  ftate  to  attend  to 
the  common  occurrences  of  life  without  fatigue  ; 
and  that  both  my  fpirits  and  health  fufFer,  by 
the  exertion  which  a  man  is  obliged  to  make  in 
company  for  which  he  does  not  care  a  ftraw. 
However,  as  Afhby  had  been  very  obliging  to 
me  in  bringiixg  my  pacquets  from  Marfcilles, 
and  depended  on  me  for  introdutSlion  here,  I 
went  with  him  yefterday  to  the  houfe  of  a  man 
of  fome  confideration,  where  there  is  generally 
the  beft  company  of  the  place  afiembled,  and 
where  there  then  happened  to  be,  among  many 
others,  French  and  Swifs,  two  Englifhmen, 
one,  a  Mr.  Cranbourne,  who  has  accompanied, 
in  their  travels,  feveral  men  of  rank,  and  now 
is  returning  to  England  with  a  Lord  Fording- 
bridge,  whofe  minority  is  juft  ended,  and  who 
is  returning  to  hiiJ-land  to  take  his  feat  in  the 
houfe  of  peers. 

Mr.  Cranbourne,  who  waf,  I  find,  bred  to 
the  law,  has  all  that  fupercilious  and  dogmatical 
manner,  which   an  education  for  the  bar  very 

*  V/as  there  ever  iuch  an  abominable  ferow?  he  expofesthe 
trmh  fo  (dioufly;  he  les  before  our  eyes  the  arguments  oa 
both  fides  with  Itch  honible  imp;irtialiiy  ;  he  is  Co  intolerably 
clear  and  I'lain,  that  he  enables  people  •uibi  have  enly  commcn 
Jeaje,  ts  di.i/t,  ar.d  iv.-ti  ti  !u./^v.— Voltaire, 

frequently 


D    E    S    M    O    N"    O.  243 

frequently  gives — He  afTcrts  with  violence,  ami 
maintains  witti  obftinacy;  and  though  the  wnrld 
doubted  either  of  the  pnjfundity  of  his  jucij- 
mcnt,  or  the  power  of  his  eloquence,  fo  t'ut 
he  was  unfeed  and  unretaincd  during  the  couiic 
of  thofe  years  that  he  called  himfclf  a  couiilel- 
lor,  he  is  fo  perfe(5tly  convinced  of  his  emintncc 
in  both,  that  he  is  on  all  occ^fions,  not  a  pleader, 
but  a  decider,  and  fits  felf-ele£led  on  the  judg- 
rnent  feat,  on  every  occafion  of  controverfy— 
His  travels,  without  diverting  him  of  the  que- 
rulous afperity  of  the  bar,  have  made  him  a 
folemn  coxcomb  in  every  other  fcience  ;  and  he 
prides  himfelf  on  having  formed  his  prefent 
pupil  on  his  own  model,  and  declares,  that  he 
will  make  a  fuperior  figure  as  an  orator  in  the 
Britifli  fenate. 

The  boy,  who  has  thus  been  taught  to  con- 
fider  himlelf  as  a  miracle  of  elegance  and  eru- 
dition, unites  the  flippant  airs  of  a  young  man 
*<  of  a  certain  rank"— —with  the  fenfntious 
pertnefs  of  an  attorney's  clerk  juft  out  of  his 
time — I  found  him,  on  our  entrance,  Handing 
in  the  midft  of  a  circle,  declaiming  againft-  the 
French  government;  and  pouring  fortn  a  warm 
eulcgium  on  Mr.  Burke — The  lordling  aiFe(£ls 
an  Italian  accent,  and  to  have  forgotten  the  harlh 
tones  of  his  native  laniuage,  when  he  dt  ians 
to  fpeak  it — '*  Pray*"  f^^'d  he,  *'  tell  me  you, 
who  know,  what  is  this  other  book—This  an- 
fwer  to  Hurke,  that  I  have  been  bored  with— 
fomebody  wanted  me  td  sead  it,  but  I  had  neither 
patience  nor  inclination — 1\  (;;ems  from  the  ac- 
count other  people  have  given  .Tie,  to  be  very 
feditiou"-;  I  wonder  they  don't  purufh  the  au- 
thor, who,  they  fay,  is  quite  a  low  fo.t  of  fel- 
low  What  does  he  mean  by  his  Rights  oi 

M  2  Man, 


244  B    E    S    M    0    N    *. 

jVIan,  and  his  equality? — What  wretched  and 
dangerous  doifirine  to  diffeminate  among  the 
.lazzaroni*  of  England,  where  they  are  always 
ready  enough  to  ip.urmur  againft  their  betters? 
I  hope  our  government  will  take  care  to  fdence 
-fuch  a  demagogue,  before  he  puts  It  into  the 
iieads  of  les  gens  fans  culotes-^  in  England,  to  do 
as  they  have  done  m  France,  and  even  before  be 
gets  feme  of  the  ragged  rogues  hanged — They 
rights !  poor  devils,  who  have  neither  fhiris 
nor  breeches  '" 

You  have  accufed  me  of  laying  by  in  com- 
pany, even  where  the  converfation  has  turned 
'«n  topics  that  intereft  me  moft..  I  own  i  had 
.done  lb  now,  partly  from  depreflion  of  fpirits, 
.and  partly  from  the  reluctance  I  felt  to  engage 
in  "  wordy  war"  againft  prejudice  and  ablur- 
-dity. — 1  now,  however,  venturrd  to  enquire  of 
Lord  Fordingbi  idgc,  whether  thefe  men  whom 
he  called  Inzzaroni,  might  not  be  urged  to  re- 
volt by  thole  very  miferies  which  expofed  them 
to  his  contempt?  and  whether  fuch  extreme 
^Xiverty  and  wretchednefs  did  not  fhew  the  ne- 
cefTity  of  foaie  alteration  in  the  government 
where  -vhey  exiHed  ? — If  government  be  allowed 
K»  be  for  ib.e  benefit  of  the  governed,  not  the 
governor?,  fiirely  thtfe  complaints  fhould  be 
beard.  '"•  Whv,  what  would  you  have  govern- 
ment do  ?"  aniwcrcd  he — "  Hovvc-n  it  prevent 

fuch   fort   of  things  ?■ Ou/'s,   for    example, 

againft  which  th^fc  ftijpidj'iogs  are  complaining 
in  libellous  p.imphLf>  and  pipers,  by  what 
mean?  can  it  <ihv  .i<'-  thefe  difcon tents  ? — 'Would 
you  have  thu  >.liniiltr  keep  a  fitap-Iliop,  to  fup- 


*  i-*23aronl,  a  v.-orii   rlef^riptiie  of  people   reduced   to  the 
•!Jtm-)!.t  f.oveil"  ai'd  wicltiiccitK  is. 

ply 


DESMOND.  24.5 

ply  the  fans  cuktes  with  thofe  nccefiaries  gratis  F 
—This  convincing  argum?iit,  which  tiie  whole 
company  apfilauded  with  a  loud  laugh,  gave  my 
right  honourable  adverfary  luch  confidence  in 
his  own  powers,  that,  without  perniittmg  me 
to  reply,  he  proceeded. — "  I  inlift  upon  it,  that 
there  is  no  caule  of  complaint  in  England  ;  no- 
body is  poor,  unlefs  itbe  by  their  own  fault;  anil 
nobody  is  opprefTed  j  as  to  the  common  people, 
the  mub,  or  whatever  you  pleaje  to  call  them; 
what  were  they  born  lor  but  to  work  ?  And 
here  comes  a  fellow  and  tells  them  about  tiieir 
rights — They  have  no  rights — they  can  have 
none,  but  to  labour  for  their  fuperiors,  and  if 
they  are  idle,  'tis  their  own  faults,  and  not  the 
fault  o(  the  conftilution,  in  which  there  are  no 
imperfe£lions,  and  which  cannot  by  any  con- 
trivance be  made  better." 

'*  Your  lorufhip,"  anfwered  1,  "  whofe  com- 
prehenfive  mind  prob*bly  looks  forward  to  th^ 
time  when  you  will  yourfelf  make  one  of  that 
illuftricus  body  that  Mr.  Burke  defcribes  as  the 
Corinthian  pillar  of  poliflied  focieiy,  has,  1  dare 
fay,  in  travelling  through  other  countries,  made 
the  government  of  your  own  your  peculiar  ftudy, 
and  by  contrafting  it  with  thoie  you  have  (een^ 
you  have  learned  to  appreciate  iis  value — That 
it  is  fuperior  to  moll,  perhaps,  to  all  of  them, 
1  am  willing  to  allow,  yet  i  cannot  pronounce 
it  to  be  without  imperfections,  where  i  obferve 
fuch  dreadful  contrails  in  the  condition  of  the 
people  under  it — Who  can  walk:  through  the 
ftreets  of  London  without  being  (hocked  with 
them  ? — Here.,  a  man,,  who  polltires  an  im- 
menfe  income  which  has  been  g  vtn  him  tor  his 
fervile  attendance,  or  his  venal  voice,  an  in- 
come, which  is  paid/rom  the  b.urthenfome  im- 

pofts 


240  !»  'E    S    .VI    O    N    D. 

poils  laid  on  the  people,  is  feen  driving  along 
in  a  fplendid  equipage  ;  his  very  fervants  cloath- 
ed  in  purple  and  fine  linen,  and  teftifying,  bj 
their  looks,  that  they  *  fare  fumptuoufly  every 
day' — 1  here,  extended  on  the  pavement,  lies 
one  of  thofe  very  people  whofe  labour  has  pro- 
bably contributed  to  the  fupport  of  this  luxury, 
begging  vil>efewithal  to  continue  his  degraded 
exiftence,  of  the  difgufted  pairenger,  who  turns 
from  the  fpe£lacle  of  his  fqualid  wretchednefs 
— In  our  daily  prints,  this  fhocking  inequality 
is  not  lefs  ftriking — In  one  paragraph,  we  are  re- 
galed with  an  eulogium  on  the  innumerable 
bleiiings,  the  abundant  profperity  of  our  coun- 
try J  in  the  next,  we  read  the  melancholy  and 
rrrrt^ryirg  Wi}  of  m!mbcr]i.r«  unhappy  debtors, 
who,  in  vain,  folicit,  from  time  to  time,  the 
mercy  of  the  legifiature,  and  who  are  left  by  the 
powers  who  tan  relieve  them,  to  linger  out  tt-.eir 
unprofitable  lives,  and  to  perifh,  through  penury 
and  difealie,  in  the  moft  loathfome  continementsj 
condemned  to  feel 

*  The  horrors  of  a  gloomy  paol. 


llBpiiiid  and  unheard,  where  niilery  moans  ; 
Whtie  fjcknefs  pine^^  where  third  and  hunger  burn, 
And  poo!  misfortune,  feels  the  lafti  of  guilt.*' 

To-day,  we  fee  difplayed  in  tinfel  panegyric, 
thie  fuperb  trappings,  the  gorgeous  ornanients, 
the  iewels  of  immeofe  value,  with  which  the 
illiifli  SOU";  perfonagc5  of  our  land  amaze  and  ue- 
light  ui — T"o- morrow,  we  read  d  a  poor  man, 
an  ancient  woman,  a  (ieferted  child,  who  were 
found  dead  in  luch  or  fuch  alleys  or  flrcet, 
*  Juppofcd  lo  have   pcrifhed  through  want,  and 

*  Thomfoin. 

the 


D    H    S    M    O    N    D.  2:\.J- 

the  inclemency  of  the  weather  ;'  and  is  it  pof*-> 
fible  to  help  exclaiming. 


-'  lake  phyfic  pomp— 


Expofe  thyiielf  to  feel  what  wretches  fee  I  ; 
S«  (halt  thou  ni;\ke  ihe  I'uptrflux  to  ihein. 
And  (hew  the  heavens  more  jurt.*" 

The  young  peer,  who  had  (hesvn  more  pa.- 
tience  than  I  expe(5led,  now  interrupted  me — 
"  All  this  is  very  fine,  Sir,"  faid  he,  '*  but  give 
me  leave  to  fay,  that  it  is  all  common  place  de- 
clamation, (that  was  true  enough)  and  does  not 
go  to  prove,  that  the  form  of  our  government 
is  defective — mifery  exilts  every  where,  and  i<i 
intended  toexiil;  even  according  to  your  own 
qiiotadon,  it  is  allowed  — 

*  And  0>«w  the  htavens  mor*  juft.' 

It  is  heaven  fo  decides  then,  and  by  no  means 
the  fault  of  government — It  is  the  lot  of  hu- 
manity, and  cannot  be  changed."  **  liius  it 
is,"  anfwered  1,  *'  that  we  dare  to  arraign  our 

God  for  the  crime?  and  follies  of  man that. 

God,  who  certainly  made  none  of  his  creatures- 
to  be  miferable,  nor  called  any  into  exiftence 
only  to  live  painfully,  anJ  pcriPa  vvietchedly  ; 
but  when  the  blind  fcinlhnefs  of  man  dif- 
tf  ibutes  what  Providence  has  given  ;  when  ava- 
rice accumulates,  and  power  u Turps,  fome  have 
fuperfluities,  which  contribute  nothing  to  their 
happinefs,  others  hardly  enough  to  give  them 
the  means  of  a  tolerable  exiftence — Were,  there, 
indeed,  a  fure  appeal  to  the  mercies  of  the  rich, 
the  calamities  of  the  poor  might  be  Icfs  inio- 

*  Shakeri>cace. 

Icrable  j 


248  D    li    S    M    O    N    D. 

Icrable  j  but  it  is  too  cerfain,  that  higli  aiSucncc 

•^and  pro.'perity  have  a  dirtit  tendency  to  harden 

the  tcinptr.      How    few  do  we  meet  with   who 

can  feci  lor  miCeiics  ihey  Cejmut  imagine,  and 

are  Ture  they  can   nevti  cxper  ence  ? How 

many,  who  ha\e  heans  fo  indurated  by  tlicir 
town  fviccefs  or  fortune,  that  diey  are  infenfible 
to  geuerohly,  and  even  tojiiftice? — f-low  many 
nK)re,  who  wotild,  perhaps,  be  in  fc^me  degree 
alive  to  the  fcnf.ttiot.s  of  ln-'maiiity,  if  their  bvi- 
fuief;;,  or  iheir  plciifuies  billowed  them  time  to 
thmic,  but  who  are  (o  occupied  by  either  the 
«rne  or  the  othtr,  and  fo  litile  ii.  the  habit  of 
attendir.g  to  difagrceiibie  fi;bjc<ib,  that  they 
flirink  Ironi  the  det^ul  (.f  poverty  and  lorrow, 
and- would  be  dIfguHed  with  thofe  who  fiiuuld 
attempt  to  intrude  with  fuch  images 

'   On  ffirn  j.'.)lit<.  ?' 

"  Well,  Sir,"  ciied  my  lord,  in  whore  hands 
the  reft  of  the  corripany  continued  to  Jcave  an 
argument  in  which  they  thought  he  had  greati.y 
the  advantage — ••*  Well,  Sir!  and  what  then  ? 
—Have  we  not  laws,  by  which  our  poor  are 
amply,   magnihcently  provided  for  ?" 

"  That  they  were  intended  to  be  fc,  I  be- 
lieve," anfwertd  1,  "  but  how  thofe  laws  are 
perverted,  let  the  frequent,  the  meritorious, 
but  unfuccefsful  attempts  to  amend  them,  bear 

witncfs- Their   abufe  ;    the    heavint-fs    with 

^^■hich  they  prefs  on  one  pidt  of  the  comoiunitv, 
without  relieving  the  other,  is  ojie  of  the  greateit 
evils  we  corap'a.in  of;  but  here,  as  in  twenty 
other  inftance^-,  every  attempt  at  redrefs  h 
filenced  by  the  ncli  me  tangcre^  which  our  con- 
fiitution   has  been  made  to  fay,  and  which  has 

been 


B    F   S    M    O    N    Dj  249 

been  echoed,  without  enquiry,  by  all  who  have 
either  intereft  in  prcftrving  the  inviolability 
even  of  its  acknowlcd<:,ed  defedts,  or  who  have 
been  brought  up  in  prejudices,  that  make  them 
believe  that  our  anceftors  were  Co  much  wifer 
than  we  are  ;  that  it  is  a  fort  of  facrilege  to 
doubt  the  perfe(5tion  of  the  ftrutlurc  they  raifed, 
and  to  imagine  an  edifice  of  greater  ftrength  and 
fimplicity — If  thefe  prejudices  are  enforced  and 
continued — if  every  attempt  to  repair  what  time 
has  injured,  or  amend  what  is  acknowledged  to 
be  defe(fl:ive,  is  oppofed  as  dangerous,  and  exe- 
crated as  impious  ;  let  us  go  on  till  the  building 
falls  upon  our  heads,  and  let  thofe  who  efcape 
the  ruins,  continue  to  meditate  on  the  prodi- 
gious advantage  of  this  holy  reverence,  and 
to  bo.jft  of  the  happinefs  of  being  Englilh- 
men!" 

'*  I  fhould  be  glad,  Sir,  fince  ycu,  at  leaft, 
feem  to  have  none  of  this  refjie.ft,"  faid  the 
young  lawyer,  and  who  now  thought  he  had 
been  filent  long  enough— '•'  I  fhould  be  glad  if 
your  fagacity  would  point  out  fome  of  thofe 
mher  defeds  in  the  ftrudure  of  the  Englifh  con- 
rticution,  which,  doubtlefs,  you  have  difcover- 
ed." 

«  That  is  not  very  difficult,'*  I  replied,  "  and 
I  (hould  begin  by  faying,  that  its  very  founda- 
tion is  defective,  from  the  inequality  of  repre- 
fentation  ;  (were  that  aiTertion  not  atlov/ed  by 
every  one  as  an  incontrovertible  truth  j  and  had 
not  there  been  fuch  repeated  mockeries,  fuch 
frequently  renewed  forces  aifled,  to  amufe  us 
with  pretended  efforts  at  a  reform,  which  never 
were  intended,  nor  can  ever  be  carried  ino  ef- 
fect, but  by  the  unanimous  and  determined  per- 
feverance  of  the  people) — To  drop  the  meta- 
M  5  phor, 


•250  D    E    S    M    O    N    D. 

phor,  let  mc  turn  to  another  very  common  fub- 
jedt  of  acknowledged  complaint — I  mean  the 
penal  laws — laws,  by  which  the  property  and 
the  life  of  the  individual  is  put  on  an  equal 
footing,  and  by  which  murder,  or  a  robbery  to 
the  amount  of  forty  (hillings,  are  offences 
equally  punifhed  witn  death — Is  it  poinble  to 
itRe^  without  horro-,  on  the  numbers  that  are 
every  year  executed,  while  every  year's  expe- 
rierjce  evinces,  that  this  prodigality  of  life  ren- 
ders tlie  punifliment  familiar,  and  prevents  not 
crimes? — Is  there  a  feflion  at  the  Old  Bailey, 
where  boys,  from  fifteen  to  twenty  are  not  con- 
demned ? — boys,  who,  deferted  from  their  in- 
fancy, have  been  driven,  by  ignorance  and  want, 
to  violate  the  laws  of  that  fociety,  which 

*  SSakes  her  encumbered  lap,  and  throw*  them  out.'* 

Why  do  we  boafl;  of  the  mildnefs  and  huma- 
nity of  laws,  whicii  provides  punifhment  inftead 
of  prevention  ?  And  can  we  avoid  feeing,  that 
v;hile  they  give  up  yearly  to  the  hands  of  the 
txecutianer  greater  numbers  than  die  the  vidlims 
of  public  juftice  in  all  the  other  European  coun- 
tries reckoned  together;  we  mufl,  in  fpite  of 
our  national  vanity,  acknowledge,  either,  that 
the  Engliilh  are  the  worft,  and  moft  unprinci- 
pled race  of  men  in  Europe,  or,  that  their  pe- 
nal laws  are  the   moll  fanguinary  of  thofe  of 

any   nation    under  heaven. Attempts  have 

been  made  to  remedy  this  enormity,  which  I 
cannot  help  calKng  a  national  difgrace  ;  but, 
like  every  other  endeavour  at  partial  corre(5tion 
of  abufts,  thefe  humane  eflforts  have  been  baf- 

*  C«wper, 

fled 


DESMOND.  251 

fled  on  the  ufual   principle,   that  nothing   muft 
be   touched,   nothing    muft    be   changed"— —- 
"  Really,  Sir,"  faid   Mr.   Cranbourne,  '*  you 
are     a    molt    able    advocate     for   beggars    and . 
thieves." 

"  At  leaft,  Sir,  I  am  a  difinterefted  one,  for 
I   plead  for  thofe  who  cannot  fee  me — but  it  is 
not  for  beggars  and  thieves,  as  you  are  pleafed 
to  fay,  that  1  plead — it  is  for  the  honor  of  my 
country — for  the  reform  of  the  laws,   which  oc- 
cafion  beggars  and  thieves  to  exili  in  fuch  num- 
bers;  while  we  oftentatioufly   boaft,  that  thofe- 
laws  are  the  beft  in  the  world.     Nor  is  it  only, 
the  penal  laws   that  feem  to  want  alteration; 
allow  me  to  obferve,  that  from   the  continual 
complaints  of  the  defedts  of  our  law,  as  it  re- 
lates to  the  protedion  of  property,  it  does  not 
feem  to  deferve  the  praile  of  fuperiority  which 
we  arrogantly  claim — We  hear  every, day  of 
fuits   in  which  even  fuccefs   is  ruin  ;  and  we 
know,  that  far  from  being  able  to  obtain  in  our 
courts,  that    fpeedy,    clear,  decifive,  and    im- 
partial juftice,  which,   from    their   inftitution 
they  are  defigned  to  give,  a  vidtory   (obtained, . 
after    being   fent   through    them  all)   is  often 
much  worfe  than  a  retreat — ihe  remedy  more  fa- 
tal than  the  difeafe — So   confcious  are  even  the  ^ 
lawyers  themfelves  of  this,  that  if  one  of  them 
(as  may  happen)  has  a  perfonal  regard  for  his 
client,  and  is  willing  to  wave  pecuniary  advan^ 
tage  in  his  favor,  fuch  a  lawyer  will  fa) — '-'  Do 
any  thing — fubmit  to  any  compromife — put  up 
with  any  lofs,  rather  than  go  to  lav,?" — One  of. 
our  courts  is  called  that  of  Equity,  where  the 
widow,  the  orphan,  the  deferred   and   unhappy 
of  every  defcription,  (who  have  money)  are  to 
find  protedion  and  redrefsj  yet  it  is  too  cer- 
tain, 


5^  DESMOND. 

tain,  that  fuch  are  the  delay?,  fuch  the  expences 
in  this  court,  that  the  ruinous  tedioufnefs  of  a 
Chancery  fuit  is  become  proverbial-^the  op- 
preileJ  may  perifh,  before  they  r-an  obtain  the 
remedy  they  feek  ;  and  where,  under  the  direc- 
tion of  this  court,  litigated  property  is  to  be 
divided,  it  continually  happen?,  that,  by  the 
time  a  decifion  is  obtained,  there  is  nothing  to 
divide — The  poet  I  juft  now  quoted,  fays, 

■— ^— r— *  ln,tlii«  rank  sge. 


Mjch  is  the  patriot'*s  weeding  hand  required*.' 

But  alas ! — efpecial  care  is  taken,  that  neither 
reafon  nor  patriotifm  Ihall  touch  too  rudely 

*  The  tails  ci^  law,   where  da' k,   infidious  mee, 
Hne  cumbious  added  to  perpkx  the  truth, 
And  lejag'hen  fi  .  pie  jufticc  into  trade. f 

And  yet 

*  How  ghricus  'Wire  the  dny  that  faiu  thefe  hnkty 
And  every  man  Kuilh'tn  tht  reach  of  right  \'' 

*■*■  As  to  your  poets,"  cried  Mr.  Cranbourne 
fi/percilioufly — "  There  is  no  bringing  argu- 
ment againfl  their  flowery  declamation ;  fine 
fooiiding  words  about  rights  and  liberties,  are 
impoAng  to  fuperficial  underftandings,  but  can- 
not convince  others — fine  flourifhing  words  are 
not  arguments." 

"  Nor  does  there,"  faid  I,  "  need  arguments, 
jsn  what  I  have  aflerted — they  are  matters  of 
iu^^b,  and  not  of  fpeculation  or  opinion— truths, 
which  cannot  be  denied,  and  which  it  would 
require  fonie  fkill  to  palliate." 

*  Thorn  f'jj). 

X  i^id. 

«  As 


DESMOND.  253 

"  As  to  truth.  Sir,  it  is  not  always  proper 
to  fpeak  it,  nay,  it  is  not  always  fafe  to  the 
well-beinjj;  of  a  ftatC'-^The  queftion,  I  think  i?, 
not  whether  a  thina;  be  exadly  conformable  to 
vour  Utopian  anJ  impra<f^icable  fchemee,  but 
whether  it  be  expedient— -We  know  that  truth 
is  not  expedient^  and  that  it  is  the  buftnefs  of 
government  to  enforce  obedience,  without  which 
it  would  not  go  on  ;  not  to  liften  to  the  reafon- 
ing  of  every  wild  dogmatift,  who  fancies  him- 
felf  a  philofopher,  and  able  to  mend  what  is 
already  good — all  fuch  fhould  be  prevented 
from  difleminating  their  pernicious  doctrines, 
which  ferve  only  to  make  men  difcontent  with 
their  fituation,  to  raife  murmurs,  and  to  clog  the 
wheels  of  government." 

This  fentence,  which  was  moft  confequen- 
tially  delivered,  was  applauded  by  all  the  party, 
as  I  had  nothing  to  offer  againft  it,  but  that 
truth  which  had  juftbecn  pronounced  to  be  in- 
expedient, I  declined  the  conteft,  faying  only, 
•*  If  truth  is  not  to  be  fpoken,  Sir,  in  a  go- 
vernment, calling  itfelf  free,  left  it  fhould  be 
underftood  by  the  people,  who  are  governed  ; 
and  prevent  their  freely  fupplying  the  oil,  that 
facilitates  the  movement  of  the  cumbrous  ma- 
chine— If  fa£ls,  which  cannot  be  denied,  be 
repreffed  j  and  reafon,  which  cannot  be  con- 
troverted, be  ftifled  ;  the  time  is  not  far  diftant, 
when  fuch  a  country  may  fay,  adieu  liberty  !— 
Let  them,  therefore,  if  they  are  content  to  do 
(o^  begin  with  expelling  thofe  who  dare  fpeak 
truth,  and  are  fo  impudent  as  to  reafon — '  Tous 
ces  gens  qui  raifonent  font  la  pefte  d'un  etat.*' 

•  Voltaire — *  All  thefe  reafoning  people  are  the  very  curfes 
of  a  gavcinment.' 

I  then 


2  si  DESMOND. 

I  then  left  my  adverfary  to  enjoy  the  triumph  of 
his  imaginary  fupcriority,  and  wandered  away 
alone,  indulging  contemplations,  mournful  con- 
templations, on  far  other  fubje£tf. — The  mo- 
ment 1  am  in  folitude,  the  image  of  Gcraldine 
in  diftrefs,  Geraidme  contending  with  irreme- 
diable misfortunes,  recurs  to  me  j  and  other 
fubje£ls  of  regret,  add  bitlernefs  to  my  reflec- 
tions ;  perhaps,  therefore,  I  fiiould  do  wifely, 
to  mix  more  in  fociety,  where  1  muft,  of  courfe 

'   Difguife  the  thing  I  im, 
By  fteining  oiherwife.' 

But  1  am  fo  poor  at  diflimulation,  that  the  pain 
of  attempting  it,  is  more  haraffing  than  the 
thoughts  I  would  fly  from. 

Write  to  me  very  frequently,  my  friend  ;  and 
remember  as  he  wiihes  to  be  remembered, 

Year's  ever,  moft  afFedlionately, 

LIONEL  DESMOND. 


LET- 


S    £    S    M    O    N   ».  255 


LETTER      XXVII. 


TO    MRS.    VERNE  Y. 


Bath,  April  20,  lygr. 

I  A  M  not  furprifed,  my  dear  ftfter,  but  I 
am  very  forry  you  have  had  a  vifit  from  your 
hufband,  and  his  foreign  and  Englifh  compa- 
nions— I  forefee  no  poflible  good  that  can  arife 
from  it,  though  I  will  not  aiFe£l  fo  much  prc- 
fcience  as  to  point  out  exadly  the  evils  I  appre- 
hend ;  one  of  which,  however,  you  muft  your- 
fclf  iee,  I  mean  the  expences  that  Verney  will 
be  drawn  into  to  give  himfelf  confequencc 
among  thefe,  his  new  friends  ;  but,  perhaps,  he 
may  be  content  to  exhibit  his  Yorkfliire-houfe, 
with  feme  of  the  inhabitants  he  had  lately  there, 
to  do  its  honors,  and  may  fpare  you,  notwiih- 
ftanding  what  he  faid  about  your  going  down 
thither — Believe  me,  I  would  not  have  named 
this  circumftance,  as  you  have  fo  often  reproved 
me  for  fpeaking  with  afperity  of  Verney,  could 
1  have  fuppofed  it  poiTible  that  you  can  be  igno- 
rant of  the  party  who  were  fo  lateJy  colledted 

there. 


256  ■    DESMOND. 

there,  or  of  the  real  reafon  which  made  hitn 
oppofe  your  going  thither  with  your  children, 
when  the  country  was  pronounced  abfolutely 
nccefiary  for  you  by  your  ph\  ficians  ;  forgive 
me,  pray,  if  I  thus  renew  difagreeable  recol- 
ledtions,  but  I  do  not  love  you  fhouid  now  go 
where  fuch  people  held  fo  lately  their  profligate 

focieties 1  do  not  love  that  my  Geraldine 

Ibould  appear  a  neglected  and  unhappy  wife, 
prefiding  in  the  fame  fcenes  that  fo  recently 
witnefled  the  orgies  of  Verney,  S<:arfdale,  Dey- 
bourne,  and  Newminfter,  with  abandoned  prof- 
titutes — Shall  I  go  farther,  and  add,  that  I  do 
not  love  my  Geraldine  fliould  be  where  Scarf- 
dale  is  at  all — you  have  often  yourfelf  obferved 
his  behaviour;  and,  as  he  knows  you  cannot 
fail  to  underftand  it,  furely  it  is  inconfiftent  with 
your  character  to  allow  him  an  opportunity  of 
repeating  it;  do  not  go  to  Moorily  Park,  my 
filler,  if  you  can  avoid  it ;  and  if  it  cannot  other- 
Wife  be  evaded,  without  a  violation  of  what  you 
think  your  duty — obedience  ! — unqualified  obe- 
dience ! — I  will  contrive,  that  my  mother  (hall 
make  a  point  of  your  coming  hither  ;  a  requeft 
which  Verney  will  not  refu(e,  fince  he  believes 
that  he  owes  to  her  the  difcharge  of  thofe  two 
moft  troublcfome  debts;  (though  it  certainly 
was  not  by  her  they  were  difcharged)  nor,  were 
fome  little  ^atitude  oUtof  the  qucftion,  (which, 
perhaps,  with  him  it  might  be,)  would  lie,  how- 
ever politic  he  is,  hazard  offending  my  mother, 
while  he  feels  the  daily  probability  of  his  being 
under  the  neceflity  of  a/king  other  pecuniary 
favors. 

Let  me  hear,  by  an  early  pofl,  that  you  de- 
termine on  this,  or  fome  other  equally  proper 
fcheme — Again  Jet  me  afk  your  forgivencfs,  if 

I  have 


DESMOND,  2r57 

(  have  faid  too  much,  and  I  entreat  you  to  im- 
pute it  to  the  tender  <ift't6tion  1  bear  you,  which 
is,  jou  know,  inheienr,  and  has  grown  up  with 
me  from  my  iiri\  conrcioufncls  of  exidencc — 
Alas  !  if  i  did  not  love  you,  what  elfe  fhould 
I  have  to  love  in  the  world  ?  My  other  fifter  is 
lo  much  old<r,  that  1  have  alwa)S  had  my  aftoc- 
tion  for  htr,  "  chaftifed  by  fei;r,"  and  (lie  i$ 
now  afar  ofF,  and  time  and  diflance  are  cruel 
encmiej>,  eveii  to  the  ties  of  blood  —  iVIy  brother ! 
— alas  !  does  he  care  for  any  of  us,  and  is  it  pof- 
libie  to  wafle  one's  affection  on  apathy  and  inde- 
cilion? — My  mother  !  1  truft,  i  venerate  and 
legard  her,  as  my  only  parent  j  I  think  myfelf 
inaebted  to  her  for  the  trouble  fhe  has  taken 
during  my  infancy  and  my  childhood,  and  for 
that  portion  of  regard  which  flie  is  able  to  fpare 
me  (hnce  I  believe  the  affedtions  are  involun- 
tary^ from  her  fon  j  but  I  have  felt  too  much 
awe,  to  be  fenfible  towards  her,  of  that  fympa- 
thetic  and  gentle  affe<Stion  which  unites  me  ta 
you— to  you,  my  Geraldine,  whofe  foft  temper 
is  ever  ready,  even  amidft  your  friendly  chidings, 
to  plead  for  your  flippant  Fanny,  while  ^^r  heart 
finds  refpondent  fentiments  only  in  your's — 
Ah  !   would  to  heaven  I  dared  entruft  you  with 

one,  which  is but  no:  you  have  too  many 

troubles  of  your  own — Never,  never,  may  yoyr 
tirnuernefs  for  me  add  to  their  number. 

Your  uncafinefs  about  my  brother  is  now^  I 
hope,  relieved,  at  kail  fo  far  as  depends  on 
knowing  where  he  is — My  mother,  however,  is 
fo  far  /rom  feeling  herfeif  contented  at  the  ac- 
cotiiHs  he  has  fent  her  of  his  journey  to  the 
Archipelago,  and  his  Grecian  importations, 
that  (he  IS,  if  poUlble,  more  unealy  and  more 
reltjcfs  than  ilie  has  been  fince  his  abfence;  for 

my 


45^  13    £    S    M    O    N    D. 

my  part,  I  think  he  is  quite  as  well  at  Venrcf, 
witli  his  Cypriot,  as  he  would  be  at  Paris,  or 
itj  LoiiJoi),  with  any  connection  of  the  fame 
fort,  liut  he  might  form  at  either  of  thofe 
places  ;  and  certainly  we  have  much  lefs  reafon 
to  be  difTatisfied,  than  if  he  had  added  to  our 
family  alliances,  by  a  union  with  that  of  the 
illuftrious  houfe  of  St.   Eloy. 

That  name  brinj,s  to  my  mind,  or  rather 
to  the  end  of  my  pen,  another  name,  I  mean, 
that  of  Defmond.  His  uncle,  who  is  ftill  here, 
is  grown  quite  coy  upon  that  fubje£l,  though 
willing  enough  to  talk  to  me  upon  any  other ; 
or  if  1  continue,  at  any  time,  to  oblige  him  to 
fpeak  upen  it,  his  anfwers  are  peevifii,  (hort, 
and  unfatisfadory— !  proteft  I  am  half  inclined 
to  believe  the  venerable  veteran  h  in  love  with 
me  himfelf,  and  is  jealous  of  ray  grateful  recol- 
)c«Slion  of  his  nephew — Oh  !  how  I  fhould  be 
delighted  to  have  the  power  of  teizing  this  old 
petrifaction.  But,  alas!  my  dear  fifter,  is  all 
exerted  in  vain,  the  heart  of  the  Major  is  com- 
pofed  of  fuch  impenetrable  ftuff,  that,  1  believe, 
there  is  no  plaguing  him  any  way. 

Now  do  1  long  to  tell  you  a  little  of  what 
is  paffing  here  ;  but,  I  know,  the  goffip  of  this 
place  is  rather  irkfome  than  plealing  to  you  j 
and  I  am  often  rather  reproved  than  thanked,  for 
endeavouring  to  amufe  you  with  the  events, 
real  or  imaginary,  which  occupy  us  here,  and 
gives  us  the  requifite  fupplies  of  converfation  for 
the  tea  and  card  parties;  but  indeed,  my  Ge- 
raldine,  if  you  deprive  me,  by  your  rigid  avtrfion 
to  what  you  call  detraction,  of  fuch  a  refource  1 
know  not  what  there  will  remain  for  me  to  write 
about,  and  to  fill  ihofe  long  letters  which  alone 
faligfy  you  y  I  mult  not  fay  much  of  any  of  our 

own 


DESMOND.  Z5^ 

own  family,  becaufe  you  fay  it  is  pert,  and  un- 
duiiful,  and  1  know  not  what ;  if  I  could  rc- 
rcpeat  only  good  ot  the  people  I  am  among,  you 
would  let  me  fill  quires  of  paper  about  them  ;  but, 
as  it  if,  if  I  report  only  what  1  hear,  you  accule 
me  of  being  as  fpitefully  fcandalous  as  the 
dowagers,  who  fit  in  tremendous  coinmittces  on 
the  reputations  of  the  week— You  know,  I  ne- 
ver am  allowed  to  converfe  with  any  of  the  lite- 
raty  people  1  meet,  as  my  mother  has  a  terrible 
averfion  to  every  thing  that  looks  like  a  deiirc 
to  acquire  knowledge  ;  and  for  tlie  fame  reafon, 
fhe  profcribes  every  fpecies  of  reading,  and  mur- 
murs, when  flie  cannot  abfolutely  prohibit  the 
fafhionable,  infipid  novel. 

The'e  is  fo  much  enquiry  of  the  f.ige,  ma- 
tronly gentlewomen  of  her  acquaiiuancc,  who 
are,  as  (he  believes,  deep  in  the  fecret,  as  to 
what  books  are  proper,  who  are  the  authors, 
and  whether  there  be  *'  any  offence  in  them  j" 
that,  by  the  time  thefe  voices  are  co.lecled,  I 
find,  more  than  half  1  propofe  reading,  abfo- 
lutely forbidden — Novels,  it  is  decided,  con- 
vey the  poifon  of  bad  example  in  the  foft  fem- 
blance  of  refined  fentiment — One  contains  an 
oblique  apology  for  fuicide  ;  a  fecond,  a  lurking 
palliation  of  conjugal  infidelity  ;  a  third,  a 
fneer  againft  parental  authority  j  and  a  fourth, 
againft  religion  ;  tome  are  difliked  for  doctrines, 
which,  probably,  malice  only,  afiuming  the 
gaib  of  wifdom,  can  difcover  in  them;  and 
others,  becaufe  their  writers  have  either,  in 
their  private,  or  political  life,  given  offence  to 
the  prudery,  or  (he  party  of  fome  of  thefe  wor- 
thy perfonages,  whom  ray  mother,  relying  on 
their  reputation  for  fandlity  and  iagacity,  chufes 
to  cofalt  J  and  thus  I  am  reduced  to  pradife  the 

Jineje 


J^C'O  DESMOND. 

yf^^^of  aboafding-fchool  mifs,and  to  hide  thefc 
obje£tionabie  pages,  from  an  inquifition  not  lefs 
fevere  than  that  which  the  lovely  Serena*  fuf- 
tained,  or  I  mult  confine  myfelf  to  fuch  maw- 
kifii  reading  as  is  produced,  "  in  a  rivulet  of 
text  I  uiining  through  a  meadow  of  margin,"  in 
the  fott  lemblance  of  letters,  "  from  Miiskve- 
rilsJa  Evelyn,  to  Mifs  Viclorina  Villars'" — 
How  then,  my  fifier,  am  1  to  find  any  thing  to 
fay  but  of  living  characters  ?  or  how  can  I  help 
being  facirical  againfi:  thofe  vvho  will  not  let  me 
be  fentimental  ?— 1  might,  indeed,  read  hiftory  ; 
but  whenever  I  attempt  to  do  fo,  I  am,  to  tell 
you  the  truth,  driven  from  it  by  difguft — What 
IS  it,  but  a  miferably  mortifying  detail  of  crimes 
and  follies  ? — of  the  guilt  of  a  few,  and  the 
fufterings  of  many,  while  almoft  every  page 
offers  an  argument  in  favor  of  what  I  never  will 
believe — that  Heaven  created  the  human  race 
only  to  deftroy  itfelf ;  and  that  in  placing  the 
various  fpecies  of  it,  in  various  climates, 
whence  they  acquired  various  complexions,  ha- 
bits, and  languages;  their  Creator  meant  thefe 
men  fhould  become  the  natural  enemies  of  each 
other,  and  apply  the  various  portions  of  reafon 
he  has  allotted  them,  only  in  itudying  how  to 
annoy  and  murder  each  other. 

But  I  am  wajidering,  in  my  wild  way,  from 
the  point  ;  and,  in  my  complaints,  that  the 
pretty,  foothing  tales  of  imagination  are  pro- 
hibited, while  the  hideous  realities  ot  human 
life  affright  me,  1  had  nearly  forgctten  what  I 
v/as  going  to  fay,  wiiich  is  not  at  all  fcandalous 
— Oh  no!  —  it  is,  on  the  contrary,  an  event  at 
which  you  will  rejo;ce— Your  old  f;iend,  Mifs 


*  Triomrfesj^f  ten-.per. 

Elford, 


D    E    S    M    O    N    li.  '  261 

El  ford,  has,  at  laft,  met  with  a  lover,  who 
really  purpofesto  becofne  hei  hufband — He  is  a 
phyftcian  ;  very  well  looking,  and  twelve  OT 
fourteen  >ears  younger  than  herlclf — She  is  irt 
love!— Oh!  undefcribably  in  love — And  the 
Do£lor  forefecs,  in  her  extenfive  connexions, 
advantages  likely  to  arife  to  him  in  his  profef- 
fton,  thjt  will,  he  thinks,  more  than  counter- 
balance the  trifling  wants  of  fortune,  beauty, 
and  youth— I  dare  not  paint  to  you -the  ridicu*- 
lous  love  fcenes  that  this  tender  pair  exhibit-— 
You  have  feen  Mifs  Elford  in  love  once  before*, 
and  can,  perhaps,  imagine  how  {he  exprcfles 
now  a  ftill  more  ardent  paflion  ;  and  with  what 
airs  of  antiquated  coquetry  fhe  recalls  th?  Doc- 
tor to  his  allegiance,  if,  peradventure,  (be  de- 
teds  his  eyes  wandering  towards  any  of  the 
younger  and  handfomer  part  of  the  company—* 
The  idea  here  is,  that  they  are  to  be  married  very 
foon,  and  I  really  wifti  they  may,  if  it  bs  only 
in  the  hope,  that  Mifs  Elford,  rn  having  a  huf- 
band  of  her  own,  will  be  fa  engaged  by  her  own 
un''xpe6tedgood  fortune,  a^  to  let  the  reft  of  the 
world  remain  for  feme  time  unmolefted.  I 
cannot  help  it,  my  dear  filler  if,  rn  deCpite  of 
your  gentle  admonitions,  I  do  hdte  this  little, 
flirivelled,  fatirical  Sybil — It  was  from  her  1 
find,  that  the  hiftory  ©f  my  brother's  adventure? 
with  the  St.  Lloy  family  got  abroad  here,  with 
numberlefs  additional  circumilances  that  never 
happened  ;  and  it  is  of  her,  thr.:  my  mother 
learned  what  I  w.fhed  toconceai  from  her,  the 
parties  that  Verney  lately  had  ii,  Yorkfliir^.— 
Oh  I  if  you  could  have  heard  how  (be  canted 
about  "  her  dear,  her  amiable  JMrs.  Verney  ;*' 
while  fhe  could  not  difguife  th?  pleaiore  Ihe  took 
in  defcptbing  your  hufband's  fo;blei.>— -you  would 

have 


■26«2  D   E   S   M   O  K   D. 

liave  been  convinced  of  what  I  always  told  you  ; 
that  under  uncommon  hypocrify,  fhe  conceals 
uncommon  malignity — Astomyfelf,  I  find  fhe 
goes  about  talking  of  me  in  fuch  terms  as  thefe : 
**  Did  you  fee  dear  Mifs  Waverly  at  the  ball 
laft  night? — Was  (he  not  charming? — I  think 
fhe  never  looked  fo  well ;  and  really  I  begin  to 
be  a  convert  to  the  opinion  of  thofe,  who  faid, 
lail  year,  when  fhe  firft  came  out,  that  fhe  was 
quite  as  handfome  as  her  fecond  fifter  Mrs.  Ver- 
ney,  the  celebrated  beauty — Mrs.  Verney,  poor, 
dear  creature  ! — (I  have  an  amazing  regard  for 
her,  and  have  loved  her  from  our  childhood.^ 
though  (he  is  two  or  three  years  younger  than  I 
am!)  Mrs.  Verney  is  a  little  altered,  though 
ftill  fo  very  young — Poor  thing  ! — -troubles,  like 
her's,  are  great  enemies  to  beauty,  which  is  but 
as  the  flower  of  the  morning  ;  but  however  fhe 
may  be  changed  in  appearance,  fhe  is  flill  moll 
amiable — indeed,  more  fo,  as  to  gentlenefs  of 
temper,  than  Mifs  Waverly,  though  Jhe  is  a 
fweet  girl,  and  has  no  fault,  except,  perhaps,  a 
Jittle,  a  very  little  too  much  vivacity,  which,  it 
is  the  great  object  of  my  worthy  friend,  hei 
mother,  to  check  ;  judging,  indeed,  very  truly, 
that  a  young  perfon,  fo  much  followed  and  ad- 
mired, cannot  be  too  referved  and  cautious." 
— Yes  !  and,  in  confequence  of  this  imperti- 
nent opinion,  this  odious  tabby  (who  fays  fhe 
is  only  a  year  or  two  younger  than  you,  though 
fhe  will  never  fee  forty  again)  has  made  my 
mother  fo  full  of  fears  and  precautions,  tha'.  i 
am  neither  to  read  any  books  but  thofe  that  are 
ordered  by  the  Divan,  of  which  fhe  is  deputy 
chair-woman,  or  to  fpeal^  to  any  men  but  old 
fograms,  fuch  as  Major  Diuby  ;  or  men  of  hrge 
fortune — My  mother  need  not  be  fo  apprehen- 

five; 


DESMOND.  id^J 

five;  firft,  becaufe  I  have  not  the  leaft  inclina- 
tion to  fet  out  for  Scotland  with  any  of  the  in- 
fignificant  butterflies,  whom  I  like  well  enough 
to  have  flutter  about  me  in  public  j  and  fecond- 
ly,  becaufe,  if  I  had  fuch  a  fancy,  there  is  not 
on«  of  them  who  has  the  leaft  notion  of  marry- 
ing a  young  woman  without  a  fortune,  or  with 
a  very  fmall  one — Even  the  fortunate  beings 
who  are  not  profcribed,  men  who  can  make  a 
fettlement,  have,  for  the  moft  part,  but  Jittle 
inclination  to  encumber  themfelves  with  z 
|)ortionlefs  wife  ;  and  among  them  all,  1  know 
none  who  anfwer  my  ideas  of  what  a  man  ought 
to  be — Alas  !  there  is  but  one  in  the  world  whom 
I  fhould  felecSl  as  the  hero  of  my  Romance,  if  I 
were  in  hafte  to  make  one. 

But  you  muft  give  me  leave  to  deteft  Mifs  El- 
ford  a  little  j  though,  indeed,  I  have  not  in  my 
heart  room  for  many  other  fentiments  than  thofc 
of  anxiety  and  tendernefs  for  you,  my  dear  Ge- 
raldine.  Write  foon,  and  explicitly,  of  your 
intentions,  to 

Your  affe6lionate  and  faithful. 


JANNV  WAVERLY 


LET- 


2^  B  E   S    M   O   N   ». 


LETTER      XXVIII. 


SeynsootStreet,  27th  April,  1791. 

YES!  my  fifter,  I  knew  of  the  way  in 
which  Mr.  Verney  lived  when  he  was  laft  in 
Yorklhire,  though  I  never  mentioned  it,  and 
had  fome  hope  it  might  have  efcaped  my  mo- 
ther's knowledge  and  your's— Alas  !  Fanny  ! 
I  cannot  be  ignorant,  however  I  defire  to  apprar 
fo,  of  the  extreme  bitternefs  of  the  lot  to  which 
I  .am  condemned  ;  but  while  you  love  rr,e— 
while  my  charming  children  are  weW — whiJemy 
mother  thinks  of  me  with  fome  intereft — and 
let  me  a=dd,  while  1  have  a  few  friends,  whofe 
regard  is  fo  well  worth  poflefiing,  I  will  not  fmk 
under  it;  but  will  fupport  myfelf  by  there- 
flexion,  that  I  do  tr.y  duty,  and,  at  leaft,  de- 
fcrve  a  better  fate — I  now  haften  to  the  other 
parts  of  your  letter — You  will  fee,  by  the  date 
of  this,  that  1  am  returmd  to  London— and  you 
well  knovv"  how  much  againft  my  inclination — 
However,  it  was  thought  better  than  going  into 
Yorkfhirc  ;  and  fortunately  for  me,  the  Due  de 
Komaguecourt,  who  is  become  Mr.  Verney's 
moft  mtimate  friend,  difcovered,  thac  he  had 
no  inclination  to  go  at  this  feafon  into  fo  remote 
apart  of  England — However,  Mr.  Verney  de- 
termines 
I 


DESMOND.  265 

tcrmines  to  entertain  him  here  in  a  ftyie  which 
may  do  honor  to  his  hofpitality  ;  and  as  frequent 
dinners  are  to  be  given,  and  the  Duke  profeflcs 
himfelf  diffatisfied,  even  with  the  moft  luxu- 
rious table,  where  ladies  do  not  prefide,  I  have 
been  compelled  to  quit  my  quiet  lodging,  and 

am  to  remain  here  till indeed,  I  know  not  . 

till  when,  for  Mr.  Verney  is  as  unfettled*  in- 
his  plans,  even  as  my  poor  brother  himfelf,  and 
without  the  docility  which  Waverly  has,  who 
will  generally  allow  fome  other  perfon  to  decide 
for  him,  and  then  believes,  for  a  few  hoursy 
that  he  has  followed  his  own  inclination. 

All  you  fay  about  Col.  Scarfdale  is  very  true 
— It  is  impoflible  not  to  fee,  however  I  have 
endeavoured  to  mifunderftand  him  ;  that  his 
pretended  friend/hip  for  Verney,  does  not  pre- 
vent his  forming  defigns,  which  you  may  affure 
yourfelf,  excite  only  my  contempt,  and  add 
abhorrence  of  his  principles  to  perfonal  aver- 
fion — I  now  fee  a  great  deal  more  of  him  than 
I  do  of  Mr.  Verney  ;  for  though  we  have  ap- 
parently inhabited  the  fame  houfe  thefe  three 
days,  we  have  met  only  once,  even  at  table, 
and  th?t  was  yeflerday,  when  a  magnificent 
dinner  was  given  to  his  friends — Col.  Scarfdale, 
however,  is  very  obligingly  willing  not  to  eon- 
iign  me  to  folitude  ;  but,  nnce  he  is  always  ad- 
mitted by  Mr.  Verney's  dire6l:ion,  and  knows  I 
am  never  out,  he  takes  the  opportunity  of  faun- 
tering  up  to  my  dreffing^room,  where  he  plays 
with  the  children,  picks  up  my  thread-paper, 
infifts  upon  bringing  me  new  mufic,  and  on 
reading  to  me  fome  novel  or  poem,  with  which 
he  is  generally  furnifhed— If  coldnefs,  and  ap- 
parent difguft,  could  have  put  an  end  to  attend- 
ance fo  improper,  and  fo  uneafy  to  me,  it  cer- 
VoL.  I.  N  tainly 


266  D    £    S    M    O    N    D» 

tainly  would  not  have  continued  beyond   the 
fecond   morning,  but   to-day   is  the  third,  on 
which,  in  dfepitc  of  myfelf,  I  (hall  probably  be 
condemned   to  endure  it — He  afFe<5ls  extreme 
uneafinefs  at    the    ftate   of  Verney's  affairs, 
(though,    till    lately,   he   has  endeavoured    to 
laugh  ofF  my  folicitude  about  them,  whenever 
I  ventured  to  exprefs  it)  and  has  given  feveral 
intimations,  that  his  friend   has  formed  an  at- 
tachment  to   fome   expenfive    woman — hints, 
that   I    determine   never   to    underfland — But, 
when  I  thus  evade  the  fubjedtl  wifli  not  to  hear 
of,  he  fighs,  walks  about  the  room,  and,  as 
if  unable  to  exprefs  his  emotions,  cries,  "  I  love 
Verney  from  my  foul  ;  but,  in  this  inftance,  I 
cannot  excufe  him,  though  I  pity  him,  for  be- 
ing fo  infenfible  of  his  own  happinefs  ! — I  be- 
lieve he  is  the  only  man  in  England  who  has  fo 
little  tafte." 

.  This,  they  fay,  is  fuch  a  common y{»<;^,  and 
has  been  ufed  fo  often,  that  I  rather  wonder  the 
Colonel,  who  piques  himfelf  on  his  peculiar 
talents  in  gallantry,  has  not  recourfe  to  fomc 
lefs  hackneyed  expedient — I  muft  put  an  end  to 
fuch  fort  of  converfation,  however,  though  I  do 
not  know  how  to  do  it  j  as  my  fpeaking  to 
Verney,  (if  he  did  not  laugh  at  it,  as  he  pro- 
bably would)  might  be  attended  with  unpleafant 
confequences.  To-morrow  the  whole  party 
dine  here  again  j  and  1  have  promifed  Mr.  Ver- 
ney to  go  to  Ranelagh  with  them,  and  Mifs 
Ayton,  who  is  fo  good  as  to  come  to  me  when- 
ever thefe  engagements  are  made,  that  I  may 
not  be  the  only  woman — Oh  !  my  Fanny,  would 
you  were  with  me — Nothing  could  fo  foothc 
my  fufFerings,  as  having  you,  to  whom  I  might 
weep  at  night,  when  1  have  been  compelled  to 

conceal 


B    £    S    M    O    N    D.  267 

conceal  all  day  under  afFe£led  tranquillity,  the 
anguifli  of  a  breaking  heart — I  {hall  own  to  you, 
my  dear  filler,  that  notwithftanding  the  refolu- 
tions  1  made  at  the  beginning  of  my  letter,  to  be 
patient  and  tranquil,  there  are  moments,  when 
1  moft  fmccrely  vvifli  that  1  and  my  babies  were 
ali  dead  together — What  will  become  of  us  ? 
If,  as  J  greatly  fear,  there  will  foon  be  nothing 
left  but  my  fettlement,  between  their  father 
and  utter  ruin—  If  it  ever  does  come  to  that,  of 
which,  from  the  hints  dropped  by  Scarfdale,  I 
expert  every  day  to  hear,  I  fhall,  if  I  have  any 
fuch  power,  give  it  up  to  him,  for  I  cannot 
bear  his  diftrefs,  while  I  have  the  means  of  re- 
lieving it — However,  perhaps,  it  may  not  be  fo 
bad  as  Scarfdale,  with  fome  very  unworthy  view 
of  his  own,  feems  inclined  toreprcfent  it — But, 
from  him,  I  have  heard  of  fuch  lofles  at  play, 
upon  the  turf,  and  in  bets  of  other  fort?,  that  if 
only  half  of  what  he  fays  be  true,  it  is  impoflible 
this  poor  infatuated  man  can  go  on  long — I 
need  not  fay  how  greatly  his  expences  are  en- 
creafed  by  the  prefent  fet  of  acquaintance  he 
has  got  into — I  have  fpolcen  of  it  to  him  at  the 
only  moment  1  had  an  opportunity,  and  his  an- 
fwer  was — "  Pooh  !  don't  give  yourfelf  any 
concern  about  that — I  know  what  1  am  about, 
and  fhall  take  care  to  be  no  lofcr,  but  very  much 
oiherwife." — This,  I  fuppofe,  meant,  that  he 
doubted  not  his  fuccefs  at  play  againft  the 
French  noblemen,  two  of  whom  are  men  of 
very  large  fortune — But  how  degrading  is  fuch 
a  fcheme  ! — how  unworthy  of  a  man  profefling 
any  honor  or  piinciple  ! — Enough,  my  Fanny, 
peih.ips  too  much  on  this  cruel  topic — I  will 
try  to  talk  of  other  things. 

N  2  I  cannot 


a68  B  E   S   M   O   N    D. 

I  cannot  help  fmiling  at  your  account  of  my 
old  acquaintane  Mjfs  Elford,  whom  I  have 
heartily  forgiven,  not  only  for  the  {lories  (he 
once  fent  forth  about  Mr.  Mulgrave,  which  I 
never  knew  fne  had  done  till  lately  j  but  for  the 
little  air  of  triumph  (he  aflumes  in  relating,  that 
*'  poor,  dear  Mrs.  Verneyis  already  altered  in 
her  appearance,  though  fo  young!" — Ah!  it 
is  very  true,  indeed,  my  love — I  not  only  for- 
give her,  but  am  really  very  glad  fhe  is  at  length 
likely  to  enter  happily  into  that  ftate  which  has 
always  been  the  great  obje(5^  of  her  laudable  am- 
bition— She  will  now,  1  truft,  bear  lefs  enmity 
towards  her  young  married  friends,  (how  fel-  . 
dom,  alas!  the  objedts  of  well-founded  envy) 
or  towards  thofe  whofe  youth  and  charms  feem- 
ed  to  give  them  a  chance  which  fhe  herfelf  def- 
paired  of — I  wifti,  however,  ftie  would  not  be- 
iet  my  mother  with  ftories  of  Mr.  Verney^ 
which  ferve  only  to  make  her  uneafy,  without 
producing  any  benefit  to  us. 

You  fay,  that  my  mother  certainly  did  not 
pay  off  thofe  two  debts  that  fo  fad ly  diftrefled 
us  five  months  ago — AVho  then  could  it  be  ? — 
Since  I  have  been  convinced  it  was  none  of  my 
own  family,  I  have  been,  I  own,  very  folici- 
teus  to  di/cover  to  whom  fuch  an  obligation  is 
owing  ;  and  in  the  indifcretion  of  my  curiofity,  I 
have  applied  to  Colonel  Scarfdale,  who,  with- 
out dire6lly  afierting  it,  has  given  fuch  anfwers, 
as  would  (if  I  did  not  believe  him  incapable  of 
fuch  an  action,  even  from  interefud  motives) 
have  led  me  to  imagine  it  might  be  himfelf— — 
Surely  this  cannot  be? — I  wifn  it  were  poflible 
to  know. 

You  afk  me,  my  Fanny,  after  Mr.  Def- 
mond — Alas  !  I  know  nothing  fatisfadory    of 

him  i 


DESMOND.  269 

him  ;  and  have  fometimes  been  fo  anxious  to 
hear  of  him,  as  to  think  of  writing  to  Mr. 
Bethel — Yet  a  fear  of  its  having  a  fingular  and 
improper  appearance,  has  always  deterred  me. 
What  is  your  fecret,  my  clear  fifter,  which  ycu 
will  not  communicate,  left  it  fliould  add  to  my 
troubles  ? — Does  it,  as  I  guefs,  relate  to  Def- 
mond  ? — Oh  !  how  happy,  how  enviable,  would 
the  lot  of  that  woman  be,  who,  infpiring  fuch 
a  man  with  efteem  and  afFeftion,  fhould  be  at 
liberty  to  return  it — Need  1  fay,  that  it  is  the 
wifliof  my  heart,  my  Fanny,  might  be  that  for- 
tunate creature  ;  yet,  let  me  not  aflift  in  cherifli- 
ing  an  hope  that  may  ferve  only  to  embitter  her 
lite — I  have  heard  it  hinted,  (but  it  is  long 
fince,  and,  perhap«,  came  from  no  very  good 
authority)  that  he  is  already  attached,  with  the 
moft  ardent  afFeftion,  to  that  Madame  de  Boif- 
belle,  who  fo  afliduoufly  attended  him  in  his 
illnefs  ;  and  that  his  continuing  fo  long  abroad, 
is  owing  to  his  unwillingnefs  to  leave  her — I 
have  colleiSted  this  intelligence  partly  from 
Colonel  Scarfdale,  who  has  fome  correfpondence 
abroad,  and  partly  from  my  fcrvant  Manwar- 
ing,  whofe  hufband  is  an  old  friend  of  War- 
ham's,  Mr.  Defmond's  fervant,  and  now  and 
then  has  a  letter  from  him — Upon  putting  all 
the  circumftances  together,  I  am  compelled  to 
give  that  credit  to  their  united  evidence,  which 
1  fliould  not  have  given  to  the  Colonel  alone, 
who  feemed  to  triumph  mightily  in  being  able 
to  relate,  that  my  excellent  and  virtuous  fncnd, 
as  he  fneeringly  calls  Oefmond,  is  entangled  in 
an  adventure  with  a  married  woman — Perhaps, 
however,  this  is  all  the  invention  of  malice,  or 
the  painting  of  ignorance — Malice,  that  will 
not  allow  it  ■prcbabU  mere  friendship  fliould  exift 
N  3  between 


270  DESMOND. 

between  two  perfons  of  difFerent  fexes  ;  and 
grofs  ignorance,  that  connot  imagine  it  poffiblc 
— May  heaven  blefs  Defmond,  whatever  are  his 
prolpedls  and  connexions  !  and  may  he  be  as 
happy  as  he  deferves  to  be  ! — I  feel,  too  fenfibly, 
the  weight  of  our  obligation  to  him  whenever 
his  name  is  mentioned,  whenever  1  think  of 
him  —  Perhaps,  I  fee!  it  the  more,  becaufe  (you 
only  excepted)  none  of  my  family  feem  to  feel 
it  at  all — My  brother,  I  fear,  never  writes  to 
him  ;  and  has  probably  committed  follies  as 
great,    though    not   fo    irretrievable,  as    thofe 

from  which  Defmond  delivered    him. Mr. 

Verney  is  continually  making  Defmond's  quix- 
otifm  the  fubjeit  of  his  ridicule;  (a  talent 
which  he  manages  generally  (o  as  to  attract  ridi- 
cule himfelf)  and  my  mother  J?ems  rather  forry 
that  Defmond  is  wifer  than  her  fon,  than  obli- 
ged to  him  for  having  exerted  that  wlfdom  in 
his  behalf.  How  long,  my  dear  Fanny,  has 
your  reading  been  under  profcription  ? — We 
ufed  to  read  what  we  would,  when  we  were 
girls  together,  and  I  never  found  it  was  preju- 
dicial to  either  of  us  ;  but  my  mother  feems  to 
have  been  liftening  (notwithftanding  her  diflike 
of  women's  knowledge)  to  fome  of  thofe  good 
ladies,  who,  by  dint  of  a  tolerable  memory,  and 
being  accuftomed  to  aflbciate  with  men  of  let- 
terii,  have  colledted  fome  phrafes  and  remarks, 
which  they  retail  in  lefs  enlightened  focicties, 
and  immediately  obtain  credit  for  an  uncommon 
{hare  of  penetration  and  fcience — But  if  every 
work  of  fancy  is  to  be  prohibited  in  which  a  tale 
is  told,  or  an  example  brought  forward,  by 
which  fome  of  thefe  ladies  fuppofe,  that  the  er* 
rors  of  youth  may  be  palliated,  or  the  imagina- 
tion awakened  —  1  know  no  book  of  amufement 

that 


rr  E  s  M  o  M  D.  271 

that  can  efcape  their  cenfure;  and  the  whole 
phalanx  of  novels,  from  the  two  firft  of  our 
claffics,  in  that  linp  of  writing,  Richardfon 
and  Fielding,  to  the  lefs  exceptionable,  though 
certainly  lefs  attractive  inventors  of  the  prefent 
day,  muft  be  condemned  with  lefs  mercy,  than 
the  curate  and  the  barber  fnewed  to  the  collec- 
tion of  the  Knight  of  the  forrowful  Counte- 
nance ;  and  ten,  I  really  know  not  what  young 
people  (I  mean  young  women)  will  read  at  all 
— But  let  me  afk  thefe  fevere  female  cenfors, 
whether,  in  every  well-written  novel,  vice^  and. 
even  weaknejps,  that  deferve  not  quite  fo  harfli 
aname,  ^re  not  exhibited, as  fubjedtingthofe  who 
are  examples  of  them,  to  remorfe,  regret,  and 
punifliment — And  fmce  circumftances,  more 
inimical  to  innocence,  are  every  day  related, 
without  any  difguife,  or  with  very  little,  in  the 
public  prints  ;  fince,  in  reading  the  world,  a 
girl  muft  fee  a  thoufand  very  uglv  blots,  which 
frequently  pafs  without  any  cenfure  at  all — I 
own,  I  cannot  imagine,  that  novel  reading, 
can,  as  has  been  alledged,.  corrupt  fhe  imagin- 
ation, or  enervate  the  heart ;  at  leaft,  fuch  a 
defcription  of  novels,  as  thofe  which  reprefent 
human  life  nearly  as  it  is ;  for,  as  to  others, 
thofe  wild  and  abfurd  writings,  that  defcribe  in 
inflated  language,  beings,  that  never  were,  nor 
ever  will  be,  they  can  (if  any  young  woman 
has  fo  little  patience  and  tafte  as  to  read  them) 
no  more  contribute  to  form  the  charadler  of 
her  mind,  than  the  grotefque  figures  of  fhep- 
herdeffes,  on  French  fans  and  B^rgamot  boxes, 
can  form  her  tafte  in  dref-^ — Who  could,  for 
a  moment,  feel  any  imprefllon  from  the  peru- 
fal  of  fuch  ftuff  as  this,  though  every  diurnal 
print  puffed  its  excellence,  and  every />^///  maitrt 

3  fwore 


272  DESMOND. 

fwore  it  was  quite  the  thing — exquifite — -pathe- 
tic— ^^interefting. 

"  The  beautiful,  the  foft,  the  tender  Iphi- 
gcnia,  cloied  not,  xluring  the  tedious  hours, 
her  beauteous  eyes  while  the  glorious  flambeau 
offilver-flippered  day  funk  beneath  the  cncrim- 
foned  couch  of  coral-crowned  Thetis,  giving 
up  the  dormant  world  to  the  raven-embrace  of 
all  over-clouding  night- — When,  however,  the 
matin  loving  lark,  or  rufTet  pinions,  floating 
amid  the  tiffany  clouds,  that  variegated,  in  fleecy 
undulation,  the  grcy-invefted  heavens,  hailed 
with  his  foul  reviving  note,  the  radiant  coun- 
tenance oi  returning  morn;  the  fweet,  the 
mild,  the  elegantly  unhappy  maid,  turned  to- 
wards the  rofeate-ltreaming  Eaft,  thofe  fapphire 
mefl'engers,  that  exprefTed,  in  language  of  fuch 
exquifite  fenfibility,  every  emotion  of  her  deli- 
cate foul  ;  and,  with  a  palpi tatina:  flgh,  arofe 
— She  clad  her  graceful  form  in  a  clofe  jac- 
ket of  Nakara  fatin,  trimmed  with  filvcr,  and 
the  bloiroms  of  the  fweet- fcented  pea,  intermix- 
ed ;  her  petticoat  was  of  white  fattin,  with  a 
border  of  the  fame;  and  on  her  head,  half  hid- 
ing, and  half  difcovering  her  hyacinthine  locks, 
fhe  carclefsly  bound  a  glowing  wreath  of  Afri- 
can marygold?,  and  purple  v^^hina-after,  fur- 
mounting  the  whole  with  a  light  kerchief  of 
piivk  Italian  gauze,  embroidered  by  herfelf  in 
lilies  of  the  valley — She  then  appoached  the 
window,  and  in  a  voice,  whofe  dulcet  gurglings 
emulated  :he  cooings  of  the  enamoured  pigeon 
of  the  woods,  fliefighed  forth  the  following  ex- 
quifitively  expreilive  ode." 

Now  do  you  think,  my  dear  Fanny,  that  ei- 
ther good  or  harm  can  be  derived  from  fuch  a 
book  as  this  r — Lofs  of  time  may  be,  with  juf- 

tice, 


DESMOND.  273 

tice,  objci^eJ  to  it,  but  no  other  evil — A  fen- 
fible  girl  would  certainly  throw  it  away  iii  Jii- 
guft  ;  a  weak  one  (who  would  probably  not  un- 
derftand  half  of  it,  could  it  be  underftood  at  all) 
cries,  "  Dear  ! — how  fweet  ! — charming  crea- 
ture ! — A  light  kerchief  of  pink  italim  gauze, 
embroidered  with  lilies  of  the  valley  !  —  Her 
voice,  the  dulcit  gurglings  of  the  enamoured 
pigeon  of  the  woods  !" — And  then,  meaning 
only  to  enquire,  whether  this  amiable  Iphlge- 
nia  was  happy  or  no  ? — She  fits  down  to  have 
her  hair  curkd— reads  as  faft,  as  the  rofeate 
rays,  and  azure  adventures,  will  let  her,  to  the 
end,  and  forgetting  them  all — dreflVs  herfelf  and 
goes  to  Ranelagh,  or  the  opera,  where  (he  tells 
fome  little  cream-coloured  beau  what  a  dear, 
divine  novel  fhe  has  been  reading  ;  but  of  which, 
in  fadt,  fhe  has  forgotten  every  word. 

1  own  it  has  often  ftruck  me  as  a  fmgular  in- 
confiftency,  that,  while  novels  have  been  con- 
demned as  being  injurious  to  the  intereft  of  vir- 
tue, the  play-houfe  has  been  called  the  fchool 
of  morality — -The  comedies  of  the  lait  century 
are  alanoil,  w  thout  exception,  fo  grofs,  that, 
with  all  the  alterations  they  have  received,  they 
are  very  unfit  for  that  part  of  the  audience  to 
whom  novel  reading  is  deemed  pernicious,  nor 
is  the  example  to  be  derived  from  them  very 
conducive  to  the  intererts  of  morality  ;  for,  not 
only  the  rake  and  the  coquette  of  the  piece  are 
generally  made  happy,  but  thofe  duties  of  life, 
to  which  novel-reading  is  believed  to  be  prejudi- 
cial, are  almoft  always  violated  with  impunity, 
or  rendered  ridiculous  by  *••  the  trick  of  the 
fcene" — Age  which  ought  to  be  refpeded,  is 
invariably  exhibited,  as  hateful  and  contemp- 
tible— To  cheat  an   old   father,  or  laugh   at  a 

fat 


274  DESMOND. 

fat  aunt,  are  the  fupreme  merits  of  the  heroes 
and  [i.roines  ;  and  though  nothing  is  more  out 
of  nature  than  the  old  man  of  the  ft  age — 1  can- 
not be  of  opinion,  that  the  fcene  is  a  fchool  of 
morality  for  youth,  which  teaches  them,  that 
age  and  infirmity,  are  fubjesfts  of  laughter  and 
ridicule — Such,  however,  is  the  tafte  of  the 
t.nglifn  in  their  thentrical  amufcment? — And 
n^nv,  when  the  very  ofFenfive  jeft  is  no  longer 
admitted,  ponraits  of  foliy,  exaggerated  till 
they  lofc  all  refemblance,  harlequin  tricks,  and 
pantomimical  efcapes,  are  fubftitued  to  keep  the 
audience  awak?,  and  are  accepted  in  place  of 
genuine  wit,  of  which  it  muft  be  owned,  there 
is  "  a  plentiful  lack"  (with  fome  ftrong  excep- 
tions, however)  m  our  modern  comedy — All 
this  is  very  well,  if  we  take  it  as  mere  amufc- 
ment; but,  what  1  quarrel  with,  is  the  canting 
fallacy  of  calling  the  fbage  the  fchool  of  morali- 
ty— Roufleau  fays,  very  juftly,  "  II  n'y  a  que 
la  raifon  qui  ne  foit  bonne  a  rien  fur  la  fcene*" 
— A  reafonable  man  would  be  a  character  in- 
fupportably  flat  and  infipid  even  on  the  French 
ftage,  and  on  the  Englifh,  would  not  be  endur- 
ed to  the  end  of  the  firft  fcene — Even  thofe 
charming  pieces,  which  are  called  drames,  fuch 
as  le  Pere  de  famille,  I'lndigent,  le  Philofophe 
fans  le  fcavoir,  would,  howevr^r  well  they  might 
be  tranflated,  adapted  to  our  manners,  and  re- 
prefented,  lull  an  Englifh  audience  to  fleep, 
though  they-  exhibit  donieftic  fcenes,  by  which 
morality  and  virtue  are  moft  forcibly  inculcated  ; 
and  fuch,  as  by  coming  "  home  to  the  bufinefs 
and  bofoms"  of  the  younger  part  of  the  audience, 

*  It  is  reafon  only  that  is  worih  noihing  on  the  ftage. 

might 


DESMOND.  275 

might  be,  indeed,  leflbns  in  that  fchool,  which 
our  theatre  certainly  does  not  form;  though  the 
careful  mothers, wh  odread  the  evil  influtnce  cf 
novels,  carry  their  daughthers  to  its  moft  ex- 
ceptionable reprefentations. 

In  regard  to  novels,  I  cannot  help  remarking 
another  ilrange  inconfiftency,  which  is,  that  the 
great  name  of  Richardfon,  (and  great  it  certainly 
deferves  to  be)  makes,  by  a  kind  of  hereditary 
prefcriptive  deference,  thofe  fcenes,  thofe  de- 
i'criptions  pafs  uncen fared  in  Pamela  and  Cla- 
rifla,  which  are  infinitely  more  improper  for 
the  perufal  of  young  wometi,  than  any  that  can 
be  found  in  the  novels  of  the  prefent  day  j  of 
which,  indeed,  it  may  be  faid,  that,  if  they  do 
no  good,  they  do  no  harm  ;  and  (hat  there  is  a 
chance,  that  thofe  who  will  read  nothing,  if 
the  do  not  read  novels,  may  colIe(£t  from  them 
fome  few  ideas,  that  are  not  either  fallacious,  or 
abfurd,  to  add  to  the  very  fcanty  ftock  which 
their  ufual  infipidity  of  life  has  afforded  them 
■ — As  to  niyielf,  1  read,  you  know,  all  forts  of 
books,  and  have  done  fo  ever  fmce  I  was  out  of 
the  nurfery,  for  my  mother  had  then  no  notion 
of  reftraining  me — Novels,  ofcourfe,  and  thofe 
very  indifferent  novels,  were  the  firft  that  I 
could  obtain  ;  and  I  ran  through  them  with 
extreme  avidity,  often  forgetting  to  pradlife  my 
leflbn  on  the  harpfichord,  or  to  learn  my  French 
tafk,  while  I  got  up  into  my  own  room,  and 
devoured  with  an  eager  appetite,  the  mawkiih 
pages  that  told  of  a  damfel,  moil  exquifitely 
beautiful,  confined  by  a  cruel  father,  and  e(- 
caping  to  an  heroic  lover,  while  a  wicked  Lord 
laid  in  wait  to  tear  her  from  him,  and  carried 
her  to  fome  remote  caftle — Thofe  delighted  me 
moft  that  ended  miferably  ;  and  having  tortured 

mc 


276  DESMOND. 

me  through  the  lad  volume  with  impoflible  di- 
ftrefs,  ended  in  the  funeral  of  the  heroine- 
Had  the  imagination  of  a  young  perfon  been  li- 
able to  be  much  afFedled  by  thefe  fort  of  hifto- 
ries,  mine  would,  probably,  have  taken  a  ro- 
mantic turn,  and  at  eighteen,  when  I  was  mari- 
cd,  I  Ihould  havehefitated  whether  I  fliould  obey 
my  friends  dirediions,  or  have  waited  till  the 
hero  appeared,  who  would  have  been  imprinted 
on  my  mind,  from  fome  of  the  charming  fabu- 
lous creatures,  of  whom  I  had  read  in  novels 
— But,  far  from  doing  fo,  I  was,  you  fee, 
"  obedient — very  obedient  ;"  and,  fn  the  four 
years  that  have  fmce  paft,  I  have  thought  only 
of  being  a  quiet  wife,  and  a  good  nurfe,  and 
of  fulfilling,  as  well  as  I  can,  the  part  which 
has  been  chofen  for  me — I  know  not  how  I  have 
Aid  into  all  this  egotifm,  from  a  defence  of 
novel-reading — It  has,  however,  ferved  to  de- 
tach my  thoughts  from  fubje<Sts  of*  fad  import  j" 
and  I  have  written  myfelf  into  fome  degree  of 
cheerfulnefs  ;  before  1  relapfe,  therefore,  I  will 
bid  you,  my  beloved  Fanny,  adieu  I 

GERALDINE  VERNEY. 


End  of  Vol,  I.


A ... 


^ 


\\S 


I 


&v 


-^ 


•\ 


Digitized  by  tine  Internet  Archive 
in  2010  witii  funding  from 
Duke  University  Libraries 


,littp://www.arcliive.org/details/desmondnovelintw02smit 


DESMOND, 

4 

N    O    V    E    L, 

Ik    TWO    VOLUMt*^ 


€n  A  k  I  b  7  r  E    s  m  j  t  //. 


0  L  U  M   E     ir. 


i^^ 


Z)     U    JS    L    I    X 


>%.l't!TXt)     FOR     r.    W  O  G  A  N,     P.    fe  T  R  N  E,     J.   M~t)  ft  R  I. 

W.   M'KE  NZIE,  H.   COLBERT,  A.   GRUEBER,  J.  ]OSf, 

B.    DORNIN,     J.    RICE,     W.    JONES,     J.     MEHAIN", 

e.    DRAFER,      R.    M    ALHSTER, 

O.    fOLlNGSBY. 

M,t<cc,xcir 


e>c>H 

DESMOND. 


LETTER      I. 
TO    MR.    DESMOND. 

Bitli,  May   17th,   lypr. 

I  N  purfuaace  of  my  promife,  which,  though 
it  was,  perhaps,  inJifcreet  to  give  it,  I  hold  fa- 
cred  now  that  it  is  given;  I  write  to  you,  my 
dear  friend,  to  relate  an  hiftorv  that  cannot  but 
wound  you  moil:  cruelly,  and  add  to  that  n-it^'an- 
choly  del'pimdence  too  vifii.le  in  your  Lift  let- 
ters—  I  believe  I  told  you*  that  Geraldine  was 
fuddenlv  returned  to  London,  at  the  requeft  of 
her  hultand,  and  that  his  ftyle  of  living  at  his 
ho.ife  in  Seyniour-ftreet,  far  from  having  been 
reduced  by  the  late  untoward  circumftances  that 
betid  him  there,  was  more  extravagant  and  pro- 
fufe  than  before — He  was  fuppofed  to  have  won 
confiderable  fums  of  money  from  the  Duke  de 
Romagnecourt,  and  fome  other  Frenchmen  of 

*    la  a  letter  which  dots  not  appear. 

Vol.  IL  B  fortune, 


2  DESMOND. 

fortune,  emigrants  in  England;  and  it  was  to 
do  the  honours  of  his  houfe  to  thefe  new  friendf, 
that  his  wife,  who  could  no  lunger  plead  the  ex- 
cufe  of  ill  health,  was  compelled,  in  obedience 
to  his  withes,  to  leave  her  quiet  retirement  at 
Sheen,  and  return  to  witnels  follies  fhe  could 
not  check,  and  to  fee  the  progrefs  of  ruin,  it  was 
impoflible  for  her  to  prevent. 

in  may  v,^ay  through  London,  about  three 
weeks  ago,  1  called  at  her  door,  merely  to  make 
an  enojuiry  after  her,  and  not  expecting  to  fee 
her — T  he  fervant,  however,  whom  i  fpoke  to, 
informed  mc  (he  \uA  been  fome  days  in  Londorr, 
was  then  at  home,  and  would,  he  believed,  fee 
me.  1  fent  up  my  name,  and,  on  entering  the 
room,  was  gratified  by  the  expreHion  of  pleafure, 
which  I  favv  on  the  countenance  of  Geraldine, 
who,  inftead  of  receiving  me  with  the  formality 
of  mere  acquaintance,  held  out  her  hand  to  me, 
and  called  me  her  good  friend. 

The  features  of  a  gentleman,  who  was  fitting 
with  her,  wore,  1  thought,  a  very  different 
-  meaning — This  was  Colonel  Scarfdale,  who 
looked  at  me  as  if  he  at  once  contemned  me  as 
a  rural  Squire,  and  diflikcdme  as  an  unwelcome 
intruder — while  the  evidtnt  preference  that  Gc- 
raldine  gave  me  by  addreiling  sll  her  converfa- 
lion  to  me,  and  enquiring  folicitoufly  about  you, 
fecined  e\cry  moiiitnt  to  encreafe  his  difnleafure; 
ftill,  however,  he  ilaid — now  humming  an  air — 
and  now  m.;king  a  violent  noife  wiih  the  little 
boy,  for  whoin  he  ail'ec^s  the  mod  extravagatit 
londnefs-,  and  though  I  v/iihed  very  much  to 
have  fome  converfation  with  Geraldine,  in 
which,  notwiihitanding  her  referve,  1  might  have 
learned  mere  of  her  real  fituation,  than  1  can 
gather  from  public  report — I  found  the  Colonel 

determined 


DESMOND.  3 

determined  to  ftay  too  ;  and  that  he  was  fo  much 
domefticated  in  the  houfe,  that  he  drtlled  there, 
and  was,  that  day,  to  make  one  of  a  large  party 
that  were  coming  to  dinner — As  I  was  under 
the  neceffity  of  leaving  London  early  the  next 
morning,  1  had  no  opportunity  of  attempting 
another  interview  with  her  ;  but  as  foon  as  I 
arrived  at  Bath,  I  waited  on  her  mother  and  her 
fifter,  and  fortunately  found  the  latter  at  home 
alone. 

Fanny  Waverly  received  me  with  great  plea- 
fure,  and  was  not  lefs  early  and  eager  in  her  en- 
quiries after  you,  than  Geraldine  had  been  two 
days  before — When  1  told  her  that  you  were, 
from  your  own  account,  fo  far  recovtred  of 
your  accident,  that  you  talked  of  leaving  off 
the  fling  in  which  your  arm  had  been  confined 
— her  exes  fparkled  witli  pleafure  ;  bat  when  I 
added,  that  you  /poke  lefs  favourably  of  your 
general  hea'-''^}  and  had  no  thoughts  of  return 
ing  foon  to  England,  fhe  evidently  d'ooped  in 
dtjedfl^ion  ;  and  when  I  led  the  ditcourfe  towards 
Geraldine,  as  1  immediately  did,  Ihe  diirolvcd 
In  tears. 

She  told  me,  that  the  fituation  of  her  fi;lef 
gave  her  the  moft  cruel  alarm^  ;  that  Verney 
was  moft  undoubtedly  ruined  beyond  remedy; 
and  that  fhe  feared  his  real  reaibn  for  having 
brought  back  Geraldine  to  his  houfe,  V/as,  * 
hope  of  perfuading  her  to  jiive  up  her  fetticmenr, 
and  enable  him  to  fell  his  Yorkihire  eltate, 
which,  faid  fhe,  "  i  have  too  mu-h  reafon  to 
bilieve  my  fifter  will  confent  to — Nor  is  this  all 
my  fear — Geraldine  is  young,  and  very  lovely — 
Every  man  of  intrigue,  who  fees  fuch  a  woman 
neglected,  or  even  worfe  treated  by  her  hufoand, 
is  ready  to  form  defigns  for  himlelf — i  kn  »w 
B  2  there 


4  DESMOND. 

there  are,  at  this  time,  many  fuch  furrounding 
my  fifter  ;  and  though  the  purity  of  her  heart, 
the  excellence  of  her  underftanding,  and  her  ex- 
cellive  tendernefs  for  her  children,  are  fecurities 
for  her  conduc^t,  which  I  cannot  a  moment 
doubt;  yet,  I  have  fuch  an  opinion  of  Verney, 
that  I  am  not  certain  he  is  not  capable  of  the 
moft  infamous  proceedings,  even  towards  his 
wife,  if,  by  fuch,  he  could  obtain  the  means  of 
Supporting  a  little  longer  the  wild  career,  which 
his  mad  infatuation  reprefents  as  the  only  one 
worthy  of  a  man  of  fafliion." 

This  remark  added  to  what  I  had  made  in 
town  on  the  behaviour  of  Colonel  Scarfdale, 
and  my  opinion  of  Verney,  which  is  not  at  all 
better  than  that  Fanny  entertains  of  him,  (tar- 
red me  extremely — <'  If  fuch,  my  dear  Mifs 
vVaverly,"  faid  I,  *'  are  your  apprehenfions 
for  your  fifter,  furely  your  mother,  or  your 
brother,  oui^ht  to  interfere,  before  they  can  he  re- 
alized— Surely,  they  ought  to  refcue  t^jls  excel- 
lent and  lovely  woman  from  the  power  uf  a 
hufband,  of  whom  fuch  horrors  can  belufpeft- 
ed."— *'  Alas!  Mr.  Bethel,"  replied  ilie, 
*'  how  can  I  mention  fucn  dreadful  ideas  to  my 
mother  ?  who,  confcious,  I  believe,  that  Geral- 
dine  was  the  vidim  of  duty,  and  married  only 
in  compliance  with  her  and  my  father's  wifhes, 
now  endeavours  to  efcape  the  convi£lion,  that 
fhe  has  condemned  her  to  the  moft  dreadful  of 
all  deftinies,  and  will  not  fee  or  hear,  if  (he  can 
by  any  means  efcape  it,  what  is,  unhappily,  too 
evident  to  the  reft  of  the  world — Wrapt  up,  as 
her  whole  foul  has  ever  been  in  my  brother,  (lie 
has  always  thought,  that  in  marrying  h-  r  daugh- 
ters, in  what  is  called,  a  prudent  way,  that  is, 
to  men  of  large  fortune,  fhe  had  taken  fuificient 

trouble 


DESMOND.  5 

trouble  about  them  ;  fhe  never  confidered  whe- 
ther there  were  any  other  fources  of  unhappi- 
nefs  than  want  of  money  ;  nor  did  it  ever  occur 
to  her,  that  in  giving  Geraldine  to  a  man  of 
fortune  and  family,  fhe  overlooJccd  circumllances 
in  the  character  of  Verney,  (though,  when  he 
married,  his  charadier  was  not  developed)  that 
might  make  her  daughter  liable  to  all  the  uif- 
trtlT  s  and  inconveniencies  of  poverty — To  be 
convinced  that  it  is  fo,  is  to  be  convinced,  that 
(he  has  wanted  either  judgment  or  tendcrnefs, 
and  fhe  tak.es  refuge  in  cards  and  company  againft- 
the  reproaches  of  her  own  heart — 1  have  ven- 
tured, howe\'er,  fince  I  received  (ome  hints  of 
the  probability  there  wa?,  that  Geraldine  fhould 
be  ptrfuaded  to  part  with  her  fettiement,  to 
implore  my  mother's  attention  to  k  circum- 
ftance  (o  deftruitive,  but  I'he  impatiently  anfwer- 
ed,  that  1  talked  ncnfcnfe  j  for  that  the  truf- 
tees  to  her  marriage-articles,  would  take  efpe- 
cial  care  to  prevent  her  committing  fuch  a  folly 
•^As  to  any  other  ftars  I  ent>;rtaiii,  fuch  as  thofe 
I  have  juft  now  mentioned,  my  mother  would 
treat  them  as  a  romantic  chimeiaot  mine,  and 
refent  my  fuppoiing  them  probdble  or  poilible — 
How  then  1  can  venture  to  m;  ke  reprtientations 
to  my  mother,  which  would,  piobably,  be  ill  re- 
ceived and  fruitlefs  ?  or  \^h:ch,  were  ihe  to  at- 
tend to  them  a  moment,  fhe  would,  pei  haps,  find 
fome  occafion  to  condemn  as  futile,  becaufe  fhe 
would  dillike  to  do  that,  which,  if  fhe  allows 
them  well  founded,  file  ou^ht  to  do— I  mean, 
to  take  her  daughter  to  her  own  houfe,  as 
the  only  proper  afylum,  if  ihe  is  compelled  to 
quit  that  of  her  hufband — Thi^,  however,  I 
know  my  mother  will  avoid,  tor  Geraldine  will 
never  leave  her  children,  and  my  mutner  diflikes 

their 


b  n    E    S    iM    O    N    D. 

their  noife,  and  the  trouble  they  occafion  in  an 
houfe  ;  and  fhe  is,  in  ihort,  for  why  may  I  not 
fpeak  the  truth  to  you  ?  juft  at  that  period  of 
life,  when  the  chara£ler  retains  little  tliat  is  fe- 
minine, but  a  love  of  trifles,  and  a  redoubled 
attachment  to  fome  one  weaknefs  that  has  long 
been  cherifbed — Such  is  her  violent  partiality  to 
m)-  brother,  for  whom  (notwithfl'adning  the  lit- 
tle encouragement  his  entrance  into  the  world 
has  given  to  fuch  hopes)  fhe  looks  forward  to- 
W4rds  titles  and  dignities,  which  fhe  imagines 
his  fortune  will  command,  and  his  merit  de- 
izr\c — There  arc  fome  hearts,  Mr.  Bethel,  that 
have  not  room  for  more  than  one  ftrong  aftecU- 
ot) — Such,!  fijppofe,  is  my  mother's — The  reft 
of  it,  which  her  ddughters  might  have  occupied, 
is  fiiitd  with  trifling  objedls — and  — but  1  be- 
lieve, you  will  think  ine  very  wrong,"  continu- 
ed fiie,  *'  and,  pe  haps,  1  have  already  faid  loo 
liiuc!! — I  meant,  however,  to  account  to  you  ft^r 
omitting  to  do,  what  certainly  appears  mod  ra- 
tional  under  the  apprehenfiuns  1  have  ventured 
to  exprefs  to  you." 

I  was  la  much  flruck  by  the  manner,  as  well 
ES  the  purport  of  this  apj\ver — fo'  concerned  for 
the  nruation  of  Geraldine- — and  fo  affeiSied  by 
the  tender  intereil  her  filfer  thus  cxprefled,  that 
1  could  neither  find  words,  iinmedia;ely  to  do 
juHice  to  my  feelings,  nor,  in  my  mind,  any  re- 
mtd^,  for  rhe  unhappy  circumftances  that  ex- 
cited them— Your  charge,  my  dear  Defmond, 
to  uie  y  )ur  fortune  without  fcruple,  in  the  fer- 
vice  of  Geraldint,  cannot  here  be  executed  ; 
for  t')  her,  it  would  be  worfe  than  ulclefs, 
while  hir  hufb.'nd  would  derive  from  it  the 
(Deans  of  continuing  hi^  oner  of  vice  and  folly 
yet  fouK thing  Ujould  b?  dene,  and  done  imme- 
diately. 


DESMOND. 


iliatcly,  to  fave  her  fenfible  heart  from  the  an- 
guiih  it  muft  endure  for  her  children — to  fpare 
her  the  mortification    and    mifery  fhe  muft  feel 
in  feeing  herfeif  at  the  mercy  of  a  wretch,  who 
is  believed  capable  of  fuch   adlions   as   Vanny 
Waverly,  I  fear  with  too  much  reafon,  reprefents 
him  as  likely  to  pradife.      As  I  wiflied  to  have 
time  to  reflect  on   what  meafures  were  the  moft 
proper,  fmce  of  her  own  family  there  feemed  lo 
little  to  hope,  I  took  leave  of  Mifs  Waverly,  and 
returned    to   my   lodgings  j    but    my    thoughts 
dwelt  in  vain  on  the  fubject — I  faw   no  way  iri 
which    it  was  proper,   or  even  poflible,  for  the 
moft  difintereited  friendftiip    to    interfere   be- 
tween a  man  and  his  wife — If  Verney  is  deter- 
mined  to  ruin  himfelf  and   her,  1    fee   not    by 
what  means  it  can  be  prevented,  or  on  what  pre- 
tence, even  her  own  family,  can    feparate  them, 
while  he  chufes  fhc  fhould  remain  the  vicStim  of 
his  difTipation,  or  hopes  to  derive,  from  the  ad- 
miration (he  excites,  the  power  of  continuing  it ; 
for  to  fuch  a  plan  Fanny  Waverly  undoubtedly 
alluded  ;   and  1  have  fmce  heard,  that  Scarfdale, 
who  has  been  long  trying  to  lecommend  himfelf 
to  the  favour  of  Geraldine  in  vain,  has  found  it 
much  eafier  to  embarrafs  her  hufband's  affairs  (o 
much,  as  to  have  a  profpe61  of  obtaining  that  in- 
fluence over  her,  from  ncctUity,  which,  from  any 
othermotivehe could  neveroblain — But,  1  think, 
if  1  know  any  thing  of  the  fpirit  and  temper  of 
that  in  comparable  woman  ;  fhc  will  fpurn,  with 
deteftation,  a  monfter,   who  purfues  the  gratifi- 
cation of  his  pafTions  by  perfidy  lo  atrocious — 
'I  here  was  a  time,  when  new  to  the  world,  and 
unhackneyed  in  the  ways  of  men,  I  fhould  have 
felt  indignation   at   the   mere   reprefcnraticn  of 
fuch  charaders  of  thole  as  Verney  and   Scarf- 
dale, 


6  C    E    s    M    O    N    D. 

dsle,  and  fhouU!  have  thought  it  a  mifantrophic 
libel  on  human  nature — But,  alas !  I  know  that 
(lich  men  do  exill: ;  and  I  know  that  it  is  very 
difHciiU  to  la^'C  Geraldine  from  them,  if  they 
unite  in  deftroying  her  peace  and  her  reputation 
— I  here  brcrik  off,  to  iceep  an  appointment  I 
have  made  with  Fanny  Waverly,  to  meet  at  a 
bookfellor's  (Hop,  and  walk  together — You  will 
iuiile,  or  rather,  you  would  fmile,  at  any  other 
time,  in  figuring  to  yourfelf,  your  fage  Men- 
tor, making  an  aiTignri^un  with  a  fprightly  girl 
of  nineteen  or  tweney — But  this  is  the  only 
way,  by  which  I  can  obtain  an  opportunity  of 
talking  with  her  alone — And  I  am  one  of  the 
tavored  few,  whonr»  her  difcreet  mother  allows 
to  converfe  with  her — Louifa,  who  is  a  great 
favorite,  and  who  loves  Mifs  Waverly  ex- 
tremely, isj  however,  to  make  a  third  in  our 
party. 

May  iSth,   1791. 

Well  !  my  friend— I  am  returned  from  my 
icle-a-iite  with  thiS  young  beauty,  and  with  an 
aching  heart,  but  aching  from  other  motives 
than  ihofe  of  love— ^Ihe  week  that  haselapfed 
iince  i  lafi^  converfed  with  htr  about  Geraldine, 
has  produced  fome  of  the  events  (he  then  ex- 
pecled,  and  others,  of  which  fhe  had  no  appre- 
henfion. 

Waverly,  your  travelling  companion,  is  fud- 
den! y  returned  to  England,  while  his  mother  and 
his  fifier  thought  hmi  at  Venice,  with  a  nymph 
whom  he  had  brought  from  the  Ifle  of  Cyprefs, 
whither  he  w^ent  with  fome  other  young  En- 
ghlnnven — Some  mifadventure,  by  which  he  lo(t 
the  lady,  difgufted  him  with  their  fociety,  and 
meeting  at  Genoa,  with  a  Captain   of  a  mer«. 

chaiitman. 


DESMOND.  9 

chantman,  juft  coming  to  England,  he  embark- 
ed, after  half-an-hour's  d^-batc,  with  only  one 
of  his  fervants,  leavinj  the  others  with  his  bao;- 
gage  to  follow;  and  having  a  very  quick  paf- 
fage,  he  landed  near  London  ;  and  in  fourteen 
hours  arrived  at  Bath,  to  the  extreme  fatisfattion 
of  his  mother,  who  received  him,  as  if  the 
whole  time  of  his  abfence  had  been  pafled  in  re- 
fining his  manner?,  and  cultivating  his  under- 
ftanding — I  believe  (though  Fanny  does  not  fay 
fo)  that  there  is  no  very  vifible  improvement  ia 
either  ;  but  that  he  has  picked  up,  at  every  place, 
f:->me  Imall  fpecimen  of  the  reignine  follies, 
without  having  dropped  thofe  that  he  had  acquir- 
ed before  he  fct  out — But  his  mother,  who  be- 
lieves he  has  completed  the  courfe  of  ftudy  and 
education  which  is  requifite  to  a  mm  of  fortune, 
and  **  of  a  certain  ityle,"  is  now  mofl  eagerly 
folicitous  to  have  him  married  j  and  Fanny  tells 
me,  that,  from  every  appearance,  at  prefent,  it 
is  highly  probable,  that,  by  the  mutual  endea- 
vours of  the  two  elder  ladie?,  Mr«.  Fairfax  and 
Mrs.  Wavcrly,  this  great  event  may  be  accom- 
plifhed — The  eldeft  Mifs  Fairfax  (your  fairarif- 
tocrate,  at  Margate)  is  the  lady  whofe  happy 
deftiny  it  will  be,  to  fix  this  fiuduating 
lover. 

This  is  a  matter  of  importance  no  otherwife, 
than,  as  it  oocupies  entirely  the  maternal  feelings 
of  Mrs.  Waverly,  and  prevents  her  giving  any 
attention  to  the  fuuation  of  her  daughter  Ver- 
ney,  and  will  as  certainly  be  a  rcafon  awainft 
her  affording  her,, even  that  pecuniary  affiftance, 
wiiich  I  greatly  fear  fhe  may  now  want,  for  the 
cataftrophe  of  '''erney's  affairs,  fo  long  fortfeen, 
is  at  length  arrived — The  fudden  encreafe  of 
cxpence  v»hich  he  nsihed  into  in  London,  ended 
B  5  in 


iO  DESMOND. 


in  his  giving  up  the  leafe  of  ihe  houfc,  and  all  ts 
fu!  r;iture,  to  his  creditors ;  and  it  is  advertiled 
for  (ale  on  the  30th  inftant — Geraldine,  and  her 
children,  have,  of  courfe,  left  it ;  but  not  to  j.o 
to  Moorefly  Park,  wh;ch  is  made  over  for  a  term 
of  years,  with  the  furniture  and  flock,  to  Colo- 
nel Scarfdale,  as  is  faid,  towards  the  difcharge  of 
a  confidcrable  debt,  of  what  is  called  honor — 
"Verney  himfelf,  who  feems  totally  infeniible 
to  the  lufl'erings  of  his  wife,  and  has  left  her  to 
ftrugijle  agairilt  them  alone,  is  cither  gone,  or 
going  to  Germany  with  the  Duke  de  Romagne- 
courr,  and  his  party,  who  are  about  to  join  the 
exiled  French  Princes — Fanny  Waverly  told 
me,  with  many  tears,  that  her  fifter  was  gone 
into  a  fmall  lodging  at  Kcnfington,  for  thofc  at 
Sheen,  humble  as  they  once  appeared,  fhe  now 
thought  too  expenfive  for  her  j  that  fhe  did  not 
intend  to  icniain  {.)  near  London,  but  to  find 
forhe  che;Tp  retirement  in  a  diftant  country, 
where  fhe  might  conctal  her  forrows  from  thole, 
to  whorh  the  light  of  them  would  be  oppreiTiVe. 
— Thus,  my  dear  Defmond,  I  have  executed  the 
jmofl  une.ify  tafk  I  ever  undertook,  that  of  relat- 
Tng  the  Cilamities  that  feem  likely  toeverwhelm 
our  charming  friend — Be  not,  however,  in  pain 
about  her  iowr.ediate  fituarion,  as  to  money — I 
have  fettled  with  Fanny  Wavcrly  t;  e  means  of 
being,  for  the  j  rif  nt,  her  banker,  without  htr 
knowing  that  ;;ny  but  her  own  family  execute 
thisoffice — "^^^  nd  I  have  entreated  this  amiabls 
girl  to  ender.vour  to  obtain  leave  of  her  mother 
to  go  to  h.r  fifter  in  tins  hour  of  bitter  dirtrefs 
— 'I'bis,  however,  is  a  permifilon  that  P  ai:ny  has 
?lrcady  iolicited  m  vain;  nor  can  fhe  obtam  cf 
Mrs.  Wavcrly  ar.y  other  attention  to  the  cruel 
iituaiicn  of  Geraldine,  than  what  the  old  lady 

thinks 


DESMOND.  II 

(hinlcs  neceflarVi  to  prevent  the  circumftances 
fhe  is  under,  from  bringini/  any  fiirt  of  difgrace 
on  the  rt-ll  of  the  family,  and  injuring  her  prc- 
fent  projects,  in  regard  to  her  ion,  which  are 
alone  near  her  heart, 

I  direct  this  to  St.  Germain?,  where  vourlaft 
letter  tells  me  you  will,  by  this  time,  be  arrived, 
to  remain  (omc  time,  .  cannot  imagine  why,  and 
do  not  afk,  as  if  you  had  chofen  I  Ihould  know, 
ynu  would  probably  have  told  me — -However, 
my  bufinefs  is  to  forward  this  letter  to  you,  by 
as  quick  a  conveyance  as  poilible — 1  luckily 
have  an  opportunity  of  doing  fo,  by  a  lervant 
belonging-  to  an  acquaintance  of  mme,  who  is 
going  to  rejoin  his  mafter  at  Paris.  1  fhall  be 
impatient  to  hear  from  you — Let  me  foon  have 
that  fatisfddtion  ;  and  let  me  hear  that  the  de- 
fpnndence  is  gone,  which,  at  your  age,  and  with 
your  character,  is  a  weaknefs  you  ought  not  to 
indulge. — Adieu! 

Moft  faithfully  your's, 

E.    BETHEL. 


L  E  T- 


12  DESMOND. 


LETTER    II. 


TO  MISS  WAVERLY. 


May  29ih  1791 . 

•'  A  T  length  my  Fanny,  I  begin  to  reco- 
ver— It  is  now  three  daye  fince  I  have  been  fet- 
tled at  my  new  abode,  and  returning  tranquilli- 
ty—I  mean  outward  tranquillity,  (for  that  of 
the  heart  ?,nd  fpirit  can  never  mere  be  mine) 
pives  me  a  little  time  to  collc«St  my  troubled 
thoughts — 

'*  And  rn  the  hear  and  flivne  of    my  endursncc. 
Sprinkle  cool  patitnte.*" 

Eut  be  not  uncafy  about  me-~I  am  not  ill- — I 
am  only  languid  frc-m  tiie  feverity  of  my  paft 
fafftrings,  and  that  languor  is  every  day  decreaf- 
ing. 

Iv'ly  two  eldtft  children  are  quite  well ;  and 
my  liule  George  is  as  gail)  playing  on  the  turf 
htie,  at  he  efeJtobe  on  that  of  the  lawn  at  Lin- 

*  Ehakefpeare. 

well. 


O   £    S   M    O    K    O.  13 

well,  or  the  park  at  Moorefly— places,  of  which 
I  once  hoped,  he  would  be  the  inheritor-^But, 
of"  my  difappointed  hopes,  my  lovely  boy  is  un- 
confcious  !  —  yet  he  continually  brings  tears  into 
my  eyes,  by  aflong,  why  we  came  hither?-— 
what  is  become  of  his  papa,  of  the  fervants,  and 
the  horfes,  whofe  names  they  had  taught  him, 
and  of  the  maid  who  ufed  to  wait  upon  me  ?■— 
I  endeavour  to  divert  thefe  infantine  enquiries 
as  much  as  I  can,  for  they  afFe£l  me  more  than 
even  my  own  melancholy  refleiilions — Fortu- 
nately it  is  a  feafon  when  he  is  eafily  amufed— 
1  fend  him  out  with  his  fifter  and  his  maid  into 
the  furrounding  meadows,  where,  after  their' 
maid  has  dreffed  iheir  hats  with  cowflips,  or« 
chiiTes,  cuclcoo-flowers,  and  golden-cups — my 
Flarriet  brings  home  her  lap  full  of  thefe  *'  gay 
children  of  the  May,"  and,  in  her  imperfeiSl 
language,  fays,  they  are  for  "dear  mama." 

While  my  little  prattlers  are  abfent,  I  hang 
over  the  cradle  of  mv  infant  William,  whofe 
fiealth  has  again  been  fadly  difordered  by  all  the 
anxiety  1  have  endured  ^  yet,  for  his  fake,  1  en- 
deavoured to  reprefs  thofe  acute  feelings  with 
which  my  heart  was  torn  in  pieces;  but  fuch 
were  their  nature,  that  it  was  impolhble  my 
health  fhould  not  be  afFe«',led>  and,  of  courfe, 
that  of  the  child,  whc,  under  fucn  circumlbn- 
ces,  1  have,  perhaps,  done  wrong  to  continue 
nounfhing  at  my  breaft,  efpecialiy  as  I  think  he 
has  never  recovered  the  firft  fiiock  he  received, 
when,  at  his  birth,  I  firft  knew  (o  much,  and  fo 
fuddenly,  of  the  difarranged  flatc  of  IVIr  V  cr- 
ney's  circumft.inces— Compared  with  the  lofs 
of  my  chill ,  every  other  evil  would  be  as  no- 
thing i  yet,  perhaps,  I  ought  not  to  wifh  him  to 
live,  hncc  to   live  is  but  to  fufter. — But  again, 

my 


H  D    E    S    M    O    N-  D. 

my  dear  fifter,  I  check  thefe  mournful  thoughts, 
With  which  1  ought  not  to  opprefs  v')u  ;  and 
againi  affure  you,  ih.it  when  none  of  thefe  ap- 
prehenfions  aHail  my  heart,  i  am  not  io  unhappy 
as  you  fay  ycu  fr-ar  1  an. — if  i  obtam  refolut.on 
enough  to  look  calmly  at  the  change  which  has 
befallen  me,  i  fee  much  lefs  to  regret  than  moft 
people  would  difcove, — The  only  plrafu^e  I 
have  loll  in  1  fing  high  affluence,  is  that  of 
having  the  power  to  b-friend  the  unhappy,  to 
whom  1  can  now  give  cnly  my  te^TS  ;  but,  for 
the  reft,  what  hsve  1  loif,  th,;t  1  ought  to  la- 
mtnt  ? — 1  he  turbulent  and  jo\]-rs  focieties 
which  Mr.  Verifcy  loved,  were  to  rcc  only  fa- 
tiguing anddilagrceabie-  Thepartiesof  failiion- 
abie  men  that  he  con;inuall\  colleded,  offered 
me  neither  ration&l  eonvei  jation,  nor  j'ermanent 
friendfhip — and  the  women,  wah  whom  I  was, 
in  confequencc  of  tf.efe  connedtcns,  compelled 
to  aflbciate,  were  fo  infipid,  or  fo  vainj  fo  de- 
voted to  the  card  table,  or  occupied  by  the  rage 
of  being  admired,  that  ibsir  acquaintance  gave 
me  as  little  pleiifire  as  mine  feemed  to  give  them;, 
and  our  intercourfe  wa5,  after  two  or  three  for- 
mal dinncis,  reduced  to  the  flight  civility  of 
fenumg  cards  to  each  other  four  or  five  times  in 
a  winier.  1  he  fii2eries  in  wh  ch  Mr.  Verney's 
vaniiy  drefle  j  me  out,  ^  he  called  it  love,  J  think, 
foi  a  iitile  time)  never  gave  me  a  moment's 
plcnfure  ;  and  when  laft  year,  Colonel  Scarfuale 
perfuaded  him,  that  I  ou^.ht  to  be  preitnted,  and 
appear  fometimes  at  court,  1  was  perft.£tly  con- 
vmced  tha.  fuch  certmionics  were  for  me  the 
hcaveft  punifhu^ents  th;it  could  be  devifedj  and, 
indeed,  iew  oi  thofe  v;hofe  pride  or  inttreft 
m.detheii  attendance  on  them  niore  frequ- nt, 
were  apparently  more-deJighied  than  I  was,  for 

they 


DESMOND.  15 

they  feemed  univerially  to  feel  under  all  the  ap- 
parent gaiety  and  iplendor  the  influence  of  the 
Damon  ennui — 

"  That  reslm  he  rules,  and  in  fupcrb  attire, 
Vifiti'  each  earthly  palace  *" 

Now,  I  believe,  my  Fanny,  I  am  for  ever  ex- 
em|)t  from  being  a  vifitor  where  this  hideous 
phantom  holds  his  eternal  reign;  and  he  will 
not,  1  trult,  leelc  me  in  the  farm  houfe  I  now 
inhabit,  and  which  I  am  going  to  defcribe  to  you. 

The  lituationof  it  is  charming — t  ftands  on 
a  rifjng  ground  among  meadows,  of  which  poe- 
try, in  the  mort  flowery  language,  could  hardly 
exaggerate  the  beauty — Through  thele  yellow 
meads,  the  Wye  takes  its  "•  fipous  courfe,"  till 
its  progrefs  is  concealed  by  prtijed^ing  hills,  or 
rather  mountains,  rifmg  beyond  the  meadows  ; 
their  fummits  bare  and  rockv,  their  (i6e^  cloth- 
ed with  woods,  which,  at  this  time,  exhibit  eve- 
ry varied  lint  of  vivid  and  eaily  vegetation — 
Forgive  me,  if  I  borrow  here  the  aid  of  a  poer, 
whwie  powerful  pen,  with  more  than  the  magic 
of  the  pencil,  brings  whatever  he  defcribes  im- 
mediately before  the  eye. 

"   No  tree  in  all  the  grove  but  has  it»  charms, 
Tbo'  each  its  hue  pecu  lar;   piltr  fome. 
And  ■'!    a  wgn.afh  giey,  the  wiilow  luch  ; 
A'-.d  iHiplar,  that  with  (i  ver  lines  hi-  leaf; 
And  3(h,  far  ftreuh  ng  his  umhiagtous  arm; 
Oi  deeper  green  the  elm  ;   snd    deeptr  ft  11, 
Lord  of  the  wood?,  ihe  I'lng-lurvivm,;  oak  i 
Some  g  (.(Ty- itaved  and  (hining  in  the  fu", 
The  maple,  and  I'tech  of  oily  outs 
Prolific  ;    anii  (he  I'me  at  dewy  eve 
Diffufing  odours. "f"" 


*  Hay  ley. 
■f"  Cowper. 


Beneath 


i6  DESMOND. 

Beneath  thefe  varied  woods  are  a  trait  of  or- 
chards, now  covered  with  bloom,  giving  com- 
pletely the  idea  of  the 

'*  PrirtMvera  Candida  e  vertniglia.*" 

A  cottage  or  two,  almofi:  embofomed  among 
the  trees,  are  marked  rather  by  the  fmoke  arifing 
from  their  chimney's,  than  by  their  concealed 
thatch  ;  but  thus  dimly  feen,  they  give  cheerful- 
nefs  to  the  landfcape — Behind  the  houfe,  the 
country  wears  qui'e  another  afpe<Si — It  rifes 
abruptly  into  fmall  knolls,  too  ftecp  for  the 
plough,  and,  fiom  the  nature  of  the  foil,  not 
much  worth  cultivation  ;  fince  it  is  in  the  low- 
er part  a  black  mocr,  and  the  nillocks  are  of 
yellow  fand,  producing  little  but  the  heath  and 
the  whortle-berr*  t — The  higher  ridges,  furze, 
or  thorn?,  with  here  and  there,  in  the  hollows, 
tufts  of  (Vlf-planted  oaks. 

From  this  rude  tra6t  of  country,  the  garden 
of  this  hnufe  is  divided,  in  fome  parts,  by  an  old 
wall,  in  othtrs  by  a  thick  hedge  of  yew  and 
holly,  the  g'owth  of  centuries  j  for  this  is  an 
old  manorial  refidence  ;  and  b  fides  the  long  row 
of  firs,  of  very  ancient  date,  that  fhade  part  of 
the, garden,  hdS  many  marks  of  having  been  once 
the  jbode  of  opulent  pcfillTors,  who  ornar.ent- 
ed  it  in  the  tafte  of  the  diiys  in  V'luch  they  lived. 
The  hvft  improvements  in  the  houfe  appear  to 
have  been  made  in  the  time  of  Elizabeth  and 
James  the  Firrt  j  b.  t  thofe  in  the  garden  are 
rather,  perhaps,  in  the  iiyk  that  was  imported 

•  Peiraich. 

-}■  V/bortle-terry,  or  huitj.     Faainium  MyrtilUs. 

from 


BF.    SMdND.  17 

from  Holland  by  William,  when  he  was  fent 
for  to  fecure  the  liberty  of  tnglifhmen,  and  tcarh 
them  to  curtail  that  of  their  trees— I  mean  the 
tafte  which  decorated  our  gardens  with  rows  of 
evergreens,  formally  planted,  and  cut  into  the 
imagined  fliapes  of  men,  peacocks,  ami  fundiy 
other  forms — 

"   CorgoQS  and  Hydra?,  and  Chimeras  dire," 

The  lafl  inhabitant  of  the  houfe,  wa?  an  old 
and  rich  farmer,  who  had  no  relifh  for  thefc  m,o- 
numents  of  former  elegance)  but  the  wife  of 
him  who  now  rents  it,  and  of  whom  I  hire  my 
apartments,  told  me,  with  great  exultation,  that 
Jhe  had  caufed  one  of  the  men,  at  bis  leifure 
hours,  to  clip  them  into  thtir  former  beauty^ 
and  '<  make  them  fit  to  be  (een,  all's  one,  a? 
folks  fay,  they  ufcd  to  be  in  the  old  Squire's 
time." — Bur,  as  this  ruftic  fculptor,  of  vegeta- 
bles is  not  very  expert  in  his  art,  the  box,  the 
holly,  and  the  yew,  have  loft  all  refemblance  to 
themffclves,  without  finding  any  other — In  the 
borders  beneath  them,  however,  there  are  a  great 
many  flowers,  wliofe  roots  have  furvived  thofe 
who  planted  them,  and  thefe  are  even  fcaitered 
over  the  rough  parts  of  the  enclofure,  which  is 
given  up  to  the  culinary  produdiions,  or  left 
wholly  uncultivated 

**  Along  the  wafte,  where  once  the  garden  fmiled. 
And  where  ftiJl  many  a  garden  flower  giows  wild.*" 

And  it  is  among  thefe,  which  are  now  peeping 
through  the  grafs,  or  blooming,  unfeen,  among 

♦  Goldftnith. 

the 


l8  DESMOND^ 

the  thyme,  balm,  and  lavender,  that  I,  in  my 
melancholy  meditations,  repeat 

*•  The  tender  rofe  which  fcems  in  winter  dead, 
Revives  in    Spring,  and  lift?  it»  dew)  head  : 
But  we — the  great,  the  gloiious  and  tiie  wife! 
-    When  once  the  hand  of  deaih  has  clos'd  cur  eyes—*" 


Or  rather,  the  lighter  comnDcnt  of  a  very  agree- 
able French  authorefs  on  this  text,  which  con- 
clues  with 

•'  Mais  hells !— pour  voulcir  tevivre, 

La  vie  eft  il  on  bien  fi  d'lux  ? 

Qoind  nouk  raimnns  tant,  fongeons  nous 

De  combien  de  chagrins,  i*  ptita  nous  delivre? 

EUe  n*ett  rju'un  amas  de  craintes,  de  douleurs, 
k.       De  travauK,  de  loucif,  de  peines. 
^       Pour  qui  tonnoit  les  miferes  humaines ; 

Mourirn'tft  pas  le  plus  grands  ces  malheurs.'}'" 

But  1  am  getting  again  into  refiedions,  which 
J  biame  myfclf  for  indulging,  and  moralizing, 
when  I  undertook  to  give  you  a  pidure  of  my 
abode. 

Thehoufe  itfelf  is  very  old  j  wide,  projeiling 
cafements,  divided  by  heavy  ftone  work,  a  great 
brick  hall,  and 

"   Paffages  ihnt  lead  to  n'Uhing." 

May  give  you  fomc  idea,  and  perhaps  a  drepry 
idea  of  the  fort  of  houl'e. — The  farmer,  and 
hi?  family,  inhabit  the  northern  end  of  it,  which 
was  once  the  fervants  apartments,  kitchen,  and 

*  Myllitmof  Mofclius  on  the  death  of  Bion. 
•|-  Les  fleurt,  Idylle  par  Madair.e  dcs-Houlieres. 

buttery 


DESMOND.  19 

buttery — The  rooms,  however,  which  I  have 
taken,  are  not  To  forlorn,  as  from  the  general 
air  of  the  houfe  you  would  fuppofe — I  have  a-- 
parlour  wainfcotted  and  carpetted — The  chim- 
ney, indeed,  is  very  large,  but,  at  this  time  of 
the  year,  is 

"   With  flowers,  and  fennel  E*y,*" 

And  will  I  dare  fiiy,  look  very  well  with  a  blaz- 
ing wood  fire  in  it — Above,  I  have  a  very  good 
bed-chamber  for  myfelf,  nnd  one,  ftill  better, 
immediately  adjoining,  for  my  children  j  thefe 
are  papered,  and  though  not  in  a  very  modern 
ftyle,  perhaps,  they  are  clean,  and  warm — I  have 
defired  fume  great,  old,  family  pi6iures,  with 
which  both  theie  and  the  parlour  were  disfigured, 
might  be  removed,  and  I  {\iA\  fupply  the  places 
of  thefe  heroes,  who  bled  in  the  civil  wars,  (as 
I  guefs,  by  their  wigs  and  their  armour)  and  the 
dames,  whofe  fimpering  chaims  rewarded  their 
prowefs,  but  whofe  very  names  arc  now  forgot- 
ten, (fad  lefibn  to  human  vanity  !)  with  rude 
brackets  of  wood,  en  which  I  (hall  put  flowers, 
and  between  ihem  fhelves  for  the  books  I  have 
broujiht  with  me — Thefe  little  arrangements 
fcrve  to  occupy  my  mind  ;  and  I  forget  the  con- 
vcniencics  and  luxuries  of  which  1  am  deprived, 
in  contriving  how  I  may  ftill  obtain  thofe  few, 
which  (perhaps,  from  Angularity  of  tafte)  are 
more  neccflary  to  my  content,  than  the  fide- 
board  of  plate,  the  elegant  furniture,  and  haiid- 
lome  carriages,  1  have  parted  with. 

I  think  more  of  their  late  thoughtltfs  owner, 
poor  Verney!  yet  why  do  I  fpeak  of  him  m  a 
tone  cf   pity,  when  he  is,  probably,  muchh^p- 

*  Gold  mith.  ■ 

pier 


20  DESMOND. 

pier  than  I  am  ?—■ I  have  had  no  other  letter 
from  him  fince  our  hafty  parting  in  Lon^'on, 
than  that,  wherein  he  very  briefly  i-ffenttd  to 
my  propofed  retirt-ment;  and  fai'd,  though  not 
in  direct  terms,  that  if  1  did  not  embarrafi  him 
about  money,  I  was  at  liberty  to  do  with  myfelf 
and  my  children  whatever  I  thought  goc3^^ — I 
will  not  comment  on  this — I  wi!)  '  rdeavour  not 
to  think  of  it— I  turn  always  with  painful  piea- 
fures,  X.0  fome  other  fubjedls  ;  but  to  one  I  think 
with  pieafure  only.  I  am  happy  to  hear  Mr. 
Bethel  is  at  Bath,  that  you  have  fuch  long  and 
pleafant  Converfations  with  him,  and  that  his 
charming  girl  is  fo  much  with  you — He  is  a 
man  whom  I  have  always  regarded  andefleemed 
for  his  own  fake,  as  well  as  becaufe  he  was  fo 
excellent  a  guardian,  and  is  fo  warm  a  fi  end  to 
Mr.  Defmond. — You  hear  that  Defmond  is  at 
St.  Germain?,  that  place  is,  I  fuppofe,  the  re- 
fidence  of  A^Iadame  de  Boifl->p]ic,  when  fl:ie  is 
not  with  her  brother. — But  Mr.  Bethel  tells  you 
that  Defmond  is  quite  reftced  to  health,  and 
only  occafionallv  wears  lu>  arm  in  a  fling — may 
be  foon  lofeeven  that  recollediif.n  of  his  painful 
adventure! — 1  muft  now,  my  Fanny,  bid  you 
adieu  !  my  letter  is  very  long,  yet  1  have  writ- 
ten it  all  while  my  little  William  has  been 
ileeping,  and  my  other  charmers  walking  with 
their  maid  in  the  fliade  of  <"ne  of  the  woods, 
which  a  ruliic  bridge  thrown  acrofs  the  ri\er, 
puts  within  cur  re  ch — It  js  now  near  their 
hour  of  dinner,  and  I  fee  them  from,  n.y  win- 
dow crofling  the  mcadov/  }  I  go  to  meet  them, 
and  help  to  bring  them  home,  as  I  fee,  by  his 
actions,  tnat  George  complains  of  being  tired, 
and  fclicits  his  Peggy  to  carry  him  as  well  as 

h' > 


DESMOND.  21 

his  fifter.    Jr,.will  feal  my  letter  on   my  return, 
as  it  cannot  go  to  the  poft  till  to-morrow. 

May  29th,  Nine  at  Night. 

I  did  not  imagine,  my  Fanny,  in  leaving  mj 
letter  unfealed  this  mornin.;,  that  I.  ftiould  have 
to  add  to  its  contents,  the  hiftoryof  acircum- 
ftance  that  has  furprifed  me  a  good  deal. 

On  my  meeting  my  children  in  the  field  be- 
low the  houfe,  their  maid  told  me,  that  Mafter 
George  had  tired  himfelf  fo  by  playing  with  a 
gentleman  whom  they  had  met,  and  with  a 
great  dog  he  had  with  him,  that  ihe  could  hard- 
ly get  him  home.  I  enquired  who  the  gentle- 
man was  ;  and  heard,  that  they  bad  feen  him 
reading  in  the  wood,  and  that  the  dog,  which 
was  a  large  water-fpaniel,  having  ran  towards 
the  children,  and  fomewhat  alarmed  the  little 
girl,  his  mailer,  who  was,  as  Peggy  defcribed 
him,  *'  one  of  the  molt  handfome  gentlemen 
£he  ever  fet  eyes  upon,"  had  come  up  to  them, 
and  afked  very  eagerl)',  whofe  children  thzy 
were;  and  hearing  that  their  names  were  Ver- 
ney,  he  had  taiven  them  both  up  and  IcifTed 
them — That  the  little  boy  looked  earncftly  at 
him,  and  then  returned  his  fondnefs  ;  and  that 
once,  in  playing  with  him,  the  genclcman, 
called  him  George,  as  if  he  had  known  him 
before  —  I  deiired  the  maid  to  defcribe  the  hgure 
of  this  genileman,  that  I  might  know  If  it  were 
any  of  my  acquaintance — She  faid,  "  that  he 
was  a  tall,  and,  (according  to  her  phrafe)  quite 
a  grand  looking  ynan^  though  not  lujly^  but  rather 
tbinnijh  \  he  had  dark  eyes,  brighter  than  any 
diamonds,  and  brown  hair  }  but  that  he  looked 
a  little  pale,  as  if  he  was  fickj  and  though  he 

ilemed 


22  D    E    S    M    O    K    D. 

feemed  in  his  way  fomehow  like  an  officer,  that 
he  was  left-handed." — Till  now,  I  had  formed, 
I  own,  a  vague,  and  yet  a  very  uneafy  idea,  that 
this  rtranger,  who  knew  the  name  of  my  little 
boy  fo  well,  might  be  Colonel  Scarfdale  ;  but 
this  defcription  did  not  at  all  anfwer  his  perfon  ; 
and  then  I  recollected,  that  if  it  had  been  him, 
George  Vv'ould  have  known  him,  and  indeed  the 
maid  alfo,  who  has  been  fo  lately  accuftomed  to 
fee  him  every  day — 1  then  fuppofed  it  might  be 
fome  of  the  neighbouring  gentlemen,  and  bade 
Peggy  dcfcribe  him  to  the  farmer's  wife  and  fer- 
vants,  which  fhe  has  juft  done,  and  tells  me  that 
there  is  no  fuch  perfon  in  this  country  that  they 
know  of,  and  that  the  nearefl:  gentleman's  feat  is 
above  feven  miles  off — I  have  again  been  quef- 
tioning  Peggy,  as  this  {granger's  having  fo  much 
noticed  the  children,  has  made  a  great  impreffion 
on  my  mind — She  fays,  {he  is  fure,  from  his 
manner,  that  it  is  fome  gentleman  who  had  been 
acquainted  ia  the  tamily,  becaufe  he  feemed  To 
fond  of  ihem,  and  ''  fomehow  glad  to  fee  them," 
ajid  that  he  afked  George  if  he  often  v/alked  in 
that  wood,  and  whether  his  mama  ever  walked 
there  ?  — "  And  to  be  fure,  Ma'am,"  remarks 
Peggy,  "  itmuft  be  fomebody  that  knows  you, 
or  how  (liould  he  enquire  after  the  children's 
mama,  for  I  never  told  him  whether  they  had  a 
mama  or  a  papa,  or  who  belonging  to  them." 

The  more  queftions  1  afk,  the  more  I  wifii 
to  know  who  th^s  is,  and  whether  it  is  really  any 
man  whom  1  have  formerly  known  who  hap- 
pens accidentally  to  be  in  this  country  ? — If  it 
is,  he  will,  probably,  fince  he  knows  where  1  am, 
call  upon  me  ;  and  if  it  is  not,  of  what  importance 
is  the  circumftance  at  all? — Thus  I  have  en- 
deavoured to  reafon  myfelf  out  of  the  refllefs 
2  cuiiofuv 


DESMOND.  23 

curiofity  that  hasdifturbed  me,  perhaps,  foolifh- 
ly  enough  the  whole  of  the  remaiiiiiig  day — It 
is  now  night — a  calm,  a  lovely  nighr,  without 
a  moon  indeed,  but  with  the  can(>py  of  heaven 
illuminated  with  countlefs  miriads  of  "planeta- 
ry fires". —  Such  a  night,  my  Fanny,  as  fome  of 
thofe  in  which  we  ufed,  during  the  iirft  year  of 
my  marriage,  to  be  induced  by  Defrnond  to  wan- 
der in  the  coppice-walks  and  ihrubberie?,  that 
furrounded  the  Lawn  at  Linwell — Alcne,as  I  am 
here,  I  muft  not  venture  fo  far  from  the  houfe ; 
but  1  may  traverfe  the  grafs-plat  before  it,  and 
liften  to  the  nightingales,  of  which  numbers  fa- 
lute  me  every  evening  with  their  fong  from  the 
oppofite  woods  ;  their  delicious  notes,  foftened 
and  prolonged  by  the  echos  from  the  bridge  and 
the  water ;  one  only  one,  feems  to  have  taken  up 
his  lonely  abode  in  the  garden  here — Alas!  I 
could  be  romantic  enough  to  fancy  it  the  fpirit  of 
fome  folitary  and  deferted  being  like  myfelf,  that 
comes  fympathetically  to  hear  and  foothe  my 
forrows. 

Let  me  tell  them  then  to  this  vifionary  vifi- 
tant,  rather  than  to  my  Fanny,  and  now,  in 
wifhing  her  a  good  night,  wilh  too,  that  her 
(lumbers  may  bring  to  her  mind,  without  dif- 
turbing  it,  the  image  of,  her 

GERALDINE. 


LET- 


24  DESMOND. 


LETTER    III. 


TO   MISS  WAVERLT. 


6th  June,   1791' 

THE  opportunities!  have  of  fending  tothe 
poft  are  fo  few,  my  dear  fifter,  that  though  I 
write  whenever  I  have  any  thing  to  fay,  which  I 
imagine  you  wifli  to  hear,  or  whenever  it  re- 
lieves my  heavy  heart,  to  pour  out  its  fofrovvs  to 
you,  yet  I  know  my  letters  do  not  reach  you 
regularly,  and  I  have,  from  the  fame  caufe,  the 
mortification  of  waiting  fome  days  for  your's, 
after  they  arrive  at  the  poft-office  of  the  neigh- 
bouring town. 

You  may,  perhaps,  be  anxious  to  know  if  I 
have  again  heard  of  the  ftranger,  whofe  notie 
of  my  children  feemed  fo  extraordinary,  and  i 
own,  for  the  following  day  or  two,  gave  me  fome 
uneafinefs — He  was  probably,  however,  only  a 
traveller  of  tafte,  invited  by  the  beauty  of  this 
part  of  the  country  at  this  feafon,  to  make  an 
abode  of  a  day  or  two  at  fome  little  neighbour^ 
ing  public-houie,  or  cottage,  a  circnmftance 
which,  my  landlord  here,  tells  rae,  is  not  unfre- 

quent 


DESMOND.  2j 

<qucnt — It  was,  perhaps,  the  lovelinefs  of  my 
httle  ones  that  attraCled  his  attention,  and 
not  any  previous  acquaintance  with  their  fa- 
mily ;  and  for  the  famiHarity  with  which  he 
feemed  to  treat  them,  much  of  it  poffibly  ia 
the  mere  fancy  of  Peggy,  who,  though  a  ve- 
ry good  girl,  is  as  likely  as  any  other,  to  add 
to  a  ftory  flie  tells  from  a  natural  love  of  the 
marvellous. — I  fay  thus  much  about  this  ad- 
venture, lead  what  I  told  you  in  my  lad  let- 
ter fhould  raife  any  uneafy  ideas  in  your  mind  i 
for  I  know  you  have  a  hundred  fancies  about 
Colonel  Scarfdale,  and  fuppofc  that  he  is  a 
fort  of  modern  Lovelace  ;  but,  believe  m.e,  my 
Fanny,  that  character  does  not  exift  now  ; 
there  is  no  modern  man  of  fafhion,  who  would 
take  a  hundredth  part  of  the  trouble  that  Rich- 
ardfon  makes  Lovelace  take,  to  obtain  Helen 
herfelf,  if  (he  were  to  return  to  earth — And 
Scarfdale  is  a  man  fo  devoted  to  the  acquifition 
of  fame  in  his  own  (lyle  of  life,  that  with  my 
change  of  fortune,  Ais  purfuit  ends — It  would 
have  added  fomething  to  the  glories  he  alrea- 
dy boafls  in  the  annals  of  gallantry,  if  he- 
could  have  carried  otTVerney's  wife  from  her 
huflnind,  her  children,  and  lier  fame ;  but 
now  that  fl)e  is  baniihed  from  the  circles  where 
file  was  talked  of  and  followed — now,  that  flie 
is  forgotten  by  the  idle  fiutterers  who  furround- 
ed  her  for  a  few  months ;  flie  is  too  humble, 
and  too  inconfiderable,  to  be  any  objedt  to 
fuch  a  man,  and  is,  Ihe  thanks  lieaven,  fhel- 
tered  by  her  obfcurity  from  his  .nfolcnt  pre- 
tenfions. 

I  have  little  more  to  fay  to-dny,  but  that  my 
•irecious  William    is    better,    and  pry   appre- 

^^OL.  n.  C  heulions 


2(5  DESMOND. 

henfions  about  him  fubfide  aga:!i — I  impatient- 
ly wait  to  hear  how  my  brother's  love  affair 
proceeds,  though,  in  my  lad  letter,  I  omitted 
to  mention  his  name,  engaged,  as  I  was,  by 
the  multiplicity  of  trifles ;  but  this  is  not 
owing  to  any  indifPerence  about  him — I  love 
my  brother,  and  Ihould  rejoice  in  his  being 
happily  married,  thougli  he  feems  to  have  for- 
gotten that  he  has  a  filler,  whole  comfortlefs 
defliny  fliould,  at  leaft,  fecure  to  her  the  com- 
mon civilities  of  life  from  her  own  family,  if 
they  cannot  fpare  her  any  fliare  of  their  affec- 
tions— Alas  !  how  eafily  do  common  minds 
make  to  themfelves  excufes  for  forfaking  and 
forgetting  the  unhappy — Were  I  again  to  ap- 
pear (which  heaven  forbid)  in  thofe  focieties, 
whofe  members  now  think  me  funk  below 
them — what  infulting  pity  ! — what  contemptu- 
ous condolences  I  fbould  receive  ! — In  pro- 
portion as  I  was  once  thought  the  obje(Sb  of 
envy,  fnould  I  now  be  that  of  ill  concealed  tri- 
umph,  and  malignant  (corn,  under  the  fem- 
blance  of  fympathy  and  concern — When  thefc 
though.ts  ariie,  you  cannot  imagine  how  well 
plcafci  I  am  that  I  am  here — 


Are  not  thefe  woods 


More  free  from  peril  than  the  envious  court  ?*'* 

And,  as  I  hide  myfelf  in  them,  I  regret  no- 
thing but  your  company,  my  filter,  and  yet,  I 
ought  not  to  with  you  with  me,  when  you 
are  where  the  young  and  happy  ought  to  be, 
amid  that  world  which  has,  at  your  age,  and 
with  your  unbligh.ted  profpeds,  fo  many 
charms, 

Farewell* 


DESMOND.  27 

Farewell,    for  the  prefent — it  is  a  delicious 
evening,     and  I  will  now  venture  to  walk  out 
and  enjoy  it — How  forcibly  every  fuch  fcene 
brings  to   my  mind  our  morning  walks,    our 
evening  rambles  in  Kent,    and  the  pleafaut  lit- 
tle trios  we   ufed  to  make  with  Mr.  Dcfmond, 
^A■ho  has  fo  much  tafte,    and  (o  much  genuine 
euthufiafm — I  wonder  vi^hether  he  is  as  much 
gratified   by   the  charms  of  Spring  at  St.  Ger- 
mains,    as  he  ufed  to  be  in  England  ?    I  flioukl 
rather  fear  not ;    at  leaft,    that  he  is  lefs  likely 
there  to  find  companions  vi'ho  underfland  him 
and    can    participate  his    pleafure ;      for  the 
French   ladies  in  general  have,  I  believe,    ve- 
ry little  notion  of  that  fpecies  of  delight,    that 
arifes  from  contemplating  the   fimple  beauties 
of  nature — A  few   days  v/ill  foon  make   it   a 
twelvemonth  fincc  I   law  Defmond,     and  of 
th.it  time,     he    has  facrificed  more  than  half 
to  his  difnitercfled  frienddiip  to  my  brother — 
But    I  have  repeated  this  fo  often   to  myfelf, 
that,  perhaps,  I  have  as  often  obtruded  it  up- 
on your  recollc£lion. 

1  have  found  in  the  oppofite  v/oods  one  of 
the  mofh  fingular,  and  moft  beautiful  fpots 
that  I  ever  law — It  is  a  little  hill,  or  rather 
three  or  four  hills  that  fecm  piled  together, 
though  the  inequality  of  their  forms  is  ccn- 
rcaled  ami  adorned  by  the  variety  of  trees  with 
wJiich  lliey  are  covered  ;  many  of  thefe  are 
ever-grecns,  fuch  as  J-o11y  and  yew  ;  gnd  juft 
where  their  {l:adc  is  tiie  dirkell,  they  fudden- 
iy  recede,  and  from  a  lloncy  excavation, 
burds  forih  ?  ftrong  and  rapid  dream  of 
pure  and  brilliant  water,  v.hicli  pours  dire-Tbly 
down  the  precipice,  and  Is  Ijft  in  the  trees 
C   2  that 


2Sr  DESMOND. 

that  crowd  over  it A  few  paces  hig/ier  up 

from  a  bare  proje£lion  of  rock,  darts  forth 
another  current  equally  limpid,  and  having 
made  itfelf  a  little  bafon,  which  it  fills,  ithai- 
tcns  over  the  rugged  flones,  that  are  thus 
worn  by  its  courfe,  and  dafliing  down  the  hill 
for  fome  time  in  a  difl'erent  dired^ion,  meets 
the  former  fl.ream  ;  united  they  make  a  confi- 
derable  brook,  and  haften  to  join  the  Wye  ; 
not,  however,  till  two  or  three  other  little 
wandering  currents,  that  arife  ftill  nearer  the 
fummit  of  this  rocky  emintrnce,  which  feems 
to  abound  in  fprings,  have  found  their  way  to 
the  fame  courfe — Of  thefe  unexpe(fled  gufties 
of  water,  you  hear  the  murmurs  often  with- 
out feeing  from  whence  they  arife  ;  fo  thick- 
ly is  the  wood  interwoven  over  the  whole 
furface  of  the  wild  liill  j  a  narrow,  and  hard- 
ly vifible  path,  however,  winds  around  it, 
quite  to  its  fummit,  which  is  lefs  clothed 
than  the  relt,  and  where,  on  two  roots,  that 
the  hand  of  time,  rather  than  the  art  of  man, 
-has   tv/ifted    into  a    fort  of  grotefque,    ruftic 

chair,    I   fit and  liltening  to  the  foothing 

founds  of  the  water,  as  it  either  deals  or  rufli- 

es  beneath 1  can   fee  through  the  boughs 

great  part  of  the  farm-houfe  I  inhabit,  and 
nearer,  the  grey  fmcke  of  cottages  without 
,  the  wood,  curling  among  the  mingled  foilagc 
— It  is,  my  dear  filler,  in  this  fcqueflered 
nook,  that  1  am  going  to  wander,  and  to  think 
of  )ou  as  the  moil  pleating  contemplation,  in 
wliich  I  can  indulge  m)  fcU"  j  oncemcre,  then, 
a  good  n'ght. 

Gracious  heaven  ! — Am    I   in  the   delirium 
of  one  of  tliofo    icvcrlfli  viliouo,  which,  v  iih 

undefcrib' 


D    E    5    M    O    N    ».  29 

Uttdefcrib.ible  fenf.itions  of  pain,  ph^afure 
and  wonder,  reconcile,  for  a  moment,  impofri- 
bilities,  or  am  I  really  awake  ? — I  have  feca 
liim. — Defmond,  whom  I  believed  to  be  in 
France! — Whom  I  had  not  the  lead  iclei  of 
meeting  in  this  remote  country  f  wiiom  I  even 
doubted,  wJiether  I  liiould  ever  fee  attain  ! 
Tliat  I  might  fay,  how  truly  fenHble  I  was  of 
the  debt  of  gralituue  I  owed  Idm  ! — But  I  will 
try  to  recoIle£l:  rnyfelf  enough  to    relate,  inllead 

of  exclaiming  .' -Yefccnlay  evening,    I  had 

finiiliea  zs  I  believed,  my  letter  to  you,  and 
h?,d  feen  my  children  put  to  bed — It  was  not 
yet  eight  o'clock,  and  the  fun,  though  funk 
beneath  the  oppofite  hills,  tinged  the  whole 
landfcape  with  tjiat  rofy  light,  wiiieh  it  is  ini- 
poflible  to  defcribe — I  did  not  take  a  book  with 
me,  as  I  ufually  do,  when  I  walk  alone,  be- 
caufe  it  was  fo  late,  tliat  I  meant,  inllead  of 
faunterin'g,  as  I  love  to  do,  to  take  my  walk 
and  return  ;  however,  when  I  reached  tlie  wood, 
I  was  tempted,  by  the  perfeil;  tranquillity  cf 
every  thing  avoiuui  me — the  fragrant  feents 
that  floated  in  the  air — the  foothing  fong  of 
intnnnerable  birds,  and  the  low  murmurs  of 
the  water,  to  gratify  myfelf  with  a  viewof  my 
favourite  little  hill,  which  I  had  nevxr  yet  feeu 
in  an  evening — I  reached  the  top;  when 
ilretched  on  the  ground,  his  head  reding  on 
his  arm,  (from  which  a  book  feemed  to  have 
fallen)  as  it  hung  over  the  branch  of  the  rude 
chair  I  before  defcribed  to  you,  1  faw  a  gen- 
tleman who  appeared  to  be  fleeping — 'I  had  no 
idea  of  his  face,  for  his  liat  and  his  hair  con- 
cealed it,  nor  did  I  flay  to  fee  if  h  recoUedled 
his  figure,    but  concluding  that   this    was  the 

fame 


30  DESMOND. 

fame  pcrfcn  who  had  been  met  by  the  chikh'cri, 
T  was  returning  very  haftily  from  an  impulfe 
that  had  more  of  fear  in  it  than  his  general 
appearance  ougli:  to  have  raifed  ;  when  his 
dog  which  lay  by  him,  ran  forward  towards  mc 
at  the  fame  moment,  the  gentleman  raifed  his 
head — I  faw  Defmond  leap  from  the  ground, 
and,  though  in  as  much  confufon  as  I  was,  he 
inilantly  appioachcd  me—"  Mrs.  Verney  !" 
was  ail  he  faid,  and  even  to  tl:at  I  had  nothing, 
for  a  moment,  to  reply— till  he  added — "f 
am  afraid  I  have  alarmed  you'* — "  you  liave 
indeed,"  anfwerc^l  I-—"  for  to  meet  any  one 
here,  was  very  unexpected — to  meet  you  !" — 
I  did  not  know  what  I  would  fay — but  he 
feemed  now  to  liave  recovered  himfelf,  arid 
finifiied  the  fentence  for  me — "  v/as  more  un- 
expefted  ftill  ?" — "  It  was  .  indeed,  for  I 
thought  you  v^■ere  in  France." 

He  gave  no  anfwer  to  this,  nor  did  he  ac- 
count for  liis  being- in  a  part  of  the  country, 
where  I  don*t  remember  to  have  heard  he  hail 
any  acquaintance  or  connexions,  but  fimply 
begging  of  me  to  forgive  the  momentary  alarm 
he  had  involuntarily  been  tlie  occafion  of,  he 
faid,  fnice  I  hnve  had,  however  unexpectedly, 
the  happinefs  of  meeting  you,  Madam,  vv'ill 
you  allow  me  to  have  the  honour  of  atrcndmg 
vou  to  your  home  V- — I  hefitated — I  know  not 
why,  and  then  faid,  •'  certainly" — We  began 
flowiy  to  defeend  the  winding  and  ftecp  path, 
which  is  crofied  by  roots,  and  interrupted  by 
jvieces  of  rocks — It  was  now,  from  the  latenefs 
cf  the  hour,  alfo  obfcure  ;  and  be,  of  courfe, 
ciifcrcd  line  hi?  ^rm^  which  I   accepted   indeed, 

but 


n    £    S    M    0    In    D.  tl 

but  notwitli  thntcafv  coiifulence  I  uf<'d  to  have 
in  our  early  rambles,  three  years  ago — -It  wii^ 
now,  that  I  firil  oblervcd  a  black  crape  rouiicir 
his  neck,  in  which  he  £ung  his  right  arm, 
while  he  alhileil  me  to  liefcend  with  his  left — 
I  fliuddercd,  but  I  could  make  no  remvirk  oa 
that,  circumllance — He  feemcd  no  mc-re  ilif- 
pofed  to  converfc  than  1  was,  and  v.e  were 
filent  till  we  reached  the  orchard,  fuiTeunding 
a  cottage,  through  which  the  path  leads,  by  a 
IHle  thorough  the  me-fulows  .md  over  the  brul-e 
— He  feemcd  to  know  the  way,  as  if  he  had 
been  long  accudomed  to  i: — I  then  difengaged 
my  arm  and  lie  went  M\,  but,  in  reaciiing 
die  other  fide  of  the  (lile,  my  foot  fiippedj 
and  I  fhould  have  fallen,  but  Defmond,  who 
had  advanced  three  or  four  fteps,    ilew  back 

and  caught  me- He    trembled    fo,  tliat   it 

was  impofiible  to  help  remarking  it — I 
feared,  that,  in  endeavouring  to  fave  me,  he 
had  hurt  his.  arm  ;  and  I  ulniofty  involun- 
tarily, .expreiTdd  my  anprelienfions — He 
allured  me  he  had  not  received  the  ilightell: 
injury,  and  again  ofi^ered  me  his  loft  arm, 
on  wliich  I  again  leant,  and  with  very  little 
converfatiyn,  and  tliat  little  confiding  of 
broken  and  incoherent  fentences,  we,  at  length 
reached  the  houfe. 

There  'w^re  candles  in  my  littk  parlour; 
and  the  table  was  prepared  for  my  fimple 
firpper ;  1  alked  him,  of  courfe,  to  par- 
take of  it  ;  he  replied,  in  a  low  voice,  -that 
lie  feldom  fuppcd  at  all,  but  could  not  re- 
ufe  to  fit  down — r*cggy  came  into  wait,  and 
he  placed  himfelf  oppofite  to  m  e. 

It 


32  D    E    9    M    O    N    D. 

It  was  then,  and  not  till  then,  my  Fanny 
that  I  obt'eived  the  extraordinary  alteration 
in  the  countenance  of  Defmond  ;  he  has 
loft  all  that  look  of  health  and  vivacity    which 

we  ufed  to   remark pale,    thin,    almofl  to 

emaciation  ;  his  eyes  flill  radient  indeed,  but 
expreffmg  dejeclion  ;  or  if  they  for  a  moment, 
aiTumed  atty  other  look,  it  was  that  of  anxiety 
— He  fpoke  fometimes  very  low,  at  others, 
with  that  fort  of  quickuefs,  v/nich  is  obfev- 
vable,  when   people   wifli  to   end  embarairmcr 

converfation And  when    I    mentioned   his 

\^#anderings,  or  his  friends  in  France,  (which 
I  at  length  coUetTted  courage  to  do)  he  gave 
me  flight  aufwers,  and  changed  the  con- 
verfation as  foon  as  poiTible. 

As  this  evafion  of  every  topic  that  led 
him  to  fpeak  ot  his  foreign  connexions,  was 
every  moment   inore    Ihiking,    the    caufe   of 

it,  at    length,    occurred   to    me 1    truil   I 

am  not  fufpicious,  or  inquifitive  ;  and  cer- 
tainly am  neither  defiroiis  of  prying  into  the 
a<n:ionsofmy  friends,  nor  difpofed  to  blame 
thofe  of  Defmond,  to  whom  I  owe  fo  much  ; 
but  I  have  now  no  doubt,  that  this  referve 
arifes  from  his  having  been  accompained  to 
Englai^d  by  Madame  de  Boifbelle ;  and  ha- 
ving taken,  in  this  neighbourhood,  feme  re- 
fidence  for  her,  on  account  of  its  being  fo 
retired If  this  is  the  cafe,  he  was  pro- 
bably hurt  and  diftrefled  in  meeting  here, 
one  of  his  acquaintance  •,  and  it  accounts  at 
©nee  for  his  manner,  which  though  I  cannot 
wjell  defcribe  it,  appears  very  extraordinai-y. 

This   idea    no   fooner   ftrack  me,  than  I  felt 
l^irt  at  the    pain  I  thus   unintentionally    had 

given 


DESMOND.  33 

given  him,  and  particularly  at  having  aOced 
him,  as  I  had  done  fome  minutes  before, 
and  merely  for  fomething  to  fay,  how  long 
he  propofed  (laying  in  this  pait  of  England? 
an  enquiry  wliich  he  anfwered  after  fome 
hefitation,  by  faying,  it  was  uncertain. 

As  I  now  dreaded  that  every  queflion, 
however  apparently  inconfequential,  might 
lead  him  to  fuppofe  me  impertinently  curi- 
ous, weboth  fat  filent,  audi  believe,  he  was 
meditating  how  to  put  an  end  to  an  inter- 
view, which  was,  perhaps,  at  once  tedious 
and  diflreffing  to  him  -,  yet,  I  obferved,  when 
I  dared  obf^rve  his  countenance,  that  he 
looked  at  me  with  eyes  full  of  concern  and 
pity,  which  I  impute  to  the  goudnefs  of  his 
nature — He  felt  ibrry  to  fee  me  in  a  Stuaticu 
fo  different  from  that  which  I  was  placed  in, 
when  our  acquaintance  began Au  acquain- 
tance, that  I  cannot  endure  to  think,  has 
been  productive  to  him  only  of  perfonal  and 
mental  uneafmefs. 

At  length,  after  an  hour  and  a  half,  the 
only  time  of  my  life  that  I  ever  paiTed  in 
Dcfmond's  company  unpleafantly,  he  aroic 
to  go,  and  witli  a  foiemnity  that  yet  havl 
more  dejeclion  than  rormality  in  it  j  he  faid 
he  muil  wifh  me  a  good  night — I  was  on 
the  point  of  aiking  him  a  very  natural  quef- 
tion,  "  If  he  had  far  to  go  home  ?"  But  I 
checked  myfelf,  and  did  not  encreafe,  by 
any  queiflon,  the  embarraiTment  he  fee;nec? 
to  be  under,  when,  heutiting  and  faltering^ 
he  faiJ,  "  May  I  be  permitted.  Madam, 
to  pay  my  refpe^ls  to  vou  once  more  before  I 

Alay  J  b;:  allowed   tiie  honor  of  waiting 

C  5  oa 


34  »    E    S    M    O    N    B. 

on  you  once  agaiR  r" — I  had  furely  no  pretence  to 

refufe  this He  knows  I  am  never  engaged  j 

and  he  knows  that  I  am,  or  ought  to  be,  more 
obhged  to  him  than  to  any  other  human  being 
— I  could  not,  affuredly,  therefore  decline  or 
evade,  what  I,  hov/ever,  wifhed  he  had  not 
alked  ;  as  I  not  only  fee  him  fo  changed,  as  he 
is,  both  in  appearance  and  in  fpirits,  with  con- 
cern :  but  fear,  fro-m  his  deportment,  that  the 
attention  which  he,  perhaps,  thinks  himfclf  un- 
der the  necefluy  of  {liewing  me,  may  put  liim 
into  difliculties  with  the  lady  to  whom  he  has 
attached  himfelf — 1  have  other  uneafy  fenfations 
about  it  ;  but,  liowevcr,  I  could  only  fay,  in  an- 
fwer  to  the  permiflion  he  requefted,  that  I 
(hould  always  be  glad  of  Mr.  Defmond's  com- 
pany, whenever  he  would  fo  fra"  honor  me 
— He  fighed,  and  thanked  me ;  but  added, 
**  I  fiiail  not,  Madam,  intrude  much  on  your 
indulgence,  for  in  a  very  few  days" — he  hefi- 
tated  again,,  and  I  could  not  help  repea.ing, 
**  in  a  few  days  ?  Do  you  leave  the  neighbour- 
^ood  in  a  few  days  ?"■ — ''  i  believe  fo,"  faid  he 
-  — "  Yes  !  I  believe  I  ;«;///  go  within  a  few 
days ;  will  you  then  fuffcr  nie  to  call  to-mor- 
row ?  and  may  I  be  gratified  with  a  fight  o.f 
your  children  ? — I  faid,  yes,"  and  then,  wltl> 
out  naming  the  hour  at  wiiicli  he  would  call, 
he  left  me. 

Thus,  m.y  Fanny,  ended  this   very  extraor- 
dinary iutervlev/,  for  extraordinary  it  certainly 

is- 1  know  not   from  whence   Mr.  Dci- 

mond  l;'!t   came,  or  wiieiher  he'is  going- 1 

know  not  Vv'here  he  li.is  taken  up  his  prefent 
abode -I  could  not,  however  forbear  mark- 
ing from  my  vvnulovr  the  v.-ay  lie  took  when  he 

left 


■  t>    E"S    Tvl    0    N    D.  3^^^ 

Jcft  me  5  and,  as  long  a^  could  dlfcern  his  figure 
through  the  obfcurity  of  the  night,  he  feenied 
to  return  through  the  fields,  and  over  the  bridgei 
the  fame  road  as  he  came  with  ilie — I  left  the 
window — (fi-om  whence,  I  hope,  there  was  no- 
thing wrong  in  my  thus  obfcrving  him)  I  left  i(^ 
only  to  retire  to  my  pillow  and  my  tears; 
which  flowed  more  than  ufual  this  evening,  yet 
I  know  not  why ;  unlefs  they  fuddenly  meet- 
ing an  acquaintance,  a  friend,  who  has  cer- 
tainly a  great  claim  to  my  gratitude  and  good 
wiflies,  had  more  than  ufually  fatigued  my 
fpirits,  for,  as  to  the  reft,  why  ihoukl  I  be  thus 
agitated  by  a  circumftance  in  which  I  have  no 
immediate  intereft  ? — Whether  Mr.  Defmond 
be  travelling  through  this  country  alone,  or 
u'hether  he  is  retired  hither  with  any  compani- 
on, what  have  I  to  do  with  it  ?  or  whv  fliould  1 
think  of  him  farther  than  ever  to  follow  him 
with  my  grateful  wi files  ? 

It  is  now  eleven  o'clock — I  have  left  my  bed 
fince  a  quarter  pall  five,  for  to  ficep  was  im- 
polhble  -,  ever  fince  the  hour  when  I  tkought  \t 
probable  Mr.  Defmond  (who  knows  I  am  an 
early  rifer)  might  come — I  ha^^e  been  expecting 
tim,  but,  perhaps,  he  has  changed  his  mindj 
Qr  his  fiicnd  may  have  eiigaged  him. — It  is 
market-day  atthe  neighbouring  town,  and  I  have 
an  opportunity  of  fending  this  letter,  or  rather 
this  enormous  pacquef ,  to  die  pofi:,  by  my  honejl 
farmer,  who  has  juft  feat  in  to  fiiy  he  is  going 
1 — 1  therefore  feal  it,  and  will  endeavour  to  rea- 
fon  away  this  ridiculous  flutter,  which  the  idea 
of  a  vifitor  gives  me,  (probahly,  becaufe  I  have 
bi^enoflatc  fo  little  ufed  to  company)  and  Qt 
fluiL-tly  dow  n  to  ini\?.\  a  view   I  am    doing  for 

VQU, 


-3<i  1>  E    S   M    0    N   B. 

you,  of  the  profpe£l  from  my  windows;  In 
the  progrefs  of  which,  hitherto,  I  have,  con- 
trary to  my  ufual  cuftom,  pleafed  myfelf. 

Farewell,  my  dear  filler — perhaps  my  com- 
miflioner  may,  on  his  return  from  town,  bring 
me  what  would  now  be  the  moft  foothing  and 
confoling  to  my  fpirits,  a  letter  from  my  Fanny  J 


GERALDINE  VERNEY. 


J   '='  T- 


0    E    S   M    O    N    D.  37 

LETTER    IV 
TO  M  R.  B  E  T  H  E  L. 

Frcm  Bridge-foot,  3  fmall  Cluftercf  Cot- 
tages, in  Hercfordftiire,  June  8th,  1791, 

WHEN  a  man  knows,  my  dear  Bethel, 
that  he  is  a£img  like  a  fool,  the  moft  ufual  way 
is  to  keep  it  to  himfelf,  and  to  endeavour  to 
perfuade  the  world  that  he  is  a<n:ually  perform- 
ing the  part  cf  a  wife  man  ;  but  I,  who  am,  as 
you  have  often  faid,  a  flrange,  eccentrick  be- 
ing, and  not  much  like  any  other,  amgoing  to 
dojuft  the  reverfe  of  this,  and  to  acknowledge 
my  folly  without  even  trying  at  palliation  j  nay, 
I  accufe  myfelf  of  having  the  appearance  cf 
fomething  much  worfe  than  folly,  which  is  in 
gratitude  to  you  ;  but,  as  this  is  in  appeararxe 
only,  it  is  the  former  accufation  alone  to  which 
I  fhall  plead  ;  and  much  eloquence  will  be  ne- 
ceffary  to  fupply  the  defedl  of  reaforiy  which  I 
know  you  will  think  my  condudl  betrays,  when 
you  fee  my  letter  dated  frcm  fuch  a  place,  and 
are  told  that  it  is  within  half  a  mile  of  the  re- 
fidence  of  Geraldine — Have  pa/ic:.Cv,  how- 
ever, till  I  can  relate  the  caufe  of  all  this,  and, 
though  I  was  neither  bred  to  the  bar,  where, 
for  money,  our  learned  in  the  laws  undertake 

"  To  nialic  the  worfer  feem  the  better  reafon.*" 

Nor  am  naturally  endowed  with  the   faculty 
cf  doing  lo,  I  fhall,  at  leafl,  be  able,  I  think, 

•  Milton. 

to 


3$  DESMOND. 

to  convince  you,  that  no  motive  injurious  ei- 
therto  my  friendlhip  towards  you,  or  my  mqrs. 
tender  affection  for  Geraldine,  has  led  me  to 
vifit  her  in  a  way  that  may  be  called  clan- 
deftine,  of  to  conceal  from  you  my  journey 
and  my  intentions ;  though,  to  fay  the  truth, 
I  did  not  mean  to  inform  you  of  it  till  I 
faw  you,  nor  (hould  I  have  done  fo,  but  for 
the  accidental  circumftances  of  having  firit 
met  her  lovely  children,  and  then  her  lovely 
felf.—    . 

How  then,  you  aflc,  "  were  yo'i  concealed 
in  her  immediate  neighboui'hood,  withotit  any 

intention  of  either?; — Incredible    follv  !" ■ 

Such,,  however,  luere  my  intentions — I  allow, 
if  you  pkafe,  all  the  folly,  but,  I  infift  upon  it, 
that  there  was  no  fort  of  harm  in  fuch  a  grati- 
fication as  I  propofed  to  myfelf,  by  which  my- 
fclf  only  (if  romatic  attachment  can  hurt  a  m?^n) 
was  alone  likely  to.be  hurt  ;  and,  for  which, 
therefore,  I  (liould  hold  myfelf  accountable  to 
no  one,  my  dear  friend;  not  even  to  j.:'«,  iii 
did  not  feel  that  your  fmcere  and  generous  a.t- 
•  tachment  to  me,  deferves  all  that  confidence 
wJiicli  I  can  repofe  in  you,  in  matters  that  re- 
late only  to  myfelf. — Your  lall  letter  dcfcribing 
the  total  ruin  of  Vcrney,  and  the  difpcrlion  of 
his  family,  completed  the  meafure  of  that  un- 
eafuiefs  I  had  long  fuflained  on  account  of 
Geraldine — It  was  in  vain  I  endeavoured  lO  rea- 
fon  myfelf  out  of  it— —I  find,  that  feven-and- 
twenty  is  not  the  age  of  realbn,  or,  at  leaft, 
where  the  heart  is  fo  deeply  concerned — Tiiere 
■were  a  hundred  caufes  why  I  l)'-id  rather  have 
gone  at  the  moment  I  fet  out,  to  Nova-Scotia, 
or  even  to  Nova-Zeinbla,  than  to  England — Hut 

the 


D    •£    S    M    0    N    D-  39 

llie  idea  of  GeraUUne  deforted  in  diftrefs  ! — Of 
Geraldlne  in  poverty  and  forrow  !  obliterated 
every  other  confideratiou  in  the  world  ;  and 
w  ithin  four-and-tvventy  hours  after  the  receipt 
of  your  laft  letter,  which  found  me  at  St.  Ger- 
mains,  I  fet  out  poft,  without  taking  even 
Warham  with  iiie,  or  faying  whither  I  was 
going  ;  and  in  fix-and-thirty  hours  afterwards 
was  at  Dover,  from  whence  I  made  my  way, 
as  quickly  as  I  could,  to  the.  poll-town  in  Here- 
fordfhire,  near  which  I  had  learned,  (it  matters 
not  by  what  means)  that  Geraldine  had,  with 
her  children,  fixed  her  hurable  abode. 

I  told  the  people  at  the  inn  where  I  put  up, 
that,  being  in  an  ill  ftate  of  health,  (an  afler- 
tion,  to  the  truth  of  which,  my  figure  and 
countenance  bears  fomc  teflimony)  1  was  di- 
re(ited  by  my  phydcians  to  travel ;  and  had  been 
advifed  to  bend  iny  way  towards  Wales,  flay- 
ing fome  little  time  at  any  place  where  the  face 
of  the  country  appeared  agreeable,  or  the  air 
faiubrious — I  added,  that  I  ihciild  ilay,  per- 
haps, a  week  or  ten  days  in  this  neighbourhood  ■» 
but  as  it  was  not  for  their  intereft  to  find  out  a 
private  lodging  for  me,  I  applied,  for  tiiat  pur- 
pofc,  to  the  hairdrefler,  who  profefled,  over 
his  lliop  window,  to  '*  drefbiuuies  and  gentle- 
men in  the  very  newell  London  laihion." 

This  very  intelligent  perf)nage  informed 
me,  that  what  I  wanted  was,  at  prefcnt,  fonuv 
what  hard  to  be  met  with  j  for  that  *'  the  • 
pleafanted  and  alaioil  only  lodging  near  that 
town,  wiiich  \\  as,  Iiowcvlt,  about  fix  miles 
off,  or  railier  bester,  wais  lately  taken,  by  a  la- 
dy and  her  children,  for  a  year  certain" — 1  af- 
felled  to  be  llruck    with    the   defcrlption  ihe 

gav'i 


gave  of  the  pkafantnefs  of  thq  fituiaibn  on  the 
banks  of  the  Wye  ;    aj>d  aiked,    if  he  thought 
any  cottage  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  houfe 
he  defcribed,    could  afford  me  a  bed-chamber  ? 
i  cared  not  bovr  humble  and  plain,    if  it  were 
jnerely  clean  ;  faying  farther,   that,   as  health 
was  my  purfuit,    money  was  no  objedl  to  me  ; 
and  that,    therefore,    I  would  give  any  perfon, 
who  could  find  fuch  an  accommodation  tor  me, 
a   handfome    prefent  for   their  trouble ;     and 
would  hire  the  apartment  for  a  month  certain, 
though   I  potfibly  might  not  remain   ia  it  a 
week. 

My  honeft  barber,    whofe  zeal  for  my  fer- 
vice  was  now  completely  awakened,    fet  forth 
immediately  to  fee  what  could  be  done  for  me  ; 
and,    in  the  afternoon,    returned  to  fay,    that, 
in  a  very  clean  cottage,    he    had  found   a  de- 
cent  bed-chamber,    which  I  inftantly  fet   off, 
on  foot,  to  fee — walking  not  much  like  an  ii>- 
valid.     I   found  the   humble  thatched  cottage 
was  one  among  a  group  of  live  or  fix,    which 
are  fituated  among  orchards-,    at  the  foot   of 
that  range  of  woody  hills,    which  are  imme- 
diately  oppofite  the  favrn-houfe    inhabited   by 
Geraidine — There  was  no  ceiling  to  the   room 
but  the  thatch  and  rafters,    and  no  curtains  to 
the  bed,  yet  rhe  chamber  was  clean,  and  I  de- 
termined  to  take  immediate  poffeflion  of  it — 
I  therefore  ratified  my  bargain  to  the  great  de- 
light of  the  old  man  and  his  wife,    who  alone 
inhabited  the  cottage  ;    and  having  fatisfied  my 
conductor,     even   beyond   his    e.\pe(51:ation,    I 
engaged   him   to  return   to  the   town  for  my 
baggage,    and   to  attend  me  every  dav  with  a 

lad 


D    E    S    M    O    N    D.  4T 

hul  from  the  inn,    from  whenee  I  am  fupplicd 
with  provifions. 

I  tlien  retired  to  my  lowly  couch,  and  ilept 
better  than  I  have  done  fince  the  receipt  of 
your  letter,  in  the  certainty  tliat,  by  the  ri- 
ling fun  of  the  next  morning,  I  fhould  fee  the 
hcufe  where  the  lovelieft  and  mod  injured 
woman  on  the  eartli  hides  her  undeferved  mif- 
fortunes. 

You  will  believe  me,  my  friend,  when  I 
proteiL  to  you,  that  this  fatisfadlion,  and  that 
of  witnefling  her  real  fituatlon,  (whicli  I  hoped 
to  do,  without  her  knowing  I  was  near  her) 
were  the  only  gratirications  i  propofed  to  my- 
felf ;  for  many  days  I  enjoyed  it,  and  was 
content ;  nor  did  I  voluntarily  feek  any  other 
fatisfa£lion. 

"  There  are,"  fays  St.  Preux,  in  thofe  en- 
chanting letters  of  the  incomparable  RouiTeau, 
*'  but  two  divifions  of  the  v/orld,  that  where 
Julie  is,  and  that  where  fhe  is  not"- — I  forget  the 
French,  and  I  have  not  the  book  here — To 
the  force  of  the  fentiment,  however,  I  bear 
witnefs — To  me  the  world  is  divided  into  only 
two  parts  ;  or  rather,  to  me,  it  is  all  a  blank 
where  Geraldine  is  not — Yet,  my  friend,  is 
this  declaration  no  contradicftion  to  what  I 
often,  and  particularly,  of  late,  aflerted,  that 
J  have  noiu  (if  indeed  I  ever  was  weak  enough 
to  indulge  it)  not  the  remoteit  hope  of  her 
rver  rewarding  an  attachment,  with  which, 
as  I  knov/  it  is  wrong,  I  wifli  not  that  (he 
fliould  eve7i  be  acquai/ited— But ^  if  you  have 
ever  truly  loved,  can  you,  Bethel,  blame  me 
for  indulging  that  delicious,  and  furely  that 
fe'.amelefs  fenfation,    which    is    derived  from 

watching 


42  D    E    S    M    O    N    B. 

■watching  over  the  peace  and  fafety  of  a  be- 
loved object,  from  whom  we  do  not  even 
hope  a  return  ?  While  I  could  open  my  eyes 
in  a  morning  and  fee  the  fun's  firfi:  beams 
enlighten  the  oppofite  heath,  and  fall  on  the 
roof  of  Geraldine's  habitation,  making  its  high 
clufters  of  heavy,  antique  chimneys,  vifible, 
among  the  firs  and  elms  that  furround  it — I 
ufed  to  fay  to  myfelf,  "  there  fie  is  ! — There, 
die  will  foon  awaken  to  fulfil  her  maternal 
duties;  to  cultivate,  to  llrengthen,  or  adorn, 
tlie  purell  of  minds,  by  foine  ufeful  or  elegant 
occupation. —  She  is,  if  not  happy,  at  i'.ia{t 
tranquil  ;  and  now  and  then,  perh.aps,  hedows 
a  thought,  and  a  kind  wifh,  on  her  friend 
Defmond," 

Indeed,  Bethel,  v:\i\\  this  fatlsfatliion,  (ro- 
mantic, and  even  ridiculous  as  it  would,  I 
know,  be  thought  by  thofe  who  could  not  un- 
deriland  the  riature  of  my  affection  for  Geral- 
dine)  I  fhould  have  been  perfectly  content, 
and  having  for  a  little  while  indulged  myfelf 
in  it,  I  ftiould  have  fought  you  at  Bath,  have 
made  you  a  confefiion  of  my  folly,  and  then, 
"after  having  given  a  few  days  to  friendlhip, 
have  again  gone  back  to  France ;  for  England 
is  not  my  country,  when  I  can  hear  only,  in 
whatever  company  I  go  into,  of  Geraldine's 
unhappincfs,  and  the  folly,  extavagancies, 
and  utter  ruin  of  her  hufband. 

This  was  my  proje£t  ;  I  lingered  however, 
from  day  to  day,  finding  happinefs,  I  could 
not  eafily  determine  to  relinquiQi,  in  catching, 
now  and  then,  at  a  windo\'^,  which  I  fancied 
to  be  that  of  the  room  where  Ihe  flept,  the 
diftaot  view  of  a  ficurc,  which  I  perfuaded  my- 
felf 


D   E    S    Ar    0    N   D.  43 

fvilfwas  lier's — The  window  was  only  partly 
feen  *,  the  tall  elms,  which  grow  round  a  fort 
of  court,  immediately  before  the  houfe,  hid  it 
half,  and  thou2,h,  when  the  fctting  fun  play- 
ed on  the  cafement,  I  could  more  diltinc^Uy 
fee  it ;  I  found,  that  if  I  would  really  fatisfy 
myfelf  with  the  certain  view  of  Geraldine,  I 
mult  feek  forae  fpot,  where  from  its  elevati- 
on, I  could,  by  means  of  a  fmall  pocket 
telefcope,  have  an  uninterrupted  view  of  thefe 
windows.  , 

I  confined  myfelf,  however,  to  the  houfc 
all  day — you  know  I  never  am  weary  of  foli- 
tude,  nor  am  ever  deilitute  of  employment  j 
thefe  days,  therefore,  appeared  neither  tedious 
nor  unpleafant,  fince,  at  their  clofe,  I  was  to 
be  engaged  in  feeking  for  tlie  means  of  fati?- 
fying  my  willies  ;  and  fince  I  could,  as  they 
pafled,  look  out  of  my  low  and  narrow  cafe- 
nients  toVk-ards  the  habitation  of  Geraldine, 
and  vvliifper  to  myfelf — "  Soc  is  there." 

At  length,  in  the  woods  that  llcii-t  the  feet 
of  thefe  hills,  which  M-ould,  about  London, 
be  accounted  inacceiFible  mountains,  I  fo.ind 
a  little,  (hady  knoll,  to  which  the  gufli  of  in- 
numerable llreams  of  water  attrailed  me — ^I 
afcended  by  the  almoll  perpendicular  patli, 
which  feems  to  have  been  traced  only  by  bovs 
in  their  excurfions  after  birds,  or  by  the  iheep 
that  fometim.es  feed  here  ;  and  reaching  tlw 
top,  I  had  the  fatisfadlion  to  find,  that  though 
it  was  furrounded  on  all  fides  by  trees,  fo  as 
to  form  the  no  oil  perfc£l  concealment,  they 
were  low  towards  the  top  ;  and  that  a  little 
rocky  crag,  that  hung  over  the  twilled  roots 
of  an  old  thorn  and  a  blighted  dafli,    afforded 

me. 


44  DESMOND. 

me  a  view  of  many  of  the  windows  of  Geritf- 
dine's  refidence ;  at  a  greater  diflance,  in- 
deed, than  from  my  cottage,  but  much  lefs  ob- 

fcured  by   the    interveniug  obja6ls Here» 

then,  I  refolved  to  pafs  fome  part  of  all  the  few 
days  that  I  had  determined  to  flay  here. 

Four  days  fincej  I  was  returning,  about  one 
o'clock,  from  this  my  morning  occupation, 
when  the  heat  of  the  morning,  and  the  frcili- 
nefs  of  the  grafs  in  that  part  of  the  wood, 
through  which  I  was  pafTmg,  induced  me  to 
throvvf  myfelf  on  the  ground,  and  continue 
the  perufa!  of  a  book  i  had  with  me,  o'.i  which 
I  was  extremely  ir.teat,  when  I  heard  the 
prattle  of  children,  but  as  I  had  often  fecn 
fuch  little  raftic  wanderers  in  tlie  woods,  I 
heeded  not  the  circumil.mcs  •,  till  fuddenly, 
Flora  running  forward,  I  h.eard  an  infant 
fcream  at  her  approach — I  raifed  my  eyes 
and  faw  a  maid-fervant  with  the  two  elder 
children  of  Geraldinc  ! — I  darted  up  to  pre- 
vent the  little  girl's  being  more  alarmed  by 
tlic  dog,  and  as  I  v.-iilied  net  to  betray  myfelf, 
I  enquired  the  name  of  the  children,  yet,  in 
-a  way  fo  confuted,  that,  I  believe,  the  fer- 
vant  thought  my  manner  very  flrange — I  fup- 
pofed  it  impoihble,  after  an  abfence  of  twelve 
months,  that  George  could  recolleifl  me,  but 
he  certainly  did,  though  my  name  was  no  lon- 
ger familiar  tp  him  ;  for,  after  looking  at  me 
earneftly  a  moment,  he  returned  my  embraces, 
and  even  hung  round  my  neck — What  de- 
light !  to  prefs  to  my  heart  this  lovely  little 
fellow,  fo  dear  to  me  on  account  of  his  mo- 
ther— .1  was  fo  charmed  with  him,  and  with 
the  eagerneis  ise  focwed  to  Gontiijue  with  me, 

that 


DESMOND.  4j^ 

that  I  nra  afraid,  I  more  than  once  forgot  my 
precaution  ;  however,  the  children,  at  length, 
left  me.  I  imagined  the  fervant  would  con- 
clude, that  it  was  fome  perfon  of  the  neigh- 
bourhood, and  would  tliink  no  more  about  it 
— I  continued  my  ufual  rambles  therefore  in 
the  woods,  but  not  at  thofe  hours  when  it 
was  probable  I  ihould  again  meet  them. 

Convinced  that  Geraldine  was  lefs  uncom- 
fortable in  her  new  fituation  than  my  fears 
had  led  me  to  fuppofe  ;  having  been  now 
above  a  week  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  fear- 
ing my  remaining  there  much  longer  m.ight 
raife  fome  fufpicions,  that  I  would  not  for 
millions  of  worlds  excite — T  began  to  think  of 
quitting  it,  and  had  once  or  twice  determined 
to  Itay  only  07je  day  longer  ;  yet  when  the 
day  of  departure  came,  put  it  of  till  the  next 
— But,  on  Thurfday,  I  reforted  to  the  fpot, 
■where  I  ufually  palled  the  evening  ;  the  wea- 
ther was  uncommonly  lovely — I  had,  during 
the  preceding,  day,  taken  my  walk',  at  an  hour 
when  I  fancied  Gerandile  was  at  her  dinner, 
round  her  garden,  and  was  effectually  concealed 
by  a  thick  hedge  of  cut  evergreens  5  but  1  was 
happy  enough  to  be  miftaken,  as  to  her  hour 
of  dining — She  came  out  with  her  children — 
I  faw  her  within  ten  paces  of  me — She  fpoke 
cheerfully — I  Iieard  once  mere  that  enchant- 
ing voice — I  dared  ha  rdly  breathe,  left  flie 
Ihould  be  alarmed  ;  but,  as  foon  as  I  could  ef- 
cape  unperceived,  I  croffed  umcng  the  high 
furze  and  hollow  ways  of  the  common,  and 
returned  home  by  a  road  remote  from  that 
which  led  from  her  refidcnce  to  njy  cottage.  '  -f 


4<J  t)    E    S    M    0    N    D. 

The  delicious  imprcflion,  however,  which 
the  fight  of  Geraldine  had  left  on  my  mind, 
the  uncommon  beauty  of  the  evening,  unit- 
ed to  that  of  the  fcene,    contributed  to    foothc 

my  mind 1  fat  down,  and  began  to  read  ; 

but  every  thing  that  took  my  thoughts  from 
her  was  infipid — I  let  my  book  fall,  and  fell 

into  a  refverie But  I  own,  my  dear   friend, 

that  the  pleafing  dreams  in  which  I  was  in- 
dulging myfclf  were  interrupted  by  the  re- 
collection of  your  frequent  remonftrances, 
and  particularly  by    that  queftion  which  you 

have  fo   often   repeated "  What  I  meant 

by  all    this?" My  heart,    however,    could 

anfwer  without  hefitation,  that  I  meant  no 
injury  to  any  human  being — Nor,  unworthy 
and  undeferving  as  Verney  is,  M^ould  I  Mafh 
to  rob  him  of  the  afFeCtions  of  his  wife, 
admitting  it  pofTible  he  could  poHefs  them 
■ ^Thus  far  my  confcience  clearly  ac- 
quitted me;  (.\'ou!d  to  heaven  it  could 
do  fo  in  every  other  circumftance  of  my  life) 
n.nd  I  had  fettled  it  with  myfelf,  that  v.-hilc 
I  avoided  giving  ariy  fuch  evidence  of  my 
attachment  to  her,  as  might  tend  to  cad  a 
refle^lion  on  the  fair  and  unimpeached  fame  of 
the  lovely  woman  for  whom  I  felt  it  j  'I  might 

j^ield  to  its  influence  with  impunity 1  know 

you  will  declare  againft  any  fuch  inference  ;  but 
I  had  convinced  myfelf  I  was  right,  and  la- 
mented that  I  had  ever  left  England,  under 
the  idea  of  curing  myfeii  of  a  paiTion,  which 
conllituted  the  charm  of  my  exiilence;  fince  by 
doing  fo,  I  have  without  loling  whatever 
ui^eafinefs  may  occalionly  embitter  that  at- 
tachment created  for  myfelf  others,  which 
will  net  foon  he:  diiripated. — In   thele    fort   of 

con- 


DESMOND.  4? 

contemplations,  I  had    f6me    time  been  loft, 

when     fuddenly    my     dog    rouled    me 1 

looked  up,  and  faw  Geraldine  herfelf,  wlio, 
having  perceived  me,  was  haftily  retreating 
from  the  fight  of  a  ftranger  in  a  place  fo 
remote. 

Could   I,    Bethel,    then   avoid    fpeaking  to 

lier  ? It   was  impoflible — I    flew   forwards 

to  meet  her 1  apologized  for  the    alarm  I 

had  occafioned    her 1    entreated    leave   to 

attend  her  home,  though,  when  fhe  accepted 
my  afTiftance  to  condutl  her  down  the  decli- 
vity on  the  fummit  of  which  ve.  met,  I  trem- 
bled fo,   that  I   could  with  dilKculty   fupport 

myfelf She     feemed    amazed    at  meeting 

me  ;  but  after  fome  time  recovered  herfelf, 
and  afked,  in  the  way  of  converfation,  feve- 
ral  of  thofe  quellions,  which  from  any^  other 
perfon,  or  in  any  other  fituation,  would  have 
been  indifferent ;  but  I  could  not  anfwer  them 
with  the  eafe  flie  put  them  ;  and  I  am  furc 
1  behaved  like  'an  ideot,  for  on  a  fudden, 
flic  grew  cold,  and  referved,  and,  I  fancied 
vvifhed  me  away,  though  I  could  not  collect 
courage  enough  to  go — At  length  confcious  of 
the  fcolifh  figure  I  made,  fitting  filently  oppofite 
to  her,  and  afraid  of  entering  into  any  con- 
verfaiion  left  it  ftiould  lead  to  topics  I  could 
not  determine  to  fpeak  upon,  I  collc(fled  re- 
folution   enough    to  wifli  her     a    good  night, 

and  afk    leave   to    fee  her    again     to-day 

Tiiis  fl^e  granted  in  the  fame  diilant  way 
that  flic  would  have  granted  it  to  a  common 
acquaintance,  and  I  left  her,  half  frantic,  to 
think  that  I  am  perfectly  indifferent  to  her, 
diough,  three  hours  before,    I    was  declaring 

t9 


4tt  DESMOND. 

to  njyfeif  that  I  harboured  not  a    wifli  to  hi 
other  wife. 

It  is  now  near  eleven  o'clock — I  find  I 
have  an  opportunity  of  fending  this  to  the 
poft — I  difpatch  it  therefore  and  haften  to 
take  one  look,  one  lad  look,  for  fuch,  indeed, 
I  mean  it  flioukl  be  ;  and  if  I  can  gain  courage 
to  talk  to  her  as  to  a  fifter,  who  can  feel 
for,  and  pity  my  errors  and  my  weaknefs,  I 
think,  that  whatever  I  fuffer  in  tearing  myfelf 
from  her,  I  Ihall  yet,  after  I  have  once  got  over 
the  pangs  of  an  interview,  which  may  be  the 
lalt  I  fliall  enjoy  for  years,  be  more  eafy  than 

I  have  been  for  many  months. -Adieu,  dear 

Bethel 1  feel  as  anxious  as  if  the  fate  of  my 

whole  life  depended  on  the  next  three  hours  } 
but  perhaps  it  does. 

Tour's  faithfully, 

LIONEL  DESMOND. 

P.  S.  I  fliall  not,  certainly,  (lay  here  above 
-a  day  longer — I  think  not — Ai  after  I  have 
taken  leave  of  her,  upon  what  pretence  can 
I  linger  in  the  neighbourhood  ?  yet,  as  I  have 
not  determined,  whether  I  fliali  reach  you  at 
Uath,  by  the  crofs-country  road,  or  go  firfl  to 
London,  and  for  a  day  or  two  into  Kent ;  in 
fhort,  as  I  have  not  determined  v/hat  I  fliall 
do  j  and,  probably,  Ihall  ilutluate  a  la  Waver- 
ly,  till  the  hour  of  my-fetting  forth — You  may 
as  well  direct  hither  ;  becaufe  I  fliall  leave  or- 
ders at  the  poft-houfe,  whither  my  let- 
ters are  to  be  forwarded.  Who  faid,  that  for- 
rov/  had  anticipated  the  injury    of  time;  and 

that 


D  fe  s  ^  o  N  r>.  4s) 

that  telle  beautiful  and  once  admired  Geral- 
dijje  had  loft  all  her  perfonal  attradlions  ? — To 
me,  fhe  appears  a  thoufand  times  lovelier  than 
ever  ;  and  was  it  merely  her  form  and  face,  to 
which  my  heart  yields  homage,  it  v^ould  be 
more  than  ever  her  captive. 


Vol.  II.  i)  IL^T- 


^►O  D    E    S    M    0    N    E. 

LETTER     V. 
TO    MISS    WAVERLY. 

Junepth,  1 79 1. 

1  HAVE  feen  IMr.  Dcfmond  again,  my  Fan- 
ny ;  and  if  he  had  before  a  claim  to  my  regard, 
it  is  now  heightened  into  as  much  efteem  as  I 
can  feel  for  any  human  being — Yes  !  he  is 
unhappy  ;  and  it  is  to  me,  as  to  a  fider  and  a 
friend,  he  communicates  liis  unhappinefs — All  I 
what  would  I  not  do  to  relieve  from  its  folici- 
tudc,  that  noble  and  ingenuous  heart,  which 
places  fuch  conhdence  in  me  ? — But,  of  tliis, 
enough — I  only  fay  thus  much,  to  vindicate 
him  from  my  unjufl;  and  improper  fufpicions, 
of  having  come  here  clandeflinely,  on  account 
of  the  foreign     lady,_  of  whom  we  heard  fo 

many     idle    reports. Defmond    is     alone  ; 

and  quits  this  neighbourhood  to-day. — ■ — He 
talks  of  vifiting  his  friend,  Bethel,  who  is  at 
Bath  ;    and    foon    afterwads,    of    returning   to 

France If  he  goes  to  Bath  you  will  fee  him  j 

but  I,  perhaps,  fhall  fee  him  no  more  for  fome 
years As  tliofc  years,  witli  mc,  are,  pro- 
bably, to  pafs  in  this  remote  folitude  ;  where, 
it  would  be  violating  the  connnon  rules,  which 
the  world  expefts  us  to  obTerve,  'were  1  to  re- 
ceive Ins  vifits,  how  innocent  and  brotherly  fj- 
cver,  tlicy  wovild  afi'u redly  be. 

Wiiile  I  yet  write,  he  croiTes  the  bridge  on 
horfeback  ,  and  George,  v/ho  is  aUonlihingly 
fvMid  of  hlni,  his  run  vv.t,  with  ills  msid,  ro 
meet  him — ■ — Defaiond  gets  od" ;  he  puts  tlie 
dear 'litle  hoy  on  his  horfc  ;  and;   witli  one  arm 

rounti 


DESMOND.  ^\ 

rt>uiul  him,  he  makes  Peggy  lead  the  horfe 
forwLird 1  hear  the  laugh  of  infantine  de- 
light even  hither—- ^^fhere  is  nothing,  Fan- 
ny, in  my  opinion,  fo  graceful,  fo  enchanting, 
in  a  young  man,  as  this  tendernefs  to\vai"ds 
children-  ■■  -It  becomes  every  man,  but  none 
more  than  Defmorid  ;  who  is  never  fo  amiable 
in  my  eyes,  as  when  he  is  playing  with  George 
— And  my  little  girl,  fhe  now  lifps  out  his 
name  ;  and  though  fhe  lias  feen  him  only  twice, 
i's  a  candidate  for  a  feat  on  his  knee  ;  and  turns 
towards  him,  thofe  fwcct  blue  eyes,  without 
that  penilve  look  that  her  delicate  countenance 
generally  exprelTes  i,  ai  if  flie  knew,  even  in 
babyhood,  her  fate  to  bo  marked  with  forrow — ^ 
But  mv  noify  boy,  and  his  friend,  are  at  the 
door-  I  hear  Defmond  fay,  he  is  come  to  bid 
him  goodby  ;  and  the  child  enquires,  v/hy  he 

goes,  and  when  he  will  come  again. I'muft 

go  to  wiih  him  a  good  joui-ney,  and  deliver  him 
from  the  little,  wild  intcrrogatorici  of  his  play- 
fellow. 

He  is  gone  !  and  I  feel  ridlculoufly  low— -- 
I  fay,  riiliculoufly,  though,  I  trultj  I  do  not 
give  way  to  an  improper  fentimcnt — But  why 
fliould  it  be  wrong  to  admire  and  elteem  an 
excellent  and  amiable  man,  from  wJiom  I  have 
feceived  moi-e  than  brotlierly  kindnefs  ?^-^Why, 
indeed,  (licifW  I  qucdion  the  propriety  of  this 
regard,  becaufe  I  am  married  ?--^Docs  thvtf 
prevent  our  feeing  and  loving  excellence  where^^ 
ever  found  ? — and  why  lliould  it  f — ^To  dil- 
^uife  thcfe  fentimcntrv,  would  be  to  acknow- 
ledge them  to  be  criminul — I  ratlu^r  glory  in 
avowing  them,  becaufe  I  am  confcious  they 
are  jufl.,  pure,  and  honourabk^^— Vv'liVj  y^ 
D  a  'deed. 


52  D    L    S    M    O    N    i). 

deed,  fhould  I  hide  or  apologize,  tot  the 
tears  I  even  now  »  llied,  when  I  think  that 
I  may  never  fee  Defmond  again  ?— What  a 
treafuFC  is  a  friend,  fo  dinnterefted,  fo  noble- 
minded,  as  he  is  ?  And  why  fliould  I  not  re- 
gret liim  ? — IIow  foothing,  to  a  fick  heart  in 
iblitude  and  fadncfs,  is  tlie  voice  of  kindnefs, 
adminlllering  the  confol.itions  of  reafon  and 
good  fenfe,  dignified  with  all  the  graces  of  a 
polilhed  mind — Such  have  I  heard  from  Def- 
mond, in  our  lait  confcrrence  ■,  and  can  I  help 
regretting,  that  I  fliall  hear  them  no  more  ? 

J3ut  it  is  not  to  you,  my  Fanny,  I  ought 
to  excufe  myftlf,  (if,  indeed,  it  could  be  ne-- 
cellary  at  all,)  for  my  regard;  nay,  .  I  will 
call  it  my  affection,  for  our  admirable  friend 
-—Nor,  tliough  I  feel  his  departure  as  a  pri- 
vation, juft  at  this  moment,  can  I  lament  ha-i 
ving  fcen  him. — I  find  that  there  is  a  polhbi- 
lity  that  I  may  be  of  ufe  to  one  of  liis  friends, 
in  fome  difagrecable  circumftance ;  and  with 
what  delight  ihall  I  embrace  an  opportunity 
of  being  ufeful  to  any  of  his  acquaintance  or 
^connexions.  -Farewell,  my  dear  filter — I  am 
unable  to  write  a  long  letter  to  day— I  will 
go  to  my  books,  and  to  my  walk  in  the 
wood ;  for  thofe  are  refources  tliat,  I  find, 
foothe  me  to  tfanquillii-','  ;  while  the  complaints 
of  George,  that  Mr.  Defmond  is  gone,  and 
tj^at  he  iliall  not  ride  any  more,  and  his  lit- 
tle innocent  quclLions,  when  he  wHi  come 
again  ?  and  if  lie  is  gone  ro  fee   pappa  ?    quite 

overcome  my    fpirits.     1  will  write    a  longer 

letter  in  a  day  or    two,     tho'Jgh   I  fhall    have 

now  very  little  to  fay. 

^  -  Jtuie 


DESMOND.  53 

Jiuie  lOth,  fe  in  the  Ev-fuing. 

What  is  to  become  of  me  now  ? — An  ex- 
prcfs  from  the  neighbouring  poft-town,  ac- 
companied by  a  French  ftrvant,  h;  <  jufc  deli- 
vered me  the  cnclofcd  letter  from  Mr.  Verney 
—  I  enclofe  it ;  for  I  have  not  (Irength  or  thiie 
to  copy  it —Oh  !  Fanny,  what  ruail  I— ought 
I  to  do  ?  In  truth,  I  knov/  not  !  -How  un- 
fortunate, that  Defmond  is  gone  ;  and  that  I 
cannot  have  the  benefit  of  his  advice.— Gra- 
f'lpus  heaven  !  Whut  does  fate  intend  to  clo 
W'it.h  this  mlicrable,  pcvfccuted  being  ? 


L  E  T- 


t:,4  je  £  s  M  0  n  d. 


LETTER     VI*. 

Paris,  ]\I.iy  Z2,  1,-9.1. 


AI  V      E  E  A  K, 


AI Y  very  wortliy  friends,  Monfieur  le 
Due  cle  Rcmagnecouvt,  and  Monfieur  le 
Chevalier  dc  Boiibellc,  are,  this  day,  fetting 
ofF  for  England  on  a  journey,  relative  to  the 
afFairo  of  the  King  of  Franee,  their  inafler 
— They  are  returning  to  Paris  direclly  ;  and 
having  heard  me  exprefs  a  wifli  to  fee  you 
here,  have  undertaken  to  efeort  you  over  ;  and 
the  Duke  himfelf  attends  you  with  this —  I  de- 
fire,  tiierefore,  that  you  v\-ill  fet  off  with  him, 
.;s  ioon  as  you  eonvcr.iently  ean  —As  to  the 
tliildren,  I  think,  travelling  with  them  will  be 
inconvenient  to  ycu  j  and  ihould  fuppofe  your 
mother  would  take  them  for  the  time  you  are 
abroad  j  or,  perhaps,  ycu  might  leave  them 
very  fafe  in  the  care  of  tlieir  fei'vants.  —You 
will  do  as  you  like  about  bringing  fervants  fcr 
yourfelf  j  but,  I  think,  you  will  iind  Englifli 
_  women  only  encumbrances,  and  may  hire 
French  maid  fervants  here  ;  as  to  men,  as  we 
Ihall  live  altogether  at  the  Due  de  Romagnc- 
court's,  his  fuiie  of  fervants  will  be  ours.  I 
iliall  expedl  tiie  pleafure  of  your  arrival  with 
impatience,  where  all  things  are  going  on 
well  for  the  fuppreffion  of  the  prefent  vile 
proceedings. 

I  am,  my  dear,'' 

Your's,  affectionately, 

RICHARD  VERNEY. 

•  Ilnclofed  in  the  foregoing. 

I  repeat 


d'  E    S    M    0    N    V.  SS 

I  repeat  my   queftion,    my    filler AVliat 

ouglit  1  to  do  ? — Good  heaven  !  wivat  an  in- 
confidcrate  man  is  Mr.  Vcvney  •,  and,  I  am 
lorry  to  add,  liow  unfeeling  ! — Leave  my  chil- 
dren ! — Accompany  ftrangers  to  Paris  ! — The 
iormer  I  will  not  do;  ami  furely  I  ought  no;, 
to  do  the  latter  ;  but  on  fometliing  I  mull  de- 
termine ;  for,  I  underfland,  from  the  Frcncli 
fervant,  to  whom  I  have  been  fpeaking,  that 
this  Duke  is  a£lually  waiting  at  the  inn,  '.a 
the  neighbouring  town,  and  e.\pe61s  to  be  aJk- 
ed  hitlier — What  wiidnels — v.liat  maih'.eis,    in 

Mr.  Veruey,     to  propofe  fueh  a  fchemc  ' 

Wliither  can  I  turn  me  ? — Oii  !  woidd  to  Ikm- 
ven  Defmond  was  not  gone  ! — Write  to  me 
inflantly: — Yet  how  fliall  I  put  od'  niy  deter- 
mination till  I  receive  your  anfvver  r — How 
evade  going  ? — For  furcly  1  ought  not  to  go. — 
I  believe  it  will  be  bed  to  write  a  letter  of  ex- 
cafe  to  this  French  nobleman  j  faying,  how 
impofTible  it  is  for  me  to  undertake  a  journey 
fo  fuddenly. — Surely  Mr.  Veruey  cannot  mean 
-—But  I  will  not  diftraifl  myfelf  with  ufc- 
lefs  conjedhires,  with  fuppofuions  more  tor- 
menting than  the  miferable  realities.  I  fend 
this  to  the  town,  on  purpofe  to  have  it  reach 
you  by  the  earlLeft  p^ll ;  but  I  tremble  fo, 
vhat  I  fear  it  is  hardly  bgible.  The  Chevalier 
dc  Boifbclle  has  not,  I  lind,  taken  the  trou- 
ble to  come  down  hither  with  his  noble 
friend.  Surely  he  cannot  be  gone  in  fearch — 
But,  again,  I  arn  bewildered  and  diitracled. 
^I'ityr  and  indantly  relieve  your  very  un- 
happy, 

GERALDINE. 

L  £  T- 


5^  D    E    3    M    O    K    B, 

LETTER     Vir. 
TO   MR.    BETHEL. 

Rofs,  June  11,1791. 

Ji  Y  this  time,  my  friend,  you  expe<?l  me 
at  Bath ;  and  there  I  {hould  certainly  have 
been  on  Monday  next,  if  I  liad  not  been,,  by 
a  mod  fmgular  and  unexpecled  accident,  flop- 
ped here. 

I  took  leave  of  Geraldine  yeflerday  morn- 
ing— T  left  her  fituated  in  a  place,  where  if 
ilie  enjoyed  not  that  affluence  and  profperity 
to  which  {lie  has  been  accuftomed,  flle  \vus, 
I  thought,  tranquil  and  content. — She  bade 
me  ^adieu  with  the  tendereft  friendfliip,  yet 
with  that  guarded  expreiTion  of  it  that  her 
lituation  demanded.  I  blefied  her  for  the  ge- 
nerous kindnefs  flie  flievvcd  me  ;  I  refpecled 
the  referve  her  circumitances  made  it  proper 
for  her  to  adopt. — I  thought  by  Iier  eyes — 
.md  were  thpre  ever  eyes  more  exprefhve  ?  that 
ihe  was  fovry  to  fee  me  depart,  yet  knew  that 
it  v/as  proper  I  (liould  go. — Such  fcnfations, 
in  a  more  violent  degree,  I  alfo  felt — To  tear 
myfelt  from  her  was  now  more  dilncult  than  I 
ever  yet  found  it ;  but  I  knew  it  would  be 
injurious  to  her  to  ftay  ;  and  never  yet  did 
my  prcpenfity  to  felf-indulgence  conquer  my 
fenfe  of  what  I  owe  J  to  the  dinntcrefted  te.n~ 
dernefs   I  bear  iier. 

It  was  neceffiiry  then  to  go — and  I  dared 
not  tell  her  how  cruelly  I  felt  the  neceffity  ;  I 
^ffeifled  tome  degree  of  cheerfuinefs  ;  I  play- 
ed 


DESMOND,  57 

ed  with  her  lovely  boy,    and  tried  to.  difguife, 
though  I  bcUeve  inefFedually,    the  contending 

fenfations    with  which    I  was   agitated at 

length  I  left  her.  As  I  looked  back,  I  beheld 
her  at  the  window  as  long  as  (he  could  fee 
nie,  for  the  little  fellow  would  not  be  content 
to  quit  it  while  I  was  in  fight  ;  and  (lie  held 
him  in  her  arms. —  At  length  the  defcent  of 
the  bridge  hid  her  from  my  view. — I  then  haf- 
tened  on  to  this  place,  which  is  about  ten 
miles  from  her  habitation,  for  hither  I  had 
diretled  my  portmanteau-trunk  to  be  fcnt  from 
my  cottage  ;  and  here  an  horfe,  I  had  pur- 
chafed  fome  days  before  waited  for  me — As  I 
found  it  eafier  and  pleafanter  to  have  an  horfe 
of  my  own,  now  that  I  am  able  to  ride,  tlian 
to  go  in  a  poft-chaife  or  by  any  other  convey- 
ance. - 1  was  then  giving  fomc  dirccftions  about 
the  forwarding  my  trunk,  and  was  juit  going 
to  mount  my  new  purchafc  in  the  yard  of 
the  inn  ;  when  a  berlin,  apparently  belonging 
to  a  foreigner  of  diftiniflion,  attended  by  three 
French  or  Sv/ifs  fervants,  drove  to  the  door  — 
an  appearance,  which  though  about  the  affairs 
of  others  I  have  not  much  curiofl:y,  I  own 
excited  it  flrongly. — I  (topped  therefore,  ?nd 
faw  alighting  from  the  caiTiage,  a  man  about 
three  or  four-and-forty  ;  he  fcemed  to  be  a 
perfon  of  rank  ;  but  he  wore,  with  fome  ilrong 
iymptoms  of  his  ov^n  ccnfequence,  that  be- 
wildered loc>k  whicJi  I  have  often  obferved  in 
travellers  v/ho  are  unacquainted  with  the  lan- 
guage and  manners  of  the  people  they  are 
among.-  He  fpoke  French  to  the  landlord  and 
the  waiter,  who  not  having  the  ieaft  idea  of 
what  he  faid,  were  as  much  cliilicired  as  he 
D   5  was  J 


58  DESMOND. 

was ;  a  perfon,  however,  foon  after  made  his 
appearance,  v/ho  feemcd  to  be  a  fort  of  tra- 
velling companion,  and  who  undertook  to  be 
his  interpreter  ;  but  fo  miferably  did  he  execute 
this  oflicc,  that  tlie  honell  Welchman  and  his 
people,  were  more  puzzled  by  liis  incompre- 
henfible  Englifh,    than   they  had  before   been 

by  the  French  of  his  fuperior. ^The  fhewy 

equipage,  and  the  number  of  attendants,  liow- 
evcr,  raifed  To  much  refpe£t  in  the  breafts  of 
the  landlord  and  his  houfchold,  that  they  were 
extremely  defirous  of  accommodating  their  great 
cuftomers,  if  they  could  but  find  out  what  they 
wiflicd  lor. 

The  firfl  ivlea  that  occurs  to  an  Engllmman, 
on  fuch  an  cccafion,  is  a  good  fubftantial  din- 
ner ;  this,  therefore,  by  fuch  figns  as  he  tliought 
moft  likely  to  elucidate  his  meaning,  the  mailer 
of  the  inn  propofed  ;  and  as  there  h  a  language 
in  all  countries  by  which  eating  or  loving  may 
be  cjiprefied,  tliis  was  at  length  aflented  to. 
The  gentleman  attendant,  or  as  the  landlord  cal- 
led him,  t'other  Monfieur,  was  fliewn  into  the 
Urdcr  ;  which,  though  ii  was  not  quite  fo  well 
farnifl^ed  as  that  of  the  Bear  at  Bath,  or  fome 
ethers  of  equal  fame,  yet  appeared  very  fjtisfac- 
tory  ;  and  a  certain  numbirr  of  diPncs  were  order- 
ed to  be  prepared,  to  the  fatisfaclioii  of  both 
parties. 

As  there  was  fomething  exceiTively  comique 
in  the  diilrefs  of  the  landlord  and  his  wh^e, 
who  could  get  no  more  intelligence  from  the 
Ih'ange  fervants  than  from  their  mailer,  I  could 
not  iovbeir  Raying  a  ]\:tU  to  be  amufed  with 
it.  I  had  nothing  to  do  bttcr,  and  was  indif- 
ferent whether  I  lafout  beforj  dinner  or  after- 
wards,    0.1  my   folit-iry   j  var.i^y  :     but   I  lr.i  I 

vet 


X>^  E    S    M    O    N-  D.  59) 

yet  another  motive  for  {laying  than  to  witnefs^ 
this  odd  fccnc  ;  I  thought  I  might  be  of  fomc 
ufe  to  tlicfe  foreigners,  by  explaining  to  the 
people  what  they  really  wanted,  or  what  houfe 
they  came  in  fearch  of  j  for  they  enquired  tor 
Ibme  place  or  perfon  in  the  neighbourhood, 
about  whom  or  wluch,  the  people  could  com- 
prehend nothing. 

The  landlord,  however,  feemed  fully  per^ — 
fuaded,  that  after  fo  good  a  dinner  as  had  been 
ordered,  matters  mull  clear  up  •,  inhnite, 
therefore,  was  the  bullling  and  fulling  to  have 
this  rcady.^ — The  weather  was  hot ;  and  the 
landlord,  wl^h  his  wig  half  ofF,  a  good  round,, 
plump  Welch  head,  a  fiery  red  waiilcoat,  and 
Lis  pompadour  Sunday  coat,  exerted  his  broad 
ftjunt  figure  to  tlie  utmoft  ;  while  liis  wife  put 
on  licr  bcfl  plated  cap  with  pink  ribands;  a 
fine  llourifhcd  Ihnwl ;  -.ind  a  pea-green  flounced 
fluffed  petticoat,  under  a  ilov;cred  cotu:cu  gown, 
drawn  up  i  and,  notwithdatiding  this  elegar.ce 
(all  to  do  honour  to  the  Britith  females  hefore 
cutlandifli  gentlemen,)  The  was  as  anxioufly  fu- 
perintending  the  roafling  and  boiling,  as  if  Ihe 
was  providing  in  her  common  array  for  the 
ordinary  of  a  market  dav,  on  v/hieh  the  cullon\ 
of  her  hoafe  depended. 

At  length  the  dinner  was  ready,  and  the 
landlord  marched  iii  with  it  -,  but  he  had  not 
remained  long  in  tlie  room  before  he  left  it,. 
and  came  puihng  into  that  v/liere  I  fiit,  in 
redoubled  eonfternatioi-u — ^<  Oh  lord,  bir," 
fald  he,  "  do  you  underftand  French  ?  —  Lord, 
.Sii",  if  Iben't  quite,  as  one  may  fay,  at  a  non- 
pliifli  ;  not  one  fyllable  more  can  I  n^ake  out  . 
icojn  that  tlicre  gtntlemun  that  far; cies  how  lie 

talk" 


^3  D    E    S    M    O    N    D. 

talk  Englifiij  tlian  that  he  is  come  to  fetch 
away  feme  lady,  that  he  calls  jSIadam  fome- 
thing,  and  will  have  it  that  Ihe's  here.— Lord, 
Sir,  I'm  quite  floundered  for  my  Ihare,  and 
knows  uo  mere  wl.at  he'd  be  at,  than  m.y  little 
Nan  there  in  the  cradle.—  I  wiih  for  my  fhare, 
folks  would  fpeak  Englifli ;  for  why.'' — fuch 
lingo  as  thefe  foreigners  uf;  is  of  no  lervice  in 
the  wor|d,  and  only  confounds  people,  ready  to 
drive  them  crazy — Then  they  gabble  fo  plaguy 
faft,  that  there's  no  catching  a  word  by  the 
way,  even  to  guefs  a  little  by  what  they  would 
be  at. — Sir,  if  your  honour  has  a  fmattering  of 
then-  tongue,  and  would  not  think  it  too  great 
a  condefcenfion,  feeing  they  are  Frenchmen, 
to  make  yourfelf  known  to  them,  'twould  be 
doing  me  a  great  fcrvice,  if  fo  be  you'd  juft 
give  me  an  item  of  their  intentions— for  my 
wife  flic's  teizing  me  like  a  crazy  woman,  to 
know  if  they  wan.t  beds  made  up,  and  if 
they  do,  whether  their  beds  are  to  be  made 
like  as  ours  are  ? — I  fays  to  her,  why  how  the 
murrain  now  Jenn,  fliowld  I  know,  but  I'll  go 
^{k  yon  gentleman,  perhaps  he  can  let  us  in  to 
^he  right  of  the  thing,  which  to  be  fure  I  {hould 
\>e  glad  of  ;  for.  Sir,  they  fay  that  one  of  thefc 
is  a  duke."-— To  (lop  this  harangue,  which 
feemed  not  otherwifc  to  be  near  its  concla-' 
fion,  I  afl'ured  my  landlord  that  I  knew  a  little 
of  tlieir  tongue  ',  and  if  he  would  order  one  of 
their  fcrvants  to  me,  i  would  fend  them  in  a 
fneflagc,  exprcfTive  of  my  wifii  to  be  of  ufe  to 
them  if  in  my  power. 

In  confevyjtnce  of  this,  their  anfwervinformed 
Xnc,  that  the.Duc  de  Romagnecourt  w;is  much 
iippcured  and   flattered  by   my  attention,    and 

rcqueft'-ul 


DESIdOND.  6l 

Ycquefted  the  Inppinefs  of  feeing  me. — Judge, 
dear  Bethel,  of  the  afloniflimenr,  the  mixture 
of  wonder,  indignation  and  confufion,  with 
which  I  learned  that  Mr.  Verney  is  become 
the  intimate  friend  of  this  Due  de  Romagnc- 
court ;  that  it  is  with  him  he  refides  at  Paris  ; 
and,  that  it  is  under  his  efcort  he  has  fent  for 
Geraldine  to  join  him  there. 

If  I  had  heard  that  I  was,  at  one  blow,  re- 
duced from  affluence,  to  depend  on  the  bounty 
of  upftart  greatnefs — dependence  which  of  all 
other  fpecies  is  mofl  hideous  to  my  imagination; 
if  I  had  been  told  that  I  had  no  longer  a  friend 
in  the  world  ;  nay,  that  Bethel  himfelf  had  for- 
faken  me,  I  think  I  fhould  not  have  felt  a  fenfa- 
tion  of  greater  anguifli  andamazement. — Mon- 
fieur  D'Auberval  enquired  of  me  if  I  knew  Ma- 
dame Verney  ;  though  I  faw  by  the  Duke's  man- 
ner, that  he  was  the  perfon  interefted.  I  knew 
not  what  to  anfwer  j  and  my  cmbarrafTment 
muft  have  been  vifjble,  if  they  had  not  imputed 
pai't  of  it,  to  my  natural  diffidence  as  an  Eng- 
liflmian  ;  and  (as  they  thought)  an  Engliftman 
of  inferior  rank  ;  for  they  faw  I  had  no  fervants 
with  me,  and  feemed  to  wonder  how  a  perfon 
who  travelled  in  his  own  country  without  a 
Ju'itc^  fhould  be  fo  perfedlly  verfed  in  the  lan- 
guage of  their's. —  I  now,  however,  underflood 
the  purpofes  of  their  journey  ;  and  under  pre- 
tence of  m.aking  fome  enquiries,  I  with- 
drew to  confider  of  what  I  ought  to  do. 

ToJnterfere  between  Geraldine  and  herhuf- 
band  (T- cannot  write  his  name  with  patience) 
was,  at  leall,  improper  To  give  her  notice 
tliat  I  w'as Hill  near  her,  was  impertinent ;  and 
jTiakir.g  itttfclf  ridiculouily  of  confequence,  in  an 

affair 


6t  DESMOND. 

affair  where  my  protcdtion  was  not,  perhaps> 
requifite. — This  iJuc   de  Romagnecourt,  tho' 
he  Iiad   the  air  of  a    veteren    debauche  ;    and 
tlidughhis  converfation,  httle  as  I  heard  of  it, 
confirmed  the  idea  his   appearance  imprefied— 
might  be   a  married  man ;  a  man  of  refpeda- 
bihty  and  honour  ;  at  leafl  he  was  one  to  wliom 
it  was  evident  Mr.  Verney  chofe  to  entruft  his 
wife  ;  and  what  right  had  I  to  interfere  i  How 
eould  I  indeed  do  fo,  without  its  being  known 
that  I  had  been  privately  refiding  in  her  im- 
mediate   neighboui-hood  j    and   encouraging  a 
bcUef,  that  I  had  fome  fancied   authority,    to 
exert  that  influence  which  only  a  brother  or 
feme  very  near  relation,  is  fuppofed  to  have  a 
right  to  exert. — The  more  I  confidered  the  man, 
this  Due    de   Romagnecourt,    his   behaviour, 
his  converfation  ;  the  more  improper,  nay,  im- 
pofhble  it  feemed  for  Geraidine  to  fet  out  with 
him  on  fuch  a  journey  ;  yet  I  did  not  fee  how 
I  could,  with  propriety,  fave  her  from  it   by 
my  diredl  interference.     I  therefore  determin- 
ed to  give  the  Due  de  Romagnecourt  the  direc- 
tion he  requefted  me  to  procure  for   him  ;  to 
trufl  to  the  firfl  reception  of  fuch  a  propofal  to 
the  fenfe  and  prudence  of  Geraidine,  and   to 
await  where  I  was  the  event  of  the  letter  which, 
by  a  fervant  of  his  own,  he  fent  to  her   from 
her  hufband. -It   contained,  as  the  Duke  in- 
formed me,  an  injundtion  to  fet  off  immediate- 
ly   with  him  for  Paris. — I  affected  merely   to 
know  there  was  fuch  a  lady  as  Madame  Verney 
in  the  neighboarhood  j  and,  having  nommade 
up  my  mind,  I  returned  to  thefe  worthpfriends 
of  Verney's  ;  gave  them  the  addrefs  -they  de- 
fired,  and  faw  the  French  valet  fet  out  accom- 
panied 


D   E    9   M    O    N    B,  6^ 

pained  by  a  guide  from  the  inn. — It  is  impoiTiblc 
to  defcribe  to  you  what  I  felt  while  thefe  men 
were  abfent ;  nor  the  effort  with  which  I  fup- 
portcd  theconverfation  that  the.Duc  de  Romag- 
iiecourt  invited  me  to  engage  in. — However, 
I  commanded  myfelf  as  much  as  poffible,  as  it 
"was  abfolutely  neceflary  to  prevent  any  fufpici- 
on  of  my  being  particularly  interefted  for  Mrs. 
Verney  ;  and  I  wiihed  to  lead  him  to  fpeak  of 
her,  which  he  perhaps  would  not  have  done 
with  fo  little  referve,  if  he  had  fufpedled  that  I 
was  acquainted  with  her. 

It  is  not  very  difficult,  after  having  feen  a 
good  deal  of  this  bcfl  of  all  poffible  worlds, 
to  enter  into  much  of  a  man's  chara(fl;er,  eren 
from  a  firfl  interview. — I  foon  learned  that 
the  Due  de  Romagnecourt,  was  a  man  of 
very  high  fafhion,  and  very  great  fortune  in 
France ;  that  he  v.'as  very  much  confided 
in  by  the  court,  and  of  courfe  extremely 
averfe  to  the  claims  of  the  people ;  that  he 
execrated  the  flruggle  they  had  fo  fuccefsfuUy 
made  for  their  liberties,  and  now  vifited 
England  with  a  view  to  engage  in  favour  of 
an  oppofite  fvflem,  which  he  faid,  would 
foon  have /«' fl^^/.;*  again  j)  tliofe,  among  us 
whofe  interelt  it  v.-as  moll  efledlually  to  crufti 
every  attempt  at  reform. —  He  hinted  that  in 
liis  way  through  London,  he  had  fucceeded 
in  this  negociation  beyond  his  hopes ;  and 
that  he  was  to  liave  a  farther  cor.firmation 
of  tlie  fupport  that  had  been  prcmlfed  him 
on  his  return,  which  I:e  pvopofed  immediately, 
avfc  la  cktif  nu:t:ie  Je'iT:j/it',  whom  he  expecfled 
to  conduct. 

•  The  upper  hand, 

Picud, 


,<J4  B    E    S    M    O    N    ». 

Proud,  profligate,  and  perfidious,  accuf- 
tomed  to  entertain  high  ideas  of  felf-import- 
ance  ;  and  feldoni  finding  any  of  his  incli- 
nations refifted  becaufe  lie  had  power  and 
money  to  purchafe  their  indulgence,  the  Due 
de  Romagnecourt  was  but  little  difpofed  to 
conceal  his  principles  or  his  views. — I  learned 
tliat  when  he  was  in  England  fome  few 
months  fince,  he  faw  and  admired  Geraldine, 
to  whom  he  had  then  been  introduced 
by  her  hufband. — I  underftood  that  Verney 
was  under  very  great  pecuniary  obligations 
to  this  man,  who  now  atlually  fupports  him 
in  France  ;  and  the  inference  I  drew  from 
the  knowledge  I  thus  obtained  of  the  charac- 
ter of  the  one,  and  the  necellities  of  the  other, 
was  too  dreadful  ;  I  recoiled  with  abhor- 
rence from  its  immediate  imprcffion,  but 
ftill  it  returned  with  undiminifhcd  anguifh, 
and  every  word  uttered  by  the  Due  de  Ro- 
magnecourt, ferved  only  to  confirm  my  ap- 
prehenuons,  and  entcrcafe  my  uneafinefs. 

I  determined  tliat,  whatever  might  be  the 
eonfequence,  no  confideration  upon  earth 
Ihoald  induce  me  to  quit  the  country,  while 
this  mod  iliuflrious  perfouage  remained  in 
it ;  and  ha\'ing  made  tliat  rcfolution,  I  await- 
ed, with  as  little  vifible  anxiety  as  poiTible, 
the  return  of  the  mefiengers  who  were  fent 
to  Geraldine, 

I  had  indeed  very  little  occadon  for  an^ 
other  exertion,  than  that  of  patience  ;  for 
the  Duke,  with  all  th.'  forward  eonfequence  of 
winch  we  accufe  (.ind  fomeanies  juftly  a> 
cufe)  his  countrymen,  enttred,  nothing 
doubting  my   app'obation,     into  a   hiiUry  ot 

himfelf 


DESMOND.  6$ 

Iwmfelf— His  rank,  his  fortune,  his  feats, 
were  tlefcribed — nor  was  he  more  guarded 
on  the  fubje(fls  of  his  poUtics,  or  his  amours. 

In  i-egard  to  the  firft,  he  was,  I  found,  a 
moft  inveterate  enemy  to  the  revolution — 
Deprecated  the  idea  of  any  degree  of  free- 
dom being  allowed  to  the  inferior  ranks  of 
men  in  any  country  ;  yet  owned  that  he 
had  with  the  duplicity  that  was  adopted  by 
many  of  his  compatriots,  appeared  to  yield 
to  a  torrent  they  could  not  refift  ;  but  while 
they  feemed  to  go  with  the  ftream,  he  hint- 
ed, that  meafures  were  taking  efl'edlually 
to  turn  its  courfe  j  and  he  triumphed  in  the 
difcomfitore  of  the  reptiles,  who  had  thus 
dared  to  afpire  to  the  privilege  of  freemen 
and  faw,  in  his  mind's  eye,  the  leaders  cf 
this  obnoxious  cantialUc  languifliing  out  their 
miferable,  lives  in  the  molt  dreary  dungeons 
of  the  ndw-ere£bed  Baftile — Such  was  the 
colour  of  his  politics.  His  love  ever  fuc- 
cefsful,    and  without  thorns,  was,  as   he  re- 

prefcnted     it,     tcujotirs    icultur  de  roff. He 

fcrupled  not  to  hint,  in  terms  that  could  not 
be  mifunderftood,  that  he  had  been  verv  high- 
ly favoured  by  feme  of  the  moft  exalted 
ladies  of  the  French  court ;  that  lie  was  an 
univerfal  favourite  ;  and  that  there  was  no 
woman  in  this  country,  or  bis  own,  who 
could  Icng  remain  inlenfible  of  his  powers 
of  pleafing,  wlien   he  chofe  to   make    a  point 

of  gaining  their    favours.      In    this   flyle • 

(and  I  liliened  to  him  with  contempt  tliat 
{lifled  my  indignation. — he  ran  on  for  fome 
time  ;  till  the  wine  he  drank,  much  heavier 
than  that  he  was  ufually  accuflomed   to,    be-. 


66  DESMOND.' 

gan  to  have  a  very  vifible   efl-e<rt    on   him • 

His  companion,  a  Monfieur  d'Auberval, 
(though  I  underftand  another  perfon  came 
over  with  him)  was  even  more  inebriated 
than  himfelf— And  I  learned,  from  what 
they  together  dilcourfed,  that  Verney  had 
no  intention  of  meeting  his  wife  at  Paris, 
but  was  going  to  Metz  with  fome  other  French 
noblemen  deeply  embaiiced  in  the  caufe, 
whatever  it  is,  that  now  engages  their  intri- 
guing fpirit  -,  and  that  Mrs.  Verney  was, 
after  fome  (lay  at  a  magnificent  feat  of  the 
Due  de  Romagnecourt's,  about  five  leagues 
frcfin  Paris,  to  follow  her  hufband  to  Meta 
—  In  fnort,  dreadful  as  the  confirmation  of 
my  fears  was,  I  had  no  longer  to  doubt  but 
that  Geraldine  was  fold  by  the  wretch  who 
dares  call  her  his  wife. 

Nothing  but  the  reflection  of  what  I  owed 
to  Geraldiae,  could  have  retrained  me  from 
cxprefTmg  the  indignation  I  fe)c  ~Lz  was, 
however,  neceiTary  to  diflemble  ——1  am  a 
wretched  hyprocrite  ;  nor  could  I  even  in  this 
emergency  have     fucceeded,    if    my     compa^ 

nioUs  iiad  been    very    accurate  obfervers ~ 

At  length  after  fome  hom-s  of  fucli  tortures 
as  Itlioaght  it  hardly  pollible  to  feel  and  exii^  ; 
the  men,  who  had  been  fent  to  Geraldine 
with  her  liuiband's  letter,  returned,  and 
brought  to  r^Ionlieur  de  Romagneeourt  a  note 
written  in  French,  of  which  this  is  the 
fubflance. 

"  Mrs.  Verney  prefents  her  compliments 
to  the  Due  de  Romaenecourt  ;  and,  as  it 
IS  quite  out  of  her  power,  on  account  o^ 
iil    heakhj     and    from    other    circumftances, 

to 


DESMOND.  67 

to  leave  England  immediately ;  and  equally  fo, 
to  quit  hcv  children,  who  mull  neceffarily  be 
very  inconvenient  companions  to  him  ;  (lie  muft 
beg  leave  to  decline  the  honor  he  Intends  her 
of  a  place  in  his  carriage  on  his  return  to  Paris  ; 
and  the  letter  with  which  (lie  takes  the  liberty 
of  troubling  him  to  Mr.  Verney,  will  account 
to  him  for  her  delaying  her  journey. 

"  Mrs.  Verney  i"^  forry  the  fmall  houfe  and 
eftablifliment  flic  has  here,  makes  it  impoffible 
for  her  to  receive  the  Due  de  Romagnecourt  at 
her  prefent  rcfidence  •,  and  obliges  her  to  take 
this  method  of  thanking  him  for  the  civility  he 
intended  her."  • 

BriU'>e-foot  IMjnor-farm, 
June    nth,   1791. 

Though  the  purport  of  this  note  was  exactly 
what  I  expetleil  from  the  prcfence  of  mind  and 
good  fenfe  of  Geraldine  j  and  though  I  was 
relieved  from  ray  firfi:  anxious  apprehenf;ons, 
as  to  the  terror  fiie  would  be  in  on  receiving  it, 
I  had  yet  but  too  many  fears  to  con'. end  with. 
I  fav/  that  Monfieur  de  Romagnecourt  was 
mortified  for  the  moment,  but  by  no  means  fo 
much  difcouraged  as  to  dxdil  from  his  purfuit ; 
and  after  reading  the  note  over  twice  or  thrice, 
admiring  the  elegance  of  the  writing,  and  the 
purity  of  the  French,  which,  he  faid,  was 
fuch,  as  not  one  in  a  thoufand  of  his  country- 
women could  have  produced,  he  fluttered  about 
the  room,  though  with  fomewhat  Icfs  dignity 
than  ufual,  for  lie  could  hardly  (land  ;  and 
then  calling  her  a  lovely  prude,  he  determined 
to  try,  the  next  morning,  what  iiis  own  irrefif- 
tible  prcfence  could  do  towards  thawing  the  ice 


68  n  E  s  M  o  ]Si  D. 

of  this  cold  Engllfli  beauty ;  and,  in  this  difi- 
pofjtion,  I  left  him  at  one  in  the  morning. 

I  faw  that  any  attempt  to  difuade  him  from 
fuch  a  fcheme,  would  be  fruitlefs  ;  and,  indeed, 
I  thought  it  befi;  to  let  her  pofitive  and  perfonal 
refufulconvincc  him  at  once,  that  his  prc- 
fumptuous  and  infolent  propofal  mail  be  abor- 
tive— Still  it  was  painful  to  me,  to  think  that 
Geraldine  mud  be  infulted  by  hearing  it. —  I 
knew,  that  elevated  as  her  mind  is,  above  thofu 
frivolous  and  unworthy  apprehenfions,  to  whicli 
women  fancy  it  an  amiable  weaknefs  to  yield; 
yet,  that  fuch  an  addrefs,  from  luch  a  man, 
in  a  place  where  llie  was  eiitirely  unprote(5lcd  ; 
and  the  application  coming  from  her  hulhand, 
could  not  but  be  altogether  moft  diftreffing  to 
her. — Though  I  could  not  fave  her  from  it,  it 
was  pofhble  to  fcften  the  fliock,  by  giving  her 
notice  of  it ;  and  afiiiring  b.er,  that  thitc  w;»s 
v.itliin  her  reach,  a  man  who  would  lay  down 
his  life,  rather  than  fee  her  expofed  to  any  un- 
worthy treatment. 

Sleep  was  with  me  entirely  ou*:  of  the  quef- 
tlon. — At  the  earliefl:  dawn  of  the  morning,  I 
was  on  horfeback,  and  diredled  my  courfe  to 
my  former  refidence,  tlie  cottage.  -  My  ancient 
hofl  and  his  v/ifc  were  jull  making  their  homely 
brcakfafl,  on  brown  bread  and  cyder,  when  I 
entered  their  kitchen  j  they  were  rejoiced,  jtt 
amazed,  to  fee  me  ;  and  I  was  compelled,  once 
more,  to  have  recourfe  to  flratagem,  to  con- 
ceal the  real  motive  cf  ray  fecond  vifit. ^I 

told  them,  I  had  found  myfelf  not  fo  well  after 
I  left  their  houfe,  and  had,  therefore,  return- 
ed from  Rofs,  to  abide  with  them  a  few  days 
jpnger. 

I  then 


t)     E    S    M    6    N    D.  6i) 

1  then  confdered  in  what  way  I  {hould  an- 
nounce to  Geraldine  the  vifit  fhe  was  to  espe£l ; 
and  I  concluded,  tliat  I  woidd  go  to  the  houfe 
and  fend  up  my  nime— Slowly  and  penfively  I 

began  this    fliort  walk 1  dreaded  for    her 

the  uneafinefs  I  was  about  to  inflict — I  dreaded 
for  myfelf,  that  I  ftiould  betray  in  a  way,-  too 
unequivocally  expvefTive  of  my  fentiments,  all 

T  felt.- To   tell  her  that  I  apprehended  her 

hufband  had  configned  her  to  another,  was  to 
mtininte  to  her  a  degree  of  infamy,  almoft  too 
ihocking  to  be  imagined,  and  that  of  a  man, 
wlih  whom  flie  was,  perhaps,  to  pafs  her  life, 
and  who  Was  the  father  of  her  children  ;  yer, 
to  let  her,  for  a  moment,  think  cf  obeying  hum, 
which,  it  was  pcflible,  {he  m.ight  do,  if  it  ilruck 
her  as  being  her  duty,  was  Ai'l  more  dreadful ; 
and  I  f".\r  there  was  nothing  to  be  hoped  for,  but 
from  the  rectitude  of  underilanding,  which  I 
have  always  remarked  in  her  ;  but  I  even  dread- 
ed the  exccfs  of  thofe  flrict  principles,  ■«-hich 
I  have  often  known  to  impel  her,  contrary  to 
her  own  wlfnes,  and  her  c\%-n  fenfe  of  propri- 
ety, to  follow  tlie  dictates  of  thofe,  who,  confci- 
ous  as  fhe  muil  be,  of  their  mental  inferiority, 
had,  ihe  thought,  a  right  to  her  compliance. 

As  foon  as  I  could  diitiuftly  difcern  the 
V*indows,  I  faw  they  were  already  open,  thouzh 
it  Was  yet  early — The  m.crning  was  lovely  } 
bu:  my  mind  was  too  much  occupied  to  futfer 
ir.e  to  cnj.yit.  I  knew  Geraldine  ufed  to 
walk  early  in  tlie  little  court  that  is  before  her 
apartments;  but  now  there  was  no  traces  of 
her  having  been  out  i  nor  did  I  hear  the  voica 
ot  my  little  playfellow  cheeifuUv  greering  my 
return,  as,  I  cw:i,  I  had  foi^uiy  iui tici^ att c — All 

feemed 


70  D   E    S   M   0   N   n. 

feemed  mournfully  filent ;  yet  I  thought  I 
heard  fome  footfteps  moving  foftly  about  the 
houfe.  I  tapped  at  the  old,  thick,  carved  door 
with  my  ftick  ;  for  there  Is  no  knocker — 
Nobody  anfwered — I  repeated  it — Still  no  an- 
fvi'er^— — At  length,  after  waiting  near  a  quarter 
of  an  hour  at  the  door,  I  lifted  up   the    iron 

latch,  and  opened  it 1  crofTed  the    brick 

hall,  but  faw  nobody T.':e  door  of  the  par- 
lour, where  Geraldine  ufudlly  fits,  was  a-jav  j, 
I  puflied  it  gently  opt  n,  and  was  ftruck  with 
a  groupc  of  figures,  which  exaclly  brought  to 
my  mind  that  which  liad  been  fo  forcibly  and 
painfully  imprefled  on  it,  by  my  dream  at 
Hautcville.-'— — 

Gerald ine  was  extended  on  an  old  fafhion 
cane  fopha,  or  what  is,  I  thmk,  called  a  fettee, 
fupovted  by  cufhions  of  green  fluff,  and   with 
her  right  arm  flie  clafped  the  youngefl  of  her 
children,  who  appeared  to  my  terrified  imagina- 
tion to  be  dying,    as  its  head   repofed  on  her 
bofom,  Avhile  her  tears  fall  flowly  on  the  little 
pallid    face ;    the  girl,  unconfcious  of  her  mo- 
ther's anguiOi,  fat  upon  the  pillow  behind  her, 
playing  with  fome  flowers,  and   the  eldcft  boy 
liad    feated    hlmfelf  by  iier   in  his  own  little 
chair,  and  was  lu^Uiing  her  left  hand  and  look- 
ing mournfully  at  her,  and  his  brother.  Fixed  to 
the  fpot  by  grief  and  amazement,  I  dared  hardly 
breathe   left   I  fliould    too  fudenly   alar  n   her. 
Her  eyes  were  fliut,  and  -I  only  faw  by  the  tears 
tliat  fell  from  tiiem,  that  (he  was  not  in  a  ftate 
of  iufenfil-ility,   for  my  entrance  did  not  iVem 
toditturbher — fhe  fuppofod  it  to   be  the  maid. 
In  a  momenr,  however,  th'  little  boy  turned 
ftsuai  an.l  faw  me,  and  fcreaming  my  nam:  in 

an 


E    E    S    M    O    N    D.  ^71 

nn  accent  of  tranfport,  as  he  eagerly  ran 
towards  me.  Gerakiine  opened  her  eyes,  and 
repeated,  "  Defmond  !  gracious  heaven  !  Def- 
inond  !" 

As  foon  as  I  could   dilengage  myfelf  fi-om 

tlie  carefles  of  the  child  I  approached 

**  I  am  deflined"  faid  I,  in  faultering  accents, 
"  I  am  deftined  to  difturb  and  alarm  you, 
can  you  forgive  me  for  this  intrufion  ?"—- 1 
hcfitated— I  hardly  knevi^  vhat  I  would  fay. 
She  gave  me  however  her  haiid  as  {he  rofe^ 
involuntarily  I  could  have  prelled  it,  for  the 
firft  time  in  my  life,  to  my  trembling  lips, 
but  I  darc-d  not ;  and  I  remained  holding  it 
dill  in  mine,  while  fhe  faid,  after  a  paule  of 
a  moment — "  Never  was  tlie  fight  of  a  friend 
■more  truly  welcome." 

The  cordiality  of  this  reception,  (fur  her 
eyes,  heavy  as  they  were,  confirmed  the  pur- 
.port  of  her  words)  reflored  nie  to  fome  de- 
gree of  confidence  and  compofure.  I  took  a 
chair,  unbidden  ;  {he  begged  I  would  forgive 
her  for  attending  to  her  child,  who  was, 
ilie  apprehended,  dangercufly  ill.— I  enquired 
how  long  it  had  been  fo,'  and  {[\c  replied — 

**  I  am  grown  fo  very  weak,  INIr.  Dcfniond, 
I  mean,  that  I  am  fo  much  difpofed  to  be 
what  the  fine  ladies  call  nervous,  that  I  am 
■no  longer  fit  for  a  nvirfe  ;  every  fcolifli  acci>- 
dent  difcompofes  me,  and  of  courfe  injures 
niy  nurfmg — I  have  been  extremely  alarmed 
for  tlie  life  of  thit;  ill-ftarred  baby,  within 
tjiefe  few  hours,  but  I  hope  my  fears  have 
exaggerated  the  danger."  1  had  no  need  to 
aft:  wh.at  it  was  th*t  had  fo  much  diflreHtd 
•her,  vet  I   did   not   like   abrupt! v   to    tell   her, 

that 


fjt  £>   E   S   Iki   O   N  li. 

fhat  I  was  already  acquainted  with  it  j  {he  did 
not  however,  lead  to  it,  and  we  remained 
for  fome  moments  filent,  while  little  George 
clung  about  me,  and  faid  he  loved  me  dearly 
for  coming  back. 

«  Ailc  Mr.  Defmond,  my  love,"  faid  Ge- 
raldine,  as  if  glad  to  have  the  means  of  thus 
queftioning  me.— '«  Afk  him,  why  he  came 
back  when  we  were   afraid  he  was  quite  gone. 

"  It  was,"  anfwered  I,  "  to  prevent  your 
being  alarmed  by  the  fuddennefs  of  a  vifit 
from  another  perfon,  which  will,  even  when 
you  are  prepared  for  it,  be,  I  believe,  difa 
greeable  enough."  She  grew  more  pale  at 
thefe  words — "  you  mean  the  Duke  de  Ro* 
magnecourt  ?"  "  I  anfwered,  yes  -,  and  re- 
lating briefly  what  had  paflTed,  except  that 
part  of  our  converfation  that  raifed  my  fufpi* 
cions  about  her  hufband's  having  literally  fold 
her,  (with  which  it  was  impofRble  for  me  to 
Overwhelm  her)  1  alked  what  fhe  would  do 
to  €vade  the  importunities  of  a  man,  who 
feemed  to  fuppofe  his  wiihes  were  not  to  be 
-countera<^ed,  and  to  believe  he  need  only  ap- 
pear, to  obtain  them." 

The  dignity'of  confcious  worth,  thus  de- 
ferted  by  its  protedlor,  gave  fpirit  for  a  mo»- 
ment  to  her  languid  countenance.  "  If  Mr4 
Verney,"  faid  fte — but  fhe  checked  herfelf, 
and  hefitating  a  moment,  faid,  with  lefs  viva- 
city— "  if  this  nobleman  gives  himfelf  the 
trouble  to  come  hither,  which,  howeverj  I 
mod  earneftly  v/idi  he  may  not,  my  anfwev 
will  be  very  pofitive,  and  very  ihort  -I  am 
extremely  obliged   to   you  for  giving  me  no-* 

tice 


n  E  5  M  0  N  ».  7j 

tice  of  his  intentions  5  but  if  you  could  pre- 
vent his  coming—" 

It  did  not,  at  that  moment,  appear  to  he» 
that  my  interference  was  liable  to  a  thoufand 
mifconftrud^ions  — — ^— but  before  fhe  had  fi- 
niflied  the  fentence,  this  occurred   to  her  very 

forcibly  i  and  fhe  added "  but  I  beg  your 

pardon  for  my  inconfiderate  folly this  can- 
not be— ——he  muft  come— —I  muft  under- 
go, unfit  as  I  am,  the  irkfome  ceremony  of 
feeing  him  and  of  giving  him  my  pofitive  rsfu- 
fal. ' 

«  And  if  he  (hould  afterwards  perfifl  V 
«'  Impoflible — he  furely  cannot  intend  it." 
I  then  gave  her  a  fpecimen  of  his  converfa- 
tion,  which  I  had,    till  now,    mentioned  only 

in  general  terms. She  was  much  affecfl- 

ed  at  the  idea,  that  the  ftrange  and  unmanly 
conduct  of  Verney  liad  expofed  her  to  a  fcene 

fo  improper  and  fo  extraordinary And  I 

faw  her  turn  her  turn  her  eyes,  exprefilve  of 
the  moil  acute  maternal  anguifli,  and  filled 
with  tears,  on  her  children,  particularly  on 
the  little  one  in  her  arms  ;  but  even  in  this 
moment  Ihe  uttered  ho  complaint  againft  their 
cruel  father,  though  I  faw  her  bofom  heave 
as  bitter  reflections  on  his  condu^,  fwellcd 
her  heart  almoft  to  burlting. 

Oh  !  Bethel  !  uhf  could  I  not,  at  th.U  mo- 
ment, have  taken  this  lovely,  injured  woman 
and  her  children  openly  under  my  proteclion  ? 
— Why  could  I   not  aver  that  ardent,    yet  fa- 

cred  paffion  I  feel  for  her? Alas!    in- 

llead  of  daring  to  own  it,  and  to  offer  her  my 
life,  I  was  llruggling,  perhaps  inefficacioufly 
Oruggling,  to  make  all  I  faid,  aU  I  prcpjfed, 
nppcitr  as  the  dictates  of  mere  fri.n.d.hip  ; 
VeL.  II.  E  a.Ai 


74  D    E    S    M    0    N    Bi 

and  to  perfuade  her,  that,  from  a  mere  friend, 
(he  might,  nay,  ought  to  accept  my  counfel, 

if  {he  could  not  my  offers  of  fervice. i^  f- 

ter  a  farther  conference  of  half  an  hour,  dur- 
ing which,  I  faid  all  that  might,  without  too 
much  alarming  her,  put  her  upon  her  guard 
againfl:  the  Due  de  Romagnecourt's  proje6ls 
—I  was  preparing  to  take  my  leave,  when 
(he  afked  me  if  I  had  breakfafted —  I  never 
once  recolle£led  that  I  had  not —  She  or- 
dered breakfaft  to  be  brought ;  and,  I  faw, 
made  an  effort  to  be  cheerful,  but  it  was  evi- 
dently forced  -,  her  eyes  anxioufly  followed 
the  child,  as  the  maid  carried  it  out  of  the 
room — I  remarked,  that  notwithftandlng  the 
particular  converfation  in  which  we  were  en- 
gaged during  breakfaft,  ftie  liftened  to  every 
noife  above  (lairs,  and  went  out  twice  to  en- 
quire after  it. — It  was  proper  I  fliould  go — 
for,  I  knev/,  I  muft  be  an  inconvenient  inter- 
ruption to  her  ;  yet  I  had  not  faid  all  I  wilh- 
cd  to  fiiy,  and  could  not  determine  to  depart. 

On  her  return  the  laft  time  into  tlie  room, 
(lie  fmiled  on  me  with  angelic  fweetnefs,  and 
afked  if  I  forgave  her  abrupt  rudenefs  F-^She 
then  fat  down  again— endeavoured  once  more 
to  regain  her  compofure  ;  and  enquired  at 
wliat  time  1  thought  it  probable  ilie  might  be 
opprefTed  by  the  honor  that  tliveatened  her  ? 
— "As  file  tiius  again  introduced  the  iubjcLl, 
]  collected  refolutlon  enough  to  tell  her  that 
my  fears  of  her   fuiferings  did   not  end  with 

this  vifit for  that  1  thought  the  nobie  fo- 

re^igner  very  likely  to  perfevere  in  his  entrea- 
ties, and  leave  nothing  unattcniptcu  to  en- 
force them.— —At  the  word  etijjsccy  on  vvhich 

I  laid 


fr  E    S    M    0    N   B.  "7^ 

I  laid  a  ftrong  emphafis,  fhe  fmiled,  and  aflc- 
ed  me  if  I  tliought  he  would  really  enaiTt  a 
French  Sir  Ilargrave  Pollexfen,  and  carry  her 
to  Paris  witliout  her  own  confent  ?— — I  an- 
fwered  very  gravely,  that  though  that  could 
hardly  be  done ;  yet,  that  flie  might,  and  I 
was  afraid,  would  find  the  JJuke  a  vifitor  of 
great  perfeverance,  and  one  who  would  not, 
without  great  difficulty,  be  difluaded  to  recede 
from  a  point  which,  he  thought,  he  had  her 
hufband's  authority  to  perfifl;  in. 

bhe  lookted  at  me,  as  if  to  examine  whether 
I  meant  more  than  I  faid— — I  fuppofe  I  look- 
ed as  if  I  did  -  But  again  fhe  endeavoured  to 
laugh  ciT  the  fears  which  flie  would  willingly 

believe   groundlefs. "  I   cannot  imagine," 

faid  Tne,  "  why  you  have  taken  it  into  your 
head,    that  this   man   v/ould   give   himfelf  fo 

much  trouble 1  dare   fay   he  will  make  a 

fine  Ipeech  or  two,  be  an  dejfefpoh-^  that  he 
cannot  have  the  happincfs  of  my  company, 
and  content  himfelf  with  drugging  up  his 
fhoulders  at  my  want  of  common  fcnfe,  in 
preferring  this  pays  trijie  ts*  moniey  with  my 
children,  to  the  delights  of  a  journey  to  Pa- 
ris with  him." 

"  I  \\  i(h,"  replied  I,  "  it  nir.y  end  fo,  my 
^lear  Madam." 

<«  But  you  doubt  it  ?" 

"  I   do   indeed." 1  tiien  gave  her  fome 

ftrcnger  reafons,  drawn  from  my'obfervations 
of  the  preceding  evenmg,    nvJ.y  I   doubted  it 

"  You  are,"    faid  I,    «  quite  unprotecled 

here  ;  you  liave  net  even  a  man-fervant  who 
might  Ihut   your  doers  againft  imp.'rtincnt  in- 

iruilon." Sh?  allowed   thisj    and  \\-h-^   I 

E  2  alk.d 


7^  ©   E    S    M    0    N   ». 

aflced  her  whether  I  had  her  permifTion  f<J 
remain  at  the  cottage,  I  had  before  inhabit* 
ed,  till  I  faw  the  event  of  this  vifit,  a  faint 
blufh,  which  fpoke  a  thoiifand  grateful,  yet 
fearful  fenfaticns,  was  vifible  on  her  cheek 
■  "  But  cliccking  her  fear,  her  pure  and 
noble  mind  yielded  only  to  gratitude,  fhe  gave 
me  once  more  her  lovely  hand— — ^"  It  is 
worthy  of  you,"  faid  Ihe,  with  enchanting 
franknefs,  "  to  make  fo  generous  an  offer,  I 
accept  it  rather  to  quiet  your  apprehenfions 
than  my  own  ;  but  it  mufl  be  upon  conditi- 
on, that  you  run  no  rifk  of  embroiling  your-" 
felf  with  this  extraordinary  vifitor  of  mine." 

— 1  aflured  her  I  would  not ;  and  having 

obtained  permiffion  to  wait  on  her  for  half  an 
hour  in  the  evening,  I  took  my  leave. 

And  now,    my   dear  friend,  I  have  written 

this  volume  fince ■  I   have   feen  from  my 

windows  the  carriage  of  Romagnecourt  go  to 
her  lioufe— —  Impatiently  I  awaited  its  return, 
which  was  not  for  an  hour  and  a  half ;  and 
now  I  go  to  enquire  the  refult  j  and  as  I  (hall 
-fend  this  immenfe  packet  away  to  day,  and 
fhall  have  no  opportunity  to  write  again  for 
fome  time,  I  leave  you  to  comment  on  the 
ftrange  flory  I  have  related,  and  to  blame, 
for  fo  I  doubt  not  but  you  will,  (fince  chi- 
valry is  no  more)  this  romantic  knight-erran- 
try 

Of  your  faithful, 

LIONEL  DESMOND. 

You    fee    I    conclude    cheerfully,    which    t 
accottnt  for   by  telling  yon,    tl:at   wlicnevcr  I 

am 


DESMOND.  77 

am  to  fee  Geraldiiie,  I 'feel  in  heaven ;  and  I 
hope  to  fee  her  this  evening  reRored  to  quiet, 
for  her  cluild  was  better  when  1  left  her ; 
(indeed,  f  believe  her  tenderncfs  greatly  ex- 
aggerated his  danger)  and  I  hope  the  noble 
Duke  has  departed  peaceably  with  his  final 
anfwer;  yet,  till  I  am  ailured  that  fiie  i'". 
•completely  relieved  from  his  infolent  impor- 
tunities, my  heart,  I  find,  rnulb  be  fubjcc-t  to 
frequjeut  fitjs  of  aiuieties  and  indignation. 


LET. 


7?  DESMOND. 

LETTER    VIII. 
TO    MR.  BETHEL. 

Bridge-foot,  June  13    1791. 

THOUGH  there  has  rot  been  time  for 
you  to  anfwer  my  former  letters,  I  am  grow- 
ing extremely  impatient  to  hear  from  you ; 
but  till  I  do,  though  I  fear  you  will  blame 
all  I  have  done,  I  muft  beguile  the  anxiety 
of  the  fituation  I  am  now  in,  by  continuing 
iny  narrative. 

I  went  on  the  evening  of  yefterday,  at  the 
time  Geraldine  had  appointed,  to  her  houfc. 
--»,».-.,—. Ho  far  from  rejoicing  in  the  final  dif- 
miflion  of  her  importunate  French  vifitor,  as 
I  hoped  to  have  found  her,  fhe  appeared  ex- 
tremely alarmed  at  his  determined  perfever- 
ance  ;  and  under  tlie  greatefb  apprehenfions 
of  another  viHt  from  him  on  the  following 
raorning. —  She  repeated  with  fymptoms  of 
great  difquiet,  the  converfiition  (he  had  held 
with  him  j  and  his  enger  remonilrances,  on 
her  pofitively  refufing  to  accompany  him  ; 
mingled  with  wljat  he  believed  the  mofl  ir- 
refiftible  adulation,  left  me  no  doubt  as  to 
his  views ;  nor  of  the  compadT.  made  with 
Verney,  by  which  lie  afiured  himfelf  he 
fiiould  carry  them  into  eifec^. — Though  the 
whole  of  this  odious  tranfiisfliion  did  not  feem 
to  have  ftruck  Geraldine  as  it  had  done  me, 
I  fee  that  flie  fufpe^fts  but  too  much  of  it ; 
and  fuch,  indeed,  was  the  language  tlie  Due 
de  .Romagnecourt  held,    tJiat   of    his  dofigns 

the 


DESMOND.  79 

Hie    could    net  be  ignorant. She    evaded, 

however,  repeating  the  extravagant  fpeechcs 
which  made  them  fo  evident,  with  modefl: 
dignity ;  but,  as  this  was  no  time  to  conceal 
irom  her  any  part  of  my  apprehenfions,  I 
ventured  to  afk  her- whether  flie  couM  be 
blind  to  tlie  real  motive  of  this  importunate 
interference ;  and,  if  it  was  not  very  vifible 
that  the  Duke's  pretended  friendOiip  for  Mr. 
Vcrney,  was  only  a  paflion  for  her  perfonal 
charms.—  She  owned  that  it  appeared  fo  ; 
and  then  added,  that  during  tlie  time  (lie  was 
under  the  cruel  necefhty  of  remaining  in 
London,  where  the  acquaintance  begun,  f]:e 
perceived  that  this  foreigner  had  confidered 
the  funis  he  loft  to  Verney,  as  a  fort  of  pafT- 
port  to  her  favour ;  and  had  then  addrefled 
her  in  a  ftyle,  which  only  the  lighter  man- 
ners of  his  country,  and  his  total  ignorance 
of  her  real  character,  could  have  induced  her 
to  tolerate  a  moment  :  but  flie  had  believed, 
that  on  returning  to  France  he  liad  thought 
no  more  about  her. 

I  could  have  told  her,  that  the  impreflions 
fhe  made,  even  when  thofe  impreflions  were 
only  Ifiofe  of  her  perfonal  lovelinefs,  were 
not  eafily  erafed  ;  but  I  was  in  fuch  a  ftate 
of  mind,  that  I  dared  hardly  fpeak  at  all, 
left  I  (hoiild  too  evidently  betray,  what  in 
her  prefent  fituation  would  have  been  doubly 
improper. — Her  diftrefs  diftraClcd  me  ;  and 
I  knew  not  how  to  relieve  it  but  by  a  diredt 
addrefs  to  the  Duke,  from  whence  I  faw 
jTiany  ill  confequences,  and  (lie  others ;  t-^ 
which  /  (hould  have  been  entirely  indifferent 
— 1  underflcod  that  this  unfeeling  fuitor, 


8o  DESMOND. 

had  dared  not  only  to  exprefs  his  contempt 
for  all  thofe  ties  which  fhe  held  facred,  but 
to  ridicule  Verney ;  judging,  perhaps,  that 
it  was  irapoflible  (he  could  love  him  j  and 
that  her  iliewing  fhe  defpifed  him,  (v/hich 
Vas  a  fentiment  he  thought  fhe  could  not 
conceal,)    would  be    a   very    important  point 

iivhis  favour. "  It  is  now,"    faid  fhe,  "  it 

is  now  that  I  feel  in  all  its  bitternefs,  that 
humiliation  to  which  the  conducfl  of  Mr. 
Verney  has  reduced  me-— This  man  dares 
thus  addrefs  me,  becaufe  I  am  fallen  from 
the  fituation  in  which  I  once  moved,  and  he 
fappofes  that  my.  mind  is  humbled  with  my 
fortune."— —— She  had  hitherto  reflrained  her 
tears,  but  they  now  fell  on  her  bofom~Had 
fo  many  drops  of  blood  been  drawn  from 
my  heart,  I  fhould  have  felt  them  lefs  pain- 
fully  Blame  me   not  too  feverely  if  the 

fcnfe  of  what  Geraldine  fuffered  (ihe,  at 
^vhofe  feet  the  world  {liould  be  proftrate) 
my  cur  fed  fituation  which  rendered  my  at- 
tempting to  Tclieve  her  fo  hazardous  to  her 
fame — the  dread  of  her  continuing  defence- 
Ufs  and  unprote£led  as  (lie  was,  to  be  ex- 
pofed  to  propofals  fo  infufFerably  infolent ; 
the  efFccl  which  I  faw  this  (late  of  uneafi- 
nefs  had  on  her  health,  and  a  thoufand  other 
reflexions,  crowding  together  into  my  mind, 
tlirew  mc  off  my  guard.—  By  heaven,  Bethel ! 
I  was  in  a  momentary  phrenzy — and  for- 
getting that  to  avoid  encreafing  her  dlfcom- 
fort  was  the  obje£l  neareft  my  heart,  I 
yielded  to  the  violence  of  fuch  mingled  and 
diflrading  emotions ;  and  I  believe,  looked 
sad  behaved  like  .1  madman. 

I  was 


DESMOND.  81 

I  was  almoft  immediately  checked,  how- 
ever, by  the  efFe£t  this  fally  of  ungovern- 
able paffion  had  on  Geraldine — She  feemed 
at  one  thundcrftruck  for  a  moment ;  then 
recovering  her  prefence  of  mind,  Ihe  put  her 
hand  gently  on  my  arm  ;  and,  with  a  coun- 
tenance where  what  (lie  felt  for  herfelf,  was 
loft  in  the  expreflion  of  folicitude  for  me  ;  (he 

faid «  My    good    friend!      what    is    the 

meaning  of  all  this  ? — Do  not  fuffer  your 
concern  for  me  to  overcome  you  thus— Above 
all  things,  you  nnijl  promife  me  that  you  da 

not  perfonally   appear    in  this    affair Give 

nie  your  advice  ....  I  know  it  will  be  that  of 
the  kindeft  and  moft  brotherly  friendfliip,  and 
I  will  follow  it :  but  I  mull  infift  upon  your 
relinquifliing  every  idea  of  fpeaking  to  Mon- 
{leur  de  Romagnecourt  — to  any  other  pro- 
pofal  you  {hall  make,  I  ought  to  attend." 
The  manner  in  which  this  was  uttered,  re- 
ftored  me  inftantly  to  myfelf ;  I  wus  afhamed 
of  the  cxpreihons  of  vengeance  againft  Ro- 
anagnecourt,  and  of  rage  at  my  own  fituation, 
that  I  had  ufed. 1  felt  all  their  improprie- 
ty, and  regretted  that  I  had  uttered  them  ; 
yet  the  emotions  which  gave  them  birth  were 
•as  ftrong  as  ever  •,  and,  while  I  repented,  I 
could  not  apologize  for  them — I  remained 
filent,  till  Geraldine,  in  a  voice  yet  more 
foothing,  enquired,  what  I  would  advife  her 
to  do,  fmce  it  was  too  certain  that  no  cont- 
mon  means  of  repveiilng,  uuM'elcome  impor- 
tunity, had  any  t'Stdi  on  the  arrogant  per- 
feverance  of  Moufieur  de  Romagnecourt — 
-For  he  had  told  her,  that  he  ihould  remain 
at  lead  a  week  in  the  neighbourhood,  in  ex- 
£  5  peilation. 


82  DESMOND. 

peculation,  that  fhe  would  change  in  his  Ta- 
vour,  a  refolution  fo  haftily  adopted. 

**  Good  God  !  exclaimed  I,  is  it  impoffiblc 
to  cfcape  feeing  this  man  ?  is  it  impollible  to 
deny    yourfelf?     On  what    pretence  does    he 

exclaim  a  right  to  moleft    you  ?" "  On 

that,"  flie  replied,  "  of  being  fent  by  Mr. 
Verney." 

"  But  has  he  no  fenfe  or  propi'iety,  none  of 
the  refpeft  be  owes  you  ? 

«  Alas  !"  anfv^ered  flie,  «  it  is,  I  think, 
too  certain  that  I  fhall  fufFer  much  more  perfe- 
cution  before  I  am  releafed  from  him  ;  but  be 
that  as  it  may,  you  may  be  aflured,  Defmond, 
that  the  idea  of  your  perfonal  danger,  which 
could  not  fail  to  arife  from  any  application  to 
Mr.  De  Romaguecourt,  is  infinitely  more  ter- 
vifving  to  me,  than  any  apprehenfions  I  enter- 
tain for  myfelf;  ar.d  after  all,  why  fhould  I 
be  thus  uneafy  at  impertinence  v/hich  cannot 
luft  many  days  ;  and  which  can  only  harafs  and 
fatigue  my  fjnrits,  but  not  do  me  any  material 
injury." 

"  And  is  it  not  then  (Geraldine,  I  had 
jiearly  faid)  is  it  not  a  material  injury,  dear 
Madam,  to  be  fubje(fted  for  hours  and  days  to 
hear  fuch  fort  of  converfition  as  that  with 
which  this  rr.un  prefumed  to  addrefs  you  ?  and 
is  not  your  deigning  to  admit  a  fecond  and  a 
third  viilt,  giving  him  reafon  to  hope  you  will 
finally  be  kfs  inexorable  than  you  declare 
yourfelf."^ Prefuniing  as  he  is,  a  very  lit- 
tle of  what  he  V.' ill  inierprjt  as  encouragement, 

viil   render  his  infolence  inlunportablc. 

I  own,  that  if  I,  v.ho  have  not  the  happincfs 
to  be    allied  to   you,    and    have    certainly   no 

tliht. 


D    E    S    Af    O    N    n.  83 

right  to  influerxe  you,  fliould  interfere  on 
this  occafion  to  deliver  you  from  his  importu- 
nity }  (which,  I  believe,  it  would  not  be  dif- 
ftcult  to  do)  fuch  an  intei-ference  might  ]:'<vc 
occafion  to  difagreeable  mifcon(lru(il:ions  ;  out 
furely  it  were  better  to  ha-^.ird  thofe,  whichj 
perhaps,  in  this  remote  place,  miglit  not  hap- 
pen, than  to  leave  you  a  day,  an  hour,  expo- 
fed  to  the  intrufion  of  this  ailuming  and  arro- 
gant foreigner  ■  Would  it  be  confident  with 
the  friendlhip,  the  efleem,  you  are  fo  good  as 
to  allow  me  to  profefs  ;  and  I  hope  I  need  not 
fay  how  fincercly  I  profefs  it)  to  leave  you  in  a 
predicament,  ia  which,  were  you  my  filler, 
I  could  not  bear  that  you  fliould  remain  a  mo- 
ment ?" 

I  faw  this  argument  had  a  vihble  efFe£l  on 
Geraldine  — —  but,  fliall  I  ovvn,  that  at  this 
moment  my  feifilh  heart  bounded  wirh  delight 
at  the  idea  that  I  was  not  indiiiereat  to  her; 
'4nd  regardlcis  of  the  additional  ])z'injlje  muft 
ieel  from  a  preference  againll  tlie  indulgence 
of  wliich  her  principles  would  revolt — — I 
dared  to  taile  delight,  which  no  confideration 
had,  for  a  moment,  power  to  re  It  rain. — She 
remained  filent  ;     and   then   faid   v/ith   a   deep 

figh *'  1  thank  you   moft  truly,    Defmond, 

for  fuppofi-ng  me  your  filler -Ah  !   would  to 

God  I  were  indeed  f o  1  H^d  I  fuch  a  brother, 
I  could  net  be  expofed  to  a  fiiuatlen  fo  cruel 
-——I  fiiould  then  have  a  protector!  But  as  it 
is,  (and  her  tears  fell  fait)  i  am  deferted  by. 
all  thofe  on  whofe  guardiandiip  i. have  a  claim.: 
--To  your  generous— your  more  than  bro- 
therly friendlh.p,  I  am  aiieady  but  too  mucli 

indebted Vv'ere  th;re  not  a;:  infinite  nu.u- 

bcc 


8^4  B  r.  s  M  o  N  D. 

ber  of  obje6lIons,  I  could  not  bear  to  encreafe 
this  debt  j  but,  as  it  is,  the  bare  idea  of  any 
interview,  on  the  fub)e(Sl  of  his  vifits  here,  be- 
tween you  and  Monfieur  de  Romagnecourt,  is 
intolerably  dreadful ;  and  I  entreat  you  never 
to  name  it  again." 

*'  Something,  however  mufl  be  done," 
faid  I  ;  "  for  unauthorifed,  as  I  am,  to  fpeak 
to  Monfieur  de  Romagnecourt,  /  can  as  little 
bear  his  infults  to  you  ■  infults,  from  which 
•it  is  the  indifpenfible  duty  of  every  man  of 
honor  and  feeling  to  defend  you." 

"  You  terrify  mc  to  death  !"   anfwer^d  flie 

»— "  Promife  me — —I  infift  upon  your  pro- 

jnife,  that  of  fuch  a  meafure  as  applying  to 
this  Frenchman  yourfelf,  you  wii  think  no 
xnore." 

*'  Promife  me  then,"  faid  I,  "  that  you 
will  think  of  fome  way  of  avoiding  his  future 
vifits." 

"  I  know  of  but  one,  and  that— —that  is, 
at  prefent,  impracticable. 

"  Name  it,  however,  for  heaven's  fake." 

*«  It  is",  faid  flie,   hefitating "  to  go  to 

Bath  to  my  mother  j  but  befides  otiier  conn- 
<krations,  v.'hich  render  fuch  a  journey,  at 
prefent,  almoft  impoflible — I  have  realbn  to 
fear  that  I  fliould  be  at  this  time  an  unwel- 
come vifitor— »—- My  brother  is,  as  Fanny's  lafl 
letters  tell  me,  on  the  point  of  being  married 
into  a  family,    whofe  favour^    profperity  alone 

■can  conciliate. For  this   dehred  union    my 

mother  has  long  been  labouring  ;  and  fhouid 
my  prefence,  tleprefled  and  humbled  as  I  am, 
impede  it — —I  know,  too  well,  that  I  fliould 
be  a  moil  unwelcome  vifitor— Unwelcome  to 
every  one  but  my  Fanny." 

This 


DESMOND.  8^ 

This  cruel  refledlion  conqueved,  foi'  a  mo- 
ment, her  equality  of  mind  -,  deep  fighs  and 
tears  choaked  her.  Oh !  Bethel  !  to  behold 
the  woman  I  adore  in  fuch  a  (late,  without 
daring  to  relieve,  or  even  to  participate  her 
forrows  !  ——There  is  on  earth  no  condition  fo 

painful. I   internally  curfed   her  deteftable 

relations ;  (of  whom  ail  but  her  filler  are  fo 
imworthy  of  her)  and,  for  a  little  time,  was 
too  much  afFedled  by  her  anguifli,    to  be  able 

to  fpeak. -At  length,  I  faid «  But  is  it 

not  poflible  for  you  to  be  in  lodgings  where 
you  need  not  be  under  the  neceflity  of  meet- 
ing this  ridiculous  Fairfax  family — You  may 
cfcapi  from  hence,  for  a  time,  to  return  again 
when  your  purfuer  is  baffled." 

"  A  journey,  with  fuch  a  family,  to  Bath,^ 
faid  flie  mournfully,  "  and  lodgings,  when  I 
arrive  there,  are  expences  wliich  my  mother 
would  affuredly  murmur  at.  Perhaps  you  arc 
not  aware,  that  though  it  was  found  impradli- 
cable  for  me  to  give  up  my  fettlement,  as  I 
molt  willingly  would  have  done  ;  yet,  that  I 
have  nothing  during  Mr.  Verney's  life, 
but  a  trifling  allowance  by  way  of  pin-mo- 
ney, which  /have  never  afked  for,  and  he  has 
never  paid.  Though  he  could  not  fell  his  ef- 
tate  with  my  jointure  fecured  upon  it,  yet  it  is 
fequcflered  Colonel  Scarfdale  inhabits  the 

houfe  for  a  certain  number  of  years  ;  and  the 
income  is  his— — Verney  has  tlierefore,  left 
liimfcli  deftitute,  and  thus  improvident,  on  his 

own  account Is  it  wonderful  he  ihould  be 

ib  on  mine  and  his  chiklren  ?" 

Oh  !"  thought  I,  **  had  he  been  only  impro- 
vident—equally  improvident,    it  were  well' — 

but 


86  DESMOND. 

but  for  himfelf  he  thinks  but  too  muchj  and 
you,  Geraldine,  are  the  deftined  facrifice  !" 

But  this,  though  I  thought  it,  I  dared  not 
fay.  I  fhall  make  my  letter  endlefs,  if  I  relate 
all  that  afterwards  pad. — Alas  !  my  friend  !  I 
found,  that  notwithftanding  the  precaution 
with  which  you  promifed  to  fupply  her,  by 
means  of  her  filler,  flie  had  been  of  late  fo  in- 
adequately furnilhed  with  money,  that  (lie  had 
not  enough  to  pay  what  mud  be  paid  for  her 
apartments,  were  flie  to  quit  them,  ^m]  to 
anfwer  the  expences  of  her  journey.  At 
length,  llie  confented  to  my  fupplying  her 
with  what  was  neceflary  for  this  purpofe,  to 
be  repaid,  as  fhe  believes,  by  her  mother  ;  and 
the  apartments,  (having  paid  for  the  prefent 
half-year,)  flie  Hill  retains  ;  and  thus  it  is  fet- 
tled, that  if  {he  cannot  to-morrow  difmifs  this 
very  improper  and  importunate  vifitor,  flie 
quits  this  place,  and  you  will  fee  her,  my 
friend,  at  Bath.  On  my  part,  that  no  re- 
marks may  be  made  on  our  being  in  this  re- 
tired fpot,  or  travelling  together,  I  fliall  fee 
her  only  to  a  place  of  fafety,  probably  as  far 
as  GlouceRer,  and  then  go  into  Kent  for  a 
few  days ;  after  which,  there  will  furely  be 
no  impropriety  in  my  joining  you  at  Batli,  (as 
I  have  always  intended  to  do)  even  though 
Geraldine  jhouLl  be  there. — Sue  has  promifed 

to  v/rite  to  me ^ — (I  truft  there  is  no  harm 

in  that)  I  Ihall  hear  how  long  her  ilay  is  like- 
ly to   be If  V/averly's  marriage  takes  place, 

and  all  her  own  family  look  as  cool  upon  her, 
as  there  is  reafon  to  fear  they  will,  ihe  will, 
perhaps,  hait.^n  to  bury  herfelf  again  in  her 
beloved   fulitudc  :    at   all    events,    //zv   llav   at 

B.uh 


D    E  -S   M    0    N   D.  87 

Bath  muft  be  (hort,  as  fome  bufinefs,  from 
which  I  cannot  difengage  myfelf,  v/ill  abfo- 
lutely  require  my  prefence  in  France  early  in 
July  ;  and  then,  perhaps,  (hall  take  leave  of 
England  for  ever. 

The  breath  of  fcandal  has  never  yet  injured 
the  fpotlefs  chara6ler  of  Geraldine.  You,  who 
know,  that  my  love  for  her  has  a  juft  claim 
to  be   called  true  love,    becaufe   it  feeks  only 

her  good You,    my  friend,    before  you 

condemn  me,  will  afk  yourfelf,  whether  /  am 
likely  to  commit  any  indifcretion  that  will  real- 
ly injure  her  fame  ? You  will  not,    after 

having  fo  reflected,    blame   me  for   what  has 

pafled  fmce  I  have  been  here 1  could  not 

act  otherwife And  after  all,    who  is  to 

I'eport  my  being  here  at  all  ? ^Thofe  fo- 
reigners  do  not  know  me  even  by  name — 

They  do  not  know  that  I  am  acquainted  with 
Geraldine— Her  departure  cannot  be  im- 
puted to  me  ;  and  though  I  forefee  that  you 
will  now  find  a  hundred  reafons  to  condemn 
me— lvalue  myfelf  on  having  acted,  as  vou 
would  have   afted   had  you  been  fo  fituated. 

Farewell,  dear  Bethel,  till  I  meet  you.  — 
You  will,  perhaps,  fee  the  lovely  fubjccft  of 
this  letter  almoft  as  foon  as  you  receive  it. 
From  you,  and  from  her  filter,  flic  will  hear 
the  foothing  voice  of  friendlhip   and   tonder- 

nefs And  I    recommend     her     to   thofe 

good  offices  from  you,  which,  from  her  own 
ianu'Iy,  I  am  afraid  il.e  will  not  receive. 

Ever  your'sj  faithfully, 

.  .  LIONEL  DESMOND. 

L  E  T- 


i@  DESMOND. 

LETTER    IX. 
TO  MISS  WAVERL  Y. 

Gloucefler,  June  i6th  1791. 

I  STAY  here  a  day,  my  Fanny,  to  re- 
cruit my  exhaufted  fpirits,  after  the  variety  of 
agitations  I  have  been  expofed  to.  You  have, 
by  this  time,  received  my  two  laft  letters ;  and 
know  th€  ftrange  vifit  that  has  driven  me  from 
my  peacable  abode  j  though  I  would  have  con- 
tinued there  in  defpite  of  importunities  and  im- 
pertinence, which  could  not  have  lafted  long, 
if  I  had  not  dreaded  Mr.  Defmond's  inter- 
ference, which  feemed  hourly  probable ;  and 
which  nothing  but  my  determining  to  put  my- 
felf  under  the  protetlion  of  my  family,  could 
have  long  prevented. 

My  account  of  the  fecond  and  third  vifits 
of  the  D^uc  de  Romagnecourt*,  would  con- 
vince you  that  he  was  not  eafily  to  be  re- 
jTulfed ;  nor  would  Defmond  be  perfuaded 
that  I  ought  patiently  to  endure  this  tranGent 

€vil_ ^I   law   confequences     attending    his 

applying  to  Monfieur  de  Romagnecourt,  of 
v/hich  I  could  not  bear  the  idea  without  terror 

Any  meafure,  therefore,  was  to  be   adopted 

rather  than  hazard  it ;  and  yet  I  forefee,  that 
if  even  his  prefent  interference,  and  his  friendly 
attention  to  me,  be  known,  inferences  may  be 
^dravv'n  asfalfe  towards  him,  as  unfavourable  to 
j»e.     Alas  !     my    Fanny,  the   profpe£l    every 

■*  hi  a  letter  v/hicfc  (Joes  not  appear. 

way 


DESMOND.  89 

way  around  me  is  darkening  ;  and  in  the  ftorms 

hat  are  on  all  fides  gathering,  I  •(hall  probably 

perifh.     Defmond  was  fo  good  as  to  infift  on 

accompanying  me  as  far  as  this  place  on  horfe- 

back "He    then  immediately  left   me;  and 

is  gone  into  Kent.  I  am  very  fure,  my  fifter, 
by  your  laft  letter*,  that  you  blame  me  for  the 
circumftances  that  have  occured  fince  Mr. 
Defmond^s  refidence  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
my  retirement ;  and  I  own  that  fuch  adven- 
tures befalling  a  married  woman,  feparated 
from  her  hufband,  are  very  likely  to  raife, 
even  in  the  moil  candid  minds,  fufpicions  of 
her  condu£l.- — You,  however,  furely  know  me 
too  well  to  harbour  them  a  moment ;  and  if 
I  were  not  bound  by  all  the  ties  of  honour 
and  gratitude  to  fecrecy,  I  could  at  once 
convince  you,  that  no  improper  attachment  to 
me,  has  been  the  caufe  of  ISIr.  Defmond's  jour- 
ney hither. Still  as  it  is  impofTible  that 

this  can  at  prefent  be  explained,  I  wiQi  that  as 
little  may  be  faid  of  it  as  poffible. 

I  know  not  how  I  find  refolution  to  proceed 
from  day  to  day  in  this  career  of  mifery. — My  • 
children,  for  whom  I  ought  to  live,  alone  fup- 
port  mc  ;  nor  have  T  in  the  world  another  mo- 
tive to  wiili   my  exigence  prolonged,  unlefs  it 

be  your  ai7e<£lion,  my  dear   Fanny. 'Do 

not  therefore,  now  when  I  mod  want  it,  do 
not  let  it  fail.     You  will  receive  this  letter  a 

few  hours  before  my  arrival Let  me   find 

at  the  Bear  at  Bath,  a  note  from  you,  to  fay 
where  you  have  taken  lodgings  for  me  ;  when 
I  {hall  fee  you,  and  when  I  may  be  permitted 
to  pay  my  duty  to    my  mother. Surely, 

*  Which  does  not  appear. 

hoW" 


90  DESMOND. 

however  fhe  may  be  occupied  with  the  approach- 
ing feftivities  which  are  intended  for  the  more 
•beloved  and  more  profperous  part  of  her  family, 
ihe  will  not  refiife  fome  maternal  kindnefs  to 
her  unfortunate  child,  whofe  unhapplnefs  is  not 

of  her  own   creating ■_ — and  who,  though 

(he  returns  poor  and  defolate,  like  the  Prodigal 
in  Scripture,  has  nothing  wherewith  to  reproach 
herfelfj  nor  occafion  to  fay,  "  Lo  I  have  fni- 
ned  againft  heaven,  and  in  thy  fight." 

Perhaps,  my  dear  Fanny,  your  ill-darred 
Geraldine  will  not  long  trouble  you. —  "  There 
certainly  is  fuch  a  diitemper,"  fays  Fielding, 
'*  as  a  broken  heart',  though  it  is  not  mentioned 
in  the  billsof  mortality".— Till  that  calamity  robs 
mine  of  every  fcnf.uion,  it  will  be  fondly  at- 
tached to  you. 

GERALDINE  VERNEY. 


L  E  T- 


DESMOND.  91 

.LETTER    X. 
TO    MR.    DESMOND. 

Bath  June  ir ,  1791. 

I  AM  again   undertaking  to  execute  a  very 

unpleafant  tafk But   my   friendfliip    for 

you  Defmond,  is  of  a  nature  which  withftands 
even — what  (hall  I  call  it  ?  not  unklndnefs,  nov 
duplicity  ;    for  I  believe,  from  my  foul,  you  are 

incapable  of  cither But    that  vv'ant    of 

confidence  which  ought  to  fubfifl  betvreen  us, 
and  in  which  you  certr.inly  failed  when  you 
came  to  England,  and  went  into  Herefordniire 

without  informing  me  of  ycur  intentions. • 

Theconfcquences  of  this  imprudence, for  fuch  it 
furely  was,  have  been  more  uneafy  to  the  object 
of  your  folicitude  than  you  are  aware  of ;  but 
though  I  am  ftill  vexed,  and  a  little  angry  with 
you,  becaufe  I  think  you  acled  unlike  yourfclf, 
it  is  impolfible  to  fee  her,  without  feeling  fo 
much  inttrelled,  that  every  other  confiderntion 

is  abforbed  in  a.xiety  for  her. Gerahiine  is, 

indeed,  an  excufe  for  every  failure  towards  mc  ; 
but  when  that  failure  has  injured  her,  I  cannot 
allow  of  the  apology;  and  the  talk  of  chiding 
you  for  your  indifcretions^  and  relating  their 
effedls,  falls  on  me  mod  unwelcomcly. 

Early  yefterday,  I  received  a  hurried  and 
confufed  note  from  IMIfs  Waverly,  befeechlng 
me  to  fee  her,  by  fome  means  or  other,  in  the 

courfe  of  the  mornini;. 1  anfwered  tliat  I 

would  b;  at  a  bookfeller's,  where  we  fometime 

have 


9«  DESMOND. 

have,  you  know,  made  thefe  ajftgtmt'ions^  within 
an  hour. — —I  was  pun61:al  to  my  appointment, 
and  in  a  few  moments  after,  Fanny  arrived, 
xvrapped  in  a  large  morning  cap,  and  a  cloak, 
tied  round  her  neck,  which  were,  however,  in- 
fufficient,  even  with  the  deep  veil  that  depended 
from  her  bonnet,  to  conceal  that  her  eyes  were 
fwollen  with  weeping,  and  that  her  whole 
frame  was  in  extreme  agitation.  She  feemed 
unable  to  fpeak  when  (lie  came  in,  but  recover- 
ing herfclf,  {he  sliced  if  I  would  walk  with  her, 
as  {nc  had  mucli  to  fay  to  me.  We  took 
the  fhortefl  way  to  get  out  of  town,  and  pro- 
ceeded in  profound  filence,  till  we  reached  the 
fields. — She  then  put  into  my  hands  her  fiRer's 
laft  letter,  dated  from.  Gloucefter,  and  told  me, 
that  flic  had  obeyed,  as  well  as  (lie  dared,  her 
directions,  and  had  provided  a  lodging  for  her  ; 
but  that  her  mother  was  extremely  difpleafed 
with  the  journey,  and  had  heard,  by  fome 
means  or  other,  for  which  it  was  very  difficult 
to  account,  that  Mr.  Defmond  ha  been  fome 
time  concealed  in  the  neighbourhood  of  her  re- 
fidence  at  Bridgefoot,  and  "was  the  perfon  who 
had  advifed  her  to  quit  it  for  Bath,  inflead  of 
complying  with  Mr.  Verney's  wiihes,  and  go- 
ing to  France,  with  a  nobleman  of  very  high 
rank,  a  married  man,  a  man  of  the  very  firft 
fafhion  and  confequence,  under  whofe  protefti- 
on  fne  might  not  only  have  travelled  with  ut- 
mod  eafe  and  elegance,  but,  fmce  (he  was  di- 
redled  to  do  fo,  by  her  hufband,  with  the 
greateft  propriety. — "  Such,"  faid  Mifs  Waver- 
ly,  "  is  the  reprefentation  that  has  been  made 
to  my  mother,  and  which,  added  to  her  own 
diflike   of  Geraldine's   coming  hitlier   at  this 

time, 


D   E   S   M    0   N   B*  9J 

time,  has  irritated  her  fo  much  againft  my  fif- 
ter,  that  fhe  will  hear  nothing  I  can  fay  in  her 
excufe. — She  has  even  forbidden  me  to  fee  her  5 
I  fhall  not,  however,  obey  her  m  that  refpeft  ; 
but  I  dare  not  fo  diredly  violate  my  mother's 
cruel  injun(f\ions,  as  to  meet  her  on  her  arrival-— 
Yet  how  will  her  already,  half  broken  heart, 
be  wounded,  v»hen  inftead  of  a  friendly  recep- 
tion from  a  fifter,  who  fondly  loves  her,  from 
a  mother  who  ought  to  protetl  her,  fhe  finds, 
awaiting  her  arrival,  a  harfli  letter  from  that  mo- 
ther, filled  with  remonftrances  and  complaints." 
«  She  fhall  at  leall"  faid  I,  as  foon  I  as  could 
recover  from  the  pain  this  intelligence  gave  me, 
"  fhe  Ihall  at  leaft  find  one  friend  ready  to  re- 
ceive her;  I  will  wait  myfelf  her  coming,  and 
foften  as  much  as  I  can,  the  inhuman  conduit  of 
Mrs.  Waverly  ;  forgive  me  Mils  Fanny,  I  think 
it  mofl  Inhuman." 

"  I  was  about,"  anfWered  flie,     "  to  folicit 
that  friendly  affiilance  which  you  now  fo  gene- 
roufly  offer — Without  fome  fuch  interference, 
the  blow  will    quite  overwhelm   my  unhappy 
fifter.— By  what  means  my  mother  has  got  fuch 
intelligence,  I  cannot  imagine. — Her  ufual  in- 
former, one  Avhofe  vifits  I  always  dreaded,  is  no 
longer  here,  and   if    fiie   were,  I   cannot   dif- 
cover  how  Defmond's  abode  in  England,  M'hich 
was  a  fecret  to  his  mofl  Intimate  friends,  Ihould 
be  known  to  her. — I  own,  Mr.  Bethel,  I  wifh 
he  had    forborne   to  vifit  the  country,  where 
Geraldlne  refides,  with  an  air  of  fecrefy  ;  for 
■  though  (he  affures  me,  (and  fhe   is  truth   and 
candour  Itielf,  that  in  doing  lo,  he  was  actuated 
by  very  different  motives  from  thofe  which  my 
mother's  informer  has  dared  to  impute  to  him  ; 

yet 


94  D   E    S    M    0    N   D< 

yet  afluredly,  fuch  a  circumftance  happening  to 
a  young  and  beautiful  woman,  apart  from 
her  hufband,  will  receive,  from  the  generality 
of  the  world,    a  very  different  interpretation." 

It  would  be  difficult  to  defcribe  with  the 
pen,    the    manner  and  voice  in  which    Fanny 

Waverly  uttered  this her  countenance  I  could 

not  fee,  for  fhe  turned  from  me,  and  had  her 
handkerchief  to  htr  eyes — Her  emotion  was 
however  extremely  affecting  ;  I  did  all  I  could 
to  re-aflure  her,  and  promifed,  that  I  would 
f;e  Geraldine  compofed  and  eafy,  before  I 
left  her,  in  her  new  lodgings,  (where  Ihe 
was  expelled  that  afternoon,)  and  give  early 
intelligence  of  her  ftate  of  health  and  Ipirits 
to  the  anxious  Fanny. 

"  Alas"  faid  (he,  "  it  is  all  the  comfort  I 
{hall  have  about  her  to  day,  for  my  moth.^r  has 
made  an  engagement  with  tlie  Fairfax's,  from 
which,    I   have    in  vain    attempted  to  excufe 

myfelf pardon   me,     Mr.  Bethel ■ 

they  are  relations  of  yours,  and  are  foon  to 
become  relations  of  mine,  but  I  fnall  never 
love  them,  for  I  detefl:  pride  and  felnflinefs 
wherever  I  m^eet  them  ;  above  all,  I  deteft 
them,  when  they  are  poorly  concealed  under 
the  ill-managed  afFe61:ation  of  refined  ^  fenti- 
ment,    and  fupei'ior  information. 

I  could  not  forbear  a  fmile  at  the  little  af-  . 
pejity,  Math  which  tliis  farcafm,  (you  will  call 
it  truth)  was  uttered  •,  and  foon  after,  as 
Fanny  had  made  fome  excufe  to  her  mother, 
which  (lie  feared,  would  be  detected  as  an  ex- 
cufe, if  (he  flaid  too  long,  we  parted,  and  I 
prepared  for  the  painful  fcene  I  was  co  go 
through  in  the  afternoon  ;  I  thought  it  how- 
ever 


DESMOND.  <;J5 

.  ever  bcft,  as  I  was  known  to  be  fo  much  con- 
necfted  with  you,  not  to  wait  her  arrival  at  the 
inn  ;  but  to  leave  a  note  for  her,  entreating 
permiflion  to  attend  her,  as  early  as  (he  eould 
admit  me. 

About  half  pafh   five    o'clock,     I    received 
from  her,  the  following  card. 

"  Mrs.  Verney  is  infinitely  obliged  to  Mr. 
Bethel,  for  his  early  and  moil  welcome  atten- 
tion ;  being  unable  from  indifpofition,  to  re- 
main at  the  Bear  without  great  inconvenien- 
ces, fhe  is  already  removed  to  her  lodgings  in 
Milfom-lheet,  where  (lie  expe^ls,  with  impa- 
tience, the  fatisfa^f  ion  of  feeing  Mr.  Bethel." 
I  haftened  tliither  inftantly^ ;  and  was  fiicwn 
into  a  fmall  dining-room,  where  I  law  the 
two  eldefl  of  her  lovely  children  playing  on 
the  carpet  ;  the  door  of  the  adjoining  room 
was  a-jar,  and  I  had  hardly  fpoken  to  George, 
befcre  Gevaldine  entered. 

Such  an  exprefficn  of  dcfponder.ce  and  woe 
Was  on  her  countenance,  that  I  llarted  as  I 
faw  her — She  forced,  however,  a  melancholy 
fmile,  as  fhe  held  out  her  hand  to  me  ;  and 
'  faid,  in  a  faultering  voice,  "  This  is  kind  in- 
deed, and  like  my  friend  Mr.  Bethel." 

I  endeavoured,  in  niy  turn,  to  fpcak  cheer- 
fully -,  but  it  would  not  do — She  w.ivfd  her 
hand  for  me  to  take  a  chair,  but  fecmed  afraid 
oftrufling  her  voice  with  another  fcntencc.-— 
There  was  evidently  fuch  a  painful  flruggle  to 
conceal  her  agitation  and  check  her  tears,  that 
to  have  fecn  her  weep  v.'ould  Iiave  been  lefs 
affefting.  I  cxprcllcd  my  fears,  that  flie  was 
a  good  deal  fatigued  by  her  journey  -—'-••  ■- 
She  anfv.ered,  "  I  am  indeed  •,  traelling  with 

three 


9(5  D  E   S   M   0   tJ  £>. 

three  very  young  children,  with  only  one  fet- 
vant,  and  in  feme  uneafinefs  of  mind,  has  been 
altogether  a  little  too  much  for  me— ^The  fight  of 
3  friend  like  you,  Mr.  Bethel,  is,  however, 
reviving  j  and  makes  me  as  much  amends  as^ 
any  thing  can  now  make  me,  for  the  want  of 
kindnefs  I  experience  from  my  own  family." 
This  cruel  reflection  was  infupportable—  her 
voice  failed  her  j  and  fhe  drew  her  handker- 
chief from  her  pocket,  to  conceal  the  tears  (lie 
could  no  longer  reftrain. 

After  yielding  to  them  a  moment,  however, 
fhe  endeavoured  again  to  reprefs  them  ;  and  faid 
inarticulately,  "  I  beg  your  pardon,  for  at- 
tempting to  conceal  any  thing  from  you  ;  and 
to  diftrefs  you  by  the  fight  of  lorrow  that  mud 
appear  extravagant — —but  read  this  letter  from 

my    mother— from  my    only  parent -from 

her  in   compliance    with    whofe  wilhes -" 

Sh€  could  not  go  on-^I  took  the  letter  from  her 
hand,  which  I  could  willingly  have  prefled  to 
my  heart — 'I  was  too  much  agitated  to  read  it  very 
diitinQly  then  ;  but  I  enclofe  it  to  you,  for 
the  gave  me  leave  to  put  it  in  my  pocket. 

«  You  fee,  Mr.  Bethel,"  laid  Ihe,  when 
fhe  regained  her  voice—"  You  fee,  that  the 
coldnefs  of  my  family  is  not  judged  punHh- 
ment  enough  ;  but  that  they  accufe  that  molt 
generous  and  noble-minded  of  men,  your  friend 

'I)efmond,  of  attachments -of  views,  which  I 

am  fure,  he  never  entertained  ;  and  thus  rob 
me  of  the    only   friend,  except  yourfelf,    that 

my  cruel  deftiny  has  left  me But  I  will  fub- 

mit  to  it  in  filence — I  will  not  trouble  my  mo- 
ther with  the   unwelcome  fight  of  a  daughter, 

whofe  mtsfovtunes  are  her  faults 1  will  go 

but 


E>  E  s  w  o  N  d;  '  97 

hnt  yet  1  knov/  not  whither  !-■  "  '  ■■  tney  will 
allow  me,  I  hope,  a  (liort  reipite  lK;e  till  1  can 
determine." 

I  need  iiot,  furcly,  fay  to  you,  that  I  faid 
every  thing  I  could   imagine,    to  confole  this 

lovelv,    injured    mourner I    told    her 

that  her  f:iler  had  fent  me,  to  afHire  her  of 
her  unfailing  tendernefs,  and  ot  her  de- 
termination, that  no  injunftions  from  her  mo- 
ther, fV.ould  ]->revent  her  feeing  her  the  next 
day.  I  endeavoured  to  perfuade  her,  that  the 
ideas  Pvlrs.  Wa\'eily  had  taken  up  a'wJt  you, 
were  owing  to  the  forgeries  of  malice  and  ma- 
lignity   that  fr.e  ^voiild  foon  be  con- 
vinced of  their  falfehocd — and  that  all 

would    be  well ■ She   Ihook  her   head-  — 

«  Ah!  never  !"  faid  (he,  '*  in  this  vv-oildfor 
m.e— my  defliny  cannot  be  changed— it  muff, 
therefore,  be  fupported  --But,  however,  no 
frate  of  mind,  fo  cruelly  painful  as  that  I  have 
endured  fince  I  received,  two  hours  ago,  my 
mother's  letter  can  lali  Ion/." 

A  lilence  cf  fomc  moments  enfued,  for  I 
had  exhauilcd  every  proper  topic  c*^  confola* 
tion.  At  length,  ihe  faid—-"  Notnlthilanding 
all  this,  I  am  fo  conlcious  of  the  redilude  of 
my  own  heart;  and  fo  perfe6fly  convinced  of 
Mr.  Definond's  honor  and  integrity  tow^ards 
me,  that  1  ftia!!  not  afFe6l  to  have  any  refervc 
about  naming  him  ;  for  to  do  lo  nii"-ht  inti- 
mate that  I  blufhed  at  knowing  how  highly  he 
honours  me  with  his  cftecm,  which  I  rather 
glory  in.  Have  you  heard  from  him,  Mr. 
Bethel,  fince  he  has  been  in  Kent  ?  --Is  he 
well  ?— And  does  he  talk  of  returning  foon  to 
France  ?'*— I  replied,  *'  that  I  was  not,  at 
prefent,    informed   of    yom    intentions  ;     hut 

Vof..II.  F  (hould. 


9?  DESMOND. 

flioulJ,  probably,  foon  fee  you  at  your  own 
houfe  ;  where,  I  imagined,  you  would  ftay, 
at  lead,  a  month  "--She  fighed— *^-  We  (hall 
*'  lofe  you  then,"  faid  iue  to  me  ;  "'  that  lofs 
**  will  be  irreparable."  I  affurcd  her,  that, 
as  long  as  my  continuing  at  Bath  would  be  of 
ufe  to  her,  in  the  {mallell  degree,  I  would 
not  fuffer  even  my  wirti  to  fee  you,  after  fo 
long  an  ab'ence,  to  have  any  weight  with  me. 
—  1  could  have  added,  that  1  knew  J  could  not 
oblige  you  fo  much  as  in  remaining  where  my 
prcfence  could  contribute  to  her  fatisfaftion. 

She  was  not  able  to  thank  me ;  or,  for  fomc 
lime>  to  fpcak-'-Recovering  herfcif,  (he  Lud 
.— <<  you  are  too  good.  Air.  Bethel  I  —The 
voice  of  kindnefs  and  fympathy,  overcomes 
me  more  than  the  cold  and  cruel  referve  of  my 
family,  bccaufe  J  cannot  help  making  conti- 
nual   compirifons  ! \!y   Fanny!---  the   too 

foriakes  me  ! — -yet  I  would  not  have  her  dif- 
obey  my  mother,  however  I  may  languiih  to 
fee  her." 

Again  I  affired  her,  her  filler  would  fly  to 
her,  at  all  hazards,  the  moment  it  was  pof- 
fible  ;  and  after  fome  farther  converfation,  1 
had,  at  length,  the  pleafure  of  leaving  her 
much  wore  compofed  than  I  had  found  her. 
— She  fpoke,  however,  with  extreme  anKiety, 
abouf  her  \oungefl:  child,  whofe  conilitution 
is,  fhe  fears,  quite  ruined  by  the  uncafinels 
that  has  been  preying  upon  her  own,  while  Ihe 
has  been  nwrHng  hsm. 

As  to  Geraldi.ne  herielf,  file  looks  mod  beau- 
tiful— lefs  dazzling  than  {be  once  was — Ihe  is 
a  thoufand  times  more  intercding  than  in  the 
moll:  luxuriant  bloom  of  cirly  beauty — I  never 

faw 


r>  E  §  M  o  N  0.  9^ 

faw  a  face  that  gave  me  fo  much  pleafure  in 
the  contemplation  of  It,  as  her's  does ;  and 
yet  i  have  feen  many  more  regular — The 
reafon  of  this,  1  beHcve,  is,  that  there  is 
fo  much  fenfe  blended  with  fo  much  fweet- 
nefs  in  every  expreiTion  of  her  countenance; 

1   have   often   feen    both    fcpar-.tely ;    but, 

in   faces,     where   one  predominates,    there  is 

frequently     a     want    of    the     other Her 

form,  too,  is,  in  my  opinion,  the  very 
perfe6lion  of  feminine  lovehnel's^  yet  it 
feenis   to   owe   all    its    charms    to    her   mind 

the   dign-.ty    of  the   one    lieighteas    every 

jrrace  of  the  other.  See  !  if  your  inexora- 
ble Mentor,  as  you  have  often  called  me,  is 
not  writing  an  culogiiim  on  tlie  very  charms 
for  which  he  condemns  your  aJoration— But 
I  am  now  too  well  convinced  that  nothing 
can  divert  you  of  your  attachment;     and  the 

juftice   of  my   praifes    cannot    encrcafe    it 

All  I  Ihall  henceforward  attempt  to  do,  will 
be  to  keep  it  within  thofe  bounds  of  pru- 
dencej  which  you  cannot  pafs  without  do- 
ing the  moft  fatal  injury  to  its  o')je61:  — — 
Prudence  in  which,  my  friend,  you  moft 
cruelly  failed  in  your  journey  into  Wales. 

I  own  1  am  much  difturbed  at  the  in- 
formanon  Mrs.  Waverly  has  obtained  of  the 
circnmilances  of  your  abode  in  a  place,  where 
1  thought  it  quite  miprobable  that  you  could 
be  knc'vn.  I  am  ftill  more  diiturbed  at 
the  conl"lru6l:on  Ihe  has  been  taught  to  put 
on  your  vifir. 

1    have  jull:    had    a   note   from    Mifs  Wa- 
verly,   fhe    will    be   with  her  filler   tc-morrow 
morning   at  feven   o'clock— —This   evenin<r, 
■F  2  her 


lOO  DESMOND. 

her  mother  has   taken  care   to  render  it'im- 
poffible. 

I  will  write  again  in  a  few  days,  till  when 
and  ever  1  remain. 


My  dear  friend,  your's  faithfully, 

E.  BETHEL. 


LET 


DESMOND.  101 

LETTER    xr. 
TO  MRS.  VERNEY. 

Bath,  T/Wirjiv. 

CAUGUTE,'^    VERKEf, 

I  HRAR,  with  great  concern,  and  indeed 
amazement,  of  your  intended  arrival  in  thi3 
place.  I  willi  you  had  aded  more  prudently, 
as  wcil  as  properly  ;  and  am  furprifed,  that 
in  your  lituation,  you  Ihould  think  it  right 
or  becoming,  to  receive  vifirs  from  Mr.  Del"' 
mond,  or  any  other  perfon,  not  authorifed  by 
your  family  ;  and,  at  the  fame  time,  refufc 
to  comply  with  your  hufband's  requeft,  in  go- 
ing abroid,  under  the  care  of  the  nobleman, 
"whom  he  had  engaged  to   fee  you  fafc  to  hi«i 

1  am    very   much   alarmed   for   tfte 

confequences  of  all  this  ;  and,  indeed,  thofc 
of  my  particular  friends,  whofe  judgment  I 
rely  on,  have  given  me  great  reafon  to  be 
fo,  by  the  reprefentations  they  have  made  to 
me  of  the  opinion  the  world  will  form  upon 
fuch  condu6l— — — —  Encourag.'-ment  or  coun- 
tenance from  me,  it  will  not  receive  ;  and, 
as  to  fupporting  the  txpence,  it  is  quite  out  of" 

niy  pov.er S'ou   will   do   well,    therefore,  to 

ccnfidcr,  whether  you  had  not  better  d.-ter- 
mine  to  go  to  France,  where,  I  und^riland, 
your  .hufband  is  likely  to  b:  handiomety  fup- 
ported,  till  his  affairs  can  be  fettled  ;  and  to 
accept  the  polite   and   hjndfcmc  oiTer  made  by 

the  foreign  Duke,  before  it  is  t-oo  late You 

remember,  to  be  fure,  as  you  are  fond  cf 
poetry,  the  line   your  poor   father,    on  fnrmer 

occarions. 


lOa  DESMOND. 

occafions,  lias  quoted  from  Milton  or  Shake- 
fpeare,  or  fome  of  your  favorite  authors 

"  The  wife,  where  danger  or  diflionor  lurks, 
SeeirJieft  and  fafeft  by  her  hufband  ftays." 

At  prefenr,  your  feparation  from  Mr.  Ver- 
iiey  is  altogether  voluntary,  and,  therefore, 
highly  improper  j  and  quite  inconfiftent  with 
the  prudent  line  of  hehaviour,  which  I  ex- 
pe£l  from  a  daughter  of  mine — fuch,  indeed, 
as  lays  me  under  the  neceffity  of  faying  to 
you,  though  it  may  appear  harlh,  that  I  can- 
not let  my  daughter  Frances  fee  you,  nor 
confent  to  receive  you  myfelf,  till  I  find  you 
have  determined    to   embrace  the  proper  con-. 

du6l  of   going  to    your  hufband as   to   do 

otherwife,  would  be  to  encourage  both,  in 
what  is  in  my  own  opinion,  quite  wrong; 
and  give  frefh  occafion  for  fcandal,  which  has 
begun  to  be  too  bufy  already. 

1  hope  Mr.  Defmond  will  oblige  me  in  for- 
bearing, for  the  future,  to  interfere  in  the 
,  afFairs  of  my  family  ;  and  that  I  may  not 
hear  him  named  again  in  the  fame  breath 
with  any  of  them,  unlefs  on  quite  a  different 
tooting. 

I  dcfire  your  fpeedy  determination,  as  to 
going  abroad  ;  and  when  you  have  taken  a 
becoming  refolution,  you  Ihail  not  find  me 
backward  in  kindnefs.— My  circumflances  are, 
at  prefenr,  much  circumfcribed,  by  the  ne- 
ceffity I  am  under  to  do  my  bel^  in  figure 
and  appearance  for  your  brother's  approaching 
marriage  with  a  woman,  whofe  fortune  and 
connexions  are  fo  proper  and  defirable  for  him 
— -Neverthelefs,  1  will  ilrain  a  point  to  grant 

you 


DESMOND.  103 

you  any  little  accommodalion  for  your  jour- 
ney—though,  certainly,  not  to  fupport  you 
in  a  wilful  reparation  from  your  huftand,  which 
nothing  can  excufe,  and  no  mother,  who  has 
a  due  fenfe  of  propriety  will  encourage. 

As  to  your  three  children,  I  am  glad  to  hear 
from  Frances,  that  you  have  weaned  the  little 
one,  as  that  takes  off  one  oKje6lion  to  your 
travelling.  You  may  leave  them  all  very 
properly,  with  fomc  careful  perfon;  and,  if 
ihey  are  near  this  place,  1  will  ice  now  and 
then,  that  they  ;ire  well  looked  after. 

I  am  (if  fo  your  condu6i  fliall  allow  mc 
to  fublcribe  myieU) 

Your  affeflionate  mother, 

ELIZABETH  WAVERLY. 


LET-J 


104  D    £    S    M    O    N    I>. 

LETTER       XII. 
TO    MR.  BETHEL. 

Sedgewood,  Kent,   June  24tK,    1791- 

WITH  what  calmnefs,  iny  dear  Bethel, 
do  you  recount  a  fcenc,  that  I  cannot  read, 
withoct  feeling  fometliing  like  frenzy.  With 
how  few  remarks  do  you  enclofe  me  a  letter 
that  deprives  me  of  all  patience  and 
But  it  is  the  mother  of  Geraldine  that  writes 
if,  (at  ka\\,  (be  ha«  always  palled  for  fuch, 
though  one  would  be  tempted  to  fancy 
there  was  an  exchange  ma Je  in  her  infancy) 
and  I  will  not  exclaim  agiinll:  her  ;  but  only 
entreat  you  to  let  me  know,  by  the  return 
of  the  pofl-,  whether  the  lovely  perfecuted 
being  to  whom  it  is  addrefled,  has  taicen  any 
refoiution  in  confequence  of  it.  I  dread, 
Icll  that  tciKicr  and  dutiful  fweetnefs  of  cha- 
r461ef,  to  which  her  wretclicJ  miarriage  was 
owing,  fhoiild  a;nin  betray  her  into  this  de- 
teiled  meafu:c  ;  and  that  her  ideas  of  obedience 
10  lier  odious  mother,  and  her  worthlefs 
hufband  fnoi.ld  precipitate  her  into  the  very 
abyis  of  vvretchednefs. — My  hope  is,  that 
the  propolal — lo  cool  a  propofal  too,  that  flic 
fnould  leave  her  childi*en,  \viil  loufe  that  proper 
(pirit  of  refiilance  agaimt  ufurped  and  abufed  au- 
thority which,  for  herfelf,  fhe  would  nor,  per- 
haps,  exert.' To  leave  i^er  children,  to  go 

herfelf  to  fuch  a  hufband,  efcorted  by  a  man 
to  whom,  lam  pcrfuaded,  he  has  fold  her; 
and  all  this,  by  the  authority  of  an  unfeeling 
^Id   woman,    who  is  folicitous   for   her  fame, 

foF' 


D    E    S    M    O    N    ©^  JO5 

foifooth  ! and  difpleafed    at  my   havinp; 

calledat  herdoo",  wh^n  1  hnrpsncd  10  be  in  a 
fame  neighbourhood 

One  is  half  tempted  to  fly  cut  of  the 
world  in  a  fit  of  defpair,  when  one  connders 
how  thefaiccof  it  is  carried  on,  and  what 
wretches  exnl  in  ir,  whofe  whole  bufinefs 
feems  to  be  to  dedroy  the  few  comforts,  and 
embitter    the  few    pleafures  which    it  affords. 

.- 1   r;m  totally  unable    to  guefs    to    whofe 

curfed  officioulne's  it  is  o'.ving,  that  this  pru- 
dilh,  narrow-minded  old  woman  (I  cannot 
keep  my  temper  with  her)  is  fo  well  informed 
of  my  having  been  at  Bridge- foot  j  a  fecret 
I  kept  even  from  you,  and  fancied  was  un- 
known to  all  the  world  i  fince  I  had  the  pre- 
caution not  to  take    even    a    fervant    with    me 

1    could    execrate  with    a   moft:  hearty 

good  will,  her  informers  whoever  they  may 
be  ;  and  wifh  I  could  draw  a  drop  of  blood 
from  their  hearts  for  every  tear  this  diabolical 
bufinefs  has  drawn  from   the  eyes  of  Geraldine 

But  a  heart  that  can  wantonly  injure  hr, 

can   have   no  warm  blood  in  it' It    mull 

be  feme  difappointed  prude,  or  uncharitable 
pedant.  I  know  none  of  either  deicription 
at  all  likely  to  interfere  with  me — yet,  if  I 
could  difcover  them,  I  Ihould  be  tempted 
to  expofc  them  to  ibmeihing  worfe-than  thi* 
apoftrophe — 

"  I  tell  thee,  damned  prieH:, 
"  A  miniftering  angel  ihall  my  fifter  be 
"  When  thou  hell  howling  ! — "* 

It  is  in  vain,  my  dear    Bethel,    for  rre   to 
attempt   callmg  off  my    mind  a  mom.ent  trom 

*  Shakcfj-carc, 

F  5  GcraJdinej 


1C6  D  'E    S    M   O    N    D. 

Geraldine  ;  and  were  it  not  that  my  prefence 
might  expofe  her  to  a  repetition  of  tliefe  odi- 
ous fufpicions,  I  fliould  be  now  at  Bath  ; 
whither  you  ktiew  it  was  fully  my  purpofe 
to  fio  when  I  quitted  Herefordfhire,  had 
jiot  fhe  been  driven  thither,  and  made  mr 
going  juft  at  the  fame  time  improper  ;  though 
I  was  then  far  from  dreaming  of  all  the  occa- 
fion  there  exilled  for  my  precaution. 

As  it  is,  I  muil  remain  here,  at  leaft,  till 
I  have  your  anfwer ;  which  I  entieat  you 
to  forward  to  me  as  foon  as  poffible  ; 
for,  till  it  comes,  I  c:\n  determine   on  nothing 

- — and    there  is  no  fituation  fo  irkfome 

as  theftate  offupence  I  am  now  in  ;  certain, 
that  however  it  terminates,  I  mud:  be  wretch- 
ed, but  dreading  what  is  of  infinitely  greater 
moment,  that  Geraldine  my  be  yet  more 
niifcrable 

Do  not  encourage  me.  Bethel,  in  the 
idea  of   her    having  for    me     perfonal    regard 

— 1,   who  know    and  adore   the  unfulhcd 

purity  of  her  mind,  know,  that  the  admiilion 
of  fuch  a  fenliinent,  however  involuntary, 
would  render  her  unhappy  ;  and  I  would  not 
obtain  all  the  iiappinefs  imagination  can  con- 
ceive,    at   the    cxpence    of  giving   her   heart 

one    reproachful  pang. You  ihmk    this 

alleveration  inconfiftent  with  my  rafhnefs,  in 
concejling    myf:if  in    the      neighbourhood    of 

her     late     rehd-Mice — But    befideo  that 

1  had  other  motives  for  my  journey  thither, 
than  it  is  in  my  power  to  communicate  to 
you  ;  I  protetf  to  ycu  that  had  not  chance 
dirown  mc  in  her  '-vay,    I  Ihouli  not  havo  f/je/i 

fe^n     her. — ■ This    appears    co.itradiftory 

and 


and  ridiculous,  hot  J  ii;all  be  content:  to  ht 
you  call  It  r<\ 

How  tediou?,  how  irkfome  is  the  fort  of 
life  I  have  led  the  little  time  I  have  heen 
here. 1  find  that  the  locality  of  our  at- 
tachments depend  upon  the  perfons  that 
furround  us,    rather  than  the     places    where 

"we  are  happy 1  have  prtferied  this  fma! 

eftale  as  a  refidence,  from  my  infancy  ; 
and  here  the  moft  joyous  hours  of  my  life 
■were  paft. '  When    I    became  my   own 

mafler,  I  haftened  hither ;  and,  as  I  re- 
paired the  old  houfe,  and  faw  the  roads 
mended  and  the  fences  got  in  order,  as  I 
planted  my  flirubs,  and  gave  dire6lions 
for  the  care  of  my  timber,  procured  mo- 
dern comforts  within  the  houfe,  and  put 
every  thing  without  in  order,  a  thoufand 
agreeable  images  returned  of  my  former 
pleafures ;  and  with  the  fanguine  eye  of 
youthful  expedlation,  I  looked  forward  to 
greater  pleafures  yet  tocome. 

I  fhall  meet,  laid  I  to  myfelf,  as  I  in- 
dulged thefe  charming  illulions,  with  fome 
lovely    and     amiable   young    woman,    whofe 

tafte  is  congenial   with   my  own One, 

who  will  be  more  plenfed  with  this  place, 
becaufe  1  love  it,  than  with  my  other 
houfe;  which,  though  larger  and  h^^.nd- 
fomer,  is  not  in  fo  beautiful  a  country,  and 
to    which   I    have   no   particular  attachment, 

' 7  hat,   therefore,    I  will  let,    and  refide 

here  altogether;  and,  when  the  na'.i^ally 
delicious  fituation  is  gradually  improved, 
and  a  new  room  built  for  my  books,  1 
ihink,  that  with  fuch  a  woman  as  my  ima» 
gination  has    formed,    I  ftiall  here  find  l-.ap- 

piaefs 


t08  15    E    S    M    O    N    Di 

pinefs— if  haf  pinefs  be  ever  the^Ict  of  htima- 
iiity. 

While  I  was  looking  out,  therefore,  for 
this  **  laft  bell  gift  of  heaven,"  I  was  as  bufy 
in  my  improvements,  and  as  delighted  with 
my  future  paradife,  as  ever  projefior  was 
tvith  feme  favourite  fcheme  that  was  to  pro- 
cure him  millions.-^-— Alas  !  deftiny,  in- 
exorable deftiny,  was  at  work  not  only  to 
deflroy  my  lov:ly  vif.ons,  but  to  embitter 
their  deflruSion  by  {hewing  me  that  they 
might  have  been  all  realized — At  this  period 
—  near  four  years  ago,  I  f-rfl:  faw  Mrs.  Ver- 
Tvcy  j  then  only  a  few  months  married,  and 
brought  down  by  her  hufband,  for  ihe  firfl: 
time,  to  his  Kcntifh  villa.— The  beauty  of 
her  perfon,  though  that  pcrfon  is  exaflly 
what  my  fancy  would  form  as  the  mofi  lovely 
and  perfect,  made  no  immediate  or  deep 
imprelfion. — She  was  a  married  woman,  and 
her  beauty  was  not,  therefore,  to  be  confi- 
dered  by  a  man,  looking  out,  as  I  was,  for 
a  wife,  and  who  never  harboured  an  idea  of 
fi^ducing  the  wife  of  another — Yet,  perhaps, 
I  lidened  with  more  pleafure  to  her  fentiments, 
becaufe  flie  was  eminently  handfome. — 1  had 
liftened  but  a  little,  before  I  diicovered,  to 
my  utter  confufion,  that  flie  was  cxa6tly  the 
•woman  with  whom  I  could  be  happy  ;  and, 
in  a  fcv/  months,  I  found  that  I  could  never 
now  be  happy  at  ail,  for  that  flie  could  not  be 
mine,  and  1  could  think  with  pleafure  of  no 
©th^  woman. 

For  above  two  years,  under  pretence  of 
trying  to  reafon  myfclf  out  of  this  p/e* 
fplleincn,    1    cheridied    it.— The     unafFetlcd 

eafc 


DESMOND,  i09 

eafc  and  innocent  freedom  with  which  (lie 
treated— me,  fed  the  flame  that  was  confumiu^ 
me  ;  but  fhe  was  totally  unconfcious  of  it — 
And,  though  I  could  fee  that  Mr.  Verne/ 
was  altogether  unworthy  cf  her,  that  fhe  was 
but  too  fenfible  of  it  ;  and  had  leen  married 
to  him  merely  becaufe  it  was  the  M'ill  cf  her 
family.  Believe  me.  Bethel,  that  I  honour- 
ed highly  that  noble  refolution  with  which  I 
faw  fhe  not  only  bore,  but  tried  to  make  the 
bcft  of  her  lot  j  and  never,  in  any  one  inffance, 
attempted  to  raife  a  fentiment  in  my  own 
favour,  to  the  preiudice  of  the  affcftion 
which  fhe  believed  Ihe  ought,  and  which 
(he  tried  to  feel,  for  her  hufband—That  huf- 
band,  who  valued  fo  little  the  bicffing  he  pof- 
fcfTed,  that,  after  he  had  once  gratified  his 
pride,  by  (hewing  to  his  libertine  friends  the 
moll  beautiful  woman  of  the  time,  as  his 
wife,  was  accuilomcd  to  leave  her  for  weeks 
and  months  togeliier  ;  and,  while  he  was 
difiipating  his  fortune  in  every  fpecies  of  ex- 
travagant folly,  fhe  was  either  alone  at  Lin- 
well,  or  had  no  other  companion  than  Fanny 
Waverly,  then  a  wild  girl,  between  fixteen 
and  fevenieen — jufl:  emerging  from  the  nur- 
fery  into  the  delights  of  fuccceding  her  filler 
as  a  beauty  :  and  who,  though  heaitily  re- 
joiced to  efcape  from  her  mother,  feemed 
then  not  to  be  fo  advanced  in  underftanding, 
as  to  be  a  companion  for  her,  though  there 
was  not  the  ditfeiencc  of  two  years  in  their 
ages. 

It  was  at  thefe  periods  when  Geraldine  was 
fo  much  in  folitude  at  Linwcll,  that  my  at- 
tachment   took  fo  deep  root.— I  found  by  her 

pfC" 


ItO  DESMOND. 

preferring  the  country  even  at  feafons  when 
Ihe  might  have  been  in  London— I  found  by 
her  tafle  for  reading,  for  drawing,  for  do- 
mcftic  pleafures,  that  fhe  was,  in  every  re- 
fpefl:,  the  very  woman  my  imagination  had 
formed.— The  more  I  faw  of  her,  the  more 
I  felt  this  yet  could  I  not  determine  to  quit 
her,  till  your  remonftrances  and  fome  fears, 
left  with  Verney's  encreafing  follies,  my  re- 
gret and  murmurings  might  encreafe  alfo, 
and  to  her  prejudice,  determined  me  to  go 
abroad— How  fuccefslefs  that  expedient  has 
been  in  regard  to  curing  me  of  my  paflion 
for  her,  you  know  too  well^ — What  i!l  con- 
fcquences  have  otherwife  attended  it,  I  hope 
you  will  never  know  at  all. 

But  I  was  about  to  relate  the  effe6l  that  my 
former  friendly  and  innocent  intercourfe  with 
this  lovely  woman,  has  on  my  prefent  frame 
of  mind  ;  aad  how  it  touches,  with  peculiar 
fadnels,  every  obje6l:  around  me. 

This  place,  though  more  than  fix  miles 
from  Linwcll  and  almoft  as  far  again  from 
Hartfield,  is  yet,  you  know  at  that  dil1:ance, 
which  in  the  country  conftitutes  near  neigh- 
bourhood.—  I  was  at  fchcol  at  Eaton  with 
Verney,  and  though  on  cur  entrance  into 
life,  his  purfults  and  mine  were  lb  different, 
that  no  intimacy  could  fubiirt  between  us,  yet 
our  acquaintance  was  of  courfc  renewed,  when 

we    both    came   te  fettle    in  this  country. 1 

vifited  equally  at  the  houfe,  whether  he  was  at 
home  or  no  ;  and,  at  length,  I  was  reflrained 
only  by  my  fears  of  injuring  ;he  reputation  of 
Geraldinc,  from  kcing  her  every  day  ;  for 
all  other  fociety  was  imipid  or  difguihng. 

At 


DESMANS.  Ill 

At  that  time  Geraldine  rode  on  horfcback, 
or  drove  her  fiftcr  in  a  cabriole  ;  and,  as  (he 
was  fond  of  gardening,  I  fometimes  ufed  to 
fohcit  her   opinion   on   the   alterations   I    was 

making and    when    Ihe  approved  what   I 

had  dire6ted,  or  gave  me  any  idea  of  her  own, 
I  purfued  my  plans  oF  improvement  with  re- 
doubled    alacrity. Her      prefence    gave    to 

every  obje6l  a  charm  which  1  now  look  for  in 
vain  !  —-And  the  groups  of  flirubs  which 
were  then  planted  by  her  dire6tion,  now 
grow   and   flourifti,  as  if  to    remind  me  only 

of   the    happinefs  I    have     lofl: a    happinefs 

which  one  half  the  world  would  call  chimeri- 
cal, and  the  other  half  abfurd  and  ridiculous 

but  which  nevertheicfs  ivas  comparative  happi- 
nefs ;  for  when  I  knew  I  could  fee  her  at 
any  time  in  an  hour,  and  that  I  fhould  pafs 
an  hour  or  two  near  her,  twice  or  thrice  in 
the  courfe  of  the  week  ;  I  reprelTed,  if  I 
could  not  entirely  dcilroy,  the  regret  which 
arole  T)n  rcflcdting  that  her  life  was  dedicated  to 
another. 

1  have  been  moil  decidedly  miferable  ever 
(inc<;  J  have  been  here  ;  every  body  tires  me, 
and  bufincis  or  convertaticn  alike  ditguft  and 
teize  me.  —  1  fancied  that  alter  an  abl'ence  of 
twelve  months,  the  former  might,  for  a  time, 
occupy  my  mind  i  but  Uert,  who  you  know 
I  left  as  a  fteward,  is  fo  intolerably  iiow  and 
flupid,  that  It  is  quiie  impoflible  for  me  to  at- 
tend to  his  accounts  and  his  details—  however 
be  is  very  honeft,  and  ail  fcems  right  enough— 
and  1  have  given  h;m  his  difcharges.-  The 
gocd  tclks  cf  the  neighbourhood  have  perfe- 
cutcd  a.e    every    n.orning--.-pcfl  chalks  and 

wfifkics. 


lia  DESMOND, 

whiHcies,  and    cavaliers,  have  befet  my  door, 

Some  of  thele    worthy   people   I   have  feen, 

bccaufe  I  happened  to  meet  them  in  the 
grounds,  and  they  were  fo  happy  at  my  re- 
turn, and  fo  full  of  obliging  hopes  that  I  was 
coming  to  live  among  them,  and  be  a  good 
neighbour,  that  really  I  was  concerned  to 
difappoii>t  them  ;  efpecially  certain  amiable 
gentlewomen  between  hfty  and  fixty,  who 
have  daughters  between  tvi^cnty-and  thirty, 
and  who  are  fo  good  as  to  be  particul-.riy 
folicitous  for  my  fettling  in  their  neighbour- 
hood.—  Oneofthefe,  an  acquaintance  it  feems 
of  my  mother's,  came  in  a  folemn  emhalfy, 
like  a  dowager  queen  of  Sheba,  to  vifit  me, 
\vhom  ihc  praifed  quite  into  a  Solomon  ;  but, 
as  {he  piques  herlelf  upon  fpe.iking  her  mind 
freely  (and  is  of  couife  the  terror  of  all  her 
acquaii  tance)  flie  told  me  (he  fliould  not  fpare 
my  faults  ;  for  flic  loved  me  for  the  fake  of  hsr 
old  friend,  ^ny  dear  mother,  and  knew  I  had 
too  much  I'enfe  not  to  underhand  fti;  fpoke  out 
of  fincere  regard  ;  when  fhe  pointed  out  fome 
-errors  in  my  condu^  which  fo  good  and 
promifing  a  young  man,  one  who  ivasfuch  a 
credit  to  the  times,  would  do  \i'ell  to  correal. 

I  cannot  fay  1  much  liked  this  exordium  — 
Confcience  told  me  I  had  committed  errors 
enough,  which  fuch  a  fybil  might  Ifrike  at  ; 
but  1  felt  the  mod;  uneafy  in  a  matter  where 
my  confcience  totally  acquitted  me.-— I  figured 
to  myfelf  that  flie  might  allude  to  my  jouiney 
'into  Wales;  and,  1  believe,  my  countenance 
betrayed  my  apprehenfions,  tor  Ihe  cried — 
*«  Oh  1    but  my   dear  Sir,  don't;   bluQi   'i<:i — I 

ft-.all 


D  B  a  M  o  N  D.  ^r$ 

fliall  not  touch  upon  family  fecrets  (nodding' 
liguificantly) — No,  no —  I  only  mean  to  afk 
you,  how  you  r<7//  hke  to  go  fo  often  lo  that 
odious  France,  which,  at  all  times,  was  the 
Tuin  of  all  the  fine  young  men  that  ever  went 
there  in  my  memory,  and  now  muft  be  much 
worfe  ;  for,  I  underftand,  they  have  neither 
t:hurch  nor  king — neither  money  nor  bread 
.—-a  fad  race  of  pecple  always;  and  no- 
thing  ever  feemed  to  me  fo  abfurd  as  fend- 
ing an  Englifn  gentleman  among    them. As 

to  you,  I  don't,  indeed,  fee  any  great  change 
in  you  yet,  except  that  you  have  lofl  your 
Englifli  complexion — but  I  heartily  hope 
you'll  go  no  more — but  fit  down  quietly  and 
cieditahfy  at  home,  with  a  good  difcreet 
young    woman   for   your    wife,  and^have    no 

hankerings  after  thefe  foreign   doings. There 

was  a  report  got  about,  that  you  had  either 
been  mairied  in  France,  or  got  a  French 
mifircfs — I  am  heartily  glad  to  find  there's 
no  truth  in  fuch  a  rumour Indeed  I  al- 
ways faid No,  no,    fays    I,  Mr.  Defmond, 

if  J  underftand  him  at  all,  has  belter  no- 
tions- --Take  tfiy  word  for  it,  who  have  known 
him  ever  fmce  he  was  an  infant,  that  he  has 
good  found  honeft  Ei^iglilli  principles  at  bottom, 
and  loves  his  own  country,  and  his  own  coun- 
try folks,  and  we  fliall   fee  him  come   and  fettle 

among    us a    yeoman    of   Kent  :     which    is 

better   than   any   French  cuke  or  marquis,  or 

grandee  of  them   all." To   the  truth  of  this 

pofition  I  heartily  aflented ;  and  felt  relieved 
that  nothing  had  alarmed  this  Truly  Britifn 
matron,  more  than  a  friendly  dread  of  my 
having  imported  a.  French  miftrefs.  —She  did 

not, 


114  D    E    S    M    O    N    Di 

fiof,  however,  end  her  very  long  vifi%  till 
Hie  had  again  mofl  ferioufly  exhorted  me 
to  put  away  all  foreign  vanities,  and  come 
to  fee  her— -She  aflured  me  her  daughter, 
Dorothy,  was  returned  from  vifiting  her  aunt 
in  the  North,  quite  altered  for  the  better  in  her 
health,  and  longing  to  fee  her  old  play-fellow, 
Mr.  Defmond-- -and  th^  her  youngeft,  Mari- 
anne, was  grown  out  or  my  knowledge,  and 
quite  a  fine  young  woman.-— What  could  de- 
fend an  heart  thus  flrongly  befet,  but  a  predi- 
Ie6tion,  ae;ainfl  which  neither  Dorothy  nor 
Marianne  can  contend  ? 

My  dear  Bethel,  I  expefi  your  next  letter 
tvith  impatience,  that  is  beyond  the  power  of 
■words  to  defcribe  ;  five  days    muft   pafs  before 

I  can  be  relieved but    keep  me  not   in   fuf- 

'  pence   an  hour    longer Day    after  day    I 

linger  here  in  tortures,  even  greater  than  you 
are  aware  of  j  I  rife  in  a  morning  only  to 
count  the  moments,  till  the  return  of  the  mef- 
fenger  I  fend  for  letters ;  and  then  tn  become 
fplcuetic  for  the  reft  of  the  day,  if  he  does  not 
bring  me  letters  from  you  or  from  fome  other 
perfon  who  can  name  the  fituation  of  Geral- 
dine. 

She  did,  indeed,  promife  to  write  to  me 
herfeif ;  and  I   have  expefted  her    performance 

of   that  promife  with   torturing   inquietude 

But  now  I  can  too  well  account  for  her  having 
failed  in  it ;  and,  fince  thefe  internal  goffips 
have    raifed   fuch  fufpicions,    i   (hall   not  hear 

from  her  at  all Oh  1  I  could  curfe  them 

but  you  will  have  no  patience  if  I  fuffer  myfelf 
to  relapfe  into  the  ufelefs  execrations  ofimpo* 
tent  rage. 

I  wand«»' 


D    E    S    Nf   O   N   e.  115 

I  wander  about  like  a  wretched  reftlcfs  be- 
ing  now   trying   to  fit   down  to  hooks   of 

which  1  know  not  one  word,  though  1  pore 
over  them  for  hours;  now  hiding  myfelf  in 
the  woods  from  the  horrible  importunity  of 
vifitors  whofe  kindnefs  I  cannot  return. 

Relieve  me  foon,  dear  Behcl,  from  this  mi- 
ferable  (late,  or  in  a  fit  of  defperation,  I  may 
fet  out  for  Bath. 

LIONEL  DESMOND. 


L  a  T- 


Il6  DESMOND. 

LETTER    XIII. 
T  O   M  R.  D  E  S  M  O  N  D. 

Bath,   -8th  June,  1791. 

I  Have  this  moment  your  Ltf-er  of  the 
24th,  which  diOreill-s,  but  docs  not  amaze 
ire.  I  expe£b  to  have  you  ena£i:ing  very  foon 
the  part  of  an  Englilh  Werter ;  for  you  feem 
far  gone  in  his  fpecies  of  infanity  ;  and  I  fear 
what  1  have  to  fay  to  you  to  day,  will  only 
feed  this  unhappy  frenzy. — -You  tell  me,  how- 
ever, that  if  you  do  not  hear  from  me  exadly 
at  the  time  you  expect,)  without  ever  confider- 
ing  that  many  circumfiances,  quite  immaterial 
to  the  caufe  of  your  folicitude,  may  prevent  my 
being   fo  very  pun6tual)    you  may,    perhaps, 

fet  off  for  Bath,  in  a  fit  of  defperation 1 

Vv'rile,  therefore  ;  for  though  fure  to  infii6l 
pain,  by  all  I  have  to  fay,  it  will  (if  you  have 
yet  a  fhadow  of  reafon  left)  prevent  a  greater 
evil — Your  coming  now  to  Bath  would  be 
abfolute  madncfs;  and  abfolutely  ufelefs  as  to 
any  fervice  you  could  render  Geraldine  — IF,  in 
this  difpolition  of  mind,  you  can  attend  to  ihe 
mofi  extraordinary  events,  that  do  not  imme- 
diately belong  to  its  caufe,  you,  perhaps,  may 
have  Heard  the  news  of  the  flight  of  the  King 
of  France  and  his  family,  vi'hich  arrived  here 
ye/lerday — The  iauie  poll  brought  letters  to 
Gcraldme  from  her  hulband,  written  in  great 
haile,  and  with  great  exultation, —  He  feems 
to  doubt,  from  the  purport  of  de  Romagne- 
court's  letter,  after  his  firll;  interview,  whe- 
ther llie  would  accompany  him ;  and  there- 
fore 


©ESMOND.  117 

fore  fends  to  the  Duke's  agent,  in  London, 
Si  letter  to  her,  containing  more  pofitive  in- 
jundions ;  and  bills  for  fixty  pounds,  with 
■which,  in  cafe  the  Duke  (hould  be  departed, 
he  direQs  her  inftantly  to  fet  out  for  Paris,  by 
way  of  Dieppe  and  Rouen;  and,  iffheww/? 
have  it  fo,  to  bring  her  children  ;  but,  at  all 
events,  to  begin  her  journey  immediately.— 
He  tells  her,  that  though  he  is,  at  prcfent,  in 
Aullrian  Flanders,  meafures  are  fo  arranged, 
that  his  friends  will,  in  a  very  ftiort  time,  re- 
turn in  triumph  to  Paris,  where  he  is  afllired 
of  a  fplendid  fupport  ;  and  the  immediate 
means  of  retrieving  his  afFairs — This  letter, 
which  is  couched  in  the  moft  pofitive  and 
forcible  terms  he  could  devife,  was  forwarded 
by  the  agent  of  the  Duke,  who,  it  appears, 
knew  that  Geraldine  was  at  Bath. — On  the 
Keceipt  of  it,  fi^e  fent  for  me;  and  putting  the 
letter  into  my  hands,  fat  down,  and  fell  into 
an  agony  of  tears. 

I  afked  her,  as  foon  as  I  recovered  a  little 
from  my  furprife  and  concern,  what  fhe  meant 
to  do  ? — «'  I  go,"  replied  llie — **  I  have  now 
no  longer  a  reafon  againft  it— at  leaft,  none 
that  will  be  attended  to  ;  and  I  muft  obey-—" 

**  Good  God!"  exclaimed  I,  in  dilbcfs  I 
could  not  conceal,  **  is  this  a  time  to  order 
you,  unguarded  and  alone,  to  undertake  fuch 
a  journey ;  and  to  enter  a  capital,  which 
mull,  from  the  prefent  circumftanccs,  be  in 
confternation  and  confufion  ? — If  \ou  muft  go, 
I  cannot  bear  the  thoughts  of  your  going  un- 
proteded." — *«  And  yet,"  faid  (he,  «'  that 
is  the  very  circumllance  that  determines  me  ; 
for,  with  fuch  protedion  as  Mr.  Verney  had 
before  chofcn    for  rac,     1  would    not    have 

gone." 


Il8  S    £    S    M    O    K    D. 

gone." "She  fighed  deeply,  but  dried  hcf 
eyes. — **  !t  is  over,  added  {he — **  I  look  the 
liherty  of  troubling  you  to  come  to  me,  Mr. 
Bethel,  to  a{k  your  friendly  advice ;  but  I 
now  fee,  on  a  moment's  farther  confider^tion, 
that  I  have  but  one  pa't  to  take;  and  that  I 
have  doni  wrong  to  hefitate." 

*•  Pardon  me,"  replied  I — **  I  rather  think, 
my  dear  Madam,  you  will  be  more  wrong, 
Ihculd  you  determine  too  haflily-  Does  your 
lifter— does  your  mother  know  of  this  letter  j. 
and  the  conunajid  it  cuntains  ?" 

•*  My  firter  does  ;  for  fhe  was  here  when 
1  received  it  half  an  hour  ago  -—  She  left  me 
to  acquaint  my  mother  with  it,  whom  I  have 
not  yet  been  permitted  to  fee — But,  as  (lie  has 
kept  me  at  a  dii^ance  from  her,  becaufe  fhe 
conceived  difpleafure  at  my  not  confenting  to 
go    before,    ihe    will,     undoubtedly,    have    a 

ftronger  reafcn  to  infift  on  my  going  now. 

My  brother,  Mr.  Wavcily,  has,  at  laft,  de- 
termined on  all  the  preliminaries  and  prepara- 
tions for  his  marriage,  >  hich  has  been  fo  long 
irtfufpence — It  is  to  be  concluded  on  immedi- 
ately---! am,  I  know,  in  the  way  ;  they  can 
neither  invite  me  to  thejoyous  feftivity  with  plea- 
fure,  or  leave  me  out  with  decency.— I  have 
now  money  to  go  abroad,  which  my  mother 
will  infift  upon  my  ufing  for  the  purpofe  my 
hufband  defigned  it  ;  and  fie  will  be  relieved 
from  the  apprchenficns  which  I  know  fhe  has 
been  under,  leit  (he  fhould  be  compelled  to 
advance  money  for  my  fupport  here  — Againfl 
all  thefe  reafons  on  her  part,  which  (he  will 
enforce  by  the  powerful  words,  duty  and  obe- 
dience  What  have   I   to  ofi^r  ? My  fears  ; 

they  will   be   treated  as  chimerical nor,    in 


»   E    S    M    O   N   0.  119 

fa£l  do  I  entertain  any)  My  reluctance  !  that 
will  be  imputed  to  very  unworthy  and  very  falfe 
motives  --  -In  a  word,  though  I  will  await 
Fanny's  return,  before  I  begin  to  make  a6lual 
preparations  for  my  immediate  journey,  I  am 
peite£lly  aiTuredj  that  my  mother's  orders  will 
enforce  thole  of  Mr.  Verney  ;    and  that  I  muft 

At  this  inftant,  Fanny  Waverly,  her  eyes 
fwoln,  and  the  tears  ftill  dreaming  down  her 
cheeks,  entered  the  room  >  and  throwing  her- 
felf  into  the  arms  of  Geraldine,  fobbed  aloud, 

and  hid    her  face   in   her   bofom Geraldine, 

by  a  g!cr:oiis  effort  of  refolution,  inftead  of 
yielding  to  rhe  anguifh,  under  which  I  could 
fee  file  was  ill  able  to  fupport  herfelf,  tried  to 
foothe  and  tranquillize  her  lifter..—**  Come, 
come,  my  Fanny,"    faid  ihe,    *•  be  compofed 

1  knew,  before  you  went,  the  mefTage  with 

which  you    would   return 1,    therefore,    am 

prepr.rcd  for  it  j  and  I  entreat  you  not  to  let 
it  tl-us  affed  you." 

The  agonizing  grief  of  the  one,  and  the 
tender  fortitude  of  the  other,  were,  to  m.e, 
equally  affefting  ;  and,  as  I  contemplated  one 
fitter  weeping  in  the  arms  of  the  other,  who, 
by  a  painful  rcftraint,  exerted  that  fortitude, 
not  to  add  10  her  afflictions ;  I  was  on  the 
point  of  taking  them  both  in  my  arms, 
and    fweariiig     to     defend    and  protcd  them 

with    my     life     and      fortune. The    fcenc 

however,  was  too  diftrefTing  to  be  endured 
long  -—Fanny  ccntiAued  weeping  too  much 
to  be  able  to  deliver  her  mother's  mefTage  ;  and 
Geraldine,  who  had  led  her  to  a  chair,  hung 
over   her,    fupporting   her  heaJ,  and    holding 

her 


I30  D£SMON]»« 

her  hands,  with  fuch  a  look  !  — 5/'*?,  howevef* 
did  not  now  fhed  a  tear ;  but  her  palenefs,  her 
trembling,  and  the  exnreflive  look  fhc  threw 
towards    me,    explamcd,     too    clearly,    what 

paffed   in  her   heart. At    this  moment,    the 

iervant,  who  was  not  aware  of  this  afflicting 
interview,  entered  with  the  three  children——— 
At  the  fight  of  them,  I  faw  that  Geraldine's 
refolution  was  about  to  forfake  her ;  and  when 
the  little  boy  ran  up  to  Fanny,  and  entreated 
her  not  to  cry,  (he  became  abfolutely  convulf- 
ed  ;  and  Geraldine,  after  an  ineffeftual  flrug- 
gle  of  a  moment,  haftily  left  the  room,  and 
waved  her  hand  for  the  maid  and  the  children 
to  follow  her; 

I  was  then  alone  with  Fanny  Waverly  j  but 
I  knew  not  how  to  attempt  pacifying  tf.e  vio- 
lence of  her  emotions — She  feemed,  indeed, 

incapable  of  hearing   me 1  approached  her, 

however,  and  took  her  hand. 

'*  You  injuie  yourftlf,"  faid  I,  "  and  your 
iifter,  by  tiius  giving  way  to  immoderate  for- 
row Command  jourleU,  my  dear  Mi fs  Wa- 
verly, for  her  fake ;  and  tell  me,  I  befeech 
you,  if  1  can  be  of  any  ufe  in  mitigating  dif- 
trcfs,  which,  from  my  foul,  1  lament." 

<*  Oh!  Mr.  Bethel!"  anfwered  (he  inar- 
ticulately, "  my  motner  is  fo  cruel — fo  very 
cruel  to  Geraldine,  that  it  breaks  my  heart— - 
She  has  heard  the  purport  of  Verney's  letter  ; 
and  ordered  me  back  to  fiy,  that  it  was  not 
only  her  opmion  that  (he  ought  to  fet  out, 
but  her  command  that  fhc  (houid  inilantly  pre- 
pare for  doing  fo ;  on  whicli  condition  alonff 
file  will  receive,  and  give  her  her  blefling. 
— -I  own  1  remonftrated  rather  earneilly  with 
my  mother,    but  1  was  fo  far  from  obtaining 

any 


any  mitigation,  that  I  was  very  fcverefy  re- 
proved for  daring  to  queftion  the  propriety  of 
her  decifion  ;  and  bade  to  obfcrve,  that  if  I 
prefumed  to  atteinpt  influencing  my  filler  to 
a6l  contrary  to  her  duty,  fn  clearly  pointed 
out,  it  would  be  at  my  own  peril  j  and  that  I 
niuft,  in  that  cafe,  be  content  to  fliare  the  fate 
that  mufl  foon  overwhelm  my  filler  ;  but,  in- 
deed, Mr.  Bcthtl,  continued  (he,  it  is  not 
that  threat  that  (hould  deler  or  frighten  rue,  if 
I  were  not  too  fure  that  I  fliould  be  a  burthen 
to  Gcraldiae,  and  only  encreafe  her  diflicuj- 
ties." 

*'  Do  not,  however,  encreafe  them  now, 
tny  amiable  friend,"  faid  I,  '*  by  thefe  deep 
expretiions  of  anguifh— —  I  do  aflTure  you,  that 
your  fifter  had  anticipated  all  the  purport  of 
themeflage  that  diRrclFes  you  j  and  that  it  will 
fhock  her  lefs  than  you  imarine Try  there- 
fore,    to  recover  yourfelf tell    her   the  truth, 

and  affift  her  in  forming;  fuch  a  refolution  as  is 

beft 1  own  I  think  thai  is,  to  brave  the  word 

that  can  happen  by  flaying  ;  and  to  refufe  to 
fet  out  at  leall,  till  (he  hears  Mr.  Verney  is  at 
Paris  to  receive  her." 

As  if  r.;lieved,  by  hearing  that  this  was  my 
opinion,  and  in  the  hope  that  it  would  influ- 
ence her  (ifter,    p'anny  now  fle.v  to  her She 

and  her  feivant  were  only  in  the  next  room 
with  the  children;  i  waited,  a  moment,  the 
ifTueof  tlie  conference,  and  a  violent  burfl  of 
weeping  afTured  me,  too  well,  that  it  would 
be  moil  affecting  -—  This,  however,  was  fro.n 
Fanny  Waveiiyi  for,  in  five  or  fix  minutes, 
Ger-aldme  reentered  the  d  ning-room,  with 
forced  ierenity  j  ll^e  even  tried  to  fmile,  wiien 
(he  laid,    "  this  dear  girl   is  fo   untbrtunatelv 

Vo'L.  II.  G  i^2. 


122  DESMOND. 

full  of  fcnfibility   and  afFe<5tion,    that   it  is  iitl- 

poflible   to   pacify   her She   fancies   I  go   to 

meet  anarchy  and  murder  in  France  ;  and  on 
feeing  me  packing  up  mine  and  my  children's 
clothes,  that  I  may  be  ready  to  fet  out  to-mor- 
row, (he  has  rclapfed  into  the  wildeft  expref- 
fions  of  fcrrow — I  wilh  you  would  try,  Mr. 
Bethel,  fince  fhe  will  liHen  to  and  believe  you, 
to  rcafon  here  out  of  thefe  groundlels  apprehen- 
fions." 

"  I  wilh,"    faid  I,    "  that  I  m/W  fet  about 
that  without  forfeiting  my  fincerity,  but,   upon 
my  honor,  I  do  not  think,  and  therefore  can- 
not fay,  her  apprehenfions  are  groundlefs." 
**  J,   howevci,    have  no   ftars,  Mr.  Bethel 

The  French,    of  whatfoever  party  1  may 

fall  among,  will  not  hurt  a  woman  and  chil- 
dren ! On  admitting  it    pclhble,    that   in 

fom.e  of  thofc  popular  commotions,  that  are, 
certainly,  likely  to  convulie,  for  feme  time, 
a  kingdom  juil:  burfting  into  freedom  from  the 
grafp  ot  the  moil  opprcfuve  tyranny,  I  might 
be   involved;     (wh^rh    is   extremely    unlikely) 

.  Good  Gcd  1     what   have    I    to  fear? Not 

death  I  aifuredly  ;  for  there  is  hardly  one  fitu- 
ation,  in  wiiich  i  can  f.cw  he  placed,  to  which 
death  would  not  be  preferable.  ~-A  will  be  very 
fmcerc,  my  good  friend,  and  fay  honeilly, 
that  aiter  what  1  know,  and  what  1  fifpt'^  of 
Mr.  Verney,  I  had   rather  meet  death  than  be 

in  his    power 1     had     riihtr   meet    it  than 

my  mother's  ujikindnefs — infinitely  rather, 
than  to  know  that  1  and  my  poor  little  onee 
(her  voice  almoft  failed  her^  ihould  be  a  bur- 
then to  tcT,  who  is  fo  unwilling  to  bear  it, 
even  for  a  little  while.--  -Has  then  death  any 
terrors  tor  me  ?    and  can  one  who  fears  not 

death 


death  flirlnk  from  danger  ? — If  I  get  among 
the  wildcft  collcdion  of  thofe  people,  whofc 
ferocity  arifes  not  from  their  prefent  liberty, 
but  their  recent  bondage,  is  it  poflible  to  fup- 
pole  they  will  injure  me,  who  am  myfelf  a  rai- 
ferable  flave,  returning  with  trembling  and  re- 
luQ^ant  fteps,  to  put  on  the  moft  dreadful 
of  all  fetters  ?— Fetters  that  would  even  de- 
ftroy  the  freedom  of  my  mind."  I  was  ex« 
ceflivcly  (truck  with  the  manner  in  which  fhc 
fpokc  this ;  nor  did  I  imagine  that  her  foft 
features  and  dove-like  eyes,  could  have  afTum- 
ed  fuch  an  cxpreflion  of  fpirit— She  faw,  I  be- 
lieve, I  was  furprifed — **  Why,"  faid  I,  «*  do 
yoio  put  on  thefe  fetters,  if  you  feel  them  tp 
be  fo  infupportable  ?" 

**  Becaufe,"  returned  ftie,  "  it  is  my  J«/y  | 
and  while  I  fulfil  that,  I  can  always  appeal 
to  a  judge,  who  will  not  only  acquit,  but  re- 
ward me,  if  I  a£t  up  to  it The  more  ter- 
rible the  talk,  the  greater  the  merit  I  aifume 
in  fulfilling  it  ;  befides  that,  my  mother's  in- 
humanity has  leflTencd  its  horrors. 


-'  ThouMft  fliun  a  bear  ; 


But  if  thy  flight  lay  towards  the  roaring  fea, 
Thou'dft  meet  the  bear  in  the  mouth."* 

««  Well  !  but,"  faid  I,  "  not  to  fpcak  of 
Mr.  Verney,  whore  condu6i:  is  in  every  way 
unpardonable  ;  not  to  fpeak  of  the  dangers 
that  may  attend  journeying  towards  Paris,  at 
prefent  ;    and  which  may  perhaps,    be  partly 

imaginary Give  me  leave  to  a(k,    how  arc 

you  able,  with  three  young  chik^en,   and  on- 
Jj  a  maid  fcrvant,  to  encounter  the  fatigues  of 

•  Shakef}>earc. 

G  2 


fo  long  a  journey  ? — I  have  heard  you  fay  yott 
are  exceflively  afFeded  by  fca  ficknefs ;  and 
that  nothing  overcomes  you  more  than  hurry  ; 
yet  herd  arc  you  about  to  encounter  both  the 
one  and  the  other,  with  only  a  young,  help- 
lefs  Englifti  gill  as  a  fcrvant,  ^ivho  will  be  ter- 
rified to  death  every  ftep  fhe  takes. 

"  Ah  I  Mr.  Bethel  I"  replied  Geraldine, 
(baking  her  head  inournfully,  *•  you  oblige  me 
again  to  ufe  a  quotation — 


When  the  mind's  free, 


The  bodys  delicate ;  the  tempeft  in  my  mind, 
Doth  from  my  fenfes  take  all  feeling  elfe, 
■  Save  what  beats  there."* 

"  What  then,"  faid  I,  *•  for  God's  fake 
tell  me— what  is  your  refolution  ?  and  in  what 
•way  can  1  render  more  eafy,  any  that  you  will 
abfolutely  adopt  ?" 

**  My  refolution,  my  good  friend,  is,  to  fet 
out  very  early  to-morro\v  for  France,  by  the 
roiae  Mr.  Verney  has  directed — If  there  is  a 
poffibility  of  gcttinirj  by  that  time,  a  female 
fervant,  who  Ipcaks  a  little  French  ;  and  of 
hiring  a  man  fervant,  on  whom  I  can  depend, 
1  will  do  both  ;  in  thefc  inflances,  perhaps, 
your   friendly  afiiilance  may  he  exerted." 

**  And  you  are  poiitivcly  detetinincd  to  go  ?" 

**  Sa  podtively,  that  I  !iave  lent  to  enquire 
whether  I  can  have  a  cojch  here  ;  if  not  I 
muft  have  two  port  chailes,  which  will  be  much 
lels  conveniens  ;  and  if  I  cannot  here  procure 
the  fervants  1  want,  1  muft  take  the  chance  ot 
getting  thein  either  from  London,  whither  1 
Ihall  write  this  evening,  or  at  Biighiiiclinllone, 

Sh.ikcfpeare. 

where 


I>    E    S    M    O    N    D,  125 

where  I  fliall  embark  ;  and  to  which  place  I 
ftiall  go,  by  way  of  Salifbury  and  Chlchefter, 
without  going  round  by  London." 

I  now  law,  that  the  moft  eflential  fcrv'ice  I 
could  render  our  lovely,  unhappy  friend,  was 
to  fet  out  inftantly  in  quell  of  fuch  perlbiis  and 
accommodations  as  (he  wanted  ;  I  knew  that 
it  was  abfolutely  nccelHiry  for  her  to  have  a 
coach,  and  not  to  truft  to  Fiench  vehicles — It 
was   equally    necefiary    to   procure    for    her  a 

trully  man  fervanr. 'rhelV,    therefore,    1  fct 

about  finding  ;  and  by  a  fingular  piece  ot  good 
fortune,  I  tound,  at  the  livery-ftablc  where  I 
applied,  a  very  good  coach,  that  was  left  there 
to  be  fold,  by  the  executors  of  a  geAtlenian, 
who  had   it  made  n;w  for  his  journey  to  Bath, 

where  he  died  foon  after  his  arrival it  was 

fitted  up  with  many  conveniences  for  an  in- 
valid under  the  neceflity  ot  travelling  ;  and  was 
cxadly  fuited  to  carry  fuch  a  family  as  that 
for  whofe  ufe  J  now  purchafcd  it  ;  ordering 
the  man,  who  had  the  fale  of  it,  to  tell  Mrs. 
Verney,  «<  that  he  had  d  rcdions  to  let  it  at 
a  price  he  named  ;  which  wjs  to  be  paid  on 
returning  ii  j"  for  that  1  had  otherwifc  manag- 
ed the  matter,  was,  of  neccffity,    a  fecrct. 

It  was  infinitely  more  difficult  to  procure  her 
a  fervant,  and  it  was  near  one  o'clock  in  the 
morning  when  I  gave  up  the  hope  ot  fatisfying 
myfeif  in  this  rcfpect.— -I  could  not  however, 
determine  to  let  her  go  either  without  one,  or 
with  one  with  whofe  charader  I  was  not  pcrfetily 
fatisfied;  and  therefore,  after  fomc  deliberatir 
on,  I  refolved  to  fend  my  own  man,  Thomas 
Wrightfon,  with  her;  as  I  can  do  very  well 
without  him,  till  I  can  find  fome  proper  per- 
ioa  to  fend  over  to  her,  or  hear  of  her  hav- 
ing 


126  DESMOND. 

Jng  provided  hcrfelf  with  one  there'— —Tho- 
mas, indeed,  does  not  fpeak  any  French  to 
lignify,  though  he  was  once  at  Paris  with  me  ; 
but  he  is  very  honcft  and  aSive  ;  and,  upon 
my  propofing  it  to  him,  he  faid — **  that 
though  upon  no  other  account  whatever  he 
would  quit  me,  unlefs  my  honour  was  pleafed 
to  difcharge  him  ;  yet,  for  fuch  a  lady  as  Mrs. 
Verney,  in  fuch  a  time  to  be  fure,  he  would 
go  through  fire  and  water,  by  night  or  by 
day." — I  aflured  him  there  would  be  very  lit- 
tle water,  and,  I  believed,  no  fire  whatever 
to  go  through  ;  and  having  fettled  thg  terms 
which  made  it  a  matter  of  profit,  as  well  as 
chivalry  to  honeft  Thomas,  I  difpatched,  late 
as  it  was,  a  note  to  Geraldine,  to  inform  her 
how  this  was  fettled  ;  and  had  the  pleafure  to 
hear,  in  an  anfwer  written  by  herfelf,  that  flic 
was  extremely  well  fatisfied  with  tlie  arrange- 
ments I  had  made  for  her  ;  and  had,  in  the 
mean  time,  been  lucky  in  her  own  endeavours  ; 
having  made  a  fortunate  difcovery  of  a  perfon 
between  forty  and  fifty,  who  had  been  a  go- 
verncfs  at  a  fchoo!  at  Bath,  and  was  defirous 
of  attending  any  lady  to  Mante,  of  whicli  place 
iht  was  a  native,  for  the  confideration  of  the 
cxpences  of  her  journey.— Geraldine  added, 
tiiat  as  flie  had  been  indefatigable  in  her  pre- 
parations, every  thmg  would  be  ready,  and 
Ihe  fliould  depart  at  eight  o'clock  the  next  mor- 
ning ;  when  flie  intended  driving  to  the  door 
of  her  mother,  to  take  leave  of  her,  and  re- 
ceive the  promifcd  hleffing  ;  and  that  fhe  begged 
of  me  to  meet  her  a  little  without  the  town, 
to  walk  back  with  Fanny  (who  was  to  go  fo 
far  in  the  coach  with  her)  and  to  receive  her 

lall 


DESMOND.  127 

lad  acknowledgments,     for    what  ftic  termed 
my  unexampled  friendfhip. 

I  knew  that  much  was  yet  to  be  done  of 
•which  (he  was  not  aware — I  arofe  therefore, 
at  five  o'clock,  and  had  my  banker  here  call- 
ed; who  gave  me  a  letter  of  credit  on  Paris 
for  an  hundred  pounds  ;  and  another  to  a 
gentleman  at  Rouen,  to  entreat  his  attention 
to  the  travellers,  in  regard  to  exchanging  their 
money,  or  any  other  little  office  of  kindnefs  ; 
and,  thus  prepared  I  waited  impatiently  for  the 
hour,  when  the  coach  which  contained  our 
lovely  exile,  was  to  overtake  me  on  the  road. 
- — I  had  proceeded  near  a  mile  beyond  t!ic 
place  of  appointment,  when  it  appeared---It 
flopped  on  approaching  me— I  found  only  Ge- 
-raldine,  Fanny  and  the  children  in  it,  for  that 
her  tail  conference  with  her  filler  and  v/ith  me 
might  not  be  interrupted,  (he  two  female  at- 
tendants were  ordered  to  folio-v  fo  far  on  foot, 
and  the  coach  was  to  flay  for  them. 

I  trembled  as  I  drew  near  the  fcene  I  was  to 
pafs  through — Fanny,  her  face  covered  with 
her  handkerchief,  was  fobbing  bitterly — Ge- 
raldine  was  pale  and  trembling,  but  an  artifi- 
cial compofure,  feemed  to  be  the  effect  of  the 
efFort  ihe  was  obliged  to  make  to  fupport  her- 
felf,  foothe  her  filler,  and  attend  to  her  chil- 
dren— The  moment  I  faw  her  countenance,  I 
faw  too  plainly  written  there,  the  cruel  harfli- 
nefs  of  her  mother,  but  (he  tried  to  fpeak 
with  fteadinefs,  when  fhe  begged  of  me  to  get 
into  the  coach. — I  obeyed  :  but  1  was  infe<Sed 
with  the  tender  forrows  of  the  party  I  found 
there,  and  could  fay  nothing  to  conlole  them. 

I  had,  however,    no  time  to  lofe  in  indulg- 
ing   ufelefs  fympathy  ;    I  took,  therefore,    out 

oi 


©fmy  pocliet,  the  letters  I  had  obtained. — - 
I  told  her,  that  hy  one,  {he  would  find  herfetf 
entitled  to  a  fmall  credit,  in  cafe  ilie  fhould 
•want  it,  which  would  he  no  inconvenience  to 
me  ;  and  her  taking  it  was  the  only  proof  I 
required  cf  that  friendfliip  which  fhe  had  fo  of- 
ten declared  fbe  favonred  me  with — That  the 
other  letter  was  to  a  gentleman  at  Rouen,  who 
might  be  ferviceahle  to  her  on  her  way — "And 
now,  dear  Mrs.  Verney,"  faid  I,  **  unlefs 
any  thing  more  can  be  devifed  for  your  fer- 
vice,  Mifs  Waverly  and  I  will  lay  farewell  ; 
for  this  patting,  this  fad  parting  wtll  hurt  you 
too  much  ;  and  I  fear" — '*  It  is  true,"  faid 
Ihe,  interrupting  me,  '*  that  it  is  wifer  to  part 
while  we  are  yet  able  — Fanny,  my  mod:  be- 
loved fiirer,  have  pity  upon  yourfelf  and  me, 
and  do  not  dell/oy  me  quite  by  your  affe^ion, 
"which  is  nox  almoil  cruelty." 

Poor  i''anny    threw    her    arm  round  her   lif- 
ter's neck,  and,     with  a   deep   and    convulfivc 

figh,  killed  her,  but  could  not  fpeak.-r ■ 

At  the  fame  moment  Geraidme  gave  me  her 
hand,  on  which  fell,  as  I  prefTed  it  to  my  lips 
the  only  tear  i  have  fhed  for  fome  years;  it 
-cas  cruel  lo   prolong  thi   fcene,    and,    indeed, 

.  almoll  impofiible  to  bear  it — I  therefore  opened 
the  coach  door,  leaped  out,  and  Fanny  Wa- 
\e!ly,  difcngaging  hcrfelf  from  the  children 
with  a  fort  ot  delperate  refclution,  followed  me. 
— Geraldine  was  totally  filent,  and  I  dared  not 

Jook  towards  her— but  the  little  boy  continiicd 
to  call  to  his  aunt  Fanny,  and  to  entreat  her 
not  to  go  from  him,  till  the  two  women  who 
had,  by  this  time,  come  up  with  the  coach, 
^CFC  helped  in  by  Thomas  j  one  of  tliem  veiy 

wifci/ 


E  s  M  o  N  d:  139 

wifely  drew  up  the  coach-window,  and  on 
a  fignal  from  me,  it  drove  very  rapidly 
away. 

I   remained  ftanding   in  the  road,    fupport- 
ing   Mifs  Wavcrly,    who    was    drowned     in 

tears,  and  choaked  by   fpeechlefs  Ibrrow. 

I  fpoke  to  her,  entreating  her  to  bear,  with 
as  much  fortitude  as  Ihe  could,  a  feparation 
that,     however   painful,     would   probably   be 

fliort She  replied,    in  a    voice    broken 

by  fobs — "  God  knows  how  that  may  be, 
Mr.  Bethel,  butifldired  follow  my  inclina* 
tions,  it  fhould  be  (hort  indeed." 

**  We  muft  none  of  us,"  faid  I,  **  follow 
our  inclinations,  when  they  are  in  oppofition 
to  ourduty,  aiy  dear  youn^  friend." 

"  And  yet,"  cried  ihe,  indignantly, 
**  fuch  behaviour  as  I  have  juft  now  witnefTed 
from  Mrs.  Waverly  towards  my  filler, 
ought,  methinks,  to  dilTolve  all  ties  of  duty  " 
— I  was  glad  that  her  anger  redored  her  to 
hcrfelf — 1  knew  it  was  juftly  exciied,  but 
how  juflly  I  could  not  have  believed,  if  Fanny 
had  not  by  degrees  defcribed  to  me  the  whole 
fcene  between  her  mother  and  Geraldi'.ie. — I  will 
not  irritate  your  mind  by  relating  it  ;  -fuf- 
fice  it  to  fay,  that  pride,  avarice  and  infenfi- 
bility,  never  more  effectually  uniteii  to  ren- 
der a  woman  d.nertable  ;  nor  did  ever  angel 
Iheiy- a  more  decided  contrafl  to  an  evil  fpi- 
rit,  than  Geraldine  at  that  trying  moment 
formed  'o  her  mother. 

Weil,    my   dear    Defmond,     it    is  over  ! — - 

GeraUine  is   gone : — To  night  fhe  propof- 

cd  being    at  Salifbjry,  to   mocrow  at  Chich^rf- 

ter,    and     on    Siturday   at;   Britghthclmilone, 

G  5  tunc 


f30  DESMOND. 

time  enough  for  the  packet,    which   is  advcr- 
tifed  to  fail  on  the  evening  of  that  day. 

Before  you  receive  this,  therefore,  flie  will 
be    embarked  ;    and   however  you  may  exe- 
crate   the  cruel   neceffity  that    has   compelled 
her  to   fuch  a    ftep,  or  reprobate   as  chimeri- 
cal and  ill-founded,    that  fenfe  of  duty  which 
urged  her  to  obey  this  compulfatory   mandate 
of  V'erney's,  you  will,  now  the  die    is  thrown, 
fubmit  to   what    is     inevitable^— and     perhaps 
the  certainty  that  your  misfortune  is  without 
remedy,    (for  Geraldine's  return  to  her  huf- 
band  you  vi'ill  certainly  confider  as  a  misfor- 
tune,) is  the   only  thing  that  could  teach   you 
to  bear,    or  induce   you    to  attempt  conquer- 
ing  your  regret. Allure  yourfelf,  that  as  to 

her  journey,  (he  has  every  accommodation 
to  render    it     as    tolerable    as,     under    fnch 

circumftances,    it  could  be   made The   pain 

of  her  mind  I  could  not  remove,  but  hope 
and  believe  I  have  exempted  her  from  fuffer- 
ing  much  perPonal  inconvenience. 

And  now,  Defmond,    fince  I  have  as  gra- 

-    dually  as  I  could,    difclofed   this  fudden  and 

|iainful  tranfaflion,    let   me  fpeak  a  word  or 

two  from,    and   of  myfelf. You  are  by 

this  time  convinced,  that  to  come  hither  could 
^nfwer  no  porpofe  as  to  Geraldine,  but  it 
would  certainly  alarm  the  old  lady,  who  has 
got  it  moft  invincibly  fixed  in  her  imagination 
that  you  have  a  dsfign  upon  her  daughter, 
and  have   influenced  her  torefufe  going  to  her 

feuftjandthefirrttimehe  fent  for  her Fanny 

Waverly  has  in  vain  tried  to  difcover  from 
whom  this  intelligence  came  ;  her  mother  hears 
not  your  name  mentioned  with  patience,  and 
Should  you  now  appear  here^    it  is  very  likely 

in 


DESMOND.  I3J 

in  her  Imprudent  prudence^  to  call  It  pui^fuin^ 
her  daughter  and  infuking  the  family.  It 
•will  be  cruel  too  to  poor  Fanny,  who  could 
only  fee  you  either  by  fteaith  or  by  chance—— 
one  would  be  extremely  improper,  and  the 
other  by  no  means  conducive  to  the  reftora- 
tion  of  her  tranquillity  ;  for  it  i&  eafy  to  fee  (he 
has  entertained  a  partiality  for  you,  Avhich 
her  good  fenfe  and  her  pride  have  alTiiled  her 
to  conquer,  on  the  convidlion  that  you  are  in 

love  with  her  filler for  that    you   certainly 

are  fo,  (he  is,  I  can  perceive,  perfectly  aware, 
though  Ihe  carefully  avoids  ever  hinting  at  it 
to  me. 

Coming  hither  to  meet   me,    is  now  quite 
out  of  the  queftion,  as  I  Ihall  only  be  here  about 

fix  days    more long  enough,   however,    to 

receive  a  letter  from  you,  which  I  hope  will 
tell  me,  that  your  mitid  is  more  fubdued  to 
your  fortune^  than  it  was  ivhen  you  wrote 
Jaft  ;  however,  that  fortune  may  have  be- 
come more  perverfe,  and  that  you  have  deter- 
mined to  fit  down  for  iome  months,  at  lead, 
ijuietly  in  Kent,  where  I  hope  you  will   recover 

your   reafon. Receive    for     that  and   every 

good,  th^  moii  iincere  wifhes  of, 

Your's  mod  truly, 

E.  BETHEL. 

^  P-  S.  I  fiiallleaveLouifa  here,  as  both  flie 
and  Mifs  Waverly  defire  it and  fhall  re- 
turn in  the  Autumn— and  then  the  will  go 
ijaok  with  me  to  Harifisld. 

L  E  T» 


IJ2  DESMOND. 

LETTER    XIV 
TO    MR.   BETHEL, 

Sedgewood,  July  2,    1791. 

GERALDINE  fo  fuddenly  gone  !  and  to 
meet  her  hufband,  who,  when  fhe  arrives  at 
Paris,  will  probably  not  be  there  as  he  propo- 
fed — as  the  event  that  lias  fince  happened, 
the  King  cf  France's  return,  mull:  inevitably 
make  an  alteration  in  thofe  plans,  whatever 
they  were,  that  his  noble  foreign  friends  had 
projeded  for  him—  I  am  in  fuch  a  rtate  of 
mind  that  I  know  not  what  I  write — But  do 
Jiot,  my  dear  Bethel,  hurry  from  Bath  one 
day  fooner  on  my  account,  as  1  have  bufinefs 
Vi'hich  will  inevitably  call  me  from  hence — 
and  I  fhall  fet  out  to- morrow  on  an  abfencc 
of  a  few  weeks,  perhaps  ;  but  as  I  do  not 
knov  exactly  where  I  l"hall  be,  and  (hall  have 
my  letters  fent  after  me  as  ibon  1  do  know,  con- 
tinue to  di:ev5l  hither.  — rl  am  extremely  in- 
terefted  for  Fanny  Waverly  (though  I  am 
psifuaded  you  are  m.illaken  as  to  her  honour- 
mg  me  with  her  partial  eilecm)  and  moll 
heartily   do  I    wiQi   tl^at    you    could  fee  her  in 

the  lame  light  as  )ou  wiih   me   to  do She   de- 

ferves  a  better  fate  than  fhe  will  probably  meet 
with,    if    her   hateful    mother  is  to   dilpofe  of 

her. Oh  !    where   at  this  moment  is    Geral- 

dine  ? to   what  f;  tigues    and  perils  may    flie 

not  be  expofed  ?— — i  thank  you,  however, 
for  all  your  tiiendly  attention  to  her— Would 
10  heaven  1  could  have    been   appnzed   of  her 

going but   that    was    ceitaialy   impoinble 

und  zQ.un  1  tbaok  you  for  domj  all  that  could 

be 


D    E    S    M   O  if    D.  133 

be  done  on  fuch  fhort  notice. Good  God  1 

what  would  have  been  her  fituation  had  you 
not  been  at  Bath  ? 1  ftiould  never  have  re- 
tained my  fenfes,  had  fhe  departed  on  fuch  a 
journey  without  the  accommodations  you 
contrived  to  collefl  for  her. 

If  I  could  divert  my  mind  a  moment  from 
this  uncafy  fubjed,  I  fhould  call  upon  you 
to  rejoce  with  me,  my  friend,  at  the  calm- 
nefs  and  magnanimity  fbewn  by  the  French 
people,  on  the  re^entrancc    of  the   King  into 

Paris This  will  furely  convince  the  world, 

thiit  tht  Hcody  democracy  oi  Mt.  Burke,  is  not 
a  combination  of  the  fwinifh  multitude,  for 
the  purpofes  of  anarchy,  but  the  affocialion 
of  leafonable    beings,    who  determine  to   be, 

and    deierve     to   be,    free. 1    would  alk 

the  tender-hearted  perfonages  who  afFe6l  to 
be  deeply  hurt  at  the  misfortunes  of  royalty, 
whether  if  this  treachery,  this  violation  of 
oaths  fo  folemnly  given,  had  been  fuccelsful, 
and  the  former  government  rertored  by  force 
of  arms,  the  then  triumphant  monarch 
and  his  ariftocracy,  would,  with  equal  heroifm, 
have  beheld  the  defeat  and  captivity  cf  the  lead- 
ers of  the  people — and  whether  any  indignities 
would  have  hcen  thought  too  degrading,  any  pu- 
nifliment  too  levere  for  them — Then  would  the 
Kingscajl'es'^  have  been  rebuilt,  and  leitrcs  de  • 
cachet  have  re-peopleci  the  dungeons  I 

I  rejoice  as  a  man,    that  it  is  otherwife 

and  1  believe  and  hope,  from  the  prefent 
dilpcfuion  .of  the  pe-^plc,  that  a  permanent 
conitituiion  will  now  foon  be  eftahliflied,  in 
which  all  the  power  to  do  good  (hall  be  leit 
in  the  hands  of  the  chief  magiil'^ate,  but  none 
o    become  a   defpot. — Some  evils,    however, 

•  Mr    Burke's  name  for  the  Eaflile, 

mud 


1J4  DESMOND. 

muft  be  felt  before  this  great  work 
can  be  completed — and,  perhaps,  fome  blood 
ftill  ftied ;  but  when  all  the  ill  that  has  yet 
happened  (allowing  even  the  mod  exaggerated 
accounts  of  it  to  be  as  true)  is  compared  with 
the  calamities  of  only  one  campaign  in  Ame- 
rica, for  a  point  which  at  lad  we  did  not 
carry,  and  ought  not  to  have  attempted  ; 
I  own  I  am  aftoniftied  at  the  effrontery  of  our 
minifterial  declaimers,  who  having  fup- 
ported  the  one,  have  dared  to  execrate  the 
other. 

Shall  you  hear  of  Geraldine  ? — Are  there 
any  hopes  of  her  writing  to  me  ? — Did 
fhc  mention  me  on  the  day  of  her  de- 
parture ? — Oh  !  what  would  I  not  give  for 
one,  only  one  line  from  her,  to  fay  (he 
is  fafe  in  France— —Yet  how  can  fhe  be  fafe 
any  where  while  in  the  power  of  fuch  a 
man  as  Verney  ? — And  how  could  her  mo- 
ther compel  her  to  put  herfelf  into  it  a  fe- 
cond  time  ? 

You  need  not  apprehend  my  now  vlfiting 
Bath,  againfl:  which,  at  the  beginning  of 
your  letter,  you  remonilrate  as  gravely  as 
if  you  fuppofed  I  fhould  really  fet  out  to 
fee  where  Geraldine  had  been — the  evil 
confequences  of  it  I  own  I  cannot  imagine-; 
for,  as  It   is  known  ihe  is  not  there,    it  could 

hardly    be   fuppofed    I  came  after   her. 

However,  as  you  are  fo  foon  leaving  it, 
as  I  have  really  bufinefs  elfcwhere,  and 
may,  perhaps,  foon  fee  you  in  this  part 
of  the  world,  a  journey  thither  now  is  quite 
out  of  thr  quciiion, 

,  If   you    write    by    the    return    of  the  pod, 
iperhaps  your  letter  may  ftill   find  me  iiere, 

for 


O    E    S    M    O    N    ».  135 

for  I  am  not  at  all  well  j  and  though  I  have 
had  fometimes  thoughts  of  fetting  out  to- 
morrow, as  I  mentioned  in  the  beginning 
of  my  letter,  yet  I  now  believe  it  as  likely 
1  may  defer  my  journey  for  fomc  days. 

Adieu,  my  dear  Bethel, 

Your's  ever, 

LIONEL  DESMONDj 


LET. 


LETTER      XV. 
TO    MR.    DESMOND. 

July  6th,  1791. 

ARE  you  quite  candid  with  me,  Def- 
niond  ? — And  are  you  really  going,  you 
know  not  when,  you  know  not  whither  ? — 
Is  it  quite  like  my  friend,  even  under  the 
influence  of  this  unhappy  paliJon,  to  be  fo 
very  unfettled  in  his  plans  ? — It  is  however, 
more  unlike  hi.n  to  be  difingenuous  ! — More 
unlike  him,  to  take  a  ftep  the  mod  injurious, 
that  can  he  devifed,  to  Geraldine  ! — I  mean 
going  to  France  in  purfuit  of  her — You  fure- 
ly  cannot  be  fo  indilcreet,  nay,  I  will  call  it 
io  cruel  as  to  meditate  this.— You  tell  me, 
that  if  I  write  by  the  return  of  the  port,  you 
(hall,  on  fecond  thoughts  probably  receive, 
my  letter  at  Sedgewood — I  write,  therefore  ; 
and  I  conjure  you  if  you  read  it  in  England, 
let  nothing  induce  you  to  crofs  the  Channel 
till  you  are  afTured  that  Geraldine  is  with  her 
hufband,  and  til!  there  is  no  longer  any  dan- 
ger of  thofe  reports  gaining  ground,  which, 
(I  cannot  conjecture  how,.)  have  certainly 
got  into  circulation  here  of  your  attachment 
to  her. 

On  the  fuppoiition,  thereforej  that  you 
forefce  all  this,  and  that  the  indccilion  and 
confullon  of  your  lad;  letter,  arofe,  not  from 
any  projc61.  of  this  kind,  but  merely  from 
the  painful  feniations  occafioned  by  ihe  firft 
(hock    of    Geraldine's    departure  1   write    a« 

ycu 


DESMOND,  137 

you  defire,  by  the  return  of  the  poft,  and 
direft  my  letter  to  Scdgewood. 

To  anfwer  firfl:  your  queftions — Geraldine 
has  not  yet  written  to  me;  but  (he  affured 
me  l>ie  would  write  the  moment  her  t-mbar- 
kation  was  certain,  and  again  from  Dieppe, 
by  the  return  of  the  packet. — Thefe  letters, 
therefore,  I  hourly  expe6l — I  have  very  anx- 
ioufly  watched  the  wind  ever  fince  the  day, 
•when  it  was  probable,  (he  would  reach  the 
coaft,  and  till  Thurfday  it  has  been  exa6l!y 
contrary,  and  fo  high  that  I  am  pcrfuaded 
fhe  did  not  fail  before  that  day,  though,  from 
the  change  fmce,  I  have  no  doubt  but 
that  fhe  is  by  this  time  far  on  her  way  to 
Paris. 

You  enquire,  whether,  on  the  day  of  her 
departure,  Geraldine  fpcke  of  you  ? — Yes  k 
my  friend  ;  but  it  was  with  that  guarded  pro- 
priety her  fituation  demanded. — She  fpoke  of 
her  obligations  to  you  ;  (lie  exp  efled  the  mcfl: 
earnefl:  wilhes  for  your  happinels,  and  .faid, 
**  When  1  am  fettled  in  France,  if, 
indeed,  I"  am  to  be  fettled,  i  fhall  take  the 
liberty  of  troubling  Air.  Defn.ond  with  a 
letter." — A  faint  blufh  trembled  on  her  cheek, 
and  her  voice  faultered  as  fhe  added,  "  He 
fpokc  I  think,  of  being  foon  in  France  himfclf, 
do  you  think  he  intends  it. 

I  replied,  that  you  had  talked  of  it  to  me 
in  your  letter,  but  that  I  knew  nothing 
certainly. — 1  faw  that  all  the  confcquences 
of  your  going  vvhcn  fhe  did,  occurred  to  her, 
yet,  perhaps,  flie  fecretly,  and  uitiiout  daring 
to  avow  it  even  to  herfelf,  wiflied  you  inight, 
while  fhe  perfuaded  herfelf  Ihe  feared  it — 'To 
cie,  however,  ftie  fpoke  of  it  no  more ;    but 

fimply 


138  DESMOND. 

{imply  dcfired  her  compliments  and  good  wifli- 
es  to  you  almofl:  the  moment  flie  bade  adieu 
to  me  and  her  fifter — This  I  did  not  mention 
to  you  before,  nor  ftiould  I  have  done  it 
now,  but  that  it  is  neceffary  to  be  fincere 
•when  you  qaedion  me  :  yet,  as  you  fome- 
times  proteR-,  thougli  I  think,  you  are  not 
uniformly  confiftent  in  your  declarations,  that 
you  do  not  even  wifli  (he  fliould  fed  for  yon 
a  partiality  which,  by  the  confcioufnefs  of 
its  impropriety,  might  render  her  more  unhap- 
py ;  I  wonder  you  fliould  afk  what  you  do 
not  define  to  know. 

I  thank  you  for  your  wiflics  to  promote 
me  to  the  favor  of  Mifs  Waverly,  but  have 
you  fufficiently    confidered    the  difference     of 

our  ages 1  am,    alas  !    in  my  fortieth  year 

— I  believe  Fanny  is  not  two-and  twenty  ; 
and  if  I  did  not  greatly  fufped  that  her 
little  flattering  heart  has  felt  more  than 
m:re  friendship  for  you,  I  could  never  hope 
to  become  acceptable  to  a  young  womarx 
furrounded  as  flie  is,  with  flattery  and  admi- 
ration ;  or,  admitting  it  probable,  would  it 
l^e  very  di'crcet  in  me  to  give  l^ouifa  a  mo- 
ther-in-law not  above  eleven  years  older  than 
herfelf— No,  my  dear  Defmond,  1  mufl:  not 
think   of  nymphs  of  twenty-one. 

Your  uncle  Danby,  who  is  the  mofl:  pro- 
found politician  that  frequents  the  coiTee-houf- 
cs  of  this  news-demanding  and  ne-vs-aflFotd- 
ing  city,  has,  within  this  lafl  fortnight,  been 
very  folicitoufly  enquiring  of  me  about  you; 
nor  could  his  curioflty  relative  to  your  mo- 
tions, have  been  fuperceded  by  any  thing  but 
his  greater  anxiety  about  the  motions  ot  the 
ICing   of  Frapce — Now   he   is  fo  entirely  en- 

groflTed 


DESMOND.  139 

grofTcd  by  his  lamenlations  over  difappointed 
treachery,  and  fo  concerned  that  the  intended 
evafion  of  Louis  X^  I  which  would  have 
plunged  France,  if  not  ajl  Europe,  into  an 
immediate  war,  has  failed,  that  he  has  not  a 
mind  capacious  enough  to  attend  to  your  inte* 
reds  too,  and  therefore  is  content  to  let  you 
be  as  romantic  and  abfurd  as  you  pieafe,  till 
it  is  decided  whether  th«  French  will  receive 
their  king  again,  or  immediately  declare  the 
nation  a  republic. 

It  is,  indeed,  a  fpcculation  Important  enough 
to  occupy  a  more  enlarged  and  enlightened 
undtiflanding  than  that  of  the  good  Major  ; 
and  never  were  the  eyes  of  the  European  na- 
tions fixed  on  a  more  interefling  fpe<Slacle. 

The  Major  and  I  differ  lefs  on  the  fubjefl  of 
politics  than  on  any  ether,  though  on  that  we 
are  far  from  thinking  alike  ;  it  is,  however, 
the  only  kind  of  converfation  I  can  long  hold 
with  him  ;  bccaufe  in  all  tli^it  relates  to  com- 
mon life,  there  is  in  h  s  ideas  and  expreifions, 
a  hardnefs  and  coarfcneis  thai  fometimes 
fliocks  and  always  repulfcs  me.  —Swift,  I  think, 
in  one  of  his  mofl  miianihropic  humours, 
fays,  while  he  execrates  th,-  human  race  ia 
general,  that  he  ftill  loves  John  and  Thomas. 
—-There  is  fomcihing  in  Mnjor  Danby  juft  the 
reverie  of  this  ;  he  would  not  care  it  John  and 
Thomas,  with  v/hom  he  has  been  living  in 
habits  of  friendly  intercourfe,  were  to  be  hang- 
ed to-morrow  ;  but  he  is  extremely  felicitous 
for  the  fate  of  nations  of  which  he  knows  not, 
nor  is  ever  likely  to  know  one  individual— 
But  even  there,  it  is  the  princes  and  nobles  of 
the  land,  for  whom  his  folicitudc  is  called 
jforth  f  for  as  for  les  gens  du  commune    he  thinks 


14^  DESMOND. 

they  are  by  no  means  worth  the  attention  of'a 
man  of  fenfe  and  fortune  i  and  that  the  world 
was  made  for  thofe  only,  to  whom  chance  has 
given  the  means  of  enjoying  a  good  table, 
and  certain  comforts  and  conveniences  of  life, 
for  which  he  has  a  very  decided  rcliPn. 

Of  courfc  theprefeni  arrangements  in  France 
are  very  obnoxious  to  him  ;  and  he  colieds 
round  him  a  little  band  of  minor  politicians, 
who  have  an  high  opinion  of  his  Oigacity, 
and  who  have  adopted,  from  Mr.  Burke,  un- 
der his  aufpices,  the  opinion,  that  if  fome 
fortunate  event,  (fueh  as  the  combination  of 
crowned  heads;  does  not  reAore  to  the  French 
»heir  former  government,  there  will  be  a  blank 
in  that  portion  of  the  map  of  Europe  that  nvas 
France. 

The  terrors  for  the  lives  of  the  rojal  family, 
which  thefe  perfons  affc*Sled  to  entertain  have 
now  fubfided  ;  but  the  lamentations  over  their 
imprifonment,  as  it  is  termed,  are  become 
more  clamorous  than  ever.-~'i'o  unprejudiced 
minds,  however,  the  condu£l  of  the  French, 
on  the  return  of  their  iil-adviicd  monarch, 
has  certainly  fomething  great  and  noble  in  it — 
I  own  I  am  one  of  thofe  Who  wilh  that  this 
magnanimity  of  chara<Sier  may  be  followed  by 
a  fteady  and  well  directed  purfuit  of  the  pre- 
fent  great  object,  the  formation  of  a  conftituti- 
on,  that,  without  its  defef^s,  may  unite  all 
the  advantages  peculiar  to  that  of  England, 
which,  even  with  thofe  flaws  and  imperfe^li- 
ons,  is  undoubtedly  the  beiT:  in  the  world — So 
far,  at  lead,  it  may  be  faid  to  deferve  that  cha- 
rader,  as  it  feems  to  fecure,  belter  than  any 
other,  two  great  objects  difcordant  in  their  na- 
ture,   and  therefore   not   often    very  peaceful 

neighbours 


frtlghbours— I  mean  the  dignity  of  the  ftate, 
iind  the  privileges  of  the  people — It  has  not  on- 
ly been  long  our  national  boaft,  but  admired 
and  analized  by  foreigners  Of  the  moft  enlarged 
and  enlightened  underftanding. — You  will  tell 
me,  pc'haps,  that  i?  is  beautiful  in  theory, 
but  defective  in  pra6licc  ;  and  are  not  even 
the  ordinances  of  God  expofed  to  a  fimilar  ob- 
jection ? — \V  e  have,  indeed,  a  marvellous 
proof  that  our  conftitution  has  inherent  excel- 
lence in  no  common  degree  ;  when  we  find  it,  _ 
even  in  the  days  of  luxury  and  corruption,  fo' 
Far  lufF.cicnt  for  all  the  great  purpofes  of  focie- 
ty  ;  that  amidrt  all  our  complaints,  it  may, 
I  believe,  be  truly  aflerted,  that  in  no  age  or 
country,  has  there  exifted  a  people,  to  whom 
general  happinefs  has  been  more  fairly  diflribu"- 
ted,  than  it  is  among  the  Englifh  of  the  pre-' 
fent  day. 

I  believe  you  are  fo  far  gone,  my  dear  Def- 
mond,  in  what  are  called  (but,  I  think,  im- 
properly called)  the  ne%u  doBrines,  that  you 
•would  conte  1:  this  opinion  with  me,  were  yoii 
not  juft  now  in  a  Hate  of  mind  that  renders 
every  other  concern,  but  thofe  of  Geraldine, 
indifferent  to  }ou,-*-I  am  afraid  my  friend's 
patnotifm  is  fo  inert,  at  prefent,  that  he  would 
not  care  if  all  the  world  were  enflaved,  fo  Ge- 
raldine was  but  free  ---However,  }ou  wi)l  re* 
Collcft,  that  whenever  you  are  able  and  wil- 
ling to  enter  theliAson  the  ether  fide,  I  am 
ready  to  meet  you  with  all  your  natural  acute- 
ncfs,  and  the  gid  ot  your  Frencii  friends,  on 
this  ground;  the  _general  good  of  tiie  l^ntifli 
tomntution  —This,  fuiely,  does  not  leffen,  in 
your  mind,  my  zeal  for  the  happinefs  of  the 
Tvholc  human   race--~It:  does  r.oi  make  you  fup- 

po.e. 


142  l>   E    S   M  O  N  ». 

pofe,  that  bccaufe  I  think  our  form  of  govern- 
ment good,  I  do  not,  therefore,  allow,  that 
there  ma  be  a  better;  nor  that  I  am  jealoua 
kft  a  neighbouring  nation  (hould  find  that 
better, — At  the  fame  time,  I  am  compelled  to 
fay,  that  the  proceedings  of  the  national  af- 
fembly,  fincc  the  death  of  Mirabeau,  gives  me 
too  little  reafon  to  believe  they  will—-!  dread 
the  want  of  unanimity— The  want  of  fomc 
great  leading  mind,  to  collc6l  and  condenfc 
the  patriotic  intentions  and  views  of  thofe  who 
really  wilh  only  the  falvation  of  their  country 
— Tne  defpotifm  of  fuperior  ability  is,  after  all, 
ncccffary  ;  and  it  is  the  only  defpotilm  to 
vhich  reafonaMe  beings  ought  to  fubmit. 

Enough  of  pohtics — Now,  again,  to  do- 
tneftic  concerns — though  you  give  me  but  lit- 
tle hope,  in  the  vague  way  in  which  you  write 
of  meeting  you  in  Kent  ;  1  ihali  in  a  few  days, 
fet  out  on  my  return  home  In  leaving  this 
place,  after  fo  !on_f^  a  flav,  I  regret  nobody 
but  my  ^air  Fanny  Waverly  ;  yet,  indeed, 
Defmond,  I  am  n-  t  m  love  with  her.  1  Ihall 
not,  however,  go  from  henct,  till  fome  ac- 
counts arc  ohtaintd  oi  Gcialdine,  which, 
■whenever  they  arrive,  I  will  tianfmit  to  you  by 
the  quickeft  coriveyance,  not  vit'irtandmg  all 
the  confufion  of  that  part  of  your  letter  which 
talks  of  your  addrefs.  Again,  I  afk  you,  are 
you  a£ling  witli  your  ulual  ingenuous  confi- 
dence towards  your  friend  ? 

E.  BETHEL. 

LET- 


>   E   S   M   0   K  ».  143 

LETTER    XVI. 
TO    MRS.    VERNEY. 

Bath,  July,  l8,  1791 

WHERE  arc  you,  my  dear  fifter  ?  an<l 
how  fViall  I  quiet  my  anxiety  about  you  ?  While 
Mr.  Bethel  was  here,  I  could  endure  it  better, 
becaufe  he  had  patience  to  liften  to  my  eager, 
and  fometimes  childifh  inquiries,  and  to  con- 
vince me,  by  reafon  and  argument,  that  there 
■was  not  time  to  hear  from  you,  or  that  a 
thoufand  circumftances  might  arife,  from 
winds  and  polls,  to  delay  your  letters,  but  now 
that  he  has  been  gone  two  days,  I  find  myfclf 
jnfupportably  wretched,  and  I  feel  my  wrctch- 
ednefs  the  more,  becaufe  I  am  compelled  to 
conceal  it. 

My   brother  was   married   yeflerday,  and  is 
departed  with  his  bride  for  Bexly  Hill,  vhere 
his    mother  and    mine,     with   your  unhappy 
Fanny,    are  to  meet  them  in   a  few  days — I 
am  heartily  glad   the  ceremony   is  over,    and 
this  very  important  matter,    which   has  fo  long 
occupied  and  agitated  my  mother,  at  length  ar- 
ranged.     As  her    fon   cannot   be  unmarried, 
(which  he  will  probably  dcfire  to   be  before  the 
end  of  the  week,  from  mere  ficklenefs  of  difpo- 
fition)  (he  will  now  fancy   him  fettled   in  the 
world,     and    I   hope  be   more    fettled   herfelf, 
though  I  have   lately  learned,  that   Mrs.  Fair- 
fax, who,   to  the  laft  moment,  murmured   in- 
ternally, at  giving  her  daughter  tea  common- 
er, (though  his  fortune   reconciled  her   to  the 
deficiency)  is  plotting  with  my   mother,    and 

making 


144  '   D    E    S    M   O   W  ». 

making  intcreft  with  all  hei  great  friends,  td 
procure  for  Mr.  Waverly  an  Irjfti  peerage—— 
The  preamble  to  the  patent  will  apply  with  in- 
finite propriety  to  my  brother,  when  it  fpeaks 
of/6/.f  good  fervices  to  his  country— 'However  f  in  the 
plentiful  fhowers  of  new  coronets  which  dai- 
ly fall,  one,  I  doubt  not,  will  find  its  way  to 
his  head  ;  but,  I  fuppofe,  a  great  difficulty 
will  be  to  determine  what  title   he  (hall  ailumc 

Every  pretty  name,    and  words  of  elegant 

termination,    m'ville,    and  wcjc/,  zndion,  and 
fordy  and  bury^  and  wick,     feem  to  be  already 
monopolized  and   engaged  ;    but,     if  he  were 
not  my  brother,    I  fhould    venture  to    propofc 
the  very  proper   appellation  of   Baron  Weafber- 
cock— Now  don'r,  my  dear    Tcraldine,    put  on 
an  air  of  difpleafure  ;    I  would  not  be  flippant 
about  tbcfe  relations  of  ours,  though  the  whole 
courtlhip  that  preceded  rhs   marriage  has  been 
to   me   ,1  courfc  of   inexprelTiI)le    torment;    but 
when    I  refli'cl  on  their  '^ehaviour  to  you, 
find  it    impoifible    to   command    myfelf — The 
cold,    fupercilious  infolence  of  that  antiquated 
"piece  of  afFeStion,  Mrs   t-'airfax,     with  whom, 
there  is  no  crime  fo  great  as  being  in   inconve- 
nient circumflances  ;     nor  any  recoinniendati- 
on  (o    irrefiUible  a>  riches  and     itit-  -The  pride 
and  arrogance  of  her  eldeft  daug  ;te^,  now  my 
filler-in-law,   who,    under  an  .frected  a;id   over 
acied  mildnefb  of  manners,    believes  that  the 
world  was    made  only  to  do   homage    to   her 
charms  ;    and  tiie  yet  more  ofFcnfive  conceit  cf 
Anaftatia,    whofe  whipt  fyllabubs  of  fcicnce  fhe 
compels    e\'erv   one    to   taile   and   to   admire, 
form  together  fi'ch  a  group,    as  it    is  quite   im- 
poPiihle   not  lo   fly  from   if  one   could.— But  I, 
alas  !    am  chained  to  it     under  pain   of  being 

«<   put 


DESMOND.  145 

**  put  into  cverlafting  hberty" — for,  I  believe, 
•were  my  mother  to  know  how  very  much 
I  diflike  thefc  people,  Ihe  would,  without 
much  coiopun6tion,  difcard  me,  and  put  me 
to  board  foiTiewhere  or  other  on  the  interefl: 
of  my  foitune — and  can  I  wonder  at  this  af- 
ter her  behaviour  to  you  ? 

You  tell  me;  however,  that  I  ought  to  bear 
whatever  is  nifli£led  by  a  parent's  hand  ;  and 
fo,  my  dear  Geraldine,  I  aai  learnmg  as  fall 
as  I  can,  to  check  the  natural  inipetuofuy 
ot  my  nature,  and  finhten  on  one  cheeh^  to  turn 
the  other.— \  will  not  indulge  any  of  thofe  fa-' 
tiricai  failles  that  you  have  (o  often  difap- 
.proved,  but  grow  'bftly,  fweetiy  fcntimental, 
like  the  amiable  Anailacia  ;  and,  when  Ihe  is 
colleding  round  her  all  the  men  in  the  room 
(whether  old  or  young,  ugly  or  handfome, 
fools  or  wits)  by  the  pretty  languilhing  airs 
(lie  gives  herfelf,  and  totally  negleOiing  everv 
one  elfe,  with  a  rude  indifference,  ab  to  then" 
opinions,  which  is  often  exirei"n;;ly  Ihocking  ; 
I  will  v;ry  humbly  take  my  llation  behind  her, 
and  lludy  thofe  inimitable  graces  wliich  ren- 
der her  fo  attratVive. — She  treats  me  like  an 
infignihcint  ciiild— and  fometimcs  in  the  drav.'- 
ling  quality  tone,  which  fhe  affe^vts,  fpcakinj 
in  the  root  of  her  mouth  as  if  ilie  had  loir  her 
palate,  (he  calls  me  poor,    dear  little  Fanny  I 

Cerrainly    I    have    not    twenty    thoufand 

pounds  as  Ihe  has — nor  have  I  a  genius  to 
vvrite  charades,  fongs  and  fonnets — nor  to  act 
plays,  and  read  in  pubhc.-— 1  hope,  however, 
you  don't  think  I  fay  all  this  from  envy,  for 
I  affure  you,  that  with  her  humble  three  thoa- 
fand  pounds,  and  inferior  advantages  of  every 
kind,    poor,    dea^,    little     Fanny     would    not 

Vol.  II.  H  chant-e 


146  DESMOND. 

change  with  the    accompHftied    Anailatia. — 1 
never  fcemed  much   worth  her  notice  in  any 
way,  not  even  an  ohje£t  of  her  contemptuous 
pity,    till   Mr.    Bethel    (hewed    me    fo   much 
fiiendly  attention,  and  was  fo  much  with  me. 
— Mr.   l^etliel   is,    you   know,    related   to   the 
Fairfax  family,  and  though   it   is  well   under- 
ilood  that  he  does  not   intend   to  marry  again, 
and  is,  on  account  of  his  two  children,  a  man 
whom    Mifs  Anadatia    would    not   accept  of, 
yet  could  Ihe  not  bear  the  preference    he   has. 
always   fhcwn   me  ;    and   has  (ometimes   been 
unable  to  reprcfs  her   indignation  at  his  want 
of    tafls. — Since    he  has   been   gone,    fhe  has 
perceived   the  dejection    of    my     fpirits,    and 
w^henevcr  fhe  has  had  an  opportunity  has  af- 
fected to  condole  with  me  on  the  departure  of 
my/age  lovev — and  my   difnppoiiiiinetii. — It  is  in 
fuch  converfation,    if  convet'ation  it   may  be 
called,  that  I  am   to  pafs  the  tedious  days  of 
the  next  n;cnth,  with  the  new  married  couple, 
and   their    relations  and   acquaintance. — Oh  ! 
Geraldine,   why  cannot   I   dedicate  ihefc  days 
to  you  ? 

Mr,  Bethel  is  gone  back  to  liis  houfe  in 
Kent ;  he  told  me  fonie  time  before  the  cruel 
event  of  your  being  fent  for  to  France,  that 
his  friend  DeOnond  was,  he  believed,  coming 
to  Bath  :  but  the  moft  unaccountable  circum- 
flance  of  my  mother's  fufpicions  being  excit- 
ed about  him,  has,  as  1  gather  from  Mr. 
Bethel's   hints,    entirely    put    an   end    to    that 

projciSl and  h=e   is   now  gone,  his  iricnd 

knovvs  net  whitlier  ;  but  he  fays,  moft  pro- 
bably into  the  North  ot  England  (where  he 
has  many  connexions  J  for  tlie  rc:l  of  tlie 
Summer. 

I  o^vn 


DESMOND.  147 

I  own  I  regret,  though  peihaps  I  ought  ra- 
ther to  rejoice  at,  not  feeing  him  here  ;  but 
do  not  fancy,  my  dear  fifter,  that  this  wilh 
has  any  thing  to  do  with  that  partiahty  for 
Dcfmond,  which  1  was  once  flmple  enough 
to  indulge,  and  partly  to  avow — No  predilec- 
tion of  that  fort  can  laft  long,  after  a  convic- 
tion of  its  never  being  returned,  and  I  mud 
have  the  mofl  perfe6l  conviQion  of  that,  in 
regard  to  Mr.  Defmond,  who'e  heart  is  cer- 
tainly devoted  to  another — -though  who  tliat 
other  is,  it  is  better,  perhaps,  for  neither  of  us 
to  enquire. 
•    The   idle   rumours  that  had   been  fpread  on 

that  fu  ^je£l^,  are  now  dving  away. Other 

Hones,  equally  gratifying  to  the  curious  ma- 
lignity of  the  people,  who  call  themfelves  the 
w^orld,  have  fucceeded  i  and  except  fome  far- 
cafms  on  the  part  of  A-Irs  Fairfax- — fome  af- 
fected concern  on  that  of  ivfifs  AuadsMa,  and 
fome  airs  of  confequential  ar^d  myilerious  ap- 
prehenfion  from  the  new  Airs.  Wavcrly,  I 
have  h;ard  nothing  about  Defaio  rd's  Welch 
expedition,  on  which  you  will  therefore,  i 
hope,  make  yourfilf  eafy. 

One  of  the  ftorics  that  for  fome  days  en- 
grofled  the  converfation  of  the  Bath  circles, 
till  It  was  fupeiceded  yeflerday  by  the  fplendid 
wedding  of  Mr.  Waverly,  was  the  fad  cala- 
mity that  has  befail-n  poor  Mifs  PLlford  ;  you 
know,  I  believe,  tliat  fix  or  eight  weeks  fince, 
{he  departed  (rom  hence  in  order  to  make  her 
ufi.ial  Summer  four  among  her  illutJrIous 
friends,  for  the  la.l  time  before  her  marriage  ; 
and  having  llald  a  week  with  one  friend,  and 
a  week  wnh  .anotliei,  and  ten  days  with  a 
third,  her  lover,  Dr,  M'DoNgal,  was  to  have 
H  2  n-.t 


148  D    E    S    M    O    N    D; 

met  her  at  the  moll  northern  of  thefe  vlfits, 
and  with  no  other  guard,  "  Tave  her  own  pu- 
rity"— Ihe  was  to  entrufl:  herielf  to  him  to  go 
into  ifcotland,  where  his  family  refide,  and 
Avhere  Ihe  was  to  have  become  Mrs.  M*Dou- 
gal. 

As  none  of  thofc  friends,  with  whom  fhc 
formerly  correfponded,  heard  from  her,  they 
concluded  that  thefe  arrangements  were  prof- 
peroufly  fucceeding;  and  within  thefe  ten  or 
fourteen  days,  they  have  been  looking  with 
impatience  for  an  account  of  the  celebration 
at  Edinburgh  of  thefe  happy  nuptials — When 
iuddenly  a  report  prevails  among  the  acquain- 
tance of  the  Do£lor,  that  on  his  arrival  four 
or  five  weeks  fmce,  at  the  feat  of  his 
Father's,  from  whence  he  was  to  have  met 
his  future  bride  at  York,  he  received  the  very 
unexpected  intelligence,  that  an  uncle  who 
had  been  many  years  in  the  Weft-Indies, 
where  he  had  a  wife  and  a  Ton,  and  from  whofe 
riches  no  expectations  were  therefore  formed, 
had  buried  both  within  the  courfe  of  eigh- 
teen months,  and  at  length  followed  them 
himfelf,  leaving  about  forty  thoufand  pounds 
between  Dj.  Al'Dougal  and  his  filter,  a 
widow,  not  young,  and  without  children — 
fo  that  it  was  probable  the  Do6lor  would 
pofTefs  the  whole. — In  confequence  of  this  ac- 
cumulation of  good  fortune,  report  goes  on 
to  fay,  that  Mifs  Elford  has  lolt  her  admirer, 
who  now  feels  it  unncceliary  to  unite  himfelf 
to  a  woman  whom  he  does  not  love,  in  or- 
der to  forward  his  intcretl  in  his  profeifion 
. — and  that  the  deferted  damfcl,  in  the  laft 
defpair  at  this  difappoimment,  cannot  bear 
to  ibew  herlclf  in  a  place  which  fhe  Icfi  with 

fuch 


DESMOND,  149 

fuch  very  different  hopes,  but  Has  hid  heiTeif 
and  her  blarted  expectations  in  feme  remote 
part  of  England, 

It  is  at  once  amuung  and  mortifying,  to 
remark  the  fecret  pleafure  with  which  the  /&/- 
difmit  friends  of  poor  Mils  Klford  ralate  this. 
— The  day  before  Mr.  Waverly's  marriage, 
an  afiembly,  chiefly,  confifling  of  the  tabbies, 
who  are  the  delight  of  my  mother  and  Mrs. 
Fairfax,  was  held  at  the  houfe  of  the  latter; 
and  while  amid  their  cards,  tliis  fertile  fubject 
was  introduced,  I  could  not  but  fmite  at, 
while  I  regret,  the  fallacy  of  profcffed  friend- 
fhip,  and  the  wonderful  malignity  of  human 
nature. — The  good  fortune  of  Dr.  M'Dourra!, 
railed  all  their  fpleen. — Yet  I  could  fee  tliat 
they  fecretly  rejoiced,  that  their  **  wortiiy 
friend>"  A4irs  EUord,  was  not  to  fliare  it, 
M'hile  as  if  to  revenge  lier  caufe,  they  loaded 
the  poor  Do6lor  with  every  abuGve  epithet 
which  their  fertile  maiice  could  fuggeil — and 
with  the  mofl  fulfome  nffedation  of  pity  towards 
the  deferted  Ariadne,  they  exprelT^d  a  terrible 
abhorrence  of  the  cruelty  of  this  modern  The- 
feus  ;  who  had,  as  one  of  them  afiirmed, 
left  her  in  a  dreary  part  of  Scotland,  where 
he  had  appointed  to  meet  her  ;  but  where, 
inflead  of  himfelf,  (he  was  faluted  by  a  cold 
letter,  taking  leave  of  her  for  ever — part  of 
which  letter  this  well-informed  gentl:womaii 
even  repeated, 

I  oblcrved,  that  during  this  converfation, 
my  mother,  who  in  fuch  fort  of  confabula- 
tions is  ftidom  backward,  was  unufually  re- 
ferved— fhe  faid  it  ryug!:t  be  all  very  true,  for 
(he  had  no  intelligence  from  dear  Philadelphia 
to  the  contrary  ;    but  ftiil  Ihe  was  willing  to 


15°  DESMOND. 

hope  for  the  heji. — You  muft  agree  with  me, 
my  dear  fifter,    that   my  mother  is   not  very 
apt  to   keep  to   herfelf  her  knowledge  on  any 
topic,  particuhTrly  when  (lie  fancies,  or  knows, 
Ihe  pofTefTes,  on  the  lubjecl  in  difcuffion,   more 
information   than    thofe   who   are  fpeaking  of 
it — Neverihelefs,    I    am    convinced,    that  ftie 
on  this   knows   a    great  deal    more   than   fhe 
chufes  to  tell ;    and  has,  for  once,    fome  rca- 
ion   for   fiience,    fo   ftrong  as   to  conquer  her 
defire  of  giving   her  knowledge   to  her  admir- 
ing auditors. — How    flie  ftiould  come    by  this 
iniormatlon,  indeed,  I  cannot  guefs  ;    or  why, 
if  (he  correfponds  with   her  dear  Philadelphia, 
it  fhould  all   of  a  fudden   be   kept   fo  profound 
a    fccret— But   conjedurcs  on   this    head    are 
nfelefs,  nor  is  it  a  matter  that  much  deferves 
the  trouble  of  inveftigation. — My  mother,  per- 
haps,  having   changed    her   bofom   friend    (for 
one,     of    what   the    conmion    people    call    a 
crony,  (he  nuifl:  always  have)    has  a   mind  to 
difmiis  her  quietly,  and  not  b^  joininsj  in  any 
farcafni  again!!:  her,   irritate  her  (efpecially  in 
"thefc  very   irritable  moments)    to   difclofe   the 
purport    of  thefe   long   conferences   which    (he 
and   Mifs  Elrord   ufed  to  have  toget/ier  ;    dur- 
iing  wliicb,    I  believe,    there  vTas   no  tranfac- 
tion  of  her  pall  iifc  that  fhe  did  not  relate  to  this 
dear  Philadelphia  ;     nor  any   meafures   tor  her 
future  condud,  in  regard   to  her  family,    that 
fhe  was   not   fuffered  to  di£tat:e.— The  elderly 
ladies   have   a    mortal   averfion   to  great  inti- 
macy between  two  girb—and  many  have  been 
the  chidings  and  remonflraices  i  have  endured, 
for  walking  and    whifpering  and   gigling    with 
?he  young  people  of  my  own  age,    who  have 
happened  to   be   thrown  in   my   way. — 'Twas 

for 


DESMOND.  151 

for  no  good,  my  mother  ufcd  to  fay,  that 
thefe  violent  intimacies  fubfilkd — I  wonder 
what  good  ever  arifes  from  the  caballing  of 
a  dowager,  and  an  old  fpinfter — I  dare  fay, 
it  thefe  conferences  could  he  fairly  related, 
thofe  of  the  Aliffes  would  be  found  the  moft 
innocent  of  the  two;  for  theirs,  I  believe, 
generally  turns  upon  the  topic  of  gaiety,  va- 
nity and  love— and  thofe  of  the  ladies  of  a 
certain  age,  upon  hatred,  malice,  and  all 
LUTcharitai}lenc's. 

Ah  !  my  deared  filler,  while  I  am  writing 
all  this  where  are  you  ?  Your  fliort  incoherent 
letter*  informed  me,  indeed,  that  you  were 
fafe  as  far  as  Rouen  ;  but  what  has  happened 
fines  ?  —I  tremble  at  every  fentence  of  French 
news  ;  and  the  people  among  whom  1  live 
are  fuch  inveterate  and  decided  enemies  to 
the  revolution,  that  they  exaggerate  wicH 
malicious  delight,  all  the.  mifchief  they  hear 
ot,  and  reprefent  the  place  whither  you  are 
going  as  a  fccne  of  anatchy,  famine,  and 
bloodlhed  — -1  have  heard  lloiies  that  I  am 
fure  are  improbable,  and  I  hope  impoffible--- 
and  u'hen  my  mother,  the  other  day,  was 
relating  one  of  them  "  on  the  authority  of 
a  dear  friend,  cf  a  dear  friend  of  her?,  a  Lord 
fomebody,  jufl  come  through  Taris  in  his  way 
from  Itaiy"— I  could  not  helji  faying---**  And 
you  believe  all  tlii*  Madam  ?  ' 

*'  Believe  it  girl  ?  — -yes  to  be  fure-— I  not 
only  believe,  but  know  it.'' 

*•  And  yet,  Midam,  it  Was  at  fuch  a  time, 
and  configncd  to  fuch  a  man  as  your  fon-in- 
law,  Verney,  that  you  infilled  upon  fending 
your  daughier,  Geraldine,  to  Paru." 

*  which  docs  not  a^r-pear, 

I  don't. 


J52  D    E    S    M    O    N   ». 

I  don't  know  that  I  ever  recolle<fl;  feeing  my 
mother  fo  angry,  nor  can  I  guefs  when  her 
indignation  for  my  impertinence  would  have 
fubfuied — if  luckily  for  me,  the  upholilcrer 
had  not  that  moment  entered  with  the  patterns 
of  fome  linens  and  chintz  of  which  the  new 
furniture  at  Bexley  Hill  is  to  confifl. — Her 
daughter  Geraldine,  and  her  daughter  Fanny, 
were  in  a  moment  equally  forgotten ;  and 
Hie  fent  in  a  great  hurry  for  her  fon  to 
call  a  council  with  Mifs  Fairfax  on  this  im- 
portant point.- A  very  ferious  debate    en- 

I'ued,  which,  as  Mr.  Waverly  was  of  the 
party,  I  knew  would  not  very  fpeedily  end  : 
and  before  they  could  fettle  the  firfl:  queflion, 
whether  the  chintz  furniture  of  the  weft  bed 
cliambcr  fliould  be  lined  with  fky  blue,  or 
grafs  green,  I  made  my  efcape. 

I  direift  this  letter  to  the  care  -of  the  banker 
nt  Paris,  v/ho  Mr.  Bethel  aiTurcs  me  will 
know  your  abode  there,    and  carefully  convey 

it  to* you. Oh  !  how  anxioufly  I  long  to 

hear  from  you how    painfully  does  my 

imagination  dwell  on  the  diificulties  you  may 
encounter,  unprotected  as  you  arc  ;  yet  how 
decidedly  convinced  I  am,  that  the  gi'eatell 
evil  tliat  can  befall  you  would  be  meeting  with 
your  hufoand. 

It  is  with  a  bleeding  heart,  my  dear  Geral- 
dine, I  fay  this  j  and,  with  a  bleeding  heart 
I  await  your  letters,  which  heaven  grant  may 
bring  mc  better  accounts  of  you  than  my  at- 
frlghted  fancy  fuggefts. 

May  heaven  protect  you,  and  all  you  love. 

FANMY  WAVERLY. 
LET- 


DESMOND.  l^-j 

LETTER     XVIT. 
TO   MISSWAVERLY. 

MeuJon,  Auguft  i6tb5  lyjr, 

ONCE  more,  my  deareft  fifter,  I  have 
sgain  a  tranfient  refpite,  after  fuch  a  feries 
of  mental  and  bodily  fufterlngs  as  I  have  not 
in  my  former  letters'^',  very  fully  infiRed 
upon,  becaufe  it  was  enough  for  me  to  en- 
dure them,  without  tearing  to  pieces,  by 
the  defcription,  the  fenfible  heart  of  my 
Fanny. 

I  will  now,  however,  when  I  can  look 
back  upon  thefe  fituations  and  fenfations  with 
fome  degree  of  calmi»efs,  recapitulate  briefly 
my  little  travels,  the  account  of  which  muft 
have  been  broken  and  disjointed,  by  the  hur- 
ried and  incoherent  letters  I  wrote  from  Rouen 
and  Paris.      ^ 

I  need  not  remind  you  of  the  flate  of  lan- 
guor in  which  T  landed  at  Dieppe,  after  what 
was,  they  told  me,  a  quick  pailage  of  feven- 
teen  hours. — I  expecfled,  the  next  morni:uT, 
to  have  fcen  fome  lymptons,  in  tiie  town, 
of  the  mifery,  which  I  was  aflured,  the  re- 
volution "had  occafioned  j  but  every  thino-  is 
the  fame  as  it  was  when  v/q  pafled  this  way  to 
England,  fix  years  fince,  except  that,  initead 
of  proceiTions  of  /t"/  Ccirmes  dechauffts-,  on  les 
^eres    de  /'  AJJbmpiicny  we    now  fee  fmall  par- 

*  \Vhi.;h  do  not  appear.. 


1^4  »    E    5    M    O    N    ft. 

ties  of  armed  citizens  parading  tlie  ftreets, 
at  certain  hours,  as  they  go  to  their  exercife, 
or  to  relieve  the  guard  ;  much  better  looking 
men,  and  much  litter  to  be  entrufled  with 
the  care  of  their  town  than  the  miferable 
looking,  half-flarved  foldiers,  that  I  remember 
to  have  feen  exercifing  on  the  walls  when  we 
were  here  before,  who  feemed  likely,  frora 
actual  want,  to  pillage,  rather  than  protect 
the  coall — ^Thefe,  on  the  contrary,  are  all 
men  armed  voluntarily  to  defend  themfelves, 
their  families,  and  their  property  *,  and,  in  a 
fhort  time,  when  the  advantages  of  freedom 
are  felt,  and  the  difadvantages  of  obtaining  it 
by  force  forgotten,  thefe  aflbciations  will  be 
as  Smollett  defcribes  his  countrymen,  in  one  of 
the  mofl  beautiful  odes  that  ever  was  writ- 
ten.— ' 

"  With  hearts  refulv'd,  and  hands  prepar'd, 
The  blelhngs  they  enjoy— to  guard." 

That  thefe  bleflings  are  not  yet  fully  felt, 
,feems  to  be  the  only  complaint  that  the  ene- 
mies to  the  freedom  of  France  can  alledge 
againft  it ;  as  if,  immediately  after  fuch  a 
change,  all  could  fubfide  into  order,  and 
*<  every  man  fit  down  under  his  own  vine  and 
bis  ovv^i  fig-tree." 

We  know,  from  daily  experience,  that 
even  in  a  private  family,  a  change  in  its  oeco- 
nomy  or  its  domeltics,  dillurbs  the  tranquiliity 
of  its  members  for  fome  time — It  mull  furely 
then  happen,  to  a  much  greater  degree,  in  a 
great  nalion,  whofe  government  is  fu(^denly 
<Ji£blved  by  the  refolutiou  of  tlie  people  ;  and 

which. 


DESMOND.  155 

v/nich  In  taking  a  new  form,  has  fo  many 
jarring  intereRs  to  conciliate — A  country  too, 
where  genuine  patriotifni  having  been  always 
a  prohibited  fentiment,  every  man,  whofe 
property  or  talents  give  him  weight,  has  been 
fo  long  accuftomed  to  confult  his  own  interefl, 
that  the  facrifices  to  be  made  for  general  good 
appear  too  difficult  to  the  individual,  and 
he  {brinks,  from  private  inconvenience, 
Avhich  is  certain  and  immediate,  when  remote 
though  general  benefit  is  to  be  obtained 
by  it. 

We  began  our  land  journey  the  next  day, 
fave  one,  after  our  landing — Some  little 
difficulties  occurred  about  the  number  of 
poft-horfes  that  were  to  draw  our  carriage, 
on  account  of  fix  perfons  being  in  it  ;  though, 
of  thofe  f^-a,  three  were  infants  in  lap  (thefe 
arrangements,  which  fcem  fo  ftrange  and 
teizing  to  the  Englifb,  are,  I  imagine,  a  rem- 
nant of  former  defpotifm,  which  gave  the 
profits  of  the  pofls  to  government  at  its  own 
difcretion). 

The  country  is  very  fine  around  Rouen 
Hills,  rcfcmbling  the  high  downs  in  Suilex, 
arife  immediately  around  it,  but  the  prof- 
pe£l  from  the  fummlt  of  that  to  which  the 
road  led  us,  is  infinitely  more  beautiful 
than  any  I  ever  faw — The  Seine  winding 
through  a  lovely  vale  of  great  extent,  and 
the  port  of  Rouen  crowded  with  veflcls — 
the  town  and  luburbs — the  old  and  magni- 
ficent cathedral all  embofomed  with  trees, 

wnth  the  finefl  meadows  beyond  them,  and 
an  infinite  number  of  cIuAwin  feattered 
through  the  whole  landfcape,  render  it 
altogetlicr    fuch     a    view     as     I     never    faw 

ecjualed 


156         .  D   E    S    M    O    N   15. 

equaled  In  England  ;  but,  indeed,  I  have  not, 
in  my  own  country,  been  a  great  traveller. 

On  the  fummit  of  the  hill,  and  juft  as  the 
road  led  along  a  chalky  hollow,  which  had 
been  cut  to  eafe  the  fteepnefs  of  the  accli- 
vity, we  were  met  by  a  proceflion  of  priefts, 
chanting  folemnly  in  Latin,  and,  as  I  appre- 
hend,   carrying  the   hod  to  fome   lick   perfon 

. They  were  preceded  by   a  fmail  party  of 

the    national    guard,     in    their    uniform    and 

under   arms-' The    priefts,    one    of    whom 

carried  a  large  crucifix  of  filver,  gilt,  were 
to  the  number  of  eighteen  or  twenty,  all 
men  in  the  flower  of  their  age,  and  remark-, 
ably  well-looking — I  ordered  the  poilillions 
to  flop,  and  my  fervants  to  pull  off  their 
hats,  while  the  prccelhon  palled,  which  had 
in  it  a  folcmnity  particularly  affedling ;  as 
the  dirge  they  were  fmging  in  excellent  voi- 
ces, fell,  or  M'as  refumed  in  aweful  refpon» 
fes  echoing  along  tiie  hollow  cliffs  of  chalk 
——The  mournful  muiic  v/as  in  unifon  with 
the  mehinchoiy  temper  of  my  mind,  and  I 
involuntarily  flied  tears,  as  I  apolfrophifed 
the  departing  fpirit,  to  whom  thefe  religious 
men  were  carrying  the  facred  wafer,  which, 
in  their  opinion,    fecuves  its  future  happinefs 

. «  Poor  trembling  being  !"  faid  I,    "thou 

art,  perhaps,  about  to  quit,  reluOantly,  a 
world,  to  which  fome  tender  connexion, 
fome    fcene    of    promifcd    happinefs    attaches 

hee  ! With  relutSlant  and  fearful  heart, 

thcu  wilt  receive  what  is  to  be,  in  thy  opi- 
nion,   a  pafsport  to   the  bofom  of  thy  God  ! 

— v/hile    I,    a    wretched   wanderer,    in    a 

wretched  wcrld,  would  mofl  willingly  ex- 
change   fituations   with   thee  j    3ud   v  ith   thy 

faith 


D    E    S    M    O    N    IJ.  I^'J 

faith  and  thy  profpecls,  lay  down,  even  with 
pleafure,  a  life  which,  according  to  the  courfe 
of  nature,  may  be  very  long,  according  to 
all  prefent  probability,  muft  be  vjcry  miferable." 

Thefe  thoughts  occured  as  the  figures  flow- 
ly,  and  with  down-cafl  eyes,    pafled  clofe  to 

my  coach -The    proceflion    was  finiflied 

by  another  fmall  party  of  the   national  guard 

"  All  religion,  however,"    faid  I,    "  is 

not  aboliflied   in    France they   told    me  it 

was  defpifed  and  trampled  on  ;  and  I  never 
enquired,  as  every  body  ought  to  do>  when 
fuch  aflertions  are  made — Is  all  this  true  ?" 

As  we  proceeded,  nothing  could  appear 
more  beautiful  than  the  extenfive  plains  of 
Normandy,  which,  under  all  the  difadvan- 
tages  of  bad  cultivation,  and  the  tumults  ex- 
ifting  thefe  lalt  two  year?,  which  are  certainly 
inimical  to  the  labour  of  the  hufbandman, 
do,  literally,  laugh  and  fing This  ap- 
pearance of  plenty  would  convince  me  of 
the  truth  of  what  Mr.Defmond  once  aflured 
me,  if  I  ever  could  doubt  of  fa6ls  which  I 
hear  from  fo  accurate  and  candid  a  judge  ;  I 
mean  that  the  defi^ciency  of  bread,  f/a  dijfette 
du  pain ^  which,  in  eighty- nine  and  ninety, 
was  fo  feverely  felt  at  Paris,  was  artificial, 
and  created  by  thofe,  who  not  only  had  the 
power  to  monopolize  for  their  own  profit, 
but  others  who  had  it  in  view  to  reduce  the 
people  by  famine  to  obedience——  to  turn  their 
thoughts  from  the  acquifition  of  freedom,  to 
the   prefervation,    on  any  terms,    of  exillence. 

It  has  been  afHnr.ed,  and  never  contradi^- 
^,  that  the  civil  magiflrates  of  Paris,  and 
the  intendants  of  the  provinces,  had  caufed 
the  corn  to  be   cut  down,  i^^  t'l*^  green  blade 

..-The- 


158  D    E    S    M    0    N   B. 

The  effe^l  of  this  atrocious   wickednefs, 

was,  however,  exacftly  the  reverfe  of  that 
which  was  intended — The  tranfa£lion  was 
difcovered,  and  can  we  wonder  it  was  re- 
lented ? — ^The  wretched  projectors  fell  vic- 
tims to  the  indignation  of  the  people  j  and 
the  cry  of  '*  du  pain,  du  pain,  pour  nous 
&  pour  nos  enfans,*"  was  loudly  urged  in 
the  ears  of  royalty,  when  royalty  was  believed 
to  have  encouraged  fuch  atrocity. 

While  humanity  drops  her  tears  at  the  fad 
ftories  of  thofe  individuals  who  fell  the  vic- 
tims of  popular  tumult  fo  naturally  excited, 
pity  cannot  throw  over  thefe  tranfadlions  a 
veil  thick  enough  to  conceal  the  tremendous 
decree  of  juflice,  which,  like  "  the  hand 
writing  upon  the  wall,"  will  be  feen  in  co- 
lours of  blood,  and  however  regretted,  muft 
ftill  be  acknowledged  as  the  hand  of  jultice. 

This  excurfion  into  the  field  of  politics, 
where,  for  the  mofl  part,  only  thiftles  can  be 
gathered,  and  where  we,  you  know,  have  al- 
ways been  taught  that  women  fhould  never 
advance  a  ftep,  may,  perhaps,  excite  your 
furprize**— You  will  poflibly  wonder  that, 
under  the  preflure  of  thofe  evils  which  fo 
lately  furrounded  me,  I  fliould,  for  a  mo- 
ment,   find   my   fpirits   enough   difengaged  to 

enter  into  difquifitions  fo   little  attractive 

The  truth  is,  that  whenever  I  am  not  fufter- 
ing  under  any  immediate  alarm,  my  mind, 
pofleffing  more  elallicity  than  I  once  thought 
poflible,  recovers  itfelf  enough  to  look  ar  the 
objeds  around  me,  and  even  to  contemplate 
with  fome  degree  of  compofure,  my  own  pre- 
fent   circumftances,    and    the    profped   before 

*  Bread,  bread,   for  us  and  our  children. 


©    E    S    M    0    N    B.  159 

me,  which  would  a  few,    a  very  few  mouths 
fjnce,  have  appeared  quite  infupportable. 

It  is  to  my  fifler,  to  my  fecond  felf  1  write, 
and  from  her  I  do  not  fear  fuch  a  remark 
.  as  was  made  on  fome  French  woman  of  fafhi- 
on,  (who  I  cannot  now  recoiled)  who,  being 
feparated  from  her  hulband,  changed  her  re- 
ligion  to   that   (whatever    it  was)    which    he 

did  not  profefs "  She  has   done  it," 

faid  a  wit,  "  that  fhe  might  never  meet  her 
hufband  either  in  this  world  or  the  next'* 
I  »  Thus  it  might,  perhaps,  be  faid, 
tliat  I  determine  never  to  think  on  any  arti- 
cle (even  on  thefe,  whereon  my  age  and  fex 
might  exempt  me  from  thinking  at  all)  like 
Mr.  Verney ;  and  therefore,  as  he  is,  he 
Knows  not  why  a  very  furious  ariftocrat,  that 
with  no  better  reafon,  become  democrat. 
But  I  do  aflure  you,  my  Fanny,  that  how- 
ever ridiculous  Mr.  Verwey's  adherence  may 
feem  to  the  caufe  of  perfons  of  whom  he 
knows  nothing  but  their  vices  and  their  follies, 
my  inconfequential  opinion  would  not  be  put 
in  the  other  fcale,  were  I  not  convinced,  that 
every  principle,  all  that  we  owe  to  God,  our 
fellow  creatures  and  ourfelves,  is  clearly  on  the 
other  fide  the  queftion. 

This  muft  be  from  convicftion,    for  it  can- 
not be   from   the  prejudice   of  education 

n.ve  were  always  brought  up  as  if  we  were 
defigned  for  wives  to  the  Vicars  of  Bray— - 
My  father,  indeed,  would  not  condefcend  to 
fuppofe  that  our  fcntiments  were  worth  form- 
ing or  confulting  ;  and  with  all  my  refpect 
for  his  memory,  I  caunot  help  recclle<^ing 
that  he  was  a  very  Turk  in  principle,  and 
liardly    allowed    women    any    prettnfions    to 

fouls. 


i6©  D  E  s  M  o  N  n. 

fouls,  or  thought  them  worth  more  care  thaw 
he  beftowed  on  his  horfes,  which  were  to  look 
lleek,  and  do  their  paces  well. 

As  to  our  mother,  I  am  afraid  our  filial 
duty,  highly  as  I  venerate  the  principle,  can- 
not conceal  from  us,  that  fhe  fufFered,  in  her 
department,  no  fentiments  to  be  adopted 
which  did  not  fquare  wich  the  fubftantial 
rules  of  domeflic  policy;  for  every  fmgle 
man  of  large  fortune,  though  decrepid  with 
age,  er  diflorted  by  the  hand  of  Nature, 
though  half  an  ideot  from  his  birth,  or  ren- 
dered worfe  than  an  ideot  by  debauchery,  we 
were  taught  to  throw  out  encouragement ; 
and,  I  really  believe,  if  the  wandering  Jew, 
or  the  yellow  dwarf,  or  any  other  fabled 
being  of  hideous  defcription,  could  have  been 
fent  on  earth  to  have  perfonified  men  of  eight 
OT  ten  thoufand  a  year,  we  lliould  have  found 
it  duikult  to  have  efcaped  being  married  to 
them,  if  they  had  offered  goodfettletnents. 

Riches  and  high  birth — (the  latter  rather 
becaufe  it  generally  includes  the  former,  than 
for  its  own  fake)  riches  and  high  birth  were 
ever  the  moft  certain  recommendations  to  the 

favor  of  my  mother Merit  unattended  by 

thefe  advantages,  we  were  always  taught  to 
fliun  ;  fhe  knew  that,  unlefs  we  were  blinded 
by  early  prejudice,  it  would  force  itfelf  ivrefifl- 
ibly  on  unadulterated  minds  ;  and  again  ft  fuch 
imprefTions  fhe  was   conftantly  on   her  guard. 

With  what  vigilance  did  flic  contrive,  at 
Bexley  Hill,  to  exclude  from  lii  our  parties 
every  young  man  who  had  nothing  clfe  to  re- 
commend him,  than  his  deferving  to  be  no- 
ticed.—I  remember,  when  a  regiment  cf  horle 

was 


DESMOND.  l6l 

was  quartered  for  fome  time  at  Wells,  how 
eagerly  (he  folicited  the  company  of  thofe  of 
the  officers,  who  were  reputed  to  be  men  of 
fortune,  while,  if  any  fubaltern,  of  inferior 
expectations,  was  introduced  to  her  table, 
how  cold,  how  reludlant  were  her  civilities  ! 
That  /have  been  mofl  unhappily  the  vicflim 
of  this  mercenary  fpirit,  I  do  not,  however, 
mean  to  make  matter  of  reproach  to  my  mo- 
ther—-Happinefs,  in  her  eflimation,  eonfifts 
in  being  vifited  by  the  opulent ;  in  giving  and 
receiving  good  dinners ;  in  having  at  Bath, 
or  in  London,  the  reputation  of  having  fafhi- 
onable  parties,  and  very  full  rooms  ;  of  curt- 
fying,  at  church,  to  all  the  bed  drelled  part 
of  the  congregation  ;  and  being  looked  upon 
as  a  very  fenfible  woman,  and  one  who  knows 
the  world  ;  of  being  appealed  to  by  the  yel- 
low admirals  and  gouty  generals,  as  a  per- 
fon  of  great  fagacity  in  cafes,  whether  of 
medicine,  or  cards,  or  anecdote ;  and  of 
being  confidered  as  a  perfect  judge  of  eti- 
quette ;  and  a  woinan  of  the  higheft  rcfpeCla- 
bility. 

Now,  as  tliefe  circnmflances  do,  in  lier 
dea,  conftitute  the  fwnnnnn  bonuvi^  can  you 
wonder  that  flie  endeavoured  to  procure  their 
certain  poiUffion  for  us  ? — That  fhe  has  failed, 
at  Icail,  in  regard  to  me,  is  not  to  be  imput- 
ed to  her  as  an  error;  her  judgment  was 
originally  wrong ;  the  fault  of  the  head 
rather  than  the   heart.-  She  could  not 

have  fucceeded,  becaufe,  had  Mr.  Verney's 
felf-indulgences  left  me  all  thefc  bleflings, 
on  which  my  mother  fets  fo  high  a  value, 
I  fhculd,    if  I   had   been  compelled  to  have 

entered 


l52  DESMOND. 

entered  into  their  routine,  have  been  infinitely 
more  miferable  than  I  nm  now. 

But  to  go  on  with  the  brief  hiftory  of  tra- 
vels, which  I  have  Jiirherto  only  related  in  a 
vague  and  disjointed  way,  I  may  as  well  take 
up  the  word  miferable,  with  which  I  concluded 
the  lafl  fentence,  and  tell  you,  that  miferable, 
very  miferable  I  was  at  Rouen  :  not,  how- 
ever, from  finding  the  country — "  en  fen  tff 
eiifa;ig,'"*  as  I  had  been  affured  I  fiiould  do, 
by  fo:iie  emigrants  with  whom  I  coaverfcd  at 
Brighthelmflione  ;  but  from  my  own  fad  re- 
flecftions,  and  the  uncertainty  of  what  was  to 
be  my  delliny  on  my  arrival  at  Paris. 

Far  from  finding  my  approach  to  this  city 
/Rouen)  impeded  by  any  of  the  popular  con- 
fufion  of  which  we  have  been  told  fo  much, 
I  mufl  give  you  a  defcription  of  the  fcene. 

It  was  ^bout  half  pad  nine  o'clock,  when 
we  entered  the  long  double  avenue  of  elms, 
which  begins  above  a  mile  from  the  town. 
—The  day  had  been  very  vv'arm,  and  the  eve- 
ning-was delicioufly  ferene — The  moon,  nearly 
at  the  full,  was  reilcfled  in  long  lines  of  ra- 
diance on  the  filver  bofom  of  the  Seine,  which 
is  here  much  broader  and  clearer  than  at  Paris  ; 
and  the  oars  of  boats,  going  up  the  river,  were 
heard  at  intervals,  as  they  daihed  the  fparkling  . 
water,  mingled  with  the  fomewhat  mourn- 
ful, yet  not  unpleafing,  found  of  the  faiiors 
on  the  quay  above,  drawing  up  their  anchors^ 
to  depart. — As  we  advanced,  the  noife  of 
the  pollillions,  who  delight  in  cracking  tlieir 
whips  and  hooting  as  tliey  approach  a  town, 

*  In  blood  iind  fire — or,  as  we  Hiy,  under  fire  and  fword. 

interrupted, 


tt    E    S    M    0    N    D.  1(5'3 

interrupted,  but  could  not  drown  the  enliven- 
ing notes  of  the  fifes,  clarinets,  and  organs 
of  the  Savoyards,  to  which  two  or  three  par- 
ties were  gaily  dancing, by  the  road  fide,  while 
many  others  were  walking  under  the  trees, 
enjoying  the  beauty  of  the  night.'— The  nearer 
we  approached  the  town,  the  more  nume- 
rous and  well  drefled  were  the  groups  we 
perceived,  till  near  the  former  barrier,  it 
might  be  juftly  called  a  crowd  who  feemed 
to  have  no  object  but  the  pleafure  of  a  gay 
walk  by  moon-light  after  a  hot  day--"  ^.nd 
this,"  cried  I,  as  I  furveyed  them,  "  this  is 
a  fpecimen  of  univerfal  national  mifery — of 
the  fierce  and  fanguinary  democracy  fo  pa- 
thetically lamented  by  ^>Ir.  liurke  !" 

The  next  morning  I  received  from  the 
French  merchant,  to  whom  Mr.  Bethel  gave 
"me  letters,  every  attention  which  I  could  have 
claimed  on  a  long  acquaintance  ;  he  regulated 
every  thing  for  our  future  journey  in  the  way, 
leaft  likely  to  occafiun  fatigue  to  me,  and 
after  reding  at  Rouen  one  day,  we  again 
went  forward  towards  Paris. 

Had  my  mind  been  Icfs  cruelly  occupied 
by  the  certainty  of  prefent  evils,  or  could 
I  have  looked  forward  with  more  calmnefs 
to  the  fcenes  that  awaited  me  at  Paris,  I 
fhould  have  contemplated,  with  peculiar  plea- 
fure, the  uncommon  charms  of  the  country 
tliat  borders  the  Seine  near  Vernon  — a  town 
remarkably  dirty  and  melancholy,  fituated  in 
a  ipot  of  which  imagination  cannot  conceive 
the  beauty. 

Around  Rouen  it  is  very  fine ;  but,  per- 
haps, as  I  had   pafled  that  country  before,    I 

was 


i64  D    E    S    M    0    N    B. 

was  lefs  ftruck  with  it  now,  and  as  I  then  tra- 
velled what  is  called  the  upper  way  to  Paris, 
I  did  not  go  through  Vernon, 

The  Seir»e,  along  whofe  banks  the  road 
lies  for  many  miles,  is  here  very  broad  and 
very    rapid  -broken    by    feveral    beautiful 

little  illands,  where  the  willow  dips  its 
trembling  leaves  into  the  current,  and  mingled 
with  the  darker  fliade  of  alders,  the  pop- 
lar rifes  in  luxuriant  fpires  above.— On  the 
oppofite  fide  of  the  river  there  are  coppices 
edging  the  water,  or  green  lines  of  meadow 
ground — hills  refembling  the  Southern  Downs 
of  England  arife  beyond  thefe*— — — with 
here  and  there  a  Scattered  vineyard,  the  firll 
I  had  feen  in  France — But  a  little  beyond 
Vernon  there  are  other  hills  of  the  moll  ex- 
traordinary forms  I  ever  remarked — they  ap- 
pear, at  the  diftance  from  which  I  furveyed 
ihem,  like  immenfe  circular  mafles  of  ilone 
or  marble,  piled  on  each  other,  or  aiicmbled 
in  rows,  as  if  feme  fupernatural  beings  of 
extraordinary  ftrength  had  thrown  them  there 
-—The  fingulavity  of  their  outline  gives  to  the 
whole  landfcape,  for  fome  miles,  a  very  ro- 
mantic appearance,  and  the  road  from  which 
it  is  furveyed  is  equally  wild  and  pic- 
turefque — for  it  lies  under  a  ridge  of  high 
chalk  rock,  beneath  which  are  a  few  cot- 
tages, partly  formed  of  the  rock  itfelf,  and 
half  hid  with  vines. 

You  will  wonder,  perhaps,  that  in  the 
flate  of  mind  I  was,  as  I  pafled  through 
this  country,  I  fliould  be  able  to  give  fo  much 
attention  to  it  as  to  make  out  even  this  flight 
defcription— But  I  find,  that  from  a  habit  of 

fufFeringj 


DESMOND.  165 

fufferlng,  the  mind  acquires  the  power  to 
fuffer  ;  and,  if  it  refifts  at  all,  becomes  every 
year  lefs  acutely  fenfible ;  it  rauft  at  ieaft  be 
fo  with  me,  for  I  now  look  forward  with 
melancholy  compofure  to  events  that  appear 
inevitable,  of  whicli  the  bare  idea  a  few  years, 
or  even  a  few  months  ago,  would  have  dri- 
ven me,  I  think,  to  frenzy.  —  I  fee  no  end 
of  my  calamities  but  in  the  grave-  — —  -and 
having  in  a  great  meafure  ceafed  to  hope,  it 
were  ridiculous  to  fear-  Fate  can  have  no- 
thing worfe  in  (lore  for  me  than  feparatiou 
from  thbfc  I  love,  embittered  by  poverty  and 
contempt"  Long  lingering  years,  varied  only 
by  diflerent  fhades  of  w  vetchednefs,  is  all  my 
profpc(^l.—  Torn  for  ever  from  my  deareit 
connections,  and  doomed  to  be  tl^c  nnrcfift- 
ing  victim  of  a  man,  uhofe  eondu6l  is  a  con- 
tinual difgrace  to  hin^fclf,  hia  family,  and  his 
country. 

"  Regretter  ce  ceux  qu'on  aime,  eft  un 
bien  en  comparaifon  de  vivre  avec  ce  qu'on 
hait"— fays  de  la  Rochefaucault.-^I  do  not 
hate  ISIr.  Verney—  God  forbid  I  fliould  5  but 
yet  I  own  his  late  conduct,  in  regard  to 
JVionfieur  de  Romagnecourt,  and  other  cir- 
cumilances  that  have  accidentally  come  to 
my  knowledge,  have  raifed  in  me  luch  a  dread 
of  him,  that  there  is  no  humiliation  to  which 
I  had  not  rather  fubmlt,    tiian  that  of  confi- 

dering  myfelf  as  his  Have. -^ — -Yet   to  re* 

peat  the  words  of  a  pathethic   French  poem., 
1  was  reading  yeiterday, 

"  Tel  j'ctois,  telje  fuis  encore, 
"  >>c  rcl^iraiit  (^Lic  pour  loullrir.** 

But 


t66  D    E    S   M    0    N   B. 

But  I  have  ftrangely  wandered  from  the 
narrative  I  undertook,  to  give  more  connect- 
edly than  you  can  gather  it  from  my  former 
letters. 

I  pafs  over  the  reft  of  my  journey  from 
Vernon  to  Mante,  where  we  remained  one 
night  ;  and,  in  which,  if  there  was  any  thing 
remarkable,  I  did  not  fee  it — for  as  I  ap- 
proached Paris  my  fpirits  funk,  and  every 
league  became  more  and  more  deprefied — 
Yet  what  I  ft^lt  was  the  calm  defperatlon  of 
incurable  calamity,  and  not  thofe  fudden 
paroxyfms  of  anxiety  which  are  yielded  to, 
when  hope  reprefents  the  podibility  of  re- 
ar efs  j  and  the  agitated  mind,  in  the  jnoft 
acute    moments    of  furrow,    looks  round  ior 

fuccour.— ^I  had   nothing   to  hope and  what 

I  then  had  to  fear  was  of  a  nature  fo  dreadful 
and  fo  peculiar,  that  I  hard.y  dared  truft  my 
mind  with  its  contemplation. 

At  length  we  arrived  at  V:xvis,  and  I  faw 
myfelf  in  I'Hotel  de  Mofcovie  ;  for  though 
Mr.  Verney's  letter  had  ordered  me  to  take 
up  my  abode  at  the  magnificent  hotel  of  his 
illuflrious  friend,  Monfieur  le  Due  de  P.o- 
magnccourt,  I  had,  in  this  inftanre,  and  by 
the  advice  of  Mr.  Bethel,  determit>ed  to  dlfo- 
bey  him — I  had  written  from  Dieppe  to  Mr. 
Verney,  to  fay  I  fhould  await  his  orders  at 
I'Hotel  de  Mufcovie  ;  but  there  were  no  let- 
•ters  there  for  me,  or  had  any  perfon  been 
there   enquiring  after   me.—  -As  I  was 

extremely  fatigued,  I  determined,  though,  it 
was  yet  only  early  in  the  evening,  to  do  no 
more  thai;  night,  than  announce  my  arrival  to 
the  banker,    to    whom   Mr-  Bethel,     and  his 

rfiead, 


DESMOND.  167 

fiknd,  had  given  me  letters ;  and  deferring 
till  the  next  day,  every  determination  as  to  a 
future  plan,  to  endeavour  to  procure  fome 
repofe  to  my  children   and  myfelf— — -  In 

this  I  fucceedcd  fo  far,  as  to  fee  them  all  well 
the  following  morning,  and  to  find  my  ovi'n 
fpirits  rather  more  tranquil  than  I  could  ex- 
pert, when,  at  nine  o'clock,  I  received  a  note 
from  ATonficur  Bergafle,  to  whom  my  letters 
were  addrefled,  faying  that  he  would  wait  on 
me  at  ten. 

I  could  not  avoid  explaining  to  him,   though 
it  \\  as  M  ith  extreme  rekuSlance,    the  orders  I 

had  received  from  I*>Ir.  Verney. 1  faw  at 

once  that  he  was  llartled  at  tlicm,  and  believ- 
ed that  no  hufband  who  either  regarded  his 
wife    or  his   honour,     would  have   given   fuch 

dire£lions Ke  informed  me,    however, 

thac  though  the  Due  de  Romagnecourt  had 
quitted  Paris  fome  time  before  the  fliglit  of 
the  King,  and  that  the  fplendid  preparations 
making  for  his  return  from  England,  had  been 
countermanded  ;  yet  it  was  likely  that  Mr. 
Verney,  wlio  might  not  have  received  my  let- 
ter from  Dieppe,  had  font  to  the  Duke's 
houfe  his  inii  rutlions  how  I  ihould  proceed 
(ince  the  political  charges  that  had 
happened  after  his  fivfl  dcfning  me  to  meet 
him  in  Fii'nce,  had  probably  changed  his  in^ 
tentions  in  regard  to  me  and  to  himfelf. 

To  tlie  l.ctel  de  Romagnecourt,  therefore, 
Mr.  Bergafio  was  (o  good  as  to  go  for  me  ; 
he  very  foon  returned  with  a  letter  froni  IVIr. 
Verney,  dircifling  me  to  remain  there  till  his 
arrival,  and  infovniing  me  that  he  was  going 
for  a  vtry  ii.crt  uiv.c   to  chc   neig,hbcurhood  of 

Avigni«j 


I©8  DESMOND. 

Avignon,  with  his  dear  friends  MeHieurs  de 
Romagnecouit,  de  Bellizet  and  de  Boifbelle  ; 
the  former  and  latter  of  whom  had  jull 
rejoined  him  ■  •  and  that,  in  the  mean 
time,  I  Ihould  find  that  every  accommodati- 
on had  been  directed  by  the  Duke  to  await 
me  at  Paris. 

I  could  fee  by  the  whole  turn  of  tliis  let- 
ter, which  was  not  indeed  written  with 
much  art,  that  Mr.  Verney  had  calcuhiied  that 
the  money  he  remitted  to  me  for  my  journey, 
could  do  no  more  than  defray  the  expences  of 
it  j  and  that  on  my  arrival  at  Paris,  necef- 
fity  mull  conquer  the  repugnance  I  might 
feel  at  being  thus  made  over,  as  an  ialiabi- 
tant  of  the  houie  of  MoaUeur  de  Roniagne- 
court. 

This  gentleman  alfo  had  taken  the  trouble 
t .  write  to  me  ;  and  v/ith  many  extravagant 
cxpreflions  of  attachment  and  admiration,  ex- 
prefled  his  regret  at  my  cruelty  in  not  deign- 
ing to  accompany  hi.ii,  and  his  delight  at  my 

charming  condefcenfion  in  coming  at  all ' 

His  arilent  hopes  that  this,  his  letter,  would 
find  me  in  entire  poirellion  of  his  houfe  at 
Paris,  where  he  had  given  direifions  that  his 
carriages  and  fervants  fhould  be  at  my  com- 
mand ;  and.  of  all  of  which  he  befought  me 
to  confider  myfelf  as  fole  miftrefs. 

Oh  !  Fanny,  what  would  have  become  of 
vour  unhappy  fiflei*,  but  tor  the  kind  inter- 
pofition  of  Mr.  Bethel.  —  ■'■■Thus  forced  by 
iiiy  mother's  inhumanity  into  a  foreign  coun- 
try, without  money  or  friends,  where  could  I 
have  found  refuge  for  myfelf  and  my  poo*" 
little  ones,  v.'licfe  natural  proteilor  moil  un- 
naturally 


t)   E   S    M   O    K   JBi  l6^ 

li-aturally  configns   their  mother  to  a  defllny 
more  terrible  than  the  mod  humble  poverty. 

Good  God  I  is  it  poflible  that  I  am  writing 
thus  of  the  father  of  thefe  children,  for  whofe 

fake  only    1    endure     life  ? 1    dare   not 

truft  my  pen   with   another  line  on  that  fub . 
jea 

"  Oh  !  that  way  madnefs  lies ;  let  me  Ihun  that, 
••  No  more  ofthat"     ■     '  *  — i 

The  determination  I  at  length  came  to  was, 
to  remain  at  the  hotel  de  Mofcovie,  where  t 
found  very  good  accommodations,  till  I  heard 
again  from  the  unfortunate  man  whofe  .pro- 
perty I  am but  on  no  account  to  meet 

him,  if  I  could  avoid  it,  till  he  had  relin- 
quifhed  every  idea  of  compelling  me,  either 
with  him  or  alone,  to  become  an  inmate  in 
the  houfe  of  Monfieur  de  Romagnecourt.  -— 
The  manner  in  which  I  perceived  Monfieur 
Bergafle  heard  the  name  of  that  nobleman 
fpoken  of,  confirmed,  too  certainly,  all  the 
fears  I  had  of  Mr.  Verney's  motive  for  culti- 
vating an  intimacy,  from  which  mofl  hufbands 

w^ould   have  recoiled and,    if  contempt 

and  abhorrence  of  his  principles,  could  en- 
gender hatred  againfl  the  father  of  George, 
of  Harriet,  and  of  William,  furely  I  {hould 
be  judified  in  feeling  it. 

Oh  !    how  impollible  it  is  to  help  relapfing 
continually  into  a  topic  fo  heavily  prefTmg  on 

the  heart Let  me,    however,    clofe  the 

detail  of  my  wandering,  till  I  fettled  here. — 
i  remarked,  in  the  little  time  I  had  to  remark 

*  Shakefpeare, 

Vol.  IL  I  .any 


'fj'o  'b   ESMOND. 

any  thing,  that  I  never  faw  fo  many  people, 
of  all  ages,  fcarred  and  feamed  with  the  fmall- 
pox,  as  I  had  obfei'ved  fince  my  being  at  Pa- 
ris.  1   was  told  that  it  was  owing  to  the 

inveterate  prejudices  inculcated  by  the  priefts, 
who  even  now  perfifted  in  teaching,  that  to 
difavm  this  cruel  difeafe  of  its  malignity,  was 
to  ofl'end  heaven,  which  intended  that  it 
ihould  blind,  cripple,  or  render  fpedlacles  of 
horror,  thofe  whofe  lives  it  fpared 1  en- 
quired if  it  was  now  in  Paris 1  was  an- 

fwered  that  it  was  always  in  Paris. Ter- 
rified at  this  intelligence,  I  fent  to  my  friend 
Monfieur  Bergafl'e,  entreating  him  to  look 
out  for  an  houfe  at  fome  of  the  villages 
around  it  He  very  obligingly  under- 
took the  enquiry,  and  on  Friday  informed 
me,  that  he  had  heard  of  a  maifon  burgoisy* 
but  well  furnifhed,    and  fit  to  be  immediately 

inhabited,    at  Meudon. 1  entreated  him  in- 

ftantly   to   engage  k  -    he  did  fo  j    and, 

on  my   arrival,     I  found    it    infinitely     more 

comfortable    than    I  espe<n:ed Here 

then  I  am,  my  Fanny,  waiting  in  anxiety,  but 
not  with  impatience,  Mr.  Verney's  further  or- 
ders-  With  fenfations  very  different  your 

letters  are  expcfted  by  your  affecfbionate 

GERALDINE, 

H?.vc  you  heard  from   Mr.  Defmond  .?- 

I  thought  he  would  before  now  have  written 
to  rne. 

•  Houfes  in  Fi.incc  were,  till  hot.'  dlftinguinied  by 
*'  irailons  bourg■oi^,"  fit  only  for  citizens  or  inferior  pco- 
Y'k  •  and  maifm  nai-lc,     beJcrging  to  nicti    of  r-nk,   cr 

Mr. 


B  I  S   M  0   H   D.  !7t 

Mr.  Bethel,    I  hope,    is  ftill  at  Bath.- 


t  conclude  I  might  by  this  time  fend  my  com- 
pliments to  our  newly  acquired  fifter;  but 
probably  ihe  will  readily  difpenfe  with  that 
ceremony. — —Do  you  recollect  in  the  novel 
of  Sidney  Biddulph  (one  of  the  belt  that  we 
have  in  our  language)  how  poor  Sidney  is 
treated  in  her  adverfity  by  the  haughty  wife 
of  her  brother.  Sir  George  f  Perhaps  there 
is  a  little  fimilarity  in  our  deftinies— — — — But 
/  have  m  Faulkhnd! 


It  LET« 


171  D   E   S    M    O    N    Of 

LETTER    XVIir. 
TO    MISS    WAVERLY. 

Meudon,  Sept.  7,  1791- 

YOU  afk  me,  my  fifter,  for  a  further  def- 
Cription  cf  my  abode,  if  that  can  be  called  aa 
abode  where  I  am  only  a  tranfient  lodger,  and 
from  whence  I  every  moment  expe<ft  to  receive 
a  fummons  to  depart— for  Alas  ! —  I  know  not 
whither  ! 

You  alk,  too,  my  motives  for  prefering  this 
place,  which  in  my  laft  letter  I  told  you  was 
melancholy,  to  Verfailles  or  St.  Cloud,  where 
I  could  equally  have  the  advantage  of  gar- 
dens— or  to  Chaillot,  PalTy,  or  fome  other 
pleafant  village,  more  immediately  adjoinhig  to 
Paris. — My  dear  Fanny,  I  prefer  this  place, 
becaufe  it  is  melancholy,  and  becaufe  it  is  retired. 

Here,  as  I  wander  over  the  deferted  gar- 
dens, I  feldom  meet  any  body  but  the  men, 
•who  keep  them  in  fomething  like  order,  and 
who  do  not  even  look  back  at  m.e,  or  mark  my 
folitary  walks. 

There  are  at  Meudon,  two  palaces,  one  of 
very  ancient  ilru^lure  and  long,  quite  uninha- 
bited— the  other  built,  or  at  leafl:  repaired,  by 
the  Dauphin,  father  of  the  prefent  King  which 
Louis  the  XVIth  has  occafionally  inhabited,  and 
which  contains  maiy  handfome  apartments — 
tiicy  both  ilaiid  in  tlic  fame  garilen,  which  has 
^€ver  received  any  modcrii  improvements — and 

in 


■DESMOND.  175 

in  many  parts  of  it  the  borders  are  deflitute  of 
their  former  ornaments  •,  and,  of  many  of  the 
trees  and  fhrubs  that  remain, 

"  The  boughs  are  mofs'd  with  age, 
And  high  tops  bald  with  dry  antiquity."* 

Adjoining  to  the  mofl  ancient  of  thefe  royal 
houfes,  which  terminates  a  long  avenue  and  a 
large  court,  is  a  chapel  with  an  arched  gateway, 
leading  to  it  from  the  garden,  and  furrounded 
by  paved  palTliges  and  high  cloiftcrs — and  it  is 
on  iome  broken  fteps,  that  near  thefe  almoll 
ruinous  buildings,  lead  from  the  lower  to  the 
upper  garden,  I  frequently  take  my  penfive 
feat  and  mark  the  fun  fmking  away  above  the 
high  coppices  that  are  beyond  the  gardens  ;  fand 
I  imagine  from  a  part  of  them,  though  I  have 

not  yet  ventured  to  wander  fo  far.) ^A  yet 

more  cheerful  feat  I  have  found  for  my  Icfs  me- 
lancholy moods,  on  the  wall  of  the  terrace  on. 
the  oppofite  fide,  which  looks  down  immediate- 
ly on  the  village  of  Meudon  —  where,  among 
its  pleafant- looking  houfes,  they  ftill  point  out 

the  habitation   of  the  celebrated  R,:bfl  is. 

As  I  never  enjoyed,  becaufe,  perlv.'.ps,  I  do  not 
iniderfLand  his  works,  I  contemplate  it  net  with 
•fo  much  pleafure  as  it  would  allord  thofe  who 
can  admire  them.  —  Of  late,  ■  .^y  Fanny,  I  have 
found  this  view  too  rinute,  and  have  ad'^cred  ai- 
moil  every  evening  after  I   have  put  my  little 

ones  to  bed,  to  the  old  ftepa where  1  hear 

no  founds  but  the  bell  of  the  convent  of  Capu- 
chins (which  is  on  a  high  ridge  of  land,  con- 
foaled  by  trees  about  half  a  mile  from  the  old 

paUc«>^ 

*  5hakefpeare,» 


174  »    E    S    M    O    N    D. 

palace)  or  the  wind  murmuring  hollow  through 
the  iron  gratings  and  ftone  paflages  that  lead 
round  the  chapel,  from  whofe  windows  of  paint- 
ed glafs  I  can  fancy  the  fullen  genius  of  fuper- 
ftition  peeps  forth,  fighing  over  his  departed 
power,  in  melancholy  refponfes  to  the  fum- 
inons,  that  call  the  monks  to  their  evening  de- 
votions. 

I  often  meet,  as  I  come  through  the  avenue, 
fome  of  thefe  venerable  fathers,  who,  with  flow 
fteps,  and  downcall  eyes,  their  cowl  frequently 
covering  their  faces,  and  their  arms  crofTed  up- 
on their  breafts,  pafs  me — apparently  fo  oc- 
cupied by  their  holy  meditations,  as  not  to 
hold  an  infignificant  being  like  me,  v.'orth  even 
a  falutation. 

But  why  {houkl  that  feem  difcourteous, 
which  is  probably  a  part  of  their  religion  ?  I 
ought  alfo  to  confider,  that  befides  the  gloomy 
aufterity  cf  their  order,  they  are  now,  perhaps, 

moi"e  auficre,  becaufe  they  are  unhappy- • 

.They  believe  their  altars  are  violated,  and  their 
profelPiOn  rendered  odious. — They  fear  their 
i'ubfiftence  may  fail  them,  and  that  they  may 
be  turned  out  into  a  world  which  is  feldom  too 
kind  to  the  unfortunate,  and  is  likely  to  treat 
their  misfortunes  with  ridicule  inftead  of  pity. 

1  have    obferved,     within   this   laft  week, 

one  among  them  who  feems  more  reftlefsly 
wretched  than  the  reft-— I  remark  him  every 
day  pafs  by  the  windows  of  the  houfe  where  I 
live,  with  a  bafket  in  one  hand,  and  a  ftaff  in 

the  other his  hood  always  concealing  his 

face,  and  his  tall  figure  bending  as  if  weighed 
^own  by  calamity. 

After 


DESMOND.  175 

After  the  morning  duties  are  over,  I  fe.e  hina 
glide  among  the  trec^W n  the  garden,  or  among 
the  vines  that  clothe  the  declivity  towards  the 
village  ;  more  than  once  he  has  come  forth  of 
an  evening  from  the  cloiilered  palTages  of  the 
chapel,  and,  with  folemn  ftep,  crofled  near  me, 
to  attend  the  laft  offices  of  the  evening,  when 
he  hears  the  bell  from  the  convent  echo  among 
the  windincr  colonades. 

There  is  fomething  particular!}'-  alTciniing   to 

me,  in  beholding  this  folitary  mourner ■ 

whofe  griefs  though  they  arc  probably  of  a  dif- 
ferent kind  from  mine,  are  poiHbly  as  poignant. 
—Perhaps  he  was  once  a  gay  and  thought lefs 
inhabitant  of  the  world -—He  may  have  fceu 
(for  he  does  not  appear  to  be  a  young  man) 
ihefe  now  deferted  palaces,  blazing  in  the  fplen- 
dour  of  a  voluptuous  court — Among  is  va- 
nilhed  glories,  he  may  have  loll  all  he  loved  j 
and  he  has  now,  it  may  be,  no  other  confolation 
than  vifiting  in  the  cimetiere  of  the  chapel,  the 
flone  on  v/hich  time  is  dertroying  even  the 
fepulchral  memorial  of  this  beloved  objesTt. 

As  I  thus  m.ake  out,  in  my  imagination,  his 
melancholy  (lory,  I  Ihed  tears  :  I  fhudder  at 
the  diftrefs  I  have  drawn  —  Oh!  Fanny!-- — 
among  all  the  miferies  of  humanity,  the  mofl 
infupportable  is  furely  the  death  of  thofe  we 
love  ;  and  yet  how  full  of  contradiction  is  the 
human  heart — I  know  there  are  many,  many 
evils  in  life  to  which  death  is  infinitely  prefera*- 
ble— I  know  that  I  myfelf  prefer  it  to  the 
continuance  of  fuch  an  exiftence  as  has  long 
been  mine ;  yet  to  out-live  you^  my  children y 
and  one  ortiuo  of  my  f /tends ^  prefents  an  idea  of 
calamhy  which  would  deprive  me  of  my  reafon. 

How 


176  DESMOND. 

How  have  1  been  led  by  the  poor  defponding' 
Monk  into  this  digreffion  ?— -I  hardly  know 
and  have  not  now  much  time  to  revife  what  I 
have  v/ritten,  as  a  rneffenger  goes  to  Paris  this 
evening,  who  is  to  take  my  letter  ;  I  return, 
therefore,  to  irfy  fubjedl  as  abruptly  as  1  quit- 
ted it,  to  tell  you  the  little  that  remains  to  be 
faid  about  my  houfe — It  is  juft  like  other  French 
houfes  ;  and  its  only  recommendation  to  me  is 
the  melancholy  fort  of  repofe,  and  the  folitary 
walks,  which  its  inimediate  neighbourhood  to 
the  gardens  of  Mcudon  afford  me. 

'Dii  windovv's  command  great  part  of  the 
view  between  this  place  and  Paris,  to  which,  it 
would  be  difficult  for  the  pencil  to  do  juftice — - 
with  a  pen,  it  were  hopelefs  to  attempt  it. 

The  firft  yellow  tints  of  Autumn  are  hardly 
Healing  on  the  trees,  encreafing,  howevevj, 
where  they  have  touched  them,  the  beauty  of  the 
foliage — The  Iky  is  delightfully  ferene  ;  and  a 
ian-fet  in  the  gardens  here  exceeds  what  I  ever 
faw  in  England  for  warmth  and  brilliancy  of  co- 
louring  No  dew  falls,  even  when   the  fun 

15  gone,  though  we  may  call  the  evenings  now 
autumnal  evenings— I  am  generally  out  with 
my  children  till  pad  feven  o'clock,  and  after  I 
have  attended  them  to  their  beds,  I  flill  find  it 
mild  and  warm  enough  to  allow  me  to  perform 
"uy  vefpers  in  the  open  air. 

You,  my  Fanny —  at  lead,  till  your  ten- 
dernefs  '  for  me  taught  it  to  you — you  have 
jiever  been  unhappy,  and  have  never  known 
(O  !  may  you  never  know)  the  ftrange  and, 
perhaps,  capricious  feelings  of  the  irre- 
trievably wretched — Since  I  have  found  myfelf 
fo,  I  have  taken  up  a  notion  that  I  do  not 
|)re3the  freely,  while  I  am  within  the  houfe  j 

au4 


D    E    S    M   6   N  D;  177 

and  like  the  poor  maniac,  who  wandered  about 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Brillol,  I  fancy  "  that 
nothing  is  good  but  liberty  and  frefh  air." 

In  confequence  of  this  fenfation,  I  live  all- 
day  about  the  gardens  ;  while  the  fun  is  high, 
Peggy  attends  me  with  the  three  children,  in 
fome  {hady  part  of  them;  and  George  often 
amufes  himfelf  with  catching  the  little  brown 
lizards  which  abound  in  the  grafs,  and  among 
the  tufts  of  low    fhrubs  on  this  dry  foil — He 

brings    them    to    me 1    bid     him    take 

great  care  not  to  hurt  them — I  explained  to  him, 
that  they  have  the  fame  fenfe  of  puln  as  he  has, 
and  fufFer  equally  under  preflure  and  confine- 
ment— He  looks  very  grave,  as  I  endeavour  to 
imprefs  this  on  his  mind  ;  and  then  gently  put- 
ting them  down,  cries,  "  no  !  no  !  indeed  f 
I  will  not  hurt  you,  poor  li:.tlc  things !" 

How  much  a  tone,  a  look,  an  almoll:  imper- 
ceptible expreffion  of  countenance  will  awaken 
to  new  anguifli  an  heart  always  opprefled  like 
mine!  —  As,  liberating  his  prifoners,  he  fays 
this — I  look  round  on  him,  his  fweet  firter,  and 
his  baby-brother,  and  internally  fighing,  fay, 
*'  Oh  !  would  I  were  fure,  if  ever  your  poor 
mammals  torn  from  you,  that  nobody  will  hurt 
you^  poor  litrle  things  !" 

What  ails  me,  to  be  thus  unufually  weak, 
this  evening  ?  I  believe  the  heat  of  the  day  has 
overcome  me — I  will  go-  and  walk,  as  I  did 
laft  night,  when  I  have  finilhed  my  letter. 

I  fliall  probably  meet  my  fellow  fufPerer,  for 
fuch  I  am  fure  he  is,  the  folitary  C;ipuchia— I 
have  juft  feen  hiin  walk  towards  the  palace  gar- 
den.— Y^''ell ! — and  is  there  not  futisraclion  in 
beholding  a  being,  who,  whatever  may  have 
I  5  beeu 


I7S  »    L    S    M    O   TH   »i 

been  hrs  misfortunes,  feems  to  have  found  con- 
folation  and  fortitude  in  religion — I  have  often 
entertained  an  half-formed  vi'ifh  that  he  would 
fpeak  to  me — perhaps  his  own  fufFerings  may 
liave  taught  him  that  tender  fympathy  with 
the  fufFerings  of  others,  which  is  often  fo  footh- 
ing  to  the  fick  heart,  and  he  might  fpeak  of 
peace  to  me  ! 

I  am  fadly  diftrefled  here  for  want  of 
books  i  the  few  which,  with  fuch  a  quan- 
tity of  neceflary  baggage,  I  was  able  to 
bring  with  me,  I  have  now  cxhaufted  ;  and 
though  my  good  friend,  Monfieur  Bergafle, 
has  fent  me  fome  from  Paris,  they  happen 
to  be   fuch  as  I  cannot  read  with  any   plea- 

fure 1    have    fuppofed    it    not    impolfible 

that  the  ]Monk  might  fupply  me  from  the 
library  of  his  convent. 

This  deficiency  of  books  has  compelled  me 
to  have  recourfe  to  my  pen  and  my  pencil 
to  beguile  thofe  hours,  when  my  foui,  ficken- 
ang  at  the  pail,  and  recoiling  from  the  fu- 
ture, would  very  fain  lofe  its  ov/n  mournful 
images  in  the  witchery  of  fi(Slion,  or  in  fome 
purluit  i  though,  alas  !  it  is  too  true,  that 
ihe  mind  will  flray  from  the  fingers ;  and 
that  I  cannot  lind,  either  in  work  or  in 
drawing,  enough  employment  to  keep  mc 
irom  fad  and  bitter  refltiftion. 

Reafon  as  vainly  tells  me,  that  nothing  can 
he  worth  the  uuceafing  fulicitude  I  feel — 
Were  it  only  for  myfclf,  1  fureiy  ihould  not 
indulge  it  j  nor  would  I  n-iagnify  or  dwell 
upon  the  nilual  and  pollible  miferies  of  my 
jleftiny,  but  for  my  children  i — for  thofe  I 
icvs  fo  much  better  than  myfelfl— I  cannot 

help 


WESMONB.  179 

help  being  fenfible  of  fuch  agonizing  anxie- 
ty as  occupation  cannot  charm,  nor  reafon 
conquer. 

I  have  found,  Tiowever,  a  melancholy  de- 
light in  defcribing  thefe  fufferings — -I  ufually 
take  my  evening  feat  on  the  flight  of  Iteps 
I  have  defcribed  to  you — Sometimes,  when 
I  am  in  more  tranquil  fpirits,  I  fketch,  in  my 
port-folio,  the  wild  flowers  and  v/eeds  that 
grow  among  the  buildings  where  I  fit — In 
fome  parts,  ivy  holds  together  the  broken 
piles  of  brick,  from  whence  the  cement  has 
fallen — The  (lone-crop,  and  the  toad-flax^ 
cover  or  creep  among  the  mafles  of  disjointed 
marble,  feveral  forts  of  antirhinum  ftill  wave 
their  pink  and  purple  bloflbms  along  the  edges 
of  the  wall  j  and  laft  night  I  obferved  min- 
gled with  them,  a  root  of  the  field  poppy, 
ftill  in  flower — On  the  qualities  of  this  plant 
I  fell  into  a  reverie. — To  you,  my  Fanny^ 
and  to  you  only,  I  entruft  the  little  wild  ode 
— almolt,  indeed,  an  impromptu,  which  this 
contemplation  pTioduced. 


ODE    TO    THE    POPPY. 


Nat  for  the  protnife  of  the  JaborJ  fiekl. 
Not  for  the  good  the:  yell-Jw  hvveilsyicli^ 
I  bend  at  Ceres'  Ihriiie  ; 
F-ir  dull,  to  humid  eves  apoeajr, 
The  goidjn  giorles  of  the  yuar  ; 
A^)i!-^a  uisJlaa;lioly  worlhip's  luiue!" 


l80  B    E    S    M    O    N   D. 

I  hail  the  GoddeA  for  her  fcarlet  flower 

Thou  brilliant  weed 

'i'hat  doft  ib  far  exceed, 
The  richeft  gifts  gay  Flora  can  beftow  ; 
Heedlefs  I  pafs'd  thee,  in  life's  morning  houfp 

(Thou  comforter  of  woe,) 
'Till  forrow  taught  me  to  confefs  thy  power. 

In  early  days  when  Fancy  cheats, 

A  various  wretch  I  wove  ; 
Of  laughing  (prings  luxuriant  fweets. 

To  deck  ungrateful  love  : 
The  rofe  or  thorn,  my  numbers  crown'd. 
As  Venus  fmil'd,  or  Venus  frown'd  ; 
But  Love,  and  Joy,   and  all  their  train,  are  flowE; 
E'en  languid  Hope  no  niore  is  mine, 
And  1  will  ling  of  thee  alone ; 
Unlefs,  perchance,  the  attributes  of  grief, 

'I'he  cyprefs  bud  and  willow  leaf, 
■^heir  pale,  funeral  foliage,  blend  with  thine. 
!       Hall,  lovely  bloffom ! — thou  cau'ft  eafe, 

The  v/retched  vidlims  ofdifeafe; 
Can'ft  clofe  thofc  weary  eyes,  in  gentle  fleep, 
Which  never  open  but  to  weep; 
For,  oh !  thy  potent  charm, 
Can  agonizing  pain  difarm  ; 
^xpel  imperious  memory  from  her  feat, 
j^nd  bid  the  throbbing  heart  forgei;  to  beat. 

l^cul-focthing  plant !— that  can  fuch  bleflings  giTe, 

By  thee  the  mourner  bears  to  Ijv'c  ! 
By  thee  the  hopelefs  die  ! 

Oh!  ever  "friendly  to  defpair," 

Might  forrow'spalid  votary  dare 
"Without  a  crime,  that  remedy  implore, 
Which  bids  the  fpirit  from  its  bondage  fly, 
I'd  court  thy  palliative  aid  no  more  ; 

No  more  I'd  fue,  that  thou  fhouldft  fpread^ 

Thyfpell  around  my  aching  head. 

But  \\  ould  conjure  thee  to  impart, 

Thy  bailam  for  a  broken  heart ; 

And  by  thy  foft  Lethean  power, 
(Ineftimable  flower) 
lurft  thtfeterrtftrial  bonds,  and  other  regions  try, 

GERALDINE  VERNEY. 
LET- 


I)    E    S    M    O    N    D.  l8l 

LETTER    XIX. 
TO   MR.   BETHEL. 

I  HAVE  been  long  in  writing  to  you. 
Bethel,  and  now  hardly  know  whence  to  date 
my  letters,  as  I  am,  and  have  been,  and 
fhall  be,  upon  the  ramble  for  forae  time — 
I  am  unhappy,  and  the  unhappy  are  always 
refllefs. 

What  a    challenge  on     political  afFairs  does 

your  laft:  letter    contain  ! In    the    prefent 

ilate  of  my  fpirits  I  cannot  contend  with  you 
■were  1  difpofed  to  doit;  but  I  am  willing 
to  allow,  that  much  of  your  eulogium  on  the 
conftitution  of  England  is  juft  ;  and  that  it 
is  fo  good,    that  it  ought  to  be  better. 

If  we  fee  an  individual  who  has  a  thoufand 
good  qualities  that  excite  our  efleem  and  ad- 
miration, and  yet  know  he  has  two  or  three 
failings  that  render  all  his  virtues  of  little  a- 
vail,  we  very  naturally  fay,  what  pity  that 
•this  man,  who  is  fo  brave,  fo  fenfible,  fo  hu- 
mane, fliould,  by  a  llrange  inconfiftency  of 
characfter,    be  fo  corrupt,    fo  cafily  led  away 

by  obje£ls   unworthy  of  him fo  M'arped  by 

prejudice,  fo  blind  to  his  own  inteieft — And 
thus  it  is  with  all  the  affairs  of  life,  per- 
haps J  that  any  degree  of  perfe£lion  makes  us 
Te>;ret  that  the  objedl:  m  wluch  it  exills  is  not 
perfe([i. 

Of  this  nature  is  the  regret  I  feel  in  re- 
gard   to    my   country 1    would   have   our 

boafl;  of  her  exc(.llenci- jult — 1  woulrl  not  haveit 
the  mere  cant  which  we  have  learned  by  rote. 


l9Z  8    £    S    M   O  N   D. 

and  repeat  by  habit ;    though  when  we  ven- 
ture to  think  about  it,  we  know  that  it  is  vanity 
and  prejudice,  and  not  truth,  when  we  fpeak 
of  its    wonderful  perfection ;  and   that   even 
thofe  who  are  its  moft  decided  partizans,  are 
continually  betrayed   into   an  acknowledgment 
of  its  defects. — Bofwell,     in   his  life  of  John- 
fon  fays,  that  "  in  the  Britifli  parliment,  any 
queflion,  however  unreafonableorunjuft,   may 
he  carried  by  a  venal  majority,"  --This  is  ac-» 
knowTedged  truth  ;  and  it  follows,  that  while 
the  means  of  corruption  exift  to  an  extent  fo 
immenfe,     there  mufl  be   a   venal  majority , 
and,  of  courfe,  every  queftion,  howe7er  rui- 
nous, will  be  carried. — While  this  is  the  cafe 
and  while  every  attempt  to  remedy  this  orlgi- 
nil/ Jin  of  the  conftitution  is  oppofed  (though 
the  neceflity  of  that  remedy  has  been  allowed 
by  the  greateft  ftatefmen  of  our  country)  while 
€very  propofai  to  make  it  ren/ly  what  it  is  on- 
ly nominally^  raifes  a  cry  as  if  the    fubverfion 
of  the  whole  empire  was  intended — I  cannot 
agree  to    unlimited  praife — and,    though  moft 
certainly  willing  to  allov/  to  you,  that  a  great- 
er  portion    of    happinefs    is     diffufed  among 
the   fubje£ls  of  the   Britifh  government,    than 
among  any  other  people  upon  earth  j    but  this 
rather   proves   that    their     condition    is    very 
wretched,    than   that  ours  is  perfe(ftly  happy. 
— Carried  on   a   little  in  the  fame  way,    was 
the    argument    that  I  heard  not    long  fuice, 
agoinjl   the   abolition  of    the   detcftable   Slave 
Trade — I  was  pleadingyir  it  with   a  member  of 
parliament,    who  has  aii   ejiatc  in  the  U  eft   In- 
diesy  and  who  has   been   there  himfelf,    feme 
years    ago,     when  he  commanded  a  man  of 

war 


]»  E   s  14:  o  N  i».  193 

war— -I  talked  warmly  (for- 1  had  juft  been 
reading  the  reports  of  the  committee)  and  I 
talked  from  my  heart. — My  adverfary,  well 
hackneyed  in  the  ways  of  men,  treated  all  I 
could  fay  as  the  ill-digefted  fpeculation  of  a 
hot-head  enthufiaft,  who  knew  nothing  of  the 
matter. — *<  You  are  young,  Mr.  Defmond," 
faid  he,  **  very  young,  and  have  but  little 
confidered  the  importance  of  this  trade  to  the 
profperity  of  the  Britilh  nation  ;  befides,  give 
mc  leave  to  tell  you,  that  you  know  nothing 
of  the  condition  of  the  negroes  neither,  nor 
of  their  nature — They  are  not  fit  to  be  treated 
otherwife    than  as  flaves,    for   they   have  not 

the   fame  Icifes  and  feeling   as  we  have A 

negro  fellow  minds  a  flogging  fo  liitle,  that 
he  vili  go  to  a  dance  at  night,  or  at  leaft 
the  next  day,  after  a  hearty  application  of  the 

cat They  have  no  underftanding.  to  qualify 

them  for  any  rank  in  fociety  above  ilaves  ; 
and,  indeed,  are  not  to  be  called  men — they 
are  monkies." — "  Monkies  !  Sir  !"  exclaimed  I, 
«*  that  is,  indeed,  a  mofl  extraordinary  aiTer- 
tion. — IMonkies  !  I  believe,  indeed,  they  arc 
a  very  diltin£l  race  from  the  European — So 
alfo  is  the  I'traight-La'ixJ  ani  fine  formed 
Afiatic — So  are  tiie  rtu  men  of  north  Ame- 
Tica — But  where,  amid  this  variety,  does  the 
niun  end,  .iv.c  tie  monkey  begin  ?  I  am  afraid 
if  v."e  follow  vv hither  this  inquiry  will  lead  us, 
that  Mc  fi)all  find  ( urfclvts  more  degraded 
than  even  by  the  whiniiicu-i  fylLcm  of  Lord 
Mcnbcddo. -If  the  ncj,ro,  however,  is  a  mon«. 
key,  lei  n^e  h.azaru  one  remavk—that  their  ve- 
rv  licar  aiiiuiiv  to  us,    is  too  clearly  afcertain- 


1^4  DESMOND; 

ed  by  the  alliances  we  have  formed  witii 
them.;  nay,  I  have  even  heard  that  captams 
of  our  ihips  of  vi'ar,  have  often  profefTed  that 
they  prefer  the  fable  nymphs  of  Africa  to  the 
fairer  dames  of  Europe — 

"'The  pale  unripen'd  beauties  of  the  North." 

"  And,  if  I  recolledl  aright.  Sir  I  have  for- 
merly, in  moments  of  unguarded  conviviality, 
heard  you  fay,  that  when  you  were  a  young 
rnan,  and  in  the  fea  fervice,  you  had  your- 
felf  indulged  this  partiality  for  thefe  monkey 
ladies." 

This  parried,  a  little,  the  round  aflertion 
that  negroes  were  not  men ;  but  he  ftill  in- 
filled upon  it  that  they  had  little  or  no  feel- 
ing ;  it  v^as  not,  however,  very  difficult  to 
prove,  as  far  as  proof  can  on  fuch  a  point  be 
brought,  that  their  phylical  and  moral   fenfibi- 

lity   is  more    acute    than   ours. 1  will  not 

lengthen  my  letter  by  repeating  thefe  proofs, 
becaufe  I  am  perfuaded  you  are  not  dlfpofed 
to  difpute  them  j  but  go  on  to  fay,  that  after 
I  had  carried  almcft  every  article  againll  him, 
my  adverfary  was  compelled  to  take  fhelter 
under  fuch  an  argument  as  yours. — "  Per- 
haps," fald  he,  "  the  negroes  are  fometimes 
beat,  but  not  half  fo  niuch  as  our  foldiers  are 
•^-The  punifliment  infli<!:led  on  foldiers  is  in- 
finitely more  fevere." 

«  Does  not  that.  Sir,"  faid  I,  "  rather 
prove  that  our  military  punifliments  are  inhu- 
man, than  that  the  negroes  have  nothing  to 
complain  of?" 

Thus, 


"D    B    S    M    O    N    ».  185 

Thus,  my  dear  Bethel,  it  feems  to  me,  that 
Inftead  of  proving  that  we  are  extremely  hap- 
py, you  piove  only  that  we  are  comparatively 
lb  ;  and,  for  my  part,  I  never  could,  as  ma- 
ny people  do,  derive  confolation  from  the  re- 
fiediion  that  the  exigence  of  evil  in  the  per- 
fon  of  another,  diminiflied  the  fenfe  of  what 
I  felt  in  my  own. 

Do  not,  however,  mifunderftand  mc  •,  I 
think  that  our  form  of  government  is  cer- 
tainly the  beft not  that  can  be  imagined 

. but   that    has    ever    been    experienced  j 

and,  while  we  are  fure  that  praftice  is  in 
its  favour,  it  would  be  mod  abfurd  to  dream 
of  deftrcying  it  on  theory.' -If  I  had  a  ve- 
ry good  houfe  that  had  forne  inconveniencies 
about  it,  I  lliould  not  dcGre  to  pull  it  down, 
but   I  certainly   fliould  fend   for   an  architect 

and   fay,  alter  this  room—- it  is  too   dark 

— -  ■  remove    thcfe   paflages -they    are    too 

intricate make  a  door  here,    and  a  flair- 

cafe  there ;  make  the  kitchen  more  habita- 
ble for  my  fervants,  and  then  my  houfe  will 
be  extremely  good — ■ — But  I  fiiould  be  very 
much    flartled    if   my   architecl;     was    to   fay, 

•*  Sir,     I  dare  not   touch   your   houfe if  I 

let  in  more  light,  if  I  take  down  thofe  partiti- 
ons, and  make  the  other  changes  you  defire, 
1  am  very  much  afraid  that  the  great  timbers 
will  give  way,  and  the  party'ivalls  crufli  you 
beneath  their  ruins." 

As   I  do  not  know  when  I  fliall   fee   you,    I 
fliall  continue  to    write — and  wifli   very  much 

to  hear  from  you  often. -If  you  fend  your 

letters  to  Meflrs.  Sibthorpe  and  Griffith,  ban- 
ters in  London,   on  whom  I  draw  for  money 

as 


lS6  O    E    S    M    9    N    D. 

as  I  want  it,  they  will  always  be  able,  du- 
ring  the  reft  of  my  ramble,  to  trace  my  route 
Jjy  my  drafts  and  letters  on  bufinefs. 

Adieu  !    dear  Bethel, 

Ever  youi's  faithfully, 

LIONEL  DESMOND 


L  E  T-, 


^ESMOND.  187 

LETTER     XX. 
TO    MR.    DESMOND. 

Hartfield,  Sept.  10,  1791^ 

I  STIFLE,  I  reprefs  all  curlofity,  Def- 
mond-  I  have  often  told  you  I  never  defired 
to  interfere  with  your  affairs,  farther  ,than 
you  wilhed  me  to  do  fo — farther  than  you 
thought  I  could  be  ufcful  to  you  :  and  therer 
fore,  though  I  read,  with  -wonder  and  con- 
cern, a  letter  not  dated,  either  as  to  place  or 
time — A  letter,  in  which  the  name  of  Geral- 
dine  is  not  mentioned  ;  and  in  which  you 
feem  not  to  know  either  where  you  are  or  where 
you  fliall  be— I  will  not  fay  more  upon  it, 
than  that  I  am  always  glad  to  hear  of  you,  up- 
on your  own  terms. 

When  will  the  time  come  to  which  I  have 
lb  long  and  fo  vainly  been  looking  forward  ? 
— When  fliall  I  fee  you  living  in  Sedgewood 
in  that  mod  refpe£l:able  of  all  charadlers,  the 
independent  Englifh  gentleman  .'  —  I  never 
wanted  your  fociety  fo  much  as  I  do  now  ; 
butj  perhaps,  never  was  fo  unlikely  to  have 
it ;  and  all  that  I  find  here,  is  fo  little  to  my 
tafte,  that  I  (hall  be  glad  to  return  to  Bath, 
which  it  is  judged  neceflary  for  me  foon  to 
do. 

This  diflike  of  fociety,  however,  arifes  not 
from  its  quantity,  but  its  quality -^ Since  Sir 
Robert  Stamford  has  fettled  in  the  neighbour- 
hood, his  houfe,  which  is  almoft  always  full, 
fupplies  the  market-town  with  idle  or  curious 

morning 


l88  DESMOND. 

morning  vifitors ;  and  at  the  cofFee-houfe, 
where  I  very  feldom  go,  I  happened  on  call- 
ing yeflerday,  to  meet  your  Uncle  Major 
Danby,  and  I  learned  that,  attracted  by  the 
reputation  of  Epicurean  living,  he  had 
accepted  the  invitation  often  given  by  his  old 
acquaintance  Sir  Robert,  and  was  on  a  fort- 
nighc's  vifit  at  Linwell. 

I  found  the  Major  had  collected  round 
him  the  Curate,  the  Attorney,  the  Attor- 
ney's Clerk,  the  Riding  Surveyor,  the  Mailer 
of  an  Academy,  'f  where  youth  are  genleely 
educated,"  and  two  or  three  of  the  principal 
tradefmen  of  the  tov/n  -,  and  that,  from  a 
very  long  oration  on  politics  which  they  had 
heard  with  convi£lion  and  admiration,  he  had 
glided  away  on  a  defcriptive  tour  to- his  own 
feat  near  Bath  ;  and  was  giving  a  catalogue  rat- 
fonee  of  its  conveniences,  obliquely  preferring 
them  all  to  the  accumulations  of  the  fame 
luxuries  at  Linwell. 

*'  I  own,"  faid  he,  "  Sir  Robert  has  been 
at  a  great  expence,  an  Immenfe  expence — 
but  the  thing,  my  dear  Sir,  ( addrelhng  him- 
felf  to  tlie  Attorney)  the  thing  is  judgment 
-—judgment  in  laying  out  money  is  every 
thing." 

"  Aye,  Sir,  to  be  fure,"  anfwered  this 
gentleman,  (who  was,  I  found,  an  enemy 
©f  Sir  Robert's,  becaufe  he  was  employed 
in  eledlion  matters  by  a  great  man  of  the  op- 
pofice  party) — "  aye,  certainly ;  and,  as 
you  fay,  how  fliould  Sir  Robert  Stamford 
l)ave  this  judgment  ? — feeing,  that  it  was 
but  a  very  few  years  ago  that  he  knew   more 


•    ESMOND.  l8$ 

•f  a  jff,  fa  and  latitats ,  John  Doe  TiuA  Richard 
Roe,  than  about  raifing  foreign  fruits  and 
ice   creams — I  don't  wifh  to    fpeak  in    difpa- 

ragement    of    the     profefTion    neither- for 

an  honeft  attorney  is  a  very  honorable 
thing." 

"  And,  I  am  fure,  it  is  a  very  rare  one, 
interrupted  a  blunt  tradefman,    in    a  fmooth 

black  wig,    and   leather   breeches a    Very 

rare  one — and,  for  aught  I  ever  faw  or  heard 
to  the  contrary,  you  may  put  all  the  honeft 
lawyers  that  ever  was,  in  your  eye,  and  never 
fee  the  worfe.*' 

"  That's  not  fo  civil  a  fpeech,  Sir,"  faid 
Mr.  Grimbold,  the  Excifeman  ;  "  Sir  Ro- 
bert Stamford,  Sir,  my  worthy  patron,  is 
a  man  of  honor,  Sir,  and  a  gentleman, 
Sir ;  and  as  for  his  having  pracElis'd  the 
law,  Sir,  and  thereby  raifed  himfelf  to  his 
prefent  rank,  it  does  him  credit.  Sir,  and 
fhews  that  this  government  and  admiuillra- 
tion  fairly  and  juftly  rewards  merit,  Sir." 

"  Come,  come,  Mr.  Grimbold,"  cried 
the  Attorney,  "  we  know  very  well  that  the 
greatell  merit  Sir  Robert  has  in  your  eyes, 
is  his  having  rewarded  your  merit,  and  made 
you  a  riding-officer  -,  becaufe  of  the  votes 
for  this  here  borough  of  ours,  that  are  in 
your  family,  Mr.   Grimbold-^" 

"  Yes !  yes !"  faid  Mr.  Doughty,  ano- 
ther tradefman,  we  underftand  trap,  and  fo 
does  our  good  neighbour-^As  to  me,  I  am 
free  to  fpeak  without  favour  or  affeclion — ^We 
all  know  what  Sir  Robert  Stamford  was — ■ 
What  then  ! — which  of  us  tha.   had  been    as 

much 


t§b  ©    £    S    M    0   N   6; 

much  in  luck  would  not  have  done  the  fim« 
thing  ? 1  have  nothing  to    fay    to   that- 
Whatever  a  mail    can    make    in    the  way  of 
bufinefs,  whether  it   be  as  to  lawyer,     or    a 
tradefman,    or  a    place    at  court,    is    all  fair 
enough  •,  and  I,  for  my  part,    don't  want  to 
cry    Sir  Robert  down,    though  he  does    not 
deal  at  my   (hop  ;    he    went    to    Gill's  when 
he    fettled    here — for    why  ?     Twas  natural 
enough.  Gill    could   command  three  votes-— 
certain  I  have  but  one  ;  but  Sir  Robert,  though 
ho   is  not    a   conftant    cuftomer,    lays  out  a 
good    deal  of   mouey   with  me,    and  I've  no 
fault  to  find."  ^ 

"While  this  converfation,  fo  exprefllve  6x 
the  candor  and  difinterefted  condudt  of  Britifli 
eleiftors,  went  on,  I  flood  perdu  behiiid  Mr* 
Grimbold  j  a  tall  perfonage,  whofe  broad 
Ihoulders,  however,  jull  permitted  me  to  peep 
over  at  the  Major,  who  had  not  yet  efpied 
me — I  faw  he  became  extremely  reftlefs  at 
being  compelled  to  hear  fo  much  of  the  con* 
fequence  of  his  friend  Sir  Robert,  when  he 
was  thinking  only  how  he  might  beft  difplay 
his  own— Not  very  curious  in  his  auditors, 
he  is  well  contented  to  be  heard  ;  and  detefts 
a  man  who  interrupts  him  worfe  than  a  pick- 
pocket. 

He  now  raifed  his  voice  in    the  vain   hope 

of    being     ftill    attended    to The   worthj 

BurgefTes  of  W — had  got  upon  a  topic  much 
more  interefting  to  them,  than  a  defcription 
of  paftures,  the  beef  of  which  they  ihould 
never  partake,  and  of  pineries,  the  produce 
cf  which  net  even  an-^k£lion  could  fend  .hem 

a  fhar^; 


1»    E    ^    M   O   N   I».  iff 

ti  fliare  ;  and  he  therefore  buftled  up  to  quit 
the  circle,  when  perceiving  me,  he  advanced, 
and  very  cordially  (hook  hands  with  me — We 
walked  away  together,  and  fell  into  conver- 
fation  on  the  views,  and  the  foil,  and  the 
hulbandry  in  this  part  of  the  country  ;  which, 
he  faid,  was  very  much  inferior  to  that  tradl 
of  the  country  of  Somerfet,  round  his  houfe 
at  Aihford-hall. 

This  uncle  of  yours  has,  to  a  very  extra- 
vagant degree,  a  trait  of  character  vvhich 
I  have,  in  my  way  through  life,  once  or 
twice  remarked  before — Whatevet  he  does, 
is  better  done  than  any  other  man  living  could 
have  done  it — whatever  he  fays  is  without 
appeal — whatever  he  pofiefles  is  more  ex- 
traordinary, more  excellent,  than  are  the 
fame  things  in  the  pofleffion  of  his  neigh- 
bours. 

His  houfe  and  gardens  are  the  beft  in  the 
county — his  men  do  more  work — his  crops 
are  more  luxuriant — -and  fo  fond  is  he  of 
being  always  the  moft  atfiive  and  the  moft 
important,  that  I  have  heard  him  boaft  of  ha- 
ving, in  his  judicial  capacity  for  the  county  af 
Somerfet,  committed  in  the  courfe  of  one 
year,  more  prifoners  to  the  county  jail  than 
any  three  of  his  brethren  of  the  bench. 

li'ou  know,  that  being  an  old  batchelor, 
and  fomewhat  of  an  epicure,  he  is  at  home, 
what  the  vulgar  call  a  cot  ;  and  has  laid 
down  his  fpontoon  for  the  tafting  fpoon, 
converted  his  fword  into  a  carving  knife, 
and  his  fafli  into  a  jelly  bag — It  is  not  her 
youth  or  her  beauty,  that  recommendei 
his   prefent    favorite    houfekeeper  ;     but    the 

{km 


1^2  DESMOND. 

fkill  (he  had  acquired  in  ftudying  under  i 
French  cook,  at  the  houfe  of  a  great  man, 
who  acquired  an  immenfe  fortune  in  the 
American  war,  by  obtaining  the  contra£l 
for  potatoes  and  four  crout — But  even  to 
this  gentlewoman,  fkilled  as  fhe  is  in  "  all 
kiads  of  made  di{hes,  pickling,  pdtting, 
and  preferving,"  and  tenderly  connecfted 
with  her,  as  the  prying  world  fuppofes  the 
Major  to  be  ;  he  does  not  leave  the  folc 
direiflion  of  that  important  department,  his 
kitchen  ;  which  when  he  is  at  home,  he 
always  fuperintends  himfelf.— •'  Aye,  aye,*' 
faid  he,  in  this  Lift  converfation,  <'  let  thofe 
alone  for  good  eating  who  knou^  what  it  is 
to  have  lived  badly. — /  remember  when  we 
were  in  camp  in  Germany,  and  had  nothing 
to  drink  but  water  from  a  pond  that  fwarmed 
with  vermin,  and  not  enough  of  that — and 
nothing  to  eat  but  fuch  bread  as  I  would 
not  now  give  to  my  hog — while  the  money 
went  into  the  pockets  of  the  contracSlors." 

**  You  now  live  in  happier  times,  Major,' 
faid  I" 

**  Aye,  that  we  do,  indeed — thefe  times 
are  very  good  times,  if  the  damned  fcoundrels 
of  prefbyterlans  and  non-couformifts  virould 
but  let  us  be  quiet  that  think  them  good ; 
and  not  be  difturbing  the  public  tranquillity, 
and  be    curfed   to     the    roundheaded   fons  of 

b S." — Then     looking     more      important, 

he  added,  ♦*  To  tell  you  very  feriouily  my 
thoughts,  Mr.  Bethel,  I  don't  much  like  the 
prefent  appearance  of  affairs — there  is  a  very 
Uoublefome    mutinous  fpirit   got  among   the 

difTeijH- 


D   E   S   M    0    K   D.  195 

Jiflenters — ^Thefe  riots  that  happened  in  July  »t 
Birmingham" — 

«  Nay,  dear  Major  Danby,"  cried  I, 
"  it  was  not  the  diilenters  who  rioted 
there"— 

"  No  i  but  it  was  owing  to  them  and 
their  feditious  meetings— For  my  part,  I 
rejoice  that  they  fell  into  the  pit  they  had 
dug  for  others — I  wifh  that  they  had  all  been 
blown  up  together,  and  the  country  well 
rid  of  them.— I'll  tell  you  what,  Bethel,  if 
I  had  commanded  on  tliat  occafion,  I  fhould 
have  been  apt,  I  believe,  to  have  prote(fted 
thofe  honelt  men  in  what  they  did  againft 
your  confounded  faints, — ^Thofe  canting  puri- 
tans are  all  water  drinkers,  fellows  that  fmg 
and  pray — I'd  extirpate  the  whole  race." 

«  You  would  really  ?" 

"  Yes,    by   G '■ would  I,  before  they 

do  any  more  mifchlef— What  bufmefs  have 
th(y  to  mutter,  and  raife  difturbances,  and 
complain  of  their  grievances  .•'  I  hope  govern- 
ment will  never  grant  them  an  ace — let  them 
grumble  on,  but  net  iniluence  the  opinion 
of  other  people. — At  prefent  I  am  a  little 
uneafy  at  the  face  of  affairs — I  have  a  (lake 
in  the  hedge,  Mr.  Bethel,  a  pretty  cofidera- 
ble  ftake,  and  1  don't  defire  to  fee  it  trampled 
down." 

"  I  don't  know,"  replied  I,  «*  any  body 
that  does." 

"  Yes,  yes,  but  I  do  know  fuch — You 
are,  indeed,  a  temperate  nan — a  man  who 
has  feen  a  good  deal  of  the  world — You  have 
a  itake  alfo  of  fome   confeqv.ence  ;  lb,    indeed. 

Vol  II.  K  and 


t^4  i)    E    S    M    O    N   J5. 

and    a  very  valuable   one,    has   my   nephew', 

Defmend But  whst    d'ye    think    now  ©f 

him  ? — He's  as  difcontented  as  any  Praife* 
God-Bare-Bones  of  them  all — I  can't  imagine 
what  poffeiTes  the  puppy — he's  not  like  any 
ofhev  young  fellow  of  his  age  ;  inflead  of 
fporting  his  money  like  a  man  of  fpirit,  on 
the  turf,  or  with  the  bones,  he  goes  piping  about 
and  talks  of  unequal  reprefentation,  and  the 
weight  of  taxes,  and  the  devil  knows 
%hat  ;  things,  v/ith  which  a  young  fel- 
low of  fix  and-twenty  has  no  conceril 
at  all-^^ — And  then,  as  for  his  amours; 
inftead  of  keeping  a  brace  or  two  of 
pretty    wenches,      he    goes     fneaking    after 

a  married  woman — to  be    fued  for  da* 

mages,  and,  perhaps,  run  through  tlic 
body." 

««  Sneaking  about  after  a  married  woman, 
Sir,"     faid  I,    "  pray  explain." 

"  Come,     cc(me.     Bethel,"      replied    your 

fage    uncle,       "    don't     affedl    ignorance — I 

believe  you  are  a  truily  confidant,    but    here 

■  your    fecrecy    is  a   mere     joke — ^the   thing  is 

notorious." 

"  I  mud  beg  an  explanation,  IMajair 
Danby,"  cried  I,  with  fome  warmth — 
"  fince  ycu  think  me  concerned,  ic  is  the 
more  neceffary." — ''  "Why,  if  I  muft  explain 
then,  can  you  really  now  fuppofe  that  we 
don't    all  know    the     hillory    of    Mrs.  Ver- 

r-icy  r'-~ "  The    hiftory    of  Mrs.     Verney, 

gir  ! — Upon  my  honour  I  mull  recommend 
It  to  you  to  fpeak  more  cautioufly  of  a 
'\vomun    of    v.-)iora    malice     itfclf  cannot   hw 

jure 


DESMOND.  i^p 

}\ire  the  reputation— A  woman  who  Is  an 
example  of  a  blamelefs  wife,  to  a  very 
worthlefs  hufband — and  the  befl  mother, 
daughter,  and  fifter " 

*<  "Why  damn  it  now,  Bethel,  how  can 
you  fancy  all  this  will  do  Vvith  mc  ?  If 
Mrs.  Verney  has  ■ipefichant  for  Lionel,  with 
all  my  foul.— I  know  very  well  that  if  the 
ftupid  puppy,  her  hufband,  had  as  many 
horns  as  the  beaft  in  the  revelations,  ht 
deferves  them  all,  And  Defmond  has  as 
good  a  chance  as  another,  M'ith  any  wo- 
man ;  but  I  think  he's  a  fool  to  be  at  fuch  a 
curfed  expence  about  it,  and  then  to  fancy 
himfelf  fo  fnug,  like  a  woodcock  that  hides 
its  head,  and  believes  itfelf  fecure, — Hah  ' 
ha  !  hah  !" 

«<  Upon  my  word.  Major,  I  mull  flill 
declare    myfelf  ignorant   of  your     meaning.*' 

He  abfolutely  ftiouted,  in  his  coarfe 
boifterous  way,  but  feeing  me  look  very 
grave,  he  at  length  checked  his  mirth,  and 
faid — »*  Why  lookee,  Bethel,  when  a  young 
fellow  lays  down  between  three  and  four 
thoufand  pounds,  to  rcleafe  from  execution 
the  efFetls  of  a  man  he  defpifes  and  con- 
temns ;  when  he  g^oes  down  incog,  to  the  re- 
tirement of  fuch  a  man's  wife,  and  ftays  near 
a  month  in  her  neighbourhood ;  when  he  is 
known  to  have  declined  the  moft  advantage- 
ous offers  of  alliance  from  the  families  of 
fome  of  the  fined  young  women  in  England 
on  her  account ;  and  when  he  is  acliually,  at 
this  time,  gont  abroad  with  her  ;  or,  how- 
ler, concealed  foniewhcre  or  other,  hovy 
^'^  2  the 


196  D   E    S   M    0    N   Dj 

the  plague  can  you  fuppofe  the  world  will 
»oi  talk.  ?  It  is  well  enough  known, 
that  Verney  is  a  favage  and  a  fcoun- 
drel,      who    will     fell       his      wife     to     the 

beft     bidder "Why    don't    Lionel    offer 

him    her    price     at     once,      for    now     you 
may    depend    upon    it    he'll    be     fued     and 
Verney      will     get     devilifh     damages."- 
I    was,     as   you    will  eafily    believe,     thun- 
derftruck     by     a      fpeech     in     which     truth 
was     fo      blended      with        falfehood,      that 
while      I      was    compelled     to    allow    fomc 
part    of    it    to    be     true,     it    feemed    hope- 
Icfs,  with    fuch  a    man,     to    contend,     that 
much    of    it    was  an    infamous    fuppofition. 
How      make     your    uncle    Danby      be- 
lieve,     that    you  fhould,       on    a  fyllem    of 
atFeStion,       merely      platomcy       have     advanc- 
ed     this     m.oney  ?     (of  which    it    is     won- 
derful    thiit     he    fliould     be      informed)     on 
a   fypem     merely    pla tonic y    go    and   live  perdu 
\i\     Hereford  (hire  ?    On    a  fyllem    merely   pla- 
toTiii-y    be     now     concealed    in      France,     in 
the        neighbourhood       of       Geraldine — for 
fuch    I     am    afraid  is    the    fa£l. — Dear  Def- 
mond   !       behold      the       coufequences       of 
your      indifcretion  ! — See    what    cruel    (and, 
as    I    atn     convinced)     what     unjuji    reflec- 
tions you    have  been    the  means    of    throw- 
ing   on    the     woman     you       love — confidcr 
all    the     confequences     that      may       follow. 

However       hopelcfs       the       undertaking' 

appeared,  I  endeavoured  to  convince  Mnjor 
Dauby,  that  in  whatever  way  you  miL':hr 
have    intcrfcied    to    be    ferv:ceable    to  Mr.-. 

Va-ney, 


DESMOND.  197 

Verney,  for  whom  you  had  a  very  great 
friendftiip ;  yet  that  all  this  originated, 
on  your  part,  not  from  any  defigns 
prejudicial  to  the  honour  of  Mrs.  "Verney, 
but  from  your  pity  for  an  amiable  wo- 
man involved  in  undeferved  calamities  ; 
that  you  certainly  were  not  in  France  now, 
but  in  the  North  of  England  ;  and  that  Mrs. 
Verney  was  with  her  hufband." 

All    the     anfwen    I   could     obtain  to    this 

was,     "  Pooh  !    pooh    ! Plhaw  !  pfliaw  ! 

we  know  better.*' — I  could  neither  con- 
vince the  Major  of  the  fallacy  of  the  re- 
ports he  had  heard,  or  prevail  upon  him 
to  name  the  authors. — Tired  with  the  con- 
verfation,  and  heartily  vexed,  I  left  him 
foon  after ;  nor  could  the  account  he  was 
again  going  to  begin  of  his  own  impor- 
tance, which  is  an  idea  ever  uppermoft  in 
his  mind,  prevail  upon  me  longer  to  at- 
tend to  him.— I  returned  home,  and  he 
went  back  to  Sir  Robert  Stamford's,  there 
to  entertain  the  refpedlable  fociety  (anion;;; 
whom  I  find  is  Lord  Newminfter  and  Sir 
James  Deybourne)  with  an  account  of  my 
confternation  at  the  knowledre  he  has  of 
your  affairs. 

I  own  to  you,  Defmond,  that  tliis  dia- 
logue has  occafioned  to  me  very  cruel  dil- 
quiet. — If  this  letter  reaches  you  before 
the  mifchicf  is  irreparable,  by  the  univer- 
fal  dilTemination  of  thefe  reports,  fo  injuri- 
ous to  the  peace,  perhaps  fo  fatal  to  the 
]ife  of  Geraldine  \  appear,  I  conjure  you, 
fliew     yourfcJf     in      England— -convince     her 

friends 


ip8  DESMOND. 

friends  and  the  world  that  you  have  n9t 
followed  her  to  France ;  and  vindicate,  2St 
once,    her  fame  and  the  veracity  of 

Your  faithful  fervant, 

E.  BETHELi 


L  E  T. 


jD  E  s  M  o  N  r.  sg^ 

LETTER    XXI. 
TO    MR.   BETHEL. 

Eexley  Hill,  near  Wells,   Sonierfet, 
Sept.  23,  1791, 

YOU  lately  accuftonied  me,  dear  Sir,  to 
confide  to  you  the  cruel  uneafinefs  tlrat  prey- 
ed upon  my  heart,  in  regard  to  my  fifler 
Verney  ;  and  furely  you  will  forgive  me,  if  I 
once  more  intrude  upon  you— Mlien  I  am, 
on  her  account,  infinitely  more  unhappy  than 
ever,  and  when  I  have  no  fiicnd  but  you  to 
•whom  I  dare  fpeak  of  her. 

It  is  now  two  days  fince  I  have  been  In  pcf- 
feflion  of  a  fixth  letter  from  her,  fince  ilie 
has  been  in  France  j  it  is  dated,  as  the  two 
preceding  letters  were,  from  Meudon  ;  it 
gives  me  an  account  of  her  fituation  j  it  de- 
fcribes  the  fcene  around  her ;  they  are  her 
words — her  fentiments  —her  ideas — and  flie 
has  even  added  a  beautiful  little  ode,  v.hicii 
as  I  read  it,  gave  me  fuch  a  pi(flure  of  her 
defpondent  flate  of  mind,  as  drew  tears  from 
my  eyes. 

As  there  were,  however,  fome  parts  cf  tliis 
letter  which  I  couH  not,  with  propriety,  fliew 
my  mother,  as  the  fcntimenis  might  have  raif- 
«d  her  anger,  and  the  poetry  her  averfion,  I 
faid  nothing  to  her  of  my  having  received  fuch 
a  letter. —  She,  herfelf,  had  long  ceafed  to  en- 
quire, earneftly,  about  my  filler  ;  and  there* 
fore,  in  this  concealment,  or  rather  filence,  I 
had  not  to  reproach  aiyfelf  with  breach  of  du- 
ty 


200  D   £   S   M    0   M    D. 

ty  and  tcndernefs,    in  trifling  with  maternal 
Iblicitude. 

I  believed  my  mother  was  quite  eafy  about 
Geraldine,  and  content  not  to  be  at  any  ex- 
pence  herfelf,  was  perfe<ftly  fatisfied  with 
whatever  difpofitions  Mr.  Verney  might  chufe 
to  make  about  his  wife  and  his  children* 

You  will  fuppofe  then,  that  I  was  ex- 
tremely furprifed  yefterday.— I  was  at  work  in 
my  own  room,  when  my  mother,  about  a 
quarter  of  an  hour  after  the  arrival  of  the  let- 
ters from  the  poll,  entered  it ;  I  faw  im- 
mediately that  fomething  had  difcompofed 
her ;  but  as  trifles  very  often  afi^edl  her 
more  than  things  of  confequence,  I  con- 
cluded that  her  maid  had  made  up  her  Meck- 
lin  lace  awkwardly,  or  had  put  too  much 
ftarch  in  her  new  Japan  muflin  ;  and  that  hav- 
ing vented  as  much  of  her  anger  on  the  poor 
girl  as  it  was  probable  fhe  would  bear  at  one 
fitting,  I  was  to  afford  Mrs.  Waverly  entire 
eafe,  by  liflening  (as  in  duty  bound)  to  the 
rtfiduum  ;  which  feemed,  by  its  acrimony,  to 
inflame  her  features,    and   agitate  her   whole 

frame- "  Daughter    Frances,"    cried   fhej, 

■"  have  you  heard  lately  from  Mrs.  Verney  ?" 

<«  Yes,  Madam." 

«*  And  pray  where  is  flie"— 

"  In  France,  Madam,  at  Meudon,  where 
fhe  was  when  fhe  wrote  to  you" — 

<«  'Tis  falfe" — replied  my  mother,  anger 
flafhing  from  her  eyes,  and  trembling  on  her 
tongue — "  'tis  a  bare-faced,  infamous  falfe- 
hood,  andyouknoivitis" 

"  Good  God  !  dear  Madam  !  you  terrify 
and  amaze  me  !    what  can  you  mean  ? 

"I  mean, 


DESMOND.  201 

«  I  mean,  I  mean— I  dare  liardly  trufl;  my- 
felf  to  utter  a  fentence  fo  difgraceful — You> 
Mifs,  deceitful,  worthlefs,  wicked  girl,  know 
it,  however,  but  too  well." 

"  My  dear  Madam,  what  do  I  know  ?  For 
mercy's  fake  do  not  agitate  youvfeif  thus  ! — 
Whatever  I  know  about  our  poor  Geraldine, 
I  am  fure  I  never  made  any  myftery  of:  tell 
me,  I  befeech  you,  what  do  I  know  ?" 

"  Odious,  bafe,  little  hypocrite — you  know 
that  this  difgrace  to  my  blood,  this  viper  who 
is  to  deftroy  the  honour  of  my  family,  is  not 
in  France  \  perhaps  never  has  been  there  ; 
but  has  been,  and  is,  I  believe  in  my  confci- 
ence,  ftill  at  that  farm-houfe  in  HerefordiTiire, 
where  fhe  lived  before  —where  fhe  has  lain-in 
— yes,  Mifs,  lain-in  of  a  girl,  and  is  the  de- 
clared miftrefs  of  that  villain,  Defmond,  who 
has  been  there  with  her  j  and  perhaps,  is  with 
her  yet !" 

The  moment  I  could  recover  from  my  im- 
mediate furprlfe,  the  ridiculous  impoflibility 
€Jf  this  flory  llruck  me  fo  forcibly,  that  my 
terrors  were,  for  a  moment,  dilhpated  ;  and  I. 
recoliedled  myfelf  enough  to  fav  (perhaps 
with  a  look  of  too  much  contempt,  confider- 
ing  it  was  my  mother  to  whom  I  fpoke)  "  up- 
on my  word.  Madam,  a  very  curious  legend 
— Have  the  goodnefs  to  tell  me,  to  whole  ad- 
mirably fertile  invention  you  owe  it — If  d^arJ 
good  Mifs  Elford  had  not  been  quite  removed 
from  this  part  of  the  world,  1  fhoulj  have 
given  her  the  honour  of  it." 

I  faid  this  quite  by  guefs,  and  not  at  all  Uip_ 

pofing  I  was  right ;    but  I  fuw  inllantly  by  my 

mother's  countenance,  tlutt  my  con]e:lure  w.ii 

K  5  juit. 


!202  15    E    S    U    0    N    D; 

juft,  and  my  alarm  fubfided  flill  more,— 'I  was 
now  fure,  that,  not  only  this  falfchood,  but 
the  fadls  that  happened  during  Geraldine's  real 
refidence  at  Bridge-foot,  came  from  Mifs  El- 
ford  ;  and  having  conquered  my  firft  pertun- 
bation,  I  managed  the  reil  of  the  dialogue  fo 
as  to  procure  from  my  mother's  unguarded 
warmth,  all  the  intelligence  I  defired  ;  though 
it  has  not,  on  refledlion,  given  my  mind  all 
the  eafe  I  expelled. — Mifs  Elford  has  a  relati- 
on whofe  refidence  is  at  Rofs,  and  to  the  houfe 
of  this  relation  flie  retired,  when  overwhelm- 
ed with   anguifli  and  difappointment,    by  the 

fudden    defertion   of  her    mercenary  lover 

1  hi  inn  where  the  French  nobleman  and  his 
fuit-'  put  up,  was  exa6\ly  oppofite  this  her  me- 
lancholy retirement — A  group  much  lefs 
ma-ked  by  Angularity  of  appearance,  would 
have  attrafted  the  attention  of  an  infulated 
being,  eagerly  attentive  to  every  occurrence 
that  afforded  any  thing  to  gratify  her  natural 
love  of  malicious  enquiry,  now  {harpened 
by  internal  wretchednefs  and  difcontent — -The 
fortigners  no  fooner  appeared,  than  Mifs  El- 
ford became  flationary  at  her  window,  and 
fhe  faw  an  Englifhman  with  them,  in  whom 
{he  immediately  recollcdlcd  the  perfon  of  Mr 
Defmond. 

The  chambermaid  of  the  inn  was  well 
known  to  her  ;  flie  contrived  to  fend  for  her 
over,  to  pick  out  all  flie  knew  then  of  the 
guefts,  and  to  engage  her  to  make  farther  en- 
quiries-— ^In  confcquence  of  which  the  wo- 
man foon  informed  her,  that  Mr.  Defmond 
had  been  living  foms  time  at  the  cottage  at 
Bridgefoot,    very  near  the  refidence    of  Mrs 


Verne 


7 


D   E    S   M    G    K   n.  20J 

Verncjr ;  that  he  returned  thither  before  the 
foreign  gentlemen,  and  afterwards  accompa- 
nied   Geraldine  to   Glocefter. All  this, 

"vvith  fome  additions  of  her  own,  was  tranf- 
tnitted  to  my  mother,    under  the  ftrictell  in- 

jun6lions    of    fecrecy. This    explains    all 

thofe  circumftances  that  gave  me  fuch  pain 
and  aftonifliment,  when  my  mother  had  taken 
fuch  a  fudden  antipathy  to  Mr.  Defmond, 
and  fo  ftrenuoufly  infilled  on  Geraldine's  go^ 
ing  to  her  hufband. 

But  how  fhall  I  account  for  what,  on  the 
fame  authority,  my  mother  has  now  heard, 
that  my  filler,  attended  by  a  gentleman,  the 
defcription  of  whom  anfwers  to  the  perfon  of 
Mr.  Defmond,  returned  to  Bridge-foot  about 
three  weeks  fince,  where  fhe  was,  in  a  few 
days,  delivered  of  a  daughter  ;  that  her  atten- 
dants, conCfting  of  two  women,    are  French, 

who    cannot  fpeak  a   fyllable  of  Englifli. 

The  gentleman,  who  accompanied  her,  left 
,the  place  about  ten  days  ago  ;  but  the  lady  is 
fuppofed  to  be  ftill   there. 

I  know,  that  were  not  Geraldine  incapable 
of  fuch  condu6l,  unverfed  in  deceit  and  pof- 
fefling  a  heart  as  free  from  guilt  as  her  mind 
is  ingenuous  and  candid,  there  are  numberlels 
•other  objedlions  to  the  probability  cf  her  be- 
ing fo    fituated Yet,    as   Mifs  Elford   had 

moll  certainly  truth  for  the  general  ground 
'Of  her  former  affs^rtions,  how  is  it  poffible  to 
convince  my  mother  that  all  (lie  relates  now 
is  mere  fabrication  ? — How  is  it  polTible  to 
convince  the  malicious,  prying  world  of  tliis  ? 
- — Indeed  the  particulars  are  (o  minute  which 
Mifs  Eiford  had  lent,    ic  is  almoft  impoflibie 


2&4  ft   E   S    M    O    N   D. 

to  fuppofe,  that  with  all  her  art,  or  all  hcf 
malice,  (he  could  have  the  cunning  to  invent, 
©r  the  effrontery  fo  boldly  to  aflert  them, 
and  to  dare  any  one  to  difprove  facts  ;  which 
(he  aflures  my  mother,  only  her  tender  re- 
gard for  her  could  induce  her  to  bring  for- 
ward fo  pofitlvely — "  My  heart,  dear^  deavj 
Mrs.  Waverly,"  fays  the  canting  prude,  "  my 
heart  bleeds  for  every  pang  which  juftice  and 
truth  oblige  me  (to  prevent  your  being  de- 
ceived and  impofed  upon)  thus  to  infiidt  on 
your's  !" 

Dear  Sir  !  what  am  I  to  think  of  all  this  ? 
—That  my  filler  Geraldine,  whom  I  know  to 
be  in  France,  fhould  be  at  this  village  in  Here- 

fordlhire,    I   know  is   impoTible 1  own  it 

is  much  more  likely  that  Mifs  Elford,  through 
malice  or   error,    or  both,    has    invented  the 

ftory,  or  taken  fome  other  perfon  for  her 

Yet,  as  the  report  will  not  only  be  injurious 
to  the  fame  of  my  beloved  filler,  but  may  be 
attended  with  confequences  fatal  to  the  life 
of  your  beloved  friend  — I  own,  that  though  I 
defpifed  it  at  firfl:,  I  now  feel  moft  com- 
pletely alarmed  ;  and  entreat  you  to  have 
the  goodnefs  to  tell  me,  by  the  return  of 
the  poft,  whether  you  know  where  Mr.  Def- 
mond  is ;  and  whether  you  think  any  mea- 
fures  ought  to  be  purfued ;  a;id  what  to 
prevent  the  farther  progrefs  of  a  calumny 
from  which  fo  much  mifchief  is  to  be  appre- 
Jjended. 

Imagine  with    what   impatience    I  wait  to 
hear  again   from  my  fifttr — and  how  often  I 
have  examined  and  re-examined  the   contents 
^nd  the  pod-marks  of  thofe   letters  I  have  al- 
ready 


DESMOND.  20j 

tcady   received  from  her When  an  evil, 

of  whatever  nature,  is  certain,  the  mind,  by 
degrees,  acquires  firmnefs  to  endure  it  ;  but 
the  pain  of  uncertainty  and  conje6lure,  like 
what  I  now  fufFer,  is  of  all  others  the  moft 
"^tolerable — I  have  not  clofed  my  eyes  dur- 
ing the  laft  night ;  or  have  I  had  one  mo- 
ment's tranquillity  of  mind  fmce  my  m9ther's 
angry  communication — To  add  to  my'  excef- 
fivc  vexation,  flie  has  related  the  whole,  in 
the  moft  unguarded  way,  to  Mrs.  Fairfax  and 
her  daughter,  to  my  brother  and  his  wife, 
and  to  a  certain  Lord  Fordingbridge,  who  is 
here  on  a  vifit  to  Mr.  Waverly  ;  and  I  think, 
the  lover  of  Mifs  Anaftatia — —There  are, 
therefore,  no  hopes  of  ftifling  the  report  j 
and  if  I  can  judge  by  the  manner  of  the  la- 
dies,   there  is  not  one   of  them   who   fails  to 

hope   it  may  be  found   true. Geraldine  is 

too  lovely,  and  has  been  too  much  admired, 
not  to  be  dilliked  by  women  who  are  fo  re- 
markable for  their  wifh  to  monopolize  all 
admiration  j  and  they  are  glad  of  an  oppor- 
tunity to  exclude  from  the  family  a  part  of 
if,  v.ho  might,  they  apprehend,  in  confe- 
quence  of  Verney's  mad  difilpation,  be,  at 
fome  time  or  other,  a  weight  on  the  pecuni- 
aty  intereft  cf  the  relh 

Lord  Fordingbridge  met  with  Defmond 
abroad,  and  feems  to  have  conceived  fomc 
perfcnal  dillike  to  him. — My  brother  has 
been  debating,  whether  he  ought  not  to  ap- 
ply to  him  for  immediate  fatisfa£tion ;  but 
of  his  purfuing  that  idea,  I  ihoujd  not  have 
very  accute  apprehenfions,  if  I  did  not  fee 
that  Lcrd  Fordingbridge,    towards   whom  he 

looks 


206  B   £    S    M    0    N   Si 

looks  as  to  an  oracle,  (for  he  is  reckoned  a 
young  man  of  eminent  abilities)  did  not  feem 
very  much  inclined  to  urge  him  to  fuch  a 
ftep— The  whole  converfation  of  the  circle 
here,  has  been  engrofled  by  this  affair  ever 
fmce  yefterday  ;  of  courfe,  it  is  terribly  pain- 
ful to  me  •,  but  I  dare  not  abfent  myfelf 
fron^.  it  long  together,  and  have  llolen  the 
time  Fvnave  been  writing  this  from  my  pillow, 
though  not  from  my  repofe ;  for,  till  I  am 
lefs  diftra(fted  by  conjeftures  and  apprehen- 
lions,  I  have  no  hope  of  obtaining  any.— 
Pardon,  dear  Sir,  this  incoherent  letter — 1  re- 
ally do  not  know  what  I  am  about ;  and  never 
•in  my  life  had  fo  much  occafion  for  that 
friendly  advice,  with  which  you  have  fo  oftem 
honored  and  obliged, 

Sir, 

Tour  laoft  grateful  and  obedient  fervant, 

FRANCES  WAVERLY. 


XST= 


n   £    S    M   0    K    D.  207 

LETTER    XXII. 
TO   MISS   WAVERLY. 

Hartfield,  Sept.  28th,  1791-r 

IT  was  late  lad  night  dear  Madam,  be- 
fore I  received  your  letter — However  I  am  flat- 
tered by  being  thus  honoured  with  your  con- 
fidence, the  purport  of  it  has  given  me  ex- 
treme uneafmefs — ^^the  more  fo,  as  what  I  have 
to  fay,  in  reply,  will  not,  I  fear,  relieve  you 
from  any  part  of  your's. 

I  agree  with  you,  however,  in  opinion—* 
opinion,  furely,  founded  on  the  fecureft 
ground  ;  that  our  dear  Mrs.  Verney  is  inca* 
pable  of  the  conduft  v/hich  is,  by  Mifs  El- 
ford's  reprefentation,  and  Mrs.  Waverly's 
credulity,  imputed  to  her— Yet,  convinced  as 
I  muft,  on  reflection,  be  of  this,  I  am,  at  the 
fame  time,  compelled  to  acknowledge,  that 
there  is  an  air  of  myftery  in  the  letters  of  Mr. 
Defmond  to  me,  fo  unlike  his  ufual  flyle  of 
confidence  and  candor,  that  I  account  for  it 
no  otherwife  than  by  fuppofing  there  is  fome- 
thing  in  his  fituation,  which  it  is  neceflTary  to 
conceal  even  from  me. 

Thefe  letters  are  not  dated,  fo  that  I  know 
not  whither  they  come  from,  or  how  long  they 
are  written  before  I  receive  them — But  it  is 
probable  that  Defmond  is  at  a  great  diflance, 
as  he  receives  my  letters  which  are  fent  to  the 
xare  of  his  bankers  in  London,  very  long  af- 
ter they  are  written. 

-I  will  own  to  you,    that  this  referve  of  m.y 

friend's, 


2o8  DESMOND. 

friend's,  which  I  never,  till  lately  experienc- 
ed from  him,  has  hurt  me  extremely— ^Yet, 
perhaps,  I  am  wrong  ;  there  are  circumllance* 
and  fituations,  which  a  man  of  honor  cannot, 
and  ought  not,  to  reveal  to  his  mofl  intimate 
friends. 

I  thought,  however,  that  upon  the  footing 
we  always  have  been  together,  I,  who  can 
have  no  obje£l  in  view  but  his  fervice,  might 
attempt  to  difcover  how  I  might  more  quickly 
convey  my  letters  to  him,  particularly  as  fome 
affairs  relative  to  one  of  his  eftates,  required 
his  immediate  anfwer — I,  therefore  wrote  to 
the  fecond  partner  in  the  banking-houfe  he  is 
connecfled  with,  who  is  more  particularly  en- 
trufted  with  his  concerns,  and  begged  an  ad- 
drefs  to  Mr.  Defmond,  Hating  my  reafons  for 
aiking  it — I  received  laft  night  a  very  polite 
anfwer  from  this  gentleman,  afluring  me,  that 
he  would  convey  any  letter  to  Mr.  Defmond, 
as  fafely  and  expeditioufly  as  poflible  ;  but, 
that  to  give  his  addrefs,  even  to  me,  would  be 
a  breach  of  a  promife  folemnly  givert,  which, 
he  was  fure  I  would   not  alk  him  to  commit. 

What  am  I  to  think  of  this  .''——and  why 
(hould  Defmond's  refidence  be  a  fecret  to  me, 
unlefs — but  I  will  not  torment  you  or  myfelf, 
dear  Mifs  Wavcrly,  with  conjedlures,  vi'hich 
I  ftifle  as  foon  as  they  arife — Perhaps  I  may 
have  a  letter  from  him  to  day  ;  "but  as  I  fend 
this  to  the  pod  at  fix  miles  diftance,  by  the 
mcflengev  who  brings  back  my  letters,  I  can- 
not, if  I  wait  the  man's  return,  anfwer  your's 
fo  foon  as  you  defire — All  I  can  now  do,  there- 
fore, is  to  aflure  you,  that  I  will  fend  you 
tiie  eailieit  intelligence  I  receive  ;    and  if  fuch 

difficulties 


DESMOND.  209 

difficulties  fliould  arife,  as  make  my  being 
near  of  any  ufe  to  you,  in  your  prefent  ftate 
of  folicitude,  in  regard  to  friends  fo  dear  to 
us  both,  I  will  haften  my  journey  to  Bath. — 
If  I  have  any  news  of  Defmond  by  the  poft 
of  this  day,  I  will  write  to-morrow, 

I  have  the  honor  to  be. 

Dear  Madam, 

With  great  efleem, 

Your  moft  obedient  and  faithful  fervant, 

E   BETHEL. 


LET 


%!•  p     K   S   If   (»   M  9. 

LETTER     XXIII. 
TO    MISS    WAVERLT, 

Hartfield,  Sept.  29th,  179I. 

DEAR    MADAM, 

IN  p^rfuance  of  my  promife,  in  my  letter 
©f  yefterday,  I  enclofe  you  a  pacquet  I 
received  from  Mr.  Defmond,  by  the  return 
of  my  meffenger——— Though  it  is  wholly 
foreign  to  the  topic  that  fo  deeply  interefts 
us,  and  can  ferve,  perhaps,  only  to  encreafc 
uneafy  apprehenfions ;  for  it  mull  be  re- 
marked with  wonder,  that  Dcfmond,  who, 
with  whatever  fubjedl  he  began  bis  letters, 
generally  fpoke  more  of  Mrs.  Verney  than 
any  other,  now  feems  to  force  himfelf  upon 
political  affairs,  (about  which,  till  a  few 
linonths  fince,  he  was  totally  indifferent)  in 
order  to  efcape  from  naming  her  who  once 
cngrofied  all  his  attention 

-The  letter  came,  as  ufual,  fro^n  his  bankers 
in  London ;  and,  I  own,  ferves  rather  to 
irritate  than  appeafe  my  uneafinefs.  I  await 
your  farther  commands  with  impatience  — 

And  am. 

Dear  Madam, 

With  perfefl  efleem, 

Your  moft  obliged  fervant, 

E.  BETHEL. 

From 


DE5M0KD.  2TI 

.From  fome  paflages  of  the  enclofed 
letter,  one  would  conjefture  that  Defmond 
is  in  France— —I  know  not  -what  to  think 
•f  it. 


LET- 


212  DESMOND. 

LETTER    XXrV. 
TO    MR.    BETHEL. 


^ 


I  THANK  you,  dear  Bethel,  for  your  ac- 
count of  my  worthy  uncle,  whom  you  feem, 
indeed,  to  have  ftudied  more  than  I  have 
done — Perhaps,  according  to  worldly  maxims, 
I  have  done  wrong  to  have  neglected  him  fo 
much  :  but,  to  the  overbearing  and  dictato- 
rial confequence  he  aflumes,  I  never  could 
fubmit,  even  if  I  had  happened  to  ivant  the 
advantage  I  might  have  acquired  by  it.— The 
grofs  epicurifm  in  which  he  indulges  himfelf, 
while  he  repeats,  with  exaggeration,  the  vices 
of  others,  are  traits  of  chara6ler  fo  ofFenfive 
to  me,  that  whenever  we  meet,  I  am  far 
from  gaining  his  good  opinion  by  flattery  and 
acquiefcence  ;  and  find  it  as  much  as  I  can  do, 
to  conceal  the  difgull  I  feel.  A?  we  fee  each 
other,  however,  fo  feldom,  and  I  levy  no  tax 
cither  on  his  afFe£lions  or  his  pocket,  I  could 
wi(h  he  would  not  remember  our  relationfliip 
only  to  make  me  the  obje6l  of  his  enquiries 

and  his  comments. ^What  bufinefs  has  he 

to  talk  of  Mrs.  Verney  i' — he,  who  never  in 
his  life  was  fenfible  of  an  attachment  to  a 
woman  of  honor,  nor  was  ever  capable  of 
underftanding  fuch  a  character  as  hers. — The 
grofs  and  odious  refledtions  which  he  has 
taken  the  unwarrantable  liberty  to  utter,  I 
{hould  find  it  impofiible  to  avoid  refenting, 
were  he  (till  nearer  related  to  me — I  hope, 
therefore,    before  I  fee  him   again^    that   he 

wiU 


9   E   S    M   O    M   D.  ai3 

trill  be  fumifhed  with  fome  other  topic  of 
converfation,  by  his  cofFee-houfe  friends  at 
Bath. —  Men  who  having  once  had  ad^ive  bo- 
dies and  ina£live  minds,  are  now  deprived, 
by  difeafe,  of  the  former  advajitage,  and  are 
compelled  to  give  to  their  fhallow  underftand- 
ings  obnoxious  a£livity  ;  to  prevent  a  total 
flagnation  of  exiftence ;  or  by  the  (illy  wo- 
men, at  whofe  card  parties  he  paffes  his  eve- 
nings, many  of  whom  owe  the  prodigious 
virtue  on  which  they  value  themfelves,  to 
that  want  of  perfonal  beauty,  which  prevent- 
ed their  ever  being  in  danger. 

"  Cafla  eft,  quam  nemo  rogavit," 

fays  the  proverb — Heaven  forgive  me,  if  I 
judge  uncharitably,  but  I  very  much  fufpefl, 
that  in  common  minds  among  the  fex,  this 
extreme  and  exquifite  fenfe  of  delicacy^' 
which  always  acquires  peculiar  energy  after 
thirty-five,    is  much   oftener  the  offspring  of 

difappointed   pride,    than    angelic  purity 

Among  the  good  matrons  and  virgins  of  this 
defcription,  my  uncle  is  a  very  oracle— 
Among  them  he  retails  the  converfation  of 
the  morning,  and  they  make  up  together,  in 
their  evening  vigils,  thcfe  fcandalous  anec- 
dotes, from  even  which  Geraldine  cannot 
efcape,  though,  if  they  had  not  the  power 
to  give  her  a  moment's  pain,  I  am  fure  they 
would  not  give  me  a  moment's  thought. — 
Now,  however,  fhe  is  in  France,  and  rhefc 
arrows  *•  dipped  in  double  poifon,"  will  not, 
1  truft,  reach  her,   unlefs  fome  *«  d-^n'd  go-.d 

fiuiured 


St4  BESMON  01 

natitred  frien^^"*  (hould  take  the  trouble,  111 
pure  h'lndnefsy  to  feather  the  {hafts  fo  as  that 
they  may  reach  her. 

I  remember,    that  when  I  ufed  to  fee  more 
of  Major  Danby  than  I  have  now  done  for 
thefe  laft  years,    I  ufed  to  conGder,  with  fome 
degree   of  wonder,    the   odd   conftrucftion  of 
his  mind,  which  nature  intended  to  be  a  good, 
plain,  common  mind ;    but  having  acquired  a 
Toughnefs,  from  being  early  in  life  a  foldier 
cf  fortune,  he  faw  himfelf  in  unexpe£led  af- 
fluence, at  a  middle  period  of  life,    when  he 
had  learned  the  value  of  money,    by  having 
ftruggled  with  the  want  of  it — And  the  mo-» 
ment   he   quitted  his  profeffion,    he  loft   the 
open,  manly  character  it  gives,  and  acquired 
nothing  meritorious  in  place  of  thofe  qualities  j 
for  he  became  a   little   of   a  literary  man — a 
little  more  of  a  politician— ftill  more    cf  an 
epicurean — and    above    all,    a    man    of   great 
confequence   to   himfelf — His  mind  now   re* 
fembles  a  quilt  I  have  feen  at  an  inn,    com-» 
pofed  by   the   induftrious  landlady,    in  a  fort 
of  work,    which,    I  believe,    the  women  call 
patch- work  ;    triangular  or  fquare  ihreds  fewn 
together   to  form    a    motley    whole — here    a 
little  bit  of  chintz,    furrounded   by  pieces   of 
coarfe  and  tawdry  cotton  ;    there   a   piece  of 
decca  work,  joined  to  a  fcrap  of  dowlas  ;    irt 
one  place  a  rem.nant  of  the  line  gown  of  the 
Lady  of  the   manor }    in  the  next,  a  relifb  cf 
the  bed-gown  of  her  houfe-maid — So  oddly, 
in   the   compofltion   of  my  good   uncle,    is  a 
fragment   of    gcntieinan-like   qualiiies    tacked 


*  The  Critic. 

t€> 


to  great  patches  of  obfolete  principles  and 
hard  prejudices — to  an  obftinate  adherence  to 
his  own  gratifications,  and  a  prodigious  at- 
tachment to  his  own  imagined  confequence— 
But  a  truce  with  the  Major—  t  have  beftowed 
more  words  upon  him  than  ever  I  recoUeft 
to  have  done  before,  and  more  than,  perhaps^ 
I  fliall  ever  do  again. 

In  wandering  round  the  world,  I  hear  more 
of  politics  than  of  any  other  fubje£l: — and  1 
am  always  glad  to  attend  to  them,  when 
the  events  under  difcufllon  are  of  confequence 
enough  to  attract  my  attention,  and  detain  it 
a  little  from  the  internal  wretchednefs  I  bea< 
about  me. 

The  enemies  of  the  French  revolution  are, 
at  prefent,  in  difmay — for  the  King  has  figned 
the  conflitution,  and  they  begin  ferloufly  to 
fear  that  the  liberties  of  France  will  be  firmly 
eilablifhed — Their  great  hope,  however,  is  in  the 
confederacy  of  **  he  kings  of  the  earth"  againft 
it,  particularly  that  of  the  Northern  powers  j 
which,  if  they  do  unite,  will  be  the  firlt 
inftance,  in  the  annals  of  mankind,  of  an 
union  of  tyrants  to  crufh  a  people  vidio  profefs 
to  hav^  no  other  objt£t  than  to  obtain,  for 
themfelves,  that  liberty  which  is  the  undoubt^ 
ed  birth-right  of  all  mankhid — I  do  not,  my 
friend,  fear  that  :\11  «'  thefe  tyrannous  breathings 
of  the  Nonh"  will  dellroy  the  lovely  tree  that 
has  thus  taken  vigorous  root  in  the  fineft 
country  of  the  v.orld,  though  it  may  awhile 
check  its  growth,  and  blight  its  produce  ;  but 
I  lament,  thnt  in  defplte  of  the  pacific  in- 
tentions of  the  French  tovv'ards  their  ntigh- 
bours,  its   root   mull   be  niauurcd  with  blood 

--  1  la-. 


ii6  DESMOND. 

—I  lament  ftill  more,  the  difpoGtion  whick 
too  maoy  Engliflimen  fbew  to  join  in  this  unjufl 
and  infamous  crufade  againft  the  holy  ftandard 
of  freedom ;  and  I  blulh  for  my  country  ! 

I  muft,  however,  remark,  that  thofe  in 
whom  I  have  obferved  this  difpofition,  arc 
all  either  courtiers  themfelves,  or  conne£led 
with  courtiers  —And  I  know  not  whether  to 
admire  mod  their  Englijh  fentiments  or  their 
EngUJh  verfality ;  for  among  them,  I  recol- 
le(Sl:,  are  fome  gentlemen,  who,  three  years 
fince,  when  the  fpeeches  of  Mr.  Burke  were 
faid  to  prefs  fo  hardly  on  a  gentleman  then, 
and  ftill  before  the  higheft  tribunal  of  his 
country,  exclaimed  againft  the  proceedings  of 
that  great  orator  with  the  utmoft  indignation 
—They  then  declared,  in  all  companies,  that 
he  proftituted  his  eminent  talents  to  the  pur- 
pofes  of  party — and,  to  the  purpofes  of  party, 
facrificed  his  veracity. 

But  now,  when  in  the  book  written  againft 
the  patriots  of  France,  he  has  done  the  fame 

^thing when    he    advances    opinions,     and 

maintains  principles  abfolutely  oppofite  to  all 
the  profeflions  of  his  political  life— when  he 
drefies  up  contradi£lions  with  the  gaudy 
flowers  of  his  luxuriant  imagination,  in  one 
place,  and  in  another,  knowingly  mifrepre- 
fents  facls,  and  fwells  the  guilt  of  a  fewy  into 
national  crimes-,  to  prove  the  delinquency  of 
a  whole  people  ftruggling  for  the  deareft 
rights  of  humanity,  Mr.  Burke  is  become,  in 
the  opinion  of  thel'e  my  courtier  acquaintance, 
the  mofl  correct,  as  well  as  the  moll  eloquent 
of  men — for  he  is  of  their  party — he  is  be- 
come 


D   E    S    M    0    N    It.  2lf 

come  the  champion  of  the  placeman  ^ — and 
the  apologift  of  the  penfioner.  , 

As  for  his  political  adverfarles,  who  havfi 
taken  up  the  guantlet,  he  has  chofen  to  throw 
down— What  have  they  done  to  excite  fuch 
a  terrible  outcry  ?  — They  have  fhewn  many 
prejudices,  which  we  have  been  fo  accuftom- 
ed  to,  that  we  never  thought  of  looking  at 
them. 

They  have  endeavoured  to  convince  us  of 
the  abfurdity  and  folly  of  war — the  inefficacy 
of  conquell — the  impofition  which  all  Euro- 
pean nations  have  fubmitted  to,  who  have, 
for  ages,  paid  for  the  privilege  of  murdering 
each  other — Thefe  writers  have  told  us  what, 
I  apprehend,  Locke,  and  Milton,  and  Bacon, 
and  (what  is  better  than  all)  common  feufe 
has  told  us  before,  that  government  is  not 
for  the  benefit  of  the  governors,  but  the  go- 
verned j  that  the  people  are  not  transferable 
like  property  ;  and  their  money  is  very  ill  be- 
ilowed,  when,-  Inftead  of  preventing  the  evils 
of  poverty,  it  is  taken  from  them,  to  fupport 
the  wanton  profufion  of  the  rich. — And  what 
is  there  in  all  this,  that  in  other  rimes,  IMr. 
yljurke  himfelf,  and  Mr,  Burke's  airociates, 
have  not  repeatedly  re-echoed  through  their 
fpeeches  .'* — Once,  it  is  certain,  thefe  gentle- 
men feemed  to  agree  with  Voltaire,  who  fome- 
where  fays, 

«  A  mefure  que  los  pays  font  barbares,  oa. 
que  les  cours  font  faiblc,  le  ceremonial  ell 
plus  en  vogue — La  vraie  puiflance,  Sc  la  vraie 
politelie,  dedaignent  la  vanite."* 

*  In  proportion  as  countries  are  rude,  or  th;ir  govern- 
»ients  teeblc,  ccreaiony  is  more  requilite — True  po.vcr  aud 
Uiu  politeiicfs,  alike  difdaln  aud  pageantr/  and  Vuiihy. 

.    Vol.  IL  L  '  Bn^ 


2i8  DESMOND. 

But  let  us  allow,  in  contradiftion  to  M?. 
Burke's  fonncr  opinion,  (who  once  wifhed  to 
ice  even  the  fun  of  royalty  fliorn  of  his  fu- 
perfluous  beams)  let  us  allow,  that  a  very 
great  degree  of  fplendor  fhould  furround  the 
chief  niagiftrate  of  a  great  and  opulent  nation 
— Let  us  allow,  that  the  illuftrious  perfonage, 
who  now  fills  that  charatfler,  lias,  Irom  his 
private  and  public  virtues,  a  claim  to  the 
warmell  affccTHons  of  his  people  ;  that  towards 
him  and  his  family,  the  greatelt  zeal  and  at- 
tachment ihould  be  felt,  and  every  fupport 
of  his  dignity  cheerfully  given  ;  yet,  can  it 
be  denied,  that  the  people  are  enduring  need- 
lefs  burthens,  M'ith  v»'hich  all  tliis  has  nothing 
to  do  ? 

Let  any  man  (whofe  name  neither  is,  nor 
is  ever  likely  to  be  in  the  court-calendar  (the 
"red  book)  look  deliberately  over  it — let  him 
reckon  up  thfc  places  that  are  there  enumerat- 
ed— a  great  many  of  which  are  finecures — 
let  him  inquire  the  real  amount  of  the  fala- 
ries  annexed  to  them,  (for  thy  are  not  enu^ 
merated)  and  the  real  fervices  performed — 
then  let  him  confidefr  whether  thefe  places 
would  exiit,  but  for  the  parpofes  of  corruption 
—  let  him  reckon  of  how  many  cnprcfiive  taxes 
'the  annihilation  of  thefe  pbces,  would  \>yc- 
clude  the  neceifity. 

I  might  add,  that  the  lift  of  penfioners, 
could  it  ever  be  fairly  got  at,  might  came 
under  the  fame  confidcration  — Is  there  upon 
that  lift  many,  are  there  I'jny  i:ames,  that  have 
found  a  place  there  becr.ufe  their  owners  have 
. grown  old,  without  growing  rich  in  the  fer- 
vice  of  th-'ir  cc-'.ntry  ?— Docs   dcferted    merit? 

•loes 


15   E    S    M    O   N    D.  21^ 

does  Vndlgent  genius  find,  in  the  bounty  of 
that  country,  an  honorable  refource  againft 
unmerited  misfortune?  Alas  !  no  ! — To  thofe 
who  have  only  fttch  recommendations,  the 
puvfuit  of  court  favor  is  hopelefs  Indeed  — 
But  the  meretricious  nymph  receives,  with 
compkcent  fralles,  the  fupcrannuated  pander 
of  a  noble  patron,  his  call  miftrelTes,  his 
illegitimate  clnldren,  his  difcarded  fervants, 
his  aunts,  great  aunts,  and  fifth  coufins — ^11: 
the  nobleman  liimfelf  is  a  fure  mlnifterial  man 
in  the  upper  houfe,  he  is  fuve  of  fome  degree 
of  favor  -,  but  it  is  nieafured  to  him  in  pro- 
proportion  to  the  influence  he  has  in  the 
lower ;  and  it  is  to  reward  fuch  men^  to  gra- 
tify their  dependents,  tliat  the  poor  pittance 
of  the  mechanic  is  leilened — the  prices  of  the 
molt  neceflary  articles  of  life  raifed  upon  the 
"  fmutchcd  artificer,"  and  a  fliare  of  Jus  four- 
teen pence  a  day  "  v\'rung  from  the  hard 
hands"  of  the  laborer. 

Either  thefe  things  are  tvt;c,  or  they  air- 
not — If  they  are  not  true,  the  pcrfons  who  are 
interefled  in  the  refutation  of  them,  are  mar- 
velloufly  filent  ! — If  they  are  true^  can  your 
inoft  enth-ullailic  a'dniiraiion  of  our  prefen? 
glorious  cllablinunent,  conceal  from  you,  that 
they  Ihould  be  put  an  end  to? 

You  fay,  my  deer  Bethel,  that  you  wlrtii 
for  my  fociety  in  our  favorite  county — If  ever 
I  iliould  return  thither,  to  meet  you,  would 
be  my  principal,  indeed  only  inducement  \ 
but,  alas  !  warm  and  fincere  as  my  friend- 
Ihip  for  you  is,  it  cannot  alone  replace,  ic 
.cannot  make  amends  for  all  1  have  loll  ;  ycL, 
\  know,  you  will  fay  I  liave  iofi;  iKuhlug  thar 
\.   1  .  -lev.- 


220  ©ESMOND. 

I  ever  pofTefied  ,-  and  that  if  I  could  once 
determine  to  look  out  for  fome  other  enjoy- 
ments than  thofe  my  romantic  fancy  had 
defcribed,  I  might  yet  find  as  reafonable  a 
portion  of  happinefs  as  any  human  being  has 
a  right  to  expecl: — All  this  may  be  very  true, 
tand  very  reafonable  ;  but  I  have,  unhappily, 
a  degree  of  felicity,  imprefled  on  my  mind, 
nvhich  luas  once  attainable  ;  and  though  I  knovf 
it  is  attainable  no  longer,  I  am  like  the  un- 
happy man  who  is  faid  to  have  died  in  con- 
fequence  of  the  love  he  had  conceived  for  a 
picture,  which,  after  many  inquiries,    proved 

to  be  that  of  the  fair   Gabrielle 1  know 

there  are  a  hundred,  nay,  a  thoufand  other 
plans  and  people,  with  whom  other  men 
might  fit  down  contented  ;  but  I  have  made 
up  a  *■*■  fair  idea"  and  lofmg  that,  all  is  to  me 
a  blank. 

You  are  always  lamenting,  in  the  warmth 
of  your  friendly  zeal,  that  my  profpeQs  are 
thus  blafted  on  my  entrance  into  life  ;  but 
why  ? — What  do  you  call  their  beino;  blafted  ? 
— I  might,  it  is  true,  be  a  member  of  par- 
liament, and  give  a  filent  vote  for,  or  make 
an  unregarded  fpeech  againft  government, 
which    my    flight    influence  could   not  render 

better  or  worfe — I  might  have  married 

fom.e  fine  lady,  with  a  fine  fortune,  who 
would  have  done  me  the  honor  to  bear  my 
name  abroad,  and  rendered  me  completely 
wretched  at  home  :  and  this  you  call,  my 
good  friend,  following  my  profpedls  —  Alas  ? 
1  would  not  recall  uneafy  recolltjSlions  to  your 
mind,  but  I  mufl  afk-.-Did  ycu  find  happinefs 
iji  this    career,     which    you  now  lament  my 

ueglcctinjj 


DESMOND.  221 

negle6ling  to  purfue  ?— Or  can  you  decide, 
whether  I  (hall  finally  be  wrong  or  right  in 
following  one  very  oppofite. 

It  is  amazing  to  me,  that  with  your  mind, 
you  cannot  comprehend  the  delight  of  Uving 
only  for  one  beloved  obje(ft,  though  hopelefs 
of  any  other  return  than  what  the  purelt 
friendship  may  authorife---It  is  ftill  more 
wonderful  that  you  cannot  underftand  this, 
Avhen  this  objecl  is  Geraldiae,  of  whom  you 
think  Co  highly — Oh!  Bethel!  is  it  noffible  you, 
can  have  feen  her  in  thofe  fceiies  which  have, 
called  forth  all  the  perfcdlions  of  that  lovely 
mind,  and  not  allow  ms  to  be  right,  when  I 
fay  with  Petrarch — 

"  Pur  me  confola,  chc  languir  per  lei 
Meglio  e,  che  gioir  d'altra — " 

Adieu  !  my  friend,  continue  to  write  to 
me  ;  and  be  allured  ever  of  the  trucil  attach- 
ment and  regard  of 

Your^, 

LIONEL  DESMOND. 


LET- 


222  »   E    S    M    0    K'   l>.    , 

LETTER     XXV. 
TO    MR.    BETHEL. 

Bath,  OA.  3,  lyj^i 
CEy. R   tin, 

A  SLIGHT  indifpofition  that  my  mother 
has  h?id,  and  the  fudden  departure  cf  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Waverly,  to  vifit  fome  dillant  friends 
of  the  Fairfax  family,  bi-ought  us  back  to 
Bath  fooncr  than  we  intended — Your  lad  let- 
ter followed  me  hither  ;  and,  in  thanking 
you  fcr  it,  and  for  that  it  enclofed  from  Mr. 
Defmond,  I  have  to  inform  you  of  fome  very 
fmgular  circumllances  that  have  happened 
fince  our  return. 

I  was  furprifed  yefterday  morning,  by  the 
fervant's  informing  me  that  a  -French  gentle- 
man was  belov/,  and  dcfired  to  fpeak  to  me  j 
my  mother  was  in  the  room,  ajid  I  could 
not  concc;d  my  npprehen(ions,  that  this  (Iran- 
gev  brought  mc  feme  intelligence  of  Geral- 
dixie — I  trembled  as  I  afked  her  whether  ihe 
would  be  pkafed  to    admit  him  ? 

"  What  kind  of  a  man  is  he  ?"  inquired 
Mrs.  Waverly,  fternly,  of  Matthew. 

**  Lord,  Madam,"  replied  he,  "  quite  a 
gentleman-like,  handfomiili-kind  of  a  man  ; 
really  a  good-looking  perfon,  conlldering  he 
is   a  foreigner." 

"  Let  him  be  fl^ewn  up,"  anfwered  my  mo- 
ther, who  had  not  fo  much  intended  inqui-» 
ring  aftei"  his  good  looks,  as  whether  they 
vere  th^  locks  of  a  vifuorj    or  of  a  folicitcr 

cf 


DESMOND.  2^3 

of  charity — "  I   cannot,  fpeak    to   him," 

f.)id  {he,  "  you  mull  make  ou',  cuikl,  what 
h'ui  bufincfs  is." 

I  liad  not  time  to  analyfo  the  confufcd 
emotions  I  felt,  before  a  gentleman  entercil 
tlie   room,     who  appeared  to  nie  one   of  the 

moll  elegant  men  I  had  ever  feen —1\  las 

perfoa  prejudiced  me  in  his  favor,  you  may 
believe  that  favorable  prejudice  was  not  le;Ten- 
ed,  when  lie  announced  himfelf  to  be  Mon- 
f:eur  de  Montfleuri ;  the  int".:r,ate  and  b.d  v- 
ed  friend  of  Defmond. 

I  felt  inilantiy  as  if  I  had  known  h.lm  t'or 
ages,  and  was  forry  I  could  not  acquire  cou- 
rage to  tell  him  fo  in  his  own  language  ;  yet 
he  fpoke  Englifh  extremely  well,  and  divideil 
Jiis  attentions  witli  fo  much  true  politcnefs  be- 
tween my  mother  and  me,  that  though  ilie 
was  prepared  to  difllke  him,  nvfl,  becaufe  he 
\vas  a  fovelguer,  and  feco::dly  becaufe  he  w.t^ 
the  avow-ed  friend  of  Defmond,  fhe  infenublv 
relaxed  into  a  fniile,  then  gave  him  a  general 
invitation  to  her  houfe  during  Ids  vilit  to 
Bath  ;  and,  before  he  took  leave,  even  pref- 
fed  him  to   make    her    houfe  his  m.oll    ufual. 

home He    anfwered,     that  his    fcay   at 

Bath  wuidd  be  iliort,  but  that  he  fnould  moil 
undoubtedly  avail  liimfelf  of  her  obliging  per- 
milhon  to  pay_  his  rcfpc<fl:s  to  her. 

He  left   us and    during    his  viut  had 

never  named  IMr.  Defmond,    but  in  his  intro  • 

dutiiory  fpefch 1  longed  to  afk  him  whe-ce 

lie  was,  but  was  wiih-held  by  a  ihouiand  fears 

that   have    fmce     appeared   ridiculous 1 

would  have  ail\ed  him  in  French,  but  as  he 
fpokc  Englifn  lb  wed,    it  would  have  been  un^. 

polite  i 


2  24  DESMOND. 

polite  ;  yet  I  futfered  inconceivable  anxiety  till 
evening,  when  I  was  engaged  to  go  to  a  ball, 
at  the  upper  rooms,  where,  I  flattered  myfelf, 
I  (hould  meet  him— —I  was   not  difappoint- 

ed Montfleuri  was   the   firft  perlbn   1  faw 

on    entering    the    i"oom lie    immediately 

came  up  to  me  ;  and  as  he  did  not  think  him- 
felf  qualified  to  join  in  Englifh  country  dan- 
ces, and  as  I  was  the  only  perfon  in  the  room 
with  whom  he  was  acquainted,  I  difengaged 
myfelf  from  the  gentleman  with  whom  I.  was 
jioing  to  dance,  and  had  a  great  deal  of  con- 
verfation  with  Monfieur  de  ]\Ionlfleurl,  which, 
of  courfe,  turned  principally  on  Mr.  Defmond. 

You  will  eafily  imagine,  dear  Sir  i  how 
earneftly  I  wiflied  to  aik  him  feveral  queftions 
about  his  friend ;  but,  though  lie  fpoke  in 
the  moft  unreferved  terms  of  the  good  quali- 
ties of  Defmond,  and  of  their  long  friendfhip, 
I   obferved    that   lie  carefully    avoided    faying 

much  of  his  prefent  fituation  or  profpe<Sl:s 

At  length,    I   ventured  to  afk  him  where  his 

friend  now   was  ? He    replied,    that  he 

did  not  certainly  know,  as  it  was  fome  time 
fince  he  heard  from  him——*'  Is  he,"  faid  I, 
afraid  of  prefTing  too  far  on  a  fubje<ft,  from 
which  he  feemed  to  recede,  *'  is  he  in  France 
or  in  England  ?" 

Monfieur  de  Montfleuri,  whofe  eyes  are  the 
moll  penetrating  I  ever  faw,    looked  at  me  as 

if  he  would  read   my  very  foul 1  flirunk, 

I  believe,  from  his  inquiring  and  piercing 
eyes  ;  for,  I  own,  they  difti-efled  me  extreme- 
ly »»«-,.«.>nor  did  what  he  faid  ferve  to  relieve 

me ^-.«  Defmond,"    faid  he,    "  is  a  very 

fortunate  man,  to  occafion  to  you,    I^Iademoi- 

felle, 


DESMOND.  22^ 

felle,  fo  much  friendly  folicitude" 1  believe 

I  looked  very  foolifh  ;  and  though  I  hardly 
know  why,  I  was  dilcouraged  from  repeating 
my  queflion. 

But,  on  confideration,  after  I  returned 
home,  my  anxiety  was  by  no  means  abated  by 
an   interview,    which,    I    had   hoped,    would 

entirely  fubdue  it The  more  I  confidered 

the  converfation  I  had  with  Monfieur  de 
Montfleuri,  the  more  I  was  perfuaded,  that 
there  was  fome  myftery  hung  over  the  prefent 
fituation  of  Defmond.— — -I  have  feen  Mon- 
fieur de  Montfleuri  this  morning;  he  dines 
with  us  to  day  ;  and  fays,  that  though  he 
came  to  Bath  with  no  other  intention  than  to 
pay  his  compliments  to  us,  and  a  family 
from  France,  with  whom  he  is  acquainted  ; 
yet  he  is  fo  flattered  by  the  civility  he  has  re- 
ceived, and  fo  happy  in  being  allowed  the 
honor  of  cultivating  our  acquaintance,  that 
he  fliall  prolong  his  Hay,  and  not  return  to 
France  for,  at  lead,  a  fortnight. 

Dear  Sir  !  how  ihall  I  remain  fo  long  in  fuf- 

pence  about  tliis  otlioas  report  ? Yet  I  feel 

it  to  be  impoflible  to  fpenk  of  it  to  Monfieur 
<ie  Montfleuri,  nor  do  I  ciare  entruO;  my  mo- 
ther with  fuch  a  delicate  negoclation  j  lur, 
it  is  but  too  probable,  that  ilie  would  fpeak  of 
Defmond,  perhaps  of  my  filter,  with  aipeiity 
that  would  be  extremely  improper,  and  would 
defeat  her  purpofe. 

I  have  reafon  to  believe  that  her  intelligence 
fails,  either  by  the  removal  of  Mifs  Elford, 
or  the  difappearance  of  thofe  cbjec\s,  who- 
ever they  were,  that  gave  her  ground  for  j/^r 
report ;  for  within  thefe  few  davs,  mv  mo- 
L"q  "  "    ther 


226  n  E   S   W   0   N   Jl. 

ther  Kas  not  renewed  the  converfatlon  ;  but 
feems  again  occupied  by  fome  fcheme  for  the 
aggrandizement  of  Mr.  Waverly. 

In  the  mean  time,  I  have  obferved,  with 
wonder,  the  favor  Monfieur  de  Montfleuri 
has  obtained  in  her  fight- — —For  him,  flie 
feems  to  have  conquered  her  averfion  to  fo- 
reigners-, and  her  pecuUar  averfion  to  French- 
men— nay,  (lie  is  ahnoil  perfuaded,  that 
lince  he  is  a  partisan  of  the  French  revolulion, 
it  cannot  be  quite  fo  dreadful  a  thing  as  peo- 
ple have  reprefented  it. — I  never  obferved 
fo  flrong  and  prompt  an  efieft,  from  ele- 
gance of  manners,  (whicli  he  certainly  pof- 
iefles  in  an  eminent  degree)  as  in  this  fud- 
den  impreflion  Montfleuri  has  made  on  my 
mother— But  it  muil,  however,  be  added, 
that  ilie  has  pretty  good  iHtelligence  as  to  his 
fortune,  knows  it  to  be  a  very  large  one,  at 
prefent,  and  iilcely  to  be  much  encreafed  by 
his  acceffioa  to  the  eflate  of  the  Count 
-  d'Hauteville,  his  uncle,  v.'hofe  on-ly  heir  he  is. 
— You  know  my  mother  well  enough  to  un- 
derftand,  that  were  Monfieur  Montileuri  a 
Cherokee,  or  a  Cliickfaw,  his  country  would 
be  no  obje(flion  to  a  place  in  her  eileem,  if 
he  had  -a  good  property -,  and  liis  manners  and 
underftanding,  though  they  were  tlie  fivft  in 
the  world,  no  reconimendatlon  to  her  favor 
without  it. 

But  I  am  writing  on-,  as  if  you  had  norhii>g 
e'fc  to  do  but  to  attend  to  my  letters — pray  p,:.r- 
don  me  ;  and  recollect,  in  my  excule,  that:  I 
have  not,  in  the  world,  any  other  perfon  to 
whom  I  can  open  my  heart  on  the  cruel  fub- 
je<^  wliich  vs'cighs  upon  it.. 
^'  .  Wh^t 


"What  I  mean  to  afk  of  you,  (thoui^fh  I  have 
made  fo  maufdigrefrions,  ftill  unwilling  to  in- 
trude upon  you  with  what  mav,  perhaps,  be 
an  impvoper  requeft)  is,  whether  tliere  would 
be  any  impropriety  in  your  writing  to  Mont- 
fleuri,  to  ulk  intellij^ence  about  our  frieni! — - 
Perhaps  this  is  impradlicable  -if  it  is,  pra^ 
forget  my  ailcin^  ;  and  forgive  it,  in  coniklcra- 
tlon  of  the  e-vceilivc  anxiety  I  feel. — I  have 
had  no  letter  from  Geraldine  ;  and  every  hour 
encreafes  that  folicltude,  which  I  can  neither 
fatisfy  or  reprefs. 

Whatever  you  have  learned,  I  beg  to  hear 
by  an  early  poll ;  and  tliat  I  may  be  allowed - 
lo  remain, 

-Sir, 

Your  much  oblige;!, 

And  mod  obedient  feri-ant, 

FRANCES  WAVERLY. 

I  enclofe,  in  one  of  the  franks  that  brings 
this  voiuminouii  letter,  a  billet  from  deardl 
Louifa,  who  impatiently  expefls  your  return 
to  Bath. — I  have  not  once  broken  your  in- 
juncTtion,  not  to  take  her  to  a  bail,  or  any  pab- 
he  meeting,    till    you  come. 


L  E  T^ 


SaS  ©ESMOND. 

LETTER    XXVI. 
TO    MISS    WAVERLY. 

Hartficld,  06t.  7,  1 792. 

BEAR     MADAM, 

IT  is,  indeed,  impra^icable  for  me  to  ap- 
ply to  Mr.  de  Montfleuri,  to  inquire  into  the 
pafl  condtidt  or  adtual  fituation  of  Mr.  Def- 
mond  j  if  there  are  any  circumllances  in  that 
condudl:  M'ith  which  he  has  chofen  rather  to 
confide  to  M.  de  Montfleuri  than  to  me,  you 
will  fee  at  once  the  impropriety  of  tny  expref- 
fing  any  curioiity  on  affairs  with  which  he 
did  not  himfclf  think  proper  to  entruft  me. — 
I  lament  that  I  cannot,  in  this  inflance, 
obey  your  commands  with  that  alacrity  which 
it  would,  on  almoft  any  other  occafion,  be 
my  pride  to  fliew. 

As  to  the  report  which  you  have  traced  to 
Mifs  Elford,  and  which  ])as  given  you  fo  much 
difquiet,  perhaps  it  is  bell  to  let  it  die  of  it- 
felf.—-!  fhall,  in  a  few  days  ...  I  was  here  in- 
terrupted by  the  arrival  of  a  meflenger  from 
W.  bringing  the  inclofed  extraordinary  letter  ; 
which,  from  the  diitction—"  to  be  forward- 
ed inlcantly"—tl;e  poll  maflcr  fent  over,  with- 
out waithig  for  the  arrival  of  tlie  fervanti  ufual- 
ly  fend  I  am  too  much  confufed,  by  the 
contents  of  this  letter,  to  be  able  to  make  any 
lemavks  on  it ;  or  indeed,  to  advife  what 
firould  be  done. 

Let  me  hear   as  fcou  as  you  hive  received 

and 


9    E    S    M    O    M    D.  229 

and  confidered  it ;  and,    if  I  can  be  of  any  ufe, 

I  will  inftantly  fet  out  for  Bath though  I 

know  not  what   good  I  can  do  j    or,    indeed, 
what  cin  be  done  at  all. 

I  am,  dear  Mifs  Waverly, 

Your  faithful  fervant, 

E.  BETHEL, 


L  E  T 


230  DESMOND. 

LETTER     XXVII,* 
T  O    M  R.    B  E  T  H  E  L. 

Pr-ris  0  5t    i,   1791. 

I  T  were  vain  to  attempt  fccrecy  any 
ionger — She  is  gone  i  She  is  gone  to  meet 
that  very  fate  from  which  I  have,  vvith  watch- 
ful affeftion,  being  endeavouring  to  fave  her. 
..— ~I  left  her  only  for  one  day  on  indifpenfabic 

bufmers 1    found,      on    my  return,     that 

fhe  was  fet  out  on  a  moment's  notice  for. the 
South    of   France,    by    the   diredlion  of    her 

hufband.        Alone  ! fhe    is    gone    alone  ! 

and  has  not     taken  even    a   fervant  with  l^er. 

Her  children,    to    v.'hom    fhe  has   always 

been  fo  tendei'ly  attached,  ilie  has  left  at  Mcu- 
don,  to  tiie  c.:re  of  fervants  ;  and  in  fuch 
hafte  did  (lie  depart,  that  ilie  gave  no  diretlion 
whether  (he  (hould  be  written  to.— It  is  fome 
infamous  llratagem  of  De  Romagnecourt's 
to  get  her  into  his  power— —And  I,  fool 
that  I  was,  have  been  afraid  of  openly  avow- 
ing myfelf,  of  taking  thcfe  meafures  which 
would    have    faved    her;    and  now,    perhaps, 

now  it  is   too  late  \~ Whitlier  can    1  turn 

me  ?  what  can  I  do  ?  ——-To  fit  dowjT 
quietly  under  the  apprehenfions  that  ci"owd 
upon  my  n;ind,  is  im.poilible. 

I?,milii3  moment  retcrned  from  ?vlcudon, 
where,    bvameie     accident    I    witncffed  the 

*  This  Ittic.r    \v;4r    inch  Te  d    to  I/ufs  "SVuvcriy  by    Mr, 

^iftriifs 


n    E    S    M    O^N    D'.  23-t 

iViftrcfs  of  hei-  fcrvants,  left  with  the  childrea. 
in  fuch  a  (late  of  anxiety  and  fufpence. — 
She  gave  to  the  young  woman,  who  has  long 
lived  with  her,  all  the  money  fne  had  about 
her,  and  an  order  on  Bei-gafle  for  more. 
This  has  given  me  the  only  ray  of  coir.fort 
I  have  received —Bergafle  may  inform  me 
whither  fho  is  gone,  and  I  will  inllantly 
follow  her,  whatever  may  be    the    confequen- 

ces. She  faid  to  the    fervants    that   Mr. 

Verney  was  wounded  in  a  quarrel  and  lay 
very  ill  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Avignon  ; 
and  that  thither  {lie  was  going  to  him — 
But  it  is  not  fo  ;  it  is  a  ji>!f/p  of  Romagne- 
court's,    to    which  her  huiband   has    lent   his 

name. It   is  impollible   to  defcribe  to  you 

what  I  feel  -I  will  leave  my  letter  open 
till  I  return  from,  fpeaking  to  Bergafle. 
(Three  o'clock)-!  have  feen  him;  all  he 
could  inform  me  was,  that  about  five, 
yertcrday  evening,      Mrs.     Verney    cams     to 

him     in    great     a[)parent    diftrefs She     read 

to  him  part  of  a  letter,  written  by  Mr. 
Verney,  in  an  hand  hardly  legible,  whicli 
informed  her  of  his  having  been  wounded 
in  a  fcufFie  in  the  llrcets  of  Avignon,  and 
laying  in  great  danger  at  a  cottage  about 
two  mllci  from  the  town,  where  he  en- 
treated her  to  haften  to  him,  that  he  might 
put  into  her  hands  the  means  of  fecuring 
his  remaining  fortune  to  his  children  ;  and 
aik  and  obtain  for^ivcnefs  for  all  the 
injuries  he  Lad  done  to  them,  and  to  her- 
felf. 

Bergafle    affured    me,    he     endeavoured  to 
^iffuade    her  from    fetting    out    al-ono,      an 

fych 


332  »    E    S"  M    O    N   D. 

fuch  an  occafion,  and,  for  a  part  of  the 
country  where  to  travel,  is  really  hazard- 
ous.  ^She   anfwered,  fhould  Mr.  Verney 

die,  without  having  feen  her,  fhe  fhould 
never    forgive  herfelf,     or    ever    tafte    again 

one  moment's  content. That  to  perfonal 

danger  Ihe  was  totally  indifferent,  and  only 
entreated  him  to  fupply  her  family  at  Meudon 
with  money  •,  and  if  fhe  did  not  return  with- 
in a  month,  to  fend  them  back  to  England,  to 
the  care  of  her  mother. — 

"  I  never  faw,"  laid  BergalTe,  "  fo  lovely 
a  woman,  nor  ever  felt  fo  interelted  for 
any  one  before — I  would  have  laid  down 
my    life    at  that   moment,     to  have      ferved 

her,  but  what    could  I  do  ? fhe  would  not 

hear  of  fending  any  other  perfon  to  in- 
quire into  the  real  fituation  of  her  hufband  ; 
fhe  v.'ould  not  hear  of  my  procuring  any 
perfon   to    accompany  her,    who    would,  fhe 

faid,    be  of  no  ufe  to  her' All  that  fhe 

would  fuffer  me  to  do,  for  her  fervice,  was 
to  hive  a  chalfe,  as  lighter  and  more  expedi- 
tlous  than  the  coach  fhe  came  in  from  Eng- 
land  1   faw   her  get  into  it — She  promifed 

to    write    to    me  the  inflant    fhe    got   to   the 

place  defcribed  by  Mr.    Verney's   letter 

I  faw  her  depart." 

Though  it  was  very  true,  that  Mi",  de 
BergafTe  could  do  no  more,  1  could,  in 
the  agony  of  mind  I  was  in,  have  curfed 
him,  for  not  flopping  her— I  gave  him 
however,  a  draft  for  money,  that  iier  diil- 
dren  may  be  affurcd  of  a  fupply ;  and  I 
now  write  this,  my  dear  Bethel,  wliile 
Warham  is   gone  for   the     polt    horfes,     on 

wJiich 


D    E    S    M    O    N    Dr  133 

wcich  I  will  inftantly  follow  this  dear  un- 
happy, but  ever  adorable  woman — Good 
God! — my  fenfes  for  fake  me,  when  I  reflect 
the  hazardous  journey  llie  has  undertaken  ; 
when  I  refledl  that  fhe  has  perhaps  thrown 
herfelf  into  the  hands  of  an  unprincipled 
monfler,  in  a  country  where  he  has  pro- 
bably power  to  execute  whatever  he  un- 
dertakes, and  where,  the  confufion  it  is 
in,  may  give  him  unquertioned  oppor- 
tunity to  commit  any  outrage  with  impu- 
nity— 

Warham  is  at  the  door  with  the  horfes  — 
I  fly  to  overtake  her — that  may  not  yet  be 
impoffible — this  hope  alone  animates  me — 

I  would  write  to  Fanny  Waverly,  and 
to  Montfleuri,  for  all  myftery  mull  no\r 
be  at  an  end --But  I  know  not,  very  ex- 
zOilj,  where  Montfleuri  is ;  and  if  you  fend 
thisj  or  the  purport  of  it,  to  Mifs  Waverly, 
it  will  fave  me  time — God  blefs  you  my 
dear  friend  ? — Oh  !  would  you  M'ere  here 
to  alhil  me,  in  the  pious  office  of  faving  the 
moft  perfedl  of  human  beings,  from  a  fate 
fo  dreadful,  as  that,  which  I  am  perfuaded, 
awaits  Geraldine. 

JHONEL  DESMOND. 


LET- 


234  DESMOND. 

LETTER     XXVIII. 
r  O     Al  R.     D  E  S  M  O  N  D. 

Bath,  in  Eno;land,  this 
l8th  Od.  1791. 

T  HERE  is    nothiiig,    you    have  toUl    nic 
ibmetimes,    more   utigular     than  I  ani — You 

might  have   added,    unlefs    it   be   yourfelf 

But  I  am  going  to  give  you,  my  friend,  a  new 
proof  of  my  eccentricity,  for  after  having  ef- 
caped  tin  now,  and  Iiaving  borne  away  an 
unwounded  heart,  from  eyes,  the  brightePc 
that  France,  or  England,  or  America  could 
produce,  I  am  defpcrately  in  love.-  — fvfad  ! 
for  your  Mrs.  Vcrney'.s  filler,  and  fliall 
moft  certainly  marry  the  lovely  little  Fanni, 
if  [he  Will  accept  of  me — Why  did  you  not 
give  me  notice  of  the  danger  that  awaited 
me  in  coming  here  ?  --It  was  not  right  to 
fiiiFer  me  to  run  into  an  embarraffment  that 
you  know,  I  have  always  had  the  prefenti- 
nient,  would  be  a  y^ry  ferious  one  if  ever  it 
came  to  me— -I  jiave  vowed  a  huridred  time? 
never  to  marry,  but  this  beautiful  little  Eng- 
liilVwoman  M'ho  can  relift  .''---My  affairs  howe- 
ver, are  in  a  profpcfous  train — The  good  mam- 
ina  looks  kindly  upon  m?,  and  niy  charming 
Fanni,  does  not  hate  me,  if  there  is  any  truft- 
ing  to  the  language  of  the  eye: — ■■  There  Is 
a  brother  it  fcems,  to  be  confultedj  But  I 
imagine,  if  my  goddefs  and  I  agree,  we  fliall 
Hclther  the  one  or  thcr,  pay  great  attention    to 

hibs 


DESMOND.  235 

kis  opinion 1  do  not  love  to  be    long    in 

fufpence,  and,  when  I  determine  to  commit 
a  folly,  I  like  to  have  it  over  at  once — So 
I  go  this  day  to  Miftrcfs  Waverly,  to  make 
my  overture  in  form,  for  to  tell  the  truth, 
I  have  already  fecured  the  fair  Fanni,  who  is 
n  little  afraid  the  mother  may  make  feme  ab- 
jeclion,  on  the  account  of  religion  ;  but  I  am 
much  in  a  miftake,  or  the  idol  of  her  vi-orfliip 
is  money ;  and,  if  fhe  does  net  fancy,  tiiat 
fince  the  revolution,  all  the  lands  in  France 
have  agreed  not  to  bear  corn,    wine,  and  oil 

• ^I   perfuade    me  that  I  can  make  out  an 

account  of  my  eflate,  which  will  fatisfy  all 
her  fcvuples  about  the  foul  of  her  daughter, 
which  alTuredly,  I  fliaJl  not  lead  out  of  the 
path  that  has  been  followed  by  the  fouls  cf 
her  nncejlors^  or  divert,  from  any  other,  it 
may  like  better  to  follow — My  ambition  lying 
quite  in  another  line — If  I  bring  m.atters  to  a 
fpeedy  conclufion,  I  flnll  be  married  like  a 
good  Lutheran  or  Calvinift,  or  whatever  l.-i 
orthodox  in  the  Britifh  church -and,  hav- 
ing fecured  my  fwcef  little  EngHfli  woman, 
according  to  her  own  ritual,  fliall  fet  forward 

immediately    for   France This,    I    fup- 

pofe,  is  the  only  thing  I  have  done  thefe  foui* 
years,  that  will  pleafo  Monfeigneur  le  Conite 
d'Hauteville,  to  whom  I  mean  to  announce  it 
in  due  form. —  He  may  now  flatter  himfclt 
that  his  family  will  not  be  utterly  extinguifh- 
ed  ;  but  what  figuifies  it,  when  they  will  be 
under  the  cruel  ncceflity  of  being  only  JiUf- 
f-curs^  and  not  AIls  Seigneurs — My  good  un- 
cle, however,  lives  in  hopes  of  a  counter-re  t- 
volution,    and  pioufly  puts  up  his  orifons  for 


23^  ©ESMOND. 

an  Invafion  of  his  native  country  by  Auflrians, 
Ruffians,  and  Pruffians,  to  reftorc  Frenchmen 
to  their  fenfes  and  their  felgnories The  re- 
medy, it  mufl  be  confeiTed,  is  fomewhat  vio- 
lent. 

I  pray  you,  Defmond,  to  write  to  me  im- 
mediately, and  tell  me  what  part  of  France  I 
fiiall  find  you  in.  I  hope  you  are  made  quite 
content  by  the  purport  of  my  lad  letter,  as 
10  the  lubjea_  of  our  lon^  and  mutual  inqui- 
etude.— Nothing  but  filence  and  prudence  is 
wanting  now  to  put  an  end  to  all  fartlier  pain 
upon  this  affair;  and  I  differ  fo  much  from 
nil  the  reft  of  the  world  in  fuch  circumftances, 
that,  I  think,  I  have  done  much  better  than 
if  I  had  killed  my  friend,  or  been  killed  my- 
felf,  bccaufe  he  was  amiable,  and  my  filler, 
was  a  woman.— An  Epicurean  is,  at  lead,  a 
peaceable  animal.— Poor  Jofephine  is  quite 
well  in  London  j  and,  by  this  time,  vou  have 
leen  Madame  Verney  in  poffeffion'  of  her 
charge— If  Boifbelle  fliould  have  his  head 
broke,*  as  I  think  it  very  likely  he  may,  we 
might  make  a  double  wedding— if,  however, 
Jofephine  fhould  alter  her  mind— Unlefs  that 
happens,  I  hope  you  will  never  meet,  though 
I  have  no  great  notion  that  her  convent  fcheme 
will  hold  long. 

^  I  direft  this  to  you  by  your  ufual  addrefs  at 
Paris. — I  expe<Sl  an  immediate  anfwer — and 
your  felicitations  on  my  having,  at  laft,  taken 
a  refolution  to  marry,    and  become  an  honeft 

•  A  broken  head  in  England  conveys  a  very  different 
idea,  but  "  hit  cajfdr  la  tete" — means,  in  the  French  idiom,  to 
ftjoet  a  mau  through  the  head,  or  kill  him. 

man. 


n    K    8    M    O    N   B.  237 

man,  -wliich  you  have  fo  often  recommended  ; 
I  hope  I  fhall  not  repent  it— but  I  have  doubts 
about  tlie  wifdom    of  it    fometimes. — If    my 
wife  {hould  be  ill-tempered,  I  ftiall  run  away 
from   her—  If  fhe  fhould   be  dull,    I  (hall  be 
weary  of  her fatigued,  if  (he  have  the  fol- 
ly to  be  jealous  of  me— -and   if  fhe   be  very 
much  a  coquette,  I  fhall  be  jealous  of  her. — 
How  many  rocks    are    here,    in  this  perilous 
voyage,    on  which  to  wreck  one's  happinefs ! 
— but  never  mnid  ! — courage  ! — I    am  deter- 
^'-mined  to  venture My  Fanni  is  a  little  an- 
gel,   and  I  muft  have  her — There  is  a  good 
many  chances  of  being  reafonably  happy  with 
her,  at  leaft,  for  tliree  or  four  years,  and  that 
is  as  much  as  any  body  has  a  right  to  expe<ft. 
I  find  I  am  unreafonably  unhappy  with- 
out her,    and  every  time  I  fee  her  I  become 
more  and   more  intoxicated  with  my  pafTion. 
How,   if  our  good  mamma  fliould  refufe  her 

confent  ? I  do  believe,    that  if   fuch    a 

perverfe  accident  fhould  arrive,  I  have  hite- 
refl  enough  with  my  nymph  to  perfuade  her 
to  truft  herfelf  with  me  without  it,    and  take 

our  chance  for  forgivenefs  afterwards But 

this  is  unlikely — I  (hall  give  the  old  lady  a, 
Carte  blanche^  and  let  her  name  her  own  truf- 
tces     O  /  Ca  ira — Ca  ira  ! 

Ever  devotedly  your's. 

My  dear  friend, 

JONVILLE  DE  MONTFLEURI. 


Bo 


flijo  I»    E    S    M   0    N    f?; 

Do  you  not  think  I  improve  in  my  Englifh  ^ 
—-Since  I  have  been  acquainted  with  my  Fan- 
ni,  I  have  thrown  away  my  di£lionary 

I  have  undone  my  letter  again,  to  fay  to 
you,  that  I  have  Mrs.  Waverly's  full  confent, 
and  am  the  mofl  happy  of  men. 

Evening  of  Wednefday, 
7  o'clock. 

Still  I  have  to  add— My  Fannl  has  received 
the  letter  you  wrote  from  Paris,  the  firll  of 
this  month,  which  you  fent  to  that  Mr.  Bs- 
thel,  who  is  to  be  her  truflee.  -  This  haflens 
our  marriage. — It  is  fixed  for  Sunday  ;  and 
We  come  to  France  inllantly. — I  am  almofl  as 
uneafy  as  ray  dear  girl  is,  who  has  done  no- 
thing but  weep  ever  fmce,  at  the  fate  of  her 
iiiler.  Defmond,  you  have  not  ever  been 
quite  fo  ingenuous  with  me  about  Mrs.  Ver- 
ney,  as  I  had,  I  think,  a  claim  to  expestl. 
AVe  fnall  go  immediately  to  Meudon,  to  the 
four  children  who  are  there  •,  and,  furely,  by 
the  time  of  our  arrival,  there  will  be  received 
fome  account  of  what  is  become  of  you  and 
Mrs.  Verney  ;  her  hufband  too  ! — I  did  not 
think  any  thing  could  have  given  me  fo 
jnuch  concern. 


LET- 


LETTER    XXIX. 
*rO    MR.  BETHEL. 

O^f^ober  23d,  179x1 

NEVER,  my  dear  Bethel,  did  the  mofl 
feverid-i  dreams  of  ficflion  produce  fccnes  more 
painful,  or  more  terrific,  than  the  real  events 
to  which  I  have  been  a  witnef;;,  and  in  uhich 
I  have  beeir   an  actor,    fince  the  date  of  my 

laft    letter They    are  far    froth    being  yet 

at  an  end — With  anxiety,  fuch  as  it  is  inipof- 
fible  to  defciibe,  I  await  the  cataftrophe  ! — 
but  I  owe  it  to  you,  to  put  you,  as  foon  and 
as  much  as  I  can,  out  of  the  fufpenfe  and 
uneafniefs  in  which  my  lall  letter  involved 
you,  tliough,  poffibly,  it  be  only  to  give  you 
new  fufpenfe  and  new  uneafntcfs — Before  this 
letter  reaches  you,  however,  my  fate,  mult 
probablv  be  decided. 

I  write  from  the  cabin  of  a  Vigneron,    at 

Salon,  near  Avignon How  I  came  hither, 

and  the  extraordinary  circumflances  that  at- 
tended my  journey,  I  will  endeavour  to  col- 
le<Sl  my  agitated  and  fcattered  thoughts  enough 
to  tell  you. 

As  well  as  I  remember,  I  v;rote  to  you 
very  haflily  from  Paris,  in  confequence  of 
Mis.  Verney's  fudden  departure,  who  was 
then  gone  forward  alone,  to  attend  her  huf- 
band  ;  who  reprefented  himfelf  wounded  and 
dying  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Avignon  j  but 
that    you   may   more  clearly    comprehend  the 

whole 


24d  D    E    3    M    O    N   d. 

whole  of  the  fubfequent  narrative,  it  may, 
perhaps,  be  neceflary  to  tell  you  how  I  came 
fo  well  acquainted  with  the  fituation  and  fud- 
den  removal  of  Geraldine. 

You  have  remonflrated  with  me  fo  often  and 
fo  vainly,  on  my  paflion  for  her,  that  the  fubje6l 

was  fometime  fince  exhaufted  between  us 1 

could  not,  however,  fo  candidly  reveal  to  you 
my  purpofe,  as  I  had,  on  almoft  every  oc- 
cadon  of  my  life,  been  accuftomed  to  do,  for 
rcafons,  with  which  (he  had  no  concern  j  but 
if  I  did  not  relate  my  actions,  I  attempted  not 
to  put  on  them  any  falfe  appearance  ;  and 
fince  I  could  not  tell  you  the  truth,  I  forbore 
to  date  my  letters,  and  would  not  miflead  you 
by  mifreprefentations  ;  which,  had  I  not  ab- 
horred every  kind  of  deception,  might  have 
been  eafily  done —  I  muft  now,  how- 
ever,   relate    as   much   as   concerns   my   own 

wanderings undertaken  from    a    motive 

which,    however  blameable   it   might  appear, 

1  could  not  contend  with The  event  has 

fhewn  that,  where  the  intentien  is  perfedly 
pure,  it  is  not  always  wrong  to  follow  the 
diftales  of  tiie  heart,  even  when  they  impel 
us  to  ail  contrary  to  the  maxims  of  the  world, 
and  even  in  defiance  of  its  cenfure. 

Know  then,  my  dear  Bethel,  that  when 
you  fent  me  intelligence  of  the  fudden  depar- 
ture of  Geraldine  for  France when  I  heard, 

that  the  perievering  infamy  of  her  hufband, 
and  tiic  unfeeling  brutality  of  her  mother, 
contributed  to  drive  her  into  the  fnare  from 
which  1  beliL;ved,  1  had  fcen  her  fecured, 
when   file  quittsd   Hcretordfhire — I   could  not 

patiently  await    the   event 1  determined 

though   with  anxiety  of  a  very  diffcient  kmd 

upon 


Vpon  iViy  mind;  to  follow  Iier,  and  to  protc6l 
licr,  ifpoiribie,  from  the  wretch,  who  would 
thus  bafcly  avail  himfelt"  of  his  legal  right  to 
render  wretched,  this  moil:  lovely  and 
injured  woman — Compared  with  her  fafety> 
e\er}  other  confidciation  on  earth  was  infig- 
nificant  ;  yet  I  was  confcious  that,  were  it 
known,  even  hy  her  own  family,  I  had 
followed  her  to  France,  feme  part  of  the  in- 
convenience, from  which  it  was  the  willi  of 
my  life  to  fave  her,  would  be  incurred  ;  and 
that  convlflion,  added  to  other  circumftanccs, 
compelled  me  to  conceal  my  intentions  even 
from  you. 

I  fat  out  for  Brighthelmftone  the  very  next 
day  atter  I  had  inreIhgenCc  of  her  departure, 
and  travelling  along  the  coafl,  I  reached  that 
place    late    in    the   evening    of  the   next  day. 

» Geraidine  and  her  family   were  at  the 

Old  Ship  waiting  fot  a  wind — I  dared  not, 
iherefore,  go  to  that  houfe,  which  I  on  other 
occa(:ons  ufcd  to  irequent,  but  I  took  a  pri- 
vate lodging  ;  and  ordered  my  fervants,  who 
were  known,  becaufe  they  have  both  lived 
with  me  io  many  years,  to  keep  out  of  fight. 

The  wind  was  lo  higli  and  fo  contrary  for 
three  days,  that  the  packet  Ihc  was  going  in 
cculd  not  get  out--7t  was  not  poirible  for  mc 
to  engage  my  palTage  in  the  fame  vefTel — • 
Others  were  on  the  pomt  of  failing  with  the 
change  of  the  wind  j  but,  as  thefe  might  wait 
for  paflengers,  and  I  might  thus  be  detained 
after  her,  1  chofe  rather  to  hire  one  of  th.e 
largefl:  Elhing  boats,  the  mader  of  whicli^  for 
a  crtain  confideration,  was  to  convey  me  to 
Dieppe,  and  to  fail  immediately  after  the  pac^ 
ket. — Tl.e  air  of  myllery   I   was  com.pellcd  to 

Vol.  Ho  M  obicrvG, 


242  t>    E    3    M    <}    N    D. 

cbferve,  anj  the  liigh  terms  I  was  willing  tc^ 
give  for  a  conveyance  fo  apparently  infener 
to  the  packttv,  excited  in  the  Hlhermen,  v.'ith 
■whom  I  opened  my  negociation,  much  fur- 
prifc  and  many  corije£iures ;  the  nio!l  fa- 
vourable of  whicli,  to  me  were,  that  I  had 
been  eng.iged  in  a  duel,  and,  from  its  Fatal 
confequence',  was  compelled  to  make  my 
cfcape  ;  cr,  tliat  1  was  employed  by  Govern- 
ment to  carry  on  fom.e  negociation  with  the 
French  ariflccratic  paity,  and  was-  going  to 
Paris  incog,  lor  fear  of  the  re-rer.eve  of  the 
democracy  ;  yet,  1  am  perfuaded,  notwith- 
franding  the  credit  I  obtained  for  the'e  genile- 
man-hke  motive?,  that  if  there  had,  juft  at 
that  time,  happened  to  have  been  any  de- 
linquent fought  for  by  public  jaftice,  who  was 
fuppoied  likely  to  attempt  efcaping  to  France, 
I  fhould  have  ftood  a  chance  of  being  carried 
to  Lewes,  and  committed  for  further  exami- 
nation. 

After  ihirty-iix  tedious  hours,  durmg  which 
I  never  ventured  out  but  of  a  night,  for  a 
folitary  walk  along  the  wellward  Tnore,  where 
there  was  the  leaff  danger  of  my  meeting  any 
cf  my  acquaintance,  (of  whom  I  found  the 
place  was  full;)  the  wind  changed,  and  a 
ileady  gale  fpringing  fiom  the  northreali,  the 
packet  came  out  of  harbour  in  the  evening 
of  the  fecond  day  }  and,  at  fevcn  o'clock  in 
the  evening,  I  had  notice  froai  Warham, 
whom  I  had  fent  to  rc'Cj.uuiitre^  that  the  paf- 
fengers  were  about  lo  embark. 

1  would  have  given  tlie  world  to  have  dared 
aPiiit  the  beautiful  and  mtcrerting  eXiie,  who 
I  could  only  v/atch  at  a  dillance — I  buttoned 
a  horicaian's  coat    round  me,    j  ulleJ  my   hat 

over 


DESMOND.  2|3 

6ver  my  eyes,  and  in  a  crowd  of  French  and 
Englilli  who  were  buflling  around  the  door  of 
the  fhip  tavern,  to  get  their  baggage  down  to 
the  Chore,  I  ventured  to  pafs  quite  clofs  to  the 
lovely  but  melancholy  group,  for  which  my 
anxious  heart  was  fo  deeply  afF;£led-— I  faw 
Geraldine  pale,  languid,  and  c'cje£led,  yet 
forcing  herfeif  to  appear  calm  and  cheerful,  in 
order  to  quiet  the  apprchenfions  of  her  En- 
glilh  fervant,  Peggy,  who  had  never  feen  the 
Tea  before,  and  now  hung  back,  afraid  of  ven- 
turing on  an  elemeat  which  flie  had  beheld  a 
few  hours  l)efore,  black  with  tempeft;  that 
threa'ened  den:ru6tion.— The  poor  girl,  ■who 
-was  weeping  bitteily,  h.id  the  youngeft  child 
in  her  arms  ;  the  old  Fienchwoman  cariied 
little  Hariet;  and  the  elJed  boy  was  led  by 
his  mother,  who  endeavoured  to  quiet  his  ea- 
ger inquiries  of  what  they  were  going  to  do  ? 

They  proceeded  thus  down  to  tl.e  fra  ;  I 
All  remained  wiihiq  hearing,  for  I  obfcrved 
that  Gerald'ne  was  too  much  abforbed  in  at- 
tention to  her  children,  to  r.^akc  jnany  ohfer- 
vations  on  the  objefts  around  her  ;  and  1  be- 
lieved, it  was  inijoflible  for  her  to  know  me. 
— I  faw  her.  Bethel,  with  calm  refolutjon 
ftcp  forward  to  meet  her  deftiny  ;  for  herfeif 
(he  feemicd  to  fufFer  nothing,  but  towards  the 
fea,  which  was  fli!!  high,  and  the  rough 
waves  breaking  at  her  feet,  fi:e  f.ea;ed  to  call 
her  imploring  eyes,  aiid  then  turned  them, 
humid  with  tears,  which  (lie  yet  llruggled  to 
fupprefs,  on  her  chilJren.—  George,  who  had 
been  very  filent  tor  a  moment,  now  afked, 
v/hether  they   were   ail    to   go"  on    that   great 

pond  ? His  mother,    in  a   faulccring  voice, 

replied «*  Yts,     my    love,     I    h^'pe  aou 

M   2  're 


244  D    E    $    M    O    N    B. 

are   not   afraid?'' *«  No;"    replied   the 

dear  little  l"eliovV,  '*  not  afraid.  Mamma,  of 
going,  if  you  go — but  fee  how  frightened  poor 
Harriet  is,  let  us  not  lake  her  if  fhe  is  fo 
frightened." 

The  little  girl,  terrified  at  the  noife  of  the 
people,  and  the  rufhing  of  the  water,  now 
leached  out  her  arms  to  her  mother,  who 
foothed  her,    as  fhe  hid  her  face  in   her  bofom 

• This  obliged  her  to  difenga^e  her  hand 

from  George,  who  alarmed  at  the  privation, 
clung  to  her  gown,  fixing  his  exprelfive  eyes 
eagerly  on  her  face,  and  refiifing  the  attenti- 
on of-  youi  fervant,  honed:  Thomas,  who 
would  li?.ve  taken  him  up  in  his  arms  —Had 
a  painter  been  there,  who  could  have  been 
indifferent  enough  to  the  fccne  to  have  exer- 
cifed  his  art,  he  might  have  n  ade  a  Iketch  of 
this  group  that  would  have  fpoken  moft  forcibly 
to  the  heart — what  then  muff  1  have  felt,  who 
was  within  ten  yai'ds  of  Gcraldine,  and  dared 
not  fpeak  to  her  ? 

The  baggage  was  now  flowed,  and  the 
boat  ready  to  put  ofF---I  had  need  of  all  my 
refolutJon  at  that  moment,  and  all  the  confi* 
deration  of  the  ill  confequences  that  might  a*^* 
tend  my  raftinef?,  to  prevent  my  ilepping  for- 
ward to  take  her  in  my  arms  to  the  boat  j 
but  a  gigantic  fon  of  the  ocean,  Ttalked  in  his 
feT  boots  through  the  waves  like  another  Po- 
lypheme,  and  leizing  her  and  her  child,  which 
clung  fhrieking  to  her  bofom,  lifted  them  in- 
to it  ;  while  another,  wuh  as  iitde  ceremony, 
carried  off  Peggy  and  the  infant  ihc  had  the 
charge  of;  your  good  old  'Ih  mns  took  care 
of  the  litile  boy,  whom  he  placed  clofe  to  his 
mother ;    the   French    gentlewoman  foilowed, 

and 


B     E    S    M    O    N    D.  245 

tnd  afl  the  paOengers  being  now  embarked, 
the  boat  with  a  furious  cra(h,  put  off  from 
the  fhingles--the  fpray  flaflied  over  it,  and  I 
faw  in  ihe  pale  and  difmayed  countenance   of 

Peggy,    that  (he  gave  beifelf  up  for  lo.'l. 

Geraldine,  I  believe,  was  fenfible  of  nothing 
but  the  terrors  of  her  children,  whom  (he  now 
collected  round  her,  having  the  two  young- 
eft  of  them  in  her  arms  and  the  eldeft  cling- 
ing to  h;r---I  faw  her  countenance  as  fhe  hang 
over  them — and  never,  never  fliall  I  lofe  the 
imprelfion  it  made  on  my  hcirt. 

The  boat  now  made  its  Vv'ay  quickly  tow- 
ards the  packet—  I  lent  Wariiam  away  to  or- 
der my  honelt  fiilierman  to  b:  ready  ;  and, 
wliilc  my  boat  was  preparing,  I  went  up  to 
the  high  clifFs  on  tde  eailern  end  of  the  town, 
to  ma^k  tile  progrefs  towards  the  packet,  of 
that,  wh'ich  contained  the  being  to  whom  my 
heart  is  devored. 

Had  1  not  before  determined  to  follow  her, 
I  ihould  now  have  done  it  j  fo  terrible  did 
the  encreaHng  dill:ance  apjiear,  as  leaning 
over  the  cliff,  i  parodied  the  fpeech  of  Imogen, 
and  as  the  boat  leircned  to  my  view,  1  could, 
like  her,   have 

"  Tuvn'cl  mine  eyes  and  wept."'' 

But  it  was  now  more  to  the  purpofe  to  ha  flea 
after  her  ;  I  faw  the  men  w<:re  ready.  War- 
ham  and  John  had  brought  and  ftowed  my 
baggage  j  I  went  down  to  the  (hore  and  threw 
myfelf  into  the  boat  j  and  defiring  the  men  to 
fet  all  the  canvas  they  had,  the  light  vefTel 
overtook  and  pafled  the  packet  before  it  was 
<juite  dark,,  and  at  four  o'clock  the  next  mor- 
ning 


20  DESMOND. 

Jiing  I  landed  at  Dieppe,  fome  hours  before 
the  packet. 

I  might  now,  perhaps,  without  any  fear  of 
fubje6ting  Geraldine  to  remaiks,  have  appear- 
ed ;  but  I  knew  fo  well  that  thoLjgh  the  world 
fhould  be  filent,  fiie  herfelf  would  be  rendered 
uneafy  by  it,  that  I  checked  myfelf;  and 
though,  on  the  road,  I  never  was  a  league 
diftant  from  her,  ihe  had  not  the  leaft  fufpi- 
cion    ot  my  bcin^  in  the  fame  country. 

At  Paris  1  took  up  Jtiy  abode  in  another  ho- 
tel in  the  fame  ftrcet,  and  as  fhe  was  wholly 
given  up  to  her  children,  and  never  went  out, 
it  was  not  difficr.lt  to  efcape  being  known. — 
It  was  an  infinite  relief  to  me  to  learn,  that 
Air.  Verney  was  not  at  Paris,  and  that  Geral- 
dine fleadily  refufed  to  take  up  her  refideace 
p,t    the  hotel   oi  Monfieur    de   Roniagnecoiirt, 

whither  he  had  configned   her for  about 

eight  days  after  her  arrival,  fne  removed  to 
?Jeudon  ;  and  thither,  though  it  could  not  be 
done  without  diilicuitv,  I  determined  to  attend 
her. 

-'  if  your  fiicnd,  my  dear  B;th:!,  had  been 
fo  difpofed,  he  coulJ,  perhaps,  have  perFcrjii- 
ed  the  Pioieus  of  intiigue,  as  well  as  any  mo- 
dern  hero  in  that  line  of-  acting but,    in 

this  inlLance,  ^b  far  was  1  from  meditating  to 
injure,  that  my  v.'hole  purpofe  was  to,  protect 
from  injury  the  objed  of  my  tender  attach- 
ment-- It  was,  to  mc,  a  moll  Mattering  and 
focthing  idea,  that  1  was  deputed  to  watch 
over  this  angelic  woman,  with  the  fond  aflec- 
tion  of  a  guardian  fpirit  -1  felt  myfelf  ennobled 
by  the  charge,  and  would  not  have  exchang- 
ed the  fublime  pleafure  it  afforded  me,  for 
&riy  kfs  elevated  indulgence  that  the  epicureaa 

doctrine 


D    E    S    M    O    N    n.  247 

doctrine  might  offer. — 1  know,  that  with  all 
your  good  fenfe,  and  all  your  right  notions  of 
friendfhip,  you  have  no  more  comprehenfion 
of  tiiis  fort  of  attachment  than  of  the  Roficru- 
lian  myftery— Not  much  more,  perh.ips  than 
Montfiwuri,  who  ridicules  my  pjatonifin  as  a 
degree  ofvificnary  infanity,  and  believes  no- 
thing ahcut  it — Not  much  more,  that  my  wor- 
thy uncis,  the  Major,  who  has  as  Utile  idea  cf 
true  diuuterelled  love,  ns  he  has  cf  patriotifm 
or  charity,  or  reclitude,  cr  of  refraining, 
when  it  conies  in  his  wav,  from  a  rood  din- 
ner. 

As  it  was  l-tfs  cafy  to  be  concealed  nt  Ivfeu- 
don  than  at,  Paris ;  and  as  I  languiilied  for  the 
pleafure  of  gazing,  unpeiceivcd,  on  that  love- 
ly countenance,  I  was  compelled  to  take  a  dif- 
guife  ;  the  means  of  doing -fo  were  crfcrred 
me  by  the  vicinity  of  the  convent  cf  Ca- 
p;:cliins  —  I  need  net  relate  the  manner  in 
which,  by  the  help  of  Warham,  I  con'rivcd 
this  ;  it  is  enough  that  1  iucceeded  with.oiii  !>e-. 
Jng  at  all  fufpcffcd,  and  was  frequently  with- 
in<j  few  paces  of  Geraldine  anJ  her  children 
—  Kvery  hour  encreafing  my  a'.tachmcnt  to 
her,  for  I  every  hour  faw  new  occafion  to  ad- 
mire the  rAcetnofs  of  h:r  temper,  her  tender 
maternal  attention— -iicr  mild  tortitude,  and 
the  graces  which  fct  otT  the'fe  virtues.' — C)h  ! 
Bethel  I  this  woman,  whofe  condu£t  is  fo  ir- 
reproachable, while  united  to  hich  a  man  as 
Verney,  what  would  fhe  have  been  if  given  to 
one  who  feh  her  value,  and  endeavoured  to 
deferve  her  ? — --If,  contending  almoft  ever 
Cnce  her  marriage  with  calamity  and  regret, 
Ihe  has  not  only  fhewn  the  nohleft  qualities  of 
the  heart,    but  has  cultivated  her  underdand- 


mz. 


^4^  »    E    S    M    O    K    D. 

tng,  and  added  every  ornament  to  evxry  vir- 
tue ;  what  would  fhe  have  been  if  the  watch- 
ful tendernefs  of  unabated  love  had  fhielded 
her  from  all  inconvenience  and  evil,  and  left 
to  her  only  the  praflice  of  the  milder  virtue?;, 
and  the  cultivation  of  ornamental  talents  ?- — 
But  whither  am  I  wandering — in  what  dreams 
am  'I  induli^ing  m)  fe!f  ? — dreams  of  wliat 
might  have  been  :  as  if  to  embitter  the  fad  re- 
flexion oi  what  is :  or  to  irritafe  the  terror 
■with  which  my  foul  recoils  from  the  pidure  of 
what  mny  Ik. 

Yes  !  my  deir  friend,  at  the  moment  I  am 
writiUjT,  and  wish  a'^paient  compofure,  this 
long- narrative,  I  know  not  wiiether  the  moft 
xniferable  defliny  is  not  hanging  over  me  t 
,and,  at  all  events,  I  aui  cenam,  tiiat  Gcral- 
dine  mufi:  go  through  as  much  and  as  pamful 
iuffering  as  can  he  felt  by  innocence — Guitt 
and  felf-rcproach  can  alone  infl.ft  incuiable 
anguini. 

I  willj  however,  fince  this  ftate  of  fnfpence 
may,  perhaps,  !a:l-  much  fnnger,  endcavaur 
fo  conmiand  ni)  fclf  enough  to  continue  my 
narrati'^e. 

Whih  1  continued  at  Meudon,  i  everyday, 
?3nd  foHKlimes  every  honr  of  tiie  day,  indulg- 
ed myfjlf  with  the  fight  o(  Gcraldine — i  faw 
her  morning  walks,  in  penfive  meditation, 
and  heard  the  hgh  which  anxiety  drew  from 
lier  bofom  as  flie  turned  her  lovely  eyes  to  hea- 
ven, to  implore  its  protection  for  her  children  ; 
1  watched  lier  as  (he  fought  the  ihade  at  noon, 
when  Ihc  fometimes  tried  to  beguile  her  pain, 
by  playing  with  them  on  the  grais,  or  by  con- 
templating the  wonderful  ftru^ure  of  the 
ka^ves  and  flowers^     which    they   gathered  and 

brought 


DESMOND.  249 

brought  to  her — Sometimes  I  faw  hir  attempt 
to  read,  but  her  thouglUs  feemed  to  wander 
from  her  book,  and  her  own  fituation  waa 
too  iineafy  and  unceitain  to  allow  her  to  at- 
tend to  the  fi£iitious  diftrefs  of  novels,  or  mo- 
ralize on  the  real  miferits  reprefented  by  hif- 
tory — Her  evening  walk  was  ai'vays  towards 
the  upper  gardens,  from  whence  fhe  de'bendcd 
a  long  flight  of  fteps  adjoining  the  chapel  of 
the  old  palace,  which  led  to  the  lower  ;  and 
there,  after  her  children  were  gone  to  their 
repofe,  1  have  feen  her  fit  whole  hours ;  fome- 
times  employed  with  her  pencil,  and  fome- 
times  apparently  a^forbcd  in  thought— and 
failing  to  recoUevSt  it  was  nccefTary  to  return 
home,  till  reminded  of  it  by  the  furrounding 
darknefs. 

Oh  !  what  would  I  not  then  have  given  to 
have  dared  to  approach  her  ?  what,  to  have 
been  fure,  that  one  of  thofe  auxious  thoughts 
■which  crowded  on  her  mind,  was  fraught 
with  good  wiihes  and  good  will  towards  me  r  ^ 
— yet,  though  inthete  refpects  I  could  not  he 
farisfied  —indeed,  Bethel,  I  enjoyed,  during 
this  pcrioH,  comparative  happinsis--  1  iaw 
her  in  prefent  fafety,  arid  every  hour  rendered 
lefs,  ths  probability  of  h.r  hufband's  Ichemes 
being  carried  into  cff:S.  ;  as  the  return  of  hiS 
friends  to  their  former  oppreliive  power  be- 
came every  day  Icfs  probable-  -I  fl^w  her 
health,  which  had  been  very  mixh  injured  by 
long  folicitude,  no.v  vifil)ly  amending;  for 
though  that  folicitude  wa^  far  from  being  at; 
an  end,  ti;e  comparative  repofe  fhe  enjoyed, 
aided  tiy  the  fine  air  of  this  country,  had  al- 
ready a  vifible  and  happy  effct'^  on  her  frame 
-  -The  pale  role  returned  to  her  cheeks  j  and 
M  5  fees: 


250  DESMOND. 

her  eyes,  though  they  were  often  filled  with 
rears,  regained  their  mild  luftre-^-Thofe  lovely 
arms  which  had  lofl:  their  beautiful  embonpoint^ 
when  I  faw  her  at  Bridgefoot,  'were  now 
««  blanc  IS  potele  y"*  as  when  they  firfl:  attra£l- 
ed  my  admiration-— But  plain  profe  cannot  do 
jufticc  to  her  perfonal  beauty  ;  and,  I  am 
afraid,  if  I  run  into  poetry,  you  will  find  (if 
you  have  not  tound  it  already)  new  caufe  to 
doubt  of,  and  to  ridicule  my  profeflions  of 
platonifm. 

Yet,  very  certain  it  is,  that  if  I  could  have 
ictxv  her  perfe£lly  freed  from  all  her  apprehen- 
sions of  future  difficulties — if  I  might  have 
been  allowed  to  converfe  with  her  a  few  hours 
every  day— have  been  admitted  to  a  place  in 
her  heart,  as  her  friend  and  her  brother,  I 
{hould  have  been  well  content,  nor  ever  have 
wiflied  (at  the  expence  of  dillurbing  her  tran- 
quility) for  any  other  happinefs  the  world 
could  afford— -So,  entirely,  do  I  fubfcribe  to 
the  opinion  of  a  French  mcralin:,  who  fays, 
,  *'  Etre  avec  des  gens  qu'on  aime,  celafuf- 
fit;  rever,  leur  parler,  ne  leur  parlcr  point; 
penfer  a  eux,  penfer  a  des  chofes  plus  indif- 
ferent, mais  aupres  d'eux  ;    tout  eft  egal.*" 

An  event,  however, happened,  that  I  had  long 
expefled,  and  which  relieved  my  mind  from  a 
weight  of  anxiety  and  pain- --It  was  nothing  that 
related  to  Geraldine  ;  but  it  made  my  prefcnce 
at  Paris  necelTary  for  fome  hours— 1  went  thi^ 
ther,  therefore,  on  the  noon  of  Wednefday  ; 
and  on  my  return, , on  the  following  morning, 
about  twelve  o'clock,  I  repaired,  ftill  as  a 
capuchin,  (though  1  now  intended,    in  a  few 

*  l.a  Cruycrc. 

days. 


D£SMOND.  231 

days,  to  throw  off  my  dilguife)  to  the  fpot 
■wheic,  at  that  hour  ot  the  day,  I  ufually  faw 
Geraldinc  witli  her  chiidren  -Alas !  there  was 
now  no  Geraldine  !-— But  after  waiting  about 
■a  quarter  of  an  hour  near  the  fpot,  1  faw  the 
children  approach  with  their  maid,  and  per- 
ceived that  the  poor  girl  was  in  an  a.iony  cf 
tears,  fobbing  audibly  as  Ine  vainly  attempted 
to  pacify  and  appeafe  tlie  dear  boy,  v;ho  v;as 
£agsrly  infilling  on  being  fuffered  to  go  to  hjs 
mamma. 

The  idea  that  illnefs  or  accident  had  be- 
fallen Geraldine,  difiipated,  in  a  moment,  all 
my  refolulions  of  precaution  and  concealment  i 
without  even  attempting  to  difguife  my  voice, 
or  conceal  my  features,  i  fpoke  hallily  to  Peg- 
gy—'* Good  God,"  faid  I,  *'  what  is  the 
matter,  and  where  is  your  miflrefs ; 

The  fudden  fight  of  me,  in  lucli  a  place, 
and  in  fuch  a  drefs,  added  to  the  tenor  and 
confufion  or  the  poor  girl,  whom  I  was  oblig- 
ed to  fupport  to  a  feat,  where  llie  fell  into  a 
fort  of  fit  i  and  I  never  lelt,  I  think,  more 
awkwardly  and  uncafily  (iiuated  than  1  did, 
for  fome  moments,  while  I  endeavoured  to 
reafon  her  into  feme  degree  of  recolledion, 
and  to  foothe  the  el  Jert  boy,  who  continued 
to  entreat  her  to  take  him  to  his  mother  ^  and 
who,  at  l.ri>,  Ihrunk  horn  n'ly  melanchc^ly  and 
uncouth  appearnnce — At  length  1  learned,,  to 
my  inexprclhble  terror,  that  at  two  o'clock, 
the  day  before,  an  exprefs  l^ad  been  feni  to 
Geraldme  by  Air.  Btrgalle.  v.-ith  a  letter, 
which  he  had  received  from  the  Hotel  de  Rc- 
magnccourt  ;  it  v/as  trom  Verncy,  and  relat- 
vied,  that  having,    y^ixh   a  party  of  his  Iriendsa 

;  joiiisJ 


252  D    E    S    M    O    K    I?. 

/oined  the  arirtocratic  fide  in  the  difputes  ex* 
Jfting  at  Avignon,  he  had  been  wounded  in  a 
fkirmifli,  where  many  of  his  friends  were  kil- 
led—that he  lay  at  a  miferable  auberge,  at  the 
village  of  Salon,  near  two  leagues  beyond 
Avignon,  v/hither  he  had,  with  difTicuhy,  e!- 
caped — that  de  Romagnecourt  and  Boiibellc 
had  fled  farther,  and  were  gone  he  knew  not 
whither — and  that  thus  deferred,  in  a  place 
where  there  was  no  medical  alliftance  he 
entreattd  her  to  fend  him  money  and  fome 
friend,  who  might  receive  his  laft  directions  in 
regard  of  his  family- -He  added—"  1  Ihould 
afk  you  to  come  yourfelf,  if  1  did  not  feel 
confcious  that  I  have  not  deferved  your 
kind  attention  ;  otherwife,  it  would  be  the 
only  confolation  1  could  receive  in  dying  ; 
r,  if  i  live,  you  would  be  entitled  to  my 
everlading  gratitude." 

It  was    this  fen'ence  wh'ch   determined  Ge- 

raldine  to  fet  out   immediately liPiening 

to  nothing  but  what  flie  believed  to  be  the 
voice  o\  duty,  fne  gave  herfelf  no  time  to 
reflection  danger  which  aflTedled  only  herfelf; 
and  without  any  other  preparation  than 
putting  up  a  (mall  quantity  ot  linen,  giving 
orders  about  her  children,  and  providing 
for  their  fubfifleuce  during  her  abfence.  Hie  fet 
out  for  Paris  ;  and,  I  believe  1  related  to  you, 
in  my  firll  hurriei  letter,  her  departure  from 
thence,  in  defpile  of  the  remonftranccs  and 
entreaties  oi  BergafTe,  who,  feeing  her  fo 
determined,  could  do  110  more  than  lacihtate 
and  render  eafy  llie  journey  Ihe  was  refolved 
to  undertake. 

Gerald. ne,    unattended,    even  by  a  fcrvajit, 
had  been  gone  near  twenty  ]xo-^-i^    when  1 

#cgan 


B    E    S    M    0    N    D.  25J 

began  my  journey — Every  body  at  Paris  told 
liie,  that  the  Southren  Provinces  v;ere  infefled 
by  afToctations  of  aridocrats  ;  who  encouraged 
by  the  hopes  of  being  fpcedily  reftorcd  to 
their  former  fituation,  by  the  armies  which 
"vvere  aflembling  under  the  exilrd  prince;, 
Ijad,  f/i  ntiefidant  viievx^  armed  thole  nho 
were  content  flill  to  remain  in  vaffalage 
and  had  fortified  their  caflles,  from  whence 
they  fent  out  parties  to  attack  and  deftroy  ail 
Avhofe  religious  or  pclit'cal  creed  differed 
from  th;ir  o"vn  ;  and  that  it  was  fuj^pofcd 
to  be  under  the  aufpiccs  ofthcfe  great  men, 
that  many  parties  of  banditti  liivaged  the 
provinces,  carrying  with  tliem  terror  a:id 
devallation  ;  mileties  which  wcie  often  imputed 
to  ihofe  who  had  armed  only  in  defence  of 
their  families  and  their  freedom.  Oii  !  Be- 
thel!--judge  what  cruel  apprehcnfions  thefe 
accounts  raifed  for  the  lately  of  Geraidine— 
They  were,  indeed,  (uch  as  drove  me  aimofl 
to  diilraiSlion  ;  but  J,  though  I  almoff  defpaired 
of  overtaking  and  Having  her  from  the  horrors 
into  which  fhe  had  rufhed  from  a  millaken 
principle  of  duty  ;  the  defire  of  .being  fcrvice- 
able  to  her  was  the  only  fentin.ent  ]  colM 
attend  to;  and  I  thwreicre  added  to  my  own 
Enghfh  fervants,  a  Swif^,  who  was  recom- 
mended to  me  for  his  honelly  and  reibiution, 
and  a  Frenchman,  who  had  formerly  Icrved  me 
as  Vdlitt  de  placcy  and  ot  whom  I  had  a  very 
good  opinion '1  i.eic  four  men  were  com- 
pletely armed,  as]  was  myfelf,  with  tw-o  brace 
pt  pillols  each,  and  a  couteau  de  chajfe ;  and 
as  I  furveyed  my  little  tn  op,  I  thought,  that 
if  we  could  orce  ovcitakc  Geraidine,  \^e  ilioi'ld 

be 


254  DESMOND. 

be  able,  atleail  to  convey  her  in  fafety,  to  the 
place  of  her  deftination. 

Juft  as  I  was  on  the  point  of  departure  by 
the  ftraight  road  to  Lyons,  Bergafle  recol- 
le(9.ed,  that  Verney  had  direftcd  his  wife,  in 
cafe  either  flie  or  any  friend  came  to  him, 
that  they  micjht  travel  through  Clermont, 
infiead  of  the  ufual  route,  becaufe  if  he  was 
able  to  be  removed,  he  hoped  he  might  reach 
the  chateau  d'Hauteville,  in  Auvergn.*,  where 
a  great  number  of  his  friends  had  agreed,  by 
the  confent  of  the  Count,  to  a  rendezvous 
—In  this  cafr,  a  letter  was  to  be  left  at  the 
poft-houfe  at  Clermont,  to  inform  her  of  his 
being  at  Hauteville,  though  this  information 
ferved  only  to  flrengthen  my  prepoireffioti 
that  this  was  altogether  an  infamous  and 
treacherous  contrivance  to  put  Geraldine  into 
the  power  of  the  Due  de  Romagnecourt,  I 
determined,  at  all  events,  to  purfue  this 
road.— At  the  chateau  d'Hauteville,  I  thought 
I  fliould,  at  leaft,  have  fome  little  inlereft 
on  the  ftrengih  of  my  friendfhip  with  Mont- 
fiueri  ;,  and,  upon  the  whole,  I  confidered 
this  rather  as  a  circumllance  in  my  favour 
than  other  wife  ;  for  though  it  did  not  make 
me  lefs  apprehenfive  of  the  danger  Geraldine 
might  incur,  it  feemed  to  lend  probability  to 
my  hopes  of  being  a  proteftion  to  her. 

I  find  fne  has  hcrlelf,  lince  the  prefei^t 
^fpence,  dreadful  as  it  is,  has  given  her 
leave  to  look  back  on  the  pail  related  to 
her  fitter  the  clrcumftances  of  her  journey  ; 
and  as  Fanny  will  fend  you  that  leiter  ;  and 
I  had  rather  you  would  learn  what  pafled  from 
any  hand  than  from  mine  ;  1  will  only  ,:dd 
to  this  great  packet,  an  alTui ance,  that  if  it 
leaves  you,  my  friend,    in  doubt,     as   to   my 

fatea 


DESMOND.  255 

fate,  and  that  of  Geraldine  ;  that  uncertainty 
muft,  in  a  very  few  days,  very  few  hours 
beterminated  ;  and  that  exquifite  happinefs, 
or  irretrievable  mifery,  muft  be  the  decided 
Jot  of 

Your's,  ever  faithfully, 

LIONEL  DESMOND; 


25^  a     ESMOND. 

LETTER     XXX. 
TO    MISS    WAVE  R  L  Y» 

Od.  29,  1791. 

WHAT  fcenes,  my  dear  fifler,  have 
pafled  fince  I  wro'e  to  you  lafl  !  --In  what 
a  fcenc  do  I  now  write  !  — When  I  look  back 
upon  the  pall,  or  confider  the  prefent,  I 
fon':etimes  wonder  to  find  myfelf  living,  of- 
tener  doubt  my  exigence  !— and  afk,  whether 
the  fufferings  I  have  lately  experienced,  are  not 
the  hideous  paintings  of  difeafe  on  the  dif- 
oidered  brain  of  a  wretch  in  a  fever  ? — i  am 
now,  however,  for  the  firft  time  fince  I  left 
JMcudon,  collcded  enough  to  attempt  giv- 
ing you  an  account  of  ail  that  has  befall :n 
n]'e. 

Perhaps  1  was  rafh  in  plunging  intodanger,^ 
which,  before  my  departure  from  Pans^ 
Monfieur  BergafTe  forcibly  reprefented  to  me— 
I  hardly  dare  invelligate  the  real  motive  of 
this — for  were  I  to  examine  too  narrowly  my 
own  heart,  I  might,  perhaps,  find  that  right 
a(9:ions  do  fometimes  arife  from  wrong  feel- 
ings  Had  Moved   Mr.  Vemcy,  as  the 

poircfTor  of  my  firfl  afFc6tions— -as  the  father 
of  my  children — in  fhort,  as  almofl:  any  other 
man  might  have  been  beloved,  1  fliould  not, 
perhaps,  have  felt  fo  very  ftrongly  the  impulie 
of  duty  on/y,  and  (hould  not  have  be.n  urged, 
by  i^s  rigid  laws,  to  incur  dangers,  agaiaft 
which,    the   fervlce  of  pure  affcdion,   though 

ihe 


©ESMOND.  257 

tJie  firongefl  of  al!  motives,  could    liarclly  for- 
tify the  heart. 

Being  now,  however,  hut  too  fenfible,  that 
•whatever  fhare  of  tendernefs  my  young  heart 
once  gave  him,  he  had  long  {ince  thro-vn 
away;  and  that  duty  alone  found  me  to  him, 
1  determined  to  fulfil  what  fecmed  to  be  my 
deftiny— to  be  a  complete  martyr  to  that  duty, 
and  to  follow  v/hitherfoever  ir  led. 

A  wretch,  who  is  compelled  to  tremble  on 
the  brink  of  a  precipice,  has  often  been  known 
to  throw  himfejf  headlong  from  it,  and  rufh 
to  death  rather  than  endure  the  dread  of  it — 
This  fort  cf  fenfation  M-as,  I  think,  what  I 
felt  ;  and  as  to  my  pov.'ers  of  endurance,  I 
was  like  a  vidim,  who.e  limbs  being  broken 
on  the  wheel,  is,  a^hde,  rclcafed  trom  it, 
that  he  may  acquire  llrength  to  bear  accumulat- 
ed tenures  --The  fl-:crt  lefpite  I  had  felt  at 
Meudon,  after  all  my  apprehcnlions  on  fet- 
ting  out  {or  Paris,  had  jurt  this  tWz5t — my 
fpirits  had  acquired  energy  enough  to  cna';le 
me  to  fufTcr,  without  linking  entirely  under 
ihem,  the  hoi  rots  that  overtook  me. 

Hardly  knowing  wh.it  I  did,  and  imprclT.-d 
only  with  the  predominant  i-dea,  that  i  ought, 
at  all  hazards,  to  attend  my  hufband,  that  I 
might  contribute  to  his  recovery,  or  receive 
his  dyinr  injundions,  i  left  Paris,  by  the 
road  lie  haddnected,  without  even  a  fervant, 
and  taking  with  me  only  a  fmall  packet  of  li- 
nen, and  money  enough  for  my  journey---! 
travelled  in  a  fiatc  ot  mind,  I  cannot  defcribe, 
during  the  firll  day,  and  would  have  conti- 
nued to  purfue  my  route  during  the  tollowing 
jiight,    if  my  deloiate  and  helplefs    appearance 

hid 


258  D    E    S    M    O    K    D. 

had  not  encouraged  the  refillance  of  the  peo- 
ple at  the  poft-houfes  and  the  poftillions-— I  ha 
no  means  of  enforcing  my  wifhcs  ;  and  was 
under  the  neceflity  of  fubmitting  to  remain  in 
a  miferahle  poft-houfe,  at  a  village  called  La 
Briare,  where  I  arrived  at  night -fall — Ihere 
■were,  however,  women  in  the  houfe  of  decent 
sppearance  j  they  feemed  defirous  of  contri- 
buting,-as  well  as  they  could,  to  my  repofe-- 
I  obtained,  from  excefiive  fatigue,  a  few 
hours  fleep  and  by  day-break,  the  next  morn- 
iig,  I  proceeded  on  my  way,  fullaincd  by  a 
fort  oFdefpcrate  reiblution  which  I  had  never 
before  felt. 

The  fecond  and  third  day  pafTed  nearly  as 
ihe  firft--]  travelled  as  far  as  I  could  find  peo- 
ple v/ Hi  ng  to  convey  me,  and  then,  in  ar.y 
houfe  that  would  give  me  a  Iheltcr,  lay  dov.n 
in  my  clothes. 

On  the  fourth,  th:y  fold  me  I  v,-3s  in  Au- 
vergne  ;  and,  towards  evening,  I  ilopped  at 
a  folitary  pofl-fiOufe,  fitu.tted  on  the  edge  of  an 
exlenfive  toreft,  and  in  a  country,  where, 
hardly  any  traces  of  civilization  appeared — 
The  people  vjho  came  out,  upon  my  afking 
for  horfes,  had  a  wild  and  favage  appearance 
— A  tall,  fvvartliy,  meagre  figure,  prcfentcd 
hirafelfat  tlie  door  of  my  carriage,  and  told 
me  he  was  the  poft-niailer — i  begged  of  him 
to  let  me   have    horfes   to  go   on  to.vards  Chr- 

monl he   told  me     he   had    none— -that  a 

cnmpany  of  banditti,  whom,  in  the  prcfent 
ftate  of  the  police,  juilice  had  not  been  able 
to  difperfe,  had  been,  for  many  days,  ravag- 
ing the  country,  and  had  taken  from  him  all 
his  hot  fes- -Then  it  was  that,  lor  the  firfl 
rime  during  this  melancholy    journey,    I  was 

knfiblc 


D    E    S    M    O    K    D.  259 

fenfible  of    fear  ...  I  looked    round  mc, 

and  faw  only  faces  which  feemed  to  me  to 
belons;  to  the  banditti  the  man  defcribed  ;  and 
his  ©wn  had,  beyond  any  1  ever  fiiw,  the  ter- 
rific look  which  Salvator  gives  to  his  affaiiins-  - 
The  country  around  was  more  dreary  than 
the  wildeft  heath  in  England— It  was  a  wide 
uncultivated  plain.,  furroundcd  with  woods, 
which  feemed  to  be  endlels--!  knew  not, 
whether  to  prefer  venturing  into  them,  or 
remain  at  the  gloomy  and  mifsrabls  habitati- 
on before  me.— Any  debate  however,  on  this 
point,  was  foon  put  an  end  to,  by  the  decla- 
ration of  the  -poiVillion  who  had  brought  me 
hither,  that  he  could  go  no  farther. 

I  now  certainly  felt,  in  all  its  force,  the 
horrors  of  my  fituation,  and  fancy  evcn  aug- 
mented them — There  was,  I  thought,  a  fort 
offavage  fikafure  on  the  countenance  of  the 
man  who  called  himfelf  the  poft- mailer,  as  he 
opened  the  door  of  the  chaife — I  entered 
trembling,  and  hardly  af^le  to  funport  myfeif, 
into  a  kind  of  kitchen,  which  feemed  to  ferve 
for  every  purpofe,  to  tbic  groups  of  hideous  fi- 
gure? tliat  were  a.Temblcd  in  it  —If  I  had  be- 
fore iliuddercd,  at  the  looks  ot"  the  men,  who 
furrcunded  my  chaife,  thofe  of  three  women, 
who  nor/  crowded  about  me,  gave  me  infi- 
nitely more  alarm  ;  I  know  not  how,  under 
the  immediate  jmprefllon  I  felt,  I  was  able  to 
make  fuch  obfervations  ;  but  the  elder  of  thcni 
ftruck  m.c,  as  being  an  exa£l  reprefentation 
of  Horace's  Canidia — The  two  others  were 
younger,  and  more  rebuft,  equally  hideous 
however,  and  more  mafculine-'-They  fpoke  to 
each  other,  as  they  examined  my  drefs,  in  a 
language  ©f  which  I  underftood  only  a    few 

words. 


46©  D    E    S    M    O    N    ». 

words,  repeating  often  the  word,  Angliife  t 
with  an  air  of  dcrifion. — A  fire  of  vine  dalles 
and  turf  was  made  in  the  chiinney  of  the  room, 
.which  was  floored  only  with  earth,  or  rather 
with  mud— and  never  will  the  circle,  that 
gathered  round  it,  be  erafed  from  my  recol- 
ledion — The  blaze  of  the  fire,  threw  catchina; 
lights  upon  their  iiarfh  features;  and,  as  all 
their  eyes  were  fixed   on  me,  I    fancied  my'elf 

furrounded    by    dseuons. My     imagination 

flew  back  to  my  children  ;  it  reprefented  my 
lovely  cherubs  calmly  ileepuig,  unconfcious 
of  the  iituation  of  their  unhappy  mother;  who 
was  now,  1  thou.;ht,  torn  fiom  tliem  for  ever 
---Tlieir  poor  father  too,  occurred  to  .me— 
dying,  perhaps,  in  a  place  equally  wretched  ; 
among  peoph  equally  lavage.  --That  i  haJ  put 
myfelr  into  the  prefeut  danger  from  a  motive 
ot  duty  to  him,  was  the  only  conadcration  that 
fupported  met— What  would  Ivave  been  my  re- 
flefiions  if  the  purfuit  of  any  giulry  attachment 
had  led  me  hither  ? 

Though  i  did  not  entirely  unacriland  the 
pittois  in  which  thefe  rude  people  converfcd, 
J  yet  heard  enough  to  make  me  coirtpreh.end 
they  were  waiting  for  fome-body  ;  they' 
looked  frequently  ar  me,  and  repeated, 
'^  cette  Angh'tfcy'  and  "■  ins  Mejfieurs:'-—Tht 
women  f.imetimes  laughed  immoderately,  and 
fometimes  one  of  them  went  to  the  door, 
as  if  to  look  for  the  arrival  of  the  people  they 
expeded— this  fcene  lafted  above  an  hour. 
— One  of  the  women  began  to  prepare  fupper 
-  -a  coarfe  cloth,  difgullingly  dirty,  was 
fpread  on  a  board  that  reached  the  whole 
length  of  the  kitchen-— Tiie  pot  an  feu  was 
Jifoughi  forward  to  reqeive  a   fupply  of  leek,s ; 

a  Urg^e 


t  lar-e  difli  of  onions  anJ  garlic  was  heated, 
V'ith  foniething  ihey  called  beef;  and  all  this 
was,  I  learned  from  tneir  conveifation,  for 
ffs  Mejfieurs,  xyhoie  arrivTJ  they  awaited. 

I  felt  mylelf  finking  fafl:  under  the  horrible 
apprehenfion,  that  thefe  cxpe^ed  gucfls  were 
the  banditti  of  whom  I  had  been  told,  and 
that  this  was  ati  houfe  of  rendezvous.-— The 
dreadful  ftones  of  murders  and  affaffmations 
that  I  had  heard,  or  read  of,  now  crowded  on 
my  imaginaiion-— I  found  it  would  foon  be 
impcfiibie  tO  fi:ppoit  myfcif,  and  a  flate  of  in- 
fenlibiHty,  at  fuch  a  period,  might  fubjc£t  me  to 
the  m.oft  hideous  infults.-  — 1  begged  ore  of  the 
women  to  give  me  a  httle  wine-  flic  brought 
fome,  which  I  drank  j  and,  on  her  rcqueft  for 
money,  I  took  out  a  parcel  of  offiguats  I  had 
in  my  pccket---She  immediately  fcized  them, 
and  carried  them  to  one  of  the  men,  who 
loc  ktd  at  them  by  the  fire  light,  then  turned 
tov>ards  me  his  hideous  countenance,  and 
giinning  horribly,  nodded  to  me,  and  thrull 
them  all  into  his  pockef. 

This  fcemed  as  if  it  would  have  been  the 
fignal  to  plunder  me,  if  fome  other  projcd  had 
not  been  in  agitation---!  have  fince  been  amaz- 
ed how  I  retained  my  fcnfes  and  rccolledion 
under  fuch  circumflances  of  horror  I  which 
had  now,  indeed  continued  till  my  aggravated 
apprehenlions  were  arifen  to  a  height  it  wa» 
impoiriblc  long  to  endure. 

But  now  the  feet  of  feveral  horfes  were  heard 
upon  \.\\z^iixe---Kx\  exclamation  from  the  peo- 
ple within  the  houfc' — Eh  !  voila  done  ncSy 
Mejfieurs  I''''  left  me  no  doubt  that  thefe  were 
the  troop  of  ruffians  who  fcoured  the  country 
ior  prey-— They    feemed,    however,    to   be  in 

con- 


26  Z  DESMOND  «■ 

contention,  for  voices  were  heard  very  loud,  and 
three  piftols  went  off  very  quickly— My  ears 
were  then  invaded  by  dreadful  groans,  as  of  a 
perfon  killed;  gioans  fp  ioud,  that  they  were 
diftinguifliable  amidlT;  the  clamour  of  feveral 
haifh  voices,  which  was  now  increafed  by  the 
hallooing  of  the  men,  and  the  fiirieks  of  two  of 
the  women  who  had  gone  out  from  the  hovel  ; 
where  I  fat  in  a  flate  1  have  not  language  to 
defcribe  ;  the  beldam  alone  remaining  with 
me,  who  fixed  her  terrible-  eyes  upon  me,  and 
approached  me  in  an  attitude  as  it"  {he  were 
about  to  ilrike  me,  with  a  long  knife,  which 
fne  had  been  ufing  over  the  fire  — 1  arofe  to 
avoid  her,  when  a  figure,  covered  with  blood, 
ruQied  into  the  room,  daggered  tov>?ards  the 
chimney,  and  fell  at  my   feet ;  at  the  fame  in- 

ftant,  a  very  loud    voice   cried  in   Englilh 

*'  Sir  1  Sir  !  Mr.  Delmond  !  for  God  fake  ! 
Mr.  Defmond  I"— -My  fenfes  then  forfook 
nie. 

When  I  recovered  them  it  was  yet  dark  ; 
by  the  fingle  candle,  on  a  table  near,  I  found 
myfclf  on  a  fort  of  bed  in  a  wretched  room; 
around  which,  as  I  cafl:  my  eyes,  all  the  ter- 
rors I  had  paired  through  ruflied  upon  my  re- 
colleQion. — There  was  a  rug  hung  up  on  one 
fide  the  bed,  which  concealed  fome  perfon  be- 
hind it  ;  an  impulfe  of  tear  made  me  put  it 
hallily  afide — and  I  faw,  not  the  hag  who  had 
apparently  attempted  my  life  ;  not  one  of  the 
ruffians  from  whom  I  had  dreaded  greater  hor- 
rors, butDelmond  himleir.---"  Thank  God  !" 
cried  he,  **  ihe  lives  1" -Oh  !  Fanny,  the 
found  of  that  voice,  thofe  words,  the  fudden- 
nefs  of  beholding  !uch  a   friend  protecting  me 

It    is   poflibic    ?---Ah  !    no,  it    is   not  ;    to 

convey. 


DESMOND.  263 

convey,    hy   language,  any    idea    of  my  fenfa- 
tion  at  that  moment— I  have,  indeed,  no  very 
cicar  recollection  of  ihem  myiclf,  for  in  a  fhort 
time  my  faintnefb  returned---!  only   remember 
that  I  gave  both  my   hands   into  thofe  of  Def- 
mond,  who  hung  over   me;  and  telling  him  I 
was  dying,  recommended  my  children  to  him 
---bade   him  cairy   tiiem   to  England,  to  put 
them   under   your    care-— blefled    him  for   his 
friendfhip—  and   then  clofed   my    eyes,  in  the 
perfuauon  that  I  frxuld  open  them  no  more. 
Again,     however,  the    tender   attention     of 
this     inefi:imable   friend   rellored   me    to    life  j 
when    I    became    fenlible    the    feccnd     time, 
he  was   on    the    other    fide  of  the  bed,    bath- 
ing my     temples  with    brar.dy,    and  chaffing 
my    hands ;    behind    him    flood    an    Englilh- 
man,    whom   I   knew   to  be   his  fervant,  and 
whofe   appearance,    tlie    moment    I  recovered 
myfelf   enough    to     remark     it,     ftruck     me 
with  new    fcar---His    check     was  cut  acrofs, 
and     his     cloths     ftained     with     blood  ;      he 
held   under   one   arm   a  cafe   of   pillols,     and 
a  hanger  was  fiung  to  the    wrift  of  the  other. 
On   a  table,    clofe  to  the    head    of  the  bed, 
lay  another     cafe    of  piilols,     and    Defmond 

had    put    a    broad     fword     on    the    bed. 1 

turned  my  enqui-ring  looks  on  him™he 
did  not  feem  to  be  wountied,  but  his  whole 
appearance  indicated  that  fomething  very 
extraordinary  had  happened----he  was  pale, 
his  eys  were  fwoln  as  with  exticme  fa- 
tigue ;  and,  I  obierved,  that  he  call:  them 
eageily  towards  the  dcor  of  the  room,  and 
liftened  anxioufly  to  every  noife- 

When    he   faw  rr.e   again  fenlible,      he    be- 
foui^lat    me  to    fw.iUcw    lon.c    wine    which    he 

ofi'cfcii 


rftered  mc--I  obeyed  in  filence  ;  for  I  waS 
not,  at  that  moment,  able  torpeak.---!  found 
however  my  ft^rength  and  rccolledion  return- 
ing ;  and,  at  length  I  a(ked  him  the  mean- 
.  ing  ot  all  I  Taw. 

*'  Will  you,  deare.l  Mrs.  Verney  ?"  faid 
he,  *'  will  you  only  oblige  me  fo  far  as  not 
to  afk  till  you  are  in  a  place  of  fafety  ?"— - 
**  Am  I  not  fate,"  cried  I,  **  any  where 
with  )OU  ?".—«*  You  fnould  be,"  anfwered 
he,  "  if  my  arm,  or  thofe  of  my  fervants 
rould  ferve  you  -  if  we  were  fure  of  being 
able  to  prot<:<£^  you  againrt  numbers,  our 
lives  would  be  held  well  factificed  in  the  at- 
tempt :  but  the  mtn  with  whom  we  engaged 
laft  night  at  the  door  of  this  cottage,  little 
knowing  the  dear  invaluable  life  it  contained 
are  free-booters  ;  men,  who  having  been 
armed  by  the  reliiling  ariftocracy  againrt  the 
JihtrUe-s  of  the  country,  have  thrown  oft  their 
allegiance  to  their  employers,  and  now  prey 
upon  Us  property. -'An  reaching  this  poil-hcufe 
we  met  a  jiariy  of  eight  of  them,  who  im- 
mediately attacked  us  ;  wc  difarmcd  and 
wounded  two-^-i  hope  not  to  death— The 
other  fix,  after  a  faint  attempt  to  revenge 
their  comrades,  in  which  I  am  afraid  a 
third  was  defperately  wounded,  fled  to 
the  woods;  and  we  eanly  repelled  the  en- 
deavours ot  the  people  here,  who  are  their 
ailociates,  to  affill:  them — The  fudden  fight 
of  you,  to  all  appearance  dead,  put  every 
thing  out  of  my  head  but  the  necefiicy  of 
fccuiingihefe  people  }  which,  with  my  fmall 
party  1  could  not  fo  cffe£tually  do,  but  that 
one  of  the  men  is  cfcaped,  who,  together 
With  the     wretches     who    attacked  us,    will 

moit 


»  ■*   ^   II   D   M   ^. 


':> 


Fnoft  certainly  return  hither  ;  and  though 
in  fuch  a  caufe  it  is,  I  think,  no  boaft  to  fay, 
I  feel  myfelfanhoft;  yet  I  own  I  dread  woi  le 
ten  thoufand  times  worfe  thin  death,  the 
confequcnccs  to  you,  if  fuperior  numbers 
fiiould  render  my  e^ndeavours  to  guard  you, 
fruitlcfs." 

Oh !  Fanny  !  what  imaged  of  dldraS* 
ing  terror  did  this  fet  before  me  ?— The 
moft  dreadful  of  them  was,  that  of  Def- 
mond  facriticing  his  life  to  fave  me.— I 
was  no  longer  fenfible  of  that  weaknefs 
which,  a  moment  before,  lay  hcivy  on 
me  like  the  hand  of  dea^h  ;  bat  Parting  up 
I  cxcalimed — "  Oh  !  Defmond  !  for  God's 
fake  let  us  go  I  1  am  able  to  go  in  any 
manner,  indeed  I  am— only  do  not  leave 
me,  and  my  ftrength  wi!l  not  fail  mc 
>vhatever  it  may  be  neceflary  fof  me  to  un* 
dertake." 

**  Do  you  then  ihink,"  fald  he,  "  you 
could  he  removed  in  the  chaife  ?"— I  hur- 
ried from  the  bed,  protefling  I  could. — 
He  then  told  me  he  had  three  fervants 
below — one  of  whom,  on  his  calling  aloud, 
came  up-'-He  bade  him  inftantly  harne's 
to  the  chaife  whatever  horfcs  he  could  find 
He  'did  fo  ;  and,  in  a  few  moment  I  was, 
I  know  not  how,  feated  in  it  with  Defmond  ; 
who,  I  Believe  had,  with  the  aid  of  one 
of  his  fervants,  lifted  mc  down  the  ladde:* 
which  led  to  the  lower  room  j  for  I  recoIle(3: 
that  on  attempting  to  defcend,  my  (Ircn-^th 
and  fpirits  again  wholly  failed  mc. 

One  of  Defmand's  fervantsj  a  S  vifs,  was 
mounted  as  po:iilllon  ;  fvo  En2;lifh  and  a 
French  fervant  rode  by  its  fide;  and  DwrmonJ 
hi:nlelf    was   in   the    chaife,     onW    prcvenMn-T 

Vol.  II.  N  ^  m? 


.it^r. 


t65      -  t>   E    S    M    0    N    D.  , 

my   falling    to    the   bottom    by  fupporting  me 

in  his    arms. With    my  returning  fen- 

fes,  however,  the  conrcioufiiefs  returned  of 
the  exertion  I  odght  to  make  that  fo  much 
friendtliip  might  not  be  rendered  abortive  ; 
and   that    I  might   not,     by   being    needlefsly 

burthenfome  to  him,  endanger   his   life — -. • 

I  flruggled  then  againll  the  fick  languor  which 
had  been  occafioned  by  the  dreadful  fcene 
1  had  pafTed — and  again  inquired,  *'  to 
what  fortunate  circumdaace  I  owed  the  pro- 
te6tion  he  had  afforded  me." 

"  Stay,"  anfwered  he,  "  my  dear  friend, 
flay  til!  you  fee  whether  that  prote£licn  has 
been  effedual  ! — Let  it  not  now  dwell  upon 
your  fpirits,    when    they  may  be  required  for 

greater     exertions"- '*  You    apprehend 

danger  then  ?"  inquired  I.——'*  Lefs  and 
his,"    replied  h?,     ♦'  every  flep  we  advance; 

but  ftill,  perhaps,   there    is  fome My   fer- 

va:n$,  hcvrevcr,  are  well  armed  and  rcfolute 
end  it  the  worft  flvould  happen" 

i   dared   nor  affe   what  — what     if  the  worft 

'fliould  happen  ? 1  ea^    my  eyes  around  — 

the  dawajuil  afforded  light  enough  to  {hev\^, 
that  we  were  travelling  aciofs  an  extenfive 
jihin,  towards  tlrs  woods  that  on  a!l  fides 
fui rounded  it Into  thele  wo^ds  we  en- 
tered  Defmond     looking     anxioi.lly    from 

the  windows,  and  direflir.g  the  driver  which 
rqad  to  take- — -"  V/iiither  do  we  go  ?" 
f-iidl,  "  and  is  there  not  danger  of  meeting 
thefe  dreadful  menagain?"-^ 

*'  There  certaiiily   is,"  anfwefcd   he — — ' 

**  but    the    dat^ger   would   have   been    greater 

to     have    remained     where     we   were It    is 

nj.v     poffihle     we     n.ay     ellapc    them,     and 

reach 


DESMOND.  •     2$7 

reach  the  little  village  of  Aiqueperce,  which 
I  know  is  within  a  league  of  thefe  woods, 
and  not  above  fix  from  the  chateau  d'Haute- 
rille. 

'«  It  is  thither,"  faid  I,  '/  that  Mr. 
Verney  thought  it  pofTible  he  might  be  well 
enough  to  remove—" 

•<  And  yet,"  interrupted  Defmond,  *Mt 
is  a.  very  long  journey  from  the  neighbour- 
hood of  Avignon,  where  his  letter  is  dated, 
to  the  houle  of  A'lonfieur  D'HauteviJIe." 

1  cannot,  my  Fanny,  relate  all  the  con- 
vcrfation  which  was  held  by  fits  and  ilarts 
- — Defmond  rather  declining  it,  and  trying 
rather  to  footh  my  inquiries,  than  to  fatisfy 
them—  While  the  more  I  refl;:<£ted  on  his  ar- 
rival at  fuch  a  place,  and  at  fuch  a  time, 
the  more  wonderful  appeared  tiie  interven- 
tion, of  providence  in  my  favour. 

1  faw  that  Defmond  had  fome  flrange 
(ufpicions  on  his  mind  which  were  raifed 
by  ihe  directions  1  had  received  from  Mr» 
Verney,  to  take  fuch,  and  ifo  dangerous 
a  circuit  to  reach    Avignon,     when  the    mofl 

obvioiis   way    was    by     Lyons and  I   felt, 

too  cruelly  felt,  that  Mr.  Verney 's  former 
conduct  too  well  judined  thofe  fufpicions. — 
Prelent  terror,  in  fom?  meafure  deprived  me 
of  reflection,  or  it  muu  have  flruck  me  as 
ftrange  that  if  Defmond  apprehended  any 
danger  at  Hauteville  he  fhould  rather  bend 
his  courfe  thither  than  towards  Clermont, 
which  he  told  mc  was  a  large  tov;n,  not  much 
farther  dillant. 

We   travelled    on   through   the    vroods     for 
fome  miles;    it  was  dJie  of  thofe  cold,    damp, 
gloomy  mornings,    which    imprclTts   a  dreary 
N  2  idea 


253.  DESMOND. 

idea  that   tlx   fun    has   fcrfaken     the    world. 

• The    wind    fighed    hollow  anions^  the 

half  dripped  trees  ;  and  the  leaves  (lowly 
fell  from  the  bougl)?,  heavy  with  tain — 'I  he 
road,  rough,  and  hard'y  pafiahle,  fecmed 
ieadinc^  us  to  the  dark  at:ode  of  defolation 
and  dcfpalr  ;  yet,  when  1  faw,  as  I  reclined 
my  head  againil  the  fide  of  the  chalfe,  that 
Defmond  was  with  me — as  I  found  his  arm 
fcmetur.es  fiipporting  me  --and  heard  his  voice 
fpeaking  of  hope  and  comfort,  I  found  that 
all  local  evils  were  unheeded;  and  that  no- 
thing had  power  to  prrduce  again  the  ftupor 
from  which  1  had  (o  lately  lecovered,  but 
the  dread  oi:  feeing  his  life  in  danger— My 
filler!  if  fi.'ch  a  fentimvnt  (hould  he  deemed 
culpable  in  a  mariicd  wcnan,  let  the  cir- 
cumllance?,  under  which  it  was  felt,  be 
at  leall  confi;  cred  before  (he  is  condemn* 
ed. 

At  lad  we  emerged  fiom  the  fearful  folitude 
and  approached  a  lone  village,  which  Dcfmord 
believed  to  be  Aiqueperce;  it  was  not  that, 
however,  hut  another,  a  league  from  it 
But  as  the  people  fcemed  incftenfive  and  hcf- 
pitable,  he  determined  lo  llop  there  for  fi  ch 
rcrrcHiment  as  it  afForded--*}Ie  would  have  per- 
fuadcd  me  to  have  gone  to  bed  for  fome  hours, 
alTuring  me  il  at  he  would  become  a  fcntinel 
without  the  door  of  my  room,  to  guard 
againd  e\cry  alarm— hut,  befides  that,  I 
(hould  ha\e  found  ft  impcfTihle  lo  obta-n  a-.^y 
repofe,  I'lhouglu  it  better  noi  to  loofe  a  mo- 
ment in  purkii;  g  our  journey,  and  geiMng 
as  far  as  pofif.ble  frrm  the  {'art  of  the  country 
which  was  defcribcd  as  bring  iiifcfteJ  with 
banditti— -We  were  yu  abo'. e  leven  leagues 
fcoi-n  Hautcvillc  ;    the    greater,   pan    of    oi.r 

rOi.te 


B    E    S    M    O    N   ».  269 

route  lay,  according  to  the  account  of  t'  e 
villagers,  through  a  country  as  dreiry  in 
itfelf,  and  as  dangerous  from  the  parties  rf 
unlicenfed  free  hooters  that  ficquented  it, 
as  that  we  had  already  pafTed.-  -After  u 
flight  refre^ment,  therefore,  we  haftened 
on  ;  meeting,  indeed,  with  no  impediments 
but  thofe  of  dreadful  roads-  -The  horfes  verc 
quite  tired  ;  and  though  we  again  flopped 
to  give  them  food  and  re;l  for  above  two  hours, 
they  were  fo  exhauflcd,  that  it  was  with  ti\c 
utmoft  difficulty,  and  only  in  a  foot  p-.ce, 
that  they  crcllcj  the  great  and  ^sild  plain 
tyhich,  asDefinond  told  me,  lay  before  the 
Hvenue  to  the  cafrie  of  ilautevilie  ;  but  it 
v/as  now  dark,  and  1  could  d  fcem  r.otliing 
—-My  fpirits  were  qjitc  worn  out,  and  my 
hia't  funk  in  utter  dcipondence  ;  n:ver  indeed 
could  be  imag  ncd  a  fuuation  fo  ftrange  as 
mine -'I,  was  going,  I  h-.rcly  knew  with 
wliat  hope,  to  a  place  where  Defmond,  while 
he  condii6ted  me  thither,  fcemcd  to  apprehend 
that  dangers  and  diflrefles,  of  which,  how- 
ever, he  evaded  explaining  the  nature,  await- 
ed mc  ;  but  he  agreed  with  me  in  thinking, 
Ihat  a*  I  had  there  a  probability  of  being 
informed  of  the  f.tuation  of  Mr.  Vcrney,  I 
acted  rightia  gO!ng---IIe  fighed  deeply  as  he 
afTented  to  my  rcafons,  and  generally  con- 
•eluded  the  fho;t  converfations,  which  were 
frequently  renewed  on  this  fubjeS,  with 
fjying— -«*  At  leall,  white  you  w^ill  allow  mc 
the  honour  of  remaining  with  you,  I  wiil- 
defend  you  with  my  life." 

At  length  a  diflant  and  faint  light,  glim- 
mering through  the  trees,  told  us  we  were 
vej-y  ncgr  the  caftle  j    as  wc  approached  it  the 

lioiht 


2^&  DESMOND. 

light  difappeared — ^and  the  night  was  fo  dark, 
that  the  Svvifs  who  drove  us,  could  no  longer 
difcern  whither  he  was  going. —  On  a  fudden, 
one  of  the  three  horfes  fell  into  what  appeared  to 
be  a  dccpfoj'e' ;  the  harneis  of  ropes  fortunately 
gave    way,     cr    the    chaife    inuil    have    been 

dragged  after  him the  other  horfes,    hov/- 

ever,  though  down,  were  difengaged  from 
this,  by  the  breaking  of  the  tackle  ;  and  Def- 
mond,  leaping  from  the  chaife,  fnatched  me 
out — and  having  feen  rr.e  fafe  on  the  ground, 
advanced  with  the  other  three  men  to  the  af- 
firtance  of  the  poftillion. 

I  was  unable  to  (land — I  ftagoercd  to  a,  tree 
againfl:  which  I  leaned,  fo  overcome  with  fa- 
tigue and  terror,  that  I  feaied   my  fenfes  would 

again  forfake    me. Defmond  havir.g  difcn^ 

gaged  the  remaining  hoifes  from  the  chaiie, 
and  fcnt  the  French  fervant  forward  to  try 
to  obtain  a  iight,  that  the  other  poor  animal 
inight  be  relieved,  came  to  me  j  but  he  was 
obliged  to  find  me  by  my  voice,  tor  it  was 
iippofTible  to  fee  even  ths  ncarefl  ohjcds.— 
"  Good  God  I  how  cold  you  are — how  you 
tremble  !"  critd  he,  as  he  took  my  hand — 
**  are  ycu  able,  no  furely  you  arc  not,  lo 
walk  forward  ?— and  yet,  perhaps,  ifyo'iare, 
It  v^ill  be  unfafe  to  venture. — Since  I  was  here 
jafl:^  fomc  iuce  kind  of  fortification  fecms  to 
have  been  made—  There  was  no  ditch  around 
the  caflle  before — and  1  knpw  no  longer  how 
to  guide  you  fafely" — I  was  unable  to  anfwer 
him- -He  was  terrified  at  my  filence  ;  and 
fuppofing  me  again  in  the  fituation  in  which 
he  had  fo  lately  ken  me,  he  called  aloud  for 
•lights  and  lor  aiuilance.— One  of  the  fervants 
'Camc  up  to  him  j    two  of  the   others  were  by 


DESMOND.  271 

this  time  gone  to  endeavour  to  obtain  admit- 
tance into  the  cal'le,  and  the  fourth  remained 
Avith  the  horfes. 

The  anguifli  that  Defmond  feemed  to  feel 
tor  me,  roufcd  me  from  the  ftate  into  which 
I  had  fallen — I  afllircd  him  I  was  able  to  wailc 
on  ;  and  he  fupported  me,  as  llcp  by  ftep, 
his  fervant  Warham  going  firil  ;  we  endea- 
voured to  find,  or  rather  to  fed  cur  way  towards 
the  houfc. 

Every  way,  however,  in  front,  where  Def- 
mcnd  faid  there  was  formerly  only  a  rail,  a 
dcspfoj'e  intercepted  our  paHage.--- The  heavy 
clouds  which  had  occafionsd  daikncfs  fo  to- 
tal, were  now  driven  away  by  ihe  fixlde.i 
riling  of  the  wind  ;    and  we  col. Id  j nil:   di!"cern 

the   chiitcaii    before  us and    attempt  to  crofs 

the  ditch  in  fome  ether  place  by  going  icund 
if. 

When  I  rcfieQcd  whither  I  was  going,  and 
to  what  purpofe  Defmond  was,  on  m.y  ac- 
count, incurring  fo  much  fatigue  and  fo  much 
hazard,  I  cannot  dcfciibe  the  eiv.otions  that 
arofe  in  my  mind  ;  nor  do  I  know  how  [ 
fotmd  llrength  to  traverfe  this  melancholy 
place,  flill  finding  it  imccelTable. — Defmond 
now  hallooed  in  l.opes  his  own  fervants  would 
hear  and  anfwer  him  ;  alter  near  a  quarter 
of  an  hciT,  one  of  them  came  towards  us, 
but  fliil  on  the  other  i:de  of  the  fijfe ;  he  faid 
that  he  had  fallen  into  it  in  endeavouring  to 
fi  id  his  way  to  the  houfe,  and  that  it  w.'S 
h  df  full  of  water,  but  that  he  had  fcrambted 
up  on  the  other  fide,  and  found  one  of  the 
entrances  to  the  caftle,  where  he  had  knocked 
and  called  in  vain  for  fome  time;  that  he  had 
then  attempted  to  force  the  door,  which  feem- 

ed. 


S73  DESMOND. 

ed,  by  fome  accident,  to  be  incompletely 
faftened ;  that  he  had  entered  a  great  hall 
where  the  embers  were  yet  a  light  on  the 
hearth,  but  that  he  could  make  no  one  hear, 
and  was  afraid  of  going  any  fariher»- 

Defmond  now  enquired  where  he  could  pafs 
\\\zfcjfef  and  bads  his  fervant  walk  round  it, 
as  there  mud  fomewhere  be  a  bridge — Within 
a  few  paces  a  flight  draw  bridge  was  found, 
•which  tke  man  eafily  let  down— We  paffed 
it ;  and  he  kd  us  to  the  door  by  which  lie  had 
himfelF  entered. 

Never  was  fo  diOnal  a  place  fo  long  and 
eagerly  fought  for. — The  faint  embers  fervcd 
iufl  to  fliew  that  it  was  a  large  and  high  vault- 
ed roo.n  ;  but  as  my  clothes  v/ere  wet  through, 
tor  it  had  ra'ned,  at  intervals,  the  whole  eve- 
ning, D^fmond  was  fo  glad  to  find  a  fire,  that 
he  fcenied,  in  his  eagetneTs  for  my  immediate 
relief,  regardlefs  of  all  that  did  not  tend  to 
that  obje<5\.--- By  this  tmie  the  Englifh  groom, 
who  had  alfo  been  fent  to  the  chatcaUy  had 
found  the  'ame  door  ;  and  after  having  helped 
to  make  i:p  the  fire,  and  light  a  candle,  he 
went  out  with  Warh.:m,  to  affifl  the  Swilf, 
who  re.iained  with  the  horfes,  and  to  ihew 
him  the  way  over  the  draw-bridge  j  the 
rrenchman  only  remaining  with  us. 

I  now  faw,  in  the  countenance  of  Defmond, 
an  exprefTion  of  doubt  and  uneaHnefs,  which 
Jiiarmed    me   more   than    any    fears    he    could 

openly  have   expreffed 1    endeavoured 

iirll  to  convince  him  that  I  was  lefs  incom^ 
moded  by  my  wet  clothes  than  he  feemed  to 
apprehend;  and  then  to  inquire  what  he 
tiiought  of  our  fituation.-  -"  the  people  you 
<xpe5tcd  to  find,"    faid  I»    *'  ihe  ])eoplc  whom 

mj 


DESMOND*  173 

my  letter  gave  nic  reason  to  fuppofe  might  hs 
here,  are  certainly  not  here" — *'  God  knows/' 
rep'icd  he,  •*  perhaps  thefc  m°n  have  fallen 
into  the  fnare  they  have  laid  for  others-  -The 
dcfperados,  whom  they  have  armed  againfl 
their  country,  have,  perhaps,  turned  thofe 
arms  againfl  themfelves — The  ruffians  have, 
pofliMy,  driven  out  the  owner  of  this  caflle, 
or  liis  friends,  for  I  do  not  beheve  he  has 
been  lately  here  himfcU;  and  it  may  be  in 
polT^ffion  cf  fome  fuch  wretches  as  thofe  we 
have  efcaped  from- --It  is  better,  however,  to 
know  at  once." 

"  You  will  not  leave  me?"  faid  I,  terri- 
fied at  the  idea  of  his  going  on  this  fearch  — 
*<  N.-ver,"  replied  he,  '*  but  with  my  life; 
but,  when  the  other  men  arrive,  we  will, 
fom.e  of  us,  go  round  the  rooms  of  the  caf^le 
"--That  there  are  inh-iSitants,  the  light  we 
faw  in  the  v;indow5,  and  unextinguifhed  em- 
bers of  fire,  afcertains  ;  that  (here  lias  exifled 
lojie  necelfi'.}  tor  defence,  the  works  around 
the  houfe,  vvliicii  v/ere  certainly  not  here  be- 
fore, leaves  no  manner  of  doubt.  What  Mr. 
Verney  faid  to  you,  is  cv-id^-nce  enough  tfiat 
here  the  aiiftocratic  party  of  thefe  provinces 
had  a  rende;&vous ;  yer,  if  it  were  rtill  atT-m- 
i)led  here,  it  h  improba')k  the  members  of  rt 
fhoul-d  be  fo  link  on  their  gujid,,  or  that  the 
iioife  we  have  made  AoalJ  not  have  alarmed 
them- 

From  this  converfution  I  difcovered,  tliat 
Defmond  apprehended  the  place  we  were  in, 
was  in  the  poffclnon  of  ruffians  and  bandiiti 
—a  circurallancc  i'lfiniiely  more  terrific  than 
any  other  that  couid  be  imagined— I  obferved 
that  he  liftcncd  to  every  noife---kept  his  pillols 
N  5  «A 


274  ^    ^    S    M  'O    N   D. 

in  his  liahd,  and  inquired  folicitoufly  of  the 
French  fervant  whether  his  fire-arms  were 
properly  charged  ?— I  do  not  beheve  that  a 
quarter  of  an  hour  was  ever  pafTed  in  a  more 
uneafy  Hate  ;  for  fo  long  it  was  before  the 
other  three  men  came  to  us— When  they  ar- 
rived, Defmond  queftioned  them  whether  they 
had  {ttw  any  hgns  of  inhabitants  while  they 
remained  within  view  of  the  whole  iront  of 
the  caflle     they  anfv/ered  none. 

Defmond  then  told  them.,  he  wilhed  to  in- 
quire, be  fome  perfons  going  round  the  rooms, 
whether  there  were  any  women  who  couid 
prepare  a  bed  for  me  ;  but  none  of  them 
knew  the  way— -and  none  of  tliem  feemed 
very  delirous  ot  undertaking  the  exploit  with- 
out him  >~whi!e  1  was  as  refolutely  determined 
not  to  remain  behind,  it"  he  went — On  fui- 
veying  the  room  where  vie  were,  it  appeared 
to  be  a  lort  of  feivants  hail — Every  thing  in 
it  was  dirty  and  in  diforder— -The  piece  of 
candle  which  one  of  the  men  had  to^nd,  was 
iiearly  extinguiflicd,  and  v.'e  faw  no  means 
of  renewing  the  light  when  it  was  burnt  out 
—My  fears  were  lo  much  greater  ol:  the  peo- 
ple tiiat  Pcfmond  feemed  to  apprehend  were 
with.n  the  houfe,  than  of  any  tat.gue  1  could 
encounter  without  it,  that  1  couid,  moil  wil- 
lingly, have  left  it  without  any  farther  inqui- 
ry ;  but,  bclides  that,  the  horfcs  were  inca- 
pable of  going  tarther,  he,  probably,  knew 
that  our  efcape  was  irapoifible — for  that,  if 
f  jch  were  ttic  inhabitants  of  the  chateau  d'Hau' 
teville,  detached  parties  of  ihem  were  in  the 
woods,  with  whoiii    we    fliould  infallibly  meet. 

■ 1  faw,  with  dieadtul  alarm,  the  debate 

he  held  with  h.imfclf,  wliat  it  would  be  bell  to 

de 


U    E    S    At    O    N    D.  275 

do At  length  he  determined  to   fee  who 

was  in  the  houle  i  and,  fccuring  the  door  by 
which  we  had  entered,  he  determined  that  we 
(hould  all  go  on  this  inquiry. 

He  dire£ied   Warham    to  go   firfl  with  the 

candle 1  trembled  like   an   afpin  leaf,  as 

he    took    my    arm    within    his,    to     lead   me 

-along — the  other  three  fervants  followed 

"  Be  not  fo  alarmed,"  faid  he,  as  we  croflcd 
a  long  (lone  pafTage,  "  there  are  five  of  us  ; 
and,  I  think,  any  nearly  equal  number  mult 
he  fortunate  if  they  gain  any  advantage." — 
We  now  entered  a  dark  and  goth.ic  hal! — 
Warham  llumbled  over  fomething,  he  ftooped 
and  took  it  up  ;  it  was  one  of  thofe  caps  ^o 
travel  in  of  a  night,  ufed  fometimes  in  feng- 
land,  but  oftencr  in  France ;  a  bullet  had 
pierced  it,  and  it  was  on  one  fide  covered 
with  blood — Warham,  with  a  countenance 
where  tcror  was  ifrongly  marked,  fnewed  it 
to  his  mailer — I  felt  that  he  grasped  my  ami 
clofer  within  his,  but  b;.':raye.i  no  other  fi:^ns 
of  fear,  and  calmly  baJe  Warham  go  on. 

We  afcendw'd  tiie  llairs,  and  cam.e  to  a  cor- 
ridor ^  in  one  of  the  rooms  opening  into  it, 
Delmond  told  me  he  had  formerly  (lept — The 
corridor  was  long,  and  feveral  rooms  ndjo  ncii 
to  it       ■  Defmond  thought   he  heard   a   lound 

— he  bade  us  lillen! Whara  paufc  of  hor* 

ror  I We    diili nelly    heard    the    loud 

breaching  01"  fome  pei  (on  or  perfjni -"  Wc 

wiil  kno-.v,"    laid  D.irnond,    "  at  all  events, 
who  they  are." 

You  know  that,  in  France,  it  is  impoflible 
to  open  a  door,  from  without,  but  with  the 
tey  — — Difmond,  th.-refor-,  <jid  not  heficate, 
haviiig  once  takea  his  refoluiion,  but,  with   a 

vjcleat 


a^  E>    fc    S    M    D    N    D, 

violent  blow  againft  the  door,  he  aroufed  the 
perfon  uho  flept  in  the  room— A  loud,  maf- 
culine  voice  inquired  what  he  wanted,  and  he 
bade  inini  indantly  open  the  door. 

1  ihrunk  back  with  dread — for,  in  a  mo^ 
ment,  a  hideous  figure  appeared  at  it,  who 
afkcd,  why  fuch  hafte,  and  whether  they  had 
biought  any  prifoners  ? — This  fufficiently  con- 
vinced me  t hat Dcfm end's  conjectures  were  true; 
-and  1  know  not  how  Ifullainedmy  trembling 
•jimbs,  while  Defmond,  without  giving  the 
man  time  for  lecolkdion,  diiengagcd  himfclt 
from  me,  and  fprung  upon  him  like  a  lion — 
**   Villain!"     faid    he,    "what    priioncrs ! — 

Your  lite  is  at  my  mercy Tell  me   inllant- 

\y — Where  is  the  Count  d'HauteviHc  i*  and  in 
-whole  poffcflion  is  his  houfe. 

'Ihe  man   appeared  to   me   to  be  twice  as 
tall  and  athletic  as   Dclmcnd  i    but  guilt  and 

fear  are  infeparable  ■— —  He  either  was   in- 

icapable  ot  making,  or  feared  to  make  any  rc- 
iillance,  but  called  lor  mercy  with  the  moil 
abject  fupplicitions — ■-Dcimond  told  him  it 
vvDuld  be  grai.ted,  on  condition  of  his  iiniV'<;- 
diatcly  inlor.^ing  him  by  v/hat  authority  he 
was  in  thai  hcyfe — who  was  there  witli  him — 
and  to  whom  he  belonged. 

The  man  fiid  that  he  was  one  of  a  troop 
^rnied  for  the  defence  of  the  ca'.ilc,  by  the  or- 
der of  the  Count  dTTiUtevillc,  who  was,  him- 
ielf,  gone  to  Itai} — That  other  noblemen, 
friend--  to  the  caule,  had  fortified  it  againlt 
the  municipal  guard,  to  whom  ihey  were  de- 
termined never  to  iubrnit — I'hat  thclc  noble- 
men had,  witiiin  a  few  days,  leh  ths  place  i 
and  that  tlu  vairals  tncy  had  left  behind,  had 
•continued^  by  iheir  orders,  in  thccaftle,  from 

whence 


DESMOND.  277 

xvhencc  they  had,  occafionally,  made  excur- 
{lons  againft  the  rational  e;uard. 

**  And  againft  travellers,"  faid  Defmond 
vehemently  interrupting  him,  '*  whom  }0u 
have  robbed  and  murdered — Is  it  not  fo  ?" 

The  man  denied  their  having  murdered  any 
one,  but  owned,  that  they  thought  themfelves 
jjftified  in  plundering  the  partizans  of  demo- 
cracy, who  were  endeavouring  to  plunder  the 
noble  perfons,  by  whom  they  vere  employed 
and  paid. — The  eyes  of  Defmond  flafhed  fire 
at  this  information — '*  Tell  niC  inflantly," 
cried  he,  *'  what  number  of  men  there  is  in 
the  houfe  ?"—<«  Only  myfelf,"  anfwcrcd  he, 
•*  and  one  more,  with  fomc  women  that  be- 
long to  us— 'J  he  reft  of  our  gentlemen  are  out, 
and  when  you  came,   1  believed  it  to  be  them." 

••*  And    how    many    are  there   of    thefe 

genileiMfi    ou:    marauding." *'  There    arc 

eight." 

Dtfmcnd,  with  r.dmirabk  prefencc  of  m.ind, 
fent  two  of  the  men  to  fecure  the  companion 
to  tfiis  woithy  jerfon,  who  was,  he  faid,  in 
the  next  room  — Both  thefe  ruffians  had  been 
fo  intoxicated  the  preceding  evening,  that  they 
■wcie,  pel  haps,    incapable  ot  refiflance — They 

mad*  none Lefmond's  fervants   conveyed 

them  to  a  room  in  the  moft  ancient  part  of 
the  caftle,  which  was,  \vh-n  the  fc'Jdal  fyf- 
lem  was  in  all  i'.b  force,  a  place  of  corjfinemcnt 
icrahe  wretched  vaflali,  over  wiiom  thofe  bar- 
■barous  cuftums  gave  the  jVigricur  the  power 
rf  life  and  cieaih — It  was  ftill  ftrongly  fccurcd  ; 
for  the  privilege,  though  not  fo  otien  extited, 
l.'^id  never  been  given  up — While  thefe  jneu 
were  fccuring  in  one  part  of  this  buildings 
Defmond,  \ruh   his  trcmblirg  companion  Ihii 

hanginjj 


^7^  D    E    S     M    O    N    D. 

hanging  on  his  arm,  went  with  the  other  men 
and  drew  up  tlie  bridge,  thus  preventing  the 
entrance  of  the  eight  ruffians,  who  it  was 
likely  wouid  immediately  return. — Four  wo- 
men were  now  affembled  in  extreme  terror — 
Delmond  allured  them  that  he  waged  no  war 
againll:  them,  but  that  he  muft  infift  upon  their 
not  attempting  to  give  any  mtelligence  to  the 
perfons  without,  and  upon  their  furnilhing  me 
with  alTiftance  and  refrefiiment. 

He  then,  as  we  Teemed  to  be  now  in  a  to- 
lerable date  of  fecurity,  would  have  had  me 
take  fome  repofe,  for  he  faw  that  I  was  hardly 
aWe  to  fupport  mylelf;  this,  hoA'ever,  I  re- 
tufed  ;  for  I  knew  that  to  attempt  fleeping  in 
iuch  circumllances  would  be  to  no  purpofe. — 
As  one  of  hisiervants  had  found  his  way  acrofs 
the  fcjfe,  of  the  depth  of  which  he  was  ig- 
5iorant,  th;;  men  who  were  out  tor  the  pur- 
pofes  of  robbery,  were  certainly  able  to  crofs  . 
It. — i  faw  ftill  the  poflibility,  nay  the  proba- 
bility ot  danger  to  him,  and  of  fuch  Icenes  as 
njy  fou!  fickcned  at ;  the  cap  which  Warhaai 
had  picked  up  now  lay  on  a  great  table  in  the 
room  to  which  we  had  returned — and  the  idea 
that  the  murdered  body  cf  icme  unhappy  pcr- 
ion  to  whom  it  belonged,  might  be  concealed 
in  the  houfe,  made  mc  Ihudd'^r  ns  I  lurvcyed 
it. — Suddenly  the  luopoiition  that   it  was,  pcr- 

liaps,    Verney  hir»iielf,    occurred  to   me. 

Gracious   heaven  1     what    horror  accompanied 

that  tliought  ! -Involuntarily  I  caugln   the 

hand  of  l3erinond,  v/ho  fat  anxioully  watch- 
ing  my    countenance —He  inquired  eagerly 

what  was  ihe  matter. — "Oh!  D-fmond!" 
faid  I,  hardly,  indeed,  conl'cious  of  what  I 
laid — "  Verncy  is    here,    1   am   pcrfuaded  ho 

■is  i 


D    E    S    M    O    N    D.  a?9 

Is  ;  he  came  hither  by  appointment  of  his  per- 
fidious friends — they  were  called  away  hef'orc 
his  arrival,  and  thefe  their  retainers  have  def- 
troyed  him." 

He  endeavoured  to  argue  me  out  of  a  fup- 
portion  which  he  law  (hook  my  whole  trame. 
— "  If  you  have  any  imprcilion  of  this  Ibrt," 
faid  he,  *'  I  wiil  interrogate  the  men  below  ; 
I  will  myfelf  fearch  the  whole  houfe." — **  Oh  I 

no,  no,"  replied  1 •*  fend  yourlervant  to  do 

this,  but  for  heaven's  fake  do  not  yourklf  leave 
me!" 

Warham  was  then  fent  \Mth  the  Swifs  round 
the  houfe  ;  there  was  no  appearance  of  any 
perlon  concealed  in  it,  euher  dead  or  alive, 
— The  n.en  who  were  in  connncmeai  below, 
protefted  that  the  cap  belonged  to  one  of  theii 
own  people,  who  !iad  been  hred  at  ni  retreat^ 
ing  betore  a  party  of  the  national  horfe,  and 
wounded  in  the  cheek. — On  this  allurance  I 
became  cafier  ;  but  as  I  llill  perfilted  in  re- 
fuling  to  go  ^  any  bed  above  liairs,  Delmond 
dchred  the  women  to  bung  down  one  and 
iay  on  the  floor  of  the  lOom  where  we  were; 
ttiey  did  fo,  and  he  prevailed  upon  me  to  lie 
down,  the  mere  change  of  pofture  after  Jo 
many  hours  or  fatigue  and  terror,  was  ex- 
tremely refrcfhing.— He  had  b.fore  made  me 
cat  of  fome  provifions  the  women  produced, 
and  drink  fome  warm  wme. — He  now  allured 
mc  his  men  were  io  placed  that  the  people 
^rcm  whom  we  aprchcnded  danger  coula  not 
lurprife  us. — "  We  are,"  iaid  lie,  *'  nve  men, 
reickire  and  well  armed;  we  have  heaven  on 
our  licic  ;  we  have  yoiir  fateiy  to  contend  for 
— and  can  you  imagine  that  we  fhoujj  be  ea« 
fi!y  conquered  ?" 

**  Oh  I 


28o  DESMOND. 

"  Oh  !  no,"  replied  I,  "  I  do  not  Imagine 
it  ;  but  the  terror  of  fuch  a  fcene  ! — to  ihed 
blood  even  of  the  mif2;uidcd  wretches  whom 
we  fear  is  fo  horrible  1 — Your  danger— danger 
for  me  fool" — ^ Tears,  the  firft  I -had  been 
able  to  fhed  for  many  days,  now  burfl;  from 
my  eyes ;  I  found  myfelf  greatly  relieved  by 
them — and  fince  I  faw  how  much  he  wiflicd 
me  to  attempt  it,  1  endeavoured,  while  he 
fat  by  me,  to  reft.-  -I  even  fell  into  a  kind  of 
half  flumber,  from  which  I  ftartcd  in  terror, 
fancying  1  heard  fire-arms,  and  faw  the  hor- 
rid vifages  of  the  ruffians,  but  I  found  Def- 
niond  only  by  me,  aflTurJng  me  that  all  was 
per;'e£i!y  fate  and  quiet,  and  I  funk  once 
more  into  fomething  like  fleep — and  when  I 
again  recovered  my  reco!le£lion,  it  was  morn- 
ing— Never  was  the  light  of  day  more  wel- 
come —for  it  fnewed  me  Defmond,  my  gene- 
rous prote6lor  in  fafcty  ;  and  I  faw  his  coun- 
tenance lighten  with  friendly  pleafure,  when 
he  found  me  fo  much  reftored.--jrbe  women, 
by  -this  time  convinced  that  we  meant  nothing 
hoftile  to  them,  or  everi  to  the  men  who  had 
been  in  pofieflion  of  the  houfe,  if  we  vi>erc 
not  molerted,  were  nov/  in  hopes  that  we 
(hould  quietly  depart  ;  they  were  affiduous, 
thereFore,  in  affifting  me  —-My  clothes,  about 
which  1  h.d  nev^r  thought,  were  inquired  for 
in  the   chaife,     and   the    fmall   portmanteau   I 

had     v.as     produced     untouched Dcf.nond 

waited  without  the  door,''  while  I,  with  the 
alfiilance  of  the  women,  changed  my  clothes 
-—A  very  few  moments,  you  may  believe, 
lufficed  me  ;  for  1  found  he  was  now  impati- 
c-nt  to  purfuethe  plan  which  he  Had  fettled  for 
sx\s,  which  wab  to  go  on,    notwithilandmg  all 

•  paiTcd 


©ESMOND.  281 

f>a(red  dangers,  to  the  village  where  Verney 
had  informed  me  he  was,  though  this  journey 
was  above  feventy  leagues. ---Every  conlidera- 
tion  of  prudence  and  fifety  urged  our  imme- 
diate departure  ;  the  m:n  were  fufficlcntly  le- 
frelhed,  and  the  horfcs  able  to  proceed,  all  but 
the  poor  animal  which  had  fallen  into  the 
foJf€—-'wh\c\\  was  fo  much  injured,  that  Def- 
mond  in  mercy  ordered  it  to  be  fhot,  an^  it 
was  replaced  by  jhat  which  he  had  rode  him- 
felf— and  uhich  one  of  the  men  had  led 

Before  feven  in  the  morning  we  left  this 
difnial  abode  ;  it  was  three  leagues  to  Ckr» 
niont — but  we  arrived  there  without  meeting 
tl-.e  party  we  had  fo  much  reafon  to  appre- 
hend, and  I  once  more  faw  my  invaluable 
friend  in  fifety,  alter  all  the  perils  ]ie  h.id,  on 
my  account,  hazard. d  ;  and  here  I  agreed 
to  lake  fomc  hours  repof^r,  o.\  condition  that 
he   would  in  the  mean  time,    attend  to  him- 

Eaily  on  th% following  morning  we  pro- 
ceeded, Dcfmond  having  hired  two  men  with 
firc-a/ms  to  accompany  us;  which  mads  the 
party,  he  thought,  fo  ftron^  a»  to  preclude 
any  apprchenfions  from  the  troops  of  marau- 
dcff,  ot  which  we  were  flill  trld.-— He  went 
himfelf  to  the  municipality  at  Clermont,  and 
informed  them  of  the  fituation  of  the  chateau 
D'fiautvilic ;  where  it  is  probable  the  two 
prifoniprs  were  releafed  by  their  femah  friends, 
as  foon  as  we  had  left  them. 

I  will  not  my  dear  filler,  fpeak  of  any  cir.- 
cumflanccs  of  our  five  days  journey  from  Cler- 
mont to  Lyons,  and  from  thence  to  this  place 
-—We  met  with  nothing  worth  relating  af;er 
Juch  fcenes  as  1   have  jufl  defcribed  ;    but  the 

convcrfa- 


282  DESMOND. 

converfation  I  had  with  Defmond  I  will  re- 
peat as  ingenuoufly  to  you,  Fanny,  as  I  re- 
peat it  involuntarily  to  my  own  heart. 
-  Confcious  as  I  am  of  the  ties  lam  bound 
by,  and  fhrinking  from  every  idea  of  their 
violation,  I  will  now  own  to  you,  that  I  have 
long  been  unable  to  conceal  from  niyfeif, 
Defmond's  regard  for  me,  though  he  neVer 
avowed  it ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  has  en- 
trufted  me  with  connexions  he  has  formed, 
that  were  wholly  incompatible  with  fuch  an 
attachment,  if  he  ever  meant  to  acknow- 
iedge  it  --I  am,  however,  pcrfuaded  he  never 
did;  and  only  the  f^ngular  circumilances  of 
my  deftmv  have  made  my  afFc£ted  ignorance 
difficult,  and,  at  length,  impoflible  to  be 
fupported. 

Fanny — though  I  certainly  fhould  have  pr.> 
ferred  Defmond  to  every  other  man  in  the 
world,  had  it  been  my  fortune  to  have  been 
acquainted  with  him  befcre  I  became  iirevo- 
cably  another's— though  I  hj*e  received  from 
him  the  molf  extraordinary  inrtances  of  generous 
friendlhip — though  he  has  more  than  once  ha- 
zarded his  life  for  me  -rand  once — Oh  !  how 
lately,  and  how  wonderfully,  refcued  me  from 
death  !-  perhaj^s,  from  worfe  than  death  !--Yet, 
believe  me,  when  I  declare  to  you,  that  never 
have  I  even  in  thought,  tranfgreffed  the  bounds 
of  that  duty,  which  though  it  was  impofed  on 
me  when  1  was  not  a  competent  judge  of  the 
engagement  1  entered  into,  I  feel  to  be  equal- 
ly binding,  and  whether  my  unhappy  Ver^ 
ney  lives  or-  dies,  I  have  the  comfort  of 
Icnowing,  that  towards  him,  my  condu(5i: 
has  been  irreproachable — I  break  my  melan- 
choly 


»    E    S    M   O    N"   D.  283 

'choly  narrative  to  fay  this,  becaufe  I  owe  it 
to  truth,  I  owe  it  to  myfelf — Indulge  me  then 
■with  yet  a  word  on  this  delicate  and  painful 
fubjed,  becaufe  I  may,  perhaps,  fpeak  upon 
it  now  for  the  laft  time, 

I  learned  then  in  our  convcrfation  which 
became  lefs  interrupted  and  confufed,  after 
ViC  left  Clermont,  that  Defmond  had  never 
lofl:  fight  of  nie  after  I  quitted  England  ;  that 
he  had  followed  me  to  Paris,  and  lived  in  dif- 
guifc  at  Meudon— — that  a  circumftance  of 
a  very  peculiar  nature  had  obliged  him  to  go 
to  Paris  the  day  I  to  fuddenly  received  a  fum- 
mons  ro  attend  Mr.  Verney  ;  but  that  on 
his  return,  finding  me  gone,  and  learning, 
by  Mr.  Bergafie,  by  what  route,  he  had  pur- 
fucd  me,  and  but  for  an  accident  that  hap- 
pened on  the  road,  he  would  have  overtaken 
me  long  be.ore  that  dreadful  night,  when  he 
mod  providentially  delivered  me  from  a  fitua- 
tion  (o  very  terrible,  that,  in  refle*5ting  oa  it, 
I  ficken  with  the  terror  it  yet  imprelTes — — 
When  all  this  mv  Fannv,  wss  nddrd  to  ths  rsr 
collc6lion  of  the  circumftances  that  happened 
at  Bridge-foot,  and  fome  (which  though  1  ne- 
ver thought  them  of  much  confequence,  it 
was  not  in  my  power  to  obliterate  from  my 
minj)  that  happened  much  earlier  in  our  ac- 
quaintance, it  would  have  been  falfehocd  or 
affe6iation,  had  I  pretended  to  have  been  ig- 
norant that  Delmond's  attachment  to  me  was 
not  a  common  one  ;  but  while  all  its  confe- 
:quences  had  been  to  me  only  good  ;  while 
he  preferved  for  me  the  moft  inviolate  re- 
fpecf,  and  even  promoted  my  executing  low- 
bkIs  Verney,    what  he   knew  to  be  my  duty, 

.     it 


284  D    E    S    M    O   N    ». 

it  would  have  been  folly  and  ingratitude,  had 
I  affeded  refcntment  which  certainly  I  did 
not  feel. 

Still  lam  a>vare  that  my  fituation  was  ve- 
ry flrange  and  very  improper,  travelling  un- 
der the  proteQion  of  a  man,  whom  I  knew 
felt  for  me  a  regard  which  I  ought  not  to  en- 
courage,   and  dared  not  return -So  much 

obliged  to  hiin  — —  efteeming  him  beyond  any 
other  human  being  ;  every  ftep  I  took,  being 
confcious,  that  I  owed  to  him  that  I  exiiled  ; 
and  all  this,  while  I  knew  not  but  that  my  un- 
fortunate  huH^and   was  dying,      or,     poffibly, 

dead Alas  !    I  am  not  a  floic— perhaps  my 

heart  is  but  too  fufceptible  of  gratitude  Jtnd 
tendernefb  —How    ill    my   early  affe6iions   had 

been   replaced,    you  kno  v  but   too  '.veil  ! 

But  when  my  hufoand  dlfdained  them,  they 
found  refuse  with  my  chilJ'en  and  with  my 
fifter  —Ah  !  Fanny  !  but  for  thefe  refourcc*, 
fhould  I  have  been  kTs  culpable  than  fj  many 
other    young   wom.en    have    been,     who  have 

been   as   unhappily  married? and  Ihould   I 

now  have  poffcffed  what  foftcns  the  mifery  of 
my  delliny  ? — the  confcioufncfs  cf  not  having 
deferved  it- 
Let  me  rtill  poffifs  this  confollng  confcioof- 
nefs— I  will  tell  yoj,  Fanny,  what  1  have 
done  to  fecure  its  pofleffion  {lill— When  I 
found,  loo  certainly,  that  Dcfmond  had  plac- 
ed his  whole  happinefs  in  teftifying  to  me, 
by  his  condudt  rather  than  his  words,  how 
much  he  was  attached  to  me,  I  endeavoured 
for  his  fake  and  for  my  own,  to  convince  him^ 
that  the  continuance  of  that  regard,  unlefs  it 
was  under  the  regulation  of  reafon,  would  be 
only  a   fource    of    milery   to  us    both—*'   If 

Ycrncy 


Vcrney  (hould  be    no  more,"  faid  I,    **  or  if 
my  earneft  endeavours  to  contribute  (o  his  re- 
covery,   ftiould  fail^-What   have   I  cither   m 
my  heart  or  my  perfon,    to  repay  fuch   affec~ 
tion  ? — Alas  !    nothing  !--the   bloom   of  both 
are  gone-  -l^ow.    Sir,    are  in  a  fituation  of  life 
to  expecJ  the  undiviu'cd  tcnderncfs  of  the  mofl 
lovely   and   fortunate  of  women-  -I   have   no- 
thing but  a  fpiriL  weighed  down  by  long  anxi- 
ety— a  perfon  no  longer  boafting  of  any  advan- 
tages— and    a    heart  trembling  for  the  fate   of 
three  little,  hclplcfs  being?,    who,    if  my  fears 
do  not  exaggerate,    have  but  little   to  truft  to 
from  the  wreck  of  their  father's   fortune— Let 
me,  Dcfmond,    as  your  grateful  friend,    point 
6ut  where,    without   any  of   thefe   drawbacks, 
all  the  little  advantages  you  found   or  fancied 
in  mr,    may  bimtt  with — My  Fanny  poireflcs 
them  all  j,    and    with  them    an   heart   worthy 
of  your's  uninjured  by  calam  ty,  and  untainted 
by  forrow."^ — I    will  not  tell  you,    my    fifter, 
his  anfwer,  it  was  expreflive  of  the  high  fcnfc 
Defmond  has  of  your  merit — I  felt  that  I  had 
acquitted  myfelf,  and  while  my  eyes  overflow 
with  tears,  1  ftill  feel  it ;     for  mdeed  I  think  I 
could  die  happy,  if  you  w  ere  married  to  Def- 
mond,   if  1  knew  that  you  united  in  giving   to 
my  luckle's  little  ones  that  generous  tendernefa 
you  are  both  fo  capable  of  feeling  ;    and  lorn e- 
times,    in  deploring   together,    with  the  footh- 
ing  fympathy  of  kindred  mind?,    tht   fate   of 
your  loit  Geraldine  I 

I  hii  is  the  only  plan  I,  at  this  moment, 
look  forward  to  with  any  degree  of  fatis'acli- 
on  — If  poor  Verney  furvives — Alas  !  I  would 
very  fa'n,  but  cannot  flatter  myfcif,  that  he 
\iiii  bc-m'nzrgti — if  he  dici — 1    will  retire   to 


286  D    E    S    M    0    N|p. 

fome  cheap  country  with  my  children,  and 
never,  with  my  poverty  and  theirs,  embitter 
the  affluent  and  fortunate  fituation  of  Dcf* 
mond. 

But  it  is  time  to  clofe  my  long  and  didref- 
fing  narrative,  and  if  I  yield  to  thefe  over- 
whelming fenfations,  I  fliall  not  be  able  !  — 
My  tears  have  rendered  the  lad  page  illegible  ! 

We  arrived  chen,  without  any  very  alarm- 
ing occurence,  at  the  village,  from  an  auherge 
in  which  Verney's  letter  had  been  v/ritten — - 
Oh!  what  was  my  breathlefs  asjitation,  as  I 
flopped  in  the  chaife,  while  Defiuand  went  to 
inquire  for  him,  I  cannot  defcribe,  for  I  could 
not  difcriminate  fuch  a  combination  of  d.f- 
trafling  emotions  as  at  that  moment  affaiJed 
me. — In  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  Dcfmond 
returned,  and  1  faw,  by  his  countenance,  that 

I  was    to  expeSt  fomething  very  dreadful ~ 

*'  Verney,"  cried  I,  "  my  hufband,  is  he 
there? — is  he  living?" — "  He  is  there,"  re- 
plied Defmond  ;  *'  and  I  am  fliocked  at  my- 
felf  for  having  fuppofed  that  he  was  engaged 
in-a  fchcme  of  didionourable  treachery,  while 
he  lay  in  all  the  miferies  of  indigence  and 
iicknefs.'' — I  h.ad  heard  enough,  and  attempt- 
ed to  open  the  chaife  door — "  Let  me  go  to 
him,"    cried  1,    **  this  moment — let   me  go." 

*«  Be  calm,  dear  Midain,"  replied  Def- 
mond, *'  you  will  need  all  your  fortitude,  dd 
not,  thereforej  exhauli  your  ibength."  — <'  I 
will  go,  however,"  exclaimed  I,  *'  nothing 
(hall  itop  me — Have  you  {ttn  him  yourfelt  ? 
— «'  I  have." — '*  And  does  he  know  that  I  am 
here? — '*  He  does — I  tolJ  hi.u  that  meeting 
^•Qu    by  a  ilrang^    accident,     cncompilied  by 

^dangers 


t)..E    S    MO   N    D.  287 

dangers,  into  which  you  had  hurried  in  youf 
anxiety  to  attend  him>  I  could  not  quit  you 
till  I  had  feen  you  hither — He  exprefled,  as 
well  as  he  was  able  to  exprefs,  gratitude  to- 
wards nie,  and  afFedion  towards  you." 

Oh  !  my  fiilcr,  judge  of  what  I  muH:  have 
felt,  whenDefmond,  after  a  little  more  prepa- 
ration, led  me  into  the  room— a  miferabis 
room,  where  lay  the  father  of  my  children, 
in  a  fituation  which  I  have  not  the  courage  mi- 
nutely to  defer  ibe- -His  affociates  had  deferted 
him — his  wounds,  one  of  which  was,  at  firfl-, 
fuppofed  to  be  fatal,  had  never  been  properly 
dreffed,  and  noiv  ftill  (though  we  inllanily 
procured  better  alfiftance)  it  threatens  a  mor-* 
tification  ;  befides  this,  the  bones  of  his  leg 
had  been  broken  ;  and  it  was  fo  ill  fet,  that, 
on  Defmond's  procuring  a  furgeon,  he  was 
under  the  neceillty  of  breaking  it  again — In  a 
condition,  which  I  will  not  fhock  you  by  paint- 
ing difl;in£lly,  had  Verney  lain  near  five  v;ceks, 
without  any  money,  but  what  his  arms  ar.d 
watch  had  fold  for  i  nor  any  attendance,  at 
iirll,  but  what  the  reluctant  charity  of  a  wo- 
man in  the  houfe  had  afforded  him  ;  but  as  his 
money  tailed,  that  declined  alfo  j  and  had  it 
not  been  tor  one  of  L'sf^urs  de  la  vujerictirde., 
who  had  Ictt  her  convent,  but  flili  cxercifcd  the 
mofl  noble  part  of  her  profellion,  he  told  us 
that  he  muft  have  pcriihed — Such  was  the  bigo- 
try of  the  people  in  this  part  of  France,  that 
tl^ja^worthy  woman  was  reproached  tor  her  hu- 
manity by  the  favages  of  the  village,  and  told, 
th^t  in  trying  to  fave  the  lit.-  of  an  heretic,  fhe 
offended  God-  -'1  hough  this  heretic  had  fallen 
in  a  difetice  (from  v.liatever  motive)  of  the  very 
party.which  fo  pio'jfl;- eoaligncd  hini   to  death, 

for 


for  difFering,  as  they  fuppofcd,  in  opinion— = 
Alas  !  poor  Vcrncy  had  never  any  opinion  at 
all  ;  and  now  had  hardly  exprcffcd,  in  a  lan- 
guid and  indi{lin<S  voice,  his  gratitude  for  my 
attendance,  before  he  befought  me  to  prevent 
the  cure  of  the  parifti  from  pcrfecuting  him 
hourly  miih  his  vififs  and  exhortations  ; 
Defmond  undertook  to  do  This ;  but  the  chari- 
table nun  came  every  day  ;  and,  indeed, 
without  her  afliftance,  I  fhotld  have  funk 
under  the  fatigue  I  have  endured  ever  fince 
I  have  been  here,  now  four  days. 

I  need  not  remind  you  of  the  unhappy  pro- 
pcnfity  Verney  has  long  had  to  intox'cition— 
In  this  habit  he  has  indulged  himfclf  ever  fince 
he  has  been  told  that  it  endangers  his  life  ; 
and  when  he  is  abfolutely  denied  it,  he  (inkc 
into  a  fuUen  or  torpid  flate,  and  complains 
that  I  will  let  him  die  of  faintnefs  and  dejec- 
tion. 

Oh  !  Fanny  1  when  I  fee  him  fuller,  and 
trace  in  his  countenance,  dillortcd,  pale,  and 
disfigured  as  it  is,  the  likenefs  my  dear  boy 
bears  to  him,  I  forget  ail  I  have  fuffered— I 
pardon  ail  his  faults—  I  endeavour  to  apolo* 
gize  even  for  thofe  which  I  fancied  he  in  ended 
to  commit —and  I  pray  to  heaven  for  hi s^  life— • 
and  that  he  may  be  happy  with  his  children — 
That  Being  alone,  in  whofe  hands  are  life  and 
death,  knows  what  is  beH: — My  on'y  rcfourcc 
againft  the  long  anxiety  I  have  gone  through, 
againft  that  which  is  to  come,  is  in  the  confci- 
oufnefs  of  having  done  my  duty — I  am,  in 
fome  me^\ire,  rewardeJ,  even  no'.v,  by  tht 
unwearied,  the  generous,  and  fiirely  the  difrn- 
tereftcd  conduQ  of  Dcfmcmd,  who,  whatever 
vwy    have   hctn    his    motives.    Or    h:s   w((hcsj 


h  t  'i  W  0  K  i5.  4^9 

ffjjiecls  that  fa  ere  d  duty;  and  never  has,  fince 
my  arrival,  uttered  one  word  that  could  make 
me  reproaich  myfclf  with  having  liftened  td 
him. 

Oh  !    -what  a  heart   is   his  I— ^- — hbw  truly 

brave  ! — ^how  manly  1- — how  generous  !-- 

'J  hough  he   has  tio  realon  to  love  Defnuond, 
the  tendereil  friend,  the  mod  afT-'Slionate   bro- 
ther, eould  r.ct  flicw   more  conflant   attention 
to  his    eafe  *— YederclaV,    overcome    witli    the 
Fatigue  o\  fitting  np  two  nights,  h\  order  that 
the  dire£ticns  of   the    furgeon,    alter  the   laft 
horrible  operation,  might    be    llridly  followed, 
1  lny  down,  for   a   few    hours,  in  my  clothes, 
leaving  the  }Oung  woman- i'ervant  of  the  houfc 
!"n  the  room,  who  promifcd  to  call  me  if  Mr, 
Verney  wanted    any    thing-~Defmond   was 
gone  to  the   pbce  where  he  Iodge^,  to  write 
letters  to  England,  which    he  Was  promifed  an 
opportunity  of  fending  that  afternoon,   or  this 
mornings  Qiiite    e?;haiiftcd    by  ex'cefs  of    fa- 
tigue,  deep  fell   heavier  upon  me  than  it  has 
done  for    many-j    niany    days>    And  v/hen  I 
ftarted   from   my  unquiet  tlreams  which  ftill 
haunted  me,  I  found  it  was  five  o'clock. 

I  fleppcd  fofrly  towards  tht  room  v/herc 
Verney  lay,  where  I  heard  him  talking  ina 
loud  and  peremptory  voice,  his  face -was  fludied 
even  to  a  purple  hue  ■;  and  he  was  arguing 
angrily  with  Defmond,  who  hung  over  him, 
fpeaking  !oothingly  to  him,  and  entreating  him 
to  be  patient  !-  -to  be  pacified  1- -As  I  approach- 
ed, I  CiW  that  Verney  darted  towards  me  a 
iookol  anger  and  reproach,  v/hile  Defmond 
had  a  countenance  fo  cxpreflive  of  concern  for  us 
both  I — Ah  1  Fanny  I  I  found  that  the  poor, 
imprudentpatient  had  bribed,  by  a  promife  oK 
Vol.  jl.  Q  R  crow  i 


2pO  DESMOND. 

a  crown,  the  fooHfli  girl  that  had  been  left 
with  him,  to  bring  him  wine  and  brandy,  of 
which  he  had  drank  fo  Uberally,  that  the  fever 
which  he  had,  to  all  appearance,  bafRed,  by 
compelHng  his  abftinence,  threatened  to  return 
—It  was,  indeed  returned,  and  delirium  fuc- 
ceeded  ;  this  laftcd  till  towards  morning, 
daring  all  which  time,  Defmond  fat  by  him, 
often  keeping  him,  by  force,  in  bed,  from 
which  he  would  other  wife  have  ruftied,  not- 
withftanding  his  frafitured  limb— The  fcene 
was  often  too  much  for  me-^at  four  o'clock  he 
became  more  calm,  and  then  DefmOnd  pre- 
vailed upon  me  to  leave  the  room,  promifing 
to  remain  with  him. 

This  morning  he  feemed  a  great  deal  better 
-—declares  himfelf  fenfible  of  his  folly,  and 
aflures  us  he  will  be  governed — He  no  longer 
complains  of  pain,  and,  I  think,  I  have  ne- 
ver feen  him  fo  compofed  as  fince  eight  o'clock 
to-day }  it  is  now  ten  at  night— The  furgeon 
has  not  been  here  to-day  ;  but  Verney  has 
been  fo  cool  and  rational,  and  flept  fo  much, 
that  I  have  been  enabled  to  finilh  this  letter, 
which  I  began  yeflerday  morning. 

1  own  1  now  have  lefs  apprehenfions  of  him 
than  I  have  ever  had — His  age— his  naturally 
good  conftitution,  are  ftrong  circumftances  in 
his  favor  ;  and  I  may  remark,  my  Fanny,  I 
hope  not  unkindly  remark,  that  Verney  does 
not  fuffer,  as  many  people  do,  great  irritation 
of  fpirits,  from  cxcefs  of  fenfibility  ;  and  if 
he  is'  tolerably  free  from  bodily  fufferings, 
feels  no  injury  from  the  emotions  of  the 
mind. 

Still  his  condition  is,  I  know,  precarious- 
Still  1  have  much  to  fuffer  with  him,  and  for 

him 


D   E  S  M  0  K  9.  S^X^ 

him — I  am,  however,  relieved,  by  having 
thus  difburthened  my  poor  heart  to  you  ! — 
Pray  forme,  my  Fanny— for  my  children — 
and  for  the  poor  unfortunate  fufFercr  their  fa- 
ther.—Perhaps,  before  you  receive  this,  for 
it  is  3  long  way  from  hence  to  England,  he 
willbe  well— perhaps  he  may  not  need  your 
prayers  I  I  will  contrive  to  write,  from  day 
to  day,  but  now  I  muft  clofe  my  letter,  as 
this  is  the  only  chance  of  fending  it  off  for  Ibmc 
time. 

That  heaven  may  watch  over  the  happinefs 
of  My  dear  Fanny,  is  the  warmeft  wifh  of 
her. 

CERALDINE. 


O  a  LETe 


L  E  T  T  E  R     XXXI. 
TO    MR.    BETHEL. 

Silon,  Nov.  ic-,  »79l. 

I  T  is   all  over,  my   friend  — ~-  Verney    i^ 

gone  ! — —The    torpor    and    tranquillity 

■w-hich  I  dcfcribed  to  you  Ih  my  lail  letter,* 
M-cre  the  beginning  of  a  mortiiicatlon,  which 
proved  fatal  twenty  hours  afterwards — He 
died  yefterday  morning.  --I  will  not  attempt 
to  defcribe  the  behaviour  of  his  angelic  wife, 
nor  the  comfort  it  is  to  me  to  reflcdl:,  on  the 
cxa£l  and  vigorous  attention  flie  has  been 
enabled  to  give  tu  tliis  unfortunate  man  at 
the  clofc  of  liis  life,  fo  that  her  gentle  heart, 
when  the  firR  (liock  has  loll  its  force,  will  be 
reiiored  to  its  tranquillity,  and  may  tafte  of 
happincfs  which  no  felf- reproach  will  inter- 
i^pt. 

Peace  to  the  a  Hies  of  poor  Verney  !  and 
may  his   faults   be   forgotten  by  the  world,  as 

his  divine  Gerakline  has  forgiven  thetn. = 

Bethel  ;  his  hdl  acl  of  his  life  fhould  plead  his 
pardon  for  every  folly  with  which  it  was 
itained.— He  was  not,  till  a  very  few  hours 
before  his  death,  convinced  that  there  v/as  no 
hopes  ;  he  then  feemed  to  coUedl:  himfclf  as  if 
to  Ihew  how' much  better  he  could  die  than  he 
bid  lived. 

He   futTered  no   pain,    and   was  in  pcrfec\ 


*  Whuh  iocs  rot  appev. 


JioflcffioK 


DESMOND.  2L^3 

pofTeffion  of  his  fenfes  ;  he  bade  Gcrakiine 
leave  him  alone  with  me,  and  thus  fpoke  to 
me — 

«  Defmond'  I  know  that  your  friendfliip 
fpT  me  cannot  have  been  ftrong  enough  to  in- 
duce you  to  make  all  the  kind  exertions  for  me, 
which  you  have  done  fincc  you  have  been 
here  v  nor,  indeed,  to  bring  you  hither-— 
I  have  been  told,  by  feveral  people,  that  you 
have  ahvays  been  in  love  Avith  my  wife—Per- 
fe£liy  fecure  of  her  honour,  more  i'o  than  I 
deferved  to  bc»  not  naturally  of  a  jealous  tem- 
per, and  engaged  in  the  pleafuves  of  the  world, 
as  long  as  I  had  money  to  enjoy  them,  I 
never  heeded  this ;  and,  if  my  informers 
meant  milicioufly,  th.ey  loll  their  aim.---I 
am  new  dying,  and  I  owe  it  to  you,  that 
death  comes  not  with  all  the  aggi-avated  hor- 
rors of  poverty  and  ■wretchcdnefs---!  knov/  you- 
to  be  a  man  of  honour,  and  if  Geraldine 
marries  again,  as  tliere  Is  certainly  reafon  to  be- 
lieve fnc  will,  it  is  to  you,  rather  than  to  any 
other  man,  that  I  wifh  to  confide  her  and  my 
•  childrLii.''' 

It  would  be  very  dilTr.-ult  for  me.  Bethel, 
to  ueicrlbe  my  fenfations  while  this  palled— -I 
anlwcred,  hovvever,  ingenuoufly  and  with 
trutli---*'  th.at  1  certainly  had  always  preferred 
Mrs.  Verncy  to  every  other  woman,  but  that 
my  altachmc'at  had  been  unknown  to  .^tv,  and 
never  would  have  led  me  to  tranfgrefs  the 
bounds  of  honour  towards  him  \  but  thar  if  (hs 
ever  was  at  liberty,  1  (hould  deeni  the  happi- 
neis  of  becoming  her  protciftor  the  firil  that 
f.ue  I'o  lid  give  me." 

*'  Let  me,*'  laid   he,  *'  wiiile  I  am  yet  able» 

mak.? 


$94  DESMOND. 

make  a-vvill  in  which  I  will  give  you,  jointly  with 
her,  the  guardianfhip  of  my  children. — ^Poor 
things  !  I  have  nothing  to  give  theqi ;  but 
the  fettlements  made  on  my  marriage  has  pre- 
vented my  making  them  entirely  beggars — 
Perhaps,  my  dear  friend,  my  death  may  be, 
for  them,    the    moft    fortunate    circumflance 

that  could  happen ^I  have  been  miferably 

cheated  j  perhaps  fome  of  my  affairs  may  be 
retrievable." 

He  then  defired  me  to  call  up  my  two  Eng- 
lUh  fervants,  before  whom  he  dictated  to  me  a 
memorandum,  m  which  he  left  his  wife  and 
his  children  to  my  care,  appointing  her  exe- 
cutrix, but  requefting  that  I  would  be  the 
guardian  of  his  children,  jointly  with  her  i 
and  exprefling  his  willies,  that  if  fhe  ever 
look  a  fecond  hufband,  it  might  be  his  friend 
Defmond— tills  he  figned  ;  it  was  witnefled 
in  due  form,  and  when  that  was  done,  he  gave 
it  me  and  bade  me  keep  it. — He  was  fatigued, 
and  afked  for  a  medicine  which  Geraldine  came 
in  to  give  him — he  then  fell  into  a  fort  of  ftu- 
por,  rather  than  lleep— when  he  awoke  Ge- 
raldine vv^as  alone  with  liim — I  know  not  what 
paiTed,  but  when  fhe  fent  for  m.e  I  found  her 
drowned  in  tears,  and  Verney  evidently  dy- 
irtg — In  a  few  moments  he  expired  in  her 
arms. — Bethel,  if  I  had  not  hopes  of  living 
with  her,  fuch  a  death  would  excite  my 
envy. 

There  was  no  affeclation  of  violent  affliction 
in  his  lovely  widow — the  natural  tendernefs  of 
her  heart,  the  thoughts  of  her  children,  and 
the  circumftance  of  their  father's  dying  fo  far 
from  his  country,  and  in  confc(|uencc  of  his 

unhappy 


DESMOND.  295 

unhappy  connexions,  were  enough  to  produce 
thofe  fevere  paroxyfms  of  grief  in  which  I  faw 
her  for  the  firft  tweve  hours— at  the  end  of 
that  time  (he  became  more  calm. — As  I  found 
it  was  her  wifli  that  the  remains  of  her  hufbp.nd 
ihould  be  conveyed  to  England,  I  determine 
that  it  fhould  be  done,  and  gave  orders  accords 
ingly. 

Mournful  as  the  fcenc  was,  I  reflefled  on 
what  the  fituation  of  Geraldine  would  have 
been  had  I  not  been  with  her  ;  and  felt  a  degree 
of  fatisfatlion  which  the  pofleflion  of  worlds 
could  not  beilov*-. 

It  is  now  time  to  confider  ox  our  return  to 
Meudon — ]  have  been  entreating  h.er  direfti-- 
ens  ;  but  I  fee  the  circumftance  of  going,  fo 
recently  a  widow,  with  a  man  of  whofe  at- 
tachment to  her  flie  cannot  now  be  Ignorant, 
is  very  oppreflive  to  her  delicate  fenfe  of  pro- 
priety ;  yet,  very  certain  it  is,  that  the  v.'hole 
world  united  fo  ccnfure  it,  (liould  not  induce 
me  to  quit  her  an  inllant. — Hitherto  her  m.ind, 
weakened  by  long  anguifli,  has  not  recovered 
firmnefs  enough  to  decide. — She  weeps,  and 
tells  me  in  a  voice  rendered  inarticulate  by  her 
tears,  that  fhe  leaves  the  direction  of  all  to 
me. 

Adieu  !  dear  Bethel,  as  foon  as  I  know  our 
route,  I  will  write  again,  in  the  hope  *that 
you  will  continue  to  let  me  hear  from  you. — 
Will  it  feem  unfeeeling  if  i  fay  that  I  am  a 
happy  ieWow?  I  do  not  know — but  I  am  furer 
I  fhould  be  very  Jiupid  if  I  did  not  feel  that  I  am 
Jo — I  mean,  however,  only  comparatively  hap- 
py, for  I  intend  to  be  a  great   deal  happier  ; 

but 


29^  D    E    S    il    O    N    p. 

but    I  know   tbat  it  rauft   be   many   tedious 
months  firft. 

November  ii,  1791, 

I  had  fealed  my  letter,  and  was  difpatchiug 
It  by  a  meflenger  to  England,  with  fevcral 
from  Geraldine  to  her  family,  when  I  was 
aniLized  by  the  fuddeu  appearance  of  my  friend. 
jMontiieuri,  who,  ruihing  into  a  lower  apart- 
Tuent  of  the  poor  houfe  I  inhabit  in  this  vil 
lage,  threw  himfelf  into  n;y  arms  ;  and,  be- 
fore I  could  recover  my  furprife,  difengaged 
i!;;n;ie!f,  and  put  into  them  his  wife  ;  on  whom, 
■-vitii  unJ.efcribable  alloniflnnenr  and  pleafurc, 
i  recognized  Fanny  Waverly,  the  filler  of  my 
GeraLline. 

1  was  very  gl.id  that  this  unguariled  intro- 
duction was  no:  maile  to  her  inllcad  of  to  me  j 
for  in  her  prefent  llatc  of  mind  I  know  not 
wliat  might  have  been  the  confequence. 

I  contrived  that  the  knowlctlgi  of  her  filler's 
being  here,  of  v/hofc  niarri-.ige  Ihe  \vx\  entirely 
igiiorant,  n)ight  not  reach  her  fu  alivuptly--- i 
had  the  iiicxprcflible  happniefs  to  find  that  Oa: 
couiideved  this  arrival  as  thi  moit  fortunat-; 
circum-lhitico  that  could  have  befallen  her  — -r 
With  wh.it  delight  does  fl)e  ga^^e  on  her  filler 
.-•li^w  aireclingj  how  iiiterelluig  is  the  tcndtr 
/iriendfhip  betwen  tlieni. 

Alontlleuvi  and  I  have  noM^  fettled  every  thing 
for  our  journey  i!nmeJiately---We  ihall  Cj'ii,!: 
this  pl.ice  on  the  day  following  to-morrow  ; 
and  he  is  to  fend  fome  of  his  own  fervanr^, 
with  two  of  mine,  in  whom  I  can 
<^onfide-  tQ  attend  the   lall  olTices  that  can  be 

doiu" 


-©ESMOND.  2C>7 

<'lonc  for  pool'  Verncv — This  fad  ceremoTiy 
ucing  over,  we  go  to  Montlkuri,  and  from 
thence  to  Paris,  or  r.ithcr  to  Meudon. — N.nv^ 
there  is  nothhig  wrong  or  improper  in  my  at- 
tending Gcraldtnc — Bieflmgs  on  tlie  lovely  lit- 
tle Fanny  for  coming  hither. — If  Montfleun 
fliould  forget  liis  good  xefolutions,  and  relapfe 
into  that  libertinifm  which  was  his  only  fault, 
I  fiiall  not  forgive  him  ;  but,  at  prefent,  ^ie 
feems  the  moil  truly  happy,  as  he  is  always 
the  gayclt  creature  in  the  world. 


O5  L  £  T- 


apS  DESMOND. 

LETTER    XXXIL 
TO   MR.  BETHEL. 

Meudon,  Dec  26th,  1 791, 

M.y    EXCELLENT    FRIEND, 

FOR  fo,  I  perfuade  myfelf,  I  may  call  yovt 
^o—I  write  to  you  by  the  exprefs  wifh  of  our 
dear  friead,  Defmond,  who  begs  me  and  ma^ 
douce  Fanni,  to  tell  you  what  he  thinks  we 
can  fay  better  than  he  can  himfelf. 

And,  indeed,  he  is  fo  occupied  with  his 
love  and  his  hopes,  diftant  as  they  muft  be, 
that  he  fometimes  feems  to  lament  the  necefli- 
ty  of  acknowledging  that  any  other  perfons 
in  the  world  have  a  right  to  fhare  his  thoughts 
or  his  affeflions— If  he  can  fit  whole  hours, 
filent,  in  the  room  with  Geraldine,  he  is  con- 
tent— If  he  knows  flie  is  engaged,  c-r  unwil- 
ling to  be  in  company,    he   takes  her  children 

in  his  arms —  he  plays  with,  he  carefles 

them  ;    and    ftill  he   is  content. 1  thought 

I  liad  been  tolerably  in  love,  when  I  deter- 
mined on  an  affair,  fo  entirely  out  of  my  way, 
as  marrying  ;  but  my  love  is  really  of  fo  hum- 
ble a  fpccies,  when  put  by  the  fide  of  this 
fublime  paffion  of  my  friend's,  that  I  am 
afraid  my  amiable  Fanchon  will  difcover  the 
difference,  and  be  difcontent  with  me. 

But  all  this  is  wandering  from  my  purpofcj 
which  is  to  tell  you,  that  we  are  hallening  to 
Eniland,  v/hcre  we  hope  to  be  within  this 
.cic  tib. 

J  Jiate 


«  DESMOND.  20J^ 

I  hate  writing  long  letters;  and  there- 
fore I    will    only  relate  what    Delmond  tells 

me    he    wiflies    you    to    know. You 

have,  before  now,  received  the  commlflions 
with  which  he  troubled  you  about  poor  Ver- 
ney,  and  we  are  fatisfied  will  execute  thcxn. 

We  bring  with  us  four  children  ;  and  that 
there  may  be  no  more  rayftery  about  this ; 
that  Geraldine's  reputation  may  not  fuffer, 
which  otherwife  it  might  do,  even  in  your 
eyes,  I  will  confide  to  you  the  truth. 

I  was  fo  indifcreet  and  thoughtlefs  as  to 
encourage  in  the  gay  and  unguarded  heart  of 
fiiy  filler  de  Boifbelle,  an  affc6lion  for  Def- 
-mond,  while  he  was  at  my  houfe,  little  ima- 
gining the  cruelty  I  was  guilty  of  lov/ards 
them  both. — Indeed,  I  knew,  that  Jofephine 
had  been  married  againft  her  inclination  j  and 
had  an  attachment,  almoli:  from  her  infancy, 
to  a  naval  ofllcer,  a  near  relation,  which, 
I  fuppofed,  guard  enough  againfl  any  other 
imprellion  •,  and  tliougn  I  ufed  to  rally  her 
about  Defmoml,  I  was  fo  pvepolkrfild  with 
this  id^a,  that  the  polfible  confequencc  of 
encouraging  her  apparent  prciorence  to  him, 
never  Occurred  to  rpe. — When  lie  was  wound- 
ed at  Marfcilles,  I  flew  to  hitn,  and-  Jof.-.= 
phine  went  Ayith  ms — —.We  attended  him 
through  his  alarming  iljfiiifg,  ajid  .when  pc- 
litical  bufinefs  caiied  me  .-awiay,  I  delegated 
to  my  filter  the  tafii  of  taking  i-ure  oi/ my 
friend.  .  ,^ 

No  part  of  the  event  was  to  be  wondered 
a,t,  unlcfs.it  was  the  greatnefs  of  mi  id..whitfii 

Jofephine  evincc-d As  loon   as  Hi-;   became 

4)0  well  aflured  that  the  confequence  of  htv 

i-idiLTtcii 


30.6  IJ    E    3    M    O    N    1), 

jndifcrcet  attachment  could  not  be  finally  con- 
cealed, flie  determined  to  f:ave  Defmond  from 
nrty  rel'cntnient  which  1  might  have  felt,  by 
declarinfT  to  me,  that  it  was  to  her  own  un- 
guarded  folly,  and  not  to  any  art  or  deception 
on  his  part,  that  the  blame  was  owing — She 
told  me  he  had  promifed  nothing  ;  that  he 
ufcd  no  art  to  betray  lier  ;  but,  on  the  con- 
trarv,  had   told   her  that   his   whole  foul  was 

dedicated  to  another.-. Should   I  have  been 

wife,  under  thefe  circumftances,  to  have  def- 
troyed  my  friend  ?  or  to  have  &ivcn  him  a 
chance  of  dcitroying  me  ? — ■ — I  think  it  was 
ri:uch   more  rational  to  endeavour  to  conceal 

what  could  not  be  amended- 1  did  fo  ;    and 

it  was  Joffphi/ie,  v.hom  /  attended,  that  cauf- 
ed  fych  fpeculation  at  Bridge-foot ;  and  who, 
being  taken  for  Geraldine,  occafioned  >to  my 
wife  all  the  terror  and  uneafir.efs  (he  has  fincu 
dcfcribed  to  mc. 

Her  going  thither  was  concerted  between 
Geraldine  zn<.\  Defrr.or.d  ;  and  it  was  to  the 
generous  tcnde  nefs  of  Ger.ddine  that  my 
iiltcr  confcntcd,  ami  Dtfmoud  dctcrjanned  19 
tonfide  their  cliild. 

■    '  ]VIy   fjiler,  as  fcon   as   (he   recovered,  went 

•  lo  London  ;    aiui   I  took   care   that  her  infant, 

which  was  a  gill,  "ftiould  be  conveyed  to  Paris, 

as    Defmond   fecmed   anxious,    that  wherever 

Geraldine    was,    tlie   little  creature   might  be 

put  under  her  proteftion It  was  to  meet 

and  convey  tias  charge  to  licr,  tf.at  Defmotwi 
left  Mcudcn  on  the  day  that  Geraldine  fo 
abruptly  quitted  that  '^>lace.— My  fifter  is  {n\ce 
gone  to  Italy,  and  is  now  under  the  proted\ion 
\ai    Mcniicur   d'Hautevillc— Her   laiiband  lias 

n9t 


n  E  s  M  o  N  D.  3c  r 

not  been  heard  of  fiiice  tlic  night  in  whicit 
Vcrney  Tcceived  the  wound  that  coil  him  his 
life — If  he  is  dead,  and  my  rehition  de  Rive- 
mont,  ever  returns  from  the  Eaft-Indies, 
where  he  hr.s,  for  three  years,  been  Ibitioned, 
it  is  probable  that  their  firll  attachment  will 
end  in  a  marriage  ;  but  I  fhall  never  deceive 
him  as  to  what  has  happcnfd  in  his  abfcnce. 

Thus,  my  dear  Sir,  I  have  acquitcd  my- 
felf  in  informing  you  of  what,  though  Dcf- 
mond  owned  it  was  necefi'ary  you  flioukl  know, 
he  could  not  prevail  on  liimfelf  to  relate  to 
jou. 

Have  you  not  heard  in  England,  that  Mr. 
Verney,  an  EngliOi  gentleman,  travelling  for 
his  amufcmcnt,  has  been  inhumanly  fallen 
upon  by  a  party  of  the   national   troops,    ami 

killed  ? -This   is,    I   undcvdand,  the  report 

that  has  univcrfally  gained  credit  -,  yet,  I  beg 
to  aiTiux  you,  that  it  was  in  attempting  to 
drive  the  Eronch  from  Avignon,  which,  in  a 
fit  of  defperate  valour,  his  party  undertook  j 
and  not  in  any  tumult,  or  even  by  the  hands 
of  rutiians,  wlio  are  equally  the  dread  and 
fcourge  of  all  parties,  that  Verney  fell ;  ;  nd 
that,  as  I  believe,  Boifbelle  his  fallen  alfo» 

But  thus  it  is,  that,  throughout  the  revo- 
lution, every  circumitance  has,  on  your  fide 
tlie  water,  been  exaggerated,  falfihed,  diilort- 
ed,  and  mifrepreCnted,  to  ferve  the  purpofes 
of  party  j    and  thus*  1,    as  well   as  Defmondj 

fear  it  will  continue  to  be Probably  much 

more  c^ufe  will  arife  for  it  than  has  yet  arifen  ; 
for,  according  to  every  prclent  appearance, 
tlie    hydra,     dtfpotifm,     is    raifmg    in    every 

country 


302  DESMOND. 

country  of  Europe  cue  of  its  deteftabie  heads 
againfl  the  liberty  of  France. 

Should  this  arrive,  it  is  true,  I  fnall  be  torn 
from  a  circle  of  friends,  where  the  happinefs 
of  my  life  is  placed,  to  draw  the  fword  once 
more  j  but  he  mud  be  a  defpicable  wretch, 
who,  in  fuch  a  caufe,  would  refufe  to  facri- 
fice  his  life  itfelf. 

In  the  mcvm  time,  however,  let  us  not 
wafte  the  moments,  as  they  are  paffing,  in 
dark  fpeculations  on  the  future  ;    which,  after 

all,  we  cannot  arreft  or  amend It  is  flill 

more  fooiifli  to  embitter  the  prefcnt  with  ufe» 
lefs  regret  j  and,  as  to  the  pail, 

"  Mortels! voulez-vous  tolerer  la  vie  ? 

Oublitz,  &  y)uiffez,*"_ 

is  a  very  good  maxim. 

Dear  Sir!    I  wifh   you  all  happinefs  with 

your    amiable   family And   am,    with  fin- 

fere  refpeft, 

Your  moil  faithful 

And  devoted  fervant, 

ONVILLE  DE  MONTFLEURL 

*  Voltaire. 


1.ET- 


'■  3   E   S   T<    •'»    •       .,  303;. 

LETTER     KXXIII. 
TO   MR.  BETHEL. 

,  Bath,  Feb.  6th,  1792- 

COME,  my  dear  Bethel,  I  befeeeh  you 
come  hither,  and  render  by  your  prefence, 
ftill  more  happy,  thofe  friends  for  whom  you 
have  ever  been  fo  generoufly  interefted — Come 
and  fee  Geraldine  reftored  to  her  tranquillity, 
and  your  happy  friend  evei*v  day  more  tender- 
ly attached  to  her  ;  and  reckoning  (with  im- 
patience he  vainly  endeavours  to  fiifle)  the 
months  that  muil  yet  elapfe  before  ihe  can  be 
wholly  his. — Oh  !  were  you  to  fee  her — 
were  you  to  witnefs,  in  addition  to  all  her 
former  charms,  her  behaviour  to  a  mother, 
vho  was  once  fo  harfh,  fo  ungenerous,  fo 
cruel  to  her ;  were  you  to  fee  the  compani- 
onate attention  with  which  fhe  treats  her  old 
friend,  Mifs  Elford,  whofe  malicious  repre- 
fentations  coft  her  fo  dear ;  were  ycu  to  be- 
hold the  tender  folicitude  which  fhe  bellows 
equally  on  her  own  children,  and  on  my  little 
girl,  you  would  love  her  a  thoufand — oh  !  a 
million  times  better  than  ever ;  and  would, 
with  me,  blefs  the  hour  when  I  did  not, 
when,  indeed,  I  found  1  could  twt,  take  your 
advice  -Ani^. forget  her.' 

Bethel,  my  dear  friend,  come  to  me  I  be- 
feeeh you,  that  I  may  have  fomebody  to 
"whom  I  can  talk  of  Geraldine  when  I  do  not 
.  [cQ  her-r- — Montfleuri  is  too  vclatile  }  he  loves 


3^4  B   E    S    M    O    N    D. 

his  wife  paff-onately,  but  my  adoration  £ot 
her  filter  he  cninot  compreh;.'nd  ;  and,  by  tha 
reft  of  the  people,  I  fee  it  would  be  under- 
ftood  ftill  lefs. 

And  yet  there  are  many,  many  hours  wliea 
I  am  obliged  (by  thefe  deteftable  rules,  to  the 
obfervance  of  which  we  facrifice  fo  many  days, 
and  hours,  and  years  of  happinefs)  to  be  ab- 
lent  from  her. — Oh  !  'twould  be  an  alleviaHon 
of  their  infupportable  tedioufnefs,  if  you 
would  let  me  talk  to  you  about  her,  and  hear 
all  the  plans  I  have  laid  down  for  happinefs  — 
If  you  will  come  only  for  a  fortnight  I  will 
return  with  you  into  Kent  ;  it  will  be  fonre 
amufement  to  me  now,  to  fettle  an  houfe 
which,  in  eight,  or  at  farthejl  ten  months 
(for  it  is  now  above  three  fince  fhe  has  been  a 
widow)  Geraldine  may  inhabit — I  can  wafte 
a  month  or  fix  weeks  there  -She  feems  to 
wifli  it ;  for,  I  believe,  I  fometimes  frighten 
her  by  my  reltlefs  and  vehement  temper — 
yet  ilie  may  do  with  me  what  Ihe  pleafes  ; 
it  is  only  when  I  am  divided  from  her,  to 
comply  with  lome  ridiculous  whim  of  fomc 
formal  and  ridiculous  old  woman,  that  I  lofe 
my  temper. — When  I  am  with  her  I  am  pa- 
tient and  tranquil — uniefs  an  idea  croffes  me, 
as  it  cioes  now  and  then,  that  I  am  unworthy 
of  the  cxccilive  happinefs  of  being  lier  Jiuf- 
banxl,  and  that  fome  dreadful  event  will  tear 

her  from  me  '.■ -If  Ihc   looks  pale,    though 

only  from  fome  flight  cold  or  accidental  fa- 
tigue, I  fancy  her  about  ro  be  ill,  and  weary 
her  with  my  apprehenfions  and  inquiries — 
She  bears  with  all   my  follv   patiently  ;    or  if 

flic 


n  E  s  M  o  K  p.  305 

ihc  chides,  it  is  with  a  fweetncfs  that  makes 
me  almoll  love  to  be  cliidckn. 

Will  tliis  lovely,  this  adorable  woman,  be 
indeed  mine  ? — Did  I  tell  you,  Bt  thel,  how 
fuccclbfuUy  I  had  managed  the  affairs  of  her 

children  P^^ Scarfdale    feemed  difpofed    to 

give  me  a  great  deal  of  trouble,  but  now  it  is  all 
fettled. — Thcfe  dear  infants  will  be  lefs  in- 
jured by  their  father's  imprudence  than  I  ap- 
prehended ;  and  for  their  future  deftiny,  as 
to  pecuniary  coneernsj  tlieir  beloved  mothev  is 
no  longer  anxious. 

Heavens  !  dare  I  trufl  myfelf  with  trie  rap- 
turous h.cpe,  th.at  on  the  return  of  tli.is  month, 
in  the  next  year,   Gerakline  v/ill  bear  vjy  nama 

• "Will  be  tiie  dircclrefs   of   nty  family. 

will  be  my  friend — my  millrefs — my  wife  ! 
-r— I  fet  before  me  thei'e  fcenes— I  -imagine 
thefc  days  of  happinefs  to  ccme  — I  fee  the  be- 
loved   group    allemblcd    at   Sedge  wood. —  My 

Geraldinc — You,  my  dear   Bethel yoiu- 

fwcet  Louif.t- — niy  friend  Montfleuri,  and  his 
I'^anny. — I  imagine  the  delight  of  living  in  that 
tender  confidence  of  mmtiul  aflvCtion,  whicii 
only  fuch  a  circle  of  friends  can  taibe. — I  go 
over  in  my  imagination  ouv  fludies,  ciir 
amufenKuts,  our  rural  improvements  ;  a  Ic- 
ries  of  domeftic  and  fecial  happinefs,  for 
which  only  life  is  worth  having— 1  believe,  I 
truil  it  will  be  mine,  and  I  exclaim — 

Viver  cofi  vorrai, 
Vorrai  morir  lof; ! 

Heaven  grant  it  ! — But  till  that  hour  ar- 
rives,   when  the  afTuranc?  of  fuch  felicity  is 

moT^" 


^06  DESMOND. 

more  completely  given  me-^h  !  lend  me, 
dear  Bethel,  fome  of  your  calm  reafon  to 
check  my  impatience  j  and  foothe,  with  your 
ufual  friendship,  the  agitated  heart — which, 
whatever  elfe  may  difturb  it,  will  ever  be 
faithfully  grateful  to  you,  while  it  beats  in 
the  bofom  of  your 

LIONEL  DESMOND, 


The     fe'  n  d.