     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel.
      Creator(s): Butler, Joseph (1692-1752)
   CCEL Subjects: All; Sermons
     __________________________________________________________________

   Joseph Butler

   Joseph Butler

                  Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel

  Cambridge: Published by Hilliard and Brown; Boston:
  Hilliard, Gray, Little, and Wilkins,
  1827.
     __________________________________________________________________

Preface. [1]

   THOUGH it is scarce possible to avoid judging, in some way or other, of
   almost every thing which offers itself to one's thoughts, yet it is
   certain that many persons, from different causes, never exercise their
   judgment upon what comes before them, in the way of determining whether
   it be conclusive and holds. They are perhaps entertained with some
   things, not so with others; they like and they dislike: but whether
   that which is proposed to be made out, be really made out or not;
   whether a matter be stated according to the real truth of the case,
   seems to the generality of people merely a circumstance of no
   consideration at all. Arguments are often wanted for some accidental
   purpose: but proof, as such, is what they never want for themselves;
   for their own satisfaction of mind, or conduct in life. Not to mention
   the multitudes who read merely for the sake of talking, or to qualify
   themselves for the world, or some such kind of reasons; there are, even
   of the few who read for their own entertainment, and have a real
   curiosity to see what is said, several, which is prodigious, who have
   no sort of curiosity to see what is true: I say, curiosity; because it
   is too obvious to be mentioned, how much that religious and sacred
   attention, which is due to truth, and to the important question, What
   is the rule of life? is lost out of the world. For the sake of this
   whole class of readers, for they are of different capacities, different
   kinds, and get into this way from different occasions, I have often
   wished that it had been the custom to lay before people nothing in
   matters of argument but premises, and leave them to draw conclusions
   themselves; which, though it could not be done in all cases, might in
   many.

   The great number of books and papers of amusement, which, of one kind
   or another, daily come in one's way, have in part occasioned, and most
   perfectly fall in with and humor, this idle way of reading and
   considering things. By this means, time, even in solitude, is happily
   got rid of, without the pain of attention: neither is any part of it
   more put to the account of idleness, one can scarce forbear saying, is
   spent with less thought, than great part of that which is spent in
   reading.

   Thus people habituate themselves to let things pass through their
   minds, as one may speak, rather than to think of them. Thus, by use,
   they become satisfied merely with seeing what is said, without going
   any further. Review and attention, and even forming a judgment, become
   fatigue; and to lay any thing before them that requires it, is putting
   them quite out of their way.

   There are also persons, and there are at least more of them than have a
   right to claim such superiority, who take for granted, that they are
   acquainted with every thing; and that no subject, if treated in the
   manner it should be, can be treated in any manner but what is familiar
   and easy to them.

   It is true, indeed, that few persons have a right to demand attention;
   but it is also true, that nothing can be understood without that degree
   of it, which the very nature of the thing requires. Now morals,
   considered as a science, concerning which speculative difficulties are
   daily raised, and treated with regard to those difficulties, plainly
   require a very peculiar attention. For here ideas never are in
   themselves determinate, but become so by the train of reasoning and the
   place they stand in; since it is impossible that words can always stand
   for the same ideas, even in the same author, much less in different
   ones. Hence an argument may not readily be apprehended, which is
   different from its being mistaken; and even caution to avoid being
   mistaken, may, in some cases, render it less readily apprehended. It is
   very unallowable for a work of imagination or entertainment not to be
   of easy comprehension, but may be unavoidable in a work of another
   kind, where a man is not to form or accommodate, but to state things as
   he finds them.

   It must be acknowledged, that some of the following discourses are very
   abstruse and difficult; or, if you please, obscure. But I must take
   leave to add, that those alone are judges, whether or no, and how far
   this is a fault, who are judges whether or no and how far it might have
   been avoided--those only who will be at the trouble to understand what
   is here said, and to see how far the things here insisted upon, and not
   other things, might have been put in a plainer manner; which yet I am
   very far from asserting that they could not.

   Thus much however will be allowed, that general criticisms concerning
   obscurity, considered as a distinct thing from confusion and perplexity
   of thought, as in some cases there may be ground for them, so, in
   others, they may be nothing more at the bottom than complaints, that
   every thing is not to be understood with the same ease that some things
   are. Confusion and perplexity in writing is indeed without excuse,
   because anyone may, if he pleases, know whether he understands and sees
   through what he is about; and it is unpardonable for a man to lay his
   thoughts before others, when he is conscious that he himself does not
   know whereabouts he is, or how the matter before him stands. It is
   coming abroad in a disorder which he ought to be dissatisfied to find
   himself in at home.

   But even obscurities, arising from other causes than the abstruseness
   of the argument, may not be always inexcusable. Thus, a subject may be
   treated in a manner, which all along supposes the reader acquainted
   with what has been said upon it, both by ancient and modern writers;
   and with what is the present state of opinion in the world concerning
   such subject. This will create a difficulty of a very peculiar kind,
   and even throw an obscurity over the whole, before those who are not
   thus informed; but those who are, will be disposed to excuse such a
   manner, and other things of the like kind, as a saving of their
   patience.

   However, upon the whole, as the title of Sermons gives some right to
   expect what is plain and of easy comprehension, and as the best
   auditories are mixed, I shall not set about to justify the propriety of
   preaching, or under that title publishing, discourses so abstruse as
   some of these are. Neither is it worth while to trouble the reader with
   the account of my doing either. He must not, however; impute to me, as
   a repetition of the impropriety, this second edition, but to the demand
   for it.

   Whether he will think he has any amends made him, by the following
   illustrations of what seemed most to require them, I myself am by no
   means a proper judge.

   There are two ways in which the subject of morals may be treated. One
   begins from inquiring into the abstract relations of things; the other,
   from a matter of fact, namely, what the particular nature of man is,
   its several parts, their economy or constitution; from whence it
   proceeds to determine what course of life it is, which is correspondent
   to this whole nature. In the former method the conclusion is expressed
   thus, that vice is contrary to the nature and reasons of things; in the
   latter, that it is a violation or breaking in upon our own nature. Thus
   they both lead us to the same thing, our obligations to the practice of
   virtue; and thus they exceedingly strengthen and enforce each other.
   The first seems the most direct formal proof, and in some respects the
   least liable to cavil and dispute: the latter is in a peculiar manner
   adapted to satisfy a fair mind, and is more easily applicable to the
   several particular relations and circumstances in life.

   The following discourses proceed chiefly in this latter method. The
   three first wholly. They were intended to explain what is meant by the
   nature of man, when it is said that virtue consists in following, and
   vice in deviating from it; and, by explaining, to show that the
   assertion is true. That the ancient moralists had some inward feeling
   or other, which they chose to express in this manner, that man is born
   to virtue, that it consists in following nature, and that vice is more
   contrary to this nature than tortures or death, their works in our
   hands are instances. Now, a person who found no mystery in this way of
   speaking of the ancients: who, without being very explicit with
   himself, kept to his natural feeling, went along with them, and found
   within himself a full conviction that what they laid down was just and
   true; such a one would probably wonder to see a point, in which he
   never perceived any difficulty, so labored as this is, in the second
   and third sermons: insomuch, perhaps, as to be at a loss for the
   occasion, scope, and drift of them. But it need not to be thought
   strange, that this manner of expression, though familiar with them,
   and, if not usually carried so far, yet not uncommon amongst ourselves,
   should want explaining; since there are several perceptions daily felt
   and spoke of, which yet it may not be very easy at first view to
   explicate, to distinguish from all others, and ascertain exactly what
   the idea or perception is. The many treatises upon the passions are a
   proof of this; since so many would never have undertaken to unfold
   their several complications, and trace and resolve them into their
   principles, if they had thought, what they were endeavoring to show was
   obvious to everyone who felt and talked of those passions. Thus, though
   there seems no ground to doubt, but that the generality of mankind have
   the inward perception expressed so commonly in that manner by the
   ancient moralists, more than to doubt whether they have those passions,
   yet I appeared of use to unfold that inward conviction, and lay it open
   in a more explicit manner than I had seen done; especially when there
   were not wanting persons, who manifestly mistook the whole thing, and
   had so great reason to express themselves dissatisfied with it. A late
   author, of great and deserved reputation, says, that to place virtue in
   following nature, is, at best, a loose way of talk. And he has reason
   to say this, if what I think he intends to express, though with great
   decency, be true, that scarce any other sense can be put upon those
   words, but acting as any of the several parts, without distinction, of
   a man's nature, happened most to incline him. [2]

   Whoever thinks it worth while to consider this matter thoroughly,
   should begin with stating to himself exactly the idea of a system,
   economy, or constitution, of any particular nature, or particular any
   thing: and he will, I suppose, find, that it is a one or a whole, made
   up of several parts; but yet that the several parts, even considered as
   a whole, do not complete the idea, unless, in the notion of a whole,
   you include the relations and respects which those parts have to each
   other. Every work both of nature and of art is a system: and as every
   particular thing, both natural and artificial, is for some use or
   purpose out of and beyond itself, one may add, to what has been already
   brought into the idea of a system, its conduciveness to this one or
   more ends. Let us instance in a watch: Suppose the several parts of it
   taken to pieces, and placed apart from each other: let a man have ever
   so exact a notion of these several parts, unless he considers the
   respects and relations which they have to each other, he will not have
   any thing like the idea of a watch. Suppose these several parts brought
   together and any how united: neither will he yet, be the union ever so
   close, have an idea which will bear any resemblance to that of a watch.
   But let him view those several parts put together, or consider them as
   to be put together, in the manner of a watch; let him form a notion of
   the relations which those several parts have to each other--all
   conducive, in their respective ways, to this purpose, showing the hour
   of the day; and then he has the idea of a watch. Thus it is with regard
   to the inward frame of man. Appetites, passions, affections, and the
   principle of reflection, considered merely as the several parts of our
   inward nature, do not at, all give us an idea of the system or
   constitution of this nature: because the constitution is formed by
   somewhat not yet taken into consideration, namely, by the relations
   which these several parts have to each other; the chief of which is the
   authority of reflection or conscience. It is from considering the
   relations which the several appetites and passions in the inward frame
   have to each other, and, above all, the supremacy of reflection or
   conscience, that we get the idea of the system or constitution of human
   nature. And from the idea itself it will as fully appear, that this our
   nature, i.e. constitution, is adapted to virtue, as from the idea of a
   watch it appears, that its nature, i.e. constitution or system is
   adapted to measure time. What in fact or event commonly happens, is
   nothing to this question. Every work of art is apt to be out of order:
   but this is so far from being according to its system, that let the
   disorder increase, and it will totally destroy it. This is merely by
   way of explanation, what an economy, system, or constitution is. And
   thus far the cases are perfectly parallel. If we go further, there is
   indeed a difference, nothing to the present purpose, but too important
   a one ever to be omitted. A machine is inanimate and passive: but we
   are agents. Our constitution is put in our power: we are charged with
   it: and therefore are accountable for any disorder or violation of it.
   Thus nothing can possibly be more contrary to nature than vice; meaning
   by nature not only the several parts of our internal frame, but also
   the constitution of it. Poverty and disgrace, tortures and death, are
   not so contrary to it. Misery and injustice are indeed equally contrary
   to some different parts of our nature taken singly: but injustice is
   moreover contrary to the whole constitution of the nature.

   If it be asked, whether this constitution be really what those
   philosophers meant, and whether they would have explained themselves in
   this manner: the answer is the same as if it should be asked, whether a
   person, who had often used the word resentment, and felt the thing,
   would have explained this passion exactly in the same manner in which
   it is done in one of these discourses. As I have no doubt but that this
   is a true account of that passion, which he referred to and intended to
   express by the word resentment; so I have no doubt, but that this is
   the true account of the ground of that conviction which they referred
   to, when they said, vice was contrary to nature. And though it should
   be thought that they meant no more than that vice was contrary to the
   higher and better part of our nature; even this implies such a
   constitution as I have endeavored to explain. For the very terms,
   higher and better, imply a relation or respect of parts to each other;
   and these relative parts, being in one and the same nature, form a
   constitution, and are the very idea of it. They had a perception that
   injustice was contrary to their nature, and that pain was so also. They
   observed these two perceptions totally different, not in degree, but in
   kind: and the reflecting upon each of them, as they thus stood in their
   nature, wrought a full intuitive conviction, that more was due, and of
   right belonging to one of these inward perceptions, than to the other;
   that it demanded in all cases to govern such a creature as man. So
   that, upon the whole, this is a fair and true account of what was the
   ground of their conviction; of what they intended to refer to when they
   said, virtue consisted in following nature: a manner of speaking not
   loose and undeterminate, but clear and distinct, strictly just and
   true.

   Though I am persuaded the force of this conviction is felt by almost
   everyone, yet since, considered as an argument, and put in words, it
   appears somewhat abstruse, and since the connexion of it is broken in
   the three first sermons, it may not be amiss to give the reader the
   whole argument here in one view.

   Mankind has various instincts and principles of action, as brute
   creatures have; some leading most directly and immediately to the good
   of the community, and some most directly to private good.

   Man has several which brutes have not; particularly reflection or
   conscience, an approbation of some principles or actions, and
   disapprobation of others.

   Brutes obey their instincts or principles of action, according to
   certain rules; suppose the constitution of their body, and the objects
   around them.

   The generality of mankind also obey their instincts and principles, all
   of them; those propensions we call good, as well as the bad, according
   to the same rules, namely, the constitution of their body, and the
   external circumstances which they are in. [3]

   Brutes, in acting according to the rules before mentioned, their bodily
   constitution and circumstances, act suitably to their whole nature. [It
   is however to be distinctly noted, that the reason why we affirm this,
   is not merely that brutes in fact act so; for this alone, however
   universal, does not at all determine, whether such course of action be
   correspondent to their whole nature: but the reason of the assertion
   is, that as, in acting thus, they plainly act conformably to somewhat
   in their nature, so, from all observations we are able to make upon
   them, there does not appear the least ground to imagine them to have
   any thing else in their nature, which requires a different rule or
   course of action.]

   Mankind also, in acting thus, would act suitably to their whole nature,
   if no more were to be said of man's nature than what has been now said;
   if that, as it is a true, were also a complete, adequate account of our
   nature.

   But that is not a complete account of man's nature. Somewhat further
   must be brought in to give us an adequate notion of it; namely, that
   one of those principles of action, conscience, or reflection, compared
   with the rest, as they all stand together in the nature of man, plainly
   bears upon it marks of authority over all the rest, and claims the
   absolute direction of them all, to allow or forbid their gratification:
   A disapprobation of reflection being in itself a principle manifestly
   superior to a mere propension. And the conclusion is, that to allow no
   more to this superior principle or part of our nature, than to other
   parts; to let it govern and guide only occasionally in common with the
   rest, as its turn happens to come, from the temper and circumstances
   one happens to be in; this is not to act conformably to the
   constitution of man. Neither can any human creature be said to act
   conformably to his constitution of nature, unless he allows to that
   superior principle the absolute authority which is due to it. And this
   conclusion is abundantly confirmed from hence, that one may determine
   what course of action the economy of man's nature requires, without so
   much as knowing in what degrees of strength the several principles
   prevail, or which of them have actually the greatest influence.

   The practical reason of insisting so much upon this natural authority
   of the principle of reflection or conscience is, that it seems in a
   great measure overlooked by many, who are by no means the worst sort of
   men. It is thought sufficient to abstain from gross wickedness, and to
   be humane and kind to such as happen to come in their way. Whereas, in
   reality, the very constitution of our nature requires, that we bring
   our whole conduct before this superior faculty; wait its determination;
   enforce upon ourselves its authority; and make it the business of our
   lives, as it is absolutely the whole business of a moral agent, to
   conform ourselves to it. This is the true meaning of that ancient
   precept, reverence thyself.

   The not taking into consideration this authority, which is implied in
   the idea of reflex approbation or disapprobation, seems a material
   deficiency or omission in Lord Shaftesbury's Inquiry concerning Virtue.
   He has shown, beyond all contradiction, that virtue is naturally the
   interest of happiness, and vice the misery of such a creature as man,
   placed in the circumstances which we are in this world. But suppose
   there are particular exceptions; a case which this author was unwilling
   to put, and yet surely it is to be put. Or suppose a case which he has
   put and determined, that of a sceptic not convinced of, this happy
   tendency of virtue, or being of a contrary opinion: his determination
   is, that it would be without remedy. [4] One may say more explicitly,
   that, leaving out the authority of reflex approbation or
   disapprobation, such a one would be under an obligation to act
   viciously; since interest, one's own happiness, is a manifest
   obligation, and there is not supposed to be any other obligation in the
   case. "But does it much mend the matter, to take in that natural
   authority of reflection? There indeed would be an obligation to virtue;
   but would not the obligation from supposed interest on the side of vice
   remain?"If it should, yet to be under two contrary obligations, i.e.
   under none at all, would not be exactly the same as to be under a
   formal obligation to be vicious, or to be in circumstances in which the
   constitution of man's nature plainly required, that vice should be
   preferred. But the obligation on the side of interest really does not
   remain. For the natural authority of the principle of reflection, is an
   obligation the most near and intimate, the most certain and known:
   whereas the contrary obligation can at the utmost appear no more than
   probable; since no man can be certain, in any circumstances, that vice
   is his interest in the present world, much less can he be certain
   against another: and thus the certain obligation would entirely
   supersede and destroy the uncertain one; which yet would have been of
   real force without the former.

   In truth, the taking in this consideration totally changes the whole
   state of the case; and shows, what this author does not seem to have
   been aware of, that the greatest degree of scepticism which he thought
   possible, will still leave men under the strictest moral obligations,
   whatever their opinion be, concerning the happiness of virtue. For,
   that mankind, upon reflection, felt an approbation of what was good,
   and disapprobation of the contrary, he thought a plain matter of fact,
   as it undoubtedly is, which none could deny, but from mere affectation.
   Take in, then, that authority and obligation, which is a constituent
   part of this reflex approbation, and it will undeniably follow, though
   a man should doubt of every thing else, yet, that he would still remain
   under the nearest and most certain obligation to the practice of
   virtue; an obligation implied in the very idea of virtue, in the very
   idea of reflex approbation.

   And how little influence soever this obligation alone can be expected
   to have, in fact, upon mankind, yet one may appeal even to interest and
   self-love, and ask, since from man's nature, condition, and the
   shortness of life, so little, so very little, indeed, can possibly in
   any case be gained by vice, whether it be so prodigious a thing to
   sacrifice that little, to the most intimate of all obligations; and
   which a man cannot transgress without being self-condemned, and, unless
   he has corrupted his nature, without real self-dislike? This question,
   I say, may be asked, even upon suspicious that the prospect of a future
   life were ever so uncertain.

   The observation that man is thus, by his very nature, a law to himself,
   pursued to its just consequences, is of the utmost importance; because
   from it will follow, that though men should, through stupidity, or
   speculative skepticism, be ignorant of, or disbelieve, any authority in
   the universe to punish the violation of this law; yet, if there should
   be such authority, they would be as really liable to punishment, as
   though they had been beforehand convinced, that such punishment would
   follow. For, in whatever sense we understand justice, even supposing,
   what I think would be very presumptuous to assert, that the end of
   divine punishment is no other than that of civil punishment, namely, to
   prevent future mischief; upon this bold supposition, ignorance, or
   disbelief of the sanction would by no means exempt even from this
   justice; because it is not foreknowledge of the punishment which
   renders the obnoxious to it, but merely violating a known obligation.

   And here it comes in one's way to take notice of a manifest error, or
   mistake, in the author now cited, unless, perhaps he has incautiously
   expressed himself so as to be misunderstood; namely, that "it is malice
   only, and not goodness, which can make us afraid." [5] Whereas, in
   reality, goodness is the natural and just object of the greatest fear
   to an ill man. Malice may be appeased or satisfied; humor may change;
   but goodness is a fixed, steady, immoveable principle of action. If
   either of the former holds the sword of justice, there is plainly
   ground for the greatest of crimes to hope for impunity: But if it be
   goodness, there can be no possible hope, whilst the reason of things,
   or the ends of government, call for punishment. Thus, everyone sees how
   much greater chance of impunity an ill man has, in a partial
   administration, than in a just and upright one. It is said, that "the
   interest, or good of the whole, must be the interest of the universal
   Being, and that He can have no other." Be it so. This author has
   proved, that vice is naturally the misery of mankind in this world.
   Consequently, it was for the good of the whole, that it should be so.
   What shadow of reason, then, is there to assert, that this may not be
   the case hereafter? Danger of future punishment, (and if there be
   danger, there is ground of fear) no more supposes malice than the
   present feeling of punishment does.

   The sermon upon the character of Balaam, and that upon self-deceit,
   both relate to one subject. I am persuaded, that a very great part of
   the wickedness of the world, is, one way or other, owing to the
   self-partiality, self-flattery, and self-deceit endeavored there to be
   laid open and explained. It is to be observed amongst persons of the
   lower rank, in proportion to their compass of thought, as much as
   amongst men of education and improvement. It seems, that people are
   capable of being thus artful with themselves, ill proportion as they
   are capable of being so with others. Those who have taken notice that
   there is really such a thing, namely, plain falseness and insincerity
   in men, with regard to themselves, will readily see the drift and
   design of these discourses: and nothing that I can add will explain the
   design of them to him, who has not beforehand remarked at least
   somewhat of the character. And yet the admonitions they contain, may be
   as much wanted by such a person as by others; for it is to be noted,
   that a man may be entirely possessed by this unfairness of mind,
   without having the least speculative notion what the thing is.

   The account given of resentment, in the eighth sermon is introductory
   to the following one, upon forgiveness of injuries. It may possibly
   have appeared to some, at first sight, a strange assertion, that injury
   is the only natural object of settled resentment; or that men do not,
   in fact, resent deliberately any thing but under this appearance of
   injury. But I must desire the reader not to take any assertion alone by
   itself, but to consider the whole of what is said upon it. Because this
   is necessary, not only in order to judge of the truth of it, but often,
   such is the nature of language, to see the very meaning of the
   assertion. Particularly, as to this, injury and injustice is, in the
   sermon itself, explained to mean, not only the more gross and shocking
   instances of wickedness, but also contempt, scorn, neglect, any sort of
   disagreeable behaviour towards a person, which he thinks other than
   what is due to him. And the general notion of injury, or wrong, plainly
   comprehends this, though the words are mostly confined to the higher
   degrees of it.

   Forgiveness of injuries is one of the very few moral obligations which
   has been disputed. But the proof that it is really an obligation, what
   our nature and condition l require, seems very obvious, were it only
   from the consideration, that revenge is doing harm merely for harm's
   sake. And as to the love of our enemies: Resentment cannot supersede
   the obligations to universal benevolence, unless they are in the nature
   of the thing inconsistent, which they plainly are not.

   This divine precept, to forgive injuries and love our enemies, though
   to be met with in Gentile moralists, yet, is in a peculiar sense a
   precept of Christianity; as our Saviour has insisted more upon it than
   upon any other single virtue. One reason of this doubtless is, that it
   so peculiarly becomes an imperfect, faulty creature. But it may be
   observed also, that a virtuous temper of mind, consciousness of
   innocence, and good meaning towards everybody, and a strong feeling of
   injustice and injury, may itself, such is the imperfection of our
   virtue, lead a person to violate this obligation, if he be not upon his
   guard. And it may well be supposed, that this is another reason why it
   is so much insisted upon by him, who knew what was in man.

   The chief design of the eleventh discourse, is to state the notion of
   self-love and disinterestedness, in order to show that benevolence is
   not more unfriendly to self-love, than any other particular affection
   whatever. There is a strange affectation in many people of explaining
   away all particular affections, and representing the whole of life as
   nothing but one continued exercise of self-love. Hence arises that
   surprising confusion and perplexity in the Epicureans [6] of old,
   Hobbs, the author of Reflections, Sentences, et Maximes Morales, and
   this whole set of writers; the confusion of calling actions interested,
   which are done in contradiction to the most manifest known interest,
   merely for the gratification of a present passion. Now, all this
   confusion might easily be avoided, by stating to ourselves wherein the
   idea of self-love in general consists, as distinguished from all
   particular movements, towards particular external objects; the
   appetites of sense, resentment, compassion, curiosity, ambition, and
   the rest. When this is done, if the words selfish and interested cannot
   be parted with, but must be applied to every thing; yet, to avoid such
   total confusion of all language, let the distinction be made by
   epithets; and the first may be called cool, or settled selfishness, and
   the other passionate, or sensual selfishness. But the most natural way
   of speaking plainly is, to call the first only, self-love, and the
   actions proceeding from it, interested; and to say of the latter, that
   they are not love to ourselves, but movements towards somewhat
   external, -- honor, power, the harm, or good, of another. And that the
   pursuit of these external objects, so far as it proceeds from these
   movements (for it may proceed from self-love,) is no otherwise
   interested, than as every action of every creature must, from the
   nature of the thing, be; for no one can act but from a desire, or
   choice, or preference of his own.

   Self-love and any particular passion may be joined together; and from
   this complication, it becomes impossible, in numberless instances, to
   determine precisely how far an action, perhaps even of one's own, has
   for its principle general self-love, or some particular passion. But
   this need create no confusion in the ideas themselves of self-love and
   particular passions. We distinctly discern what one is, and what the
   other are; though we may be uncertain how far one or the other
   influences us. And though, from this uncertainty, it cannot, but be,
   that there will be different opinions concerning mankind, as more or
   less governed by interest; and some will ascribe actions to self-love,
   which others will ascribe to particular passions; yet it is absurd to
   say, that mankind are wholly actuated by either; since it is manifest
   that both have their influence. For as, on the one hand, men form a
   general notion of interest, some placing it in one thing, and some in
   another, and have a considerable regard to it throughout the course of
   their life, which is owing to self-love; so, on the other hand, they
   are often set on work by the particular passions themselves, and a
   considerable part of life is spent in the actual gratification of them;
   i.e. is employed, not by self-love, but by the passions.

   Besides, the very idea of an interested pursuit, necessarily
   presupposes particular passions or appetites; since the very idea of
   interest, or happiness, consists in this, that an appetite; or
   affection, enjoys its object. It is not because we love ourselves that
   we find delight in such and such objects, but because we have
   particular affections towards him. Take away these affections, and you
   leave self-love nothing at all to employ itself about; no end, or
   object, for it to purpose, excepting that of avoiding pain. Indeed, the
   Epicureans, who maintained that absence of pain was the highest
   happiness, might, consistently with themselves, deny all affection,
   and, if they had so pleased, every sensual appetite too. But the very
   idea of interest, or happiness, other than absence of pain, implies
   particular appetites or passions; these being necessary to constitute
   that interest or happiness.

   The observation, that benevolence is no more disinterested than any of
   the common particular passions, seems of itself worth being taken
   notice of; but is insisted upon to obviate that scorn, which one sees
   rising upon the faces of people, who are said to know the world, when
   mention is made of a disinterested, generous, or public spirited
   action. The truth of that observation might be made to appear in a more
   formal manner of proof: for, whoever will consider all the possible
   respects and relations which any particular affection can have to
   self-love and private interest, will, I think, see demonstrably, that
   benevolence is not ill any respect more at variance with self-love,
   than any other particular affection whatever, but that it is, in every
   respect, at least as friendly to it.

   If the observation be true, it follows, that self-love and benevolence,
   virtue and interest, are not to be opposed, but only to be
   distinguished from each other; in the same way as virtue and any other
   particular affection, love of arts, suppose, are to be distinguished.
   Every thing is what it is, and not another thing. The goodness, or
   badness of actions, does not arise from hence, that the epithet,
   interested, or disinterested, may be applied to them, any more than
   that any other indifferent epithet, suppose inquisitive or jealous may,
   or may not, be applied to them; not from their being attended with
   present or future pleasure or pain, but from their being what they are;
   namely, what becomes such creatures as we are, what the state of the
   case requires, or the contrary. Or, in other words, we may judge and
   determine that an action is morally good or evil, before we so much as
   consider, whether it be interested or disinterested. This consideration
   no more comes in to determine, whether an action be virtuous, than to
   determine whether it be resentful. Self-love, in its due degree, is as
   just and morally good as any affection whatever. Benevolence towards
   particular persons may be to a degree of weakness, and so be blameable.
   And disinterestedness is so far from being in itself commendable, that
   the utmost possible depravity, which we can in imagination conceive, is
   that of disinterested cruelty.

   Neither does there appear any reason to wish self-love were weaker in
   the generality of the world, than it is. -- The influence which it has,
   seems plainly owing to its being constant and habitual, which it cannot
   but be, and not to the degree or strength of it. Every caprice of the
   imagination, every curiosity of the understanding, every affection of
   the heart, is perpetually showing its weakness, by prevailing over it.
   Men daily, hourly, sacrifice the greatest known interest to fancy,
   inquisitiveness, love, or hatred, any vagrant inclination. The thing to
   be lamented is, not that men have so great regard to their own good or
   interest, in the present world, for they have not enough; but that they
   have so little to the good of others. And this seems plainly owing to
   their being so much engaged in it the gratification of particular
   passions unfriendly to benevolence, and which happen to be most
   prevalent in them, much more than to self-love. As a proof of this may
   be observed, that there is character more void of friendship,
   gratitude, natural affection, love to their country, common justice, or
   more equally and uniformly hard-hearted, than the abandoned in, what is
   called, the way of pleasure -- hard-hearted and totally without feeling
   in behalf of others; except when they cannot escape the sight of
   distress, and so are interrupted by it in their pleasures. And yet it
   is ridiculous to call such an abandoned course of pleasure interested,
   when the person engaged in it knows beforehand, and goes on under the
   feeling and apprehension, that it will be as ruinous to himself, as to
   those who depend upon him.

   Upon the whole, if the generality of mankind were to cultivate within
   themselves the principle of self-love; if they were to accustom
   themselves often to sit down and consider, what was the greatest
   happiness they were capable of attaining for themselves in this life;
   and if self-love were so strong and prevalent, as that they would
   uniformly pursue this their supposed chief temporal good without being
   diverted from it by any particular passion, it would manifestly prevent
   numberless follies and vices. This was in a great measure the Epicurean
   system of philosophy. It is indeed by no means the religious, or even
   moral institution of life. Yet, with all the mistakes men would fall
   into about interest; it would be less mischievous than the
   extravagancies of mere appetite, will, and pleasure. For certainly
   self-love, though confined to the interest of this life, is, of the
   two, a much better guide than passion, which has absolutely no bound
   nor measure, but what is set to it by this self-love, or moral
   considerations.

   From the distinction above made, between self-love and the several
   particular principles or affections ill our nature, we may see how good
   ground there was for that assertion, maintained by the several ancient
   schools of philosophy against the Epicureans, namely that virtue is to
   be pursued as an end, eligible in and for itself. For, if there be any
   principles or affections in the mind of man distinct from self-love,
   that the things those principles tend towards, or that the objects of
   those affections are, each of them, in themselves eligible, to be
   pursued upon its own account, and to be rested in as all end, is
   implied in the very idea of such principle or affection. They indeed
   asserted much higher things of virtue, and with very good reason; but
   to say thus much of it, that it is to be pursued for itself, is to say
   no more of it than may truly: be said of the object of every natural
   affection whatever.

   The question which was a few years ago disputed in France, concerning
   the love of God, which was there called enthusiasm, as it will every
   where by the generality of the world; this question, I say, answers, in
   religion, to that old one in morals now mentioned. And both of them
   are, I think, fully determined by the same observation, namely, that
   the very nature of affection, the idea, itself, necessarily implies
   resting in its object as an end. I shall not here add any thing further
   to what I have said in the two discourses upon that most important
   subject, but only this, that if we are constituted such sort of
   creatures, as, from our very nature, to feel certain affections or
   movements of mind, upon the sight or contemplation of the meanest
   inanimate part of the creation, for the flowers of the field have their
   beauty; certainly there must be somewhat due to him himself, who is the
   Author and Cause of all things; who is more intimately present to us
   than any thing else can be; and with whom we have a nearer and more
   constant intercourse, than we can have with any creature. There must be
   some movements of mind and heart which correspond to his perfections,
   or of which those perfections are the natural object. And that when we
   are commanded to love the Lord our God, with all our heart, and with
   all our mind, and with all our soul, somewhat more must be meant than
   merely that we live in hope of rewards, or fear of punishments, from
   him; somewhat more than this must be intended; though these regards
   themselves are most just and reasonable, and absolutely necessary to be
   often recollected, in such a world as this.

   It may be proper just to advertise the reader, that he is not to look
   for any particular reason for the choice of the greatest part of these
   discourses; their being taken from amongst many others, preached in the
   same place, through a course of eight years, being in a great measure
   accidental. Neither is he to expect to find any other connexion between
   them, than that uniformity of thought and design, which will always be
   found in the writings of the same person, when he writes with
   simplicity and in earnest.

   STANHOPE, Sept. 16, 1729.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] The Preface stands exactly as it did before the second edition of
   the Sermons.

   [2] Religion of Nature Delineated. Ed. 1724. Pages 22, 23.

   [3] Therefore it is not a true representation of mankind, to affirm
   that they are wholly governed by self-love, the love of power and
   sensual appetites: since, as on the one hand, they are often actuated
   by these, without any regard to right or wrong; so on the other, it is
   manifest fact, that the same persons, the generality, are frequently
   Influenced by friendship, compassion, gratitude, and even general
   abhorrence of what is base, and linking of what is fair and just, takes
   its turn amongst the other motives of action. This is the partial
   inadequate notion of human nature treated of in the first discourse:
   and it is by this nature, if one may speak so, that the world is in
   fact influenced, and kept in that tolerable order in which it is.

   [4] Characteristics, vol. ii. p. 69.

   [5] Characteristics, vol. i. p. 39.

   [6] One need only look into Torquatus's account of the Epicurean
   system, in Cicero's first book, De Finibus, to see in what a surprising
   manner this was done by them. Thus, the desire of praise, and of being
   beloved, he explains to no other than desire of safety: Regard to our
   country, even in the most virtuous character, to be nothing but regard
   to ourselves. The author of Reflections, &c. Morales, says, "curiosity
   proceeds from interest, or pride; which pride also would doubtless have
   been explained to be self-love;" (Page 85. Ed. 1725)--as if there were
   no passions in mankind, as desire of esteem, or of being beloved, or of
   knowledge. Hobbs' account of the affections of good-will and pity, are
   instances of the same kind.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

Sermon I. Upon the Social Nature of Man -- Rom. xii. 4, 5.

   For as we have many members in one body, and all members have not the
   same office; so we being many, are one body in Christ, and every one
   members one of another.

   The epistles of the New Testament have all of them a particular
   reference to the condition and usages of the Christian world at the
   time they were written. Therefore, as they cannot be thoroughly
   understood, unless that condition and those usages are known and
   attended to; so, further, though they be known, yet, if they be
   discontinued or changed, exhortations, precepts, and illustrations of
   things, which refer to such circumstances now ceased or altered, cannot
   at this time be urged in that manner, and with that force, which they
   were to the primitive Christians. Thus, the text now before us, in its
   first intent and design, relates to the decent management of those
   extraordinary gifts which were then in the church, but which are now
   totally ceased. [7] And even as the allusion, that "we are one body in
   Christ," though what the apostle here intends is equally true of
   Christians in all circumstances; and the consideration of it is plainly
   still an additional motive, over and above moral considerations, to the
   discharge of the several duties and offices of a Christian; yet it is
   manifest this allusion must have appeared with much greater force to
   those, who, by the many difficulties they went through for the sake of
   their religion, were led to keep always in view the relation they stood
   in to their Saviour, who had undergone, the same; to those who, from
   the idolatries of all around them, and their ill treatment, were taught
   to consider is themselves as not of the world, in which they lived, but
   as a distinct society of themselves; with laws, and ends, and
   principles of life and action, quite contrary to those which the world
   professed themselves at that time influenced by. Hence the relation of
   a Christian was by them considered as nearer than that of affinity and
   blood; and they almost literally esteemed themselves as members one of
   another.

   It cannot indeed possibly be denied, that our being God's creatures,
   and virtue being the natural law we are born under, and the whole
   constitution of man being plainly adapted to it, are prior obligations
   to piety and to virtue, than the consideration that God sent his Son
   into the world to save it, and the motives which arise from the
   peculiar relation of Christians, as members one of another, under
   Christ our head. However, though all this be allowed, as it expressly
   is by the inspired writers, yet it is manifest, that Christians, at the
   time of the Revelation, and immediately after, could not but insist
   mostly upon considerations of this latter kind.

   These observations show the original particular reference of the text;
   and the peculiar force with which the thing intended by the allusion in
   it, must have been felt by the primitive Christian world. They likewise
   afford a reason for treating it at this time in a more general way.

   The relation which the several parts or members of the natural body
   have to each other, and to the whole body, is here compared to the
   relation which each particular person in society has to other
   particular persons, and to the whole society; and the latter is
   intended to be illustrated by the former. And if there be a likeness
   between these two relations, the consequence is obvious: that the
   latter shows us we were intended to do good to others, as the former
   shows us, that the several members of the natural body were intended to
   be instruments of good to each other, and to the whole body. But as
   there is scarce any ground for a comparison between society and the
   mere material body, this without the mind being a dead unactive thing;
   much less can the comparison be carried to any length. And since the
   apostle speaks of the several members as having distinct offices, which
   implies the mind, it cannot be thought an unallowable liberty, instead
   of the body and its members, to substitute the whole nature of man, and
   all the variety of internal principles which belong to it. And then the
   comparison will be between. the nature of man as respecting self, and
   tending to private good, his own preservation and happiness; and the
   nature of man as having respect to society, and tending to promote
   public good, the happiness of that society. These ends do indeed
   perfectly arise from coincide; and to aim, at public and private good
   are so far from being inconsistent, that they mutually promote each
   other; yet, in the following discourse, they must be considered as
   entirely distinct; otherwise the nature of man, as tending to one, or
   as tending to the other, cannot be compared. There can no comparison be
   made, without considering the things compared as distinct and
   different.

   From this review and comparison. of the nature of man as respecting
   self, as respecting society, it will plainly appear, that there are as
   real and the same kind of indications in human nature, that we were
   made for society and to do good to our fellow creatures, as that we
   were intended to take care of our own life, and health, and private
   good; and that the same objections lie against one of these assertions
   as against the other.

   For,

   First, There is a natural principle of benevolence [8] in man, which is
   in some degree to society, what self-love is to the individual. And if
   there be in mankind any disposition to friendship; if there be any such
   thing as compassion, for compassion is momentary love; if there be any
   such things as the paternal of filial affections; if there be any
   affection in human nature, the object and end of which is the good of
   another; this is itself benevolence, or the love of another. Be it even
   so short, be it in ever so low a degree, or ever so unhappily confined;
   it proves the assertion, and points out what we were designed for, as
   really as though it were in a higher degree and more extensive. I must
   however remind you, that though benevolence and self-love are
   different; though the former tends most directly to public good, and
   the latter private; yet there are so perfectly coincident, that the
   greatest satisfactions to ourselves depend: upon our having benevolence
   in a due degree; and that self-love is one chief security of our right
   behaviour towards society. It may be added, that their mutual
   coinciding, so that we can scarce promote one without the other, is
   equally a proof that we were made for both.

   Secondly, This will further appear from observing, that the several
   passions and affections, which are distinct [9] both from benevolence
   and self-love, do in general contribute and lead us to public good as
   really as to private. It might be thought too minute and particular,
   and would carry us too great a length, to distinguish between, and
   compare together the several passions or appetites, distinct from
   benevolence, whose primary use and intention is the security and good
   of society; and the passions distinct from self-love, whose primary
   intention and design is the security and good of the individual. [10]
   It is enough to the present argument, that desire of esteem from
   others, contempt and esteem of them, love of society as distinct from
   affection to the good of it, indignation against successful vice, that
   these are public affections or passions, have an immediate respect to
   others, naturally lead us to regulate our behaviour in such a manner as
   will be of service to our fellow creatures. If any or all of these may
   be considered likewise as private affections, as tending to private
   good, this does not hinder them from being public affections too, or
   destroy the good influence of them upon society, and their tendency to
   public good. It may be added, that as persons without any conviction
   from reason of the desirableness of life, would yet of course preserve
   it merely from the appetite of hunger; so, by acting merely from regard
   (suppose) to reputation, without any consideration of the good of
   others, men often contribute to public good. In both these instances
   they are plainly instruments in the hands of another, in the hands of
   Providence, to carry on ends, the preservation of the individual and
   good of society, which they themselves have not in their view or
   intention. The sum is, Men have various appetites, passions, and
   particular affections, quite distinct both from self-love and from
   benevolence; all of these have a tendency to promote both public and
   private good, and may be considered as respecting others and ourselves
   equally and in common; but some of them seem most immediately to
   respect others, or tend to public good; others of them most immediately
   to respect self, or tend to private good. As the former are not
   benevolence, so the latter are not self-love: neither sort are
   instances of our love either to ourselves or others, but only instances
   of our Maker's care and love both of the individual and the species,
   and proofs that he intended we should be instruments of good to each
   other, as well as that we should be so to ourselves.

   Thirdly, There is a principle of reflection in men, by which they
   distinguish between, approve, and disapprove their own actions. We are
   plainly constituted such sort of creatures as to reflect upon our own
   nature. The mind can take a view of what passes within itself, its
   propensions, aversions, passions, affections, as respecting such
   objects, and in such degrees, and of the several actions consequent
   thereupon. In this survey it approves of one, glaring a disapproves of
   another, and towards a third is affected neither of these ways, but is
   quite indifferent. This principle in man, by which he approves or
   disapproves his heart, temper, and action, is conscience; for this is
   the strict sense of the word, though sometimes it is used so as to take
   in more. And that this faculty tends to restrain men from doing
   mischief to each other, and leads them to do good, is too manifest to
   need being insisted upon. Thus, a parent has the affection of love to
   his children: this leads him to take care of, to educate, to make due
   provision for them. The natural affection leads to this; but the
   reflection that it is his proper business, what belongs to him, that it
   is right and commendable so to do; this, added to the affection,
   becomes a much more settled principle, and carries him on through more
   labor and difficulties for the sake of his children, than he would
   undergo from that affection alone, if he thought it, and the course of
   action it led to, either indifferent or criminal. This indeed is
   impossible, to do that which is good, and not to approve of it; for
   which reason they are frequently not considered as distinct, though
   they really are: for men often approve of the actions of others, which
   they will not imitate, and likewise do that which they approve not. It
   cannot possibly be denied, that there is this principle of reflection
   or conscience in human nature. Suppose a man to relieve an innocent
   person in distress; suppose the same man afterwards, in the fury of
   anger, to do the greatest mischief to a person who had given no just
   cause of offence; to aggravate the injury, add the circumstances of
   former friendship, and obligation from the injured person; let the man
   who is supposed to have done these two different actions, coolly
   reflect upon them afterwards, without regard to their consequences to
   himself; -- to assert that any common man would be affected in the same
   way towards these different actions, that he would make no distinction
   between them, but approve or disapprove them equally, is too glaring a
   falsity to need being confuted. There is therefore this principle of
   reflection or conscience in mankind. It is needless to compare the
   respect it has to private good, with the respect it has to public;
   since it plainly tends as much to the latter as to the former, and is
   commonly thought to tend chiefly to the latter. This faculty is now
   mentioned merely as another part in the inward frame of man, pointing
   out to us in some degree what we are intended for, and as what will
   naturally and of course have some influence. The particular place
   assigned to it by nature, what authority it has, and how great
   influence it ought to have, shall be hereafter considered.

   From this comparison of benevolence and self-love, our public and
   private affections, of the courses of life they lead to, and of the
   principle of reflection or conscience as respecting each of them, it is
   as manifest, that we were made for society, and to promote the
   happiness of it; as that we were intended to take care of our own life,
   and health, and private good.

   And from this whole review must be given a different drought of human
   nature from what we are often presented with. Mankind are by nature so
   closely united, there is such a correspondence between the inward
   sensations of one man and those of another, that disgrace is as much
   avoided as bodily pain, and to be the object of esteem and love as much
   desired as any external goods: and, in many particular cases, persons
   are carried on to do good to others, as the end their affections tend
   to, and rest in; and manifest that they find real satisfaction and
   enjoyment in this course of behaviour. There is such a natural
   principle of attraction in man towards man, that having trod the same
   track of land, having breathed in the same climate, barely having been
   born in the same artificial district, or division, becomes the occasion
   of contracting acquaintances and familiarities many years after: for
   any thing may serve the purpose. Thus, relations, merely nominal, are
   sought and invented, not by governors, but by the lowest of the people;
   which are found sufficient to hold mankind together in little
   fraternities and copartnerships: weak ties indeed, and what may afford
   fund enough for ridicule, if they are absurdly considered as the real
   principles of that union; but they are, in truth, merely the occasions,
   as any thing may be of any thing, upon which our nature carries us on
   according to its own previous bent and bias; which occasions,
   therefore, would be nothing at all, were there not this prior
   disposition and bias of nature. Men are so much one body, that in a
   peculiar manner they feel for each other, shame, sudden danger,
   resentment, honor, prosperity, distress: one or another, or all of
   these, from the social nature in general, from benevolence, upon the
   occasion of natural relation, acquaintance, protection, dependence;
   each of these being distinct cements of society. And, therefore, to
   have no restraint from, no regard to others in our behaviour, is the
   speculative absurdity of considering ourselves as single and
   independent, as having nothing in our nature which has respect to our
   fellow-creatures, reduced to action and practice. And this is the same
   absurdity, as to suppose a hand, or any part, to have no natural
   respect to any other, or to the whole body.

   But allowing all this, it may be asked, "Has not man dispositions and
   principles within, which lead him to do evil to others, as well as to
   do good? whence come the many miseries else, which men are the authors
   and instruments of to each other?" These questions, as far as they
   relate to the foregoing discourse, may be answered by asking, "Has not
   man also dispositions and principles within, which lead him to do evil
   to himself, as well as good? whence come the many miseries else,
   sickness, pain, and death, which men are the instruments and authors of
   to themselves?"

   It may be thought more easy to answer one of these questions than the
   other, but the answer to both is really the same: That mankind have
   ungoverned passions which they will gratify at any rate, as well to the
   injury of others, as in contradiction to known private interest: But
   that as there is no such thing as self-hatred, so neither is there any
   such thing as ill-will in one man towards another, emulation and
   resentment being away; whereas there is plainly benevolence or
   good-will. There is no such thing as love of injustice, oppression,
   treachery, ingratitude; but only eager desires after such and such
   external goods; which, according to a very ancient observation, the
   most abandoned would choose to obtain by innocent means, if they were
   as easy, and as effectual to their end. That even emulation and
   resentment, by anyone who will consider what these passions really are
   in nature, [11] will be found nothing to the purpose of this objection;
   and that the principles and passions in the mind of man which are
   distinct both from self-love and benevolence, primarily and most
   directly lead to right behaviour with regard to others as well as
   himself, and only secondarily and accidentally to what is evil. Thus,
   though men, to avoid the shame of one villany, are sometimes guilty of
   a greater; yet it is easy to see, that the original tendency of shame
   is to prevent the doing of shameful actions; and its leading men to
   conceal such that actions when done, is only in consequence of their
   being done; i. e. of the passion's not having answered its first end.

   If it be said, that there are persons in the world, who are, in great
   measure, without the natural affections towards their fellow-creatures;
   there are likewise instances of persons without the common natural
   affections to themselves: but the nature of man is not to be judged by
   either of these, but by what appears in the common world, in the bulk
   of mankind.

   I am afraid it would be thought very strange, if, to confirm the truth
   of this account of human nature, and make out the justness of the
   foregoing comparison, it should be added, that from what appears, men,
   in fact, as much and as often contradict that part of their nature
   which respects self; and which leads them to their own private good and
   happiness, as they contradict that part of it which respects society,
   and tends to public good: That there are as few persons, who attain the
   greatest satisfaction and enjoyment which they might attain in the
   present world, as who do the greatest good to others which they might
   do; nay, that there are as few who can be said really and in earnest to
   aim at one, as at the other. Take a survey of mankind: The world in
   general, the good and bad, almost without exception, equally are
   agreed, that were religion out of the case, the happiness of the
   present life would consist in a manner wholly in riches, honors,
   sensual gratifications; insomuch that one scarce hears a reflection
   made upon prudence, life, conduct, but upon this supposition. Yet, on
   the contrary, that persons in the greatest affluence of fortune are no
   happier than such as have only a competency; that the cares and
   disappointments of ambition for the most part far exceed the
   satisfactions of it; as also the miserable intervals of intemperance
   and excess, and the many untimely deaths occasioned by a dissolute
   course of life: these things are all seen, acknowledged, by every one
   acknowledged; but are thought no objections against, though they
   expressly contradict this universal principle, that the happiness of
   the present life consists in one or other of them. Whence is all this
   absurdity and contradiction? Is not the middle way obvious? Can any
   thing be more manifest, than that the happiness of life consists in
   these, possessed and enjoyed only to a certain degree; that to pursue
   them beyond this degree, is always attended with more inconvenience
   than advantage to a man's-self, and often with extreme misery he
   greatest and unhappiness? Whence then, I say, is all this absurdity and
   contradiction? Is it really the result of consideration in mankind, how
   they may become most easy to themselves, most free from care, and enjoy
   the chief happiness attainable in this world? or is it not manifestly
   owing either to this, that they have not cool and reasonable concern
   enough for themselves to consider wherein their chief happiness in the
   present life consists; or else, if they do consider it, that they will
   not act conformably to what is the result of that consideration? i. e.
   reasonable concern for themselves, or cool self-love, is prevailed over
   by passion and appetite. So that, from what appears, there is no ground
   to assert, that those principles in the nature of man, which most
   directly lead to promote the good our fellow creatures, are more
   generally or in a greater degree violated, than those which most
   directly lead us to promote our own private good and happiness.

   The sum of the whole is plainly this. The nature of man, considered in
   his single capacity, and with respect only to the present world, is
   adapted and leads him attain the greatest happiness he can for himself
   in the present world. The nature of man, considered in public or social
   capacity, leads him to a right behavior in society, to that course of
   life which we call virtue. Men follow or obey their nature in both
   these capacities and respects to a certain degree, but not entirely;
   their actions do not come up to the whole of what their nature leads
   them to in either of these capacities or respects; and they often
   violate their nature in both; i. e. as they neglect the duties they owe
   to their fellow-creatures, to which their nature is abhorrent: so there
   is a manifest negligence in men of their real happiness or interest in
   the present world, when that interest is inconsistent with a present
   gratification; for the sake of which they negligently, nay, even
   knowingly, are the authors and instruments of their own misery and
   ruin. Thus they are as often unjust to themselves as to others, and for
   the most part are equally so to both by the same actions.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [7] 1 Cor. xii.

   [8] Suppose a man of learning to be writing a grave book upon human
   nature and to show in several parts of it that he had an insight into
   the subject he was considering; amongst other things, the following one
   would require to be accounted for; the appearance of benevolence or
   good will in men towards each other in the instances of natural
   relation, and in other. [Hobbs of Human Nature, c. 9. § 17.] Cautious
   of being deceived with outward show, he retires within himself, to see
   exactly what that is in the mind of man from whence this appearance
   proceeds; and upon deep reflection, asserts the principle in the mind
   to be only the love of power, and delight in the exercise of it. Would
   not every body think here was a mistake of one word for another? That
   the philosopher was contemplating and accounting for some other human
   actions, some other behaviour of man to man? And could anyone be
   thoroughly satisfied, that what is commonly called benevolence or good
   will was really the affection meant, but only by being made to
   understand that this learned person had a general hypothesis, to which
   the appearance of good will could no otherwise be reconciled? That what
   has this appearance, is often nothing but ambition; that a delight in
   superiority often (suppose always) mixes itself with benevolence, only
   makes it more specious to call it ambition than hunger, of the two; but
   in reality that passion does no more account for the whole appearances
   of good will than this appetite does. Is there not often the appearance
   of one man's wishing that good to another, which he knows himself
   unable to procure him; and rejoicing in it, though bestowed by a third
   person? And can love of power any way possibly come in to account for
   this desire or delight? Is there not often the appearance of men's
   distinguishing between two or more persons, preferring one before
   another, to do good to, in cases where love of power cannot in the
   least account for the distinction and preference? For this principle
   can no otherwise distinguish between objects, than as it is a greater
   instance and exertion of power to do good to one rather than to
   another. Again, suppose good will in the mind of man to be nothing but
   delight in the exercise of power: men might indeed be restrained by
   distant and accidental considerations; but these restraints being
   removed, they would have a, a disposition to, and delight in mischief,
   as an exercise and proof of a power: and this disposition and delight
   would arise from, or be the same principle in the mind, as a
   disposition to, and delight in charity. Thus cruelty, as distinct from
   envy and resentment, would be exactly the same in the mind of man as
   good will: that one tends to the happiness, the other to the misery of
   our fellow creatures, is, it seems, merely an accidental circumstance,
   which the mind has not the least regard to. These are the absurdities
   which even men of capacity run into, when they have occasion to belie
   their nature, and will perversely disclaim that image of God which was
   originally stamped upon it: the traces of which, however faint, are
   plainly discernible upon the mind of man. If any person can in earnest
   doubt, whether there be such a thing as good will in one man towards
   another; (for the question is not concerning either the degree or
   extensiveness of it, but concerning the affection itself;) let it be
   observed, that whether man be thus, or otherwise constituted, what is
   the inward frame in this particular, is a mere question of fact or
   natural history, not proveable immediately by reason. It is therefore
   to be judged of and determined in the same way other facts or matters
   of natural history are: by appealing to the external senses, or inward
   perceptions, respectively, as the matter under consideration is
   cognizable by one or the other: by arguing from acknowledged facts and
   actions; for a great les number of actions of the same kind, in
   different circumstances, and on respecting different objects, will
   prove, to a certainty, what principles they do not, and, to the
   greatest probability, what principles they do proceed from: and,
   lastly, by the testimony of mankind. Now, that there is some degree of
   benevolence amongst men, may be as of strongly and plainly proved in
   all these ways, as it could possibly be proved, supposing there was
   this affection in our nature. And should any one think fit to assert,
   that resentment in the mind of man was of absolutely nothing but
   reasonable concern for our own safety, the falsity of this, and what is
   the real nature of that passion, could be shown in no other ways than
   those in which it may be shown, that there is such a thing in some
   degree as real good will in man towards man. It is sufficient that the
   seeds of it be implanted in our it nature by God. There is, it is
   owned, much left for us to do upon our own heart and temper; to
   cultivate, to improve, to call it forth, to exercise it in a steady
   uniform manner. This is our work: this is virtue and religion.

   [9] Every body makes a distinction between self-love, and the several
   particular passions, appetites, and affections; and yet they are often
   confounded again. That they are totally different, will be seen by
   anyone who will distinguish between the passions and appetites
   themselves, and endeavoring after the means of their gratification.
   Consider the appetite of hunger, and the desire of esteem; these being
   the occasion both of pleasure and pain, the coolest self-love, as well
   as the appetites and passions themselves, may put us upon making use of
   the proper methods of obtaining that pleasure, and avoiding that pain;
   but the feelings themselves, the pain of hunger and shame, and the
   delight from esteem, are no more self-love than they are any thing in
   the world. Though a man hated himself, he would as much feel the pain
   of hunger as he would that of the gout: and it is plainly supposable,
   there may be creatures with self-love in them to the highest degree,
   who may be quite insensible and indifferent (as men in some cases are)
   to the contempt and esteem of those upon whom their happiness does not
   in some further respects depend. And as self-love and the several
   particular passions and appetites are in themselves totally different;
   so that some actions proceed from one, and some from the other, will be
   manifest to any who will observe the two following very supposable
   cases. -- One man rushes upon certain ruin for the gratification of a
   present desire; nobody will call the principle of this action
   self-love. Suppose another man to go through some laborious work, upon
   promise of a great reward, without any distinct knowledge what the
   reward will be; this course of action cannot be ascribed to any
   particular passion. The former of these actions is plainly to be
   imputed to some particular passion or affection, the latter as plainly
   to the general affection or principle of self-love. That there are some
   particular pursuits or actions concerning which we cannot determine how
   far they are owing to one, and how far to the other, proceeds from
   this, that the two principles are frequently mixed together, and run
   into each other. This distinction is further explained in the eleventh
   sermon.

   [10] If any desire to see this distinction and comparison made in a
   particular instance, the appetite and passion now mentioned may reward
   serve for one. Hunger is to be considered as a private appetite;
   because the end for which it was given us, is the preservation of the
   former individual. Desire of esteem is a public passion; because the
   end for which it was given us is to regulate our behaviour towards
   society. The respect which this has to private good is as remote, as
   the respect that has to public good; and the appetite is no more
   self-love, than the passion is benevolence. The object and end of the
   former is merely food; the object and end of the latter is merely
   esteem: but the latter can no more be gratified, without contributing
   to the good of society, than the former can be gratified, without
   contributing to the preservation of the individual.

   [11] Emulation is merely the desire and hope of equality with, or
   superiority over others, with whom we compare ourselves, There does not
   appear to be any other grief in the natural passion, but only that want
   which is implied in desire, However, this may be so strong as to be the
   occasion of great grief. To desire the attainment of this equality, or
   superiority, by the particular means of others being brought down to
   our own level, or below it, is, I think, the distinct notion of envy.
   From whence it is easy to see, that the real end which the natural
   passion, emulation, and which the unlawful one, envy, aims at, is
   exactly the same; namely that equality or superiority; and,
   consequently, that to do mischief is not the end of envy, but merely
   the means it makes use of to attain its end. As to resentment, see the
   eighth sermon.
     __________________________________________________________________

Sermon II. Upon the Natural Supremacy of Conscience -- Rom. ii. 14.

   For when the Gentiles, which have not the law, do by nature the things
   contained in the law, these having not the law, are a law unto
   themselves.

   As speculative truth admits of different kinds of proof, so likewise
   moral obligations may be shown by different methods. If the real nature
   of any creature leads him, and is adapted to such and such purposes
   only, or more than to any other; this is a reason to believe the Author
   of that nature intended it for those purposes. Thus there is no doubt
   the eye was intended for us to see with. And the more complex any
   constitution is, and the greater variety of parts there are which thus
   tend to some one end, the stronger is the proof that such end was
   designed. However, when the inward frame of man is considered as any
   guide in morals, the utmost caution must be used that none make
   peculiarities in their own temper, or any thing which is the effect of
   particular customs, though observable in several, the standard of what
   is common to the species; and, above all, that the highest principle be
   not forgot or excluded, that to which belongs the adjustment and
   correction of all other inward movements and affections: which
   principle will of course have some influence, but which, being in
   nature supreme, as shall now be shown, ought to preside over and govern
   all the rest. The difficulty of rightly observing the two former
   cautions the appearance there is of some small diversity amongst
   mankind with respect to this faculty, with respect to their natural
   sense of moral good and evil; and the attention.. necessary to survey
   with any exactness what passes within have occasioned that it is not so
   much agreed what is the standard of the internal nature of man, as of
   his external form. Neither is this last exactly settled. Yet we
   understand one another when we speak of the shape of a human body; so
   likewise we do when we speak of the heart and inward principles, how
   far soever the standard is from being exact or precisely fixed. There
   is, therefore, ground for an attempt of showing men to themselves, of
   showing them what course of life and behaviour their real nature points
   out and would lead them to. Now, obligations of virtue shown, and
   motives to the practice of it enforced, from a review of the nature of
   man, are to be considered as an appeal to each particular person's
   heart and natural conscience; as the external senses are appealed to
   for the proof of things cognizable by them. Since, then, our inward
   feelings, and the perceptions we receive, from our external senses, are
   equally real; to argue from the former to life and conduct, is as
   little liable to exception, as to argue from the latter to absolute
   speculative truth. A man can as little doubt whether his eyes were
   given him to see with, as he can doubt of the truth of the science of
   optics, deduced from occular experiments. And allowing the inward
   feeling, shame; a man can as little doubt whether it was given him to
   prevent his doing shameful actions, as he can doubt whether his eyes
   were given him to guide his steps. And as to these inward feelings
   themselves; that they are real; that man has in his nature passions and
   affections, can no more be questioned, than that he has external
   senses. Neither can the former be wholly mistaken, though to a certain
   degree liable to greater mistakes than the latter.

   There can be no doubt but that several propensions or instincts,
   several principles in the heart of man, carry him to society, and to
   contribute to the happiness of it, in a sense and a manner in which no
   inward principle leads him to evil. These principles, propensions, or
   instincts, which lead him to do good, are approved of by a certain
   faculty within, quite distinct from these propensions themselves. All
   this hath been fully made out in the foregoing discourse.

   But it may be said, "What is all this, though true, to the purpose of
   virtue and religion? these require, not only that we do good to others
   when we are led this way, by benevolence or reflection happening to be
   stronger than other principles, passions, or appetites; but likewise
   that the whole character be formed upon thought and reflection; that
   every action be directed by some determinate rule, some other rule than
   the strength and prevalency of any principle or passion. What sign is
   there in our nature (for the inquiry is only about what is collected
   from thence) that this was intended by its Author? or how does so
   various and fickle a temper as that of man appear adapted thereto? It
   may indeed be absurd and unnatural for men to act without any
   reflection; nay without regard to that particular kind of reflection
   which you call conscience; because this does belong to our nature. For,
   as there never was a man but who approved one place, prospect,
   building, before another; so it does not appear that there ever was a
   man who would not have approved an action of humanity rather than of
   cruelty; interest and passion being quite out of the case. But interest
   and passion do come in, and are often too strong for, and prevail over
   reflection and conscience. Now, as brutes have various instincts, by
   which they are carried on to the end the Author of their nature
   intended them for; is not man in the same condition, with this
   difference only, that to his instincts (i. e. appetites and passions)
   is added the principle of reflection or conscience? And as brutes act
   agreeably to their nature, in following that principle or particular
   instinct which for the present is strongest in them; does not man
   likewise act agreeably to his nature, or obey the law of his creation,
   by following that principle, be it passion or conscience, which for the
   present happens to be strongest in him? Thus, different men are by
   their particular nature hurried on to pursue honor, or riches, or
   pleasure. There are also persons whose temper leads them in an uncommon
   degree to kindness, compassion, doing good to their fellow creatures;
   as there are others who are given to suspend their judgment, to weigh
   and consider things, and to act upon thought and reflection. Let
   everyone then quietly follow his nature; as passion, reflection,
   appetite, the several parts of it, happen to the strongest; but let not
   the man of virtue take upon him to blame the ambitious, the covetous,
   the dissolute; since these, equally with him, obey and follow their
   nature. Thus, as in some cases, we follow our nature in doing the works
   contained in the law, so in other cases we follow nature in doing
   contrary."

   Now, all this licentious talk entirely goes upon a supposition, that
   men follow their nature in the same sense, in violating the known rules
   of justice and honesty for the sake of a present gratification, as they
   do in following those rules when they have no temptation to the
   contrary. And if this were true, that could not be so which St Paul
   asserts, that men are "by nature a law to themselves." If by following
   nature were meant only acting as we please, it would indeed be
   ridiculous to speak of nature as any guide in morals: nay, the very
   mention of deviating from nature would be absurd; and the mention of
   following it, when spoken by way of distinction, would absolutely have
   no meaning. For, did ever anyone act otherwise than as he pleased? And
   yet the ancients speak of deviating from nature, as vice: and of
   following nature so much as a distinction, that, according to them, the
   perfection of virtue consists therein. So that language itself should
   teach people another sense to the words following nature, than barely
   acting as we please. Let it however be observed, that though the words
   human nature are to be explained, yet the real question of this
   discourse is not concerning the meaning of words, any otherwise than as
   the explanation of them may be needful to make out and explain the
   assertion, that every man if naturally a law to himself; that everyone
   may find within himself the role of right, and obligations to follow
   it. This St Paul affirms in the words of the text, and this the
   foregoing objection really denies, by seeming to allow it. And the
   objection will be fully answered, and the text before us explained, by
   observing, that nature is considered in different views, and the word
   used in different senses; and by showing in what view it is considered,
   and in what sense the word is used, when intended to express and
   signify that which is the guide of life, that by which men are a law to
   themselves. I say, the explanation of the term will be sufficient,
   because from thence it will appear, that in some senses of the word
   nature cannot be, but that in another sense it manifestly is, a law to
   us.

   I. By nature is often meant no more than some principle in man, without
   regard either to the kind or degree of it. Thus, the passion of anger,
   and the affection of parents to their children, would be called equally
   natural. And as the same person hath often contrary principles, which
   at the same time draw contrary ways, he may by the same action both
   follow and contradict his nature in this sense of the word; he may
   follow one passion, and contradict another.

   II. Nature is frequently spoken of as consisting in those passions
   which are strongest, and most influence the actions; which being
   vicious ones, mankind is in this sense naturally vicious, or vicious by
   nature. Thus St Paul says of the Gentiles, who were dead in trespasses
   and sins, and walked according to the spirit of disobedience, that they
   were by nature the children of Wrath. [12]

   They could be no otherwise children of wrath by nature, than they were
   vicious by nature.

   Here then are two different senses of the word nature, in neither of
   which men can at all be said to be a law to themselves. They are
   mentioned only to be excluded; to prevent their being confounded, as
   the latter is in the objection, with another sense of it, which is now
   to be inquired after and explained.

   III. The apostle asserts, that the Gentiles do by nature the things
   contained in the law. Nature is indeed here put by way of distinction
   from revelation, but yet it is not a mere negative. He intends to
   express more than that by which they did not, that by which they did
   the works of the law; namely, by nature. It is plain the meaning of the
   word is not the same in this passage as in the former, where it is
   spoken of as evil; for in this latter it is spoken of as good; as that
   by which they acted, or might have acted virtuously. What that is in
   man by which he is naturally a law to himself; is explained in the
   following words: Which shows the work of the law, written in their
   hearts, their consciences also bearing witness, and their thoughts the
   meanwhile accusing or else excusing one another. If there be a
   distinction to be made between the works written in their hearts, and
   the witness of conscience; by the former must be meant, the natural
   disposition to kindness and compassion, to do what is of good report,
   to which this apostle often refers; that part of the nature of man,
   treated of in the foregoing discourse, which, with very little
   reflection and of course, leads him to society, and by means of which
   he naturally acts a just and good part in it, unless other passions or
   interest lead him astray. Yet since other passions, and regards to
   private interest, which lead us (though indirectly, yet they lead us)
   astray, are themselves in a degree equally natural, and often most
   prevalent; and since we have no method or seeing the particular degrees
   in which one or the other is placed in us by nature, it is plain the
   former, considered merely as natural, good and right as they are, can
   no more be a law to us than the latter. But there is a superior
   principle of reflection or conscience in every man which distinguishes
   between the internal principles of his heart, as well as his external
   actions; which passes judgment upon himself and them; pronounces
   determinately some actions to be in themselves just, right, good;
   others to be in themselves evil, wrong, unjust: which, without being
   consulted, without being advised with, magisterially exerts itself, and
   approves or condemns him, the doer of them, accordingly; and which, if
   not forcibly stopped, naturally and always of course goes on to
   anticipate a higher and more effectual sentence, which shall hereafter
   second and affirm its own. But this part of the office of conscience is
   beyond my present design explicitly to consider. It is by this faculty,
   natural to man, that he is a moral agent, that he is a law to himself.
   By this faculty, I say, not to be considered merely as a principle in
   his heart, which is to have some influence as well as others; but
   considered as a faculty, in kind and in nature, supreme over all
   others, and which bears its own authority of being so.

   This prerogative, this natural supremacy, of the faculty which surveys,
   approves, or disapproves the several affections of our mind, and
   actions of our lives, being that by which men are a law to themselves,
   their conformity or disobedience to which law of our nature renders
   their actions, in the highest and most proper sense, natural or
   unnatural; it is fit it be further explained to you: and I hope it will
   be so, if you will attend to the following reflections.

   Man may act according to that principle or inclination which for the
   present happens to be strongest, and yet act in a way disproportionate
   to, and violate his real proper nature. Suppose a brute creature by any
   bait to be allured into a snare, by which he is destroyed: he plainly
   followed the bent of his nature, leading him to gratify his appetite.
   There is an entire correspondence between his whole nature and such an
   action: such action therefore is natural. But suppose a man, foreseeing
   the same danger of certain ruin, should rush into it for the sake of a
   present gratification; he in this instance would follow his strongest
   desire, as did the brute creature. But there would be as manifest a
   disproportion between the nature of a man and such an action, as
   between the meanest work of art and the skill of the greatest master in
   that art; which disproportion arises, not from considering the action
   singly in itself; or in its consequences, but from comparison of it
   with the nature of the agent. And since such an action is utterly
   disproportionate to the nature of man, it is in the strictest and most
   proper sense unnatural; this word expressing that disproportion.
   Therefore, instead of the words disproportionate to his nature, the
   word unnatural may now be put; this being more familiar to us: but let
   it be observed, that it stands for the same thing precisely.

   Now, what is it which renders such a rash action unnatural? Is it that
   he went against the principle of reasonable and cool self-love,
   considered merely as a part of his nature? No: For if he had acted the
   contrary way, he would equally have gone against a principle, or
   towards, part of his nature, namely, passion or appetite. But, to deny
   a present appetite, from foresight that the gratification of it would
   end in immediate ruin or extreme misery, is by no means an unnatural
   action. Whereas, to contradict or go against cool self-love, for the
   sake of such gratification, is so in the instance before us. Such an
   action then being unnatural, and its being so not arising from a man's
   going against a principle or desire barely, nor in going against that
   principle or desire which happens for the present to be strongest; it
   necessarily follows, that there must be some other difference, or
   distinction, to be made between these two principles, passion and cool
   self-love, than what I have yet taken notice of. And this difference,
   not being a difference in strength or degree, I call a difference in
   nature and in kind. And since, in the instance still before us, if
   passion prevails over self-love, the consequent action is unnatural;
   but if self-love prevails over passion, the action is natural; it is
   manifest that self-love is in human nature a superior principle to
   passion. This may be contradicted without violating that nature, but
   the former cannot. So that, if we will act conformably to the economy
   of man's nature, reasonable self-love must govern. Thus, without
   particular consideration of conscience, we may have a clear conception
   of the superior nature of one inward principle to another; and see that
   there really is this natural superiority, quite distinct from degrees
   of strength and prevalency.

   Let us now take a view of the nature of man, as consisting partly of
   various appetites, passions, affections, and partly of the principle of
   reflection or conscience; leaving quite out all consideration of the
   different degrees of strength, in which either of them prevail; and it
   will further appear, that there is this natural superiority of one
   inward principle to another, or that it is even part of the idea of
   reflection or conscience.

   Passion or appetite implies a direct simple tendency towards such and
   such objects, without distinction of the means by which they are to be
   obtained. Consequently, it will often happen there will be a desire of
   particular objects, in cases where they cannot be obtained without
   manifest injury to others. Reflection, or conscience comes in, and
   disapproves the pursuit of them in these circumstances; but the desire
   remains. Which is to be obeyed, appetite or reflection? Cannot this
   question be answered from the economy and constitution of human nature
   merely, without saying which is strongest? or need this at all come
   into consideration? Would not the question be intelligibly and fully
   answered by saying, that the principle of reflection or conscience
   being compared with the various appetites, passions, and affections in
   men the former is manifestly superior and chief, without regard to
   strength? And how often soever the latter happens to prevail, it is
   mere usurpation. The former remains in nature and in kind its superior;
   and every instance of such prevalence of the latter, is an instance of
   breaking in upon, and violation of the constitution of man.

   All this is no more than the distinction which every body is acquainted
   with, between mere power and authority: only, instead of being intended
   to express the difference between what is possible, and what is lawful
   in civil government, here it has been shown applicable to the several
   principles in the mind of man. Thus, that principle by which we survey,
   and either approve or disapprove our own heart, temper, and actions, is
   not only to be considered as what is in its turn to have some
   influence; which may be said of every passion, of the lowest appetites:
   but likewise as being superior; as from its very nature manifestly
   claiming superiority over all others; insomuch that you cannot form a
   notion of this faculty, conscience, without taking in judgment,
   direction, superintendency. This is a constituent part of the idea,
   that is, of the faculty itself: and to preside and govern, from the
   very economy and constitution of man, belongs to it. Had it strength,
   as it has right; had it power, as it has manifest authority, it would
   absolutely govern the world.

   This gives us a further view of the nature of man; shows us what course
   of life we were made for; not only that our real nature leads us to be
   influenced in some degree by reflection and conscience, but likewise in
   what degree we are to be influenced by it, if we will fall in with, and
   act agreeably to the constitution of our nature: that this faculty was
   placed within to be our proper governor; to direct and regulate all
   under principles, passions, and motives of action. This is its right
   and office: thus sacred is its authority. And how often soever men
   violate and rebelliously refuse to submit to it, for supposed interest
   which they cannot otherwise obtain, or for the sake of passion which
   they cannot otherwise gratify; this makes no alteration as to the
   natural right, and office of conscience.

   Let us now turn the whole matter another way, and suppose there was no
   such thing at all as this supremacy of conscience; that there was no
   distinction to be made between one inward principle and another, but
   only that of strength; and see what would be the consequence.

   Consider then what is the latitude and compass of the actions of man
   with regard to himself, his fellow creatures, and the Supreme Being?
   What are their bounds, besides that of our natural power? With respect
   to the two first, they are plainly no other than these: no man seeks
   misery as such for himself; and no one provoked does mischief to
   another for its own sake. For in every degree within these bounds,
   mankind knowingly, from passion or wantonness, bring ruin and misery
   upon themselves and others: and impiety and profaneness, I mean, what
   every one would call so who believes the being of God, have absolutely
   no bounds at all. Men blaspheme the Author of nature, formally, and in
   words renounce their allegiance to their Creator. Put an instance then
   with respect to any one of these three. Though we should suppose
   profane swearing, and in general that kind of impiety now mentioned, to
   mean nothing, yet it implies wanton disregard and irreverence towards
   an infinite Being, our Creator; and is this as suitable to the nature
   of man, as reverence and dutiful submission of heart towards that
   Almighty Being? Or suppose a man guilty of parricide, with all the
   circumstances of cruelty which such an action can admit of: this action
   is done in consequence of its principle being for the present
   strongest: and if there be no difference between inward principles, but
   only that of strength; the strength being given, you have the whole
   nature of the man given, so far as it relates to this matter. The
   action plainly corresponds to the principle, the principle being in
   that degree of strength it was: it therefore corresponds to the whole
   nature of the man. Upon comparing the action and the whole nature,
   there arises no disproportion, there appears no unsuitableness between
   them. Thus the murder of a father and the nature of man correspond to
   each other, as the same nature and an act of filial duty. If there be
   no difference between inward principles, but only that of strength, we
   can make no distinction between these two actions, considered as the
   actions of such a creature, but in our coolest hours must approve or
   disapprove them equally: than which nothing can be reduced to a greater
   absurdity.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [12] Ephes. ii. 3.
     __________________________________________________________________

Sermon III. Upon the Natural Supremacy of Conscience -- Rom. ii. 14.

   The natural supremacy of reflection or conscience being thus
   established; we may from it form a distinct notion of what is meant by
   human nature, when virtue is said to consist in following it, and vice
   in deviating from it.

   As the idea of a civil constitution implies in it united strength,
   various subordinations, under one direction, that of the supreme
   authority; the different strength of each particular member of the
   society not coming into the idea; whereas, if you leave out the
   subordination, the union, and the one direction, you destroy and lose
   it: So reason, several appetites, passions, and affections, prevailing
   in different degrees of strength; is not that idea or notion of human
   nature; but that nature consists in these several principles considered
   as having a natural respect to each other, in the several passions
   being naturally subordinate to the one superior principle of reflection
   or conscience. Every bias, instinct, propension within, is a real part
   of our nature, but not the whole: add to these the superior faculty,
   whose office it is to adjust, manage, and preside over them, and take
   in this its natural superiority, and you complete the idea of human
   nature. And as in civil government the constitution is broken in upon
   and violated, by power and strength prevailing over authority; so the
   constitution of man is broken in upon and violated by the lower
   faculties or principles within prevailing over that, which is in its
   nature supreme over them all. Thus, when it is said by ancient writers,
   that tortures and death are not so contrary to human nature as
   injustice; by this, to be sure, is not meant, that the aversion to the
   former in mankind is less strong and prevalent than their aversion to
   the latter: but that the former is only contrary to our nature,
   considered in a partial view, and which takes in only the lowest part
   of it, that which we have in common with the brutes; whereas the latter
   is contrary to our nature, considered in a higher sense, as a system
   and constitution, contrary to the whole economy of man. [13]

   And from all these things put together, nothing can be more evident,
   than that, exclusive of revelation, man cannot be considered as a
   creature left by his Maker to act at random, and live at large up to
   the extent of his natural power, as passion, humor, wilfulness, happen
   to carry him; which is the condition brute creatures are in but that,
   from his make, constitution, or nature, he is the strictest and most
   proper sense, a law to himself. He hath the rule of right within: what
   is wanting is only that he honestly attend to it.

   The inquiries which have been made by men of leisure after some general
   rule, the conformity to, or disagreement from which, should denominate
   our actions good or evil, are in many respects of great service. Yet
   let any plain, honest man, before he engages in any course of action,
   ask himself, is this I am going about right, or is it wrong? Is it
   good, or is it evil? I do not in the least doubt but that this question
   would be answered agreeably to truth and virtue, by almost any fair man
   in almost any circumstance. Neither do there appear any cases which
   look like exceptions to this; but those of superstition, and of
   partiality to ourselves. Superstition may, perhaps, be somewhat of an
   exception: but partiality to ourselves is not; this being itself
   dishonesty. For a man to judge that to be the equitable, the moderate,
   the right part for him to act, which he would see to be hard, unjust,
   oppressive in another; this is plain vice, and can proceed only from
   great unfairness of mind.

   But, allowing that mankind hath the rule of right within himself, yet
   it maybe asked, "What obligations are we under to attend to and follow
   it?"I answer: it has been proved, that man by his nature is a law to
   himself, without the particular distinct consideration of the positive
   sanctions of that law; the rewards and punishments which we feel, and
   those which, from the light of reason, we have ground to believe are
   annexed to it. The question then carries its own answer along with it.
   Your obligation to obey this law, is its being the law of your nature.
   That your conscience approves of and attests to such a course of
   action, is itself alone an obligation. Conscience does not only offer
   itself to show us the way we should walk in, but it. likewise carries
   its own authority with it, that it is our natural guide, the guide
   assigned us by the Author of our nature: it therefore belongs to our
   condition of being: it is our duty to walk in that path, and follow
   this guide, without looking about to see whether we may not possibly
   forsake them with impunity.

   However, let us hear what is to he said against obeying this law of our
   nature. And the sum is no more than this: "Why should we be concerned
   about any thing out of, and beyond ourselves? If we do find within
   ourselves regards to others, and restraints of we know not how many
   different kinds; yet these being embarrassments, and hindering us from
   going the nearest way to our own good, why should we not endeavor to
   suppress and get over them?"

   Thus, people go on with words, which, when applied to human nature, and
   the condition in which it is placed in. this world, have really no
   meaning. For does not all his kind of talk go upon supposition, that
   our happiness in this world consists in somewhat quite distinct from
   regards to others, and that it is the privilege of vice to be without
   restraint or confinement? Whereas, on the contrary, the enjoyments; in
   a manner all the common enjoyments of life, even the pleasures of vice,
   depend upon these regards of one kind or another to our fellow
   creatures. Throw off all regards to others, and we should be quite
   indifferent to infamy and honor: there could be no such thing at all as
   ambition, and scarce any such thing as covetousness; for we should
   likewise be equally indifferent to the disgrace of, poverty, the
   several neglects and kinds of contempt which accompany this state; and
   to the reputation of riches, the regard and respect they usually
   procure. Neither is restraint by any means peculiar to one course of
   life; but our very nature, exclusive of conscience, and our condition,
   lays us under an absolute necessity of it. We cannot gain any end
   whatever without being confined to the proper means, which is often the
   most painful and uneasy confinement. And, in numberless instances, a
   present appetite cannot be gratified without such apparent and
   immediate ruin and misery, that the most dissolute man in the world
   chooses to forego the pleasure, rather than endure the pain.

   Is the meaning, then, to indulge those regards to our fellow-creatures,
   and submit to those restraints; which upon the whole, are attended with
   more satisfaction than uneasiness, and get over only those which bring
   more uneasiness and inconvenience than satisfaction? "Doubtless this
   was our meaning." You have changed sides then. -- Keep to this: Be
   consistent with yourselves; and you and the men of virtue are, in
   general, perfectly agreed. But let us take care, and avoid mistakes.
   Let it not be taken for granted, that the temper of envy, rage,
   resentment, yields greater delight than meekness, forgiveness,
   compassion, and good-will: especially when it is acknowledged, that
   rage, envy, resentment, are in themselves mere misery; and the
   satisfaction arising from the indulgence of them is little more than
   relief from that misery; whereas the temper of compassion and
   benevolence is itself delightful; and the indulgence of it, by doing
   good, affords new positive delight and enjoyment. Let it not be taken
   for granted, that the satisfaction arising from the reputation of
   riches and power, however obtained, and from the respect paid to the
   them is greater than the satisfaction arising from the reputation of
   justice, honesty, charity, and the esteem which is universally
   acknowledged to be their due. And if it be doubtful which of these
   satisfactions is the greatest, as there are persons who think neither
   of them very considerable, yet there can be no doubt concerning
   ambition and covetousness, virtue and a good mind, considered in
   themselves, and as leading to different courses of life; there can, I
   say, be no doubt, which temper and which course is attended with most
   peace and tranquillity of mind; which, with most perplexity, vexation,
   and inconvenience. And both the virtues and vices which have been now
   mentioned, do in a manner equally imply in them regards of one kind or
   another to our fellow creatures. And with respect to restraint and
   confinement: whoever will consider the restraints from fear and shame,
   the dissimulation, mean arts of concealment, servile compliances, one
   or other of which belong to almost every course of vice, will soon be
   convinced, that the man of virtue is by no means upon a disadvantage in
   this respect. How many instances are there, in which men feel, and own,
   and cry aloud under the chains of vice with which they are enthralled,
   and which yet they will not, shake off? How many instances, in which
   persons manifestly go through more pain and self-denial to gratify a
   vicious passion, than would have been necessary to the conquest of it?
   To this is to be added, that when virtue is become habitual, when the
   temper of it is acquired, what was before confinement ceases to be so,
   by becoming choice and delight. Whatever restraint and guard upon
   ourselves may be needful to unlearn any unnatural distortion or odd
   gesture; yet, in all propriety of speech, natural behaviour must be the
   most easy and unrestrained. It is manifest, that in the common course
   of life there is seldom any inconsistency between our duty and what is
   called interest. It is much seldomer that there is an inconsistency
   between duty and what is really our present interest; meaning by
   interest, happiness and satisfaction. Self-love, then, though confined
   to the interest of the present world, does in general perfectly
   coincide with virtue, and leads us to one and the same course of life.
   But, whatever exceptions there are to this, which are much fewer than
   they are commonly thought, all shall be set right at the final
   distribution of things. It is a manifest absurdity to suppose evil
   prevailing finally over good, under the conduct and administration of a
   perfect mind.

   The whole argument which I have been now insisting upon, may be thus
   summed up and given you in one view. The nature of man is adapted to
   some course action or other. Upon comparing some actions with this
   nature, they appear suitable and correspondent to it: From comparison
   of other actions with the same nature there arises to our view some
   unsuitableness or disproportion. The correspondence of actions to the
   nature of the agent renders them natural; their disproportion to it,
   unnatural. That an action is correspondent to the nature of the agent,
   does not arise from its being agreeable to the principle which happens
   to be the strongest; for it may be so, and yet be quite
   disproportionate to the nature of the agent. The correspondence,
   therefore, disproportion, arises from somewhat else. This can be
   nothing but a difference in nature and kind, (altogether distinct from
   strength) between the inward principles. Some, then, are in nature and
   kind superior to others. And the correspondence arises from the action
   being conformable to the higher principle; and the unsuitableness from
   its being contrary to it. Reasonable self-love and conscience are the
   chief or superior principles in this nature of man: because an action
   may be suitable to this nature, though all other principles be
   violated; but becomes unsuitable, if either of those are. Conscience
   and self-love, if we understand our true happiness, always lead us the
   same way. -- Duty and interest are perfectly coincident; for the most
   part in this world, but entirely and in every instance, if we take in
   the future and the whole; this being implied in the notion of a good
   and perfect administration of things. Thus, they who have been so wise
   in their generation, as to regard only their own supposed interest, at
   the expense and to the injury of others, shall at last find, that he
   who has given up all the advantages of the present world, rather than
   violate his conscience and the relations of life, has infinitely better
   provided for himself, and secured his own interest and happiness.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [13] Every man, in his physical nature, is one individual single agent.
   He has likewise properties and principles, each of which may be
   considered separately, and without regard to the respects which they
   have to each other. Neither of these are the nature we are taking a
   view of. But it is the inward frame of man, considered as a system or
   constitution: whose several parts are united, not by a physical
   principle if individuation, but by the respects they have to each
   other; the chief of which is the subjection which the appetites,
   passions, and particular affections, have to the one supreme principle
   of reflection or conscience. The system or constitution is formed by
   and consists in these respects and this subjection. Thus, the body is a
   system or constitution; so is a tree; so is every machine. Consider all
   the several parts of a tree, without the natural respects they have to
   each other, and you have not at all the idea of a tree; but add these
   respects, and this gives you the idea. The body may be impaired by
   sickness, a tree may decay, a machine be out of order, and yet the
   system and constitution of them not totally dissolved. There is plainly
   somewhat which answers to all this in the moral constitution of man.
   Whoever will consider his own nature, will see, that the several
   appetites, passions, and particular affections, have different respects
   amongst themselves, They are restraints upon, and are in a proportion
   to, each other. This proportion is just and perfect, when all those
   under principles are perfectly coincident with conscience, so far as
   their nature permits, and, in all cases, under its absolute and entire
   direction. The least excess or defect, the least alteration of the due
   proportions amongst themselves, or of their coincidence with
   conscience, though not proceeding into action, is some degree of
   disorder in the moral constitution. But perfection, though plainly
   intelligible and supposable, was never attained by any man. If the
   higher principle of reflection maintains its place, and, as much as it
   can, corrects that disorder, and hinders it from breaking out into
   action, this is all that can be expected in such a creature as man. And
   though the appetites and passions have not their exact due proportion
   to each other; though they often strive for mastery with judgment or
   reflection; yet, since the superiority of this principle to all others
   is the chief respect which forms the constitution, or so far as this
   superiority is maintained, the character, the man, is good, worthy,
   virtuous.
     __________________________________________________________________

Sermon IV. Upon the Government of the Tongue -- James i. 26.

   If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue,
   but deceiveth his own heart, this man's religion is vain.

   The translation of this text would be more determinate by being more
   literal, thus: "If any man among you seemeth to be religious, not
   bridling his tongue, but deceiving his own heart, this man's religion
   is vain." This determines that the words, "but deceiveth his own
   heart," are not put in opposition to, "seemeth to be religious," but
   to, "bridleth not his tongue." The certain determinate meaning of the
   text then being; that he who seemeth to be religious, and bridleth not
   his tongue, but, in that particular, deceiveth his own heart, this
   man's religion is vain; we may observe somewhat very forcible and
   expressive in these words of St James. As if the apostle had said, No
   man surely can make any pretences to religion, who does not at least
   believe that be bridleth his tongue: If he puts on any appearance or
   face of religion, and yet does not govern his tongue, he must surely
   deceive himself in that particular, and think he does: And whoever is
   so unhappy as to deceive himself in this, to imagine he keeps that
   unruly faculty in due subjection, when, indeed, he does not, whatever
   the other part of his life be, his religion is vain; the government of
   the tongue being a most material restraint which virtue lays us under:
   without it, no man can be truly religious.

   In treating upon this subject, I will consider,

   First, What is the general vice, or fault, here referred to: Or, what
   disposition in men is supposed in moral reflections and precepts
   concerning "bridling the tongue,"

   Secondly, When it may be said of anyone, that he has a due government
   over himself in this respect.

   I. Now, the fault referred to, and the disposition supposed in precepts
   and reflections concerning the government of the tongue, is not evil
   speaking from malice, nor lying of bearing false witness from indirect
   selfish designs. The disposition to these, and the actual vices
   themselves all come under other subjects. The tongue may be employed
   about, and made to serve all the purposes of vice, in tempting and
   deceiving, in perjury and injustice. But the thing here supposed and
   referred, to is talkativeness; a disposition to be talking, abstracted
   from the consideration of what is to be said; with very little or no
   regard to, or thought of doing, either good, or harm. And let not any
   imagine this to be a slight matter, and that it deserves not to have so
   great weight laid upon it, till he has considered what evil is implied
   in it, and the bad effects which follow from it. It is, perhaps, true,
   that they who are addicted to this folly, would choose to confine
   themselves to trifles and indifferent subjects, and so intend only to
   be guilty of being-impertinent; but as they cannot go on forever
   talking of nothing, as common matters will not afford a sufficient fund
   for perpetual continued discourse, when subjects of this kind are
   exhausted, they will go on to defamation, scandal, divulging of
   secrets, their own secrets as well as those of others: any thing rather
   than be silent. They are plainly hurried on, in the heat of their talk,
   to say quite different things from what they first intended, and which
   they afterwards wish unsaid; or improper things, which they had no
   other end in saying, but only to afford employment to their tongue. And
   if these people expect to be heard and regarded, for there are some
   content merely with talking, they will invent to engage your attention;
   and, when they have heard the least imperfect hint of an affair, they
   will, out of their own head, add the circumstances of time and place,
   and other matters, to make out their story, and give the appearance of
   probability to it; not that they have any concern about being believed,
   otherwise than as a means of being heard. The thing is, to engage your
   attention; to take you up wholly for the present time: what reflections
   will be made afterwards, is in truth the least of their thoughts. And
   further, when persons, who indulge themselves in these liberties of the
   tongue, are in any degree offended with another, as little disgusts and
   misunderstandings will be, they allow themselves to defame and revile
   such a one without any moderation or bounds; though the offence is so
   very slight, that they themselves would, not do, nor perhaps wish, him
   an injury in any other way. And in this case the scandal and revilings
   are chiefly owing to talkativeness, and not bridling their tongue; and
   so come under our present subject. The least occasion in the world will
   make the humor break out in this particular way, or in another. It is
   like a torrent, which must and will flow; but the least thing
   imaginable will first of all give it either this or another direction,
   turn it into this or that channel: or like a fire, the nature of which,
   when in a heap of combustible matter, is to spread and lay waste all
   around; but any one of a thousand little accidents will occasion it to
   break out first either in this or another particular part.

   The subject then before us, though it does run up into, and can scarce
   be treated as entirely distinct from all others; yet it needs not be so
   much mixed and blended with them as it often is. Every faculty and
   power may be used as the instrument of premeditated vice and
   wickedness, merely as the most proper and effectual means of executing
   such designs. But if a man, from deep malice and desire of revenge,
   should meditate a falsehood, with a settled design to ruin his
   neighbor's reputation, and should, with great coolness and
   deliberation, spread it, nobody would choose to say of such a one, that
   he had no government of his tongue. A man may use the faculty of speech
   as an instrument of false-witness, who yet has so entire a command over
   that faculty, as never to speak but from forethought and cool design.
   Here the crime is injustice and perjury; and, strictly speaking, no
   more belongs to the present subject, than perjury and injustice in any
   other way. But there is such a thing as a disposition to be talking for
   its own sake; from which persons often say any thing, good or bad, of
   others, merely as a subject of discourse, according to the particular
   temper they themselves happen to be in, and to pass away the present
   time. There is likewise to be observed in persons, such a strong and
   eager desire of engaging attention to what they say, that they will
   speak good or evil, truth or otherwise, merely as one or the other
   seems to be most hearkened to: and this, though it is sometimes joined,
   is not the same with the desire of being thought important and men of
   consequence. There is in some such a disposition to be talking, that an
   offence of the slightest kind, and such as would not raise any other
   resentment, yet raises, if I may so speak, the resentment of the
   tongue, puts it into a flame, into the most ungovernable motions. This
   outrage, when the person it respects is present, we distinguish in the
   lower rank of people by a peculiar term: and let it be observed, that
   though the decencies of behaviour are a little kept, the same outrage
   and virulence, indulged when he is absent, is an offence of the same
   kind. But, not to distinguish any further in this manner; men run into
   faults arid follies, which cannot so properly be referred to any one
   general head as this, that they have not a due government over their
   tongue.

   And this unrestrained volubility, and wantonness of speech is the
   occasion of numberless evils and vexations in life. It begets
   resentment in him who is the subject of it; sows the seed of strife and
   dissension amongst others; and inflames little disgusts and offences,
   which, if let alone, would wear away of themselves. It is often of as
   bad effect upon the good name of others, as deep envy or malice: and,
   to say the least of it in this respect, it destroys and perverts a
   certain equity, of the utmost importance to society to be observed;
   namely, that praise: and dispraise, a good or bad character, should
   always be bestowed according to desert. -- The tongue, used in such a
   licentious manner, is like a sword in the hand of a madman; it is
   employed at random, it can scarce possibly do any good, and, for the
   most part, does a world of mischief; and implies not only great folly,
   and a trifling spirit, but great viciousness of mind, great
   indifference to truth and falsity, and to the reputation, welfare, and
   good of others. So much reason is there for what St James says of the
   tongue, "It is a fire, a world of iniquity; it defileth the whole body,
   setteth on fire the course of nature, and is itself set on fire of
   hell." [14] This is the faculty or disposition which we are required to
   keep a guard upon; these are the vices and follies it runs into when
   not kept under due restraint.

   II. Wherein the due government of the tongue consists, or when it may
   be said of anyone, in a moral and religious sense, that "he bridleth
   his tongue," I come now to consider.

   The due and proper use of any natural faculty or power, is to be judged
   of by the end and design for which it was given us. The chief purpose
   for which the faculty of speech was given to man, is plainly that we
   might communicate our thoughts to each other, in order to carry on the
   affairs of the world; for business, and for our improvement in
   knowledge and learning. But the good Author of our nature designed us
   not only necessaries, but likewise enjoyment and satisfaction, in that
   being he hath graciously given, and in that condition of life he hath
   placed us in. There are secondary uses of our faculties: they
   administer to delight, as well as to necessity; and as they are equally
   adapted to both, there is no doubt but he intended them for our
   gratification, as well as for the support and continuance of our being.
   The secondary use of speech is to please and be entertaining to each
   other in conversation. This is in every respect allowable and right; it
   unites men closer in alliances; and friendships; gives us a fellow
   feeling of the prosperity and unhappiness of each other; and is, in
   several respects, serviceable to virtue, and to promote good behaviour
   in the world. And provided there be not too much time spent in it, if
   it were considered only in the way of gratification and delight, men
   must have strange notions of God and of religion to think that he can
   be offended with it, or that it is in any way inconsistent with the
   strictest virtue. But the truth is; such sort of conversation, though
   it has no particular good tendency, yet it has a general good one; it
   is social and friendly, and tends to promote humanity, good nature, and
   civility.

   As to the end use, so likewise the abuse of speech, relates to the one
   or other of these; either to business or to conversation. As to the
   former, deceit in the management of business and affairs, does not
   properly belong to the subject now before us; though one may just
   mention that multitude, that endless number of words, with which
   business is perplexed, when a much fewer would, as it should seem
   better serve the purpose; but this must be left to those who understand
   the matter. The governance of the tongue, considered as a subject of
   itself, relates chiefly to conversation; to that kind of discourse
   which usually fills up time spent in friendly meetings, and visits of
   civility. And the danger is, lest persons entertain themselves and
   others at the expense of their wisdom and their virtue, and to the
   injury or offence of their neighbor. If they will observe and keep
   clear of these, they may be as free, and easy, and unreserved, as they
   can desire.

   The cautions to be given for avoiding these dangers, and to render
   conversation innocent and agreeable, fall under the following
   particulars: silence; talking of indifferent things; and, which makes
   up too great a part of conversation, giving of characters, speaking
   evil or well of others.

   The wise man observes, that "there is time to speak and a time to keep
   silence." One meets with people in the world, who seem never to have
   made the last of these observations. And yet these great talkers do not
   at all speak from their having any thing to say, as every sentence
   shows, but only from their inclination to be talking. Their
   conversation is merely an exercise of the tongue; no other human
   faculty has any share in it. It is strange these persons can help
   reflecting, that unless they have in truth a superior capacity, and are
   in an extraordinary manner furnished for conversation; if they are
   entertaining, it is at their own expense. It is possible that it should
   never come into people's thoughts to suspect whether or no it be to
   their advantage, to show so very much of themselves? "O that you hold
   your peace, and it should be you wisdom." [15] Remember likewise, there
   are persons who love fewer words, an inoffensive sort of people, who
   deserve some regard, though of too still and composed tempers for you.
   Of this number was the son of Sirach; for he plainly speaks from
   experience, when he says, "As the hills of sand are to the steps of the
   aged, so is one of many words to a quiet man." But one would think it
   should be obvious to every one, that when they are in company with
   their superiors of any kind, in years, knowledge, and experience; when
   proper and useful subjects are discoursed of, which they cannot bear a
   part in; that these are times for silence; when they should learn to
   bear, and be attentive, at least in their turn. It is indeed a very
   unhappy way these people are in: they in a manner cut themselves out
   from all advantage of conversation, except that of being entertained
   with their own talk; their business in coming into company not being at
   all to be informed, to hear, to learn, but to display themselves, or
   rather to exert their faculty, and talk without any design at all. And
   if we consider conversation as an entertainment, as somewhat to unbend
   the mind, as a diversion from the cares, the business, and the sorrows
   of life; it is of the very nature of it, that the discourse be mutual.
   This, I say, is implied in the very notion of what we distinguish by
   conversation, or being in company. Attention to the continued discourse
   of one alone grows more painful often, than the cares and business we
   come to be diverted from. He, therefore, who imposes this upon us, is
   guilty of a double offence; arbitrarily enjoining silence upon all the
   rest, and likewise obliging them to this painful attention.

   I am sensible these things are apt to be passed over, as too little to
   come into a serious discourse; but, in reality, men are obliged, even
   in point of morality and virtue, to observe all the decencies of
   behaviour. The greatest evils in life have had their rise from
   somewhat, which was thought of too little importance to be attended to.
   And as to the matter we are now upon, it is absolutely necessary to be
   considered. For if people will not maintain a due government over
   themselves, in regarding proper times and seasons for silence, but will
   be talking, they certainly, whether they design it or not at first,
   will go on to scandal and evil speaking, and divulging secrets.

   If it were needful to say any thing further to persuade men to learn
   this lesson of silence, one might put them in mind, how insignificant
   they render themselves by this excessive talkativeness: insomuch, that
   if they do chance to say any thing which deserves to be attended to and
   regarded, it is lost in the variety and abundance which they utter of
   another sort.

   The occasions of silence then are obvious, and one would think should
   be easily distinguished by every body: namely, when a man has nothing
   to say, or nothing, but what is better unsaid: better, either in regard
   to the particular persons he is present with; or from its being an
   interruption to conversation itself; or to conversation of a more
   agreeable kind; or better, lastly, with regard to himself. I will end
   this particular with two reflections of the wise man; one of which, in
   the strongest manner, exposes the ridiculous part of this
   licentiousness of the tongue; and the other, the great danger and
   viciousness of it. "When he that is a fool walketh by the way side, his
   wisdom faileth him, and he saith to every one that he is a fool." [16]
   The other is, "In the multitude of words there wanteth not sin." [17]

   As to the government of the tongue, in respect to talking upon
   indifferent subjects: After what has been said concerning the due
   government of it in respect to the occasions and times for silence,
   there is little more necessary, than only to caution men to be fully
   satisfied, that the subjects are indeed of an indifferent nature; and
   not to spend too much time in conversation of this kind. But persons
   must be sure to take heed, that the subject of their discourse be at
   least of an indifferent nature: that it be no way offensive to virtue,
   religion, or good manners; that it be not of a licentious, dissolute
   sort, this leaving always ill impressions upon the mind; that it be no
   way injurious or vexatious to others; and that too much time be not
   spent this way, to the neglect of those duties and offices of life
   which belong to their station and condition in the world. However,
   though there is not any necessity, that men should aim at being
   important and weighty in every sentence they speak: yet, since useful
   subject, at least of some kinds, are as entertaining as others, a wise
   man even when he desires to unbend his mind from business, would choose
   that the conversation might turn upon somewhat instructive.

   The last thing is, the government of the tongue as relating to
   discourse of the affairs of others, and giving of characters. These are
   in a manner the same. And one can scarce call it an indifferent
   subject, because discourse upon it almost perpetually runs into
   somewhat criminal.

   And first of all, it were very much to be wished that this did not take
   up so great a part of conversation; because it is indeed a subject of a
   dangerous nature. Let anyone consider the various interests,
   competitions, and little misunderstandings which arise among men, and
   he will soon see; that he is not unprejudiced and impartial; that he is
   not, as I may speak, neutral enough, to trust himself with talking of
   the character and concerns of his neighbor, in a free, careless, and
   unreserved manner. There is perpetually, and often it is not attended
   to, a rivalship amongst people of one kind or another, in respect to
   wit, beauty, learning, fortune; and that one thing will insensibly
   influence them to speak to the disadvantage of others, even where there
   is no formed malice or design. Since therefore it is so hard to enter
   into this subject without offending, the first thing to be observed is,
   that people should learn to decline it; to get over that strong
   inclination most have to be talking of the concerns and behaviour of
   their neighbor.

   But since it is impossible that this subject should be wholly excluded
   conversation, and since it is necessary that the characters of men
   should be known; the next thing is, that it is a matter of importance
   what is said; and therefore, that we should be religiously scrupulous
   and exact to say nothing, either good or bad, but what is true. I put
   it thus, because it is in reality of as great importance to the good of
   society, that the characters of bad men should be known, as that the
   characters of good men should. People who are given to scandal and
   detraction, may indeed make an ill use of this observation; but truths,
   which are of service towards regulating our conduct, are not to be
   disowned, or even concealed, because a bad use may be made of them.
   This, however, would be effectually prevented, if these two things were
   attended to. First, That though it is equally of bad consequence to
   society, that men should have either good or ill characters which they
   do not deserve; yet, when you say somewhat good of a man which he does
   not deserve there is no wrong done him in particular; whereas, when you
   say evil of a man which he does not deserve, here is a direct formal
   injury, a real piece of injustice done him. This therefore makes a wide
   difference; and gives us, in point of virtue, much greater latitude in
   speaking well, than ill, of others. Secondly, A good man is friendly to
   his fellow creatures, and a lover of mankind, and so will, upon every
   occasion; and often without any, say all the good he can of every body:
   but, so far as he is a good man, will never be disposed to speak evil
   of any, unless there be some other reason. for it, besides barely that
   it is true. If he be charged with having given an ill character, he
   will scarce think it a sufficient justification of himself to say it
   was a true one, unless he can also give some farther account how he
   came to do so: a just indignation against particular instances of
   villany, where they are great and scandalous; or to prevent an innocent
   man from being deceived and betrayed, when he has great trust and
   confidence in one who does not deserve it. Justice must be done to
   every part of a subject, when we are considering it. If there be a man
   who bears a fair character in the world, whom yet we know to be without
   faith or honesty, to be really an ill man; it must be allowed in
   general, that we shall do a piece of service to society, by letting
   such a one's true character be known. This is no more than what we have
   an instance of in our Saviour himself, [18] though he was mild and
   gentle beyond example. However, no words can express too strongly the
   caution which should be used in such a case as this.

   Upon the whole matter: If people would observe the obvious occasions of
   silence; if they would subdue the inclination to tale-bearing, and that
   eager desire to engage attention, which is an original disease in some
   minds; they would be in little danger of offending with their tongue,
   and would, in a moral and religious sense, have due government over it.

   I will conclude with some precepts and reflections of the Son of Sirach
   upon this subject. "Be swift to hear; and, if thou hast understanding,
   answer thy neighbor; if not, lay thy hand upon thy mouth. Honor and
   shame is in talk. A man of an ill tongue is dangerous in his city; and
   he that is rash in his talk shall be hated. A wise man will hold his
   tongue, till he see opportunity; but a babbler and a fool will regard
   no time. He that useth many words shall be abhorred; and he that taketh
   to himself authority therein, shall be hated. A back-biting tongue hath
   disquieted many; strong cities hath it pulled down, and overthrown the
   houses of great men. The tongue of a man is his fall; but if thou love
   to hear, thou shalt receive understanding."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [14] Chap. iii. 6.

   [15] Job xiii..

   [16] Eccles. x. 3.

   [17] Prov. x. 19.

   [18] Mark xii. 38-40.
     __________________________________________________________________

Sermon V. Upon Compassion -- Rom. xii. 15.

   Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep.

   Every man is to be considered in two capacities, the private and
   public; as designed to pursue his own interest and likewise to
   contribute to the good of others. Whoever will consider, may see, that
   in general there is no contrariety between these; but that, from the
   original constitution of man, and the circumstances he is placed in,
   they perfectly coincide, and mutually carry on each other. But, amongst
   the great variety of affections or principles of action in our nature,
   some in their primary intention and design seem to belong to the single
   or private, others to the public or social capacity. The affections
   required in the text are of the latter sort. When we rejoice in the
   prosperity of others, and compassionate their distresses, we, as it
   were, substitute them for ourselves, their interest for our own; and
   have the same kind of pleasure in their prosperity, and sorrow in their
   distress, as we have from reflection upon our own. Now, there is
   nothing strange, or unaccountable, in our being thus carried out, and
   affected towards the interests of others. For if there be any appetite,
   or any inward principle besides self-love; why may there not be an
   affection to the good of our fellow creatures, and delight from that
   affection being gratified, and uneasiness from things going contrary to
   it? [19]

   Of these two, delight in the prosperity of others and compassion for
   their distresses, the last is felt much more generally than the former.
   Though men do not universally rejoice with all whom they see rejoice,
   yet, accidental obstacles removed, they naturally compassionate all in
   some degree whom they see in distress; so far as they have any real
   perception or sense of that distress: Insomuch that words expressing
   this latter, pity, compassion, frequently occur whereas we have scarce
   any single one, by which the former is distinctly expressed.
   Congratulation, indeed, answers condolence: but both these words are
   intended to signify certain forms of civility, rather than any inward,
   sensation, or feeling. This difference, or inequality, is so
   remarkable, that we plainly consider compassion as itself an original,
   distinct, particular affection in human nature; whereas to rejoice in
   the good of others, is only a consequence, of the general affection of
   love and good will to them. The reason and account of which matter is
   this: When a man has obtained any particular advantage or felicity; his
   end is gained; and he does not in that particular want the assistance
   of another: There was, therefore, no need of a distinct affection
   towards the felicity of another already obtained; neither would such
   affection directly carry him on to do good to that person: Whereas, men
   in distress want assistance; and compassion leads us directly to assist
   them. The object of the former is the present felicity of another; the
   object of the latter is the present misery of another. It is easy to
   see, that the latter wants a particular affection for its relief, and
   that the former does not want one, because it does not want assistance.
   And, on supposition of a distinct affection in both cases, the one must
   rest in the exercise of itself, having nothing further to gain; the
   other does not rest in itself, but carries us on to assist the
   distressed.

   But, supposing these affections natural to the mind, particularly the
   last, "Has not each man troubles enough of his own? must he indulge an
   affection which appropriates to himself those of others? which leads
   him to contract the least desirable of all friendships, friendships
   with the unfortunate? Must we invert the known rule of prudence, and
   choose to associate ourselves with the distressed? Or, allowing that we
   ought, so far as it is in our power, to relieve them, yet is it not
   better to do this from reason and duly? Does not passion and affection
   of every kind perpetually mislead us? Nay, is not passion and affection
   itself a weakness, and what a perfect being must be entirely free from?
   Perhaps so: but it is mankind I am speaking of; imperfect creatures,
   and who naturally, and from the condition we are placed in, necessarily
   depend upon each other. With respect to such creatures, it would be
   found of as bad consequence to eradicate all natural affections, as to
   be entirely governed by them. This would almost sink us to the
   condition of brutes; and that would leave us without a sufficient
   principle of action. Reason alone, whatever anyone may wish, is not, in
   reality, a sufficient motive of virtue in such a creature as man; but
   this reason, joined with those affections which God has impressed upon
   his heart. And when these are allowed scope to exercise themselves, but
   under strict government and direction of reason; then it is we act
   suitably to our nature, and to the circumstances God has placed us in.
   Neither is affection itself at all a weakness; nor does it argue
   defect, any otherwise than as our senses and appetites do; they belong
   to our condition of nature, and are what we cannot be without. God
   Almighty is, to be sure, unmoved by passion or appetite, unchanged by
   affection; but then it is to be added, that he neither sees, nor hears,
   nor perceives things by any senses like ours, but in a manner
   infinitely more perfect. Now, as it is an absurdity almost too gross to
   be mentioned, for a man to endeavor to get rid of his senses, because
   the Supreme Being discerns things more perfectly without them; it is as
   real, though not so obvious an absurdity, to endeavor to eradicate the
   passions he has given us, because He is without them. For, since our
   passions are as really a part of our constitution as our senses; since
   the former as really belong to our condition, of nature as the latter;
   to get rid of either, is equally a violation of, and breaking in upon,
   that nature and constitution he has given us. Both our senses and our
   passions are a supply to the imperfection of our nature: thus they
   show, that we are such sort of creatures, as to stand in need of those
   helps which higher orders of creatures do not. But it is not the
   supply, but the deficiency; as it is not a remedy, but a disease which
   is the imperfection. However, our appetites, passions, senses, no way
   imply disease; nor, indeed, do they imply deficiency or imperfection of
   any sort; but only this, that the constitution of nature, according to
   which God has made us, is such as to require them. And it is so far
   from being true, that a wise man must entirely suppress compassion, and
   all fellow-feeling for others, as a weakness, and trust to reason alone
   to teach and enforce upon him, the practice of the several charities we
   owe to our kind; that, on the contrary, even the bare exercise of such
   affections would itself be for the good and happiness of the world; and
   the imperfection of the higher principles of reason and religion . I in
   man, the little influence they have upon our practice, and the strength
   and prevalency of contrary ones, plainly require these affections to be
   a restraint upon these latter, and a supply to the deficiencies of the
   former.

   First, The very exercise itself of these affections, in a just and
   reasonable manner and degree, would, upon the whole, increase the
   satisfactions, and lessen the miseries of life.

   It is the tendency and business of virtue and religion to procure, as
   much as may be, universal good-will: trust, and friendship, amongst
   mankind. If this could be brought to obtain; and each man enjoyed the
   happiness of others, as everyone does that of a friend; and looked upon
   the success and prosperity of his neighbor, as every one does upon that
   of his children and family; it is too manifest to be insisted upon, how
   much the enjoyments of life would be increased. There would be so much
   happiness introduced into the world, without any deduction or
   inconvenience from it, in proportion as the precept of rejoicing with
   those who rejoice, was universally obeyed. Our Saviour has owned this
   good affection as belonging to our nature, in the parable of the lost
   sheep; and does not think it to the disadvantage of a perfect state, to
   represent its happiness as capab1e of increase, from reflection upon
   that of others.

   But since, in such a creature as man, compassion, or sorrow, for the
   distress of others, seems so far necessarily connected with joy in
   their prosperity, as that whoever rejoices in one must unavoidably
   compassionate the other; there cannot be that delight or satisfaction,
   which appears to be so considerable, without the inconveniences,
   whatever they are, of compassion.

   However, without considering this connexion, there is no doubt but that
   more good than evil, more delight than sorrow, arises from compassion
   itself; there being so many things which balance the sorrow of it.
   There is, first, the relief which the distressed feel from this
   affection in others towards them. There is likewise the additional
   misery which they would feel, from the reflection that no one
   commiserated their case. It is indeed true, that any disposition;
   prevailing beyond a certain degree, becomes somewhat wrong; and we have
   ways of speaking, which, though they do not directly express that
   excess, yet always lead our thoughts to it, and give us the notion of
   it. Thus, when mention is made of delight in being pitied, this always
   conveys to our mind the notion of somewhat which is really a weakness:
   the manner of speaking, I say, implies a certain weakness and
   feebleness of mind, which is and ought to be disapproved. But men of
   the greatest fortitude would in distress feel uneasiness from knowing,
   that no person in the world had any sort of compassion or real concern
   for them; and in some cases, especially when the temper is, enfeebled
   by sickness, or any long and great distress, doubtless would feel a
   kind of relief even, from the helpless good-will and ineffectual
   assistances of those about them. Over against the sorrow of compassion
   is likewise to be set a peculiar calm kind of satisfaction, which
   accompanies it, unless in cases where the distress of another is by
   some means brought home to ourselves, as to become in a manner our own;
   or when from weakness of mind the affection rises too high, which ought
   to be corrupted. This tranquillity, or, calm satisfaction, proceeds
   partly from consciousness of a right affection and temper of mind, and
   partly from a sense of our own freedom from the misery we
   compassionate. This last may possibly appear to some at first sight
   faulty; but it really is not so. It is the same with that positive
   enjoyment, which sudden ease from pain for the present affords, arising
   from a real sense of misery, joined with a sense of our freedom from
   it; which in all cases must afford some degree of satisfaction.

   To these things must be added the observation, which respects both the
   affections we are considering, that they who have got over all fellow
   feeling for others, have withal contracted a certain callousness of
   heart, which renders them insensible to most other satisfactions, but
   those of the grossest kind.

   Secondly, Without the exercise of these affections, men would certainly
   be much more wanting in the offices of charity they owe to each other,
   and likewise more cruel and injurious, than they are at present.

   The private interest of the individual would not be sufficiently
   provided for by reasonable and cool self-love alone: therefore the
   appetites and passions are placed within, as a guard and further
   security, without which it would not be taken due care of. It is
   manifest our life would be neglected, were it not for the calls of
   hunger and thirst, and weariness; not withstanding that without them
   reason would assure us, that the recruits of food and sleep are the
   necessary means of our preservation. It is therefore absurd to imagine,
   that, without affection, the same reason alone would be more effectual
   to engage us to perform the duties we owe to our fellow-creatures. One
   of this make would be as defective, as much wanting, considered with
   respect to society, as one of the former make would be defective, or
   wanting, considered as an individual; or in his private capacity. Is it
   possible any can in earnest think, that a public spirit, i. e. a
   settled reasonable principle of benevolence to mankind, is so prevalent
   and strong in the species, as that we may venture to throw off the
   under affections, which are its assistants, carry it forward, and mark
   out particular courses for it; family, friends, neighborhood; the
   distressed, our country? The common joys and the common sorrows, which
   belong to these relations and circumstances, are as plainly useful to
   society, as the pain and pleasure: belonging to hunger, thirst, and
   weariness, are of service to the individual. In defect of that higher
   principle of reason, compassion is often the only way by which the
   indigent can have access to us: and therefore to eradicate this though
   it is not indeed formally to deny that assistance which is their due;
   yet it is to cut them off from that which is too frequently their only
   way of obtaining it. And as for those who have shut up this door
   against the complaints of the miserable, and conquered this affection
   in themselves; even these persons will be under great restraints from
   the same affection in others. Thus, a man who has himself no sense of
   injustice, cruelty, oppression, will be kept from running the utmost
   lengths of wickedness, by fear of that detestation, and even resentment
   of inhumanity; in many particular instances of it, which compassion for
   the object towards whom such inhumanity is exercised, excites in the
   bulk of mankind. And this is frequently the chief danger, and the chief
   restraint, which tyrants and the great oppressors of the world feel.

   In general, experience will show, that as want of natural appetite to
   food, supposes and proceeds from some bodily disease; so the apathy the
   Stoics talk of, as much supposes, or is accompanied with somewhat amiss
   in the moral character, in that which is the health of the mind. Those
   who formerly aimed at this upon the foot of philosophy, appear to have
   had better success in eradicating the affections of tenderness and
   compassion, than they had with the passions of envy, pride, and
   resentment; these latter, at best, were but concealed, and that
   imperfectly too. How far this observation may be extended to such as
   endeavor to suppress the natural impulses of their affections, in order
   to form themselves for business and the world, I shall not determine.
   But, there does not appear any capacity or relation to be named in
   which men ought to be entirely deaf to the calls of affection, unless
   the judicial one is to be excepted.

   And as to those who are commonly called the men of pleasure, it is
   manifest that the reason they set up for hardness of heart, is to avoid
   being interrupted in their course, by the ruin and misery they are the
   authors of: neither are persons of this character always the most free
   from the impotencies of envy and resentment. What may men at last bring
   themselves to, by suppressing their passions and affections of one
   kind, and leaving those of the other in their full strength? But surely
   it might be expected, that persons who make pleasure their study and
   their business, if they understood what they profess, would reflect,
   how many of the entertainments of life, how many of those kind of
   amusements which seem peculiarly to belong to men of leisure and
   education, they become insensible to by this acquired hardness of
   heart.

   I shall close these reflections with barely mentioning the behaviour of
   that divine Person, who was the example of all perfection in human
   nature, as represented in the gospels mourning, and even, in a literal
   sense, weeping over the distresses of his creatures.

   The observation already made, that, of the two affections mentioned in
   the text, the latter exerts itself much more than the former; that;
   from the original constitution of human nature, we much more generally
   and sensibly compassionate the distressed, than rejoice with the
   prosperous, requires to be particularly considered. This observation,
   therefore, with the reflections which arise out of it, and which it
   leads our thoughts to, shall be the subject of another discourse.

   For the conclusion of this, let me just take notice of the danger of
   over great refinements; of going besides or beyond the plain, obvious,
   first appearances of things, upon the subject of morals and religion.
   The least observation will show, how little the generality of men are
   capable of speculations. Therefore morality and religion must be
   somewhat plain and easy to be understood: it must appeal to what we
   call plain common sense, as distinguished from superior capacity and
   improvement, because it appeals to mankind. Persons of superior
   capacity and improvement have; often fallen into errors, which no one
   of mere common understanding could. Is it possible that one of this
   latter character could ever of himself have thought, that here was
   absolutely no such thing in mankind as affection to the good of others;
   suppose of parents, to their children? or that what he felt upon seeing
   a friend in distress, was only fear for himself? or, upon supposition
   of the affections of kindness and compassion, that it was the business
   of wisdom and virtue, to set him about extirpating then as fast as he
   could? And yet each of these manifest contradictions to nature has been
   laid down by men of speculation, as a discovery in moral philosophy;
   which they, it seems, have found out through all the specious
   appearances to the contrary.

   This reflection may be extended further. The extravagancies of
   enthusiasm and superstition do not at all lie in the road of common
   sense; and, therefore, so far as they are original mistakes, must be
   owing to going beside or beyond it. Now, since inquiry and examination
   can relate only to things so obscure and uncertain as to stand in need
   of it, and to persons who are capable of it, the proper advice to be
   given to plain honest men, to secure them from the extremes both of
   superstition and irreligion is that of the son of Sirach: In every good
   work trust thy soul; for this is the keeping of the commandment. [20]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [19] There being manifestly this appearance of men's substituting
   others for themselves, and being carried out and affected towards them
   as towards themselves; some persons, who have a system which excludes
   every affection of this sort, have taken a pleasant method to solve it;
   and tell you, it is not another you are at all concerned about, but
   your self only, when you feel the affection called compassion: i. e.
   Here is a plain matter of fact, which men cannot reconcile with the
   general account they think fit to give of things; they, therefore,
   instead of that manifest fact, substitute another, which is
   reconcileable to their own scheme. For, does not every body by
   compassion mean, an affection the object of which is another in
   distress? Instead of this, but designing to have it mistaken for this,
   they speak of, an affection, or passion, the object of which is
   ourselves; or danger to ourselves. Hobbs defines pity, imagination, or
   fiction, of future calamity to ourselves, proceeding from the sense (he
   means sight, or knowledge) of another man's calamity. Thus, fear and
   compassion would be the same idea, and a fearful and a compassionate
   man the same character; which every one immediately sees are totally
   different. Further, to those who give any scope to their affections,
   there is no perception, or inward feeling, more universal than this;
   that one who has been merciful and compassionate throughout the course
   of his behaviour, should himself be treated with kindness, if he
   happens to fall into circumstances of distress. Is fear, then, or
   cowardice, so great a recommendation to the favor of the bulk of
   mankind? Or, is it not plain, that mere fearlessness (and therefore,
   not the contrary) is one of the most popular qualifications? This shows
   that mankind are not affected towards compassion as fear, but as
   somewhat totally different. Nothing would more expose such accounts as
   these of the affections which are favorable and friendly to our
   fellow-creatures, than to substitute the definitions which this author
   and others who follow his steps, give of such affections, instead of
   the words by which they are commonly expressed. Hobbs, after having
   laid down, that pity, or compassion, is only fear for ourselves, goes
   on to explain the reason why we pity our friends in distress more, than
   others. Now, substitute the definition instead of the word pity in this
   place, and the inquiry will be, why we fear our friends? &c. which
   words (since he really does not mean why we are afraid of them) make no
   question, or sentence at all. So that common language, the words to
   compassionate, to pity, cannot be accommodated to his account of
   compassion. The very joining of the words to pity our friends, is a
   direct contradiction to his definition of pity: Because, those words,
   so joined, necessarily express, that our friends are the objects of the
   passion; whereas his definition of it asserts, that our selves (or
   danger to ourselves) are the only objects of it. He might, indeed, have
   avoided this absurdity, by plainly saying what he is going to account
   for; namely, why the sight of the innocent, or of our friends in
   distress, raises greater fear for ourselves than the sight of other
   persons in distress. But had he put the thing thus plainly, the fact
   itself would have been doubted; that the sight of our friends in
   distress, raises in us greater fear for ourselves, than the sight of
   others in distress. And, in the next place, it would immediately have
   occurred to every one, that the fact now mentioned, which, at least, is
   doubtful, whether true or false, was not the same with this fact, which
   nobody ever doubted, that the sight of our friends in distress raises
   in us greater compassion than the sight of others in distress, every
   one, I say, would have seen that these are not the same, but two
   different inquiries; and; consequently, that fear and compassion are
   not the same. Suppose a person to be in real danger, and, by some means
   or other, to have forgot it, any trifling accident, any sound might
   alarm him, recall the danger to his remembrance, and renew his fear.
   But it is almost too grossly ridiculous (though it is to show an
   absurdity) to speak of that sound, or accident, as an object of
   compassion; and yet, according to Mr Hobbs, our greatest friend in
   distress is no more to us, no more the object of compassion, or of any
   affection in our heart. Neither the one nor the other raises any
   emotion in our mind, but only the thoughts of our liableness to
   calamity, and the fear of it; and both equally do this. It is fit such
   sorts of accounts of human nature should be shown to be what they
   really are, because there is raised upon them a general scheme, which
   undermines the whole foundation of common justice and honesty. See
   HOBBS of Hum. Nat. c. 9. sec. 10. There are often three distinct
   perceptions, or inward feelings, upon sight of persons in distress:
   real sorrow and concern for the misery of our fellow creatures; some
   degree of satisfaction, from a consciousness of our freedom from that
   misery: and, as the mind passes on from one thing to another, it is not
   unnatural, from such an occasion, to reflect upon our own liableness to
   the same or other calamities. The two last frequently accompany the
   first, but it is the first only which is properly compassion, of which
   the distressed are the objects, and which directly carries us with
   calmness and thought to their assistance. Anyone of these, from various
   and complicated reasons, may, in particular cases, prevail over the
   other two; and there are, I suppose, instances where the bare sight of
   distress, without our feeling any compassion for it, may be the
   occasion of either or both of the two latter perceptions. One might
   add, that if there be really any such thing as the fiction or
   imagination of danger to ourselves, from sight of the miseries of
   others, which Hobbs speaks of, and which he has absurdly mistaken for
   the whole of compassion; if there be any thing of this sort common to
   mankind, distinct from the reflection of reason, it would be a most
   remarkable instance of what was furthest from his thoughts, namely, of
   a mutual sympathy between each particular of the species, a
   fellow-feeling common to mankind. It would not, indeed; be an example
   of our substituting others for ourselves, but it would be an example of
   our substituting ourselves for others. And as it would not be an
   instance of benevolence, so neither would it be any instance of
   self-love; for this phantom of danger to ourselves, naturally rising to
   view upon sight of the distresses of others, would be no more an
   instance of love to ourselves, than the pain of hunger is.

   [20] Eccles. xxxii.
     __________________________________________________________________

Sermon VI. Upon Compassion -- Rom. xii. 15.

   Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep.

   There is a much more exact correspondence between the natural and moral
   world, than we are apt to take notice of. The inward frame of man does,
   in a peculiar manner, answer to the external condition and
   circumstances of life in which he is placed. This is a particular
   instance of that general observation of the son of Sirach, All things
   are double one against another, and God hath made nothing imperfect.
   [21] The several passions and affections in the heart of man, compared
   with the circumstances of life in which he is placed, afford, to such
   as will attend to them, as certain instances of final causes, as any
   whatever which are more commonly alleged for such: since those
   affections lead him to a certain determinate course of action suitable
   to those circumstances; as (for instance) compassion to relieve the
   distressed. And as all observations of final causes, drawn from the
   principle of action in the heart of man, compared with the condition he
   is placed in, serve all the good uses which instances of final causes
   in the material world about us do; and both these are equally proofs of
   wisdom and design in the Author of nature: so the former serve to
   further good purposes; they show us what course of life we are made
   for, what is our duty, and, in a peculiar manner, enforce upon us the
   practice of it.

   Suppose we are capable of happiness and of misery in degrees equally
   intense and extreme, yet we are capable of the latter for a much longer
   time, beyond all comparison. We see men in the tortures of pain for
   hours, days, and, excepting the short suspensions of sleep, for months
   together, without intermission; to which no enjoyments of life do, in
   degree, and continuance, bear any sort of proportion. And such is our
   make, and that of the world about us, that any thing may become the
   instrument of pain and sorrow to us. Thus, almost any one man is
   capable of doing mischief to any other, though he may not he capable of
   doing him good; and if he be capable of doing him some good, he is
   capable of doing him more evil. And it is, in numberless cases, much
   more in our power to lessen the miseries of others, than to promote
   their positive happiness, any otherwise than as the former often
   includes the latter; ease from misery occasioning, for some time, the
   greatest positive enjoyment. This constitution of nature, namely, that
   it is so much more in our power to occasion, and likewise to lessen
   misery, than to promote positive happiness, plainly required a
   particular affection, to hinder us from abusing, and to incline us to
   make a right use of the former powers, i. e. the powers both to
   occasion and to lessen misery; over and above what was necessary to
   induce us to make aright use of the latter power, that of promoting
   positive happiness. The power we have over the misery of our fellow
   creatures, to occasion or lessen it, being a more important trust than
   the power we have of promoting their positive happiness: the former
   requires, and has a further, an additional security and guard against
   its being violated, beyond, and over and above what the latter has. The
   social nature of man, and general good will to his species, equally
   prevent him from doing evil, incline him to relieve the distressed, and
   to promote the positive happiness of his fellow creatures: but
   compassion only restrains from the first, and carries him to the
   second; it hath nothing to do with the third.

   The final causes then of compassion are, to prevent and to relieve
   misery.

   As to the former: this affection may plainly be a restraint upon
   resentment, envy, unreasonable self-love; that is, upon all the
   principles from which men do evil to one another. Let us instance only
   in resentment. It seldom happens, in regulated societies, that men have
   an enemy so entirely in their, power, as to be able to satiate their
   resentment with safety. But if we were to put this case, it is plainly
   supposable, that a person might bring his enemy into such a condition,
   as, from being the object of anger or rage, to become an object of
   compassion, even to himself, though the most malicious man in the
   world: and in this case compassion would stop him, if he could stop
   with safety, from pursuing his revenge any farther. But since nature
   has placed within us more powerful restraints to prevent mischief; and
   since the final cause of compassion is much more to relieve misery, let
   us, go on to the consideration of it in this view.

   As this world was not intended to be a state of any great satisfaction
   or high enjoyment; so neither was it intended to be a mere scene of
   unhappiness and sorrow. Mitigations and reliefs are provided by the
   merciful Author of nature, for most of the afflictions in human life.
   There is kind provision made even against our frailties; as we are
   constituted, that time abundantly abates our sorrows, and begets in us
   that resignment of temper, which ought to have been produced by a
   better cause; a due sense of the authority of God; and our state of
   dependence. This holds in respect to far the greatest part of the evils
   of life; I suppose, in some degree, as to pain and sickness. Now, this
   part of the constitution or make of man, considered as some relief to
   misery, and not as provision for positive happiness, is, if I may so
   speak; an instance of nature's compassion for us, and every natural
   remedy or relief to misery, may be considered in the same view.

   But, since, in many cases, it is very much in our power to alleviate
   the miseries of each other; and benevolence, though natural in man to
   man, yet is, in a very low degree, kept down by interest and
   competitions; and men, for the most part, are so engaged in the
   business and pleasures of the world, as to overlook and turn away from,
   objects of misery, which are plainly considered as interruptions to
   them in their way, as intruders upon their business, their gaiety and
   mirth; compassion is an advocate within us in their behalf, to gain the
   unhappy admittance and access, to make their case attended to. If it
   sometimes serves a contrary purpose and makes men industriously turn
   away from the miserable, these are only instances of abuse and
   perversion: for the end for which the affection was given us most
   certainly is, not to make us avoid, but to make us attend to the
   objects of it. And if men would only resolve to allow this much to it,
   let it bring before their view, the view of their mind, the miseries of
   their fellow creatures: let it gain for them that their case be
   considered; I am persuaded it would not fail of gaining more, and that
   very few real objects of charity would pass unrelieved. Pain, and
   sorrow, and misery, have a right to our assistance compassion puts us
   in mind of the debt, and that we owe it to ourselves, as well as to the
   distressed. For to endeavor to get rid of the sorrow of compassion by
   turning from the wretched, when yet it is in our power to relive them,
   is as unnatural as to endeavour to get rid of the pain of hunger by
   keeping out of sight of food. That we can do one with greater success
   than we can the other, is no proof that one is less a violation of
   nature than the other. Compassion is a call, a demand of nature, to
   relieve the unhappy; as hunger is a natural call for food. This
   affection plainly gives the objects of it an additional claim to relief
   and mercy, over and above what our fellow creatures in common have to
   our good will. Liberality and bounty are exceedingly commendable; and a
   particular distinction in such a world as this, where men set
   themselves to contract their heart, and close it to all, interests but
   their own. It is by no means to be opposed to mercy, but always
   accompanies it: the distinction between them is only, that the former
   leads our thoughts to a more promiscuous and undistinguished
   distribution of favors; to those who are not, as well as those who are
   necessitous; whereas the object of compassion is misery. But in the
   comparison, and where there is not a possibility of both, mercy is to
   have the preference: the affection of compassion manifestly leads us to
   this preference. Thus, to relieve the indigent and distressed, to
   single out the unhappy, from whom can be expected no returns, either of
   present entertainment or future service, for the objects of our favors;
   to esteem a man's being friendless as a recommendation; dejection, and
   incapacity of struggling through the world, as a motive for assisting
   him; in a word, to consider these circumstances of disadvantage, which
   are usually thought a sufficient reason for neglect and overlooking a
   person, as a motive for helping him forward: this is the course of
   benevolence, which compassion marks out and directs us to: this is that
   humanity, which is so peculiarly becoming our nature and circumstances
   in this world.

   To these considerations, drawn from the nature of man, must be added
   the reason of the thing itself we are recommending; which accords to
   and shows the same. For, since it is so much more in our power to
   lessen the misery of our fellow-creatures, than to promote their
   positive happiness. In cases where there is an inconsistency, we shall
   be likely to do much more good by setting ourselves to mitigate the
   former, than by endeavoring to promote the latter. Let the competition
   be between the poor and the rich. It is easy, you will say, to see
   which will have the preference. True: but the question is, which ought
   to have the preference? What proportion is there between the happiness
   produced by doing a favor to the indigent, and that produced by doing
   the same favor to one in easy circumstances? It is manifest that the
   addition of a very large estate to the who before had an affluence,
   will in many instances yield him less new enjoyment or satisfaction,
   than any ordinary charity would yield to a necessitous person. So that
   it is not only true that our nature, i. e. the voice of God within us.
   carries us to the exercise of charity and benevolence in the way of
   compassion or mercy, preferably to any other way; but we also
   manifestly discern much more good done by the former; or, if you will
   allow me the expressions, more misery annihilated, and happiness
   created. If charity, and benevolence, and endeavoring to do good to our
   fellow-creatures, be any thing, this observation deserves to be most
   seriously considered by all who have to bestow. And, it holds with
   great exactness, when applied to the several degrees of greater and
   less indigency throughout the various ranks in human life: the
   happiness or good produced not being in proportion to what is bestowed,
   but in proportion to this joined with the need there was of it.

   It may perhaps be expected that upon this subject notice should be
   taken of occasions, circumstances, and characters, which seem at once
   to call forth affections of different sorts. Thus, vice may be thought
   the object both of pity and indignation; folly, of pity and of
   laughter. How far this is strictly true, I shall not inquire; but only
   observe upon the appearance, how much more humane it is to yield and
   give scope to affections, which are most directly in favor of, and
   friendly towards our fellow-creatures; and that there is plainly much
   less danger of being led wrong by these, than by the other.

   But, notwithstanding all that has been said in recommendation of
   compassion, that it is most amiable, most becoming human nature, and
   most useful to the world; yet it must be owned, that every affection,
   as distinct from a principle of reason, may rise too high, and be
   beyond its just proportion. And by means of this one carried too far, a
   man throughout his life is subject to much more uneasiness than belongs
   to his share. And, in particular instances, it may be in such a degree,
   as to incapacitate him from assisting the very person who is the object
   of it. But as there are some, who upon principle set up for suppressing
   this affection itself as weakness, there is also I know not what of
   fashion on this side; and, by some means or other, the whole world
   almost is run into the extremes of insensibility towards the distresses
   of their fellow-creatures; so that general rules and exhortations must
   always be on the other side.

   And now, to go on to the uses we should make of the foregoing
   reflections; the further views they lead us to, and the general temper
   they have a tendency to beget in us. There being that distinct,
   affection implanted in the nature of man, tending to lessen the
   miseries of life, that particular provision made for abating its
   sorrows, more than for increasing its positive happiness, as before
   explained; this may suggest to us, what should be our general aim
   respecting ourselves, in our passage through this world; namely, to
   endeavour chiefly to escape misery, keep free from uneasiness, pain,
   and sorrow, or to get relief and mitigation of them; to propose to
   ourselves peace and tranquillity of mind rather than pursue after high
   enjoyments. This is what the constitution of nature, before explained,
   marks out as the course we should follow, and the end we should aim at.
   To make pleasure, and mirth, and jollity, our business, and be
   constantly hurrying about after some gay amusement, some new
   gratification of sense or appetite, to those who will consider the
   nature of man and our condition in this world, will appear the most
   romantic scheme of life that ever entered into thought. And yet, how
   many are there who go on in this course, without learning better from
   the daily, the hourly disappointments, listlessness, and satiety, which
   accompany this fashionable method of wasting away their days?

   The subject we have been insisting upon would lead us into the same
   kind of reflections, by a different connexion. The miseries of life
   brought home to ourselves by compassion, viewed through this affection,
   considered as the sense by which they are perceived, would beget in us
   that moderation, humility, and soberness of mind, which has been now
   recommended; and which peculiarly belongs to a season of recollection,
   the only purpose of which is to bring us to a just sense of things; to
   recover us out of that forgetfulness of ourselves, and our true state,
   which, it is manifest, far the greatest part of men pass their whole
   life in. Upon this account Solomon says, that it is better to go to the
   house of mourning, than to go to the house of feasting; i. e. it is
   more to a man's advantage to turn his eyes towards objects of distress,
   to recall sometimes to his remembrance the occasions of sorrow, than to
   pass all his days in thoughtless mirth and gaiety. And he represents
   the wise as choosing to frequent the former of these places; to be
   sure, not for its own sake, but because by the sadness of the
   countenance the heart is made better. Everyone observes, how temperate
   and reasonable men are when humbled and brought low by afflictions, in
   comparison of what they are in high prosperity. By this voluntary
   resort to the house of mourning, which is here recommended, we might
   learn all those useful instructions which calamities teach, without
   undergoing them ourselves; and grow wiser and better at a more easy
   rate than men commonly do. The objects themselves, which in that place
   of sorrow lie before our view naturally give us a seriousness and
   attention, check that wantonness which is the growth of prosperity and
   ease, and lead us to reflect upon the deficiencies of human life
   itself; that every man, at his best estate, is altogether vanity. This
   would correct the florid and gaudy prospects and expectations which we
   are too apt to indulge, teach us to lower our notions of happiness and
   enjoyment, bring them down to the reality of things, to what is
   attainable, to what the frailty of our condition will admit of, which,
   for any continuance, is only tranquillity, ease, and moderate
   satisfactions. Thus we might at once become proof against the
   temptations, with which the whole world almost is carried away; since
   it is plain, that not only what is called a life of pleasure, but also
   vicious pursuits, in general, aim at somewhat besides, and beyond these
   moderate satisfactions.

   And as to that obstinacy and wilfulness, which renders men so
   insensible to the motives of religion: this right sense of ourselves
   and of the world about us, would bend the stubborn mind, soften the
   heart, and make it more apt to receive impression: and this is the
   proper temper in which to call our ways to remembrance, to review and
   set home upon ourselves the miscarriages of our past life. In such a
   compliant state of mind, reason and conscience will have a fair
   hearing; which is the preparation for, rather the beginning of that
   repentance, the outward show of which we all put on at this season.

   Lastly, The various miseries of life which lie before us wherever we
   turn our eyes, the frailty of this mortal state we are passing through,
   may put us in mind that the present world is not our home; that we are
   merely strangers and travellers in it, as all our fathers were. It is
   therefore to be considered as a foreign country, in which our poverty
   and wants, and the insufficient supplies of them, were designed to turn
   our views to that higher and better state we are heirs to: a state,
   where will be no follies to be overlooked, no miseries to be pitied, no
   wants to be relieved; where the affection we have been now treating of,
   will happily be lost, as there will I no objects to exercise it upon:
   For God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be
   no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying; neither shall there be any
   more pain; for the former things are passed away.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [21] Eccles. xlii. 24.
     __________________________________________________________________

Sermon VII. Upon the Character of Balaam -- Numb. xxiii. 10.

   Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his.

   These words, taken alone, and without respect to him who spoke them,
   lead our thoughts immediately to the different ends of good and bad
   men. For, though the comparison is not expressed, yet it is manifestly
   implied; as is also the preference of one of these characters to the
   other in that last circumstance, death. And, since dying the death of
   the righteous, or of the wicked necessarily implies men's being
   righteous or wicked, i. e. having lived righteously or wickedly; a
   comparison of them in their lives also might come into consideration
   from such a single view of the words themselves. But my present design
   is, to consider them with a particular reference or respect to him who
   spoke them; which reference, if you please to attend, you will see. And
   if what shall be offered to your consideration at this time, be is
   thought a discourse upon. the whole history of this man, rather than
   upon the particular words I have read, this is of no consequence; it is
   sufficient if it afford reflections of use and service to ourselves.

   But, in order to avoid cavils respecting this remarkable relation in
   Scripture, either that part of it which you have heard in the first
   lesson for the day, or any other, let me just observe, that as this is
   not the place for answering them, so they no way affect the following
   discourse; since the character there given is plainly a real one in
   life, and such as there are parallels to.

   The occasion of Balaam's coming out of his own country into the land of
   Moab, where he pronounced this solemn prayer or wish, he himself
   relates in the first parable or prophetic speech, of which it is the
   conclusion: In which is a custom referred to, proper to be taken notice
   of, that of devoting enemies to destruction, before the entrance upon a
   war with them. This custom appears to have prevailed over a great part
   of the world, for we find it amongst the most distant nations. The
   Romans had public officers, to whom it belonged as a stated part of
   their office. But there was somewhat more particular in the case now
   before us; Balaam being looked upon as an extraordinary person, whose
   blessing or curse was thought to be always effectual.

   In order to engage the reader's attention to this passage, the sacred
   historian has enumerated the preparatory circumstances, which are
   these. Balaam requires the king of Moab to build him seven altars, and
   to prepare him the same number of oxen and of rams. The sacrifice being
   over, he retires alone to a solitude sacred to these occasions, there
   to await the divine inspiration or answer, for which the foregoing
   rites were the preparation. "And God met Balaam, and put a word in his
   mouth;" [22] upon receiving which, he returns back to the altars, where
   was the king, who had all this while attended the sacrifice, as
   appointed, he and all the princes of Moab standing, big with
   expectations of the prophet's reply. "And he took up his parable, and
   said, Balak the King of Moab hath brought me from Aram, out of the
   mountains of the east, saying, Come, curse me Jacob, and come, defy
   Israel. How shall I curse, whom God hath not cursed? Or how shall I
   defy, whom the Lord hath not defied? For from the top of the rocks I
   see him, and from the hills I behold him: Lo, the people shall dwell
   alone, and shall not be reckoned among the nations. Who can count the
   dust of Jacob, and the number of the fourth part of Israel? Let me die
   the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his." [23]

   It is necessary, as you will see in the progress of this discourse,
   particularly to observe what he understood by righteous. And he himself
   is introduced in the book of Micah [24] explaining it; if by righteous
   is meant good, as to be sure it is. "O my people, remember now what
   Balak king of Moab consulted, and what Balaam the son of Beor answered
   him from Shittim unto Gilgal." From the mention of Shittim it is
   manifest, that it is this very story which is here referred to, though
   another part of it, the account of which is not now extant; as there
   are many quotations in Scripture out of books which are not come down
   to us. "Remember what Balaam answered, that ye may know the
   righteousness of the Lord," i. e. the righteousness which God will
   accept. Balak demands, "Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow
   myself before the high God? Shall I come before him with
   burnt-offerings, with calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased
   with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil? Shall I
   give my first born for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the
   sin of my soul?"Balaam answers him, "He hath showed thee? O man, what
   is good: And what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and
   to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?"Here is a good man
   expressly characterized, as distinct from a dishonest and a
   superstitious man. No words can more strongly exclude dishonesty and
   falseness of heart, than doing justice and loving mercy. And both these
   as well as walking humbly thy God, are put in opposition to those
   ceremonial methods of recommendation, which Balak hoped might have
   served the turn. From hence appears what he meant by righteous whose
   death he desires to die.

   Whether it was his own character shall now be inquired: and in order to
   determine it, we must take a view of his whole behaviour upon this
   occasion. When the elders of Moab came to him, though he appears to
   have been much allured with the rewards offered, yet he had such regard
   to the authority of God, as to keep the messengers in suspense until he
   had consulted his will. "And God said to him, Thou shalt not go with
   them, thou shalt not curse the people, for they are blessed." [25] Upon
   this he dismisses the ambassadors, with an absolute refusal of
   accompanying them back to their king. Thus far his regard to his duty
   prevailed; neither does there any thing appear as yet amiss in his
   conduct. His answer being reported to the king of Moab, a more
   honorable embassy is immediately dispatched, and greater rewards
   proposed. Then the iniquity of his heart began to disclose itself. A
   thorough honest man would without hesitation have repeated his former
   answer, that he could not be guilty of so infamous a prostitution of
   the sacred character with which he was invested, as, in the name of a
   prophet, to curse those whom he knew to be blessed. But instead of
   this, which was the only honest part in these circumstances that lay
   before him, he desired the princes of Moab to tarry that night with him
   also; and, for the sake of the reward, deliberates, whether, by some
   means or other, he might not be able to obtain leave to curse Israel:
   to do that, which had been before revealed to him to be contrary to the
   will of God, which yet he resolves not to do without that permission.
   Upon which, as when this nation afterwards rejected God from reigning
   over them, he gave them a king in his anger; in the same way, as
   appears from other parts of the narration, he gives Balaam the
   permission he desired: For this is the most natural sense of the words.
   Arriving in the territories of Moab and being received with particular
   distinction by the king, and he repeating in person the promise of the
   rewards he had before made to him by his ambassadors, he seeks, the
   text says, by sacrifices and enchantments, (what these were is not to
   our purpose,) to obtain leave of God to curse the people; keeping still
   his resolution, not to do it without that permission: Which not being
   able to obtain, he had such regard to the command of God, as to keep
   this resolution to the last. The supposition of his being under a
   supernatural restraint, is a mere fiction of Philo: He is plainly
   represented to be under no other force or restraint, than the fear of
   God. However, he goes on persevering in that endeavor, after he had
   declared, that "God had not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither had he
   seen perverseness in Israel;" [26] i. e. they were a people of virtue
   and piety, so far as not to have drawn down, by their iniquity, that
   curse which he was soliciting leave to pronounce upon them. So that the
   state of Balaam's mind was this: he wanted to do what he knew to be
   very wicked, and contrary to the express command of God; he had inward
   checks and restraints, which he could not entirely get over; he
   therefore casts about for ways to reconcile this wickedness with his
   duty. How great a paradox soever this may appear, as it is indeed a
   contradiction in terms, it is the very account which the Scripture
   gives us of him.

   But there is a more surprising piece of iniquity yet behind. Not daring
   in his religious character, as a prophet, to assist the king of Moab,
   he considers, whether there might not be found some other means of
   assisting him against that very people, whom he himself, by the fear of
   God, was restrained from cursing in words. One would not think it
   possible, that the weakness, even of religious self-deceit in its
   utmost excess, could have so poor a distinction, so fond an evasion, to
   serve itself of. But so it was: and he could think of no other method,
   than to betray the children of Israel to provoke His wrath, who was
   their only strength and defence. The temptation which he pitched upon,
   was that concerning which Solomon afterwards observed, that it had
   "cast down many wounded; yea, many strong men had been slain by it:"
   And of which he himself was a sad example, when his wives turned away
   his heart after other gods." This succeeded: the people sin against
   God; and thus the prophet's counsel brought on that destruction, which
   he could by no means be prevailed upon to assist with the religious
   ceremony of execration, which the king of Moab thought would itself
   have effected it. Their crime and punishment are related in Deuteronomy
   [27] and Numbers. [28] And from the relation repeated in Numbers [29]
   it appears, that Balaam was the contriver of the whole matter. It is
   also ascribed to him in the Revelation, [30] where he is said to have
   "taught Balak to cast a stumbling-block before the children of Israel."

   This was the man, this Balaam I say, was the man, who desired to "die
   the death of the righteous," and that his "last end might be like his:"
   And this was the state of his mind when he pronounced these words.

   So that the object we have now before us is the most astonishing in the
   world: A very wicked man, under a deep sense of God and religion,
   persisting still in his wickedness, and preferring the wages of
   unrighteousness, even when he had before him a lively view of death and
   that approaching period of his days, which should deprive him of all
   those advantages for which he was prostituting himself; and likewise a
   prospect, whether certain or uncertain, of a future state of
   retribution: All this joined with an explicit ardent wish, that, when
   he was to leave this world, he might be in the condition of a righteous
   man. Good God! what inconsistency, what perplexity is here! With what
   different views of things, with what contradictory principles of
   action, must such a mind be torn and distracted! It was not unthinking
   carelessness, by which he run on headlong in vice and folly, without
   ever making a stand to ask himself what he was doing. No; he acted upon
   the cool motives of interest and advantage. Neither was he totally hard
   and callous to impressions, of religion, what we call abandoned; for he
   absolutely denied to curse Israel. When reason assumes her place, when
   convinced of his duty, when he owns and feels, and is actually under
   the influence of the divine authority; whilst he is carrying on his
   views to the grave, the end of all temporal greatness; under this sense
   of things, with the better character and more desirable state present
   -- full before him -- in his thoughts, in his wishes, voluntarily to
   choose the worse -- What fatality is here! Or how otherwise can such a
   character be explained? And yet, strange as it may appear, it is not
   altogether an uncommon one. Nay, with some small alterations, and put a
   little lower, it is applicable to a very considerable part of the
   world. For, if the reasonable choice be seen and acknowledged, and yet
   men make the unreasonable one, is not this the same contradiction; that
   very inconsistency, which appeared so unaccountable!

   To give some little opening to such characters and behaviour, it is to
   be observed in general, that there is no account to be given, in the
   way of reason, of men's so strong attachments to the present world: Our
   hopes, and fears, and pursuits, are in degrees beyond all proportion to
   the known value of the things they respect. This may be said without
   taking into consideration religion and a future state; and when these
   are considered, the disproportion is infinitely heightened. Now, when
   men go against their reason, and contradict a more important interest
   at a distance, for one nearer, though of less consideration; if this be
   the whole of the case, all that can be said is, that strong passions,
   some kind of brute force within, prevails over the principle of
   rationality. However, if this be with a clear, full, and distinct view
   of the truth of things, then it is doing the utmost violence to
   themselves, acting in the. most palpable contradiction to their very
   nature. But if there be any such thing in mankind, as putting
   half-deceits upon themselves; which there plainly is, either by
   avoiding reflection, or (if they do reflect) by religious equivocation,
   subterfuges, and palliating matters to themselves; by these means
   conscience may be laid asleep, and they may go on in a course of
   wickedness with less disturbance. All the various turns, doubles, and
   intricacies in a dishonest heart, cannot be unfolded or laid open; but
   that there is somewhat of that kind is manifest, be it to be called
   self-deceit, or by any other name. Balaam had before his eyes the
   authority of God, absolutely forbidding him what he, for the sake of a
   reward, had the strongest inclination to. He was likewise in a state of
   mind sober enough to consider death and his last end. By these,
   considerations he was restrained, first from going to the king of Moab,
   and, after he did go, from cursing Israel. But notwithstanding this,
   there was great wickedness in his heart. He could not forego the
   rewards of unrighteousness: he therefore, first, seeks for indulgences;
   and, when these could not be obtained, he sins against the whole
   meaning, end, and design of the prohibition, which no consideration in
   the world could prevail with him to go against the letter of. And
   surely that impious counsel he gave to Balak against the children of
   Israel, was, considered in itself, a greater piece of wickedness, than
   if he had cursed them in words.

   If it be inquired, what his situation, his hopes, and fears were, in
   respect to this his wish, the answer must be, That consciousness of the
   wickedness of his heart must necessarily have destroyed all settled
   hopes of dying the death of the righteous: he could have no calm
   satisfaction in this view of his last end. Yet, on the other hand; it
   is possible that those partial regards to his duty, now mentioned,
   might keep him from perfect despair.

   Upon the whole; it is manifest that Balaam had the most just and true
   notions of God and religion; as appears, partly from the original story
   itself, and more plainly from the passage in Micah; where he explains
   religion to consist in real virtue and real piety, expressly
   distinguished from superstition, and in terms which most strongly
   exclude dishonesty and falseness of heart. Yet you see his behaviour.
   He seeks indulgences for plain wickedness; which not being able to
   obtain, he glosses over that same wickedness, dresses it up in a new
   form, in order to make it pass off more easily with himself: that is,
   be deliberately contrives to deceive and impose upon himself, in a
   matter which he knew to be of the utmost importance.

   To bring these observations home to ourselves. It is too evident that
   many persons allow themselves in very unjustifiable courses, who yet
   make great pretences to religion; not to deceive the world, none can be
   so weak as to think this will pass in our age; but from principles,
   hopes, and fears, respecting God and a future state; and go on thus
   with a sort of tranquillity and quiet of mind. This cannot be upon a
   thorough consideration, and full resolution, that the pleasures and
   advantages they propose are to be pursued at all hazards, against
   reason, against the law of God, and though everlasting destruction is
   to be the consequence. This would be doing too great violence upon
   themselves. No; they are for making a composition with the Almighty.
   These of his commands they will obey: But as to others -- why, they
   will make all the atonements in their power; the ambitious, the
   covetous, the dissolute man, each in a way which shall not contradict
   his respective pursuit. Indulgences before, which was Balaam's first
   attempt, though he was not so successful in it as to deceive himself,
   or atonements afterwards, are all the same. And here perhaps come in
   faint hopes that they may, and half resolves that they will, one time
   or other, make a change.

   Besides these, there are also persons, who, from a more just way of
   considering things, see the infinite absurdity of this, of substituting
   sacrifice instead of obedience; there are persons far enough from
   superstition, and not without some real sense of God and religion upon
   their minds, who yet are guilty of most unjustifiable practices, and go
   on with great coolness and command over themselves. The same dishonesty
   and unsoundness of heart discovers itself in these another way. In all
   common ordinary cases, we see intuitively at first view what is our
   duty, what is the honest part. This is the ground of the observation,
   that the first thought is often the best. In these cases, doubt and
   deliberation is itself dishonesty; as it was in Balaam upon the second
   message. That which is called considering what is our duty in a
   particular case, is very often nothing but endeavoring to explain it
   away. Thus those courses, which, if men would fairly attend to the
   dictates of their own consciences, they would see to be corruption,
   excess, oppression, uncharitableness; these are refined upon -- Things
   were so and so circumstantiated -- Great difficulties are raised about
   fixing bounds and degrees: and thus every moral obligation whatever may
   be evaded. Here is scope, I say, for an unfair mind to explain away
   every moral obligation to itself. Whether man reflect again upon this
   internal management and artifice, and how explicit they are with
   themselves, is another question. There are many operations of the mind,
   many things pass within, which we never reflect upon again, which a
   by-stander, from having frequent opportunities of observing us and our
   conduct, may make shrewd guesses at.

   That great numbers are in this way of deceiving themselves is certain;
   There is scarce a man in the world, who has entirely got over all
   regards, hopes, and fears, concerning God and a future state; and these
   apprehensions in the generality, bad as we are, prevail in considerable
   degrees: yet men will and can be wicked, with calmness and thought; we
   see they are. There must, therefore, be some method of making it sit a
   little easy upon their minds, which, in the superstitious, is those
   indulgences and atonements before mentioned, and this self-deceit of
   another kind in persons of another character. And both these proceed
   from a certain unfairness of mind, a peculiar inward dishonesty; the
   direct contrary to that simplicity which our Saviour recommends, under
   the notion of becoming little children, as a necessary qualification
   for our entering into the kingdom of heaven.

   But to conclude: How much soever men differ in the course of life they
   prefer, and in their ways of palliating and excusing their vices to
   themselves; yet all agree in the one thing, desiring "to die the death
   of the righteous." This is surely remarkable. The observation may be
   extended further, and put thus: even without determining what that is,
   which we call guilt or innocence, there is no man but would choose,
   after having had the pleasure or advantage of a vicious action, to be
   free of the guilt of it, to be in the state of an innocent man. This
   shows at least a disturbance, and implicit dissatisfaction in vice. If
   we inquire into the grounds of it, we shall find it proceeds partly
   from an immediate sense of having done evil; and partly from an
   apprehension, that this inward sense shall, one time or other, be
   seconded by a higher judgment, upon which our whole being depends. Now,
   to suspend and drown this sense, and these apprehensions, be it by the
   hurry, of business or of pleasure, or by superstition, or moral
   equivocation, this is in a manner one and the same, and makes no
   alteration at all in the nature of our case. Things and actions are
   what they are, and the consequences of them will be what they will be:
   why then should we desire to be deceived? As we are reasonable
   creatures, and have any regard to ourselves, we ought to lay these
   things plainly and honestly before our mind, and upon this, ct as you
   please, as you think most fit; make that choice, and prefer that course
   of life, which you can justify to yourselves, and which sits most easy
   upon your own mind. It will immediately appear, that vice cannot be the
   happiness, but must upon the whole, be the misery, of such a creature
   as man; a moral, an accountable agent. Superstitious observances,
   self-deceit, though of a more refined sort, will not, in reality, at
   all amend matters with us. And the result of the whole can be nothing
   else, but that with simplicity and fairness we "keep innocency, and
   take heed unto the thing that is right; for this alone shall bring a
   man peace at the last."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [22] Ver. 4, 5.

   [23] Ver. 6.

   [24] Micah vi..

   [25] Chap. xxii. 12.

   [26] Ver. 21.

   [27] Chap. iv.

   [28] Chap. xxv.

   [29] Chap. xxxi.

   [30] Chap. ii.
     __________________________________________________________________

Sermon VIII. Upon Resentment -- Matt. v. 43, 44.

   Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbor, and
   hate thine enemy: But I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them
   that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which
   despitefully use you and persecute you.

   Since perfect goodness in the Deity is the principle, from whence the
   universe was brought into being, and by which it is preserved; and
   since general benevolence is the great law of the whole moral creation;
   it is a question which immediately occurs, "Why had man implanted in
   him a principle, which appears the direct contrary to benevolence?"Now,
   the foot upon which inquiries of this kind should be treated is this:
   To take human nature as it is, and the circumstances in which it is
   placed as they are; and then consider the correspondence between that
   nature and those circumstances, or what course of action and behaviour,
   respecting those circumstances, any particular affection or passion
   leads us to. This I mention, to distinguish the matter now before us
   from disquisitions of quite another kind; namely, "Why we are not made
   more perfect creatures, or placed in better circumstances?"These being
   questions which we have not that r know of, any thing at all to do
   with. God Almighty undoubtedly foresaw the disorders, both natural and
   moral, which would happen in this state of things. If upon this we set
   ourselves to search and examine why he did not prevent them; we shall,
   I am afraid, be in danger of running into somewhat worse than
   impertinent curiosity.

   But upon this to example, how far the nature which he hath given us
   hath a respect to those circumstances, such as they are; how far it
   leads us to act a proper part in them; plainly belongs to us: and such
   inquiries are in many ways of excellent use. Thus, the thing to be
   considered is not; "Why we were not made of such nature, and placed in
   such circumstances, as to have no need of so harsh and turbulent a
   passion as resentment;" but, taking our nature and condition as being
   what they are, "Why, or for what end, such a passion was given us:" And
   this chiefly in order to show, what are the abuses of it.

   The persons who laid down for a rule, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor,
   and hate thine enemy," made short work with this matter. They did not,
   it seems, perceive any thing to be disapproved in hatred more than in
   good will: and, according to their system of morals, our enemy was the
   proper natural object of one of those passion, as our neighbor was of
   the other of them.

   This was all they had to say, and all they though needful to be said,
   upon the subject. But this cannot be satisfactory; because hatred,
   malice, and revenge, are directly contrary to the religion we profess,
   and to the nature and reason of the thing itself. Therefore, since no
   passion God hath endued us with can be in itself evil; and yet since
   men frequently indulge a passion in such ways and degrees, that at
   length it becomes quite another thing from what it was originally in
   our nature; and those vices of malice and revenge, in particular, take
   their occasion from the natural passion of resentment; it will be
   needful to trace this up to its original, that we may see, "What it is
   in itself, as placed in our nature by its Author;" from which it will
   plainly appear, "For what ends it was placed there." And when we know
   what the passion is in itself, and the ends of it, we shall easily see,
   "What are the abuses of it, in which malice and revenge consist;" and
   which are so strongly forbidden in the text, by the direct contrary
   being commanded.

   Resentment is of two kinds: Hasty and sudden, or settled and
   deliberate. The former is called anger, and often passion; which,
   though a general word, is frequently appropriated and confined to the
   particular feeling, sudden anger, as distinct from deliberate
   resentment, malice, and revenge. In all these words is usually implied
   somewhat vicious: somewhat unreasonable as to the occasion of the
   passion, or immoderate as to the degree or duration of it. But that the
   natural passion itself is indifferent, St Paul has asserted in that
   precept, "Be ye angry and sin not;" [31] which, though it is by no
   means to be understood as an encouragement to indulge ourselves in
   anger, the sense being certainly this, "Though ye be angry, sin not;"
   yet here is evidently a distinction made, between anger and sin,
   between the natural passion and sinful anger.

   Sudden anger, upon certain occasions, is mere instinct; as merely so as
   the disposition to close our eyes upon the apprehension of somewhat
   falling into them; and no more necessarily implies any degree of
   reason. I say, necessarily: for, to be sure, hasty, as well as
   deliberate anger, may be occasioned by injury or contempt; in which
   cases, reason suggests to our thoughts that injury and contempt, which
   is the occasion of the passion: But I am speaking of the former only so
   far as it is to be distinguished from the latter. The only way in which
   our reason and understanding can raise anger, is by representing to our
   mind injustice or injury of some kind or other. Now, momentary anger is
   frequently raised, not only without any real, but without any apparent
   reason; that is, without any appearance of injury, as distinct from
   hurt or pain. It cannot, I suppose, be thought that this passion, in
   infants, in the lower species of animals, and, which is often seen, in
   men towards them; it cannot, I say, be imagined, that these instances
   of this passion are the effect of reason: no, they are occasioned by
   mere sensation and feeling. It is opposition, sudden hurt, violence,
   which naturally excites the passion; and the real demerit or fault of
   him who offers that violence, or is the cause of that opposition or
   hurt, does not, in many cases, so much as come into thought.

   The reason and end for which man was made thus liable to this passion,
   is, that he might be better qualified to prevent, and likewise (or
   perhaps chiefly) to resist and defeat sudden force, violence, and
   opposition, considered merely as such, and without regard to the fault
   or demerit of him who is the author of them. Yet, since violence may be
   considered in this other and further view, as implying fault; and since
   injury, as distinct from harm, may raise sudden anger, sudden anger may
   likewise accidentally serve to prevent, or remedy, such fault and
   injury. But, considered as distinct from settled anger, it stands in
   our nature for self-defence, and not for the administration of justice.
   There are plainly cases, and in the uncultivated parts of the world,
   and where regular governments are not formed, they frequently happen,
   in which there is no time for consideration, and yet to be passive is
   certain destruction; in which sudden resistance is the only security.

   But from this, deliberate anger or resentment is essentially
   distinguished, as the latter is not naturally excited by, or intended
   to prevent mere harm without appearance of wrong or injustice. Now, in
   order to see, as exactly as we can, what is the natural object and
   occasion of such resentment, let us reflect upon the manner in which we
   are touched with reading, suppose, a feigned story of baseness and
   villany, properly worked up to move our passions. This immediately
   raises indignation, somewhat of a desire that it should be punished.
   And though the designed injury be prevented, yet that it was designed
   is sufficient to raise this inward feeling. Suppose the story true,
   this inward feeling would be as natural and as just: and one may
   venture to affirm, that there is scarce a man in the world, but would
   have it upon some occasions. It seems in us plainly connected with a
   sense of virtue and vice, of moral good and evil. Suppose further, we
   knew both the persons who did, and who suffered the injury: neither
   would this make any alteration, only that it would probably affect us
   more. The indignation raised by cruelty and injustice, and the desire
   of having it punished, which persons unconcerned would feel, is by no
   means malice. No; it is resentment against vice and wickedness: it is
   one of the common bonds, by which society is held together; a fellow
   feeling which each individual has in behalf of the whole species, as
   well as of himself. And it does not appear that this, generally
   speaking, is at, all too high amongst mankind. Suppose now the injury I
   have been speaking of, to be done against ourselves, or those whom we
   consider as ourselves: it is plain, the way in which we should be
   affected, would be exactly the same in kind; but it would certainly be
   in a higher degree, and less transient: because a sense of our own
   happiness and misery is most intimately and always present to us; and,
   from the very constitution of our nature, we cannot but have a greater
   sensibility to, and be more deeply interested in what concerns
   ourselves. And this seems to be the whole of this passion which is,
   properly speaking, natural to mankind; namely, a resentment against
   injury and wickedness in general; and in a higher degree when towards
   ourselves, in proportion to the greater regard which men naturally have
   for themselves, than for others. From hence it appears, that it is not
   natural, but moral evil; it is not suffering, but injury, which raises
   that anger or resentment, which is of any continuance. The natural
   object of it is not one, who appears to the suffering person to have
   been only the innocent occasion of his pain or loss but one, who has
   been in a moral sense injurious either to ourselves or others. This is
   abundantly confirmed by observing, what it is which heightens or
   lessens resentment; namely, the same which aggravates or lessens the
   fault; friendship and former obligations, on one hand; or inadvertency,
   strong temptations, and mistake, on the other. All this is so much
   understood by mankind, how little soever it be reflected upon, that a
   person would be reckoned quite distracted, who should coolly resent a
   harm, which had not to himself the appearance of injury or wrong. Men
   do indeed resent what is occasioned through carelessness; but then they
   expect observance as their due, and so that carelessness is considered
   as faulty. It is likewise true, that they resent more strongly an
   injury done, than one which, though designed, was prevented, in cases
   where the guilt is perhaps the same. The reason however is, not that
   bare pain or loss raises resentment, but, that it gives a new, and, as
   I may speak, additional sense of the injury or injustice. According to
   the natural course of the passions, the degrees of resentment are in
   proportion, only to the degree of design and celebration in the
   injurious person, but in proportion to this, joined with the degree of
   the evil designed or premeditated; since this likewise comes in to make
   the injustice greater or less. And the evil or harm will appear greater
   when they feel it, than when they only reflect upon it: so, therefore,
   will the injury: and consequently the resentment will be greater.

   The natural object or occasion of settled resentment, then, being
   injury, as distinct from pain or loss, it is easy to see, that to
   prevent and to remedy such injury, and the miseries arising from it, is
   the end for which this passion was implanted in man. It is to be
   considered as a weapon put into our hands by nature, against injury,
   injustice and cruelty. How it may be innocently employed and made use
   of, shall presently be mentioned.

   The account which has been now given of this passion is in brief, that
   sudden anger is raised by, and was chiefly intended to prevent or
   remedy, mere harm, distinct from injury: but that it may be raised by
   injury, and may serve to prevent or to remedy it; and then the
   occasions and effects of it are the same with the occasions and effects
   of deliberate anger. But they are essentially distinguished in this,
   that the latter is never occasioned by harm, distinct from injury; and
   its natural proper end is to remedy or prevent only that harm, which
   implies, or is supposed to imply, injury or moral wrong. Every one
   sees, that these observations do not relate to those who have
   habitually suppressed the course of their passions and affections, out
   of regard either to interest or virtue; or who, from habits of vice and
   folly, have changed their nature. But, I suppose, there can be no doubt
   but this, now described, is the general course of resentment,
   considered as a natural passion, neither increased by indulgence, nor
   corrected by virtue, nor prevailed over by other passions, or
   particular habits of life.

   As to the abuses of anger, which it is to be observed may be in all
   different degrees, the first which occurs is what is commonly called
   passion; to which some men are liable, in the same way as others are to
   the epilepsy, or any sudden particular disorder. This distemper of the
   mind seizes them upon the least occasion in the world, and perpetually
   without any real reason at all; and by means of it they are plainly,
   every day, every waking hour of their lives, liable and in danger of
   running into the most extravagant outrages. Of a less boisterous, but
   not of a more innocent kind, is peevishness; which I mention with pity,
   with real pity to the unhappy creatures, who from their inferior
   station, or other circumstances and relations, are obliged to be in the
   way of, and to serve for a supply to it. Both these, for aught that I
   can see, are one and the same principle: but, as it takes root in minds
   of different makes, it appears differently, and so is come to be
   distinguished by different names. That which in a more feeble temper is
   peevishness, and languidly discharges itself upon every thing which
   comes in its way; the same principle in a temper of greater force and
   stronger passions, becomes rage and fury. In one, the humor discharges
   itself at once; in the other it is continually discharging. This is the
   account of passion and peevishness, as distinct from each other, and
   appearing in different persons. It is no objections against the truth
   of it that they are both to be seen sometimes in one and the same
   person.

   With respect to deliberate resentment, the chief instances of abuse
   are: when, from partiality to ourselves, we imagine an injury done us,
   when there is none: when this partiality represents it to us greater
   than it really is: when we fall into that extravagant and monstrous
   kind of resentment, towards one who has innocently been the occasion of
   evil to us, that is, resentment upon account of pain or inconvenience,
   without injury; which is the same absurdity, as settled anger at a
   thing that is inanimate: when the indignation against injury and
   injustice rises too high, and is beyond proportion to the particular
   ill actions it is exercised upon: or lastly, when pain or harm of any
   kind is inflicted merely in consequence of, and to gratify that
   resentment, though naturally raised.

   It would be endless to descend into and explain all the peculiarities
   of perverseness, and wayward humor, which might be traced up to this
   passion. But there is one thing, which so generally belongs to and
   accompanies all excess and abuse of it, as to require being mentioned:
   a certain determination, and resolute bent of mind, not to be convinced
   or set right; though it be ever so plain, that there is no reason for
   the displeasure, that it was raised merely by error or
   misunderstanding. In this there is doubtless a great mixture of pride;
   but there is somewhat more, which I cannot otherwise express than that
   resentment has taken possession of the temper and of the mind, and will
   not quit its hold. It would be too minute to inquire, whether this be
   any thing more than bare obstinacy: it is sufficient to observe, that
   it, in a very particular manner and degree, belongs to the abuses of
   this passion.

   But, notwithstanding all these abuses, "Is not just indignation against
   cruelty and wrong, one of the instruments of death which the Author of
   our nature hath provided? Are not cruelty, injustice, and wrong, the
   natural objects of that indignation? Surely then it may, one way or
   other, be innocently employed against them." True. Since therefore it
   is necessary for the very subsistence of the world, that injury,
   injustice, and cruelty, should be punished; and since compassion, which
   is so natural to mankind, would render that execution of justice
   exceedingly difficult and uneasy; indignation against vice and
   wickedness is, and may be allowed to be, a balance to that weakness of
   pity, and also to anything else which would prevent the necessary
   methods of severity. Those who have never thought upon these subjects,
   may perhaps not see the weight of this. But let us suppose a person
   guilty of murder, or any other action of cruelty, and that mankind had
   naturally no indignation against such wickedness and the authors of it;
   but that every body was affected towards such a criminal in the same
   way as towards an innocent man: Compassion amongst other things, would
   render the execution of justice exceedingly painful and difficult, and
   would often quite prevent it. And notwithstanding that the principle of
   benevolence is denied by some, and is really in a very low degree, that
   men are in great measure insensible to the happiness of their
   fellow-creatures; yet they are not insensible to their misery, but are
   very strongly moved with it: insomuch that there plainly is occasion
   for that feeling which is raised by guilt and demerit, as a balance to
   that of compassion. Thus much may, I think, justly be allowed to
   resentment, in the strictest way of moral consideration.

   The good influence which this passion, has, in fact, upon the affairs
   of the world, is obvious to every one's notice. Men are plainly
   restrained from injuring their fellow-creatures by fear of their
   resentment; and it is very happy that they are so, when they would not
   be restrained by a principle of virtue. And after an injury is done and
   there is a necessity that the offender should be brought to justice;
   the cool consideration of reason, that the security and peace of
   society requires examples of justice should be made, might indeed be
   sufficient to procure laws to be enacted, and sentence passed: but is
   it that cool reflection in the injured person, which, for the most
   part, brings the offender to justice? Or is it not resentment and
   indignation against the injury and the author of it? I am afraid there
   is no doubt which is commonly the case. This, however, is to be
   considered as a good effect, notwithstanding it were much to be wished,
   that men would act from a better principle, reason and cool reflection.

   The account now given of the passion of resentment, as distinct from
   all the abuses of it, may suggest to our thoughts the following
   reflections.

   First, That vice is indeed of ill desert, and must finally be punished.
   Why should men dispute concerning the reality of virtue, and whether it
   be founded in the nature of things, which yet surely is not matter of
   question; but why should this, I say, be disputed, when every man
   carries about him this passion, which affords him demonstration, that
   the rules of justice and equity are to be the guide of his actions? For
   every man naturally feels an indignation upon seeing instances of
   villany and baseness, and therefore cannot commit the same, without
   being self-condemned.

   Secondly, That we should learn to be cautious lest we charge God
   foolishly, by ascribing that to him, or the nature he has given us,
   which is owing wholly to our own abuse of it. Men may speak of the
   degeneracy and corruption of the world, according to the experience
   they have had of it; but human nature, considered as the divine
   workmanship, should, methinks, be treated as sacred: for in the image
   of God made he man. That passion, from whence men take occasion to run
   into the dreadful vices of malice and revenge; even that passion,
   implanted in our nature by God, is not only innocent, but a generous
   movement of mind. It is in itself, and its original, no more than
   indignation against injury and wickedness: that which is the only
   deformity in creation, and the only reasonable object of abhorrence and
   dislike. How manifold evidence have we of the divine wisdom and
   goodness, when even pain in the natural world, and the passion we have
   been now considering in the moral, come out instances of it!
     __________________________________________________________________

   [31] Ephes. iv. 26.
     __________________________________________________________________

Sermon IX. Upon Forgiveness of Injuries -- Matt. v. 43, 44.

   Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbor, and
   hate thine enemy: But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them
   that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which
   despitefully use you and persecute you.

   As God Almighty foresaw the irregularities and disorders, both natural
   and moral, which would happen in this state of things, he hath
   graciously made some provision against them, by giving us several
   passions and affections, which arise from, or whose objects are, those
   disorders. Of this sort are fear, resentment, compassion, and others;
   of which there could be no occasion or use in a perfect state: but in
   the present we should be exposed to greater inconveniences without
   them; though there are very considerable ones, which they themselves
   are the occasions of. They are incumbrances indeed, but such as we are
   obliged to carry about with us, through this various journey of life:
   some of them as a guard against the violent assaults of others; and in
   our own defence; some, in behalf of others; and all of them to put us
   upon, and help to carry us through a course of behaviour suitable to
   our condition, in default of that perfection of wisdom and virtue,
   which would be in all respects our better security.

   The passion of anger or resentment hath already been largely treated
   of. It hath been shown, that mankind naturally feel some emotion of
   mind against injury and injustice, whoever are the sufferers by it, and
   even though the injurious design be prevented from taking effect. Let
   this be called anger, indignation, resentment, or by whatever name
   anyone shall choose, the thing itself is understood, and is plainly
   natural. It has likewise been observed, that this natural indignation
   is generally moderate and low enough in mankind, in each particular
   man, when the injury which excites it doth not affect himself, or one
   whom he considers as himself. Therefore the precepts to forgive, and to
   love our enemies, do not relate to that general indignation against
   injury and the authors of it, but to this feeling, or resentment, when
   raised by private or personal injury. But no man could be thought in
   earnest who should assert, that though indignation against injury, when
   others are the sufferers, is innocent and just, yet the same
   indignation against it, when we ourselves are the sufferers, becomes
   faulty and blameable. These precepts therefore cannot be understood to
   forbid this in the latter case, more than in the former. Nay, they
   cannot be understood to forbid this feeling in the latter case, though
   raised to a higher degree than in the former; because, as was also
   observed further, from the very constitution of our nature, we cannot
   but have a greater sensibility to what concerns ourselves. Therefore
   the precepts in the text, and others of the like import with them, must
   be understood to forbid only the excess and abuse of this natural
   feeling, in cases of personal and private injury: the chief instances
   of which excess and abuse have likewise been already remarked, and all
   of them, excepting that of retaliation, do so plainly in the very terms
   express somewhat unreasonable, disproportionate, and absurd, as to
   admit of no pretence or shadow of justification.

   But, since custom and false honor are on the side of retaliation and
   revenge, when the resentment is natural and just; and reasons are
   sometimes offered in justification of revenge in these cases; and since
   love of our enemies is thought too hard a saying to be obeyed; I will
   show the absolute unlawfulness of the former; the obligations we are
   under to the latter; and then proceed to some reflections, which may
   have a more direct and immediate tendency to beget in us a right temper
   of mind towards those who have offended us.

   In showing the unlawfulness of revenge, it is not my present design to
   examine what is alleged in favor of it, from the tyranny of custom and
   false honor, but only to consider the nature and reason of the thing
   itself; which ought to have prevented, and ought now to extirpate every
   thing of that kind.

   First, Let us begin with the supposition of that being innocent which
   is pleaded for, and which shall be shown to be altogether vicious, the
   supposition that we were allowed to render evil for evil, and see what
   would be the consequence. Malice or resentment towards any man hath
   plainly a tendency to beget the same passion in him who is the object
   of it, and this again increases it in the other. It is of the very
   nature of this vice to propagate itself, not only by way of example,
   which it does in common with other vices, but in peculiar way of its
   own; for resentment itself, as well as what is done in consequence of
   it, is the object of resentment. Hence it comes to pass, that the first
   offence, even when so slight as presently to be dropt and forgotten,
   becomes the occasion of entering into a long intercourse of ill
   offices. Neither is at all uncommon to see persons, in this progress of
   strife and variance, change parts; and him, who was at first the
   injured person, become more injurious and blameable than the aggressor.
   Put the case, then, that the law of retaliation was universally
   received and allowed, as an innocent rule of life, by all; and the
   observance of it thought by many, (and then it would soon come to be
   thought by all) a point of honor: this supposes every man in private
   cases to pass sentence in his own cause; and likewise, that anger or
   resentment is to be the judge. Thus, from the numberless partialities
   which we all have for ourselves, every one would often think himself
   injured when he was not, and in most cases would represent an injury as
   much greater than it really is; the imagined dignity of the person
   offended would scarce ever fail to magnify the offence. And, if bare
   retaliation, or returning just the mischief received, always begets
   resentment in the person upon whom we retaliate, what would that excess
   do? Add to this, that he likewise has his partialities. There is no
   going on to represent this scene of rage and madness: it is manifest
   there would be no bounds, nor any end. "If the beginning of strife is
   as when one letteth out water," what would it come to when allowed this
   free and unrestrained course? "As coals are to burning coals, or wood
   to fire," so would these "contentious men be to kindle strife." And,
   since the indulgence of revenge hath manifestly this tendency, and does
   actually produce these effects in proportion as it is allowed; a
   passion of so dangerous a nature ought not to be indulged, were there
   no other reason against it.

   Secondly, It hath been shown that the passion of resentment was placed
   in man, upon supposition of, and as a prevention or remedy to,
   irregularity and disorder. Now, whether it be allowed or not, that the
   passion itself, and the gratification of it, joined together, are
   painful to the malicious person; it must however be so with respect to
   the person towards whom it is exercised, and upon whom the revenge is
   taken. Now, if we consider mankind, according to that fine allusion of
   St Paul, "as one body, and everyone members one of another," it must be
   allowed that resentment is, with respect to society, a painful remedy.
   Thus, then, the very notion or idea of this passion, as a remedy or
   prevention of evil, and as in itself a painful means, plainly shows
   that it ought never to be made use of, but only in order to produce
   some greater good.

   It is to be observed, that this argument is not founded upon an
   illusion or simile, but that it is drawn from the very nature of the
   passion itself, and the end for which it was given us. We are obliged
   to make use of words taken from sensible things, to explain what is the
   most remote from them: and everyone sees from whence the words,
   prevention and remedy, are taken. But, if you please, let these words
   be dropped: the thing itself, I suppose, may be expressed without them.

   That mankind is a community, that we all stand in a relation to each
   other, that there is a public end and interest of society which each
   particular is obliged to promote, is the sum of morals. Consider then
   the passion of resentment, as given to this one body, as given to
   society. Nothing can be more manifest, than that resentment is to be
   considered as a secondary passion, placed in us upon supposition, upon
   account of, and with regard to injury; not, to be sure, to promote and
   further it, but to render it, and the inconveniences and miseries
   arising from it, less and fewer than they would be without this
   passion. It is as manifest, that the indulgence of it is, with regard
   to society, a painful means of obtaining these ends. Considered in
   itself, it is very undesirable, and what society must very much wish to
   be without. It is in every instance absolutely an evil in itself;
   because it implies producing misery; and, consequently, must never be
   indulged or gratified for itself, by any one who considers mankind as a
   community or family, and himself as a member of it.

   Let us now take this in another view. Every natural appetite, passion,
   and affection, may be gratified in particular instances, without being
   subservient to the particular chief end, for which these several
   principles were respectively implanted in our nature. And if neither
   this end, nor any other moral obligation, be contradicted, such
   gratification is innocent. Thus, I suppose, there are cases in which
   each of these principles, this one of resentment excepted, may
   innocently be gratified, without being subservient to what is the main
   end of it: that is, though it does not conduce to, yet it may be
   gratified without contradicting that end, or any other obligation. But
   the gratification of resentment, if it be not conducive to the end for
   which it was given us, must necessarily contradict, not only the
   general obligation to benevolence, but likewise that particular end
   itself. The end for which it was given is, to prevent or remedy injury;
   i. e. the misery occasioned by injury; i. e. misery itself: and the
   gratification of it consists in producing misery; i. e. in
   contradicting the end for which it was implanted in our nature.

   This whole reasoning is built upon the difference there is between this
   passion and all others. No other principle, or passion, hath for its
   end the misery of our fellow creatures. But malice and revenge
   meditates evil itself; and to do mischief, to be the author of misery,
   is the very thing which gratifies the passion: this is what it directly
   tends towards, as its proper design. Other vices eventually do
   mischief; this alone aims at it as an end.

   Nothing can with reason be urged in justification of revenge, from the
   good effects which the indulgence of it were before mentioned [32] to
   have upon the affairs of the world; because, though it be a remarkable
   instance of the wisdom of Providence, to bring good out of evil, yet
   vice is vice to him who is guilty of it." But suppose these good
   effects are foreseen;" that is, suppose reason in a particular case
   leads a man the same way as passion; why then, to be sure, he should
   follow his reason in this as well as in all other cases. So that, turn
   the matter which way ever you will, no more can be allowed to this
   passion, than hath been already. [33]

   As to that love of our enemies which is commanded; this supposes the
   general obligation to benevolence or good will towards mankind: and
   this being supposed, that precept is no more than to forgive injuries;
   that is, to keep clear of those abuses before mentioned; because, that
   we have the habitual temper of benevolence, is taken for granted.

   Resentment is not inconsistent with good will; for we often see both
   together in very high degrees, not only in parents towards their
   children, but in cases of friendship and dependence, where there is no
   natural relation. These contrary passions, though they may lessen, do
   not necessarily destroy each other. We may therefore love our enemy,
   and yet have resentment against him for his injurious behaviour towards
   us. But when this resentment entirely destroys our natural benevolence
   towards him, it is excessive, and becomes malice or revenge. The
   command to prevent its having this effect, i. e. to forgive injuries,
   is the same as to love our enemies; because that love is always
   supposed, unless destroyed by resentment.

   "But though mankind is the natural object of benevolence, yet may it
   not be lessened upon vice, i. e. injury?"Allowed: but if every degree
   of vice or injury must destroy that benevolence, then no man is the
   object of our love; for no man is without faults.

   "But if lower instances of injury may lessen our benevolence, why may
   not higher, or the highest, destroy it?"The answer is obvious. It is
   not man's being a social creature, much less his being a moral agent,
   from whence alone our obligations to good will towards him arise. There
   is an obligation to it prior to either of these, arising from his being
   a sensible creature; that is, capable of happiness or misery. Now this
   obligation cannot be superseded by his moral character. What justifies
   public execution is, not that the guilt or demerit of the criminal
   dispenses with the obligation of good will; neither would this justify
   any severity; but, that his life is inconsistent with the quiet and
   happiness of the world: that is, a general and more enlarged obligation
   necessarily destroys a particular and more confined one of the same
   kind, inconsistent with it. Guilt or injury then does not dispense with
   or supersede the duty of love and good will; neither would this justify
   any severity; but that his life is inconsistent with the quiet and
   happiness of the world: that is, a general and more enlarged obligation
   necessarily destroys a particular and more confined one of the same
   kind, inconsistent with it. Guilt or injury then does not dispense with
   or supersede the duty of love and good will.

   Neither does that peculiar regard to ourselves, which was before
   allowed to be natural [34] to mankind, dispense with it: because that
   can no way innocently heighten our resentment against those who have
   been injurious to ourselves in particular, any otherwise than as it
   heightens our sense of the injury or guilt.; and guilt, though in the
   highest degree, does not, as hath been shown, dispense with or
   supersede the duty of love and good will.

   If all this be true, what can a man say, who will dispute the
   reasonableness, or the possibility, of obeying the divine precept we
   are now considering? Let him speak out, and it must be thus he will
   speak. "Mankind, i. e. a creature defective and faulty, is the proper
   object of good will, whatever his faults are, when they respect others;
   but not when they respect me myself." That men should be affected in
   this manner, and act accordingly, is to be accounted for like other
   vices; but to assert, that it ought, and must be thus, is
   self-partiality possessed of the very understanding.

   Thus, love to our enemies, and those who have been injurious to us, is
   so far from being a rant, as it has been profanely called, that it is
   in truth the law of our nature, and what everyone must see and own, who
   is not quite blinded with self-love.

   From hence it is easy to see, what is the degree in which we are
   commanded to love our enemies, or those who have been injurious to us.
   It were well if it could as easily be reduced to practice. It cannot be
   imagined, that we are required to love them with any peculiar kind of
   affection. But suppose the person injured to have a due natural sense
   of the injury, and no more; he ought to be affected towards the
   injurious person in the same way any good men, uninterested in the
   case, would be; if they had the same just sense, which we have supposed
   the injured person to have, of the fault: after which there will yet
   remain real good will towards the offender.

   Now, what is there in all this, which should be thought impracticable?
   I am sure there is nothing in it unreasonable. It is indeed no more
   than that we should not indulge a passion, which, if generally
   indulged, would propagate itself so as almost to lay waste the world:
   that we should suppress that partial, that false self-love, which is
   the weakness of our nature: that uneasiness and misery should not be
   produced, without any good purpose to be served by it: and that we
   should not be affected towards persons differently from what their
   nature and character require.

   But since to be convinced, that any temper of mind, and course of
   behaviour, is our duty, and the contrary vicious, hath but a distant
   influence upon our temper and actions; let me add some few reflections,
   which may have a more direct tendency to subdue those vices in the
   heart, to beget in us this right temper, and lead us to a right
   behaviour towards those who have offended us: which reflections,
   however, shall be such as will further show the obligations we are
   under to it.

   No one, I suppose, would choose to have an indignity put upon him, or
   be injuriously treated. If, then, there be any probability of a
   misunderstanding in the case, either from our imagining we are injured
   when we are not, or representing the injury to ourselves as greater
   than it really is; one would hope an intimation of this sort might be
   kindly received, and that people would be glad to find the injury not
   so great as they imagined. Therefore, without knowing particulars, I
   take upon me to assure all persons who think they have received
   indignities or injurious treatment, that they may depend upon it, as in
   a manner certain, that the offence is not so great as they themselves
   imagine. We are in such a peculiar situation, with respect to injuries
   done to ourselves, that we can scarce any more see them as they really
   are, than our eye can see itself. If we could place ourselves at a due
   distance, i. e. be really unprejudiced, we should frequently discern
   that to be in reality inadvertence and mistake in our enemy, which we
   now fancy we see to be malice or scorn. From this proper point of view
   we should likewise, in all probability, see something of these latter
   in ourselves, and most certainly a great deal of the former. Thus, the
   indignity or injury would almost infinitely lessen, and perhaps at last
   come out to be nothing at all. Self-love is a medium of a peculiar
   kind: in these cases it magnifies every thing which is amiss in others,
   at the same time that it lessens every thing amiss in ourselves.

   Anger also, or hatred, may be considered as another false medium of
   viewing things, which always represents characters and actions much
   worse than they really are. Ill-will not only never speaks, but never
   thinks well, of the person towards whom it is exercised. Thus, in cases
   of offence and enmity, the whole character and behaviour is considered
   with an eye to that particular part which has offended us, and the
   whole man appears monstrous, without any thing right or human in him:
   whereas the resentment should surely, at least, be confined to that
   particular part of the behaviour which gave offence, since the other
   parts of a man's life and character stand just the same as they did
   before.

   In general, there are very few instances of enmity carried to any
   length, but inadvertency, misunderstanding, some real mistake of the
   case, on one side however, if not on both, has a great share in it.

   If these things were attended to, these ill humors could not be carried
   to any length amongst good men, and they would be exceedingly abated
   amongst all. And only would hope they might be attended to: for all
   that, these cautions come to is really no more than desiring, that
   things may be considered and judged of as they are in themselves, that
   we should have an eye to, and beware of, what would otherwise lead us
   into mistakes. So that to make allowances for inadvertence,
   misunderstanding, for the partialities of self-love, and the false
   light which danger sets things in; I say, to make allowances for these,
   is not to be spoken of as an instance of humbleness of mind, or
   meekness and moderation of temper, but as what common sense should
   suggest, to avoid judging wrong of a matter before us, though virtue
   and morals were out of the case. And therefore it as much belongs to
   ill men, who will indulge the vice I have been arguing against, as to
   good men, who endeavor to subdue it in themselves. In a word, all these
   cautions concerning anger and self-love, are no more than desiring a
   man, who was looking through a glass which either magnified or
   lessened, to take notice, that the objects are not in themselves what
   they appear through that medium.

   To all these things one might add, that resentment being out of the
   case, there is not, properly speaking, any such thing as direct
   ill-will in one man towards another. Therefore the first indignity or
   injury, if it be not owing to inadvertence or misunderstanding, may
   however be resolved into other particular passions, or self-love:
   principles quite distinct from ill-will, and which we ought all to be
   disposed to excuse in others, from experiencing so much of them in
   ourselves. A great man of antiquity is reported to have said, that as
   he never was indulgent to anyone fault in himself, he could not excuse
   those of others. This sentence could scarce with decency come out of
   the mouth of any human creature. But if we invert the former part, and
   put it thus: that he was indulgent to many faults in himself, as it is
   to be feared the best of us are, and yet was implacable; how monstrous
   would such an assertion appear? And this is the case in respect to
   every human creature, in proportion as he is without the forgiving
   spirit I have been recommending.

   Further, Though injury, injustice and oppression, the baseness of
   ingratitude, are the natural objects of indignation, or, if you please,
   of resentment, as before explained; yet they are likewise the objects
   of compassion, as they are their own punishment, and without repentance
   will for ever be so. No one ever did a designed injury to another, but
   at the same time he did a much greater to himself. If therefore we
   would consider things justly, such a one is, according to the natural
   course of affections, an object of compassion, as well as of
   displeasure: and to be affected really in this manner, I say really, in
   opposition to show and pretence, argues the true greatness of mind. We
   have an example of forgiveness in this way in its utmost perfection,
   and which indeed includes in it all that is good, in that prayer of our
   blessed Saviour on the cross: "Father, forgive them; for they know not
   what they do!"

   But, lastly, The offences which we are all guilty of against God, and
   the injuries which men do to each other, are often mentioned together:
   and, making allowances; for the infinite distance between the Majesty
   of heaven and a frail mortal, and likewise for this, that he cannot
   possibly be affected or moved as we are; offences committed by others
   against ourselves, and the manner in which we are apt to be affected
   with them, give a real occasion for calling to mind our own sins
   against God. Now, there is an apprehension and presentiment natural to
   mankind, that we ourselves shall one time or other be dealt with, as we
   deal with others; and a peculiar acquiescence in, and feeling of the
   equity and justice of this equal distribution. This natural notion of
   equity the son of Sirach has put in the strongest way; "He that
   revengeth shall find vengeance from the Lord, and he will surely keep
   his sins in remembrance. Forgive thy neighbor the hurt he hath done
   unto thee, so shall thy sins also be forgiven when thou prayest. One
   man beareth hatred against another; and doth he seek pardon from the
   Lord? He showeth no mercy to a man which is like himself; and doth he
   ask forgiveness of his own sins? [35] Let anyone read our Saviour's
   parable of "the king who took account of his servants;" [36] and the
   equity and rightness of the sentence which was passed upon him who was
   unmerciful to his fellow servant, will be felt. There is somewhat in
   human nature, which accords to, and falls in with that method of
   determination. Let us then place before our eyes the time which is
   represented in the parable; that of our own death, or the final
   judgment. Suppose yourselves under the apprehensions of approaching
   death; that you were just going to appear naked and without disguise
   before the judge of all the earth, to give an account of your behaviour
   towards your fellow creatures: could any thing raise more dreadful
   apprehensions of that judgment, than the reflection, that you had been
   implacable, and without mercy towards those who had offended you;
   without that forgiving spirit towards others, which, that it may now be
   exercised towards yourselves, is your only hope? And these natural
   apprehensions are authorized by our Saviour's application of the
   parable; "So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye
   from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses."
   On the other hand, suppose a good man in the same circumstance, in the
   last part and close of life, conscious of many frailties, as the best
   are, but conscious too that he had been meek, forgiving, and merciful;
   that he had in simplicity of heart been ready to pass over offences
   against himself; -- the having felt this good spirit will give him, not
   only a full view of the amiableness of it, but the surest hope that he
   shall meet with it in his Judge. This likewise is confirmed by his own
   declaration: "If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father
   will likewise forgive you." And that we might have a constant sense of
   it upon our mind, the condition is expressed in our daily prayer. A
   forgiving spirit is therefore absolutely necessary, as ever we hope for
   pardon of out own sins, as ever we hope for peace of mind in our dying
   moments, or for the divine mercy at that day when we shall most stand
   in need of it.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [32] Sermon. viii. p. 119.

   [33] Sermon viii. p. 119.

   [34] Sermon viii. p. 139.

   [35] Eccles. xxviii. 1-4.

   [36] Matt. xviii.
     __________________________________________________________________

Sermon X. Upon Self-Deceit -- 2 Sam. xii. 7.

   And Nathan said to David, Thou art the man.

   These words are the application of Nathan's parable to David, upon
   occasion of his adultery with Bathsheba, and the murder of Uriah her
   husband. The parable, which is related in the most beautiful
   simplicity, is this: [37] "There were two men in one city; the one
   rich, the other poor. The rich man had exceeding many flocks and herds;
   but the poor man had nothing, save one little ewe lamb, which he had
   bought and nourished up: and it grew up together with him, and with his
   children; it did eat of his own meat; and drank of his own cup, and lay
   in his bosom, and was unto him as a daughter. And there came a
   traveller unto the rich man, and be spared to take of his own flock,
   and of his own herd, to dress for the way-faring man that was come unto
   him, but took the poor man's lamb, and dressed it for the man that was
   come to him. And David's anger was greatly kindled against the man, and
   he said to Nathan, As the Lord liveth, the man that hath done this
   thing shall surely die. And he shall restore the lamb fourfold, because
   he did this thing, and because he had no pity." David passes sentence,
   not only that there should be a fourfold restitution made, but he
   proceeds to the rigor of justice, "The man that hath done this thing
   shall die:" and this judgment is pronounced with the utmost indignation
   against such an act of inhumanity: "As the Lord liveth, he shall surely
   die: and his anger was greatly kindled against the man." And the
   prophet answered, "Thou art the man." He had been guilty of much
   greater inhumanity, with the utmost deliberation, thought, and
   contrivance. Near a year must have passed, between the time of the
   commission of his crimes and the time of the prophet's coming to him;
   and it does not appear from the story, that he had in all this while
   the least remorse or contrition.

   There is not any thing, relating to men and characters, more surprising
   and unaccountable than this partiality to themselves, which is
   observable in many; as there is nothing of more melancholy reflection,
   respecting morality, virtue, and religion. Hence it is that many men
   seem perfect strangers to their own characters. They think, and reason,
   and judge quite differently upon any matter relating to themselves,
   from what they do in cases of others where they are not interested.
   Hence it is one hears people exposing follies, which they themselves
   are eminent for; and talking with great severity against particular
   vices, which, if all the world be not mistaken, they themselves are
   notoriously guilty of. This self-ignorance and self-partiality may be
   in all different degrees. It is a lower degree of it, which David
   himself refers to in these words, "Who can tell how oft he offendeth: O
   cleanse thou me from my secret faults." This is the ground of that
   advice of Elihu to Job: "Surely it is meet to be said unto God, -- That
   which I see not, teach thou me; if I have done iniquity, I will do no
   more." And Solomon saw this thing in a very strong light when he said,
   "He that trusteth his own heart is a fool." This likewise was the
   reason why that precept, " Know thyself," was so frequently inculcated
   by the philosophers of old. For if it was not for that partial and fond
   regard to ourselves, it would certainly be no great difficulty to know
   our own character, what passes within the bent and bias of our mind;
   much less would there be any difficulty in judging rightly of our own
   actions. But from this partiality it frequently comes to pass, that the
   observation of many men's being themselves last of all acquainted with
   what falls out in their own families, may be applied to a nearer home,
   to what passes within their own breasts.

   There is plainly, in the generality of mankind, an absence of doubt or
   distrust, in a very great measure, as to their moral character and
   behaviour; and likewise a disposition to take for granted, that all is
   right and well with them in these respects. The former is owing to
   their not reflecting, not exercising their judgment upon themselves;
   the latter, to self-love. I am not speaking of that extravagance, which
   is sometimes to be met with; instances of persons declaring in words at
   length, that they never were in the wrong, nor had ever any diffidence
   of the justness of their conduct, in their whole lives: no, these
   people are too far gone to have any thing said to them. The thing
   before us is indeed of this kind, but in a lower degree, and confined
   to the moral character; somewhat of which we almost all of us have,
   without reflecting upon it. Now, consider how long, and how grossly, a
   person of the best understanding might be imposed upon by one of whom
   he had not any suspicion, and in whom he placed an entire confidence;
   especially if there were friendship and real kindness in the case:
   surely this holds even stronger with respect to that self we are all so
   fond of. Hence arises in men a disregard of reproof and instruction,
   rules of conduct and moral discipline, which occasionally come in their
   way: a disregard, I say, of these, not in every respect, but in this
   single one, namely, as what may be of service to them in particular
   towards mending their own hearts and tempers, and making them better
   men. It never in earnest comes into their thoughts, whether such
   admonitions may not relate, and be of service to themselves; and this
   quite distinct from a positive persuasion to the contrary, a persuasion
   from reflection that they are innocent and blameless in those respects.
   Thus we may invert the observation which is somewhere made upon Brutus,
   that he never read but in order to make himself a better man. It scarce
   comes into the thoughts of the generality of mankind that this use is
   to be made of moral reflections which they meet with; that this use, I
   say, is to be made of them by themselves, for every body observes and
   wonders that it is not done by others.

   Further, there are instances of persons having so fixed and steady an
   eye upon their own interest, whatever they place it in, and the
   interest of those whom they consider as themselves, as in a manner to
   regard nothing else; their views are almost confined to this alone.
   Now, we cannot be acquainted with, or in any propriety of speech be
   said to know any thing but what we attend to. If, therefore, they
   attend only to one side, they really will not, cannot see or know what
   is to be alleged on the other. Though a man hath the best eyes in the
   world, he cannot see any way but that which he turns them. Thus these
   persons, without passing over the least, the most minute thing which
   can possibly be urged in favor of themselves, shall overlook entirely
   the plainest and most obvious things on the other side. And whilst they
   are under the power of this temper, thought, and consideration upon the
   matter before them, has scarce any tendency to set them right; because
   they are engaged; and their deliberation concerning an action to be
   done, or reflection upon it afterwards, is not to see whether it be
   right, but to find out reasons to justify or palliate it; palliate it,
   not to others, but to themselves.

   In some there is to be observed a general ignorance of themselves, and
   wrong way of thinking and judging in every thing relating to
   themselves; their fortune, reputation, every thing in which self can
   come in; and this perhaps attended with the rightest judgment in all
   other matters. In others, this partiality is not so general, has not
   taken hold of the whole man, but confined to some particular favorite
   passion, interest, pursuit: suppose ambition, covetousness, or any
   other. And these persons may probably judge and determine what is
   perfectly just and proper, even in things in which they themselves are
   concerned, if these things have no relation to their particular
   favorite passion or pursuit. Hence arises that amazing incongruity; and
   seeming inconsistency of character, from whence slight observers take
   it for granted, that the whole is hypocritical and false; not being
   able otherwise to reconcile the several parts: whereas, in truth, there
   is real honesty, so far as it goes. There is such a thing as men's
   being honest to such a degree, and in such respects, but no further.
   And this, as it is true, so it is absolutely necessary to be taken
   notice of, and allowed them; such general and undistinguishing censure
   of their whole character, as designing and false, being one main thing
   which confirms them in their self-deceit. They know that the whole
   censure is not true, and so take it for granted that no part of it is.

   But to go on with the explanation of the thing itself: Vice in general
   consists in having an unreasonable and too great regard to ourselves,
   in comparison of others. Robbery and murder is never from the love of
   injustice or cruelty, but to gratify some other passion, to gain some
   supposed advantage: and it is false selfishness alone, whether cool or
   passionate, which makes a man resolutely pursue that end, be it ever so
   much to the injury of another. But whereas, in common and ordinary
   wickedness, this unreasonableness, this partiality and selfishness,
   relates only, or chiefly, to the temper and passions; in the characters
   we are now considering, it reaches to the understanding, and influences
   the very judgment. [38] And, besides that general want of distrust and
   diffidence concerning our own character, there are, you see, two
   things, which may thus prejudice and darken the understanding itself:
   that over-fondness for ourselves, which we are all so liable to; and
   also being under the power of any particular passion or appetite, or
   engaged in any particular pursuit. And these, especially the last of
   the two, may be in so great a degree as to influence our judgment, even
   of other persons and their behaviour. Thus a man, whose temper is
   formed to ambition or covetousness, shall even approve of them
   sometimes in others.

   This seems to be in a good measure the account of self-partiality and
   self-deceit, when traced up to its original. Whether it be, or be not,
   thought satisfactory, that there is such a thing is manifest; and that
   it is the occasion of great part of the unreasonable behaviour of men
   towards each other: that by means of it they palliate their vices and
   follies to themselves: and that it prevents their applying to
   themselves those reproofs and instructions, which they meet with either
   in Scripture or in moral and religious discourses, though exactly
   suitable to the state of their own mind, and the course of their
   behaviour. There is one thing further to be added here, that the temper
   we distinguish by hardness of heart with respect to others, joined with
   this self-partiality, will carry a man almost any lengths of
   wickedness, in the way of oppression, hard usage of others; and even to
   plain injustice, without his having, from what appears, any real sense
   at all of it. This indeed was not the general character of David; for
   he plainly gave scope to the affections of compassion and good will, as
   well as to his passions of another kind.

   But as some occasions and circumstances lie more open to this
   self-deceit, and give it greater scope and opportunities than others,
   these require to be particularly mentioned.

   It is to be observed then, that as there are express determinate acts
   of wickedness, such as murder, adultery, theft; so, on the other hand,
   there are numberless cases in which the vice and wickedness cannot be
   exactly defined, but consists ill a certain general temper and course
   of action, or in the neglect of some duty, suppose charity or any
   other, whose bounds and degrees are not fixed. This is the very
   province of self-deceit and self-partiality: Here it governs without
   check or control. "For what commandment is there broken? Is there a
   transgression where there is no law? A vice which cannot be defined?"

   Whoever will consider the whole commerce of human life will see, that a
   great part, perhaps the greatest part, of the intercourse amongst
   mankind, cannot be reduced to fixed determinate rules. Yet in these
   cases, there is a right and a wrong: a merciful, a liberal, a kind and
   compassionate behaviour, which surely is our duty; and an unmerciful
   contracted spirit, a hard and oppressive course of behaviour, which is
   most certainly immoral and vicious. But who can define precisely
   wherein that contracted spirit and hard usage of others consist, as
   murder and theft may be defined? There is not a word in our language
   which expresses more detestable wickedness than oppression: yet the
   nature of this vice cannot be so exactly stated, nor the bounds of it
   so, determinately marked, as that we shall be able to say, in all
   instances, where rigid right and justice ends, and oppression begins.
   In these cases, there is great latitude left for everyone to determine
   for, and consequently to deceive himself. It is chiefly in these cases,
   that self-deceit comes in; as everyone must see, that there is much
   larger scope for it here, than in express, single, determinate acts of
   wickedness. However it comes in with respect to the circumstances
   attending the most gross and determinate acts of wickedness. Of this,
   the story of David, now before us, affords the most astonishing
   instance. It is really prodigious, to see a man, before so remarkable
   for virtue and piety, going on deliberately from adultery to murder,
   with the same cool contrivance, and, from what appears, with as little
   disturbance, as a man would endeavor to prevent the ill consequences of
   a mistake he had made in any common matter. That total insensibility of
   mind, with respect to those horrid crimes, after the commission of
   them, manifestly shows that he did some way or other delude himself:
   and this could not be with respect to the crimes themselves, they were
   so manifestly of the grossest kind. What the particular circumstances
   were, with which he extenuated them, and quieted and deceived himself,
   is not related.

   Having thus explained the nature of internal hypocrisy and self-deceit,
   and remarked the occasions upon which it exerts itself, there are
   several things further to be observed concerning it: that all of the
   sources to which it was traced up, are sometimes observable together in
   one and the same person; but that one of them is more remarkable, and
   to a higher degree, in some, and others of them are so in others: that,
   in general, it is a complicated thing, and may be in all different
   degrees and kinds: that the temper itself is essentially in its own
   nature vicious and immoral. It is unfairness, it is dishonesty, it is
   falseness of heart; arid is, therefore, so far from extenuating guilt,
   that it is itself the greatest of all guilt in proportion to the degree
   it prevails; for it is a corruption of the whole moral character in its
   principle. Our understanding, and sense of good and evil, is the light
   and guide of life: "If, therefore, this light that is in thee be
   darkness, how great is that darkness?" [39] For this reason our Saviour
   puts an evil eye as the direct opposite to a single eye; the absence of
   that simplicity, which these last words imply, being itself evil and
   vicious. And whilst men are under the power of this temper, in
   proportion still to the degree they are so, they are fortified on every
   side against conviction: and when they hear the vice and folly of what
   is in truth their own course of life, exposed in the justest and
   strongest manner, they will often assent to it, and even carry the
   matter further; persuading themselves, one does not know bow, but some
   way or other persuading themselves, that they are out of the case, and
   that it hath no relation to them. Yet, notwithstanding this, there
   frequently appears a suspicion, that all is not right, as it should be;
   and perhaps there is always at bottom somewhat of this sort. There are
   doubtless many instances of the ambitious, the revengeful, the
   covetous, and those whom, with too great indulgence, we only call the
   men of pleasure, who will not allow themselves to think how guilty they
   are, who explain and argue away their guilt to themselves; and though
   they do really impose upon themselves, in some measure, yet there are
   none of them but have, if not a proper knowledge, yet at least an
   implicit suspicion, where the weakness lies, and what part of their
   behaviour they have reason to wish unknown or forgotten for ever.
   Truth, and real good sense, and thorough integrity, carry along with
   them a peculiar consciousness of their own genuineness: there is a
   feeling belonging to them, which does not accompany their counterfeits,
   error, folly, half-honesty, partial and slight regards to virtue and
   right, so far only as they are consistent with that course of
   gratification which men happen to beset upon. And, if this be the case,
   it is much the same as if we should suppose a man to have had a general
   view of some scene, enough to satisfy him that it was very
   disagreeable, and then to shut his eyes, that he might not have
   particular or distinct view of its several deformities. It is as easy
   to close the eyes of the mind as those of the body: and the former is
   more frequently done with wilfulness, and yet not attended to, than
   tile latter; the actions of the mind being more quick and transient
   than those of the senses. This may be further illustrated by another
   thing observable in ordinary life. It is not uncommon for persons, who
   run out their fortunes, entirely to neglect looking into the state of
   their affairs, and this from a general knowledge that the condition of
   them is bad. These extravagant people are perpetually ruined before
   they themselves expected it: and they tell you for an excuse, and tell
   you truly, that they did not think they were so much in debt, or that
   their expenses so far exceeded their income. And yet no one will take
   this for an excuse, who is sensible that their ignorance of their
   particular circumstances was owing to their general knowledge of them;
   that is, their general knowledge that matters were not well with them,
   prevented their looking into particulars. There is somewhat of the like
   kind with this in respect to morals, virtue, and religion. Men find
   that the survey of themselves, their own heart and temper, their own
   life and behaviour, doth not afford them satisfaction; things are not
   as they should be, therefore they turn away, will not go over
   particulars, or look deeper, lest they should find more amiss. For who
   would choose to be put out of humor with himself? No one, surely, if it
   were not in order to amend, and to be more thoroughly and better
   pleased with himself for the future.

   If this sincere self-enjoyment and home-satisfaction be thought
   desirable, and worth some pains and diligence, the following
   reflections will, I suppose, deserve your attention; as what may be of
   service and assistance to all who are in any measure honestly disposed,
   for avoiding that fatal self-deceit, and towards getting acquainted
   with themselves.

   The first is, that those who have never had any suspicion of, who have
   never made allowances for this weakness in themselves, who have never
   (if I may be allowed such a manner of speaking) caught themselves in
   it, may almost take it for granted that they have been very much misled
   by it. For consider: nothing is more manifest, than that affection and
   passion of all kinds influence the judgment. Now. as we have naturally
   a greater regard to ourselves than to others, as the private affection
   is more prevalent than the public, the former will have proportionally
   a greater influence upon the judgment, upon our way of considering
   things. People are not backward in owning this partiality of judgment,
   in cases of friendship and natural relation. The reason is obvious why
   it is not so readily acknowledged, when the interest that misleads us
   is more confined, confined to ourselves: but we all take notice of it
   in each other in these cases. There is not any observation more common,
   than that there is no judging of a matter from hearing only one side.
   This is not founded upon supposition, at least it is not always, of a
   formed design in the realter to deceive: for it holds in cases where he
   expects that the whole will be told over again by the other side. But
   the supposition, which this observation is founded upon, is the very
   thing now before us; namely, that men are exceedingly prone to deceive
   themselves, and judge too favorably in every respect, where themselves,
   and their own interest, are concerned. Thus, though we have not the
   least reason to suspect that such an interested person hath any
   intention to deceive us, yet we of course make great allowances for his
   having deceived himself. If this be general, almost universal, it is
   prodigious that every man can think himself an exception, and that he
   is free from this self-partiality. The direct contrary is the truth.
   Every man may take for granted that he has a great deal of it, till,
   from the strictest observation upon himself, he finds particular reason
   to think otherwise.

   Secondly, there is one easy and almost sure way to avoid being misled
   by this self-partiality, and to get acquainted with our real.
   character: to have regard to the suspicious part of it, and keep a
   steady eye over ourselves in that respect. Suppose then a man fully
   satisfied with himself, and his own behaviour. such a one, if you
   please, as the Pharisee in the gospel, or a better man -- Well, but
   allowing this good opinion you have of yourself to be true, yet
   everyone is liable to be misrepresented. Suppose then an enemy were to
   set about defaming you, what part of your character would he single
   out? What particular scandal, think you, would he be most likely to fix
   upon you? And what would the world be most ready to believe? There is
   scarce a man living but could, from the most transient superficial view
   of himself, answer this question. What is that ill thing, that faulty
   behaviour, which I am apprehensive an enemy, who was thoroughly
   acquainted with me, would be most likely to lay to my charge, and which
   the world would be most apt to believe? It is indeed possible that a
   man may not be guilty in that respect. All that I say is, let him in
   plainness and honesty fix upon that part of his character for a
   particular survey and reflection; and by this he will come to be
   acquainted, whether he be guilty or innocent in that respect, and how
   far he is one or the other.

   Thirdly, It would very much prevent our being misled by this
   self-partiality, to reduce, that practical rule of our Saviour,
   "Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, even so do unto them,"
   to our judgment and way of thinking. This rule, you see, consists of
   two parts. One is, to substitute another for yourself, when you take a
   survey of any part of your behaviour, or consider what is proper and
   fit and reasonable for you to do upon any occasion: the other part is,
   that you substitute yourself in the room of another; consider yourself
   as the person affected by such a behaviour, or towards whom such an
   action is done; and then you would not only see, but likewise feel, the
   reasonableness, or unreasonableness of such an action or behaviour.
   But, alas! the rule itself may be dishonestly applied: there are
   persons who have not impartiality enough with respect to themselves,
   nor regard enough for others, to be able to make a just application of
   it. This just application, if men would honestly make it, is, in
   effect, all that I have been recommending: it is the whole thing, the
   direct contrary to that inward dishonesty as respecting our intercourse
   with our fellow-creatures. And even the bearing this rule in their
   thoughts may be of some service: the attempt thus to apply it, is an
   attempt towards being fair and impartial, and may chance unawares to
   show them to themselves, to show them the truth of the case they are
   considering.

   Upon the whole it is manifest, that there is such a thing as this
   self-partiality and self-deceit: that in some persons it is to a degree
   which would be thought incredible, were not the instances before our
   eyes; of which the behaviour of David is perhaps the highest possible
   one, in a single particular case; for there is not the least
   appearance, that it reached his general character: that we are almost
   all of us influenced by it in some degree, and in some respects: that,
   therefore, everyone ought to have an eye to, and beware of it. And all
   that I have further to add upon this subject is, that either there is a
   difference between right and wrong, or there is not: religion is true,
   or it is not. If it be not, there is no reason for any concern about
   it: but if it be true, it requires real fairness of mind and honesty of
   heart. And if people will be wicked, they had better of the two be so
   from the common vicious passions without such refinements, than from
   this deep and calm source of delusion; which undermines the whole
   principle of good; darkens that light, that "candle of the Lord
   within," which is to direct our steps; and corrupts conscience, which
   is the guide of life.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [37] Verse 1.

   [38] That peculiar regard for ourselves which frequently produces this
   partiality of judgment in our own favor, may have a quite contrary
   effect, and occasion the utmost diffidence and distrust of ourselves;
   were it only, as it may set us upon a more frequent and strict survey
   and review of our own character and behaviour. This search or
   recollection itself implies somewhat of diffidence; and the discoveries
   we make, what is brought to our view, may possibly increase it. Good
   will to another may either blind our judgment, so as to make us
   overlook his faults; or it may put us upon exercising that judgment
   with greater strictness, to see whether he is so faultless and perfect
   as we wish him. If that peculiar regard to ourselves leads us to
   examine our own character with this greater severity, in order really
   to improve and grow better, it is the most commendable turn of mind
   possible, and can scarce be to excess. But if, as every thing hath its
   counterfeit, we are so much employed about ourselves, in order to
   disguise what is amiss, and to make a better appearance; or if our
   attention to ourselves has chiefly this effect, it is liable to run up
   into the greatest weakness and excess, and is, like all other excesses,
   its own disappointment; for scarce any show themselves to advantage,
   who are over solicitous of doing so.

   [39] Matt. vi. 23.
     __________________________________________________________________

Sermon XI. Upon the Love of Our Neighbor -- Rom. xiii. 9.

   And if there be any other commandment, it is briefly comprehended in
   this saying, namely, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.

   It is commonly observed, that there is a disposition in men to complain
   of the viciousness and corruption of the age in which they live, as
   greater than that of former ones; which is usually followed with this
   further observation, that mankind has been in that respect much the
   same in all times. Now, to determine whether this last be not
   contradicted by the accounts of history; thus much can scarce be
   doubted, that vice and folly takes different turns, and some particular
   kinds of it are more open and avowed in some ages than in others: and,
   I suppose, it may be spoken of as very much the distinction of the
   present, to profess a contracted spirit, and greater regards to
   self-interest, than appears to have been done formerly. Upon this
   account it seems worth while to inquire, whether private interest is
   likely to be promoted in proportion to the degree in which self-love
   engrosses us, and prevails over all other principles; "or whether the
   contracted affection may not possibly be so prevalent as to disappoint
   itself, and even contradict its own end, private good?"

   And since, further, there is generally thought to be some peculiar kind
   of contrariety, between self-love and the love of our neighbor, between
   the pursuit of public good and of private good; insomuch, that when you
   are recommending one of these, you are supposed to be speaking against
   the other; and from hence arises a secret prejudice against, and
   frequently open scorn of all talk of public spirit, and real good will
   to our fellow creatures; it will be necessary to "inquire, what respect
   benevolence hath to self-love, and the pursuit of private interest to
   the pursuit of public?"Or whether there be any thing of that peculiar
   inconsistence and contrariety between them, over and above what there
   is between self-love and other passions and particular affections, and
   their respective pursuits?

   These inquiries, it is hoped, may be favorably attended to; for there
   shall be all possible concessions made to the favorite passion, which
   hath so much allowed to it, and whose cause is so universally pleaded:
   it shall be treated with the utmost tenderness, and concern for its
   interests.

   In order to this, as well as to determine the forementioned questions,
   it will be necessary to consider the nature, the object, and end of
   that self-love, as distinguished from other principles or affections in
   the mind and their respective objects.

   Every man hath a general desire of his own happiness; and likewise a
   variety of particular affections, passions, and appetites, to
   particular external objects. The former proceeds from, or is,
   self-love; and seems inseparable from all sensible creatures, who can
   reflect upon themselves and their own interest or happiness, so as to
   have that interest and object to their minds: what is to be said of the
   latter is, that they proceed from, or together make up, that particular
   nature, according to which man is made. The object the former pursues
   is somewhat internal, our own happiness, enjoyment, satisfaction;
   whether we have, or have not, a distinct particular perception what it
   is, or wherein it consists: the objects of the latter are this or that
   particular external thing, which the affections tend towards, and of
   which it hath always a particular idea or perception. The principle we
   call self-love never seeks any thing external for the sake of the
   thing, but only as a means of to happiness or good: particular
   affections rest in the external things themselves. One belongs to man
   as a reasonable creature reflecting upon his own interest or happiness;
   the other, though quite distinct from reason, are as much a part of
   human nature.

   That all particular appetites and passions are towards external things
   themselves, distinct from the pleasure arising from them, is manifested
   from hence, that there could not be this pleasure, were it not for that
   prior suitableness between the object and the passion: There could be
   no enjoyment or delight for one thing more than another, from eating
   food more than from swallowing a stone, if there were not an affection
   or appetite to one thing more than another.

   Every particular affection, even the love of our neighbor, is as really
   our own affection, as self-love; and the pleasure arising from its
   gratification is as much my own pleasure, as the pleasure self-love
   would have from knowing I myself should be happy some time hence, would
   be my own pleasure. And if, because every particular affection is a
   man's own, and the pleasure arising from its gratification his own
   pleasure, or pleasure to himself, such particular affection must be
   called self-love; according to this way of speaking, no creature
   whatever can possibly act but merely from self-love; and every action
   and every affection whatever is to be resolved up into this one
   principle. But then this is not the language of mankind: or, if it
   were, we should want words to express the difference between the
   principle of an action, proceeding from cool consideration that it will
   be to my own advantage; and an action, suppose of revenge, or of
   friendship, by which a man runs upon certain ruin, to do evil or good
   to another. It is manifest the principles of these actions are totally
   different, and so want different words to be distinguished by. All that
   they agree in is, that they both proceed from, and are done to gratify
   an inclination in a man's self. But the principle or inclination in one
   case is self-love; in the other, hatred, or love of another. There is
   then a distinction between the cool principle of self-love, or general
   desire of our own happiness, as one part of our nature, and one
   principle of action; and the particular affections towards particular
   external objects, as another part of our nature, and another principle
   of action. How much soever, therefore, is to be allowed to self-love,
   yet it cannot be allowed to be the whole of our inward constitution;
   because, you see, there are other parts or principles which come into
   it.

   Further, private happiness or good is all which self-love can make us
   desire, or be concerned about. In having this consists its
   gratification: it is an affection to ourselves; a regard to our own
   interest, happiness, and private good: and in the proportion a man hath
   this, he is interested, or a lover of himself. Let this be kept in
   mind; because there is commonly, I shall presently have occasion to
   observe, another sense put upon these words. On the other hand,
   particular affections tend towards particular external things: these
   are their objects; having these is their end; in this consists their
   gratification; no matter whether it be, or be not, upon the whole, our
   interest or happiness. An action, done from the former of these
   principles, is called an interested action. An action proceeding from
   any of the latter, has its denomination of passionate, ambitious,
   friendly, revengeful, or any other, from the particular appetite or
   affection from which it proceeds. Thus self-love as one part of human
   nature, and the several particular principles as the other part, are
   themselves their objects and ends, stated and shown.

   From hence it will be easy to see, how far, and in what ways, each of
   these can contribute and be subservient to the private good of the
   individual. Happiness does not consist in self-love. The desire of
   happiness is no more the thing itself, than the desire of riches is the
   possession or enjoyment of them. People may love themselves with the
   most entire and unbounded affection, and yet be extremely miserable.
   Neither can self-love any way help them out, but by setting them on
   work to get rid of the causes of their misery, to gain or make use of
   those objects which are by nature adapted to afford satisfaction.
   Happiness or satisfaction consists only in the enjoyment of those
   objects, which are by nature suited to our several particular
   appetites, passions, and affections. So that if self-love wholly
   engrosses us, and leaves no room for any other principle, there can be
   absolutely no such thing at all as happiness or enjoyment of any kind
   whatever; since happiness consists in the gratification of particular
   passions, which supposes the having of them. Self-love then does not
   constitute this or that to be our interest or good; but, our interest
   or good being constituted by nature and supposed, self-love only puts
   us upon obtaining and securing it. Therefore, if it be possible that
   self-love may prevail and exert itself in a degree or manner which is
   not subservient to this end; then it will not follow, that our interest
   will be promoted in proportion to the degree in which that principle
   engrosses us, and prevails over others. Nay further, the private and
   contracted affection, when it is not subservient to this end, private
   good, may, for any thing that appears, have a direct contrary tendency
   and effect. And if we will consider the matter, we shall see that it
   often really has. Disengagement is absolutely necessary to enjoyment:
   and a person may have so steady and fixed an eye upon his own interest,
   whatever he places it in, as may hinder him from attending to many
   gratifications within his reach, which others have their minds free and
   open to. Over-fondness for a child is not generally thought to be for
   its advantage: and, if there be any guess to be made from appearances,
   surely that character we call selfish is not the most promising for
   happiness. Such a temper may plainly be, and exert itself in a degree
   and manner which may give unnecessary and useless solicitude and
   anxiety, in a degree and manner which may prevent obtaining the means
   and materials of enjoyment, as well as the making use of them.
   Immoderate self-love does very. ill consult its own interest: and, how
   much soever a paradox it may appear, it is certainly true, that, even
   from self-love, we should endeavor to get over all inordinate regard
   to, and consideration of ourselves. Everyone of our passions and
   affections hath its natural stint and bound, which may easily be
   exceeded; whereas our enjoyments can possibly be but in a determinate
   measure and degree. Therefore such excess of the affection, since it
   cannot procure any enjoyment, must in all cases be useless; but is
   generally attended with inconveniences, and often is downright pain and
   misery. This holds as much with regard to self-love as to all other
   affections. The natural degree of it, so far as it sets us on work to
   gain and make use of the materials of satisfaction, may be to our real
   advantage; but beyond or besides this, it is in several respects an
   inconvenience and disadvantage. Thus it appears, that private interest
   is so far from being likely to be promoted in proportion to the degree
   in which self-love engrosses us, and prevails over all other
   principles, that the contracted affection may be so prevalent, as to
   disappoint itself; and even contradict its own end, private good.

   "But who, except the most sordidly covetous, ever thought there was any
   rivalship between the love of greatness, honor, power, or between
   sensual appetites, and self-love? No, there is a perfect harmony
   between them. It is by means of these particular appetites and
   affections that self-love is gratified in enjoyment, happiness, and
   satisfaction. The competition and rivalship is between self-love and
   the love of our neighbor. That affection which leads us out of
   ourselves, makes us regardless of our own interest, and substitute that
   of another in its stead." Whether then there be any peculiar
   competition and contrariety in this case, shall now be considered.

   Self-love and interestedness was stated to consist in or be an
   affection to ourselves, a regard to our own private good: it is,
   therefore, distinct from benevolence, which is an affection to the good
   of our fellow creatures. But that benevolence is distinct from, that
   is, not the same thing with self-love, is no reason for its being
   looked upon with any peculiar suspicion, because every principle
   whatever, by means of which self-love is gratified, is distinct from
   it: and all things, which are distinct from each other, are equally so.
   A man has an affection or aversion to another: that one of these tends
   to, and is ratified by doing good, that the other tends to, and is
   gratified by doing harm, does not in the least alter the respect which
   either one or the other of these inward feelings has to self-love. We
   use the word property so as to exclude any other person's having an
   interest in that, of which we say a particular man has the property:
   and we often use the word selfish so as to exclude in the same manner
   all regards to the good of others. But the cases are not parallel: for
   though that exclusion is really part of the idea of property; yet such
   positive exclusion, or bringing this peculiar disregard to the good of
   others into the idea of self-love, is in reality adding to the idea, or
   changing it from what it was before stated to consist in, namely, in an
   affection to ourselves. [40] This being the whole idea of self-love, it
   can no otherwise exclude good will or love of others, than merely by
   not including it, no otherwise than it excludes love of arts, or
   reputation, or of any thing else. Neither, on the other hand, does
   benevolence, any more than love of arts or of reputation, exclude
   self-love. Love of our neighbor, then, has just the same respect to, is
   no more distant from self-love, than hatred of our neighbor, or than
   love or hatred of any thing else. Thus the principles, from which men
   rush upon certain ruin for the destruction of an enemy, and for the
   preservation of a friend, have the same respect to the private
   affection, are equally interested, or equally disinterested: and it is
   of no avail, whether they are said to be one or the other. Therefore,
   to those who are shocked to hear virtue spoken of as disinterested, it
   may be allowed, that it is indeed absurd to speak thus of it; unless
   hatred, several particular instances of vice, and all the common
   affections and aversions in mankind, are acknowledged to be
   disinterested too. Is there any less inconsistence between the love of
   inanimate things: or of creatures merely sensitive, and self-love, than
   between self-love, and the love of our neighbour is desire of, and
   delight in the happiness of another any more a diminution of self-love,
   than desire of and delight in the esteem of another? They are both
   equally desire of and delight in somewhat external to ourselves; either
   both or neither are so. The object of self-love is expressed in the
   term self: and every appetite of sense, and every particular affection
   of the heart, are equally interested or disinterested, because the
   objects of them all are equally self or somewhat else. Whatever
   ridicule, therefore, the mention of a disinterested principle or action
   may be supposed to lie open to, must, upon the matter being thus
   stated, relate to ambition, and every appetite and particular
   affection, as much as to benevolence. And indeed all the ridicule, and
   all the grave perplexity, of which this subject hath had its full
   share, is merely from words. The most intelligible way of speaking of
   it seems to be this: that self-love, and the actions done in
   consequence of it, (for these will presently appear to be the same as
   to this question,) are interested; that particular affections towards
   "external objects, and the actions done m consequence of those
   affections, are not so. But everyone is at liberty to use words as he
   pleases. All that is here insisted upon is, that ambition, revenge,
   benevolence, all particular passions whatever, and the actions they
   produce, are equally interested or disinterested.

   Thus it appears, that there is no peculiar contrariety between
   self-love and benevolence; no greater competition between these, than
   between any other particular affections and self-love. This relates to
   the affections themselves. Let us now see whether there be any peculiar
   contrariety between the respective courses of life which these
   affections lead to; whether there be any greater competition between
   the pursuit of private and of public good, than between any other
   particular pursuits and that of private good.

   There seems no other reason to suspect that there is any such peculiar
   contrariety, but only that the course of action which benevolence leads
   to, has a more direct tendency to promote the good of others, than that
   course of action which love of reputation, suppose, or any other
   particular affection, leads to. But that any affection tends to the
   happiness of another, does not hinder its tending to one's own
   happiness, too. That others enjoy the benefit of the air and the light
   of the sun, does not hinder but that these are as much one's own
   private advantage now, as they would be if we had the property of them
   exclusive of all others. So a pursuit which tends to promote the good
   of another, yet may have as great tendency to promote private interest,
   as a pursuit which does not tend to the good of another at all, or
   which is mischievous to him. All particular affections whatever,
   resentment, benevolence, love of arts, equally lead to a course of
   action for their own gratification, i. e. the gratification of
   ourselves; and the gratification of each gives delight: so far, then,
   it is manifest, they have all the same respect to private interest.
   Now, take into consideration further, concerning these three pursuits,
   that the end of the first is the harm, of the second, the good of
   another, of the last, somewhat indifferent; and is there any necessity,
   that these additional considerations should alter the respect, which we
   before saw these three pursuits had to private interest; or render
   anyone of them less conducive to it than any other? Thus, one man's
   affection is to honor, as his end; in order to obtain which, he thinks
   no pains too great. Suppose another, with such a singularity of mind,
   as to have the same affection to public good, as his end, which he
   endeavors with the same labor to obtain. In case of success, surely the
   man of benevolence hath as great enjoyment as the man of ambition; they
   both equally having the end their affections, in the same degree,
   tended to: but in case of disappointment, the benevolent man has
   clearly the advantage; since endeavoring to do good, considered as a
   virtuous pursuit, is gratified by its own consciousness, i. e. is in a
   degree its own reward.

   And as to these two, or benevolence and any other particular passions
   whatever, considered in a further view, as forming a general temper,
   which more or less disposes us for enjoyment of all the common
   blessings of life, distinct from their own gratification: is
   benevolence less the temper of tranquillity and freedom, than ambition
   or covetousness? Does the benevolent man appear less easy with himself,
   from his love to his neighbor? Does he less relish his being? Is there
   any peculiar gloom seated on his face? Is his mind less open to
   entertainment, to any particular gratification? Nothing is more
   manifest, than that being in good humor, which is benevolence whilst it
   lasts, is itself the temper of satisfaction and enjoyment.

   Suppose then a man sitting down to consider, how he might become most
   easy to himself, and attain the greatest pleasure he could; all that
   which is his real natural happiness: this can only consist in the
   enjoyment of those objects, which are by nature adapted to our several
   faculties. These particular enjoyments make up the sum total of our
   happiness; and they are supposed to arise from riches, honors, and the
   gratification of sensual appetites. Be it so: yet none profess
   themselves so completely happy in these enjoyments, but that there is
   room left in the mind for others, if they were presented to them: nay,
   these, as much as they engage us, are not thought so high, but that
   human nature is capable even of greater. Now there have been persons in
   all ages, who have professed that they found satisfaction in the
   exercise of charity, in the love of their neighbor, in endeavoring to
   promote the happiness of all they had to do with, and in the pursuit of
   what is just, and right, and good, as the general bent of their mind,
   and end of their life; and that doing an action of baseness or cruelty,
   would be as great violence to their self, as much breaking in upon
   their nature, as any external force. Persons of this character would
   add, if they might be heard, that they consider themselves as acting in
   the view of an infinite Being, who is in a much higher sense the object
   of reverence and of love, than all the world besides; and, therefore,
   they could have no more enjoyment from a wicked action done under his
   eye, than the persons to whom they are making their apology could, if
   all mankind were the spectators of it; and that the satisfaction of
   approving themselves to his unerring judgment, to whom they thus refer
   all their actions, is a more continued, settled satisfaction than any
   this world can afford; as also that they have, no less than others, a
   mind free and open to all the common innocent gratifications of it,
   such as they are. And, if we go no further, does there appear any
   absurdity in this? Will anyone take upon him to say, that a man cannot
   find his account in this general course of life, as much as in the most
   unbounded ambition, and the excesses of pleasure? Or that such a person
   has not consulted so well for himself, for the satisfaction and peace
   of his own mind, as the ambitious or dissolute man? And though the
   consideration, that God himself will in the end justify their taste,
   and support their cause, is not formally to be insisted upon here; yet
   thus much comes in, that all enjoyments whatever are much more clear
   and unmixed, from the assurance that they will end well. Is it certain,
   then, that there is nothing in these pretensions to happiness?
   especially when there are not wanting persons, who have supported
   themselves with satisfactions of this kind in sickness, poverty,
   disgrace, and in the very pangs of death; whereas it is manifest all
   other enjoyments fail in these circumstances. This surely looks
   suspicious of having somewhat in it. Self-love, methinks, should be
   alarmed. May she not possibly pass over greater pleasures, than those
   she is so wholly taken up with?

   The short of the matter is no more than this. Happiness consists in the
   gratification of certain affections, appetites, passions, with objects
   which are by nature adapted to them. Self-love may indeed set us on
   work to gratify these. But happiness or enjoyment has no immediate
   connexion with self-love, but arises from such gratifications alone.
   Love of our neighbor is one of those affections. This, considered as a
   virtuous principle, is gratified by a consciousness of endeavoring to
   promote the good of others; but, considered as a natural affection, its
   gratification consists in the actual accomplishment of this endeavor.
   Now, indulgence or gratification of this affection, whether in that
   consciousness, or this accomplishment, has the same respect to
   interest, as indulgence of any other affection; they equally proceed
   from, or do not proceed from self-love; they equally include, or
   equally exclude, this principle. Thus it appears, that "benevolence and
   the pursuit of public good hath at least as great respect to self-love
   and the pursuit of private good, as any other particular passions, and
   their respective pursuits."

   Neither is covetousness, whether as a temper or a pursuit, any
   exception to this. For if by covetousness is meant the desire and
   pursuit of riches for their own sake, without any regard to, or
   consideration of the uses of them; this hath as little to do with
   self-love, as benevolence hath. But by this word is usually meant, not
   such madness and total distraction of mind, but immoderate affection to
   and pursuit of riches, as possessions, in order to some further end:
   namely, satisfaction, interest, or good. This, therefore, is not a
   particular affection, or particular pursuit, but it is the general
   principle of self-love, and the general pursuit of our own interest;
   for which reason, the word selfish is by everyone appropriated to this
   temper and pursuit. Now, as it is ridiculous, to assert, that self-love
   and the love of our neighbor are the same; so neither is it asserted,
   that following these different affections hath the same tendency and
   respect to our own interest. The comparison is not between self-love
   and the love of our neighbor; between pursuit of our own interest, and
   the interest of others; but between the several particular affections
   in human nature towards external objects, as one part of the
   comparison: and the one particular affection to the good of our
   neighbor, as the one part of it: and it has been shown, that all these
   have the same respect to self-love and private interest.

   There is indeed frequently an inconsistence, or interfering, between
   self-love or private interest, and the several particular appetites,
   passions, affections, or the pursuits they lead to. But this
   competition or interfering is merely accidental; and happens much
   oftener between pride, revenge, sensual gratifications, and private
   interest, than between private interest and benevolence. For nothing is
   more common, than to see men give themselves up to a passion or an
   affection to their own prejudice and ruin, and in direct contradiction
   to manifest and real interest, and the loudest calls of self-love:
   whereas the seeming competitions and interfering between benevolence
   and private interest, relate much more to the materials or means of
   enjoyment, than to enjoyment itself. There is often an interfering in
   the former, when there is none in the latter. Thus, as to riches: so
   much money as a man gives away, so much less will remain in his
   possession. Here is a real interfering. But though a man cannot
   possibly give without less lessening his fortune, yet there are
   multitudes might give without lessening their own enjoyment; because
   they say have more than they can turn to any real use or advantage to
   themselves. Thus, the more thought and time any one employs about the
   interests and good of others, he must necessarily have less to attend
   his own; but he may have so ready and large a supply of his own wants,
   that such thought might be really useless to himself, though of great
   service and assistance to others.

   The general mistake, that there is some greater inconsistence between
   endeavoring to promote the good of another and self-interest, than
   between self-interest and pursuing any thing else, seems, as hath
   already been hinted, to arise from our notions of property; and to be
   carried on by this property's being supposed to be itself our happiness
   or good. People are so very much taken up with this one subject, that
   they seem from it to have formed a general way of thinking, which they
   apply to other things that they have nothing to do with. Hence, in a
   confused and slight way, it might well be taken for granted, that
   another's having no interest in an affection, (i. e. his good not being
   the object of it) renders, as one may speak, the proprietor's interest
   in it greater; and that if another had an interest in it, this would
   render his less, or occasion that such affection could not be so
   friendly to self-love, or conducive to private good, as an affection or
   pursuit which has not a regard to the good of another. This, I say,
   might be taken for granted, whilst it was not attended to, that the
   object of every particular affection is equally somewhat external to
   ourselves: and whether it be the good of another person, or whether it
   be any other external thing, makes no alteration with regard to its
   being one's own affection, and the gratification of it one's own
   private enjoyment. And so far as it is taken for granted, that barely
   having the means and materials of enjoyment is what constitutes
   interest and happiness; that our interest or good consists in
   possessions themselves, in having the property of riches, houses lands,
   gardens, not in the enjoyment of them; so far it will even more
   strongly be taken for granted, in the way already explained, that an
   affection's conducing to the good of another, must even necessarily
   occasion it to conduce less to private good, if not to be positively
   detrimental to it. For, if property and happiness are one and the same
   thing, as by increasing the property of another, you lessen your own
   property, so by promoting the happiness of another, you must lessen
   your own happiness. But whatever occasioned the mistake, I hope it has
   been fully proved to be one; as it has been proved, that there is no
   peculiar rivalship or competition between self-love and benevolence;
   that as there may be a competition between these two, so there may also
   between any particular affection whatever and self-love; that every
   particular affection, benevolence among the rest, is subservient to
   self-love, by being the instrument of private enjoyment; and that in
   one respect benevolence contributes more to private interest, i. e.
   enjoyment or satisfaction, than any other of the particular common
   affections, as it is in a degree its own gratification.

   And to all these things may be added, that religion, from whence arises
   our strongest obligation to benevolence, is so far from disowning the
   principle of self-love, that it often addresses itself to that very
   principle, and always to the mind in that state when reason presides;
   and there call no access be had to the understanding, but by convincing
   men, that the course of life we would persuade them to is not contrary
   to their interest. It may be allowed, without any prejudice to the
   cause of virtue and religion, that our ideas of happiness and misery
   are, of all our ideas, the nearest and most important to us; that they
   will, nay, if you please, that they ought to prevail over those of
   order, and beauty, and harmony, and proportion, if there should ever
   be, as it is impossible there ever should be, any inconsistency between
   them; though these last, too, as expressing the fitness of actions, are
   real as truth itself. Let it be allowed, though virtue or moral
   rectitude does indeed consist in affection to and pursuit of what is
   right and good, as such: yet that, when we sit down in a cool hour, we
   can neither justify to ourselves this or any other pursuit, till we are
   convinced that it will be for our happiness, or, at least, not contrary
   to it.

   Common reason and humanity will have some influence upon mankind,
   whatever becomes of speculations: but, so far as the interests of
   virtue depend upon the theory of it being secured from open scorn, so
   far its very being in the world depends upon its appearing to have no
   contrariety to private interest and self-love. The foregoing
   observations, therefore, it is hoped, may have gained a little ground
   in favor of the precept before us, the particular explanation of which
   shall be the subject of the next discourse.

   I will conclude, at present, with observing the peculiar obligation
   which we are under to virtue and religion, as enforced in the verses
   following the text, in the epistle for the day, from our Saviour's
   coming into the world. "The night is far spent, the day is at hand; let
   us, therefore, cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the
   armor of light," &c. The meaning and force of which exhortation is,
   that Christianity lays us under new obligations to a good life, as by
   it the will of God is more clearly revealed, and as it affords
   additional motives to the practice of it, over and above those which
   arise out of the nature of virtue and vice; I might add, as our Saviour
   has set us a perfect example of goodness in our own nature. Now, love
   and charity is plainly the thing in which he hath placed his religion;
   in which, therefore, as we have any pretence to the name of Christians,
   we must place ours. He hath at once enjoined it upon us by the way of
   command, with peculiar force; and by his example, as having undertaken
   the work of our salvation, out of pure love and good will to mankind.
   The endeavor to set home this example upon our minds, is a very proper
   employment of this season, which is bringing on the festival of his
   birth; which, as it may teach us many excellent lessons of humility,
   resignation, and obedience to the will of God; so there is none it
   recommends with greater authority, force, and advantage, than this of
   love and charity; since it was "for us men, and for our salvation, that
   he came down from heaven, and was incarnate, and was made man;" that he
   might teach us our duty, and more especially that he might enforce the
   practice of it, reform mankind, and finally bring us to that "eternal
   salvation, of which he is the Author to all those that obey him."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [40] unclear note
     __________________________________________________________________

Sermon XII. Upon the Love of Our Neighbor -- Rom. xiii. 9.

   And if there be any other commandment, it is briefly comprehended in
   this saying, namely, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.

   Having already removed the prejudices against public spirit, or the
   love of our neighbor, on the side of private interest and self-lore; I
   proceed to the particular explanation of the precept before us, by
   showing, "who is our neighbor: In what sense we are required to love
   him as ourselves: The influence such love would have upon our behaviour
   in life:" And, lastly, "How this commandment comprehends in it all
   others."

   I. The objects and due extent of this affection will be understood by
   attending to the nature of it, and to the nature and circumstances of
   mankind in this world. The love of our neighbor is the same with
   charity, benevolence, or good will. It is an affection to the good and
   happiness of our fellow creatures. This implies in it a disposition to
   produce happiness: and this is the simple notion of goodness, which
   appears so amiable wherever we meet with it. From hence it is easy to
   see, that the perfection of goodness consists in love to the whole
   universe. This is the perfection of Almighty God.

   But as man is so much limited in his capacity, as so small a part of
   the creation comes under his notice and influence, and as we are not
   used to consider things in so general a way; it is not to be thought
   of, that the universe should be the object of benevolence to such
   creatures as we are. Thus, in that precept of our Saviour, "Be ye
   perfect, even as your Father, which is in heaven, is perfect," [41] the
   perfection of the divine goodness is proposed to our imitation, as it
   is promiscuous, and extends to the evil as well as the good; not as it
   is absolutely universal, imitation of it in this respect being plainly
   beyond us. The object is too vast. For this reason moral writers also
   have substituted a less general object for our benevolence, mankind.
   But this likewise is an object too general, and very much out of our
   view. Therefore, persons more practical have, instead of mankind, put
   our country; and made the principle of virtue, of human virtue, to
   consist in the entire uniform love of our country. And this is what we
   call a public spirit; which in men of public stations is the character
   of a patriot. But this is speaking to the upper part of the world.
   Kingdoms and governments are large; and the sphere of action of far the
   greatest part of mankind is much narrower than the government they live
   under: or, however, common men do not consider their actions as
   affecting the whole community of which they are members. There plainly
   is wanting a less general and nearer object of benevolence for the bulk
   of men than that of their country. Therefore the Scripture, not being a
   book of theory and speculation, but a plain rule of life for mankind,
   has with the utmost possible propriety put the principle of virtue upon
   the love of our neighbor; which is that part of the universe, that part
   of mankind, that part of our country, which comes under our immediate
   notice, acquaintance, and influence, and with which we have to do.

   This is plainly the true account, or reason, why our Saviour places the
   principle of virtue in the love of our neighbor: and the account itself
   shows who are comprehended under that relation.

   II. Let us now consider in what sense we are commanded to love our
   neighbor as ourself.

   This precept, in its first delivery by our Saviour, is thus introduced:
   "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart with all thy
   soul, and with all thy strength; and thy neighbor as thyself." These
   very different manners of expression do not lead our thoughts to the
   same measure or degree of love, common to both objects; but to one,
   peculiar to each. Supposing, then, which is to be supposed, a distinct
   meaning and propriety in the words, "as thyself;" the precept we are
   considering will admit of any of these senses: That we bear the same
   kind of affection to our neighbor, as we do to ourselves: or, that the
   love we bear to our neighbor should, have some certain proportion or
   other to self-love: or, lastly, that it should bear the particular
   proportion of equality, that it be in the same degree.

   First, the precept may be understood as requiring only, that we have
   the same kind of affection to our fellow creatures, as to ourselves.
   That, as every man has the principle of self-love, which disposes him
   to avoid misery, and consult his own happiness; so we should cultivate
   the affection of good will to our neighbor, and that it should
   influence us to have the same kind of regard to him. This, at least,
   must be commanded: and this will not only prevent our being injurious
   to him, but will also put us upon promoting his good. There are
   blessings in life, which we share in common with others; peace, plenty,
   freedom, healthful seasons. But real benevolence to our fellow
   creatures would give us the notion of a common interest in a stricter
   sense: for in the degree we love another, his interest, his joys and
   sorrows, are our own. It is from self-love that we form the notion of
   private good, and consider it as our own. Love of our neighbor would
   teach us thus to appropriate to ourselves his good and welfare; to
   consider ourselves as having a real share in his happiness. Thus the
   principle of benevolence would be an advocate within our own breasts,
   to take care of the interests of our fellow creatures in all the
   interfering and competitions which cannot but be, from the imperfection
   of our nature, and the state we are in. It would likewise, in some
   measure, lessen that interfering; and hinder men from forming so strong
   a notion of private good, exclusive of the good of others, as we
   commonly do. Thus, as the private affection makes us in a peculiar
   manner sensible of humanity, justice, or injustice, when exercised
   towards ourselves; love of our neighbor would give us the same kind of
   sensibility in his behalf. This would be the greatest security of our
   uniform obedience to that most equitable rule: "Whatsoever ye would
   that men should do unto you, do ye even so unto them."

   All this is indeed no more than that we should have a real love to our
   neighbor: but then, which is to he observed, the words, as thyself,
   express this in the most distinct manner, and determine the precept to
   relate to the affection itself. The advantage which this principle of
   benevolence has over other remote considerations is, that it is itself
   the temper of virtue; and likewise, that it is the chief, nay, the only
   effectual security of our performing the several offices of kindness we
   owe to our fellow creatures. When, from distant considerations, men
   resolve upon any thing to which they have no liking, or, perhaps, an
   averseness, they are perpetually finding out evasions and excuses;
   which need never be wanting, if people look for them: and they
   equivocate with themselves in the plainest cases in the world. This may
   be in respect to single determinate acts of virtue: but it comes in
   much more, where the obligation is to a general course of behaviour;
   and most of all, if it be such as cannot be reduced to fixed
   determinate rules. This observation may account for the diversity of
   the expression, in that known passage of the prophet Micah, "To do
   justly, and to love mercy." A man's heart must be formed to humanity
   and benevolence, he must love mercy, otherwise he will not act
   mercifully in any settled course of behaviour. As consideration of the
   future sanctions of religion is our only security of persevering in our
   duty, in cases of great temptations; so, to get our heart and temper
   formed to a love and liking of what is good, is absolutely necessary in
   order to our behaving rightly in the familiar and daily intercourses
   amongst mankind.

   Secondly, The precept before us may be understood to require, that we
   love our neighbor in some certain proportion or other, according as we
   love ourselves. And indeed a man's character cannot be determined by
   the love he bears to his neighbor, considered absolutely: but the
   proportion which this bears to self-love, whether it be attended to or
   not, is the chief thing which forms the character, and influences the
   actions. For, as the form of the body is a composition of various
   parts; so likewise our inward structure is not simple or uniform, but a
   composition of various passions, appetites, affections, together with
   rationality; including in this last both the discernment of what is
   right, and a disposition to regulate ourselves by it. There is greater
   variety of parts in what we call a character, than there are features m
   a face: and the morality of that is no more determined by one part,
   than the beauty or deformity of this is by one single feature. Each is
   to be judged of by all the parts of features, not taken singly, but
   together. In the inward frame the various passions, appetites,
   affections, stand in different respects to each other. The principles
   in our mind may be contradictory, or checks and allays only, or
   incentives and assistants to each other. And principles, which in their
   nature have no kind of contrariety or affinity, may yet accidentally be
   each other's allays or incentives.

   From hence it comes to pass, that though we were able to look into the
   inward contexture of the heart, and see with the greatest exactness in
   what degree anyone principle is in a particular man; we could not from
   thence determine, how far that principle would go towards forming the
   character, or what influence it would have upon the actions, unless we
   could likewise discern what other principles prevailed in him, and see
   the proportion which that one bears to the other's. Thus, though two
   men should have the affection of compassion in the same degree exactly,
   yet one may have the principle of resentment, or of ambition, so strong
   in him, is to prevail over that of compassion, and prevent its having
   any influence upon his actions; so that he may deserve the character of
   a hard or cruel man. Whereas the other, having compassion in just the
   same degree only, yet having resentment or ambition in a lower degree;
   his compassion may prevail over them, so as to influence his actions,
   and to denominate his temper compassionate. So that, how strange soever
   it may appear to people who do not attend to the thing, yet it is quite
   manifest, that when we say one man is more resenting or compassionate
   than another, this does not necessarily imply that one has the
   principle of resentment or of compassion stronger than the other. For
   if the proportion, which resentment or compassion bears to other inward
   principles, is greater in one than in the other; this is itself
   sufficient to denominate one more resenting or compassionate than the
   other.

   Further, the whole system, as I may speak, of affections (including
   rationality) which constitute the heart, as this word is used in
   Scripture and on moral subjects, are each and all of them stronger in
   some than in others. Now the proportion which the two general
   affections, benevolence and self-love, bear to each other, according to
   this interpretation of the text, denominates men's character as to
   virtue. Suppose then one man to have the principle of benevolence in a
   higher degree than another: it will not follow from hence, that his
   general temper, or character, or actions, will be more benevolent than
   the others. For he may have self-love in such a degree as quite to
   prevail over benevolence; so that it may have no influence at all upon
   his actions: whereas benevolence in the other person, though in a lower
   degree, may yet be the strongest principle in his heart; and strong
   enough to be the guide of his actions, so as to denominate him a good
   and virtuous man. The case is here as in scales: it is not one weight
   considered in itself, which determines whether the scale shall ascend
   or descend; but this depends upon the proportion which that one weight
   hath to the other.

   It being thus manifest, that the influence which benevolence has upon
   our actions, and how far it goes towards forming our character, is not
   determined by the degree itself of this principle in our mind, but by
   the proportion it has to self-love and other principles; a comparison
   also being made in the text between self-love and the love of our
   neighbor; these joint considerations afforded sufficient occasion for
   treating here of that proportion: it plainly is implied in the precept,
   though it should be questioned whether it be the exact meaning of the
   words, "as thyself."

   Love of our neighbor, then, must bear some proportion to self-love, and
   virtue, to be sure, consists in the due proportion. What this due
   proportion is, whether as a principle in the mind, or as exerted in
   actions, can be judged of only from our nature and condition in this
   world. Of the degree in which affections and the principles of action,
   considered in themselves, prevail, we have no measure: let us then
   proceed to the course of behaviour, the actions they produce.

   Both our nature and condition require, that each particular man should
   make particular provision for himself; and the inquiry, what proportion
   benevolence should have to self-love, when brought down to practice,
   will be, what is a competent care and provision for ourselves? And how
   certain soever it be, that each man must determine this for himself;
   and how ridiculous soever it would be, for any to attempt to determine
   it for another: yet it is to be observed, that the proportion is real;
   and that a competent provision has a bound; and that it cannot be all
   which we can possibly get and keep within our grasp, without legal
   injustice. Mankind almost universally bring in vanity, supplies for
   what is called a life of pleasure, covetousness, or imaginary notions
   of superiority over others, to determine this question: but every one
   who desires to act a proper part in society, would do well to consider,
   how far any of them come in to determine it, in the way of moral
   consideration. All that can be said is, supposing, what, as the world
   goes, is so much to be supposed that it is scarce to be mentioned, that
   persons do not neglect what they really owe to themselves; the more of
   their care and thought, and of their fortune, they employ in doing good
   to their fellow creatures, the nearer they come up to the law of
   perfection, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself."

   Thirdly, If the words, "as thyself," were to be understood of an
   equality of affection, it would not be attended with those
   consequences, which perhaps may be thought to follow from it. Suppose a
   person to nave the same settled regard to others, as to himself; that
   in every deliberate scheme or pursuit he took their interest into the
   account in the same degree as his own, so far as an equality of
   affection would produce this; yet he would, in fact, and ought to be,
   much more taken up and employed about himself, and his own concerns,
   than about others and their interests. For, besides the one common
   affection towards himself and his neighbor, he would have several other
   particular affections, passions, appetites, which he could not possibly
   feel in common both for himself and others: now, these sensations
   themselves very much employ us, and have perhaps as great influence as
   self-love. So far indeed as self-love, and cool reflection upon what is
   for our interest, would set us on work to gain a supply of our own
   several wants; so far the love of our neighbor would make us do the
   same for him: but the degree in which we are put upon seeking and
   making use of the means of gratification, by the feeling of those
   affections, appetites, and passions, must necessarily be peculiar to
   ourselves.

   That there are particular passions, (suppose shame, resentment,) which
   men seem to have, and feel in common both for themselves and others,
   makes no alteration in respect to those passions and appetites which
   cannot possibly be thus felt in common. From hence (and perhaps more
   things of the like kind might be mentioned) it follows, that though
   there were an equality of affection to both, yet regards to ourselves
   would be more prevalent than attention to the concerns of others.

   And from moral considerations it ought to be so, supposing still the
   equality of affection commanded: because we are in peculiar manner, as
   I may speak, intrusted with ourselves; and, therefore, care of our own
   interests, as well as of our conduct, particularly belongs to us.

   To these things must be added, that moral obligations can extend no
   further than to natural possibilities. Now, we have a perception of our
   own interests, like consciousness of our own existence, which we always
   carry about with us; and which, in its continuation, kind, and degree,
   seems impossible to be felt in respect to the interests of others.

   From all these things it fully appears, that though we were to love our
   neighbor in the same degree as we love ourselves, so far as this is
   possible; yet the care of ourselves, of the individual, would not be
   neglected; the apprehended danger of which seems to be the only
   objection against understanding the precept in this strict sense.

   III. The general temper of mind which the due love of our neighbor
   would form us to, and the influence it would have upon our behaviour in
   life, is now to be considered. The temper and behaviour of charity is
   explained at large, in that known passage of St Paul: "Charity
   suffereth long, and is kind; charity envieth not, doth not behave
   itself unseemly, seeketh not her own, thinketh no evil, beareth all
   things, believeth all things, hopeth all things." [42] As to the
   meaning of the expressions, "seeketh not her own, thinketh no evil,
   believeth all things;" however those expression may be explained away,
   this meekness, and, in some degree, easiness of temper, readiness to
   forego our right for the sake of peace, as well as in the way of
   compassion, freedom from mistrust, and disposition to believe well of
   our neighbor; this general temper, I say, accompanies, and is plainly
   the effect of love and good will. And, though such is the world in
   which we live, that experience and knowledge of it not only may, but
   must beget in us greater regard to ourselves, and doubtfulness of the
   characters of others, than is natural to mankind, yet these ought not
   to be carried further than the nature and course of things make
   necessary. It is still true, even in the present state of things, bad
   as it is, that a real good man had rather be deceived, than be
   suspicious; had rather forego his known right than run the venture of
   doing even a hard thing. This is the general temper of that charity, of
   which the apostle asserts, that if he had it not, giving his "body to
   be burned would avail him nothing;" and which, he says, "shall never
   fail."

   The happy influence of this temper extends to every different relation
   and circumstance in human life. It plainly renders a man better, more
   to be desired, as to all the respects and relations, we can stand in to
   each other. The benevolent man is disposed to make use of all external
   advantages in such a manner as shall contribute to the good of others,
   as well as to his own satisfaction. His own satisfaction consists in
   this. He will be easy and kind to his dependants, compassionate to the
   poor and distressed, friendly to all with whom he has to do. This
   includes the good neighbor, parent, master, magistrate: and such a
   behaviour would plainly make dependance (sic), inferiority, and even
   servitude, easy. So that a good or charitable man, of superior rank in
   wisdom fortune, authority, is a common blessing to the place he lives
   in: happiness grows under his influence. This good principle in
   inferiors would discover itself in paying respect, gratitude,
   obedience, as due. It were therefore, methinks, one just way of trying
   one's own character, to ask ourselves, Am I in reality a better master
   or servant, a better friend, a better neighbor, than such and such
   persons; whom, perhaps, I may think not to deserve the character of
   virtue and religion so much as I myself?

   And as to the spirit of party, which unhappily prevails amongst
   mankind, whatever are the distinctions which serve for a supply to it,
   some or other of which have obtained in all ages and countries; one who
   is thus friendly to his kind, will immediately make due allowances for
   it, as what cannot but be amongst such creatures as men, in such a
   world as this. And as wrath and fury and overbearing upon these
   occasions proceed, as I may speak, from men's feeling only on their own
   side; so a common feeling, for others as well as for ourselves, would
   render us sensible to this truth, which it is strange can have so
   little influence; that we ourselves differ from others, just as much as
   they do from us. I put the matter in this way, because it can scarce be
   expected that the generality of men should see, that those things which
   are made the occasions of dissension and fomenting the party spirit,
   are really nothing at all: but it may be expected from all people, how
   much soever they are in earnest about their respective peculiarities,
   that humanity, and common good will to their fellow creatures, should
   moderate and restrain that wretched spirit.

   This good temper of charity likewise would prevent strife and enmity
   arising from other occasions: it would prevent our giving just cause of
   offence, and our taking it without cause. And in cases of real injury,
   a good man will make all the allowances which are to be made; and,
   without any attempts of retaliation, he will only consult his own and
   other men's security for the future against injustice and wrong.

   IV. I proceed to consider lastly, what is affirmed of the precept now
   explained, that it comprehends in it all others; i. e. that to love our
   neighbor as ourselves includes in it all virtues.

   Now, the way in which every maxim of conduct, or general speculative
   assertion, when it is to be explained at large, should be treated, is,
   to show what are the particular truths which were designed to be
   comprehended under such a general observation, how far it is strictly
   true; and then the limitations, restrictions and exceptions. If there
   be exceptions, with which it is to be understood. But it is only the
   former of these, namely, how far the assertion in the text holds, and
   the ground of the pre-eminence assigned to the precept of it, which in
   strictness comes into our present consideration.

   However, in almost every thing that is said, there is somewhat to be
   understood beyond what is explicitly laid down, and which we of course
   supply; somewhat, I mean, which would not be commonly called a
   restriction or limitation. Thus, when benevolence is said to be the sum
   of virtue, it is not spoken of as a blind propension, but as a
   principle in reasonable creatures, and so to be directed by their
   reason: for reason and reflection come into our notion of a moral
   agent. And that will lead us to consider distant consequences; as well
   as the immediate tendency of an action: it will teach us, that the care
   of some persons, suppose children and families, is particularly
   committed to our charge by nature and Providence; as also, that there
   are other circumstances, suppose friendship or former obligations,
   which require that we do good to some, preferably to others. Reason,
   considered merely as subservient to benevolence, as assisting to
   produce the greatest good, will teach us to have particular regard to
   these relations and circumstances; because it is plainly for the good
   of the world that they should be regarded. And as there are numberless
   cases, in which, notwithstanding appearances, we are not competent
   judges, whether a particular action will upon the whole do good or
   harm; reason in the same way will teach us to be cautious how we act in
   these cases of uncertainty. It will suggest to our consideration, which
   is the safer side; how liable we are to be led wrong by passion and
   private interest; and what regard is due to laws, and .the judgment of
   mankind. All these things must come into consideration, were it only in
   order to determine which way of acting is likely to produce the
   greatest good. Thus, upon supposition that it were, in the strictest
   sense true, without limitation, that benevolence includes in it all
   virtues; yet reason must come in as its guide and director, in order to
   attain its own end, the end of benevolence, the greatest public good.
   Reason then being thus included, let us now consider the truth of the
   assertion itself.

   First, It is manifest that nothing can be of consequence to mankind or
   any creature, but happiness. This then is all which any person can, in
   strictness of speaking, be said to have a right to. We can, therefore,
   owe no man any thing, but only to further and promote his happiness,
   according to our abilities. And, therefore, a disposition and endeavor
   to do good to all with whom we have to do, in the degree and manner
   which the different relations we stand in to them require, is a
   discharge of all the obligations we are under to them.

   As human nature is not one simple uniform thing, but a composition of
   various parts, body, spirit, appetites, particular passions, and
   affections; for each of which reasonable self-love would lead men to
   have due regard, and make suitable provision: so society consists of
   various parts, to which we stand in different respects and relations;
   and just benevolence would as surely lead us to have due regard to each
   of these, and behave as the respective relations require. Reasonable
   good will, and right behaviour towards our fellow creatures, are in a
   manner the same: only that the former expresseth the principle as it is
   in the mind; the latter, the principle as it were, become external, i.
   e. exerted in actions.

   And so far as temperance, sobriety, and moderation in sensual
   pleasures, and the contrary vices, have any respect to our fellow
   creatures, any influences upon their quiet, welfare, and happiness; as
   they always have a real, and often a near, influence upon it; so far it
   is manifest those virtues may be produced by the love of our neighbor,
   and that the contrary vices would be prevented by it. Indeed, if men's
   regard to themselves will not restrain them from excess, it may be
   thought little probable, that their love to others will he sufficient:
   but the reason is, that their love to other's is not, any more than
   their regard to themselves, just, and in its due degree. There are,
   however, manifest instances of persons kept sober and temperate from
   regard to their affairs, and the welfare of those who depend upon them.
   And it is obvious to every one, that habitual excess, a dissolute
   course of life, implies a general neglect of the duties we owe towards
   our friends, our families, and our country.

   From hence it is manifest, that the common virtues; and the common
   vices of mankind, may be traced up to benevolence, or the want of it.
   And this entitles the precept, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as
   thyself," to the pre-eminence given to it; and is a justification of
   the apostle's assertion, that all other commandments are comprehended
   in it: whatever cautions and restrictions [43] there are, which might
   require to be considered, if we were to state particularly and at
   length, what is virtue and right behaviour in mankind. But,

   Secondly, It might be added, that, in a higher and more general way of
   consideration, leaving out the particular nature of creatures, and the
   particular circumstances in which they are placed, benevolence seems in
   the strictest sense to include in it all that is good and worthy; all
   that is good, which we have any distinct particular notion of. We have
   no clear conception of any positive moral attribute in the supreme
   Being, but what may be resolved up into goodness. And, if we consider a
   reasonable creature or moral agent, without regard to the particular
   relations and circumstances in which he is placed, we cannot conceive
   any thing else to come in towards determining whether he is to be
   ranked in a higher or lower class of virtuous beings, but the higher or
   lower degree in which that principle, and what is manifestly connected
   with it, prevail in him.

   That which we more strictly call piety, or the love of God, and which
   is an essential part of a right temper, some may perhaps imagine no way
   connected with benevolence: yet, surely, they must be connected, if
   there be indeed in being an object infinitely good. Human nature is so
   constituted, that every good affection implies the love of itself; i.
   e. becomes the object of a new affection in the same person. Thus, to
   be righteous, implies in it the love of righteousness; to be
   benevolent, the love of benevolence; to be good, the love of goodness;
   whether this righteousness, benevolence, or goodness, be viewed as in
   our own mind, or in another's: and the love of God as a Being perfectly
   good, is the love of perfect goodness contemplated in a being or
   person. Thus morality and religion, virtue and piety, will at last
   necessarily coincide, run up into one and the same point, and love will
   be in all senses the end of the commandment.

     O Almighty God, inspire us with this divine principle: kill in us
     all the seeds of envy and ill-will; and help us, by cultivating
     within ourselves the love of our. neighbor, to improve in the love
     of thee. Thou hast placed us in various kindreds, friendships, and
     relations, as the school of discipline for our affections: help us,
     by the due exercise of them, to improve to perfection; till all
     partial affection be lost in that entire universal one, and thou, O
     God, shalt be all in all!
     __________________________________________________________________

   [41] Matt. v. 48.

   [42] 1 Cor. xiii.

   [43] For instance: as we are not competent judges what is, upon the
   whole, for the good of the world, there may be other immediate ends
   appointed us to pursue, besides that one of doing good, or producing
   happiness. Though the good of the creation be the only end of the
   Author of it, yet he may have laid us under particular obligations,
   which we may discern and feel ourselves under, quite distinct from a
   perception, that the observance or violation of them is for the
   happiness or misery of our fellow creatures. And this is, in fact, the
   case. For there are certain dispositions of mind and certain actions,
   which are in themselves approved or disapproved by mankind, abstracted
   from the consideration of their tendency to the happiness or misery of
   the world; approved or disapproved by reflection, by that principle
   within, which is the guide of life, the judge of right and wrong.
   Numberless instances of this kind might be mentioned. There are pieces
   of treachery, which in themselves appear base and detestable to every
   one. There are actions, which perhaps can scarce have any other general
   name given them than indecencies, which yet are odious and shocking to
   human nature. There is such a thing as meanness, a little mind, which,
   as it is quite distinct from incapacity, so it raises a dislike and
   disapprobation quite different from that contempt, which men are too
   apt to have of mere folly. On the other hand, what we call greatness of
   mind, is the object of another sort of approbation, than superior
   understanding. Fidelity, honor, strict justice, are themselves approved
   in the highest degree, abstracted from the consideration of their
   tendency. Now, whether it be thought that each of these are connected
   with benevolence in our nature, and so may be considered as the same
   thing with it; or whether some of them be thought an inferior kind of
   virtues and vices, somewhat like natural beauties and deformities; or,
   lastly, plain exceptions to the general rule; thus much, however, is
   certain, that the things now instanced in, and numberless others, are
   approved or disapproved by mankind in general, in quite another view
   than as conducive to the happiness or misery of the world.
     __________________________________________________________________

Sermon XIII. Upon the Love of God -- Matt. xxii. 37.

   Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
   soul, and with all thy mind.

   Every body knows, you therefore need only just be put in mind, that
   there is such a thing, as having so great horror of one extreme, as to
   run insensibly and of course into the contrary; and that a doctrine's
   having been a shelter for enthusiasm, or made to serve the purposes of
   superstition, is no proof of the falsity of it: truth or right being
   somewhat real in itself, and so not to be judged of by its liableness
   to abuse, or by its supposed distance from, or nearness to error. It
   may be sufficient to have mentioned this in general, without taking
   notice of the particular extravagancies, which have been vented under
   the pretence or endeavor of explaining the love of God; or how
   manifestly we are got into the contrary extreme, under the notion of a
   reasonable religion; so very reasonable as to have nothing to do with
   the heart and affections, if these words signify any thing but the
   faculty by which we discern speculative truth.

   By the love of God, I would understand all those regards, all those
   affections of mind, which are due immediately to him from such a
   creature as man, and which rest in him as their end. As this does not
   include servile fear, so neither will any other regards, how reasonable
   soever, which respect any thing out of or besides the perfection of the
   divine nature, come into consideration here. But all fear is not
   excluded, because his displeasure is itself the natural proper object
   of fear. Reverence, ambition of his love and approbation, delight in
   the hope or consciousness of it, come likewise into this definition of
   the love of God; because he is the natural object of all those
   affections or movements of mind, as really as he is the object of the
   affection, which is in the strictest sense called love; and all of them
   equally rest in him, as their end. And they may all be understood to be
   implied in these words of our Saviour, without putting any force upon
   them; for he is speaking of the love of God, and our neighbor, as
   containing the whole of piety and virtue.

   It is plain, that the nature of man is so constituted, as to feel
   certain affections upon the sight or contemplation of certain objects.
   Now the very notion of affection implies resting in its objects as an
   end: And the particular affection to good characters, reverence, and
   moral love of them, is natural to all those who have any degree of real
   goodness in themselves. This will be illustrated by the description of
   a perfect character in a creature; and by considering the manner in
   which a good man, in, his presence, would be affected towards such a
   character. He would or course feel the affections of love, reverence,
   desire of his approbation, delight in the hope or consciousness of it.
   And surely all this is applicable, and may be brought up to that Being,
   who is infinitely more than an adequate object of all those affections;
   whom we are commanded to "love with all our heart, with all our soul,
   and with all our mind." And of these regards towards Almighty God, some
   are more particularly suitable to and becoming so imperfect a creature
   as man, in this mortal state we are passing through: and some of them,
   and perhaps other exercises of the mind, will be the employment and
   happiness of good men in a state of perfection.

   This is a general view of what the following discourse will contain.
   And it is manifest the subject is a real one: there is nothing in it
   enthusiastical or unreasonable. And if it be indeed at all a subject,
   it is one of the utmost importance.

   As mankind have a faculty by which they discern speculative truth, so
   we have various affections towards external objects. Understanding and
   temper, reason and affection, are as distinct ideas as reason and
   hunger; and one would think, could no more be confounded. It is by
   reason that we get the ideas of several objects of our affections: but
   in these cases reason and affection are no more the same, than sight of
   a particular object, and the pleasure or uneasiness consequent
   thereupon, are the same. Now, as reason tends to and rests in the
   discernment of truth, the object of it; so the very nature of affection
   consists in tending towards, and resting in, its objects as an end. We
   do indeed often, in common language, say, that things are loved,
   desired, esteemed, not for themselves, but for somewhat further,
   somewhat out of and beyond them: yet, in these cases, whoever will
   attend, will see; that these things are not in reality the objects of
   the affections, i. e. are not loved, desired, esteemed, but the
   somewhat further and beyond them. If we have no affections which rest
   in what are called their objects, then what is called affection, love,
   desire, hope, in human nature, is only an uneasiness in being at rest;
   an unquiet disposition to action, progress, pursuit, without end or
   meaning. But if there be any such thing as delight in the company of
   one person, rather than of another; whether in the way of friendship,
   or mirth and entertainment, it is all one, if it be without respect to
   fortune, honor, or increasing our stores of knowledge, or any thing
   beyond the present time; here is an instance of an affection absolutely
   resting in its object as its end, and being gratified, in the same way
   as the appetite of hunger is satisfied with food. Yet nothing is more
   common than to hear it asked, What advantage a man hath in such a
   course, suppose of study, particular friendships, or in any other?
   nothing, I say, is more common than to hear such a question put in a
   way which supposes no gain, advantage, or interest, but as a means to
   somewhat further: and if so, then there is no such thing at all as real
   interest, gain, or advantage. This is the same absurdity with respect
   to life, as an infinite series of effects without a cause is in
   speculation. The gain, advantage, or interest, consists in the delight
   itself, arising from such a faculty's having its object: neither is
   there any such thing as happiness or enjoyment, but what arises from
   hence. The pleasures of hope and of reflection are not exceptions: the
   former being only this happiness anticipated; the latter, the same
   happiness enjoyed over again after its time. And even the general
   expectation of future happiness can afford satisfaction, only as it is
   a present object to the principle of self-love.

   It was doubtless intended, that life should be very much a pursuit to
   the gross of mankind. But this is carried so much farther than is
   reasonable, that what gives immediate satisfaction, i. e. our present
   interest, is scarce considered as our interest at all. It is inventions
   which have only a remote tendency towards enjoyment, perhaps but a
   remote tendency towards gaining the means only of enjoyment, which are
   chiefly spoken of as useful to the world. And though this way of
   thinking were just, with respect to the imperfect state we are now in,
   where we know so little of satisfaction without satiety; yet it must be
   guarded against, when we are considering the happiness of a state of
   perfection; which happiness being enjoyment and not hope, must
   necessarily consist in this, that our affections have their objects,
   and rest in those objects as an end, i. e. be satisfied with them. This
   will further appear in the sequel of this discourse.

   Of the several affections, or inward sensations, which particular
   objects excite in man, there are some, the having of which implies the
   love of them, when they are reflected upon. [44] This cannot be said of
   all our affections, principles, and motives of action. It were
   ridiculous to assert, that a man, upon reflection, hath the same kind
   of approbation of the appetite of hunger, or the passion of fear, as he
   hath of good will to his fellow creatures. To be a just, a good, a
   righteous man, plainly carries with it a peculiar affection to, or love
   of justice, goodness, righteousness when these principles are the
   objects of contemplation. Now if a man approves of, or hath, an
   affection to any principle, in and for itself; incidental things
   allowed for, it will be the same whether he views it in his own mind or
   in another; in himself; or in his neighbor. This is the account of our
   approbation of, our moral love and affection to good characters; which
   cannot but be in those who can have any degrees of real goodness in
   themselves, and who discern and take notice of the same principle in
   others.

   From observation of what passes within ourselves, our, own actions, and
   the behaviour of others, the mind may carry on its reflections as far
   as it pleases; much beyond what we experience in ourselves, or discern
   in our fellow creatures. It may go on, and consider goodness as become
   an uniform continued principle of action, as conducted by reason, and
   forming a temper and character absolutely good and perfect, which is in
   a higher sense excellent, and proportionably the object of love and
   approbation.

   Let us then suppose a creature perfect according to his created nature:
   let his form be human, and his capacities no more than equal to those
   of the chief of men: goodness shall be his proper character; with
   wisdom to direct it, and power, within some certain determined sphere
   of action, to exert it: but goodness must be the simple actuating
   principle within him; this being the moral quality which is amiable, or
   the immediate object of love, as distinct from other affections of
   approbation. Here then is a finite object for our mind to tend towards,
   it to exercise itself upon: a creature perfect according to his
   capacity, fixed, steady, equally unmoved by weak pity, or more weak
   fury and resentment; forming the justest scheme of conduct; going on
   undisturbed in the execution of it, through the several methods of
   severity and reward, towards his end, namely, the general happiness of
   all with whom be hath to do, as in itself right and valuable. This
   character, though uniform in itself, in its principle, yet exerting
   itself in different ways, or considered in different views, may by its
   appearing variety move different affections. Thus, the severity of
   justice would not affect us in the same way, as an act of mercy: the
   adventitious qualities of wisdom and power may be considered in
   themselves; and even the strength of mind, which this immoveable
   goodness supposes, may likewise be viewed as an object of
   contemplation, distinct from the goodness itself. Superior excellence
   of any kind, as well as superior wisdom and power, is the object of awe
   and reverence to all creatures, whatever their moral character be: but
   so far as creatures of the lowest rank were good, so far the view of
   this character, as simply good, most appear amiable to them, be the
   object of, or beget love. Further, suppose we were conscious, that this
   superior person so far approved of us, that we had nothing servilely to
   fear from him; that he was really our friend, and kind and good to us
   in particular, as he had occasionally intercourse with us: we must be
   other creatures than we are, or we could not but feel the same kind of
   satisfaction and enjoyment (whatever would be the degree of it,) from
   this higher acquaintance and friendship, as we feel from common ones;
   the intercourse being real, and the persons equally present, in both
   cases. We should have a more ardent desire to be approved by his better
   judgment, and a satisfaction, in that approbation, of the same sort
   with what would be felt in respect to common persons, or be wrought in
   us by their presence.

   Let us now raise the character, and suppose this creature, for we are
   still going on with the supposition of a creature, our proper guardian
   and governor; that we were in a progress of being towards somewhat
   further; and that his scheme of government was too vast for our
   capacities to comprehend; remembering still that he is perfectly good,
   and our friend as well as our governor. Wisdom, power, goodness,
   accidentally viewed any where, would inspire reverence, awe, love: and
   as these affections would be raised in higher or lower degrees, in
   proportion as we had occasionally more or less intercourse with the
   creature endued with those qualities, so this further consideration and
   knowledge that he was our proper guardian and governor, would much more
   bring these objects and qualities home to ourselves; teach us they had
   a greater respect to us in particular, that we had a higher interest in
   that wisdom and power and goodness. We should, with joy, gratitude,
   reverence, love, trust, and dependance, appropriate the character, as
   what we had a right in, and make our boast in such our relation to it.
   And the conclusion of the whole would be, that we should refer
   ourselves implicitly to him, and cast ourselves entirely upon him. As
   the whole attention of life should be to obey his commands, so the
   highest enjoyment of it must arise from the contemplation of his
   character, and our relation to it, from a consciousness of his favor
   and approbation, and from the exercise of those affections towards him,
   which could not but be raised from his presence. A being who hath these
   attributes, who stands in this relation, and is thus sensibly present
   to the mind, must necessarily be the object of these affections: there
   is as real a correspondence between them; as between the lowest
   appetite of sense and its object.

   That this Being is not a creature, but the Almighty God; that he is of
   infinite power and wisdom and goodness, does not render him less the
   object of reverence and love, than he would be if he had those
   attributes only in a limited degree. The Being who made us, and upon
   whom we entirely depend, is the object of some regards. He hath given
   us certain affections of mind, which correspond to wisdom, power,
   goodness; i. e. which are raised upon view of those qualities. If then
   he be really wise, powerful, good, he is the natural object of those
   affections, which he hath endued us with, and which correspond to those
   attributes. That he is infinite in power, perfect in wisdom and
   goodness, makes no alteration, but only that he is the object of those
   affections raised to the highest pitch. He is not indeed to be
   discerned by any of our senses: "I go forward, but he is not there; and
   backward, but I cannot perceive him: on the left hand where he doth
   work, but I cannot behold him: he hideth himself on the right hand that
   I cannot see him. Oh that I knew where I might find him! that I might
   come even to his seat!" [45] But is he then afar off? Does he not fill
   heaven and earth with his presence? The presence of our fellow
   creatures affects our senses, and our senses give us the knowledge of
   their presence; which hath different kinds of influence upon us --
   love, joy, sorrow, restraint, encouragement, reverence. However, this
   influence is not immediately from our senses, but from that knowledge.
   Thus, suppose a person neither to see nor hear another, not to know by
   any of his senses, but yet certainly to know, that another was with
   him; this knowledge might, and in many cases would, have one or more of
   the effects before mentioned. It is therefore not only reasonable, but
   also natural, to be affected with a presence, though it be not the
   object of our senses: whether it be, or be not, is merely an accidental
   circumstance, which needs not come into consideration: it is the
   certainty that he is with us, and we with him, which hath the
   influence. We consider persons then as present, not only when they are
   within reach of our senses, but also when we are assured by any other
   means, that they are within such a nearness; nay, if they are not, we
   can recall them to our mind, and be moved towards them as present: and
   must he, who is so much more intimately with us, that "in him we live,
   and move, and have our being," be thought too distant to be the object
   of our affections? We own and feel the force of amiable and worthy
   qualities in our fellow creatures; and can we be insensible to the
   contemplation of perfect goodness? Do we reverence the shadows of
   greatness here below; are we solicitous about honor, and esteem, and
   the opinion of the world; and shall we not feel the same with respect
   to him, whose are wisdom and power in their original, who "is the God
   of judgment, by whom actions are weighed?"Thus love, reverence, desire
   of esteem, every faculty, every affection, tends towards, and is
   employed about its respective object in common cases: and must the
   exercise of them be suspended with regard to him alone, who is an
   object, an infinitely more than adequate object, to our most exalted
   faculties; him, "of whom, and through whom, and to whom are all
   things?"

   As we cannot remove from this earth, or change our general business on
   it, so neither can we alter our real nature. Therefore no exercise of
   the mind can be recommended, but only the exercise of those faculties
   you are conscious of. Religion does not demand new affections, but only
   claims the direction of those you already have, those affections you
   daily feel; though unhappily confined to objects, not altogether
   unsuitable, but altogether unequal to them. We only represent to you
   the higher, the adequate objects of those very faculties and
   affections. Let the man of ambition go on still to consider disgrace as
   the greatest evil; honor as his chief good. But disgrace, in whose
   estimation? Honor, in whose judgment? This is the only question. If
   shame, and delight in esteem, be spoken of as real, as any settled
   ground of pain or pleasure, both these must be in proportion to the
   supposed wisdom and worth of him by whom we are contemned or esteemed.
   Must it then be thought enthusiastical to speak of a sensibility of
   this sort, which shall have respect to an unerring judgment, to
   infinite wisdom; when we are assured this unerring judgment, this
   infinite wisdom, does observe upon our actions?

   It is the same with respect to the love of God in the strictest and
   most confined sense. We only offer and represent the highest object of
   an affection supposed already in your mind. Some degree of goodness
   must be previously supposed: this always implies the love of itself, an
   affection to goodness: the highest, the adequate object of this
   affection, is perfect goodness? which, therefore, we are to "love with
   all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our strength." "Must we
   then, forgetting our own interest, as it were go out of ourselves, and
   love God for his own sake?"No more forget your own interest, no more go
   out of yourselves, than when you prefer one place, one prospect, the
   conversation of one man to that of another. Does not every affection
   necessarily imply, that the object of it be itself loved? If it be not,
   it is not the object of the affection. You may and ought, if you can,
   but it is a great mistake to think you can, love, or fear, or hate any
   thing, from consideration that such love, or fear, or hatred, may be a
   means of obtaining good or avoiding evil. But the question, whether we
   ought to love God for his sake or for our own, being a mere mistake in
   language; the real question, which this is mistaken for, will, I
   suppose, be answered by observing, that the goodness of God already
   exercised towards us, our present dependance upon him, and our
   expectation of future benefits, ought, and have a natural tendency, to
   beget in us the affection of gratitude, and greater love towards him,
   than the same goodness exercised towards others: were it only for this
   reason, that every affection is moved in proportion to the sense we
   have of the object of it; and we cannot but have a more lively sense of
   goodness, when exercised towards ourselves, than when exercised towards
   others. I added expectation of future benefits, because the ground of
   that expectation is present goodness.

   Thus, Almighty God is the natural object of the several affections,
   love, reverence, fear, desire of approbation. For though he is simply
   One, yet we cannot but consider him in partial and different views. He
   is in himself one uniform Being, and for ever the same, without
   "variableness or shadow of turning:" but his infinite greatness, his
   goodness, his wisdom, are different objects to our mind. To which is to
   be added, that from the changes in our own characters, together with
   his unchangeableness, we cannot but consider ourselves as more or less
   the objects of his approbation, and really be so. For if he approves
   what is good, he cannot, merely from the unchangeableness of his
   nature, approve what is evil. Hence must arise more various movements
   of mind, more different kinds of affections. And this greater variety
   also is just and reasonable in such creatures as we are, though it
   respects a Being, simply one, good, and perfect. As some of these
   affections are most particularly suitable to so imperfect a creature as
   man, in this mortal state we are passing through; so there may be other
   exercises of mind, or some of these in higher degrees, our employment
   and happiness in a state of perfection.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [44] St Austin observes, Amor ipse ordinate amandus est, quo bene
   amatur quod amandum est, ut sit in nobis virtus qua vivitur bene. i. e.
   The affection which we rightly have for what is lovely, must ordinate
   justly, in due manner, and proportion, become the object of a new
   affection, or be itself beloved, in order to our being endued with that
   virtue which is the principle of a good life. Civ. Dei. I. 15. c. 22.

   [45] Job 23..
     __________________________________________________________________

Sermon XIV. (Upon the Love of God)

   Consider then our ignorance, the imperfection of our nature, our
   virtue, and our condition in this world, with respect to an infinitely
   good and just Being, our Creator and Governor, and you will see what
   religious affections of mind are most particularly suitable to this
   mortal state we are passing through.

   Though we are not affected with any thing so strongly as what we
   discern with our senses; and though our nature and condition require,
   that we be much taken up about sensible things; yet our reason
   convinces us that God is present with us, and we see and feel the
   effects of his goodness; he is, therefore, the object of some regards.
   The imperfection of our virtue, joined with the consideration of his
   absolute rectitude or holiness, will scarce permit that perfection of
   love, which entirely casts out all fear: yet goodness is the object of
   love to all creatures who have any degree of it themselves; and
   consciousness of a real endeavor to approve ourselves to him, joined
   with the consideration of his goodness, as it quite excludes servile
   dread and horror, so it is plainly a reasonable ground for hope of his
   favor. Neither fear, nor hope, nor love then are excluded; and one or
   another of these will prevail, according to the different views we have
   of God; and ought to prevail, according to the changes we find in our
   own character. There is a temper of mind made up of, or which follows
   from all three, fear, hope, love; namely, resignation to the divine
   will, which is the general temper belonging to this state, which ought
   to be the habitual frame of our mind and heart, and to be exercised at
   proper seasons more distinctly, in acts of devotion.

   Resignation to the will of God is the whole of piety: it includes in it
   all that is good; and is a source of the most settled quiet and
   composure of mind. There is the general principle of submission in our
   nature. Man is not so constituted as to desire things, and be uneasy in
   the want of them, in proportion to their known value: many other
   considerations come in to determine the degrees of desire;
   particularly, whether the advantage we take a view of, be within the
   sphere of our rank. Who ever felt uneasiness upon observing any of the
   advantages brute creatures have over us? And yet it is plain they have
   several. It is the same with respect to advantages belonging to
   creatures of a superior order. Thus, though we see a thing to be highly
   valuable; yet, that it does not belong to our condition of being, is
   sufficient to suspend our desires after it, to make us rest satisfied
   without such advantage. Now, there is just the same reason for quiet
   resignation in the want of every thing equally unattainable, and out of
   our reach in particular, though others of our species be possessed of
   it. All this may be applied to the whole of life; to positive
   inconveniences as well as wants; not indeed to the sensations of pain
   and sorrow, but to all the uneasinesses of reflection, murmuring, and
   discontent. Thus is human nature formed to compliance, yielding;
   submission of temper. We find the principles of it within us, and
   everyone exercises it towards some objects or other: i. e. feels it
   with regard to some persons, and some circumstances. Now, this is an
   excellent foundation of a reasonable and religious resignation. Nature
   teaches and inclines us to take up with our lot: the consideration,
   that the course of things is unalterable, hath a tendency to quiet the
   mind under it, to beget a submission of temper to it. But when we can
   add, that this unalterable course is appointed and continued by
   infinite wisdom and goodness; how absolute should be our submission,
   how entire our trust and dependance!

   This would reconcile us to our condition; prevent all the supernumerary
   troubles arising from imagination, distant fears, impatience; all
   uneasiness, except that which necessarily arises from the calamities
   themselves we may be under. How many of our cares should we by this
   means be disburdened of! Cares not properly our own, how apt soever
   they may be to intrude upon us, and we to admit them; the anxieties of
   expectation, solicitude about success and disappointment, which in
   truth are none of our concern. How open to every gratification would
   that mind be, which was clear of these encumbrances!

   Our resignation to the will of God may be said to be perfect, when our
   will is lost and resolved up into his; when we rest in his will as our
   end, as being itself most just, and right, and good. And where is the
   impossibility of such an affection to what is just, and right, and
   good, such a loyalty of heart to the Governor of the universe, as shall
   prevail over all sinister indirect desires of our own? Neither is this
   at bottom any thing mare than faith and honesty, and fairness of mind:
   in a more enlarged sense, indeed, than those words are commonly used.
   And as, in common cases, fear and hope and other passions are raised in
   us by their respective objects; so this submission of heart, and soul,
   and mind, this religious resignation, would be as naturally produced by
   our having just conceptions of Almighty God, and a real sense of his
   presence with us. In how low a degree soever this temper usually
   prevails amongst men, yet it is a temper right in itself: it is what we
   owe to our Creator: it is particularly suitable to our mortal
   condition, and what we should endeavor after for our own sakes in our
   passage through such a world as this; where is nothing upon which we
   can rest or depend; nothing but what we are liable to be deceived and
   disappointed in. Thus we might "acquaint ourselves with God, and be at
   peace." This is piety and religion in the strictest sense, considered
   as a habit of mind: an habitual sense of God's presence with us; being
   affected towards him, as present, in the manner his superior nature
   requires from such a creature as man: this is to walk with God.

   Little more need be said of devotion or religious worship, than that it
   is this temper exerted into act. The nature of it consists in the
   actual exercise of those affections towards God, which are supposed
   habitual in good men. He is always equally present with us: but we are
   so much taken up with sensible things, that "lo, he goeth by us, and we
   see him not: he passeth on also, but we perceive him not." [46]
   Devotion is retirement, from the world he has made, to him alone: it is
   to withdraw from the avocations of sense, to employ our attention
   wholly upon him as upon an object actually present, to yield ourselves
   up to the influence of the divine presence, and to give full scope to
   the affections of gratitude, love, reverence, trust, and dependance; of
   which infinite power, wisdom; and goodness, is the natural and only
   adequate object. We may apply to the whole of devotion those words of
   the son of Sirach: "When you glorify the Lord, exalt him as much as you
   can; for even yet will he far exceed: and when you exalt him, put forth
   all your strength, and be not weary; for you can never go far enough."
   [47] Our most raised affections of every kind cannot but fall short and
   be disproportionate, when an infinite Being is the object of them. This
   is the highest exercise and employment of mind, that a creature is
   capable of. As this divine service and worship is itself absolutely due
   to God, so also is it necessary in order to a further end; to keep
   alive upon our minds a sense of his authority, a sense that in our
   ordinary behaviour amongst men, we act under him as our Governor and
   Judge.

   Thus you see the temper of mind respecting God, which is particularly
   suitable to a state of imperfection; to creatures in a progress of
   being towards somewhat further.

   Suppose, now, this something further attained; that we were arrived at
   it: what a perception will it be, to see, and know, and feel, that our
   trust was not vain, our dependance not groundless? that the issue,
   event, and consummation, came out such as fully to justify and answer
   that resignation? if the obscure view of the divine perfection, which
   we have in this world, ought in just consequence to beget an entire
   resignation; what will this resignation be exalted into, when "we shall
   see face to face, and know as we are known?"If we cannot form any
   distinct notion of that perfection of the love of God, which casts out
   all fear; of that enjoyment of him, which will be the happiness of good
   men hereafter; the consideration of our wants and capacities of
   happiness, and that he will be an adequate supply to them, must serve
   us instead of such distinct conception of the particular happiness
   itself.

   Let us then suppose a man, entirely disengaged from business and
   pleasure, sitting down alone and at leisure, to reflect upon himself
   and his own condition of being. He would immediately feel that he was
   by no means complete of himself, but totally insufficient for his own
   happiness. One may venture to affirm, that every man hath felt this,
   whether he hath again reflected upon it or not. It is feeling this
   deficiency, that they are unsatisfied with themselves, which makes men
   look out for assistance from abroad; and which has given rise to
   various kinds of amusements, altogether needless any otherwise than as
   they serve to fill up the blank spaces of time, and so hinder their
   feeling this deficiency, and being uneasy with themselves. Now, if
   these external things we take up with were really an adequate supply to
   this deficiency of human nature, if by their means our capacities and
   desires were all satisfied and filled up; then it might be truly said,
   that we had found out the proper happiness of man; and so might sit
   down satisfied, and be at rest in the enjoyment of it. But if it
   appears that the amusements, which men usually pass their time in, are
   so far from coming up to, or answering our notions and desires of
   happiness, or good, that they are really no more than what they are
   commonly called, somewhat to pass away the time; i. e. somewhat which
   serves to turn us aside from, and prevent our attending to this our
   internal poverty and want; if they serve only, or chiefly, to suspend,
   instead of satisfying our conceptions and desires of happiness; if the
   want remains, and we have found out little more than barely the means
   of making it less sensible; then are we still to seek for somewhat to
   be an adequate supply to it. It is plain that there is a capacity in
   the nature of man, which neither riches, nor honors, nor sensual
   gratifications, nor any thing in this world, can perfectly till up, or
   satisfy: there is a deeper and more essential want than any of these
   things can be the supply of. Yet surely this is a possibility pf
   somewhat, which may fill up all our capacities of happiness; somewhat,
   in which our souls may find rest; somewhat, which may be to us that
   satisfactory good we are inquiring after. But it cannot be any thing
   which is valuable only as it tends to some further end. Those,
   therefore, who have got this world so much into their hearts, as not to
   be able to consider happiness as consisting in any thing but property
   and possessions, which are only valuable as the means to somewhat else;
   cannot have the least glimpse of the subject before us; which is the
   end, not the means; the thing itself, not somewhat in order to it. But
   if you can lay aside that general, confused, undeterminate notion of
   happiness, as consisting in such possessions; and fix in your thoughts,
   that it really can consist in nothing but in a faculty's having its
   proper object; you will clearly see, that in the coolest way of
   consideration, without either the heat of fanciful enthusiasm, or the
   warmth of real devotion, nothing is more certain, than that an infinite
   Being may himself be, if he pleases, the supply to all the capacities
   of our nature. All the common enjoyments of life are from the faculties
   he hath endued us with, and the objects he hath made suitable to them.
   He may himself be to us infinitely more than all these; he maybe to us
   all that we want. As our understanding can contemplate itself, and our
   affections be exercised upon themselves by reflection, so may each be
   employed in the same manner upon any other mind: and since the supreme
   Mind, the Author and Cause of all things, is the highest possible
   object to himself, he may be an adequate supply to all the faculties of
   our souls; a subject to our understanding; and an object to our
   affections.

   Consider then: When we shall have put off this mortal body, when we
   shall be divested of sensual appetites, and those possessions which are
   now the means of gratification, shall be of no avail; when this
   restless scene of business and vain pleasures, which now diverts us
   from ourselves shall be all over: we, our proper self, shall still
   remain: we shall still continue the same creatures we are, with wants
   to be supplied, and capacities of happiness. We must have faculties of
   perception, though not sensitive ones; and pleasure or uneasiness from
   our perceptions, as now we have.

   There are certain ideas, which we express by the words, order, harmony,
   proportion, beauty, the furtherest removed from any thing sensual. Now,
   what is there in those intellectual images, forms, or ideas, which
   begets that approbation, love, delight, and even rapture; which is seen
   in some person's faces upon having those objects present to their
   minds? "Mere enthusiasm!" -- Be it what it will: there are objects,
   works of nature and of art, which all mankind have delight from, quite
   distinct from their affording gratification to sensual appetites; and
   from quite another view of them, than as being for their interest and
   further advantage. The faculties from which we are capable of these
   pleasures, and the pleasures themselves, are as natural, and as much to
   be accounted for, as any sensual appetite whatever, and the pleasure
   from its gratification. Words, to be sure, are wanting upon this
   subject. To say, that every thing of grace and beauty throughout the
   whole of nature, every thing excellent and amiable shared in
   differently lower degrees by the whole creation, meet in the Author and
   cause of all things; this is an inadequate, and perhaps improper way of
   speaking of the divine nature. But it is manifest, that absolute
   rectitude, the perfection of being, must be in all senses, and in every
   respect, the highest object to the mind.

   In this world it is only the effects of wisdom, and power, and
   greatness, which we discern: it is not impossible, that hereafter the
   qualities themselves in the Supreme Being may be the immediate object
   of contemplation. What amazing wonders are opened to view by late
   improvements? What an object is the universe to a creature, if there be
   a creature who can comprehend its system? But it must be an infinitely
   higher exercise of the understanding, to view the scheme of it in that
   Mind which projected it, before its foundations were laid. And surely
   we have meaning to the words, when we speak of going further, and
   viewing, not only this system in his mind, but the wisdom and
   intelligence itself from whence it proceeded. The same may be said of
   power. But since wisdom and power are not God, (he is a wise, a
   powerful Being) the divine nature may therefore be a further object to
   the understanding. It is nothing to observe that our senses give us but
   an imperfect knowledge of things: effects themselves, if we knew them
   thoroughly, would give us but imperfect notions of wisdom and power;
   much less of his being, in whom they reside. I am not speaking of any
   fanciful notion of seeing all things in God, but only representing to
   you, how much a higher object to the understanding an infinite Being
   himself is, than the things which he has made; and this is no more than
   saying, that the Creator is superior to the works of his hands.

   This may be illustrated by a low example. Suppose a machine, the sight
   of which would raise, and discoveries in its contrivance gratify, our
   curiosity; the real delight, in this case, would arise from its being
   the effect of skill and contrivance. The skill in the mind of the
   artificer would be a higher object, if we had any senses or ways to
   discern it. For, observe, the contemplation of that principle; faculty,
   or power, which produced any effect, must be a higher exercise of the
   understanding than the contemplation of the effect itself. The cause
   must be a higher object to the mind than the effect.

   But whoever considers distinctly what the delight of knowledge is, will
   see reason to be satisfied that it cannot be the chief good of man. All
   this, as it is applicable, so it was mentioned with regard to the
   attribute of goodness. I say, goodness. Our being and all our
   enjoyments are the effects of it: just men bear resemblance: but how
   little do we know of the original, of what it is itself? Recall what
   was before observed concerning the affection to moral character; which,
   in how low a degree soever, yet is plainly natural to man, and the most
   excellent part of his nature: suppose this improved, as it may be
   improved, to any degree whatever, "in the spirits of just men made
   perfect:" and then suppose that they had a real view of that
   "righteousness, which is an everlasting righteousness;" of the
   conformity of the divine will to the law of truth, in which the moral
   attributes of God consist; of that goodness in the sovereign mind,
   which gave birth to the universe; add, what will be true of all good
   men hereafter, a consciousness of having an interesting what they are
   contemplating; suppose them able to say, "This God is our God forever
   and ever:" Would they be any longer to seek for what was their chief
   happiness, their final good? Could the utmost stretch of their
   capacities look further ? Would not infinite perfect goodness be their
   very end, the last end and object of their affections; beyond which
   they could neither have, nor desire; beyond which they could not form a
   wish or thought?

   Consider wherein that presence of a friend consists, which has often so
   strong an effect, as wholly to assess the mind, and entirely suspend
   all other affections and regards; and which itself affords the highest
   satisfaction and enjoyment. He is within reach of the senses. Now, as
   our capacities of perception improve, we shall have, perhaps by some
   faculty entirely new, a perception of God's presence with us, in a
   nearer and stricter way; since it is certain he is more intimately
   present with us than any thing else can be. Proof of the existence and
   presence of any being, is quite different from the immediate
   perception, the consciousness of it. What then will be the joy of
   heart, which his presence, and the "light of his countenance," who is
   the life of the universe, will inspire good men with, when they shall
   have a sensation, that he is the sustainer of their being, that they
   exist in him; when they shall feel his influence to cheer, and enliven,
   and support their frame, in a manner of which we have now no
   conception? He will be, in a literal sense, "their strength and their
   portion for ever."

   When we speak of things so much above our comprehension, as the
   employment and happiness of a future state, doubtless it behooves us to
   speak with all modesty and distrust of ourselves. But the Scripture
   represents the happiness of that state, under the notions of "seeing
   God, seeing him as he is, knowing as we are known, and seeing face to
   face." These words are not general or undetermined, but express a
   particular determinate happiness. And I will be bold to say, that
   nothing can account for, or come up to these expressions, but only
   this, that God himself will be an object to our faculties; that he
   himself will be our happiness, as distinguished from the enjoyments of
   the present state which seem to arise, not immediately from him, but
   from the objects he has adapted to give us delight.

   To conclude: Let us suppose a person tired with care and sorrow, and
   the repetition of vain delights which fill up the round of life;
   sensible that every thing here below, in its best estate, is altogether
   vanity. Suppose him to feel that deficiency of human nature, before
   taken notice of; and to be convinced that God alone was the adequate
   supply to it. What could be more applicable to a good man, in this
   state of mind, or better express his present wants and distant hopes,
   his passage through this world as progress towards a state of
   perfection, than the following passages in the devotions of the royal
   prophet? They are plainly in a higher and more proper sense, applicable
   to this, than they could be to any thing else. "I have seen an end of
   all perfection. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon
   earth that I desire in comparison of thee. My flesh and my heart
   faileth: but God is all the strength of my heart, and my portion for
   ever. Like as the hart desireth the water brooks, so longeth my soul
   after thee, O God. My soul is athirst for God; yea, even for the living
   God: when shall I come to appear before him? How excellent is thy
   loving kindness, O God! and the children of men shall put their trust
   under the shadow of thy wings. They shall be satisfied with the
   plenteousness of thy house: and thou shall give them drink of thy
   pleasures, as out of the river. For with thee is the well of life: and
   in thy light shall we see light. Blessed is the man whom thou choosest,
   and receivest unto thee: he shall dwell in thy court, and shall be
   satisfied with the pleasures of thy house, even of thy holy temple.
   Blessed is the people, O Lord, that can rejoice in thee: they shall
   walk in the light of thy countenance. Their delight shall be dally in
   thy name; and In thy righteousness shall they make their boast. For
   thou art the glory of their strength; and in thy loving kindness they
   shall be exalted. As for me, I will behold thy presence in
   righteousness: and when I awake up after thy likeness, I shall be
   satisfied with it. Thou shalt show me the path of life; in thy presence
   is the fullness of joy, and at thy right hand there is pleasure for
   evermore."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [46] Job ix. 11.

   [47] Eccles. xliii. 30.
     __________________________________________________________________

Sermon XV. Upon the Ignorance of Man -- Eccles. viii. 16, 17.

   When I applied mine heart to know wisdom, and to see the business that
   is done upon the earth; then I beheld all the work of God, that a man
   cannot find out the work that is done under the sun; because though a
   man labor to seek it out, yet he shall not find it; yea, further,
   though a wise man think to know it, yet shall he not be able to find
   it.

   The writings of Solomon are very much taken up with reflections upon
   human nature, and human life; to which he hath added, in this book,
   reflections upon the constitution of things. And it is not improbable,
   that the little satisfaction, and the great difficulties he met in his
   researches into the general constitution of nature, might be the
   occasion of his confining himself, so much as he hath done, to life and
   conduct. However, upon that joint review he expresses great ignorance
   of the works of God, and the method of his providence in the government
   of the world; great labor and weariness in the search and observation
   he had employed himself about; and great disappointment, pain, and even
   vexation of mind, upon that which he had remarked of the appearances of
   things, and of what was going forward upon this earth. This whole
   review and inspection, and the result of it, sorrow, perplexity, a
   sense of his necessary ignorance, suggests various reflections to his
   mind. But, notwithstanding all this ignorance and dissatisfaction,
   there is somewhat, upon which he assuredly rests and depends; somewhat,
   which is the conclusion of the whole matter, and the only concern of
   man. Following this his method and train of reflection, let us
   consider,

   I. The assertion of the text, the ignorance of man; that the wisest and
   most knowing cannot comprehend the ways and works of God: and then,

   II. What are the just consequences of this observation and knowledge of
   our own ignorance, and the reflections which it leads us to.

   I. The wisest and most knowing cannot comprehend the works of God, the
   methods and designs of his providence in the creation and government of
   the world.

   Creation is absolutely and entirely out of our depth, and beyond the
   extent of our utmost reach. And yet it is as certain that God made the
   world, as it is certain that effects must have a cause. It is indeed in
   general no more than effects, that the most knowing are acquainted
   with: for as to causes, they are as entirely in the dark as the most
   ignorant. What are the laws by which matter acts upon matter, but
   certain effects; which some, having observed to be frequently repeated,
   have reduced to general rules? The real nature and essence of beings
   likewise is what we are altogether ignorant of. All these things are so
   entirely out of our reach, that we have not the least glimpse of them.
   And we know little more of ourselves, than we do of the world about us:
   how we were made, how our being is continued and preserved, what the
   faculties of our minds are, and upon what the power of exercising them
   depends. "I am fearfully and wonderfully made: marvellous are thy
   works, and that my soul knoweth right well." Our own nature, and the
   objects we are surrounded with, serve to raise our curiosity; but we
   are quite out of a condition of satisfying it. Every secret which is
   disclosed, every discovery which is made, every new effect which is
   brought to view, serves to convince us of numberless more which remain
   concealed, and which we had before no suspicion of. And what if we were
   acquainted with the whole creation, in the same way and as thoroughly
   as we are with any single object in it? What would all this natural
   knowledge amount to? It must be a low curiosity indeed which such
   superficial knowledge could satisfy. On the contrary, would it not
   serve to convince us of our ignorance still, and to raise our desire of
   knowing the nature of things themselves; the author, the cause and the
   end of them?

   As to the government of the world: though from consideration of the:
   final causes which come within our knowledge; of characters, personal
   merit and demerit; of the favor and disapprobation, which respectively
   are due and belong to the righteous and the wicked, and which,
   therefore, must necessarily be in a mind which sees things as they
   really are; though, I say, from hence we may know somewhat concerning
   the designs of Providence in the government of the world, enough to
   enforce upon us religion and the practice of virtue; yet, since the
   monarchy of the universe is a dominion unlimited in extent, and
   everlasting in duration, the general system of it must necessarily be
   quite beyond our comprehension. And since there appears such a
   subordination and reference of the several parts to each other, as to
   constitute it properly one administration or government, we cannot have
   a thorough knowledge of any part without knowing the whole. This surely
   should convince us, that we are much less competent judges of the very
   small part which comes under our notice in the world, than we are apt
   to imagine. "No heart can think upon these things worthily: and who is
   able to conceive his way? It is a tempest which no man can see: for the
   most part of his works are hid. Who can declare the works of his
   justice? For his covenant is afar off, and the trial of: all things is
   in the end;" i. e. the dealings of God with the children of men are not
   yet completed, and cannot be judged of by that part which is before us.
   "So that a man cannot say, This is worse than that: for in time they
   shall be well approved. Thy faithfulness, O Lord, reacheth unto the
   clouds; thy righteousness standeth like the strong mountains; thy
   judgments are like the great deep. He hath made every thing beautiful
   in his time: also he hath set the world in their heart; so that no man
   can find out the work that God maketh from the beginning to the end."
   And thus St Paul concludes a long argument upon the various
   dispensations of Providence: "O the depth of the riches, both of the
   wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and
   his ways past finding out! For who hath known the mind of the Lord? "

   Thus, the scheme of Providence, the ways and works of God, are too
   vast, of too large extent for our capacities. There is, as I may speak,
   such an expanse of power, and wisdom, and goodness, in the formation
   and government of the world, as is too much for us to take in or
   comprehend. Power, and wisdom, and goodness, are manifest to us in all
   those works of God which come within our view: but there are likewise
   infinite stores of each poured forth throughout the immensity of the
   creation; no part of which call be thoroughly understood, without
   taking in its reference and respect to the whole: and this is what we
   have not faculties for. And as the works of God, and his scheme of
   government are above our capacities thoroughly to comprehend; so there
   possibly may be reasons which originally made it fit that many things
   should be concealed from us, which we have perhaps natural capacities
   of understanding; many things concerning the designs, methods, and ends
   of divine Providence in the government of the world. There is no manner
   of absurdity in supposing a veil on purpose drawn over some scenes of
   infinite power, wisdom, and goodness, the sight of which might some way
   or other strike us too strongly; or that better ends are designed and
   served by their being concealed, than could be by their being exposed
   to our knowledge. The Almighty may cast clouds and darkness round about
   him, for reasons and purposes of which we have not the least glimpse or
   conception.

   However, it is surely reasonable, and what might have been expected,
   that creatures in some stage of their being, suppose in the infancy of
   it, should be placed in a state of discipline and improvement, where
   their patience and submission it to be tried by afflictions, where
   temptations are to be resisted, and difficulties gone through in the
   discharge of their duty. Now, if the greatest pleasures and pains of
   the present life may be overcome and suspended, as they manifestly may,
   by hope and fear, and other passions and affections; then the evidence
   of religion, and the sense of the consequences of virtue and vice,
   might have been such, as entirely in all cases to prevail over those
   afflictions, difficulties, and temptations; prevail over them so, as to
   render them absolutely none at all. But the very notion itself now
   mentioned, of a state of discipline and improvement, necessarily
   excludes such sensible evidence and conviction of religion, and of the
   consequences of virtue and vice. Religion consists in submission and
   resignation to the divine will. Our condition in this world is a school
   of exercise for this temper: and our ignorance, the shallowness of our
   reason, the temptations, difficulties, afflictions, which we are
   exposed to; all equally contribute to make it so. The general
   observation may be carried on; and whoever will attend to the thing
   will plainly see, that less sensible evidence, with less difficulty in
   practice, is the same, as more sensible evidence, with greater
   difficulty in practice. Therefore difficulties in speculation as much
   come into the notion of a state of discipline, as difficulties in
   practice: and so the same reason or account is to be given of both.
   Thus, though it is indeed absurd to talk of the greater merit of
   assent, upon little or no evidence, than upon demonstration; yet the
   strict discharge of our duty, with less sensible evidence does imply in
   it a better character, than the same diligence in the discharge of it
   upon more sensible evidence. This fully accounts for and explains that
   assertion of our Saviour, "Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet
   have believed;" [48] have become Christians and obeyed the gospel, upon
   less sensible evidence, than that which Thomas, to whom he is speaking,
   insisted upon.

   But after all, the same account is to be given, why we were placed in
   these circumstances of ignorance, as why nature has not furnished us
   with wings; namely, that we were designed to be inhabitants of this
   earth. I am afraid we think too highly of ourselves: of our rank in the
   creation, and of what is due to us. What sphere of action, what
   business is assigned to man, that he has not capacities and knowledge
   fully equal to? It is manifest he has reason, and knowledge, and
   faculties, superior to the business of the present world: faculties
   which appear superfluous, if we do not take in the respect which they
   have to somewhat further, and beyond it. If to acquire knowledge were
   our proper end, we should indeed be but poorly provided: but if
   somewhat else be our business and duty; we may, notwithstanding our
   ignorance, be well enough furnished for it; and the observation of our
   ignorance may be of assistance to us in the discharge of it.

   II. Let us then consider, what are the consequences of this knowledge
   and observation of our own ignorance, and the reflection it leads us
   to.

   First, We may learn from it, with what temper of mind a man ought to
   inquire into the subject of religion; namely, with expectation of
   finding difficulties, and with a disposition to take up and rest
   satisfied with any evidence whatever which is real.

   He should beforehand expect things mysterious, and such as he will not
   be able thoroughly to comprehend, or go to the bottom of. To expect a
   distinct comprehensive view of the whole subject, clear of difficulties
   and objections, is to forget our nature and condition; neither of which
   admit of such knowledge, with respect to any science whatever. And to
   inquire with this expectation, is not to inquire as a man, but as one
   of another order of creatures.

   Due sense of the general ignorance of man would also beget in us a
   disposition to take up and rest satisfied with any evidence whatever,
   which is real. I mention this as contrary to a disposition, of which
   there are not wanting instances, to find fault with and reject
   evidence, because it is not such as was desired. If a man were to walk
   by twilight, must he not follow his eyes as much as if it were broad
   day and clear sunshine? or, if he were obliged to take a journey by
   night, would he not "give heed to any light shining in the darkness,
   till the day should break and the day-star arise?"It would not be
   altogether unnatural for him to reflect, how much better it were to
   have day-light: he might perhaps have great curiosity to see the
   country round about him: he might lament that the darkness concealed
   many extended prospects from his eyes, and wish for the sun to draw
   away the veil: but how ridiculous would it be to reject with scorn and
   disdain the guidance and direction which that lesser light might afford
   him, because it was not the sun itself! If the make and constitution of
   man, the circumstances he is placed in, or the reason of things,
   affords the least hint or intimation that virtue is the law he is born
   under, scepticism itself should lead him to the most strict and
   inviolable practice of it; that he may not make the dreadful
   experiment, of leaving the course of life marked out for him by nature,
   whatever that nature be, and entering paths of his own, of which he can
   know neither the dangers nor the end. For, though no danger be seen,
   yet darkness, ignorance, and blindness, are no manner of security.

   Secondly, Our ignorance is the proper answer to many things which are
   called objections against religion; particularly, to those which arise
   from the appearances of evil and irregularity in the constitution of
   nature, and the government of the world. In all other cases it is
   thought necessary to be thoroughly acquainted with the whole of a
   scheme, even one of so narrow a compass as those which are formed by
   men, in order to judge of the goodness or badness of it: and the most
   slight, and superficial view of any human contrivance comes abundantly
   nearer to a thorough knowledge of it, than that part which we know of
   the government of the world, does to the general scheme and system of
   it; to the whole set of laws by which it is governed. From our
   ignorance of the constitution of things, and the scheme of Providence
   in the government of the world; from the reference the several parts
   have to each other, and to the whole; and from our not being able to
   see the end and the whole; it follows, that however perfect things are,
   they must even necessarily appear to us otherwise, less perfect than
   they are. [49]

   Thirdly, Since the constitution of nature, and the methods and designs
   of Providence, in the government of the world, are above our
   comprehension, we should acquiesce in, and rest satisfied with our
   ignorance, turn our thoughts from that which is above and beyond us,
   and apply ourselves to that which is level to our capacities, and which
   is our real business and concern. Knowledge is not our proper
   happiness. Whoever will in the least attend to the thing will see that
   it is the gaining, not the having of it, which is the entertainment of
   the mind. Indeed, if the proper happiness of man consisted in
   knowledge, considered as a possession or treasure, men who are
   possessed of the largest share would have a very ill time of it, as
   they would be infinitely more sensible than others, of their poverty in
   this respect. Thus, "He who increases knowledge would" eminently
   "increase sorrow." Men of deep research and curious inquiry should just
   be put in mind, not to mistake what they are doing. If their
   discoveries serve the cause of virtue and religion, in the way of
   proof, motive to practice, or assistance in it; or if they tend to
   render life less unhappy, and promote its satisfaction; then they are
   most usefully employed. But bringing things to light, alone and of
   itself, is of no manner of use, any otherwise than as an entertainment
   or diversion. Neither is this at all amiss, if it does not take up the
   time which should be employed in better works. But it is evident that
   there is another mark set up for us to aim at; another end appointed us
   to direct Our lives to: an end, which the most knowing may fail of, and
   the most ignorant arrive at. "The secret things belong unto the Lord
   our God: but those things which are revealed belong unto us, and to our
   children for ever, that we may do all the words of this law." Which
   reflection of Moses, put in general terms, is, that the only knowledge
   which is of any avail to us, is that which teaches us our duty, or
   assists us in the discharge of it. The economy of the universe, the
   course of nature, almighty power exerted in the creation and government
   of the world, is out of our reach. What would be the consequence, if we
   could really get an insight into these things, is very uncertain;
   whether it would assist us in, or divert us from, what we have to do in
   this present state. If then there be a sphere of knowledge, of
   contemplation and employment, level to our capacities, and of the
   utmost importance to us; we ought surely to apply ourselves with all
   diligence to this our, proper business, and esteem every thing else
   nothing, nothing as to us, in comparison of it. Thus Job, discoursing
   of natural knowledge, how much it is above us, and of wisdom in
   general, says, "God understandeth the way thereof, and he knoweth the
   place thereof. And unto man he said, Behold, the fear of the Lord, that
   is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding." Other orders of
   creatures may perhaps be let into the secret counsels of heaven, and
   have the designs and methods of Providence, in the creation and
   government of the world, communicated to them: but this does not belong
   to our rank or condition. "The fear of the Lord, and to depart from
   evil," is the only wisdom which man should aspire after, as his work
   and business. The same is said, and with the same connexion and
   context, in the conclusion of the book of Ecclesiastes. Our ignorance,
   and the little we can know of other things, affords a reason why we
   should not perplex ourselves about them; but no way invalidates that
   which is the "conclusion of the whole matter, Fear God, and keep his
   commandments; for this is the whole concern of man." So that Socrates
   was not the first who endeavored to draw men off from laboring after,
   and laying stress upon other knowledge, in comparison of that which
   related to morals. Our province is virtue and religion, life and
   manners; the science of improving the temper, and making the heart
   better. This is the field assigned us to cultivate: how much it has
   lain neglected is indeed astonishing. Virtue is demonstrably the
   happiness of man; it consists in good actions, proceeding from a good
   principle, temper, or heart. Overt acts are entirely in our power. What
   remains is, that we learn to keep our heart; to govern and regulate our
   passions, mind, affections: that so we may be free from the impotencies
   of fear, envy, malice, covetousness, ambition; that we may be clear of
   these, considered as vices seated in the heart, considered as
   constituting a general wrong temper: from which general wrong frame of
   mind, all the mistaken pursuits, and far the greatest part of the
   unhappiness of life, proceed. He who should find out one rule to assist
   us in this work, would deserve infinitely better of mankind, than all
   the improvers of other knowledge put together.

   Lastly, Let us adore that infinite wisdom, and power, and goodness,
   which is above our comprehension. "To whom hath the root of wisdom been
   revealed? or who hath known her wise counsels? there is one wise and
   greatly to be feared; the Lord sitting upon his throne. He created her,
   and saw her, and numbered her, and poured her out upon all his works."
   If It be thought a considerable thing, to be acquainted with a few, a
   very few, of the effects of infinite power and wisdom: the situation,
   bigness, and revolution of some of the heavenly bodies; what sentiments
   should our minds be filled with concerning him, who appointed to each
   its place, and measure, and sphere of motion, all which are kept with
   the most uniform constancy? "Who stretched out the heavens, and telleth
   the number of the stars, and calleth them all by their names. Who laid
   the foundations of the earth, who comprehendeth the dust of it in a
   measure and weigheth the mountains in scales, and the hills in a
   balance." And, when we have recounted all the appearances which come
   within our view, we must add, "Lo, these are part of his ways; but how
   little a portion is heard of him? Canst thou by searching find out God?
   Canst thou find out the Almighty unto perfection? It is as high as
   heaven; what canst thou do? Deeper than hell; what canst thou know?"

   The conclusion is, that in all lowliness of mind we set lightly by
   ourselves: that we form our temper to an implicit submission to the
   Divine Majesty; beget within ourselves an absolute resignation to all
   the methods of his providence, in his dealings with the children of
   men: that, in the deepest humility of our souls, we prostrate ourselves
   before, him and join in that celestial song, "Great and marvellous are
   thy works, Lord God Almighty! Just and true are thy ways, thou King of
   saints! Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name?"
     __________________________________________________________________

   [48] John xx. 29.

   [49] Suppose some very complicated piece of work, some system or
   constitution, formed for some general end, to which each of the parts
   had a reference. The perfection or justness of this work or
   constitution would consist, in the reference and respect which the
   several parts have to the general design. This reference of parts to
   the general design may be infinitely various, both in degree and kind.
   Thus, one part may only contribute and be subservient to another; this
   to a third; and so on through a long series, the last part which alone
   may contribute immediately and directly to the general design. Or a
   part may have this distant reference to the general design, and may
   also contribute immediately to it. For instance: If the general design
   or end, for which the complicated frame of nature was brought into
   being, is happiness; whatever affords present satisfaction, and
   likewise tends to carryon the course of things, hath this double
   respect to the general design. Now, suppose a spectator of that work or
   constitution was in a great measure ignorant of such various reference
   to the general end, whatever that end be; and that, upon a very slight
   and partial view which he had of the work, several things appeared to
   his eye as disproportionate and wrong; others, just and beautiful: what
   would he gather from these appearances? He would immediately conclude
   there was a probability, if he could see the whole reference of the
   parts appearing wrong to the general design, that this would destroy
   the appearance of wrongness and disproportion: but there is no
   probability, that the reference would destroy the particular right
   appearances, though that reference might show the things already
   appearing just, to be so likewise in a higher degree or another manner.
   There is a probability, that the right appearances were intended: there
   is no probability, that the wrong appearances were. We cannot suspect
   irregularity and disorder to be designed. The pillars of a building
   appear beautiful; but their being likewise its support does not destroy
   that beauty: there still remains a reason to believe that the architect
   intended the beautiful appearance, after we have found out the
   reference, support. It would be reasonable for a man of himself to
   think thus, upon the first piece of architecture he ever saw.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Numbers

   [1]22:12   [2]23:4-5   [3]23:6   [4]23:10   [5]23:21   [6]25:1-18
   [7]31:1-54

   Deuteronomy

   [8]4:1-49

   2 Samuel

   [9]12:1   [10]12:7

   Job

   [11]9:11   [12]13:5   [13]23:8

   Proverbs

   [14]10:19

   Ecclesiastes

   [15]8:16-17   [16]10:3

   Micah

   [17]6:1-16

   Matthew

   [18]5:43-44   [19]5:43-44   [20]5:48   [21]6:23   [22]18:23   [23]22:37

   Mark

   [24]12:38-40

   John

   [25]20:29

   Romans

   [26]2:14   [27]2:14   [28]12:4-5   [29]12:15   [30]12:15   [31]13:9
   [32]13:9

   1 Corinthians

   [33]12:1-31   [34]13:4

   Ephesians

   [35]2:3   [36]4:26

   James

   [37]1:26   [38]3:6

   Revelation

   [39]2:14

   Sirach

   [40]13:24   [41]28:1-4   [42]32:23   [43]43:30
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture Commentary

   Numbers

   [44]23:10

   2 Samuel

   [45]12:7

   Ecclesiastes

   [46]8:16-17

   Matthew

   [47]5:43-44   [48]5:43-44   [49]22:37

   Romans

   [50]2:14   [51]2:14   [52]12:4-5   [53]12:15   [54]12:15   [55]13:9
   [56]13:9

   James

   [57]1:26
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=22&scrV=12#iii.vii-p7.2
   2. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=23&scrV=4#iii.vii-p5.2
   3. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=23&scrV=6#iii.vii-p5.4
   4. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=23&scrV=10#iii.vii-p0.3
   5. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=23&scrV=21#iii.vii-p7.4
   6. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=25&scrV=1#iii.vii-p8.4
   7. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=31&scrV=1#iii.vii-p8.6
   8. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iii.vii-p8.2
   9. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=1#iii.x-p2.2
  10. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=7#iii.x-p0.3
  11. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=9&scrV=11#iii.xiv-p6.2
  12. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=13&scrV=5#iii.iv-p13.2
  13. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=23&scrV=8#iii.xiii-p13.2
  14. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=10&scrV=19#iii.iv-p16.4
  15. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=8&scrV=16#iii.xv-p0.3
  16. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=10&scrV=3#iii.iv-p16.2
  17. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=6&scrV=1#iii.vii-p6.2
  18. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=43#iii.viii-p0.3
  19. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=43#iii.ix-p0.3
  20. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=48#iii.xii-p4.2
  21. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=23#iii.x-p13.2
  22. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=23#iii.ix-p32.4
  23. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=37#iii.xiii-p0.3
  24. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=12&scrV=38#iii.iv-p20.2
  25. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=29#iii.xv-p9.2
  26. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.ii-p0.3
  27. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.iii-p0.3
  28. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=4#iii.i-p0.3
  29. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=15#iii.v-p0.3
  30. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=15#iii.vi-p0.3
  31. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=9#iii.xi-p0.3
  32. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=9#iii.xii-p0.3
  33. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=1#iii.i-p2.2
  34. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=4#iii.xii-p21.2
  35. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=3#iii.ii-p7.2
  36. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=26#iii.viii-p6.2
  37. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=26#iii.iv-p0.3
  38. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iii.iv-p8.2
  39. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.vii-p8.8
  40. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=13&scrV=24#iii.vi-p2.2
  41. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=28&scrV=1#iii.ix-p32.2
  42. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=32&scrV=23#iii.v-p20.2
  43. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=43&scrV=30#iii.xiv-p6.4
  44. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=23&scrV=10#iii.vii-p0.1
  45. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=7#iii.x-p0.1
  46. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=8&scrV=16#iii.xv-p0.1
  47. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=43#iii.viii-p0.1
  48. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=43#iii.ix-p0.1
  49. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=37#iii.xiii-p0.1
  50. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.ii-p0.1
  51. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.iii-p0.1
  52. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=4#iii.i-p0.1
  53. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=15#iii.v-p0.1
  54. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=15#iii.vi-p0.1
  55. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=9#iii.xi-p0.1
  56. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=9#iii.xii-p0.1
  57. file:///ccel/b/butler/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=26#iii.iv-p0.1
