JEREMY   BENTHAM,   ESQ. 

bencher  of  lincoln's  inn  ;  and  late  of 
queen's  college,  oxford,  M.A. 


IN  TWO  VOLUMES. 


A  NEW  EDITION,  CORRECTED  BY  THE  AliTHOR. 


VOL.  I. 


L  ()  NDO  N  : 

PRINTED     FOU    W.    PICKERING, 
lincoln's-inn  fields  ; 

AND 

E.    WILSON,    ROYAL    EXCHANGE. 
1023. 


THE    FIRST   EDITION    OF   THIS    WORK    WAS    PRINTED 
IN    THE    YEAR    1 780  ; 

AND    FIRST    PUBLISHED    IN    1789. 


B.  Bensley,  Bolt  Court,  Fleet  Street. 


i^i^r^ 


CONTENTS. 


CHAP.    1. 

0/  the  Principle  of  Utility. 

Page 

JM  ANKIND  governed  by  pain  [and  pleasure     1 

Principle  of  utility,  what    3 

j4  principle,  what ib. 

Utility,  what ib. 

Interest  of  the  community,  what    4 

An  action  conformable  to  the  principle  of  utility,  what .5 

A  measure  of  government   conformable  to  the  principle  of  utility, 

what ib. 

Laws  or  dictates  of  utility,  what ib. 

A  partisan  of  the  principle  of  ufitity,  who ib. 

Ought,  ought  not,  right  and  ivrong,  &c.  how  to  be  understood. ...  6 
To  prove  the  rectitude  of  this  principle  is  at  once  unnecessary  and 

impossible ib. 

It  has  seldom,  however,  as  yet,  been  consistently  pursued ib. 

It  can  never  be  consistently  combated 7 

Course  to  be  taken  for  surmounting  prejudices  that  may  have  been 

entertained  against  it  9 

CHAP.   \l. 

0/"  Principles  adverse  to  that  of  Utility 

All  other  principles  than  that  of  utility  must  be  wrong    !•' 

Ways  in  which  a  principle  may  be  wrong 'h. 

Asi-eticism,  origin  of  the  word   ''•• 

Principles  of  the  Monks ''•• 

Priiwiple  of  ruceticism,   what 

c 


XVIU  CONTENTS. 

Page 

A  partisan  of  the  principle  of  asceticism,  who 15 

This  principle  has  had  in  some  a  philosophical,  in  others  a  religious 

oripn ib. 

It  has  been  carried  farther  by  (he  religious  party  than  by  the  philo- 
sophical      IC 

The  philosophical  branch  of  it  has  had  most  influence  among  per- 
sons of  education,  the  religious  among  the  vulgar 17 

The  principle  of  asceticism  has  never  been  steadily  applied  by  either 

party  to  the  business  of  goverunseut ib. 

The  principle  of  asceticism,    in  its  origin,  was  but  that  of  utility 

misapplied 20 

It  can  never  be  consistently  pursued     21 

The  principle  of  sympatlty  and  antipathy,  what lb. 

This  is  rather  the  negation  of  ail  principle,  than  any  thing  positive     27 

Sentiments  of  a  partisan  of  the  principle  of  antipathy ib. 

The  systeips  that  have  been  formed  concerning  the  standard  of  light 

and  wrong,  are  all  reducible  to  this  principle     28 

Various  phrases,  that  have   served  as  the  characteristic 
marks  of  so  many  pretended  systems ib. 

1.  Moral  Sense 29 

2.  Common  Sense ib. 

3.  Understanding ib. 

4.  Rule  of  Right 30 

5.  Fitness  of  Things. ib. 

6.  Law  of  Nature ib. 

7.  Law  of  Reason,  Right  Reason,  Natural  Justice,  Natural  Equity, 

Good  Order ib. 

8.  Truth 31 

y.  Doctrine  ef  'Election   ib. 

10.  Repugnancy  to  Nature    ib. 

Mischief  they  i)roduce 32 

Whether  utility  is  actually  the  sole  ground  of  all  the  ap- 
probation we  ever  bestow,  is  a  different  consideration  33 

This  principle  will  frequently  coincide  with  that  of  utility 29 

This  principle  is  most  apt  to  err  on  the  side  of  severity 34 

But  errs,  in  some  instances,  on  the  side  of  lenity    3G 

The  theological  principle,  what — not  a  separate  principle ib. 

The  principle  of  theology  how  reducible  to  one  or  another 

of  the  other  three  principles 33 

Antipathy,  let  the  actions  it  dictates  be  ever  so  right,  is  never  of 
itself  a  right  ground  of  action    ib. 


CONTENTS.  XIX 

CHAP.    III. 

Of  the  four  Sanctions  or  Sources  of  Pain  and  Pleasure. 

Page 

Connexion  of  this  chapter  with  the  preceding'. . « 41 

Four  sanctions  '>r  sources  of  pleasure  and  pain ib. 

1.  The  physical  sanction 42 

2.  The  political 4.'^ 

3.  The  moral  or  popular ib. 

4.  The  religious ib. 

'Ihc  pleasures  and  jjains  which  belong  to  the  religious  sanction,  may 

regard  either  the  present  life  or  a  future 44 

Those  which  regard  the  present  life,  from  which  soever  source  they 

flow,  differ  only  in  the  circumstances  of  their  production ib. 

Example 45 

Those  which  regard  a  future  life  are  not  specifically  known 46 

The  physical  sanction  included  in  each  of  the  other  three ib. 

Use  of  this  chapter 47 

CHAP  IV. 

Value  of  a  Lot  of  Pleasure  or  Pain  how  to  be  measured. 

Use  of  this  chapter 49 

Circumstances  to  be  taken  into  the  account  in  estimating  the  value  of 
a  pleasure  or  pain  considered  with  reference  to  a  single  person, 

and  by  itself ib. 

— considered  as  connected  with  other  pleasures  or  pains 50 

— considered  with  reference  to  a  number  of  persons hi 

Process  for  estimating  the  tendency  of  any  act  or  event il). 

Use  of  the  f<jregtiing  process ,....,.,   5.3 

The  same  process  a|)plicablc  to  good  and  evil,  profit  and  mischief,  and 

all  other  modiiications  of  pleasure  and  jiain ib. 

Conformity  of  men's  practice  to  this  theory , .    ib, 

CHAP.   V. 
Pleasures  and  Pains,  their  Kinds. 

Pleasures  and  pains  are  eitiicr,  ].  Simple  :  or  2.  Citmplex 55 

'I'he  simple pleaiures  enumerated ib. 

The  simple  paint  enumerated 56 

Aualytical  view,  why  none  given ib. 

c  2 


XX  CONTENTS. 

Page 

1.  Pleasures  of  sense  enumerated 57 

2.  Pleasures   of  wealth,   which   are   either  of  acquisition,  or   of 

possessioti ib. 

3.  Pleasures  of  skill 58 

4.  Pleasures  of  amity ib. 

5.  Pleasures  of  a  good  tiame ib. 

6.  Pleasures  of  pouer 59 

7.  Pleasures  of  piety ib. 

8.  Pleasures  of  benevolence  or  good-mil ib. 

9.  Pleasures  of  malevolence  or  ill-will 60 

10.  Pleasures  of  the  memory ib. 

1 1 .  Pleasures  of  the  imagination 61 

12.  Pleasures  of  erpectalion ib. 

13.  Pleasures   depending  on  association ib. 

14.  Pleasures  of  relief 62 

1.  Pains  o{ privation ib. 

These  include,  1.  Pains  of  desire 63 

2.  Pains  of  disappointment ib. 

3.  Pains  of  regret ib. 

2.  Pains  of  the  senses 64 

No  positive  pains  correspond  to  the  pleasure  of  the  sexual 
sense ib. 

3.  Pains  of  awkuardness 65 

No  positive  pains  correspond  to  the  pleasure  of  novelty, .  ib. 

— nor  to  those  of  wealth ib. 

Is  this  a  distinct  positive  pain, or  only  a  pain  of  privation?  ib. 

4.  Pains  of  enmity 66 

5.  Pains  of  an  ill-name  ib. 

The  positive  pains  of  an  ill- name,  and  the  pains  of  privation, 
opposed  to  the  pleasures  of  a  good  name,  run  into  one 

another ib. 

6.  Paius  of  piety 67 

No  positive  pains  correspond  to  the  pleasures  of  power. ...   ib. 

The  positive  pains  of  piety,  and  the  pains  of  privation,  op- 
posed to  the  pleasures  of  piety,  run  into  one  another. .   ib. 

7.  Pains  of  benevolence ib. 

8.  Pains   of  malevolence 68 

9.  Pains  of  the  memory ib. 

10.  Pains  of  the  imagination ib. 

11.  Paius  of  expectation   .« ib. 

12.  Pains  of  association 69 

Pleasures  and  pains  are  either  self-regarding  ot  eitra-regarding ib. 


CONTENTS.  XXI 

Pleasures  and  pains  of  amity   and  enmity  distinguished 

from  those  of  benevolence  and  malevolence Gd 

In  what  way  the  law  is  concerned  with  the  above  pains  and  pleasures  ib. 

Complex  pleasures  and  pains  omitted,  why 70 

Specimen. — Pleasures  of  a  country  prospect ib. 

CHAP    VI. 

Of  Circumstances  injiuencing  Sensibility, 

Pdin  emd  pleasure  not  uniformly  proportioned  to  their  causes. . ..  72 

Degree  or  quantum  of  sensibility,  what ib. 

Bias  or  qmility  of  sensibility,  what ib. 

Exciting  causes  pleasurable  and  dolorific 73 

Circumstances  influencing  sensibility,   what 74 

Circumstances  influencing  sensibility  enumerated ib. 

Extent  and  intricacy  of  this  subject 75 

1.  Health 76 

2.  Strength 77 

Measure  of  strength,  the  weight  a  man  can  lift 78 

Weakness,  what ih. 

?i.  Hardiness ib. 

Difference  between  strength  and  hardiness 79 

4.  Bodily  imperfection ib. 

5.  Quantity  and  quality  of  knowledge 80 

6.  Strength  of  intellectual  powers 81 

7.  Firmness  of  mind ib. 

<i.  Steadiness 82 

9.  Bent  of  inclinations - ib. 

10.  Moral  sensibility 8ili 

11.  Morulbiases 84 

1 2.  Religious  sensibility 85 

l.l.  Religious  biases ib. 

14.  Sympathetic  sensibility ib. 

15.  Sympathetic  biases ib. 

If),  17.  Antipatli»:tic  sensibility  and  biases 8(1 

X'l'j.  Insanity ib. 

19.  Habitual  occupations 87 

20.  Pecuniiiry  circumstance-i 'h. 

21.  C'onne.vions  in  the  way  of  sym/iathy 90 

22.  Connexions  in  the  way  of  antipathy ib. 

215.  Ridical  frame  of  body 9.1 

21.  Radical  frame  of  mind 91 


XXll  CONTENTS. 

Page 

Idiost/ncrast/,  what 'J-l 

This  dislinct  from  the  circumstance  of  Vrame  of  body ib. 

Whether   the  soul  be   moitrial  or  immaterial  makes  no 

ilifference 95 

— and  from  all  others ib. 

Yet  the  result  of  them  is  not  separately  discernible C'G 

Frame  of  body  indicates,  but  not  certainly,  tbat  of  mind    ib. 

Secondary  iiifluenciu°^  circumstances 98 

25.  Sex ib. 

26.  y^ge 100 

27.  Rank 101 

28.  Educaden 102 

29.  Climate 104 

30.  Lineage 105 

3 1 .  Government 106 

32.  lieligioifs  pro/ess  ion 107 

Use  of  the  preceding  observations 109 

How  far  the  circumstances  in  question  can  be  taken  into  account  ib. 

To  what  exciting  causes  there  is  most  occ.ision  to  apply  them 111 

Anah/tical  view  of  the  circumstances  influencing  sensibilty    114 

A)itilijtical  view   of  the  constituent  arlidcs  in  a  man's 
pecuniary  circu7nstances 116 


CHAP.    VIL 

Of  Human  Actions  in  general. 

The  demand  for  punishment  depends  in  part  upon  the  tendency 

of  the  act 117 

Tendency  of  an  act  determined   by  its   coyiteqiicnces ib. 

Material  consequences  only  are  to  be  regarded ib. 

These  depend  in  part  upon  the  intention 118 

The  intention  depends  as  well  upon  the  understanding  a?  the  will  ib. 

In  an  action  are  to  be  considered,    1.  The  act.    2.  The  circum- 
stances.    3.  The  intentionality .     4.  The  consciousness.      5.  The 

motives.     6.  The  diaposilion 1  ]  y 

Acts  positive  and  negative 120 

Acts  of  omission  are  still  acts ib. 

Negative  acts  may  be  so  relatively  or  absolutely 121 

Negative  acts  may  be  expressed  positively  ;  and  vice  versa ib. 

Acts  exierruil  and  internal  . , 122 


•  •  • 


CONTENTS.  XXlll 

Page 

Acts  of  discourse,  what 122 

External  acts  may  be  transitive  or  intransitive i'^- 

Distinction  between  transitive  acts  and  intransitive,  recog- 
nised by  grammarians '23 

A  transitive   act,  ils   commencement,   termination,  End   intermediate 

progress i'l. 

An  intransitive  act,  its  commencement,  and  termination 124 

Acts  transient  and  continued 125 

Difference  between  a  continued  act  and  a  repetition  of  acts ib. 

Difference  between  a  repetition  of  acts  and  a  habit ib. 

Acts  are  iTidivisible,  or  divisible,  and  divisible,  as  well  with  regard  to 

matter  as  to  motion 126 

Caution  respecting  the  ambiguity  of  language 127 

Circumstances  are  to  be  considered ib. 

Circumstances,    what 128 

Circumstance,  archetypation  of  the  word. ib. 

Circumstances  material  and  immaterial 129 

A  circumstance  may  be  related  to  an  event  in  point  of  causality,  in 

four  ways,  viz.  1.  Production.     2.  Derivation.     3.  Collateuil  connexion. 

4 .  Conjunct  iiijiuence ib. 

Example.     Assassination  of  Buckingham 130 

It  is  not  every  event  that  has  circumstances  related  to  it  in  all  those 

ways 132 

Use  of  this  chapter 133 

CHAP.  VIII. 

Of  Intentioiiality. 

Recapitulation l."7 

The  intention  may  regard,  1.  'I'lie  act  :  or,  2.  The  consetpiences  ....  ib. 

Ambiguity  of  the  words  voluntary  and  involuntary ib. 

It  may  regard  the  act  without  any  of  the  consequences 138 

— or  the  coiiseciuiuces  uithout  rt-garding  the  act  in  all  its  stages  il). 

— but  not  without  regarding  the  first  stage • li'J 

An  act  unintentional   in  its   fn-st  stage,   may  be   so  with 
respect  to    1.  Qncinlity   (jf  mailer  mo\cd:    2.  Direction: 

3.  Velocity ib. 

A  consequence,  when  intentional,  may  be  directly  so,  or  obliquely..  MO 

When  directly,  vltimately  so,  or  mediately Ill 

When  dirci  tly  intentional,  it  may  be  exclusively  so,  or  ineiclusively. .  142 
When   inexclusivcly,  it  may  be   conjunctively,  disjunctively,  or  indis- 

rriminutslg         • ''•• 


XXIV  CONTENTS. 

Page 

When  disjunctively,  it  may  be  with  or  mithout  preference 142 

Difference  between  an  incident's  being  unintentional,  and 
disjunctively  intentional,  when  the  election  is  in  favour  of 

the  other 143 

Example    ib. 

Intentionality  of  the  act  with  respect   to  its  different  stages,  bow 

far  material 145 

Goodness  and  badness  of  intention  dismissed 146 

CHAP.    IX. 

Of  Consciousness. 

Connexion  of  this  chapter  with  the  foregoing 148 

Acts  advised  and  unadvised :  consciousness,  what ib. 

Unadvisedness  may  regard  either  existence,  ov  materiality 149 

The  circumstance  may  have  been  present,  past,  or  future ib. 

An  unadvised  act  may  be  heedless,  or  twt  heedless ib. 

A  misadvised  act,  what. — a  missupposal ib. 

The  supposed  circumstance  might  have  been  material  in  the  way 

either  of  prevention  or  of  compensation 150 

It  may  have  been  supposed  present,  past,  or  future ib. 

Example,  continued  from  the  last  chapter ib. 

In  what  case   consciousness  extends  the  intentionality  from  the 

act  to  the  consequences 152 

Example  continued. 153 

A  misadvised  act  may  be  rash  or  not  rash ib. 

The  intention  may  be  good  or  bad  in  itself,  independently  of  the 

motive  as  well  as  the  eventual  concequences 154 

It  is  better,  when  the  intention  is  meant  to  be  spoken  of  as  being 

good  or  bad,  not  to  say,  the  motive 155 

Example 156 

Intention,  in  what  cases  it  may  be  innocent ib. 

Intentionality  and  consciousness  how  spoken  of  in  the  Romania.^    157 
Use  of  this  and  the  preceding  chapter 159 

CHAP.  X. 

Gf  Motives, 

§  1 .  Different  senses  of  the  word  motive. 

Motives,  why  considered 161 

Purely  speculative  motives  have  nothing  to  do  here    ib. 

Motives  to  the  will  162 


CONTENTS.  XXV 

Pa^e 

Firrurative  and  unjigurative  senses  of  the  word I'>3 

AJotives  interior  and  eiteri-/r   164 

Motive  in  prospect — motive  in  esse ib. 

Motives  immediate  and  remote 1<)6 

Motives  to  the  understanding  how  they  may  influence  the  will 167 

§  2.  No  motives  either  constant! ij  good  or  constantly 

bad. 
Nothing  can  act  of  itself  as  a  motive,  but   the  idea  of  pleasure 

or  pain 1 69 

No  sort  of  motive  is  in  itself  a  bad  one ib. 

Inaccuracy  of  expressions   in    which  good  or  bad  are  applied  to 

motives 170 

Any  sort  of  motive  may  give  birth  to  any  sort  of  act ib. 

Difficulties  which  stand  in  the  way  of  an  analysis  of  this  sort   171 

§  3.   Catalogue  of  motives  corresponding  to  that  of 
Pleasures  and  Pains. 

Physical  desire  corresponding  to  pleasures  of  sense  in  general    175 

The  motive  corresponding  to  the  pleasures  of  the  palate ib. 

Sexual  desire  corresponding  to  the  pleasures  of  the  sexual  sense  ........  176 

Curiosity,  &c.  corresponding  to  tiie  pleasures  of  curiosity 177 

None  pleasures  of  sense 17B 

Pecunary  interest  to  the  pleasures  of  wealth ib. 

None  to  the  pleasures  of  skill    179 

To  the  pleasures  of  amity,  the  desire  of  ingratiating  one's  self il). 

To  the  pleasures  of  a  good  luime,  the  love  of  reputation \y,Q 

To  the  pleasures  of  power,  the  love  of  power 1^1 

The  motive  belonging  to  the  religious  saiiction   1B5 

Good-will,  &c.  to  the  pleasures  of  sympathy    187 

Ill-will,  &c.  to  the  pleasures  of  antipathy    190 

Self-preservation,  to  the  several  kinds  of  pains 1!)2 

To  the  pains  of  eierlion,  tlic  love  of  ease    1  i)5 

Motives  can  only  be  had  with  reference  to  the  most  frc<|uent  com- 

)>lexion  of  their  effects 1  !)7 

flow  it  is  that  motives,  such  as  lust,  avarice,  &c.  are  constantly  bud  ih. 
Under  the  above  restrictions,  nmlivcs  may  be  distinguished  into 

good,  IhuI,  and  iii<lijjeretil  or  veidrid    198 

Fncouveniences  of  tliis  distri!)\jli(iii 199 

1 1  is  only  iu  iiuUviduui  instances  that  motives  <-an  i)c  good  or  bad. .  200 

X      Motives  disliugiiished  into  social,  dissocial,  au.l  self ■  regarding     "201 

— iocial,  into  parfly-sociul,  and  semi-social ib. 


XXVI  CONTENTS. 

Page 

§  4.   Otder  of  pre-eminence  amony  motives. 

Tlie  dictates  of  good-will  are  the  surest  of  coincidiug  with  those  of 

uiUity    202 

Laws  and  dictates  conceived  as  issuing-  from  motives. ...     ib. 

Yet  do  not  in  all  cases '"• 

Next  to  them  come  those  of  the  lave  of  repuiution 204 

Next  those  of  the  desire  of  amity    206 

Difficulty  of  placing  those  of  religion   207 

Tendency,  they  have  to  improve "^^ 

Afterwards  come  the  self-regarding  motives  :    and,  lastly,  'that   of 
displeasure * 

§  5.  Confiict  among  motives. 

Motives  impelling  and  restraining,  what    212 

What  are  the  motives  most  frequently  at  variance 213 

Example  to  illustrate  a  struggle  among  contending  motives ib. 

Practical  use  of  the  above  disquisitions  relative  to  motives    216 


CHAP.    XI. 

Of  human  Dispositions  in  general. 

Disposition,  what ^    213 

How  far  it  belongs'  to  the  present  subject ib. 

A  mischievous  disposition  ;  a  meritoi-ious  disposition  ;   what    220 

What  a  man's  disposiiion  is,  can  only  be  matter  of  presumption  . .     ii). 

It  depends  upon  what  the  act  appears  to  be  to  him    221 

Which  position  is  grounded  on  two  facts:   1.  The  correspondence 

between  intentions  and  consequences ib. 

2.  Betw  een  the  intentions  of  the  same  person  at  different  tunes    . .    222 
A  disposition,  from  which  proceeds  a  habit  of  doing  mis- 
chief, cannot  be  a  good  one ib. 

The  disposition  is  to  be  inlerrt-d,    1.  From  the  apparent  tendency 

of  the  act :  2.  From  the  nature  of  the  motive ib. 

Case  1.  Tendency,  good — motive,  self-regarding 223 

Case  2.  Tendency,  bad — motive,  self-regard ivg ih. 

Case  3.  Tendency,  good — motive,  good-will 224 

Case  4.  Tendency,  t/arf  — motive,  good-will ib. 

This  case  not  an  impossible  one ib. 


CONTENTS.  XXVll 

Example  I • 225 

Example  II 226 

Example  III ib. 

Case  5.  Tendency,  good — motive,  love  of  reputation 227 

The  bulk  of  mankind  apt  to  depreciate  this  motive     ....     ib. 

Case  6.  Tendency,  had — motive,  honour 228 

Example  1 22d 

Example  II ib. 

Case  7.  Tendency,  good — motive,  j)ieti)    230 

Case  8.  Tendency,  had — motive,  religion 23 1 

The  disposition  may  be  bad  in  this  case    " ib. 

Case  9.  Tendency,  good — motive,  malevfilence 234 

Example   ib. 

Case  10.  Tendency,  bud — motive,  malevolence 235 

Example 236 

Problem — to  measure  the  depravity  in  a  man's  disposition ib. 

A  man's  disposition  is  constituted  by  tlie  sum  of  his  intentions ib. 

— which  owe  their  birth  to  motives   237 

A  seducing  or   corrupting   motive,    what — a    tutelary   or  presei-vatory 

motive ib. 

Tutelary  motives  are  either  standing  or  occasional ib> 

•S:anding-  tutelary  motives  are,   1 .  Good-will 23^ 

2.  The  love  of  reputation 239 

3.  The  desire  of  amity    240 

4.  The  motive  of  religion 241 

Occasional  tutelary  motives  may  be  any  whatsoever    242 

Motives  that  are  particularly  apt  to  act  in  tliis  character  arc,  1.  Love 

of  ease.  2.  Helf-presei-vatimi.    243 

Dangers  to  whicli  self-preservation  is  most  apt  in  this  case  to  have  re- 
spect, are,  1.  Dangers  purely  physical.  2.  Dangers  depending 
on  detection ib. 

Danger  depending  on  detect  ion  may  result  from,   I.  Opposition  on 

the  spot  :    2.  Subsequent  punishment    214 

The  force  of  the  two  standing  tutelary  motives  of  lnve  of  rcputa- 

ti(jn,  and  desire  of  amity,  depends  upon  detection ib. 

Strength  of  a  temptation,  what  is  meant  by  it   245 

(iidicatiuns  afforded  by  tliis  and  other  circumslances  respecting  the 

depravity  of  an  offender's  disposition    246 

Rulei  for  measuring  the  depravity  of  disposition  indicated  by  an 

ofll-ncc  248 

Use  of  this  rhaptpr 2.')1 


XXVlll  CONTENTS. 

CHAP.  XII. 

Of  the  Consequences  of  a  mischievous  act. 

§  1.  Shapes  in  which  the  mischief  of  an  act  may  shoiv  itself. 

Page 

Recapitulation 253 

Mischief  of  an  act,  the  aggregate  of  its  mischievous  consequences  254 

The  mischief  of  an  act,  primary  or  iccondary it>. 

Primary — original  or  derivative i''- 

The  secoudarj — 1.  Alarin :  or,  2.  Danger  255 

Example 256 

The  danger  whence  it  arises — a  past  offence  affords  no  direct  motive  to  a 

future 257 

But  it  snggehts  feasibility,  and  weakens  the  force  of  restraining  motives  258 

viz,  1.  Those  issuing  from  the  puUtical  sanction 259 

2.  Those  issuing  from  the  7noral 260 

It  is  said  to  operate  by  the  influence  of  example 261 

The  alarm  and  the  danger,  though  connected,  are  distinguishable. ...      ib. 

Both  may  have  respect  to  the  same  person,  or  to  otiwrs ib. 

The  primary  consequences  of  an  act  may  be  mischievous  and  the 

secondary,  beneficial 262 

Analysis  of  the  different  shapes  in  which  the  mischief  of  aa  act  may 

show  itself ib. 

— applied  to  the  preceding  cases 265 

to  examples   of  other  cases    where    the   mischief  is  less    con- 
spicuous         ib. 

Ex.ample  I.  An  act  of  self-intoxication 266 

Example  II.  Non-payment  of  a  tax 267 

No  alarm,  when  no  assignable  person  is  the  object 270 

§  2.  How  intentionality,  ^'c.  may  influence  the  mischief  of 

an  act. 

Secondary  mischief  influenced  by  the  Uate  of  the  agent's  mind 272 

Case  1.  Invohintariness 2/3 

Case  2.  Vnintentionalily  with  heedlessness Jb. 

Case  3.  Missupposal  of  a  complete  justification,  without  rashness 271 

Case  4.  Missupposal  of  a  partial  justification,  without  rashness ib. 

Case  5.  Missupposal,   with   roiliiwss -'  ^ 

Case  6.   Consequences    completely   intentional,  and   free  from    mis- 
supposal   


CONTETNTS.  XXIX 

Pa^e 
The  nature  of  a  nn^tive  takes  not  auay  the  mischief  of  the  secondary 

ciinsequences 275 

Nor  the  beQcficiahiess 276 

But  it   may  aggravate  the   mischievousness,  where  they  are  mis- 
chievous     277 

But  not  the  most  in  the  case  of  the  ivorst  motives ib. 

It  does  the  more,  the  more  considerable  the  tendency  of  the  motive 

to  produce  such  acts ib. 

— which  is  as   its  strength  and  cmstancit 278 

General  efficacy  of  a  species  of  motive,  how  measured ib. 

A  mischievous  act  is  more  so,   when  issuing  from   a  self-regarding 

than  when  from  a  dissucial  motive ib. 

— so  even  when  issuing  from  the  motive  of  religion 279 

How  the  secondary  mischief  is  influenced  by  disposition 280 

Connexion  of  this  with  the  succeeding chajiter ib. 


ERRATA. 

Side-note  in  page  43,  for  politic  read  political. 
Title  of  Chapter  X.  page  Ifjl,  insert  "  Motives." 


PREFACE. 


The  following  sheets  were,  as  the  title-page  ex- 
presses, printed  so  long  ago  as  the  year  1780. 
The  design,  in  pursuance  of  which  they  were  written, 
was  not  so  extensive  as  that  announced  by  the 
present  title.  They  had  at  that  time  no  other 
destination  than  that  of  serving  as  an  introduction 
to  a  plan  of  a  penal  code  in  terminis,  designed  to 
follow  them,  in  the  same  volume. 

The  body  of  the  work  had  received  its  completion 
according  to  the  then  present  extent  of  the  author's 
views,  when,  in  the  investigation  of  some  flaws  he 
had  discovered,  he  found  himself  unexpectedly  en- 
tangled in  an  unsuspected  corner  of  the  metaphysical 
maze.  A  suspension,  at  first  not  apprehended  to  be 
more  than  a  temporary  one,  necessarily  ensued : 
suspension  brought  on  coolness,  and  coolness,  aided 
by  other  concurrent  causes,  ripened  into  disgust. 

Imperfections  pervading  the  whole  mass  had  al- 
ready been  pointed  out  by  the  sincerity  of  severe 
and  discerning  friends ;  and  conscience  had  cer- 
tified the  justness  of  their  censure.  The  inordinate 
length  of  some  of  the  chapters,  the  apparent  inutility 
of  others,  and  the  dry  and    metaphysical  turn  of 

VOL.   I.  b 


11  PREFACE. 


the  whole,  suggested  an  apprehension,  that,  if  pub- 
lished in  its  present  form,  the  work  would  contend 
under  great  disadvantages  for  any  chance,  it  might 
on  other  accounts  possess,  of  being  read,  and  con- 
sequently of  being  of  use. 

But,  though  in  this  manner  the  idea  of  completing 
the  present  work  slid  insensibly  aside,  that  was  not 
by  any  means  the  case  with  the  considerations  which 
had  led  him  to  engage  in  it.  Every  opening,  which 
promised  to  afford  the  lights  he  stood  in  need  of, 
was  still  pursued :  as  occasion  arose,  the  several 
departments  connected  with  that  in  which  he  had 
at  first  engaged,  were  successively  explored ;  in- 
somuch that,  in  one  branch  or  other  of  the  pursuit, 
his  researches  have  nearly  embraced  the  whole  field 
of  legislation. 

Several  causes  have  conspired  at  present  to  bring 
to  light,  under  this  new  title,  a  work  which  under 
its  original  one  had  been  imperceptibly,  but  as  it 
had  seemed  irrevocably,  doomed  to  oblivion.  In 
the  course  of  eight  years,  materials  for  various 
works,  corresponding  to  the  different  branches  of 
the  subject  of  legislation,  had  been  produced,  and 
some  nearly  reduced  to  shape :  and,  in  every  one 
of  those  works,  the  principles  exhibited  in  the 
present  publication  had  been  found  so  necessary, 
that,  either  to  transcribe  them  piece-meal,  or  to  ex- 
hibit them  somewhere  where  they  could  be  referred 
to  in  the  lump,  was  found  unavoidable.  The  former 
course  would  have  occasioned  repetitions  too  bulky 


PREFACE.  m 

to  be  employed  without  necessity  in  the  execution 
of  a  plan  unavoidably  so  voluminous :  the  latter 
was  therefore  indisputably  the  preferable  one. 

To  publish  the  materials  in  the  form  in  which  they 
were  already  printed,  or  to  work  them  up  into  a 
new  one,  was  therefore  the  only  alternative :  the 
latter  had  all  along  been  his  wish,  and,  had  time 
and  the  requisite  degree  of  alacrity  been  at  com- 
mand, it  would  as  certainly  have  been  realised. 
Cogent  considerations,  however,  concur,  with  the 
irksomeness  of  the  task,  in  placing  the  accomplish- 
ment of  it  at  present  at  an  unfathomable  distance. 

Another  consideration  is,  that  the  suppression  of 
the  present  work,  had  it  been  ever  so  decidedly 
wished,  is  no  longer  altogether  in  his  power.  In 
the  course  of  so  long  an  interval,  various  incidents 
have  introduced  copies  into  various  hands,  from 
some  of  which  they  have  been  transferred,  by  deaths 
and  other  accidents,  into  others  that  are  unknown 
to  him.  Detached,  but  considerable  extracts,  have 
even  been  published,  without  any  dishonourable 
views,  (for  the  name  of  the  author  was  very  honestly 
subjoined  to  them)  but  without  his  privity,  and  in 
publications  undertaken  without  his  knowledge. 

It  may  perhaps  be  necessary  to  add,  to  complete 
his  excuse  for  offering  to  the  public  a  work  pervaded 
by  blemishes,  which  have  not  escaped  even  the 
author's  ])artial  eye,  that  the  censure,  so  justly  be- 
stowed upon  the  form,  did  not  extend  itself  to  the 
matter. 

h  2 


IV  PREFACE. 

In  sending  it  thus  abroad  into  the  world  with 
all  its  imperfections  upon  its  head,  he  thinks  it  may- 
be of  assistance  to  the  few  readers  he  can  expect, 
to  receive  a  short  intimation  of  the  chief  particulars, 
in  respect  of  which  it  fails  of  corresponding  with 
his  maturer  views.  It  will  thence  be  observed  how 
in  some  respects  it  fails  of  quadrating  with  the 
design  announced  by  its  original  title,  as  in  others 
it  does  with  that  announced  by  the  one  it  bears 
at  present. 

An  introduction  to  a  work  which  takes  for  its 
subject  the  totality  of  any  science,  ought  to  con- 
tain all  such  matters,  and  such  matters  only,  as 
belong  in  common  to  every  particular  branch  of 
that  science,  or  at  least  to  more  branches  of  it  than 
one.  Compared  with  its  present  title,  the  present 
work  fails  in  both  ways  of  being  conformable  to 
that  rule. 

As  an  introduction  to  the  principles  of  morals^  in 
addition  to  the  analysis  it  contains  of  the  extensive 
ideas  signified  by  the  terms  pleasure,  pain,  motive, 
and  disposition,  it  ought  to  have  given  a  similar 
analysis  of  the  not  less  extensive,  though  much  less 
determinate,  ideas  annexed  to  the  terms  emotion, 
passion,  appetite,  virtue,  vice,  and  some  others,  in- 
cluding the  names  of  the  particular  virtues  and  vices. 
But  as  the  true,  and,  if  he  conceives  right,  the  only 
true  ground- work  for  the  development  of  the  latter 
set  of  terms,  has  been  laid  by  the  explanation  of  the 
former,  the  completion  of  such  a  dictionary,  so  to 


PREFACE.  V 

style  it,  would,  in  comparison  of  the  commencement, 
be  little  more  than  a  mechanical  operation. 

Again,  as  an  introduction  to  the  principles  of 
legislation  in  general,  it  ought  rather  to  have  included 
matters  belonging  exclusively  to  the  civil  branch, 
than  matters  more  particularly  applicable  to  the 
"penal:  the  latter  being  but  a  means  of  compassing 
the  ends  proposed  by  the  former.  In  preference 
therefore,  or  at  least  in  priority,  to  the  several 
chapters  which  will  be  found  relative  to  punishment, 
it  ought  to  have  exhibited  a  set  of  propositions 
which  have  since  presented  themselves  to  him  as 
affording  a  standard  for  the  operations  performed 
by  government,  in  the  creation  and  distribution  of 
proprietary  and  other  civil  rights.  He  means  cer- 
tain axioms  of  what  may  be  termed  mental  pathology, 
expressive  of  the  connexion  betwixt  the  feelings  of 
the  parties  concerned,  and  the  several  classes  of  in- 
cidents, which  either  call  for,  or  are  produced  by, 
operations  of  the  nature  above  mentioned.* 

The  consideration  of  the  division  of  offences,  and 
every  thing  else  that  belongs^  t«   offences,  ought, 

•  For  example. —  It.  h  worse  to  lone  llitin  simply  not  to  gain. — A  los%  fnlh 
the  lifibttr  hy  being  divukd. —  The  suffering,  of  a  person  hurt  in  gratifica- 
tion of  enmity  J  is  greater  than  the  gratijication  jrroduced  by  the  same  cause. 
Tliese,  and  a  few  others  which  lie  will  have  occasion  to  exhibit  at  the 
head  of  another  inihlication.  have  the  same  claim  to  the  appellation  of 
axioms,  as  those  given  by  mathematicians  under  that  name ;  since,  re- 
ferring to  universal  cxpcrimce  as  their  inimcdialc  basif<,  they  are  in- 
capable ol  demonstration,  and  require  only  to  be  developed  and  illustrated, 
in  order  to  be  reco<jnised  as  inconlestable. 


VI  PREFACE. 

besides,  to  have  preceded  the  consideration  of 
punishment :  for  the  idea  of  punishment  presupposes 
the  idea  of  offence :  punishment,  as  such,  not  being 
inflicted  but  in  consideration  of  offence. 

Lastly,  the  analytical  discussions  relative  to  the 
classification  of  offences  would,  according  to  his 
present  views,  be  transferred  to  a  separate  treatise, 
in  which  the  system  of  legislation  is  considered 
solely  in  respect  of  its  form  :  in  other  words,  in 
respect  of  its  method  and  terminology. 

In  these  respects  the  performance  fails  of  coming 
up  to  the  author's  own  ideas  of  what  should  have 
been  exhibited  in  a  work,  bearing  the  title  he  has 
now  given  it,  viz.  that  of  an  Introduction  to  the  Prin- 
ciples of  Morals  and  Legislation.  He  knows  how- 
ever of  no  other  that  would  be  less  unsuitable: 
nor  in  particular  would  so  adequate  an  intimation 
of  its  actual  contents  have  been  given,  by  a  title 
corresponding  to  the  more  limited  design,  with 
which  it  was  written:  viz.  that  of  serving  as  an 
i7itroduction  to  a  penal  code. 

Yet  more.  Dry  and  tedious  as  a  great  part  of 
the  discussions  it  contains  must  unavoidably  be 
found^  by  the  bulk  of  readers,  he  knows  not  how 
to  regret  the  having  written  them,  nor  even  the 
having  made  them  public.  Under  every  head,  the 
practical  uses,  to  which  the  discussions  contained 
under  that  head  appeared  applicable,  are  indicated : 
nor  is  there,  he  believes,  a  single  proposition  that 
he  has  not  found  occasion  to  build   upon  in  the 


PREFACE.  Vll 

« 

penning  of  some  article  or  other  of  those  provisions 
of  detail,  of  which  a  body  of  law,  authoritative  or 
unauthoritative,  must  be  composed.  He  will  ven- 
ture to  specify  particularly,  in  this  view,  the  several 
chapters  shortly  characterised  by  the  words  Sen- 
sibility, Actions,  Intentionality,  Consciousness,  Motives, 
Dispositions,  Consequences.  Even  in  the  enormous 
chapter  on  the  division  of  offences,  which,  notwith- 
standing the  forced  compression  the  plan  has  under- 
gone in  several  of  its  parts,  in  manner  there  men- 
tioned, occupies  no  fewer  than  one  hundred  and  four 
closely  printed  quarto  pages,*  the  ten  concluding 
ones  are  employed  in  a  statement  of  the  practical 
advantages  that  may  be  reaped  from  the  plan  of 
classification  which  it  exhibits.  Those  in  whose 
sight  the  Defence  of  Usury  has  been  fortunate 
enough  to  find  favour,  may  reckon  as  one  instance 
of  those  advantages  the  discovery  of  the  principles 
developed  in  that  little  treatise.  In  the  preface  to 
an  anonymous  tract  published  so  long  ago  as  in 
i776,t  he  had  hinted  at  the  utility  of  a  natural  clas- 
sification of  offences,  in  the  character  of  a  test  for 
distinguishing  genuine  from  spurious  ones.  The 
case  of  usury  is  one  among  a  number  of  instances 
of  the  truth  of  that  observation.  A  note  at  the  end 
of  Sect.  XXXV.  Chap.  xvi.  of  the  present  publication, 
may  serve  to  show  how  the  opinions,  developed  in 
that  tract,  owed   their  origin  to  the  difficulty  cx- 


*  Thtj  first  fdition  was  published  in  17 HO,  in  quarto, 
t^  A  rragmcnt  on  (Jovcrnnunl,  Sec.  reprinted  inc^. 


Vlll  PREFACE. 

perienced  in  the  attempt  to  find  a  place  in  his  system 
for  that  imaginary  offence.  To  some  readers,  as  a 
means  of  helping  them  to  support  the  fatigue  of 
wading  through  an  analysis  of  such  enormous  length, 
he  would  almost  recommend  the  beginning  with 
those  ten  concluding  pages. 

One  good  at  least  may  result  from  the  present 
publication ;  viz.  that  the  more  he  has  trespassed  on 
the  patience  of  the  reader  on  this  occasion,  the  less 
need  he  will  have  so  to  do  on  future  ones :  so  that 
this  may  do  to  those,  the  office  which  is  done,  by 
books  of  pure  mathematics,  to  books  of  mixed  ma- 
thematics and  natural  philosophy.  The  narrower 
the  circle  of  readers  is,  within  which  the  present 
work  may  be  condemned  to  confine  itself,  the  less 
limited  may  be  the  number  of  those  to  whom  the 
fruits  of  his  succeeding  labours  may  be  found  ac- 
cessible. He  may  therefore  in  this  respect  find 
himself  in  the  condition  of  those  philosophers  of 
antiquity,  who  are  represented  as  having  held  two 
bodies  of  doctrine,  a  popular  and  an  occult  one : 
but,  with  this  difference,  that  in  his  instance  the 
occult  and  the  popular  will,  he  hopes,  be  found  as 
consistent  as  in  those  they  were  contradictory ;  and 
that  in  his  production  whatever  there  is  of  occultness 
has  been  the  pure  result  of  sad  necessity,  and  in 
no  respect  of  choice. 

Having,  in  the  course  of  this  advertisement,  had 
such  frequent  occasion  to  allude  to  different  ar- 
rangements, as  having  been  suggested  by  more  ex- 


PREFACE.  JX 

tensive  and  maturer  views,  it  may  perhaps  contribute 
to  the  satisfaction  of  the  reader,  to  receive  a  short 
intimation  of  their  nature :  the  rather,  as,  without 
such  explanation,  references,  made  here  and  there 
to  unpublished  works,  might  be  productive  of  per- 
plexity and  mistake.  The  following  then  are  the 
titles  of  the  works  by  the  publication  of  which  his 
present  designs  would  be  completed.  They  are 
exhibited  in  the  order  which  seemed  to  him  best 
fitted  for  apprehension,  and  in  which  they  would 
stand  disposed,  were  the  whole  assemblage  ready  to 
come  out  at  once :  but  the  order,  in  which  they 
will  eventually  appear,  may  probably  enough  be 
influenced  in  some  degree  by  collateral  and  tem- 
porary considerations. 

Part  the  1st.  Principles  of  legislation  in  matters 
of  civil,  more  distinctively  termed  private  distributive y 
or  for  shortness,  distributive,  law. 

Part  the  2d.  Principles  of  legislation  in  matters 
of  penal  law. 

Part  the  3d.  Principles  of  legislation  in  matters 
of  procedure :  uniting  in  one  view  the  criminal  and 
civil  branches,  between  which  no  line  can  be  drawn, 
but  a  very  indistinct  one,  and  that  continually  liable 
to  variation. 

Part  the  4th.  Principles  of  legislation  in  matters 
of  reward. 

Part  the  5th.  Principles  of  legislation  in  matters 
of  publu  distributive,  more  concisely  as  well  as  fa- 
miliarly termed  constilutional,  law. 


X  PREFACE. 

Part  the  Gth.  Principles  of  legislation  in  matters 
of  political  tactics:  or  of  the  art  of  maintaining  order 
in  the  proceedings  of  political  assemblies,  so  as  to 
direct  them  to  the  end  of  their  institution:  viz. 
by  a  system  of  rules,  which  are  to  the  constitutional 
branch,  in  some  respects,  what  the  law  of  procedure 
is  to  the  civil  and  the  penal. 

Part  the  7th.  Principles  of  legislation  in  matters 
betwixt  nation  and  nation,  or,  to  use  a  new  though 
not  inexpressive  appellation,  in  matters  of  inter- 
7iational  law. 

Part  the  8th.  Principles  of  legislation  in  matters 
q{  finance. 

Part  the  9th.  Principles  of  legislation  in  matters 
of  political  economy. 

Part  the  10th.  Plan  of  a  body  of  law,  complete 
in  all  its  branches,  considered  in  respect  of  its  form ; 
in  other  words,  in  respect  of  its  method  and  ter- 
minology ;  including  a  view  of  the  origination  and 
connexion  of  the  ideas  expressed  by  the  short  list 
of  terms,  the  exposition  of  which  contains  all  that 
can  be  said  with  propriety  to  belong  to  the  head 
of  universal  jurisprudence.* 

The  use  of  the  principles  laid  down  under  the 
above  several  heads  is  to  prepare  the  way  for  the 
body  of  law  itself  exhibited  in  terminis ;  and  which 
to  be  complete,  with  reference  to  any  political  state, 
must  consequently  be  calculated  for  the  meridian, 

*  Such  as  obligation,  right,  power,  possession,  title,  exemption,  immu- 
nity, franchise,  privilege,  nullity,  validity,  and  the  like. 


PREFACE.  XI 

and  adapted  to  the  circumstances,  of  some  one  such 
state  in  particular. 

Had  he  an  unlimited  power  of  drawing  upon  time, 
and  every  other  condition  necessary,  it  would  be 
his  wish  to  postpone  the  publication  of  each  part 
to  the  completion  of  the  whole.     In  particular,  the 
use  of  the  ten  parts,  which  exhibit  what  appear  to 
him  the  dictates  of  utility  in  every  line,  being  no 
other  than  to  furnish  reasons  for  the  several  cor- 
responding provisions  contained  in  the  body  of  law 
itself,  the  exact  truth  of  the  former  can  never  be 
precisely  ascertained,  till  the  provisions,  to  which 
they  are  destined  to  apply,  are  themselves  ascer- 
tained, and  that  in  terminis.     But  as  the  infirmity  of 
human  nature  renders  all  plans  precarious  in  the 
execution,  in  proportion  as  they  are  extensive  in 
the  design,  and  as  he  has  already  made  considerable 
advances  in  several  branches  of  the  theory,  without 
having  made  correspondent  advances  in  the  prac- 
tical applications,  he  deems  it  more  than  probable, 
that  the  eventual  order  of  publication  will  not  cor- 
respond exactly  with  that  which,  had  it  been  equally 
practicable,    would    have  appeared    most  eligible. 
Of  this  irregularity  the  unavoidable  result  will  be, 
a  multitude  of  imperfections,  which,  if  the  execu- 
tion of  the  body  of  law  in  terininis  had  kept  pace 
with  the  development  of  the  principles,  so  that  each 
part  had  been  adjusted  and  corrected  by  the  other, 
mjfht  have  been  avoided.      His  conduct  however 
will  be  the  less  swayed  by  this  inconvenience,  from 


XU  PREFACE. 

his  suspecting  it  to  be  of  the  number  of  those  in 
which  the  personal  vanity  of  the  author  is  much 
more  concerned,  than  the  instruction  of  the  public : 
since  whatever  amendments  may  be  suggested  in 
the  detail  of  the  principles,  by  the  literal  fixation 
of  the  provisions  to  which  they  are  relative,  may 
easily  be  made  in  a  corrected  edition  of  the  former, 
succeeding  upon  the  publication  of  the  latter. 

In  the  course  of  the  ensuing  pages,  references 
will  be  found,  as  already  intimated,  some  to  the 
plan  of  a  penal  code  to  which  this  work  was  meant 
as  an  introduction,  some  to  other  branches  of  the 
above-mentioned  general  plan,  under  titles  some- 
what different  from  those,  by  which  they  have  been 
mentioned  here.  The  giving  this  warning  is  all 
which  it  is  in  the  author's  power  to  do,  to  save  the 
reader  from  the  perplexity  of  looking  out  for  what 
has  not  as  yet  any  existence.  The  recollection  of 
the  change  of  plan  will  in  like  manner  account 
for  several  similar  incongruities  not  worth  par- 
ticularizing. 

Allusion  was  made,  at  the  outset  of  this  ad- 
vertisement, to  some  unspecified  difficulties,  as  the 
causes  of  the  original  suspension,  and  unfinished 
complexion,  of  the  present  work.  Ashamed  of  his 
defeat,  and  unable  to  dissemble  it,  he  knows  not 
how  to  refuse  himself  the  benefit  of  such  an  apology 
as  a  slight  sketch  of  the  nature  of  those  difficulties 
may  afford. 

The   discovery  of   them  was    produced   by  the 


PREFACE.  Xiii 

attempt  to  solve  the  questions  that  will  be  found  at 
the  conclusion  of  the  volume :  Wherein  consisted  the 
identity  and  completeness  of  a  law  ?  What  the  dis- 
tinction, and  ivhere  the  separation,  between  a  penal  and 
a  civil  law?  What  the  distinctiony  and  where  the 
separation,  between  the  penal  aiid  other  branches  of 
the  law? 

To  give  a  complete  and  correct  answer  to  these 
questions,  it  is  but  too  evident  that  the  relations  and 
dependencies  of  every  part  of  the  legislative  system, 
with  respect  to  every  other,  must  have  been  com- 
prehended and  ascertained.  But  it  is  only  upon  a 
view  of  these  parts  themselves,  that  such  an  opera- 
tion could  have  been  performed.  To  the  accuracy 
of  such  a  survey  one  necessary  condition  would 
therefore  be,  the  complete  existence  of  the  fabric 
to  be  surveyed.  Of  the  performance  of  this  con- 
dition no  example  is  as  yet  to  be  met  with  any 
where.  Common  law,  as  it  styles  itself  in  England, 
judiciary  law,  as  it  might  more  aptly  be  styled  every 
where,  that  fictitious  composition  which  has  no 
known  person  for  its  author,  no  known  assemblage 
of  words  for  its  substance,  forms  every  where  the 
main  body  of  the  legal  fabric :  like  that  fancied 
ether,  which,  in  default  of  sensible  matter,  fills  up 
the  measure  of  the  universe.  Shreds  and  scraps 
of  real  law,  stuck  on  upon  that  imaginary  ground, 
compose  the  furniture  of  every  national  code. 
What  follows? — that  he  who,  for  the  purpose  just 
mentioned  or  for  any  other,  wants  an  example  of 


XIV  PREFACE. 

a  complete  body  of  law  to  refer  to,  must  begin  with 
making  one. 

There  is,  or  rather  there  ought  to  be,  a  logic  of 
the  will,  as  well  as  of  the  understanding :  the  opera- 
tions of  the  former  faculty,  are  neither  less  sus- 
ceptible, nor  less  worthy,  than  those  of  the  latter, 
of  being  delineated  by  rules.  Of  these  two  branches 
of  that  recondite  art,  Aristotle  saw  only  the  latter : 
succeeding  logicians,  treading  in  the  steps  of  their 
great  founder,  have  concurred  in  seeing  with  no 
other  eyes.  Yet  so  far  as  a  difference  can  be  as- 
signed between  branches  so  intimately  connected, 
whatever  difference  there  is,  in  point  of  importance, 
is  in  favour  of  the  logic  of  the  will.  Since  it  is 
only  by  their  capacity  of  directing  the  operations 
of  this  faculty,  that  the  operations  of  the  under* 
standing  are  of  any  consequence. 

Of  this  logic  of  the  will,  the  science  of  laWy 
considered  in  respect  of  its  form,  is  the  most  con- 
siderable branch, — the  most  important  application. 
It  is,  to  the  art  of  legislation,  what  the  science  of 
anatomy  is  to  the  art  of  medicine  :  with  this  differ- 
ence, that  the  subject  of  it  is  what  the  artist  has  to 
work  with,  instead  of  being  what  he  has  to  operate 
upon.  Nor  is  the  body  politic  less  in  danger  from 
a  want  of  acquaintance  with  the  one  science,  than 
the  body  natural  from  ignorace  in  the  other.  One 
example,  amongst  a  thousand  that  might  be  adduced 
in  proof  of  this  assertion,  may  be  seen  in  the  note 
which  terminates  this  volume. 


PREFACE.  XV 

Such  then  were  the  difficulties :  such  the  pre- 
liminaries : — -an  unexampled  work  to  achieve,  and 
then  a  new  science  to  create  :  a  new  branch  to  add 
to  one  of  the  most  abstruse  of  sciences. 

Yet  more :  a  body  of  proposed  law,  how  complete 
soever,  would  be  comparatively  useless  and  unin- 
structive,  unless  explained  and  justified,  and  that  in 
every  tittle,  by  a  continued  accompaniment,  a  per- 
petual commentary  oi  reasons:*  which  reasons,  that 
the  comparative  value  of  such  as  point  in  opposite 
directions  may  be  estimated,  and  the  conjunct  force, 
of  such  as  point  in  the  same  direction,  may  be  felt^ 
must  be  marshalled,  and  put  under  subordination 
to  such  extensive  and  leading  ones  as  are  termed 
pinncipks.  There  must  be  therefore,  not  one  system 
only,  but  two  parallel  and  connected  systems, 
running  on  together,  the  one  of  legislative  provisions, 
the  other  of  political  reasons,  each  affording  to  the 
other  correction  and  support. 

Are  enterprises  like  these  achievable  ?  He  knows 
not.  This  only  he  knows,  that  they  have  been  un- 
dertaken, proceeded  in,  and  that  some  progress  has 
been  made  in  all  of  them.  He  will  venture  to  add, 
if  at  all  achievable,  never  at  least  by  one,  to  whom 
the  fatigue  of  attending  to  discussions,  as  arid  as 
those  which  occupy  the  ensuing  pages,  would  either 
appear  useless,  or  feel  intolerable.  He  will  repeat 
it  boldly  (for  it  has  been  said  before  him,)  truths 

•  To  Uie  aggregate  of  them  a  common  denomination  has  since  been 
allotted — tilt  rnlionaU. 


XVI  PREFACE. 

that  form  the  basis  of  political  and  moral  science, 
are  not  to  be  discovered  but  by  investigations  as 
severe  as  mathematical  ones,  and  beyond  all  com- 
parison more  intricate  and  extensive.  The  familiarity 
of  the  terms  is  a  presumption,  but  it  is  a  most  fal- 
lacious one,  of  the  facility  of  the  matter.  Truths 
in  general  have  been  called  stubborn  things :  the 
truths  just  mentioned  are  so  in  their  own  way. 
They  are  not  to  be  forced  into  detached  and  general 
propositions,  unincumbered  with  explanations  and 
exceptions.  They  will  not  compress  themselves 
into  epigrams.  They  recoil  from  the  tongue  and 
the  pen  of  the  declaimer.  They  flourish  not  in  the 
same  soil  with  sentiment.  They  grow  among  thorns ; 
and  are  not  to  be  plucked,  like  daisies,  by  infants 
as  they  run.  Labour,  the  inevitable  lot  of  humanity, 
is  in  no  track  more  inevitable  than  here.  In  vain 
would  an  Alexander  bespeak  a  peculiar  road  for 
royal  vanity,  or  a  Ptolemy,  a  smoother  one,  for 
royal  indolence.  There  is  no  King's  Road,  no 
Stadtholders  Gate,  to  legislative,  any  more  than  to 
mathematic  science, 


AN 

INTRODUCTION 


TO    THE 


PRINCIPLES  OF  MORALS  AND  LEGISLATION. 


CHAP.    L 

OF    THE    PRINCIPLE    OF    UTILITY. 

Nature  has   placed  mankind  under  the  go-  Mankind 
vernance  of  two  sovereign  masters,   pain  and  hypTin^and 
pleasure.     It  is  for  them  alone  to  point  out  what  p'^^^"""^- 
we  ought  to  do,  as  well  as  to  determine  what 
we  shall  do.     On  the  one  hand  the  standard  of 
right  and  wrong,   on  the  other  the   chain  of 
causes  and  effects,  are  fastened  to  their  throne. 
They  govern  us  in  all  we  do,  in  all  we  say,  in 
all  we  think :  every  effort  we  can  make  to  throw 
off  our  subjection,  will  serve  but  to  demonstrate 
and  confirm  it.     In  words  a  man  may  pretend 
to  abjure  their  empire:  but  in  reality  he  will 
remain  subject  to  it  all  the  while.     The  pinn- 
ciple  of  ntility  *  recognises  this  subjection,  and 

*  Note  by  the  Author,  July  1822. 

To  this  denomination  has  of  late  been  added,  or  substituted, 

the  greatest  happiness  or  greatest  felicity  principle :   this  for 

shortness,  instead  of  saying  at  length  that  principle  which 

states  the  greatest  hajjpincss  of  all  those  whose  interest  is  iu 

VOL.  r.  B 


Chap.  I. 


OF    THE    PRINCIPLE    OF    UTILITY. 

assumes  it  for  the  foundation  of  that  system, 
the  object  of  which  is  to  rear  the  fabric  of 
felicity  by  the  hands  of  reason  and  of  law. 
Systems  which  attempt  to  question  it,  deal 
in  sounds  instead  of  sense,  in  caprice  instead 
of  reason,  in  darkness  instead  of  light. 

But  enough  of  metaphor  and  declamation : 
it  is  not  by  such  means  that  moral  science  is 
to  be  improved. 

II. 

The  principle  of  utility  is  the  foundation  of 
the  present  work :  it  will  be  proper  therefore 
at  the  outset  to  give  an  explicit  and  deter- 
minate account  of  what  is  meant  by  it.     By 

question,  as  being  the  right  and  proper,  and  only  right  and 
proper  and  universally  desirable,  end  of  human  action  :  of 
human  action  in  every  situation,  and  in  particular  in  that  of 
a  functionary  or  set  of  functionaries  exercising  the  powers  of 
Government,  The  word  utility  does  not  so  clearly  point  to 
the  ideas  oi pleasure  and  pain  as  the  words  happiness  and  fe- 
licity do :  nor  does  it  lead  us  to  the  consideration  of  the 
7iumber,  of  the  interests  affected  ;  to  the  number,  as  being  the 
circumstance,  which  contributes,  in  the  largest  proportion, 
to  the  formation  of  the  standard  here  in  question ;  the  standard 
of  right  and  wrong,  by  which  alone  the  propriety  of  human 
conduct,  in  every  situation,  can  with  propriety  be  tried.  This 
want  of  a  sufficiently  manifest  connexion  between  the  ideas 
of  happiness  and  pleasure  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  idea  of 
utility  on  the  other,  I  have  every  now  and  then  found  ope- 
rating, and  with  but  too  much  efficiency,  as  a  bar  to  the 
acceptance,  that  might  otherwise  have  been  given,  to  this 
principle. 


OF    THE    PRINCIPLE    OF    UTILITY.  ^ 

the  principle  *  of  utility  is  meant  that  principle    chap^ 
which  approves  or  disapproves  of  every  action  of  "'t^Jf^^^ 
whatsoever,  according  to  the  tendency  which  "'^^^• 
it  appears  to  have  to  augment  or  diminish  the 
happiness  of  the  party  whose    interest    is  in 
question :   or,  what  is  the  same  thing  in  other 
words,  to  promote  or  to  oppose  that  happiness. 
I  say  of  every  action  whatsoever ;  and  there- 
fore not  only  of  every  action  of  a  private  in- 
dividual, but  of  every  measure  of  government. 

III. 
By  utility  is  meant  that   property  in    any  utility, 
object,  whereby  it  tends  to  produce  benefit,  ad- 
vantage, pleasure,  good,  or  happiness,  (all  this 
in  the  present  case  comes  to  the  same  thing)  or 


*  [Principle]  The  word  principle  is  derived  from  the  Latin  A  principle, 
,  .  ,  ,  1    1      <•     ,  wiiat. 

principium :    which   seems  to   be   compounded   or   the  two 

words  primus,  first,  or  chief,  and  cipium,  a  termination  which 
seems  to  be  derived  from  capio,  to  take,  as  in  manciphim, 
municipium ;  to  which  are  analogous  auceps,  forceps,  and 
others.  It  is  a  terra  of  very  vague  and  very  extensive  sig- 
nification :  it  is  applied  to  any  thing  which  is  conceived  to 
serve  as  a  foundation  or  beginning  to  any  series  of  operations  : 
in  some  cases,  of  physical  operations  ;  but  of  mental  opera- 
tions in  the  present  case. 

The  principle  here  in  question  may  be  taken  for  an  act  of 
the  mind  ;  a  sentiment ;  a  sentiment  of  approbation  j  a  sen- 
timent which,  when  applied  to  an  action,  approves  of  its 
utility,  as  that  (|uality  of  it  by  which  the  measure  of  appro- 
bation or  disapprobation  bestowed  upon  it  ought  to  be  go- 
verned. 

S  i 


4  OF    THE    PRINCIPLE    OF    UTILITY. 

5^"-^j-  ^  (what  comes  again  to  the  same  thing)  to  prevent 
the  happening  of  mischief,  pain,  evil,  or  unhap- 
piness  to  the  party  whose  interest  is  considered : 
if  that  party  be  the  community  in  general,  then 
the  happiness  of  the  community  :  if  a  particular 
individual,  then  the  happiness  of  that  individual. 

IV. 

interest  of       The  intcTCst  of  tlic  commuuity  is  one  of  the 

the  com- 
munity,     most  general  expressions  that  can  occur  in  the 

what.  1  1  />  1  111 

phraseology  of  morals :  no  wonder  that  the 
meaning  of  it  is  often  lost.  AVhen  it  has  a 
meaning,  it  is  this.  The  community  is  a  ficti- 
tious body,  composed  of  the  individual  persons 
who  are  considered  as  constituting  as  it  were 
its  members.  The  interest  of  the  community 
then  is,  what? — the  sum  of  the  interests  of  the 
several  members  who  compose  it. 

V. 

It  is  ill  vain  to  talk  of  the  interest  of  the 
community,  without  understanding  what  is  the 
interest  of  the  individual.*  A  thing  is  said  to 
promote  the  interest,  or  to  be  for  the  interest, 
of  an  individual,  when  it  tends  to  add  to  the 
sum  total  of  his  pleasures  :  or,  what  comes  to 
the  same  thing,  to  diminish  the  sum  total  of 
his  pains. 


"  *  [Interest,  &c.]  Interest  is  one  of  those  words,  which  not 
having  any  superior  genus,  cannot  in  the  ordinary  way  be 
define(1. 


OF    THE    PRIXCIPLE    OF    UTILITY.  5 

vr.  Sl!^^ 

An  action  then  may  be  said  to  be  conform-  ^o"jf,'r,n" 
able  to  the  principle  of  utility,  or,  for  shortness  p|.f,^/ipie*'^f 
sake,  to  utility,  (meaning  with  respect  to  the  ".h^J-' ' 
community  at  large)  when  the  tendency  it  has 
to  augment  the  happiness  of  the,  community  is 
greater  than  any  it  has  ta  diminish  it. 

VII. 

A  measure  of  government  (which  is  but  a  ^^ "^q^^^^.^^ 
particular  kind  of  action,  performed  by  a  par-  ["^^"^^^£1'"^'^ 
ticular  person  or  persons)  may  be  said  to  be  ^'j^  jj'i.'JI','" 
conformable  to  or  dictated  by  the  principle  of  ^y*  '^'^^'• 
utility,  when  in  like  manner  the  tendency  which 
it  has  to  augment  the  happiness  of  the  com- 
munity is  greater  than   any  which  it  has   to 
diminish  it. 

VIII. 

When  an  action,  or  in  particular  a  measure  ^-^ws  or 

^  dictates  ol 

of  government,  is  supposed  by  a  man  to  be  utility, 
conformable  to  the  principle  of  utility,  it  may 
be  convenient,  for  the  purposes  of  discourse,  to 
imagine  a  kind  of  law  or  dictate,  called  a  law 
or  dictate  of  utility  :  and  to  speak  of  the  action 
in  question,  as  being  conformable  to  such  law 
or  dictate. 

IX. 

A  man  may  be  said  to  be  a  partizan  of  the  Apanuan 
J  '  of  the  prill- 

principle  of  utility,   when  the  approbation  or  fi'/^'^^^'^f,"''' 

disapprobation  he  annexes  to  any  action,  or  to 

any  measure,    is  determined,  by  and  propor- 


6  OF    THE    PRINCIPLE    OF    UTILITY. 

5^"^J-  ^\  tioned  to  the  tendency  which  he  conceives  it 
to  have  to  augment  or  to  diminish  the  hap- 
piness of  the  community  :  or  in  other  words, 
to  its  conformity  or  unconformity  to  the  laws 
or  dictates  of  utility. 

X. 

Ought,  Of  an  action  that  is  conformable  to  the  prin- 

ought  not,        •     1  r*         •!•  1  -11 

rifciit  and     ciplc  01  Utility,  oiic  may  always  say  either  that 

wrous;,  &c.    .       .  i  i  i  i  i 

how  to  be    it  is  one  that  ought  to  be  done,  or  at  least  that 

uuderstood   .      .  ,  i  i  /^ 

it  IS  not  one  that  ought  not  to  be  done.  One 
may  say  also,  that  it  is  right  it  should  be  done; 
at  least  that  it  is  not  wrong  it  should  be  done : 
that  it  is  a  right  action ;  at  least  that  it  is  not 
a  wrong  action.  When  thus  interpreted,  the 
words  ought,  and  right  and  wrong,  and  others 
of  that  stamp,  have  a  meaning :  when  other- 
wise, they  have  none. 

XI. 

To  prove         Has  thc  rcctitudc  of  this  principle  been  ever 

tudeofthis  formally  contested?  It  should  seem  that  it  had, 

at  once  un-  by  those  wlio  liavc  not  known  what  they  have 

and^inTpos-  bccn  meaning.     Is  it  susceptible  of  any  direct 

proof?   it  should  seem  not :  for  that  which  is 

used  to  prove   every  thing  else,   cannot  itself 

be  proved :    a  chain  of  proofs  must  have  their 

commencement  somewhere.    To  give  such  proof 

is  as  impossible  as  it  is  needless. 

XII. 

It  has  sei-        ^^^  ^^^^  tlicrc  is  or  ever  has  been  that  human 
ev^'i^'jxt,  creature  breathing,  however  stupid  or  perverse, 

been  consistently  pursued. 


OF    THE    PRINCIPLE    OF    UTILITr. 

who  has  not  on  many,  perhaps  on  most  occa-  .^'"^J-  ^: 
sions  of  his  life,  deferred  to  it.  By  the  natural 
constitution  of  the  human  frame,  on  most  oc- 
casions of  their  lives  men  in  general  embrace 
this  principle,  without  thinking  of  it :  if  not 
for  the  ordering  of  their  own  actions,  yet  for 
the  trying  of  their  own  actions,  as  well  as  of 
those  of  other  men.  There  have  been,  at  the 
same  time,  not  many,  perhaps,  even  of  the  most 
intelligent,  who  have  been  disposed  to  embrace 
it  purely  and  without  reserve.  There  are  even 
few  who  have  not  taken  some  occasion  or  other 
to  quarrel  with  it,  either  on  account  of  their 
not  understanding  always  how  to  apply  it,  or 
on  account  of  some  prejudice  or  other  which 
they  were  afraid  to  examine  into,  or  could  not 
bear  to  part  with.  For  such  is  the  stuff  that 
man  is  made  of:  in  principle  and  in  practice, 
in  a  right  track  and  in  a  wrong  one,  the  rarest 
of  all  human  qualities  is  consistency. 

XIII. 

When  a  man  attempts  to  combat  the  prin-  |tta""fve 

*■  ■*  he  CDijsist 

ciple  of  utility,  it  is  with  reasons  drawn,  without  f-'i'iv  »<""■ 
his  being  aware  of  it,  from  that  very  principle 
itself.*    His  arguments,  if  they  prove  any  thing, 
prove  not  that  the  principle  is  wrong,  but  that, 
according  to  the  applications  he  supposes  to 

*  "  The  j)rinciple  of  utility,  ([  have  heard  it  said)  is  n  dan- 
"  gerous  principle :  it  is  dangerous  on  certain  occasions  to 
"  consult  it."     This  is  as  much  as  to  say,  what?    that  it  is 


OF    THE    PRINCIPLE    OF    UTILITY. 


f  "^J-  '•,  be  made  of  it,  it  is  misapplied.  Is  it  possible 
for  a  man  to  move  the  earth  ?  Yes ;  but  he 
must  first  find  out  another  earth  to  stand  upon. 


not  consonant  to  utility,  to  consult  utility  :    in  short,  that  it 
is  not  consulting  it,  to  consult  it. 

Addition  by  the  author,  July  1822. 

Not  long  after  the  publication  of  the  Fragment  on  Govern- 
ment, anno  1776,  in  which,  in  the  character  of  an  all-com- 
prehensive and  all-commanding  principle,  the  principle  of 
utility  WHS  brought  to  view,  one  person  by  whom  observation 
to  the  above  effect  was  made  was  Alexander  Wedderburn,  at 
that  time  Attorney  or  Solicitor  General,  afterwards  succes- 
sively Chief  Justice  of  the  Common  Pleas,  and  Chancellor  of 
England,  under  the  successive  titles  of  Lord  Loughborough 
and  Earl  of  Rosslyn.  It  was  made — not  indeed  in  my  hear- 
ing, but  in  the  hearing  of  a  person  by  whom  it  was  almost 
immediately  communicated  to  me.  So  far  from  being  self- 
contradictory,  it  was  a  shrewd  and  perfectly  true  one.  By 
that  distinguished  functionary,  the  state  of  the  Government 
was  thoroughly  understood  :  by  the  obscure  individual,  at 
that  time  not  so  much  as  supposed  to  be  so  :  his  disquisitions 
had  not  been  as  yet  applied,  with  any  thing  like  a  compre- 
hensive view,  to  the  field  of  Constitutional  Law,  nor  therefore 
to  those  features  of  the  English  Government,  by  which  the 
greatest  happiness  of  the  ruling  one  with  or  without  that  of 
a  favoured  few,  aie  now  so  plainly  seen  to  be  the  only  ends 
to  which  the  course  of  it  has  at  any  time  been  directed.  The 
principle  of  utility  was  an  appellative,  at  that  time  employed — 
employed  by  me,  as  it  had  been  by  others,  to  designate  that 
which,  in  a  more  perspicuous  and  instructive  manner,  may, 
as  above,  be  designated  by  the  name  of  the  greatest  happiness 
principle.  "  This  principle  (said  Wedderburn)  is  a  dangerous 
"■  one,"  Saying  so,  he  said  that  which,  to  a  certain  extent, 
is  strictly  true  :   a  principle,  which  lays  down,  as  the  only 


It. 


OF    THE    PRINCIPLE    OF    UTILITY.  c 

XIV.  Sll^ 

To  disprove  the  propriety  of  it  by  arguments  beuken" 
is  impossible ;  but,  from  the  causes  that  have  ^ou"[i'n^ 
been  mentioned,  or  from  some  confused  or  par-  fhaSay' 
tial  view  of  it,  a  man  may  happen  to  be  disposed  p^Jert^-n- 
not  to  relish  it.  Where  this  i^  the  case,  if  he  f^'^  ^^'°*^ 
thinks  the  settling  of  his  opinions  on  such  a 
subject  worth  the  trouble,  let  him  take  the  fol- 
lowing steps,  and  at  length,  perhaps,  he  may 
come  to  reconcile  himself  to  it. 

1.  Let  him  settle  with  himself,  whether  he 
would  wish  to  discard  this  principle  altogether ; 

right  and  justifiable  end  of  Government,  the  greatest  hap- 
piness of  the  greatest  number — how  can  it  be  denied  to  be  a 
dangerous  one  ?  dangerous  it  unquestionably  is,  to  every 
government  whicli  has  for  its  actual  end  or  object,  the 
greatest  happiness  of  a  certain  one,  with  or  without  the  ad- 
dition of  some  comparatively  small  number  of  others,  whom 
it  is  matter  of  pleasure  or  acconmiodation  to  him  to  admit, 
each  of  tliem,  to  a  share  in  the  concern,  on  the  footing  of  so 
many  junior  partners.  Dangerous  it  therefore  really  was,  to 
the  interest — the  sinister  interest — of  all  those  functionaries, 
himself  included,  wliose  interest  it  was,  to  maximize  delay, 
vexation,  and  expense,  in  judicial  and  other  modes  of  pro- 
cedure, for  the  sake  of  the  profit,  extractible  out  of  the  ex- 
pense. In  a  Government  which  had  for  its  end  in  view  the 
greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest  number,  Alexander  Wed- 
ilerburn  might  have  been  Attorney  General  and  then  Chan- 
cellor •  but  he  would  not  have  been  Attorney  General  with 
rt^lS.CXX)  a  year,  nor  ChanceHor,  with  a  peerage  with  a  veto 
upon  all  justice,  with  c£'2:i,00()  a  year,  and  with  .500  sinecures 
at  his  disposal,  under  the  name  of  Ecclesiastical  Benefices, 
besides  et  ccEteras. 


10  OF    THE    PRINCIPLE    OF    UTILITY. 

5^"^J-  ^  if  SO,  let  him  consider  what  it  is  that  all  his 
reasonings  (in  matters  of  politics  especially) 
can  amount  to  ? 

2.  If  he  would,  let  him  settle  with  himself, 
whether  he  would  judge  and  act  without  any 
principle,  or  whether  there  is  any  other  he 
would  judge  and  act  by  ? 

3.  If  there  be,  let  him  examine  and  satisfy 
himself  whether  the  principle  he  thinks  he  has 
found  is  really  any  separate  intelligible  prin- 
ciple ;  or  whether  it  be  not  a  mere  principle  in 
words,  a  kind  of  phrase,  which  at  bottom  ex- 
presses neither  more  nor  less  than  the  mere 
averment  of  his  own  unfounded  sentiments; 
that  is,  what  in  another  person  he  might  be 
apt  to  call  caprice  ? 

4.  If  he  is  inclined  to  think  that  his  own 
approbation  or  disapprobation,  annexed  to  the 
idea  of  an  act,  without  any  regard  to  its  con- 
sequences, is  a  sufficient  foundation  for  him  to 
judge  and  act  upon,  let  him  ask  himself  whether 
his  sentiment  is  to  be  a  standard  of  right  and 
wrong,  with  respect  to  every  other  man,  or 
whether  every  man's  sentiment  has  the  same 
privilege  of  being  a  standard  to  itself? 

5.  In  the  first  case,  let  him  ask  himself 
whether  his  principle  is  not  despotical,  and 
hostile  to  all  the  rest  of  human  race? 

6.  In  the  second  case,  whether  it  is  not 
anarchial,  and  whether  at  this  rate  there  are  not 


OF    THE    PRINCIPLE    OF    UTILITY.  11 

as  many  different  standards  of  right  and  wrong  chap^ 
as  there  are  men  ?  and  whether  even  to  the 
same  man,  the  same  thing,  which  is  right  to- 
day, may  not  (without  the  least  change  in  its 
nature)  be  wrong  to-morrow  ?  and  whether  the 
same  thing  is  not  right  and  wrong  in  the  same 
place  at  the  same  time  ?  and  in  either  case, 
whether  all  argument  is  not  at  an  end?  and 
whether,  when  two  men  have  said,  "  I  like 
this,"  and  "  I  don't  like  it,"  they  can  (upon 
such  a  principle)  have  any  thing  more  to  say  ? 

7.  If  he  should  have  said  to  himself,  No : 
for  that  the  sentiment  which  he  proposes  as  a 
standard  must  be  grounded  on  reflection,  let 
him  say  on  what  particulars  the  reflection  is  to 
turn?  if  on  particulars  having  relation  to  the 
utility  of  the  act,  then  let  him  say  whether  this 
is  not  deserting  his  own  principle,  and  bor- 
rowing assistance  from  that  very  one  in  oppo- 
sition to  which  he  sets  it  up :  or  if  not  on  those 
particulars,  on  what  other  particulars  ? 

8.  If  he  should  be  for  compounding  the 
matter,  and  adopting  his  own  principle  in  part, 
and  the  principle  of  utility  in  part,  let  him  say 
how  far  he  will  adopt  it? 

0.  When  he  has  settled  with  himself  where 
he  will  stop,  then  let  him  ask  himself  how  he 
justifies  to  himself  the  adopting  it  so  far  ?  and 
why  he  will  not  adopt  it  any  farther? 

10.   Admitting  any  other  principle  than  the 


12  OF    THE    PRINCIPLE    OF    UTILITY. 

Chap.  I.  principle  of  utility  to  be  a  right  principle,  a 
principle  that  it  is  right  for  a  man  to  pursue ; 
admitting  (what  is  not  true)  that  the  word 
riM  can  have  a  meanino-  without  reference  to 
utility,  let  him  say  whether  there  is  any  such 
thing  as  a  motive  that  a  man  can  have  to  pursue 
the  dictates  of  it :  if  there  is,  let  him  say  what 
that  motive  is,  and  how  it  is  to  be  distinguished 
from  those  which  enforce  the  dictates  of  utility : 
if  not,  then  lastly  let  him  say  what  it  is  this 
other  principle  can  be  good  for  ? 


1-  J 


CHAP.    II. 

OF    PRINCIPLKS    ADVERSE    TO    THAT    OF    UTILITY. 


All  other 


If  the  principle  of  utility  be  a  right  principle  pv\Qc\p\L 
to  be  governed  by,  and  that  in  all  cases,  it  of  miuty 
follows  from  what  has  been  just  observed,  that  ™"'^ 


wrons. 


whatever  principle  differs  from  it  in  any  case 
must  necessarily  be  a  wrong  one.  To  prove 
any  other  principle,  therefore,  to  be  a  wrong 
one,  there  needs  no  more  than  just  to  show  it 
to  be  what  it  is,  a  principle  of  which  the  dictates 
are  in  some  point  or  other  different  from  those 
of  the  principle  of  utility :  to  state  it  is  to  con- 
fute it. 

II. 
A  principle  may  be  different  from  that  of  J^|||>^J'" 
utility  in  two  ways:     1.  By  being  constantly  11^1!^'^'^ 
opposed  to  it :   this  is  the  case  with  a  principle  '' 
which  may  be  termed  the  principle  of  asceticism  * 


iiile 
b 
roii:: 


*  [Asceticism]  Ascetic  is  a  term  that  has  been  sometimes  ,^,.^J|'',','||^',"^ 
applied  to  Monks.     It  comes  from  a  CJreek  word  which  sig-  word, 
niiies    exercise.     The  practices   by  wliich  Monks  sought    to  Printiiiles 

,,,,.,,         rif  till- 

distinguish  themselves  trom  other  men  were  culled  their  li.x-  M„nks. 
ercises.  These  exercises  consisted  in  so  many  contrivances 
they  had  for  ttjrmenting  themselves.  By  this  they  thought 
to  ingratiate  themselves  with  the  Deity.  For  the  Deity,  said 
they,  is  a  Being  of  infinite  benevolence  ;  now  a  Being  r)f  the 
most  ordinary   benevolence    is   pleased   to  see  others  make 


14  OF    PRINCIPLES    ADVERSE 

^"^^-  ";  2.  By  being  sometimes  opposed  to  it,  and 
sometimes  not,  as  it  may  happen :  this  is  the 
case  with  another,  which  may  be  termed  the 
principle  of  sympathy  and  antquithi/ . 

III. 
a"eti'mmf  ^Y  ^^^^  principle  of  asceticism  I  mean  that 
what.  principle,  which,  like  the  principle  of  utility, 
approves  or  disapproves  of  any  action,  accord- 
ing to  the  tendency  which  it  appears  to  have 
to  augment  or  diminish  the  happiness  of  the 
party  whose  interest  is  in  question  ;  but  in  an 
inverse  manner  :  approving  of  actions  in  as  far 
as  they  tend  to  diminish  bis  happiness ;  dis- 
approving of  them  in  as  far  as  they  tend  to 
augment  it. 


themselves  as  happy  as  they  can  :  therefore  to  make  ourselves 
as  unhappy  as  we  can  is  the  way  to  please  the  Deity.  If  any 
body  asked  them,  what  motive  they  could  find  for  doing  all 
this  ?  Oh  !  said  they,  you  are  not  to  imagine  that  we  are 
punishing  ourselves  for  nothing  :  we  know  very  well  what 
we  are  about.  You  are  to  know,  that  for  every  grain  of 
pain  it  costs  us  now,  we  are  to  have  a  hundred  grains  of 
pleasure  by  and  by.  The  case  is,  that  God  loves  to  see  us 
torment  ourselves  at  present  :  indeed  he  has  as  good  as  told 
us  so.  But  this  is  done  only  to  try  us,  in  order  just  to  see 
how  we  should  behave  :  which  it  is  plain  he  could  not  know, 
without  making  the  experiment.  Now  then,  from  the  satis- 
faction it  gives  him  to  see  us  make  ourselves  as  unhappy  as 
we  can  make  ourselves  in  this  present  life,  we  have  a  sure 
proof  of  the  satisfaction  it  will  give  him  to  see  us  as  happy 
as  he  can  make  us  in  a  life  to  come. 


TO    THAT    OF    UTILITY.  15 

jy  Chap.  II. 

It  is  evident  that  any  one  who  reprobates  of^hrprfn- 
any  the  least  particle  of  pleasure,  as  such,  from  Slcismr" 
whatever  source  derived,  is  pro  tanto  a  partizan  ''''°- 
of  the  principle  of  asceticism.  It  is  only  upon 
that  principle,  and  not  from  the  principle  of 
utility,  that  the  most  abominable  pleasure 
which  the  vilest  of  malefactors  ever  reaped 
from  his  crime  would  be  to  be  reprobated,  if  it 
stood  alone.  The  case  is,  that  it  never  does 
stand  alone ;  but  is  necessarily  followed  by 
such  a  quantity  of  pain  (or,  what  comes  to  the 
same  thing,  such  a  chance  for  a  certain  quantity 
of  pain)  that  the  pleasure  in  comparison  of  it, 
is  as  nothing :  and  this  is  the  true  and  sole, 
but  perfectly  sufficient,  reason  for  making  it  a 
ground  for  punishment. 

V. 

There  are  two  classes  of  men  of  very  different  Thisprin- 

ciple  has 

complexions,  by  whom  the  principle  of  asceti-  had  in  some 

*  a  philoso- 

cism  appears  to  have  been  embraced ;    the  one  phicai,  iu 

.  .      oiliersare- 

a  set  of  moralists,  the  other  a  set  of  reli-  Hsiousori- 
gionists.  Different  accordmgly  have  been  the 
motives  which  appear  to  have  recommended  it 
to  the  notice  of  these  different  parties.  Hope, 
that  is  the  prospect  of  pleasure,  seems  to  have 
animated  the  former:  hope,  the  aliment  of  phi- 
losophic pride  :  the  hope  of  honour  and  repu- 
tation at  the  hands  of  men.  Fear,  that  is  the 
prospect  of  pain,  the  latter  :    fear,  the  offspring 


16'  OF    THE    PRINCIPLES    ADVERSE 

f"^p- ";  of  superstitious  fancy :  the  fear  of  future  pu- 
nishment at  the  hands  of  a  splenetic  and  re- 
vengeful Deity.  I  say  in  this  case  fear  :  for  of 
the  invisible  future,  fear  is  more  powerful  than 
hope.  These  circumstances  characterize  the 
two  different  parties  among  the  partizans  of 
the  principle  of  asceticism ;  the  parties  and 
their  motives  different,  the  principle  the  same. 

VI. 

!wrie(?faT      '^^^^  religious  party,  however,  appear  to  have 
ther  by  the  carried  it  farther  than  the  philosophical :  they 

religious  ^  ^  '' 

party  than  havc  actcd  morc  consistently  and  less  wisely. 

by  the  phi-  "^  "^ 

losophicai.  The  philosopliical  party  have  scarcely  gone 
farther  than  to  reprobate  pleasure  :  the  religious 
party  have  frequently  gone  so  far  as  to  make  it 
a  matter  of  merit  and  of  duty  to  court  pain. 
The  philosophical  party  have  hardly  gone  far- 
ther than  the  making  pain  a  matter  of  indif- 
ference. It  is  no  evil,  they  have  said :  they 
have  not  said,  it  is  a  good.  They  have  not  so 
much  as  reprobated  all  pleasure  in  the  lump. 
They  have  discarded  only  what  they  have 
called  the  gross  ;  that  is,  such  as  are  organical, 
or  of  which  the  origin  is  easily  traced  up  to 
such  as  are  organical :  they  have  even  cherished 
and  magnified  the  refined.  Yet  this,  however, 
not  under  the  name  of  pleasure :  to  cleanse 
itself  from  the  sordes  of  its  impure  original,  it 
was  necessary  it  should  change  its  name  :  the 
honourable,  the  glorious,  the  reputable,  the  be- 


TO    THAT    OF    UTILITY.  17 

coming,  the  honestuni,  the  decorum,  it  was  to  be  S"^^-  ": 
called  :    in  short,  any  thing  but  pleasure. 

VII. 

From   these   two   sources  have  flowed  the  ihe  philo- 
sophical 
doctrines  from  which  the   sentiments   of  the  branch  of  it 

has  had 

bulk   of  mankind   have  all   along   received   a  mostinflu- 

.        .  ente  among 

tmcture  of  this  principle;   some  from  the  phi-  persons  of 
losophical,  some  from  the  religious,  some  from  the  reiigi-' 

1         1  Ti/r  p       1  •  r  ^         r  ""*  among 

both.  Men  oi  education  more  irequently  irom  the  vulgar, 
the  philosophical,  as  more  suited  to  the  eleva- 
tion of  their  sentiments :  the  vulgar  more  fre- 
quently from  the  superstitious,  as  more  suited 
to  the  narrowness  of  their  intellect,  undilated 
by  knowledge  :  and  to  the  abjectness  of  their 
condition,  continually  open  to  the  attacks  of 
fear.  The  tinctures,  however,  derived  from 
the  two  sources,  would  naturally  intermingle, 
insomuch  that  a  man  would  not  always  know 
by  which  of  them  he  was  most  influenced : 
and  they  would  often  serve  to  corroborate  and 
enliven  one  another.  It  was  this  conformity 
that  made  a  kind  of  alliance  between  parties  of 
a  complexion  otherwise  so  dissimilar :  and  dis- 
posed tiiem  to  unite  upon  various  occasions 
against  the  common  enemy,  the  partizan  of  the 
principle  of  utility,  whom  they  joined  in  brand- 
ing with  the  odious  name  of  Epicurean. 

VIII. 

The  principle  of  asceticism,  however,  with  '''i»pp'-'"t'- 

11  '  pie  1)1  a<«.e- 

whatever  warmth  it  may  have  been  embraced  "'i'^"' ''a^* 

•'  iieviT  been 

VOL.    I,  C  sttadilv applied  hy  eiihtr  party 

to  the  Busiueis  of  Gdveniineiit. 


1.S  OF    PRINCIPLES    ADVERSE 


Chap.  II. 


by  its  partizans  as  a  rule  of  private  conduct, 
seems  not  to  have  been  carried  to  any  con- 
siderable length,  when  applied  to  the  business 
of  government.  In  a  few  instances  it  has  been 
carried  a  little  way  by  the  philosophical  party ; 
witness  the  Spartan  regimen.  Though  then, 
perhaps,  it  may  be  considered  as  having  been 
a  measure  of  security :  and  an  application, 
though  a  precipitate  and  perverse  application, 
of  the  principle  of  utility.  Scarcely  in  any 
instances,  to  any  considerable  length,  by  the 
religious :  for  the  various  monastic  orders,  and 
the  societies  of  the  Quakers,  Dumplers,  Mo- 
ravians, and  other  religionists,  have  been  free 
societies,  whose  regimen  no  man  has  been  as- 
tricted  to  without  the  intervention  of  his  own 
consent.  Whatever  merit  a  man  may  have 
thought  there  would  be  in  making  himself 
miserable,  no  such  notion  seems  ever  to  have 
occurred  to  any  of  them,  that  it  may  be  a  merit, 
much  less  a  duty,  to  make  others  miserable: 
although  it  should  seem,  that  if  a  certain  quan- 
tity of  misery  were  a  thing  so  desirable,  it 
would  not  matter  much  whether  it  were  brought 
by  each  man  upon  himself,  or  by  one  man  upon 
another.  It  is  true,  that  from  the  same  source 
from  whence,  among  the  religionists,  the  at- 
tachment to  the  principle  of  asceticism  took  its 
rise,  flowed  other  doctrines  and  practices,  from 
which  misery  in  abundance  was  produced  in 


TO    THAT    OF    UTILITY.  19 

one  man  by  the  instrumentality  of  another:    Chap^ 
witness  the  holy  wars,  and  the  persecutions  for 
religion.    But  the  passion  for  producing  misery 
in  these  cases  proceeded  upon   some  special 
ground :    the   exercise   of  it   was  confined  to 
persons  of  particular  descriptions  :   they  were 
tormented,  not  as  men,  but  as  heretics  and  in 
fidels.     To  have  inflicted  the  same  miseries  on 
their  fellow-believers  and  fellow-sectaries,  would 
have  been  as  blaraeable  in  the  eyes  even  of 
these  religionists,  as  in  those  of  a  partizan  of 
the  principle  of  utility.     For  a  man  to  give 
himself  a  certain  number  of  stripes  was  indeed 
meritorious  :    but  to  give  the  same  number  of 
stripes  to  another  man,  not  consenting,  would 
have  been  a  sin.     We  read  of  saints,  who  for 
the  good  of  their  souls,  and  the  mortification  of 
their   bodies,   have  voluntarily   yielded  them- 
selves a   prey  to  vermin  :    but   though  many 
persons  of  this  class  have  wielded  the  reins  of 
empire,  we  read  of  none  who  have  set  them- 
selves to  work,    and  made  laws  on  purpose, 
with  a  view  of  stocking  the  body  politic  with 
the  breed  of  highwaymen,   housebreakers,  or 
incendiaries.     If  at  any  time  they  have  suffered 
the  nation  to  be  preyed  upon  by  swarms  of 
idle  pensioners,   or    useless   placemen,    it  has 
rather   been  from   negligence  and   imbecility, 
than  from  any  settled  plan  for  oppressing  and 
plundering  of  the  people.     If  at  any  time  they 

c  2 


•^O  OF    PRINCIPLES    ADVERSE 

9"^^- ":   have  sapped  the  sources  of  national  wealth,  by 
cramping  commerce,  and  driving  the  inhabi- 
tants into  emigration,  it  has  been  M^ith  other 
views,  and  in  pursuit  of  other  ends.     If  they 
have  declaimed  against  the  pursuit  of  pleasure, 
and  the  use  of  wealth,  they  have  commonly 
stopped  at  declamation :    they  have  not,  like 
Lycurgus,   made   express   ordinances   for   the 
purpose  of  banishing  the  precious  metals.     If 
they  have  established  idleness  by  a  law,  it  has 
been  not  because  idleness,  the  mother  of  vice 
and  misery,  is  itself  a  virtue,  but  because  idle- 
ness (say  they)  is   the  road  to  holiness.      If 
under  the  notion  of  fasting,  they  have  joined 
in  the  plan  of  confining  their  subjects  to  a  diet, 
thought  by  some  to  be  of  the  most  nourishing 
and  prolific  nature,  it  has  been  not  for  the  sake 
of  making  them  tributaries  to  the  nations  by 
whom  that  diet  was  to  be  supplied,   but  for 
the  sake  of  manifesting  their  own  power,  and 
exercising  the  obedience  of  the  people.      If 
they  have   established,  or  suffered  to  be  esta- 
blished, punishments  for  the  breach  of  celibacy, 
they  have  done  no  more  than  comply  with  the 
petitions  of  those  deluded  rigorists,  who,  dupes 
to  the  ambitious  and  deep-laid  policy  of  their 
rulers,   first  laid   themselves   under  that   idle 
obligation  by  a  vow. 

IX. 

Tiicprinci-      The  principle  of  asceticism  seems  orisrinally 

pie  ot  asce-  j.  j.  o  j 


TO    THAT    OF    UTILITY.  21 

to  have  been  the  reverie  of  certain  hasty  spe-   ^'"''^- "; 
dilators,  who   having    perceived,    or   fancied,  [ts'u.'i-in, 
that  certain  pleasures,  when  reaped  in  certain  ^f^t  of  uu- 
circumstances,  have,  at  the  long  run,  been  at-  p£d""^'^' 
tended   with  pains   more   than  equivalent   to 
them,    took   occasion    to  quarrel   with   every 
thing   that  offered   itself  under  the    name   of 
pleasure.   Having  then  got  thus  far,  and  having 
forgot  the  point  which  they  set  out  from,  they 
pushed  on,   and  went  so  much  further  as   to 
think  it  meritorious  to  fall  in  love  with  pain. 
Even  this,  we  see,  is  at  bottom  but  the  prin- 
ciple of  utility  misapplied. 

X. 

The  principle  of  utility  is  capable  of  beinff  Jtcannever 
r         i  J  I  '^  be  consist- 

consistently  pursued ;  and  it  is  but  tautology  entiy  pur- 

to  say,  that  the  more  consistently  it  is  pursued, 
the  better  it  must  ever  be  for  human-kind. 
The  principle  of  asceticism  never  was,  nor  ever 
can  be,  consistently  pursued  by  any  living 
creature.  Let  but  one  tenth  part  of  the  in- 
habitants of  this  earth  pursue  it  consistently, 
and  in  a  day's  time  they  will  have  turned  it 
into  a  hell. 

XI. 

Among  principles  adverse*  to  that  of  utility,  Thepriiui- 

— — ■ ■ I'athy  and 

•  The  following  Note-  was  first  printed  in  January  1789.       ^",^1"'''^' 
It  ought   rather  to  have   been   styled,  mure  extensively, 
the  principle  of  caprice.     Where  it  applies  to  the  choice  of 
actions  to  be  marked  out  for  injunction  or  prohibition,  for 


2^  OV    PRINCIPLES    ADVERSE 

f^"^^-  ";  that  which  at  this  day  seems  to  have  most  in- 
fluence in  matters  of  government,  is  w^hat  may 
be  called  the  principle  of  sympathy  and  an- 

reward  or  punishment,  (to  stand,  in  a  word,  as  subjects  for 
obligations  to  be  imposed,)  it  may  indeed  with  propriety  be 
termed,  as  in  the  text,  the  principle  of  sympathij  and  antipathy. 
But  this  appellative  does  not  so  well  apply  to  it,  when  occu- 
pied in  the  choice  of  the  events  which  are  to  serve  as  sources 
of  title  with  respect  to  rights:  where  the  actions  prohibited 
and  allowed  the  obligations  and  rights,  being  already  fixed, 
the  only  question  is,  under  what  circumstances  a  man  is  to  be 
invested  with  the  one  or  subjected  to  the  other  ?  from  what 
incidents  occasion  is  to  be  taken  to  invest  a  man,  or  to  refuse 
to  invest  him,  with  the  one,  or  to  subject  him  to  the  other  ? 
In  this  latter  case  it  may  more  appositely  be  characterized  by 
the  name  of  the  phantastic  principle.  Sympathy  and  antipathy 
are  affections  of  the  sensible  faculty.  But  the  choice  of  titles 
with  respect  to  rights,  especially  with  respect  to  proprietary 
rights,  upon  grounds  unconnected  with  utility,  has  been  in 
many  instances  the  work,  not  of  the  affections  but  of  the 
imagination. 

When,  in  justification  of  an  article  of  English  Common 
Law,  calling  uncles  to  succeed  in  certain  cases  in  preference 
to  fathers.  Lord  Coke  produced  a  sort  of  ponderosity  he  had 
discovered  in  rights,  disqualifying  them  from  ascending  in  a 
straight  line,  it  was  not  that  he  loved  uncles  particularly,  or 
hated  fathers,  but  because  the  analogy,  such  as  it  was,  was 
what  his  imagination  presented  him  with,  instead  of  a  reason, 
and  because,  to  a  judgment  unobservant  of  the  standard  of 
utility,  or  unacquainted  with  the  art  of  consulting  it,  where 
affection  is  out  of  the  way,  imagination  is  the  only  guide. 

When  I  know  not  what  ingenious  grammarian  invented 
the  proposition  Delegatus  non  potest  delegare,  to  serve  as  a 
rule  of  law,  it  was  not  surely  that  he  had  any  antipathy  to 
delegates  of  the  second  order,  or  that  it  was  any  pleasure  to 


TO    THAT    OF    UTILITY.  '23 

tipatliy.     By  the  principle  of  sympathy  and  chap.  ii. 
antipathy,  I   mean  that  principle  which    ap- 
proves or  disapproves  of  certain  actions,  not  on 

him  to  think  of  the  ruin  which,  for  want  of  a  manager  at 
home,  may  befal  the  affairs  of  a  traveller,  whom  an  unforeseen 
accident  has  deprived  of  the  object  of  his  choice :  it  was, 
that  the  incongruity,  of  giving  the  same  law  to  objects  so 
contrasted  as  active  and  passive  are,  was  not  to  be  sur- 
mounted, and  that  -atus  chimes,  as  well  as  it  contrasts, 
with  -are. 

When  that  inexorable  maxim,  (of  which  the  dominion  is 
no  more  to  be  defined,  than  the  date  of  its  birth,  or  the 
name  of  its  father,  is  to  be  found,)  was  imported  from 
England  for  the  government  of  Bengal,  and  the  whole  fabric 
of  judicature  was  crushed  by  the  thunders  of  ex  post  facto 
justice,  it  was  not  surely  that  the  prospect  of  a  blameless 
magistracy  perishing  in  prison  afforded  any  enjoyment  to  the 
unoflfended  authors  of  their  misery  j  but  that  the  music  of 
the  maxim,  absorbing  the  whole  imagination,  had  drowned 
the  cries  of  humanity  along  with  the  dictates  of  common 
sense.*     Fiat  Justilia,  mat  ccelum,  says  another  maxim,  as 

•  Additional  Note  by  the  Author,  July  1822. 

Arid,  and  that  the  bad  sydtt-ni,  of  Mahometan  and  other  native  law  was  to  be  pnt 
down  at  all  events,  to  make  way  for  the  inapplicable  and  still  more  mischievous 
syitem  of  English  Jud^c-made  law,  and,  by  the  hand  of  his  accomplice  Hastinj;*, 
wa«  to  be  put  into  the  pocket  of  Impey — Importer  of  this  instrument  of  subversion, 
£8.00(1  a-year  contrary  to  law,  in  addition  to  the  £8,<HKI  a-year  lavished  upon  him, 
with  the  customary  profusion,  by  the  hand  of  law. — See  the  Account  of  this  trans- 
action  in  Mills'  liTitisk  India. 

To  this  (iovernor  a  ^tatue  is  erecting  by  a  vote  of  East  India  Directors  and  Pro- 
prietors :  on  it  should  be  inscribed — Lei  it  but  put  money  into  our  pocketi,  no 
tytnnny  too  Jiagilious  to  he  norshippcd  by  us. 

To  this  statue  of  the  Arch-malefactor  should  be  added,  for  a  companion,  that  of 
the  long  robed  accomplice  :  the  one  lodnint;  the  bribe  in  the  liaiid  of  the  other.  The 
hundred  millions  of  pinndereil  and  opprrssfd  Hindoos  and  Mahometans  pay  for  the 
one  :  a  WcitmiTistcr  Hdlt  subscription  mii;ht  pay  for  the  other. 

What  they  have  done  for  Ir<'land  with  her  /leveii  millions  of  aoals,  the  authorised 
Hrniers  and  perverters  of  justice  have  done  for  Hindostan  with  her  hundred  millions. 
In  this  there  is  nothin;;  wonderful.  The  wonder  is — that,  nndcr  such  institutions, 
men,  thnoch  in  ever  such  small  number,  should  br  found,  whom  the  view  of  the 
injn^icei  which,  hy  Englith  Judge-mndc  Inw,  they  iir"-  rnmpi-llrd  to  rnmmit,  nnd 


24  OF    PRINCIPLES    ADVERSE 


Chap.  II. 


account  of  their  tending  to  augment  the  hap- 
piness, nor  yet  on  account  of  their  tending  to 
diminish   the  happiness   of   the   party   whose 

full  of  extravagance  as  it  is  of  harmony  :  Go  heaven  to 
wreck — so  justice  be  but  done  : — and  what  is  the  ruin  of 
kingdoms,  in  comparison  of  the  wreck  of  heaven  ? 

So  again,  when  the  Prussian  chancellor,  inspired  with  the 
wisdom  of  I  know  not  what  Roman  sage,  proclaimed  in  good 
Latin,  for  the  edification  of  German  ears,  Servitus  servitutis 
nondatur,  [Cod.  Fred.  tom.  ii.  par.  2.  liv.  2.  tit.  x.  §  6.  p.  308,] 
it  was  not  that  he  had  conceived  any  aversion  to  the  life- 
holder  who,  during  the  continuance  of  his  term,  should  wish 
to  gratify  a  neighbour  with  a  right  of  way  or  water,  or  to 
the  neighbour  who  should  wish  to  accept  of  the  indulgence  j 
but  that,  to  a  jurisprudential  ear,  -tus  -tutis  sound  little  less 
melodious  than  -atus  -are.  Whether  the  melody  of  the 
maxim  was  the  real  reason  of  the  rule,  is  not  left  open  to 
dispute  :  for  it  is  ushered  in  by  the  conjunction  quia,  reason's 
appointed  harbinger  :    quia  servitus  servitutis  non  datur. 

Neither  would  equal  melody  have  been  produced,  nor 
indeed  could  similar  melody  have  been  called  for,  in  either 
of  these  instances,  by  the  opposite  provision  :  it  is  only  when 
they  are  opposed  to  general  rules,  and  not  when  by  their 
conformity  they  are  absorbed  in  them,  that  more  specific 
ones  can  obtain  a  separate  existence.  Delegatus  potest  dele- 
gare, and  Servitus  servitutis  datur,  provisions  already  included 
under  the  general  adoption  of  contracts,  would  have  been  as 
unnecessary  to  the  apprehension  and  the  memory,  as,  in 
comparison  of  their  energetic  negatives,  they  are  insipid  to 
the  ear. 

Were  the  inquiry  diligently  made,  it  would  be  found  that 

the  miseries  they  aro  thus  compelled  to  produce,  deprive  of  health  and  rest. 
AVihiess  the  Letter  of  an  English  Hindostan  Judge,  Sept.  1,  1819,  which  lies  before 
me.  I  will  not  make  so  cruel  a  requital  (or  his  honesty,  as  to  put  his  name  in 
print  :  indeed  the  House  of  Commons'  Documents  already  published  leave  little 
need  of  it. 


TO    THAT    OF    UTILITY.  25 

interest  is  in  question,  but  merely  because  a  Chaf.  ii. 
man  finds  himself  disposed  to  approve  or  dis- 
approve of  them :    holding  up  that  approbation 
or  disapprobation   as    a  sufficient   reason   for 

the  goddess  of  harmony  has  exercised  more  influence,  how- 
ever latent,  over  the  dispensations  of  Themis,  than  her  most 
diligent  historiographers,  or  even  her  most  passionate  pane- 
gyrists, seem  to  have  been  a.vare  of.  Every  one  knows, 
how,  by  the  ministry  of  Orpheus,  it  was  she  who  first  col- 
lected the  sons  of  men  beneath  the  shadow  of  the  sceptre  : 
yet,  in  the  midst  of  continual  experience,  men  seem  yet  to 
learn,  with  what  successful  diligence  she  has  laboured  to 
guide  it  in  its  course.  Every  one  knows,  that  measured 
numbers  were  the  language  of  the  infancy  of  law  :  none 
seem  to  have  observed,  with  what  imperious  sway  they  have 
governed  her  maturer  age.  In  English  jurisprudence  in  par- 
ticular, the  connexion  betwixt  law  and  music,  however  less 
perceived  than  in  Spartan  legislation,  is  not  perhaps  less  real 
nor  less  close.  The  music  of  the  Office,  though  not  of  the 
same  kind,  is  not  less  musical  in  its  kind,  than  ti»e  music  of 
the  Theatre  ;  that  which  hardens  the  heart,  than  that  which 
softens  it : — sostenutos  as  long,  cadences  as  sonorous  ;  and 
those  governed  by  rules,  though  not  yet  promulgated,  not 
less  determinate.  Search  indictments,  pleadings,  proceedings 
in  chancery,  conveyances :  whatever  trespasses  you  may  find 
against  trutli  or  common  sense,  you  will  find  none  against 
the  laws  of  harmony.  The  English  Liturgy,  justly  as  this 
quality  has  been  extolled  in  that  sacred  ofiice,  possesses  not 
a  greater  measure  of  it,  than  is  commonly  to  be  found 
in  an  English  Act  of  Parliament.  Dignity,  simplicity, 
brevity,  precision,  intelligibility,  possibility  of  being  retained 
or  so  nmch  as  apprehended,  every  thing  yields  to  Harmony. 
Volumes  might  be  filled,  shelves  loaded,  with  the  sacrifices 
that  are  made  to  thi.s  insatiate  power.  Expletives,  her 
ministers  in  Grecian  poetry,  arc  not  Ics.s  bu^y,  though  in  rlif- 


26  OF    PRINCIPLES    ADVERSE 

^"^J'-^V  itself,  and  disclaiming  the  necessity  of  looking 
out  for  any  extrinsic  ground.  Thus  far  in  the 
general  department  of  morals  :  and  in  the  par- 

ferent  shape  and  bulk\,  in  English  legislation  :  in  the  former, 
they  are  monosyllables  :*  in  the  latter,  they  are  whole  lines. f 

To  return  to  the  principle  of  sympathy  and  antipathy:  a 
term  preferred  at  first,  on  account  of  its  impartiality,  to  the 
principle  of  caprice.  The  choice  of  an  appellative,  in  the 
above  respects  too  narrow,  was  owing  to  my  not  having,  at 
that  time,  extended  my  views  over  the  civil  branch  of  law, 
."ny  otherwise  than  as  I  had  found  it  inseparably  involved  in 
the  penal.  But  when  we  come  to  the  former  branch,  we 
shall  see  the  phantastic  principle  making  at  least  as  great  a 
figure  there,  as  the  principle  of  sympathy  and  antipathy  in  the 
latter. 

In  the  days  of  Lord  Coke,  the  light  of  utility  can  scarcely 
be  said  to  have  as  yet  shone  upon  the  face  of  Common  Law. 
If  a  faint  ray  of  it,  under  the  name  of  the  argumentum  ab 
inconvenienti,  is  to  be  found  in  a  list  of  about  twenty  topics 
exhibited  by  that  great  lawyer  as  the  co-ordinate  leaders  of 
that  all-perfect  system,  the  admission,  so  circumstanced,  is 
as  sure  a  proof  of  neglect,  as,  to  the  statues  of  Brutus  and 
Cassius,  exclusion  was  a  cause  of  notice.  It  stands,  neither 
in  the  front,  nor  in  the  rear,  nor  in  any  post  of  honour  ;  but 
huddled  in  towards  the  middle,  without  the  smallest  mark 
of  preference.  [Coke  Littleton.  11.  a.]  Nor  is  this  Latin 
inconvenience  by  any  means  the  same  thing  with  the  English 
one.  It  stands  distinguished  from  mischief:  and  because  by 
the  vulgar  it  is  taken  for  something  less  bad,  it  is  given  by 
the  learned  as  something  worse.  The  law  prefers  a  mischief 
to  an  inconvenience,  says  an  admired  maxim,  and  the  more 
admired,  because  as  nothing  is  expressed  by  it,  the  more  is 
supposed  to  be  understood. 

*  Mcj/,  TOi,  ye,  vw,  &c. — 

t  And  be  it  farther  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that — Provided  always, 
and  it  is  hereby  further  enacted  and  declared  that — &c.  &c. 


TO    THAT    OF    UTILITY.  27 

ticular  department  of  politics,  measuring  out   chapjl 
the  quantum  (as  well  as  determining  the  ground) 
of  punishment,   by  the  degree   of  the  disap- 
probation. 

XII. 

It  is  manifest,  that  this  is  rather  a  principle  This  is  ra- 

,      .  .    .  ther^hene- 

in  name  than  in  reality :    it  is  not  a  positive  jcation  of 
principle  of  itself,  so  much  as  a  term  employed  pie,  than 

•  n        t  •  p      n         •        •     1  -iTTi  anything: 

to  Signify  the  negation  of  all  principle.  What  positive. 
one  expects  to  find  in  a  principle  is  something 
that  points  out  some  external  consideration, 
as  a  means  of  warranting  and  guiding  the  in- 
ternal sentiments  of  approbation  and  disap- 
probation :  this  expectation  is  but  ill  fulfilled 
by  a  proposition,  which  does  neither  more  nor 
less  than  hold  up  each  of  those  sentiments  as  a 
ground  and  standard  for  itself. 

XIII. 

In   looking  over    the    catalogue    of   human  sentiments 

.  ...  .       ot  a  parti- 

actions   (says  a  partizan  of  this   principle)   in  zanotthc 

~  antipathy. 

Not  that  there  is  any  avowed,  much  less  a  constant  ojjpo- 

sition,  between  the  prescriptions  of  utility  and  the  operations 

of  the  conimon  law  :    such  constancy  we  have  seen  to  be  too 

much  even  for  ascetic  fervor.   [Supra,  par.  x.]    From  time  to 

time  instinct  would  unavoid.'ibly  betray  them  into  the  paths 

of  reason  :   instinct  which,  liowever  it  may  be  cramped,  can 

never  be  killed  by  education.     The  cobwebs  spun  out  of  the 

materials  brought  together  by  "  the  competition  of  opposite 

analogies,"  can  never  have  ceased  being  warped  by  the  silent 

attraction  of  the  rational  principle:    though  it  should  havr 

been,  as  the  needle  is  by  the  magnet,  without  the  privity  of 

conscience. 


yS  OF    PRINCIPLES    ADVERSE 

^''^^-  ";  order  to  determine  which  of  them  are  to  be 
marked  with  the  seal  of  disapprobation,  you 
need  but  to  take  counsel  of  your  own  feelings  : 
whatever  you  find  in  yourself  a  propensity  to 
condemn,  is  wrong  for  that  very  reason.  For 
the  same  reason  it  is  also  meet  for  punishment : 
in  what  proportion  it  is  adverse  to  utility,  or 
whether  it  be  adverse  to  utility  at  all,  is  a 
matter  that  makes  no  difference.  In  that  same 
proportion  also  is  it  meet  for  punishment :  if 
you  hate  much,  punish  much:  if  you  hate 
little,  punish  little  :  punish  as  you  hate.  If 
you  hate  not  at  all,  punish  not  at  all :  the  fine 
feelings  of  the  soul  are  not  to  be  overborne  and 
tyrannized  by  the  harsh  and  rugged  dictates 
of  political  utility. 

XIV. 

The  sys-        The  various  systems  that  have  been  formed 

terns  tliat  _  "^ 

have  been   conccming  the  standard  of  right  and   wrong, 
toncernin-  mav  all  bc  rcduccd  to  the  principle  of  svm- 

tlie  stand-  *'  .  r  r  J 

ard  of  right  pathv  and  antipathy.     One  account  mav  serve 

and  wrong,    *  "^  ^  -^  •'  _ 

are  all  re-  for  all  of  them.     They  consist  all  of  them  in 

(lucible  to 

this  prin-    SO  many  contrivances  for  avoiding  the  obliga- 

ciple. 

tion  of  appealing  to  any  external  standard,  and 
for  prevailing  upon  the  reader  to  accept  of  the 
author's  sentiment  or  opinion  as  a  reason  for 
itself.  The  phrases  different,  but  the  principle 
the  same.* 

Various  *  It  is  curious  enough  to  observe  the  variety  of  inventions 

that  have     "^^^  h^cve  hit  upon,  ant!  the  variety  of  phrases  they  have 
served  as  the  charac- 


TO    THAT    OF    UTILITY.  29 

XV,  Chap.  II. 

It  is  manifest,  that  the  dictates  of  this  prin-  Jple^'i^" 
ciple  will  frequently  coincide  with  those  of  cSncuTe^^ 
utility,  though  perhaps  without  intending  any  of*,Jjj\'jf' 

brouerht  forward,  in  order  to  conceal  from  the  world,  and,  if  tei^'st'c 

°  ^  marks  of  so 

possible^  from  themselves,  this  very  general  and  therefore  many  pre- 

j        ui         ir       re    •  tended  sys- 

very  pardonable  self-sumciency.  tems. 

1.  One  man  says,  he  has  a  thing  made  on  purpose  to  tell  j.  Moral 
him  what  is  right  and  What  is  wrong ;   and  that  it  is  called  a  Sense. 
moral  sense :  and  then  he  goes  to  work  at  his  ease,  and  says, 

such  a  thing  is  right,  and  such  a  thing  is  wrong — why  ? 
"  because  my  moral  sense  tells  me  it  is." 

2.  Another  man  comes  and  alters  the  phrase  :    leaving  out  2.  Common 
moral,  and  putting  in  common,  in  the  room  of  it.     He  then 

tells  you,  that  his  common  sense  teaches  him  what  is  right 
and  wrong,  as  surely  as  the  other's  moral  sense  did :  meaning 
by  common  sense,  a  sense  of  some  kind  or  other,  which,  he 
says,  is  possessed  by  all  mankind  :  the  sense  of  those,  whose 
sense  is  not  the  same  as  the  author's,  being  struck  out  of  the 
account  as  not  worth  taking.  This  contrivance  does  better 
than  the  other ;  for  a  moral  sense,  being  a  new  thing,  a  man 
may  feel  about  him  a  good  while  without  being  able  to  find 
it  out:  but  common  sense  is  as  old  as  the  creation;  and 
there  is  no  man  but  would  be  ashamed  to  be  thought  not  to 
have  as  much  of  it  as  his  neighbours.  It  has  another  gre.it 
advantage:  by  appearing  to  share  power,  it  lessens  envy: 
for  when  a  man  gets  up  ujjon  this  ground,  in  order  to 
anathematize  those  who  differ  from  him,  it  is  not  by  a  sic 
volo  sic  juheo,  but  by  a  velitis  juhealis. 

3.  Another  man  comes,  and  says,  that  as  to  a  moral  sense  3.  Under- 
indeed,  he  cannot  find  that  he  has  any  such  thing:  that  "^an'l'nff- 
however  he  has  an  underslandiRg ,  which   will  do  quite   as 

well.     This  understanding,  he  says,  is  the  standard  of  right 
and  wrong  :   it  tells  him  so  and  so.     All  good  and  wise  men 


4.  Rule  of 
Risht. 


5.  Fitness 
of  Things. 


30  OF    PRINCIPLES    ADVERSE 

Chap.  11.  g^^jj  thing.  Probably  more  frequently  than 
not :  and  hence  it  is  that  the  business  of  penal 
justice  is  carried  on  upon  that  tolerable  sort 


understand  as  he  does  :  if  other  men's  understandings  differ 
in  any  point  from  his,  so  much  the  worse  for  them :  it  is  a 
sure  sign  they  are  either  defective  or  corrupt. 

4.  Another  man  says,  that  there  is  an  eternal  and  im- 
mutable Rule  of  Right  :  that  that  rule  of  right  dictates  so 
and  so  :  and  then  he  begins  giving  you  his  sentiments  upon 
any  thing  that  comes  uppermost :  and  these  sentiments  (you 
are  to  take  for  granted)  are  so  many  branches  of  the  eternal 
rule  of  right. 

5.  Another  man,  or  perhaps  the  same  man  (it's  no  matter) 
says,  that  there  are  certain  practices  conformable,  and  others 
repugnant,  to  the  Fitness  of  Things ;  and  then  he  tells  you, 
at  his  leisure,  what  practices  are  conformable  and  what  re- 
pugnant :   just  as  he  happens  to  like  a  practice  or  dislike  it. 

6.  A  great  multitude  of  people  are  continually  talking  of 
the  Law  of  Nature  j  and  then  they  go  on  giving  you  their 
sentiments  about  what  is  right  and  what  is  wrong :  and 
these  sentiments,  you  are  to  understand,  are  so  many  chapters 
and  sections  of  the  Law  of  Nature. 

7.  Instead  of  the  phrase.  Law  of  Nature,  you  have  some- 
times. Law  of  Reason,  Right  Reason,  Natural  Justice,  Na- 
tural Equity,  Good  Order.  Any  of  them  will  do  equally 
well.  This  latter  is  most  used  in  politics.  The  three  last 
are  much  more  tolerable  than  the  others,  because  they  do 
not  very  explicitly  claim  to  be  any  thing  more  than  phrases  : 
they  insist  but  feebly  upon  the  being  looked  upon  as  so 
many  positive  standards  of  themselves,  and  seem  content  to 
be  taken,  upon  occasion,  for  phrases  expressive  of  the  con- 
formity of  the  thing  in  question  to  the  proper  standard, 
whatever  that  may  be.  On  most  occasions,  however,  it  will 
be  better  to  say  utility :  utility  is  clearer,  as  referring  more 
explicitly  to  pain  and  pleasure. 


6.  Law  of 
Nature. 


7.  Law  of 
Reason, 
Right  Rea- 
son, Natu- 
ralJustice, 
Natural 
Equity, 
Good  Or- 
der. 


TO    THAT    OF    UTILITY.  31 

of  footing  upon  which  we  see  it  carried  on  in  ^"^^-  '^• 
common  at  this  day.    For  what  more  natural 
or  more  general  ground  of  hatred  to  a  practice 

8.  We  have  one  philosopher,  who  says,  there  is  no  harm  8.  Truth. 
in  any  thing  in  the  world  but  in  telling  a  lie :   and  that  if, 

for  example,  you  were  to  murder  your  own  father,  this  would 
only  be  a  particular  way  of  saying,  he  was  not  your  father. 
Of  course,  when  this  philosopher  sees  any  thing  that  he  does 
not  like,  he  says,  it  is  a  particular  way  of  telling  a  lie.  It  is 
saying,  that  the  act  ought  to  be  done,  or  may  be  done,  when, 
in  truth,  it  ought  not  to  be  done. 

9.  The  fairest  and  openest  of  them  all  is  that  sort  of  man  g  Doctrine 
who  speaks  out,  and  says,  I  am  of  the  number  of  the  Elect :  of  Election, 
now  God  himself  takes  care  to  inform  the  Elect  what  is 

right :    and  that  with  so  good  efifect,  that  let  them   strive 

ever  so,  they  cannot  help  not  only  knowing  it  but  practising 

it.     If  therefore  a  man  wants  to  know  what  is  right  and 

what  is  wrong,  he  has  nothing  to  do  but  to  come  to  me. 

It  is  upon  the  principle  of  antipathy  that  such  and  such  Repu". 

acts  are  often  rei)robated  on  the  score  of  their  beiner  nn-  n^ncy  to 
'  ^  Nature. 

natural:    the    practice  of    exposing    children,    established 

among  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  was  an  unnatural  practice. 
Unnatural,  when  it  means  any  thing,  means  unfrequent :  and 
there  it  means  something}  although  nothing  to  the  present 
purpose.  But  here  it  means  no  such  thing  :  for  the  fre- 
quency of  such  acts  is  perhaps  the  great  complaint.  It 
therefore  means  nothing ;  nothing,  I  mean,  which  there  is 
in  the  act  itself.  All  it  can  serve  to  express  is,  the  dispo- 
sition of  the  person  who  is  talking  of  it  :  the  disposition 
he  is  in  to  be  angry  at  the  thoughts  of  it.  Does  it  merit  his 
anger  ?  Very  likely  it  may  :  but  whether  it  docs  or  no  is  a 
question,  which,  to  be  answered  rightly,  can  only  be  an- 
swered upon  the  principle  of  tUility, 

Unnatural,  is  as  good  a  word  as  moral  sense,  or  common 


3-2  OF    PRINCIPLES    ADVERSE 

^"'^^-  ^';  can  there  be,  than  the  mischievousness  of  such 
practice  ?  What  all  men  are  exposed  to  sufFci 
by,  all  men  will  be  disposed  to  hate.     It  is  far 

sense ;  and  would  be  as  good  a  foundation  for  a  system. 
Such  an  act  is  unnatural ;  that  is,  repugnant  to  nature : 
for  I  do  not  like  to  practise  it ;  and,  consequently,  do  not 
practise  it.  It  is  therefore  repugnant  to  what  ought  to  be 
the  nature  of  every  body  else. 
Mischief  "^^^  mischief  common  to  all  these  ways  of  thinking  and 

they  pro-      arguing  (which,  in  truth,  as  we  have  seen,  are  but  one  and 

(iuC6< 

the  same  method,  couched  in  different  forms  of  words)  is 
their  serving  as  a  cloke,  and  pretence,  and  aliment,  to  des- 
potism :  if  not  a  despotism  in  practice,  a  despotism  however 
in  disposition :  which  is  but  too  apt,  when  pretence  and 
power  offer,  to  show  itself  in  practice.  The  consequence  is, 
that  with  intentions  very  commonly  of  the  purest  kind,  a 
man  becomes  a  torment  either  to  himself  or  his  fellow- 
creatures.  If  he  be  of  the  melancholy  cast,  he  sits  in  silent 
grief,  bewailing  their  blindness  and  depravity  :  if  of  the 
irascible,  he  declaims  with  fury  aud  virulence  against  all  who 
differ  from  him  5  blowing  up  the  coals  of  fanaticism,  and 
branding  with  the  charge  of  corruption  and  insincerity,  every 
man  who  does  not  think,  or  profess  to  think,  as  he  does. 

If  such  a  man  happens  to  possess  the  advantages  of  style, 
his  book  may  do  a  considerable  deal  of  mischief  before  the 
nothingness  of  it  is  understood. 

These  principles,  if  such  they  can  be  called,  it  is  more 
frequent  to  see  applied  to  morals  than  to  politics  :  but  their 
influence  extends  itself  to  both.  In  politics,  as  well  as 
morals,  a  man  will  be  at  least  equally  glad  of  a  pretence 
for  deciding  any  question  in  the  manner  that  best  pleases 
him,  without  the  trouble  of  inquiry.  If  a  man  is  an  in- 
fallible judge  of  what  is  right  and  wrong  in  the  actions  of 
private  individuals,  why  not  in  the  measures  to  be  observed 


TO    THAT    OF    UTILITY.  33 

yet,  however,  from  being  a  constant  ground :   chap.  ii. 
for  when  a  man  suffers,  it  is  not  always  that 
he  knows  what  it  is  he  suffers  by.     A  man  may 

by  public  men  in  the  direction  of  those  actions  ?  accordingly 
(not  to  mention  other  chimeras)  I  have  more  than  once 
known  the  pretended  law  of  nature  set  up  in  legislative 
debates,  in  opposition  to  arguments  derived  from  the  prin- 
ciple of  utility. 

"  But  is  it  never,  then,  from  any  other  considerations  than  whether 

"  those  of  utility,  that  we  derive  our  notions  of  right  and  utility  is 

■'  °  actually 

"wrong?"   I  do  not  know:    I   do  not  care.     Whether  a  the  sole 

moral  sentiment  can  be  originally  conceived  from  any  other  alTthe  ap- 

source  than  a  view  of  utility,  is  one  question :    whether  upon  probation 

we  ever 
examination  and  reflection  it  can,  in  point  of  fact,  be  actually  bestow,  is 

persisted  in  and  justified  on  any  other  ground,  by  a  person  ^^'n^^ii' 
reflecting  within  himself,  is  another  :  whether  in  point  of  t'on. 
right  it  can  properly  be  justified  on  any  other  ground,  by  a 
person  addressing  himself  to  the  comnmnity,  is  a  third.  The 
two  first  are  questions  of  speculation  :  it  matters  not,  com- 
paratively speaking,  how  they  are  decided.  The  last  is  a 
question  of  practice  :  the  decision  of  it  is  of  as  much  im- 
portance as  that  of  any  can  be. 

"  I  feel  in  myself,"  (say  you)  "  a  disposition  to  approve  of 
such  or  such  an  action  in  a  moral  view  :  but  this  is  not  owing 
to  any  notions  I  have  of  its  being  a  useful  one  to  the 
community,  I  do  not  pretend  to  know  whether  it  be  an 
useful  one  or  not  :  it  may  be,  for  aught  I  know,  a  mis- 
chievous one."  '  But  is  it  then,*  (say  I)  '  a  mischievous  one? 
examine  ;  and  if  you  can  make  yourself  sensiljle  that  it  is  so, 
then,  if  duty  means  any  thing,  that  is,  moral  duty,  it  is  your 
dut7j  at  least  to  abstain  from  it  :  and  more  than  that,  if  it  is 
what  lies  in  your  power,  and  can  be  done  without  too  great 
a  sacrifice,  to  endctivour  to  prevent  it.  It  is  not  your  che- 
rishing the  notion  of  it  in  your  bosom,  and  giving  it  the  name 
of  virtue,  thiit  will  excuse  you.' 
VOL.   I.  D 


3-1  OF   PRINCIPLES    ADVERSE 

^li^^  suffer  grievously,  for  instance,  by  a  new  tax, 
w^ithout  being  able  to  trace  up  the  cause  of  his 
sufferings  to  the  injustice  of  some  neighbour, 
who  has  eluded  the  payment  of  an  old  one. 

XVI. 

This  prin-  The  principle  of  sympathy  and  antipathy  is 
most  apt  to  most  apt  to  crr  on  the  side  of  severity.  It  is 
side  of  se-  for  applying  punishment  in  many  cases  which 

verity. 

"  I  feel  in  myself,"  (say  you  again)  "  a  disposition  to 
detest  such  or  such  an  action  in  a  moral  view  ;  but  this  is 
not  owing  to  any  notions  I  have  of  its  being  a  mischievous 
one  to  the  community.  I  do  not  pretend  to  know  whether 
it  be  a  mischievous  one  or  not :  it  may  be  not  a  mischievous 
one :  it  may  be,  for  aught  I  know^  an  useful  one." — '  May 
it  indeed,'  (say  I)  '  an  useful  one  ?  but  let  me  tell  you  then, 
that  unless  duty,  and  right  and  wrong,  be  just  what  you 
please  to  make  them,  if  it  really  be  not  a  mischievous  one, 
and  any  body  has  a  mind  to  do  it,  it  is  no  duty  of  your's, 
but,  on  the  contrary,  it  would  be  very  wrong  in  you,  to  take 
upon  you  to  prevent  him  :  detest  it  within  yourself  as  much 
as  you  please ;  that  may  be  a  very  good  reason  (unless  it  be 
also  a  useful  one)  for  your  not  doing  it  yourself  :  but  if  you 
go  about,  by  word  or  deed,  to  do  any  thing  to  hinder  him,  or 
make  him  suffer  for  it,  it  is  you,  and  not  he,  that  have  done 
wrong :  it  is  not  your  setting  yourself  to  blame  his  conduct, 
or  branding  it  with  the  name  of  vice,  that  will  make  him 
culpable,  or  you  blameless.  Therefore,  if  you  can  make 
yourself  content  that  he  shall  be  of  one  mind,  and  you  of 
another,  about  that  matter,  and  so  continue,  it  is  well :  but 
if  nothing  will  serve  you,  but  that  you  and  he  must  needs 
be  of  the  same  mind,  I'll  tell  you  what  you  have  to  do  :  it 
is  for  you  to  get  the  better  of  your  antipathy,  not  for  him  to 
truckle  to  it.' 


TO    THAT   OF    UTILITY.  35 

desen^e  none  :  in  many  cases  which  deserve  chap^. 
some,  it  is  for  applying  more  than  they  deserve. 
There  is  no  incident  imaginable,  be  it  ever  so 
trivial,  and  so  remote  from  mischief,  from  which 
this  principle  may  not  extract  a  ground  of  pu- 
nishment. Any  difference  in  taste :  any  dif- 
ference in  opinion :  upon  one  subject  as  well 
as  upon  another.  No  disagreement  so  trifling 
which  perseverance  and  altercation  will  not 
render  serious.  Each  becomes  in  the  other's 
eyes  an  enemy,  and,  if  laws  permit,  a  criminal.* 

*  King  James  the  First  of  England  had  conceived  a 
violent  antipathy  against  Arians :  two  of  whom  he  burnt.* 
This  gratification  he  procured  himself  without  much  difficulty: 
the  notions  of  the  times  were  favourable  to  it.  He  wrote  a 
furious  book  against  Vorstius,  for  being  what  was  called  an 
Arminian  :  for  Vorstius  was  at  a  distance.  He  also  wrote  a 
furious  book,  called  "  A  Counterblast  to  Tobacco,"  against 
the  use  of  that  drug,  which  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  had  then 
lately  introduced.  Had  the  notions  of  the  times  co-operated 
with  him,  he  would  have  burnt  the  Anabaptist  and  the 
smoker  of  tobacco  in  the  same  fire.  However  he  had  the 
satisfaction  of  putting  Raleigh  to  death  afterwards,  though 
for  another  crime. 

Disputes  concerning  the  comparative  excellence  of  French 
and  ItaUan  music  have  occasioned  very  serious  bickerings 
at  Paris.  One  of  the  parties  would  not  have  been  sorry 
(says  Mr.  D'Alembert  t)  to  have  brought  government  into 
the  quarrel.  Pretences  were  sought  after  and  urged.  Long 
before  that,  a  dispute  of  like  nature,  and  of  at  least  equal 
warmth,  had  been  kindled  at  London  upon  the  comparative 

*  Hame'i  Hiil.  vol.  C.  f  Melanpr*  E^ini  lar  la  Libert^'  de  la  Mnsique. 

D   2 


36  OF    PRINCIPLES    ADVERSE 

*^"^^-  ";  This  is  one  of  the  circumstances  by  which  the 
human  race  is  distinguished  (not  much  indeed 
to  its  advantage)  from  the  brute  creation. 

XVII. 

Buterrs,  in      It  is  not,  howcvcr,  bv  any  means  unexampled 

some  in- 

stauces.on  for  this  principle  to  err  on  the  side  of  lenity. 

the  side  of  r  r  .      ,  .    ^ 

lenity.  A  near  and  perceptible  mischief  moves  an- 
tipathy. A  remote  and  imperceptible  mischief, 
though  not  less  real,  has  no  effect.  Instances 
in  proof  of  this  will  occur  in  numbers  in  the 
course  of  the  work.*  It  would  be  breaking  in 
upon  the  order  of  it  to  give  them  here. 

XVIII. 

Thetheo-        It  may  be  wondered,  perhaps,   that  in  all 

prmcipie,    this  whilc  uo  meiitiou  has  been  made  of  the 

a  separate   theologicttl  principle ;    meaning   that   principle 

which  professes  to  recur  for  the  standard  of 

'merits  of  two  composers  at  London  ;  where  riots  between 
the  approvers  and  disapprovers  of  a  new  play  are,  at  this  day, 
not  unfrequent.  The  ground  of  quarrel  between  the  Big- 
endians  and  the  Little-endians  in  the  fable,  was  not  more 
frivolous  than  many  an  one  which  has  laid  empires  desolate. 
In  Russia,  it  is  said,  there  was  a  time  when  some  thousands 
of  persons  lost  their  lives  in  a  quarrel,  in  which  the  govern- 
ment had  taken  part,  about  the  number  of  fingers  to  be  used 
in  making  the  sign  of  the  cross.  This  was  in  days  of  yore  : 
the  ministers  of  Catherine  II.  are  better  instructed  f  than  to 
take  any  other  part  in  such  disputes,  than  that  of  preventing 
the  parties  concerned  from  doing  one  another  a  mischief. 

+  Instruct,  art.  474,  475,  476. 

♦  See  ch.  xvi.  [Division]  par.  42,  44. 


TO    THAT    OF    UTILITY.  37- 

right  and  wrong  to  the  will  of  God.  But  the  ^^^^^ 
case  is,  this  is  not  in  fact  a  distinct  principle. 
It  is  never  any  thing  more  or  less  than  one  or 
other  of  the  three  before-mentioned  principles- 
presenting  itself  under  another  shape.  The 
will  of  God  here  meant  cannot  be  his  revealed 
will,  as  contained  in  the  sacred  writings  :  for 
that  is  a  system  which  nobody  ever  thinks  of 
recurring  to  at  this  time  of  day,  for  the  details 
of  political  administration  :  and  even  before  it 
can  be  applied  to  the  details  of  private  conduct, 
it  is  universally  allowed,  by  the  most  eminent 
divines  of  all  persuasions.,  to  stand  in  need  of 
pretty  ample  interpretations  ;  else  to  what  use 
are  the  works  of  those  divines  ?  And  for  the 
guidance  of  these  interpretations,  it  is  also  al- 
lowed, that  some  other  standard  must  be  as- 
sumed. The  will  then  which  is  meant  on  this 
occasion,  is  that  which  may  be  called  the  pre- 
mmptivc  will :  that  is  to  say,  that  which  is  pre- 
sumed to  be  his  will  on  account  of  the  con- 
formity of  its  dictates  to  those  of  some  other 
principle.  What  then  may  be  this  other  prin- 
ciple ?  it  must  be  one  or  other  of  the  three 
mentioned  above :  fur  there  cannot,  as  we  have 
seen,  be  any  more.  It  is  i>lain,  therefore,  that, 
setting  revelation  out  of  the  question,  no  light 
can  ever  be  thrown  upon  the  standard  of  right 
and  wrong,  by  any  thing  that  can  be  said  upon 
the  question,  what  is  God's  will.     We  may  be 


38  OF    PRINCIPLES    ADVERSE 

S"^^- ";  perfectly  sure,  indeed,  that  whatever  is  right 
is  conformable  to  the  will  of  God  :  but  so  far  is 
that  from  answering  the  purpose  of  showing  us 
what  is  right,  that  it  is  necessary  to  know  first 
whether  a  thing  is  right,  in  order  to  know  from 
thence  whether  it  be  conformable  to  the  will 
of  God  * 

XIX. 

kfthf  ^/'  There  are  two  things  which  are  very  apt  to 
tions  it  die-  be  confounded,  but  which  it  imports  us  care- 

tates  be  ^      ^  ^ 

ever  so       fully  to    distiuguish : — the  motive   or  cause, 

l^QllLy     IS 

never  of  it-    -  

cTound'of*  *  '^^^  principle  of  theology  refers  every  thing  to  God's 
action.  pleasure.  But  what  is  God's  pleasure?  God  does  not,  he 
Theprin-     confessedly  does  not  now,  either  speak  or  write  to  US.     How 

cipleofthe-  ^j^gj^  a,re  we  to  know  what  is  his  pleasure?    By  observins: 

olo^  how  ^  JO 

reducible  what  is  our  own  pleasure,  and  pronouncing  it  to  be  his.  Ac- 
another'of    cordingly,  what  is  called  the  pleasure  of  God,  is  and  must 

the  other      necessarily  be  (revelation  apart)  neither  more  nor  less  than  the 

three  prin- 

riples.  good  pleasure  of  the  person,  whoever  he  be,  who  is  pro- 

nouncing what  he  believes,  or  pretends,  to  be  God's  pleasure. 
How  know  you  it  to  be  God's  pleasure  that  such  or  such  an 
act  should  be  abstained  from  ?  whence  come  you  even  to 
suppose  as  much  ?  "  Because  the  engaging  in  it  would,  I 
imagine,  be  prejudicial  upon  the  whole  to  the  happiness  of 
mankind  J "  says  the  partizan  of  the  principle  of  utility: 
"  Because  the  commission  of  it  is  attended  with  a  gross  and 
sensual,  or  at  least  with  a  trifling  and  transient  satisfaction ;" 
says  the  partizan  of  the  principle  of  asceticism  :  *'  Because 
I  detest  the  thoughts  of  it ;  and  I  cannot,  neither  ought  I  to 
be  called  upon  to  tell  why  j"  says  he  who  proceeds  upon  the 
principle  of  antipathy.  In  the  words  of  one  or  other  of  these 
must  that  person  necessarily  answer  (revelation  apart)  who 
professes  to  take  for  his  standard  the  will  of  God. 


TO    THAT    OF    UTILITV.  39 

which,  by  operating  on  the  mind  of  an  indi-  S^"^^- "; 
vidual,  is  productive  of  any  act :  and  the  ground 
or  reason  which  warrants  a  legislator,  or  other, 
by-stander,  in  regarding  that  act  with  an  eye 
of  approbation.  When  the  act  happens,  in 
the  particular  instance  in  question,  to  be  pro- 
ductive of  effects  which  we  approve  of,  much 
more  if  we  happen  to  observe  that  the  same 
motive  may  frequently  be  productive,  in  other 
instances,  of  the  like  effects,  we  are  apt  to 
transfer  our  approbation  to  the  motive  itself, 
and  to  assume,  as  the  just  ground  for  the 
approbation  we  bestow  on  the  act,  the  cir- 
cumstance of  its  originating  from  that  motive. 
It  is  in  this  way  that  the  sentiment  of  antipathy 
has  often  been  considered  as  a  just  ground  of 
action.  Antipathy,  for  instance,  in  such  or 
such  a  case,  is  the  cause  of  an  action  which  is 
attended  with  good  effects :  but  this  does  not 
make  it  a  right  ground  of  action  in  that  case, 
any  more  than  in  any  other.  Still  farther.  Not 
only  the  effects  are  good,  but  the  agent  sees 
beforehand  that  they  will  be  so.  This  may 
make  the  action  indeed  a  perfectly  right  action : 
but  it  does  not  make  antipathy  a  right  ground 
of  action.  For  the  same  sentiment  of  antipathy, 
if  implicitly  deferred  to,  may  be,  and  very 
frequently  is,  productive  of  the  very  worst 
effects.  Antipathy,  therefore,  can  never  be  a 
right  ground  of  action.     No  more,  therefore. 


4b'  OF    PRINCIPLES    ADVERSE,    ETC. 

F"^^- ":  can  resentment,  which,  as  will  be  seen  more 
particularly  hereafter,  is  but  a  modification  of 
antipathy.  The  only  right  ground  of  action, 
that  can  possibly  subsist,  is,  after  all,  the  con- 
sideration of  utility,  which,  if  it  is  a  right  prin- 
ciple of  action,  and  of  approbation,  in  any  one 
case,  is  so  in  every  other.  Other  principles  in 
abundance,  that  is,  other  motives,  may  be  the 
reasons  why  such  and  such  an  act  has  been 
done :  that  is,  the  reasons  or  causes  of  its 
being  done :  but  it  is  this  alone  that  can  be 
the  reason  why  it  might  or  ought  to  have 
been  done.  Antipathy  or  resentment  requires 
always  to  be  regulated,  to  prevent  its  doing 
mischief :  to  be  regulated  by  what  ?  always  by 
the  principle  of  utility.  The  principle  of  utility 
neither  requires  nor  admits  of  any  other  re- 
gulator than  itself. 


[  ^1  ] 


CHAP.    III. 

OF    THE    FOUR    SANCTIONS    OR    SOURCES    OF 
PAIN    AND    PLEASURE. 

I. 

It  has  been  shown  that  the  happiness  of  the  Connexion 
individuals,  of  whom  a  community  is  composed,  chapter 
that  is  their  pleasures  and  their  security,  is  the  preceding. 
end  and  the  sole  end  which  the  legislator  ought 
to  have  in  view :  the  sole  standard,  in  confor- 
mity to  which  each  individual  ought,  as  far  as 
depends  upon  the  legislator,  to  be  made  to 
fashion  his  behaviour.  But  whether  it  be  this 
or  any  thing  else  that  is  to  be  done,  there  is 
nothing  by  which  a  man  can  ultimately  be  made 
to  do  it,  but  either  pain  or  pleasure.  Having 
taken  a  general  view  of  these  two  grand  objects 
(viz.  pleasure,  and  what  comes  to  the  same 
thing,  immunity  from  pain)  in  the  character  af 
final  causes;  it  will  be  necessary  to  take  a 
view  of  pleasure  and  pain  itself,  in  the  cha- 
racter of  efficient  causes  or  means. 

II. 
There  are  four  distinguishable  sources  from  Fonrsanc- 

u  ■     1  1  1  •  •  n  tions  or 

which  j)leasure  and  pain  are  in  use  to  now:  sources  of 
considered  separately,  they  may  be  termed  the  and  pain. 
phi/.sica/,   the  political,  the   moral,    and   tlie   re- 
ligious:    and   inasmuch    as  the    pleasures   and 
paiub   belonging  to  each  of  them  are  capable 


42  OF    THE    FOUR    SANCTIONS    OR 

chap^.  Qf  giving  a  binding  force  to  any  law  or  rule 

of  conduct,  they  may  all  of  them  be  termed 

sanctions* 

III. 

i.Thephy-      If  it  bc  in  the  present  life,  and  from  the  or- 

sical  sane-  „  i  Ti2     j 

tiou.  dinary  course  oi  nature,  not  purposely  modmea 

by  the  interposition  of  the  will  of  any  human 
being,  nor  by  any  extraordinary  interposition 
of  any  superior  invisible  being,  that  the  plea- 
sure or  the  pain  takes  place  or  is  expected,  it 

*  Sanctio,  in  Latin,  was  used  to  signify  the  act  of  binding, 
and,  by  a  common  grammatical  transition,  any  thing  which 
serves  to  bind  a  man :  to  wit,  to  the  observance  of  such  or 
such  a  mode  of  conduct.  According  to  a  Latin  grammarian,* 
the  import  of  the  word  is  derived  by  rather  a  far-fetched 
process  (such  as  those  commonly  are,  and  in  a  great  mea- 
sure indeed  must  be,  by  which  intellectual  ideas  are  derived 
from  sensible  ones)  from  the  word  sanguis,  blood :  because, 
among  the  Romans,  with  a  view  to  inculcate  into  the  people 
a  persuasion  that  such  or  such  a  mode  of  conduct  would  be 
rendered  obligatory  upon  a  man  by  the  force  of  what  I  call 
the  religious  sanction  (that  is,  that  he  would  be  made  to 
suffer  by  the  extraordinary  interposition  of  some  superior 
being,  if  he  failed  to  observe  the  mode  of  conduct  in  question) 
'  certain  ceremonies  were  contrived  by  the  priests :  in  the 
course  of  which  ceremonies  the  blood  of  victims  was  made 
use  of. 

A  Sanction  then  is  a  source  of  obligatory  powers  or  motives : 
that  is,  of  -pains  and  pleasures;  which,  according  as  they  are 
connected  with  such  or  such  modes  of  conduct,  operate,  and 
are  indeed  the  only  things  which  can  operate,  as  motives. 
See  Cha]).  x.  [Motives.] 

*  Servius.    See  Ains worth's  Diet,  ad  verbum  Sanctio. 


SOURCES    OF    PAIN    AND    PLEASURE.  43 

may  be  said  to  issue  from  or  to  belong  to  the  C"*^^"'; 
physical  sanction. 

IV. 

If  at  the  hands  of  a  particular  person  or  set  2-  The  po- 
of persons  in  the  community,  who  under  names 
correspondent  to  that  of  judge,  are  chosen  for 
the  particular  purpose  of  dispensing  it,  ac- 
cording to  the  will  of  the  sovereign  or  supreme 
ruling  power  in  the  state,  it  may  be  said  to 
issue  from  the  political  sanction. 

V. 

If  at  the  hands  of  such  chance  persons  in  the  ^•'J^^^  ™*'- 

■••  ral  or  po- 

community,  as  the  party  in  question  may  happen  p"'^""- 
in  the  course  of  his  life  to  have  concerns  with, 
according  to  each  man's  spontaneous  disposi- 
tion, and  not  according  to  any  settled  or  con- 
certed rule,  it  may  be  said  to  issue  from  the 
moral  or  popular  sanction.* 


VI. 

linnri     nf  5»     cimprinr 

ligious. 


If  from  the  immediate  hand   of  a  superior  ^-  '^^^  '■^" 


invisible  being,  either  in  the  present  life,  or  in 
a  future,  it  may  be  said  to  issue  from  the  re- 
ligious sanction. 

*  Better  termed  popular,  as  more  directly  indicative  of  its 
ronstituent  cause  ;  as  likewise  of  its  relation  to  the  more  com- 
mon phrabc  public  ojiirtion,  in  French  opinion  publi(jue,  the  name 
there  given  to  that  tutelary  power,  of  which  of  late  so  nmch 
is  said,  and  by  which  so  much  is  done.  The  latter  appella- 
tion is  however  unhapjjy  and  inexpressive ;  since  if  opinion 
is  material,  it  is  only  in  virtue  of  the  influence  it  exercises  over 
action,  through  the  medium  of  the  affections  and  the  will. 


44  OF    THE    FOUR    SANCTIONS    OR 


Chap.  III. 


VII. 


The  plea-        Pleasiires  or  pains  which  may  be  expected 

sures  and  '^  _  ";  _  *• 

pains         to   issuc  from  the  physical,  political,  or  moral 
Ion- to  the  sanctions,  must  all  of  them  be  expected  to  be 

religious 

sanction,     experienced,  if  ever,  in  the  present  life  :  those 

may  le-  -i  -  r  ^ 

gard  either  which  mav  bc  cxpcctcd  to  issue  from  the  re- 

the  present 

life  or  a  fu-  Ugious  sauction,   may  be   expected  to  be  ex- 
perienced   either  in   the  present   lite   or   in   a 


future. 


VIII. 


Those  Those   w^hich   can    be   experienced   in   the 

which.  rC" 

^ardthe      present  life,  can  of  course  be  no  others  than 
from  which  such  as   humau  nature  in  the  course   of  the 


soever 


source  they  prcscut  life  is  susccptiblc  of:    and  from  each 
ouiy'in'the  of  thcsc  sourccs  may  flow  all  the  pleasures  or 


stances  of  paius  of  which,  in  the  course  of  the  present 
ductiSn!  life,  human  nature  is  susceptible.  With  regard 
to  these  then  (with  which  alone  we  have  in 
this  place  any  concern)  those  of  them  which 
belong  to  any  one  of  those  sanctions,  differ  not 
ultimately  in  kind  from  those  which  belong  to 
any  one  of  the  other  three :  the  only  differ- 
ence there  is  among  them  lies  in  the  circum- 
stances that  accompany  their  production.  A 
suffering  which  befals  a  man  in  the  natural  and 
spontaneous  course  of  things,  shall  be  styled, 
for  instance,  a  calamity ;  in  which  case,  if  it  be 
supposed  to  befal  him  through  any  imprudence 
of  his,  it  may  be  styled  a  punishment  issuing 
from  the  physical  sanction.     Now  this  same 


SOURCES    OF    PAIX    AND    PLEASURE.  45 

suffering,  if  inflicted  by  the  law,  will  be  what  9'^^-  "?• 
is  commonly  called  a  pimisJnnent ;  if  incurred 
for  want  of  any  friendly  assistance,  which  the 
misconduct,  or  supposed  misconduct,  of  the 
sufferer  has  occasioned  to  be  withholden,  a 
punishment  issuing  from  the  moral  sanction ;  if 
through  the  immediate  interposition  of  a  par- 
ticular providence,  a  punishment  issuing  from 
the  religious  sanction. 

IX. 

A  man's  goods,  or  his  person,  are  consumed  Example. 
by  fire.  If  this  happened  to  him  by  what  is 
called  an  accident,  it  was  a  calamity :  if  by 
reason  of  his  own  imprudence  (for  instance, 
from  his  neglecting  to  put  his  candle  out)  it 
may  be  styled  a  punishment  of  the  physical 
sanction  :  if  it  happened  to  him  by  the  sentence 
of  the  political  magistrate,  a  punishment  be- 
longing to  the  political  sanction  ;  that  is,  what 
is  commonly  called  a  punishment :  if  for  want 
of  any  assistance  which  his  neighbour  withheld 
from  him  out  of  some  dislike  to  his  moral  cha- 
racter, a  punishment  of  the  moral  sanction : 
if  by  an  immediate  act  of  God's  displeasure, 
manifested  on  account  of  some  sin  committed 
by  him,  or  through  any  distraction  of  mind, 
occasioned  by  the  dread  of  such  displeasure, 
a  punishment  of  the  ixligious  sanction.* 

*  A  buffering  conceived  to  bcfal  a  man  by  the  iinuicdiatc 


46  OB'    THE    FOUR    SANCTIONS    OR 

Chap.  III. 

Those  As  to  such  of  the  pleasures  and  pains  be- 

which  re-  .  _     _      ^  ^ 

gardafu-   longing  to  the  religious  sanction,  as  rearard  a 

ture  life  are   „  .  . 

not  sped-    futurc  life,   of  what  kind   these   may   be   we 

fically  *' 

known.  canuot  Kuow.  Thcsc  lie  not  open  to  our  ob- 
servation. During  the  present  life  they  are 
matter  only  of  expectation  :  and,  whether  that 
expectation  be  derived  from  natural  or  revealed 
religion,  the  particular  kind  of  pleasure  or  pain, 
if  it  be  different  from  all  those  which  lie  open 
to  our  observation,  is  what  we  can  have  no 
idea  of.  The  best  ideas  we  can  obtain  of  such 
pains  and  pleasures  are  altogether  unliquidated 
in  point  of  quality.  In  what  other  respects 
our  ideas  of  them  mai/  be  liquidated  will  be 
considered  in  another  place.* 

xr. 

The  phvsi-      Of  these  four  sanctions  the  physical  is  al- 

cal  sanction  *      •' 

•°ciudeti  in  together,  we  may  observe,  the  ground-work  of 
otherthree.  the  political  and  the  moral :  so  is  it  also  of 
the  religious,  in  as  far  as  the  latter  bears  relation 
to  the  present  life.  It  is  included  in  each  of 
those  other  three.  This  may  operate  in  any 
case,  (that  is,  any  of  the  pains  or  pleasures  be- 


act  of  God,  as  above,  is  often,  for  shortness  sake,  called  a 
judgment :  instead  of  saying,  a  suffering  inflicted  on  him  in 
consequence  of  a  special  judgment  formed,  and  resolution 
thereu])on  taken,  by  the  Deity. 

*  See  ch.  xiii,  [Cases  unmeet")  par.  2.  Note. 


SOURCES  OF  PAIN  AXD  PLEASURE.  47 

longing  to  it  may  operate)  independently  of  ch*p-J"; 
them  :  none  of  the>7i  can  operate  but  by  means 
of  this.  In  a  word,  the  powers  of  nature  may 
operate  of  themselves;  but  neither  the  ma- 
gistrate, nor  men  at  large,  cmi  operate,  nor 
is  God  in  the  case  in  question  supposed  to 
operate,  but  through  the  powers  of  nature. 

XII. 

For  these  four  objects,  which  in  their  nature  Use  of  this 

''  chapter. 

have  so  much  in  common,  it  seemed  of  use 
to  find  a  common  name.  It  seemed  of  use, 
in  the  first  place,  for  the  convenience  of  giving 
a  name  to  certain  pleasures  and  pains,  for 
which  a  name  equally  characteristic  could 
hardly  otherwise  have  been  found  :  in  the 
second  place,  for  the  sake  of  holding  up  the 
efficacy  of  certain  moral  forces,  the  influence 
of  which  is  apt  not  to  be  sufficiently  attended 
to.  Does  the  political  sanction  exert  an  in- 
fluence over  the  conduct  of  mankind  ?  The 
moral,  the  religious  sanctions  do  so  too.  In 
every  inch  of  his  career  are  the  operations  of 
the  political  magistrate  liable  to  be  aided  or 
impeded  by  these  two  foreign  powers  :  who, 
one  or  other  of  them,  or  both,  are  sure  to  be 
either  his  rivals  or  his  allies.  Does  it  happen 
to  him  to  leave  them  out  in  his  calculations  ? 
he  will  be  sure  almost  to  find  himself  mis- 
taken in  the  result.     Of  all  this  we  shall  find 


48  OF    THE    FOUR    SANCTIONS,    ETC. 

Chap  III,  abundant  proofs  in  the  sequel  of  this  work. 
It  behoves  him,  therefore,  to  have  them  con- 
tinually before  his  eyes ;  and  that  under  such 
a  name  as  exhibits  the  relation  they  bear  to 
his  own  purposes  and  designs. 


[  49  ] 


CHAP.  IV. 

VALUE  OF  A  LOT  OF  PLEASURS  OR  PAIN, 
HOW  TO  BE  MEASURED. 


I. 


Pleasures  then,  and  the  avoidance  of  pains,  Use  of  this 
are  the  ends  which  the  legislator  has  in  view : 
it  behoves  him  therefore  to  understand  their 
value.  Pleasures  and  pains  are  the  instruments 
he  has  to  work  with  :  it  behoves  him  there- 
fore to  understand  their  force,  which  is  again, 
in  other  words,  their  value. 

II. 
To  a  person  considered  by  himself,  the  value  ^/j^J"^' 
of  a  pleasure  or  pain  considered  by  itself,  will  ^fj^f*" 
be  greater  or  less,  according  to  the  four  fol-  f^l^^J'"^^" 
lowing:  circumstances  :*  the  value 

°  of  a  plea- 

■ — sure  or 

•  These  circumstances  have  since  been  denominated  ele-  P^'"  ^"*'"*l* 

dered  with 

ments  or  dimensions  of  value  in  a  pleasure  or  a  pain.  reference 

Not  long  after  the  publication  of  the  first  edition,   the  per^on'a^d 
following  memoriter  verses  were   framed,    in  the  view  of  ^y  itself, 
lodging  more  effectually,  in  the  memory,  these  points,  on 
which  the  whole  fabric  of  morals  and  legislation  may  be  seen 
to  rest. 

Intense,  long,  certain,  speedy ,  fruilful,  pure — 

Such  marks  in  pleasures  and  in  pains  endure. 

Such  pleasures  seek,  \i  private  be  thy  end  : 

If  it  be  public,  wide  let  them  extend. 

Such  pains  avoid,  whichever  be  thy  view  : 

If  pains  must  come,  let  them  extend  to  few. 
VOL.  I.  E 


50  PLEASURE    OR    PAIN, 


:hap.  IV. 

1.  Its  intensity. 

2.  Its  duration. 

3.  Its  certainty  or  uncertainty. 

4.  Its  propinquity  or  remoteness. 

r  T  T 

-coasi- 

111. 

These  are  the  circumstances  which  are  to  be 

dered  as  .,,... 

connected  considered.  in  estimating  a  pleasure  or  a  pain 
pleasures  considcrcd  cach  of  them  by  itself.  But  when 
or  pains.  ^^^  yalue  of  any  pleasure  or  pain  is  considered 
for  the  purpose  of  estimating  the  tendency  of 
any  act  by  which  it  is  produced,  there  are  two 
other  circumstances  to  be  taken  into  the  ac- 
count ;   these  are, 

5.  Its  fecundity,  or  the  chance  it  has  of 
being  followed  by  sensations  of  the  same  kind  : 
that  is,  pleasures,  if  it  be  a  pleasure:  pains, 
if  it  be  a  pain. 

6.  Its  purity,  or  the  chance  it  has  of  not 
being  followed  by  sensations  of  the  opposite 
kind  :  that  is,  pains,  if  it  be  a  pleasure :  plea- 
sures, if  it  be  a  pain.  ', 
These  two  last,  however,  are  in  strictness 
scarcely  to  be  deemed  properties  of  the  plea- 
sure or  the  pain  itself;  they  are  not,  therefore, 
in  strictness  to  be  taken  into  the  account  of 
the  value  of  that  pleasure  or  that  pain.  They 
are  in  strictness  to  be  deemed  properties  only 
of  the  act,  or  other  event,  by  which  such  plea- 
sure or  pain  has  been  produced ;  and  accord- 
ingly are  only  to  be  taken  into  the  account  of 
the  tendency  of  such  a,ct  or  such  event. 


HOW    TO    BE    MEASURED.  51 

TV  Chap.  IV. 

To  a  number  of  persons,   with  reference  to  — consu 
each  of  whom   the  value  of  a  pleasure   or  a  reference 

•  T  1       •  -11    1  1  '-°  ^  num- 

pain  IS  considered,  it  will  be  greater  or  less,  berofper- 

,.  .  .         ,        sous. 

according  to  seven  circumstances :  to  wit,  the 
six  preceding  ones ;    viz. 

1.  Its  intensiti/. 

2.  Its  duration. 

3.  Its  certainty  or   uncertainty. 

4.  Its  propinquity  or  remoteness. 

5.  Its  fecundity. 

6.  Its  purity. 

And  one  other  ;   to  wit : 

7.  Its  extent;  that  is,  the  number  of  persons 
to  whom  it  extends;  or  (in  other  words)  who 
are  affected  by  it. 

V. 

To  take  an  exact  account  then  of  the  s"eneral  Process  for 

"  estimatiu^ 

tendency  of  any  act,  by  which  the  interests  thetenden- 

*'•'•'  cy  of  any 

of  a  community  are  affected,  proceed  as  follows,  act  or  event 
Begin  with  any  one  person  of  those  whose  in- 
terests seem  most  immediately  to  be  affected 
by  it :    and  take  an  account, 

1.  Of  the  value  of  each  distinguishable /?/e«- 
sure  which  appears  to  be  produced  by  it  in 
the  first  instance. 

2.  Of  the  value  of  each  pain  which  appears 
to  be  produced  by  it  in  i\ni.  Jirst  instance. 

3.  Of  the  value  of  each  pleasure  which  aj)- 
pears  to   be   produced  by   it   after   the   first. 

E  1 


52     '  PLEASURE    OR    PAIN, 

Chap.  IV.   -pj^jg  constitutes  the  fecundity  of  the  first  plea- 
sure and  the  impurity  of  the  first  pain. 

4.  Of  the  value  of  each  pain  which  appears 
to  be  produced  by  it  after  the  first.  This  con- 
stitutes the  fecundity  of  the  first  pain^  and  the 
impurity  of  the  first  pleasure. 

5.  Sum  up  all  the  values  of  all  the  pleasures 
on  the  one  side,  and  those  of  all  the  pains  on 
the  other.  The  balance,  if  it  be  on  the  side 
of  pleasure,  will  give  the  good  tendency  of  the 
act  upon  the  whole,  with  respect  to  the  in- 
terests of  that  individual  person ;  if  on  the  side 
of  pain,  the  bad  tendency  of  it  upon  the  whole, 

6.  Take  an  account  of  the  number  of  persons 
wliose  interests  appear  to  be  concerned ;  and 
repeat  the  above  process  with  respect  to  each. 
Sum  up  the  numbers  expressive  of  the  degrees 
of  good  tendency,  which  the  act  has,  with  re- 
.spect  to  each  individual,  in  regard  to  whom  the 
tendency  of  it  is  good  upon  the  whole  :  do  this 
again  with  respect  to  each  individual,  in  regard 
to  whom  the  tendency  of  it  is  good  upon  the 
whole :  do  this  again  with  respect  to  each  in- 
dividual, in  regard  to  whom  the  tendency  of 
it  is  bad  upon  the -whole.  Take  the  balance; 
which,  if  on  the  side  of  pleasure,  will  give  the 
general  good  tendency  of  the  act,  with  respect  to 
the  total  number  or  community  of  individuals 
concerned ;  if  on  the  side  of  pain,  the  general 
evil  tendency,  with  respect  to  the  same  com- 
munity. 


HOW    TO    BE    MEASURED.  53 

C»AP.  IV. 


VI. 


It  is  not  to  be  expected  that  this  process  ^;;^^'J^^^ 
should  be  strictly  pursued  previously  to  every  process. 
moral  judgment,  or  to  every  legislative  or  judi- 
cial operation.  It  may,  however,  be  always 
kept  in  view :  and  as  near  as  the  process  ac- 
tually pursued  on  these  occasions  approaches 
to  it,  so  near  will  such  process  approach  to  the 
character  of  an  exact  one. 


vir. 


The  same  process  is  alike  applicable  to  plea-  The  same 

process ap- 

sure  and  pam,  m  whatever  shape  they  appear :  piicabie  to 

...  J .         good  aud 

and  by  whatever  denommation  they  are   dis-  evii,  profit 
tinguished  :   to  pleasure,  whether  it  be  called  chief,  and 
good  (which  is  properly  the  cause  or  instrument  modifica- 
of  pleasure)  or  prrj/it  (which  is  distant  pleasure,  pleasure 
or  the  cause  or  instrument  of  distant  pleasure,)  """  '**'"' 
or  convenience,  or  advantage,  benefit,  emolnmetit, 
happiness,  and  so  forth:   to  pain,  whether  it  be 
called  evil,  (which  corresponds  to  good)  or  mis- 
chief, or  inconvenience,  or  disadvantage,  or  loss, 
or  unhappiness,  and  so  forth. 

vrir. 
Nor  is  this  a  novel  and   unwarranted,  any  Conformity 

•      •  1  1-  r  11      !-•      of  mijn's 

more  than  it  is  a  useless  theory.     Im  all  this  practice  to 

.  ,  •  ,  II  •  r  ^^''s  theory. 

there  is  nothing  but  what  the  practice  ot  man- 
kind, wheresoever  they  have  a  clear  view  of 
their  own  interest,  is  perfectly  conformable  to. 
An  article  of  property,  an  estate  in  land,  for 
instance,   is    valuable,  on  whut  account  ?   On 


54  PLEASURE    OR    PAIN,    ETC. 

^"^'j  ^^;  account  of  the  pleasures  of  all  kinds  which  it 
enables  a  man  to  produce,  and  what  comes  to 
the  same  thing  the  pains  of  all  kinds  which  it 
enables  him  to  avert.  But  the  value  of  such 
an  article  of  property  is  universally  understood 
to  rise  or  fall  according  to  the  length  or  short- 
ness of  the  time  which  a  man  has  in  it :  the 
certainty  or  uncertainty  of  its  coming  into  pos- 
session :  and  the  nearness  or  remoteness  of  the 
time  at  which,  if  at  all,  it  is  to  come  into  pos- 
session. As  to  the  intensity  of  the  pleasures 
which  a  man  may  derive  from  it,  this  is  never 
thought  of,  because  it  depends  upon  the  use 
which  each  particular  person  may  come  to 
make  of  it ;  which  cannot  be  estimated  till  the 
particular  pleasures  he  may  come  to  derive 
from  it,  or  the  particular  pains  he  may  come  to 
exclude  by  means  of  it,  are  brought  to  view. 
For  the  same  reason,  neither  does  he  think  of 
the  fecundity  or  purity  of  those  pleasures. 

Thus  much  for  pleasure  and  pain,  happiness 
and  unhappiness,  in  general.  We  come  now 
to  consider  the  several  particular  kinds  of  pain 
and  pleasure. 


[     55     ] 


CHAP.    V. 

PLEASURBS    AND    PAINS,    THEIR    KINDS. 
I. 

Having  represented  what  belongs  to  all  sorts  Pleasures 
of  pleasures  and  pains  alike,  we  come  now  to  are  either, 
exhibit,  each  by  itself,  the  several  sorts  of  pains  or,  2°Com- 
and  pleasures.     Pains  and  pleasures  may  be  ''"' 
called  by  one   general  word,   interesting  per- 
ceptions.     Interesting  perceptions  are   either 
simple  or  complex.     The  simple  ones  are  those 
which  cannot  any  one  of  them  be  resolved  into 
more  :  complex  are  those  which  are  resolvable 
into  divers  simple  ones.     A  complex  interest- 
ing perception  may  accordingly  be  composed 
either,    1.    Of  pleasures    alone :   2.    Of  pains 
alone :   or,   3.  Of  a  pleasure  or  pleasures,  and 
a  pain  or   pains  together.     What  determines 
a  lot  of  pleasure,  for  example,  to  be  regarded 
as  one  complex  pleasure,  rather  than  as  divers 
simple  ones,  is  the  nature  of  the  exciting  cause. 
Whatever  pleasures  are  excited  all  at  once  by 
the  action  of  the  same  cause,   are  apt  to  be 
looked   upon  as  constituting  all  together  but 

one  pleasure. 

II. 

The  several   simple  pleasures  of  which  hu-  The  simple 

pleasures 

man    nature    is    susceptible,    seem    to    be  as  enume- . 

rated. 


56 


PLEASURES    AND    PAINS. 


Chap. 
* — sr 


sim- 


The 

pie  pains 

euumerat- 

ed. 


Analytical 
view,  why 
noae  given 


follows:  1.  The  pleasures  of  sense.  2.  The 
pleasures  of  wealth.  3.  The  pleasures  of  skill. 
4.  The  pleasures  of  amity.  5.  The  pleasures 
of  a  good  name.  6.  The  pleasures  of  power. 
7.  The  pleasures  of  piety.  8.  The  pleasures  of 
benevolence.  9.  The  pleasures  of  malevolence. 
10.  The  pleasures  of  memory.  11.  The  plea- 
sures of  imagination.  12.  The  pleasures  of  ex- 
pectation. 13.  The  pleasures  dependent  on 
association.     14.  The  pleasures  of  relief 

III. 
The  several  simple  pains  seem  to  be  as  fol- 
lows :  1.  The  pains  of  privation.  2.  The  pains 
of  the  senses.  3.  The  pains  of  awkwardness. 
4.  The  pains  of  enmity.  5.  The  pains  of  an 
ill  name.  6.  The  pains  of  piety.  7.  The  pains 
of  benevolence.  8.  The  pains  of  malevolence. 
9.  The  pains  of  the  memory.  10.  The  pains 
of  the  imagination.  1 1 .  The  pains  of  expecta- 
tion.    1 2.  The  pains  dependent  on  association.* 

•  The  catalogue  here  given,  is  what  seemed  to  be  a  com- 
plete list  of  the  several  simple  pleasures  and  pains  of  whicli 
human  nature  is  susceptible  :  insomuch,  that  if,  upon  any 
occasion  whatsoever,  a  man  feels  pleasure  or  pain,  it  is  either 
referable  at  once  to  some  one  or  other  of  these  kinds,  or  re- 
solvable into  such  as  are.  It  might  perhaps  have  been  a 
satisfaction  to  the  reader,  to  have  seen  an  analytical  view  of 
the  subject,  taken  upon  an  exhaustive  plan,  for  the  purpose 
of  demonstrating  the  catalogue  to  be  what  it  purports  to  be, 
a  complete  one.  The  catalogue  is  in  fact  the  result  of  such 
an  analysis ;  which,  however,  I  thought  it  better  to  discard 
at  present,  as  being  of  too  metaphysical  a  cast,  and  not 


PLEASURES    AND    PAINS.  5* 

CUAP.  V. 

1.  The  pleasures  of  sense  seem  to  be  as  fol-  Pleasures 

*  of  serine 

lows  :  1.  The  pleasures  of  the  taste  or  palate  ;  enumerat- 
including  whatever  pleasures  are  experienced 
in  satisfying  the  appetites  of  hunger  and  thirst. 
2.  The  pleasure  of  intoxication.  3.  The  plea- 
sures of  the  organ  of  smelling.  4.  The  pleasures 
of  the  touch.  5.  The  simple  pleasures  of  the 
ear  ;  independent  of  association.  6.  The  simple 
pleasures  of  the  eye  ;  independent  of  associa- 
tion. 7.  The  pleasure  of  the  sexual  sense.  8.  The 
pleasure  of  health  :  or,  the  internal  pleasure- 
able  feeling  or  flow  of  spirits  (as  it  is  called,) 
which  accompanies  a  state  of  full  health  and 
vigour  ;  especially  at  times  of  moderate  bodily 
exertion.  9.  The  pleasures  of  novelty  :  or,  the 
pleasures  derived  from  the  gratification  of  the 
appetite  of  curiosity,  by  the  application  of  new 
objects  to  any  of  the  senses.* 

v. 

2.  Bv  the  pleasures  of  wealth  may  be  meant  Pipa«iure« 

J  ir  >>  of  wealth, 

those  pleasures  which  a  man  is  apt  to  derive  which  are 

*  .  •     1       either  of 

from  the  consciousness  of  possessing  any  article  acquisii 

or  of  }io5 

or  articles  which  stand  in  the  list  of  instruments  session. 
of  enjoyment  or  security,  and  more  particularly 


ion 


Strictly  within  the  limits  of  this  design.     See  ch.  xiii.  [Cases 
unmeet]  Par.  2.  Note. 

•  There  are  also  pleasures  of  novelty,  excited  by  the  ap- 
pearauce  of  new  ideas  :  these  are  [ileasures  of  the  imagina- 
tion.    See  infra  xiii. 


of  skill. 


of  amit}'. 


58  PLEASURES    AND    PAINS. 

Sl^^L^  at  the  time  of  his  first  acquiring  them  ;  at  which 
time  the  pleasure  may  be  styled  a  pleasure  of 
gain  or  a  pleasure  of  acquisition  :  at  other  times 
a  pleasure  of  possession, 
s.pieasures  •^-  The  plcasurcs  of  skill,  as  exercised  upon 
particular  objects,  are  those  which  accompany 
the  application  of  such  particular  instruments 
of  enjoyment  to  their  uses,  as  cannot  be  so  ap- 
plied without  a  greater  or  less  share  of  diffi- 
culty or  exertion.* 

VT. 

4.pieasures  4.  The  plcasurcs  of  amity,  or  self-recommen- 
dation, are  the  pleasures  that  may  accompany 
the  persuasion  of  a  man's  being  in  the  acquisi- 
tion or  the  possession  of  the  good-will  of  such 
or  such  assignable  person  or  persons  in  particu- 
lar :  or,  as  the  phrase  is,  of  being  upon  good 
terms  with  him  or  them  :  and  as  a  fruit  of  it,  of 
his  being  in  a  way  to  have  the  benefit  of  their 
spontaneous  and  gratuitous  services. 

VII. 

5.  The  pleasures   of  a  good  name  are  the 
of  a  good    pleasures  that  accompany  the  persuasion  of  a 
man's  being  in  the  acquisition  or  the  posses- 
sion of  the  good-will  of  the  world  about  him  ; 

*  For  instance,  the  pleasure  of  being  able  to  gratify  the 
sense  of  hearing,  by  singing,  or  performing  upon  any  musical 
instrument.  The  pleasure  thus  obtained,  is  a  thing  super- 
added to,  and  perfectly  distinguishable  from,  that  which  a 
man  enjoys  from  hearing  another  person  ])erform  in  the  same 
manner. 


5. Pleasures 
of  ag 
name 


PLEASURES    AND    PAINS.  59 

that  is,  of  such  members  of  society  as  he  is  chaj-  v- 
likely  to  have  concerns  with ;  and  as  a  means 
of  it,  either  their  love  or  their  esteem,  or  both  : 
and  as  a  fruit  of  it,  of  his  being  in  the  way  to 
have  the  benefit  of  their  spontaneous  and  gra- 
tuitous services.  These  may  likewise  be  called 
the  pleasures  of  good  repute,  the  pleasures  of 
honour,  or  the  pleasures  of  the  moral  sanction.* 

VIII. 

6.  The  pleasures  of  power  are  the  pleasures  e.pieasures 

of  power. 

that  accompany  the  persuasion  of  a  man's  be- 
ing in  a  condition  to  dispose  people,  by  means 
of  their  hopes  and  fears,  to  give  him  the  bene- 
fit of  their  services  :  that  is,  by  the  hope  of 
some  service,  or  by  the  fear  of  some  disservice, 
that  he  may  be  in  the  way  to  render  them. 

IX. 

7.  The  pleasures  of  piety  are  the  pleasures  -.Pleasures 
that  accompany  the  belief  of  a  man's  being  in 

the  acquisition  or  in  possession  of  the  good- 
will or  favour  of  the  Supreme  Being  :  and  as  a 
fruit  of  it,  of  his  being  in  a  way  of  enjoying  plea* 
sures  to  be  received  by  God's  special  appoint- 
ment, either  in  this  life,  or  in  a  life  to  come. 
These  may  also  be  called  the  pleasures  of  reli- 
gion, the  pleasures  of  a  religious  disposition,  or 
the  pleasures  of  the  religious  sanction.'l" 

X. 


8.  The  pleasures  of  benevolence  are  the  plea-  ^.i 


Pleasures 
benevo- 
lence or 


*  See  ch.  iii.  [SanctioiiR.]  f  See  ch.  iii.  LSanetions.J       good-will. 


60  PLEASURES    AND    PAINS. 

^"^^'  ^ :  sures  resulting  from  the  view  of  any  pleasures 
supposed  to  be  possessed  by  the  beings  who 
may  be  the  objects  of  benevolence ;  to  wit,  the 
sensitive  beings  we  are  acquainted  with  ;  under 
which  are  commonly  included,  1.  The  Supreme 
Being.  2.  Human  beings.  3.  Other  animals. 
These  may  also  be  called  the  pleasures  of  good- 
will, the  pleasures  of  sympathy,  or  the  pleasures 
of  the  benevolent  or  social  affections. 

XI. 

9.pieasures  9.  The  plcasurcs  of  malcvolcnce  are  the  plca- 
leuceoriu-  sures  resulting  from  the  view  of  any  pain  sup- 
posed to  be  suffered  by  the  beings  who  may 
become  the  objects  of  malevolence :  to  wit, 
1.  Human  beings.  2.  Other  animals.  These 
may  also  be  styled  the  pleasures  of  ill-will,  the 
pleasures  of  the  irascible  appetite,  the  pleasures 
of  antipathy,  or  the  pleasures  of  the  malevolent 
or  dissocial  affections. 

XII. 

10.  Plea-         10.  The  pleasures  of  the  memory   are  the 

sures  of  the      ,  i  •    i  r-         i         • 

memory,  plcasurcs  which,  after  having  enjoyed  such  and 
such  pleasures,  or  even  in  some  case  after  having 
suffered  such  and  such  pains,  a  man  will  now 
and  then  experience,  at  recollecting  them  ex- 
actly in  the  order  and  in  the  circumstances  in 
which  they  were  actually  enjoyed  or  suffered. 
These  derivative  pleasures  may  of  course  be 
distinguished  into  as  many  species  as  there  are 
of  original  perceptions,  from  whence  they  may 


tiun. 


PLEASURES    AND    PAINS.  61 

be  copied.     They  may  also  be  styled  pleasures  £|i^^- 
of  simple  recollection. 

XIII. 

11.  The  pleasures  of  the  imadnation  are  the  ^^-^H*-, 

*    ^  <->  sures  of  the 

pleasures  which  may  be  derived  from  the  con-  imagina 
templation  of  any  such  pleasures  as  may  hap- 
pen to  be  suggested  by  the  memory,  but  in  a 
different  order,  and  accompanied  by  different 
groups  of  circumstances.  These  may  accord- 
ingly be  referred  to  any  one  of  the  three  car- 
dinal points  of  time,  present,  past,  or  future. 
It  is  evident  they  may  admit  of  as  many  dis- 
tinctions as  those  of  the  former  class. 

XIV. 

12.  The   pleasures  of  expectation   are  the  ^2.  Piea 

r  t  sures  of  i 

pleasures  that  result  from  the  contemplation  of  p^*^'^^' 
any  sort  of  pleasure,  referred  to  time  futurCy 
and  accompanied  with  the  sentiment  of  belief. 
These  also  may  admit  of  the  same  distinctions.* 

XV. 

13.  The  pleasures  of  association  are  the  plea-  is.  piea- 

_  *  sures  de- 

sures  which  certain  objects  or  incidents  may  peudinsun 

''    associa- 

happen  to  afford,  not  of  themselves,  but  merely  tion. 
in   virtue  of  some  association  they  have  con- 
tracted  in  the  mind  with    certain    objects  or 
incidents  which  are  in  themselves  pleasurable. 
Such  is  the  case,  for  instance,  with  the  pleasure 

*  In  contradistinction  to  thcbc,  all  other  plcaburcb  may  be 
tcnucd  pleaburcs  of  enjoyment. 


e*- 
on. 


6^  PLEASURES    AND    PAIN§. 

i^!!^^lZ;  of  skill,  when  afforded  by  such  a  set  of  incidents 
as  compose  a  game  of  chess.  This  derive  its 
pleasurable  quality  from  its  association  partly 
with  the  pleasures  of  skill,  as  exercised  in  the 
production  of  incidents  pleasurable  of  them- 
selves :  partly  from  its  association  with  the 
pleasures  of  power.  Such  is  the  case  also  with 
the  pleasure  of  good  luck,  when  afforded  by 
such  incidents  as  compose  the  game  of  hazard, 
or  any  other  game  of  chance,  when  played  at 
for  nothing.  This  derives  its  pleasurable  qua- 
lity from  its  association  with  one  of  the  plea- 
sures of  wealth ;  to  wit,  with  the  pleasure  of 
acquiring  it. 

XVI. 

14.  Plea-  14.  Farther  on  we  shall  see  pains  grounded 
sures  ot  re-  ^p^^^^  plcasurcs ;  iu  like  manner  may  we  now 
see  pleasures  grounded  upon  pains.  To  the 
catalogue  of  pleasures  may  accordingly  be 
added  the  pleasures  of  relief:  or,  the  pleasures 
which  a  man  experiences  when,  after  he  has 
been  enduring  a  pain  of  any  kind  for  a  certain 
time,  it  comes  to  cease,  or  to  abate.  These 
may  of  course  be  distinguished  into  as  many 
species  as  there  are  of  pains  :  and  may  give  rise 
to  so  many  pleasures  of  memory,  of  imagina- 
tion, and  of  expectation 

XVII. 

1.  Pains  of      1.  Pains  of  privation  are  the  pains  that  may 
privation,   ^^^^j^  ^^^^  ^^  thought  of  HOt  posscssing  in  the 


PLEASURES    AND    PAINS.  63 

time  present  any  of  the  several  kinds  of  plea-    chap.  v. 
sures.     Pains  of  privation  may  accordingly  be 
resolved  into  as  many  kinds  as  there  are  of 
pleasures  to  which  they  may  correspond,  and 
from  the  absence  whereof  they  may  be  derived. 

XVIII. 

There  are  three  sorts  of  pains  which  are  only  '^^^"^  i°- 

.  elude, 

so  many  modifications  of  the  several  pains  of  i.  Pains  of 

1  •  r  •      desire. 

privation.  When  the  enjoyment  of  any  parti- 
cular pleasure  happens  to  be .  particularly  de- 
sired, but  without  any  expectation  approaching 
to  assurance,  the  pain  of  privation  which  there- 
upon results  takes  a  particular  name,  and  is 
called  the  pain  of  desire,  or  of  unsatisfied  desire. 

XIX. 

Where  the  enjoyment  happens  to  have  been  2.  Pains 

1        1        1     p  •    1  1  r  •  ofdisap- 

looked  tor  with  a  degree  oi  expectation  ap-  poimment. 
proaching  to  assurance,   and  that  expectation 
is  made  suddenly  to  cease,  it  is  called  a  pain 
of  disappointment. 

XX. 

A  pain  of  privation  takes  the  name  of  a  pain  3.  Paius  of 
of  regret  in  two  cases  :  1.  Where  it  is  grounded 
on  the  memory  of  a  pleasure,  which  having 
been  once  enjoyed,  appears  not  likely  to  be 
enjoyed  again  :  2.  Where  it  is  grounded  on 
the  idea  of  a  pleasure,  which  was  never  actually 
enjoyed,  nor  perhaps  so  much  as  expected, 
but  which  might  have  been  enjoyed  (it  is  sup- 


64  PLEASURES    AND    PAINS. 

S"^^-  \-  posed,)  had  such  or  such  a  contingency  hap- 
pened, which,  in  fact,  did  not  happen. 

XXI. 

2  Pains  of      2.  The  sevcral  pains  of  the  senses  seem  to 

the  senses.  '■ 

be  as  follows :  1 .  The  pains  of  hunger  and 
thirst :  or  the  disagreeable  sensations  produced 
by  the  want  of  suitable  substances  which  need 
at  times  to  be  applied  to  the  alimentary  canal. 
2.  The  pains  of  the  taste  :  or  the  disagreeable 
sensations  produced  by  the  application  of  va- 
rious substances  to  the  palate,  and  other  supe- 
rior parts  of  the  ^ame  canal.  3.  The  pains  of 
the  organ  of  smell :  or  the  disagreeable  sensa- 
tions produced  by  the  effluvia  of  various  sub- 
stances when  applied  to  that  organ.  4.  The 
pains  of  the  touch  :  or  the  disagreeable  sensa- 
tions produced  by  the  application  of  various 
substances  to  the  skin.  5.  The  simple  pains 
of  the  hearing :  or  the  disagreeable  sensations 
excited  in  the  organ  of  that  sense  by  various 
kinds  of  sounds  :  independently  (as  before,)  of 
association.  6.  The  simple  pains  of  the  sight  : 
or  the  disagreeable  sensations  if  any  such  there 
be,  that  may  be  excited  in  the  organ  of  that 
sense  by  visible  images,  independent  of  the 
principle  of  association.    7*  The  pains  resulting 


No  positive       •  The  pleasure  of  the  sexual  sense  seems  to  have  no  posi- 
pains  cor-      .  .  ,         .        •.  i  i  •        <•       •      ^• 

respond  to  tive  pain  to  correspond  to  it :  it  has  only  a  pain  ot  privation, 

the  plea-  j       ^  ^j^^  mental  class,  the  pain  of  unsatisfied  desire. 

sure  of  the         »  ^ 

sexual 

tense. 


PLEASURES    AND    PAINS.  65 

from  excessive  heat  or  cold,  unless  these  be  ^'"^^-  ^\ 
referable  to  the  touch.  8.  The  pains  of  dis- 
ease :  or  the  acute  and  uneasy  sensations  re- 
sulting from  the  several  diseases  and  indispo- 
sitions to  which  human  nature  is  liable.  9.  The 
pain  of  exertion,  whether  bodily  or  mental :  or 
the  uneasy  sensation  which  is  apt  to  accompany 
any  intense  effort,  whether  of  mind  or  body. 

xxir. 
3.*  The  pains  of  awkwardness  are  the  pains  3.  Pains  of 

awkward- 

which  sometimes  result  from  the  unsuccessful  ness. 
endeavour  to  apply  any  particular  instruments 
of  enjoyment  or  security  to  their  uses,  or  from 
the  difficulty  a  man  experiences  in  applying 
them.-)- 

If  any  positive  pain  of  body  result  from  the  want  of  such  in- 
dulgence, it  belongs  to  the  head  of  pains  of  disease. 

*  The  pleasures  of  novelty  have  no  positive  pains  corre-  No  positive 
sponding  to  them.     The  pain  which  a  man  experiences  when  g^onfUoUie 
he  is  in  the  condition  of  not  knowing  what  to  do  with  him-  pleasure  of 
self,  that  pain,  which  in  French  is  expressed  by  a  single  word 
ennui,  is  a  pain  of  privation :  a  pain  resulting  from  the  ab- 
sence, not  only  of  all  the  pleasures  of  novelty,  but  of  all  kinds 
of  pleasure  whatsoever. 

The  pleasures  of  wealth  have  also  no  positive  pains  cor-  nor  to 

responding  to  them:  the  ordy  pains  opposed  to  them  are  ^Vith^" 
pains  of  privation.  If  any  positive  pains  result  from  the 
want  of  wealth,  they  are  referable  to  some  other  class  of  posi- 
tive pains ;  principally  to  those  of  the  senses.  From  the 
want  of  food,  for  instance,  result  the  pains  of  hunger  j  from 
the  want  of  clothing,  the  pains  of  cold  ;  and  so  forth. 

t  It  may  be  a  (|ucstion,  pcrhajjs,  whether  this  be  a  positive      Is  this  a 

-    .,     ,-  ,       ,         .     ,  ,  •  .1  •         c  <listiiKtpo- 

pam  of  Itself,  or  whether  it  be  nothmg  more  than  a  pam  ot  ^■^^■^^^  p,Jm^ 

VOL     T  F  or  only  a   ' 

"^'    '•  '  painof  priration? 


66  PLEASURES    AND    PAINS. 

Chap_V.  XXIII. 

4.  Pains  of  4.  The  pains  of  enmity  are  the  pains  that 
eumi  y.  ^^^  accompany  the  persuasion  of  a  man's  be- 
ing obnoxious  to  the  ill-will  of  such  or  such  an 
assignable  person  or  persons  in  particular :  or, 
as  the  phrase  is,  of  being  upon  ill  terms  with 
him  or  them  :  and,  in  consequence,  of  being 
obnoxious  to  certain  pains  of  some  sort  or  other^ 
of  which  he  may  be  the  cause. 

XXIV. 

5.  Faiiis  of  5.  The  pains  of  an  ill-name,  are  the  pains 
an  ill  name.  ^^^^  accompaiiy  the  persuasion  of  a  man's  be- 
ing obnoxious,  or  in  a  way  to  be  obnoxious  to 
the  ill-will  of  the  world  about  him.  These  may 
likewise  be  called  the  pains  of  ill-repute,  the 
pains  of  dishonour,  or  the  pains  of  the  moral 
sanction.* 

privation,  resulting  from  the  consciousness  of  a  want  of  skill. 

It  is,  however,  but  a  question  of  words,  nor  does  it  matter 

which  way  it  be  determined. 
The  posi-        *  In  as  far  as  a  man's  fellow-creatures  are  supposed  to  be 
of  an  Ul"^     determined  by  any  event  not  to  regard  him  with  any  degree 
uame,  and  q(  esteem  or  good  will,  or  to  regard  him  with  a  less  degree 

the  pains  ,.,,,,  i  i       i  •  j 

of  priva-  of  esteem  or  good  will  than  they  would  otherwise ;  not  to  do 
*^'""'dT  ^^^  ^^y  ^°^*®  of  good  offices,  or  not  to  do  him  so  many  good 
the  plea-  offices  as  they  would  otherwise  j  the  pain  resulting  from  such 
good  name,  consideration  may  be  reckoned  a  pain  of  privation  :  as  far  as 

run  into  one  ^y^     ^^.^  supposed  to  regard  him  with  such  a  degree  of  aver- 

auuthcr.  j  rr  d  ... 

sion  or  disesteera  as  to  be  disposed  to  do  him  positive  ill 

offices,  it  may  be  reckoned  a  positive  pain.  The  pain  of  pri- 
vation, and  the  positive  pain,  in  this  case  run  one  into  another 
indistinguishably. 


PLEASURES    AND    PAINS. 
XXV. 

6.*  The  pains  of  piety  are  the  pains  that  ac-  e.  Pains  of 
company  the  belief  of  a  man's  being  obnoxious  ^'^  ^' 
to  the  displeasure  of  the  Supreme  Being  :  and 
in  consequence  to  certain  pains  to  be  inflicted 
by  his  especial  appointment,  either  in  this  life  or 
in  a  life  to  come.  These  may  also  be  called 
the  pains  of  religion  ;  the  pains  of  a  religious 
disposition ;  or  the  pains  of  the  religious  sanc- 
tion. When  the  belief  is  looked  ^pon  as  well- 
grounded,  these  pains  are  commonly  called 
religious  terrors ;  when  looked  upon  as  ill- 
grounded,  superstitious  terrors.^ 

XXVI. 

7.  The  pains  of  benevolence  are  the  pains  ^-^{[^i"'/^ 
resulting   from   the    view  of  any   pains    sup-  i^nce. 
posed  to  be  endured  by  other  beings.     These 
may  also  be  called   the  pains  of  good-will,  of 

*  There  seem  to  be  no  positive  pains  to  correspond  to  the  No  positive 
pleasures  of  power.     The  pains  that  a  man  may  feel  from  the  i^ggpJnJto 

want  or  the  loss  of  power,  in  as  far  as  power  is  distinguished  the  plea- 
'  .  sures  ot 

from  all  other  sources  of  pleasure,  seem  to  be  nothmg-  more  power. 

than  pains  of  privation. 

t  The  positive  pains  of  piety,  and  the  pains  of  privation,  jT^J^^j^'^g 

opposed  to  llic   pleasures  of  piety,  run   one  into  another   in  of  piety, 

.  /.  •.  c  ami  the 

the  same  manner  as  the  positive  pains  of  enmity,  or  ot  an  j,^i„3ofpri- 

ill  name,  do  with  respect  to  the  pains  of  privation,  oi)posed  vation,  op- 
•  ir  '  posed  to  the 

to  the  pleasures  of  amity,  and   those  of  a  good  name.     Ir  pleasures 

what  is  apprehended  at  the  hands  of  God  is   barely  the  not  ".[P'^^J,^;!""" 

receiving  i>leiLSure,    the  pain   is   of  the   privative  class  :    if,  another. 

moreover,  actual  pain  be  apprehended,  it  is  of  the  class  of 

positive  pains. 

F  1 


68  PLEASURES    AiVD    PAINS. 


Chap.  V. 


sympathy,   or  the  pains  of  the  benevolent  or 
social  affections. 


XXVII. 

8.  Pains  ot  8.  The  pains  of  malevolence  are  the  pains 
lenccr'  resulting  from  the  view  of  any  pleasures  sup- 
posed to  be  enjoyed  by  any  beings  who  happen 
to  be  the  objects  of  a  man's  displeasure.  These 
may  also  be  styled  the  pains  of  ill-will,  of  anti- 
pathy, or  the  pains  of  the  malevolent  or  dis- 
social affections. 

XXVIII. 

0.  Pains  of      9.  The  paius  of  the  memory  niav  be  arrounded 

the  memo-  *  ./  J  o 

ry.  on  every  one  of  the  above  kinds,  as  well  of 

pains  of  privation  as  of  positive  pains.  These 
correspond  exactly  to  the  pleasures  of  the  me- 
mory. 

XXIX, 

the  imagi*.       10.  The  paius  of  the  imagination  may  also  be 


nation. 


grounded  on  any  one  of  the  above  kinds,  as 
well  of  pains  of  privation  as  of  positive  pains  : 
in  other  respects  they  correspond  exactly  to 
the  pleasures  of  the  imagination. 

XXX. 

II. Pains  of      H.  The  paius  of  expectation  may  be  grounded 
tion!*^'^      on  each  one  of  the  above  kinds,  as  well  of  pains 
of  privation  as  of  positive  pains.     These  may 
be  also  termed  pains  of  apprehension.* 

*Iii  contradistinction  to  these,  all  other  pains  may  be 
termed  pains  of  sufferance. 


PLEASURES    AND    PAINS.  69 

XXXI.  SH^ 

12.  The  pains  of  association  correspond  ex-  12.  Pains  of 

^  _  assucia- 

actly  to  the  pleasures  of  association.  lion. 

XXXII. 

Of  the  above  list  there  are  certain  pleasures  Pleasures 

■*•  niul  pains 

and  pains  which  suppose  the  existence  of  some  are  either 
pleasure  or  pain  of  some  other  person,  to  which  gardin^  or 

^  *  _  ^  _  _  extra-re- 

the  pleasure  or  pain  of  the  person  in  question  gardiug. 
has  regard  :  such  pleasures  and  pains  may  be 
termed  eMra-regarding.  Others  do  not  sup- 
pose any  such  thing  :  these  may  be  termed 
self -regarding  *  The  only  pleasures  and  pains 
of  the  extra-regarding  class  are  those  of  bene- 
volence, and  those  of  malevolence :  all  the  rest 
are  self-regarding.| 

XXXIII. 

Of  all  these  several  sorts  of  pleasures  and  in  what 

*  ways  the 

pains,   there  is   scarce  any  one  which  is  not  lawiscon- 

*  *'  cerned 

liable,  on  more  accounts  than  one,  to  come  under  "-'fi  the 

above 

the  consideration  of  the  law.     Is  an  offence  pains  and 

pleasures . 

committed  ?  it  is  the  tendency  which  it  has  to 
destroy,  in  such  or  such  persons,  some  of  these 
pleasures,  or  to  produce  some  of  these  pains, 
that  constitutes  the  mischief  of  it,  and  the  ground 

»  See  chap.  x.  [Motives.]  Pleasures 

t  By  this  means  the  pleasures  and  pains  of  amity  may  be  and  pains 

the  more  clearly  distinguisiied   from  those  of  benevolence  :  a,„i  e„„ii. 

and  on  the  other  hand,  those  of  enmity  from   those  of  male-  'y/'stin- 

volence.     The  pleasurca  and   pains  of  amity  and  enmity  arc  from  those 

of  the  self-regarding  cast :   those  of  benevolence  and  male-  ie„,.g  a,„i 
volence  of  the  extra-reganling.                                                     malevolence. 


70 


PLEASURES    AND    PAINS. 


Chap.  V. 


for  punishing  it.  It  is  the  prospect  of  some  of 
these  pleasures,  or  of  security  from  some  of 
these  pains,  that  constitutes  the  motive  or  tempt- 
ation, it  is  the  attainment  of  them  that  consti- 
tutes the  profit  of  the  offence.  Is  the  offender 
to  be  punished  ?  It  can  be  only  by  the  pro- 
duction of  one  or  more  of  these  pains,  that  the 
punishment  can  be  inflicted.* 


Complex 
pleasures 
and  pains 
omitted, 
why. 


Specimen. 
Pleasures 
of  a  coun- 
try pro- 
spect. 


*  It  would  be  a  matter  not  only  of  curiosity,  but  of  some 
use,  to  exhibit  a  catalogue  of  the  several  complex  pleasures 
and  pains,  analyzing  them  at  the  same  time  into  the  several 
simple  ones,  of  which  they  are  respectively  composed.  But 
such  a  disquisition  would  take  up  too  much  room  to  be  ad- 
mitted here.  A  short  specimen,  however,  for  the  purpose  of 
illustration,  can  hardly  be  dispensed  with. 

The  pleasures  taken  in  at  the  eye  and  ear  are  generally 
very  complex.  The  pleasures  of  a  country  scene,  for  instance, 
consist  commonly,  amongst  others,  of  the  following  pleasures  :, 
I.  Pleasures  of  the  senses. 

1.  The  simple  pleasures  of  sight,  excited  by  the  percep- 
tion of  agreeable  colours  and  figures,  green  fields,  waving 
foliage,  glistening  water,  and  the  like. 

2.  The  simple  pleasures  of  the  ear,  excited  by  the  percep- 
tions of  the  chirping  of  birds,  the  murmuring  of  waters,  the 
rustling  of  the  wind  among  the  trees. 

3.  The  pleasures  of  the  smell,  excited  by  the  perceptions 
of  the  fragrance  of  flowers,  of  new-mown  hay,  or  other 
vegetable  substances,  in  the  first  stages  of  fermentation. 

4.  The  agreeable  inward  sensation,  produced  by  a  brisk 
circulation  of  the  blood,  and  the  ventilation  of  it  in  the  lungs 
by  a  pure  air,  such  as  that  in  the  country  frequently  is  in 
comparison  of  that  which  is  breathed  in  towns. 


PLEASURES    AND    PAINS.  71 

11.  Pleasures  of  the  imagination  produced  by  association.       Chap^. 

1.  Tlie  idea  of  the  plenty,  resulting  from  the  possession  of 
the  objects  that  are  in  view,  and  of  the  happiness  arising 
from  it. 

2.  The  idea  of  the  innocence  and  happiness  of  the  birds, 
sheep,  cattle,  dogs,  and  other  gentle  or  domestic  animals. 

3.  The  idea  of  the  constant  flow  of  health,  supposed  to  be 
enjoyed  by  all  these  creatures  :  a  notion  which  is  apt  to 
result  from  the  occasional  flow  of  health  enjoyed  by  the 
supposed  spectator. 

4.  The  idea  of  gratitude,  excited  by  the  contemplation  of 
the  all-powerful  and  beneficent  Being,  who  is  looked  up  to 
as  the  author  of  these  blessings. 

These  four  last  are  all  of  them,  in  some  measure  at  least, 
pleasures  of  sympathy. 

The  depriving  a  man  of  this  groupe  of  pleasures  is  one  of 
the  evils  apt  to  result  from  imprisonment  j  whether  produced 
by  illegal  violence,  or  in  the  way  of  punishment,  by  appoint- 
ment of  the  laws. 


[     72 


CHAP.    VI. 


OF    CIRCUMSTANCES    INFLUENCING    SENfelBILIf Y. 


I. 

pie'asure'     ^"^  ^  '^    ^^^  pleasurc  are  produced  in   men's 

fom"iypro-  ^nii^^is  by  the  action  of  certain  causes.     But 

fo°theu^^'^    the    quantity  of  pleasure  and  pain  runs   not 

causes.       uniformly  in  proportion  to  the  cause;  in  other 

words,  to  the  quantity  of  force  exerted  by  such 

cause.     The  truth  of  this  observation  rests  not 

upon  any  metaphysical  nicety  in  the  import 

given  to  the  terms  cause,  qnantiti/,  and  force: 

it  will  be  equally  true  in  whatsoever  manner 

such  force  be  measured. 


Degree  or 
quantum 
of  seusibi- 
lity,  what. 


II. 

The  disposition  which  any  one  has  to  feel 
such  or  such  a  quantity  of  pleasure  or  pain, 
upon  the  application  of  a  cause  of  given  force, 
is  what  we  term  the  degree  or  quantum  of  his 
sensibility.  This  may  be  either  general,  re- 
ferring to  the  sum  of  the  causes  that  act  upon 
him  during  a  given  period :  or  particular,  re- 
ferring to  the  action  of  any  one  particular  cause, 
or  sort  of  cause. 

III. 
Bias  or  But    in    the    same    mind    such    and    such 

?e"n^ibnhy,  causcs  of  pain  or  pleasure  will  produce  more 
pain  or    pleasure  than    such    or   such    other 


CIRCUMSTANCES    INFLUENCING    SENSIBILITY.  fS 

causes  of  pain  or  pleasure  :  and  this  proportion  Chapj^. 
will  in  different  minds  be  different.  The  dis- 
position which  any  one  has  to  have  the  pro- 
portion in  which  he  is  affected  by  two  such 
causes,  different  from  that  in  which  another 
man  is  affected  by  the  same  two  causes,  may 
be  termed  the  quality  or  bias  of  his  sensibility. 
One  man,  for  instance,  may  be  most  affected 
by  the  pleasures  of  the  taste  ;  another  by  those 
of  the  ear.  So  also,  if  there  be  a  difference 
in  the  nature  or  proportion  of  two  pains  or 
pleasures  which  they  respectively  experience 
from  the  same  cause ;  a  case  not  so  frequent 
as  the  former.  From  the  same  injury,  for  in- 
stance, one  man  may  feel  the  same  quantity 
of  grief  and  resentment  together  as  another 
man  :  but  one  of  them  shall  feel  a  greater 
share  of  grief  than  of  resentment:  the  other, 
a  greater  share  of  resentment  than  of  grief. 

IV. 

Any  incident  which  serves  as  a  cause,  either  Exdung 

causes 

of  pleasure  or  of  pain,  may  be  termed  an  ei"-  pieasur- 

.   .  r     /^  1  able  and 

citing  C2iuse:  if  of  pleasure,  a  pleasurable  cause :  doiorifit. 
if  of  pain,  a    painful,   afflictive,    or   dolorific 
cause.* 

*  The  exciting  cause,  the  pleasure  or  inun  produced  by  it, 
and  the  intention  proJuccd  by  such  pleasure  or  pain  in  tlie 
character  of  a  motive,  are  objects  so  intimately  connected, 
that,  in  what  follows,  I  fear  I  have  not,  on  every  occasion, 
been  able  to  keep  them  sufiicicntly  distinct.     I  thought  it 


rated 


74:  OF    CIRCUMSTANCES 

CHAI\  VI.  y^ 

circiini-         Now  tlic  quantity  of  pleasure,  or  of  pain, 
flueucfng"  which  a  man  is  liable  to  experience  upon  the 

sensibility,  i-       i*  /•  -i-  •  ,1 

what.  application  oi  an  exciting  cause,  since  they 
will  not  depend  altogether  upon  that  cause, 
will  depend  in  some  measure  upon  some  other 
circumstance  or  circumstances :  these  circum- 
stances, whatsoever  they  be,  may  be  termed 
circumstances  bifluencing  sensibility.* 

VI. 

Circum-         Thcsc  circumstauccs  will  apply  differently 
fluendn^°  to  different  exciting  causes ;  insomuch  that  to 

sensibility  ,     •  •■•  ... 

enume-  ^  ccrtaiu  cxcitiug  causc,  a  certain  circumstance 
shall  not  apply  at  all,  which  shall  apply  with 
great  force  to  another  exciting  cause.  But 
without  entering  for  the  present  into  these  dis- 
tinctions, it  may  be  of  use  to  sum  up  all  the 
circumstances  which  can  be  found  to  influence 
the  effect  of  any  exciting  cause.  These,  as  on 
a  former  occasion,  it  may  be  as  well  first  to 

necessary  to  give  the  reader  this  warning ;  after  which, 
should  there  be  found  any  such  mistakes/ it  is  to  be  hoped 
they  will  not  be  productive  of  much  confusion. 

*  Thus,  in  physical  bodies,  the  momentum  of  a  bcdl  put  in 
motion  by  impulse,  will  be  influenced  by  the  circumstance  of 
gravity :  being  in  some  directions  increased,  in  others  di- 
minished by  it.  So  in  a  ship,  put  in  motion  by  the  wind,  the 
momentum  and  direction  will  be  influenced  not  only  by  the 
attraction  of  gravity,  but  by  the  motion  and  resistance  of 
the  water,  and  several  other  circumstances.  ' 


INFLUENCING    SENSIBILITY.  75 

sum  up  together  in  the  concisest  manner  possi-  ^."*^^^^: 
ble,  and  afterwards  to  allot  a  few  words  to  the  se- 
parate explanation  of  each  article.  They  seem 
to  be  as  follows:  1.  Health.  2.  Strength.  3.  Har- 
diness. 4.  Bodily  imperfection.  5.  Quantity 
and  quality  of  knowledge.  6.  Strength  of 
intellectual  powers.  7.  Firmness  of  mind. 
8.  Steadiness  of  mind.  9.  Bent  of  inclina- 
tion.  10.  Moral  sensibility.  11.  Moral  biases. 
12.  Religious  sensibility.  13.  Religious  biases. 
14.  Sympathetic  sensibility.  15.  Sympathetic 
biases.  16.  Antipathetic  sensibility.  17.  An- 
tipathetic biases.  18.  Insanity.  19.  Habitual 
occupations.      20.    Pecuniary    circumstances. 

21.  Connexions    in    the    way    of   sympathy. 

22.  Connexions    in    the    way    of   antipathy.^ 

23.  Radical  frame  of  body.  24.  Radical  frame 
of  mind.  25.  Sex.  26.  Age.  27,  Rank. 
28.  Education.  29.  Climate.  30.  Lineage. 
31.  Government.     32.  Religious  profession.* 

*  An  analytical  view  of  all  these  circumstances  will  be  £  .    ,      . 

given  at  the  conclusion  of  the  chapter :  to  which  place  it  intricacy  of 

r      •  ■  II  11  .  .  thissubject 

was  necessary  to  refer  itj  as  it  could  not  well  have  been  un- 
derstood, till  some  of  them  had  been  previously  explained. 

To  search  out  the  vast  variety  of  exciting  or  moderating 
causes,  by  which  the  degree  or  bias  of  a  man's  sensibility 
may  be  influenced,  to  define  the  boundaries  of  each,  to  ex- 
tricate them  from  the  entanglements  in  which  tliey  are  in- 
volved, to  lay  the  eflfect  of  each  article  distinctly  before  the 
reader's  eye,  is,  perhaps,  if  not  absolutely  the  most  difficult 


76  OF    CIRCUMSTANCES 

Chap.  VI.  VII. 

1.  Health.  1.  Health  is  the  absence  of  disease,  and 
consequently  of  all  those  kinds  of  pain  virhich 
are  among  the  symptoms  of  disease.  A  man 
may  be  said  to  be  in  a  state  of  health,  when  he 


task,  at  least  one  of  the  most  difficult  tasks,  within  the 
compass  of  moral  physiology.  Disquisitions  on  this  head  can 
never  be  completely  satisfactory  without  examples.  To 
provide  a  sufficient  collection  of  such  examples,  would  be  a 
work  of  great  labour  as  well  as  nicety  :  history  and  biography 
would  need  to  be  ransacked  :  a  vast  course  of  reading  would 
need  to  be  travelled  through  on  purpose.  By  such  a  process 
the  present  work  would  doubtless  have  been  rendered  more 
amusing  ;  but  in  point  of  bulk,  so  enormous,  that  this  single 
chapter  would  have  been  swelled  into  a  considerable  volume. 
Feigned  cases,  although  they  may  upon  occasion  serve  to 
render  the  general  matter  tolerably  intelligible,  can  never 
be  sufficient  to  render  it  palatable.  On  this  therefore,  as  on 
so  many  other  occasions,  I  must  confine  myself  to  dry  and 
general  instruction  :  discarding  illustration,  although  sen- 
sible that  without  it  instruction  cannot  manifest  half  its 
efficacy.  The  subject,  however,  is  so  difficult,  and  so  new, 
that  I  shall  think  I  have  not  ill  succeeded,  if,  without  pre- 
tending to  exhaust  it,  I  shall  have  been  able  to  mark  out  the 
principal  points  of  view,  and  to  put  the  matter  in  such  a 
method  as  may  facilitate  the  researches  of  happier  inquirers. 

The  great  difficulty  lies  in  the  nature  of  the  words ;  which 
are  not,  like  pain  and  pleasure,  names  of  homogeneous  real 
entities,  but  names  of  various  fictitious  entities,  for  which  no 
common  genus  is  to  be  found  :  and  which  therefore,  without 
a  vast  and  roundabout  chain  of  investigation,  can  never  be 
brought  under  any  exhaustive  plan  of  arrangement,  but  must 
be  picked  up  here  and  there  as  they  happen  to  occur. 


INFLUENCING    SENSIBILITY.  77 

is  not  conscious  of  any  uneasy  sensations,  the  Chap^. 
primary  seat  of  which  can  be  perceived  to  be 
any  where  in  his  body.*  In  point  of  general 
sensibility,  a  man  who  is  under  the  pressure  of 
any  bodily  indisposition,  or,  as  the  phrase  is, 
is  in  an  ill  state  of  health,  is  less  sensible  to  the 
influence  of  any  pleasurable  cause,  and  more 
so  to  that  of  any  afflictive  one,  than  if  he  were 
well. 

VIII. 

2.  The  circumstance  of  strength,  though  in  2.strenjrth. 
point  of  causality  closely  connected  with  that 
of  health,  is  perfectly  distinguishable  from  it. 
The  same  man  will  indeed  generally  be  stronger 
in  a  good  state  of  health  than  in  a  bad  one. 
But  one  man,  even  in  a  bad  state  of  health,  may 
be  stronger  than  another  even  in  a  good  one. 
Weakness  is  a  common  concomitant  of  disease  : 
but  in  consequence  of  his  radical  frame  of  body, 
a  man  may  be  weak  all  his  life  long,  without 
experiencing  any  disease.  Health,  as  we  have 
observed,  is  principally  a  negative  circumstance : 
strength  a  positive  one.     The  degree  of  a  man's 

*  It  may  be  thought,  that  in  a  certain  degree  of  health, 
this  negative  account  of  the  matter  hardly  conies  up  to  the 
case.  In  a  certain  degree  of  health,  there  is  often  such  a  kind 
of  feeling  diffused  over  the  whole  frame,  such  a  comfortable 
feel,  or  flow  of  spirits,  as  it  is  called,  as  may  with  propriety 
come  under  the  head  of  positive  pleasure.  I3ut  without  ex- 
periencing any  such  pleasurable  feeling,  if  a  man  experience 
no  p.'iinful  one,  he  may  be  well  enough  said  to  be  in  health. 


78  OF    CIRCUMSTANCES 

a:^1^^;J^-  strength  can  be  measured  with  tolerable  accu- 
racy.* 

IX. 

3.  Hardi-  3.  Hardincss  is  a  circumstance  which,  though 
closely  connected  with  that  of  strength,  is  dis- 
tinguishable from  it.  Hardiness  is  the  absence 
of  irritability.  Irritability  respects  either  pain, 
resulting  from  the  action  of  mechanical  causes  ; 
or  disease,  resulting  from  the  action  of  causes 
purely  physiological.    Irritability,  in  the  former 

■    •  sense,  is  the  disposition  to  undergo  a  greater 

or  less  degree  of  pain  upon  the  application  of  a 

Measure  of  -     *  -phe  most  accurate  measure  that  can  be  ffiven  of  a  man's 

slreiig'th,  ° 

the  weight  Strength,  seems  to  be  that  which  is  taken  from  the  weight  or 
lift.  ^"  ^^'^  number  of  pounds  and  ounces  he  can  lift  with  his  hands  in  a 
given  attitude.     This  indeed  relates  immediately  only  to  his 
'arms  :  but  these  are  the  organs  of  strength  which  are  most 
•  employed ;  of  which  the  strength  corresponds  with  most 
^exactness  to  the  general   state  of  the  body  with  regard  to 
strength ;  and  in  which  the  quantum  of  strength  is  easiest 
measured.     Strength  may  accordingly  be  distinguished  into 
general  and  particular. 
Weakness,       Weakness  is  a  negative  term,  and  imports  the  absence  of 
strength.     It  is,  besides,  a  relative  term,  and  accordingly  im- 
ports the  absence  of  such  a  quantity  of  strength  as  makes  the 
share,  possessed  by  the  person  in  question,  less  than  that  of 
some  person  he  is  compared  to.     Weakness,  when  it  is  at 
such  a  degree  as  to  make  it  painful  for  a  man  to  perform  the 
motions  necessary  to  the  going  through  the  ordinary  functions 
of  life,  such  as  to  get  up,  to  walk,  to  dress  one's  self,  and  so 
forth,  brings  the  circumstance  of  health  into  question,  and 
puts  a  man  into  that  sort  of  condition  in  which  he  is  said  to 
be  ill  ill  health. 


INFLUENCING    SENSIBILIT7.  79 

mechanical  cause ;  such  as  are  most  of  those  c^;^;^^^- 
applications  by  which  simple  afflictive  punish- 
ments are  inflicted,  as  whipping,  beating,  and 
the  like.  In  the  latter  sense,  it  is  the  disposi- 
tion to  contract  disease  with  greater  or  less 
facility,  upon  the  application  of  any  instrument 
acting  on  the  body  by  its  physiological  pro- 
perties ;  as  in  the  case  of  fevers,  or  of  colds,  or 
other  inflammatory  diseases,  produced  by  the 
application  of  damp  air :  or  to  experience  im- 
mediate uneasiness,  as  in  the  case  of  relaxation 
or  chilliness  produced  by  an  over  or  under  pro- 
portion of  the  matter  of  heat. 

Hardiness,  even  in  the  sense  in  which  it  is  Differeuce 

between 

opposed  to  the  action  of  mechanical  causes,  is  strength 

-  ,  ,Tii  1   and  hardi- 

distinguishable  from  strength.  Ihe  external  ness. 
indications  of  strength  are  the  abundance  and 
firmness  of  the  muscular  fibres  :  those  of  hardi- 
ness, in  this  sense,  are  the  firmness  of  the  mus- 
cular fibres,  and  the  callosity  of  the  skin. 
Strength  is  more  peculiarly  the  gift  of  nature  : 
hardiness,  of  education.  Of  two  persons  who 
have  had,  the  one  the  education  of  a  gentle- 
man, the  other,  that  of  a  common  sailor,  the 
first  may  be  the  stronger,  at  the  same  time  that 
the  other  is  the  hardier. 

X. 

4.  By  bodily  imperfection  may  be  under-  4.  Bodiiy' 
stood  that  condition  which  a  person  is  in,  who  tiou. 
either  stands  distinguished  by  any  remarkable 


so  OF    CIRCUMSTANCES 

V"^^-  ^\  deformity,  or  wants  any  of  those  parts  or 
faculties,  which  the  ordinary  run  of  persons  of 
the  same  sex  and  age  are  furnished  with  :  who, 
for  instance,  has  a  hare-lip,  is  deaf,  or  has  lost 
a  hand.  This  circumstance,  like  that  of  ill- 
health,  tends  in  general  to  diminish  more  or  less 
the  effect  of  any  pleasurable  circumstance,  and 
to  increase  that  of  any  afflictive  one.  The  ef- 
fect of  this  circumstance,  however,  admits  of 
great  variety :  inasmuch  as  there  are  a  great 
variety  of  ways  in  which  a  man  may  suffer  in 
his  personal  appearance,  and  in  his  bodily  or- 
gans and  faculties  :  all  which  differences  will 
be  taken  notice  of  in  their  proper  places.* 

XI. 

5.  Quantity      5.  So  much  for  circumstanccs  belonging  to  the 

and  quality  . 

of  know-  condition  of  the  body  :  we  come  now  to  those 
which  concern  the  condition  of  the  mind :  the 
use  of  mentioning  these  will  be  seen  hereafter. 
In  the  first  place  may  be  reckoned  the  quantity 
and  quality  of  the  knowledge  the  person  in  ques- 
tion happens  to  possess  :  that  is,  of  the  ideas 
which  he  has  actually  in  store,  ready  upon  oc- 
casion to  call  to  mind  :  meaning  such  ideas  as 
are  in  some  way  or  other  of  an  interesting 
nature :  that  is,  of  a  nature  in  some  way  or 
other  to  influence  his  happiness,  or  that  of  other 
men.     When  these  ideas  are  many,  and  of  im- 

*  See  B.  I.  Tit.  [Irrep.  corp.  Injuries.] 


INFLUENCING    SENSIBILITY.  i^l 

portance,  a  man  is  said  to  be  a  man  of  know-  ^.hap^ 
ledge  ;  when  few,  or  not  of  importance,  ignormit. 

XII. 

6.  By  strength  of  intellectual  powers  may  be  6- strength 
understood  the  degree  of  facility  which  a  man  tuaipowers. 
experiences  in  his  endeavours  to  call  to  mind 

as  well  such  ideas  as  have  been  already  aggre- 
gated to  his  stock  of  knowledge,  as  any  others, 
which,  upon  any  occasion  that  may  happen,  he 
may  conceive  a  desire  to  place  there.  It  seems 
to  be  on  some  such  occasion  as  this  that  the 
words  parts  and  talents  are  commonly  employed. 
To  this  head  may  be  referred  the  several  qua- 
lities of  readiness  of  apprehension,  accuracy  and 
tenacity  of  memory,  strength  of  attention,  clear- 
ness of  discernment,  amplitude  of  compre- 
hension, vividity  and  rapidity  of  imagination. 
Strength  of  intellectual  powers,  in  general, 
seems  to  correspond  pretty  exactly  to  general 
strength  of  body  :  as  any  of  these  qualities  in 
particular  does  to  particular  strength. 

XIII. 

7.  Firnniess  of  mind  on  the  one  hand,  and  7.  Firmness 

II-  11  °^  mind. 

irritability  on  the  other,  regard  the  proportion 
between  the  degrees  of  efficacy  with  which  a 
man  is  acted  upon  by  an  exciting  cause,  of  which 
the  value  lies  chietty  in  magnitude,  and  one 
of  which  the  value  lies  chiefly  in  propinquity.* 
A  man  may  be  said  to  be  of  a  fjrm  mind,  when 

»  See  chap.  iv.  [\'iiliie.] 
VOL.   I.  G 


83 


OF    CIRCUMSTANCES 


Chap.  VI. 


8.  Steadi- 


9.  Bent  oi 
inclina- 
tions. 


small  pleasures  or  pains,  which  are  present  or 
near,  do  not  affect  him,  in  a  greater  proportion 
to  their  value,  than  greater  pleasures  or  pains, 
v^hich  are  uncertain  or  remote  ;*  of  an  irritable 
mind,  when  the  contrary  is  the  case. 

XIV. 

8.  Steadiness  regards  the  time  during  which 
a  given  exciting  cause  of  a  given  value  conti- 
nues to  affect  a  man  in  nearly  the  same  manner 
and  degree  as  at  first,  no  assignable  external 
event  or  change  of  circumstances  intervening 
to  make  an  aleration  in  its  force. t 

XV. 

9.  By  the  bent  of  a  man's  inclinations  may 
be  understood  the  propensity  he  has  to  expect 
pleasure  or  pain  from  certain  objects,  rather 
than  from  others.     A  man's  inclinations  may  be 


When,  for  instance,  having  been  determined,  by  the 
prospect  of  some  inconvenience,  not  to  disclose  a  fact, 
although  he  should  be  put  to  the  rack,  he  perseveres  in  such 
resolution  after  the  rack  is  brought  into  his  presence,  and 
even  applied  to  him. 

f  The  facility  with  which  children  grow  tired  of  their 
play-things,  and  throw  them  away,  is  an  instance  of  un- 
steadiness :  the  perseverance  with  which  a  merchant  applies 
himself  to  his  traffic,  or  an  author  to  his  book,  may  be  taken 
for  an  instance  of  the  contrary.  It  is  difficult  to  judge  of 
the  quantity  of  pleasure  or  pain  in  these  cases,  but  from  the 
effects  which  it  produces  in  the  character  of  a  motive  :  and 
even  then  it  is  difficult  to  pronounce,  whether  the  change  of 
conduct  happens  by  the  extinction  of  the  old  pleasure  or 
pain,  or  by  the  intervention  of  a  n^w  one. 


IXFLUENCING    SENSIBILITY.  83 

said  to  have  such  or  such  a  bent,  when,  amongst  chap^. 
the  several  sorts  of  objects  which  afford  pleasure 
in  some  degree  to  all  men,  he  is  apt  to  expect 
more  pleasure  from  one  particular  sort,  than 
from  another  particular  sort,  or  more  from  any 
given  particular  sort,  than  another  man  would 
expect  from  that  sort;  or  when,  amongst  the  se- 
veral sorts  of  objects,  which  to  one  man  afford 
pleasure,  whilst  to  another  they  afford  none,  he 
is  apt  to  expect,  or  not  to  expect,  pleasure  from 
an  object  of  such  or  such  a  sort :  so  also  with  re- 
gard to  pains.  This  circumstance,  though  inti- 
mately connected  with  that  of  the  bias  of  a  man's 
sensibility,  is  not  undistinguishablefromit.  The 
quantity  of  pleasure  or  pain,  which  on  any  given 
occasion  a  man  may  experience  from  an  appli- 
cation of  any  sort,  may  be  greatly  influenced  by 
the  expectations  he  has  been  used  to  entertain 
of  pleasure  or  pain  from  that  quarter ;  but  it 
will  not  be  absolutely  determined  by  them  :  for 
pleasure  or  pain  may  come  upon  him  from  a 
quarter  from  which  he  was  not  accustomed  to 
expect  it. 

XVI. 

10.  The    circumstances   of    moral,    religiouSy  lo.  Moral 

,.  ,  .  ,.  ......  ,  sensibility. 

sympathetic,  and  antipathetic  .sensibility,  when 
closely  considered,  will  appear  to  be  included 
in  some  sort  under  that  of  bent  of  iudination. 
On  account  of  their  particular  importance  they 
may,  however,  be  worth  mentioning  apart.     A 

G  -2 


S4  OF    CIRCUMSTANCES 

c^4AP.  VI.  man's  moral  sensibility  may  be  said  to  be 
strong,  when  the  pains  and  pleasures  of  the 
moral  sanction  "*  show  greater  in  his  eyes,  in 
comparison  with  other  pleasures  and  pains 
(and  consequently  exert  a  stronger  influence) 
than  in  the  eyes  of  the  persons  he  is  compared 
with ;  in  other  words,  when  he  is  acted  on 
with  more  than  ordinary  efficacy  by  the  sense 
of  honour :  it  may  be  said  to  be  weak,  when 
the  contrary  is  the  case. 

XVII. 

biases'"'^*  11.  Moral  sensibility  seems  to  regard  the 
average  effect  or  influence  of  the  pains  and 
pleasures  of  the  moral  sanction,  upon  all  sorts 
of  occasions  to  which  it  is  applicable,  or 
happens  to  be  applied.  It  regards  the  average 
force  or  quantity  of  the  impulses  the  mind  re- 
ceives from  that  source  during  a  given  period. 
Moral  bias  regards  the  particular  acts  on  which, 
upon  so  many  particular  occasions,  the  force 
of  that  sanction  is  looked  upon  as  attaching. 
It  regards  the  quality  or  direction  of  those 
impulses.  It  admits  of  as  many  varieties, 
therefore,  as  there  are  dictates  which  the  moral 
sanction  may  be  conceived  to  issue  forth.  A 
man  may  be  said  to  have  such  or  such  a  moral 
bias,  or  to  have  a  moral  bias  in  favour  of  such 
or  such  an  action,  when  he  looks  upon  it  as 

*  See  ch.  v.  [Pleasures  and  Pains.] 


INFLUENCING    SENSIBILITY.  85 

beino-  of  the  number  of  those   of  which   the  ^^^l^^- 
performance  is  dictated  by  the  moral  sanction. 

XVITI. 

12.  What  has  been  said  with  regard  to  moral  i2.nciigi- 

^  _  ous  seusi- 

sensibility,  may  be  applied,  mutatis  mutandis,  to  biuty. 
relisfious. 


XTX. 


13.  What  has  been  said  with  regard  to  moral  oushfaill' 
biases,  may  also  be  applied,   mutatis  mutamlis, 
to  religious  biases. 


XX. 


14.  Bv  sympathetic  sensibility  is  to  be  un-  H.svmpa- 

J        J       L  ^  thefic  sen^ 

derstood  the  propensity  that  a  man  has  to  sibiiity. 
derive  pleasure  from  the  happiness,  and  pain 
from  the  unhappiness,  of  other  sensitive  beings. 
It  is  the  stronger,  the  greater  the  ratio  of  the 
pleasure  or  pain  he  feels  on  their  account  is  to 
that  of  the  pleasure  or  pain  which  (according 
to  what  appears  to  him)  they  feel  for  them- 
selves. 

XXI. 

15.  Sympathetic  bias    regards  the  descrip-  ',"^;^^-^"'''''' 
tion  of  the  parties  who  are  the  objects  of  a  '''a^*^^- 
man's  sympathy  :   and  of  the  acts  or  other  cir- 
cumstances of  or  belonging  to  those   persons, 

by  which  the  sympathy  is  excited.  These 
parties  may  be,  1.  Certain  individuals.  2.  Any 
subordinate  class  of  individuals.  .3.  The  whole 
nation.  4.  Human  kinrl  in  general.  5.  The 
whole  sensitive  creation.     According  as  these 


fi6  OF    CIRCUMSTANCES 

chap^  VI.  objects  of  sympathy  are  more  numerous,  the 
affection,  by  which  the  man  is  biased,  may  be 
said  to  be  the  more  enlarged. 

XXII. 

16, 17.  An-  16j  17.  Antipathetic  sensibility  and  antipa- 
Sibtuty,  thetic  biases  are  just  the  reverse  of  sympa- 
and  biases,  j-j^g^j^^  scusibility  and  sympathetic  biases.  By 
antipathetic  sensibility  is  to  be  understood  the 
propensity  that  a  man  has  to  derive  pain  from 
the  happiness,  and  pleasure  from  the  unhap- 
piness,  of  other  sensitive  beings. 

XXIII. 

is.iasauity  18.  The  circumstaucc  of  insanity  of  mind 
corresponds  to  that  of  bodily  imperfection.  It 
admits,  however,  of  much  less  variety,  inas- 
much as  the  soul  is  (for  aught  we  can  perceive) 
one  indivisible  thing,  not  distinguishable,  like 
the  body,  into  parts.  What  lesser  degrees  of 
imperfection  the  mind  may  be  susceptible  of, 
seem  to  be  comprisable  under  the  already- 
mentioned  heads  of  ignorance,  weakness  of 
mind,  irritability,  or  unsteadiness ;  or  under 
such  others  as  are  reducible  to  them.  Those 
which  are  here  in  view  are  those  extraordinary 
species  and  degrees  of  mental  imperfection, 
which,  wherever  they  take  place,  are  as  con- 
spicuous and  as  unquestionable  as  lameness  or 
blindness  in  the  body :  operating  partly,  it 
should  seem,  by  inducing  an  extraordinary 
degree  of  the  imperfections  above  mentioned. 


INFLUENCING    SENSIBILITY.  87 

partly   by  giving   an  extraordinary  and   pre-  ^^^^f^^- 
posterous  bent  to  the  inclinations. 

XXIV. 

19.  Under  the  head  of  a  man's  habitual  oc-  id.  Hahi- 

lual  (ifiu- 

cupations,  are  to  be  understood,  on  this  occa-  pations. 
sion,  as  well  those  which  he  pursues  for  the 
sake  of  profit,  as  those  which  he  pursues  for 
the  sake  of  present  pleasure.  The  considera- 
tion of  the  profit  itself  belongs  to  the  head  of 
a  man's  pecuniary  circumstances.  It  is  evi- 
dent, that  if  by  any  means  a  punishment,  or 
any  other  exciting  cause,  has  the  eftect  of 
putting  it  out  of  his  power  to  continue  in  the 
pursuit  of  any  such  occupation,  it  must  on  that 
account  be  so  much  the  more  distressing.  A 
man's  habitual  occupations,  though  intimately 
connected  in  point  of  causality  with  the  bent 
of  his  inclinations,  are  not  to  be  looked  upon 
as  precisely  the  same  circumstance.  An  amuse- 
ment, or  channel  of  profit,  may  be  the  object 
of  a  man's  mclinatmis,  which  has  never  been 
the  subject  of  his  habitual  occupations :  for  it 
may  be,  that  though  he  wished  to  betake  him- 
self to  it,  he  never  did,  it  not  being  in  his 
power :  a  circumstance  which  may  make  a 
good  deal  of  difference  in  the  effect  of  any 
incident  by  which  he  happens  to  be  debarred 
from  it. 

XX\'. 

20.  Under  the  head    of   nccuniarv  circum-  '^^-  ''^<'"- 

'  ••  nt^ry  cir- 

ciimsianccs. 


88  OF    CIRCUMSTANCES 

c^HAP^.    stances,  I  mean  to  bring  to  view  the  propor- 
tion which  a  man's  means  bear  to  his  wants: 
the  sum  total  of  his  means  of  every  kind,  to 
the  sum  total  of  his  wants  of  every  kind.     A 
man's  means  depend  upon  three  circumstances  : 
1.  His  property.     2,  The  profit  of  his  labour. 
3.  His  connexions  in  the  way  of  support.    His 
wants  seem  to  depend  upon  four  circumstances. 
1.  His  habits  of  expense.     2.  His  connexions 
in  the  way  of  burthen.     3.  Any  present  casual 
demand  he  may  have.     4.  The  strength  of  his 
expectation.     By  a  man's  property  is  to  be 
understood,   whatever  he  has  in   store   inde- 
pendent of  his  labour.     By  the  profit  of  his 
labour  is  to  be  understood  the  growing  profit. 
As  to   labour,   it  may  be  either  of  the  body 
principally,  or  of  the  mind  principally,  or  of 
both  indifferently  :    nor  does  it  matter  in  what 
manner,  nor  on  what  subject,  it  be  applied,  so 
it  produce  a  profit.     By  a  man's  connexions  in 
the  way  of  support,  are  to  be  understood  the 
pecuniary  assistances,  of  whatever  kind,  which 
he  is  in  a  way  of  receiving  from  any  persons 
who,   on  whatever  account,  and  in  whatever 
proportion,   he   has  reason  to  expect   should 
contribute  gratis  to  his  maintenance  :   such  as 
his  parents,  patrons,  and  relations.     It  seems 
manifest,  that  a  man  can  have  no  other  means 
than  these.    Wliat  he  uses,  he  must  have  either 
of  his  own,  or  from  other  people  :  if  from  other 


INFLUENCING    SENSIBILITY.  89 

people,  either  gratis  or  for  a  price.  As  to  chap^ 
habits  of  expense,  it  is  well  known,  that  a 
man's  desires  are  governed  in  a  great  degree 
by  his  habits.  Many  are  the  cases  in  which 
desire  (and  consequently  the  pain  of  privation 
connected  with  it  *)  would  not  even  subsist  at 
all,  but  for  previous  enjoyment.  By  a  man's 
connexions  in  the  way  of  burthen,  are  to  be 
understood  whatever  expense  he  has  reason 
to  look  upon  himself  as  bound  to  be  at  in  the 
support  of  those  who  by  law,  or  the  customs 
of  the  world,  are  warranted  in  looking  up  to 
him  for  assistance ;  such  as  children,  poor  re- 
lations, superannuated  servants,  and  any  other 
dependents  whatsoever.  As  to  present  casual 
demand,  it  is  manifest,  that  there  are  occasions 
on  which  a  given  sum  will  be  worth  infinitely 
more  to  a  man  than  the  same  sum  would  at 
another  time  :  where,  for  example,  in  a  case 
of  extremity,  a  man  stands  in  need  of  extra- 
ordinary medical  assistance :  or  wants  money 
to  carry  on  a  law-suit,  on  which  his  all  depends: 
or  has  got  a  livelihood  waiting  for  him  in  a 
distant  country,  and  wants  money  for  the 
charges  of  conveyance.  In  such  cases,  any 
piece  of  good  or  ill  fortune,  in  the  pecuniary 
way,  might  have  a  very  different  effect  from 
what  it  would  have  at  any  other  time.  With 
regard  to  strength  of  expectation ;   when  one 

*  See  ch.  v.  [Pleasures  and  Pains.] 


sympathy. 


90  OF    CIRCUMSTANCES 

^!ll^;Zi  man  expects  to  gain  or  to  keep  a  thing  which 
another  does  not,  it  is  plain  the  circumstance  of 
not  having  it  will  affect  the  former  very  diffe- 
rently from  the  latter  ;  who,  indeed,  commonly 
will  not  be  affected  by  it  at  all. 

XXVI. 

21.  Con.  21.  Under  the  head  of  a  man's  connexions 

nexious  in     , 

the  way  of  in  the  Way  of  sympathy,  I  would  bring  to  view 
the  number  and  description  of  the  persons  in 
whose  welfare  he  takes  such  a  concern,  as  that 
the  idea  of  their  happiness  should  be  productive 
of  pleasure,  and  that  of  their  unhappiness  of 
pain  to  him :  for  instance,  a  man's  wife,  his 
children,  his  parents,  his  near  relations,  and  in- 
timate friends.  This  class  of  persons,  it  is  ob- 
vious, will  for  the  most  part  include  the  two 
classes  by  which  his  pecuniary  circumstances 
are  affected :  those,  to  wit,  from  whose  means 
he  may  expect  support,  and  those  whose  wants 
operate  on  him  as  a  burthen.  But  it  is  obvious, 
that  besides  these,  it  may  very  well  include 
others,  with  whom  he  has  no  such  pecuniary 
connexion  :  and  even  with  regard  to  these,  it  is 
evident  that  the  pecuniary  dependence,  and  the 
union  of  affections,  are  circumstances  perfectly 
distinguishable.  Accordingly,  the  connexions 
here  in  question,  independently  of  any  influence 
they  may  have  on  a  man's  pecuniary  circum- 
stances, have  an  influence  on  the  effect  of  any 
exciting  causes  whatsoever.     The  tendency  of 


INFLUENCING    SENSIBILITY.  91 

them  is  to  increase  a  man's  general  sensibility ;   chap.  vi. 
to  increase,  on  the  one  hand,  the  pleasure  pro- 
duced by  all  pleasurable  causes  ;  on  the  other, 
the  pain  produced  by  all  afflictive  ones.     When 
any  pleasurable  incident  happens  to  a  man,  he 
naturally,   in  the  first  moment,  thinks  of  the 
pleasure  it  will  afford  immediately  to  himself : 
presently  afterwards,  however  (except  in  a  few 
cases,  which  is  not  worth  while  here  to  insist 
on)  he  begins  to  think  of  the  pleasure  which 
his  friends  will  feel  upon  their  coming  to  know 
of  it :  and  this  secondary  pleasure  is  commonly 
no  mean  addition  to  the  primary  one.     First 
comes  the  self- regarding  pleasure  :  then  comes 
the  idea  of  the  pleasure  of  sympathy,  which  you 
suppose  that  pleasure  of  your's  will  give  birth 
to  in  the  bosom  of  your  friend:  and  this  idea 
excites  again  in  your's  a  new  pleasure  of  sym- 
pathy, grounded  upon  his.     The  first  pleasure 
issuing  from  your  own  bosom,  as  it  were  from 
a  radiant  point,  illuminates  the  bosom  of  your 
friend  :  reverberated  from  thence,  it  is  reflected 
with    augmented  warmth    to    the    point    from 
whence  it  first  proceeded  :  and  so  it  is  with 
pains.* 


•  This  is  one  reason  why  legislators  in  general  like  better 
to  have  married  people  to  deal  with  than  single ;  and  people 
that  have  children  than  such  as  are  childless.  It  is  manifest 
that  the  stronger  and  more  numerous  a  man's  connexions  in 
the  way  of  sympathy  ;irc,  the  stronger  is  the  hold  which  the 


92  OF    CIRCUMSTANCES 

^!!1^;Z1;  Nor  does  this  effect  depend  wholly  upon  af- 
fection. Among  near  relations,  although  there 
should  be  no  kindness,  the  pleasures  and  pains 
of  the  moral  sanction  are  quickly  propagated 
by  a  peculiar  kind  of  sympathy  :  no  article, 
either  of  honour  or  disgrace,  can  well  fall  upon 
a  man,  without  extending  to  a  certain  distance 
within  the  circle  of  his  family.  What  reflects 
honour  upon  the  father,  reflects  honour  upon 
the  son  :  what  reflects  disgrace,  disgrace.  The 
cause  of  this  singular  and  seemingly  unreason- 
able circumstance  (that  is,  its  analogy  to  the 
rest  of  the  phenomena  of  the  human  mind,)  be- 
longs not  to  the  present  purpose.  It  is  suflH- 
cient  if  the  effect  be  beyond  dispute. 

XXVII. 

22.  Con-         22.  Of  a  man's  connexions  in  the  way  of  an- 
nexions in     . 

the  way  "f  tipathy,  thcrc  needs  not  any  thing  very  parti- 
cular to  be  observed.  Happily  there  is  no 
primaeval  and  constant  source  of  antipathy  in 
human  nature,  as  there  is  of  sympathy.  There 
are  no  permanent  sets  of  persons  who  are  natu- 
rally and  of  course  the  objects  of  antipathy  to 
a  man,  as  there  are  who  are  the  objects  of  the 
contrary  affection.  Sources,  however,  but  too 
many,  of  antipathy,  are  apt  to  spring  up  upon 
various  occasions  during  the  course  of  a  man's 


law  has  upon  him.     A  wife  and  children  are  so  many  pledges 
a  man  gives  to  the  world  for  liis  good  behaviour. 


INFLUENCING    SENSIBILITY.  93 

life  :  and  whenever  they  do,  this  circumstance  9''^^-^'l- 
may  have  a  very  considerable  influence  on  the 
effects  of  various  exciting  causes.  As  on  the 
one  hand  a  punishment,  far  instance,  which 
tends  to  separate  a  man  from  those  with  whom 
he  is  connected  in  the  way  of  sympathy,  so  on 
the  other  hand,  one  which  tends  to  force  him 
into  the  company  of  those  with  whom  he  is  con- 
nected in  the  way  of  antipathy,  will,  on  that 
account,  be  so  much  the  more  distressing.  It 
is  to  be  observed,  that  sympathy  itself  multi- 
plies the  sources  of  antipathy.  Sympathy  for 
your  friend  gives  birth  to  antipathy  on  your 
part  against  all  those  who  are  objects  of  anti- 
pathy, as  well  as  to  sympathy  for  those  who  are 
objects  of  sympathy  to  him.  In  the  same  man- 
ner does  antipathy  multiply  the  sources  of  sym- 
pathy ;  though  commonly  perhaps  with  rather 
a  less  degree  of  efficacy.  Antipathy  against 
your  enemy  is  apt  to  give  birth  to  sympathy  on 
your  part  towards  those  who  are  objects  of  anti- 
pathy, as  well  as  to  antij)athy  against  those  who 
are  ojects  of  sympathy,  to  him. 

XXVIII. 

23.  Thus   much  for  the    circumstances    by  2.'.  Radical 

•^    frame  of 

which  the  effect  of  any  exciting  cause  may  be  i^^Jy-. 
influenced,  when  applied  upon  any  given  oc- 
casion, at  any  given  period.     But  besides  these 
supervening  incidents,  there  are  other  circum- 
stances relative  to  a  man,  that  may  have  their  in- 


d4  OF    CIRCUMSTANCES 

^I^;^-  fluence,  and  which  are  co-eval  to  his  birth.  In 
the  first  place,  it  seems  to  be  universally  agreed, 
that  in  the  original  frame  or  texture  of  every 
man's  body,  there  is  a  something  which,  indepen- 
dently of  all  subsequently  intervening  circum- 
stances, renders  him  liable  to  be  affected  by 
causes  producing  bodily  pleasure  or  pain,  in  a 
manner  different  from  that  in  which  another 
man  would  be  affected  by  the  same  causes.  To 
the  catalogue  of  circumstances  influencing  a 
man's  sensibility,  we  may  therefore  add  his  ori- 
ginal or  radical  frame,  texture,  constitution,  or 
temperament  of  body. 

XXIX. 

24.  Radical      24.  In  the  next  place,  it  seems  to  be  pretty 

frame  of  r  '  f  J 

mind.  well  agreed,  that  there  is  something  also  in  the 
original  frame  or  texture  of  every  man's  mind, 
which,  independently  of  all  exterior  and  subse- 
quently intervening  circumstances,  and  even  of 
his  radical  frame  of  body,  makes  him  liable  to 
be  differently  affected  by  the  same  exciting 
causes,  from  what  another  man  would  be.  To 
the  catalogue  of  circumstances  influencing  a 
man's  sensibility,  we  may  therefore  further  add 
his  original  or  radical  frame,  texture,  constitu- 
tion or  temperament  of  mind.* 

Idiosyn-  *  The  characteristic  circumstances  whereby  one  man's  frame 

what.'  of  body  or  mind,  considered  at  any  given  period,  stands  dis- 

tinguished from  that  of  another,  have  been  comprised  by 
metaphysicians  and  physiologists  under  the  name  idiosyncrasy, 
from  ihoi,  peculiar,  and  a-vrnpaai^,  composition. 


INFLUENCING    SENSIBILITY.  95 

XXX.  ^H^^- 

It  seems  pretty  certain,  all  this  while,  that  a  This  dis- 

tinct  from 

man's  sensibility  to  causes  producino-  pleasure  thecircum- 

''        .  ^  P    ^  .      stance  of 

or  pain,  even  of  mind,  may  depend  in  a  consi-  frame  of 
derable  degree  upon  his  original  and  acquired 
frame  of  body.  But  we  have  no  reason  to  think 
that  it  can  depend  altogether  upon  that  frame  : 
since,  on  the  one  hand,  we  see  persons  whose 
frame  of  body  is  as  much  alike  as  can  be  con- 
ceived, differing  very  considerably  in  respect 
of  their  mental  frame  :  and,  on  the  other  hand, 
persons  whose  frame  of  mind  is  as  much  alike 
as  can  be  conceived,  differing  very  conspi- 
cuously in  regard  to  their  bodily  frame.* 

XXXI. 

It  seems  indisputable  also,  that  the  different  - — a"«? 

*  from  all 

— others. 

*  Those  who  maintain,  that  the  mind   and  the  body  are  whether 

one  substance,  may  here  object,  that  upon  that  supposition  *'"*  s**"'  ^^ 

material  or 
the  distinction  between  frame  of  mind  and  frame  of  body  is  im material 

but  nominal,  and  that  accordingly  there  is  no  such  thing  as  '.Jl^jjrence* 
a  frame  of  mind  distinct  from  the  frame  of  body.  But  grant- 
ing, for  argument-sake,  the  antecedent,  we  may  dispute  the 
consequence.  For  if  the  mind  be  but  a  part  of  the  body,  it 
is  at  any  rate  of  a  nature  very  different  froiu  the  other  parts 
of  the  body. 

A  man's  frame  of  body  cannot  in  any  part  of  it  undergo 
any  considerable  alteration  without  its  being  immediately  in- 
dicated by  pha;nomena  discernible  by  the  senses.  A  man's 
frame  of  mind  may  undergo  very  considerable  alterations,  his 
fraujc  of  body  remaining  the  same  to  all  appearance ;  that 
is,  for  any  thing  that  is  indicated  to  the  contrary  by  phacno- 
mcna  cognizable  to  the  senses  :  meaning  those  of  other  men. 


96 


OF    CIRCUMSTANCES 


^'^'^-  ^  l  sets  of  external  occurrences  that  may  befal  a 
man  in  the  course  of  his  life,  will  make  great 
differences  in  the  subsequent  texture  of  his 
mind  at  any  given  period  :  yet  still  those  dif- 
ferences are  not  solely  to  be  attributed  to  such 
occurrences.  Equally- far  from  the  truth  seems 
that  opinion  to  be  (if  any  such  be  maintained) 
which  attributes  all  to  nature,  and  that  which 
attributes  all  to  education.  The  two  circum- 
stances will  therefore  still  remain  distinct,  as 
well  from  one  another,  as  from  all  others. 

XXXIT. 

suitoffhem       Distiuct  howcvcr  as  they  are,  it  is  manifest, 
isnotsepa-  that  at  uo  Dcriod  in  the  active  part  of  a  man's 

rately  dis-  ^  '■ 

leniibie.  jjfe  can  they  either  of  them  make  their  appear- 
ance by  themselves.  All  they  do  is  to  consti- 
tute the  latent  ground-work  which  the  other 
supervening  circumstances  have  to  work  upon  : 
and  whatever  influence  those  original  principles 
may  have,  is  so  changed  and  modified,  and 
covered  over,  as  it  were,  by  those  other  circum- 
stances, as  never  to  be  separately  discernible. 
The  effects  of  the  one  influence  are  indistin- 
guishably  blended  with  those  of  the  other. 

XXXIII. 

The  emotions  of  the  body  are  received,  and 
with  reason,  as  probable  indications  of  the  tem- 
perature of  the  mind.  But  they  are  far  enough 
from  conclusive.  A  man  may  exhibit,  for  in- 
stance, the  exterior  appearances  of  grief,  with- 


Frame  of 
body  indi- 
cates, but 
not  certain 
ly,  that  of 
miud. 


INFLUENCING    SENSIBILITY.  97 

out  really  grieving  at  all,  or  at  least  in  any  thing  ^"^^-  ^^• 
near  the  proportion  in  which  he  appears  to 
grieve.  Oliver  Cromwell,  whose  conduct  in- 
dicated a  heart  more  than  ordinarily  callous, 
was  as  remarkably  profuse  in  tears.*  Many 
men  can  command  the  external  appearances  of 
sensibility  with  very  little  real  feeling.f  The 
female  sex  commonly  with  greater  facility  than 

*  Hume's  Hist. 
■f-  The  quantity  of  the  sort  of  pain,  which  is  called  grief, 
is  indeed  hardly  to  be  measured  by  any  external  indications. 
It  is  neither  to  be  measured,  for  instance,  by  the  quantity  of 
the  tears,  nor  by  the  number  of  moments  spent  in  crying. 
Indications  rather  less  equivocal  may,  perhaps,  be  afforded 
by  the  pulse.  A  man  has  not  the  motions  of  his  heart  at 
command  as  he  has  those  of  the  muscles  of  his  face.  But 
the  particular  significaney  of  these  indications  is  still  very 
uncertain.  All  they  can  express  is,  that  the  man  is  affected  ; 
they  cannot  express  in  what  manner,  nor  from  what  cause. 
To  an  affection  resulting  in  reality  from  such  or  such  a  cause, 
he  may  give  an  artihcial  colouring,  and  attribute  it  to  such 
or  such  another  cause.  To  an  affection  directed  in  reality  to 
such  or  such  a  person  as  its  object,  he  may  give  an  artificial 
bias,  and  represent  it  as  if  directed  to  such  or  such  another 
object.  Tears  of  rage  he  may  attribute  to  contrition.  The 
concern  he  feels  at  the  thoughts  of  a  punishment  thiat  awaits 
him,  he  may  impute  to  a  sympatlictic  concern  for  the  mis- 
chief produced  by  his  offence. 

A  very  tolerable  judgment,  however,  may  commonly  be 
formed  by  a  discerning  mind,  upon  laying  all  the  external 
indications  exhibited  l>y  a  man  together,  and  at  the  same 
time  comparing  them  witii  liis  actions. 

A  remarkable  instance  of  the  power  of  the  will,  over  the 
external  indications  of  sensibility,  is  to  be  found  in  Tacitus's 

VOL.  I.  H 


98 


OF    CIRCUMSTANCES 


ClIAl'.  VI. 


Secondary 
iuflueucing 
circuin- 
stauces. 


25.  Sex. 


the  male  :  hence  the  proverbial  expression  of 
a  woman's  tears.  To  have  this  kind  of  com- 
maad  over  one's  self,  was  the  characteristic  ex- 
cellence of  the  orator  of  ancient  times,  and  is 
still  that  of  the  player  in  our  own. 

xxxiv. 

The  remaining  circumstances  may,  with  re- 
ference to  those  already  mentioned,  be  termed 
secondary  influencing  circumstances.  These 
have  an  influence,  it  is  true,  on  the  quantum  or 
bias  of  a  man's  sensibility,  but  it  is  only  by 
means  of  the  other  primary  ones.  The  manner 
in  which  these  two  sets  of  circumstances  are 
concerned,  is  such  that  the  primary  ones  do  the 
business,  while  the  secondary  ones  lie  most 
open  to  observation.  The  secondary  ones, 
therefore,  are  those  which  are  most  heard  of; 
on  which  account  it  will  be  necessary  to  take 
notice  of  them  :  at  the  same  time  that  it  is  only 
by  means  of  the  primary  ones  that  their  in- 
fluence can  be  explained ;  whereas  the  influence 
of  the  primary  ones  will  be  apparent  enough, 
without  any  mention  of  the  secondary  ones. 

xxxv. 

25.  Among  such  of  the  primitive  modifica- 
tions of  the  corporeal  frame  as  may  appear  to 
influence  the  quantum  and  bias  of  sensibility, 


story  of  the  Roman  soldier,  who  raised  a  mutiny  in  the  camp, 
pretending-  to  have  lost  a  brother  by  the  lawless  cruelty  of  the 
General.     The  truth  was,  he  never  had  had  a  brother. 


INFLUENCING    SENSIBILITV.  99 

the  most  obvious  and  conspicuous  are  those  ^"*''-  ^^• 
which  constitute  the  se.v.  In  point  of  quantity, 
the  sensibility  of  the  female  sex  appears  in  ge- 
neral to  be  greater  than  that  of  the  male.  The 
health  of  the  female  is  more  delicate  than  that 
of  the  male  :  in  point  of  strength  and  hardiness 
of  body,  in  point  of  quantity  and  quality  of 
knowledge,  in  point  of  strength  of  intellectual 
powers,  and  firmness  of  mind,  she  is  commonly 
inferior :  moral,  religious,  sympathetic,  and 
antipathetic  sensibility  are  commonly  stronger 
in  her  than  in  the  male.  The  quality  of  her 
knowledge,  and  the  bent  of  her  inclinations, 
are  commonly  in  many  respects  different.  Her 
moral  biases  are  also,  in  certain  respects,  re- 
markably different :  chastity,  modesty,  and 
delicacy,  for  instance,  are  prized  more  than 
courage  in  a  woman  :  courage,  more  than  any 
of  those  qualities,  in  a  man.  The  religious 
biases  in  the  two  sexes  are  not  apt  to  be  re- 
markably different ;  except  that  the  female  is 
rather  more  inclined  than  the  male  to  super- 
stition ;  that  is,  to  observances  not  dictated  by 
the  principle  of  utility;  a  difference  that  may 
be  pretty  well  accounted  for  by  some  of  the 
before-mentioned  circumstances.  Her  sympa- 
thetic biases  are  in  many  respects  different :  for 
her  own  offspring  all  their  lives  long,  and  for 
children  in  general  while  young,  her  affection 
is  commonly  stronger  than  that  of  the  male^ 

II  i 


100  OF    CIRCUMSTANCES 

c^HAH^.  jjgj.  afFections  are  apt  to  be  less  enlarged  : 
seldom  expanding  themselves  so  much  as  to 
take  in  the  welfare  of  her  country  in  general, 
much  less  that  of  mankind,  or  the  whole  sen- 
sitive creation :  seldom  embracing  any  ex- 
tensive class  or  division,  even  of  her  own  coun- 
trymen, unless  it  be  in  virtue  of  her  sympathy 
for  some  particular  individuals  that  belong  to 
it.  In  general,  her  antipathetic,  as  well  as 
sympathetic  biases,  are  apt  to  be  less  conform- 
able to  the  principle  of  utility  than  those  of 
the  male ;  owing  chiefly  to  some  deficiency  in 
point  of  knowledge,  discernment,  and  com- 
prehension. Her  habitual  occupations  of  the 
amusing  kind  are  apt  to  be  in  many  respects 
different  from  those  of  the  male.  With  regard 
to  her  connexions  in  the  way  of  sympathy, 
there  can  be  no  difference.  In  point  of  pe- 
cuniary circumstances,  according  to  the  customs 
of  perhaps  all  countries,  she  is  in  general  less 
independent. 

XXXVI. 

26.  Age.  26.  Age  is  of  course  divided  into  divers  pe- 
riods, of  which  the  number  and  limits  are  by 
no  means  uniformly  ascertained.  One  might 
distinguish  it,  for  the  present  purpose,  into, 
1.  Infancy.  2.  Adolescence.  3.  Youth.  4.  Ma- 
turity. 5.  Decline.  6.  Decrepitude.  It  were 
lost  time  to  stop  on  the  present  occasion  to 
examine  it  at  each  period,  and  to  observe  the 


INFLUENCING    SENSIBILITY.  101 

indications  it  gives,  with  respect  to  the  several  C^ll^^' 
primary  circumstances  just  reviewed.  Infancy 
and  decrepitude  are  commonly  inferior  to  the 
other  periods,  in  point  of  health,  strength,  har- 
diness, and  so  forth.  In  infancy,  on  the  part 
of  the  female,  the  imperfections  of  that  sex  are 
enhanced  :  on  the  part  of  the  male,  imperfec- 
tions take  place  mostly  similar  in  quality,  but 
greater  in  quantity,  to  those  attending  the  states 
of  adolescence,  youth,  and  maturity  in  the  fe- 
male. In  the  stage  of  decrepitude  both  sexes 
relapse  into  many  of  the  imperfections  of  in- 
fancy. The  generality  of  these  observations  may 
easily  be  corrected  upon  a  particular  review. 

XXXVII. 

27.  Station,  or  rank  in  life,  is  a  circumstance,  27.  Rank. 
that,  among  a  civilized  people,  will  commonly 
undergo  a  multiplicity  of  variations.  CiEteris 
paribus,  the  quantum  of  sensibility  appears  to 
be  greater  in  the  higher  ranks  of  men  than  in 
the  lower.  The  primary  circumstances  in  re- 
spect of  which  this  secondary  circumstance  is 
apt  to  induce  or  indicate  a  difference,  seem 
principally  to  be  as  follows:  1.  Quantity  and 
Quality  of  knowledge.  2.  Strength  of  mind. 
3.  Bent  of  inclination.  4.  Moral  sensibility. 
5.  Moral  biases.  6.  Religious  sensibility. 
7.  Religious  biases.  8.  Sympathetic  sensi- 
bility. 0.  Syni))athetic  biases.  10.  Antipa- 
thetic   sensibility.       11.    Antipathetic    biases. 


102  OF    CIRCUMSTANCES 

£!1^^-  12.  Habitual  occupations.  13.  Nature  and 
productiveness  of  a  man's  means  of  livelihood. 
14.  Connexions  importing  profit.  15.  Habit 
of  expense.  16.  Connexions  importing  bur- 
then. A  man  of  a  certain  rank  will  frequently 
have  a  number  of  dependents  besides  those 
whose  dependency  is  the  result  of  natural  re- 
lationship. As  to  health,  strength,  and  hardi- 
ness, if  rank  has  any  influence  on  these  cir- 
cumstances, it  is  but  in  a  remote  way,  chiefly 
by  the  influence  it  may  have  on  his  habitual 
occupations. 

XXXVIII. 

28.  Educa-      28.  The  influence  of  education  is  still  more 

tion. 

extensive.  Education  stands  upon  a  footing- 
somewhat  diff'erent  from  that  of  the  circum- 
stances of  age,  sex,  and  rank.  These  words, 
though  the  influence  of  the  circumstances  they 
respectively  denote  exerts  itself  principally,  if 
not  entirely,  through  the  medium  of  certain  of 
the  primary  circumstances  before  mentioned, 
present,  however,  each  of  them  a  circumstance 
which  has  a  separate  existence  of  itself.  This 
is  not  the  case  with  the  word  education  :  which 
means  nothing  any  farther  than  as  it  serves  to 
call  up  to  view  some  one  or  more  of  those 
primary  circumstances.  Education  may  be 
distinguished  into  physical  and  mental;  the 
education  of  the  body  and  that  of  the  mind  : 
mental,  again,  into  intellectual  and  moral ;   the 


INFLUENTCING    SENSIBILITY.  103 

culture  of  the  understanding,  and  the  culture  f^f'_v^- 
of  the  affections.     The  education  a  man    re- 
ceives, is  given  to  him  partly  by  others,  partly 
by  himself.     By  education  then  nothing  more 
can   be    expressed   than  the  condition  a   man 
is  in  in  respect  of  those  primary  circumstances, 
as  resulting  partly  from  the  management  and 
contrivance  of  others,  principally  of  those  who 
in  the  early  periods  of  his  life  have  had  do- 
minion over  him,  partly  from  his  own.     To  the 
physical  part  of  his  education,  belong  the  cir- 
cumstances of  health,  strength,  and  hardiness: 
sometimes,  by  accident,  that  of  bodily  imper- 
fection ;   as   where  by  intemperance  or  negli- 
gence an  irreparable  mischief  happens  to  his 
person.      To   the   intellectual   part,    those    of 
quantity  and  quality  of  knowledge,  and  in  some 
measure  perhaps  those  of  firmness  of  mind  and 
steadiness.     To   the   moral    part,   the   bent  of 
his  inclinations,  the    quantity   and    quality   of 
his  moral,  religious,  sympathetic,  and  antipa- 
thetic sensibility :    to  all  three  branches  indis- 
criminately, but  under  the  superior  control  of 
external  occurrences,  his  habitual  recreations, 
his  property,  his  means  of  livelihood,  his  con- 
nexions in  the  way  of  profit  and  of  burthen, 
and  his  habits  of  expense.    With  respect  indeed 
to  all  these  points,  the  influence  of  education  is 
modified,  in  a  manner  more  or  less  apparent, 
by    that  of  exterior   occurrences ;     and   in    a 


106  OF    CIRCUMSTANCES 

chai>.  VI.  operates  chiefly  through  the  medium  of  moral, 
religious,  sympathetic,  and  antipathetic  biases. 

XLI. 

si.Govern-      31    -pj^g  i^^^  circumstancc  but  one,  is  that 

merit. 

of  government :  the  government  a  man  lives 
under  at  the  time  in  question ;  or  rather  that 
under  which  he  has  been  accustomed  most  to 
live.  This  circumstance  operates  principally 
through  the  medium  of  education :  the  magis- 
trate operating  in  the  character  of  a  tutor  upon 
all  the  members  of  the  state,  by  the  direction 
he  gives  to  their  hopes  and  to  their  fears. 
Indeed  under  a  solicitous  and  attentive  govern- 
ment, the  ordinary  preceptor,  nay  even  the 
parent  himself,  is  but  a  deputy,  as  it  were,  to 
the  magistrate :  whose  controlling  influence, 
different  in  this  respect  from  that  of  the  ordinary 
preceptor,  dwells  with  a  man  to  his  life's  end. 
The  effects  of  the  peculiar  power  of  the  magi- 
strate are  seen  more  particularly  in  the  in- 
fluence it  exerts  over  the  quantum  and  bias  of 
men's  moral,  religious,  sympathetic,  and  anti- 
pathetic sensibilities.  Under  a  well-constituted, 
or  even  under  a  well-administered  though  ill- 
constituted  government,  men's  moral  sensibility 
is  commonly  stronger,  and  their  moral  biases 
more  conformable  to  the  dictates  of  utility : 
their  religious  sensibility  frequently  weaker, 
but  their  religious  biases  less  unconformable 
to   the  dictates   of  utility  :    their  sympathetic 


INFLUENCING    SENSIBILITY.  107 

affections  more  enlarged,  directed  to  the  magis-  ^"*^-^''; 
trate  more  than  to  small  parties  or  to  indivi- 
duals, and  more  to  the  whole  community  than 
to  either  :  their  antipathetic  sensibilities  less 
violent,  as  being  more  obsequious  to  the  influ- 
ence of  well-directed  moral  biases,  and  less  apt 
to  be  excited  by  that  of  ill-directed  religious 
ones  :  their  antipathetic  biases  more  conform- 
able to  well-directed  moral  ones,  more  apt  (in 
proportion)  to  be  grounded  on  enlarged  and 
sympathetic  than  on  narrow  and  self-regarding 
affections,  and  accordingly,  upon  the  whole, 
more  conformable  to  the  dictates  of  utility. 

XLII. 

32.  The  last  circumstance  is  that  of  religious  32.  Reiu 
profession  :  the  religious  profession  a  man  is  of :  fession. 
the  religious  fraternity  of  which  he  is  a  mem- 
ber. This  circumstance  operates  principally 
through  the  medium  of  religious  sensibility  and 
religious  biases.  It  operates,  iiowever,  as  an 
indication  more  or  less  conclusive,  with  respect 
to  several  other  circumstances.  With  respect 
to  some,  scarcely  but  through  the  medium  of 
the  two  just  mentioned  :  this  is  the  case  with 
regard  to  the  quantum  and  bias  of  a  man's 
moral,  sympathetic,  and  antipathetic  sensibi- 
lity: perhaps  in  some  cases  with  regard  to  quan- 
tity and  quality  of  knowledge,  strength  of  in- 
tellectual powers,  and  l^ent  of  inclination.  With 
respect  to  others,  it  may  operate  iumiediatcly 


108  OF    CIRCUMSTANCES 

v"^^  ^[-  of  itself :  this  seems  to  be  the  case  with  regard 
to  a  man's  habitual  occupations,  pecuniary  cir- 
cumstances, and  connexions  in  the  way  of  sym- 
pathy and  antipathy.  A  man  who  pays  very 
little  inward  regard  to  the  dictates  of  the  re- 
ligion which  he  finds  it  necessary  to  profess, 
may  find  it  difficult  to  avoid  joining  in  the  cere- 
monies of  it,  and  bearing  a  part  in  the  pecu- 
niary burthens  it  imposes.*  By  the  force  of 
habit  and  example  he  may  even  be  led  to  en- 
tertain a  partiality  for  persons  of  the  same  pro- 
fession, and  a  proportionable  antipathy  against 
those  of  a  rival  one.  In  particular,  the  anti- 
pathy against  persons  of  different  persuasions 
is  one  of  the  last  points  of  religion  which  men 
part  with.  Lastly,  it  is  obvious,  that  the  re- 
ligious profession  a  man  is  of  cannot  but  have  a 
considerable  influence  on  his  education.  But, 
considering  the  import  of  the  term  education, 
to  say  this  is  perhaps  no  more  than  saying  in 
other  words  what  has  been  said  already. 

*  The  ways  in  which  a  religion  may  lessen  a  man's  means, 
or  augment  his  wants,  are  various.  Sometimes  it  will  pre- 
vent him  from  making  a  profit  of  his  money  :  sometimes 
from  setting  his  hand  to  labour.  Sometimes  it  will  oblige 
him  to  buy  dearer  food  instead  of  cheaper  :  sometimes  to 
purchase  useless  labour :  sometimes  to  pay  men  for  not 
labouring :  sometimes  to  purchase  trinkets,  on  which  ima- 
gination alone  has  set  a  value  :  sometimes  to  purchase  ex- 
emptions from  punishment,  or  titles  to  felicity  in  the  world 
to  come. 


INFLUEiVCING    SENSIBILITY.  109 

xLiii.  ^^!!l^li 

These  circumstances,  all  or  many  of  them,  Use  of  the 
will  need  to  be  attended  to  as  often  as  upon  observa-" 

,  ^  lions. 

any  occasion  any  account  is  taken  oi  any  quan- 
tity of  pain  or  pleasure,  as  resulting  from  any 
cause.  Has  any  person  sustained  an  injury? 
they  will  need  to  be  considered  in  estimating 
the  mischief  of  the  offence.  Is  satisfaction  to 
be  made  to  him  ?  they  will  need  to  be  attended 
to  in  adjusting  the  quantum  of  that  satisfaction. 
Is  the  injurer  to  be  punished  ?  they  will  need 
to  be  attended  to  in  estimating  the  force  of  the 
impression  that  will  be  made  on  him  by  any 
given  punishment. 

XLIV. 

It  is  to  be  observed,  that  though  they  seem  How  far 
all  of  them,  on  some  account  or  other,  to  merit  a  stances'iu' 
place  in  the  catalogue,  they  are  not  all  of  equal  ca.rbe''" 
use  in  practice.     Different  articles  among  them  Iteming** 
are  applicable  to  different  exciting  causes.     Of 
those  that  may  influence  the  effect  of  the  same 
exciting  cause,  some  apply  indiscriminately  to 
whole  classes  of  persons  together ;  being  ap- 
plicable to  ail,  without  any  remarkable  diffe- 
rence in  degree  :    these   may  be  directly  and 
pretty  fully    provided    for   by  the    legislator. 
This  is  the  case,  for  instance,  with  the  primary 
circumstances  of  bodily  imperfection,  and  in- 
sanity :  with  the  secondary  circumstance  of  sex  : 
perhaps  with  that  of  age  :  at  any  rate  with  those 


no  .  OF    CIRCUMSTANCES 

^"-^^■^l  of  rank,  of  climate,  of  lineage,  and  of  religious 
profession.  Others,  however  they  may  apply 
to  whole  classes  of  persons,  yet  in  their  appli- 
cation to  different  individuals  are  susceptible 
of  perhaps  an  indefinite  variety  of  degrees. 
These  cannot  be  fully  provided  for  by  the  legis- 
lator ;  but,  as  the  existence  of  them,  in  every 
sort  of  case,  is  capable  of  being  ascertained, 
and  the  degree  in  which  they  take  place  is 
capable  of  being  measured,  provision  may  be 
made  for  them  by  the  judge,  or  other  executive 
magistrate,  to  whom  the  several  individuals  that 
happen  to  be  concerned  may  be  made  known. 
This  is  the  case,  l.With  the  circumstance  of 
health.  2.  In  some  sort  with  that  of  strength. 
3.  Scarcely  with  that  of  hardiness  :  still  less 
with  those  of  quantity  and  quality  of  know- 
ledge, strength  of  intellectual  powers,  firmness 
or  steadiness  of  mind;  except  in  as  far  as  a 
man's  condition,  in  respect  of  those  circum- 
stances, may  be  indicated  by  the  secondary 
circumstances  of  sex,  age,  or  rank  :  hardly  with 
that  of  bent  of  inclination,  except  in  as  far  as 
that  latent  circumstance  is  indicated  by  the 
more  manifest  one  of  habitual  occupations  : 
hardly  with  that  of  a  man's  moral  sensibility  or 
biases,  except  in  as  far  as  they  may  be  indicated 
by  his  sex,  age,  rank,  and  education  :  not  at  all 
with  his  religious  sensibility  and  religious  biases, 
except  in  as  far  as  they  may  be  indicated  by  the 


INFLUENCING    SENSIBILITY.  Ill 

religious  profession  he  belongs  to  :  not  at  all  chap.  vi. 
with  the  quantity  or  quality  of  his  sympathetic 
or  antipathetic  sensibilities,  except  in  as  far  as 
they  may  be  presumed  from  his  sex,  age,  rank, 
education,  lineage,  or  religious  profession.  It 
is  the  case,  however,  with  his  habitual  occupa- 
tions, with  his  pecuniary  circumstances,  and 
with  his  connexions  in  the  way  of  sympathy. 
Of  others,  again,  either  the  existence  cannot 
be  ascertained,  or  the  degree  cannot  be  mea- 
sured. These,  therefore,  cannot  be  taken  into 
account,  either  by  the  legislator  or  the  execu- 
tive magistrate.  Accordingly,  they  would  have 
no  claim  to  be  taken  notice  of,  were  it  not  for 
those  secondary  circumstances  by  which  they 
are  indicated,  and  whose  influence  could  not 
well  be  understood  without  them.  What  these 
are  has  been  already  mentioned. 

XLV. 

It  has  already  been  observed,  that  difl'erent  '^"  ^\^^^ 

J  '  exciting 

articles  in  this  list  of  circumstances  apply  to  ^^^^^^^ 

i^  I    J  there  is 

different  excitins:  causes  :  the  circumstance  of  "'"^^  "<^*^*" 

^  sion  to  ap- 

bodily  strength,  for  instance,  has  scarcely  any  p'j  *^^^'"- 
influence  of  itself  (whatever  it  may  have  in  a 
roundabout  way,  and  by  accident)  on  the  effect 
of  an  incident  which  should  increase  or  diminish 
the  quantum  of  a  man's  property.  It  remains 
to  be  considered,  what  the  exciting  causes  are 
with  which  the  legislator  has  to  do.  These 
may,  by  some  accident  or  other,  be  any  what- 


112  OF    CIRCUMSTANCES 

Chap.  VI.  goever :  but  those  with  which  he  has  princi- 
pally to  do,  are  those  of  the  painful  or  afflictive 
kind.  With  pleasurable  ones  he  has  little  to 
do,  except  now  and  then  by  accident:  the 
reasons  of  which  may  be  easily  enough  per- 
ceived, at  the  same  tinie  that  it  would  take 
up  too  much  room  to  unfold  them  here.  The 
exciting  causes  with  which  he  has  principally 
to  do,  are,  on  the  one  hand,  the  mischievous 
acts,  which  it  his  business  to  prevent ;  on  the 
other  hand,  the  punishments,  by  the  terror  of 
which  it  is  his  endeavour  to  prevent  them. 
Now  of  these  two  sets  of  exciting  causes,  the 
latter  only  is  of  his  production :  being  produced 
partly  by  his  own  special  appointment,  partly 
in  conformity  to  his  general  appointment,  by 
the  special  appointment  of  the  judge.  For  the 
legislator,  therefore,  as  well  as  for  the  judge, 
it  is  necessary  (if  they  would  know  what  it  is 
they  are  doing  when  they  are  appointing 
punishment)  to  have  an  eye  to  all  these  cir- 
cumstances. For  the  legislator,  lest,  meaning 
to  apply  a  certain  quantity  of  punishment  to 
all  persons  who  shall  put  themselves  in  a  given 
predicament,  he  should  unawares  apply  to 
some  of  those  persons  much  more  or  much 
less  than  he  himself  intended  :  for  the  judge, 
lest,  in  applying  to  a  particular  person  a  par- 
ticular measure  of  punishment,  he  should  apply 
much  more  or  much  less  than  was  intended, 


TiVFLUENCING    SENSIBILITY.  113 

perhaps  by  himself,   and   at  any  rate  by  the  chap.vi. 
legislator.    They  ought  each  of  them,  therefore, 
to  have  before  him,  on  the  one  hand,  a  list  of 
the  several  circumstances  by  which  sensibility 
may  be  influenced  ;    on  the  other  hand,  a  list 
of  the  several  species  an'd  degrees  of  punishment 
which  they  purpose  to  make  use  of:   and  then, 
by  making  a  comparison  between  the  two,  to 
form  a  detailed  estimate  of  the  influence  of  each 
of  the    circumstances  in   question,    upon   the 
efl'ect  of  each  species  and  degree  of  punishment. 
There  are  two  plans  or  orders  of  distribution, 
either  of  which  might  be  pursued  in  the  drawing 
up  this  estimate.    The  one  is  to  make  the  name 
of  the  circumstance  take  the  lead,  and  under 
it  to  represent  the  different  influences  it  exerts 
over  the  effects  of  the  several  modes  of  punish- 
ment :    the  other  is  to  make  the  name  of  the 
punishment   take    the    lead,   and    under   it    to 
represent   the   diff'erent    influences  which   are 
exerted  over  the  eff'ects   of  it   by  the  several 
circumstances  above  mentioned.     Now  of  these 
two  sorts  of  objects,  the  punishment  is  that  to 
which  the  intention  of  the  legislator  is  directed 
in  the  first  instance.     This  is  of  his  own  crea- 
tion, and  will  be  whatsoever  he  thinks  fit  to 
make  it :    tlic  influencing  circumstance  exists 
independently  of  him,  and  is  what  it  is  whether 
fie  will  or  no.     What  he  has  occasion  to  do  is 
to   establish  a   certain   species  and   degree   of 

VOL.   I.  I 


114  OF    CIRCUMSTANCES 

cw^  punishment :  and  it  is  only  with  reference  to 
that  punishment  that  he  has  occasion  to  make 
any  inquiry  concerning  any  of  the  circum- 
stances here  in  question.  The  latter  of  the 
two  plans  therefore  is  that  which  appears  by 
far  the  most  useful  and  commodious.  But 
neither  upon  the  one  nor  the  other  plan  can 
any  such  estimate  be  delivered  here.* 

XLVI. 

Analytical       Qf  thc  scvcral   circumstanccs  contained   in 

view  of  the 

circum-      this  cataloQfue,  it  may  be  of  use  to  give  some 

stances  in-  o       '  j  o 

fluencing    goft  of  aualvtic  vicw ;  in  order  that  it  may  be 

sensibility.  -^ 

the  more  easily  discovered  if  any  which  ought 
to  have  been  inserted  are  omitted;  and  that, 
with  regard  to  those  which  are  inserted,  it  may 
be  seen  how  they  differ  and  agree. 

*  This  is  far  from  being'  a  visionary  proposal,  not  reducible 
to  practice.  I  speak  from  experience,  having  actually  drawn 
up  such  an  estimate,  though  upon  the  least  commodious  of 
the  two  plans,  and  before  the  several  circumstances  in  ques- 
tion had  been  reduced  to  the  precise  number  and  order  in 
which  they  are  here  enumerated.  This  is  a  part  of  the 
matter  destined  for  another  work.  See  ch.  xiii.  [Cases 
unmeet]  par  ^.  Note.  There  are  some  of  these  circumstances 
that  bestow  particular  denominations  on  the  persons  they 
relate  to  :  thus,  from  the  circumstance  of  bodily  imperfec- 
tions, persons  are  denominated  deaf,  dumb,  blind,  and  so 
forth :  from  the  circumstance  of  insanity,  idiots,  and  maniacs  : 
from  the  circumstance  of  age,  infants  :  for  all  which  classes 
of  persons  particular  provision  is  made  in  the  Code.  See  B.  I. 
tit.  [Exem])tions.]  Persons  thus  distinguished  will  form  so 
many  articles  in  the  caialogxis  personanim,  prmlegiatarum-. 
See  Appendix,  tit.  [Composition.] 


INFLUENCING    SENSIBILITY.  115 

In  the  first  place,  they  may  be  distinguished  ^!!^^- 
into  primary  and  secondary:  those  may  be 
termed  primary,  which  operate  immediately  of 
themselves  :  those  secondary,  which  operate 
not  but  by  the  medium  of  the  former.  To  this 
latter  head  belong  the  circumstances  of  sex, 
age,  station  in  life,  education,  climate,  lineage, 
government,  and  religious  profession  :  the  rest 
are  primary.  These  again  are  either  connate 
or  adventitious:  those  which  are  connate,  are 
radical  frame  of  body  and  radical  frame  of 
mind.  Those  which  are  adventitious,  are  either 
personaly  or  exterior.  The  personal,  again,  con- 
cern either  a  man's  dispositions,  or  his  actions. 
Those  which  concern  his  dispositions,  concern 
either  his  body  or  his  7nmd.  Those  which  con- 
cern his  body  are  health,  strength,  hardiness, 
and  bodily  imperfection.  Those  which  concern 
his  mind,  again,  concern  either  his  understanding 
or  his  affections.  To  the  former  head  belong 
the  circumstances  of  quantity  and  quality  of 
knowledge,  strength  of  understanding,  and  in- 
sanity. To  the  latter  belong  the  circumstances 
of  firmness  of  mind,  steadiness,  bent  of  incli- 
nation, moral  sensibility,  moral  biases,  religious 
sensibility,  religious  biases,  sympathetic  sensi- 
bility, sympathetic  biases,  antipathetic  sensi- 
bility, and  antipathetic  biases.  Those  which 
regard  his  actions,  are  his  habitual  occupations. 
Those  which  are  exterior  to  him,  regard  either 

I  2 


116  CIRCUMSTANCES    INFLUENCING    SENSIBILITY. 

9^*^-  ^^;  the  things  or  the  pei^sons  which  he  is  concerned 
with ;  under  the  former  head  come  his  pecuniary 
circumstances  ;*  under  the  latter,  his  con- 
nexions in  the  way  of  sympathy  and  antipathy. 


Analytical         *  As  to  a  man's  pecuniary  circumstances,  the  causes  on 

^  '^"^  of  the  ^^jpj^  those  circumstances  depend,  do  not  come  all  of  them 

constitu-  ' 

ent  articles  under  the  same  class.     The  absolute  quantum  of  a  man's 

p"  *uulary     property  does  indeed  come  under  the  same  class  with  his 

circuiu-       pecuniary  circumstances  in  general :    so  does   the  profit  he 
stances.         ^  ■'  ,  ,.,/..,        i-  -..u   ^u 

makes  from  the  occupation  which  furnishes  him  with  tne 

means  of  livelihood.  But  the  occupation  itself  concerns  his 
own  person,  and  comes  under  the  same  head  as  his  habitual 
amusements  :  as  likewise  his  habits  of  expense :  his  con- 
nexions in  the  ways  of  profit  and  of  burthen,  under  the  same 
head  as  his  connexions  in  the  way  of  sympathy  :  and  the 
circumstances  of  his  present  demand  for  money,  and  strength 
of  expectation,  come  under  the  head  of  those  circumstances 
relative  to  his  person  which  regard  his  affections. 


[    nr    ] 


CHAP.    VII. 


OF    HUMAN'    ACTION'S    IN'    GENERAL. 


I. 


The  business  of  government  is  to  promote  the  Thede- 

niaiid  for 

happiness  of  the  society,  by  punishing  and  re-  punish- 

./  »/    1  ment  de- 

warding.     That  part  of  its  business  which  con-  pends  in 

part  upon 

sists  in  punishing,  is  more  particularly  the  sub-  the  ten- 
dency of 
ject  of  penal  law.     in   proportion  as    an    act  the  act. 

tends  to  disturb  that  happiness,  in  proportion 
as  the  tendency  of  it  is  pernicious,  will  be  the 
demand  it  creates  for  punishment.  What  hap- 
piness consists  of  we  have  already  seen  :  enjoy- 
ment of  pleasures,  security  from  pains. 

II. 
The  general  tendency  of  an  act  is  more  or  less  Tenden(y 

.     .  , .  ,  1       r  • .  of  an  act 

pernicious,  according  to  the  sum  total  oi  its  con-  detemuned 
sequences :  that  is,  according  to  the  difference  sequences. 
between  the  sum  of  such  as  are  good,  and  the 
sum  of  such  as  are  evil. 

HI. 

It    is    to  be    observed,    that   here,    as    well  Maiciiai 

coiiscquen- 

as  henceforward,  wherever  consequences   are  cesoniyare 

to  he  re- 
spoken  of,  such  only  are  meant  as  are  material,  yarded. 

Of  the  consequences  of  any  act,  the  multitude 

and  variety  must  needs  be  infinite  :  l)iit  such 

of  them  only  as  arc  material  are  worth  regard- 


118 


OF    HUMAN    ACTIONS    IN    GENERAL. 


Chap.  VII. 


These  de- 
pend in 
part  upon 
the  inten- 
tion. 


The  inten- 
tion  de- 
pends as 
well  upon 
the  under- 
standing as 
the  will. 


ing.  Now  among  the  consequences  of  an  act, 
be  they  what  they  may,  such  only,  by  one  who 
views  them  in  the  capacity  of  a  legislator,  can 
be  said  to  be  material,*  as  either  consist  of  pain 
or  pleasure,  or  have  an  influence  in  the  produc- 
tion of  pain  or  pleasure."}" 

IV. 

It  is  also  to  be  observed,  that  into  the  account 
of  the  consequences  of  the  act,  are  to  be  taken 
not  such  only  as  might  have  ensued,  were  in- 
tention out  of  the  question,  but  such  also  as 
depend  upon  the  connexion  there  may  be  be- 
tween these  first-mentioned  consequences  and 
the  intention.  The  connexion  there  is  between 
the  intention  and  certain  consequences  is,  as 
we  shall  see  hereafter,:):  a  means  of  producing 
other  consequences.  In  this  lies  the  difference 
between  rational  agency  and  irrational. 

V. 

Now  the  intention,  with  regard  to  the  con- 

*  Or  of  importance. 
f  In  certain  cases  the  consequences  of  an  act  may  be  mate- 
rial by  serving  as  evidences  indicating  the  existence  of  some 
other  material  fact,  which  is  even  antecedent  to  the  act  of 
wliich  they  are  the  consequences  :  but  even  here,  they  are 
material  only  because,  in  virtue  of  such  their  evidentiary  qua- 
lity, they  have  an  influence,  at  a  subsequent  period  of  time, 
in  the  production  of  pain  and  pleasure  :  for  example,  by  serv- 
ing as  grounds  for  conviction,  and  thence  for  punishment. 
See  tit.  |_Simple  Falsehoods.]  verho  [material.] 

X  See  B.  I.  tit.  [Exemptions]  and  tit.  [Extenuations.] 


OF    HUMAN    ACTIONS    IN    GENERAL.  119 

sequences  of  an  act,  will  depend  upon  two  ^"^^•^'!- 
things :  1 .  The  state  of  the  will  or  intention, 
with  respect  to  the  act  itself.  And,  2.  The  state 
of  the  understanding,  or  perceptive  faculties, 
with  regard  to  the  circumstances  which  it  is, 
or  may  appear  to  be,  accompanied  with.  Now 
with  respect  to  these  circumstances,  the  percep- 
tive faculty  is  susceptible  of  three  states :  con- 
sciousness, unconsciousness,  and  false  conscious- 
ness. Consciousness,  when  the  party  believes 
precisely  those  circumstances,  and  no  others,, 
to  subsist,  which  really  do  subsist :  unconscious- 
ness, when  he  fails  of  perceiving  certain  cir- 
cumstances to  subsist,  which,  however,  do  sub- 
sist :  false  consciousness,  when  he  believes  or 
imagines  certain  circumstances  to  subsist,  which 
in  truth  do  not  subsist. 

VI. 

In  every  transaction,  therefore,  which  is  ex-  in  an  action 

are  lo  be 

amined  with  a  view  to  punishment,  there  are  considered, 

.  -,  ,  _,,  !■  The  act. 

four  articles  to  be  considered  :  1.  The  act  itself,  2.  The  cir- 

1  •    1     •       1  n      mi  •  .  1  cumstan- 

which  is  done.     2.   Ihe  circumstances  m  which  ces.  .s.The 

1  r»     mi         •  •  /•  1  intention- 

it  IS  done.     6.  Ihe  intentionality  that  may  have  ainy.  i.The 

,     •  .      ,.p,  .  conicions- 

accompanied  it.      4.   Ihe  co?2scious)2ess,  uncon-  ness. 
Rciousness,   or  false    consciousness,    that   may 
have  accompanied  it. 

What  regards  the  act  and  the  circumstances 
will  be  the  subject  of  the  present  chapter  : 
what  regards  intention  and  consciousness,  that 
of  the  two  succeeding. 


120 


OF    HUMAN    ACTIONS    IN    GENERAL. 


Chap.  VII. 


VII. 


ft.  The  mo- 
tires.  6.The 


There  are  also  tw^o  other  articles  on  which 
disposition,  the  general  tendency  of  an  act  depends  :  and 
on  that,  as  w^ell  as  on  other  accounts,  the  de- 
mand w^hich  it  creates  for  punishment.  These 
are,  1.  The  particular  tnotive  or  motives  which 
gave  birth  to  it.  2.  The  general  disposition  which 
it  indicates.  These  articles  will  be  the  subject 
of  two  other  chapters. 

viir. 

Acts  may  be  distinguished  in  several  ways, 
for  several  purposes. 

They  may  be  distinguished,  in  the  first  place, 
into  positive  and  negative.  By  positive  are  meant 
such  as  consist  in  motion  or  exertion :  by  ne- 
gative, such  as  consist  in  keeping  at  rest ;  that 
is,  in  forbearing  to  move  or  exert  one's  self  in 
such  and  such  circumstances.  Thus,  to  strike 
is  a  positive  act :  not  to  strike  on  a  certain  oc- 
casion, a  negative  one.  Positive  acts  are  styled 
also  acts  of  commission  ;  negative,  acts  of  omis- 
sion or  forbearance.* 


Acts  posi- 
tive and 

negative. 


Acts  of 
omission 
are  still 
acts. 


*  The  distinction  between  positive  and  negative  acts  runs 
through  the  whole  system  of  offences,  and  sometimes  makes 
a  material  difference  with  regard  to  their  consequences.  To 
reconcile  us  the  better  to  the  extensive,  and,  as  it  may  ap- 
pear on  some  occasions,  the  inconsistent  signification  here 
given  to  the  word  act,  it  may  be  considered,  1.  That  in  many 
cases,  where  no  exterior  or  overt  act  is  exercised,  the  state 
which  the  mind  is  in  at  the  time  when  the  supposed  act  is 
said  to  happen,  is  as  truly  and  directly  the  result  of  the  will. 


versa. 


OF    HUMAN    ACTIONS    IN    GENERAL. 
IX. 

Such  acts,  acrain,  as  are  nesrative,  may  either  Negative 

'      o         '  O  '  J  acts  may  be 

he  absolutely  so,  or  relativeh/ :  absolutely,  when  f^Jj^lJ^^^" 
they  import  the  negation  of  all  positive  agency  '^ueiy. 
whatsoever ;  for  instance,  not  to  strike  at  all : 
relatively,  when   they  import  the  negation  of 
such  or  such  a  particular  mode  of  agency;  for 
instance,  not  to  strike  such  a  person  or  such  a 
thing,  or  in  such  a  direction. 

X. 

It  is  to  be  observed,  that  the  nature  of  the  Negative 

acts  maybe 

act,  whether  positive  or  negative,   is  not  to  be  expressed 

.  ,  .        positively ; 

determined  immediately  by  the  form  of  the  dis-  and  ind 
course  made  use  of  to  express  it.     An  act  which 
is  positive  in  its  nature  may  be  characterized 
by  a  negative  expression  :  thus,  not  to  be  at 
rest,  is  as  much  as  to  say  to  move.     So  also  an 

as  any  exterior  act,  how  plain  and  conspicuous  soever.  The 
not  revealing  a  conspiracy,  for  instance,  may  be  as  perfectly 
the  act  of  the  will,  as  the  joining  in  it.  In  the  next  place, 
that  even  though  tlie  mind  should  never  have  had  the  incident 
in  question  in  contemplation  (insomuch  that  tiie  event  of  its 
not  happening  should  not  liave  been  so  much  as  obli(iuely 
intentional)  still  the  state  the  person's  mind  was  in  at  the 
time  when,  if  he  had  so  willed,  the  incident  might  have  hap- 
pened, is  in  many  cases  productive  of  as  material  consequences; 
and  not  only  as  likely,  hut  as  fit  to  call  for  the  interposition 
of  other  agents,  as  the  opposite  one.  Thus,  when  a  tax  is 
imposed,  your  not  paying  it  is  an  act  which  at  any  rate  must 
be  punished  in  a  certain  manner,  whether  you  hup[>cned  to 
think  of  paying  it  or  not. 


123  OF    HUMAN    ACTIONS    IN    GENERAL. 

chap^  VII.  jj^g|.^  which  is  negative  in  its  nature,  may  be 
characterized  by  a  positive  expression :  thus, 
to  forbear  or  omit  to  bring  food  to  a  person  in 
certain  circumstances,  is  signified  by  the  single 
and  positive  term  to  starve. 

XI. 

Acts  exter-  I^  the  sccoud  placc,  acts  may  be  distinguished 
temd.^'"'  iiito  external  and  internal.  By  external,  are 
meant  corporal  acts  ;  acts  of  the  body :  by  in- 
ternal, mental  acts ;  acts  of  the  mind.  Thus, 
to  strike  is  an  external  or  exterior  *  act :  to  in- 
tend to  strike,  an  internal  or  interior  one. 

XII. 

Acts  of  dig.      Acts  of  discourse  are  a  sort  of  mixture  of  the 

course, 

what.  two  :  external  acts,  w^hich  are  no  ways  mate- 
rial, nor  attended  with  any  consequences,  any 
farther  than  as  they  serve  to  express  the  exist- 
ence of  internal  ones.  To  speak  to  another  to 
strike,  to  write  to  him  to  strike,  to  make  signs 
to  him  to  strike,  are  all  so  many  acts  of  dis- 
course. 

XIII. 

External         Third,  Acts  that  are  external  may  be  distin- 

acts  may  be         .  ^  _  ^  "^  _  _ 

transitive    guishcd  iuto  transitive  and   intransitive.     Acts 

or  intransi- 

live.  may  be  called  transitive,  when  the  motion  is 

communicated  from  the  person  of  the  agent  to 
some  foreign  body :  that  is,  to  such  a  foreign 
body  on  which  the  effects  of  it  are  considered 

•  [Exterior.]  An  exterior  act  is  also  called  by  lawyers  overt. 


OF    HUMAlSr    ACTIONS    IN    GENERAL.  123 

as  being  material ;  as  where  a  man  runs  against  <^,"ap-  vii- 
you,  or  throws  water  in  your  face.  Acts  may 
be  called  intransitive,  when  the  motion  is  com- 
municated to  no  other  body,  on  which  the 
effects  of  it  are  regarded  as  material,  than  some 
part  of  the  same  person  in  whom  it  originated : 
as  where  a  man  runs,  or  washes  himself.* 

XIV. 

An  act  of  the  transitive  kind  may  be  said  to  AtransUivr 

...  •        \        r  p  -i      act,itscom- 

be  in  its  commencement,  or  in  they^r^^  stage  oi  its  mence- 
progress,  while  the  motion  is  confined  to  the  mination, 
person  of  the  agent,  and  has  not  yet  been  com-  mediate 
municated  to  any  foreign  body,  on  which  the  '"^^''^^  ^* 
effects  of  it  can  be  material.     It  may  be  said  to 
be  in  its  termination,  or  to  be  in  the  last  stage 
of  its  progress,  as  soon  as  the  motion  or  impulse 
has  been  communicated  to  some  such  foreign 
body.     It  may  be  said  to  be  in  the  middle  or 

*  The  distinction  is  well  known  to  the  latter  gramma-  Distinciioi* 

rians :  it  is  with  them  indeed   that  it  took  its  rise :   tliough  between 

^     transitive 

by  them  it  has  been  applied  rather  to  the  names  than  to  the  acts  and  in- 

t|*Q  n  Git)  VC 

things  themselves.     To  verbs,  signifying  transitive  acts,  as  recoraizeH 

here  described,  they  have  given  the  name  of  transitive  verbs  :  ^^y  gram- 
'  °  inariant. 

those  significative  of  intransitive  acts  they  have  termed  intran- 
sitive. These  last  are  still  more  frequently  called  nexiler ; 
that  is,  neither  active  nor  passive.  The  appellation  seems 
improper :  since,  instead  of  their  being  neither,  they  are  both 
in  one. 

To  the  class  of  acts  that  are  here  termed  intransitive,  be- 
long those  which  constitute  the  .3d  class  in  the  system  of 
offences.  .See  ch.  [Division.]  and  B.  I.  tit.  [Self-regarding 
Offences.] 


1^4  OF    HUMAN    ACTIONS    IN    GENERAL. 

Chap^i.  intermediate  stage  or  stages  of  its  progress, 
while  the  motion,  having  passed  from  the  person 
of  the  agent,  has  not  yet  been  communicated  to 
any  such  foreign  body.  Thus,  as  soon  as  a  man 
has  Hfted  up  his  hand  to  strike,  the  act  he  per- 
forms in  striking  you  is  in  its  commencement : 
as  soon  as  his  hand  has  reached  you,  it  is  in 
its  termination.  If  the  act  be  the  motion  of  a 
body  which  is  separated  from  the  person  of  the 
agent  before  it  reaches  the  object,  it  may  be 
said,  during  that  interval,  to  be  in  its  interme- 
diate progress,*  or  in  gradu  ^nediativo :  as  in  the 
case  where  a  man  throws  a  stone  or  fires  a 
bullet  at  you. 

XV. 

An  intran-       Au  act  of  the  zVitransitivc  kind  may  be  said 

sitive  act,  ,        .       . 

its  com-     to  be  in  its  commencement,  when  the  motion  or 

mence- 

meut,  and   impulsc  IS  as  yct  confincd  to  the  member  or 

termina-  •  i  •    i      • 

tion.  organ  in  which  it  originated ;  and  has  not  yet 

been  communicated  to  any  member  or  organ 
that  is  distinguishable  from  the  former.  It  may 
be  said  to  be  in  its  termination,  as  soon  as  it 
has  been  applied  to  any  other  part  of  the  same 
person.  Thus,  where  a  man  poisons  himself, 
while  he  is  lifting  up  the  poison  to  his  mouth, 
the  act  is  in  its  commencement :  as  soon  as  it 
has  reached  his  lips,  it  is  in  its  termination.! 

*  Or  in  its  migration,  or  in  transitu 

t  These  distinctions  will  be  referred  to  in  the  next  chapter : 
eh.  viii.  [Intentionality]  :  and  applied  to  practice  in  B,  I. 
tit.  [Extenuations.] 


OF    HUMAN    ACTIONS    IN    GENERAL.  i  ^5 

j^Yj^  Chap.  VII. 

In  the  third  place,  acts  may  be  distinguished  ^gj,*  "n" 
into  transient  and  continued.     Thus,  to  strike  is  continue.!. 
a  transient  act :  to  lean,  a  continued  one.     To 
buy,  a  transient  act :  to  keep  in  one's  posses- 
sion, a  continued  one. 

XVII. 

In  strictness  of  speech  there  is  a  difference  Difference 
between  a  continued  act  and  a  repetition  of  acts,  continued 
It  is  a  repetition  of  acts,  when  there  are  inter-  repe^utioa 
vals  filled  up  by  acts  of  different  natures :   a  "  ^'^^*' 
continued  act,  when  there  are  no  such  intervals. 
Thus,  to  lean,  is  one  continued  act:  to  keep 
striking,  a  repetition  of  acts. 

XVIII. 

There  is  a  difference,  again,  between  a  repe-  Difference 
tition  of  acts,  and  a  habit  or  practice.     The  term  rep^utioir 
repetition  of  acts  may  be  employed,  let  the  acts  ^  habu.'^"' 
in  question  be  separated  by  ever  such  short  in- 
tervals, and  let  the  sum  total  of  them  occupy 
ever  so  short  a  space  of  time.     The  term  habit 
is  not  employed  but  when  the  acts  in  question 
are  supposed  to  be  separated  by  long-continued 
intervals,  and  the  sum  total  of  them  to  occupy 
a  considerable  space  of  time.     It  is  not  (for  in- 
stance) the  drinking  ever  so  many  times,  nor  ever 
so  much  at  a  time,  in  the  course  of  the  same 
sitting,  that  will  constitute  a  habit  of  drunken- 
ness :   it  is  necessary  that  such  sittings  them- 
selves be  frequently  repeated.     Every  habit  is 


1*26'  OF    HUMAN    ACTIONS    IN    GENERAL. 

lhap^vii.  ^  repetition  of  acts  ;  or,  to  speak  more  strictly, 
when  a  man  has  frequently  repeated  such  and 
such  acts  after  considerable  intervals,  he  is  said 
to  have  persevered  in  or  contracted  a  habit : 
but  every  repetition  of  acts  is  not  a  habit.* 

XIX. 

Acts  are  in-      Fourth,  acts  may  be  distinguished  into  indi- 

divisible,or 

divisible,     visihk  and  divisible.    Indivisible  acts  are  merely 

and  divi-       .  .  ... 

sibie,  as      imaginary :  they  may  be  easily  conceived,  but 

well  with  •/»/  «/ 

regard  to    caii  nevcr  be  known  to  be  exemplified.  Such  as 

matter  as  i-     •    -i  i  i  •   i  i       •   i 

to  motion,  are  divisible  may  be  so,  with  regard  either  to 
matter  or  to  motion.  An  act  indivisible  with 
regard  to  matter,  is  the  motion  or  rest  of  one 
single  atom  of  matter.  An  act  indivisible,  with 
regard  to  motion,  is  the  motion  of  any  body, 
from  one  single  atom  of  space  to  the  next  to  it. 
Fifth,  acts  may  be  distinguished  into  simple 
and  complex :  simple,  such  as  the  act  of  striking, 
the  act  of  leaning,  or  the  act  of  drinking,  above 
instanced :  complex,  consisting  each  of  a  multi- 
tude of  simple  acts,  which,  though  numerous 
and  heterogeneous,  derive  a  sort  of  unity  from 
the  relation  they  bear  to  some  common  design 
or  end ;  such  as  the  act  of  giving  a  dinner, 
the  act  of  maintaining  a  child,  the  act  of  exhi- 


*  [Habit.]  A  habit,  it  should  seem,  can  hardly  in  strict- 
ness be  termed  an  aggregate  of  acts  :  acts  being  a  sort  of 
real  archetypal  entities,  and  habits  a  kind  of  fictitious  entities 
or  imaginary  beings,  supposed  to  be  constituted  by,  or  to 
result  as  it  were  out  of,  the  former. 


OF    HUMAN    ACTIONS    IN    GENERAL.  127 

biting  a  triumph,  the  act  of  bearing  arms,  the  <^hap^vik 
act  of  holding  a  court,  and  so  forth. 

XX. 

It  has  been  every  now  and  then  made  a  ques-  cauUonre- 

,  .      .       .  ,  .  specting 

tion,  what  it  is  in  such  a  case  that  constitutes  the  ambi- 
one  act :  where  one  act  has  ended,  and  another  lan^age. 
act  has  begun :  whether  what  has  happened 
has  been  one  act  or  many.*  These  questions, 
it  is  now  evident,  may  frequently  be  answered, 
with  equal  propriety,  in  opposite  ways :  and  if 
there  be  any  occasions  on  which  they  can  be 
answered  only  in  one  way,  the  answer  will  de- 
pend upon  the  nature  of  the  occasion,  and  the 
purpose  for  which  the  question  is  proposed.  A 
man  is  wounded  in  two  fingers  at  one  stroke — 
Is  it  one  wound  or  several  ?  A  man  is  beaten  at 
12  o'clock,  and  again  at  8  minutes  after  12 — Is 
it  one  beating  or  several  ?  You  beat  one  man, 
and  instantly  in  the  same  breath  you  beat  ano- 
ther— Is  this  one  beating  or  several  ?  In  any  of 
these  cases  it  may  be  one,  perhaps,  as  to  some 
purposes,  and  several  as  to  others.  These  ex- 
amples are  given,  that  men  may  be  aware  of 
the  ambiguity  of  language :  and  neither  harass 
themselves  with  unsolvable  doubts,  nor  one 
another  with  interminable  disputes. 

XXI. 

So  much  with  regard  to  acts  considered  in  circum- 

stances  arc 

to  be  coii- 
*   Distinctions  like  these  coinc  frequently  in  fjuestion  in  sulert-d. 

the  course  of  Procedure. 


ns 


OF    HUMAN    ACTIONS    IN    GENERAL. 


^!I1^;^-  themselves  :  we  come  now  to  speak  of  the  cir- 
cumstances with  which  they  may  have  been 
accompanied.  These  must  necessarily  be  taken 
into  the  account  before  any  thing  can  be  deter- 
mined relative  to  the  consequences.  What  the 
consequences  of  an  act  may  be  upon  the  whole 
can  never  otherwise  be  ascertained :  it  can 
never  be  known  whether  it  is  beneficial,  or  in- 
different, or  mischievous.  In  some  circum- 
stances even  to  kill  a  man  may  be  a  beneficial 
act :  in  others,  to  set  food  before  him  may  be  a 
pernicious  one. 

XXII. 

Now  the  circumstances  of  an  act,  are,  what  ? 
Any  objects  *  whatsoever.  Take  any  act  what- 
soever, there  is  nothing  in  the  nature  of  things 
that  excludes  any  imaginable  object  from  being 
a  circumstance  to  it.  Any  given  object  may  be 
a  circumstance  to  any  other.f 


Circum- 
stances, 
what. 


*  Or  entities.     See  B.  II.  tit.  [Evidence.]  §  [Facts.] 
Ciraim-  t  The  etymology  of  the  word  circumstance  is  perfectly 

"arcSypa-  characteristic  of  its  import :  circum  stantia,  things  standing 
tion  of  the  round  :  objects  standing  round  a  given  object.  I  forget  what 
mathematician  it  was  that  defined  God  to  be  a  circle,  of  which 
the  center  is  every  where,  but  the  circumference  no  where. 
In  like  manner  the  field  of  circumstances,  belonging  to  any  act, 
may  be  defined  a  circle,  of  which  the  circumference  is  no  where, 
but  of  which  the  act  in  question  is  the  center.  Now  then,  as 
any  act  may,  for  the  purpose  of  discourse,  be  considered  as  a 
center,  any  other  act  or  object  whatsoever  may  be  consi- 
dered as  of  the  number  of  those  that  are  standing  round  it. 


OF    HUMAN    ACTIONS    IN    GENERAL.  129 

XXIII.  Chap^. 

We  have  already  had  occasion  to  make  men-  circum- 
tion  for  a  moment  of  the  consequences  of  an  act :  material 
these  were  distinguished  into  material  and  im-  material. 
material.     In   like    manner   may   the   circum- 
stances of  it  be  distinguished.     Now  materiality 
is  a  relative  term  :  applied  to  the  consequences 
of  an  act,  it  bore  relation  to  pain  and  pleasure : 
applied  to  the  circumstances,  it  bears  relation 
to  the  consequences.     A  circumstance  may  be 
said  to  be  material,  when  it  bears  a  visible  rela- 
tion in  point  of  causality  to  the  consequences : 
immaterial,  when  it  bears  no  such  visible  relation. 

XXIV. 

The  consequences  of  an  a€t  are  events.*    A  a  circum- 

,  ,  ,  .       stance  may 

circumstance  may  be  related   to  an  event  in  be  related 

.     ^        /.  T .        •  f    c  to  an  event 

point  ot  causahty  in  any  one  ol  tour  ways :  in  point  of 
1.  In  the  way  of  causation  or  production.    2.  In  fn"four^* 
the  way  of  derivation.     3.  In  the  way  of  colla-  X^vI'Jmc- 
teral  connexion.     4.  In  the  way  of  conjunct  rlvSiiou.  *" 
influence.     It  may  be  said  to  be  related  to  the  raUon!^*' 
event  in  the  way  of  causation,  when  it  is  of  the  J^conjunct 
number  of  those  that  contribute  to  the  produc-  '"*^"^""- 
tion  of  such  event :  in  the  way  of  derivation, 
when  it  is  of  the  number  of  the  events  to  the 
production  of  whicli  that  in  question  has  been 
contributory :    in    the   way    of  collateral   con- 
nexion,  where   the  circumstance  in  question, 
and  the  event  in  question,  without  being  either 

*  bee  II.  II.  tit.  [Evidenre.]  §  [Facts.j 
VOL.  1.  K 


130  OF    HUMAN    ACTIONS    IN    GENERAL* 

Chap  VII.  ^f  them  instrumental  in  the  production  of  the 
other,  are  related,  each  of  them,  to  some  com- 
mon object,  which  has  been  concerned  in  the 
production  of  them  both :  in  the  way  of  con- 
junct  influence,  when,  whether  related  in  any 
other  way  or  not,  they  have  both  of  them  con- 
curred in  the  production  of  some  common  con- 
sequence. 

XXV. 

Example.  An  cxamplc  may  be  of  use.  In  the  year 
Assassina-  jg^s,  Villicrs,  Dukc  of  Buckingham,  favourite 
ham*!'°^'  and  minister  of  Charles  I.  of  England,  received 
a  wound  and  died .  The  man  who  gave  it  him  was 
one  Felton,  who,  exasperated  at  the  tnal-admi- 
nistration  of  which  that  minister  was  accused, 
went  down  from  London  to  Portsmouth,  where 
Buckingham  happened  then  to  be,  made  his 
way  into  his  anti-chamber,  and  finding  him 
busily  engaged  in  conversation  with  a  number 
of  people  round  him,  got  close  to  him,  drew  a 
knife  and  stabbed  him.  In  the  effort,  the  assas- 
sin's hat  fell  off",  which  was  found  soon  after, 
and,  upon  searching  him,  the  bloody  knife.  In 
the  crown  of  the  hat  were  found  scraps  of 
paper,  with  sentences  expressive  of  the  purpose 
he  was  come  upon.  Here  then,  suppose  the 
event  in  question  is  the  wound  received  by 
Buckingham :  Felton's  drawing  out  his  knife, 
his  making  his  way  into  the  chamber,  his 
going  down  to  Portsmouth,  his  conceiving  an 


OF    HUMAN    ACTIONS    IN    GENERAL.  131 

indignation  at  the  idea  of  Buckingham's  admi-  CiiAPAoi. 
nistration,  that  administration  itself,  Charles's 
appointing  such  a  minister,  and  so  on,  higher 
and  higher  without  end,  are  so  many  circum- 
stances, related  to  the  event  of  Buckingham's 
receiving  the  wound,  in  the  way  of  causation 
or  production  :  the  bloodiness  of  the  knife,  a 
circumstance  related  to  the  same  event  in  the 
way  of  derivation  :  the  finding  of  the  hat  upon 
the  ground,  the  finding  the  sentences  in  the 
hat,  and  the  writing  them,  so  many  circum- 
stances related  to  it  in  the  way  of  collateral 
connexion  :  and  the  situation  and  conversations 
of  the  people  about  Buckingham,  were  circum- 
stances related  to  the  circumstances  of  Felton's 
making  his  way  into  the  room,  going  down  to 
Portsmouth,  and  so  forth,  in  the  way  of  conjunct 
influence ;  inasmuch  as  they  contributed  in 
common  to  the  event  of  Buckingham's  receiv- 
ing* the  wound,  by  preventing  him  from  putting 
himself  upon  his  guard  upon  the  first  appear- 
ance of  the  intruder.* 


»g 


•  The  division  may  be  farther  illustrated  and  confirmed  by 
the  more  simple  and  particular  case  of  animal  generation. 
To  production  corresponds  paternity  :  to  derivation,  filiation  : 
to  collateral  connexion,  collateral  consanguinity  :  to  conjunct 
influence,  marriage  and  copulation. 

If  necessary,  it  might  be  again  illustrated  by  the  material 
image  of  a  chain,  such  as  that  which,  according  to  the  inge- 
nious fiction  of  the  ancients,  is  attached  to  the  tlwone  of  .Jupi- 
ter.    A  section  of  this  chain   should  then   be  exhibited  by 

K  2 


IS'i  OF    HUMAN    ACTIONS    IN    GENERAL. 

Chap^I.  XXVI. 

It  IS  uot  These  several  relations  do  not  all  of  them 

every  e\ent 

that  lias      attach  upon  an  event  with  equal  certainty.    In 

circum- 
stances re-  the  first  place,  it  is  plain,  indeed,  that  every 

lated  to  it  ' 

in  all  those  evcut  must  havc  some  circumstance  or  other, 

ways.  .  1    •        1  r      • 

and  in  truth,  an  indefinite  multitude  of  circum- 
stances, related  to  it  in  the  way  of  production : 
it  must  of  course  have  a  still  greater  multi- 
tude of  circumstances  related  to  it  in  the  way 
of  collateral  connexion.  But  it  does  not  ap- 
pear necessary  that  every  event  should  have 
circumstances  related  to  it  in  the  way  of  deri- 
vation :  nor  therefore  that  it  should  have  any 
related  to  it  in  the  way  of  conjunct  influence. 
But  of  the  circumstances  of  all  kinds  which 
actually  do  attach  upon  an  event,  it  is  only  a 
very  small  number  that  can  be  discovered  by 
the  utmost  exertion  of  the  human  faculties :  it 
is  a  still  smaller  number  that  ever  actually  do 
attract  our  notice :  when  occasion  happens, 
more  or  fewer  of  them  will  be  discovered  by  a 
man  in  proportion  to  the  strength,  partly  of  his 
intellectual  powers,  partly  of  his  inclination.  * 

way  of  specimen,  in  the  manner  of  the  diagram  of  a  pedigree. 
Such  a  figure  I  should  accordingly  have  exhibited,  had  it 
not  been  for  the  apprehension  that  an  exhibition  of  this  sort, 
while  it  made  the  subject  a  small  matter  clearer  to  one  man 
out  of  a  hundred,  might,  like  the  mathematical  formularies 
we  see  sometimes  employed  for  the  like  purpose,  make  it 
more  obscure  and  formidable  for  the  other  ninety-nine. 
*  The  more  remote  a  connexion  of  this  sort  iSj  of  course 


OF    HUMAN    ACTIONS    IN    GENERAL.  133 

It  appears  therefore  that  the  multitude  and  de-  ^l^^^^- 
scription  of  such  of  the  circumstances  belonging 
to  an  act,  as  may  appear  to  be  material,  will 
be  determined  by  two  considerations:  1.  By 
the  nature  of  things  themselves.  2.  By  the 
strength  or  weakness  of  the  faculties  of  those 
who  happen  to  consider  them. 

XXVII. 

Thus  much  it  seemed  necessary  to  premise  Use  of  this 

ciidptcr* 


the  more  obscure.  It  will  often  happen  that  a  connexion, 
the  idea  of  which  wouUl  at  first  sight  appear  extravagant  and 
absurd,  shall  be  rendered  highly  probable,  and  indeed  indis- 
putable, merely  by  the  suggestion  of  a  few  intermediate  cir- 
cumstances. 

At  Rome,  390  years  before  the  Christian  ajra,  a  goose  sets 
up  a  cackling  :  two  thousand  years  afterwards  a  king  of 
France  is  murdered.  To  consider  these  two  events,  and 
nothing  more,  what  can  appear  more  extravagant  than  the 
notion  that  the  former  of  them  should  have  had  any  in- 
fluence on  the  production  of  the  latter  ?  Fill  up  the  gap, 
bring  to  niind  a  few  intermediate  circumstances,  and  nothing 
can  appear  more  probable.  It  was  the  cackling  of  a  \nivce\ 
of  geese,  at  the  time  the  Gauls  had  surprised  the  Capitol,  that 
saved  the  Roman  commonwealth  :  had  it  not  been  for  the 
ascendancy  that  commonwealth  accjuircd  afterwards  over 
most  of  the  nations  of  Europe,  amongst  others  over  France, 
the  Christian  religion,  humanly  speaking,  could  not  have 
established  itself  in  the  manner  it  (hd  in  that  country,  (irant 
then,  that  sucti  a  man  as  Henry  IV.  would  have  existed,  no 
man,  however,  wouhl  have  had  those  motives,  l>y  wliich 
Ravaillac,  misled  by  a  mischievous  notion  concerning  the 
<iictates  of  that  religion,  was  prompted  to  iissussinate  him. 


134  OF    HUMAN    ACTIONS    IN    GENERAL. 

Chat^.  jj^  general  concerning  acts,  and  their  circum- 
stances, previously  to  the  consideration  of  the 
particular  sorts  of  acts  with  their  particular 
circumstances,  with  which  we  shall  have  to  do 
in  the  body  of  the  work.  An  act  of  some  sort 
or  other  is  necessarily  included  in  the  notion  of 
every  offence.  Together  with  this  act,  under 
the  notion  of  the  same  offence,  are  included 
certain  circumstances :  which  circumstances 
enter  into  the  essence  of  the  offence,  contribute 
by  their  conjunct  influence  to  the  production 
of  its  consequences,  and  in  conjunction  with 
the  act  are  brought  into  view  by  the  name  by 
which  it  stands  distinguished.  These  we  shall 
have  occasion  to  distinguish  hereafter  by  the 
name  of  crimitiative  circumstances.*  Other 
circumstances  again  entering  into  combination 
with  the  act  and  the  former  set  of  circum- 
stances, are  productive  of  still  farther  conse- 
quences. These  additional  consequences,  if 
they  are  of  the  beneficial  kind,  bestow,  accord- 
ing to  the  value  they  bear  in  that  capacity, 
upon  the  circumstances  to  which  they  owe 
their  birth,  the  appellation  of  eixulpative  f  or 
eTtenuativec\xc\misidiXiCQs:%  if  of  the  mischievous 
kind,  they  bestow  on  them  the  appellation  of 

*  See  B.  I.  tit.  [Crim.  circumstances.] 
•f  See  B.  I.  tit.  [Justifications.] 
X  See  B.  I.  tit.  [Extenuations.] 


OF    HUMAN    ACTIONS    IN    GENERAL.  135 

aggravative  circumstances.*  Of  all  these  dif-  ^"af.  vii. 
ferent  sets  of  circumstances,  the  criminative 
are  connected  with  the  consequences  of  the 
original  offence,  in  the  way  of  production ;  with 
the  act,  and  with  one  another,  in  the  way  of 
conjunct  influence :  the  consequences  of  the 
original  offence  with  them,  and  with  the  act 
respectively,  in  the  way  of  derivation :  the 
consequences  of  the  modified  offence,  with  the 
criminative,  exculpative,  and  extenuative  cir- 
cumstances respectively,  in  the  way  also  of 
derivation :  these  different  sets  of  circum- 
stances, with  the  consequences  of  the  modified 
act  or  offence,  in  the  way  of  production :  and 
with  one  another  (in  respect  of  the  consequences 
of  the  modified  act  or  offence)  in  the  way  of 
conjunct  influence.  Lastly,  whatever  circum- 
stances can  be  seen  to  be  connected  with  the 
consequences  of  the  offence,  whether  directly 
in  the  way  of  derivation,  or  obliquely  in  the 
way  of  collateral  affinity  (to  wit,  in  virtue  of  its 
being  connected,  in  the  way  of  derivation,  with 
some  of  the  circumstances  with  which  they 
stand  connected  in  the  same  manner)  bear  a 
material  relation  to  the  offence  in  tlie  way  of 
evidence,  they  may  accordingly  be  styled  evi- 
dentiary  circumstances,  and  may  become  of 
use,  by  being  held   forth  upon  occasion  as  so 

*  See  B.  I.  tit.  [Aggravations.] 


136  '  OF    HUMAN    ACTIONS    IN    GENERAL. 


Chap.  VII. 


\m 


many  proofs,  indications,  or  evidences  of  its 
having  been  committed.* f 

*  See  B.  I.  tit.  [Accessory  Offences.]  and  B.  II.  tit.  [Evi- 
dence.] 

f  It  is  evident  that  this  analysis  is  equally  applicable  to 
incidents  of  a  purely  physical  nature,  as  to  those  in  which 
moral  agency  is  concerned.  If  therefore  it  be  just  and  use- 
ful here,  it  might  be  found  not  impossible,  perhaps,  to  find 
some  use  for  it  in  natural  philosophy. 


[      137      ] 


CHAP.    VIII 


OF    INTENTIONALITY. 


I. 

So  much  with  regard  to  the  two  first  of  the  RecapUu- 

°  latioD. 

articles  upon  which  the  evil  tendency  of  an 
action  may  depend  :  viz.  the  act  itself,  and  the 
general  assemblage  of  the  circumstances  with 
which  it  may  have  been  accompanied.  We 
come  now  to  consider  the  ways  in  which  the 
particular  circumstance  of  intention  may  be  con- 
cerned in  it. 

II. 

First,  then,  the  intention  or  will  may  regard  The  imen- 

•^  ^  tiou  may 

either  of  two  objects  :  1.  The  act  itself:  or,  2.  \^^^['^' 

•'  1.  rhe  act : 

Its  consequences.     Of  these  objects,  that  which  or>  2.  The 

^  *'  ^  cousequeii- 

the  intention  regards  may  be  styled  intentional,  ces. 
If  it  regards  the  act,  then  the  act  may  be  said 
to  be  intentional  :*  if  the  consequences,  so  also 

*  On   this  occjision  the  words  voluntary  and   involuntary     J",i!^"'  ^ 
are  commonly  employed.     These,  however,  I  purposely  ab-  words 

e  p     .  ,..-,.      voluntary 

8tam  from,  on  account  of  the  extreme  ambiguity  of  their  and  invo- 
signification.  By  a  voluntary  act  is  meant  sometimes,  any  ^^tnry. 
act,  in  the  performance  of  which  the  will  has  had  any 
concern  at  all ;  in  this  sense  it  is  synonymous  to  intentional : 
sometimes  such  acts  only,  in  the  production  of  which  the 
will  has  been  determined  by  motives  not  of  a  painful 
nature  j  in  this  sense  it  is  synonymous  to  unconstrained,  or 


138  OF    INTENTIONALITY. 

CHAP.viir.  j^j^gj^  j^g^y  ^jjg  consequences.  If  it  regards  both 
the  act  and  consequences,  the  whole  action  may 
be  said  to  be  intentional.  Whichever  of  those 
articles  is  not  the  object  of  the  intention,  may 
of  course  be  said  to  be  unintentional. 

III. 

It  may  re-       The    act    mav   very    easily   be    intentional 

gard  the  .  J  J  J- 

actwithout  without  the  consequcnccs  •    and  often   is   so. 

any  of  the 

consequen.  Thus,  you  may  mtend  to  touch  a  man,  without 

ces. 

intending  to  hurt  him  :  and  yet,  as  the  conse- 
quences turn  out,  you  may  chance  to  hurt  him. 

IV. 

—or  the  The  consequences  of  an  act  may  also  be  in- 
ce^wkhout  tcntioual,  without  the  act's  being  intentional 
thricUn  throughout ;  that  is,  without  its  being  intentional 
in  every  stage  of  it :  but  this  is  not  so  frequent  a 
case  as  the  former.  You  intend  to  hurt  a  man, 
suppose,  by  running  against  him,  and  pushing 
him  down  :  and  you  run  towards  him  accord- 
ingly :  but  a  second  man  coming  in  on  a  sudden 

uncoerced :  sometimes  such  acts  only,  in  the  production  of 
which  the  will  has  been  determined  by  motives,  which, 
whether  of  the  pleasurable  or  painful  kind,  occurred  to  a  man 
himself,  without  being  suggested  by  any  body  else  ;  in  this 
sense  it  is  synonymous  to  spontaneous.  The  sense  of  the 
word  involuntary  does  not  correspond  completely  to  that  of 
the  word  voluntary.  Involuntary  is  used  in  opposition  to  in- 
tentional ;  and  to  unconstrained  :  but  not  to  spontaneous. 
It  might  be  of  use  to  confine  the  signification  of  the  words 
voluntary  and  involuntary  to  one  single  and  very  narrow 
case,  which  will  be  mentioned  in  the  next  note. 


all  its 

stasres. 


OF    INTENTTONALITY.  139 

between  you  and  the  first  man,  before  you  can  c»ap^viii. 
stop  yourself,  you  run  against  the  second  man, 
and  by  him  push  down  the  first. 

V. 

-    But  the  consequences  of  an  act  cannot  be  in — but  not 

,  ,    ,    .       -IP-  without  re- 

tentional, without  the  acts  being  itseli  inten-  gardingtbe 

tional  in  at  least  the  first  stage.  If  the  act  be 
not  intentional  in  the  first  stage,  it  is  no  act  of 
your' s :  there  is  accordingly  no  intention  on 
your  part  to  produce  the  consequences  :  that  is 
to  say,  the  individual  consequences.  All  there 
can  have  been  on  your  part  is  a  distant  inten- 
tion to  produce  other  consequences,  of  the  same 
nature,  by  some  act  of  yours,  at  a  future  time : 
or  else,  without  any  intention,  a  bare  wish  to 
see  such  event  take  place.  The  second  man, 
suppose,  runs  of  his  own  accord  against  the 
first,  and  pushes  him  down.  You  had  intentions 
of  doing  a  thing  of  the  same  nature  :  viz.  To  run 
against  him,  and  push  him  down  yourself;  but 
you  had  done  nothing  in  pursuance  of  those  in- 
tentions :  the  individual  consequences  therefore 
of  the  act,  which  the  second  man  performed  in 
pushing  down  the  first,  cannot  be  said  to  have 
been  on  your  part  intentional.* 

*  To  render  the  analysis  here  given  of  the  possible  states  An  act  un- 

-   ,  .     1  .  •  p  •  •        ,■         1,1  1   i       -i    intentional 

of  the  mind  in  point  of  intentionality  absolutely  complete,  it  ;„  ^^^  f,rgt 

must  be  pushed  to  such  a  fartlicr  decree  of  minuteness,  as  to  ft"&«^»  "'.^7 

'  °  _      he    so  with 

some  eyes  will  be  apt  to  appear  trifling.     On  this  account  it  respect  to, 

teemed  advisable  to  discard  what  follows,  from  the  text  to  a  of'niatier' 

moved  :  2.  Direction  :  3.  Velocity. 


140  OF    INTENTIONALITY. 

CHAP.VllI. 


VI. 


— \r~^ 

Aconse-         Second.    A  consequence,  when  it  is  inten- 

quence,  _  '^ 

wiiei.  in-     tional,  may  either  be  directly  so,  or  only  obliquely. 
may  be  di-  It  mav  bc  Said  to  be  directly  or  lineally  inten- 

recily  so,         _  "^  j  j 

or  oblique-  tional,  whcn  the  prospect  of  producing  it  consti- 

place  where  any  one  who  thinks  proper  may  pass  by  it.  An 
act  of  the  body,  when  of  the  positive  kind,  is  a  motion  :  now 
in  motion  there  are  always  three  articles  to  be  considered  : 
1.  The  quantity  of  matter  tliat  moves  :  2.  The  direction  in 
which  it  moves  :  and,  3.  The  velocity  with  which  it  moves. 
Correspondent  to  these  three  articles,  are  so  many  modes  of 
intentionality,  with  regard  to  an  act,  considered  as  being  only 
in  its  first  stage.  To  be  completely  unintentional,  it  must 
be  unintentional  with  respect  to  every  one  of  these  three  par- 
ticulars. This  is  the  case  with  those  acts  which  alone  are 
properly  termed  involuntary :  acts,  in  the  performance  of 
which  the  will  has  no  sort  of  share  :  such  as  the  contraction 
of  the  heart  and  arteries. 

Upon  this  principle,  acts  that  are  unintentional  in  their  first 
stage,  may  be  distinguished  into  such  as  are  completely  unin- 
tentional, and  such  as  are  incompletely  unintentional :  and 
these  again  may  be  unintentional,  either  in  point  of  quantity  of 
matter  alone,  in  point  of  direction  alone,  in  point  of  velocity 
alone,  or  in  any  two  of  these  points  together. 

The  example  given  further  on  may  easily  be  extended  to  this 
part  of  the  analysis,  by  any  one  who  thinks  it  worth  the  while. 

There  seem  to  be  occasions  in  which  even  these  disquisi- 
tions, minute  as  they  may  appear,  may  not  he  without  their 
use  in  practice.  In  the  case  of  homicide,  for  example,  and 
other  corporal  injuries,  all  the  distinctions  here  specified  may 
occur,  and  in  the  course  of  trial  may,  for  some  purpose  or 
other,  require  to  be  brought  to  mind,  and  made  the  subject 
of  discourse.  What  may  contribute  to  render  the  mention  of 
them  pardonable,  is  the  use  that  might  possibly  be  made  of 


OF    INTENTIONALITY.  141 

tuted  one  of  the  links  in  the  chain  of  causes  by  ^^^^;^^^' 
which  the  person  was  determined  to  do  the  act. 
It  may  be  said  to  be  obliquely  or  collaterally 
intentional,  when,  although  the  consequence 
was  in  contemplation,  and  appeared  likely  to 
ensue  in  case  of  the  act's  being  performed,  yet 
the  prospect  of  producing  such  consequence 
did  not  constitute  a  link  in  the  aforesaid  chain. 

VII. 

Third.    An   incident,  which  is   directly  in-  wiien  di- 
rectly, ulti- 
tentional,  may  either  be  idtimatelu  so,  or  only  mateiy  so, 

"^  1    •  1       •        ormediate- 

mediatdy.  It  may  be  said  to  be  ultimately  in-  ly. 
tentional,  when  it  stands  last  of  all  exterior 
events  in  the  aforesaid  chain  of  motives ;  inso- 
much that  the  prospect  of  the  production  of 
such  incident,  could  there  be  a  certainty  of  its 
taking  place,  would  be  sufficient  to  determine 
the  will,  without  the  prospect  of  its  producing 
any  other.  It  may  be  said  to  be  mediately  in- 
tentional, and  no  more,  when  there  is  some  other 
incident,  the  prospect  of  producing  which  forms 
a  subsequent  link  in  the  same  chain  :  insomuch 
that  the  prospect  of  producing  the  former  would 
not  have  operated  as  a  motive,  but  for  the  ten- 

them  in  natural  philosophy.  In  the  hands  of  an  expert  meta- 
physician, tliese,  together  with  the  foregoing  chapter  on 
human  actions,  and  tlie  section  on  facts  in  general,  in  title 
Evidence  of  the  Book  of  l'roce»lure,  might,  perhaps,  be  made 
to  contribute  something  towards  an  exhaustive  analysis  of  the 
possible  varieties  of  mechanical  inventions. 


14^^  OF    INTENTIONALITY. 

c^ijakviii.  (Jency  which  it  seemed  to  have  towards  the 
production  of  the  latter. 

VIII. 

When  di-  Fourth.  When  an  incident  is  directly  inten- 
tentionai,it  tional,  it  may  either  be  exclusively  so,   or  inex- 

nri&v  be  c\~ 

ciusiveiy  clusiveli/.  It  may  be  said  to  be  exclusively  in- 
duslvdy^  tentional,  when  no  other  but  that  very  indivi- 
dual incident  would  have  answered  the  purpose, 
insomuch  that  no  other  incident  had  any  share 
in  determining  the  will  to  the  act  in  question. 
It  may  be  said  to  have  been  inexclusively  *  in- 
tentional, when  there  was  some  other  incident, 
the  prospect  of  which  was  acting  upon  the  will 
at  the  same  time. 

IX. 

When  in-        Fifth.     Whcu  an    incident  is   inexclusively 

exclusively,   ...  i  •   i 

it  may  be    intcntional,  it  may  be  either  conjunctively  so, 

conjunc-         ,.  .  .  .... 

lively,  dis-  flwjuiictively,  or  indiscrini'mately .     It  may  be  said 

junctively,  .       ,      .  .  i        •  i 

orindiscri-  to  bc  conjunctivcly  iiitcntional  with  regard  to 
so.  such  other  incident,  when  the  intention  is  to 

produce  both:  disjunctively,  when  the  inten- 
tion is  to  produce  either  the  one  or  the  other  in- 
differently, but  not  both :  indiscriminately,  when 
the  intention  is  indifferently  to  produce  either 
the  one  or  the  other,  or  both,  as  it  may  happen. 

X. 

When  ds-  Sixth.  When  two  incidents  are  disjunctively 
it'may'^bJ'  Inteutioual,  they  may  be  so  with  or  without 
without     preference.     They  may  be  said  to  be  so  with 

preference.    ^^,   ■— — — _ ____ — __ 

*  Or  concurrently. 


OF    INTENTIONALITY.  143 

preference,  when  the  intention  is,  that  one  of  ciiapaoii. 
them  in  particular  should  happen  rather  than  the 
other  :  without  preference,  when  the  intention 
is  equally  fulfilled,  whichever  of  them  happens.* 

XI. 

One  example  will  make  all  this  clear.  Wil-  E"™pie' 
ham  II.  king  of  England,  being  out  a  stag-hunt- 
ing, received  from  Sir  Walter  Tyrrel  a  wound, 
of  which  he  died.f  Let  us  take  this  case,  and 
diversify  it  with  a  variety  of  suppositions,  cor- 
respondent to  the  distinctions  just  laid  down. 

1.  First  then,  Tyrrel  did  not  so  much  as 
entertain  a  thought  of  the  king's  death ;  or,  if 
he  did,  looked  upon  it  as  an  event  of  which 
there  was  no  danger.  In  either  of  these  cases 
the  incident  of  his  killing  the  king  was  al- 
together unintentional. 

2.  He  saw  a  stag  running  that  way,  and  he 
saw  the  king  riding  that  way  at  the  same  time  : 
what  he  aimed  at  was  to  kill  the  stag :    he  did 

*  There  is  a  difference  between  the  case  where  an  incident  Difference 

1  .   ,       .     ,    .  ,.       between  .in 

is  altogether  unintentional,  and  that  in  which,   it  being  dis-  incident's 

iunctivelv  intentional  with  reference  to  anotlier,  the  preference  |"^'Off.ui^- 
is  in  favour  of  that  other.     In  the  first  case,  it  is  not  the  in-  and  dis- 
tention of  the  party  that  the  incident  in  question  sliould  hap-  jnicutional. 

Den  at  all  :  in  the  latter  case,  the  intention  is  rather  that  the  ^\^'^°  ^^^. 
•^  election  is 

Other  should  happen  :  but  if  that  cannot  be,  then  that  this  in  in  favour  of 
question  should  happen  rather  than  that  neither  shouhl,  and 
that  both,  at  any  rate,  should  not  happen. 

All  these  are  distinctions  to  be  attended  to  in  tiie  use  of  the 
particle  or :  a  particle  of  very  ambiguous  import,  and  of  great 
importance  in  legislation.     See  Append,  tit.  [Composition] 

t  Hume's  Hist. 


144  OF    INTENTIONALITY. 

Chapvih.  not  wish  to  kill  the  king  :  at  the  same  time  he 
saw,  that  if  he  shot,  it  was  as  likely  he  should 
kill  the  king  as  the  stag:  yet  for  all  that  he 
shot,  and  killed  the  king  accordingly.  In  this 
case  the  incident  of  his  killing  the  king  was 
intentional,  but  obliquely  so. 

3.  He  killed  the  king  on  account  of  the 
hatred  he  bore  him,  and  for  no  other  reason 
than  the  pleasure  of  destroying  him.  In  this 
case  the  incident  of  the  king's  death  was  not 
only  directly  but  ultimately  intentional. 

4.  He  killed  the  king,  intending  fully  so  to 
do;  not  for  any  hatred  he  bore  him,  but  for 
the  sake  of  plundering  him  when  dead.  In 
this  case  the  incident  of  the  king's  death  was 
directly  intentional,  but  not  ultimately  :  it  was 
mediately  intentional. 

5.  He  intended  neither  more  nor  less  than 
to  kill  the  king.  He  had  no  other  aim  nor 
wish.  In  this  case  it  was  exclusively  as  well  as 
directly  intentional :  exclusively,  to  wit,  with 
regard  to  every  other  material  incident. 

6.  Sir  Walter  shot  the  king  in  the  right  leg, 
as  he  was  plucking  a  thorn  out  of  it  with  his 
left  hand.  His  intention  was,  by  shooting  the 
arrow  into  his  leg  through  his  hand,  to  cripple 
him  in  both  those  limbs  at  the  same  time. 
In  this  case  the  incident  of  the  king's  being 
shot  in  the  leg  was  intentional :  and  that  con- 
junctively with  another  which  did  not  happen ; 
viz.  his  being  shot  in  the  hand. 


or    INTENTIOISrALITY.  145 

7.  The    intention   of  Tyrrel   was   to   shoot  t^^^^^^^i- 
the  king  either  in  the  hand  or  in  the  leg,  but 

not  in  both  ;  and  rather  in  the  hand  than  in 
the  leg.  In  this  case  the  intention  of  shooting 
in  the  hand  was  disjunctively  concurrent,  with 
regard  to  the  other  incident,  and  that  with 
preference. 

8.  His  intention  was  to  shoot  the  king  either 
in  the  leg  or  the  hand,  whichever  might  happen ; 
but  not  in  both.  In  this  case  the  intention 
was  inexclusive,  but  disjunctively  so :  yet  that, 
however,  without  preference. 

9.  His  intention  was  to  shoot  the  king  either  in 
the  leg  or  the  hand,  or  in  both,  as  it  might  happen. 
In  this  case  the  intention  was  indiscriminately 
concurrent,  with  respect  to  the  two  incidents. 

XII. 

It  is  to  be  observed,   that  an  act  may  be  intention- 

/.  .        ,  1     ality  of  the 

unmtentHjnal  m  any  stage  or  stages  oi  it,  though  act  withre- 

1-1  1  •  1  11  spect  to  its 

mtentional  in  tlie  preceding  :  and,  on  the  other  different 
hand,  it  may  be  intentional  in  any  stage  or  farmate- 
Rtages  of  it,  and  yet  unintentional  in  the  suc- 
ceeding.* But  whether  it  be  intentional  or  no 
in  any  preceding  stage,  is  immaterial,  with 
respect  to  the  consequences,  so  it  be  unin- 
tentional in  the  last.  The  only  point,  with 
respect  to  which  it  is  material,  is  the  proof. 
The  more  stages  the  act  is  unintentional  in, 
the  more  apparent  it  will  commonly  be,  that 

*  See  cli.  vii.  [Action?]  par.  14. 
VOL.    J.  L 


OF    INTEJJTIONALITY. 

it  was  unintentional  with  respect  to  the  last. 
If  a  man,  intending  to  strike  you  on  the  cheek, 
strikes  you  in  the  eye,  and  puts  it  out,  it  will 
probably  be  difficult  for  him  to  prove  that  it  was 
not  his  intention  to  strike  you  in  the  eye.  It  will 
probably  be  easier,  if  his  intention  was  really 
not  to  strike  you,  or  even  not  to  strike  at  all. 

XIII. 

Goodness        It  is  frequent  to  hear  men  speak  of  a  good 
nessofin-   intention,  of  a  bad  intention  ;  of  the  goodness 

tentiondis-  ,    ,       ,  p  ^      ■    j.       j.- 

missed.  and  badness  of  a  man  s  intention :  a  circum- 
stance on  which  great  stress  is  generally  laid. 
It  is  indeed  of  no  small  importance,  when 
properly  understood :  but  the  import  of  it  is 
to  the  last  degree  ambiguous  and  obscure. 
Strictly  speaking,  nothing  can  be  said  to  be 
good  or  bad,  but  either  in  itself;  which  is 
the  case  only  with  pain  or  pleasure :  or  on 
account  of  its  effects ;  which  is  the  case  only 
with  things  that  are  the  causes  or  preventives 
of  pain  and  pleasure.  But  in  a  figurative  and 
less  proper  way  of  speech,  a  thing  may  also  be 
styled  good  or  bad,  in  consideration  of  its 
cause.  Now  the  effects  of  an  intention  to  do 
such  or  such  an  act,  are  the  same  objects  which 
we  have  been  speaking  of  under  the  appellation 
of  its  cmuequences :  and  the  causes  of  intention 
are  called  motives.  A  man's  intention  then  on 
any  occasion  may  be  styled  good  or  bad,  with 
reference  either   to  the  consequences   of  the 


OF    TNTENTIOXALITY.  147 

act,  or  with  reference  to  his  motives.     If  it  Chap.viii. 
be  deemed  good  or  bad  in  any  sense,  it  must 
be  either  because  it  is  deemed  to  be  produc- 
tive of  good  or  of  bad  consequences,   or  be- 
cause it  is  deemed  to  originate  from   a  good 
or  from  a  bad  motive.     But  the  goodness  or 
badness  of  the  consequences  depend  upon  the 
circumstances.      Now    the   circumstances  are 
no  objects  of  the  intention.     A  man  intends 
the  act :  and  by  his  intention  produces  the  act : 
but  as  to  the  circumstances,  he  does  not  intend 
them:   he  does  not,  inasmuch  as  they  are  cir- 
cumstances of  it,  produce  them.    If  by  accident 
there  be  a  few  which  he  has  been  instrumental 
in  producing,  it  has  been  by  former  intentions, 
directed   to    former   acts,  productive  of  those 
circumstances  as  the  consequences :  at  the  time 
in   question  he  takes  them  as  he  finds  them. 
Acts,  with  their  consequences,  are  objects  of 
the  will  as  well  as  of  the  understanding :    cir- 
cumstances, as  such,  are  objects  of  the  under- 
standing only.     All  he  can  do  with  these,  as 
such,  is  to   know  or  not  to  know  them :    in 
other  words,  to  be  conscious  of  them,  or  not 
conscious.     To  the  title  of  Consciousness  be- 
longs what  is  to  be  said   of  the  goodness  or 
badness  ol'  a  man's  intention,  as  resulting  from 
the  consequences  of  the  act :    and  to  the  head 
of  Motives,  what  is  to  be  said  of  his  intention, 
as  resulting  from  the  motive. 

L  2 


t      148     ] 


CHAP.    IX. 


OF    CONSCIOUSNESS. 


I. 

ouh"'""   '^^  ^^^  ^^^^  regard  to  the  ways  in  which  the 
diapter      ^in  or  intention  may  be  concerned  in  the  pro- 
foregoing,    duction  of  any   incident :   we   come   now   to 
consider  the  part  which  the  understanding  or 
perceptive  faculty  may  have  borne,  with  re- 
lation to  such  incident. 


IT 

Acts  ad- 


^scd  and  A  certain  act  has  been  done,  and  that  in- 
consdoul'  tentionally :  that  act  was  attended  with  certain 
ness,  what,  circumstanccs  :  upon  these  circumstances  de- 
pended certain  of  its  consequences;  and 
amongst  the  rest,  all  those  which  were  of  a 
nature  purely  physical.  Now  then,  take  any 
one  of  these  circumstances,  it  is  plain,  that  a 
man,  at  the  time  of  doing  the  act  from  whence 
such  consequences  ensued,  may  have  been 
either  conscious,  with  respect  to  this  circum- 
stance, or  unconscious.  In  other  words,  he 
may  either  have  been  aware  of  the  circum- 
stance, or  not  aware  :  it  may  either  have  been 
present  to  his  mind,  or  not  present.  In  the 
first  case,  the  act  may  be  said  to  have  been 


OF    CONSCIOUSNESS.  149 

an  advised  act,   with  respect  to   that  circum-   £^^^^_^" 
stance  :   in  the  other  case,  an  unadvised  one. 

III. 
There  are  two  points,  with  rerard  to  which  Wnadvisej. 

r  '  o  lies*  may 

an  act  may  have  been  advised  or  unadvised :  regard 

''  either  ex- 

1.  The   existejice    of   the    circumstance   itself.  isteiicc,or 

malewahtj. 

2.  The  materiality  of  it.* 

IV. 

It  is  manifest,  that  with  reference  to  the  time  V'^tl'.^ 

'  cumstance 

of  the  act,  such  circumstance  may  have  been  ™^y  ^^"^ 

'  •'  beeu  pre- 

either  present,  past,  or  future.  or'fuiurf' 

v. 
An  act  which  is  unadvised,  is  either  heedless,  A"  unad- 

vised  act 

or  not  heedless.     It  is  termed  heedless,  when  '"ay  be 

needless,  or 

the  case  is  thought  to  be  such,  that  a  person  of  j'ot  heed- 
ordinary  prudence,!  if  prompted  by  an  ordinary 
share  of  benevolence,  would  have  been  likely 
ta.  have  bestowed  such  and  so  much  attention 
and  reflection  upon  the  material  circumstances, 
as  would  have  effectually  disposed  him  to  pre- 
vent the  mischievous  incident  from  taking  place: 
not  heedless,  when  the  case  is  not  thought  to 
be  such  as  above  mentioned.;]: 

VI. 

Again.  Whether  a  man  did  or  did  not  sup-  fj^'^j^'ajf 
pose  the  existence  or  materiality  of  a  given  ^)^^*.^7^ 
circumstance,  it  may  be  that  he  f//V/ suppose  the  i""^*^'* 


*  See  til.  vii.  [Actions.]  par.  3. 

t  See  ch.  vi.  [.Sensibility.]  par.  12. 

X  See  B.  1.  tit.  [Extenuations.] 


150  OF    CONSCIOUSNESS. 

chai\  IX.  existence  and  materiality  of  some  circumstance,' 
which  either  did  not  exist,  or  which,  though 
existing,  was  not  material.  In  such  case  the 
act  may  be  said  to  be  mis-advised,  with  respect 
to  such  imagined  circumstance :  and  it  may  be 
said,  that  there  has  been  an  erroneous  suppo- 
sition, or  a  mis-supposal  in  the  case. 

VII. 

The  sup-  Now  a  circumstance,  the  existence  of  which 
fmnstance  is  thus  crroucously  supposcd,  may  be  material 
bi'fn  ma^te-  cithcr,  1.  lu  thc  way  of  prevention:  or,  2.  In 
wa/ehhe/  that  of  Compensation.  It  may  be  said  to  be 
tionTrTf  material  in  the  way  of  prevention,  when  its 
compensa-  gg-^^^  ^^  tendency,  had  it  existed,  would  have 

been  to  prevent  the  obnoxious  consequences : 
in  the  way  of  compensation,  when  that  effect 
or  tendency  would  have  been  to  produce  other 
consequences,  the  beneficialness  of  which  would 
have  out- weighed  the  mischievousness  of  the 
others. 

VIII. 

itmajhave      ^^  ^^  manifest  that,  with  reference  to  the  time 
pose/pre-  ^^  ^^^^  ^^^'  ^Vic\i  imaginary  circumstance  may 
orfumS!'  ^^  either  case  have  been  supposed  either  to  be 
present,  past,  ov  future. 

IX. 

Exami)ie,  To  rctum  to  the  example  exhibited  in  the 
Z^T}   preceding  chapter. 

last  chap-        jQ    Tyrrel  intended  to  shoot  in  the  direction 
in  which  he  shot ;  but  he  did  not  know  that 


OF    CONSCIOUSXESS.  151 

the  king  was  riding  so  near  that  way.     In  this  S"*'^  *^: 
case  the  act  he  performed  in  shooting,  the  act 
of  shooting,  was  unadvised,  with  respect  to  the 
existence  of  the  circumstance  of  the  king's  being 
so  near  riding  that  way. 

11.  He  knew  that  the  king  was  riding  that 
way :  but  at  the  distance  at  which  the  king 
was,  he  knew  not  of  the  probability  there 
was  that  the  arrow  would  reach  him.  In  this 
case  the  act  was  unadvised,  with  respect  to  the 
materiality  of  the  circumstance. 

12.  Somebody  had  dipped  the  arrow  in  poi- 
son, without  Tyrrel's  knowing  of  it.  In  this 
case  the  act  was  unadvised,  with  respect  to  the 
existence  of  b.  past  circumstance. 

13.  At  the  very  instant  that  Tyrrel  drew  the 
bow,  the  king,  being  screened  from  his  view  by 
the  foliage  of  some  bushes,  was  riding  furiously, 
in  such  manner  as  to  meet  the  arrow  in  a  direct 
line :  which  circumstance  was  also  more  than 
Tyrrel  knew  of.  In  this  case  the  act  was  un- 
advised, with  respect  to  the  existence  of  ^pre- 
sent circumstance. 

14.  The  king  being  at  a  distance  from  court, 
could  get  nobody  to  dress  his  wound  till  the 
next  day ;  of  which  circumstance  Tyrrel  was 
not  aware.  In  this  case  the  act  was  unadvised, 
with  respect  to  what  was  then  a  fulure  cir- 
cumstance. 

15.  Tyrrel  knew  of  the  king  s  being  riding  tlut 


152  OF    CONSCIOUSNESS. 

Chap. IX.  way,  of  his  being  so  near,  and  so  forth;  but 
being  deceived  by  the  foliage  of  the  bushes,  he 
thought  he  saw  a  bank  between  the  spot  from 
which  he  shot,  and  that  to  which  the  king  was 
riding.  In  this  case  the  act  was  mis-advised^ 
proceeding  on  the  mis-supposal  of  a  preventive 
circumstance. 

16.  Tyrrel  knew  that  every  thing  was  as 
above,  nor  was  he  deceived  by  the  supposition 
of  any  preventive  circumstance.  But  he  be- 
lieved the  king  to  be  an  usurper :  and  supposed 
he  was  coming  up  to  attack  a  person  whom 
Tyrrel  believed  to  be  the  rightful  king,  and  who 
was  riding  by  TyrreFs  side.  In  this  case  the 
act  was  also  mis-advised,  but  proceeded  on  the 
mis-supposal  of  a  co^npensative  circumstance. 

X. 

In  what  Let  US  obscrvc  the  connexion  there  is  be- 

case  con-  .  ... 

sciousness   twccu  mtcntionality  and  consciousness.    When 

extends  the     ,  •         ir  •      •  •  i  i        •   i 

intention-    the  act  itseli  IS  mtcutioual,  and  with  respect  to 

ality  from        ,  .  p      n      i 

the  act  to    the  existence  oi  all  the  circumstances  advised^ 

the  conse-  ,  .   ,  •,-/., 

quences.  as  also  With  rcspcct  to  the  materiality  of  those 
circumstances,  in  relation  to  a  given  conse- 
quence, and  there  is  no  mis-supposal  with  re- 
gard to  any  preventive  circumstance,  that  con- 
sequence must  also  be  intentional :  in  other 
words;  advisedness,  with  respect  to  the  cir- 
cumstances, if  clear  from  the  mis-supposal  of 
any  preventive  circumstance,  extends  the  inten- 
tionality   from   the   act  to   the   consequences. 


OF    CONSCIOUSNESS.  153 

Those  consequences  may  be  either  directly  in-  <;^»ai^ix. 
tentional,  or  only  obliquely  so  :  but  at  any  rate 
they  cannot  but  be  intentional. 

XI. 

To  go  on  with  the  example.     If  Tyrrel  in-  Example 

,,  ,  .  ,  ,.  .  .  i-ii        contiuued. 

tended  to  shoot  in  the  direction  m  which  the 
king  was  riding  up,  and  knew  that  the  king  was 
coming  to  meet  the  arrow,  and  knew  the  pro- 
bability there  was  of  his  being  shot  in  that  same 
part  in  which  he  was  shot,  or  in  another  as 
dangerous,  and  with  that  same  degree  of  force, 
and  so  forth,  and  was  not  misled  by  the  erro- 
neous supposition  of  a  circumstance  by  which 
the  shot  would  have  been  prevented  from  taking 
place,  or  any  such  other  preventive  circum- 
stance, it  is  plain  he  could  not  but  have  intended 
the  king's  death.  Perhaps  he  did  not  positively 
wish  it ;  but  for  all  that,  in  a  certain  sense  he 
intended  it. 

XII. 

What  heedlessness  is  in  the  case  of  an  unad-  ^  misad- 
vised act 

vised  act,  rashness  is  in  the  case  of  a  misadvised  "ay  be 

rash  or  uol 

one.  A  misadvised  act  then  may  be  either  rash. 
rash  or  not  rash.  It  may  be  termed  rash,  when 
the  case  is  thought  to  be  such,  that  a  person  of 
ordinary  prudence,  if  prompted  by  an  ordi- 
nary share  of  benevolence,  would  have  em- 
ployed such  and  so  much  attention  and  reflec- 
tion to  the  imagined  circumstance,  as,  by  disco- 
vering to  him  the  non-existence,  improbability, 


154  OF    CONSCIOUSNESS. 

^"^'j  ^\'  or  immateriality  of  it,  would  have  effectually 
disposed  him  to  prevent  the  mischievous  inci- 
dent from  taking  place. 

XIII. 

The  iinen-       In  ordinary  discourse,  when  a  man  does  an 

tioii  may  be  p        i  •    i        i  •       i  • 

podoibad  act  01  which  the  consequences  prove  mischie- 
depeiid-      vous,  it  is  a  common  thing  to  speak  of  him  as 
the  iiotive   having  acted  with  a  good  intention  or  with  a 
the^'even.'    bad  iiitcntion,  of  his  intention's  being  a  good 
qulnces"^^'  one  or  a  bad  one.     The  epithets  good  and  bad 
are  all  this  while  applied,  we  see,  to  the  inten- 
tion :  but  the  application  of  them  is  most  com- 
monly governed  by  a  supposition  formed  with 
regard  to  the  nature  of  the  motive.     The  aci, 
though  eventually  it  prove  mischievous,  is  said 
to  be  done  with  a  good  intention,  when  it  is 
supposed   to   issue    from   a  motive   which    is 
looked  upon  as  a  good  motive  :  with  a  bad  in- 
tention, when  it  is  supposed  to  be  the  result  of 
a  motive  which  is  looked  upon  as  a  bad  motive. 
But  the  nature  of  the  consequences  intended, 
and  the  nature  of  the  motive  which  gave  birth 
to  the  intention,  are  objects  which,  though  in- 
timately connected,  are  perfectly  distinguish- 
able. The  intention  might  therefore  with  perfect 
propriety  be  styled  a  good  one,  whatever  were 
the  motive.     It  might  be  styled  a  good  one, 
when   not  only  the  consequences  of  the  act 
p?^ove  mischievous,  but  the  motive  which  gave 
birth  to  it  was  what  is  called  a  bad  one.     To 


OF    CONSCIOUSNESS.  155 

warrant  the  speaking  of  the  intention  as  being  ^!1^;1^ 
a  good  one,  it  is  sufficient  if  the  consequences 
of  the  act,  had  they  proved  what  to  the  agent 
they  seemed  likely  to  be,  icould  have  been  of  a 
beneficial  nature.  And  in  the  same  manner  the 
intention  may  be  bad,  when  not  only  the  con- 
sequences of  the  act  prove  beneficial,  but  the 
motive  which  gave  birth  to  it  was  a  good  one. 

XIV. 

Now,  when  a  man  has  a  mind  to  speak  of  itisbener 
your  intention  as  being  good  or  bad,  with  refer-  intention  h 
ence  to  the  consequences,  if  he  speaks  of  it  at  spoken  of  ^ 
all  he  must  use  the  word  intention,  for  there  is  ^ooAof 
no  other.     But  if  a  man  means  to  speak  of  the  say,'  the  " 
motive  from  which  your  intention  originated,  as  '""  "^' 
being  a  good  or  a  bad  one,  he  is  certainly  not 
obliged  to  use  the  word  intention  :  it  is  at  least 
as  well  to  use  the  word  motive.     By  the  sup- 
position he  means  the  motive ;  and  very  likely 
he  may  not  mean  the  intention.     For  what  is 
true  of  the  one  is  very  often  not  true  of  the 
other.     The  motive  may  be  good  when  the  in- 
tention is  bad  :  the  intention  may  be  good  when 
the  motive  is  bad :  whether  they  are  both  good 
or  both  bad,  or  the  one  good  and  the  other  bad, 
makes,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter,  a  very  essen- 
tial difference  with  regard  to  the  consequences.* 
It  is  therefore  much  better,  when  motive  is 
meant,  never  to  say  intention. 

*  See  ch.  xii.  [Conseciuences.] 


156  OF    CONSCIOUSNESS. 

Chap.  IX,  -j-y 

Example.  An  cxaiTiple  will  make  this  clear.  Out  of 
malice  a  man  prosecutes  you  for  a  crime  of 
which  he  believes  you  to  be  guilty,  but  of  which 
in  fact  you  are  not  guilty.  Here  the  conse- 
quences of  his  conduct  are  mischievous  :  for  they 
are  mischievous  to  you  at  any  rate,  in  virtue  of 
the  shame  and  anxiety  which  you  are  made  to 
suffer  while  the  prosecution  is  depending:  to 
which  is  to  be  added,  in  case  of  your  being 
convicted,  the  evil  of  the  punishment.  To  you 
therefore  they  are  mischievous;  nor  is  there 
any  one  to  whom  they  are  beneficial.  The 
man's  motive  was  also  what  is  called  a  bad  one : 
for  malice  will  be  allowed  by  every  body  to  be 
a  bad  motive.  However,  the  consequences  of 
his  conduct,  had  they  proved  such  as  he  be- 
lieved them  likely  to  be,  would  have  been  good: 
for  in  them  would  have  been  included  the  pu- 
nishment of  a  criminal,  which  is  a  benefit  to  all 
who  are  exposed  to  suffer  by  a  crime  of  the 
like  nature.  The  intention  therefore,  in  this 
case,  though  not  in  a  common  way  of  speaking 
the  motive,  might  be  styled  a  good  one.  But 
of  motives  more  particularly  in  the  next 
chapter. 

XVI. 

Intention,       In  thc  samc  sense  the  intention,  whether  it 

iu  what  .   .       , 

cases  it      be  positivcly  good  or  no,   so  long  as  it  is  not 

may  beia- 

noceat.      bad,  may  be  termed  innocent.     Accordingly, 


OF    CONSCIOUSNESS.  157 

let  the  consequences  have  proved  mischievous,  ChapJx. 
and  let  the  motive  have  been  what  it  will,  the 
intention  may  be  termed  innocent  in  either  of 
two  cases :  1 .  In  the  case  of  w?«-advisedness 
with  respect  to  any  of  the  circumstances  on 
which  the  mischievousness  of  the  consequences 
depended:  2.  In  the  case  of  ?ww-advisedness 
with  respect  to  any  circumstance,  which,  had 
it  been  what  it  appeared  to  be,  would  have 
served  either  to  prevent  or  to  outweigh  the 
mischief. 

XVII. 

A   few  words  for  the  purpose  of  applying  intention- 

TT    •         alityand 

what  has  been  said  to  the  Roman  law.      Unm-  conscious- 

.  .  ness  how 

tentionality,  and  innocence  of  mtention,  seem  spoken  of 
both  to  be  included  in  the  case  of  infortunium,  man  law. 
where  there  is  neither  dolus  nor  culpa.     Un- 
advisedness    coupled  with    heedlessness,    and 
mis-advisedness    coupled   with   rashness,  cor- 
respond to  the  culpa  sine  dolo.     Direct  inten- 
tionality  corresponds  to  dolus.     Oblique  inten- 
tionality    seems  hardly  to    have  been    distin- 
guished from  direct ;  were  it  to  occur,  it  would 
probably  be  deemed  also  to  correspond  to  dolus. 
The  division  into  culpa,  lata,  levis,  and  Icvissima, 
is  such  as  nothing  certain  can  correspond  to. 
What  is  it  that  it  expresses  ?  A  distinction,  not 
in  the  case  itself,  but  only  in   the  sentiments 
which  any  person  (a  judge,  for  instance)  may 
find  himself  disposed  to  entertain  with  relation 


158  OF    CONSCIOUSNESS. 

^^^-  "y-  to  it :  supposing-  it  already  distinguished  into 
three  subordinate  cases  by  other  means. 

The  word  dolus  seems  ill  enough  contrived: 
the  word  culpa  as  indifferently.  Dolus,  upon 
any  other  occasion,  would  be  understood  to 
imply  deceit,  concealment,*  clandestinity :  f  but 
here  it  is  extended  to  open  force.  Culpa,  upon 
any  other  occasion,  would  be  understood  to 
extend  to  blame  of  every  kind.  It  would 
therefore  include  dolus.  J 

See  B.  I.  tit.  [Theft]  verbo  [amenable.] 
f  Dolus,  an  virtus  quis  in  hoste  requirit?        Virgil. 

— — ^  S^Xw  vje  vcai  ocfMpccdov.  HoMEB. 

X  T  pretend  not  here  to  give  any  determinate  explanation 
of  a  set  of  words,  of  which  the  great  misfortune  is,  that  the 
import  of  them  is  confused  and  indeterminate.     I  speak  only 
by  approximation.     To  attempt  to  determine  the  precise  im- 
port that  has  been  given  them  by  a  hundredth  part  of  the 
authors   that  have  used  them,  would  be  an  endless  task. 
Would  any  one  talk  intelligibly  on  this  subject  in  Latin  ?  let 
him  throw  out  dolus  altogether  :  let  him  keep  culpa,  for  the 
purpose  of  expressing  not  the  case  itself,  but  the  sentiment 
that  is  entertained  concerning  a  case  described   by  other 
means.     For  intentionality,  let  him  coin  a  word  boldly,  and 
say  intentionalltas :    for  unintentionality,  non-intentionalitas. 
For  unadvisedness,  he  has  already  the  word  inscitia ;  though 
the  words  imprudentla,  inobsen'antia,    were    it  not  for  the 
other  senses  they  are  used  in,  would  do  better  :  for  unad- 
visedness   coupled  with   heedlessness,  let   him  say    inscitia 
culpabilis :  for  unadvisedness   without  heedlessness,  inscitia 
inculpahilis :    for    mis-advisedness    coupled   with    rashness, 
error  culpabilis,  error  temerarius,  or  error  cum  temeritate :  for 
mis-advisedness  without  rashness,  error  inculpahilis,  erromon- 
temerarius,  or  error  sine  temeritate. 

It 


OF    CONSCIOUSNESS.  159 

XVIII.  C^HAP^. 

The  above-mentioned  definitions  and  distinc-  use  vf  this 

and  the 

lions  are  far  from  bein^  mere  matters  of  specu-  preceding 

^  .         chapter. 

lation.     They  are  capable  of  the  most  extensive 
and  constant  application,  as  well  to  moral  dis- 
course as  to   legislative  practice.     Upon   the 
degree  and  bias  of  a  mans  intention,  upon  the 
absence  or  presence  of  consciousness  or  mis- 
supposal,  depend  a  great  part  of  the  good  and 
bad,  more  especially  of  the  bad  consequences 
of  an  act;  and  on  this,  as  well  as  other  grounds, 
a  great  part  of  the  demand  for  punishment.* 
The  presence  of  intention  with  regard  to  such 
or  such  a  consequence,  and  of  consciousness 
with  regard  to  such  or  such  a  circumstance,  of 
the  act,  will  form  so  many  criminative  circum- 
stances, f  or  essential  ingredients  in  the  com- 
position of  this  or  that  offence :  applied  to  other 
circumstances,  consciousness  will  form  a  ground 
of  aggravation,  annexable  to  the  like  offence. J; 
In  almost  all  cases,   the  absence  of  intention 

It  is  not  unfrequent  likewise  to  meet  with  tl>e  phrase,  malo 
animo :  a  phrase  still  more  indeterminate,  if  possible,  than 
any  of  the  former.  It  seems  to  have  reference  either  to  in- 
tentionality,  or  to  consciousness,  or  to  the  motive,  or  to  the 
disposition,  or  to  any  two  or  more  of  these  taken  together ; 
nobody  can  tell  which :  these  being  objects  which  seem  to 
have  never  hitherto  been  properly  distinguished  and  dclincil. 

•  See  ch.  xiii.  [Cases  unmeet.] 

t  See  B.  I.  tit.  [Circumstances  influencing.] 

J  See  B.  I.  tit   [Aggravations.] 


160  OF    CONSCIOUSNESS. 

9"*^^^;  with  regard  to  certain  consequences,  and  the 
absence  of  consciousness,  or  the  presence  of 
mis-supposal,  with  regard  to  certain  circum- 
stances, will  constitute  so  many  grounds  of 
extenuation.  * 

*  Sec  B.  I.  tit.  [Extenuations.] 


[      161      ] 


CHAP.    X. 

§    1.    DIFFERENT    SENSES    OF    THE    WORD    MOTIVE.* 

I. 

It  is  an  acknowledsred  truth,  that  every  kind  of  ^"t'^'es, . 

^  «^  why  consi- 

act  whatever,  and  consequently  every  kind  of  .de»ed. 
offence,  is  apt  to  assume  a  different  character, 
and  be  attended  with  different  effects,  accord- 
ing to  the  nature  of  the  motive  which  gives  birth 
to  it.     This  makes  it  requisite  to  take  a  view  of 
the  several  motives  by  which  human  conduct  is  - 
liable  to  be  influenced. 

II. 
By  a  motive,  in  the  most  extensive  sense  in  Purely  spe- 
which  the  word  is  ever  used  with  reference  to  a  motives 

,.,.-.  .  ,  .  ,  have  no- 

thinking  being,  is  meant  any  tiling  that  can  thing  to  do 
contribute  to  give  birth  to,  or  even  to  prevent, 
any  kind  of  action.     Now  the  action  of  a  think- 

*  Note  by  the  author,  July  1822. 

For  a  tabular  simultaneous  view  of  the  whole  list  of 
MOTIVES,  in  conjunction  with  the  correspondent  pleasures  and 
pains,  interests  and  desires,  see,  by  the  same  author.  Table  of 
the  Springs  of  Action,  &c.  with  Explanatory  Notes  and  Obser- 
vations. London  1817,  Hunter,  St.  Paul's  Church  Yard,  Svo. 
pp.  32. 

The  word  inducement  has  of  late  presented  itself,  as  being 
in  its  signification  more  comprehensive  than  tlie  woril  motive, 
and  on  some  occasions  more  apposite. 
VOL.    r.  M 


162  OF    MOTIVES. 

^"*J-  ^:  ing  being  is  the  act  either  of  the  body,  or  only 
of  the  mind :  and  an  act  of  the  mind  is  an  act 
eitlier  of  the  intellectual  faculty,  or  of  the  will. 
Acts  of  the  intellectual  faculty  will  sometimes 
rest  in  the  understanding  merely,  without  ex- 
erting any  influence  in  the  production  of  any 
acts  of  the  will.  Motives,  which  are  not  of  a 
nature  to  influence  any  other  acts  than  those, 
may  be  styled  purely  speculative  motives,  or 
motives  resting  in  speculation.  But  as  to  these 
acts,  neither  do  they  exercise  any  influence 
over  external  acts,  or  over  their  consequences, 
nor  consequently  over  any  pain  or  any  pleasure 
that  may  be  in  the  number  of  such  conse- 
quences. Now  it  is  only  on  account  of  their 
tendency  to  produce  either  pain  or  pleasure, 
that  any  acts  can  be  material.  With  acts, 
therefore,  that  rest  purely  in  the  understand- 
ing, we  have  not  here  any  concern  :  nor  there- 
fore with  any  object,  if  any  such  there  be, 
which,  in  the  character  of  a  motive,  can  have 
no  influence  on  any  other  acts  than  those. 

III. 

Motives  to       The  motives  with  which  alone  we  have  any 

the  will.  ,  _ 

concern,  are  such  as  are  of  a  nature  to  act^ 
upon  the  will.  By  a  motive  then,  in  this  sense 
of  the  word,  is  to  be  understood  any  thing 
whatsoever,  which,  by  influencing  the  will  of 
a  sensitive  being,  is  supposed  to  serve  as  a 
means  of  determining  him  to  act,  or  voluntarily 


OF    MOTIVES.  163 

to  forbear  to  act,*  upon  any  occasion.     Motives    chap^ 
of  this  sort,  in  contradistinction  to  the  former, 
may  be  styled  practical  motives,  or  motives  ap- 
plying to  practice. 

TV. 

Owins:  to  the  poverty  and  unsettled  state  of  Figurative 

^  .  ...      and  unfi- 

ianofuasre,  the  word  motive  is  employed  indiscri-  gurative 

^       ®    '  .  .  .  senses  of 

minately  to  denote  two  kinds  of  objects,  which,  the  word, 
for  the  better  understanding  of  the  subject,  it  is 
necessary  should  be  distinguished.  On  some 
occasions  it  is  employed  to  denote  any  of  those 
really  existing  incidents  from  whence  the  act 
in  question  is  supposed  to  take  its  rise.  The 
sense  it  bears  on  these  occasions  may  be  styled 
its  literal  or  unfigurative  sense.  On  other  oc- 
casions it  is  employed  to  denote  a  certain  ficti- 
tious entity,  a  passion,  an  affection  of  the  mind, 
an  ideal  being  which  upon  the  happening  of  any 


*  When  the  effect  or  tendency  of  a  motive  is  to  determine 
u,  man  to  forbear  to  act,  it  may  seem  imj)roper  to  make  use 
of  the  term  motive  :  since  motive,  properly  speaking,  means 
that  which  disposes  an  object  to  move.  We  must  however 
use  that  improper  term,  or  a  term  which,  though  proper 
enough,  is  scarce  in  use,  the  word  dettnninative.  By  way  of 
justification,  or  at  least  apology,  for  the  popular  usage  in  this 
behalf,  it  may  be  observed,  that  even  forbearance  to  act,  or 
the  negation  of  motion  (that  is,  of  bodily  motion)  supposes 
an  act  done,  when  such  forbearance  is  voluntary.  It  sup- 
poses, to  wit,  an  act  of  the  will,  which  is  as  much  a  positive 
act,  as  much  a  mo*ion,  as  any  other  act  of  the  thinking  sub- 
stance. 

M  2 


164  OF    MOTIVES. 

>E!l^Jl5'   such  incident  is  considered  as  operating  upon 

the  mind,  and  prompting  it  to  take  that  course, 

towards  which  it  is  impelled  by  the  influence 

of  such   incident.     Motives  of  this    class  are 

Avarice,  Indolence,  Benevolence,  and  so  forth; 

as  we  shall  see  more  particularly  farther  on. 

This  latter  may  be  styled  i\\ejignrative  sense  of 

the  term  motive. 

v. 

Motives  in.      As  to  the  real  incidents  to  which  the  name 

terior  and 

exterior,  of  motivc  is  also  givcu,  these  too  are  of  two  very 
different  kinds.  They  may  be  either,  1.  The 
interrial  perception  of  any  individual  lot  of  plea- 
sure or  pain,  the  expectation  of  which  is  looked 
upon  as  calculated  to  determine  you  to  act  in 
such  or  such  a  manner ;  as  the  pleasure  of  ac- 
quiring such  a  sum  of  money,  the  pain  of  ex- 
erting yourself  on  such  an  occasion,  and  so 
forth :  Or,  2.  Any  external  event,  the  happening 
whereof  is  regarded  as  having  a  tendency  to 
bring  about  the  perception  of  such  pleasure  or 
such  pain :  for  instance,  the  coming  up  of  a  lot- 
tery ticket,  by  which  the  possession  of  the 
money  devolves  to  you ;  or  the  breaking  out 
of  a  fire  in  the  house  you  are  in,  which  makes 
it  necessary  for  you  to  quit  it.  The  former  kind 
of  motives  may  be  termed  interior,  or  internal : 
the  latter  exterior,  or  external. 

VI, 

Motive  in       j^q  othcr  scuscs  of  the  term  motive  need  also 

J)  r  Of  pet  t— 
motive  in  etse. 


OF    MOTIVES.  165 

to  be  distinguished.  Motive  refers  necessarily  chap^ 
to  action.  It  is  a  pleasure,  pain,  or  other  event, 
that  prompts  to  action.  Motive  then,  in  one 
sense  of  the  word,  must  be  previous  to  such 
event.  But,  for  a  man  to  be  governed  by  any 
motive,  he  must  in  every  case  look  beyond  that 
event  which  is  called  his  action  ;  he  must  look 
to  the  consequences  of  it :  and  it  is  only  in  this 
way  that  the  idea  of  pleasure,  of  pain,  or  of  any 
other  event,  can  give  birth  to  it.  He  must  look, 
therefore,  in  every  case,  to  some  event  poste- 
rior to  the  act  in  contemplation  :  an  event  which 
as  yet  exists  not,  but  stands  only  in  prospect. 
Now,  as  it  is  in  all  cases  difficult,  and  in  most 
cases  unnecessary,  to  distinguish  between  ob- 
jects so  intimately  connected,  as  the  posterior 
possible  object  which  is  thus  looked  forward  to, 
and  the  present  existing  object  or  event  which 
takes  place  upon  a  man's  looking  forward  to  the 
other,  they  are  both  of  them  spoken  of  under 
the  same  appellation,  motive.  To  distinguish 
them,  the  one  first  mentioned  may  be  termed  a 
motive  in  prospect,  the  other  a  motive  in  esse : 
and  under  each  of  these  denominations  will  come 
as  well  exterior  as  internal  motives.  A  fire 
breaks  out  in  your  neighbour's  house :  you  are 
under  apprehension  of  its  extending  to  your 
own  t  you  are  apprehensive,  that  if  you  stay  in 
it,  you  will  be  burnt :  you  accordingly  run  out 
of  it.     This  then  is  the  act :  the  others  are  all 


166  OF    MOTIVES. 

^'"^p-  ^;  motives  to  it.  The  event  of  the  fire's  breaking 
out  in  your  neighbour's  house  is  an  external 
motive,  and  that  in  esse :  the  idea  or  belief  of 
the  probability  of  the  fire's  extending  to  your 
own  house,  that  of  your  being  burnt  if  you  con- 
tinue, and  the  pain  you  feel  at  the  thought  of 
such  a  catastrophe,  are  all  so  many  internal 
events,  but  still  in  esse :  the  event  of  the  fire's 
actually  extending  to  your  own  house,  and  that 
of  your  being  actually  burnt  by  it,  external 
motives  in  prospect :  the  pain  you  would  feel  at 
seeing  your  house  a  burning,  and  the  pain  you 
would  feel  while  you  yourself  were  burning,  in- 
ternal motives  in  prospect :  which  events,  ac- 
cording as  the  matter  turns  out,  may  come  to 
be  in  esse :  but  then  of  course  they  will  cease 
to  act  as  motives. 

VII. 

Motives  Of  all  these  motives,  which  stand  nearest  to 

'amUe-'^^"  the  act,  to  the  production  of  which  they  all  con- 
tribute, is  that  internal  motive  in  esse  which 
consists  in  the  expectation  of  the  internal  mo- 
tive in  prospect :  the  pain  or  uneasiness  you 
feel  at  the  thoughts  of  being  burnt.*    All  other 


mote. 


*  Whether  it  be  the  expectation  of  being  burnt,  or  the  pain 
that  accompanies  that  expectation,  that  is  the  immediate  in- 
ternal motive  spoken  of,  may  be  difficult  to  determine.  It  may 
even  be  questioned,  perhaps,  whether  they  are  distinct  entities. 
Both  questions,  however,  seem  to  be  mere  questions  of  words. 


OF    MOTIVES.  167 

motives  are  more  or  less  remote  :  the  motives  5"'^J'-^; 
in  prospect,  in  proportion  as  the  period  at  which 
they  are  expected  to  happen  is  more  distant 
from  the  period  at  which  the  act  takes  place, 
and  consequently  later  in  point  of  time :  the 
motives  in  esse,  in  proportion  as  they  also  are 
more  distant  from  that  period,  and  consequently 
earlier  in  point  of  time.* 

VIII. 

It  has  already  been  observed,  that  with  mo-  Motives  to 
tives  of  which  the  influence  terminates  altc-  stamUngr 
gether  in  the  understanding,  we  have  nothing  ^^y  -nflu- 
here  to  do.     If  then,  amongst  objects  that  are  w^iii!*^^ 
spoken  of  as  motives  with  reference  to    the 
understanding,  there  be  any  which  concern  us 


and  the  solution  of  them  altogether  immaterial.  Even  the 
other  kinds  of  motives,  though  for  some  purposes  they  de- 
mand a  separate  consideration,  are,  however,  so  intimately 
allied,  that  it  will  often  be  scarce  practicable,  and  not  always 
material,  to  avoid  confounding  them,  as  they  have  always 
hitherto  been  confounded. 

*  Under  the  term  esse  must  be  included  as  well  past  exist- 
ence, with  reference  to  a  given  period,  as  present.  They  are 
equally  real,  in  comparison  with  what  is  as  yet  but  future. 
Language  is  materially  deficient,  in  not  enabling  us  to  dis- 
tinguish with  precision  between  existence  as  opposed  to  un- 
reality, and  present  existence  as  opposed  to  past,  Tlie  word 
existence  in  English,  and  esse,  adopted  by  lawyers  from  the 
Latin,  have  the  inconvenience  of  appearing  to  confine  the 
existence  in  ([uestion  to  some  single  period  considered  as 
being  present. 


168 

Chap.  X. 


OF    MOTIVES. 

here,  it  is  only  in  as  far  as  such  objects  may, 
through  the  medium  of  the  understanding,  ex- 
ercise an  influence  over  the  will.  It  is  in  this 
way,  and  in  this  way  only,  that  any  objects, 
in  virtue  of  any  tendency  they  may  have  to  in- 
fluence the  sentiment  of  belief,  may  in  a  practi- 
cal sense  act  in  the  character  of  motives.  Any 
objects,  by  tending  to  induce  a  belief  concern- 
ing the  existence,  actual,  or  probable,  of  a  prac- 
tical motive ;  that  is,  concerning  the  probabi- 
lity of  a  motive  in  prospect,  or  the  existence  of 
a  motive  in  esse ;  may  exercise  an  influence  on 
the  will,  and  rank  with  those  other  motives  that 
have  been  placed  under  the  name  of  practical. 
The  pointing  out  of  motives  such  as  these,  is 
what  we  frequently  mean  when  we  talk  of 
giving  reasons.  Your  neighbour's  house  is  on 
fire  as  before.  I  observe  to  you,  that  at  the 
lower  part  of  your  neighbour's  house  is  some 
wood-work,  which  joins  on  to  your's  ;  that  the 
flames  have  caught  this  wood-work,  and  so  forth ; 
which  I  do  in  order  to  dispose  you  to  believe  as 
I  believe,  that  if  you  stay  in  your  house  much 
longer  you  will  be  burnt.  In  doing  this,  then,  I 
suggest  motives  to  your  understanding ;  which 
motives,  by  the  tendency  they  have  to  give  birth 
to  or  strengthen  a  pain,  which  operates  upon 
you  in  the  character  of  an  internal  motive  in 
esse,  join  their  force,  and  act  as  motives  upon 
the  will. 


OF    MOTIVES.  169 


§  2.  Xo  Jiiotives  either  const  a  fitly  good,  or  con-   chap^ 
stantly  had. 


IX. 

In  all  this  chain  o   motives,  the  principal  or  Nothing 
original  link  seems  to  be  the  last  internal  motive  k^eif'^as  °a 
in  prospect;  it  is  to  this  that  all  the  other  The  ideas  of 
motives  in  prospect  ov^e  their  materiality :  and  paln.""^^  °^ 
the  immediately  acting  motive  its  existence. 
This  motive  in  prospect,  we  see,  is  always  some 
pleasure,  or  some  pain ;  some  pleasure,  which 
the  act  in  question  is  expected  to  be  a  means  of 
continuing   or  producing  :  some  pain  which  it 
is  expected  to  be  a  means  of  discontinuing  or 
preventing.    A  motive  is  substantially  nothing 
more  than  pleasure  or  pain,  operating  in  a  cer- 
tain manner. 

X. 

Now,  pleasure  is  in  itself  di  good  :  nay,  even  ^otil^/isTn 
setting  aside  immunity  from  pain,  the  only  ''^*'^^  ^  ^^** 
good :  pain  is  in  itself  an  evil ;  and,  indeed, 
without  exception,  the  only  evil ;  or  else  the 
words  good  and  evil  have  no  meaning.  And  this 
is  alike  true  of  every  sort  of  pain,  and  of  every 
sort  of  pleasure.  It  follows,  therefore,  immedi- 
ately and  incontestibly,  that  there  is  no  such  thing 
as  any  sort  of  inotive  that  is  in  itself  a  bad  one* 


*  Let  a  man's  motive  be  ill-will ;  call  it  even  malice,  envy, 
cruelty  ;  it  is  still  a  kind  of  |)leasure  that  is  his  motive  :  thf* 
pleasure  he  takes  at  the  thought  of  the  pain   which  he  sees. 


170  OF    MOTIVES. 

Chap.  X. 

XI. 

Inaccuracy      It  is  common,  howcver,  to  speak  of  actions 

sioDs^i^^*    as  proceeding  from  good  or  bad  motives :    in 

oriac/are   which  casc  the  motivcs  meant  are  such  as  are 

moti'ves.  '^   internal.     The  expression  is  far  from  being  an 

accurate  one ;  and  as  it  is  apt  to  occur  in  the 

consideration  of  almost  every  kind  of  offence,  it 

will  be  requisite  to  settle  the  precise  meaning 

of  it,  and  observe  how  far  it  quadrates  with 

the  truth  of  things. 

XII. 

Any  sort  of      With  rcspcct  to  gooducss  and  badness,  as  it 

motive  may  •  •  .■,  ,,  .  ,  ,  .  .,/,., 

give  birtb  IS  With  every  thing  else  that  is  not  itself  either 

to  any  sort         .  ,  .      . ,         .   ,  .  -r  „    ■. 

of  act.  pain  or  pleasure,  so  is  it  with  motives.  If  they 
are  good  or  bad,  it  is  only  on  account  of  their 
effects :  good,  on  account  of  their  tendency  to 
produce  pleasure,  or  avert  pain:  bad,  on  ac- 
count of  their  tendency  to  produce  pain,  or 
avert  pleasure.  Now^  the  case  is,  that  from  one 
and  the  same  motive,  and  from  every  kind  of 
motive,  may  proceed  actions  that  are  good, 
others  that  are  bad,  and  others  that  are  indif- 
ferent. This  we  shall  proceed  to  shew  with 
respect  to  all  the  different  kinds  of  motives,  as 


or  expects  to  see,  his  adversary  undergo.  Now  even  this 
wretched  pleasure,  taken  by  itself,  is  good  :  it  may  be  faint ; 
it  may  be  short :  it  must  at  any  rate  be  impure  :  yet  while  it 
lasts,  and  before  any  bad  consequences  arrive,  it  is  as  good  as 
any  other  that  is  not  more  intense.     See  ch.  iv.  [Value.] 


OF    MOTIVES.  171 

determined  by  the  various  kinds  of  pleasures   ^"*p-^-, 
and  pains. 

XIII. 

Such  an  analysis,  useful  as  it  is,  will  be  found  Difficulties 

which 

to  be  a  matter  of  no  small  difficulty;  owing,  in  staudinthe 

way  of  an 

great  measure,  to  a  certain  perversity  of  struc-  analysis  of 
ture  which  prevails  more  or  less  throughout  all 
languages.     To   speak   of  motives,  as  of  any 
thing  else,  one  must  call  them  by  their  names. 
But  the  misfortune  is,  that  it  is  rare  to  meet 
with  a  motive  of  which  the  name  expresses  that 
and  nothing  more.     Commonly  along  with  the 
very  name  of  the  motive,  is  tacitly  involved  a 
proposition  imputing  to  it  a  certain  quality ;  a 
quality  which,  in  many  cases,  will  appear  to 
include  that  very  goodness  or  badness,  concern- 
ing which  we  are  here  inquiring  whether,  pro- 
perly speaking,  it  be  or  be  not  imputable  to 
motives.     To  use  the  common  phrase,  in  most 
cases,  the  name  of  the  motive  is  a  word  which 
is  employed  either  only  in  a  good  sense,  or  else 
only  in  a  had  sense.     Now,  when  a  word  is 
spoken  of  as  being  used  in  a  good  sense,  all 
that  is  necessarily  meant  is  this :  that  in  con- 
junction with  the  idea  of  the  object  it  is  put  to 
signify,  it  conveys  an  idea  of  approbation  :  that 
is,    of  a   pleasure   or  satisfaction,  entertained 
by  the  person  who  employs   the  term  at  the 
thoughts  of  such  object.     In  like  manner,  when 
a  word  is  spoken   of  as  being  used  in  a  bad 


1/2  OF    MOTIVES. 

Chap.x.  sense,  all  that  is  necessarily  meant  is  this  : 
that,  in  conjunction  with  the  idea  of  the  ob- 
ject it  is  put  to  signify,  it  conveys  an  idea  of 
disapprobation :  that  is,  of  a  displeasure  enter- 
tained by  the  person  who  employs  the  term 
at  the  thoughts  of  such  object.  Now,  the 
circumstance  on  which  such  approbation  is 
grounded  will,  as  naturally  as  any  other,  be  the 
opinion  of  the  goodness  of  the  object  in  ques- 
tion, as  above  explained :  such,  at  least,  it 
must  be,  upon  the  principle  of  utility :  so,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  circumstance  on  which 
any  such  disapprobation  is  grounded,  will,  as 
naturally  as  any  other,  be  the  opinion  of  the 
badness  of  the  object :  such,  at  least,  it  must 
be,  in  as  far  as  the  principle  of  utility  is  taken 
for  the  standard. 

Now  there  are  certain  motives  which,  unless 
in  a  few  particular  cases,  have  scarcely  any 
other  name  to  be  expressed  by  but  such  a  word 
as  is  used  only  in  a  good  sense.  This  is  the 
case,  for  example,  with  the  motives  of  piety 
and  honour.  The  consequence  of  this  is,  that 
if,  in  speaking  of  such  a  motive,  a  man  should 
have  occasion  to  apply  the  epithet  bad  to  any 
actions  which  he  mentions  as  apt  to  result  from 
it,  he  must  appear  to  be  guilty  of  a  contradic- 
tion in  terms.  But  the  names  of  motives  which 
have  scarcely  any  other  name  to  be  expressed 
by,  but  such  a  word  as  is  used  only  in  a  bad 


OF    MOTIVES.  173 

sense,  are  many  more.*  This  is  the  case,  for  chap.  x. 
example,  with  the  motives  of  lust  and  avarice. 
And  accordingly,  if  in  speaking  of  any  such 
motive,  a  man  should  have  occasion  to  apply 
the  epithets  good  or  indifferent  to  any  actions 
which  he  mentions  as  apt  to  result  from  it,  he 
must  here  also  appear  to  be  guilty  of  a  similar 
contradiction. f 

This  perverse  association  of  ideas  cannot,  it 
is  evident,  but  throw  great  difficulties  in  the 
way  of  the  inquiry  now  before  us.  Confining 
himself  to  the  language  most  in  use,  a  man  can 
scarce  avoid  running,  in  appearance,  into  per- 
petual contradictions.  His  propositions  will 
appear,  on  the  one  hand,  repugnant  to  truth; 
and  on  the  other  hand,  adverse  to  utility.  As 
paradoxes,  they  will  excite  contempt :  as  mis- 
chievous paradoxes,  indignation.  For  the  truths 

*  For  the  reason,  see  chap.  xi.  [Dispositions.]  par.  xvii.  note. 

f  To  this  imperfection  of  language,  and  nothing  more^  are 
to  be  attributed,  in  great  measure,  the  violent  clamours  that 
have  from  time  to  time  been  raised  against  those  ingenious 
moralists,  who,  travelling  out  of  the  beaten  tract  of  specu- 
lation, have  found  more  or  less  difficulty  in  disentangling 
themselves  from  the  shackles  of  ordinary  language:  such  as 
Rochefoucault,  Mandeville,  and  Helvetius.  To  the  unsound- 
ness of  their  opinions,  and,  with  still  greater  injustice,  to  the 
corruption  of-their  hearts,  was  often  imputed,  what  was  most 
commonly  owing  either  to  a  want  of  skill,  in  matters  of  lan- 
gucige  on  tlie  part  of  the  author,  or  a  want  of  discernment, 
possibly  now  and  then  in  some  instances  a  want  of  probity, 
on  the  part  of  the  commentator. 


174  OF    MOTIVES. 

^^^l^^l^  he  labours  to  convey,  however  important,  and 
however  salutary,  his  reader  is  never  the  better : 
and  he  liimself  is  much  the  worse.  To  obviate 
this  inconvenience,  completely,  he  has  but  this 
one  unpleasant  remedy ;  to  lay  aside  the  old 
phraseology  and  invent  a  new  one.  Happy  the 
man  whose  language  is  ductile  enough  to  per- 
mit him  this  resource.  To  palliate  the  incon- 
venience, where  that  method  of  obviating  it  is 
impracticable,  he  has  nothing  left  for  it  but  to 
enter  into  a  long  discussion,  to  state  the  whole 
matter  at  large,  to  confess,  that  for  the  sake  of 
promoting  the  purposes,  he  has  violated  the 
established  laws  of  language,  and  to  throw  him- 
self upon  the  mercy  of  his  readers.* 


♦  Happily,  language  is  not  always  so  intractable,  but  that 
by  making  use  of  two  words  instead  of  one,  a  man  may  avoid 
the  inconvenience  of  fabricating  words  that  are  absolutely  new. 
Thus  instead  of  the  word  lust,  by  putting  together  two  words 
in  common  use,  he  may  frame  the  neutral  expression,  sexual 
desire  :  instead  of  the  word  avarice,  by  putting  together  two 
other  words  also  in  common  use,  he  may  frame  the  neutral 
expression,  pecuniary  interest.  This,  accordingly,  is  the 
course  which  I  have  taken.  In  these  instances,  indeed,  even 
the  combination  is  not  novel :  the  only  novelty  there  is  con- 
sists in  the  steady  adherence  to  the  one  neutral  expression, 
rejecting  altogether  the  terms,  of  which  the  import  is  infected 
by  adventitious  and  unsuitable  ideas. 

In  tlie  catalogue  of  motives,  corresponding  to  the  several 
sorts  of  pains  and  pleasures,  I  have  inserted  such  as  have 
occurred  to  me.  I  cannot  pretend  to  warrant  it  complete. 
To  make  sure  of  rendering  it  so,  the  only  way  would  be,  to 


OF    MOTIVES.  175 

CiiAr.  X. 


§  3.  Catalogue  of  motives  corresponding  to  that  of 
Pleasures  and  Pains. 

XIV. 

From  the  pleasures  of  the  senses,  considered  Physical 

flCisirc  cor™ 

in  the  gross,  results  the   motive  which  in  a  responding 
neutral  sense,  may  be  termed  physical  desire :  o^sense  ia 
in  a  bad  sense,  it  is  termed  sensuality.     Name  ^""""^^ " 
used  in  a  good  sense  it  has  none.     Of  this,  no- 
thing can  be  determined,  till  it  be  considered 
separately,  with  reference  to  the  several  species 
of  pleasures  to  which  it  corresponds. 

XV. 

In  particular,  then,  to  the  pleasures  of  the  The  motive 

corres- 

taste  or  palate  corresponds  a  motive,  which  in  ponding  to 

1  1         •  -1  ,  the  plea- 

a  neutral  sense  having  received  no  name  that  suresofthe 

•      •         n  11        palate. 

can  serve  to  express  it  in  all  cases,  can  only  be 
termed,  by  circumlocution,  the  love  of  the  plea- 
sures of  the  palate.  In  particular  cases  it  is 
styled  hunger  :  in  others,  thirst.f  The  love  of 
good  cheer  expresses  this  motive,  but  seems  to 
go  beyond  :  intimating,  that  the  pleasure  is  to  be 

turn  over  the  dictionary  from  beginning  to  end  :  an  operation 
which,  in  a  view  to  perfection,  would  be  necessary  for  more 
purposes  than  this.  See  B.  I.  tit.  [Defamation.]  and  Append, 
tit.  [Composition.] 

f  Hunger  and  thirst,  considered  in  the  light  of  motives, 
import  not  so  much  the  desire  of  a  particular  kind  of  plea- 
sure, as  the  desire  of  removing  a  positive  kind  of  pain.  They 
do  not  extend  to  the  desire  of  that  kind  of  pleasure  which 
depends  on  the  clioice  of  foods  and  lifjuors. 


176  OF    MOTIVES. 

^!lij^  partaken  of  in  company,  and  involving  a  kind 
of  sympathy.  In  a  bad  sense,  it  is  styled  in 
some  cases  greediness,  voraciousness,  gluttony  : 
in  others,  principally  when  applied  to  children, 
lickerishness.  It  may  in  some  cases  also  be 
represented  by  the  word  daintiness.  Name 
used  in  a  good  sense  it  has  none.  1.  A  boy, 
who  does  not  want  for  victuals,  steals  a  cake 
out  of  a  pastry-cook's  shop,  and  eats  it.  In 
this  case  his  motive  will  be  universally  deemed 
a  bad  one :  and  if  it  be  asked  what  it  is,  it  may 
be  answered,  perhaps,  lickerishness.  2.  A  boy 
buys  a  cake  out  of  a  pastry-cook's  shop,  and 
eats  it.  In  this  case  his  motive  can  scarcely  be 
looked  upon  as  either  good  or  bad,  unless  his 
master  should  be  out  of  humour  with  him  ;  and 
then  perhaps  he  may  call  it  lickerishness,  as 
before.  In  both  cases,  however,  his  motive  is 
the  same.  It  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  the 
motive  corresponding  to  the  pleasures  of  the 
palate.* 

XVI. 

Sexual  de-  To  the  plcasures  of  the  sexual  sense  corre- 
resp^onding  spouds  the  motivc  which,  in  a  neutral  sense, 
!ure  of 'fhe  Dtiay  bc  termed  sexual  desire.  In  a  bad  sense,  it 
sense!        i^  spokcu  of  undcr  the  name  of  lasciviousness, 

*  It  will  not  be  worth  while,  in  every  case,  to  give  an 
instance  in  which  the  action  may  be  indifferent :  if  good  as 
well  as  bad  actions  may  result  from  the  same  motive,  it  is 
easy  to  conceive,  that  also  may  be  indififerent. 


OF    xMOTIVES.  177 

and  a  variety  of  other  names  of  reprobation.    ^^^^P;^- 
Name  used  in  a  good  sense,  it  has  none.* 

1.  A  man  ravishes  a  virgin.  In  this  case  the 
motive  is,  without  scruple,  termed  by  the  name 
of  lust,  lasciviousness,  and  so  forth;  and  is  uni- 
versally looked  upon  as  a  bad  one.  2.  The 
same  man,  at  another  time  exercises  the  rights 
of  marriage  with  his  wife..  In  this  case  the 
motive  is  accounted,  perhaps,  a  good  one,  or 
at  least  indifferent :  and  here  people  would 
scruple  to  call  it  by  any  of  those  names.  In 
both  cases,  however,  the  motive  may  be  pre- 
cisely the  same.  In  both  cases  it  may  be  neither 
more  nor  less  than  sexual  desire. 

XVII. 

To  the  pleasures   of  curiosity  corresponds  Curiosity, 

&c  corrc— 

the  motive  known  by  the  same  name  :  and  spondingto 
which  may  be  otherwise  called  the  love  of  sures  of  cu- 
novelty,  or  the  love  of  experiment ;    and,  on  ""*"^* 

*  Love  indeed  includes  sometimes  this  idea  :  but  then  it 
can  never  answer  the  purpose  of  exhibiting  it  separately  : 
since  there  are  three  motives,  at  least,  that  may  all  of  them 
be  included  in  it,  besides  this  :  the  Jove  of  beauty  correspond- 
ing to  the  pleasures  of  the  eye,  and  the  motives  correspond- 
ing to  tiiose  of  amity  and  benevolence.  We  speak  of  the 
love  of  children,  of  the  love  of  parents,  of  the  love  of  (iod. 
These  pious  uses  protect  tlie  appellation,  and  preserve  it 
from  the  ignominy  poured  forth  ujioii  its  profane  associates. 
Kvcn  sensual  love  would  not  answer  the  j)urposoj  since  that 
would  include  the  love  of  beauty, 
vor..  I.  N 


178  OF    MOTIVES. 

S"^^-  ■^;  particular   occasions,    sport,     and    sometimes 
play. 

1 .  A  boy,  in  order  to  divert  himself,  reads  an 
improving  book :  the  motive  is  accounted, 
perhaps,  a  good  one :  at  any  rate  not  a  bad 
one.  2.  He  sets  his  top  a  spinning :  the  motive 
is  deemed,  at  any  rate,  not  a  bad  one.  3.  He 
sets  loose  a  mad  ox  among  a  crowd ;  his  motive 
is  now,  perhaps,  termed  an  abominable  one. 
Yet  in  all  three  cases  the  motive  may  be  the 
very  same:  it  may  be  neither  more  nor  less 
than  curiosity. 

XVIII. 

None  to         As  to  the  othcr  pleasures  of  sense  they  are 
sense!"^^*^^  of  too  little   conscquencc  to  have  given  any 

separate  denominations  to   the   corresponding 

motives. 

XIX. 

Pecuniary       To  the  plcasurcs  of  Wealth  corresponds  the 

interest  to  .       r  j_-  i  •    i        •  ^      i 

the  plea-  sort  01  motivc  which,  in  a  neutral  sense,  may 
w"eaUh.  be  termed  pecuniary  interest :  in  a  bad  sense, 
it  is  termed,  in  some  cases,  avarice,  covetous- 
ness,  rapacity,  or  lucre :  in  other  cases,  nig- 
gardliness :  in  a  good  sense,  but  only  in  par- 
ticular cases,  economy  and  frugality ;  and  in 
some  cases  the  word  industry  may  be  applied 
to  it :  in  a  sense  nearly  indifferent,  but  rather 
bad  than  otherwise,  it  is  styled,  though  only 
in  particular  cases,  parsimony. 

1 .  For  money  you  gratify  a  man's  hatred,  by 


OF    MOTIVES.  179 

putting  his  adversary  to  death.  2.  For  money  ^hap^. 
you  plough  his  field  for  him. — In  the  first  case 
your  motive  is  termed  lucre,  and  is  accounted 
corrupt  and  abominable  :  and  in  the  second,  for 
want  of  a  proper  appellation,  it  is  styled  in- 
dustry; and  is  looked  upon  as  innocent  at 
least,  if  not  meritorious.  Yet  the  motive  is  in 
both  cases  precisely  the  same :  it  is  neither 
more  nor  less  than  pecuniary  interest. 

XX. 

The   pleasures  of  skill  are  neither  distinct  None  to  the 

,  ^  1         .        t  pleasures  of 

enough,  nor  01  consequence  enough,  to  have  skiii. 
given  any  name  to  the  corresponding  motive. 

XXI. 

To   the   pleasures   of  amity   corresponds   a  Tothepiea- 
motive  which,    in   a   neutral    sense,    may   be  amity  "the 
termed  the  desire  of  ingratiating  one's  self.     In  gratiating 
a  bad  sense  it  is  in  certain  cases,  styled  ser-  °^^^^^  ' 
vility  :   in  a  good  sense  it  has  no  name  that  is 
peculiar  to  it:    in  the  cases  in   which  it  has 
been  looked  on  with  a  favourable  eye,  it  has 
seldom  been  distinguished  from  the  motive  of 
sympathy  or  benevolence,  with  which,  in  such 
cases,  it  is  commonly  associated. 

1.  To  acciuire  the  affections  of  a  woman 
before  marriage,  to  preserve  them  afterwards, 
you  do  every  thing,  that  is  consistent  with 
other  duties,  to  make  her  happy  :  in  this  case 
your  motive  is  looked  upon  as  laudable,  though 
there  is    no    name  for    it.      2.  For    the   same 

N  'i 


ISO  OF    MOTIVES. 

^"^''-  \-  purpose,  you  poison  a  woman  with  whom  she 
is  at  enmity :  in  this  case  your  motive  is  looked 
upon  as  abominable,  though  still  there  is  no 
name  for  it.  3.  To  acquire  or  preserve  the 
favour  of  a  man  who  is  richer  or  more  powerful 
than  yourself,  you  make  yourself  subservient  to 
his  pleasures.  Let  them  even  be  lawful  plea- 
sures, if  people  choose  to  attribute  your  be- 
haviour to  this  motive,  you  will  not  get  them 
to  find  any  other  name  for  it  than  servility. 
Yet  in  all  three  cases  the  motive  is  the  same  : 
it  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  the  desire  of 
ingratiating  yourself. 

XXII. 

To  the  To  the  pleasures  of  the  moral  sanction,  or,  as 

a  good       they  may  otherwise  be  called,  the  pleasures  of 

uame,  the  ,  ,  .  •  i  •    i      • 

love  of  re-    a  good  name,  corresponds  a  motive  which,  in  a 
puaion.     JJg^^J.^^  sense,  has  scarcely  yet  obtained  any 

adequate  appellative.  It  may  be  styled,  the 
love  of  reputation.  It  is  nearly  related  to  the 
motive  last  preceding :  being  neither  more  nor 
less  than  the  desire  of  ingratiating  one's  self 
with,  or,  as  in  this  case  we  should  rather  say, 
of  recommending  one's  self  to,  the  world  at 
large.  In  a  good  sense,  it  is  termed  honour, 
or  the  sense  of  honour :  or  rather,  the  word 
honour  is  introduced  somehow  or  other  upon 
the  occasion  of  its  being  brought  to  view  :  for 
in  strictness  the  word  honour  is  put  rather  to 
signify  that  imaginary  object,  which  a  man  is 


OF    MOTIVES,  181 

spoken  of  as  possessing  upon  the  occasion  of  ^H^^' 
his  obtaining  a  conspicuous  share  of  the  plea- 
sures that  are  in  question.  In  particular  cases, 
it  is  styled  the  love  of  glory.  In  a  bad  sense, 
it  is  styled,  in  some  cases,  false  honour;  in 
others,  pride;  in  others,  vanity.  In  a  sense 
not  decidedly  bad,  but  rather  bad  than  other- 
wise, ambition.  In  an  indifferent  sense,  in 
some  cases,  the  love  of  fame :  in  others,  the 
sense  of  shame.  And,  as  the  pleasures  be- 
lonsrins:  to  the  moral  sanction  run  undistinguish- 
ably  into  the  pains  derived  from  the  same 
source,*  it  may  also  be  styled,  in  some  cases, 
the  fear  of  dishonour,  the  fear  of  disgrace,  the 
fear  of  infamy,  the  fear  of  ignominy,  or  the 
fear  of  shame. 

1 .  You  have  received  an  affront  from  a  man : 
according  to  the  custom  of  the  country,  in 
order,  on  the  one  hand,  to  save  yourself  from 
the  shame  of  being  thought  to  bear  it  patiently  ;t 

*  See  Chap.  vi.  [Pleasures  and  Pains.]  par.  xxiv,  note, 
f  A  man's  bearing  an  affront  patiently,  that  is,  without 
taking  this  method  of  doing  what  is  called  wiping  it  off,  is 
thought  to  import  one  or  other  of  two  things  :  either  that 
he  does  not  possess  that  sensibility  to  the  pleasures  and  pains 
of  the  moral  sanction,  which,  in  order  to  render  himself  a 
respectable  member  of  society,  a  man  ought  to  possess :  or, 
that  he  does  not  possess  courage  enough  to  stake  his  life  for 
the  chance  of  gratifying  that  resentment  which  a  proper 
sense  of  the  value  of  those  pleasures  and  those  jjains  it  is 
thought  would  not  fail  to  inspire.     True  it  is,  that  there  are 


182  OF    MOTIVES. 

C"AP.  X.  Qi^  the  other  hand,  to  obtain  the  reputation  of 
courage  ;  you  challenge  him  to  fight  with  mor- 
tal weapons.     In  this  case  your  motive  will  by 

divers  other  motives,  by  any  of  which  the  same  conduct 
might  equally  be  produced  :  the  motives  corresponding  to 
the  religious  sanction,  and  the  motives  that  come  under  the 
head  of  benevolence.  Piety  towards  God,  the  practice  in 
question  being  generally  looked  upon  as  repugnant  to  the 
dictates  of  the  religious  sanction  :  sympathy  for  your  an- 
tagonist himself,  whose  life  would  be  put  to  hazard  at  the 
same  time  with  your  own ;  sympathy  for  his  connexions ; 
the  persons  who  are  dependent  on  him  in  the  way  of  support, 
or  connected  with  him  in  the  way  of  sympathy  :  sympathy 
for  your  own  connexions :  and  even  sympathy  for  the  public, 
in  cases  where  the  man  is  such  that  the  public  appears  to 
have  a  material  interest  in  his  life.  But  in  comparison  with 
the  love  of  life,  the  influence  of  the  religious  sanction  is 
known  to  be  in  general  but  weak  :  especially  among  people 
of  those  classes  who  are  here  in  question  :  a  sure  proof  of 
which  is  the  prevalence  of  this  very  custom.  Where  it  is  so 
strong  as  to  preponderate,  it  is  so  rare,  that,  perhaps,  it  gives 
a  man  a  place  in  the  calendar:  and,  at  any  rate,  exalts  him 
to  the  rank  of  martyr.  Moreover,  the  instances  in  which 
either  private  benevolence  or  public  sphit  predominate  over 
the  love  of  life,  will  also  naturally  be  but  rare  :  and,  owing 
to  the  general  propensity  to  detraction,  it  will  also  be  much 
rarer  for  them  to  be  thought  to  do  so.  Now,  when  three  or 
more  motives,  any  one  of  them  capable  of  producing  a  given 
mode  of  conduct,  apply  at  once,  that  which  appears  to  be 
the  most  powerful,  is  that  which  will  of  course  be  deemed  to 
have  actually  done  the  most :  and,  as  the  bulk  of  mankind, 
on  tills  as  on  other  occasions,  are  disposed  to  decide  peremp- 
torily upon  superficial  estimates,  it  will  generally  be  looked 
upon  as  having  done  the  whole. 

The  consequence  is,  that  when  a  man  of  a  certain  rank 


OF    MOTIVES.  183 

some  people  be  accounted  laudable,  and  styled  9"*^-  ^-^ 
honour :  by  others  it  will  be  accounted  blame 
able,  and  these,  if  they  call  it  honour,  will 
prefix  an  epithet  of  improbation  to  it,  and  call 
it  false  honour.  2.  In  order  to  obtain  a  post 
of  rank  and  dignity,  and  thereby  to  increase 
the  respects  paid  you  by  the  public,  you  bribe 
the  electors  who  are  to  confer  it,  or  the  judge 
before  whom  the  title  to  it  is  in  dispute.  In 
this  case  your  motive  is  commonly  accounted 
corrupt  and  abominable,  and  is  styled,  perhaps, 
by  some  such  name  as  dishonest  or  corrupt 
ambition,  as  there  is  no  single  name  for  it. 
3.  In  order  to  obtain  the  good-will  of  the 
public,  you  bestow  a  large  sum  in  works  of 
private  charity  or  public  utility.  In  this  case 
people  will  be  apt  not  to  agree  about  your 
motive.  Your  enemies  will  put  a  bad  colour 
upon  it,  and  call  it  ostentation :  your  friends, 
to  save  you  from  this  reproach,  will  choose 
to  impute  your  conduct  not  to  this  motive  but 
to  some  other:  such  as  that  of  charity  (the 
denomination  in  this  case  given  to  private 
sympathy)  or  that  of  public  spirit.  4.  A  king, 
for  the  sake  of  gaining  the  admiration  annexed 

forbears  to  take  this  chance  of  revenging  an  affront,  his 
conduct  will,  by  most  people,  be  ioiputed  to  the  love  of  life  : 
which,  when  it  jiredomi nates  over  the  love  of  reputation,  is, 
by  a  not  unsalutary  association  of  ideas,  stigmatized  with  the 
reproachful  name  of  cowardice. 


1^4  OF    MOTIVES. 

S!!^^-  to  the  name  of  conqueror  (we  will  suppose 
power  and  resentment  out  of  the  question) 
engages  his  kingdom  in  a  bloody  war.  His 
motive,  by  the  multitude  (whose  sympathy  for 
millions  is  easily  overborne  by  the  pleasure 
which  their  imagination  finds  in  gaping  at  any 
novelty  they  observe  in  the  conduct  of  a  single 
person)  is  deemed  an  admirable  one.  Men  of 
feeling  and  reflection,  who  disapprove  of  the 
dominion  exercised  by  this  motive  on  this  oc- 
casion, without  always  perceiving  that  it  is  the 
same  motive  which  in  other  instances  meets 
with  their  approbation,  deem  it  an  abominable 
one ;  and  because  the  multitude,  who  are  the 
manufacturers  of  language,  have  not  given  them 
a  simple  name  to  call  it  by,  they  will  call  it  by 
some  such  compound  name  as  the  love  of  false 
glory  or  false  ambition.  Yet  in  all  four  cases 
the  motive  is  the  same:  it  is  neither  more  nor 
less  than  the  love  of  reputation. 

XXIII. 

^leam^s        To  the  plcasurcs  of  power  corresponds  the 
of  power,    motive  which,  in  a  neutral  sense,  may  be  termed 

the  love  of  -^ 

power.  the  love  of  power.  People,  who  are  out  of 
humour  with  it  sometimes,  call  it  the  lust  of 
power.  In  a  good  sense,  it  is  scarcely  pro- 
vided with  a  name.  In  certain  cases  this 
motive,  as  well  as  the  love  of  reputation,  are 
confounded  under  the  same  name,  ambition. 
This  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  considering  the 


OF    MOTIVES.  185 

Ultimate  connexion  there  is  between  the  two  S!i^^ 
motives  in  many  cases :  since  it  commonly 
happens,  that  the  same  object  which  affords 
the  one  sort  of  pleasure,  affords  the  other  sort 
at  the  same  time:  for  instance,  offices,  which 
are  at  once  posts  of  honour  and  places  of  trust : 
and  since  at  any  rate  reputation  is  the  road 
to  power. 

1.  If,  in  order  to  gain  a  place  in  adminis- 
tration, you  poison  the  man  who  occupies  it. 
2.  If,  in  the  same  view,  you  propose  a  salutary 
plan  for  the  advancement  of  the  public  welfare ; 
your  motive  is  in  both  cases  the  same.  Yet 
in  the  first  case  it  is  accounted  criminal  and 
abominable  :  in  the  second  case  allowable,  and 
even  laudable. 

XXIV. 

To  the  pleasures  as  well  as  to  the  pains  of  Theraouve 

belonging; 

the   religious    sanction  corresponds   a   motive  i"  iiie  reii- 

gioussauc- 

which  has,  strictly  speaking,  no  perfectly  neu-  tion. 
tral  name  applicable  to  all  cases,  unless  the 
word  religion  be  admitted  in  this  character: 
though  the  word  religion,  strictly  speaking, 
seems  to  mean  not  so  much  the  motive  itself, 
as  a  kind  of  fictitious  personage,  by  whom  the 
motive  is  supposed  to  be  created,  or  an  assem- 
blage of  acts,  supposed  to  be  dictated  by  that 
personage  :  nor  docs  it  seem  to  be  completely 
settled  into  a  neutral  sense.  In  the  same  sense 
it  is  also,  in  some  cases,  styled  religious  zeal : 


IHd  OF    MOTIVES. 

^'^'•-  ^\  ill  other  cases,  the  fear  of  God.  The  love  of 
God,  though  commonly  contrasted  with  the 
fear  of  God,  does  not  come  strictly  under  this 
head.  It  coincides  properly  with  a  motive  of 
a  different  denomination ;  viz.  a  kind  of  sym- 
pathy or  good-will,  which  has  the  Deity  for  its 
object.  In  a  good  sense,  it  is  styled  devotion, 
piety,  and  pious  zeal.  In  a  bad  sense,  it  is 
styled,  in  some  cases,  superstition,  or  supersti- 
tious zeal :  in  other  cases,  fanaticism,  or  fanatic 
zeal :  in  a  sense  not  decidedly  bad,  because  not 
appropriated  to  this  motive,  enthusiasm,  or  en- 
thusiastic zeal. 

1 .  In  order  to  obtain  the  favour  of  the  Supreme 
Being,  a  man  assassinates  his  lawful  sove- 
reign. In  this  case  the  motive  is  now  almost 
universally  looked  upon  as  abominable,  and  is 
termed  fanaticism  :  formerly  it  was  by  great 
numbers  accounted  laudable,  and  was  by  them 
called  pious  zeal.  2.  In  the  same  view,  a  man 
lashes  himself  with  thongs.  In  this  case,  in 
yonder  house,  the  motive  is  accounted  laud- 
able, and  is  called  pious  zeal :  in  the  next  house 
it  is  deemed  contemptible,  and  called  supersti- 
tion. 3.  In  the  same  view,  a  man  eats  a  piece 
of  bread  (or  at  least  what  to  external  appear- 
ance is  a  piece  of  bread)  with  certain  cere- 
monies. In  this  case,  in  yonder  house,  his  mo- 
tive is  looked  upon  as  laudable,  and  is  styled 
piety  and  devotion :  in  the  next  house  it  is 


OF    MOTIVES.  187 

deemed  abominable,  and  styled  superstition,  as  cuAr^ 
before :  perhaps  even  it  is  absurdly  styled 
impiety.  4.  In  the  same  view,  a  man  holds 
a  cow  by  the  tail  while  he  is  dying.  On 
the  Thames  the  motive  would  in  this  case  be 
deemed  contemptible,  and  called  supersti- 
tion. On  the  Ganges  it  is  deemed  merito- 
rious, and  called  piety.  5.  In  the  same  view, 
a  man  bestows  a  large  sum  in  works  of  charity, 
or  public  utility.  In  this  case  the  motive  is 
styled  laudable,  by  those  at  least  to  whom  the 
works  in  question  appear  to  come  under  this 
description :  and  by  these  at  least  it  would  be 
styled  piety.  Yet  in  all  these  cases  the  motive 
is  precisely  the  same  :  it  is  neither  more  nor 
less  than  the  motive  belonging  to  the  religious 
sanction.* 

XXV. 

To  the  pleasures  of  sympathy  corresponds  the  ^""^■^^'''' 
motive  which,  in  a  neutral  sense,  is  termed  s^ood-  pieasurescf 

^  sympatliv. 

will.     The  word  sympathy  may  also  be  used 
on  this  occasion :  though  the  sense  of  it  seems 

*  I  am  aware,  or  at  least  I  hope,  that  people  in  general, 
when  they  see  the  matter  thus  stated,  will  be  ready  to  ac- 
knowledge, that  the  motive  in  these  cases,  whatever  be  the 
tendency  of  the  acts  which  it  produces,  is  not  a  bad  one  :  but 
this  will  not  render  it  the  less  true,  that  hitherto,  in  popular 
•liscourse,  it  has  been  common  for  men  to  speak  of  acts,  which 
they  could  not  but  acknowledge  to  have  originated  from  this 
source,  as  proceeding  from  a  bad  motive.  The  same  obser- 
vation will  apply  to  many  of  the  other  cases. 


^^^  OF    MOTIVES. 

criAP.  X.  ^Q  bg  i-atJier  more  extensive.  In  a  good  sense, 
it  is  styled  benevolence :  and  in  certain  cases, 
philanthropy ;  and,  in  a  figurative  way,  brotherly 
love ;  in  others,  humanity  ;  in  others,  charity;  in 
others,  pity  and  compassion  ;  in  others,  mercy ; 
in  others,  gratitude ;  in  others,  tenderness ;  in 
others,  patriotism ;  in  others,  public  spirit.  Love 
is  also  employed  in  this  as  in  so  many  other 
senses.  In  a  bad  sense,  it  has  no  name  appli- 
cable to  it  in  all  cases  :  in  particular  cases  it  is 
styled  partiality.  The  word  zeal,  with  certain 
epithets  prefixed  to  it,  might  also  be  employed 
sometimes  on  this  occasion,  though  the  sense 
of  it  be  more  extensive ;  applying  sometimes 
to  ill  as  well  as  to  good  will.  It  is  thus  we 
speak  of  party  zeal,  national  zeal,  and  public 
zeal.  The  word  attachment  is  also  used  with 
the  like  epithets :  we  also  say  family-attach- 
ment. The  French  expression,  esprit  de  corps, 
for  which  as  yet  there  seems  to  be  scarcely  any 
name  in  English,  might  be  rendered,  in  some 
cases,  though  rather  inadequately,  by  the  terms 
corporation  spirit,  corporation  attachment,  or 
corporation  zeal. 

I .  A  man  who  has  set  a  town  on  fire  is  appre- 
hended and  committed  :  out  of  regard  or  com- 
passion for  him,  you  help  him  to  break  prison. 
In  this  case  the  generality  of  people  will  pro- 
bably scarcely  know  whether  to  condemn  your 
motive  or  to  applaud  it :  those  who  condemn 


OF    MOTIVES.  189 

your  conduct,  will  be  disposed  rather  to  im-  £^i^ 
piite  it  to  some  other  motive :  if  they  style  it 
benevolence  or  compassion,  they  will  be  for  pre- 
fixing an  epithet,  and  calling  it  false  benevo- 
lence or  false  compassion.*  2.  The  man  is 
taken  again,  and  is  put  upon  his  trial :  to  save 
him  you  swear  falsely  in  his  favour.  People, 
who  would  not  call  your  motive  a  bad  one  be- 
fore, will  perhaps  call  it  so  now.  3.  A  man  is 
at  law  with  you  about  an  estate :  he  has  no 
right  to  it :  the  judge  knows  this,  yet,  having 
an  esteem  or  affection  for  your  adversary,  ad- 
judges it  to  him.  In  this  case  the  motive  is  by 
every  body  deemed  abominable,  and  is  termed 
injustice  and  partiality.  4.  You  detect  a  states- 
man in  receiving  bribes :  out  of  regard  to  the 
public  interest,  you  give  information  of  it,  and 
prosecute  him.     Tn  this  case,  by  all  who  ac- 


*  Among  the  Greeks,  perhaps  the  motive,  and  the  conduct 
it  gave  birth  to,  wouul,  in  such  a  case,  have  been  rather  ap- 
proved than  disap|)roved  of.  It  seems  to  have  been  deemed 
an  act  of  heroism  on  the  part  (;f  Hercules,  to  have  delivered 
Ids  friend  Theseus  from  hell  :  tiiuugh  divine  justice,  wliich 
held  him  there,  should  iiaturuUy  have  been  regarded  as  being 
at  least  upon  a  footing  m  ith  human  justice,  liut  to  divine 
justice,  even  when  acknowledged  under  that  character,  the 
respect  paid  at  that  time  of  day  does  not  seem  to  have  been 
very  profound,  or  well-settled  :  at  ))resent,  the  respect  paid 
to  it  is  profound  and  settled  enough,  though  the  name  of  it 
is  but  too  often  applied  to  dictates  which  could  have  had  no 
other  orii?in  than  the  worst  sort  of  human  cai)rice. 


190  OF    MOTIVES. 

Chap.  X.  knowledge  your  conduct  to  have  originated  from 
this  motive,  your  motive  will  be  deemed  a 
laudable  one,  and  styled  public  spirit.  But 
his  friends  and  adherents  will  not  choose  to  ac- 
count for  your  conduct  in  any  such  manner  : 
they  will  rather  attribute  it  to  party  enmity. 
5.  You  find  a  man  on  the  point  of  starving  :  you 
relieve  him ;  and  save  his  life.  In  this  case 
your  motive  will  by  every  body  be  accounted 
laudable,  and  it  will  be  termed  compassion, 
pity,  charity,  benevolence.  Yet  in  all  these 
cases  the  motive  is  the  same  :  it  is  neither  more 
nor  less  than  the  motive  of  good-will. 

XXVI. 

Ill-will,  &c.  To  the  pleasures  of  malevolence,  or  antipathy, 
sures*'o'fan-  corrcspouds  the  motivc  which,  in  a  neutral 
t.pathy.  ggjjgg^  jg  termed  antipathy  or  displeasure :  and, 
in  particular  cases,  dislike,  aversion,  abhorrence, 
and  indignation :  in  a  neutral  sense,  or  perhaps 
a  sense  leaning  a  little  to  the  bad  side,  ill-will : 
and,  in  particular  cases,  anger,  wrath,  and  en- 
mity. In  a  bad  sense  it  is  styled,  in  different 
cases,  wrath,  spleen,  ill-humour,  hatred,  malice, 
rancour,  rage,  fury,  cruelty,  tyranny,  envy, 
jealousy,  revenge,  misanthropy,  and  by  other 
names,  which  it  is  hardly  worth  while  to  endea- 
vour to  collect*     Like  good-will,   it  is  used 


*  Here,  as  elsewhere,  it  may  be  observed,  that  the  same 
words  which  are  mentioned  as  names  of  motives,  are  also 


OF    MOTIVES.  191 

with  epithets  expressive  of  the  persons  who  are  5"''^--^: 
the  objects  of  the  affection.  Hence  we  hear  of 
party  enmity,  party  rage,  and  so  forth.  In  a 
good  sense  there  seems  to  be  no  single  name 
for  it.  In  compound  expressions  it  may  be 
spoken  of  in  such  a  sense,  by  epithets,  such  as 
just  and  laudable,  prefixed  to  words  that  are 
used  in  a  neutral  or  nearly  neutral  sense. 

1 .  You  rob  a  man :  he  prosecutes  you,  and 
gets  you  punished :  out  of  resentment  you  set 
upon  him,  and  hang  him  with  your  own  hands. 
In  this  case  your  motive  will  universally  be 
deemed  detestable,  and  will  be  called  malice, 
cruelty,  revenge,  and  so  forth.  2.  A  man  has 
stolen  a  little  money  from  you :  out  of  resent- 
ment you  prosecute  him,  and  get  him  hanged 
by  course  of  law.  In  this  case  people  will  pro- 
bably be  a  little  divided  in  their  opinions  about 
your  motive :  your  friends  will  deem  it  a  laud- 
able one,  and  call  it  a  just  or  laudable  resent- 
ment :  your  enemies  will  perhaps  be  disposed 
to  deem  it  blameable,  and  call  it  cruelty,  ma- 
lice, revenge,  and  so  forth :  to  obviate  which, 


many  of  them  names  of  jiassions,  appetites,  and  affections  : 
fictitious  entities,  which  are  framed  only  by  considering 
pleasures  or  pains  in  some  particular  point  of  view.  Some 
of  tliera  are  also  names  of  moral  qualities.  This  branch  of 
nomenclature  is  remarkably  entangled :  to  unravel  it  com- 
pletely would  take  up  a  whole  vohune  3  not  a  sylhible  of 
which  would  belong  profierly  to  the  present  design. 


192  '  OF    MOTIVES. 

^'"^''-  ^:  your  friends  will  try  perhaps  to  change  the 
motive,  and  call  it  public  spirit.  3.  A  man 
has  murdered  your  father:  out  of  resentment 
you  prosecute  him,  and  get  him  put  to  death 
in  course  of  law.  In  this  case  your  motive 
■  will  be  universally  deemed  a  laudable  one,  and 
styled,  as  before,  a  just  or  laudable  resentment : 
and  your  friends,  in  order  to  bring  forward  the 
more  amiable  principle  from  which  the  male- 
volent one,  which  was  your  immediate  motive, 
took  its  rise,  will  be  for  keeping  the  latter  out 
of  sight,  speaking  of  the  former  only,  under 
some  such  name  as  filial  piety.  Yet  in  all  these 
cases  the  motive  is  the  same  :  it  is  neither  more 
nor  less  than  the  motive  of  ill-will. 

XXVII. 

seif-preser-  To  the  scvcral  sorts  of  pains,  or  at  least  to 
the'severai  all  such  of  them  as  are  conceived  to  subsist  in 
pSns.°'  an  intense  degree,  and  to  death,  which,  as  far 
as  we  can  perceive,  is  the  termination  of  all  the 
pleasures,  as  well  as  all  the  pains  we  are  ac- 
quainted with,  corresponds  the  motive,  which 
in  a  neutral  sense  is  styled,  in  general,  self- 
preservation  :  the  desire  of  preserving  one's  self 
from  the  pain  or  evil  in  question.  Now  in  many 
instances  the  desire  of  pleasure,  and  the  sense 
of  pain,  run  into  one  another  undistinguishably. 
►Self-preservation,  therefore,  where  the  degree 
of  the  pain  which  it  corresponds  to  is  but  slight, 
will  scarcely  be  distinguishable,  by  any  precise 


OF    MOTIVES.  193 

line,  from  the  motives  corresponding  to  the  f"^^^-^- 
several  sorts  of  pleasures.  Thus  in  the  case  of 
the  pains  of  hunger  and  thirst :  physical  want 
will  in  many  cases  be  scarcely  distinguishable 
from  physical  desire.  In  some  cases  it  is  styled, 
still  in  a  neutral  sense,  self-defence.  Between 
the  pleasures  and  the  pains  of  the  moral  and 
religious  sanctions,  and  consequently  of  the 
motives  that  correspond  to  them,  as  likewise 
between  the  pleasures  of  amity,  and  the  pains 
of  enmity,  this  want  of  boundaries  has  already 
been  taken  notice  of.*  The  case  is  the  same 
between  the  pleasures  of  wealth,  and  the  pains 
of  privation  corresponding  to  those  pleasures. 
There  are  many  cases,  therefore,  in  which  it 
will  be  difficult  to  distinguish  the  motive  of 
self-preservation  from  pecuniary  interest,  from 
the  desire  of  ingratiating  one's  self,  from  the 
love  of  reputation,  and  from  religious  hope  :  in 
which  cases,  those  more  specific  and  explicit 
names  will  naturally  be  preferred  to  this  general 
and  inexplicit  one.  There  are  also  a  multitude 
of  compound  names,  which  either  are  already 
in  use,  or  might  be  devised,  to  distinguish  the 
specific  branches  of  the  motive  of  self-preser- 
vation from  those  several  motives  of  a  pleasur- 
able origin :  such  as  the  fear  of  poverty,  the 
fear  of  losing  such  or  such  a  man's  regard,  the 
fear  of  shame,  and  the  fear  of  God.     Moreover, 

See  ch.  v.  [Pleasures  and  Pains.]  par.  xxiv.  xxv. 
VOL.   I.  O 


194  OF    MOTIVES. 

chap^.  to  the  evil  of  death  corresponds,  in  a  neutral 
sense,  the  love  of  life ;  in  a  bad  sense,  cow- 
ardice :  which  corresponds  also  to  the  pains  of 
the  senses,  at  least  when  considered  as  subsist- 
ing in  an  acute  degree.  There  seems  to  be  no 
name  for  the  love  of  life  that  has  a  good  sense;  un- 
less it  be  the  vague  and  general  name  of  prudence. 
1.  To  save  yourself  from  being  hanged,  pil- 
loried, imprisoned,  or  fined,  you  poison  the  only 
person  who  can  give  evidence  against  you.  In 
this  case  your  motive  will  universally  be  styled 
abominable :  but  as  the  term  self-preservation 
has  no  bad  sense,  people  will  not  care  to  make 
this  use  of  it :  they  will  be  apt  rather  to  change 
the  motive,  and  call  it  malice.  2.  A  woman, 
having  been  just  delivered  of  an  illegitimate 
child,  in  order  to  save  herself  from  shame,  de- 
stroys the  child,  or  abandons  it.  In  this  case, 
also,  people  will  call  the  motive  a  bad  one, 
and,  not  caring  to  speak  of  it  under  a  neutral 
name,  they  will  be  apt  to  change  the  motive, 
and  call  it  by  some  such  name  as  cruelty. 
3.  To  save  the  expense  of  a  halfpenny,  you 
suffer  a  man,  whom  you  could  preserve  at  that 
expense,  to  perish  with  want,  before  your  eyes. 
In  this  case  your  motive  will  be  universally 
deemed  an  abominable  one ;  and,  to  avoid  call- 
ing it  by  so  indulgent  a  name  as  self-preserva- 
tion, people  will  be  apt  to  call  it  avarice  and 
niggardliness,  with  which  indeed  in  this  case  it 


OF    MOTIVES.        '  195 

indistinguishably  coincides :  for  the  sake  of  ^"*^'  ^* 
finding  a  more  reproachful  appellation,  they 
will  be  apt  likewise  to  change  the  motive,  and 
term  it  cruelty.  4.  To  put  an  end  to  the  pain 
of  hunger,  you  steal  a  loaf  of  bread.  In  this 
case  your  motive  will  scarcely,  perhaps,  be 
deemed  a  very  bad  one ;  and,  in  order  to  ex- 
press more  indulgence  for  it,  people  will  be  apt 
to  find  a  stronger  name  for  it  than  self-preser- 
vation, terming  it  iiecessity.  5.  To  save  yourself 
from  drowning,  you  beat  off  an  innocent  man 
who  has  got  hold  of  the  same  plank.  In  this 
case  your  motive  will  in  general  be  deemed 
neither  good  nor  bad,  and  it  will  be  termed 
self-preservation,  or  necessity,  or  the  love  of 
life.  6.  To  save  your  life  from  a  gang  of  rob- 
bers, you  kill  them  in  the  conflict.  In  this  case 
the  motive  may,  perhaps,  be  deemed  rather 
laudable  than  otherwise,  and,  besides  self-pre- 
servation, is  styled  also  self-defence.  7.  A  sol- 
dier is  sent  out  upon  a  party  against  a  weaker 
party  of  the  enemy :  before  he  gets  up  with  them, 
to  save  his  life,  he  runs  away.  In  this  case  the 
motive  M'ill  universally  be  deemed  a  contempti- 
ble one,  and  will  be  called  cowardice.  Yet  in  all 
these  various  cases,  the  motive  is  still  the  same. 
It  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  self-preservation. 

XXVIII. 

In  particular,  to  the  pains  of  exertion  cor-  To  ti.e 

j>ains  of 

responds  the  motive,  which,  in  a  neutral  sense,  exertion, 

the  love  of 
O    '2  ease. 


19«  OF    MOTIVES. 

£*.^J-  ^;  may  be  termed  the  love  of  ease,  or  by  a  longer 
circumlocution,  the  desire  of  avoiding  trouble. 
In  a  bad  sense,  it  is  termed  indolence.*  It 
seems  to  have  no  name  that  carries  with  it  a 
good  sense. 

1 .  To  save  the  trouble  of  taking  care  of  it,  a 
parent  leaves  his  child  to  perish.  In  this  case 
the  motive  will  be  deemed  an  abominable  one, 
and,  because  indolence  will  seem  too  mild 
a  name  for  it,  the  motive  will,  perhaps,  be 
changed,  and  spoken  of  under  some  such  term 
as  cruelty.  2.  To  save  yourself  from  an  illegal 
slavery,  you  make  your  escape.  In  this  case 
the  motive  will  be  deemed  certainly  not  a  bad 
one :  and,  because  indolence,  or  even  the  love 
of  ease,  will  be  thought  too  unfavourable  a 
name  for  it,  it  will,  perhaps,  be  styled  the  love 
of  liberty.  3.  A  mechanic,  in  order  to  save 
his  labour,  makes  an  improvement  in  his  ma- 
chinery. In  this  case,  people  will  look  upon 
his  motive  as  a  good  one ;  and  finding  no  name 
for  it  that  carries  a  good  sense,  they  will  be  dis- 
posed to  keep  the  motive  out  of  sight :  they 
will  speak  rather  of  his  ingenuity,  than  of  the 
motive  which  was  the  means  of  his  manifesting 
that  quality.     Yet  in  all  these  cases  the  motive 

*  It  may  seem  odd  at  first  sight  to  speak  of  the  love  of 
ease  as  giving  birth  to  action  :  but  exertion  is  as  natural  an 
effect  of  the  love  of  ease  as  inaction  is,  when  a  smaller  degree 
of  exertion  promises  to  exempt  a  man  from  a  greater. 


OF    MOTIVED.  197 

^  is  the  same  :  it  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  the   ch*^ 
love  of  ease. 

XXIX. 

It  appears  then  that  there  is  no  such  thing  Motives 

,  .       .         ca"  oulv  be 

as  any  sort  of  motive  which  is  a  bad  one  in  it-  t>ad  with 

reference 

self :  nor,  consequently,   any  such  thing  as  a  to  the  most 

1   •    1      •       •         -ir    •  1        •       1  frequent 

sort  of  motive,  which  in  itself  is  exclusively  a  complexion 

»       1  1      •         /r  •  of  their  ef- 

good  one.  And  as  to  their  eiiects,  it  appears  fects. 
too  that  these  are  sometimes  bad,  at  other 
times  either  indifferent  or  good :  and  this  ap- 
pears to  be  the  case  with  every  sort  of  motive. 
If  any  sort  of  motive  then  is  either  good  or  bad  on 
the  score  of  its  effects,  this  is  the  case  only  on  indi- 
vidual occasions,  and  with  individual  ftwtives ;  and 
this  is  the  case  with  one  sort  of  motive  as 
well  as  with  another.  If  any  sort  of  motive 
then  can,  in  consideration  of  its  effects,  be  termed 
with  any  propriety  a  bad  one,  it  can  only  be  with 
reference  to  the  balance  of  all  the  effects  it  may 
have  had  of  both  kinds  within  a  given  period* 
that  is,  of  its  most  usual  tendency. 

XXX. 

What   then  ?  (it  will  be  said)  are  not  lust.  How  it  \% 
cruelty,  avarice,  bad  motives?  Is  there  so  much  tiUs,  such 
as  any  one  individual  occasion,  in  which  motives  avarice, 
like  these  can  be  otherwise  than  bad?     No,  cousuStiy 
certainly:  and  yet  the  proposition,  that  there 
is  no  one  sort  of  motive  but  what  will  on  many 
occasions  be  a  good  one,  is  nevertheless  true. 
The  fact  is,  that  these  are  names  which,  if  pro-  ^ 


198  OF    MOTIVES. 

S!!^^  perly  applied,  are  never  applied  but  in  the 
cases  where  the  motives  they  signify  happen 
to  be  bad.  The  names  of  these  motives,  con- 
sidered apart  from  their  effects,  are  sexual 
desire,  displeasure,  and  pecuniary  interest. 
To  sexual  desire,  when  the  effects  of  it  are 
looked  upon  as  bad,  is  given  the  name  of  lust. 
Now  lust  is  always  a  bad  motive.  Why?  Be- 
cause if  the  case  be  such,  that  the  effects  of  the 
motive  are  not  bad,  it  does  not  go,  or  at  least 
ought  not  to  go,  by  the  name  of  lust.  The 
case  is,  then,  that  when  I  say,  ''  Lust  is  a 
bad  motive,"  it  is  a  proposition  that  merely 
concerns  the  import  of  the  word  lust;  and 
which  would  be  false  if  transferred  to  the 
other  word  used  for  the  same  motive,  sexual 
desire.  Hence  we  see  the  emptiness  of  all 
those  rhapsodies  of  common-place  morality, 
which  consist  in  the  taking  of  such  names  as 
lust,  cruelty,  and  avarice,  and  branding  them 
with  marks  of  reprobation :  applied  to  the 
thing,  they  are  false ;  applied  to  the  naine,  they 
are  true  indeed,  but  nugatory.  Would  you  do 
a  real  service  to  mankind,  shew  them  the 
cases  in  which  sexual  desire  merits  the  name 
of  lust ;  displeasure,  that  of  cruelty ;  and  pecu- 
niary interest,  that  of  avarice. 

XXXI. 

Under  the       If  it  wcrc  neccssarv  to  apply  such  denomi- 

above  re-  .  j  i.  r   j 

striciions,    nations  as  good,  bad,  and  indifferent  to  motives, 

motives 


OF    MOTIVES.  199 

they  might  be  classed  in  the  following  manner,    chat^. 
in  consideration   of  the   most   frequent   com-  J51jJ-J,ed" 
plexion  of  their  effects.     In  the  class  of  good  '^H^^"^'^' 
motives  might  be  placed  the  articles  of,  1.  Good-  Jj"*^„e^,3. 
will.     2.    Love   of  reputation.      3.    Desire   of 
amity.     And,  4.  Religion.    In  the  class  of  bad 
motives,  5.  Displeasure.     In  the  class  of  neu- 
tral or  indifferent  motives,    G.   Physical  desire. 
7.    Pecuniary  interest.      8.    Love    of    power. 
9.  Self-preservation ;  as  including  the  fear  of 
the  pains  of  the  senses,  the  love  of  ease,  and  the 
love  of  life. 

XXXII. 

This  method  of  arrangement,  however,  can-  inconve- 
not  but  be  imperfect;  and  the  nomenclature  Uiisaistri- 
belonging  to  it  is  in  danger  of  being  fallacious. 
For  by  what  method  of  investigation  can  a  man 
be  assured,  that  with  regard  to  the  motives 
ranked  under  the  name  of  good,  the  good  effects 
they  have  had,  from  the  beginning  of  the  world, 
have,  in  each  of  the  four  species  comprised 
under  this  name,  been  superior  to  the  bad  ? 
still  more  difficulty  would  a  man  find  in  assur- 
ing himself,  that  with  regard  to  those  which 
are  ranked  under  the  name  of  neutral  or  indif- 
ferent, the  effects  they  have  had  have  exactly 
balanced  each  other,  the  value  of  the  good 
being  neither  greater  nor  less  than  that  of  the 
bad.  It  is  to  be  considered,  that  the  interests 
of  the  person  himself  can  no  more  be  left  out  of 


200  OF    MOTIVES. 

1'"^^-  ^.  the  estimate,  than  those  of  the  rest  of  the  com- 
munity. For  what  would  become  of  the  spe- 
cies, if  it  were  not  for  the  motives  of  hunger 
and  thirst,  sexual  desire,  the  fear  of  pain,  and 
the  love  of  life  ?  Nor  in  the  actual  constitution 
of  human  nature  is  the  motive  of  displeasure 
less  necessary,  perhaps,  than  any  of  the  others: 
although  a  system,  in  which  the  business  of 
life  might  be  carried  on  without  it,  might  pos- 
sibly be  conceived.  It  seems,  therefore,  that 
they  could  scarcely,  without  great  danger  of 
mistakes,  be  distinguished  in  this  manner  even 
with  reference  to  each  other. 

XXXIII. 

iidiv'idlfai''  '^^^  ^^^y  ^^Y'  ^*  should  seem,  in  which  a 
thaf  mo-  i^^otive  can  with  safety  and  propriety  be  styled 
tives  can     pood  or  bad,  is  with  reference  to  its  effects  in 

oe  good  or    ^ 

each  individual  instance  ;  and  principally  from 
the  intention  it  gives  birth  to :  from  which  arise, 
as  will  be  shewn  hereafter,  the  most  material 
part  of  its  effects.  A  motive  is  good,  when  the 
intention  it  gives  birth  to  is  a  good  one ;  bad, 
when  the  intention  is  a  bad  one :  and  an  in- 
tention is  good  or  bad,  according  to  the  mate- 
rial consequences  that  are  the  objects  of  it.  So 
far  is  it  from  the  goodness  of  the  intention's 
being  to  be  known  only  from  the  species  of  the 
motive.  But  from  one  and  the  same  motive, 
as  we  have  seen,  may  result  intentions  of  every 
sort  of  complexion  whatsoever.    This  circum- 


bad 


OF    MOTIVES.  201 

Stance,  therefore,  can  afford   no  clue  for  the   ^"^J-^-, 
arrangement  of  the  several  sorts  of  motives. 

XXXIV. 

A  more  commodious  method,    therefore,  it  Motives 

distin- 

should  seem,  would  be  to  distribute  them  ac-  guisiied  in- 

to  social, 

cording  to  the  influence  w^hich  they  appear  to  dissocial, 
have  on  the  interests  of  the  other  members  of  regardinj. 
the  community,  laying  those  of  the  party  him- 
self out  of  the  question :  to  M^it,  according  to 
the  tendency  which  they  appear  to  have  to 
unite,  or  disunite,  his  interests  and  theirs.  On 
this  plan  they  may  be  distinguished  into  social, 
dissocial,  and  self-i^egarding.  In  the  social  class 
may  be  reckoned,  1.  Good-will.  2.  Love  of 
reputation.  3.  Desire  of  amity.  4.  Religion. 
In  the  dissocial  may  be  placed,  5.  Displeasure. 
In  the  self-regarding  class,  G.  Physical  desire. 
7.  Pecuniary  interest.  8.  Love  of  power. 
9.  Self-preservation ;  as  including  the  fear  of 
the  pains  of  the  senses,  the  love  of  ease,  and  the 
love  of  life. 

XXXV. 

With  respect  to  the  motives  that  have  been  —social, 
termed  social,  if  any  farther  distinction  should  so.iai,  and 
be  of  use,  to  that  of  good-will  alone  may  be 
applied  the  epitliet  of  purely -social ;  while  the 
love  of  reputation,  the  desire  of  amity,  and  the 
motive  of  religion,  may  together  be  comprised 
under  the  division  of  semi-social:  the  social 
tendency  being  much  more  constant  and  uno- 


202  OF    MOTIVES. 

S^^  quivocal  in  the  former  than  in  any  of  the  three 
latter.  Indeed  these  last,  social  as  they  may 
be  termed,  are  self-regarding  at  the  same 
time.* 

§  4.  Order  of  pre-eminence  among  motives, 

XXXVI. 

The  die-         Of  all  these  sorts  of  motives,  good-w^ill  is 

tales  of  '    o  " 

fretiie''^  that  ofwhich  the  dictates,!  taken  in  a  general 
surest  of     view,  are  surest  of  coincidino^  with  those  of  the 

coiucuiing  .  ° 

with  those  principle  of  utility.  For  the  dictates  of  utility 
are  neither  more  nor  less  than  the  dictates  of 
the  most  extensive  J  and  enlightened  (that  is 
well-advised^  benevolence.  The  dictates  of  the 
other  motives  may  be  comformable  to  those  of 
utility,  or  repugnant,  as  it  may  happen. 

XXXVII. 

Yet  do  not       In  this,  hov^ever,  it  is  taken  for  granted,  that 

ill  all  cases.  .  ,  . 

in  the  case  in  question  the  dictates  of  benevo- 
lence are  not  contradicted  by  those  of  a  more 
extensive,  that  is  enlarged,  benevolence.  Now 
when  the  dictates  of  benevolence,  as  respecting 

*  "  Religion,"  says  the  pious  Addison,  somewhere  in  the 
Spectator,  "^  is  the  highest  species  of  self-love." 

J^aws  and  f  When  a  man  is  supposed  to  be  prompted  by  any  motive 
dictates         ^  r  i  j        j 

conceived  ^^  engage,  or  not  to  engage,  in  such  or  such  an  action,  it 
as  issuing  j^j^y  |jg  ^f  ^gg^  foj.  ^j^g  convenience  of  discourse,  to  speak  of 
lives.  such  motive  as  giving  birth  to  an  imaginary  kind  of  law  or 

dictate,  injoining  him  to  engage,  or  not  to  engage,  in  it.  j| 
J-  See  ch.  iv.   [Value.]  and  ch.  vi.  [Sensibility.]  xxi. 
§  See  ch.  ix.  [Consciousness.] 

II  See  ch.  i. 


OF    MOTIVES.  205 

the  interests  of  a  certain  set  of  persons,  are  re-  chap^ 
pugnant  to  the  dictates  of  the  same  motive,  as 
respecting  the  more  important  *  interests  of  ano- 
ther set  of  persons,  the  former  dictates,  it  is  evi- 
dent, are  repealed,  as  it  were,  by  the  latter :  and  a 
man,  were  he  to  be  governed  by  the  former,  could 
scarcely,  with  propriety,  be  said  to  be  governed 
by  the  dictates  of  benevolence.  On  this  account, 
were  the  motives  on  both  sides  sure  to  be  alike 
present  to  a  man's  mind,  the  case  of  such  a 
repugnancy  would  hardly  be  worth  distin- 
guishing, since  the  partial  benevolence  might 
be  considered  as  swallowed  up  in  the  more 
extensive :  if  the  former  prevailed,  and  governed 
the  action,  it  must  be  considered  as  not  owing 
its  birth  to  benevolence,  but  to  some  other 
motive :  if  the  latter  prevailed,  the  former  might 
be  considered  as  having  no  effect.  But  the 
case  is,  that  a  partial  benevolence  may  govern 
the  action,  without  entering  into  any  direct 
competition  with  the  more  extensive  benevo- 
lence, which  would  forbid  it ;  because  the 
interests  of  the  less  numerous  assemblage  of 
persons  may  be  present  to  a  man's  mind,  at  a 
time  when  those  of  the  more  numerous  are 
either  not  present,  or,  if  present,  make  no  im- 
pression. It  is  in  this  way  that  the  dictates  of 
this  motive  may  be  repugnant  to  utility,  yet 

•  Or  valuable.     See  ch.  iv.  [Value.] 


204  OF    MOTIVES. 

p"*^'  ^:  still  be  the  dictates  of  benevolence.  What 
makes  those  of  private  benevolence  conformable 
upon  the  whole  to  the  principle  of  utility,  is, 
that  in  general  they  stand  unopposed  by  those 
of  public  :  if  they  are  repugnant  to  them,  it  is 
only  by  accident.  What  makes  them  the  more 
conformable,  is,  that  in  a  civilized  society,  in 
most  of  the  cases  in  which  they  would  of  them- 
selves be  apt  to  run  counter  to  those  of  public 
benevolence,  they  find  themselves  opposed  by 
stronger  motives  of  the  self-regarding  class, 
which  are  played  off  against  them  by  the  laws ; 
and  that  it  is  only  in  cases  where  they  stand 
unopposed  by  the  other  more  salutary  dictates, 
that  they  are  left  free.  An  act  of  injustice  or 
cruelty,  committed  by  a  man  for  the  sake  of 
his  father  or  his  son,  is  punished,  and  with 
reason,  as  much  as  if  it  were  committed  for  his 
own. 

XXXVIII. 

Next  to  After  sfood-will,  the  motive  of  which  the  dic- 

them  come  o 

those  of  the  tates  sccm  to  have  the  next  best  chance  for  co- 

love  of  re- 
putation,    inciding  with  those  of  utility,  is  that  of  the  love 

of  reputation.     There  is  but  one  circumstance 

which  prevents  the  dictates  of  this  motive  from 

coinciding  in  all  cases  with  those  of  the  former. 

This  is,  that  men  in  their  likings  and  disiikings,. 

in  the  dispositions  they  manifest  to  annex  to 

any  mode  of  conduct  their  approbation  or  their 

disapprobation,  and  in  consequence  to  the  per- 


OF    MOTIVES.  205 

son  who  appears  to  practise  it,  their  good  or  ^^'i^^-x- 
their  ill  will,  do  not  govern  themselves  exclu- 
sively by  the  principle  of  utility.  Sometimes 
it  is  the  principle  of  asceticism  they  are  guided 
by :  sometimes  the  principle  of  sympathy  and 
antipathy.  There  is  another  circumstance,  which 
diminishes,  not  their  conformity  to  the  principle 
of  utility,  but  only  their  efficacy  in  comparison 
with  the  dictates  of  the  motive  of  benevolence. 
The  dictates  of  this  motive  will  operate  as 
strongly  in  secret  as  in  public  :  whether  it  ap- 
pears likely  that  the  conduct  which  they  re- 
commend will  be  known  or  not :  those  of  the 
love  of  reputation  will  coincide  with  those  of 
benevolence  only  in  proportion  as  a  man's  con- 
duct seems  likely  to  be  known.  This  circum- 
stance, however,  does  not  make  so  much  differ- 
ence as  at  first  sight  might  appear.  Acts,  in  pro- 
portion as  they  are  material,  are  apt  to  become 
known  :*  and  in  point  of  reputation,  the  slight- 
est suspicion  often  serves  for  proof.  Besides,  if 
an  act  be  a  disreputable  one,  it  is  not  any  assur- 
ance a  man  can  have  of  the  secrecy  of  the  par- 
ticular act  in  question,  that  will  of  course  sur- 
mount the  objections  he  may  have  against 
engaging  in  it.  Though  the  act  in  question 
should  remain  secret,  it  will  go  towards  forming 
a  habit,  which  may  give  birth  to  other  acts,  that 

*  See  B.  II.  tit.  [Evidence.] 


'206 
Chap.  X. 


OF    MOTIVES. 


may  not  meet  with  the  same  good  fortune. 
There  is  no  human  being,  perhaps,  who  is  at 
years  of  discretion,  on  whom  considerations  of 
this  sort  have  not  some  weight :  and  they  have 
the  more  weight  upon  a  man,  in  proportion  to 
the  strength  of  his  intellectual  powers,  and  the 
firmness  of  his  mind.*  Add  to  this,  the  in 
fluence  which  habit  itself^  when  once  formed, 
has  in  restraining  a  man  from  acts  towards  which, 
from  the  view  of  the  disrepute  annexed  to  them, 
as  well  as  from  any  other  cause,  he  has  con- 
tracted an  aversion.  The  influence  of  habit,  in 
such  cases,  is  a  matter  of  fact,  which,  though  not 
readily  accounted  for,  is  acknowledged  and  in- 
dubitable.| 

XXXIX. 

Next  those      After  the  dictates  of  the  love  of  reputation 

of  the  dc-  _  i 

sire  of  ami-  comc,  as  it  should  seem,  those  of  the  desire  of 

ly. 

amity.  The  former  are  disposed  to  coincide 
with  those  of  utility,  inasmuch  as  they  are  dis- 
posed to  coincide  with  those  of  benevolence. 
Now  those  of  the  desire  of  amity  are  apt  also  to 

*  See  ch.  vi.  [Sensibility.]  par.  xii.  xiii. 
f  Strictly  speaking,  habit,  being  but  a  fictitious  entity,  and 
not  really  any  thing  distinct  from  the  acts  or  perceptions  by 
which  it  is  said  to  be  formed,  cannot  be  the  cause  of  any 
thing.  The  enigma,  however,  may  be  satisfactorily  solved 
upon  the  principle  of  association,  of  the  nature  and  force  of 
which  a  very  satisfactory  account  may  be  seen  in  Dr.  Priestley's 
edition  of  Hartley  on  Man. 


OF    MOTIVES,  207 

coincide,  in  a  certain  sort,  with  those  of  bene-  chap.x. 
volence.  But  the  sort  of  benevolence  with 
the  dictates  of  which  the  love  of  reputation 
coincides,  is  the  more  extensive ;  that  with 
which  those  of  the  desire  of  amity  coincide,  the 
less  extensive.  Those  of  the  love  of  amity  have 
still,  however,  the  advantage  of  those  of  the  self- 
regarding  motives.  The  former,  at  one  period 
or  other  of  his  life,  dispose  a  man  to  contribute 
to  the  happiness  of  a  considerable  number  of 
persons :  the  latter,  from  the  beginning  of  life 
to  the  end  of  it,  confine  themselves  to  the  care 
of  that  single  individual.  The  dictates  of  the 
desire  of  amity,  it  is  plain,  will  approach  nearer 
to  a  coincidence  with  those  of  the  love  of  repu- 
tation, and  thence  with  those  of  utility,  in  pro- 
portion, ccEteris  paribus,  to  the  number  of  the 
persons  whose  amity  a  man  has  occasion  to 
desire  :  and  hence  it  is,  for  example,  that  an 
English  member  of  parliament,  with  all  his 
own  weaknesses,  and  all  the  follies  of  the  people 
whose  amity  he  has  to  cultivate,  is  probably, 
in  general,  a  better  character  than  the  secre- 
tary of  a  visier  at  Constantinople,  or  of  a  naib 
in  Indostan. 

XL. 

The  dictates  of  religion   are,  under  the  in-  Dimcuity 
finite  diversity  of  religions,  so  extremely  vari-  those of'r^i- 
able,  that  it  is  difficult  to  know  what  general  '^"'"" 
account  to  give  of  them,  or  in   what  rank  to 


^08  OF    MOTIV'ES. 


Chap.  X. 


place  the  motive  they  belong  to.     Upon  the 
mention  of  religion,  people's  first  thoughts  turn 
naturally  to  the  religion  they  themselves  pro- 
fess.    This  is  a  great  source  of  miscalculation, 
and  has  a  tendency  to  place  this  sort  of  motive 
in  a  higher  rank  than  it  deserves.     The  dictates: 
of  religion  would  coincide,   in  all  cases,  with 
those  of  utility,  were  the  Being,  who  is  the  ob- 
ject of  religion,  universally  supposed  to  be  as 
benevolent  as  he  is  supposed  to  be  wise  and 
powerful ;  and  were  the  notions  entertained  of 
his  benevolence,  at  the  same  time,  as  correct  as 
those  which  are  entertained  of  his  wisdom  and 
his    power.     Unhappily,   however,  neither  of 
these  is  the  case.     He  is  universally  supposed 
to  be  all-powerful :  for  by  the  Deity,  what  else 
does  any  man  mean  than  the  Being,  whatever 
he  be,  by  whom  every  thing  is  done  ?     And  as 
to  knowledge,  by  the  same  rule  that  he  should 
know  one  thing  he  should  know  another.  These 
notions  seem  to  be  as  correct,  for  all  material 
purposes,   as  they  are  universal.     But  among 
the  votaries  of  religion  (of  which  number  the 
multifarious  fraternity  of  Christians  is  but  a 
small  part)  there  seem  to  be  but  few  (I  will  not 
say  how  few)  who  are  real  believers  in  his  bene- 
volence.    They  call  him  benevolent  in  words, 
but  they  do  not  mean  that  he  is  so  in  reality. 
They  do  not  mean,  that  he  is  benevolent  as  man 
is  conceived  to  be  benevolent :    they  do  not 


OF    MOTIVES. 

mean  that  he  is  benevolent  in  the  only  sense  in 
which  benevolence  has  a  meaning.  For  if  they 
did,  they  would  recognise  that  the  dictates  of 
religion  could  be  neither  more  nor  less  than  the 
dictates  of  utility :  not  a  tittle  different :  not  a 
tittle  less  or  more.  But  the  case  is,  that  on  a 
thousand  occasions  they  turn  their  backs  on  the 
principle  of  utility.  They  go  astray  after  the 
strange  principles  its  antagonists  :  sometimes  it 
is  the  principle  of  asceticism :  sometimes  the 
principle  of  sympathy  and  antipathy.*  Accord- 
ingly, the  idea  they  bear  in  their  minds,  on  such 
occasions,  is  but  too  often  the  idea  of  malevo- 
lence ;  to  which  idea,  stripping  it  of  its  own 
proper  name,  they  bestow  the  specious  appel- 
lation of  the  social  motive. f  The  dictates  of 
religion,  in  short,  are  no  other  than  the  dictates 
of  that  principle  which  has  been  already  men- 
tioned under  the  name  of  the  theological  prin- 

*  Ch.  ii.  [Principles  Adverse.]  xviii. 
f  Sometimes,  in  order  the  better  to  conceal  the  cheat  (from 
their  own  eyes  doubtless  as  well  as  from  others)  they  set  up 
a  phantom  of  their  own,  which  they  call  Justice  :  whose  dic- 
tates are  to  modify  (which  being  explained,  means  to  oppose) 
the  dictates  of  benevolence.  Rut  justice,  in  the  only  sense  in 
which  it  has  a  meanings,  is  an  imajrinary  personage,  feigned 
for  the  convenience  of  discourse,  whose  dictates  are  tlie  dic- 
tates of  utility,  ajjplied  to  certain  particular  cases.  Justice, 
then,  is  nothing  more  than  an  imaginary  instrument,  em- 
ployed to  forward  on  certain  occasions,  and  by  certain  means, 
the  purposes  of  benevolence.  The  dictates  of  justice  are  no- 
VOL.    I.  P 


'ilO  OF    MOTIVES. 

chap.x.  ciple.*  These,  as  has  been  observed,  are  just 
as  it  may  happen,  according  to  the  biases  of 
the  person  in  question,  copies  of  the  dictates  of 
one  or  other  of  the  three  original  principles : 
sometimes,  indeed,  of  the  dictates  of  utility :  but 
frequently  of  those  of  asceticism,  or  those  of 
sympathy  and  antipathy.  In  this  respect  they 
are  only  on  a  par  with  the  dictates  of  the  love 
of  reputation :  in  another  they  are  below  it. 
The  dictates  of  religion  are  in  all  places  inter- 
mixed more  or  less  with  dictates  unconformable 
to  those  of  utility,  deduced  from  texts,  well  or 
ill  interpreted,  of  the  writings  held  for  sacred 
by  each  sect :  unconformable,  by  imposing  prac- 
tices sometimes  inconvenient  to  a  man's  self, 
sometimes  pernicious  to  the  rest  of  the  com- 
munity. The  sufferings  of  uncalled  martyrs, 
the  calamities  of  holy  wars  and  religious  perse- 
cutions, the  mischiefs  of  intolerant  laws,  (objects 
which  can  here  only  be  glanced  at,  not  detailed) 
are  so  many  additional  mischiefs  over  and  above 
the  number  of  those  which  were  ever  brought 
into  the  world  by  the  love  of  reputation.  On 
the  other  hand,  it  is  manifest,  that  with  respect 
to  the  power  of  operating  in  secret,  the  dictates 
of  religion  have  the  same  advantage  over  those 


thing  more  than  a  part  of  the  dictates  of  benevolence,  which, 
on  certain  occasions,  are  applied  to  certain  subjects  j  to  wit, 
to  certain  actions. 

*  See  ch.  ii.  [Principles  Adverse,  ike] 


OF    MOTIVES.  '311 

of  the  love  of  reputation,  and  the  desire  of  amity,    chap.x. 
as  is  possessed  by  the  dictates  of  benevolence. 

XLl. 

Happily,  the  dictates  of  religion  seem  to  ap-  Tendency, 
proach  nearer  and  nearer  to  a  coincidence  with  to^mpwve. 
those  of  utility  every  day.  But  why  ?  Because 
the  dictates  of  the  moral  sanction  do  so :  and 
those  coincide  with  or  are  influenced  by  these. 
Men  of  the  worst  religions,  influenced  by  the 
voice  and  practice  of  the  surrounding  world, 
borrow  continually  a  new  and  a  new  leaf  out  of 
the  book  of  utility :  and  with  these,  in  order  not 
to  break  with  their  religion,  they  endeavour, 
sometimes  with  violence  enough,  to  patch  toge- 
ther and  adorn  the  repositories  of  their  faith. 

XLII. 

As   to  the   self-regarding  and  dissocial  mo-  Afterward? 
tives,  the  order  that  takes  place  among  these,  seif-re-ard- 
and  the  preceding  one,  in  point  of  extra-regard-  t'i\"es :  and, 
ing  influence,  is  too  evident  to  need  insisting  oTdi'piea- 
on.     As  to  the  order  that  takes  place  among  ^^^^' 
the  motives  of  the  self-regarding  class,  consi- 
dered in  comparison  with  one  another,    there 
seems  to  be  no  difl'erence  which  on  this  occa- 
sion would  be  worth  mentioning.    With  respect 
to  the  dissocial  motive,  it  makes  a  difference 
(with  regard  to  its  extra-regarding  eff"ccts)  from 
which  of  two   sources  it  originates ;    whether 
from  self-regarding  or  from  social  considera- 
tions.    The  displeasure  you  conceive  againstja' 

p  2 


21?  OF    MOTIVES. 

^"^^- ^j  man  may  be  founded  either  on  some  act  which 
offends  you  in  the  first  instance,  or  on  an  act 
which  offends  you  no  otherwise  than  because 
you  look  upon  it  as  being  prejudicial  to  some 
other  party  on  whose  behalf  you  interest  your- 
self: which  other  party  may  be  of  course  either 
a  determinate  individual,  or  any  assemblage  of 
individuals,  determinate  or  indeterminate.*  It 
it  is  obvious  enough,  that  a  motive,  though  in 
itself  di>ssocial,  may,  by  issuing  from  a  social 
origin,  possess  a  social  tendency ;  and  that  its 
tendency,  in  this  case,  is  likely  to  be  the  more 
social,  the  more  enlarged  the  description  is  of 
the  persons  whose  interests  you  espouse.  Dis- 
pleasure, venting  itself  against  a  man,  on  ac- 
count of  a  mischief  supposed  to  be  done  by  him 
to  the  public,  may  be  more  social  in  its  effects 
than  any  good-will,  the  exertions  of  which  are 
confined  to  an  individual.-}- 

§  5.     Coiifiict  among  motives. 

XLIII. 

Motives  When  a  man  has  it  in  contemplation  to  en- 

impelling 

and  re-      gagc  iu  any  action,  he  is  frequently  acted  upon 

what.     '    at  the  same  sime  by  the  force  of  divers  motives : 

one   motive,  or  set  of  motives,  acting  in  one 

direction ;    another  motive,  or  set  of  motives. 


*  See  ch.  vi.  [Sensibility.]  par.  xxi. 
f  See  supra,  par.  xxxvii. 


OF    MOTIVES.  213 

acting  as  it  were  in  an  opposite  direction.  The  chap^ 
motives  on  one  side  disposing  him  to  engage  in 
the  action  :  those  on  the  other,  disposing  him 
not  to  engage  in  it.  Now,  any  motive,  the  in- 
fluence of  which  tends  to  dispose  him  to  en- 
gage in  the  action  in  question,  may  be  termed  an 
impelling  motive :  any  motive,  the  influence  of 
which  tends  to  dispose  him  not  to  engage  in  it, 
a  restraining  motive.  But  these  appellations 
may  of  course  be  interchanged,  according  as 
the  act  is  of  the  positive  kind,  or  the  negative.* 

XLIV. 

It  has  been  shown,  that  there  is  no  sort  of  Y'*""^  ^'^ 

the  moiives 

motive  but  may  give  birth  to  any  sort  of  action.  "Jj°*|J^f''^\ 
It  follows,  therefore,  that  there  are  no  two  mo-  variance. 
tives  but  may  come  to  be  opposed  to  one  an-  - 
other.     Where  the  tendency  of  the  act  is  bad, 
the  most  common  case  is  for  it  to  have  been 
dictated  by  a  motive  either  of  the  self-regard- 
ing, or  of  the  dissocial  class.     In  such  case  the 
motive  of  benevolence  has  commonly  been  act- 
ing, though  ineff"ectually,  in  the  character  of  a 
restraining  motive. 

XLV.. 

An  example  may  be  of  use,  to  show  the  variety  Example 

r  '^  '  -^    to  illus- 

of  contending-  motives,  bv  which  a  man  may  be  trate  a 
acted  upon  at  the  same  time.  Crillon,  a  Catholic  amonfr 

'  .  coDteiidiiig 

(at  a  time  when  it  was  generally  thought  merito-  motives. 


See  ch.  vii.  [Actions.]  jjur.  viii. 


214  OF    MOTIVES. 

^"'^'^•^•,  rious  among  Catholics  to  extirpate  Protestants) 
was  ordered  by  his  king,  Charles  IX.  of  France, 
to  fall  privately  upon  Coligny,  a  Protestant,  and 
assassinate  him  :  his  answer  was,  "  Excuse  me. 
Sire;  but  Til  fight  him  with  all  my  heart."* 
Here  then,  were  all  the  three  forces  above  men- 
tioned, including  that  of  the  political  sanction, 
acting  upon  him  at  once.  By  the  political 
sanction,  or  at  least  so  much  of  the  force  of  it 
as  such  a  mandate,  from  such  a  sovereign,  issued 
on  such  an  occasion,  might  be  supposed  to  carry 
with  it,  he  was  enjoined  to  put  Coligny  to  death 
in  the  way  of  assassination :  by  the  religious 
sanction,  that  is,  by  the  dictates  of  religious  zeal, 
he  was  enjoined  to  put  him  to  death  in  any  way : 
by  the  moral  sanction,  or  in  other  words,  by  the 
dictates  of  honour,  that  is,  of  the  love  of  reputa- 
tion, he  was  permitted  (which  permission,  when 
coupled  with  the  mandates  of  his  sovereign,  ope- 
rated, he  conceived,  as  an  injunction)  to  fight  the 
adversary  upon  equal  terms  :  by  the  dictates  of 
enlarged  benevolence  (supposing  the  mandate  to 
be  unjustifiable)  he  was  enjoined  not  to  attempt 
his  life  in  any  way,  but  to  remain  at  peace 
with  him :  supposing  the  mandate  to  be  unjus- 
tifiable, by  the  dictates  of  ])rivate  benevolence, 
he  was  enjoined  not  to  meddle  with  him  at  any 

*  The  idea  of  the  case  here  supposed  is  taken  from  an 
anecdote  in  real  history,  but  varies  from  it  in  several 
particulars. 


OF    MOTIVES.  215 

rate.  Among  this  confusion  of  repugnant  die-  c^a^-^- 
tates,  Crillon,  it  seems,  gave  the  preference,  in 
the  first  place,  to  those  of  honour  :  in  the  next 
place,  to  those  of  benevolence.  He  would  have 
fought,  had  his  offer  been  accepted ;  as  it  was 
not,  he  remained  at  peace. 

Here  a  multitude  of  questions  might  arise. 
Supposing  the  dictates  of  the  political  sanction 
to  follow  the  mandate  of  the  sovereign,  of  what 
kind  were  the  motives  which  they  afforded  him 
for  compliance  ?  The  answer  is,  of  the  self- 
regarding  kind  at  any  rate :  inasmuch  as,  by  the 
supposition,  it  was  in  the  power  of  the  sovereign 
to  punish  him  for  non-compliance,  or  reward 
him  for  compliance.  Did  they  afford  him  the 
motive  of  religion?  (I  mean  independently  of 
the  circumstance  of  heresy  above  mentioned) 
the  answer  is.  Yes,  if  his  notion  was,  that  it  was 
God's  pleasure  he  should  comply  with  them ; 
No,  if  it  was  not.  Did  they  afford  him  the 
motive  of  the  love  of  reputation  ?  Yes,  if  it  was 
his  notion  that  the  world  would  expect  and  re- 
quire that  he  should  comply  with  them  :  No,  if 
it  was  not.  Did  they  afford  him  that  of  bene- 
volence ?  Yes,  if  it  was  his  notion  that  the 
community  would  upon  the  whole  be  the  better 
for  his  complying  with  them  :  No,  if  it  was  not. 
But  did  the  dictates  of  the  political  sanction, 
in  the  case  in  question,  actually  follow  the  man- 
dates of  the  sovereign  :    in  other  words,  was 


motives. 


ai6  OF    MOTIVES. 

5"'|J'--^j  such  a  mandate  legal  ?  This  we  see  is  a  mere 
question  of  local  jurisprudence,  altogether 
foreign  to  the  present  purpose. 

XLVI. 

Practical         What  is  hcrc  said  about  the  sroodness  and  bad- 
use  of  the  _  '^ 

above  dis-  ncss  of  motivcs,  is  far  from  beine-  a  mere  mat- 

quisitions  " 

relative  to  tcr  of  words.  There  will  be  occasion  to  make 
use  of  it  hereafter  for  various  important  pur- 
poses. I  shall  have  need  of  it  for  the  sake  of 
dissipating  various  prejudices,  which  are  of  dis- 
service to  the  community,  sometimes  by  cherish- 
ing the  flame  of  civil  dissensions,*  at  other  times, 
by  obstructing  the  course  of  justice.  It  will  be 
shown,  that  in  the  case  of  many  offences,!  the 
consideration  of  the  motive  is  a  most  material 
one  :  for  that  in  the  first  place  it  makes  a  very 
material  difference  in  the  magnitude  of  the  mis- 
chief:  J  in  the  next  place,  that  it  is  easy  to  be 
ascertained ;  and  thence  may  be  made  a  ground 
for  a  difference  in  the  demand  for  punishment : 
but  that  in  other  cases  it  is  altogether  incapable 
of  being  ascertained  ;  and  that,  were  it  capable 
of  being  ever  so  well  ascertained,  good  or  bad, 
it  could  make  no  difference  in  the  demand  for 
punishment :  that  in  all  cases,  the  motive  that 
may  happen  to  govern  a  prosecutor,  is  a  consi- 
deration totally  immaterial :  whence  may  be 


*  See  B.I.  tit.  [Rebellion.] 

■^  lb,  tit,  [Simp,  corp,  injuries,]    lb.  tit.  [Homicide.] 

J  See  ch.  xi.  [Dispositions.] 


OF    MOTIVES.  217 

seen  the  mischievousness  of  the  prejudice  that    ^"^^'  ^y 
is  so  apt  to  be  entertained  against  informers ; 
and  the  consequence  it  is  of  that  the  judge,  in 
particular,  should  be  proof  against  the  influence 
of  such  delusions. 

Lastly,  The  subject  of  motives  is  one  with 
which  it  is  necessary  to  be  acquainted,  in  order 
to  pass  a  judgment  on  any  means  that  may  be 
proposed  for  combating  offences  in  their  source.* 

But  before  the  theoretical  foundation  for  these 
practical  observations  can  be  completely  laid, 
it  is  necessary  we  should  say  something  on  the 
sub}ect  of  disposition :  which,  accordingly,  will 
furnish  matter  for  the  ensuing  chapter. 


See  Append,  tit.  [Preventive  Institutions.] 


[     218     ] 


CHAP.    XI. 


OF    UUMAN    DISPOSITIONS    IN    GENERAL. 


I. 


Disposi-     Ijf  the  foregoing  chapter  it  has  been  shown  at 

tion,  what.  o         o  i 

large,  that  goodness  or  badness  cannot,  with 
any  propriety,  be  predicated  of  motives.  Is 
there  nothing  then  about  a  man  that  can  pro- 
perly be  termed  good  or  bad,  when,  on  such  or 
such  an  occasion,  he  suffers  himself  to  be  go- 
verned by  such  or  such  a  motive?  Yes,  cer- 
tainly :  his  disposition.  Now  disposition  is  a 
kind  of  fictitious  entity,  feigned  for  the  con- 
venience of  discourse,  in  order  to  express  what 
there  is  supposed  to  be  'permanent  in  a  man's 
frame  of  mind,  where,  on  such  or  such  an  oc- 
casion, he  has  been  influenced  by  such  or  such 
a  motive,  to  engage  in  an  act,  which,  as  it  ap- 
peared to  him,  was  of  such  or  such  a  tendency. 

II. 

— ho'.v  far  It  is  with  dispositiou  as  with  every  thing  else : 
to'the°'yre.  it  will  bc  good  or  bad  according  to  its  effects  : 
according  to  the  effects  it  has  in  augmenting  or 
diminishing  the  happiness  of  the  community. 
A  man's  disposition  may  accordingly  be  con- 
sidered in  two  points  of  view :    according  to 


sent  sub- 
ject. 


HUMAN    DTSFOSITIOXS    IN    GENERAL.  '^19 

the  influence  it  lias,  either,  1.  on  his  own  hap-  chap,  xi. 
piness :  or,  2.  on  the  happiness  of  others. 
Viewed  in  both  these  lights  together,  or  in 
either  of  them  indiscriminately,  it  may  be 
termett,  on  the  one  hand,  good;  on  the  other, 
bad  ;  or,  in  flagrant  cases,  depraved.*  Viewed 
in  the  former  of  these  lights,  it  has  scarcely 
any  peculiar  name,  which  has  as  yet  been  ap- 
propriated to  it.  It  might  be  termed,  though 
but  inexpressively,  frail  or  infirm,  on  the  one 
hand  :  sound  or  firm,  on  the  other.  Viewed  in 
the  other  light,  it  might  be  termed  beneficent, 
or  meritorious,  on  the  one  hand :  pernicious  or 
mischievous,  on  the  other.  Now  of  that  branch 
of  a  man's  disposition,  the  eff'ects  of  which 
regard  in  the  first  instance  only  himself,  there 
needs  not  much  to  be  said  here.  To  reform  it 
when  bad,  is  the  business  rather  of  the  moralist 


*  It  might  also  be  termed  virtuous,  or  vicious.     Tlie  only 
objection  to  the  use  of  those  terms  on  the  present  occasion 
is,  the  great  quantity  of  good  and  bad  repute  that  respectively 
stand  annexed  to  them.     The  inconvenience  of  this  is,  their 
being  apt  to  annex  an  ill-proportioned  measure  of  disrepute 
to  dispositions  which  are  ill-constituted  only  with  respect  to 
the  party  hiujself :    involving  them  in  suclx  a  degree  of  ig- 
nominy as  shouM  be  ap|)roj)riated  to  such  dispositions  only  as 
are  miscliimous  witli  regard  to  otiiers.     To  exalt  weaknesses 
to  a  level  with  crimes,  is  a  way  to  dimini.sh  the  abhorrence 
which  ougiit  to  be  reserved  for  crimes.    To  exalt  small  evils 
to  a  level  with  great  ones,  is  the  way  to  diminish  the  share 
of  attention  which  ought  to  be  paid  to  great  ones. 


'220  HUMAN    DISPOSITIONS    IN    GENERAL. 

OiAP  xr.  xh^Yi  the  legislator:  nor  is  it  susceptible  of 
those  various  modifications  which  make  so  ma- 
terial a  difference  in  the  effects  of  the  other. 
Again,  with  respect  to  that  part  of  it,  the 
effects  whereof  regard  others  in  the  first  in- 
stance, it  is  only  in  as  far  as  it  is  of  a  mis- 
chievous nature  that  the  penal  branch  of  law 
has  any  immediate  concern  with  it :  in  as  far 
as  it  may  be  of  a  beneficent  nature,  it  belongs 
to  a  hitherto  but  little  cultivated,  and  as  yet 
unnamed  branch  of  law,  which  might  be  styled 
the  remuneratory. 

III. 
A  mischie-      A  man  then  is  said  to  be  of  a  mischievous 
sition;  a     dispositiou,  wlicu,  by  the  influence  of  no  matter 
ousdispo-  what  motives,  he  is  presumed  to  be  more  apt  to 
what!'       engage,  or  form  intentions  of  engaging,  in  acts 
which  are  apparently  of  a  pernicious  tendency, 
than  in  such  as  are  apparently  of  a  beneficial 
tendency :  of  a  meritorious  or  beneficent  dis- 
position in  the  opposite  case. 

IV. 

What  a  ^  ^^y  presumed  :   for,  by  the  supposition,  all 

JSufon  is,  tliat  appears  is  one  single  action,  attended  with 
mrtiTr  o?^  one  single  train  of  circumstances :  but  from 
presump-  ^^^  dcgrcc  of  consistcncy  and  uniformity  which 
experience  has  shown  to  be  observable  in  the 
different  actions  of  the  same  person,  the  pro- 
bable existence  (past  or  future)  of  a  number  of 
acts  of  a  similar  nature,  is  naturally  and  justly 


HUMAX    DISPOSITIONS    IN    GENERAL.  221 

inferred  from  the  observation  of  one  single  one.   chap^i. 
Under  such  circumstances,  such  as  the  motive 
proves  to  be  in  one  instance,  such  is  the  dis- 
position to  be  presumed  to  be  in  others. 

V. 

I  say  apparently  mischievous  :    that  is,  appa-  it  depends 
rently   w^ith  regard   to   him  :•   such  as  to  him  the  act  ap- 

1  1  n       n  ^        pears  to  be 

appear  to  possess  that  tendency :  tor  irom  the  to  him. 
mere  event,  independent  of  what  to  him  it 
appears  beforehand  Hkely  to  be,  nothing  can 
be  inferred  on  either  side.  If  to  him  it  appears 
likely  to  be  mischievous,  in  such  case,  though 
in  the  upshot  it  should  prove  innocent,  or  even 
beneficial,  it  makes  no  difference  ;  there  is  not 
the  less  reason  for  presuming  his  disposition  to 
be  a  bad  one  :  if  to  him  it  appears  likely  to  be 
beneficial  or  innocent,  in  such  case,  though  in 
the  upshot  it  should  prove  pernicious,  there  is 
not  the  more  reason  on  that  account  for  pre- 
suming his  disposition  to  be  a  good  one.  And 
here  we  see  the  importance  of  the  circum- 
stances of  intentionality,*  consciousness,t  un- 
consciousness, f  and  mis-supposal-t 

VI. 

The  truth  of  these  positions  depends  upon  which  po- 
two  others,  both  of  them  sufficiently  verified  by  ^^vounlLi 
experience  :    Tlie  one  is,  that  in  the  ordinary  facts^"i. 
course  of  things   the  consequences  of  actions  spmwtcncr 

l)clwceu 

'  ~       ""^     ~~     "  '  — '  iiiteiitions 

*  See  ch.  viii.  t  bcc  ch.  l.x.  ,,„cuces: 


2^2  HUMAN   DISPOSITIONS  IN  GENERAL.  - 

^"^^•^!'  commonly  turn  out  conformable  to  intentions. 
A  man  who  sets  up  a  butcher's  shop,  and  deals 
in  beef,  when  he  intends  to  knock  down  an  ox, 
commonly  does  knock  down  an  ox  ;  though  by 
some  unlucky  accident  he  may  chance  to  miss 
his  blow  and  knock  down  a  mail :  he  who  sets 
up  a  grocer's  shop,  and  deals  in  sugar,  when  he 
intends  to  sell  sugar,  commonly  does  sell  sugar : 
though  by  some  unlucky  accident  he  may  chance 
to  sell  arsenic  in  the  room  of  it. 

VII. 

2.  BetMcea      The  otlicr  is,  that  a  man  who  entertains  in- 

the  inten- 
tions of  the  tentions  of  doing"  mischief  at  one  time  is  apt  to 

same  per-  _  ... 

sonatdifife-  entertain  the  like  intentions  at  another.* 

rent  times. 

VIII. 

The  dispo-      ThcTC  are  two  circumstances  upon  which  the 

sition  is  to  _    ^  _        _ 

be  inferred,  naturc  of  thc  dispositioii,  as  indicated  by  any 
apparent     act,  is  Uablc  to  dcpcud  :    1 .  The  apparent  ten- 

teudency  of 

the  act:     dcucy  of  the  act :  .  2.  The  nature  of  the  motive 

A  disposi-        *  To  suupose  a  man  to  be  of  a  good  disposition,  and  at  the 
lion,  from    ^^^^  ^ime  likely,  in  virtue  of  that  very  disposition,  to  engage 

ceeds  a  ha-  in  an  habitual  train  of  mischievous  actions,  is  a  contradiction 
bit  of  doinsr  .  -i  i         i  •  •  i         i  i    i 

mischief       i"  terms  :   nor  could  such  a  proposition  ever  be  advanced,  but 

cannotbea  f^.Q^y^  i\^q  p;ivine:,  to  the  thing  which  the  word  disposition  is 
good  one.  t>        to>  o  t 

put  for,  a  reality  which  does  not  belong  to  it.  If  then,  for 
example,  a  man  of  religious  disposition  should,  in  virtue  of 
that  very  disposition,  be  in  the  habit  of  doing  mischief,  for 
instance,  by  persecuting  his  neighbours,  the  case  must  be, 
either  that  his  disposition,  though  good  in  certain  respects,  is 
not  good  upon  the  whole  :  or  that  a  religious  disposition  is 
not  in  general  a  good  one. 


HUMAN  DISPOSITIONS  IN  GENERAL.  ^23 

which  gave  birth  to  it.     This  dependency  is  Chap^. 
subject  to  different  rules,  according  to  the  na-  2. From  the 

''  nature  of 

ture  of  the  motive.     In  stating  them,  I  suppose  t^^e  motive. 
all  along  the  apparent  tendency  of  the  act  to  be, 
as  it  commonly  is,  the  same  as  the  real. 

IX. 

1 .  Where  the  tendency  of  the  act  is  good,  and  Case  i. 

.       '  Tendency, 

the  motive  is  of  the  self-regardmg  kind.    In  this  ^oorf— mo- 
case  the  motive  aifords  no  inference  on  either  regarding. 
side.     It  affords  no  indication  of  a  good  dispo- 
sition :  but  neither  does  it  afford  any  indication 
©f  a  bad  one. 

A  baker  sells  his  bread  to  a  hungry  man  who 
asks  for  it.  This,  we  see,  is  one  of  those  acts 
of  which,  in  ordinary  cases,  the  tendency  is  un- 
questionably good.  The  baker's  motive  is  the 
ordinary  commercial  motive  of  pecuniary  in- 
terest. It  is  plain,  that  there  is  nothing  in  the 
transaction,  thus  stated,  that  can  afford  the  least 
ground  for  presuming  that  the  baker  is  a  better 
or  a  worse  man  than  any  of  his  neighbours. 

X. 

2.  Where  the  tendency  of  tlie  act  is  bad,  and  case  2. 

.  Tendency, 

the  motive,  as  before,  is  of  the  adf-i^cgarding  bad-mo- 

1-1  T         1-  1  T  ••  -T^  1^      live,  self- 

kind.     In  this  case  the  disposition  indicated  is  regarding. 

a  mischievous  one. 

A  man  steals  bread  out  of  a  baker's  shop  :  this 

is  one  of  those  acts  of  wljich  the  tendency  ^^'ill 

readily  be  acknowledged  to  be  bad.   Why,  and 

in  what  respects  it  is  so,  will  be  stated  farllicr 


224 


HUMAN  DISPOSITIONS  IN  GENERAL. 


Chap.  XI. 


Case  3. 
Tendency, 
good-iao- 
tive,  good- 
will. 


Case  4. 
Tendency, 
bad-mo- 
tive,  good- 
will. 


This  case 
not  au  im- 
possible 
one. 


on.*  His  motive,  we  will  say,  is  that  of  pe- 
cuniary interest ;  the  desire  of  getting  the  value 
of  the  bread  for  nothing.  His  disposition,  ac- 
cordingly, appears  to  be  a  bad  one :  for  every 
one  will  allow  a  thievish  disposition  to  be  a  bad 
one. 

XI. 

3.  Where  the  tendency  of  the  act  is  good,  and 
the  motive  is  the  purely  social  one  of  good-will. 
In  this  case  the  disposition  indicated  is  a  bene- 
ficent one. 

A  baker  gives  a  poor  man  a  loaf  of  bread. 
His  motive  is  compassion  ;  a  name  given  to  the 
motive  of  benevolence,  in  particular  cases  of  its 
operation.  The  disposition  indicated  by  the 
baker,  in  this  case,  is  such  as  every  man  will 
be  ready  enough  to  acknov/ledge  to  be  a  good 


one. 


XII. 


4.  Where  the  tendency  of  the  act  is  bad,  and 
the  motive  is  the  purely  social  one  of  good- will. 
Even  in  this  case  the  disposition  which  the  mo- 
tive indicates  is  dubious :  it  may  be  a  mis- 
chievous or  a  meritorious  one,  as  it  happens  ; 
according  as  the  mischievousness  of  the  act  is 
more  or  less  apparent. 

XIII. 

It  may  be  thought,  that  a  case  of  this  sort 
cannot  exist ;  and  that  to  suppose  it,  is  a  con- 
*  See  ch.  xii.  [Consequences]  and  Code,  B.  I.  tit.  [Theft.] 


HUMAN  DISPOSITIONS  IN  GENERAL.  25' 

tradiction  in  terms.  For  the  act  is  one,  which,  CiiapJcl 
by  the  supposition,  the  agent  knows  to  be  a 
mischievous  one.  How  then  can  it  be,  that 
good-will,  that  is,  the  desire  of  doing  good, 
could  have  been  the  motive  that  led  him  into 
it?  To  reconcile  this,  we  must  advert  to  the 
distinction  between  enlarged  benevolence  and 
confined.*  The  motive  that  led  him  into  it, 
w^as  that  of  confined  benevolence.  Had  he  fol- 
lowed the  dictates  of  enlarged  benevolence,  he 
would  not  have  done  what  he  did.  Now,  al- 
though he  followed  the  dictates  of  that  branch 
of  benevolence,  which  in  any  single  instance  of 
its  exertion  is  mischievous,  when  opposed  to 
the  other,  yet,  as  the  cases  which  call  for  the 
exertion  of  the  former  are,  beyond  comparison, 
more  numerous  than  those  which  call  for  the 
exertion  of  the  latter,  the  disposition  indicated 
by  him,  in  following  the  impulse  of  the  former, 
will  often  be  such  as  in  a  man,  of  the  common 
run  of  men,  may  be  allowed  to  be  a  good  one 
upon  the  whole. 

XIV. 

A  man  with  a  numerous  family  of  children,  Exnmpic  i. 
on   the   point  of  starving,  goes  into  a  baker's 
shop,  steals  a  loaf,  divides  it  all  among  the  chil- 
dren, reserving  none  of  it  for  himself.     It  will 
be  hard  to  infer  that  that  man's  disposition  is  a 

•  iSec  cli.  X.  [Motives.] 
vol..   I.  ci 


'^26  HUMAN    DISPOSITIONS    IN    GENERAL. 

?"^^-^l-  mischievous  one  upon  the  whole.  Alter  the 
case,  give  him  but  one  child,  and  that  hungry 
perhaps,  but  in  no  imminent  danger  of  starving  : 
and  now  let  the  man  set  fire  to  a  house  full  of 
people,  for  the  sake  of  stealing  money  out  of  it  to 
buy  the  bread  with.  The  disposition  here  indi- 
cated will  hardly  be  looked  upon  as  a  good  one. 

XV. 

Example  Auothcr  case  will  appear  more  difficult  to 
decide  than  either.  Ravaillac  assassinated  one 
of  the  best  and  wisest  of  sovereigns,  at  a  time 
when  a  good  and  wise  sovereign,  a  blessing  at 
all  times  so  valuable  to  a  state,  was  particu- 
larly precious  :  and  that  to  the  inhabitants  of  a 
populous  and  extensive  empire.  He  is  taken, 
and  doomed  to  the  most  excruciating  tortures. 
His  son,  well  persuaded  of  his  being  a  sincere 
penitent,  and  that  mankind,  in  case  of  his  being 
at  large,  would  have  nothing  more  to  fear  from 
him,  effectuates  his  escape  :  Is  this  then  a  sign 
of  a  good  disposition  in  the  son,  or  of  a  bad 
one  ?  Perhaps  some  will  answer,  of  a  bad  one  ; 
for,  besides  the  interest  which  the  nation  has 
in  the  sufferings  of  such  a  criminal,  on  the  score 
of  the  example,  the  future  good  behaviour  of 
such  a  criminal  is  more  than  any  one  can  have 
sufficient  ground  to  be  persuaded  of. 

XVI. 

Example        Well  thcu,  let  Ravaillac,  the  son,  not  faci- 
III. 

litate  his  father's  escape ;  but  content  himself 


HUMAX    DISPOSITIONS    IN    GENERAL.  227 

with  conveying  poison  to  him,  that  at  the  price  ciiap.xk 
of  an  easier  death  he  may  escape  his  torments. 
The  decision  will  now,  perhaps,  be  more  diffi- 
cult. The  act  is  a  wrong  one,  let  it  be  allowed, 
and  such  as  ought  by  all  means  to  be  punished  : 
but  is  the  disposition  manifested  by  it  a  bad  one  ? 
Because  the  young  man  breaks  the  laws  in  this 
one  instance,  is  it  probable,  that  if  let  alone,  he 
would  break  the  laws  in  ordinary  instances,  for 
the  satisfaction  of  any  inordinate  desires  of  his 
own  ?  The  answer  of  most  men  would  pro- 
bably be  in  the  negative. 

XVII. 

5.  Where  the  tendency  of  the  act  is  s:ood,  and    Case  5. 

...  .  .  &         '  Tendency, 

the  motive  is  a  semi-social  one,  the  love  of  rejm-  good—m'o- 

f         ,.  ,  ,.  ..  -T  1-      live,  love  t)f 

tation.  In  this  case  the  disposition  indicated  is  reputation. 
a  good  one. 

In  a  time  of  scarcity,  a  baker,  for  the  sake  of 
gaining  the  esteem  of  the  neighbourhood,  dis- 
tributes bread  gratis  among  the  industrious  poor. 
Let  this  be  taken  for  granted :  and  let  it  be 
allowed  to  be  a  matter  of  uncertainty,  whether 
he  had  any  real  feeling  for  the  sufferings  of  those 
whom  he  has  relieved,  or  no.  His  disposition, 
for  all  tiiat,  cannot,  with  any  pretence  of  reason, 
be  termed  otherwise  than  a  good  and  beneficent 
one.  It  can  only  be  in  consequence  of  some  very 
idle  prejudice,  if  it  receives  a  different  name.* 

*  The  bulk  of  niiviikind,  ever  ready  to  (Icprcciute  tlie  cliii-  'llidxilkof 
ractcr  of  their  neijj^hhour.'-,  in  order,  indirectly,  to  ex.ilt  their  ,^.  ^^^  ^|'^_ 

J,  cf  j)rcciale  tlii.s  iiiutive. 


228  HUMAN    DISPOSITIONS    IN    GENERAL. 

Chap^.  XVIII. 

TSTdrncy,       ^-  Where  the  tendency  of  the  act  is  bad,  and 

\\y~ho.'    ^^^  motive,  as  before,  is  a  semi-social  one,  the 

upur.         \oYe  of  reputation.    In  this  case,  the  disposition 

which  it  indicates  is  more  or  less  good  or  bad : 

in  the  first  place,  according  as  the  tendency  of 

the  act  is  more  or  less  mischievous  :   in   the 

own,  will  take  occasion  to  refer  a  motive  to  the  class  of  bad 
ones  as  often  as  they  can  find  one  still  better,  to  wiiich  the 
act  might  have  owed  its  birth.  Conscious  that  his  own 
motives  are  not  of  the  best  class,  or  persuaded  that  if  they 
be,  they  will  not  be  referred  to  that  class  by  others  ;  afraid 
of  being  taken  for  a  dupe,  and  anxious  to  show  the  reach  of 
his  penetration  ;  each  man  takes  care,  in  the  first  place,  to 
impute  the  conduct  of  every  other  man  to  the  least  laudable 
of  the  motives  that  can  account  for  it :  in  the  next  place,  when 
he  has  gone  as  far  that  way  as  he  can,  and  cannot  drive  down 
the  individual  motive  to  any  lower  class,  he  changes  his  bat- 
tery, and  attacks  the  very  class  itself.  To  the  love  of  repu- 
tation he  will  accordingly  give  a  bad  name  upon  every  occa- 
sion, calling  it  ostentation,  vanity,  or  vain-glory. 

Partly  to  the  same  spirit  of  detraction,  the  natural  conse- 
querKie  of  the  sensibility  of  men  to  the  force  of  the  moral 
sanction,  partly  to  the  influence  of  the  principle  of  asceticism, 
may,  perhaps,  be  imputed  the  great  abundance  of  bad  names 
of  motives,  in  comparison  of  such  as  are  good  or  neutral  : 
and,  in  particular,  the  total  want  of  neutral  names  for  the 
motives  of  sexual  desire,  physical  desire  in  general,  and  pecu- 
niary interest.  The  superior  abundance,  even  of  good  names, 
in  comparison  of  neutral  ones,  would,  if  examined,  be  found 
rather  to  confirm  than  disprove  the  above  remark.  The  lan- 
guage of  a  people  on  these  points  may,  perhaps,  serve  in  some 
measure  as  a  key  to  their  moral  sentiments.  But  such  specula- 
tive disquisitions  are  foreign  to  the  purpose  of  the  present  work. 


HUMAX    DISPOSITIONS    IN    GENERAL.  229 

next  place,  according  as  the  dictates  of  the  ^'"^p-  xk 
moral  sanction,  in  the  society  in  question,  ap- 
proach more  or  less  to  a  coincidence  with  those 
of  utility.  It  does  not  seem  probable,  that  in 
any  nation,  which  is  in  a  state  of  tolerable  civi- 
lization, in  short,  in  any  nation  in  which  such 
rules  as  these  can  come  to  be  consulted,  the 
dictates  of  the  moral  sanction  will  so  far  recede 
from  a  coincidence  with  those  of  utility  (that  is, 
of  enlightened  benevolence)  that  the  disposition 
indicated  in  this  case  can  be  otherwise  than  a 
good  one  upon  the  whole, 

XIX. 

An  Indian  receives  an  injury,  real  or  imaginary.  Example  i. 
from  an  Indian  of  another  tribe.  He  revenges  it 
upon  the  person  of  his  antagonist  with  the  most 
excruciating  torments  :  the  case  being,  that 
cruelties  inflicted  on  such  an  occasion,  gain  him 
reputation  in  his  own  tribe.  The  disposition 
manifested  in  such  a  case  can  never  be  deemed  a 
good  one,  among  a  people  ever  so  few  degrees  ad- 
vanced, in  point  of  civilization,  above  the  Indians. 

XX. 

A  nobleman  (to  come  back  to  Europe)  con-  E'^ampie 
tracts  a  debt  with  a  poor  tradesman.  The  same 
nobleman,  presently  afterwards,  contracts  a 
debt,  to  the  same  amount,  to  another  nobleman, 
at  play.  He  is  unable  to  pay  both :  he  pays 
the  whole  debt  to  the  companion  of  his  amuse- 
ments, and  no  part  of  it  to  the  tradesman.     The 


230  HUMAN    DISPOSITIONS    IN    GENERAL. 

Chap.  xf.  disposition  manifested  in  this  case  can  scarcely 
be  termed  otherwise  than  a  bad  one.  It  is  cer- 
tainly, however,  not  so  bad  as  if  he  had  paid 
neither.  The  principle  of  love  of  reputation, 
or  (as  it  is  called  in  the  case  of  this  partial  ap- 
plication of  it)  honour,  is  here  opposed  to  the 
worthier  principle  of  benevolence,  and  gets  the 
better  of  it.  But  it  gets  the  better  also  of  the 
self-regarding  principle  of  pecuniary  interest. 
The  disposition,  therefore,  which  it  indicates, 
although  not  so  good  a  one  as  that  in  which  the 
principle  of  benevolence  predominates,  is  better 
than  one  in  which  the  principle  of  self-interest 
predominates.  He  would  be  the  better  for  having 
more  benevolence:  but  would  he  be  the  better 
for  having  no  honour  ?  This  seems  to  admit  of 
great  dispute. 


XXI. 


Case  7.         7    ^^j^erc  thc  tendency  of  the  act  is  s:ood,  and 
good—mo-  ^}-^g  motive  is  the  semi-social  one   of  relio;ion. 

live,  j>K't_y._  ^ 

In  this  case,  the  disposition  indicated  by  it  (con- 
sidered with  respect  to  the  influence  of  it  on  the 
man's  conduct  towards  others)  is  manifestly  a 
beneficent  and  meritorious  one. 

A  baker  distributes  bread  gratis  among  the 
industrious  poor.  It  is  not  that  he  feels  for 
their  distresses  :  nor  is  it  for  the  sake  of  gaining 
reputation  among  his  neighbours.  It  is  for  the 
sake  of  gaining  the  favour  of  the  Deity :  to  whom, 

*  See  the  case  of  Duels  discussed  in  B.  1.  tit.  [Homicide.] 


HUMAN    DISPOSITIONS    IN    GENERAL.  231 

he  takes  for  granted,  such  conduct  will  be  ac-  ^^^^^p^f- 
ceptable.     The  disposition  manifested  by  such 
conduct  is  plainly  what  every  man  would  call 
a  good  one. 

XXIT. 

8.  Where  the  tendency  of  the  act  is  bad,  and  ,,casc  a. 

''  lendcDcy, 

the  motive  is  that  of  relisrion,  as  before.     In  bad-mo- 

^  tiv-e,  reli- 

this  case  the  disposition  is  dubious.  It  is  good  g'»"- 
or  bad,  and  more  or  less  good  or  bad,  in  the 
first  place,  as  the  tendency  of  the  act  is  more  or 
less  mischievous  ;  in  the  next  place,  according 
as  the  religious  tenets  of  the  person  in  question 
approach  more  or  less  to  a  coincidence  with 
the  dictates  of  utility. 

XXIII. 

It  should  seem  from  history,  that  even   in  Theriisro- 

,         ,  ,  „..,..  .       sitioii  may 

nations  in  a  tolerable  state  oi  civilization  m  be  biui  in 
other  respects,  the  dictates  of  religion  have 
been  found  so  far  to  recede  from  a  coincidence 
with  those  of  utility ;  in  other  words,  from 
those  of  enlightened  benevolence ;  that  the 
disposition  indicated  in  this  case  may  even  be 
a  bad  one  upon  the  whole.  This  however  is 
no  objection  to  the  inference  which  it  affords 
of  a  good  disposition  in  those  countries  (such 
as  perhaps  are  most  of  the  countries  of  Europe 
at  present)  in  which  its  dictates  resj)ccting  the 
conduct  of  a  man  towards  other  men  a|)proach 
very  nearly  to  a  coincidence  witli  those  of 
utility.     The  dictates  of  religion,  in  their  ap- 


<232  HUMAN    DISPOSITIONS    IN    GENERAL. 

Chap,  XI.  plicatioii  to  the  conduct  of  a  man  in  what  con- 
cerns himself  alone,  seem  in  most  European 
nations  to  savour  a  good  deal  of  the  ascetic 
principle  :  but  the  obedience  to  such  mistaken 
dictates  indicates  not  any  such  disposition  as 
is  likely  to  break  out  into  acts  of  pernicious 
tendency  with  respect  to  others.  Instances  in 
which  the  dictates  of  religion  lead  a  man  into 
acts  which  are  pernicious  in  this  latter  view, 
seem  at  present  to  be  but  rare :  unless  it  be 
acts  of  persecution,  or  impolitic  measures  on 
the  part  of  government,  where  the  law  itself  is 
either  the  principal  actor  or  an  accomplice  in 
the  mischief.  Ravaillac,  instigated  by  no  other 
motive  than  this,  gave  his  country  one  of  the 
most  fatal  stabs  that  a  country  ever  received 
from  a  single  hand :  but  happily  the  Ravaillacs 
are  but  rare.  They  have  been  more  frequent, 
however,  in  France  than  in  any  other  country 
during  the  same  period  :  and  it  is  remarkable, 
that  in  every  instance  it  is  this  motive  that 
has  produced  them.  When  they  do  appear, 
however,  nobody,  I  suppose,  but  such  as  them- 
selves, will  be  for  terming  a  disposition,  such 
as  they  manifest,  a  good  one.  It  seems  hardly 
to  be  denied,  but  that  they  are  just  so  much  the 
worse  for  their  notions  of  religion;  and  that 
had  they  been  left  to  the  sole  guidance  of 
benevolence,  and  the  love  of  reputation,  with- 
out any  religion  at  all,  it  would  have  been  but 


HUMAX    DISPOS'ITIONS    IN    GENERAL.  233 

SO  much  the  better  for  mankmd.    One  may  say  CHAP.xr. 
nearly  the  same  thing,  perhaps,  of  those  persons 
who,   without  any  particular  obligation,  have 
taken  an  active  part  in  the  execution  of  laws 
made  for  the  punishment  of  those  who  have  the 
misfortune    to    differ   with    the    magistrate    in 
matters  of  religion,  much  more  of  the  legislator 
himself,   who   has   put  it   in  their  power.     If 
Louis  XIV.  had  had  no  religion,  France  would 
not  have  lost  800,000  of  its  most  valuable  sub- 
jects.    The  same  thing  may  be  said  of  the  au- 
thors of  the  wars  called  holy  ones ;  whether 
waged  against  persons  called  Infidels,  or  persons 
branded  with   the   still  more  odious   name  of 
Heretics.    In  Denmark,  not  a  great  many  years 
ago,  a  sect  is  said  to  have  arisen,  who,   by  a 
strange  perversion  of  reason,  took  it  into  their 
heads,  that,  by  leading  to  repentance,  murder, 
or  any  other  horrid  crime,  might  be  made  the 
road  to  heaven.     It  should  all  along,  however, 
be  observ^ed,  that  instances  of  this  latter  kind 
were  always  rare  :    and  that  in  almost  all  the 
countries  of  Europe,   instances  of  the  former 
kind,  though  once  abundantly  frequent,  have 
for  some  time   ceased.     In  certain  countries, 
however,  persecution  at  home,  or  (what  pro- 
duces a  degree  of  restraint,  which  is  one  part 
of  the   mischiefs  of  persecution)  I    mean    the 
disposition    to   persecute,   whensoever   occasion 
happens,  is  not  yet  at  an  end :    insomuch  that 


234  HUMAN    DISPOSITIONS    IN    GENERAL. 

v"'^^'  ^[  if  there  is  no  actual  persecution,  it  is  only 
because  there  are  no  heretics ;  and  if  there  are 
no  heretics,  it  is  only  because  there  are  no 
thinkers.* 

XXIV. 

Case  9.         9^  Where  the  tendency  of  the  act  is  o-ood, 

I  endency,  •'  '-' 

good— mo-  and  the  motive  (as  before)  is  the  dissocial  one 

tive,  male-  ^  ^ 

voience.  of  ill-will.  In  this  case  the  motive  seems  not 
to  afford  any  indication  on  either  side.  It  is 
no  indication  of  a  good  disposition  ;  but  neither 
is  it  any  indication  of  a  bad  one. 

Example.  You  liavc  detected,  a  baker  in  selling  short 
weight :  you  prosecute  him  for  the  cheat.  It 
is  not  for  the  sake  of  gain  that  you  engaged  in 
the  prosecution  ;  for  there  is  nothing  to  be  got 
by  it :  it  is  not  from  public  spirit :  it  is  not  for 
the  sake  of  reputation ;  for  there  is  no  repu- 
tation to  be  got  by  it :  it  is  not  in  the  view  of 
pleasing  the  Deity  :  it  is  merely  on  account  of 
a  quarrel  you  have  with  the  man  you  pro- 
secute. From  the  transaction,  as  thus  stated, 
there  does  not  seem  to  be  any  thing  to  be  said 
either  in  favour  of  your  disposition  or  against 
it.  The  tendency  of  the  act  is  good  :  but  you 
.  would  not  have  engaged  in  it,  had  it  not  been 
from  a  motive  which  there  seems  no  particular 
reason  to  conclude  will  ever  prompt  you  to 
engage  in  an  act  of  the  same  kind  again.    Your 


*  See  B.  I.  tit.  [Oifences  against  Religion.] 


HUMAN    DISPOSITIONS    IN    GENERAL.  235 

motive  is  of  that  sort  which  may,  with  least  chap.xl 
impropriety,  be  termed  a  bad  one  :  but  the  act 
is  of  that  sort,  which,  were  it  engaged  in  ever 
so  often,  could  never  have  any  evil  tendency ; 
nor  indeed  any  other  tendency  than  a  good 
one.  By  the  supposition,  the  motive  it  hap- 
pened to  be  dictated  by  was  that  of  ill-will : 
but  the  act  itself  is  of  such  a  nature  as  to  have 
wanted  nothino^  but  sufficient  discernment  on 
your  part  in  order  to  have  been  dictated  by  the 
most  enlarged  benevolence.  Now,  from  a  man's 
having  suffered  himself  to  be  induced  to  gratify 
his  resentment  by  means  of  an  act  of  which 
the  tendency  is  good,  it  by  no  means  follows 
that  he  would  be  ready  on  another  occasion, 
through  the  influence  of  the  same  sort  of  mo- 
tive, to  engage  in  any  act  of  which  the  tendency 
is  a  bad  one.  The  motive  that  impelled  you 
was  a  dissocial  one  :  but  what  social  motive 
could  there  have  been  to  restrain  vou  ?  None, 
but  what  might  have  been  outweighed  by  a 
more  enlarged  motive  of  the  same  kind.  Now, 
because  the  dissocial  motive  prevailed  M'hen  it 
stood  alone,  it  by  no  means  follows  that  it  would 
prevail  when  it  had  a  social  one  to  combat  it. 

XXV. 

10.  Where  the  tendency  of  the  act  is  bad.    Case  lo. 

.  TcikIi'ik'v, 

and  the  motive  is  the  dissocial  one  of  malevo-  lud—nui 

I  T  1   •  11-  ......  tive,  iiiale- 

lence.     in  this  case  the  disposition  it  indicates  voieu<i-. 
is  of  course  a  mischievous  one. 


-236  HUMAN    DISPOSITIONS    IN    GENERAL. 

CMAPja.  Ti^g  j^-jg^j-^  ^}^Q  stole  the  bread  from  the  baker, 
Examjie.  ^^^  before,  did  it  with  no  other  view  than  merely 
to  impoverish  and  afflict  him:  accordingly, 
when  he  had  got  the  bread,  he  did  not  eat,  or 
sell  it ;  but  destroyed  it.  That  the  disposition, 
evidenced  by  such  a  transaction,  is  a  bad  one, 
is  what  every  body  must  perceive  immediately. 

XXVI. 

Problem—      Thus  mucli  with  respect  to  the  circumstances 
the'depra-^  from  which  the  mischievousness  or  meritorious- 
mSi'TcTis-   ness  of  a  man's  disposition  is  to  be  inferred  in 
position,     ^j^^  gross  :  we  come  now  to  the  measure  of  that 
mischievousness  or  meritoriousness,  as  resulting 
from  those  circumstances.     Now  with  merito- 
rious acts  and  dispositions  we  have  no  direct 
concern  in  the  present  work.     All  that  penal 
law  is  concerned  to  do,  is  to  measure  the  depra- 
vity of  the  disposition  where  the  act  is  mis- 
chievous.    To  this  object,  therefore,  we  shall 
here  confine  ourselves. 

XXVII. 

A  man's  It  is  cvidcut,  that  the  nature  of  a  man's  dis- 

is  consti-     positiou  must  dcpcud  upon  the  nature  of  the 

tutcdbylhe  .  .  i-n  ii  -^i 

sum  of  his  motives  he  is  apt  to  be  mtluencea  by:  in  other 
words,  upon  the  degree  of  his  sensibility  to  the 
force  of  such  and  such  motives.  For  his  dispo- 
sition is,  as  it  were,  the  sum  of  his  intentions  : 
the  disposition  he  is  of  during  a  certain  period, 
the  sum  or  result  of  his  intentions  during  that 
period.     If,  of  the  acts  he  has  been  intending 


HUMAN    DISPOSITIONS    IN    GENERAL.  23? 

to  engage  in  during  the  supposed  period,  those  9"^^'  ^l- 
which  are  apparently  of  a  mischievous  ten- 
dency, bear  a  large  proportion  to  those  which 
appear  to  him  to  be  of  the  contrary  tendency, 
his  disposition  will  be  of  the  mischievous  cast : 
if  but  a  small  proportion,  of  the  innocent  or 
upright. 

XXVIII. 

Now  intentions,   like  every  thing  else,    are  —which 

"^  _  owe  their 

produced  by  the  things  that  are  their  causes :  hinh  to 

■*  .  .  .  motives. 

and  the  causes  of  intentions  are  motives.  If,  on 
any  occasion,  a  man  forms  either  a  good  or  a 
bad  intention,  it  must  be  by  the  influence  of 
some  motive. 

XXIX. 

When  the  act,  which  a  motive  prompts  a  a  seducing 

„  .       ,   .  or  corrupt- 

man  to  engage  in,  is  oi  a  mischievous  nature,  in-ruotive, 

it  may,  for  distinction's  sake,  be  termed  a  se-  tutelary  or 

,       .  ^ .  .  .  ,   .    ,  ,         preservato- 

aucing  or  corrupting  motive :  m  which  case  also  ry  motive. 
any  motive  which,  in  opposition  to  the  former, 
acts  in  the  character  of  a  restraining  motive, 
may  be  styled  a  tutelary,   preservatory,  or  pre- 
serving motive. 

XXX. 

Tutelary  motives  may  a^ain  be  distinguished  Tutelary 

''  JO  o  motives  are 

into  atandlu'^  or  constant,  and  occasional.     By  '^'^''^j: 

•-^  •'    staiul'n;;-  or 

standing  tutelary  motives,  I  mean  such  as  act  occaMonai. 
with   more  or  less  force  in  all,  or  at  least  in 
most  cases,  tending  to  restrain  a  man  from  <'/;/// 
mischievous  acts  he  may  be  prompted  to  en- 


-238 


HUMAN    DISPOSITIONS    IN    GENERAL. 


Chap.  XI. 


Standing 
tutelary 
motives 
are,  1. 
GooJ-v.'ill. 


gage  in ;  and  that  with  a  force  which  depends 
upon  the  general  nature  of  the  act,  rather  than 
upon  any  accidental  circumstance  with  which 
any  individual  act  of  that  sort  may  happen  to 
be  accompanied.  By  occasional  tutelary  mo- 
tives, I  mean  such  motives  as  may  chance  to 
act  in  this  direction  or  not,  according  to  the 
nature  of  the  act,  and  of  the  particular  occasion 
on  which  the  engaging  in  it  is  brought  into  con- 
templation. 

XXXI. 

Now  it  has  been  shown,  that  there  is  no  sort 
of  motive  by  which  a  man  may  not  be  prompted 
to  engage  in  acts  that  are  of  a  mischievous  na- 
ture ;  that  is,  which  may  not  come  to  act  in 
the  capacity  of  a  seducing  motive.  It  has  been 
shown,  on  the  other  hand,  that  there  are  some 
motives  which  are  remarkably  less  likely  to 
operate  in  this  way  than  others.  It  has  also 
been  shown,  that  the  least  likely  of  all  is  that 
of  benevolence  or  good-will :  the  most  com- 
mon tendency  of  which,  it  has  been  shown,  is 
to  act  in  the  character  of  a  tutelary  motive.  It 
has  also  been  shown,  that  even  when  by  acci- 
dent it  acts  in  one  way  in  the  character  of  a 
seducing  motive,  still  in  another  way  it  acts  in 
the  opposite  character  of  a  tutelary  one.  The 
motive  of  good-will,  in  as  far  as  it  respects  the 
interests  of  one  set  of  persons,  may  prompt  a 
man  to  engage  in  acts  which  are  productive  of 


HUMAN    DISPOSITIONS    IN    GENERAL.  239 

mischief  to  another  and  more  extensive  set :  Chap.xi. 
but  this  is  only  because  his  good-will  is  imper- 
fect and  confined :  not  taking  into  contempla- 
tion the  interests  of  all  the  persons  whose  in- 
terests are  at  stake.  The  same  motive,  were 
the  affection  it  issued  from  more  enlarged, 
would  operate  effectually,  in  the  character  of  a 
constraining  motive,  against  that  very  act  to 
which,  by  the  supposition,  it  gives  birth.  This 
same  sort  of  motive  may  therefore,  without  any 
real  contradiction  or  deviation  from  truth,  be 
ranked  in  the  number  of  standing  tutelary  mo- 
tives, notwithstanding  the  occasions  in  which  it 
may  act  at  the  same  time  in  the  character  of  a 
seducing  one. 

XXXII. 

The  same  observation,  nearly,  may  be  applied  2.  The  love 

1  •  •     1  ■  r   ^  n  .of  repuU- 

to  the  semi-social  motive  01  love  01  reputation,  tion. 
The  force  of  this,  like  that  of  the  former,  is 
liable  to  be  divided  against  itself.  As  in  the 
case  of  good-will,  the  interests  of  some  of  the 
persons,  who  may  be  the  objects  of  that  senti- 
ment, are  liable  to  be  at  variance  with  those  of 
others  :  so  in  the  case  of  love  of  reputation,  the 
sentiments  of  some  of  the  persons,  whose  good 
opinion  is  desired,  may  be  at  variance  with  the 
sentiments  of  other  persons  of  that  number. 
Now  in  the  case  of  an  act,  which  is  really  of  a 
mischievous  nature,  it  can  scarcely  happen  that 
there  shall  be  no  persons  whatever  who   will 


240  HUMAN    DISPOSITIONS    IN    GENERAL. 

Chap. XL  Iqq]^  upoii  it  witli  an  eye  of  disapprobation.  It 
can  scarcely  ever  happen,  therefore,  that  an  act 
really  mischievous  shall  not  have  some  part  at 
least,  if  not  the  v^^hole,  of  the  force  of  this  mo- 
tive to  oppose  it;  nor,  therefore,  that  this 
motive  should  not  act  w^ith  some  degree  of  force 
in  the  character  of  a  tutelary  motive.  This, 
therefore,  may  be  set  down  as  another  article 
in  the  catalogue  of  standing  tutelary  motives. 

XXXIII. 

3.  Thede-  Tlic  samc  obscrvatiou  may  be  applied  to  the 
Mre  o  ami-  ^gg'^.^  ^^  amity,  though  not  in  altogether  equal 
measure.  For,  notwithstanding  the  mischiev- 
ousness  of  an  act,  it  may  happen,  without 
much  difficulty,  that  all  the  persons  for  whose 
amity  a  man  entertains  any  particular  present 
desire  which  is  accompanied  with  expectation, 
may  concur  in  regarding  it  with  an  eye  rather 
of  approbation  than  the  contrary.  This  is  but 
too  apt  to  be  the  case  among  such  fraternities 
as  those  of  thieves,  smugglers,  and  many  other 
denominations  of  offenders.  This,  however,  is 
not  constantly,  nor  indeed  most  commonly  the 
case :  insomuch,  that  the  desire  of  amity  may 
still  be  regarded,  upon  the  whole,  as  a  tutelary 
motive,  were  it  only  from  the  closeness  of  its 
connexion  with  the  love  of  reputation.  And 
it  may  be  ranked  among  standing  tutelary 
motives,  since,  where  it  does  apply,  the  force 
with  which  it  acts,  depends  not  upon  the  occa- 


HUMAN    DISPOSITIONS    IN    GENERAL.  241 

sional  circumstances  of  the  act  which  it  op-  9^^^^-  ^': 
poses,  but  upon  principles  as  general  as  those 
upon  which  depend  the  action  of  the  other  semi- 
social  motives. 

xxxiv. 

The  motive  of  religion  is  not  altogether  in  the  4.  The  mo- 
same  case  with  the  three  former.  The  force  of  Ugiou. ' 
it  is  not,  like  theirs,  liable  to  be  divided  against 
itself.  I  mean  in  the  civilized  nations  of  mo- 
dern times,  among  whom  the  notion  of  the 
unity  of  the  Godhead  is  universal.  In  times  of 
classical  antiquity  it  was  otherwise.  If  a  man 
got  Venus  on  his  side,  Pallas  was  on  the  other : 
if  ^olus  was  for  him,  Neptune  was  against 
him.  iEneas,  with  all  his  piety,  had  but  a  par- 
tial interest  at  the  court  of  heaven.  That  matter 
stands  upon  a  different  footing  now-a-days. 
In  any  given  person,  the  force  of  religion,  what- 
ever it  be,  is  now  all  of  it  on  one  side.  It  may 
balance,  indeed,  on  which  side  it  shall  declare 
itself:  and  it  may  declare  itself,  as  we  have 
seen  already  in  but  too  many  instances,  on  the 
wrong  as  well  as  on  the  right.  It  has  been,  at 
least  till  lately,  perhaps  is  still,  accustomed  so 
much  to  declare  itself  on  the  wrong  side,  and 
that  in  such  material  instances,  that  on  that 
account  it  seemed  not  proper  to  place  it,  in 
point  of  social  tendency,  on  a  level  altogether 
with  the  motive  of  benevolence.  Where  it  docs 
act,  liowever,  as  it  docs  in  by  fur  the  greatest 

VOL.  I.  R 


24S2  PUMAN  DISPOSITIONS  IN  GENERAL. 

F"-^^-  ^l-  number  of  cases,  in  opposition  to  the  ordinary 
seducing  motives,  it  acts,  like  the  motive  of 
benevolence,  in  an  uniform  manner,  not  de- 
pending upon  the  particular  circumstances  that 
may  attend  the  commission  of  the  act ;  but 
tending  to  oppose  it,  merely  on  account  of  its 
mischievousness ;  and  therefore,  with  equal 
force,  in  whatsoever  circumstances  it  may  be 
proposed  to  be  committed.  This,  therefore, 
may  also  be  added  to  the  catalogue  of  standing 
tutelary  motives. 

XXXV. 

Occasional      As  to  the  motivcs  which  may  operate  occa- 

tutelary  "^       ^ 

laoiives      sionally  in  the  character  of  tutelary  motives, 

may  be  any  "^  ,        .       .  , 

whatso-      these,   it  has  been  already  intimated,   are  of 

ever. 

various  sorts,  and  various  degrees  of  strength 
in  various  offences  :  depending  not  only  upon 
the  nature  of  the  offence,  but  upon  the  ac- 
cidental circumstances  in  which  the  idea  of  en- 
gaging in  it  may  come  in  contemplation.  Nor 
•  is  there  any  sort  of  motive  which  may  not  come 

to  operate  in  this  character  ;  as  may  be  easily 
conceived.  A  thief,  for  instance,  may  be  pre- 
vented from  engaging  in  a  projected  scheme  of 
house-breaking,  by  sitting  too  long  over  his  bot- 
tle,* by  a  visit  from  his  doxy,  by  the  occasion 
he  may  have  to  go  elsewhere,  in  order  to  receive 
his  dividend  of  a  former  booty  ;  f  and  so  on. 

*  Love  of  the  pleasures  of  the  palate. 
f  Pecuniary  interest. 


HUMAN  DISPOSITIONS  IN  GEXERAL.  243 

XXXVI.  ^^^ii:;^ 

There  are  some  motives,  however,  which  seem  Motives 

that  arc 

more  apt  to  act  in  this  character  than  others ;  panicuiar- 

i  _  ly  apt  to 

especially  as  thinos  are  now  constituted,  now  act  in  this 

L  ''  ^  character 

that  the  law  has  every  where  opposed  to  the  are, 
force  of  the  principal  seducing  motives,  artificial  ease. 

r   •  •  r\r     u       -•  Self  pre- 

tutelary  motives  of  its  own  creation.  (Ji  the  servatiou. 
motives  here  meant  it  will  be  necessary  to  take 
a  general  view.  They  seem  to  be  reducible 
to  two  heads  ;  viz.  1.  The  love  of  ease  ;  a  mo- 
tive put  into  action  by  the  prospect  of  the  trou- 
ble of  the  attempt ;  that  is,  the  trouble  which  it 
may  be  necessary  to  bestow,  in  overcoming  the 
physical  difficulties  that  may  accompany  it. 
2.  Self-preservation,  as  opposed  to  the  dangers 
to  which  a  man  may  be  exposed  in  the  prose- 
cution of  it, 

XXXVII. 

These  dangers  may  be  either,  1.  Of  a  purely  ^J°/"'gi\! 
physical  nature  :  or,  2.  Dano^ers  resultine;  from  pi-^sorva- 

l      J  '  o  o  j„„i  IS  most 

moral  a'^ency ;  in  other  words,  from  the  conduct  =^p^  "'  \^'s 
of  any  such  persons  to  whom  the  act,  if  known,  respcct.are, 
may  be  expected  to  prove  obnoxious.  But  moral  r."^'-'}  p''y- 
asrency  supposes  knowledo-e  with  respect  to  the  2.Dai)2:ers. 

<=>  •'  i^  t^  ■^  1  de]ienuiiifj 

circumstances  that  are  to  have  the  effect  of  ex-  «"  ''enac- 
tion. 

ternal  motives  in  giving  birth  to  it.  Now  the 
obtaining  such  knowledge,  with  respect  to  the 
commission  of  any  obnoxious  act,  on  the  part  •  , 

of  any  persons  M'ho  may  be  disposed  to  nrake 
the  agent  suffer  for  it,  i.s  cdWiid  ik  feci  ion ;  and 

R  '2 


244  HUMAN   DISPOSITIONS  IS  GENERAL. 

Chap.  XI.  ^|^g  agent  concerning  whom  such  knowledge  is 
obtained,  is  said  to  be  detected.  The  dangers, 
therefore,  which  may  threaten  an  offender  from 
this  quarter,  depend,  whatever  they  may  be,  on 
the  event  of  his  detection ;  and  may,  therefore, 
be  all  of  them  comprised  under  the  article  of 
the  danger  of  detectmi. 

XXXVIII. 

Danajerde-      The  dangler  depending  upon  detection  may 

peuding  on  ....  o        i  j 

detection     bc  divided  again  into  two  branches:   1.  That 

may  result  _ 

from,  which  may  result  from  any  opposition  that  may 
tion  on  the  bc  made  to  the  enterprise  by  persons  on  the 
2.  subse-    spot ;  that  is,  at  the  very  time  the  enterprise  is 

quent  pu-  .  ^      mi  i  •    i  i        i  i 

nishment.  Carrying  on  :  2.  Inat  which  respects  the  legal 
punishment,  or  other  suffering,  that  may  await 
at  a  distance  upon  the  issue  of  the  enterprise. 

XXXIX. 

Tiie  force        It  may  be  worth  calling  to  mind  on  this  occa- 

of  the  two        .  ,  ,  ,  .  1  •    1 

standing     siott,  that  among  the  tutelary  motives,  which 
motives  of  havc  bccn  styled  constant  ones,  there  are  two 
pu\at*ionr   of  which  the  force  depends  (though  not  so  en- 
ofamityr   tircly  as  the  force  of  the  occasional  ones  which 
uponVtec-  have  been  just  mentioned,  yet  in  a  great  mea- 
sure) upon  the  circumstance  of  detection.  These, 
it  may  be  remembered,  are,  the  love  of  reputa- 
tion, and  the  desire  of  amity.     In  proportion, 
therefore,  as  the  chance  of  being  detected  ap- 
pears greater,  these  motives  will  apply  with  the 
greater  force :  with  the  less  force,  as  it  appears 
less.     This  is  not  the  case  with  the  two  other 


IIUMA^r  DISPOSITIONS  IN  GENERAL.  24S 


standing  tutelary  motives,  that  of  benevolence, 
and  that  of  religion. 


Chap.  XI. 


XL. 


We  are  now  in  a  condition  to  determine,  with  strength  of 

'  a  tempta- 

some  degree  of  precision,  what  is  to  be  under-  Jg^^eam^by 
stood  by  the  strength  of  a  temptation,  and  what  ''• 
indication  it  may  give  of  the  degree  of  mischiev- 
ousness  in  a  man's  disposition  in  the  case  of  any 
offence.  When  a  man  is  prompted  to  engage 
in  any  mischievous  act,  we  will  say,  for  short- 
ness, in  an  offence,  the  strength  of  the  tempta- 
tion depends  upon  the  ratio  between  the  force 
of  the  seducing  motives  on  the  one  hand,  and 
such  of  the  occasional  tutelary  ones,  as  the  cir- 
cumstances of  the  case  call  forth  into  action,  on 
the  other.  The  temptation,  then,  may  be  said 
to  be  strong,  when  the  pleasure  or  advantage 
to  be  got  from  the  crime  is  such  as  in  the  eyes 
of  the  offender  must  appear  great  in  comparison 
of  the  trouble  and  danger  that  appear  to  him 
to  accompany  the  enterprise :  slight  or  weak, 
when  that  pleasure  or  advantage  is  such  as  must 
appear  small  in  comparison  of  such  trouble  and 
such  danger.  It  is  plain  the  strength  of  the 
temptation  depends  not  upon  the  force  of  the 
impelling  (that  is  of  the  seducing)  motives  alto- 
gether :  for  let  the  opportunity  be  more  favour- 
able, that  is,  let  the  trouble,  or  any  branch  of 
the  danger,  be  made  less  than  before,  it  will  be 
acknowledged,  that  the  temptation  is  made  so 


246  HUMAN  DISPOSITIONS  IN  GENERAL. 

Chap.  XL  Yn^c}^  the  stroiigei" :  and  on  the  other  hand,  let 
the  opportunity  become  less  favourable,  or,  in 
other  words,  let  the  trouble,  or  any  branch  of 
the  danger,  be  made  greater  than  before,  the 
temptation  will  be  so  much  the  weaker. 

Now,  after  taking  account  of  such  tutelary 
motives  as  have  been  styled  occasional,  the  only 
tutelary  motives  that  can  remain  are  those  which 
have  been  termed  standing  ones.  But  those 
which  have  been  termed  the  standing  tutelary 
motives,  are  the  same  that  we  have  been  styling 
social.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  the  strength 
of  the  temptation,  in  any  case,  after  deducting 
the  force  of  the  social  motives,  is  as  the  sum  of 
the  forces  of  the  seducing,  to  the  sum  of  the 
forces  of  the  occasional  tutelary  motives. 

XLI. 

Indications      It  remains  to  be  inquired,  what  indication 

afforded  by  _  * 

this  and      concerning  the  mischievousness  or  depravity  of 

other  cir-  ....  r  ./ 

cumstances  a  mau's  dispositiou  is  afforded  by  the  strength 

respecting^  ■"■       _  _  ^ 

the  depra-  of  tlic  teiiiptation,  in  the  case  where  any  offence 

vity  of  an 

offender's    happcus  to  havc  bceu  committed.     It  appears, 

disposition. 

then,  that  the  weaker  the  temptation  is,  by  which 
a  man  has  been  overcome,  the  more  depraved 
and  mischievous  it  shows  his  disposition  to  have 
been.  For  the  goodness  of  his  disposition  is 
measured  by  the  degree  of  his  sensibility  to  the 
action  of  the  social  motives :  *  in  other  words, 

*  Supra,  par,  x-wii.  xx.viii. 


HUMAN  DISPOSITIONS  IN  GENERAL.  24? 

by  the  strength  of  the  influence  which  those  ^"^^-  ^] 
motives  have  over  him :  now,  the  less  consider- 
able the  force  is  by  which  their  influence  on  him 
has  been  overcome,  the  more  convincing  is  the 
proof  that  has  been  given  of  the  weakness  of  that 
influence. 

Again,  The  degree  of  a  man's  sensibility  to 
the  force  of  the  social  motives  being  given,  it  is 
plain  that  the  force  with  which  those  motives 
tend  to  restrain  him  from  engaging  in  any  mis- 
chievous enterprise,  ^rill  be  as  the  apparent  mis- 
chievousness  of  such  enterprise,  that  is,  as  the 
degree  of  mischief  with  which  it  appears  to  kirn 
likely  to  be  attended.  In  other  words,  the  less 
mischievous  the  offence  appears  to  him  to  be, 
the  less  averse  he  will  be,  as  far  as  he  is  guided 
by  social  considerations,  to  engage  in  it ;  the 
more  mischievous,  the  more  averse.  If  then  the 
nature  of  the  oflence  is  such  as  must  appear  to 
him  highly  mischievous,  and  yet  he  engages  in 
it  notwithstanding,  it  shows,  that  the  degree  of 
his  sensibility  to  the  force  of  the  social  motives 
is  but  slight ;  and  consequently  that  his  disposi- 
tion is  proportionably  depraved.  Moreover,  the 
less  the  strength  of  the  temptation  was,  the  more 
pernicious  and  depraved  does  it  show  his  dis- 
position to  have  been.  For  the  less  the  strength 
of  the  temptation  Avas,  the  less  was  the  force 
which  the  influence  of  those  motives  had  to 
overcome  :   the  clcafcr  therefore  is  the  proof 


248  HUMAX    DISPOSITIONS    IN    GENERAL. 

^"^^•^l-  that  has  been  given  of  the  weakness  of  that 
influence. 

XLII. 

Rules  for        Frotti  wliat  has  been  said,  it  seems,  that,  for 

measuring 

the  depra-  judo^inaf  of  the  indication  that  is  afforded  con- 

vity  of  dis-  J        CO 

position  in-  cerning  the  depravity  of  a  man's  disposition  by 
an  offence,  the  strength  of  the  temptation,  compared  with 
the  mischievousness  of  the  enterprise,  the  fol- 
lowing rules  may  be  laid  down  : 

Rule  1.  The  strength  of  the  temptation  being 
given,  the  mischievousness  of  the  disposition  7nani- 
fested  by  the  enterprise,  is  as  the  apparent  mis- 
chievousness of  the  act. 

Thus,  it  would  show  a  more  depraved  dis- 
position, to  murder  a  man  for  a  reward  of  a 
guinea,  or  falsely  to  charge  him  with  a  rob- 
bery for  the  same  reward,  than  to  obtain  the 
same  sum  from  him  by  simple  theft  :  the 
trouble  he  would  have  to  take,  and  the  risk  he 
would  have  to  run,  being  supposed  to  stand  on 
the  same  footing  in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other. 

Rule  2.  The  apparent  mischievousness  of  the  act 
being  given,  a  mans  disposition  is  the  more  depraved, 
the  slighter  the  temptation  is  by  which  he  has  been 
overcome. 

Thus,  it  shows  a  more  depraved  ajid  dan- 
gerous disposition,  if  a  man  kill  another  out 
of  mere  sport,  as  the  Emperor  of  Morocco, 
Muley  Mahomet,  is  said  to  have  done  great 
numbers,   than  out  of  revenge,   as   Sylla  and 


IIUMAX    BtSPOSITIOXS    J-NT    GEXEUAL.  249 

Marius  did  thousands,  or  in  the  view  of  self-  CuAP.ja. 
preservation,  as  Augustus  killed  many,  or  even 
for  lucre,  as  the  same  Emperor  is  said  to  have 
killed  some.  And  the  effects  of  such  a  depra- 
vity, on  that  part  of  the  public  which  is  ap- 
prized of  it,  run  in  the  same  proportion.  From 
Augustus,  some  persons  only  had  to  fear, 
under  some  particular  circumstances.  From 
Muley  Mahomet,  every  man  had  to  fear  at 
all  times. 

Rule  3.  The  apparent  mischievousness  of  the  act 
hehig  given,  the  evidence  ichich  it  affords  of  the  de- 
pravity of  a  man's  disposition  is  the  less  conclusive, 
the  stronger  the  temptation  is  hij  ivhich  he  has  been 
overcome. 

Thus,  if  a  poor  man,  who  is  ready  to  die  with 
hunger,  steal  a  loaf  of  bread,  it  is  a  less  explicit 
sign  of  depravity,  than  if  a  rich  man  were  to 
commit  a  theft  to  the  same  amount.  It  will  be 
observed,  that  in  this  rule  all  that  is  said  is,  that 
the  evidence  of  depravity  is  in  this  case  the  less 
conclusive :  it  is  not  said  that  the  depravity 
is  positively  the  less.  For  in  this  case  it  is 
possible,  for  any  thing  that  appears  to  the  con- 
trary, that  the  theft  might  have  been  com- 
mitted, even  had  the  temptation  been  not  so 
strong.  In  this  case,  the  alleviating  circum- 
stance is  only  a  matter  of  presumption ;  in  the 
former,  the  aggravating  circumstance  is  a  matter 
of  certainty. 


250  HUMAN    DISPOSITIONS    IN    GENERAL. 

Chap.  XI.  Rule  4.  Where  the  motive  is  of  the  dissocial  kind, 
the  apparent  mischievousness  of  the  act,  and  the 
strength  of  the  temptation,  being  given,  the  de- 
pravity is  as  the  degree  of  deliberatioti  with  which 
it  is  accompanied. 

For  in  every  man,  be  his  disposition  ever  so 
depraved,  the  social  motives  are  those  which, 
wherever  the  self-regarding  ones  stand  neuter, 
regulate  and  determine  the  general  tenor  of 
his  life.  If  the  dissocial  motives  are  put  in 
action,  it  is  only  in  particular  circumstances, 
and  on  particular  occasions ;  the  gentle  but 
constant  force  of  the  social  motives,  being  for 
a  while  subdued.  The  general  and  standing 
bias  of  every  man's  nature  is,  therefore,  to- 
wards that  side  to  which  the  force  of  the  social 
motives  would  determine  him  to  adhere.  This 
being  the  case,  the  force  of  the  social  mo- 
tives tends  continually  to  put  an  end  to  that  of 
the  dissocial  ones ;  as,  in  natural  bodies,  the 
force  of  friction  tends  to  put  an  end  to  that  which 
ifs  generated  by  impulse.  Time,  then,  which 
wears  away  the  force  of  the  dissocial  motives, 
adds  to  that  of  the  social.  The  longer,  there- 
fore, a  man  continues,  on  a  given  occasion, 
under  the  dominion  of  the  dissocial  motives, 
the  more  convincing  is  the  proof  that  has  been 
given  of  his  insensibility  to  the  force  of  the 
social  ones. 

Thus,  it  shov/s  a  worse  disposition,  where  a 


HUMAN     DISPOSITIONS    IN    GENERAL.  251 

man  lays  a  deliberate  plan  for  beating  his  ant  a-  ch^^^^ 
gonist,  and  beats  him  accordingly,  than  if  he 
were  to  beat  him  upon  the  spot,  in  consequence 
of  a  sudden  quarrel :  and  worse  again,  if,  after 
having  had  him  a  long  while  together  in  his 
power,  he  beats  him  at  intervals,  and  at  his 
leisure.* 

XLIII.  Use  of  this 

chapter. 

The  depravity  of  disposition,  indicated  by  an 
act,  is  a  material  consideration  in  several  re- 
spects. Any  mark  of  extraordinary  depravity, 
by  adding  to  the  terror  already  inspired  by  the 
crime,  and  by  holding  up  the  offender  as  a  per- 
son from  whom  there  may  be  more  mischief  to 
be  apprehended  in  future,  adds  in  that  way  to 
the  demand  for  punishment.  By  indicating  a 
general  want  of  sensibility  on  the  part  of  the 
offender,  it  may  add  in  another  way  also  to  the 
demand  for  punishment.  The  article  of  dispo- 
sition is  of  the  more  importance,  inasmuch  as, 
in  measuring  out  the  quantum  of  punishment, 
the  principle  of  sympathy  and  antipathy  is  apt  to 
look  at  nothing  else.  A  man  who  punishes  be- 
cause he  hates,  and  only  because  he  hates,  such 
a  man,  when  he  does  not  find  any  thing  odious 
in  the  disposition,  is  not  for  punishing  at  all  ; 
and  when  he  does,  he  is  not  for  carrying  the 
punishment  further  than  his  hatred  carries  him. 

*  See  li.  1.  tit.  [Confinement.] 


252  HUMAN    DISPOSITIONS    IN    GENERAL. 

Chap.  XI.  jJence  the  aversion  we  find  so  frequently  ex- 
pressed against  the  maxim,  that  the  punish- 
ment must  rise  with  the  strength  of  the  tempta- 
tion ;  a  maxim,  the  contrary  of  which,  as  we 
shall  see,  would  be  as  cruel  to  offenders  them- 
selves, as  it  would  be  subversive  of  the  pur- 
poses of  punishment. 


[     253     ] 


CHAP.    XII. 

OF    THE    CONSEQUEN'CES    OF    A    MISCHIEVOUS    ACT. 

§  1.  Shapes  in  ivhich  the  mischief  of  cm  act  may 

show  itself. 

1. 

-Hitherto  we  have  been  speaking  of  the  va-  Recapitn- 

•    1  1   •  1-11  latioii. 

nous  articles  or  objects  on  which  the  conse- 
quences or  tendency  of  an  act  may  depend  :  of 
the  bare  act  itself :  of  the  circumsta)iccs  it  may 
have  been,  or  may  have  been  supposed  to  be, 
accompanied  with  :  of  the  consciousness  a  man 
may  have  had  with  respect  to  any  such  cir- 
cumstances :  of  the  intentio)is  that  may  have 
preceded  the  act :  of  the  motives  that  may  have 
given  birth  to  those  intentions :  and  of  the 
disposition  that  may  have  been  indicated  by  the 
connexion  between  such  intentions  and  such 
motives.  We  now  come  to  speak  of  conse- 
fjucjices  or  tendency  :  an  article  which  forms 
the  concluding  link  in  all  this  chain  of  causes 
and  effects,  involving-  in  it  the  materiality  of 
the  whole.  Now,  such  part  of  this  tendency 
as  is  of  a  mischievous  nature,  is  all  that  we 
liave  any  direct  concern  with  ;  to  that,  there- 
fore, we  shall  here  confine  ourselves. 


254  OF    THE    CONSEQUEiSTCES 

Chap.  XII.  ^, 

Mischief  of      Xhe  tendency  of  an  act  is  mischievous  when 

an  act,  the  'i 

aj,-gregate    the  conseqiiences  of  it  are  mischievous;   that  is 

or  Its  mis-  *■  ' 

ciiievous  to  say,  either  the  certain  consequences  or  the 
queuces.  probablc.  The  consequences,  how  many  and 
whatsoever  they  may  be,  of  an  act,  of  which 
the  tendency  is  mischievous,  may,  such  of  them 
as  are  mischievous,  be  conceived  to  constitute 
one  aggregate  body,  which  may  be  termed  the 
mischief  of  the  act. 

HI. 

chief'^'/an  ^^^^^  mischicf  may  frequently  be  distin-' 
act,  pri-  o'uished,  as  it  were,  into  two  shares  or  parcels  : 
condary.  the  ouc  Containing  what  may  be  called  the  pri- 
mary mischief;  the  other,  what  may  be  called 
the  secondary.  That  share  may  be  termed  the 
primary,  which  is  sustained  by  an  assignable 
individual,  or  a  multitude  of  assignable  indi- 
viduals. That  share  may  be  termed  the  se- 
condary, which,  taking  its  origin  from  the 
former,  extends  itself  either  over  the  whole 
community,  or  over  some  other  multitude  of 
unassignable  individuals. 


IV. 


Primarv—       The  primary  mischief  of  an  act  may  again 
on!,ni)ai  or  j^^  distiuQ'uished  into    two  branches  :    1.  The 

aer)\aii\e.  o 

original:  and,  "2.  The  derivative.  By  the  ori- 
ginal.branch,  I  mean  that  which  alights  upon 
and  is  confined  to  any  person  who  is  a  sufferer 
in  the  first  instance,  and  on  his  own  account : 


OF    A    MISCHIEVCUS    ACT.  ^55 

the  person,  for  instance,  who  is  beaten,  robbed,   f^^^^^p^^ 
or  murdered.    By  the  derivative  branch,  I  mean 
any  share   of  mischief  which  may  befal  any 
other  assignable  persons  in  consequence  of  his 
beins:   a    sufferer,    and   no   otherwise.      These 
persons  must,    of  course,  be  persons  who  in 
some  wav  or  other  are   connected  with  him.       \ 
Now  the  ways  in  which  one  person  may  be 
connected   with   another,    have   been    already 
seen  :    they  may  be  connected  in  the  way  of 
interest    (meaning    self-regarding    interest)    or 
merely  in  the  way  of  symjjathij.     And  again, 
persons  connected  with  a  given  person,  in  the 
way  of  interest,  may  be  connected  with  him 
either  by  affording  support  to  him,  or  by  de- 
riving it  from  him.* 

V. 

The   secondary   mischief,    again,    may   fre-  x],^  ^^^^^^ 
quently  be  seen  to  consist  of  two  other  shares  '/^"Xf^rm  ■ 
or  parcels :    the  first  consisting  of  pain ;   the  'j.^;^-  ^^'^' 
other  of  danger.     The  pain  which  it  produces 
is  a  pain  of  apprehension  :    a  pain  grounded  on 
the  apprehension  of  suffering   such  mischiefs 
or  inconveniencies,  whatever  they  may  be,  as 
it  is  the    nature  of  the    primary    mischief  to 
produce.     It  may  be  styled,  in  one  word,  the 
alarm.     The  danger  is  the  chance,  whatever  it 
may  be,  which  the  multitude  it  concerns  may 

*  Sec  ch.  vi.  [Scnsibilitv.] 


256  OF    THE    CONSEQUENCES 

chap^xii.  [j^  consequence  of  the  primary  mischief,  stand 
exposed  to,  of  suffering  such  mischiefs  or  in- 
conveniencies.  For  dan2fer  is  nothing?  but  the 
chance  of  pain,  or,  what  comes  to  the  same 
thing,  of  loss  of  pleasure. 

VI. 

Example.  An  example  may  serve  to  make  this  clear. 
A  man  attacks  you  on  the  road,  and  robs  you. 
You  suffer  a  pain  on  the  occasion  of  losing  so 
much  money  :*  you  also  suffered  a  pain  at  the 
thoughts  of  the  personal  ill-treatment  you  ap- 
prehended he  might  give  you,  in  case  of  your 
not  happening  to  satisfy  his  demands. f  These 
together  constitute  the  original  branch  of  the 
primary  mischief,  resulting  from  the  act  of 
robbery.  A  creditor  of  your  s,  vv^ho  expected 
you  to  pay  him  with  part  of  that  money,  and 
a  son  ofyour's,  who  expected  you  to  have 
given  him  another  part,  are  in  consequence 
disappointed.  You  are  obliged  to  have  re- 
course to  the  bounty  of  your  father,  to  make 
good  part  of  the  deficiency.  These  mischiefs 
together  make  up  the  derivative  branch.  The 
report  of  this  robbery  circulates  from  hand  to 
hand,  and  spreads  itself  in  the  neighbourhood. 

*  Viz.  a  pain  of  privation.  See  ch.  v.  [Pleasures  and  Pains.] 
xvii. 

f  Viz.  a  pain  of  apprehension,  grounded  on  the  prospect  of 
organical  pain,  or  whatever  other  mischiefs  might  have  en- 
sued from  the  ill  treatment.     lb.  xxx. 


OF    A    MISCHIEVOUS    ACT.  257 

It  finds  its  way  into  the  newspapers,  and  is  ^^11^^- 
propagated  over  the  whole  country.     Various 
people,    on   this    occasion,    call   to   mind   the 
danger  which  they  and  their  friends,  as  it  ap- 
pears from  this  example,  stand  exposed  to  in 
travelling ;  especially  such  as  may  have  occa- 
sion to  travel  the  same  road.     On  this  occa- 
sion  they  naturally  feel  a  certain  degree  of 
pain:    slighter   or  heavier,    according   to  the 
degree  of  ill-treatment  they  may  understand 
you  to   have  received ;    the  frequency  of  the 
occasion  each  person  may  have  to  travel  in 
that  same  road,  or  its  neighbourhood ;  the  vi- 
cinity of  each  person  to  the  spot ;  his  personal 
courage  ;   the  quantity  of  money  he  may  have 
occasion  to  carry  about  with  him  ;  and  a  va- 
riety of  other  circumstances.     This  constitutes 
the  first  part   of  the  secondary  mischief,  re- 
sulting from  the  act  of  robbery ;  viz.  the  alarm. 
But  people  of  one   description  or  other,  not 
only  are  disposed  to  conceive  themselves  to 
incur  a  chance  of  being  robbed,  in  consequence 
of  the  robbery  committed  upon  you,  but  (as 
will  be  shown  presently)  they  do  really  incur 
such  a  chance.     And  it  is  this  chance  which 
constitutes  the  remaining  part  of  the  secondary 
mischief  of  the  act  of  robbery;  viz.  the  danger. 

VII. 

Let  us  see  what  this  chance  amounts  to;  The.h,.- 
and  whence  it  comes.     How  is  it,  for  instance,  ;i  ^;'ses-~ 

YQ  r     f  S  feace  atTords  no  direct  tnoti\  t  \o  h  future. 


^58  OF    THE    C0NSEQUP:NCES 

chai-^  XII.  t|j2^j  QjjQ  robbery  can  contribute  to  produce 
another?  In  the  first  place,  it  is  certain  that 
it  cannot  create  any  direct  motive.  A  motive 
must  be  the  prospect  of  some  pleasure,  or  other 
advantage,  to  be  enjoyed  in  future :  but  the 
robbery  in  question  is  past :  nor  would  it  fur- 
nish any  such  prospect  were  it  to  come  :  for 
it  is  not  one  robbery  that  will  furnish  pleasure 
to  him  who  may  be  about  to  commit  another 
robbery.  The  consideration  that  is  to  operate 
upon  a  man,  as  a  motive  or  inducement  to 
commit  a  robbery,  must  be  the  idea  of  the 
pleasure  he  expects  to  derive  from  the  fruits  of 
that  very  robbery :  but  this  pleasure  exists  in- 
dependently of  any  other  robbery. 

VIII. 

But  it  su?-      The   means,    then,   by  which    one  robbery 

erests  feasi-  ,  •         i         i  i  t  , 

biiity,  and  tcnds,  as  it  should  seem,  to  produce  another 
the  force  of  robbery,  are  two.  1.  By  suggesting  to  a  person 

restraining  ,  •  i         •  i  /> 

mofcives;  cxposcd  to  the  tcmptation,  the  idea  of  com- 
mitting such  another  robbery  (accompanied,  per- 
haps, witli  the  belief  of  its  facility).  In  this  case 
the  influence  it  exerts  applies  itself,  in  the  first 
place,  to  the  understanding.  2.  By  weakening 
the  force  of  the  tutelary  motives  which  tend  to 
restrain  him  from  such  an  action,  and  thereby 
adding  to  the  strength  of  the  temptation.*  In 
this  case  the  influence  applies  itself  to  the  will. 
These  forces  are,  1.  The  motive  of  benevolence, 

•  See  ch.  xi.  [Dispositions.]  xl. 


tlOil. 


OF    A    MISCHIEVOUS    ACT.  ^59 

which  acts  as  a  branch  of  the  physical  sanction.*  ^"ap^xii. 

2.  The  motive  of  self-preservation,  as  against 

the  punishment  that  may  stand  provided  by 

the  political  sanction.     3.  The  fear  of  shame ; 

a    motive   belonging    to   the   moral    sanction. 

4.  The  fear  of  the  divine  displeasure  ;  a  motive 

belonging  to   the   religious  sanction.     On  the  ' 

first  and  last  of  these  forces  it  has,  perhaps, 

no  influence  worth  insisting  on :  but  it  has  on 

the  other  two. 

IX.  viz. 

The  way  in  which  a  past  robbery  may  sumt"frVm 
weaken  the  force  with  which  the  political  ctfi!i"i!l'- 
sanction  tends  to  prevent  a  future  robbery,  may 
be  thus  conceived.  The  way  in  which  this 
sanction  tends  to  prevent  a  robbery,  is  by  de- 
nouncing some  particular  kind  of  punishment 
against  any  who  shall  be  guilty  of  it :  the 
real  value  of  which  punishment  will  of  course 
be  diminished  by  the  real  uncertainty  :  as  also, 
if  there  be  any  difference,  the  apparent  value 
by  the  apparent  uncertainty.  Now  this  un- 
certainty is  proportionably  increased  by  every 
instance  in  which  a  man  is  known  to  commit 
the  ofience,  without  undergoing  the  punish- 
ment.    This,  of  course,  will  be  the  case  with 

♦  To  wit,  in  virtue  of  the  pain  it  n;ay  give  a  man  to  be  a 
witness  to,  or  otlicrv\ise  conscious  of,  the  bufferings  of  a  fel- 
low-creature :  c&pecially  when  he  is  hin»self  the  cause  of 
then)  :  in  a  won!,  the  pain  c,f  j-ynipuihy.  6ce  ch.  v.  [I'lc.i- 
•urce  iir.A  Piiiiis.]  xwi. 

S  o 


260  Oi    THE    CONSEQUENCES 

Chap,  xti.  every  offence  for  a  certain  time ;  in  short, 
until  the  punishment  allotted  to  it  takes  place. 
If  punishment  takes  place  at  last,  this  branch 
of  the  mischief  of  the  offence  is  then  at  last, 
but  not  till  then,  put  a  stop  to. 

X. 

2.Thoseif.  The  Way  in  which  a  past  robbery  may 
the  moral,  wcakcu  the  forcc  with  which  the  moral  sanction 
tends  to  prevent  a  future  robbery,  may  be  thus 
conceived.  The  way  in  which  the  moral  sanction 
tends  to  prevent  a  robbery,  is  by  holding  forth 
the  indignation  of  mankind  as  ready  to  fall 
upon  him  who  shall  be  guilty  of  it.  Now  this 
indignation  will  be  the  more  formidable,  accord- 
ing to  the  number  of  those  who  join  in  it :  it  will 
be  the  less  so,  the  fewer  they  are  who  join  in 
it.  But  there  cannot  be  a  stronger  way  of 
showing  that  a  man  does  not  join  in  whatever 
indignation  may  be  entertained  against  a  prac- 
tice, than  the  engaging  in  it  himself.  It  shows 
not  only  tliat  he  himself  feels  no  indignation 
against  it,  but  that  it  seems  to  him  there  is 
no  sufficient  reason  for  apprehending  what  in- 
dignation may  be  felt  against  it  by  others. 
Accordingly,  where  robberies  are  frequent,  and 
unpunished,  robberies  are  committed  without 
shame.  It  was  thus  amongst  the  Grecians  for- 
merly.*    It  is  thus  among  the  Arabs  still. 

*  See  Horn.  Odyss.  L.  xix.  I.  395.  ib.  L.  iii.  I.  71.  Plato 
de  Rep.  L.  i.  p.  576.  edit.  Ficin.  Thucyd.  L.  i.— -and  see  B.  I. 
tit.  [Offences  against  external  security.] 


OP    A    MISCHIEVOUS    ACT.  261 

Chap.  XII. 
XI. 

In  whichever  way  then  a  past  offence  tends  it  is  said  io 

1  r  1  •       •  f       r  operate  by 

to  pave  the  way  for  the  commission  of  a  future  the  ii.au- 

ciicc  of  C\~ 

offence,  whether  by  suggesting  the  idea  of  com-  ample. 
mitting  it,  or  by  adding  to  the  strength  of  the 
temptation,  in  both  cases  it  may  be  said  to  ope- 
rate by  the  force  or  itifliience  of  example. 

XII. 

The  two  branches  of  the  secondary  mischief  The  alarm 
of  an  act,  the  alarm  and  the  danger,  must  not  dan-ert 
be  confounded  :    though  intimately  connected,  connected, 
they  are  perfectly  distinct :  either  may  subsist  gulshab'ie' 
without  the  other.     The  neighbourhood  may 
be  alarmed  with  the  report  of  a  robbery,  when, 
in  fact,  no  robbery,  either  has  been  committed  or 
is  in  a  way  to  be  committed :  a  neighbourhood 
may  be  on  the  point  of  being  disturbed  by  rob- 
beries, without  knowing  any  thing  of  the  mat- 
ter.    Accordingly,  we  shall  soon  perceive,  that 
some  acts  produce  alarm  without  danger :  others, 
danger  without  alarm. 

XIII. 

As  well  the  danger  as  the  alarm  may  again  Both  mny ; 
be  divided,  each  of  them,  into  two  branches:  specit.iihe 
the  first,  consisting  of  so  much  of  the  alarm  or  s.T.'nMo 
danger  as  may  be  apt  to  result  from  the  future  " 
behaviour  of  the  same  agent :  the  second,  con- 
sisting of  so  much  a.s  may  be  apt  to  result  from 
the  behaviour  of  other  persons  :  such  others,  to 


2C2  OF    TUB    CONSEQUENCES 

chap^^.  ^j^^  g^g  j^^y  come  to  engage  in  acts  of  the  same 
^ort  and  tendency.* 

XIV. 

ihe  pri-         The  distinction  between  the  primary  and  the 

Ttiarv  con-  ,  z'  J  j^  1 

sequences  secondary  consequences  oi  an  act,  must  be  care- 
maybe  mi  -  fully  attended  to.  It  is  so  just,  that  the  latter 
and  the  se-  niay  oftcu  bc  of  a  directly  opposite  nature  to 
ncfiS  ^  the  former.  In  some  cases,  where  the  primary 
consequences  of  the  act  are  attended  with  a 
mischief,  the  secondary  consequences  may  be 
benefical,  and  that  to  such  a  degree,  as  even 
greatly  to  outweigh  the  mischief  of  the  primary. 
This  is  the  case,  for  instance,  with  all  acts  of 
punishment,  when  properly  applied.  Of  these, 
the  primary  mischief  being  never  intended  to  fall 
but  upon  such  persons  as  may  happen  to  have 
committed  some  act  which  it  is  expedient  to 
prevent,  the  secondary  mischief,  that  is,  the 
alarm  and  the  danger,  extends  no  farther  than 
to  such  persons  as  are  under  temptation  to  com- 
mit it :  in  which  case,  in  as  far  as  it  tends  to 
restrain  them  from  committing  such  acts,  it  is 
of  a  beneficial  nature. 

XV. 

Anaiy^i'^  of      Thus  much  with  reorard  to  acts  that  produce 
cat  shapes   positive  pam,  and  that  mimediately.    This  case,  ' 

in  whi(i:i . 

the  mi«- 

chict  of  an        *  To  the  former  of  these  branches  is  opposed  so  much  of 

^h^  ™^tself   ^^^  force  of  at»y  punishment,  as  is  said  to  operate  in  the  -vvay 

of  reformation  :  to  the  latter,  so  much  as  is  said  to  operate  in 

the  wav  of  example.     See  ch.  xiii.  [Cases  unmeet]  ii.  note. 


OF    A    MISCHIEVOUS    ACT.  263 

by  reason  of  its  simplicity,  seemed  the  fittest  CHAr.xii. 
to  take  the  lead.     But  acts  may  produce  mis- 
chief in  various  other  ways ;  which,  together 
with  those  already  specified,  may  all  be  com- 
prized by  the  following  abridged  analysis. 

Mischief  may  admit  of  a  division  in  any  one 
of  three  points  of  view.  1.  According  to  its 
own  nature.  2.  According  to  its  cause.  3.  Ac- 
cording to  the  person,  or  other  party,  who  is  the 
object  of  it.*  "With  regard  to  its  nature,  it  may 
be  either  simple  or  complex  :-\  when  simple,  it 
TCidLj  either  he  positive  OT  negative :  positive,  con- 
sisting of  actual  pain :  negative,  consisting  of 
the  loss  of  pleasure.  Whether  simple  or  com- 
plex, and  whether  positive  or  negative,  it  may 
be  either  certain  or  co7itinge7it.  When  it  is  ne- 
gative, it  consists  of  the  loss  of  some  benefit  or 
advantage  :  this  benefit  may  be  material  in  both 
or  either  of  two  ways  :  1.  By  affording  actual 
pleasure  :  or,  2.  By  averting  pain  or  danger, 
which  is  the  chance  of  pain  :  that  is,  by  afford- 
ing security.  In  as  far,  then,  as  the  benefit  which 
a  mischief  tends  to  avert,  is  productive  of  secu- 

*  Tliere  may  he  oilier  [joints  of  view,  iiccording  to  which 
mischief  might  be  divided,  besides  these  :  but  this  does  not 
prevent  the  division  here  given  from  being  an  exhaustive  one. 
A  line  may  be  divided  in  any  one  of  an  inlinity  of  ways,  and 
yet  without  leaving  in  any  one  of  tliose  cases  any  remainder. 
Seech,  xvi.  [Division.]  i.  note. 

•j-  Ch.  v.  [Pleasures  and  Pains.]  i. 


264  OF    THE    CONSEQUENCES 

chap.xii.  j-i^y^  tj^g  tendency  of  such  mischief  is  to  pro- 
duce insecurity.  2.  With  regard  to  its  cause, 
mischief  may  be  produced  either  by  one  single, 
action,  or  not  without  the  concurrence  of  other 
actions  :  if  not  without  the  concurrence  of  other 
actions,  these  others  may  be  the  actions  either 
of  the  same  person,  or  of  other  persons  :  in  either 
case,  they  may  be  either  acts  of  the  same  kind  as 
that  in  question,  or  of  other  kinds.  3.  Lastly, 
with  regard  to  the  party  who  is  the  object  of 
the  mischief,  or,  in  other  words,  who  is  in  a  way 
to  be  affected  by  it,  such  party  may  be  either 
an  assignable  *  individual,  or  assemblage  of  in- 
dividuals, or  else  a  multitude  of  unassignable  in- 
dividuals. When  the  object  is  an  assignable 
individual,  this  individual  may  either  be  the 
person  himself  who  is  the  author  of  the  mis- 
chief, or  some  other  person.  When  the  indivi- 
duals, who  are  the  objects  of  it,  are  an  unassign- 
able multitude,  this  multitude  may  be  either 
the  whole  political  community  or  state,  or  some 
subordinate  division  of  it.  Now  when  the  object 
of  the  mischief  is  the  author  himself,  it  may  be 
styled  self -regarding:  when  any  other  party  is  the 
object,  extra-regarding :  when  such  other  party 
is  an  individual,  it  may  be  styled  jonV^te :  when 
a  subordinate  branch  of  the  community,  semi- 
public:  when  the  whole  community,  jow^/zc.  Here, 
for  the  present,  we  must  stop.     To  pursue  the 

*  See ch.  xvi,  [Division]  iv.  note. 


OF    A    MISCHIEVOUS    ACT.  ^65 

subject  through  its  inferior  distinctions,  will  be  ch^^^i. 
the  business  of  the  chapter  which  exhibits  the 
division  of  offences.* 
The  cases  which  have  been  already  illustrated,  —applied 

to  the  pre- 

are  those  in  v/hich  the  primary  mischief  is  not  ceding 

cases. 

necessarily  otherwise  than  a  simple  one,   and 
that  positive  :  present,  and  therefore  certain : 
producible  by  a  single  action,  without  any  ne- 
cessity of  the  concurrence  of  any  other  action, 
either  on  the  part  of  the  same  agent,  or  of 
others  ;  and  having  for  its  object  an  assignable 
individual,  or,  by  accident,   an  assemblage  of 
assignable  individuals :  extra-regarding  there- 
fore, and  private.     This  primary  mischief  is  ac- 
companied by  a  secondary  :  the  first  branch  of 
which  is  sometimes  contingent  and  sometimes 
certain,  the  other  never  otherwise  than  contin- 
gent :  both  extra-regarding  and   semi-public : 
In  other  respects,  pretty  much  upon  a  par  with 
the  primary  mischief:    except   that   the   first 
branch,  viz.  the  alarm,  though  inferior  in  mag- 
nitude to  the  primary,  is,  in  point  of  extent, 
and  therefore,  upon  the  whole,  in  point  of  mag- 
nitude, much  superior. 

xvr. 

Two  instances  more  will  be  sufficient  to  illus-  —to  exam- 
ples of 

tratc  the  most   material  of  the   modifications  o'l'*-'-  cases 

where  the 

above  exhibited.  mischief  i* 


less  con- 
tpicuuut. 


•  Ch.  xvi. 


cation. 


266  OF    THK    CONSEQUENCES 

c^iiAivXH.  ^  jj^r^jj  drinks  a  certain  quantity  of  liquor, 
AnTct'of  ^'  ^^^  intoxicates  himself.  The  intoxication  in  this 
seif-mtoxi-  particular  instance  does  him  no  sort  of  harm : 
or,  what  comes  to  the  same  thing,  none  that  is 
perceptible.  But  it  is  probable,  and  indeed 
next  to  certain,  that  a  given  number  of  acts  of 
the  same  kind  would  do  him  a  very  considerable 
degree  of  harm  :  more  or  less  according  to  his 
constitution  and  other  circumstances  :  for  this  is 
no  more  than  what  experience  manifests  every 
day.  It  is  also  certain,  that  one  act  of  this  sort, 
by  one  means  or  other,  tends  considerably  to 
encrease  the  disposition  a  man  may  be  in  to 
practise  other  acts  of  the  same  sort :  for  this 
also  is  verified  by  experience.  This,  therefore, 
is  one  instance  where  the  mischief  producible 
by  the  act  is  contingent:  in  other  words,  in 
which  the  tendency  of  the  act  is  no  otherwise 
mischievous  than  in  virtue  of  its  producing  a 
chance  of  mischief.  This  chance  depends  upon 
the  concurrence  of  other  acts  of  the  same  kind  ; 
and  those  such  as  must  be  practised  by  the  same 
person.  The  object  of  the  mischief  is  that  very 
person  himself  who  is  the  author  of  it,  and  he 
only,  unless  by  accident.  The  mischief  is  there- 
fore private  and  self-regarding. 

As  to  its  secondary  mischief,  alarm,  it  pro- 
duces none :  it  produces  indeed  a  certain  quan- 
tity of  danger  by  the  influence  of  example :  but 


OF    A    MISCHIEVOUS    ACT.  2G7 

it  is  not  often  that  this  danger  will  amount  to  a  c^^ap^i. 
quantity  worth  regarding. 

XVII. 

Again.     A  man  omits  paying  his  share  to  a  Example 
pubhc  tax.     This  we  see  is  an  act  oi  the  nega-  pavmeRt  of 
tive  kind.*     Is  this  then  to  be  placed  upon  the  ^^''^' 
list  of  mischievous  acts  ?  Yes,  certainly.    Upon 
what  grounds  ?  Upon  the  following.   To  defend 
the  community  against  its  external  as  well  as 
its  internal  adversaries,  are  tasks,  not  to  men- 
tion  others  of  a  less  indispensable  nature,  wmch 
cannot  be   fulfilled  but  at  a  considerable  ex- 
pense.   But  whence  is  the  money  for  defraying 
this  expense  to  come  ?     It  can  be  obtained  in 
no  other  manner  than  by  contributions  to  be 
collected  from  individuals  ;  in  a  word,  by  taxes. 
The  produce  then  of  these  taxes  is  to  be  looked 
upon  as  a  kind  of  benefit  which  it  is  necessary 
the  governing  part  of  the  community  should 
receive  for  the  use  of  the  whole.    This  produce, 
before  it  can  be  applied  to  its  destination,  re- 
quires that  there  should  be  certain  persons  com- 
missioned to  receive  and  to  apply  it.     Now  if 
these  persons,  had  they  received  it,  would  have 
applied  it  to  its  proper  destination,  it  would 
have  been  a  benefit :  the  not  putting  them  in  a 
way  to  receive  it,  is  then  a  mischief.     But  it  is 
possible,  that  if  received,  it  might  not  have  been 


Sec.  ch.  vii.  [Actions]  viii. 


^^^  OF    THE    CONSEQUENCES 

cnAP.xn.  applied  to  its  proper  destination;  or  that  the 
services,  in  consideration  of  which  it  was  be- 
stowed, might  not  have  been  performed.     It  is 
possible,  that  the  under-officer,  who  collected 
the  produce  of  the  tax,  might  not  have  paid  it 
over  to  his  principal:  it  is  possible  that  the 
principal  might  not  have  forwarded  it  on  ac- 
cording to  its  farther  destination ;  to  the  judge, 
for  instance,  who  is  to  protect  the  community 
against  it*  clandestine  enemies  from  within,  or 
the  soldier,  who  is  to  protect  it  against  its  open 
enemies  from  without :  it  is  possible  that  the 
judge,  or  the  soldier,  had  they  received  it,  would 
not  however  have  been  induced  by  it  to  fulfil 
their  respective  duties  :  it  is  possible,  that  the 
judge  would  not  have  sat  for  the  punishment  of 
criminals,  and  the  decision  of  controversies  :  it 
is  possible  that  the  soldier  would  not  have  drawn 
his  sword  in  the  defence  of  the  community. 
These,  together  with  an  infinity  of  other  inter- 
mediate acts,  which  for  the  sake  of  brevity  I 
pass  over,  form  a  connected  chain  of  duties,  the 
discharge  of  which  is  necessary  to  the  preserva- 
tion of  the  community.     They  must  every  one 
of  them  be  discharged,  ere  the  benefit  to  which 
they  are  contributory  can  be  produced.  If  they 
are  all  discharged,  in  that  case  the  benefit  sub- 
sists, and  any  act,  by  tending  to  intercept  that 
benefit,  may  produce  a  mischief.    But  if  any  of 
them  are  not,  the  benefit  fails  :  it  fails  of  itself: 
it  would  not  have  subsisted,  although  the  act 


OF    A    MISCHIEVOUS    ACT.  269 

in  question  (the  act  of  non-payment)  had  not  <^["*p-^ti. 
been  committed.  The  benefit  is  therefore  con- 
tingent ;  and,  accordingly,  upon  a  certain  sup- 
position, the  act  which  consists  in  the  averting 
of  it  is  not  a  mischievous  one.  But  this  sup- 
position, in  any  tolerably-ordered  government, 
will  rarely  indeed  be  verified.  In  the  very 
worst-ordered  government  that  exists,  the 
greatest  part  of  the  duties  that  are  levied  are 
paid  over  according  to  their  destination :  and, 
with  regard  to  any  particular  sum,  that  is  at- 
tempted to  be  levied  upon  any  particular  person 
upon  any  particular  occasion,  it  is  therefore 
manifest,  that,  unless  it  be  certain  that  it  will  not 
be  so  disposed  of,  the  act  of  withholding  it  is  a 
mischievous  one. 

The  act  of  payment,  when  referable  to  any 
particular  sum,  especially  if  it  be  a  small  one, 
might  also  have  failed  of  proving  beneficial  on 
another  ground  :  and,  consequently,  the  act  of 
non-payment,  of  proving  mischievous.  It  is 
possible  that  the  same  services,  precisely,  might 
have  been  rendered  without  the  money  as  with 
it.  If,  then,  speaking  of  any  small  limited  sum, 
such  as  the  greatest  which  any  one  person  is 
called  upon  to  pay  at  a  time,  a  man  were  to 
say,  that  the  non-payment  of  it  would  be  at- 
tended with  mischievous  consequences ;  this 
would  be  far  from  certain  :  but  what  comes  to 
the  same  thing  as  if  it  were,  it  is  perfectly  cer 


270  OF    THE    COXSEQ.UE\CES 

Chap.  XII.  tain  when  applied  to  the  whole.  It  is  certain, 
that  if  all  of  a  sudden  the  payment  of  all  taxes 
was  to  cease,  there  would  no  longer  be  any 
thing  effectual  done,  either  for  the  maintenance 
of  justice,  or  for  the  defence  of  the  community 
against  its  foreign  adversaries:  that  therefore 
the  weak  would  presently  be  oppressed  and 
injured  in  all  manner  of  ways,  by  the  strong  at 
home,  and  both  together  overwhelmed  by  op- 
pressors from  abroad.  Upon  the  whole,  there- 
fore, it  is  manifest,  that  in  this  case,  though  the 
mischief  is  remote  and  contingent,  though  in  its 
first  appearance  it  consists  of  nothing  more 
than  the  interception  of  a  benefit,  and  though  the 
individuals,  in  whose  favour  that  benefit  would 
have  been  reduced  into  the  explicit  form  of 
pleasure  or  security,  are  altogether  unassign- 
able, yet  the  mischievous  tendency  of  the  act 
is  not  on  all  these  accounts  the  less  indisputable. 
The  mischief,  in  point  of  intensity  and  duration, 
is  indeed  unknown  :  it  is  uncertain :  it  is  remote. 
But  in  point  of  extent  it  is  immense ;  and  in 
point  oi  fecunditij,  pregnant  to  a  degree  that 
bafiles  calculation. 

XVIII. 

No  alarm,       It  may  now  be  time  to  observe,  that  it  is  only 
assiguabie  in  the  casc  where  the  mischief  is  extra-regard- 

persun  is 

the  object,  ing,  and  has  an  assignable  person  or  persons  for 
its  object,  that  so  much  of  the  secondary  branch 
of    it   as   consists    in    alarm   can  have    place. 


OF    A    MISCHIEVOUS    ACT. 

When  the  individuals  it  affects  are  uncertain,  Chap-J^- 
and  altogether  out  of  sight,  no  alarm  can  be  pro- 
duced :  as  there  is  nobody  whose  sufferings  you 
can  see,  there  is  nobody  whose  sufferings  you 
can  be  alarmed  at.  No  alarm,  for  instance,  is 
produced  by  non-payment  to  a  tax.  If  at  any 
distant  and  uncertain  period  of  time  such  offence 
should  chance  to  be  productive  of  any  kind  of 
alarm,  it  would  appear  to  proceed,  as  indeed 
immediately  it  would  proceed,  from  a  very  dif- 
ferent cause.  It  might  be  immediately  refer- 
able, for  example,  to  the  act  of  a  legislator,  who 
should  deem  it  necessary  to  lay  on  a  new  tax, 
in  order  to  make  up  for  the  deficiency  occa- 
sioned in  the  produce  of  the  old  one.  Or  it 
might  be  referable  to  the  act  of  an  enemy,  who, 
under  favour  of  a  deficiency  thus  created  in  the 
fund  allotted  for  defence,  might  invade  the 
country,  and  exact  from  it  much  heavier  contri- 
butions than  those  which  had  been  thus  with- 
holden  from  the  sovereign.* 

*  The  investigation  might,  by  a  process  rendered  obvious 
by  analogy,  be  extended  to  the  consequences  of  an  act  of  a 
beneficial  nature.  In  both  instances  a  tliird  order  of  conse- 
quences may  be  reckoned  to  have  taken  place,  when  the  in- 
fluence of  the  act,  through  the  medium  of  the  passive  faculty 
of  the  patient,  has  come  to  atTcct  his  active  faculty.  In  this 
•way,  1.  Evil  may  flow  out  of  evil: — instance;  the  exertions 
of  industry  put  a  stop  to  by  the  extinction  of  inducement,  re- 
sulting from  a  continued  chnin  of  acts  of  robbery  or  extor- 
tioD      ".  -  Good  out  of  evil : — inbtance  ;   hubits  of  deprcdatiou 


OF    TH£    CONSEQUENCES 

As  to  any  alarm  which  such  an  offence  might 
raise  among  the  few  who  might  chance  to  re- 
gard the  matter  with  the  eyes  of  statesmen,  it 
is  of  too  slight  and  uncertain  a  nature  to  be 
worth  taking  into  the  account. 

§  2.  How   Intent Lonalitij ,  8^c.    may  irifluence  the 
mischief  of  an  act. 

XIX. 

Secondary       Wc  havc  secn  the  nature  of  the  secondary  mis- 
influenced  chief,  which  is  apt  to  be  reflected,  as  it  were, 
of  the*  ^  ^  from  the  primary,  in  the  cases  where  the  indi- 
mind.        viduals  who  are  the  objects  of  the  mischief  are 
assignable.     It  is  now  time  to  examine  into  the 
circumstances  upon   which  the  production  of 
such  secondary  mischief  depends.     These  cir- 
cumstances are  no  others  than  the  four  articles 
which  have  formed  the  subjects  of  the  four  last 
preceding  chapters  :  viz.   1.  The  intentionality. 
2.  The  consciousness.     3.  The  motive.     4.  The 
disposition.     It  is  to  be   observed   all   along, 
that  it  is   only  the  danger  that  is  immediately 
governed  by  the  real  state  of  the  mind  in  re- 
spect to  those  articles  :  it  is  by  the  apparoit  state 

put  a  stop  to  by  a  steady  course  of  punishment,  3.  Evil  out 
of  good  : — instance  ;  habits  of  industry  put  a  stop  to  by  an  ex- 
cessive course  of  gratuitous  bounty.  4.  Good  out  of  good : — 
instance ;  a  constant  and  increasing  course  of  industry,  ex- 
cited and  kept  up  by  the  rewards  afforded  by  a  reguhir  and 
increasing  market  for  the  fruits  of  it. 


OF    A    MISCHIEVOUS    ACT.  272 

of  it  that  the  alanii  is  governed.  It  is  governed  ^^!:!^^' 
by  the  real  only  in  as  far  as  the  apparent  hap- 
pens, as  in  most  cases  it  may  be  expected  to 
do,  to  quadrate  with  the  real.  The  different  in- 
fluences of  the  articles  of  intentionality  and  con- 
sciousness may  be  represented  in  the  several 
cases  folk)winsr. 


XX. 


Case  1.  Where  the  act  is  so  completely  un-  Ca^^  i- '"- 
intentional,  as  to  be  altogether  uwoluntarij.     In  "'=^^- 
this  case  it  is  attended  with  no  secondary  mis- 
chief at  all. 

A  bricklayer  is  at  work  upon  a  house  :  a  pas- 
senger is  walking  in  the  street  below.  A  fellow- 
workman  comes  and  gives  the  bricklayer  a 
violent  push,  in  consequence  of  which  he  falls 
upon  the  passenger,  and  hurts  him.  It  is  plain 
there  is  nothing  in  this  event  that  can  give  other 
people,  who  may  happen  to  be  in  the  street,  the 
least  reason  to  apprehend  any  thing  in  future 
on  the  part  of  the  man  who  fell,  whatever  there 
may  be  with  regard  to  the  man  who  pushed  him. 

XXI. 

Case  2.    Where  the   act,  thouuh    not   unin-  Cascs.un- 

'~  inicDiioi)- 

tentional,  is  unadvised,  insomuch  that  the  mis-  »i''y  wini 

liffdli'S.-- 

chievous  part  of  the  consequences  is  unintcn-  ""''• 
tional,  but  the  unadvisedness  is  attended  with 
heedlessness,     in  this  case  the  act   is  attended 
with  some  small  degree  of  secondary  miscliief, 
in  proportion  to  tlie  degree  of  heedlessness, 

VOL.    I.  T 


2^4  OF   THE    CONSEQUENCES 

^vIllT^^'  A  groom  being  on  horseback,  and  riding 
through  a  frequented  street,  turns  a  corner  at 
a  full  pace,  and  rides  over  a  passenger,  who 
happens  to  be  going  by.  It  is  plain,  by  this 
behaviour  of  the  groom,  some  degree  of  alarm 
may  be  produced,  less  or  greater,  according  to 
the  degree  of  heedlessness  betrayed  by  him  : 
according  to  the  quickness  of  his  pace,  the  full- 
ness of  the  street,  and  so  forth.  He  has  done 
mischief,  it  may  be  said,  by  his  carelessness, 
already  :  who  knows  but  that  on  other  occasions 
the  like  cause  may  produce  the  like  effect  ? 

XXII. 

Cases.         Case  3.  Where  the  act  is  7?iisadvised  with,  re- 

Missuppo- 

sai  of  a      spect  to  a  circumstance,  which,  had  it  existed, 

complete         ■'■ 

justifica-     would  fully  havc  excluded  or  (what  comes  to 

lion,  with-  ./       ^  ... 

out  lash-     the  same  thing)  outweighed  the  primary  mis- 

ness.  1  •        1  T 

chief :  and  there  is  no  rashness  m  the  case.     In 
this  case  the  act  is  attended  with  no  secondary 
mischief  at  all. 
It  is  needless  to  multiply  examples  any  farther. 

XXIII. 

Case  4.        Case  4.  Where  the  act  is  misadvised  with 
saiofTfar-  rcspcct  to  a  circumstancc  which  would  have 
cation^  '  excluded  or  counterbalanced  the  primary  mis- 
Talshaei.    chieUti  part,  but  not  entirely :  and  still  there  is 
no  rashness.     In  this  case  the  act  is  attended 
with  some  degree  of  secondary  mischief,  in  pro- 
portion to  that  part  of  the  primary  which  re- 
mains unexcluded  or  uncounterbalauced. 


OF    A    MISCHIEVOUS    ACT. 


XXIV. 


Case  5.  Where  the  act  is  misadvised  with    ^^^^  ^- 

Missuppo- 

respect  to  a  circumstance,  which,  had  it  existed,  if^^'^^^ 
would  have  excluded  or  counterbalanced  the 
primary  mischief  entirely,  or  in  part :  and  there 
is  a  degree  oirashiess  in  the  supposal.  In  this 
case,  the  act  is  also  attended  with  a  farther  de- 
gree of  secondary  mischief,  in  proportion  to  the 
degree  of  rashness. 

XXV. 

Case  6.  Where  the   consequences   are  com-  casee.con- 

i-  sequences 

pletelu  intentional,  and  there  is  no  missupposal  completely 

r         J  '  rr  intentional^ 

in  the  case.     In  this  case  the  secondary  mischief  ^"^^  '^^^^. 

•^  from  mis- 

is  at  the  highest.  supposai. 

XXVI. 

Thus  much  with  regard  to  intentionality  and  The  nature 

.  .       of  a  nioti»e 

consciousness.     We  now  come  to  consider  in  takes  not 
what  manner  the  secondary  mischief  is  affected  mischief  of 

the  second- 
by  the  nature  of  the  motive.  aryconse- 

■\\Ty  •  •    •  •        •  •  quences. 

Where  an  act  is  pernicious  m  its  primary 
consequences,  the  secondary  mischief  is  not 
obliterated  by  the  goodness  of  the  motive ;  though 
the  motive  be  of  the  best  kind.  For,  notwith- 
standing the  goodness  of  the  motive,  an  act  of 
which  the  primary  consequences  are  pernicious, 
is  produced  by  it  in  the  instance  in  question, 
by  the  sup})osition.  It  may,  therefore,  in  other 
instances  :  although  this  is  not  so  likely  to  hap- 
pen from  a  good  motive  as  from  a  bad  one.* 

♦  An  act  of  homicide,  for  instance,  is  not  rendered  inno- 


276  OF    THE    CONSEQUENCES 

Chap^.  XXVII. 

Nor  the  be-      All  act,  wliicli,  tliough  pemicious  in  its  pri- 
ness.  mary  consequences,  is  rendered   in   otlier  re- 

spects beneficial  upon  the  whole,  by  virtue  of  its 
secondary  consequences,  is  not  changed  back 
again,  and  rendered  pernicious  upon  the  whole 
by  the  badness  of  the  motive :  although  the  mo- 
tive be  of  the  worst  kind.* 


cent,  much  less  beneficial,  merely  by  its  proceeding  from  a 
principle  of  religion,  of  lionour  (that  is,  of  lovt^  of  reputation) 
or  even  of  benevolence.  When  Ravaillac  ass  ssinated  Henry 
IV.  it  was  from  a  principle  of  religion.  But  this  did  not  so 
much  as  abate  from  the  mischief  of  the  act.  It  even  rendered 
the  act  still  more  mischievous,  for  a  reason  that  we  shall  see 
presently,  than  if  it  had  originated  from  a  principle  of  revenge. 
When  the  conspirators  against  the  late  king  of  Portugal  at- 
tempted to  assassinate  him,  it  is  said  to  have  been  from  a 
principle  of  honour.  But  this,  whether  it  abated  or  no,  will 
certainly  not  be  thought  to  have  outweighed,  the  mischief  of 
the  act.  Had  a  son  of  Ravailiac's,  as  in  the  case  before  sup- 
posed,t  merely  on  the  score  of  filial  affection,  and  not  in  con- 
sequence of  any  participation  in  his  crime,  put  him  to  death 
in  order  to  rescue  iiim  from  the  severer  hands  of  justice,  the 
motive,  although  it  should  not  be  thought  to  afford  any  proof 
of  a  mischievous  disposition,  and  should,  even  in  case  of 
punishment,  have  made  such  rescuer  an  object  of  pity,  would 
hardly  have  made  the  act  of  rescue  a  beneficial  one. 

*  The  prosecution  of  offences,  for  instance,  proceeds  most 
commonly  from  one  or  other,  or  both  together,  of  two  mo- 
tives, the  one  of  which  is  of  the  self-regarding,  the  other  of 
the  dissocial  kind  :  viz,  ])ecuniary  interest,  and  ill-will :  from 
pecuniary  interest,  for  instance,  whenever  the  obtaining  pecu- 

4-  Cb.xi.  [Disposition.]  xv. 


OF    A    MISCHIEVOUS    ACT.  277 

XXVIII.  Ci^AT^I. 

But  when  not  only  the  primary  consequences  Rut  it  may 
of  an  act  are  pernicious,  but,  in  other  respects,  the  mis- 

^  _  /         ,         chievous- 

the  secondary  likewise,  the  secondary  mischief  ness,  where 

^  '  .  thev  are 

may  be  as;g7^avated  by  the  nature  of  the  motive :  misch  e- 
so  much  of  that  mischief,  to  wit,  as  respects  the 
future  behaviour  of  the  same  person. 

XXIX. 

It  is  not  from  the  worst  kind  of  motive,  how-  Bi't  i><>tti.e 

most  iu  the 

ever,  that  the  secondary  mischief  of  an  act  re-  t^a^e  of  the 

worst  luo- 

ceives  its  greatest  aggravation.  tives. 

XXX. 

The  aggravation  which  the  secondary  mis-  udoes  the 
chief  of  an  act,  in  as  far  as  it  respects  the  future  moreconsi- 

v     V         •  z'  ^  1  •  r  ,^        titrable  the 

behaviour  ot  the  same  person,  receives  kom  the  tendeiKyof 

,  ^  ...  •      1-     •  1        1  •  i''*^   motive 

nature  oi  a  motive  in  an  individual  case,  is  as  to  produce 

!>uch  acts, 

niary  amends  for  damage  suffered  is  one  end  of  the  prosecution. 
It  is  common  enough  indeed  to  hear  men  speak  of  prosecu- 
tions undertaken  from  public  spirit ;  which  is  a  branch,  as  we 
liave  seen,'  of  the  principle  of  henevolence.  Far  be  it  from 
me  to  deny  but  that  such  a  principle  may  very  frequently  be  an 
ingredient  in  the  sum  of  motives,  by  which  men  are  engaged 
in  a  proceeding  of  this  nature.  But  whenever  such  u  j)ro- 
ceeding  is  engaged  in  from  liic  sole  influence  of  public  spirit, 
uncombined  with  the  least  tincture  of  self  interest,  or  ill-will, 
it  must  be  acknowledged  to  be  a  proceeding  of  the  heroic- 
kind.  Now  acts  of  heroism  are,  in  the  very  essence  of  them, 
but  rare  :  for  if  thev  were  common,  they  would  not  be  acts 
of  heroism.  But  prosecutions  for  crimes  are  very  frecjucnt,  and 
yet,  unless  in  very  particular  circumstances  indeed,  tliey  are 
never  otherwise  than  bcnclicial. 

»  Sec  ch.  X.  [MoUtcs.J  »xv. 


278  OF    THE    CONSEQUENCES 

^^'^  ^^}-  the  tendency  of  the  motive  to  produce,  on  the 
part  of  the  same  person,  acts  of  the  like  bad 
tendency  with  that  of  the  act  in  question. 

XXXT. 

—which  The  tendency  of  a  motive  to  produce  acts  of 
strenftth  ^^c  Hkc  kind,  on  the  part  of  any  given  person, 
st°ancj°"     is  ^s  the  strength  and  constancy  of  its  influence 

on  that  person,  as  applied  to  the  production  of 

such  effects. 

XXXII. 

General  ef-     Tlic  tcndeucy  of  a  spccics  of  motive  to  give 

licacy  of  a  i   •      i 

species  of    Dirth  to  acts  ot  any  kmd,  among  persons  in 

motive, how  i     •  i 

measured,  general,  is  as  the  strength,  constancy,  and  exten- 
siveness*  of  its  influence,  as  applied  to  the  pro- 
duction of  such  effects. 

XXXIII. 

A  mischie-      Now  the  iTiotivcs,  whcrcof  the  influence  is  at 
more^so,'^  oncc  most  powcrful,  most  constant,  and  most 
in/°rom'^a  cxtcnsive,  arc  the  motives  of  physical  desire, 
ing  thS''^  the  love  of  wealth,  the  love  of  ease,  the  love  of 
rf^^soda!"  life,  and   the   fear  of  pain :  all  of  them  self- 
iDotiTe.,     regarding  motives.     The  motive  of  displeasure, 
whatever  it  may  be  in  point  of  strength  and 
extensiveness,  is  not  near  so  constant  in  its  in- 
fluence (the  case  of  mere  antipathy  excepted) 
as  any  of  the  other  three.     A  pernicious  act, 
therefore,  when  committed  through  vengeance, 
or  otherwise  through  displeasure,  is  not  near 
so  mischievous    as    the   same   pernicious   act, 

'       •  Ch.  iv.  [Value.] 


OF    A    MISCHIEVOUS    ACT.  '  279 

when  committed  by  force  of  any  one  of  those  chap  xii. 
other  motives.* 

XXXIV. 

As  to  the  motive  of  religion,  whatever  it  may  —so  even 

*'    when  issu- 

sometimes  prove  to  be  in  point  of  strength  and  i"g  from 

^  _  '^      _  the  motive 

constancy,  it  is  not  in  point  of  extent  so  univer-  of  religion. 
sal,  especially  in  its  application  to  acts  of  a  mis- 
chievous nature,  as  any  of  the  three  preceding 
motives.  It  may,  however,  be  as  universal  in  a 
particular  state,  or  in  a  particular  district  of  a 

*  It  is  for  this  reason  that  a  threat,  or  other  personal  out- 
rage, when  committed  on  a  stranger,  in  pursuance  of  a  scheme 
of  robbery,  is  productive  of  more  mischief  in  society,  and 
accordingly  is,  perhaps,  every  where  more  severely  punished, 
than  an  outrage  of  the  same  kind  offered  to  an  acquaintance, 
in  prosecution  of  a  scheme  of  vengeance.  No  man  is  always 
in  a  rage.  But,  at  all  times,  ev°ry  man,  more  or  less,  loves 
money.  Accordingly,  although  a  man  by  his  quarrelsome- 
ness should  for  once  have  been  engaged  in  a  bad  action,  he 
may  nevertheless  remain  a  long  while,  or  even  his  whole  life- 
time, without  engaging  in  another  bad  action  of  the  same 
kind  :  for  lie  may  very  well  remain  his  whole  life-time  with- 
out engaging  in  so  violent  a  quarrel :  nor  at  any  rate  will  he 
quarrel  with  more  than  one,  or  a  few  people  at  a  time-  But 
if  a  man,  by  his  love  of  money,  has  once  been  engaged  in  a 
bad  action,  such  as  a  scheme  of  robbery,  he  may  at  any  time, 
by  the  influence  of  the  same  motive,  be  engaged  in  acts  of  the 
same  degree  of  enormity.  For  take  men  throughout,  if  a 
man  loves  money  to  a  certain  degree  to-day,  it  is  probable 
that  he  will  love  it,  at  least  in  equal  degree,  to-morrow.  And 
if  a  man  is  disposed  to  actjuire  it  in  that  way,  he  will  tind  in- 
ducement U)  rob,  wheresoever  and  whensoever  thcic  are 
people  to  be  robbed. 


'^80  OP    THE    CONSEQUENCES 

cw^i.  particular  state.  It  is  liable  indeed  to  be  very  ir- 
regular in  its  operations.  It  is  apt,  however,  to 
be  frequently  as  poM^erful  as  the  motive  of  ven- 
geance, or  indeed  any  other  motive  whatsoever. 
It  will  sometimes  even  be  more  powerful  than 
any  other  motive.  It  is  at  any  rate  much  more 
constant.*  A  pernicious  act,  therefore,  when 
committed  through  the  motive  of  religion,  is 
more  mischievous  than  when  committed  through 
the  motive  of  ill-will. 

XXXV. 

How  the  Lastly,  The  secondary  mischief,  to  wit,  so 
inischief'^s  niuch  of  it  as  hath  respect  to  the  future  be- 
by  disposi-  naviour  oi  the  same  person,  is  aggravated  or 
lessened  by  the  apparent  depravity  or  benefi- 
cence of  his  disposition  :  and  that  in  the  pro- 
portion of  such  apparent  depravity  or  bene- 
ficence. 

XXXVI. 

couuexion       The   conscqucHces  we   have    hitherto   been 
the  sul'  *  speaking  of,  are  the  natural  consequences,  of 

ceediug- — 

chapter.  *  If  a  man  happen  10  take  it  into  his  head  to  assassinate 

with  his  own  hands,  or  with  the  sword  of  justice,  those  whom 

he  calls  heretics,  that  is,  people  who  think,  or  perhaps  only 

speak,  differently  upon  a  subject  which  neither  party  under- 

btandSj  he  will  be  as  much  inclined  to  do  this  at  one  time  as 

at  another.     Fanaticism   never  sleeps  :  it  is  never  glutted : 

it  is  never  stopped  by  philanthropy ;  for  it  makes  a  merit  of 

trampling  on  philanthropy  :  it  is  never  stopped  by  conscience ; 

for  it  has  pressed  conscience  into  ifs  service.     Avarice,  lust, 

and  vengeance,  have  piety,  benevolence,  honour  3  fanaticism 

has  nothing  to  oppose  it. 


OF    A    MISCHIEVOUS    ACT.  281 

which  the  act,  and  the  other  articles  we  have  ^^"'^pxij. 
been  considering,  are  the  causes  :  consequences 
that  result  from  the  behaviour  of  the  individual, 
who  is  the  ofFendinof  ao:ent,  without  the  inter- 
ference  of  political  authority.  We  now  come 
to  speak  of  punishment :  which,  in  the  sense  in 
which  it  is  here  considered,  is  an  art'ijicial  con- 
sequence, annexed  by  political  authority  to  an 
offensive  act,  in  one  instance ;  in  the  view  of 
putting  a  stop  to  the  production  of  events  simi- 
lar to  the  obnoxious  part  of  its  natural  conse- 
quences, in  other  instances. 


END    OF    VOL.    I. 


VOL.     I.  U 


B.  Bensley,  Bolt-court,  Fleet-street. 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY 

Los  Angeles 

This  book  is  DUE  on  the  last  date  stamped  below. 


JAN  081988 


APR  1 0  1388 


iiHiiiiii  II  imiiiiiiiilllli 

3  1158  01250  0319 


UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 


AA    000  430  224    6