to make the world's books discoverable online. 

Il has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one thai was never subject 

to copy right or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often dillicull lo discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher lo a library and linally lo you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud lo partner with libraries lo digili/e public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order lo keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial panics, including placing Icchnical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make n on -commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request thai you use these files for 
personal, non -commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort lo Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each lile is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use. remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 

countries. Whether a book is slill in copyright varies from country lo country, and we can'l offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through I lie lull lexl of 1 1 us book on I lie web 
al |_-.:. :.-.-:: / / books . qooqle . com/| 



lifiili 

3 901 S 05986 7609 



. / 







A" / 









ii 



A N 



E S S A Y 

On the ORIGIN of 

Human Knowledge. 



BEING 

A SUPPLEMENT 

TO 

Mr. L OCJCE's ESSAY on the 
Human Understanding. 

Tranflated from the French of the Abbe de Condillac, 
Member of the Royal Academy of Berlin. 

By Mr. NUGENT. 

Vt foterOy explkabo: nee tamrn, ut Pythius A folio, aria mi finf 
it fixa (put dtxtro: ft J, ut bomurt cuius, frobabilia cmye&arm 
ftqutns* Cic, Tufc. Qwcft. lib. 1. c 9, 



» • • • - 

• • • 



LONDON: 

Printed for J. Nourse at the Lerx, <sc«»5ee 

Katberine Street in the Sircz*. 

MDCCLVL 



<^ f ' c 

^^ **< <-". \^*.t. 

'"'■•t'-fa. TO THE 



Rev. Dr. WAR BUR? ON. 



SIR, 

CjHE following work is fo gte titty in- 
debted in many refpeEls to the author 
of the Divine Legation, that I Jhouldhave 
thought it a hind of omijfton, in fending this 
tranflation of it abroad \ not to have pub- 
licly acknowledged the obligation. While t 
endeavour to dif charge my duty by this ad* 
drefsy I am pleafedto think that I conform 
to the intention of the author of this EJfay, 
whofe candour in every refpeEl is equal to 
his learning. Jngenui eft fateii per quem 
profeceris. He is ingenuous in exprejftng 
the pleafure he received, whenever he found 
that his thoughts coincided with yours : he 
is ingenuous in acknowledging his having 
borrowed of your writings, thofe remarks 

A 2 on 



iv DEDICATION. 

9 * 

tin Hieroglyphics > which enrich this Ef- 
fay : he is ingenuous y in fine> in de- 
cfazingy that without your ajJtjtcLnce % h% 
Jhould have found it difficult to fucceed in 
the enquiry concerning the invention of let- 
ters. Can it be then thought extraordi- 
nary '> that I jhould return you, thojjfa 
in his Ttyme^ and in behalf of that vety 

branch ofHuratt^re^ which you havefo hap- 
pily illujlratedf J hope : not. , However^ 
I am pleafed with the idea of executing d 
$o?%mijfton) which affords pte an opportunity 
of expr effing the real efteem I have, for 
a Gentleman x who has done fuch qminenf 
fervices to religion and letters., I cfm^ 

SIR, 

Your moft Humble, 



Obedient Servant^ 



G»ay's-Inn, Afril 
zz. 1756. 



Thomas Nugent. 




TRANSLATO R's 



PREF ACE. 



jgRUTH being the end of all philo- 

^Ttgjg fophical refearches, an impartial 
1^Jv($b regard to this important point is 
the chafactetiftic of every candid inquirer. 
Among thole, who have made the Human 
Onde'rftanding the fubjecl: of their inveftiga- 
tioris, none feems, to' hive been rhbre deferving 
of this title, than the Author of the; following 
Effay. Engaged in the examination of a My- 
jeft, which though intimately prefent to us, 
A3 feera 



vi 7%e Translator's Preface. 

feems involved in great obfeurity, he took 
care to diveft himfelf of all prejudice, paying 
no regard to eftablifhed forms of fchools, nor 
to any other authority, than that of reafon. 
He cultivated the true metaphyfics with, care, 
in order to deftroy the falfe and adulterate ; 
fo that he feems to have removed thofe bram- 
bles by which the weaknefs of fuperftition, 
and the ignorance of falfe pretenders to learn- 
ing, has been hitherto prote£ted. Thus he 
has been doing real fervice to learning, and 
opening, as it were, a new and eafier path 
through the avenues of the firft philofophy. 
With regard to the truths which he has de- 
monftrated, they are fuch as contribute to 
affift each other -, and they form all together a 
chain, whofe parts are clofely conne&ed. 
He has fixed the fignification of terms, fo 
as to render it impoflible for any one to be 
roiftaken $ and all his proofs are built on the 
inconteftable principles of experiment. In 
endeavouring to clear his fubjeft of the thorns 
pf the fthoQls, he has fometimes attempted 
to ftrew it with flowers, though with a fpar- 
Ji)g hand, ffojn a convidlion that folidityis 

preferable 



• ■II 



The Translator's Preface, vii 

preferable to brilliancy aijd fhow, and that 
the fure way to pleafe a fenfible reader is {p? 
have reafon on our fide* 

In making this arduous inquiry he hasfok; 
lowed the footfteps of the celebrated Mr.> 
Locke, not amufing his reader with airy fpe- . 
culations about the nature of the human 
mind, but attempting to make an exa& ana- 
lyfis of its powers and capacity, to know its 
operations, to afcend to the origin and for- 
mation of our ideas, in order to fettle the 
boundaries of human knowledge. While he 
was thus intent upon difcovering the fecret 
fprings and principles by which the under- 
ftanding is a&uated in its operations, he has 
carried his refearches ftill farther, and fhewn 
how one operation or principle of the mind 
depends upon another, which again may be 
refolved into one more general and univerfal. 
Thus directed by the light of experiment, he 
has found out a folution of the mod difficult 
problems concerning the intelle&ual operati- 
ons, and, as he fays himfelf, he has reduced 
to a fingle principle whatever relates to tha 
human underflanding. 

A 4 I| 



■*s 



viii The Translator's Preface, 

If any name can be faid to have had weight 
with oar author, it was that of Mr. Locke. 
This is the more remarkable, as he &ems tt> 
have but an indifferent opinion of his own 
countrymen, thofe great tttetaphyficiafts Des 
Cartes and Mallebranche, the former of whom 
he charges with being a ftfanger to the origin and 
formation of ideas, the other with metaphysi- 
cal reveries. Thus he (hews himfelf ft friend 
to truth wherever he finds it ; and as fuch he 
could not but have a regard for a Writer, 
whofe memory will be ever revered by thofe 
who have any tafte for found reafoning. 
And yet here our author ftill preferves his 
ufual impartiality, and freedom : for though 
he allows that Mr. Locke is the only philofo* 
pher that has fucceeded in the ftudy of hu- 
man underftanding; though he allows him to 
have the honour of being the firft to cfeflion-* 
ftrate, that our knowledge is derived from the 
fenfesj in fhort, though he allows that he 
fcems to be the firft who ever handled the 
fobjeft of language like a philofopher, yfet he 
i* far from paying an implicit regard to 

wh« ! 



the TftAfcsLAf 6*'4 Pkt#ACfe s i* 

What he {kp, 6r frQtti behig any. way iftflti- 
cftced by his authority* H*h<& he ntt oiUy 
takes notifce : of his negle&g ahd omiflions, 
efpedally tOnceWiing the ffitaiWr of adqtdring 
the habit of the opet atiohs of the mind, 
which iridic! was the etfcafioh of this Sup- 
plement s hut he likfcwife remarks that there 
£« feveral articles ih his fbtlrth book; in- 
titled, Of tooi&kdge, Whitrh he is fat from 
approving* What articles thefe aire he omits 
to mention, becatife they belong to the ex- 
tenfion of ideas* which does not cottie un- 
der his plan : but as he has ftrongly Oppof- 
t& Mr* Locke in this Eflay, p; 1 54. vi feq. 
ihd as he has fince written a treatiffc on 
ffenfatiofts; in which he candidly acknowledges 
himfelf ift an error, to the great honour of bur 
Englifh philosopher, it will not, I hope; be 
thought ah impertinent digreffion, if I at- 
tempt to give a review of the whole contro- 
vferfy, with an analyfis of his treatife on fen*- 
iations. 

Mr, Locke, in the fecond book of his Eflay 
On hutaan undemanding, p. 107, obferves, 

- 2 " that 



x Tie Translator's Preface. 

<c that the ideas we receive from fenfation, arc 
cc often altered in grown people by the judg- 
" ment, without our taking notice of it. Thus, 
" a globe of any uniform colour, as gold, or. 
<c jet, being fet before our eyes, the idea there- 
,c by imprinted in our minds is of a flat circle, 
€< varioufly fhadowed, with feveral degrees of 
€< light and brightnefs coming to our eyes : but 
<c being accuftomed to perceive what kind of 
€< appearances convex bodies are wont to make. 
« inus,whatalterationsaiemadeinthereflexi- 
<c ons of light by the difference of the fenfible 
c< figure of bodies; the judgment prefently alters 
<c the appearances into their caufes * and from. 
<c that variety of fhadow or colour, collecting 
<c the figure, it makes it pafs for a mark of fi- 
<c gure, and frames to itfelf the perception of a 
€< convex figure, and an uniform colour, when 
€t the idea we receive from thence is only a plane 
cc varioufly coloured, as is evident in painting/* 
This he illuftrates further from the famous pro- 
blem of Mr. Molineux, which is, " Suppofe 
" a man born blind, and now adult, and taught 
" by his touch to diftinguifh between a cube^ 

" and 



a 






7%e Translator's Preface, xi 

and a fphere of the fame v metal, and nighly 
of the fame bignefs ; if he was made to fee, 
quaere whether by his fight before he touched 
them, he could diftinguifh which is the globe 
" and which the cube ?" Mr. Locke thinks as 
Mr. Molineux, that he could not. " For 
though he has obtained the experience of 
how a globe, how a cube affe&s his touch ; 
" yet he has not yet attained the experience, 
u that what affefts his touch fo or fo, muft af- 
" fe£t his fight fo or fo/' 

This opinion the Abbe Condillac endea^ 
vours to refute, p. 154, His reafons are 
thefe : Mr. Locke's whole argument fup- 
pofes that the image imprefTed on the eye at 
the fight of a globe is only a circle, with dif- 
ferent degrees of light, and varioufly fha- 
dowed ; which is true. But it fuppofes like^ 
wife, what our author at that time thought to 
be falfe, that the impreflion conftantly made 
on the mind, gives us only the perception of 
this circle ; that if we fee the globe of a con- 
vex figure, it is becaufe having acquired by 
the touch the idea of this figure, and know- 
2 ing 



xii 7be TftAtf slatgrY P&eface. 

irtgwhat fort of ifaagfe it produces in Us by 
the fight* w* have accuftomed ourfelves> con- 
trary to the ktea we receive from thence, to 
judge it to be convex. Among thefe fuppofi- 
tions he fays, that Mr, Locke without proof 
advances, th&t the idea received by fenfation. 
reprefents nothing more than the image which 
we know to be imprinted on the eye. He 
lays further* that there are a great many* 
reafons for reje£Hng thofe judgments to which 
Mr. Locke has recourfe : for this philofopher 
firft of all fuppofes that we know what fort 
of images are produced within us by convex 
bodies, a knowledge which far the greateft 
part of nlatikkid have not. Secondly, it 
would be in vaiil* to drive to join thefe judg-* 
nients to vifioh 5 we fhould never confound 
them, as Mr. Locke fuppofes j but we fhould 
fee one Way and judge another. A third 
realbh, i9 $*6 ithpoffibility of making us 
hive a cotifcioufnefs of this fort of judg- 
ments. Nor Would it figriify to fay, that a 
great many things feem to pafs in the mind* 
of which we take no manner of notice. It 
is true we might forget thefe judgments the 

minute 



7%e TrahVlator'stPeeiacj;"? xiii 

minute after we had: framed them : but if ^rc 
were to make them the obje& of owr rc~ 
flexion, our confcioufnefs concerning : thorn 
would be fo ftrong, that [ :we fhou!4 iiever 
be able to entertain the leaft doubt about? 

• 

them. " ' ■:/..■! ■ '-> ' ' ' ■ '"..-:? *• 

Such was the ftate : c£ this controvetfjr^ as 1 
it (lands in the. folk) wing EfTay> ^hen our 
author published his ^rearffe on : fao&ti- 
ens. Having had leifurfc*. .to. confide? this 
fiibje&.more attentively, he found himfelf 
in an error, and* from his great regard to 
fruth, he confeffed that he had been led 
away by prejudice ta be of a (liferent o- 
pinion from Mr: Locke. But I fhall give 
his retrattatioh in his. own words : " It is im- 
" poflible for. us to recoiled the ignorance in 
v which we were born : this is a ftate which 
" leaves no traces behind it. We remember 
« f to have been ignorant of no more than we 
<c remember to have learnt $ and even to ob- 
cc ferve that we learn, we muft know fomo- 
" thing : we muft have difcerned fome ideas, 
" to obferve that we are fenfible of our now 
u having ideas, which before we had not. 

" There- 



xiv The Translator's Preface. 

cc Therefore this reflex memory, which 
c< renders us fo fenfible at this time of day 
* of the tranfition from one notion to an- 
c< other, cannot afcend to the firft ideas : .on 
cc the contrary it fuppofes them, and this is 
cc the origin of that inclination we have to 
" think they are innate. . To fay that we 
€r have learnt to fee, to hear, to tafte, t<> 
<c feel, to touch, . appears the ftrangeft para- 
<c dox in die world. Nature feems to have 
given us the intire ufe of our fenfes, at the 
very inftant (he formed us ; and we ima- 
gine we always ufed them without any fort 
c< of ftudy, becaufe this ufe is now grown fa- 
miliar to us by exercife and habit. 

Such were the prejudices I had imbibed, 
when firft I published my Effay on the 
Cf Origin of Human Knowledge. Nor could 
<c I be convinced of my error by the argu- 
" ments of Mr. Locke, concerning a perfon 
cl born blind, and now adult,, who had ac- 
quired the ufe of his fight. I maintained 
contrary to the opinion of that philofo- 
pher ; that the eye naturally judges of fi- 
cc gure, magnitude, fituation and diftance/' 

Our 



<c 

ffC 

cc 



cc 
cc 

cc 



cc 
cc 
cc 



l%e Translators Preface, xv 

Our author having thus acknowledge 
cd his miftake, proceeds to mention by what 
means he furmounted his prejudices : It was 
by having frequent conferences on this' flib- 
jeft with mademoifelle Ferrand y a .French 
lady, of a philofophic turn of mind, whofe 
lively imagination, and folid judgment, 'parts 
fo feldom united in the fame perfon, he takes 
an opportunitity to commend. In thefe con- 
ferences he was convinced, and he has the 
complaifance to fay that the lady convinced 
him, of the neceflity of confidering the fenfes 
feparately, of exaftly diftinguifhing the ideas 
we receive from each, of obferving the pro- 
grefs with which they gain inftruftion, and 
in what manner they aflift each other. For 
this purpofe he fancied to himfelf a ftatuc in- 
ternally organized like ourfelves, and animat- 
ed by a foul deftitute of all forts of ideas. 
He fuppofed likewife that the external furface 
of marble did not permit this ftatue to have 
the free ufe of any of its fenfes j but he re- 
ferred to himfelf the liberty of opening 
them, as he thought proper, to fuch different 
impreflions as fuited their organs. He thought 

fit 



xvi Tig Translator's PnEPAcft* 

fit to begin with the faieU, becanfe of all %hc 
fcnfe It contribute?, the leaft t;o human kapw^. 
ledge. The others fucceffively , became tj*? 
objqft o£ his reftarches, and aftey having 
fionfidered thepa fepmrately and jointly, htt 
perceived th# th^ ftatu? grew to be aji ani-r 
roal capable of: attending to its own prefer 
vation. 

" ■ ■ . r i . » *. .. 

Having formed this fuppofition, he obferve$ 
that the principle which determines this ftatmp 
to. the exercifc f^ its faculties, i& plain a,n4 
fimple ; the fenfatiops th«infelv$s. include it ; 
thefe being all of their own nature- either a^ 
greeable or difagrecable, the ftatue has an 
intereft in enjoying the former, and relin*- 
quifhing the latter. Now it is evident, that 
this intereft is fuffipent to give rife to th? 
operations of the underftanding and the wilL 
Judgment, reflexion, defires, pafiions, &c. art 
only the very fame fenfation differently trans- 
formed *. Hence it feems to be of no majv 

* The Abbe Condillac was fenfible of an, obje&km agaioJE 
what is here advanced, viz. that brutes have fenfati#ns, and 
yet their foul is not fufceptible of the fame faculties as that of 
man. This he admits to be true ; but in anfwer he ©bforvej, 

that 



Tie Translator's Prepack, xvii 

ner of ufe to fuppofe that the foul holds the 
ieveral faculties, with which it is endowed, 
immediately of nature. Nature gives us or- 
gans, to inform us by pleafure what objefts 
we are to feek, and by pain what obje&s we 
are to avoid. But there it flops ; and leaves 
to experience the care of making, us contract 
habitudes, and of finifhing the work it has 
begun. This confideration is new, and (hews 
how fimple, and at the fame time how ad- 
mirable, are the ways of providence. Ad- 
mirable, that to occafion ideas, defircs, habi- 
tudes, and talents of every kind, nothing more 
(hould be wanting than to render us fenffyle 
to pleafure and pain 1 

thai; the organ of feeling is lefs perfect in them ; and confer 
qocntly it cannot be the occafion al caofe of all the operations 
which are obferved in us. He fays the occafamal cau/e, be* 
caofe fenfations are properly modes of the mind, and the or* 
gans can only occafion them. From thence a philosopher 
•light to conclude, agreeably to what religion teaches, that 
the foal of brutes is of an order eflcntially different from that 
Of man. For would it become the wifdom of the Deity to 
permit that a fpirit capable of railing itfelf to every kind of 
knowledge, of difcovering its duty, and of deferving punifh- 
tnent or rewards, (hould be fubjeft to a body, which was only 
the occafion of faculties neceflary for animal life ? 



But 



Xv»i The Translator's Priface^ 

But to return to our author, before he 
forms his fuppofitions concerning the ftatue, 
he tells us, that it is of. the utmoft conic* 
quence to put ourfelves exa&ly in its piacq, 
in order to make our obfervatiQBs. . Wcmuft 

• * 

begin to exiA at the fame timeias the ftatue; we 
muft have a fmgle fenfe,whcn it has but ^ fan 
gle fenfe 3 we muft acquire the fame ideas, as 
it acquires; we muft contract the fame t*a^ 
bits, and in a word be exadtly what that ftatue 
is. It will not be able to judge of things as 
we cb, till it has our fenfes and our expe- 
rience; nor fhall we judge like it, till we fup^ 
poCe oorfelvcs deprived of every thing which 
it wants. This being premifed he comes now 
to his remarks. 

Beginning with thofe fenfes which of them*, 
fefves do not judge of external obje&s, and 
which he ftippofes to be the fmell, hearing, 
tafte, and fight, he inquires into the ideas of 
a ftatue confined firft to the fenfe of f{peH ^ 
next to the fenfe of hearing ; then to find) 
and hearing ; then to the fenfe of tafte aloAe • 
and then to tafte, fmell, and hearing, all three 
united. He fhews, that with a fingle fenfe 

the 



7&r Translator's Prb# ac%» xiac 

the ftatue is capable of giving its attfn- 
tioiky tof / rcmcpflfcerihg, corfipaiing* Judging; 1 
dtearnntgi ittiagittiftg ; that it has abftraft 
noDoffis, ideas of fruibber and duration > th#fc 
it ' isr acquainted \fcith general and particular 
liruths v : tfufc it forms defires, is a&uated by* 
pafllons, • is capable of love, fear, and furprisJc^ 
and in. finc 3 that it con tr aft s habits. From 
thenre 1 he Concludes, that with a fmgle fenfe 
the underUanding hath as many faculties, aa 
with all the five. Thofe which feefti to us to be 
p&rtlaalar, are only thefef very faculties, appli- 
ed / to a greater number of objc&s, 
• :J£ we confider that to remember, fo com- 
pare, tt> Judgei, fo difcem, to have abftra& 
idea*, to know general and particular truths? 
are mo more than different modes of being at* 
tetitivej to have pafRons, to love, to Irate^ 
to hope, to fear r to will,, are only different 
modes of defire $; a»d % in fhort that to be at- 
tentive and to defire, are originally no mores 
than to perceive y We may conclude, that fen* 
iattow includes all the facukiea of the mind. 

a 2 Further, 



xx *the Translator's Preface. 

Further, if we confider that there are no 
fenfations abfolutely indifferent, we fhall like* 
wife conclude, that the different degrees of 
pleafure and pain, are the law by which our 
feveral faculties are produced. This principle 
may aflume the names of want, furpri?e and 
others, which our author indeed is content 
to give it ; (till it is always the fame. For 
we are always excited either by pleafure or 
pain, in whatever we do through want or 
fur prize. And indeed our firfl: ideas ire no- 
thing but pain, or pleafure. Thefe are Toon 
fucceeded by others, which make room for 
comparifons, from whence arife our firft wants 
and defires. In order to fatisfy thefe, our 
refearches are prod u&ive of other ideas> which 
are ftill produ&ive of frefh appetites. -The 
furprize which renders us fenfible of any 
extraordinary event, occafionally augments the 
a&ivity of our faculties ; and a chain is form*- 
ed, whofe links are alternately ideas and de- 
fires, the tracing of which will be a means 
to difcover the whole progrefs of human 
knowledge. 

From 



The Translator's Preface, xxt 

From the confideration of the fenfes above- 
mentioned, our author is led next to view the 
ftatue as confined to the fenfe of feeing -, and 
here he fays we have a great many prejudi- 
ces to ftruggle with. We are fo accuftomed 
to judge by the eye, of objedts that furround 
us, that we never imagine we could have judged 
otherwife, the very firft moment we beheld the 
light. At firft we fancy, that we have al- 
ways feen as we fee at prefent, and that all 
our ideas are innate. If a philofopher hap- 
pens to fufpeft that our ideas derive their 
original from the fenfes, a thoufand difficul- 
ties are ftarted by thofe.who are prejudiced in 
favour of the contrary opinion. They afk 
the colour, the tafte, the fmell of thought : 
and the philofopher, who is in a hurry to de- 
termine, before he has examined the origin% 
of our ideas, finds himfelf puzzled. But 
philofophy takes a new ftep : it finds that 
our fenfations are not the real qualities of ob- 
jects, but on the contrary, that they are 
modes of the mind. From thence it was 
e»fy to conclude, that we perceive nothing 

a 3 but 



xxii l%e Translator's Preface. 

but within ourfelve6 ; confequently that a 
man confined to the fcnfe of finell, would 
have been fmell ; to the tafte, would have 
been tafte $ to the hearing, would have been 
found; to the fight, would have been light 
and colour. Then the greateft difficulty 
would have been to imagine, how we con.- 
tra& the habit of referring fenfations that arc 
within ourfelves, to the objedts that occafion 
them, when the fenfes have no means of fuk 
pe&ing an external fpace. 

But confidering the properties of feel-? 
ing, we fhould have perceived that tfeis 
fenfe is capable of difcovering that fpace, 
and of directing the other fenfes to refer, their 
fenfations to the bodies fpread around them : 
then even thofe who were prejudiced againfl 
this truth, would have begun at leaft; to 
form fome doubt. They would have agreed, 
that with the fmell or tafte, we ihould 
have thought ourfelves to be nothing but 
fmell or tafte. The hearing would have ad- 
mitted of more difpute, by reafon of the ha- 
bit we have formed of perceiving founds, as 
ibmething without us* However, this fenfe 

has 



7%e Translator's P&efaciu* xxiifc 

has fuch difficulty in judging of dift&ice 
and fituation, and is fo often -rtiiftaken --a* 
bout them, that we fhould have agreed ££ 
length, that it does not judge of them by it- 
£df. 

But how could the fight be informed by 
the touch ; the fight that judges of diftartces 
to which the; touch carindt reach? Bf 
analogy we fliould have judged that -it? 
muft be the fame cafe with this &fc w^r 
the other fenfes : the impreffion of lights 
being ihtirdy in, the eye, I -we; (night cbn- 
jefture that we fee only within ourfelvfcfcj 
when we have not as yet learnt to refer ou# 
fenfations to an external objeft. We fhould 
therefore have fuppofed, ? that of ourfelve* 
we have no ktio wiedge but of light and co- 
lours, and after having accounted in this hy- 
pothecs for all the phenomena, and after hav- 
ing explained in what manner with the affift- 
ance of the touch, we come to judge of thtf 
obje6ts contained in fpace, there would have 
been nothing wanting but experiments to re- 
move all our prejudices. 

a 4 After 



xxiv The Translator's Preface. 

After thefc remarks, our author fays it 
muft in juftice be acknowledged, that Mr. 
Molineux was the firft who formed conjee- 
tares on the queftion before us : that this gen- 
tleman communicated his thought to Mr. 
Locke, who agreed with him, that a man born 
blind, upon being made to fee, would not dif- 
tinguifh by his fight a globe from a cube. This 
conje&ure was afterwards confirmed by the 
experiments of Mr. Chefelden, which it had 
occafioned. 

Having paid this compliment to Mr. Mo- 
lineux and to Mr. Locke, our author returns 
to his ftatue, and thinks himfelf authorized to 
affirm, that with the fenfe of vifion only it could 
fee nothing but light and colours, and tha t it 
could not judge there is any objeft without it 
{elf ; that it would perceive colours only as 
modes of its own exiftence j at the firft inftant 
it would fee them confufedly ; afterwards it 
would diftinguifh them one from the other ; 
then it would come to difcern feveral toge- 
ther ; but that it could have no idea of figure, 
fituation, or motion. 



n7:«.k A ~+sv 



. ■ 

The Translator* Preface, xxv 

Hitherto he had treated of thofe fenfes 
which of themfelves do not judge of external 
obje&s ; he comes now to the only fenfe that 
does ; which is that of feeling. And here he 
examines into the feveral degrees of fenfation 
which a man may have, who is reduced to 
this Angle fenfe. Beginning with the very 
loweft degrbe of all, he fays, that a man in 
that fituation has no idea of extenfion or mo- 
tion. Then he explains in what manner a 
man continuing motionlefs begins to feel him- 
felf in fome meafure extended ; and how hav- 
ing the ufe of his hands, he comes to difcover 
his body, and finds that: there is fomething 
without him. Next he confiders the pleafure,the 
pain,the wants and defires of aman confined to 
the fenfe of feeling ; the manner in which he 
begins to difcover fpace ; the ideas he may ac- 
quire, fuch as of pleafure, pain, number, figure, 
duration, fpace, immenfity, eternity, &c. 

From this detail he proceeds to make 
fortie obfervations in order to facilitate what 
he has to fay concerning the fight. The 
manner in which the hands judge of obje&s, 
by means of one, two, or more flicks, bears 

fo 



ttvi . T^^TfflN^^ATjpiuf: ORwBf .AGE. 

fo, great a tieflttntflance itq .that; (in .•which. the 
eye. judge? of them, by means; of the rays, that 
thpfe . problems are generally explained*, the 
one by the. other,'. The firft time the Uatue 
takes the iiick in hand, it knows only that 
part .which it actually holds. It doe* not 
know it is extended, consequently it .cannot 
judge of the diftance of thofe bodies to which 
it reaches. This flick may* be differently in* 
dined, and then it makes different imprefTions 
on the hand. But thefe impreffions do not 
inform it that it is inclined, fo long as it i* 
ignorant of its being extended. ^Confequently 
k •cannot discover the <lin%rent frtuationa of 
©bjefts. To judge thereby of diftances, itmuft 
have felt the whole length of the ftick» and 
to judge of fitoations by the impreffion it re- 
ceives from the ftick, it is neceffary that while 
it hoMs kwfth one hand, it ftiould examine 
its direftion wifh the other. So long as it is 
incapable of judging of the direction of two 
ftteks, whofe ; length it knows, and which 
it holds, one with the light hand, and th« 
other with fhefeft j it cannot tell whether they 
er©fi : one another in 'any part, nor whether 

their 



Tie T* 4*m<ator'6 Preface, aa^vii 

their extremities^ join, or arc wide from each 
otter. It will tfften imagine that it touches two 
fodjes when- it .touches but one ; it will imagine 
a thing to,J>e (above whfch is below, and <wV* 
wrjfl. Bitf as fcon as it become* capable of re- 
marking the different direft^ons, according to 
tfc diifervOtinvprefTions, then it will kpow< tty* 
fifttiiation tf tjte ftieki,, and thereby (hall judge 
of the fituAtion of bodies. Then it no longer 
i^efer s the fenfatfons jtranfmitted by the JHclt, to 
the extremity which, afts upon die hand) but 
Qn the CQflfcrarjf it feels on the oppofite extre~ 
roily, . the ftftnefs or hardaefs of thole bodies, 
tp which it extends i and this habit (hall make 
it diftingutfh fenCatJone, : which it did not dif- 
tingutfh before. . f ■ , 

After this inquiry into the different feufes- 
fiflgly confulered, our author proceeds now 
to the mod cprious part, and what moft re- 
lates to our purpofq, namely, the man- 
ner in which the touch inftru&s the other 
feftfes to judge of external obje&s* Hav- 
ing considered the touch in conjunction with 
the fmtli 4nd .hearing, • he inquires how the 
eye learns to fee the ,<Uftance, fituation, fi- 
gure, 



xxviii The Translator's PrH#acb? 

gure, magnitude, and motion of bodies. And 
applying his obfervations to the ftatue, the 
firft thing, he fays, to be remarked, upon 
making the ftatue fee, would be its furprize. 
So long as it was confined to the fenfe of, feel- 
ing, there was no poflibility of its judging 
of magnitude, fituation, and diftance, by 
means of two fticks, of which it neither 
knew the length nor dire&ion. Now the rays 
are to the eye, what a flick is to the hand; 
and the eye may be looked upon as an organ, 
which in fome meafure has an infinite number 
of hands, to lay hold of an infinite number 
of fticks. If the eye was capable by itfelf of 
knowing the length and dire&ion of the rays, 
it might, like the hand, refer to one extre- 
mity what it perceived at the other, and thus 
judge of magnitude, diftance, and fituation. 
But the fenfation it feels, fo far from inform- 
ing it of the length and direction of the rays, 
does not even acquaint it whether there be 
any length and direction at all. Befides, the 
eye wants the affiftance of the touch, to 
form a habit of the motions proper for vifion ; 
to accuftom itfelf to refer its fcnfations to the 

extremity 



iTx Translator's Preface, xxix 

extremity of the rays, or thereabouts ; and to 
judge thereby df diftance, magnitude, fituati- 
on,, and figure. 

To apply. Jthis to the ftatue, it puts its 
hand oh its eye, and the colours difappear,; 
it draws back its. hand, and the colours appear 
again. From thence it is induced to think 
that thefe colours are not modes of its exift- 
ence, but that they are fomething impalpable, 
which it perceives on the top of its eye, as it 
feels the object it touches, at the end of its 
finger. It fees that thefe colours form a for-; 
face, and this luminous furface appears im~ 
menfe* but every thing is reprefented in 
great confufion. For as colours do not 
Of , themfelves convey an idea of extenfion, 
the eye is incapable of diftinguilhing magni- 
tude, figure, or fituation, but fo far as it 
applies them to objects whofe magnitude, 
figure, and fituation, are known to it fome 
other way. Now it has no knowledge of 
thefe things, fo long as it ftill beholds the 
colours as a furface juft upon it. The 
touch muft learn it to remove the colours to 
fome diftance, and to fee them oi> objects 

with 



% • 



xxx ' The Tn ans l atok'sj Ba/t* 1 

with whole magnkiKle r figoseyilarid i^ttwraow/ 
thi* fitife is well acquainted. .> Th^ itatU ei^i^ 
begins to judge this furface at fon^diftanoey 
k fees the colours on the £K&ip|l: bodies -, 
an4, --: fttrprized at -this difoow*yj n tfiefif 
att^ftoundy whether it cariifek ^ttxich eirerji 
tfcmg' ir -fees* Its hand meets :VmjA a todays 
of a new colour, and its eye pk«eiww^artd^ 
th& ftirff*ce, fo cfeat the lar^0^^p«im»it^k)P 
due* i£to form $» fame judgmei^ It ptiw 
its* han& ort every Ai%^<>ilfid^«mt 4is a»d 
b^- torching a^bo^-pamted with- diflbrertt\$oi* 
kftUrs* its eye centrals the-haibik c£ diffofc* 
guif!«rig colours on a furface^ • whkh defeat 



sit a diftance. - '-.-«i'.^ 



* v 



Thus by alternately conveyitsg I itt haiild 
from its eye, to externa* bodies and .fredf 
the bodies to its eye, it learns to impure 4ftP 
taiiees. 1% ftudiea the diffesantt imprefilaji^ 
which ita eye «eceikre& every ttfi&v ami havisjlg 

■ 

accuftomed itfetf to tonricft thefe i|ftpreffion& 
with the diftan<3es>'knovm by feeling, it fees 
objects fbmetipies tK&rer, or fometimes fa#* 
ther off, becaufe it-fees them where it reached 
them by- the tooth* ■*■••; '■,.,: 

' ,/ i * The 



•the T&KSUkVotf* 'PWe^^e. 'jfifld 

The Sift< tbkb, j foi- Intafce; -it ; dirts' fei 
fight towards a globe, thfe irf^reffidh It re* 
teivesfrom tkeft€fey«r^€fehtSorify ; af flat c?rcle f 
differently (hadbwd to& coloured; It does' not 
therefore as yet fee a globfe/ ndr'ddes itevc« 3ft 
ftittguifh a ctfctej heeaufe ksreye has iio* ; ye* 
learnt to regufete its mottohs • itt order total* 
m the 'whole- %ire. : Swt if ! loddSe& r the 
globe, and dfre&Srig fc» figh#by this hand bVe* 
the whole furfkce, it jildgesflSfitthe cdldufft 
beholds is extended, ' round,- &*& prominent: 
Thi^ expeFimcirt is repeater >^M thereby SI 
is the feme Judgment!- T&uti it coftabSS 
die ideas of rotundity* afrf <kftivexky, : wftK 
the * ftnpreffion made on it bf^ particular ftifefr 
tttre of ihade and colour. Afterwards & tfftj 
to 1 Judge of a glebe, which it ; has never t&«K- 
ed. At firfHt is pulled, but upor* feelings 
ks uncertainty 1 is removed i-andlncorifequetabe 
of the habit it has' framed ; of judging ifhat h 

r 

fees a globe, this^ judgment is performed wltH 
fech qukknefs and certainty; and the *ide& of 
this figure is fo ftrongly eonnefted *v#tfe $ 
furface, on which there is a certain proper-* 
tion of fhade and colours, that at length it 
;; fees 



xxxii Tie TaanSlatoiOs PufiFACE. 

fees every time nothing but what it has often 
faid it ought to fee. 

In like manner it (hall learn to diftinguifh 
a cube> when the eye having ftudied the im- 
preflions it repeives at the very time that the 
hand feels the angles and fides of this figure, 
it hath contracted the- habit of obferving in 
different degrees of light, the fame angles and 
the fame fides. The reafon therefore why the 
eye fees a figure diftindtly, is becaufe the 
hand has taught it how to take in the whole 
at once ; it muft direfl: the eye to the different 
parts of a body, fo as to make it give its at- 
tention firft to one, then to two, and after- 
wards to a greater number ; and at the fame 
time to the different impreffions of light. If 
it did not ftudy each part feparately, it could 
never fee the intire figure $ and if it did not 
ftudy with what variety the light a£is upon it, 
it would fee only flat furfaces. Tims the fta- 
tue comes to diftinguifh fo many things at 
once, only becaufe having obferved them fe- 
parately, it recolledts in an inftant the feveral 
judgments it fucccffively framed. 



It 



7fa TransJ/atq* s Jf*g*ACfc* ttxm 

t It is the hand that, fixing the fight to tbo 

different parts of a figure, one sifter the other, 
ingraves them all in the memory. The eye 
perceives them^ where the touch tells, them 
thsy Wight to be, and exactly in that fitpa>tfe 
on. Jt i$ the hand that learns this organ to 
judge at the fame time of magnitude. For as 
foon a? it (hews the colours on the object it 
touches, it delineates a . fprfece of a limited 
extent* In fliort, it is the hand that make* 
the eye perceive the motion of bodies 3 ber 
caufe it accuftogia this organ to follow the 
obje&s, which it remove? from ftw point ..nf 
fpace to another. j 

Hitherto the ftatiie has taken A view only 
of tho£e objects which are within the reach of 
its hand : for with thefe it muft begin* * it 
has not yet learnt to fee any further. The 
motion indeed of its body has informed it th«t 
fpace mult be much more extended; but it 
does not imagine how this fpace will be able to 
appear fo to the eye. As it fees within the 
reach of its hand, only becaufe having fre- 
quently beheld, and at the fame time felt the 
objects within that fpace, k has (b ftropgly 

b connected 



xxxiv 7%e Translator's Preface. 

conne&ed the judgments of feeling with the 
fenfations of vifion, that feeing and judging 
aire formed at the fame time, and confounded 
together ; fo it (hall not be able to fee any fur- 
ther, till new experiments make it confound 
With thofe fenfations, the judgments it hath 
formed on other diftances. It perceives 
& fpace about two feet diftant from it: 
the eye inftrudled by the touch meafures its 
parts, determines the figure and fize of ob- 
je&s inclofed within it, places them at diffe- 
rent diftances* judges of their fituation, moti- 
on, and reft. As to the objects that are far- 
ther off, it fees them all at the extremity of 
that inclofure which bounds its fight; it 
perceives them as upon a luminous furface, 
concave, and immoveable. They appear to 
have figure, becaufe the experience it has had 
in refpeft to thofe that are within the reach of 
its hand is fufficient for this effeft. If they 
move horizontally, it fees them pafs from one 
part of the furf ace to another $ if they ap- 
proach or draw back, it only fees them in- 
creafe or diminifh in a very fenfible manner. 
But it does not judge of their real magnitude : 

for 



7%e Translator's Pr-b£ac£. 

for the feafon of its having learnt to diftinguifh 
the objefts contained withihr its fphere, by the 
eye, was becaufe the touch had made it con- 
ned different ideas of magnitude with the differ 
rent impreffions made on the eye,;. Now thefe 
impreflions vary in proportion to the diftan^ 
ces, fince the images diminifh or increafe in 
the fame proportion. Therefore as it has 
not made any experiments to eonneft thefe 
impreflions with the magnitudes within the 
diftance of a few fteps, it cannot judge of dif* 
tant objefts, but from the habits it has con- 
tracted. Confequcntly the impreflion made 
by fmall images, muft rtiake them appear 
(mail, and that of large images muft make 
them appear large ; for thus it judges of thofe 
which the touch has placed within the reach 
of its eye. Hence it is that the connexions it 
has formed to judge by the fight of the magni- 
tude of objefts within a foot or two, are not 
fufficient to frame a judgment of thofe at a 
further diftance. 

In the mean time it ftretches out its arm 
to lay hold of what it fees : furprized at its 
touching nothing, it advances $ at length it 

b 2 meets 



Xxxvi 72* Translator^ Preface. 

meets a body : immediately the judgments of 
the fight agree with thofe of the touch. A 
moment after it draws back ; and then the ob- 
ject does not feem to be farther off: l?ut up- 
on ftretching out its hand, and finding it to 
be out of its reach, it moves towards it again, 
and after having done this feveral times, it 
gradually accufloms itfelf to fee it beyond its 
reach. The motion it made to get from 
the obje&, gives it nearly an idea of the in- 
termediate fpace: it knows how big that 
object was when it touched it: and if it 
has learnt from the touch to apprehend it of 
a certain magnitude, at the diftance of two 
feet 5 the memory it retains of this magnitude 
dire&s it to apprehend it of the fame bulk, 
when at a greater diftance. Then it is ca- 
pable of judging by the fight, whether the 
object draws back, comes forward, or moves 
in anY other direction ; becaufe it fees its mo- 
tions in the , changes incident to the imprefli- 
cms made on the eye. It is true thefe changes 
are the fame, whether it goes towards the ob- 
it^ or the objeft comes towards it; but the 

fenfation 



Tie Translator's Preface, xxxvii 

fenfatioii it has of its own motion or reft, does 
not fuffer it to be miftaken. . . , 

The ftatue therefore accuftoms itfelf tp 
connieft different ideas of diftance, magnitude,, 
and motion, with different imprcflions of light. 
It does not indeed know that the images im- 
printed on the bottom of the eye, diminifh in 
proportion to the diftances. But it experien- 
ces different ferjfationsj and the judgments, of 
which it has formed a habit according to cir- 
cumftances, coming to be confounded with 
thefe fenfations, it perceives the light and co- 
lours no longer in its eye, but at the other 
extremity of the rays $ as it perceives folidity, 
fluidity, &c, at the end of the ftick with 
which it touches external objects. Thus the 
more the eye is direfted in its judgment by the 
touch, the greater the fpace muft appear. It 
perceives the light and colours, which being 
diffufed over the obje£ts, delineate their fize 
and figure, and reprefent their motion through 
fpace; in a word it fees them, where it judg- 
es they ought to be. 

By its fight the ftatue comes to diftinguifh not 
only thofe objetts which it ceafes to touch, but 

b 3 likewife 



■xxxviii *fbe Translator's Preface. 

jfikewife thofc which it never touched at all } 
providecUhe eye receives the like, or very near 
the like fenfatioris. For the touch having 
pnce connected different judgments, with dif- 
ferent impreffions of light, thefe impreffions 
cannot be revived, but the judgments muft 
be revived and confounded with them. Thus 
it accuftoms itfelf by degrees to fee without 
the help of feeling. And yet the experience 
by which it has learnt to fee the diftance, 
fize, and figure of one body, is not always 
fufficiertt to enable it to diftinguifh the dif- 
tance, fize, and figure of every other. It 
muft make as many obfervations, as there are 
pbjefts that differently refleft the light; it 
muft even multiply its obfervations on each 
according to the different degrees of diftance ; 
and after all, notwithftanding thefe precauti- 
ons, it fhall be often miftaken. 

Thus it is that the ftatue fhall learn to 
judge by the eye, of fpace, diftance, fituation, 
figure, and motion. The more it makes ufe 
of this organ, the more it will find the conr 
yeniency of it. The eye enriches the memory 



The Translator's Preface, xxxix 

with the moft agreeable ideas : it fupplies the 
imperfe&ion of the other fenfes ; judges of in- 
acceffible obje&s $ and reaches as far almoft as 
interminate fpace. And indeed the ideas acquir- 
ed by vifion are fo ftrongly connefted with 
all the reft, that it is hardly any longer poffible 
for the ftatue to think of odoriferous, fpnor- 
ous, or tangible cjbje£te, without immediately 
invefting them with light and colours. The 
eye having contra&ed the habit of embracing 
an intire objeft, or even feveral at once, and 
of judging of their relations $ acquires there- 
by fo fuperior a difcernment, that the fta- 
tue will even chufe to confult it preferably to 
all the other fenfes. 

In regard to ourfelves, it is become fo na- 
tural for us to judge by the eye, of magnitude* 
figure, diftance, and fituation, that a great 
many will find it difficult perhaps to perfuade 
themfelves that this is only a habit confequent 
to experience. All thefe ideas feem fo inti- 
mately conpefted with the fenfations of co- 
lour, that we do not imagine they were ever 
feparated. This is the only caufe, which 
ftill keeps up that prejudice j but to remove it 

b 4 entirely. 



Si ?V TRANSLATORS PftEFAClS, ' 

entirely, it r & ftiflkietit to make fueh foppo- 

fitions as thoffe above concerning the fta- 
file. Thiiftattie wouM' certainly believe that 
fittclls and (bands were tranfmitted to it by 
the fight, if-upoA making it fee, hear, and 
fthell at Oftfc*, we fuppofed that thefe three 
feftfes wefl^always to be exercifed at the fame 
tithe 5 infcmiieh that every time it faw a par-, 
ticular colour/ jt fhould perceive a particular 
finell 5 and hear a particular found j and it fhould 
&afe to fttiell and to hear ,tohen it ceafed to fee, 
The reafon therefore why it diftinguifhefc fo 
well what belongs to the hearing and to the 
fmell, is becaufe fmells and founds are tranf- 
mitted, without mingling with colours. But 
a* the fenfes of feeing and feeling aft at the 
ftlfle time, the one to give lis the idea of light 
attd colours, the other the ideas of magni- 
tude, figure, diftance, and fituatioft, it is 
With difficulty we diftinguifh what belongs to 
eAfch of thefe fenfes, and we attribute to one 
only, what we fhould divide amongft them 

?tfl. 

The fight is therefore enriched at the ex^ 

j*erjce of the touch, becaufe afting only in 

con-r 



* The Translator's Preface, xli 

corijun&ion with the latter, or in confequence 
of the inftru&ions received from it, its fenfa* 
tions are mixed with thofe ideas for which it is 
indebted to the touch. On the contrary the 
latter a&s frequently by itfeff, and does hot 
fufFer us to imagine that the fenfations of 
light and Colours belong to it. But if the fta- 
tue were to fee only th6 bodies it touclfed,* and 
to touch only the bodies it law, it would be 
impoffible for it to diftinguifh the fenfatioris 
of fight, from thofe of feeling. : It would. not- 
fo much as fufpeft that it liaB^yetf: it would 
think that its hands had both the fenfes of 
vifion and touch. It is therefore owing to 
judgments formed by habitual cuftom, that 
thofe ideas, which we receive only from the 
touch, are attributed to the fight. 

The Abb6 Condillac having thus accounted 
for our being prompted to attribute to the 
light thofe ideas for which we are indebted 
only to the touch, attempts to Ihew by what 
train of reflexions this prejudice is furmount- 
ed. And here he obferves, that in cafe of every 
jiew difcovery, it is well worth our curiofity 
J to 



xlii Tie Translator's Prejaci. 

to be acquainted with the firft fufpicions of 
philofophers, and efpecially with the reflexi- 
ons of thofe, who came neareft the truth. 
Mallebranche, according to him, is the firft, 
who fays that there are any judgments mixed 
with our fenfations. The fame Mallebranche 
takes notice, that a great many will be furprized 
at his opinion ; and fo they will, when they 
fee his explication. For not being able to 
comprehend how we fhould form thefe judg- 
ments, he attributes them to God : a very con- 
venient way, and generally the laft fhift of 
philofophers. 

But Mr, Locke, fays our author, was above 
framing any fuch fyftems. He acknowledges 
that our feeing convex figures is merely in 
virtue of a judgment which we have formed to 
ourfelves by habitual cuftom. And yet the 
reafon he gives is not fatisfa&ory. " Being 
ci accuftomed to perceive what kind of ap- 
cc pearances convex bodies make in us, what 
" alterations are made in the reflexions of 
light, by the difference of the fenfible fi- 
gure of bodies ; the judgment prefently, by 

« an 



<c 



cc 



The TraKsLator ! s Preface. xlii| 

" an habitual cuftom> a&$r§#h$ appearances 
" into their ca.ujfes$ fothat from that. which 
" truly is variety pf fha4ow or colour, col- 
" le&ing the figure, it makes it pafs for a 
u mark of figur^ and frames to itfelf the per* 
% * ception of acpnvex figure^ &c/* Can; it be 
fuppofed, lays our ; author, that we fhould know 
the images which convex bodies produce with* 
in us, and the changes which happen in the 
reflexion of light, according to the difference 
of the fenfible figures of bodies ? 

Mr. Mpljmeux, who propofed the problem, 
which occafioned the feveral difcoveries in re-* 
lation to fight, feems, according to our au- 
thor, to have hit only upon part of the truth, 
" Suppofe a Man born blind, and now adult, 
and taught by his touch to diftinguifh be- 
tween a cube and a fphere of the fame me- 
< ( tal, and nighly pf the fame bignefs. Sup- 
* c pofe then the cube and the fphere placed on 
" a table, and the blind man to be made to 
fee : quaere, whether by his fight, before he 
touched them, he could diftinguifh which 
tt is the globe, which the cube ?" The con- 
ditions 



cc 

cc 



cc 
cc 



xliv Tie Translator's Preface. 

ditkms that thofc two bodies fhould be of the 
fame metal and feme bignefs, are fuperfluous ; 
and the laft feems to fuppofe that the fight may, 
without the affiftance of the touch, give dif- 
ferent ideas of bignefs. If fo, our author 
fays he does not fee why Locke . and Moli- 
neux fhould deny that the fight alone is ca- 
pable of diftingurfhing figures. 
*■ Befides, the i&bbe Goodilktc obferves, that 
they fhould have ttafoned in regard to diftanc6, 
fituation, and bignefs, as in refpefifc to fi- 
giiife; and concluded that the moment when a 
fiiian born blind was made to fee, he would be 
incapable of judging of any of tbefe things at 
all. - For they are all included in the percep- 
tion of the different parts of a globe and a 
tvtbe- It is a contradi£liori to fuppofe that an 
eye, which diftinguifhed fituation, bignefs, 
2hd diftance, could not diftinguifh figures. 
The bifhop of Cloyne was the firft who 
thought, that the fight alone could not 
fudge of any of thefe things. Another confe- 
rence our author obferves, which fhould 
not have efcaped Mr. Locke, is that the eye, 

unaflifted 



7%e Translator's .Preface, *1v 

unaffifted by experience, could of itfelf fee noy 
thing but light and colours, and that the touch 
alone could inftruft it how to diftinguifh ex+ 
ternal obje&s; -Befides, Mr,: Locke ihould 
have remarked that judgments .are minglfcd 
with all our fenfatiorts, : fefjr whatever orgaft 
they are tranfmitted to : the. foul ; whereas h« 
fays exa6lly the contrary *f. The whole of 
this (hews, that the difcoyery of truth is 
made by flow and infeniible degrees $ and that 
very often we are within fight, as it were, of 
the cxpe&ed port, without being able ts* 
reach it. 

As we have thus far attended our author 
in his obfervations, we Ihould be glad to 
follow him to the end of the difiertation, in 
order to {hew in what manner he confiders the 
feiife of tafte as joined to the touch, and what 
efFedb arife from the union of the five fen(e&. 
But this would lead us too far beyond the bounds 
of a preface, which we are afraid we hate 
already exceeded ; we (hall therefore conclude 
with his review of the cafe mentioned ia 



.* 



■f Eflay on Hamaa Underft. Book IX. $ 9. 

this 



xlvi 2%e Translator's Preface* 

this Eflay, p. 164. concerning the matt 
born blind, who had been couched by Mn 
Chefelden. Here again he oppofes the opi* 
nion of Mr. Locke, and contrary to Mr* 
Chdelden's pofitive experiment, maintains, 
that a man born blind, upon acquiring the 
ufe of his fight, would, without the afliftance 
of the touch; be able to acquire the ideas of 
cxtenfion, figure, fituation, &c. But this 
being exaftly a parallel cafe to that of Mr* 
Molineux; our author, upon a review of the 
lubjedl in the treatife we have been here ana* 
lyzing, fairly retra&s his former opinion, and 
giving the cafe as publifhed in the Philofophi* 
cal Tranfaftions, No. 402. Ann. 1728, he 
makes the following comment upon it. 

The young man would not have confent* 
ed to the operation, if he had not been in* 
duced to it by the defire of knowing how to 
read and write. This determined him 5 and 
they began With deprefling the cataract of one 
of his eyes. It is to be obferved, that he was 
not born fo blind, but he could diftinguifh 
day from night. He could even by broad 
1 day 



72* Translator's Preface, xlvii 

day difcern white, black, and red. As foon 
as he began to fee, the obje&s appeared to 
him as if they touched the outward furface of 
his eye. The reafon of this is obvious. Be- 
fore they had couched him, he had often ob- 
ferved, that he ceafed to fee the light, as 
foon as he put his hand on his eye. From 
thence he contra&ed the habit of judging it 
to be fomething externa]. But as this was a 
confiifed and glimmering light, he did not 
diftinguifh the colours enough to difcover the 
bodies by which they were tranfmitted. Hence 
he did not conclude them to be at a certain dif- 
tance ; confequently it was impoffible for him to 
diftinguifh any intermediate fpacej and of 
courfe they muft have appeared to him as if they 
immediately touched his eye. Now the ope- 
ration produced no other effedfc than to render 
the light more vivid and diftinft. He muft 
therefore have continued to fee it, where he 
had hitherto judged it to be, that is, upon his 
eye -, confequently he perceived only a furface 
equal to the fize of this organ. 

But he fully proved the truth of the pre- 
ceding obfervations on the ftatue. Every 

thing 



xlviii Tie Translators Pre* ace- 

thing He faw appeared to him to. be of a fur 1 - 
prizing bignefs. His eye not haying yet com- 
pared objects of different magnitude, he could 
have no relative ideas concerning this fubje<Sk 
Consequently he knew not how to diftinguifh 
the limits of obje&s $ fo that the furface which 
touched him, muft have appeared to hun* 
as it did to the ftatue, immenfe. Hence we 
are told that he was fome time before he coulcj 
conceive there was any thing beyond what he 
faw. The objedis appeared to him to be alj 
jumbled and confufed, and how different for- 
ever they were in figure and fize, he cou]4 
not diftinguifh .them. This i$ becaufe thf 
eye cannot diftinguifh, till it has }earnt tx? 
apply the colours to diftant obje&s. But 
in proportion as he accuftomed himfelf to 
deepen the light, and to create, as it were, a 
fpace before his eyes, he placed each obje£t at 
different diflances, affigning to each its pro- 
per place ; and then he began to judge, by 
the eye, of their figwe and relative mag- 
nitude. 

Till thefe ideas were familiar to him, he 
had a difficulty m comparing them j, and he 

was 



the Translator's Preface xlitf 

was far from imagining in what manner the 
eye could judge of relations of magnitude. It 
is for this reafon that a thing an inch long, 
put before his eye* appeared to him as big as 
a houfe. Thefe new fenfations, in which 
he was every inftant making frefti difcoveries* 
could ijot fail infpiring him with a curiofity 
of jftudying every thing by the light. Thus 
when they fhewed him any objeits that he 
Jcnew by the touch, he carefully obferved 
them, that he might know them again by 
the eye j and his attention wa* greater on 
this account, bepaufe he could not diilin*- 
.gtiifh them at firft §ither by their figure s or 
fize. In this (ituati^n Jthofe obje&s which 
reflect moft light, and whofe whole together 
is eafieft perceived, muft have pleafed him the 
moft ; fudi are fmooth and even bodies. They 
even pleafed him moft at the time when he 
could not yet tell their figure *. 

The 

* This is not cxa£tly What Mr. Chefelcfen fays. For at the 
fame time that he mentions this young man's incapacity of 
diftinguifhing objects, how different foever in fize and figure, 
he fays he found thofe moft pleating and agreeable which were 
regular and fmooth. This feems to be a contradiction. It 

C wai 



1 7le Translator's Preface. 

The relievo, or prominence of bodies, riot 
being fo diftinguifhable in painting, as in 
real life, this young maft' was fome time be- 
fore he could confider pi&ifres any otherwift 
than as plans differently coloured ; it was two 
months before they appeared to him to re- 
prefent folid bodies, i And this was >a difco- 
very which he made all of a fudd^Vfcur- 
prized at this phenomenon, he afk<d which 
was the fenfe that deceived Mm, his. fight, 6r 
liis touch ? 

' I ut he was greatly amazed : at feeing has 
father's pi&ure in miniature; lie (kid it was 
Tike put ing a bujhel info a pint. Hfe furprige 
was owing to the habit his eye had formed* 
of connc&ing the figure wkh the fiieof the 
objeft. He had not as yet fcccuftonttd him- 
felf to judge, that thefe two things might be 
feparated. We are naturally prejudiced in 

was natural that this young man fhould not diftinguifh either 
figure, or fize, the firft moment he faw the light; but it would 
hare been impoffible for him to be - better pleafed with .regular 
obje&s, if his fight had continued in that confufed flate. He 
could not therefore think them more agreeable, till he had be- 
gun, to diftinguifh figure and magnitude. Doubtlefs he found 
it difficult to explain the feveral differences he obferved. 

favour 



7%e Translator's Prefa^i. fi 

faybur of an obje£l that affords us any plear 
furc, and think it is paffefTed^of etfery per- 
fection. Thus this ybung man feeffied to be 
furprized, that the . perfons whom he loved 
bcft fliould not b$ did handfomcft ; and that 
the viands which he relifhed moil fhould not 
be the moft agrqeable to the eye. 

The more obje6b he beheld, the more he 
was pleafed with having acquired. his fight. 
He feemed quite charmed, when they carried 
him to ^Epfom, where the profpeft is extent- 
five and delightful. He called this a new 
ihanner of feeing >■ and indeed ' he was in the 
rigj^t ; for there are *as many^ifferent ways of 
feeing; as there' are different judgments 'in vi- 
fibn: and what atiutnber of them ^rimft have 
arifen from the profpeft of ib delightful i 
landflcape? . ..1 ;«; 

It is . obferved that black was difagfeeable fb 
him, and that he was even feared, the firft time 
he law a Negro y probably becaufe that colour 
reminded him of his former ftate. At length 
about a year afterwards they made the opera- 
tion on the other eye * and it fucceeded in the 
feme manner. To this eye every thing ap- 

c a peared 



lii He Translator's Preface* 

peared very large, but not fo large as they had 
appeared to the firft. The reafon, I fancy* 
is becaufe prefuming he was to fee with this 
eye in the fame manner as he had done with 
the other, he mixed the judgments he had 
accuftomed himfelf to frame with the eye 
on which they had begun to perform the ope- 
ration ; he mixed, I fay, thofe judgments 
with the fenfations tranfmitted by the other 
eye. But as he could not be fo exa& at 
firft, he faw with this eye the obje&s ftill 
too large. 

When he began to view an objeft with 
both eyes, it appeared to him as big again* 
This was becaufe it was more natural, that 
the eye to which things appeared but fmall, 
fliould increafe their fize, than the other to 
which they appeared fo large, fhould diminifh 
it And yet he did not fee double : becaufe 
his touch directing the eye which had laft re- 
covered its fight, to diftinguifli the obje&s, 
made it fee thetn, juft in the very fituation 
where it fhewed them to the other. 

Mr. Chefelden obferves, that what greatly 
puazled thofe who were borft blind, and had 

acquired 



The Translator's Preface* liii 

acquired their fight by being couched, was 
how to direft their eye to the objefts which 
they wanted to fee. This muft have been 
the cafe ; becaufe as hitherto there had been 
no occafion for moving their eyes, they could 
have formed no habit of direfting them. To 
conclude. It is impoffible but there fhowld 
be feveral defefts in obfervations made for 
the firft time on phenomena, in which there 
are a thoufand minute difficulties to folye. 
But there is this ufe in them at leaft, that they 
enable future obfervers to make greater im- 
provements. 



c 3 THE 



*4- 



[Mr] 



THE 



CONTENTS, 



I 



NtroduSiion 



Page | 



PARTI. 



Qf the materials of our knowledge, 
and particularly of the operati- 
ons of the mind 

SECT. I. CHAP. I. 



*3 



Of the materials of our knowledge, and of the 
dijlinftion between foul and body ibid. 



CHAP. II. 



> 3 



Of fenfations 



19 

SEC- 



v. 1 



.CONTENTS. 
S E CT ion II. 

ffle anatyfis and origin of the opera- 
tions of the. mind 26 

■ ■.'.. .'*••• • " 

CHAP. I. 

Of perception, confciotifnefs, attention, and 
remimfcence * ay 

CHAP. II. 

Of the imagination, contemplation, and me- 
mory '. . 38 

# * 
- « • 

CHAP. III. 

In what manner tbf connexion of ideas, form- 
ed by the attention, produces the imagina- 
tion, contemplation, and memory 45 

CHAP. IV. 

That tbeufe (f.figns is tfo realcaufe of the 
progrefs of the imagination, contemplati- 
on, and memory 51 

chap, y: 

Of reflexion 58 

c 4 CHAP. 



, C ONTENTa 

CHAP. VI. 

Of the operations which confifi in dijlinguijh- 
ing, abftracJing, comparing, compound- 
ing, and decompounding our ideas 64 

CHAP. VII. 

A digrejpon on the origin of principles, and 
of the operation which confifts in ana- 
lyzing 67 

CHAP. VIII. 

Ctf affirming : denying : judging : reafoning : 
conceiving: under/landing 74 

CHAP. IX. 

Of the defeSls and advantages of the imagi- 
nation 7 8 

CHAP. X. 

From whence the imagination derives tbofe 
graces with which it embellijhet truth 8 9 

CHAP. XL 

Ofreafon, wit, and its different kinds 92 

SEC. 



CONTENTS, 



8 E C T LO N III. 



* -• 



Of fimple and complex ideas 104 

SECT. IV. CHAP. I. 



1 \ 



Of the operation by which we give Jigm to 

our ideas ,, v. ■ •/ «,- if 14 

•- 

CHAP. II. 

Fafts confirming •what has been demonflrated 
in the preceding chapter 123 



SECTION V. 

• • ■ • ■ 

Of abflraSlion I37 



SECTION VI. 

Offotne judgments attributed to the v ' ' 
mind without foundation, or the 
folution of w metaphyseal problem 152 



PART 



..>. 



gon? EM'ra 



r- - - r '> 



P A R T II. 



J « . . J >J • ' • !»' 



> 



Of language and method * 169 

r . - » I 

S E C T I N I« 

1 ■ ■ 

Of the origin and progrefs of lan- 
guage -. - -. - » ibid* 



..'< -,.r\ 



<« ■* 



? '* 



CHAP. L 



... . ■ - » - » » 



• 

£#* aw*/* of /peaking by aSim^i^difatip" 

articulate founds, confidered in their ori* 

ginal \ ' O i" 1 - •'"■- 171 

CHAP. II. ... 

0/* /& profody of the ear lie ft languages 179 



* . » « 



CHAP. -III. 

0/7A* profody ofthfGreek and Latin tongues %* 
and occafionally of the recitation or dechh . 
matory fpeaking of the ancients 1 8 j 

CHAP. I\ r . 

Of the progrefs which the art of gejiure 
made among the ancients 199 

2 CHAP. 



> 



CONTENTS* 

CHAP.. % 
Of tnufic 206 

CHAP/VI. <^n V> 

■"•■.•■■■' r i Vxl - 
Comparifon between the mufical and the plain." : 

declamation 22 1 



• 

• » ' JL , * 



CHAP. VII. 



Which is the tnofi perfeft projody 224 

CHAP. vm. 

Of the origin of \ poetry . . ^ 2fc^ 



1 • 



CHAP... BK 
Of words 337 

eh A p. x 

Ibe fame fubje& continued *4$ 

f 

CHAP, XL 

Of the fgnification of words 258 

CHAP. xn. 

Of tranjpofitions- 264 

V.--.CHAP. : 23R 

Of writing 273 

CHAP. 



CONTENTS, 

.m 

CHAK XIV. 

Of the origin of fable, of parables and enig- 
mas, with fome particulars concerning the 
ufe of figures and metaphors 279 

CHAP. XV, 

Of the char after of languages 283 

S E.C.T ION II. 

Of method 3QO 

CHAP. I. 

Of the firjl caufetf-erntik, "and Jf the origin 

v cf truth ibid. 

CHAR II. 

Ofibe manner of determining ideas, or their* 
names 305 

CHAP. III. 

Of the order which we ought to follow in the 
invejiigation of truth 318 

CHAP. IV. 

Of the order which ought to be followed in the 
expofition of truth 333 

AN 



ESSAY 

• ■ CONCERNING THE 

ORIGIN 

O F 

HUMAN KNOWLEDGE. 



INTRODUCTION. 

: F all fciences that which contri- 
butes moft to open, as well as to 
fix and enlarge the underftanding, 
and which, confequently, ought 
to prepare it for the ftudy of every 
other branch of knowledge is metaphyfics. 
But this fcience is fo greatly neglected at pre- 
fent, that the above affertion will doubtlefs to a 
great many of my readers appear no lefs than 
a paradox. I confefs there was a time, when I 
B ihould 




2 INTRODUCTION. 

fhould have formed the fame judgment of it 
myfelf. Of all philofophers the metaphyfi- 
cians appeared to me the moft fuperficial ; fb 
far was I from receiving any inftrudtion from 
their writings, that I met with nothing but 
airy fpeculations, fo that I began to charge the 
fcience with thofe extravagances which fhould 
have been imputed only to its profeflbrs. But 
endeavouring afterwards to remove this illufion, 
and to difcover the caufe of fo many errors, I 
found thofe who are wideft from the truth, to 
be of the greateft fervke to me. I had fcarce 
difcovered the unfafe paths they had trod, when 
I thought I had hif upon the only and fure way 
of arriving at the truth. It feemed to me that 
We might reafon in metaphyfics and in morals 
with as great exadlnefs as in geometry ; that we 
might frame as accurate ideas as the geometri- 
cians ; that We might determine, as well as they, 
the meaning of words in a precife and invariable 
manner ; In fhort that we might prefcribe, per- 
haps better than they have done, a plain and 
eafy order for the attainment of demonftration. 

We muft diftinguifh two forts of metaphy- 
fics. The one, vain and ambitious, wants to 
fearch into every myftery ; into the nature and 
effence of beings, and the moft hidden Caufes ; 
all thefe fhe promifes to difcover to her admirers, 
who are pleafed with the flattering idea. The 

other 



tNTRODUCf IOti. 3 

Other more referved, proportions her refearches 
to the weaknefs of the human understanding • 
and not concerning herfelf about what is above 
her fphere, but eager to know whatever is with- 
in her reach, (he wifely keeps within the bounds 
prefcribed by nature. The firft makes all na- 
ture a kind of magic incantation, which va- 
nishes like herfelf y the fecond, defirous only of 
, feeing things as they really are, is as Ample as 
truth itfelf* The former is the fource of in- 
numerable error*, as it fills the mind with vague 
and indeterminate notions, and with Words that 
have no meaning : the latter conveys indeed no 
great (lore of knowledge, but it helps the mi-* 
derftanding to avoid falling into miftakes, to 
reafbn exa&ly, and to frame clear ideas. 

Philofophers have applied themfelves more to 
the ftudy of the former, and have confidered 
the latter only as an accefTory part which fcarcely 
deferves the name of metaphyfics. Mr. Locke 
is the only one, I think, that ought to be ex> 
cepted : he has confined himfelf to the ftudy of 
the human underftanding, and has fucceeded in 
the purfuit. Defcartes was acquainted neither 
with the origin nor the formation of our ideas *• 
To this we muft attribute the infufficiency of his 

* I refer die reader to his third meditation : nothing ap- 
pears to me lefs philosophical than what he fays upon this 
ftbjecl. 

B 2 method: 



4 INTRODUCTION. 

method : for we fhall never difcover a fure way 
of conducing our thoughts, fo long as we are 
Grangers to the manner in which they are 
formed. Of all the Cartefians Mallebr^nche is 
he who faw moft into the caufes of our errors ; 
and yet this philofopher fometimes draws his 
comparifons from matter to explain the faculties 
of the foul * : at other times he is loft in the 
intellectual worlds where he imagines he has 
difcovered the fource of our ideas -f\ Others 
create and annihilate beings, which they fuper- 
add to or take from the foul according to their 
fancy, vainly thinking by this means to ac- 
count for the different operations of the mind, 
and of the manner in which it acquires or lofes 
its knowledge %. In fine, the Leibnitzians 
make a far completer being of this fubftance : 
it is, according to them, a microcofm, a living 
mirror of the univerfe ; and by the power they 
give it of reprelenting every thing that exifts, 
they imagine they are able to explain its effence, 
its nature, and properties. Thus it is that each 
is biaffed by his own fyftem. We fee only 
what furrounds us, and we think we fee every 
thing : we are like children who imagine that 

* Inquiry after truth, 1. i. c. i. 

t L. i. See alio his difcourfes and his mctaphyfica! medi- 
tations, with his anfwers to M. Arruud, 

\ The author ot the action of the deity upon his creatures. 

when 



INTRODUCTION. 5 

when they come to the end of a plain, they 
ihall be able to touch the fky with their hand. 

I would not have it inferred from hence that 
the writings of philofophers are of no manner . 
of ufe : all that I mean, is, that whoever flatters 
himfelf to fucceed better than fo many celebrat- 
ed genius's, muft ftudy them at leaft with a 
view of improving by their miftakes. It is an 
eflential point to every perfon that is defirous of 
making any progrefs by himfelf in the fearch 
after truth, to know the miftakes of thofe who 
firft undertook to (hew him the way. The ex- 
perience of a philofopher, like that . of a pilot, 
confifts in being acquainted with the rocks on 
which others have fplit $ and without this 
knowledge no compafs can direct them. 

It would not be fufficient to„ difcover the 
errors of philQfophers, unlefs we fearched into, 
the caufes of them : we ftiould even afcend from 
one caufe to another, till we reached the firft.- 
For there muft be one and the fame to all thofe 
who have gone aft ray $ and this is the very 
point, as it were, at which the feveral roads 
begin that lead to error. Then perhaps, and 
clofe to this point, we fhould perceive another, 
where begins the only path that conducts to the 
knowledge of truth. 

Our firft aim, which we ought never to lofe 
fight of, is the ftudy of the human underftand-p 

B 3 ing 5 



6 INTRODUCTION. 

ing ; not to difcover its nature, but to know ks 
operations ; to obferve with what art they are 
combined, and how we ought to condudt them, 
in order to acquire all the knowledge of which 
we are capable. We muft afcend to the origin 
of our ideas, we muft unfold their formation, 
^nd trace them to the limits which nature has 
prefcribed, to the end that we may fix the ex- 
tent and boundaries of our knowledge, and new 
model as it were the whole frame of the human 
understanding. 

This inquiry cannot be carried on with fuccefs 
but by the way of obfervation $ and our only aim 
fliould be to difcover a fundamental experiment 
which no one can queftion, and will be fuffi- 
cient to explain all the reft. It ought fenfibly 
to point out to the fource of our ideas, to the 
materials of which they are formed, the prin- 
ciple which fets them in motion, the inftrumenta 
employed about them, and the manner in which 
we fhould apply them. I think I have found the* 
folution of all thefe problems in the connection 
of ideas, either with figas, or with one another ; 
whether I am right the reader will judge in 
proportion as he advances m the perufal of this 
work. 

My purpofe therefore is to reduce to a fingle 
principle whatever relates to the human under- 
standing, and this principle (hall neither be a 

vague 



INTRODUCTION. 7 

vague proportion, nor an abftradfc maxim, nor 
a groundless fuppofition, hut a conftant experi- 
ence, all the confequences of which fhall be 
confirmed by new obfervations. 

The ideas are connected with the figns, and 
it is only by this means, as I fhall prove, they 
are conne&ed with each other. Hence it 1% 
that after touching upon the materials of our 
knowledge, the diftindion of the foul and body, 
and the different fenfations, I have been obliged, 
in order more folly to explain my principle, 
not only to follow the workings of the mind 
through all their gradations, but likewife to in* 
% quire in what manner we have contracted the 
habit of figns of every kind, and what ufe we 
ought to make of them. 

In order to execute this undertaking, I have 
traced things* as high as poflible. On the one 
hand, I have afcended to perception, becaufe it 
is the fkft operation we obferve in the mind.; 
and I have (hewn haw, and in what order it 
produces every other operation of which we can 
acquire the a£t and habit. On the other hand, I 
have begun with the language of a&ron : here the 
reader will fee how it has produced every art 
proper to exprefe our thoughts; fuch as ges- 
ture, dancing, fpeech, declamation, arbitrary 
marks for words or things, pantomimes, mufic, 
.poetry, eloquence, writing, and the cjifferent 

B 4 characters 



8 INTRODUCTION. 

characters of language. This hiftory of Ian* 
guagc will difclofc the circumftances in which 
the figns were invented, will (hew the true 
meaning of them, will help to prevent the 
nbufe they may be turned to, and, in my opi- 
nion, will remove all doubt concerning the 
origin of our ideas. 

At length after laying open the progreflion of 
mental operations, as well as that of language, 
I have attempted to point out the means by 
tvhk-h we may avoid falling into error, and to 
fhew the order we ought to follow, either in 
endeavouring to make diicoveries, or inftru&ing 
others concerning thofe we have already made. 
Such is the general plan of this eflay. 

It often happens that a philofopher declares 
liimfelf on the fide of truth, without knowing 
it. I Te fees an opinion hitherto abandoned, and 
he adopts if, not becaufe it appears the beft 
grounded, but with the expectation of becom- 
ing the founder of a new fed:. And, indeed, 
the novelty of mod iyftems has generally fe- 
v\m\\ their fuccefs. 

This perhaps was the motive which induced 
the Peripatetics to aflumc as a principle, that all 
our knowledge is derived from the fenfes. So 
far were they from having any certainty of this 
truth, that not one of them could ever explain 



INTRODUCTION. 9 

it, and after a long fucceflion of ages, the dif- 
covery was not yet made. 

My lord Bacon is perhaps the firft who 
perceived this truth : it is the foundation of a 
work, in which he lays down excellent rules 
for the advancement of knowledge*. The 
Cartefians rejected this principle with contempt, 
becaufe they judged of it only from the writings 
of the Peripatetics. At length Mr. Locke 
Seised upon it, and has the honour of being the 
firft to demonftrate it. 

And yet this philofopher does not feem to 
have made it the principal objefl: of the ejfay r 
which he has left on the human underfianding. 
He fell upon it occafionally, and fo continued 
to do as opportunities offered. And though he 
was fenfible that a work written after that man^ 
ner muft difguft the judicious, yet he had not, 
as he fays himfelf, either courage or leifure to 
model it a- new -f\ To this we may attribute 
the tedioufnefs, the repetitions, and confufion 
which prevail throughout the work. Locke was 
very capable of amending thefe defers, and this 
is what perhaps renders him more inexcufable. 
He few, for inftance, that the confideration of 
words, and of our manner of ufing them, might 
give fome light into the principle of our ideas £ : 

* Nov. org. fcient. f Sec his preface. 

. £ L. j. c. 8. $. 1. 

but 



io INTRODUCTION. 

but because he perceived it too late *, he handled 
this fubjed in his third book, which ought to 
have been difcuffed in the fecond. If he could 
have prevailed upon himfelf to recommence die 
fubjedt, there is reafon to prefume, he would 
have given a far better explication of the fprings 
of the human underftanding. But through 
xiegleft of this, (b far is he from fearching deep- 
ly into the origin of human knowledge, that he 
touches the fubjedt but very flightly. He fup- 
pofes, for inftance, that when once the undeiv 
ftanding is ftored with ideas by means of the 
fenfes, it has the power to repeat, compare, and 
unite them, even to an almoft infinite variety, 
and fo can make at pleafure new complex 
ideas -f~. But it is beyond all doubt that in our 
infancy we have had fenfations, long before we 
could derive any ideas from them. Thus, the 
foul not having had immediately and from the 
firft inftant the exercife of all its operations, it 
was a point of the utmoft confequence, for the 
better unfolding the origin of knowledge, to 
fhew in what manner (he acquires this exercife, 
and what progrefs (he makes in it - Locke does 

♦ I mnft confefs then, that when I firft began this dxfcourft 
pf the underftanding, and a good while after, I had not the 
lead thought that any confideration of words was at all nccef- 
fary to it. L. 3. c 9. |. *i. 

•\ L. 2. p. 2. J. z. 

not 



INTRODUCTION. it 

not 6cm to have even thought of this, nor does 
it appear that any one ever charged him with 
the omi&oh, xx endeavoured CO fupply this part 
of his work. Nay, perhaps the defign of ex-> 
plaining the origin of the operations of the mind, 
by deriving them from a fimple perception, will 
appear fp new, that the reader will have a diffi- 
culty to' comprehend, in what manner I (hall 
execute it. 

Locke in the firft book of has eflay examines 
into the opinion concerning innate ideas. Per- 
haps he has dwelt too long on the refutation of 
this error ; ,&p following Work will explode it 
indire&ly, * In fome parts of the fccond book, 
he treats but in a fuperficial manner, of the 
operations of the mind. In the third he in- 
quires into words, and he feems to be the firft 
that ever handled the fubjed: like a philofopher. 
And yet I have thought proper to make this 
fame fubjedt a confiderable part of the follow- 
ing work, as well hecaufe it may be viewed' 
in a new and more extenfive light, as becaufe J 
4m convinced, that the ufc of figns is the prin- 
ciple which/enfolds all our ideas as they lye 
in the bud. But among many excellent things 
which Locke fays in his fecond book, concern- 
ing the formation of feveral forts of ideas, fuch 
as fpace, duration, &c. and in his fourth book 
jfltitled of knowledge, there are feveral articles 

which 



12 INTRODUCTION. 

which I am very far from approving ; but as 
they belong more particularly to the extenfion 
of our ideas, they do not come under my 
plan, and therefore it is needlefs for me to 
dwell long upon them. 




AN 









A N 

E S S A Y 

CONCERNING THE 

ORIGIN 

O F 

HUMAN KNOWLEDGE. 

PARTI. 

\ Of the materials of our knowledge, and 
particularly of the operations of the 
mind. 

SECTION I. 

CHAP. I. 

Of the materials of our knowledge », and of the diftinfti- 

on between foul and body. 

§ i. W%tSJ^%yk Hether we foar, metaphorically 

ifl vn cu fpeaking, into the higheft heavens, 

6fc ogo or whether we defcend into the pro- 

Sk$?t$l%ji foundeft abyfs, we cannot go out of 

ourfelves ; for all we perceive is nothing more than 

our own proper thoughts. Whatever knowledge we 

i may 



14 Origin op Partly 

may boaft, yet if we trace it to its origin, we fhall ar- 
rive at length at a firft firnplc thought, which has been 
the object of a fecond, and this of a third, an4 fi> on. 
It is this order of thoughts we muft develop, if we 
have a mind to underftand our ideas of things. 

§ 2. It would be of no ufe to inquire into the na- 
ture of our thoughts. The firft reflection we make 
on ourfelves is fufficient to convince us, that we have 
no poffiblo means of fatisfying this inquiry. Every 
man is confeious of his thought ; he diftinguifhes it 
perfectly from every thing elfc ; he even djftinguifhes 
pne thought from another ; and that is fufficient. If 
we go any further, we ftray from a point which we 
apprehend fo clearly, that it can never lead us into 
error. " ■» * 

$ 3. Let us con fide r man the firft moment of his 
exiftence ; his mind immediately feels different fen- 
fations ; fuch as light, colours, pain, pleafure, mo- 
tion, reft : theie are his firft thoughts. 

§ 4. Let us follow him when he begins to refleft 
on the effeft which the fenfations produce within 
him, and we fhall find him forming ideas of the' 
different operations of his mind, fuch as to perceive, 
to imagine : thefe are his fecond thoughts. 

Thus according as external objedts affedt us, we 
receive different ideas by means of the fenfes 5 and - 
according as we refledt on the operations which the 
fenfations produce within our minds, we acquire 
fuch ideas as we could not receive from external 
objefts. 

§ 5. The fenfations therefore, and the operations 
of the mind, are the materials of all our knowledge ; 
materials which our refle&ipn employs, when by com- 
pounding 



Chap.L Human Knowledge, 15. 

pounding it fceks for the relations which they con- 
tain. But the whole fuccef* depends on circumftan- 
ces which occur to us in our paflagc through life ; 
the moft favourable of which are thofe that offer 
themfelves to us in greateft number, from fuch ob- 
jects as are mod: proper to exercife our refledtion. 
For example, thofe important circumftances which 
occur to perfons who are deftined to govern man- 
kind, afford an opportunity of forming very exten- 
five views; and thofe which continually prefent 
themfelves in high life, produce thofe fort of talents 
we call natural, becaufe not being the fruit of ftu- 
dy, We cannot point out the caufe from whence they 
arife. Let us therefore conclude that there are no 
ideas but fuch as are acquired : the firft proceed im- 
mediately from the fenfes ; the others are owing to 
experience, and incrcafe in proportion as we become 
capable of refle&ing. 

§ 5. The ftain of original tranfgreffion has ren- 
dered the foul fo dependent on the body, that many 
philofophers have confounded thefe two fubftances. 
They imagined that die former is nothing more than 
that part of the body which is finer and more fubtil 
than the reft, and fo more capable of motion : but 
this opinion is a confequence of the little care they 
had to reafon from exa& ideas. For I afk them what 
they underftand by body. If they anfwer with 
precifion, they will not fay that it is a fingle fub- 
ftance ; but they muft look upon it as an affemblage 
of fubftances. If thought therefore be a property 
belonging to body, it muft be either as it is an 
affemblage and aggregate, or becaufe it is a proper- 
ty of each fubftance of which this aggregate is com- 

t pofed. 



16 Origin of Part U 

Now thcfe words, ajfemblage and aggregate? fignify 
only an external relation betwixt feveral things, a 
manner of exifting, dependently of one another. 
By this union we confider them as forming one fingle 
whole, though in reality they are no more one? than 
if they were feparated, and at diftance. Confequent- 
ly, they are only abftraft terms, which do not fup- 
pofe a fingle fubftance, but a multitude of fubftan- 
ces. The body therefore, as an aflemblage and ag- 
gregate, cannot be the fubjeft of thought. 

Shall we divide thought among the feveral iub- 
ftances of which the body is compofed ? In the firft 
place, this is impoflible, if thought be only a fingle and 
indivifible perception. Secondly, We muft alfo re- 
ject this fuppofition, even if thought were formed of 
a certain number of perceptions. Let a, b, c, three 
fubftances, which compofe the body, divide three 
different perceptions amongft them •, I afk, where 
lhall we fix the place for comparing thefe three per- 
ceptions with one another. Not in a, becaufe it 
could not compare a perception which it has, with 
thofe which it has not. For the fame reafon it muft 
no* - be in b, nor in c. We muft therefore admit of 
a point of re-union, a fubftance which at the fame 
time fliall be a fimple and indivifible fubjedt of thefe 
three perceptions ; confequently diftindl from the bo- 
dy ; in one word, a foul. 

§7.1 know not how Mr. Locke \ came to aflert, 
that it is impoffible for us to difcover whether om- 
nipotency has not given to fome fyftems of matter, 
fitly difpofed, a power to perceive and think. We 

f Efiay on human underftanding, 1. IV. c. 3. 

muft 



Se£t 1. Human Knowledge. 17 

muft not imagine, that to refolve this queftion, it is 
neceflary to know the efience and nature of matter* 
The arguments founded on this ignorance are alto- 
gether frivolous. It is fufficient to obferve, that the 
fubjedt of thought muft be one. Now a fyftem or 
heap of matter is not one, but a multitude *. 

§ 8. The foul being diftindt and different from 
the body, the latter can be only occafionaliy the 
caufe of what it feems to produce in the former. 
From whence we muft conclude, that the fenfes are 
onlyoccafionally the fource of our knowledge. But 
whatever is only occafioned by a thing, may be done 
without it •, becaufe in faft it depends on its occafi- 
onal caufe only in a certain cafe* The foul may 
therefore abfolutcly acquire knowledge, without the 
afliftance of the fenfes« Before the fall, it was under 
a quite different fyftem from the prefent. Free from 
ignorance and concupifcence, it had a command 

* In oppofition to what has been here faid, fame haveoh- 
je&ed, that the property of marking time is indivifible. For 
it cannot be faid to be divided among the wheels of a watch 5 
it is in the whole. Why then may not the property of think- 
ing be in an organized whole ? I anfwer, that the property of 
marking time, may in its nature belong to a compound fub- 
jelt ; becaufe as time is only a facceffion, whatever is dapable 
of motion, may meafure it. Another objection i 3, that unity 
is applicable to an ailemblage of matter fitly difpofed, though 
it cannot be applied to it, when the confufion is fo great as to 
hinder us from coniidering it as a whole. I agree; but I muft 
add, that unity is not then taken in its exact and rigorous fenfe. 
It is taken for a unit compofed of Other units; corifequently it 
is, properly fpeaking, an aflemblage, cr a multitude ; now it 
is not of this unity, improperly fo called, that I intend to 
fpeak. 

C over 



1 8 Origin of Part L 

cv^r it* f.:n!es, and ft.fper«ded or modified their ope- 
ration as it pleased : confequently it had ideas prece- 
dent to the ufe of its ienfes. But things are greatly 
chanced throi.eh its difobedience. God has de- 
prived it of this command ; fo that it is become as 
dependent on the ienfes, as if they were the phyfical 
caufc of what they only occafioB ; and it has no 
knowledge but what is conveyed by this channel. 
Hence arifc ignorance and concupifcence. It is this 
ftate of the foul which I purpofe to inquire into ; the 
only one that can properly be the objedt of philofb- 
phy, fince it is the only one made known to us by 
cxj>ericncc. Whenever therefore I happen to fay, 
that ive. h(r:r. no ideas but ivkat come f rem the fenfes t 
it mud be remembered, that I fpeak only of the ftate 
into which we are fallen by fin. This propofition 
applied to the foul before the fall, or after its fepa~ 
ration from the body, would be abfolutely falfe. I 
do not trc it of the knowledge of the foul in the two 
extreme dates ; becaufe I cannot reafon but from 
experience. lit fides, if it be of great importance, 
which no rcafonable perfon can deny, to knowthofe 
fuculiics with which God has been pleafed to leave us 
pofii:fled, m/.v.ithHanding the tranfgrefiion of our 
firft parent* •, it is of very little fignification to in- 
quiic into thole of which he has deprived us, and 
which ixvr nut to be reftored to us till we arrive to a 
glorious immortality. 

I (online niyfelf therefore, in the following work, 
to the prcfeni fhuc of humanity. Our bufinefs is 
not tncoriiidcf the foul as independent of the body, 
lime its dependence is but too well eftablifhed ; nor 
:u united lo the body in a different fyftem from that 
a of 



Seft. i. Human Knowledge. 19 

of the prefent frail and mortal life. Our only view 
muft be to confult experience, and to reafon only 
from fads, which no one can call in queftion. 



CHAP. II. 

Of Senfations. 

§ 9. T T is evident, that the ideas which we cz\\ fen- 
A fations, are of fuch a nature, that if we^ had m 
been deprived of our Senfes, we fhould never have 
been able to have acquired them. Hence no philofo- 
pher ever aflerted that they were innate ; this would 
have been plainly contradifting experience. But it 
has been faid, that they are not ideas ; juft as if they 
were not in themfelves as reprefentative as any other 
thought of the foul. The fenfations have therefore 
been confidered only as fomfcthing that comes after, 
and that modifies our ideas; an error on which fe- 
veral extravagant and unintelligible fyftems are 
founded. 

A very flight attention muft convince us, that 
when we perceive light, colours, or folidity, thefe 
arid the like fenfations are more than fufficient to 
give us all the ideas which we generally have of bo- 
dies. For is there, in fa<5t, any idea not included 
in thofe firft perceptions ? Do not we find in thefe 
the ideas of extenfion, figure, place, motion, reft, 
&c. ? 

Let us therefore rejeft the hypothefis of in- 
nate ideas, and fuppofethat God has given us only, 
for inftance, the perceptions of light and colour. 

C 2 Will 



20 Origin op Part L 

Will not thefe reprefent even to our eyes the idea* 
of extenfion, of lines, and figures ? But it will be 
objedted, that we cannot be fure by our fenfes, whe- 
ther thefe things are really fuch as they appear : 
therefore we have not the ideas of them from- the 
fenfes. How ftrangc a confequence ! Can we have 
any greater certainty from innate ideas ? What does 
it fignify whether the fenfes can give us any certain 
knowledge of the figure of a body or not ? The 
queftion is, whether, even when they deceive us* 
they do not convey the idea of a figure. I fee one, for 
inflance, which I take to be a pentagon, though on 
one of its fides it forms an imperceptible angle. This 
is an error : but, for all that, does it not convey to 
my mind the idea of a pentagon ? . 

§ 10. And yet the followers of De Cartel and 
Mallebranche make fuch a loud cry againft the fenfes* 
and repeat to us fo often, that they produce nothing 
but error and delufion ; that a great many are apt 
to look upon them as an obftacle to knowledge, and 
through a miftaken zeal for truth, would be glad, 
if poffible, to be diverted of them. Not that the 
complaints of thofe philofophcrs are abfolutely with- 
out foundation : they have fo ingenioufly expofed a 
multitude of errors on this very fubjeft, that we can* 
not, without injuftice, deny the obligations we owe 
them. But is there no medium ? Cannot we find in 
our fenfes a fourcc of truth, as well as of error ; and 
diftinguifh them fo clearly, as to have always re- 
couric to the former ? This is a point indeed worthy 
of inquiry. 

§ ii. And firft of all, it is very certain, that no- 
thing is more clear and more diftinflTthan our per- 
ception, 



Se£t. i. Human Knowledge. 21 

ception,when we feel fome particular fenfations. What 
can be more clear and diftindt than the perceptions of 
found and of colour ? Do we ever confound thefe 
ideas ? But if we are defirous to inquire into their 
nature,' and to know in what manner they are pro- 
/ duced within us ; we muft not begin, by faying that 
our fenfes deceive us, or that they give us confufed 
and obfcure ideas : the leaft refle&ion is fufficient to 
refute fuch an aflertion. 

And yet, lqt the nature of thefe perceptions be 
what it will, and let them be produced as they will, 
if we look amongft them for the idea of extenfion, 
for inftance, of a line, of an angle, and any other 
figure, we (hall find it in that repofitory very clearly 
aTid diftinctly. If we afterwards look for the thing 
to which we attribute this extenfion, and thefe fi- 
gures, we fhall perceive (till as clearly and diftin&ly 
that it belongs not to us, nor to that which, within 
us, is the fubjedt of thought, but to fomething 
without us. 

But if we want to find, in thefe perceptions, the 
idea of the abfolute magnitude of certain bodies, of 
even of their relative magnitude, and proper figure, 
we fhall have reafon to fufpedt the information they 
give us. According as the objedt is more or lefs dif- 
tant, the appearances of fize and figure, in which it 
will fhew itfelf, fhall be intirely different. 

We muft therefore diftinguifh three things in our 
fenfations. 1 °. The perception which we feel. 2 . 
The application we make of it to fomething without 
us. 3 # . The judgment," that what we apply or at- 
tribute to thpfe things, really belongs to them. 

C 1 * Then 



22 Origin of Parti. 

There is neither error, nor obfeurity, nor confu- 
fion in what paflcs within us, nor in the application 
we make to that which is without us. If we reflect, 
for inftance, that we have ideas of a particular mag- 
nitude and figure, and that we attribute them to a 
particular body •, all this is real, clear, and deter- 
minate. Here it is that all truths whatfoever have 
their fource. If error afterwards follows, it is 
only becaufc we judge that fuch fize, and fuch figure 
really belong to fuch a body. If, for example, I 
fee at a dillance a fquare building, it will appear to 
me to be round. Is there then any obfeurity or 
confulion in the idea of rotundity, or in my apply- 
ing it ? No: but I judge this building to be round, 
and there lies the mittake. 

When I fay that all our knowledge proceeds from 
the fenfes, we muft not forget that this is to be un- 
dcrltood fo fur as this knowledge is derived from the 
clear and diltinft ideas which thofc fenfes contain. 
As to the judgments which accompany them j they 
can be of no fervice to us, till their defeats have been 
corrected by experience and reflection. 

§ 12. What has been faid concerning extenfion 
and figures, is equally applicable to the other ideas 
of fenfations •, and may refolve the following ques- 
tion of the Cartefians, viz. whether colours, and 
odours, &c. are in the objefts themfclves. 

There is no manner of doubt but that there are 
qualities in bodies, which occafion the impreffions 
they make on our fenfes. The difficulty fome pre- 
tend to raile, is whether thefe qualities bear a refem- 
blancc or likenels to what we feel. What embarrafles 
us here is this, that as wc perceive within us the idea 

of 



Sec), x. Human Knowlkdc; k. 23 

of extenfion, and we fee no inconvcnicucy in fup- 
pofmg fomething like it in bodies •, we arc apt to 
imagine that there is alfo in bodies fomething that 
refembles the perceptions of colours, odours, &c. 
This is a precipitate judgment, founded only on this 
analogy, and of which in reality we know nothing. 
The notion of extenfion, ftript of all its difficulties, 
and confidered in the cleared light, is no more than 
the idea of fcvcral beings which to us appear one 
without the other *. This is the reafon that, fup- 
pofing fomething without us conformable to this 
idea, ftill the representation i3 as clear as if wc con- 
fidered it in the idea itfelf. It is quite othcrwifc in 
regard to colours, odours, fcfc, for fo long as we 
refleft on thefe fenfations, and confider them as be- 
longing to ourfelves, we have very clear ideas of 
them. But when we come to divorce them, as it 
were from ourfelves, and to enrich the objects with 
them, we then begin to do we know not what. We 
are carried to attribute them to the objedls, for no 
other reafon but this, that on the one hand we are 
obliged to fuppofe fomething there that occafions 
them ; and on the other, this caufe is abfolutely un- 
known to us, 

§ 13. It would be idle in this cafe to have recourfe to 
the terms of obfeure and confuted ideas or fenfations. 

* And united, fay the Leibnitzians. But this is of no man- 
ner of ufc, when wc talk of extenfion in the ab(lra£l Wc 
cannot reprefent feparate beings to ourfelves, without fuppofing 
others which feparate them, and the totality, or whole, implies 
the idea of union. 

C 4 Suclf 



24' Or r c i n op Part I. 

Such language ought not to be admitted among phi* 
lofophcrs, who can never be too exadt in their ex- 
prcflions. If you fay that a picture bears an obfeure 
and confufed refemblance, explain your meaning, 
and you will fee that in fomc parts it is like the 
original, in others it is not. It is the fame with 
each of our perceptions : what they really contain is 
clear and diftinft \ and what we fuppofc to be ob- 
feure and confufed docs not at all belong to them. 
We cannot fay of them, as of a pufture, that they 
have only a partial refemblance. Each is fo fimple, 
that whatever bears any relation of equality to them 
is equal in every refpedt. For this rcafon I think, 
that to have clear and diftinft ideas is, in a more 
concifc way of fpeaking, really to have ideas *, and 
to have obfeure and confufed ideas, is to have none 
at all. 

§ 14. What makes us imagine that our ideas are 
fufeeptiblc of obfeurity, is that we do not fuflkient- 
Jy diltinguifh them from the exprcflions commonly 
u fed. We fay, for inftance, that /now is white, and 
wc frame a thoufand fuch judgments, without ever 
thinking of removing the ambiguity of words. 
Thus becaufc our judgments aire cxprefled in an 
obfeure manner, we imagine that this obfeurity 
falls on the judgments themfelves, and on the ideas 
which cnmpofc them : but a definition would fct 
the whole to right. Snow is white* if by white- 
mj's we undcrfland the phyfical caufe of our per- 
ception : but it is not white, if by whitenefs we 
'mean fomcthing that refembles the perception it 
(elf. Thcfc judgments therefore are not obicure, 

but 



Sfeft. T« Human Knowledge. 25 

but are true or falfc according to the meaning of 
the words. 

There is another motive that induces us to admit 
of this unphilofophic language of obfeure and con- 
fufed ideas ; this is the itch we have of knowing a 
great deal. It feems to be a kind of confolation to 
our'curiofity, if we may be allowed to have at lcaft 
an obfeure and confufed knowledge. Hence it is 
that it fomctimes gives us pain to find that our ideas 
indeed fail us *• 

It has been proved by others, that colours, fmclls, 
&c. are not in the objects thcmfclves. But I think 
their arguments do not give full fatisfa&ion to the 
mind. I have therefore taken a different road, from 
a perfuafion, that in thefe, as well as in other mat* 
ters, it was fuflicient to explain our' ideas, in or- 
der to determine which opinion deferves the pre- 
ference. 



* Locke admits of ideas clear and obfeure, diftinfl and 
confufed, true and falfe. But it appears, from his own expli- 
cations, that we differ only in the manner of cxprefling our* 
iclves. That which I make ufe of has the advantage of being 
clearer and Ampler. For this reafon it ought to have the 
preference j becaufe nothing but the fimplicity of language can 
prevent the abufes of it. This whole work (hall be a proof 
Of it. 



SECTION 



l6 Origin of Parti. 



SECTION II. 

Hie analyjis and origin of the operations of the 

mind. 






WE may diftinguifh the operations of the 
mind into two forts, according as they 
relate more particularly to the underftanding or to 
the will. The fubjed of this cflay plainly fhews 
that my purpofc is to confider them only in the* re- 
lation they bear to the underftanding. 

I fhail not content myfelf with defining them : 
my defign is to examine them in a point of light. 
which will throw more ijftrc on them than they 
have yet received. The bulinefs is to unfold their 
gradual progreflion, and to fhew in what manner 
they are all derived from one fundamental, znAftmple 
perception. This refearch alone is of more Ufe than 
all the rules of the logicians. For how indeed could 
we be ignorant of the manner of conducting the 
Operations of the mind, if we were once well ac- 
quainted with their origin ? But all this quarter 
of mctaphyfics has hitlierto lain involved in fuch 
obfeurity and corifufion, that I have been obliged to 
frame to myfelf, in fome meafure, a new language. 
It was impoflible for me to be exadt, and at the 
fame time to employ fuch undeterminate figns as 
vulgar ufe has adopted. This however will render 
me more eafy to be underftood by thofe who fhall 
nead me with attention. 

CHAP. 



Scft. i. Hum an Knowledge. 27 

CHAP. I. 

Of perception, confcioufnefs, attention, and reminifcence. 

§,i. *T* HE perception or the impreffion caufed 
1 in the mind by the agitation of the 
fenfes, is the firft operation of the underftanding. 
The idea of it cannot be acquired by any difcourfe 
or words whatfoever ; nothing can convey it to us 
but the reflexion on what paffes within us, when we 
are affe&ed by fome extraneous impreffion on the 
fenfes. 

§.2. In vain would outward objects foilicit the 
fenfes, the mind would never have any knowledge 
of them, if it did not perceive them. Hence the 
firft and fmalleft degree of knowledge, is perception. 
-. §. 3. But fince perception arifes only from the 
impreffions made on the fenfes, it is certain that 
this firft degree of knowledge ought to have more 
or lefs extent, according as men arc organized to 
receive a greater or lefs variety of fenfations. Sup- 
pofe fome creatures deprived of fight, others of 
fight and hearing, and fo on fucceffively •, you fhall 
have creatures, which by being deprived of every 
fenfe, become incapable of attaining any knowledge 
at all. On the contrary, fuppofe, if poffible, new 
fenfes unknown to man in fome animals more per- 
fect than man, what a fund will there be for new 
perceptions! and confequently what ftores of various 
knowledge within their reach, which we can never 
attain unto, and concerning which we cannot even 
fo much as form any reafpnable conjecture ! 

§. 4. 



2$ Origin of PartlJ 

§. 4. Our inquiries arc fometimes more difficult, 
in proportion as the objedt of them is more fimplc. 
Our very perceptions are an inftance of this. What 
is more eafy in appearance than to determine whe- 
ther the foul takes notice of all thofe perceptions by 
which it is affefted ? Need there any thing mQre 
than to reflcdt on one's felf ? Doubtlefs all philoso- 
phers have done it : but fomc of them prejudiced 
by their principles, have admitted perceptions 
of which the mind never takes any notice * ; and 
others have looked upon this opinion as alto- 
gether unintelligible -f. I fhall endeavour to decide 
this queftion in the following paragraphs. It is fuffi-i 
cient here to obferve, that every body allows thofe 
perceptions to be in the mind, which the mind knows: 
it has. Now that perception which gives it this know- 
ledge, and informs it at leaft in part of what paffes 
within itfclf, I Ihall call confeioufnefs. If, according to 
.Locke, the foul has no perceptions of which it does 
not take notice, infomuch as it muft imply a contra-^ 
didtion that a perception fhould be unobferved, per- 
ception and confeioufnefs ought then to be taken for. 
one and the fame operation. If on the contrary the 
other opinion were true, they would be two diftindb 
operations, and our knowledge would then properly 
begin from confeioufnefs, and not, as I have fup- 
pofed, from perception. 

§.5. Among fcveral perceptions of which we have 
a confeioufnefs at the fame time, it frequently hap- 
pens that we arc more confeions of one than the 
other, or more itongly apprized of their exiftence, 

* The Cartcfiam, Mallebranchifts, and Leibnitzians. 
•| Locke and his followers. 

Nay 



Seft. I. Human Knowledge. 29 

Nay the more the confcioufnefs of fome increafes, 
the more that of others diminifhes. Let a perfon 
be at a public entertainment, where a variety of 
obj^dks feem to difpute his attention, his mind will 
fee attacked by a number of perceptions, of which 
it certainly takes notice ; but infenfibly fome of 
thefe will be more agreeable and engaging to him 
than others, and of courfe * he will more willingly 
give way to them. As foon as that happens, he 
will begin to be lefs afFedled by the others, his con- 
fcioufnefs of them will even infenfibly diminifli* 
infomuch that upon his coming to himfelf he (halt 
not remember to have taken any notice of them. 
Of this we have a ftrong proof in the deception we 
are fubjedt to at the theatre. There are fome mo- 
ments in which our confcioufnefs does not feem to 
be divided between the aftion reprefented, and the 
reft of the entertainment; by which I mean, the 
theatre, the audience, the aftors &c. One would 
think at firfl: that the deception ought to be ftronger, 
in proportion as there are fewer objedts capable of 
diminilhing our attention. And yet every man may 
have obferved, that we are never more inclined to 
think ourfelves fingle fpe&ators at a moving fcene, 
than when the hopfe is full. Perhaps this is be- 
caufe the number, variety, and magnificence of 
the objefts ftrike the fcnfes, elevate the imagination, 
and render us thereby more fit to receive the impref- 
fions which the poet intends to give us. Perhaps it 
is alfo owing to this, that the fpeftators are mutually 
encouraged by the example they fee each other, 
of fixing their eyes on the ftage. Be that as it may, 
this operation by which our confcioufnefs concerning 

particular 



go Origin of Part I. 

particular perceptions is fo greatly increafed, that 
they feem to be the only perceptions of which we 
take notice, I call attention. Thus to be attentive 
to a thing, is to be more confeious of the percep- 
tions which it occafions, than of thofe which other 
objefts produce by folliciting our fenfes in the fame ' 
manner •, and our attention is in proportion greater, 
as we have lefs remembrance of the latter. 

§ 6. I diftinguifh therefore two forts of percept 
tions among thofe we are confeious of ; fome which 
we remember at leaft the moment' after, others 
which we forget the very moment they are impref- 
fed. This diftindtion is founded on the experience 
juft now given. A perfon highly entertained at a 
play fhall remember perfeftly the impreflion made 
on him by a very moving fcene, though he may 
forget how he was affe&ed by the reft of the enter- 
tainment. 

§ 7. There are two opinions on this point dif- 
ferent from mine. The firft is, that the mind 
has not felt, in my fuppofition, thofe perceptions 
which I pretend it fo quickly forgets ; and this they 
attempt to explain by reafons drawn from natural 
philofophy. It is indubitable, fay they, that the 
foul perceives, only as the adtion of the obje&s 
upon the fenfes is communicated to the brain *« 
Now one might fuppofe the fibres of the brain fo 
overheated by the theatrical illufion, as to refift 
every other impreflion. From whence we may con- 
clude that the foul has no other perceptions, than 
thofe which it remembers. 

* Or, if you plcafe, to that part of the brain which is 
called finforium communis , 

But 



Scft. I. Human Knowledge. 31; 

But it is not at all probable, that when we give 
our attention to an objeft, all the fibres of the 
brain fhould be equally agitated, fo as not to leave 
a great many others capable of receiving a different 
impreffion. We have therefore fufficient reafon to 
prefume, that there are perceptions in our mind, 
which we do not remember, not even the very mo- 
ment after their impreffion. What has been here 
mentioned only as a prefumption, fhall be prefently 
demonftrated .even in regard to the greateft part of 
them. 

$ 8. The fecond opinion is, that there are no im- 
preffions ever made on the fenfes, without being 
communicated to the brain, and which confequently 
do not produce a perception in the mind. But they 
add that it is without confeioufnefs, or that the mind 
takes no notice of it. Here I declare myfelf for 
Locke ; for I have no notion of fuch a perception ; 
one might as well fay that I perceive without per- 
ceiving. 

§ 9. My opinion therefore is, that we are always 
confeious of the impreffions made on the foul * 
though fometimes in fo fuperficial a manner that a 
moment afterwards we remember nothing more of 
them. A few examples will fully illuftrate my no* 
tion on this fubjedt. 

I confefs there was a time when I believed that 
we had perceptions within us, of which we had no 
confeioufnefs. My opinion was founded on the fol- 
lowing experiment, which appears to be very plain 
and fimple, viz. that we fhut our eyes a thoufand 
times, without feeming to take notice that we are 
in the dark. But other experiments fufficicntly con- 
vinced 



32 Origin of Part I. 

vinced me of my error. Some perceptions which I 
had not forgot, and which necefiarily fuppofed that 
I had had others which I did not remember the mo- 
ment after their impreffion, induced me to alter my 
fentiment. Among feveral experiments, the follow- 
ing is one of the moft ftriking. 

If we refleft on ourfelves the moment after we 
have been reading, it will appear to us as if we had 
had no confcioufnefs but of the ideas which that 
reading has produced. We fhall no morjc imagine that 
we had a perception of every letter, than that we have 
a perception of darknefs fo often as we involuntarily 
clofe our eyelids. But this appearance cannot im- 
pofe upon us, when we come to refled that without 
a confcioufnefs of the perception of letters, we 
ftiould not have been confcious of the words, nor 
confequently of the ideas. 

§ io. This example leads us naturally to account 
for a thing which every man hath experienced * 
namely, the furprizing rapidity with which timefecms 
now and then to have elapfed. This appearance is 
owing to our having forgot the moft confiderable 
part of the perceptions that have fucceeded each 
other within our minds, Locke has fhewn that we 
form an idea of the fucceflion of time, merely by 
the fucceflion of our thoughts. Now all perceptions 
the moment they are forgotten, are juft as if they 
had never exifted. Their fucceflion muft therefore 
be (truck out of our meafure of duration. Confe- 
quently a very confiderable fucceflion of hours, for 
example, muft feem to us to have paflcd away like 
fo many moments, 

2 §. IX. 



&e£t.£. Human Knowledge. 33 

§ 11. This explication frees me from the trouble 
of producing new examples : for it will furnifh a 
fpffecient number to thofe who chufe to refledt upon 
it. Every man may obfcrve that among the percep- 
tions he has felt during a certain fpace of time which 
to him appears to have been very fhort, there are a 
great number which his conduct fufficiently proves 
him. to have been confeious of, though he has now 
intirely forgot them. Notwithftanding it is not every 
example of this fort which is equally proper to illu- 
ftrate this matter. The not refle&ing on that occa- 
fioned my miftake, when I fancied that I involun- 
tarily fliut my eyelids, without taking notice that 
I was in the dark. But there is nothing more rea- 
fonable than to explain one example by another. 
My miftake proceeded from this, that the perception 
of darknefs was fo quick and fudden, and the con- 
fcioufnefs of it fo weak, that it was quite cancelled 
out of my memory. But indeed if I give any at- 
tention to the movement of my eyes, this very per- 
ception becomes fo lively, that I no longer doubt of 
my having had it. 

§ 12. We not only forget in the ordinary courfe 
of things a part of our perceptions, but fometimes 
we forget them all. When we do not fix our at- 
tention, but receive the perceptions produced within 
. us, in fuch a manner as not to take more notice of 
one than of the other, the confeioufnefs of them is 
fo very flight, that upon quitting that ftate, we do 
not remember to have felt any impreflion at all. 
Suppofe an hiftoricaj picture is fet before me, the par- 
ticular parts of which do not ftrike me at firft fight 
one more than the other, and that it is taken away 

D . before 



34 Origin of Part I. 

before I have time to examine it minutely ; it is 
certain that there is not one of its vifible parts, but 
has produced fome perceptions in me, though the 
confeioufnefs of them has been fo very weak, that 
I retain no idea of them. This oblivion is not 
owing to the fhortnefs of their duration. For 
fuppofing even that I have had my eyes for a long 
time fixed on this pifturc, yet if I have not quick- 
ened the confeioufnefs of the perceptions of each 
part one after another, I fhall be no more capable of 
giving any account after a view of feveral hours, 
than the firft inftant. 

What has been here obferved in regard to the 
perceptions caufed by this pidture, muft for the fame 
reafon hold good in reference to thofe produced by 
the feveral objedts around me. If afting upon the 
fenfes with an almoft equal force, they produce per- 
ceptions in my mind, all of them very near in the 
fame degree of vivacity ; and if I yield to the im- 
preflion they make, without Arriving to have a 
greater confeioufnefs of one perception than another, 
I fhall retain no idea at all of what has paffed within 
me. It will appear to me as if my undcrftanding 
had been all this time in a kind of lethargy, without 
employing itfelf in any one thought. Whether this 
fituation continues many hours or only fome feconds, 
1 fhall not be able to point out the difference in the 
feries of thofe perceptions which I have felt, bc- 
caufe they are alike forgot in both cafes. Even if 
it was made to continue days, months or years, the 
coniequence would be, that as foon as I was awak- 
ed out of it by fome lively fenfation, I fhould re- 
collect a fucceflioft of years only as a fingle moment. 

§ *3- 



Sc&. 2. Human Knowledge. 35 

§ 13. Let us therefore conclude that We are inca- 
pable of giving any account of the greateft part of 
our perceptions, not becaufe we wfcre hot confeious 
of them, but that w£ forgot them the next mo- 
ment. There are therefore no perceptions in the 
ihind, of which it does not take notice. • Hence 
perception and confeioufnefs are only the fame ope- 
ration under different names. Confidered only as 
an impreflion on the mind, we may continue to give 
it the name of perception ; as it renders us fenflble 
of its prefence, we may call it confeioufnefs. And 
it is in this fenfe I (hall hereafter make ufe of thefe 
two words. 

$14. Our attention is drawn by external objefts, 
in proportion as they are more relative to our con- 
ititution, paflions, and ftate of life. It is thefe re- 
lations that are the caufe of their afting upon us 
with greater force, and that we have a livelier con- 
feioufnefs of them. To this it is owing, that when 
a change is made in us, we view the fame obje&s 
differently, and form quite contrary judgments' 
of them. Men are generally fo apt to be deceived • 
by this fort of judgments, that he who at one time 
fees and judges this way, and at another fees and 
judges differently, thinks neverthekfs that both now 
and then he fees and judges right. And this bias 
becomes fo natural to us, that being led thereby to 
confider the objedts only as they regard ourfelves, 
we never fail to cenfure the conduft of others, as 
much as we approve our own. Add to this, that 
felf-love eafily perfuades us that things are eftimable 
only in proportion to the favourable attention we 
have paid them •, and we fhall eafily understand, 

D 2 why 



36 Origin of Part I. 

why even thofc who have difcernment enough to fet 
a right value upon things, generally fpeaking, place 
their efteem fo ill, that fometiraes they unjuftly re- 
fufe it, and at other times they beftow it with wan- 
ton profufion. 

§ 15. When objefts attraft our attention, the 
perceptions they produce within us are conne&ed with 
the confideration of ourfelves, and of every thing re- 
lative to us. Hence it is that confeioufnefs not only 
gives us a knowledge of our perceptions •, but more- 
over, if thofe perceptions be repeated, it frequently 
informs us that we had them before, and reprefents 
them as belonging to us, and as affedting, notwith- 
ftanding their variety and fucceffion, a being that is 
always the famzfelf. Confeioufnefs, confidered in 
regard to thefe new effedts, is a new operation, which 
ferves us every inftant, and is the foundation of ex- 
perience. "Without it each moment of our life would 
feem the firft of our exiftence, and our knowledge 
would never extend beyond a firft perception. I fhall 
call it reminifcence. 

Evident it is that if the conne&ion fubfifting 
between the perceptions which I aftually feel, thofc 
which I felt yefterday, and the confeioufnefs of my 
being, were deftroyed, I fliould be incapable of know- 
ing that what happened to me yefterday happened 
to myfelf. If this connexion were interrupted every 
night, I fliould begin, as it were, a new life every 
day, and nobody could convince me that I am the 
fame individual perfon to-day as yefterday. Remi- 
nifcence is therefore produced by that link or chain 
which preferves the feries of our perceptions. In the 
following chapters the effe&s of this chain or con- 
nexion 



Se£t. 2. Human Knowledge. 37 

ncxion will be ftill more* clearly explained. But if 
any one fliould alk me how that chain itfelf can be 
formed by attention, I anfwer, that the reafon there- 
of is to be found only in the nature of the foul and 
body. Hence I confider this connexion as a firft and 
fundamental experience, which has a right to be con- 
fidered as fufficient to explain every other. 

In order to make a better analyfis of rcminilcence, 
we fhould, of right, give it two names ; one under 
the confideration of its reminding us of our being ; 
the other of its rendering us fenfible of the perceptions 
there repeated : for thefe are very diftindt ideas. But 
language does not furnifh me with a word that I can 
venture to make ufe of; and it is of very little fervice 
to my defign to invent one on purpofe. It will fuf- 
fice to have obferved of what fimple idea* the com- 
plex notion of this operation is compounded. 

§ 1 6. The progrefs of the operations, whole ana- 
lyfis and origin have been here explained, is ob- 
vious. At firft, there is only a fimple perception 
in the mind, which is no more than the impref- 
fion it receives from external objefts. Hence arife 
in their refpeftivc order the Other three operations. 
This impreflion, confidered as giving us notice 
of its prefence or exiftence, is what I call con- 
fcioufnefs. If the notice we take of it is fuch, that 
it feems to be the only perception of which we are 
confeious, it is properly atteotion. In fine, when 
it makes itfelf known as having afiefted the mind be- 
fore, it is reminifcence. Confcioufnefs fays, as it 
were to the foul, you have now a perception : at- 
tention fays, you have now only one fingle percepti- 

D 3 on: 



38 Origin or Parti. 

on : rcminifccncc fays, you have now a perception 
which you had before. 



CHAP. II. 

Of the imagination, contemplation, and memory ; 

§17. TTj^ Xperience fhcws that the firft effedt of at* 
X-i tention is to make thofe perceptions which 
are occafioned by their objects to continue ftill in th$ 
mind, when thofe objefts are removed. They are 
preferved, generally fpeaking, in the fame order in 
which the objefts prefentcd them f By this means a 
chain or connexion is formed amongft them, from 
whence feveral operations, as well as reminifcencCf 
derive their origin. The firft is imagination, which 
takes place when a perception, in virtue of the con- 
nexion which attention has eftablifhed between it and 
the objeft, is revived at the fight of this objedfc, 
Sometimes, for inftance, the bare mentioning th? 
name of a thing is fufficient to reprefent it to one's 
ielf, as if it were really prefent. 

§ 18. And yet it is not always in our power to 
revive the perceptions we have felt. On fome occap- 
fions the moft we can do is by recalling to mind their 
names, to recollect fome of the circumftances at- 
tending them, and an abftraft idea of perception 1 
an idea which we are capable of framing every mi- 
litant, becaufe we never think without being confei- 
ous of fome perception which it depends on ourfclvej 
to reader genera). Let us think, for example, on a 

flower 

1 . • t • 



Sc£t. 2. Human Knowledge. 39 

flower whofe fmell we are not accuftomed to, we 
flialJ recollect the name of it ; we fhall remember the 
circumftanccs of our having feen it ; we (hall reprefent 
to ourfelves the fragrancy of it, under the general idea 
of a perception that affedb the fmelling ; but we lhall 
not be able to revive the fpecific perception. Now 
the operation which produces this effeft I call me- 
mory. 

§ 19. There is (till another operation which arifes 
from the connexion eftablifhed by the attention be- 
twixt our ideas ; this is contemplation. It confifts in 
preferving, without any interruption, the perception, 
the name or the circumftances of an objeft which is 
vanifhed out of fight. By means of this operation we 
are capable of continuing to think of a thing, when 
it ceafes to be prefent. This operation we may re- 
duce, as we pleafe, either to the imagination or to 
the memory; to the former, if it preferves the per- 
ception itfelf ; to the latter, if it preferves only the 
name or circumftances of it. 

$ 20. It is of great importance carefully todiftin- 
guifh the point which feparates the imagination from 
the memory. Every man will be able to judge of 
this by himfelf, when he comes to fee what light 
this difference (wfrich perhaps may be thought too 
limple to appear eflential) will throw upon the whole 
matter of the generation of mental operations. What 
has been hitherto advanced by philofbphers on this 
occafion, is fo embarrafled and confufed, that we ■*** 
may oftentimes apply to the memory what they fay 
of the imagination •, and fo vice verfa. Locke him- 
felf makes the memory to confift in the power which 
die mind has, in many cafes, to revive perceptions 

P 4 it 



40 d it 1 g 1 fi o p part j f 

it has once had, with this additional perception an* 
nexed to them, that it has had them before. And 
yet this is not philofophicaHy exaft; for it is beyond 
all doubt, that we may have the memory of a per- 
ception, without having it in our power to «t 
vive it. 

The whole tribe of philofophers have fallen into 
the fame error with Locke. Some of them, whey 
pretend that every perception leaves an image in the 
mind, in the fame manner almoft as a feal leaves its 
impreflion behind it, are not to be excepted : for 
what is the image of a perception, which is not the 
perception itfelf ? The miftake is owing to this, that 
for want of having fufficiently confidered the matter, 
they have miftaken, for the very perception of the 
objeft, fome circumftances, or fome general idea, 
which revive themfelyes in its (lead. To avoid fuch 
miftakes, I (hall here diftinguifh the different per- 
ceptions we are capable of feeling, and examine 
them each in their proper order. 

§ 21: The jideas of extenfion are thofe which we 
revive the moft eafily ; becaufe the fenfations from 
which we derive them, are fuch as it is impoflible 
for us to be without, fo long as we are awake. The 
lafte and fmell may not be affe&ed ; we may be with-"* 
put hearing any found, or feeing any colour : but 
fleep alone can deprive us of the perceptions of touch. 
The body muft be fupported by fomething, and the 
feveral parts muft weigh one upon the other. Hence 
arifes a perception which reprefent$ them to us as 
diftant^and limited; and which confecjuently implies 
the idea of fome extenfion. 

Now this idea we may render general, by confider- 



Sett. 2. Human Knowledge, 41 

ing it in an indeterminate manner. We may after- 
wards modify it, and draw from it, for example, the 
idea of a ftrait or curve line. But we cannot exadtly 
revive the perception of the magnitude of a body, 
becaufe we have no abfolute idea upon this head, 
which may ferve a9 a fixed meafure. On this occafi- 
bn the mind recollefts only the names of foot, fa- 
thom, 13 c. with an idea of magnitude fo much the 
more indeterminate, as the idea it wants to reprefenc 
to itfelf is more confiderable. 

With the afliftance of thefe firft ideas, we may, 
in the abfencc of objefts, exaftly reprefent to our- 
felves the mod fimple figures ; fuch as triangles and 
fquares. But if the number of the fides confiderably 
increafes, our efforts then will prbve fruitlefs. If I 
think on a figure of a thoufand fides, and on another 
.of nine hundred and ninety nine, I do not diftin- 
guilh them by perceptions, but by the names which 
I have given them. It is the fame in regard to all 
other complex ideas. Every man may obferve, 
that when he wants to make ufe of them, he recol- 
lefts only their names. As to the fimple ideas which 
they include, he cannot revive them but one after the 
other, and this we muft attribute to an operation 
different from the memory. 

§ 22. The imagination naturally avails itfelf of 
whatever is capable of affording it any afliftance. 
It is by a comparifon with our own fhape and figure 
that we reprefent to ourfelves the fhape and figure of 
an abfent friend, and we imagine him tall or low,be- 
caufe we meafure, as it were, his fize with our own. 
But the imagination is chiefly aflifted by order and 
proportion -, becaufe there it finds different points on 

which 



42 Origin of Parti. 

which it fixes, and to which it refers the whole. 
If 1 think on a fine countenance ; the eye, or fome 
other feature which has (truck me moft, will recur 
to me the firft : and relatively to thefe firft features 
the reft will be arranged in my imagination. We 
therefore imagine a figure or fhape with more eafe, 
in proportion as it is more regular. We might even 
fay that it is more eafy to fee ; becauie the very firft 
glance is fufficient to form an idea of it. On the 
contrary, if it be very irregular, we lhall not be able 
to reprefent it to our view, till after having for a 
long while confidered its different parts. 

§23. When the obje&s which occafion thefenfa- 
tions of tafte, of found, of fmell, of colour, and 
light, are abfent •, we have no perception left which 
we can modify, to form fomething like the colour, 
the tafte, and the fmell, for inftance, of an orange. 
Neither is there any order or proportion to aflift the 
imagination. Thefe ideas cannot therefore be re- 
vived, without having been rendered familiar to us. 
For this reafon the ide^s of light and colour muft be 
the moft eafily revived, and afterwards thofe of 
founds. With regard to fmells and taftes, we revive 
only thofe for which we have had a particular liking. 
Confequently many perceptions remain, which we 
may recall to mind, and yet we recolleft only their 
names. How often does this happen even in regard 
to fuch perceptions as are moft familiar to us, cfpe- 
cially in converfation, when we are frequently fatiC- 
fied with mentioning things without representing 
them to our imagination ? 

§ 24. We may obferve different degrees of force 
in the imagination. 

% if 



Se£t. 2. Human Knowledge. 43 

If we want to revive a perception which is not fa- 
miliar to us, fuch as the tafte of a fruit of which we 
have eaten but once, our endeavours will terminate, 
generally fpeaking, in caufing a kind of concuffion 
in the fibres of the brain and of the mouth •, and the 
perception (hall bear no refcmblance to the tafte of 
that fruit. It would be the fame in regard to a me- 
lon, to a peach, or even to a fruit of which we had 
never tailed. The like remark may be made in re- 
/pe6l to the other fenfes. 

Whei> a perception is familiar to us, the fibres of 
the brain accuftomed to yield to the follicitati- 
on of the obje&s, are more ready to comply with 
our defires. Sometimes our ideas are revived with- 
out any concurrence on our part, and prefent them- 
felves with fuch vivacity, that we are milled by them, 
imagining we have the objefts before our eyes. This 
is the cafe in regard to madmen, and to thofe who 
are in a dream. Thefe irregularities probably are 
owing to the near relation there is between thofe 
movements which are the phyfical caufe of the ima- 
gination, and thofe which caufe the perception of the 
objeft when prefent *. 

* I fuppofe here, and in other places, that the phyfical 
caufe of the perceptions of the mind is the concuffion of the 
fibres of the brain : not that I look upon this hypothecs as 
demonftrated, but that it feems the beft adapted for explain- 
ing my thought. If this is not the way they are produced, it 
muft be in fome other, not very different manner. For the 
brain can be a&ed upon only by motion. Therefore, whether 
we fuppofe the perceptions are occasioned by the concuffion of 
&e fibres, or by the circulation of the animal fpirits, or by 
fome other caufe j it is alj. the fame to the purpofe of this dif- 

I 25. Be? 



44 Oricin of Part I. 

$ ir r Between the imagination, the memory, and 
rr minilcencc, there is a certain progrefs, by which 
atone they are diftinguifhed. The firft renews the 
perceptions themfclves; the fecond brings to our 
mind* only their figns or circumftartces ; the 
third make % us difcern them as perceptions which 
we have had before. And here it may be proper to 
obfervr, that the fame operation which I call me* 
mory, in regard to thofe perceptions of which it re- 
vives only thr fi»\ns or circumftances, is imaginati- 
on in relprft to the figns or circumftances revived ; 
Itiue their figns and circumftances are perceptions. 
Ak to contemplation, it participates of the nature of 
iiwitfi nation or memory, according as it preferves 
the very perce prions of an abfent objeft on which we 
continue to think, or as it retains only its name, and 
the * iivumllances in which we have feen it. From 
both it dittem, only in as much as it fuppofes no in- 
terval between the prefrncc of an objett, and the at- 
tention with which we CI ill view it when abfent. 
Thrle dilVi-i ences will perhaps appear very fmall, yet 
ihev avc rtbioluit.lv ncccflarv. It is in this cafe as in 
MtmlvtN. where i!tc neglecting of a fraction, as a thing 
fermiuoly of no eonfequence* infallibly draws us in- 
to fjtlle calculation?. And there is reafon to fear 
that ihole who tre,it this cxaAncfs as a metaphvfical 
ii.biiliY* n\»H nevrr be Able to attain tha: juft method 
%\\ tra(onm£ to :».eoc4lAry in the (ciences. 

* *i\ By obfervmg* as I have done, the difference 
lvi*vcn iheie perceptions whxh never leave us but 
*hr« w *?? «Aecp, and thoie which, even when 
awa!^ w? exycricFtf only by intervals, we may 
^.v.vtfdttsdy frr how far our power of reviving them 



Scft. 2. Human Knowledge. 45 

extends : we may fee why the imagination at plea- 
furc revives the fimpler figures, while we are inca- 
pable of diftinguiftpng others moje compounded, 
but by the names recolledted by our memory : we 
may fee why the perceptions of colour, of tafte, (£c. 
are opt fuhor&nafe to our command, unlefs they 
arc familiar to us; and in what manner the vivacity 
with whicl} the ideas are renewed* £s the caufe of 
dreams, and of madnefr: in fi^e we fenfibly per- 
ceive the difference which ought to be made between 
the imagination and the memory* 



chap. in. 

In what manner the comuxitm of ideas, formed by the 
attention, produces the imuginatin, contemplation* 
; and memory. 

% 27. T N relation to what fo$ t>edn laid in the pre- 
X ceding chapter, two queftions might be 
propofed : the firft, how comtwe to .have the power 
of reviving fo?nc»of our perceptions? thefecond, 
how comes it (htf when this power is wanting, we 
are frequently capable of rccolkdting at lcaft their 
xuugpes or cipcunaftances ? 

To begin with anfwering the fecond queftion, I 
fey that we cannot recal their names or circumftan- 
ccs ? but when they are fanliliar to us. Then they 
come withiji the. t\&{% of perceptions fubjeft to our 
command, whereof we arc going to fpeak by an- 
fwering the ftsfrqutcftion, which requires a more par- 
ticular CQEofideratioa. : . . ^ . 

X §28. The 



46 Origin or Part I. 

$28. The connexion of ideas can arife from no 
other caufe, than from the attention given to them, 
when they prefcnted themfelves conjun&ly to our 
minds. Hence as things attract our attention only 
by the relation they bear to our conftitution,- to our 
paflions, to our ftate, or, to fum up all in one word, 
to our wants •, it follows that the fame attention em- 
braces at once the ideas of wants, and of fuch things 
as are relative to thefe wants, and connects them to- 
gether. 

§ 29. Our wants are all dependent upon one an- 
other, and the perceptions of them might be confix 
dcred as a feries of fundamental ideas, to which w& 
might reduce all thofe which make a part of our 
knowledge. Over each of thefe feries, other feries 
of ideas might be raifed, which (hould form a kind 
of chains, whofe ftrength would intirely confift in the 
analogy of the figns, in the order of perceptions, and 
in the connection that fhould be formed by the cir- 
cumftances which fometimes reunite the moft difli- 
milar ideas. Want is connected with the idea of the 
thing proper for relieving it ; this is conne&ed with 
the idea of the place where it is to be had ; this, with 
the idea of the perfons we have feen there ; this ip 
fine, with the ideas of fuch pleafures or pains a* 
we have felt there, and with many others. We 
may even obferve, that in proportion as the chain 
extends, it is fubdivided into different and fmaller 
chains ; fo that the farther we remove from the firft 
ring, the more we increafe the number of thefe fmall- 
er chains. A firft fundamental idea is connected 
with two or three others ; each of thefe with an 
equal, or even with a greater number, andfoon. 

.$30. The 



Se&. 2. Human Knowledge. 47 

§ 30. The different larger or fmaller chains which 
I fuppofe to be over each fundamental idea, might 
be connected by a feries of fundamental ideas, and 
by fome rings which probably would be common 
to many ; for the very fame objeAs, and of courfe 
the fame ideas are oftentimes relative to different 
wants. Thus all our knowledge would form only 
one and the fame chain, whofe fmaller chains fhould 
reunite at particular rings, to feparate at others. 

§31. Thefe fuppofitions admitted ; in order to 
recoiled the familiar ideas, it would be fufficient to 
be capable of giving attention to fome of our fun- 
damental ideas, with which they are connected. 
Now this is always feafible > becaufe, fo long as we 
are awake, there is not an inftarit in which our con- 
stitution, our pafiions, and our fituation, do not 
occafion fome of thole perceptions which I call fun- 
damental. We fhould therefore fucceed therein with 
more or lefs eafe, in proportion as the ideas we would 
willingly revive, depended on a greater number of 
wants, and by a more immediate connexion. 

§ 32. The fuppofitions here made are not ground- 
lefs. I appeal to experience, and am convinced that 
every man muft acknowledge, upon obfervation, 
that he endeavours to recolledt a thing *, only by 
the relation it bears to the circumftances he is under, 
and that he fucceeds in proportion to the greater 
number of thofe circumftances, or to its more im- 
mediate connexion with them. The attention given 

* I take the word recoiled in the fignification commonly 
nfed ; that is for the power of reviving the ideas of abfent ob- 
jects, or of recalling their figns. Hence it is equally appli- 
cable to the imagination and to the memory, 

to 



zzzi. 



• r i /■ 



■ a* .- W | 



• 

I 



• ». « i •- j 



>•**«•• « 



.'•■.\\ ...'iVrrMiTPS. inZZ Z1Z*Zj 



t * •» / >• 



' • • •!..,'< 



, ■ . ; -iccsiilvelv. 

•"• "O nJLTC not L 

•••'* » «•• .%.»«i^Oix t.,CY 2i 

• •••< ' ..:;"* . ..ty . . . '.varaiv rccu 

■ ■ • • • 

.!...»»• .;■.; ;i w.d-T. . .lev roniciaiix 
■■■'■•• * • i ^..Si-.in- . ...--■ . : -..-.'./.t: r;-.emieives with a 
' " ■*• .•■.*:..;•/•% -••-u:-.;. ;:r.cv :~.rmeriv ea- 

■*: v*/ »;» . .,:-.;: ...::., y ^then. . :liaii how- 

. i/»t 1 1/» i i /.hi ii i|r , 

i 

. *•• .... ...i.|,f.ir iiui ;• ..j-rlon iT^rjoies a ciiScuky 

i f . ...*• ...,,## i ...:u; .\r4 v";y" -v/nrk. :o vnich I am 

' ••' 'J- 1 " i..m«"i!i i.# ly mi :-jvf n fati&tactory anfwer; 

,. i .. .it, ijnr it iiip \\\\\\t\k\\y |-; nor. Weil ^round- 

•'• •• I'Mill jr'.mi 4 »nr ;u» uilwr.r itteif. I therefore 

i.i .if.ii'it ii. . .• miiiw I.* tLffriiu^i.ly^ ,*nd I find parts 

• •* •• ■■'••'«., ii'.m i« -lnir « -nnnrflrd with fome of the 
»'' ••• •'••• 'i.m|ifii'* 'iii' i'llution I am lcx>king fbr, 

• ■— ■ • i-.i i.. i. V i.m Hem. Tiifir, by dieir clofc 

»i ■■ili tin* nilirp:. rc< till dirm liicrcflively to 

••■. -• -t.l ,,, | ,. !, nifjli I Ire the wholr an Twer. 

i i. .1 . - !,,, \\s\\\ |.i.»-i|r to oW'tyc wl.:it every day 
I* 'j-; \ |-mI.|i. »ii"i>>l »ii- •;, will n w# t with a mul— 

• »in * ■«< •■!*•. -i .-vint'lr*. 1 tt the fill *|f^"l" of COn— 

» . i«ii.«M !« • « ii -ii«p -i 1 r\ c\ \r lMpiilly. (\ rri'lon in full 
im '".■ .-< nnnJ, nm! i\ho is a liulc aanuimcd 

widi 



Se&. i'. Human Knowledge^ 49 

with the charadter of the company, fees by what 
connexion of ideas they pafs from one fubjedt to an- 
other. I therefore believe I have a right to con- 
elude that the power of reviving our perceptions, 
their names, or their circumftances, proceeds intire- 
ly from the connexion which the attention has efta- 
blifhed between thefe things, and the wants to 
which they arc related. Take away this connexion, 
and you deftroy the imagination and memory. 

§ 33. All men cannot conneft their ideas with 
equal force, nor in equal number : and this is the 
reafon why all are not equally happy in their imagi- 
nation and memory. This incapacity proceeds from 
the different conformation of the organs, or perhaps 
from the very nature of the foul •, therefore the rea- 
fons which might be given for it are all drawn from 
natural philofophy, and foreign to this work. I 
fhall only obferve that the organs are fometimes not 
fo well fitted for the connexion of ideas, merely be- 
caufe of their not having been fufficiently exer- 
cifcd. 

§ 34. The power of connecting our ideas has its 
inconveniences, as well as advantages. In order to 
render this more obvious, I will fuppofe two men, 
one who never could conneft his ideas ; the other 
who connefts them with fuch eafe and force, that he 
is no longer able to feparate them. The firft would 
have neither imagination nor memory, nor confe- 
quently any of the operations which thefe produce : 
he would be abfolutely incapable of reflexion ; nay he 
would be quite an idiot. The fecond would have 
too great a memory, and too lively an imagination ; 
an excefs which would be produdtive of almoft the 

E fame 



.*. 



jo Or i g i n of Part I. 

fame, eflfoft, ai an intire privation of both. He 
would hardly have the ufe of reflexion, he would be 
a madman. The mod heterogeneous ideas being 
flrongly connc£ted in his mind, for no other reafoa 
but bctaufe th*y prefented themfelves together ; he 
would judge them to be naturally conne&ed , and 
would rar^c them after one another, as juft con- 
feqiienrcs. 

IJetwixt thofe two extremes we might fuppofe a 
medium, in which neither too great a fhare of imagi- 
nation t and memory, Ihould prejudice the folidity of 
the underllanding, nor too fmall aportion deprive it of 
its amufements. Perhaps this medium is fo very dif- 
ficult to find, that men of the greateft genius have 
only come near it. According as different minds 
deviate from it, and tend towards the oppofite ex- 
tremes, they have qualities more or lefs incompa- 
tible, becauie they muft participate more or lefs of 
the extremes which ablblutely exclude each other. 
Thus it is that fuch as border on the extreme in 
which the imagination and memory predominate, in 
proportion lofc thole qualities by which die under- 
ftanding is enabled to reafon juftly, confequentially, 
and methodically j and thofe who approach the other 
extreme, are in the fame proportion deprived of 
thofe qualities which contribute to pleafure and 
amutcment. The former write with more eafe, the 
others with more connexion and ftrength. 

And here we lee not onlv how the fariKtv of con- 
ncfiing our ideas produces the imagination, contem- 
plation, And memory \ but likewife how it is the 
real principle of the pertc&ian or defeft of thefe 
operations. 

CHAP. 



§e&. 2. Human Knowledge; 51 

CHAP. IV. 

fbat the ufe of figns is the real caufe of the progrefs 
of the imagination, contemplation and memory. 

IN order to develop the real caufe of the pro- 
" grefs of the imagination, contemplation and 
.memory, we muft inquire what afliftance thefe ope- 
rations derive from the ufe of figns. 

§ 35. I diftinguifh three forts of figns : i°. Acci- 
dental figns, or the objedts which particular circum • 
itances have connected with fome of our ideas, fo as 
to render the one proper to revive the other. 2 . Na- 
tural figns, or the cries which nature has eftablifhed to 
exprefs the paflions of joy, of fear, or of grief, &c. 
3 . Inftituted figns, or thofe which we have chofen 
ourfclvcs, and bear only an arbitrary relation to our 
ideas. 

§ 36. Thefe figns are not necefiary for the habit 
of the operations which precede reminifcence : for 
perception and confeioufnefs cannot but take place 
ib long as we are awake ; and attention being no 
more than the confeioufnefs which informs us more 
particularly of the prefent perception 5 to occafion it 
no more is wanting, than that one objed aft upon 
the fenfes with greater force than another. So far 
the figns would be proper only for furnifhing a 
more frequent opportunity of employing the atten- 
tion. 

§37, But fuppofe a man who has no ufe of any arbi- 
trary fign : with the fole aid of accidental figns,his ima- 
gination and reminifcence may already have acquired 

E 2 fomc 



$2 Originop Part fc 

fomc kind of habit; that is, at the fight of an objedt 
the perception, with which that objedt is connected, 
may be revived, and he may know it to be that 
which he had before. Yet we mud obferve that this 
will not happen, except fome extrinfic caufe fets this 
objed: before his eyes. When it is abfent, he has 
no poflible means of reviving it of himfelf, fince he 
has no command over thofe things with which the 
objedt is connedled •, therefore it does not depend up- 
on him to retrieve the idea to which it is united. 
Hence his imagination is not as yet in his power. 

§ 38. With regard to natural cries, this man fhall 
form them, as foon as he feels the paflions to which 
they belong. However they will not be figns in re- 
fpe£t to him the firft time ; becaufc inftead of reviving 
■his perceptions, they will as yet be no more than 
confequenccs of thofe perceptions. 

But when he has often felt the fame paflion, and 
as often broke out into that cry which accompanies 
it, both will be fo ftrongly connected in his imagi- 
nation, that he cannot hear the one without experi- 
encing in fome meafure the other. Then it is that 
this cry becomes a fign : but his imagination will not 
acquire any habit, till he has heard it by chance ; 
confequently this habit will be no more in his power 
than in the preceding cafe. 

Nor will it fignify to objedt that in procefs of time 
he might ufc this fort of cries, to revive at pleafure 
the paflions they exprefs. I anfwer, that then they 
would ceafe to be natural figns, whofe character is 
* to exprefs of themfelves, and independently of the 
choice made of them, the impreflion we feel, by 
producing fomething of the like nature in others. 

They 



Sc£l. 2. Human Knowledge, $$ 

They would be founds of his own making, juft as 
we make thofe of fear, joy, &c. confeqdently he 
would have employed fome inftituted figns, which 
is contrary to the fuppofition upon which I am now 
arguing. 

§ 39. Memory, as we have feen, confifts only in 
the power of reviving the figns of our ideas, cr the 
circumftances thatattended them ; a power which never 
takes place, except when by the analogy of the figns 
we have chofen, and by the order we have fettled 
between our ideas, the objedls which we want to re- 
vive are conne&ed with fome of our prefent wants. 
In ihort we cannot recall a thing to mind, unlefe it 
be in fome manner connected with fomcthing elfe 
which is in our power. Now a man who has only 
accidental and natural figns, has none at all at 
his command. His wants can therefore occafion 
nothing more than the repeated aft of his' imagina- 
tion : confequently he rauft have no memory. 

§ 40. Hence we may conclude that brutes have 
no memory; and that they have only an imagination 
which they cannot command as they pleafe. They 
reprefent to themfelves an abfent object, only becaufe 
the image of it in their brain is clofely connected 
with the objeft prefent. It is not their memory that 
direfts them to a place, where the day before they 
met with nourifhment : but it is becaufe the fenfa- 
tion of hunger is fo ftrongly connected with the 
ideas of that place and of the road leading to it, that 
thefe ideas are revived, as foon as they feel the fen- 
fation. It is not their memory that makes them fty 
from other animals that devour them. But it is 
becaufc fome of their fpecies having been deftroyed 

E ^ before 



54 Origin of Parti. 

before their eyes, the cries which at that -time 
reached their ears, revived in their minds the 
perceptions of pain, of which they are the na- 
tural figns ; and in confequence thereof they fled. 
When thefe animals appear again, they revive in 
them the fame perceptions ; becaufe as thefe were 
produced the firft time on that occafion, the con- 
nexion is eftablifhed. Therefore they betake them- 
felves again to flight. 

With refpeft to thofe that have never feeh arty 
other animals perilh in this manner ; we may with 
juft reafon fuppofe that their dam, or fomc other 
fellow brute, did induce them at firft to flee with 
them, having communicated by cries the terror 
which pofTeffes them, and which is conftantly revived 
at the fight of their enemy. If all thefe fuppofi- 
tions fliould be rejected, I own I do not fee what 
can make them run away. 

Perhaps I (hall be afked, who it is that taught 
them to diftinguifh thofe cries which are the natural 
figns of pain ; I anfwer, experience. There is none 
of them but has had an early experience of pain, and 
of courfe has had occafion to join the cry of it 
to the fenfation. We muft not imagine that they 
arc unable to run away, unlefs they have an exaft 
idea of the danger that threatens them : it is fuffi- 
cient that the cries which creatures of their own 
fpecics fend forth, do but revive in them the per- 
ception of fome fort of pain. 

§ 41. Hence it appears, that though brutes, for 
want of memory, have not the fame power as we, of 
reviving at pleafure the perceptions conne&ed in their 
brain, yet this defeft is fufficiently fupplied by the 
imagination. For by renewing the very percep- 
tions 



Se&. 2. Human Knowledge. 55 

tions of abfent objefts, it enables them to conduft 
themfelves as if thofe objefts were prefent, and 
thereby to provide more readily and furely for their * 
prefervation, than even the human fpecies are capable 
of doing onfome occafions with the alfiftance of reafon. 
We may often obferve within ourfelves fomething of 
the like nature, when reflexion would come too late to 
refcue us from danger. For example, at the fight 
of a great weight ready to fall upon us and crufh 
us to pieces, the imagination brings to our minds 
the idea of death, or of fomething like it, and this 
idea prompts us to avoid the danger. Certain death 
would attend us, if in thofe moments we had only 
the afliftance of memory and reflexion. 

§ 42. It frequently happens that the imagination 
produces even fuch effefts within us, as might feem 
to proceed from prefent reflexion. Though we 
may be greatly taken up with a particular idea, yet 
the objefts which furround us, continue to follicit 
our fcnfes ; the perceptions they occafion, revive 
others with which they are connected ; and thefe de- 
termine certain movements in our bodies. When 
all thefe things do not affeft us fo ftrongly as the 
idea with which we are principally occupied, they are 
unable to divert us from it •, and thence it happens 
that without refle&ing on what we are doing, we aft 
in the fame manner as if our conduct was directed by 
reafon. There is no body but muft have experienced 
what I have been faying. A man walks through the 
ftreets, and avoids every hinderance or crowd with 
the fame precaution, as if he thought of no- 
thing elfe. And yet it is certain that his thoughts 
were quite otherways employed. Farther •, it fre- 

E 4 quently 



j6 Origin of Part I. 

q.iently happens that though the mind is not intent 
upon the thing we are aflced, yet we anfwer perti- 
nently. This is becaufe the words which exprefs 
the qucftion, arc connected with thofe which frame 
the anfwer, and the htter determine the movements 
proper for their articulation. The connexion of 
ideas is the principle of all thefe appearances. 

\Vc therefore know by experience that the imagina- 
tion, even when we have it not in our power to regu- 
late the aft and habit of it, is fufficient to explain 
Jrvcral aftions which appear to be direfted by reafbn, 
but arc really not fo. Hence we have foundation to 
be iieve that there is no other operation in brutes. 
Fur let the facts related of them be what they will, 
we (hall find others as extraordinary in men, which 
may be explained by the principle of the connexion 
of ideas. 

§ 43. By following the explications here given, 
we may frame a clear idea of what is commonly 
called injlintt. It is the imagination, which at the 
pre fence of the objeft, revives the perceptions im- 
mediately connected with it, and thereby dire<5ti 
every fpecics of animals without the afliftance of 
reflexion. 

For want of knowing the analyfis above given, 
and efpecially what has been faid concerning the 
connexion of ideas, philofophers have been greatly 
pr.77.lcd to explain the inftinft of brutes. The fame 
has happened to them, as muft happen to every one 
that attempts to reafon without tracing matters to their 
fource : that is, being unable to hit upon a proper 
medium, they have loft themfelves in two extremes. 
Some have placed inltinft upon a level with, or even 

above 



Se&. 2. Human Knowledge. 57 

above reafon ; others have reje&ed all inftinft, and 
confidered brutes as mere automata or machines. 
Thefe two opinions are equally ridiculous, to fay 
nothing worfe. The refemblance between brutes 
and* us, proves they have a foul; and the diffe- 
rence between us, evinces that it is inferior to 
ours. The analyfis I have been making, conveys a 
fenfible proof of the thing, becaufe the operations of 
the foul of brutes are limited to perception, confei- 
oufnefs, attention, reminifcence, and to an imagina- 
tion not fubjeft to their command ; whereas ours 
has other operations whofe origin I am going to ex- 
plain. 

§ 44. What we have been faying in regard to 
imagination and memory, muft be applied to con- 
templation, according as it is referred to either. If 
it be made to confift in retaining the perceptions ; 
before the ufe of inftituted figns it has only & 
habit which does not depend on us : but it has 
none at all, if it be made to confift in preferving the 
figns themfelves. 

§ 45. So long as we have acquired no habit of the 
imagination, contemplation, and memory ; or the ha- 
bit of the two firft, is not fubordinate to our comn)an<j - 
we cannot difpofe of our attention as we pleafe. 
For how indeed ihould we difpofe of it, when the 
foul as yet has no operation in her power ? fhe pafles 
therefore from one objedfc to another, only as fhe is 
dragged by the impreffion of the different objefts. 

§ 46. But as foon as a man comes to conneft 
ideas with figns of his own chufing, wc find his 
memory is formed. When this is done, he begins 
of himfelf to difpofe of his imagination, and to 

give 



5? Ckjgik of Parti. 

g ; vc i: 2 new habit. For by means of the figu 
which he is able to recall at plcafure, he revives, or 
iviift is often capable of reviving the ideas which 



are connected \sith them. Afterwards he obtains a 
greater command over his imagination, in propor- 
tion air he invents more figns, becaulc he thereby pro- 
cures more means of employing it. 

And here it is we begin to perceive the fhperi- 
oritv of the human foul over that of brutes. Far 
on the one ha::d it is certain that it does not de- 
pend on them, to affix their ideis to arbitrary figns j 
and on the other it feems indubitable that this inca- 
pacity does not proceed inure' y from the organiza- 
tion. Is not their body as proper for the language 
of action as ours ? have not many of them every 
thi:;g ncctiTary for the articulation of founds ? why 
there-fere, if they are capable cf the fame operations 
as we, do not they give fome proofs of it ? 

Thcfe particulars fhew in what manner the ufc 
of different figns contributes to the progrefs of the 
imagination, contemplation, and memory. But all 
this (hall be ftill further explained in the following 
chapter. 



CHAP. V. 

Of RejUffion. 

§ 47. A S foon as the memory is formed, and the 

IV habit of the imagination is in our 

power, the figns recolle&cd by the former, and the 

ideas revived by the latter, begin to free the foul 

from 



ScQ:. 2. Human Knowledge. 59 

from her dependence in regard to the obje&s by 
which flie was furrounded. As fhe has it now in 
her power to recall the things which fhe has feen, 
fhe may direft all her attention towards them, and 
transfer it from the prefent objeft. At the fight of 
a pl&ure, for inftance, we recoiled the knowledge 
we have of nature, and of the rules by which we 
learn to imitate •, then we transfer our attention fuc- 
ceflively from this pidlure to that knowledge, and 
from that knowledge to this pidlure, or fucceflively 
to its different parts. But beyond all doubt our dif- 
pofing thus of our attention, is intirely owing to 
the affiftance afforded us by the vivacity of the ima- 
gination, which is the effedt of great memory. 
Otherwife we fhould not regulate it ourfelves, but 
it would be intirely fubjedt to the adtion of the 
objedts. 

§ 48. This manner of fucceflively applying our 
attention of ourfelves to different objedts, or tQ the 
different parts of one objedt only, is what we call 
to reflefl. Thus we fenfibly perceive in what man- 
ner reflexion arifes from imagination and memory. 
But the degrees by which this is effedted, ought not 
to efcape our obfervation, 

§ 49. The very dawn of memory is fufficient to 
make us matters of the habit of our imagination. 
A fingle arbitrary fign is enough to enable a perfon 
to revive an idea by himfelf •, this is ^certainly the 
firft and fmalleft degree of memory, and of the com- 
mand which we may acquire over the imagination. 
The power it gives us of difpoling of our attention, 
is t the weakeft that can be. But fuch as it is, it 
begins to render us fenfible of the advantage of 

figns; 



62 Ok i gin or Parti, 

it will feem to be annihilated, whiift another {hall 
emerge from nothing. To fpeak lefs figuratively, 
my confeioufnefs of the former will become fo faint, 
and that of the latter fo ftrong, that it (hall appear 
to me as if I had felt them in fucceffion only. 
This experiment may be made by confidering a 
very compound fubjefh There is no doubt but we 
have at the fame time a confeioufnefs of all d* 
perceptions, which the different parts of that fuhjed, 
difpofed to follicit our fenfes, produce within us. And 
yet one would imagine that our reflexion fufpends at 
pleafure the impreflions made on the mind, in order 
to preferve only one of them. 

§ 52. Geometry informs us that the fureft method 
of facilitating our reflection, is to fet before the 
fenfes the very obje&s of the ideas about which «g 
intend to employ ourfelves, becaufe our confcioufads 
of them is then more lively. But we cannot haze 
recourfe to this artifice in all fciences. One way 
,that may be generally .ufed with fuccefs, is to take 
care that our meditations be clear, precifc, and me- 
thodical. Clear, becaufe the clearer the figns axe, 
the more we are confeious of the ideas which . they 
fjgnify, and confequently, the better we prefcrye 
them : precife, to the end that our attention . being 
lefs divided, may fix itfelf with lefs difficulty : me- 
thodical, that a fundamental idea, being better known 
and more familiar to us, may prepare our attention 
for that which is to follow. 

$ 53. It never happens that the fame man is capabje 
of acquiring an equal habit of memory, imagination, 
and reflection on all forts of fubjefts. This is be- 
caufe thefc operations depend on attention as on 
2 th'eir 



Sc&.2. Human Knowledge.' , 63 

their caufe •, and this cannot employ itfelf about an 
objedt but in proportion to the relation it bears to 
our conftitution and to whatever concerns us. From 
hence we learn why thofe who attempt to become 
tinivcrfal in point of literature, run the rifle of mifcar- 
rying in many branches. There are but two forts 
of talents : one-acquired merely -by the violence ufed 
to the organs ; the other the confequence of a hap- 
py difpofition, and great flexibility in the organs* 
As the latter more prQperly belongs to nature, it is 
more lively, more a&ive, and produces far fuperior 
effe&s. The former on the contrary is the efFed of 
labour and ftruggle, and never rifes above thedc- 
.gree of mediocrity. 

.§.54. I have inveftigated the caufes of imagina- 
tion, memory, and reflc&ion in the operations which 
.precede them, becaufe my defign in this fedtion is 
to explain in what manner the operations rife one 
from the other. It would be the province of na- 
tural philofophy to remount to other caufes, were 
there any poffibility of knowing them *. 

* This whole work is built on the five chapters which the 
reader has new gone through ; he muft therefore underfland them 
thoroughly before be froceedt any farther. 



CHAP. 



64 Origin of Part I, 



CHAP. VI. 

Of the ' operations which conjift in diftinguifhing y ab- 
ftra fling, comparing* compounding* and decompounding 
our ideas. 

WE have at length developed whatever was 
moft abftrufe and difficult to perceive in 
the progrefs of the operations of the mind. Thofe 
of which we have ftill to fpeak, are fuch fenfible 
. effc&s of reflection, that their origin in fome mea- 
fure explains itfelf. 

§ 55. From refle&ion or from the power of dif 
pofing of our attention ourfelves, arifes the poweir 
of confidcring our ideas feparately. So that the 
fame confcioufnefs which informs us more particu- 
larly of the prefence of certain ideas (which is the 
charadteriftic of attention) informs us at the fame 
time that they are diftindt. Hence it is that while 
the foul was not miftrefs of her attention, (he was 
incapable of diftinguifhing by herfelf the different 
impreffions which fhe received from objedts. We 
experience this fo often as we want to apply ourfelves 
to fubjedts for which we are not qualified. For 
then we confound the feveral objedts to fuch a de- 
gree, that fometimes we find it difficult to diftin- 
guifli even thofe which differ the moft. This is bc- 
caufe for want of refledting, or giving our attention 
. to all the different perceptions which they occafion ; 
thofe that diftinguifh them efcape our notice. Here- 
by we may judge that if we were intirely deftitute 
of the ufe of reilcdtion, we fhould not diftinguifh 

different 



Se£t» 2. Human Knowledge. 6j 

different obje&s, but fo far as each would make a 
very ftrong impreflion on us. All thofe which 
would a£t but weakly, we fhould reckon as nothing. 

§ $6. It is eafy to diftinguilh two ideas abfolutely 
fimple j but in proportion as they become more 
complex, the difficulties increale. Then as our 
notions refemble each other in more refpe&s, there 
is realbn to fear left we take many of them for one 
only, or at leaft that we do not diftinguilh them as 
much as we might. This frequently happens in 
metaphyfics and morals. The fubjeft which we 
have a&ually in hand, is a very fenfible proof or 
the difficulties that are to be furmounted. On thefe 
occafions we cannot be too cautious in pointing out 
even the minuteft differences. This is what confti- 
tutes a clear found judgment •, and contributes moil 
to give to our ideas that order and precifion fo ne- 
ceflary to arrive at any real knowledge. But indeed 
this truth is fo little known, that we run the rifk of 
rendering ourfelves ridiculous, when we engage in 
any thing of a fubde analyfis. 

§ 57. By * dift inguifhing our ideas, we fometimes 
confider thofe qualities which are moll effential to 
the -fubjedt, as intirely feparate from it. This is 
what we call more particularly to abftratt. The 
ideas from thence refulting, are denominated general* 
by reafon they reprefent fuch qualities as agree with 
feveral different things. For inftance, if without 
attending to what diftinguilhes men from brutes, I 
refle& only on what is common to both, I make an 
abftra&ion which gives me the general idea of 
animal. 

F This 



66 Origin -of Part £ 

This operation is abfolutely neceffary to limited 
underftandings, which are incapable of confidering 
more than a few ideas at once, and for this reafon 
are obliged to reduce feveral to the fame clafs. But 
we mull take care not to confider things which are 
diftinguifhed only by our manner of conception, not 
to confider them, I fay, as fo many diftinct beings. 
This is an error into which a great many philofophers 
have fallen. I propofe fpeaking more particularly 
of it in the fifth feftion of this firft part. 

§ 58. Reflexion, from whence we derive a power 
of diftinguifhing our ideas, gives us likewife that of 
comparing them, in order to know their relations. 
This is done by transferring our attention alternately 
from the one to the other, or by fixing it at the 
fame time on many. When fuch ideas, as are not 
much compounded, make an imprefiion fufficient to 
draw our attention, without any effort on our part, 
the comparifon is eafy : but the difficulties augment, 
in proportion as the ideas become more complex; 
and make a (lighter imprcflion, Comparifons, for 
example, are generally more eafy in geometry, than 
in metaphyfics. 

By the help of this operation we compare thofe 
ideas which are leaft familiar to fuch as are more 
fo -, and the relations we find there, eftablifti fuch 
connexions between them, as are extremely proper 
for augmenting and ftrengthening the memory, the 
imagination, and reflexion. 

§ 59. Sometimes after having diftinguifhed feveral 
ideas, we confider them as forming only a (ingle 
notion ; at other times we prefcind from a notion 
fome of the ideas of which it is compofed. This 

^ is 



Seft. £. Human Knowledge. £7 

is what we call to compound and decompound our ideas. 
By means of thefe operations we are capable of com- 
paring them under ail forts of relations, and of daily 
making new combinations of them. 

§ 60. In order rightly to conduft the former, we 
arc to obferve which are the moft fimple of our ideas, 
and how, as well as in what order, they are united to 
thofe which come after them. By this means we 
fhaJJ be capable of equally regulating the latter •, for 
the bufinefs will be only to undo what has been 
done. This fhews how both proceed from refle- 
xion. 



CHAP. VII. 

A digreffion on the origin of principles* and of the ope* 
ration which confifts in analyzing. 

$61. fTT^HE faculty of abftrafting anddecom- 
X pounding foon introduced the cuftom 
of general propofitions. It is impoffible to be long 
without perceiving, that as thefe propofitions are the 
refult of particular knowledge, they are proper for 
cafing the memory, and rendering our difcourfe pre- 
cife. But they foon degenerated into abufe, and 
•gave birth to a very imperfect manner of reafoning •, 
the caufe whereof is this. 

§ 62. Thefirft difcoverics in thefciences were fo fim- 
ple and cafy, as to have been made without the aflift- 
ance of any method. People could not even imagine 
rules,* till after they had made fome progrefs, which 

* F 2 enabling 



63 O & r g in o p Part f. 

enabling them to obferve in what manner they had 
attained to fome truths, gave them to underftand how 
they (liould acquire the knowledge of others. Thus 
the firft difcoverers could not point out the. 
way for others to follow them, fince they did not 
even know what road they had taken themfclves. 
They had no other method left to prove the cer- 
tainty of thole difcoveries, than to fliew that they 
agreed with the general propofitions which no body 
called in doubt. This made many believe that thtfe 
propofitions were the real fource of human know- 
ledge. In confequence hereof they gave them, the 
name of principle •, and it was a general prejudice, 
which even ftill obtains, that we ought not to rea- 
fon but from principles *. Thofe who made new dif- 
coveries, thought to give a higher idea of their 
penetration, by making a myftery of the method 
they had followed. They were fatisfied with explain- 
ing thofc difcoveries by means of principles generally 
adopted •, the prejudice being once received, gain- 
ed further credit, and gave birth to innumerable 
fyftems. 

§ 63. The inutility and abufe of principles appears 
efpecially in the fynthetic method •, in which truth 
feems to be forbid to make her appearance, unlefi 
fhe has been preceded by a great number of axioms, 
definitions, and other propofitions of pretended fer- 
tility. The evidence of mathematical demonftrati- 

* I do not uiitlerftaud here by priueiphs, thofc obfervationj 
which a:c confirmed by experience. I take this word in the 
ufual fenic of philofophers, who give the name of principles to 
general and abiti ad jTopofkions, on which they build their 
fyftemi. 

ons, 



Se&. 2. Human Knowledge. 69 

ons, and the approbation which the torrent of the 
learned give to this manner of reafoning, would 
make one believe that I am advancing here a ridicu- 
lous paradox. But it is not difficult to prove, that 
the mathematics are far from owing their certainty 
to the fynthetic method. And indeed, had this fci- 
ence been fufceptible of as many errors, obfcurities, 
and ambiguities as metaphyfics, the fynthetic method 
would have been the beft thing in the world for con- 
tinuing them, and even for increafing their number. 
That the ideas of mathematicians are cxa£t,is becaufc 
they are the work of algebra and analyfis. The me- 
thod which I condemn, as improper for Settling a 
vague principle, or an indeterminate notion, leaves 
all the defeats of an argument uncorrefted, or con- 
ceals them under the appearance of a vaft deal of order, 
which is entirely as fuperfluous as it is dry and dif- 
gufting. I refer the reader for the truth of what I 
have been faying, to thofe works of metaphyfics , mo- 
rality, and theology, whofe authors have attempted 
to make ufe of this method -f*. * 

-f Has De Cartes, for example, thrown any farther light 
on his metaphyseal meditations, by attempting to demonftrate 
them according to this method ? Is it poffible to find 
worfe demonflrations than thofe of Spinofa ? I might like- 
wife mention Mallebranche, who has fometimes made ufe of 
the fynthetic method ; Arnaud, who has ufed it in a very bad 
treatife on ideas, and in other places ; - and the author of the 
a&ion of God upon his creatures, as well as" feveral others. 
One would think, that thofe writers, in order to demonftrate 
geometrically, imagined it was fufficient to range the different 
parts of an argument in a certain order, under the- title of**/* 
9m*i definitions, fo/Iu/atumj, Sec. 

F 3 . $ 64? 



jo Origin of Part I. 

§ 64. It is fufficicnt to confider that a general 
propofition is no more than the refult of the know- 
ledge of particulars, in order to convince us, that it 
can only make us defcend to the knowledge which 
firft raifed us to it, or to that which might have 
equally (hewn us the fame way. Confequently, fo 
far from being the principle of the knowledge of par- 
ticulars, it fuppofes thefe to be known, or at leaft 
that they may be known to us, by other means. And 
indeed to fet forth the truth with all that fhow of 
principles which the fynthetic method requires, it is 
plain that we muft have fome previous knowledge 
of it. This method, which at the moft is proper 
only for demonftrating, in a very abftradt manner, 
fuch things as might be proved in the plaineft and 
fimpleft method, affords fo much the lefs light to 
the underftanding, as it conceals the road which Jeads 
to difcoveries. There is even room to apprehend, 
left it (hould impofe on us, by giving an air of pit>- 
bability to paradoxes the moft falfe; beewfe by 
loofe, and oftentimes far fetched propofitions, it is 
eafy to prove whatever we have a mind, without its 
being eafy to perceive where the argument is defec- 
tive. Of this there are frequent examples to be met" 
with in metaphyfics. In fine this is not a fummarjr 
way, as is commonly imagined; for there are no 
authors that fall into more frequent repetitions, and 
into more ufelefs details, than thofe who make ufe 
of it. 

§ 65. For example, one would think that it is 
fufficient to reflcft on the manner in which we form 
the idea of a whole, and of a part, to prove evidently 
that the whole is greater than its pan. And yet fe- 

veral 



8e£t. 2. Human Knowledge. 71 

veral modern geometricians, after cenfuring Euclid 
for having negle&ed to demonftrate this fort of pro- 
pofitions, undertake to fupply the defeat. And inr- 
deed, the fynthetic method is too nice to leave any 
thing unproved ; it takes only one propofition for 
granted, which it confiders as the principle of the 
reft, and even this muft be identical. Let us fee 
then how a geometrician goes about to prove that 
the whole is greater than its part. 
■ Firft of all he lays down as a definition, that a 
whole is greater^ whofe part is equal to another whole \ 
and as an axiom, that the fame is equal to itfelf\ this 
is the only propofition he docs not undertake to de- 
monftrate. Then he reafons thus : 

" A whole, whofe part is equal to another whole, 

" is greater than this other whole (by the definition) ; 

" but each part of a whole is equal to itfelf (by the 

." axiom); therefore a whole is greater than its 

part . 

I confefs that this fyllogifm has need of a commen- 
tator, to render it level to my capacity. Be that as 
it may, it feems to me that the definition is neither 
more clear nor more evident than the theorem, and 
confequently it caanot be brought to prove it. And 
yet this dcmonftraticn is given as an inftanceofaper- 

* This demonftration is taken from the mathematical ele- 
ments of a celebrated writer. But I will give it here in the au- 
thor s own words, $ 18. Defi. Majus eft, cujus pars alteri toti 
aqualis eft; minus vero, quod parti a/terius <r quale. § 73. Axio. 
Idem eft aquale fibimet ipfi. Theor. Totum eft majus fud parte. 
Demonftr. Cujus pars alteri toti aquaUs eft, id ipfum altero majus. 
(§ 18.) Sed qu*libet pars toti us parti tortus, hoc eft, fihi ipfi <stqxa* 
b* 'ft* (§'73*) Ergftotum qualibet fud parti majus eft. 

F 4 fe« 



Sett. 2. Human Knowledge. 73 

render our reafonings demonftrative •, and confe- 
quently it is the only one we ought to embrace in 
the purfuit of truth. But it fuppofes in thofc who 
are willing to make ufe of it, a great knowledge of 
the progrefs of the operations of the mind. 

§ 67. We muft therefore conclude, that principles 
are only particular inferences which mayfcrve to point 
out the moft remarkable places through which we 
have paflcd 5 and that like the clue of a labyrinth, 
they are of no ufe when we want to proceed forward, 
but only facilitate the means of returning the fame 
way we came. Though they may be proper for eafing 
the memory, and fhortcning difputes, by concifely 
pointing out thofe truths which both fides are agreed 
on •, yet they generally become fo vague and indeter- 
minate, that if they are not ufed with, caution, they 
multiply difputes, which then degenerate into a mere 
caviling about words. Hence the only means of 
acquiring knowledge, is to afcend to the origin of 
our ideas, to trace their formation, and to compare 
them under all their polTiblc relations, which is what 
I call to analyze. 

§ 68. It is commonly faid that we ought to have 
fixed principles. This I own is right ; but I am 
very much miftaken, or moft of thofe who inculcate 
this maxim, do not well know what they would 
have. It fcems even to me that we confidcr as 
principles only fuch as we have adopted ourfelves, 
and of courfc wc charge other with having none, 
when they refufe to admit of ours. If by prin- 
ciples we mean general propofitions, which may 
occafionally be applied to particular cafes, who is 
without them ? But on the other hand what merit 

a is 



74 Origin of Part Ii 

}s there in having them ? They are indeterminate 
maxims, which we never learn juftly to apply. To 
fay of a perfon that he has fuch principles as thofe, 
is giving to underftand that he is incapable of 
having clear ideas of what he thinks. If therefore 
we muft have principles, this does not imply that 
we ought to begin with them in order to defcend af- 
terwards to lefs general notices ; but that we ought 
to have made a diligent ftudy of particular truths, 
and to have afcended by different abflra<5tion3 up 
to univerfal propofitions. This kind of principles 
are naturally determined by the particular ideas 
that conducted us to them; their full extent is 
perceived, and we may be fure of ufing them 
with the utmoft exadtnefs. To fay that a man has 
fuch principles, is giving to underftand that he has 
a thorough knowledge of the arts and fciences* 
which he makes his ftudy, and that in every thing 
he proceeds with the utmoft clearnefs and precir 
fion. 



C H A P. vni. 

Of affirming : denying : judging : reafoning : conceiv- 
ing: under ft anding. 

§ 69.TT 7HEN we compare our ideas, the con- 
W fcioufnefs we have of them is the caufe 
of our knowing that they are the fame in the feveral 
refpe&s in which weconfider them, which we manifeft 
by conneding thofe ideas by the word is *, and this is 
called affirming : or clfe it is the caufe of our know- 

2 ing 



Se6t. 2. Human Knowledge. 75 

ing that they are not the fame, which we manifeft 
by feparating them by thefc words, is not ; and this is 
called denying. This twofold operation is what we call 
judging \ and is plainly a confequence of the others. 

§ 70. From the operation of judging arifes that of 
reafoning. Reafoning is only a concatenation of 
judgments depending one upon the other. On thefc 
laft operations there is leis occafion to expatiate. 
All that the logicians fay concerning them in nume- 
rous volumes,* I lpok upon as of no manner of ufe. 
1 4hz\l therefore content myfelf with accounting for 
one experiment. 

§ 71. It has been often a Iked, how is it we are able 
in convcrfation to unfold, and often without hefitating, 
the mbft extenfive reafonings ? are all the parts of 
it prefent at the fame inftant? and if they are not 
(which is the moft likely, fince the mind is too li- 
mited to embrace a multitude of ideas at once) how 
happens it that the mind condu&s itfelf fo regular- 
ly ? This is eafily explained by what ha* been al- 
ready mentioned. 

A a foon as a perfon propofes to form an argu- 
ment, the attention he gives to the propofition he 
wants to prove, makes him fucceflivcly perceive the 
principal propofitions, which are the refult of the 
diflfef ent parts of the argument he is going to make. 
If they are clofcly connected, he gives them fo cur- 
fory a view, that he is apt to imagine he fees them 
all at the fame time. When he has poflefled him- 
felf of thefe propofitions, he confiders which ought 
to be explained firft. By this means the ideas 
proper for fetting it in its full light are revived 
in him, according to the order of connexion be- 
tween 



^6 Origin op Part I. 

fwccn them. From thence he proceeds to the fe- 
, cond, in order to repeat the fame operation, and ib 
on till he comes to the conclufion of his argument. 
His mind therefore does not embrace all the parts at 
the fame time; but from the connexion between 
them he views them with a rapidity fufficient to 
outrun his ipeech, juft as in reading aloud the 
eye catches the words fo as to outrun the tongue. 

Some perhaps will afk, how it is poflible to per- 
ceive the refult of an argument, without hav- 
ing fully viewed all its different parts ? I anfwer, 
that this happens only when we are fpeaking of mat- 
ters familiar to us, or which are almoft fo by the 
relation they bear to thofe with which we are better 
acquainted. This is the only cafe in which we may 
obferve the particularity I mentioned. In every other 
cafe, people fpeak with hefitation, which is owing to 
this, that as the ideas are too weakly conne&ed, it 
takes up fome time before they are revived : or clfe 
they fpeak incoherently, which is the effedl of igno-. 
ranee. 

§ 72. When, by having acquired the habit of the 
preceding operations, or at leaft of fome of them, 
we have framed exaft ideas, and we know their re- 
lations, our confcioufnefs of them is called conceiving. 
Confcquently an eflential condition for conceiving 
well, is always to reprefent things to ourfelves under 
their proper ideas. 

§ 73. Thefe analyfes help to give us a more ex- 
aft idea of the underftanding than is generally 
formed. This is looked upon as a different faculty 
from our knowledge, and as the place where it all 
comes to unite. And yet to fpeak with per- 

fpicuity, 



Se£t* 2. Human Knowledge.* 77 

fpicuity, I think we fhould* fay that the under- 
ftanding is no more than the collection or combi- 
nation of the operations of the mind. To perceive 
or to have a confcioufnefs, to give one's attention, 
to difcover, to imagine, to remember, to reflect, to 
diftinguifti one's ideas j to compare, to compound, 
to decompound, to analyze ; to affirm, to deny, 
to judge, to reafon, to conceive : all this is the un- 
demanding. 

§ 74. I have confined myfelf to thcfc analyfes^ 
in order to fhew the dependance of the operations 
of the mind, and how they are all originated 
from the firft. We begin with having percep- 
tions of which we are confeious. If we after- 
wards form a more lively, confcioufnefs of fome per- 
ceptions ; this becomes attention. From that time 
the ideas are connected, and in confequence thereof 
we know again the perceptions we have had, and 
we know ourfelves to be the fame being that had 
them ; this is called reminifcence. If the mind re- 
vives, or preferves its perceptions, or only recolle£ts 
the figns of them ; this is imagination, contempla- 
tion, and memory : if it difpofes of its atten- 
tion itfclf, this is reflexion. In fine, from this 
laft all the reft arifc. It is properly reflexion 
that diftinguifhes, compares, compounds, decom- 
pounds, and analyzes -, fince thefe are only different 
ways of conducing the attention. From thence 
by a natural confequence, judgment, reafoningj and 
conception are formed ; and from thence refults the 
underftanding. But I thought proper to confider the 
different manners in which we acquire the habit of re- 
flexion, as fb many diftinft operations j becaufc there 

is 



70 Origin op Part T. 

is a magis or minus in the effedts arifing from it* 
For inftance, it docs fomething more in comparing 
ideas, than when it only diftinguifhes them ; in 
compounding and decompounding them, than when 
it is content with only comparing them, juft as they 
are ; and fo of the reft. No doubt but we may 
multiply more or lefs the operations of the mind, 
according to the manner in which we are willing to 
form a conception of things. We might even re- 
duce them to one only, which is confcioufnefs. But 
there is a medium between dividing too much and 
not dividing fufficiently. In order therefore to fct 
this matter in its full light, we muft ftill proceed to 
new analyfes. 



4* 



C H A P. IX. 

Of the defers and advantages of the imagination. 



$75- 



F 



derived that of reuniting and connefting the mod dis- 
tant ideas. Every thing is capable of afluming a new 
form in our imagination. By the liberty with which 
it removes the qualities of one fubjeft to another, it 
unites in one only the perfeftions which nature would 
judge fufficient for the embellifhment of many. 
Nothing at firft fight fcems more contrary to truth, 
than this manner in which the imagination difpofes 
of our ideas. And indeed if we do not render our- 
ielves matters of this operation, it will infallibly 
lead us aftray ; whereas if we learn how to fubjed 

• 

it 



Sett. 2. Human Kn'owledgz! 79 

it to rule, it will prove one of the principal fbtrces 
of all our knowledge *. 

§ 5?6. The connexions cf ideas are forrr.ec is the 
imagination two different ways : fmrdzses fpc-12- 
neoufly -, and at other times they are the efe-ir of 23 
external impreflion. The former are gecerilry Ids 
vivid, fo that they may eafily be broke : ari h L> 
agreed that they are inflimted or anifkiaL Tie 
latter are oftea.fo well cemented, that ir is ini 



for us to deftroy them ; hence Tre are iscHned t3 
think them natural. They have both their adras- 
tages and inconveniences •, but the latrer are 5b 
much the more ufeful or pernicious, as they zjljszz 

the mind with greater force. 

§ 77. Language is the mod femlble exarrple cf 
the connexions fpontaneoufly formed : for wit^-Mt 
any other aid it points out the advantages ari£rg 
from this operation ; while the precautior-s cereilkrT 
for fpeaking with juftnefs and propriety, for** the 
difficulty of reducing it to a proper regulation- Bji 
as I purpofe fhortly to treat of the neceSEty, v£% 
origin, and progrefc of language, I fhall not 



* Hitherto I have taken the isiaginarzoa for that open£r , s 
only which revives the perceptions in the absence of ci*c~Lt : 
but now that I con fid er the ejects of tiis operation, I £d£ io 
inconveniency in following the common accep&uiojs ; r*r. I an 
obliged to do it. Hence k is xhi* ia the p:e:eai ciapisr 1 
take the imagination for an opera.:*: r: f v.-hi-h ty jcrivlsfg Vmj 
ideas, forms new combinations of the-i l: *:!: Tin r"i£ 
word imagination fhall her.C2for*ard have two differ en z£ti£- 
cations with me : but this fhall rot occsf:*^ a-y er*-:v5ca , f ?* 
or ambiguity, becaufe the circuniiiarjces in »L:ca I ti I:, *• — 
determine each time my panicalar meaning. . 



& Origin of Part L' 

vp tike reader's time here in explaining the advan- 
tages and inconveniences of this part of the imagi- 
nation. I proceed therefore to thofe connexions 
of ideas which are the effect of fome external im- 
prefEon. 

§78.1 faid that thefe connexions are ufeful and ne- 
ceflary. For inftance, it was neceflary that the fight 
of a precipice, which we are in danger of falling into, 
ihould revive in our minds the idea of death. Our 
attention cannot therefore upon the firft occafion 
help forming this connexion ; which it muft render 
fo much the ftronger, as it is determined by the 
xnoft preffing motive, namely the prefervation of 
our being. 

Mallebranche looked upon this connexion as na- 
tural or innate. . " The idea, fays he, of a great 
precipice which we fee under us, and into which 
we are in danger of falling, or the idea of a 
heavy body ready to tumble upon us and crufli us 
to pieces, is naturally connected with that which 
reprefents death to our minds, and with an emo- 
tion of the fpirits, which prompts us to fly from 
u it. This connexion never changes, becaufe it is 
* c neceflary it Ihould be always the fame; and it 
€< confifts in a difpofition of the fibres of the brain, 
*' which we have from our infancy *." 

It is evident that if experience had not informed 
us of our mortality, fo far from having an idea of 
death, we ihould be furprized at the fight of the 
firft dead body. This idea is therefore acquired, 
and Mallebranche is miftaken in confounding that 

+ Inquiry after truth, book 2. c. $. 

which 



«( 

cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 



Se£h 2. Human Knowledge. 8i 

tvhich is natural, or imprinted on our minds from 
our infancy, with what is common to all mankind. 
This is a general error. They do not obferve that 
the fame fenfes, the fame operations, and the fame ' 
circumftances muft every where produce the fame 
efiedts *. They are abfolutely determined to have 
recourfe to fomething innate, or natural, which 
precedes the adtion of the fenfes, the habit of the 
operations of the mind, and fhe common circum- 
ftances of life. 

§ 79. Though the connexions of ideas formed 
within by external impreflions, are fometimes ufeful, 
yet they may be alfo frequently pernicious. Sup- 
pofe we arc accuftomed by education to conned: the 
idea of fhame or infamy with that of furviving an * 
affront ; the idea of magnanimity or courage with 
that of dcftroying ourfelves, or of expofing our 
Jives by endeavouring to deprive him of life who 
has affronted us r we fhall h#ve two prejudices : * 
pne which was the point of honour among the Ro- 
mans, the other that of part of modern Europe. 
Thefe connexions are encouraged and increafed more 
or lefs by age, by ftrength of conftitution, by the pat? 
fions to which we become fubjeft, and by the ftate of 

life which we feverally embrace, 

/ 

* They fuppofe a perfoa to be born in full maturity on the 
fide of a precipice, and they afk whether it is probable h? 
would avoid falling into it. For ijay part, I think he would ; 
not indeed from the fear of death, for no man can be afraid of 
what he does not know ; but becaufe it feems natural to me 
that he fhould direct his (Ups towards that fide, where his 
feet can tread upon fomething, 

G This 



82 Origin of Part L 

This fort of prejudices being the firft impreflions 
we have experienced, conftantly appear to us as in- 
conteftable principles. In the inftance I have given, 
the error is palpable, and the caufe of it well 
known. But there is fcarce a perfon perhaps, who 
has not fometimes happened to fall into abfurd rea- 
fopings, the ridiculoufnefs of which he has at length 
difcovered, without being able to comprehend how 
he could have thus impofed upon himfelf even a 
fingle inftant. Thefe are frequently no more than 
the effe£t of a Angular connexion of our ideas ; a 
fufficient caufe indeed to humble our vanity, and 
which for this very reafon we have fo much diffi- 
culty to perceive. If it operates in fo fecret a man- 
ner, well may we judge of the miftaken notions 
into which it leads the generality of mankind. 

§ 80. In general the impreflions we feel under 
different circumftanccs, induce us to connedt ideas, 
which we have it no longer in our power to feparatc. 
We cannot, for inftance, frequent company, without 
infenfibly connecting the ideas of a certain turn of 
mind and , character with a particular figure and 
make. This is the reafon that perfons of a parti- 
cular phjjfiognomy, ftrike us more than others : for 
phyfiognomy is only an affemblage of features with 
which we have connefted fuch ideas, as are never re- 
vived without being accompanied with approbation 
or diflike. We muft not therefore be furprized if we 
are inclined to judge of other people from their 
phyfiognomy, and if fometimes even at firft fight 
we conceive a diflike to them or are prejudiced in 
their favour. 



In 



Se£t. 2. Human Knowledge, 83 

In confequerice of thefe connexions we are fre- 
quently prepoflefled even to excefs in favour of 
particular perfons, and conceive intirely wrong no- 
tions in regard to others. This is becaufe whatever 
ftrikes ub either in our friends or enemies, is natu- 
fally connefted with the agreeable or difagreeable 
fenfatibns which they make us feel j and of courfe, 
the defeats of the former are always overlooked be- 
caiife of the other amiable qualities of which we fee 
them poflefled, while the moft perfect endowments 
of the latter feem to partake of their vices. Hence 
it is that thefe connexions have a prodigious influence 
upon our conduft : they feed our love or our hatred, 
they encourage our eftcem or our contempt, they ex~ 
cite our gratitude or refentment, and produce thofe 
fympathies, thofe antipathies, and all thofe whitnfical 
inclinations for which we often find fuch difficulty 
to account. I think I have fomewhere read that 
Defcartes always preferved a liking for people that 
were fquint-eyed, becaufe the firft woman he fell in 
love with, happened to have this kind of blemifh. 

§ 81. Mr. Locke has (hewn the great danger 
arifing from the connexions of ideas, when he ob- 
ferved that they are produ&ive of madnefs. " A 
man, fays he, * who is very fober and of a right 
underftanding in all other things, may in one 
particular be as frantick as any in Bedlam ; if 
either by any fudden very ftrong impreffion, or long 
li fixing his fancy upon one fort of thoughts, inco* 
" hcrent ideas have been cemented together fa 
" powerfully, as to remain united." 

* EfTay on Human Underftanding, book 2. c. 11. $ 1 3* 
He repeats almoft the fame in c 13. § 4. of the fame book. 

G 2 § 72. In 



cc 

CC 

cc 

cc 



$4 tytizjv :f PartL 

$ ? i ■ V* wfcr w swrgartiKxi due jafflacfi cf this 
t£i\rx&n, it iii foflacacx » *K*fcrre chat in a phyfical 
iw&foa-V.*;, imi^sacxx £o£ araafrnirft can differ 
tr*rth «tf* '/iar ">&Jy inr £teto or jcb- A3 depends 
Cf, tta: vr/jL^r *jj£ %i*moxj i«io wikh the ipirits 
a?* rwwmtd r> the braam. Hsaoe in dreams die 
\m£Q&-'xn are Co fiT'jnzpj renewed, that upon our 
ftwakEftj^ *>rh c^fneufer we difcover ocr error. This 
i* wubiy a moment of frenzy : to continue 
ffmt\<; f ft w</j!d be fuffirient to fuppofe that the 
fibre* </f the brain had been fhaken with too great 
vblc/Ke to be able to recover themfclves. The 
fame effect may be produced in a flower manner. 

$ ft f There is hardly a peribn, I think, that in his 
hWt hours, ha* noc had fome rcvery in which he has 
imagined himfclf the hero of the romance. Thefe 
filtiom, which arc called caftles in the air 9 generally 
produce only a (light impreffion on the brain, be- 
ciufc wc frldom give way to them ; fo that they are 
ftnm difprrled by more real objedts, with which we 
lire obliged to occupy our thoughts. But fuppofe 
Ibmc fudden l\i of melancholy feizes our minds, fo 
;t» to make us avoid the company of our beft 
I'rirmU, and diflikc every thing that pleafed us 
brlcirr i we (hall then find in the tranfport of our 
fi»irl t that our favourite romance will be the only 
aim that can divert us from it. The animal ipirits 
by dealers will dip fuch a llrong foundation to this 
(rUllr f that nothing will be able to demolifh it: 
\vc llull tall uflcep in the building of it \ we 
(lull dream we rdide in it \ and in fine when 
the imprrllion of the ipirits (hall infenfibly arrive 
10 (twit pitch as^ if we really were what we have 

fancied 



Se&. 2. Human Knowledge. 85 

fancied ourfelves to be, upon returning to ourfelves 
we fhall take our chimeras for a reality* Perhaps 
the madnefs of that Athenian, who imagined all 
the (hips which entered the Piraeum, to belong to 
him, was owing to no other caufe. 

§ 84. By this explication we may eafily conclude 
how dangerous the reading of romances muft be to 
young ladies who have generally a lively imagina- 
tion. As from the nature of their education their 
minds are feldom fufficiently employed, they eagerly 
embrace fuch fi&ions as flatter the paflions fo na- 
tural to their age. There they find materials for the 
jmeft caftles in the air. Thefe they make ufe of fo much 
the more readily, as the defire of rendering themfclves 
agreeable, and the continual flattery of our fex, help 
to feed this ridiculous tafte. Then there needs only a 
flight difappointment perhaps to turn a girl*s brain, 
to perfuade her that fhc is Angelica, or any other 
heroine that has pleafed her fancy, and to make her 
take every man that comes near her for a Medorus. 

§85. There arc other works written with a quite 
different view, which are yet liable to the like in- 
conveniences : I mean fome particular books of 
devotion penned by men of ftrong imaginations. 
Thefe are apt fometimes to turn a woman's brain, 
even (b far as to make her imagine that (he has 
vifions, that fhe is converfing with angels, or ever\ 
that (he is already in company with them in heaven. 
It were to be wilhed that young perfons of both 
(exes were always well inftrufted in regard to this 
fort of reading, by diredtors acquainted with ths 
temper of their imagination, 

. G 3 § 85. Such 



86 OriOin of Part I* 

. § 85. Such frenzies as thefe are known to all the 
world. There arfe others, . which no body thinks of 
calling by 'the fame name : and yet every error 
whofe fource is in the imagination, ought to be 
ranked in the fame clafs. If madnefs is to be de T 
termined only by the confequence of error, we Ihall 
never be able to fix the point where it begins. It 
muft therefore be made to confift in fuch an ima- 
gination, as, unknown to us, afibciates ideas in an 
irregular manner, and fometimes influences our judg- 
ment, and even our conduft. If this- be the cafe, 
very probably no one will be exempt from it. The 
wifeft man fhall differ from the grcateft blockhead 
only in this, that luckily for him the irregularities 
of his imagination have fuch things for their obje£t 
as interfere but little with the ordinary courfe of life, 
and do not create fo vifible a difference between hinj 
and the reft of mankind. And indeed where is the 
perfon whom fome favourite paffion does not con- 
ftantly engage, upon certain occafions, to follow the 
ftrong impreffion which the obje&s make upon his 
imagination, and thus is the caufe of his relapfing 
into the fame faults ? let us but obferve the fchemes 
that men form in regard to their condudt ; for here 
is the rock upon which human reafon generally fplits. 
What prejudices, what blindnrfs even in perfons of 
the beft underftanding ! though their mifcarriage 
jftiews them their error, yet they will not alter their 
conduft. The fame imagination will continue to 
feduce them ; you jnay fee them juft ready to 
qommit fuch another miftake as the firft, and yoil 
fhall not be able to convince them of their folly. 

§87. Thi? 



Seft.2. Human Knowledge. Bj 

§ 87. The impreffions made on phlegmatic confti- 
turions are very durable. Hence it is that perfons of 
a grave and fedate deportment, have no other advan- 
tage, if it be really an advantage, than always to pre- 
fcrve the fame irregularities. By this means their mad- 
nefs, which efcapes one at firft light, becomes more 
diftinguilhable to thofe who have obferved them for 
fome time. On the contrary, in perfons of a brifk 
aftive dilpofition, the impreffions are effaced, and 
again revived, fo that there is a conftant fucceffion of 
mad aftions. You perceive that fuch a man's mind 
is fubjc<St to fome irregularity, but he changes with 
fuch rapidity, that you can fcarce obferve it. 

§ 88. The poWer of the imagination has no 
bounds. It diminiflies or even difpels our pains, 
and alone is capable of giving that relilh to plea- 
fures which conftitutes their whole value. But 
fbmetimes it is the moft bitter enemy we have ; it 
increafes our evils, it affli&s us with other evils which 
we had not before, and ends with poifoning the 
very fources of life. 

In order to account for thefe effefts, I muft ob- 
ferve in the firft place, that as the fenfes a£t upon 
the organ of the imagination, this organ reads 
upon the fenfes. This cannot be at all doubted : 
for experience (hews fuch a rea&ion -even in the leaft 
elaftic bodies, Secondly I obferve that the reaftion 
of this organ is more lively than the aftion of the 
fenfes, becaufe it does not readt upon them with that 
force alone which is fuppofed by the perception they 
have produced, but with the united force of all 
thofe which are intimately connefted with this- per- 

G 4 ception* 



88 Orig i* or Part L 

caption, and which for this very reafbn muft needs 
have been revived. If fo, it is not difficult to com- 
prehend the effefts of the imagination. Let i]$ 
come to examples. 

The perception of pain revives in my imaging 
tion all the ideas with which it has an intimate 
connexion. I fee the danger, I am frightened, I 
am caft down, my body is fcarce able to fupport 
itfelf, the pain becomes more intenfe, my dejection 
increafes, and from my imagination's being ftruck, 
it is poffible that a diforder, which in the beginning 
lyas but very flight, may bring me to my grave. 

The enjoyment of a pleafure which I have been 
long purfuing, revives all the agreeable ideas with 
which that pleafure can poflibly be connected. The 
imagination returns feveral perceptions to the fenfes 
for one that it receives. My. (pints are in foch * 
motion as to difpel every thing that is capable of 
depriving me of my prefent fenfation. In this 
fijuation, quite refigned to the perceptions which I 
receive by the fenfes, and to thofe reproduced by 
the imagination, I feel the moil exquifite pleafures. 
But fuppofe the a£tion of my imagination is interrupt- 
ed, I immediately awake as it were out of a trance * 
I have then in view the objefts on which I fixed 
my happinef$, I fearch for them, and yet I fee them 
po longer. 

By this explication we may conceive that the 
pleafures pf the imagination are intirely as real and 
as natural as the others, notwithftanding what is 
commonly faid to the poptrary. I fhall give only 
Onp example more, 

A man 



§e6t.£. Human Knowledge. , 89 

A man tormented by the gout, and unable to ftand 
upon his legs, . fees his fon fafcly returned at the 
very time when lcaft he expe&ed it, and when he 
imagined him to be loft : this joyful light makes 
him forget his pain. A moment afterwards his houfe 
is on fire : and the fright makes him recover his loft 
ftrength. He is now out of danger, when they 
think of giving him afliftance. This is becaufe his 
imagination from the fudden and ftrong furprize, 
reads on all the parts of the body, and produces 
the revolution which faves his life. 

Thefe are I think the moft amazing effe&s of 
the imagination. In the following chapter I fhall 
fay a word or two concerning thofe graces with which 
it embclUfhcs truth, 



4» 



C H A P. X. 

From whence the imagination derives thofe graces with 

which it embellishes truth* 

% 89. HT^ H E imagination derives her graces from 
A the privilege ihe has of borrowing what- 
ever appears moft amiable and moft agreeable in the 
various parts of nature, in order to adorn the fubje<St 
(he handles. Nothing comes amifs to her ; ihe 
makes every thing her own, as foon as (he knows it 
can increafe her luftre. She is like a bee that culls 
the treafure from the choiceft flowers : or like a co- 
quette, who eager to pleafe her admirers, confults her 
caprice rather than her reafon. Always complaifant, 
ftp accommodates hcrfelf to our taftei, to our paflions, 

and 



qo Origin of Part L 

and to our weaknefies. One (he attracts and per- 
vades by her lively and winning air; another fhe Ibr- 
prizes and aftonifhes by her grand and noble deport- 
ment. Sometimes (he diverts us vrith her entertain- 
ing difcourfe - 9 at other times (he fucceeds by the 
boldnefs of her faliies. Here (he affects a lbftnels 
in order to engage us: there (he languifhes and 
weeps in order to move us ; and if occafion requires, 
(he will fbon put on the rnafk to excite us to 
laughter. As fhe is fecure of her empire, fhe wan- 
tonly exercifes her caprice in every thing. Some- 
times fhe is pleafed with giving an air of grandeur 
to the moft trivial fubjefts ; and at other times to 
give an air of ridicule to fubje&s the moft ferious 
and the moft fublime. Though (he alters every thing 
fhe touches, yet fhe frequently fucceeds, when fhe 
endeavours only to pleafe : in every other cafe fhe 
mud necefiarily mifcarry. Her empire ceafes, where 
that of analyfis commences. 

§ 90. She borrows not only of Nature, but like- 
wife of the moft abfurd and moft ridiculous chime- 
ras, provided they have the fan&ion of prejudice. 
Little does it fignify v/hethcr they are falfe or not, 
if wc arc inclined to think them true. The chief 
point the imagination has in view is amufement; yet 
fhe is not at variance with truth. Her fi&ions are all 
jufl, when conformable to the analogy of our nature, 
to our knowledge, and to our prejudices. But as 
foon as flic deviates from thefe, her ideas become 
monflrous and extravagant. This is, in my opini- 
on, what renders the following thought of Boileau 
(o juft. 

* 

In 



Se&. 2. Human Knowledge. 91 

In all things, truth fhould like an cmprefs reign. 
And ev'n o'er fable her matchlefs fway maintain : 
This beauteous form alone deferves our love, 
By men rever'd, as by the gods ^bove. 

And indeed, truth is the property of fable ; not that 
things are abfolutely as fhe reprefents them, but be- 
caufe flie exhibits them under clear and familiar ima- 
ges, fuch as pleafe us of courfe, without leading us 
into error. 

§91. Nothing is beautiful that is not true :' and 
yet every truth is not always beautiful. In order 
to. fupply this defcdt, the imagination connedts it 
with ideas the moft proper for embellifhing it, 
and by this reunion it forms a whole, in which, 
We. find both folidity and amufement. Of this there 
arfL an infinite number of inftances in poetry: 
There we fee how fidtion, which would be always 
ridiculous if divefted of truth, embellifhes truth, 
which would be always infipid, if divefted of fiftion. 
This mixture is ever pleafing, provided the orna- 
ments are chofen with difcernment, and judicioufly 
fcattered. And indeed the imagination is the fame 
as drefs to a beautiful perfon : it muft lend her every 
affiftance, in order to appear with all the advantage 
her form is capable of receiving. 

I fhali not dwell any longer on this part of the 
imagination, which indeed would require a feparate 
work : it is fufficient for my purpofe, that I have 
not forgot to make mention of it. 



CHAP. 



92 Origin or Part L 

CHAP. XL 

Of reafon, wit, and its different kinds. 

§92. "I^ROM the fcvcral operations we have been 
I? defcribing, there refults one which crowns, 
as it were, the underftanding ; and that is reafon. 
Whatever idea we form of it, every body agrees that 
it is by reafon alone we are enabled to condudt our- 
felves prudently in life, and to make any pro- 
grefs in the fearch after truth. From hence we muft 
conclude, that reafon is nothing more than the 
knowledge of the manner in which we ought to re- 
gulate the operations of the mind. 

§ 93. Explaining myfelf thus, I do not think I 
go out of the beaten road : I only determine an idea 
which I have no where found fufficiently exalt. I 
even obviate all thofe inveftives which are uttered 
againft reafon, only becaufe of its being taken in too 
vague a fignification. Shall it be faid that nature 
made us a prefent becoming a ftcp-mother, when 
fhe gave us the means of wifely conducing the ope- 
rations of our minds ? Can fuch a notion ever come 
into our heads ? Shall it be faid, that if the foul was 
not endowed with the feveral operations we have been 
mentioning, fhe would be a vaft deal happier, be- 
caufe they are the caufe of much vexation by the abufe 
fhe makes of them ? Why then do not we reproach na- 
ture for having given us a mouth, arms, and other 
organs, which are oftentimes the inftruments of our 
unhappinefs ? Perhaps we fhouid be glad to partici- 
pate only of fo much of life as is neceffary to render 

1 us 



Seft. 2. Human Knowledge.' 93 

us fcnfiblc of our exiftence, and fhould willing- 
ly refign the feveral operations which raife us fo 
much above the level of brutes, only to enjoy their 
inftinlh 

§ 94. But what is the ufe, fomc will fay, which we 
ought to make of the operations of the mind ? How 
often, and yet how unfuccefsfully have the utmoft 
endeavours been employed to make this difcovery ? 
And can we flatter ourfelves that we fhall fucceed 
better at prefent? I anfwer, that we mud therefore 
complain of having had no fhare at all of reafon. 
But to be ferious : let us enter into a thorough ftu- 
dy of the operations of the mind ; let us learn their 
full extent, without concealing their weaknefs ; let us 
exa&ly diftinguifh them ; let us develop their feveral 
iprings -, let us fhew the advantages and abufes of 
them ; let us fee what afliftance they lend to each 
other ; in fhort, let us apply them only to the ob- 
je&s-within our reach, and I engage we fhall learn 
the ufe we ought to make of theni. We fhall find 
that we have Tiad as much reafon to our fhare as our 
ftate required \ and that he of whom we hold all 
we have, does not lavifh, but wifely diftributes his 
favours. 

§ 95: There arc three operations which we ought 
to compare with each other, the better to underftand 
the difference between them. Thefe are inftinft, mad- 
nefs and reafon. Inftindt is no more than the ima- 
gination, as independent of our command, though 
by its activity, completely concurring to the prefer- 
vation of our being. It excludes memory, reflexion 
and the other operations of the mind. On the 
contrary, madngfs admits of all the operations -, but 

thefe 



94 Ohiginof Part I. 

thefe are directed by an irregular imagination. In 
fine, reafon refults from all the operations well con- 
duced. If Mr. Pope had but formed to himfelf 
clear ideas of thefe things, he would not have de- 
claimed as he did again ft reafon, and much lefs 
would he have concluded : 

And reafon raife o'er inJiinB as you can, 
In this 'tis God direfts, in that 'tis man. 

Eflay on man, ep. 3: 

§ 96. It is eafy here to explain the diftin&iorr 
that is made between above reafon* according to rea- 
fon, and againft reafon. Every truth that includes 
fuch ideas as cannot be the object of the operations 
of the mind, becaufe they have not been able to enter 
by the fenfes, nor are derived from fcnfations, is abovfc 
reafon. A truth, which contains none but ideas on 
which the mind can operate, is according to reafon; 
In fine, every propofition that contradi6ts another 
propofition refulting from the operations of the mind 
rightly conduced, is againft reafon. 

§ 97. It may eafily be obferved, that in the no- 
tion of reafon, and in the new analyfis I have given 
of the imagination *, there are no other ideas than 
thofe of the operations which have been the fubjeft 
of the eight firft chapters of this fedtion. And yet 
it was proper to confider thefe things feparately, in 
order either to conform to cuftom, or to point out 
more exaftly the different obje&s of the operations 
of the mind. I even think we ought likewife to com- 
ply with cuftom, when it diftinguifhes between good 

* The foregoing chapter. 
-* I fenfe, 



Se£t. 2. Human Knowledge. 9$ 

fenfc, wit, underftanding, penetration, profoundnefs, 
difcernmenf, judgment, fagacity, tafte, invention* 
talent, genius, and enthufiafro : it will fuffice if I 
-mention only a word or two concerning thefe par- 
ticulars. 

§ 98. Good fenfe and underftanding are no more 
than to conceive or to imagine, and differ only by 
the nature of the objedt with which we are occupied. 
To comprehend, for inftance, that two and two 
make four, or to comprehend a whole courfe of ma* 
thematics, is equally to conceive ; but with this dif- 
ference, that one is called good fenfe, and the other 
underftanding. In like manner to imagine common 
things, fuch as every day are obvious to our fight, 
no more than good fenfe is wanting : but to imagine 
new things, efpecially if they are of any extent, un- 
derftanding is requifite. The objedt of good fenfe 
feems therefore to lye only in what is eafy and com- 
mon ; while underftanding makes us conceive or 
imagine things of a newer or more compound na- 
ture. 

§ 99. For want of a proper method of analyzing 
our ideas, we are often fat isfied with underftanding one 
another within a finall matter. Of this we have an ex- 
ample in the word «;//, to which we generally annex a 
very indeterminate idea, though it be in every body's 
mouth. Whatever the fignification of it may be, it 
cannot extend beyond the operations whofe analyfis 
I have given. According as thefe operations are 
fcparately confidered, as feveral of them are united, 
or as they are all viewed at the fame time, we form 
different notions, to which we commonly give the 
name of wit. But we muft lay down as a con- 
dition, 



96 OfciGiN of Parti, 

dition, that wc conduft thcfc operations in a fuperior 
manner, fuch as fhall fhew the adtivity of the under- 
Handing. Thofe in which the mind hardly a£ts of its 
own accord, do not deferve this name. Thus the 
memory and the operations preceding it, do not con- 
ftitutc what we call wit. Even if the a&ivity of the 
mind has only common things for its objeft, this is 
ftill but good fenfe, as I have already mentioned. Wit 
comes immediately after, and would be at its higheft 
pitch in a man who on every occafion were capable 
of perfeftly conducing all the operations of his un- 
derftanding, and could make ufe of them with all 
poffible facility. Such a model we fhall never find ; 
but we mud fuppofe a notion of this kind in order to 
have a fixed point, from which we may be able to 
remove to a greater or leffer diftance by different 
ways, and thus to form to ourfelves fome idea of 
the inferior fpecies. I confine myfelf to thofe which 
have been diftinguifhed by names. 

§ 106. Penetration fuppofes us capable of attend- 
on, reflexion, and analyfis fufficient to pierce even 
into the inward nature of things : profoundnefs fup- 
pofes that we go to the bottom of them, fo as to 
difcover their feveral fprings, that we fee from 
whence they proceed, what they are, and what is to 
become of them. 

§ 101. By difcernment and judgment things are 
compared, the difference between them is fettled, 
and their mutual value exaftly regulated : but the 
firft is more particularly faid of thofe which relate 
to fpeculation *, and the fecond of fuch as regard 
pra&ice. Difcernment is requifite in philofophical 
reiearches j judgment, in the conduct of life. 

§ I02, 



Se6ti2. Human Knowledge. 97 

' § 102. Sagacity is only that quicknefs of mind 
with which we difcover an objedt with greater eaie, 
or make others more eafily comprehend it : this 
is the work of the imagination, joined to refledtion 
and analyfis. 

§ 103. Tafte is fo happy a kind of fenfation, that 
we perceive the value of things without the aid of 
reflexion, or rather without making ufe of any rule 
to judge of them. It is an effect of the imagination, 
which having early acquired the habit of entertain- 
ing itfelf with agreeable objefts, preferves them al- 
ways prefent, and naturally forms them into pat- 
terns. Hence it is that good tafte is generally the • 
portion of people who have feen the world. 

§ 104. We do not properly create any ideas; we 
only combine, by compounding and decompounding, 
thofe which we receive by the fenfes. Invention con- 
fifts in knowing how to make new combinations : 
there are two kinds of it ; talent, and genius. 
■ Talent combines the ideas of an art, or of a 
fcience, in fuch a manner as is proper to produce 
thofe efFcfts, which fhould naturally be expe&ed 
from it. Sometimes it requires more imagination, 
■ibmetimes more analyfis. Genius adds to talent the 
idea in fome meafure of a creative mind. It in- 
vents new arts, or in the fame art, new branches 
•equal, and even fomctimes fuperior to thofe already 
known. It examines things in a point of view pe- 
. culiar to itfelf ; it gives birth to a new fcience ; or 
in thofe already cultivated it opens a road to truths, 
which it never expe&ed to reach. To thofe which 
wfere known before, it communicates a perlpicuity 
and eafe of which they were not thought fufcep- 

H tible< 



98 Origin of Parti. 

tible. The cfiara&er of a man of talents may be 
common to others, by whom he is equalled, or even 
furpaffed. But the chara&er of a man of genius is 
'original, is inimitable. Hence it is that the gfeat 
writers who fucceed him, feldom venture to try their 
ftrength in that kind of writing in which he excelled. 
Corneille, Moliere, and Quihault, have had no imi- 
tators. And we have fome moderns, whom proba- 
bly it will be in vain to imitate. 

Genius is fometimes called extenfive, fometimes 
vaft. Extenfive is when it. makes' a great prbgrefi 
in one kind ; vaft is when it Unites fo many kindsr, 
and to fuch a degree, that we have fome difficulty 
to imagine it has any limits. 

§ 105. We cannot ianalyze ertthufiafm when we 
feel it, becaiife at that time We .are not mafters of 
Otir reflexion. But how can we analyfe it when Wfc 
do not feel it ? By corifidering the effedts it has pro- 
duced. On this occafion the knowledge of the ef- 
f fe<5ts' ought to lead us to the knowledge of their 
dtiife, and this caufe can be only one of the opera- 
tions which we have already analyzed. 

When the paflions throw us into violent agita- 
tions, fo as to deprive us of the ufe of reflexion, wfe 
feel a thoufand different Senfations. This is becaufe 
the imagination being heated, according as the paf- 
lions are more or lefs lively, it awakes with greater or 
lefler force thofe fenfations which have fome relation 
to, and confequently fome connexion with our ptefertt 
fituation. 

.Let us fuppofe two men in the fame circumftan- 
ces, and a&uatcd by the fame paflions, but in ah 
unequal degree of force. On the one hand let us 
" • ' " take, 



Se&. 2. Human Knowledge. 99 

take, for inftance, old Horatius, fuch as he is 
reprefeftted in Corneille, with that Roman foul, 
which prompts him to facrifice his own children to 
the welfare of the republic. The impreflion he re- 
ceives, when he hears that his fon has turned his 
back, is aconfufedafiemblage of every fentiment, that 
the love of one's country, and the thirft of glory, 
carried to the higheft pitch, can poffibly infpire : even 
to fuch a degree as not to regret the lofs of two 
of his fons, but rather to wifh that the third had 
alfo perifhed. Thefe are his fentiments : but fhall 
•he expptffs them each in particular? No; this is not 
'the language of the grand paflions. Neither will fee 
be fatisfied with exprefling one of the weakeft df 
*them. He will naturally prefer that which aituatcs 
4iim with the greateft violence; and he will dwell 
upon it, becaufe from the connexion it has with the 
*rdt, it fufficieritly includes them. Now what fenti- 
ment is this ? it is to wifh that his fon had been 
•flain : for fuch a defire either never takes pofleffion 
df a father's foul •, or, when it does, it entirely pof- 
<(ei!es him. This is the reafon that when they afk 
him what his fon could have done again ft three, he 
anfwers, be could have dud. 

Let us fuppofc, on the other hand, a Roman, who, 
though fcnfible to the glory of his family, and to the 
-iafety of the republic, had neverthelefs experienced 
much weaker impulfes of paffion than old ; Ho- 
ratius ; I fancy he would have nearly preferv- 
"ed his intire prefence of mind. The fenfations 
which the notion of honour, and the love of his 
country would have produced in his Tou], muft 
have had a weaker effaft upon him; arid each very 

H 2 near 



ioo Origin of PartR 

near in an equal degree •, he would not have been in- 
clined to exprefs the one rather than the other ; con- 
sequently it would have been natural for him to have 
vented them each in particular. He would hive men- 
tioned, how greatly he was affli&ed to behold the ruin 
of the republic, and the fhame and difgrace which hifi 
fon had brought upon himfelf ; he would have laid his 
commands on him never to appear in his prefence ; 
and inftead of wifhing his death, he would have only 
declared that it would have been better for him to 
have undergone the fame fate as his brothers. 

Whatever we underftand by enthufiafm, it is Suffi- 
cient to know, that it is oppofite to indifference or 
' unconcernednefs, in order to obferve that it is imr 
poflible for us, without enthufiafm, to put ourielves 
in the place of Corneille's old Horatius. The famp 
cannot be faid in regard to putting ourfelves in the 
place of the other man. Let us give another ex- 
ample. 

If Mofes, fpeaking of the creation of light, had 
been lefs afFe&ed with the idea of the divine gran- 
deur, he would have expatiated in demonftrations of 
the power of the fupreme Being. On the one hand 
he would have neglefted nothing to exalt the excel- 
lency of light, and on the other he would have re- 
prefented darknefs as a chaos in which all nature was 
involved. But, to enter into thefe particulars, he 
was too much affedted with the idea of the fuperiori- 
ty of the fupreme Being, and the dependance of his 
creatures. Hence as the ideas of command and obe- 
dience are connefted with thofe of fuperiority and de- 
pendance, they muft of neceffity have prefented thero- 
felvcs to his mind, and he muft have dwelt upon 

them, 



Se6t.2» JJuman Knowledge. *oi 

them, as fufficient to exprcfs all the reft. He 
Was therefore contented with faying, God faid> let 
there be light, and there was light. By the number 
and beauty of ideas which thefe fhort expreffions 
excite at the fame time, they have the advantage of 
ftriking the foul in a furprizing manner, and for 
this reafon are what we call the fublime. 

In confequence of thefe analyfes, the notion I 
form to myfelf of enthufiafm, is this : it is the 
fituation of a man, who confidering with attention 
the circumftances in which he is placed, is ftrongly 
moved by the different fentiments which they muft 
needs produce -, and who to exprefs what he feels, 
naturally chufes from among thofe fentiments that 
which is the moft lively, and which alone is equi- 
valent to the reft, by the ftri£t connexion it has 
with them. If this fituation is only of fhort du- 
ration, it occafions a lively expreffion ; if it lafts 
for any time, it may produce an intire piece, Re- 
ferving our prefence of mind, we might imitate the 
tranfports of enthufiafm, if we were accuftomed to 
analyze the fine paffages, which poets put into the 
ftiouths of perfons feized with enthufiaftic fits. But 
would the copy be always equal to the original ? 

■ § 1 06. Wit is properly the inftrument by which 
we acquire fuch ideas as differ from vulgar no- 
tions. Hence our* ideas are of a very different na- 
ture according to the kind of operations which more 
particularly conftitutfe each perfon's wit. The effe<5te 
cannot be the fame in a perfon in whom you fup- 
pofe more analyfis with lefs imagination, as in anr 
other in whom you fuppofe more imagination with 
Jefs analyfis. The imagination, alone is fufceptible 

«■ - H 3 &l 



io2 Origin or Parti. 

of a great variety, and fufficient to form different 
fpecies of wit. We have models of each in the 
writers of our nation, but they are not all diftin- 
guifhed by names. Befides, in order to confide? wit 
in all its effedts, it is not fufficient to h^ve givca 
the analyfis of the operations of the understanding, 
we muft likewife give that of the paffions* and ob- 
ferve how all thefe things are combined and ecu*- 
founded in one fmgle caufe. The influence of th* 
paffions is fo great, that * without them the under- 
ftanding would frequently have fcarce any em- 
ployment at all •, and in order to have wit, all 
that is wanting fometimes to a man, is paffions. 
They are even abfolutely neceflary for fome talents* 
But an analyfis of the paffions belongs rather to a 
work written on the progrefs, than to that which 
Ipeaks only of the origin, of human knowledge, 

§ 107. The principal advantage arifing from the 
manner in which 1 have confidered the operations 
of the mind, is that we evidently fee in what 
manner good fenfe* wit, reafon and their contraries 
equally refult from the fame principle, which is the 
connexion of ideas one with the other •, and that 
tracing things ftill higher, we fee that this con- 
nexion is produced by the ufe of figns. This is the 
principle we lay down : I fhall now conclude with a 
recapitulation of what has been hitherto faid. 

We are capable of more reflexion in proportion 
as we have more reafon : confequently this laft fa- 
culty is produ&ive of reflexion. On the one hand 
reflexion renders us matters of our attention ; there- 
fore it begets attention : on the other hand, it makes 
us conned our ideas * therefore it occafions memory. 

From 



Se&.2* Human Knowledge. joj 

From thence arifes analyfis ; and hence is formed 
reminifcence, which, gives occafion to {he imagina- 
tion (I take this word here in the fenfe which I have 
already given it.) 

It is by means of reflexion that the imagination 
becomes fubjedt to our power ; nor have we the 
habit of merpory at our difpofal, till a long time 
after we have acquired a thorough maftery of the 
imagination -, and thefc two operations are produ&ive 
<>f .conception. 

The underftanding differs from the imagination 
in the lame manner as the operation which confifts 
in conceiving differs from analyfis. With regard 
to the operations which cpnfift in diftinguifhing, 
comparing, compounding, decompounding, judg- 
ing, reafoning ; they arife one from the other, and , 
are the immediate effe&s of the imagination and 
memory. Such is the origin of the operations of 
the mind. 

It is a point of importance to underftand all thefc 
things thoroughly, and efpecially to remark the ope- 
rations which form the underftanding (it is plain I 
dp not take this word in the fame fenfe as others) 
and to diftinguifh them from thofe it produces. 
On this difference the remaining part of this work 
is built ; this is the foundation of it. To thofe 
who fhould happen not to attend to this difference, 
every thing will appear confufed. 



H4 SECTION 



104 Origin of Part L 

SECTION III. 

Of Jimple and complex ideas. 

§ i.T3 Y complex idea I mean the reunion or col- 
JD ledtion of feveral perceptions ; and by Am- 
ple idea a perception fingly confidered. 

Though the qualities that affedt our fenfes, 
fays Mr. Locke *, are, in the things themfelves, 
fo united and blended, that there is no feparation, 
no diftance between them ^ yet it is plain, the ideas 
they produce in the mind, enter by the fenfes fimplc 
and unmixed. For though the fight and touch 
often take in from the fame objeft, at the fame 



CC 
4C 

cc 

cc 

cc 

cc 

cc 



" time, different ideas, as a man fees at once ma* 
tc tion and colour •, the hand feels foftnefs and 



cc 
cc 
cc 



cc 
cc 
cc 



warmth in the fame pfece of wax : yet the fimplc 
ideas thus united in the fame fubjedt, are as per-? 
feftly diftindt as thofe that come in by different 
" fenfes •, the coldnefs and hardnefs which a man 
feels in a piece of ice, being as diftindt ideas in 
the mind, as the fmell and whitenefs of a lily, 
or as the tafte of fugar, and fmell of a rofe : and 
<c there is nothing can be plainer to a man than 
cc the clear and diftindt perception he has of thofe 
" fimple ideas •, which being each in itfelf uncom- 
" pounded, contains in it nothing but one uniform 
iC appearance or conception in the mind, and is not 
iC diftinguifhable into different ideas." 

Though our perceptions are fufceptible of more 
or lefs vivacity, yet it would be wrong to imagine 
* gffay on Human Underftanding, book 2. c. ?. § i, 

that 



Se£t. 3. Human Knowledge. 105 

that each is compounded of feveral others. Suppofe 
you were to mix colours which differ only as they 
are more or lefs vivid, they would produce only 
one perception. 

It is true that we are apt to look upon as different 
degrees of the fame perception, all thofe which have 
lefs diftant relations. Yet this is becaufe for want 
of having as many names as perceptions, we have 
been obliged to reduce the latter to certain clafles : 
feparately confidered, there are none of them but 
what are fimple. How can we, for inftance, de- 
compound the perception caufed by the whitenefs 
of fnow ? fhall we diftinguifh feveral other white - 
neffes of which it is formed ? 

§ 2. All the operations of the mind confidered in 
their original, are equally fimple i for each is then 
no more than one perception. But afterwards they 
are combined in order to acft together in concert, 
and they form compound operations. This appears 
very plain in what we call penetration, difcermnent* 
Sagacity, &c. 

§ 3. Befides the ideas which are really fimple, we 
often look upon a colleftion of many perceptions 
as fuch, when related to a larger collection of which 
it conftitutes a part. There is even no notion, how 
compound foever, but may be confidered as fimple, 
by annexing the idea of unity to it. 

§ 4. Among complex ideas fome are com- 
pounded of different perceptions, fuch as that of 
J>ody : others are compounded of uniform percep- 
tions, or rather they are only the fame perception 
feveral times repeated. Sometimes the number is 
Dot determined, fuch is the abftraft idea of extern 

fion ; 



';o6 Origin of Parti. 

(ion :, at other times it is, determined •, a foot, for 
example* is the perception of an inch twelve time* 
repeated. 

§ 5. With regard to the ideas formed of different 
perceptions, there are two forts : thofe of fub- 
ftances, and thofe compounded of fimple ideas 
which relate to the different a&ions of men. The 
former to be of any ufe, muft be formed after the 
pattern of fubftances, and muft reprefent none but 
the properties which fubftances include. In the 
others a different conduft is obferved. It is 
frequently of confequence to form them, before 
having feen any patterns ; and moreover thefc 
patterns generally fpeaking would be too vague 
to ferve as a rule. An idea of virtue or of 
juftice framed in this manner, would vary accord- 
ing as particular cafes admitted of particular cir- 
cumftances : and the confufion would be carried fo 
far, that we fhould no longer be able to difcern 
juftice from injuftice ; an error into which a great 
many philofophers have fallen. What remains, 
therefore is only to colleft after eur own choice 
feveral fimple ideas, and to take thefe colle&ions 
when once determined, for the criterion by which we 
are to judge of things. Such are the ideas annexed 
to thefc words ; glory, honour, courage : I (hall call 
them archetypes ; a term fufficiently authorized hy 
modern metaphyficians. 

§ 6. Since fimple ideas are only our own percep- 
tions, the only way to know them, is to refledt on 
what we experience at the fight of obje&s. 

§ 7. It is the fame thing in regard to thofe com- 
plex ideas, which are only an indeterminate repcti- 
2 tion 



$e€t3- Human Knowledge! 107 

ticm of the lame perception. It is Sufficient, for 
inftance, to have an abftraft idea of perception* 
without confidering any determinate part of it as 
repeated a certain number of times. 

§ 8. As my bufinefs is to confider ideas only 
m regard to the manner in which we come to know 
them, I fhall make of thefe two forts but one 
clafs* Therefore when I fpeak of complex ideas, I 
am to he underftood of thofe which are formed of 
different perceptions, or of the fame perception re- 
peated in a determinate manner. 

§ 9. We cannot have a right knowledge of com- 
plex ideas, taken in the fenfe to which they have 
been juft now confined, without analyzing them ; 
that is, we muft reduce them to the fimple ideas of 
which they are compounded, and follow the pro- 
grefs of their formation. It is thus we have framed 
la Quriclves an idea of the underftanding. Philofo- 
phers have hitherto been ignorant that this method 
might be praftifed in metaphyfics : the means they 
ufe to fupply this defeft, only increafe the confufion, 
and multiply difputes. 

§ 10. From hence we may conclude the inutility 
Of definitions ; that is, of thofe propofitions where- 
in we attempt to explain the properties of things by 
a genus and difference. i°. It is impoffible to ufe 
them, when treating of fimple ideas. This has 
been demonftrated by Locke * ; and it is very ex- 
traordinary that he is the firft who made this obfer- 
ration. As thofe philofophers who wrote before him, 
did not know how to difcern thofe ideas which were 

* Book 3. c. 4. 

definable" 



■u'- 



r " 

108 Origin of Parti? 

definable from thofe which were not fo, we may* 
eafily judge of the confufion which is to be found 
Uv their writings. The Cartefians were not igno- 
rant that there are fome ideas much clearer than 
ajl the definitions that can be given of them -, but they 
did not know the reafon of this, obvious as it may 
fcem to be. Thus they give themfelves a great 
deal of pains to define fome very fimple ideas ; while 
they think it ncedlefs to define others that are ex- 
tremely complex. This fhews how difficult it is to 
make even the fmalleft progrefs in philofophy. 
. Secondly, definitions are of very little ufe in 
giving an exadt idea of things of a complex na- 
ture. Even the very beft of them are not equi- 
valent to an imperfedt analylis. This is becauie 
they are always made up in part of fome gratis diSum \ 
or at leaft there are no rules to affure us of the con- 
trary. In making an analyfis we are obliged to 
follow the very original of the thing : fo that when 
it is well made, it infallibly reconciles opinions, and 
thereby puts an end to difputes. 

§11. Though geometricians are no ftrangers to 
this method, yet they are not exempt from miftakes. 
Sometimes they happen not to hit on the real 
origin of things, even on occafions, where it would 
not be difficult to do it. Of this we have a proof 
at the very entrance of geometry. After telling us 
that a point is that which terminates it/elf on every 
fide ; that which has no other bounds than it f elf '; or 
that which has neither lengthy breadth, nor depth, they 
make it move in order to produce a line. After^ 
wards they make a line move to produce a furface ; 
and a furface to produce a folid. 

In 



4 

* 



Seffc. 3. Human Knowledge. 1 *Jotj 

In the firft place I obferve that they fall here into 
the fame miftake as other philofophers, viz. they 
want to define a very fimple thing : a miftake 
that may be faid to be one of the confequenceS of 
their favourite fynthefis, which requires ; that every 
jthing be defined. 

Secondly, the word bounds fo neceffarily. implies 
a relation to fomething extended, that it is impoffible 
to imagine a thing which terminates itfelf on every 
fide, or which has no other bounds than itfelf. ■: Be^ 
fides, the privation of length, breadth, and depth, 
is not an idea eafy enough to be the firft exhibited. \ 
Thirdly, we cannot reprefent to ourfelves the 
movement of a point without extenfion, and much 
lefs the track which it is fuppofed to leave behind it 
to produce a line. With regard to a line, we may 
indeed apprehend.it in motion according to the de>- 
termination of its length, but not according to the 
determination which Ihould produce a furface ; for 
then it is in the fame cafe as a point. The famfc 
.we may fay in jfefpedt to a furface moved to pro- 
duce a folid. 

§ 12. It appears very plainly that the intent of 
.geometricians was to conform themfelves to the 
origin of things, or to that of ideas ; but they have 
: not fucceeded. 

It is impoffible to have the ufe of one's fenfes, 
• without immediately having the idea of extenfion 
. with all its dimenfions. That of folidity is there- 
fore one of the firft which they tranfmit to us. Now 
' fuppofe you take a folid, and confider one extremity 
of it, without attending to its breadth, you fhall 
: Juve the idea .of *. furface, or of an extenfion in 
; 2 length 



ifo Origin of Part f • 

length and breadth without depth. For your re- 
flexion is no more than the idea of the thing oft 
which it is employed. 

Suppofe you take this furface afterwards, and 
think *on its length without minding its breadth * 
you fhall have the idea of a line, or of extenfioft 
in length, without breadth and without depth. 

If in fine you reffedt on an extremity of this line, 
without attending to its length, you fhall form 1ft 
■yourfclf the idea of a point, or of that which in 
geometry is taken for what has neither length* 
breadth, nor depth. 

By this means you fhall eafily frame to yourfelf 
the ideas of apoint, line, and furface. It is obvious 
•that all this depends on the ftudy of experience, in 
tffder to explain the origin of ideas in the fame 
ofder, in which they are framed. This method i* 
-particularly indifpenfable, when we are treating of 
■aBftraft ideas ; for it is the only way of explaining 
•them with pcrfpicuity. 

§ 13. We may obfcrve two eflential different 
between fimple and complex ideas, i*. The mind 
is merely paffive in the produdtion of the former * 
it cannot form to itfelf the idea of a colour which 
it has never feen. On the contrary it is a&ive in 
the formation of the latter. It is the mind that 
conncfts the fimple ideas either from fome pat- 
tern, or of its own choice ; in a word, they are the 
cffedt of reflexion and experience. I fhall more 
particularly diftinguifh them by the name of notions. 
2 . We have no meafurc to find out the excefs 6f 
one fimple idea beyond another ; and the reafon is 
becaufe they cannot be divided. It is not the fame 

in 



Seft. 3. HUMAK K'NOWLtDGl" lit 

in regard to complex ideas : we know exa&ly the 
differehce of two jrcimbers, becaufe the unit, their 
common meafurfc, is always equal. We may like- 
wife reckon among fimple ideas, feme complex 
notions, which being formed of different percep*- 
tions, have not fo exaft a meafure as stn unit. If 
there are any relations which cannot be rated, ; it fe 
only thofe of fittiple ideas. For example, we tsc- 
aftly can tell the difference between the ideas im- 
•nexed to the Word gold, and thofe annexed to the 
word pinchbeck, but cannot meafufe the diffefleffcie of 
the colour of thefe metals, becaufe the pergfcptidh 
of them is fimple and iftdivifible. 

§ 14. Simple and complex ideas agree in thfe, 
that they may be equally confidered as abfolUte sand 
as relative. They are abfolute, when dwelling tipoh 
them, we make them (he objaft of reflexion with- 
out comparing them to others. But When con- 
'lidered as fubordinace to one another, they are call- 
ed relations. 

§ 15. Archetypes ha^e two advantages : the firft 
^is that of being adequate •, they are Handing pit- 
- terns, of which the mind is capable of acquiring 
fo perfeft a knowledge, that there fhall remain 
nothing further for it to difcover. This is evident, 
becaufe thefe notions cartnot include any other fimple 
■ideas, than fuch as the mind itfelf has collcft- 
"ed. The fecond advantage is a confequence of the 
former ; it confifts in this, that all the relations be- 
tween them may be perceived -, for by knowing the 
feveral fimple ideas of which they are formed, we 
are able to make every poffible -analyfis of them. 

But 



112 Origin of Part I. 

But the notions of fubftanccs have not the fame 
advantages r they are neceffarily inadequate, becaufe 
we compare them to patterns, in which we can every 
day difcover new properties. Confequently, we 
cannot know the feveral relations between two fub- 
ftances. It may be commendable to endeavour at 
an increafe of our knowledge in this refpeft by ex- 
perience •, but it is ridiculous to flatter ourfelves with 
the hopes of ever rendering it perfedt. 

And yet we muft take notice that this knowledge 
is not obfcure and confufed, as fome people imagine ; 
it is only limited. It is in our power to Ipeak of 
fubftances with the utmoft exaftnefs, provided we do 
riot include in our ideas and in our expreflions,. any 
. more than what we have learnt from conftant obfer- 
vation. 

§ 1 6. The fynonymous terms thought , operation, 
perception* fenfation, confeioufnefs, notion, are of fuch 
great ufe in metaphyfics, that it is eflentially 
nece/Tary to mark the difference between them. 
Thought I call whatever the mind feels, whether by 
external impreffion, or by the ufe it makes of its 
reflexion : operation, thought, inafmuch as it is pro- 
per for producing fome change in the mind, and 
by this means of inftru&ing and conducting it : 
perception, the impreflion produced Wthin us at the 
pretence of the objects : fenfation, this very im- 
prellion as it comes by the fenfes : confeioufnefs, the 
notice we lake of it : iJej, the notice we take of it as 
an image : jv:/.\*,\ every idea which is our own pro- 
duction. This is (lie fignification, in which I make 
ufe of thele word*. They cannot be taken indiffe- 
rently one tor ihc oihcr» except when we have need 

only 



Se£h 3. Human Knowledge. 113 

only of the principal idea which they fignify. Sim- 
ple ideas may indifcriminately be called perceptions 
or ideas ; but we cannot call them notions, bc- 
caufe-they are not the produ&ion of the mind. 
We ftiould not fay the notion of while, but the per- 
ception of white. Notions in their turn may be con- 
fidered as images : confequently we may give them 
the name of ideas, but never that of perception. 
This would be fignify ing that they are not our 
production. We may fay the notion ofboldnefs, but 
not the perception of boldnefs : or if we have a mind 
to make ufe of this term, we muft fay the percept 
tions which compefe the notion of boldnefs. In a word, 
as we have no other confeioufnefs of the impreflions 
made within the mind, than as of fomething fimple 
and indivifible •, the term perception ought to be coo- 
fined to fimple ideas, or at leaft to thofe which are 
confidered as fuch with regard to more complex 
motions. 

I have ftill a remark to make on the words idea 
and notion : this is, that as the former fignifies a 
perception confidered as an image, and the fecond 
an idea which the mind has framed to itfelf, ideas 
and notions can appertain only to beings capable of 
reflexion. Brutes have only fenfations and percep- 
tions : that which in them is no more than a percep- 
tion, becomes an idea in us by the reflexion wc 
make, that this perception reprefents fomething. 



I SECTION 



H4 Origin or Parti. 

SECTION IV. 

* 

C H A P. I. 

Of the operation by which we give Jigns to our ideas. 

THIS operation is the refult of the imagination, 
which prefents figns to the mind with which 
it had been as yet unacquainted ; and of the attention 
which connects them with our ideas. It is one of 
the rnoft effential operations in the ftudy of truth ; 
and yet it is one of thofe which are leaft known. I 
•have already fhewn the ufe and neceflity of figns in 
acquiring a habit of the operations of the mind. I 
.fhall now demonftrate the. lame thing, confidering 
them in regard to the different fpecies of ideas. This 
is a truth which cannot be too often exhibited under 
different views. 

§ 

§ i. Arithmetic furnifhes us with a very fenfible 
example of the neceflity of figns. If after having 
given name to a unit, we did not fucceflively 
imagine others for the feveral ideas which we form 
by the multiplication of this firft one, it would be 
impoflible for us to make any progrefs in the know*- 
ledge of numbers. We difcern different combinations, 
only becaufe we have cyphers whidi are themfelves 
very diftindh Take away thefe cyphers, take away all 
the figns in ufe, and we fhall find it impoflible to pre- 
ferve any idea of thofe combinations. Can we form' 
to ourfelves a notion even of the fmalleft number, 

fi without 



.geit. 4. Human Knowledge. 115 

without confidering feveral objedte, each of which is 
in fume mcafure the fign to which we affix the unit ? 
For my part, I perceive the numbers tzvo or three? 
only as I reprefent to myfelf two or three different 
objects. If I proceed to the number four, I arm 
obliged, for greater eafe, to imagine two objects 
on one fide and two on the other : coming to num- 
ber^, I cannot help distributing them by two and 
.two, or three and three ; and if I have a mind to 
go further, I fhail foon be ui^der a jieceflity of con- 
Bering feveral units as a fingle one, and to reunite 
.them for this purpofe in a fingle object. 
;:.■$ 2. Locke * makes mention of lome Americans* 
who had no idea of the number thoufand, becaufe 
■they had contrived names only for reckoning as far 
as twenty. I may add that they would have found 
iome difficulty to form an idea of the number one 
,and twenty ; for the following reafon. 

From thfe nature of our way of calculating, it i$ 
.fufficicnt to have ideas of the firft numbers, in 
order to form ideas to ourfelves of every number 
•that can poffibly be determined. This is becaufe 
the firft figns being given, we have rules for in- 
venting others. Thofe who fhould be ignorant af 
this method fo far as to be obliged to affix each 
combination to fuch figns as bear no analogv to 
one another, would find no affiftance to dire£t them 
in the invention of figns : of courfe,. they would not 
•have the fame facility as we in forming new ideas. 
Such in all probability was the cafe of thofe Ameri- 
cans. Hence they not only had no idea of the 

• B<jok a. c. 16". $ 6. He fays that he converted with 
them. 

: I I 2 number 



u6 Origin op Parti. 

number thtfufand, but it was even difficult for them 
to form immediately an idea of any number above 
twenty *. 

§ 3. The progrefs therefore of our knowledge in 
numbers, is intirely owing to the exadtnefs with 
which we have added the unit to itfelf, by giving 
to each progreflion a name which diftinguilhes it 
from the preceding and fubfequent number. I 
know that a hundred exceeds a unit by ninety nine, 
and is lefs by a unit than a hundred and one, becaufe 
I recoiled that thefe are three figns which I have 
pitched upon to point out three fucceffive numbers. 

§ 4. We muft not deceive ourfelves, by imagin- . 
ing that the ideas of numbers feparate from their 
figns, are fomething clear and determinate -fv No- 
thing can reunite more units in the mind, than the 
very name to which they have been affixed. If a 
peribn fhould afk me the meaning of a thoufandj 
what anfwer can I give him, but that this word 
fixes a certain combination of units in my mind ? If 

* There can be no manner of doubt of what has been here 
advanced, fince the relation of M. de la Condamine. He 
jnakes mention (p. 67.) of a people who had no other fign tm 
exprefa the number three than this, pesllarrarorincourac. Thefe 
people having begun to reckon in fo inconvenient a manner, it 
was not eafy for them to reckon any farther. We ought 
not therefore to find it difficult to comprehend, that thefe were, 
as we have been allured, the boundaries of their arithmetic. 

•f- Mallebranche thought that the numbers perceived by pure 
under/landing, are fomething far fuperior to thofe which fall 
under the fenfes. St. Auftin in his confeffions, the Platonifts, 
and all the favourers of innate ideas, laboured under the faof 
prejudice. 



Se&. 4- Human Knowledge. 117 

he ftill afks me concerning this combination, it is 
evident that I cannot make him perceive it at once in 
ail its parts. It remains therefore that I fucceflively 
prefent tc/ him the feveral names which have been in- 
vented to fignify the progreffions that precede it. I 
muft learn him to join one unit to another, and to 
unite them by the fign two \ a third to the two 
preceding, and to affix them to the fign three ; and 
fb on. By this, which is the only way, I fhall 
conduit him from different numbers to a thoufand. 

Let him afterwards examine into his mind, and 
all he diftinftly knows of the matter he (hall find to 
be thefc three things : the idea of the unit, the idea 
of the operation by which he has feveral times add- 
ed the unit to itfelf, and in fine the remembrance of 
having imagined the fign thoufand after the figns 
nine hundred and ninety nine, nine hundred and ninety 
eighty &c. But furely it is neither by the idea of 
the unit, nor by the idea of the operation which 
has multiplied it, that this number is determined ; 
for thefe things are equally found in all the other 
combinations. Therefore fince the fign thoufand 
belongs only to this combination, it is this fign alone 
that determines and, diftinguifhes it. 
• § 5, Hence it is beyond all manner of doubt, 
that if a perfon wanted only to calculate for himfelf, 
he would be equally obliged to invent figns, as if 
he wanted to communicate his calculations. But 
why fhould that which is true in arithmetic, not be 
the fame in other fciences ? Should we be capable 
ever to refledl on metaphyfics and morals, if we 
had not invented figns to fix our ideas, in propor- 
tion as we formed new combinations ? Should not 

I 3 words 



u8 Origin or. Parti." 

words be the fame in regard to our ideas in th« 
feveral fciences, as cyphers are to our ideas in arith- 
metic ? In all probability the ignorance of thi» 
truth is one of the caufes of the confufiAn which. 
prevails in works of metaphyfics and morality. In 
order to handle this fubjed: methodically, we tnuft 
take a curfory view of the feveral ideas which miy 
be the object of our reflection. 

§ 6. Nothing, I think, can be added to what hat 
been already faid concerning fimple ideas. Cer- 
tain it is that we frequently refledt on our pereep-* 
tions without recolledling more than their names, Qt 
the circumftances in which we have experienced 
them. It is even by their conne&ion alone with 
thefe figns, that the imagination is capable of reviv- 
ing them at will. 

The mind is fo limited that we cannot revive 
a great number of ideas to render them all at 
the fame time the fubjeft of our reflexion, And 
yet it is oftentimes neceflary that we fhould confider 
feveral of them together. This we do with the 
afliftancc of figns, which, by being combined, makes 
us confider them as if they were only one idea. 

§ 7. There are two cafes, in which we combine 
fimple ideas under a fingle fign : this is done after 
feme pattern, or without patterns, 

I find a body, andT fee that it is extended, figu* 
fate, divifibie, folid, hard, capable of motion and reft, 
yellow, fufible, dy&ile, malleable, very heavy, fixed, 
and that it has a capacity of being diflblved in aqu* 
regia y &c. It is very certain that if I cannot com- 
municate to a perfon all at once an idea of thefe 
feveral qualities* I cannot recajl them to my own 
fnind, but by taking a review of them in fuccefiion 

one 



Se£t. 4* Human Knowledge. iip- 

one after the other. But if, upon finding myfelf 
incapable to view them all at the fame time, I 
ihould think of one only, for example, of its 
colour ; fo inadequate an idea would be of no ufe 
to me, but would oftentimes make me confound 
this body with fuch as refcmble it in this refpedh 
To extricate myfelf from this difficulty, I invent 
the word gold, and I accuftom myfelf to conne<5t it 
with all the ideas above enumerated. When I come 
afterwards to think on the notion of gold, I per- 
ceive only the found of the word gold, and the re- 
membrance of having connected it with a certain 
number of fimple ideas, which I cannot revive all 
at once, but which I have feen co-exifting in the 
fame fubje<5t, and which I recall to mind one after 
the other, juft as my will diredts. 

We cannot therefore refleft on fubftances, but 
as we have figns to determine the number and van 
riety of the properties which we have obferved in 
them, and which we chufe to combine in complex 
ideas, according as they really are in the external 
objefts. Let us for a moment forget all thefe figns, 
and try to revive the ideas of them ; we fhali find 
that words or other equivalent figns, are fo greatly 
necefiary, that they fupply, as it were in our minds, 
the place which is occupied by the obje&s without. 
As the qualities of things would not coexift inde- 
pendently of us, were it not for the objedts in which 
they are collefted •, fo the ideas of them would not 
coexift in the mind, were it not for the figns in 
which they are in like manner united. 

§ 8. The neceflity of figns is ftill very obvious in 
thofe complex ideas which we form without patterns. 

I 4 When 



120 Origin or Parti 

When once we have combined fuch ideas as we fee 
no where elfe united, which generally happens -in 
archetypes ; who is it that could fix their com- 
binations, if we did not conned them with words 
which are the chain, as it were, that hinders them 
from efcaping our memory ? If you imagine that 
the names of things are of no ufe, cancel them 
from your memory, and try to refledt on civil and 
moral laws, on virtues and' vices, in fhort on all 
human aftions, and you will foon perceive your 
miftake. You will acknowledge that at every com- 
bination you make, if you have no figns to deter- 
mine the number of fimple ideas which you wanted 
to combine, you can hardly advance one ftep without 
finding yourfclf in a labyrinth. You will be juft 
in the fame dilemma, as a perfon that fhould want 
to calculate, by repeating feveral times one, one, 
one, and did not imagine figns for each combina- 
tion. This man would never form to himfelf the 
idea of twenty, becaufe he could not be allured 
that he had exaftly repeated all the units. 

§ 9. Let us conclude that in order to have ideas 
on which we may be capable of refle&ing, we have 
need of imagining figns that may ferve as chains to 
the different combinations of fimple ideas ; and that 
our notions are exaft, no farther than as we have 
invented regular figns to fix them. 

§ 10. This truth is fufficient to convince thofc 
who are willing to refleft on what pafies within 
themfelves, how greatly the number of words which 
we have laid up in our memory, exceeds that of 
our ideas. This muft naturally fo happen •, either 
becaufe as reflexion fucceeds the memory, it has 

not 



Se&.4- Human Knowledge." 121 

not always carefully reviewed the ideas to which 
figns had been given ; or becaufe we find there is 
a confiderable interval between the time, in which we 
begin to cultivate the memory of a child by im- - 
printing Qn it a 'great many words, the ideas of 
which he is not as yet capable of remarking •, and 
that in which he begins to be capable of analyzing 
his notions, in order to give fome account of them. 
When this operation follows, it is too tardy to be 
able to keep pace with the memory, which from 
long pra&ice has acquired activity and eafe. How 
laborious a talk would it be to examine all the 
different figns ? They are therefore ufed juft a§ 
they occur, and we are generally fatisfied with 
coming pretty near their meaning. From thence it 
happens that of all operations, the analytic method 
is that which lead obtains. How many men are 
there who never ufe it at all ? By experience at 
leaft we find, that it has lefs praftice, in proportion 
to the greater cultivation of the memory and ima- 
gination. I therefore repeat it j that whofoever enters 
into himfelf, will find a great number of figns to 
which he has annexed but very inadequate ideas, and 
even a great many to which he has annexed none at 
all. Hence arifes that confufion which we find in 
the abftradt fciences, a confufion which philofophers 
have not been able to remove, becaufe none of 
them was acquainted with its original caufe. Locke 
is the only one in favour of whom we are allowed 
to make fome exception. 

§11. From this truth it likewife appears, how 
fimple and how admirable are the fprings of human 
knowledge. The foul has felt various fenfations 

and 



I2& Origin op Part I. 

and operations : how then fliall it difpofe of thefe 
materials ? By geftures, by figns, by founds, by 
cyphers, by letters •, by inilruments fo foreign as 
thefe from our ideas, we fet them to work, in 
order to raife ourfclves even to the fublimeft know- 
ledge. The materials are the fame in all men ; but 
the art of making ufe of figns varies ; and from 
thence the inequality which is to be obferved among 
mankind. 

Take away from a fuperior genius the ufe of cha- 
racters •, and you debar him of a deal of knowledge 
to which a perfon of middling abilities may eafily 
attain.* Take away from him likewife the ufe of 
fpeech •, and the fate of mutes will fhew you to what 
narrow limits you confine him. In fine deprive him 
of the ufe of all forts of figns, fo as he fhall not 
be able to make the leaft gefture with propriety, in 
order to exprefs the moft ordinary thought; and 
he will be no more to you than a driveler. 

§ 12. It were to be wifhed that thofc who ate 
cntrufted with the education of children, were not 
ignorant of the firft fprings of the human mind. 
If a preceptor perfectly acquainted with the origin 
and progrefs of our ideas, entertained his pupil, 
only upon matters which have the neareft relation to 
his wants and to his age ; if he managed fo as to 
place him in fuch circumftances as are beft adapted 
lor learning him to form to himfelf precife ideas, 
and to fix them by conftant figns ; if even in play- 
ing he never made ufe of words, whofe fenfe 
was not exa&Iy determined ; would not -this be the 
way to open and enlarge the mind of his pupil ? But 
how few parents are able to procure fuch tutors for 

their 



5e&. 4. Human Knowledge. 123 

their children ? and how fewer are thofc tutors who 
may be judged really capable of anfwering thefe expec- 
tations ? And yet it is of fervice to know every thing 
that can contribute towards a good education. If 
it cannot be always put in practice, perhaps we may 
avoid at leaft whatever is dire&ly contrary to it. 
We ought never, for ihftance, to confound children 
with paralogifms, fophifms, and other falfe argu- 
mentations. By giving ourfelves fuch liberties of 
trifling, we run the rifk of confounding and even 
vitiating their under (landings. We fhould never 
ufe any captious ^arguments with them, by way of 
fharpening their wits, till their minds had attained 
to great perfpicuity and precifion. I (hould be glad 
that proper caution were ufed, to prevent every in- 
convenience that may happen ; but reflexions of 
this nature would lead me too far from my fubjedh 
In the following chapter I ihall confirm by ia&s 
what I think has been demonftrated in this 5 and 
from thence I fliall have occafion of ftill developing 
tnore clearly my opinion. 



CHAP. II, 

Fatts confirming what has been demonftrated in tbt 

preceding chapter. 

" § 13TN the city of Chartres, a young man of 
" X t hree and twenty, a tradefman's fon, 

." who was born deaf and dumb, began all of a 
" fudden to fpcak, to the great furprize of the 
* 4 whole town. He informed them that three or 

2 " four 



CI 

c« 



« 

^24. Origin of Parti. 

44 four months before, he had heard the found of 
4C beils, and that he had been greatly aftonifhed 
44 at this new and unexperienced fenfation. After- 
44 wards a kind of water iflued from his left ear, 
44 and he then perfectly heard with both ears. He 
44 was three or four months a liftening without 
44 faying a word, accuftoming himfelf to repeat 
foftiy what he had heard, and confirming himfelf 
in the pronunciation and in the ideas annexed to 
the words. At length he thought himfelf quali- 
44 fied to break filence, and he declared that he 
4< Ipoke, though as yet only imperfectly, Imme- 
44 diately fome eminent divines examined him in 
<c regard to his pall ftate, and their principal quef- 
41 tions were on God, on the foul, on the moral 
44 goodnefs and badnefs of human aftions. He did 
44 not feem to have carried his thoughts fo far. 
Though he was born of Catholic parents, went 
to niais, and was taught to make the fign of 
4i the crofs, and to put himfelf on his knees in the 
44 pofture of a perfon that prays •, yet he never had 
44 joined any intention to thofe external aftions, nor 
C4 did he underfcand what others meant by them. He 
44 did not even diftindtly know what it was to dye, 
44 nor did he ever think about it. He led a mere ani- 
44 mal life, intirely buficd with the prefent obje&s of 
44 fen-fe, a/id with the few ideas tranfmitted by the 
eyes. Nor did he extraft from the comparifon 
of his ideas all that one would imagine he might. 
Not that he wanted underftanding ; but the un- 
derstanding of a man deprived of the communis 
44 cation of others, is lb very little cultivated, that 

44 it 



41 



44 
44 

44 



Se£t.4« Human Knowledge. 125 

*' it thinks only as it is indifpenfably forced fo to do 
<c by external objedts. The principal fond of the 
" ideas of mankind is their mutual converfe." 

§14. This fa£t is in the Memoirs of the Aca- 
demy of Sciences *. It were to be wifhed they had 
examined this young man concerning what few ideas 
he had, while he was without the ufe of fpeech '; 
what were the firft ideas he acquired after he recof- 
•vered his hearing •, what afliftance he received either 
from external obje&s, or from what he heard faid, 
or from his own reflexion, to form new ideas ; in a 
word, concerning every thing that might give him 
an opportunity of improving his mind. Experi- 
ence afts fo early upon us, that it is not furprizing if 
■ we often miftake it for nature herfelf. On die con- 
trary here it afts fo late, that it would have beeii 
eafy to have avoided any miftake; But the divines 
wanted to fee what nature had done, and notwith- 
(landing their abilities, they could make no difco- 
very either of nature or of experience. All that we 
can do is to fupply their account by conjeftures. 

§ 15. I imagine that for twenty three years, this 
young man was nearly in the fame ftate as that 
• wherein I reprefented the foul, when having no com- 
mand as yet of her attention, fhe gives it to objefts, 
not according to her choice, but as Ihe is impelled 
by the force with which they aft upon her. It is 
true that being brought up in fociety, he received 
from thence fuch afliftance as made him conneft 
fopie of his ideas with figns. There is no doubt 
but he could by geftures fignify his neceflitics, and 

* The year 1703. p. 1 %. 

the 



126 Origin of Part L 

the things which might relieve them. But as he 
wanted names to point out thofe things which had 
not fo great a relation to himfelf, and as he had little 
or no inducement to fupply them by fome other 
means, and he received no external afiiftance, he 
never thought of them except when he had an ac- 
tual perception. His attention being intirely at- 
tracted by lively fenfations, ceafed with thefe fenfa- 
tions : then he had no habit of contemplation and 
much lefs of memory. 

§ 1 6. Sometimes our confcioufnefs, being divided 
among a great number of perceptions, which a£t upon 
us with very near an equal force, is fo feeble and 
imperfect, that we have no remembrance at all of 
what we have felt. We fcarce perceive that we exift : ' 
whole days would then Aide away like moments 
without our making any difference between them ; 
and we fhould a thoufand times feel the fame per- 
ception, without obferving that we ever had it. A 
perfon who by the ufe of figns has acquired a great 
many ideas, and is become familiar with them, 
cannot long remain in this kind of lethargy. The 
greater his ftock of ideas, the more reafon there is 
to believe that fome of them will have occafion to 
be revived, to exercife his attention, and to draw 
him out of this dead fleep. Confequently the 
fewer ideas, the more ufual muft this lethargy be. 
Judge therefore whether during the twenty three 
years that the young man of Chartres was deaf and 
dumb, his mind was often capable of attention, 
reminifcence, and reflexion. 

§ 1 7. If the practice of thefe firft operations was 
fo limited, how much more fo muft that of the 

others 



SeQ:. 4- Human Knowledge. 127 

others have been ? Incapable of fixing and exa&ly 
detefmining the ideas he received by the fenfes, he 
could neither by compounding nor decompounding 
them, form notions to himfelf juft as he pleafed* 
As he had not figns fufficiently commodious for 
comparing his ideas of the moil familiar kind, he 
very rarely formed any judgment. It is even pro- 
bable that for the firft three and twenty years of 
his life, he did not form one fingie reafoning, Tb 
reafon is to frame judgments, and to conned them 
by obferving their dependency jon one another. 
Now this young man could do no fucli thing, 5> 
long as he had not the ufe of conjunctions, or of 
particles expreffing the relations of the different parte 
of fpeech. It was therefore natural that hejhould not 
-txtraff from the comparifon of his ideas all that one 
would think be might have done. His reflexion hav- 
"ing only lively or new fenfations for its object, had 
-no influence on the greateft part of his actions, and 
but very little on the reft. He was directed only by 
.habit and imitation, efpecially in things which had 
.lefs relation to his wants. Thus it is that comply- 
ing with what the piety of his parents required of 
;him, he never thought on the motive they, might 
have had, and was ignorant of any duty of inten- 
tion, Perhaps the imitation was fo much the more 
cxaft, as it was not accompanied by reflexion ; for 
the minds of thofe are lefs fubjedt to wapder who 
are lefs capable of reflecting.. 

§ 18. One would think that to know what is life, 

it is fufflcient to exift and to feel. And yet, though 

^ it may feem a paradox, I will venture to fay that 

this young man had hardly any idea of life* - To ,a 

being 



12? Ohigin op Parti. 

being that docs not refledt, even to ourfelves in 
thofe, moments in which though awake we ftarcc 
do more than vegetate, fenfations are only fenfa- 
tions ; nor do they become ideas till reflexion makes 
us confider them as the images of fome thing. True 
it is they dire&ed this young man in the purfuit of 
whatever was ufcful for his prefervation, and kept 
him away from whatever might hurt him : but he 
followed their impreffion without reflefting on pre- 
fervation or deftru&ion. A proof of the truth here 
advanced is that he did not diftin&ly know what 
death was. If he had known what it was to live, 
would not he have feen as diftindtly as ourfelves, 
that death is only. the privation of life* ? 

§ 19. We find in this young man fome feeble 
traces of the operations of the mind : but if we ex- 
cept perception, confcioufnefs, attention, reminif* 
cence, and imagination not as yet fubjed to our 
difpofal, we fhall not find the leaft veftige of the 
reft in a perfon whom we may fuppofe to have 
been deprived of all communication with fociety, 
and who with found and perfeft organs had been 
trained up, for inftance, among the bears of the 
foreft. Having fcarce any reminifcence, he would 
frequently pafs through the fame ftatc, without per- 
ceiving that he had ever been in it. Having no 
memory, he would have no fign to fupply the ab- 

* Death may be like wife taken for the paffage from this, 
life to another. But this is not the fenfe in which we are here 
to underftand it. M. de Fontenelle having faid that this* 
young man had no idea of God, nor of the foul, it is plain 
that he had no idea of death taken for the paflage from this 
to another life, 

fence 



.Se&i4- Human Knowledge. 129 

fence of things. His imagination not being fubor- 
dinate to his command, his perceptions could be 
revived, only as chance fhould prefeht to him an 
©bjedt with which fomc particular circumftances 
had connefted thofe perceptions : in fine being with- 
out reflexion, he would receive the impreffions 
which the objefts made on his fenfes, and would 
obey them only by inftindfc. He would imitate the 
bears in every thing, have a cry almoft like theirs, 
and creep on all four : we are fo ftrongly inclined 
to imitation, that perhaps a Defcartes in his fituatioh 
would not try to walk ereft. 

§ 20. But here fome will fay, would not the ne- 
ceffity of providing for his wants, and of fatisfying 
his paflions, be fufficient for acquiring a habit of 
. the feveral operations of the mind ? 

I ahfwer in the negative ; becaufe fo long as he 
lived without converfing with the reft of mankind* 
he would have no occafion to conned: his ideas with 
arbitrary figns. He would have no memory ; confe- 
quently his imagination would not be in his power : 
from whence it follows that he would be intirely in- 
capable of reflexion. 

§ 21. And yet his imagination would have one 
advantage over ours * which is that it would revive 
the obje&s in a more lively manner. We have fo 
great a conveniency in recalling our ideas by tlit 
afliftance of memory, that the imagination is fel- 
dom employed. On the contrary as this operatibn 
in the perfon abovementioned fupplied the place of 
all the reft, its vivacity would be in proportion to his 
wants, and would revive the perceptions with greater 

K force, 



i;o Origin of Parti. 

force. This may be confirmed by the example of 
blind people who have commonly a more exquifite 
fenfe of feeling than we ; for the very fame reafon 
may be given in both cafes. 

§ 22. But this man would never be able of himfelF 
to difpofe of the operations of his mind. To un- 
derftand this, let us fee under what circumftances he 
could acquire the aft and habit of them. 

Suppofc that a monfter which this man has ieen 
devouring other animals, or which the brutes he 
lives with have learnt him to fhun, advances to- 
wards him : this fight draws his attention, revive* 
the idea of terror connefted with that of the mon- 
fter, and difpofes him to fly. He cfcapes, but 
the tremor with which his body is feized, preferves 
the idea for fome time prefent •, this is contem- 
plation : a little while after by chance he goes 
to the fame place ; the idea thereof revives that 
of the monfter with which it was conncfted : this 
is imagination. In fine, fince he knows himfelf 
to be the fame being that was already in that 
place, he is likewife poflefied of reminifcence. By 
this it appears that the habit of thefe operations 
depends on a certain concurrence of circumftances, 
which affedt him in a particular manner ; and 
confequently that it ought to ceafe, as foon is 
thefe circumftances ceafe. When this man's fright 
is over, if we fuppofc he does not return to the 
fame place, or that he returns only when the idea of 
it is no longer connc&ed with that of the mort- 
fter, we fhall find nothing in him that is adapt- 
ed for recalling what he has feen. We cannot re- 
vive our ideas, but as they are conne&ed with fomc 

2 figns: 



"man Knowledge. 13! 

1 only with the circumftances 
1 • nnnot therefore recall 
> be ' in thofe very 
: • y. .ids the habit of the 
■'•ii.i ..c has it not in his power, 
•■ c .. luck them by himfelf. He 
• :v \\ ;*ion which the objects make 
1 •• ought not to expe£t that he 
; : giving any marks of reafon. 
. !iere advancing mere conje&ures. v 
:■.. v.- Bering on Lithuania and Ruflia, a 
:: years old was caught in 1695, who 
;:^ht up among bears. He fhewed no 
.;ibn, fpoke no language, but walked on 
;id formed fuch founds as did not in the 
i.ble thofe of the human fpecies. It was a 
ne before he could utter fome words, and 
jx he did it in a very uncouth manner. As 
s he could fpeak, they interrogated him about 
•rmer ftate, but he remembered no more of it, 
we do what has happened to us in our cradle *. 
24. This fadt fufficiently proves the truth of 
.iat I have advanced concerning the progrefs of 
le operations of the mind. It was eafy to forefee 
.nar this boy could not recolledt his former ftate. 
He might remember fome fmall matter of it at the 
si trcry time he was taken out of it : but this remem- 
brance being the effedt of an attention rarely given, 
m *nd never ftrengthened by reflexion, was fo weak 
that the traces of it were cancelled during the fpace 
cl^pfed from the moment of his beginning to form 

< 
*- .* Connor, in evarg. med. art. 15. pag. 133. & feq. 

: - K 2 ivieas, 



132 Origin of Parti. 

ideas, 2nd the time in which they could aflc him any 
queftions. Suppofing, in order to try every hypo- 
thecs, that he had likewife remembered the time 
tfhen he lived in the foreil, it would have been 
impoffiblc for him to reprefent it to himfelf but by 
the perceptions which he would have recalled to 
mind. Thefe perceptions could be very few ; and 
as he had no remembrance of thofe which had 
preceded, followed, or interrupted them, he would 
never have recollefted the fucceflion of the parts of 
this time. The confequence of this muft have 
been, that he never would have fufpe&ed it to have 
had any beginning, and yet he would have confidcr- 
ed it only as an inftant. In a word, the confided 
remembrance of his former ftate would have reduced 
him to the abfurdity of imagining himfelf to have 
always exifted, though he was yet incapable of re- 
prefenting his pretended eternity to himfelf but as a 
moment. I do not queftfon but he would have 
been greatly furprized, as foon as he had been told 
that he had begun to cxift ; and ftill more fo when 
he had been alfo told that he had paffed through 
different degrees of growth. Hitherto incapable of 
reflexion, he never would have taken notice of fuch 
infenfible changes, fo that he would naturally have 
been inclined to believe that he had been always the 
fame as he found himfelf at the very inftant when 
he was firft induced to reflect on his condition. 

§ 25. The learned fecretary of the Academy of 
Sciences, has very judicioufly obferved, that the 
principal flock of the ideas of mankind, is derived 
from their mutual intercourfc. The explication of 

this 



Seft.4- Human Knowledge. 1.33 

this truth, will fully corroborate all I have been 
ikying. 

I have diftinguifhed three forts of figns ; acci- 
dental, natural, and inftituted. A child nurfed by 
bears has only the former. True it is that we 
cannot refufe him thofe founds which are natural to 
each paffion : but how could he imagine that they 
are the proper figns of the fenfations he feels ! If he 
lived in human fociety, he would fo often hear them 
utter founds like thofe which he makes . himfelf, 
that fome time or other he would connefl thofe 
founds with the fenfations which they are defigned 
to exprefs. As to the bears, they cannot furnifli 
him with the fame opportunity ; their roar hath 
not a fufficient analogy to the human voice. By 
the communication which thefe animals have with 
each other, probably they conned: their cries with 
the perceptions which they fignify : and this is 
what the boy here mentioned could not do. There- 
fore for condufting themfelves by the impreffion of 
natural cries, they have helps which he cannot have ; 
and there is a probability, that they have acquired a 
ftronger habit of attention, reminifcence, and ima*- 
gination, than he : but this is the ucmoft limits of 
all the operations of the foul of brutes *. 

Since 

* Locke (book 2. c. 11. § 10. and 11.) juftly remarks, that 
brutes have not the power of abftra£ling. In confequence 
hereof he denies that they have the faculty of reafoning on 
general ideas, but he looks upon it as evident that fome of 
them in certain inftances reafon on particular ideas. If this 
philofopher had difcovered that it is impoffible to reflect, but 
inafmuch as we have the ufe of inftituted figns, he would have 

K 3 acknow* 



J34 Origin of Parti. 

Since men arc incapable of making any figns, 
but by living in fociety, it follows of courfe, that 
the ftpek of their ideas, when their minds begin to 
be formed, intirely confifts in their mutual commu- 
nication. I fay, when their winds begin to be format^ 
becaufe it is evident, that when the mind has made 
fome progrefs, it underftands the art of making 
figns, and may acquire ideas without external aftHk 
ance. 

Let no one objeft, that before- this communi- 
cation the mind has ideas already, becaufe it has 
perceptions : for perceptions which never were the 
objeft of reflexion, are not properly ideas. They 
are only impreflions made on the mind, which 
muft be confidered as images before they can be 
ideas. 

§ 26. It is needlefs in my opinion to add any 
thing further to thefe examples, or to the explica- 
tions given of them ; they plainly confirm that wc 
acquire a ftronger habit of the operations of the 
mind, in proportion as we have the ufe of figns. 

And yet there is one difficulty remaining ; viz, 
that if the mind fixes its ideas only by figns, there 
, is great odds but our argumentations will be often- 
times merely about words \ which mull be the fourcc 
of many errors, 

1 anfwer that the certainty of the mathematics 
removes this difficulty* Provided we determine the 

acknowledged that brutes are absolutely incapable of reafoa- 
ing, and confequently that fuch a&ions of theirs as appear 
rational, are no more than the effe&s of an imagination which 
they cannot command. 

fimple 



Se6fc. 4. Human Knowledge. 135 

fimplc ideas annexed to each fign fo exa&ly, as 
to be able to analyze them whenever there is 
occafion, we fliall be in no more danger of being 
deceived, than the mathematicians when they make 
pfe of their figns. Indeed this obje&ion fhews that 
we niuft a6t with great precaution, to avoid engag- 
ing, like a great many philofophers, in verbal dis- 
putes, and vain and puerile queftions : but it only 
confirms what I have myfelf remarked. 

§ 27. Here we may obferve the flow advances 
which the mind makes towards the knowledge of 
truth. Locke furnifhes us with an example of it 
that to me appears very curious. 

Though the neceffity of figns for the ideas of 
numbers has not efcaped him, yet he does not fpeak 
of it as a perfon well allured of what he advances. 
* c For .without fuch names or marks, he fays, we 
<c can hardly make ufe of numbers in reckoning, 
" efpecially where the combination is made up of 
■" any great multitude of units *." 

He was fenfible that names were neceflary for 
the archetypes, but he has not hit upon the true 
reafon. cc The connexion, he fays, between the 
loofe parts of thofe complex ideas, being made 
by the 'mind, this union, which has no particular 
foundation in nature, would ceafe again, were 
there not fomething that did, as it were, hold 
together, and keep the parts from fcattering +." 
This reafoning muft naturally have hindered him, as 
it really did, from perceiving the neceffity of figns 
for the notions of fubftances : for as thefe notions 

* Book 2. c. 16. 5 5. 
f Book 3. c. 5. $ io. 

K 4 "hav« 



cc 
cc 

4C 
€4 



136 Origin op Parti. 

have a foundation in nature, it followed of courts 
that the combination of their fimple ideas muft be pre- 
fcrvcd in the mind without the affiftance of words. 

A very little .thing is fufficierit to retard the pro- 
grefs even of the greateft geniufes : it is fufficicnt, 
as we have here an inftance, that a very fmall mis- 
take has dropped from them at the very time they 
were defending the truth. This is what hindered 
Locke from difcovcring the neceffity of figns in 
jirquiring a habit of the operations of the mind, 
lie fuppofes that the mind makes mental propofi- 
tions, in which it joins or feparates ideas without 
the intervention of words *. He even pretends that 
the bed way to arrive at knowledge, would be to 
con fider the ideas in themfelves ; but he obferves 
that through the prevailing cuftom of ufing founds 
for ideas, this is very feldom pra&ifed f . After 
what I have faid, it is needlefs for me to lofe any 
time in (hewing how inaccurate he is in this refpeft. 

Wol fins oblerves that it is very difficult for rea- 
fon to difplay itfelf in a man who has not the ufc of 
inftituted figns. He gives for example the two fads 
above related ;£, which he does not however explain. 
Helides he was a ftranger to the abfolute neceffity of 
figns, as alfo to the manner in which they concur 
10 the progrefs of the operations of the mind. 

With regard to the followers of Defcartes and 
Nhllebrunche, they have been as wide, as poffible, 
from making this difcovery. How can we fufpeft 
the neceffity of figns, if we think with Defcartes 

* Book 4, c. 5. $ 3, 4, 5. -f Book 4. c. 6. 5 1. 

J lYvchol. rz&on. j 4C1. 

that 



Se£t. 5. Human Knowledge. 137 

that the ideas are innate ; or with Mallebranche, 
that we fee all things in God? 

SECTION -V. 
Of Abjlraftion, 

% 1 . T X 7 % have feen that abftraft ideas are formed 
V V by ceafing to think on the properties by 
which things are diftinguifhed, in order to think only 
on the qualities in which they agree. Let us ccafe 
to confider that which determines extenfion to be 
fuch, or a whole to be fuch, and we (hall have ab- 
ftradt ideas pf extenfion and of a whole *. 

This 

* Mr. Locke explains the progrefs of this kind of ideas ia 
the following manner. " The ideas, he fays, which children 
* * form of the perfons they converfe with, are like the perfons . 
if themfelves, only particular. The ideas of the nurfe, and 
" the mother, are well framed in their minds ; and like pic- 
•' tares of them there, reprefent only thofe individuals. The 
" names they firft gave to them, are confined to thofe indivi- 
" duals ; and the names of nurft and mamma, the child ufes, 
" determines themfelves to thofe perfons. Afterwards when 
" time and a larger acquaintance has made them obferve, that 
*' there are a great many other things in the world, that in 
" fome common agreements of fhape, and feveral other quali- 
" ties, refemble their father and mother, and thofe perfons 
*' they have been ufed to, they frame an idea, which they find 
•? thofe many particulars to partake in ; and to that they give 
'• with others, the name man, for example. And thus they 
f come to have a general name, and a general idea. Wherein 

" they 



138 Origin of Part I. 

This fort of ideas are therefore no more than de- 
nominations we give to things confidered in thole 
refpeds in which they refemble each other ; for 
which reafon" they are called general ideas. But it is 
not fufficient to know their origin ; there are ftill 
fome important confiderations to make on the ne- 
ceffity of them, and on the defeats with which they 
are attended. 

§ 2. General ideas are, beyond all manner of 
doubt, abfolutely ncceffary. As men are obliged tp 
ipeak of things, according as thefe differ, or agree, 
there is a neceffity for referring them to clafies dif- 
tinguilhed by figns. -By this means we comprize 
in a fingle word what could not, without confu- 
fion, be introduced into a long difcourfe. Of this 
we have a ftrong inftance in the ufe of the terms 
fubftance^ mind x body> animal. If we want to {peak 
only of things, as we reprefent to ourfelves a fub- 
jedt which fupports their properties and modes* we 
have need only of the word fubftance. If we'in- 
tend to point out more particularly the kind of 
properties and modes, we make ufe of the word 
mind or that of body. If by uniting thefe two 
ideas, we defign to fpeak Qf a living whole, which 
moves of itfelf and by inftinft, we have the word 
animal. In fine according as we join to the latter 
notion the ideas which diftinguifli the different Ipc- 
cies of animals, cuftom generally fupplies us with 



it 



they make nothing new, but only leave oat of the complex 
idea they had of Peter and James, Mary and Jane, that 

" which is peculiar to each, and retain only what is com- 

" mon to them all/' Book 3. c 3. § 7. 

terms 



Se&. 5. Human Knowledge. 139. 

terns proper for communicating our thought in a 
eoncife manner. 

§3. But we muft obferve that it is.lefs in regard 
to the nature of things, than to our manner of 
knowing them, that we determine their genus or 
fpecies, or to fpeak in a more familiar language, 
that we diftribute them into clafles fubordinate to 
each other. If we were clear lighted enough to 
difcover a greater number of properties in the ob- 
jects, we fhould foon perceive the difference betwixt 
thofe which to us feem the moft fimilar, and of 
courfe we fhould be able to fubdivide them into 
hew clafles. Though different particles of the fame 
metal, for example, refemble each other in the qua- 
lities which we know in them, it does not follow 
that they have the fame refemblance in thofe which 
we do not know. If we were capable of making 
the latter arialyfls, perhaps we fhould find as much 
difference between them, as now we find betwixt 
jnetals of different fpecies. 

§ 4, What renders general ideas fo neceflary, is the 
limited capacity of the human mind. The deity has 
no need of them ; his infinite knowledge compre- 
hends every individual, fo that it is no more diffi- 
cult for him to think of them all at the fame time, 
than to think of one. With regard to us mortals, 
the capacity of our minds is filled, not only when 
we think on a fingle objedt, but even when we 
confider it in fome particular refpeft. Hence 
we are under a neceflity, in order to methodize 
pur thoughts, of diftributing things into different 
Clafles, 

§ 5. Notions 



i 



140 Origin of Part L 

§ 5. Notions arifing from fuch an origin, mift. 
needs be defective ; and in all probability we fhould 
run fome rifk in making ufe of them, did we not 
do it with fome precaution. Hence moft philolb- 
phers have fallen into a great miftake in this point, 
which has been attended with very bad confe- 
quences : they have realized all their abftra&ions, or 
looked upon them as beings that have a real exifl> 
ence independently of the things themfelves *. Now 
what gave rife, as I apprehend, to fo abfurd an opi- 
nion, is this. 

§ 6. Our firft ideas are particular ; they arc 
particular fenfations of light, of colour, &c. or 
particular operations of the mind. Now all thefc 
ideas exhibit a real being, becaufe properly fpeak- 
ing they are only our own being differently mo* 
dified. For we can perceive nothing within us, 
but we muft confider it as belonging to ourfelves, 

* At the beginning of the twelfth century the Peripatetics 
formed two branches, the Nominals and the Realifts. The 
latter maintained that the general notions which the fchools 
call nmverfal mature, relations, formalities, and others, are real 
beings diftinft from the things. The former on the contrary 
were of opinion, that they are bare names, by which we ex- 
prefs the different ways of conceiving, and they went upon 
this principle, that nature does nothing in vain. This was 
maintaining a good thefis, by a very bad reafon ; for it was 
agreeing that thefe relations were poffible, and that to give 
them exiftence, nothing more was wanting than to find them 
to be of fome utility. And yet this principle was called the 
rajor of the Nominals. So warm was the difpute between thefe 
two feds, that in Germany they came to blows ; and in France 
Lewis XI. was obliged to prohibit the reading of the books 0/ 
the Nominals, 

as 



Se£t* 5. Human Knowledge.' 141 

as belonging to our being, or as our very being that 
cxifts in fuch or fuch a manner : that is, feeling, 
feeing, &c. fuch are all our ideas in their original. 
* As the human mind is too limited to reflect at 
the fame time on all the different modifications 
which may belong to it, there is a neceffity for dif- 
tinguifhing them, in order to view them in fucceffion 
one after the other. The foundation the mind has 
for this diftin&ion, is the continual change and fuc- 
ceffion of modifications in its very being, which 
appears to it as a kind of fubjed: or bottom that 
remains always the fame. 

Certain it is that thefe modifications in this" man- 
ner diftinguifhed from the being which is the fubjedt 
of them, have no longer any real exiftence. Arid 
yet it is impoflible for the mind to refleft on no- 
thing ; for this would be properly not refle&ing 
at all. How then fhall thefe modifications taken in 
an abftraft manner, or feparatcd from the being t& 
which they appertain, and which belongs to them 
only as they are included in it, how fhall they, I 
fay, become the objeft of the mind ? By continu- 
ing to confider them as beings. ' Accuftomed every 
time it confiders them as belonging to itfelf, to 
perceive them in conjunftion with its own real 
being, from which at that time they are not 
diftinft, it continues, as much as poffible, to give 
them this fame reality, at the very time that it ab- 
ftrafts them from real exiftence. It afts in contra- 
diction to itfelf : on the one hand, it confiders the 
modifications without any regard to its being, and 
they are no longer a reality : on the other hand, be- 
caufe it cannot confider a non entity, it views them 

2 as 



142 Origin of Part J* 

as fomething, and continues to attribute to them that 
very reality which it firft perceived them to havc$ 
though it no longer belongs to them. In a word, 
when thefe abftraftions were only particular ideas, 
fhey were conne&ed with the idea of being, and thiy 
connexion ftill fubfifts. 

How defeftive foever this contradi&ion may be^ 
it is neverthelefs necefiary. For if the mind is tOQ 
much limited to embrace its beings and its modifi- 
cations all at the fame time, it mud needs diftin- 
guifli them, by framing abftraft ideas •, and though 
the modifications by this means lofe all the reality 
they had, yet it muft ftill fuppofe them to be fome- 
thing real, otherwife it could never be able to fflfkf 
jthem the objedl pf its reflexion. 

To this neceffity it is owing that a great many 
philofophers never fufpedted the reality of abftr^ 
ideas to be the wpijc of the imagination. They 
perceived that we were abfoiutely engaged to con- 
iider thefe ideas as fomething real, and there they 
flopped •, but as they did not trace out the caufe qf 
our .perceiving them under this falfe appearance, 
they concluded that they were real beings. 

They have therefore realized all thefe notions.} 
but more or lefs according as the things of which 
they arc partial ideas, feem to have more or left 
reality. The ideas of modifications have particj* 
pated of fewer degrees of exiftence than thofe pf 
fubftances, and thofe of finite fubftances have had 
ftill lefs than that of the infinite being *. 

* Dcfcartes himfelf icafoaa after this manner, mecL 

$ 7. Thefe 



Se£t. J. Human KnowledgeI 143 

$ 7. Thcfc ideas realized after this manner have 
been mod furprizingly fertile* It is to them we owe 
the happy difcovefy of occult qualities, fubftantial 
forms, intentional fpecies : or to fpeak only of what 
is common alfo with the moderns, to them we owe 
thofe genus's, thofe fpecies, thofe eflences and thofe 
differences, which arc like fo many beings that feat 
themfelve3 in each fubftance, to determine it to be 
what it is. When philofophers make ufe of thefe 
words, beivg, fubftance, offence, genus, fpecies, we arc 
not to imagine that they mean no more than parti- 
cular combinations of fintple ideas* which we receive 
by fenfation and reflexion : they want to penetrate 
ftill further, and to fee in e&ch of them fome fpeciflc 
realities. If we ehter even fato a greater detail, and 
'mufter the names of fubftahoes in review, as boA} y 
animal, tnan, metal, gold, Jifoer^ &c/ they all dif- 
xlofe to phtlofophic dyes, particular beings concealed 
from the reft of mankind. 

What fhews that they look Upon thefc words as 
figns of fome reality, is that though a fubftance has 
undergone fome alteration, ;ftill they continue to 
afk, whether it belongs to the fame fpecies, as it 
belonged to before this change : a quefticn which 
would be altogether fuperfluous, if they ranked the 
notions -of fubftances and of their feveral fpecies in 
the different combinations of fimple ideas. When 
they afk whether ice andfnow are water ; whether a 
'fnonftrous foetus is a man ; whether God, the mind, the 
body, or even a vacuum are fubftances -, it is evident, 
that the queftion is not whether thefe things agree 
with the fimple ideas combined under thefe words, 
water, man, fubftance ; for it would folve itfelf. 

The 



1*44 Origin bt Part I. 

The point is to know whether thefe things include 
certain eflences, certain realities, which thefe words, 
water, man, fubftancc y are fuppofed to fignify, 

§ 8. This prejudice is the caufe that the whole 
tribe of philofophers have imagined, that we ought 
to define fubftances by their neareft difference, as 
that which is moft proper to explain their nature. 
But they are ftill to feek for an example of this fort 
of definitions. Thefe muft be always defedtive 
From our incapacity of knowing the effences of 
'things ; an incapacity never in the leaft fufpe&ed 
by them, becaufe they are prejudiced in favour of 
abftraft ideas which they realize, and afterwards 
take for the eflence of things- 

§ 9. The abufe of realizing abftraft ideas becomes 
-ftill more obvious, when philofophers not fatisfied 
with explaining after their manner the nature of 
that which is, attempt to explain the nature of that 
which is not. We have inftances of their fpeaking 
of creatures merely poflible, as of creatures that 
exifted ; and of their realizing every thing, even to 
the very non-entity, from which they fprang. Where 
were the creatures, fome aflc, before God created 
them ? The anfwer is eafy •, for it is afking where 
they were before they were ; to which, I think, it » 
fufficient to anfwer that they were no-where. 

The idea of poflible creatures is only a realized 
abftraftion, which we have framed by ceafing to 
think on the exiftence of things, in order to 
confider only the other qualities with which we 
know they are endued. We have been think- 
ing of extenfion, of figure, of motion and reft m 
bodies, and we have ceafed to think on their exift- 
ence. 



Se&. $. MuMan Knowledge. 145 

ence. Thus it is we have formed to ourlelves the 

* 

idea of poflible bodies : an idea which deprives them 
of all their reality, becaufe it fuppofes them in a 
ftate of non-exiftence ; and which neverthelefs by a 
tnanifeft contradiction makes them ftill keep it, be- 
caufe it reprefents them to us, as fomething extended, 
of a fenfible figure, &c* 

Philofophers not perceiving this contradiction* 
have taken this idea only in the laft fenfe. 'Confe- 
quently they have given to that which does not ex- 
ift, the real properties of that whicji does : nay fomc 
of then? imagined they could refolve in an intelli- 
gible manner the moft intricate queftions concerning 
the creation. 

§ 10. 1 fufpeft, fays Locke, that thisway of fpeak- 
ing of faculties, has milled many into a confufed 
notion of fo many diftindt agents in us, which. 
€< had their feveral provinces and authorities, and 
did command, obey, and perform feveral actions* 
as fo many diftindt beings, which has been no 
iC fmall occafion of wrangling, obfeurity, and un- 
" certainty in queftions relating to them *•" 

This fufpicion is worthy of a fage philoibpher, 
for why Ihould we difcufs as very important quefti- 
ons, whether judgment belongs to the underftanding or 
to the will \ whether they are both equally afiive or 
equally free j whether the will is capable of knowledge, 
*r is only a blind faculty -> whether in fine it com- 
mands the underftanding) or the latter guides and de- 
termines it ? If by the underftanding and the will § 
philofophers wanted only to fignify the foul con- 
fidcrcd in regard to particular a£ts, which it pro- 

* Book 2. c. 21. J 6, ' 

L duces, 



cc 

C< 
M 
CC 
CC 



146 Origin of Part L 

duces, or is capable of producing, it is evident that 
judgment, a&ivity, and liberty, do or do not belong 
to the underftanding, according as fpeaking of this 
faculty, we come to confider a greater orlefier num- 
ber of thefe afts. It is the fame with the will. It 
is fufficient in this fort of cafes to explain the terms, 
determining by exaft analyfes the notions we frame 
of things. But philofophers having been obliged 
to reprefent the foul by abftra&ions, have multi- 
plied its being •, fo that the underftanding and will • 
have undergone the fate of all abftraft ideas. Even 
thofe who in exprefs terms obferve, for inftance 
the Cartefians, that thefe are not beings diftinft 
from the foul, have entered into all the queftiom 
above related. They have therefore realized thefe 
abftra£t notions contrary to their intention, and 
without perceiving it. Through ignorance of the 
manner of analyzing them, they were incapable of 
knowing their defedts, and confequently of making 
ufe of them with all the neceflary precautions. 

§ 11. This fort of abftra&ions have thrown an 
infinite obfcurity on all that has been written on 
liberty ; a queftion on which a great many pens 
feem to have been employed, only to involve it in 
greater darknefs. The underftanding, fay fome 
philofophers, is a faculty which receives ideas ; and 
the will is of itfelf a blind faculty, which is deter- 
mined only in confequence of the ideas prefented 
unto it by the underftanding. It does not depend 
on the underftanding to perceive or not perceive, the 
ideas and mutual relations of truth or probability. It 
is not free, it is not even adivc ; for it does not pro- 
duce 



S6&5' Human Knowljdgl 147 

duce in itfelf the ideas of white and black, but it 
rtecefiarily fees that the one is not the other. The 
will afts, it is true : but blind of its own nature, it 
follows the diftates of the undcrftanding ; that is, it 
is determined in confequence of what is prefcribed 
Co it by a neceflary caufe. It is therefore neceflary. 
Now if man were free, it would be by one or other 
of thefe two faculties. Therefore man is not free. 

To refute this whole argument, it is fufficient to 
obferve, that thefe philofophers have framed fuch 
phantoms to themfelves of the undcrftanding and 
will, as exift only in their own imagination. If 
thefe faculties were fuch as they reprefent them to 
their minds, doubtlefs there could be no room for 
liberty. I defire them to enter into themfelves, and 
then I engage, that provided they confent to re* 
nounce thefe abftraft realities, and to analyze their 
thoughts, they will fee things in a very different 
light. It is not true, for inftance, that the under* 
ftanding is neither free nor adtive ; the analyfes we 
have given of it, prove the contrary. But we muft 
acknowledge that this difficulty is very great, if not 
infolvable, in the hypothefis of innate ideas. 

§12. I know not whether after all that has 
been faid, we fhall be able at length to abandon 
all thefe realized abftra&ions : nay for feveral rea- 
fons I apprehend the contrary. We have already 
obferved * that the names of fubftances occupy 
•in our minds the place which is taken up by 
the fubjedts without us : there they are the chain 
-and fupport of the fimple ideas, as the fubje&s are 

* Sea. 4. p. 114. 

JL x the 



148 Origin or Part L 

the fupport of the qualities. Hence we are con- 
ftantly tempted to refer them to this fubje6t, and 
to imagine to ourfelves that they exprefs the vfcry 
reality of it. 

In the fecond place : I have elfe where * obferved 
that we are capable of knowing all the fimple 
ideas of which the archetypes are framed. Now 
fince the eflence of a thing, according to phi- 
lofophers, is that which conftitutes it what it is, it 
follows of confequence that we are capable on thofe 
occafions of having ideas of efiences ; and accord- 
ingly we have given them names. For example* 
the name of jufiice fignifies the eflence of the juft 
man, the name of wifdom the eflence of the wife 
man, &c. This is perhaps one of the reafons which 
made the fchoolmen believe, that to have names 
which fhould exprefs the eflence of fubftances, they 
had only to follow the analogy of language. Hence 
they framed the words corporeity* animality* humanity* 
to point out the eflence of bodies, animals, and 
man. Thefe terms being grown familiar to them, 
it is very difficult to perfuade them that they are 
void of meaning. 

In the third place \ there are only two ways of 
making ufe of words, viz. after having fixed in 
one's mind all the fimple ideas which they ought to 
fignify, or only after having fuppofed them to be 
figns of the very reality of things. The firft way 
is generally embarrafling, becaufe the cuftom of ap- 
plying them is not always fufficiently determined. 
As men fee things in a different light, according to 

* Sett. 3. p. 1*4. 

the 



Se£l. $. Human Knowledge. 149 

the experience they have acquired, it is difficult 
they fhould agree in regard to the number and qua- 
lity of the ideas of a great many names. Befides, 
even when they happen to agree, ic is not always 
an eafy matter to hit on the meaning of a term in 
its full extent : for this end a vaft deal of time, ex- 
perience, and reflexion is requilite. But it is far 
more convenient to fuppofe in the things a reality, 
of which the words are confidered as the a<5hial figns, 
and to under ftand by thefe names, for inftance, man* 
animal, &c. an entity which determines and diftin- 
guifhes thefe things, than to attend to all the fimple 
ideas which may poflibly belong to them. This 
way fatisfies at once our impatience and our 
curiofity. There are few perhaps, even among 
thofe who have moft endeavoured to diveft them- 
selves of their prejudices, who do not feel fome in- 
clination to refer all the names of fubftances to 
unknown realities. This appears even in cafes 
where it is eafy to avoid committing any miftake, 
becaufe we are very well convinced that the ideas 
which we realize, are not real beings. I mean to 
{peak of moral beings, fuch as glory r , war* renown* 
.to which we have given the denomination of being* 
only becaufe in our moft ferious, as well as in our 
moft familiar converfations, we imagine them under 
this idea. 

§ 13. This is certainly one of the moft extenfive 
caufes of the errors we fall into- It is fufficient to 
fuppofe that words correfpond to the reality of the 
things, in order to confound them with thole things, 
and to conclude that they perfectly explain their 
nature. From thence it comes that the perfon who 

L 3 propofes 



i$6 Origin op Parti.' 

propofes a queftion, and afks what fuch or fuch a 
body is, imagines, as Locke obferves, that he afks 
fomething more than a name •, and that the perfon 
who anfwers him, it is iron, believes likewife that 
he tells him fomething more. But there is no hy- 
pothefis, how unintelligible foever, which may not 
be defended by fuch a jargon. We mull not then 
be furprized at the reputation which different fe£U 
have obtained. 

§ 14, It is therefore a point of great importance 
not to realize our abftraftions. In order to avoid 
this inconveniency I fee but one way only, which 
is to know how to explain the origin and for- 
mation of our abftraft notions. But this is a 
way which the philofophic tribe have been unac- 
quainted with ; and in vain have they endeavoured 
to fupply it with definitions. The fource of their 
ignorance in this refpe£t, is the prejudice under 
which they have always laboured, that it was necef- 
fary to begin with general ideas : for when they 
have made it a law to themfelves not to begin with 
particular ideas, it is impoffible to explain the more 
abftradt ones which from thence derive their origin. . 
I fhall give here an example of this. 

After having defined, a thing impoffible to be that 
which implies contradiction ; a thing poffible that which 
does not imply contradiction •, and being, that which is 
capable of exifting : they can give no other definition 
of exiftence, except that it is the completion ofpofftbility. 
But I afk whether this definition gives us any idea, 
and whether it is not as much liable to ridicule as 
fome of Ariftotle's, 



Se£h 5. Human Knowledge^ 151 

If a thing poflible is that which does not imply a 
Contradi&ion, poflibility is the non implication of con- 
tradiction. Exiftence is therefore the completion of the 
non implication of contradiction. What a ftrange 
jargon ! By more accurately obferving the natural 
order of our ideas, they might have feen that the 
notion of poflibility is not formed till after that of 
exiftence. 

The reafon, I fancy, of their adopting this fort 
of definitions, is becaufe as they are otherwife ac- 
quainted with the thing defined, they do not exa- 
mine into them fo very ftri&ly. The mind having 
already received fome rays of light, attributes it to 
thofe definitions, and does not perceive that they 
arc unintelligible. This example Ihews of what 
importance it is to adhere to my method ; that is, 
always to fubftitute analyfes in the place of defini- 
tions. I am even of opinion that we ought to 
carry our delicacy fo far, as to avoid making ufc of 
cxpreflions, which are commonly adopted in philofo- 
phic fchools. Thie abufe of them is grown fo far 
miliar, that it is difficult, what care foever we ufe, 
but they muft lead the generality of readers into error. 
Mr. Locke is an example of this. It is true that ge- 
nerally fpeaking he makes a very juft application of 
thofe expreflions ; but it would have been much eaficr 
to underftand him in a great many places, if he had 
intirely banifhed them from his writings. However 
I judge only by the translation. 

Thefe particulars are fufficient to. fhew the influ- 
ence of abftraft ideas. If the ignorance of their 
infufficiency, has thrown a great mift on every 

L 4 past 



152 Origin of Part L 

part of mctaphyfics, now this infufficiency is known, 
it depends on ourfclvc3 to apply a remedy to the 

evil. 

SECTION VI. 

Of fome judgment* attributed to the mind imtbout 
foundation^ or the folution of a toetapby/ical 

problem. 

§ i.^PHE operations which we have hitherto 
JL attributed to the mind, are fuch as every 
man is capable of perceiving within himfelf. But 
philofophers in order to account for the phenomena 
of vifion, have fuppofcd that we form certain judg- 
ments, of which we have no fort of confcioufnefs. 
This opinion is fo generally received, that it is 
admitted by Locke, the moft circumfpedt of theiq 
all. The manner he explains himfelf is as follows. 

<c We are farther to confider concerning percep- 
iC tion, that the ideas we receive by fenfation arc 
" often in grown people altered by the judgment, 
" without our taking notice of it. When we fet 
M before our eyes a round globe of any uniform 
*' colour, e. g. gold, alabafter, or jet, it is certain 
** that the idea thereby imprinted in our mind is of 
fC a flat circle, varioufly fhadowed, with fcveral 
* c degrees of light and brighenefs coming to our 
* c eyes. But we having by ufc been accuftomed to 
t € perceive what kind x>f appearance convex bodies 
" jire wont to make in us, what alterations are 

" mad? 



Se&. 6. Human Knowledge- 153 

44 made in the reflexions of light by the difference 
44 of the fenfible figure of bodies ; the judgment 
44 prefently by an habitual cuftom, alters the ap- 
44 pearances into their caufes ; fo that from that 
44 which truly is variety of fhadow or colour, col- 
44 ledting the figure, it makes it pafs for a mark of 
4C figure, and frames to itfelf the perception of a 
4C convex figure, and an uniform colour \ when the 
44 idea we receive from thence is only a plane vari- 
*' oufly coloured •, as is evident in painting. To which 
44 purpofe I fhall here infert a problem of that very 
" ingenious and ftudious promoter of real knowledge, 
** the learned and worthy Mr. Molineux, which he 
4 4 was pleafed to fend me in a letter fome months 
44 fince •, and it is this : Suppofe a man born blind* 
44 and now adult \ and taught by bis touch to diftin- 
" guijh between a cube and afphere of the fame metal* 
4C and nighly of the fame bignefs, fo as to tell* when 
44 he felt one and f other y which is the cube, which the 
44 fphere. Suppofe then the cube and fpbere placed on 
4C a table, and the blind man to be made to fee : quart 
4C whether by his fight before he touched them, he could 
44 now diftinguijh and tell which is the globe* which 
* 4 the cube ? To which the acute and judicious 
propofer anfwers, not. For though he has obtained 
the experience of how a globe, how a cube affefts 
4C his touch 9 yet be has not yet attained the experience* 
* c that what affedts his- touch fo or fo* muft affeft his 
<c fi£bt fo or fo ; or that a protuberant angle in the 
44 cube, that preffed his hand unequally, fhall appear to 
44 his eye as it does on the cube. I agree with this 
44 thinking gentleman, whom I am proud to call 
44 my fri$jid in Jus anfwer to this his problem ; and 

44 am 






154. Origin of Parti. 

" am of opinion, that the blind man, at firft fight, 
cc would not be able with certainty to fay which 
€ * was the globe, which the cube, whilft he only 
<c few them ; though he could unerringly name 
€i them by his touch, and certainly diftinguifh them 
4< by the difference of their figures felt *." 

§ a. This whole reafoning fuppofes that the image 
imprefled on the eye at the fight of a globe, is only 
a flat circle, with different degrees of light, and va- 
rioufly fhadowed, which is true. But it fuppofes 
likewife, what to me appears to be falfe, that the 
impreffion confequently made on the mind, gives us 
only the perception of this circle; that if we fee the 
globe of a convex figure, it is becaufe having ac- 
quired by the touch the idea of this figure, and know- 
ing what fort of image it produces in us by the fight, 
we have accuftomed ourfelves, contrary to the idea 
we receive from thence, to judge it to be convex; a 
judgment which, to exprefs myfelf in the very fame 
terms as Locke ufes a little while after, changes the 
idea of the fenfation, and reprefents it to us differently 
from what it is in itfelf 

§ 3. Among thefe fuppofitions Lockcwithout proof 
advances, that the idea received by fenfation repre*- 
fents nothing more than the image which we know 
to be imprinted on the eye. For my part, when I 
look upon a globe, I fee fomething elfe befides a flat 
circle : and it is very natural for me to be determin- 
ed by my own experience. Befides, there are a 
•great many reafons for rejefting the judgments to 
which this philofopher has recourfe. Firft of all 

* Book 2. c. 9. $ 8, 



Sett.6. Human Knowledge, 155 

he fuppofes that we know what fort of images are 
produced within us by convex bodies, and what 
changes happen in the reflexion of light, according 
to the difference of the fenfible figures of bodies : a 
knowledge which far the greateft part of mankind 
have not, though they fee thefe figures as well as 
philofophers. Secondly, it would be in vain to ftrive to 
join thofe judgments to vifion : we fhould never con- 
found them, as Locke fuppofes ; but we fhould fee 
one way and judge another. 

I behold a baffo relievo, I know beyond all doubt 
that it is done on a flat furface ; I have touched it : and 
yet neither this knowledge, nor repeated experience, 
nor all the judgments I can frame, hinder me from 
feeing convex figures. "Why does this appearance 
continue ? Why fhould not a judgment, which has 
the power of making me fee things quite differently 
from what they are in the idea received from my 
fenfations, why fhould not it, I fay, have the power 
of making me fee them conformable to this idea ? 
We may argue in the fame manner in regard to the 
appearance of roundnefs under which we fee a diftant 
building which we know and judge to be fquare, 
and to a thoufand fimilar examples. 

§ 4. Thirdly, an argument which alone would 
fuffice to overturn Locke's opinion, is the impofli- 
bility of making us have a confcioufnefs of this fort 
of judgments. In vain would it be to fay, that a 
great many things feem to pafs in the mind, of which 
we take no manner of notice. From what I have 
plfewhere faid f 9 it is true that we might indeed 

-j- ScS, 2. cap. ij 

forget 



156 Origin or PartL 

ixyi thrft judgment:: the mirr-ite after we had 
framed thtrr. : •>::: :: v> v er* t:. r'iE.Lt tuerr. the ob- 
ject of our rsSe 2; i '_>:., out convjouiht ■{& concerning 
t!«em woulc. bt i^ f'.-ori^, u;a: we ihoLid never 
xr.oic be tble 1^ er^en^u tiit iea:r doubt abain 
ih-raa. 

§ 5. Traar.g M-\ Locke's opinion through aQ 
it* cor.feouer/.tt, ve fiiouid rtafon about diitances, 
fivjz\i'jni 9 rr.fcgr,::^^, tad exttnison, as he has 
don* ir; regard to figures. Thus we fhould iay^ 
44 Wh&ri we bt.vjid a vide Etld, it is certain that 
44 t;*e idea im*rinwd on our minds at this fight, re- 
44 prefents a fiat furiace, fhadowed, and differently 
44 coloured, witl. different degress of Lgkt coming 
44 to our eyes. But as by ufe we are zeeuitomed to 
44 diflingMiHi what fort of image is generally produ- 
* 4 ced in oar minds by bodies differently fruaisd, 
44 differently diftant, differently large, and different- 
44 ly extended, and what changes happen in the 
44 reflexion of light, according to the difference 
44 of difiances, fituations, magnitude, and exten- 
fion, we immediately put in the room of the 
fcveral appearances, the very caufe of the images 
which we fi:e, and this in virtue of a judgment 
44 which ufe has rendered habitual to us •, fo that 
44 joining the aft of feeing to a judgment which we 
44 confound with it, wc frame to ourfclves the ideas 
44 of different fituations, diftances, figures, and 
t-xtciifioiis, though in reality our eyes reprefent 
no mint to u» than a plane fh ado wed, and diffe- 
rently ciilounxl. 1 ' 
'1 hi.i applictiion of Mr. Locke's reafoning is fb 
mm:h the morr juft, as the ideas of fituation, difc 

tance, 



it 
ft 
cc 



41 

tfc 



Sc6t. 6. Human Knowledge. 157 

tance, figure, and extenfion, which we receive from 
the fight of a field, are all to be found in fmall in 
the perception of the different parts of a globe. And 
yet this philofopher has not adopted thefe confequcn- 
ces. As he requires in his problem that the globe 
and the cube fhould be very near of ,the fame fize«> 
he fufficiently gives us to underftand, that the fight 
may, without the aid of any judgment, give us dif- 
ferent ideas of magnitude. And yet this is a con- 
tradi&ion : for there is no conceiving how we fhould 
have ideas of magnitude, without having ideas alfb 
of figure. 

§ 6. Others have made no difficulty to admit thefe 
confequences. The celebrated M. de Voltaire * ap- 
proves of the opinion of the bifhop of Cloyne, who 
aflerted that neither fituation, diftance, fize, nor 
figure, could be diftinguifhed by a man born blind, 
who of a fudden had received the ufc of his fight. 

§ 7. I look, fays he, from a confiderable dif- 
tance, through a little hole, at a man Handing on 
the top of a houfe; the diftance, and the fmall num- 
ber of rays hinder me at firft from difcerning whe- 
ther it be a man •, the objedt appears to me very 
fmall, I think I fee a ftatue two feet high at the 
moft ; prefently the obje& moves, I think it is a 
man, and from that inftant this man appears to me 
of the ordinary fize. 

$ 8. I admit, if you will, of this judgment, and 
of the effedt attributed to it; yet it is ftill far from 
proving the bifhop of Cloyne's thefis. There is here 
a fudden tranfition from a firft judgment to another 

* Elements of Newton's philofopby, c. 6*. 

of 



j~5* Origin op PartL 

of a quite oppofite nature. This engages us to view 
the obje& with greater attention, in order to find 
therein the common fize of a man. This violent 
attention probably produces ibme change in the 
brain, and thereby in the eye, which makes us fee a 
man about five feet high. This is a particular cafe, 
and the judgment we make in confequence is fuch 
as we cannot deny ourfelves to be confcious of. 
Why fhould it not be the fame thing on every other 
occafion, if we always framed, as is fuppofed, the 
like judgments ? 

Suppofe a man, who flood only four fteps from 
me, removes to the diftance of eight, the image 
imprinted on my eye will be the fmaller by one half. 
How comes it then that he continues to appear to be 
very near of the fame fize ? Yoii perceive him at 
firft, it will be anfwered, of a lefler fize by one half; 
but the connexion which experience has eftablifhed 
In your brain, between the idea of a man, and that 
of the height of five or fix feet, obliges you to ima- 
gine by a fudden judgment a man of fuch a height, 
and in faft to fee fuch a height. Here, I confefs, 
is a thing which I cannot confirm by my own expe* 
rience. Is it poflible for a firft perception to be effa- 
ced fo foon, and to be lb fuddenly replaced by a 
judgment, that we cannot obferve the tranfition 
from the one to the other, though we give our whole 
attention to it ? Befides, fuppofe this man removes to 
the diftance of fixteen, thirty two, or fixty foor 
paces, and fo on in that proportion ; why fhall he 
appear to me to diminifli gradually, till at laft 
I intirely ceafe to fee him ? If the perception of 
feeing be the effeft of a judgment, by which I have 

a connected 



Se&.6, Human Knowledge! 159 

connected the idea of a man with that of the height 
of five or fix feet ; this man ought either immediately 
to vanifh from my fight, or at what diftance foe- 
ver he removes, he fhould continue to appear to 
ine of the fame height. Why fhall he diminifh 
quicker to me than to another perfon, though we 
have both the fame experience ? In fine let them 
point out the diftance at which this judgment ought 
to begin to lofe its force. 

. § 9. Thofe whom I here oppofc, are wont to 
compare the fenfe of feeing to that of hearing, and 
conclude from the one the other. The founds, they 
lay, ftrike the ear ; we hear the tones, and nothing 
more. The objedt in like manner ftrikes the eye ; 
we fee the colours, and nothing more. The firffc 
time a perfon was to hear the report of a great 
gun, he would be incapable of judging whether 
it was fired at the diftance of three miles, or of 
thirty paces. Nothing but experience could enable 
him to judge habitually of the diftance between 
himfelf, and the place from whence this report 
comes. It is exa&ly the fame thing in regard to the 
rays of light received from an objeffc ; they do not 
in the leaft inform us whereabouts this objedfc is. 

§ 10. The hearing, of its own nature, is not 
Framed to give us the idea of diftance, and even, 
when afiifted by experience, the idea it affords us is 
of all others the moft imperfect. There are fome 
occafions in which almoft the fame thing may be 
fakl of the fight. If I look through a hole at a dif- 
■tant -objedt, without perceiving thofe intermediate 
ithings which part me from it, 1 have but a very 
imperfedt idea of its diftance. Then I call in what 

knowledge 



160 Origin o * Part 1. 

knowledge I have acquired by experience to my aid, 
and I judge this object to be more or lefs diftant, ac- 
cording as to me it appears more or lefs below its 
ordinary fize. Here then we have a cafe in which it is 
nfecefiary to join our judgment to the fenfe of feeing, 
as well as of hearing : but take particular notice, 
that we are confcious of it, and that after, as before, 
we have only a very imperfedt knowledge of the dif- 
tance. 

Suppofe in opening the window I perceive a man 
at the further end of the ftreet : I fee that he is at 
fome diftance from me, before I have as yet formed 
any judgment. It is not indeed the rays of light 
which come from him, that give me the moft exalt 
information of his diftance •, but thofe emitted from 
the objefts between us. It is natural that the fight of 
thefe objefts fhould give me fome idea of the dif- 
tance between me and this man ; it is even impofli- 
ble for me not to have this idea, as often as I per* 
ceive them. 

§ ii. You are miftaken, fome will fay to me. 
The fudden and almoft uniform judgments, which 
at a certain age the mind frames of diftances, mag- 
nitudes, and fituations, make you imagine that you 
have only to open your eyes to fee in the manner 
you do. But it is not fb, you muft have the aflift- 
ance of the other fenfes. If you had none but that of 
feeing, you would have no way at all of acquiring 
the knowledge of extenfion. 

§12. What is it then I fhould perceive ? a ma- 
thematicg} point. No furely : I fhould undoubt- 
edly perceive light and colours. But do not light 
and colours neceflarily reprefent different diftances, 

I different 



Sc&. 6. Human Knowledge. 161 

different magnitudes, and different fituations ? I 
look before me, above, below, to the right, to the 
left ; I fee a light diffufed in every fenfe, and feveral 
colours that are not certainly concentered in a point : 
I want no more. There I find, independently of 
all judgment, without the aid of the other fenfcs, 
the idea of extenfion, with all its dimenfions. 

May I be permitted to make a fuppofition, 
which to fome perhaps will appear whimficai ; that 
of an animated eye. According to the bifhop of 
Cloyne's opinion, this eye would fee light and 
colours ; but would perceive neither extenfion, 
magnitude, diftance, fituation, nor figure. It would 
therefore accuftom itfelf to judge that all nature 
is only a mathematical point. Let it be united to 
a human body, after its foul has long contracted 
the habit of framing this judgment : doubdefs fome 
will imagine that this foul has no more to do 
than to make ufe of the fenfes it has juft acquired, 
in order to form ideas of diftance, magnitude, 
fituation, and figure. Not fo indeed : the habi- 
tual, fudden, and uniform judgments which at all 
times it has formed, (hall change the ideas of thefe 
new fenfations, in fuch a manner that it will touch 
bodies, and pofitively affirm that they have neither 
extenfion, fituation, magnitude, nor figure. 
• § 13. It would be curious to trace the laws which . 
the author of nature follows, When he enriches vs 
with the different fenfations of fight: fenfations 
which not only advertife us better than any others, 
of the relation of things to pur wants, as well 
as of the prcfervation of our being ; but which alfo 

M difplay 



162 Origin of Part h 

difplay to us in a more (biking manner, the order, 
beauty, and grandeur of the univerfe. How im- 
portant foever this refearch may be, I leave it to 
others. It fuffices me that thofe who are willing to 
open their eyes, agree that they perceive light, co- 
lours, extenfion, figures, &c. I afcend no higher, 
becaufe there it "is, 1 begin to find demonftrative 
knowledge. 

§ 14. Let us, in our turn, examine what would 
happen to a man born blind, upon acquiring the uje 
of his fight. 

This man has framed to himfclf ideas of extenfi- 
on, magnitude, &c. by reflecting on the different 
fenfations he feels at the touch, of bodies. He takes 
a ftick, whofe parts he feels have all the fame deter- 
mination, and from theilce he draws the idea of a 
dired line. He touches another whofe parts have 
different determinations, inibmuch, that if they 
were continued, they would end in different points ; 
and from thence he derives the idea of a curve line. 
After this he paffes forward to the ideas of an angle, 
a cube, a globe, and of all forts of figures. Such is 
the origin of the ideas he has in regard to extenfion. 
But we muft not imagine that the very moment he 
opens his eyes, he immediately enjoys that glorious 
fpe&acle, which in the various parts of nature arifes 
from the admirable mixture of light and colours. 
It is a treafure inclofed in the new fenfations 5 
but it is reflexion alone that can difcover it to 
him, and grant him the real enjoyment of it. When 
wc ourfelves fix our eyes on a very complex picture, 
and fee it all entire, we do not as yet form any de- 
terminate idea of it. To view it in a proper man- 
ner, 



Se£fc.6. Human Knowledge. 163 

ner, we are obliged to confider all its parts, one after 
the other. What a pi&ure muft this whole frame 
of nature be to a perfon upon his firft opening his 
eyes to the light ! 

I pafs on to that inftant in which this man is ca- 
pable of refledting on what has ftruck his fight. 
Undoubtedly the whole does not appear to him like 
a point. He perceives therefore an extenfion in 
iength, breadth, and depth. Let him analyze this 
extenfion, and he will frame to himfelf ideas of a 
iurface, of lines, of a point, and all forts of figures: 
ideas which fhall be like unto fuch as he acquired by 
the toudh, for through whatever fenfation we arrive at 
the knowledge of extenfion, it cannot be reprefented 
two different ways. Let me fee, or let me touch a 
circle and a rule, the idea of the one can reprefent only 
a curve line, and that of the other a right line. This 
m^A therefore who was born blind, will by his fight 
4iftinguifh the globe from the cube, becaufe he will 
difcover the fame ideas as he had framed to himfelf 
by the toudh. 

And yet he might be induced to fufpend his judg- 
ment, by propofing to him the following diffi- 
culty. This body, we might fay to him, appears to 
your eye a globe, this other a cube; but what 
grounds have you to be fure that the firft is the fame 
which by the touch has given you the idea of a 
globe ; and the fecond the fame that gave you the 
idea of a cube ? Who told you that thefe bodies, 
when touched, ought to have the fame figure as when 
feen ? How do you know whether that which to 
your eye appears a globe, will not turn out a cube 
upon touching it with your hand ? Who can even 

M % anfwor 



cc 

C4 
CC 
CC 



164 Origin op Parti, 

anfwer that there is fomeching fimilar therein to thofe 
bodies which by your touch you would know to be 
a cube and a globe ? the difficulty would be extreme- 
ly embarrafiing, and I know nothing but experience 
that could furnifh him with an anfwer : but this is 
neither Mr. Locke's nor the bifhop of Cloyne's thefis. 
§ 15. I confefs there remains one, and that no 
fmall difficulty to folve : it is an experiment which 
in every refpetft feems contrary to the opinion I have 
been now eftablifhing. I fhall give it here as relat- 
ed by M. de Voltaire, for it would lofe its beauty in 
being told by any body elfe. 

In 1729. Mr. Chefclden, a very eminent furgeon, 
having fancied that he could give fight to a man 
born blind, by couching the catara£ts,which he fup- 
pofed to have been formed in his eyes, almoft at the 
" very moment of his birth, propofed the operation. 
" The blind man with difficulty confented ; for he 
" could not well conceive how the fenfe of feeing 
" fhould make any great addition to his plcafures. 
" Were it not for the defire inftilled into him of 
" learning to read and write, he would not have 
" wifhed to fee.— Be that as it may, the operation 
was performed, and fucceeded. His experience 
confirmed all that Locke and * Dr. Barklay had 
fo well forefeen. He could not for a long time 
diftinguifti either magnitude, diftance, filiati- 
on, or figure, A thing an inch long, put before 
" his eyes, fo as to hide a houfe from him, appear- 
c< ed to him as big as the houfe. Whatever he be- 
held feemed to him at firft to be upon his eyes, 

* Bifhop of Cloyne. 

" and 



CC 
CC 

cc 
c< 
c< 



CC 



Seft. 6. Human Knowledge. 165 

c< and to touch them, juft as the obje&s in feeling 
<c touch the fkin. He could not diftinguifh what 
" he had judged to be round by the aid of his hands, 
" from what he had judged angular j nor difcern by 
€C his fight, whether that which his hands had felt 
cc to be above or below, was indeed above or below. 
<4 So far was he from knowing any thing of mag- 
<c nitude, that after having at length conceived by his 
€C fight that his houfe was larger than his chamber, 
<c he could not conceive how the fight fhould com- 
<c municate this idea. It was not till after two 
* c months experience that he could perceive that 
<c pictures reprefented folid bodies : and when after 
<c this long groping with a new fenfe about him, he 
cc had found that bodies, and not furfaces only, 
<c were reprefented on pi&ures; he was furprifed 
<c not to feel with his hands thofe folid bodies whofe 
" reprefentations he began to perceive. He aflccd 
<c which was the fenfe that deceived him, that of 
<c feeling, or that of feeing *. " 

§ 1 6. A few reflexions on what pafles in the eye 
at the prefence of light, will be fufficient to explain 
this experiment. 

Though we are as yet far from being perfeftly 
acquainted with the whole mechanifm of the eye, 
yet we know that the tunica cornea is more or lefs 
convex ; that in proportion as objefts refledt a great- 
er or lefier quantity of light, the pupil is contracted 
or enlarged, to give pafiage to fewer, or to receive 
a greater number of rays ; the refervoir of the aque- 
ous humour is fulpefted to aflume fucceflively dif- 

* Chapter already quoted. 

M 3 ferent 



1 66 Origin of Parti. 

ferent forms. Certain it is that the chryftalline 
humour advances or falls back, to the end that the 
rays of light may exactly unite upon the retina*; 
that the delicate fibres of the retina are fhakcn 
in a furprifing manner ; that this concuffion . is 
communicated in the brain, to the other minuter 
parts, whofe fpring and texture muft be (till more 
furprifing. In fine, the mufcles, whofe office it is 
to dircft the eye towards the objefts we want to fix 
upon, comprefs the whole ball; and thereby change 
piore or lefs the form of it. 

Not only the eye, and its feveral parts, muft ad- 
minifter to all thefe movements, to thefe forms, and 
to a thoufand changes which we know nothing of, 
with a quicknefs fuperior to conception ; but it is 
moreover requifite that all thefe revolutions be 
performed in perfect harmony, to the end that 
the whole may concur to produce the fame ef- 
fe6t If, for example, the cornea had too gjeat 
or too little a convexity, in rcfpefl: to the fite and 
form of the other parts of the eye, the objefts would 
jail appear to us confufed, and inverted, fo that wt 
fhould not diftinguifh whether what our bands felt t$ 
he above or below, was really above or below. Of 
this we may be convinced, by making ufe of a glafs, 
whofe form does not exactly agree with th^t of thft 
pye, 

If, to receive the impreflion of light, the parts of 
jhe eye are inceffantly modified with fo great a variety, 

* Of upon the Cbcroides: for we do not exa£Uy know whe- 
ther it is by the fibres of the retina, or by thofe of the Cb§~ 
r?ifc> *# the ijnprcffion pf ligjit is fr*nfputted to the foul. 

and 



Seft. 6. Human Kn6wledge, 167 

and with fuch furpriftng vivacity, it is becaufc the 
fprings have been rendered more pliant and eafy 
by long exercife. But this was not the cafe of 
the young man, whofe catara&s were couched. 
His eyes having grown for the fpace of fourteen 
years, without ever making any ufe of them, re- 
filled the impreflion of objefts. The cornea had 
either too great or too fmall a convexity in rsfpedfc 
to the fituation of the other parts. The chryftal- 
line humour being grown immoveable, coriftantly 
United the rays either on this fide of, or beyond the 
retina ; or if it changed fituation, it was never to 
place itfelf on that fpot where it ought to bs. To 
fet thofe fprings agoing, which had grown ftiffby 
time, a practice of many days was requifite. This 
is the reafon why this young man groped and fum- 
bled for two months. If he owed any thing to the 
affiftance of the touch, it is that the endeavours he 
ufed in order to fee in the objefts the ideas he had 
framed of them by contact, afforded him ari op- 
portunity of acquiring a greater habit of the (enfe 
of feeing. Suppofing he had difcontinued to make 
ufe of his hands whenever he opened his eyes to the 
. light, there is no doubt but he would have acquired 
the fame ideas by his fight, though indeed more 
flowly. 

Thofe who obferved this man, at the moment 
when the catara&s were couched, were in hopes of 
feeing the confirmation of an opinion, in favour of 
which they were prejudiced. When they came to know 
that he perceived the objefts in fo imperfedt a manner, 
they did not fufpeft that any other reafons could be 
given than thofe which Mr. Locke and the bifhop of 
1 M 4 Cloyne 



168 Origin, &c. Parti. 

Cloyne had imagined. It was therefore an abfolute 
decifion in refpeft to them, that the eye, without 
the affiftance of the other fenfes, would be very un- 
fit to furnifh us with ideas of extenfion, figure, fitu- 
ation, &c. 

What gave rife to this opinion, which doubtlefs 
muft have appeared extraordinary to many readers, 
is on the one hand the itch we have of accounting 
For every thing, and on the other the infufficiency 
of the rules of optics : in vain do they pretend to 
meafure the angles which the rays of light form at 
the bottom of the eye ; we do not find that they are 
in proportion to the manner in which we fee the ob- 
jects. But I did not think that this could be any 
authority for my having recourfe to judgments of 
which no body can have a confeioufnefs. I appre- 
hend, that in a work wherein I propofe to myfelf to 
explain the materials of our knowledge, I ought to 
look upon it as a law, not to advance any thing but 
what is inconteftable, and what every man may, 
with the leaft reflexion, perceive within himfelf. 



fbe END of tht First Part, 



A N 




A N 

ESSAY 

CONCERNING THE 

ORIGIN 

O F 

HUMAN KNOWLEDGE. 



PART II. 

Of language and method. 

S E C T I ON L 

Of the origin and pwgrefs of language. 

OTHE habit of intellectual operations in our 
r q firft parents was not the efFeft of experi- 
ence ; for immediately after their creation 
they were rendered capable, by the extra- 
ordinary afliftance of the Deity, of reflecting and of 
communicating their thoughts to each other. But 
fuppofe that fome time after the deluge two chil- 
dren, one male, and the other female, wandered 
about in the deferts, before they underftood the ufe 
of any fign. I am authorized to make this fuppofi- 

tion 



170 Origin of Part IT. 

tion by the fa& above related. And who knows bet 

hme nation or ether owes its original to an event 
of this kind ? Let me then be permitted to make 
the fuppofition, and the queftion * will be to know, 
in what manner this nation firft invented lan- 
guage- 

CHAP. 

* " In judging only from the nature of things, (fays Dr. 
War burton, Divine Lrgat:on 9 Vol. II. p. 81.) " and without die 
44 furer aid of revelation, one mould be apt to embrace the 
" opinion of Diodoms Sicoius (lib. n.) and Vitruvins (lib. ii. 
•* cap. 1 .} that the firft men lived for feme time in woods and 
" cavet, after the manner of beafts, uttering only confuted and 
«' indiftinct founds, till, aflbciating for mutual afiiftance, they 
came, by degrees, to nfe fuch as were articulate, for the ar- 
bitrary figns or marks, mutual]/ agreed on, of thofe ideas 
in the mind of the fpeaker, which he wanted to communi- 
cate to others. Hence the diverfity of languages j for it is 
" agreed on all hands that fpeech is not innate. 

" This is fo natural an account of the original of language, 
" and fo unqueftioned in antiquity, that Gregory Nyflen (ad- 
11 n>ir 9 Etmomium, lib. xiii.) a father of the church, and Richard 
" Simon (Hifi. Crit. du wieux teft. lib. i. cap. 14. and 15. lib. 
" iii. cap. zi.) a pried of the oratory, have both endeavour- 
ed to fupport it: and yet, methinks, they (hould have 
known better; nothing being more evident from fcripture, 
u than that language had a different original. God, we then 
" find, taught the firft man religion; and can we think he 
" would not, at the fame time, teach him language ? (And 
indeed the knowledge of religion fuppofed a great many idea*, 
and a conftant habit of the operations of the mind, which 
could never happen but by the afuftance of figns, as I havt 
fully proved in the firft park of this work) " though, continues 
" Dr. Warburton a little lower, k appears that God taught 
" man language, yet we cannot reafonably iuppofe it any 

u other 



it 

it 

t • 
t* 



it 

it 



Se£fc. i. Human Knowledge. 171 

" other than what ferved hia prefent occafions, he being now 
" of himfelf able to improve and enlarge it, as his future ne- 
" ceffities fhould require: conftcpieHtly the firft language muft 
" needs be very poor and narrow. 1 * 

This whole obfervation appears to me very judicious. My 
motive for fappofing two children under a neceffity of invent- 
ing even die firft figns of language, is becaufe I did not think 
it fufEcient for a philofopher to fay a thing was efFe&ed by ex- 
traordinary means, but judged it to be alfo incumbent upon 
him to explain how it could have happened according to the 
ordinary courfe of nature. 



CHAP. I. 

The mode of fpeoking by altion, ami that of articulate 
founds, conftdtrtd in their original. 

§ 1. QO long as the abovementioned children liv- 
O ed afunder, the operations of their minds 
w$re confined to perception and confcioulhefs, which 
never ceafe to aft whilft we are awake ; to attention 
which muft have taken place whenever any percepti- 
ons affe&ed them in a particular manner •, to reminif- 
cence, which was when they recolle&ed fome cir- 
curnftances that had ftruck them, before they had 
loft the connexions formed by thofe circumftances ; 
and to a very limited exercife of the imagination. 
For example, the perception of a particular want, 
^was conne&ed with that of the object which had con- 
tributed to relieve it. But as this fort of connexions 
werfc formed by chance, without deriving any 
ftrength from reflexion, their duration was but 
ibort* One day the fenfatjon of hunger put thefo 

children 



\yt Origin op Partll. 

children in mind of a tree loaded with fruit, which 
they had teen the day before : foon after this tree 
was forgot, and the fame fenfation revived the idea 
of another objedt. Thus the habit of the imagi- 
nation was not in thair power •, it was no more than 
the cffeft of the circumftances in which they were 
placed *. 

§ 2. When they came to live together, they had 
occafion to enlarge and improve thofe firft operations ; 
becaufe their mutual converfe made them conned 
with the cries of each paflion, the perceptions which 
they naturally fignified. They generally accompanied 
them with fomc motion, gcfture or a&ion, whofe ex- 
preffion was yet of a more fenfible nature. For ex- 
ample, he who fuffered, by being deprived of an ob- 
jedl which his wants had rendered neceffary to him, 
did not confine himfelf to cries or founds only ; he 
ufed fome endeavours to obtain it, he moved his head, 
his arms, and every part of his body. The other 
ftruck with this fight, fixed his eye on the fame 
objeft, and perceiving fome inward emotions which 
he was not yet able to account for, he fuffered in 
feeing his companion fufFer. From that very in- 
ftant he felt himfelf inclined to relieve him, and he 
followed this impreffion to the utmoft of his power. 
Thus by inftindl alone they afked and gave each 
other afiiftance. I fay by inftinSI alone \ for as yet 
there was no room for reflexion. One of them 
did not fay to himfelf, 1 muji make fucb particular 

* What I have here advanced concerning the intelle&uaj 
operations of thefe children, cannot be called into queftion, 
after what has been proved in the firft part of this cflay. Seft. 
2. c. i, 2, 3, 4, 5. and fed. 4. 

j motions 



Se&. i. Human Knowledge. 173 

motions to render bim fenfible of nty want, and to induce 
bim to relieve me : nor the other, I fee by bis motions 
that be wants fucb a things and 1 will let bim bave it : 
but they both a&ed in confequence of the want 
which prefled them moft. 

§ 3. And yet the fame circumftances could not 
be frequently repeated, but they muft have accuf- 
tomed themfelves at length to connect with the 
cries of the paflions and with the different motions 
of the body, thofe perceptions which were exprefled 
in fo fenfible a manner. The more they grew fa- 
miliar with thofe figns, the more they were in a ca- 
pacity of reviving them at pleafure. Their memory 
began to acquire fome fort of habit, they were able 
to command their imagination as they pleafed, and 
infenfibly they learned to do by reflexion what they 
had hitherto done merely by inftinft *. At firft 
both of them acquired the habit of difcerning by 
thofe figns the fenfations which each other felt 
at that moment, and afterwards they made ufe of 
them in order to let each other know their paft 
(enfations. For example, he who faw a place in 
which he had been frightened, mimicked thofe cries 
and movements which were the figns of fear, in 
order to warn the other not to expofe himfelf to the 
fame danger. 

§ 4. The ufe of thofe figns infenfibly enlarged 
and improved the operations of the mind, and on 
the other hand thefe having acquired fuch improve- 
ment, perfe&ed the figns, and rendered the ufe of 

* This anfwers the obje&ion I made in the firft put of this 
work, felt, a c. 5. p. jt. 

them 



174 Origin or Part IT. 

them more familiar. Experience fhews that thefe 
two things aflift each other. Before the disco- 
very of algebraical figns, the human mind had 
acquired a fufficient habit and improvement of its 
operations to invent thofe arbitrary marks ; but it 
is only fince this invention, that they have been cul- 
tivated and improved to a degree fufficient, to bring 
mathematical learning to its prefent ftate of per- 
fection. 

§ 5. By thefe particulars we fee in what manner 
the cries of the paffions contributed to enlarge the 
operations of the mind, by giving occafion natu- 
rally to the mode of fpeaking by a&ion ; a language 
which in its infancy, probably confifted only in 
contortions and violent agitations, being thus pro- 
portioned to the (lender capacity of this young 
couple. 

§ 6. And yet when once they had acquired the 
habit of connecting fome ideas with arbitrary figns, 
the natural cries ferved them for a pattern, to frame 
a new language. They articulated new founds, and 
by repeating them feveral times, and accompanying 
them with fome gefture which pointed out fuch 
objects as they wanted to be taken notice of, they 
accuftomed themfelves to give names to things. 
The firft progrefs of this language was neverthelefe 
very flow. The organ of fpeech was fo inflexible, 
that it could not eafily articulate any other than a 
few fimple founds. The obftacles which hindered 
them from pronouncing others, prevented them even 
from fufpefting that the voice was fufceptible of any 
further variation, beyond the fmall number of words 
which they had already devifed. 

$ 7. Let 



Sc£k. i. Human Knowledge^ 175 

§ 7. Let us fuppofe this young couple to have 
had a child, who being prefled by wants which hf 
could not without fome difficulty make known, put 
every part of his body into motion. His torque 
being extremely pliant, made an extraordinary mo- 
tion, and pronounced a new exprefiion. As thofe 
wants continued to prefs the child, this occasioned a 
repetition of the fame efforts •, again h& moved his 
tongue in the fame manner as at firft, and articulated 
the fame found. The parents furprized, having at 
length gueffed his meaning, gave him what he 
wanted, but tried as they gave it him, to repeat 
the fame word. The difficulty they had to pro- 
nounce it, {hewed that they were not of themfelves 
capable of inventing it. 

For the fame reafon this new language was not 
much improved. The child's organ for want of 
exercife quickly loft all its flexibility. His parents* 
taught him to communicate his thoughts by ac- 
tion ; the fenfible images of this mode of fpeaking, 
being much eaficr to him than articulate founds. 
Chance alone could give rile to fome new words ; 
and doubtlefs it mud have been a long time, before 
their number could be confiderably increafed by fo 
(low a method. The mode of fpeaking by adtion, 
at that time fo natural, was a great obftaclc to fur- 
mount, How could they leave it for another, 
whofe advantages were not yet forefeen, and whofc 
difficulties were fo obvious ? , 

§ 8. In proportion as the language of articulate 
founds became more copious, there was more need 
of feizing early opportunities of improving the or- 
gan of fpeech, and for preferving its firft flexibility* 

Then 



I76 Origin of Part II 

Then it appeared as convenient as the mode of 
ipeaking by adtton : they were both indifcriminatdy 
ufed ; till at length articulate founds became ii> eafy, 
that they abfolutely prevailed. 

§ 9. There was therefore a time when converfa- 
tion was fupported by a language intermixed with 
words and geftures. " Ufe and cuftom *, as in 
Cl> moft other circumftances of life, improving what 
arofe out of necefiity into ornament, this pra£tice 
fubfifted long after the necefiity had ceafed ; efpe- 
cially amongft the eaftern people, whole natural 
cc temper inclined them to a mode of converfation, 
" which fo well exercifed their vivacity by motion ; 
44 and fo much gratified it, by a perpetual reprefen- 
<c tation of material images. 

" Of this we have innumerable inftances in holy 
<c fcripture : as where the falfe prophet pufhed with 
" horns of iron, to denote the intire overthrow of 
the Syrians -f- ; where Jeremiah, by God's direc- 
tion, hides the linen girdle in a hole of the rock 
near Euphrates J; where he breaks a potter's 
veflcl in fight of the people § ; puts on bonds 
and yokes ||, and cafts a book into Euphrates * * $ 
where Ezekiel, by the fame appointment, deline- 
* f ates the fiege of Jerufalem on a tile f f ; weighs 
the hairs of his beard in balances J ; carries out 
his houfhold-ftufF§ ; and joins together the two 
flicks for Judah and Ifrael ||. By thefe aftions 



cc 



cc 



cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
«c 



cc 
cc 
CC 



* Divine Legation, vol. 2. p. 83. f 1 Kings xxii. 11. 

% Chap. xiii. § Chap. xix. f Chap, xxvii. 

•* Jer. li. 63. ff Ezek. iv. 1. J Ezek. ▼. I. 
$ Ezek. xii # H Ezek. xxxvii. 16. 

c< the 



Sect i. Hi/mam Kuowifiuefi. 177 

4< the prophets inftru&ed *the people in the will of 
Cf God, and fconverfed with them in figns." 

Some for want of knowing that the mode of 
(peaking by aftion was a common and familiar 
manner of converting among the Jews, have pre- 
fumed to treat thefe actions of the prophets as 
abfurd and fanatic. Dr. Warburton clears them 
intirely * of this idle charge. " The abfurdity of 
an adtion confifts in its being extravagant and 
infignificant -, but ufe and application made thefe 
in queftion both fober and pertinent : and the 
" fanaticifm of an adtion, in the delighting in un- 
ufual actions and foreign modes of fpeech ; but; 
thofe in queftion were idiomatic and familiar. 
But it is not only in facred ftory that we meet 



cc 
cc 
cc 



cc 

cc 
cc 

*' with this mode of fpeaking by adtion. Profane 
€ * antiquity is full of fuch examples . . . The early 

cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 



oracles, particularly, ufed it, as we learn from, 
an old faying of Heraclitus : That the king whofs 
oracle is at Delphi, neither /peaks, nor keeps Jtlent 3 
but reveals bimfelf by figns f ; a plain proof that 
fpeaking by adtions was once the common mode 
" of information." 

§ 10. It feems that this mode of fpeaking was 
preferved chiefly to inftrudt the people in regard to 
matters in which they were moft deeply concerned $ 
fuch as government and religion. Becaufe as it 
adted upon the imagination with greater force, 
the impreflion was more durable. Its expreffion 
contained even fomething elevated and noble, which 

: * Divine Legation,, vol./ii. p. 86. 

f 0»n *tyn t $rt xfvirfui ctXfot crxpafuu, Pint, wtj t5 ffci? xt?* 
ippiTfsi. p. 962, 

N %h9 



178 Origin of Part IL 

the language of articulate founds, as yet poor and 
barren, could not come up to. This mode of 
fpeaking the ancients called by the name of dance ; 
which is the reafon of its being faid that David 
danced before the ark. 

§ 11. Astafte improved, men gave a greater 
variety, grace, and exprefiion to this dance. They 
not only fubje&ed the motions of the arms, and the 
attitudes of the body to rules, but they likewife 
marked out the movements of the feet. By thefc 
means dancing was naturally divided into two fub- 
ordinate arts : one, if I may be permitted an expreP* 
(ion conformable to the language of antiquity, was 
the dance of gefturesy which they preferved in order 
to make it concur in the communication of their 
thoughts •, the other was chiefly the dance of Jteps, 
and was employed in exprefling iome particular erno^ 
tions of the mind, but chiefly joy * it was therefore 
ufed on occafions of rejoicing, and its principal ob- 
jedfc was plcafure. 

The dance of fieps arifes therefore from that of 
geftures ; whofe chara&er it retains. Among the 
Italians, whofe a&ion is more lively and more vari- 
ed, it is pantomimic : on the contrary, in France 
it is more grave and Ample. This, if any advan- 
tage, feems to me the caufe that the language of this 
dance is not fo copious and expreffive. For ex- 
ample, would it be poflible for a dancer, who aim- 
ed at nothing more than grace in his movements 
and dignity in his attitudes, would it be poflible, I 
fay, for him, when he danced with a partner, to 
have the fame fuccefs, as if he danced alone ? would 
not diere be room to apprehend that the fimplicity 

of 



Se&. t. Human Knowledge* 179 

of his movement, would be fo confined in its e*~ 
predion, as not to furniih him with ligns fufEcient 
for the language of a figured dance ? if fo, the 
tnqre fimple this art bccpmcs, the more its cxpreflioa 
fe limited. 

§ 1 a. There are different kinds of dance, from 
tfr? n^oft fimple to that which is leaft fo. They 
$re all good, provided they be expreflivc of fome- 
thing, and they are fo much the more perfedt, as 
their expreifion is more various and difiufe. A 
{iftpce that e*pre{Tcs grace and dignity, is good \ 
ljiut th^t which frames a kind of converfation and 
difd9gqe t feems better. The leaft perfect is that 
wty^h requires nothing but ftrength and agility, 
bqcfLUJk its pbyeft is nqt fufficiently interefting : and 
yet |t is not to be undervalued, fince it frequently 
c Wfe a very agreeable furprize. The fault of the 
French is their confining the arts by ftriving to ren- 
der t))pn> fiiflple. . Hence they fometimes deprive 
thcfnlelves of the improvements of other nations, 
frofn an attachment to their own mode and tafte : 

1 

and of this we have another example in mufic. 



CHAP. II. 

Of the profody of the earUeft Languages. 



s 



method of communicating our thoughts could not 
be contrived without imitating the firft. In order 
then to jfupply the place of the violent contorfions 

N % of 



186 Origin of Part III 

of the body, the voice was raifed and deprefled by 
very fenfible intervals. 

Thefe languages did not fucceed each other ab- 
ruptly : they were a long time intermixed ; and it 
was not till very late that fpeech prevailed. Now 
every man may experience in himfelf, that it is na- 
tural for the voice to diverfify its inflexions in pro* 
portion as the geftures are more varied. There are. 
feveral other reafons to confirm this conjecture. 

In the firft place, when men began to utter arti- 
culate founds, the refiftance of their organs did not 
permit them to do it by fuch foft inflexions as ours. 

Secondly, we # may obferve that there is fo great 
a neceflity for inflexions, that we have fome diffi- 
culty to underftand a perfon, who is fubjedt to a 
monotony in reading. If we are fatisfied with a 
flight variation of the voice, it is becaufe the mind has 
been fufficiently enlarged and improved by the great 
number of ideas which we have acquired, and by 
the habit we have formed of connefting them with 
founds. This is what thofe men wanted, who firft 
invented the ufe of fpeech. Their minds were rude 
and uncultivated, infomuch that ideas the moft 
common to us were new to them. Therefore to 
underftand one another, they were obliged to con- 
duct their voice by very diftindt degrees. We our 
felves experience, that the lefs we are acquainted 
with a language, the greater ftrefs we are obliged 
to lay on every fyllable, and to make a fenfible 
diftindHon between them. 

Thirdly, at the origin of languages, mankind 

meeting with too great a difficulty in devifing new 

words, had no other means for. a long time of ex- 

i prefling 



Se6L i. Human Knowledge. 181 

prefling the emotions of the foul, than the natural 
cries, to which they gave the charafter of inftituted 
figns. Now the natural cries neceflarily introduce 
the ufe of violent inflexions ; fince different emo- 
tions are fignified by the fame found varied in dif- 
ferpnt tones. Ab> for inftance, according to the dif- 
ferent manner in which it is pronounced, exprefles 
admiration, pain, pleafure, fadnefs, joy, fear, diflike, 
and almoft all the paflions. 

Finally, I might add that the firft names of ani- 
mals probably were made in imitation of their cries : 
a remark which is equally applicable to thofe that 
were given to winds, to rivers, and to every thing 
that makes a noife. It is evident that this imitation 
luppofes the founds to have fucceeded each other by 
very diftinft intervals. 

§ 14. We might improperly give the name of 
mufic to this manner of pronouncing, as cuflom 
indeed gives it to $11 pronunciations that are very 
much accented. Yet I . avoid doing it, becaufe I 
fhall have occafion to make ufe of this' word in its 
proper fenfe. It is not fufficient 'for mufic, that the 
founds fucceed each other by diftindt degrees, they 
mud likewife be fuftained, fo as to let their har- 
mony, be perceived, and the intervals muft be fuch 
as can be meafured. It was impoffible that this fhould 
generally be the character of thofe founds by which 
the voice was varied at the origin of languages ; 
but on the other hand it could not be very far from 
agreeing to them. Let two founds fucceed each 
other with never fo fmall a relation, it will be fuffi*- 
cient flightly to deprefs or to raife one of the two, 
in order to find fuch an interval between them as 

w / N 3 harmony 



182 Origin op Part II. 

harmony requires. Therefore at the origin of lan- 
guages the manner of pronouncing admitted of in- 
flexions that were fo diftinft, afc a mufician might 
prick it down, making only fome fmall changes ; 
I (hall fay then that it partook of the nature of 
mufic. 

§ 1 5. This profody was fo natural to mankind in 
the beginning, that to feveral it has appeared eafief 
to exprefs different ideas by the fame word pro- 
nounced in different tones, than to multiply the 
number of words in proportion to that of ideas. 
This language is ftill preferved among the Chinefe.- 
They have only 328 monofyllables ; thefe they vaxy 
on five tones, which is equivalent to 1640 figra. 
It has been obferved that our languages are not 
more copious. Other people, doubtlefs of a mort 
fruitful imagination, chofe rather to invent new 
words. Profody with them began infcnfibly tote- 
cede from mufic, in proportion as the reafons for 
its former approximation, ceafed to take place. But 
it was a long rime before it became fo fimple as it 
is at prefent. Eftablifhed cuftoms oftentimes fubfift 
even when the wants which gave rife to them are at 
an end. If I were to fay that the profody of thfe 
Greeks and Romans participated alfo of mufic, 
fome would find a difficulty perhaps to guefs at the 
grounds of fuch a conjecture. And yet the reafons 
for it feem to me both plain and convincing j I 
(hall give them in the following chapter. 



CHAP. 



Sefh x. Human Knowledge. 1S3 

CHAP. HI. 

« 

Of the profody of the Greek and LatiA tongues ; and 
occafionally of the recitation or declamatory {peaking 
of the ancients. 

$ 16. HP HAT the Greeks and Romans deter- 
-** mined their recitation or declamatory 
fpeaking by notes and fignatures, and accompanied 
it with the found of inftruments *, is beyond all 
manner of doubt : it was therefore properly a kind 
of chant or fong. This is an evident coofequence 
to fuch as have the leaft knowledge of the princi- 
ples of mufic. In the firft place they are not igno- 
rant that it is impoffible to have any permanent 
marks of found, Otherways than by meafuring it* 
Secondly, that nothing can be meafured in mtifiet 
without the refonance of fonorous bodies. Thirdly* 
that this refonance does not produce any other 
founds, or intervals, than fuch as are admitted ta 
vocal mufid. 

It is alfo unqueftionable that this mufical reci- 
tation was not at all offenfive to die ancients. We 
do not find that they ever complained of its being 
unnatural, except in particular cafes, as we are apt 

to do ourfelves, when we think a comedian overads 

#■ 

* I produce no authority to prove this l&rtto*, bat refer 
the reader to the third volume of the Critical Reflexions o» 
poetry and painting, where he will likewife find a confirmation 
of mod of the fa&s here advanced. My author, the Abbe dur 
Bos, is a very competent judge of thefe matters, his character 
being fufficicntly eftablilhed in the learned world, 

N 4 hi* 



4^4 Origin op Part If. 

his part. On the contrary, they confidered vocal 
mufic as eflential to poetry. The verfification of 
the very beft Lyric poets, fays Cicero *, appears 
like profe, unlefs it be fupported by vocal mufic. 
Poes not this evidently fhew that the pronunciation, 
which at that time was looked upon as natural in 
familiar difcourfe, partook fo much of the nature 
of chant or fong, that it was impoflible for them 
(to imagine fuch a medium as our manner of de- 
claiming ? 

And indeed our only aim in declaiming, is to 
fcxprefs our thoughts in a ftronger manner, but with- 
out too great a deviation from what we look upon 
as nature. If the pronunciation of the ancients had 
been like ours, they would therefore have been fa- 
tisBed as we are with plain declamation. But it mull: 
have been very different, fince they could not in- 
creafe its expreffion without the affiftance of har- 
mony. 

§ 1 7. Befides every body knows that in the Greek 
and Latin tongues, there were accents, which inde- 
pendently of the meaning of a word, or of an intire 
phrafe, determined the voice to fall on certain Sylla- 
bles and to rife on others. How thofe accents never 
happened to claflrwith the expreffion, there is only 
one way of accounting. We mull abiblutely fup- 
<pofc 9 that according to the pronunciation of the 
ancients, the inflexions expreffive of the thought, 
were fo often and fo fenfibly varied, that they could 
(jot clafli with thofe required by the accents. 



* Cic. dc oral. 



§ 18. Bu| 



Se£L i. Human Knowledge. j$c 

§ 1 8. But to thofe who fhall place themfelves 
under the farifie circumftances as the Greeks and 
.Romans, it will not be at all furprizing that they 
fliould have had fo tuneful a manner of declaiming. 
What makes us confider finging ad not altogether fo 
natural on the ftage, is not becaufe the founds fuc- 
ceed each other according to the proportions re- 
quired by harmony ; but becaufe even the weakeft 
inflexions feem generally to us fufficient to exprefs 
our thoughts. People accuftomed to conduct their 
Voice by diftinft intervals, would find our pronun- 
ciation to be a lifelefs monotony ; whereas a mufical 
recitation that modified thefe intervals, only fo far 
as is neceflary to meafure their founds," would in- 
creafe the expreflion, without appearing at all extra- 
ordinary to them. 

§ 19. For want of being acquainted with the na- 
ture of the Latin and Greek pronunciation, feveral 
Tiave found a great difficulty to comprehend what 
the ancients have wrote concerning their public fpec- 
tacles. I fhall give here an example. 

" If tragedy may do without verfe, fays a com- 
* c mentator of Ariftotle's poetics *, furely it can 

much better difpenfe with mufic. And in truth 

I do not rightly underftand how mufic could ever 
4C be confidered ^s in fome meafure conflituting part 

Of tragedy ; for if any thing upon earth appears 

foreign ahd even contrary to a tragic a&ion, 
M it is myfic. This may be faid without any 
* c offence, I hope, to the writers of mufical trage- 
f c dies, poems as ridiculous as they are modern, and 






<4 



,** . * 



f pacicr, Afiftot. part, p. 82. 



* - 4 ^ • » J » 



cc 

4C 



186 Origin of Part IT. 

€4 which could never be endured, if we had the leaft 
" reliih for theatrical entertainments, and if we 
" had not been charmed and bewitched by one of 
" the greateft muficians that ever cxifted. For 
opera's* if I may prefume to faynt, are grotefque 
poems, which become the more intolerable by 
4< being made to pais for regular compoGtions. 
iC Ariftotle would therefore have obliged us greatly 
€i in pointing out the manner in which mufic might 
<c have been judged neceflary to tragedy. But in- 
" ftead of this he was pleated to fay, that its 
" in tire force was khown ; which ftiews only that 
every body was convinced of this neceflity, and 
felt the marvellous effefts which mufic produced 
in poems, though it only txreupied the interludes. 



cc 
cc 

CC 

*' Often have I endeavoured to comprehend the rea- 
(C ions which obliged fo . ingenious and fo nice a 

cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
c< 
cc 

cc 
cc 



people as the Athenians to join mufic and danc- 
ing to tragical reprefentations, and after a great 
many inquiries how it could fcem natural and 
probable to them, that a chorus which reprefented 
the fpedtators of an adtion, fhould dance and 
fing at fuch extraordinary events, I have found 
that in this they were directed by their natural 
biafs to fuperfiition. The Greeks were the moft 
fuperftitious people in the world, and the fondeft 
of dancing and mufic, a paffion which was 
greatly ftrengthened by their education. 

I very much queftion, lays the Abbe du Bo^ 
whether this way of reafoning would excufe the 
(C tafte of the Athenians, upon a fuppofition that 
" the mufic and dancing mentioned by ancient 
" authors, as an entertainment abfblutely neceflary 



" in 



Se& i. Hum A* Knowlidge] 187 

" in tragic reprefehtations, were the lame as burs ; 
" but we have already fcen, that this mufic was no 
•• more than plain declaiming, and we fliall pre- 
*" fently fee that this dancing, was only a ftudicd 
" and regular gpfturt." 

Both thefe writers appear to me to be alike mif~ 
taken in their explications. Montr. Dacier forms 
an idea of the Greek pronunciation from the French, 
and of the mufic of the ancient tragedies from that 
of the modern opera's : fo that it is very natural he 
fhould be furprized at the tafte of the Athenians* 
But he is in the wrong to find fault with Ariftotle* 
This philofopher, incapable of forefeeing the changes 
that were to happen in pronunciation and mufic* 
reckoned that he fliould be understood by pofterity* 
juft as he was by his cotemporaries. If to us he 
appears obfeure, it is owing to the habit we have 
acquired of judging of the cuftoms of antiquity by 
bUr own. 

The Abbe du Bos's miftake is owing to the fame 
Caufe. Unable to comprehend how the ancients 
fcould have looked upon it as a practice moft agree* 
able to nature, to introduce a mufic on the ftage 
like that of our opera's, he has taken it into his 
head to fay that it was not mufic, but only a plain 
declamation, determined by note and meafure. 

§ 20. In the firft place he feems hereby to give a 
forced conftrudtion to a great many pafiages of the 
ancients : this we fee efpecially by the confufion he 
is under to clear up fuch as relate tp the choruffes. 
In the fecond place, if this learned Abbe had been 
acquainted with the principles of harmony, he would 
have Teen that a plain declamation reprefcnted by ar- 
2 hvtxwj 






C4 

4C 
(6 



i i? C i : ::* c? Part D. 

h-.r.-ir/ rr.arlc; ir r.y r.ctss and meaiurc is a thing io 
cr/T.hle. To dcftrov tFie fyfem which he has framed 
r,n rfif! or/jfcr., it wSI (uffice to relate the manner 
i.i whkh he attests to e&iblifh. ir. 

" I have afksd/iay! he, feveril muficians, whether 
\z would be difficult to invent charafters or per- 
manent figrft by which we might repreient the 
der. lamatory {peaking uled at our theatres. They 
u anfwered, that the thing was poflible, and even 
that we might mark it with our gamut, pro- 
vided we gave the notes no more " than half the 
common intonation. For example, thofe notes 
which have a femitone of intonation in mufic, 
fhould have only the fourth part of a tone in de- 
" claiming. Thus we fhould mark even the fmalleft 
" elevations of the voice that were fenfible, at Ieaft 
c< to our cars. 

" The French verfification does not carry its 
*' meafure along with it like the Greek and Roman 
" metre. But I h^ve been alfo told,, that we might 
u ufc rhofc characters or fignatures in declaiming, 
tc for their value as well as for their intonation. 
" We fhould give a minum no more than the value 
** of a crotcher, and meafure the other notes ac- 
" cording to this proportion. 

*' I am not ignorant that we fhould not find 
* e it cafy at firfl to meet with perfons capable of 
■' currently reading this kind of mufic, and of pro* 
•• paly intoning the notes. But boys at the age of 
%i tiftrrn would be able to learn it in fix months, 
•' I 'heir organs would become pliant to it, juft as 
14 they Ixrotnc pliant to the intonation of our 
M common niiilic. Exercifc, and habir, the conle- 

4i quence 



cc 
cc 



CC 

cc 



&£fc-. i 1 . Human Knowledge. 18^ 

cc quence of exercife, are in regard to the voice whaf 
** the bow and the arm are to the violin. How then 
can it be imagined that this intonation ihould be 
a difficult matter ? You need/only accuftom your 
cc voice to a regular method of performing what it 
" doe* every day in common conVerfation. Some- 
<c times we are quick, at other times flow in fpeak- 
cc ing. We ufe all forts of tones, 'and make diffe- 
<c rent kinds of progreffions, either by railing the 
voice, or deprefling it by all poffible intervals. 
A recitation, reprefented bf permanent figns, 
u would be nothing more than the tones and move- 
<c ments of pronunciation pricked down in notes, 
€c And indeed the difficulty attending fuch a method 
would be nothing like that which we experience 
in reading what we never faw before, and at the 
fame time in finging and accompanying the words 
on the harpfichord, without having ever ftudied 
the notes. And yet by praftice even women 
learn to perform thefe three operations at the fame 
cc time. 

" With regard to the manner of reprefenting the 
41 declamation by figns, whether that already men- 
cc tioned, or any other, it cannot be fo difficult to 
cf reduce it to certain rules, and to put the method 
* c into pradtice, as it was to difcover the art of de- 
€C termining by notes the fteps and movements of a 
* 4 ballet danced by eight perfons ; efpecially confi- 
4< dering the prefent variety of fteps, and intricate 
" movements. Neverthelefs Feuillee has invented 
" this art, and from his notes dancers may learn 
" even their different attitudes. 

§ 21. Here 



cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 



190 0*ig;n or Partll. 

$ 21. Here is a very (biking example of the 
frrors into which a perfon is liable to fal], and of 
the vague incoherent reafonings he muft needs 
jn^ke, who undertakes to fpeak of an art without 
being acquainted with its principles. This pafiage 
might juftly be criticifed from one end to the other* 
I have given it at full length, with a view that by 
the miftakes of a writer fo worthy of refpeft as the 
Abbe dy Bos, we piay fee the danger we run in 
being deceived in our conje&ures, whenever we (peak 
without accurate ideas. 

Whofoever is acquainted with the formation «f 
founds, and with the art by which their iqtpnjtaon 
becomes natural to us, will never fuppofc that they 
jnay be divided by quarter tones, and that their 
gamut would foot} become as fyqiliar as that whioh 
we ufe in mufic. The muficians, whole authority 
4s produced by the Abbe du Bos, might be excellent 
pra&itioners ; but in all probability they were unac- 
quainted with the theory of this art, whole true 
principles were firft difcovered by M. Rameau. 

$22. It is demonftrated in the treatife of the 
harmonic generation, i e . that a found cannot be mea* 
fured, unlefs it be continued fo as to let its melody be 
heard. 2°. That the voice cannot tune feveral founds 
fucceffively, making determinate intervals between 
them, unlefs it be guided by a fundamental bafe. 
3 . That there is no fundamental bafe able to give a 
fucceffion by quarter tones. Now in our way of de- 
claiming, the founds for the moil part are very little 
continued, but fucceed each other by quarter tones, 
or even by leffer intervals. The projeft of reprefent* 
ing them by permanent marks is therefore impracti- 
cable. §23. True 



Sc£t. i. Human Knowledge. 191 

§ 2 3. True it is that the fundamental fucceffion 
by a tierce gives the femitone minor which is by 4 
quarter tone below the femitone major. But thi$ 
tikes place only in the changes of the modes, fo 
that it can never give rife to a gamut by quarter 
tones. Befides this femitone minor is not natural, 
and the ear is fb little acquftomed to meafure it, 
that upon the harpfichord it is not diftinguiihed 
from the femitone major ; for the fame (top forms 
them both *. The ancients undoubtedly were ac* 
quainted with the difference of thefe two femitones ; 
and this is what made the Abbe du Bos and others 
believe, that they had divided their gamut by quarter 
tones. 

§ 24. There is no inference to be drawn from 
Yhoregraphy, or from the art of determining by 
permanent figns the fteps and improvements of a 
ballet. Feuillee had only to contrive the figns ; be- 
caufe in dancing, every ftep and movement, at lead: 
thofe which he knew how to mark, are meafured. 
In our way of declaiming, the founds for the moft 
, part cannot be meafured : they may be compared to 
fome particular cxpreflions in ballets, which chore* 
graphy cannot reprefent by its arbitrary marks. 

I fhall infert in a note the explication of fome 
paflages which the Abbe du Bos has borrowed of 
the ancients, to fupport his opinion f. 

§ 25. The 

• See in the treatife entitled the harmonic generation, c. 1 4. 
art. 1. by what artifice the voice paffes to a femitone minor. 

-f- He produces fome paflages in which the ancients fpeak of 
their ordinary pronunciation, as of a very fimplc thing, and as 
having a continuous found. But he fhould have taken notice 

that 



192 Origin op Part II. 

§ 25.. The fame caufes which determine the voic? 
to vary by very diftinft intervals, necefiarily occa- 
fion it to make a difference between the times which 

it 

that they fpoke of it only by way of comparifcm to their 
mafic : therefore it was not absolutely fimple. And indeed 
when they confidered it in itfelf, they have taken notice of its. 
being' fubjeft to rules of profody, which ours is not, A 
gafcoon that knew no pronunciation more fimple than his own, 
would look upon it as a continuous found, when compared 
to vocal miific. The ancients were in the fame cafe. 

Cicero makes CrafTus. fay, that whenever he liftens to Lxlia", 
he fancies he heard a recitation of the pafTages of Plautns and 
Naevius, becaufe (he pronounces fmooth and even, without 
affecting stay foreign accent. Now, fays the Abbe du Bos, 
Leelia did not fing;in. familiar converfation : that is true, but 
in Plautus and Natvius's time the pronunciation of the Romans 
already partook of the nature of vocal mafic, fince the decla 7 
mation of pafTages out of thefe poets had been determined by 
note and meafure. Laelia therefore feemed to pronounce 
frnooth and even, only becaufe (he did not make ufe of the 
new accents which cuftom had introduced. 

Comedians, fays Quintilian, do not deviate from nature 
in their pronunciation, at leaft fo as to make us lofe fight 
of it : but they heighten the ufual method of pronouncing, 
with ornaments tolerated in their art : Judge now whether this 
be fmging, fays the Abbe du 60s. I fay it is, upon a fuppofition^ 
that the pronunciation which Quintilian calls natural, was regu- 
lated by profody to fuch a degree, as to be capable of being 
reprefented by permanent figns, without any feniible alteration. 
Now this is fad, efpe daily in regard to the time when this 
rhetor wrote ; for then the accents of the Latin tongue were. 
greatly multiplied. 

But the following fadt, at firft fight, feems more favourable 
to our Abbe's opinion. At Athens they ordered the publica- 
tion of the laws to be compofed or determined by note, and 

the 



.Sjeft. l< Human Knowledge. 193 

it ufeth in the articulation of founds. It was npt 

therefore natural, that a people, whofe profody was in 

. fome meafure mufical, fliould obferve equal (tops in 

each 

the perfon who cried or publifhcd them, to be accompanied by 
an Uftrument. Now is it at all likely that the Athenians ftiould 
caufe .their, laws to be fet to mufic ? I anfwer, that they would 
never hare thought of eftabliftiing fuch a cuftom, bad their 

. pronunciation been like ours,becaufe there wonld.be too great a 
difference between it and even the mod firople melody : bat .we 
mttft putourfelves in their place. Their language was mere load- 
ed with rules of profody than that of the Romans; fo that in a 

.recitation not much heightened by mufic, they might meafure 
^inflexions of the voice, without feeming to deviate from the 
common .pronunciation. 

It feems therefore evident, concludes the Abbe du Bos, that the 
recitation of the dramatic pieces in the antient theatres, had 

-neither any tranfitions, nor drained cadences, nor continued 
quavers, nor the other qhara&ers of our vocal mufic. 
. ; I. am much miftaken, or this writer had not a very clear idea 

.<lf what conititutes vocal mufic. He feems to judge of it only 
from, that of our operas. Having mentioned that Quintilian 
complained of fome Bawifters for pleading in the fame manper 

<*'s they recited on the ftage, is it to-be imagined, adds he, 

•that thpfe orators fang as we fing at our operas r I anfwer, that 
the. fucceflion of the tones which conftitute a fong may fiill.be 

.much more Ample than that of our operas; nor it it at all negef- 

,.fcfy they mould have the fame tranfitions, the fame ffcrained 
cadences, and continued quavers. 

. ;.fiut we.find in t;he ancients a multitude of paffages, which 
fhew.&at their pronunciation was not, a continuous found. 
"1 Such is, fays Cicero in his treatife de orator$> the marvellous 
'* power of the voice, which out of three, tones, acute, grave, 
'? and. middle.* forms all the variety, fweetnefs, and harmony 
'* of fong: for it is remarkable that the pronunciation in- 
i( eludes. « kind. <Jf. . fong, not indeed regulated by the laws 

O " of 



i<74 O R i g j m of Part II. 

each fyllable,: this method of pronouncing would 
not have fufficiently imitated die mode of fpeaking 
by a&ion. Some founds therefore at the origin of 

languages 

" of mufic, or fuch as that ufed by the Phrygian and Carian 
tc orators in their perorations, bat a fong of a lefs perceptible 
' *' kind, fuch as that meant by Demofthenes and Afchines, 
" when they reproached each other with the inflexions of their 
*' voice, and when Demofthenes, to carry the irony ftill for- 
"' ther, confefled that his adverfary had fpokc in a foft, clear, 
€t and convincing tone." 

Quiritilian' obferves, that this reproach of Demofthenes and 
^(chines, mould not make us condemn thofe inflexions of 
Voice, fince it informs ns that they 'both made ufe of them. 

" The moft eminent a£tors,fays the Abbe duBosf, would not 
*\ fpeak a word in the morning, before they had, if fo I may 
j u exprefs myfelf, methodically exercifed their voice, by emit- 
" ting it gradually, - and making, as it were, an inferifible de- 
•• vaticm, in order not to hurt the vocal organ by any 
' "** fudden ftraining or kind of violence. They even took 
n ' care to lye down during this exercife. When the play was 
"over they fat themfelves down, and entered upon another 

kind of exercife of their organ, running through the fe- 

veral tones they had ufed during the time of performing, 
* €t from the higheft down to the loweft, with which they con- 
* x eluded," * ff the recitation had not been a melody that ad- 
mitted of all the tones, would the comedians have ufed the 

» 

precaution of exercifing every day their voice on the whole fe- 
ries of tones which they were capable of framing ? 

Inline, " the writings of the ancients, as the Abbe du Boi 
" himfelf fays *, abound with fafts which prove, that their at- 
4 * tention to every thing proper for ftrengthening, or even for 

fweetning the voice, was carried to a degree of fuperftition. 

We may fee, in the third chapter of the eleventh book of 

■ i - • 

f VoUII. p. 198. ; • Vol. UI. p. aoo. . 

« QuintUian, 



•c 
« 






fleft. u Human Knowledge. ^195* 

languages fucceeded each other with great velocity, 
and others very flowly. From thence arifes what 
grammarians call quantity, or the fenfible difference 
betwixt long and fhort fyllables. Quantity, and 
pronouncing by diftind: intervals, have kept pace to- 
gether, and altered very nearly in the fame proporti- 
on. The profody of the Romans bordered upon 
vocal mufic; hence their words were compofed of 
very unequal fyllables : in French the quantity has 
been no farther preferved, than as the weak inflexi- 
ons of the voice have rendered it neceflary. 

§ 26. As the inflexions by fenfible intervals in- 
troduced the ufe of mufical declamation, fo the di- 
ftindfc inequality of fyllables added a difference of time 
and meafure to it. The declamatory fpeaking of* 
the ancients contained therefore thofe two things, 
which chara&erife vocal melody, I mean modulati- 
on and movement. 

Movement is the foul of mufic : hence we fee that 
the ancients confidered it as abfolutely neceflary to 
their recitation. There was a perfon appointed at 
their theatres to determine it by ftamping with his 
feet ; fo that the ancient comedians were as much 
tied down to meafure as muficians and dancers in 
our times. It is beyond all doubt that fuch a reci- 

«* Quintilian, that in every kind of eloquence, the ancients had 
ic made deep reflexions on the nature of the human voice, and 
•* efpecially on the feveral methods proper for flrengthening it 
" by exercife. Now the art of learning to ftrengthen and ma* 
nage the voice was become a particular profeffton. Is it then 
at all likely that when they ufed fuch exceflive care and re- 
" flexion about their declamatory fpeaking, it could be fo fim- 
" pie as ours:" 

O a tatiori 



€€ 
€£ 



196 Origin of Part It. 

tation would deviate too widely from our manner of 
pronouncing, ever to feem natural to us. Far from 
requiring that an a&or Ihould follow a particular 
movement, we forbid him to make us fenfibk of tRc 
meafure of our verfe; nay we inlifl: on his breaking 
it fo, as he fhall feem to exprefs himfelf in profe. 
Upon the whole it appears, that the pronunciation 
of the ancients, in familiar converfation, bordered fo 
near upon vocal mufic, that their declamation! may 
be faid to have been mufical in the ftrift ferifc of the 
word. 

§27. Every day we obferve, at our theatrical en- 
tertainments, that the fingers have a great de&l of 
difficulty to make us underftand the words. Doubt- 
lefs a qucflion will arife, whether the declamatory 
fpeaking of the ancients was fubjeft to' the like ih- 
conveniency ? I anfwer in the negative, and my 
reafon for fo thinking is drawn from the" nature of 
their profody. 

As the French language has but very little quan- 
tity, we are fatisfied with the mufician, provided he 
does not lengthen a fhort fyllable, or fhorten "a long 
one. Obferving this relation, he may in othier fe- 
fpedts dwell upon them as much, or as little as lie 
pleafes ; for inftance, he may make a flop of one, 
two, or three meafures on the fame fyllable. The 
want of rules of profody gives him likewife as much 
liberty; for he has it in his power todeprefs or to 
raife the voice on the fame, found ; being direfted^ 
intirely by his own tafte. From all this fome con- 
fufion muft naturally arife in words fet to mufic. 

At Rome, the mufician who compofed the recita-. 
tion of the dramatic performances, was obliged to 

conform 



Sc£t. i. Human Knowledge. 197 

conform ftridtly to profody. He was not at liberty 
to lengthen a fliort fyllable beyond one time, nor a 
long one beyond two •, for even the common people 
would have hifled him. The profody oftentimes de- 
termined whether he fhould pafs to an acuter or to 
a graver found ; fo that here he was tied down. In 
a word it was his duty to adapt the movement of 
the mufic to the meafure of the verfe, as much as 
to the fentiment which it exprefied. Thus it is that 
their declamation, by conforming to a profody whofe 
rules were more fixed than ours, contributed, notwith- 
ftanding the mufic, to make them clearly underftand 
the words. 

§ 28. We muft not form an idea of the declama- 
tion of the ancients from the French recitatives ; it 
was not near fo mufical. The reafon of thefe reci- 
tatives being fo heightened with mufic is, becaufe 
if they had been never fo fimple, ftill we fhould not 
think them natural. On the one hand we were fond 
of theatrical fong, and on the other we were fenfible 
it could not be brought near enough to our ordinary 
pronunciation ; we chofe therefore to heighten it with 
mufic, in order to indemnify us by its artificial 
charms, not indeed for the lofs of any natural beau- 
ty, but of a habit which we took for fuch. The 
Italians have a recitative lefs mufical than ours. As 

# 

they are accuftomed to ufe more aflion in their dif- 
courfe than we, and their pronunciation falls as na- 
turally into a frequent change of tone, as ours feems 
to avoid it, a plain fimple mufic feemed natural 
enough to them. This is the reafon why they give 
it the preference in fuch pieces as require to be de- 
claimed. The French recitative would lofe in re- 

O 3 gard 



io? Origin of Part II. 

gard to us, were it rendered more fimple, becaufc it 
would have fewer beauties, without any appearance 
of nature- : and the Italian recitative would lofe great- 
ly in rtfpec: to them, if it were lefs fimple ; becaufc 
r.o artificial ornament could ever indemnify them 
for the certain lofs of natural beauty, or at leaft of 
what appeared fuch to them. We may conclude that 
both the Italians and French ought to adhere to their 
refpective manner, and that they are in the wrong to 
criticize each other. 

§ 29. In the profody of the ancients I find like- 
wife the reafon of a faft, which no one, at leaft as I 
know of, has hitherto explained. The queftion is, 
in what manner the Roman orators, who harangued 
in the public forum, could be heard by the whole 
people ? 

Vocal founds arc eafily conveyed to the extremi- 
ties of a place, even of a very large extent : the on- 
ly difficulty is to hinder thofe founds from being con- 
fbuiidcd. Ejt this difficulty muft diminish in pro- 
portion as the fyliablcs are more fenfibly diftinguifb- 
c:l from each other by the profody of a language. 
In L:tin, they differed by the quality of the found ; 
by the accent, which, independently of the fenfe, re- 
quired the voice to be raifed or deprefied j and by the 
quantity : the French tongue wants accents, and has 
fcarce any fuch thing as quantity ; befides a great 
many of their fyllabJes are mute. A Roman might 
therefore make himfelf perfeftly heard, where a 
Frenchman could not be heard without difficulty, or 
perhaps not at all. 



CHAP. 



Soft. i.- a Human Knowledge. 199 



C H A P. IV. 

Of the progrefs which the art of gejture made among 

the ancients* 

$ 3°- \X7 HAT progrefs the art of gefture made 
VV among the ancients, and principally 
among the Romans, every body that has the leaft 
tin&ure of learning muft have lyard. The Abbe du 
Bos has collected the mofl curious pafTages onthis fub- 
jedt, from the feveral authors of antiquity. But the . 
reafon of this progrefs n9 one yet has given. Hence 
it is that the public fpe&acles of the ancients appear . 
fo incomprchenfibly furprizing, and that we fome- . 
times find it difficult to forbear turning them inta . 
ridicule; fuch is our prejudice againft every thing that 
' greatly differs from our own cuftoms. The Abbe du 
Bos having undertaken to defend thofe. entertain- 
ments* particularly remarks, the immenfe expences 
of the Greeks and Romans in the reprefentation of 
their dramatic pieces, and the great progrefe they 
made in poetry, eloquence, painting, fculpture,.and 
archite&ure* From thence he concludes, that, the 
prefumption ought to be in their favour, in regard 
to thofe arts of which there are no monuments left ; 
and if we would believe him, we fhould beftow the 
fame encomiums on the reprefentations of their dra- 
matic performances,, a$ we do. on their buildings 
and writings. My opinion is, that to relifti fuch 
reprefentations they muft have been prepared by far 
different cuftoms from thofe of our age and nation :., 
that in confequence of thofe cuftoms the public fpec- 

O 4 tacle* 



a$o - Origin of Part H . 

tacles of the ancients deferved to be commended, and 
poffibly were even fuperior to our*. This is what 
I fhall endeavour to explain in this and the following 
chapter. 

§ 31. If it be natural, as I have obferved, for the 
voice to vary its inflexions in proportion to the great- 
er variety of geftures, it is for the fame reafon na- 
tural for people who fpeak a language, the pronun- 
ciation of which bonders very near upon mufic, to 
have a more varied ^fture : thefe two things ought 
to go together. And indeed if in the profody of 
the Greeks* and Romans we can trace the charafter of 
the mode of fpeaking by adion, there is a ftrongcr 
reafon for our perceiving it in thofe movements with 
which they animated their difcourfc. By this we fee 
that their a&ion might be expreflive enough to be 
meafured, We fhall therefore find no difficulty any 
lCnger to comprehend their having laid down rules 
for it, and invented the art of determining it by notes 
2nd meafure. In our days this part of declamatory, 
fpeaking is become as fimple as the reft. We taktf 
no notice of an adlor, any further than as by a mo- 
derate variation of gefture, he has the art of expreff- 
ihg the different emotions of his foul; and we think 
Jiis aftion unnatural, if it deviates too much from 
out ordinary gefture. The confequence is, that we 
can no longer have any fixt principles to regulate the 
feVgral attitudes and movements ufed in declaiming, 
fo that the obfervations that may be made on this 
fubjeft are limited to particular cafes. 

$ 32. When geftures were once reduced to an 
ftrt, $nd determined by notes, it was found an eafy 
{flatter %o fybjedt ;frem to the movement andmea* 



Se&. i. Human Knowledge, . 201 

furfc of declamation; and this was done by the 
Greeks and Romans. Nay the latter went farther; 
they divided the recitation and adtion between two 
comedians. Extraordinary as this practice may ap- 
pear, we fee how, by means of a meafured move- 
ment, a player might properly vary his attitudes, 
fo as to make them agree with the recitation of an- 
other perfon, and why they were as much offended 
with a gefture performed out of meafure, as we are 
tfith the movements of a dancer, when he does not 
keep time. 

§33. The manner in which the Romans firft in- 
troduced the pradtice of dividing the recitation and 
aftion betwixt two comedians, fhews how fond they 
were of a kind of gefture which to us would appear 
altogether extravagant. It is faid that the poet Li- 
vius Andronicus, at the afting of one of his plays, 
having grown hoarfe by the repeated recital of fome 
paflages which the people highly relifhed, thought 
proper to make a (lave recite, while he himfelf per- 
formed the geftures. His aftion was the more live- 
ly, becaufe he exerted his whole force ; and having 
thus met with applaufe, the cuftom at length pre- 
vailed in monologues. It was only in dialogue that 
die fame comedian continued to act together and 
recite. Would fuch movements, as required the 
mlertion of a man's whole ftrength, be ever applaud- 
ed upon our ftage ? 

§ 34. The cuftom of dividing the declamation, 
naturally led to the difcovery of pantomimes : there 
was only one ftep more to take, namely, for the ac- 
tor to render his gefture fo exprefliye, that the reci«» 
fttiofl lhoul4 appear yfelefs. This is wh^t happen* 

eel. 



202 Origin of , Part II. 

ed. The moft ancient writers, who make men- 
tion of pantomimes, inform us that the firft who 
appeared in this way of a&ing made their efiay in 
monologues; thofe fcenes, as we have juft now ob- 
ferved, in which the declamation was divided. Thefe 
comedians made their firft appearance under Auguf- 
tus, and were foon qualified to a£t whole regular 
pieces. Their art was the fame in regard to our at- 
titude and gefture, as the mufic of their declamatory 
fpeaking is in refpedt to our recitation. Thus after, 
a feries of revolutions, a language, which may be 
faid to be of all others the moft ancient, or which 
differed from the moft ancient only as it was better 
adapted for variety of expreflion ; this language, I 
fay, was treated as a modern invention. 

§35. The pantomimic art could never have taken 
its rife in fuch a nation as ours. From the languid, 
gefture of our converfation, to the lively and ex-* 
preffive movements ufed ^ith fuch variety by thi& 
fort of comedians, the diftance is too great. Among 
the Romans thofe movements were part of their Ian-* 
guage, and efpecially of that which was fpoke oa 
the ftage. They had made three colledbions of geC- 
tures, one for tragedy, another for con>edy, and a 
third for thofe dramatic pieces called Jatires. There 
it was that Pylades and Bathillus, the firft panto*, 
mimes that appeared at Rome, learned their art. If 
they invented any new geftures, thefe were doubt-, 
lefs analogous to thofe already known to the 
public. 

§ 36. The rife of pantomimes, a natural confer 
quence of the improvement of the theatrical profefli- 
on; the geftures taken from the collections madq 

3 for 



Seft. il Human Knowledge! 203 

for tragedies, Comedies, and fatires -, in fine, the 
great relatiori between a very exprefiive gefture, and 
a fenfible varying of the inflexion of the voice, are 
a farther confirmation of what I have been faying in 
regard to the declamation of the ancients. Befides, 
if we confider that the pantomimes could not avail 
themfelves of the expreflion of the countenance, bc- 
caufe they wore mafks like the other comedians, 
we fhall be able to judge of the expreflion of their 
geftures, and of the harmonious recitation of thofe 
pieces from whence thofe geftures had been bor- 
rowed. 

§ 37. The emulation betwixt Cicero and Rofcius 
fliews us the force and expreflion of geftures, even 
before the eftablifhment of pantomimes. This ora- 
tor having pronounced a period which he had but 
juft compofed, the comedian gave the meaning of 
if by a dumb fhew. Cicero afterwards changed the 
turn of the phrafe, in fuch a manner that the fenfe 
was not weakened, and Rofcius equally exprefled it 
by new geftures. Now I would fain know whether 
fuch geftures as thofe could ever match with fo Am- 
ple a recitation as ours ? 

§ 38. The pantomimic art was agreeable to the 
Romans from its infancy ; it pafled afterwards into 
provinces the moft diftant from the capitol, and 
lafted as long as the empire. The jpeople wept at 
thefe reprefentations, as at thofe of the other come- 
dians : they had even the advantage of affording 
more pleafure than the others, becaufe the imagina- 
tion is more ftrongly affefted with a language that 
confifts intirely in aftion. In a word, the paflion 
fp? this kind of entertainment increafed to fuch a 

degree, 



cc 



204 Origin of Partll. 

dcgrzz, that fo early as the beginning of Tiberius's 
reign, the fenate were obliged to enact a law, for- 
bidding any of their own. body to freque.it the ichools 
cf pantomimes, and the Reman knights to pay any 
ref^it to them in the ftreets. 

" The pantomimic art, fays with very juft rea- 
" {on the Abbe du Bos *, would have found it far 
nore difncult to fucceed among the northern na- 
ti,r.s of Europe, whofe natural aftion is not fo 
4t cxprcff,ve as to be eafily underftood, when not 

" joined with articulate language But con- 

" verfations of every kind are fuller of exprefiion, 
<( and far more fpcaking, if fo I may fay, to the eye, 
" in Italy, than in our part of the world. When 
" a Roman has a mind to lay afide his fludied gra- 
vity, and to indulge his natural vivacity, he 
abounds in geftures that convey aim oft as 
much meaning as in tire fentences. His aftion 
€t renders feveral things intelligible, which ours 
" would not even make a perfbn conjecture; 
ic and every movement is fo remarkably espreflive* 
that it is eafily known a fecond time. A Roman 
that has a mind to fpeak to his friend in private, 
* c is not fatisfied with putting himfelf out of the 
reach of being heard, he avoids being feeti ; with 
reafon apprehending left his gefture, and the ex- 
prefiion of his countenance, fhould betray a fuf- 
* c picion of what he is going to fay. 

" It may be obferved, that the fame vivacity, and 
*' fire of imagination, which is the natural caufe of 
<c that great variety of lively and exprefiive geftures, 
41 renders their meaning obvious to others. We 

* Critical feflrf*. vol. III. J 16. 

" eafily 












ScQ:. i. Human Knowledge. 205 

c€ cafily underftand a language which we fpeak. To 
cc thefe remarks let us join one more, though it con- 
c< tains nothing new, namely, that fome nations 
cc have a greater fenfibility than others, and we 
cc (hall not find it difficult- to comprehend hcfw ce- 
cc medians,* by dumb (hew,- and by imitating the 
IC natural gefture, were capable of moving the- paf- 
c * fions of the Greeks and Romans." 

$ 39. The particulars mentioned in this and in 
the preceding chapter, (hew plainly that the recitii- 
kion of the ancients differed from ours two ways : 
by the mufic, which was the caufe of the comedians 
teing heard *ven by thofe who were farthefl from 
ftim ; aikt by the geftures, which having a greater 
variety and • force of expreffion, were underftood'at 
the remoteft part «f the theatre. This was the rta- 
ibn of their building theatres capacious enough for 
the whole people. And it was owing to the diftarice 
of the greateft part of the fpedators from the- (Hgc 
that the faces of the aftors could not be diftinftlv 
feen ; which reafoii alfo prevented their illuminating 
the ftage fo'much as we do: nay, it was this that 
ihtroduced the ufe of maflcs, : Perhaps this Wafc a 
cuftom at firft defigned to conceal : foriie deformity or 
imperfeftion; but afterwards they made ufe of- it to 
ftrengthen the voice, and to give to each aAor a 
bhyfibgnomy fuited to his charafter. ' Hence it was 
that maflcs ; came to be extremely ufefiil: the- only 
inconveniency attending them wis their concealing 
the expreffion of the countenance ; but as this cotild 
' affeft only an • inconfiderable part of the fpe&ators, 
it was not worth minding. 

9 

• B • " ■ 

At 



" * 

206 Origin of PartlL 

Our declamatory fpeaking is become more Am- 
ple, (6 that the adtor cannot be heard at fo great 
a diftance. Befides, there is lefs variety and force 
of gefture. The eye is now the feat of expref- 
fion ; there it is that the able comedian paints the 
emotions of his foul. For this reafon he mud be 
feen at lefs diftance and unmafked. Hence oui* 
theatres are much (mailer, and better illuminated 
than thofe of the ancients. And thus it is that the 
change of profody produced a revoliftion oren in 
things, to which at firft fight it does not appear to 
have any relation. 

§ 40. From the difference between our manner of 
declaiming, and that of the ancients, we. may fafety 
conclude, that it is far more difficult; now than for- 
merly to excel in this profeflion. The lefs wefuffer 
our Comedians to deviate from the natural voice 
and gefture, the nicer we are in regard to their 
ading. And indeed I have been allured that there 
is a greater number of good players in Italy than in 
France. So it mult be -, but this fhould be under- 
flood relatively to the tsifte of the two nations. Ba- 
ron would have appeared quite heavy and ftupid to 
the Romans ; and Rofcius to us would have feemed 
a madman. ■ ■ - 

§ 41. Declamatory fpeaking was: the favourite 
paffion of the Romans 5 moft of them, fays the 
Abbe du Bos, were become declaimers *. The 
caufe of this is obvious, efpecially while the repub- 
lic fubfifted. At that time the talent moft valued 
by a citizen was that of eloquence, becaufe it paved 
the way to the higheft honours and preferments* 

* Vol.111, p. 9 x. 

Therefore 



StSt.i. Human Knowledge.' £07 

Therefore they could not avoid cultivating fo eflen- 
tial a part of eloquence, as declamatory fpeaking : 
this was one of the chief points of their education; 
and it was fo much the eafier for young people to 
learn, becaufe it was determined by rules, as our 
dance and mufic. ' This is one of the chief fources 
of the paflion of the ancients for public fpe&acles. 

The true tafte of declamatory fpeaking was gra- 
dually communicated to the people who aflifted at 
the reprefentation of .theatrical pieces. They eafily 
. A ace u domed themfelves to a kind of recitation, which 
differed jio otherways from their natural manner of 
(peaking, than in conforming to fuch rules as in- 
creafed its expreflion. Hence they had a delicate 
•knowledge of their language, fuch as at prefent we 
find only among perfons of birth and education. 

§ 42. In confequence of the changes which have 
happened in profody, the manner of declaiming is 
- become fo fimple, that it can no longer be afcer- 
tained by rules. It is become almoft an affair of 
inftind or tafte. With us it cannot conftitute any 
part of education; nay, it is negle&ed to fuch a 
degree, that we have orators, who do not feem to 
think it an eflential part of their profeffion ; which 
the ancients would have found it as hard to con- 
ceive, as we to believe any of the moft furprizing 
fafts of antiquity. Not having made any early 
improvement in declamatory fpeaking, we do not 
refort to the theatres with the fame anxious defire 
as they, nor are we influenced fo much by the 
force of eloquence. The oratorical difcourfes 
which they have left us, retain only a part of their 
expreflion. We are acquainted neither with their 

tone 



i 



^208 Origin of Part H. 

tone nor gcfturc, which mud have fo powerfully 
a&uated the minds of their hearers *. In fhort, 
; we fcarce feel the force of j Demo&henes's thun- 
cder, or the harmony of Cicero's eloquence. 

* <* Have not we often feen, fays Cicero it oratore, very 
«« indifferent orators obtain the whole honour and prize^f 
f* eloquence merely by the dignity of their action ; while 

•. " others very learned in the profeflion, paffed for indifferent, 
€( becaufe they had not the ornaments of pronunciation ; in* 
" fomuch that' Demofthenes was in the right for giving the 
«« firft, fecond, and third rank to aftion. If without this qua* 

- " lification eloquence is nothing, and if adton, though «uf- 
49 filled by eloquence, has fo much efficacy .and force, mail we 
" not agree that it is of the utmoft confequence in .public 
" fpeaking ■?" The declamatory fpeaking of the ancknta-muft 
have had a force greatly fuperior to ours, for Demofthenes and 

. Cicero, who excelled in the other parts, to have judged that 
without action eloquence is # nothing. Our modern oratprs 
would not agree to this opinion ; hence the Abbe Colin fays, 
that this fentiment of' Demofthenes is exaggerated. If that 
was the cafe, how comes Cicero to approve of it without «oy 
limitation ? 



CHAP. V, 
Of Mufic. 

TTltherto I have been obliged to fuppofe that -the 
-*■ ■*■ ancients had a knowledge of mufic : it is now 
time to give a hiftory of this art, fo : far at leaft as 
it conftitutes a part of language. 

§ 43. At the origin of languages their profody 
being extremely various and uncertain, every in- 

1 flexion 



$e&. i. Human Knowledge. 109 

flexion of the voice was natural to it: confequently 
they could not avoid falling now and then upon 
fome tones, with which the ear was pleafed. Thcfe 
were obferved, and frequently repeated : and luch is 
the firft idea they had of harmony. 

§ 44. The diatonic order, namely that in which 
the founds fuccecd each other by tones and femi- 
tones, appears at prefent fo natural, that one would 
imagine it to have been difcovered before the reft : 
but if we find founds whofe relations are more 
fenfible, we have reafon to conclude that their fuc- 
ceflion was firft obferved. 

Since it is a point demonftrated that the pro- 
greffion by a tierce,* a fifth, or an oftave immedi- 
ately depends on the principle from whence harmony 
is derived, that is on the refonance of fonorous 
bodies, and that the diatonic order arifes from this 
progreflion ; it neceflarily follows that the relations 
of founds ought to be far more fenfible in the har- 
monic fucceflion than in the diatonic order. The 
latter by departing from the principle of harmony, 
cannot preferve any relations between the founds, 
otherwife than as they are tranfmittcd by the fuccef- 
fion which produces it. For example, in the dia- 
tonic order re is connefted with «/, only becaufe ut 
re is produced by the progreflion ut fol ; and the 
connexion of the two laft has its principle in the 
harmony of fonorous bodies, of which they confti- 
tute a part. This is confirmed by the ear ; which 
is more fenfible of the relation between the founds 
*/, mi, foI> ut y than of that between «/, re, mi, fa. 
The harmonic intervals were therefore the firft taken 
notice of, 

P There 



2io Origin of PartIL 

There are ftill fbmc progreffions here to be ob- 
ferved : for fince harmonic founds are produ&i ve of 
intervals, fome more and others lefs eafy to tune, and 
contain relations more or le(s fenfible, it is not at all 
natural that they fhould have been perceived op 
obferved the one as foon as the other. It is there- 
fore highly probable that this intire progreffion nt % 
miifol^ ut % was not found out* till after repeated expe- 
riments. When this was once known, feverai others 
were made on the fame pattern, fuch as fol, fi> re, 
Jbl. With refpeft to the diatonic order, it was dif* 
covered only by degrees, and not till after many 
fruitlefs attempts, fince the origin of it was hot 
determined till very lately *. 

§ 45. The firft improvements therefore of this 
art were the fruit of long experience. But it6 prin- 
ciples were multiplied to fuch 'a degree,-: that its 
origin was not known. Mr. Rameau is the firft 
who difcovered the fource of all harmony in the 
refonance of fonorous bodies, reducing the theory 
of this art to a fingle principle. The Greeks, whofe 
mufic is fo much extolled, were ftrangers as well 
as the Romans, to compofition in parts. And yet 
it is very probable that they were acquainted with 
fome few forts of concords, by obferving the meeting 
of two voices, or by ftriking together two firings 
of the fame inftrument. 

§ 46. As the progrefs of mufic was fo very flow, 
it was a long time before the ancients had any 
thoughts of feparating it from the words : for it 
would have feemed void of expreflion. Befidds as 

* See Mr. Rameau* s harmonic generation. 

their 



Scft. i. Human Knowledge* 211 

their profody had regulated the feveral tones of the 
Human voice, and alone had furnilhed the occafion 
of obferving their harmony, it was natural to look 
up6h mufic only as an art capable of adding more 
£itergy or ornament to fpeech. Hence the preju- 
dice of the ancients againft feparating the mufic 
from the words. Mufic was in regard to them, very 
nearly what recitation is to us : by it they learnt 
to regulate the voice, which before that time was 
under no fort of dire&ion. To them it muft have' 
appeared as ridiculous to feparate the mufic from 
the #ords, as it would be to us to feparate the 
founds of our theatrical recitation from verfe. 

§ 47. In the mean time this art improved : by 
degree* it came to equal the expreflion of the 
Words, till at length it ftrove to furpafs it. One 
Alight thfen perceive that of itfelf it was fufceptible 
of infinite expreflion ; confequgntly it could na 
fenger appear ridiculous to divorce it from the 1 
words. The expreflion of the founds in their tune- 
ful ptofody, and that which they had alfo in their 
mufical recitation, muft have been introductory to 
the impreflion they were to make, when feparate 
from the human voice. There were two reafons why 
perfons of any abilities, that attempted this kind 
of mufic, could not help meeting with fuccefs. The 
firft is, that without doubt they pitched upon fuch 
pietes, as in the courfe of reciting, they had beeit 
accuftomed to render particularly expreflive ; or at 
leaft they imagined fome fuch. The fecond is the 
furprize, which this mufic muft needs have pro- 
duced by" its novelty. The greater the furprize, 
the greater the impreflion of the mufic. Thus there* 

P 2 were 



212 Origin or Part II. 

were inftanccs of people of a delicate fenfibility,who 
were fuddenly tranfported by the force of founds, from 
joy to fadnefs, or even to fury. At this fight others 
who would not have been fo eafily moved, felt very 
qear the fame impreflion. The effe&s of this mufic 
became thefubjeft of converfation, and the imagina- 
tion was raifed even upon hearing them mentioned. 
Each wanted to judge for himfelf ; and as mankind 
are naturally defirous of feeing a confirmation of 
any extraordinary phenomenon, they they came to 
hear this mufic with the moft favourable difpofi- 
tion. The confequence was that it often produced 
the fame wonderful efFe&s. 

§ 48. Our modern profody and recitation are far 
from being introductory to the effefts which fhould 
arife from our mufical compofitions. The language 
of fong or vocal mufic is not fo familiar to us, as 
it was to the ancients'; and that of mere inftru- 
mental performance has no longer the air of novelty, 
which alone has fo great an effedb upon the imagi- 
nation. Befides at the time of performing, wc 
keep ourfelves as calm as we can, without aflifting 
the mufician to draw us out of that fituation ; fo 
that the fenfations we feel, arife intirely from the 
impreflion of the found upon our ear. But our 
perceptions are generally fo weak, when the ima- 
gination does not read upon the fenfes, that we 
ought not to be furprized if our mufic be not pro- 
ductive of fuch wonderful effe&s as that of the 
ancients. In order to judge of its power, fome of 
<?ur bell pieces fhould be performed before per- 
fons of a lively imagination, who had a modulated 
elocution, founded on a tuneful profody, and to 
2 whom 



Se&. i." Human Knowledge. 113 

whom thofe pieces fhould recommend themfelves at 
leaft for their novelty. But this experience would 
be of no manner of ufe, were we as much inclrned 
to admire things near us, as thofe at a diftance. 

§ 49. Our vocal mufic is fo greatly different from 
our common recitation or declamatory fpeaking, that 
the imagination is not eafily impofed upon by our 
mufical tragedies. On the other hand, the Greeks 
being a livelier people than we, had a more exqur- 
fitc fenfibility. In fine, the ancient muficians em- 
braced the moft favourable opportunities to move 
the paflions ; for inftance, Alexander was feated at 
table, and as M. Burette obferves *, in all proba- 
bility was over-heated with wine, when at the found 
of warlike mufic he flew to arms. I do not at ali 
qucftion but we have foldiers, on whom the found 
of drums and trumpets would have the like effedh 
Let us not therefore judge of the mufic of the 
ancients by the efFefts attributed to it ; but by the 
inftruments they ufed, and we fhall have reafon to 
prefume that the fuperiority is on our fide. 

§ 50. It is obfervable that the inftrumentalmufic 
of the Greeks was introduced by preparatory fteps, 
like thofe to which the Romans were indebted for 
their pantomimes ; and that both thefe arts, at their 
firft appearance, produced the fame furprize in- both 
nations, and the fame wonderful effe&s. This ana*- 
logy feems to me a matter of great curiofity, and 
ferves to confirm my conjectures. 

§51. I juft now obferved, and indeed 1 every 
writer on this fubjeft has made the fame obferva- 

* Hiftory of the academy of belles lettre*, tome 5. 

P 3 tioiv 



214 Origin of - Part II. 

tion, that the Greeks were a people, who greatly 
furpafled us in fprightlinefs of fancy. But I ques- 
tion whether the true reafon of this difference be 
known •, at leaft I think they are miftaken who attri- 
bute it intirely to the climate. Suppofe the climate 
of Greece had continued always the fame, ftill that 
fprightlinefs of fancy muft have gradually declined. 
We fliall prefently fee that this is a natural effeft 
of the changes incident to language. 

I have elfewhere taken notice * that perfons not 
as yet accuftomed to inftituted figns, have the live- 
lieft imagination : confequently as the mode of 
fpeaking by adlion or gefture is the immediate work 
of the imagination, it ought to have more energy 
and force. And indeed to thofe who are ufed to it ? 
a tingle gefture is oftentimes equivalent to a whole 
fentence. For the fame reafon the languages form- 
ed after this pattern, muft needs be extremely ex* 
preffive * and the energy of the others muA dimi- 
jiifh, in proportion as they differ from thjs pattern. 
Now what we have already faid concerning profbdy, 
fliews that the Greek tongue, above all others, felt the 
influence of the mode of fpeaking by adtion j and 
what we fhall prefently obferve in regard to tranf- 
pofitions, will prove that this was not the only 
.effect of that influence. This language was there • 
fore extremely well adapted for exercifing the fan- 
cy. On the contrary fuch is the fimplicity of the 
conftrudtion and profody of the French tongue, that 
it hardly requires apy thing more than memory. In 
leaking of things, we are fatisfied with recolledting 

* Firft part, p. 139. J 21. 

J theip 



Seft.i/ Huma*j Knowledge. 215 

tbeir figns, but we fcldom revive their ideas. Thus 
die fancy being feldom raiied, becomes more difficult 
to enliven : and therefore the Greeks greatly furpafled 
ps in fprightlinefs of fancy. 

§ 52. Prejudices in favour of inveterate cuftoms 
have in all ages been an obftacle to the progrefs 
of arts ; and mufic efpecially has felt the bad effe&s 
of it. Timotheus was baniflied from Sparta by a 
decree of the Ephori, fix hundred years before the 
birth of Chrift, for having, in contempt of the 
tnrient mufic, added three chords to the lyre ; that 
is, -for. having endeavoured to render it more various 
and exjtqqfivc. Such were the prejudices of thofe 
days : we have fome ourfelves of the like nature ; 
and posterity will have their prejudices alfo, without 
thinking perhaps that thefe too will appear ridicu- 
lous to fucceeding ages. We look upon Lulli as a 
plain and natural mufician ; and yet he patted for a 
iantaftical compofer in his life- time. He was ac- 
CRfed of fpoiling-the art of dancing with the airs 
which he compofed for ballets, and which were faid 
fo be fit only for buffoons. " It is now a hun- 
** drcd and twenty years, fays the Abbe du Bos, 
" fince the fongs 'compofed in France were ge- 
" ncrally (peaking, no more than a feries of long 
" notes .... and it is fourfcore years fince all the 
44 ballet-airs had only a flow movement, and their 
44 mufic, if I may be permitted the expreffion, 
44 moved with a grave folemn pace, even in its 
44 greateft gaiety." Such was the mufic regretted 
by thofe who cenfured Lulli. 

P4 § 53- Mu fc 



ai6 Origin op Part It* 

§ 53. Mufic is an art of which every man thinks 
himfelf a judge, confequently the number of bad 
judges muft be very confiderable. There is cer- 
tainly in this as in other arts, a point of perfection, 
from which we muft not wander. But how vague 
is this principle ! who has determined this point as 
yet ? and if it be not yet determined, who is to 
find it out ? is it the unpra&ifed ears, becaufe they 
are the greater number ? if fo, there was a time 
when Lulli's mufic was juftly condemned. Is it the 
ears of thofe who are /killed in mufic, though they 
are the fmaller number ? if fo, there is then a 
mufic not lefs excellent, for differing from that of 
Lulli. 

Mufic muft naturally have been criticifed in pro- 
portion as it improved, efpecially if its progrefs was 
confiderable and fubitaneous : for then it differs 
molt from the founds to which our ear is accuf- 
tomed. But if we begin to be ufed to it, then 
it plcafes, and it is prejudice any longer to oppofc 
it. 

§ 54. There is no poffibility of ever having an 
adequate notion of the inftrumental mufic of the 
ancients ; I fhall therefore be fatisfied with ftarting 
a few conjectures on the mufic of their declamatory 
fpeaking. 

In all likelihood this mufic deviated from their 
ordinary pronunciation in the fame manner almoft as 
our recitation deviates from our common difcourfe, 
and was equally varied according to the nature of 
the performances. In comedy it muft have been as 
fimple, as their profody would permit. It was no 
more than the ordinary pronunciation altered fo far 

as 



Seft- 1. Hcmax Knowledge* 217 

as was neceUary to mealure founds, and to conduct 
the voice by certain intervals. 

In tragedy the mufic admitted of greater variety 
and extent ; efpecially in the monologues, to which 
they gave the name of cgptica. Thefe are generally 
the molt afie&ing fcenes ; for it is natural, that the 
perfonage who checks himfelf in the other parts of 
the play, fhould give vent to his paflion, when he 
comes to be alone. Hence the Roman poets caufed 
their monologues to be fet to mufic by matters of 
that art. Sometimes they even employed thofe 
muficians to compofe the recitation of the remainder 
of the play. It was not fo among the Greeks * 
their poets underftood mufic, fo that they perform- 
ed this talk themfelves. 

In fine, the mufic of the chorufies was more 
heightened than that of the other fcenes : here it 
was that the poet gave loofe to his fancy ; and no 
doubt but the mufician followed his example. Thefe 
conjectures are confirmed by the different forts of in- 
ftruments which accompanied the vocal performance 
of the aftors ; for the extent of their reach was cer- 
tainly fuited to the nature of the words. 

We cannot form an idea of the ancient chorus 
by that of our opera's. Their mufic was very 
different, fince they were not acquainted with com- 
pofition in parts ; and their dancing was perhaps 
ftill more remote from any refemblance to our 
ballets. " It is eafy to conceive, fays the Abhi 
M du Bos, that their dances were nothing more 
" than geftures or figns made by the characters of 
u the chorus to exprefs their fentiments, whether it 
*' be that they fpoke, or by a dumb (hew tcftified 

" how 



gi8 Origin of Part II. 

" bow greatly they were moved at the event in 
cc which they were to be concerned. This kind of 
" declamation frequently obliged the chorufes to 
" walk on the ftage, and as the evolutions which 
* c ' a number of perfons go through at the fame 
cc time, cannot be performed without fome previous 
." adjjiftment, unlefs we fuppofe them to have been 
" done by a giddy multitude, the ancients had pre- 
" fcribed certain rules to the movements of the 
." chorus." Upon ftages fo capacious as thofe of 
the ancients, thefe evolutions might exhibit fuch 
pictures, as were extremely proper for exprefling 
the pailiprjs with which the chorufes were a&uated. 

§ 55. The art of determining the recitation by 
note and meafure, and of accompanying it with in- 
ftrumep.tal niufic, w$s kjpown at Rome even from the 
earlieft times of the republic. Their recitation, in 
the beginning was iinjple enough : but in pro* 
c?fs of timfc their communication with the Greeks 
was the occafion of its being altered. The Romans 
could not withftanc) the harmony and expreflion of 
the language of Greece. . From fo polite a nation 
they learnt a tafte for letters, arts, and fciences : and 
the Latiji tongue conformed to the charadter of the 
Greek, as much as its nature would permit. 

Cicero informs us th^t the accents borrowed of 
foreigners, had made «a fenfiblc change in the Roman 
pronunciation. Doubtlefs they were the occafion of 
the like alterations in the mufic of their dramatic 
performances ; for one is a natural confequcncc of 
the other. And indeed Horace and this orator ob- 
ferve, that the inftruments ufed on the ftage in their 
tirae, had a far greater reach than thofe of more 

ancient 



:. i. Human Knowledge. tig 

ancient ufe ; that in the accompanyment the a&or 
was obliged to declaim in a greater number of 
tones ; and that the mufic was become lb petulant, 
as to leave no poffibility of conforming to its mea- 
sure, without the moft violent agitations. I retVr 
the reader to thofe paffages, as they are quoted by 
the Abbe du Bos, that he may judge whether they 
can poffibly mean only a fimple recitation *. 

§ 56. Such is the idea we may form of a mufic.il 
declamation, and of the caufes which firft gave rile 
io it, or made it vary. It. remains now that we in- 
quire into the circumftanccs which were die oc- 
cafion of fo fimple a declamation as ours, and of 
public fpe&acles fo different from thofe of the an- 
cients. 

.The nature of the climate would not lufler 
fuph cold and phlegmatic people as the northern 
nations, to preferve the accents and quantity, which 
heceflity had introduced into profody at the ori- 
gin of languages. When, thofe barbarians Jprcad 
ihemfelves over the Roman empire, and had con- 
quered all the v/eftern world, the Latin tongue be- 
came confounded with their idioms, fo as to lofe 
its charafter. From fuch fource do we derive tlie 
want of accents, which we efteem the chief beauty 
of our pronunciation ; but this original dors not 
prejudice me in its favour. Under thefc rude peo- 
ple letters declined : the theatres were deftroyed : pan- 
tomimes ceafed : the art of reprefenting the declama- 
tory fpeaking by permanent figns, and of dividing 
It between two players ; as lifcewife thofe arts which 

• 

* Vol. 3. p. I ZO. 

contributed 



i2o Origin of Part II. 

contributed to the decoration of public fpe&acles, 
fuch as archite&ure, painting, fculpture, and the 
fcvcral branches fubordinate to mufic, were utterly 
abolifhed. At the refune&ion of letters, the genius 
of languages was fo altered, and the manners of 
the people were become fo different, that it was 
impoffible to comprehend any thing that the an- 
cients had faid concerning their public fpe&acles. 

In order to have an adequate idea of the caufe of 
this revolution, we need only to recollect .what has 
been faid concerning the influence of profody. The 
profbdy of the Greeks and Romans had fixed prin- 
ciples, which were fo well knownj that even the 
common people themfelves without having ftudicd 
its rules, were (hocked at the leaft default of pro- 
nunciation. This enabled them to make their de- 
clamatory fpeaking an art, fo as to determine it by 
note and meafure ; an art which from that time be- 
came a branch of polite education. 

This improvement of their modulated elocution, 
produced the art of dividing the mufic and the 
aftion between two comedians •, it alfo gave rife to 
pantomimes ; and extending its influence even to 
the form and dimenfions of the theatres, it occa- 
fioned, as we have already obferved, their being 
made large enough to contain a confiderable part 
of the people. 

Such was the fource of that paflion which the 
ancients had for public fpe&acles, and for the 
feveral arts fubfervient to theatrical decorations, 
fuch as mufic, architeflfure, painting, and fculpture. 
Among fuch a people, abilities could not be loft •, be- 
I caufe 



Sc£t. i. Human Knowledge! 221 

caufe each citizen had continual opportunities of 
cxercifing his fancy. 

As the French language has hardly any fuch thing 
as profody, it follows that our declamatory fpeaking 
could have no fettled rules ; that it was impoffible 
for us to reprefent it by permanent figns -, that we 
could never learn the art of dividing it between two 
adtors ; that we are not greatly affe&ed with panto* 
mimes ; and that our. public fpe&acles are confined 
to buildings where only an inconfiderable part of 
the people can aflemble. From thence proceeds, 
what indeed is more to be lamented, the little tafte 
we have for mufic, architecture, painting, and fculp- 
ture. We think that we alone refemble the ancients 
in general, but that in this particular we mud yield 
to the Italians. It is plain therefore that if our 
theatrical entertainments are fo greatly different 
from thofe of the Greeks and Romans, it is a 
natural effeft of the changes which have happene4 
in our profody. 



CHAP. VI. 

Comparifon between the mufical and the plain decla- 
mation* 

§ 57 'O U R pl a ' m declamation now and then ad- 
^^ mits of as diftinft intervals as melody. 
If thcfe intervals were altered no further than is 
neceffary to meafure the founds, they would not 
appear lefs natural, and they might be determined 
by notes. It is even my opinion, that a comedian, 

who 



222 Origin of Part II. 

who has tafte and a good ear, will naturally prefer 
the harmonic founds, whenevef they do not deviafi? 
too much from our ufual pronunciation. It is 
doubtleft for this fort of founds that Molierc invent- 
ed no«s "*. But the ftheifte of repirefentirtg the 
dther parts of the recitation by pertinent marks, is 
faipoffible ; for the inflexions of the voice become' • 
{htti fo feeble, that to meafure the tones, the inter- 
vals mult be altered to fuch a degree, as" Would ren- 
der the recitation altogether unnatural. 
: $58. Though our plain declamation does not, 
like the modulated elocution of the* atnfcients, admit 
of a fbccefiion of meafufable founds, yet itexprefics 
the paflions with energy fufftciefit" to move thole 
wKo are ufed to it, and- whole language has very 
little life or variety in its profody. The realbn 6( 
its producing this effeft is, becaufe the founds retain 
almoft the fame proportions aS in mulic. I fay al- 
moft, for as they cannot be meafured, it is impot 
fible for their relations to be fo exaft*. 

Our declamatory fpeaking is therefore naturally; 
iefs expreflive than mufic. For I want to know 
what found is beft adapted to exprefs any particular 
paflion ? In the firft place, it mull furely be that 
which imitates the natural lign of this paflion ; and? 
this is common both to declamation and mulic. 
Next it is the harmony of thofe firft founds, as being 
more clofcly connected with them. In fine, it 
is every found that may arife from this harmony, 
varied and combined in the movement which cha- 
rafterifes each paflion : for every paflion determines 

* Critical Rcfl. vol. III. p. 243. 

the 



Sfe&. i. Hum Aft Knowledge. 22 3 

die tone and riovement of that mufic which is J fflfcft 1 
proper for exprelfing it. • Now thefe two laft fpecies 
of founds are feldom to be met with in our dccla- 
Hfetoiy fpeaking ; befide* it does not imitate the j*af- 
fions like ipufic.- 

$59. And yet this defeft of our recitation is ; 
oompenfated by the advantage it has of appearing 
more natural to us. It gives an air of truth to its 
expreffion, from whence it follows, that though it 
makes a much weaker impreflion on the fenfes than 
mufic, yet it a£te' with greater force on the imagina- 
tion* Hence we are oftentimes more affefted with a 
fine fpeech at a play, than with a fine recitative. 
Blit when the mufic does not deftroy the deception, 
k makes a much deeper 1 impreflion in its turn. 

$60. Though oui* recitatioii caiinot be determin- 
ed by permanent figns, yet F think there might be 
fome method of fiicing it. For this end it would be 
fufficient that a mufician had but tafte enough to ob- 
ferve very near the fame proportions in his melody, as 
the voice obferves in the recitation. Thofe who had 
made themfelves mafters of this melody, might, 
with a good ear, trace the very recitation from which 
it was compofed. Would it not be an eafy matter 
for a perfon, who was thoroughly matter of Lulli's 
recitatives, to declaim in Quinault's theatrical pie- 
ces, as Lulli himfelf would have declaimed ? In or- 
der however, to render the thing (till more eafy, it 
were to be wiftied that the melody was extremely 
fimple, and that the inflexions of the voice were dif- 
finguifhed no farther than was necefiary to mea- 
fure them. Lully's recitatives would be much 
better understood, if they had lefs melody. We 
1 mm " have 



224 Origin of Part II. 

have therefore reafon to believe that this Wftuld be 
a great afiiftance to thofe who had fome difpofition 
to declamatory fpeaking. 

$ 6*. The profody of different languages does not 
deviate equally from mufic. In fome it affe&s a great- 
er, in fome a lefler variety of accents, becaufe from the 
variety of conftitutions in people of different climates, 
it is impoflible they fhould have the fame fenfibility. 
For this reafon, according to the genius of languages, 
different kinds of declamation and mufic are rcejui- 
fite. We fay, for inftance, that the tone in which 
an Englifhman expreffes anger, in Italy would be 
only a mark of furprize. 

The capacioufnefs of the Greek and Roman the- 
atres, the expence of their decorations, the mafka 
which imprefled the phyfiognomy of each chara&er, 
their • modulated elocution, which was infinitely 
more expreflive than our plain recitation, all this 
feems to prove the fuperiority of the theatrical enter- 
tainments of the ancients. To make amends we 
have the graces,and theexpreffion of the countenance, 
with fome fineness in ading, which in any other 
recitation woyla be loft to the audience. 

^ 

C H A p. jaj. 

Which is the tnojt perfcB profody. 

$ 62. T Do not doubt but every man will be inclin- 

X able to determine in favour of the profody 

©f his own language : but in order to guard againft 

this 



Se&. li Human Knowledge. 225 

this prejudice, let us endeavour to frame an exaft 
idea of the queftion. 

The moft perfedt profody is that whofe harmony 
is beft adapted to exprefs all forts of chara&ers. 
Now there are three things concurring to harmony ; 
the quality of the founds, the intervals by which 
they fucceed each other, and the movement. A lan- 
guage muft therefore have founds of different foft- 
nefs, even fome that are rough, in a word, fome of 
all kinds •, fecondly, it muft have accents to deter- 
mine the voice to rife and to fall ; thirdly, by ine- 
quality of fyllables it muft be capable of expreffing 
all forts of movements. 

'■ To produce harmony, the cadences ought not to 
be placed indifferently. Sometimes the harmony 
ought to be fufpended, and at other times it ought 
to terminate with a fcnfible paufe. Confequently in 
a language, whofe profody is perfedt, the fucceffion 
of founds fhould be fubordinatc to the fall of each 
period, fo that the cadences fhall be more or lefs 
abrupt, and the ear fhall not find a final paufe, till 
the mind be intirely fatisfied. 

§ 63. If we confider the furprize with which Ci- 
cero fpeaks of the effedts of oratorical numbers, it 
is fufficient to convince us that the profody of the 
Romans made much nearer approaches than ours 
to this point of perfection. He reprefents the 
people in raptures it harmonious periods ; and to 
fhew that this was intirely owing to the numbers, 
he changes the order of words in a period that 
had met with great applaufe, and affures us that 
they immediately perceived it had loft its harmony. 
The laft conftruftion no longer preferved by a pro- 

Q per 



226 Origin or Partly 

per mixture of long and fhort fyllables, and ac- 
cents, the neceflary order for pleafing the ear-f. 
The French language is foft and fmooth, but there 
is fomething farther wanting to conftitutc harmony. 
I do not find that in the different turns or forms 
of expreffion, our French orators have ever hit upon 
any thing fimilar to thofe cadences, with which the 
Romans were fo greatly affe&ed. 

§ 64. Another reafon that confirms the fuperiori* 
ty of the Latin profody, is tl\e relifh the Romans h|4 
for harmony, and the delicate ear for which even th$ 
common people were remarkable. The comedian* 
could not commit the lead default in regard to quan- 
tity, but immediately the whole audience expreffed 
their difapprobation. 

Fafts like thefe we cannot read without furprize, 
becaufe we obferve nothing of the fame kind in oyjf 
pwn nation. The reafon is, the pronunciation of 
people of tafte is fo fimple, that thofe who are guiln 
ty of a fmall miftake can be corredted by very few, 
there being but very few to whom it is familiar. 
Among the Romans it was fo ftrongly marked, 
and the quantity of fyllables was fo determined, that 
even vulgar ears thoroughly understood it \ ib that 
whatever difcompofed the harmony could not avoid 
being grating to them. 

§ 65. I fhall continue my conje&ures with obfenr- 
ing, that as the Romans were more fenfible of har- 
mony than our nation, fo the Greeks had a greater 
fenfibility than the Romans, and the Afiatics ftill a 
greater than the Greeks: for the more ancient the lan~ 
guages, die nearer their profody muft have bordered 

f Cicero dc orat» 

y upon 



Se£t. i. Human Kmowl^dgl 427 

upon mufic. And indeed, wc have reafon to think 
that the Greek language was more harmonious than 
the Latin, fince the latter borrowed its accents 
from the former. With regard to the Afiatics they 
Were fond of harmony to fuch a degree, that the 
Romans looked upon it as excefs of affe&atioh. 
This we learn of Cicero, when, after blaming thofe 
Who, to render the fentence more fonorous, fpoil it 
by forced tranfpofitions, he reprefents the Afiatic 
orators as greater flaves to numbers than the reft. 
Perhaps he would think, were he now living, that 
the nature of our language makes us fall into the 
oppofite extreme : but if in this we lofe fome ad- 
vantages, we fliall prefently fee that we are made 
amends in other refpefts. 

What has been faid at the end of the fixth chap- 
ter of this fe&ion, is a fenfible proof of the fuperi- 
ority of the ancient profody. 



CHAP. VIIL 

Of the origin of poetry. 

§66. AS the profody of the primitive language* 
jLjL fell very little fhort of melody ; fo the ftyle 
of thofe languages affe&ing to imitate the fenfible 
images of the mode of fpeaking by a&ion* adopted all 
forts of figures and metaphors, and was become ex- 
tremely pifturefque. For example, in the mode cf 
fpeaking by a&ion, to give an idea of a perfon that had 
been frightened, they had no other way than to mi* 

Q^ a mic 



228 Origin of Part H. 

mic the cries and natural figns of fear. Therefore 
to communicate this idea by articulate founds, they 
made ufe of the different exprefiions by which it was 
particularly defcribed. A fingle word, which depidts 
nothing, would not have been fufficiently expreffive 
to have immediately fucceeded the mode of fpeaking 
by aftion : this was a language fo well proportioned 
to rude capacities, that it could not be fupplied by 
articulate founds, without accumulating exprefiions 
one upon the other. The fterility of languages did 
not even permit them to exprefs themfelves other- 
wife : as thefe feldom afforded a proper term, they 
had no other way of explaining their meanings, than 
by repeating fimilar ideas. This is the origin of 
pleonafm ; a default for which the ancient languages 
are particularly remarkable. And indeed examples 
hereof occur very frequently in the Hebrew. It was 
a long time before they learnt to conned a fingle 
word with ideas, which they had been ufed to ex- 
prefs by very complex movements ; neither did they 
avoid difFuie exprefiions, till languages becoming 
more copious, they were- furnifhed with proper and 
familiar terms for every idea. Precifion was much 
fooner received among the northern nations. In 
confequence of their cold and flegmatic conftitutions, 
they were readier to part with any thing that refem- 
bled the mode of fpeaking by aftion. Every where 
clfe the influence of this manner of communicating 
their thoughts fubiiftcd a long time. Even now, in 
the fouthern parts of Afia, pleonafms are confidered 
as an elegance of fpeech. 

§ 67. The ftyle of all languages was originally 
poetical, becaufe it began with depicting the moft 

fenfible 



Se£L i. Human Knowledge. 229 

fcnfible images of our ideas ; and befides it ftri&ly 
conformed to meafure. But in proportion as lan- 
guages became more copious, the mode of fpeaking 
by aftion was abolifhed by degrees, the voice admit- 
ted of lefs variety of tone, the relifli for figures and 
metaphors, for the reafons I fhall hereafter mention, 
infenfibly diminilhed, and their ftyle began to re- 
femble our profe. Authors neverthelefs adhered to 
the ancient language, as more lively and better 
adapted for making an impreflion on the memory •, 
the only way at that time of tranfmitting their works 
to pofterity. This language received' different 
forms •, rules were alfo invented for increafing its. 
harmony, fo that it became a particular art. The 
neceffity they were under of making ufe of it, gave 
rife to the opinion which long prevailed, that their 
compofitions ought always to be ia verfe. So long 
as mankind had no permanent figns to fix their 
fleeting conceptions , they were induced to be of that 
opinion, becaufe verfe is eafier learnt and better re- 
tained. Yet the pra&ice ftill continued thnough,pre- 
judice, after this reafon had ceafed. At length a. 
philofopher, difdaining to be fettered by the rules 
of poetry, was the firfl who ventured to., write ia 
profe *. 

§ 68. Rhime did not, in the fame manner 
as meafure, figures, and metaphors, derive its 
origin from the firfl: inftitution of languages. 
The cold and phlegmatic people of the north 
could not conform to a profody of fuch ftridt mea- 
fure, when the neceflity which, gave rife to it no 

* Pherecydcs, of the ifland of Scyro*s is the firft we know 
of who wrote in profe. 

0. 3. lon S cr 



230 Origin or ParttL 

linger fubfifted. To fupply this defeft, they were 
obliged to invent rhime. 

§ 6g. It is not at all difficult to conje&ure by what 
progrefs poetry became an art. When mankind had 
obferved the uniform and regular cadences acciden- 
tally introduced into language, together with the 
different movements owing to the inequality of fyl- 
lables, and the agreeable imprefiion arifing from 
particular inflexions of the voice •, they formed pat- 
terns to themfelves of numbers and harmony, from 
which they gradually derived all their rules of veri- 
fication. Mufic and poetry are therefore of equal 
antiquity. 

• § 70. Thefe two arts affociated themfelves with 
that of gefture, their elder fitter, and known by the 
name of Dance. From whence there is reafon to 
conjecture, that fome kind of dance, and foroe kind 
of mufic and poetry, might have been obferved at 
all times, and in all nations. The Romans inform 
us that the Gauls and Germans had their myficians 
and poets : and the fame thing has been remarked 
in our times, in- regard to the Negroes, the Canibals, 
and the Iroquois. Thus it is that even among Bar* 
barians we find the feeds of thofe arts which are ma* 
tured to perfection in civilized countries, and which 
having been fmce employed as inftruments of high- 
er luxury, appear fo remote from their fourcc, that 
we find a difficulty to trace it. 

§ 71. The intimate connexion which thefe arts 
have with their original, is the reafon of their being 
confounded by the ancients under a general name. 
With them the word mufic comprehends not only 
the art meant thereby in our language, but more- 
over 



Se£h u Human Knowledge. 231 

ever that of gefture, dancing, poetry, and decla- 
matory fpeaking. To thefc united we muft attri- 
bute moft of the effedte of their mufic, and then they 
ccafe to be lb furpriiing * 

• § 72. We fee plainly what were the fubjefts of 
the eariicft poems. At the firft inftitution of focie- 
ties, mankind could not as yet employ themfelves 
in matters of amufement •, fo that the wants which 
obliged them to unite, at the fame time confined 
their views to whatever might be ufefiil or neceflary 
t6 them. Therefore poetry and mufic were culti- 
vated merely with a defign to promote the knowledge 
of religion and laws, or to preferve the memory of 
great men, and of the fervices which they had done 
to fociety. Nothing could be more proper for this 
pufpofe : and indeed it was the only method they 
could take ; for as yet they were Arrangers to writ- 
ing. From the feveral monuments of antiquity it 
appears, that thefe arts in their infancy were intirely 
applied to the inftruftion of the people. The Gauls 
and Germans made ufe of them for preferving their 
religion and laws ; while among the Egyptians and 
the Jews they in fomc meafure conftituted part of 
thei# religion. This is the reafon why the ancients 
infilled that the principal point of education fhould 
be the ftudy of mufic : here I take this term in the 
full extent they gave it. The Romans looked up- 
on mufic as neceflary to perfons of every age, be- 
caufe it taught what was neceflary for children to 

* It is faid, for inft&nce, that Terpander's mufic appeafed 
a fedition : this however was not an inftrumentnl performance* 
but verfes which this poet recited. 

Q^4 . learn, 



2%2 Origin of Part II. 

learn, as well as what was proper for adult perfons 
topractife. With reg ard to the Greeks, it was fo 
gre^t a difgrace to be ignorant of this art, that with 
them a mufician and a fcholar were fynonymous 
terms •, and an ignorant perfon was called a man who 
did not underftand mufic *. They could not be- 
lieve that this art was a human invention, but ima- 
gined thofe inftruments which moft furprized them/ 
to have been of celeftial origin. Surpafling us in 
fprightlinefs of fancy, they were more fenfible of 
harmony : befides, the veneration they had for their 
laws, their religion, and the great men whofe praties* 
they fang, was extended to mufic, by which the 
tradition of thefe things was preferved. 
. § 73. As the profody and ftyle of languages be- 
came more fimple, profe began to differ more and 
more from verfe. On the other hand the hyman 
mind improving, poetry decked itfelf with fre{her 
images •, by which means it deviated more from the 
language" in common ufe, and became left proper 
for the inftru&ion ef the vulgar. 

Further, laws and public tranfa&ions, together with 
every thing that deferved the attention of mankind, 
were multiplied to fuch a degree, that the memory 
grew too weak for fo heavy a burden 5 and humart 
focieties increafed in fuch a manner, that the promul- 
gation of the laws could not, without difficulty, 
reach the ears of every individual. In order there- 
fore to inftrudt the people, they were, obliged to have 
recourfe to fome new method. Then it was that 
writing was invented : what progrefs it made I fhail 
prelently relate -f. 

* ftpwof. f Chapter 13th of this fedlion. 

Soon 



Se&. i. Human Knowledge. 233 

Soon after this invention, the fubjefts of poetry 
and mufic began to change : thefe arts were then di- 
vided between utility and pleafure ; but at length 
they were almoft intirely confined to things of mere 
amufement. The lefs neceffary they were become, 
the more they feeked for opportunities of pleafing 1 
and both of them made a very confiderable pro- 
grefs. 

Mufic and poetry, hitherto infeparable, began*" 
as foon as they were brought to perfedtion, to be di- 
vided into two different arts. Loud complaints 
were made againft thofe who firft ventured to fepa- 
rate them. The eflfe&s they were capable of pro- 
ducing without any mutual aid, were not as yet felt ; 
their future fate nobody had forefeen ; and betides,- 
this innovation was too contrary to the praftice re- 
ceived. They appealed, as we fhould have done, 
to antiquity, which had never employed them 
feparately ; and they concluded, that airs without 
words, or verfes without mufic, were a thing too 
whimfical and abfurd to meet with approbation. 
But when the contrary had been demonftrated by 
experience, philofophers began to be afraid left thefe 
arts fhould enervate the minds of the people. 
They oppofed their progrefs, and likewife quoted an- 
tiquity, which had never rendered them fubfervient 
to mere pleafure and amufement. It was not there- 
fore without great difficulty that mufic and poetry 
changed their fubje&s, and were divided into two 
arts. 

§74. One would be tempted to believe, that the 
prejudice in favour of antiquity began with the fe- 
cond race of mankind. The greater our ignorance, 

2 the 



$34 Origin or Part II. 

the more we (land in need of guides, and the more 
we are inclined to believe that our anceftors were al- 
ways in the right, and that all we have to do is' to 
imitate them. The experience of repeated ages 
ought furely to have cured us of this prejudice. 

Time and circumftances are ahle to efie&uate 
what reafon cannot ; but oftentimes the confequence 
is, that we fall into prejudices of a contrary nature. 
This is obfervable in regard to the fubjedt of poetry 
and mufic. As our profody was become fo extreme* 
ly fimple, thefe two arts have been feparated in fuch 
a manner, that the fcheme of uniting them again 
upon the ftage appeared ridiculous to every body, 
and does fo ftili (fo whimfical are mankind) to many 
who applaud theexecution. 

§ yg. The fabjedt of the moft ancient poems 
plainly fhews ustheir chara6ter. It is probable that 
they fang of religion, laws, and heroes, only to ex- 
cite fentiments of love, admiration, and emulation, 
in the minds of the people. They were pfalms, can- 
ticks, ode*, and fongs. With regard to epic and 
dramatic poems, thefe are of a much later date. 
We are indebted to the Greeks for the invention * 
and their hiftory has been writ by fo many pens* 
that every body muft know it. 

$ 76. We may judge of the ftyle of the earfieft 
poems by the genius of the primitive languages. 

In the firft place, the cuftom of leaving out words 
which are to be fupptied, is very frequent. Of this 
the Hebrew is a ftrong proof j the reafon of it is 
this : 

The cuftom which nsceffity had introduced, of 
intermixing the language of a&ion with that of arti- 

2 culate 



Sfeft. i- Human Knowledge.' 235 

£u)ate founds, continued ftill a long time, eveft 
ffrhen that neceffity ceafed, efpecially among people 
4f fuch a fprightly fancy as the eaftern nations. 
Htace it i9 that when a new- word was invented, 
they underftood each other equally . well, whether 
they fpok£ it or not. For thi* reafon they were in- 
clined to omit it, in order to exprefe themfelves with 
greater force, or to include their thought within the 
meafure of a verfe. This liberty was fo much the 
ftiore excufeaWe, as their poems having been defign- 
ed to be fung, ftftd before the art of writing was 
invented, the tone and gefture fupplied the word 
omitted. But when in fucceffion of time a parti- 
cular name was become the moft natural fign of an 
idea, it was no longer eafy to fupply it. Hence it is 
that, tracing the feveral. languages from thofe of 
more modtfrn date, to thofe of the greateft antiqui- 
ty, we fliall find that the cuftom of leaving out words 
which are to be afterwards fupplied, has gradually 
diminifhed. The French tongue in particular is fo 
Sverfe to it, that one would imagine it calls our un- 
derftanding in queftion. 

§ jy. Secondly, the moft ancient poets could have 
no knowledge of accuracy and precifion. Hence it 
is that in order to fill up the meafure of their verfe, 
they frequently inferted ufelefs words, or repeated 
the fame thing feveral ways : a new reafon of the 
frequent pleonafms in the ancient languages. 

§ 78. In fine, their poetry was extremely figura- 
tive and metaphorical : for we are informed that in 
the oriental languages, even their profe admits of 
fuch figures as in Latin poetry are feldom allowed. 
It is therefore among the oriental poets that enthufi- 

afni 



236 Origin of PartIL 

afm produced the moft irregular flights : it is in their 
compofitions that the paffions were painted in fuch 
colours as would appear to us unnatural. And yet I 
am not fure that we have any right to find fault with 
them : they had not the fame degree of feeling as 
we, and therefore were not obliged to ufe our man- 
ner of expreffing. To judge impartially of their 
performances, we fhould confider the tejnper of thole 
nations for whom they wrote. A great deal is faid 
of the beauty of nature j every polite nation prides 
itfelf in copying it ; but every man thinks he per- 
ceives the copy in his own degree of fenfibility. Let 
us not therefore be furprized if this native beauty is 
fo difficult to be found ; too often it changes face, 
or at leaft it ■ difguifes itfelf in the drefs peculiar 
to each country. I am not even certain whe- 
ther the manner in which I now exprefs myfelf, in 
regard to this beauty, does not a little partake of the 
air which it has lately affumed in France. 

§ 79. The diflimilarity that arofe between poetic 
ftyle and common language, opened a middle way 
from which eloquence derived its origin, and from 
which it fometimes deviated to draw near to the ftyle 
of poetry, and fometimes to refemble common con- 
vention. From the latter it differs only as it rejeds 
all forts of expreffions that have not a fufficient dig- 
nity, and from the former only becaufe it is not 
fubjedt to the fame meafure, and according to the 
different chara&er of languages, it is not allowed 
fome particular figures and phrafes which are admit- 
ted in poetry. In other refpedts thefe two arts are 
fometimes confounded in fuch a manner, that it as 
no longer poflible to diftinguiih them. 

.C H A P % 



Se&. r. Human Knowledge." 237 

CHAP. IX. 
Of words. 

I Could not bear any interruption in what I had 
to fay concerning the art of gefture, of dancing, 
profody, declamation, mufic, and poetry: thefe 
feveral articles have an intimate connexion with each 
other, and with the mode of fpeaking by action, 
from which they are derived. I fhall now inquire 
into the progrefs by which the language of articulate 
founds was perfected, till at length it became of all 
others the moll convenient. 

§ 80. In order to comprehend in what manner 
mankind agreed among themfelves, about the firft 
fignification of words, it is fufficicnt to obferve, that 
they pronounced them under fuch particular circum- 
ftances, that every one was obliged to refer them to 
the fame perceptions. Thus they afcertained the mean- 
ing with more precifion, according as from the more 
frequent repetition of circumftances, the mind was 
more accuftomed to connedt the fame ideas with the 
fame figns. The mode of fpeaking by a£tion re- 
moved the ambiguities which muft have frequently 
occurred in the beginning. 

§ 81. The objefts defigned for relieving our 
wants may fometimes efcape our attention ; but it is 
very difficult for us not to obferve thofc which are 
apt to produce fenfations of fear and pain. Thus as 
mankind muft have been under a neceffity fooner or 
later of naming things, in proportion as thefe excited 
their attention * it is very probable, for example, 

that 



2%% Origin op Part IE 

that they gave names to the wild beafts with which 
they were at war, before they had any particular 
names for fruits upon which they lived. With re- 
gard to other obje&s, they invented words to diftin- 
guifli them, according as they found them beft 
fuitcd to the relief of their wants, or as they moft 
folicited their fenfes. 

§ 82. Language was a longtime without having 
any other words than the names which had been 
given to fenfible objefts, fuch as thefe, tree, fruit, 
water, fire, and others, which they had more fre- 
quent occafion to mention. The complex ideas of 
fubftances being the firft known, fince they are im- 
mediately derived from the fenfes, they muft have 
been the firft that had names. . In proportion as 
mankind grew capable of analyzing them, by r& 
fle&ing on the different perceptions which they in* 
elude, figns were invented for more fimple ideas. 
When they had acquired, for example, the idea 
of a tree, they invented thole of a $runk, a bough, a 
leaf, verdure, &c. They came afterwards, though 
by degrees, to diftinguifh the different ienfible qua- 
lities of objedts ; they took notice of the circum- 
ftances to which they might happen to be expofed, 
and invented words to exprefs all thefe things* 
fuch is the origin of adjeftives and adverbs. But it 
was found very difficult to give names to the opera- 
tions of the mind, becaufe we are naturally ill qua- 
lified for felf-reflexion. They were therefore a long 
while without any other way of communicating 
thefe ideas, I fee, 1 bear, I am willing, I love, and 
the like, than that of pronouncing the name of the 
things in a particular tone of voice, and of fignifying 

as 



Jfeft. i. Human KnowiEdge! 239 

3s near as poffible by fome a&ion their prefent fitifcr 
ation. Thus it is th« children who learn thcfe 
words, only when they already know how to name 
the obje&s to which they bear the greateft relation* 
mpke known what pafies within their minds, 

§ 83. In forming a habit of communicating to 
one another this fort of ideas by a&ions, mankind 
accuftomed themfel ves to determine them ; and from 
thpttime they begun to find a greater eafe in con- 
necting them with othqr figns. The names they 
pitched upon for this purpofe, are fhofe which they, 
called wk Hence the -firft verbs were contrived 
only to exprefs the difpofition of mind, when wc 
either a£t or fuffer. They had this in common witli 
the adje&ives, that they fignified the fituation of a 
being j and this in particular that they fignified it 
inafmuch as it confifts in what we call aifion and 
paffion. 2*4 feel, to move, were verbs •, great, JmalU 
were adje&ivcs : as to the adverbs they ferved to 
make known the fubftantives which were not ex- 
prefied by the adje&ives. 

§ 84. Before they were acquainted with the ufe of 
verbs, the name of the object which they intended 
to fpeak of, was pronounced at the very inftant* 
when by fome adion they fignified the ftate of their 
minds : and this indeed was the fureft way of mak* 
ing themfel ves underftood. But when they began 
to fupply the place of the a&ion by means of arti- 
culate founds, the name of the thing naturally pre- 
fented itfclf the firft, as the moft familiar fign. 
This manner of utterance was the moft convenient, 
as well for the fpeaker, as for the hearer : for the 
former, becaufe it made him begin with the idea 

which 



*4° . Origin of Part IE 

"which was mod eafy to communicate : For the latter, 
becaufe by fixing his attention to the fubjedt with 
which they propofed to entertain him, it prepared 
him for more eafily comprehending a term lefs fami- 
liar to his ear, whofe fignification he could not fo 
readily underftand. Thus the moll natural order of 
ideas required, that the government fhould precede 
the verb : they faid, for example, fruit to want. 

This may be ft ill further confirmed by a very 
limple reflexion : which is, that the language of 
a&ion having of itfelf been able to ferve as a pattern 
to that of articulate founds, the latter muft, in the 
beginning have preferred the ideas in the very fame 
order which the ufe of the former had rendered the 
mod natural. Now it was impoffible for the lan- 
guage of aftion to difclofe the fituation of one's 
mind, but by (hewing the objedfc to which it re- 
lated. The movements expreffive of want, were 
not underftood, any further than as by fomc gef- 
ture the perfon had fignified what was proper for 
eafing it. If they preceded, they were all loft* 
and he was obliged to repeat them ; for thofe to 
whom he wanted to communicate his thought, were 
as yet not fufficiently pra&ifed, to think of recol- 
lecting them in order to interpret their meaning. 
But by means of the attention given to the ob- 
ject pointed at, the adtion was eafily underftood. 
I am apt to think that even now this would be 
the moft natural manner of making ufe of this 
language. 

The verb coming after its government, the noun 
that governed it, that is, the nominative, could not 
be placed between both \ for this would have ren- 
dered 



dered the relation dubious. Neither could it begin 
the fentence, becaufe its relation to its government 
would have been lefs obvious. Its place therefore 
was after the verb. Thus the words were eon- 
ftrued in the very fame order in which they were 
governed ; the only way to render them eafy to be 
underftood. They faid, fruit vJant Peter* inftead 
of Peter wants fruit, and the former conftruftion 
was not lefs natural than the other is at prefent* 
This is proved from the Latin tongue, in Which both 
are equally received : and indeed the Latin feems to 
preferve a fort of medium between the ancient and 
modern languages, fo as to partake of the charadter 
of both. 

. $ 85* Verbs originally expreffed the date of 
things* only in an indeterminate manner. Such are 
the infinitives, to go, to a£t. The adtion accompany- 
ing them fupplied the reft ; that is, the tenfes* 
moods, numbers, and perfons. In faying tree to fee, 
they fignified by fome gefture, whether they fpoka 
of themfclves or of a third perfon, of one or of 
many, of the paft, prefent, or future, in fine, whether 
in a pofitive or in a conditional fenfe. 

§86. The cuftom of connecting thefe ideas with 
the like figns having facilitated the means of affixing 
them to founds, words were therefore invented, 
whofe place in a fentence was to be after the verbs, 
for the fame reafon as thefe had been placed after 
the nouns. Hence they ranged their ideas in this 
order, fruit to eat to come me, inftead of / will eat 
fome fruit. 

§ 87. The founds which determined the fignifi- 
cation of the verb, being always added to it, they 

R foon 



.${&♦ i; Human Knowledge* 243 

/waft /# / *, &t. we follow (h^t order which is 
becoirte moft natural to qs : for fait +, is prQperly 
the verb, fincc it is the name which fignifies the ftatp 
of aftion •, and avoir ;£, anfwers only to the found, 
which ac the origin of languages came after the 
verb, to poiot out its tenfe, mood, and number. 

§ 89. The fame remark may be made on the term 
etre +, which renders the participle joined to it, fome- 
times equivalent to a verb paffive, and at other times 
to the compound preterit of a verb a&ive or neuter. 
In thefe phrzksfy efuis airpejc niitois fait fortje ferois 
parti \ aime exprefles the paffive ftate, fait and parti 
the a&ive : but fuis 9 6tois> and ferois^ denote only 
the tenfe, mood, and number. This fort of words 
were very feldom ufed in the Latin conjugations, 
where they were conftrued as in fhe primitive lan r 
guages, that is, after the verb. 

§ 90. Since there are terms in French which we put 
before the verb, in order to point out tjie tenfes, mood, 
and number, by placing them after the verb we 
might frame to ourfelves a model of the conjuga- 
tions in the primitive languages. This would give 
us, for inftance, inftead of je fuis aime, fetois aims |j, 
&c. aimefuis, aimetois^ &c. 

§ 91. Mankind did not multiply words withoift 
peceffity, efpecially in the beginning : for they wer$ 
at no fmall trouble to invent and to retain them. 
The fame noun which was the fign q{ a tenfc or of 
a mood, was therefore placed after each verb 9 from 

* I have done, I had done, I had done. f Done. % Ta 
have. 4 To be. § I am beloved ; I had made myfelf 

ftrong ; I mould have gone. || I am beloved, I was beloved. 

R 2 whence 



244 Origin op Part II. 

whence it follows, that every mother tongue had at 
firft only one conjugation. That their number in- 
creafed, was owing to the mixture of feveral lan- 
guages, or to this, that as the words fignifying the 
tetifes, moods, &c. were pronounced with more or 
lefs cafe according to the verb which preceded them, 
they happened fometimes to be altered. 

§9?. The different qualities of the mind are 
no more than the effeft of the different ftates of 
a&ion and paffion through which it paffcs, or of the 
habits which it contracts, when it aits or fuffers 
at feveral times. To know thefe qualities, it is 
therefore neceflary to have fome idea of the diffe- 
rent manners in which this fubftance afts and fuf- 
fers : confequently the adje&ives which exprefs 
them, could not be currently received till after the 
verbs were known. The verbs tofpeak y and to per- 
fuadcy muft needs have been in ufe, before that of 
eloquent: this example is fufficient to explain my 
meaning. 

§ 93* Speaking of the names given to the qua- 
lities of things, I have as yet made mention only 
of adje&ivcs ; becaufe abftraft fubftantives were not 
known till a long while after. When mankind 
began to obferve the different qualities of things, 
they did not fee them all feparate, but as fomething 
which inhered in a fubject. Confequently the names 
they gave them, muft have imported fome idea of 
this fubjed : fuch as the words great ; vigilant * &c. 
In procefs of time they examined the ideas they had 
framed, and were obliged to decompound them, in 
order more conveniently to explain their new con- 
ceptions ; then it was that the qualities were diftin- 

guiihed 



Se&. r. Human Knowledge, * 245 

guifhed from their fubjeft, and that the abftradt 
fubftantives of greatnefs, vigilance \ &c, were framed. 
If we could trace all the primitive nouns, we fhould 
find that there is not one abftradfc fubftantive but is 
derived from fome adjective, or from fome verb. 

§ 94. Before the ufe of verbs they had adje&ives, 
as we have already fcen, toexprefs (enfible qualities-, 
becaufe thofe ideas which are eafieft to determine, 
muft have been the firft that had names. ' But for 
want of a word to connect the adje&Lve with its 
fubftantive, they were fatisfied with placing the one 
near the other. Terrible monfter fignified, this mon- 
fter is terrible % for the adtion or gefture fupplied 
what was not exprefled by the founds. In regard 
to which we are to obferve that the fubftantive was 
conftrued fometimes before, and fometimes after the 
adjedtive, acording as they wanted to lay a greater 
ftrefs on either of thefe ideas. A perfon furprfced at 
the taUnefs of a tree, would fay, tall tree, though on 
other occafions he had made ufe of the words tree 
tall : for the idea which ftrikes us moft, is that 
which wc are naturally inclined to pronounce the 
firft. 

As foon as they became acquainted with the ufe 
of verbs, they eafily obferved that the word >yhich 
had been added to them, to diftinguifli the perfon, 
number, tenfe, and mood, had alfo the property of 
connedting them with the noun which governed 
them. Hence it came that they employed this very 
fame word for the connexion of the adjedtive with its 
fubftantive, or at leaft that they invented one of a 
like fort. This is the ufe of the verb to be, only 
that it does not denote the perfon. This way of 

R 3 connecting 



446 Origin of Part II. 

connecting two ideas, is, as We have elfewhferc ob- 
fer ved *, what is called affirming. Hence the cha- 
racter of this word is to mark the affirmation- 

§ 95- When this word was made ufe of to con- 
ned: the fubftantive and the adje£tive, they joined it 
to the latter, as to that on which the affirmation 
more particularly falls. But the fame happened very 
foori in this Cafe, as before had happened in regard to 
the verbs ; which is, that the two words were 
melted into one. Thus the adjedfcives became 
fufceptible of conjugation, and were diftinguifli- 
ed from the verbs, only becaufe the qualities which 
they exprefled, were neither adion nor paffion* 
Then to rank all thefe nouns in the fame clafs, they 
cbhfidered the verb, only as a word % which bting Juf* 
cfytible of conjugation, affirms feme quality cr other 
concerning a fubjeSi. Hencfc there were three forts of 
verbs : the firft a&ive, or whidh fighify fome 
d&ion •, the fecond paflive, or which are expreflive 
of paffion ; £nd the laft neuter, or which denote 
every* other quality. Grammarians afterward* 
changed thefe divifions, of ifpagfned new ones, be- 
caufe it appeared more convenient to them to difc* 
tigguifh the verbs by theif government, than by the 
iehfe. 

§ 96. The adjeftives having been changed into 
verbs, the coriftru&ion of languages was fomewhat 
altered. The place of thefe new verbs varied like 
that of the noufi* from which they were derived : 
in confequence of which they were placed fornetimes 
t>efore, and fornetimes aftet the fubftantive which 

* Ficft part, feft. *. f>. 74* . - . . . 

. • they 



Sd&;£ Human Knowledge. 647 

tteygoveFrted. * This pradice was afterwards ex- 
tended to the other verbs. Such is the period 
introductory to the confirmation now fo natural to 
us. 

$ 97: Men were therefore no longer obliged to 
range their ideas fconftantiy in the fame order : they 
feparated the fuperadded word from feveral adjec- 
tives, and conjugated it apart 5 and after they had a 
longtime placed it indifferently, as may be proved 
from the Latin tongue, it was fixed in *he French 
after ttik noun which governs it, and before its go- 
vernment. 

- '* § gS. This Word wa9 not the fign of any quality, 
neither could it have been ranked among the verbs, 
if the idea df a verb had not been enlarged in its 
favour, as had been already the cafe in regard to 
the adjectives. It was therefore nd longer considered 
but as a word which fignifies affirmation with the diftinc- 
tion:ofperfons 9 numbers^ tenfes^ and moods. From that 
time to be was properly the only verb. As the 
grammarians had not traced thefe feveral alterations, 
they could not eafily agree in regard to the idea we 
Ought to have of this part of fpeech *. 

$ 99. The Latin declenfions ought to be explain- 
ed in the fame manner as the conjugations •, for 
their original nruft be the fame. To exprefs num- 
ber, cafe, and gender, they invented words which 
were placed after the nouns, and varied their termi- 
nation. Concerning which it is obfervable, that the 



• 



Of all the parts of fpeech, fays the Abbe Regnier, tftere 
are none that have had fo many definition, a* the verbs. 
French Grammar, p. 325. 

; - R 4 French 



248 Origin of PartH. 

French declenfions were partly framed from -the 
Latin, becaufe they admit of different terminations; 
and partly from the order in which we now range 
our ideas ; for the articles which are the figns.of 
number, cafe, and gender, are put before the nouns. 

I am apt tp think that a companion between the 
French and Latin tongues would fiijficiently-jqftify 
jny conjeftures, and that there is reafon to prefume 
they would prove to have been well grounded* could 
we afcend to a primitive language, 

§ 1 op. The Latin conjugations and declenfi- 
ons have the advantage of variety and precifioo 
pver the French. The frequent ufc we . are o- 
bliged to make of auxiliary verbs and of articles, ' 
renders our ftyle diffufe and prolix : this is fQ 
much the more obvious from our being fo nice as 
jeven to repeat the articles without necefiity. For 
example* we dp not fay, feft le plus pieux et plus 
favant homrqe que je conncijfe *, but we fay e'eft le 
plus pieux £s? k plus favant^ &<;. We may like* 
wife obferye that from the nature of our detentions 
3Ve want thofc nouns which the grammarians call 
comparatives, and whofe place we fuppjy only by 
the Word plus -j-, which requires the fame repetition 
as the article. The conjugations and declenfions 
being thp parts of fpeech which occur moft fre- 
quently, it is evident that the French is not fo prer 
cife a language as the Latin. 

§ ipi. But our conj ligations and declenfions have 
|n another refpedt an advantage over the Latin ; by 

* He is the mpft pious and mail Iw&ed m*n I know, 
■J- More. 




,Se&. i. Human Knowledge. 249 

making us diftinguifh (bme fignifications which arc 
confounded in that language. We have three pre- 
terits, jefo 9 fat fait j feus f*it*% in Latin there is 
but one. The omifllon of* the article fometimes 
changes the fenfe of a proportion : je fuis pere 6? je 
fids le pere f, have two different meanings, which are 
confounded in the Latin tongue. 

* I did, I have done. .,-. f Iaa^ father, I am the father. 



r 
. « I 



";.- C H A P. X. 

* • 

The fame fubjeSt continued, 

$ 102. A S it was impoffible to invent names for 
l\ each particular objeft ; it becamp there- 
fore neceflary to have recourfe to general terms. But 
to diftinguifh circumftances, fo as to be fure that 
each perfon formed the fame abftra&ions, and gave 
the fame names to the fame ideas, was a matter of 
great nicety and judgment. Whofoever is acquaint- 
ed with metaphyseal writers, muft be convinced 
that even at this time it is not an eafy matter to 
attain to any fuch certainty. 

To comprehend the order in which thofe ab- 
ftraft terms were invented, it is fufficient to obferve 
the order of general ideas : for the original and 
progrefs of both are the fame. I mean that if it 
be certain that the moft general notions are derived 
from the ideas which we immediately receive from 
(^e fepfes, it is equally certain that the mod: abftraft 

terms 



2$o , Obiqikof PaftIL 

terms come from the firft Annies which were given 
to fenfible objed*,/ y - 

Men, fo far 95 they are able, ifcfer their kft ideas to 
ibme of thole already. acquired. Thu5.it is that fuch 
notions as are lets familiar tp them, become tonnecldd 
with thoft which a^e more fo; an&tbiaiiideed is a vtsy 
great help to the memory andcht imagpiatigBu.Whcn 
circumftances therefore induced them to take notice of 
new obje&s, tKejrtrtquired how far"tbty agreed with 
fuch as they already knew, and ranging them in the 
fame clafs they made the fame names leirve" For l)6th" 
Thus it is that the ideas of figbs. became more ge- 
neral ; but this was done infenfibly, they role only 
by degrees to the, mo ft abftraft ideas,' and it was a 
long time before they had the terms of effence, fub- 
ft&nct) . and bting- • Dbubtlefs i there are nations that 
have not as yet enriched their language --with thefe 
terms * % and if they are more ignorant than we* > 
this is not what renders them fo. 

% 103. The mote the ufe of abftrad- terms was 
eftablifhed, the more it fhewed the conveniency of 
articulate founds for expreffing even thofe thoughts 
which fcem to have the leaft relation to fenfible 
things. The imagination ft rove to difcover in the 
objc&s which (truck the fcnfes, an image of what 
pAticd within the mind. Mankind having obferved 
that motion and reft were the properties of matter; 
having likewife obferved the tendency or mclmatioh 
of bodies, having perceived that the air is moved, i$ 
darkened, and enlightened -, that the plants flioot 

• » . • 

* This ii confirmed by the relation of M, de la Conda* 

minc, 

up, 



Seft. i. Human Knowledge, 251 

up, come to maturity, and then decay, thence 
took occafion to fay the motion* the reft* the ten* 
dencj or inclination of the mind ; and that the mind 
is moved* is darkened* is enlightened* /boots up* comes 
to maturity -., and decays. In fine they were fatisfied 
with finding any kind of relation between the aftion 
of the mind and that of the body, to give the fame 
name to both *. For whence comes the word fpirit 
itfelf, but from the idea of a very fubtil matter, of a 
vapour, of an imperceptible breath ? an idea with 
which a great many philofophers are grown fo fami- 
liar, as to imagine that a fubftance compofed of in- 
numerable parts, is capable of thinking ? But this 
is an error which we have elfewhere refuted -f- . 

That all thefe names were originally figurative, 
will appear evident to every man that confiders the 
matter. Examples indeed might be taken from 
fome of the moft abftraft terms, where this truth 
would not appear in fo clear a light * fuch is the 
word thought % : but we fhall quickly fhew that it 
makes no exception. 

It 

* " And I doubt not (fays Mr. Locke,) but if we could 
" trace them to their fources, we mould find, in all languages, 
" the names which ftand for things that fall not under our 
fenfes, to have had their, firft rife from fenfible ideas. By 
which we may give fome kind of gaefs, what kind of no- 
tions they were, and whence derived, which filled their 
'* minds, who were the firft beginners of languages ; arid how 
" nature, even in the naming of things, unawares fuggefted 
" to men the originals and principles or all their knowledge/* 
, JSflay on hum. underft. book 3. c. 1. J. 5. 
+ Firft part, fed. i.e. 1 . 

J I think this is the ftrongeft example we could pitch upon. 

Of 



it 



252 Ojkicjx cf Part II. 



It wm iccn% wans tfcax feat afforded them the 
oppottority of obfcrring what pafled within them- 
idwet, and cf expreffing it by a£bons and after- 
ward* by words. Therefore tbofc obfcrvations were 
only in relation to thefe wants, lb that the diftinftion 
made in many things was only lb far as thefe wants 
engaged them to make ic Now thefe wants were in- 
tirely relative to the body. Hence the firft names 
that were given to what we are capable of feeling, 
ftgnified none but fenfible anions. In procefs of 
time men became gradually familiar with abftraft 
terms, learnt to diftinguifh the foul from the body, 
and to confider the operations of thefe two fiib- 
fiances feparately. Then they not only perceived 
which was the aftion of the body, when we lay, 
for inftance, I fee ; but they likewife more particu- 
larly obferved the perception of the mind, and be- 

Of this we may judge by an argument ah abfurda, which die 
Cartefians bring againA thofe who pretend that all our ideas 
are derived from the fenfes. " By what fenfes, fay they, could 
" ideas that are altogether of a fpiritual nature, that of thought, 
" for example, and that of being, ever enter into the under- 
" ftanding ? Are they luminous or coloured to enter by the 
fight ? of a grave or acute tone to enter by the hearing ? Of 
a good or bad fcent to enter by the fmelling ? Of a good or 
bad tafte to enter by the tafte ? Cold or hot, hard or foft, 
to enter by the touch ? And if no reafonablc anfwer can 
be given, it muft be allowed that fpiritual ideas, fuch as 
thofc of being and of thought, do not in any wife derive 
their original from the fenfes, but that the mind has of itfelf 
the faculty of framing them. 1 ' Art of thinking. This ob- 
jeftipn is taken from St. Auftin's confeffions. It might havq 
impofed upon fome before Locke wrote, but now the objection 
ik become quite frivolous. 

gan 



<( 

it 
it 
it 
*t 
• f 
«< 
14 



Scft. i. Human Knowledge. 253 

gan to look upon the term to fee, as proper for ex- 
prefling both. And in all probability this cuftom 
was fo naturally eftablifhed, that they were not fen- 
fibJe of their having extended the fignification of 
this word. Thus it was that a fign, which in the 
beginning had been applied only to a corporeal 
• a&ion, came to denominate an operation of the mind. 
The more they wanted to reflect on thofe operations 
whofe ideas had been this way acquired, the more 
they grew fenfible of the neceflity of referring them 
to different claffes. They did not indeed invent new 
terms for that purpofe ; this would not have been the 
eafieft way to make themfelves underftood : but in- 
fcnfibly and as occafion required, they enlarged the 
fignification of fome of the words which were be- 
come the figns of mental operations ; infomuch 
that one of them became at lafl fo general as to ex- 
prefs them all : this is thought. We ourfelves do 
not aft otherways, when we want to communicate 
an abftraft idea, which has not as yet been adopted 
by cuftom. Thus every thing confirms what I have 
been faying in the foregoing paragraph, that the moft 
abftraft terms are derived from the firft names that were 
given to fenfible objefts. 

§ 104. When the ufe of thofe figns became 
familiar, their origin was forgot, and people were 
fo weak as to believe that thefe were the moft natu- 
ral names for fpiritual things. It was even ima- 
gined that they perfectly explained the effence and 
nature of thofe things, though they only exprefied 
fome imperfect analogies. This abufe is mani- 
feftly feeri in the writings of ancient philofo- 
phers ; it ftill fubfifts even in the belt of the mo- 
derns, 



254 Origin of Part II. 

derns, and is the chief fburce of the flow progrefs 
we make in the art of reafoning. 

§ 105. As mankind, efpecially at the origin of 
languages, were very ill qualified to reflect on thenv- 
felvcs ; and as to exprefs what they might have in- 
wardly obfervcd, theywere poffefled only of fuch figns 
as had been hitherto applied to things of quits a 
different nature ; we may eafily judge of the diffi- 
culties they had to furmount, before .names were 
given to particular operations of the mind. The 
particles, for inftance, which conneft the different 
parts of difcourfe, mud have been invented very 
late. They exprefs the manner in which the objects 
affeft us, and the judgments which we frame ef 
them, with a delicacy long unperceived by our dull 
underftanding, which rendered it impoffiblc for man- 
kind to reafqn. To reafon, is to exprefs the re- 
lations which fubfift betwixt different propofitt- 
ons ; now that the conjunctions alone afford us the 
means of exprefling thefe relations, is evident 
The want of thefe particles could be but very im* 
perfe&ly fupplied by the mode of fpeaking by a&ion*, 
nor were they in a condition of exprefling by names 
the relations fignified by thofe particles, till they 
had been fixed by particular circumftances, and a 
great many different times. We fliall prefently fee 
that this is the origin of apologue or fable. 

§ 106. Mankind never underftood one another 
better, than when they gave names to fenfible ob- 
jects. But fo foon as they wanted to pafs to the 
archetypes, as they had generally no patterns to 
go by, as they were likewife under circumftances 
which inceflantly varied, and as. they did not all 

equally 



Sfe£b i. Human Knowledge. *$$ 

equally under ftahd how to conduft the operations tif 
their . minds ; they- began td have a great deal of 
difficulty to underftand one 'another. They aflem- 
bled under the feme term a greater or lefler number 
of ..Ample ideas, and frequently of ideas quite Ticte- 
rogeneous ; from whence arofe a multitude of verba! 
difputes. It was rare to find in regard to 1 thefe 
matters, terms pcrfc&ly correfpdnding to each other 
in two different languages. On the Contrary It was 
a common things to obferve feveral in the fame 
language,, the fignification of which was not firffici- 
ently determined,* and of which a thoufand different! 
applications might be made. Thefe defedts have 
crept even into the. works of philofophers, and are 
the fource of a great many errors. 

We have feen, ; when fpeakiftg of the names of 
fubftancesy that thofe of complex ideas were in- 
vented before the names of fimple ideas * : but 
in giving names- to archetypes, they followed 
quite a different order. Thefe notions being no 
more thanaflemblagfes of many fimple ideas made at 
pleafure, it is evident that we 1 could ; not frame them, 
till after we bad already determined by particular 
names, each; of the fimpje ideas which we wanted 
to infert into the colleftion. For example, the name 
c£ .courage wa$ not given to the idea it fignifies, till 
after having fixed by other names the ideas of danger ', 
knowledge tf danger \ obligation of expofing onfs felf to 
if, and rtfoktion to fulfil this obligation. 

§ 107. The pronouns were the laft words 
iavented, becaufe the want of them was felt the 

* Above, $ 82. 
■■■'■■■ laft: 



256 O r 1 g, i H o f Partfll; 

laft: it is even probable that people were a long 
time before they grew accuftomed to, them* Their 
minds having be^n habituated to revive each time 
the fame idea by the fame word, they found it diffi- 
cult to ufe themfelves to a word which ftood for an- 
other, and fometimes for a whole fentence. 

§ 108. To diminiih thefe difficulties, they put 
the pronouns before the verbs; for being thus 
nearer • to the nouns whofe place they fupplied, 
their relations became more obvious. The French 
language makes even a rule of this; we except 
only when the verb is in the imperative, and it fig- 
nifies command: we fay faites le *, This prac- 
tice was perhaps introduced, only the better to dif- 
tinguifh the imperative from the prefcnt. But if 
the imperative fignifieth prohibition, the pronoun 
refumes its natural place : we fay, ne le faites pas -f% 
The reafon of this feems obvious,. The verb figni- 
fies the ftate of a thing, and the negative marks the 
privation of this ftate •, it is therefore natural, for the 
fake of perfpicuity, not to feparate it from the verb. 
Now it is pas that renders it complete : of courfe 
there is a greater neceflity for its being joined to the 
verb than ne. It even appears to me that this par- 
ticle is never willing to be feparatcd from its verb : 
nor do I know whether any of our grammarians 
ever made this remark. 

§ 109. The nature of words has not been always 
confulted, by thofe who wanted to diftribute them 
into different clafles : hence it is that fome words 
which are not pronouns, are ranked however in that 

* Do it. f Do not do it. 

1 order. 



Se£b I. HuMAtf KnoWlei3ge, 257 

order. When we fay, for example, will you giv* 
fnt this ? you, me, ibis fignify the perfon that fpeaks, 
the perfon to whom we fpeak, and the thing we aflc. 
Henee thefe ire properly nouns that Were known 
long before the pronouns, and which have been 
placed in difcourfe, according to the brder of the 
other nouns, that is, before the Verb, when they 
were its government, and after, when they govern- 
ed it : they ufed to fay, this want I, iiiftead of, / 
want this. 

§ i 10. I believe We have iiothing further left than 
to (peak of the diftinftion of genders : but it is evi- 
dent that this derives its origin only from the dif* 
tinftion of the fexes ; and that the diftribution of 
iiouns into two or three forts of genders, was de- 
signed for the greater order and pcrfpicuky of lan- 
guage. 

§ in. Such, Or nearly fuch, is the order in 
which words were invented. The ftyle of language* 
did not properly commence, till thtfy had acquired 
Iiouns of every fpecies, and had eftabliihed princi- 
ples for the conftruftion of fpeech. Before that 
time it had been only a certain number of words, 
which exprefled a fucceflion of thoughts, by the 
afliftance of the mode of fpeaking by aftion. AncK 
yet we muft obferve that the neceflity of pronouns 
was only in regard to the precifion of ftylt. 



CHAP, 



2$S Origin of Part II. 

CHAP. XL 

Of the Jignification of words. 

§ 112.TT is fufficient to confider in what manner 
4- words were firft invented, to obferve that 
the names of fimple ideas are the leaft fufceptible 
of ambiguity : for circumftances plainly determine 
the perceptions to which they are related. I cannot 
doubt of the fignification of thefe words, white, 
black, when I obferve that the ufe of them is to 
exprefs fome particular perceptions which I actually 
experience. 

§ 113. The fame qjnnot be faid of complex 
ideas : they are fometimes of fo compound a na- 
ture, that it is a long while before we can af- 
femble the fimple ideas that belong to them. A 
few fenfible qualities obvious to vulgar obfervation r 
compofed at firft the idea of fubftance : in procefs 
of time it was rendered more complex, according as 
new qualities were difcovered. It is very likely, for 
inftance, that the notion of gold in the beginning 
was only that of a yellow and very heavy body : 
fome time afterwards experience made them add the 
idea of malleability to it, afterwards dudtility, and 
fucceffively all the qualities of which the mod 
able chemifts have framed their idea of this fub- 
ftance. Each perfon inight have obferved, that the 
new qualities which he difcovered in this metal, had 
as much right to be added to the idea already form- 
ed of it, as the qualities that had been firft obferv- 
ed. Hence it was no longer poffible to determine 

the 



i. HvtiAii iCtfatoLEddfc. 259 

the number of fimpfc ideas that might compofc the 
nation of a fubftance. According to fome it was 
greater, to others leflcr ; and this intirely depended 
on experiments, and on the fagacity of th* perfon 
that made them. Hence the fignification of the 
names of fuhftanees rnufi needs have bBen very un- 
certain, and been the occafion of d multitude of 
verbal altercations. We are naturally inclined to 
believe that others have the fame ideas as we, becaufc 
they make ufe of the fame language ; from whence 
it frequently happens that we imagine we think dif- 
ferently, though we are defending the fame opinions. 
On thefe occafions an explanation of the terms 
would be fuffieient to remove the fubjeft of difpute, 
and to fhew the futility of a great many queftions 
which ate looked upon as important. Mr. Locke 
gives an example of this, which deferves a plfcce in 
this work. 

" I was once in a meeting of Very learned and 
u ingenious phyficians, where by chance thert arofe 
u a queftion, whether any liquor pafled through the 
* 4 filaments of the nerves. The debate having been 
tc managed a good while, by variety of arguments 
u on both fides, I (who had been ufed to fufpedfc 
u that the greateft part of difputes were more about 
u the fignification of words, than a real difference 
u in the conception of things) defired, that before 
44 they went any further on in this difpute, they 
" would firft examine and eftablifh among them,' 
" what the Word liquor fignified. They at firfl. 
were a little furprized at the propofal ; and had 
they been perfons lefs ingenious, they might per* 
u haps have taken it for a very frivolous or extra- 

S 2 V* vagant 



cc 



a6o Origin or, Part IL 



«c 
cc 
cc 



cc 



cc 



cc 

cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 



vagant one : fince there was no one there that 
thought not himfelf to underftand very perfectly, . 
what the word liquor flood for •, which, ; I think 

" too, none of the moft perplexed names of fub- 
ftances^ However, they were pleafed to" comply 
withmyjiftotion, and upon examination found, 

I ,that the fignification of that word was not fo 
f^ttled^and certain as they had all imagined ; but 

V that each of them made it a fign of a different 

V complex idea. This made them perceive that 
the main of their difpute was about the fignifica- 
tion of that term ; and that they differed very 
little in their opinions, concerning fome fluid and 
fubtile matter palTing through the conduits of the 
nerves ; though it was not fo eafy to agree whe-, 

U ther it was to be called liquor, or no, a thing, 
" which when confidered, they thought it not worth 
" the contending about *." 

§ i j 4. The fignification of the names of ar- 
chetypes is ftill more uncertain than that of the 
names of fubftances, whether becaufe it is rare to 
find the pattern of the colle&ions to which they 
belong, or becaufe it is oftentimes very difficult to 
obferve every part of them, even when we have the 
pattern : the moft efiential are exaftly thofe of which 
we know the leaft. In order to frame, for inftance, 
the idea of a criminal adtion, it is not fufficient to 
obferve the external and vifible aft, it is neceflary 
moreover to come at things which do not fall under 
the fenfes. We muft fearch into the intention of the 
perfon that commits it, we muft difcover the relation 

* Eflay on Human Underftanding, book j. c. 9. § 16. 

I which 



Sc£k. i. Humam Knowledge. 261 

which it bears to the law, and even know a great 
many circumftances that preceded it. All this re- 
quires fo particular a care, as from our fupinenefs or 
want of penetration can fcldom be expefted. 

§ 115. It is a matter of curiofity to obfervc, with 
what confidence fomc men make ufe of language 
at the very time they are abufing it. They think 
they underftand each other, though they take no pre- 
caution for that purpofe. The ufe of words is be- 
come fo familiar to us, that we do not at all doubt 
but our meaning mud be underftood, as foon as we 
utter them -, as if there muft neceffarily be the fame 
ideas in the fpeaker and in the hearer. Philoso- 
phers, inftead of remedying thefe inconveniencies, 
have affe&ed to be very obfeure themfelves. Each 
fed has made it a point to invent ambiguous or 
infignificant terms. It is by thefe means they have 
endeavoured to fupport fome ftrange opinions, or 
to cover fome weak part of their hypothecs ; a 
good expedient, as Mr. Locke obferves *, to pr&- 
ferve to themfelves the admiration of others, by 
unintelligible terms. At length arofe a fet of 
men, who, having framed their language out of 
the jargop of every fed:, took a pride in maintain- 
ing both fides of the queftion upon every fubjed : $ 
talent formerly, and perhaps ftill admired, but which 
we fhould treat with fovereign contempt, did we but 
fet a right value on things. In order to prevent alt 
thefe abufes, I (hall give here a few rules for the exadfc 
iignification of words. 



• Book III. chap. 10. 



§ 116. We 



2&z Oai^iN of 

§ 116. Weougbtnrv^toiiMkeafeaf figm, barm 
order to exprefs intra wfairft we raffiy krtnc ks oar 
minds. In %«afciflgaf &bfcaicEs» «fe naatt we give 
diem ought tzr triace onff tx> the quafinre wfcch we 
h^^ob&nrcdthem tncQotiiii* and of which we iucve 
grarfcr coDJeffipas^ The names of archetypes fltoaki 
fikewife import arty 2. certain oonsber of fitnple 
ideas* w&kb we have k in oar power to determine. 
We mafit pamcularfy aroid fbppofing, wkhoot ftf- 
fkknc groand)*, that othera anopt the fame ideas as 
we to the feme word*. Upon the d&uffingof & 
qaeftioii, oar chief care ought to be to conlfcter, 
whether die complex notions of thofe with whom 
we enter into difpote, include a greater number erf 
fimplc ideas than ours. If we fufped k to exceed 
ouri, we (hould inform oorfelves by how many, and 
what kind of ideas : if it appears to Us fcfe, late 
ihould difcovcr what Ample ideas we add 10 theirs. 

In relation to general terms, we can eonfider them 
only as figns that diftinguilh the different clafies un- 
der which we distribute our ideas : and when it is 
faid that a fubftance belongs to a certain fpecies, we 
ought Amply to tmderftand, that it includes foch 
qualities as are contained in the complex nation fig- 
fiified by a particular word. 

In every other cafe, except that of fubflances, the 
edifice of a thing is confounded with the idea we 
have framed of it ; and of courfe the fame Wotfd is 
equally the fign of t>o£h. A fpace terminated bjF 
fhree angles is together the -dfenfce and the idea 
pf a triangle. The fame may be faid in regard tq 
whatfoevcr mathematicians *corffound under the ge- 
neral term of magnitude. Philofophers perceiving 

that 



•8fe£h i. Human Knowledge. 263 

that in mathematics the idea of a thing imports the 
knowledge of its effence, have precipitately con- 
cluded that the fame may be faid in regard to phyfics, 
and thence imagined that they knew the very eflence 
of fabftances. 

Mathematical ideas being determined by the fenf$s, 
the confufion of the idea of a thing with its eflence, 
is not attended with abufe : but in fciences where 
we reafon from archetypes, the confequence is, 
-that we are lefs upon our guard againft verbal 
difputes. I am afked, fo^inftance, what is the ef- 
fence of thofe dramatic poems called comedies ; and 
whether fome particular performances which bear 
that name really deferve it. 

I obferve, that the firft writer of comedies had no 
pattern to go by : xrohfequently the effence of that 
kind of poem conftftcd intirely in the idea which he 
himfelf had framed of it. Thofe who came after 
him have fucceflively added fomething to that firft 
idea, and thereby changed the effence of comedy. 
We have a right to do the fame ; but inftead of 
availing tmffelves of this right, we confult the mo- 
dels we have before us, and frame pur idea frQfli 
thofe who pleafe us mod:. The confequence is, that 
we admit fome pieces into the clafs of comedies, and 
others we exclude. If we are afterwards alked whe- 
ther fuch a poem be a comedy or not: we anfwer 
each of us, according to the ideas we have framed 
of it ; and as thefe are not all alike, we fcem to be of 
different opinions. If we would fubftitute ide^s in 
the place of words, we fhpuld foon be convinced that 
we differ only in the manner of exprefling ourfelves. 
Inftead of thus limiting the idea of a thing, it would 

S4 be 



a64 .Origin. of Part H. 

be far more reafonable to extend it, in proportion as 
we find new branches, of a fubordinate nature. Then 
indeed it would be a curious and ufeful inquiry tQ 
examine which fpecies is fuperior to the reft. 

What has been faid of comedy may be applied tQ 
ppic poetry, fince we find it warmly debated, whe- 
ther Paradife Loft, the Lutrin, &c. are epic 
poems. 

Sometimes it is fufficient to have inadequate ideas, 
provided they are determinate; and at other times it 
is abfolutely necefiary that they be adequate : thi$ 
depends on the objeft i§ view. We fhould efpeci- 
ally diftinguifh whether we are fpeaking of things in 
order to explain them, or only to receive inftruftif 
pn. In the former cafe it is not enough to have fome 
imperfe& notion of }t t we ought to know, it tho- 
roughly. But it is a very common failing, to decide 
moft matters with a fmall number of ideas, and thefe 
oftentimes very indeterminate. 

When I come to treat of method, I fhall point 
out the means that may be conftantly ufed to deter- 
mine die ideas which we annex to different figns. 



CHAP. XIL 

* 

Qf tr anfp oft t ions, 

$ \l y. \JL7 E flatter ourfelves that modern laor 
V V guages have an advantage of thp 
ancient, in arranging words in difcourfe, as the 
ideas range themfelves in the mind ; becaufe we ima- 
gine that die moft natural ordef requires we fhould 



£e&. i. Human Knowledge. fc6$ 

declare the fubjed of which we ipeak, before we af- 
firm any thing of it ; that is, that the verb fhould 
be preceded by its nominative, and followed by its 
government And yet we have feen that at the ori- 
gin of languages the moll natural conftru&on re- 
quired quite a different order. 

What we here: call natural, muft certainly vary, 
according to the different genius of languages, , and 
in fome admits of a more cxtehfive acceptation than 
in. others; Of this the Latin tongue is a convincing 
proof; it unites conftruftions which are altogether 

-oppofite, and feem neverthelefs alike conformable to 

. the arrangement of ideas. Such are thefe : Alexan- 
der vicit Dorsum, Darium vicit Alexander. Our 

.snaking ufe only of the firft, Alexander overcame 
Darius, is not becaufe it is the only natural conftruc- 
tion, but becaufe our declenfions do not permit us 
to reconcile perfpicuity with a different order. 

I aflc of thofe who pretend that in this propofition, 
Alexander overcame Darius, the modern is the only 
natural conftrudtion, on what they found their opi- 
nion ? Whether they confider the thing in regard to 
the operations of the mind, or in refpeft to the ideas, 

. they will find that they are in an error. Taking it 
on the fide of the operations of the mind, we may 
fuppofe that the three ideas which form this propo- 
fition, are revived at the fame time in the mind of 
the fpeaker, or that they are revived fuccefiively. 

. In the firft cafe there is no order between them *> in 
the fecond it may vary, becaufe it is every whit as 

• natural that the ideas of Alexander, and of overcom- 
ing* fhogld be revived by that of Darius, as it is 

thtt 



266 Gji-g/tn ov Part If. 

that the idea -of Darius fhouH Jbe revived by die 
other two. 

The error will not be lefs obvious, when we qome 
to coofider the thing in regard to the ideas ; fbr the 
faboniination betwixt, them, equally authorifesthp 
two Latin conftru&ioits ; Alexander vicit Darium, 
£)ariim vicit Alexanders and For this reafon : 

ideas are modified in difcourfe, according as die 
one explains, extends, or reftrains the other. By 
thefe means they are naturally fubordinafie among 
themfelves, but more or lefs immediately, in pro- 
portion 1 as their connexion itfelf is more or Ids im- 
mediate. The nominative is connected with the verb, 
the verb with its government, the adjedive with its 
fubftantive, &c. but the connexion is not fo itrift 
between the government of the verb and its nomina- 
tive, becaufe thefe two terms are modified only by 
means of the verb. The idea of Darius, for exam- 
ple, is immediately conne&ed with that of overcame, 
{hat of overcame with the idea of Alexander, and the 
fubordination betwixt* thefe three ideas preferves the 
fame order. 

This obfervation fhews that to avoid breaking 
through the natural arrangement of ideas, it is fuffi- 
rientto conform ourfeives to the greateft connexion 
between them. Now this is equally found in the two 
Latin conftrux5tions, Alexander vicit Darium, Datum 
visit Alexander. Therefore the one is as natural as 
the other. What leads us into an error on this fflb- 
jeft, is our taking that order .for the moft natural, 
which is only a habit contra&ed from the ch^raiber 
of our mother language. And yet there are con- 
ductions even iji the French tongue, which might 

prevent 



•fteft. i. Human Knowledge^ 267 

^brfeveflt ourfafiirig into this error, 1ince in thefc the 
Jiominative ftands better after the verb : we fay, for 
"fn&ancty Darius que vainquit Alexandre *. 

§ 118. The fubordination of ideas is changed in 
proportion as We conforfn lcfe to their greateft con- 
nexion ; and then the ccMftrtiflion ceafes to be natu- 
ral, Such is dii5, <oicit .Darium Alexander ; for the 
: tdea of Alexander is feparated from that of vicit 9 
"with which it ought to be immediately connc&ed. 
" ' § 1 19. Latin writers furnifh us with examples of 
?ill Torts of conftrudtions -f, Conferte banc facem cum 
illo hello ; here is one analogous tp the modern lan- 
guages : bujus prat oris advent urn, cum illius impe- 
ratdris viSoria •, bujus cobortem impuram, cum illius 
cxetcitu iwoiSto ; bujus libidinis, cum illius continentia ; 
A'efe are as natural as the former, fifcce the connexi- 

m 

'on of ideas is not at aH altered ; and yet they would 
not be fuffered in modern languages. At length the 
period concludes with a termination which is not na- 
tural : ab illo 9 qui cepit* conditas ; db hoc, qui con- 

ft it ut as accepit, c apt as dicetis Siracufas. Siracufas is 
feparated from conditas, conditas from ab illo, &c. 
Which is contrary to the fubordination of ideas. 

§ 120. Tranfpofitions not coriformable to the 
greateft connexion of ideas, would be attended with 
inconveniencies, if the Latin tongue did not provide 
a remedy by the relation ^vlych the terminations efta- 

* blifli betwixt words that naturally ought not to be 

'feparated. This relation is fuCh, that the mind eali- 
jly joins the njoft diftant ideas, to place them in their 

9 1 

1 

** Darius *vohm Alexander overcame, 
•J- Cic. in Vcjt. 4. J 52. 

J proper 



a6S Origin. of Part II. 

proper order : if thefe conftrudtions offend in fome 
meafure the connexion of ideas, they have on the 
other hand fome advantages. which it is of impor- 
tance to know. 

The firft is, they render our difcourfe more har- 
monious. And indeed fince the harmony of a lan- 
guage coofifts in the mixture of every kind of founds, 
in their movement, and in the intervals by which 
they fucceed each other, we may eafily fee what har- 
mony arifes from tranfpofitions judicioufly chofcn : 
Cicero gives us a pattern hereof in the period above- 
mentioned *. 

§ 121. Another advantage is, they, render our 
ftyle more nervous and lively : this appears from 
the eafe we find in placing each word where it 
ought naturally to produce the beft effect. Perhaps 
fome will afk the reafon why a word fhould have a 
greater force in one place than in another. 

To underftand this, we need only to compare a 
conftru&ion in which the terms follow the connexi- 
on of ideas, to that wherein it deviates from this 
connexion. In the former, the ideas prefent them- 
felves fo naturally, that the mind perceives their 
whole fucceflion, without any occafion almoft to ex- 
ercife the fancy. In the other, the ideas, which 
fhould immediately follow each other, are too far 
feparated to be perccive4 in this manner : but if it be 
artfully made, the moft diftaqt words are eafily join- 
ed by the relation which the terminations eftablilh 
between them. Thus the trifling difficulty arifing 
from their diftance, feems to have been defigned 
only to excite the imagination ; and the ideas are 

• J?c OnttQre, 

difperfcd, 



Se&. i. HuMAtf Knowledge. 260 

difperfed, only that the mind being at the troubfeof 
joining them, fhould be more fenfible of their con- 
nexion or oppofition. By this artifice the whple 
force of a fentence centers fometimes in the word 
with which it terminates. For example, 

Nee qtiicquam tibi pro deft 

Aerias tentajfe domos, animoque rotundum 
Percurrijfe polum^ morituro f. 

This laft word (morituro) concludes with force, 
becaufe the mind cannot apply it to tibi 9 to which it 
belongs, without naturally recollecting the feveral 
words between them. Suppofe we tranfpofe the word 
morituro according to the connexion of ideas, and fay, 
nee quicquam tibi morituro^ &c, the effect fhall be no 
longer the fame, becaufe there is not the fame exer- 
cife of the fancy. This fort of tranfpofitions partake 
of the charafter of the mode of (peaking by a&ion, 
where a (ingle fign was oftentimes equivalent to an 
entire fentence. 

§ 122. From this fecond advantage of tranf- 
pofitions arifes a third; which is their forming a 
pi&ure : 1 mean that they unite in a (ingle word the 
circumftances of an a&ion, in fome meafure as a 
painter unites them upon a canvas : if they prefent- 
ed them in fucceffion, it would be only a plain nar- 
rative. This will be better underftood by means of 
an example. 

Nympba fiebant Dapbmm extintiumfunere crudeli. 

t Horat. lib. i. Od. 28. 

Here 



270 OriqIv QT tartlfc 

Here is a fiwpte narrative. I l&ara ^hat the nymph* 
wept, that they wept for Daphros* that Daphnfo 
was dead, &c. Thus the eircumfewee* fuccesdiflg 
each other make but a flight impreffion on m$* 
Change but the order of words, and fay : 

ExtinRum nymph* crudeli furiere Dafbnim 

Flebant * 4 

it produces quite a different effect, becaufe having 
read extinBum nymph* crudeli /mere, I am (till ill the 
dark ; but at Daphnim I fee the fir ft ftrofee of the' 
pencil, 2Xfiebant I fee the focond, and then the pic- 
ture is finiftied. The nymphs in tears, DaphoU 
dying, and this death attended with every doleful 
circum fiance, ftrike me all at once, &uch is the 
power which tranfpofitioas have over the imagina- 
tion. 

§ 123. The laft advantage I find in this fort of 
conftru&ions, is that of rendering our ftyle moffd 
precife. By accuftoming the mind to refer a term 
to thofe which are at the greateft diftance in the 
fame fentence, they learn us at the fame time to 
avoid repetitions. The French language is fo im* 
proper for giving us any habit of this kind, that ond 
would think we fee the relation of two words, only as 
they immediately follow one another. 

§ 124. If we compare the French and Latin 
tongues* we lhall find advantages and inconvenien- 
cies on both fides. Of two arrangements of ideas 
equally natural, the French generally fpeaking, ad- 
mits of but one \ in this refpedl therefore it has lefe 

* Vir* EscL 5. v. 20. 

variety 



Soft. i. Human Knowledge, 271 

variety and lefs harmony. It very feldom allows of 
thoie tranfpofitions in which the connexion of ideaa 
is altered ; hence it is naturally lefs lively. But it 
makes us amends on the fide of Simplicity and per- 
fpicuity. It chufes fuch conftru&ions as are always 
agreeable to the greatcft connexion of ideas. Thus 
it gives us an early habit of preferring this con- 
nexion, it renders us naturally more precife, and 
gradually inverts the mind with that chara&er of 
clearnefs and fimplicity, by which this language is fo 
fuperior in many refpe&v We fhall prefently fee *, 
how greatly theft advantages have contributed to the 
progrefs of found philofophy, and how much we are 
indemnified for the lofs of a few beauties peculiar to, 
die ancient languages. To avoid being thought 
to promife a paradox, , I lhall beg leave to obferve* 
that we are naturally accuftomed to connect our ideas 
according to the genius of our mother tongue, and 
that we acquire a greater degree of precifion, in pro- 
portion to the greater fhare which the language itfelf 
has of it. 

§ 125. The more fimple the conftru&ion, the 
more difficult it is to be thorough mafter of a lan- 
guage. I fancy it was much eafier to write in Latin 
than it is in French. The conjugations and declenfions 
could, by their nature, prevent a great many incon- 
veniencies, againft which it is very difficult for us to 
guard. They united a large number of ideas in the 
fame period, without any confufion; nay, it was 
frequently looked upon as a beauty. On the con- 

* The laft chapter of this feltion. 

trary, 



Xr 



272 Ofci6iN of PArttL 

trary, in French we cannot be too cautious iff ad* * 
mitting no ideas into a fentence, but fuch as will, 
bear the moft natural coriftru&ion. We muft be pro* 
digioufly attentive to avoid the ambiguities occafion-* 
cd, by the ufe of pronouns. In fine, what a number 
of contrivances are requifite to guard againft thefe 
defefts, without falling into thofe far-fetched turns 
of expreflion, which enervate a language ? But when 
thefe obftacles are once furmounted, nothing can be 
more beautiful than the French conftru&ion. 

§ 126. I am not however fb vain as to think my- 
fclf qualified to determine to every body's fatisfadti- 
on the preference between the Latin and French 
tongues, in regard to the point treated of in this 
chapter. Some are pleafed only with order and 
perfpicuity, while others prefer variety and vivacity 
of ftyle. On thefe occafions it is natural for every 
one to judge in regard to his own tafte. For my 
part, I think the advantages of thefe two languages 
are fo very different, that they will hardly admit of 
a comparison, 



CHAP. 



5e£h i. HuMak Knowi£dg£» 273 

CHAP. XIIL 

Of writing *« 

% 12 Jr. \\T HEN riiarikind had orid* acquired the 
V V art of communicating their concepti- 
ons by founds, they began to feel the neceflity of 
inventing new figns proper for perpetuating them, 
and for making them knowri at a diftance +« Their 
imaginations then repreiented nothing more to them 
than thofe fame images, which they had already ex- 
prefled by geftures and words, and which from 
the very beginning had rendered language figurative 
and metaphorical. The rtioft natural way therefore 
was to delineate the images of things. To ex- 
prefs the idea of a man or of a horfe* they reprefented 

* This fedtion was near firiiftied, when I happened to light 
On an eflay on hieroglyphics, extracted from the fecond volume. 
of DnWarburton's Divine Legation of Mofes ; a work equally 
diftinguifhed for ftrength of reafoning and variety of erudition* 
With pleafure I found that this author's notions and mine co- 
incided, in fuppofing that language mud, from its fir ft begin- 
ning, have been very figurative and metaphorical, My owrt 
reflexions had led me to obferve, that writing at fiflft could be 
no more than a (imple picture ; but I had not as yet made any 
Attempt to difcover by what progrefs mankind arrived at the 
invention of letters, and it feemed difficult to me to fucceed in 
the inquiry. The tafk has been exceedingly well executed by 
Dr. Warburton, of whom the greateft part of this chapter' has 
been borrowed. 

f I have accounted for this in the 7th chapter of this fee* 
tion« 

T the 



274 0*ioih"o# Part If. 

the form of each of thefe animals ; fo that the firft 
effay towards writing was a mere pitture. 

§ 128. It is in all probability to the neceflity of 
thus delineating our thoughts that the art of painting 
owes its original - 9 and this neceflity has doubtlefs 
contributed to preferve the mode of fpcaking by 
a&ion, as the eafieft to reprefent by the pen- 
cil. 

$ 129. Notwithstanding the inconveniencies arifing 

from this method, the moil civilized nations in A- 

merica were incapable of inventing a better *. The 

Egyptians, a more ingenious people, were the firft 

who made life of a fhorter method, which is knowa 

1 

by the nante of hieroglyphics -J-. From the greater' 
or lefier contrivance in their feverai methods, it ap- 
pears that they did not invent letters, till they had 
gone thw>ugh every gradation of writing. 

The inconveniency arifing from the enormous 
bulk of volumes, induced them to make ufc of 
only a fingle figure to fignify feverai things* Thus 
it was that 'writing, which before that ti*ne was a 

* The favages of Canada have no other. 

f Hieroglyphics aie diftinguiftied into proper and fynbolic.: 
The proper are fubdived into curiologic, and tropical. Tb& 
curiologic fubftituted a part in the place of the who}e ; and the, 
tropical represented one thing by another which had fome r«~ 
iemblance or common analogy to it. Both thefe forts were. 
employed to divulge their knowledge. The fymbolic hiero- 
gjyphics were employed to conceal ; thefe were alfo diftingatfh* 
ed into two fpecies, tropical and enigmatic* To frame tropic 
fymbols, they made ufe of fuch properties of things as wewr 
leaft known ; and the enigmatic were compofed of the myfte- 
rioos afTemblage of different things and of the parts of difFcrentr 
animals. See the Divine Legation, vol. II. 

fimple 



&&-*> Mt7^A*f fcrtowLfciJGE. ^75 

fimpW pSSteM, b&fcahlfe both piftUfe arid character y 
Whidv isf what jk&ptfly donftitutes the nature of 
fiteni^plhics;' Sutih was thfc firft degree of per- 
ftftfbn' in this rude method of preferring ideas. 
They titttie Ufe of thtie Ways, *hkh if we confulf 
die nafiA* of thi tftfrig, fteni to hive been invented 
gradually arid at' fhrt£ different times, 'the firft 
was to rfiafce the principal circumftance of the fub-' 
je6t ftand for the whole. Two hands, for inftanceV 
6ne holding a fhieldand the other a boW, r^prdTerited 
a battfc. The fecond of more ingenious contriv- 
ance, was by putting the inftrument of the thing,' 
whether real or metaphorical, for the thing itfelf. 
Thus, ah* iyi 9 eminently placed* was defigmed to 
rtj)rfefeht God's omnifcifence, and a fword reprefented 
a tyrant; Thdr third, and ftill ittdte artificial me- 
thod of abridging, was by 1 making one thing ftand 
for, or repteferit another* where any quaint refem- 
blarlce or analogy, in thd feprefentative, could be 
Colledted from their obfervatiofis of nature, 6r theif 
traditiohal fuperftitions; Thci uriiverfe, for exam- 
ple, wis defigried by a ferpent in a circle* whole 
Variegated' fpots figriified the ftars. 

§ 13b* Thrf firft defign of thofe who invented 
hierbglyphics, was to preftrve the memory of events* 
and to record, openly and plainly, their laws, poli-^ 
ties, and whatever elfe relates to civil matters. 

■ 

They were therefore very careful in the ^ginning 
to life only thofe figures whofe analogy ^Wasrftoft* 
within the reach of every capacity : but this niethod 
led then! into fubtilties, in proportion as philofophers 
applied themfelves to matters of fpeculation. As 
foon as they fancied they had made a difcovery of 
1 Ta more 



276 Origin of Part II. 

more . abftrufe qualities in things, fome, either 
through Angularity, or to conceal their knowledge 
from the vulgar, were pleafed to make a character 
pf figures, whofe relation to things which they 
wanted to exprefs, was not known. For fome time 
-they confined themfelves to figures of natural ori- 
ginals : but afterwards thefe appeared neither nume- 
rous, nor convenient enough, for the great multitude ' 
of ideas with which their imaginations were crowded. 
Hence they came to form their hieroglyphics of a 
myfterious affemblage of different things, or of parts 
of different animals j which rendered them intirely 
enigmatical, 

. § 1 3 1 . At length the cuftom of expreffing their 
thoughts by analogous figures, and the defign of 
fometimes making a fee ret and a myftery of them,' 
induced them to reprefent even the modes of fiib- 
ftances by fenfible images. Thus freedom they ex- 
prefied by a hare ; impurity, by a wild he-goat ; 
impudence, by a fly •, fcience by an ant, &c. In 
a word, they invented fymbolical marks for every 
thing that is even without (hape or form. On 
thefe occafions, they were fatisi&ed with any fort of 
relation whatever ; and it is in this very way they 
had already adted, upon giving names to fpiritual 
ideas. 

§ 132. " * Hitherto the animal or thing repre- 
" fenting was drawn out graphically ; but when the 
" ftudy of philofophy (which had occafioned fym- 
" bolic writing) had inclined their learned to write, 
44 much, and varioufly, that exadt manner of deli- 

v 

* Divine Legation, vol. II. p. 115. 

<c neation 



c< 
cc 
cc 
cc 



u 
«c 
*c 
cc 



§e&. i. Human Knowledge. 277 

c< neation would be as well too tedious as too volu^ 
<c minous ; they therefore by degrees perfected an- 
c< other chara&er, which we may call the running 
hand of hieroglyphics, refembling the Chinefe 
writing, which being at firft formed only by the 
outlines of each figure, became at length a kind 
of marks. One natural effedt that this running 
€i band would in time produce, was, that its ufe would 
" take off much of the attention from the fymbol and 
" fix it on the thing fignified ; by which means the 
" ftudy of fymbolic writing would be much abbre- 
<c viated, there being then little to do, but to re- 
member the power of the fymbolic mark ; whereas 
before, the properties of the thing or animal, 
ufed as a fymbol, were to be learnt : in a word, it 
would reduce this writing to the prefent ftate of 
" the Chinefe." 

§ 133. Thefe charafters having gone through fo 
many changes, it was not an eafy matter' to perceive 
how they could be derived from a kind of writing, 
which at firft had been no more than a mere pifture. 
Hence it is that fome learned men have been fo far 
miftaken, as to believe that the Chinefe writing 
did not begin in the fame manner as that of the 
Egyflians. 

§ 134. " Thus .have we brought down the gene- 
ral hiftory * of writing, by a gradual and eafy 
defcent, from a pifture to a letter •, for Chinefe 
marks, which participate of the nature of Egyp- 
tian hieroglyphics on the one hand, and of letters 

# Pivinc Legation, vol. II. p. 77. 



cc 

4( 
CC 



&j% Ojligin .oj Part U, 

" on the other ; juft as thefe hieroglyphics equally 
* c partook of that of Mexican piftures, and .of tbfl 
" Chinefe chara&ers •, are, on the very t}Qfder$ of 
." letters ; an alphabet being Qnly a compendious 
f4 abridgment of that troublefome multiplicity." 

$ 135. Notwithftanding the prodigious conveni- 
ency of letters, yet the Egyptians, long after thefe 
fcad been invented, ftill preferved the ufe of hiero- 
glyphics. The reafon was, all their learning had 
been committed to this fort of writing. Having 
conceived a veneration for the books, they .were 
led to refped the chara&ers, the ufe of which was 
perpetuated by the learned of that nation. But 
thofe who wejrc not men of fcience, did npt think 
fit to continue the ufe of this kind of writing. The 
authority of the learned could only prevail upon 
them to look upon thefe characters with 3 reve- 
rential eye, as proper for ornamenting their public 
monuments, on which the ufe of them was ftill 
continued. Perhaps the Egyptian priefts fyw with 
pleafure that by degrees they alone fhould be pofr 
feffed of the }cey of a writing, which preferved the 
fecrets of their religion. This is what occafionecj 
the miftake of thofe, who ipiagined that the fub- 
limeft myfteries were couched in hieroglyphic^*, 

§ 136. 4f Thus we find * how it happened tha$ 
*' that which had its origin from neceffity, came in 
fC time to be employed for fecrecy, arjd jpiproyed 
V for ornament. Byt now, in the inceflkpt revo- 
*' lutions of things, thjs iipagery, ^hich ^was at firft 
!' invented for clearnefs, and was from thence con- 

* 

£ Divine Legation, vo{. II. j>. 143. 

V verte<J 



V 



Seft. i. Human Knowledge. 279 

'* verted into myftery, at length refumed its pri- 
4< mitive employment 5 and, in the flourifhing ages 
44 of Greece and Rome, was employed in their 
44 monuments and medals as the cleared: method of 
44 conveying men's conceits ; and a fymbol, which 
44% in Egypt, was pregnant with profound wifdom, 
44 was here the vocabulary of the people." 

§ 137. In procefs of time, language had exa&ly 
the fame fate as Writing. In the beginning, figures 
and metaphors were neceffary, as we have feen, for 
the lake of perfpicuity : we fhall now inqyire how 
they came to be changed into myfteries, afterwards 
to ferve for ornament, and to conclude at length in 
the way of popular information. 



mmm 



CHAP. XIV. 



Of the origin of fable, of parables and enigmas, with 
fome particulars concerning the ufe of figures and 
metaphors *. 

§ I38.TJ 1 ROM what has been faid it evidently 
*• appears, that at the origjn of languages 
mankind were under a neceflity of joining the mode 
of fpeaking by aftion to that of articulate founds, 
and of conveying their thoughts by fenfible images, 
Befides, notions the moft common to us, were fo 
refined in regard to them, that they could not be 
levelled to their capacities, unlefs they were brought 

* The greateft part of this chapter is likewife taken from 
the feeond volume of the Divine Legation, part I. 

T 4 * down 



s8o Origin of PartIL 

down to their fenfes. In fhort, as they were 
ftrangcrs to the ufe of conjunctions, it was im- 
poffible for them as yet to reafon or argue. Thofe 
who wanted, for example, to prove how beneficial 
a thing it is to be fubjeft to laws, or to follow the 
counfels of the wife, had no Ampler method than 
to imagine fafts particularly circumflanced : the 
event which they rendered contrary or favourable 
according to the point in view, had the double 
advantage of inftru&ing and perfuading. . This is : ? 
the origin of apologue or fable. It appears that its ; 
firft aim was inftru&ion, and confequently that its 
.fubjc&s were borrowed from the rooft familiar 
things, whofe analogy was mod obvious to the 
fenfes -, the fcene was firft: laid among men, then 
among brutes, and foon after among plants. At 
length the fpirit of refinement, which in all ages has 
had its admirers, led them into the mod abftrufe 
refe^rches, They ftudied the rpoft Angular proper^ 
tics of beings, in order to draw delicate ajlufions ; 
infomuch that fable was infenfibly changed into pa- 
rable, and rendered at length fo myfterious as. to be 
little better than an enigma, Thefe enigmas ob-. 
tained more generally, as the learned, or thofe who 
fet up for fuch, thought it incumbent upon them 
to conceal part of their knowledge from the vulgar. 
By thefe means, language, which had been defigned 
for perfpicuity, was changed into myftery. To 
frame an idea of the tafle of the earlieft ages, wq 
have only to take a view of people who have nq 
tinfture of learning : they are pleafed with every 

thing that is figurative ancl metaphorical, let it be 

neve* 



Sc£t. i. Human Knowledge. 281 

never fo obfcure ; and are always fure to give it the 
preference. 

§ 139. Another thing which alfo contributed to 
increafe the figures of uyle, was the ufe of hiero- 
glyphics. Thefe two ways of communicating one's 
thoughts, muft needs have influenced each other *. 
It was natural, when fpeaking of a thing, to make 
ufe of the name of the hieroglyphical figure which 
was its fymbol, as at the origin of hieroglyphics it 
had been natural to paint thofe figures, which had 
been authorized by the cuftom of language. Hence 
we fhall find. " that as in hieroglyphical writing -f, 
44 the fun, moon, and ftars were ufed to reprefent 
44 ftates and empires, kings, queens, and nobility ; 
44 their eclipfe and excinftion, temporary difafters or 
44 intire overthrow ; fire and flood, defolation by 
44 war and famine ; plants or animals, the qualities 
44 of particular perfons, &c. So in like manner 
44 the holy prophets call kings and empires by the 
44 names of the heavenly luminaries ; their misfor- 
4< tunes and overthrow are reprefented byeclipfes and 
44 extindtion •, ftars falling from the firmament arc 
44 employed to denote the deftru&ion of the nobi- 
44 lity •, thunder and tempeftuous winds, hoftile in • 
44 vafions ; lions, bears, leopards, goats, or high 
44 trees, leaders of armies, conquerors, and found- 
ers of empires ; royal dignity is defcribed by 
purple or a crown •, iniquity by fpotted garments \ 



it 

Cft 



* See in Dr. Warburton's Divine Legation, vol, II. part I f 
the ingenious parallel he drafts between apologue, parable, 
enigma, figures and metaphors on the one fide, and the diffe- 
rent fpecies of writing on the other. 

| Divine Legation, vol. II. p. 153, 

* error 



z%z DiieiNOF PajtlL 

" error and xnHery by an intoxicating draught % a 
** warrior by fword or bow •, a powerful man by 
" JWjpntic fixture ; and a judge by balance, weights, 
" and meafyres : in a word, the prophetic ftyle 
*' feeros to be a fpeaking hieroglyphic." 

$ 140, In proportion as writing became more 
Ample, ftyle became the fame. By forgetting the 
(jgnification of hieroglyphics, they infenfibly loft 
the ufe of a great many figures and metaphors : but 
to render this change fenfible, was the work of ages. 
The ftyle of the ancient Afiatic authors was ex- 
tremely figurative •, even in Greek and Latin we 
meet with marks of the influence of hieroglyphics 
on language * •> and the Chinefe who ftill make ufe 
of a chara&er in fome meafure hieroglyphical, over- 
load their difcourfe with allegories, comparifons and 
jnetaphQrs. 

§ 141. After all thefe revolutions, figures were 
at length employed for the embellifhment of fpeech, 
when mankind had acquired fo exadfc and extenfive 
a knowledge of the arts and fciences, as to draw 
Images from thence, which without being in the. 
leaft prejudicial to perfpicuity, had all the grace, 
and fublimity, that the fubj$ft required* la the 
fubfequent revolutions of languages, they muft cer- 
tainly have greatly faffered. Their decline may be 
dated even from thofe very times, in which they feetn 
to lay claim to the moft ftriking beauties. We fee 
figures and metaphors heaped upon one another, and 
the ftyje overloaded with ornaments, whilft efien^ 

* Annus, for example, comes from iwmte, tattufo the yew 
revolves upon itfclf, 

tials 



ge&. i. Human Knowledge. $83 

jials are neglected. When this critical time comes, 
there may be a poffibility perhaps of retarding, but 
pot of abfolutely preventing the decline of a lan- 
guage. In morals, ^s in phyfics, there is an utnjoft 
period of increafe, after which ? things muft terjd to 
diffolution. 

Thus it is that figures an4 metaphprs, which in 
fhe beginning had been invented through neceffify, 
^nd afterwards were applied to the pqrpofes of 
piyftery, are become an ornament to difcourfe, 
when ufed with judgment and difcretion ; and thup 
Jt is that by the abufes made of them, they have 
been the firft and principal caufe of the .decline of 
languages. 

I 

C H A P. XV. 

Of the character of languages. 

* 

% 142/ I 1 form the charadter of a people two 

-** things contribute, climate and goyem T 
ment. From the climate arifes a greater degree of 
vivacity or qf phlegm \ and of courfe a difpqfition 
to one form of gpvernment preferably to another. 
But thefe difpofitions are changed by a thoufan4 
cireumftances. The fterility, fruitfulnefs, or fituar 
%\on of a cquntry ; the refpe&ive interefts of the; 
inhabitants compared to thofe o£ their neighbours j 
the reftiefe fpirits who difturb it, while the govern-? 
jnent is not yet fetded on a folid bafis ;' the extra- 
ordinary men whofe fuperiqr abilities eclipfe thofe of 
tljej? fellow citizens j thefe and feveral pther caufe$ 

contribute 



284 Origin op Part II. 

contribute to alter, and even fometimes intirely to 
deftroy. the firft propenfities which a nation derives 
from its climate. The charadter therefore of a 
people undergoes very near the fame changes as 
their government ; nor does it fix, till the latter has 
received a fettled form. 

§ 143. As government influences the charadter of 
a people, fo the charadter of a people influences that 
of language. It is natural for men inceflantly 
prefled by wants, and agitated by paflions, hot to 
fpeak of things without mentioning how far thefe 
things concern them. They are obliged infenfibly 
to connedt the words with adventitious ideas exprefs- 
ing the manner in which they are affedted, and the 
judgments they frame. This is an eafy obfervation ; 
for there are very few whofe converfation does not 
at length difclofe their real charadter, even at the 
very time when they endeavour moft to conceal it. 
We need only to have a fhort acquaintance with a 
perfon, in order to learn his language : I fay, bis 
Umguage^ for every man according to his paflions has 
a particular one of his own : I except only fuch as 
are of a cold and phlegmatic conftitution •, who in- 
deed more readily conform to the language of others, 
and whofe charadter of courfe it is much more diffi-* 
cult to difcover. 

The charadter of a nation is ftill more eafily feen 
into, than that of individuals. A multitude can- 
.jnot adt in joint concert to conceal their paflions. 
Befldes, we never dream of making a myftery of 
our inclinations, when they are common to the reft 
of our countrymen. On the contrary we boaft of 
them, and are pleafed at their being looked upon as 

cha- 



Sc£t. i. Human Knowledge^ 28$ 

charafteriftics of a country, to which we owe our 
birth, and in favour of which we are naturajSs^re- 
judiced. Upon the whole therefore it aoplffs that 
every language expreffes the charadter ?Fthe people 
that fpeak it. ,;^ ; 1 

§ 144. In Latin, for example, the terms of agri- 
culture, imply an idea of dignity and grandeur, 
which they do not in French y the ^reafon of this is 
obvious. When the Romans laid the foundation of 
their empire, their knowledge was as yet confined to 
the neceflary arts : thefe they valued fo much the 
more, as it behoved every member of the republic 
to make them his ftudy - 9 fo that they were early 
accuftomed to look upon agriculture, and the general 
who ploughed his own lands, with the fame eye 
of favour and efteem. Hence the terms of this art 
acquired fuch adventitious ideas as implied both 
dignity and grandeur. They continued to prefervc 
them, when the Roman republic was fallen into 
the greateft excefs of luxury ; for the charadter of 
a language, efpecially if afcertained by celebrated 
writers, does not change fo eafily as the manners of 
a people. With regard to the French nation, they 
have had quite a different turn of mind, fince the 
eftablifhment of the monarchy. As the Franks en- 
tertained a high efteem for the military profeflion, 
to which they were indebted for a potent empire, it 
was natural for them to defpife thofe arts which 
they were not obliged to cultivate in perfon, but 
committed to the care of their (laves. From that 
time the adventitious ideas annexed to the terms of 
agriculture, muft have been very different from thofe 
which they had in the Latin tongue. 

1 § 145. Though 



l86 Ofcicift oP Parttf. 

$ 145* Though die character of language* is ori- 
ginilly formed from that of die people* yet ft is riot 
p c i fc fl ed witboat the aflHtance of eminent Writers. 
But to trace its progrefe, we fh6tild rcfolve tWd 
queftions, which have been often difcufled,- and 
never, I think, rightly decided. H 16 to know the 
feafim why die arts and feiences do not flOurifli alikd 
& aD ages and in ail countries ; and why nien of 
ctainence in every kind are generally cotemporaries: 
• There ot writers trtiohOTdfifa^ 
thde qxrcftibns irt the cfifierehceof climatfcs. If forhrf 
nations ait ftifrtogertf to the arts and fcfenc«, theft 
writers prtterid that die ditnate fcthe reatcauftdf it 4 
and if there are others in which 1 tte culture of fliofe are? 
and feiences is now nfcgle&ed, they agaiii- ptttend 
that this is owing to a change ill tHe cliriiatSe. But S v 
lis idle to fuppofe any fuch fudden and extraordinary 
change, equal to "die revolutions: of die arfe arid 
feiences. The climate influences nothing mbre tKari 
the organs ; let it be" never fo favourable, it can bd 
produftive only of machines better organfetd, antf 
probably in all ages it' prtiduces vei^y n6tf an equal 
number*. If it were every- where the fame, ftill th<f 
fame variety would appear in different pciople ? 
forrte, as at prefent, would be famed for fearnirig, and 
others would be involved in ignorance*. Hencd 

. there muft be particular circumftances, by means of 
which, men of a delicate organization fliall have ari 
opportunity of applying' thertifelves t6 proper fub-* 

jefts, and of difplaying their talents- Otherwife 
they would refcmble thofe autoriiata of a moft cu^ 
rious contrivance, which are fuffered to run to ruin, 
for want of knowing their mechanifm, of how t6 

fet 



Seft. i. Mumau Knowledge. ±$f 

fee the fprings a-going. Tke cfiraafie is not there- 



fare the caufe of the progrds of Ac arts aad id- 
ences $ it it required only as an rflrnriil conditiorL. 

§ 146. The circumstances favourable to the dif- 
piaying of talents, are always id be found in a 
nation, when the langtnge begins to hare fixed 
principle* and a fettled ftandaid : foch a period is 
therefore die epocha of great men. This is an ob- 
servation confirmed by the hiffary of Ac arts, bat 
I fltaU give a rcafon for it, drawn from the very 
nature of the thing. 

The firft turns of ezpreffion introduced into a lan- 
guage, are neither very clear, precife, nor elegant : 
nothing but time and experience can direft mefl in 
this choke. Languages filmed of die ruins 6$ 
feverai others, meet with very great obftacles which 
retard dleir progrefc. As they Rave borrowed 
ibmething from eadiv they are only a corrfufed heap 
of heterogeneous exprelBons. They have not that: 
analogy, which affords light to* writers, and cha- 
ra&erifes a language. Such was the French' at its 
firft eftablifhment. This is the reafon why it Was to 
long before we Wtote ill our mother tongue, arid 
why thdk who made tfhe flffe eflay, cotild not give* 
any fettled chara&er to their ftyle. 

§147. If we recolleft that the habit of the 
imagination and memory depends inrirely on the* 
connexion of ideas, and that the latter is formed by 
the relation and analogy of figns * ; we fhall be 
convinced that the Jefs a language abounds in ana- 
logous expreffions, die lefs affiftance it giv£s to the 



? Firft patt> ft&. a, c. 3* aodf 

memory 



$e£i. i. Human Knowledge. 289 

I anfwer that people having been accuftomed to 
conceive things as exprefled in the language which 
they had learnt from their infancy* their minds muft 
have been naturally confined. They could not be 
offended with the want of precifion, becaufe they 
had habituated 'themfelves to it : confequently they 
were not as yet capable of deriving fuch afliftance 
from the learned languages. And indeed if wfc 
trate things up from age to age, we fhall find 
that the badnefs of our Latin ftyle has been always 
in proportion to that of our mother tongue •, for 
we did not begin to write good Latin, till we had 
learnt to write good French. Befides, it would 
be (hewing very little knowledge of the genius of 
languages, to imagine that the advantages of thofe 
which are reckoned the moft perfect, could be fad* 
denly communicated to the qioft imperfeft : this 
muft be the work of time. Marot underftood 
Latin ; and yet how comes it that he had not the 
fame equality of ftyle as his imitator Roufleau ? 
merely for this reafon, becaufe the French tongue 
was not at that time fufficiently improved. Roufleau, ' 
perhaps with lefs abilities, has given a more equal 
chara&er to the Marotic ftyle, becaufe he made his 
appearance under more favourable circumftances $ 
had he come a century fooner, he would not have 
fucceeded. The comparifon that may be drawn 
between Regnier and Dcfpreaux, will further cor- 
roborate this argument. 

$ 149. The progrefs muft be a great deal more 
rapid, in a language not formed upon the ruin of 
others $ becaufe it has a charadfcer from its original : 

U this 



it)o Origin of Part II 

this is the reafon why Greece was fo early diftin- 
guifhed For excellent writers. 

§ 1 50* Let us fuppofe a perfon of the moft com- 
plete organization to ftart up of a fudden among a 
people, who though inhabiting a climate favpurable 
to the arts and fciences, are as yet in a ftate of 
barbarifm : I apprehend that he may become a ge- 
nius in regard to thofe people ; but we plainly fee 
that it is impoffible for him to equal fome of the 
eminent writers of the age of Lewis XIV, When 
we view the thing in this light, it is fo plain and 
clear as not to admit of the lead doubt. 

If the language of thefe rude and ignorant people 
obftrudts the progrefs of the mind, let us give it 
one degree of perfe&ion, nay let us give it two, 
three, or four ; the obftacle fhall dill continue, nor 
can it diminifh, but in proportion to the degrees of 
perfection added to that language. Therefore it will 
jiot be intirely removed, till the language has ac- 
quired very near as many degrees of perfe&ion, as 
ours had, when it firft began to furnilh us with good 
writers. Confequently, it is demonftrable that there 
can be no fuch thing as a fuperior genius, till the 
language of a nation has been confiderably im- 
proved. 

§151. The caufes which contribute to the difplay 
of abilities are as follow. i°. The climate is an 
effential condition. 2 . It is requifite that the form 
of government be fettled, fo as to fix the character 
of a nation. 3 . It is this that gives a chara&er 
to the language by multiplying fuch phrafes as 
exprefs the prevailing tafte of a people. 4 . This 
is brought about very (lowly in languages formed 

upon 



Se&. J. Human KNoWtEbGL igt 

upon the ruirt of others : but when once thefe obfta- 
cles are furmounted, then the rules of analogy arcs 
eftabliihed, the language makes fome improvements, 
and there is an opportunity to difplay one's abilities.. 
We lee therefore the feafon why great Writers do not 
indifferently flourifh in all ages, and why they make 
their appearance fooner in fome, and later in other 
Countries. It remains now for us to inquire how it 
happens that great men of every kind are generally 
cotemporarieS. 

§ 152. As fbort as a man of genius discovers the 
charadter of a language, he exprefles it ftrongly in 
his writings. With this afliftance other ingenious 
perfons, who would not perhaps have been able to 
find it out of themfelves, fee it very plain, and ex- 
prefs it after his example, each in his own way* 
The language is infenfibly enriched with a multitude 
of new turns of expreffions, which from the relation 
they bear to its character, enlarge it more and more % 
and analogy becomes as it were a lamp, whofe light 
continually increafes, to direct a greater number of 
writers. Then the public eye is naturally fixed on 
thofe who diftinguifh themfelves from the crowd : . 
the tafte of thefe becomes the prevailing tafte of the 
nation : each perfon in the feveral fubje&s to which 
he applies himfelf, ufes that difcernment which he 
learnt of thofe ingenious perfons : abilities begin to 
ferment : the feveral arts affume their proper cha- 
racter ; and men of fuperior merit in every branch of 
learning make their appearance. Thus it is that great 
parts, of what kind foever, do not fliew themfelves till 
a language is confiderably improved. This is fo very 
true, that though fuch circumftances as favour the mi- 

U 2 litary 



292 Origin of - Part II*> 

litary and political arts, occur the moft frequent, 
yet it is thofe ages which have been diftinguifhed 
for great writers, that are able to boaff of generals 
and minifters of a fuperior rank. Such is the in- 
fluence of letters over government; an influence 
whofe full extent does not feem as yet to have been 
rightly understood. 

§ 153. If the difplay of great abilities is owing tQ 
the fenfible improvements already made in a lan- 
guage, on the other hand ihe latter is indebted to 
men of abilities for new improvements, which raife 
it to its higheft pitch of perfeftion : this is what 
I fhall briefly explain. 

Though it be true that great men partake, in 
fome fenfe or other, of the chara&er of their nation, 
yet they have ftill fomerhing that diftinguirties them 
from the crowd. They fee and feel in a manner pe- 
culiar to thcmfelves,which they cannot communicate, 
without inventing new turns of expreffion within the 
rules of analogy, or at leaft fo as to deviate from 
them as little as poflible. Hence they conform to 
the character of their language, to which at the fame 
time they communicate their own. Corneille deve- 
lops the interefts of grandees, the policy of am- 
bitious men, and in a word all the movements of 
the foul, with a dignity and force peculiar to him- 
felf. Racine exprcfics love, its fears, and trans- 
ports, with a fweetnefs and elegance which form the 
charafteriftic of the gentler pa&ons. The pencil with 
which Qiiinault draws his piftures of pleafure and 
volupty, is diredfced by foftnefs : and feveral other 
writers, who are no more, or who are diftinguilhed 
among the moderns, have each a character which 

the 



-Se&. i. Human Knowledge. 293 

the French tengiiage has 'gradually appropriated to 
itfelf. Outrfirft, and perhaps greateft obligation, 
is owing to our poets; for as they are fubjeft 
to the reftraint of rules, their imagination makes 
ftronger efforts, and neceffarily produces new turns 
of exprefiion. And indeed the fudden improvement; 
of a language is generally the sera of fome emi- 
nent poet. Philofophers do not carry it to perfecti- 
on till a long time after : they have indeed given to 
ours that precifion and perfpicuity which form its 
charadteriftic, and which by furnifhing us with the 
figns moft convenient for analyzing our ideas, enable 
us to difcern the fubtileft and minuteft part of every 
objeft. 

§ 154. Philofophers afcending to the reafon of 
things, lay down the rules of arts, explain the 
moft abftrufe branches, and by their writings in- 
creafe the number of good* judges. But if we 
confider the arts where they feem to require a 
greater exertion of fancy, we fhall find that phi- 
lofophy does not contribute to improve thefe as 
it does the fciences •, on the contrary, it feems to 
hurt them. This is becaufe the fire of imagination 
is dapjped, partly by the attention given to the 
rules, and partly by the apprehenfion of feeming not 
to know them : for this is an operation that chufes 
rather to be diredted by fenfation, and by a lively im- 
preffion of the objefts, than by a reflexion which 
combines and -calculates every thing. 

True it is that the knowledge of rules may be 

of ■fervice to thofe who, from too great a luxuriancy 

of fancy, are apt to lofe fight of them when they 

• are compofing, and recoiled them only in f evifing 

U 3 their 



Scft, i. Human Knowledge. 295 

what I have already had occafion to make mention f . 
It is therefore extremely difficult for the fame lan- 
guages equally to favour the habit of both theft 
operations. The French, by the fimplicity and 
clearnefs of its conftru&ion, gives an early precifion 
to the mind, which by degrees "becomes habitual, 
and is greatly preparatory to the analytical pro- 
grefs; but it is not favourable to the imagination. 
On the contrary, the tranfpofitions of the ancient 
languages were an obftrudtion to the analytic method, 
in proportion as they contributed more to improve 
the fancy, and thereby rendered the habit of it more 
natural than that of the other operations of the mind. 
This is, I think, one of the caufes of the fuperiority 
of modern philofophers to thofe of antiquity. A 
language fo exaft as the French in its choice of fi- 
gures and expreffions, ought furely to be more fo 
in the argumentative way. 

In order to fix our ideas, we ought to imagine 
two languages ; one which fhould exercife the fancy, 
to fuch a degree, that the people who fpoke it muft 
be perpetually blundering : the other, which on the 
contrary fhould caufe fuch an exercife of the analy- 
tic method, that thofe to whom it was natural fhould 
conduft themfelves even in their pleafures, like ma- 
thematicians inveftigating the folution of a problem. 
Between thefe two extremes we might reprefent to 
our minds all the languages poflible, we might fee 
them afiuming different charadters according to the 
extremity to which they approached, and indemni- 
fying themfelves for the advantages loft on the one 

f Firft part, page 50, 

U 4 fide. 



296 Origin of Part II. 

fide, by thofe which they acquired on the other. 
The rood perfect fhould take poflfeflion of the 
middle, and thofe who fpoke it would be a great 
people. 

Here it will be obje&ed, that if the chara&er of 
languages is a reafon of the fuperiority of modern 
over ancient philofophers, does it not in confequence 
follow that the ancient poets are fuperior to the mo- 
derns ? I anfwer no : the analytic method borrows no 
afliftance except from language ; therefore it cannot 
take place but as it is favoured by language : we 
have feen on the contrary that the caufcs which con- 
tribute to the progrefs of the imagination are far 
more extenfive; every thing tends to promote the 
habit of this operation. Though the Greeks and 
Romans may have had fome poets fuperior to ours 
in particular branches, yet we have fome fuperior to 
theirs in others. What poet of all antiquity can be 
compared to Corneille or to Moliere ? 

§ 157. The fimpleft way to judge which language 
excels in moft branches, would be to reckon the 
original authors in each. I am afraid that ours 
would have in this refpeft fome disadvantage. 

§ 158. After having (hewn the caufes of the laft 
improvements of language, it will be proper to in- 
quire into thofe of its decline : they are indeed the 
fame, and produce fuch contrary effects only from 
the nature of circumftances. It is nearly the fame 
here as in phyfics, where motion, the fouroe of life, 
becomes the principle of deftru&ioo. 

When a language abounds with original writers 
in every kind, the more a perfon is endowed with 
abilities, the more difficult te thinks it will be to 

furpafs 



Se£t. i. Human Knowledge. 297 

furpafs them. A mere equality would not fatisfy 
his ambition ; like them he wants the pre-eminence. 
He therefore tries a new road. But as every ftyle 
analogous to the chara&er of the language, and to 
his own, hath been already ufed by preceding writ- 
ers, he has nothing left but to deviate from analo- 
gy. Thus in order to be an original, he is obliged 
to contribute to the ruin of a language, which a cen- 
tury fooner he would have helped to improve. 

§ 159. Though fuch writers may be criticifed, 
their fuperior abilities mud ftill command fuccefs. 
The eafe there is in copying their defe&s, foon per- 
fuades men of indifferent capacities, that they ftiall 
acquire the fame degree of reputation. Then be- 
gins the reign of fubtil and ftrained conceits, of 
affefted antithefes, of fpecious paradoxes, of frivo- 
lous and far-fetched exprefiions, of new-fangled 
words, and in fliort of the jargon of perfons whole 
underftandings have been debauched by bad meta- 
phyfics. The public applauds : foolifh and ridicu- 
lous writings, the beings of a day, are furprifingly 
multiplied ; a vicious tafte infe&s the arts and fci- 
ences, which is followed by a vifible decreafe of men 
of abilities. 

§ 1 60. I do not in the leaft doubt but I (hall be 
contradi&cd in what I have advanced concerning 
the chara&er of articulate founds. I have frequent- 
ly met with perfons who look upon all languages as 
equally adapted for all kinds of writing, and who 
pretend that a man with the fame organization as 
Corneille, in whatever age he lived, and in whatever 
tongue he wrote, would have given the fame proofs 
of his fuperiorky of genius. 

Signs 



298 Origin of PartH. 

Signs are arbitrary the firft time they are employ* 
ed, which is the reafon perhaps that fome imagine 
they can have no chara&er. But I would fain know 
whether it be not natural for every nation to com- 
bine their ideas according to their own peculiar ge- 
nius; and to conned a certain fund of principal 
ideas with different adventitious notions, according 
as they are differently affe&ed. Now thefe combina- 
tions authorized by time and cuftom. are properly 
what conftitutes the chara&er of a language. It 
may be more or lefs diffufed •, for this depends on 
the number and variety of the expreffions received, 
and on its analogy, which affords the means of in- 
venting new phrafes when wanted. But it is not in 
the power of man intirely to change this chara&er. 
As foon as he departs from it, he fpeaks a foreign 
tongue, and ceafes to be underftood. It is the work 
of time to produce fuch confiderable changes, by 
reducing a whole nation to fuch circumftances as 
ihall engage them to confider things in quite a diffe- 
rent light. 

J> 161. It is in the writings of poets, that the cha- 
er of a language is mod ftrongly painted. Hence 
arifes the difficulty of tranflating thofe writings ; a 
difficulty fo great, that men of abilities oftentimes find 
it eafier to furpafs than to equal them. And indeed 
one might in drift truth affirm, that it is impoflible 
to make a good poetical tranflation : for the rcafons 
which prove that two languages cannot have the 
fame charafter, prove likewife that the fame thoughts 
can be feldom expreffed in both with the fame 
beauties. 

When I wasfpeaking of profody and tranfpofitions, 

I tnm~ 



Seft. i. Human Knowledge. 299 

I mentioned fomething relative to the fubjeft handled 
in this chapter, which it is needlefs here to repeat. 

% 162. From this hiftorical account every body 
may fee, that to a perfon well acquainted with 
languages, they are a pi&ure of the character and 
genius of every nation. He may lee in what 
manner the imagination firft made a combina- 
tion of ideas from prejudice and paflion : he may 
fee how a different ipirit arofe in every nation, 
in proportion as they had lefs communication with 
each other. But if the manners of a people in- 
fluenced language, the latter, as foon as its rules 
were afcertained by celebrated writers, had in its 
turn an influence on manners, and for a long time 
preferved to each people their peculiar charafte- 
riftic. 

§ j 63. Some perhaps will look upon this whole 

hiftory as a romance : but they cannot at lead deny 

its probability. I do not conceive that I have been 

often led aftray by the method here purfued : for my 

aim has been to advance nothing but upon a fuppo- 

fition, that every language has been formed after the 

pattern that immediately preceded it. In the mode of 

fpeaking by a&ion we have beheld the bloflbm, as it 

were, of articulate founds, and of the feveral contri- 

varices that may be ufed to exprefs our thoughts : we 

have obferved the circumftances proper for ripening 

this bloflbm ; and we have not only perceived thefe 

arts to rife from thence, but we have likewife traced 

their progrefs, and explained their different chara&ers. 

In a word we feem to have plainly demonftrated, 

that thofe things which to us appear fo extremely 

lingular, were mod natural in their time, and that 

nothing 



goo Origin of Part II. 

nothing has happened but what we had reafon to 
cxpcGt. 

SECTION II. 

Of method. 

FR O M the knowledge we have acquired of the 
operations of the mind, and of the caule* of 
their progrels, we are now to learn the condud which 
ought to be obferved in the inveftigation of truth. 
Before this it was impoffible to frame a good me- 
thod -, but now it feems to prefent itfelf, and to be 
a natural confequence of our refearches. It will fuf- 
fice to develop fome of the reflexions difperfed 
throughout this work. 



CHAP. I. 

Of the firft Caufe of error 9 and of the origin of truth. 

§ i . A Great many philofophers have very elo- 
JLjL quently expofed a multitude of errors, 
which are attributed to the fenfes, to the imagi- 
nation, and the paffions : but they cannot flatter 
themfelves with having reaped all the benefit they 
expe&ed from .their performances. The imperfec- 
tion of their theory renders it of very little ufe. 
The imagination aad the paffions take ibch a variety 

of 



Se&. 2« Human Knowledge. 301 

of turns, and depend fo ftrongly on conftitution* 
time, and circumftances, that it is impoffible to 
difcover the feveral fprings which they employe 
and it is natural for each perfon to flatter himfelf 
that he is not of the number of thofe on whom they, 
have impofed. 

Like a perfon of a weak conftitution, who as foon 
as recovered from one illnefs immediately falls into 
another, the mind, inftead of quitting, oftentimes 
only changes its errors. To cure the former of 
all his ailments, would require him to be new 
moulded :, in like manner to recover the latter 
from all its weakncfles, would require a new dock 
of ideas, and inftead of loling time about each 
particular complaint, we fhould endeavour to re- 
move the original caufe. 

§ 2. This caufe we fhall find to be the habitude of 
reafoning on things, of which we have either no ideas 
at all, or fuch as are but very indeterminate. It is 
proper to inquire into the fource of this habitude, in 
order to make a thorough difcovery of the origin of 
error, and to know with what preparation we ought 
to undertake the ftudy of philofophy. 

§ 3. While we are yet in the ftate of childhood, and 
incapable of reflexion, we arc intirely employed about 
our wants. The objedts in the mean time make 
deep impreffions on us, as they meet with no refift- 
ance. The organs are perfected by very flow de- 
grees, reafori advances ftill more flowly, and we fill 
our heads with fuch ideas and maxims as chance and 
education offer. When we come to an age in which 
the mind begins to arrange its thoughts, we continue 
to fee only thofe things with which we have been long 

2 acquainted. 



3d Origin o* Partlt- 

acquainted. Hence we make no difficulty to be- 
lieve that they exift, and are of fuch a nature, becaufe 
it appears natural to us that they fhould exift, and be 
of fuch a nature. They are fo ftrongly imprinted in 
our brain, that we cannot think they do hot exift, or 
that they exift in a different manner. Hence arifes 
that indifference about knowing things to which we 
are accuftomed, and thofe emotions of curiofity for 
every thing that has the appearance of novelty. 

§ 4. When we begin to refl'eft, we do not perceive 
in what manner the ideas and maxims, which we 
find in our minds, could be introduced there ; nor 
do we recolleft that we were ever without them : 
confequently we enjoy them in full fecurity. How 
defe&ive foever they be, we take them fi^r felf-evi- 
dent notices •, we give them the name ot^eafon, of 
Ught % of nature* of innate* of principles ingraved> and 
imprinted on the mind, We rely fo much the more 
willingly on thefe ideas, as we think, that if they led 
us aftray, God would be the caufc of error, becaufe 
we confider them as the only means he has given u$ 
to arrive at the truth. Thus it is that being fa* 
miliarly acquainted with fome particular ideas, we 
fancy them to be principles of the utmoft evidence. 

§ 5. What accuftoms us to this inaccuracy, is the 
manner in which we form ourfelves to language. 
We do not arrive at the age of reafbn, till long af- 
ter we have contra&ed the habit of fpeech. Ex- 
cepting words affigned to the difcovery of our wants, 
it is generally owing to chance that we have had oc- 
cafion to hear fome founds rather than others, and it 
is chance alio that has determined the ideas we have 
annexed to them. If on iefle&ing but ever fo little 
on the children we fee, we were to recoiled the ftate 

through 



Sc6l. 2. Human Knowledge! $oj 

through which we ourfelves hare pafied, it would 
convince us that there can be nothing more inaccu- 
rate than the common ufe we make of words. This 
is not at all furprizing. We heard fome expreflions, 
whofe fignification, though determined by cuftom, 
was fo complex, that we had neither experience nor 
fagacity fufficient to apprehend it : others we heard, 
which never conveyed twice the fame idea, or which 
were even void of all fenfe. Tp judge of the inca- 
pacity we were under of ufing them with difcern- 
ment, we have only to take notice of the frequent 
difficulty we find even at prefent of doing it. 

§ 6. And yet the cuftom of joining figns to things 
was become fo natural to us, when we were not as . 
yet in a condition of eftimating their value, that we 
have ufed ourfelves to refer the names even to the 
reality of the obje&s, believing they perfectly ex- 
plained their eflence. We came to imagine that 
there are innate ideas, becaufe fome of them are the 
fame in ail men : we fhould have certainly judged 
that our language is innate, if we had not known 
that other nations fpeak quite differently. It feems 
that in all our inquiries our chief endeavour is to find 
new expreflions, which as foon as we have com- 
pafled, we fancy ourfelves to have acquired new 
knowledge. We are eafily perfuaded by felf-love, 
that we have a real knowledge of things, when we 
have long endeavoured to know them, and have long 
made them the fubjedt of converfation. 

§ 7. By tracing human error to the fource here 
mentioned, we reduce it to one fingle caufe, and 
fuch a caufe that we cannot honeftly deny but it has 
had a confiderable fhare in our judgments. Perhaps 

1 we 



304 Origin or Part II. 

we might oblige even the moft prejudiced philoso- 
phers to own that it his laid lie firft foundation of 
their fyftems : we need only to afk the queftkm m a 
proper manner. And. indeed if our paffions are the 
occafion of error, it is becaufc they abufe a vague 
principle, a metaphorical expreffion, or an equivo* 
cal term, to make application* from which we may 
deduce fuch opinions as flatter us. If we are mis- 
taken, thofe vague principles, thofe metaphors, and 
thofe equivocal terms, are therefore caufes prior to 
our paffions. . Coafequently, to detect the whole 
artifice, it will be fuificient to lay. afide this empty 
language. 

$ 8. If error owes its original to the defeft of 
ideas, or to ideas not properly determined, truth 
muft arife from determinate ides. ' Of this we have 
a proof in mathematics. On whatsoever fubjed: we 
happen to have accurate ideas, they will always be 
fufficient to make us diftingutfh the truth : on the 
contrary, if we have no fuch ideas, in vain will it 
be for us to take all the precaution imaginable, we 
/hall only confound every thing. In a word, in 
metaphyfics we might proceed on fore ground with 
determinate ideas, and without them we fhould be 
loft even in arithmetic. 

§ 9. But how come arithmeticians to have inch 
accurate ideas ? becaufe knowing in what man- 
ner they are framed, they are always able to com- 
pound or decompound them, in order to compare 
them according to their relatio s. It is by iefledfc- 
ing on the formation of numbers, that they have 
found out the rules of combinations. Such as have 
not made this reflexion, may calculate as exa&ly as 

others 



&e£L 2. Human Knowledge. 305 

others, becaufe the rules are fure ; but not knowing 
the reafons on which they are founded, they have no 
idea of what they are about, and are confequently 
incapable of difcovering new rules. 

§ 10. Now in all fciences whatsoever, as well as 
in arithmetic, the only way to come at the truth is 
by compounding and decompounding. If we do 
not generally reafon on thofe fciences with the fame 
precifion, it is becaufe we have not as yet found out 
fure rules for being always exa& in compounding or 
decompounding our ideas, which proceeds from our 
not knowing how to determine them. But perhaps 
the reflexions we have made on the origin of human 
knowledge, will furnilh us with the means of fup- 
plying this defeft. • 



CHAP. II. 

Of the manner of determining ideas, or their names. 

§ 1 1. T T is a received opinion, that words ought 
A to be underftood according to the common 
acceptation. And indeed one would at firft ima- 
gine there is no other way of making ourfelves un- 
derftood, than by fpeaking like other people. And 
yet I cannot help thinking that we ought to pur- 
fue a different method. As I have already obferved 
that to attain to any real knowledge we fliould be- 
gin with ftudying the fciences anew, without being 
fwayed by any prejudices whatfoever in favour of 
received opinions ; fo I apprehend that if we have 

X any 



306 Origin of Part II. 

any defign of rendering a language exa£t, we ought 
to reform it without regard to ufe or cuftom. 
Not that I would make it a law always to conned 
terms with ideas quite different from thofe which they 
commonly fignify : this would be a puerile and ridi- 
culous affedation. There is a conftant and uniform 
practice in regard to the names of fimple ideas ; and 
as to thofe of feveral notions which are familiar to 
the generality of people, we muft make no change 
in them: but when we come to complex ideas, 
which more particularly belong to metaphyfics and 
morals, nothing is more arbitrary, and oftentimes 
more capricious. Hence I have been induced to 
believe, that to render a language clear and precife, 
it would be requifite to take the materials of our 
knowledge once more in hand, and to frame new 
combinations of them, without any regard to thofe 
already made. 

§ 12. In examining the progreffion of languages, 
we have feen that cuftom fixes the meaning of words, 
merely by the circumftances in which we fpeak *. 
Qne would think indeed that it is mere chance which 
difpofes of thefe circumftances : but if we knew how 
to chufe them ourfelves, we might be able to perform 
on every occafion what chance makes us do only now 
and then, that is, exa&ly to determine the fignifi- 
cation of words. The precifion of a language muft 
be preferved by the fame means by which it was firft 
acquired. We ought therefore to begin with pla- 
cing ourfelves in fome fenfible circumftances, in ort 
der to frame figns for expreffing the ideas we firft 

* Second part, $ I . c. 9. 

z acquired 



Se&.i. Human Knowledge. 307 

acquired by fcnfation and reflexion ; and when by 
refledting on thefe, we come to have new ideas, we 
Ihould invent new names with a determinate fignifi- 
cation, by placing others in the fame circumftances 
as we ourfelves have been, and making them reflect 
in the very fame manner as we have done. Then the 
expreffions would perpetually fucceed the ideas ; con* 
fequently they would be clear and precife, fince they 
would only fignify what every body had experi- 
enced. 

§ 13. And indeed if a man was to begin with 
framing a language, and determined not to enter 
into any converfation, till he had fixed the meaning 
of his words by particular circumftances, he would 
not fall into thofe miftakes to which we are fo ge- 
nerally fubjeft. The names of fimple ideas would 
be clear, becaufe they would fignify only what he 
perceived in particular circumftances : the names of 
complex ideas would be precife, becaufe they would 
include only fuch fimple ideas as by particular cir- 
cumftances would be collefted in a determinate man- 
ner. In a word, if he wanted to add to, or retrench 
from his firft combinations, the figns he made ufe of, 
would preferve the cleamefs of the former, provided 
that what he added or retrenched was marked by new 
circumftances. If he had afterwards a mind to con- 
verfe with others, he would have occafion only to place 
them in the fame fituation as he himfelf had been,when 
he invented the figns, which would engage them tp 
affix the fame ideas as he had done to the words. 

§ 14. When I fpeak however of framing words, 
I do not mean that we fliould propofe quite new 
terms. Thofe authorized by cuftom appear to me 

X 2 generally 



308 Origin of Part IT. 

generally fufficient for converfing on all forts of fub- 
jcdts. It would be even prejudicing the jferfpicuity 
of language, if we were to invent words without any 
neceflity, efpecially in the fciences. I therefore 
fnake ufe of this way of fpeaking, becaufe I would 
not advife any one to begin with explaining terms, 
in order afterwards to define them, as is gene- 
rally pra&ifed : but, after having placed ourfelvea 
in circumftances in which we felt or faw fome 
objedt or other, we fhould give to that obje6t a 
name authorized by cuftom. This is an expedi- 
ent that feems natural enough, and proper moreover 
for expreffing the difference that appears between 
the manner in which I would have the fignification 
of words to be determined, and the definitions of 
philofophers. 

§ 15. I believe it would be of no manner of ufe 
to conftrain one's felf by employing only fuch terms 
as are adopted by the learned ; perhaps it would be 
better to borrow them from the common language. 
The one is not more accurate than the other ; yet I 
find in the latter one imperfe&ion lefs. It is that 
the generality of people not having refle&ed on the 
objefts of the fciences, are eafily convinced of their 
ignorance, and of the inaccuracy with which thejr 
make ufe of words. But philofophers, ever afhamed 
of having meditated to no purpofe, are blindly pre- 
judiced in favour of the pretended fruit of their 
fiudies. 

§ 1 6, The better to comprehend this method, we 
muft enter into further particulars, and apply to 
different ideas what we have been explaining in a 

general" 



Se£h 2. Human Knowledge. 309 

general manner. Let us therefore begin with the 
flames of Ample ideas. 

. The obfeurity and confufion of words proceeds 
from our giving them either too unlimited or too 
limited an extent, or even from our making ufe of 
them without any idea at all. There are a great 
many whofe fignification we do not comprehend in- 
tire -, but we take it only in part, and even increafe 
or diminifh it : from whence it happens that different 
combinations are formed, which have only the fame 
fign, and that the fame words, though fpoken by 
the fame perfon, have very different acceptations. 
Befides, as the ftudy of languages, however (lightly 
performed, ftill requires fome reflexion, we cut 
fhort, and refer the figns to realities, of which we have 
no idea. Such are, in the language of many philofo- 
phers, the terms being, fubftance, effence, &c. It is evi* 
dent that thefe defe&s can be attributed only to thofe 
ideas which are the workmanfliip of the mind. As to the 
fignification of the names of fimple ideas, which pro* 
ceed immediately from the fenfes, it is known at once*; 
nor can it have any imaginary realities for its objedt, 
becaufe it is immediately referred to fimple percep- 
tions, which are in the mind fuch indeed as they 
appear there to be. This kind of terms cannot 
therefore be obfcure. Their meaning is fo well ex* 
prefled by the feveral circumftances in which we 
naturally find ourfelves, that the very children can- 
not miftake them. For if they have but learnt a 
little to prattle, they are fure not to confound the 
names of fenfations, and they have as clear ideas of 
thefe words, white, black, red, motion, reft, fleafure, 
pain, as we ourfelves. With regard to the opera-% 

X 3 tions 



310 Origin of Part II. 

tions of the mind, they diftinguifli the names of 
them with the fame eafe, provided thefe are fimplc* 
and the reflexion of the children be turned that way 
by particular circumftances : for we fee from the uic 
they make of thefe words, yes, no y I willy I will 
twt, that they take their right meaning. 

§ 17. Some perhaps will objedt, that it is de- 
monftrable the fame objefts produce different fen- 
fations in different perfons, that we do not fee them 
under the fame ideas of magnitude, that we do not 
perceive them to have the fame colours, &c. 

My anfwer is, that notwithftanding all this we 
fhall ftill underftand one another fufficiently in re- 
gard to the end we propofe in metaphyfics and 
moral philofophy. As to the latter, there is no 
neceffity, for inftance, of our being fure that the feme 
chaftifements are productive of the fame fenfations 
of pain in regard to all mankind, or that the feme 
rewards are attended with the fame fenfations of 
pleafure. How great foever the variety with which 
the caufes of pleafure and pain affeft men of diffe- 
rent conftitutions, it is fufficient that the meaning of 
thefe words, pleafure and pain, is fo well fixed, that 
no body can miftake it. Now the daily circum- 
ftances of our lives, do not permit us to be miftaken 
in the ufe which we are obliged to make of thefe 
terms. 

In relation to metaphyfics it is fufficient that the 
fenfations reprefent extenfion, figure, and colours. 
The difference between the fenfations of two men, 
can occafion no confufion. If, for inftance, what 
I call blue* conftantly appears to me what others call 
green y and what I call green conftantly appears to 

me 



Se6l. 2. Human Knowledge. 311 

me what others call blue ; we fhall underftand one 
another as well, when we fay, the meadows are green* 
the Jky is blue, as if we had all the fame fenfations 
concerning thofe objefts. This is becaufe we mean 
then to fay nothing more, than that we have ac- 
quired a knowledge of the fky and the meadows 
under appearances which enter the mind by the 
fight, and which we call blue and green. If we wanted 
to make thefe words fignify that we have exadtly 
the fame fenfations, thefe propofitions would not 
become obfcure -, but they would be falfe, or at 
lead we fhould not have fufficicnt grounds to look 
upon them as certain. 

§ 18. We may therefore conclude, that the 
names of fimple ideas, as well thofe of fenfations 
as of the operations of the mind, may be very eafily 
determined by circumftances •, fince they are already 
determined fo exadtly, that even children cannot 
miftake them. A philofopher, in treating of fenla- 
tions, ought only to avoid two miftakes, to which 
our precipitate judgments render us fubjed : the 
one is to believe that the fenfations are in the ob* 
jefts ; the other is that now mentioned, viz. that 
the fame objefts produce the fame fenfations in all 
mankind. 

§ 19. When once the terms (ignifying the fimple 
ideas are exadfc, nothing can hinder us from deter- 
mining thofe which belong to the other ideas. For this 
end it is fufficient to fix the number and quality of 
thofe fimple ideas, of which a complex notion may be 
framed. The caufe of our meeting with fo many 
difficulties, on thefe oecaftons, in afcextaining the 
meaning of words, and that after having taken a 

X4 great 



312 Origin of PartIL* 

great deal of pains we are ftill obliged to leave 
them very equivocal and obfcure •, is our taking the 
words jufl: as we find them in common ufe, to 
which we want to conform. Moral philofophy 
efpecially affords fuch a number of compound ex-; 
preffions, and the ufe or cuftom which we confult, 
agrees fo little with itfelf, that it is impoffible but 
this method muft make us fpeak inaccurately, and 
fall into a great many contradi&ions. A perfon, 
that was to apply himfelf at firft to the consideration 
of none but fimple ideas, and colle&ed them by 
figns only -in proportion as they grew familiar 
to him, would not furely be expofed to the fame 
danger. The mod: compound words which he would 
have occafion to ufe, muft have always a deter- 
minate fignification, becaufe by chufing the fiipple 
ideas which he wanted to affix to them, and whofe 
number he took care to determine, he would con- 
fine the meaning of each to exa£t bounds. 

§ 20. But unlefs we renounce the vain fcience 
of thofe who refer words to realities which 
they know nothing of, it will avail tis but little 
to think of precifion of language. The reafoi* of 
arithmetic's being demonftrable in all its parts, i$ 
becaufe we have an exadt idea of a unit, and by 
means of the art with which we make ufe qf figns, 
we determine how often a unit is added to itfelf in 
the mod compound numbers. In other fciences 
they would fain by vague and obfcure expreflions, 
reafon on complex ideas, and difcover their rela- 
tions. To be convinced of the unreafonablefs of 
this conduct, we have only to think in what fituation 
-we Should be y if men could have thrown arithmetic 
' , into 



Se6t. 2. Human Knowledge. 313 

into the fame confufion as that which now prevails 
in metaphyfics and moral philofophy. 

§21. Complex ideas arc the workmanfhip of the 
jnind : if they are defective, it is becaufe we framed 
them ill : the only way to mend them, is to fr$me 
them anew. We muft therefore take the materials of 
knowledge again in hand, and fet about them as if 
we had never employed them before. For this 
purpofe, it will be of fervice in the beginning to 
affix to founds, as few fimple ideas as poffibly wo 
pan ; to chufe fuch as every body may perceive 
without difficulty, by placing themfelyes in the 
fame circumftances as we ; and to add no new ones, 
till the firft are grown familiar to us, and that we 
find ourfelves in fuch circumftances as are adapted 
for conveying them clearly and precifely to the 
mind. By tjiefe, means we fhftll accuftom ourfelves 
to jpin words to all forts of fimple ideas, be they 
never fo numerous. 

The connexion of ideas with figns, is a habit we 
cannot fqddenly contract, efpecially if it gives rife 
to very complex notions. It is late before children 
come to have any accurate idea of the numbers 
loDOj io;oqo» &q; They cannot acquire it but by Icing 
.and frequent practice, which learns them to multiply 
4 unit, and to determine each colle&ion by particular 
.names. In like manner, among the great number of 
•complex ideas belonging to. metaphyfics and moral 
philofophy, it would be impoflible for us to give any 
exaftnefs tq our terms, if .we fhould want, the very firft 
timfe and without any other precaution, to load them 
with fimple ideas. We fhould fometimes happen to 
take them in one fenfe and fometimes in another, 

becaufe 



a# * «i 



314 Origin or Part II. 

becatffe having imprinted the collections of ideas in 
a very fuperficial manner in our minds, we fhould 
oftentimes add or diminilh, without perceiving it. 
But if we began with affixing only a few ideas to 
words, and proceeded to the larger colle&ions in very 
great order, we (hould ufe ourfelves to render our 
ideas ftill more complex, without making them lefs 
determinate and certain. 

§22. This is the method I chofe to follow, efpe- 
cially in the third fe&ion of this work. I have not 
begun with explaining the names of the operations 
of the mind, in order afterwards to define them : 
but I took care to place myfelf in fuch circum- 
ftances as were beft adapted for making me obferve 
their progreffion; and in proportion as I framed 
fuch ideas as made any addition to thofe which had 
gone before, I fixed them by particular names, con- 
forming herein to cuftom fo often as I could do it 
without inconveniency. 

§ 23. There are two forts of complex ideas ; the 
one we frame from patterns ; the others are parti- 
cular combinations of fimple ideas which the mind 
makes by its own choice. 

It would be propofing to ourfelves a quite ufelefs 
and even dangerous method, to want to frame ideas 
of fubftances by an arbitrary aflemblage of ibme 
fimple ideas. This would be reprefenting fubftances 
to ourfelves that had no real exiftence ; would be 
colle&ing properties that were no- where to be found 
together •, would be feparating thofe which were 
united -, and it would be a very great hazard, if 
they were fometimes conformable to their patterns. 
To render therefore the names of fubftances clear 

and 



Se&. 2. Human Knowledge, 315 

and exadt, we muft confult nature, and never let 
them fignify more than thofe fimple ideas which we 
obferve to exift together. 

§ 24. There are likewife fome other ideas which 
belong to fubftances and are called abftraft. - I 
have already obferved that thefe are only particular 
notions, more or lefs fimple, to which we give our 
whole attention, by ceafing to think on the other 
fimple ideas which coexift with them. Let us ceafe 
to think on the fubftance of bodies as having a&ual 
colour and figure, and confider it only as fomething 
moveable, divifible, impenetrable, and of an indeter- 
minate extenfion, and we fhall have the idea of mat- 
ter ; an idea far more fimple than that of body, of 
which it is only an abftradtion, though a great 
many philofophers have been pleafed to realize it. 
If we afterwards ceafe to think on the mobility of 
matter, on its divifibility, and impenetrability, and 
refleft only on its indeterminate extenfion ; we (hall 
frame an idea of pure fpace which is ftill more 
fimple. The fame may be faid of all abftra&ions, 
whereby it appears that the names of the moft ab- 
ftradt ideas are as eafy to determine, as thofe of 
the fubftances themfelves. 

§ 25. To detetmine archetypal ideas, namely thofe 
relating to human adtions, to moral philofqphy, 
jurifpj-udence, and the liberal arts, we muft conduit 
ourfelves quite otherwife than irt determining the 
ideas of fubftances. Legiflators had no patterns, 
when firft they coljefted thofe fimple ideas, of which 
they compofed their laws ; and when they made 
mention of feveral human a&ions, before they had 
confidered whether there were any examples of them 

to 



•316 Orugin of PartH. 

to be found. Jn like manner the patterns of arts 
■esift no where but in the mind of the firft in-, 
venters. Subftances, fo far as they fall within 
oyr knowledge, are no more than particular collec- 
tions of propertie*, which it is not in our power ei- 
ther to unite or Separate, and which it is of ^ad- 
vantage to us to know, but as objeds that exift, and 
|n the manner a? they exift. Human adions are 
combinations' inceffantly varying, of which it fire* 
quently cpne^ms u$. to have fobae idea, before *we 
b^y e feen any patterns: of them,. Were we to frame 
GUjr id?as of them Ofily as experience inftruded us, 
it would be oftentimes too late. We are therefore 

* mm 

under a neceflity of behaving here in a. different 
manner ;. we unit? or feparate feme fimple ideas ac- 
^prditfg as Qur fantfy directs ; or we adopt the com- 
kjnatiorts already made by others. 
. $ ^6. There H this difference between the ideas of 
f^bfts^nces and archetypes, that we look upon the 
Jatt^r * s patterns to which we refer external objects, 
f whereas the former are no more than copies of what 
we perceive without ourfelves. For the truth of the 
former,, it is peceffary that the combinations of the 
mind be conformable to what we obferve in the ob* 
je<Sja : for the truth of the latter, it is fufficient that 
externally the combinations of them may poffibly be 
fuch as they are in our minds. The idea of juftia? 
would be true, even if there was no fuch thing as a 
juft a&ion,. hecaufe the truth of it confifts in a col* 
leftion of ideas, which does not at all depend on ex- 
ternal objefts. The idea of iron is no further true 
than as it is conformable to this metal, becaufe this 
(hould be its pattern. ■ . • . 

1 By 



By thcfc particulars concerning archetypes, one 
may eafily concei-V* thai it defends abfolutely on our 
felves to fix the fignification of their names, becaufe 
it is in our own power to determine the fimple ideas, 
whofe colle&ions we burfelves have framed. It is 
eafy alfo to conceive that others, will come into our 
w&y of thinking, provided we place them iri parti- 
cular circumftanfces, in which the fame fimple ideas 
Ihall be the (ubjed of their thoughts as they are of 
ours ; and wherein they fliall be engaged to unite 
them under the fame names as we have done. 
: Such are the means I had to offer, in order to pro-? 
mote as much as poflible the perfpicuity and precifi- 
on of language. I did not thirik there was a necef- 
fity for making any change in the names of fimple 
ideas, becaufe the fignification of them has appeared 
to me to be fufficiently determined by cuflom. With 
regard to complex ideas, they are framed fo very 
inaccurately, that we cannot be excufed from taking 
the materials of them once ipore in hand, and mak- 
ing new combinations of them, without any regard 
to thofe already framed. They are all the work- 
manfliip of the mind, as well the moft accurate,, as 
thofe which are leaft fo : if we have fucceeded in fome, 
we may therefore promife ourfelves fuccefs in the 
reft, provided we always proceed with the. fame cir- 
cumfpeition. 



C H A Pi 



51S Origin of Partfl. 

CHAP. III. 

Of the wrier which we ought to follow in the invefti- 

gation of truth. 

§ 27. T Cannot help thinking, but that a method 
X which has concluded us to one truth may 
lead us to a fecond, and that the belt mud be the 
lame for all fciences. It is therefore fufficient to 
refleft oft the difcoveries already made, in order to 
proceed in the exercife of our inventive powers. 
The moft fimple difcoveries are the fitteft for this 
purpofe, becaufe there is lefs trouble in obferving the 
feveral means that have been ufed : I fhall therefore 
borrow an example from the elements of mathema- 
tics, and fuppoie that we are juft in the cafe of learn- 
ing them the firft time. 

§ 28. We lhould doubtlefs begin with framing an 
idea of a unit ; and adding it feveral times to itfeif, 
we fhould form collections thereof, determinable by 
figns. This operation we fhould repeat, and there- 
by foon acquire as many complex ideas of numbers 
as we defired. We fhould afterwards refleft on the 
manner in which they are formed; we fhould obferve 
their progrefs, and infallibly learn the way of de- 
compounding them. Then we might compare the 
moft complex with the moft fimple, and difcover the 
properties of both. 

In this method the objeft of the operations of the 
mind would be only fimple ideas, or fuch complex 
notions as we had already framed, and with whofe 
origin we were perfe&ly acquainted. We fhould 

therefore 



Sc&/2. Human Knowledge. 319 

therefore find no difficulty in cjifcovering the firft re- 
lations of magnitudes. When once we knew thefe, 
it would be more eafy to perceive the relations that 
immediately follow them, and which would certain- 
ly lead us to the knowledge of others. Thus having 
begun with the- moft. fimple, we fhould infenfibly 
rife to the moft complex, and frame to ourfelves a 
fcries of ideas fo ftrongly connected with eaqh other, 
that we could never reach the moft diftant but by 
means of thofc which preceded them. 

§ 29. Other fciences, which are equally within 
the reach of the human underftanding, have no other 
principle than fimple ideas, which we receive by 
fenfation and reflexion. To acquire complex notioiis 
of them, our only method, as in the mathematics, 
is to make different colle&ions of the fimple ideas. 
We muft therefore follow the fame order in the pro- 
greilion of ideas, and ufe the fame precaution in the 
choice of figns. 

Againft this conduft there are a great many pre- 
judices-, but I have thought on the following me- 
thod to get rid of them. 

It is in our infancy that we imbibe thofe prejudi- 
ces which retard the progrefs of knowledge, and 
lead us into fo many errors. If God were to create 
an adult perfon, with organs fo perfedl, that the very 
firft moment of his exiftence he enjoyed the full ufe 
of reafon, this man would not meet with the fame 
difficulties as we in the inveftigation of truth. He 
would invent no figns but in proportion as he expe- 
rienced new fenfations, and made new reflexions. 
His firft ideas he would combine according to the 
circumftances in which he found himfelf - 9 he would 

determine 



§20 OxtGiit or Part IT. 

determine each cofle&ion by particular names ; and 
when he wanted to compare two complex notions, 
be might eaffly analyze them, becaufe he would meet 
with no difficulty in reducing them to the fimple 
ideas of which he himfelf had framed them. Thus 
as he invented words only after he had framed his 
ideas, thefe would be always exa£Hy determined, fo 
that his language would not be fubjeft to the obfeu- 
rity and ambiguity which prevails in ours. Let 
us therefore imagine ourfelves in the place of this 
man, let us pafs through every circumftance in 
which he muft be, let us fee with him what he fees, 
form the fame reflexions, acquire the fame ideas, 
analyze them with the fame care, exprefs them with 
the like figns, and frame to ourfelves in fome mea- 
fure a new language. 

§ 30. Reafoning, according to this method, only 
from fimple ideas, or from fuch complex notions as 
are the workmanfhip of the underftanding, we fhall 
have two advantages : the firft is, that being ac- 
quainted with the origin of thofe ideas on which we 
meditate, we (hall not advance the lead ftep without 
knowing where we are, how we got thither, and how 
we (hall find our way back. The fecond is, that on 
.every fubjeft we (hall plainly fee the boundaries of 
Dur knowledge ; which will be as foon as the fenfes 
ceafe to furnifii us with ideas, and when the mind, 
of courfe, is no longer capable of forming the leaft 
notion. Now nothing feems to me of greater im- 
portance, than to difcern thofe fubjefts on which 
our inquiries may be attended with fuccefs, from 
thofe where we muft inevitably mifcarry. For want 
of knowing how to make this difference, philofo- 

phers 



Se£t.2. Human Knowledge, 321 

phers have frequently trifled away their time in ex- 
amining infolvable queftiofis, when they might have 
employed it in ufeful refearches. Of this we have 
an example in the great pains they give themfelves 
to explain the eflence and nature of beings. 

§ 31. All truths whatfoever are limited to the re- 
lations fubfifting betwixt fimple ideas, complex 
ideas, and a fimple and a • complex idea. By the 
method here propofed, we fhall be able to avoid the 
miftakes which fome are apt to commit in this in- 
quiry. 

Simple ideas can never occafion any miftake. All 
errors proceed either from our depriving an idea of 
fomething that belongs to it, for want of feeing all 
Its parts; or from our adding fomething that does 
not belong to it, through a precipitate judgment of 
the imagination that it contains fomething which it 
does not. Now we can take nothing from a fimple 
idea, fince we do not perceive any parts in it; nor 
can we add any thing to it, fo long as we confider 
it as fimple, for then it would lofe its fioE>plicity v 
- It is only in the ufe of complex ideas that a per-' 
ifon may be miftaken, either in adding or diminish- 
ing fomething without foundation. But fuppofing 
them framed with the circumfpedtion above required* 
the way to avoid miftakes will be to make new com- 
binations of them; for thereby we fhall fee what 
they contain, and nothing more nor lefs. Then, 
what comparifons foever ure make of fimple and 
complex ideas, we (halt never attribute any other 
relations to them, than, thofe which they really 
contain. 

' § 32. TbM 



3*2 OjtIGtN OF Put- If. 

§ 32. The obfcurity and ponfijfian which prevail* 
in the writings of philofophers, arifes from their not 
fufpe&ing that there are any ideas wbipb arc thp 
workmanfhip of the mind, or if they fufpeffc it, ffoi& 
an incapacity of difcovering their real origin, Thp 
prejudices they had imbibed, th?t all jde*s ^re inr^te, 
or come from what fource they will, tfof they arp 
properly framed, thefe prejudices, I %, induce 
them to believe that they ought nqt to $t& fhofe 
ideas, but to. take them juft a$ they happen to offer. 
As there is no poflibility of making a good aiydyfip 
of any other ideas than thofe which we. puffeives 
have regularly framed, their analyfes, or ftfch$r de- 
finitions, are generally defe&iye. They extend Of 
reftrain the fignification of their fierms without any 
juft reafon, they change it unknowingly, or they 
even refer the words to indefertnin?** i^tion^ a#d 
to unintelligible beings. He&ce a le{ me beg leav$ 
to repeat it, there is a ncceffity of m^iki^g a new 
combination, beginning with the mo$ fim.pk ideas 
tranfmitted by the fenfes, and framing thtm intp 
complex notions, which combined in their tyra, will 
-be productive of others and fo on. This method 
Will fere us from failing into error, provided w$ 
ftJEgn diftin& names for* each colle#4oA, 

§ 33. Des Cartes was in the right to tjiiftk that 
the only way of attaining real knowledge, was tp 
begin wkh rejafting all thofc ideas whkh we ima- 
gine we have acquired: but he was miftajtea ift 
thinking that it was Efficient to doubt of them- Tq 
doubt whether two and two make four, whether 
man is a rational animal, is having ideas q£ two, 
four, man, aaim*l* *nd rational. A doubt there- 
fore 



5e&. 2. Human KnowlJdge. 323 

fpre leaves the ideas ftill fubfifting as they are v con- 
fe*|uently as error proceeds from our ideas having, 
jfefica wrong framed, a doubt cannot prevent them* 
U may indeed make us fufpend our judgments for 
£ frvhilfc; but we (hail never be able to get rid of our 
ftate of uncertainty, except by confulting thofe ideas 
which it has not deftroyed ; and of courfe, if they 
Ja£ vague and indeterminate, they will bewilder us 
$s before. Des Cartes ? s doubting is therefore to ne 
pilffpofc. That it is like wife impra&icable, every. 
mm ? s experience may convince him : for if we com- 
pare foine familiar and very determinate ideas, we 
Atidl-fiod it impoffible to doubt of the relations be- 
fiwcgn them. Such ace, for inftance, thofe of num- 
bfirs. 

§ 34. ff this philofopher had not been prejudiced 
in feyour of innate ideas, he would have feen that 
fbe ooijr way of railing a new ftock of knowledge, 
is to deftroy the old ideas chemfelves, in order to 
jnake new combinations, as we receive them front 
naftiue, that is, by fenfatioru Hence a great diffe- 
tence may be obferved between faying with him, that 
frt tmtft begin with the moil iimple things, and fay- 
iag with me, chat we ihould begin with the fimpleft 
ideas . transmitted by the fenies. With him the moft 
ftraplc things are innate ideas, general principles and 
abftradt notions,which he looks upon as the fource of 
human knowledge. With me the moft fimple ideas 
are the firft partic r ular notices that we receive from the 
fcofes^ajad from reflexion. Thefe are the materials of 
knowledge, which we occafionaUy combine in order 
to frame complex idftae, whole relations we dHcover by 
analyfis.. I do not lay only that: we otrght to begirt 

Y a with 



324 Origin of Part II, 

vtith the mod fimple ideas, but with the moft fimple 
ideas tranjmtttd by the fenfes, which I add to the cue} 
they may not be confounded with abftraft notions, 
por with the general principles of philofophers. 
•The idea of folidity, for inftance, complex as it is, 
is neverthelefs one of the fimpleft that we receive 
immediately from the fenfes. In proportion as we 
^decompound it, we frame ideas ftill more fimple, 
and which differ in the fame proportion from thofe 
*ranfmitted by the fenfes. We fee it diminifh in 9 
furface, in a line, and intirely difappear in a point*. 
§ 35. There is ftill another difference between 
Dcs Cartes's method and that which I have here 
attempted to eftablifh. According to him we muft 
begin with defining things, and look upon the de- 
finitions as principles by which their prQperties 
are difcovered. On the contrary, I think, that we 
pught to begin with inquiring into their properties ; 
an opiniqn which feems to be well founded. If the 
jiotions we acquire are no more, as we have lhewn f 
than different combinations of fimple ideas, which 
experience has taught us to colled under particular 
names ; it is much more natural to frame them, by 
fearching for the ideas in the fame order as we re- 
ceived them from nature, than to begin with defini- 
tions, that we may afterwards deduce the different 
properties of things. 

' § 36. From this detail it appears that the order 
we pught to purfue in the investigation of truth, is 
that which I have already had occafion to mention, 

* I fake the wprd$, fyrfap, lint, pint, in the fignificatioa 
fffed by geometricians. ~ < 

wlier* 



&£&• £ MuM'AN KNOWLEDGE. $2$ 

when fpeaking of the analytic method. It confifts 
in afcending to the origin of our ideas, ih unravell- 
ing their formation^ and in compounding or decom- 
pounding them different ways, in Order to compare 
them irt every light that is capable of (hewing theif 
relations. I fhall mention a word or (Wo concern- 
ing the cohdutt trhich I think we ought to obferve^ 
in preparing our minds, as much as pbflible, for 
the difcovery of truth. 

§ 37. We fhould begin with examining our pfe- 
ferit notions in regard to the fubjeft in hand, with 
unraveling their origin* and exa&ly determining 
our ideasr. For one truth which we hit Upon by 
chance, and cannot even be lure of, We run a rilky 
by having only indeterminate ideas, of falling into a 
thoufand errors. 

When the ideas afe determined, we fhould com-* 
pare them. But as we do not always meet with the 
fame facility in making comparifons, it is of great 
confequence to know how to avail ourfelvci of what- 
ever is capable of giving us any affiftance. It fhould 
therefore be obferved, that according to the habi- 
tudes which the mind has acquired, there ii nothing 
but what can help us to reflect. That is, theft are 
no obje£bs with which we cannot connedt our ideas* 
and confequently there are none improper fot 
ftrengthning the memory, and improving the fancy; 
The whole eonfifts in knowing how tQ frame thefe 
connexions according to the end we propofe, and tor 
our prcfent circumftances. Were we matters of this 
art we fhould not ftand in need of the precaution of 
fome philofophers, in retiring into deferts, and fhut- 
ting themfelves up in caves, there to meditate bf 

Y $ lamp* 



526 Origin of PartH. 

lamp light. Neither day, nor night, neithet noife* 
nor filence, nothing in fine can difturb a perfbn who 
has acquired the habit of thinking. 
. $ 38. In pnoof of this we need only take notice 
of two fe#$ which a great mafcy perfons mu& cei* 
tainly have experienced, Suppofe we betake o6r* 
felves to feme gloomy recefs, the leaft npife or 
light that comes unexpected, fhall befufficient tordi* 
vert our thoughts from the fubjc£fc of our medStatb 
on. The reafon is, the ideas about which we are 
iftnployed are naturally conne&ed with our prefent 
fituation : hence we are no fboner follicited by per- 
ceptions contrary to this fituation, than the order ofc 
ideas is difturbed. The fame may be obferved in 
quite a different fuppofitiori. Let me refledt on a»y 
particular fubjedt by day-light, and in the mktft df 
hurry and noife •, the fudden ecfiation of light or 
noife is fufficient to interrupt my reflexion* In xkA& x 
as in the former cafe, the^ new perceptions are quite 
contrary to my prefent fituation; Therefore the fad* 
den itapreffion muft likewifc break the thread of my 
ideas. 

This fecond experiment (hews that light and noife 
arc no hindrance to reflexion: on the contrary, I 
I think they might be rendered greatly conducive to 
this, by cuftom and habit. Properly fpeakihg, 
nothing but an unexpeSed change is capable of inter- 
rupting our attention. I fay umxpeatd\ for let the 
changes around us be what they will, if they prefent 
us with nothing but what we ought naturally to ex- 
peft, they only make us apply ourfelvcs rrtore m- 
tenfly to the fubjeft before us. What a variety erf 
things do not we fbmetimes meet with in the fame 
t land- 



9d&.2* Human Knowledge. 327 

kndfkip ? Fruitful hills, barren ptiins, rocks that 
fear theft lofty heads above the clouds, woods where 
noife ami filence, light and darknefs, fucceed each 
frther alternately* flee. And yet daily experience 
ftiews, that poets are infpired by this variety * for, as 
It is ccftiM&ed with the mod florid images of poetry* 
k mu(fc needs revive thofe agreeable ideas. The 
pfofpeft, for example, of a fruitful hill, renews the 
ktea of the tinging of birds, of purling rills, of 
hippy fwains, of theif pleafant and quiet life, their 
Icftrei, their conftancy, their fidelity, the innocenofc 
fcf their tfianriers, &c. There are indeed a variety 
of examples, by which we might prove that men 
think only as they are afiifted by the objeds which 
follicic their fenfes, or by thofe whofe images thft 
Imagination calls iftto view. 

§ 3£. It has been already obferved that the ana- 
lytic method is the only mean or inftruraent of in* 
ventioft. But feme perhaps will aik me, by what 
mean or inftrument are we to difcover die analytic 
teethod kfelf ? I anfwer, by the connexion of ideas* 
When I want to refleft upon an objeft, in the firifc 
place I obferve that the ideas I have of it are connect- 
ed with thofe 1 have not, and which I am in fearch 
after. I obferve next, that the one and the othdr 
may be combined a great many ways, and accord- 
ing as the combinations vary, there is more or ids 
connexion between the ideas. I may therefore fup- 
pofe a combination m which the connexion is as 
great as it poffibly can be; and fevcral others m 
which tiie connexion gradually diminishes, till it 
ceafcs to be fenfibk. If I view an obje& on that 
fide which has no fenfible connexion with the ideas 

Y 4 Iain 



328 Origin of Partll. 

I am fieking, I fhall find nothing. If the con- 
nexion is fuperficial, I fliall difcover very little ; my 
conceptions fhall feem to be no more than the con- 
fequence of an intcnfe application, or even the effe£k 
of chance, and a difcovery of this nature will afford 
me very little affiftance towards making any further 
progrefs. But let me confider an objed on that fide 
which is moft connected with the ideas I am invefK- 
gating, the whole fhall be fully difcovered to my 
view -, the analyfis fhall be almoft without any trou- 
ble on my fide -, and in proportion to the progrefs I 
make in the knowledge of truth, I fhall be able to 
difcern even the minuteft fprings of my underftand- 
ing, and thereby to learn the art of making new ana- 
lyfes. 

The whole difficulty confifts in knowing how to 
begin in order to find thofe ideas according to their 
principal connexion. I fay that the combination in 
which this connexion is found, is that which agrees 
with the origin and formation of things. Confe- 
quently we are to begin with the firft idea which 
muft have been produdtive of all the reft. Let us 
come to an example. 

The fchoolmen and the Cartefians were ftrangers 
both to the origin and formation of our ideas: 
for the principle of innate ideas, and the vague no- 
tion of the underftanding, with which they fet out, 
have no connexion with this difcovery. Mr. Locke 
had better fuccefs, becaufe he began at the fenfes, 
and if he has left any thing imperfedl in his work, 
it muft be owing to his not having developed the 
firft progreflion of the operations of the mind. I 
have attempted what this philofopher forgot, by 

afcending 



Se&. 2f # Human KnowjLEDge! 329 

afcending to the firft operation of the mind, and have* 
I think, not only given a complete analyfk of the 
understanding, but likewife difcovered the ahfolute 
neceffity of figns, and the principle of the connexi- 
on of ideas* 

We cannot however make ufe of the method I 
propofed, without ufing every fort of precaution not 
to advance a ftep but in proportion as we have ex- 
actly determined our ideas. If . we pafs too fu- 
perficially over fome, we fhall find ourfelves retard- 
ed by fuch obftacles as it will be impoffible for us 
to furmount, without returning to our firft notions, 
in order to render them more determinate. 

§ 40. Every man muft, fome time or other, have 
had fome invention of his own, where his thoughts 
are not borrowed, though perhaps they contain no- 
thing new. 'Tis then we ought to enter into our- 
felves, and reflect on what we inwardly experience. 
We ihould obferve the impreflions made on the 
fenfes, the manner in which the mind was affe&ed, 
the progrefs of its ideas, in a word, every circum- 
ftance that could give rife to a thought which intirely 
proceeded from our own reflexion. If we would 
but repeat this obfervation fcveral times, we fhouki 
furely difcover the natural conduct of the mind. 
Confequently we fhould know the means moft pro- 
per for making it refledt ; and if it contradted any 
habit contrary to the exercife of its operations, we 
might gradually cure it. 

§ 41. We fhould eafily acknowledge our faults, 
if we could but obferve that the greateft men were 
guilty of the like. Philofophers would have fuppli- 
ed our general incapacity of felf-reflexion, if they 

had 



$3<jr Obi6tU of Part If, v 

had left us the hiftoiy 6f the pttopth of theif minds, 
Des Cartes indeed has done it, And this is one of the 
great obligation* we owe him. Inftead of attacking 
the fchoolmen dkt&ty, he reprefeiits the time when 
he was fwayed by the fame prejudices, he mentforti 
the difficulties he had to encounter before he could 
get rid of them* he lays down rules for a much 
plainer method than any ufed before his time, he 
hints at the difcoveries which he imagines hithfetf 
to have made, and by this whole artifice he p repare s 
tile mind for embracing die 6pinion whteh he pur- 
pofed *> eftabfcfti *. I am apt to think that this 
contrivance greatly contributed to the revGfution oc- 
fcaftoned by this phflofopher. 

$ 42. Nothing tan be of greater importance than 
to conduit children in the maimer in which I obferr- 
ed we ought to condfcft ourfebw. Even in play- 
i&g wkh them we might make them improfe the 
habit of their intelle&ual operations, as much as they 
are capable of being improved, if every objc&, as 
we have juft now obferved, be fit for this end. We 
/night even infenfiWy bring them to contract a habit 
o£ fubmitting thefe operations to regularity and or- 
der. .When years and circumftances came afterwards 
to change the objefts of their amufements, their 
minds would be perfe&ly formed, fo as to poflefe, 
at an early period of life, a degree of fagacity,whicli 
by any other method they would very late, or 
perhaps never acquire. Children are not there- 
fore to be taught Latin, hiftory, or geography, 
&c. Of what advantage can thefe fciences be at an 

f See Kid method* 



ge&. 2. Human KhoWdbG e. 331 

• 

8ge ki tfrhich tbdf are ite Jet irtcapa&le of thittklttg ? 
For ftiy part, I j&y t&ofe infaffts yhofe leiitfjftfg is 
admired, foikfedfrg that fontt tirtifc or- otter the tff- 
tBhary level of their capacity, tfr'pfcrirajJs theft chrti T 
nfcfe, will cifcfe a* great 4 futprizc. t fefeat it pfiti 
rtort, that the principal point & td improve tK6 h&- 
bh of the dffiimt&p€ta&dtts of their ffiiftds-, fib* 
fteed tffe go in fearch of o6je6ts%rfeigh to thrif yeatt, 
tfrfefen this eAd riWy ifcry *M1 btf attained even altiidtf 
tffcir innocent AmafetfitfrtS. 

§ 4 J. It has been fiteqiiently the Mfjeft of inquiry 
atttongphilofoph#s,whethe* there be a firft prihcipte 
of human knowledge : fomfc haft fuppo&d but one, 
ib*ae two, others more. Every man, I think, iftay 
by his owh experience be ftrffc 6f the truth of that 
principle on which tki* W6ik is founded. I*erhapi 
ttfe foall e*en be contimttcf that the connexion of 
idttt* is *khdrtt compariftm thfc frttipleft, the clear- 
*&, ahd eve* tfce- moft fruitful ptihciple. At this 
very time when its influence was not obfrrved, ^e 
were indebted to it for every improvement made by 
the human underftanding. 

§ 44. Such were the reflexions I had made on 
method when I began to read my lord Bacon's 
works. I was afterwards as much pteafed that my 
jRQftions happened to coincide With this great man's 
on 4bme particular points, as I was furprized that 
the Cartefians had borrowed nothing from him. No 
man was better acquainted with the caufe of human 
error : for he perceived that there was an original 
defeft in the framing of thofe ideas which are the 
workmanfhip of the mind ; and confequently that 
to advance in the inveftigation of truth, new com- 
binations 



33« Origin of ParfIL 

bijiations are requifite. This is an advice he often 
repeats +. But how was it poffible for him to bs 
heard ? The public were fo ftrongly prejudiced in 
favour of the fchool jargon, and of innate ideas* 
that they treated the regeneration of . the human un- 
derftanding as a chimerical projedt ? . The method , 
propofed by his lordfhip was top perfeft to produce 
a revolution; that of Des Cartes,, by letting fome 
errors continue, was fure of fuccefe. ; Farther, tj*e 
♦Englifh philofopher had fuch weighty employments 
as hindered him . from putting his own theory in 
practice j confequently he was obliged to be fatisfied 
with giving advice, which rauft have. made but a 
flight impreflion on fuperficial minds* Des Gartesy 
on the contrary,, delivered himfelf up intirely to 
philofophic ftudies, and having a more lively and 
more fruitful imagination, in the room .of former 
errors he fometimes introduced others of a more im- 
pofing nature, which contributed not a little to his 
reputation. 

.. -J- Nemo, he fays, adhue tanta mentis conflaniia fcf rigore in- 
ventus eft, ut decreverit IS fibi impofuerit, theorias fcf notiomi 
communes fenitus abolere, iff intelleBum abrofum Csf aquum ad far - 
ticularia de integro applicare, Itaque ilia ratio humana quam hd* 
bemus, ex multa fide, IS multo etiam cafu, nee non ex puerilibuf^ 
quas prima haufimus, notionibus, farrago qtuedam eft £ff congeries^ 
Quod ft quis a'tate matura IS fenfibus integris; Cjf mente repur- 
gata t fe ad experientiam & ad parti cul aria de integro applicet, de 

eo melius fperandum eft Non eftjpes nifi in regenerations 

fcientiarum; ut ea fci licet ab experientia certo or dine excitentur 6r 
rurfus condantur : quod adbuc fafium ejfe aut cogttatum, nemo, ut 
arbitramur, ajfirmaverit . This is one of the aphorifms of thtf 
work which I mentioned in my introduction. 

2 chap; 



• j5e&,2. Human K-No-WLieDGE^ 3 3 5 






C H A P. IV. 

V 

Oftbeofder which ought to be followed in the cxpojf. 

- tion of truth. 



1 -i ' 



1 :» 



§ 45. TJ* VERY body kngrtvs that an author ought 
< T JQ/ -to fhdW no appearance of art •, but it is 
ndt fo well known perhaps that it requires great arjt 
to make this cowcedlment. There are many writers^ 
whd, to render themfelves more eafy and natural, 
think it ridt right to fubmit to order. And yet if b^ 
the word natural we are to' underftandnature - £x- 
empt from blemSfh, it is evident that' we ought' not 
to pretend to imitate her by axarelefs irregularity, 
iior to throw off 1 the appearance of art till we have 
learnt to avoid L fo unpardonable a' defeat. 
• $46; Other writers there are, who endeavour to 
diftinguifli themfelves by method' and order, care- 
fully dividing and fubdividing their works: but we 
are offended with the too glaring appearance of art. 
The more they Sim at order, 1 'the r more they grow 
infipid, ; and obfcitfe: becaufe thfy are incapable'of 
chufirig'the order mbft naturalto the fubjedt befoffe 
them-. . If they hacl pitched upon this, theywouM 
haVe eonveyed r their thoughts in fo clear and fii 
limple a manner, that' the reader would have unf 
derftood them too eafily, to make the leaft queftioii 
of tke pains they 'had take/i. We are inclined to 
believe things eafy or difficult to others, according 
as they are" either the one or the other in refpefl: t< 
gurfelyes, and we naturally jud^e of the difficulty a 

writer 



jj4 Osigi* or _ Paftg. 

writer his had to explain himlelf, from that which 

we find to underlland Mm. 

$ 47. Natural order can never do any harm : it is 
ltquiiite, even in works written with the fpirit of 
enthufiafm, for example* 10 p&s : not that there is 
a neccfiity for any methodical reafoning in thefe 
poems; but we ought to comply with the «rdes p 
which the ideas cfcfcriptive of Wjk jpaflioa are ran- 
ged And indeed here, I think,, lies the whelp 
/orce and beauty of this kindof poetry. 

With regard xp philosophic works, .jjptjiing \m 
ord*r will enable m juphor 10 perceive fome t^uraji 
tj^t have been fr Jgppep, f>r others which fcivi «c* 
feeen foflipjyttly examined. This I hare often roy«- 
fc\f*^^c&*. Jte pDeftnt$fl&y, for efgffipjfe 
w*s* ffoJAcd, ^od yet J did not eypuhen ypdq&mi 
the principle of. (he xwneyion of idqu in^ts fu^ ex- 
jenf. This was owing ifltireiy *o a paf£*gp of aljput 
twppagos^ which was not in its right place, * 

§ 48. We arc pleafcd witfc orcjer, for 9 vgpf 
plaioreaibn: ir,fe^ things in this feme light a#4 
view; it cooncfts. {hem 5 and by thus piomotwg {he 
habit of intellectual pperations, if pnables us eafily «? 
jemark fuch relations as are of any iippoi*ance ajp w 
jtp perceive in cj^i^, tb# *#& fis. p*r ple?fiH3P 
ought to iocreaft, y* proportion fs we^ore eafijf 
conceive th^de jhiqg* whicji it is our inteceft ^ 

Wantof order, jnay be lijcewife £yd to pleafe fomer 
£imes, but ttu$ 4pppnds on particular affe&iops of 
fhe mind. In thpj(e moments of rev^ry, vhea- ve 
arc foo indolent tp employ our thoughts for any cpn- 
fidcra,ble time on the fame fubjed, but are amufed 

with 



Se<5t. *-. Human Knowj-edgeJ 335 

with rambling ide^s * a wide feld e for inftanee, fli^JJ 
afford us more pkafure than the fineft garden. This 
is becaufe the irregularity of the field feems tp agrep 
better with our prefent ideas, a»d humourp our r&- 
very, by hindering us from dwelling on the &me 
thought. This affe&ipn of the mind is fbipetimep 
delicious, ei]ppcially when we enjoy it after our fa- 
culties have been for any time on the ftretcJv 

There am fame affedtions of the mind which may 
be faid to fayour the reading pf looie and unconnect- 
ed eflays. Sometimes, for example, I read Mon- 
taigne with a great deal of pleafare; at other tkxiep 
J confefe I cannot bear him, I know not whether 
others have experienced the feme : for my part I 
fhould not like to be condemned to read only fuch 
writers. Be that as it may, therp ii tins advantage 
in order, that it constantly pleafesj whereas irregular 
rity pleafes only now and thep, and there are 09 
certain rules for rendering it agreeable. It wa$ there* 
fore Montaigne's good fortune to fucceed in this 

kind of writing 5 but it would be preemption to ate 
tempt to imitate luou 

$ 50. The intent of xyder & petfptwity. Wjj 
pUjgjht thenefiarc to avoid prpljasity, becaufe it is txr&e 
fome - 9 dignefEon*, becaufe jftey interrupt our attea* 
(ion ; too frequent divifona and tiibdivifions, be* 
cwfe they con^xwd aur ideas ; and repetition*; be? 
caufe they are fatiguing to the mind : a, thing one? 
faid, and in its proper place, is clearer thaw if it had 
been elfcwh^e repeated a thqufand tfmei. 

§ 51. In the jespofition, a$ well a* the inveftigiti* 
pa of tratU, wc ought to begin with the tyfy&'vtew) 
fwch a* arp immediately derived from the ftnfo > 

and 



jj6 Ok r gist er Piatt IL 

and gft g rw g gtfe tg rrfe Ey degress to more finapfeor 
iwotc complex notions 1 ecseHjt hdErwr drat if we 
yigfetly cocrsprehenided else pragEdGjoa of tradbs, wc 
ftotrftf hare no need to took for atgnunaits to dc*- 
fnonff rate them* the bare proposing dbem being fiif- 
ficfent $ for they woatd follow one another in fach 
order, that whatever a fabfequrnt truth added to 
d&t which preceded, woold be too fimple to hare 
need of any demonftratxon. Thus we fbould arrive 
at thofc which are more complex, and be farer of 
diem than by any other way, Wc might even cfta- 
bKjfh fo great a fabordination b e twe en the ievcral 
idea* we had acquired, as to be able to pais, when 
we pleaied, from the moft complex to the moft 
Simple, or from the moft fimple to the moft com- 
plex/ We could hardly indeed forget diem; or if 
this fhould happen, the connexion fubfifting be- 
tween them, would render them eafy to be re- 
trieved. 

But to communicate a truth in the moft perfefk 
order, it is requifite we take notice of the order in 
which it might have been naturally found : for the 
beft method of inftrufting others, is to conduit 
them the fame way which we were obliged to follow 
for our own information. Thus it would feem as if 
we were not demonftrating truths already difcover- 
ed, but rather pointing out new truths, and making 
new difcoveries. The reader would not only be 
tonvlnced but inftrufted -, and by learning him to 
inveftigate by himfelf, we fhould fet the truth be- 
fore him in the moft interefting light. In fine, 
he would be enabled to account to himfelf for every 
ftep he took : he would know whereabouts he is, 

from 



Sc6l.2., Human Knowledge] 337 

from what point he fets out, and whither he is go- 
ing; confequently he might judge by himfclf of 
the road he is dire&ed to, and might chufe a fafer 
way, fo often as he perceived any danger in fol- 
lowing his guide. 

§52. Nature itfelf points out the order we ought 
to follow in the communication of truth : for if all 
our ideas come from the fenfes, it is manifeft that 
the perception of abftradt notions muft be prepared 
by fenfible ideas. Is it reafonable to begin with the 
idea of poflibility to come to that of exiftence ? or 
with the idea of a point to arrive at that of folidity ? 
The elements of fciences can never become fimple 
and eafy, till we take quite a contrary method. If 
philofophers do not care to acknowledge this truth, 
it is becaufe they are prejudiced in favour either of 
innate ideas, or of a cuftom which feems to have 
been confecrated by time. So general is this preju- 
dice, that I fhail have fcarce any but the ignorant 
on my fide : but here the ignorant are proper judges, 
fince elementary inftitutions are defigned for their 
ufe. In this way of writing, what the learned would 
look upon as a mafter-piece, does not anfwcr its end, 
if we do not understand it. 

Geometricians themfelvcs, who of all philofo- 
phers ought to be beft acquainted with the advan- 
tages of the analytic method, give the preference 
very frequently to. the fynthetic. Hence it is that 
when they quit their calculations to enter into re- 
fearches of a different nature, we find they have 
neither the fame clearnefs, nor precifion, nor the 
fame extent of comprehenfion. Of four celebrated 
metaphyficians, Des Cartes, Mallebraache,, Leibnitz, 

& and 



338 Origin of ' PartIL 

and Locke, the latter is the only one that was not a 
geometrician, and yet how vaftly faperior is he tQ 
the reft! 

§ 53. Let us conclude, that if the analytic method 
be what we ought to follow in the inveftigation of 
truth, it fhould likewife be ufcd in communicating 
fuch truths as are already difcovcred : and indeed I 
have endeavoured to follow it. 

What I have been faying in regard to the opera- 
tions of the mind, to language, and method, plain- 
ly proves the impoflibility of perfecting the fciences, 
unlefs we endeavour to render their language more 
precife. Thus it has been demonftrattd that the 
origin and progrefs of our ideas intirely depends on 
the manner in which we makeufc of figns. There- 
fore I was in the right to deviate fometimes from 
cuftom, 

In a word, whatever contributes to the enlarging 
of the mind, may, I think, be brought into this fliort 
compafs. The fenfes are the fource of human know- 
ledge. The different fenfations, perception, con- 
fcioufnefs, reminifcence, attention and imagination, 
the two laft confidered as not yet fubjeft to our 
controul, are its materials: memory, imagination, 
as fubjeft to controul, reflexion, and the other ope- 
rations, employ thefe materials : the figns to which 
we are indebted for the habit of thefe very operati- 
ons, are the inftruments they make ufe of: and the 
connexion of ideas is the firft fpring which puts all 
the reft into motion. I fhall finifh with propofing 
the following problem. An author's work being 
given ', to determine the char a if er and extent of hisun- 
derftandingi and in cpnfequence thereof to tell not only 
i the 



Se£t. 2. Human Knowledge! 339 

the talents of which be gives proofs, hut likewife thoft 
which he is capable of acquiring : to take, for inftance* 
CorneilUs earlieft performance, and to demonfirate that 9 
when this poet wrote it, he was already poffeffed of, or at 
leaji would foon acquire tbofe bright parts by which heme* 
rited fiich high applaufe. Nothing but an analy lis of the 
work is capable of fhewing us the operations that 
produced it, and how far they were exerted; and 
nothnig but the analyfis of thefe operations can 
make us diftinguifh the qualifications compatible in 
the fame man, from thofe which are otherwife, and 
thereby enable us to give a folution to the pro- 
blem. I queftion whether there are many problems 
more difficult than this. 



The END of the Second and Last Part; 



BOOK'! priTttedfvr J. Nourie at the Lamb vppofii* 
Kitherine-itreer in the Strand London. 



THE. P*i>i-:?-is of N"*Txr^AL as:j Politic Law; by 
]. J. BuHamaqui, Caanfeilor af Sate, and late Profeflbr of 
tfafcrai and Civil Law at Geneva. Txanflated into EngLuh by 
Mr. N" agent, 2 Yoia. Octavo. 



Critical Riflc-ticsi a* Pgitit, Fatntisc, ajd Musrc. 
With an Enqairy into the Riie and Progrsfs of die Theatrical 
Fntertafnmena of the Ancients. Written in French bv the 
Abbe Dtr B01, Member and perpetual Secretary of tie French 
Academy. Tranilased :=.:o Englifh by Thomas Nugent, Gent. 
frorr* the Fif:h Edition, reviled, corrected, and enlarged by 
the Author, 3 Vols. Odawo, 1748. 

.V. !?. :.-; this V/crk the Riie, ProgreG, and Perfection cf 
thtfe fevsrai Arts are folly difcnSed ; an hifforkal Account 
2: giver, cf the moft eminent Artifb in the feveral Kinds ; the 
pmicalar Excellencies in which each excelled are explained ; and 
the Criterion* are laid down, by which the Reader is inftru&ed 
how to j idge of the Works of the greateft Mailers both ancient 
ar.d modern, in Poetry, Painting, Mafic, Sculpture, and of the 
other Parti of polite Literature. 

As EslAV TOWARDS A PRACTICAL ENGLISH GRAMMAR, de- 
Scribing the Genius and Nature of the Engl ifh Tongue ; giving 
likewifc a rational and plain Account of Grammar in general, 
with a familiar Explanation of its Terms ; by James Green- 
wood, Sur-Maftcr of St. Paul's School. The fourth Edition, 
with Additions, Duodecimo. 



IIkrmippus Ridivivus; or, the Sages Triumph over Old-Age 
and the Grave ; wherein a Method is laid down for prolonging 
the J.ifc and Vigour of Man; including a Commentary upon 
an antient Infcription, in which this great Secret is jevealed; 
Supported by numerous Authorities : The whole interfperfed 
with a great Variety of remarkable and well-attefted Relations. 
Oftavo, 1 7^9. 2d Edition* carefully corrected, and much en- 
largcd. 



4 



V< 



» > 






■■ *■ — : t 



-. — .1- 



3I~* -w 



//; 



////.-: ■■' 



-//<•'■ . 



■. :■•■• 



; > 






/ 



/ 



/
