ma ay on 





Ts a ee Or 
eet TO waren 


a 
eee 


HHT 


Tec tr san» 
face Pea RESALE SPO NCO oP a 
PEE VICW PARE SAUNA CULE Fo eM wenn 8 TT 2 TN 
Pace wer ne mene Ee BEET Ee CAA AAS 
error ro ia te oer ne Pte ated 


BR LT Cee A Coe 


Neve WTC Ee 


» 


’ 
wee 
é 


Lee BP wits 


rie 





TUE eRUr 
INTELLECEUAL SYSTEM 
QE 
TIE UNIVERSE: 
WHULREIN AERL Tie 
REASON AND PHILOSOPHY 
ATID ETS Mo oITS COUN ers 


‘> seri 


i? ee 
VED E Sie he DUALTONNERA PED, 


aN. 
, A WISCOURSE 


are oe ios, 5 THE 
¢ 


TRUE NOTION OF-YNE LORD'S SUPPER; 


YAO) STURANEOINS, oc. DP dues an 3, bo anil f qrereset sen 
By RALPH CUDWORT 


tal 

|} Nap Ty BPgssb ns 

bORetoe edie the seseral Quotitiars in the Antellcctial 5 ee an. 
A basebedd the B3fe are PPT of the Author : : 


By THOMAS BIRCH, M.A. ann B yy? 





IN FOUR VOLUL WES. 
YO. 1. 


LONDON 
FRIN VG DT) BY fb, pean BP, SS}. J02EN Ss 4Q1 ARE; 
POR RIEU ARD PRIESTLEY, 143, HIGH HOLBORA, 


Iso. 


roy TUN 


RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, 


JOSEPH, 


LORD BISUOP OF BRISTOL, 


DEAN OF ST. PAUTS. 


MY LORD, 


Tue value of the present work is so unive® 
sally acknowledged, that to offer any thing 
here in recommendation of it, might seem 
equally to reflect upon your Lordship’s judg- 
ment, as on the character of the excellent 
Author. It will be a sufficient honour and 
satisfaction to me, to have contributed in 
any measure to the improvement of the In- 
tellectual System, and to the spreading a 
performance, one of the noblest of the last 
age, and at least as necessary to the present, 
for supporting the grand foundations of all 
religion and virtue, against ignorance, so- 
phistry, and every pernicious effect of vice 
and sensuality upon the human understand- 
ing. Sucha design, I persuade myself, wants 


iV 


no apology, especially to a person whose 
writings display the evidence, and whose 
character exemplifies the beauty and dignity, 
of Christianity. I shall therefore only add, 
that, upon these accounts, Iam, with the 
highest esteem and veneration, 


My Lorp, 
Your Lordship’s most obedient 
and most humble servant, 


Tromas BIRCH. 


dondon, Nov. 6, 1742. 


ADVERTISEMENT. 
<q 


‘Tur former Edition of the Intellectual System, 
though the most valuable treasure of the ancient 
theology and philosophy extant in any language, 
had one considerable defect, (frequent amongst 
even the best writers of the last age,) that the re- 
ferences of its numerous quotations were very 
few, and those obscure and imperfect. Such as 
were wanting are therefore supplied in the present 
edition with the utmost exactness, chiefly 
Dr. Laurence Mosheim’s Latin translation of this 
work ; those of the Author are included in[ ] to 
render them more clear and determinate. 


The dedication to the House of Commons, in 
1647, of the sermonon 1] John ii. 3, 4. omitted in 
the second and third editions, is restored likewise 
from the first. 


To the whole is prefixed a new life of the Au- 


thor, wherein is given a very particular account 
of his several excellent works. 


VOL. [. B 


AN 


ACCOUNT 


THE LIFE AND WRITINGS: 


-R. CUDWORTH, D.D. 


Beeman apeme mannan 
Sneed 


Dr. Ralph Cudworth was son of Dr. Ralph 
Cudworth, at first fellow of Emanuel College, in 
the University of Cambridge, and afterwards mi- 
nister of St. Andrew’s Church in that town, and 
at last rector of Aller, in Somersetshire, and chap- 

ain to James 1.° He died in August or September, 
__1624.? Though he was aman of genius and learn- 
ing, he published only a supplement to Mr. W. 
Perkins’s Commentary upon St. Paul’s Epistle to 
the Galatians, of which, as well as several. other 
works of that divine, he was editor. 

Our Author’s mother was of the family of Ma- 
chell, and bad been nurse to Prince Henr y, eldest 
son of James 1. and after Dr. Cudworth’s death, 
married to Dr. Stoughton.°. Our Author himself 
was born at Aller, in the year 1617, and educated 
with great care by his father-in-law, Dr. Stough- 
ton; and in 1630 was admitted pensioner in Ema- 


- @ Sec Dr. John Laurence Mosheim’s preface to his Latin transla- 
, tionof Dr. Cudworth’s Intellectual pm: The pages of this preface 
are not numbered. 

b Wood, Fasti Oxon. vol. 1. col. 187. secon edit. London, 1721. 

© Mousheim ubt supra. | 
B Py 


trad 


8 OF THE LIFE AND WRITINGS 


nuel College, the Doctor giving him this testi- 
mony, “ that he was as well grounded in school- 
learning asany boy of his age, that went to the 
University.” July 5, 1632, he was matriculated 
as a student in the University, and applied him- 
self to all parts of literature with such vigour, that - 
in 1639, he was created master of arts with great 
applause. Soon after he was chosen fellow of 
his college, and became an eminent tutor there, 
and had at one time eight-and-twenty pupils ; an 
instance scarce ever known before, even in the 
largest colleges of the University. Among these 
was Mr. W. Temple, afterwards famous for his em- 
bassies and writings. Not long after, he was pre- 
sented to the rectory of North Cadbury, in Somer- — 
setshire, worth three hundred pounds per annum. 

‘In 1642, he published A Discourse concerning 
the true Notion of the Lord’s Supper. It was 
printed at London, in quarto, with only the initial 
letters of his name. Bochart, Spencer, Selden, 
and other eminent writers quote this discourse 
with great commendations; and my most ingeni-. 
ous and learned friend, Mr. ‘Warburton, i in a letter 
of excellent remarks upon our Author, which he 
favoured me with, styles ita masterpiece in its 
kind; and observes, that he has undoubtedly given 
the true nature and idea of the sacrament, and 
supported it with all his learning. The same year 
likewise appeared his treatise, intitled, The Union 
of Christ and the Church a Shadow, by R. c 
printed at London, in quarto. 

He took the degree of batchelor of divinity in 
the year 1644, upon which occasion he maintained 
at the commencement in the University the two 
following theses: 1. Dantur boni et mali rationes 


OF RALPH CUDWORTH, D.D. 9 


wternze et indispensabiles: 11. Dantur substan- 
tie incorporee sua naturd immortales. Hence it 
appears, that even at that time he was examining 
and revolving in his mind those important subjects, 
which he so long afterwards cleared up with such 
uncommon penetration in his Intellectual System, 
and other works. 

In the same year, 1644, he was appointed mas- 
ter of Clare Hall, in Cambridge, in the room of 
Dr. Paske, who had been ejected by the parlia- 
mentary visitors. In 1645, Dr. Metcalf having re- 
signed the regius professorship of the Hebrew 
tongues, Mr. Cudworth was unanimously nomi- 
nated Oct. 15, by the seven electors, to succeed: 
him. From this time he abandoned all the func- 
tions of a minister, and applied himself only to 
his academical employments and studies, especi- 
ally that of the Jewish antiquities. And we find 
the following passage im a manuscript letter of 
Mr. Johu Worthington, afterwards master of Jesus 
College, dated May 12, 1646. “Our learned friend, 
Mr. Cudworth, reads every Wednesday in the 
schools. His subject is, Templum Hierosolymi- 
tanum.” When his affairs required his absence 
from the University, he substituted Mr. Worth- 
ington in his room. March 31, 1647, he preached 
before the House of Commons, at Westminster, 
upon a day of public humiliation, a sermon upon 
John ii. 3, 4, for which he had the thanks of that 
House returned him on the same day. This ser- 
mon was printed the same year, at Cambridge, in 
quarto, with the following motto in the title-page, 
‘EvoiBet, & réxvov" 0 -yapevocBwv axpwo XporiaviZe’ and 
with a dedication to the House of Commons, 
which was omitted in the second and third edi- 


10 OF THE LIFE AND WRITINGS | 


tions, but. restored in the present. In 1651, he 
took the degree of doctor of divinity. Though 
the places, which he held in the University, were 
very honourable, yet he found the revenue of them 
. not sufficient to support him; for which reason he 
had thoughts of leaving Cambridge entirely ; and, 
indeed, actually retired from it, though but for a 
short time. This appears from two manuscript let- 
ters of Mr. Worthington, the former dated Jan. 6. 
1651, where he writes thus: ‘ If through want of 
maintenance, he (R. C.) should be forced to leave 
Cambridge, for which place -he is so emmently 
accomplished with what is noble and exempla- 
rily academical, it would be an ill omen.” In the 
latter, dated Jan. 30, 1654, is this passage: “‘ After 
many tossings, Dr. Cudworth is, through God’s 
providence, returned to Cambridge, and settled in 
Christ’s College, and by his marriage more settled 
and fixed.” For upon the decease of Dr. Sam. 
Bolton, master of that college, in 1654, our Au- 
thor was chosen to succeed him, and married the 
same year. In this station he spent the rest of his 
life, proving highly serviceable to the University 
and the whole church of England. In Jan. 165%, 
he was one of the persons nominated by a com- 
mittee of the parliament to be consulted about the 
English translation of the Bible; as appears from 
the following passage of Whitelocke.* 

“Jan. 16th. At the grand committee for reli- 
gion, Ordered, that it be referred to a sub-com- 
mittee to send for, and advise with, Dr. Walton, 
Mr. Hughes, Mr. Castell, Mr. Clark, Mr. Poulk, 
Dr. Cudworth, and such. others as .they shall 
think fit; and to consider of the translations aud 


* Memorials of the Ebglish Affairs, p. 654, edit. Lond. 1732, in fol. 


‘OF RALPH CUDWORTH, D.D. ___it1it 


impressions of the Bible, and to offer -their Opi- - | 


nions therein to this committee; and that it be és- 
pecially commended to the Lord. Commissioner 
Whitelocke to take care of this business.’ , 

“ This committee, (says Whitelocke,) often met 
at my house, and had the most learned men in the 
oriental tongues to consult with in this great busi- 
ness, and divers excellent and learned observations’ 
of some mistakes in the translations of the Bible 
in English; which yet was agreed to be the best of 
any translation in the world. I took pains in it; — 
but it became fruitless by the parancnya disso- 
lution.” 

Our Author-had a great share in the fendahip 
and esteem of John Thurloe, Esq. secretary of 
state: to the protectors, Oliver and Richard Crom-. 
well, who frequently corresponded with him, and © 
consulted him with regard to the characters of 
such persons in the University, as were proper to - 
be employed in political and civil affairs. For 
which purpose, Dr. Cudworth wrote, among 
others, the following letter.* 7 : | 


ee HONOURED SIR, 


«I must, in the first place, crave your pardon 
for the delay of this, my second letter, thus long; 
(for, I suppose, you have received. my former in — 
answere to yours,) which, had not some unavoida- 
ble occasions hindred me, had come.sooner to | 
your hands. Sir, I think there are divers men in 
the University at this time, of singular parts and 
accomplishments for learning ; some of which are 
so farre engaged in divinity, that they cannot well 
divert themselves to other professioris or employ- 


* Thurloe's Manuscript State Papers, vol. xxxviii. p. 259. 


12 OF THE LIFE AND WRITINGS 


ments ; others perhaps so.much addicted to a 
comtemplative life, that.they could not.so well 
apply themselves to politicall and civill affairs. 
But for those, which I conceive to.be more free 
and undetermined, I'shall here present you with a 
catalogue.of some of their names, such as I con- 
ceive best qualified for civill employments. First, 
Mr. Page, a fellow of King’s Colledge, an excel- 
lent Latinist, and one, that hath travelled abroad 
for above ten yeares tegether. He is above forty 
years of age; but how he hath been.or is affected 
to the parliament, or present government, I-cannot — 
tell. He is now absent from the University, and, 
I think, at present with the Earle of Devonsbire. ' 
_ Secondly, Dr. Bagge, fellow of Caius College, 
and doctor of physick, a singularly good and 
ready Latinist; and I beleeve. there is none of his 
yearesin England equall-to him inthe profession 
. of physick.. He hath excellent parts, but I know 
not certamly, whether being so eminent in that 
way, (though a very young doctor) he would put 
himselfe upon state-employment; neither do I 


fully know how he is affected. There are of Tri- 


nity Colledge severall, that are very good Latin- 
ists, and well furnisht with all the politer learning; 
as Mr. Valentine:(a sober discreet man) and Mr. 
_Linne (well known for an excellent poet.) 

“¢ Mr. Mildmay, of Peter-house, one, whose in- 
clination seems to -be peculiarly carried out to- 
wards politicall and civil empaoyments, a scholar 
and a discreet man. — 

‘“‘ Mr. Croone, of Emanuel Colledge, a young 
master of arts, of poees good parts, and a ge- 
neral scholar, 

‘* Mr. Miles, fellow -of Clare-hall, formerly my 


OF RALPH CUDWORTH, D.D. 13 


pupill; one that hath no mind to professe divi- 
nity, but avery good scholar, and also a junior 
master of arts. 

* Lastly, of Christ Colledge there is a young 
man, that is master of arts this yeare, one Mr. 
Leigh, that for his. standing is very well accom- 
plished, and I doubt not, but in a very little time, 
would be exceedinge fitte for any such employ- 

ment, as you would designe him for. 

- Many more names I could set down? but 
these may suffice for your choice, and you may, ~ 
if you thinke good, enquire further concerning 
any of them from some others, and, if you please, 
from this gentleman, whom I have for that pur 
pose desired to-present this to you, Mr. George 
Rust,*. fellow of. Christ Celledge, who can. fur- 
ther enforme and satisfy you concerning them. He 
is an understanding, pious, discreet man, and 
himselfe I know to bee, a man of exceeding good 
parts, and a generalle scholar, but gne that seemes 
not so willing to divert himselfe from preaching 
and divinity, which he hath of late intended; other- 
wise I know his parts are such, as would ‘enable 
him for any employment. 

« If you please to enquire further from him, and 
by him signify your further pleasure to me, IT shall 
be ready in this or any thing else, that I am able, 
to expresse my selfe, 

“ Sir, 
a Your affectionately devoted friend and servant, 
“R,. Cupworrtu.” 


| Dr. Cudworth likewise recommended’ to the 


'2 Afterwards Dean of Dromore, in Ireland. 
> 'Thurloe’s Manuscript State Papers, vol. xliii. p. 329, of the printed 
Papers, vol. v. p. 022, 523. : 


14 OF THE LIFE AND WRITINGS - 


secretary, ‘for the place of chaplain to the English 
merchants at Lisbon, Mr. Zachary Cradock, 
afterwards provost of Eton Colledge, and famous 
for his uncommon genius and learning, and his 
abilities as a preacher. : 

In Jan. 1658, he wrote the following letter to 
Secretary Thurloe, upon his design of publish- 
ing some Latin discourses in defence of Christ- 
lanity against Judaism.* : 


** SIR, 
“ Having this opportunity offered by Doctour 
Solater, who desires to waite upon you, upon your 
kind invitation, which I acquainted him with, I 
could do no lesse than accompatty him with these 
few lines to present my service to you. I am per- 
swaded, you will be well satisfied in his ingenuity, 
when you are acquainted with him. Now I have 
this opportunity, I shall ‘use the freedom to ac- 
quaint you with another busines. I am perswad- 
_ed by friends to publish some discourses, which I- 
have prepared in Latine, that will be of a polemi- 
call nature in defense of Christianity against Juda- 
isme, explaining some cheef places of scripture 
controverted between the Jewes and us, (as Da-_ 
niel’s prophecy of the 70 weekes, never yet suffi- 
ciently cleared and improved) and withall extri- 
cating many difficulties of chronologie. Which 
taske I the rather undertake, not onely because it 
is suitable to my Hebrew profession, aud because .. 
Ihave lighted on some Jewish writings upon the 
argument, as have scarcely ever been seen by any 
Christians, which would the better mable me fully: 
to confute them ; but also because I conceive it a 


# "Thurloe’s Manuscript State Papers, vol. Ixiii. p. 43: 


OF RALPH CUDWORTH, D.D. 15° 


worke proper and suitable to this present age. 
However, though I should not be able myselfe to 
be any way instrumental to these great transae- 
tions of Providence (not without cause, hoped for 
of many) amougst the Jews; yet I perswade my- 
selfe my pains may not be alltogether unprofitable 
for the setling and establishing of Christians; or 
at least I shall give an account of my spending 
such vacant hours, as I could redeeme from my 
preaching and other occasions, and the perpetual 
distractions of the bursarship, which the statutes 
of this Colledge npose upon me. It was my pur- 
pose to dedicate these fruits of my studies to his 
highues, (to whose noble father I was much ob- 
liged) if ] may have leave, or presume so to doe; 
which I cannot. better understand by any than 
yourselfe, if you shall think it convenient, when 
you have an opportunity to insinuate any such 
thing, which I permitte wholy to your prudence. 
I intend, God willing, to be in London some time 
in March, and then [ shall waite upon you to re- 
ceve your information. In the mean time crav- 
ing pardon for this prolixity of mine, and free- 
dome, I subscribe myselfe, 


« Your really devoted friend aud humble servant, 


“R. Cupworru.” 
Jan. 20, 1658, Christ’s Coll. Cambr. 


The Discourse concerning Daniel’s prophecy of 
the seventy weeks, mentioned in this letter, and 
which is still extant in manuscript, 1s highly com- 
mended by Dr. Henry More, in his preface, sec. 
18. p. xvi. to his ixplanation of the grand Mys- 
tery of Godliness, priuted at London, 1660, in 
folio, where he observes, that Dr. Cudworth in 


16 OF THE LIFE AND WRITINGS 


that Discourse, which was read in the public 
schools of the University, had undeceived the 
-world, which had been misled too long by the 
over-great opinion they had of Joseph Scaliger, 
and that taking Funccius’s Epocha, he had de- 
monstrated the manifestation of the Messiah to 
have fallen out at the end of the sixty-ninth week, 
and his passion in the midst of the last, im the 
most natural and proper sense thereof; ‘ which 
demonstration of his, is of as much price and 
worth in theology, as either the circulation of the 
blood in physic, or the motion of the earth in na- 
tural philosophy.” 

Upon the restoration of Charles 11. he wrote 
a copy of verses, published in Academie Can- 
tabrigiensis SOQSTPA, sive ad Carolum 11. redu- 
cem de Regnis ipsi, Musis per ipsum restitutis, 
Gratulatio, printed at Cambridge, 1660, in quarto. 
In 1662, he was presented by Dr. Gilbert Shel- 
don, bishop of London, to the vicarage of Ash- 
well, in Hertfordshire,* to which he was admitted 
on the Ist of December that year. 

In the beginning of the year 1665, he had a de 
sign to publish a discourse concerning moral good 
and evil, as appears from the following extracts of 
letters written by bim and by Dr. Henry More, 
fellow of his college.’ 


Dr. Cudworth, in a letter to Dr John Worth- 
ington, January, 1668. 

“ You know, I have had this designe concern- 
ing good and evil, or natural ethicks, a great 
while ; which I begun above a year agoe, (when I 

a Newcourt, Repertorium, vol. li. p- 462. 


> Communicated by my very learned friend, Mr. John Ward, F.R.S. 
and professor of Rhetoric in Gresham College. 


' _OF RALPH CUDWORTH, D.D. +17 
made the first sermon in the chapel about the ar- 
gument) to study over anew, and dispatch a dis- 
course about it. .No man had so frequently ex-. 
horted me to it, and so earnestly, as this friend.— 
But about three months since unexpectedly he 
' told me on a suddain, he had begun a discourse 
enthe same argument. The next day in writing | 
I imparted my mind more fully and plainly to 
him. ‘Whereupon he came to me, and told me, 
he would speak with me about it after a day or 
two. So he did; and then excused the business; 
that he could not tell, whether I would dispatch 
and finish it or no, because I had been so long 
about it; that Mr. Fullwood and Mr. Jenks, had 
sollicited him to do this, and that you were very 
glad, that he would undertake it. But now he 
_ understood I was resolved to go through with it, 
he was very glad of it, that he would desist, and 
throw his intoa corner. All this I impart to you 
privately, because a.common friend. Ihave not 
_ spoken to any body else but Mr. Standish, and 

something to Mr. Jenks and Fullwood.” 


Dr. H. More, in a letter to Dr. Worthington, 
Jan. 24, 1664. 


“ T understand, by Mr. Standish’s letter, that 
he, unawares, speaking to the master* of my 
Enchiridion Ethicum, he shewed again his dis- 
gust, &c.—-that, if 1 persisted in the resolution of 
publishing my book, he would desist in his, though 
he had most of it then ready to send up to be li- 
censed that week. I pray you, spur him up to set ~ 
his to the press. For my part, it is well known, 
I have no designe at all but to serve the publick ; 


a Dr. Cudworth, 


18 OF THE LIFE AND WRITINGS 


and that lentered upon the task extreamly against 
my own will, and yet I have finished it all buta 
chapter. Whether, or when, I shall publish it, I 
shall have leistre enough to cousider. ” 


Dr. More, in a letter to Dr. Worthington, 
Feb. 7, 166%. 

— Some few friends at Cambridge were exceed- 
ing earnest with me to write a short ethicks, 
alleging no small reason for it. [did not only 
‘heartily reject them more than once, but with great 
zeal, if not rudeness, alleging several things, 
‘which were too long to write, indeed in a manner 
vilifying the project, preferring experience of life 
' before all such fine systems; alleging also, that 
Dr. Cudworth had a design for the greatest cur- 
osity of that subject. But nothing would content 
them but ‘my setting upon the work, that it was 
‘uncertain, when Dr. Gudworth’s would come out, 
and besides, mine being a small treatise, ruaning 
through the whole body of ethicks, they would 
not interfere one with another. For my part, til 
Thad by chance told Dr. Cudworth of my pur- 
pose, (which I did simply, thinking nothing) and 
how many chapters J had finished, I knew no- 
thing either of the time, or the scope of his writ- 
ing, or if he intended a general ethicks. But the 
effect of those friends’ earnestness (to tell you 
plainly how the case stood) was this: a day or 
two after their last importunity, I, waking in the 
morning, and some of their weightiest allegations 
recurring to my mind, and also remembering, with 
what an excessive earnestness one of them soli- 
‘cited me to this work Gin which I thought there 
might be something more than ony: ary, and that 


-OF RALPH CUDWORTH, D.D. °° ‘19 


he was actuated in this business, I knew not how,) 
1 began seriously to think with myself of the 
matter, and at last was so conscientiously illa- 
queated therein, that I could not Sbsolutely free 
myself therefrom to this very day. Nor was this 
only an act of mere conscience, but of present self- 
denial. For it did very vehemently cross other 
great and innocent pleasures, that I promised my- 
self in a certain order of my studies, which I had 
newly proposed to myself at that very time. But 
when I was once engaged, I proceeded not with-. 
ome some pleasure.’ 


_ Dr. More, in a letter to Dr. Worthington, 
May 10, 1665. | 


_-“ | thank you for your freedom both to him and 
tome. It never came into my mind to print this 
Enchiridion, till bis book was out, unless he would 
have professed his like of the project. I have new 
transcribed it all. Mr. Jenks and Mr. Fullwood 
are exceeding earnest to see it, and would tran- 
scribe it for their present satisfaction. But, if they 
should do so, and it be known, it would, it may 
be, disgust Dr. Cudworth, ‘whom J am very loth 
any way to grieve. Butif yourself have a mind — 
to seeit, and could get a fair and true. copy tran- 
scribed of it, I would willingly pay the tran- 
scriber, and the copy should be your’s; for lam 
loth, that what I have writ on so edifying a sub- 
ject should be lost.” 


| ‘Trreligion began now to lift up itshead ; but the 
progress of it was opposed by no person with 
greater force and learning than by our Author. For 
this purpose, in 1678, he published at roueen: 


20 OF THE LIFE AND WRITINGS 


in folio, his True Intellectual System of the Uni- 
verse :—The first part, wherein ‘all the reason and 
philosophy of atheism 1s confuted, and its impos- 
sibility demonstrated. The imprimatur by Dr. 
Samuel Parker, chaplain to Archbishop Sheldan, 
is dated May. 29, 1671, seven years before the 

publication of this work; which met with great 
Opposition from some of the courtiers of King 
Charles 11. who endeavoured to destroy the repu- 
tation of it, when it. was first published.*. Nor has 
it. escaped the censures of writers of different par- 
ties since that time. 

The first piece, which appeared against it, was 
from-a Roman catholic, in a Letter to Mr. R. Cud- 
worth, D.D. printed at the end of a tract, en- 
titled, Anti-Haman; or, an Answer to Mr. G. Bur- 
net's Mystery of Iniquity Unveiled; wherein is 
shewed the Conformity of the Doctrine, Worship, 
andi Practice of the Roman Catholic Church, with 
those of the purest Times ; the Idolatry.of the Pa- 
gans is truly stated, and the Imputation of Pagan 
Idolatry clearly confuted; and. the Reasons are 
given, why Catholics avoid the Communion of the 
Protestant Church. To which is annexed, a Letter 
to R. Cudworth, D. D. by W. E. Student. in Di- 
vinity. With Leave of Superiors, 1679, in octavo. 
This writer attacks Dr. Cudworth’s assertion, that 
though very few of the ancient philosophers 
thought God to be corporeal, as Epicurus, Strato, 
&c. yet, that the greatest part of. them believed 
him. to be a pure spirit, and adored the only true | 
God, under ‘the names of Jupiter, Minerva, Osiris 
and Venus. In opposition to which, his antago- 


* Vide Joannis Clerici Vitam, ad ann. 1711, p. 129, edit. Amstelod. 
1711, in octavo. 


OF RALPH CUDWORTH, D.D.. 21 


nist maintains,* “ that although all Pagans (nay 
all men) had naturally a knowledge of the true 
God, yet those they adored, were men;” in sup- 
port of which, he urges four proofs taken, [. 
From the diversity of their sexes; 2. From 
their generation; 3. From their death; 4. From 
their rites. He likewise attempts to confute what 
Dr. Cud worth has strenuously defended through- 
out his book, that the unity of God was a prime 
article of the Pagan creed. 

But let us now see, in how severe a manner he 
was treated, even by a Protestant divine, Mr. John 
_ Turner, in his discourse of the Messiah.” He tells 
us,° “we must conclude Dr. Cudworth to be him- 
self a Tritheistic ; a sect, for which, I believe, he 
may havea kindness, because heloves hard words, 
or something else, without either stick or trick, 
which I will not name, because his book pretends 
to be written against it.” And again,* that, “ the 
most that charity itself can allow the Doctor, if it — 
were to step forth, and speak his most fayourable 
character to the world, is, that he is an Arian, a 
Socinian, or a Deist.” 

‘Mr. Dryden likewise tells us,* that our Author 
‘¢ hag raised such strong objections against the 
being of a God and providence, that many think 
he has not answered them.” And the laté earl of 
Shaftesbury, in his Moralists, a rhapsody,‘ has 

the following passage :—“ You know the com- 


2p. 335, &e. 
_ ® See p. 16, 17, 19, 162. edit. London, 1685, in 8vo. 
£ Pel? ~ P19. 


© Dedication of his translation of Virgil’s A&neid, voli il. p- $78. 
edit. London, 1730, in 8vo. 

4 Part ii. sec. 3. Characteristics, ic ii. p. 262. edit. ole: 1787, 
in 8vo. 


VOL. L a © 


22 OF THE LIFE AND WRITINGS 


mon fate of those, who dare to appear fair authors. 
What was that pious and learned man's case, 
who wrote the Intellectual System of the Uni- 
verse? I confess, it was pleasant enough to con- 
sider, that though the whole world were no less 
satisfied with his capacity and learning, than with 
his sincerity in the cause ofthe Deity ; yet was he 
accused of giving the upper band to the Atheists, 
for having only stated their reasons and those of 
their adversaries fairly together. ° 

Such was the treatment, which our great Author 
received for his immortal volume: wherein, as 
Mr. Warburton says,” with a boldness uncommon 
indeed, but yery becoming a man conscious of his 
own integrity, and of the truth and evidence of his 
cause, he launched out into the immensity of the 
Intellectual System; and, at his first essay, pene- 
trated the very darkest recesses of antiquity, to 
strip Atheism of all its disguises, and drag up the 
lurking monster to conviction. Where, though 
few readers could followhim, yet the very slowest 
were able to unravel his secret purpose---to tell 
the world—that he was an Atheist in his heart, and 
an Arian in his book. However, thus ran the po- 
pular clamour against this excellent person. 
Would the reader know the consequence? Why, 
the zealots inflamed the bigots :-— 


Twas the time’s plague, when madmen Jed the blind :—- 


The silly calumny was believed; the much-in- 
jured Author grew disgusted; his ardonr slack- 
- ened; and the rest and far greatest part of the de- 
fence never appeared. 

The same gentleman, likewise, in his letter to 


* Preface to vol. ii, of his Divine Legation of Moses, p. 10, 12, #2. 


OF RALPH CUDWORTH, D.D. ‘93 | 


‘me above cited, observes, that among the other 
- excellences of this work, “all his translations 
from the Greek writers are wonderfully exact, 
and a vast judgment and penetration shewn i 1D 
explaining their sense.’ 

In 1706, there was published at Ponten, in 
two vol umes, in quarto, an abridgment of the In- 
tellectual System, under this title :—A Confuta-. 
tion of the Reason and Philosophy of Atheism ; 
being in a great measure, either an abridgment or 
an improvement of what Dr. Cudworth offered to 
that purpose in his true Intellectual System of 
the Universe. Together with an introduction, in. 
which, among accounts of other matters relating 
to this treatise, there is an impartial examination 
of what that learned person advanced, touching 
the Christian doctrine of a trinity in unity, and the 
resurrection of the body. By Thomas Wise, B. D. 
fellow of Exeter College, in Oxford, and chaplain 
to his Grace, the Duke of Ormond. | 

In the introduction, Mr. Wise styles Dr. Cud- 
worth’s book, the vastest magazine of reasoning 
and learning, that ever singly appeared against . 
-Atheism; and then examines his notions concern- 
ing the trinity and the resurrection of the body. 
With regard to the former, he observes, that Dr. 
‘Cudworth having laid down a general proposi- 
tion, that the heathens universally held but one 
‘unmade independent God, comes to shew, that 
the Platonists, in particular, maintained an unity of 
the Godhead, in their three Divine hypostases, — 
viz. Monad or Good, Mind, and Soul ; notwith- 
‘standing that they owned these three hypostases 
to be numerically distinct, or to have distinct sin-,_ 
gular essences of :thelir own. To vindicate the 

C2 


24 OF THE LIFE AND WRITINGS 


Platonists in this point, he tells us, that the an- 
cient orthodox Fathers of the Christian church, 
were generally of no other persuasion than this-— 
that that essence or substance of the Godhead, 
which all the three persons, or hypostases agree 
in, aseach of them is God, was not one singular 
or individual, but only one common or universal 
essence or substance. 

« This, (says Mr. Wise,) and other assertions of 
the like nature in Dr. Cudworth’s Intellectual 
System, have made so much noise in the world, 
that there has hardly been a pampblet or book 
_ written for some years about the blessed trinity, 
especially in England, and in the heterodox way, 
which does not bring in Dr. Cudworth upon the 
stage, and vonch his name and quotations for its 
purpose. While, on the other hand, the truly 
orthodox (though often through a misunderstand- 
ing of his sense) do aim at his doctrine, as a mark 
of their invectives; and others, who call them- 
selves also by that name, entertaining no little ve- 
neration for the very words used by the ancient 
Fathers, especially when repeated and revived by 
so learned a person as Dr. Cudworth, and resolv- 
ing, whatever should come of it, to stand by them, 
have unhappily fallen into a kind of Tritheism.” 
Mr. Wise therefore endeavours, as much ag possi- 
ble, to clear up and justify our Author's doctrine. 
However, Mr. Robert Nelson, in his life of Bishop 
Bull,* declares, that Dr. Cudworth’s notion, with 
regard to the Trinity, was the same with Dr. Sa- 
muel Clarke's, and represents it in the following 
terms :—That the three persons of the trinity arc 
three distinct spiritual substances; but that the 


: * Sec. Ixi. p. 339, 340, edit. London, 1714, in 8vo. 


OF RALPH CUDWORTH, D.D. 25 


Father alone is truly and properly God; that he 
alone, in the proper sense, is supreme; that abso- | 
lute supreme honour is due to him only ; and that 
he, absolutely speaking, is the only God of the 
universe, the Son and Spirit being God, but only 
by the Father’s concurrence with them, and their 
subordination and subjection to him. But to re- 
turn to Mr. Wise: he next considers our Author’s 
opinion about the resurrection, who, as appears 
from several passages of his Intellectual System; 
thought, that the resurrection-body will not con- 


- gist of the same substance with that which was 


buried; and that it will not be a body of flesh, 
but an ethereal one; and that the present body 
is only a seed of the resurrection. However, Mr. 
‘Wise shews from-other passages 1n his works, that 
he has as plainly asserted the resurrection of the 
same numerical body, as in some places he has 
denied it. 

In the year 1708, &c. Monsieur le Clerc gave 
large extracts of the Intellectual System in his 
Bibliotheque Choisie, tom. i. ii. iii. v. vii. vill. ix. 
which engaged him in a dispute with Monsieur 
Bayle, concerning Dr. Cudworth’s notion of plas-. 
tic natures. Monsieur Bayle, in his Continuation 
des Pensées diverses sur les Cometes,* had ob- 
served, that “the Atheists are very much per- 
plexed, how ‘to account for the formation of ani- 
mals, which they ascribed to a cause which was 
not conscious of what it did, and yet followed a 
regular plan, without knowing according to what 
plan it went to work. But Dr: Cudworth’s Plas-' 
tic Nature, and Dr. Grew’s Vital Principle’ are 


* Tom. i. Sec. 21. o See Dr. Nehemiah Grew’s Posmologin 
nate, printed at London, 1701, in folio. J ° 


26 OF THE LIFE AND WRITINGS 


exactly in the same case; and thus they take 
away the whole strength of this objection against. 
the Atheists. For if God could communicate such 
a plastic power, it follows, that it is not inconsist- 
ent with the nature of things, that there be such 
agents. They may therefore exist of themselves, 
will the adversary say ; whence it would also fol- 
low, that the regularity which we observe in the 
universe, may be the effect of a blind cause, which 
was not -conscious of what it did.” Mr. Bayle, 
however, owned, that Dr. Cudworth and Dr. 
Grew were not aware of the consequence, which, . 
according to him, followed from their system. 
Monsieur le Clerc returned an answer in the fifth 
volume of his Bibliotheque Choisie ;* wherein he 
- observed, that the plastic or vital natures, which 
those two writers admit, cannot in the least favour 
the Atheists : because these natures are only in- 
struments in the hand of God, and have.no power 
or efficacy but what they receive from him, who 
rules and directs all their actions. That they are 
only instrumental causes produced and employed 
_by the chief and First Cause; and that it cannot 
be said, that a palace has been built up without 
art, because not only hammers, rales, saws, &c. — 
but even the arms of men, which made use of 

_ these instruments, are destitute of knowledge. It 
is sufficient, that the mind of the builder directed 
all these things, and employed them in the exe- 
cution of his design. It is therefore plain, that. 
the Atheists, who deny the being of an intelligent 
Cause, cannot retort the argument of Dr..Cud- 
worth and Dr. Grew upon them. Monsieur Bayle, 


2 P, 283, &o.) 


‘OF RALPH CUDWORTH,’ D.D.: 27 


in his answer,’ endeavoured to shew, that if these 
writers had considered the plastic natures only as 
instruments in the hand of God, this system would 
have been exposed to all the difficulties to which 

the Cartesian hypothesis is hable, and which they 
intend to avoid. That therefore we must suppose 
their opinion to have been, that. these natures 
are active principles, which do not want to be 
continually set on and directed:; but that it is 
sufficient, if God does but put them in a proper 
‘situation, and superintend their actions, to set 
them right, if it be necessary. This being the 
- case, Monsieur Bayle pretends, that the argu- 
ment may be retorted against those writers. - For, 
says he, since when the order and regularity of 
this world are alleged as a proof of the’ being of 
a God, it is supposed that a being cannot. pro- 
duce a regular work, without having an idea of 
it; yet, according to Dr. Cudworth, the plastic 
natures, which produce plants and animals, have 
not the leastidea of what they do. If it be answer- | 
. ed, that they have been created with that faculty 

_by-a Being, who knows all, and whose ideas they 
only put in execution; the Stratonician will re- 
ply, that ifthey do it only as efficient causes, this 
is as incomprehensible as that which is objected 
-tohim; since it is as difficult-for any being to 
perform a scheme, which it does not understand, 
_ but which another understands, as it is to perform 

a scheme which no being at aj] has any notion of. 

Since you acknowledge, will the Stratonician say, 
that God could endow some creatures. with a 

power of producing excellent waerks, though 
‘without any knowledge: you must also confess, 
_? Hist. des-Quvrages des Scavans, Agtt. 1704. Art.’7, p. 880, &c, 


28 OF THE LIFE AND WRITINGS 


that there is no necessary connexion between the 
power of producing excellent works, and the idea 
and knowledge of their essence, and of the man- 
ner of producing them: consequently, you ought 
not to assert, that these things cannot subsist se- 
parately in nature, and that nature cannot have 
of itself what, according to you, the plastic beings 
received from God. In short, Monsieur Bayle 
asked, whether these writers maintained, that 
the plastic and vital natures are only passive in- 
struments in the hand of God, as Monsieur le 
Clerc seemed to suppose by his comparison of an 
architect. Monsieur le Cler¢ answered," that, 
according to Dr. Cudworth, the plastic natures 
were not passive instruments ; but that they are 
under God’s direction, who conducts them, though 
we cannot explain after what manner. Nor can 
the Atheists, added he, retort the argument, be- 
cause God is the author of the regularity and 
order with which the plastic natures act; where- 
as, according to the Atheists, matter moves of it- 
self, without any cause to direct it, and to give 
it a power of moving regularly. This dispute was 
carried on still further, with some warmth, and a 
great many repetitions on both sides. But what 
has been said is sufficient to give the reader a no- 
tion of this controversy, for the progress of which 
he may consult the following books :—Histoire 
des Ouvrages des Scavans. Decemb. 1704, art. 
12. Bibliotheque Choisie, tom. vil. art. 7. Répons 
aux Questions d’un Provincial, tom. ii. chap. 179. 
Bibliotheque Choisie, tom. ix. art. 10. Réponse 
pour Mr, Bayle &-Mr. Le Clerc, p. 31, annexed 
to the fourth volume of the Répons. aux Quest. 


* Biblioth, Choisic, tom. vi. art.7, p. 422. 


OF RALPH CUDWORTH, D. D. 29 


d’un Provincial.—Upon the whole, Mr. Warbur- 
ton, in his letter to me above cited, is of opinion, 
that our Author’s “ Plastic Life of Natureisfully 
overthrown by Monsieur Bayle, whose superiority - 
in that dispute with Monsieur le Clerc, is clear 
and indisputable.” 

Monsieur le Clerc* expressed his wishes, that 
some man of learning would translate the Intel- 
lectual System into Latin; but this design, | 
though resolved upon and attempted by several 
persons in Germany,” was never executed till the 
year 1733, when Dr. Mosheim published his 
translation of it under the following title :—Ra- 
dulphi Cudworth, Theologie Doctoris et in Aca- 
demia Cantabrigiensi Professoris, Systema Intel- 
lectuale hujus Universi, seu de veris Nature Re- 
rum originibus Commentarii; quibusomnis eorum > 
Philosophia, qui Deum esse negant, funditis 
evertitur. Accedunt reliqua ejus Opuscula. Jo- 
annes Laurentius Moshemius, Theologie Doctor, 
serenissimi. Ducis Brunsvicensis 4 Consiliis Re- 
rum sanctiorum. Abbas Ceenobiorum Vallis S. 
Marie et Lapidis S. Michaelis, omnia ex Anglico 
-Latiné vertit, recensuit, variis Observationibus et 
Dissertationibus illustravit, et auxit. Jenx, 2 
vols. in folio. Dr. Mosheim, in his preface, re- 
presents the difficulties of translating this work to 
be very great ; and observes some mistakes, which 
Monsieur Le Clerc has committed with regard to 
the sense of our Author in his extracts in the Bi- 
bliotheque Choisie. Monsieur Bourdelin, a mem- 
ber of the French Academy of Inscriptions and 
Belles Lettres, had begun a translation of the In- 
s Biblioth, Choisie, tom. i. p- 65, 

» See Dr. Mosheim’s preface. . 


30. OF THE LIFE AND W RITINGS 


tellectual S ystem into French,’ but was prevent- 
ed from completing it by his. death, which hap- 
pened in May, 1717. | 

But to return to our Author: in 1678, he was 
installed prebendary of Gloucester.” He died at 
Cambridge, June 26, 1688; and was interréd in 
the chapel of Christ’s College, with the following 
inscription on his monument :— 

‘Here lyeth the body:of Dr. Ralph Cudworth, 
_ late Master of Christ’s College, about thirty years | 
Hebrew Professor, and Prebendary of Glouces- 

ter. He died the 26th of June, 1688, in the se- 
- venty-first year of his age.” 

He was a man of very extensive learning, ex- 
cellently skilled in the learned languages ‘and 
antiquity, a good mathematician, a subtle philo- 
sopher, and a profound metaphysician. He em- 
braced the mechanical or corpuscular philosophy; 

but, with regard to the Deity, intelligences, genii, 
ideas, and in short the principles of human know- 
‘ledge, he. followed Plato, and even the latter 
 .Platonists.. A great number of writers commend 
' his piety and modesty ; and Bishop Burnet? hav- 
ing observed, that Dr. Henry. More studied to 
consider religion as a seed of a deiform nature, 
and in order to this, set young students much on 
reading the ancient philosophers; chiefly Plato, 
‘Lully, and Plotin; and on considering the Christ- 
ian religion as a doctrine sent fromi God both to 
elevate and sweeten human nature, tells us, that 
4 See his Eloge in Hist. de V Academie des Inscriptions et none 
Lettres, tom. ii. p. 562, edit. Amsterdam. 7 
- © Survey of the Cathedrals of York, &v. by Browne Willis, Esq. p. 
743, edit. London, 1727, in 4to. 


€ Moshcim, ubi supra. 
d History of his Own Time, vol. 1. p. 187; 


OF RALPH CUDWORTH, D. D. St 


_«©Dr. Cudworth carried this on with, a. great 
strength of genius, and a vast compass of learn- 
ing ;” and that ‘he was a man of great conduct 
and prudence; upon which his picaics did very 
falsely accuse him of craft and dissimulation.” 
The late earl of Shaftesbury* styles him an ex- 
cellent and learned divine, of highest authority at 
Jaome and fame abroad. 

Besides his sermon on | John ir. 3, 4, above: 
mentioned, he published likewise another, on 1 
Cor. xv. 57. the third edition of both: which was 
printed at London, 1676, in folio. | | 

He left several posthumous works, most of 
“which seem to be a continuation of his Intellec- 
tual System, of which he had given the world only 
the first part.. One of these was published by 
-BDr. -Edward Chandler, bishop of Durham, at 
T.ondon, in 1731, under this title, A Treatise con- 
cerning eternal and immutable Morality. In the | 
preface® to which, the Bishop observes, that in 
this book our Author “ proves the falseness of the 
consequences with respect to natural justice and 
morality in God, which are deducible from the 
principles of those that maintain the second sort 
of Fate, denominated by him Theologic. And thus 
it may be reckoned to be a sequel in part of his . 
first book against Material Fate. Had it come 
abroad as early as it was written, it had served 
for-a proper antidote to the poison in: some of 
Mr. Hobbes’s, and others writings, who revived in 
‘that age the exploded opinions of Protagoras and 
--other ancient ‘Greeks, and took away the essen-— 
tial and eternal] discriminations of moral good and 


* Charagteristics, vol. iii. chap. 2, p.64. . & P.9, 10, LL, 


32 OF THE LIFE AND WRITINGS 


evil, of just and unjust, and made them all arbi- 
trary productions of Divine or human will. Against 
the ancient and modern patrons of this doctrine, 
no one hath writ better than Dr. Cudworth. His 
book is indeed a demonstration of the truth of 
the contrary opinion, and is drawn up with that 
beauty, clearness, and strength, as must delight 
as well as convince the reader, if I may judge of 
the affection of others from the effect it had on 
me. It will certainly givea just idea of the writer's 
good sense, as well as vast learning. Weare not 
certain, that this treatise is quoted so perfect as 
the Author designed it; but it appears from the 
manuscript, that he transcribed the best part of 
it with his own hand, as if it was speedily to have 
been sent to the press.” 

The titles and subjects of the rest of our Aue 
thor’s manuscmpts are as follow: 

A. Discourse of moral Good and Evil, 3n se- 
veral folios, containing near 1000 pages. 


Heads of the chapters of one of those books. 


Chap. 1. The opinions of the ancient adversa- 
ries of natural justice explained, p. 1. 

2. Objections against morality, p. 11. 

3. Answers to the Ist objection, p. 29. 

4. Answer to the 2d and 3d objections, p. 45. 

5. Inconsistencies with a commonwealth, p. 49. 

6. Justice by God’s arbitrary command, p. 79. 

7. The 6th and 7th objections answered, p. 112. 

8. Pleasure; wherein the ancient Hedonic phi- 
losophy is explained, and it is largely debated, 
whether pleasure is the summum bonum, p. 117. 

y. Answer to the 9th objection, p. 175. 
10. Notion of morality settled, p. 198 


OF RALPH CUDWORTH, D.D. - 33. 


11, Happiness ; and the philosophy of Epicu- 
‘rus concerning it examined and refuted, p. 253. 

12. True happiness in Divine life, p. 296. 

13. Result of the former discourse ; _—: 
real substance Deity, p. 303. 

14. Controyersy.of liberty stated. A new phi- 
losophical hypothesis, p. 336. 

15. Objections against liberty. To ayalov ga 
VOMEVOY. © 

16. Argument from the phenomenon of i incon- 
tinency, p. 382. 


Heads of another book of Morality, wherein Hobbes’s 
philosophy is explained. 

Prolegomena ; to shew, that if nothing is na- 
turally just or unjust, nothing can be made so.— 
Chap. 2. Not by laws.—Chap. 3. Not by laws of 
nature.—Chap. 4. Not by covenants.—Chap. 5. _ 
To explain his doctrine, generally and particu- 
larly —Chap. 6. State of nature.—Chap. 7. Laws 
of nature——Chap. 8. Common, representative.— 
Chap.9. To discover his equivocations.—Chap. 
10. About obligation.—Chap. 11. According to 
him, there can be no Ethic.—Chap. 12. Judgment . 
on his politics, that no politic can be built on 
these principles. 

A Discourse of Liberty and Necessity, in which 
the grounds of the Atheistical philosophy are con- 
futed, and morality vindicated and explained. 
This book contains 1000 pages in folio. 


Heads of the chapters of one of the books. 

Chap. 1. The necessity of all human actions 
asserted by threesorts of men, and in different 
ways :—First, Some Christian theologers of the 


31 —-OF~*THE LIFE -AND WRITINGS. 
jJatterage. Secondly, The old Zenonian Stoics. 
Thirdly, The Democritical Physiologers or Athe- 
istical Fatalists, p. 1... 

2. Christian Fatalists pleading, p. 37. 

3. The Stoical Fatalists pleading, p. 70. 

4. Atheistical Fatalists pleading, p. 84. 

5. Answer to the phenomena objected, p. 119. 

6. Of motion and sense, p. 167. 

7. Of intellection, p. 196. 

8. Answer to Hobbes’s Reflections, p. 305. 

-$: Morality, p. 317. 


Heads of the chapters of another book, De libero 
Arbitrio. 


Chap. 1. Dreams.—2. Indifferences.—3. Gene-_ 
ral account.—4. Particular or full account.—5. 
Definition and particular account.—6. An imper- 
fection not formally in God.—7. Arguments to 
prove such a thing. —8. That that, which rules 
call, is not avayKn aTapaitnToc, but Tpovola iAacpoc. 
—9. Answer to the objection, undv avairiov.—10: 
Contingencies.—11.Argument for necessity, taken 
from the nature of God. | | 

Upon Daniel’s prophecy of the LXX weeks, 
wherein all the interpretations of the Jews are 
considered and confuted, with several of some 
learned Christians: In two volumes, in folio. - 

- Of the verity of the Christian religion against - 
the Jews. Dr. Cudworth mentions this in his 

MSS. but it is not yet found. 7 

A Discourse of the Creation of the World, and 
Immortality of the Soul, in 8vo. 

Hebrew learning. 

An explanation of Hobbes’s notion of God, and 
of the extension of spirits. : 


OF RALPH CUDWORTH, D.D. 35 


Our Author had several sons, who probably 
died young, but he left one daughter, Damaris, 
who was second wife to Sir Francis Masham, of 
Oates, in the county of Essex, Bart.* by whom 
she had a son, the late Francis Cudworth :Ma- 
sham, Esq.” one of the Masters of the High Court 
of Chancery, and accountant-general of the said 
Court; and foreign apposer in the Court of Ex- 
chequer. ‘This lady had a great friendship with 
Mr. Locke, who died at her house at Oates, 
where he had resided for several years before. 
She was distinguished for her uncommon genius 
and learning; and in the year 1696 published at 
London, in 12mo. without her name, A Discourse 
concerning the Love of God.* She introduces this 
tract with observing, that ‘‘ whatever reproaches 
have been made ae the Romanists, on the one 
hand, of the want of books of devotion in the 
church of England, or by the dissenters, on the | 
other, of a dead and lifeless way of preaching, it 
may be affirmed, that there cannot any where be 
found so good a collection of discourses on mo- 
ral subjects, as might be made of English sermons, 
and other treatises of that nature, written by the 
divines of our church: which books are certain- 
ly in themselves of the greatest, and most general 
use of any; and do most conduce to that, which 
is the chief aim of Christianity—a good life.” She 
then animadverts u pon those who andevvalie mo- 
rality,° and others, who strain the duties of it to 
an impracticable pitch, and pretend to ascend by 


2 He dicd at his scat at Oates, on Sunday, the 3d of March, 1702-3, 

in the 77th year of his age. a 
b He died May 17, 1731. 
£ It centains 126 pages, besides the preface. a P2533: 


36 OF THE LIFE AND WRITINGS 


it to something beyond or above it;* and after- 
wards proceeds to consider the conduct of those 
who build their practical and devotional dis- 
courses upon principles which will not bear the 
test, but which oblige them to lay down such as- 
sertions of morality, as sober and well-disposed 
Christians cannot understand to be practicable." 
And here she applies herself to the examination 
of Mr. John Norris’s* scheme in his Practical 
Discourses and other treatises, wherein he main- 
tains, that “mankind are obliged strictly, as their 
duty, to love, with desire, nothing but God only, 
every degree of desire of any creature whatsoever 
being sinful:” which assertion Mr. Norris defends 
upon this ground, that God, not the creature, is 
the immediate efficient cause of our sensations ; 
for whatsoever gives us pleasure has a right to 
our love: but God only gives us pleasure, there- 
fore he only has a right to our love. This hypo- 
thesis is considered with great accuracy and in- 
genuity by Lady Masham, and the bad conse- 
quences of it represented ina strong light. Her 
Discourse was translated into French by Mr. 
Peter Coste, and printed at Amsterdam, ip 1705. 
She lies buried in the cathedral church of Bath, 
where a monument ts erected to her memory, with 
the following inscription : 


‘Near this place lies Dame Damaris MasHam, 
daughter of Ralph Cudworth, D. D. aud second 
wife of Sir Francis Masham, of Oates, in the 
county of Essex, Bart. who to the softness and 


2 P.3, 4, 5, ¢: 
»P.7. 
© This divine borrowed his hypothesis from Father Mallebranche. 


OF RALPH CUDWORTH, D.D. | Oo” 


 elegancy of her own sex added several of the no- 


+ 


blest accomplishments and qualities to the other. 
. “ She possessed these advantages in a degree 
unusual to either, and tempered them with an 
exactness peculiar to herself. 

« Her learning, judgment, sagacity, and pene- 
tration, ‘together with her candour and love of 
truth, were very observable to all that conversed 
with her, or were acquainted with those small 
treatises she published in her life-time, though she 
industriously concealed her name. 

“ Being mother of an only son, she applied 
all her nataral and acquired endowments to the 


care of his education. 


“« She was a strict observer of all the intiies 
belonging to every station of her life; and only 
wanted opportunities to make these talents shine 
in the world, which were the admiration of her — 
friends. 

‘‘ She was born on the 18th of January, 1658, 
and died on the 20th of April, 1708.” 


VOL. I. D 


THE TRUE 
INTELLECTUAL SYSTEM 
UNIVERSE. 

\ pee ae ae 


Tuevarioy vig sbuxig ‘H ‘ANOPQTIVNH ZONA, Tero? de ‘H OEMA. 


ORIGENES. © 


¥O THE 


RIGHT HONOURABLE 


é 


HENEAGE LORD FINCH, 


Baron of Daventry, Lord High Chancellor of England, and 
one of his Majesty's most Honourable Privy Council. 


MY LORD, 
Tue many favours I have formerly re- 

ceived from you, as they might justly challenge, 
whenever I bad a fit opportunity, a public and 
thankful acknowledgment; so have they encou- 
- raged me at this time, to the presumption of this 
dedication to your Lordship. Whom, as your 
perspicacious wit and solid judgment, together 
with your acquired learning, render every way a 
most accomplished and desirable patron ; xo did 
T persuade myself, that your hearty affection to 
religion, and zeal for it, would make you not un- 
willing, to take that into your protection, which 
is written wholly in the defence thereof; so far 
forth, as its own defects, or miscarriages, should 
not render it incapable of the same. Nor can [ 
think it probable, that in an age of so much de 
bauchery, scepticism, and infidelity, an under- 
taking of this kind should be judged by you use- 


DEDICATION. 


less or unseasonable. And now, having so fit an 
opportunity, I could most willingly expatiate in 
the large field of your Lordship’s praise, both that 
I might do an act.of justice to yourself, and pro- 
voke others to yourimitation. But I am sensible, 
that as no eloquence, less than that of your own, 
could be fit for such a performance; so the noble- 
ness and generosity of your spirit is such, that you 
take inuch more pleasure in doing praiseworthy | 
things, than in hearing the repeated echoes of 
them. - Wherefore, instead of pursuing encomi- 
ums, which would be the least pleasing to your- 
self, I shall offer up my prayers to Almighty 
God, for the continuation of your Lordship’s life 
and health; that so his Majesty may long have 
such a-loyal subject and wise counsellor; the 
church of England such a worthy patron; the 
High Court of Chancery such an oracle of impar- 
tial justice; and the whole nation such a pattern 
of virtue and piety. Which shall ever be the 
hearty desire of, : | 


_ My Lorp, 
Your Lordship’s most humble, and 4 
Most affectionate servant, 


-R. CUDWORTH. 


PREFACE, TO THE READER* 


—— 


Tuovcn, 1 confess, I have seldom taken any 
great pleasure ia reading other men’s apologies, 
vet must Pat this time make some myself. First, 
therefore, T acknowledge, that when I engazed 
the press, Tintended only a discourse coucern- 
lng liberty and necessity, or, to speak Gut more 
plainly, against the fatal necessity of all actions 
and events; which, upon whatsoever grounds or 
principles maintained, will, as we conceive, serve 
the design of Atheism, and undermine Christ- 
lanity, and all religion, as taking.away all guilt 
and blame, punishmeuts and rewards, and plainly 
rendering a day of judgment ridiculous: aud, it is 
evident, that some have pursued it of Tate, in 
order to that end. But afterwards we considered, 
that this, which is indeed a coutroversy concern- 
ing the True Intellectual System of the Universe, 
does, in the fall extent thereof, take in other 
things: the necessity of all actions and events 
being maintained by several persons, upon very 
different grounds, according to that tripartite fa- 
talism, mentioned by us in the beginning of the 
first chapter. For first, the Democritic Fate is 
nothing but the material necessity of all things 
without a God, in supposing senseless matter, 
necessarily moved, to be the only original and 
principal of all things; which therefore is called 
by Epicurus the Physiological, by us the Athe- 
* Preface to the 2d edit. 4to. 1743. 


44 | PREFACE. 


istic Fate. Besides which, the Divine Fate is also 
bipartite: some Theists supposing God, both to 
decree and do all things in us (evil as well as 
good), orby his immediate influence to determinate 
all actions, and so make them alike necessary to 
us. From whence it follows, that his willis no 
_ way regulated or determined by any essential and 
immutable goodness and justice; or that he hath 
nothing of morality in his nature, he being only 
arbitrary will omnipotent. As also that all good 
and evil moral, to us creatures, are mere thetical 
or positive things; voum, and not duce, by law or 
command only, and not by nature. This there- 
fore may be called the Divine Fate immoral, and 
violent. Again, there being other Divine fatalists, 
who acknowledge sucha Deity, as both suffers 
other things, besides itself, to act, and hath an 
essential goodness and justice in its nature, and 
consequently, that there are things, just and un- 
just to us naturally, and not by law and arbitrary 
constitution only ; and yet nevertheless take away 
from men all such liberty as might make them 
capable of praise and dispraise, rewards and pu- 
' nishments, and objects of distributive justice ; 
they conceiving necessity to be intrinsical to the 
nature of every thing, in the actings of it, and 
nothing of contingency to be found any where: 
from whence it will follow, that nothing could 
possibly have been otherwise, in the whole world, 
than it is. And this may be called the Divine 
Fate moral (as the other immoral) and natural (as 
the other violent); it being a concatenation, or 
implexed series of causes, all in themselves ne- 
cessary, depending upon a Deity moral (if we 
may so speak) ; that is, such as 1s essentially good, 


PREFACE. 45 


and naturally just, as the head thereof; the first 
contriver and orderer of all. Which kind of Di- 
vine Fate hath not only been formerly asserted by 
the NSteics, but also of late by divers modern 
writers. Wherefore, of the three fatalisms, or 
false hypotheses of the universe, mentioned in 
the beginning of this book, one is absolute Athe- 
ism, another immoral Theism, or religion without 
any natural justice and morality (all Just and un- 
just, according to this hypothesis, berag mere the- 
tical or factitious things, made by arbitrary will 
and command onty); the third and last, such a 
Theism, as acknowledges not only a God, or om- 
nipotent understanding Being, but also natural 
justice and morality, founded in bim, and derived 
from him; nevertheless no liberty from necessity 
any where, and therefore no distributive or re- 
tributive justice mm the world. Whereas these 
three things are (as we conceive) the fundamentals 
or essentials of true religion. First, that all things 
in the world do not float without a head and go- 
vernor; but that there is a God, an omnipotent 
understanding Being, presiding over all. Second- 
ly, that this God, being essentially good and just, 
there is gucee xadov xat &xaov, something in its own 
nature immutably and eternally just and unjust ; 
and not by arbitrary will, law, and command 
only. And, lastly, that there is something é¢’ nuw, 
or, that we are so far forth principles or masters 
of our own actions, as to be accountable to jus- 
tice for them, or to make us guilty and blame- 
worthy for what we do amiss, and to deserve pu- 
nishment accordingly. Which three fandamentals 
of religion are intimated by the author to the 
Hebrews in these words :—“ He that cometh to 


Af} | PREFACE. 


God must believe that he is, and that he is a re- 
warder of those who seek him out.” For to seek 
out God here, is.nothing else but to seek a parti- 
cipation of his image, or the recovery of that 
nature and life of his which we have been alienat- 
ed from. And these three things, namely, that 
all things do not float without a head and go- 
vernor, but there is an omnipotent understanding | 
Being presiding over all; that this God hath an- 
essential goodness and justice; and that! the dif- 
ferences of good and evil moral, honest and dis- 
honest, are not by mere will and law only, but - 
by nature; and consequently, that the Deity can- 
not act, influence, and necessitate men to such 
things as are in their own nature evil ; and, lastly, 
that necessity is not intrinsical to the nature of 
every thing, but. that men have such a liberty or 
power over their own actions, as may render them 
accountable for the same, and blameworthy when 
they do amiss; and, consequently, that there is a 
justice distributive of rewards and punishments — 
running: through the world: I say, these three 
(which are the most important things that the 
mind of man can employ itself upon), taken all 'to- 
gether, make up the wholeness and entireness of 
that which ishere called byus the True Intellectual 
System ofthe Universe, in such a sense as Atheism 
may be called a false system thereof; the word 
Intellectual being added, to distinguish it from. 
the other, vulgarly so called, Systems of the 
World (that is, the visible and cdrporeal world), 
‘the Ptolemaic, Tychonic, and Copernican; the 
two former of which are now commonly account- 


ed false, the latter true. And thus our prospect | 


being now enlarged into a threéfold fatalism, or 


PREFACE, AT 
spurious and false hypothesis of the intellectual 
system, making all things necessary upon several 
grounds ; we accordingly designed the confuta- 
tion of them all, in three several books. -The © 
first, against Atheism (which is the Democritic 
Fate), whereinall the reason and philosophy there- 
of is refelled, and the existence of a God demon- 
strated ; and so that vu) dvayen, or material ne- 
cessity of all things, overthrown. The second, for 
such a God, as-is not mere arbitrary will omnipo- 
tent, decreeing, doing, and necessitating all ac- 
tions, evil as well as good, but essentially moral, 
good, and just; and for a natural discrimen ho- — 
nestorum et turpium, whereby another ground of 
the necessity of all human actions will be re- 
moved. And the third and last, against necessity 
intrinsical and essential to all action, and for such 
a liberty, or szt-potestas, in rational creatures, as 
may render them accountable, capable of rewards 
and punishments, and so objects of distributive or 
retributive justice; by which the now only re- 
maining ground, of the fatal necessity of all ac- 
tions and events, will be taken away. -And all 
these three under that one general title of the 
True Intellectual System of the Universe; each 
book having, besides, its own particular title: as, 
against Atheism ; for natural justice and morality, 
founded in the Deity; for liberty from necessity, 
and a distributive justice of rewards and punisb- 
ments in the world. And this we conceive may 
fully satisfy, concerning our general title, all those 
who are not extremely critical or captious, at least 
as many of them as ever heard of the astronomi- 
cal systems of the world; so that they will not 
think us hereby obliged to treat of the hierarchy 


48 PREFACE. 


of angels, and of all the several species of ani- 
mals, vegetables, minerals, &c.; that is, to write 
de omni ente, of whatsoever is contained within 
the complexion of the universe. Though the whole 
scale of entity is here also taken notice of; and 
the general ranks of substantial beings, below the 
Deity (or trinity of Divine hypostases) considered ; 
which yet, according to our philosophy, are but 
two; souls of several degrees (angels themselves 
being included within that number), and body or 
matter; as also the immortality of those souls 
proved: which notwithstanding is suggested by 
us, only to satisfy some men’s curiosity. Never- 
theless, we confess, that this general title might 
well have been here spared by us, and this volume 
have been presented to the reader's view, not as a 
part or piece, but a whole complete and entire 
thing by itself, had it not been for two reasons; 
first, our beginning with those three fatalisms, or 
false hypotheses of the Intellectual System, and 
promising a confutation of them all then, when 
we thought to have brought them within the com- 
pass of one volume; and secondly, every other 
page, throughout this whole volume, accordingly 
bearing the inscription of book the first upon the 
head thereof. This is therefore that, which, in 
the first place, we here apologize for our publish- 
ing one part or book alone by itself, we being 
surprised in the length thereof; whereas we had 
intended two more along with it. Notwithstand- 
ing which, there is no reason why this volume 
should be therefore thought imperfect and incom- 
plete, because it hath not all the three things at 
first designed us; it containing aJl that belongeth 
to its own particular title and subject, and being 


PREFACE. ' = 49 
in that respect no piece, but a whole. This. in- 
_ deed must needs beget. an expectation of the two 
following treatises (especially in-such as shall 
have received any satisfaction from this first), con- 
cerning those two other fatalisms, or false hypo- 
theses mentioned, to make up our whole Intel- 
lectual System complete; the one to prove, that 
God is not mere arbitrary will omnipotent, (with- 
out any essential goodness and justice) decreeing 
— and doing all things in the world, as well evil as 
good, and thereby making them alike necessary 
to us; from whence it would follow, that all good 
and evil moral are mere thetical, positive, and’ ar- 
bitrary things ; that is, not nature, but will : which 
is the defence of natural, eternal, immutable jus- 
tice or morality. The other, that necessity is not 
intrinsical to the nature of every thing, God and 
all creatures, or essential to all action; but, that — 
there is something 2¢ nui, or that we have some 
liberty or power over our own actions: which is 
the defence of a distributive or retributive justice, 
dispensing rewards and punishments throughout 
the whole world. Wherefore we think fit here to 
advertise the reader concerning these, that though 
they were and still are, really intended by us, yet 
the complete finishing and publication of them 
will notwithstanding depend upon many contin- 
gencies ; not only of our life and health, the lat- 
ter of which; as well as the former, is to us-very © 
uncertain ; but also of our leisure, or vacancy from 
other necessary employments. 

In the next place, we must apologize diss for 
the fourth chapter ; inasmuch as though, in regard. 
of its length, it might rather be called a book, — 
than a chapter, yet it doth not answer all.the con- 


50... PREFACE. 


tents prefixed to it. Here therefore must we again 
confess ourselves surprised, who, when we wrote 
those contents, did not suspect in the least, but 
that we should have satisfied them all within a 
“lesser compass. And our design then was, be- 
sides answering the objection against the natu- | 
rality of the idea of God, from the Pagan Poly- 
theism (we having then so fit an occasion), to give 
such a further account of the idolatry and a 
gion of the. Gentiles,.as might prepare our way 
for a defence of Christianity, to. be subjoined in — 
the close ; it being not only agreeable to the sense 
of ancient doctors, but also expressly declared in 
the Scripture, that one design of Christianity was 
to abolish and extirpate the Pagan Polytheism 
and idolatry. And our reasons for this intended 
defence of Christianity were, first, because we 
had observed, that some professed opposers of 
Atheism had either incurred a suspicion, or at 
- Jeast suffered under the imputation of being mere 
Theists, or natural religionists only, and no hearty 
believers of Christianity, or friends to revealed 
religion. From which either suspicion or impu- 
tation therefore we thought it justice to free our- 
selves, we having so unshaken a belief and firm 
assurance of the truth of the whole Christian doc-_ 


trine. But, secondly, and principally, because we | 


had: further observed it to have been the method 
of our modern Atheists, to make their first assault 
against Christianity, as thinking that.to be the 

most vulnerable: and that it would be an easy 
step for them, from thence, to demolish all reli- 
- gion and Theism. However, since the satisfying 
. the former part of those contents had already 
taken up so much room, that the pursuit of the 


PREFACE. | bl 


remainder would have quite excluded our princi- 
pally-intended confutation of all the atheistic 
erounds; the forementioned objection being now 
sufficiently answered, there was a necessity, that 
we should there break off, and leave the further 
account of the Pagan idolatry and religion, toge- 
‘ther with our defence of Christianity, to some 
other more convenient opportunity. _ 

And now we shall exhibit to the reader’s view 
a brief and general synopsis of the whole follow- 
ing work, together with some particular reflec- 
tions upon ‘several parts thereof, either for: his 
better information concerying them, or for their 
vindication; some of which, therefore, will be of 
ereater use, after the book has been read, than 
before. The first chapter is an account of the | 
Atomic physiology, as made the foundation of 
the Democritic Fate: where the reader is to un- 
derstand, that this Democritic Fate, which is one 
of the three false hypotheses of the Intellectual 
System, there mentioned, is the very self-same 
thing wih the Atomic Atheism, the only form of 
Atheism, that hath publicly appeared upon the 
stage, as an entire philosophic system, or hath 
indeed been much taken notice of in the world 
for these two thousand years past. ‘For, though 
it be true, that Epicurus, (who was also an Ato- 
mic Atheist, as is afterwards declared, havmg, in 
all probability, therefore a mind to innovate some- — 
thing, that he might not seem to have borrowed 
all from Democritus,) did by violence introduce 
liberty of will into his hypothesis; for the solving 
whereof, he ridiculously devised, that his third 
motion of Atoms, called by Lucretius— 


Exiguum Clinamen Principiorum: 





52 | PREFACE. 

Yet was this; as Cicero* long since observed, a 
most heterogeneous patch, or assumentum of his, 
and altogether as contradictious to the tenor of 
-his own principles, as it was to the doctrine of 
Democritus himself. There can be nothing more 
absurd, than for an Atheist to assert liberty of 
will;. but, it is most of all absurd, for an Atomic 
one. And, therefore, our modern Atheists do> 
here plainly disclaim Epicurus, (though otherwise 
so much admired by them,) and declare open war 
against this liberty of will; they apprehending, . 
that it would unavoidably introduce incorporeal 
substance; as also well knowing, that necessity, 
on the contrary, effectually overthrows all reli- 
gion, it taking away guilt and blame, punish- 
ments and rewards; to which might be added 
also prayers and. devotions. 

And as there was a necessity for us heres to 
give some account. of that ancient.Atomic physio- 
logy, with which Atheism now became thus blend- 
ed and complicated ; so do we, in this first chap- 
ter, chiefly insist upon two things concerning it. 
_ First, that it was no invention of Democritus nor 
Leucippus, but of much greater antiquity; not 
only from that tradition transmitted by Posido- | 
nius, the Stoic, that it derived its original from one 
Moschus, a Pheenician, who lived before the Tro- 
jan wars, (which plainly ‘makes it to have been 
Mosaical ;) but also from Aristotle's affirmation, 
that the greater part of the ancient philosophers 
entertained this hypothesis ; and further, because 
it is certain, that divers of the Italics, and parti- 
cularly Empedocles, before Democritus, physio-— 
logized atomically, which is the reason he was so 


oo De Nat. Deor. I. Lc. 23. 


_ PREFACE. — 33 


tauch applauded by Lucretius. Besides which, 
itis more than a presumption, that Anaxagoras | 
his Homeomery, or similar Atomology, was but 
a degeneration from the true and genuine Atomo- 
logy of the acient Italics, that was an Anomeco- 
mery, or doctrine of dissimilar and unqualified 
atoms. Wherefore all that is true concerning 
Democritus and Leucippus, is only this, that_ 


these men were indeed the first atheizers of this _. 


ancient Atomic physiology, or the inventors and 
broachers of the Atomic Atheism. Which is Laer- 
tius his true meaning, (though it be not commonly 
understood,) when he recordeth of them, that they 
were the first, who made unqualified atoms the 
principles of all things in the universe without ex- 
ception ; that is, not only of inanimate bodies, (as 
the other ancient religious Atomists, the Italics, 
before had done,) but also of soul and mind. 
And whereas, we conceive this Atomic physio- 
logy, as to the essentials thereof, to. be unques- 
tionably true, viz.—That the only principles of 
bodies are magnitude, figure, sight, motion, and 
rest; and that. the qualities and fom of inani- 
| mate bodies are really nothing, but several com- 
binations of these, causing several fancies m us; 
(which excellent discovery, therefore, so long ago 
made, is a notable instance of the wit and sagacity 
of the ancients ;) so do we in the next place make 
it manifest, that this Atomic physiology, rightly _ 
understood, is so far from being either the mo- 
_ther or. nurse of Atheism, or any ways favourable 
thereunto, (as is vulgarly supposed) that it is in- 
deed the most directly opposite to it of any, and 
the greatest defence against the same. For, first, 
we have discovered, that the principle, upon 
VOL. I. > E | 


oA | PREFACE. 


which this Atomology is founded, and from 
whence it sprung, was no other than this, nothing 
out of nothing, in the true sense thereof; or, that 
nothing can be caused. by nothing oi whence 
it was concluded, that in natural generations 
there was no new real entity produced, which 
was not before: the genuine consequence whereof 
was two-fold ; that the qualities and forms of in- 
animate bodies are no entities really distinct from 
the magnitude, figure, sight and motion of parts; 
and that souls are substances incorporeal, not ge- 
nerated out of matter. Where we have shewed, 
that the Pythagoric doctrine, of the pre-exist- 
ence of souls, was founded upon the very same 
principles with the Atomic physiology. And it is 
from this very principle, rightly understood, that 
ourselves afterwards undertake to demonstrate 
the absolute impossibility of all Atheism. More- 
over, we have made it undeniably evident, that the 
intrinsic constitution of this Atomic physiology 
also is such, as that whosoever admits it, and 
' rightly understands it, must needs acknowledge 
incorporeal substance ; which is the absolute over- 
throw of Atheism. And from hence alone it is 
certain to us, without any testimonies from anti- 
quity, that Democritus and Leucippus could not 
possibly be the first inventors of this philosophy, 
they either not rightly understanding it, or else 
wilfully depraving the same; and the Atomic Athe- 
_ Ism being really nothing else, but a rape committed 
upon the Atomic physiolog ‘y. . For which reason, 

we do by no means here applaud Plato, nor Aris- 
totle, in their rejecting this most ancient Atomic 
physiology, and introducing again, that unintelli- 
gible first matter, and those exploded qualities 


PREFACE. | Qo 


and forms, into philosophy. For though this were 
probably done by Plato, out of a disgust and.pre- 
judice against the Atomic Atheists, which made 
him not so well consider nor understand that 
physiology ; yet was he much disappointed of his 
expectation herein, that atomology, which he ex- 
ploded, (rightly understood.) being really the 
greatest bulwark against Atheism; and, on the 
contrary, those forms and qualities, which he es- 
poused, the natural seed thereof, they, besides 
their unintelligible darkness, bringing something 
‘out of nothing, in the impossible sense ; which we 
shew to be the inlet of all Atheism. And thus, in 
this first chapter, have we not only quite disarmed 
Atheism of Atomicism, or shewed, that the latter, 
(rightly understood) affordeth no manner of shel- 
ter or protection to the former; but also made it - 
manifest, that it is the greatest bulwark and de- 
fence against the same; which isa thing after - 
wards further insisted on.. 

As to the second chapter, we have no more to 
say, but only this; that here we took the liberty to 
reveal the arcana mysteries of Atheism, and to dis- 
cover all its pretended grounds of reason, that 
we could find any where suggested .in writings, 

~ those only excepted, that are peculiar to the Hy- 
_lozoic, form (which is directly contrary to ‘the 
~ Atomic), and that to their best advantage too ; 
“hevertheless to this end, that these being afice: 

wards all baffled and confuted, Theism might, by 
- this means, obtain the greater ee — triumph 
over Atheism. 

In the third chapter, we thought it necessary, 
in order to a fuller confutation of Atheism, to con- 
sider all the other forms theréof, besides the Ato- 

E2 


fxd 


o6 PREFACE, 


mic. And here do we, first of all, make a dis- 
_covery of a certain form of Atheism, never before 
taken notice of by any modern ‘writers, which 
we call the Hylozoic: which, notwithstanding, 
though it were long since started by Strato, in 
way of opposition to the Democritic and Epicu- 
_ rean hypothesis, yet because it afterwards slept in 
perfect silence. and oblivion, should have been 
here*by us passed by silently, had we not had 
certain knowledge of its being of late awakened 
-and revived by some, who were so sagacious, as 
plainly to perceive, that the Atomic form could 
never do their business, nor prove defensible, and 
therefore would attempt to carry on this cause of 
Atheism, in quite a different way, by the life and 
perception of matter; as also that this, in all pro- 
bability, would, ere long, publicly appear upon 
the stage, though not bare-faced, but under a dis- 
‘guise. Which Atheistic hypothesis is. partly con- 
futed by us, in the close of this chapter; ‘and partly 
in the fifth. 

- In the next place it being certain, that: there 
-had been other philosophic Atheists in the world 
- before those Atomics, Epicurus and Democri- 
tus ;-we declare, out of Plato and Aristotle, what 
that) most ancient Atheistic hypothesis was ; 
‘namely, the education of all things, even life and 
‘understanding itself, out of matter, in the way of 
qualities, or as the passions and affections thereof, 
generable and corruptible. Which form.of Athe- | 
ism is styled by us, not only Hylopathian, but also 
Anaximandrian ; however, we grant some proba- 
bility of that opinion, that Anaximander held an 
Homeceomery of qualified atoms, as Anaxagoras 
afterwards did; the difference between them 


PREFACE, o7@ 
being only this, that the latter asserted an unmade 
mind, whereas, the former generated all mind and 
understanding out of those qualified atoms, hot 
and cold, moist and dry, compounded together ; 
because we judged this difference not to be a suf- 
ficient ground to multiply forms of Atheism upon. 
And here do we give notice of that strange kind 
of religious Atheism, or Atheistic Theogonism, 
which asserted, not only other understanding 


beings, superior to men, called by them gods, but. 


also, amongst those, one Supreme or Jupiter too; 
nevertheless native, and generated at first out of 
night and chaos (that is, senseless matter), as also 
mortal and corruptible again into, the same. | 
- Besides which, there is yet a fourth Atheistic 
form taken-notice of, out of the writings of the 
ancients, (though perhaps junior to the rest, it 
seeming to be but the corruption and degeneration 
of Stoicism) which concluded the whole world, 
not to be an animal (as the Pagan Theists then ge- 
nerally supposed), but only one huge plant or ve- 
getable, having an artificial, plantal, and plastic 
nature, as its highest principle, orderly disposing 
the whole, without any mind or understanding. 
And kere have we set down the agreement of all 
the Atheistic forms (however differing so much 
from one another), in this one general principle, 
viz.—That all animality, conscious life and un- 
derstanding, is generated out of senseless matter, 
- and corruptible again into it. . at 
‘Wherefore, in the close of this third chapter, we 
insist largely upon an artificial, regular, and plas- 
tic nature, devoid of expréss knowledge and un- 


derstanding, as subordinate ta the Deity; chiefly ~ 


in way-of confutation of those Cosmo-plastic andl. 


58 PREFACE, 

Hylozoic Atheisms. Though we had a further 
design herein also, for the defence of Theism; for- 
. asmuch as without such a nature, either God must 
be supposed to do all things in the world immedi- 
ately, and to form every gnat and fly, as it were, | 
with his own hands; which seemeth not so be- 
coming of him, and would render his providence, 
_ to human apprehensions, laborious and distrac- 
tious ; or else the whole system of this corporeal 
universe must result only from for tuitous mechan- 
ism, without the direction of any mind; which © 
hypothesis once admitted, would unquestionably, | 

by degrees, supplant and undermine all Theism. 

And now, from what we have declared, it may 
plainly appear, that this digression of our’s, con- 
cerning an artificial, regular, and plastic nature, 
(subordinate to the Deity) is no wen, or excres- 
cency in the body of this book ; but a natural and 
necessary member thereof. 

In the fourth chapter, after the idea of God 
fully declared, (where we could not omit his es- 
sential goodness and justice, or, if we may so call. 
it, themorality of the Deity, though that be a thing 
properly belonging to the second book, the confu- 
tation of the Divme Fate immoral) there is a large 
account given of the Pagan Polytheism ; to satisfy 
a very considerable objection, that lay in our way 
from thence, against the naturality of the idea of - 
God, as including oneliness and singularity in it. 
For had that, upon inquiry, been found true, 
which.is so commonly taken for granted, that the 
generality of the Pagan nations had constantly 
scattered their devotions amongst a multitude of 
self-existent and independent deities, they ac- 
knowledging no sovereign Numen; this would 


PREFACE, | 4 59 


much have stumbled the naturality of the Divine 
idea. But now it being, on the contrary, clearly — 
proved, that the Pagan theologers all along ac- 
knowledged one sovereign and omnipotent Deity, 
from which all their other gods were generated or 
created; we have thereby not only removed the _ 
forementioned objection out of the way, but also | 
evinced, that the generality of mankind have con- 
stantly had a certain prolepsis or anticipation in 
their minds, concerning the actual existence of a 
God, according to the true idea of him. And this 
was the rather done fully and carefully by us, be- 
‘cause we had not met with it sufficiently per- 
formed before; A. Steuchus Engubinus having 
laboured most in this subject, from whose profit- 
able industry, though we shall no way detract, yet 
whosoever will compare what he hath written 
with our's, will find no just cause to think our’s 
superfluous and unnecessary, much less, a tran- 
scription out of his. In which, besides other 
things, there is no account at all given of the many 
Pagan, poetical, and political gods, what they 
‘were: which is so great a part of our perform- 
ance, to prove them really to have been but the 
polyonymy of one God. From whence it follows, | 
also, that the Pagan religion, though sufficiently 

faulty, yet was not altogether so nonsensical, as 
the Atheists would represent it, out of design, that — 
they might from thence infer all religion to. be no- 

thing but a mere cheat and imposture - they wor- 
shipping only one supreme God, in the several 
manifestations of his goodness, power, and pe 
. yidence throughout the world, together with his 
inferior ministers. Nevertheless, we cannot deny, | 
that being once engaged in this subject, we thought 


ad 


60 PREFACE: 


ourselves the more concerned to do the business 
thoroughly and effectually, because of that con-— 
troversy lately. agitated concerning idolatry (which 
cannot otherwise be decided, than by giving a true 
account of the Pagan religion), and the so confi- 
dent affirmations of some, that none could posst- 
bly be guilty of idolatry, in the scripture sense, 
who believed one God, the creator of the whole 
world ; whereas‘it is most certain, on the contrary; 
that the Pagan Polytheism and idolatry consisted, 
not in worshipping many creators, or uncreateds, 
but in giving religious worship to creatures, be- 


tidesihev Creator: ; they directing their devotion, 


(as Athanasius* plainly affirmeth of them,) «x 
ayEVITH, Kal roAAote yevnroic, to one uncreated only; 


but, besides him, to many created gods. Butas 


for the polemic management of this controversy, 
concerning idolatry, we leave it to other learned 


hands, that are already engaged in it. 


Moreover, we have, in this fourth chapter, 
largely insisted also upon the Trinity. The rea: 
son whereof was, because it came in our way, 
and our contents engaged us thereunto, in order 
to the giving a full account of the Pagan theology, 


it being certain, that the Platonics and Pythago- 


reans, at least, if not other Pagans also, had their 
trinity, as well as Christians. And we could 
not well avoid the comparing, of these two tege- 
ther: upon which occasion, we take notice of a 
double Platonic trinity; the one spurious and 
adulterated, of some latter Platonists; the other 
true and genuine, of Plato himself, Parmenides, 
and the ancients. The former of which, though 
it be opposed by us to the Christian trinity, and 


* Oratione LV. conira Arianos ‘I’; I, Operum, p. 469. 


PREFACE, . 61° 


confuted, yet betwixt the latter and that, do 
we. find a wonderful correspondence; which is 
largely pursued in the Platonic Christian apology. . 
Wherein, notwithstanding, nothing must be look- 
ed upon, as dogmatically asserted by us, but only 
offered, and submitted to the judgment of the 
learned in these matters; we confining ourselves — 
in this mysterious point of the holy trinity, 
within the compass of those its three essentials 
declared :—First, that it is not a trinity of mere 
names and words, or of logical notions only; but 
of persons or hypostases.—Secondly, that none of 
those persons or hypostases are creatures, but all 
uncreated.—And, lastly, that they are all three, 
. truly and really one God. Nevertheless we ac- 
knowledge, that we did therefore the more copi- 
ously insist upon this argument, because of our 
then designed defence of Christianity ; we con- 
ceiving, that this parallelism, betwixt the ancient 
or genuine Platonic, and the Christian trinity, 
might be of some use to satisfy those amongst us, 
who boggle so much at the trinity, and look 
upon it as the choak-pear of Christianity ; when. 
they shall find, that the freest wits amongst the 
Pagans, and the best philosophers, who had no- 
thing of superstition to determine them that way, 
were so far from being shy of such.an hypothesis, 
as that they were even fond thereof. And that 
the Pagans had indeed such a Cabala amongst 
them (which some perhaps, will yet hardly be- 
lieve, notwithstanding all that we have said), 
might be further convinced, from that memorable 
relation.in Plutarch,* of Thespesius.Solensis, who, 


2 Libro de his, qui sero 4 Numine puniuntur, tom, ii. Oper. p. 563. 8. . 


62 — PREFACE. 


after he had been looked upon as dead for three 
days, reviving, affirmed, amongst other things, 
which he thought he saw or heard in the mean 
time in his ecstasy, this of three gods in the form 
ofa triangle, pouring in streams into one another ; 
Orpheus his soul being said to have arrived so far; 
accordinglyas from the testimonies of other Pagan 
writers we have proved, that a trinity of Divine 
hypostases was a part of the Orphic Cabala. 
True, indeed, our belief of the holy trinity is 
founded upon no Pagan Cabala, but only Scrip- 


ture revelation; it. being that, which Christians 


are, or should be, all baptized into. Nevertheless 
these things are reasonably noted by us to this 
end, that that should not be made a prejudice 
against Christianity and revealed religion, nor 
looked upon as such an affrightfal bugbear or 
mormo in it, which even Pagan philosophers them- 
selves, and those of the most accomplished intel- 
lectuals, and uncaptivated minds, though having 
neither councils, nor creeds, nor Scriptures, had 
so great a propensity and readiness ta ebrer tain, 

and such @ veneration for. 

In this fourth chapter, we were necessitated, 
by the matter itself, to run out into philology and 
antiquity ; as also in the other parts of the book, 
‘we do often give an account of the dectrine of the 
ancients ; which, however, some over-severe phi- 
losophers may look upon fastidiously, or under- 
value and depreciate, vet as we conceived it often 
necessary, So possibly may the variety thereof not 
be ungrateful to others; and this mixture of phi- 
lology, throughout the whole, sweeten and allay 
the severity of plnlosophy to them; the main 
thing, which the book pretends to, in the mean 


PREFACE. | 63 


tume, being the philosophy of religion. But, for 
our parts, we neither call philology, nor yet phi- 
losophy, our mistress; but serve ourselves of 
either, as occasion requireth. | 
As for the last chapter, though it promise on! y 

a confutation of all the Atheistic grounds, yet we 
do therein also demonstrate the absolute IMpossi- 
bility of all Atheism, and the actual existence of 
_aGod. Wesay demonstrate, not d prior, which 
is impossible and contradictious; but by neces- 
sary inference from principles altogether undeni- 
able. For we can by no means grant to the Athe- 
ists, that there is no more than a probable per- 

_suasion or opinion to be had of the existence of 
a God, without any certain knowledge or science. 
Nevertheless, it will not follow from hence, that 
whosoever shall read these demonstrations of 
our’s, and understand all the words of them, must 
therefore of necessity be presently convinced, 
-whether he will or no, and put out of all manner 
of doubt or‘hesitancy, concerning the existence 
of a God. For we believe that to be true, which 
some have affirmed, that were there any interest 
of life, any concernment of appetite and passion, 
against the truth of geometrical theorems them- 
selves, as of a triangle having three angles equal 
to two right, whereby men’s judgments maybe 
clouded and bribed, notwithstanding all the de- 
monstrations of them, many would remain at least 

sceptical about them. Wherefore mere specula- 
| tion, and dry mathematical reason, in minds un-_ 
purified, and having a contrary interest of. carnal- 
ity, and a heavy load of infidelity and distrust 
sinking them down, cannot alone beget an un- 
shaken -canfidence and assurance of so high a 


64 PREFACE. 


truth as this, the existence of one perfect under- 
standing Being, the original of all things. As it 
is certain, also, on the contrary, that minds cleans- 
ed and purged from vice may, without syllogistical 
reasonings, and mathematical demonstrations, 
have an undoubted assurance of the existence of 
a God, according to that of the philosopher, 
= Kabagotc motel Ev yuwoet Tw agtoTwy Ewa, Pp urity pos- 
sesses men with an assurance of the best things;— 
whether this assurance be called a vaticination or 
Divine sagacity (as itis by Plato and Aristotle), 
or faith, as in the Scripture. For the Scripture 
faith is not a mere believing of historical things, 
and upon inartificial arguments or testimonies 
only ; buta certain higher and Divine power in the 
soul, that peculiarly correspondeth with the Dei- 
ty. Notwithstanding which, kuowledge or sci- 
ence added to this faith, according to the Scripture 
advice, will make it more firm and stedfast, and 
the better able to resist those assaults of sophis- 
tical reasonings, that shall be made against it. 

In this fifth chapter, as sometimes elsewhere, 
we thought ourselves concerned, in defence of the 
Divine wisdom, goodness, and perfection against 
Atheists, to maintain (with all the ancient philose- 
phic Theists) the perfection of the creation also; 
or, that the whole system of things, taken altoge- 
ther, could not have been better made and ordered 
than it is. And, indeed, this Divine goodness and 
perfection, as displaying and manifesting itself im 
the works of nature and providence, is supposed 
in Scripture to be the very foundation of our 
Christian faith; when that is defined to be the sub- 
stance and evidence rerum sperandarum ; that 13, 
of whatsoever is (by a guod man) to be hoped for.— 


| PREFACE, | . 65 
Notwithstanding which, it-was far from our inten- 
tion therefore to conclude, that nothing neither in 
Nature nor Providence could be otherwise than it 
ig; or that there is nothing left to the free will 
and choice of the Deity. And though we do, in 
the third section, insist largely upon that ancient 
Pythagoric Cabala, that souls are always united 
to some body or other, as also, that all rational 
and intellectual creatures consist of soul and 
body; and suggest several things from reason and 
Christian antiquiiy in favour of them both; yet 
would we not be understood to dogmatize in — 
either of them, but to ‘submit all to beter judg- 
ments. 

Again, we sh all here advertise the reader (though 
we have cautioned concerning it in the book it- 
self), that in our defence of incorporeal substance 
against the Atheists, however we thought our- 
selves concerned tosay theutmost that possibly we 
could, in way of vindication of the ancients, who 
generally maintained it to be unextended (which 
to some seems an absolute impossibility) ; yet we 
would not be supposed ourselves dogmatically to 
assert any more in this point than what all incor- 
porealists agree in, that there is a substance spe- 
cifically distinct from body ; namely, suchas con- 
sisteth not of parts separable from one another, — 
and which can penetrate body, and lastly, is self 
active, and hath an ‘internal energy, distinct from 
that of local motion. And thus much is undeni- 
ably evinced by the arguments before proposed. 
But whether this substance be altogether unex- | 
fended, or extended otherwise then body, we 


shall leave every man to make mis own | Judginent 
concerning it. 


66 | PREFACE. . 


% Furthermore, we think fit here to suggest, that 
whereas throughout this chapter and whole book, 
we constantly oppose the generation of souls, that 
is, the production of life, cogitation, and under- 
standing, out of dead and senseless matter; and 
assert all souls to be as substantial as matter it- 
self: this is not done by us, out of any fond ad- 
dictedness to Pythagoric whimseys, nor indeed - 
out of a mere partial regard to that cause of Theism 
neither, which we were engaged in (though we 
had great reason to be tender.of that too); but 
because we were enforced thereunto, by dry ma- 
thematical reason; it being as certain to us, as 
any thing in all ScOmiciEy, that cogitation and un- 
derstanding can never possibly result out of mag- | 
nitudes, figures, sites, and local motions (which is 
all that ourselves can allow to body) however 
compounded together. Nor indeed in that other 
way of qualities, is it better conceivable how.they 
should emerge out of hot and cold, moist and 
dry, thick and thin; according to the Anaximan- 
drian Atheism. And they who can persuade | 
themselves of the contrary, may believe, that any 
thing may be caused by any thing; upon which 
supposition we confess it impossible to us. to 
prove the existence of a God from the phenomena. | 
In the close of this fifth chapter, because the 
Atheists do in the last place pretend, Theism and . 
religion to be inconsistent with civil sovereignty, 
we were necessitated briefly to unravel and con- 
fyte all the Atheistic ethics and politics (though 
this more properly belong to our second book in- 
tended); where we make it plainly to appear, that 
the Atheists artificial and factitious justice is no- 
thing ae will and words; and that they give to 


? 


PREFACE. 67° 
civil sovereigtis no right nor authority at all, but 
only belluine liberty and brutish force. But, on 
the contrary, as we assert justice and obligation, 
not made by law and commands, but in nature, 
and prove this, together with conscience and-re- 
ligion, to be the only basis of civil authority, so 
do we also maintain all the rights of civil sove- 
reigns ; giving both to Cesar the things that are 


Cesar’s, and to God the things that are God’s. 


And now, having made all our apologies and 
reflections, we have no more to add, but only the 
retractation or retraction of one passage (Chap. V.); 
where mentioning that opinion of a modern Athe- 
istic writer, that cogitation is nothing else but 
local motion, we could not think Epicurus and 
Democritus to have sunk to such a degree, either 
of sottishness or impudence, as this ; whereas we 
found cause afterwards, upon further consider- 
ation, to change our opinion herein. Foras- 
much as when Epicurus derived liberty of will in 
men, merely from that motion of senseless atoms 


declining uncertainly from the perpendicular ; it 
is evident, that, according to him, volition itself 


must be really local motion. As indeed in the 
Democritic fate, and material necessity of all 


things, it is implied, that human cogitations are 


but mechanism and motion. Notwithstanding 
which, both Democritus and Epicurus supposed 
that the world was made without cogitation, 
though by local motion. So that the meaning of 
these besotted Atheists (if at least they had any 
meaning) seems to have been this, that all cogita- 


‘tion is really nothing else but local motion; ne- 


vertheless all motion not cogitation, but only in 


68 - PREFACE. 


such and such circumstances, Or in noe so mo- 
dified. 

_ And now we are not ignorant, that some will 
- be ready to condemn this whole labour of our’s, 
and of others in this kind, against Atheism, as 
altogether useless and superfluous ; ; upon this pre- 
tence, that an Atheist is a mere éhinmer a, and there 
is no such a thing any where to be found in the 
world. And indeed we could heartily wish, upon 
that condition, that all this labour of our’s were 
superfluous and useless. But as to Atheists, these | 
so confident exploders of them are both unskilled 
in the monuments of antiquity, and unacquainted 
with the present age they live in; others having 
found too great an assurance, from their own per- 
sonal converse, of the reality of them. Never- 
theless, this labour of our’s is not intended only 
for the conversion of downright and professed 
Atheists (of which there is but little hope, they 
being sunk into so great a degree of sottishnéss), 
but fox the Sondeniaton of weak, staggering, and 
sceptical ‘Theists. And unless these exploders of — 
Atheists will affirm, also, that all men have con- 
stantly an unshaken faith. and belief of the ex- 
istence of .a God, without the least mixture of a 
doubtful distrust or hesitancy (which, if it were 
so, the world could not possibly be so bad as now » 
itis), they must needs grant, such endeavours as 
these, for the soncnmine: and establishing of men’s 
minds in the belief of a God, by philosophic rea- 
sons, in an age so philosophical, not to be super- 
_ fluous and aecles. 


THE TRUE 


INTELLECTUAL SYSTEM 


OF 


PHE UNIVERSE. 


BOOK I. 


ee enmaeergurey 





CHAPTER I, 


1. The fatal necessity of all human actions and events maintained upon 
three several grounds, which are so many false hypotheses of the — 
intellectual system of the universe—2. Concerning the mathema- 
tical or astrological Fate.—3. Concerning the opinion of those, who 
suppose a, Fate superior to the highest Deity.—4. The moderation 
of this discourse.—8. The Atheistical hypothesis or Democritical Fate 
being founded upon the Atomical physiology: the necessity of giving 
an account of it, and that first briefly described.—6. The antiquity 
of this physiology, and the account which is given of it by Aristo- 
tle.--7. A clear and full record of the same physiology in Plato, 
that hath not been taken notice of —8. That neither Democritus, 
nor Leucippus, nor Protagoras, nor any Atheists, were the first invent- 
ors of this philosophy ; and of the necessity of being thoroughly ac- 
quainted with it, im order to the confutation of Atheism.—9. The | 
tradition of Posidonius, the Stoic, that Moschus, an ancient Phoe- 
nician, was the first inventor of the Atomical physiology.—10. That 
this Moschus, the inventor of the Atomical physiology, was probably 
the same with Mochus, the physiologer, in Jamblichus, with whose 
successors, priests, and prophets, Pythagoras conversed at Sidon — 
1}. Other probabilities for this, that Pythagoras was acquainted with 
the Atomical physialogy.—12. That Pythagoras’s Monads were 

- Atoma.—13. Proved plainly, that Empedocles, who was a Pythago- 
reap, physiologized atomically.—l4. The same further convinced 

- feom Plato, Aristotle, Plutarch, and Stobzus,—-15. That Anaxagoras 
was a spurious Atomist, or unskilfal imitator of that philosophy.— 
14. That Ecphanius, the: Pythagorean, Xenecrates, Heraclides, 
Diodoeyus, and Metrodorus Chius, were alk ancient assertors ef the 


VOL. I. F 


70 © THREE FATALISMS AND 


Atomical physiology; together with Avistotle’ s testimony, that the 
ancient physiologers generally went that way.—17. How Aristotle 
is to be reconciled with himself, and the credit of other writers to be 
salved, who impute this philosophy to Leucippus and Democritus ; 
that they were the first Atheizers of it, or the founders of that philoso- 
phy, which is Atheistically Atomical.—18. That the Atomists, before © 
Democritus, were assertors of a Deity and substance mcorporeal.— 
19. A confutation of those neoterics, who deny that incorporeal 
‘substance was ever asserted by any of the ancients, and the anti- 
quity of that doctrine proved from Plato, who himself professedly 
maintained it—20. That Aristotle likewise asserted incorporeal 
-substance.—2). That Epicurus endeavoured to confute this opinion, 
as that which Plato and others of the ancients had maintained.— 
22. That all those philosophers, who held the immortality of the 
soul, and a Deity distinct from the world, held incorporeal sub- 
stance ; and that besides Thales, Pythavoras was a grand champion 
for the same, who also asserted a Divine triad.—23. ‘Par menides an 
assertor of incorporeal substance, together with all those, who main- 
tained that all things did not flow, but something stand —24. Em- 
pedocles vindicated from being either an Atheist or Corporealist at 
large.—25. Anaxagoras a plain assertor of incorporeal substance.— 
26. Inferred thatthe ancient Atomists before Democritus were both 
Theists and Incorporealists.—27. That there is not only no inconsist- 
ency between A tomology and Theology, but also a natural cognation 
proved from the origin of the Atomical physiology, and first a general 
account thereof.—28. A more particular account of the origin of this 
philosophy, from that principle of reason, That in nature, nothing 
comes from nothing, nor goes to nothing.—29. ‘That the same prin- 
ciple, which made tlic ancients discard substantial forms and quali- 
ties, made them also to assert incorporeal substance.—30. That from 
the same ground of reason also they asserted the immortality of | 
souls.—31. That the doctrine of the pre-existence and transmigra- 
tion of souls had its original from hence also.—32. That the ancients 
did not confine: this to human souls only, but extend it to all souls 
~ and lives whatsoever.—33. All this proved frofa Empedocles, who 
asserted the pre-existence as well as the post-existence of all souls 
upon that ground.—34. A censure of this doctrine; that the reason 
of it is irrefragable for the post-eternity of all human souls; and 
that the hypothesis of the creation of human souls, which salves 
their immortality without 'pre-existence, is rational.—35. A new 
hypothesis to salve the incorporeity of the souls of brutés, without 
, their post-existence and successive transmigrations.—36. That this 
_ ‘will not prejudice the immortality .of human souls.—37. That the 
“Empedoclean hypothesis is more rational than the opinion of those, 
that would make the souls of -brutes corporeal.—38. That the con- 
. stitution of the Atomical physiology is such, that whosoever enter- 
tains it, and thoroughly understands it, must needs hold incorporeal 


HYPOTHESES OF THE MUNDANE SYSTEM. 7] 


substance, in five particulars.—39. Two general advantages of . the 
Atomica] or mechanical physiology ; first, that it renders the corpo- 
real world intelligible.—40. The second advantage of it, that it pre- 
pares an easy and clear way for the demonstration of incorporeal 
substance.—41. Concluded, that. the ancient Moschical philosophy 
consisted oftwo paris, Atomical physiology, and theology or pneu- 
matology.—42. That this entire philosophy was afterwards mangled 
_and dismembered, some taking one part of it alone, and some the 
_ other.—43. That Leucippus and Democritus, being atheistically in- 
clined, took'the Atomical physiology, endeavouring to make it sub- 
servient to Atheism; and upon what occasion they did it, and how 
unsuccessfully.—44, That Plato took the theology and pneumato- 
logy of the ancients, but rejected their Atomical physiology, and 
upon what accounts.—45. That Aristotle followed Plato herein, 
with a commendation of Aristotle’s philosophy. a7 


Turey, that hold the necessity of all human ac- 
tions and events, do it upon one or other of 
these two grounds—either because they suppose, 
that necessity is inwardly essential to all agents ~ 
whatsoever, and that contingent liberty is rpayya 
vanentarelyB thing impossible or contradictious, 
which can have no existence any where in na- | 
ture ; ‘the sense of which was thus expressed by 
the Epicurean poet,’ - 


Quod res queque Necessum 
Intestinum habeat cunctis in rebus agendis, &c. 





That every thing naturally labours under an in- 
testine necessity :—or else, because, though they . 
admit contingent liberty not only as a thing possi- 
ble, but also as that which 1s actually existent in 
the Deity, yet they conceive all things to be 80 de- 
termined by the will and decrees of this Deity, as. 
that they are thereby made necessary to us. The 
former of these two opinions, that contingent li- 
berty is T paypal avuToorTarov,’ such a thing as can 
have no existence in nature, may be maintained 
2 Lucrét. lib. ii. v.289, &e. | 
| FQ 


72 THREE FATALISMS AND 


upon two different grounds: either from such an 
hypothesis as this, that the universe is nothing else — 
but body and local motion; and nothing moving 
itself, the action of every agent is determined by 
some other agent without it; and therefore that 
hu} dvayxn, material and mechanical necessity, 
must needs reign over all things; or else, though 

cogitative beings be supposed to have a certain 
principle of activity within themselves, yet that 
there can be no contingency in their actions, be- 
cause all volitions are determined by a necessary 
antecedent understanding. 

- Plotinus* makes another distribution of Fatal- 
ists, whieh yet in the conclusion will come to the 
same with the former; dSirrove av tie béuevog rovTove 
ovk av oirou aAnBove amoruy yavot, ol pev yao ag Evog Tivoe Ta 
ravra dvaptwas, ot oe ovK otro’ Aman, (saith he) will 
not do amiss, that will divide all Fatalists first in- 
to, these two general heads, namely, that they de- 
rive all ae from one principle or not;—the 
former of which may be called Divine Fatalists, 
the latter Atheistical. Which Divine Fatalists he 
again subdivides into such, as first make God by 
immediate influence to do all things inus; as in 
animals the members are not determined by them- 
selves, but by that which is the hegemonic in 
every one: and, secondly, such as make Fate to be 
an implexed series or concatenation of causes, all 
in themselves necessary, whereof God is the chief. 
The former seems to be a description of that very 
Fate, that is maintamed by some neoteric Christ- 
ians; the latter is the Fate of the Stoics. 

Wherefore F atalists, that hold the necessity of 
all human actions and events, may.be reduced to” 

2 Libro de Fato, Ennead. iii. lib. i. c. 2. p. 230. 


HYPOTHESES OF THE MUNDANE. SYSTEM, 73 
these three heads: first, such as, asserting the 
Deity, suppose it irrespectively to decree and - 
determine all things, and thereby make all actions 
necessary to us; which kind of Fate, though phi- 
losophers and other ancient writers have not been 
altogether silent of it, yet it has been principally 
maintained by some neoteric Christians, contrary 
to the sense of the ancient church. Secondly, such - 
as suppose a Deity, that, acting wisely, but ne- 
cessarily, did contrive the general frame of things 
in the world; from whence, by a series of causes, 
doth unavoidably result whatsoever is now done 
in it: which Fate is a concatenation of causes, all 
in themselves necessary, and is that which was 
asserted by the ancient Stoics, Zeno and Chry- 
sippus, whom the Jewish Essenes seemed to fol- 
low. And, lastly, such as hold the material ne- 


cessity of all things without a Deity ; which Fate - 


Epicurus’ calls rav tov puoucey SlULapUEYNY, the Fate 
of the Naturalists—that is, indeed, the Atheists, 
the assertors whereof may.be called also the De- 

" mocritical Fatalists. Which three opinions con-. 

cerning Fate are so many several hypotheses of 

the intellectual system of the universe: all which © 
we shall here propose, endeavouring to shew the 
falseness of them, and then substitute the true 
mundane system in the room of them. 

u1. The mathematical or astrological Fate so 
much talked of, as it is a thing no way consider- 
able for the grounds of it, so whatsoever it be, it 

‘must needs fall under one or other of those two 

general heads in the Plotinical distribution last 
mentioned, so as either to derive all things from 


2 Vide Epistol. Epicuri ad Menecoeum, apud a Laertium, lib 
x. segm. 184, p. 659, edit. Meibomii. 


74 THE MATHEMATICAL, OR 


one principle, or not. It seems to have had its 
first emersion amongst the Chaldeans from a cer- 
tain kind of blind Polytheism (which is but a bet- 
ter sort of disguised Atheism), but it was after- 
wards adopted and fondly nursed by the Stoics, 
in a wayof subordination to their Divine Fate; 
for Manilius, Firmicus, and other masters of that 
sect, were great promoters of it. And there was 
too much. attributed to astrology also by those 
that -were no Fatalists, both Heathen and Christ- 
jan philosophers, such as were Plotinus, Origen, 
Simplicius, and others; who, though they did not 
make the stars to necessitate all human actions 
_ here below, they supposed, that Divine Provi- 
dence (foreknowing all things) had contrived such 
a strange coincidence of the motions and confi- 
gurations of the heavenly bodies with such ac- 
tions here upon earth, as that the former might be 
| prognostics of the latter. Thus Origen* deter- 
mines, that the stars do not make but signify; 
and that the heavens are a kind of Divine volume, 
in whose characters they that are skilled may 
read or spell out human events. T’o the same pur- 
pose, Plotinus,” Déperar ney TAavTA eT owrnptia TW ddan, 
mapéxeobat Se Kat aAdAnv xpetay THY TOU ‘sc avTa WomeEp | 

ypanpara Prérovrac, Tove TOLAUT NY ‘ypauwareKyy aderac ; 
| dvarywvwoKkew Ta EROS EK TW oXnKarwy Kata 0 ava- 

Aoyav peBodevorr ac TO onpatvepevor" worep etic Azyo, 
- émretdn ulydoc 6 Opvic onatve vbyrac tivac moacetc” The 
motion of the stars was intended for the physical: 
_ good of the whole; but they afford also another 
use collaterally.in order to prognostication, name- 


® Vide P. Dan. Huetium Origenianor. lib. ii. C. Vili. -sec. v. p. 129. 
* Libro de Fato, Ennead. iii. lib. i. c. vi. p. 233. videas etiam En- 
nead. ii. lib. ill. c. 1. p. 137, et c. vil. p. 140, 141. 


ASTROLOGICAL FATE. Vo 


ly, that they who are skilled in the grammar of 
the heavens may be able, from the several confi- 
gurations of the stars, as it were letters, to, spell 
out future events, by making such analogical in- 
terpretations as they use to do in augury; as 
when a bird flies high, to interpret this of some 
high and noble exploit.—And Simplicius,* in like 
manver, Voupegpende tori y sipecagaeéry mecipoga 7?) ™po[30An 
rey boywry 7) Kar auTyy Ep yoptévy gle THY yeveotn, OUK 
dvayxaZouca ple Tag Twres opéyeo Oat } THVOE, TVUPWVOG 
ct ovea rac ogeSeowy QuT@yY. The fatal conversion of 
the heavens is made to correspond with the pro- 
duction of souls into generation at such and such 
times, not necessitating them to will this or that, 
but conspiring agreeably with such appetites and 
volitions of theirs.— And these philosophers were 
the rather inclinable to this persuasion from a su-’ 
perstitious conceit which they had, that the stars, 
being animated, were intellectual beings of a far 
higher rank than men. And since God did not 
make them, nor any thing else in the world, 
singly for themsclves alone, but also to contribute 
to the public good of the universe, their physical 
influence seeming inconsiderable, they knew not 
well what else could be worthy of them, unless it 
were to portend human events. This indeed is 
the best sense that can be made of astrological 
prognostication ; but it is a business that stands 
upon a very weak and tottering, if not inpossible 
foundation. | 

w41. There is another wild and extravagant con: 
ceit, which some of the Pagans had, who, though 
they verbally acknowledged a Deity, yet sup- 


* Comment. in Epictetum, c.i. p. 26, edit. Salmasit. 


76 THE OPINION OF A FATE 


posed a certain Fate superior to it, and not only to 
all their other petty gods, but also to Jupiter hitn- 
self. To which purpose is that of the Greek poet 
Latined by Cicero," ‘ Quod fore paratum est, id 
summum exuperatJovem;” and that of Herodotus,” 
Try mexpwonévny poipay advvarov torw amroguyiew Kal ry 
Gep’ It is impossible for God himself to avoid the 
destined Fate:—and SovAcc Veoe avayxne, God hinaself 
is a servant of necessity.—According to which 
conceit, Jupiter in Homer* laments his condition, 
in that the Fates having determined, that his be- 
loved Sarpedon should be slain by the son of 
Menetius, he was not able to withstand it, 
Though all these passages may not perhaps imply 
much more than what the Stoical hypothesis itself 
imported ; for that did also in some sense make 
God himself a servant to the necessity of the 
matter, and to his own decrees, in that he conld 
not have made the smallest thing in the wortld 
otherwise than now it is, much less was ableto 
alter any thing: according to that of Seneca,* 
‘“« Kadem necessitas et Deos alligat. Irrevocabilis 
divina pariter altque humana cursus vehit. Ile 
ipse omnium conditor ac rector scripsit quidem 
Fata, sed sequitur. Semper paret, semel jussit.” 
One and the same chain of necessity ties God 
and men. The same irrevocable and unalterable 
course carries on Divine and human things. The 
very maker and governor of all things, that writ 
the fates, follows them. He did but once com- 


* De Divinat. lib. ii. c. x. p. 3196, edit, Verburgii. 

* Lib. i. c. xci. p. 38. od. Gronovii. 

© Vide Menandri et Philomonis rcliquiasa Jo. Clerivo editas, p. 307. 
4 Tliad, f. «, 

* Do Providentia, c. v. p. 195, edit. Jo. Fred. Gronovii. 


| SUPERIOR TO THE DEITY. 77 
mand, but he always obeys.—But if there were 
this further meaning in the passages before cited, 
that a necessity without God, that was invincible 
by him, did determine his will to all things; this 
was nothing but a certain confused and contradic- 
tious jumble of Atheism and Theism both together; 
or an odd kind of intimation, that however the 
name of God be used in compliance with vulgar 
speech and opinion, yet indeed it signifies no- 
thing but material necessity ; and the blind mo- 
tion of matter is really the highest numen in the 
world. And here that of Balbus the Stoic, in 
Cicero," is opportune: ‘“ Non est natura Dei pre- 
potens et excellens, siquidem ea subjecta est ei. 
vel necessitati vel natura, qua ccelum, maria, ter-_ 
_Yfeque reguntur. Nibil autem est prestantius 
Deo. Nulli igitur est nature obediens aut sub- 
jectus Deus.” God would not be the most power- 
ful and excellent being, if he were subject to that 
either necessity or nature, by which the heavens, 
seas, aud earth are governed. But the notion of a 
God implies the most excellent being. Therefore, 
God is not obedient or subject to any nature.— 

1v. And now we think fit here to suggest, that 
however we shall oppose those three Fatalisms be- 
forementioned, as so many false hypotheses of the 
mundane system and economy, and endeavour to 
_ exclude that severe tyranness, as Epictrus calls — 
it, of Universal Necessity reigning over all, and to 
leave some scope for contingent liberty to move 
up and down in, without which neither rational 
creatures can be blameworthy for any thing they 
do, nor God have any object to display his justice 

* De Nat. Deor. lib. ii, C. XXX, P. 3000, 


78 MODERATION OF THIS DISCOURSE. 


upon, norindeed be justified in his providence; yet, 
as we vindicate to God the glory of all good, so 
we do not quite banish the notion of Fate neither, 
nor take away all Necessity ; which is a thing the 
Clazomenian philosopher" of old was taxed for, 
affirming pndéy tov yoopéver ywecOat Kal? staguévny, 
adAG Eivat KEevoY TOUTO rouvoua’ That nothing at all 
was done by Fate, but that it was altogethera vain 
name.—And the Sadduceaus among the Jews have 
been noted for the same: Thy pév equageevny avat- 
povan, ovdey gtvae TUUTHY axtourTEG, OVTE KAT aUTHY Ta av- 
Ocwawa ttc AauPanecy, amayvra ot Ep nw avroic ridévree’ 
They take away all Fate, and will not allow it to 
be any thing at all, nor to have any power over 
human things, but put all things entirely into the 
hands of men’s own free will.—-And some of our 
own seem to have approached too near to this ex- 
treme, attributing perhaps more to the power of 
free will, than either religion or nature will ad- 
init. But the bypothesis, that we shall recom- 
mend as most agreeable to truth, of a wgovoea 
ihaapoc, Placable providence—of a Deity essen- 
tially good, presiding over all, will avoid all ex- 
tremes, asserting to God the glory of good, and 
freeing him from the blame of evil; and leaving a 
certain proportionate contemperation and com- 
mixture of contingency and necessity both toge- 
ther in the world ; as nature requires a mixture of 
motion and rest, without either of which there 
could be no generation. Which temper was ob- 
served by several of the ancients; as the Phari- 
* Anaxagoras, who was censured for this opinion by Alexander 
Aphrodisiensis de Fata, sec. ii. p. tt, edit. Lond. 1658, in J2mo. 


» Josephi Antiq. Judaic. lib. xilic. ve see. ix. p. 649, tom, i. edit, 
Havercamp. 


MODERATION OF THIS DISCOURSE. 79 
saic sect amongst the. Jews, who determined,’ 
TIVa Kal Ov TavTa THC Elapuevne eival Epyov, riva 6¢ Ep 
eavrotc vrapyetv, That some things and not all were 
the effects of Fate, but some things were left in 
men’s own power and liberty:—and also by Plato’ 
amone: the philosophers, [Darwv ¢ eyKplvel ney siuap- 
ae El TWY avlporinoy du yov Kal Biwy, ouveioayet ob. 

Kal THY Tap nuac airiav’ Plato inserts something of 
Fate into human lives and actions, and he joins 
with it liberty of will also.He doth indeed sup- 
pose human souls to have within themselves the 
causes of their owt changes .to a better or worse 
state, and every where declares God to be blame- 
Jess for their evils; and yet he’ somewhere makes 
the three fatal sisters, notwithstanding, Clotho, 
Lachesis, and Atropos, to be busy about them 
also. For according to the sense of the ancients, 
T'ateis aservant of Divine Providencein the world, 
and takes place differently upon the different act- 
ings of free-willed beings. And how free a thing 
soever the will of man may seem to be to some, 
yet I-conceive it to be out of question, that it may 
contract upon itself such necessities and fatali- 
ties, as It cannot upon a sudden rid itself of -at 
-pleasure. But whatsoever is said in the sequel 
‘of this discourse by way of opposition to’ that 
Fatalism of the neoteric Christians, is intended 
only to vindicate what was the constant doctrine 
of the Christian church in its ‘greatest purity (as 
shall be made manifest), and not to introduce any 
mowtenere conceit of our own. 


4d. ibid. 

> Vide Plutarch. de Placitis Philosophorum, lib. i. c. xxvii. p. 844, 
tii. oper. edit. Francof. 1599, fol. 
. © Vide Platon, de Republica, |. x, p. 520. 


80 ATHEISTICAL HYPOTHESIS FOUNDED 


vy. We must now proceed to give a more full and 
perfect account of these three several Fates, or by- 
potheses of the mundane system beforementioned, 
together with the grounds of them, beginning first 
_ with that, which we principally intend the contu- 
tation of, the Atheistical or Democritical Fate ; 
which, as it is a thing of the most dangerous con- 
sequence of all, so it seems to be most spreading» 
and infectious in these latter times. 

Now this Atheistical system of the world, that 
makes-all things to be materially and mechani- 
cally necessary, without a God, is built upon a 
peculiar physiological hypothesis, different from 
what hath been generally received for many ages 5 
which is called bysome Atomical or corpuscular, 
by others Mechanical; of which we must there- 
fore needs give a full and perfect account. Aud 
we shall do it first in general, briefly, not descend- 
ing to those minute particularities of it, which are 
disputed amongst these Atomists themselves, in 
this manner.. 3 

The Atomical physiology supposes, that body 
is nothing else but Stacrarov avriruTvov, that is, ex- 
tended bulk ; and resolves, therefore, that nothing 
is to beattributed to it, but what is included in the 
nature and idea of it, viz——more or less magni- 
tude, with divisibility into parts, figure, and posi- 
tion, together with motion or rest, but so as that 
- no part of body can ever move itself, but is always 
moved by something else. And consequently it . 
supposes, that there is no need of any thing else 
besides the simple elements of magnitude, figure, 
site, and motion (which are all clearly intelligible 
as different modes of extended substance) to solve 
the corporeal phenomena by ; and therefore, not 


UPON THE ATOMICAL PHYSIOLOGY. 81 


of any substantial forms distinct from the matter; 
nor of any other qualities really existing in the — 
bodies without, besides the results or aggregates. 
of those simple elements, and the disposition of 
the insensible parts of bodies in respect of figure, 
site, and motion; nor of anyintentional species or 
shows, propagated from the objects to our senses ; 
nor, lastly, of any other kind of motion or action 
really distinct from local motion (such as genera- 
tion and alteration), they being neither intelligible, 
as modes of extended substance, nor any ways 
mecessary, Forasmuch as the forms and quali-— 
ties of bodies may well be conceived to be nothing 
but the result of those simple elements of magni- 
tude, figure, site, and motion, variously com- 
pounded together, ‘in the same.manner as sylla- 
bles and words in great variety result from the 
different doabinations and conjunctions of a few 
letters, or the simple elements of speech; and the 
corporeal part of sensation, and particularly: that 
of vision, may be solyed only by local motion of 
bodies, that is, either by corporeal effluvia (called 
simulacra, membrane, and exuvig) streaming con- 
tinually from the surface of the objects, or rather, 
as. the later and more refined Atomists’ conceived, 
by pressure made from the object to the eye, by 
means of hght im the medium. So that" we da 
Baxrngiag rou rafeyrog agpoc to BAemOuevov avayyedAerar 
the sense taking cognizance of the object by the 
subtle interposed medium, that is tense and 


* Vide Cartesii Dioptric. c. i, oti. p, 50. tom. i, oper. ed., Amstelod. 
1692, in 4to. 


"> Apollodorus apud Diogenem Lacrtium, lib. vii. segu. 157, p. 466. 


vide etiam Plutarch. de Placitis Philosophor. lib. iv. c. xv. tom. ii. 
oper. p. 911. 


$2 ANTIQUITY OF THIS PHYSIOLOGY, 


stretched (thrusting every way from it upon the 
optic nerves), doth by that as it were by a staff 
touch it. Again, generation and corruption may 
be sufficiently explained by concretion and secre- 
tion, or local motion, without substantial forms 
and qualities. And, lastly, those sensible ideas 
of light and colours, heat and cold, sweet and bit- 
ter, as they are distinct things from the tigure, site, 
and motion of the insensible parts of the bodies, 
seem plainly to be nothing else but our own fan- 
cles, passions, and sensations, however they be 
vulgarly mistaken for qualities in the bodies with- 
out us. 

vi. Thus much may suffice tor a general ac- 
count of the Atomical physiology. We shall in 
the next place consider the antiquity thereof, as 
also what notice Aristotle hath taken of it, and 
what account he gives of the same. For though 
Epicurus went altogether this way, yet It is well 
known, that he was not the first inventor of it. 
But it is most commonly fathered on Democritus, 
who was senior both to Aristotle and Plato, be- 
ing reported to have been born the year after So- 
crates; from whose fountains Cicero’ saith, that 
Epicurus watered his orchards, and of whom Sex. 
Empiricus” and Laertius* testify, that he did 
exPadrew Tag rowrtyrac, cashier qualities ;—and Plu- 
tarch,* that he made the first principles of the 
whole universe dropove arawue, Kat arrabete, atoms de- 
void of all qualities and passious.—-But Laertius* 


* De Nat. Deor. lib. i. ¢. xiii. p. 2048, tix. oper. 

® Lib. ii. adv. Logicos, p. 459. Vide etiam lib. vi. adv. Musicos, p. 
367. et lib. i. adv. Logicos, p. 399. 

© Lib. ix. segm. 72. p. 586. 

4 Libro adversus Colotem, tom. ii. oper. p. 1110. 

© Lib. ix. segm. 30. p. 567. 


WITH ARISTOTLES ACCOUNT OF IT. 83. 


will have Leucippus, who was somewhat senior 
to Democritus, to be the first inventor of this phi- 
losophy, though he wrote not so many.books con- 
‘cerning it as Demoeritus did. Aristotle, who often 
takes notice of this philosophy, and ascribes it 
commonly to Leucippus and Democritus jointly, 
gives us this description of it in his Metaphysics :* 
‘Asvxurmoc 0& Kat 0 ETAaLpOC QvToOU Anpoxetroc STOLY ELA ev 
TO wAngEC Kal TO K&vov Elval past, AéyovTEc olov TO "ev dv, 
To O& uy Ov, Kal Tac duapopac airiacg TWY dddwv pact Tavrac 
pevror TpeLC oyna TE Kal racw Kal Béouv, Suapégev yao TO 
Ov prope Kal Suadeyn KatTeomn” Leucipp usand his com- 
panion Democritus make the first principles of 
all things to be Plenum and Vacuum (body and 
space), whereof one is Ens, the other Non-ens, and 
the differences of the body, which are only figure, 
order, and position, to be the causes of all other 
things—Which differences they call by these 
names, Rysmus, Diathige, and Trope. And in his 
book, De Anima,” having declared that Democri- 
tus made fire and the soul to consist of round 
atoms, he describes those atoms of his after this 
manner, oloy €v Tw aépL Ta Kadouneva Evopuata éy Talc ola 
TWV Bupidwr aKTIsl, wy Tv TaVvoTEoulay oT OLY ELA Agvet 
Anpoxetroe Tn¢ OAng PVaEwe, oMolwe Se cat: Asvxermoc’ 
They are (saith he,) like those ramenta or: dusty 
particles which appear in the sun-beams, an om- 
nifarious seminary whereof Democritus makes to 
‘be the first elements of the whole universe, and so 
doth Leucippus likewise.—Elsewhere® the same 
Aristotle tells us, that these two philosophers-ex-. 
plained generation and alteration, without forms 
‘s Lib. i. c. iv. p. 268. tom. iv, oper.’ 


» Lib. i. cap. ii. p. 4. tom. il. oper. 
¢ De Generat, et Corrupt. lib. i.-c. ii. p. 700. tom. 1. oper. 


34 ANTIQUITY OF THIS PHYSIOLOGY, 


and qualities, by figures and local motion: Anpo- 
Kplrog kat Asuxurroe womaavres ra oyKHuata ryv adXoiwety 

Kat F7V vives EK TQUTWY ToL, Stakpices pev Kal ovyxpioet 
yeveoty Kat pOopay, racer Of Kal Ge ose adXolwa 2 Demo- 
critus and Leucippus having made figures (or va- 
riously figured atoms), the first principles, make 
generation and alteration out of these; namely, 
generation together with corruption from the con- 
cretion and secretion of them, but alteration from 
the change of their order and position.—Again, 
he elsewhere* takes notice of that opinion of the 
Atomists, that all sense was a kind of touch, and 
that the sensible qualities of bodies were to be 
resolved into figures, imputing it not‘only to De- 
mocritus, but also to the generality of the old phi- 
losophers, but very much disliking the same :— 
Anpoxpirog Kat ot AEtarou TOV pusoldywy aroTwrarov TL 
Roovel, TavTa yap Ta aloAnra anra rovover Kat ei¢ oynpara 
avayoust rove yvpoue’ Democritus and most of the 
physiologers here commit a very great absurdity, 
in that they make all sense to be touch, and re- 
solve sensible qualities into the figures of insensi- 
ble parts or atoms.—And this opinion he endea- 
vours to confute by these arguments. First, be- 
cause there is contrariety in qualities, as in black 
and white, hot and cold, bitter and sweet, but 
there is no contrariety in figures ; for a circular fi- 
gure is nat contrary to a square or multangular ; 
and therefore there must be real qualities in bo- 
dies distinct from the figure, site, and motion of 
parts. Again, the variety of figures and disposi- 
‘tions being infinite, it would follow from thence, 
that the species of colours, odours, and tastes 
should be infinite likewise, and reducible to no 

2 De Sensu et Scnsibili, c. iv. p. 70. tom. ii. oper. 


WITH ARISTOTEE’S ACCOUNT OF IT. 85 


certain number. Which arguments I leave the 
professed Atomists to answer. Furthermore, Aris- 
totle somewhere also censures that other funda- 
mental principle of this Atomical physiology, that 
the sensible ideas of colours and tastes, as red, 
green, bitter, and sweet, formally considered, are 
only. passions and fancies in us, and not real qua- 
lities in the object without. . For as in a rainbow . 
there is really nothing without our sight, but a 
rorid cloud diversely refracting and reflecting the . 
sun-beams, in such an angle; nor are there really 
such qualities in the diaphanous prism ; when re- 
fracting the light, it exhibits to us the same co- 
lours of the rainbow; whence it was collected, 
that those things are properly the phantasms ofthe 
sentient, occasioned by different motions on the 
optic nerves ; so they conceived the case to be the 
same in all other colours, and that both the co- 
lours of the prism and rainbow were as real as 
other colours, and all other colours as fantastical 
as they; and then by parity of reason they extend- 
ed the business further to the other sensibles. But 
this opinion Aristotle condemns 1 in these words * 
Ou mpOrepov guavodoyor ToUTO ov Kadwe eheyous Levedy, oure 
ovoey olouevor GUTE péAaY avev Oewc, OUTE Yupcov avév yev- 
cewce’ The former physiologers were generally out 
' in this, in that they thought there was no black or 

white without the siglit, nor no bitter or sweet 
- without the taste.—There are other passages in 
‘Aristotle concerning this philosophy, which I 
think superfluous to insert here; and I shall have 
occasion to cite some of them afterward for other 
purposes. 

vit. But in the next place it : will not be amiss s to 

2 De Anima. lib. ii. c. 1. p. 48. tom. il. oper. 
VOL.I. °° G eo 


36 RECORDS IN PLATG CONCERNING 


shew, that Plato also hath left a very full record 
of this mechanical or Atomical physiology (that 
hath hardly been yet taken notice of), which uot- 
withstanding he doth not impute either to Demo- 
critus (whose name Laertius* thinks he purposely 
declined to mention throughout all his writings,) 
or to Leucippus, but to Protagoras. Wherefore, 
in his Theetetus, having first declared in general,” 
that the Protagorean philosophy made all things 
to consist of a commixture of parts (or atoms), and 
‘local motion, he represents it, in particular, con- 
cerning colours, after this manner 3° vrodaBe ron 
OUTwoL Kara ra dupuara TEWTOV, O db KaAste yowpa NeuKoy 
un glvat avro Erepov re Ew twv owv OMpaTwr, und tv TOK 
Oupact, adha wéXay re Kat Aevxov Kal oriwovv adAo ypu EX 
Tne moocPorn¢ TwY OMMaTWY Tpog Thy Tpoonkougay pooay 
ere yeyevnuévov, Kat 0 O& tkaorov wal papev ypwna, 
obre 70 moocaAXov ovre To moocBaddouevov aAda peraty 
Tl EKAGT OW) Loxov yeyoues’ First, asto that which belongs 
to the sight, you must conceive that which is call- 
ed a white or a black colour not to be any thing 
absolutely existing, either without your eyes or 
‘within your eyes : en black aud white, and every 
other colour, is caused by different motions made 
upon the eye from objects differently modified : 

so that it is nothing either in the agent nor the pa- 
tient absolutely, but something which arises from 
between them both.— Where it follows immedi- 
ately, i 7) ou Sua yupicaco & av os olov ool patverat txaoroy 
cy pwra TOLOUTOY Kal KUVL Kal Orwour Cw 3 Can you or 
any man else be confident, that as every colour 
appears to him, so it appears just the same to 
every other man and animal, any more than tastes 

and touches, heat and cold do?—From whence it 


* Lib. ix. segm. 40. p. 571. > P. 118. © Sbid. p. 119. 


THIS ATOMICAL PHYSIOLOGY. 87 


is plain, that Protagoras made sensible qualities 
not to be all absolute things existing tn the bodies 
without, but to be relative to us, and passtons in 
us; and so they are called presently after riva by 
ano dacnara, Certain fancies, seemings, or appear- 
ances in us. But there is another passage," in 
which a fuller account Is given of the whole Pro- 
tarorean doctrine, beginning thus; “Aayn & & ae 
a pur on thé-youty wavra npryrae nce aura, we TO Tay Kivy- 
otc nv, Kal aAAo Tapa ruuro ovely, TNE ee KOMORI cue gion, 
wAn Oe ey arapor ixaTEpOY, Suva ce TO yay mony éyay, 
TO Of was yey" tx S& rye TuVT@Y ontdiacg TE Kal Tpipewe Toe 
aAAnAa ytyverat éxyord, wAnHer pte arepa, ciduuna et, To 
yey ataOyrov, ro ee atallnote au CUVEXTIUTTOUCR Kat yevvar- 
pion pera tov aisfyrov, &e. The priveiple upon 
which all these things depend, 1s this, that the 
whole universe ts motion (of atoms) and nothing 
else besides: which motion is considered two 
wavs, and accordingly called by two names, ac- 
tion and passion ; from the mutual congress, and 
as it were attrition together of both which, are be- 
gotten innumerable offsprings, which though infi- 
nite in number, yet may be reduced to two general 
heads, sensibles and sensations, that are both ge- 
nerated at the same time ; the sensations are seeing 
and hearing, and the like, and the correspondent 
sensibles, colours, sounds, &c. Wherefore when 
the eye, or such a proportionate object meet toge- 
ther, both the aic@yrov and the atoOnoe, the sensible 
idea of white and black, and the seuse of seeing, 
are generated together, neither of which would 
have been produced, if either of those two had not 
met with the other. Kat r' adda & obrw uyedr Kai 
Oipudv Kai wavra Tov avtov TpOTLy vrodmrioy, atrd pay 
® Lib. ix. sem. 44). p. 120. 
G2 


88 RECORDS IN PLATO CUNCERNING 


xa’ avro pndty Etvat, Ev OF TH p0¢ GdAnva omirttg, wavra 
yiyvecBat, Kal wavrota aro tne kunoewe’ The like is to 
be conceived of all other sensibles, as hot and cold, 

&c. that none of these are absolute things in them- 
selves, or real qualities in the objects without, but 
they are begotten from the mutual congress of 
agent and patient with one another, and that by 
motion; so that neither the agent has any such 
thing in it before its congress with the patient, nor 
the patient before its cougress with the agent. "Ex 
Os apporipwy Tov TOLOVVYTO Kal Tou TAS YKOVTUG TOG ra aA- 
Anra cuvyryvouivwy Kat rag atcbnoeg Kat ra atoOnra aro- 
TUKTOVTWY, ra ev Tote arra yiyveoban, ra of atoGavopeva’ 
But the agent and patient meeting together, and 
begetting sensation and seusibles, both the object 
and the sentient are forthwith made to be so and 
so qualified, as when honey is tasted, the seuse of 
tasting and the quality of sweetness are begotten 
both together, though the sense be vulgarly attri- 
buted to the taster, and the quality of sweetness 
to the honey.—The conclusion of all which is 
summed up th us, ovdev sivat auto Kal! auro, adra ron 
ais yiyvecBa, ‘That none of those sensible things is 
any thing absolutely in the objects without, but 
they are all generated or made relatively to, the 
- sentient.—There is more in that dialogue to this 
purpose, which I here omit; but I have set down 
so much of it in the sation own language, be- 
cause it seems to me to be an excellent monu- 
ment of the wisdom and sagacity of the old philo- 
sophers ; that which is the main curiosity in this 
whole business of the mechanical or Atomical 
philosophy being here more fully and plainly ex- 
pressed, than it is in Lucretius himself, viz. that 
sensible things, according to those ideas that we 


“THIS ATOMICAL PHYSIOLOGY. | 89 


have of them, are not real qualities absolutely ex- 
isting without us, but év uw dacuara, fancies or phan- 
tasms in us: so that both the Latin mterpreters 
_ Ficinus and Serranus, though probably neither 
of them at all acquainted with this philosophy, as 
being not yet restored, could not but understand 
it after the same manner; the one expressing 
it thus—‘‘ Color ex aspectu motuque medium . 
quiddam resultans est. Talis circa oculos pas- 
sio ;” and the other, “‘ Ex varia aspicientis diathesi, 
vatiaque sensilis specie colores varios et vidéri et 
fieri, ita tamen ut sint gavracra, nec nisi In animo 
subsistant.” However, it appears by Plato’s man- 
ner of telling the story, and the tenour of the. 
whole dialogue, ‘that hithself was.not a little pre- 
judiced against this philosophy. In-all probabi- 
lity the rather, because Protagoras had made it a 
foundation both for Scepticism and Atheism. 
vit. We have now learnt from Plato, that De- 
mocritus and Leucippus were not the sole pro- 
_ prietaries in this philosophy, but that Protagoras, 
’ though not vulgarly taken notice of for any such 
thing (being commonly represented as a Sophist 
only) was a sharer in it likewise ; which Prota- 
goras, indeed, Laertius,* and others, affirm to have 
been an auditor of Democritus; and so he might 
be, notwithstanding what Plutarch tells us,” that 
Democritus wrote against his taking away the 
absolute nature of things. However, we are of 
opinion, that neither Democritus, nor Prota- 
goras, nor Leucippus, was the ‘first inventor of 
this philosophy; and our reason is, because 
they were all three of them Atheists (though 


® Lib. ix. segm. 50. p. 575, 576. Videas etiam A. Gellium Noct.. 
Attic. lib. v. c. iii. et Suidam voce Tparrayépars, ‘ 
> Libro adversus Colotem, tom. il. oper. p. 1108, 1109. 


6-90 THE ANTIQUITY OF ATOMOLOGY. 4 


Protagoras alone was banished for that crime by 
the Athenians) and we cannot think, that any 
Atheists could be the inventors of it, much less 
that it was the genuine spawn and brood of Athe- 
ism itself, as some conceit, because, however these. 
Atheists adopted it to themselves, endeavouring 
to serve their turns of it, yet, if rightly understood, 
itis the most effectual engine against Atheism that 
can be. And we shall make it appear afterwards, . 
that never any of those Atheists, whether ancient 
or modern (how great pretenders soever to it) did 
thoroughly understand it, but perpetually contra- 


dicted themselves in it. And this is the reason, — 


‘why we insist so much upon this philosophy here, 
not only because without the perfect knowledge 
of it, we cannot deal with the Atheists at their own 
weapon; but also because we doubt not but to 
make a sovereign antidote against Atheism out of 
that very philosophy, which so many have used as 
a vehiculum to convey this poison of Atheism by. 

1x. But besides reason, we have also good his- | 
torical probability for this opinion, that this philo- 
sophy was a thing of much greater antiquity than 
either Democritus or Leucippus. And first, be- 
eause Posidonius, an ancient and learned philo- 
sopher,. did (as both Empiricus* and Strabo? tell 
us) avouch it for an old tradition, that the first in- 
ventor of this Atomical philosophy, was one Mos-. 
chus, a Phoenician, who, as Strabo also’ notes, 
lived before the Trojan wars. 

x. Moreover, it seems not altogether improba- 
ble, but that this Moschus, a Pheenician philoso- 
pher, mentioned by Posidonius, might be the same 
with that Mochus, a Pheenician physiologer, in 

* Lib. ix. advers. Mathemat. p.621. > Lib. xvi. p. 718. 


THE ANTIQUITY OF ATOMOLOGY. 91 


Jamblichus, with whose successors, priests, and 
prophets, he affirms that Pythagoras, sometimes 
sojourning at Sidon (which was his native city), 
had conversed: which may be taken for an inti- 
mation, as if he had been by them instructed in 
that Atomical physiology, which Moschus, or 
~ Mochus, the Pheenician, is said to have been the 
inventor of. Mochus, or Moschus, is plainly a. 
Pheenician name, and there is one Mochus, a 
‘Pheenician writer, cited in Atheneus, whom the 
Latin translator calls Moschus; and Mr. Seldon 


' approves of the conjecture of Arcerius, the pub- 


lisher of Jamblichus, that this Mochus was no 
other man than the celebrated Moses of the Jews, 
with whose successors, the Jewish philosophers, 
priests, and prophets, Pythagoras conversed at 
Sidon. ‘Some fantastic Atomists perhaps would 
here catch at this, to make their philosophy to 
stand by Divineright, as owing its original to re- 
velation ; whereas philosophy being not a matter 
of faith, but reason, men ought not to affect (as I 
conceive) to derive its pedigree from revelation, 
and by that very pretence, seek. to impose it ty- 
rannically upon the minds of men, which God hath 
here purposely left free to the use of their own fa- 
culties, that so finding out truth by them, they 
- might enjoy that pleasure and satisfaction, which — 
arises from thence. But we aim here at nothing 
more, than a confirmation of this truth, that the 
Atomical physiology was both older than Demo- 
critus, and had no such atheistical original nei- 
ther. And there wants not other good authority 
for this, that Pythagoras did borrow many things 
from the Jews, and translate them into his philo- 
sophy. — | | 


92 _PYTHAGORAS AN ATHEIST. 


x1, But there are yet other considerable proba- 
bilities for this, that Pythagoras was not unac- 
quainted with the Atomical physiology. And 
first from Democritus himself, who, as he was of 
the Italic row, or Pythagoric succession, so it is 
recorded of him in Laertius,* that he was a great 
emulator of the Pythagoreans, and seemed to 
have taken all his philosophy from them, inso- 
much that if chronology had not contradicted it, 
it would have been concluded, that he had been 
an auditor of Pythagoras himself, of whom he 
testified his great admiration in a book entitled by 
his name. Moreover, some of his opinions had a 
plain correspondency with the Pythagoric doc- 
trines, forasmuch as Democritus’ did not only 
hold, ¢gépecOat dropouc év tw OAw Swovpévac, that the 
atoms were carried round in a vortex ;—but alto- 
gether with Leucippus, riv ynv oyeidae zept ro péoov 
cwoupérny, that the earth was carried about the 
middle or centre of this vortex (which is the sun) 
turning in the meantime round uponits own axis. 
— And just so the Pythagoric opinion is expressed 
by Aristotle,‘ cy ynv Ey TwY dotpwy ovoav KUKAw peoo- 
pévHY TEGL TO LéooV VUKTA Kal THY nuépav roy’ ‘That the 
earth, as one of the stars (that is a planet), being 
earried round about the middle or centre (which 
is fire or the sun), did in the meantime by its cir- 
cumgyration upon its own axis make day and 
night.—Wherefore it may be reasonably from 
hence concluded, that as Democritus’s philoso- 
phy was Pythagorical, so Pythagoras’s philoso- 
phy was likewise Democritical, or Atomical.. 

* Lib. ix. segm. 38. p. 570. | 


_ ° Lib. ix. segm. 44. p. 573, et segm. 30. p. 567. 
© De Coelo, lib. ii. c. xiii. p. 658. tom. i. oper. 


, 


PYTHAGORASS MONADS, ATOMS. 93 


xu1, But that which is of more moment yet, we 
have the authority of Ecphantus, a famous Py- . 
thagorean for this, that Pythagoras’s Monads, 
so much talked of, were nothing else but corpo- 

real Atoms. Thus we find it in Stobeus,* rd¢ Ilv-_ 
Ba-yopikac Movasae ovTOC TOWTOC amrednvaro CWMATIKA, 
Ecphantus (who himself? asserted the doctrine of 
_ Atoms) first declared, that the Pythagoric Monads 
were corporeal,—i.e. Atoms. And this is further 
confirmed from what Aristotle’ himself writes of. 
these Pythagoreans and their Monads,. rag Mo- 
yasac Vro\auBavovow Eyety péyeBoc” they suppose their 
-Monads to have magnitude.—And from that he 
elsewhere* makes Monads and Atoms to signify 
the same thing, ovoeev Siagépe Movasdae AEyew 7 owuaria - 
supa’ It is all one to say.monades or small cor- 
puscula.—And Gassendus’® hath observed out of 
the Greek epigrammatist,' that Epicurus’s Atoms 
were sometimes called Monads too :— 
earn “Entuoupoy eacoy 
Tlov 79 xevoy Cureiy xab-viveg at Movades. 

xi11. But to pass from, Pythagoras himself; 
that Empedocles, who was a Pythagorean $ also, 
did physiologize atomically, is a thing that could 
hardly be doubted of, though there were no more 
proof for it than that one _ of his in’ his 
philosophic poems := 


ee ovdEves Eorty Exaorrou 
AAR pedvov aikig re Diarrable re esyévro" 


* Eclog. Phys. lib. i. cap. xiii. p. 27. edit. Plantin. 1575. fol. 

’ Stob. ubi supra, lib. i. c. xxv. p. 48. 

© Metapbys. lib. xi. c. vi, tom. iv. oper. p. 424. 

4 De Anima, lib. ii. ¢. vi. p. 13. tom. ii. oper. 

: Physices sect. i. lib. iii. c. iv. p. 256. tom. i. one: et i in Notis ad 
hb. ix. Diog. Laertii, p. 70. tom. v. oper. 

f Antholog. Greecor. Epigram. lib. i. xv. p. 32. edit. Francof. 1600. fol. 
* € Vide Plut. de Placitis Philos. lib. i. c. xxx. p.-885- tom. ii. oper. 


94 PROVED THAT EMPEDOCLES 


Nature is nothing but the mixture and separation 
of things mingled ; or thus; There is no produc- 
tion of any thing anew, but only mixture and 
separation of things mingled.—Which is not only 
to'be understood of animals, according to the Py- 
thagoric doctrine of the transmigration of souls, 
but also, as himself expounds it, universally of 
all bodies, that their generation and corruption is 
nothing but mixture and separation; or, as Aris- 
totle* expresses It, OU'YKLOLC Kat Staxptote, concretion 
and secretion of parts, together with change of 
figure and order. It, may perhaps be objected, 
that Empedocles held four elements, out of which 
he would have all other bodies to be compounded ; 
and that as Aristotle affirms,” he made those ele- 
ments not to be transmutable into one another 
neither. To which we reply, that he did indeed 
make'four elements, as the first general concre- 
tions ef atoms, and therein he did no more than 
Democritus himself, who, as Laertius writes,° did 
from atoms moving round in a vortex, wavra ovy- 
‘Kpiuara yevvay TUP, Joup, aéoa, yn, elvat yap Kal Taura 
:E dropwy twwv ovornpara, generate all concretions, 
fire, water, air, and earth, these being systems 
made out of certain atoms.—And Plato further 
confirms the same; for in his book De Legibus* 
he describes (as I suppose) that very Atheistical 
hypothesis of Democritus, though without men- 
tioning his name, representing it in this manner; 
that by the fortuitous motion of senseless matter 
were first made those four elements, and then out 


* De Generat. et Corrupt. lib. ii. c. vi. p. 739. tom. i. oper- 
> Ibid. p. 734. et lib. i. c. iii. p. 699. 

© Lib. ix. segm. 44. p. 573. 

* Lib. x. p. 666. oper. 


‘ ‘PHYSIOLOGIZED ATOMICALLY. © 95 


of them afterward sun, moon, stars, and earth. 
Now both Plutarch* and. Stobezus? testify, that 
Empedocles compounded the four elenients them-: 
selves out of atoms. ‘“EumsdoxAne Sé & puxporépwv 
OyKwY Ta oroyeta ovyKpivet amrep goTly é\aytora, Kal OLOvEL 
| oTOLYEta croyeiwy’ Empedocles makes the elements | 
to be compounded of other small! corpuscula, 
which are the least, and as it were the elements of © 
the elements.—And the same Stobzus again ob- 
serves,* "EurredoxAne T™po TWV TEToapWY oToLyetwy Opave- 
para éddywra’ Empedocles makes the smallest 
particles and fragments of body (that is, atoms), — 
to be before the four elements.—But whereas 
Aristotle affirms, that Empedocles denied the 
transmutation of those elements into one another, 
‘that must needs be either a slip in hin, or else a 
fault in our copies; not only because Lucretius, 
who was better versed in that philosophy, and 
gives a particular account of Empedocles’s 
doctrine (besides many others of the ancients), 
affirms the quite contrary ; but also because him- — 
self, in those fragments of his still preserved, ex- 
pressly acknowledges this transmutation. 


Kai pbeiver sig AAAnAa, nal avgeras Ev wéees alons. 


xiv. Besides all this, no less author than Plato 
affirms, that according to Empedocles, vision and 
other sensations were made by azogpoat synpdrwv, 
the defluxions of figures,—or effluvia of atoms 
(for so Democritus’s Atoms are called in Aristotle — 
synpuara, because they were bodies which had only 
figure without qualities), lie supposing, that some 

2 De Placitis Philos. lib. i. c. xvii. p. 883. tom. ii. oper. Wide etiam 
c. xili. p. 883. , 


b Eclog. Physic. lib. i. c. xx. p. 36. 
© Jbid. lib. 1. c. xvil. p. 38. 


96 THE SAME FURTHER CONVINCED 


of these figures or particles corresponded with. 
the organs of one sense, and some with the organs 
of another. *Ovxouy déyere aroppodg Tivac rwv ovTwY 
xara Epmedoxdéa, Kat ‘TOPOUC, gic ove, Kal Ol wy al arrop- 
poat wopevovrat, Kat Tov dsr of powy Tac fey aoporrety eviowg 
TwWY TOOWD, rac 82 eAdrrouc 7 peiZove evar’ You say, 
then, according to the doctrine of Empedocles, 
that there are certain corporeal effluvia from bo- 
dies of different magnitudes and figures, as also 
several pores and meatus’s in us diversely corre- 
sponding with them : so that some of these corpo- 
real effluvia agree with some pores, when they are 
either too big or too little for others.—By which it 
is evident, that Empedocles did not suppose sen- 
ations to be made by intentional species or quali- 
ties, but as to the generality, in the Atomical way ; 
in which notwithstanding there are some differ- 
ences among the Atomists themselves. But Em- 
pedocles went the same way here with Demo- 
critus, for Empedocles’s amroppoat oyNMaTwY, de- 
fluxions of figured bodies,—are clearly the same 
thing with Demoeritus’s aswAwv cicxpicac, insinua- 
tions of simulachra; or, exuvious images of bo- 
dies.—And the same Plato adds further,’ that ac- 
cording to Empedocles, the definition of colour 
was this, a7roppon oynuarwy Owen oUMpETpoc Kat aisOnroe, 
The defluxion of figures, or figured’ corpuscula 
(without qualities) commensurate to the sight and 
sensible-—Moreover, that Empedocles’s physio- . 
lagy was the very same with that of Democritus, 
is manifest also from this passage of Aristotle," 
Ou pv otv rept “EumedoxXéa cal Anpoxetrov ANavbavovew 
avro. EavTove OV yevéow && addnrAwv rovovvrec, ard gat- 


4 Plato in Menone, p. 14, >’ Tbid. 
© De Ceelo, lib. iii. cap. vii. p. 680. tom.'i, oper. 


FROM PLATO AND OTHERS. 97 


VOMEVNY yévectv” évuTrag yor yao y aetOD exxolvecDat gacw 
WamTEO ef ayyetou Tne YEVETEWC ovenc’ Empedocles and 
Democritus deceiving themselves, unawares de- 
stroy all generation of things out of one another, 
leaving a seeming generation only: for they say, 
that generation is not the production of any new 
entity, but ouly the secretion of what was before 
inexistent; as when divers kinds of things con- 
founded together in a vessel, are separated from 
one another.—Lastly, we shall confirm all this by, 
the clear testimony of Plutarch, or the writer De 
Placitis Philosophorum ° "EumedoxAne kat - Exixoupos 
Kal TAVTEC Soot Kata cvvabpoispov TWV AETTOMEPWY CwUaTWY 
KOOMOTrOLOUGL, cUyKpiCElC uev Kal Sak picetc Eica-youst, yevi- 
osic Of Kal p0opac ov Kuplwe, ov yao KaTa Troloy & adAow- 
EWC, Kata Oe TOoOV ovuK cuvallooispou ravrac yivecbar’ Em- 
pedocles and Epicurus, and all those that com- 
pound the world of small atoms, introduce con- 
cretions and secretions, but no generations or cor- 
ruptions properly so called; neither would they 
have these to be made according to quality by al- | 


‘teration, but only according to quantity by ag- 


gregation.— And the same writer sets down the 
order and method of the Cosmopeia, according to 
Empedocles;? ‘Epmedoxhne; TOV pev aiBépa TOwToy Staxer- 
Onva, Sevrepoy oe TO TUp, ep @ mV yay 2B a ral aed aot 
mévne ™ pun TNC TEPLPOPAC, avaBAvoat To Jdwp, & ov bv- 
pear vas TOV agpa, Kal ryevtobat TOV MEV OUPavoV é TOU’ albE- 
goc, rov 8 HAuov ek rupoc’ Empedocles writes, that 
ether. was first of all secreted out of the confused 
chaos of atoms, afterwards the fire, and then the 
earth, which being constringed, ‘and as it were, 
squeezed by the force of agitation, sent forth wa; 
ter bubbling out of it; from the evaporation of 
. * Lab. ic. xxiv. p. 884; oper. ' . > Lib. il. cap. vi. p. 887. 


98 ‘MOST OF THE ANCIENT 

‘which did proceed air; and from the ether was 
made the heavens, from fire the sun.—We see, 
‘therefore, that it was not without cause, that Lu- 
cretius* did so highly extol Empedocles, since his 
physiology was really the same with that of Epi- 
curus and Democritus ; only that he differed from 
them in some ear iealannes: as In excluding a va- 
. cuum, and denying such. physical minima as were 
indivisible. . 

xv. As for Anaxagoras, though he _philoso- 
phized by Atoms, substituting concretion and se- 
cretion, in the room of generation and corruption, 
insisting upon the same fundamental principle, 
that Empedocles, Democritus, and the other 
Atomists did; which was (as we shall declare 

more fully afterward) that nothing could be made 
out ofnothing, nor reduced to nothing: - and there- 
fore;that there were neither any new productions, 
vor destructions of any substances or real entities: 
yet, as his Homeomeria is represented by Aristo- 
- tle,-Lucretius, and other authors, that bone was 
xiidde of bony atoms, and flesh of fleshy, red 
things of red atoms, and hot things of hot atoms: 
these atoms being supposed to be endued origi- 
nally with so many several forms and qualities es- 
sential to them, and inseparable from them, there 
was indeed a wide difference between his philoso-— 
phy-and the Atomical. However, this seems to 
have had its rise from nothing else but this philo- 
sopher’s not being able to understand the Atomi- 

cal hypothesis, which made him decline it, and 
- substitute this spurious and counterfeit Atomism 
of his own in the room of it. = 

xvi. Lastly, I might add oe that it is record- 

| 2 Lib. i. vers. 744, 745. | 


PHY¥SIOLOGERS ATOMISTS. — 9g 


ed by good authors, concerning divers other an- 
cient philosophers, that were not addicted to De- 
mocriticism or Atheism, that they followed this 
Atomical way of physiologizing, and therefore 
in all probability did derive it from those religi- 
ous ‘Atomists before Democritus. - As for ex- 
ample; Ecphantus, the Syracusian Pythagorist, 

who, as Stobeus writes, made ra aduaipera owpara 
Kat ro kevov, indivisible bodies and vacuum, the 
principles of physiology, and as Theodoret also 
testifies, taught && rwv drouwy cvvecravar Tov KOopoy, 
that the corporeal world was made up of atoms; 
——Xenocrates,* that made peyéOn aduipera, indivisi- 
ble magnitudes, the first principles of bodies ; 
Heraclides,° that resolved all corporeal things 
into Wnyuara Kal Boavopara Twa éXayuora, certain 
smallest fragments of bodies ;—Asclepiades,*.who 
supposed all the corporeal world to be made é 
avopolwy Kal avapnwy oyxwv, not of similar parts (as 
Anaxagoras) but of dissimilar and inconcinn.mo 

lecule, i.e. atoms of different magnitude and fi- 
gures ; and Diodorus,” that solved the material 
' phenomena by ayepn ra ehayiora, the smallest indi- 
visibles of body. And lastly, Metrodorus® (not 
Lampsacenus, the Epicurean, but) Chius, who is 
reported also to have made indivisible particles 
aud atoms the first principles of bodies. But 
| what need we any more proof for ed that one 


2 Vide Georg. Pachymer. libellum reg ATSLAV Yeatepray, qui extat inter 
Aristotelis opera, tom. 11. cap. 1. p. 819. 

b Vide Plutarch. de Placitis Philos. lib. i. cap. xiii. p. 883. ‘ua ii. 
oper. 
¢ Vide Sextum Eipide. Hypotypos. Pyrrhon. lib. iii. cap. Iv. p- 136. 

@ Sext. Empiric. lib. i. adv. Physicos, sect. 363. p.621. vide etiam 
lib. iii, Hypothes. cap. iv. p.*136. 

© Vide Stobeei Eclog. pesca lib. j. Cap. XL. P. 27. 


100 DEMOCRITUS AND LEUCIPPUS 


Atomical physiology was ancienter than Demo- 
critus and Leucippus, and not confined only to 
that sect, since Aristotle himself* in the passages 
already cited, doth expressly declaré, that besides 
Democritus, the generality of all the other physi- - 
_ ologers went that way; Anpoxprtoc cai ot Ascot 
rav guowrcywv, &e. Democritus and the most of 
the physiologers wake all sense to be touch, and 
resolvesensible qualities, as thé tastes of bitter and 
sweet, &c. into figures.—And again,” he imputes © 
it generally to all the physiologers that went be- 
fore him, ot rporepov guowodoyor, the former physio- 
_logers (without any exception) said not well in 
this, that there was no black and white without 
the sight, nor bitter and sweet without the taste.— 
Wherefore, I think, it cannot be. reasonably 
doubted, but that the generality of the old physio- 
logers before: Aristotle and Democritus, did pur- 
sue the Atomical way, which is to resolve the cor- 
poreal phenomena, not into forms, qualities, and 
species, but into figures, motions, and fancies. 
xvi1. But.then there will seem to be no small 
difficulty in reconciling Aristotle with himself, 
who. doth in so many places plainly impute this 
philosophy to Democritus and Leucippus, as the 
first source and original of it; as also in salving 
the credit of Laertius, and many other ancient 
writers, who do the like, Democritus having had 
for many ages almost the general cry and vogue 
for Atoms. However, we.doubt not but to give 
a very good account of this business, and recon- 
cile the seemingly different testimonies of these 
ancient writers, so as to take away all contradic- 


"© Lib. de Sensu et Sensibili, cap. iv. p: 70. tom. ii. oper. 
> De Animo, lib. ii. cap. i. p. 43. tom. ii. oper. | 


THE FIRST ATHEISTIC ATOMISTS. 101 


tion and repugnancy between them.- For al- 
though the Atomical physiclogy was in use long 
before Democritus and Leucippus, so that they 
did not make it, but find it; yet these two, with - 
their confederate Atheists arheieot Protagoras 
seems to have been one) were undoubtedly the 
first, that ever made this physiology to be a com- 
plete and entire philosophy by itself, so as to de- 
rive the original of all things in the whole universe 
from senseless atoms, that had nothing but figure 
and motion, together with vacuum, and made up 


_-such a system of it, as from whence it would fol- 


low, that the e could not be any God, not so much 
as acorporea] one. ‘These two things were both 
of them before singly and apart. For there is no 
doubt to be made, but that there hath been Athe- 
ism lurking in the minds of some or other in all 
aves ; and perhaps some of those ancient Atheists 
did endeavour to philosophize too, as well as they 
could, in some other way. And there was Ato 
mical physiology lhkewise before, without Athe- 
ism. But these two thus complicated together, | 
were never before Atomical Atheism, or Atheisti- — 
cal Atomism. And therefore, Democritus and 
‘his comrade Leucippus, need not be envied the: 
glory of being reputed the first inventors or found- 
ers of the Atomical philosophy atheized and 
adulterated. 

xviti. Before Leucippus and Deinoctilits the 
doctrine of Atoms was not made a whole entire 
philosophy by itself, but looked upon only as a 
part or member of the whole philosophic system, 
and that the meanest and lowest part too, it being 
only used to explain that which was purely cor- 
poreal in the. world ; besides which, they acknow- 

VOL. I. 


102 | INCORPOREAL SUBSTANCE 


ledged something else, which was not’mere bulk 
sel mechanisin, Ga life and self activity, that is, 
immaterial or incorporeal substance; the head and 
summity whereof, is the Deity distinct from the 
world. So that there have been two sorts of Ato- 
mists in the world, the one Atheistical, the other 
Religious. The first and most ancient Atomists 
holding incorporeak substance, used that physio- 
logy in a way of subordination to theology and me- . 
taphysics. The other, allowing no other sub- 
stance but body, made seuseless atoms and f- 
gures, without any mind and understanding (i. e. 
without any God) to be the original of all things ; 
which latter is that, that was vulgarly known “by 
the name of Atomical philosophy, of which De- 
mocritus and Leucippus were the source. 

xix. It hath been indeed of late confidently as- 
serted by some, that never any of the ancient phi- 
losophers dreamed of any such thing as incorpo- 
real substance; and therefore they would bear 
- menin hand, that it was nothing but an upstart 
and new-fangled invention of some bigotical reli- 
gionists ; the falsity whereof, we shall here briefly 
make to appear. For though there have been 
' doubtless, inall ages, such as have disbelieved the 
existence of any any but what was sensible, 
whom Plato* Neeeribee. after this manner ; of Starci- 
yowr av wav 6 un Suvarol Talc yepot oupmiscey et ElolY, we aga 
TOUTO OVOESD TO Tapa EoTi” That would contend, that 
whatsoever they could not feel or grasp with their 
hands, was altogether nothing ;—yet this opinion 
was préfesdedly opposed by the best of the an- 
cient philosophers, and condemned for a piece of 
sottishness and stupidity. Wherefore, the same 
; 2 In Sophista, p. 160, 


ASSERTED BY THE ANCIENTS. 103 


Plato tells us, that there had been always, as well 
as then there was, a perpetual war and contro- 
versy in the world, and, as he calls it; a kind of 
gigantomachy betwixt these two parties or sects 
of men; the one, that held there was no other sub- 
stance in the world besides body; the other, that 
asserted incorporeal substance. The former of 
these parties or sects is thus described by the phi- 

losopher ; Ot ev ELC ny e& ovpavou Kat Tov dopdrov 
- gavra e\Kovot rac ey, aTEyvOc mérpac Kal dpvue TEDL 
A au Pavovrec, Twv yao ToLourey sper roueral TAVTWDV, dite yu 
pitovrat TOUTO sivat povov 6. mapexer mpocPodny Kat era 
ony Tlva, TAUTOV WME Kal OVoLAY OpICOuEVoL” THY OE aAAwv 
siri¢ pol my copa eyov elvat, Kat appovouvrec TO Tapatrav, 
Kat oupev ebédovrec GAAO axoveww" These (saith he)pull all 
things down from heaven and the invisible region, 

arr their hands to the earth, laying hold of voce: 
and oaks; and when they grasp all these hard and 
gross things, they confidently affirm, that that 
only is substance, which they can feel, and will re- 
sist their touch; and they conclude, that body 
and substance are one and. the self-same thing ; 
and if any one chance to speak to them of some- 
thing which is not body, i.e. of incorporeal sub- 
stance, they will altogether despise him, and not 
hear a word more from him. And many such the 
philosopher there says he, had met withal.. The 
‘other he represents in this manner ; Ot zpd¢ avrove 
auto Pnrovvrec para evraPwe: avobey 2 aoparou rood 
aLvvoOVTal vonTa aTTa Kal dowpara elon, PraZopevat rv aXxn- 
Ouv ovolav eivat. ev péow d& mepl ravTa Am ero¢ dugorégwv 
payn tic det Evvéornxe’ The adversaries of these 
Corporealists do cautiously and piously assault 
them from the invisible region, fetching all things 
from above by way of descent, and by strength of 

H2 : 


‘ 


104 INCOR POREAL. SUBSTANCE 


reason convincing , that certain intelligible nad in- 
corporeal forms are the true or first substance, and 
not sensible things. But betwixt these two there 
hath always been (saith he) a great war and con- 
tention.—And yet in the sequel of his discourse, 
he adds, that those Corporealists were then grown 
a little more modest and shame-faced than for- 
merly their great champions had been, such as 
Democritus and Protagoras; for however they 
still persisted in this, that the soul wasa.body, 
yet they had not, it seems, the impudence to 
affirm, that wisdom and virtue were corporeal 
things, or bodies, as others before and since too 
have done. We see here, that Plato expressly 
asserts a substance distinct from body, which 
sometimes he calls ovotay acwiuarov, incorporeal sub- 
stance,—and sometimes ousiav vonryv, intelligible 
substance,—in opposition to the other which he 
calls aic$yrijv, sensible-—And it is plain to any one, 
that hath had the least acquaintance with Plato’s 
philosophy, that the whole scope and drift of it, 
is to-raise up men’s minds from sense to a belief of 
incorporeal things as the most excellent: ra yap 
acwuara kaAddtora Ovra Kai peylora oye uovor, arr 3 
ovdert, capwc deikvurat, aS he writes in another place ;* 
for incorporeal things, which are the greatest and 
most excellent things of all, are (saith he) disco- 
-verable by reason aay. and nothing else.—And 
his subterraneous cave, so emously known, and so_ 
elegantly described by him,’ where he supposes 
men ‘tied with their backs towards the hight, 

placed at a great distance from them, so that they 
could not turn about their heads to it neither, 

and therefore could see nothing but the shadows 


* In Politico, p.182. oper. ® De Repub, lib. vii. p. 483, 


ASSERTED BY THE ANCIENTS. 105 


(of certain substances behind them) projected 
from it, which shadows they concluded to be thé 
only substances and realities, and when they 
heard the sounds made by those bodies that were 
betwixt the light and them, or their reverberated 
echoes, they imputed them tothose shadows which | 
they saw; I say, all this is a description of the 
state of those men, who take body to be the only 
real and substantial thing in the world, and to do 
all that is done in it; and therefore often impute 
sense, reason, and understanding, to nothing but 
blood and brains in us. : 

xx. I might also shew in the next place, haw 
Aristotle did not at all dissent from Plato herein, 
he plainly asserting,® aAAnv ovoiav mapa ta aicAnra, 
another substance besides sensibles,—ovoiay ywpt- 
oTny Kal KEY WOLoUs évnu TwV aobnrwr, a substance separ- 
able and also actually separated from sensibles,— 
axivyntov ovgiav, an Immoveable nature or essence— 
(subject to no generation or corruption) adding, 
that the Deity was to be sought for here: nay, 
‘such a substance, nv neyeBoc ovcey evdkyeran EYED, an- 
Ad apepne Kat adtaigeroe éort, aS hath no magnitude at 
all, but is impartible and indivisible-—He also 
blaming Zeno (not the Stoic, who. was junior to 
Aristotle, but an aucienter philosopher of that 
name) for making God to be a body, in these 
words 3’ avrv¢ ydo swua XéEyee civat TOV Osdv’ cize 8 rdde Td 
‘Tay, ere OTt OnTOTE avTog AEywy" aowWuaTOS yap OV THC av 
opaipoeionc ein ; OTaV OUTWE OUT Av KLWOITO, OUT aY NPEMOL, 


~ wo. 3 \ \ ~ 4» p wf > 8 , ~ : 
pindajou re wy" Eve O& owpa EsTt, TLaY avTO KwAvE KivEOaL 


2 Metaphys. lib. xiv. cap. vii. p. 480. tom. iv. Open, et in multis aliis 
locis. 

b Libro de Zenone, a ak et t Corgia, cap. iv. p. 844. tom. i. 
oper. 


106 | INCORPOREAL SUBSTANCE » 


Zeno implicitly affirms God to be a body, whe- 
ther he mean him to be the whole corporeal uni- 
verse, or some particular body; for if God were 
incorporeal, howcould he be spherical? nor could 
he then either move or rest, being not properly 
-in any place: but if God be a body, then nothing 
hinders but that he may be moved.— From which 
and other places of Aristotle, it-is plain enough 
also, that he did suppose incorporeal substance to 
be unextended, and as such, not to have relation 
to any place. But this is a thing to be disputed 
afterwards. Indeed some learned men conceive 
Aristotle to have reprehended Zeno without cause, 
and that Zeno made God to be a sphere, or sphe- 
rical, in no other sense, than Parmentdes aid in 
that known verse of his ;* | 


Tayrobey ebudenov oHaipac ee oye. 


_ Wherein hed is understood to describe the Divine 
eternity. However, it plainly appears from hence, . 
that according to Aristotle’s sense, God was dow- | 
_ paroc, an. incorpor eal substance distinct from the 
world. 

xx1. Now this doctrine, which Plato especially 
was famous for asserting, that there was ovcla dsw- 
arog, incorporeal substance,—and that the souls 
of men were such, but principally the Deity; 
Epicurus taking notice of it, endeavoured with 
all his might to confute it, arguing. sometimes. 
after this manner :’ There can Be no incorporeal 
God (as Plato maintained), not. only because no 
man can frame a conception of an incorporeal 


¢ Apud Aristot. in libro jam laudato, cap. iv. p. 843. tom. ii. oper, 
et apud Platonem in Sophista, et veterum alios. 
> Cicero de.Natur. Deor. lib. i. cap. sii. p, 2807. tom. ix. oper. 


| CONFUTED BY EPICURUS. | 107 
substance, but also because whatsoever is incor- 
poreal must needs want sense, and prudence, and 
pleasure, all which things are included in the no-. 
tion of God; and therefore, an incorporeal Deity 
is a contradiction.—And concerning the soul of 
man: “oa héyourec aowp"aTov give THY puyny parataZovet, 
&c. They who say, that the soul is incorporeal, in 
any other sense, than as that word may be used to 
signify a subtile body, talk vainly and foolishly ; 
for then it could neither be able to do nor suffer 
any thing. It could not act upon any other thing, 
because it could touch nothing ; neither could it 
suffer from any thing, because it could not be. 
touched by any thing; but it would be just like 
to vacunom or empty space, which can neither do 
nor suffer any thing, but only yield bodies a pas- 
sage through it. _-From whence it is further evi-. 
dent, that this opinion was professedly maintain- 
ed by some philosophers before Epicurus’s time. 

xxII. But Plato and Aristotle were not the first 
inventors of it; for it is certain, that all those phi- 
losophers, who held the immortality of the hu- 
man soul, and a God distinct from this visible 
world (and 80 properly the Creator of -it and all 
its parts), did really assert incorporeal substauce. 
For that a corporeal soul cannot be in its own 
nature immortal and incorruptible, is plain to 
every, one’s understanding, because of its parts 
being separable from one another ; and whosoever : 
denies God to be incorporeal, if he make him any 
thing at all, he must needs make him to be either 
the whole corporeal world, or else a part of it-— 
Wherefore, if God be neither of these, he must 
then be an incorporeal substance. Now Plato 


. Vide Diog. Lacrt. lib. x. segm. 67, 68. p. 630. 


“108 PROVED THAT INCCRPOREAL SUBSTANCE 


was not the first who asserted these two things, 

but they were both maintained by many pifilose: 
phers before him. Pherecydes Syrus, and Thales, 
were two of the most ancient philosophers among 
the Greeks; and it is said of the former of them,’ 

that by his lectures and disputes concerning the 
immortality of the soul; he first drew off Pytha- 
goras from another course of life to the study of 
philosophy. Pherecydes Syrus. (saith Cicero) 
‘primus dixit animos hominum esse sempiternos.” 
And Thales, in.an epistle,° directed to him, con- 
gratulates his being the first, that had designed to 
write to the Greeks concerning Divine things ; 
which Thales also (who was the head of the Ionic 
succession of philosophers, as Pythagoras of the 
Italic) is joined with Pythagoras and Plato, bythe 
writer “ De Placitis Philosophorum, ** after this 
pariiaia OUTOL TAVTEC ol wporeraypévor aowparov ry bu: 
ynv- - droriBevra, pve AEYouTEC aUTOKIYnTOV Kat ovolay 
vontnv’ All these determined the soul to be in-— 
corporeal, making it to be naturally selfmoving - 
(or self-active) and an intelligible substance,— 
that is, not sensible. Now le, that determines 
the soul to be incorporeal, must needs hold the 
Deity to be incorporeal much more. “ Aquam 
dixit Thales esse initium rerum (saith Cicero,)* 
Deum autem eam mentem, que ex aqua cuncta 
fingeret.”" Thales said that water was the first 
principle of all corporeal things, but that God was 
that mind, which formed ali things out of water, 


2 Vide Augustin. cap- Cxxxvii. p. 308. tom. ii. oper. 

> Tusculan. Quasi. lib. i. c. xvi. p. 2586. tom. viii. oper. 
¢ Apud Diogen. Lacrt. lib. i. segm. 43. p. 25. 

¢ Lib. iv. cap. iit. p. 908.. 

© De Natur, Deor. lib. i. cap. x. p. 2894. tom. ix. oper, 


i 


WAS ASSERTED BY THE ANCIENTS. 109° 


—TFor Thales was a Pheenician by extraction, and 
accordingly seemed to have received his two 


principles from thence, water, and the Diyine © 


Spirit moving upon the waters. The first whereof 
is thus expressed by Sanchoniathon,* in his de- 
scription of the Pheenician theology, yaoc BodrEoov, 
gpeGwdec, a turbid and dark chaos ;—and the se- 
cond is intimated in these words, nodobn 76 rvsiua 
rwv wiwy aeywov, the Spirit was affected with love 
towards its own principles ;—perhaps expressing 
the force of the Hebrew word, Merachepheth, and 
both. of them implying an understanding prolifical 
goodness, forming and hatching the corporeal 
world into this perfection ; or else a plastic power, 
subordinate toit. Zeno (who was also originally 
a Pheenician) tells us,” that Hesiod’s chaos wa: 
water: and that the material heaven as well ac 


earth was made out of water (according to the- 


judgment of the best interpreters) is the genuine 
sense of Scripture, 2 Pet. 1.5. by which water 
some perhaps would understand a chaos of 
atoms confusedly moved. But whether Thalés 
were acquainted with the Atomical physiology or 
no,° it is platn that he asserted, besides the soul’s 
immortality, a Deity distinct from the corporeal 
world. 

_. We pass to Pythagoras, whom we have proved 
already to have been an Atomist; and it is well 
known, also, that he was a professed Incorpore- 
alist. That he asserted the. immortality of the 
soul, and consequently its immateriality, is evi- 


= Apud Euseb. de Pracparatione. Evangelica, lib. ij. cap. x. p. 33. 


oa 


* b Vide Scholiast. in Apollon. Argouautic. lib. iv. vers. 676. s. cifa- - 


tum ab Hug. Grotio, in Notis ad lib. i. de Veritate Relig. Christ. sec. 
AVI. p. 30, 31. 
© Vide Plutarch. de Placitis Philos. lib. i. cap. xvi. p. 883, 


{10 PARMENIDES AN ASSERTOR OF 


dent from his doctrine of pre-existence and trans- 
wnigration: and that he hkewise held an incorpo- 
real Deity distinct from the world, is a thing not 
questioned by any. Butif there were any need of 
proving it (because there are no monuments of his 
extant), perhaps it might be done from heuce, be- 
cause he was the chief propagator of that doc- 
trine amongst the Greeks, concerning three hy- 
postases in the Deity. 

For, that Plato and his followers held, ree do- 
yixag vrooractic, three hypostases in the Deity, that 
were the first principles of all things—is a thing 
very well known to all; though we do not affirm, 
that these Platonic hypostases are exactly the 
same with those in the Christian trinity. Now 
Plato himself sufficiently intimates this not to have 
been his own invention; and Plotinus tells us, 
that it was weAad doa, an ancient opinion before 
Plato’s time, which had been delivered down by 
some of the Pythagorics. Wherefore, I conceive, 
this must needs be one of those Pythagoric mon- 
strosities, which Xenophon covertly taxes Plato 
for entertaining, and mingling with the Socratical 
philosophy, as if he had thereby corrupted the 
purity and simplicity of it. Though a Corpore- 
alist may pretend to bea Theist, yet I never heard 
that any of them did ever assert a trinity, respec- 
tively to the Deity, uniess it were such an one as 
I think not fit here to mention, 

xxi. That Parmenides, who was likewise a 
Pythagorean, acknowledged a Deity distinct from 
the corporeal world, 1s evident from Plato* Aud 
Plotinus tells us also, that he was one of them 
that asserted the triad of Divine hypostases. 


A Tn Parmentde, 


INCORPOREAL SUBSTANCE. Ald 


Moreover, whereas there was a great controversy 
amongst the.ancient philosophers before Plato’s 
time,* between such as held all things to flow 
(as namely Heraclitus and Cratylus), and others, - 
who asserted that some things did stand, and that 
‘there was axivntoc ovcia, a certain immutable na- 
. ture—to wit, an eternal mind, together with eter- 
nal and immutable truths (amongst which were 
Parmenides and Melissus); the former of these 
were all Corporealists (this being the very reason 
why they made all things to flow, because they 
supposed all to be body), though these were not, 
therefore, all of them Atheists. But the latter 
~ were all both Incorporealists and Theists; for 
whosoever holds incorporeal substance, must 
needs, according to reason, also assert a Deity. — 
And although we did not before particularly 
mention Parmenides amongst the Atomical philo- 
sophers, yet we conceive it to be manifest from 
hence, that he was one of that tribe, because he 
‘was an eminent assertor of: that principle, ovdy 
OuTE yiveBan ovte POcigeBac Tw Ovrwn, that no.real en- - 
tity is either madé or destroyed, generated or 
corrupted.—Which we shall afterwards plainly 
_ shew, to be the grand fundamental ponent of 
the Atomical philosophy. 
xx1Iv. But whereas we did evidently prove be-. 
fore, that Empedocles was an Atomical physiolo-. 
ger, it may, notwithstanding, with some colour of 
probability, be doubted, whether he were not an 
Atheist, or at least a Corperealist, because Aris- 
totle accuses him of these following things. First,” 
of making knowledge to be sense, which 3 is, 1- 


'* Vide Platon..in Theseteto, p. 130, 131. 
> Aristot. de Anima, lib. iii. cap. iii, p. 45. tom. ii. oper. 


112 | -EMPEDOCLES NO ATHEIST 


deed, a plats sign of a Corporealist ; and, ieee. 
fore, in the next t place also,* of compounding the 
soul out of the four elements, making it to un- 
derstand every corporeal thing by something of 
the same within itself, as fire by fire, and earth 
by earth; and lastly,” of attributing much to for- 
tune, and affirming, that divers of the parts of 
animals were made such by chance, and that 
there were at first certain mongrel animals, fortul- © 
tously produced, that were Bovyevn Kal avdedrowea, 
such as had something of the shape of an ox, to- 
gether with the face of a man (though they could 
not long corttinue);—which seems to give just 
cause of suspicion, that Empedocles atheized in 
the same manner that Democritus did. 

To the first of these we reply, that some others, 
who had also read Empedocles’s poems, were of 
a different judgment from Aristotle as to that, 

- conceiving Empedocles not to make sense but 
. reason the criterion of truth. Thus Empiricus 
informs us :* Others say, that, according to Em- 
pedocles, the criterion of truth is not sense, but 
right reason; and also that right reason is of two 
sorts, the one Qtoc, or Divine, the other avOowmwoe, 
or human: of which the Divine is inexpressible, 
but the human declarable.—And there might be 
several passages cited out of those fragments of 
Empedocles’s poems yet left, to confirm this; but 
we shall produce only this one: 

Tui ales teune, vées 3 F Sidoy Excoroy.d 

To this sense; Suspend thy assent to the corpo-- 

@ Arist. lib. i. cap. ii. p. 5. tom. ii. oper. 

> Id. de Partibus Animal. lib. i. cap. i. p. 470. tom. 1. oper. et Phy- 
-sicor. lib. ii. cap. vill. p. 475. et 477. 


¢ Lib. vii. adv. Math. sec. 122. p. 396. 
4 Jb. sec, 125. p. 347. 


@ 


NOR CORPOREALIST. 113 


real senses, and consider every thing clearly with 
thy mind or reason. 

And as to the second crimination, Aristotle 
has much weakened his own testimony here, by 
accusing Plato also of the very same thing. ITa- 
Twy THY PUYHY EK TW oTOLyElwy TOLEL, yvwoKETAL yap Opole 
Su0L0v, Ta OF Teaypara EK TWY apywv evar’ Plato com- - 
pounds the soul out of the four elements, because 
like is known by like, and things are from their 
principles.—Wherefore it is probable, that Em- 
pedocles might be no more guilty of this fault (of 
making the soul corporeal, and to consist of earth, 
water, air, and fire) than Plato was, who, in all 
men’s judgments, was as free from it as Aristotle 
himself, if not more. For Empedocles’ did, in the 
same manner as Pythagoras before him, and 
Plato after him, hold the transmigration of souls, 
and consequently both their future immortality 
and ‘pre-existence; and therefore must needs as- 
sert their incorporeity: Plutarch® rightly. declar- . 
ing this to have been his opinion; Eivai cai rove 
unos yeyovorac Kal rove non rébvyxorac’’ That as well 
those who are yet unborn, as those that are dead, 
have a being.—He also asserted human souls to 
be here ina lapsed state ; “a usravacrac, Kal Kévouc, Kal 
guyadac, wanderers, strangers, and fugitives from 
God; declaring, as Plotinus tells us,° that it was 
a Diane law, a apaoravoveaic Talc puyaic TEGELVY évravoa, 
that-souls sinning should fall down into these 

earthly bodies. But the fullest record of the 


* De Anima, 1. i. c. ii. P. 5. tom. ii. op. 

b Diogen. Laert. lib. viii. segm. 78. ‘p 359. et Plut. ‘is Solertia Ani- 
mal. tom. ii. p. 964. oper. 

¢ Libro Adv. Colotem, p. 1113. tom. ii. oper. 

¢ Plutarch. de Exilio, p.-607. 

«De Anime Descensu in Corpora, En. iy. lib. viii. eap. i. p. 468. 


i 
114 EMPEDOCLES NO. ATHEIST 


Empedoclean philosophy concerning: the soul is 
contained 1 in this of Hierocles,? Karen kat arorirre 
FNC EVOMLLOVOE ywoac 0 dvOpwrroc, we "EuredoxAne vice oO 
TlBaydperoc,—duyac O<obev cat adnrne Neixer pawvopéven 


aiovvoe.— Avetot S& Kat THY apyaiay Ev aroAauPavet, 


El pevzer +a megh yiy nal rly drteméia yBeov, 
ae epivog re xbrog Te nal aAAaW eOven ungdoy. 


eid OV ol EKITEGOVTEC— ” Arne 
—dye redve re nat oxdrog HAdoKoUCHY. 


‘H Os Epecic TOU pevyovroc TOV 7G "Arne Aewova Tooc TOV 
TNC adnBetac eretyerat Aeyiva Ov amroAuTwv 7 coun THC 
TTEpOPPUNTEWS zlc yntvov zo yerau ow Ua; ON Giow—<aluivoc 

uch Osic’ Man falleth from his happy state, as Em- 
pedseles the. Pythagorean saith,—by being a fu- 
gitive, apostate, and wanderer from God, actuated 
with a certain mad and irrational strife or conten- 
tion.—But he ascends again, and recovers his 
former state,—if he decline, and avoid these earth- 
ly things, and despise this unpleasant and wretch- 
ed place, where murder, and wrath, and a troop 
of all other mischiefs reign. Into which place, 
they who fall, wander up and down through the 
field of Ate and darkness. But the desire of him 
that flees from this field of Ate carries him on 
towards the field of truth; which the soul at first © 
relinquishing, and losing its wings, fell down into 
this earthly body, deprived of its happy life.— 
From whence it appears that Plato’s wrepoppunate 
was derived from Empedocles and the Pytha- 
goreans. | 

Now, from what hath been already cited, it is 
‘sufficiently manifest, that Empedocles was so far 
from being either an Atheist or Corporealist, that 
he was indeed arank Pythagorist, as he is here 
called.. And we might add hereunto, what Cle- 

*¥n Aurea Pythagorz Carmina, p. 186. 


NOR CORPOREALIST. 115 


mens Alexandrinus observes, that, according to 
Empedocles, nv Ostwe Kal Sucaiwe StaPiwownev, Haxagtot 
ev evrava, pakagwreool de pera rhv evOives arad\aynv’ : 
ou yoovep Tivl THY evoatwovtay Eyovrec, add tv aw dva- 
wavecOat Suvauevor, "A@avaroie GAXorsww ouéoriot, ev Of Toa 
néiZac, &c. If we live holily and justly, we shall 
be happy here, and more happy after our depar- 
ture hence; having our happiness not necessarily 
confined to time, but being able to'rest and fix in 
it to all eternity ; feasting with the other immortal 
beings, &c.—We might also take notice, how, 
besides the immortal souls of men, ‘he acknow- 
ledged demons or angels; declaring that some of 
these fell from heaven, and were since prosecuted 
by a Divine Nemesis. For these in Plutarch’ aré 
called ot @enXarot Kat ovpavorereic Seeoet rou "Eurredo- 
KArtoug Saiuovec’ Those Empedoclean demons lapsed 
from heaven, and pursued with Divine vengeance; 
—whose restless torment is there described in se- 
veral verses of his... And we might observe, like- 
wise, how he acknowledged a natural and immu- 
table justice, which was “not topical and confined 
to places and countries, and relative to particular 
laws, but catholic and universal, and every where. 
the same, through infinite hght and space; as he 
expresses it with poetic pomp and bravery : 


G°AAAR 1O paly wavrav vopesoy, Sid + Elengebdovres 
Albégoc, tventwg reraras, da + dorrévou abyhic. 
And the asserting of natural morality is no small 
argument of a Theist. 
But what then shall we say. to these ‘ethics ’ 
things, which Empedocles is charged with by 
2 Stromatum, lib. v. p. 722. 
_-® De vitando ere alieno, tum. ii. oper. p. 830. 
© Apud Plat. de Exilho, t. ii. oper. p. 607. 
* Apud Aristot, Rhetoric. lib, i. cap. xiii, p. 737. tom. iil. oper. . 


~ 


" 


116 EMPEDOCLES NO ATHEIST. 


Aristotle, that seem to have so rank -a smell of 


Atheism? Certainly those mongrel and biform 
animals, that are said to have sprung up out of 
the earth by chance, look as if they were more 
akin to Democritus than Empedocles ; and proba- 
bly it is the fault of the copies, that it is read 
otherwise, there being no other philosdpher that I 
know of, that could ever find any such thing in 
Empedocles’s poems.* But for the rest, if Aristo- 


- tle do not misrepresent Empedocles, as he often 


doth Plato, then it must be granted, that he be- 
ing a mechanical physiologer, as well as theolo- 
ger, did something too much indulge to fortuitous 
mechanism; which seems to be an extravagancy, 


. that mechanical philosophers and Atomists have 


been always more or less subject too. But Aris- 


. totle doth not charge Empedocles with resolving 


all things into fortuitous mechanism, as some phi- 
Josophers have done of late, who yet pretend to 
be Theists and Incorporealists, but only that he 


would explain some things in that way. Nay, he 
clearly puts a difference betwixt Empedocles and 


the Democritic Atheists, in these words subjoin- 


ed;° Eto 8 ric, &c. which is as if he should have 


said, “ Empedocles resolved some things in the 
fabric and structure of animals ‘into fortuitous 
mechanism; but there are certain other philoso- 
phers, namely, Leucippus and Democritus, who 
would have all things whatsoever in the whole 
world, heaven, and earth, and animals, to be made 


_bychanceand the fortuitous motion of atoms, with- 


out a Deity.” It seems very plain, that Empedo- 


* Some verses of Empedocles, wherein he expressly maintains that 
opinion, are extant in Allian de Natura Animalium, lib. xvi. c. xxix, 
» Physicor. lib. ii. cap. iv. p. 470, oper. 


. NOR CORPOREALIST. | 117 


¢les’s Philia and Neikos, his friendship and dis- 
cord, which he makes to be the apyn Spactngioc, the - 
active cause,—and principle of motion in the uni- 
verse, was a certain plastic power, superior to for- 
tuitous mechanism: and Aristotle himself ac-_ 
knowledges somewhere as much. And Plutarch 
tells us,* that, according to Empedocles, the 
order and system of the world is not the result of 


_” material causes and fortuitous mechanism, but of 


a Divine wisdom, assigning to every thing ov« nv 7 
ovoic OLowet yowpar, aAr nv n TOC TO Kowov zoryov qroOe 
cvvratic' not such a place as nature would give it, 
but such as is most convenient for the good of the 
whole.—Simplicius,” who had read Empedocles, 
acquaints us, that he made two worlds, the one 
intellectual, the other sensible ; and the former of 
these to be the exemplar and archetype of the 
latter. And so-the writer De Placitis Philosopho- 
rut observes, that Empedocles made 8vo nAlouc, 
TOV jlev apyéruToy, Tov Oé, pavduevov, LWO SUNS, the one 
archetypal and intelligible, the other apparent or 
sensible.— 

But I need take no more pains #6 purge. Empe- 
docles from those two imputations of Corporeal- 
ism and Atheism, since he hath so fully confuted 
them himself in those fragments of his still extant. 
. First, by expressing such a hearty resentment of 
the excellency of piety, and the wretchedness and 
oe of Atheism in these. verses : 


A*OABi0¢ 6 og Gefay mectmrtdav & EXTHTATO mrsirov, 
Aerts 8’ & cxordicoa Osa wip Sofa utpandev. 


* Symposiac. lib. i. Quest. if. p. 618. 
~ > Commentar. ad Aristot. libr. ERySeOr: p. 74. b. edit. Grac. Al- 
dine. | 
© Lib. ii. cap. xx. p. 900. tom. ii. oper. Plutarchi. 
4 Apud Clement. Alexandrin. Stromat. lib. v. cap. xiv. p. 733. 
VOL, I. I 


118 ANAXAGORAS AN INCORPOREALIST. 


To this sense: He is happy, who hath his mind 

richly fraught and stored with the treasures of 

Divine knowledge ; but he miserable, whose mind 

is darkened as to the behef of a God.—And, se- 

-condly, by denying God to have any human form, 
or members, 


3 Ob mtv yg Booren neparn xara yia xixagras, &c. 


-Or otherwise to be corporeal, 


b Oixterw mirdcacd ob8 ipbarpoicw Edixrdy 
" “Hyesrteos, i yeect AaBely. 


And then positively affirming what he is, 


c AAAS Pei beg Kak b abberparros 8 EMAETO £L00V0V, 
Ogavrier xicpeoy Garavra xaraiscouca bohoive - 


' Only a holy and ineffable mind, that by swift 
thoughts agitates the whole world.— | 

, xxv. And now we shall speak something also 
of Anaxagoras, having shewed before, that he 
was a spurious Atomist. For he likewise agreed 
with the other Atomists in this, that he asserted 
incorporeal substance in general, as the active 
cause and principle of motion in the universe, and 
particularly an mcorporeal Deity distinct from 
the world; affirming, that there was besides 
atoms, N oie 6 Braxoduon TE Kal Tavrwy airroe, (as it 1s: 
expressed in Plato*) An orderiig and disposing © 
mind, that: was the cause of all things.— Which 
mind (as Aristotle tells us’) he made to be povov 

* Apud Tzetz. Chiliad. xiii, Hist. cccclxiv. v. 80. et Ammonium ip 

. Comment. in Aristotel. regi Egunveias, fol. 107. edit. Aldin. 

» Apud Clem. Alexandr. Stromat. lib. v. p. 694. 

© Apud Tzetz. et Ammonium, ubi supra, 


* In Pheedon. p. 393. oper. 
© De Anima, lib. i, cap. ii, p. 6, tom. ii, oper. 


THE ANCIENT ATOMISTS THEISTS. 119 


twv Ovrwy amAovv Kal auryn cat xafapov, the only sim- 
ple, unmixed, and pure thing—in the world. And 
he supposed this to be that, which brought the 
confused chaos of omnifarious atoms into that or- 
derly compages of the world that now is. | 

xxvi. And by this time wehave made it‘evi- 
dent, that those Atomical physiologers, that were 
before Democritus and Leucippus, were all of 
them Incorporealists : joining theology and pneu- 
matology, the doctrine of incorporeal substance 
and a Deity, together with their Atomical physio- 
logy. This is a thing expressly noted concern- 
ing Ecphantus, the Pythagorean, in Stobeus,* 
"Exgavroc EK pev TwWY aTOuwY ouvEecravat TOV KOGLOV, Otot- 
ketoOar dé amd zpovoiag’ Ecphantus held the corpo- 
real world to consist of atoms, but yet to be or- 
dered and governed by a Divine providence:— 
that is, he joined atomology and theology both 
together. And the same is also observed of Ar- 
alan: or perhaps Archelaus, by Sidonius Apol- | 
iinaris ;” 


Post hos Arcesilaus divina mente paratam 
Conjicit hanc molem, confectam partibus illis, 


Quas atomos vocat ipse leves. & 


Now, I say, as Ecphantus and Archelaus asserted 
the corporeal world to be made of atoms, but yet, 
notwithstanding, held an incorporeal ‘Deity dis- 
tinct from the same, as the first principle of acti- ~ 
vity init; so in like manner did all the other an- 
cient Atomists generally before Democritus, join 
theology and incorporealism with their Atomical. 


* Eclog. Physic. lib. 1. cap. XxV. p. 48. 7 
> Carm. xv. in Epithalamio Polemi et Araneolz, v. 94. p. 132. edit, 
Savaronis. 


12: 


120 THE NEAR COGNATION BETWIXT 


physiology. They did atomize as well as he, but, 
they. did not atheize; but. that Atheistical atomo- 
logy. was a thing first set on foot afterward by 
Leucippus and Democritus. 

xxviIl, But because many seem to be so 
strongly. possessed with this prejudice, as if 
Atheism. were a natural and necessary appendix 
to Atomism, and therefore will conclude, that the 
same persons could not possibly be Atomists, and 
Incorporealists or Theists, we shall further make 
it evident, that there is not only no ‘inconsistency 
betwixt the Atomical physiology and theology, 
but also that there is,-on the contrary, ¢ a most na- 
tural cognation between them. 

And this we shall do two manner of ways; first, 
by inquiring into the origin of this philosophy, . 
and considering what erqunds .or principles of: 
reason they were, which first led the ancientsinto 
this Atomical or mechanical way of physiologiz- 
ing. And secondly, by making it appear, that 
the intrinsical constitution of this physiology is 
such, that whosoever entertains it, if he do but 
thoroughly understand it, must of necessity ac- 
knowledge, that there is something else in the 
world besides body. 

First, therefore, this Atomical physiology seems 
to have had its rise and origin from. the strength 
of reason, exerting its own “inward active. power 
and vigour, and thereby bearing itself up against 
the prejudices of sense, and at ‘length prevailing 
over them, after this manner. The ancients con- 
sidering and revolving the ideas of their own 
minds, found that they had a elear and distinct 
conception of two things, as the general heads 
and principles of whatsoever was in the universe ; 


ATOMISM AND INCORPOREALISM. 121 


the one whereof was passive matter, and the other 
active power, vigour, and virtue. To the latter 
of which belongs both cogitation, and the power 
of moving matter, whether by express conscidus- 
nessor no. Both which together may be called 
by one general name of life; so that they made 
these two general heads of being or entity, passive 
matter and bulk, and self-activity or life. ‘The 
‘former of these was commonly called by the an- 
cients the ro wacyov, that which suffers and re- 
- ceives,—-—and the latter the ro TOLovY, 
the active principle,—and the ro 60ev 9 ator teacrt- 
xlyoic, that fromi whence motionsprings. 43, Se 

—‘‘In rerum natura (saith Cicero* ac- 
cording to the general sense of the ancients) duo 
quzrenda sunt; unum, que materia sit, ex qua 
queeque res efficiatur ; ; alterum, que res sit que 
- quicque efficiat :” There are two things to be in- 
quired after in nature; one, what isthe matter out 
of which every thing is made; another, what is the 
active cause or efficient. —To the same purpose 
Seneca,’ “ Esse debet aliquid unde fiat, deinde 
A quo fiat; hoc est causa, ‘illud materia :” There 
must be something out of which a thing is made, 
and then something by which it is niade; the latter 
AS properly the cause, and the former the matter. 
— Which is to be understood of corporeal things 
and their differences, that there must be both 
matter, and an active power, for the production 
of them. And so also that of Aristotle,’ oven 
airlag puac bey d0ev thv doyny elvat gapev THC Kivnoewse, 

2 De Finibus bonorum et malorum, lib. i. cap. vi. p. 2346. tom. viii. 
oper. 

> Epistol. Ixv- tom. ii. oper. p. 160. 

© -Physicor. lil. ii. cap. ili. p. 463. toni, 1. opcr. 


122 THE NEAR COGNATION BETWIXT 


mac St rn¢ dAne’ That, from whence the principle 
of motion is, is one cause, and the matter is ano- 
ther.—Where Aristotle gives that name of cause 
tothe matter also, though others did appropriate - 
it to the active power. And the writer De Pla- 
citis Philosophorum’ expresses this as the general 
sense of the ancients: aSvvarov apyay piav vAny Twv 
dvrwy eG nC ra Tavra vroorTnvat, ad\a Kal TO ToLOUY airtov 
yen umorévat, olov ovK -Apyupoc apKEt: TOC 70 EKTWUA YE 
vicOat dy pn Kal TO mow 7, ToUTésTIV 0. apyupoKOToS, 
- omolwe Kat ext rov yadxov, Kal tov: Eudov, Kat Tne GAANC 
inc’ It is impossble, that matter alone should 
be the sole principle of all things, but there must 
of necessity be supposed also an agent or efficient 
cause: as silver alone is not sufficient to make a - 
cup, unless there be an artificer to work upon it. 
And the same is to be said concerning brass, 
wood, and other natural bodies.—. 

_ Now as they apprehended a necessity of these 
two principles, so they conceived them to be 
such, as could not be confounded together into 
one and the same thing or substance, they having 
such distinct ideas and essential characters from 
one another; the Stoics being the only persons, 
who, offering violence to their own apprehensions, 
rudely and unskilfully attempted to make these 
two distinct things to be one and the, same sub- 
stance. Wherefore, as the first of these, viz. mat- 
ter, or passive extended bulk, is taken by all for 
substance, and commonly called by the name of 
body ; so the other, which is far the more noble of 
the two, being that, which acts upon the matter, 
and hath a commanding power over it, must 
needs be substance too, of a different kind from 


» Lib, i. cap. iii. p. 876, tom. i, oper. Plutarch. 


ATOMISM AND INCORPOREALISM. - 123 


‘matter or body; and therefore immaterial or incor- 
poreal substance. Neither did they find any other 
entity to be conceivable, besides these two, passive 
bulk or extension, which is corporeal substance, 
and internal self-activity or life, which is the es- . 
sential character of substance incorporeal ; 

which latter belongs not only cogitation, - ‘but Fie 

the power of moving body. 

‘Moreover, een they further considered the 
first of these, the material or corporeal principle, 
they being not able clearly to conceive any thing 
else in it, besides magnitude, figure, site, and mo- 
tion or rest, which are all several modes of extend- 
ed bulk, concluded therefore, according to rea- 
son, that there was really nothing else existing in 
bodies without, besides the various complexions 
and conjugations of those simple elements, that is, 
nothing but mechanism. Whence it necessarily 
followed, that whatsoever else was supposed to be 
in bodies, was, indeed, nothing but our modes of 
sensation,‘or the fancies and passions in us begot- 
ten from them, mistaken for things really existing 
without us. And this is a thing so obvious, that 
some of those philosophers, who had taken little 
notice of the Atomical physiology, had notwith- 
_ standing a suspicion of it; as for example, Plo- 
tinus,* who, writing of the criterion of truth, and 
the power of reason, hath thesé words, Kaira ei 
rnc ator cewe a oe OoKEL wtiorw Eye evagyeorarny, amtoreirat 
LLNTOTE OUK EV TOL varoKerpevore, aX’ év rote mabeow = xn rnv 
- SoKoudaD u uTooracly, Kal vou él n dtavotac TwWv KowovTwr* 
Though the things of sense seem to have so clear 
-acertainty, yet, notwithstanding, it is doubted 


~@ Libro, quod intelligibilia non sint extra iniellectum, Enncad. v. 
lib. v. cap. i. p- 520. 3 


124 THE NEAR COGNATION BETWIXT 


concerning them, whether (the qualities of them) 
have any real existence at all in the things with- 
out us, and not rather a seeming existence only, 
in our own passions; and there is need of mind 
or understanding to judge in this case, and to de- 
termine the controversy, which sense alone cannot 
decide.—But the ancient physiologists concluded 
without any hesitancy, ov rd avro tort ro edt Ty yAU- 
xaleofat pe, Kat TO apivhoy rp mupateou, That the 
nature of honey in itself, is not the same thing 
with my being sweetened, nor of wormwood with 
that sense of bitterness which I have from it ;— 
Stapépery & 10 1aQog Tov Ekg VTOKEpEVvoL, Kal Tag atcOnoud, 
rd piv éxTOg vIroKéiueva Ov KaTaAap[ave, pova Se & apa 
ra éavtov ray’ But that the passion of sense dif- 
fered from the absolute nature of the thing itself 
without; the senses not comprehending the ob- 
jects themselves, but only their own passions from 
them.— 

Isay, therefore, that the ancients concluded the 
absolute nature of corporeal things in themselves 
to be nothing but a certain disposition of parts, in 
respect of magnitude, figure, site, and motion, 
which in tastes cause us to be differently affect- 
ed with those senses of sweetness and bitterness, 
and in sight with those fancies of colours, and 
accordingly in the other senses with other fan- 
cies ; and that the corporeal world was to be ex- 
plained by these two things, whereof one is absolute 
in the bodies without us, the various mechanisin 
of them ; the other relative only to us, the different 
fancies in us, caused by the respective differences 
of thein in themselves. Which fancies, or fan- 
tastic ideas, are no modes of the bodies without 
us, but of that only in ourselves, which is cogita- 


ATOMISM AND INCORPOREALISM. 125 


tive or self-active, that is, incor poreal. For the 
sensible ideas of hot and cold, red and green, &c. 
cannot be clearly conceived by us as modes of 
the bodies without us, but they may be easily ap- 
prehended as modes of cogitation, that is, of sen-. 
sation, of sympathetical perception in us. | 

The result of all which was, that whatsoever is 
either in ourselves, or the whole world, was to be 
reduced to one or other of these two principles; 
passive matter and extended bulk, or self-active 
power and virtue; corporeal or incorporeal sub- 
stance ; mechanism or life; or else to a-complica- 
tion of them both together. 

Xxviit. From this general account, which we 
have now given of the origin of the Atomical phy- 
siology, it appears, that the doctrine of incorpo- 
real substance sprung up together with it. But 
this will be further manifest from that which fol- 
lows. For we shall in the next place shew, how 
this philosophy did, in especial manner, owe its 
original to the improvement of one particular 
principle of reason, over and besides all the rest; 
namely, that famous axiom, so ao talked of 
amongst the ancients, 


@ De nihilo nihil, in nihilum ni posse reverti; 


That nothing can come from nothing, nor go to 
nothing.— For though Democritus, Epicurus, and 
Lucretius abused this theorem, endeavouring to 
carry it further than the intention of the first Atom- 
ists, to the disproving of a Divine creation of any 
thing out of nothing by it; “ Nullam rem @ nihilo 
ign divinitus unquam 2 and consequently of 


a Persii Satir. ili, ver. 84, & Luerct. lib. i. ver. 1d. 


126 NOTHING COMES FROM NOTHING, 


a Deity: yet as the meaning of it was at first con- 
fined and restramed, that nothing of itself could 
come from nothing, nor go to nothing, or that 
according to the ordinary course of nature (with- 
out anextraordinary Divine power) nothing could 
be raised from nothing, nor reduced to nothing ; 
it is notonly an undoubted rule of reason in itself, 
but it was also the principal original of that Ato- 
mical physiology, which, discarding forms and 
qualities, acknowledged really nothing else iu 
body besides mechanism. 

Wherefore, it was not in vain, or to no purpose, 
that Laertius, in the hfe of Democritus,” takes no- 
tice of this as one of Ins Dogmmata, pnéiv Ex rot pa 
ovroc yiveaBat, [LN] OE tC ro 17) Ov plicec Dat, that nothing 
was made or generated out of nothing, nor cor- 
rupted into nothing;—this being a fundamental 
principle, not only of bis Atheism, but also of 
that very Atomical physiology itself, which he 
pursued. And Epicurus, in his epistle to Hero- 
dotus,” plainly fetches the beginning of all his 
philosophy from hence: [pwrov yee Ort over -yiverat 
EK TOU un OvToe, Kal oudey plaperat bic ro ny ov. Fx ney yap 
EyivETO TO Expawopevoy EX TOU [LN Ovroc, way €& Tarroc byt 
ver dy, OTEPUAaTWYYE OUSEY TpPOCSEOMEVOY" Kal t epbeipero 
TO adanlouevoy sg TO UN OV, Tavra ay awodwAR Ta Tpa- 
YHara oUK OvrwY TwY cic a SeeAvero’ We fetch the be- 
ginning of our philosophy (saith he) from hence, | 
that nothing is made out of nothing or destroyed. 
to nothing ; for if things were made out of nothing, 
then every thing might be made out of every thing, 
neither would there be any need of seeds. And 
if whatsoever is corrupted were destroyed to nu- 


* Lib. ix. segm. 44. p. 572. 
* Apud Diog. Laert. lib. x. segm. 38, 39. p. G19, Ke. 


NOR GOES TO NOTHING. 127 


thing, then all things would at length be brought 
to nothing.—Lucretius in like manner beginning 
here, insists more largely upon those grounds of 
reason hinted by Epicurus. And first, that no- 
thing can be made out of nothing he proves thus: 


* Nam si de nihilo fierent, ex omnibus rebus 
Omne genus nasci posset: nil semine cgeret: 
E mare primum homines et terra possct oriri 
Squamigerum genus, &c. 
Nec fructus iidem arboribus constare solerent, 
Sed mutarentur : ferre omnes omnia possent. 
_Preeterea cur vere rosam, frumenta calore, ; 
Vites autumno fundi giadenté videmus ? &c. 
Quod si de nihilo fierent, subito cxorerentur 
' Incerto spatio atque alienis partibus anni. 


In like manner he argues, to prove that nothing 
is corrupted into nothing: 


>’ Huc accedit uti quicque in sua corpora rursum 
Dissolvat natura; neque ad nibilum interimatres : 
Nam si quid mortale a cunctis partibus esset, 
Ex oculis res quzeque repente erepta periret. 
Preeterea quecunque vetustate amovet atas, 
Si penitus perimit, consumens materiam omnem, 
Unde animale genus generatim in lumina vitz 
Redducit Venus? aut redductum Deedala tellus ~ 
Unde alit atque auget? generatim pabula prebens, &c. 
¢ Haud igitur penitus pereunt quecunque videntur, 
Quando aliud ex alio reficit natura ; nec ullam 
Rem gigni patitur nisi morte adjutam aliena, 


Tn which passages, though it be plain, that Lu- 
cretius doth not immediately drive at Atheism, 
and nothing else, but primarily at the establishing 
of a peculiar kind of Atomical physiology, upon 
- which indeed these Democritics afterward endea- 
voured to graft Atheism; yet, to take away that 
suspicion, we shall in the next place shew, that, 


* Lueret. lib. i. ver. 160, &c. - 4 > Id. lib. i. ver. 216, &e. 
¢ Id.lib. i. ver. 263, «xe. 


128 NOTHING COMES FROM NOTHING, 


generally, the other ancient physiologers: also, 
who were Theists, did likewise build the struc- 
ture of their philosophy upon the same founda- 
tion, that nothing can come from nothing, nor go 
to nothing: as, for example, Parmenides, Melis- 
sus, Zeno, Xenophanes, Anaxagoras, and Empe- 
docles. .Of Parmenides and Melissus Aristotle 
thus writes,” ouveey oves yiveoBat gaci OvoE plciperBat | 
rav évrwv' They say that no real entity is either 
generated or corrupted,—that is, made anew out 
of nothing, or destroyed to nothing. ' And Sim- 
plicius tells us,’ that Parmenides gave a notable 
reason for the confirmation of this assertion, that 
nothing in nature could be made out of nothing, 
airiay rov Sev rave & Ovrog, yiveoOat 70 -ywvopevov, Buv- 
paoTwc 0 Tlappevidne ToootiOnxev, éAwe yao onow, EL EK 
TOU pn OVTOC, TIC n amroxAnoacis TOU TOTE yevioBan Ore Eyéve- 
10, adAd un mporepov.7 Vorepov' Because if any thing 
be made out of nothing, then there could be no 
cause, why it should then be made, and neither 
sooney nor later.— Again Aristotle‘ testifies of Xe- 
nophanes and Zeno, that they made this a main 
principle of their philosophy, un evoe yéo Oa yiveo Bat 
pnoey &k unoevoc, that it cannot be, that any thing 
should be made out of nothing:—and of this 
. Xenophanes, Sextus the philosopher tells us,* 


2De Coelo, lib. iii. cap. i. p. 668, tom. i. oper. . 

> Commentar. in Libros physicos Aristot. fol. 22. b. edit. Greec. 

¢ Libro de Xenophane, Gorgia, et Zenone, cap, i. p. 884. tom. ii, 
oper. s 2 

4 Dr. Cudworth was led into a mistake by Henry Stephens, who, in 
his Poesis Philosophica, p. 36, where he states this opinion of Xeno- 
phanes concerning the Deity, arid produces the verses which contain 
it, tells us; that he had borrowed them from Sextus the philosopher, 
by whom he undoubtedly means Sextus Empiricus. But though this 
latter ‘writer, in his Hypotypos. Pyrrhon. lib. i. cap. xxxiii. p. 59. gives 
a large account of Xcnophanes’s opinion concerning God; yet we do 


NOR GOES TO NOTHING. | 129 
that he held 6rt cig cat aswpuaroc Oeoc’ ‘That there was 
but one God, and that he was incorporeal,— 
speaking thus of him: 


Elg Gedg Evre Oecios nat dvOederac: péyteros, 
Oirs diag Ovurctcw dpeotiog, obre vonma. 


Aristotle’ also writes in like manner concerning 
Empedocles, dravra ravra KaKeivog opoAoyet 6 OTL EK TE 
Ln OvToc aun yavoy éore yeviobat, rd re dv ikorAAVGOaL avyvu-_ 
crov kal appynxrov. Empedocles acknowledges the 
yery same with other philosophers, that it is im- 
possible any thing should be made out of nothing, 
or perish into nothing .—And as for Anaxagoras, 
it is sufficiently now to all, that his Homeome- 
ria, or doctrine of similar atoms (which was a 
certain spurious kind of Atomism) was nothing 
but a. superstructure made upon this foundation. 
Besides. all which, Aristotle? pronounces univer- 
sally concerning the ancient physiologers, without 
any exception, that they agreed in this one thing, 
Tel TaVTNC OMoyvwuovovet Tne Sokne Ob Tepl pvaewe, 6rt TO 
yryvopevoy EK un Ovtrwy yiyvecBat advvarov’ The physio- 
logers generally agree in this (laying it down for 
a grand foundation) that itis impossible, that any 
thing should be made out of nothing. —And again, 
he calls this cowy Sdfav rov dvoxwy, the common 
opinion of naturalists ;—intimating, also, that they 
concluded it the greatest absurdity, that any phy- 
siologer could be guilty of, to lay down such prin- 
ciples, as from whence it would follow, that any 





not find in any part of his writings what is quoted from him by Ste- 
phens, who should have eited to ‘that purpose Clemens Alexandrin. 
Stromat. lib. v. c. xiv. p. 714. 
' 8 De Xenophane, &c. cap. ii. p. 836, 

» Physicor. lib. 1. cap. v. p. 451. tom. i. oper, 


130 THE ORIGIN OF THE ~ | 
real entity in nature did come from nothing, and 
go to nothing. 

Now, it may well be supposed, that all these . 
ancient physiologers (the most of which were also 
Theists) did not keep such a stir about this busi- 
ness for nothing ; and therefore we are in the next 
place to shew, what it was that they drove at in 
it. And we do affirm, that one thing, which they 
all aimed at, who insisted upon the forementioned — 
principle, was the establishing some Atomicak 
physiology or other, but most of them at such as 
takes away all forms and qualities of bodies (as 
entities really distinct from the matter and sub- 
stance), and resolves all into mechanism and fan- 
cy. For it is plain, thatif the forms and qualities 
of bodies be entities really distinct from the sub- 
stance, and its various modifications, of figure, 
site, and motion, that then, in all the changes and 
transmutations of nature, all the generations and 
alterations of body (those forms and qualities be- 
ing supposed to have no real existence any where 
before), something must of necessity be created 
or produced miraculously out of nothing ; as like- 
wise reduced into nothing in the corruptions of 
them, they having no being any where afterward. 
As for example ; whenever a candle is but lighted 
or kindled into a flame, there must needs be a 
new form of fire, and new qualities of hght and’ 
heat, really distinct from the matter and sub- 
stance, produced out of nothing, that is, created ; 
and the same again reduced into nothing, or anni- 
hilated, when the flame is extinguished. ‘Thus, 
when water is but congealed at any time into 
snow, hail, or ice, and when it is again dissolved ; 

when wax is by liquefaction made soft and trans- 


ATOMICAL PHILOSOPHY. 131 


parent, and changed to most of our senses ; when 
the same kind of nourishment taken in by animals 
is turned into blood, milk, flesh, bones, nerves, 
and all the other similar parts; when that which 
was in the form of bright flame, appears in the 
form of dark smoke; and that which was in the 
form of vapour, in the form of rain or water, or 
the like; I say, that in all these mutations of bo- 
dies, there must needs be something made out of 
nothing. But thatin all the Protean transforma- — 
tions of nature; which happen continually, there 

should be real entities thus perpetually produced 
out of nothing and reduced to nothing, seemed to 
be so great a paradox to the ancients, that they 
could by no means admit of it. Because, as we 
have already declared, first they concluded it 
clearly impossible by reason, that any real entity 
should of itself rise out of nothing ; and secondly, 
they thought it very absurd to bring God upon the - 
stage, with his miraculous extraordinary power, 
perpetually at every turn ; as also, that every thing 
might be madé out-of every thing, and there would 
be no cause in nature for the production of one 
‘thing rather than another, and at this time rather. 
than that, if they were miraculously made out of 
nothing. Wherefore they sagaciously apprehend- 
ed, that there must needs be some other mystery 
or intrigue of nature in this business, than was 
commonly dreamed of, or suspected ; which they 
concluded to be this, that in all these transforma- 
tions there were no such real entities of forms 
and qualities distinct from the matter, and the va- 
rious disposition of its parts, in respect of figure, 

site, and motion (as is vulgarly supposed) pro- 
duced and destroyed ; but. “that all these feats 


132 THE ORIGIN OF THE 


were done, either by the concretion and secretion 
of actually inexistent parts, or else by the differ- 
ent modifications of the same pre-existent matter, 
or the insensible parts thereof. This only being 
added hereunto, that from those different modifi- 
cations of the small particles of bodies (they 
being not so distinctly perceived by our senses), 
there are begotten in us certain confused phasma- 
ta or phantasmata, apparitions, fancies, and pas- 
sions, as of light and colours, heat and cold, and 
the like, which are those things, that are vulgarly 
mistaken for real quahties existing in the bodies 
without us; whereas, indeed, there is nothing ab- 
solutely in the bodies themselves like to those 
fantastic ideas that we have of them; and yet 
they are wisely contrived by the Author of nature 
for the adorning and embellishing of the corporeal 
world to us. 

So that they conceived, bodies were to be con- 
sidered two manner of ways, either as they are 
absolutely in themselves, or else as they are 
relatively to us: and as they are absolutely in 
themselves, that so there never was apy entity 
really distinct from the substance produced in 
them out of nothing, nor corrupted or destroyed 
to nothing, but only the accidents and modifica- 
tions altered. Which accidents and modifications 
are no entities really distinct from their substance; 
forasmuch as the same body may be put into 
several shapes and figures, and the same man 
may successively stand, sit, kneel, and walk, 
without the production of any new entities really 
distinct from the substance of his body. So that 
the generations, corruptions, and alterations of 
inanimate bodies are not terminated in the pro- 


ATOMICAL. PHILOSOPHY. 133 


duction or destruction of. any substantial forms, 
or real-entities distinct from the substance, but. 
only in different modifications of it. But secondly, 
as bodies are considered relatively to us, that so 
besides their different modifications and mecha- 
‘nical alterations, there are also different fancies, 
seemings, and apparitions begotten in us from 
them; which unwary and unskilful. phiiosophers 
mistake for absolute forms and qualities in bo- 
‘dies themselves. And thus they concluded, that 
all the phenomena of inanimate bodies, and their 
various transformations, might be clearly resolved 
into these two things; partly something that is 
-real and absolute in bodies themselves, which is 
‘nothing but their different mechanism, or disposi- 
tion of parts in respect of figure, site, and motion; 
and partly something that is fantastical in the 
sentient. | | 
_Thatthe Atomical physiology did emerge after 
this manner from the principle of reason, that 
nothing comes from nothing, nor goes to nothing, 
might be further. convinced from the testimony 
of Aristotle, writing thus concerning it: "Ex rou 
. vyivecbat s&-adAnAwy T avayrtia évuTnpyev apa El yap Tay 
TO +ivomevov avayKn vyivecbau 7 e& OvTwY 7 e& ty dvr 
TOUTWY OE TO Mev, EK un OvTwY yiveoBau advvarov, TEpl yap 
ravurne OMOyVWLOvoUGL TNC dogne dravreg OL TEpL pucewe” 
70. Aawov nde oupBaivay 2 avayxne zvomoav’ &€& dvrwy 
yey kat ewrapydrtrav yiveoBar, Sid 88 ouupdrnra rev 
OyKwy -€ dvacOyrwv quiv. The ancient physiologers 
concluded, that because contraries were made 
out of one another, that therefore they were be- 
fore (one way or other) inexistent ; arguing in this. 
manner, that if whatsoever be de. must needs 
a "2 Physicoy. lib. i. cap. v. p. 451, | 
VOL. I. 3 K 


134 THE ORIGIN OF THE 


be made out of something or out of nothing, and 
this latter (that any thing should be made out of 
nothing) is impossible, according to the general 
consent of all the ancient physiologers ; then it 
follows of necessity, that all corporeal things are 
made or generated out of things that were really 
before and inexistent, though by reason of the 
smallness of their bulks they were insensible to 
us.—-Where Aristotle plainly intimates, that all 
the ancient philosophers, whosoever insisted upon 
this principle, that nothing comes from, nor goes 
to nothing, were one way or other Atomical, and 
did resolve all corporeal things into dyxovg rwac 
ota nv opixpornra avataOirove nu, certain molecule 
or corpuscula, which by reason of their smallness 
were insensible to us,—that is, into atoms. But 
yet there was 2 difference between these Atomists, 
-forasmuch as Anaxagoras was such an Atomist, 
-as-did notwithstanding hold forms and qualities 
really distinct from the mechanical modifications 
of bodies. For he not being able (as it seems) 
well to understand that other Atomical physio- 
logy of the ancients, that, exploding qualities, 
solved all corporeal phenomena by mechanism 
and fancy; and yet acknowledging, that that 
_ principle of their's, which they went upon, must 
needs be true, that nothing could of itself come 
from nothing, nor go to nothing, framed a new 
kind of atomology of his own, in supposing the 
whole corporeal world or mass of matter to con- 
sist of similar atoms, that is, such as were ori- 
ginally endued with all those different forms and 
qualities that are vulgarly conceived to be in bo- 
dies, some bony, some fleshy, some fiery, some 
watery, some white, some black, some bitter, 


ATOMICAL PHILOSOPHY. 135 


some sweet, and the like, so that all bodies what- 
soever had some of all sorts of these atoms (which 
are in a manner infinite) Specifically differing from 
one another-in them. *rav & wavri peplyBat, Sore way 
éc mavroc vyiverat, gaiverBat oe Siagpépovra, Kat Tpocayo= 
pevecOat eTepa. adXnAwy zk TOU madtoTa UTEDEYOVTOC cua TO 
mAnBoc év ry pike TwV amelowy, &e. That all things 
were in every thing mingled together, because 
they saw, that every thing was made of every 
thing; but that things seemed to differ from one 
another, and were denominated to be this or that, 
from those atoms, which are most predominant in 
the mixture, by reason of their multiplicity :— 
whence he concluded, that all the generations, 
corruptions, and alterations of bodies were made 
by nothing but the concretions and secretions, of 
inexistent oud pre-existent atoms of different forms 
and qualities, without the production of any new 
form and quality out of nothing, or the reduction 
of any into nothing. This very account Aris- 
totle gives of the Anaxagorean hypothesis: ZOUKE 
“Avatayopac obrec dretpa omnOnvar Ta ororysia, oud TO UT0- 
ap Pave, TnY KoLWnNy Sokny ° Tw puotkwy Elva aAnOn, we 
ov -ywopevou ovoeEvoc &K Tov uN dvroc. Anaxagoras 
seemeth, therefore, to make infinite atoms endued 
with several forms and qualities to be the ele- 
-ments of bodies, because he supposed that com- 
mon opinion of physiologers to be true, that no- 
thing is made of nothing.—But all the other an- 
cient physiologers that were before Anaxagoras, 
and likewise those after him, who, insisting upon 
the same principle of nothing coming from no- 
thing, did not Anaxagorize, as Empedocles, De- 
mocritus, and Protagoras, must needs make é-yxove 


2 Ybid. 
K 2 


136 INCORPOREALISM SPRUNG FROM THE 


avosolove, dissimilar molecule, and aropovg aroiouc, 
atoms unformed and unqualified, otherwise than 
by magnitude, figure, and motion, to be the prin- 
‘ciples of bodies, and cashiering forms and quall- 
ties (as real entities distinct from the matter), re- 
solve all corporeal phenomena into mechanism 
and fancy. Because, if no real entity can come 
‘from nothing, nor go to nothing, then one of these 
two things is absolutely necessary, that either 
these corporeal forms and qualities, being real 
entities distinct from the matter, should exist 
before generations and after corruptions, in cer- 
tain insensible atoms originally such, according 
to the Anaxagorean doctrine; or else, that they 
should not be real entities distinct from the mat- 
ter, but only the different modifications and me- 
chanisms of it, together with different fancies. 
“And thus we have made it evident, that the ge- 
‘mmine Atomical physiology did spring originally 
from this principle of reason, that no real entity 
does of itself come from nothing, nor B° to no- 
thing. 

xxix. Now we shall in the next place shew, 
how this very same principle of reason, which in- 
duced the ancients to reject substantial forms and. 
qualities of bodies, and to physiologize atomical- 
ly, led them also unavoidably to assert incorpo- 
real substances ; and that the souls of men and 
animals were such, neither generated nor cor- 
rupted. They had argued against substantial 
forms and qualities, as we have shewed, in this 
manner, that since the forms and qualities of bo- 
dies are supposed by all to be generated and cor- 
rupted, made anew out of nothing, and destroyed 
to nothing, that therefore they could not be real 


‘SAME PRINCIPLE WITH ATOMISM. 137 


entities distinct from the substance of matter, but 
only different modifications of it in respect of fi- 
gure, site, and motion, causing different sensations © 
in us; and were all to be resolved into mechanism 
and fancy. For as for that conceit of Anaxago- 
ras, of pre and post-existent atoms, endued with. 
all those several forms and qualities of bodies in- 
generably and incorruptibly, it was nothing but - 
an adulteration of the genuine Atomical philoso- 
phy, and a mere ian of his, in which very few 
followed him. And now they argue contrariwise 
for the souls of men and anata in this manner ; 
because they are plainly real entities distinct from 
the substance of matter and its modification; 
and men and brutes are not mere machines, net 
ther can life and cogitation, sense and conscious- — 
’ ness, reason and understanding, appetite and will, 
ever result from magnitudes, figures, sites, and 
motions; that therefore they are not corporeally 
generated and corrupted, as the forms and quali- 
ties of bodies are. “Aduvarov yiveoBai re tx jundevoc 
mpourdgyovroc. It is impossible for a real entity to 
be made or generated from nothing pre-existing. 
—Now, there is nothing of soul and mind, rea- 
son and understanding, nor indeed of cogilation 
and life, contained in the modifications and me- 
chanism of bodies; and, therefore, to make soul , 
and mind to rise out of body whensoever a man is 
generated, would be plainly to make a real entity 
to come out of nothing, which is impossible, I 
say, because the forms and qualities of bodies are 
generated and corrupted, made and unmade, in 
the ordinary course of nature, therefore they con- 
cluded, that they were not real entities distinct 
from the substance of body and its various modi- 


138 INCORPOREALISM SPRUNG FROM THE 


fications; but because soul and mind is plainly a 
real entity distinct from the substance of body, 
its modification and mechanism; that therefore 
it was not a thing generated and corrupted, made 
and unmade, but such as had a being of its own, 
a substantial thing by itself. Real entities and 
substances are not generated and corrupted, but 
only modifications. 

Wherefore these ancients apprehended, that 
there was a great difference betwixt the souls of 
men and animals, and the forms and qualities of 
other inanimate bodies, and consequently betwixt 
their several productions: forasmuch as in the 
generation of inanimate bodies there is no real 
entity acquired distinct from the substance of the 
thing itself, but only a peculiar modification of it. 
The form of stone, or of timber, of blood, flesh, 
and bone, and stich other natural bodies generat- 
ed, is 00 more a distinct substance or entity from 
the matter, than the form of a house, stool, or 
table is: there is no more new entity acquired in 
the generation of natural bodies, than there is in 
the production of artificial ones. When water is 
turned into vapour, candle into flame, flaine into 
smoke, grass into milk, blood, and bones, there 
ig no more miraculous production of something 
out of nothing, than when wool is made into cloth, 
or flax into linen; when a rude and unpolished 
stone is hewn into a beautiful statue; when brick, 
timber, and mortar, that lay together before dis- 
orderly, is brought into the form of a stately pa- 
lace; there being nothing neither in one nor other 
of these, but only a different disposition and mo- 
dification of pre-existent matter. Which matter 
of the universe is always substantially the same, 


SAME PRINCIPLE WITH ATOMISM. | 139 


and neither more nor less, but only Proteanly 
transformed into different shapes. Thus we see, 
that the generation of all inanimate bodies is no- 
‘thing but the change of accidents and modifica- 
tions, the substance being really the same, both 
before and after. But in the generations of men 
- and animals, besides the new disposition of the 
parts of matter and its organization, there is also 
the acquisition and conjunction of another real 
entity or substance distinct from the matter, which 
could not be generated out of it, but must needs 
come into it some other way. . Though there be 
no substantial difference between a stately house 
or palace standing, and all the materials of the 
same ruinated and demolished, but only a differ- 
ence of accidents and modifications ; yet, between | 
a living man and a dead carcass, there is, besides 
the accidental modification of the body, another 
substantial difference, there being a substantial 
soul and incorporeal inhabitant dwelling in the’ 
one and acting of it, which the other is now de- 
serted of. And it is very observable, that Anax- 
' agoras* himself, who made bony and fleshy atoms, 
hot and cold, red and green, and the like, which 
he supposed to exist before generations and after 
corruptions, always immutably the same (that so 
nothing might come from nothing, and go to no- 
thing), yet he did not make any animalish atoms 
sensitive and rational. The reason whereof could 
not be, because he did not think sense and under- 
standing to be as real entities as hot and cold, red 
~ and green; but because they could not be sup- 
posed to be corporeal forms and qualities, but 


* Vide Aristot. de Anima, lib, i, cap. ii. p. 5, tom. ii, et Metaphysic. 
lib. i. c. iti tom. iv. p. 266. 


140 IMMORTALITY OF SOULS AND ATOMS 


must neéds belong to another substance that was 
incorporeal. Aid therefore Anaxagoras could 
not but acknowledge, that all souls and lives did 
preand post-exist by themselves, as well as those 
corporeal forms and qualities, in his similar atoms. 
xxx. And now it is already manifest, that from 
the same principle of reason before mentioned, 
that nothing of itself can come from nothing, nor 
go to nothing, the ancient philosophers were in- 
duced likewise to assert the soul’s immortality, 
together with its incorporiety or distinctness from 
the body. No substantial entity ever vanisheth 
of itself into nothing; for if it did, then in length 
of time all might come to be nothing. But the 
soul is a substantial entity, really distinct from 
the body, and not the mere modification of It; 
and, therefore, when a man dies, his soul must 
still remain and continue to have a being some- 
where else in the universe. All the changes that 
are in nature, are either accidental transformations 
and different modifications of the same substance, 
or else they are conjunctions and separations, or 
anagranipatical trauspositions of things in the 
universe; the substance of the whole remaining 
always entirely the same. The generation and 
corruption of inanimate bodies is but like’ the 
making of a house, stool, or table, and the un- 
making or marring of them again; either different 
modifications of ‘one and the same substance, or 
else divers mixtures and separations, concretions 
and secretions. And the generation and corrup- 
tion of animals is likewise nothing but 
plbtg va UidrArakis va peiyivrey, 





The conjunction of souls together with such par- 
ticular bodies, and the separation of them agam 


HELD FROM THE SAME PRINCIPLE. I4l 


from one another,—and so as it were the ana- 
grammatical transposition of them in the universe. 
That soul and life, that.is now fled and gone froin 

a lifeless carcass, is only a loss to that particular 
body or compages of matter, which by means 
thereof is now disanimated ; but it is no lossto ~ 
the whole, it being but transposed 1 In the universe, | 
and lodged somewhere else. 

xxx. Itis also further evident, that this same 
-principle, which thus led the ancients to hold the 
soul’s immortality, or its future permanency after 
death, must needs determine them likewise to 
maintain its wpovrapéc, or pre-existence, and con- 
sequently its nerevowudrwoc, or transmigration. For 
that which did pre-exist before the generation of 
any animal, and was then somewhere else, must 
needs transmigrate into the body of that animal 
where now it is. But as for that other transmi- 
gration of human-souls into the bodies of brutes, 
though it cannot be denied but that many of these 
ancients admitted it also, yet Timeus Locrus,’ 
and divers others of the Pythagoreans, rejected 
it; any otherwise than as it might be taken for an 
allegorical description of that beastly transforma- 
tion that is made or men’s souls by vice. Aris- 
totle tells us again,” agreeably to what ‘was de- 
clared before, ort padwra poor evor duréAncav ol 7a- 
Aaol TO EK puNdevog yivecOat Tt mpouTap yovroc* that the 
ancient philosophers were afraid of nothing more 
than this one thing, that any thing should be 
made out of nothing pre-existent :—and therefore 
they must needs conclude, that the souls of all 


* De Anima Mundi et Natura, inter Scriptores Mythologicos a Tho. 
Gale editos, p. 566. 
> De Generatione et Corruption, ib, i, cap. iii, p. 704. tom, i. “oper. 


142 PRE-EXISTENCE OF SOULS 


animals pre-existed before their generations. And 
indeed it is a thing very well known, that, accord- 
ing to the sense of philosophers, these two things 
were always included together in that one opi- 
nion of the soul’s immortality, namely, its pre- 
existence as well as its post-existence. Neither 
was there ever any of the ancients before Christ- 
janity, that held the soul's future permanency 
after death, who did not hkewise assert its pre- 
existence; they clearly perceiving, that if it were 
once granted, that the soul was generated, it 
could never be proved but that it night be also 
corrupted. ‘And, therefore, the assertors of the 
soul's immortality commonly begun here: first, to 
prove its pre-existence, proceeding thence after- 
ward to establish its permanency after death. This 
is the method used in Plato,* jw ov nuer 7 puyy 
aptly ev twode TY avOpwmrivy cide yevioba, dors Kat TavTy 
a€avaroy Te EOUKED n puyn etvat" Our soul Was some- 
where, before it came to exist in this present 
human form; and from thence it appears to be 
immortal, and such as will subsist after death. 
—And the chief demonstration of the soul's pre- 
existence to the ancients before Plato, was this, 
because it is an entity really distinct from body 
or matter, and the modifications of it; and no real 
substantial entity can either spring of itself out of 
nothing, or be made out of any other substance 
distinct from it, because nothing can be made 
&K pnoevoc évuTTap YouTog 7 ToouTrap yovros, from nothing 
either in-existing or pre-existing ;—all natural ge- 
nerations being but the various dispositions and 
modifications of what was before existent in the 
universe. But there was nothing of soul and 
2 In Phadune, p. 382. 


ASSERTED BY THE ATOMISTS. 143 
mind in-existing and pre-existing in body before, 
there being nothing of life and cogitation in mag- 
nitude, ‘figure, site, and motion. Wherefore this 
must needs be, not a thing made or generated, as 
corporeal forms and qualities are, but such as 
hath a being in nature ingenerably and incorrup- 
tibly. The mechanism of human body was a 
thing made and generated, it being only a differ- 
ent modification of what was before existent, and 
having no new entity, in it distinct from the sub- 
stance: and the totum or compositum of a man 
or animal may be said to be generated and cor- 
rupted, in regard of the union and disunion, con- 
junction and separation of those two parts, the 
soul and body. But the soul itself, according to 
these principles, is neither a thing generable nor 
corruptible, but was as well before the generation, 
and will be after the deaths and corruptions of 
men, as the substance of their body, which is sup- 
posed by all to have been from the first creation, 
and no part.of it to be annibilated or lost after 
death, but only scattered and dispersed in the 
universe. Thus the ancient Atomists concluded, 
that souls and lives being substantial entities by 
themselves, were all of them as old as any other 
substance in the universe, and as the whole mass 
of matter, and every smallest atom of it is: that 
ais, they who maintained the eternity of the world, 
did consequently assert also efernitatemanimorum 
(as Cicero .calls it), the eternity of souls and 
minds. But they, who conceived the world to 
have had a temporary beginning or.creation, held 
the coevity of all souls with it, and would by no 
means be induced to think, that every atom of 
senseless matter and particle of dust had such a 


144 PRE-EXISTENCE OF SOULS 


privilege and pre-eminency over the souls of men 
and animals, as to be the senior to them. Synesius, 
though a Christian, yet having been educated in 
this philosophy, could not be induced by the 
hopes of a bishopric to stifle or dissemble this 
sentiment of his mind,* azéeda ray puyny OUK axwwow 
wore GW {LATOS voTEpOyEvn vomicew I shall never be per- 
suaded to think my soul to be younger than my 
body.—But such, it seems, was the temper of 
those times, that he was not only dispensed with- 
al as to this, but also as to another heterodoxy of 
his concerning the resurrection. 

xxx. It, is already plain, also, that this doc- 
trine of the ancient Atomists concerning the im- 
materiality and immortality, the pre and post-ex- 
istence of souls, was not confined by them to bu- 
man souls only, but extended universally to all 
souls and hves whatsoever ; it being a thing that 
was hardly ever called to doubt or question by 
any before Cartesius, whether the souls of brutes 
had any sense, cogitation, or consciousness in 
them or no: Now alllife, sense, and cogitation 
was undoubtedly concluded by them to be an 
entity really distinct from the substance of body, 
aud not the mere modification, motion, or mecha- 
nism of it; life and mechanism being two distinet 
ideas of the mind, which canvot be confounded 
together. Wherefore they resolved, that all lives 
and souls whatsoever, which now are in the 
world, ever were from the first beginning of.it, and 
ever will be; that there will be no new ones pro- 
duced, which are not already, and have not al- 
ways been, nor any of those, which now are, de- 


4 Epistol. ev. p. 249. oper. 


ad 


ASSERTED BY THE ATOMISTS. | 145 


stroyed, any more than the substance of any mat- 
ter will be created or annihilated. So that the 
whole system of the created universe, consisting 
of body, and particular incorporeal substances 
or souls, in the successive generations and corrup- 


tions, or deaths of men and other animals, was, 


according to them, really nothing else but one and 
the same thing perpetually anagrammatized, or 
but like many different syllables and words vari- 
ously and successively composed out of the same 
pre-existent elements or letters. 

xxxii1. We have now declared, how the saine 
principle of reason, which made the ancient phy- 
siologers to become. Atomists, must needs induce | 


_ them also to be Incorporealists; how the same 


thing, which persuaded them, that corporeal 


forms were no real entities. distinct from the sub- 
stance of the body, but only the different modifi- 


cations and mechanisms of it, convinced them 


likewise, that all cogitative beings, all souls and 
lives whatsoever, were ingenerable and incorrup- 


 tible, and as well pre-existent before the genera- 


‘tions of particular animals, as post-existent after 


their deaths and corruptions. Nothing now re- 


_-Inains but only to shew more particularly, that it 
was de facto thus; that the same persons did, 


from this principle (that nothing can come. from 
nothing, and go to nothing), both atomize im their 
physiology, taking away all substantial forms and - 


qualities, and also theologize or incorporealize, 
_asserting souls to be a substance really distinct 


from matter, and immortal, as also’ to pre-exist. 


And this we shall do from Empedocles, and first 


from that Passuse of his cited pees in part: 


14G PRE-EXISTENCE OF SOULS AND ATOMS 


a“AAra 38 oot bein, pucig oudayds tortiy dxaovre 
OrnrSv, ove Tig ovrAgsEyn Gavaroto pevbOan (al. lect. tedeuTn), 
"ArAR crdvev galbtc ve Raarrakic va tyivroy 
"Eoti, puoie F deri roig ovopsd Carat dvOpoimoist. 


Which I find Latined thus: 


Ast aliud dico; nihil est mortalibus ortus, 

Est nibil interitus, qui rebus morte panatur; 
Mistio sed solum est, ct conciliatio rerum 
Mistilium ; hae dici solita cst mortalibus ortus. 


The full sense whereof .is plainly this, that there 
iS NO ¢voc, or production of any thing, which was 
not before; no new substance made, which did 
not really pre-exist; and, therefore, that in the 
generations and corruptions of inanimate bodies, 
there is no form or quality really distinct from 
the substance produced and destroyed, but only 
a various composition and modification of matter. 
But in the generations and corruptions of men 
and animals, where the souls are substances 
really distinct from the matter, that there, there 
is nothing but the conjunction and separation of 
souls and particular bodies, existing both before 
and after, not the production of any new soul 
into being, which was not before, nor the absolute 
death and destruction of any into nothing.— 
Which is further expressed in these following 


verses 
b Nasiot, ob pag oduy Sorry ddpgorec slot pfercrens, 
OF 3% ptysc bar ardgoo oun tty sAmiCoucH, 
"Hro xarabmoxey va xal iforAAvc bat azdyrn. 


To this sense; that they are infants in understand- 
ing, and short-sighted, who think any thing to be 


* Apud Plutarch. advers. Colotem, p. iv. tom. ii. oper. et ex parte 
apud Aristot. de Gencratione et Corruptione, lib. i. ¢. i. p, 698. tom. i. 
oper. | 


> Apud Plutarch. ady. Colotei, p. 1113. tom. ii. oper. 


HELD FROM THE SAME PRINCIPLE. 147 


made, which was nothing before, or any thing to 
die, so as to be destroyed to nothing.—Upon 
which Plutarch glosses after this manner: dux 
avaipet yévecty, aha Tnv &Kk un Ovroc, oveEe pBopav ada 
Tiv TAvTN, TOUTEOTL THY ELE TO UN OV aTroAVOVEUY" Empe- 
docles does not here destroy generation, but only 
such as is out of nothing; nor corruption, but such 
as is into nothing.—Which, as we have already 
intimated, is to be understood differently in re- 
spect to inanimate and animate things; for in 
things inanimate, there is nothing produced or 
destroyed, because the forms and qualities of 
them are no entities really distinct from the sub- 
stance, but only diverse mixtures and modifica- 
tions. But in animate things, where the souls 
are real entities really distinct from the substance 
of the body, there is nothing produced nor de- 
stroyed neither, because those souls do both exist 
before their generations, and after their corrup- 
tions ; which business, as to men and souls, is 
again more fully expressed thus :-— 


2 Olax dy avig raatra copes peso) pavredoairo, 
“O¢ bp—n paby re Bidios, 70 35 Bloroy naréouct, 
Tipe priv div slot, xa opn arden Serve xa} EoOaa, 
Tigly 32 wayivra Beorol xal Aubevres ob8év de sicl. 


That good and ill did first us here attend, 
And not from time before, the soul descend; , 
That here alone we live, and when 
Hence we depart, we forthwith then 
Turn to our old non-entity again ; 
Certes ought not to be believed by wise and learned men. 


Wherefore, according to Empedocles; this is to 
be accounted one of the vulgar errors, that men 
then only have a being and are capable of good 


* Apud Plutarch. adv. Colotem, p. 1113. tom. il. oper. 


148 PRE-EXISTENCE OF SOULS AND ATOMS 


and evil, when they live here that which is called 
life; but that both before they are born, and after 
they are dead, they are perfectly nothing. 

And besides Empedocles, the same is repre- 
sented by the Greek tragedian also,* as the sense 
of the ancient philosophers ; 


Oyncxs 3 oitiy ray yiveuirny, 
Asaxgsyopeavoy 8° GAO Weie AAAS 
Mégspny erigay aarsderg ty. 


That nothing dies or utterly perisheth ; but things 
being variously concreted and secreted, trans- 
posed and modified, change their form and shape 
only, and are putinto a new dress.— 

Agreeably whereunto, Plato also tells us,° that 
it was wadaws AO-yoe, AN aucient tradition or doc- 
trine before lis time, rove Zovrac &e rev reOeortey 
yeyovévat, oveey yTTov 7» Tove TeOvewrac KK THY CoOVTwI 
that as well the living were made out of the dead, 
as the dead out of the living ;—and that this was 
the constant circle of nature. Moreover, the 
same philosopher acquaints us, that some of those 
ancients were not without suspicion, that what Is 
now called death, was to men more properly a 
nativity or birth into life, and what is called ge- 
neration into life, was comparatively rather to be 
accounted a sinking into death ; the former being 
the soul’s ascent out of these gross terrestrial bo- 
dies toa body more thin and subtile, and the latter 
its descent from a purer body to that which is 
more crass and terrestrial. ‘ric otSev et ro Cay piv eore 


* Euripid. in Chrysippo apud Clement. Alexandr. Stromat. Jib. vi, 
p- 750. 

b In Phaedone, p. 381. 

¢ This passage of Euripides is cited by many of the ancicnts, a3 Plato, 
Cicero, Clemens Alex. and Sextus Empiricas., See the notes of Dr. 


HELD FROM THE SAME PRINCIPLE. 149 


KarOavety, to KarOavew d: Znv’ Who knows whether 
that which is called living be not indeed rather 
dying ; and that which is called dying, living?— 
Moreover, that this was the doctrine of Pytha- 
goras himself, that no real entity perishes in cor- 
ruptions, nor is produced in generations, but only 
new modifications and transpositions made; is 
fully expressed by the Latin poet,* both as to in- 
animate, and to animate things. Ofthe first thus: 


Nec perit in tanto quicquam (mihi credite) mundo, 
Sed variat, faciemque novat: nascique vocatur 
Incipere esse aliud, quam quod fuit ante ; morique 
Desinere ilud idem. Cum sint huc forsitan illa, 
Heec translata illuc: summa tamen omnia constant. 


Of the second, that the souls of animals are im- 
mortal, did pre-exist and do transmigrate, from 
the same ground, after this manner : 


Omnia mutantur; nihil interit: errat et illinc, 

ue venit, hinc illuc, et quoslibet occupat artus 
Spiritus, eque feris humana in corpora transit, 

Inque feras noster, nee tempore deperit ullo. 

Utque novis facilis signatur cera figuris, 

Nec manet ut fuerat, nec formas servat easdem, 

Sed tamen ipsa eadem est; animam sic semper eandem 
Esse, sed in varias doceo migrare figuras. 


Wherefore though it be a thing, which hath not 
been commonly taken notice of, of late, yet we 
conceive it to be unquestionably true, that all 
those ancient philosophers, who insisted so much 
upon this principle, ovdev ovde yivecBat ovdé pbsioecBat 
rov ovrwy’ that no real entity 1s either generated or 
Potter, now Archbishop of Canterbury, on Clem. Alexand, Stromat. 
lib. iii. cap. iii. p. 517. et Jo. Albert Fabricius on Sextus Empiric. Hy- 


potyp. Pyrrhon. lib. iti. cap. xxiv. p. 185. 
2 Ovid. Metam. lib. xv. ver. 254. et ver. 165. 


VOL. I. L 


150 CENSURE OF THE 


corrupted,—did therein at once drive at these 
two things: first, the establishing of the immorta- 
lity of all souls, their pre and post-existence, for- 
asmuch as being entities really distinct from the 
body, they could neither be generated nor cor-_ 
rupted; and secondly, the making of corporeal 
forms and qualities to be no real entities distinct 
from the body and the mechanism thereof, because 
they are things generated and corrupted, and have 
no pre and post-existence. Anaxagoras, in this lat- 
ter, being the only dissenter ; who supposing those 
forms and qualities to be real entities likewise, 
distinct from the substance of body, therefore at- 
tributed perpetuity of being to them also, pre and 
post-existence, in similar atoms, as well as to the 
souls of animals. 

And now we have made it sufficiently evident, 
that the doctrine of the incorporeity and immor- 
tality of souls, we might add also, of their pre- 
existence and transmigration, had the same ori- 
ginal, and stood upon the same basis with the 
Atomical physiology; and therefore it ought not 
at all to be wondered at (what we affirmed be- 
fore) that the same philosophers and Pythagore- 
ans asserted both those doctrines, and that the 
ancient Atomists were both Theists and Incorpo- 
realists. — 

- xxxiv.: But now to declare our sense freely 
concerning this philosephy of the ancients, which 
seems to be so prodigiously paradoxical, in re- 
spect of that pre-existence and transmigration of 
souls; we conceive indeed, that this ratiocination 
of theirs from that principle, that nothing naturally 
or of itself, comes from nothing, nor goes to no- 
thing, was not only firmly conclusive against sub- 


- PYTHAGORIC ‘DOCTRINE. 151 


stantial forms and qualities of bodies, really dis- 

tinct from their substance, but also for substantial 

incorporeal souls, and their ingenerability out of 
matter, and particularly for the future immortality 

or post-existence of all human souls. For sinee 

it is plain, that they are not a mere modification 

of body or matter, but an entity and substance 

really distinct from it, we have no more reason to 

think, that they can ever of themselves vanish into 

nothing, than that the substance of the corporeal 

world, or any part thereof, can do so. For that, 

in the consumption of bodies by fire, or age, or 

the like, there is the destruction of any real sub- 

stance into nothing, is now generally exploded as 

an idiotical conceit; and certainly it cannot bea 
jot less idiotical to suppose, that the rational soul 

in death is utterly extinguished. 

Moreover, we add aise. that this ratiocination 
of the ancients would be altogether as firm and 
irrefragable likewise for the pre-existence and 
transmigration of souls, as it is for their post-ex- 
istence and future imniortality, did we not (as in- 
deed we do) suppose souls to be created by. God 
immediately, and infused in generations. For 
they being unquestionably a distinct substance 
from the body, and no substance, according to 
the ordinary course of nature, coming out of no- 
thing, they must of necessity either pre-exist in 
the universe before generations, and transmigrate 
into their respective bodies; or else come from 
God immediately, who is the fountain of all, 
and who at first created all that substance that 
now is in the world besides himself. Now the 
latter of these was a thing, which those ancient 
philosophers would. by no means admit of; they 

L2 


152 CENSURE OF THE 


judging it altogether incongruous to bring God 
upon the stage perpetually, and make him imme- 
diately interpose every where, in the generations 
of men and all other animals, by the miraculous 
production of souls out of nothing. Notwith- 
standing which, if we well consider rt, we shall 
find, that there may be very good reason on the 
other side for the successive Divine creation of 
souls; namely, that God did not do all at first, 
that ever he could or would do, and put forth all 
his creative vigour at once, In a moment, ever af- 
terwards remaining a spectator only of the conse- 
quent results, and permitting nature to do alk 
alone, without the least interposition of his at any 
time, justas if there were no God at allin the 
world. For this may be and indeed often hath 
been, the effect of such an hypothesis as this, to 
make men think, that there ts no other God in the 
world but blind and dark nature. God might also, 
for other good and wise ends unknown to us, re- 
serve to himself the continual exercise of this 
his creative power, im the successive production 
of new souls. And yet these souls nevertheless, 
after they are once brought forth into being, will, 
notwithstanding their juniority, continue as firmly 
in the same, without vanishing of themselves into 
nothing, as the substance of senseless matter, that 
was created many thousand years before, will do. 

And thus our vulgar hypothesis of the new 
creation of souls, as it is rational in inself, so it 
doth sufficiently solve their incorporeity, their fu- 
ture immortality, or post-eternity, without intro- 
ducing those offensive absurdities of their pre- 
existence and transmigration. 

xxxv. But if there be any such, who, rather 


PYTHAGORIC DOCTRINE. | 153. 


than they would allow a future immortality or 
post-existence to all souls, and therefore to those 
of brutes, which consequently must have their 
successive transmigrations, would conclude the 
souls of all brutes, as likewise the sensitive soul 
in man, to be corporeal, and only allow the ra-- 
tional soul to be distinct from matter ; to these we 
have only thus much to say, that they, who will 
attribute life, sense, cogitation, consciousness, and | 
selfenjoyment, not without some footsteps of rea- 
son many times, to blood and brains, or were or- 
ganized bodies in brutes, will never be able clear- 
ly to defend the incorporeity and immortality of 
human souls, as most probably they do not intend 
any such thing. For either all conscious and co- 
gitative beings are incorporeal, or else nothing can 
be proved to be incorporeal. From whence it 
would follow also, that there is no Deity distinct 
from the corporeal world. But though there seem 
to be no very great reason, why it should be 
thought absurd, to grant perpetuity of duration 
to the souls of brutes, any more than to every 
atom of matter, or particle of dust that is in the 
whole world; yet we shall endeavour to suggest 
something towards the easing the minds of those, 
who are so much burthened with this difficulty ; 
viz. that they may, if they please, suppose the 
souls of brutes, being but so many particular era- 
diations or effluxes from that source of life above, 
whensoever and wheresoever there is any fitly 
prepared matter capable to receive them, and to 
be actuated by them, to have a sense and fruition 
of themselves in it, so long as it continues such ; 
‘but as soon as ever those organized bodies of 
theirs, by reason-of their indisposition, become 


4154 CENSURE OF ‘KHE 


incapable of being further acted upon by them, 
then to be resumed again and retracted back to 
their original head aud fountain. Since it cannot 
be doubted, but what. creates any thing out of 
nothing, or sends it forth from itself by freé and 
voluntary emanation, may be able either toretract 
the same back again to its original source, or else 
to annihilate it at pleasure. 

And I find, that there have not wanted some 
among the gentile philosophers themselves, who 
have entertained this opinion, whereof Porphyry 
1S One: Averac éxaorn Suvac adoryog £1¢ THY oAny Cony 
rov wavrog, every irrational power is resolved into 
the life of the whole.— 

xxxvi. Neither will this at all weaken the fu- 
ture immortality or post-eternity of human souls. 
For if we be, indeed, Theists, and do in yery 
good earnest believe a Deity, according to the 
true notion of it, we must then needs acknow- 
ledge, that all created being whatsoever owes the 
continuation and perpetuity of its existence, not 
to any necessity of nature without God, and in- 
dependently upon him, but to the Divine will 
only. And, therefore, though we had never so 
much rational and philosophical assurance, that 
our souls are immaterial substances, distinct from | 
the body, yet we could not, for all that, have any 
absolute certainty of their post-eternity, any other- 
wise than as it may be derived to us from the im- 
mutability and perfection of the Divine nature 
and will, which does always that which is best. 
For the essential gooduess and wisdom of the 
Deity is the only stability of all things. And for 
aught we mortals know, there may be good rea- 
son, why that grace or favour of future tmmorte- 


PYTHAGORIC DOCTRINE. 155 


lity and post-eternity, that is indulged to human 
souls, endued with reason, morality, and liberty 
of will (by means whereof they are capable of 
commendation and blame, reward and punish- 
ment), that so they may be objects for Divine 
justice to display itself upon after this life, in 
different retributions, may, notwithstanding, be 
denied to those lower lives and more contemptible 
souls of brutes, alike devoid both of morality and 
liberty. 

xxxvil. But if any, for all this, will still obsti- 
nately contend for that ancient Pythagoric and 
Empedoclean hypothesis, that all lives and souls 
whatsoever are as old as the first creation, and 
will continue to eternity, or as long as the world 
doth, as a thing more reasonable and probable 
than our continual creation of new souls, by 


means whereof they become juniors both to the 


matter of the world and of their own bodies, and 
whereby also (as they pretend) the Divine crea- 
tive power is made too cheap and prostituted a 
thing, as being famulative always to brutish, and 
many times to unlawful lusts and undue con- 
junctions ; but especially than the continual de- 
creation and annihilation of the souls of brutes ; 
we shall not be very unwilling to acknowledge 
thus much to them, that, indeed, of the two, this 
opinion is more reasonable and tolerable than 
that other extravagancy of those, who will either 


make all souls to be generated, and consequently . 


to be corporeal, or at least the sensitive soul, both 
in men and brutes. For, besides the monstrosity 
of this latter opinion, in making two distinct 
souls and perceptive substances in every man, 
which is a thing sufficiently confuted by internal 


156 | THE SENSITIVE SOUL 


sense, it leaves us also in an absolute impossibr- 
lity of proving the immortality of the rational 
soul, the incorporeity of any substance, and, by 
consequence, the existence of any Deity distinct 
from the corporeal world. | 

And as for that pretence of theirs, that sense- 
less matter may as well become sensitive, and, 
as it were, kindled into life and cogitation, as 2 
body, that was devoid of life and heat, may be 
kindled into fire and flame; this seems to argue 
too much ignorance of the doctrine of bodies in 
men otherwise learned and ingenious; the best 
naturalists having already concluded, that fre 
and flame is nothing but such a motion of the 
insensible parts of a body, as whereby they are 
violently agitated, and many times dissipated and 
scattered from each other, begetting in the mean- 
time those fancies of light and heat in animals. 
Now, there is no difficulty at all in conceiving, 
that the insensible particles of a body, which were 
before quiescent, may be put into motion; this 
being nothing but a new modification of them, and 
no entity really distinct from the substance of 
_ body, as life, sense, and cogitation are. There is 
nothing in fire and flame, or a kindled body, dif- 
ferent from other bodies, but only the motion or 
mechanism, and fancy of it. And, therefore, it 
is but a crude conceit, which the Atheists and 
Corporealists of former times have been always 
. so fond of, that souls are nothing but fiery or 
flammeous bodies. For, though heat in the ko- 
dies of animals be a necessary instrument for 
soul and life to act by in them, yet it is a thing 
really distinct from life: and a red-hot iron hath 
not, therefore, any nearer approximation to life 


NOT CORPOREAL. 157 


than it had before, nor the flame of a candle than 
the extinguished snuff or tallow of it; the differ- 
ence between them being only in the agitation of 
the insensible parts. We might also add, that, 
according to this hypothesis, the souls of animals 
could not be numerically the same throughout the 
whole space of their lives; since that fire, that 
needs a pabulum to prey upon, doth not continue 
always one and the same numerical substance. 
The soul of a new-born animal could be no more 
the same with the soul of that animal several years 
after, than the fame of a new-lighted candle is 
the same with that fame that twinkles last in the 
socket; which, indeed, areno more the same than 
a river or stream is the same at several distances 
of time. Which reason may be also extended 
further to prove the soul to be no body at all, since 
the bodies of all animals are in a perpetual flux, 

xxxvilr. We have now sufficiently performed 
our first task, which was to shew, from the origin 
of the Atomical physiology, that the doctrine of 
incorporeal substance must needs spring up toge- 
ther with it. We shall, in the next place, make 
it manifest, that the inward constitution of this 
philosophy is also such, that whosoever really 
entertains it, and rightly understands it, must of 
necessity admit incorporeal substance likewise. 
First, therefore, the Atomical hypothesis, allow- 
ing nothing to body, but what is either included 
in the idea of a thing impenetrably extended, or 
can clearly be conceived to be a mode of it, as 
more or less magnitude, with divisibility, figure, 
site, motion, and rest, together with the results of 
their several combinations, cannot possibsy make 
life and cogitation to be qualities of body ; since 


158 ‘THE ATOMICAL PHILOSOPHY 


they are neither contained in those things before- 
mentioned, nor can result from any ovévyia, or 
conjugations of them. Wherefore it must needs 
be granted, that life and cogitation are the attri- 
butes of another aabstence distinct from body, 
or incorporeal. 

Again, since according to the tenour of this 
physiology, body hath no other action belonging 
to it but that of local motion, which local motion, 
-as such, is essentially heterokinesy, that which 
ever springs originally from the thing itself 
moving, but always from the action of some other 
agent upon it; that is, since no body could ever 
move itself, it follows undeniably, that there must 
be something else in the world besides body, or 
else there could never have been any motion init. 
Of which we shall speak more afterwards. 

Moreover, according to this philosophy, the 
corporeal phenomena themselves cannot be 
solved by mechanism alone without fancy. Now 
fancy is no mode of body, and therefore must 
needs be a mode of some other kind of being in 
ourselves, that is, cogitative and incorporeal. 

Furthermore, it is evident from the principles 
of this philosophy, that sense itself is not a mere 
corporeal passion from bodies without, in that it 
supposeth, that there is nothing really in bodies 
like to those fantastic ideas that we have of sen- 
sible things, as of hot and cold, red and green, 
bitter and sweet, and the like, which, therefore, 
must. needs owe their being to some activity of 
the soul itself; and this is all one as to make it 
- Incorporeal. 

Lastly, from this philosophy, it is also mani- 
fest, that sense is not the xpitneov of truth con- 


LEADS TO INCORPOREALISM. 1909 


cerning bodies themselves, it confidently pro- 
nouncing, that those supposed qualities of bo- 
dies, represented such by sense, are merely fan- 
tastical things; from whence it plainly follows, 
that there is something in us superior to sense, 
which judges of it, detects its fantastry, and 
condemns its imposture; and determines what 
really is and is not, in bodies without us, which 
must needs be a higher self-active vigour of the 
mind, that will plainly speak it to be incorpo- 
real. 

xxxix. And now this Atomical physiology of 
the ancients seems to have two advantages or pre- 
eminences belonging to it, the first whereof is this, 
that it renders the corporeal world intelligible to 
us ; since mechanism is a thing that we can clear- 
ly understand, and we cannot clearly and dis- 
tinctly conceive any thing in bodies else. To say 
that this or that is done by a form or quality, is 
nothing else but to say, that it 1s done we know 
not how; or, which is yet more absurd, to make 
our very ignorance of the cause, disguised under 
those terms of forms and qualities, to be itself 
the cause of the effect. 

Moreover, hot and cold, red and green, bitter 
and sweet, &c. formally considered, may be 
clearly conceived by us as different fancies: and 
vital passions In us, occasioned by different mo- 
tions made from the objects without upon our 
nerves; but they can never be clearly under- 
stood as absolute qualities in the bodies them- 
selves, really distinct from their mechanical dis- 
positions ; nor is there, indeed, any more reason, 
why they should be thought such, than that, 
when a man is pricked witha pin, or wounded 


160 THE ADVANTAGES OF THE 


with a sword, the pain which he feels should be 
thought to be an absolute quality in the pi or 
sword. So long as our sensible ideas are taken 
either for substantial forms or qualities in bodies 
without us, really distinct from the substance of 
the matter, so long are they perfectly unintelligi- 
ble by us. For which cause, Timeus Locrus,* 
philosophizing (as it seemeth) after this manner, 
did consentaneously thereunto determine, that 
corporeal things could not be apprehended by 
us, otherwise than aicyou Kat v0 Aoyiouw, by 
sense and a kind.of spurious or bastardly reason; 
—that is, that we could have no clear conceptions 
of them in our understanding. And, for the 
same reason, Plato’ himself distinguisheth’ be- 
twixt such things as are vonjos pera Ao-you megudnT ra’ 
comprehensible by the understanding with rea- 
son,—and those which are only dof per’ aicbijoews 
. adayou, which can only be apprehended by opinion, 
together with a certain irrational sense ;—meaning 
plainly, by the latter, corporeal and sensible 
things. And accordingly the Platonists frequent- 
ly take occasion, from hence, to enlarge them- 
selves much in the disparagement of corporeal 
things, as being, by reason of that smallness of 
entity that is in them, below the understanding, 
and not having so much ovgiay as yéveow,* essence 
as generatiou,—which, indeed, is fine fancy. 
Wherefore, we must either, with these philoso- 
phers, make sensible things to be dxaraAnrra or 


*De Anima Mundi, inter Scriptor. Mytholog. a Tho. Gale editos. 
p- 545. | 

* Vide Theztctum, p. 139. s. oper. Sophistam. p. 166, 167. ct de 
Repub. lib. vii. p. 484. 

° Platu de Republica, ubi supra. 


ATOMICAL PHILOSOPHY. 161 


amspiAnnra, altogether incomprehensible and incon- 
ceivable—by our human understandings (though 
they be able, in the meantime, clearly to conceive 
many things of a higher nature), or else we must 
entertain some kind of favourable opinion con- 
cerning that which is the ancientest of all phy- 
siologies, the Atomical or mechanical, whichalone 
renders sensible things intelligible. 

xu. The second advantage, which this Atomi- 
cal physiology seems to have, is this, that it pre- 
pares an easy and clear way for the demonstra- 
tion of incorporeal substances, by settling a dis- 
tinct notion of body. He that will undertake to 
prove, that there is something else in the world 
besides body, must first deterinine what body 1s, 
for otherwise he will go about to prove, that there 
is something besides he knows not what.» But 
now, if all body be made to consist of two sub- 
stantial principles, whereof one is matter devoid 
of all form (and therefore of quantity as well as 
qualities), from whence these philoso- 
phers* themselves conclude, that it is [47°75 
incorporeal; the other, form, which, Matter 7d 
heing devoid of all matter, must needs Plotin. " 
be incorporeal likewise. (And thus Sto- =e 
beus* sets down the joint doctrine both of Plato 
and Aristotle; ov rporov 10 sidog rag tAn¢ agpatpoebey 
acwparov, odtwo Kae THY VAM Tov Edove ywpiobévrog ov 
owsLa ELVal, Oey yao andor THC ovvocoy, TOS THY TOU ow 
paro¢ urooracw’ “That in the same manner, as form 
alone separated from matter is incorporeal, so 
neither is matter alone, the form being separated 
from it, body. But there is need of the joint con- 
currence of both these, matter and form together, 


* Eclog, Phys. lib. i. cap. xiv. p. 29. 


162 . THE ADVANTAGES OF THE 


- to make up the substance of the body.)—More- 
over, if to forms qualities be likewise superadd- 
ed, of which it is _consentaneously also resolved 
by the Platonists, dre ai rowrnreg acwuaror, that qua- 
lities are incorporeal,—as if they were 
Alcinous, go many spirits possessing bodies; I say, 
in bh, in. this way of philosophizing, the no- 
aa tions of body and spirit, corporeal and 
. incorporeal, are so confounded, that it 
is impossible to prove any thing at all concerning 
thein ; body itself being made incorporeal (and 
therefore every thing incorporeal); for whatso- 
ever is wholly compounded and made up of in- 
corporeals, must needs be itself also incorporeal. 
Furthermore, according to this doctrine of 
matter, forms, and qualities in body, life and un- 
derstanding may be supposed to be certain forms 
er qualities of body. And then the souls of men 
may be nothing else but blood or brains, endued 
with the qualities of sense and understanding ; 
or else some other more subtle, sensitive, and ra- 
tional matter, in us. And the like may be said of 
God himself also; that he is nothing but a cer- 
tain rational, or intellectual, subtile and fiery body, 
pervading the whole universe; or else that he is 
the form of the whole corporeal world, together 
with the matter making up but one substance. 
Which -conceits have been formerly entertained 
by the best of those ancients, who were captivated 
under that dark infirmity of mind, to think, that 
there could be no other substance besides body. 
_ But the. ancient Atomical philosophy, settling 
a distinct notion of body, that it 1s &acrardy avriru- 
wov, a thing impenetrably extended,—which hath _ 
nothing belonging to it but magnitude, figure, site, 


ATOMICAL PHILOSOPHY. 163 


rest, and motion, without any self-moving power, 
takes away all confusion; shews clearly how far 
body can go, where incorporeal substance begins; 
as also, that there must of necessity be such a 
thing in the world. 

Again, this discovering not only that the doc- 
trine of qualities had its original from men’s mis- 
taking their own fancies for absolute realities in 
bodies themselves; but also, that the doctrine of 
matter and form sprung from another fallacy or 
deception of the mind, in taking logical notions, 
and our modes of conceiving, for modes of being, 
and real entities in things without us; it shew- 
ing, likewise, that because there is nothing else 
clearly intelligible in body, besides magnitude, 
figure, site, and motion, and their various con- 
junctions, there can be no such entities of forms 
and qualities really distinct from the substance 
of body; makes it evident, that life, cogitation, 
and understanding can be no corporeal things, 
but must needs .be the attributes of another kind 
of substance distinct from body. 

xLi..We have now clearly proved these two 
things: first, that the physiology of the ancients, 
before, not only Aristotle and Plato, but also 
Democritus and Leucippus, was Atomical or me- 
chanical. Secondly, that as there is no incon- 
sistency between the Atomical physiology and 
theology, but indeed a natural cognation: so the 
ancient Atomists, before Democritus, were nel- 
ther Atheists nor Corporealists, but held the in- 
corporeity and immortality of souls, together with 
a Deity distinct from the corporeal world. Where- 
fore, the first and most ancient Atomists did not 
make arououc acyac Tw odwy, they never endea- 


164 ANCIENT PHILOSOPHY CONSISTED 


voured to make up an entire philosophy out of 
Atomology; but the doctrine of Atoms was to 
them only one part or member of the whole philo- 
sophic system, they joining thereunto the doc- 
trine of incorporeal substance and theology, to 
make it up complete; accordingly, as Aristotle 
hath declared in his Metaphysics, that the an- 
cient philosophy consisted of these two parts, 
puotoAoyia and Geodoyia or 7 TOWTN piroco¢ia, physio- 
logy, and theology or metaphysics. Our ancient 
Atomists never went about, as the blundering 
Democritus afterwards did, to build up a world 
out of mere passive bulk, and sluggish matter, 
without any apyai Spaornpiot, any active principles, 
or incorporeal powers ; understanding well, that 
thus they could not have so much as motion, me- 
chanism, or generation in it; the original of all 
that motion that is in bodies springing from some- 
thing that is not body, that is, from incorporeal 
substance. And yet, iflocal motion could have 
been supposed to have risen up, or sprung in upon 
‘this dead lump and mass of matter, nobody 
knows how, and without dependence upon any 
incorporeal being, to have actuated it fortuitous- 
ly; these ancient Atomists would still have 
thought it impossible for the corporeal world it- 
_ self to be made up, such as now it is, by fortui- 
tous mechanism, without the guidance of any 
higher principle. But they would have concluded 
it the greatest impudence or madness, for men to 
assert, that animals also consisted of mere mecha- 
nism; or, that lifeand sense, reason and under- 
standing, were really nothing else but local mo- 
tion, and consequently, that themselves were but 
machines and automata. Wherefore, they joined 


OF PHYSIOLOGY AND THEOLOGY. 165 


both active and passive principles together, the 
corporeal and incorporeal nature, mechanism and 
life, Atomology and Pneumatology; and, from 
both these united, they made up one entire system 
of philosophy, correspondent with, and agreeable 
to, the true and real world without them. And 
this system of philosophy, thus consisting of the 
doctrine of incorporeal substance (whereof God is 
the head), together with the Atomical and mecha- 
nical physiology, seems to have been the only ge- 
nuine, perfect, and complete. 

xLi. But it did not long continue thus; for, 
after a while, this entire body of philosophy came 
to be mangled and dismembered, some taking 
one part of it alone, and some another; some 
snatching away the Atomical physiology, without 
the pneumatology and theology; and others, on 
the contrary, taking the theology and doctrine of 
incorporeals, without the Atomical or mechanical 
physiology. The former of these were Democri- 
tus, Leucippus, and Protagoras, who took only 
the dead carcass or skeleton of the old Moschi- 
cal philosophy, namely, the Atomical physiology; 
the latter, Plato and Aristotle, who took, indeed, 
the better part, the soul, spirit, and quintessence 
of it, the theology and doctrine of Incorporeals, 
but unbodied, and divested of its most proper 
and convenient vehicle, the Atomical physiology, 
whereby it became exposed to sundry inconve- 
niences. 

xLui. We begin with Leucippus and Demo- 
critus; who, being atheistically inclined, quickly 
perceived, that they could not, in the ordinary 
way of physiologizing, sufficiently secure them- 
selves against a Deity, nor effectually urge Athe- 

VOL, I. M 


16G THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE ANCIENTS 


ism upon others; forasmuch as Heraclitus and 
other philosophers, who. held that all ‘substance 
-was body, as well as themselves, did, notwith- 
standing, assert-‘a corporeal Deity, maintaining, 
that the form of the whole corporeal world was 
God, or else that he was tAn roe zyousa, a certain 
kind of body or matter, as (for example) a me- 
thodical and rational fire, pervading (as a soul) 
the whole universe; the particular souls of men 
and animals being but, as it were, so many pieces 
cut and sliced out of the great mundane soul: 
so that, according to them, the whole corporeal 
universe, or mass of body, was one way or other 
‘a God, a most wise and understanding animal, 
that did frame all particularities within itself in 
the best manner possible, and providently govern 
the same. Wherefore, those Atheists now appre- 

hending, upon what ticklish and uncertain terms | 
their Atheistical philosophy then stood, and how 
.that those very forms and qualities, and the self- 
moving power of body, which were commonly 
made a sanctuary for Atheism, might, notwith- | 
standing, chance to prove, coutrariwise, the lati- 
bulum and asylum of a Deity, and that a corpo- 
real God (do what they could) might lie lurking 
under them, assaulting men’s imnds with doubtful 
‘fears and jealousies; understanding, moreover, 
that there was another kind of physiology set on 
-foot, which, banishing those forms and qualities 
of body, attributed nothing to it. but magnitude, - 
figure, site, and motion, without apy self-moving 
‘power; they seemed presently to apprehend some 
great advantage to themselves and cause from it; 
and therefore, greedily entertained this Atomical 
or mechanical physiology, and violently cutting it 


” 


MANGLED BY DEMOCRITUS. 167 


off from that other part, the doctrine of Incorpo- 
reals, which it was naturally and vitally united 
to, endeavoured to serve their turns of it. And 
now joining these two things together, the Ato- 
mical physiology, which supposes, that there is 
nothing in body but magnitude, figure, site, and 
motion, and that prejudice or prepossession of 
their own minds, that there was no other sub- 
stance in the world besides body; between them 
both they begat a certain mongrel and spurious 
philosophy, atheistically Atomical, or atomically 
Atheistical. 

But though we have so well proved, that Leu- 
cippus and Democritus were not the first invent- 
ors, but only the depravets and adulterators of 
the Atomical philosophy; yet, if any will, not- 
withstanding, obstinately contend, that the first 
invention thereof ought to be imputed to them, 
the very principles of their Atheism seeming to 
lead them naturally to this, to strip and divest 
body of all those forms and qualities, it being 
otherwise impossible for them, surely and safely, 
to exclude a corporeal Deity; yet so, as that the 
wit of these Atheists was also much to be: ad- 
mired, in the managing and carrying on of those 
principles in such a manner, as to make up so 
entire a system of philosophy out of them, all 
whose parts should be so coherent and consistent 
together; we shall only say thus much: that if 
those Atheists were the first inventors of this 
philosophy, they were certainly very unhappy 
and unsuccessful in it, whilst endeavouring by it 
to secure themselves from the possibility and 
danger of a corporeal God, they unawares laid 
a foundation for the clear demonstration of an 

M 2 


‘168 THE ATOMICAL PHYSIOLOGY 


incorporeal one, and were indeed so far from 
making up any such coherent frame as is pre- 
tended, that they were forced every where to con- 
‘tradict their own principles. So that nonsense 
lies at the bottom of all, and is interwoven 
throughout their whole Atheistical system; and 
that we ought to take notice of the invincible 
power and force of truth, prevailing irresistibly 
against all endeavours to oppress it; and how des- 
perate the cause of Atheism is, when that very 
Atomical hypothesis of their’s, which they would 
erect and build up for a strong castle to garrison 
themselves in, proves a most effectual engine 
against themselves, for the battering of all their 
Atheistical structure down about their ears. 

XLIv. Plato’s mutilation and interpolation of 
the old Moschical philosophy was a great deal 
more excusable, when he took the theology and 
metaphysics of it, the whole doctrine of Incorpo- 
reals, and abandoned the Atomical or mechani- 
cal way of physiologizing. Which in all proba- 
bility he did, partly because those forementioned 
Atheists having so much abused that philosophy, 
adopting it as it were to themselves, he thereupon 
began to entertain a jealousy and suspicion of it; 
and partly, because he was not of himself so in- 
clinable to physiology as theology, to the study of 
corporeal as of Divine things ; which some think 
to be the reason, why he did not attend to the Py- 
thagoric system of the corporeal world, till late 
in his old age. His genius was such, that he was 
naturally more addicted to ideas than to atoms, 
to formal and final than to material causes. To 
which may be added, that the way of physiologiz- 
ing by matter, forms, and qualities, is a more huffy 


SUPERSEDED BY PLATO. 169 


and fanciful thing than the other; and lastly, that 
the Atomical physiology 1s more remote from 
sense and vulgar apprehension, and therefore not 
so easily understood. For which cause many 
learned Greeks of later times, though they had 
read Epicurus’s works, and perhaps Democri- 
tus’s too, yet they were not able to conceive, how 
the corporeal and sensible phenomena could pos- 
sibly be solved without real qualities; one in- 
stance whereof might be given in Plutarch, writ- 
ing against Colotes, the Epicurean. Wherefore 
Plato, that was a zealous assertor of an ineorpo- 
real Deity, distinct from the world, and of immer- 
tal souls, seriously physiologized only by matter, 
forms, and qualities, generation, corruption, and 
alteration; and he did but play and toy some- 
times a little with atoms and mechanism} as 
where he would compound the earth of cubical, 
and fire of pyramidal atoms, and the like. For 
that he did therein imitate the Atomical physio- 
logy, is plain from these words of his 3 *zavra ody Se 
ravra Stavociabar opixpa ovrwc, we Kal ty Exacroy ovdey 
Opipevon ud nuwv, cvvabpowbivrwy & woAAwY, TOE oy- 
kovg avrav opacba All these cubical and pyra- 
midal corpuscula of the fire and earth, are in 
themselves so small, that by reason of their par- 
vitude, none of them can be perceived singly and 
alone, but only the aggregations of many of thena 
together.— 

xLv. And Aristotle here trod in Plato’s foot- 
steps, not only in the better part, in asserting an in- 
corporeal Deity, and animmoveable First Mover ; 
but also in physiologizing by forms and qualities, 
and rejecting that mechanical way by eons 

* In Time. p. 537. oper. 


170 COMMENDATION OF 


which had been so generally received amongst the- 
ancients. Wherefore, though the genius of these 
two persons was very different, and Aristotle of- 
ien contradicteth Plato, and really dissents from 
him in several particularities ; yet, so much I think 
may be granted to those reconcilers (Porphyry, 
Simplicius, and others), that the main essentials 
of their two philosophies are the same. 

Now, I say, the whole Aristotelical system of 
philosophy is infinitely to be preferred before the 
whole Democritical ; though the former hath been 
so much disparaged, and the other cried up of 
- lateamongst us. Because, though it cannot be 
denied, but that the Democritic hypothesis doth 
much more handsomely and intelligibly solve the 
corporeal phenomena, yet in all those other things, 
which are of far the greatest moment, it is rather a 
madness than a philosophy. But the Aristotelic 
system is right and sound here, as to those greater 
things; it asserting incorporeal substance, a Deity 
distinct from the world, the naturality of morality, 
and liberty of will. Wherefore, though a late 
writer of politics does so exceedingly disparage 
Aristotle’s Ethics, yet we shall do him this right 
here to declare, that his ethics were truly such, 
and answered their title; but that new model of 
ethics, which hath been obtruded upon the world 
with so much fastuosity, and is indeed nothing but 
tlle old Democritic doctrine revived, is no ethics 
at all, but a mere cheat, the undermining and sub- 
version of all morality, by substituting something 
like it in the room of it, that 1s a mere counterfeit 
and changeling, the design whereof could not be 
~ any other than to debauch the world. 

We add further, that Aristotle’s system of phi- 


ARISTOTLE’S PHILOSOPHY. 171 


losophy seems to be more consistent with piety, 
than the Cartesian hypothesis itself, which yet 
plainly supposeth incorporeal substance. Foras- 
much as this latter makes God to contribute no- 
thing more to the fabric of the world, than the 
turning round of a vortex or whirlpool of matter ; 
from the fortuitous motion of which, according to 
certain general laws of nature, must proceed all 
this frame of things that now is, the exact organi- 
zation and successive generation of animals, with- 
out the guidance of any mind or wisdom. Whereas 
Aristotle’s nature is no fortuitous principle, but 
such as doth nothing in vain, but all for ends, 
and in every thing pursues the best ; and therefore 
can be no other than a subordinate instrument of 
the Divine wisdom, and the manuary opificer or 
executioner of it. 

However, we cannot deny, but that Aristotle 
hath been taxed by sundry of the ancients, Christ- 
jans aud others, for not so explicitly asserting 
these two things, the immortality of human souls, 
and providence over men, as he ought to have 
done, and as his master Plato did. ‘Though to 
do him all the right we can, we shall observe bere, 
that in his Nicomachian Ethics,* he speaks fa- 
vourably for the latter; « yap tic ermpédaa trav avOow 
wivwy uo Oewy yiverat, worep Soxel, Kat evAoyov yatpety 
aurove TH apiorg Kal ro ovyyevectaty (rovTO ‘yap Ein 6 
vous) Kal rouc ayarouvrac partora Kat TOVE TimwVTag aPy- 
revToLely, OG TWY Pilwy aUToIg Erysdoupévous, OpbwE TE 
xadtwe mparrovrag If God take any care of human 
things, as it seems he doth, then it is reasonable to 
think also, that heis delighted with that which is 
the best, and nearest akin to himself (which is: 


« Lib. X. cap. ix. p. 185. tom. ii. oper. 


172 COMMENDATION OF 


mind or right reason), and that he rewards those 
who most love and honour it (as taking care of such 
things asare most pleasing to him), in doing rightly 
and honestly.—A very good sentence, were it not 
ushered in with too much of scepticism. And as 
for the point of the soul’s immortality, itis true, 
that whereas other philosophers, before Aristotle, 
asserted the pre-existence, incorporeity, and im- 
mortality of all souls, not only the rational, but the 
sensitive also (which in men they concluded to be 
ove and the same substance), according to that of 
Plato’s rasa Ywyn dBbavaroc, every soul is immortal, 

—they resolving that no life nor cogitation could 
be corporeal; Aristotle, on the contrary, doth ex- 
pressly deny the pre-existence, that is, the separa- 
bility, incorporeity, and immortality, of all sensi- 
tive souls, not in brutes only, but also every where, 
giving his reason for it in these words; “dr pey 
ov xX. Olov TE waeas mpoumag xewv, pavepay toriy EK TWY TOLOU- 
a dowv yap éoriy ap ywy 7 evipyeia TeOHOTUT SnAov 6 OTt 
ravrac avev owpmaroc aduvarov vu uTapyet, olov BadiZewv a aveEV 
woswy’ ore kat Oupabev etovevar advvarov’ ovr yap avrac 
xaQ’ éavrac sistévat olov re a yuptorouc oveac, our év owmare 
sotva. That all souls cannot pre-exist, is mani- 
fest from hence, because those principles, whose 
action is corporeal, cannot possibly exist without 
the body, as the power of walking without the 
feet. Wherefore itis impossible, that these sensi- 
tive souls (pre-existing) should come into the body 
- from without, since they can neither come alone 
by themselves naked and stripped of all body, they 
being inseparable from it: neither can they come 
in with a body, that is, the seed.—This is Aristo- 
tle’s argument, why all sensitive souls must needs 


@ De Generat. ef Corruptione, lib. ii. cap. iii, p, 618. tom. ii. oper. 


ARISTOTLE 'S PHILOSOPHY. 173 


be corporeal, because there is no walking without 
feet, nor seeing without eyes. But at the same 
time he declares, that the mind or intellect does 
pre-exist and come in from without, that 1s, is in- 
corporeal, separable, and immortal, giving his rea- 
son for itin like manner :* Xetrera: 8 rov vou povoy 
Gupaber eraucievat, Kai Oetov eivat povov" ovet yap avtov TH 
Evepyeia Kowwwver swuarKn evépyeta’ It remains, that 
the mind orintellect, and that alone (pre-existing) 
enter from without, and be only Divine; since its 
energy is not blended with that of the body’s, but 
it acts independently upon it—-Notwithstanding 
which, Aristotle elsewhere’ distinguishing con- 
cerning this mind or intellect, and making it to 
be twofold, ageutand patient, concludes the former 
of them only to be immortal, but the latter cor- 
ruptible ; ToUTO uovov abavaroy Kal atdiov, 0 Se maOnrixoc 
vouc ¢Oaprdc, the agent intellect is only immortal 
and eternal, but the passive is corruptible:—where 
some interpreters, that would willingly excuse 
Aristotle, contend, that by the passive intellect 
is not meant the patient, but the fantasy only, be- 
cause Aristotle should otherwise contradict him- 
self, who had before affirmed the intellect to be se- 
parable, unmixed, and inorganical, which they con- 
ceive must needs be understood of the patient. 
But this salvo can hardly take place here, where 
the passive intellect is directly opposed to the 
agent. Now what Aristotle’s agent understanding 
is, aud whether it be any thing in us, any faculty of 
our human soul or no, seems to be a thing very 
questionable, and has therefore caused much dis- 
pute amongst his interpreters; it being resolved 
by many of them to be the Divine intellect, and 


* Ibid. » De Anima, lib. ui. cap. vi. p.50. tom. i). oper. 


174 COMMENDATION OF ARISTOTLE, 


commonly by others, a foreign thing. Whence it 
must needs be left doubtful, whether he acknow- 
ledged any thing incorporeal and immortal at alk 
inus. And the rather because, laying down this 
principle, that nothing. is incerporeal, but what 
acts independently upon the body, he somewhere 
plainly determines, that there is no intellection 
without corporeal phantasms. ‘That, which led 
Aristotle to all this, positively to affirm the cor- 
poreity of sensitive souls, and to stagger so much 
concerning the incorporeity of the rational, seems 
to have been his doctrine of forms and qualities, 
whereby corporeal and ineorporeal substance are 
eonfounded together, so that the hmits of each 
eould not be discerned by him. Wherefore 
we cannot applaud Aristotle for this; but that 
which we commend him for, is chiefly these four 
things: first, for making a perfect incorporeal in- 
tellect to be the head of all; and secondly, for re- 
solving, that nature, as an instrument of this in- 
tellect, does not merely act according to the ne- 
cessity of material motions, but for ends and pur- 
poses, though unknown to itself; thirdly, for 
maintaining the naturahity of morality ; and lastly, 
for asserting the ro é9’ nuty, autexousy, or liberty 
from necessity, 


CHAPTER II. 


In this chapter are contained all the grounds of reason for the Athe= 
istic hypothesis.—1. That the Democritic philosophy, which is made 
up of these {wo principles, Corporealism and Atomism complicated 
together, is essentially Athcistical —2. Though Epicurus, who was 
au Atomical Corporealist, pretended to assert a democracy of gods, 
yet he was, for all that, an absolute Atheist; and that Atheists 
commonly equivocate and disguise themselves.—3. That the Demo- 
critical philosophy is nothing else but a system of Atheology, or 
Atheism swaggering under the glorious appearance of philosophy. 
And, though there be another form of Atheism, which we call 
Stratonical, yet the Democritic Atheism is only considerable; all 
whose dark mysteries will be here revealed.—4. That we being 
to treat concerning the Deity, and to produce all that profane and 
unhallowed stuff of Atheists in order to a confutation, the Divine 
assistance and direction ought to be implored.—S. That there are 
two things here to be performed; first, to shew what are the Athe- 
ists’ pretended grounds of reason against the Deity; and, secondly, 
how they endeavour cither to solve or confate the contrary pheno- 
mena. ‘The first of those grounds, that no man can have an idea or 
conception of God, and that he is an incomprehensible nothing.— 
6. The second Athcistic argument, that there can be no creation out 
of nothing, nor no omnipotence, because nothing can come from 
nothing ; and, therefore, whatsoever substantially is, was from cter- 
nity seli-existent, and uncreated by any Deity.—7. The third pre- 
tended reason against a Deity, that the strictest notion of a God 
implying him to be incorporeal, there can be no such incorporcal 
Deity, because there is no other substance but body.—8. The Athe- 
ists’ pretence, that the doctrine of incorporeal substances sprung 
from a ridiculous mistaking of abstract names and notions for reali- 
ties. They impudently make the Deity to be but the chicf of spec- 
tres, and an Oberon or prince of fairies and fancies. ‘Their fourth 
argument against a Deity, that to suppose an incorporeal mind to be 
the original of all things, is but to make a mere accident and abstract 
notion to be the first cause. of all.—9. Their fifth argument; a con- 

_ futation of a corporeal Deity from the principles of Corporealism 


176 THE DEMOCRITICAL PHILOSOPHY 


itsclf, that matter being the only substance, and all other differences 
of things nothing but accidents, generable and corruptible, no living 
understanding being can be essentially incorruptible. The Stoicad 
God incorruptible, only by accident—10. TKeir sixth ratiocination 
from a complication of Atomicism; that the first principle of alk 
things whatsoever in the universe is Atoms, or corpuscula devoid of 
- all qualities, and consequently of sense and understanding (which 
spring up afterwards trom a certain composition of them), and there- 
fore mind or Deity was not the first original of all.—11. In the se- 
venth place they disprove the world’s animation, or its being govern- 
ed by a living, understanding, animalish nature, presiding over the 
whole; because scnse and understanding are a peculiar appendix 
to flesh, blood, and brains, and reason is no where to be found but 
in human form.—12. The eighth Athcistic ground, that God being, 
taken by all for a most happy, eternal, and immortal animal (or liv- 
ing being), there can be no such thing, because all living beings are 
concretious of atoms, that were at first gencrated, and are liable to 
death and corruption by the dissolution of their compages, And that 
life is no simple primitive nature, but an aceidcental modifieation of 
compounded bodies, which, upon the disunion of their parts, va- 
. nisheth into uothing.—13. The ninth pretended Atheistic demon- 
stration, that by God is meant a first causc or mover, which was not 
before moved by-any thing elsc withoutit; but nothing can move 
iisclf, and therefore there can be no unmoved mover, nor any first in 
the order of causes, that is, a God.—14. Thoir further proof of this 
principle, that nothing ean move itself, with an Atheistic corollary 
from thence, that no thinking being could bea first cause, no cogia- 
tiou arising of itsolf without a cause; which may be reckoned a 
tenth argument.—15. Another mystery of Atheism, that all know- 
Jedye and mental conception is the information of the things them- 
selves known, existing without the knower, and a passion from 
them; and, therefore, the world must needs be before any know- 
Iedge or conception of it, and no knowledge or conception before 
the world, as its cause.—16. The twelfth argumentation, that things 
could not be made by a God, because they are so faulty and ill 
made, that they were not contrived for the good of man; and tkat 
the deluge of evils, that overflows all, shews that they did not pro- 
ceed from any Deity.-17. The thirtcenth instance of the Atheists 
against a Deity, from the defect of Providence, that, in human affairs, 
all is 'Tohu and Bohu, chaos and confusion.—18. The fourteenth 
Athcistic ground, that it is not possible for any ons being to animad- 


ESSENTIALLY ATHEISTICAL, | 177 


vert and order all things in the distant places of the whole world at 
‘once: but, if it were possible, that such infinite negotiosity would 
be absolutely inconsistent with happiness.—19. Several bold but 
slight queries of Atheists, why the world was not made sooner? and 
what God did before? why it was made at all, since it was so long 
unmade? and, how the architect of the world could rear up so huge 
a fabric ?—20. The Atheists’ pretence, that it is the great interest of 
mankind, that there should be no God; and that it was a noble and 
heroical exploit of the Democritics, to chase away that aflrightful 
spectre out of the world, and to free men from the continual fear of 
a Deity and punishment after death, embittering all the pleasures of 
life.—21. Another pretence of their's, that Theism is inconsistent 
with civil sovereignty, it introducing a fear greater tan the fear of 
the leviathan; and that any other conscience allowed of besides the 
civil law (being private judgment), is, ipso facto, a dissolntion of the 
Dody politic, and a return to the state of nature.—22. ‘The Atheists’ 
conclusion from the former premises, as set down in Plate and Lu- 
cretius, that all things sprung originally from natare and chance, 
without any mind or God, that is, provecded froin the necessily of 
material motions, undirected for ends; that infinite atoms, devoid 
of life and sense, moving in infinite space from eternity, by their for- 
tuitous retcounters and entanglements, produced the system of the 
whole universe, and as well animate as inanimate things. 


1. Havine, in the former chapter, given an ac- 
count of the genuine and primitive Atomical pin- 
losophy, which may be called the Moschical; we 
are, in the next place, to consider the Democri- 
tical], that is, the atheized and adulterated Atom- 
ology: which had its origiu from nothing else 
but the joining of this heterogeneous and contra- 
dictious principle to the Atomical physiology, 
that there is no ether substance In the world be- 
sides body. Now we say, that that philosophy, 
which igs thas compounded and made up of these 
two things, Atomicism and Corporealism compli- 
cated together, is essentially Atheistical, though 
neither of them alone be such. For the Atomical 
physiology, as we have declared alreacly, is in its 


78 THE DEMOCRITICAL PHILOSOPHY 


own nature sufficiently repugnant to Atheism. 
And it is possible for one, who holds, that there 
is nothing in the world besides body, to be per- 
‘suaded, notwithstanding ge, of a corporeal Deity, 
and that the world was at first framed and is still 
governed by an understanding nature lodged in 
the matter. For thus some of these Corporealists 
have fancied the whole universe itself to be a God, 
that is, an understanding and wise animal, that or- 
dered all things within itself, after the best manner 
possible, and providently governed the same. In- 
deed, it cannot be denied, but that this 1s a very 
great infirmity of mind, that such persons lie 
under, who are not able to conceive any other 
substance besides body, by which: is under- 
stood that which is impenetrably extended, or 
else, in Plato’s language, which hath rpocBoAny cai 
éxapny, that thrusts against other bodies, and re- 
sists thelr impulse ;—or, as others express it, 
which is rézov tAnpwrixoy, that so fills up place—as 
to exclude any other body or substance from 
-co-existing with it therein ; and such must needs 
have, not only very imperfect, but also spurious 
and false conceptions of the Deity, so long as 
they apprehend it to be thus corporeal; but yet 
it does not, therefore, follow, that they must 
needs be accounted Atheists. But, whosoever 
holds these two principles (before-mentioned) 
together, that there is no other substance besides 
body, and that body hath nothing else belonging 
‘to it but magnitude, figure, site, and motion, 
without qualities: I say, whosoever is that con- 
founded thing of an Atomist and Corporealist 
jumbled together, he is essentially and unavoida- 
bly that which is meant by an Atheist, though he 


ESSENTIALLY ATHEISTICAL. 179 


should in words never so much disclaim it, be- 
cause he must needs fetch the original of all 
things from senseless matter; whereas, to assert 
a God, is to maintain, that all things sprung ori 
ginally from a knowing and understanding na- 
ture. 

11. Epicurus, who was one of those mongrel 
things before-mentioned (an Atomical Corpore- 
alist, or Corporeal Atomist), did, notwithstand- 
ing, profess to hold a multifarious rabble and de- 
mocracy of gods, such as though they were av- 
Powropopgor,” Of human form,—yet were so thin 
and subtile, as that, comparatively with our terres- 
trial bodies, they might be called imcorporeal } 
they having not so much carrem as quasi-carnem, 
nor sanguinem as quasi-sanguinem, a certain kind 
of aerial or etherial flesh and blood; which gods 
of his were not to be supposéd to exist any where 
within the world, upon this pretence, that there 
was no place in it fit to receive them: 

> Illud item non est, ut possis credere sedes 
Esse Deim sanctas, in mundi partibus ullis. 

And, therefore, they must be imagined to subsist 
in certain intermundane spaces, and Utopian re- 
gions without the world, the deliciousness where. 
of is thus elegantly described by the poet: 

€ Quas neque concutiunt venti, neque nubila nimbis 

Adspergunt, neque nix acri concereta pruina 


Cana cadens violat, semperque tnnhbilus wether 
Integit, ct large diffuse lumine ridet. 


Whereunto was added, that the chief happiness 
of these gods consisted ‘in omnium vacatione 


* Vide Ciceron. de Natur. Deor. lib. i. cap. xviii. p. 2907. tum. ixs 
oper. 
® Lucret. lib. v. ver. 147 © Td, lib. iii. ver. 19. 


180 EPICURUS AN ABSOLUTE ATHEIST. 


munerum,” in freedom from all business and em- 
ployment,—and doing nothing at all, that so they 
might live a soft and delicate life. And, lastly, 
it was pretended, that though they had neither 
any thing to do with us, nor we with them, yet 
they ought to be worshipped by us for their own 
excellent natures’ sake and happy state. 

But whosoever had the least sagacity in bim 
could not but perceive, that this theology of Epi- 
curus was but romantical, it being directly con- 
trary to his avowed and professed principles, to 
admit of any other being, than what was con- 
creted of atoms, and consequently corruptible ; 
-and that he did this upon a politic account, 
thereby to decline the common odium, and those 
dangers and inconveniences which otherwise he 
might have incurred by a downright denial of a 
God, to which purpose it accordingly served his 
turn. Thus Posidonius* rightly pronounced, “ Nul- 
los esse deos Epicuro videri; queque is de diis 
immortalibus dixerit, invidiz detestande gratia 
dixisse.” Though he was partly jocular in it also, 
it making no small sport to him, in this manner, 
to delude and mock the credulous vulgar; 
‘“‘ Deos jocandi causa induxit Epicurus perlucidos 
et perflabiles, et habitantes tanquam inter duos 
. lucos, sic inter duos mundos propter metum rui- 
narum.” However, if Epicurus had been never 
so much in earnest in all this, yet, by Gassendus’s 
leave, we should pronounce him to have been not 
a jot the less an Atheist, so long as he maintain- 
ed, that the whole world was made undevog dtarar- 

* Apud Ciceron. de Natur. Deor. ib. i. cap. xliv. p. 2949. tom, ix. 
oper. 

i Cicero de Divin. 1. ii. e. xvii. p- 3202. tom. Ix. oper. 


EPICURUS AN ABSOLUTE ATHEIST. 18] 


rovrog 3) duarakovrog THY Tacav jeukaptorynra EyovTog pETa 
upOapciac, Without the ordering ‘and direction of 
any understanding being, that was _ perfectly 
happy and immortal ;—and fetched the original 
of all things in the universe, even of soul and 
mind, avo TWY GTOMWY owuarwv am povonrov Kat ruyalav 
Eyourwy ryv Kionoww, from senseless atoms fortuitous- 
ly moved.—He, together with Democritus, here- 
by making the world to be, in the worst sense, 
wov Tig vuxroc, an egg of the night,—that is, not 
the offspring of mind and understanding, but of 
dark, senseless matter, of Tohu and Bohu, or 
confused chaos; aud deriving the original of all 
the perfections in the universe from the most im- 
perfect being, and the lowest of all entities, than 
which nothing can be more atheistical. And as 
for those romantic monogramous gods of Epi- 
curus, had they been seriously believed by him, 
they could have been uothing else but a certain 
kind of aerial and spectrous men, living by them- 
selves, nobody knows where, without the world : 
* Exrixovpog we piv mpeg Toug moAAove amoAstre Oxov we 
& mpd¢e rov gvow mpayyarwv ovdapwc’ Iupicurus, ac- 
cording to vulgar opinion, leaves a God; but, ac- 
cording to the nature of things, none at all.— 

And as Epicurus, so other Atheists, in hke 
manner, have commonly had their vizards and 
disguises; Atheism, for the most part, prudently 
choosing to walk abroad in masquerade. And, 
though some over-credulous persons have been 
so far imposed upon hereby, as to conclude, that 
there was hardly any such thing as an Atheist 
any where in the world, yet they that are saga- 
cious may easily look through these thin veils and 

a Vide Sext. Empir. adv. Mathemat. lib, mx. p. 565. edit. Fabric. 
VOL. I. N 


182 MYSTERIES OF ATHEISM REVEALED. 


disguises, and perceive these Atheists oftentimes 
insinuating their Atheism even then, when they 
most of all profess themselves Theists, by affirm- 
ing, that it-is impossible to have any idea or con- 
ception at all of God; and that, as he is not 
finite, so he cannot be infinite, and that no know- 
ledge or understanding is to be attributed to him ; 
which is, in effect, to say, that there is no such 
thing. But whosoever entertains the Democritic 
principles, that is, both rejects forms and quali- 
ties of body, and makes all things to be body, 
though he pretend never so much to hold a cor- 
poreal Deity, yet he is not at all to be believed 
in it, it being a thing plainly contradictious to 
those principles. 

111. Wherefore, this mongrel philosophy, which 
Leucippus, Democritus, and Protagoras were the 
founders of, and which was entertained after- 
wards by Epicurus, that makes (as Laertius 
writes)’ apyac twv dAwv arduovc, senseless atoms to 
be the first principles—not only of all bodies (for 
that was a thing admitted before by Empedocles 
and other Atomists that were Theists), but also of 
all things whatsoever in the whole universe, and 
therefore of soul and mind too; this, I say, wag 
really nothing else but a philosophical form of 
Atheology, a gigantical and Titanical attempt to 
dethrone the Deity, not only by solving all the 
phenomena of the world without a God, but also 
by laying down such principles, from whence it 
must needs follow, that there could be neither an 
incorporeal nor, corporeal Deity. .It was Atheism 
openly swaggering under the glorious appearance 
ef wisdom and philosophy. 

2 Lib. x, segm. 41. p. 620. et alias. 


MYSTERIES OF ATHEISM REVEALED. 183 


There is, indeed, another form of Atheism, 
which (insisting on the vulgar way of philosophiz- 
ing by forms and qualities) we, for distinction 
sake, shall call Stratonical; such as, being too 
modest and shamefaced to fetch all things from 
the fortuitous motion of atoms, would, therefore, 
allow to the several parts of matter a certain kind 
of natural (though not animal) perception, such 
as is devoid of reflexive consciousness, together 
with a plastic power, whereby they may be able 
artificially and methodically to form and frame 
themselves to the best advantage of their respec- 
tive capabilities; something like to Aristotle’s 
nature, but that it hath no dependance at all upon 
any higher mind or Deity. And these Atheists 
may be also called Hylozoic (as the other Ato- 
mic), because they derive all things in the whole 
‘universe, not only sensitive, but also rational 
souis, together with the artificial frame of animals, 
from the life of matter. But this kind of Atheism 
seems to be but an unshapen embryo of some 
dark and cloudy brains, that was never yet di- 
_ gested into an entire system, nor could be brought 
into any such tolerable form, as to have the con- 
fidence to shew itself abroad in full and open 
view. But the Democritic and Atomic Atheism, 
as it is the boldest and rankest of all Atheisms, it 
not only undertaking to solve all phenomena by 
matter fortuitously moved, without a God, but 
also to demonstrate, that there cannot be so much 
as a corporeal Deity; so it is that alone, which, 
pretending to an entire and coherent system, hath 
publicly appeared upon the stage, and therefore 
doth, in a Manner, only deserve our consideration, 

And now we shall exhibit.a full view and 

N2 


14 NECESSITY OF IMPLORING 


prospect of it, and’ discover allits dark myste- 
ries and profundities; we being much of this 
persuasion, that a plain and naked representation 
of them will be a great part of a confutation at 
least; not doubting but it will be made to appear, 
that though this monster, big swoln with a puffy 
shew of wisdom, strut and stalk so gigantically, 
and march with such a kind of stately “philosophic 
‘grandeur, yet it is, indeed, but like the giant Or 
‘goglio, in our English poet, a mere empty blad- 
‘der, blown up with vain conceit, an Empusa, 
_ phantasm, or spectre, the offspring of night and 
darkness, nonsense and contradiction. 

And yet; for all that, we sball not wrong it the 
least in our representation, but give it all possi 
ble advantages of strength and plausibility, that 
so the Atheists may have no cause to pretend (as 
they are wont to do, in such cases) that either we 
_ did not understand their mysteries, nor appre- 
hend the full strength of their cause, or else did 
purposely smother and conceal it. Which, in- 
deed, we have been so far from, that we must coi 
fess we were not altogether unwilling this busi- 
ness of their’s should look a little like something, 
that might deserve a confutation. And whether 
the Atheists ought not rather to give us thanks 
for mending and improving their arguments, than 
complain that we have any way impaired them, 
we shall leave it to the censure of a judg- 
| ments. 

‘Iv. Plato’ tells us, that even amongst those Pa- 
-gans in his time there was generally such a religi- 
ous humour, that ravre¢ dco card Bpay cwppoovung 
| petéyovot, emt wasn opun kat opikpou kat eyaXou wed-ypa- 


— * In Timeo, p. 235. 


THE DIVINE. ASSISTANCE. 186 


roc, Qsv det wou érixadover, Whosoever had but the 
least of seriousness and sobriety in them, whenso- 
ever they took in hand any enterprise, whether 
great or small, they would always invoke the 
Deity for assistance and direction.— Adding more- 
over, that himself should be very faulty, if in his. 
Timeus, when he was to treat about so grand a: 
point, concerning the whole. world, « yéyovev 7 Kat 
ayevnc tort, Whether it were made or unmade,—he 
should not make his entrance thereinto by a reli- 
gious invocation of the Deity. Wherefore cer- 
tainly it could not be less than a piece of impiety - 
in a Christian, being to treat concerning the Deity 
itself, and to produce all that profane and uvhal- 
lowed stuff of Atheists out of their dark corners, . 
in arder to a confutation, and the better confirma- — 
tion of our faith in the truth of his existence, not 
to implore his direction and assistance. And I 
know no reason, but that we may- well do it in 
that same litany of Plato’s, card vouv Exsiv piv pa- 
Awora, Eroutvc O€ nut eureiy, that we may first speak 
agreeably to his own mind, or becomingly of his 
nature, and then consentaneously with ourselves. 

v. Now there are these two things here to be 
performed by us, first to discover and produce 
the chief heads of arguments, or grounds of rea- 
son, insisted on by the Atheists, to disprove a 
Deity, evincing withal briefly the ineffectualness 
and falseness of them: and secondly, tashew how 
they endeavour either to confute or solve, con- 
sistently with their own principles, all those phe- 
nomena, which are commonly urged against them 
to prove a Deity and incorporeal substance; ma- 
nifesting likewise the invalidity thereof. 

The grounds of reason alleged for the Atheist- 


186 THE ATHEISTS PRETENCE, 


ical hypothesis are chiefly these that follow. First, 
That we have no idea of God, and therefore can 
have no evidence of him; which argument is fur- 
ther flourished and descanted upon in this man- 
ner. ‘Ehat notion or conception of a Deity, that 
is commonly entertained, is nothing but a bundle 
of incomprehensibles, unconceivables, and impos- 
sibles ; it being only a compilement of all imagina- 
ble attributes of honour, courtship, and compli-- 
‘ment, which the confounded fear and astontsh- 
ment of men’s minds made them huddle up toge- 
ther, without any sense or philosophic truth. 
This seems to be intimated by a modern writer" 
in these words: “ The attributes of God sigmfy 
not true nor false, nor any opinion of our brain, 
but the reverence and devotion of our hearts ; and 
therefore they are not sufficient premises to infer 
truth, or convince falsehood.” And the same 
thing again is further set out, with no small pre- 
tence to wit, after this manner: ‘ They that ven- 
ture to dispute philosophically, or reason of God’s 
nature from these attributes of honour, losing their 
understanding in the very first attempt, fall from 
one inconvenience into another, without end, and 
without number; in the same manner, as whea 
one, ignorant of the ceremonies of court, coming 
into the presence of a greater person than he is 
used to speak to, and stumbling at his entrance, 
to save himself from falling, lets shp his cloak, to 
recover his cloak lets fall his hat, and with one 
disorder after another, discovers his astonishment 
and rusticity.” Fhe meaning of which, and other 
inke passages of the same writer, seems to be this ; 
that the attributes-of God (by which his nature 
* Hobbes. 


HAT THERE 13 NO IDEA OF GOD. 187 
is supposed to be expressed) having no philoso- 
phic truth or reality in them, had their only ori- 
ginal from a certain rustic astonishment of mind, 
proceeding from excess of fear, raising up the 
phantasm of a Deity, as a bugbear for an object 
to itself, and affrighting men into all manner of 
confounded nonsense, and absurdity of expres- 
sions concerning it, such as-have no signification, 
nor any conception of the mind answering to them. 
This is the first argument, used especially by our ° 
wodern Democritics, against a Deity, that be- 
cause they can have no fantastic idea of it, nor 
fully comprehend all that is concluded in the no- 
tion thereof, that therefore it is but an incompre- 
hensible nothing. 

_ vi. Secondly, another aipitient much insist- 
ed ot by the old Democritic Atheists, 1s directed 
against the Divine omnipotenceand creative power, 
after this manner. By Godis always understood 
a creator of something or other out of nothing. For 
however the Theists be here divided amongst 
themselves, some of them believing, that there was 
once nothing at all existing in this whole space, 
which is now occupied by the world, besides the 
Deity, and that he was then a solitary being, so 
that the substance of the. whole corporeal umi- 
verse had a temporary beginning, and novity of 
existence, and the duration of it hath now conti 
nued but for so many years only: others per- 
suading themselves, that though the matter and 
substance at least (if not the form also) of the cor- 
poreal world, did exist from eternity, yet neverthe- 
less, they both alike proceeded from the Deity by 
way of emanation, and do continually depend 
upon it, inthe same manner as light, though co- 


188 THE ATHEISTS SECOND ARGUMENT, 


eval with the sun, yet proceeded from the sun, aud 
depends upon it, being always, as it were, made 

anew by it; wherefore, according to this hypothe- 

sis, though things had no antecedent non-entity 

in time, yet they were as little of themselves, and 

owed all their being as much to the Deity, as if 
they had been once actually nothing, they being, 

as it were, perpetually created out of nothing by. 

it. Lastly, others of those Theists resolving, that 

the matter of the corporeal universe was not only 

from eternity, but also self-existent and uncreated 

or independent upon any Deity as to its being ; 

but yet the forms and qualities of all inanimate 

bodies, together with the souls of all animals in 
the successive generations of them (being taken 
for entities aistiact from the matter), were created 

by the Deity out of nothing. We say, though 

there be such difference among the Theists them- 

selves, yet they all agree in this, that God is, in 

some ‘sense or other, the creator of some real en- 
tity out of nothing, or the cause of that which 
otherwise would not have been of itself, so that no 
creation out of nothing (in that enlarged sense), 
no Deity. Now itis utterly impossible, that any 

substance or real entity should be,created out of 
nothing, it being contradictious to that indubita- 
ble axiom of reason, de nihilo nihil, from nothing 
nothing, The argument is thus urged by Lucre- 
tius, according to the minds of Epicurus and De- 
mocritus : 


2 Principium hinc cujus nobis exordia sumet, 
Nullam rem e nihilo gigni divinitus unquam. 
Quippe ita formido mortales continet omnes, 

— Quod multa in terris fieri coeloque tucntur, 


4 Lib.i. vers. 150, &c. 


THAT NOTHING CAN COME FROM NOTHING. 189 


Quorum operum causas nulla ratione videre 
Possunt, ac fieri divino numine rentur: 

Quas ob res, ubi viderimus nil posse creari 

De nihilo, tum quod sequimur, jam tutiusinde | 
Perspiciemus, et unde queat res queque creari, 
Et quo quzeque modo fiant opera sine divum. 


ee 


It is true, indeed, that it seems to be chiefly le- 
velled by the poet against that third and last sort 
of Theists before-mentioned; such as Heraclitus 
and the Stoics (which latter were contemporary 
with Epicurus), who held the matter of the whole 
world to have been from eternity of itself un- 
created, but yet the forms of mundane things in 
the successive generations of them (as entities dis- 
tinct from the matter) to be created or made by 
the Deity out of nothing. But the force of the 
argument must -needs lie stronger against those 
other Theists, who would have the very substance 
and matter itself of the world, as well as the 
forms, to have been created by the Deity out of 
nothing. Since nothing can come out of nothing, 
it follows, that not so much as the forms and qua- 
lities of bodies (conceived as entities really distinct 
from the matter), much less the lives and souls of 
animals, could ever have been created by any 
Deity, and therefore certainly not the substance 
and matter itself. But all substance and real en- 
tity, whatsoever is in the world, must needs have 
been from eternity, uncreated and self-existent. 
Nothing can be made or produced but only the 
different modifications of pre-existent matter. And 
this is done by motions, mixtures, and separations, 
concretions and secretions of atoms, without the 
creation of any real distinct entity out of nothing ; 
so that there needs no Deity for the effecting of it, 
according to thatof Epicurus, 9 Beta puote mpoe ravra 


190) «THE ATHEISTS’ PRETENCES AGAINST 
pneaun mpooayiotw, no Divine power ought to be 
called in for the solving of those phenomena.—To . 
conclude, therefore, if no substance, nor real en- 
tity can be made, which was not before, but all 
whatsoever is, will be, and can be, was from eter- 
nity selfexistent; then creative power, but espe- 
clally thatattribute of onmipotence, can belong to 
nothing ; and this is all one as to say, there can he 
no Deity. ; 

vil, Thirdly, the Atheists argue against the 
stricter and higher sort of Theists, who will have 
God to be the creator of the whole corporeal uni- 
verse and all its parts out of nothing, after this 
mauner: that which created the whole mass of 
matter and body, cannot be itself body; where- 
fore this notion of God plainly implies him to be 
jucorporeal. But there can be no incorporeal 
Deity, because by that word must needs be un- 
derstood, either that which hath no magnitude nor 
extension at all, or else that which is indeed ex- 
tended, but otherwise than body. Hf the word 
be taken m the formner sense, then nothing at all 
ean be so incorporeal, as to be altogether unex- 
tended and devoid of geometrical quantity, be- 
eause extension is the very essence of all exist- 
ent entity, aud that which is altogether unex- 
tended is perfectly nothing. There can neither 
be any substance, nor mode or accident of any 
substance, no nature whatsoever unextended. But 
wf the word iucorporeal be taken in the latter 
sense, for that which is tdeed extended, but 
otherwise than body, namely so as to penetrate 
bodies and co-exist with them, this is also a thing 
next to nothing; since it can neither act upon any 


AN INCORPOREAL DEITY.’ | 191 


other thing, nor be acted upon by, or sensible of, 
-any thing ; it can neither do nor suffer any thing. 


2 Nam facere et fungi nisi corpus nulla potest res. 


Wherefore, to speak plainly, this can be nothing 
else but empty space, or vacuum, which runs 
through all things, without laying hold on any_ 
chine. or being affected from any thing. This is 
the only incor brea thing, that is or can be in na- 
ture, space, or place ; and therefore to suppose an 
incorporeal Deity is to make empty ape to be 
the creator of all things. 


This argument is thus sie ii by the Epicu- 
rean poet: 


. Quodcunque erit esse aliquid, debebit id ipsum 


Augmine vel grandi vel parvo 
Cui si tactus crit, quamvis levis exiguusque, 
Corporum augebit numeram summamque scquctur z 
Sin intactile crit, nulla de parte quod wWlam 

Rem prohibere queat per se transire meantem, 
Scilicet hoc id crit vacuum quod inane vocamus. 








Whatsoever is, is extended or hath geometrical 
quantity and mensurability in it; which, if it be 
tangible, then it is body, and fills up a place.in the 
world, being part of the whole mass ; .but if it be 
intangible, so that it cannot resist the passage of 
any thing through it, then it is nothing else but 
empty space or vacuum.—There is no third thing 
besides these two, and therefore whatsoever is 
not body, is space or nothing: 


¢ ——____—Przter inane et corpora tertia per se, 
Nulla potest rerum in numero natura relinqui. 


4 Lucret. lib. i. vers. 444, &ec. > Td. lib. i, vers. 434, &c, 
¢ Id. hb. 1. vers. 446. 


192 ATHEISTS OBJECTION AGAINST 


Thus the ancient Epicureansand Democritics ar- 
cued; there being nothing incorporeal but space, 
there can be no incorporeal Deity. 

But, because this seems to give advantage to 
the Theists, in making space something, or that 
which hath a real nature or entity without our 
conception, from whence it will follaw, that it 
must needs be either itself a substance, or else a 
inode of some incorporeal substance; the modern 
Democritics are here more cautious, and make 
space te be no nature really existing without us, 
but only the phantasm of a body, and, as it were, 
the ghost of it, which has no reahty without our 
imagination. So that there are not two natures 
of body and space, which must needs infer two 
distinet substances, one whereof must be icor- 
poreal, but only one nature of body. The con- 
seqnence of which will be this, that an incorpo- 
real substance is all one with an incorporeal body, 
and therefore nothing. 

vitr. But because it is generally’ conceived, 
that an error cannot be sufficiently confuted, with- 
out discovering ro alriy rou Yevdoue, the cause of 
the mistake ;—therefore, the Atheists will, in the 
next place, undertake to shew likewise the ori- 
ginal of this doctrine of incorporeal substances, 
and from what misapprehension it sprung; as 
also take occasion, from thence, further to dis. 
prove a Deity. 

Wherefore they say, that the eae of this 
doctrine of incorporeal substances. proceeded 
chiefly from the abuse of abstract names, both of. 
substances (whereby the essences of singular bo- 
dies, as of -a man or a horse, being abstracted 
from those bodies themselves, are considered uni- 


INCORPOREAI SUBSTANCES. 193 


‘versally) as also of accidents, when they are con- 
sidered alone without their subjects or sub- 
stances. The latter of which is a thing, that men 
have been necessitated to in order to the compt- 
tation or reckoning of the properties of bodies, 
the comparing of them with one another, the 
adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing of 
them; which could not be done, so long as they 
are takeu concretely together with their subjects. 
But yet, as there is some use of those abstract 
naines, so the abuse of them has been also very 
great; forasmuch as, though they be really the 
names of nothing, since the essence of this and 
that man is not any thing without the man, nor is 
an accident any thing without its substance, yet 
men have been led into a gross mistake by them, 
to imagine them to be realities existing by them- 
‘selves. Which infatuation hath chiefly proceed- 
ed from scholastics, who have been so intemperate 
in the use of these words, that they could not 
make a rational discourse of any thing, though 
never 30 small, but they must stuff it with their 
quiddities, entities, essences, hecceities, and the 
like. Wherefore, these are they, who, being first 
deluded themselves, have also deluded the world, 
introducing an opinion into the minds of men, 
that the essence of every thing issomething with- 
out that thing itself, and also eternal ; and, there- 
fore, when any thing is made or generated, that 
there is wo new being produced, but only an ante- 
cedent and eternal essence clothed (as it were) 
with a new garment of existence; as, also, that 
the mere accidents of bodies may exist alone by 
themselves without their substances. As, for 
example, that the life, sense, and understanding. 


194 ATHEISTS OBJECTION AGAINST 


of animals, commonly called by the names of 
soul and mind,. may exist. without the bodies 
or substances of them by themselves, after the 
animals are dead ; which plainly makes them to 
be incorporeal substances, as it were the separate 
and abstract essences of men. This hath been 
observed by a modern writer in these words :— 
“Est hominum abstractorum tum in omni vita, 
- tum in philosophia, magnus et usus et abusus.— 
Abusus in eo consistit, quod cum videant aliqui, 
_ considerari posse, id est,-inferri m rationes,-acci- 
dentium incrementa et decrementa, sine conside- 
ratione corporum, sive subjectorum suorum (id 
quod appellatur abstrahere), loguuntur de acci- 
dentibus, tanquam possent ab omni corpore sepa- 
rari: hinec enim originem. trahunt quorundam 
metaphysicorum crassi errores. Nam ex eo, quod 
considerari potest cogitatio, sine consideratione 
corporis, inferre solent non esse opus corporis 
cogitantis.” Itis a great abuse, that some meta- 
physicians make of these abstract names, because 
eogitation can be considered alone ‘without the 

consideration of body, therefore, to conclude, 
that it is not the action or accident of that body” 
that thinks, but a substance by itself—And the 
same writer elsewhere observes, that it is upon 
this ground, that when a man is dead and buried, 
they say. his soul (that is, his life) can walk, sepa- 
rated from his body, and is seen by night amongst 
the graves.—By which means the vulgar are con- 
firmed in their superstitious belief of ghosts, 
spirits, demons, devils, fairies, and hobgoblins, 
invisible powers and agents, called by several 
names, and that by those persons whose work it 
ought to be, rather to free men from such super- 


INCORPOREAL SUBSTANCES. 195 


stition. Which belief at first had another origi- 
nal, not altogether unlike the former; namely, 
from men’s mistaking their own fancies for things 
really existing without them. For, as in the sense 
of vision, men are commonly deceived, in sup- 
posing the image behind the ¢lass to bea real 
thing existing without themselves, whereas it is, 
indeed, nothing but their own fancy: in hke man- 
ner, when the minds of men, strongly possessed 
with fear, especially in the dark, raise up the 
phantasms of spectres, bugbears, or affrightful 
apparitions to them, they think them to be ob- 
jects really existing without them, and call them 
ghosts and spirits, whilst they are indeed nothing 
but their own fancies ; so the phantasm, or fancy 
of a Deity (which is, indeed, the chief of all spec- 
tres), created by fear, has upon no other account 
been taken for a reality. To this purpose, a mo- 
dern writer, “ l‘rom the fear, that proceeds from 
the ignorance itself, of what it is that hath the 
power to do men good or harm, men are inclined 
to suppose and feign to themselves several kinds 
of powers invisible, and to stand in awe of their 
ewn imaginations, and in time of distress to in- 
voke them, as also in the time of an unexpected 
good success to give them thanks, making the 
creatures of their own fancies their gods.” Which, 
though it be prudently spoken in the plural num- 
ber, that so it might be diverted and put’ off to 
the heathen gods; yet heis very simple, that does 
not perceive the reason of it to be the same con- 
cerning that one Deity which is now commonly 

worshipped ; and that, therefore, this also 1s but 
the creature of men’s fear and fancy, the chief of 
all fantastic ghosts and spectres, as it were an 


196 THE ATHEISTS ARGUMENT 


Oberon or prince of fairies and fancies. This 
(we say) was the first original of that vulgar be- 
lief ‘of invisible powers, g ehosts, and gods; men’s 
taking their own fancies for things really existing 
without them. And as for the matter and sub- 
stance of these ghosts, they could not, by their 
own natural cogitation, fall into any other con- 
ceit, but that it was the same with that which ap- 
peareth in a dream to one that sleepeth, or in a 
looking-glass to one that is awake, thin aeriel bo- 
dies, which may appear and vanish when they 
please. But the opinion, that such spirits were 
incorporeal and immaterial, could never eriter into 
the minds of men by-nature, unabused by doc- 
trine; but it sprung up from those deceiving and 
deceived literati, scholastics, philosophers, and 
theologers, enchanting men’s understandings, and | 
_ making them believe, that the abstract notions of 
‘accidents and essences could exist alone by them- 
selves, without the bodies, as certain separate 
and incorporeal substances. : 
To conclude, therefore, to make an incorporeal 
alae to be the cause of all things, is to make our 
own fancy, an imaginary ghost of the world, to. 
be a reality ; and, to suppose the mere abstract 
notion of an accident, and a separate essence, to. 
be not only ‘an absolute thing by itself, and a real 
substance incorporeal, but also the first original 
of all substances,:and of whatsoever is in the 
universe. And this may be reckoned for a fourth 
Atheistic ground. . 
1x. Fifthly, the Atheists’ pretend farther to 
prove, that there is no other substance in the 
world besides body: as also, from ‘the principles 
of Corporealism itself to evince, ‘that there can 


AGAINST CORPOREAL DEITY. 197 


be no corporeal Deity after this manner. No man 
can devise any other notion of substance, than 
that it is a thing extended, existing without the 
mind, not imaginary, but real and solid magni- 
tude; for, whatsoever is not extended, is no 
where and nothing. So that res extensa is the only 
substance, the solid basis and sudstratum of all. 
Now this is the very self-same thing with body; 
for avrirumia, or resistance, seems to be a necessary 
consequence and result from extension, and they 
that think otherwise can shew no reason why bo- 
dies may notalso penetrate one another, as some 
- Corporealists think they do; from whence it is 
inferred, that body or matter is the only substance 
of all things. And whatsoever else is in the world, 
that is, all the differences of bodies, are nothing 
but several accidents and modifications of this 
extended substance, body, or matter. Which 
accidents, though they may be sometimes called 
by the names of real qualities and forms, and 
though there be different apprehensions concern- 
ing them amongst philosophers, yet generally they 
agree in this, that there are these two properties 
belonging to them; first, that none of them can 
subsist alone by themselves, without extended 
substance or matter, as the basis and support of 
them; and, secondly, that they may be all de- 
stroyed without the destruction of any substance. 
Now, as blackness and whiteness, heat and cold, 
so likewise life, sense, and understanding, are 
such accidents, modifications, or qualities of body, 
that can neither exist by themselves, and may be 
destroyed without the destruction of.any sub- 
stance or matter. For if the parts of the body 
of any living animal be disunited and separated 
Ons. 0: 


198 oo PHE ATHEISTS ARGUMENT 


from one another, or the organical disposition of 
the matter altered, those accidents, forms, or qua- 
lities of life and understanding, will presently 
vanish away to nothing, all the “substance of the 
matter still remaining one where or other in the 
universe entire, and nothing of it lost. Wherefore, 
the substance of matter and body, as distinguish- 
ed from the accidents, is the only thing in the 
world that is incorruptible and undestroyable. 
And of this it is to be understood, that nothing 
can be made out of nothing, and destroyed to no- 
thing, i.e. that every entire thing, that is made 
or generated, must be made of some preexisteut 
matter: which matter was from eternity self-ex- 
istent and unmade, and is also undestroyable, 
and can never be reduced to nothing. It is not 
to be understood of the accidents themselves, 
that are all makeable and destroyable, generable 
and corruptible. Whatsoever is in the world is 
but vAn TWC eyouea, matter so and so modified or 
qualified, all which modifications and qualifica- 
tions of matter are in their own nature destroya- 
ble, and the matter itself (as the basis of them, 
not necessarily determined to this or that acci- 
dent) is the only ayévyntov Kal avwrOoov, the only 
necessarily existent. The conclusion, therefore, 
is, that no animal, no living understanding body, 
can be absolutely and essentially incorruptible, 
this being an incommunicable property of the 
matter; and, therefore, there can be no corporeal 
Deity, the original of all things, essentially unde- 
stroyable. 

Though the Stoics imagined the whole corpo- 
real universe to be an animal or Deity, yet this 
corporeal God of theirs was only by accident in- 


AGAINST CORPOREAL DEITY. 199 


corruptible and immortal ; because they su pposéd 
that there was no other matter, which, existing 
without this world, and making inroads upon it, 
could disunite the parts of it, or disorder its com- 
pages. Which, if there were, the life and under- 
standing of this Stoical God, or great mundane 
‘animal, as well as that of other animals in like 
cases, must needs vanish into nothing. Thus, 
from the principles of Corporealism itself, it plain- 
ly follows, that there can be no corporeal Deity, 
because the Deity is supposed to be ayévynrov xat 
avwr<Opov, a thing that was never made, and is es- 
sentially undestroyable, which are the privileges 
and properties of nothing but senseless matter. 

x. In the next place, the Atheists undertake 
more effectually to confute that corporeal God of 
the Stoics and others, from the principles of the 
Atomical philosophy, in this manner. AJ] corpo- 
real Theists, who assert, that an understanding 
nature or mind, residing in the matter of the whole 
universe, was the first original of the mundane 
system, and did intellectually frame it, betray no 
small ignorance of philosophy and the nature of 
body, in supposing real qualities, besides magni- 
tude, figure, site, and motion, as simple and pri- 
mitive things, to belong to it; and that there was 
such a quality or faculty of understanding in the 
matter of the whole universe, co-eternal with the 
same, that was an original thing uncompounded 
and underived from any thing else. Now, to sup- 

pose such original qualities and powers, which 

- are really distinct from the substance of extended 

matter and its modifications, of divisibility, figure, 

site, and motion, is really to suppose so many dis- 

tinct substances, which, therefore, must needs be 
02 


200 ATHEISTS CONTEND THAT THE 


incorporeal. So that these philosophers fall una- 
‘wares into that very thing, which they are so ab- 
horrent from. For this quality or faculty of un- 
derstanding, in the matter of the universe, origi- 
nal and underived from any other thing, can be 
indeed nothing else but an incorporeal substance. 
‘Epicurus suggested a caution against this vulgar 
mistake, concerning qualities, to this purpose :— 
“Non sic cogitande sunt qualitates, quasi sint 
‘quedam per se existentes nature seu substantia, 
siquidem id mente assequi non licet; sed solum- 
modo ut varii modi sese habendi corporis consi- 
derandz sunt.” 

Body, as such, hath nothing else belonging to 
the nature of it, but what is included in the idea 
of extended substance, divisibility, figure, site, 
motion, or rest, and the results from the various 
compositions of them, causing different fancies. 
Wherefore, as vulgar philosophers make their 
first matter (which they cannot well tell what 
‘they mean by it), because it receives all qualities, 
to be itself devoid of all quality ; so we conclude, 
that atoms (which are really the first principles. 
of all things) have none of those qualities in them, 
which belong te compounded bodies; they are 
‘not absolutely of themselves black or white, hot 
or cold, moist.or dry, bitter or sweet, all these 
things arising up afterwards from the various ag 
gregations and contextures of them, together with 
different motions. Which Lucretius confirms by 
this reason, agreeable to the tenour of the Atom- 
ical philosophy, that if there were any such 
real qualities in the first principles, then, in the 
various corruptions of nature, things would at 
Jast be reduced to nothing: 


FIRST PRINCIPLE IS ATOMS. a 


* Immutabile enim quiddam superare necesse est, 
Ne res ad nihilum redigantur funditus omnes ; 
Proinde colore cave contingas semina rerum, 

Ne tibi res redeant ad nilum funditus omnes, : 


Wherefore, he concludes, that it must not be 
thought, that white things are made out of white 
principles, nor black things out of black princi- 
ples: 


- Ne ex albis alba rearis 
Principiis esse, 
Aut ea que nigrant, nigro de semine nata: | 

' Neve alium quemvis, que sunt induta, colorem, 
Propterea gerere hunc credas, quod materiai 
Corpora consimili sint ejus tincta colore ; 

Nullus enim color est omnino materiai. 
Corporibus, neque par rebus, neque denique dispar. 











Adding, that the same is to be resolved likewise 
concerning all other sensible qualities as well as 
colours: 


' ©€ Sed ne forte putes solo spoliata colore 
Corpora prima manere ; etiam sccreta teporis 
Sunt, ac frigoris omnino, calidique vaporis: 
Et sonitu sterila, et succo jejuna feruntur, 
Nec jaciunt ullum proprio de corpore odorem. 


Lastly, he tells us, in like manner, that the same 
is to be understood also concerning life, sense, and 
understanding; that there are no such simple 
qualities or natures in the first principles, out of 
which animals are compounded, but that these 
are in themselves — devoid of lite, sense, 
and understanding 


- @ Lucret. facie 750, 751. 754; 755. 
b Td. lib. ii. ver. 730, &c. : 
© Id. lib. i. ver. 841, &c. 


202 ATHEISTS CONTEND THAT THE 


a Nunc ea, quze sentire videmus cunque, necesse ‘st 
Ex insensilibus tamen omnia confiteare 
Principiis constare: neque id manifesta refutant, 
Sed magis‘ipsa manu ducunt, et credere cogunt, 
Ex insensilibus, quod dico, animalia gigni. 
Quippe videre licet, vivos existere vermes 
Stercore de tetro, putrorem cum sibi nacta ’st 
Intempestivis ex imbribus humida tellus. 


All sensitive and rational animals are made of 
irrational and senseless principles, which is proved 
by experience, in that we see worms are made 
out of putrefied dung, moistened with immoderate 
- showers.— a 

Some, indeed, who are no greater friends to a 
Deity than ourselves, will needs have that sense 
and understanding, that is in animals and men, 
to be derived from an antecedent life and under- 
standing in the matter. But this cannot be, be- 
cause if matter as such had life and understand- 
Ing in it, then every atom of matter must needs 
ie a distinct percipient animal and _ intelligent: 
person by itself; and it would be impossible for 
any such men and animals as now are to be com- 
pounded out of them, because every man would 
be variorum animalculorum acervus, a heap of in- 
numerable animals and percipients. 

Wherefore, as all the other qualities of bodies, 
so likewise life, sense, and understanding arise 
from the different contextures of atoms devoid of 
all those qualities, or from the composition of 
those simple elements of magnitudes, figures, sites, 
and motions, in the same manner as from a few 
letters variously compounded all that infinite va- 
riety of syllables and words is made: 


* Id. lib, ii. ver. 684, &e. 


FIRST PRINCIPLE is aToms. 203 


* Quin etiam refert nostris in versibus ipsis 
Cum quibus et quali positura contineantur ; 
Namque eadem coelum, mare, terras, flumina, solem 
Significant, eadem, fruges, arbusta, animantes; ~ 
Sic ipsis in rebus item jam materia | 
Intervalla, viz, connexus, pondera, plage, 
Concursus, motus, ordo, positura, figuree, 
Cum permutantur, mutari res quoque debent. 


From the fortuitous concretions of senseless un- 
knowing atoms did rise up afterwards, in certain 
parts of the world called animals, soul, and mind, 
sense and understanding, counsel and wisdom. 
But to think, that there was any animalish nature: 
before all these animals, or that there was an ante- 
cedent mind and understanding, counsel and wis- 
dom, by which all animals themselves, together 
with the whole world, were made and contrived, 
is either to run round in a senseless circle, making 
animals and animality to be before one another 
infinitely ; or else to suppose an impossible be- 
ginning of an original understanding quality in the 
matter. Atoms in their first coalitions together, 
‘when the world was making, were not then di- 
rected by any previous counsel or preventive un- 
derstanding, which were things as yet unborn and 
unmade, 


b Nam certe neque consilio primordia rerum 
Ordine se quzeque atque sagaci mente locarunt, 
Nec quos quzque darent motus, pepigere profecto. 


‘Mind and understanding, counsel and wisdom, did 

not lay the foundations of the universe ;. they are 

no archical things, that is, they have not the na- 

ture of a principle i in them ; they are not simple, 

‘original, primitive, and primordial, but as all other 
* Id. tib. ii, ver. 1012, ». Id, lib. i. ver. 1020. 


904 THE ATHEISTS OPPOSE. . 


qualities of bodies, secondary, compounded, and 
derivative, and therefore they could not be archi- 
tectonical of the world. Mind and understand- 
ing is no God, but the creature of matter and . 
motion. | | | 
The sense of this whole argument is briefly this. 
The first principle of all things in the whole uni- 
‘verse is matter, or atoms devoid of all quahties, 
and consequently of all life, sense, and understand- 
ing; and therefore the original of things is no un- 
derstanding nature, or Deity. _ 
x1, Seventhly, the Democritic Atheists: argue 
further after this manner: they who assert a 
Deity, suppose Eupu yov Elva TOV KOOLOV, the whole 
world to be animated,—that is, to havea living, 
rational, and understanding nature presiding over 
it. Now itis already evident from some of the 
‘premised arguments, that.the world cannot be— 
‘animated, in the sense of Platonists, that is, with 
‘an incorporeal soul, which is in order of nature 
before body, it being proved already, that there | 
can be no substance incorporeal ; as likewise that 
“jt cannot be animated neither in the Stoical sense, 
so as to have an original quality of understanding 
or mind in the matter ; but yet nevertheless some 
may possibly imagine, that as in ourselves and 
other animals, though compounded of senseless 
atoms, there isa soul and mind, resulting from the 
-contexture of them, which being once made, do- 
mineers over the body, governing and ordering it 
at pleasure; so there may be likewise such a liv- 
‘ing soul and mind, not only in the stars; which 
many have supposed to be-lesser deities, and ‘in 
the sun, :;which has been reputed a principal deity ; 
but also in the whole mundane system, made up 


> 


- THE WORLD'S ANIMATION, 205 | 


of earth, seas, air, ether, sun, moon, and stars alto- | 
gether ; one ‘general soul and mind, which, though 
resulting at first from the fortuitous motion ‘of 
matter, yet being once produced, may rule, govern, 
and sway the whole, understandingly, and in a 
‘more perfect manner than our souls do our bo- 
dies ; and so long as it continues, exercise a prin- 
cipality and dominion over it. Which, although 
it will not amount to the full notion of a God, ac- 
cording to the strict sense of Theists, yet it will 
approach very near unto it, and. endanger the. 
bringing in of all the same inconveniences along 
with it. Wherefore they will now prove, that 
there is no such soul or mind as this (resulting 
from the contexture of atoms), that presides over 
the corporeal universe, that so there may not be 
so much as the shadow of a Deity left. 

It was observed before, that life, sense, reason, 
and understanding, are but qualities of concreted 
bodies, like those other qualities of: heat and cold, 
‘&c. arising from certain particular textures of 
atoms. Now as those first principles of bodies, 
namely, single atoms, have none of those qualities 
in them, so neither hath the whole universe any 
(that it can be denominated from) but only the 
parts ofit. The whole world is neither black nor 
white, hot nor cold, pellucid nor opake, it contain- 
ing all those qualities in its several parts. In like 
manner, the whole has no life, sense, nur under- 
standing init, but only the parts of it, which are 
called animals. Thatis, life and sense are quali- 
ties, that arise only from such a texture of atoms 
as produceth soft flesh, blood, and brains, in bo- 
dies organized, with head, heart, bowels, nerves, 
muscles, veins, arteries, and the like: 


206 THE ATHEISTS CONTEND 


a ______-——_Sensus jungitur omnis 
Visceribus, nervis, venis, quzecunque videmus, 
Mollia mortali consistere corpore creta ; 


And reasonand understanding, properly so called, 
are peculiar appendices to human shape;” ‘‘ Ratio 
nusquam esse potest nisi in hominis figura.” From 
whence it is concluded, that there is no life, soul, 
nor understanding acting the whole world, be- 
cause the world hath no blood nor brains, nor any 
animalish or human form.< “ Quimundum ipsum 
animantem saplentemque esse dixerunt, nullo 
modo viderunt animi naturam, In quam figuram 
cadere posset.” Therefore the Epicurean poet 
concludes upon this ground, that there is no Di- 
vine sense in the whole world: , ‘- 


¢ Dispositum videtur ubi esse et crescere possit 
Seorsim anima atque animus ; tanto magis inficiandum, 
Totum posse extra corpus formamque animalem, 
Putribus in glebis terrarum, aut solis in igni, 
Aut in aqua durare, aut altis zetheris oris. 
Haud igitur constant divino predita sensu, 
Quandoquidem nequeunt vitaliter esse animata. 


Now if there be no life nor understanding above 
us, nor round about us, not any where else in the | 
world, but only in ourselves and fellow-animals, 
and we be the highest of all beings ; if neither the 
whole corporeal system be animated, nor those 
greater parts of it, sun, moon, nor stars, then there 
can be no danger of any Deity. 

xi. Eighthly, the Democritic Atheists dispute 
further against a Deity in this manner: the Deity 


> Td. lib. ii. ver. 903, &e. 

b Velleius apud Ciceron. de Nat. Deor. Jib. i. cap. XViil- p. 2907. 
© Id. ibid. hb. i. cap. x. p. 2893. tom. ix. oper. 

@ Lucret. lib. v. ver. 143, &e. 


THAT NOTHING IS IMMORTAL. 207 


is generally supposed to be fav paxapiov kai apOaprov, 
a perfectly happy animal, incorruptible and im- 
mortal. Now there is no living being incorrupti- — 
ble and immortal, and therefore none perfectly | 
happy neither. For, according to that Demo- 
critic hypothesis of atoms in vacuity, the only 
incorruptible things will be these three: first of all 
vacuum or empty space, which must needs be 
such, because it cannot suffer from any thing, 
since it is plagarum expers, 


2 Et manet intactum, nec ab ictu fungitur hilum. 


Secondly, the single atoms, because by reason of | 
their parvitude and solidity they are indivisible: 
and lastly, the swmma summarum of all things, that 
is, the comprehension of all atoms dispersed every 
where throughout infinite space. 


b Quia nulla loci stat copia certum 


Quo quasi res possint discedere dissoluique. 


But according to that other hypothesis of some 
modern Atomists (which also was entertained of 
old by: Empedocles) that supposes a plenity, there 
is nothing at all incorruptible, but thesubstance of 
matter itself. All systems and compages of it,. 
all ovyKpiuara and a0poicuara, all concretions and 
coagmentations of matter divided by motion, to- 
gether with the qualities resulting from them, are 
corruptible and destroyable : ‘que est coagmenta- - 
tio rerum non dissolubilis? Death destroys not the 
substance of any matter; for as no matter came 
from nothing, but was self eternal, so none of it 

2 Id. lib. v. vers. 358. Addas etiam lib. iii. vers. 814. ' 
> Id. lib. iii. vers. $15. oa 
* Cicero de Nat. Deor. lib. i. cap. viii. p. 2891. tom. ix. oper. 


208 THE ATHEISTS’ OBJECTION TO A 


can ever vanish into nothing; but it dissolves all | 
the aggregations of it.. 


4 Non sic interimit mors res, ut material 
Corpora conficiat, sed coetum dissupat ollis. 


Life is no substantial thing, nor any primitive | 
or simple nature; it is only an accident or qua- 
lity arising from the aggregation and contexture 
of atoms or corpuscula, which when the compages 
of themis disunited and dissolved, though all the 
substance still remain scattered and dispersed, 
yet the life utterly perishes and vanisheth into no- 
thing. No life is immortal; there is no immortal 
soul, nor immortal animal, or Deity. Though 
this whole mundane system were itself an animal, 
yet being but an aggregation of matter, it would 
be both corruptible and mortal. Wherefore, since 
no living being can possibly have any security of | 
its future permanency, there is none that can be 
perfectly happy. And it was rightly determined 
by our fellow-atheists, the Hedonics and Cyre- 
naics,” -evdayiovia avuraorov, perfect happiness isa 
mere notion,—a romantic fiction, a thing which 
can have no existence any where. Thisis re- 
corded to have been one of Democritus’s chief ar- 
guments against a Deity, because there can be no 
living being immortal, and consequently none per- 
fectly happy. °‘* Cum Democritus, quia nihil 
semper suo statu maneat, neget esse quicquam 
sempiternum, nonne Deum ita tollit omnino, ut 
nullam opinionem ejus reliquam faciat?” | 

x11. A ninth pretended demonstration of the 


* Lucret. lib. ii. vers. 1001. 
> Diog. Laert. lib. ii. segm. 94. p. 135. 
© Cicero de Nat. Deor. lib. i. cap. xii- p. 2897. 


FIRST CAUSE OR MOVER. 209 


Denosnic Atheists is as followeth. By God is 
understood a first cause or mover, which being 
not before acted upon by any thing else, but act- 
ing originally-from itself, was the beginning of all 
things. Now it is an indubitable axiom, and ge- 
nerally received among philosophers, that nothing 
can move itself, but quecquid movetur, ab alio mo- 
-vetur, whatsoever is moved, is moved by some- 
thing else ;—nothing can act otherwise than it is 
made to act by something without it, acting upon 
it. The necessary consequence whereof is this, 
that there can be no such thing as any first mover, 
or first cause, that is, no God. This argumentis 
thus urged by a modern writer,* agreeably to the 
sense of the ancient Democritics; “Ex eo quod 
nihil potest movere seipsum, non, inferretur, id 
quod inferri.solet, nempe Eternum Immobile, sed 
contra Eternum Motum, siquidem ut verum est, 
nihil moveriaseipso, itaetiam verum est nihil moveri 
nisi a moto.” From hence, that nothing can move | 
itself, it, cannot be rightly inferred, as commonly 
it is, that there is an eternal immoveable mover 
(that is, a God), but only an eternal moved mover; 

or that one thing was moved by another from eter: 
nity, without any first mover. Because as itis . 
true, that nothing can be moved from itself; so it. 

is likewise true, that nothing can be moved but 

from that which was itself. also moved by some- 
thing else before:—and so the progress upwards _ 
‘must needs be infinite, without any beginning or. 

first mover. The plain drift and scope of this ra- 
tiocination is no other than this, to shew that the 
argument commonly taken from motion, to prove 





2 Hobbes’s Element, ae part iv. sive Physic. cap. xxvi. 


—- $ec. i. p. 204. 


910 THE ATHEISTS FURTHER OBJECTION 


a God (that is, a first mover or cause), is not only 
ineffectual and inconclusive ; but also that, on the 
contrary, it may be demonstrated from that very 
topic of motion, that there can be no absolutely 
first mover, no first in the order of causes, that 
is, no God. . : 

xiv. Tenthly, because the Theists conceive that 
though no body can move itself, yet a perfect co- 
gitative and thinking being might be the beginning 
ofall, and the first cause of motion ; the Atheists 
will endeavour to evince the contrary, in this man-_ 
ner. No man can conceive how any cogitation, 
which was not before, should rise-up at any time, 
but that there was some cause for it, without the 
thinker. For else there can be no reason given, 
why this thought rather than that, and at this time 
rather than another, should start up. Wherefore 
this is universally true of all motion and action 
‘whatsoever, as it was rightly urged by the Stoics, 
that there can be no kivnote avairtoc, nO Motion with- 
out a cause, l.e. no motion, which has not some 
cause without the subject of it, or, as the same 
thing is expressed by a modern writer, ‘‘ Nothing 
_ taketh beginning from itself, but from the action of 

- some other immediate agent without it.” Where-- 
fore, no thinking being could be a first cause, any 
more than an automaton or machine could. To 
this purpose, it is further argued, that these two 
notions, the one of a knowing understanding be- 
ing, the other of a perfectly happy being, are con- 
tradictious,. because all knowledge essentially im- 
plies dependance upon something else, as its 
cause; “‘ scientia et intellectus pend est poten- 
tie ab alio dependentis, id quod non ést beatissi- 
mum.” They conclude, that cogitation, and all 


TO A FIRST CAUSE OR MOVER. 211 


action whatsoever, is really nothing else but local ~ 
motion, which is essentially heterokinesy, that 
which can never rise of itself, but is caused by 
some other agent without its subject. 

xv. In the eleventh place, the Democritic Athe- 
ists reason thus: if the world were made by any 
antecedent mind or understanding, that is, by a 
Deity ; then there must needs be an idea, platform, 
and exemplar of the whole world before. it was 
made; and consequently actual knowledge, both 
‘in order of time and nature, before things. But 
_ all knowledge is the information of the things 
themselves knewn; all conception of the mind is 
a passion from the things conceived, and their ac- 
tivity upon it; and is therefore junior to them. 
Wherefore, the world and things were before know- 
ledge and the conception of any mind, and no 
knowledge, mind, or Deity before the world as its 
cause. This argument is thus proposed by the 
Atheistic poet : 


_ ‘Exempliim porro gignundis rebus et ipsa 
Notities hominum Di vis unde insita primum, 
Quid vellent facere, ut scirent, animoque viderent? 
Quove modo est unquam vis cognita principiorum, | 
Quidnam inter sese permutato ordine possent, 
Si non ipsa dedit specimen natura creandi? 


How could the supposed Deity have a pattern or 
platform in his mind, to frame the world by, and 
whence should he receive it? How could he have 
any knowledge of men before they were made, as 
also what himself should will to do, when there 
was nothing? How could he understand the force 
and possibility of the principles, what they would 


s 


* Lucret. lib. y. yer. 182. 


212 THE ATHEISTS CONTEND 


produce when variously combined together, be- 
fore nature aud things themselves, by EresHng, 
had givena specimen! = : 

xvi. A twelfth argumeniation of the Democri- 
tic and Epicurean Atheists against a Deity is to 
this purpose: that things could not be made bya 
Deity, that is supposed to be a being every way 
perfect, because they are so faulty and soil] made: 
the argument is thus propounded by Lucretius :* 


~ 


Quod si jam rerum ignorem primordia quze sint, 
- Hoc tamen ex ipsis coeli rationibus ausim 
Confirmare, aliisque ex rebus reddere multis, 
Nequaquam nobis divinitus esse paratam 
Naturam rerum, tanta stat praedita culpa. 

This argument, a‘ celt rationibus, from astro- 
nomy, or the constitution of the heavens, is this: 
* that the mundane sphere is so framed, in respect 
of the disposition of the equator and ecliptic, as 
renders the greatest part of the earth uninhabita- 
bleto men and most other animals; partly by that 
excess of heat in the torrid zone (containing all be- 
tween the tropics), and partly from the extremity 
of cold in both the frigid zones, towards either 
pole. Again, whereas the Stoical Theists con- 
temporary with Epicurus concluded, that the 
whole world was made by a Deity, only for the 
sake of men, 


ite — Horum omnia causa 


Constituisse | Deum fingunt- 





it is urged on the contrary, that a great part of the 
habitable earth is taken up by seas, lakes, and 


* Lib. il. ver. 177. et lib. Vv. ver. 196, 

> Vid. Lucret. lib. v. ver. 205, 206. et Cicer. in Sompia Scipionis 
cap. vi. p. 3981. tom. xi. oper. 

* Lucret, lib, ii. ver. 174, 175, 


THAT. THE WORLD IS ILL MADE. 213 


Yocks, barren heaths and sands, and thereby made 
useless for mankind ; and.that the remainder of it 
yields no fruit. to them, unless expunged by ob- . 
-stinate labour; after all which, men are often dis- 
appointed of the fruits of those labours by unsea- 
sonable weather, storms, and tempests. Again, 
that nature has not only produced many noxious 
and poisongus herbs, but also destructive and de- | 
-vouring animals, whose strength surpasseth that 
of men’s ; and that the condition of mankind 1s so 
much inferior to that of brutes, that nature seems 
to have been but a step-mother to the former, 
whilst she hath been an indulgent mother to the 
latter. And to this purpose, the manner of men’s 
coming into the world is thus aggravated by the 
poet : 


2 

4 Tum porro puer, ut szevis projectus ab undis 
Navita, nudus humi jacet, infans, indigus omni 
Vitai auxilio, cum primum in luminis oras 
Nixibus ex alvo matris natura profudit: | 
Vagituque locum lugubri complet, ut zequum ’st, 
Quoi tantum in vita restet transire malorum, 


But on the contrary, the comparative advantages 
of brutes and their privileges, which they have 
above men, are described after this es = 


Atvariz crescunt pecudes, armenta, feraeque: 
Nec crepitacula eis opu’ sunt nec quoiquam adhibenda: rst 
Almee nutricis blanda atque infracta loquela ; 
_ Nec varias queerunt vestes pro tempore coeli. 
Denique non armis opus est, non moenibus altis, 
 Queis sua tatentur, quando omnibus omnia large 
Tellus ipsa parit, naturaque Deedala rerum. 


And lastly, the topic of evils in general, is in-. 
_ sisted upon by them, not those which are called 


* Id. lib. v. ver. 223,  b Jd; ibid. 
VOL, I. . P | 


O14 THE ATHEISTS OBJECTION 


culpa, evils of fault (for that is a thing which the 
Democritic. Atheists utterly explode 1 in the genu- 
ine sense of it), but the evils of pain and trouble 3. 
-which they dispute concerning, after this man- 
ner, *The supposed Deity and maker-of the 
world was either willing to abolish all evils, but 
not able; or he was able, but not willing; or 
thirdly, he was neither willing nor able ;. or else 
Jastly, he was both able and willing. This latter 
is the only thing that answers fully to the notion 
of a God. Now that the supposed. creator of all 
things was‘not thus both ‘able and willing to abo-— 
lish all evils, is plain, because then there would 
have been no evils at all left. Wherefore, since 
there is. such a deluge of evils overflowing all, it - 
must needs be, that either he was willing and not 
able to remove them, and then he was impotent ; 
or else he was able and not willing, and then he 
was envious; or lastly, he was neither able nor 
; willing, and - then he was both impotent and en- 
vious. 

XVII. In the twelfth place, the Atheists further 
dispute in this manner. If the world were made 
by any Deity, then it would be governed bya 
providence ; and if there were any providence, it 
must appear in human affairs. But here it is 
plain, that all is Tohu and Bohu, chaos and con- 
fusion ; things happening alike to all, to the wise 
and foolish, religious and impious, virtuous and 

‘vicious. (For these names the Atheist cannot 
choose but make use of, though, by taking away 
natural morality, they really destroy the things.) 
- From whence it is concluded, that alll things float 
up and down, as they are agitated and driven by 


a Vide Lactat, de Ira Dei, cap. xiii. p. 942, edit, Walchii. 


TO A PROVIDENCE: = 215 
the tumbling billows of careless fortuneand chance. 
The impieties of Dionysius,* his scoffing abuses of 
religion, and whatsoever was then sacred, or wor- 
shipped under the notion of a God, were most no- 
torious; and yet it is observed, that he fared neyer 
a jot the worse for it. ‘“ Hunc nec Olympius Ju- 
piter fulmine percussit, nec sculapius misero ° 
diuturnoque morbo tabescentem interemit; verum 
in suo lectulo mortuus, in Tympanidis rogum il- 
latus est, eamque potestatem, quam ipse per sce- 
lus nactus erat, quasi justam et legitimam, here- 
ditatis loco tradidit:” Neither did Jupiter Olym- 
-pius strike him with a thunderbolt, nor A®scu- 
lapius inflict any languishing disease upon him ; 
but he died in his bed, and was honourably in- 
terred, and that power, which he had wickedly ac-_ 
quired, he transmitted, as a just and lawful inhe- 
ritance, to his posterity—And Diogenes the Cy- 
nic, though much a Theist, could not but acknow- 
ledge, that Harpalus, a famous robber or pirate 
in those times, who, committing many villanous 

actions, notwithstanding lived prosperously, did 
thereby “‘ Testimonium dicere contra deos,” bear 
_ testimony against the gods.-—Though it has been 
objected by the Theists, and thought to be a’ 
strong argument for providence, that there were — 
so many tables hung up in temples, the monu- 
' ments of such as, having prayed to the gods in 
storms and tempests, had escaped shipwreck ; 
"yet, as Diagoras observed, “ Nusquam picti sunt, 
qui naufragium fecerunt,” there are no tables ex- 
‘tant of those of them who were shipwrecked..— 
Wherefore, it was not considered by these Theists, 


Cicer. de Nat. Deor. lib. iii, cap. xxxv. p. 3101, 
b Td. ib. cap. xxxiv. p: 3099, . © Jhid. cap. xxxviil, p. 3104, 
P2 : 


916 THE ATHEISTS’ OBJECTION 


how many of them that prayed as well to the gods, 
did notwithstanding suffer shi pwreck ; as also how 
many of those, which never made any devotional 
addresses at all to any Deity, escaped equal dan- 
gers of storms and tempests. 

Moreover, it is consentaneous to the opinion of 
a God, tothink, that thunder, rattling in the clouds 
with thunderbolts, should be the immediate: sig- 
nifications of his wrath and displeasure : whereas 
it is plain that these are flung at random, and that 
the fury of them often lights upon the innocent, 
whilst the notoriously guilty escape untouched ; 
and therefore we understand not, how this can be 
answered by any Theists. 


4 Cor, quibus incautum scelus aversabile cumque est, 
Non faciunt, icti flammas ut fulguris halent, 
Pectore perfixo ; documen mortalibus acre ? 

Et potius null sibi turpis conscius reii, 
. Volvitur in flammis innoxius, inque peditur, 
~ Turbine coelesti subito correptus, étigni? — 


- Now the force of this argument appears to be 
very powerful, because it hath not only staggered | 
‘and confounded Theists in all ages, but also hath 
effectually transformed many of them into A the- 
‘ists. For Diagoras Melius’ himself was once a 
stiperstitious | religionist, insomuch that, being a 
dithyrambic poet, he began one of” his poems 
with these words, Kara ee Katty yay nhvra TeXEiral, 
all things are done by God and fortune. —But, 
being aafaved afterwards by a perjured person, 
_ that “suffered no evil nor disaster thereupon, he 
therefore took up this: contrary persuasion, that 
there was no Deity. And there ‘have been innu- 


 Lucret. lib. vi. ‘ver. 389, &c. 
* Vide Sext: Lnypiric. lib. ix. adver. Mathemat, sec. lili. p. 561, 


TO A PROVIDENTIAL DEITY. 217 


merable others, who have been so far. wrought 
upon. by this consideration, as if not absolutely 
to disclaim. and discard a Deity, yet utterly to, 
| deny providence, and all care of human affairs by 
any invisible powers.. Amongst whom the poet 
was one, who thus expressed his Sense; 


2 Sed cum res hominum tanta caligine volvi 
Aspicerem, leetosque diu florere nocentes, 
Vexarique pios, rursus labefacta cadebat 
Relligio, causzeque viam non sponte sequebar 
Alterius, vacuo qué currere semina motu — 
Affirmat, magnumque novas per inane figuras, 
Fortuna, non arte regi; que numina sensu 
Ambiguo vel nulla putat, vel nescia nostri. 


xviis. A thirteenth argumentation of the De. 
‘mocritic and Epicurean Atheists, is to this pur- 
pose: that whereas the Deity is supposed to be 
such a being, as both knaws all that is done every 
where in the most distant places of the world at 
once, and doth himself immediately order all 
things; this is, first, impossible for any one being 
thus to animadvert and order all things in the 
whole universe ; : 


, ® Quis regere immensi summam, quis habere profundi 
Jndu manu validas potis est moderanter habenas? 
Quis pariter céelos omneis convertere? et omneis 
‘ Ignibus ztheriis terras suffire feraceis? 
Omnibus inque locis esse omni tempore presto ; 
Nubibus ut tenebras faciat, coelique serena | 
- Concutiat sonitu? &c. 


And, secondly: if it were ‘supposed to be possi- 
ble,. yet such infinite negotiosity would-be abso- 
Jutely inconsistent with a happy state; nor could 


a Claudian. in Rufinum, lib. i. ver. 12, &e. 
* Lucret. lib. ii. ver. 1094, &c. 


215 SEVERAL BOLD QUERIES 


such a Deity ever have any. quiet enjoyment of 
himself, being perpetually filled with tumult and 
hurliburly : 4ou ovppevover mporymaretaL kat ppourivec 
Kal opyal Kal xagurec pakagiorytt, GXN’ ‘dcbevela cat PoBw 
Kal Tm pogoEn cet twv wAnolov tavta yivera” Distraction 
of business and solicitous cares, displeasures and 
favours, do not at all agree with happiness, but 
they proceed from imbecility, indigency, and fear: 
—To paxagiov Ka. apbaprov ours avro mpayuara Zyet, ovrE. 
adr TAVELEL, Wore oUTE opyaic OUTE yapuat ouvéyeTat, év 
aofeveia yap may TO TOLOUTOU" That which is happy 
and incorruptible, would neither have itself any 
business to do, nor create any to others; it would 
nejther have displeasure nor favour towards any 
other persons, to engage it in action; all this pro- 
ceeding from indigency.—That is, favour and. be- 
nevolence, as well as anger and displeasure, arise 
only from imbecility. "That which is perfectly 
happy; and wanteth nothing, 6dov dv. rept tnv avvo0- 
yny re Wiac evdatmwviac, being wholly possessed 
and taken up in the enjoyment of its own happi- 
ness— would be regardless of the concernments of 
any others ; and mind nothing besides itself, either 
to do it good or harm. Wherefore, this curzosus 
et plenus negotit deus, this busy, restless, and 
| pragmatical Deity, that must needs intermeddle 
and have to do with every thing in the whole | 
world, is a contradictious notion, since it cannot 
but be the most unhappy of all things, 

X1Ix. In the next place, the Atheists. dispute 
farther ‘by propounding several bold queries, 


: 2 Epicur, in Epist. ad Herodotum apud Diog, Laert, lib, xX. seem, 
97. p. 634. of 


b Vide Diog. Laert. lib. x. sem. 139. 661. 
* Velleius apud Cicer. de Natur. Deor. lib, i. Cap. XX. p 214. 


OF THE ATHEISTS. 219 
which they conceive unanswerable, after this 
manner. If the world were made by a Deity, 
why was it not made by him sooner? or, since tt 
was so long unmade, why did he make it at, 
alle Car mundi edificator repente extiterit, 
innumerabilia ante secula dormierit >” How came 
this builder and architect of the world to start 
up upon a sudden, after he had slept for infinite 
ages—and bethink himself of making a world? 
For, certainly, if he had been awake all that. 
while, he would either have made it sooner, or 
not at all; because, there was either something 
wanting to his happiness before, or nothing: if | 
there had been any thing wanting before, then 
- the world could not have been so long unmade ; 
but, if he were completely happy in himself with- 
out it, then undev édAslrwy Kevaic gueddev eMLyErpely ™pa- 
feo, wanting nothing, he vainly went about to 
make superfluous things. —All desire of change 
and novelty argues a fastidious satiety, proceed. 
ing from defect and indigency : 


b Quidve novi potuit tanto post, ante quietos 
Julicere, ut cuperent vitam muatare priorem? 
Nam gaudere novis rebus debere videtur 
Quoi veteres obsunt; sed quoi nil accidit egri 
Tempore in anteacto, eum pulchre degeret zevum, 
Quid potuit novitatis amorem accendere tali? 


' Did this Deity, therefore, light up the stars, asso — 
many lamps or torches, in that vast abyss of infi- | 
‘nite darkness, that himself might thereby have | 
a more comfortable and cheerful habitation?’ Why 
would he then content himself from eternity, to 
dwell in sucha melancholic, horn, and forlorn 
dungeon? 

2 Id. ibid. lib. i, cap. ix. p. 2891. =» Luceet, lib, ¥. ver. 169, &e. 


220 SEVERAL BOLD QUERIES 


An, credo, in tenebris vita, et mocrore jacebat, 
Donec diluxit rerum ponies: origo? 


Was company and that. ve of things, by: 
which heaven and earth are distinguished, desira- 
ble to him? Why then would he continue solitary 
so long, wanting the pleastire of such a specta- 
cle? Did he make the world and men in it to 
this end, that himself might be worshipped and 
adored, feared and honoured by them? But what . 
could he be the better for that, who was suffi- 
ciently happy alone in hiniself before? Or did he 
do it for the are of men, to gratify and oblige 
them: | , 


b At quid a iaimaniiue atque beatis 
Gratia nostra queat Jargirier emolumenti, 
Ut nostra quicquam causa gerere aggrediantur? 


Again, if this were.done for the sake of men, 
then it must be‘either for wise men or for fools: 
if for wise. men only, then all that pains was 
taken but for a very few; but if for fools, what 
reason could there be, why the Deity should seek 
to deserve so well-at- their hands? Besides this, 
what hurt ‘would it have been to any of us (whe- 
ther wise or foolish) never to have been made? 


c ¢ Quidve mali fuerat nobis non esse creatis ? 
Natus enim debet quicunque est, velle mancre 
’ In vita, donec retinebit blanda voluptas : 
Qui nunquam vero vite gustavit amorem, 
Nec oe. in numero, quid obest non esse creatum ? 


 Lastly,4 if this Deity must nééds 20 about mo- 
liminously to make a EW On Ge goyarou oa Kal TéKtO- 


a id. ibid. ver. 175, 176. | b Id. ibid. ver. 166. 
< Id. ibid. ver. 177, &e. 
' * Vide Ciceron. de Nat. Deor. lib, i. cap, viii; p. 2890. 


OF THE ATHEISTS... . . 221 


voc, like .an. artificer -and - carpenter, what tools 
and instruments could he have to work withal? 
what ministers and subservient opificers ?. what 
engines and machines for the rearing up of so 
Rive a fabric? How could he make “the niatter 
to understand his meaning, and obey his beck? 
how could he move it, and turn it up and down? 
for if incorporeal, he could neither touch nor be 
touched, but would run through aJl things, with- 
out fastening upon any thing; but if corporeal, 
then. the same thing was both materials and archi-- 
tect, both timber and carpenter, and the stones 
must hew themselves, and bring themselves toge- 
ther, with discretion, into a structure. 

xx. In the last place, the Atheists argue from 
interest (which proves many times the most effec- 
tual of all arguments) against a Deity ; endea- 
vouring to persuade, that it is, first, the interest of 
private persons, and of all mankind in general; 
and, secondly, the particular interest of civil sove- 
reigns, and commonwealths, that. there should 
neither be a God, nor the belief of any-such thing 
entertained by the minds of men; that is, no reli- 
gion. First, they say, therefore, that it is, the in- 
terest of mankind in general; because, so long as 
men are persuaded, that there is an understand- 
_ Ing being infinitely powerful, having no law but 
his own will (because he has no superior), that 
may do whatever he pleases at any time to them, 
they can never securely enjoy themselves or any 
thing, nor be ever free from disquieting fear. and 
solicitude. What the poets fable’ of Tantalus in 
hell, being always in fear of a huge stone hanging 
over his head, and ready every moment to tumble 
down upon him, is nothing to that true fear, w lich: 


4 


222 ATHEISTS DISPUTE, FROM INTEREST 


men have of a Deity, and religion, here in this 
life, which, indeed, was the very thing mytholo- 
gized in it: 

2 Nec miser impendens magnum timet aere saxum 

Tantalus, (ut fama est) cassa formidine torpens: 

Sed magis in vita, divum metus urget inanis 

Mortales, casumque timent, quemcumque ferat fors, 
For, besides men’s insecurity from all manner of 
present evils, upon the supposition of a God, the 
immortality of souls ean hardly be kept out, but 
it will crowd in after it; and then the fear of eter- 
nal punishments after death will unaveidably fol- 
low thereupon, perpetually embittermg all the 
solaces of life, and never suffering men to have the 
least sincere enjoyment. 


b 





Si certum finem esse viderent 
Erumnaram homines, aliquo ratione vaterent 
Religionibus, atque minis obsistere vatum. 
Nunc ratio nulla est restandi, nulla facultas : 
Asternas qnuoniam poenas in morte timendum, 
Ignoratur enim, que sit natura animal, 

’ Nata sit, an contra nascentibus insinuetur; 

Et simul intereat nobiscum morte dirempta, 
An tencbras Orci visat vastasque lacunas, 


Wherefore it is plain, that they who first intro- 
duced the belief of a Deity and religion, whatever 
they might aim at in it, deserved very ill of all 
mankind, because they did thereby infinitely de- 
base and depress men’s spirits under a servile fear: 


*. Efficiunt animos humiles, formidine divum, 
Depressosque premunt ad terram: 


As also cause the greatest griefs and calamities, 
that now disturb human life, 


-* 


* Lucret, lib. iii, ver.993, > Td. lib. i. ver. 108, &e. 
| ¢ Id. hb. vi. ver. 51, 


Sd 


AGAINST A DEITY. 223 
4 Quantos tum gemitus ipsi sibi, quantoque nobis 
Volnera, quas lachrymas peperere minoribw’ nostris? 
There can be no comfortable and happy living, 
without banishing from our mind the belief of 


these two things, of a Deity, and the soul’sim- 
mortality ; 


> Et metus ille foras praeceps Achcruntis agendus 
Funditus, humanam qui vitam turbat ab imo, 
Omnia suffundens mortis nigrore, neque ullam _ 
Esse voluptatem liquidam puramque relinquit. 


It was, therefore, a noble and heroical exploit 
of Democritus and Epicurus, those two good- 
natured men, who, seeing the world thus oppress- 
ed under the grievous yoke of religion, the fear 
of a Deity, and punishment after death, and 
taking pity of this sad condition of mankind, did 
manfully encounter that affrightful spectre, or 
empusa, of a providential Deity; and, by clear 
philosophic reasons, chase it away, and banish it 
quite out of the world; laying down such princi- 
ples, as would solve all the phenomena of nature 
) mou a God: 


¢ Quz bene cognita si tencas,; natura detar: 
Libera continuo, dominis privata superbis, 
Ipsa sua per se sponte omnia dis agere expers. 


So that Lucretius does not, without just cause, 

erect a triumphal arch or monument to Epicurus, — 

for this conquest or victory of bis obtained over 

the Deity and religion, in this manner : 
¢ Humana ante oculos foede quum vita jaccret 
In terris, oppressa gravi sub relligione, 


Que caput a coeli regiunibus ostendebat, 
Honrribili super aspectu mortalibus instans; - 


# Id, lib, v. ver. 1195. > Id. Jib. iii, vor. 37. 
¢ Jd. lib. ii, ver. 1089: @ Id. lib. i, ver. 63. 


~ 


224 ATHEISTS, PRETEND THAT THEISM Is 


Primum Graius homo mortales tendere contra 
Est oculos ausus, primusque obsistere contra ; 
Quem nec fama denm nec fulmina, nec minitanti 
Murmure compres coelum, &c. 


| (XXI. That it is also the interest of civil sove-. 
reigns and of all commonwealths, that there 
should neither be Deity nor religion, the Demo- 
critic Atheists would persuade m this manner: 
A body politic or commonwealth is made up of 
. parts, that are all naturally dissociated from one 

another, -by reason of that principle of private 
self-love, who therefore can be no otherwise held 
together than by fear. Now, if there be any 
greater fear than the fear of the leviathan, and 
Bil representative, the whole structure and ma- 
chine of this great coloss must needs fall a-pieces 
and tumble down. The civil sovereign reigns 
only in fear; wherefore, unless his fear be the 
king and sovereign of all fears, his empire and 
dominion ceases. But, as the rod of Moses de- 
voured the rods of the magicians, so certainly 
will the fear of an omnipotent Deity, that can’ 
punish with eternal torments after death, quite 
swallow up and devour that comparatively petty 
fear of civil sovereigns, and consequently destroy 
the being of commonwealths, which have no foun- 
dation in nature, but are mere artificial things, 
made by the enchantment and magical art of 
policy. Wherefore, it is well observed by a mo- 
dern writer, That men ought not to suffer them- 
selves to be abused by the “doctrine of separated 
‘ essences and incorporeal substances (such as 
God and the soul), built upon the vain philosophy 
of Aristotle, that would fright men from obeying 
the laws of their country, with empty names (as 


INCONSISTENT WITH CIVIL POWER. 225 


of hell, damnation, fire, and brimstone), as men 
fright birds from thé corn with an empty hat, dou- 
blet, and acrooked stick. And again: if the fear 
of spirits (the chief of which is the Deity) were 
taken away, men would be much more fitted than 
they are for civil obedience. © | 

Moreover, the power of civil sovereigns is per- 
- fectlyindivisible ; it is either all or nothing; it must 
be absolute and infinite, or else it is none at all. 
Now it cannot be so, if there be any other power 
equal to it, to share with it, much less if there be 
any superior (as that of the Deity) to check it and 
control it. Wherefore, the Deity must of neces- 
sity be removed and displaced, to make room for 
the Leviathan to spread itself in. 

Lastly, it is perfectly inconsistent with the na- 
tire of a body politic, that there should be any 
private judgment of good or evil, lawful or unlaw- 
ful, just or unjust allowed. But conscience (which 
Theism and religion introduces) is private judg- 
ment concerning good and evil; and therefore the 
‘allowance of it, is contradictious to civil sovereign- 
ty and a commonwealth. There ought to be no 
other conscience (in a kingdom or commonwealth) 
besides the law of the country; the allowance of | 
private conscience being, tpso facto, a dissolution 
of the bod y politic, and areturn to the state of na- 
‘ture. Upon-all theseaccounts it must needs be 
acknowledged, that those philosophers, who un- 
dermine atid weaken Theism and religion,’ do 
highly deserve. of all civil SOvETEIERS and comn- 
7 nionwealths. 

xx11; Now from all the premised considerations, 
the Democritics confidently conclude against a 
_ Deity; that the system and compages of the ani- 


226 THE ATHEISTS CONCLUSION, THAT 


verse had not its original from any understanding 
nature; but that mind and understanding itself, 
as well as all things else in the world, sprung up 
from senseless nature and chance, or from the un- 
guided and undirected motion of matter. Which 
is therefore called by the name of nature, because 
whatsoever moves is moved by nature and neces- 
sity ; and the mutual occursions and rencounters 
of atoms, their plage, their strokes and dashings 
against one another, their reflections and repercus- 
sions, their cohesions, implexions, and entangle- 

ments, as also their scattered dispersions and 
divulsions, are all natural and necessary; but it 
is called also by the name of chance and fortune, 
because it is all unguided by any mind, counsel, 
or design. 

Wherefore: infinite atoms of different sizes and 
figures, devoid of all life and sense, moving fortu- 
itously from eternity in infinite space, and making 
successively several encounters, and consequently | 
various implexions and entanglements with one 
another, produced first a confused chaos of these 
omnifarious particles, jumbling together with infi- 
nite variety of motions, which afterward, by the 
tugging of their different and contrary forces, | 
whereby they all hindered and abated each other, 
came, as it were, by joint conspiracy, to be conglo- 
merated into a vortex or vortexes; where, after 
many convolusions and evolutions, molitions and 
essays (in which all manner of -tricks ‘were tried, 
and all forms imaginable experimented), they 
chanced, in length of time, here to settle, into this. 
form and system of things, which now is, of earth, 
water, air, and fire; sun, moon, and stars; plants, 
animals, and men; so that senseless atoms, fortuit- 


ALL SPRUNG FROM NATURE AND CHANCE. 227 


ously moved, and material chaos, were the first 
original of all things. 

This account of the cosmopwid, and first origi- 
nal of the mundane system, is represented by ae 
cretius* according’ to the mind of Epicurus, though 
without any mention of those vortices, which were 
yet an essential part of the old Democritic hypo- 
thesis. | 


Sed quibus ille modis conjectus materiai 

Fundarit coelum, ac terram, pontique profunda, 
Solis, lunai cursus, ex ordine ponam. 

Nam certe neque consilio primordia rerum 

Ordine se quaque atque sagaci mente locarunt: 
Nec, quos quzeque darent motus, pepigere profecto. 
Sed quia multa modis mullis primordia rerum, 

Ex infinito jam tempore percita plagis, 
Ponderibusque suis consuerunt concita ferri, 
Omni-modisque coive, atque omnia pertentare, 

7 Quzcunque inter se possent congressa creare: 
Propterea fit, uti magnum volgata per evuam, 
Omnigenos coetus, et motus expcriundo, 

Tandem ca conveniant, que ut convencre, repente 
Magnarum rerum fiant exordia seepe, 
Terrai, maris, et coeli, generisque animantum, 


But because some seem to think that Epicurus 
' was the first founder and inventor of this doctrine, 
we shall here observe, that this same Atheistic 
‘hypothesis was long before described by Plato, 
when E:jpicurus was as yet unborn; and therefore 
doubtless according to the doctrine of Leucippus, 
Democritus, and Protagoras; though that philo- 
sopher, in a kind of disdain (as it seems) refused 
to mention either of their names: up Kal B8wp Kat 
yav Kat aépa, puoe Tavra tivat Kat TUXT pact” Tex ée 
ovdev TOUTWY. Kal Ta pera TravTa au owpara, yne TE Kat 


nAtov Kal oeAnvne, aorpwv TE TEDL.’ Sid ToUTWY yeyovsvat, 


@ Lib. v. ver. 417, &. —- -» Plato, de Legibus, lib. x. p. 666. oper. 


998. ‘THE ATHEISTS’ CONCLUSION, &c: . * 


TavTeAwe OvTwY abu yov. Twn Oe. pepopueva Tm ene Suva~ 
PEWS éxaoTa EKAOTWV, n Evarénroxer, apmorrovra olkEiwe 
Tees &ec. TaUTN Kal Kata ravra ovTw ee TOV TE 
ovpavoy éXov Kat wavrTa OTOca Kar . oupavoy” ‘Kat Lwa aw 
Kal pura Evuravra, WOWY Taw EK. TOUTWY a Ene, ov 
Sia vouv (pactv) oves dla Tiva Ocov, ovde dia TEYUNY, adda, 
6 AEyomev, ovaet Kat. TUYN, Téyunv oe VoTEpOV EK TOUTWY 
vorégav yevopevny, &c. The Atheists say, that fire, 
_ water, air, and earth (1. e. the four elements) were 

all made by nature and chance; and none of them 
by art or mind (that is, they were made by the for- 
tuitous motion of atoms, and not by any Deity), 
and that those other bodies, of the terrestrial 
globe, of the sun, the moon, and the stars (which 
by all, except these Atheists, were, in those times, 
generally supposed to be animated, and a kind of 
inferior Deities), were afterwards made out of the 
aforesaid elements, being altogether inanimate. 
For they being moved fortuitously, or’as it hap- 
pened, and so making various commixtures toge- 
ther, did, by that meéans, at length produce the 
whole heavens and all things in them, as likewise 
plants and animals here upon earth; all which 
were not made by mind, nor by art, nor by any 
God ; but, as wesaid before, by natureand chance; 
art, and mind itself, rising up afterwards from the 
same senseless principles i In animals. 


CHAPTER III. 


An introduction to the confutation of the Atheistic grounds, in which 
is contained a particular account of all the several forms of Atheism. 
—1. That the grounds of the Hylozoic Atheism could not be in- 

_ sisted on in the former chapter, together with those of the Atomic, 
they being’ directly contrary each to other; with a further account 
‘of this Hylozoic Atheism.—2. A suggestion, by way of caution, 
for the preventing of all mistakes, that every Hylozoist must not 
therefore be condemned for an Atheist, or a mere counterfeit his- 
trionical Theist.—3. That, nevertheless, such Hylozoists as are also 
Corporealists, can by no means be excused from the imputation of 
Atheism, for two reasons,—4. That Strato Lampsacenus, common- 
ly called Physicus, seems to have been the first assertor of the 
Hylozoic Atheism, he holding no other God but the life of nature 
in matter.—5, Further proved, that Strato was an Atheist, and that 
of a different form from Democritus, ‘he attributing an energetic 
nature, but without sense and animality, to all matter—6. That. 
Strato, not deriving all things from a mere fortuitous principle, as the | 
Democritic Atheists did, nor yet acknowledging any one plastic 
nature to preside over the whole, but deducing the original of things 
from a mixture of chance and plastic nature both together in the 

_ several parts of mutter, must therefore needs be an Hylozoic Atheist. 
—7., That the famous Hippocrates was neither an Hylozoic nor De- 
mocritic Atheist, but rather an Heraclitic corporeal Theist.—8. 
That Plato took no notice of the Hylozoic Atheism, nor of any other 
than what derives the original of all things from a mere fortuitous 

‘nature; and, therefore, either the Democritical or the Anaximan- 
drian Atheism, which latter will be next declared.—9. That it is 
hardly imaginable, there should have been no philosophic Atheists 
in the world before Democritus and Leucippus, there being in all 
ages, as Plaio observes, some or other sick of the Atheistic disease. 
That Aristotle affirms many of the first philosophers to have assign- 
ed only a material cause of the mundane system, without eithcr 
efficient or intending cause; they supposing matter to be the only 
substance, and all things else nothing but the passions and accidents — 

' of it, generable and corruptible.—10. That the doctrine of these 
Materialists will be more fully understoodfrom the exceptions which 
Aristotle makes against them: his first exception, that they assign- 
ed no cause of motion, but introduced it into the world unaccount- 
ably.—11. Aristotle’s second exception, that these Materialists did 

assign no cause To eb xai xara, of well and fit, and give no account 


VOL. —  Q 


230 

of the orderly regularity of things. That Anaxagoras was the first 
Ionic philosopher who made mind and good a principle of the uni- 
verse.—12. Concluded, that Aristotle’s Materialists were downright 
~ Atheists, not merely because they held all substance to be body, 
since Heraclitus and Zeno did the like, and yet are not therefore 
accounted A theists (they supposing their fiery matter to be originally 
intellectual, and the whole world to be an animal); but because 
these made stupid matter, devoid of all understanding and life, to 
be the only principle.—-13. As also, because they supposed every 
. thing besides the substance of matter, life and understanding, and 
all particular beings, to be generable and corruptible, and, conse- 
quently, that there could be no other God, than such as was native 
and-mortal.. That those ancient Theologers, who were Theogo- 
nists, and generated all the gods out of night and chaos, were only 
verbal Theists, but real Atheists; senseless matter being to them 
the highest Numen.—14. The great difference observed betwixt 
Aristotle’s Atheistical Materialists and the Italic philosophers, the 
former determining all things, besides the substance of matter, to 
be made or generated, the latter, that no rcal entity was either ge- 
nerated or corrupted ; thereupon both destroying qualities and forms 
of body, and asserting the ingencrability and incorporeity of souls. 
—15, How Aristotle’s Atheistic Materialists endeavoured to baffle 
and elude that axiom of the Italic philosophers, that nothing can 
come from nothing nor go to nothing; and that Anaxagoras was the 
first amongst the Ionics, who yielded so far to that principle, as from 
thence to assert incorporeal substance, and the pre-existence of qua- 
ities and forms in similar atoms, forasmuch as he conceived them to 
be things really distinct from the substance of matter.—16. The % 
error of some writers, who, because Aristotle affirms, that the an-— 
eient philosophers did generally conclude the world to have’ been 
made, from thence infer, that they were all Theists, and that Aris- 
totle contradicts himself in representing many of them as Atheists. 
That the ancient Atheists did generally xocorasivy, assert the world 
to. have been made, or have hada beginning; as also some Theists 
did maintain its eternity, but in a way of dependency upon the Deity, | 
That we ought here to distinguish betwixt the system of the world, 

and the substance of the matter, all Atheists asserting the matter to 
' Jhave been, not only eternal, but also such independently upon any 
other being.—17. That Plato and others concluded this Materialism 
or Hylopathian Atheism, to have been at least as-old as Homer, 
who made the ocean (or fluid matter) the ‘father of all the aes 
And that this was indeed the ancientest of all Atheisms, which, yver-— 
bally acknowledging gods, yet derived the original of them all from 
night and chaos, The description of this Atheistic hypothesis in 
Anistophanes, that night and chaos first laid an egg, out of which 
_ Sprung forth love, which afterwards mingling with chaos, begat hea- 

ven and earth, animals, and all the gods,—18. That, notwithstand- 


231 


ing this, in Aristotle’s judgment, Parmenides, Hesiod, and others, 
who made love, in like manner, senior to all the gods, were ‘to be 
exempted.out of the number of Atheists; they understanding this 
Jove to be an active principle, or cause of motion in the universe, 
which therefore could not rise from an egg .of the night, nor be the 
offspring of chaos, but must be something in order of nature before 
matter. Simmias Rhodius’s Wings, a poem in honour of this hea- 
venly love. ‘This not that love which was the offspring of Penia and 
Porus in Plato. In what rectified sense it may pass for true theo- 
logy, that love is the supreme Deity and original of all-things.—19. . 
That though Democritus and Leucippus be elsewhere taxed by 
Aristotle for this very thing, that they. assigned only a material cause 
of the universe; yet they were not the persons intended by him in 
' the fore-cited accusation, but certain ancienter philosophers, who 
also were not Atomists, but Hylopathians.—20. That Aristotle’s 
Atheistic Materialists were all the first Tonic philosophers before 
Anaxagoras, Thales being the head of them. But that Thales is 
acquitted from this imputation of Athcism by several good authors 
(with an account how he came to be thus differently represented); 
_ and, therefore, that his next successor, Anaximander, is rather to be 
accounted the prince of this Atheistic philosophy.—21. A passage 
out of Aristotle objected, which, at first sight, seems to make 
Anaximander a Divine philosopher, and therefore hath led both mo- 
dern and ancient writers into that mistake. That this place well 
considered proves the contrary, that Anaximander was the chief of 
the old Atheistic philosophers.—22, That it is no wonder, if Anax- 
imander called senseless matter the 72 6c, or God, since to all Athe- 
ists that must needs be the highest Numen; also how this is said to 
be immortal, and to govern all; with the concurrent judgment of 
the Greek scholiasts upon this place.—23. A further account of the 
Anaximandrian philosophy, manifesting it to have been purely Athe- 
istical.—24. What ill judges the vulgar have been of Theists and 
Atheists; as also that learned men have commonly supposed fewer 
Atheists than indeed there were. Anaximander and Democritus 
Atheists both alike, though philosophizing different ways. ‘That 
some passages in Plato respect the Anaximandrian form of Atheism, 
rather than the Democritical.—25. Why Democritus and Leucippus 
new modelled Atheism into the Atomic form.—26. That besides the 
three forms of Atheism already mentioned, we sometimes meet with 
a fourth, which supposes the universe, though not to be an animal, 
yet a kind of plant or vegetable, having one plastic nature in it, de- 
void of understanding and sense, which disposes and orders the 
whole.—27. That this form of Atheism, which makes one plastic 
life to: preside over the whole, is different from the Hylozoic, in that — 
it takes away all fortuitousness, and subjects all to the fate of one 
plastic methodical nature.—28. Though it be possible, that some in 
all ages might have entertained this Atheistical conccit, that things 


Q 2 


232 


axe dispensed by one regular and methodical, but unknowing sense- 
Jess nature, yet it seems to have been chiefly asserted by certain 
spurious Heraclitics and Stoics. ' And, therefore, this form of Athe- 
ism, which supposes one cosmoplastic nature, may be called Pseudo- 
Zenoniun.—29. ‘That, besides the philosophic Atheists, there have 
been always enthusiastic and fanatical.Atheists, though in some 
sense all Atheists may be said also to be both enthusiasts and fana- 
tics, they being led by an éeu% aoe, or irrational impetus.—3s0. That 
there cannot easily be any other form of Atheism, besides those four 
already mentioned, because all Atheists are Corporealists, and yct: 
‘all Corporealists not Atheists, but only such as make the first prin- 
ciple of all things not to be intellectual.—31. A distribution of 
Atheisms producing the former quaternio, and shewing the differ- 
ence between them.—32. That they are but bunglers at Atheism 
_ who talk of sensitive and rational matter; and that the canting as- 
trological Atheists are not at all considerable, because not under- 
standing themselves.—33. Another distribution of Atheisms; that 
they either derive the original of things from a merely fortuitous 
principle, the unguided motion of matter, or else from a plastic and 
methodical, but senseless nature.“ What Atheists denied the eter- 
nity of the world, and what asserted it—34. That of-these four 
- forms of Atheism, the Atomic or Democritical, and the Hylozoie or 
Stratonical, are the chief; and that. these two being once confuted, 
all Atheism will be confuted.—35, These two forms of Atheism 
being contrary to one another, how we ought in all reason to insist 
rather upon the Atomic; but that afterwards we shall confute the 
Hylozoic also, and prove against all Corporealists, that no cogitation 
nor life belongs to matter.—36. That, in the meantime, we shall 
not neglect any form of Atheism, but confute them all together, as 
agreeing in one principle; as also shew, how the old Atomic Athe- 
ists did sufficiently overthrow the foundation of the Hylozoists.— 37. 
Observed here, that the Hylozoists are not condemned merely for 
asserting a plastic life, distinct from the animal (which, with most 
other philosophers, we judge highly prebable, if taken in a right 
sense), but for grossly misunderstanding it, and attributing the same 
to matter. The plastic life of nature largely explained.—38. That 
though the confutation of the Atheistic grounds, according to the 
Jaws of method, ought to have been reserved for the last part of 
this discourse ; yet.we having reasons to violate thuse laws, crave 
the reader’s pardon for this preposterousness. A considerable ‘ob- 
_ Servation of Plato’s, that it is not only moral vitiosity, which in- 

clines men to atheize, but also an affectation of seeming wiser than 
the generality of mankind ; as likewise, that the Atheists, making 
such pretence to wit, it is a seasonable undertaking to evince, that 
they fumble in all their ratiocinations. That we hope to make it 
appear, that the Atheists are no conjurors; and that all forms af 
Atheism are nonsense and impossibility. 


HYLOZOISM FURTHER EXPLAINED. © 233 
1. We have now represented the grand myste- 
ries of Atheism, which may. be ae called the 
mysteries of the kingdom of darkness; though -in- 
deed some of them are but briefly hinted “here, 
they being again more fully to be insisted on af- 
terward, where we are to give an account of the 
Atheists’ endeavours to solve the phenomenon of 
cogitation. Wehave represented the chief grounds 
of “Atheisms 3 in general, as also of that most noto- 
tious form of Atheism in particular, that is called 
Atomical. But whereas there hath been already 
mentioned another form of Atheism, called by us” 
Hylozoical; the principles hereof could not pos- 
sibly be insisted on in this place, where we were 
to make the most plausible plea for Atheism, they 
being directly contrary to those of the Atomical, 
so that they would have mutually destroyed each 
other. For, whereas the Atomic Atheism sup- 
poses the notion or idea of body to be nothing but 
extended resisting bulk, and consequently to in- 
clude no manner of life and cogitation in it ; Hylo- 
zoism, on the contrary, makes all body, as sucn, 
and therefore every smallest atom of it, to have | 
life essentially belonging to it (natural perception — 
and appetite) though without any auimal sense or 
reflexive knowledge, as if life, and matter or ex- 
tended bulk, were but two incomplete and inade-. — 
quate conceptions of one and the same substance, 
called body. By reason of which life (not animal, 
but only plastical), all parts of matter being sup- 
posed able to form themselves artificially and me- 
thodically (though without any deliberation or at- 
tentive consideration) to the greatest advantage 
of their present respective capabilities, and there- 
fore also. sometimes by organization to improve: 


234 . EVERY HYLOZOIST NOT 


themselves further into sense and self-enjoyment 
in all animals, as also to universal reason and re- 
flexive knowledge in men; it is plain, that there 
is no necessity at all left, either of any incorporeal 
soul in men to make them rational, or of any Deity 
in the whole universe to solve the regularity - 
_ thereof. One main difference betwixt these two 
forms of Atheism is this, that the Atomical sup- 
poses all life whatsoever to be accidental, genera- 
ble, and corruptible; but the Hylozoic admits of a 
certain natural or plastic life, essential and sub- 
stantial, ingenerable and incorruptible, though at- 
tributing the same only to matter, as supposing no 
other substance in the world besides it. _ : 
11. Now to prevent all mistakes, we think ft 
here by way of caution to suggest, that as every 
Atomist is not therefore mpceesarily an Atheist, so 
neither must every Hylozoist needs be accounted 
such. -For whoever so holds the life of ‘matter, 
as notwithstanding to assert another kind of sub- 
stance also, that is immaterial and incorporeal, is _ 
no ways obnoxious to that foul imputation. How- 
ever, we ought not to dissemble, but that there is 
a great difference here bétwixt these two, Atomism 
and Hylozoism, in this regard ; that the former of 
them, namely Atomism (as hath been already de- 
clared) hath in itself a natural cognation and con- 
junction with Incorporeism, though violently cut 
off from it by the Democritic Atheists; whereas 
the latter of them, Hylozoism, seems to have alto- 
gether as close and intimate'a correspondence with 
Corporealism ; because, as hath been already sig- 
nified, if all matter, as such, have not only such a 
life, perception, and self-active power in if, as 
whereby it can form itself ‘to the best advantage, 


NECESSARILY AN ATHEIST. 235 
making this a sun, and that an earth or planet, 
and fabricating the bodies of animals most artifi- 
cially, but also can improve itself into sense and 
self-enjoyment; it may as well be thought able to 
advance. itself higher, into all the acts of reason 
and understanding in men; so that there will.be 
no need either of an incorporeal immortal soul in 
men, or a Deity in the universe. Nor indeed is it 
easily conceivable, how any should be induced to 
admit.such a. monstrous paradox as this is, that 
every atom of dust or other senseless matter 1s 
wiser than the greatest politician and. the.most 
acute philosopher that ever was, as having an in- 
fallible omniscience of all its own capabilities and 
congruities; were it not by reason of some strong 
prepossession, against incorporeal substance and 
a'Deity: there being nothing so extravagant and. 
outrageously wild, which a mind once infected 
with atheistical sottishness and disbelief will not — 
rather greedily swallow down, than admit a Deity, 
which to such is the highest of all paradoxes ima- 
ginable, -and the most affrigh tful bugbear. Not- 
withstanding all which, it may not be denied, but 
that itis possible for one, who really,entertains 
the belief of a Deity and a rational soul-immortal, 
to be persuaded, first, that the sensitive. soul in 
men as well as brutes is. merely corporeal; and - 
then that there is a material plastic life in the 
seeds of all plants and animals, whereby they do — 
artificially form themselves; and from thence af- 
‘terward to descend also further to Hylezoism, that 
all.matter, as such, hath a kind of natural, though 
net animal life in it: in consideration whereof, we 
ought not to censure every Hylozoist, professing 
to hold a Deity and a rational.soul immortal, for 


4 


236 ALL ATHEISTS WHO HOLD 
a mere disguised Atheist, or counterfeit histrioni- 
cal Theist. ie. | | . 
wu. But though every Hylozoist be not there- 
fore necessarily an Atheist, yet whosoever is. an 
Hylozoist and Corporealist both together, he that 
both holds the life of matter in the sense before 
declared, and also that there is no other substance © 
in the world besides body and matter, cannot be 
excused from the imputation of Atheism, for two 
reasons; first, because though he derive the origi- 
nal of all things, not from what is perfectly dead 
and stupid as the Atomic Atheist doth, but from 
that which hath a kind of life or perception in it, 
nay an infallible omniscience, of whatsoever itself 
can do or suffer, or of all its own capabilities and 
congruities, which seems to bear some semblance 
of a Deity; -yet all this being only in the way of 
natural, and not’ animal perception, is indeed no- — 
thing but a dull and drowsy, plastic and sperma- | 
tic life, devoid of all consciousness and self-enjoy- 
' ment, The Hylozoists’ nature is a piece of very 
mysterious nonsense, a thing perfectly wise, with- 
out any knowledge or consciousness of itself; 
whereas a Deity, according to the true notion of 
it, is such a perfect understanding being, as with 
full consciousnessand self-enjoyment is completely 
‘happy. Secondly, because the Hylozoic Corpo- 
realist, supposing all matter, as such, to have life 
in it, must needs make infinite of those lives, (for- 
asmuch as every atom of matter has a life of its 
own) co-ordinate and independent on one another, 
and consequently, as many independent first prin- 
ciples, no one common life or mind ruling over the 
whole. Whereas, to assert a God, is to derive all 
things ag’ évog woe, from some one principle,—or 


HYLOZOISM WITH CORPOREALISM. 237 


to suppose one perfect living and understanding 
being to be the original of all things, and the ar- 
chitect of the whole universe. 

‘Thus we see, that the Hylozoic Corporealist is _ 
really an Atheist, though carrying more the sem- 
lance and disguise of a Theist, than other Athe- 
ists, in that he attributes a kind of life to matter. 
‘For indeed every Atheist must of necessity cast 
some of the incommunicable properties of the 
Deity, more or less, upon that which is not God, 
namely, matter; and they, who do not attribute life 
to it, yet must needs bestow upon it necessary 
self-existence, and make it the first principle of 
_ allthings, which are the peculiarities of the Deity. 

‘ The Numen, which the Hylozoic Corporealist 

_ pays all his devotions to, is a certain blind she-god 
or goddess, called Nature,.or the life of matter ; 
. which is a very great mystery, a thing that is per-_ 
fectly wise, and infallibly omniscient, without any 
knowledge or consciousness at all; something 
like to that roy raidwv aiviyya (in* Plato) *DeRe pL 5. 
TEL TOU EUVOU YOU BoAng tng vuKrepiooc, that Pp. 468. 
vulgar enigma or riddle of boys concerning an 
eunuch striking a bat; aman and not a man, seeing 
and not seeing, did strike and not strike, with a 
stone and not a stone, a bird and not a bird, &c. 
the difference being only this, that this was a thing 
intelligible, but humorsomely expressed; whereas | 
the other seems to be ‘perfect nonsense, being no- 
thing but a misunderstanding of the plastic power, 
as shall be shewed afterwards. 

1v. Now the first and chief assertor of this Hy- 
lozoic Atheism was, as we conceive, Strato Lamp- 
sacenus,* commonly called also Physicus, that had 


+ Vide Diogen. Laert. sezm, 58. p. 298. 


— 238 STRATO -PHYSICUS, THE FIRST 


been once an auditor of Theophr astus, anda fa- 
mous Peripatetic, but afterwards degenerated 
from a genuine Peripatetic into a new-formed kind 
of Atheist. For Velleius, an Epicurean Atheist 
in Cicero, reckoning up all the several sorts of - 
Theists, which had been in former times, gives 
such a character of this Strato, as. whereby he 
makes him to be a strange kind of Atheistical 
Theist, or Divine Atheist, if we may use-such a 
copie icus expression: his words are. these, 
“‘ Nec audiendus Strato, qui Physicus 

- ese appellatr, qui omnem: vim divinam in 
p. 2902. natura sitam esse censet, que causas 
gignendi, augendi, minuendive habeat, 

sed careat omni sensu.” Neither is Strato, com- 
monly called the Naturalist or Physiologist, to 
be heard, who places all Divinity in nature, as — 
having within itself the causes of all generations, 
corruptions, and augmentations, but without any 
manner of sense.—Strato’s Deity therefore: was a 
certain living and active, but senseless nature. He 
did not fetch the original of all things, as the De- 
mocritic and Epicurean Atheists, from a mere for- 
tuitous motion of atoms, by means. whereof he 
bore some slight semblance of a Theist; but <yet 
he was a downright Atheist for all that, his God 
being no other than such a life of nature in matter, 
as was both devoid of sense and consciousness, 
and also multiplied together with the several parts 
efit. He is also in like manner described by 
: Seneca in St. Augustinet asa kind of 

{ De Civ. Del, mongrel thing, betwixt an Atheist and a 
ea 182, Theist ; “‘ Ego feram aut Platonem, aut 
_ ed, Benedict. Peripateticum Stratonem,; quorum: alter 
deum sine corpore fecit, altcr sine ani- 


, ATHEISTICAL HYLOZOIST.- 239 
mo?” Shall I endure either Plato, or the Peripa- 
tetic. Strato, whereof the one made God to be 
without a body, the other without a mind ?—TIn — 
which words Seneca taxes these two philosophers, 
as guilty of two contrary extremes; Plato, be- 
cause he made God to be a pure mind, or a per- 
fectly incorporeal being; and Strato, because he. 
made him to be a body without a mind, he ac- — 
knowledging no other Deity than a certain stupid 
and plastic life, in all the several parts of matter, 
without sense. Wherefore, this seems to be the 
only reason, why Strato was thus sometimes reck- 
oned. amongst the Theists, though he were indeed 
an Atheist, because he dissented from that only 
form of Atheism, then so vulgarly received, the 
Democritic and Epicurean, attributing a kind of 
life to nature and matter. 

v. And that Strato was thus an Atheist, but of 
_a different kind from Democritus, may further 
appear from this passage of Cicero’s ;* 
« Strato Lampsacenus negat opera deo- (20, 4. 
rum se uti ad fabricandum mundum ; Pp. 38. 
-quecunque sint docet omnia esse effecta loin, vith 
natura, nec ut ille, qui asperis, et levi- °°” 
bus, et hamatis uncinatisque corpor ibus concreta 
_hec esse dicat, interjecto inani; somnia censet 
hec esse Democriti, non docentis, sed optantis.” 
Strato denies, that he makes any use of a.God, 
for the fabricating of the world, or the solving the 
phenomena thereof; teaching all things to have 
_ been made by nature; but yet not in such a .man- 
_ ner, as he who affirmed them to be all. concreted 
out of certain rough and smooth, hookey and 
crooked atoms, he judging these things to be no- 
thing but the mere dreams and dotages of Demo- 


240  STRATO, THE FIRST 


critus, not teaching but wishing.—Here we see, 
that Strato denied the world to be. made by a 
Deity or perfect understanding nature, as well as 
Democritus: and yet that he dissented from De- 
mocritus notwithstanding, holding another kind 
of nature, as the original of things, than he did, 
who gave no account of any active principle and 
cause of motion, nor of the regularity that is in. 
things. Democritus’s nature was nothing but the 
fortuitous motion of matter; but Strato’s nature 
was an inward plastic life in the several parts of 
matter, whereby they could artificially frame them- 
. selves to the best advantage, according to their se- 
veral capabilities, without any conscious or reflex- 
ive knowledge. ‘ Quicquid aut sit aut fiat, (says — 
the same author) naturalibus fieri, aut factum esse 
docet ponderibus et motibus.” Strato teaches 
whatsoever is, or is made, to be made by certain 
inward natural forces and activities — 

vi. Furthermore it is to be observed, that oust 
Strato thus attributed a certain kind of life to 
matter, yet he did by no means allow of any one 
common life, whether sentient and rational, or plas- | 


’ tic and spermatic only, as ruling over the whole 


mass of matter and corporeal universe; whichis a 
thing in part affirmed by Plutarch, * and 
* Advers 


Coat. may in part be gathered from these 


p- 1115. 
tom. il. 


oper. Pn, Toe Kata guow tmeoOat Te Kara ruxnY, 


words of his TOV KOoMOY avToV ov Gwow ei cival 


apy ny yap Evoroovat TO avroparov, gira oUTW 
mepatyecba wv duotkwy Tabu écaorov. Strato affirmeth 
that the world is no animal (or god), but that what 
is natural in every thing, follows something fortu- 
itous antecedent, chance first beginning, and na- 


@ Ibid, 


ATHEISTICAL HYLOZOIST. 241 


ture acting consequently thereupon.—The full 
sense’ whereof seems to be this, that though Strato 
did not derive the original of all mundane things 
from mere fortuitous mechanism, as Democritus 
before him had done, but supposed a life and na- 
tural perception in the matter, that was directive 
of it; yet, not acknowledging any one common 
life, whether animal or plastic, as governing and 
swaying the whole, but only supposing the seve- 
‘ral parts of matter to have so many plastic lives 
of their own, he must needs attribute something to 
fortune, and make the mundane system to depend 
upon a certain mixture of chance and plastic or 
orderly nature both together, and consequently 
must be an Hylozoist. Thus we see, that these 
are two schemes of Atheism, very different from 
one another ;* that, which fetches the original of 
all things from the mere fortuitous and unguided 
motion of matter, without any vital or directive 
principle ; and that, which derives it from a cer- 
tain mixture of chance and the life of matter both 
together, it supposing a plastic life, not in the 
whole universe, as one thing, but in all the several 
parts of matter by themselves ; the first of which 
is the Atomic and Democritic Atheism, the second 
the Hylozoic and Stratonic. 

vir. It may perhaps be suspected by some, that 
the famous Hippocrates, who lived long 
before Strato, was an assertor of the ..; ae 
Hylozoic Atheism, because of such pas- | eer 
sages in him as these, aaisevroc n guotg ex - * Al lect. 
rov caov™ pabouca ra diovra row N ature *. ca, 72 ra 
is unlearned or untaught, but it learneth ™*” 
from itself what things it ought to do :—and again 


* Vide Lactant. de Ira Dei, cap. x. p. 918, 


242 HIPPOCRATES VINDICATED 


aveuploKet n ovo aury eauTy rae Epodouc, ovK Ek Stavoiac’. 
Nature finds out ways to itself, not by ratiocina- 
tion.—But there is nothing more affirmed here 
concerning nature by Hippocrates, than what 
might be affirmed likewise of the Aristotelic and 
Platonic nature, which is supposed to act for ends, 
though without consultation and ratiocination. 
And I must confess, it seems to me no way mis- 
becoming of a Theist, to acknowledge such a na- 
ture or principle in the universe, as may act ac- 
cording to rule and method for the sake of ends, 
and in order to the best, though itself do not un- 
' derstand the reason of what it doth; this being 
-still supposed to act dependently upon a higher 
intellectual principle, and to have been first set a 
work and employed by it, it being otherwise non- 
sense. But to assert any such plastic nature, as 
is independent upon any higher intellectual prin- - 
ciple, and so itself the first and highest principle 
of activity in the universe, this indeed must needs 
- be, either that Hylozoic Atheism already spoken 
of, or else another different form of Atheism, 
which shall afterwards be described. But though 
Hippocrates were a Corporealist, yet we conceive 


he ought not to lie under the suspicion of either of — - 


those two atheisms ; forasmuch as himself plainly ~ 
asserts a higher intellectual principle, than such a 
plastic nature, in the universe, namely an Hera- 
clitic corporeal God, or understanding fire, im- 
| - mortal, pervading the whole world, in 
ye a ae these words; Aoxée 82 ord Kadtouev Ocopov, 


‘sect. 1. p 0d , s . \ ~ ’ 1 ¢ \ 

O49 torn, CUAvaTOY TE Elva, Kal voELY TaYTa, Kal OpNV, Kat 
° e de Sg A 2 , ? A of \ ‘ r . 

er QKOVELY, Kal edeval TWavTa Ta OVTa Kal Ta ped- 


Aovra Zocafat It seems to me, that that 
which 1s ealled a or fire is immortal and om- 


FROM HYLOZOIC ATHEISM. 243 


niscient, and that it sees, hears, and knows all 
things, not only such as are present, but: also fu- 
ture.— Wherefore, we conclude, that Hippocrates 
~ was nelther-an Hylozoic nor Democritic Atheist, 
but an Heraclitic corporeal Theist. 

vit. Possibly it may be thought also, that 
Plato,in his Sophist, intends this Hylozoic athe- 
ism, where he declares it as the opinion of many, 
rn guow wavra yevvay, aro TWoe alriac avromarne Kat 
avev Stavoiag gvovonc’ That nature generates all 
things from a certain spontaneous principle, with- 
out any reason and understanding.— But here the 
word avrouarne may be as well rendered fortuitous 
as spontaneous; however, there is no necessity, 
that this should’ be understood of an artificial or 
methodical unknowing nature. It is true, indeed, 
that Plato himself seems to acknowledge a certain 
plastic or methodical nature in the universe, sub- 
ordinate to the Deity, or that perfect mind, which 
is the supreme governor of all things; as may be 
gathered from these words of his, rnv gvow pera 
Aoyou Kal ovv NOyw. Kal ve Ta wavra Svaxoousiy’ that na- 
ture does rationally (or orderly) together with. 
reason and niind, govern the anole universe.— 
Where le supposes a certain regular nature to be 
a partial and subordinate cause of things under 
the Divine intellect. And it is very probable, 
that Aristotle derived that whole doctrine of his 
concerning a regular and artificial nature, which 
acts for ends, from the Platonic school. But as 
’ for any such form of Atheism, as should suppose 
a plastie or regular, but senseless nature either in 
the whole world, or the several parts of matter by 
themselves, to be the highest principle ofall things, 


.* P. 168, oper. 


244 - PLATO TOOK NOTICE ONLY 


we donot conceive, that there is any intimation of . 
it to be found any where in Plato. For in his De 
Legibus, where he professedly disputes against 
Atheism, he states the doctrine of it after thie man- 
Lib. 10.p. DeY, Ta pev weyora kal kdANora amepryaleaBat 
665,665. duow Kal TYYHY, Ta OE opexporega céyynv’ that 
nature and chance produceth all the first, greatest; 

and most excellent things, but that the smaller 
things were produced by human art.-The plain 
meaning whereof is this, that the first original of 
things, and the frame of the whole universe, pro- 
ceeded from a mere fortuitous nature, or the mo- 
tion of matter unguided by any art or method. 
And thus it is further explained in the following 
words, Tuo Kat Bup Kal ynv Kal aéoa pvc wavra étvat 
Kat Tvyn past’ réEyUN O& oder - TOUTWN, &e. That the ~ 
first elements, fire, water, air, and earth, were all 
made by nature and chance, without any art or 
method ; and then, that the bodies of the sun, 
moon, and stars, and the whole heavens, were af- 
terward made out of those elements, as devoid of 
all manner of. life,—and only fortuitously moved 
and mingled together; and lastly, that the whole | 
mundane.system, together with the orderly seasons 
of the year, as also plants, animals, and men, did 
arise after the same manner, from the mere fortuit- 
ous motion of senseless and stupid matter. In 
the very same manner does Plato state this contro- 
versy again, betwixt Theists and Atheists, in his 
— sae Philebus: ; Tlorepov, bTpwrap ys, Ta i Supmavea, 
oe Kal TOOE TO kadovpevov dor; be a ow 
ev THv, TOU adoyou Kal ey Ovvamlv, Kal Ta Ory Ervyev; 7 
ravavtia, kabarep ot mpoabev nuwy eXeyov, vouv Kal poovn- 
oly Tiva. Oavpacrny ouvrarrovoay StaxuBeovay 5 ; Whether 
shall we Seay O Pr otarchus, that this whole uni- 


OF THE FORTUITOUS ATHEISMS. 245 


verse is dispensed and ordered, by.a mere irra- 
tional, temerarious, and fortuitous principle, and 
so as it happens; or contrariwise (as our forefa- 
thers have instructed us) that mind, and a certain. 
wonderful wisdom, did at first frame, and does 
still govern all-things ?— 

. Wherefore we conclade: that Plato took no no- 
fee of any other form of Atheism, as then set on 
foot, than such as derives all things from a mere 
fortuitous principle, from nature and chance; that 
is, the unguided motion of matter, without any 
plastic artificialness or methodicalness, either in 
the whole universe, or the parts of it. But be- 
cause this kind of Atheism, which derives all 
things from a mere fortuitous nature, had been ma- 
naged two manner of ways, by Democritus in the 
way of Atoms, and by Anaximander and others 
in the way of Forms and Qualities (of which we 
are to.speak in the next place); therefore the 
Atheism, which Plato opposes, was either the 
Democritic or the Anaximandrian Atheism ; or 
else (which is most probable) both of them to- 
gether. 

1x. It is Gardi¢ imaginable, that these should 
be no philosophic Atheists sin the world before 
Democritus and Leucippus. Plato*long . ere 
- since concluded, that there have been 
Atheists, more,or less, in every age, when he be- 
speaks his young Atheist after this manner ; Ov ot 
wovog oves col gidot TpwTOL Kal TOWTOV ravTny Sota TEol 
Bewy Eo yere, yiyvovrat S$ det wAElouc 7 éAdTrove rauTHY Thy 
vosov Eyoviec’’ The full sense whereof seems.to be 


' © De Legibus, lib. x. p. 665. 
VOL. I. _ r 


246 , MANY OLD PHILOSOPHERS 


this: Neither you, my son, nor your friends (De- 
mocritus, Leucippus, and Protagoras)are the first, 
who have entertained this opinion concerning the 
gods, but there have been always some more or 
less sick of this atheistic disease.— Wherefore, 
we shall now make a diligent search and in- 
quiry, to seeif we can find any other philoso- 
phers, who atheized before Democritus and Leu- 
cippus, as also what form of Atheism they enter- 
tained. 

Aristotle, in his Metaphysics, speaking of iia? 
quaternio of causes, affirms, that many of those, 
who first philosophized, assigned only a material 
cause of the whole mundane system, without ei- 
ther intending or efficient cause. The reason 
whereof he intimates to have been this, because 
they asserted matter to: be the only substance; 
and that whatsoever else was in the world, besides 
the substance or bulk of matter, were all nothing 
else but way, different passions and affections, ac- -' 
cidents and qualities of matter, that were all ge-_ 
nerated out of it, and corruptible again into it: the 
substance of matter always remaining the same, 

neither generated nor corrupted, butfrom 
Hearts eternity unmade; Aristotle’s words are* 
p- 264. these : ray: TPWTWY pirocodncayrwy OL wXslorot 

Tas ev vANC ELdEL LOVOY enbnoay ap yac Etvat Tay- 
ry; e& ov yep éoTly aTavra Ta dvra, Kal e& ov yeyerat 
mpUTOV; Kat eg 6 pOeiperat reAevratov, TNC pev ovciac vTr0~ 
pevovone, Tots de wabect peraPadovone, Touro OTOLYELOV, 
Kal TAaUTAY TwY OvTWY THY apynv .gacw eva? Most of 
those, who first philosophized, took notice of no 
other principle of things in the universe, than what 
is to be, referred to the material cause; for that, 


ASSERTED MATERIALISM. 947 


out of which all things are, and out of which all 
things are first made, and into which they are all | 
at last corrupted and resolved, the substance al- 
ways remaining the same, and being changed 

only in its passions and qualities; this they con- 
’ cluded to be the first original and principle of all 
things.— 

x. But the meaning of these old Material phi- 
losophers will be better understood by those ex- 
ceptions, which -Aristotle makes against them, 
which are two: first, that because they acknow- 
ledged no other substance besides matter, that 
might be an active principle in the universe, it 
was not possible for them to give any account of 
the original of motion and action. E: 
ap ore pahwera Taca p0opa Kat yiveots Ek TWOC, “hols ee 
we Evog n Kat TAELovwn & éoriy, Sia rl TOUTO ae ee : 
Baivet, Kat ra TO airtov ; Ov yap on TO VE UTOKEIUE 
vov aUvTO Tole peraBadXew EavTO" AEyw S& oiOY, ourE TO 
Evov, ovre TO yaAkog alrioy Tov peraBaddew exarepov av- 
TW" OVoE TOLL TO ev EVAOV KALynv, O SE yadkog dvdolavra, 
avr ErEpov rt Tne meraBoAne airtov’ ro S& TOUTO Cnreww Eore 
TO THY erépav Cnrew apynv, we av [MELE gainuer, obey ij 
doyn th¢kwyoewe? Though all generation be made. 
- never so much out of something as the matter, 
yet the question still is, by what means’ this 
cometh to pass, and what is the active cause 
which produceth it? because the subject matter 
cannot change itself; as, forexample, neither tim- : 
ber, nor bce. is ihe cause, that either of them 
are changed; for timber alone does not: make a. 
bed, nor brass a statue, but there must be some. 
thing else as the cause of the change; and to in- 
quire after this is to inquire after another princi- 

R 2 


248. THE OLD MATERIALISTS ASSIGNED 


ple besides matter, which we would call that, 
from whence motion springs.—In which words 
Aristotle intimates, that these old Material philo- 
sophers shuffled in motion and action into the 
world unaccountably, or without a cause ; foras- 
much as they acknowledged no other principle of 
things besides passive matter, which could never 
move, change, or alter itself. re 
xr. And Aristotle’s second exception against 
these old. Material philosophers is this: that since - 
‘there could be no intending causality in senseless 
and stupid matter, which they made to be the only 
principle of all things, they were not able to assign 
rov € Kal Kade airlav, any cause of well and fit,— 
and so could give no account of the regular and 
Met.1.1.c3, orderly frame of this mundane system ; 
pete: rou &0 Kal Kadwe Ta pev Eye, Ta oe yéyvecban 
TWV OVTWY, owe OUTE ynV, our -aAXo Tw rowourwy oubéev, 
ELKOC airiov etvat’ ove” avTw avroparw, Kau TUN TOCOUTOY 
tmerotbat meayna Kaw eye’ ‘That things partly are 
so well in the world, and partly are made so well, 
cannot be imputed either to earth or water, or 
any other senseless body; much less. is it reason- 
able to attribute so noble and excellent an effect 
as this to mere chance or fortune.-— Where Aristo- 
tle again intimates, that as these Material philoso- 
phers shuffled in motion into the world without a 
cause, so likewise they must needs suppose this 
motion to be altogether fortuitous and unguided ; 
and thereby in a manner make fortune, which is 
nothing but the absence or defect of an intending ~ 
cause, to supply the room both of the active and 
lutending cause, that is, efficient and final. Where- 
upon Aristotle sabjoins a commendation of Anax- 


NO CAUSE OF WELL AND FIT. 249 


_ agoras, as the first of the Ionic philosophers, who 


introduced mind or intellect for a principle in the 
universe; that in.this respect he alone seemed to 
_ be'sober and in his wits, comparatively with those. 
others that went before him, who talked so idly 
and. atheistically. For Anaxagoras’s. principle 
was such, saith Aristotle, as was dua ro Kadwg at- 
tla, Kat roaurn 60ev n Kivnowc UTA YEl, at once a cause 
of motion, and also of well and fit;—of all the 
regularity, aptitude, pulchritude, and order, that 
is in: the whole universe. And thus it seems 
Anaxagoras himself had determined: 
“Avataydpag 70 airiov rov Kadwe Kai opfwe vovv fae ais 
' Aéya, Anaxagoras saith, that mind is the >. tom}. 
only cause of right and well ;—thisbemg = 
proper to mind to aim at ends and good, and to 
order one thing fitly for the sake of another. 
Whence it was, that Anaxagoras concluded good 
also, as well as mind, to have been a principle of 
the universe, ‘Avabayopac We KWoUV TO dya- 
ov ap mys 0 yap voug Kivet, Ada Kiel Evexa bras : 
rivoc, Ware eregov’ Anaxagoras makes good ee iv. 
a principle, as that which moves; for, © 
though mind move matter, yet it moves it for the 
sake of something, and being itself, as it were, first’ 
moved by good: so that good is also a principle. 
—-And we note this the rather, to shew how well 
these three philosophers, Aristotle, Plato, and 
Anaxagoras, agreed all together in this excellent 
trath, that mind and good are the first BHEEpIC 
ae all things in the universe. 

-xit, And now we think it is cuficiently evi- 
dent, that these old Materiajists. in Aristotle, 
whoever they were, were downright Atheists ; nat 


950 ARISTOTLE’S OLD MATERIALISTS 


so much because they made all substance to be 
body or matter, for Heraclitus first, and after him 
Zeno, did the like, deriving the original of all 
things from fire, as weil as Anaximenes did from 
air, and Thales is supposed by Aristotle* to have 
done from water, and that with some little more © 
seeming plausibility, since fire, being a more sub- 
tile and moveable body than any other, was there- 
fore thought by some ancients to be dacwyardrarov, 
the most incorporeal of all bodies, as earth was 
for that cause rejected by all those corporeal phi- 
losophers from being a principle, by reason of the 
grossness ofits parts. But Heraclitus and Zeno, 
notwithstanding this, are not accounted A theists, 
because they supposed their fiery matter to have 
not only life, but also a perfect understanding 
originally belonging to it, as also the whole world 
to be an animal: whereas those Materialists of 
Aristotle made senseless and stupid matter, de- 
void of all understanding and life, ‘to be the first 
principle and root of all things. For, when they 
supposed life and understanding, as well as all 
other differences of things, to be nothing but mere 
passions and accidents of matter, generable out — 
of it, and corruptible again into it, and indeed to 
_ be produced, but in a secondary way, from the 
fortuitous commixture of those first elementary 
qualities, heat and cold, moist and dry, thick and. 
thin, they plainly implied the substance of matter 
in itself to be devoid of life and understanding. 

Now, if this:be not Atheism, to derive the origi- 
nal of all things, even of life and mind itself, from 


2 Mctaphysic, lib. i. c. iii. p..265, tom. iv. oper. 


DOWNRIGHT ATHEISTS. 251 


dead and stupid matter fortuitously moved, then 
there can be no such thing at all. | 
xuir. Moreover, Aristotle’ s Materialists con- 
‘cluded every thing besides the substance of mat- 
ter (which is in itself indifferent to all things), and 
consequently all particular and determinate be- 
ings, to be generable and corruptible. Which is 
a thing, that Plato takes notice of as an Atheistic 
principle, expressing it in these words: fort ye 
) yao ovceTor ovder, ag os vyiryverat, that no- ;, Theat. 
thing ever is, but every thing 1s made 
and generated.— Forasmuch as it plainly follows, 
from hence, that not only all animals and the 
souls of men, but also if there were any gods, 
which some of those Materialists would not stick, 
at least.verbally, to acknowlédge (meaning there- 
by certain understanding beings superior to men), 
these likewise must needs have been all gene- 
rated, and consequently be corruptible. Now, to 
say that there 1s no other God, than such as was 
made and generated,,and which may be again un-. 
made, corrupted, and die, or that there was once 
no God-at all till he was made out of the matter, 
and that there may be none again, this is all one 
as to deny the thing itself. For a native and mor- 
tal God is a pure contradiction. There- 
fore, whereas Aristotle, in his Metaphy- 5 re rca 6, 
ics, tells us of certain theologers, o: e« 
yuKrog wavra -yevvwrrec, SUCH as did generate alk 
things (even the gods themselves) out of night 
and chaos,—we must needs pronounce of such 
theologers as these, who were Theogonists, and 
generated all the gods (without exception) out of 
senseless and stupid matter, that they were but a 
kind of atheistical Theologers, or theological 


95% GREAT DIFFERENCE BETWIXT THE 


Atheists. For, though they did admit of certain 
beings, to which they attributed the name of gods, 
yet, according to the true notion of God, they 
really acknowledged none at all'G.e. no under- 
standing nature as the original of things), but 
Night and Chaos, senseless and stupid matter, 
fortuitously moved, was to them the highest of all 
Numens. So that this theology of their’s was a 
thing wholly founded in atheistical nonsense. 

xiv. And now we think it seasonable here to 
observe, how vast a difference there was betwixt 
these old Materialists in Aristotle, and those 
other philosophers, mentioned before in. the first 
chapter, who determined, ovdéy ovdé yiyvecbar ovdt 
$0clpecBat rov dvrwv’ That no real entity at all was 
generated or corrupted,—for this reason, because 
nothing could be made out of nothing. These 
were chiefly the philosophers of the Italic or Py-. 
thagoric succession; and their design in it was 
not, as Aristotle was pleased somewhere to affirm, 
aveAsy Tacay Thy yéveow, to contradict common sense 
and experience, in denying all natural generations 
and alterations; but only to interpret nature 
rightly in them, and that in way of opposition 
to those Atheistic Materialists, after this manner: 
that in all the mutations of nature, generations, 
and alterations, there was neither any new sub- 
stance made, which was not before, nor any entity 
really distinct from the pre-existing substances, 
but only that substance which was before, diverse- 
ly modified; and so nothmg produced in genera- 
tions, but new modifications, mixtures, and sepa- 
rations of pre-existent substances. Lo 

Now this doctrine of their’s drove at these two 
things: first, the taking away of such qualities 


_ @ 


MATERIALISTS AND PYTHAGORICS. 253 


and forms of body, as were vulgarly conceived to 
be things really distinct from the substance of 
extended bulk, and all its modifications of more 
or. less magnitude, figure, site, motion, or rest. 


Because, if there were any such things as these, 


produced in the natural generations and altera- 
tions of bodies, there would then be some real 
entity made & undevoe é évuTap x OvTo¢ n TpovTap yovrTos, 
out of nothing inexistent or pre-existent.— W here- 
fore they concluded, that these supposed forms 
and qualities of bodies were really nothing else 
but only the different modifications of pre-exist- 
ent matter, in respect of magnitude, figure, site 
and motion, or rest; or different concretions and 
secretions, which are no entities really distinct 
from the substance, but only cause different phas- 
mata, fancies, and apparitions in us. 

The second thing, which this doctrine aimed 


at, was the establishing the incorporeity and in- 


generability of all souls. For, since life, cogita- 
tion, sense, and understanding, could not be re- 
solved into those modifications of matter, magni- 
tude, figure, site, and motion, or into mechanism 
and fancy, but must needs be entities really dis-, 
tinct from extended bulk, or dead and stupid’ 
matter ; they concluded, that therefore souls could 
not be generated out of matter, because this would 
be the production of some real entity out of: no- 
thing inexisting or pre-existing; but that they 
must needs be Sanoihes kind of substance incor- 
poreal, which could no more be generated or cor- 
rupted, than the substance of matter itself; and, 
therefore, must either pre-exist in nature, before . 
generations, or else be divinely created and in- 


fused 1 in them, 


954 GREAT DIFFERENCE BETWIXT THE 


It hath been already proved in the first chap- 
ter, that the upshot. of that Pythagoric doctrine, 
that nothing could be generated out of nothing 
pre-existing, amounted to those two things men- © 
tioned, viz. the asserting of the incorporeity and 
ingenerability of souls, and the rejecting of those 
fantastic entities of forms and real qualities of 
bodies, and resolving all corporeal phenomena, 
into figures or atoms, and the different apparitions 
_ or fancies caused by them. But the latter of these 

may be further confirmed from this passage of 
Aristotle’s, where, after he had declared that De- 
mocritus and Leucippus made the soul and fire 
to consist of round atoms or figures, like those 
ev r@ atp. Evouara, those ramenta that appear in the 
air when the sunbeams are transmitted through 
crannies; he adds, gous 8 Kai ro Tapa 

* per) True TOV TlvBa‘yopeioy deyonever, Tay aurTy een 
ae Pi Siavoray, Epacay yap TivEc avrov, Yuya st Elva Ta 
oat ey éy TH 9 aépr Evopara, ot Og, TO TavTa Kivouv. And 
ama, cap. ii. that which is said amongst the Pytha- 
Pej goreans seems to have the same sense, 

3 for some of them affirm, that the soul is 
those very Evouara, ramenta, or atoms; but others 
- of them, that itis that which moves them :—-which 
latter doubtless were the genuine Pythagoreans. 
However, it is plain, from hence, that the old 
Pythagoreans physiologized by fvapyara, as well as 
Democritus; that is, figures and atoms, and not 
qualities and forms. : 

' But Aristotle’s Materialists, on the contrary, 
taking it for granted, that matter, or extended 
bulk, is the only substance, and that the qualities 
and forms of bodies are entities really distinct 
from those modifications of magnitude, figure, 


MATERIALISTS AND PYTHAGORICS. 200 


site, motion, or rest; and finding also, by expe- 
rience, that these were continually generated and 
corrupted, as likewise that life, sense, and under- 
standing were produced in the bodies of such 
animals, where it had not been before, and again 
extinguished at the death or corruption of them, 
concluded, that the souls of all animals, as well 
as those other qualities and forms of bodies, were 
generated out of the matter, and corrupted again 
into it; and, consequently, that every thing that 
is in the whole world, besides the substance of 
matter, was made or generated, and might be 
again corrupted. 

Of this Atheistic doctrine, Aristotle L. 3. c.4.p. 
speaks elsewhere, as in his book De ta. ‘ 
Calo. sou yap rweg ot gaciv, ovey ayévverov 
Elvat rwv mpayyarwv, adda wavra yiyvecbat® padiora pev 
ot wept Tov ‘Hoiodoy, eira 8 kal rwv adAXwy, Ol TeWTOL Pu- 
stooynoavr ec” ol ee, ra piv adda mavra vives Bai Te pact, 
Kat pet, clvat Oe Taylwc oulév. ey Og Tt MLOvOD UITOPEVELY, e& 
90 TavTa TavTa perac ynpuarilesOar TepUKEV" There are 
some who affirm, that nothing is ingenerable, but 
that all things are made; as Hesiod especially, 
.and also among the rest they who first physiolo- 
gized, whose meaning was, that all other things 
-are made (or generated) and did flow, none of 
them having any stability; only that there was 
one thing (namely, matter) which always remain- 
ed, out of which all those other things were trans- 
formed and metamorphosed.—Though, as to He- 
_ siod, Aristotle afterwards speaks differently. So 

hkewise in his Physics, after he had declared, 
that some of the ancients made air, some water, 
and some other matter, the principle Of «poet. 
all things ; he adds, *rovro Kat rocavrny P- 465. oper. 


} 


256 HOW THE MATERIALISTS EXPLAINED, 


pacty tiva rnv dmacay ovotav. ra St ada ravra Trabn rov- 
Twv, Kal sec, Kal Siabécstc’ Kat TovTtwy ‘mév ortouy Elvat 
- aldtov’ ta be dAXa ytyvecOa Kal pOcizecOat ameipaKic” This» 
they affirmed to be ‘all the substance or essence. 
that was; but all other things, the passions, af- 
fections, and dispositions of it; and that this, 
therefore, was eternal, as being capable of no 
change, but all other things infinitely generated 
= Bagg he, gen — DO 

. But these Materialists being sometimes as- 
saulted by the other Italic philosophers, in the 
manner before declared, that no real entities, dis- 
tinct from the modifications of any substance, 
could be generated or corrupted, because nothing 
could come from nothing, nor-go to nothing ; they 
would not seem plainly to contradict thattheorem, 
but only endeavoured to interpret it into a com- 
_ pliance with their own hypothesis, and distinguish | 
concerning the sense of it in this mainer: that it 
ought to be understood only of the substance of 
matter, and nothing else, viz. that no matter could 
be made or corrupted, but that all other things 
whatsoever, not only forms and qualities of bo- 
dies, but also souls; life, sense, and understand- ~ 
ing, though really different from magnitude, fi- 
cure, site, and motion, yet ought to be accounted 
only the afm, the passions and accidents of this’ 
matter, and therefore. might be generated out of 
it, and corrupted again into it, and that without 
the production or destruction of any real entity, 
matter being the only thing that is accounted 
such; All this we learn from these ‘words of 
Metaph. 14. Aristotle, cat oa TOUTO OUTE yeyvreabat oubev 
ene pucer: olovrat, ouTE ardddvobat, we Te roaurng gu- : 


tom. lv. oper. 
TEWE act owlonevae. women Ot TOY Swxearn pa- 


NOTHING OUT OF NOTHING. - 257 


py ours yeyvecBat aro, orav yeyverat KaXdc 7 n HovatKec, 
.OUTE dmddAvabat, oray arofaddn ravTac rd¢ ac, Sia ro 

vTopévery TO UTOKELMEVO, Tov LwoKxearn avTov, ouTwe oveEe 
rev drwv ovdév’ Set ag gival Twa Pow, H pay, 7) ™)eloug 
plac, && wv yeyverat ra adAXa, owlouévne exeivne’ The 
sense whereof is this: And, therefore, as to that 
axiom of some philosophers, that nothing is either 
generated or destroyed, these Materialists admit 
it to be true in respect of the substance of matter 
only, which is always preserved the same; as, 
say they, we do not say, that Socrates is simply 
or absolutely made, when he is made cither hand- ° 
some or musical, or that he is destroyed when he 
loseth those dispositions, because the subject So- 
crates still remains the same; so neither are we to © 
say, that any thing else is absolutely either gene- 
rated or corrupted, because the substance or mat-_ 
ter of every thing always continues. For there 
must needs be some certain nature, from which 
all other things are generated, that still remaining 
one and the same.— 

We have noted this passage of Aristotle’s the 
rather, because this is just the very doctrine ‘of 
“ Aiheiats at this day; that the substance of matter 
or extended bulk is the only real entity, and 
therefore the only unmade thing, that is neither 
generable nor creatable, but necessarily existent 
from eternity ; but whatever else is in the world, 
as life and animality, soul and mind, being all 
but accidents and affections of this matter (as if © 
therefore they had no real entity at all in them), 
are generable out of nothing and corruptible into 
nothing, so long as the matter, in which they are 
still remains the same. The result of which is ¢ 
no less than this, that there can be no other gods 


253 ETERNITY OF THE WORLD 


or god, than such as was at first made. or generated 
out of senseless matter, and may be corrupted 
again into it. And here indeed lies the grand 
mystery of Atheism, that every thing besides the 
substance of matter 1s made or generated, and may. 
be again unmade or corrupted 
However, Anaxagoras, though an [onic philo- 
sopher, and therefore, as shall be declared after- 
ward, successor to those Atheistic Materialists, 
was at length so far convinced by that Pythagoric 
doctrine, that no entity could be naturally gene- 
rated out of nothing, as that he departed from his 
predecessors herein, and ‘did for this reason ac- 
knowledge mind and soul, that is, all cogitative 
being, to be a substance really: distinct from mat- 
ter, neither generable out of it nor corruptible into 
it; as also that the forms and qualities of bodies 
(which he could not yet otherwise conceive of 
_ than as things really distinct from those modifica- 
tions of magnitude, figure, site, and motion), must — 
_ for the same cause pre-exist before generations in 
certain similar atoms, and remain after corruptions, 
being only secreted and concreted in them. By 
means whereof he introduced a certain spurious | 
Atomism of his own; for whereas the genuine 
_Atomists before his time had supposed oykouc 
" dvouolove, dissimilar atoms,—devoid of all forms 
and qualities, to be the principles of all bodies, 
Anaxagoras substituted in the room. of them his 
onoomépea, his similar atoms,—endued from eter- 
nity with all manner of forms and qualities incor- 
ruptibly. 
xvi. We have made it manifest, that those Mate- 
rial philosophers, described by Aristotle, were ab- 
solute Atheists, not merely because they made body 


DENIED BY THE ATHEISTS. 959 


to be the only substance, though that be a thing, 
which Aristotlehimself fjustlyreprehends 

them for also in these words of his, décor ear lL. 4. 
Bey ouv év TE TO Tay Kal play Elva Twa pow, © ee iv, oe 

. we thay riléact, Kat radray owmaricny, Kat Us~ 

yebog & = Kousay, onAoy Ort mohhaxwg a auapravovat, TOY yap 
owpareoy TA srorysia Tiléace uovor, TWVOE aowpaTwy ov, 
dvrwy Kal dowpatwv’ They who suppose the world 
to be one uniform thing, and acknowledge only 
one nature as the matter, and this corporeal or in- 
dued with magnitude, it is evident, that they err 
many ways, and particularly in this, that they set 
down only the elements of bodies, and not of in- 
corporeal things, though there be also things in- 
corporeal.—I say, we have not concluded them 
Atheists, merely for this reason, because they de- 
nied incorporeal substance, but because they de- 
duced all things whatsoever from dead and stupid 
matter, and made every thing in the world, be- 
sides the bare substance of matter, devoid of all 
quality, generable and corruptible. 

Now we shall take notice of an objection, made 
by some late writers, against this Aristotelic ac- _ 
cusation of the old philosophers, founded upon a 
passage of Aristotle’s own, who else- | 
where, in his book De Calo, speaking = Sane 
' of the heaven or world, plainly affirms, *°P¢- 
| -yevopevov pév ovv dzavrec evat gaow, that all | 
the philosophers before himself did assert the 
world to have been made, or have had a begin- 
- ning.—From whence these writers infer, that 
therefore they must needs be all Theists, and hold — 
the Divine creation of the world; and consequently, 
that Aristotle contradicts himself, in representing 
many of them: as Atheists, acknowledging only 


260 ETERNITY OF THE WORLD 


one’ material principle of the whole universe, 
without any intending or efficient cause. But we 
cannot but pronounce this to be a great error in 
these writers, to conclude all those, who held the 
world to have been made, therefore to have been 
Theists; whereas it is certain on the contrary, that 
all the first and most ancient Atheists did (in 
Aristotle's language) cooporotey 7) yevua Tov KOopor, 
make or generate to the world,—that is, suppose 
it not to have been from eternity, but to have had 
a temporary beginning; as likewise that it was 
corruptible, and would, some time or other, have 
an end again. The sense of which Atheistic 
philosophers is represented by Lucretius in this 


manner :* 


Et quoniam docui, mundi mortalia templa 
‘Esse, et nativo consistere corpore coclum, 
Et quecunque in eo fiunt, fientque, necesse 
kisse ca dissolvi. 


And there seems to be indecd a necessity, in rea- 
son, that they, who derive all things from a fortu- 
itous principle, and hold every thing besides the 
substance of matter to have been generated, should 
supposethe world to have been generated likewise, 
as also to be corruptible. Wherefore, it may well 
be reckoned for one of the vulgar errors, that all 
Atheists held the eternity of the world. 
Moreover, when Aristotle subjoins immediately 
after, a\\¢ yevopevov, Ol pev atotov, ot & g0agrev, that 
though the ancient philosophers all held the world 
to have been made, yet, notwithstanding, they 
were divided in this, that some of them supposed, 
for all that, that it would continue to eternity such 


2 Lib. vi. ver. 43. Adde lib. y. ver. 236. 


DENIED BY THE ATHEISTS. 261 


as sit 1s, others, that ‘it would be corrupted again : 
the former of these, who conceived the world to 
be yevouevov, but aidwv, made, but eternal, were 
none of them Atheists, but all Theists. Such as 
Plato, whom Aristotle seems particularly to per- 
stringe for this, who in his Timzus introduceth the 
supreme Deity bespeaking those inferior gods, the 
sun, moon, and stars (supposed by that philoso- 
pher to be animated ) after this manner: 
—al suou yevoueva, dura, & uovye Gédovroe, TO ine pene 
pev ovv debiv wav AvTOV" Toye unv Kadwe appo- 
—ofty Kai Eyov ev, Avew eerew, Kaxou’ dt a Kal éretrep yeye 
vnobs, afavarot piv OUK EoTe, OVO aXdvrot TO TauTay. ovre wey 
O7 AvOnceobé YE; ovee revbec Be Davarov potoac” re EUNC Bou- 
Anoewe peiCovoc ért O€opL0U Kal KupLwtéoov Aa yovrec’ Those 
things, which are made by me, are indissoluble by 
my will; and though every thing which is com- 
pacted, be in its own nature dissolvable, yet it is 
not the part of one that is good, to will the dissolu- _ 
tion or destruction of any thing that was once 
wellmade. Wherefore, though you are not abso- 
lately: immortal, nor altogether indissolvable, yet 
notwithstanding you shall not be dissolved, nor. 
ever die; my will being a stronger band to hold | 
you together, than any. thing else can be to loosen 
_you.—Philo and other Theists followed Plato in - 
this, asserting, that though the world was made, 
yet it would never be corrupted, but have a post- 
eternity. Whereas all the ancient Atheists, namely, 
- fhose who derived the original of things from na- 
ture and fortune, did at once deny both eternities 
tothe world, past and future. ‘Though we can- 
not’say, that none but Atheists did-this; for Em- — 
pedocles and Heraclitus, and afterward hie Stoics, 
did not only suppose the world likewise. generated, 
VOL. I. s 


262 ETERNITY OF THE WORLD 


and to be again corrupted, but also that this had 
been, and would be done over and over aoe in 
infinite vicissitudes. 

Furthermore, as the world’s eternity was gene- 
rally opposed by all the ancient Atheists, so it 
was maintained also by same Theists, and that 
not only Aristotle,* but also before him, by Ocel- 
lus Lucanus’ at least, though Aristotle thought 
not fit to take any notice of hin ; as likewise the 
latter Platonists universally went that way, yet 
so, aS that they always supposed the world to 
have as much depended upon the Deity, as if it 
had been once created out of nothing by it. 

To conclude, therefore: neither they, who as- 
serted the world’s generation and temporary be- 
ginning, were all Theists, nor they, who maintain- 
ed its eternity, all Atheists; but before Aristotle’s 
time, the Atheists universally, aud most of the 
Theists, did both alike conclude the world to 
have been made; the difference between them ly- 
ing in this, that the one affirmed the world to 
have been made by God, the other by the fortuit- 
ous motion of matter. 

Wherefore, 1f we would put another difference 
betwixt the Theists and Atheists here, as to this 
particular, we must distinguish betwixt the system 
of the world and the substance of the matter. For 
the ancient Atheists, though they generally de- 
nied the eternity of the world, yet they supposed 
the substance of the matter, not only to have 
been eternal, but also self-existent and indepen- 
dent upon any other Being; they making it the 
first principle and original of all things, and con- 


2 Physic. Auscultat. lib. viii. 
> origi wérren ddctes, inter Scriptor. Mythol. a Tho. Gale cditos, p. 601. 


DENIED BY THE ATHEISTS. | 263 


Sequently the only Numen. Whereas the genuine 
Theists, though many of them maintained the 
world’s eternity, yet they all concluded, both the 
form and substance of it to have alwaysdepended . 
upon the Deity, as the light doth upon the sun : 
the Stoics with some others being here excepted. 

xvii. Aristotle tells us, some were of Opinion, 
that this Atheistic philosophy, which derives all 
things from senseless and stupid matter in the wav 
of forms and qualities, was of great antiquity, and . 
as old as any records of time amongst the Greeks; 
and not only so, but also that the ancient 
Theologers themselves entertained it: Eis! Met. 1.1. c 3. 
oe TWEC, OL Kat TOVE TapmaXaiove, Kat ToAv ™ 20 5. $68. eo 
™NG VvUV yEvéoEwC, Kal TPWTOUC GoXoynoavrae, 
obrwe olovrat wept THE pcewc dtaraBew* Oxsavov re yap 
Kal TOuv eTroincay THC YEVETEWC Twarépac, Kal Tov épKov Tw 
Dewy Bdwe, THY KkaXoupévny vr auTwv Srvya TWY TOUNTWY. 
TyLWTAaTOV meV ydp rd mozoutarov’ dpkoc S€ TO TyWTATOY 
torw’ There are some who conceive, that even the 
most ancient of all, and the most remote from this 
present generation, and they also who first theo- 
logized, did physiologize after this manner; foras- 
much as they made the Ocean and Tethys to have - 
been the original of generation ; and for this cause 
the oath of the gods is said to be by water (called | 
by the poets Styx), as being that from which they . 
all derived their original. For an oath ought to 
be by that, which is most honourable; and that 
which is most ancient, is most honourable.—In 
which words it is very probable, that Aristotle 
aimed at Plato; however, it iscertain, that Plato, in 
his Theetetus,* affirms this Atheistic.doctrine to 
have been very ancient, dri wavra Exyova pone Te Kat 

a P18. 
s2.. 


— 2964 MATERIALISM THE MOST 


kwnocwc, that all things were the offspring of flux 
and motion,—that is, that all things were made 
and generated out of matter ; and that he chargeth 
Homer with it, in deriving the original of the gods 
themselves in like manner from the Ocean (or 
floating matter) in this verse of his, 


‘Nusasov +e Osaiy yirverv, xal unvéen TrOuy, 


The father ofall gods the Ocean is, 
Tethys their mother. 


Wherefore, these indeed seem to have been the 
ancientest of all Atheists, who, though they ac- 
knowledged certain beings superior to men, which 
they called by the name of gods, did notwith- 
standing really deny a God, according to the true 
notion of him, deriving the original of all things 
whatsoever in the universe from the ocean, that is, 
fluid matter, or, which is all one, from night and 
chaos ; and supposing all their gods to have been 
made and generated, and consequently to be mor- 
tal and corruptible. Of which Atheistic theology 
Aristophanes gives us the description in his Aves,” 
after this manner: ‘“ That at first was nothing but 
Night and Chaos, which laying an egg, from thence 
was produced Love, that mingling again with 
Chaos, begot heaven, and earth, and animals, and 
all the gods.” | 


Xdog hy, met WE, EesBds ve pebday apiirov, xal Taprapoc sipic. 
TH 2, od aie, ob obpavdg hiv’ spiBoug 3 sv darsipoos xdArose 
Tixre wpoirioroy barnvigetoy voE hh pctravoersegoe dudy. 

- "BE ob OrEDLTBAAOLLE LLC Hea tPraorav"Epue 6 grobEsyoc. 
EriAPay vary awrspuyoy ypvoraiv. cluce aveccansas Nveric. 
Odrog 8 yder wrepbevrs piytle vuylor, xard Taerapoy avpiv, 
‘Endrrince yhvos neivipov, ual xparoy drmyaysy ke pbc, 
Tipitspoy 2” obx Tv ytvos ABavaron, mel "Egwe cuvkpifey arravra. 


-* Ver. 694. p. 404. edit. Kusteri. 


ANCIENT OF ALL ATHEISMS. 265 


First, all was chaos, one confused heap ; 

Darkness enwrapt the disagreeing deep ; 

In a mixt crowd the jumbling elements were, 

Nor earth, nor air, ner heaven did appear ; 

Till on this horrid vast abyss of things, 

Teeming Night, spreading o’er her coal-black Wings, 
Laid the first eeg ; whence, after time’s due course, 
Issu’d forth Love (the world’s prolific source) 
Glistering with golden wings ; which flattering o’er 
Dark Chaos, gendered all the numerous store 

Of animals and gods, &c, 


And whereas the poet there makes the birds to 
have been begotten between love and chaos before 
all the gods; though one might think this to have 
been done jocularly by him, merely to humour his 
plot; yet Salmasius* conceives, and not without 
some reason, that it was really a piece of the old 
Atheistic cabala, which therefore seems to haye 
run thus: That chaos or mattcr confusedly moved 
being the first original of all, things did from 
thence rise up gradually from lesser to greater 
perfection. First, manimate things, as the ele- 
ments, heaven, earth, and seas; then brute ani- 
mals; afterwards men, and last of all the gods. 
Asif not only the substance of matter, and those 
inanimate bodies of the elements, fire, water, air, 
and earth, were, as Aristotle somewhere speaks, 
according to the sense of those Atheistic 
theologers, *guoee mpotepa tov Oeov, Bet dz Kai Wt tar E 
raura, first in order of nature before God, % Prt. 
as being themselves also gods,—but also 
brute animals at least, if not men too. And this 
is the Atheistic creation of the world, gods and 
all, out of senseless and stupid matter, or dark 
chaos, as the only original Numen; the perfectly 
inverted order of the universe. 


* Excreitat. Plinian. in Solinum, tom. i. p. 309. 


266 SOME, WHO MADE LOVE THE 


xvi. But though this hypothesis be purely 
atheistical, that makes Love, which is supposed 
to be the original Deity, to have itself sprung at 
first from an egg of the night; and, consequent- 
ly, that all deity was the creature or offspring of 
matter and chaos, or dark fortuitous nature; yet 
Aristotle somewhere conceives, that not only 
Parmenides, but also Hesiod, and some others, 
who did in like manner make Love the supreme 
deity, and derive all things from Love and Chaos, 
were to be exempted out of the number of those 
Atheistic Materialists before described; foras- 
much as they seemed to understand by love, an 
active principle and cause of motion in the uni- 
verse ; which, therefore, could not spring from an 

egg af the night, nor be the creature of matter, 
but must needs be something independent on it, 
and in order of nature before it: “vworrevone 8 av 
ric, Heiosov rewrov Cyrnoat ro rowovroy, Kav et Tic aAXog, 
"Epwra n  Emuptav, év roc ovow nxev we dpyny, olor 
Kal Tlappevidne. Ka yao ouroe KaTacKkevalwy: Ty Tow 


\ f 
TAVTOS yivEecw, 


Tigariorov pcey (pnciy) sgwra Osav pentizaro sravresy. 


Hoiodoc 8, 


Tlavraw ply weotiora ydog yiver’> abray lorura 
Tat sipucregvoc, 

» y ” “ e ° a 

H2 £05, o¢ warricct ustomeire abavaraciy. 


we oéov Ev roig ovow vmap xe Tlva atrlay, wre Kunate Kat 
euweter ra mpayyara. roUTOUS Mey ovY THE yen Staveyeae 
EpL rou TIC TPWTOC, ekiorw Kpivey VorEpov" One would 
suspect, that Hesiod, and if there be any other 


¥ 


* Arislot. Metaphys. lib. i. cap. iv. p. 267. 


SUPREME DEITY, NO ATHEISTS. 207 


who made love or desire a principle of things in 
the universe, aimed at this very thing (namely, 
the settling of another active principle besides 
matter): for Parmenides, describing the genera- 
tion of the universe, makes Love to be the senior 
of all the gods; and Hesiod, after he had men- 
tioned chaos, introduced Love as the supreme 
Deity. As intimating herein, that besides matter, 
there ought to be another cause or principle, that 
should be the original of motion and activity, and 
also hold and conjoin all things together. But 
how these two principles are to be ordered, and 
which of them was to be placed first, whether: 
Love or Chaos, may be judged of afterwards.—In 
which latter words Aristotle seems to intimate, 
that Love, as taken for an active principle, was 
not to be supposed to spring from Chaos, but ra- 
ther to be in order of nature before it; and, there- 
fore, by this Love of their’s must needs be meant 
the Deity. And, indeed, Simmias Rhodius, in 
his Wiugs, a hymn made in honour of this Love, 
that is senior to all the gods, and a principle in 
the universe, tells us plainly, that itis uot Cupid, 
Venus’s soft and effeminate son, but another kind 
of love: 


Ouri 74 Kusmwgidoe wai’ 
‘Qavwitag 8 avris “Epwe xadavpens 
Odrt yae ixgiva Biaay, waphye 8 sresGei. 
Tata, Gararcac rt peuryol, ovgnviny was 18 Osog soos axes. 
‘Tar? ipo door pizapem syyin oxaxres, ixpanva vi opiy Oiirras, 


I’m not that wanton boy, 
The sea-froath goddess’s only joy. 
Pure heavenly Love I bight, and my 
Soft magic charms, not iron bands, fast tye 
Heaven, carth, and seas. ‘The gods themsclves do readily 
Stoop to my laws. The whole world dances to my harmony. 


268 SLIGHT DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE 

Moreover, this cannot be that Love neither, 
which is described in Plato’s Symposium (as some 
learned men have conceived), that was begotten 
between Penia and Porus, this being not a divine 
but demoniac thing (as the philosopher there de- 
clares), no God, but a demon only, or of a middle 
nature. For it is nothing but ¢:AoceAia, or the 
love of pulchritude as such, which, though rightly 
used, may perhaps wing and inspire the mind to 
noble and generous attempts, and beget a scorn- 
ful disdain in it of mean, dirty, and sordid things ; 
yet is capable of being abused also, and then it 
will stnike downward into brutishness and sensu- 
ality. But at best it is an affection belonging 
only to imperfect and parturient beings; and 
therefore could not be the first principle of all 
things. Wherefore, we see no very great reason 
but that, in a rectified and qualified sense, this 
may pass for true theology; that Love is the su- 
preme Deity and original of all things; namely, 
if by it be meant eternal, self-originated, intellec- 
tual Love, or essential and substantial goodness, 
that having an infinite overflowing fulness and fe- 
cundity, dispenses itself uninvidiously, according 
_ to the best wisdom, sweetly governs all, without 
any force or violence (all things being naturally 
subject to its authority, and readily obeying its 
Jaws), and reconciles the whole world into har- 
mony. For the Scripture telling us, that God is 
love, seems to warrant thus much to us, that love 
in some rightly qualified-sense is God. 

xix. But we are to omit the fabulous age, and 
to descend to the philosophical, to inquire there, 
who they were among the professed philosophers, 
who atheized in that manner before described. It 


DEMOCRITICS AND HYLOPATHIANS. 369 


is true, indeed, that Aristotle, in other places, ac- 
cuses Democritus and Leucippus of the very 
same thing, that is, of assigning only a material 
cause of the universe, and giving no account of 
the original of motion; but yet it is certain, that 
these were not the persons intended by him here; 
those which he speaks of being rite rev mpdrwv 
girocogncavrwy, Some of the first and most ancient 
philosophers of all— Moreover, it appears by the 
description of them, that they were such as did 
uot philosophize in the way of atoms, but resolved 
all things whatsoever in the universe into bAn 
and ra0n ric tAnc, matter, and the passions or af- 
fections, qualities and forms of matter; so that 
they were not Atomical, but Hylopathian philo- 
sophers. These two, the old Materialists and 
the Democritics, did both alike derive all things 
from dead and stupid matter, fortuitously moved; 
and the difference between them was only this, 
that the Democritics managed this business in the 
way of atoms, the other m that more vulgar way 
of qualities and forms: so that, indeed, this is 
really but one and the same Atheistic hypothesis, 
in two several schemes. And as one of them is 
called the Atomic Atheism, so the other, for dis- 
tinction sake, may be called the Hylopathian. 
xx. Now Aristotle tells us plainly, that these 
Hylopathian Atheists of his were all the first phi- 
losophers of the Ionic order and succession, be- 
fore Anaxagoras. Wherefore Thales being the 
head, he is consentaneously thereunto by Aristo- 
tle made to be a apynyoro Tne TOWMUTAE pirrosogiac, the 
prince and leader of this kind of Atheistical phi- 
losophy,—-he deriving all things whatsoever, as 
Homer had done betore bim, from water, and ac- 


970 — ANAXIMANDER THE FIRST 


knowledging no other principle but the fluid 
matter. 

Notwithstanding which accusation of -Aristo- 
tle’s, Thales is far otherwise represented by good 
authors: Cicero’ telling us, that, besides water, 
which he made to be the original of all corporeal 
things, he asserted also mind for another priuci- 
ple, which formed all things out of the water ; and 
Laertius’ and Plutarch’ recording, that he was 
thought to be the first of all philosophers, who 
determined souls to be immortal. He is said also 
to have affirmed,’ that God was apecBurarov ravrir, 
the oldest of all things, and that the world was 
ropa Ocov, the workmanship of God.—Clemens* 
likewise tells us, that being asked, « AavOava ro 
Oetov Tpacowy TL O avOpwiog 5 Kat TWC, ELITE, oars over 
Siavoovusvoc: whether any of a man’s actions could 
be concealed from the Deity? he replied, not so 
much as any thought.—Moreover, Laertius' fur- 
ther writes of him, that he held rov xoopov Huapvyor 
kat Saysovwv wAnpy, that the world was animated, 
and full of demons.—Lastly, Aristotle® himself 
elsewhere speaks of him as a Theist; xai tv ro dA~ 
of Tivec puyiy peuiy Oat gaciv. dev tows Kai Garne wnOy 
wavra 7ANpPN few etvar.. Some think (saith he) that 
soul and life is mingled with the whole universe ; 
and thence, perhaps, was that of Thales, that all 
things are full of gods. lea we conceive, 


* De Natur. Deor. lib. i. cap. x. p. 2894. tom. ix. oper: 

h Lib. i. segm. 24. p. 16. 

© De Placit. Philos. lib. iv. cap. ii. p. 908. tom. ii. oper. 

4 Diog. Laert. lib. i. segm. 35. p. 21. et Plutarch. in Convivio septem 
sapientum, p. 153. tom. ii. oper. 

«Clemens Alex. Stromat. lib. v. D. 704. edit. Potteri. 

f Lib.i. segm. 27. p. 18. 

® De Anima, lib. i, cap. v. p. 17. tom. ii. oper. 


ATHEISTICAL PHILOSOPHER. 274 


that there is very good reason, why Thales should 
be acquitted from this accusation of Atheism. 
Only we shall observe the occasion of his being 
thus differently represented, which seems to have 
been this; because, as Laertius* and Themistius? 
intimate, he left no philosophic writings or monu- 
ments of his own behind him (Anaximander being 
the first of all the philosophic writers): whence 
probably it came to pass, that, in after times, 
some did interpret his philosophy one way, some 
another; and that he is sometimes represented as 
a Theist, and sometimes again as a downright 
Atheist. 3 

But, though Thales be thus by good authority 
acquitted, yet his next successor, Anaximander, 
can by no means be excused from this imputa- 
tion; and, therefore, we think it more reasonable 
to fasten that title upon him, which Aristotle 
bestows on Thales, that he was apynyog rig ror 
avrng gitocogiac, the prince and founder of this 
Atheistic philosophy ;—who derived all things 
. from matter, in the way of forms and qualities; . 
he supposing a certain infinite materia prima, 
which was neither air, nor water, nor fire, but 
indifferent to every thing, or a mixture of all, 
to be the only principle of the universe, and lead- 
ing a train of many other Atheists after him, such 
as Hippo, surnamed a@seog by Simplicius and 
others, Anaximenes, and Diogenes Apolloniates, 
and many more; who, though they had some 
petty differences amongst themselves, yet all 
agreed in this one thing, that matter, devoid of 
understanding and life, was the first principle of 


a Lib. i. segm. 23. p.15.  ® Orat. xxvi. p.317. cdit. Harduin. 


272 ANAXIMANDER THE FIRST 


all things ; till at length Anaxagoras stopped this 
Atheistic current amongst these Ionic philoso- 
phers, introducing mind as a principle of the uni- 
yerse. , 

xxi. But there is a passage in Aristotle’s Phy- 
sics, which seems at first sight to contradict this 
again; and to make Anaximander algo not to 
have been an Atheist, but a Divine philosopher : 
where, having declared that several of the an- 
cient physiologers made arspov, or Infinite, to be 
the principle of all things, he subjoins these 
words, So xabarep déyouEv, ov ravTne apy, adr’ airy 
tov GdAwv evar Soke. Kat wepiéyev aravra Kat wavra 
kuBsovar, we gaclv Scot uy woLover Tapa TO aireipov aArXac 
airiac, otov vovv, 7) @tAiav. Kat rovro eivat ro Oetov, aba- 
varov yao Kat avwrIcov, Worep now oO ‘Avatiuaveoog 
Kal 06 wAgaTot Tov guowdAoywv' Therefore, there seems 
ta be na principle of this Infinite, but this to be 
the principle of other things, and to contain all 
things, and govern all things, as they all say, 
whe do not make, besides infinite, any other 
causes, such as mind or friendship; and that this 
is the only real Numen or God in the world, it 
being immortal and incorruptible, as Anaximan- 
dey affirms, and most of the physiologers.—From 
which place some late writers have confidently 
concluded, that Anaximander, with those other 
physiologers there mentioned, did, by Infinite, 
understand God, according to the true notion of 
him, or an Infinite Mind, the efficient canse of the 
ypiverse, and not senseless and stupid matter ; 
since this could not be said to be immortal, and 
to govern all things; and, consequently, that 
Aristotle grossly contradicts himself, in making 
all those Ionic philosophers before Anaxagoras to 


ATHEISTICAL PHILOSOPHER. — 273 


have been mere Materialists or Atheists. And it 
is possible, that Clemens Alexandrinus also might 
from this very passage of Aristotle's, not suffi- 
ciently considered, have been induced to rank 
Anaximander amongstthe Divine philosophers, as | 
he doth in his Protreptric to the Greeks ; where, 
‘after he had condemned certain of the old philo- 
sophers as Atheistic Corporealists, he subjoins 
these words: *rwv 8 adrwv girocddwv, 
boo Td OTOLYELA vregBavrec, érroAuT payovnoay eit 
Tl vifnhorepov Kat TEPITTOTEPOY, Ol MEV AVTWY TO ue tom 
diretpov kabuuvycav, ov Avatipavdpoc o Muan- . ; 
Gtioc nV, Kal ’Avatayopac 6 KraZopévioc, Kat o A@nvatoc 
‘Apytiaoc. But of the other philosophers, who, 
trauscending all the elements, searched after some 
higher and more excellent thing, some of them 
praised Infinite, amongst which was Anaximan- 
der the Milesian, Anaxagoras the Clazomenian, - 
and the Athenian Archelaus.—As if these three 
had all alike acknowledged an incorporeal Deity, 
and made an infinite mind, distinct from matter, 
the first original of all things. , 
But that forecited passage of Aristotle’s alone, | 
well considered, will itself afford a sufficient con- 
futation of this opinion; where Anaximander, 
with those other physiologers, is plainly opposed 
to Anaxagoras, who, besides infinite senseless 
matter, or similar atoms, made mind. to bea prin- 
ciple of the universe, as also to Empedotles, who 
made a plastic life and nature, called friesdshrp, — 
another principle of the corporeal. world; from 
whence it plainly follows, that Anaximander. and | 
the rest supposed not infinite mind, but infinite 
matter, without either mind or plastic matter, to 


974 INFINITE MATTER, ANAXIMANDER'S 


have been the only original of all things, and 
therefore the only Deity or Numen. 

Moreover, Democritus being linked.in the con- 
text with Anaximander, as making both of them 
alike, ro arreipov, or Infinite, to be the first princi- 
ple of all; it might as well be inferred from this 
place, that Democritus was a genuine Theist, as 
Anaximander. But as Democritus’s only prin- 
ciple was infinite atoms, without any thing of 
mind or plastic nature; so likewise wac Anaxi- 
mander’s an infinity ae senseless stupid matter ; 
and, therefore, they were both of them Atheists 
alike, though Anaximander, in the cited words, 
had the honour (if it may be so called) to be-only 
named, as being the most ancient of all those 
Atheistical physiologers, and the ringleader of 
them. 

xxi. Neither ought it at alltoseem strange, that 
Anaximander, and those other Atheistical Mate- 
rialists, should call infinite matter, devoid of all 
understanding and life, the ré @ciov, the Deity or 
Numen, since to all those, who deny a God (ac 
cording to the true notion of him), whatsoever else 
they substitute in his room, by making it the first 
principle of all things, though it be senseless and 
stupid matter, yet this must needs be accounted 
the only Numen, and divinest thing of all. 

Nor is it to be wondered at neither, that this 
infinite, being understood of matter, should be 
said to be, not only incorruptible, but also immor- 
tal, these two being often used as synonymous and | 
equivalent expressions. For thus in Lucretius,* 


a Lib. i. vers. 672. . 


SUPREME DEITY. — 275 


the corruption of all inanimate bodies. is called 
death: 

Mors ejus quod fuit ante ; 
_ And again, 


@ Quando aliud ex alio reficit natura, nec ullam 
Rem gigni patitur, nisi morte adjutam aliena. 


‘In like manner mortal i is used by him for cor- 
ruptible : 


b Nam siquid mortale a cunctis partibus esset, 
Ex oculis res quzeque repente erepta periret. 
And this kind of language was very familiar with 
Heraclitus,° as appears from these passages of 
his, Tupoc Oavaroc, age “yéveote’ Kat aépoc Oavaroc vsare +yé- 
veoic’ ‘The death of fire is generation to air; and. 
the death of air is generation to water ;—that is, 
the corruption of them: And again, puynow Bavaroc, 
Bowp yeviaBan" voare Oe davaroc, yn yevioBat’ Itis death 
to vapour or air, to be made water; and death 
to water, to be made earth.—In which Heraclitus 
did but imitate Orpheus, as appears from this. . 
verse of his, cited by Clemens Alexandrinus :* 


"Eossy Uw uy, Odvarag F cdarecow amok 


Besides which, there are many examples of this 
use of the word a@avaroc, in other Greek writers, © 
and some in Aristotle’ himself, who, speaking of 

the heavens, attributes afavacia and adwrne to them, 

as. one and the same thing; and also affirms, that. 
the ancients therefore made heaven to be the seat — 
of the Deity, we dvra povoy afavarov, as being only 
immortal,—that is, incorruptible. 


» Lib. i. vers. 264, 265. > Lib. i. vers, 219. 
© Vide Henr. Stephan. in Poesi Philosophie. P. 137. 

@ Stromat. lib. vi.cap. ii. p. 476. 

© De Coelo, lib. i. cap. iii. p. 614, 615. tom. i. oper. 


276 INFINITE MATTER, ANAXIMANDER’S 


Indeed, that other expression, at first sight, 
would stagger one more, where it is said of this 
amepov, oF infinite,—that it doth not only contain, 
but also govern all things: but Simplicius’ tells us, 
that this is to be understood likewise of matter, 
and that no more was meant by it, than that all 
things were derived from it, and depended on it, 
as ihe first principle ; 3; 0 8: do-yor rou TOLOUTOEC ep 
TWD gvoikwy apywy, arr ov yt aEpL TW UmEp gusty, eu O& 
Kat TELE YELY éXeyov Kat kuBeovayv oveev Oavpacrov. ro pév 
yap TEple yey UTap Yel TW VALKED arte, we o1a Tavrwy yo- 
povvrt, TO Of kuBeovav we Kata THv érirnosornra avrou, TeV 
va avTou yevouévwv" ‘These philosophers spake only 
of natural principles, and not of supernatural ; 
and though they say, that this infinite of their's 
does both contain and govern all things, yét this 
is not at all to be wondered at; forasmuch as con- 
taining belongs to the material cause, as that 
which goes through all things, and likewise go- 
verning, as that from which all things, according 
to a certain aptitude of it, are made.— Philoponus” 
(who was a Christian) represents Aristotle’s sense 
. in this whole place more fully, after this manner : 
« Those of the ancient physiologers, who had no 
respect to any active efficient cause, as .Anaxa- 
goras-had to mind, and Empedocles to friendship 
and contention, supposed matter to be the only 
cause of all things; and that it was infinite in mag- 
nitude, ingenerable and incorru ptible, esteeming it 
to be a certain Divine thing, which did govern all, 
or preside over the compages of the universe, and 


* Commentar. in oeto Libros Physic. Auscultat, Aristot. lib. i. cap. 
iii. p 32. edit. Aldin. 
- » Comment. in iv. primos Libros Physicor. lib. i. cap. Hil. a. 10. eee 
cap. i. edit. Graecee Venet. 1535. fol. | 


SUPREME DEITY. 277 


to be ieamontal that is, undestroyable. “This 
Anaximenes said to be air, Thales to be water, 
but Anaximander, a certain middle thing; some 
one thing, and some another.” Kat ot3& ¥ Bavpa- 
oTOV ono, év ™ n kal’ 4 npc TEPLOOW Tovc mpwrous un emiori- 
eign rm speornxvia Tw éAwy Suvapuet, & ey TWY srouxetwn, 
Oreo ay uTorrevev éxacros, aittov rotc GAAote TE ‘etval, TOUTO 
evOvc kai Gedv vrovoncac’ And Aristotle in this pas- 
‘sage tells us, that it is no wonder, if they, who 
did not attend to the active cause, that presides 
over the universe, did look upon some one of the 


elements (that which each of them thought to be 


the cause of all other things) as God. But as 
they, considering only the material principle, con- 
ceived that to be the cause of all things; so Anax- 
agoras supposed mind to be the principle of all 
things, and Empedocles, friendship on conten- 
tion.— 

xxii, But to make it further appear, that 
Anaximander’s philosophy was purely Atheisti- 
cal, we think it. convenient to shew what account 
is given of it by other writers. Plutarch, in his 
Placita Philosophorum, does at once eneny re- 
present the Anaximandrian philosophy, : | 
and censure it after this manner : ‘Avaéi- err ot 
pavecoc pnt, TWY OVTWY Thy apy ny Elvat ro amret- F oper. i 
pov, &k yap TrovTOU Tavra yivecOat, Kal etc TOUTO , 
wavra p0eipecBar, O10 Kat yevvacbat ameipouc Koopoue, Kal 
wari Oeipecbar’ Aéyet ovv Sia Te AreIpOv zor, tva wn EA- 
Actrn 7 yevente n upurrapévy® duapraver’ oe otros, Hy pev 
thaw aropatvouevoc, TO O& TOLOUY alrioy avarpur, “ro Os 
dmrerpov ovoev @dXo, 3 4 vAn éoriv. ov Suvara Ss n° SAN Ewat 
évipyeta, Edy my TO TOLOUY UTOKENTaL’ Anaximander the 


Milesian affirms Infinite to be the first.principle 3 


and that all things are generated out Por it, and 
VOL. I. T 


278 A FURTHER ACCOUNT OF THE 


corrupted again into it ; and therefore that infinite 
worlds are successively thus generated and cor- 
rupted. And he gives the reason why it 1s infi- 
nite, that so there might be never any fail of ge- 
nerations. But he erreth in this, that assigning 
only a material cause, he takes away the active 
principle of things. For Anaximander’s Infinite 
is nothing else but matter; but matter can prodace 
nathing, unless there be also an active cause.— 
Where he shews also, how Anaximenes followed 
. Anaximander herein, in assigning only a material 
cause of the universe, without any efficient ; 
though he differed from him, in making the first 
matter to be air, and deriving all things from 
thence by rarefaction and condensation. Thus, 
we see, it is plain, that Anaximander’s Infinite 
was no.infinite mind, which is the true Deity, but 
only infinite matter, devoid of any life or 
By, hee active power. Eusebius is more parti- 
“ed. Steph. cular in giving an account of Anaximan-. 
— der’s Cosmopczia ; ; TO aTretpov pavat Thy Ta- 
cay airiay EyEly THe TOU Tavroe yevioswe Té Kat pbopac, 2 
| ob on png TOUC TE ovpavous anoxexpiofar, Kat KaBoXov rove 
dravrac a7eipovc dura Koopouc" prot Oe TO ik Tov “ dLotov, , 
yovyjoy Oepuou TE Kat Prxpov, Kara Tv. yeveow TOVOE Tov 
KOoHLOV amoxpeffnvat, Kat ma EK TOUTOU gdoyoC apaipay Wwe- 
pipunvat TW) rept HV ye aéou, we TW. ». dévopy prowy. 7 NC Ti 
voe aroppaysions, Kal cig made drox)ersBetong KuKAoue,, 
UrooTnval TOV FAY, Kal THY cEANYNY, Kal TOUC aotépac’ 
Anaximander. affirms. Infinite (matter) to be the 
only cause of the generation and corruption of all 
things; and that the heavens, and infinite worlds, 
were made out of it, by way of secretion or segre- 
gation... Also that those generative principles of. 
heat and. cold, that were ected in it from eter- 


ANAXIMANDRIAN PHILOSOPHY. 279 
nity, being segregated, when this world was made, 
a certain sphere of flame or fire did first arise and 
encompass the air, which surrounds this earth 
(as a bark doth a tree), which being afterwards 
broken, and divided into smaller spherical bodies, 
constituted the sun and moon and all the stars.— 
Which Anaximandrian Cosmopeia, was briefly 
hinted at by Aristotle in these Words, Se 

YS. L 1.c. 4, 
ot & ¢ EK TOU ‘06, zyousac rac évavT.ornrac, éK- 
Kolvovew, Warp “Avakipavdooc ons Some philoso- 
phers generate the world by the secretion and se- 
gregation of inexistent contrarieties, as Anaximan- 
der speaks.— And elsewhere in his Me- 
taphysics, he takes notice of ‘Avaguav- 
Spou rd piyja, Anaximandei’s inixture of things.— 
Wherice we conclude, that Anaximander’s [nfi- 
nite was nothing else but an infinite chaos of mat- 
ter, in which were either actually or potentially, 
contained all manner of qualities ; by the fortuit- 
ous secretion and segregation of which, he sup- 
posed infinite worlds fo be successively generated 
and corrupted. So that we may now éasily guess, 
whence Leucippus and Democritus had their infi- 
nite worlds, and perceive how near akin these two 
Atheistic hypotheses were. But it will not be 
amiss to take notice also of that particular conceit, 
which Anaximander had, concerning the first ori- 
| ginal of brute animals, and mankind. Of the 
former, Plutarch gives us this account: - 
Avagipavdpoc Ev vypy yevunOnvat ra mpwra Zwoa, Fla. Ph. 1. 5. 


C19. p. 908. 
proroie TEMLEYOLLEVA axavbuiceor, mpoPawovone tem. ii. oper. 


L: 14. ¢. 4. 


ott Tne.  prukiac, aroPatie ¢ éml TO Enporepor, | Kat: . 

TEOIPPNYvUpEvov TOU Y gAoLov, Ent orALyov Xpovey ieabiva 

That the first animals were generated i moisture, 

and encompassed about with cerfain thorny barks, 
T 2 


280 <A FURTHER ACCOUNT OF THE 


by which they were guaided and defended; which, 
after further growth, coming to’ be more dry and 
cracking, they issued forth, butlived only a short 
time after—And as for the first original of men, 
Eusebius represents his sense thus: ‘EE 
E, P.1. 4. 
a\\ondwy ww 0 avOpwrroc eyevonbn, & éK ‘TOU Ta 


“piv adda St éavtwv TaD véweoOa, povov oe TOV avOpwrrov 
mrohuypoviou detsBat TiOnvncewe, Sto Kal Kar apyac. LOUK av 
‘more rowvrov ovta SiacwOjvas: Men were at first gene- 
rated in the bellies of other animals, forasmuch as 
all other animals, after they are brought forth, are 
quickly able to feed and nourish themselves, but 
man alone needs to be nursed up a long time ; and 
therefore could not be preserved at first, in any 
other way.—But Plutarch expresseth 
Sy ib. 8. this something more particularly : “Avaki- 
‘tom. ii, oper. pavopoc.év iyQow eyyevicPar 2) TOWTOY avOou- 
: woug arrogatverat, Kau TpagevTac Kat evopEvoug 
ikavovc tauvroic Bonbew, exPAnOnvat TnvikavtTa Kat yne 
AaBésba. ‘Anaximander concludes, that men were 
at first generated in the bellies of fishes, and be- 
ing there nourished, till they grew strong, and 
were able to shift for themselves, they were after- 
ward cast out upon dry Jand.—Lastly, Anaxi- 
mander’s theology is thus both represented to us, 
and censured, by Velleius, the Epicurean 

De Nat. D. 
Tid oe philosopher | in Cicero: “ Anaximandri 
Pea i oper, OPinio est nativos esse.deos, longis inter- 
| vallis orientes occidentesque, eosque in- 
numerabiles esse mundos: sed nos deum nisi sem- 
piternum intelligere gui possumus ?”. Anaximan- 
der’s opinion is, that the gods are native, rising 
and vanishing again, in.long periods of times ; and 
that these gods are innumerable worlds: but how 
* can we conceive that to be a God, which 1s not 


ANAXIMANDRIAN PHILOSOPHY. 281 


eternal?—We learn from hence, that Anaximan- — 
der did indeed so far comply with vulgar opinion, 
as that he retained the name of gods; but, how- 
ever, thathe really denied the existence of the thing 
itself, even according to the judgment of this 
Epicurean philosopher. Forasmuch as all his 
gods were native and mortal, and indeed nothing 
else, but those innumerable worlds, which he sup- 
posed in certain periods of time to be successively 
generated and destroyed. Wherefore, it is plain, 
that Anaximander’s only real Numen, that is, his 
first principle, that was ingenerable and incor- 
ruptible, was nothing but infinite matter, devoid 
of all understanding and life, by the fortuitous se- 
cretion of whose inexistent qualities and parts, he 
supposed, first, the elements of earth, water, air, 
and fire, and then, the bodies of the sun, moon, and 
stars, and both bodies and souls of men and other. 
animals, and lastly, innumerable or infinite such 
worlds as these, as so many secondary and native 
gods (that were also mortal), to have been gene- 
rated, according to that erence eypemicsys de- 
scribed in Plato.* | 
xxiv. It is certain, that dhs wales in all ages : 
have been very ill judges of Theists and Atheists, 
they having condemned many hearty Theists, as 
guilty of Atheism, merely because they dissented 
from them in some of their superstitious rites and 
opinions. As for example; Anaxagoras the Cla- 
zomenian, though he was the first of all the Ionic 
philosophers (unless Thales ought to be excepted) 
who made an infinite mind to be a principle, that 
is, asserted a Deity, according to the true notion 


2 De Legibus, lib. x. p. 666. - 


282, THEISTS AND ATHEISTS 


* 


of it ; : yet he was, notwithstanding, generally cried 
Pla Apo. down for an, Atheist, merely because 
Socr. p.362. he affirmed the sun to be pudpov S.aTrupov, 
amass of fire, ora fiery globe, and the moon to be 
an earth ; -—that is, because he denied them to be 
animated and: endued with understanding souls, 

and consequently to be gods. So likewise So- 
crates was both accused, and condemned, for 
atheistical impiety, as denying all gods, though 
nothing. was pretended to. be proved against him, 
but only this, that he did eave Siaokew jn, 
vomizetv, ove n TOXIC voutlet, | érepo. dé Satovee 
Kata. eicgégewv, teach that those were not true gods 
which the city worshipped, and in the room thereof 
introduce othernew gods.—And lastly, the Christ- 
ians in the primitive times, for the same reason, 
were vulgarly traduced for Atheists by the Pa-. 
gas, as Justin Martyr declares 1 ID, his. Apology,* | 
adcor keeAnpeba, Kat opodoyoupey TWY TOLOYTWY vomZopéve 
Dewy aBeor slvr We: are called Atheists; and we 
confess ourselves such, in respect of those gods 
which they worship, but not of the true God.— 
And as the vulgar have unjustly condemned many 
‘Theists for Atheists, so have they also acquitted 
many rank Atheists from the guilt of that crime, 
merely. because they externally. complied with 
them, in their religious worship, and forms of 
speech. Neither is it only the vulgar, that have 
been imposed upon herein, but also the generality 
of learned ‘men, who have been commonly so su- 
perficial i in this business, as that they have hardly 
taken notice of above three or four Atheists, that 
ever were in former times, as, namely, Diagoras, 

Theodorus, Euemerus, and Protagoras; whereas 


2 P. 56. oper. 


"Plat. Apol. 


MISFAKEN FOR ONE ANOTHER. 983 


Democritus and Anaximander wereasfank Athe- 
ists as any of them all, though they had the wit to 
carry themselves externally with more cautiows- 
tiess. And indeed it was.really one and the self- 
same form of Atheism, which both these enter- 
tained, they deriving all things alike, from dead 
and stupid matter fortuitously moved, the differ- 
ence betweén them being only this, that they ma- 
naged it two different ways ;. Anaximander in the | 
way of qualities and forms, which is the more vul- 
gar and obvious kind of Atheism ;.bat Democritus - 
-in.the way of atoms and figures, which seems to 
be a more learned kind of Atheism. 

And: though we do not doubt at all, but that — 
Plato, ia his tenth De Legibus, where he attacks: 
Atheism, did intend the confutation as well of the 
Democritic as the Anaximandrian Atheism: yet! 
whether it were, because he had no mind to take’ 
any notice at all of Democritus, who is not so 
much as once mentioned by him any where, or else 
because he was not so perfectly acquainted with 

‘that. Atomic way. of physiologizing, certain It is,. 
that he there.describes: the Atheistic hypothesis — 
more according: to the Anaximandrian: than the 
Democritic form. For when he represents the - 
Atheistic generation of heaven and earth; and all. 
things in them, as resulting from the fortuitous: 
commixture of hot and‘ cold, hard and soft, moist: 
and. dry.corpuscula ; this is.clearly more agreeable: 
withthe Anaximandrian generation of the world,: 

by the secretion of inexistent contrarieties: in the 
matter, than the Democritic Cosmopeia, ‘by. the: 
fortuitous. concourse 6f atoms, age of ali man. 

ner of qualities and forms. a 

Some indeed: seem to call. that een of Athe- 


- 28-4 WHY DEMOCRITUS AND LEUCIPPUS 


ism, that deduces all things from matter, in the 
way of.qualities and forms, by the name of Peri- 
patetic, or Aristatelic Atheism; we suppose for — 
this reason, because Aristotle sn veilogied in 
that way of forms and qualities, educing them out 
of the power of the matter. But since Aristotle 
himself cannot be justly taxed for an Atheist, this 
form of Theism ought rather, as we conceive, to 
be denominated from Anaximander, and called 
the Anaximandrian Atheism. | 
xxv. Now the reasons, why Democritus and 
Leucippus new-modelled Atheism, fromthe Anax- 
imandrian and Hylopathian into the Atomic form, 
seein to have been chiefly these:—first, because 
they, being well instructed in that Atomic way of 
physiologizing, were really convinced, that it was 
not only more ingenious, but also more agreeable 
to truth; the other, by real qualities and forms, 
seeming a thing unintelligible. Secondly, because 
they foresaw, as Lucretius intimates, that the pro- 
duction of forms and qualities out of nothing, and 
the corruption of them again into.nothing, would 
prepare an easy way for men’s belief of a Divine 
creation and annihilation. And lastly, because, 
as we have already suggested, they plainly per- 
ceived, that these forms and qualities of matter 
were of a doubtful nature; and therefore, as they 
were sometimes made a shelter for Atheism, so 
they might also prove, onthe contrary, an asylum 
for Corporeal Theism; in that it might possibly be 
supposed, that either the matter of the whole 
world, or else the more subtile and fiery part of it, 
was originally endued with an understanding 
form. or quality, and consequently, the whole an 
animal or god. Wherefore, they took another 


NEW-MODELLED ATHEISM. 285 
more effectual course, to secure their Atheism; 
and exclude all possibility of a corporeal God, by 
deriving the original of all things from atoms, 
devoid of all forms and qualities, and having no- 
thing in them, but magnitude, figure, site, and 
motion, as the first principles; it following un- 
avoidably from thence, that life and understand- 
ing, as well as those other qualities, could be only 
accidental and secondary results from certain for- 
tuitous concretions and contextures of atoms; so 
that the world could be made by no previous coun- 
_ sel or understanding, and therefore by no Deity. | 

xxvi. We have here represented three several 
forms of Atheism—the Anaximandrian, the Demo- 
critical, and the Stratonical. But there is yet ano-_ 
ther form of Atheism, different from them all, to 


be taken notice of, which is such, as supposes one 


kind of plastic and spermatic, methodical and ar- 
tificial nature, but without any sense of conscious 
understanding, to preside over the whole world, 
and dispose and conserve all things, in that regu- 
lar frame in which they are. Sucha form of Athe- 
ism as this is hinted to us in that doubt- 

ful passage of Seneca’s; “Siveanimal est 3 Gost 
mundus, (for so it ought to be read, and : 
not anzma) sive corpus natura gubernante, ut ar- 
bores, ut sata;” whether the whole world be an ani- 
mal (i.e. endued with one sentient and rational 
life), or whether it be only a body governed by (a 
certain plastic and.methodical, but senseless) na- 
ture, as trees, and other plants or vegetables.—In. 
which words are two several hypotheses of the 
mundane system, sceptically proposed by. one, 
who was a Corporealist, and took it for granted 
that all was body. First, that the whole world, 


236. WHEREIN THE COSMO-PLASTIC ATHEISM 
though having nothing but body.in it, yet was not- 


withstanding an animal, as-our human bodies. 


are, endued with one senttent orrational hfeandna-. 
ture, one soul or mind, governing and ordering the 
whole. .Which corporeal Cosmo-zoism we do not 
reckon amongst the forms of Atheism, but rather 
account it fora kind of spurious Theism, or The- 
ism disguised in a Paganic dress, and not without 
a. complication. of many false apprehensions, con- 
' cerning the Deity, 1n it. The second is, that the 
whole world is no animal, bat, as it were, one huge 
plant or vegetable, a, body endued. with one- plastic 
er spermatic nature, branching out the whole, or- 
derly and methodically, but without any under: 
standing or sense. And this must needs be ac- 
counted a form of Atheism, because it does not 
derive the original of things in the universe from — 
any clearly. intellectual principle or. conscious 
yature. 

-xxvit. Now ins fee m' of Atheism, ahich ‘Sup- 
poses the whole world (there being nothing but 
body in it) not to. be an animal, but-only a great 
plant or vegetable, having one spermatic form, or 
plastic nature, which, without. any conscious.rea- 
son or understanding, orders the whole, though it 
have some bearer correspondence with that Hylo- 
zeic form of Atheism before described, in-that-it: 
does not suppose nature to be-a mere fortuitous, 
but-a kindof artificial thing; yet it differs from it! 
in this, that the Hylozoic supposing all matter, as 
such, to have life essentially belonging to.it, must 
therefore needs attribute to. every part of matter 
(or,at least every particular. totum, that-is one by: 
continuity) a distinct plastic life of its own, but: 
acknowledge no one common life, as ruling. over: 


, DIFFERS FROM THE HYLOZOIC. 287. 


the whole corporeal universe ; and consequently: 
impute the original of all (ngs (as hath been al- 
ready observed) to a certain mixture of chance,, 
and, plastic or methodical nature, both together. 
Whereas the cosmo-plastic Atheism quite ex-. 
cludes. fortune or chance, subjecting all things to. 
the regular and orderly fate of one plastic or plan-. 
tal nature, ruling over-the whole. Thus that phi-. 
Josopher before mentioned concludes, that whe-— 
ther the world were an animal (in the Stoical sense). 
or whether it were a mere plant or vege- 

table, “ Ab initio ejus usque ad exitum, 235°" 3. 
quicquid facere, quicquid pati debeat, 
inclusum est. Ut in semine, omnis futuri ratio. 
hominis. comprehensa. est. Et legem, barbe. at. 
canorum nondun_natus. infans haber: ; totius enim, 
corporis, et sequentis etatis, in parvo occultoque 
liaeamenta sunt. Sic origo mundi non magis solem, 
et lunam, et, vices. syderum, et animalium ortus, 
quam quibus-mutarentur terranea, continuit. Jn. 
his fuit, inundatio, que non secus quam hyems,, 
quam estas, , lege mundi venit.”. Whatsoever,. 
from the beginning to the end of it, it can either do. 
or suffer, it was all at first included in the nature. © 
of.the whole; asin the seed is contained the whole. 
delineation of the future man, and the embryo or. 
unborn infant hath already in it the law of a bear d. 
and grey hairs; the lineaments of the whole body, 
and of its following age, being there described as 
it were in a little and obscure compendium. In. 
like manner, the original and first rudiments ofthe, 
world, contained in them not only the sun and- 
‘moon, the. courses of the stars, and the generation. 
of animals, but also the vicissitudes of all terres- 
trial things; and every deluge or inundation, of wa- 


288 THE COSMO-PLASTIC ATHEISM 


ter comes to pass no less by the law of the world 
(its spermatic or plastic nature) than winter and 
summer doth. 

xxvil1. We do not deny it to be sauce, but 
that some in all ages might have entertained such 
_ an Atheistical conceit as this, that the original of 
this whole mundane system was from one artificial, 
orderly, and methodical, but senseless nature 
lodged in the matter; but we cannot trace the 
footsteps of this doctrine any where so much as’ 
among the Stoics, to which sect Seneca, who. 
speaks so waveringly and uncertainly in this 
point (whether the world were an animal or a 
plant), belonged. And, indeed, divers learned- 
men Have suspected, that even the Zenonian and’ 
-Heraclitic Deity itself, was no other than such a 
plastic nature or spermatic principle in the uni- 
verse, asin the seeds of vegetables and animals 
doth frame their respective bodies orderly and’ 
artificially. Nor can it be denied, but that there 
hath been just cause given for such a suspicion ; 
forasmuch as the. best of Stoics, sometimes con- 
founding God with nature, seemed to make him 
nothing but an artificial fire, orderly and metho- 
dically proceeding to generation: And it was fa- 
iniliar with them, as Laertius* tells us, to call 
God ozepparicov Aéyov rou Kéopou, the spermatic rea- 
son, or form of the world.— Nevertheless, because 
‘Zeno’ and others of the chief Stoical doctors did 
also many times assert, that there was ¢voc voeod 
kat Aoyun, a rational and intellectual nature (and 
therefore not a plastic principle only) in the mat- 
ter of the universe; as, likewise, that the whole 


a Lib. vii. segm. 136. p. 450. : 
» Vide Diog. Luert. lib. vii. p. 148. p. 459. 


ASSERTED BY SPURIOUS STOICs. 289 . 


world was an animal, and not a mere plant; there- 
fore, we incline rather to excuse the generality of 
the first and most ancient Stpics from | the imputa- 
tion of Atheism, and to account this form of 
Atheism, which we now speak of, to be but a. 
_certain degeneracy from the right Heraclitic and 
Zenonian cabala, which seemed to contain these 
_two things in it; first, that there was an animalish, 
sentient, and intellectual. nature, or a conscious 
soul and mind, that presided over the whole 
world, though lodged immediately in the fiery 
matter of it; secondly, that this sentient and in- 
palleet eel naire. or corporeal soul and mind of 
the universe, did contain also under it, or within 
it, as the inferior part of it, a certain plastic na- 
ture, . or. spermatic principle, which was proper- 
ly the fate of all things. For thus Heraclitas* 
defined Fate, Ao-yov Tov dia THE ovoiac Tov fa Suy- 
KOVTQ, 7 aiféprov owpa, omepya TNC Tou Tavroc Eve égewe’. 
A certain reason passing through the substance 
of the whole world, or an ethereal body, that was 
the seed of the generation of the universe.— And 
Zeno’s? first principle, as it is said to be an intel- 
lectual nature, so it is also said to have contained 
in it ravrac rove oreppatikovs Aoyoue, kal ove Exava, 
kal’ ciuapuevny ylyverat, all the spermatic reasons. 
and forms, by which every thing is done accord- 
ing to fate——However, though this seem to have 
been the genuine doctrine, both of Heraclitus and 
Zeno, yet others of their followers afterwards 
divided these two things from one another, and 

taking only the latter of them, made the plastic 


. Apud Plutarch. de Placitis Philosophor. lib. i, cap. xxviii. p. 885, 
tom. ii. oper. 
> Vide eee ubi supra. lib. i. cap. Vil. p. 881. 


290 MANY FANATICAL ATHEISTS, 


or spermatic nature, devoid of all animality or 
conscious intellectuality, to be the highest prin- 
ciple in the universe. ‘Thus Laertins tells us,” 

that Boethus, an eminent and -famous Stoical 
doctor, did plainly deny the world to be an ani- 
mal, that is, to have any sentient, conscious, or 
intellectual nature presiding over it; and, conse- 
quently, must needs make it to be but “ corpus 
natura gubernante, ut arbores, ut sata,” a -body 
‘governed ‘by a plastic or vegetative nature, as 
trees, plants, and herbs And as ‘it is possible, 
that other Stoics and Heraclitics might have done 
the like before Boethus, so it is very probable, 
that he had after him many followers; amongst 
which, as Plinius Secundus may be reckoned for 
one, so Seneca himself was not without a doubt- 
ful tinctute of this Atheism, as hath been already 


shewed. Wherefore this form of Atheisin, which _ 


stipposes one plastic or Spermatic nature, one 
plantal or vegetative life in the whole world, as 
the highest principle, may, for distinction sake, 
be called the Psendo-Stoical, or Stoical Atheism. | 
' xxix. Besides these philosophic Atheists, 
whose several forms we have now described, it 
cannot be doubted, but that there have been in: 
all ages many other Atheists that have not at 
all philosophized, nor pretended to maintain any 
particular Atheistic system-or hypothesis, in a 
way of reason, but were only led by a cértain 
dull and sottish, though confident disbelief. of 
whatsoever they could not either see or feél; which 
kind of Atheists may, therefore, well bé account- 
ed enthusiastical or fanatical Atheists. Though 


2. Lib, vil. segm, 143. p. 455. 


BESIDES THOSE WHO PHILOSOPHIZED. 291 


Ht be true, in the meantime, that even all manner - 
of Atheists whatsoever, and those of them, who. 
most of all pretend to reason and philosophy, 
may, in some sense, be justly. styled also both. en- 
thusiasts and fanatics. Forasmuch as they are 
not Jed or carried on, into this way of atheizing, 
by any clear dictates of their reason or under- 
standing, but only by an copy ddoyoc, a certain 
blind and irrational impetus ;-—they being, as it 
_were, inspired to it by that lower earthly life and 
nature, which is called in the Scripture oracles, 
ro mvevja Tou Koopov, the spirit of the world, or a 
mundane spirit,—and is opposed to the ré rvevpa rd 
éx tov Ocov, the Spirit that is of God.—For, when 
the apostle speaks after this manner, ‘“‘We have 
not received the spirit of the world, but the Spirit 
that is of God,” he seems to intimate thus much _ 
to us, that as some men were led and inspired by 
a Divine spirit, so others again are inspired by a 
mundane spirit, by which is meant the earthly 
life. Now the former of these two are not to be 
accounted enthusiasts, as the word is now com- 
monly taken in a bad sense; because the Spirit of 
God is no irrational thing, but either the very 
self-same thing with reason, or else such a thing 
as Aristotle (as it were vaticinating concerning it) 
somewhere calls Acyou re xpetrrov, a Certain better 
and diviner thing than reason;—and Plotinus, 
pilav Aoyou, the root of reason.—But, on-the con- 
trary, the mundane spirit, or earthly life, is irra-’ 
tional sottishness ; and they, who are atheistically 
inspired by it (how abhorrent soever they may 
otherwise seem to be from enthusiasm.and revela- 
tions); are notwithstanding really no better than a‘ 
kind of. Pe witenes: enthusiasts and blind spiritati, 


292 - THE QUATERNIO OF ATHEISMS, 


that are wholly ridden and acted by a dark, nar- 
row, and captivated principle of life, and, to use 
their own language, in-blown by it, and by it be- 
reft, even in speculative things, of all free reason 
and understanding. Nay, they are fanatics too, 


however that word seems to have a more peculiar 


respect to something of a Deity; all Atheists 
being that blind goddess Nature’s fanatics. 


xxx. We have described four several forms of 
Atheism :—first, the Hylopathian or Anaximan- _ 
drian, that derives all things from adead and 


_ stupid matter, in the way of qualities and forms, 


f 


generable and corruptible: secondly, the Atom- 
ical or Democritical, which doth the same thing 
in the way of atoms and figures: thirdly, the 
Cosmo-plastic or Stoical Atheism, which supposes 
one plastic and methodical but senseless nature, 
to preside over the whole corporeal universe ; 

and, lastly, the Hylozoic or Stratonical, that at- 
tributes to all matter, as such, a certain living and 
energetic nature, but devoid of all animality, sense, 


~ and consciousness. And as we do not meet with . 


any other forms or schemes of Atheism besides 
these four, so we conceive, that there cannot ea- 
sily be any other excogitated or devised ; and that 


_ upon these two. following considerations : first, 


because all Atheists are mere Corporealists, that 
is, acknowledge no other substance besides body 
or matter. For as there was never any yet known, 
who, asserting incorporeal substance, did deny a 
Deity ; so neither can there be any reason, why 
he that admits the former sheuld exclude the . 
latter. - Again, the same dull and earthly disbe- 
lief or confounded sottishness of mind, which 


. makes men deny a God, must needs incline them 


-ALL ATHEISTS MERE CORPOREALISTS. 293 
to deny all incorporeal substance ‘also. Where- 
fore, as the physicians speak of a certain disease 
or madness, called hydrophobia, the symptom of 
those that have been bitten by a mad dog, which 
makes them have a monstrous antipathy to water ; 
so all Atheists are possessed with a certain kind. 
of madness, that may be called Pneumatophobia, 
that makes them have an irrational but desperate 
abhorrence from spirits or incorporeal substances, 
they being acted also, at the same time, with 
an. Hylomania, whereby they madly doat upon 
matter, and devoutly worship it. as- the. only 
Numen. 7 
The second consideration is this, because, as 
there are no Atheists but such as are mere Corpo- 
realists, so all Corporealists are not to be,.ae- 
counted Atheists neither: those of them, who, 
notwithstanding they make all things to be mat-. . 
ter, yet suppose an intellectual nature in that 
matter to preside over the corporeal universe, 
being in reason and charity to be exempted out 
of that number. And there have been always 
some, who, though so strongly captivated under 
the power of gross imagination, as that an incor-_ 
poreal God seemed to them to-be nothing but.a 
God of words (as some of them call it), a mere | 
- empty sound or contradictious expression, some- 
thing and nothing put together; yet, notwith- 
standing, they have been possessed with a firm. 
belief and persuasion of a Deity, or that the sys- 
tem of the universe depends upon one perfect 
understanding being as the head of it; and there- 
-u pon have concluded that dAn Tuc yousa, @ Cer tain 
kind of body or matter is God. ——The grossest and 
most sottish of all which Corporeal Theists.seein . 
VOL, I. U 


294 ALL ATHEISTS MERE CORPOREALISTS. 


_ to. be those, who contend,. that God is only oné 
particular: piece of organized matter, of human 
form and bigness, which, endued with perfect 
reason and understanding, exerciseth an univer- 
sal dominion over all the rest. Which hypothesis, 
however.it-hath been entertained by some of the 
Christian ‘profession, both in former and later 
times, yet it hath seemed very ridiculous, even to’ 
many of those Heathen philosophers themselves, 
who were.mere Corporealists, such as the Stoics, 
who exploded it with a kind of indignation, con- 
tending earnestly, ‘un civar Ocdv avPowropopgov, that 
God (though corporeal) yet must not be conceived 
to be of any human shape. And Xenophanes,’ 
an ancient philosophic poet, expresseth the child- 
ishness of this conceit after this manner: 


e 


"AAW elros xelode 7 elev Boss hE Aéovres, 
“H ypdrlat yelpecos, xal Egya redety Goree avdenc, =~ 
.. Kab we Oedy [lag ypasov, nal coipears’ Earotow ; 


: . i ie, 
Tosatd’ ofiy weg xat aivot dtnag elyov dcrctoy: 


If oxen, lions, asses, and horses, had all of them 
a sense of a Deity, and were able to limn and 
paint, there is no question to be made, but that 
each of these several animals would paint God 
according to their respective form and likeness, 
and contend, that he was of that shape and no 
other.—But that other corporeal Theism séems 
to be of the two rather more generous and gen- 
teel, which supposes the whole world to be one 
animal, and God to be a certain subtile and ethe- 
real, but intellectual matter, pervading it.as a 
soul: which was the doctrine of others before the 

® These are the words of Clemens Alexandrinus concerning. Xeno- 


phanes, Stromat. lib. v. p. 714.. 
b Apud Clem. Alex. ubi supra. p. 715. 


ALL ATHEISTS MEfte CORPOREALISTS. 295 
Stoics, *ré up Gedy Uraygaror' “Iniracde te 6 Meraroi- 
TIvOC Kal Oo "Edéooe ‘HpaxAXztroc, Hippasus of Meta- 
pontus, and Heraclitus the Ephesian, supposed 
the fiery and ethereal matter of- the world'to be 
_God.—However, neither these Heraclitics and: 
Stoics, nor yet the other Anthropomorphites, are 
by us condemned for downright Athéists, but-ra- 
ther looked upon as 4 sort of iguorany, childish, 
and. unskilfal ‘Theists. : 

Wherefore we see, that Atheists are now re- 
diiced into a narrow compass, since none are con- 
cluded to'be Atheists, but such ag are mere: ‘Cor= 
porealists; and all Corporealists must not be 
condemned for Atheists’ neither, -but -only those 
of them, ‘who ‘assert; ‘that there is Wo conscious 1 Ine - 
télleetual nature, - presiding over’ 'thé' whole ‘ tii 
verse. For. this’ is ‘that, which the adepti’ in’ 
Atheism; of what form-soever, all agree in, that 
the first principle of the universe is no animalish, 
sentient, and conscious nature, but that’ all ani- 
niality, sense, and consciousness, isa secondary, 
derivative, ‘and -accidéntal:thing, generable and 
eorruptible, arising out of particular concrétions 
of: matter, organized and dissolved artic with 
them. 

xxx1. Now if the: first iuebicle aud original of 
all things’ in the universe be thus supposed to be 
body or mattér, ‘dévoid: of allanimality, ‘sense; 
and: cosciousness, then it must of necessity be 
either perfectly dead: and stupid; ‘and without'all 
imanner of life; or elsé- endued with sucha kind 
of tife only, as is by some called plastic; sperma: 
tical, and vegetative, by others the life of nature; 


2 Idem in Protreptico, eap, Vv. p. 55. 
| u 2 


296. WHEREIN THE FOUR ATHEISMS 


-or natural. perception. And those Aiieisis: who 
derive all things from dead and stupid matter, 
must also needs do this, either in the way of qua- 
lities and forms, and these are the Anaximandrian . 
Atheists; or else in the way of atoms and figures, 
which are.the Democritical. But those, who. 
make matter endued with a plastic life to be the 
first original of all things, must needs suppose 
either one such plastic and spermatic life only in. 
the whole mass of matter or corporeal universe, 
which are the Stoical Atheists; or else all matter. 
as such to have life and an energetic nature be- 
longing to it (though without any animal sense.or. 
self-perception), and consequently all the parti- 
.cular parts of matter, and every totum by conti- | 
nuity, to have a distinct plastic life of its own, 
which are the Stratonic Atheists. Wherefore, 
_ there does not seem to be any room now left for 
any other form of Atheism, besides these four, 
to thrust in. | 
And we think fit here again to incalente: what 
hath been already intimated, that one grand dif- 
ference amongst these several forms of Atheism 
is this, that some of them attributing no life at all 
to, matter, as such, nor indeed acknowledging 
any plastic life of nature, distinct from the ani- 
mal, and supposing every thing whatsoever is in 
the world, besides #An dros, the bare substance 
of. inatter considered as devoid of all qualities 
(that is, mere extended bulk), to be generated 
and corrupted ; consequently resolve, that all 
manner of life whatsoever is generable and cor- 
-ruptible, or educible out of nothing, and reduci- 
ble to nothing again; and these are the Anaxi- 
mandrian and Democritic Atheisms. But the 


DIFFERED FROM EACH OTHER. 297 
other, which are the Stoical and Stratonical, do, 
on the contrary, suppose ‘some life to be funda: 
mental and original, essential and substantial, 
ingenerable aad incorruptible, as being a first 
principle of things; nevertheless, this not to be 
any animal, conscious, and self-perceptive life, 
but a plastic life of nature only; all Atheists still 
agreeing in those two fore-mentioned things: first, 
that there is no other substance in the world be- 
sides body; secondly, that all aninial life, sense, 
and self-perception, conscious understanding and 
pérsonality, are generated and corrupted, succes- 
sively edticed out of nothing and reduced into 
nothing again. 

XXXII. “Indesd we are not ignorant that some, 
who seem to be well-wishers to Atheism, ‘have 
talked sometimes of sensitive and rational mat- 
ter, as having a mind to suppose, three seve- 
ral sorts of matter in the universe, specifically 
different from one another, that were originally 
such, and self-existent from ‘eternity; namely, 
senseless, sensitive, and rational: as if the mun-— 
dane ‘system might be conceived to arise froma 
certain jumble of these three several sorts of mat- 
ter, as it were scuffling together in the dark, with- 
out a God, and so producing. brute animals and 
men. Butas this is a mere precarious hypethe- 
sis, there being no imaginable account to be giveii, 
how there should come to be such an essential dif- 
ference betwixt matters, or why this piece of mat- 
ter should be sensitive, and that rational, when 
another is altogether senseless ; so the suggestors 
of it are but mere novices in Atheisin, and a kind ~- 
of bungling well-wishers to it. First, because; 
according to this: hypothesis, tio life would be pro- 


298 ON THE ASSERTORS OF SENSITIVE 


duced or destroyed in the successive generations 
and corruptions of animals, but only concreted 
and secreted in them ; and, consequently, all hu- 
man personalities must be eternal and incorrup- 
tible; which is all one, as. to. assert the pre and 
post-existence of all-souls from eternity to eter- 
nity, a thing that. all genuine and thorough-paced 
. Atheists are in a manner as abhorrent from, as 
they are from the Deity itself. And secondly, 
because there can be no imaginable reason given 
by them, why there might not beas well a certain 
Divine matter’ perfectly intellectual and self-exist- 
ent from. eternity, as a‘sensitive and rational mat- 
ter. And, therefore, such an hypothesis as ‘this 
can never serve the turn of Atheists. Butall © 
those that are masters of the craft of Atheism, 
and thoroughly catechised or initiated in the dark 
_ mysteries thereof. (as hath been already incul- 
cated);.do perfectly. agree in: this, that all animal, 
sentient, and consctous life, all souls: and minds, 
and consequently all human personalities, are ge- 
nerated out of matter, and corrupted again into’ 
it,.or rather educed out of miele A and reduced 

_ into. nothing again. is 

We understand also, that ete are eeridin carit- 

ing astrological Atheists, who would deduce,all 
things from the occult. qualities and influences of 
the stars, according to their different conjunc- 
tions, oppositions, and. aspects, in a certain blind 
and unaccountable manner, But these being per- 
sons. devoid of all j Manner. of sense,, who neither 
s9,much as -pretend.to give an account of these 
_ stars, whether they be animals or not, as algo 
whence. they derive their original (which, if they 
did undertake to do atheistically, they must needs 


AND RATIONAL MATTER, — 299 


resolve themselves at length into one or other of - 
those hypotheses already: proposed), therefore, as 
‘we conceive, they deserve not the least conside- 
ration. But we think fit here to observe, that 
such devotees to the heavenly bodies, as look up-_ 
on all the other stars as petty deities, but the sun 
as the supreme deity and monarch of the uni- 
verse, in the meantime conceiving it also to be. 


perfectly intellectual (which is in a manner the ‘’ 


same with the Cleanthean hypothesis) are not so 
tmouch to be accounted Atheists, as spurious, pa- 
ganical, and idolatrous Theists. And upou all 
these considerations, we conclude again, that 
there is no other philosophic form of Atheism, 
that can easily be devised, besides these four 
mentioned, the Anaximandrian, the eo el 
the Stoical, and the Stratonical. 
xxxil1, Amongst which forms of Atheism, 

there is yet another difference to be observed, and 
accordingly another distribution to be made of | 
them. It being first premised, that all these fore- 
mentioned sorts of Atheists (ifthey will speak con- 
sistently and agreeably to their own principles) 
must needs suppose all things to be one way or 
other necessary. For though Epicurus. ‘Intro- 
duced contingent liberty, yet it 1s well known, 
that he therein plainly contradicted his own prin- 
ciples. And this, indeed, was the first and prin-— 
cipal thing intended by us, in this whole under- 
taking, to confute that false hypothesis of. the 
mundane. system, which makes all, actions and 
évents necessary upon Atheistic grounds, but es- 
pecially in the mechanic way. Wherefore, in the - 
next place, we must observe, that though the prin- 
_ ciples of all Atheists introduce hecessity, yet the 


-B00 _ ANOTHER DISTRIBUTION 


necessity of these Atheists is not one and the same, 
but of two different kinds; some.of them suppos 
ing a necessity of dead and stupid matter, which 
~ 4s that, which is commonly meant by vduKcn- avayen, 
or material necessity, and is also called by Aristo- 
tle, an absolute necessity of things; others, the 
necessity of a plastic life, which the. same Aristo- 
tle calls an hypothetical necessity. For the Anaxi- 
mandrian and Democritic Atheists do both of them 
assert a material and absolute necessity of all 
things; one in the way of qualities, and the other 
of motion and mechanism: but the Stoical and 
Stratonical Atheists assert a plastical.and hype- 
thetical necessity of things only. | 
Now one grand difference betwixt these two 
sorts of Atheisms and their necessities lies in this, 
that the former, though they make all things ne- 
cessary, yet they suppose them also to be fortuit-_ 
ous; there being no inconsistency between these 
two. And the sense of both the Anaximandrian 
and Democritic: Atheisms seems to be thus de- 
| scribed ‘by Plato,’ wavra Kara rUyny & avayKnc OUVE= 
xepacOn, All things were mingled together by ne- 





from whence these Atheists derived all things, is 
at.once both necessary and fortuitous: But the 
Plastic Atheisms suppose such a necessary na- 
ture for the first principle of things, asis not merely 
fortuitous, but regular, orderly, and methodical; 
the Stoical excluding all chance and fortune uni- 
. yersally, because they subject all things to one 
plastic nature ruling over the. whole universe, but 
the Stratonical doing it in-part only, because they 


-. . ® De Legibus, lib. x. p. 666. oper. 


i. - 4 (OF ATHEISMS; . -- 301 


, Alerive things from.a mixture of chance and plese: 
“nature both together. | 
And thus we see, that there is a Eaoubie notion 
of nature amongst Atheists, as well as Theists ; 
which we cannot better express than in the words 
of Balbus the Stoic, personated by Ci- = 
cero: “‘ Alii naturam censent-esse vim De Nat De 
quandam sine ratione, clentem motus in xxxii. ag : 
' corporibus necessarios; alii autem vim ope 
participem ordinis, tanquam via progre- 
dientem., Cujus solertiam, nulla ars, pula ma- 
nus, nemo opifex, consequi potest imitando ; se- 
‘minis enim vim esse tantam, ut id quanquam pe- 
rexiguum, nactumque sit materiam, quo ali auge- 
‘rique possit, ita fingat et efficiat, in suo quidque 
genere, partim ut per stirpes alantur suas, partim 
ut movere etiam possint, et ex.se similia sui gene- 
rare.” Some by nature mean acertain force with- 
out reason and order, exciting necessary motions 
in bodies; but others understand by it such a 
force, as participating of order proceeds as it 
were methodically. Whose exquisiteness, no art, 
no hand, no opificer can reach to by imitation. 
For the force of seed is such, that though the bulk 
of it be very small, yet if it get convenient matter 
for its nourishment.and increase, it so forms and 
frames things in their several kinds, as that they 
can partly through their stocks :and trunks be 
nourished, and partly move themselves also, and 
generate their hke.—And again: “ Sunt qui om- 
nia nature nomine appellent, ut Epicurus; sed 
nos; cum, dicimus natura constare administrarique 
mundum, non- ita dicimus, ut glebam, aut frag- 
mentum lapidis, aut aliquid ejusmodi, nulla co- 
herendi natura; sed ut. arborem,.ut animalia, in 


‘302 WHAT ATHEISTS DENIED, 4ND WHAT 


-quibus nulla temeritas, sed ordo apparet et artis’ 
-quedam similitudo.” There are some, who call 
all things by the name of nature, as Epicurus; but 
we, when we say that the world is administered 
by nature, do not mean such a nature, as is in 
clods of earth and pieces of stone, but such as isin’ 
a tree or animal, in whose constitution there is no 
temerity, but order .and similitude of art—Now, 
according to these two-different notions of nature, 
the four forementioned forms of Atheism may be 
again dichotomized after this manner—into such 
as derive all things froma mere fortuitous and te- _ 
merarious nature, devoid of all order and metho- | 
‘dicalness; and such as deduce the original of 
things from a certain orderly, regular, and artifi- 
cial, though senseless nature in matter. The - 
former of. which are the Anaximandrian and De- 
mocritic Atheisms, the latter ne Stoical and Siskel 
tonical, 

. Jt hath been already observed, that those Athe- | 
isms, that derive all things from a mere fortuitous 
principle, as also suppose every thing, besides 
vAn aoc, the bare substance of matter—or ex- 
tended bulk, to be generated and corrupted; 
though they asserted the eternity of matter, yet 
they could not, agreeably to their own hypothesis, 
maintain the eternity and incorruptibility of the 
world. And accordingly hereunto, both the Anax- 
imandrian* and Democritic’ Atheists did conclude 
the. world. to be yevopevev Kai p9aprov, such as was at 
first made, and should be again corrupted.—And 
upon: this account, Lucretius concerns himself 
| highly herein, to prove both the novity. of the 


7 3 Vide Diog. Laert. lib. ix. segm. 44. p. 573. 
®. ‘Vide eundem lib. ii. segm. 1, 2. p. 78, 79. 


ASSERTED THE WORLD'S ETERNITY. 303 


world, and also its future dissolution and extinc- 
tion, that 


Tutum nativum mortali corpore constat. 


But instead of the world’s eternity, these two sorts 
of Atheists introduced another paradox, namely 
aN aepia Koouwv, an infinity of worlds ;—and that 
not only successive, in that space, which this world | 
of our’s is conceived now to occupy, in respect of 
the infinity of past and future time, but also a con- 
temporary infinity of coexistent worlds, at all 
times, throughout endless and unbounded space. 
However, it is certain, that some persons Athe- 
istically inclined, have been always apt to run out 
another way, and to suppose, that the frame of 
things, and system of the world, ever was from 
eternity, and ever will be to eternity, such as now 
it is, dispensed by a certain orderly and regular, 
but yet senseless and unknowing nature. And it 
is prophesied in Scripture, that such Atheists as 
these, should especially abound in theselatter days 
of our’s; ‘‘ There shall come in the last 
days (éumaixrat) atheistical scaffers, walk- : 
ing after their own lusts, and saying,.. Where j is 
_ the promise of his coming? For since the fathers | 
fell asleep, all. things continue as they were from 
the beginning of the creation.” Which latter. 
words are spoken only according to the received 
hypothesis of the Jews, the meaning of these Athe- 
ists being quite otherwise, that there was neither 
creation nor beginning of the world; but that 
_ things had continued, such as now they are, from 
all eternity. As appears also from what the apo- 
stle there adds by way of confutation, that they 
were wilfully ignorant of this, thatby the word of 


2 Pet. 3. 


~ 


304 WHAT ATHEISTS DENIED, AND WHAT 


God the heavens were of old, and the earth stand- 
ing out of the water and in the water; and that as 
the world, that then was, overflowing with water 
perished, so the heavens and earth, which now 
are, by the same word are kept in store, and re- 
. Served unto fire against the day of judgment and 
_ perdition of ungodly men.” And it is evident, 
that some of these Atheists, at this very day, 
march in the garb of enthusiastical religionists, 
acknowledging no more a God than a Christ with- 
out'them, and allegorizing the day of judgment 
and future conflagration into a kind of seemingly 
mystical, but really atheistical nonsense. These, 
if they did philosophize, would resolve themselves 
into one or other of those two hypotheses before 
mentioned ; either that of one plastic orderly and 
methodical, but senseless nature, ruling over the — 
whole universe ; or else that of the life of matter, 
making one or other of these two natures to be 
their only God or Numen; it being sufficiently 
agreeable to the principles of both these Atheistic 
hypotheses (and no others) to maintain the world’s 
both anté and post-eternity ; yet soas that the lat- 
ter of them, namely, the Hylozoists, admitting a 
certain mixture of chance together with the life of 
matter, would suppose, that though the main 
strokes of things might be preserved the same, and - 
some kind of constant regularity always kept up 
in the world, yet that the whole mundane system 
did not in ajl respects continue the same, from eter- 
amity to eternity, without any variation. 
‘But as Strabo tells us, that Strato Phy- 
situs maintained, the Euxine sea at first to have 
had no outlet by Byzantium into the Mediterra-— 
_nean, but that by the continual running in of ri+ 


Strab. 1.1. 


ASSERTED THE .WORLD’S. ETERNITY. 305 


vers into it, causing it to overflow, there’was. i ak 
length of time a passage opened by the Propontis. 
and Hellespont; as also that the Mediterranean. 
sea forced open that passage of the Herculean 
straits, being a continual isthmus or neck of land. 
before; that many parts of the present continent 
were heretofore sea, as also much of the present 
ocean habitable land :—so it cannot be doubted, 
but that the same Strato did likewise suppose 
such kind of alterations and vicissitudes as these, 
in all the greater parts of the mundane system. 
But the Stoical Atheists, who made the whole 
world to be dispensed by one orderly and plastic 
nature, might very well, and agreeably to their own 
hypothesis, maintain, besides the world’s eternity, 
one constant. and invariable course or tenor of 
things in it, as Plinius Secundus doth, who, if he 
' ‘were any thing, seems to have been one 
of these Atheists ; “Mundum et hoc Nat Hh % 
quod nomine alio celum appellare li- 
buit, (cujus circumflexu reguntur cuncta) Numen 
esse, credi par est, eternum, immensum, neque 
genitum, neque interiturum —Idem rerum, na- 
ture opus, et rerum ipsa natura.” The world, and 
that which by another name is called the heavens, 
by whose circume gyration all things are a 
ought to be believed to bea Numen, eternal, 
mense, such as was never made, and shall oo 
be destroyed .—Where, by the way, it may be 
again observed, that those Atheists, who dented 
a God, according to the true notion of him, as a 
conscious, understanding being, presidirig over 
the, whole world, did notwithstanding look upon 
either the world itself, or else a.mere senseless 
-plastic nature init, as a kind of Numen or Deity, 








WHAT ATHEISTS DENIED, AND WHAT 


they supposing it to be ingenerable and incorr upti- ! 
ble. Which same Pliny, as, upon the grounds of 
the Stoical Atheism, he maintained against the 
Anaximandrians and Democritics, the world’s 

eternity. and. Incorraptibility ; so did he likewise, 
in way of opposition to that arepia coopwv, that infi- 
nity of worlds—of their’s, assert, that there was 
- but: ote world, and that finite. In like manner 
We rédd « concerning that famous Stoic, Boethus; 

whom Laertius affirms to have denied the world 
to be an animal (which, according to the language 
and. sense of those times, was all. one as to deny a 
God) ; that hé also maintained, contrary to the ré- 
ceived doctrine of the Stoics, the world’s anteetér- 
nity and incorruptibility ; Philo, in his treatise 
mépt apBapastac Koopov, or the Incorruptibility of a 
World,—testifying the same of him. 

Nevertheless it seéms, that some of these Stoical 
Atheists did also agree with the generality of the 
‘other Stoical Theists, in supposing a successive 
infinity of worlds generated and corrupted, by rea+ 
son of intervening periodical conflagrations; though — 
all dispensed by such a stupid and senseless na-. 
ture, as governs plants and trees. For thus much - 
we gather from those words of Seneca before cited, 
where, describing this Atheistical hypothesis, he 
tells us, that though the world were a plant, that 
18, govertied by a vegetative or plastic nature, 
without any animality, yet notwithstanding, “ab 
initio ejus usque ad exitum,” &c: it had both a be- 
| ginning, and will have an end; and from its: begin: 
ning to its end, all was dispensed by akind of re- 
gular law, even its successive conflagrations too, 
as well as those inundations or deluges, which 
have sometimes happened. Which yet they un- 


ASSERTED THE WORLD'S ETERNITY. 307 


derstood after such a manner, as that-in these se- 
veral revolutions and successive circuits or periods 
_ of worlds, all things should be awagadXaxra, exactly 
alike, to what had been infinitely before, and 
should be again infinitely afterwards. Of which 
more elsewhere. | 
xxxiv. This quadripartite Atheism, which we 

have now represented, is the kingdom of darkness 
divided, or labouring with an intestine seditious 
war in its own bowels, and thereby destroying it- 
self. Insomuch that we might well save ourselves 
the labour of any further confutation of Atheism, 
merely by committing these several forms of Athe- 
ism together, and dashing them one against ano- 
ther, they opposing. and contradicting each other, 
‘no less than. they do Theism itself. For first, those - 
two pairs of Atheisms, on the one hand the Anax- 
* imandrian and Democritic, on the other the Stoical 
and Stratonical, do absolutely destroy each other; 
the former of them supposing the first principle of 
all things to be stupid matter devoid of all manner 
of life, and contending, that all life as well as other 
qualities: is generable and. corruptible, or a mere 
accidental thing, and looking upon the plastic life 


of nature as a figment or fantastic capricio, athing - - 


almost as formidable and altogether as impossible 
as a Deity ;. the other, on the contrary, founding 
all upon this principle, that there is a life and na- 
tural perception essential to matter, ingenerable . 
and incorruptible, and contending it to be: utterly 
impossible to give any account of the phenomena 
of the world, the original of motion, the orderly 
frame and disposition of things, and thenature of - 
animals, without this fundamental life of nature. __ 

Again, the single Atheisms belonging to each of 


a 


308 THE SEVERAL FORMS OF ATHEISM 


these several pairs quarrel as much also between 
themselves.. For the Democritic: Atheism: ex- 
plodes the Anaximandrian qualities and. forms, 
demonstrating that the natural production of such 
entities out of nothing, and the corruption of 
them again into nothing, is of the two rather 
more impossible than a Divine creation and anni- 
hilation.. And, on the other side, the Anaximan- 
drian Atheist plainly discovers, that, when the 
Democritics and Atomics have spent all their: 
fury against these qualities and forms, and done 
what they can to solve the phenomena of nature 
without them another way, themselves do’ not- 
_ withstanding, like drunken men, reel and stagger _ 
back into them, and are unavoidably necessitated 
at last to take up their sanctuary in them.. 

In like manner, the Stoical and Stratonical 


Atheists may as effectually undo and confute - . 


each: other; the former of them urging against 
the latter, that, besides that prodigious absurdity. 
of. making every atom of senseless matter infallic 
bly wise or-omniscient, without any conscious- 
ness, there can be no reason at all given by the 
- Hylozoists, why the matter of the whole universe: 
might not.as well conspire and confederate toge- 
ther imto one, as all the single atoms that coms 
pound the body of any animal or man; or why: - 
one conscious life might: not.as well result from: 
.the totum of the former, as of the latter; by which: 
means the whole.world would become an animal, 
er God. Again, the latter contending, that the 
Stoical or Cosmo-plastic Atheist can-pretend tio 
reason, why the whole world might not have oné 
sentient and rational, as well ‘as one plastic soul: 
in it, -that-is, as well be an animal as a plant: 


MUTUALLY DESTROY EACH OTHER. 309: 
moreover, that the sensitive souls of brute ani- 
mals, and the rational souls of men, could never 
possibly emerge out of one single, plastic, and 
vegetative soul in the whole universe: and, lastly, 
that it is altogether as impossible, that the whole 
world should have life in it, and yet none of its 
parts have any life of their own, as that the whole 
world should be white or black, and.yet no part 
of it have any whiteness or blackness at all in it. 
- And, therefore, that the Stoical Atheists, as well 
as the Stoical Theists, do both alike deny incor- 
poreal substance but in words only, whilst they 
really admit the thing itself; because one and the 
same life, ruling over all the distant parts of the 
corporeal universe, must needs be an incorporeal 
substance, it being all in the whole, and all acting 

upon every part, and yet none of it in any part by 
" itself; for then it would be many, and not one. 
From all which it may be concluded, that Athe-- 
ism is a certain strange kind of monster,’ with four 
heads, that are all of ‘them perpetually biting, tear- 
ing, and devouring one another. | 

Now, though these several forms of Atheism 


3 do mutually destroy each other, and none of them 


be really considerable or formidable in itself, as 
to any strength of reason which it hath ; yet, as 
they are compared together among themselves, 
so some of them may be more considerable than 
the rest. For, first, as the qualities and forms of 
the Anaximandrian Atheist, supposed to be really 
distinct from the substances, are things unintelli- - 
gible in themselves ; so he cannot, with any colour 
or pretence of reason, maintain the natural pro- 
. duction of them out of nothing, and the reduction 
of them again into nothing, and yet withstand a 
VOL. I. x 


310 THE ATOMIC AND THE HYLOZOIC 


Divine creation and annihilation, as an impossi-— 
bility. Moreover, the Anaximandrian Atheism 
is as it were swallowed up into the Democritic, 
and further improved i in it; this latter carrying 
on the same design, with more seeming artifice, 

greater plausibility of wit, and a more pompous 
show of something, where, indeed, there is no- 
thing. Upon which account, it hath for many 
ages past beaten the Anaximandrian Atheism in 
a manner quite off the stage, and reigned there 
alone. So that the Democritic or Atomic Athe- 
ism seems to be much more considerable of the 
two, than the Anaximandrian or Hylopathian, — 

_ Again, as for the two other forms of Atheism, 
if there were any life at all in matter, as the first 
and immediate recipient of it, then in reason this 
- ‘must needs be supposed to be after the same man- 
ner in it, that all other corporeal qualities are in 
bodies, so as to be divisible together with it, and 
_some of it be in every part of the matter; which 
is according to the hypothesis of the Hylozoists. 

Whereas, on the contrary, the Stoical Atheists. 
supposing one life only in the whole mass of.mat- 
‘ter, after such a manner, as that none of the parts 
of it by themselves should have any life of their 
own, do thereby, no less than the Stoical Theists, 
, make this life of their’s to. be no corporeal qua- 
lity or form, but an incorporeal substance ; which 
is to contradict their own hypothesis. From 
whence we may‘conclude, that the Cosmo-plastic 
or Stoical Atheism is, of the two, less considera- 
ble than the Hylozoic or Stratonical. — 
_ Wherefore, amongst these four forms of Athe- 
ism, that have been propounded, these two, the 
Atomic or Democritical, and the Hylozoic. or 


THE CHIEF OF THE FOUR ATHEISMS. 311 


Stratonical are the chief. “The former of which, 
namely, the Democritic Atheism, admitting a true 
notion of body, that (according to the dacinae of 
the first and most ancient Atomists) it is nothing 
but resisting. bulk devoid of all manner. of: life : | 
yet, because it takes for granted, that there is no 
other substance 1n the world besides body, does, 
therefore, conclude, that all life and understanding 
in animals and men is generated out of dead and 
stupid matter, though not as qualities and forms 
(which is the Anaximandrian way), but as result- 
ing from the contextures of atoms, or some pecu- 
liar composition of magnitudes, figures, sites, and 
motions; and, consequently, that they are them- 
selves really nothing else but local motion and 
- mechanism; which is a thing, that some tite 
since was very pertinently and judiciously both 
observed and perstringed by the learned 
author of the Exercitatio . Epistolica, 
now a reverend bishop. But the latter, namely, 
the Hylozoic, though truly acknowledging, on 
the contrary, that life, cogitation, and understand- 
ing are entities really distinct from local motion 
and mechanism, and that therefore they cannot 
be generated out of dead and stupid matter, but 
must needs be somewhere in the world, originally, 
essentially, and fundamentally: yet, because they 
take it also for granted, that there is no other sub- 
stance besides matter, do thereupon adulterate 
the notion of matter or body, blending and con- 
founding it with life, as making them but two in- 
adequate conceptions of substance, and conclud- 
ing that all matter and substance, as such, hath 


Sect. 4. ¢. 3 


4 Dr. Seth Ward, Savilian Professor of Astronomy in the University 
of Oxford; and sac Bishop of Exeter and Salisbury. 


x 2 


312 THE ATOMIC AND THE HYLOZOIC 


life and perception, or understanding, natural and 
unconscious, essentially belonging to it; and that 
‘sense and conscious reason or understanding in 
animals, arises only from the accidental modifica- 
tion of this ee life of matter by organi- 
zation. 

We conclude, eect: that if ‘hese two Athe- 
istic hypotheses, which are found to be the most 
considerable, be once confuted, the reality of all 
Atheism will be zpso facto confuted ; there being 
indeed nothing more requisite to a thorough con- 
futation of Atheism, than the proving of these two 
things : first, that life and understanding are not 
essential to matter, as such; .and, secondly, that 
they can never possibly rise out of any mixture 
or modification of dead and stupid matter what- 
soever. The reason of' which assertion is,. because 
all Atheists, as was before observed, are mere 

- Corporealists, of which there can be but these 
two sorts; either such as make life to be essential 
to matter, and therefore to be ingenerable and in-, 
corruptible; or else such as suppose life and . 
every thing besides.tAn aoc, the bare substance 
of matter, or extended bulk, to be merely acci- 
dental, -generable, or corruptible, as rising out: 
of some mixture or modification of it. Andas— 
the proving of those two things will overthrow all 
Atheism, so it will likewise lay a clear foundation 
for the demonstrating of a Deity distinct from. the 
corporeal world. : 

xxxv. Now that life and perception, or under-. 
standing, should be essential to matter, as such, or 
‘that all senseless matfer should be perfectly and 
infallibly wise (though without consciousness) as 
to all its own congruities and capabilities, which 


THE CHIEF OF THE FOUR ATHEISMS. 313 
js the doctrine of the Hylozoists;: this, I say, is” 
an hypothesis so prodigiously paradoxical, and so 
outrageously wild, as that very few men ever could 
have Atheistic faith enough, to swallow it down 
and digest it. Wherefore, this Hylozoic-Atheism 
hath been. very obscure ever since its ‘first emer- 
sion, and hath found so few fautors and abettors, 
that it hath looked lke a forlorn and deserted 
thing. Neither indeed are there any public monu- 
ments at all extant, in which it is avowedly main- 
_ tained, stated, and reduced into any system. Inso- 
much that we should not have taken any notice of 
it at this time, as a particular form of Atheism, nor 
have conjured it up out of its grave, had we not 
understood, that Strato’s ghost had begun to walk 
of-late; and that among some well-wishers to 
Atheism, despairing in a manier of the Atomic 
form, this Hylozoic hypothesis began already-to 
be looked upon, as the rising sun of Atheism, 
“Et tanquam spes altera Troje,” it seem- 
ing to smile upon them, and flatter them at a dis- 
tance, with some fairer hopes of supporting that 
ruinous and desperate cate. 

Whereas, on the contrary, that other Aisne 
Atheism, as it insists upon a true notion of body, 
that it is nothing but resisting bulk; by which 
means we, joining issue thereupon, shall be fairly 
conducted on to a clear decision of this present 
controversy, as likewise to the disentangling of 
many other points of philosophy; so it is that, 
which hath filled the world with the noise of it, 
for two thousand years past; that, concernmg 
which several volumes have been formerly written, 
in which it hath been-stated and brought into a 
kind of system; and which hath of late obtained © 





314 THE FOUR ATHEISMS TO BE. 


_ @ resurrection amongst us, together with the Ato- 
mic physiology, and been recommended to the 
world anew, under.a specious shew of wit and 
profound philosophy. 

Wherefore, as. we could not here insist npon 
both. these. forms of Atheism together, because 
that would have been to confound the language of . 
- Atheists, and to have. made them, like ‘he Cad- 
mean offspring, to do immediate execution upon | 
themselves; so we were in all reason obliged to’ 
make our ‘first. and - ‘principal assault upon the 
Atomic Atheism, as being the only considerable, 
upon this account, -because it is that alone, which 
publicly confronts the world, and like that proud 
uncircumcised Philistine, openly defies the hosts of 
the living God; intending nevertheless in the close 
of this whole discourse (that is, the last book), 
where we are to, determine the right intellectual 
system of the universe, and to assert an incorpo- 
real ‘Deity, to demonstrate, that. life, cogitation, | 
and understanding do not essentially belong to 
matter, and all substance, as such, but are the pe- 
culiar attributes and characteristics of substance 
incorporeal. 

XXXVL. However, since we have now started 
these. several forms.of Atheism, we shall notin the 
mean time neglect any of them neither. Forin 
the answer to the second Atheistic ground, we. 
‘shall confute them altogether at once, as agreeing 
in. this one fundamental principle, That the origi- 
nal of all things in the universe is senseless mat- . 
ter,.or. matter devoid of all animality or conscious 
fife,—In the reply to the fourth Atheistic argu- 
mentation, we shall briefly hint the grounds of 
reason, from which incorporeal substance is de- 


monstrated. In the examination of the fifth, we 
shall confute the Anaximandrian Atheism there | 
' propounded, which is, as it were, the first sciogra- 
phy and rude delineation of Atheism. And im 
the confutation of the sixth, we shall shew, how 
the ancient Atomic Atheists did preventively over- 
throw the foundation of Hylozoism. Besides alk 
which, in order to a fuller and'‘more thorough con- 
-.futation, both of the. Cosmo-plastic and H ylozoic 
Atheisnis, we’ shall ip this very place take occa- 
sion to insist largely upon the plastic life of nature, 
giving in the first place a true account of it; and 
then afterwards shewing, how grossly it is misun- 
derstood; and the pretence of it abused, by the as- 
sertors of both these Atheistic hypotheses. The ~ 
heads of which larger digression, because they 
could riot be so conveniently inserted in the con- 
tents of the chapter, shall be represented to the 
reader’s view at the end of it. 

xxxvir. For we think fit here to observe, that 
neither the Cosmo-plastic or Stoical, nor the Hy-: 
lozoic or Stratonical Atheists, are therefore con- 
demned by us, because they suppose such a thing 
as a plastie nature, or life distinct from theanimal;. 
albeit this be not only.exploded, as an absolute 
nonentity, by the Atomic Atheists, who might 
possibly be afraid of it, as that which approached — 
too near to a Deity, or else would hazard the in- 
troducing of it; but also utterly discarded by some 
professed Theists of later times, who might not-. 
withstanding have an undiscerned tang of the Me- 
chanic Atheism hanging about them, in that their 
so: confident rejecting “of all fmal and intending 
causality in nature, and admitting of no other 
causes of things, as philosophical, save the mate- 


CONFUTED ALTOGETHER. § 3%: 


a 


316 ‘A DIGRESSION CONCERNING THE 


rial and mechanical only ; this being really to ba- 
nish all mental, and consequently Divine causa- 
lity, quite out of the world ; and to make the whole 
_ world to be nothing else, but a mere heap of dust 
fortuitously agitated, or a dead cadaverous thing, 
that hath no signatures of mind and understand- 
ing, counsel and wisdom at all upon it; nor indeed 
any other vitality acting in it, than only the pro- 
duction of a certain quantity of local motion, and 
_ the conservation of it according to some general 
laws; which things the Democritic Atheists take . 
for eranted, would all be as they are, 
~— 1 though there were no God. And _ thus 
tom. i. éper. Aristotle describes this kind of philoso- 
phy, that it made the whole world to 
consist, « EK owuarwy uovov, Kat | wovacwy rake pev éyourwy, 
apvywy é& maurav, Of nothing but bodies and mo- 
nads (that is, atoms, or small particles of matter) 
only ranged and disposed together into such an 
order, but altogether dead and inanimate.— 
2. For unless there be sucha thing admitted as 
a plastic nature, that acts gveca rov, for the sake of 
something, and in order to ends, regularly, artifi- 
cially and methodically, it seems, that one or other 
of these two things must be concluded; that either 
in the efformation and organization of the bodies 
_of animals, as well as the other phenomena, every 
thing comes to pass fortuitously, and happens to 
be as it is, without the guidance and direction of 
any mind. or understanding; or else, that God him- 
self doth all immediately, and, as it were, with his : 
own hands, form the body of every gnat and fly, . 
insect and mite, as of other animals in generations, 
all whose members have so much of contrivance 
in them, that Galen professed he could never 


| PLASTIC LIFE OF NATURE. 317 
enough admire that artifice, which was in the leg 
of a fly (and yet he would have admired the wis- 
dom of nature more, had he been but acquainted 
with the use of microscopes): I say, upon supposi- 
tion of no plastic nature, one or other of these two 
things must be concluded ; because it is not con- 
ceived by any, that the things of nature are all thus 
administered, with such exact regularity and con- 
‘stancy every where, merely by the wisdom, pro- 
vidence, and efficiency of those inferior spirits, de- 
mons, or angels. As also, though it be true, that 
the works of nature are dispensed by a Divine law 
and command, yet this is not to be understood in 
a vulgar sense, as if they were all effected by the 
mere force of a verbal law or outward command, 
because inanimate things are not commendable. 
‘nor governable by such a law. And therefore, be- 
sides the. Divine will; and pleasure, there must 
needs be some other immediate agent and execu- 
tioner provided, for the producing of every effect ; 
since not so mich as a stone, or other heavy body, 
could at any time fall downward, merely by the 
force of a verbal law, without any other efficient 
cause; but either God himself must immediately 
impel it, or else there must be some other subor- 
- dinate cause in nature for that motion. Where- 
fore, the Divine Jaw and command, by which the 
things of nature are administered, must be con- 
ceived to be the real appointment of some ener- | 
getic, effectual, and operative cause for the pro- 
ge of every effect. : 

. Now to assert the former of these two things, 
/ all the effects of nature come to pass by ma- 
terial and mechanical necessity, or. the mere for- 
tuitous motion of matter, without any guidance or 


318 A DIGRESSION CONCERNING THE 
direction, is a thing-no less irrational than it is im- 
pious and atheistical. Not only because it is 
utterly inconceivable and impossible, that such 
infinite regularity and artificialness,’ as Is every 
where throughout the whole world, should coxn- 
stantly result out of the fortuitous motion of mat- 
ter; but also beeause there are many such parti- 
cular phenomena in nature, as do plamly tran- 
scend the powers of mechanism, of which therefore 
no sufficient mechanical reasons can be devised— 
as the motion of respiration in animals: as there 
are also other phenomena, that are perfectly cross 
to the laws of mechanism; as, for example, that of 
the distant poles of the equator and ecliptic, which 
we shall insist upon afterward. Of both which 
kinds there have been other instances proposed 
by my learned friend, Dr. More, in his Enchiri- 
dion Metaphysteum, and very ingeniously im proved 
by him to this very purpose, namely, to evince, 
that there 1s something in nature besides me- 
chanism, and consequently substance imcorpo- 
real. 

Moreover, those Theists, who philosophize af- 
ter this manner, by resolving all the corporeal phe- 
nomena into forturtous mechanism, or the neces- 
sary and unguided motion of matter, make God 
to be nothing else in the world, but an idle spec- 
tator of the various results of the fortuitous and 
necessary motions of bodies; and render, his wis- 
dom altogether useless and insignificant, as being 
a thing wholly enclosed and shut up within his 
own: breast, and not at all aa abroact upon any 
thing without him. 

Furthermore, all such: Mechanists as these, 
whether Theists or Atheists, do, according to that — 


PLASTIC LIFE OF NATURE. _ 319 


judicious censure passed. by Aristotle, be Part. An. 
long since, upon Democritus, but sub- (2°%) oer | 
stitute as it were yeipa Evdiny téxrovoc, & 
carpenter's or artificer’s wooden hand, moved by 
strings and wires, instead of a living hand.—They 
make a kind of dead and wooden world, as it were 
a earved statue, that hath nothing neither vital nor 
magical at all in it. Whereas to those, who are. 
considerative, it will plainly appear, that there is 
a mixture of life or plastic nature, together with 
mechanism, which runs canoer the whole cor- 
poreal universe. 
And whereas it is pretended, not only that all 
corporeal phenomena. may be sufficiently solved 
mechanically, without any final, intending, and di- 
reetive causality, but also that all other reasons of 
things in nature, besides the material and mecha- 
nical, are altogether unphilosophical, the same 
Aristotle’ ingeniously exposes the ridiculousness 
of this pretence after this manner : telling us, that 
it is just as if a carpenter, joiner, or carver should 
give this account, as the only satisfactory, of any- 
artificial fabric or piece of carved imagery, dri gume- 
GOvrog TOU Opryavov 70 piv Kotdow Eylvero, TOdE ErimesoV; 
that because the instruments, axes and hatchets, 
planes and chisels, happened to fall so and se 
apon the timber, cutting it here and there, that - 
therefore it was hollow in one place, and plain in 
another, and the like; and by that means the whole 
came. to be of such a form.—For is it not altoge- 
ther as absurd and ridiculous, for men te ander- 
take’ to: give am account of the formatiom and or- 
ganization. of the bodies of animals, by mere fortu- 
itous mechanism, without any final or intending 


2 Ubi supra. > Vide Cartes, br. de Homine, étde Formatione Feetus: 


— 320 FINAL CAUSES 


causality, as why there was an heat here, and — 
brains there ; and why the heart had so many and 
such different valves in the entrance and outlet of 
its venticles; and why all the other organic parts, 
veins and arteries, nerves and muscles, bones and 
cartilages, with the joints and members, wereof such 
a form? Because forsooth, the fluid matter of the 
seed happened to move so and so in several places, 
and thereby to cause all those differences, which 
are also diverse in different animals; all being the 
necessary result of a certain quantity of motion at 
first indifferently impressed upon the small parti- 
cles of the matter of this universe turned round in © 
a vortex. But, as the same Aristotle adds, no 
carpenter or artificer is so simple, as to give such 
an account as this, and think it satisfactory, but 
he will rather declare, that himself directed the 
motion of the instruments, after such a 

“oe Fart. manner, and in ordertosuchends: *Bé- 
| .TLOU O TEKTWY, OU yap caver tora auro, 0 TO“ 
gouTov Eire, Ort EuTEGOvTOG TOU Opyavou, &C. adda dort 
rnv wAnyny érolyoaTo. TolavTnY, Kal rlvoc Eveka, goet THY 
airiav, oTwe TOLOVOE ma TOtOvONnTOTE rn popony yévnrat. A 
carpenter would give a better account than so, for | 
he would not think it sufficient to say, that the fa- 
bric came to be of such a form, because the instru: 
ments happened to fall so and so, but he will tell 
you thatit was because himself madesuch strokes, 
and that he directed the instruments and deter- 
mined their motion after such a manner, to this 
end, that he might make the whole a fabric fit and 
useful for such purposes.—And_ this is to assign 
the final cause. And certainly. there is scarcely 
any man in his wits, that’will not acknowledge the 
reason of the different valves in the heart from the 


NOT UNPHILOSOPHICAL. — «32 


apparent usefulness of them, according to those, 
_ particular structures of their's, to be more satisfac- 


tory, than any: which can be brought from mere 


fortuitous mechanism, or the unguided motion of 
the seminal matter. 

4. And as for the latter part of the asant ior 
that every thing in nature should be done imme- 
diately by God himself; this, as, according to vul- 
gar apprehension, it would render Divine Provi- 
dence operose, solicituus, and distractious, and 
thereby make the belief of it to be entertained with 
greater difficulty, and give advantage to Atheists: 
so, in the judgment of the writer De Mundo, it is 
not so decorous in respect of God neither, that he 
Should avroupyely aravra, set his own. hand, as it 
were, to every work, ‘and immediately do all the 
meanest and triflingest things himself drudgingly, 
without making use of any inferior and | ae 
subordinate instruments. Eérep doeuvov 
mv avrov SOKELY eet avroup yely aravra, Kat Ouared ety 
a Povderro, Kal Epiorapevov choucety, TOAU uaddov amperes 
ay, in: TH. ew. Zepvdrepov oe Kat TOE ETWOESTELOV THY Suva- 
(pw, auTon, Oia TOU cUpTaVTOS KOGHOU Sinkoveay, HALov TE 
Kwewy kal ceAnvnr, &c. If it were not congruous in 
respect of the state and majesty of Xerxes, the 
great king of Persia, that he should condescend | 
to do all the meanest offices himself; much less 
can this be thought decorous in reapect of. God. 
Butit seems far more august and becoming of the 
Divine Majesty, that acertain power and virtue, 
‘derived from him, and passing through | the uni- 
verse, should move the sun and moon, and be the 
immediate cause of those lower things done here 
‘upon earth.— 


Moreover, it seems not so agreeable | to reason 


322 | NATURE A SUBORDINATE 

neither, that nature, as a distinct thing from the 
Deity, should be quite superseded or made to 
signify nothing, God himself doing all things im- 
mediately and miraculously; from whence it 
— would follow also, that they are all done either 
forcibly and violently, or else artificially only, and 
none of them by any inward principle of their own. 

Lastly: this opinion is further confuted by that 
slow and gradual process, that is in the genera- 
tions of things, which would seem to be but a vain 
and idle pomp, or a trifling formality, if the agent 
were omnipotent: as also by those avapriuara (as 
Aristotle calls them) those errors and bungles, 
_ which are committed, when the matter is inept and 
* contumacious; which argue the agent not to be 
irresistible, and that nature is such a thing, as is 
not altogether incapable (as well as human art) 
of being sometimes frustrated and disappointed, 
by the indisposition of matter. Whereas an om- — 
nipotent agent, as it could dispatch its work in a 
moment, so it would always do it infallibly and 
irresistibly ; no ineptitude or stubbornness of mat- 
ter being ever able to hinder such a one, or make 
him bungle or fumble in any thing. 

5. Wherefore, since neither all things are pro- 
duced fortuitously, or by the unguided mechanism 
of matter, nor God himself may reasonably be 
thought to do all things immediately and miracu- 
lously ; it may well be concluded, that there is a 
plastic nature under him, which, as an inferior and 
subordinate instrument, doth drudgingly execute 
that part of his providence, which. consists in the’ 
regular and orderly motion of matter; yet so as 
that there is also, besides this, a higher Provi- 
.dence to be acknowledged, which, presiding over 


INSTRUMENT OF THE DEITY. 323 


it, doth often supply the defects of it, and some- 
times over-rule it; forasmuch as this plastic na-~ 
ture cannot act electively, nor with discretion. 
And by this means the wisdom of God will not be 
shut up nor concluded wholly within his own 
breast, but will display itself abroad, and print its 
stamps and signatures every where throughout the 
world; so that God, as Plato* (after Orpheus’)’ 
speaks, will be not only the beginning and end, 
but .also the middle of all things; they being as 
much to be ascribed to his causality, as if himself 
had done them all immediately, ‘without the con- 
current instrumentality of any subordinate natural 
cause. Notwithstanding which, in this way it 
will appear also to-human reason, that all things 
are disposed and ordered by the Deity, without 
any solicitous care or distractious providence. 
And indeed those mechanic Theists, who, re- 
jecting a plastic nature, affect to concern the Deity 
as little as is possible in mundane affairs, either 
for fear of debasing him, and bringing him down to 
too mean offices, or else of subjecting him to-soli- 
citous encumberment ; and for that cause would 
have God to contribute nothing more to the mun- 
dane system and economy, than only the: first 
impressing: of a certain quantity of motion upon 
the matter, and the after conserving of it, accord- 
ing to some general laws; these men, I say, seem 
not very well to. understand themselves in this. 
Forasmuch as they must of necessity, either sup- 
pose these their laws of motion to execute them- 
selves, or else be forced perpetually to concern. 
_ the Deity in the immediate motion of every atom 
of matter throughout the universe, m_order to the 
— *De Leg. lib.iv.p. 600. oper. » Vide Apul. de Mundo, p.25. 


bis 


324 A PLASTIC NATURE AGREEABLE TO THE 


execution and observation of them. The former of - 
which being a thing plainly absurd and ridicu- 
lous, and the latter that, which these philoso- 
phers themselves are extremely abhorrent from, 
we cannot make any other conclusion than this, 
that they do but unskilfully and unawares esta- 
blish that very thing, which in words they oppose; 
and that their laws of nature concerning motion 
are really nothing else but a plastic nature, acting 
upon the matter of the whole corporeal universe, 
both maintaining the same quantity of motion al- 
ways in it, and also dispensing it (by transferring 
- jt out of one body into another) according. to 
such laws, fatally impressed upon it. Now, if 
there be a plastic nature, that governs the motion 
of matter every where, according to laws, there 
can be no reason given, why the same might not 
also extend farther to the regular disposal of that 
matter, in the formation of plants and animals, 
and other things, in order to that apt coherent 
frame and harmony of the whole universe. | 

6. And as this plastic nature is a thing, which 
seems to be in itself most reasonable, so-hath it also 
had the suffrage of the best philosophers in all 
ages. For, first, it is well known, that Aristotle 
concerns himself in nothing more zealously than 
this, that mundane things are not effected merely 
by the necessary and unguided motion of. matter, 
or-by.fortuitous mechanism; but by such a nature 
as acts regularly and artificially for ends; yet so 
as that this nature is not the highest principle 
neither, or the supreme Numen, but subordinate 
to.a perfect mind or intellect; he affirming, that 
vove airiov Kal dvate roves Tou Travroc,. that mind, toge- 
_. ther with nature, was the cause of this universe ; 


= 


SENSE OF THE BEST PHILOSOPHERS. 325 
~—and that heaven and earth, plants and animals, 
were framed by them both; that is, by mind ag 
the principal and directive cause, but by nature as 
a subservient or executive instrument; and else- 
where joining In like manner God and aature both 
together, as when he concludes, That God and 
nature do nothing in vain. | 

Neither was Aristotle the first broacher or in. 
ventor of this doctrine, Plato before him having 
plainly asserted the same. For in a passage al- 
ready cited, he affirms, that nature, together with 
reason, and according to it, orders all’ things: 
thereby making nature, as a distinct thing from 
the Deity, to be a subordinate cause under the 
reason and wisdom of it. And elsewhere he re- 
solves, that there are EudOOVvOC pdoews airtat, aic uirnoe 
roveatc o Osd¢ yonra, Certain causes of a wise and 
artificial nature, which the Deity uses as subser- 
vient to itself;—as also, that there are fuvaina ole 
Evvepyoic Oedcg yonra, Con-causes, which God makes 
use of, as puporainateny: co- oye with him- 
self. 

Moreover, before Plato, Ppsiadhe philoso- 
phized also in the same manner, when, supposing 
two worlds, the one archetypal, the other ectypal, 
he made prria and vexoc, friendship and discord, 
to be the a apyn Spaarnpioc, the active principle and 
Immediate operator in this lower world ;-he not 
understanding thereby, as Plutarch’ and some 
others have conceited, two substantial principles 
in the world, the one of goad, the other of evil; 
but only a plastic nature, as Aristotle in sundry 


.* De Iside et Osiride, p. 370. tem ji. oper. 
VOL. I. Y¥ 


- En. 3.1.2. 


226 A PLASTIC NATURE AGREEABLE TO THE 


places intimates ; which he called by that. name, 
partly because he apprehended, that the result 
and upshot of nature in all generations and cor- 
ruptions amounted to nothing more than mixtures 
and separations, or concretion and secretion of 
pre-existent things ; and partly because this plas- 
tic nature is that, which doth reconcile the con- 
trarieties and enmities of particular things, and 
bring them into one general harmony in the whole. 
Which latter isa notion, that Plotinus, describing 
this very seminary reason or plastic nature of the 
world (though taking it in something a larger 
sense than we do in this place), doth in- 
sec. 16.p. geniously pursue after this manner : ’Av- 
sls oa risic S& addAnAate ta péon, Kal roinoac EVOEC, 
moAguov Kal mayne sveracw Kat yéveow slo'ydoato* Kat ovTw¢ 
foriv sig TAG, €l py Ev £in’ ‘yevouevov yap EavT@ ToL pégedt 
TOAguov, OUTwE Ev ETL Kat Pidov, WemED ay e Spaparog 
_Xoyoe gic, 0 TOU. Spdparoc, EY WY gy avr moAXac payac’ 
TO Mev OUY Spapa ra pea ynuéva, oiov Ei¢ play aguoviay, 
ayer cuppwvov.—e te paddov av Tic ™ copovia ™ & 
payouévwy eikaceee. ‘The seminary reason or plas- 
tic nature of the universe, opposing the parts to 
one another, and making them severally indi- 
gent, produces by that means war and contention. 
And, therefore, though it be one, yet, notwith- 
standing, it consists of different and contrary 
things. ‘For. there being hostility in its parts, it 
is nevertheless friendly and agreeable i in the whole; 
after the same manner as in a dramatic poem, 
clashings and contentions are. reconciled into one 
‘harmony. And, therefore, the seminary and plas- 
tic nature of the world may fitly be resembled to 
the harmony of disagreeing things.—Which Plo- 


! 


SENSE OF THE BEST PHILOSOPHERS. 327 


tinic doctrine may well pass for a commentary 


upon Empedocles, accordingly as Sim- |... ao 


plicius briefly represents his sense, ’Ey- Cel.1.1.c. 
4 om € 10, vee 
medokAne Svo KOsmOvE ouVioTnoL, TOV Mev NvwUE- cai Grave. 


Venet. 1526. 


\ bj \ \ \ 7 A 
vov Kal vontoy, Tov d& dtakskpluévov kat atcOnrov, -F 


\ 2? r ? \ ef ; c #- A , , 
Kal &v TOUTW KOOLW TV EVWOLY Opa Kat THY oua- 


xpiow’ Empedocles makes two worlds, the one 


united and intelligible, the other divided and sen- 
sible; and in this lower sensible world, he takes 
notice both of unity and discord.—- 

-It was before observed, that Heraclitus like- 
wise did assert a regular and artificial nature, as 
the fate of things in this lower world; for his “‘ rea- 
son passing through the substance ofall things,” or 
‘‘ethereal body, which was the seed of-the gene- 


ration of the universe,” was nothing but that sper- 


matic or plastic nature which we now speak of. 


And whereas there is an odd passage of this phi- 
losopher’ s recorded,* kospov rovee ovre tic ewe ov : 


tT avlopwrwv éroinss, that neither any God nor man 
made this world,—which, as it is justly derided 
by. Plutarch for its simplicity, so it looks very 


atheistically at first sight; yet, because Heracli- 


tus hath not been accounted an Atheist, we there- 
fore conceive the meaning of it to have been this, 


that the world was not made by any whatsoever, 


after such a manner as an artificer makes a house, 
by machines and engines, acting from without 
upon the. matter, cumbersomely and moliminously, 
but by a certain inward plastic nature of its own. 

And as Hippocrates followed Heraclitus in 
this (as was before declared), so did Zeno and 


the Stoics also; they supposing, besides an intel- 


* Apud Plutarch. de Anima Procreat. ex Timzo, tom. ii. oper. ‘p. 
1014. et apud Clement. Alexandrin. Stromat. lib. v. cap. xiv. p. 711. . 


y2 


828 A PLASTIC NATURE AGREEABLE TO THE 
lectual nature, as the supreme architect and mas- 
ter-builder of the world, another plastic nature. 
as the immediate workman and operator: which 
plastic nature hath been already described, in the 
‘words of Balbus, as a.thing, which acts not for- 
ee tuitously, but regularly, orderly, and 
mek ie - artificially. ‘And Laertius tells* us, it 
yale 148-P-- was defined by Zeno himself after this 
_ 8 manner: Zort o¢ @votc eke e& aurng Kivovpevin 
Kara omepuariKove AoOyous, amoreAoUGa TE Kal cuvéyouvoa 
ra & avine év wolopevotc yeovorc, Kat’ rovavra Spwoa 
d@ olwy amexoifn’ Nature is a habit moved from it- 
self, according to spermatic reasons or seminal 
‘principles, perfecting and containing those several 
things, which in determinate times are produced 
from it, and acting agreeably to that from which 
it was secreted.— 
Lastly, as the latter Blaoniets and Peripate- 
tics have unanimously followed their masters 
herein, whose vegetative soul also is no other than 
a plastic nature; so the chemists and Paracel- 
sians insist much upon the same thing, and seem 
rather to have carried the notion on further, in 
the bodies of animals, where they call it by a new 
name of their own—the Archeus. 

Moreover, we cannot but observe here, din. 
as amongst the ancients they were generally con- 
demned for downright Atheists, who acknow- 
ledged no other principle besides body or matter, 
‘necessarily and fortuitously moved, such as De- 
mMocritus and the first Ionics; so even Anax- 
vagoras himself, netwithstanding that he was a 
‘professed Theist, and plainly asserted mind to 
be a principle, yet, because he attributed too — 
much to material necessity, admitting neither this 


‘SENSE OF THE BEST PHILOSOPHERS. $329 


plastic nature nor a mundane soul, was severely 
censured, not only by the vulgar (who unjustly 
taxed him for an Atheist), but also by Plato and 
Aristotle, as a kind of. spurious and imperfect 
Theist, and one who had given great advantage 
to Atheism. Aristotle, in his Metaphy- ee 
sics, thus represents his“ philosophy:* peg. 267. 

‘Avabayopac TE yap pnyer7 xpnrae 7 ve, mpeg eee 
rny. Kooporotian Kai érav artopnon Sua tiv airiay, e& ava~ 
yes EgTly TOTE EAKEL aurov, év S€ roc aAAowe wavtTa paddAov 
aiTvarat TOY YytvoMEvwD n vou" Anaxagoras useth mind 
and intellect, that is, God, as a machine in the 
Cosmopeia; and when he is at a loss tu give 
an account of things by material necessity, then, 


and never but then, does he drawinmindorGod ~ 


to help him out; but otherwise he will rather as- 
sign any thing ele for a cause than mind.—Now, 
if Aristotle censure Anaxagoras in this manner, 
though a professed Theist, because he did but 
seldom make use of a mental cause for the solv- 
Ing of the phenomena of the world, and only then 
- when he was at a loss for other material and me- _ 
ehanical causes’ (which it seems he. sometimes 
confessed himself to be), what would that philo- 
sopher have thought of those our so confident 
Mechanists of later times, who will never youch- 
safe so much as once to be beholden to God : Al- 
mighty for any thing in the economy of the cor- 
poreal world, after the first Se of mofion 
upon the matter? 

Plato, likewise,.in his Phedo, and ee ee 
- condemns this Anaxagoras by name for this very 
— nat though he acknowledged mind to be | 


Be *P.393. 4 


380 A PLASTIC NATURE AGREEABLE TO THE 


a cause, yet he seldom made use of it for solving 
the phenomena; but in his twelfth De Legibus, 
he perstringeth him unnamed, as one who, though 
a professed Theist, had, notwithstanding, given 
| great encouragement to Atheisin, after 
Sue a this manner :* Aéyovrec we youg £m 0 taxe- 

Koopykwe ravO doa Kat ovoarey, avrot & wadw 
auaptavovrec Yoyns pvoewe, Ore mpea[3urepov tin cwMaTaY, 
dravf we irév Erog, avérpapay wadw, ta yap & apo rey 
Ouparewv TavTa, AUTOS Epavn, ra Kar ovoavoy Peoopteva, 
peora. civar Aw, Kat yne, Kat roAAwy adAwy au yor car 
pate, Suvenovran rag atriag ravrdg TOU KOoMOU, TAUT HY 
TQ TOTE eistoyacpéva mwoAAac abeornrac’ Some of them, 
who had concluded that it was mind that or- 
dered all things in the heavens, themselves erring 
concerning the nature of the soul, and not making 
that older than the body, have overturned all 
again; for heavenly bodies being supposed by 
them to be full of stones, and earth, and other 
inanimate things (dispensing the causes of the 
whole universe), they did by this means occasion 
much Atheism and impiety.— 

Furthermore, the same Plato there tells us, that 
in those times of his, astronomers and physiolo- 
gers commonly lay under the prejudice and sus- 
picion of Atheisin amongst the vulgar, merely for 
this reason, because they dealt so much in mate- 
rial causes: Oi roAXot Stavoourrat rove ra roraura peera- 
“etpioaparoue, acrpovonia TE KA Taig mera TAUTHC avayKalat¢ 
arAate téyvaic, ablovg yiyribar, xabewpaxorag we oiowre 
ytyvoueva avayKa ta mpaypat, add’ ov Stavoiac Bovdy- 
cewe ayabor Tréot Tehouptéevw® The vulgar think, that 
they who addict themselves to astronomy and 
physiology, are made Atheists thereby, they see- 
ing as niuch as is possible, how things come to 


aa 


SENSE OF THE BEST PHILOSOPHERS. 3931 


.pass by material necessities, and being thereby 


disposed to think them not to be ordered by mind 
and will, for the sake’ of good—From whence 
we may observe, that, according to the natural 
apprehensions of men in. all ages, they who re- 
solve the phenomena of nature into material ne- 
cessity, allowing of no final nor mental causality 
(disposing things in order to ends), have been 


strongly suspected for friends to Atheism. 


7. But because some may pretend, that the 
plastic nature is all one with an occult quality, 
we-shall here shew, how great a difference there 
is betwixt these two. For he that asserts an oc- 
eult quality for the cause of any phenomenon, 
does indeed assign no cause at all of it, but only 
declare his own ignorance of the cause: but he 


_ that asserts a plastic nature, assigns a determinate 


and proper cause, nay, the only intelligible cause, 
of that which is the greatest of all phenomena in 
the world, namely, the ro & kat kadwe, the orderly, 
regular, and artificial frame of things in the uni- 
verse, whereof the mechanic philosophers, how- 
ever, pretending to solye all phenomena by matter 
and motion, assign no cause at all, Mind and | 
understanding is the only true cause of orderly 
regularity ; and he that asserts a plastic nature; 
asserts mental causality in the world; but the for- 
tuitous Mechanists, who, exploding final causes, 
will not allow mind and understanding to have 
any influence at all upon the frame of things, can 


never possibly assign any .cause of. this -grand 


-plenomenon, unless confusion may be said to be 


the cause of order, and fortune or chance of con- 
stant regularity ; and, therefore, themselves wust — 
resolve it into an occult quality, Nor, indeed, 


33% A RIGHT REPRESENTATION 

does there appear any great reason, why such 
men should assert an infinite mind in the world, 
since they do not allow it to act any where at all, 
and therefore must needs make it to be in vain. 

8. Now, this plastic nature being a thing, which 
is not without some difficulty in the conception 
ef it, we shall here endeavour to do these two 
things concerning it: first, to set down a right 
representation thereof; and then afterwards to 
shew how extremely the notion of it hath been 
mistaken, perverted, and abused by those Athe- 
jats, who would make it to be the only God Al- 
mighty, or first principle of all things. 

How the plastie nature is in general to be con- 
pence ceived, Aristotle instructs us in’ these 
c.8. pag. 17. words ri Et &vny éy Tw fud@ * vaUT yn OfOl- 
oe OP ae ay 77 pucee tote’ If the naupegical art, 
that is, the art of the shipwright, were in the tim- 
ber itself operatively and effectually, it would 
there act just as nature doth.—And the case is 
the same for all other arts. If the ecodomical 
art, which is in the mind of the architect, were 
supposed to be transfused mto the stones, bricks, 
and mortar, there acting upon them in such a 
manner as to make them come together of them- 
selves, and range themselves into the form of a 
cowplete edifice, as Awphion was said, by his 
harp, to have made the stones move, and place 
themselves orderly of their own accord. and 80 to 
have built the walls of Thebes; or if the musical 
art were conceived to be immediately in the 
instruments and strings, animating them as a liv- 
ing soul, aud waking them to move exactly, ac- 
cording to the laws of harmony, without any ex- 
ternal impulse; these, and such like instances, 


|. OF THIS PLASTIC NATURE. | 333 
in Aristotle’s judgment, would be fit iconisms or 
representations of the plastic nature, that being 
art itself acting immediately upon the matter as 
an inward principle init. To which purpose the 
same philosopher adds, that this thing might be. 
further illustrated by another instance or resem- 
blance « paducra Of onAov, éray TLC laroever avroc éaurov, 
TouTw ydo Eouev n duoc’ Nature may be yet more 
clearly resembled to the medicinal art, when it is 
employed by the physician in curing himself.—So 
that the meaning of this philosopher is, that na- 
ture is to be conceived-as art, acting not from 
without and at a distance, but immediately upon 
the thing itself which is formed by it. And thus 
we have the first general conception of the plastic 
nature, that it is art itself, acting immediately on. 
the matter as an inward principle. 

9. In the next place, we are to observe,, that 
though the plastic nature be a kind of art, yet 
there are some considerable pre-eminences which, 
it hath-above human art; the first whereof is this, 
that whereas human art cannot act upon the mat- 
ter otherwise than from without and at a distance, 
nor communicate itself to it, but with a great deal 
of tumult and hurliburly, noise and clatter, it. 
using hands and axes, saws and hammers, and. 
after this manner, with much ado, by knockings* 
and thrustings, slowly introducing its form or idea: 
(as, for example, of a ship or house) into the 
_ Inaterials; nature, in the mean time, is another 
kind of art, which, insinuating itself immediately 
_ into things themselves, and there acting more 
commandingly upon the matter as an inward prin- 
ciple, does its work easily; cleverly, and silently. 
Nature: ij is art as it were ‘incorporated and embo- 


d04 NATURE IS THE 


died in matter, which doth not act upon it from 
without mechanically, but from within 
a rie vitally and magically; ourE xeipes evravba, 
 oure mosee, OUTE TL opyavoy ETAaKTOV 7 ouppuror, 
vAne oe det Ed "6 ToWoel KUL Nv év Eloel TOLEL, TaVvTUTOU 
onArov. Set dé Kat TO poyhevet adeXgly EK THC PuaiKne ToLN- 
CEWC. IOLOC yao wbicpoc, 7 7 Tic poy Agia, &c. Here are 
no Hands, nor feet, nor any instrument, connate 
or adventitious, there being only need of matter to 
. work upon, and to be brought into a certain form, 
and nothing else. For it 1s manifest that the ope- 
ration of nature is different from mechanism, it 
doing not its work by trusion or pulsion, by knock- 
ings or thrustings, as if it were without that which 
it wrought upon.—But as God is nward to every 
thing, so nature acts immediately upon the matter, 
as aninward and living soul, or law init. 

10. Another pre-eminence of nature above. hu- 
man artis this, that whereas human artists are 
often to seek and at a loss, and therefore consult 
and deliberate, asalso upon second thoughts mend 
their former work ; nature, on the contrary, is ne- 
ver to seek what to do, nor at a stand; and for 
that reason also (besides another that will be sug- 
gested afterwards) it doth never consult nor deli- 
berate. Indeed Aristotle intimates, as if this had 
been the grand objection of the old Atheistic phi- 
losophers against the plastic nature, that because 
we do not see natural bodies to consultordelibe- - 
rate, therefore there could be nothing of art, coun- 
sel, or contrivance in them; but all came to pass 
| ‘fortuitously.— But he confutes it after 
Phys.t.2.c. this manner : "Arowov & rd pn oleoOar evexe: 
8. p.477. tom. ‘ 4 i te : 4, ear 
is aper.. Tov ytvecBat, av py tdwat TO Kwouv PovAEvoa- 


EP ce ote . . er ay ; y 2 
— -RVOV, Kairor Kat 9} TEYUN ov. BovXsverar™ Itis . 


DIVINE ART EMBODIED. 335 


absurd for men to think nothing to be done for 
ends, if they do not see that which moves to 
consult, although art itself doth not consult.— 
Whence he concludes, that nature may act artifi- 
cially, orderly, and methodically, for the sake of © 
ends, though it never consult or deliberate. In- - 
deed human artists themselves do not consult pro- 
perly as they are artists, but whenever they do it, 
itis for want of art, and-because they are to seek, 
their art being imperfect and adventitious: but 
art itself, or perfect art, is never to seek, and there- 
fore doth never consult or deliberate; and nature 
is this art, which never hesitates nor studies, as 
unresolved what to do, but is always readily 
prompted ; nor does it ever repent afterwards of 
what it had formerly done, or go about, as it 
“were, upon second thoughts, to alter and mend its 
former course; but it goes on in one constant un- 
repenting tenor, from generation to generation, 
because it is the stamp or impress of that infalli- 
bly omniscient art of the Divine understanding, 
which is the very law.and rule of what is Py | 
_ the best in every thing. 

And thus we have seen the difference between 
nature and human art: that the latter is imperfect 
art, acting upon the matter from without, and at 
a distance ; but the former is art itself, or perfect 
art, acting as an inward principle in it. Where- 
fore, when art is said to imitate nature, the meah- _ 
Ing thereof is, that imperfect human art imitates 
that perfect art of nature, which is really no other 
than the Divine art itself; as, before Aristotle,. 
Plato had declared in his Sophist,* in thése 


| *-P, 168. oper. | 


336 NATURE IS TVHE 


words: ra puoe Aeyoueva woucbat Gua vi yer Those 
things, which are said to be done by nature, are 
indeed done by Divine art. — 

11. Notwithstanding which, we are to take no- 
tice in the next place, that as nature is not the 
Deity itself, but a thing very remote from it, and 
far below it, so neither is it the Divine art, as it 1s 
in itself pure and abstract, but concrete and em- 
bodied only ; for the Divine art considered 1m it- 
self, is nothing but knowledge, understanding, or 
wisdom in the mind of God. Now knowledge and 
understanding, in its own nature, IS Keywpopévor 71, 
a certain separate and abstract thing,—and of so 
subtile and refined a nature, as that it is not capa- 
‘ble of being incorporated with matter, or mingled 
and blended with it, asthe soul of it. And there- 
fore Aristotle’s second instance, which he pro- 
pounds as most pertinent to illustrate this busi- 
uess of nature by, namely, of the physician’s art 
curing himself, is not so adequate thereunto; be- 
cause when the medicinal art cures the physician, 
in whom itis, it doth not there act as nature, that 
Is, as concrete and embodied art, but as know- 
ledge and understanding only, which is art naked, 
abstract, and unbodied; as also it doth its work 
ambagiously, by the physician’s willmg and pre- 
scribing to himself the use of such medicaments, 
as do but conduce, by removing of impediments, 
to help that, which is nature indeed, or the inward 
archcus, to effect the cure. Art is defined by Aris- 
totle’ to be Aoyo¢ rou Epyou advev bAnc, the reason of 
the thing without matter ;—and so the Divine art 
or knowledge in the mind of God, is unbodied 
reason; but nature is ratio mersa el confusa, 


* De Parlib. Animal. lib. i. cap. i. p. 472. tom. ii. oper. 


» DIVINE ART EMBODIED. 337 


reason immersed and plunged into matter, and, as 
it were, fuddled in it, and confounded with it. 
Nature is not the, Divine art archetypal, but only | 
ectypal; it is a living stamp or signature of the 
Divine wisdom; which, though it act exactly ac- 
cording to its archetype, yet it doth not at all com- 
prehend nor understand the reason of what itself 
doth. And the difference between these two may 
he-resembled to that between the dd-yoe évduberoc, 
the reason of the mind and conception,—called 
verbum mentis, and the dAoyo¢ zpopogixos, the reason 
of external speech ;—the latter of which, though 
it bear a certain stamp and impress of the former 
upon it, yet itself is nothing but articulate sound 
devoid of all understanding and sense. Or else 
we may ilustrate this business bv another sinili- 
tude, comparing the Divine art and wisdom to an 
architect, but nature to a manuary opificer; the 
difference betwixt which two is thus set forth by 
Aristotle pertinently to our purpose: 

rouc dp xtréxrovac TEpL exagTov TYLLWTépoUg Kat ee ea 
padrov edévat vouibousy TwWY Keone Kve Kal iv. oper. 
soperripoue, 6 Ort rag airiac Tw mocounévery isaoty. 

o 8 ocmep Kul THY aw ywy = vie: Tole Mev, OUK sLOUTA 33 
TOL, Olov Kale TO TUO. Ta Miv ovv abu ya @ucst Tee Totty 
ToUTwy tKacrov’ TOU de yelporeyvac d. Hoc. We account 
the architects in every thing more honourable than 
the manuary opificers, because they understand 
the reason of things done; whereas the other, as 
some inanimate things, only do, not knowing what 
they do; the difference between them being only 
this, that inanimate things act by a certain nature 
in them, but the manuary opificer by habit. —Thus 
nature may be called the yeporéyync, or manuary 
opificer, that acts subserviently under the archi- 


388 NATURE THE MANUARY OPIFICER OF 


tectonical art and wisdom of the Divine under- 
standing," 7 rote pv ove atd8via, Which does do with- 
out knowing the reason of what it doth.— 

12. Wherefore, as we did before observe the 
pre-eminences of nature above human art, so we 
must here take notice also of the imperfections 
and defects of it, in which respect it falls short of 
human art, which are likewise two: and the first 
of them is this, that though it act artificially for 
the sake of ends, yet itself doth neither intend 
those ends, nor understand the reason of that it 
doth. Nature is not master of that consummate 
art and wisdom, according to which it acts, but 
only a servant to it, and a drudging executioner of 
the dictates of it. This difference betwixt nature 
En4.4, and abstract art or wisdom is expressed 
c-43.p.467. Dy Plotinus in these words: ri étowea me 
Aeyouevyne gvoewe Ppornae 5 Ore Mev Goomaig TowroY, 7 
& puowe Ev yarov, WwdaApa yap poonoewe nH HUaty, Ket Wyre 
eo xorov Ov, to xarov Kat TOY ey arn Map ropevov Avyov 
eet. oloy él ey es » Baber, Sucverro ble to xaroy tnt Oarece 
ty TH emeparele Truro’ _Eudgyous ey Orrae rou (ven, grate 
oe dolvane Ovrog rou KaTO), OUsr oves otee priate, hover Ck 
roe. Flow doth wisdom differ from that which 
is called nature? verily in*this manner, that wis- 
dom is the first thing, but nature the last and low- 
est ; for nature Is but an image or Nnitation of wis- 
dom, the Jast thing of the soul, which hath the 
Jowest impress of reason shining upon it; as when 
a thick piece of wax is thoroughly impressed upon 
by aseal, that impress, which is clean and distinct 
in the superior superficies of it, will in the lower 
side be weak and obscure ; and such is the stamp 


* Plotin. libro utrum Stetle aliquid agant. Ennead. ii, Hb, iii. cap. 
XViL p. 147. 


THE DIVINE ARCHITECTONICAL ART. 339 


and signature of nature, compared with that of 
wisdom and understanding, nature being a thing, 
which doth only do, but not know.—And else- 
where the same writer declares the difference be- 
tween the spermatic Aoyo, or reasons, and know- 


ledges or conceptions of the mind in this 


- En. 2 
7 5.47. is “147. 
vonpara ; adAa We Kara Ta vonpara rotnoet : = 


manner: Tlorepa 8: 01 doyoe OUTOL OL Ev wy 


6 yao Aoyoo Ev UA ToLEl, Kal TO ToLOUY dvaiKWE, Ov VONCIC, 
oud: Opactc, adda Suvayic rperrixn tno UANc, ovK evia, 
aAAd dpwoa povoy, oioy TUTOV Kat oyna ev Year. Whe- 
ther are these plastic reasons or forms in the souk 
knowledges? but how shall it then act according 
to those knowledges? for the plastic reason or 
form acts or works in matter, and that which acts 
naturally is not intellection nor vision, but a cer- 
tain power of moving matter, which doth not 
know, but only do, and makes as it were a stamp 
or figure in water. 

Aud with this doctrine of the ancients, a modern 
judicious writer, and sagacious inquirer into na- 
ture, seems fully to agree, that nature is such a 
thing as doth not know, but only do; for after be 
had admired that wisdom and art, by which the 
bodies of animals are framed, he concludes that 
one or other of these two things must needs be 
acknowledged, that either the vegetative or plas- 
tic power of the soul, by which it fabricates and 
organizes its own body, is more excel- , 
lent and Divine than the rational; o C .. 
else, “ In nature operibus neque pru-_ mal. Ex. 49. 
dentiam nec intellectum inesse, sed ita 
solum videri conceptui nostro, qui secundum 
artes nostras et facultates, seu exemplaria a nobis- 
metipsis mutuata, de rebus. nature divinis judi-- 


340. ©. NATURE ACTS ARTIFICIALLY 


camus; quasi principia nature activa effectus suos 


eo modo producerent, quo nos opera nostra arti- 
ficialia solemus :” ‘That in the works of nature 
there is neither prudence nor understanding, but 
only it seems so to our apprehensions, who-judge 
of these Divine things of nature according to our 


own arts and faculties, and patterns borrowed’ 


from ourselves; as if the active principles of na- 


ture did produce their effects in the same manner — 


as we do our. artificial works.—Wherefore we 
conclude, agreeably to the sense of the best philo- 
sophers, both ancient and modern, that nature is 
such a thing, as, though it act artificially, and for 
the sake of pias: yet a doth but ape and mimic 
the Divine art and wisdom, itself not understand- 
ing those ends which it acts for, nor the reason of 
what it doth in order to them; for which cause 


also it.is not capable of consultation or delibera- 


tion, nor can it act electively, or with discretion: 
' 18. But because this may seem strange at the 
first sight, that nature should be said to act tea 
gov, for the sake of ends,—and regularly or arti- 


ficially, and yet be itself devoid of knowledge and 
understanding, we shall therefore endeavour to... 


- persuade the possibility, and facilitate the belief 
of it, by some other instances ; and first by that of 
habits, particularly those musical ones of singing, 
playing upon instruments, and dancing. Whieh 
_ habits direct every motion of the hand, voice, and 
body, and prompt them readily, without any deli- 


beration or.studied consideration, what the next, 


following note or motion should be. If you jog 
a sleeping musician, and sing but the first words 
of-asong to him, which he had either himself com- 


H 


posed, or learned before, he. will presently take it 


AND FOR ENDS. 341 


from you, and that perhaps before heis thoroughly 
awake, going on with it, and singing out the re- 


_ mainder of the whole song to the end. Thus the 


fingers of an exercised lutonist, and the legs and 
whole body of a skilful dancer, are directed to 
move regularly and orderly, in a long train and 
series of motions, by those artificial habits in them, 
which do not themselves at all comprehend those 
laws and rules of music or harmony, by which 
they are governed. Sothat the same thing may 
be said of these habits, which was said before of 
nature, that they do not know, but only do. And 
thus we see there is no reason, why this plastic 
- nature (which is supposed to move body regularly 
and artificially) should be thought to be an abso- 
lute impossibility, since habits do, in like manner, 
gradually evolve themselves in a long train or se- 
ries of regular and _ artificial motions, readily 
_ prompting the doing of them, without compre- 
hending that art and reason, by which they are di- 
rected. The forementioned philosopher illustrates 
the seminary reason and plastic nature of the uni- 
verse, by this very instance : "1 Tolwy Evip- 
yea avrg rEXMLKT Ocmep av oO Spxovpevoc, KI- oe Pe ‘267. 
voupevo ein. oO yap op uoTc, ™ otrw reXviKy oper. 
Con EOLKEV auroc, Kal n TEXUN aurov KUWél, Kat 
oUTw Kwvél, wo THE CwNE aUTNS ToLA’TNC TwE OvenC. _ The 
energy of nature is artificial, as when a dancer 
moves; for a dancer resembles this artificial life 
of nature, forasmuch as art itself moves him, and 
so.moves him as being such a life in him.—And 
agreeably to this conceit, the ancient mythologists 
represented the nature of the universe, ‘by Pan 
playing upon a pipe or harp, and being in love 
with the nymph, Echo; as if natare did, by akind 
VOL. I. Zz 


342 THE ENERGY CF NATURE 

of silent melody, make all the parts of the universe 
every where dance in measure and proportion, it- 
self being, as it were, in the mean time, delighted 
and ravished with the re-echoing of its own har- 
mony. Habits are said to be an adventitious and 
acquired nature, and nature was before defined 
by the Stoics* to be cc, or a habit: so that there 
seems to be no other difference between these two, 
than this, that whereas the one is acquired by 
teaching, industry, and exercise ; the other, as was 
expressed by Hippocrates,’ 18 awatderog Kat ov 
pabovea, unlearned and untavght,—and may in 
some sense also be said to be avrodiaxroc, self- 
taught,—though she be indeed always inwardly 
prompted, secretly whispered into, and inspired 
by the Divine art and wisdom. 

14. Moreover, that something may act artifi- 
cially and for ends, without comprehending the rea- 
son of what it doth, may be further evinced from 
those natural instincts that are in animals, which 
without knowledge direct them to act regularly, 
in order both to their own good, and the good of 
the universe. As for example: the bees mn melli- 
fication, and in framing theircombsand hexagonial 
cells, the spiders in spinning their webs, the birds 
in building their neste, and many other animals in 
such like actions of their's, which would seem to 
argue a great sagacity in them, whereas, notwith- 
standing, as Aristotle observes,* otre réyvn, ovrs 
Unrncavra, oure BovAcvedpeva Wrote’ They do these 
things, neither by art, nor by counsel, nor by any 


* Apud Diogen. Laert. lib. vii. segm. 148. p. 459. 
_ > Epidemicor. lib. vi. sect. v. p, 509. tom. i. edit, Vander Linden. 
Vide etiam cundem mg sgophs. Sec, viii, p. 597. fom. i, oper. 

¢ Physicor. lib. ii. cap. x. p. 476. tom. i. oper, 


WITHOUT EXPRESS CONSCIOUSNESS. (“348 


deliberation of their own ;—and, therefore, are not 
‘masters of that wisdom, according to which they 
act, but only passive to the instincts and impresses 
thereof upon them. And indeed to affirm, that 
brute animals do all these things by a knowledge 
* of theirown, and which themselves are masters 
of, and that without deliberation and consultation, 
were to make them to be endued with a most per- 
fect intellect, far transcending that of human rea- 
son; whereas it is plain enough, that brutes are | 
not meee ‘consultation, but below it, and that 
these instincts of nature in them are nothing but a 
kind of fate upon them. 
15. There is, in the next place, another imper- 
_ fection to be observed in the plastic nature, that 
as it doth not comprehend the reason of its own 
_ action, so neither is it clearly and expressly con-— 
scious of what it doth; in which respect, it doth 
‘not only fall short of human art, but even of that 
very manner of acting, which is in brtites them- 
selves, who, though they do not understand the 
reason of those actions, that their natural instincts 
lead them to, yet they are generally conceived to 
be conscious of them, and to do them by fancy; 
whereas, the plastic nature in the formation of 
plants and animals seems to have no animal fancy, 
NO EXpress ovvaisOyorc, CON-SeNnse, OF Consciousness 
of what it doth. Thus the often commended philo- 
sopher : n uote ove’ oavraciav eXEl, n OF vonotc pavra- 
eiatg kpetrrony, pavracia d& perakd ducewe TUTOV 


‘En. 4.1. 4 
Kat voraEwne” n pev ¥é ovbevoc avriknuw Gude 8.13. lib. ii. 


ovvesw eye. Nature hath not so much as_ set 

any fancy in it; as intellection and know- ? *”: 

ledge Is a thing superior to fancy, so fancy is su- 

perior to the impress of nature, for nature hath na 
22 | 


344 THE ENERGY OF NATURE 


apprehension nor conscious perception of any 
thing. Ina word, nature is a thing, that hath no 
such self-perception or self-enjoyment in it, as 
animals have. 

16. Now we are well aware, that this is a thing, 
which the narrow principles of some late philoso- 
phers will not admit of, that there should be any 
action distinct from local motion besides expressly 
conscious cogitation. Jor they making the first 
general heads of all entity to be extension and co- 
-gitation, or extended being and cogitative; and 
then supposing, that the essence of cogitation con- 
sists in express Consciousness, must needs by this 
means exclude such a plastic life of nature, as we 
speak of, that is supposed to act without animal 
fancy or express consciousness. Wherefore, we 
conceive, that the first heads of being ought ra- 
ther to be expressed thus; resisting or antitypous 
extension, and life, (i. e. internal energy and self- 
activity ;) and then again, that life or internal self 
activity is to be subdivided ito such as either 
acts with express consciousness and synwsthesis, 
or such as is without it; the latter of which is this 
plastic life of nature : so that there may be an ac- 
tion distinct from local motion, or a vital energy, 
which is not accompanied with that fancy, or con- 
sciousness, that is in the energies of the animal 
life ; that is, there may be a simple internal energy, 
or vital autokinesy, which is without that dupli- 
cation, that is included in the nature of cvvaicbnere, 
con-seuse and consciousness,—which makes a be- 
ing to be present with itself, attentive to its own 
actions, or animadversive of them, to perceive it- 
self to do or suffer, and to have a fruition or en 
joyment ofitself. And indeed it must be grauted, 


WITHOUT EXPRESS CONSCIOUSNESS. 340 


that what moves matter or determines the motion 
of it vitally, must needs do it by some other energy 
of its own, as it is reasonable also to conceive, 
that itself hath some vital sympathy with that 
matter, which it acts upon. But we apprehend, 
that both these may be without clear and express 
consciousness. Thus the philosopher: 

= er, a: ? > , Fa.3.l.2. 
aoa Gen EvEpyaa, Kal 7 favdn, evepryeta ee, ¢.16. lib. i. 
ox we TO wup Evepyel, adi 7 evépyea aurnc, se Heat 
«Kay uy ataOnotec TLC wapn, KWNGLE TIC OUK ELK. 
Every life is energy, even the worst of lives, and 
therefore that of nature ; whose energy is not like 
that of fire, but such an energy, as though there 
be no sense belonging to it, yet is it not temera- 
rious or fortuitous, but orderly and regular.— 

Wherefore this controversy, whether the energy 
of the plastic nature be cogitation or no, seems to 
be but a logomachy, or contention about words. 
For if clear and express consciousness be supposed 
io be included in cogitation, then it must needs be 
granted, that cogitation doth not belong to the 
plastic life of nature; but if the notion of that 
word be enlarged, so as to comprehend all action 
distinct from local motion, and to be of equal extent 
with life, then the energy of nature is cogitation. 

Nevertheless, if any one think fit to attribute 
some obscure and imperfect sense or perception, 
different from that of animals, to the energy of 
nature, and will therefore call it a kind of drowsy, 
unawakened, or astonished cogitation, the philoso- 
pher before mentioned will not very 
much gainsay it: Erie BovrAyrae cuvecip ae 
twa % alafnow avry SiSovat, ovy oiav Aéyouev een 
évt twv addAr\wv thy acbyow  rhv ouvyotw, et und, p. 


> , Cd Ww % 7” of ~- ~~ , ? 345. 3. 
arr otov Eitic THY TOV UvOU ™ Tou Eypnyooora¢g 


346 VITAL ENERGIES 


TMooceKactlE. If any will needs attribute some kind 
of apprehension or sense to nature, then it must 
not be such a sense or apprehension, as is In ant- 
mals, but something that differs as much from it, 

_as the sense or cogitation of one in a profound 
sleep differs from that of one who is awake.— 
And since it cannot be denied, but that the plas- 
tic nature hath a certain dull and obscure idea of 
that, which it stamps and prints upon matter, the 
same philosopher himself sticks not to call this 
idea of nature, ana and Gewpnua, a spectacle and 
contemplamen, as likewise the energy of nature 
towards it, Oewpia dvogoc, a silent contemplation ; 
nay, he allows, that nature may be said to be, 
in some sense, grobeaqnwv, a lover of spectacles or 
contemplation.— 

17. However, that there may he some vital 
energy without clear and express cvvaig@norc, COn- 
sense and consciousness, animadversion, atten- 
tron, or self-perception, seems reasonable upon 
several accounts. For, first, those philosophers 
themselves, who make the essence of the soul to 
consist in cogitation, and again, the essence of 
cogitation in clear and express consciousness, 
cannot render it any way probable, that the souls 
of men in all profound sleeps, lethargies, and 
apoplexies, as also of embryos in the womb, 
from their very first arrival thither, are never so 
much as one moment without expressly conscious 
cogitations; which, if they were, according to the 
principles of their philosophy, they must, zpso 
facto, cease to have any being. Now, if the souls 
of men and animals be at any time without con- 


* Ubi supra. 


- 


WITHOUT EXPRESS CONSCIOUSNESS. 347 


sciousness. and self-perception, then it must needs 
be granted, that clear and express consciousness 
is not essential to life. There is some appearance 
of life and vital sympathy in certain vegetables 
and plants, which, however called sensitive-plants 
and. plant-animals, cannot well be supposed to 
have animal sense and fancy, or express con- 
sciousness in them ; although we are not ignorant, 
in. the mean time, how some endeavour to solve 
all those phenomena mechanically. It is certain, 


that our human souls themselves are not always 


conscious of whatever they have in them; for 
even the sleeping geometrician hath, at that time, 
all his geometrical] theoremsand knowledges sone 


‘way in him; as also the sleeping musician, all 


his musical skill and songs; and, therefore, why 


may it not be possible for the soul to have like- 


wise. some actual energy in it, which it is not 
expressly conscious of? We have all experience, 
of our doing many animal actions non-attend- 
ingly, which we reflect upon afterwards; as, also, 
that we often continue a long series of bodily mo- 


tions, by a mere virtual intention of our minds, 


and as it were by halfa cogitation. That vital 
sympathy, by which our soul is united and tied 
fast, as it were with a knot, to the body, is a thing 


that we have no direct consciousness of, but only 


in its effects. Nor can we tell, how we come to 
be so differently affected in our souls, from the 
many different motions made upon our bodies. 


As, likewise, we are not conscious to ourselves of 


that energy, whereby we impress variety of mo- 


tions and figurations upon the animal spirits of 


our brain in our fantastic thoughts. For, though 
the geometrician perceive himself to mike lines, 


348 VITAL ENERGIES 


triangles, and circles in the dust with his finger, 
yet he is not aware, how he makes all those same 
figures first upon the corporeal spirits of his 
brain, from whence, notwithstanding, as froma 
glass, they are reflected to him, fancy being right- 
ly concluded by Aristotle’ to be a weak and ob- 
scure sense. There is also another more interior 
kind of plastic power in the soul Gf we may so 
call it), whereby it is formative of its own cogita- 
tions, which itself is not always conscious of; as 
when, in sleep or dreams, it frames interlocutory 
discourses betwixt itself and other persons, in a 
long series, with coherent sense and apt connec- 
tions, in which oftentimes it scems to be surprised 
with unexpected answers and repartees, though 
itself were all the while the poet and inventor of 
the whole fable. Not only our nictations for the 
most part when we are awake, but also our noc- 
turnal volutations in sleep, are performed with 
very little or no consciousness. Respiration, or 
that motion of the diaphragma and other muscles 
which causes it (there being no sufficient mecha- 
nical account of it), may well be concluded to be 
always a vital motion, though it be not always 
animal; since no man can affirm, that he is per- 
petually conscious to himself of that energy of 
his soul, which does produce it when he is awake, 
much less when asleep. And, lastly, the Carte- 
sian’ attempts to solve the motion of the heart 
mechanically, seem to be abundantly confuted by 
autopsy and experiment, evincing the systole of 
the heart to be a muscular constriction, caused 


_ * Lib. ill. de Anta, cap. iii. iv. p. 45. s. tom. ii. oper. 


> Vide Cartes, Libr. de Homine et de Formatione Foctas, p. it. 
p. 195. 8, 


WITHOUT EXPRESS CONSCIOUSNESS. 349 


by some vital principle, to make which, nothing 
but a pulsific corporeal quality in the substance 
of the heart itself, is very unphilosophical and 
absurd. Now, as we have no voluntary impe- 
rium at all upon the systole and diastole of the 
heart, so are we not conscious to ourselves of 
any energy of our own soul that causes them; 
and therefore we may reasonably conclude from 
hence also, that there is some vital energy, with- 
out animal fancy or synesthesis, express con- 
sciousness and self-perception. 

18. Wherefore, the plastic nature, acting nel- 
ther by knowledge nor by animal fancy, neither 
electively nor hormetically, must be concluded to 
act fatally, magically, and sympathetically, And 
thus that curious and diligent inquirer into; na- 
ture, before commended, resolves: ‘‘ Na- 

tura tanquam fato quodam, seu manda- tame 
to secundum leges operante, movet;” : 
Nature moveth as it were by a kind of fate or 
command, acting according to laws.—Fate, and 
the laws or commands of the Deity, concernmg 
the mundane economy (they being really the same 
thing), ought not to be looked upon, neither as 
verbal things, nor as mere will and cogitation in 
the mind of God, but as an energetical and effec- 
tual principle, constituted by the Deity, for the 
bringing of things decreed to pass. The Aphro- 
disian ‘philosopher,* with others of the ancients, 
have concluded, that fate and nature are but two 
different names for. one and the same thing; and 
that sore: Eluappevoy Kata guow Kal TO Kara dvow EyLa.O- 
vévov, both that which is done fatally is done na- 
turally, and also whatever is done netiraly? is 
2 4 Libr. de ‘Pato, sec. 6. p. 25. edit. Londin, 


850 NATURE NEITHER A 


done fatally :—but that which we assert in this 
place is only this, that the plastic nature may be 
said to be the true and proper fate of matter, or 
the corporeal world. Now, that which acts not 
by any knowledge or fancy, will or appetite, of 
its own, but only fatally, according to laws and 
impresses made upon it (but differently in differ- 
ent cases), may be said also to act magically and 
sympathetically. ‘H adnfun payeia (saith the philo- 
sopher*) n ey Tw mart piria Kal veixos, The true ma- 
gic is the friendship and discord that 1s in the 
universe.—Aud again, magic is said to be founded, 
Ey r ouurabeta Kat T™ Twv Suvauswy rey rodAwy wowrdia 
wpeog éy Cwov ouvreAourrwy, in the sympathy and va- 
riety of diverse powers conspiring together into 
one animal.—Of which passages, though the 
principal meaning seem to be this, that the ground 
of magical fascinations is one vital unitive prin- 
ciple in the universe; yet they imply also, that 
there is a certain vital energy, notin the way of 
knowledge and fancy, will and animal appetite, 
but fatally sympathetical and magical. As, in- 
deed, that mutual sympathy, which we have con- 
stant experience of, betwixt our soul and our 
body (being not a material and mechanical, but 
vital thing), may be called also magical. 

19. From what hath been hitherto declared 
concerning the plastic nature, it may appear, that 
though it be a thing that acts for ends artificially, 
and which may be also called the Divine art, and 
the fate of the corporeal world; yet, for all that, 
it is neither god nor goddess, but a low and im- 
perfect creature. Forasmuch as it is not master 


* Plotin. lib, ii. de Dubit. Anime, Ennead. iy. fib. ve cap. xb p. 494, 


COD NOR GODDESS. , 351 


of that reason and wisdom, according to which it 
acts, nor does it properly intend those ends, which 
it acts for; nor, indeed, is it expressly conscious 
ef what it doth, it not knowing, but only doing, 
according to commands and laws impressed up- 
onit. Neither of which things ought to seem 
strange or incredible, since nature may as well 
act regularly and artificially, without any know- 
ledge and consciousness of its own, as forms of 
letters compounded together may print coherent 
philosophic sense, though they understand no- 
thing at all; and it may also act for the sake of 
those ends, that are not intended by itself, but 
some higher being, as well as the saw or hatchet 
in the hand of thearchitect or mechanic  —_—_ 
doth: ro oxémapvov Eveka TOU WEAEKG, GAA Ov pee 
Toodoyilouevov, ada rw mooAoytlouevyy UTNoE- an Ai 
rouv; the axe cuts for the sake of some-. 

thing, though itself does not ratiocinate, nor in- 
tend nor design any thing, but is only subservient 
to that which does so:—It is true, that our human 
actions are not governed by such exact reason, art, 
and wisdom, nor carried on with such constancy, 
evenness, and uniformity, as the actions of nature 
are; notwithstanding which, since we act accord- 
ing to a knowledge of our own, and are masters 
of that wisdom, by which our actions are directed, 
since we do not act fatally only, but electively 
and intendingly, with consciousness and self-per- . 
ception, the rational life that is in us ought to be 
accounted a much higher and more noble perfec- 
tion than, that plastic life of nature. Nay, this 
plastic nature is so far from being the first and 
highest life,. that it is indeed the last and lowest. 
of all lives, it being. really the same thing with the 


352 NATURE NEITHER A 


vegetative, which is inferior to the sensitive. The 
difference betwixt nature and wisdom was before. 
observed, that wisdom is the first and highest 
thing, but nature the last and lowest; this latter 
being but an umbratile imitation of the former. 
And to this purpose, this plastic nature is further 
described by the same philosopher, in these 
words: fort rotyuw ovroe o Ad-yor ovK aKEATOS 
ne Pee ; vous, ovd avrovouc, oudeye wuyne xabapac ro 
aa yivos" nor npevor 32 éxeivne, eal ofov Exhequae 
267. E augow vov Kat Yuync, Kat Puyne Kara vouy 
Suaxeipevne -yevunoavrew tov AG-you rouroy. The 
spermatic reason or plastic nature 18 no pure 
mind: or perfectintellect, nor any kind of pure 
soul neither ; but something which depends upon 
it, being as it were an effulgency or eradiation 
from both together, mind and soul, or soul af- 
fected according to mind, generating the aame as 
a lower kind of life-— 

And though this plastic nature contain no small 
part of Divine providence in it; yet, since it is a 
thing that cannot act electively nor with discre- 
tion, it must needs be granted, that there is a 
higher and Diviner providence than this,- which 
also presides over the corporeal world itself; 

which was a thing likewise insisted 
ae upon by that philosopher: Piverar rd éy rtp 
roe — Wavrt ov cae THEHATIKONC, adAd kard Aoyous 
433. Tepid mwriKovc, Kat Tw Tporépwy, nN Kara rove 

Tey orEpHOLOYoV Aoyoug, ov yap ev ToC onto 
periKoig devyors § Evl, KOL Tov yivopiven, wapd. Tov¢ Om Efe 
TKOUG aurove Avyouc’ The things in the world are 
not. administered merely by spermatic reasons, 
bat-by perileptic (that is, comprehensive, intellec- 
. tual reasons), which are in order of nature before 


GOD NOR GODDESS. - 300— 


the other, because in the spermatic reasons can- 
not be contained that which is contrary to them, 
&c.—Where, though this philosopher may extend 
his spermatic reasons further than we do our 
plastic nature in this place (whichis only confined 
to the motions of matter), yet he concludes, that 
there is a higher principle presiding over the uni- 
verse than this. So that it is not ratzo mersa et 
confusa, a reason drowned in matter, and con- 
founded with it,—which is the supreme governor 
of the world, but a providence perfectly intellec- 
tual, abstract, and released. 

20. But, though the plastic nature be the low- 
est of all lives, peverihcless: since itis a life, it 
must needs he incorporeal; all life being such. 
For body being nothing but antitypous extension, 
or resisting bulk, nothing but mere outside, aud 
extra aliud, together with passive capability, hath 
no internal energy, self-activity, or life belonging 
to it; itis not able so much as to move itself, and 
therefore much less can it artificially direct its 
own motion. Moreover, in the efformation of the 
bodies of animals, it is one and the selfsame 
thing that directs the whole. That which con- 
trives and frames the eye, cannot be a distinct. 
thing from that which frames the ear; nor that 
which makes the hand, from that which makes 
the foot; the same thing, which delineates the 
veins, must also form the arteries; and that which 
fabricates the nerves, must also project the mus- 
cles and joints; it must be the same thing that 
designs and organizes the heart and brain, with 
such,communications betwixt them; one and the 
selfsame thing must needs have in it the entire 
idea, and the complete model or platform of the 


354 PLASTIC NATURE INCORPOREAL. 


whole organic body. For the several parts of 
matter distant from one another, acting alone by 
themselves, without any common directrix, being 
not able to confer together, nor communicate with 
each other, could never possibly conspire to make 
up one such uniform and orderly system or com- 
pages, as the body of every animal is. The same 
is to be said likewise concerning the plastic na- 
ture of the whole corporeal universe, in which 
aravra apo¢ ty cuyréraxrat, all things are ordered to- 
gether conspiringly into one.-- It must be one and 
the same thing, which formeth the whole, or else 
it could never have fallen into such an uniform 
order and harmony. Now that which is one and 
the same, acting upon several distant parts of mat- 
ter, cannot be corporeal. 

Indeed Aristotle is severely censured by some 
learned men for this, that though he talk every 
where of such a nature as acts regularly, artifi- 
cially, and methodically, in order to the best, yet 
he does no where positively declare, whether this 
nature of his be corporeal or incorporeal, substan- 
tial or accidental; which yet is the less to be won- 
dered at in him, because he does not clearly de- 
termine these same points concerning the rational 
soul neither, but seems to stagger uncertainly 
about them. In the mean time it cannot be denied, 
but that Aristotle's followers do for the most part 
conclude this nature of his to be corporeal ; where- 
as, notwithstanding, according to the principles of 
this philosophy, it cannot possibly be such: for 
there is nothing else attributed to body in it, be- 
sides these three, matter, form, and accidents: 
neither of which can be the Aristotelic nature. 
First, it cannot be matter; because natore, ac- 


PLASTIC NATURE INCORPOREAL. 355 - 
cording to ‘Aristotle, is supposed to bé the prin- 
ciple of motion and activity, which. matter ‘im it- 
self is devoid of. Moreover, Aristotle concludes;* 
that they, who assign only a material cause, as- 
sign no cause at all rou ed xai kadwe, of well and fit, 
of that regular and artificial frame of things which | 
is ascribed to nature; upon both which accounts, 
it is determined by that philosopher,” that 7 guar 
adAov aoyn ‘kat atria tne vAne, nature is more a prin- 
ciple and cause than matter ;—and therefore it 
cannot be one and the same thing with it. Again, 
itis as plain, that Aristotle’s nature cannot be the 
forms of particular bodies neither, as vulgar Peri- 
patetics seem to conceive, these being all gene- 
rated and produced by nature, and as well cor- 
ruptible as generable. Whereas nature is such a 
' thing as is neither generated nor corrupted, it 
being the principle and cause of all generation 
and corruption. To make nature, and the mate- 
rial forms of bodies, to be one and the self-same 
thing, is all one, as if one should make the seal 
(with the stamper too) to be one and the same 
thing with the signature upon the wax. And, 
lastly, Aristotle’s nature can least of all be the 
accidents or qualities of bodies; because these act 
only in virtue of their substance, neither can they 
exercise any active power over. the substance it- 
self in which they are; whereas the plastic na- 
ture is a thing that domineers over the substance 
of the whole corporeal universe, and which, sub- 
ordinately to. the Deity, put both’ heaven and 
earth in this frame in which now aI: Wherefore, 


* Metapbys. lib. i. cap. ili. p. 266. tom. iv. oper. 


> De Partib. Animal. lib. i. cap. 1 p. 475, tom. ii. oper. Vide etiam 
Physicor. lib. ii. cap. 1. p. 462. 


306 ARISTOTLE'S ACCOUNT OF NATURE. 


since Aristotle’s nature can be neither the matter, 
nor the forms, nor the accidents of bodies, it is 
plain, that, according to his own principles, it 
must be incorporeal. 

21. Now, if the plastic nature be incorporeal, 
then it must of necessity be either an inferior 
power or faculty of some soul, which is also con- 
scious, sensitive, or rational; or else a lower sub- 
stantial life by itself, devoid of animal conscious- 
ness. The Platonists seem to affirm both these 
together, namely, that there is a plastic nature 
lodged in all particular souls of animals, brutes, 
and men, and also that there is a general plastic 
or spermatic principle of the whole universe dis- 
tinct from their bigher mundane soul, though sub- 
ordinate to it, and dependant upon it:" 7 Acyoutun 
puoic yévynpa poyne WeOTEpAaG SuvaTwripov twonc, That 
which is called nature, is the offspring of an higher 
soul, which hath a more powerful life in it—Aund 
though Aristotle do not so clearly acknowledge 
the incorporeity and substantiality of souls, yet 
he concurs very much with this Platonic doctrine, 
that nature is either a lower power, or faculty of 
some conscious soul, or else an inferior kind of life 
by itself, depending upon a superior soul. 
ee a And this we shall make to appear from 
P. he - : his book De Partibus Animalium, after 

we have taken notice of some considera- 
ble preliuinary passages in it in order thereunto. 
For having first declared, that besides the material 
cause, there are other causes also of natural gene- 
rations, namely, these two, gre ov ivexa xat ev 7 


@ Plotin. Libr. de Natura, Contemplatione, ct Uno, Ennead. tii. lib. 
Vili. Cap. tii. p. 345. oper. 


ARISTOTLE’S ACCOUNT OF NATURE. 307 


apyn re kwnorwe, that for whose sake (or the final 
cause), and that from which the principle of mo- 
tion is,—or the efficient cause; he determines, 
that the former of these two is the principal : palve- 
rat o mourn nv a a évexa TLVOC. Aeyor ao ouros, 
apyn ot 0 Aoyoe, 0 OLOLWE, tyre Tole Kara TEyUNY Kat roic 
Prost suvecrnKoow. The chiefest of these two causes 
seems to be the final or the intending cause ; for 
this is reason, and reason is alike a principle in 
artificial and in natural things.—Nay, the philoso- 
pher adds, excellently, that there is more of rea-— 
son and art in the things of nature, than there is in 
those things that are artificially made by men: 
paddAov & égorl TO ov evexa Kal tO KaXov é Toile pUcews 
Epyotc, 7 Ev Tole rng teyunc. There is more of final 
or intending causality, and of the reason of good, 
in the works of nature, than in those of human art. 
—After which he greatly complains of the first and 
most ancient physiologers, meaning thereby Anax- 
imander, and those other lonics before Anaxago- 
ras, that they considered only rnv vAxny apyny, the 
material principle and cause of things,—without 
attending to those two other causes, the principle 
of motion, and that which aims at ends; they talk- 
ing only of fire, water, air, and earth, and gene- 
rating the whole world from the fortuitous con- 
course of these senseless bodies. But at length 
Aristotle falls upon Democritus, who, being ju- 
nior to those others before-mentioned, philoso- 
phized after the same Atheistical manner, but in 
a new way of his own, by atoms; acknowledging 
‘no other nature, neither in the universe, nor in the 
bodies of animals, than that of fortuitous me- 
chanism, and supposing all thmgs: to arisé from 
the different compositions of magnitudes, figures, 
VOL. I. ZA 


358  ARISTOTLE’'S ACCOUNT -OF NATURE. 


sites, and motions. Of which Democritic philo- 
_  sophy he gives his censure in these fol- _ 
eas lowing words: « pév ovv ro oxmqare f Kal te 

xpwpart EXaOTOV OTL, TWV TE Cow Kal FoOV pLo- 
plwy, obGe ay Anpoxetrog Azyou, &c. If animals and 
their several parts did consist of nothing but 
figure aud colour, then indeed Democritus would 
be in the-right; buta dead man hath the same form 
and figure of body, that he had before, and yet 
for all that he is not a man; neither is a brazen or 
wooden hand a hand, but only equivocally, as a 
painted physician, or pipes made of stone, are so 
called. No member of a dead man’s body is that 
which it was. before, when he was alive, neither 
eye, nor hand, nor foot. Wherefore, this is but a 
rude way of philosophizing, and just as if a car-_ 
penter should talk of a wooden hand. For thus 
these physiologers deckare the generations and 
eauses of figures only, or the matter out of which 
| things are made, as air and earth. Whereas, no- 
artificer would think it sufficient to render sucha 
eause of any artificial fabric, because the instru- 
ment happened to fall so upon the timber, that 
therefore it was hollow here, and plane there; but 
rather because himself. made such strokes, and for 
such ends, &c. 

Now, in the close of all, this philosopher. at 
length declares, that there is another principle of 
corporeal things, besides the material, and such as 
is not only the cause of motion, but also acts arti-° 
ficially i In order to ends, 2 EOTL TL TolovToY © Oy Kal Ka- 
Aovpev puow, there is such a thing as that which we 
- call nature ;—that is, not the fortuitous motion of 
senseless: matter, but a plastic regular and arti- 
‘ficial nature, such as acts for ends and vood ; de- 


ARISTOTLE’S ACCOUNT OF NATURE. 359 


claring, in the same place, what this nature is ; 
namely, that it is buy, 7 Puyne. péoos, 7 py avev Poyne, 
soul, or part of soul, or not without soul -—and 
from thence inferring, that it properly belongs to 
a physiologer, to treat concerning the soul also. 
But he concludes afterwards, ov8 raca vyn uote, 
that the whole soul is not nature ;—whence it re- 
mains, that, according to Aristotle’s sense, nature 
is 7 puyne [EQ0C, 7) pn avev duyne, either part of a 
soul, or not without soul ;—that is, either a lower 
part or faculty of some conscious soul ; or else an 
inferior kind of life by itself, which is not without 
soul, but subordinate to it, and dependent on it. 

22. As for the bodies of animals, Aristotle* first 
.resolves in general, that nature in them is either the 
whole soul, or else some part of its; gvate we 4 Kt- 
vousa, Kal wo Td TédoG TOU Lwou, nro. Tasca n Wyn, f) Mé0C 
vt avrac’ Nature, as the moving principle, or as that 
which acts artificially for ends (so far as concerns 
the bodies of animals), is either the whole soul, or 
else some part of it.—But afterward he determines 
more particularly, that the plastic nature is not 
the whole soul in animals,’ but oo. some part of 
it; ov raca boy puare, aAXa tt ogLov avrne, that 1s, na- 
ture in animals, properly so called, is some lower 
power or faculty lodged in their respective souls, 
whether sensitive or rational. 

And that there is plastic nature in the souls of 
animals, the same Aristotle elsewhere - | 
affirms and proves after this manner: ri De An.1. 2. 
To ouve yor Pita T avavtia pepopeva, TO 1 p Kat THY oe 
yay dvactracOnoerat yap Pn unre £OTaLTO KWAU- | 
SOV, HO EOTL, TOUT EOTW ny, Kat TO airiov Tov avbave- 
ofat Kat rotpeofau. ~ What is that, which, in the bo- 

; ® De Partib. Animal. lib. i. cap. i. p. 473. 
242 


360 THAT THERE IS PLASTIC NATURE 


dies of animals, holds together such things as, of 
their own nature, would otherwise move contrary 
ways, and fly asunder, as fire and earth, which 
would be distracted and dissipated, the one tend- 
ing upwards, the other downwards, were there 
not something to hinder them? Now if there be 
any such thing, this must be the soul, which is 
also the cause of nourishment and augmentation.— 
Where the philosopher adds, that though some 
were of opinion, that fire was that, which was 
the cause of nourishment and augmentation in 
animals, yet, this was -indeed but cuvairiov wwe, ov 
pny amdwe: ye airtov, adda padrov n puyn, only the con- 

- cause orinstrument, and not simply the cause, but 
rather the soul.—And to the same pur-. 
err pose he philosophizeth elsewhere, ove: 
ii. oper. yap n n welic && nen To0gy yiverat. roic Zwotc 
: oure avev Wuyne, oure Oeouarnroc OTL, Tmupl yap 
goyaterar wavra’ Neither is concoction, by which 
nourishment 1s made in animals, done without the 
soul, nor without heat, forall things are doneby fire. 
And certainly it seems very agreeable to the 
phenomena, to acknowledge something in the bo- 
dies of animals superior to mechanism, as that may 
_ well be thought to be, which keeps the more fluid 
parts of them constantly in the same form and fi- 
gure, so as not to be enormously altered in their 
erowth by disproportionate nourishment; that, 
which restores flesh that was lost, consolidates 
dissolved continuities, incorporates the newly-re- 
ceived nourishment, and joins it continuously — 
with the pre-existent parts of flesh and bone; 
which regenerates and repairs veins consumed or 
cut off; which causes dentition in so regular a man- 
ner, and that, not ony in infants, but also adult 


LODGED IN THE SOULS OF ANIMALS. 361 


persons; that which casts off excrements, and 
dischargeth superfluities; which makes things 
seem ungrateful to an interior sense, that were not- 
withstanding pleasing to the taste: that nature of 
Hippocrates,* that is the curatrix of diseases, 
a puotec TOY VOVTEWY (NT QOly and that archeus of the 
chymists or Paracelsians, to which all medica- 
ments are but subservient, as being able to effect 
nothing of themselves without it: I say, there 
seems to be such a principle as this in the bodies 
of animals, which is not mechanical but vital; and 
therefore, since entities are not to be multiplied 
without necessity, we may with Aristotle con- 
clude it to be péigoc, or poptov tno Wuyne, a certain part 
of the soul of those ammals, or a lower uncon- 
scious power lodged in them. 

23. Besides this plastic nature, which is in ani- 
mals, forming their several bodies artificially, as 
sO many microcosms, or little worlds, there must 
be also a general plastic nature in the macrocosmm, 
the whole corporeal universe, that which makes 
all things thus to conspire every where, and agree 
together into one harmony. Concerning which 
plastic nature of the universe, the author De 
Mundo? writes after this manner: kat tov dXov Ke- 
oLOV SteKOopNcE julia 7 Sta Tmavrwv S&HKovca Suvaic, one 
power passing through all things ordered and. 
formed the whole world.—Again, he calls the 
same. VEU, Kat Eup Yor, Kat yourmov ovaiav, a spirit, | 
and a living and generative nature ;—and plainly 
declares it to be a thing distinct from the Deity, 
but subordinate to it and dependent on it. But 
Aristotle himself in that genuine work of his be-. 


_ 2 Epidemic. lib. vi. sect. v. p.809. tom. i. oper, edit. Vander Linden. 
® Cap. ¥. p. 836. inter Arist, opera, tom. 1, ¢ Ib. cap. iy. p. 852. 


362 ARISTOTLE’S ACCOUNT OF THE 


fore-mentioned, speaks clearly and positively con- 
cerning this plastic nature of the universe, as well 
as that of animals, in these words :— 
aan sae patverat yap Oereg ev rote reKuaaroic 7 rena 
p. 474. OvTwCe EY AUTOLC TOLC TPayUActY arn Tig apyn 
Kat aitia rowan nv Eyouev, Kabarep To Ospuov 
Kal TO yoy pov é TOU Travroc’ O10 uadrXoy EiKoc TOV ovpavov 
yeyevnobat UTO TOLAUTIC aiTiac, yEyOvE, Kal sivae ova ToLwuU- 
THY atriay parXoyv, 7 Ta wa va Ounra* ro youv TETAYMEVOV 
Kal wptopévoy ToAV wadAov datverat év roc OVpaviore, 7, TEPL 
npoac® TO 8: GAAoreE a&dAwe, Kab WC ETUYE, rept Ta Ounra uard- 
Aov* ot de Tw ev low é £KAGTOV puss pat givat Kal i yevéoBar" 
tov S olpavov amo TU KN Kal TOU avrouarov Tolovrov ou™ 
oThvat, tv @am0 TVYNS Kal drakiag ovd ortovy gaivera’ It 
seemeth, that as there is art in artificial things, so. 
in the things of nature there is another such like 
principle or cause, which we ourselves partake 
of; mn the same manner as we do of heat and cold, 
from the universe. Wherefore, it is more probable, 
that the whole world was at first made by such a 
cause as this (if at least it were made) and that it 
is Still conserved by the same, than that mortal 
animals should beso; for there is much more of 
order and determinate regularity in the heavenly 
bodies than in ourselves; but more of fortuitous- 
ness and inconstant irregularity among these mor- 
tal things. Notwithstanding which, some there 
are, who, though they cannot but acknowledge, 
that the bodies of animals were all framed by an 
artificial nature, yet they will needs contend, that 
“the system of the heavens sprung merely from 
fortune and chance; although there be not the least 
appearance of fortuitousness or temerity ‘in it.-— 
And then he sums up all into this conclusion : 


a \ d oF ad “\ ‘ \ ~ 
wore evar pavegov Ore EoTe Te TOLOUTOY-O Oy Kat KaAovpED 


PLASTIC NATURE OF THE UNIVERSE. 363 


vow: Wherefore, it is manifest, that there is 
some such thing as that which we call nature ;— 
that is, that there is not only an artificial, metho-. 
‘dical, and plastic nature in animals, by which their 
respective bodies are framed and conserved ; but 
also, that there is such a general plastic nature 
likewisein the universe, by which the heavens and — 
whole world are thus aphncaly ordered and dis- 
are 
4. Now whereas Aristotle, in the forecited 
Bornpr us, that we partake of life and under- 
standing from that in the universe, after the same 
manner as we partake of heat and cold from that 
heat and cold that is in the universe ; it is observ- 
able, that this was a notion borrowed from So- 
crates (as we understand both from. Xenophon 
and Plato); that philosopher having used it as an 
argumentation to prove a Deity. And the sense 
of it is represented after this manner by the Latin 
poet :* | 
- Principio coelum ac terram, camposque liquentcs, 
_ Lucentemque globum lunz, Titaniaque astra, 

Spiritus intus alit, totosque infusa per artus, 

Mens agitat molem, et magno se corpore miscet. 

Inde hominum pecudumque genus, ‘vitaeque volantim. 
From whence it may be collected, that Aristotle 
did suppose this plastic nature of the universe to 
be 7 pEp0c buyne, An avev puyne, either part of some 
‘mundane soul,—that was also conscious and in- 
tellectual (as that plastic nature in animals is), or 
at least some inferior principle, depending on such 
a soul.—And indeed whatever the doctrine of the 
modern Peripatetics be, we make no doubt at all 
but that Aristotle himself held the world’s anima- 
tion, or a mundane soul: forasmuch as he plainly 
| ® Virgil. Aincid. lib. vi. yers. 724. 


364 THAT ARISTOTLE HELD 
declares himself concerning it elsewhere in his 
hook De Calo, after this manner :— 
656 ie arr nusic we TEpl SwWUATWY POvOY qurwy, Kai 
i. oper. povadwy, takiw py éyoutwy, axpu yov of wauray, 
dtavooupeba’ Sei Se we pereyouTwy vroA ap Pave 
mpatewo xat Gono’ But we commonly think of the 
heavens as nothing else but bodies and monads, 
having only a certain order, but altogether inant- 
“Inate ; ; whereas we ought, on the contrary, to con- 
ceive ‘of them as partaking of life and action:— 
that is, as being indued with a rational or intellec- 
tual life. For so Simplicius" there rightly ex- 
‘ pounds the place; Set 8 we wept Empvywv avrwv ovAXo- 
yileoQat, Kat AoyiKny Eyovrwy puyny, we Kal moatewe Kat 
Conc Aoyicne meréyerv" TO dv yap ToL, Kal Kara TwY ado- 
yor Puyey Katyyopuupey, Kal KaTa TOV apvyuY cwWLATwD, 
TO dé rearrey Kuplug Kata TWY Aoytkwv puyov KaTnyopou- 
nev’ But we ought to think of the heavens as ani- 
mated with a rational soul, and thereby partaking 
of action and rational life. For (saith he) though 
wowiv be affirmed not only of irrational souls, but 
also of inanimate bodies, yet the word zparrew does 
only denominate rational beings.—But further, to 
take away all manner of scruple or doubt con- 
cerning this business, that philosopher before, in 
the same book? pnrwe affirmeth, ére o ovpavog Eupvyog, 
Kal apyny Kiynorwg E yet 3 that the heaven is animated 
and hath a principle of motion within itself :— 
where, by the heaven, as in many otber places of 
Aristotle and Plato, is to be understood the 
whole world. 
There is indeed one passage in the same book 
De Celo, which, at first sight, aud slightly consi- 


* Comment. in Libr. de Coelo, f. 126. 
» Aristot. de Coulo, lib. ii. cap, ii. p. 642, tom. i. oper. 


A SOUL OF THE WORLD. | 865 
dered, may seem to contradict this agai; and 
therefore probably is that, which hath led many’ 
into acontrary persuasion, that Aristotle 
denied the world’s animation: adda poy ese 
OUTE VITO voy | evAoyou avarykatovens péverw 1. oper. 
| aidtov’ over yap Tne pons olovr clvat Tn ro.av~ | | 
tnv Gwny dAdvmov Kat pakaplav® avayKn yao kai rnv Kivyow | 
pera Buac ovoar, TepvKoToS TOU mpurrov oulparos awe Kat 
KUvely TUVEX WC, dio xohov clvat; Kal Traone dirnAawypévny 
pastanne Euppovoc® lye pnd deep, ™ wey ™ Tw Ou 
rev Cowv é EGTLV avaravatc n mept Tov Umvoy yevopevn TOU 
owhatoc avecic, aX avaykKatov "LElovee rwoe poipav ‘Kate 
yew aUTHV alolov Kal arpurov" But it is not reasonable 
neither to think, that the heavens continue to eter- 
nity, moved by a soul necessitating, or violently 
compelling them. Nor indeed is it possible, that — 
the life of such a soul should be pleasurable or 
happy: forasmuch as the continual violent motion 
of a body (naturally inclining to move another 
way) must needs be a very unquiet thing, and void 
of all mental repose, especially when there is no 
such relaxation as the souls of mortal animals 
have by sleep; and therefore such a soul. of the 
world as this, must of necessity be condemned to 
an eternal Ixionian‘fate.—But in these words Aris- 
totle does not deny the heavens to be moved by a 
soul of their own (which is positively affirmed by 
him elsewhere), but only by such a soul as should 
violently and forcibly agitate, or drive them round, 
contrary to their own natural inclination, where- 
by; in the’ mean time, they tended downwards of 
themselves towards the centre. And his sense _ 
concerning the motion of the heavens, is truly: re- 
_ presented by Simplicius, in this manner: 79 82 ddov 
gvotkov Kai Embuyov, umd puyne Kupiwe Kivetrat, dia péone_ 


366 THE PLASTIC NATURE OF THE WORLD 


tne Wworwe. The whole world or heaven, being as 
well a natural, as an animalish body, is moved 
properly by soul; but yet by means of nature 
also, as an Instrument, so that thé motion of it is 
not violent.—But whereas Aristotle there insinu- 
ates, as if Plato had held the heavens to be moved 
by a soul violently, contrary to their nature ; Sim- 
plicius, though sufficiently addicted to Anstotle, 
ingenuously acknowledges his error herem, and 
vindicating Plato from that imputation, shews 
how he likewise held a plastic nature as well as a 

mundane soul; and that amongst his ten 
“Deleg. : : * : ; 
+ to. instances of motion,* the ninth is that of 

nature ; rnv erepov ast Kwovcay, kat peraBadAo- 
hévny vp érépov’ that which always moves another, 
being itself changed by something else;—as the 
tenth, that of the mundane soul, ray éaurqy Kuoveav 
kat €reoa, that which originally both moves itself 
and other things :—as if his meaning in that place 
were, that though nature be a life and internal 
energy, yet it acts subserviently to a higher soul 
as the first original mover. 

But the grand objection against Aristotle's hold- 
ing the world’s animation is still behind ; namely, 
from that in his Metaphysics," where he deter- 
mines the highest starry heaven to be moved by 
an immoveable mover, commonly supposed to be 
the Deity itself, and no soul'of the world; and all 
the other spheres likewise to be moved by so many 
separate intelligences, and not by souls. To 
which we reply, that indeed Aristotle’s first im- 
moveable mover is no mundane soul, but an ab- 
stract intellect separate from matter, and the very 
Deity itself; whose manner of inoving the heavens 


* Lib. xiv. cap. vii. vill. ix. p. 476, s. tom. iv. oper. 


DEPENDS ON A PERFECT INTELLECT. 367 


is thus described by him,” xwe 8 we zowpevor, it 
moveth only as being loved.—Wherefore, besides 
this supreme unmoved mover, that philosopher 
supposed another inferior moved mover also, that 
is, a mundane soul, as the proper and immediate 
efficient cause of the heavenly motions; of which 
he speaks after this manner: kwovmevov 8: radXa 
xwe, that which itself being moved (objectively, 
or by appetite and desire of the first good) moveth 
other things.— And thus that safe and surefooted 
interpreter, Alex. Aphrodisius, expounds his mas- 
ter’s meaning, that the heaven being animated, and 
therefore indeed. moved by an internal principle 
of its own, is notwithstanding originally moved | 
by a certain immoveable and separate - 
nature, which is above soul, rw voeiw re re Nat. 
QUTO, Kal Epeow Kal dpebw Eye THC OmowsEwC 
avrov, both by its contemplating of it, and having 
an appetite and desire of assimilating itself there- 
unto.—Aristotle seeming to have borrowed this 
notion from. Plato,” who makes the constant regu- 
lar circumgyration of the heavens to be an imita- 
tion of the motion or energy of intellect. So that 
Aristotle’s first mover is not properly the efficient, 
but only the final and objective cause, of the hea- 

venly motions, the immediate efficient cause 
thereof being yYuy7 cai gvote, soul and nature.— 

Neither may this be confuted from those other 

Aristotelic intelligences of the lesser orbs; that 
philosopher conceiving in like manner concersing 
them, that they were also the abstract minds or | 
intellects of certain other inferior souls, which 

moved their several respective bodies or orbs, cit- 

* Metaph. lib. xiv. cap. viii. p 479 
b De Legibus, lib. x. p. 669. ct alias. 


368 THE PLASTIC NATURE OF THE WORLD 


cularly and uniformly, ina kind of imitation of 
them. For this plainly appears from hence, in 
that he affirms of these his inferior intelligences 
likewise, as well as of the supreme mover, that 
they do «wet we rékoc, move only as the end. 
Where it is evident, that though Aristotle did 
plainly suppose a mundane intellectual soul, such 


- as also contained, either in it, or under it, a plas- 


tic nature, yet he did not make either of these to 
be the supreme Deity ; but resolved the first prin- 
ciple of things to be one absolutely perfect mind 
or intellect, separate from matter, which was 
axivyroe ovoia,” an immoveable nature,—whose es- 
sence was his operation, and which moved only 
as being loved, or as the final cause: of which 
he pronounces in this manner, ér é ro 
Met.1.14.  aurne aoyne nornrat 0 ovpavec Kat 7 pvote, 
c.7.p. 479. 
tom.iv. oper. that upon such a principle as this, hea- 
: ven and nature depends ;—that is, the 
animated heaven, or mundane soul, together with _ 
the plastic nature of the universe, must of neces- 
sity depend upon such an absolutely perfect and 
immoveable mind or intellect. 
Having now declared the Aristotelic doctrine 
concerning the plastic nature of the universe, 
with which the Platonic also agrees, that it is, 
7 [EOOC wuyne, 2 n en avev yy, either part of a mun- 
dane intellectual soul (that is, a lower power and 
faculty of it), or else not without it, but some in- 
ferior thing depending on it ;—we think fit to add 
in this place, that though there were no such 
mundane soul, as both Plato and Aristotle sup- 
posed, distinct from the supreme Deity, yet there 
might notwithstanding be a plastic nature of the 


. Aristot. Metapbysicor. lib. xiv. cap. vi. p. 477. 


DEPENDS ON A PERFECT INTELLECT. 369 


universe depending immediately upon the Deity 
itself. For the plastic nature essentially depends 
- upon mind or intellect, and could not possibly be 
without it ; according to those words before cited, 
&K rowavrne apyne Hornrat n ovate, nature depends upon 
such an intellectual principle;—and for this cause 
that philosopher does elsewhere join vovg and 
guac, mind and nature—both together. | 

25. Besides this general place nature of the. 7 
universe, and those particular plastic powers in 
the.souls of animals, it is not impossible but that 
there may be other plastic natures also (as certain 
‘lower lives, or vegetative souls) in some greater 
7 parts of the universe; all of them depending, if not 
upon some higher conscious soul, yet at least 
upon a perfect intellect presiding over the whole. 
As for example; though it be not reasonable to’ 
think, that every plant, herb, and pile of grass, 
hath a particular plastic life, or vegetative soul of 
its own, distinct from the mechanism of the body, 
nor that the whole earth is an animal endued with 
a conscious soul; yet there may possibly be, for 
aught we know, one plastic nature or life belong- 
ing to the whole terrestrial (or terraqueous) globe, 
by which all plants and vegetables, continuous 
with it, may be differently formed, according to 
their different seeds, as also minerals and other 
bodies framed, and whatsoever else is above the 
power of fortuitous mechanism effected, as by the 
immediate cause, though always subordinate to 
other causes; the chief whereof is the Deity. 
And this perhaps may ease the minds of. those, 
who cannot but think it too much, to im pose all 
upon one plastic nature of the universe. 

26. And now we have finished our first task, 


370 THE ERRORS OF ATHEISTS, WHO MAKE 


which was to give an account of the plastic na- 
ture, the sum whereof briefly amounts to this; 
that it is a certain lower life than the animal, 
which acts regularly and artificially, accordimg to 
the direction of mind and understanding, reason, 
and wisdom, for ends, or in order to good, though 
itself do not know the reason of what it does, nor 
is master of that wisdom according to which it 
acts, but only a servant to it, and drudging execu- 
tioner of thesame; it operating fatally and sympa- 
thetically, according to laws and commands pre- 
scribed to it by a perfect intellect, and impressed 
upon it; and which is either a lower faculty of 
gome conscious soul, or else an inferior kind of 
life or soul by itself; but essentially depending 
upon a higher intellect. 

We proceed to our second undertaking ; which 
was to shew, how grossly those two sorts of Athe- 
ists before-mentioned, the Stoical or Cosmo-plas- 
tic, and the Stratonical or Hylozoic, both of them 
acknowledging this plastic life of nature, do mis- 
take the notion of it, or pervert it, and abuse it, 
to make a certain spurious and counterfeit God- 
almighty of it (or a first principle of all things), 
thereby excluding the true omnipotent Deity, 
which is a perfect mind, or consciously under- 
standing nature, presiding over the umverse; they 
substituting this stupid plastic nature in the room 
of it. 

Now the chief errors or mistakes of these Athe- 
ists concerning the plastic nature, are these four 
following. First, that they make that to be the 
first principle of all, and the highest thing in the 
universe, which is the last and lowest of all lives; 
a thing essentially secondary, derivative, and de- 


THE PLASTIC NATURE A GOD-ALMIGHTY. 371 


pendent. For the plastic life of nature is but the 
_ mere umbrage of intellectuality, a faint and sha- 
dowy imitation of mind and understanding ; upon 
which it doth as essentially depend, as the sha- 
_ dow doth upon the body, the image.in the glass 
upon the face, or the echo upon the oneinal voice. 
So that if there had been no perfect mind or intel- 
lect in the world, there could no more have been 
any plastic nature in it, than there could be an 
image in the glass without a face, or an echo with- 
. out an orig inal voice. If there be ®vorc, then 
there must be Novc: if there be a plastic na- 
ture, that acts regularly and artificially in order 
to ends, and according to the best wisdom, though 
itself not comprehending the reason of it, nor be- 
ing clearly conscious of what it doth; then there 
must of necessity be a perfect mind or intelleet, 
that is, a Deity, upon which it depends. Where- 
fore Aristotle does like a philosopher in Joining 
oie and Nove, nature and mind both together ; 
but these Atheists do very absurdly and unphilo- 
sophically, that would make a senseless and un- 
conscious plastic nature, and therefore without 
sany mind or.intellect, to be the first original of alt 
_ things. 
. Secondly, these Atheists aupmcut the former 
error, in supposing those higher lives of sense or 
animality, and of reason or understanding, to rise. 
- both of them from that lower senseless life of na- 
ture, as the only original fundamental life. Which 
is a thing altogether as irrational and absurd, as 
if one should suppose the light, that is in the air — 
or ether, to be the only original and fundamental * 
light, and the light of the sun and stars but a se- - 
condary and derivative thing from it, and nothing 


372 THE ERRORS OF ATHEISTS, WHO MAKE 


but the light of the air modificated and improved 
by condensation; or, as if one should maintain, 
that the sun and moon, and all the stars, were 
really nothing else but the mere reflections of 
those images, that we see in rivers and ponds of 
water. But this hath always been the sottish 
humour and guise of Atheists, to invert the order 
of the universe, and hang the picture of the world, 
as of a man, with its heels upwards. Conscious 
reason and understanding, being a far higher de- 
gree of life and perfection, than that dull plastic 
nature, which does only do, but not know, can 
never possibly emerge out of it; neither can the 
duplication of corporeal organs be ever able to 
advance that simple and stupid life of nature mto 
redoubled consciousness or self-perception; nor 
any triplication, or indeed milleclupation of them, 
lmprove the same into reason and understanding. 
Thirdly, for the better colouring of the former 
errors, the Hylozoists adulterate the notion of the 
plastic life of nature, confounding it with wisdom 
and understanding. And though themselves ac- 
knowledge, that no animal sense, self-perception, 
and consciousness belongs to it, yet they will have- 
it to be a thing perfectly wise, and consequently 
every atom of senseless matter that is in the whole 
world, to be infallibly omniscient, as to all its 
own capacities and congruities, or whatsoever it- 
self can do or suffer; which is plainly contradic- 
tious. For, though there may be such a thing as 
the plastic nature, that, according to the former 
description of it, can do without knowing, and is 
devoid of express consciousness or self-percep- 
tion, yet perfect knowledge and understanding, 
without cousciousuess, is nonscnse and impossi- 


THE PLASTIC NATURE A GOD-ALMIGHTY. 372 


bility. Wherefore, this must needs be con- 
demned for a great piece of sottishness in the 
Hylozoic Atheists, that they attribute perfect 
wisdom and understanding toa stupid unconscious 
nature, which is nothing but Ketporéxvnc, the mere 
drudging instrument, or manuary opus of a 
perfect mind. 7 

Lastly, these Reheets err 1D this, that they 
~ make this plastic life of nature to be a mere mate- 
rial or corporeal thing; whereas matter or body 
cannot move itself, much less, therefore, can it ar- 
tificially order and dispose its own motion. And 
though the plastic nature be indeed the lowest of 
all lives, yet, notwithstanding, since it is a life, or 
internal energy, and self-activity, distinct from 
local motion, it must needs be incorporeal, all life 
being essentially such. But the Hylozoists con- 
ceive grossly both of life and understanding, 
spreading them all over upon matter, just as but-— 
ter is spread upon bread, or plaster upon a wall, 
and accordingly, slicing them out in different 
quantities and bulks, together with it; they con- 
tending, that they are but inadequate conceptions 
of body, as the only substance; and consequently 
concluding, that the vulgarly received notion of 
God is nothing else but such an inadequate con- 
ception of the matter of the whole corporeal uni- 
verse, mistaken for a complete and entire sub- 
stance by itself, that is supposed to be the cause 
of all things; which fond dream or dotage of 
their's will be further confuted in due place. But 
it is now time to put a period to this long, though 
necessary;: digression, concerning: the plastic life 
of nature, or an artificial, orderly, and methodical 
nature. — — | 

VOL. I. 2B 


374 THE ATHEISTIC ATOMOLOGY 


xxxvi. Plato givesan account, why he judged 
it necessary in those times, publicly to propose 
that Atheistic hypothesis, in order to a confuta- 
tion, as also to produce rational arguments for 

the proof of a Deity, after this manner: 

aa 4 Et pat Kareamappivor noav ot rotourot Aoyor ° 
oper. TOW Tao, we Eros etreiv, avOpwroi, ovdev av 
toa TwY ErapvvovTwY Adywy, we elat Beot, vu 

avaykn’ Had not these Atheistic doctrines been 
publicly divulged, and made known in a manner 
to all, it would not have been needful to have 
confuted them, nor by reasons to prove a Deity ; 
but now it is necessary.—And we conceive, that 
the same necessity at this time will justify our 
present undertaking likewise; since these Athe- 
istic doctrines have been as boldly vented, and 
publicly asserted in this latter age of our’s, as 
ever they could be in Plato’s time; when the se- 
verity of the Athenian government must needs 
be a great check to such designs, Socrates having 
been put to death upon a mere false and ground- 
less accusation of Atheism, and Protagoras (who 
doubtless was a real Atheist) having escaped the 
same punishment no otherwise than by flight, his 
books being, notwithstanding, publicly burnt in 
the market-place at Athens, and himself con- 
demned to perpetual exile, though there was no- 
thing at that time proved against him, save only 
_ this one sceptical passage, in the begin- 
Webi, Bing of a book of his: wel ply Oedy ovx 
ere. yw ere, af we ctow, af” we ovK Etat, oAXa 
yao Ta ywaAvovra eldévat, Are adnAOTHC, Kul [3ea- 

ue wv 0 Piog Tov avdowmou’ Concerning the gods, I 
have nothing at all to say, either that they be or 
be not; there being many things, that hinder the 


LATELY REVIVED. | 375 


knowledge of this matter, both the obscurity of 
the thing itself, and the shortness of human life. 
—Whereas Atheism, in this latter age of our’s, 
hath been impudently asserted, and most indus- 
triously promoted; that very Atomic form, that 
was first introduced (a little before Plato’s time) 
by Leucippus, Protagoras, and Democritus, hav- 
ing been also revived amongst us, and that with | 
no small pomp and ostentation of wisdom and 
philosophy. a 
It was before observed, that there were two 
several forms of Atomical philosophy: first, the 
most ancient and genuine, that was religious, 
called Moschical (or, if you will, Mosaical) and — 
Pythagorical; secondly, the adulterated Atheistic 
Atomology, called Leucippean or Democritical. 
Now, accordingly, there have been in this latter 
age of our’s two several successive resurrections 
or restitutions of those two Atomologies. For 
Renatus Cartesius first revived and restored the 
Atomic philosophy, agreeably, for the most part, 
to that ancient Moschical and Pythagoric form ; 
~ acknowledging, besides extended substance and 
corporeal: atoms, another cogitative incorporeal 
substance, and joining metaphysics or theology, 
together with physiology, to make up one entire © 
system of philosophy. Nor can it well be doubt- 
ed, but that this physiology of his,.as to the me- 
chanic part of it, hath been elaborated by the in- 
genious author into an exactness at least equal 
with the best Atomologiés of the ancients. Ne- 
vertheless, this Cartesian philosophy is highly 
obnoxious to censure upon some accounts; the 
chief whereof is this, that, deviating from that 
primitive Moschical Atomology, in rejecting all 
2B2 | 


376 THE ATHEISTIC ATOMOLOGY 

‘plastic nature, it derives the «vhole system of the 
corporeal universe from the necessary motion of 
matter, only divided into particles insensibly 
small, and turned round in a vortex, without the 
guidance or direction of any understanding na- 
ture. By means whereof, though it boast of solv- 
ing all the corporeal phenomena by mere fortul- 
tous mechanism, and without any final or mental 
causality, yet it gives no account at all of that, 
which is the grandest of all phenomena, the ro @ 
cal kadwe, the orderly regularity and harmony of 
the mundane system.—The occasion of which 
miscarriage hath been already intimated ; namely, 
from the acknowledging only two heads of being, 
extended and cogitative, and making the essence 
of cogitation fo consist In express consciousness 3 
from whence it follows, that there could be no 
plastic nature, and therefore cither all things must 
be done by fortuitous mechanism, or else God 
himself be brought immediately upon the stage 
for the solving of all phenomena. Which latter 
absurdity our philosopher being over careful to 
avoid, cast himself upon the former, the banish- 
ing of all final and mental causality quite out of 
the world, and acknowledging no other philoso- 
phic causes, beside material and mechanical. It 
cannot be denied, but that even some of the an- 
cient religious Atomists were also too much in- 
fected with this mechanizing humour; but Rena- 
tus Cartesius hath not only outdone them all 
herein, but even the very Atheists themselves also, 
as shall be shewed afterward; and, therefore, as 
much as in him lies, has quite disarmed the world 
of that grand argument for a Deity, taken from 
the regular fraine and harmony of the universe. 


LATELY. REVIVED. oe “377 


To which gross miscarriage of hig there might - 
be also another added, that he seems to make 
matter necessarily existent, and essentially tmfi- 
nite and eternal. Notwithstanding all which, 
we cannot entertain.that uncharitable opinion of 
him, that he really designed Atheism; the funda- 
mental principles of his philosophy being such, — 
as that no Atheistic structure can possibly be 
built upon them. But shortly after this Carte- 
- sian restitution of the primitive Atomology, that 
acknowledgeth incorporeal substance, we have 
had our Leucippus and Democritus too, who 
also revived and brought again upon the stage 
that other Atheistic Atomolog gy, that makes apya¢ 
rav ddwv dréuove, senseless and lifeless atoms, to be 
the only principles of‘ all things in the universe ; 
thereby necessarily excluding, besides incorpo- 
real substance and immortality of souls, a Deity 
and natural morality; as also making all actions 
and events materially and mechanically necessary. 
Now there could be no satisfactory confuta- 
tion of this Atheistic hypothesis, without’ a fair 
proposal first made of the several grounds of it 
to their best advantage, which we have therefore 
endeavoured in the former chapter. The answers — 
to which Atheistic arguments ought, according to 
the laws of method, to be reserved for the last 
part of the whole treatise, where we are positive- 
ly to determine the right intellectual-system of the 
“universe; it being properly our work here, only 
to give an account of the three false hypotheses of 
the mundane system, together with their several 
grounds. . Nevertheless, ‘because it- might not only 
seem indecorous, for the answers to those Athe- 
istic arguments to be-so long deferred, and placed 


378 TWO SORTS OF ATHEISTS IN PLATO. 


so far behind the arguments themselves, but also 
prove otherwise really inconvenient, we shall 
therefore choose rather to break those laws of me- 
thod (neglecting the scrupulosity thereof), and 
subjoin them immediately in this place, craving 
the reader’s pardon for this preposterousness. 

It is certain, that the source of all Atheism is 
generally a dull and earthy disbelief of the exist- 
ence of things beyond the reach of sense; and it 
cannot be denied, but that there is something of 
immorality in the temper of all Atheists, as all 
atheistic doctrine tends also to immorality. Not- 
withstanding which, it must not be therefore con- 
cluded, that all dogmatic Atheists. came to be » 
such merely by means of gross intemperance, sen- 
suality, and debauchery. Plato, indeed, describes 

one sort of Atheists in this manner: oic 
. oo av TOG ™ do&n, 7 bewy Eonjua Elvat mavra, 

apa eval TE Faun Kal AuTwY ) TEOCTETWOL, pvn- 
paul re Ioyvpat kK Kat pabnoae ofelat Tapwot “Such who, 
together with this opinion, that all things are void 
of gods, are acted also by intemperance of plea- 
sures and pains, and hurried away with violent 
lusts, being persons otherwise endued with strong 
memories and quick wits.—And these are the 
debauched, ranting, and hectoring Atheists. But, 
besides these, that philosopher tells us; 
| that there 1s another sort of Atheists 
also: oi¢ uy vouiCouet Oeovc Elvat TO TapaTay, n0oc pvoe 
moocyiverat Sikalov, picovvréc TE ylyvovTat TOUS KaKOUE, Kat 
TW duc yepaivery Tv aouktay, OUTE rac rotavrac moatetc 1 poc- 


Ibid. 


tevrar mparrew, TOUC TE [LN OiKalouc TWY avDowTWY dev-yovst, 
Kal TOUS SiKatove oTépyovoly" Such who, though they 
think. there be no gods at all, yet, notwithstand- 
ing, being naturally disposed to justice and moder 


3 


TWO SORTS OF ATHEISTS IN PLATO. ~379 


' yation, as they will not do outrageous and exor- 
bitant things themselves, so they will shun the 
conversation of wicked debauched persons, and 
delight rather in the society of those that are fair 
and just.—And these are a sort of externally ho- 
nest or civilized Atheists. Now what that thing 
is, which, besides gross sensuality and debauch- © 
ery, might tempt men to entertain atheistic opi- 
nions, the same philosopher also declares ;. name- 
ly, that it is an affectation of saeularity. or of 
seeming wiser than the generality of mankind. 
For thus when Clinias had disputed honestly 


-- against Atheists, from those vulgar topics of the 


regularity and harmony of the universe (observa- 
ble in the courses of sun, moon, and stars, and 
- the seasons of the year), and of the common no- 
tions of mankind, in that both Greeks and bar- 
barians generally agreed in this, that there were 
gods, thinking he had thereby made a sufficient 
confutation of Atheism, the Athenian Hospes 
hereupon discovers a great fear and jealousy, 
which he had, lest he should thereby but render 
himself an object of contempt to Atheists, as 
being a conceited and scornful generation of men. 
. AO. GoBovpat YE wo jeakagte rouc poy Onpove, LNTwWC UpeOV 
Karapoovnswow, UILELC ev yao OUK lore avT@y Tél, THY 
™e Stapooac airiay, aAr nyeiods akoarela Lovoy ndoviiy TE 
kat emByuio & émt rov axpatn Piov opuacbar rac Wuyac 
avrav, &c. I am afraid of those wicked men the 
Atheists, lest they should despise you: for you 
are ignorant concerning them, when you think | 
the only cause of Atheism to be intemperance of 
pleasures and lusts, violently hurrying men’s souls _ 
ou to a wicked life.—-Cxi1n. ‘What other cause of 
Atheism can there be besides this?—Atu. That 


‘380 THE ATHEISTS NO CONJURERS. 


which you are not aware of, who live remotely, 
namely, ’Auata pata yadery Soxovea tivat peyiorn go0- 
vnc’ A certain grievous ignorance, which yet, 
notwithstanding, hath the appearance of the 
greatest wisdom.—And, therefore, afterwards, 
when that philosopher goes about to propose the 
Atheistic hypothesis, he calls it," rév rapa woddXoic 
 doEaZopevov eta cogpwrarov arayrwy Loywn, that which 
to many seemeth to be the wisest and profound- 
est of all doctrines.— 

And we find the same thing at this very day, 
that Atheists make.a great pretence to wisdom 
and philosophy ; and that many are tempted to 
maintain atheistic opinions, that they may gain 
a reputation of wit by it. Which, indeed, was 
one reason, that the rather induced us nakedly to 
reveal all the mysteries of Atheism, because we 
observed, that so long as these things are con- 
cealed and kept up in hbuggermugger, many 
will be the rather apt to suspect, that there is 
some great depth and profundity of wisdom lodged 
in them; and that it is some noble and generous 
truth, which the bigotic religious endeavour to 
smother and suppress. 

Now the case being thus, it was pertinently sug- 
gested also by the forementioned philosopher,’ 
ov opukpov ye To Sadipov, a daveiev ot AOywv amrouevoe 
aseBwv, aAXow TE eEap yovrec, pnoe 0 Tol¢ Aoyore, 
aAN Enuaprnpivac Ypwpevor, ‘That it must needs be a 
matter of no small moment, for any one to make 
it appear, that they, who maintain wicked athe- 
istical opinions, do none of them reason rightly, 
but grossly fumble in all their ratiocinations.— 


* De Lesib, 1. x. p. 664. oper. b Thid. p. 667. s. 


_ THE ATHEISTS NO CONJURERS. 381 


_ And we hope to effect this in our present under- 

‘taking, to make it evident, that Atheists are no 
such conjurers, as (though they hold no spirits) 
they would be thought to be; no such, gigantic 
men of reason, nor profoand philosophers, but 
that, notwithstanding all their pretensions to wit, 
their Atheisin is really nothing else, but auabia para 
yadern, a most grievous ignorance, sottishness, | 
aud stupidity of mind in then. 

Wherefore we shall, in the next place, conjure 
down all those devils raised and displayed in their 
most formidable colours, in the precedent chapter; 
or rather we shall discover, that they are really 
nothing else, but what these Atheists pretend God 
_ and. incorporeal spirits to be, mere fantastic spec- 
tres and impostures, vain imaginations of deluded 
minds, utterly devoid of. all truth and reality. 
Neither shall we only confute those Atheistic ar- 
guments, and so stand upon our defensive posture, 
but we shall also assault Atheism even with its 
own weapons, and plainly demonstrate, that all 
forms of Atheism are unintelligible nonsense and 
absolute impossibility to human reason; as we 
shall hkewise, over and above, occasionally insert 
some (as we think) undeniable arguments for ‘a 
Deity. 





The Digression concerning the Plastic Life of 
Nature, or an artificial, or derly, and me- 
Roa Nature, No. 37. Chap. iii. 


“4, Taar neither the Hylozoic nor -Cosmo- 
plastic Atheists are condemned for asserting an 
| orderly and artificial plastic nature, as a life dis- 


382 DIGRESSION CONCERNING THE 


tinct from the animal, however this be a thing 
exploded, not only by the Atomic Atheists, but 
also by some professed Theists, who, notwith- 
standing, might have an undiscerned tang of the 
mechanical-atheistic humour hanging about them. 
2. If there be no plastic artificial nature admit- 
ted, then it must be concluded, that either all 
things come to pass by fortuitous mechanism, 
and material necessity (the motion of matter un- 
guided) or else that God doth auroupyEly arayra, do 
all things himself immediately and miraculously, 
framing the body of every gnat and fly, as it were 
with his own hands; since Divine laws and com- 
mands cannot execute themselves, nor be the pro- 
per efficient causes of things in nature. 3. To 
suppose all things to come to pass fortuitously, 
or by the unguided motion of matter, a thing al- 
together as irrational as it is atheistical and im- 
pious; there being many phenomena, not only 
above the powers of mechanism, but also contrary 
to the laws of it. The mechanic Theists make 
God but an idle spectator of the fortuitous mo- 
tions of matter, and render his wisdom altogether 
useless and insignificant. Aristotle’s judicious 
censure of the fortuitous Mechanists, with the ri- 
dicuJousness of that pretence, that material and 
mechanical reasons are the only philosophical. 
4. That it seems neither decorous in respect of 
God, nor congruous to reason, that he should 
avroupyey arayra, do all things himself immediately 
and miraculously, nature being quite superseded 
and made to signify nothing. Thesame further 
coufuted by the slow and gradual process of 
things in nature, as also by those errors and bun- 
gles, that are committed, when the matter proves 


PLASTIC. LIFE OF NATURE. 383 


inept and contumacious, arguing the agent not to 
be irresistible. 5. Reasonably inferred, that there 
is a plastic nature in the universe, as a subordinate 
instrument of Divine Providence, in the orderly 
disposal of matter; but yet so as not without a 
higher providence presiding over it, forasmuch as 
this plastic nature cannot act electively or with 
discretion. ‘Those laws of nature concerning mo- 
tion, which the mechanic Theists themselves sup- 
pose,. really nothing else but a plastic nature. 
6. The agreeableness of this doctrine with the 
sentiments of the best philosophers in all ages, 
_ Aristotle, Plato, Empedocles, Heraclitus, Hippo- 
crates, Zeno, and the Paracelsians. Anaxagoras, 
though a professed Theist, severely censured, 
both by Aristotle and Plato, as an encourager of 
Atheism, merely because he used. material and- 
mechanical causes, more than mental and final. 
Physiologers and astronomers, why vulgarly sus- 
pected of Atheism in Plato’s time. 7. The plas- 
tic nature no occult quality, but the only intelligi- 
ble cause of that, which is the grandest of all phe- 
nomena, the orderly roolanie and harmony of 
things, which the mechanic Theists, however pre- 
tending to solve all phenomena, can give no ac- 
count atall of. A God, or infinite mind, asserted 
by them, in vain and to no purpose. 8. Two 
things here to be performed by us; first, to give 
an account of the plastic nature, and then to 
shew how the notion of it hath been mistaken, and 
abused by Atheists. The first general account of 
this plastic nature, according to Aristotle, that it 
is to be conceived as art itself acting, inwardly and 
immediately, upon the matter; as if harmony liv- 
ing in the musical instruments should move the 


384 DIGRESSION CONCERNING THE 


strings of them without any external impulse. 
9. T'wo pre-eminences of the plastic nature above 
human art:—First, that whereas human art acts 
upon the matter from without cumbersomely and 
moliminously, with tumult and hurly-burly, na- 
ture acting on it from within more commandingly 
doth its work easily, cleverly, and silently. Hu- 
man art acts on the matter mechanically, but na- 
ture vitally and magically. 10. The second pre- 
eminence of nature above human art, that whereas 
human artists are often to seek and at a loss, anxt- 
ously consult and deliberate, and upon second 
thoughts mend their former work, nature is never 
to seek, nor unresolved what to do, nor doth she 
ever repent afterwards of what she hath done, 
changing her former course. Human artists 
themselves consult not, as artists, but only for 
want of art; and therefore nature, though never 
consulting, may act artificially. Concluded, that 
what is called nature is really the Divine art. 
11. Nevertheless, that nature is not the Divine 
art, pure and abstract, but concreted and embo- 
died tu matter, ralio mersa et confusa ; not the Di- 
vine art archetypal, but ectypal. Nature differs 
from the Divine art, as the manuary opificer from 
the architect. 12. Two imperfections of the plas- 
tic nature, in respect whereof it falls short even 
of humau art; first, that though it act for ends 
artificially, yet itself neither intends those ends, 
nor understands the reason of what it doth, and 
therefore cannot act electively. The difference 
between the spermatic reasons and knowledge. 
Nature doth but ape or mimic the Divine art or 
wisdom, being not master of that reason, according 
fo which it acts, but only a servant to it, and 


PLASTIC LIFE OF NATURE, 385 


drudging. executioner of it. 13. Proved that there 
may be such a thing as acts artificially, though it- 
self do not comprehend that art, by which its 

motions are governed; first from musical habits ; 
the dancer resembles the artificial life of nature. 
14. The same further evinced from the instincts 
of brute animals, directing them to act rationally 
and artificially, in order to their own good and 
the good of the universe, without any reason of 
their own. The instincts in- brutes but passive 
impresses of the Divine wisdom, and a kind of 
fate upon them. 15. The. second imperfection 
of the plastic nature, that it acts without animal 
fancy, cvvaicnoie, EXpress con-sense, and consci- 
ousness, and is devoid of self-perception and self- 
enjoyment. 16. Whether this energy of the plas-. 
tic nature be to be called cogitation or no, but a 

logomachy or contention about words. Granted, | 
that what moves matter vitally, must needs do it 
by some energy of its own, distinct from local 
‘motion; but that there may be a simple vital 
energy, without that duplicity, which is in synes- 
thesis, or clear and. express consciousness. ° Ne- 
vertheless, that the energy of nature might becalled 
a certain drowsy, unawakened, or astonished 
cogitation. 17. Instances, which render it pro- 
bable, that there may be a vital energy, without 
synesthesis, clear and express Con-sense, or con- 
sciousness. 18. The plastic nature, acting nei- 
ther knowingly nor fantastically, acts fatally, ma-. 
gically, and sympathetically. The Divine laws 
and fate, as to matter, not. mere cogitation in the 
niind of God, but an energetic and effectual prin- 
ciple; and the plastic nature, the true and pr oper 
fate of matter, or the corporeal world. What ma-- ' 


386 DIGRESSION CONCERNING THE 


gicis, and that nature, which acts fatally, acts also 
magically and sympathetically. 19. That the 
plastic nature, though it be the Divme art and 
fate, yet for all that, it is neither god nor goddess, 
but a low and imperfect creature; it acting arti- 
ficially and rationally no otherwise, than com- 
pounded forms of letters, when printing coherent 
philosophic sense; nor for ends, than a saw or 
hatchet in the hands ofa skilful mechanic. The 
plastic and vegetative life of nature the lowest of 
all lives, and inferior to the sensitive. A higher 
providence than that of the plastic nature go- 
verning the corporeal world itself. 20. Notwith- 
standing which, forasmuch as the plastic nature 
is a life, it must needs be incorporeal. One and 
the same thing, having in it an entire model and 
platform, and acting upon several distant parts of 
matter at once coherently, cannot be corporeal ; 
and though Aristotle no where declares whether 
his nature be corporeal or incorporeal (which he 
neither doth clearly concerning the rational soul) 
and his followers conclude it to be corporeal, yet, 
according to the very principles of that philoso- 
phy, it must needs be otherwise. 21. The plastic 
nature being incorporeal, must either be a lower 
power lodged in souls, that are also conscious, 
sensitive, or rational; or else a distinct substan- 
tial life by itself, and inferior kind of soul. How 
the Platonists complicate both these together ; 
with Aristotle’s agreeable determination, that na- 
ture is either part of a soul, or not without soul. 
22. The plastic nature as to animals, according to 
Aristotle, a part or lower power of their respective 
souls. That the phenomena prove a plastic na- 
ture or archeus in animals, to make which a dis- 


PLASTIC LIFE OF’ NATURE. 387 


| tinct thing from the soul, is to multiply entities — 
without necessity. The soul endued with a plas- 
tic power, the chief formatrix of its own body, the 
contribution of certain other causes not excluded. 
. 93. That besides that plastic principle in particu- 
lar animals, forming them as so many little worlds, 
there isa general plastic nature in the whole cor- 
poreal universe, which likewise, according to 
Aristotle, is either a part and lower power of a 
conscious mundane soul, or else something de- — 
pending on it. 24. That no less according to 
Aristotle than Plato and Socrates, ourselves par- 
take of life from the life, of the universe, as well 
as we do of heat and cold, from the heat and cold 
of the universe; from whence it appears, that 
Aristotle also held the world’s animation, with 
further undeniable proof thereof... An answer ta 
two the most considerable places of that philose- 
pher, that seem to imply the contrary. That 
Aristotle’s first immoveable mover was no soul, 
but a perfect intellect abstract from matter; but 
that he supposed this to move only as a final cause, 
or as being loved, and besides it, a mundane soul 
and plastic nature; to move the heavens effi- 
ciently. Neither Aristotle’s nature, nor his mun- 
‘dane soul, the supreme Deity. However, though 
there be no such mundane soul, as both Plate and 
Aristotle conceived, yet notwithstanding there 
may be a plastic nature depending upon a higher 
intellectual principle. 25. No impossibility of 
some other particular plastic principles; and 
though it be not reasonable to think, that every 
plant, herb, and pile of grass, hath a plastic or 
vegetative soul of its own, nor that the earth is an 
animal ; yet, that there may possibly be one plas- 


888 DIGRESSION ON THE PLASTIC LIFE, &c. - 


tic unconscious nature in the whole terraqueous 
globe, by which vegetables may be severally or- 
ganized and framed, and all things performed, 
which transcend the power of fortuitous mecha- 
nism. 26. Our second undertaking, which was . 
to shew how grossly those Atheists (who acknow- 
ledge this plastic nature) misunderstand it and 
abuse the notion, to make a counterfeit God-Al- 
‘mighty or Numen of it, to the exclusion of the 
true Deity. First, in their supposing, that to be 
the first and highest principle of the universe, 
which is the last and lowest of all lives, a thing 
as essentially derivative from, and dependent upon 
a higher intellectual principle, as the echo on the 
original voice. 27. Secondly, in their making 
sense and reason in animals to emerge out of a 
senseless life of nature, by the mere modification 
and'organization of matter. That no duplication 
of corporeal organs can ever make one single un- 
conscious life to advance into redoubled censci- 
ousness and self-enjoyment. 28. Thirdly, in at- 
tributing perfect knowledge and understanding to 
this life of nature, which yet themselves suppose 
to be devoid of all animal sense and conscious- 
ness. 29. Lastly, in making the plastic life of 
nature to be merely corporeal; the Hylozoists 
contending, that it 1s but an inadequate concep-. 
tion of body, as the only substance; and fondly 
dreaming, that the vulgar notion of God is nothing 
but such an inadequate conception of the matter 
of the whole universe, mistaken for a complete 
and entire pa eence by itself, the cause of all | 
things.” 


CHAPTER IV. 


. The idea of God declared, in way of answer to the first Atheistic ar- 
gument. The grand prejudice against the naturality of this idea, 
as essentially including unity or oneliness in it, from the Pagan Po- 
lytheism, removed. Proved that the intelligent Pagans generally 
acknowledged one supreme Deity. What their Polytheism and 
idolatry was; with some account of Christianity.—1. The either 
stupid insensibility, or gross impudence of Atheists, in denying the 
word GOD to have any signification, or that there is any other idea 
answering to it besides the mere phantasm of the sound. The dis- 
ease called by the philosopher amoxiGworg rot vontixod, the petrification 
(or dead insensibility) of the mind.—2. That the Atheists them- 
selves must needs have an idea of God in their minds, or other- 

_ wise, when they deny his existence, they should deny the existence 
of nothing. And that they have also the same idea of him with 
Theists, they denying the very same thing which the others affirm. 
——3. A lemma, or preparatory proposition to the idea of God, that 
though some things be made or generated, yet it is not possible, 
that all things should be made, but something must of necessity 
exist of itself from eternity unmade, and be the cause of those other 
things that are made.—4. The two most opposite opinions, concern- 

_ ing that which was self-existent from eternity, or unmade, and the 
cause of all other things made: one, that it was nothing but sense- 
less matter, the most imperfect of all things; the other, that it was 
something most perfect, and therefore consciously intellectual. The 
assertors of this latter opinion, Theists in a strict and proper sense ; 
of the former, Atheists. So that the idea of God in general is a 
perfect consciously understanding being (or mind) selfexistent from 
eternity, and the cause of all other things.—5. Observed, that the 
Atheists, who deny a God, according to the true idea of him, do 
often abuse the word, calling senseless matter by that name, and 
meaning nothing else thereby but a first principle, or selfexistent 
unmade thing. That, according to this notion of the word God, 
there can be no such thing as an Atheist, no man being-able to per- 
suade himself, that all things sprung from nothing.—6. In order to 
the more punctual declaration of the Divine idea, the opinion of 
those taken notice of, who suppose two self-existent unmade 
principles, God and matter ; and so God not to be the sole, but only 
the chief principle-—7. That these are but imperfect and mistaken 

. Theists. Their idea of God declared, with its defectiveness. A la- 
titude in Theism. -None to be condemned for absolute Atheists, 


VOL. I, | 2c | 7 


390 


but such as deny an eternal unmade mind, ruling over matter.— 
8. The most compendions idea of God, an absolutely perfeet being, 
That this includes not only conscious intellectuality and necessary 
existence, but also omni-causality, omnipotence, and infinite power : 
and therefore God the sole principle of all, and cause of matter. 
The true notion of infinite power. Pagans acknowledged the Di- 
vinc omnipotence. And that the Atheists supposed infinite power 
to be included in the idca of God, proved from Luerctius.—9. That 
absolate perfection implies something more than power and know- 
ledge. A vaticination in men’s minds ofa higher good than cither. 

That God is better than knowledge, according to Aristotle; and 
that there is morality in the nature of God, whercin his chief happi- 
ness consisteth. This borrowed from Plato, who makes the highest 
perfection, and supreme Deity, to be goodness itsclf, above know- 
Jedge and intellect. God, and the supreme good, according to the 
Scripture, love. God no soft or fond love, but an impartial law, and 
ihe measure of al) things. That the Atheists supposed goodness 
also to be included in the idea of God. The idea of God more expli- 
cate and unfolded, a being absolutcly perfect, infinitely good, wisc, 
and powerful, necessarily existent; and not only the framer of tho 
world, but also the cause of all things.—10. That this idea of God 
essentially includes unity or oncliness in it; since there can be but 
one supreme, onc cause of all things, onc omnipotent, and one infi- 
nitely perfect. This unity or oneliness of the Deity supposed also 
by Epicurus and Lucretius, who professedly denied a God, accord- 
ing to this idea.—11. The grand projudice against the naturality of 
this idea of God, as it essentially includes unity and solitariety, from 
the Polytheism of all nations formerly, besides the Jews, and of all 
the wisest men and philosophers: from whence it is inferred, that 
this idea of God is but artificial, and owes its original to laws and 
institution. An inquiry to be made concerning the true sense of the 
Pagan Polytheism. That the objectors take it for granted, that the 
Pagan Polytheists universally asserted many self-cxistent intelectual 
beings, andindependent deitics, as so many partial canses of the 
world.—12, First, the irrationality of this opinion, and its manifest 
repugnancy to the phenomena; which render it less probable to havo 
been the belicf of all the Pagan Polytheists.—13. Secondly, that 
no such thing at all appears, as that ever any intelligent Pagans as- 
serted a multitude of eternal, unmade, independent dcitios. The 
Hfesiodian gods. The Valentinian Hons. The nearcst approach 
made thereunto by the Manichean good and evil gods. ‘This doctrine 
not generally asserted by the Greek philosophers, as Plutarch affirm- 
eth. Questioned whether the Persian evil demon, or Arimanius, were 
a self-existent principle, essentially cvil. Aristotle’s confutation and 
explosion of many principles, or independent dcitics, Jaustus the 
Manichean’s conceit, that the Jews and Christians paganized, in 
the opinion of monarchy, with St. Austin’s judgment, coneerning 


391 


the Pagans, thereupon.—14. Concluded that the Pagan Polythelsm. 
must be understood according to another equivocation in the word 
gods, as used for created intellectual beings, superior to men,: that 
ought to be religiously worshipped. That the Pagans held both 
many gods and one God (as Onatus the Pythagorean declares:him- 
self), in different senses; many inferior deities subordinate to one 
Supreme.—15, Further evidence of this, that the intelligent Pagan 
Polytheists held only a plurality of inferior deities, subordinate to 
one Supreme: first, because after the emersion of Christianity, and 
its contest with Paganism, when occasion was offered, not only no 
Pagan asserted a multiplicity of independent deities, but also all 
universally disclaimed-it, and professed to acknowledge’ one su- 
preme God.—16. That this was no refinement or interpolation of 
Paganism, as might possibly be suspected; but that the doctrine of 
the most ancient Pagan theologers, and greatest-promoters of Po- 
lytheism, was agreeable hereunto; which will be proved; not from 
suspected writings (as of Trismegist and the Sybils), but such as — 
are indubitate.” First, that Zoroaster, the chief promoter of Poly- 
theism in the eastern parts, acknowledged one supreme Deity, the 
maker of the world, proved from Eubulus in Porphyry, besides his 
- own words cited by Eusebius.—17, That Orpheus, commonly called 

_ by the Greeks the Theologer, and the father of the Grecanic Po- 
lytheism, clearly asserted one supreme Deity, proved by his own 
words, out of Pagan records.—18. That the Egyptians themselves, 
the most polythcistical of all nations, had an acknowledgment 
amongst them of one supreme Deity.—19. That the poets, who- 
were the greatest depravers of the Pagan theology, and, by their 
fables of the gods, made it look more aristocratically, did themsclves 
notwithstanding acknowledge a monarchy, one Prince and Father ~ 
of gods. ; That famous passage of Sophocles not to be ‘suspected, 
though not found in any of his tragedies now. extant.—20. “Ehat 
all the Pagan philosophers, who were 'Theists, universally asserted 
a mundane monarchy. Pythagoras, as much a Polytheist as any, 
and yet his first principle of things, as well as numbers, a monad or 
unity. Anaxagoras’s one mind ordering all things for sood. Xeno- 
phanes’ one and all, and his one God the greatest among the gods. 
—21. Parmenides’ supreme God, one immoveable. Empédocles’ 
both many. gods junior to friendship and contention, and his ohe 
God, called 73%, senior to them. Zeno Eleates’ demonstration of 
_ one God, in Aristotle.—22.. Philolaus’s prince and governor: of all, 
God always one. Euclides Megarensis’s God, called iva2 dyabdy, one’ 
the very good. ‘Timzeus Locrus’s mind and: good, above the soul 
of the world. Antisthenes’ one natural God. Onatus’s Corypheiis., 
—23. Generally believed and true, that Socrates acknowledged one 
supreme God; but that he disclaimed all the inferior gods of the 
Pagans, a vulgar error. Plato also a _Polytheist, and that passage, 
which some lay so-great stress upon: (that he was serious when he 


2cC2 


392 


began his epistles with God, but when with gods jocular), spurious 
and counterfeit; and yet he was, notwithstanding, an undoubted 
Monotheist also in another sense; an assertor of one God over all, 
of a maker of the world, of a first God, of a greatest of the gods. 
. The first bypostasis of the Platonic trinity properly the King of. all 
’ things, for whase sake are all things; the father of the cause .and 
‘ prince of the world, that is, of the eternal intellect, or Adyor,— D4. 
“Aristotle an acknowledger of many gods (be accounting the stars 
such), and yet an express assertor of aif xelgavoc, One prince, one imn- 
moveable moyer.—25. Cleanthes and Chrysippus Steics, though 
they filled the whole heaven, eartb, air, and sea with gods, yet, not- 
withstanding, they acknowledged only one God immortal, Jupiter ; 
all the rest being consumed into him, in the successive conflagra- 
tions, and afterwards made anew by him. Cleanthes’ excellent 
and devout hymn to the supreme God.—26. Endless to cite all the 
passages of the later Pagan writers and Polytheists, in which ono 
supreme God is asserted. Excellent discourses in some of them 
concerning the Deity, particularly Plotinus; who, though be de- 
rived all things, even matter itself, from one supreme Deity, yet 
was a contender fur many gods.—27. This not only the opinion of 
philosophers and Icarned men, but also the general belief of the 
Pagan vulgar: that there was one supreme God, proved from 
Maximus Tyrius. The Romans’ Deus optimus maximus. ‘The 
Pagans, when most serious, spake of God singularly. Kyrie Biee- 
son part of the Pagany’ litany to the supreme God. The more civil- 
ized. Pagans, at this very day, acknowledge one Supreme Deity, the 
maker of the world.—28. Plutarch’s testimony, that, notwithstand- 
ing the variety of Paganic rcligions, and the different names of gods 
used in them, yet onc reason, mind, or providence ordering all 
things, and its inferior ministers, were alike every where worship- 
ped.—29. Plain that the Pagan Theists must needs acknowledge 
one supreme Deity, because they generally believed the whole 
world to be one animal, governed by one soul. Some Pagans made 
this soul of the world their supreme God; others an abstract mind 
superior to it,—-30. The Hebrew doctors generally of this persua- 
sion, that the Pagans worshipped one sapreme God, and that ail 
their other gods wore but mediators betwixt him and men.—31. 
Lastly, this confirmed from Scripture. The Pagans knew God. 
Aratus’s Jupiter, and the Athenians’ unknown God, the true God. 
—32. In order to a fuller explication of the Pagan theology, and 
shewing the occasion of its being misunderstood, three heads requi- 
site to be insisted on. First, that the Pagans worshipped one su- 
preme God under many names; secondly, that besides this one God, 
they worshipped also many gods, which were indeed inferior deities 
subordinate to him; thirdly, that they worshipped both the supremo 
and inferior gods in images, statues, and symbols, sometimes abu- 
sively called also gods. Jirst, that the supreme God amongst the 


393 | 


Pagans was polyonymous, and worshipped: under several personal 
names, according to his several attributes and the manifestations of 
them, his gifts and effects in the world.—33. That, upon the same 
account, things not substantial were personated. and deified by the 
Pagans, and worshipped as so many several names and notions of 
one God.—34. That as the whole corporeal world animated was sup- 
posed by some of the Pagans to be the supreme God, so he was. 
_ _worshipped in the several parts and members of it (having personal 
- names. bestowed upon them) as it were by parcels and piece-meal, 
or by so many inadequate.conceptions. . That some of the Pagans 
made the corporeal world the temple of God only, but others the 
body of God.—85. The second head proposed, that besides the 
one supreme God, under several names, the Pagans acknowledged 
and worshipped also many gods; ects yemrote, made gods, created 
intellectual beings superior to men.—36. The. Pythagoric or Plato- 
nic trinity of Divine .bypostases, And the higher of the inferior 
deities, according to this hypothesis, Nous, Psyche, and the whole 
corporeal world; with particular Noes and Henades.—37. The 
other inferior deities, acknowledged as well by the vulgar as philo- 
sophers, of three sorts.. Eirst, the sun, moon, and stars, and other 
greater parts of the universe animated, called sensible gods.—38. 
Secondly, their inferior deities invisible, ethereal, and aerial animals, 
called demons. These appointed by the supreme Dcity to: preside 
over kingdoms, cities, places, persons, and things.—39. The last sort 
of the Pagan inferior deities, heroes and 6@eéybgwra, or men-gods. 
Euemerus taxed by Plutarch, for making all the Pagan gods nothing 
but dead men.—40. The third general head proposed, that the Pa-. 
gans worshipped both the supreme and inferior gods in images, sta- 
tues, and symbols. That first of all, before images and temples, 
rude stones and pillars. without sculpture were erected for. religious 
monuments, and called fartiaa, or. Bethels.—41.- That afterwards: 
images, statues, and symbols were used, and housed in temples. . 
These placed in the west-end of the temples to face the east; so 
that the Pagans entering. worshipped towards the west; one proba-. 
ble occasion of the: ancient Christians praying towards the ‘east. 
The golden calf made-for a symbolic presence of the.God of Israel. 
—42. All the parts of the entire. Pagan religion represented toge- 
ther at once in Plato.—43. That some late writers, not well under- 
standing the sense of Pagans,. have confounded all their theology, 
by supposing them to worship the inanimate parts. of the world. as 
' such, for gods; therefore distinguishing betwixt their animal. and: 
their natural gods. That no corporeal thing was. worshipped by-the 
Pagans otherwise, than either as being itself animated with  parti- 
~ cular soul of its own, or as being part of the whole. animated world, 
or as having demons presiding over it, to whom: the worship was. 
properly. directed ;, or; lastly, as being images or symbols of. Divine 
things.—44. That though the Egyptians be said to. have worshipped 


« 
4, 


394 


brute animals, and were generally therefore condemned by thc 
other Pagans; yet the wiser of them used them only as hicrogly- 
phics and symbols.—45. That the Pagans worshipped not only the 
supreme God, but also the inferior deities, by material sacrifices. 
Sacrifices or fire-offerings, in their first and general notion, nothing 
clse but gifts and signs of gratitude, and appendices of prayer. 
But that animal sacrifices had afterwards a particular notion also of 
expiation fastened on them; whether by Divine direction, or human 
agreement, left undetermined.—46. The Pagans’ apology for the 
three forementioned things. First, for worshipping one supromo 
God under many personal names, and that not only according to his 
several attributes, but also his several manifestations, gifts, and of- 
fects, in the visible world. With an excuse for those corporeal 
Theists, who worshipped the whole animated world as the supreme 
God, and the several parts of it undor personal names, as living 
members of him.—47. Their apology for worshipping, besides the 
one supreme God, many inferior deities. That they worshipping 
them only as inferior could not, therefore, be guilty of giving them 
that honour which was proper to the Suprome. That they bonoured 
the supreme God incomparably above all. That they put a dif- 
ference in their sacrifices; and that maternal sacrifices were not tho 
proper worship of the supreme God, but rather below him.—4s8. 
Several reasons of the Pagans, for giving religious worship to infe- 
rior created beings. First, that this honour, which is bestowed upon 
them, does ultimately redouand to the supreme God, and aggran- 
dize his stateland majesty, thoy being all his ministers and attend- 
ants.—49. That as demons are mediators betwixt the celestial gods 
and men, so those celestial gods, and all the other inferior deities, 
are themselves also mediators betwixt man and tho supreme God, 
and as it were convenient steps, by which we ought with reverence 
to approach him.—50. That there is an honour in justice duo to all 
those excellent beings that are above us; and that the Pagans do 
_ but honour every thing as they ought, in that due rank and place, 
in which the supreme God hath set it—51. That demons or angels 
being appointed to preside over kingdoms, cities, and persons, and 
the several parts of the corporeal universe, and. being many ways 
benefactors to us, thanks ought to be returned to them by sacrificc. 
—52. That the inferior gods, demons, and heroes, being all of them 
able to do us either good or hurt, and being also irascible, and 
therefore provokable by our negicct of them, it is as well our inter- 
eat as our duty to pacify and appease them by worship.—63. Lastly, 
that it cannot be thought, that the supreme God will envy those in- 
ferior gods that worship or honour which is bestowed upon them: 
nor suspected, that any of those inferior deities will factiously. go 
about to sct up themselves against the sppreme God.—34. That 
many of the Pagaus worshipped none but good dcmons, and that 
those of them, who worshipped evil ones, did it only in order to 


395 


their appeasement and mitigation, that so-they might.dothem no 
hurt. None but magicians to be accounted properly devil wership- 
pers, who honour evil demons, in order to the gratification of their 
' yevenge, lust,.and ambition.—55. The Pagans plead, that those 
demons, who delivered oracles, and did miracles amongst them, 
must needs be good, sincg, there cannot be agreater reproach to the 
supreme God, than to suppose him to appoint evil demons as pre- 
sidents and governors over the world, or to suffer them to have so 
- great a sway and share of power in it. The faith of Plato in. Divine 
Providence, that the good every where prevails over the bad, and 
that the Delphic Apollo was therefore a good demon.—56. ‘The Pa- 
gans’ apology for worshipping the supreme God in images, statues, 
and symbols. That. these are only schctically: worshipped by them, 
the honour passing from them to the prototype. And that since we 
living in bodies cannot easily have a conception of any thing without 
some corporcal image or phantasm, thus much must be indulged to 
the infirmity of human nature (at least in the vulgar) to the worship 
of God, corporeally in images, te prevent their running to Atheism. 
—-57. That though it should appear, by this apology of the Pagans, 
that their case were not altogether. sy bad as is commonly supposed, 
yet they cannot be justified thereby in the three particulars above~- 
mentioned, but the Scripture condemnation of them is irrefragable, 
that knowing God, they did not glorify him as God,. or. sanctify bis 
name; thatis, worship him according to his uncommon and incom- 
municable, his pecrless and insociable, transcendent and singular, 
incomparable and unresemblable nature; but mingled, some way or 
other, creature-worship with the worship of the Creator. First, that 
the worshipping of one God in Dis various gifts and effects, under se- 
veral personal names, a thing in itself absurd, may also. prove a great 
oceasion of Atheism, when the things themselves come to be called | 
by those names, as wine Bacchus, corn Ceres.. The conclusion ea- 
sily following, from thence, that the good things of nature gre the 

only deities. But to worship the corporeal world itself animated, as 

the supreme God, and the parts of it as the members of God, is plain- 

ly to confound God with the creature, and not to glorify him as Crer 

ator, nor aceording to his separate and spiritual nature.--58. To give 

religious worship to demons or angels, heroes or saints, or any other 

intellectual creatures, though not honouring them equally with, the 

supreme God, is to deny God the honour of his holiness, his singu- 

Jar, insociable, and incommunicable nature, as he is the only self- 

originated being, and the Creator of all; of whom, through whom, 

and to whom are all-.things. As God is such a being, that there is 

. hothing like him, so ought the worship which is given;him to be such 

as. hath nothing like to it, a singular, separate, and incommunicate 

worship. They -not to be religiously worshipped, that worsbip.—~ 
59. That the religious worship of created spirits proceeded chiefly 
from a fcar, that Wf they were not voniienes: they would be pro- 


= 


396 
yoked and ‘do hurt, which is both highly injurious to good spirits, 
anda distrust of the sufficiency of God’s power to protect his wor- 
shippers; ‘ That all good spirits uninvoked are of themselves offi- 


‘ciously:ready to assist those, who sincerely worship and propitiate 


the supreme Deity, and therefore no need of the religious-worship 
of them, which would be also’ offensive gto them.—60. That men’s 
praying to images and statues. is much more ridiculous than cbil- 
dren’s talking to babies made of clouts, but not so innocent ; they 
thereby debasing both themselves and God, not glorifying him ac- _ 
cording to his spiritual and unresemblable nature, but changing the 


Slory of the incorruptible God into the likeness of corruptible man 


or beast.—61. The mistake of those who think none can be guilty 
of idolatry, that believe one God the maker of the world.—62. That 
from the same ground of reason, that nothing ought to be religious- 


_ Jy worshipped besides the supreme God, or whom he appoints to 


represent himself (beeause he ought to be sanctified, and dealt 
withal, according to his singular nature, as unlike to every thiug), 
it follows, contrary to the opinion of some opposers of idolatry, that 
there qught also to be a discrimination made between things sacred 


_ and profane, and reverence used in Divine worsbip. Idolatry and sa- 


crilege allied —63. Another Scripture charge upon the Pagans, that 
they were devil-worshippers; not as though they intended all their 


. worship to evil demons or devils as such, but because their Polythe- 


ism and idolatry (unacceptable to God and good spirits) was pro- 
moted hy evil spirits delivering oracles and doing miracles for the 
confirmation of it, they also insinuating themselves into the tem- 
ples.and statues, therefore the worship was looked upon as done to 
them...'Fhe same thing said of others besides Pagans, that they 
worshipped devils.—64. Proved that they were evil demons, who 
delivered oracles, and did miracles amongst the Pagans, for the 
carrying on of that religion, from the many obscene rites and mys- 
teries, not only not prohibited, but also enjoined by them.—65. The 
same thing further proved from other cruel and bloody rites, but es- 
pecially that of man-sacrifices. Plutarch’s clear acknowledgment, 
that both the obscene rites and man-sacrifices, amongst the Pagans, 
owed their original to wicked demons.—66. That the God of Israel 
neither required nor accepted of man-sacrifices, against a modern 
Diatribist—67. That what faith soever Plato might have in the 
Delphic Apollo, he was no other than an eyil demon, or devil. An — 
answer to the Pagans’ argument from Divine Provideuce.—68. That 
the Pagans’ religion, unsound in its foundation, was infinitely more 
corrupted and depraved by means of these four things :—First, the 
superstition of the ignorant vulgar.—69. Secondly, the licentious 
figments of poets and fable-mongers, frequently condemned by 
Piato and other wiser “Pagans.—70. Thirdly, the craft of priests 
and politicians.—71. Lastly, the imposture of evil demons, or devils. 
That by means of these four things, the Pagan religion became a 


397 


most foul and unclean thing. And as some were captivated by it 
under a most gricvous yoke of superstition, so others strongly in- 
clined to Atheism.—72. Plato not insensible, that the Pagan reli- . 
gion stood in need of reformation; nevertheless, supposing many of 
those religious rites to have been introduced by visions, dreams, 
and oracles, he concluded, that no wise legislator would, of his own 
head, venture to make an alteration; implying, that this was a thmg 
not to be effected otherwise than by Divine revelation and miracles- 
The generally-received opinion of the Pagans, that no man ought 
to trouble himself about religion, but content himself to worship 
God, viuw mérsws, according to the law of that country which he. 
lived in.—73. Wherefore God Almighty, in great compassion to 
mankind, designed himself to reform the religion. of the Pagan 
world, by introducing another religion of his own framing instead 
of it; after he had first made a preeludium thereunto in one nation 
of the Israelites, where he cxpressly prohibited, by a voice out of 
the fire, in his first commandment, the Pagan Polytheism, or the wor- 
Shipping of other inferior deities besides himself; and in the second, 

their idolatry, or the worshipping of the supreme God in images, 
Statues, or symbols. Besides which, he restrained the use of sacri- 
fices: as also successively gave predictions, of a Messiah to come, 
such as together with miracles might reasonably conciliate faith to 
him when he came.—74. ‘That afterwards, in due time, God sent “ 
the promised Messiah, who was the eternal Word hypostatically | 
united with a pure human soul and body, and so a truce Gsdrdgamos, 
or God-man; designing him for a living temple and visible statue or 
image, in which the Deity should be represented and worshipped ; 
as also after his death and resurrection, when he was to be invested 
with all power and authority, for a prince and king, a mediator and 
intercessor betwixt God and men.—75. That this deavdgwaoc, or God- 
man, was so far from intending to require men-sacrifices of bis wor- 
shippers, as the Pagan demons did, that he devoted himself to be a 
catharma and expiatory sacrifice for the sins of the whole world ; 
and thereby also abolished all sacrifices or oblations by fire whatso- 
ever, according to the Divine prediction—76.. That the Christian, © 
Trinity, though a mystery, is more agreeable to réason than the Pla. 
tonic; and that there is no absurdity at all in supposing the pure ” 
soul and body of the Messiah to be made a living temple or Shechi- _ 
nah, image or statue of the Deity. ‘That this religion of one God © 
and one Mediator, or Geavépamos, God-man, preached to the Pagan. 
world, and confirmed by miracles, did effectually destroy all the 
Pagan inferior deities, middle gods and mediators, demons and he- 
roes, together with their statues and images.—77. That it is no way 
incongruous to suppose, that the Divine Majesty, in prescribing a 
form of religion to the world, should graciously condescend to com-~- 
ply with human infirmity, in order to the removing of two such 
grand evils as Polytheism aird idolatry, and the bringing of men to 


398 


worship God in spirit and-in trath—78. That demons and angela, 
heroes and. saints, are but different names for the same things, hich 
- are made gods by being worshipped. And that the introducing of 
angel and saint-worship, together with image-worship, into Christi- 
anity, seems to be a defeating of one grand design of God Almighty 
' init, and the paganizing of that, which was intended for the unpa- 
- ganizing of the. world.—79. Another key for Christianity in the 
Scripture, not disagreeing with the former, that since.the way of 
wisdom and knowledge proved ineffeetual as to the generality of 
mankind, men might, by the contrivance of the. gospel, be brought 
to God and a holy life (without profound knowledge) in the way of 
believing.—80. That, according to the Scripture, there is a higher, 
more precious, and diviner light, than that of theory and speculation. 
—l. That in Christianity all the great, goodly, and most glorious 
things of this world are slurred and disgraced, comparatively with 
the life of Christ—82. And that there are all possible engines in it to 
bring men up to God, and engage them in a holy life.—83. Two er- 
rors here to be taken notice of; the first, of those who make Christi- 
anity nothing but an Antinomian plot against real righteousness, and 
as it were a secret confederacy with the devil. The second, of those 
who turn that into matter of mere notion and opinion, dispute and 
controversy, which was designed by God only as a contrivance, ma- 
ehine, or engine, to bring men effectually to a holy and godly life. 
—84. That Christianity may be yet further illustrated, from the con- 
sideration of the adversary or Satanical power, which is in the world. 
This no Manichean substantial evil principle, but a polity of Japsed 
angels, with which the souls of wicked men are also incorporated, . 
and may therefore be called the kingdom of darkness.—85. The 
history of the fallen angels in Scripture briefly explaincd.— 86. The 
concurrent agreement of the Pagans concerning evil demons or de- 
vils, and their activity in the world.—87. That there is a perpetual 
war betwixt two polities or kingdoms in the world, the one of light, 
the.other of darkness; and that our Saviour Christ, or the Messiah, 
is appointed the head or chieftain over the héavenly militia, or the 
forces of the kingdom of light.—88. That there will be at length a 
palpable and signal overthrow of the Satanical power and whole 
“kingdom of darkness, by 423s 4m3 amavis, God appearing in an ex- 
traordinary and miraculous manner ; and that this great affair is to 
be managed by our Saviour Christ, as God’s vicegerent, and a visible 
‘Judge both of quick and dead.—89.:That our Saviour Christ de- 
signed not to set up himself factiously against God Almighty, nor 
to be accounted xvJgioc 60%, superior to God, but that when he hath - 
donc his work, and put down all adversary power, himself will then 
be subject to God, even the Father, that so God may be all in all.— 
90. Lastly, having spoken, of three ‘forms of religions, the Jewish, 
Christian, and the Pagan, .and there remaining only a fourth, the. 
Mahometan, in which the Divine monarchy is zealously asserted, 


THE IDEA OF GOD DECLARED. 399 . 


-wé may now conclude, that the idea of God‘(as essentially including. 
unity in it) hath been entertained in all forms of religion. An ac- 
count of that seemingly-strange phenomenon of Providence: the 
rise, growth, and continuance of the Mahometan religion not to be 
attempted by us, at least in this place. 


1. Havine in the former chapter prepared. the’ 
way;°we shall now proceed (with the Divine as- 
sistance) to answer and confute all those Athe- 
istic arguments before proposed. The first where- 
of was this, That there is no idea of God, and 
therefore either no such thing existing in nature, 
or at least no possible evidence of it. | 

To affirm, that there is no idea of God, is all. 
one as to affirm, that there is no conception of the 
mind answering to that word or name ; apd this 
the modern Atheists stick not to praia, that 
the word God hath no signification, and that there — 
is no other idea or conception in men’s minds, an+ 
swering thereunto, besides the mere phantasm of 
the sound. Now, for any one to go about soberly 
to confute this, and to prove, that God is not the 
only word without a signification, and that men 
do not every where pay all their religious devo- 
tions to the mere phantasm of a transient sound, 
expecting all good from it, might very well seem 
to all intelligent persons a most absurd and ridi- 
culous undertaking ; both because the thing is so 
evident in itself, and because the plainest things 
of all can be least proved ; for 0. ravra 
GroseKkra vevoulKwe, avTnv amodeiwy avaiger’ Prod in 
He that thinks all things to be demon- edit. Gree. 

7 oo bee Basil. 1534. 
strable, takes away demonstration itself. fol. 
-~Wherefore we shall here only suggest 
thus much, that since there are different words 
for God in several languages, and men have the 

same notion or conception in their minds answer- 


.) 


.400 THE INSENSIBILITY, OR 


xing to them all, it must needs be granted, that 
they have some other idea or conception belong- 
ing to those words, besides the phantasms of their 
several sounds. And indeed it can be nothing 
else, but either monstrous sottishness and stu- 
pidity of mind, or else prodigious impudence, in 
these Atheists to deny, that there is any idea of 
God at all in the minds of men, or that the word 
hath any signification. 

It was heretofore observed by Epic- 


*” > ’ Sf > “ 
Briel tee tetus, dv ric evicrnrat moog ra ayav Exgavn, 
Edit-Can- ade cog 5 addy é Lupe XO Lov 
Edit.Can- arpdg tourov ov pastov EOTLY EUpELY o10% OL ov 
andr. ; ees 


perareloee TIC auTov’ TOUTO O ours Taga THY EKEI- 
oS vou" viverau Suvapty, ouTE Tapa THV TOU. wacKovToc acbé- 
” peav’ "That if any man will oppose or contradict 
the most evident truths, it will not be easy to find 
arguments wherewith to convince him. And yet 
this, notwithstanding, ought neither to be im- 
puted. to any inability 1 in the teacher, nor to any 
strength of wit in the denier, but only to a certain 
dead insensibility i in him 7 Herenpon he further 
adds, that thereisa doubled aTOVEKPWOIC, OF aroAlbwete, 
- mortification or petrification of the soul; the one, 
when it is stupified and besotted in its intellec- 
tuals; the other, when it is bedeaded in its mo- 
rals as to that pudor, that naturally should belong 
to.aman. And he concludes, that either of these 
states (though it be not commonly so apprehend- 
ed).is a condition little less deplorable, than that 
of, bodily, death ; as also that. such a person. 18 not 
| ag all. fg. he. disputed. with. For zovyv aureo Tp t 
Hein, @tdngoy. MIRCEA Yes wy alobyras 6 Ort. VEVEK QUT AL 5 aisba- 
: YOHEVOS ov. Rpogmoteiras 5 Ett Kapur te égre Tou VEKOU, EKTE= 
TANTAL yap TO adn Lov avrou Kat TO VT ETTLKOY" What 
sword can one bring, or What fire, by burning or 


IMPUDENCE OF ATHEISTS. 401 


slashing, to make such a one perceive that he is” 
dead? But if he be sensible, and will not acknow- 
ledge it, then he is worse than dead, being‘cas- 
. trated as to that pudor, that belongs to a man.— 
Moreover, that philosopher took notice, that in 
those times, when this denial of most evident 
truths proceeded rather from impudence than stu- 
pidity or sottishness, the vulgar would be apt to 
admire it for strength of wit and great learning ; 
dy dé Twog Td alonpov arovexpwO7, Touro Eri Kal Svvapw 
kadounev’ But if any man’s pudor be deaded or 
mortified in him, we call this power and strength.— 
~ Now, as this was sometimes the case of the 
Academics, so is it also commonly of the Athe- 
ists, that their minds are partly petrified and be- 
numbed into a kind of sottish and stupid insensi- 
bility, so that they are not able to discern things 
that are most evident; and partly depudorated, or 
become so void of shame, as that though they do 
perceive, yet they will obstinately and impudently 
deny the plainest things that are; as this, that 
there is any idea answering to the word God, be- 
sides the phantasm of the sound. And we do the 
rather insist upon this prodigious monstrosity of 
Atheists in this place; because we shall have oc- 
casion afterwards more than once to take notice 
of it again in other instances, as when they affirm, . 
' that local motion and cogitation are really oneand 
the self-same thing, and the like. And we con- 
ceive it to be unquestionably true, that it is many | 
times nothing else, but either this shameless impu- 
dence, or sottish insensibility in Atheists, that is 
admired by the ignorant for profoundness of wit 
and learning,* dAXa ravrnv Svvape eirw 3 uy yévotro. et 
8a Epictet. apud Arrian. ubi supra, p. 96, 


402 SOME UNMADE SUBSTANCE MUST BE 


un kat ray tov Kwaldwy, caf’ av wav ro tredOov ev pow 
Kat Totovet Kal Aéyovat. But shall I call this power 
or wit, and commend it upon that account? no 
more than I will commend the impudence of the 
Cinedi, who stick not publicly to do and say any 
thing.— 

11. But whatever these Atheists deny in words, 
it is notwithstanding evident, that even themselves 
have an idea or conception in their minds an- 
swering to the word God, when they deny his 
existence, because otherwise they should deny the 
existence of nothing. Nor can it beat all doubted, 
but that they have also the same idea of God with 
Theists, they denying the existence of no other 
thing than what these assert. And asin all other 
controversies, when men dispute together, the one 
affirming, the other denying, both parties must 
needs have the same idea in'their minds of what 
they dispute about, or otherwise their whole dis- 
putation would be but a kind of Babel language 
and confusion ; so must it be likewise in this pre- 
sent controversy betwixt Theists and Atheists. 
Neither indeed would there be any controversy at 
all between them, did they not both by God mean 
one and the same thing; nor would the Atheists 
be any longer Atheists, did they not deny the ex 
_ istence of that very same thing which the Theists 
affirm, but of something else. 

111. Wherefore, we shall in the next place de- 
clare, what this idea of God is, or what is that 
ihing, whose existence they that affirm, are called 
Theists, and they who deny, Atheists. In order 
whereunto, we must first Jay down this lemma, or 
preparatory proposition—that as it is generally ac- 
knowledged, that all things did not exist from 


THE CAUSE OF OTHER THINGS MADE. 403 


eternity, such as they are, unmade, but that some 
things were made and generated or produced ; so 
it is not possible that all things should be made 
neither, but there must of necessity be something 
self-existent from eternity, and unmade ; because 
if there had been once nothing, there could never 
have been any thing. The reason of which is so 
evident and irresistible, that even the Atheists 
confess themselves conquered by it, and readily 
acknowledge it for an mdubitable truth, that 
there must be something dyévynrov, something which 
was never made or produced—and which there- 
fore is the cause of those other things that are 
made, something avrogusc and uvburoscraroy, that 
was self-originated and self-existing, and which is 
as well avwAkbpov and a¢Gagrov, a8 dyévvyrov, INCOF- 
ruptible and undestroyable, as ingenerable; whose 
existence therefore must needs be necessary, be- 
cause if it were supposed to have happened by 
chance to exist from eternity, then it might as 
well happen again to cease to be. Wherefore all 
the question now is, what is this dyévynrou and dyw- 
AeDpov, avrogusc and avburocraroy, this ingenerable 
and incorruptible, self-origmated and self-existent 
thing, which is the cause of all other Dune 
that are made. | 
iv. Now there are two grand Opinions eppe- 
site to one another concerning it; for, first, some 
contend, that the only salexintent. unmade, and 
incorruptible thing, and first principle of: all 
things, is senseless matter; that is, matter-cither 
perfectly dead and stupid, or at least devoid.of 
all animalish and conscious life.. But: because 
this is really the lowest and most imperfect of all 
beings, others on the contrary Judge it reasonable, 


404 ATHEISTS ABUSE THE WORD Gob, 


that the first principle and original of all things 
should be that, which is most perfect (as Aristo- 
tle’ observes of Pherecydes, and his followers, 
TO yevvnoav TPwTOV aotorov ridéact, that they made the 
first cause and principle of generation to be the 
best), and then apprehending, that to be endued 
with conscious life and understanding isa much 
greater perfection than to be devoid of both, 

(as Balbus in Cicero declares upon this 
DeNat. —_-very occasion, “ Nec dubium quin quod 
cap. xvii. p. animans sit, habeatque mentem, ct ratio- 
x oper” = hem, et sensum, id sit melius quam id 

quod his careat”) they therefore con- 
clude, that the only unmade thing, which was the 
principle, cause, and original of all other things, 
was not senseless matter, but a perfect conscious 
understanding nature, or mind. And these are 
they, who are strictly and properly called The- 
ists, who affirm, that a perfectly conscious under- 
standing being, or mind, existing of itself from 
eternity, was the cause of all other things; and 
they, on the contrary, who derive all things from 
senseless matter, as the first original, and deny 
that there is any conscious understanding being 
self-existent or unmade, are those that are properly 
called Atheists. Wherefore, the true and genu- 
ine idea of God in general, is this, A perfect con- 
scious understanding being (or mind) existing of 
itself from eternity, and the cause of all other 
things. 

v. But it is here observable, that those A the- 
ists, who deny a God, according to this true and 
genuine notion of him, which we have declared, 
do often abuse the word, calling senseless matter 


* Metaphysicor. lib, xii. cap. iy. p. 446. tom. iv. oper. 


WHO APPLY IT TO SENSELESS MATBER. 405 


by that name; partly perhaps as endeaypuring | 
thereby, to decline that odious and i igno : 
name of Atheists, and partly as conceiving, that 
whatsoever is the first principle of things, inge- 
nerable and incorruptible, and the cause of all 
other things besides itself, must therefore needs 
be the divinest thing of all.’ Wherefore, by the 
wordGod, these mean nothing else, but that which 
IS ayévvyrov, unmade or self-existent, and the dpyn, 
or first principle of things. Thus it was before 
observed,’ that Anaximander called infinite mat- 
ter, devoid of all manner of life, ro Ociov, or God ; 
and Pliny, the corporeal world, endued with no- 
thing but a plastic unknowing nature, Numen; as 
also others in Aristotle,” upon the same account, 
called the inanimate elements gods, as supposed 
first principles of things ; Ocot 88 xai ravra, for these 
are also gods.—And indeed Aristotle - himself 
seems to be guilty of this miscarriage of abusing 
the word God after this manner, when, speaking 
of love and-chaos, as the two first principles’‘of 
things, he must, according to the laws of grad- 
mar, be understood ‘to call them’, beth: .# dnt 
OdS : rovrouc uty ovY TH } Ouavermet, Tepe: egy 
gOS : rouvrovg pev ¢ yon yt PE 4! cap. tat. 
rou tic mowroc, sbiaTw Kplve Uore pov" Con- oe 
cerning these two (gods) how they ought: | 
to be ranked, and which of thena is to: be>plaead 
first, whether love or chaos,: is aftéerwaids46:be 
resolved.——_Which passage of ' Aristotle's’ Be ekkaetito 
agree with that of a rues ed "AXA Dévyeiibl = 
= : Cha “lil. sec. Xx. | 


arta wa oa hae { | 
_> This isa mistake of Dr. Cudworth, ‘fei “Aristdeid aden 
those philosophets, who cdénsidered the elements: as pods, but #2; Em- 
pedocles, and liis well known principles of nsiygg and, oie. De Gencya- 
tione et Corruptione, eap. vi. Pp. 734.tom.i.oper, | 
© Apud Diogeri: Bact: lib. iii. ‘segris LO" pelt © fo | 
VOL. I. 2D 7 | 









406 ATHEISTS ABUSE THE WORD Gal, 


yaog TowTow yevtabat Gear, but chaos ts said to have 
made the firat of gods ;—unless we should rather 
understand him thus, that chaos was said to have 
been made before the gods. And this abuse of 
the word God is a thing, which the learned Origen 
took notice of in his book against Celsus, where 
he speaks of that religious care. which ought to 
tips9 be had about the use of words: 0 rower 
vant peeyadodutarecar, Ka odtyny rourwy mecivntay 
etAngwe, evrapsnlnaerat, GAG ade ipaouocey OponaTa 
Tpeayj.act, pyToreE peony wally rote TO Choe Ovopia imate 
WC peoovaar, tt vAnY aypuyoy He, therefore, that 
hath but the least consideration of these things, 
will take a religious care, that he give not imMpro- 
per names to things, lest be should fall tute a like 
miscarriage with those, who attribute the name of 
God to inanimate and senseless matter.--. Now, 
according to this false and spurious notion of the 
word of God, when it is taken for any supposed 
first principle, or self-existeut unmade thing, what- 
soever that be, there neither is nor can be any such 
thing as an Atheist ; since whosoever hath but the 
least drachm of reason, must needs acknowledge, 
that something or other existed from eternity un- 
made, aud was the cause of those other things 
that are made. But that notion or idea of God, 
according to which some are Atheists and some 
Theists, is, in the strictest sense of it, what we 
have already declared, A perfect mind, or con- 
sclously understanding nature, self-existent from 
eternity, and the cause of all other things... The 
genuine Theists being those, who make the first 
original of all things universally to be a cousci- 
ously understanding nature (or perfect mind); but 
the Atheists, properly such, as derive all things 


WHO APPLY IT TO SENSELESS MATTER. 407 


from matter, either perfectly dead and stupid, or 
else devoid of all conscious and animalish life. 

vi. But that we may more fully and punctually 
declare the true idea of God, we must here take 
notice of acertain opinion of some philosophers, 
who went as it were in a middle betwixt both the 
former, and neither made matter alone, nor God, 
the sole principle of all things; but joined them 
both together, and held two first principles or self- 
existent unmade beings, independent upon one 
another—God, and the matter. Amongst whom 
the Stoics are to be reckoned, who, notwithstand- 
ing, because they held, that there was no other 
substance besides body, strangely confounded 
themselves, being by that means necessitated to 
_mnake their two first principles, the active and the 
passive, to be both of them really but one and the 
self-same substance: their doctrine to this pur- 
pose being thus declared by Cicero :* “ Naturam 
dividebant in res duas, ut altera esset efficiens, al- 
tera autem quasi huic se prebens, ex qua effice- 
retur aliquid. In eo, quod efficeret, vim esse cen- 
sebant; in eo, quod efficeretur, materiam quan- 
dam; in utroque tamen utrumque. Neque enim 
materiam ipsam coherere potuisse, si nulla vi con- 
tineretur, neque vim sine aliqua materia ; mihil est 
enim, quod non alicubi esse cogatur.” . The Stoics 
divided nature into two things as the first princi- 
ples, one whereof is the efficient or artificer, the 
other that which offers itself to him for things to 
be made outof it. In the efficient principle they 
_ took notice of active force in the patient of matter, 


2 Academ. Quest. lib. i. cap. vi. p. 2231. tom. viii. oper. But Ci- 
cero in this passage does not treat of the opinion of the Stoics, but’of 
that of Plato and his ancient followers, or the first Academics. 


29p2 


408 SOME ASSERT TWO UNMADE PRINCIPLES, 


but so as that in each of these were both toge- 
ther; forasmuch as neither the matter could co- 
here together, unless it were contained by some 
active force, nor the active force subsist of itself 
without matter, because that is nothing, which 
is not somewhere.—But besides these Stoics, 
there were other philosophers, who, admitting of 
incorporeal substance, did suppose two first prin- 
ciples, as substances really distinct from one ano- 
ther, that were co-existent from eternity---an incor- 

poreal Deity and matter; as for example, 
pee Anaxagoras, Archelaus, Atticus, and 
ib. 72.7, Many more; insomuch that Pythagoras 

himself was reckoned amongst those by 
Numenins, and Plato by Plutarch and Laer- 
thus. 

And we find it commonly taken for granted, 
that Aristotle also was of this persuasion, though 
it cannot be certainly concluded from thence (as 
‘some seem to suppose), because he asserted the 
eternity of the world; Plotinus, Porphyrius, Jam- 
bhchus, Proclus, and Simplicius doing the like, 
and yet, notwithstanding, maintaining, that God 
was the sole principle of all things, and that mat- 
ter also was derived from him. Neither will that 
L1e1.p, Passage of Aristotle's, in his Metaphy- 
268. tom. iv sics, necessarily evince the contrary: Ord¢ 
sain OOKEL To airtov racy tivat Ka apy n TIC, (sod 
seems to be a cause to all things, and a certain 
principles—because this might be understood 
only of the forms of things. 

But itis plain, that Plutarch was a inaintainer 
of this doctrine, from his discourse upon the Pla- 
tonic nsychogonia® (besides other places): BiArtov 


* "Tom. it. oper. p. LOl4. 


& 


GOD AND MATTER. 409 


ody TIXdrwvt meBouivoug rov uty Kocpov uro beou yeyove- 
vat Néyew Kal dew" o piv yap KadXcroc THY yeyovorwr, 
© of aptoroc TWY air’ THY dé oUciay Kal TAN, E& 7¢ yEyo- 
vev, ov yevouivny, GAAA viroKeysévny aet rw Sytovey~p, Etc 
Saecw Kat rakww avurneg, Kat Tpo¢ avrov eSouolwow, we du- 
vaToy ny Tapac yew" ov dp éx TOV “Nn OVTOE 7 yévecte, 
aAX ék Tov un KaAwe, und iKavwe zyovroc, Wwe olkiae, Kat 
iwariov, Kat avdoravroc’ It is, therefore, better for us 
to follow Plato (than Heraclitus), and loudly to 
declare, that the world was made by God. For 
as the world is the best of all works, so is God 
the best of all causes. Nevertheless, the sub- 
stance or matter, out of which the world was 
made, was not itself made; but always ready at 
band, and subject to the artificer, to be ordered 
and disposed by him. For the making of the 
_ world was not the production of it out of nothing, 
but out of an antecedent bad and disorderly state, 
like the making ofa house, garment, or statue. 

It is also well known, that Hermogenes, and 
other ancient pretenders to Christianity, did in 
like manner assert the self-existence and impro- 
duction of the matter, for which cause thev. were 
commonly called Materiarii, or the Materiarian 
heretics ; they pretending by this means to give an 
account (as the Stoics had done before them) of 
the original of evils, and to free God from the im- 
putation of them. Their ratiocination to which 
purpose, is thus set down by Tertullian: 4... se. 
“God made all things, either out of him-_ mog. p, 282. 
self, or out of nothing, or out of matter. ““* 

He could not make all things out of himself, be- 
cause himself being always unmade, he should 
then really have been the maker of nothing: and 
he did not make all out of nothing, because being 


410 THE MATERIARIANS 


essentially good, he would have made nihil non 
optimum, every thing in the best manner, and. ‘so 
there could have been no evil in the world; but 
since there are evils, and these could not pro- 
ceed from the will of God, they must needs arise 
from the fault of something, and therefore of the — 
matter, out of which things were made.” Lastly, 
it is sufficiently known, likewise, that some mo- 
dern sects of the Christian profession, at this 
day, do also assert the’ uncreatedness of the 
matter. ‘But these suppose, in like manner as 
the Stoics did, body to be the only substance. 
vir. Now of all these, whosoever they were, 
who thus maintained two self-existent principles, 
God and the matter, we may pronounce univer- 
. Sally, that they were neither better nor worse, 
than a kind of imperfect Theists. 

They had a certain notion or idea of God, such 
as it was, which seems to be the very same with 
that expressed in Aristotle,* Zoov douwrov aisiov, an 
animal the best, eternal; and represented also 
by Epicurus in this manner,° Zwov wacav Eyov paka- 
plornra per apOapoiac’ an animal, that hath all HD: 
piness with incorruptibility.— 

Wherein it was acknowledged by them, that 
besides senseless matter, shere was also an ani- 
malish and conscious or perceptive nature, self 
existent from eternity ; in opposition to Atheists, 
who made matter either devoid of all manner of 
life, or at least of such as is animalish and con- 
scious, to be the sole principle of all things. For 
it ‘hath been often observed, that some Atheists 
attributed a kind of plastic life or nature to that 


* Mctaphys. lib. xiv. cap. viii. p. 479. tom. iv. oper. 
* Vide Diogen, Lacrt. lib. x. segm, 123. p. 655. 


| IMPERFECT. THEISTS. 411 
matter, which they made to be the only principle 
of the universe. And these two sortsof Atheisms 
were long since taken notice of by Se- 
neca, in these words: “ Universum, in p%;$"s- 
quo nos quoque sumus, expers esse con- 
silii, et aut ferri temeritate quadam, aut natura 
nesciente quid faciat.”. The Atheists make the 
universe, whereof ourselves are part, to be de- 
void of counsel; and, therefore, either to be car- 
ried on'temerariously and fortuitously, or‘else by . 
such a nature, as which (though it be orderly, re- 
cular, and methodical) yet is, notwithstanding, 
nescient of what it doth.—But no Atheist éver 
acknowledged conscious animality to be a first 
principle in the universe ; nor that the whole was 
governed by any aauenl ch: sentient, and under- 
standing nature, presiding over it as the head of 
it; but as it was before declared, they concluded - 
all animals and animality, all conscious, sentient, 
and self-perceptive life, to be generated and cor- 
rupted, or educed out of nothing, and reduced to 
nothing again. Wherefore they, who, on the con- 
trary, asserted animality and conscious life to be 
a first principle or unmade thing in the universe, 
are to be accounted Theists. ‘Thus Balbus in 
Cicero declares, that to be a Theist is to assert, 
« Ab animantibus principiis mundum esse genera- 
tum,” that the world was generated or produced 
at first from animant principles ;—and that it is 
also still governed by such a nature ; “ Res omnes 
subjectas esse nature sentienti,” that all things 
are subject to a sentient and conscious nature, 
steering and guiding of them.— | 


_ * De Natura Deor. i ii. sect. xxx. p. 299. tom. ix. oper. 


412 ~ THE MATERIARIANS 


But to distinguish this Divine animal from all 
others, these definers added, that 1t was agrov 
and paxapwirarov, the best and most happy animal; 
—and, accordingly, this difference is added to 
that generical nature of animality by Balbus the 
Stoic, to make up the idea or definition of God 

complete: ‘‘ Talem esse deum certa 
Daas notione animi presentimus ; primum, ut 
ae Pp. eee sit animans; deinde, ut in omni natura 

nihil illo sit prestantius.” We presage 
concerning God, by a certain notion of our mind ; 
first, that he is an animans, or consciously living 
being; and then, secondly, that he is such an ani- 
mans, as that there is nothing in the whole uni- _ 
yerse, or nature of things, more excellent than 
him.— 7 
Wherefore these Materiarian Theists acknow- 
edged God to be a.perfectl y-understanding bemg, 
and such as had also power over the whole matter 
of the universe; which was utterly unable to 
move itself, or to produce any thing without him. 
And all of them, except the Anaxagoreans,* con- 
cluded, that he-was the creator of all the forms of 
inanimate bodies, and of the souls of animals. 
However, it was universally agreed upon amongst 
them, that he was at least the orderer and dis- 
- poser of all; and that, therefore, he might upon 
that account well be called the Sntovery9e> the 
maker or framer of the world. 

N otwithstanding which, so long as they r main- 
tained matter to exist independently upon God, 
and sometimes also to be refractory and contu- 
macious to him, and by that means to be the 
cause of evil, coutrary to the Divine will; it is 


Vide Diogen. Lacrt. lib. ii. segm. 9. p. 85. 


IMPERFECT THEISTS. 413 


plain, that they could not acknowledge the Di- 
vine omnipotence, according to the full and pro- — 
per sense of it; which may also further appear 
- from these queries of Seneca,* concerning God : 
“ Quantum Deus possit? materiam ipse sibi for- 
- met, an data utatur? Deus quicquid vult efficiat ? 
an in multis rebus illum tractanda destituant, et 
a magno artifice prave formentur multa, non quia 
_cessat ars, sed quia id, in quo exercetur, sepe 
inobsequens arti est?” How far God’s power 
does extend? whether he makes his own matter, 
or only use that which is offered him; whether 
he can do whatsoever he will; or the fates ials in 
many things frustrate and disappoint him, and by 
that means things come to be ill framed by this 
great artificer, not because his art fails him, but 
because that which it is exercised upon, proves 
stubborn and contumacious?—Wherefore, I think, - 
we may well conclude, that those Materiarian 
Theists had not a right and genuine idea of God. 
Nevertheless, it does not, therefore, follow, 
that they must needs be concluded absolute. 
Atheists ; for there may bea latitude allowed in 
Theism. And though, in a strict: and proper 
sense, they be only ‘Theists who acknowledge one 
God perfectly omnipotent, the sole original of all 
things, and as well the cause of matter as of any 
thingelse; yet 1t seems reasonable, that such consi- 
- deration should be had of the infirmity of human’ 
_ understandings, as to extend the word further, 
that it may éomprebend within it those also, who 
assert one intellectual principle self-existent from 
eternity, the framer and governor of the whole 
world, though not the creator of the matter; and 
* Preefat. lib, i. Quest. Natur. tom. ii. oper. p. 485, 


414 THAT OMNIPOTENCE IS INCLUDED | 


that none should be condemned for absolute 
Atheists, merely because they hold eternal un-— 
created matter, unless they also deny an eternal 
unmade mind, ruling over the matter, and so 
make senseless matter the sole original of all 
things. And this is certainly most agreeable to 
common apprehensions; for Democritus and Epi- 
curus would never have been condemned for 
Atheists, merely for asserting eternal self-existent 
atoms, no more than Anaxagoras and Archelaus 
were (who maintained the same thing), had they 
not’also denied that other principle of their’s, a 
perfect mind, and concluded, that the world was 
made, padevoc Starderovroc n dtataSapévou Thy Tacay ° 
Exovros pakaglornra mer ad0agciac, without the order- 
-Ing and disposal of any understanding being, 
that had all happiness with incorruptibility — | 
vit. The true and proper idea of God, in its 
most contracted form, is this, a being absolutely 
perfect ; for this is that alone, to which necessary 
existence is essential, and of which it is demon- 
strable. Now, as absolute perfection includes in 
it all that belongs to the Deity, so does it not only 
comprehend (besides necessary existence) perfect 
knowledge or understanding; but also omni-cau- 
sality and omnipotence (in the full extent of it), 
otherwise called infinite power. God is not only 
Zoov'aprov, and “ animans quo nihil in’ omni na- 
tura prestantius,” as the Materiarian Theists de- 
scribed him, the best living being; nor, as Zeno 
Eleates* called him, xparirov ravruv, the most 
powerful of all things ;—but he is also Taykoarne, 
and TavToKparwp, and mavrecouvatoc, absol utely omni- 


Vide Aristot. Libro de Xenocrate, Zenone, ct Gor gia, Cap. lil, 
p. 840. tom. i. oper. 


IN THE DIVINE IDEA: °°  . Alo 


potent, and infinitely powerful; and, therefore, 
neither matter, nor any thing else, can exist of it- 
self independently upon God; but he is the sole 
principle and source, from which all things are 
derived. 

But because this infinite power is a thing, 
which the Atheists quarrel much withal, as if it 
_ were altogether unintelligible, and therefore im- 
possible; we shall here briefly declare the sense 
of it, and render it (as we think) easily intelligi- 
ble or conceivable, in these two following steps: 
first, that by infinite power is meant nothing else 
but perfect power, or else, as Simplicius malls it, 
dAn Svvauc, a whole and entire power,—such as 
hath no allay and mixture of impotency, nor any 
defect of power mingled with it. And _ thin, 
again, that this perfect power (which is also the 
game with infinite) is really nothing else but a 
_ power of producing and doing all whatsoever 1s 
conceivable, and which does not imply a contra- 
diction; for conception is the only measure of 
power and its extent, as shall be shewed more 
fully in due place. 

Now, here we think fit to observe, that the 
Pagan Theists did themselves also vulgarly ac- 
knowledge omnipotence as an attribute of the 
Deity; which might be oS from — pas- 
po of their writings :— 


Homer. Od. 3." | 








Oedg ardor” Err AAW 
Zerg dyabivre nandvre Sider, Sivarar yag avravee. 





——__—— Deus aliud post aliud 
Jupiter, bonumque malumque-dat, potest enim omnia. 


2 Vors. 226, 227. 


416 THAT OMNIPOTENCE If INCLUDED 
And again, Od. &. 

Otic vo iv daon, 13 T iach, 

“Orrs xiv © Giza iia, duvarar yae Swarr. 


Deus autem hoc dabit, illud omittet, 
Quodcungue ci libitum fuerit, potest enim omnia. 








To this purpose also, before Homer, Linus : 


“‘phdes warre Orv vidiva:, xai dyvere dir 


And after him, Callimachus : 
Aaigon gla: way Bare’ 


All things are possible for God to do, and no- 
thing transcends his power.— 


Thus also amongst the Latin poets, Virgil. 
fEn. I. 


Sed pater omnipotens speluncis abdidit atris. 


Again, Ain. II. 


At pater Anobises oculos ad sydera letus 
Extulit, et coelo palmas cum voce tetendit ; 
Jupiter omnipotens, precibus si flecteris ullis. 


And, Ain. IV. 


Talibus orantem dictis, arasque tencntem 
Audiit Omnipotens. 


Ovid, in like manner, Metamorph. I. 


Tam pater omnipotens misso perfregit Oly mpam 
Falmine, ot excussit subjectum Pelion Ossan. 


And to cite no more, Agatho, an ancient Greek 
poet, is commended by Aristotle, for affirming 


* Vers. 432, 433. 
* Apud Jamblichum in Vita Pythag. cap. xxviii. p. 117, LTS. 
* Apud Platarch. de Placitis Philusophor. Jib, i. cap. vii. p. BAO. tom. 


il. Oper. 


IN’ THE DIVINE IDEA. | 417 


nothing to be exempted from the power of God 
but only this, that he cannot make that not to 
have been, which hath been; that is, do what 
implies a contradiction. 
Movou yap airou, xal Osd¢ orepiocusras, | | Eth. Nic, L. 4 
"Ayimra Worl, doo ava wereanyeives c. 2. p. 98. 
tom. ill. oper. 


Hoc namque duntaxat negatum etiam Deo est, 
Quz facta sunt, infecta posse reddere. 


Lastly, that the Atheists themselves under Pa- 
‘ ganism looked upon omnipotence and _ infinite 
power as an essential attribute of the Deity, ap- 
pears plainly from Lucretius; when he tells us, 
that Epicurus, in order to the taking away of re- 
ligion, set himself to confute infinite power: 


———Omne immensum peragravit mente animeque, 1, i. vers. 
Unde refert nobis victor, quid possit oriri, 75, &e. 
Quid nequeat : finita potestas denique quoique 

Quanam sit ratione, atque alte terminus heerens. 

Quare religio pedibus subjecta vicissim 

Obteritur, nos exzequat victoria coelo. 


As if he should have said, Epicurus, by shewing 
that all power was finite, effectually destroyed 
religion: he thereby taking away the object of it, 
which is an omnipotent and infinitely powerful 
Deity. And this is a thing, which the same poet 
often harps upon again, that there is no infinite 
power, and consequently no Deity, according to 
the true idea of it. But, last of all, in his sixth 
book, he condemns religionists, as guilty of great 
_ folly, in asserting omnipotence ‘or infinite power 
(that is, a Deity), after this manner: 


Rarsts in antiquas referuntur religiones, 
Et dominos acres asciscunt, omnia posse, 
Quos miseri credunt, ignari quid queat eSS@,. 


418 KNOWLEDGE AND POWER ALONE 


Quid nequeat, finita potestas denique quoiyue, 
Quanam sit ratione, atque alte terminus hiaerens : 
Quo magis errantes fota regione ferantur. 


Where though the poet, speaking carelessly, after 
the manner of those times, seems to attribute 
omnipotence and infinite power to gods plurally ; 
yet, as it is evident in the thing itself, that this can 
only be the attribute of one supreme Deity ; soit 
may be observed, that in those passages of the 
poets before cited, it is accordingly always as- 
cribed to God singularly. Nevertheless, all the 
inferior Pagan deities were supposed by them to 
have their certain shares of this Divine ommipo- 
tence, severally dispensed and imparted to them. 
ix. But we have not yet dispatched all that 
belongs to the entire idea of God ; for knowledge 
and power alone will not make a God. For Gad 
is generally conceived by all to be a most venera- 
ble and most. desirable being ; whereas, an omni- 
scient and omnipotent arbitrary Deity, that hath 
nothing either of benignity or morality in its na- 
ture, to measure and regulate its will, as it could 
not be truly august and venerable, according to 
that maxim, sine bonitafe nulla majestas ; so veither 
could it be desirable, it being that which could 
only be feared and dreaded, but not have any 
firm faith or confidence placed in it. Plutarch, 
in the life of Aristides 2 ro sion rptot Coxe dingipe, 
agbapaic., Kat Suvaze, Kai query” ay SULVOTUTOY yy apETH Kai 
Oeoraroy tore agflaare yey yg etnay Kat rw KEvg), Kat row 
orurxeior cupfie inne Suvapuv St cerapoe Kat Kinnuvor, Kae 
wveyparay Open Kau peuparioy imigopat peyadny i yout, &c. 
God seems to excel in these three things, incor- 
ruptibility, power, and virtue; af all which the 


47322, tomo. apes, 


WILL NOT MAKE UP A GOD. 419 


inost Divine and venerable is virtue: for vacuum 
and the senseless elements have incorruptibility ; 
earthquakes, and thunders, blustering winds and 
overHowing torrents, much of power and force. 
Wherefore, the vulgar being affected three man- 
ner of ways towards the Deity, so as to admireits 
happiness, to fear it, and to honour it; they es- 
teem the Deity happy for its incorruptibility, they 
fear it and stand inawe of it for its power, but they 
worsbip it, that is, love and honour it, for its jus- 
tice. —And indeed an omnipotent arbitrary Deity 
may seem to be in some sense a worse and more 
undesireable thing, than the Manichean evil god ; 
forasmuch asthe latter could be but finitely evil, 
whereas the former might be so infinitely. How- 
ever, I think, it can be little doubted, but that the 
whole Manichean hypothesis, taken all together, 
is to be preferred before this of one omnipotent 
arbitrary Deity (devoid of goodness and moral- 
ity) ruling all things; because there the evil prin- 
ciple is yolked with another principle essentially 
good, checking and controlling it; and it also 
seems less dishonourable to God, to impute defect 
of power than of goodness and justice to him. 
Neither can power and knowledge alone make 
a being in itself completely happy; for we have 
all of us by nature pavrevua ve (as both Plato and — 
Aristotle call it) a certain divination, presage, and 
parturient vaticination in our minds, of some 
higher good and perfection than either power or 
knowledge. Kuowledge is plainly to be pre- 
ferred before power, as being that which guides 
and directs its blind force and impetus; but Aris- 
totle himself declares, that there 1s Adyou 7 Kgetrrov, 


a 


which is Asyou apyn, something better than 


420 A GOOD SUPERIOR TO 


ar reason and knowledge, which is the 


p.384.tom. principle and original of all. -For (saith 
nee he) Aoyou a aney vu Avyoc, ada tt Kptirroy” 
The principle of reason is not reason, but some- 
thing better.---Where he also intimates this to be 
the proper and essential character of the Deity; 
ri ouv an Keerrow Kat ETrarr PNG, awAny o tog: For what 
is there, that can be better than knowledge, but 
God ?— Likewise the same philosopher elsewhere 
plainly determines, that there is morality in the 
natnre of God ; and that his happiness consisteth 
principally therein, and not in external things, 
iat and the exercise of his power : ore piv 
c. 1. p. 369. OUY EXGOTIN TIE sucamoriac emifsadrat TrovouTer, 
MOM ULOPET.  Gorow TEO aperne Kat ponrnatwe, Kat Top mearrety 
xara Tavrac, torw oimnoAoyyevoy niin, praorupt ris) Oars 
Yewevare, Ge eudaizwy pity tare Kat pranaping, & avthe di 
rey tEwrt pixcy ayaber:, d\Aa ot atirdy avrag, Kat Te WOOT 
ng ear ray guow. That every man bath so mach 
of happiness, as he hath of virtue and wisdom, aad 
of acting according to these, ought to be con- 
fessed and acknowledged by us, it being a thing, 
that may be proved from the nature of Gad, who 
is happy, but not from any external goods, but be- 
cause he is himself (or that which he is) and in 
such a manner affected according to bis nature; 
— that is, because he is essentially moral and vir- 
tuous. 

Which doctrine of Aristotle's seems to have 
been borrowed from Plato, who in his dialorues 
De Republica,” discoursing about moral virtue, 
occasionally falls upon this dispute concerning the 
summum donum, or chiefest good ; wherein he con- 
clades, that it neither consisted in pleasure, as 


*De Republien, lib. vip. At7. apan, 


“Rowe ndovy Soxet etat to ayablov, TOLC Of Kom orée- 


i 


KNOWLEDGE AND POWER. 42h 


such, according to the opinion of the vulgar, nor 
yet in mere knowledge and understanding, ac- 
cording to the conceit “of others, who were more 

1 ; a ic} 4 “ \ 
polite and Ingenious. ofa ote role bev 70x Lib. 6. 
gore poovnotc” Kal Orye ot TOUTO 1YOUMEVOL OUK Eyouot 
deiEar jric poovnotc, arr’ avaykalovrat TeAEUTWVTEC Tnv TOU 


~ , 4 ef > f 
ayaou oavat, pada yeXoiws, oveOiZovrec yao, OTL OVK iopjev 


ro ayabov, Aéyoust wadw we cidoors You know that, 
to the vulgar, pleasure seems to be the highest 
good ; but to those, who are more elegant and in-. 
genious, knowledge: but they, who entertain this 
latter opinion, can none of them declare what 
kind of knowledge it is, which is that highest and 
chiefest good, but are’necessitated at last to say, 
that it is the knowledge of good, very. ridicu- 
lously: forasmuch as herein they do but run 
round in a circle, and upbraiding us for being ig- 
norant of this highest good, they talk to us at the 
same time, as knowing whatit is. And thereupon 
he adds, Kadov aupotiowy OvTwY, YVWTEWS Te Kal aAn- 
Oetac, QAXo Kat KaAXLov ert Touro N-yOUUEvOS avr0, op0we 
nynonrat. “Emornuny 8: kat adnbeav, wemTrED Pwo TE Kat 
Ow nrLoEINdn pev voile oofov, jALov 0 nyetoOat OUK opr. 
Qac, obrw Katevravba ayabosdn pev vouilew audorspa opbov, 


’ ~ e ~ > ; of ‘ 
_ayaboy o& nysic8a Ororepoy avtwv ovK opfov, add’ Ere pst 


Zovwe tnv Tov a-yabou ctu TULNTEOV. That though know- 
ledge and truth’ be both of them excellent things, 
yet he.that shall conclude the chief good to be 
something which transcends them both, will not 
be mistaken. For as light, and sight, or-the see- — 


ing faculty, may both of them rightly be said to 


be soliform things, or of kin to the sun, but nei- 
ther of them to be the sun itself; so knowledge 


and truth may likewise both of them be said to be 
VOL. I. 2£E 


422. | A GOOD SUPERIOR TO 


boniform things, and of kin to the chief good, 
but neither of them to be that chief good it- 
self; but this is still to be looked upon as a thing 
more august and ‘honourable.—In all which of 
_ Plato’s there seems to be little more, than what 
may be experimentally found within ourselves; 
namely, that there is a certain life, or vital and 
moral disposition of soul, which is much more in- 
-wardly and thoroughly satisfactory, not only than 
sensual pleasure, but also than all knowledge and 
speculation whatsoever. 

Now whatever this chiefest good be, which isa 
perfection superior to knowledge and understand- 
ing ; that philosopher* resolves, “that it must needs 
be first and principally in God, who is therefore 
called by him, ‘Isa 7 ayafov, the very idea or es- 
sence of good.— Wherein he trod in the footsteps 
of the Pythagoreans, and particularly of Timeus 
Locrus,” who, making two principles of the uni- 
verse, mind and necessity, adds, concerning the 
former, TOUTEWY TOV pev Tac T ayablou @vatoc ELULEV, Ocovre 
ovupatvecbat de yavre TWY aploTwy" The first of these 
two is of the nature of good, and it is called God, 
the principle of the best things.—Agreeably with 
which doctrine of their’s, the Hebrew Cabalists 
also make a Sephirah in the Deity, superior both 
_ to Binah and Chochmah (understanding: and wis- 

.dom), which they call Chether, or the crown. And 
some would suspect this Cabalistic learning to 
have been very ancient among the Jews, and that — 
Parmenides was imbued with it, he calling God in 
like manner oregavny, or the crown.—For which, 


* Vide Platon. de Republica, lib. ii. p. 431. et Philebum, p- 77, &ec. 


_ » Libro de Anima Mundi, cap. i. p: 543. inter a Mytholog. 
2 ‘Tho, Gale editos. 


KNOWLEDGE AND POWER. 423 


Velleius in Cicero* (representing the several opi- 
nions of philosophers concerning God), perstringes” 
him amongst the rest; “ Parmenides commenti- 
tium quiddani. corone similitudine efficit, Ste- . 
phanem appellat, continentem ardore lucis orbem, 
qui cingit ceelum, quem appellat deum.” 

But all (is while we seem to be to seek, what 
the chief and highest good superior to knowledge 
is, in which the essence of the Deity principally 
consists; andit cannot be denied, but that Plato 
sometimes talks too metaphysically and cloudily 
about it; for which cause, as he lay open to the © 
lash of ‘Aristotle, so was he also vulgarly per- 
stringed for it, as appears by that of sUpHys the 
poet in Laertius: be | 

TI? dyabdy x at grav’ kotiv, 0b od Uy ave 

Méaneie 818 radanv, Sezey olde roi” dyad, 

“H tO rot Ad raves "Ayabér: 
What good that is, which you expect from hence, 
I ae I less understand, than I do Plato’s 
good —Nevertheless, he plainly intimates these 
two things concerning'It : first, that this nature of 
good, which is also the nature of God, includes 
benignity in it, when he gives this account® of 
God’s both making the world, and after such a 
manner—*‘‘ Because he -was good, and that which 
is good, hath no envy in it; and therefore he both 
made the world, and also nade it as well, and 
as like to himself as was ‘possible.’ And, se- 
condly,. that it comprehends eminently all virtue 
and justice, the Divine Nature being the ‘first 
_ pattern hereof; for which cause virtue is defined 
* De Natura Deorum, lib. i. cap. x. p. 2895. oper. tom. ix. 


» Lib. iii. segm. 27. p. 18}. 
¢ Vide Platon. in Timzo, p. 527. 


2E2 


424 Gop, ACCORDING TO THRE SCRIPTURE, 


to be, an assimilation to the Deity. Justice and 
honesty are no factious things, made by the will 
and command of the more powerful to the weaker, 
bat they are nature and perfection, and descend 
downward to us from the Deity. 

But the Holy Scripture, without any meta- 
physical pomp and obscurity, tells us plainly, 
both what is that highest perfection of intellec- 
tual beings, which is xgarrov Aoyou Kat emorapne, 
better than reason and knowledge,—aud which is 
also the source, life, aud soul of all morality ; 
namely, that it is love or charity. Though I 
speak with the tongue of men and angels, and 
have not love, Iam but yarKos nw, 7 xuppadov 
aXadalor, as sounding brass, or a unkling cymbal, 
—which only makes a noise without any inward 
life. And though J have prophecy, and uuder- 
stand all mysteries and all knowledge, and though 
I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, 
and have notlove, I am nothing; that is, [have no 
inward satisfaction, peace, or true happiness. And 
though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, 
and give my body to be burned, and have not love, 
it profiteth me nothing ; Tam for all that uiterly 
destitute of all true morality, virtue, and grace. 
And accordingly it tells us also, in the next place, 
what the nature of God is—that he is properly nei- 
ther power nor knowledge (though having the per- 
fection of both in him), but love. And certainly 
whatever dark thoughts, concerning the Deity, 
some men in their cells may sit brooding on, it 
can never reasonably be conceived, that that 
‘which IS tkavwrarov aQravrwy Kat avraoxtoraroy, the 
most self-sufficient and self-happy being,—should 
have any narrow and selfish designs abroad, with- 


LOVE OR CHARITY. 425 


out itself, much less harbour any malignant and 
despightful ones towards its creatures. Never- 
theless, because so many are apt to abuse the no- 
tion of the Divine love and goodness, and to frame 
such conceptions of it, as destroy that awful and . 
reverential fear that ought to be had of the Deity, 

and make men presumptuous and regardless of 
_their lives ; therefore we think fit here to superadd, 

also, that God is no soft nor fond and partial love, 

but that justice is an essential branch of this Di- 

vine goodness; God being, as the writer De 

Mundo* well expresses it, vonoe icoxduvne, an impar- 

tial law ;—and as Plato,” yérpov wavrwy, the mea- 

sure of all things.—In imitation whereof, Aristo- 

tle concludes also, that a good man (in a lower 

and more imperfect sense) is pérpov too, an impar- 

tial measure of things and actions. 

It is evident, that the Atheists themselves, in 
those former times of Paganism, took it for granted, 
that goodness was an essential attribute of the 
Deity, whose existence they opposed (so that it 
was then generally acknowledged for such, by the 
Pagan Theists), from those argumentations of 
their’s, before-mentioned, the 12th and 13th, taken 
from the topic of evils, the pretended ill frame of 
things, and want of providence over human affairs. 
Which, if they were true, would not at all disprove 
such an arbitrary Deity (as ts now fancied by 
some) made up of nothing but will and. power, 
without any essential goodness and justice. But 
those arguments of the Atheists are directly level- 
led against the Deity, according to the true notion 
or idea of it; and could they be made good, 


* Cap. vi. p- 865. tom. 1. oper. Aristotelis, 
» De Legibus, lib. iv. p, 601. 


426 . . THE DIVINE IDEA 


would do execution upon the same. For it cat 
not be denied, but that the natural consequence 
of this doctrine, that there is a God essentially 
good, is this, that therefore the world is well made 
and governed. But we shall afterwards declare, 
that though there be evil in the parts of the world, 
yet there is nonein the whole; and that moral 
evils are not imputable to the Deity. 

And now we have proposed the three principal 

attributes of the Deity. The first whereof is in- 
- finite goodness with fecundity ; the second, infi- 
nite knowledge and wisdom; and the last, infinite 
active and perceptive power. From:which Di- 
vine attributes, the Pythagoreans and Platonists 
seem to have framed their trinity of archical hypos- 
tases, such as have the nature of principles in the 
universe, and which, though they apprehended as 
several distinct substances, gradually subordinate 
to one another, yet they many times extend the 
rd Oxiov SO far, as to comprehend them all within it. 
Which Pythagoric trinity seems to be intimated 
_ by Aristotle in these words: kabamep y#0 
De Cal. I. 4. ; 
c. 1. p. 610. pace Kat ot TIu8a-yooetot TO wav Kat Ta jwavra 
ia a 11 Tplot Swoisra’ As the Pythagoreans 
also say, the universe, and all things, are deter- 
mined and contained by three principles.—Of 
which Pythagoric trinity more afterwards. But 
- now we may enlarge and fill up that compendious 
idea of God premised, of a being absolutely per- 
fect, by adding thereunto (to make it more par- — 
ticular) such as infinitely good, wise, and power- 
ful, necessarily existing, and not only the framer 
of the world, but also the cause of all things. 
Which idea of the Deity is sufficient, in order to 
our present undertaking. 


MORE EXPLICATE. 427 


Nevertheless, if we would not only attend to 
what is barely necessary for a dispute with Atbe- 
ists, but also consider the satisfaction of other 
free and devout minds, that are hearty and sin- 
cere lovers of this most admirable and most glo- 
rious being, we might venture for their gratifica- 
tion to propose yet a more full, free, and copious 
description of the Deity, after this manner.—God 
is a being absolutely perfect, unmade, or self-ori- 
ginated, and necessarily existing; that hath an 
infinite fecundity in him, and virtually contains 
all things; as also an infinite benignity or over- 
flowing love, uninvidiously displaying and com- 
municating itself; together with an impartial rec- 
titude, or nature of justice; who fully compre- 
hends himself, and the extent of his own fecun- 
dity, and therefore all the possibilities of things, 
their several natures and respects, and the best 
frame or system of the whole; who hath also infi- 
nite active aud perceptive power; the fountain of 
' all things, who made all that could be made, and 
was fit to be made, producing them according to 
his own nature (his essential goodness and wis- 
- dom), and therefore according to the best pattern, 
and in the best manner possible, for the good of 
the whole; and reconciling all the variety and 
contrariety of things in the universe into one most 
admirable and lovely harmony. Lastly, who con- 

tains and upholds all things, and governs them 
after the best manner also, and that without any 
force or violence, they being all naturally subject 
to his authority, and readily obeying his law. 
_And now we see, that God is such a being, as 
that, if he could be supposed not to be, there is 


428 THE IDEA OF GOD 


nothing whose existence a good mau could possi 
- bly more wish or desire. 

x. From the idea of God thus declared, it 
evidently appears, that there can be but one such 
being, and that Movwoe, unity, oneliness, or singu- 
larity is essential to it; forasmuch as there can- 
not possibly be more than one Supreme, more 
than one Omnipotent, or iniinitely powerful Being, 
and more than one cause of all things besides it- 
self. And however Epicurus, endeavourmg to 
pervert and adulterate the notion of God, pre- 
tended to satisfy that natural prolepsis or antici- 
pation in the mindy of men, by a feigned and 
counterfeit asserting of a multiplicity of co-ordi- 
nate deities, independeut upon one Supreme, 
and such as were also altogether unconcerned 
either in the frame or government of the world, 
yet himself, notwithstanding, plainly took notice 
of this idea of God, which we have proposed, 
including unity or oneliness in it (he professedly 
opposing the existence of such a Deity); as may 
sufficiently appear from that argumentation of 
his, in the words before cited : 


Lib. ap. . Quisregere nnmensi summam, quit habere profumds 
198. Lamb. Inde manu validas potis est moderanter hiabenas ? 
Quis pariter corlos omnes convertere, ut omnes 
Iguibus wtheriis terras suflire fcraces! 
Omnibus ingue locis esse ornni tempore pracste ? 


Where he would conclude it to he a thine ut- 
terly impossible, for the Deity to animad-vert, 
order, and dispose all things, and be present 
every where in all the distant places of the world 
at once; which could not be pretended of a miul- 
titude of co-ordinate gods, shartur the govern- 


ESSENTIALLY INCLUDES UNITY. 429° 


iment of the world amongst them ; and, therefore, 
it must needs be levelled against a Divine mo- 
narchy, or one single, solitary, supreme Deity, 
ruling over all. As, in hike manner, when he 
pursues the same argument further in Cicero, to 
this purpose, that though such a thing were sup- 
posed to be possible, yet it would be, notwith- 
standing, absolutely mconsistent with the happi-- 
ness of any being, he still proceeds upon the 
same hypothesis of one sole and single 

Deity: .“ Sive ipse mundus Deus est, 1.4. cap.xx. 
quid potest esse minus quietum, quam Pom 
nullo puncto temporis intermisso, ver- 

Sarl circum axem cceli admirabili celeritate? sive 
in ipso mundo Deus inest aliquis, qui regat, qui 
gubernet; qui cursus astrorum, mutationes tem- 
porum, hominum commoda vitasque tueatur; ne 
ille est implicatus molestis negotiis et operosis.” 
Whether you will suppose the world itself to 
be a God, what can be more unquiet, than with- 


De Nat. D. 


out intermission perpetually to whirl round upon © - 


the axis of the heaven with such admirable cele- 
rity? or whether you will imagine a God in the 
world distinct from it, who does govern and dis- 
pose all things, keep up the courses of the stars, 
the successive changes df the seasons, and order- 
ly vicissitudes of things, and contemplating lands 
and seas, conserve the utilities and lives of men; 

certainly he must needs be involved in much s0- 
licitous trouble and employment.—For, as Epi- 
curus here speaks singularly, so the trouble of 
this theocracy could not be thought so very great 
toa multitude of co-ordinate deities, when par- 
celled out among them, but would rather séem, 
to be but a sportful and delightful divertisement 


430 THE CHIEF OBJECTION TO THIS IDEA, 
to each of them. Wherefore it is manifest, that 
such an idea’ of God, as we have declared, in- 
cluding unity, oneliness and singularity in it, is a 
thing, which the ancient Atheists, under the times 
of Paganism, were not unacquainted with, but 
principally directed their force against. But 
this may seem to be anticipated in this place, be- 
cause it will fall in afterwards more opportunely 
to be discoursed of again. ; 
xt. For this is that, which lies as the grand 
prejudice and objection against that idea of God, 
which we have proposed, essentially including 
povusw, Singularity or oneliness in it, or the real 
existence of such a Deity, asis the sole monarch 
of the universe; because all the nations of the 
world heretofore (except a small and inconsider- 
able handful of the Jews), together with their 
wisest men, and greatest philosophers, were gene- 
rally looked upon as Polytheists, that is, such as 
acknowledged and worshipped a multiplicity of 
‘ gods. -Now one God, and many gods, being di- 
rectly contradictious to one another, it is there- 
fore concluded from hence, that this opinion of 
monarchy, or of one supreme God, the maker 
and governor of all, hath no foundation in nature, 
nor in the genuine ideas and prolepses of men’s 


minds, but is a mere artificial thing, owing its ori- 


ginal wholly to private fancies and conceits, or to 
positive laws and institutions, » mpOneer Jews, 
Christians, and Mahometans. | 

For the assoiling of which difficulty (seeming 
so formidable at first sight), it is necessary that 
we should make a diligent inquiry into the true 
and genuine sense of this Pagan Polytheism. For 
since it is impossible, that any man in his wits 


{ 


’ FROM THE PAGAN POLYTHEISM. A3l 


should believe a multiplicity of gods, according 
' to that idea of God before declared, that is, a mul- 
tiplicity of supreme, omnipotent, or infinitely 
powerful beings; it is certain, that the Pagan Po- 
lytheism, and multiplicity of gods, must be under- 
stood according to some other notion of the word 
gods, or some equivocation in the use of it. It 
hath been already observed, that there were some - 
time amongst the Pagans such, who, meaning no- 
thing else by gods but understanding beings su- 
perior to men, did suppose a multitude of such 
deities, which yet they conceived to be all (as 
well as men) native and mortal, generated suc- 
cessively out of matter, and corrupted again into 
it, as Democritus’s idols were. But these Theo-— 
gonists, who thus generated all things whatsoever, - 
and therefore the gods themselves universally, qut 
of night and chaos, the ocean or fluid matter (not- 
withstanding their using the name gods) are. 
plainly condemned both by Aristotle and Plato 
for downright Atheists, they making senseless | 
matter the only self-existent thing, and the origi- 
nal of all things. : 

Wherefore there may be ahethens agian of the 
word gods, as taken for understanding beings su- 
perior to men, that are not only immortal, but 
also self-existent and unmade. . And, indeed, the 
assertors of a multiplicity of such gods as these, 
though they. cannot be accounted Theists in a 
strict and proper sense (according to that idea of 
-God before declared), yet they are not vulgarly 
reputed Atheists neither, but looked upon as a 
kind of middle thing betwixt both, and commonly 
called Polytheists. Thereason whereof seems to 
be this, because it 1s generally apprehended to be 


432 IRRATIONALITY OF THE OPINION 


essential to Atheism, to make senseless matter the 
sole original of all things, and consequently to 
‘suppose all conscious intellectual. beings to be 
made or generated. Wherefore they, who, on the 
contrary, assert (not one but) many understand- 
ing beings unmade and self-existent, must needs be 
looked upon as those who, of the two, approach 
nearer to Theism than to Atheism, and so deserve 
rather to be called Polytheists than Atheists. 

And ‘there is no question to be made, but that 
the urgers of the forementioned objection against 
that idea of God, which includes oneliness and 
singularity in it, from the Pagan Polytheism, or 
niultiplicity of gods, take it for granted, that this 
is to be understood of many unmade selfexistent 
deities, independent upon one Supreme, that are 
so many first principles in the universe, and par- 
tial causes of the world. And certainly, if it 
could be made to appear, that the Pagan Poly- 
theists did universally acknowledge such a mul- 
tiplicity of unmade, self-existent deities, then the 
argument fetched from thence, against the natu- 
rality of that idea of God proposed (essentially 
including singularity in it), might seem to have 
no small force or validity in it. 

x11. But, first, this opinion of many self-exist- 
ent deities, independent upon one Supreme, is 
both very irrational in itself, and also plainly re- 
pugnant to the phenomena. We say, first, it is 
irrational in itself, because self-existence and ne- | 
cessary existence being ‘essential to a perfect 
being, and .to nothing else, it must needs be very 
irrational and absurd to suppose a multitude of 
imperfect understanding beings self-existent, and 
no perfect one. Moreover, if imperfect under- | 


OV MANY SELF-EXISTENT DEITIES. 433. 


standing beings were imagined to exist of them- 
selves from eternity, there could not possibly be 
any reason given, why just so many of: them 
should exist, and neither more nor less, there 
being indeed no reason why any at all should. 
But if it be supposed, that these many self-exist- - 
ent deities happened only to exist thus from eter- 
nity, and their existence, notwithstanding, was 
not necessary, but contingent; the consequence 
hereof will be, that they might as well happen _ 
again to cease to be, and so could not be incor- 
ruptible. Again, if any one imperfect being what- 
soever could exist of itself from eternity, then 
all might as well do so, not only matter, but also 
the souls. of men, and other animals; and, conse- 
quently, there could be no creation by any Deity, _ 
nor those supposed deities therefore deserve that 
name. Lastly, we might also add, that there 
could not be a multitude of intellectual beings 
selfexistent, because it is a thing, which may be 
proved by reason, that all imperfect understand- 
ing beings or minds do partake of. one perfect 
mind, and suppose also omnipotence or infinite 
power; were it not, that this is a consideration — 
too remote from vulgar apprehension, and there- 
fore not so fit to be urged in this place. 

Again, as this opinion of many self-existent 
deities.is irrational in itself, so is it likewise plain- | 
ly repugnant to the phenomena of the world. In 
which, as Macrobius writes,* omnia sunt connexa, 
all things conspire together into one harmony, 
and are carried on peaceably and quietly, con-. 
stantly and evenly, without any tumult or hurly- 
burly, ‘confusion or disorder, or the least appear- 


Tn Somn. Scip. hb, i. cap. xiv. ees 75. 


434 THE PAGAN DEITIES NOT ALL UNMADE, 


ance of schism and faction; which could not pos- 
sibly be supposed, were the world made and go- 
verned by a rabble of selfexistent deities, co-or- 
dinate, aud independent upon one Supreme. 
Wherefore this kind of Polytheism was 
sie in” obiter thus confuted by Origen: riam ote 
Mae Cantas Bidrioy ro eK Twr Ocwptvey rabouevoy roic Kara 

| ray svrakiay rou Koonov oie tov Syatoupyor 
aurov Evoc Ovroc éva, Kat CUT VEQYTOC avrou OX G tau, Kee 
Sa rovro wy Suvaudévou ure TroAA@y Snmavpywy yryordvat, 
we ovd) ure wokAGY yYuywov cuviyeaba OAoY roy oncavay 
xwovowy; Llow much better is it, agreeably to 
what we see in the harmonious system of the 
world, to worship one only maker of the world, 
which is one, and couspiring throurhout with its 
whole self, and therefore could not be made by 
inany artificers, as veither be contained by many 
souls, moving the whole heaven?—Now since 
this opinion is both irratioual in itself, and repug- 
nant to the phenomena, there is the leas probabi- 
lity, that it should have been received and enter- 
tained by all the more intelligent Pagans. 

xu. Who, that they did vot thus umversally 
look upon all their gods as so many unomade selt- 
existent beings, is unquestionably manifest from 
hence, because ever since Hesiod’s and Homer's 
time at least, the Greekish Pagans generally ac- 
knowledged a theogonia, a generation, and tem- 
porary production of the gods; which yet is not 
to be understood universally neither, forasmuch 
as he is no Theist, who does not acknowledge 
some self-existent deity. Concerning this theo- 
Futer.p.o3, conta, Herodotus writeth after this wan- 
Nh. Sap. ners Gbex yep tyiviro ¢ tkadroc row Guar, ere 


a3. p. 109, 
edit, Gromov. age naa WUPree, oxo ri TIVEG reat uteaa, aun 


| = 


BECAUSE THEY HELD A THEOGONIA. 435 


- Hrteréaro. meat ov TowHy ‘TS Kat ye, We ELITE Lovo" 
“Hatesor yap Kat. “Opunoov nAUkiny TEeTpaxoaiotst ETECL , 
Soxéw pev mpeaPuripouc yevéoOat, Kat ov m)éoot. ovrot oe. 

"tat ol moimaavrec Osoyoviay “EXAnot, kat rowst Qeorct rac 
érwvuuiac Sovrec. Whence every one of the gods 
was generated, or whether they all of them ever 
were, and what are their forms, is a thing that 
was not known till very lately; for Hesiod and 
Homer were (as I suppose) not above four hun- 
dred years my seniors. And these were they, 
who introduced the theogonia among the Greeks, 
and gave the gods their several names:—that 1s, 
settled the Pagan theology. Now, if before He- 
siod’s and Homer’s time, it were.a thing not known 
or determined amongst the Greeks, whether their 
gods were generated, or all of them existed from 
eternity ; then it was not universally concluded 
by them, that they were all unmade and self-ex- 
istent. And though, perhaps, some might in those 
ancient times believe one way, and some another, 
concerning the generation and eternity of their 
gods; yet it does not follow, that they, who 
thought them to be all eternal, must there- 
fore needs suppose them to be also unmade or 
-sélf-existent. For Aristotle, who asserted the 
eternity of the world, and consequently also of 
those gads of his, the heavenly bodies, did not, 
for all that, suppose them to be self-existent 
or first principles, but all to depend upon one 
principle or original Deity. And, indeed, the 
true meaning of that question in Herodotus, whe- 
ther the gods were. generated or existed ‘all of 
them from eternity, is (as we suppose) really no 
other than that of Plato’s, Pa yéyovev O KOopoc 4 aye- 
‘yn¢ gore’ ‘Whether the world were made or unmade? 


436 THE HESIODIAN GODS, 


—and whether it had a temporary beginning, or 
existed such as it is from eternity; which wil be 
more fully declared afterwards. But ever since 
Hesiod’s and Homer's time, that the theogonia or 
generation of the gods was settled, and generally 
believed amongst the Greeks, it is certain, that 
they could not possibly think all their gods eter- 
nal, and therefore much less unmade and sclf- 
existent. 

But though we have thus clearly proved, that 
all the Pagan gods were not universally accounted 
by them so many unmade self-existent deities, 
they acknowledging a theogonia, or a generation 
of gods; yet it may be suspected, notwithstand- 
ing, that they might suppose a multitude of them 
also (and not only one) to have been unmade 
from cternity and self-existent. Wherefore we 
add, in the next place, that no such a thing does 
at all appear neither, as that the Pagans or avy 
others did ever publicly or professedly assert a 
multitude of unmade self-existent deities. For, 
first, it is plain concerning the Hesiodian gods, 
which were all the gods of the Greekish Pagans, 
that either there was but one of them only seli- 
existent, or else none at all. Because Hesiod's 
gods were either all of them derived from chaos 
(or the floating water), love itself being generated 
likewise out of it (according to that Aristophanic 
tradition before-mentioned); or else love was sup- 
posed to be a distinct principle from chads, name- 
ly, the active principle of the universe, from 
whence, together with chaos, all the theozonia 
and cosmogonia was derived. Now, if the former 
of these were true, that Hesiod supposed all his 
gods universally to have been generated and 


THE DITHEISTIC DOCTRINE. 437 


sprung originally from chaos, or the ocean ; then 
it is plain, that notwithstanding all that rabble of 
gods mustered up by him, he tould be no other 
than one of those Atheistic Theogonists before- 
mentioned, and really acknowledged no God at 
all, according to the true idea of him ; he being not 
a Theist, who admits of no selfexistent Deity. 
But if the latter be true,. that Hesiod supposed 
' love to be a principle distinct from chaos, namely. 
the active principle of the universe, and derived 
all his other gods from thence, he was then aright _ 
paganic Theist, such as acknowledged indeed 
many gods, but only one of them unmade and 
self-existent, all the rest being generated or created 
by that one. Indeed, it appears from 
those passages of Aristotle, before cited ****° ** 
by us, that that philosopher had been sometimes 
divided in his judgment concerning Hesiod, where 
he should rank him, whether among the Atheists 
or the Theists. For in his book De Celo he ranks 
him amongst those, who made all things to be ge- 
nerated and corrupted, besides the bare substance 
of the matter, that is, amongst the absolute Athe- 
ists, and looked upon him as a ringleader of them; 
but in his Metaphysics, upon further thoughts, 
suspects, that many of those, who made love the 
chiefest of the gods, were Theists, they supposing 
it to be a first principle in the universe, or the | 
active cause of things, and that not only Parme- 
~ nides, but also Hesiod, was such. Which latter 
- opinion of his is by far the more probable, and 
therefore embraced by Plutarch,* who somewhere 
determines Hesiod to have asserted one Ocov ayévyn- 
rov, or unmade Deity; as also by the ancient scho- 
@ De Placitis Philosophor. lib, i. cap. vi. p. 880. 
VOL. I. 2F 


438 THE VALENTINIAN EONS 


last upon him, writing thus, that Hesiod’s love 
WAS 0 ovpaving Fows, O¢ Kal Qedc’ o yap te “Agpatirns 
vewreoog tory’ Tht heavenly love, which is also 
God ; that other love, that was born of Venus, he- 
lng junior.—But Joannes Diaconus 3 towra 8 tvrau- 
$a DORT ON ou Tor THE “Agpotiene Taioa, Wwe yap TH MA 
TeOg fn TW yeyorwac ovrag mageyerac; aX’ addov rive 
mpenfuyeviy Epwra. oma Cf thy tyxatiomagniy puoiwe 
KONTENY atriay EXAGTY) rw Oran. By love here (saith 
he), we must not understand Venus’s son, whose 
mother was as yet unborn, but another more an- 
cient love, which I take to be the active cause or 
principle of motion, naturally inserted into things. 
—Where, though he do not seem to suppose this 
love to be God himself, yet he conceives it to be 
an active principle in the universe derived from 
God, and not from matter. But this epinion will 
be further confirmed afterward. 

The next considerable appearance ofa multitude 
of self-existent deities, seems to be in the Valenti- 
mian thirty gods and wons, which have been taken 
by some for such; but it is certain, that these were 
all of them, save one, generated; they being de- 
rived by that fantastic deviser of them, from one 
self-originated deity, called Bythus. For thus 
Yer. $1. Epiphanius informs us, rplakevra yap Kar 
ane : P ne ouroc Grove Kai Awvac¢ xat Ovpavous BowAera: 
Tapecayey, wy oO mpwrog tore BuOoge = This 
(Valentinus) would also introduce thirty gods and 
zeons, and heavens, the first of which is Bythus ; 
—he meaning thereby an unfathomable depth and 
profundity ; and therefore, this Bythus was also 
called by him, O avorarw Kat axarovdstacro¢ waTnp, the 
highest and ineffable Father. 

We do indeed acknowledge, that there have 


WERE ALL GENERATED, EXCEPT ONE. 439 


‘been some, who have really asserted a duplicity 
of gods, in the sense declared, that is, of animal- 
ish or perceptive beings self-éxistent; one as the 
principle of good, and the other of evil. And 
this Ditheism of theirs seems to be the nearest ap- . 
proach, that was ever really made to Polytheism ; _ 
unless we should here give heed to Plutarch,* who 
seems to make the ancient. Persians, besides their 
two gods, the good and the evil, or Oromasdes 
and Arimanius, to have asserted also a third 
middle deity, called. by them, Mithras; or to some 
ecclesiastic writers, who impute a trinity of gods 
to Marcion’ (though Tertullian’ be yet more li- 
beral, and increase the number to an ennead). For 
those, that were commonly called Tritheists, be-. 
ing but mistaken Christians and Trinitarians, fall 
not under this consideration. Now, as for that 
forementioned Ditheism, or opinion of two gods, a 
‘good and an evil one, it is evident, that its origi- 
nal sprung from nothing else, but first a firm per- 
suasion of the essential goodness’ of the Deity, 
together with a conceit, that the evil that is in the 
world, was altogether inconsistent and unrecon- 
cilable with the same; and that, therefore, for the 
solving of this phenomenon, it was absolutely ne- 
_cessary to suppose another animalish principle 
self-existent, or an evilgod. Wherefore, as these 
Ditheists, as to all.that which is good in the world, 
held a monarchy, or one sole principle and ori- 
_ ginal; so itis plain, that had it not been for this 
business of evil (which they conceived could not 

4 De Iside et Osiride, tom. ii. p. 369. 

b Vide Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. v. cap. xiii. p. 177. etauctores illos 
quos Jo. Bapt. Cotelerius laudat ad Constit. Apost. p. 339. tom. 1. Pa- 


trum Apostol. 
¢ Libro i. adversus Marcionem, cap. xvi. p. 237, 238. 


2E2 


440 PLUYARCH A DITHEIST, OR ASSERTOR 


be solved any other way) they would never have 
asserted any more principles or gods than one. 

The chiefest and most emiment assertors of 
which ditheistic doctrine of two self-existent ant 
malish principles in the universe, a good vod and 
an evil demon, were the Marcionites and the Ma- 
nicheans; both of which, though they made sone 
slight pretences to Christianity, yet were not by 
Christians owned for such. But it is certain, that 
besides these, and before them too, some of the 
professed Pagans also entertained the same opt 
pion, that famous moralist, Platarchus Chioro- 
nensis being an undoubted patron of it; which in 
his book De fside ef Osiride he represents, with 
some little difference, after this manner 2 saueynien 
Pap yap n raves Tov Koanou yrrtae amt ovaradic o& 
ivarvriwn, ov pew icortiaay Cuvaner, dAda TNE 
Bedrriavec ro Kparoc tori’ amrodighat & ray gavAny marta: 
Taow adivaroy, TOhAHY ply EeMeguemay ros oapart, TOAANY 
de 7 puy TOU Wavroc, att wEOG ry (Jerriova cuca yougay. 
The generation and constitution of this world is 
mixed of contrary powers or principles (the one 
rood, the other evil), yet so as that they are not 
beth of equal force, but the better of them more 
prevalent : notwithstanding which, it is also abso- 
lutely impossible for the worser power or principle 
to be ever utterly destroyed, much of it being 
always intermingled in the soul, and much in the 
body of.the universe, there perpetually tugging 
against the better principle. 

Indeed, learned men of later times have, for 
the most part, looked upon Plutarch here, but 
either as a bare relater of the opinion of other 
philosophers, or else asa follower only, and not a 
leader init. Notwithstanding which, it is evident, 


OF AN EVIL PRINCIPLE. 4A 


that Plutarch was himself heartily engaged in this 
opinion, he discovering no small fondness for it, 
in sundry of his other writings; as, for example, 
in his Platonic questions, where he thus declares 
himself concerning it, 7 70 mOXAdKiG up P. 1003. Par. 
nuwy Aeyouevov adnOéc est, 7 pev yao ayoug ‘tm. i. oper. 
yoy, Kal To dpoppov SW fLa, ouvurnp Kav dXAmrore a ely Kal 
TO oudéregov QUTWY, yéveow zyev OVvoEé a apyny™ or else that 
which is often affirmed by us is true, that a mad 
irrational soul, and an unformed disorderly body, 
did co-exist with one another from eternity, nei- 
ther of them having any generation or beginning. 
—And in his Timean Psychogonia he does at 
Jarge industriously maintain the same, there and 
_ elsewhere* endeavouring to establish this doctrine, 
‘as much as possibly he could, upon rational foun- 
dations. As, first, that nothing can be made or 
produced without a cause; and therefore there 
must of necessity, be some cause of evil also, and 
that a. positive one too; he representing the opi- 
_nion of those as very ridiculous, who would make 
the nature of evil to be but éracdsiov, an accidental 
. appendix to the world, and all that evil which is 
in it, to have come in only by the bye, and by con- 
sequence, without any positive cause. .Secondly, 
that God being essentially good could not possibly 
-be the cause of evil, where he highly applauds 
Plato for removing God to the greatest distance 
imaginable from being the cause ofevil. ‘Thirdly, 
that as God could not, so neither could iAn azote, 
matter in itself devoid of all form and quality, 
be the cause of evil, noting this to have been the 
subterfuge of the Stoics. Upon which account 


2 Libro de Iside et Osiride, p.369, ee Psychogon. p- 1014, 1015. toms. 
li, oper. 


442 PLUTARCH A DITHEIST, OR ASKERTOR 


he often condemns them, but uncertainly, some- 
times as such, who assigned no cause at all of 
evils, and sometimes again as those, who made 
God the cause of them. For in his Psychogonia’ 
he concludes, that unless we acknowledge a sub- 
stantial evil principle, at Srowat KaraXanp arouse 
NHAC aroplal, TO KRAKOV EK TOU {tn Oyrag avatriwg Kat ayeryné 
Tot ErEoayourec, Ext TWYYE avra ovre to a@yabor, oure tH 
Grotov, xKoc Loru oUoiay KaKoU Kal youeow ragacyew The 
Stoical difficulties will of necessity overtake and 
involve us, who introduce evil into the world from 
nothing, or without a cause, since neither that 
which is essentially good (as God), nor yet that 
which is devoid of all quality (as matter), could 
possibly give being or generation to it.-- But i 
his book against the Stoics,” he accuses them ar 
those, who made God, essentially good, the cause 
of evil. Avrot rny xaxay doyny ayalloy Ovra row Poy 
HOWOVG, ov yap vA TO Kaxor t© aurne Tapes YAKEY, drucne 
"yap tort Kat Tacag doag Of yerat Stapopac, vO TOV RMOvNTOC 
avryy Kat aynparileyroc torynKev™ WOTk GwyYKYN TO KaKOY, 
et me ee ouetr, ix TOU 403) Ovroc, Loeb Cu ray Kieucan dayne 
éx tau Orov yeyorog uragyew? “Themselves make God 
being good the principle and cause of evil, since 
matter, which is devoid of quality, and receives al] 
its differences from the active principle that moves 
and forms it, could not possibly be the cause 
thereof. Wherefore, evil must of necessity, cither 
come from nothing, or else it must come from the 
active and moving principle, which ix God.—- Now 
from all these premises joined together, Plutarch 
concludes, that the phenomenon of evil could ne 
otherwise possibly be solved, than by SUPPOSE 
a substantial principle for it, and a certain irra- 


* P. 1O1S, tom. i. oper, » OP LO7G. torn. a Oper, 


OF AN EVIL PRINCIPLE. - 443 


tional and maleficent soul or demon, unmade, 
and co-existing with God and matter from eter- 
nity, to have been the cause thereof. And ac- 
cordingly he resolves, that as whatsoever is good 
in the soul and body of the universe, and likewise 
in the souls of men and demons, is to be ascribed 
to God as its only original; so whatsoever is evil, 
irregular and disorderly in them, ought to be im- 
puted to this other substantial principle, a yvyn 
avoue kai Kakorowe, an irrational and maleficent soul 
or demon,—which insinuating itself every where 
throughout the world, is all along intermingled 
with the better principle :* cat yy wav etvat Epyov rou 
Oeou thy Yvynyv, So that neither the soul of the uni- 
verse, nor that of men and demons, .was wholly 
the workmanship of God, but the.lower, brutish, 
and disorderly part of them the ee of the evil 
principle. | 
- But, besides all this, it is adie that Plutarch 
‘was also strongly possessed with a conceit, that 
nothing substantial could be created (no not by 
Divine power) out of nothing pre-existing; and, 
therefore, that all the substance of whatsoever is . 
in the world, did exist from eternity unmade; so 
that God was only the orderer or the methodizer 
and harmonizer thereof. Wherefore, as he con- 
cluded, that the corporeal world was not created 
by God out of nothing, as to the substance of it, 
but only the pre-existing matter, which before 


.. moved disorderly, was brought into this regular 


order and harmony by him; " like manner he re- 
solved, that the soul of the world (for such a thing 
is always supposed by him) was not made by God 
out of nothing neither, nor out of any thing inani- 


2 Plutarch, de Anime. Procreat. ex Timzo, p. 1027. 


444 PLUTARCH 8 GROUNDS FOR AN 


mate and soul-less pre-existing, but out of a pre- 
existing disorderly soul, was brought inte an or- 
DePircbog. erly and regular frame ; axasuia yag qv ra 
p. 10td. Par. woo TNE TOV KOMpOU yeveretie, anode 2 OUK 
aowparoc vvee axiwnrog, ovee aduyoc, adda apnggar piv Kal 
acvcraror TO owparixoy, tamwAnKroy Ct Kat aAoyor ra AIVyren 
KOV éyouca’ TOUTO ce nv avacnosria buyne aur tL savane 
Aoyou" o yap Mog obre cwpa ro aowuaroy, oUTE Peyay ro 
apuyov trometer, GAN wamen aguricor avena, Ke. There 
was unformed matter before this orderly world 
was made, which matter was not incorpercal, nor 
pninoved or inammate, but body discomposed and 
acted by a furious and irrational mover, the de- 
formity whereof was the disharmony of a soul in 
it, devoid of reason. Fur God neither made body 
out of that which was no body, nor seul out of ne 
soul. But as the musician, who neither makes 
voice nor wotion, does by ordering af them, net- 
withstanding, produce harmony; so God, though 
he neither made the tangible and resisting suly 
atance of body, nor the fantastic aud self-mov- 
ing power of soul, yet taking both those principles 
preexisting (the one of which was dark and oly 
scure, the other turbulent and irrational, and or- 
derly disposing and harmonizing of them. he did 
by that means produce this most beautiful and 
perfect arnmal of the world.-~And further, to the 
Same Purpose - avy aaparoe arkiwe, une oyxon ant 
vAnc, GAXa oUMET OAC regi oped Kat KaAAOvE Kal onaoeTrytN, 
ny 0 Gene warns Kat enponz you" raura Cet cravotisdar Kai rept 
Yuyne, we TV pow ore uTe rut fea yevoudene ovrs xe 
opou Quyny ovaav, adda tira davracriKne Kai Cokanria ne, 
adoyou ci Kal araKrou popac Kat opRen¢ suvauey AUTORIDyTOY 
Kat aukarnroy’ Thy ce auTod 0 Oeoe Gta gnomayt yes, TEC AOD. 


* - 4 é . ’ s a ? b= , 
ol anPnoic Kear Anyorg, PYRATOIT YOU HOTA Tow Kad piN 
«€ 


EVIL GOD, OR UNMADE SOUL. 445 


yeyovoroc yevyntny ovcav. God was not the cause or 
_ maker of body simply, that is, neither of bulk nor 
matter, but only of that symmetry and pulchritude 


'' -which is in body, and that likeness which it hath 


to himself; which same ought to be concluded 
also concerning the soul of the world, that the 
substance of it was not made by God neither ; nor | 
yet that it was always the soul of this world, but 
at first a certain self-moving substance, endowed 
with a fantastic power; irrational and disorderly, 
existing such of itself from eternity, which God, 
by harmonizing, and introducing into it fitting 
numbers and proportions, made to be thesovl and 
prince of this generated world.—According to 
which doctrine of Plutarch’s, in the supposed 
soul of the world, though it had a temporary be- 
ginning, yet was it never created out of nothing, 
but only that, which pre-existed disorderly, being 

acted by the Deity, was brought into a regular 
frame. And therefore he concludes, y Yvyn vov 
prac youca Kat Noyigpov Kat aouoviac, ouk Epvyov EOTL TOU ° 
~“Oeou povov, a\Xa Kat [Ep0C, ‘ove’ um avTou, aAr an avrov; 
.kat & avrov yéyovev’ Soul partaking of mind, reason, 
and ‘harmony, is not only the work of God, but 
also a part of him; nor is it a thing so much made 
by him, as from him, and existing out of him.— — 
And the same must he likewise affirm concerning 
all other souls, as those of men and demons, that 
they are either all of them the substance of God 
himself, together with that of the evil demon; or 
else certain delibations from both, (if any one — 
‘could understand it) blended and confounded to- 
gether ; he not allowing any new substance at all 
to be created by God out of nothing pre-existent. 
It was observed in the beginning of this chapter, | 


446 AN EVIL GOD NOT GENERALLY ASSERTED 


that Plutarch was an assertor of two avOvrocrara 
or self-existent principles in the universe, God and 
matter: but now we understand, that he was an 
earnest propugnor of another third principle (as 
himself calls it) besides them both, viz. a yey 
avoug Kai Kaxorovc, @ mad, irrational, and maleficent 
soul or demon:—so that Plutarch was both a 
Triarchist and a Ditheist, an assertor of three 
principles, but of two gods; according to that 
forementioned notion of a God, as it is taken for 
an animalish or perceptive being self-existent. 

We are not ignorant, that Plutarch endeavours 
with all his might to persuade this to have been 
the constant belief of all the Pagan nations, and 
of all the wisest men and philosophers that ever 
were amongst them. ‘“ For this (saith he, in bis 
book De Iside et Osiride)* is a most ancient api- 
nion, that hath been delivered down from theoalo- 
gers and Jaw-makers, all along to poets and philo- 
sopbers; and though the first author thereof be 
unknown, yet hath it been so firmly believed every 
where, that the footsteps of it have been imprinted 
upon the sacrifices and mysteries or religious rites, 
both of Barbarians and Greeks ; namely, that the 
world is neithér wholly ungoverned by any mind 
or reason, as if all thing's floated in the streams of 
chance and fortune, nor yet that there is any one 
principlesteering and guidingall, withoutresistance 
or control ; because there isa confused mixture of 
good aud evil in every thing, and nothing is pro- 
duced by nature sincere. Wherefore it is not one 
only dispenser of things, who, as it were, out of 
several vessels distributeth those several liquors 
of good and evil, mingling them together, and 


* "Por. oper. p. 360, 


ad 


BY THE GREEK PHILOSOPHERS. 447 


dashing them as he pleaseth ; but there are two 
distinct and contrary powers or principles in the 
world, one of them always leading as it were to 
the right hand, but the other tugging-a contrary 
way. Insomuch that our whole life, and the 
. whole world, is a certain mixture and confusion 
of these two; at least this terrestrial world be- 
low the moon is such, all being every where full 
of irregularity and disorder. For if nothing can 
be made without a cause, and that which is good 
cannot be the cause of evil, there must needs be 
a distinct principle in nature, for the production 
of evil as well as good. And this hath been the 
opinion of the most and wisest men, some of them 
_ affirming @eove elvat Svo kabarrep a aVTITEYVOUC, that there 
are two gods as it were of contrary crafts and 
trades, one whereof is the maker of all good, and - 
the other of all evil; but others calling the good 
principle only a God, and the evil principle a 
demon, as Zoroaster the magician.” Besides which _ 
Zoroaster and the Persian magi, Plutarch pre- 
tends, that the footsteps of this opinion were to 
sbe found also in the astrology of the Chaldeans, 
and in. the mysteries and religious rites, not only 
of the Egyptians, but also of the Grecians them- 
selves; and, lastly, he particularly imputes the 
same to all the most famous of the Greek: philo- 
sophers, as Pythagoras, Empedocles, Heraclitus, 
Anaxagoras, Plato, and Aristotle; though his 
chiefest endeavour of all be to prove, that Plato 
was an undoubted champion for it: ANAG De Psychog. 
ravto [lXarwy ovk erable roic varepor, ovo wa P- 1045 Pa. 
pidev, we EKELVOL, m™my merab ™¢ vANe Kat rou beou Tperny 
apyny Kat Suvayy, vrojeive TOV Aoywv Tov aromurarov; 


Z7reLcoOLoV OUK oloa o OT WE molouvra TWY KaKwy guow ar av- 


448 PLATO NO ASSERTOR OF A 


foparee Kara con [eSnKes. Emucoupiy pe yap Ove’ aKa- 
pe tyxdevat my aronoy sry gepavany, we avairioy truc- 
ayourt Kivnglw EK TOU mn OvTog, avrot et KaKklaw Kat i KaKoeat 
poviay rocauTny, tripac TE TEs apie pugiac aroriac Kat 
duc yepetac, attiay ty Taig apyaic ouK éyoucac, Kart traKxo- 
AovPnaw yeyovivat Atyoudny o et Tare ong onriue” 
ava TRY vAn stagopac aragye amaXdXarram, kat rou Grou 
Thy Tw Kaxwv atriay arwratre tutes. But Plato was 
not guilty of that miscarriage of later philoso- 
phers, in overlooking the third power, which is 
between the matter and Gad, and thereby falling 
into the grossest of all absurdities, that the na- 
ture of evils was but an accidental appendix to 
the world, and came into it merely by chance, no- 
body knows how. So that those very philuso- 
phers, who will by no means allow to Epicurus 
the smallest declension of his atoms from the 
perpendicular, alleging, that this would be te 
introduce a motion without a cause, and to bring 
' something out of nothing, themselves do, not- 
withstanding, suppose all that vice and misery, 
which is in the world, besides inuumerable other 
absurdities and inconventences about body, to 
have come into it, merely by accidental couse- 
quence, and without having any cause to the first 
principles. But Plato did not so; but divesting 
matter of all qualities and differences, by means 
whereof it could not possibly be made the cause 
of evils, and then placing God at the greatest 
distance from being the cause thereof, he conse- 
quently resolved it into a third unmade principle 
between God and the matter, an irrational soul, 
or demon, moving the matter disorderly... 

Now, because. Plutarch’s authority passeth so 
uncoutrolled, and his testimony in this particular 


‘SUBSTANTIAL EVIL PRINCIPLE. 449 


seems to be of late generally received as an ora- 


. cle, and consequently the thing taken for an un-. 


questionable truth, that the Ditheistic doctrine of 
a good and evil principle was the Catholic or uni- 
versal doctrine of the Pagan Theists, and parti- 
cularly that Plato, above all the rest, was a pro- 
fessed champion for the same; we shall therefore 
make bold to examine Plutarch’s grounds for this 
so confident .assertion of his; and principally 
concerning Plato. And.his grounds for imputing 
this opinion to Plato, are only these three, which 
follow. First, because that philosopher, in’ his 
Politicus,* speaks of a necessary and innate ap- 
petite, that may sometimes turn the heavens a 
contrary way, and by that means cause disorder 
' and confusion: Secondly, because, in his tenth 
De Legibus, he speaks of two kinds of souls, 
whereof oneis beneficent, but the other contrary: 

and, lastly, because in his Timeus he sup- 
poseth the matter to have been moved disorderly 
before the world was made; which implies, that 
there was a disorderly and irrational soul con- 


sisting with it as the mover of it, matter being - 


unable to move itself. But as to the first of these 


allegations, out of Plato’s Politicus, we shall only 
observe, that that philosopher, as if it had been 


purposely to prevent such an interpretation of his 
meaning there as this of Plutarch’s, inserts these 


= 


reo. words: par av dvo ‘rive Aco, peovouvre = EAUTOLC 


évayria oreépew avrov. Neither must any such thing 
be supposed, as if there were two gods, contrarily 


minded to one another, turning the heavens some- . 


times one-way, and sometimes ‘another.— Which 


* P, 176. oper. > [bid, p. 175. 


450 PLATO NO ASSERTOR OF A 


plain declaration of Plato's sense, being directly 
contrary to Plutarch’s interpretation, and this Dh- 
theistic opinion, might serve also for a sufficient 
confutation of his second ground from the tenth 
De Legibus,” as if Plato bad there affirmed, that 
there were two souls moving the heavens, the one 
beneficent, but the other contrary; because this 
would be all one as to assert two gods, contrarily 
minded to one another. Notwithstanding which, 
for a fuller answer thereunto, we shall further 
add, that this philosopher did there, _ first, 
only distribute souls in general into good and 
evil, those moral differences properly belonging 
to that rank of beings, called by him souls, and 
first emerging in them, according to this premised 
doctrine, TeV ayabury atria n puyy Kat ra Kadai, Kal 
Kaxwy Kai atcyowy, Stxaiwy re xat adixwy. Soul is the 
cause of good and evil, honest and dishonest, 
just and unjust.—But then, afterwards, making 
inquiry concerning the soul of the world or hea- 
ven, what kind of soul that was, he positively 

p.g93,  coucludes, that it was no other than a 

Steph. soul endued with all virtue. AQ. eruay 
yoyn piv £oTW wemayoura nyiv wavra, thy et atipavoy 
meppopay & avayKng meptayey gariny, erystAoundeny Kal 
KogLoucay, Hrot THY apisryy Yoyny nto rHyy tvarriav. KA. 
Q Ekve, adda ex ye tw tipnudvwv avd’ Sovow adda Aéytty, 
y wacay aperqy éyousay poyny niay 9 wARiauc wipayey 
avra.— ATH. Hosp. Since itis soul that moves all 
things, we must of necessity aflirm, that the hea- 
ven or world is moved by some soul or other, 
adorning and disposing of it, whether it be the 
best soul, or the contrary. Cun. O Hospes, it 


7 2. O60. oper. 


SUBSTANTIAL EVIL PRINCIPLE. 451 


. is certainly not holy nor pious to conclude other- 
wise, than that a soul endued with all virtue,. one 
or more, moves the world.—And as for the last 
thing urged by Plutarch, that before the world 
was made, the matter is said by Plato* to have 
been moved disorderly, we conceive, that that. 

philosopher did therein only adhere to that vul- 
garly-received tradition, which was originally 
Mosaical, that the first beginning of the Cosmo- 
poia was from a chaos, or matter confusedly 
moved, afterward brought into order. And now 
we think it plainly appears, that there is no: 
strength at allin any of Plutarch’s fore-mentioned 
allegations, nor any such monster to be found 
any where in Plato, as this substantial evil prin- 
ciple or god, a wicked soul or demon, unmade 

_ and self-existent from eternity, opposite and ini- 
micous to the good God, sharing the empire and 
dominion of the world with him. Which opinion 
is really nothing else but the deifying of the devil, 
or prince of evil spirits, making him a corrival 
with God, and entitling him to a right of receiving 
Divine honour and worship. 

And it is observable, that Plutarch himself 
confesseth this interpretation, which he makes of 
Plato, to be new and paradoxical, OF AD Psycho. p: 
invention of his own: xat Sid: rd wreloroig 294? 

@TwWY amo TlAarwvoe vrevavriovebat O€0MEVOV TapapvOidc, 
such as because it was contrary to the generally- — 
received opinion of Platonists, himself thought 

. to stand in need of some apology and defence. — 
To which purpose, therefore, he adds eign 

again : mpwrov ob nv EX mept TOUTwY dtavoiay, , 

ExDnooua m TIGTOUMEVOS TH EKOTL, Kal Tapapubovpevos, we 


*In Timeo, eap. xiv. p. 527. 


452 THE TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE 
tveort, ro aAnbic TOV Aoyou, Kal mapadetoy’ I will (saith 
he) declare miue own opinion first concerning 
these things, confirming it with probabilities, and, 
as much as possibly | ean, atding and assisting 
the truth and paradoxicalness thereof. More- 
over, Proclus upon the Timwus takes notice of 
no other philosophers that ever imputed this doc- 
trine to Plato, or indeed maintained any such 
opinion of two substantial principles of gaed and 
evil, but only Plutarch and Atticus (though, I 
confess, Chalcidius cites Numenius also to the 
> tg, Stwe purpose), Proclus’s words are 
these : ol pidy mez HAavran yor row Nigiri 
£ ” Arriucov moneat qptert rye adkospyray vA yy Tp rne 
yEvETEWC, Teotrar Ck Kal THY Kaxigyariy degny rye reaga 
Kivovcay, mole: yas WRU We, ame Legne 3 HoEE 
araxto¢ * Kune, Gm araxrou dey. Platarchus 
Cheronensis aud Atticus maintain, that before the 
generation and formation of the world, there was 
unformed and disorderly matter existing (from 
eternity) together with a maleficent soul: for 
whence, sav they, could that motion of the mat- 
ter, in Plato’s Thinwus, proceed, bat from a soul? 
and if it were a disorderly motion, it must then 
needs come from a disorderly soul.---And as Pro- 
Clus tells us, that this opinion of theirs had been 
before coufuted by Porphyrius and Jamblichus, 
as that which was both irrational and impions, 
so doth he there likewise himself briefly refel it 
in these two propositions : First, that waca Quy 
yévenua tare rou Orov, eve ery soulis the offspring of 
God,—and there can be no soul, nor any thing 
else, besides God, self- existing | and, Secondly, 
TO Kako crater Tota, woamtp Kal rH ayathen, arnwror, 


ou yap Omori por Tin Hise Tt! allow, uri tmiaye ayivyyroy, 


PLATONIC ORIGIN OF EVIL. 493 


ovre dAWC avridinonutvov" It is absurd to make evil 
- alike eternal with good, for that which is godless 
cannot be of like honour with God, and equally 
uninade, nor indeed can there be any thing atall 
positively opposite to God.— __. 

But because it may probably be here demanded, 
what account it was then possible for Plato to 
give of the original of evils, so as not to impute 
them to God himself, if he neither derived them 
from tAn arog, unqualified matter (which Plu- 
tarch has plainly proved to be absurd), nor yet from 
& ypvyn avovc, an irrational and maleficent soul of 
the world, or demon, self-existent from eternity ; 
we shall, therefore, hereunto briefly reply, that 
though that philosopher derived not the original 
of evils from unqualified matter, nor from a wicked 
soul, or demon unmade, yet did he not therefore 
impute them to God neither, but, as it seemeth, to 
the necessity of imperfect bemgs. For as Ti- 
maus Locrus had before Plato determined, that. 
the world was made by God and necessity, so 
does Plato himself accordingly declare in his 
Times," ort mspeypevn TOUDE TOU KOopov YEVEOLC £6 a avary- 
KnNC Kat vou TUgTACEWC, vou o€ a avarykng dp yovroc” That 
the generation of this world is mixed, and made © 
up of acertain composition of mind and necessity 
both together, yet so, as that mind doth also (in 
some sense) rule over necessity.— Wherefore, 
though, according to Plato, God be properly and. 
directly the cause of nothing else but good, yet the 
necessity of these lower imperfect things does un- 
avoidably give being and birth to evils. For, first, 
as to moral evils (which are the chiefest), there is a 
necessity, that there should be higher and lower 

4 P. 533. oper. . 

VOL. L. 2G 


454 THE TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE 


inclinations in all rational beings, vitally united 
to bodies, and that as autexeusious, or free willed, 
they should have a poweroft determining them- 
selves more or less either way ; as there is also a 
necessity, that the same liberty of will (essential 
to rational creatures), which makes them capable 
Of praise and reward, should likewise put them in 
a possibility of deserving blame and punishment. 
Again, as to the evils of pam and inconvenience ; 
there seems to bea uecessity, that imperfect ter- 
restrial animals, which are capable of the sense ef 
pleasure, should in contrary circumstances (which 
will also sometimes happen, by reason of the m- 
consistency and incumpossibility of things) be ob- 
noxious to displeasure and pain. And, lastly, for 
the evils of corruptions and dissolutions; there is 
a plain necessity, that if there be natural cenera- 
tions in the world, there should be also Corrup- 
tions; according to that of Lucretius* before cited, 


Quando aliud ex allo reficit natura, neo ullam 
Rem gigni patitur, nisi morte adjutam aliena. 


To all which may be added, according to the opi- 
nion of many, that there is a kind of necessity of 
some evils in the world for a condiment (as it 
were) to give a relish and haut-goust to good: since 
the nature of imperfect animals is such, that they 
are apt to have but a dull and sluggish sense, a flat 
and insipid taste of good, unless it be quickened 
and stimulated, heightened and invigorated, hy 

being compared with the contrary evil. As also, 

that there seems to be a necessary use in the world 
of the xaxa axovora, those involuntary evils of pain 
aod suffering, both for the exercise of virtue, and 


* Lib, i. vers, 264. 


PLATONIC ORIGIN OF EVIL. 4095 
the quickening and exciting the activity of the 
world, ‘as also for the repressing, chastising and . 
punishing of those kaxa éxovoi, those voluntary 
evils of vice and action.—Upon which several ac- 
counts, probably, Plato concluded, that evils 
could not be utterly destroyed, at least in this 
_ lower world, which, according to him, is the re- 
gion of lapsed souls: aAX’ ovr drodécbat InTheate,p. 
Ta Kaka Suvardy, ob w Ocodwoe, (vrrevavrioy yao fi 2fo SPR 
TH ayaby a ag elvat dvaycn) our ev Ocoic avra idovobat, TNVOE 
Ovnrny puow, Kal L TOVOE Tov TOTrOY mepiTroA Ew eé a avayKne duo 
metpacbat yon evivds ékeics, pevyey ort rayiora’ puyn 8 
OMolwatc Gem Kara ro duvarov, Omoiworc S$ Sikatoy Kat dctoy 
pera doovncewe yevéobar. But it is neither possible 
(O Theodorus) that evilsshould be quitedestroyed 
(for there must: be something always contrary to— 
good), nor yet that they should be seated amongst 
the gods, but they will of necessity infest this: 
_ lower mortal region and nature. Wherefore, we 
ought to endeavour to flee from hence with all 
' possible speed ;’and our flight from hence is this, 
to ‘assimilate ourselves to God as much as may 
~ be; which assimilation to God consisteth in being 
just and holy with wisdom.—Thus, according to 
the sense of Plato, though God be the original of 
all things, yet he is not to be accounted properly 
the cause of evils, at least moral ones (they being 
only defects), but they are to be imputed to the 
necessity of imperfect beings, which is that dvay«n 
moAda te Oem Svopayouca kat adnvuZovoa, that neces- 
sity, which doth -often resist' God, and as it were 
shake off his bridle-— Rational creatures being, by 
means thereof, in a capability of acting contrary 
to God’s will and law, as well as their own true 
nature and good; and other things hindered of that 
2G 2 “ 


456 THE GREEK PHILOSOPHERS DID NOT 


perfection, which the Divine goodness would else 
have imparted to them.:: Notwithstanding which, 
mind, that is, God, is said also by Plato to rule 
over necessity, because those evils, occasioned by 
the necessity of imperfect beings, are over-ruled 
by the Divine art; wisdom, and providence, for 
good; Typhon and Arimanius (if we may use that 
language) being, as it were, outwitted by Osiris 
and Oromasdes, and the worst of all evils made, 
‘in spite of their own nature, to contribute sub- 
serviently to the good and perfection of the whole; 
Kal Touro peytarns Téyyn¢e ayabowoty ra Kaka, and this 
must needs be acknowledged to bé the greatest 
art of all, to be able to haniky evils, or tincture 
them with good.— 

And now we have made it to appear (as we con- 
ceive) that Plutarch had no sufficient grounds to 
impute this opinion, of two active perceptive prin- 
ciples in the world (one the cause of good, and — 
the other of evil) to Plato. And as for-the other 
' Greek philosophers, his pretences to make them 
assertors of the same doctrine seem to be yet.more 


* Of mubayé- 
GELOL Uda LOU 
O ManoV Ey 


slight and frivolous. For he concludes -. 
the * Pythagoreans to have held. two 
such substantial principles of good and 


as 
rapricdaw Vil, merely because they sometimes 
ee talked of the évarvriornrec and overorytat, 
whereadmit- the contrarieties and conjugations of 
ted evil a- 

mongst the things, such as finite and infinite, dex- 
Deed trous and sinistrous, even and odd, and 
tate Me the like. As also, that Heraclitus en- 
p.2is.  tertained the same opinion, because he 


spake of TaXlvrporoc appLovia KOopou, a ver- 


satile harmony of the world,—whereby things re- 
ciprocate forwards and backwards, as when a 


ASSERT A GOOD AND EVIL PRINCIPLE. 457 


bow is successively intended and remitted; as 
likewise because he affirmed all things to flow, 
and war to be the father and lord of all. More- 
over, he resolves,’ that Empedocles’s friendship 
and contention could be no other than agood and 
evil god; though we have rendered it probable, 
that nothing else was understood thereby but an 
active spermatic power in this corporeal world, 
causing vicissitudes of generation and corruption. 
. Again, Anaxagoras is entitled by him to the same 
philosophy, for no other reason, but only because 
he made mind and infinite matter two principles 
of the universe. And, lastly, Aristotle himself 
cannot escape him from being made an assertor of | 
a good and evil god too, merely because he con- 
cluded form and privation to be two principles of 
natural bodies. Neither does Plutarch acquit him- . 
self any thing better, as to the sense of whole na- 
tions, when this doctrine is therefore imputed by 
him to the Chaldeans, because their astrologers 
supposed two of the planets to be beneficent, two 
maleficent, and three of a middle nature; and to 
the ancient Greeks, because they sacrificed not 
only to Jupiter Olympius, but also to Hades, or 
Pluto, who was sometimes called by them the in- 
fernal Jupiter. We confess, that his interpretation 
of the traditions and mysteries of the ancient 
Egyptians is ingenious, but yet there is no neces- 
sity for all that, that by their Typhon should be 
understood a substantial evil principle, or god self- 
existent, as he contends. For it being the manner 
of the ancient Pagans (as shall be more fully de- 
. Clared afterwards) to physiologize in their theo- 
_ logy, and to personate all the several things in 


@ De Iside et Osinde, p. 370. 


458 THE ARIMANIUS OF THE 


nature; it seems more likely, that these Egyptians 
did, after that manner, only reoowroroniv, personate 
that evil and confusion, tumalt and hurliburly, 
constant alteration and vicissitude of generations 
and corruptions, which is in this lower world, 
(though not without a Divine providence) by 
Typhon. 

Wherefore, the only probability now left as 
that of the Persian Magi, that they might indercd 
assert two such active principles of goad and evil, 
as Plutarch and the Manicheans afterwards did; 
and we must confess, that there is some probabi- 
lity of this, because, besides Plutarch, Laertius® 
affirms the same of them, eve nar’ avvoug avat apyac, 
ayaloy Sainova xaixaxov, that there are two principles 
according to the Persian May), a good demon and 
an evil one;—he seeming to vouch it also from the 
authorities of Hermippus, Eudoxus, and Theo- 
pompus. Notwithstanding which, it may very 
well be questioned, whether the meaning of those 
Magi were not herein misunderstood, they per- 
haps intending nothing more by their evil demon 
than such a Satanical power as we acknowledge 5 
thatis, nota substantial evil principle, unmadeand 
independent upon God, but only a polity of evil 
demons m the world, united together under one 
head or prince. And this, not only because Theo- 
dorusip Photius’ calls the Persian Arimanius by 
that very name, Satanas; but also because those 
very traditions of their's, recorded by Plutarch 
himself, seem very much to favour this opinion, 
ret. cro. they running after this manner: trun ¢ 
sir. S70, Bar, ypovec ripen eptwec, ey re row Anituavtay Aotuoy 
ixayovra cat Ayia, wore rouray avayxy pflanyvar marra- 


* In Procemio, segm, 8. p, 4. * Bibhothes, Cod. Ieuan p. Ua, 


PERSIAN MAGI CONSIDERED. . 489. 


Tal Kal i dpantaOnvat, mic && ync eruméSou 2 Kat opahne ‘yevo- 
pévne, eva Biov Kal ptav qoXrEeiav avOewrey paxaptiy Kal 
ouoyhwcowy a atayrwy yeveoBar’ That there is a fatal 
time at hand, in which Arimanius, the introducer 
of plagues and famines, must of necessity be ut- 
terly destroyed ; and when, the earth being made 
plane and equal, there shall be but one life, and 
one polity of men, all happy and speaking the same 
language.—Or else, as Theopompus* himself re- 
presented their sense,. réAo¢ arodsireaBat rov’ Adny, kat 
ToUG pev avOgarrone evBainovac zoeabat, unre Tpopns SEOMEVOUE, 
mare oklav mo.ovvrac’ Tov O& TavTA pnxavnoauevoy O:ov 
noguew Kat avarravecbat ypove KaAwe UEV ov TOAUY TH Btw, 
Woreo avOowrw Komwpuévy wérocov. That in conclusion 
Hades shall be utterly abolished, and then men 
shall be perfectly happy, their bodies neither 
needing food, nor casting any shadow; that God, 
which contrived. this whole scene of things, rest- 
ing only for the present a certain season, which is 
not long to him, but like the intermission of sleep 
to men.—For since an unmade and self-existent 
evil demon, such as that of Plutarch’s and the Ma- 
- nicheans’, could never be utterly abolished or des- 
troyed; it seems rather probable, that these Per- 
sian Magi did, in their Arimanius, either mposwzo- 
mov, personate évil only, as we suppose the 
Egyptians to have done in Typhon; or else un- 
derstand a Satanical power by it: notwithstand- 
ing which; they might possibly sacrifice thereunto 
(as the Greeks didi to evil demons) for its appease- 
ment and mitigation; or else, as wor rshipping the 
Deity itself, im : the ministers of its wat and ven- 
geance. : 
However, from what hath been declared, we 


* Apud Plutarch. de Iside et Osiride, p. 370. tem. 11. oper. 


460 DITHEISM NOT GENERALLY RECEIVED 


conceive it does sufficiently appear, that this di- 
theistic doctrine of a good and evil god (or a good 
god and evil demon both self- existent), ‘asserted by 
Plutarch and the Manicheans, was never so unl- — 
- versally received amongst the Pagans as the same 
Plutarch pretendeth. Which thing may be yet 

- farther evidenced from hence, because the Mani- 
cheans professed themselves not to have derived 
this opinion from the Pagans, nor to bea subdivi- 
sion under them, or schism from them, but a quite 
different sect by themselves. Thus, Faustus in 
Siccteus St. Augustin: “ Pagani bona et mala, 
lib.20.c.3. tetra et splendida, perpetua et caduca, 
Pai oer” wautabilia et certa, corporalia et divina, 
ac” = unum habere principium dogmatizant. 
His ego valde contraria censeo, qui 

bonis omnibus principium fateor Deum, contrariis 
vero Hylen (sic enim mali principium et naturam 
theologus noster appellat.)” The Pagans dogma- 
tize, that good and evil things, foul and splendid, 
perishing and perpetual, corporeal and Divine, do 
allalike proceed from the same principle. Whereas 
we think far otherwise, that God is the principle 
of all good, but Hyle (or the evil demon) of the 
contrary, which names our theologer (Manes) con- 
founds together.—And afterwards Faustus there 
again determines, that there were indeed but two 
_ sects of religion in the world, really distinct from 
one another, viz. Paganism and ‘Manicheism." 
_ From whence it may be concluded, that this doc- 
trine of two active principles of good and evil, was 
not then looked upon as the eenerally-received 
. doctrine of the Pagans. Wherefore, it seems 
reasonable to think, fiat Plutarch’s imputing it so | 


4 Apud Augustin. ubi supra. 


BY THE PAGANS. —  46E 


universally to them; was either out of design, 
thereby to gain the better countenance. and au- 

thority to a conceit, which himself was fond of; 
or else, because he being deeply tinctured, as it 
were, with the suffusions of it, every thing which 
he looked upon seemed to him coloured ‘with it.: 
And indeed, for aught we can yet learn, this Plu- 
tarchus Charsnenge. Numenius, and Atticus, 
were the only Greek philosophers, who ever in 
public writings positively asserted any such opi- 
nion. 

And probably St. Athanasius is to be under- 
stood of these, when, in his oration contra Gentes," 
he writes thus concerning this opinion: “EAAnvey 
ovy rivic wAavnbévrec THE OOOV, Kal TOV Xouorov OUK éyvw- 
KoTec, &Y VrooTdos Kat Kal EavTnV Elval THY Kakiav amepn- 
vavro’ dapravovrec Kara Ovo TavrTa, } TOV SnuLovpyov arro- 
OTEPOUVTEC TOU Elvat TOLNTHY THY OVTWY, OV yap av ein Tw 
ovrwy KUgtoc, elye KaT avrouc yn Kakia KaQ eaurny vrocTacw 
Eyet Kat ovciayv, 7 maAdw OirAovTeg avroy TomTHY eivar TwY 
ddwr, e& avayxne Kal Tov Kakov Swoovow Elvat, &v yap TOC 
‘ovoly Kal TO Kakov Kar avrove éore. Some of the Greeks, 
wandering out of the right way, and ignorant of 
Christ, have determined evil to be a real entity by 
itself, erring upon two accounts: because they 
must of necessity either suppose God not to be 
the maker of all things, if evil have a nature and 
essence by itself, and yet be not made by him; or 
else that heis themakerand cause of evil; whereas 
it is impossible, that he, who is essentially good, 
should produce the contrary.—After which that 
father speaks also of some degenerate Christians, 
who fell into the same error; ot & do rwv aigicewy 
_ &kmecovreg THE EkKANowuorucNe SiWackaXdtac, Kat TEOL THY 


+ Tom. 1. p. 6. oper, 


462 vpITHEISM NOT GENERALLY RECEIVED 


wiariy vanayyoavrec, Kat OUTOR piv UmOcraaiy TOU KaKoU 
manadcovoury svat. Some heretics, forsaking the 
ecclesiastical doctrine, and making shipwreck of 
the faith, have in like manner falsely attributed a 
real nature and essence to evil. —Of which here. 
tics, there were several sects before the Mani- 
cheans, sometime taken notice of aud censured 
by Pagan philosophers themselves > as by Celsus," 
where he charges Christians with holding this 
opinion, that there 1s mrarriag rp yeyade Bee Grow cae 
rnpazévoc, an execrable god contrary to the :rreat 
God ;~—and by Plotinus, writing a whole book 
against such Christians (the ninth of his second 
Ennead), which, by Porphyrius, was inscribed, 
TOC rove Vrwarixare, Against the Guostics. -- 

But if, notwithstanding all that we hase hi- 
therto said to the contrary, that which Plutarch 
so much contends for should be granted to be 
true, that the Pagan theologers generally asserted 
two self-existent principles (a good God, and an 
evil soul or demon), and no more, it would una- 
voidably follow from thence, that all those other 
gods, which they worshipped, were not looked 
upou by them as so many samade selfexistent 
beings, because then they should have acknow- 
ledged so many first principles. Hlowever, it is 
certain, that if Plutarch beheved his own writings, 
he must of necessity take it for granted, that 
none of the Pagan gods (those two principles of 
good and evil only excepted) were by their theo- 
logers accounted unmade or self-existent beings. 
And as to Plutarch himself, itis unquestionably 
manifest, that though he were a Paean, and a 
worshipper of all those many gods of theirs, but 

* Apud Ongen. contra Colsum, fib. si. p. 30d, 


BY THE PAGANS. | 463 


especially amongst the rest, of the Delian Apollo 
(whose priest he declares himself to have been), 
yet he supposed them all (except only one good 
God, and another evil soul of the world) to be 
no self-existent deities, but @coi yevynroi,* generated | 
or created gods only. And the same is to.be 
affirmed of all his Pagan followers, as also of the 
Manicheans, forasmuch as they, besides their 
good and evil god (the only unmade, self-existent 
beings acknowledged by them), worshipped also 
innumerable other deities. | 

Hitherto we have not been able to find amongst 
the Pagans, any who asserted a multitude of un- 
made, self-existent deities: but, on the contrary, 
we shall now find one, who took notice of this 
Opinion of woAdai apyail, many principles, so far 
forth as to confute it; and that is Aristotle, who 


“was not occasioned to do that neither, because 


it was a doctrine then generally received, but 
only because he had a mind odiously to impute 
such a thing to the Pythagoreans and Platonists, 
they making ideas (sdmetimes called also. num- 
bers) in a certain sense, the. principles ‘of things. 
Nevertheless, the opinion itself is well confuted 
by that philosopher from the panos iain 


na, after this manner: O: & Aéyoures TOV 1. 14.c. 10. 
pag. 486. 


5 ” A 
aptO.ov sd aaa TOV mabnnartxoy, Kat ovUTwe ast tom. iv. oper. 


aAAnvé OEE ovolay Kal a9 xac ExaoTnc adXac, 
ETELTOOLWON THY TOU TavToc ovolay mroLovaet’ &c. They 
who say that mathematical number is the first, 
and suppose one principle of one thing, and ano- 
ther of another, would make the whole world to 
be like an incoherent and disagreeing poem, where : 
things do not all mutually contribute to one ano- 
| + Vide Rualdum in Vita Plutarchi, cap. ix. 


464 ARISTOTLE’S CONFUTATION OF 


ther, nor conspire together to make up one sense 
and harmony: but the contrary (saith he) is most 
evident in the world; and, therefure, there can- 
not be many principles, but only one—From 
whence it is manifest, that though Aristotle were 
_ a worshipper of many gods, as well as the other 
Pagans (he somewhere representing it as very 
absurd to sacrifice to none but Jupiter), yet he 
was no. Polytheist, in the sense before declared, 
of many unmade, self-existent deities, nor indeed 
any Ditheist neither, no assertor of two under- 
standing principles, a good and evil god (as Plu- 
tarch pretended him to be); he not only here ex- 
ploding that opinion of roAAai ¢pyat, many princi- 
ples, but also expressly deriving all from one; 
and in that very chapter affirming, that good is a 
principle, but not evil. But as for the Platonists — 
and Pythagoreans there perstringed by him, 
though it be true, that they made ideas in some 
sense principles, as the paradigms of things; yet, 
according to Aristotle’s own confession, even in 
that same chapter, they declared also, that there 
was a\An epyn Kkupwréga, another principle more 
excellent or superior; which is indeed that, that 
was. called by them the ro &, or povac, unity itself, 
_ or a monad, thatis, one most simple deity. 

_ Though we did before demonstrate, that the 
- Pagan gods were not all supposed by them to be’ 
- unmade, self-existent beings, because they ac- 
knowledged a theogonia, a generation and tem- 
porary production of gods; yet, forasmuch as it 
might be suspected, that they held notwithstand- 
ing-a multitude of unmade deities, we’ have now 
_ made the best inquiry that we could concerning 
; this: and the utmost that we have been able yet 


MANY. PRINCIPLES. AG5 


to discover, is, that some few of the professed 
Pagans, as well as of pretended Christians, have 
indeed asserted a duplicity of such gods (viz. 
understanding beings unmade), one good, and the 
other evil, but no more. Whereas, on the con- 
trary, we have found, that Aristotle did profess- 
edly oppose this opinion of many principles, or 
unmade gods, which certainly he durst never have 
done, had it then been the generally-received 
opinion of the Pagans. And though it be true, 
that several of the ancient Christians, in their 
disputes with Pagans, do confute that opinion of 
many unmade deities; yet we do not find, for all | 
that, that any of them seriously charge the Pa-. 
gans with it, they only doing it occasionally and 


ex abundanti. But we should be the better ena- _ 


bled to make a clear judgment concerning: this 
controversy, whether there were not amongst the 
Pagan deities a multitude of supposed unmade 
beings, if we did but take a short survey of their 
_ religion, and consider all the several kinds of 
gods worshipped by them; which may, as we 
conceive, be reduced to these following heads:—In 
the first place, therefore, it is certain, that many 
of the Pagan gods were nothing else but dead 
men (or the souls of men deceased), called by 
the Greeks Heroes, and the Latins Manes; such 
as Hercules, Liber, A’sculapius, Castor, Pollux, 
Quirinus, and the like. Neither was this only 
~ true of the Greeks and Romans, but also of the 
Egyptians, Syrians, and Babylonians. For which | 
cause the Pagan sacrifices are, by way of contempt,. 
in the Scripture,* called the sacrifices of the dead ; 

that is, not of dead or lifeless statues, as some 


@ Psalm cvi. 28. 


466 A GENERAL SURVEY 


would put it off, but of dead men: which was 
the reason why many of the religious rites: and 
solemnities, observed by the Pagan priests, were 

Chap. i. Thournful and funeral; accordingly as it 

ver SE Gg expressed in Baruch concerning the 
Babylonians -—“ Their priests sit in their tem- 
ples, having their clothes rent, and their heads 
and beards Ghaven, and nothing upon their heads ; 
they roar and cry before their gods, as men do at 
the feast, when one is dead” Some of which 
rites are therefore thought to have been interdict- 
ed to the Israelitish priests. And the same thing 
is noted likewise by the poet’ concerning the 


Egyptians : 


Lt quem iu plangens, hominem testaris, Osinin: 


and intimated by Kenophanes the Colophouian,” 
when he repreheusively admonished the Egyp- 
tians after this manner: « Oeove voniZoum pn Aonvern, 
et 88 Bpnvover jin Oeove von, That if they thought 
those to be gods, they should not so lament thet ; 
but if they would lament them, they should no 
longer think them gods.—Moreover, it is well 
known, that this humour of deifying men was 
afterwards carried on further, and that ving men 
(as emperors) had also temples and altars erected 
to them; nay, human polities and cities were 
also sometimes deified by the Pagans, Rome it- 
self being madea goddess. Now, no man can 
imagine, that those men-gods aud city-gods were 
looked upon by them as so many unmade, self- 
existent deities, they being not indeed so much 


* Lacan. Pharaal. bib. vin. vers. 133. 
® Vide Plutarch. do Superatit. p. 171. tom, i. oper, et Aristot. Rhe- 
turic, Tb, i. cap. xxii. pe. THY. tom, ith, oper, 


OF THE PAGAN DEITIES. | 467 


‘as duce yevvnrot Oeot, gods made or generated by 
nature, but rather artificially made by human 
will and pleasure. Again, another sort of the 
Pagan deities were all the greater parts of the 
visible mundane system, or corporeal world, as 
supposed to be animated—the sun, the moon, and 
the stars, and even the earth itself, under the 
names of Vesta and Cybele, the mother ‘of the 
gods, and the like. _ Now it is certain, also, that 
none of these could be taken for unmade, self- 
existent deities neither, by those who supposed 
the-whole world itself to have been generated, or 
had a beginning, which, as Aristotle* tells us, was 
the generally-received opinion before his time. 
There was also a third sort of Pagan deities, 
ethereal and aeriel, animals invisible, called de- 
mons, genii, and lares, superior indeed to men, 
but inferior to the celestial or mundane gods be- 
fore-mentioned. .Wherefore, these must needs be 
~ looked upon also by them but as yevvnroi Aec0i, ge- 
nerated or created gods, they being but certain 
inferior parts of the whole generated world. 
’ Beside§ all these, the Pagans had yet another 
sort of gods, that were nothing but mere acci- 
dents or affections of substances, which therefore. 
could not be supposed by them to be self-existent 
deities, because they could not so much as sub- 
sist by themselves. Such as were virtue, piety, 
felicity, truth, faith, hope, justice, clemency, love, 
desire, health, peace, honour, fame, liberty, me- 
mory, sleep, night, and the like; all which had 
their temples or altars‘erected to them. Now 
_ this kind: of Pagan gods cannot well be conceived 
to have been any thing else, but the several and 


* Lib. i. de Coelo, cap: x. p- 632. om..i- oper. 


468 A GENERAL sSURVE 


various manifestations of that one Divine force, 
power, and providence, that runs through the 
whole world (as respecting the good and evil 
of men), fictitiously personated, and so represent- 
ed as so many gods and goddesses. 

Lastly, there is still another kind of Pagan 
gods behind, having substantial and personal 
names, Which yet cannot he conceived neither to 
be so many understanding beings, unmade aud 
independent upon any supreme, were it for no 
other reason but only this, because they have all 
of them their particular places and provinces, 
offices and functions severally, as it were, assigned 
to them, and to which they are confined; so 
as not to interfere and clash with one avoether, but 
agreeably to make up one orderly and harmonious 
system of the whole; one of those gods ruling 
ouly in the heavens, another in the air, another in 
the sea, and another in the earth and bell; one 
being the god or goddess of learning and wisdom, 
another of speech and eloquence, another of jus- 
tice and political order; one the god of war, ane- 
ther the god of pleasure; eue the pod of corn, 
and another the god of wine, and the like. For 
how can it be conceived, that a multitude of un- 
derstanding beings, selfexistent and independent, 
could thus of themselves have fallen into such an 
uniform order and harmony; and, without any 
clashing, peaceably and quictly sharing the go- 
veromicut of the whole world amongst them, 
should carry it on with such a coustant regu- 
larity? For which cause, we conclude also, that 
neither those diz majorum gentium, whether the 
twenty Selecdz, or the twelve Consentes, nor yet 
that triumvirate of vods, amongst whom Homer 


e . 


OF THE PAGAN DEITIES. _ 469 


shares the government of the whole world, ac- 
cording to that of Maximus Tyrius, Be. 
pt Oa ‘Ounoew Sdacrar ra mavra, Tlocaday 

yey ehaxe, mohuny dAa vate atet; “Adne 38 eAaye Cogov 
| nepoevra, Zae Of ovpavov" The sea being assig ned to 
Neptune, the dark and subterrancous parts to - 
Pluto, but the heaven to Jupiter; which threé 
are sometimes called also the celestial, marine, 
~ and terrestrial Jupiter; nor, Jastly, that. other 
Roman and Samothracian trinity of gods, Wwor- 
shipped altogether in the capitol, Jupiter, M1- 
nerva, and Juno; I say, that none of all these 
could reasonably be thought by the Pagans 
themselves, to be so many really distinct, un- 
made, and self-existent deities. | 
Wherefore the truth of this whole business 
seems to be this, that the ancient Pagans did 
physiologize in their theology; and whether look- 
ing upon the whole world animated, as the su- 
preme God, and consequently the several parts 
of it as his living members; or else, apprehend- 
ing it at least to be a mirror, or visible image of 
the invisible Deity, and consequently all its se- 
veral parts, and things of nature, but so many 
several manifestations of the Divine power and — 
providence, they pretended, that all their devo- 
tion towards the Deity ought not to be huddled 
up in one general and confused acknowledgment 
of a supreme invisible Being, the creator and 
governor of all; but that all the several manifes- 
tations of the Deity in the world, considered 
singly and apart by themselves, should be miade 
so many distinct objects of their devout venera- 
tion. And, therefore, in order hereunto, did they 
mposwrorosiv, Speak of the things in nature, and 

‘VoL. I. 2H 


470 THE THINGS OF NATURE DEIFIELY 


the parts of the world, as persons,--.and conse- 
quently as so many gods and goddesses ; yet so, 
as that the intelligent might easily understand the 
meaning, that these were all really nothing else 
but so many several names and notions of that 
one Numen, divine force and power, which runs 
throngh the whole world, multiformly display- 
ing itself therein. To this purpose, Balbus in 
Cicero ;* “ Videtisne ut a physicis rebus tracta 
ratio sit ad commentitios et fictos deos?” See 
you not, how from the things of nature fictitious 
gods have been made?--And Origen seems to 
insist upon this very thing (where Celsus upbraids 
the Jews and Christians for worshipping one only 
God), shewing, that all that seeming multiplicity 
of Pagan gods could not be understood of so 
rt.pte, many distinct substantial independent 
edit. Cantab. deities: daxvurw rotvuy, wwe avtog Suvaras 
wapactAcat ro wAnbog rwv cal “EXAgvac Gio, » rove 
Aolwoug BapBapovg” Aucvurw vrocracw Kal ovolay Muy 
poovung -yervwonc aro fwo¢ rag Movoac, 4 Pimeng rag 
"Qeac, n Tac Xaotrag aie YUV aS Tacnarngare coragQat 
Kar ovoiay ugeoryxévat, GAX ov Cuvyaerac tra 'EAKivey 
avarAdcpara (auparonouicfa coxourra ama roy wpayyne- 
row) Seevuvar Grove. To this sense: Let Celsus, 
therefore, bimself shew, how he is able to make 
out a multiplicity of gods (substantial and self- 
existent) according to the Greeks and other bar- 
barian Pagans; let him declare the essence and 
substantial personality of that memory, which by 
Jupiter geuerated the Muses, or of that Themis, 
which brought forth the hours; or let him shew 
how the Graces, always naked, do subsist by 
themselves. But he will never be able to do this, 


* De Natar. Deor. lib. ii. cap. xxviil. p. 2003. tom. ix. oper, 


BUT SEVERAL NAMES OF GOD. ATI 


nor to make it appear, that those figments of the 
Greeks (which seem to be really nothing else but 
the things. of nature turned into persons) are so 
many distinct (self-existent) deities —Where the | 
latter words are thus rendered in a late edition; 
« Sed nunquam poterit (Celsus) Grecorum fig- 
menta, que validiora fieri-videntur, ex rebus Ipsis 
deos esse arguere;’—which we confess we can- 
not understand ; but we canceive the word cwparo- 
— roueisfat, there turned validiora fieri, is here used 
by Origen in the same sense with zpocwzéroreio Bar 
so that his meaning is, as we have declared, that 
those figments of the Greeks and other barbarian 
Pagans (which are the same with Balbus’s com- 
meniiti et ficti Dit), are really nothing else but the — 
things of vature, figuratively and fictitiously per- 
-sonated, and consequently not so many distinct 
substantial deities, but only several notions and 
considerations of one God, or supreme Numen, 
in the world. | 

‘Now this fictitious personating, and deifying of 
things, by the Pagan Theologers, was done two | 
manner of ways; one, when those things in na- 
ture. were themselves without. any more ado, or 
change of names, spoken of as persons, and so 
made gods and goddesses, as in themany instances - 
before proposed: another, when there were dis- 
tinct proper and per sonal names accommodated 
severally to those things, as of Minerva to wis- 
dom, of Neptune to the sea, of Ceres to corn, and 
of Bacchus to wine. In which latter case, those 
personal names properly signify the invisible Di- 
vine powers, supposed to preside over those seve- 
ral.things in nature; and these are therefore pro- 
ae those gods and goddesses, which are dwrnpe¢ 

2H2 


472 THE THINGS OF NATURE DEIFIED, 


tawy,* the givers and dispensers of the good things, 
and the removers of the contrary; but they are 
used improperly also for the things of nature 
themselves, which, therefore, as manifestations of 
the Divine power, goodness, and providence per- 
sonated, are sometimes also abusively called gods 
and goddesses. This mystery of the Pagan Poly- 
InHesiod, theism, is thus fully declared by Moscho- 
poe pulus: "Joréov ore wavra at “FAXmee a Suvamey 
éyoura turoouy, ouUK avev erioragiac Ow ry cuvapuy uurwry 
evepysiv ivonuloy, at & ovouare ro re ray Covapey Lyov, Kai 
roy értorarouvra rourg Oedv mvopalov’ Ober" Haatcrow ixa- 
Aovy rore Staxowxcy rovro rue, Kal row Emwrarouvra Taic 
Sta rovrov Eveoyourtévarg riyvatc, Kat Mnuantgay rov otrov 
Kat rouc Kaorruuc, Kat thy Swoounhiny rovrovg Oeov, Kat 
émioraroucay aura, kat A@nvay rny geovnay, KaLTaY ho- 
pov tng goowncewe Oeov" cai roy Arovuooy roy olvoy Kat roy 
Sidovra rovrov Gov ov cat awd tou SSovar row olwow o 
Acre mapaya, Kat Aolvvcov rovroy roti era cal Dto- 
wusov’ Kat Eike@viag rove roxouc, xat ra¢ ipopweag rouc 
roKove brag? Kat “Agpodirny thy avvovaiay Kat Grurratoveay 
Taurn Giov’ Kara rovro Kai Movaac tXeyou ragrt Anyixag 
riyvac, oior purogixny, aaTpovopiay, Ktorewatey’, roaywoay, 
Kat Tac EPOpoug Kai wapo youg rourwy Orac, We must 
know, that whatsoever the Greeks (or Pagans) 
saw to have any power, virtue, or ability in it, 
they looked upon it as not acting according to 
such power, without the providence, presidency, 
or influence of the gods; and they called both the 
thing itself, which hath the power, and the deity 
presiding over it, by one and the same name: 
whence the ministerial fire used in mechanic arts, 
and the god presiding over those arts that work 
hy Gre, were both alike called Hephestus, or Val- 


* Hesiod. in Theogon. vers. 111. 


BUT SEVERAL NAMES OF GOD. 472 


can; so the name Demetra, or Ceres, was given as 
_ ‘well to corn and fruits, as to that goddess which 
bestows them ; Athena, or Minerva, did alike sig- 
nify wisdom, and the goddess which is the dis- 
penser of it; Dionysius, or Bacchus, wine, and the 
god that siveth wine; (whence Plato etymologizes 
the name from giving of wine.) In like manner, 

' they called both the child-bearing of women, and 
the goddesses that superintend over the same, 
hilithyia, or Lucina; Coitus, or copulation, aud 
the deity presiding over it, Aphrodite or Venus. 
And, lastly, in the same manner, by the. Muses. 
they signified both those rational arts, rhetoric, | 
astronomy, poetry, and the goddesses, which as- 

sist therein or promote the same.—-Now, as the se- 
veral things in nature and parts of the corporeal 
world are thus metonymically and catachresti- 
cally called gods and goddesses, it is evident, that 
such deities as these could not be supposed to be 
unmade or self-existent, by those, who acknow- 
ledged the whole world to have been generated 
_and had a beginning. But as these names were 
used more properly, to signify invisible and un- . 
derstanding powers, presiding over the things in 
nature, and dispensing of them, however they have 
an appearance of so many several distinct deities; 
yet they seem to have been all really nothing else, 

but as Balbus in Cicero* expresses it, . Deus per- 
tinens per naturam cujusque rei,” God passing 
through, and acting in the nature of every thing; 
—~and consequently, but several naimes, or so 
many different notions and considerations of that 
one supreme Numen, that Divine force, power, 





> Be Natur. Deor. Jib. ii. cap. Xxvili. p. 2996. tom. ix. oper. 


474 ALL THE PAGAN GODS 


and providence, which runs through the whole 
world, as variously manifesting itself therein. 

Wherefore, since there were no other kinds of 
Gods amongst the Pagans, besides these already 
enumerated, unless their images, statues, and 
symbols, should be accounted such (because they 
were also sometimes abusively called gods) which 
could not be supposed by them to have been un- 
made or without a beginning, they being the work- 
manship of men’s own hands; we conclude unt 
versally, that all that multiplicity of Pagan gods, 
which makes so great a show and noise, was really 
either nothing but several names and notions of 
one supreme Deity, according to its different ma- 
nifestations, gifts, and effects in the world, per- 
eonated ; or else many inferior understanding bhe- 
ings, generated or created by one Supreme: so 
that one unmade selfexistent Deity, and no more, 
was acknowledged by the more intelligent of the 
ancient Pagans (forof the sottish vulgar, no man 
can pretend to give an account, in any religion), 
and, consequently, the Pagan Polytheism (Cor ido- 
latry) consisted uot in worshipping a multiplicity 
of unmade minds, deities, and creators, self-exist- 
ent from eternity, and independent upon one Su- 
preme ; but in mingling aud blending, some way or 
other, unduly, creature-worship with the worship 
of the Creator. 

And that the ancient Pagan Theists thus ac- 
knowledged one supreme God, who was the only 
Grd¢ aylernroc, UnMAde or upproduced Deity, (I 
say, Pheists, because those amongst the Pagans, 
who admitted of many gods, but nave at all un- 
made, were absolute Atheists) this may be unde- 


' DERIVED FROM ONE SUPREME. 475 


niably concluded from what was before proved, 
that they acknowledged omnipotence or infinite 
power to bea Divine attribute. Because upon the 
hypothesis of many unmade self-existent deities, 
it is plain, that there could be none omnipotent, 
and consequently no such thing as omnipotence 
tn rerum natura: and therefore omnipotence was 
rightly and properly styled by Macrobius,’ summz 
Dei omnipotentia, it being an attribute essentially 
peculiar to one supreme and sole self-existent 
Deity. And Simplicius, likewise a Pagan, con- 
futed the Manichean hypothesis of two self-ex- 
istent deities from hence also, because it destroyed 
omnipoten ce: avaykalovrat oud Aéyovrec TWV ii Rpicwe 
ddwv apyac (ro re ayabov Kat To Kakov) Kal 7o cp cn 
ayalov Tap’ avroig Aeyouevov Oeov, pnkére Wav- p. 164. 
Twv alriov déyew, unde WE TavToKparopa Stkaiws ae 
avujvelv, nds Sovapty auTw TY axporarny kat oAnv ava- 
riBévan, aXAa ro npc Tne oAne Suvauewse, eimrep apa Kat 
rovro' For they, who assert two principles of the 
universe (one good, the other evil) are necessitated 
' to grant, that the good principle, called by them 
God, is not the cause of all things, neither can 
they praise it as omnipotent, nor ascribe a perfect 
‘and whole entire power to it, but only the half of 
a whole power at most, if so much.——Over and be- 
‘sides all which, it hath been also proved already, 
that the ancient Atheists under Paganism directed 
themselves principally against the opinion of mo- 
narchy, or of one supreme Deity ruling overall ; 
from whence it plainly appears, that it was then | 
' asserted by the Pagan Theists. — 

And we think it here observable, that this was 
a thing so generally confessed and acknowledged, | 


* In Somn. Scipion. lib. i. cap. xvii. p. h 


‘ 


476 THE PAGANS GPINION OF MONARCHY 


that Faustus the Manichean took up this conceit, 
that both the Christians and Jews paganized in 
the opinion of monarchy, that is, derived this 
doctrine of one Deity, the sole principle of all 
things, only by tradition from the Pagans, and, by 
consequence, were no other than schisms or sub- 
S. Ang. con. Givided sects of Paganism. “ Vos descis- 
rig  centes a gentibus (saith he) monarchie 
p.237.tom. opinionem primo vobiscum divulsistes, 
vuvoper. id est, ut omuia credatis ex deo.  istis 
sane schisma, nec non et priores vestri Judai. De 
opinione mouarchie, in nullo etiam ipsi dissen- 
fiunt a pagavis. Quare constat vos atque Ju- 
dos schisma esse gentilitatis. Sectas autem st 
queras, non plures erunt quam duw, Gentium et 
nostra.” You revolting from the Gentiles, broke 
off their opinion of monarchy, and carried it along 
with you, so as to believe all things to come from 
God. Wherefore, you are really nothing buta 
schism of Paganism, or a subdivided branch of it, 
and so are your predecessors the Jews; who differ 
nothing from Pagans neither in this opinion of 
monarchy. Whence it is manifest, that both Christe 
jans aod Jews are but kchistus of Gentilism, But 
as for sects of religion, really differing from ano- 
ther, there are but these two, that of the Pagans, 
and that of ours, who altogether dissent from 
them.—-Now though this be false and fvolish, as 
tothe Christians and Jews deriving that opinion 
of monarchy, only by way of tradition, from the 
Pagans, which is a thing founded in the princi- 
ples of nature; yet it sufficiently shews this to 
have been the general sense of the Payuns, that 
ali their gods were derived from one sale, selfex. 
istent Deity; so that they neither acknowledged 


ASCRIBED TO JEWS AND CHRISTIANS. 477 


a. multitude of unmade deities, nor yet that dupli- 
city of them, which Plutarch contended for (one 
good, and the other evil), who accordingly denied 
God to be the cause of all things, writing thus in 
his Defect of Oracles,’ ou pey ovderds arhwe rov Ozov, 
ol of 0 OfLoU Tt Tavrwv airtov TOLOUVTEC, asToyouat Tov [ET pLOV 
kat wpérovroc, ‘They are guilty of one extreme, 
who make God the cause of nothing, and they of 
another, who make him the cause of all things. 
— But this paradox was both late started amongst 


the Greeks, and quickly cried down by the suc-. 


cession of their philosophers, and therefore pre- 
judiceth not the truth of Faustus’s general asser- 
tion concerning the Pagans. Which is again 
fully confirmed: by St. Ansan in his re- 

ply: ‘‘ Siquis ita dividat, ut dicat eorum, ome aii 
que aliqua religione detinentur, aliis spe 
placere unum Deum colendum, aliis 

multos; per hanc differentiam et pagani a nobis 
remot sunt, et Manichezi cum paganis deputan- 
tur, nos autem cum Judeis. Hic forte dicatis, 
quod multos deos vestros ex una substantia per- 
hibetis ; quasi pagani multos suos, non ex una 
asserant, quamvis diversa illis officia, et opera, 
et potestates illis attribuant; sicut etiam apud 
vos alius deus expugnat gentem tenebrarum, alius 
ex ea capta fabricat mundum,” &c. If one should 


make another distribution of religionists, into | 


such as worship either one God, or many gods; 
according to this division, the Pagans will be 


removed from us Christians,.and joined with you . 


Manicheans. But, perhaps, you will here say, 
that all: your many gods are derived from one 
substance; as if the Pagans did not also derive 


2 Jom. if. oper. p. 414. 


- 


478 THE PAGANS HELD, BOTH MANY GODs, 


all their gods from one, though attributing several 
offices, works, and powers to them ; m hke man- 
ner as amongst you, one god expugns the nation 
of darkness, another god makes a world out of 
it, &c.—And again, afterwards, he writes further 
iene 1° the same purpose: ‘ Discat ergo 
traFaust.l.20. Faustus monarchiz opinionem non ex 
t. 19.p. 246. Ss 

gentibus nos habere, sed gentes non 

usque adeo ad falsos deos esse dilapsas, ut opi- 
nionem amitterent unius veri del, ex quo est om- 
‘nis qualiscunque natura.” Let Faustus therefore 
know, that we Christians have not derived the 
epinion of monarchy from the Pagans, but that 
the Pagans have not so far degenerated, sinking 
down into the worship of false gods, as to have 
lost the opinion of one true God, from whom is 
all whatsoever nature.— 

_ xiv. It follows, from what we have declared, 
that the Pagan Polytheism, or multiplicity of vods, 
is not to be understood in the sense before 
expressed, of many Oeot aryévynror Kat avburocrarot, 
many unproduced and self-existent deities, but 
according to some other notion or equivocation 
of the word gods. For God is rey rodAaywe Aeyo- 
nivev, one of those words, that hath been used 
in many different senses,—the Atheists themselves 
acknowledging a God and gods, according to 
some private senses of their own (which yet they 
do not all agree in neither), and Theists not al- 
ways having the same notion of that word ; foras- 
much as angels in Scripture are called gods in one 
sense, that is, as understanding beings superior 
to men, immortal, holy, and happy ; and the word 
is again sometimes carried down lower to princes 
ear magistrates; and not only so, but also to 


AND ONE GOD IN DIFFERENT SENSES. 479 


good men as such, when they are said to be made 
partakers of the Divine nature* And thus that 
learned philosopher and Christian, Boethius,® 
‘“ Omnis beatus deus; sed natura quidem unus, 
participatione vero nihil prohibet esse quamplu- 
rimos :” Every good and happy man is a god, 
and though there be only one god by nature, yet 
nothing hinders but that there may be many by 
participation.—But.then again, all men and an- 
gels are alike denied to be gods in other respects, 
and particularly as to religious worship: “ Thou. 
shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only: 
shalt thou serve.” Now this is that, which seems 
to be essentially included in the Pagan notion of 
the word God or gods, when taken in general— 
namely, a respect to religious worship. Where- 
fore, a God in general, according to the sense 
of the Pagan Theists, may be thus defined, An 
understanding Being superior to men, not ori- 
ginally derived from senseless matter, and looked 
upon ‘as an object for men’s religious worship. 
But this general notion of the word God is again 
restrained and limited by differences, in the divi- 
sion of it. For such a God as this may be either 
dyévmroc, ingenerate or unproduced, and conse- 
quently selfexistent; or else yevvnrdc, generated 
or produced, and dependent on some higher 
Being as its cause. In the former sense, the in- 
. telligent Pagans, as we have declared, acknow- 
ledged only one God, who was therefore called 
by them o 6s0¢ kar eéoynv, according to that of 
Thales in Laertius,° mpcoSuTarov Tov ovtrwy o Aedc, 
ayévynrov yao’ God is the oldest of all things, be- 


«2 Peter i. 4. > De Consolat. Philos, lib. iii. p. 72. s. 
, 7 _£ Lib. i. segm. 35, p. 2L. s. 


480 THE PAGANS HELD, NOTH MANY GODS, 


cause he is unmade or unproduced, and the only 
thing that is so ;—but in the Jatter, they adnutted 
of many gods, many understanding beings, which, 
though generated or produced, yet were superior 
to men, and looked upon as objects for their reli- 
gious worship. And thus the Pagan Theists 
were both Polytheists and Monotheists in differ- 
ent senses, they acknowledged both many gods, 
and one God; that is, many inferior deities, sub- 
ordinate to one Supreme. Thus Onatus the Py- 
Fel Pass thagorean, iv Stobaus, declares hunself: 
Ltopob edit. Cones de pos, Kat py vig tt tivo Bric, add tic ale 
iu O piyitag, Kat Kall umtorizac, Kai o xpariey Te 
mavrog? ot 3 aor wodlAai Ccapipartic Kara Came, Bae 
atAevE Ck marron avr o Kat Kparet Keni peerye Der Pat amre 
Mtitwy" ourog fb Kai tin oO mimiytow tay ounmayra Koon 
rai 6 aAdAat ot Olowres stot Kerr’ Opava Guy Te Ter wavTOE 
WeMLA YAEL, Kara Aayow urolinvrec res Wemwres Kal vonrat. 
It seemeth to me, that-there is not only one God, 
but that there is ove the greatest and highest 

tod, that governeth the whole world, and that 
there are many other gods besides him differing 
as to power, that one God reigning over them all, 
who surmounts them allio power, greatness, and 
virtue. That is that God, who contains and 
comprehends the whole world; but the other 
gods are those, who, together with the revolution 
of the universe, orderly follow that first and intel- 
ligible God.—Where it is evident, that Onatus’s 
wohAoi feat, Or many gods, were only the heavenly 
bodies, or animated stars, And partly from those 
words cited, but chiefly others, which follow after 
inthesame place(that will be produced elsewhere), 
it plainly appears, that in Onatus’s time, there were 
same who ackuowledacd one only God, denying 


- 


AND ONE GOD IN DIFFERENT SENSES. 481 


all those other gods, then commonly worshipped: 
And indeed Anaxagoras seems to have been such 
an one; forasmuch as asserting one perfect mind 
ruling over all (which is the true Deity), he effec- 
tually degraded all those other Pagan gods, the 
sun, moon, and stars from their godships, by 
making the sun nothing but a globe of fire, and 
the moon earth and stones, and the like of the 
other stars and planets. And some such there 
were also amongst the ancient Egyptians, as 
shall be declared in due place. . Moreover, Pro- 
clus, upon Plato’s Timeus, tells us, 
‘that there hath been always less doubt 
and controversy in the world concerning the one 
God, than concerning the many gods. Where- 
fore Onatus here. declares his own sense, as to | 
this particular, viz. that besides the one supreme 
God, there were also many other inferior deities, 
that is, understanding beings, that ought to be 
religiously worshipped. 

But because it is not impossible, but that there 
might be imagined one supreme Deity, though 
there were many other @:oi dyévynror, unmade and 
. self-existent gods besides, as Plutarch supposed 
before, one supreme God, together with a pyr 
dvove, an irrational soul or demon unmade, infe- 
rior in power to it; therefore, we add, in the next 
place, that the more intelligent Pagans did not 
_ only assert one God, that was supreme and x«pdre- 
_oro¢ ravrwy, the most powerful of all the gods, but 
also, who, being omnipotent, was the principle 
and cause of all the rest, and therefore the only © 
Meoc a a-yévynroc Kal av0undcraroe, the. only ub- Diss, t.p.5 
produced and self-existent Deity. —Max- ‘edit. Luga. 
imus Tyrius affirms this. to have been *°""*” 
the general sense of.all the Pagans, that there 


P. 206. 


A482 THE PAGAN THEROGONITA 


was foc ee Twavray Paccdeve Kai warn, waa Gene wodAo, 
Grou maicec, ovwds yourec then, ONE God the king and 
father of all, and many gods, the sons of God, 
reigning together with God.— Neher did the 
poeisimply any thing less, when Zac was so often 
called by the Greeks, and Jupiter by the Latins, 
warno avegenre Oeorrs, and hominem pater atque 
deorwn, or Aominum factorque deorim, and the 
like. And, indeed, the theogonia of the ancient 
Pagans before-mentioned, was commonly thus 
declared by them universally, yevwgrove rave thove 
ava, that the gods were generated, or, as Hero- 
dotus* expresseth it, ore txadroc roy Geoy vywtro, that 
every one of the gods was generated or pro- 
duced ;-—which yet Is not so to be understood, ax 
if they had therefore supposed no Good at all un- 
made or seléexistent (which is absolute Atheisan), 
but that the ot Gea, the gods, as ‘distinguished 
from the 6 @eoc, Or ro feiov, froin Grad, or the su- 
preme Deity, were all of them universally made 
or generated. 

But to the end, that we may now render this 
business yet something more easy to be beheved, 
that the intelligent Payans did thus suppose all 
their gods save one to have been made or rene- 
rated, and consequently acknowledged only one 
Oeov a-yivynroy Kal aullvrodraroy, One unproduaced and 
self-existent Deity,——we shall in this place farther 
observe, that the theogonia of those ancient. 
Pagans, their genesis and generation of gods, 
was really one and the same thing with the cos- 
inogonta, the genesis and generation of the world, 
and indeed both of them understood of a tempo- 
rary production both of these gods and the world. 
And this we shall first prove from Plato, in 


* Histor. lib. ii, cap, di. pp. 1O, 


THE SAME THING WITH THE COSMOGONIA. 483 


his Timeus; where he, being to treat of the 
cosmogonia, premiseth this distinction concern- 
ing two heads of being—that some were eternal 
and never-made, and some again made or gene- 
rated:; the former whereof he calls ovcia, or es- 
sence, the latter yiveorc, or generation; adding 
also this difference betwixt them, that the eternal 
and immutable things were the proper objects of 
science and demonstration, but the other gene- 
rated things of faith and opinion only ; 
6, Tt yao TOC yéveotv ovaia, TovTo mpo¢ wictTW 
adnOea, for what essence is to generation, the same 
is certainty of truth or knowledge to faith— And 
thereupon he declares, that his reader was not to 
expect the same evidence and certainty of truth 
* from him, where he was now ‘to treat of things 
generated (namely, the gods, and the_ visible 
world), as if he had been to discourse about things 

immutable and eternal, in these words: | 
éay ovv, @ DwKparec, Toda ToAXWY etrdvTWY 
wept Dewy Kal THe TOU TavToe YEVETEWC, &ec. If, there- 
fore, O Socrates, many things having been spoken 
by many men, concerning the gods and the ge- 
neration of the universe, we be not able to dis- 
course demonstratively concerning the same, you. 
ought not at all to wonder at it, or be displeased 
with us; but, on the contrary, to rest well satis- 
fied with our performance, if upon this argument 
we do but deliver probabilities—Whereé the 
gods are by Plato plainly referred to yéveor, and 
not to-ovsia; to generation, and not to eternal or 
immutable, essence, as they are also joined with 
the generation of the world, as being but a part 
thereof. Neither is this at all- to be wondered at 
in Plato, sinee first the whole visible world was 


Page 29. 


Page 29. 


484 7 THE PAGAN THEOGONIA 


no less to him than it was to the other Pagans, a 
God ; he calling it Oeoy eSaiuore, a happy God, 
and before jit was yet made, Ov iconwor, a God 
about to be made.—Not as if Plato accounted 
the senseless matter of this corporeal world, 
whether as perfectly dead and stupid, or as en- 
dued with a plastic nature only, to bea God (for 
no inanimate thing was a God to Plato), but 
because he supposed the world to be an aniatal, 
endued with an intellectual soul, and indeed the 
best of all animals compounded of soul and 
body : ovreg ody Sn xara Aoyor rev uxora Sai 
Aéyety, roves row xocnor Zatoy Enybuyor ?unreuw 
TE ny cAnbeig Sta rnv rou Geo yeriothat TpoVvotar. Where 
fore we are thus, according to probability, to 
eonclude, that this world was really made by the 
providence of God an intellectual animal;-— 
Whence from an animal forthwith it became a (rod. 
So that here we are to take notice of two gods in 
Plato, very different from one another: one a:ge- 
nerated god, this whole world animated; and 
another that God, by whose providence this world: 
was generated, and thus made an animal and & 
god; winch latter must needs be an unmade; 
selfexistent Deity, and not belong to yémed, bub 
to ovsia, not to generation, but to immutablo e¢- 
sence. Again, those greater parts of the world, 
the sun, the moon, and the stars (as supposed also 
to be animated with particular souls of their 
own) were as well accounted by Plato, as by the 
other Pagans, pods, he plainly calling them thetd 
Spqyos Kniyevvyrot Oct, Visible and generated gods.-- 
Besides which celestial gods, the earth itself ale 
is supposed by him to be either a god or goddess, 
according to those ancient copies of the Timaus 


Page 30. 
:#. 


THE SAME THING WITH THE. COSMOGONIA. 485 
used. both by Cicero and Proclus: [nv 'd&, reopov 


jatv nuetépav, ciiovpévny S€ wept Tov Sia. ravTo¢ wOAOV. TETE- 
‘pévov, guAaka Kal Snpuwove-you vuKkroc TE Kat nMEpas, eun- 
yxavncaro, Towrny Kal mpcoPuTarny Ocwy, Soot evror 
ovpavou yeyovacr’ . God fabricated the earth. also, 
which is our nurse, turning round upon the axis 
of the world, and thereby causing and. maintain-— 
ing the succession of. day and night, the first and 
oldest of. all the gods generated within the hea- 
vens.—Where, since that philosopher seems the 
rather to make the earth an animal and a God, 
because of its diurnal ‘circumgyration upon. its’ 
own axis, we may conclude, that afterwards, 
when in his old age (as Plutarch* records from 
Theophrastus), he gave entertainment also to 
that other part of the Pythagoric hy pothesis, and 
attributed to the earth a planetary annual mo- 
tion likewise about the sun (from whence it would 
follow, that, as Plotinus’ expresseth it, the earth 
WAS év rwv aorpwr, one of the stars), he was there- 
fore still so much the more inclined to think the 
earth to be a god as well as the other planets, or 
‘at least as the moon; that having been formerly 
represented in the Orphic tradition but as ano- 
ther habitable earth. For these verses of Or- 
pheus are recorded by STOO ues to that Pur pote: : 


' Micaro Y GAANY yaray dmelearor, hy v6 Lednvay - 
"Abdyaros xAhgoury, Emix Gives $4 re Mrvay, 
“H w0A’ otige’ Byes, WER’ daria, WoRAa putdaben. 


* 


The sense whereof i is this: That God i in 1 the cos- | 


° In ‘Quvestion. Platonic. p. 1006. oper. vide etiam.eundem in Vita 
| Nume,’ tom.1..oper. p. 312. ° 

‘> Lib. ii. de Dub. Anime, Ennead i iv. lib. iv. ‘cap. xxii. p. 414. 

¢ Comment, in Timaeum evan lib-iv. p. 283. vide etiam lib. v.- 
p. 292, 


VoL. 0 OQ 


436 PLATO s COSMOQGONIA 


movonla, or cosmopaia, besides this earth of 
ours, fabricated also another vast earth, which 
the immortal gods call Selene, but mortal men 
Mene, or the moon; that hath many hills and 
valleys, many cities and houses in it.--From 
Sec Macon, Whence Proclus, though as it seems a 
wae 4 stranger to the Pythagoric system, yet 

being much addicted to these Orphic 
traditions, concluded the moon to be, ya» afepiay, 
an ethereal earth.— 

After all this, Plato, that he might be thought 
to omit nothing in his Timean cosmogonia, speaka 
also of the genesis ortus, or generation of the 
poetic gods, under the name of demons, such as 
Tethys and Phorcys, Saturn and Rhea, Jupiter 
and Juno, and the hke; which seem to be really 
nothing else but the other inanimate parts of the 
world and things of nature, Oewanlivre, that ix, 
fictitiously personated and deified (an is else- 
where declared). Which whole business was a 
thing set off by those poets with much fiction and 
physiological allegory. And though Plato, out 
of a seening compliance with the Jaws of his 
city, pretends here to give credit to this poetic 
theogonia, ax tradition delivered down from the 
sons of the gods, who must not be supposed to 
have been ignorant of their parents; yet, as Eo- 
sebius* well observeth, he doth but all the while 
slily jeer it, plainly insinuating the fabulosity 
thereof, when he affirmeth it to have been intro- 
duced not only ave avayxaiwy awodtiLwy,” without 
necessary demonstrations, but also dyw sxerey, 
without so much as probabilities. Neverthelesa, 


*Preparat. Evangrlic. hb. H. cap. vii. p. 75, 74, 
* Plat in Tomar, cap. axel. p. 269. 


A THEOGONIA. — AST 


Proclus,* suspecting no such matter, but taking 
Plato in all this to have been in very good earnest, 
interprets these poetic gods or demons mentioned . 
by him, to be the gods below the moon (notwith- 
standing that the earth was mentioned before by 
Plato), calling them yeveovovpyous Oeovc, the gods - 
that cause generation, and seeming to understand. 
thereby the animated ‘elements; Jupiter being 
here not taken, as he is often elsewhere, for the 
supreme God, but only for the animated ether, 
as Juno for the animated air. And upon this - 
occasion he runs out into a long dispute, to preve, 
that not only the stars were animated, but: also 
all the other sublunary bodies or elements: « yde 
OXo¢ 0 KOapoe Beog eVoayiWD, EoTL-ovdEY OTL TWY ouprAn- | 
povvTwy avrov jpopiwy aQeov, Kat dmrpovonrov, a Of Kat” 
Oéov avra mere xel kal mpovolac, betay cha ye puoe, et O8 
; rovro, Kal OtKELaL raketc Oswv epeornkagwy avroic, gt: yep 
Kat 0 ovpavec Sa péow Puyev Kal-vOwY mere yer Tne peas 
wyne, Kat TOU EvOC VOU, TL yen TEQL rourwy oicBat Tov 
orot yetwy" Tuc ov ToAAw padrdov rautTa ola On TIVO pléowD © 
Ostwv rakewv peretdayye ric "hie Tou KOo péov Oedenroes F or 
if the whole world be a happy God, then: none 
of the parts of it are godless, or devoid of provi- 
dence; butif all things partake of God and. Pro-. 
vidence, then are they not unfurnished of the 
Divine nature; and if so, there must be some. 
peculiar orders of gods presiding over them. For. 
if the heavens by. reason of particular souls and 
minds partake of that one soul and ‘one mind; 

why should we not conclude the same concerning 
the elements, that they also, by certain.interme-° 
dious orders of gods, partake of that one Divi-: 
nity of the whole world >— Wherefore, a little. be- : 

* In Timzeum Platon. lib. iv. p. 287. 
212 — 


A488 PLATO'S COSMOGONIA 


fore, the same Proclus highly condemns. certain 
ancient physiologers whom he supposeth Aris- 
totle to have followed:. wohhoig rwV pusto- 
Ad-yeov dipuya eu pepoueva, Kat dpa vonta 
ravTa: etvat Ta ororx ela vevoquarau’ ra pey yap ovpavia Sua 
rijv ev avroig takty; vouv Kat Jeov mere wpodoyouy, ray 
O8 : eVect, we ToAuperaBoXor, Kat ddptorov, Kat amrpovon- 
Tov:.anéAuTov, ota S& Kal ‘Aotsrorédne UorTepov — g00kace, 
T aac. oupaviatc mepipopaic povwe Emtarnoac, Tac axwyroue 
atria’ glre oKrw Elev, gire. mAstouc’ ayvya ot ta oTOLYELa 
ravra katadetrov' “The elements were thought by 
most of the ancient physiologers to be inanimate, 
and to be moved. fortuitously without providence. 
For. though they acknowledged the heavenly bo- 
dies, by reason of that order that appears in 
them, to partake of mind and gods; yet they left: 
this sublunary world (or genesis) to float up and 
down without providence. And these Aristotle 
afterwards followed, appointing immoveable in-_ 
telligences to preside over the celestial spheres | 
only (whether eight or more) but leaving all the 
lower elements dead and inanimate. 

Lastly, besides all those other mundane eods 
before-mentioned, as generated together with the 
world, though Proclus seems to be of another 
opinion, yet it 1s manifest, that Plato doth not 
there in his Timeus altogether forget those pro- _ 
perly called demons (elsewhere so much insisted 
upon: by him),- but in the very next following 
words he plainly insinuates them, after this man- 
ner: *Oa0t paivovrat Kal dcov av éAwor Ooi, the gods, 
which appear visibly to us as often as they please, 
or which can appear and disappear at pleasure— 
speaking also of their genesis or generation -as 


'p, 285. 


+ * In Timao, cap. xxvi. p. 248. 


A THEOGONIA: - 489 
part of the cosmogonia; and then agaio ':after- 
wards calling them vio: Soi, junior gods, he-.de- 
scribes them as those whose particular office it 
was to superintend and preside. over human 
affairs, *kai xara Svvayw ort Kadota Kal dpiora re 
Oinrdy dtaxuBeovav Zwov, Ore pen Kakov avro Eavt@ ylyvouro 
airov, and to govern this mortal animal,: man, 
after the best manner possible, so that be should 
no otherwise fail of doing well or being happy, 
than as he became a cause of evil and misery 
to himself, by the abuse of his own liberty.— 

And thus much out of Plato’s Timzus; but 
the same thing might be proved also out of his 
other writings, as particularly from that passage 
in- his tenth book of Laws,’ where he takes no- 
tice again of the theogonia of the ancients, ‘and’ 
that as it had been depraved and cerrupted 
by a great mixture of impious and immoral :fa- 
bles. Etaty nyiv év yoappact Aoyor Keliuevor. Ov pev Ey 
TloL METPOLC, ot 8& Kal vev' pérpuv" Ae youre epi Bow,” ‘Ol. 
pev Tahadrarots We yeyovev n ‘wpirn puaic ovpavou TWV TE 
aAdvwv* mpotovrer de re apyne ov woAU Beoyoviay dusifp- 
yovrat, -yevoptevol TE WE TpoC adAnAore wpinoav: There 
are (saith he) extant among us Athenians, certain 
stories and traditions, very ancient, concerning 
the gods, written partly in metre, and partly:in 
prose, declaring how the heaven, and the other: 
gods were at. first made, or generated, and then, 
_ carrying on their fabulous theogonia farther, how 
these generated gods afterward conversed ..with 
one’another, and ingendering after the manver of 
men, begat other gods.— Where that philosopher, 
taking. off: his vizard, plainly discovers his *great 
dislike of that whole fabulous theogonia (how- 

. In Timeo, cap. xxix. p.252) > P. 664. : 


490 HESIOD'S THEOGONIA 


ever he acknowledges elsewhere; that it did con- 
tain vrovotac,” that is, physiological allegories un- 
der it), as a thing that was destructive of all piety 
and virtue, by reason of its attributing all human 
passions and vices to the gods. However, it 
plainly appears from hence, that the theogonia 
and the cosmogonia were one and the same thing, 
the generation of the gods being here the genera- 
tion of the heaven, and of the sun, moon, and 
stars, and the like. 

Moreover, this same thing is sufficiently mani- 
fest also even from Hesiod’s own theogania, 
which doubtless was that which Plato principally 
aimed at; and if it were not absolutely the first, 
yet itis the most ancient writing now extant, in 
that kind. For there, in the beginning of that 
poem, Hesiod’ invokes his muses after this man- 
ner :— 

Kaipere, rixve Aloc, dere ds lusparcay dutny: 
Krslers Y Banden agin yhreg aly kérree, 

OT Iie iLeyivevro xai Olyavel arragiarro:, 
Nuxro¢g 3s dvopapic, og 8" adpeugas srpape Uovres. 
Eimara 3’, og va wera Otol xat Vata yeverro, 
Kai Tlorapcot, xal lovrog dwtigiras oiduars Guar, 


“AGT pa TL Kagerreroanra, xal Ovgavic sugis imwegder, 
QI x’ ix rir tybrovre Deol Yworiiges iar. 


Salvete natw Jovis, date vero amabilem cantilenawm : 

Celebrate quoque immortalium divinum genus semper existentium, 
Qui tellure prognati sunt, coelo stellato, 

Nocteque caliginosa, quos item salsus nufrivit pontus. 

Dicite insuper, ut primum dii et terra facti fueriat, 

Et flumina, et pontus immensus xstu fervens, 

Astraque falgentia, et coelum latum superne, 

Et quiex his nati sunt, dii, datores bonorum. 


Where we see plainly, that the generation of 
the gods is the generation of the earth, heaven, 


* Vide Platon, de Kepnbl. lib. ii. p. 430. ' Theogon. vers. 104. 


- 


THE COSMOGONIA. 491 


‘stars, seas, rivers, and other things begotten from 


them (as probably amongst the rest demons aad 
nymphs, which the same Hesiod speaks of else- 


where). But immediately after this invocation 


of the muses, the poet begins with Chaos, and 


-Tartara, and Love, as the first principles, and 


then proceeds to the production of the earth and 


of night out of chaos; of the ether and of day 


from night; of the starry heavens, mountains; and 
seas, &c. All which genesis or generation of 


‘gods is really nothing but a poetical description 


of the cosmogonia; as throughout the sequel of 
that whole poem all seems to be physiology, veiled 
under fiction and allegories. And thus the an- 


‘cient scholia upon that book begin, « igTéov OTt.0 repl 
“eNe OQcoyoviac A-yo¢ guouny Suyynow TwY OVTWY virayopevel, 
“We must know, that the whole doctrine of the 


theogonia contains under it, in way of allegory, a 
physiological declaration of things ;—Hesiod’s 


gods being not only the animated parts of the 


world, but also-all the other things of nature, fic- 
titiously personated and deified, or abusively 


_ called gods and goddesses. - 


Neither was this only the doctrine of the Greeks, 


that the world was thus: made or generated, and 
‘that the generation of the world was a theogonia, 
-or ‘a generation of gods (the world itself and its 


several parts being accounted such by them), but 


‘also in like manner of the other Barbarian Pagans. 
- For. Diogenes Laertius hath recorded ja proom. 
concerning the Persian Magi, cropaive- P* - 


‘Qa rept TE ovciac dewy Ket YEVEGEDC, ove Kat Tvo Elvat Kat 


ynv kai Hwp.* That they did both assert the being 


and generation of gods, and also that these gods 


es Vide etiam Herodot; Hist. lib. i. ‘caps €XXxi. p. 55. 


422 THE PAGAN -THEOGONIA 


| Were fire, and: earth; -and.water ;-—that.is, hat the 
enimated: elements were gods .(as Proclus also 
before ideclared), and that these, together with the - 
world,-were- generated, or had a-beginning. And 
In «ya2nér- both Laertius aad Diodorus represent it 
3 a ay :as-the opinion of the ancient Egyptians, 
Sie Ree that the: world was generated, or had 
| @bin ame pf a Lemporary production; as also, that the 
—— ‘pg SED and moon, and other parts.of the 

Tea »:, world, were gods. But whereas. the 
@iai tie. «same Diodorus writes of certain Egyp- 


Cosmogo- 
Conmogo: tian gods, ol yeveaty aidioy & ig YRKOTEC, which 


- inClio. n. 


feo. tét;.-had.an eternal generation ;—he seems to 
P3810: «inean thereby only the celestial gods, the 
sun} moon, and stars, as distinct from those other 
_heroes.and men-gods, which are.again thus de- 
scribed ‘by. him: : ot Ounrot vmdgtavrec, -Sia OE aviecty 
hot KOU: avloasrrey EVEPYEGuAY, TETU yaxorec 7H¢ aBavasiag : 
Who}:though-naturally mortal, yet, by reason of 
thein wisdon: virtue, and:beneficence toward man- 
_Winidyhad-been advanced to. immortality— | : 
q.j4nd by this time we think it doth sufficiently 
appear, that the theogonia of the ancients is not 
to be understood merely. of their heroes and men- 
- gods, or of- all their gods, as supposed to have 
_ been nothing ‘else but mortal men, (Di mortali- 
bus nati matribus, as Cotta i in Cicero® speaks) who, 
eceording :to-the more vulgar signification of:the. 
word; had: been generated (humano more), as some, 
otherwise learned men; have seemed to suppose; 
but. that it-extends-to all the inferior Pagan gods, . 
some:whereof were.parts of the visible world ani- 
hated, ay: the sun,-moon, stars, and earth: so that 
their theogonia was the very same thing .with the 


« De Natur: Deor..-lib. iii; cap.-xviii. p- 3075.-tom. ix. oper. 


“HOW MISTAKEN. ASS, 
_eésmogonia, or at leasta part thereof; Natwith- 
standing which, wwe deny not, but that there: was 
also, in the paganic fables of the geds, ‘a -certam 
mixture of history and herology interserted, and 
complicated all along together with physiology. . 
We are, in the next place, to observe; that both 
this theogonia and cosmogonia of the ancient 
Pagans, their generation of the world and sods, is 
to be understood of a temporary productiofi of 
them, whereby they were made & py dvrwy, OF 
from'an antecedent non-existence brought into 
_ being. For this was the general tradition amongst | 
the Pagans, that the world was made out of an 
‘ antecedént:chaos, aS shall be afterwards further 
declared. And Aristotle* affrmeth, that before 
his. time, this genesis and temporary produetion 
ef the world had been universally entertained by 
_all, and particularly, that Plato was an assertor ef 
‘the same. Nevertheless, the: generality of the 
latter Platonists? endeavour, with all their might, 
to force a contrary sense upon his Timzus: which 
-isia thing, that Plutarch long since observed. after 
this manner ; ot mrElorot THV Yew pévey TiAe- ) 
TOL, $Boshnevo kat TapahvTovpEvot, mavna at . ind. 
: pa xavevrar, Kat rapaphatovrat Kat oTpépovety, 
“Oe Te Seivoy kal appurov olopsevor Oey mepicahumr ety Kat aipve~ 
obat, TH: TE Tov KOoMOU. ry TE Tne dune avrov “peveaty Kat 
: ovaTacw,: ouK e& aLolou CUVESTWTWY, ovdE rov amreipov yeovay 
airwe exovrwv? The most of Plato’s followers, be- 
ing infinitely troubled and perplexed in thetr 
minds, turn themseives every way, using all man- 
ner of arts, and offering all kind of violence: to. 
his text, .as, conceiving, that they ought, by all 


| — & DeCoelo, lib. 1, cap. x. p. 632. ein: i, oper: 
b Vide Procium in Timeum- Platon: 


494 THAT PLATO REALLY ASSERTED 


means possible, to hide and conceal that opinion 
as infand and detestable) of the generation of the 
-world, and of the soul of it, so as not to have con- 
‘tinued from eternity, or through a succession of 
infinite time.—Notwithstanding which, we con- 
- -eeiveit to-be undeniably evident, that Plato, in his 
‘Timeus, doth assert the genesis of the world in 
:this sense; to wit, of a temporary production of 
it, and: as not having existed from eternity, .or 
without beginning. First, because, in the entrance 
of that discourse,* he opposeth these two things to 
‘one another, ro ae dv, that which always. is, —and 
TO ~yévveawv: Eyov; that which ts generated or made ;— 
and therefore, in affirming the world to have been 
-generated, he must needs deny the eternity thereof. 
.. Again, the question is so punctually stated by him 
' -afterwards, as that there is no possibility of any 
' subterfuge left, TOTEOOV WV GEL. YEvésewo ao yen Ew 
ovdgiay, 7 yeyovev, an apne TLVOG aptapevoc > Whether 
the world always were, having no beginning or ge- 
--neration, or whether it was made or generated, | 
‘having commenced from a certain epocha?—To 
which the answer Is, yéyovev, that 1t was made, or 
had a beginning.—Moreover, this philosopher 
there plainly affirms also,’ that time ‘itself was 
: made, or had a beginning, ydovoc S ovv wer ovpavou 
yéyovev, iva aya yevynbevrec, dua kat AVPoow, av wore AVoiC 
‘tig avrav-yévnra. ‘Time was made together with the 
heaven; that, being both generated together, they 
might be both dissolved together hkewise, if at 
‘least there should ever be any dissolution of them. 
—Besides which, he plainly declares, that-before 
 -this orderly world was produced, the matter of it 
did move disord erly ;° Trav Ooov nv Oparov, mapadaBwv, 


* Cap. xii. p.235. > Cap. xx. p. 245. ¢'T'imeei, cap. xiv. p. 237. 


THAT THB WORLD HAD A BEGINNING. 459 


oux Rovyiay ayov, GAA Kwvoupevoy TANUMEAWS Kal aTAKTWC, 
gic rakw avro hryaryev &K THe arakiac’ God taking abl 
that matter, which was, (not then resting, but 
moving confusedly and disorderly) he brought it 
into order out of confusion.—Which is no more 
than if he should have said, God made this world 
out of an antecedent chaos ; which, as we said be- 
fore, was the constant tradition of the ancient 
Pagaus. Now, as to authority, we may well con- 
clude, that Aristotle was better able to understand 
both Plato’s philosophy and Greek, than any of 
those junior Platonists, who lived hundreds of 
years after. And yet we are not quite destitute 
of other sudrages besides Aristotle’s neither; uot 
only Philo, the Jew,» but also Plutarch? and At- 
ticus,° who were both of them Platonic Pagans, 
voting on this side, besides Alexander Aphrodi- 
sius,° a judicious Peripatetic. The only objection 
considerable is from what Plato himself writes in 
his third and sixth book of Laws; in the former 
whereof, Clinias anc the Athenian Hospes dis- 
course together after this manner, concerning the 
original or first beginning of commonwealths: 
TloAereiag 3 apyny riva wore dwpev ye yovevat ea an 
KA. Aéyete 8 rofev; AO. Ourat piv aro ypovou 
pnKove Te Kal arretpiac, Kal T@Y petaBorwy Ev Tw TOLWUTID. 
KA. Ilwe Aéyac 5 AO. Déoe, ad ov woAK¢ T Etot Kal évbew- 
moe WoALTEVOMEVOL, SOKELE AY TOTE KaTavonoat Ypovou wANBoC 
ésov yéyovev; KA. Ovxouy paov ye ovdauwc. AQ. Te 8 
ye we Gretpov te Kal aunyavoy av cin. KA. avy piv ovv 
vovrd yt. AO. Mev ye ovvy ov pvpiae pév ert pupiate yw 

* In Libro, quod mundus sit incorruptibilis, p. 941. oper. 

» In Libro de Animz Procreat. p. 1013, 1014. tom. ii oper. 

© Apud Euseb. Prapar. Evangel. lib. xv- cap. vi. p. 80}. 


¢ Comment. in Libros Metaplrys. Aristot. p. 181. cd. Latin. Paris. 
1506. fol. : 


496 THAT PLATO REALLY ASSERTED 

yEyovact TOAME Ev TOUTY THY YOU, Kara TOY avrav di Tou 
wAxBoug Avyov, ovK Earrouc -epPapuévacs weWoArrevpevat 
8: av wacac wodtretag moAAaKwe EXacrayou 3 Kat roré pew £5 
éXarrévev, pelouc, Tore d& Ex peLovwy, tharroug’ Kat yel- 
poug tk Berridvew yeyovaai, kat PeAriove Ex Yeoover. 
Atu. What beginning shall we say there was of 
commonwealths? Cr. Whence would yourself 
derive them? Aru. I suppose froma great length 
and infinity of time, through successive changes. 
Cu. | understand not well what you mean. 
Aru. Thus therefore, do you think, that you are 
able to determine what length or quanuty of time 
there hath been since cities and polities of men 
first began? Cx. This is by no means easy to be 
done. Aru. Wherefore, there isa kind of intinity 
and inestimability of this time. Cx. It is very true. 
ATH. Have there not then been innumerable 
cities constituted within this time, and asx many 
again destroyed, of all several forms; they being 
changed from greater to:lesser, and from lesser'to 
greater; from better to worser, and froin worser to 
better >—Now, wesay, thatif Plato intended here 
to assert an absolute infinity of time past, then it 
must needs be granted, that in his old age, when. 
he wrote his book of Laws, he changed his opinion» 
from. what it was before when he wrote his 
‘Timeus ; and if so, he ought in all reason to have 
rétwacted: the same, which he does not here doy 
but in very trutb, the meaning of this philosopher 
in those words cited, seems to be this; not that 
there was an absolute ‘infinity of time past, (as 
Proclos contends, taking advantage of that word — 
arstgia) but only that the: world: had lasted such a - 
length: of time, as was in-a manner inestimable to - 
us, Or uncompatable by us; there having hap. 


THAT THE WORLD HAD A BEGINNING. 487 


pened, as he addeth, in the mean time, several 
successive destructions apd consumptions of man- 
kind, by means of varions accidents, as particu- 
larly one most remarkable deluge and inunda- 
tion of waters. The latter place, in his sixth 
book of Laws, runs thus: 9 rav avbodmwy ee 
yaveote 7 rd TapaTay apyny oudeniay Edney — 
avd ebee wore y réAeurny’ aAA Vv TE asl Kat torat Tavree 
‘i UNKOG TL TC doxnc ad ov yiyovey, apn over av ypovor 
Ggov yeyovog av em. Either the generation of men 
had no beginning at all, and will have no end, but 
always was and always will be; or else there has 
been an inestimable length of time from the begin- 
ning of it— Which place affordeth still more light 
to the former ; for we may well conclude, that by 
aurepoy Tk Kal aunyavor, there was not meant an abse- 
lute infinity of time, but only such as had a very 
remote or distant beginning, because apynyavey 
here is plainly taken in that sense. We conceive, 
therefore, that this was Plato’s opinion in his old 
age, when he wrote his book of Laws, that though 
the world bad a beginning, yet it had continued | 
avery long time not computable by us; or at least 
he thought fit to declare himself after that manner, 
perhaps by reason of the clamours of Aristotle, or 
some others against bis Timzus, that so he might 
thereby somewhat molify that opinion of the no- 
vity of the world, by removing the coc and, : 
date thereof to so great a distance. | 
Now, it is very true, what we have several times | 
before suggested, that there have been amongst 
the Pagans, both Theogonists and Cosmogonists 
too, that were Atheists; they abusing the word . 
gods several ways; some of them, as Anaximan-_ 
der, understanding thereby inanimate worlds suc- 


498 THAT PLATO WAS 


cessively generated out of senseless matter, and 
corrupted again into it; others, as Anaximenes 
and Democritus, allowing, that there were certain 
animals and understanding beings superior to men, 
but sach only as were native and mortal, in like 
manner as men, and calling these by the name of 
gods. Of the former of which two philosophers, 
St. Austin® gives us this account: “ Anaximenes 
omnes rerum causas infinito aéri dedit, nec deos 
negavit aut tacuit, non tamen ab ipsis aérem fac- 
tum, sed ipsos ex aére ortos credidit:” Anaxt- 
menes made infinite air to be the first original and 
cause of all things; and yet was he not therefore 
silent concerning the gods, much less did he deny 
them; nevertheless, he did not believe the air to 
have been made by the gods, but the gods to have 
been all generated out of the air-—These were 
therefore such Theogonists, as supposed all the 
gods without exception to be generable and cor- 
ruptible, and acknowledged no @:0v ayévvnrov at all, 
no understanding beiug unmade and self-existent; 
but concluded senseless matter to be the only ayéiv- 
yrov and original of all things, which is absolute 
Atheism. Notwithstanding | which, it 18 Certain, 
that all the Pagan Theogonists were not Atheists, 
(no more than all their Cosmogonists Theists) bet 
that there was anothersort of Theogonists amongst 
them, who supposed indeed all the inferior mun- 
dane gods to have been made or generated in one 
seuse or other ; but asserted one @:dv a-yévwnroy xat 
avyrocraroy, One supreme unmade self-existent 
Deity, who was the cause of them all: which The 
oyonists, for distinction sake from those other 
Atherstic ones, may be called Divine, 


* De Civitate Dei, lib viii. eap. ii. p. 147. tom. vii. oper. 


A DIVINE TAROGONIST. 499. 


And that Plato was such a Divine Theogonist, 
ig a thing, as we conceive, out of question; butif 
there had been any doubt concerning it, it would 
have been sufficiently removed from those pas-. 
sages before cited out of his Timeus. To which, 
nevertheless, for fuller satisfaction sake, may be: 
added these two following: the first, page 34: 
ovTog 87 wac ovToc att oyiopH0¢ cou, mépt roy TOTE éouevor 
Oeow Aoyrabec” For thus it ought to be read dvroe,: 
as itis-also in Aldus's edition ; and not dvrwe, as m 
Stephens, following an error in that of Ficinus. 
And accordingly the words are thus rendered by: 
Cicero: “ Hec Deus is, quisemper erat, de ali- 
quando futuro deo cogitans, levem eum effecit, 
et undique equabilem,” &c. This was the ratio- 
cination or resolution of that God, which always 
is, concerning that god, which was sometime: 
about to be made, that he should be smooth and 
spherical, &c.— Where again, it presently follows 
in Cicero's version, “ Sic Deus ille eternus hunc 
perfecte beatum deum procreavit;” thus that. 
eternal God procreated this perfectly happy god, 
the world.— Where there is plainly mention made’ 
of two gods, one a generated god, the animated 
world, called eleewhere in Plato Oeiov yevynrdy ; and 
another eternal and unmade God, innatus et mfec- 
ixs Deus, who was the cause of the world’s gene- 
ration or production ; or, to keep close to Plato’s 
own language, oue God who belonged to genesis, 
or that head of being, which he calls generation, 
and therefore must needs have an antecedent cause 
of: his existence, since nothing can be made with-. 
out a cause; and another God, that was truly and 
properly ovota, immutable essence, who was the- 
cause of that generated god the universe, and 


500 THAT PLATO WAS 


therefore of all things. The other passage of 
Plato's is, (page 41, of his Timaus,) are oty ravreg 
Oaoe TE TEgiToAQuet parepwe, Kat Scot gaivovrat Kal Ocow av 
sHidwoe Beot, yéveoty Exyov, Afya mpoC avTOUg G TOE TO 
nay yevynoac, ‘Ta0E, Geot Gewy, wy éyes Snpuovpyoc, mTarne 
re Epywv, a &t euov yevoueva® When therefore all the 
gods, both those which move visibly about the 
heavens, and those which appear to us as often as 
they please (that is, both the stars and demons), 
were generated or created, that God, which made 
this whole universe, bespake these generated gods 
after this manner: Ye gods of gods (whom I my- 
self. am the maker and father of) attend.—Where 
the words 60 av, notwithstanding Proclus’s 
other differing conjectures, seem to have been 
very well rendered by Cicero: Dit, qui deorum 
satu orti estis, Ye gods, which are the progeny or 
offspring of the gods.—And the gods, whose off 
spring these generated gods (the animated stars 
and demons) are said to be, must needs be those 
aio coi, those eternal gods, elsewhere mentioned 
in the same Timzus, as where the philosopher 
calls the world Tw aidiwy Dewy yeyouog ayaa, a g£e- 
nerated or created image of the eternal gods; ~—- 
as Cicero also is to be understood of these, when 
he speaks of the world’s being made by the gods, 
and by the counsel of the gods. Now, these eter- 
nal gods of Plato, called by his followers Os0i vxep- 
coopiot, the sapramundane gods,—though, accord- 
ing to that stricter notion of the word yéveotc, as it 
is used both in Plato and Aristotle, for a tempo- 
rary production of things, 2 ovx dvrev, they were 
indeed all ayévwnra, because they never were not, 
and had no beginning of their existence; yet, not- 


* Timi, cap. xxi, p. 245, s. 


A DIVINE THEOGONIST. sol 


withstanding were they not therefore supposed by 
that philosopher to be all avroyorot and avburdorarcl, 
so many selforiginated and self-subsistent beings, 
or first principles, but only one of them such, and 
the rest derived from that one: it being very true, 
as we conceive, what Proclus affirms, 6r: o DAarwv 
émt uta aoyny a@aye wavra, that Plato re- In nerd " 
dnuees all things to one principle,—even P- U6. — 
matter itself; but unquestionable, that he deriveth 
all his gods from one. Wherefore, all those cter-_ 
nal gods of Plato (one only excepted), though 
they were not opt or 2e¢ nerated In one sense, 
that i IS. Kara yoovor, as to a temporary beginning, 
vet were they, notwithstanding, as Proclus distin- 
ruisheth, yEvINTOL ar atriag, generated in another: 
sense, as produced from a superior cause, there 
being only one such aydnnroc, one ingenerate: ot 
unproduced Deity. Thus, according to Plato’ 
there were two sorts of secondary or inferior ahd 
derivative gods ; first, the Meot éyxoajuor, or mundane 
gods, such as had all of them a temporary ¢ genera, 
tion with the world, and of whom Plato’s théder 
nia and yeréoec Ben 18 properly to be understood! 
and secondly, the UT ECKOGHLOL and aidtoc Gent, the $u- 
pramundane and eternal gods, which were al o 
them also, save only one, produced: from ‘that 
one, and dependent on it as their cause. But of 
these inferior eternal gods of the Platonists and 
Pythagoreans we are to speak again afterwards: 
Inthe mean time it is evident, that j in- that passage 
of Plato's before cited, there is plain mentioit 
made both of @eor vyévecu EY Ours, of dit orti, gots 
who were made or generated with the world; and 
of 6 rode ra ray yervicac, Of one God, who was the 
maker of them, and of the whole universe, who 
VOL. I. 2K 


202 PAGAN THEOGONISTS ASSERTORS 
therefore is himself every way ayéunroc, unmade 
or unproduced.—And accordingly, he afterwards 
subjoins, Kat O pen on ravra maura carasac, ELEVEN" oy TH 
Eaurov kata TeoT OY HOM pevortos & ponaoarrTes Ol TALES THY 
TOU TATEOC race, ereiBorro aut). which Cicero thus 
renders: “ Atque is quidem (Deus) qui cuncta 
composuit, constanter in suo manebat statu; qui 
autem erant ab eo creati (dit) cum parentis ordi 
nem cognovissent, hune sequebantur,” &c. Then 
that god, who framed all things, remained con- 
stantly in his former state; and his sons, or the 
gods that were created by him, observed his order 
and appointment.— 

Neither was Plato singular in this; buf the gene- 
rality of the other Pagan Theists, who were more 
intelligent, all along agreed with him herein, as to 
the generation of the mundane gods; and so were 
both Theists and Theogonists, they indeed under- 
standing nothing else by their theogonia, or ge- 
neration of gods, than a Divine cosmogonia, or 
creation of the world by God; forasmuch as they 
supposed the world itself as animated, and its se- 
veral parts to be gods. So that they asserted these 
three things: first, a cosmogonia, the generation of 
the world, that it was not from eternity, but had a 
novity or beginning; secondly, that this cosmogo- 
nia, or generation of the world, was also a theo- 
gonia, or generation of gods, the world itself and 
several of its parts animated being esteemed such 5 
and lastly, that both these gods and the world 
were made and produced by one edge ayévenrac nat 
avroyevnc, one un produced and self-originated Deity. 
—AIl which particulars we may here briefly ex- 
emplify in P. Ovidius Naso, whose paganity suf- 
ficiently appears from his Fastorum and all his 


OF ONE UNMADE DEITY. | 203 


other writings, and who also went off the stage 
before Christianity appeared on it, and may well 
be presumed to represent the then generally re- 
ceived doctrine of the Pagans. First, therefore, 
as for the generation and novity of the world, and 
its first production out ofa chaos, we have it fully 
acknowledged by him in these following verses: 


Ante mare et terras, et, quod tegit omnia, coelum, § Metam. I. 1. 
Unus erat toto naturz vultus in orbe, [vers, 5.] 
Quem dixere chaos, rudis indigestaque moles, 
_Nec quicquam nisi pondus iners, congestaque eodem 
Non bene junctarum discordia semina rerum. 
Nullus adhuc mundo prebebat lumina Titan, 
Nec nova crescendo reparabat cornua Phoebe, 
Nec circumfaso pendebat in aere tellus, 
Ponderibus librata suis ; nec brachia longo 
Margine terrarum porrexerat Amphitrite. 
Quaque erat ct tellus, &c. 


Which, in Mr. Sandys's English, with some little 
alteration, speaks thus :— 


Before that sea, and earth, and heaven was fram’d, 
One face had nature, which they chaos nam’d, 

No Titan yet the world with light adorns, . 
Nor waxing Phebe fills her wained horns ; . 

Nor hung the self-poiz’d earth in thin air plac’d, 

Nor Amphitrite the vast shore embrac’d; 

Earth, alr, and sea confounded, &e. 


In the next place, when there was a world made 
out of this chaos, that this cosmogonia, or gene- 
ration of the world, was also a theogonia, or 
generation of gods, is plainly intimated in these 
verses : 


Neu regio foret ulla suis animalibus orba, 
Astra tenent coeleste solum, formzeque deorum. 


To this sense, 


That nought of animals might unfurnish’d lie, 
‘The gods, in form of stars, possess the sky. 
| "2K2 


504 PAGAN THEOGONISTS ASSERTORS 


Aud that all this was effected, and this orderly 
mundane system produced out of a disorderly 
confused chaos, not by a fortuitous motion of mat- 
ter, or the jumbling of atoms, but by the provi 
dence and command of one unmade Deity, which 
was also that, that furnished all the several parts 
of the world with respective animals, the sea with 
fishes, the earth with men, and the heaven with 
gods; is thus declared also by the poet:— 


Hance Deus et melior litem natura diremit, 
Nam coelo terras, et terris abscidit undas: 

Et liquidum spisse secrevit ab aere coclum, &c. 
Sic ubi dispositam, quisquis fuit ille decorum, 
Congeriem secuit, sectamgue in membra redegit; 
Principio terram, ne non aqualis ab omni 
Parte foret, magni speciem glomerayvit ia orbis : 
Tum freta diffudit, rapidisqgue tumescere venutis 
Jussit, &e. 

Sic onus iInclustin numery distinxit cudem 
Cura Dei, &c. 


This strife (with better nature) Gad decides, 

He earth from heaven, the sea from earth divides: 
He ether pure oxtracts from grosser air. 

All which unfolded by his prudent care, 

From that blind mass ; the happily disjoin‘d 

With strifeless peace, he te their seats confin'd, &e. 
What God soever this division wrought, 

And every part to due proportion brought, 

First, lest the earth unequal should appear, 

He turn’d it round in figure of a sphere. 

Then seas diffus’d, commanding them to roar 
With rufffing winds, and give the land a shore. 

To those he added springs, ponds, Jakes immense, 
And rivers whom their winding borders fence. 


Where, though that learned paraphrast supposed 
(and not without some probability neither) that 
Deus et melior natura, God and the better natu re, 
—~were one and the self-same thing, yet we rather 
conceived them to be distinct, but one of them 
subordinate to the other as its instrument, God 


OF ONE UNMADE DEITY. o05 


and the plastic nature; accordingly as Aristotle 
writes In his Phy SICS, Nove Kat @uvcic atrioy re ge TOW 
mavtug, That mind and uature were both together 
the cause of this universe.— 

Nevertheless, we cannot but observe in this 
place, that though that poet speaks more than 
once of God singularly, as also calls him mundi 
JSabricator, and tle opifex rerum, and mundi me- 
lioris origo; yet notwithstanding, where he writes 
of the making of man, Pagan-like, he affirms him, 
though to have been made by God, yet according 
to the j nage or likeness of the gods, which govern 
all things. 





Sanctius his animal, mentisque capacius alta, 
Deerat adhuc, ct quod dominari in catcra posset; 
Natus homo est: sive hunc divino semine fecit, 
Ile opitex rerum, mundi melioris origo : 

Sive recens tellus, scductaque nuper ab alto 
fEthere, cognati retinebat semiua coell. 

Quam satus Lapeto, mistam fluvialibus undis, 
Finvit in efigiem moderautum cuncta deorum. 


The nobler being, with a mind possest, 

Was wanting yet, that should command the rost. 
That Maker, the best world’s original, 

Hither him fram’d of seed celestial ; 

Or earth, which late be did from heaven divide, 
Some sacred seeds retain’d to heaven allied : 
Which with the living stream Prometheus mixt, 
And in that artificial structure fixt 

The form of all the all-raling deities. 


And because some may probably be puzzled with 
this seeming contradiction, that one God should 
be said to be the maker of the whole world and of 
man, and yet the government of all should be at- 
tributed to pods plurally, and man said to be made . 
in the image and Nikeness of the gods; we shall 
therefore add here, that according to the tenor 
of the Pagan theology, the inferior and minor gods 


006 PAGAN THEOGONISTS ASSERTORS 


were supposed also to have all of them their se- 
yeral share in the government of things below 
them: for which cause they are called not only 
by Maximus Trius,’ ouvdgyoureg ben, co-rulers 
with God, but also by Plato himself, ro neyiore 
Saimove suvap Yovrec, the CO-fOvernors and co-relgn- 
ers with the supreme God. So that the govern- 
ment of this inferior world was by the Pagans 
often attributed to them jointly, the supreme and 
inferior gods both together, under that one gene- 
ral name of gods. But the chief of those infe- 
rior deities, in whose image man is also said to 
have been made, as well as in the likeness of the 
supreme, were either those celestial gods and 
animated stars before mentioned by the poet. or 
else the eternal gods of Plato, which were looked 
upon likewise as co-makers of the world subor- 
dinate. 

Besides Ovid, we might instance here in many 
more of the Pagan Theogonists clearly acknow- 
ledging in like manner one unmade Deity, which 
generated both the world and all the other gods 
init; as, for example, Strabo, who, affirming that 
the world was rig dvoewe Gua Kat THE Teovolag toyor, 
the joint work both of nature and providence,- - 

as it was before ascribed by Ovid to 
© Deus ct melior natura, addy coucern- 
ing Providence or the Deity in this manner: ‘Te 


\ “ ¢ ed é 
of TNC WeOVvolag, ate BeBovrAnrac Kat QUT} montAoriza TiC 


L.17. p. 809 


v a f yf Cc x .Y ~ Y wo" 
OUVCad, Kat LUPO coryiay onplwaupyod, Ey TOW TEWTOLE wth ek 
~ a Xv “N fs rag vf é \ U \ 
YEVVaY, WO TTOAY olaptpovra Tie “NA Ka TOUTE Ta 

, ? a ? 4 cid \ af. 
koartora Qeovg re kat avOcwroug, wv evexev Kai ra dAda 
, T eae. + - rN ‘ : ‘ 2 
CUVECTNKE. aw per our Osorce arida&e tov ovsavay, row 
» 

w >? t ‘ ! ry. . ae ° 

8 avOpwrocg ryv yyy. That having a multiform fe- 


 Disserfat. i. p.o. edit. Lud. 165). syo. 


, 


OF ONE UNMADE DEITY. o07 


cundity in it, and delighting in variety of works, 
it designed principally to make auimals as the 
most excellent things, and amongst them chiefly 
those two noblest kinds of animals, gods and 
men; for whose sakes the other things were 
niade; and then assigned heaven to the gods, and 
earth to men, the two extreme parts of the world 
for their respective habitatious.—Thus also Se- 
neca in Lactautius,* speaking concerning God: 
‘“* Hic cum prima fundaménta molis pulcherrime 
jaceret, et hoc ordiretur, quo neque majus quic- 
quam novit natura nec melius ; ut omnia sub du- 
ctbus Irent, quauavis ipse per totum se corpus 
intenderat, famen ministros regni sui deos genuit.” 
God, when he laid the foundations of this most 
beautiful fabric, and began to erect that struc- 
ture, than which nature knows nothing greater or 
more excellent; to the end that all things might 
be carried on under their respective governors or- 
derly, though he intended himself through the 
whole, as to preside in chief over all, yet did he 
generate gods also, as subordinate ministers af 
his kingdom under him.—We shall forbear to 
meution the testnuouies of others here, because 
they may be more opportuncely mserted elsewhere ; 
only we shall add, as to Hlesiod and Homer, that 
though they seem to have been sometimes sus- 
pected, both by Plato and Aristotle, for Atheistic 
Theogonists, yet, as Aristotle did, upon maturer 
thoughts, afterwards change his opinion concern-: 
ing both of them, so it is most probable, that 
they were uo Atheists, bat Divine Theogonists; 
such as supposed indeed many generated gods, 
but one supreme nimade Deity, the maker both 


2 Foisvin. Lostiind. ld. caps. p. 40. 


008 TILE DIVINE THEOGONISTS MADE 


of the world and them. And this not only for 
whe grounds before alleged concerning Hesiod, 
and because both of them do every where affirm 
even their generated gods to be immortal (which 
no Atheists did), but also for sundry other rea- 
sons, some of which may be more conveniently 
inserted elsewhere. Moreover, it hath been al- 
ready intimated, that the generated gods of LHe- 
siod and Homer extend farther than those of 
Plato’s; they being not only the animated parts of 
the world, but also all the other things of nature 
fictitiously personated, and improperly or abu- 
sively called gods.and goddesses ; whereof a far- 
ther account will be afterwards given. 

Neither ought it at all to be wondered at, if 
these Divine Theogonists amongst the Pagaus did 
many times, as well as those other atheistic ones, 
make Chaos and the Ocean senior to the gods, 
and Night the mother of them. The former of 

nese being not only done by Hesiod and Homer, 

but also by the generality of the ancient Pagan 
Theists in Epicharmus ;* and the latter by Or- 
pheus,* an undoubted Theist, in his hymn of the 
Night: 


Nuxra Giiy yavivisgny aaizouai, i:38 xai avery 


Noctem concelebro genctricem hominum deumque, 


They not understanding this absolutely and uni- 

versally of all the gods without exception, as the 

other Atheistic Theogonists did, as if there had 

been no unmade Deity at all, but Chaos and 

Night (that is, senseless matter blindly and fortu- 
* Apud Diog. Laert. lth. iii. seam. 10. p. 170. 


"P. 99. oper. Vide etiam cundem in Argonautic. vers, 339. p. 24. 
et Proclum in Tomaum Platonis, libg ii. p. 62, 


CHAOS AND NIGHT SENIOR TO THE GODS. 509 


itously moved,) had been the sole original of all 
things, but only of the of Gso/, the gods, so called 
by way of distinction from God, or the supreme 
Deity; thatis, the inferior mundane gods gene- 
rated together with the world. The reason whereof 
was, because it was a most ancient, and ina man- 
ner universally received tradition amongst the 
Pagans, as hath been often intimated, that the 
cosmogonia, or generation of the world, took its 
first beginning from a chaos (the Divine Cosmo- 
gonists agreeing herein with the Atheistic ones); 
this tradition having been delivered down from 
Orpheus and Linus (amongst the Greeks), by 
Hesiod and Homer, and others; acknowledged 
by Epicharmus ; and embraced by Thales, Anax- 
aroras, Plato, and other philosophers, who were 
Thetsts ; the antiquity whereof was thus declared 
by Euripides 2 


Olx ipets 3 tSs3, aa" yaks panzets wage, 
“E25 OS ptoay Tk pave 7 hy pase hh wala, 
oy x ? i? v , e 

: “Ean 3 aupotioray adAnrov dyn, 
Tixrousi warra, xavalmnay ts dace, 
Ta Urea, orm, Giga;, oty OB ZrAun reidu, 
Piver re tonray 


Non hie meus, sed matris est sermo mex, 
Pivura ut una fuerit et cocli et soli, 
Secreta que mox ut receperunt statum, 
Cuneta edidertunt hae in oras lumins ; 
Feras, volueres, arbores, pontt gregem, 
Homines quoque ipses. 


Neither can it reasonably be doubted, but that 
it was orivinally Mosaical, and indeed at first a 
Divine revelation, since no man conld otherwise 
pretend to know what was dove before mankind 


*In Menalippe apad Diador. Sieul. lib, 1. cap. iy. et Euscbnum 
Praparat. Evangel. lb. i. cap. v. p. 20. 


S10 THE DIVINE THEOGONISTS MADE 


had any being. Wherefore those Pagan Cosmo- 
gonists, who were Theists, being Polytheists and 
Theogonists also, and asserting, besides the one 
supreme unmade Deity, other inferior mundane 
gods, generated together with the world (the chief 
whereof werethe animated stars), they must needs, 
according to the tenor of that tradition, suppose 
them, as to their corporeal parts at least, to have 
been juniors to Night and Chaos, and the offspring 
Sipe .g, of thew, because they were all made out 
Gu.d.[p.070. of an antecedent dark chaos. Tyr puya- 
tone OTD exrefleedabat déyourw (saith Plutarch), 
vro Atyurriwy rupAny ovoar, OT TO oKOTOE Tol pearog 
nyourro mpcaBureoov’ “Lhe mus urqneus being blind, 
is said to have been deified by the Ibgyptians, he- 
cause they thought, that darkness was older thau 
light—And the case was the same concerning 
their demons likewise, they being conceived to 
have their corporeal vehicula also; for which 
cause, as Porphyrius* from Numenuius writeth, 
the ancient Egyptians pictured them in ships or 
boats floating upon the water: rove ce Acyurrioue 
dua ToUTO roue Cutpovac rarrac OUK igravat tre aTeOwaN, 
av\Aa qrarrac et TAutau. Ty he lL eyptians the re fore 
represented all their demons, as not standing 
upon firm fand, but m ships upon the water. 

Bat as for the incorporeal part or souls of those 
inferior gods, though these Divine Theogonists 
could pot derive their original from = Chaos or 
matter, but rather from that other principle called 
Love, as being divinely created, and so having 
God tor their father, yet might they, notwith- 
standing, in another sense, fancy Night to have 
been thetr mother tov, inasmuch as they were 


De Autro Nymphar. p. o6. edit. Cantab, 


CHAOS AND NIGHT SENIOR TO THE GoDs. Sti 


all made if ove 6ytwv, from an antecedent non-ex- 
istence or nothing, brought forth into being. For 
which cause there seems to have been in Orpheus 
a dialogue betwixt the Maker of the world aud 
Night“ For that this ancient cabala, which de- 
rived the cosmogonia from Chaos and Love, was 
at first religious and notatheistical, and Love un- 
derstood in it not to be the offspring of Chaos, 
may be concluded from hence, because this Love 
as well as Chaos was of a Mosaical extraction 
also, and plainly derived from that Spirit of God, 
which is said in Scripture to have moved upon the 
waters, thatis, upon the chaos; whether by this 
Spirit be to be meant God himself, as acting in- 
mediately upon the matter, or some other active 
principle derived from God and not from matter 
(as a mundane soul or plastic nature). From 
whence also it came, that, as Porphyrius testifieth, 
the ancicat Pagaus thought the water ,.., 
to be divinely inspired: qyourro yap tev Nymph. p. 
Covey Tes ucuTt Tar puyac Oeomvogyp ONT we pnow ee 

o Noupywog Sa tovro ywv Kat TOV rpOPNTHY conKévat, 
tudiceabat txauw tou veuroc Oeod TEV They thought, 
that souls attended upon the water, or resorted 
thereunto, as being divinely Inspired, as Nume- 
mnlus writeth, adding the prophet also therefore to 
have said, that the Spirit of God moved upon the 
Walter. 

And that this cabala was thus understood by 
some of the aucient Pagan Cosmogonists them- 
selves, appears plainly, not only from Simmias 
Rhodius aud Parmenides, but also from these 
following verses of Orpheus, or whoever was the 
writer of those Argonautics, undoubtedly ancient, 


* Apud Proclam ct altos. 


o1l2 THE DIVINE THEOGONISTS MADE 


where Chaos and Love are thus brought in te- 
gether -— 


P. 17. ed. Teata aby agymou Xater sathinparov Urarey, 

Steph. ‘Se tmagude geotis, as ocgavig es vegas Dh, 
Troe algeerrigey your, wudueva teGabaren:, 
TlesrBura ray Te Kal al rarsAy wedcpantiy F pyva, 
“Osra Tv igungy Gorarra, Siang 0) GAA aor" AAA 


# 


To this sense: We will first sing a pleasant and 
delightful song concerning the ancient Chaos, how 
heaven, earth, and seas were framed out of tt; as 
also concerning that much-wise and sayaclous 
Love, the oldest of all, and self-perfect, which 
actively produced all these things, separating one 
thing from another—Where this Love is not 
only called wodvanrec, Of much counsel or saga- 
clousness, Which imphltes it to have been a sub- 
stantial aud intellectual thing, but also wetopurarag, 
the oldest of all, and therefore senior to Chaas, 
as, likewise, avroreAne, self-perfect or self-orizt- 
nated.—From whence it is manifest, that, ac- 
cording to the Orphic tradition, this Love, which 
the cosmogonta was derived from, was no other 
than the eternal unmade Deity (or an active prin- 
ciple depending on it) which prodte ‘d this whole 
orderly world, and all the generated wods in it, as 
to ther material part, out of Chaos and Nicht. 
Accordingly, as Aristotle determines in his Me- 

Laie, taphysies, uot only inthe place before 

yeh etted, but also afterward: trevor 86 rete, 
atte ») aon THE Konjated, Oar i) Nouv 7 “Egwra eee 
acyyy. Others, besides the material’cause of the 
world, assign an efficient, or cause of motion; 
namely, whosoever make either Mind (and intel- 
lect) or Love a principle. -Wheretore we con- 
elude, that that other Atheistic cabala, or Aristo- 


CHAOS AND NIGHT SENIOR TO THE GODs. 513 
phanic tradition before-nentioned, which accord- 
ingly, as Aristotle also elsewhere declareth con- 
eermmg it, did ix wxreg mavra -yenan, venerate all 
things whatsoever, even the rods themselves uni- 
versally, outof Night and Chaos, making Love 
itself hkewise to have been produced from an ege 
of the Night; I say, that this was nothing else 
but a mere depravation of the ancient Mosaic 
eabala, as also an absolutely impossible hy pothe- 
sis, it deriving all things whatsoever in the uni- 
verse, besides the bare substance of senscless mat- 
ter, mm another sense than that before-mentioned, 
out of nonentity or nothing; as shall be also far- 
ther manifested afterwards. 

We have now represented the sense and gene- 
rally received doctrine of the ancient Pagan theo- 
logers, that there was indeed a multiplicity of 
gods, but yet so that oue of them ouly was oyévvn- 
roc, Infenerate or unmade, by whom all the other 
gcods, together with the world, were made, so as 
to have had a uovity of being, or a temporary be- 
ginning of their existence; Plato and the Pytha- 
soreans here only differing from the rest in this, 
that though they acknowledged the world and 
all the mundane gods to have been generated to- 
gether in time, yet they supposed certain other 
intelligible and supramundane gods also, which 
however, produced from one original Deity, were 
nevertheless eternal or without beginning. But 
now we must acknowledge, that there were 
amongst the Pagan Theists some of a different 
persuasion from the rest, who therefore did not 
admit of any theagonia in the sense before de- 
elared, that is, any temporary generation of gods, 
because they acknowledged no cosmogonia, no 


o Lb SOME PAGAN THEISTS NEITHER 


temporary production of the world, but concluded 
it to have been from eternity. 

That Aristotle was one of these is sufficiently 
known; whose inferior gods, therefore, the sun, 
moon, and stars, must needs be ayayytor, or inge- 
nerate, in this sense, so as to have had no tempo- 
‘rary production, because the whole world to him 
was such. And if that philosopher* be to be be- 
lieved, himself was the very first, at least of all 
the Greeks, who asserted this ingenerateness or 
eternity of the world ; he aflirming, that all before 
him did yevray TOY KOoROY, and Kooptomoteny, renerate 
or make the world ; that is, attribute a temporary 
production to it, and consequently to all those 
gods also, which were a part thereof. Notwith- 
standing which, the writer De Placitis Philoso- 
phorum,’ and Stobans,® impute this dogina of the 
world’s eternity to certain others of the Greek 
philosophers before Aristotle (besides Ocellus 
Lucanus,* who is also acknowledged by Philo 
to have been an assertor thereof). And indeed 
Ipicharmus, though a Theist, seems plainly to 
have been of this persuasion, that the world was 
unmade, as also that there was no theogonia, nor 
temporary prosluction of the inferior gods, from 
these verses of his,* according to Gratius’s cor- 
rection :— 


Exccrp. "ADA dal toi Oat ragncay, Lrredirsy 3° 52 wh ons: 
ye AB. Taded an wagerd cucom, 2a di tar at raran, 


* De Covlo, jib. i. cap. x. p. 623. tom. i. oper. 

6 ih. i cap. iv. p. 886. | 

¢ clog. Physic. lib. i. cap. xxiv. p. 44. 

*De Mundi Atternilate, inter Seriptor, Mytholog. a ‘Tho. Gale 
editos. 

* Apud Diogen, Laert. lib. iil, segm. x. p. 170. 


as | 
_ 
gt 


THEOGONISTS NOR COSMOGONISTS. 


"AAA Adysras prév ya0g mparoy yiverdas raw Gediv: 

Tiaig 82; dudyavoev y? dod pendé Tivos 0, rs wearow pddor 
Oix ae” Enore mwecrov ovdev, ode pede Ala Sedregoy, 

Tay SE yy cov ceepues viv Abyomev WO Elvas eEAAES Fade. 


Nempe Di semper fuerunt, atque nunquam intercident : 
Hec que dico semper nobis rebus in iisdem se exhibent. 
Extitisse sed deorum primum perhibetur chaos: 
Quinam vero? nam de nihilo nil pote primum existere. 
Ergo nec primum profecto quicquam, ‘nec fuit alterum : 
Sed quze nunc sic appellantur, alia fient postmodum. 


Where, though he acknowledges this to have 
been the general tradition of the ancient Theists, 
that Chaos was before the gods, and that the in- 
ferior mundane gods had a temporary generation, 
or production with the world; yet, notwithstand- 
ing, does he conclude against it. from this ground 
of reason—because nothing could proceed from 
nothing ; and, therefore, both the gods, and in- 
deed whatsoever else is substantial in the world, 
was from eternity unmade, only the fashion of 
things having been altered. 

Moreover, Diodorus Siculus affirms the Chal- 
deans likewise to have asserted this 
dogma of the world’s eternity, ol O ovy 


Xadsatoe rnv pev TOU KOGMOV guow aidtov pacw sivat, Kat pyre 


L. 2. p. 82. 


zt a aoyne yéveow eoynKéva, une VoTEGOV plopav emdeceoBat, 
The Chaldeans affirm the nature of the world to 
be eternal, and that it was neither generated from 
any beginning, nor will ever admit corruption.— 
Who, that they were not Atheists for all that (no 
more than Aristotle), appears from those follow- 
ing words of that historiographer: ray re rwv dAwv 
rat TE Kat Stakoopnow, Ocia TLVL TOOVvOLa yeyovévat, Kat 
voy Exaora Tov éy ovparey yiwoHivwr, ovy we ErvyEV, OVO av- 
roudrwe, dA weiopivy Tit Kat BeBatwe Kexvowpuévn Bewv 
Kpiset, auvredeiabat® They believe also, that the order 


516 PAGAN ASSERTORS OF THE ETERNITY 


and disposition of the world is by a certain Di- 
vine Providence, and that every one of those 
thines, which come to pass in the heavens, hap- 
pens not by chance, but by a certain determinate 
and firmly ratified judgment of the gods.-—Llow- 
ever, itis a thing known to all, that the generality 
of the later Platonists stiffly adhered to Aristotle 
in this; neither did they only asscrt the corpo- 
real world, with all the inferior mundane gods in 
it, to be dyennjrovc, Or iIngeuerate, and to have ex- 
isted from eternity, but also maintained the same 
concerning the souls of men, and all other ani- 
mals (they concluding that no souls were younger 
than body or the w orld); sand because they would 
not scem to depart from their master, Plato, 
therefore did they endeavour violently to force 
this same sense upon Plato's words also. 
Notwithstanding which, concerning these later 
Platonists, it is here observable, that though they 
thus asserted the world, and all inferior gods and 
souls, to have been aysvyrouc, according to that 
stricter sense of the word declared, that is, to 
have had no temporary generation or beginning, 
but to have existed from eternity; yet by no 
means did they therefore conceive them to be 
aVTOYEVEIC Kal av0umocraroue, self-oniginated, and self- 
existing, but concluded them to have been all 
derived from oue sole self-existent Deity 
~as their cause; which, therefore, though 
notin order of Gime, yet of nature was before 
them. To this purpose, Plotinus: veuv mee alrod 


< ’ ¢ t f » - » , at % 
€tr'at OuxK (at) Youve TOOTEOUY auTou OVTa, avr OTE TANe 


Fins. h@e3 


~ % \ ? ¢ ? ~ ‘ af f . Fd 
VOU ESTL KML HUGE TEOTESOS EKELWOE, Kal aiTLOY TOUTOU, apyt- 

v ‘ in > ¢ : soma - wf 4 
TUrOY OFCO1 KC WAOaCE Ya ELKOVOC Kab Cf EREIHON OTAag Kate 


‘ , » 4 rN ‘ f . 4 
vrngTavrag au TaYet TAY Tz20OTOY. Mind or Giod was 


THE SAME THING WITH THE COSMOGONIA. 517 


‘before the world, not as if it existed before it 
in time, but because the world proceeded from it, © 
and that was in order of nature first as the cause 
thereof, and its archetype or paradigm; the world 
also always subsisting by it and from gy. 2. 19. 
it——-And again elsewhere to the same ** 
purpose, ov rolvuy EVEVETO, adn’ é-yivero Kal yEvnoEral, 
ooa yevnta Aéyerat, ov & p0apncera, arr’ 4 doa eyet EC 
a The things, which are said to have been 
made or generated, were not so made, as that 
they ever had a beginning of their existence, but 
yet they were made, and will be always made 
(in another sense) ; nor will they ever be destroy- 
ed otherwise than as being dissolved into those 
simple principles, out of which some of them 
were compounded.—Where, though the world be 
said never to have been made as to a temporary 
beginning, yet, in another sense, is it said to be 
always made, as depending upon God 4,5. 1. 
perpetually as the emanative cause “1! 
thereof. Agreeably whereunto, the manner of 
the world’s production from God is thus de- 
clared by that philosopher : 2 OUK opbwe ol pGeigovar Kat 
yevvway avrov, darts 749 Tporros mms TOLnGEwWC raurne, 
ovk eéXovet ovviévat, 0vd toactv, OTe Ooov Ekeiva ~AAGUTEL, 
ov pnwore ra GAXa eAXeire. They do not rightly, who 
corrupt and generate the world, for they will not 
understand what manner of making or produc- 
tion the world had, to wit, by way of effulgency 
or -eradiation from the Deity. From whence it 
follows, that the world must needs have been so 
long as there was a God, as the light was coeve 
with the sun.—So likewise Proclus* concludes, 


-* There are still extant cighteen arguments of his, wherem he 
attacks the Christian doctrine of the world’s being created by Godin 


VOL. I. 21 


518 PAGAN ASSERTORS OF THE 


that the world was au yeyvoptevos, Kat tAAascromEvog 
ardrov ovreg, always generated or eradiated from 
God—and therefore must needs be eternal, God 
being so. Wherefore these latter Platonists sup- 
posed the same thing concerning the corporeal 
world, and the lower mundane gods, which their 
master Pilato did concerning his higher eternal 
gods; that though they had no temporary pro- 
duction, yet they all depended no less upon one 
supreme Deity, than if they had been made out 
of nothing by him. From whence it is manifest, 
that none of these philosophers apprehended any 
repugnancy at all betwixt these two things; ex- 
istence from eternity, and being caused or pro- 
duced by another. Norcan we make any great 
doubt, but that if the latter Platonists bad been 
fully convinced of any contradictious inconsis- 
tency here, they would readily have disclaimed 
that their so beloved hypothesis of the world’s 
eternity ; it being so far from truth what some 
have supposed, that the assertors of the world’s 
eternity were all Atheists, that these latter Pla- 
tonists were led into this opinion no otherwise 
than from the sole consideration of the Deity ; 
to wit, its ayaBusdjc Bovdnae, Kai youpog suvagic, 
its essential goodness, aud generative 
power, or emanative fecundity—as Pro- 
clus plainly declares upon the Timeus. 

Now, though Aristotle were not acted with 
any such divine enthusiasm as these Platonists 
seem to have been, yet did he peer 


P. 116. 





a i ee eS 2? ee ee de ee ms s *. : a 
Bee Ss Ce ee aes fet A te, 
eth Saeaians Yat a 


time ; in answer to which, John Philoponus wrote the same number 
of books against the eternity of the world. Vide Jo. Alberti Fabrici 
Biblioth, Griec. lib. v. c. xxvi. §. xili., p. 522. 


ETERNITY OF THE WORLD AND GODS. 519 


after his sober manner, really maintain the same 
thing; that though the world, and inferior mun- 
dane ‘soda. had no temporary generation, yet 
were they nevertheless all produced from one 
supreme Deity as their cause. Thus Simplicius 
represents that philosopher’s sense: “ApiororéAng ov 
yivesOat a&iot tov Koopov, adAAd Kar GAXov Be 

; © y ~ re ‘. In Arist. 
TPOTOV UTO Ozovu maparyeo0at' Aristotle would Phys. k 8. 
not have the world to have been made ?3°"%,3. 
(so as to have had a beginning), but yet 
nevertheless to have been produced from God after 
some other manner.—And again afterward ; ’Agi- 
roréAyc TO alirtov TOU ovpavou KQL TNC diolov KiwnoEwe avrou 
Oeov Néeywv, Guws ayévnrov avrov arosekvuor. Aristotle, 
though making God the cause of the heaven and 
its eternal motion, yet concludes it notwithstand- 
ing to have been ingenerate or unmade ;—that is, 
without beginning. However, we think fit here 
to observe, that though Aristotle do for the 
most part express a great deal of zeal and confi- 
dence for that opinion of the world’s eternity, yet 
doth he sometimes for all that seem to flag a little, 
and speak more languidly and: sceptically about 
it; as, for example, in his book de Partibus Ani- 
malium, where he treats concerning an artificial 
nature: Maddow et ELKO TOV: ovpavey yeyevneBat, ae 
U0 TOLAUTNC airiag, El a he Kal Elvat ota TolavT ny hae 
aitiay, : ‘anddAov 7 n Cwa ta Ovnra’ It is more pea re 
likely, that the heaven was made by such a cause 
as this (if it were made), and that it is maintained 
by such a cause, than that mortal animals should 
be so; which yet is a thing more generally ac- 
-knowledged.—Now it.was before declared, that 
Aristotle’s artificial nature was nothing but the 
mere executioner or opificer of a perfect Mind, 

22u2 


520 THE PAGANS ETERNAL GODS yevnrot’ 

that is, of the Deity; which two therefore he 
sometimes joins together in the Cosmopaia, al- 
firming that Mind and nature, that is, God and 
nature, were the cause of this universe. 

And now we see plainly, that though there 
was areal controversy amongst the Pagan theo- 
logers (especially from Aristotle's time down- 
ward), concerning the Cosmogonia and Theogonia, 
according to the stricter notion of those words, 
the temporary generation or production of the 
world and inferior gods, or whether they had any 
beginning or no; yet was there no controversy at 
all concerning the self-existency of them, but it 
was universally agreed upon amongst them, that 
the world, and the inferior gods, however sup- 
posed by some to have existed from eternity, yet 
were nevertheless all derived from one sole self- 
existent Deity as their CAUNE | vireo Qraw TaApayouEVvUL 
7 éAAapTopevor, being either eradiated or produced 
from God.—W herefore it is observable, that these 
Pagan Theists, who asserted the world’s eternity, 
did themselves distinguish concerning the word 
yentov orlion, nation, et faclum, as that which 
was equivocal: aud though in one sense of it, 
they denied, that the world and inferior gods 
Were yamru, yet notwithstanding did they in an- 
other sense clearly affirm the same. For the word 
Simplic. ia YevaTow (Say they) strictly and properly 


Ariat. Phys. 


taken 1S r0 ty “ ty nl p27 7 3 oi 2 i ‘ 
ful. 203, : ? Hépes ypovou tryy ug ro tied 


Tagoday Aayor, that which in respect of 
time passed out of non-existence into being-—or 6 
TO MpOTEcay joy OV, UaTEcoy Ct or, that which being not 
before, afterwards was.—Neverthcless they ac- 
knowledge, that in a larger sense this word 
“yevyror Way be taken also for ra oTrudouy cr airiag 


DERIVED FROM ONE SELF-EXISTENT DEITY. 521 


sir aHE ON, that which doth any way depend 
upon a superior bemg as its cause.—And there 
must needs be the same equivocation in the 
word ayimroy, so that this in like manner may be 
taken also, either yzovuws, for that which is 
lingenerate In respect of time, as having no tem- 
porary beginning ; or else for that which is az 
aitiac ayivarov, ingenerate or unproduced from any 
cause :--in which latter sense, that word ayévnroy, 
or unmade, is of equal force and extent with 
avuroararoy OF miroyevec, that which is self-sub- 
sigtent or self-originated ;—and accordingly it was 
used by those Pagan Theists, who concluded 
orc wdyayiveroc, ie. that matter was unmade—that 
ig, not only existed from eternity without begin- 
ning, but also was self-existent, and independent 
upon any superior cause. Now, as to the for- 
wer of these two senses of those words, “yevntov 
and ayivnrov, the generality of the ancient Pagans, 
and together with them Plato, affirmed the 
world, and all the inferior gods, to be yevnrove, to 
have been made in time—or to have had a begin- 
ning: (for whatever the latter Platonists pretend, 
this was undoubtedly Plato's notion of that word, 
and no other, when he concluded the world to be 
yinrov, forasmuch as himself expressly opposes: 
it to aicwy, that which is eternal.) But, on the 
contrary, Aristotle, and the latter Platonists, 
determined the world, and all the inferior gods, 
to bein this sense ayemrovc, such as had no tem- 
porary beginning—but were from eternity. How- 
ever, according to the latter sense of those words, ' 
all the Pagan theologers agreed together, that 
the world, and all the inferior gods, whether 
having a beginning, or existing from eternity, 


O22 THE PAGANS ETERNAL GODp yornrov 


were notwithstanding yenrot ax ariac, produced 
or derived from a superior cause ;—and that thus 
there was only one @kog @yarnrog, One unproduced 
and selfexistent Deity—who is said by them to 
be airiag Ketirren! Kat apeapurecoc, superior toa cause, 
and older than any cause, he being the cause of 
all things besides himself. Thus Crantor, and 
his followers in Proclus, zealous assertors of the 
In Time, world’s eternity, determined, —-yerroy 
Pile see Aryeabae row Koopa ce ar atriag @\Ang 
eundem in TAOGYOREVOY, KA OUK OPTa aUTOYyaYaY oUce 
ie Theolagh av@urdararoy’ that the world (with all the 


in Theologi- 


aw Platoni- : 5 Sey 7 
cam; iba, 2Oferior mundane gods tn it), notwith- 


7 arabe 7 standing their being from eternity, might 
apethib.vi. be said to be yeunray, that Is ort:, or 
“2 PST nade, as being produced from another 
cause, and not selforiginated or self existing. 
In like manner Proclus himself, that grand cham- 
pion for the world’s eternity, plainly acknow- 
ledged, notwithstanding, the generation of the 
gods and world in this sense, as beige produced 
from a superior cause: Alyaney Qsov yanauc, tiv 
appnrov aura Tondocor EVOEKVULEVOL, KACTHY Tay CeuTi py 
Erecornra, mTpoc tac atriac avrav’ We call it the re- 
nerations of the gods, meaning thereby, not any 
temporary production of them, but their ineffa- 
ble procession from a superior first cause.—-Thus 
also Salustius, in his book de Dis et Mundo,* 
where he contends the world to have been from 
eternity, or without beginuing, yet coneludes 
both it, and the other inferior gods, to have been 
made by one supreme Deity, who is called by 
him, o wpwroc Oe, the first God.—For, saith he, 


x Cap, xii. p, 269, inter Scriptor, Mythologie. & Tho. Gale editos. 


DERIVED FROM ONE SELF-EXISTENT DEITY. oO Pad 


Heytatnc rng euvanewe ovenc, ovK avOcurouc Fa Kat Cw 
Hora wou, GAAd Geove re Kal catuovac. God, or the 
first cause, having the greatest power, or being 
omnipotent, ought therefore to make not only 
men, and other annals, but also gods and 
demons. And accordingly this is the title of - 
his 13th chapter: Twe Ta aera AEyerat ytyvecbar, how 
eternal things may be said to be made or gene- 
rated.-—It is true, indeed (as we have often de- 
clared), that some of the Pagan Theists asserted 
God not to be the only ayévnrov Kai avdurecrarov, 
the only unmade and selfexistent being—but 
that matter also was such; nevertheless, . this 
Opinion was not so generally received amongst 
them, as is commonly supposed: and though 
some of the ancient fathers confidently impute it 
to Plato, yet there seems to be uno .sufficient 
ground for their so doing; and Porphyrius, 
Jamblichus, Proclus, and other Platonists, do 
not ouly professedly oppose the same as false, 
but also as that which was dissonant from Plato’s 
principles. Wherefore, according to that - larger 
notion of the word ayémrov, as taken synony- 
mously with avroyete and avfurdsrarov, there were 
many of the Pagan theologers, who agreed with 
Christians in this, ort avTo ayévnrov O Gcoc, Kat 
ouma avray me av enroe rie 7 ayevvyoia, that God is 
the only imgenerate or unmade being, and that 
his very essence is ingenerability or innascibility ; 
-—all other things, even matter itself, being made 
by him. But all the rest of them (only a few 
Ditheists excepted), though they supposed matter 
to be selfexistent, yet did they conclude, that 
there was only tic cog ayévnroc, only one unmade 
or unproduced God—and that all their other 


o24 HOW THE PAGANS DISTINGUISHED 


gods were yanroi, In one sense or other, wf not 
as made in time, yet at least as produced from a 
superior cause. 

Nothing now remaiueth, but only that we shew, 
how the Pagans did distinguish, and put a dif- 
ference, betwixt the one supreme unmade Deity, 
and all their other inferior generated = gods. 
Which we are the rather concerned to do, because 
it Is potorious, that they did many times alse con- 
found them together, attributing the government 
of the whole world to the gods promiscuously, 
and without putting any due discrimination be- 
twixt the supreme and inferior (the true reason 
whereof seems to have been this, hecause they 
supposed the supreme God, not to do all imme- 
diately, in the government of the world, but to 
permit much to his tuferior ministers); ove instance 
of which we had before in Ovid, and inuumer- 
able such others might be cited out of their most 
sober writers. As, for example, Cicero, in his 
first book of Laws,* “ Deorum immortalium vi, 
ratione, potestate, mncute, pumine, natura omnis 
recitur;” the whole nature, or universe, is governed 
by the force, reason, power, mind, and divinity of 
the immortal gods.—And ayain in his second 
book," ‘*Deos esse dominos ac moderatores om- 
nium rerun, caque que geruntur, eorum geri ja- 
dicio atque numine ; eosdemque optine de renere 
hominum mereri, et qualis quisque sit, quid agat, 
quid in se admittat, qua mente, qua pietate reli- 
giones colat, Intuerl; priorumque et impiorum 
habere rationem ; 2 principio civibus suasum esse 


® Laibot cap. vin p. 3303, ager tom. an. 
Sab, ub. Cape vai pe a. 


THER #lUPREMB FROM THE INFERIOR GODS. 525. 


debet:” the minds of citizens ought to be first 
of all embued with a firm persuasion, that the 
gods are the lords and moderators of all things, 
and that the conduct and management of the 
whole world is directed and overruled by their 
Judgment and Divine power; that they deserve 
the best of mankind, that they behold and con- 
sider what every man is, what he doth and takes 
upon himself, with what mind, piety, and sincerity, 
he observes the duties of religion; and, lastly, 
that these gods have a very different regard to the 
pious and the impious.—Now such passages as 
these abounding every where in Pagan writings, 
it is no wonder, if many, considering their theo- 
logy but slightly and superficially, have been led 
into an error, and occasioned thereby to conclude 
the Pagans not to have asserted a Divine monar- 
chy, but to have imputed both the making and 
governing of the world to an aristocracy or demo-. 
cracy of co-ordinate gods, not only all eternal, 
but also self-existent and unmade. The contrary _ 
whereunto, though it be already sufficiently 
proved, yet it will not be amiss for us here in the 
close, to shew how the Pagans, who sometimes 
jumble and confound the supreme and_ inferior 
gods all together, do notwithstanding at other times 
many ways distinguish between the one supreme 
God, and their other many inferior gods. 

First, therefore, as the Pagans had many pro- 
per names for one and the same supreme God, 
according fo several particular considerations of 
him, in respect of his several different manifes- 
tations and effects in the world; which are often- 
times mistaken for so many distinct deities (some 
supposing them independent, others subordinate); 


§26 PAGANS PROPER NAMES 


so had they also, besides these, other proper 
names of (sod, according to that more full and 
comprehensive notion of him, as the Maker of the 
whole world, aud its supreme Governor, or the 
sole Monarch of the universe. For thus the Greeks 
called him Zite and Zyy, &e. the Latins Jupiter 
and Jovis, the Babylonians Belus and Bel, the 
Persians Mithras and Oromasdes, the Bgyptians 
and Scythians (according to Herodotus) Ammoun 
and Pappwus. And Celsus iu Origen concludes 
it to be a matter of pure indifferency, to call the 
supreme God by any of all these names, cither 
ting « eve, or Ammoun, or Pappwus, or the 
Gelpum: like; Kedaocg  anrat peneua Cra pens, Na 
p. 2ol. “— w- ig gats wo - oom 8 
“’y Qiaror, KaAtar q} Ay, ?} Actnater, i} tp ek 
wO, 4 (cde Avyumriot) “Aunovw, 4 (ae: Sava Vara, 
Celsus thinks it to be a matter of no moment, 
whether we call the highest and supreme God, 
Adonai aud Sabaoth, as the Jews do; or Dia and 
Zena, as the Greeks; or, as the Egyptians, Am- 
moun; or,as the Scythians, Pappiwus.--Notwith- 
stauding which, that pious and jealous father ex- 
presseth agreat deal of zeal agaist Christians then 
using any af those Pagan names. “ But we will 
rather endure any torment (saith he) than confess 
Zeus (or Jupiter) to be God; being well assured, 
that the Greeks often really worship, under that 
name, an evil demon, who is an esemy both to 
Gcod aud men. And we will rather sufler death, 
than call the supreme God Ammoun, whom the 
Eeyptian epchanters thus invoke: Aveyron 
Kat Exullac row Llawwatew Ceo cree roy ext maa ald’ 
WLC Ov meeaognebla, rifivrte pity row emt mane Heo, ae ee 
pidov Tes) Aa yorre ryyv Daxollere t Leamseter, Katte ipoe aureay 


Kat CULARK TUN, OUR NvOacayree rey (Yer, art Kueap 


FOR THE SUPREME GOD. _ 527 


ovepart to Llarraiov. Zcvbiori yap ro Tpoan'yopLKOy 
rov Osov, Kat Avyrnori, Kat man Sader n eKadTOC 
evtiOoarrat, ovoualwv, ovyY auaoTnoerat. And though 
the Scythians call the supreme God Pappeus, 
yet we, acknowledging a supreme God, will never 
be persuaded to call him by that name, which it 
pleased that demon (who ruled over the Scythian 
desert, people, and language) to impose. Never- 
theless, he that shall use the appellative name for 
God, either in the Scythian, Egyptian, or any 
_ other language which he hath been brought up in, 
will not offend.” Where Origen plainly affirms the 
Scythians to have acknowledged one supreme 
God, called by them Pappeas, and intimates, | 
that the Egyptians did the like, calling him-Am- 
moun. Neither could it possibly be ae intent to 
deny. the same of the Greeks and their Zeus, | 
however his great jealousy made him to call him 
here a demon; it being true in a certain sense, 
which shall be declared afterward, that the Pa- 
gans did oftentimes really worship an evil demon, | 
under those very names of Zeus and Jupiter, as 
they did likewise under those of Hammon and 
Pappeus. 

In the mean time we deny not, but that both 
the Greeks used that word Zeus, and the Latins 
Jupiter, sometimes guoixwe, for the ether, fire or 
air, some accordingly etymologizing Zeve from Zéw, 
others Ase from Asww: whence came those forms 
of speech, sub Jove, and sub Dio. And thus Ci- 


cero, “Jovem Enniusnuncupat itadicens. pe nat. p. 
}.2. 923. 
Lamb.[c.23. 
Aspice hoc Sabina candens, quem invocant omnes Jovem. a gas. ° 
tom. 9. 


Hunc re augures nostri cum dieu oper] 


35283 PAGANS PROPER NAMES 


Jove fulgeente, Jove tonante; dicunt eum in 
colo falgente, tonante,” &e. The reason of which 
speeches seems to have been this, because i an- 
cient times some had supposed the antmated hea- 
ven, ether and air, to be the supreme Deity, We 
grant, moreover, that the same words have been 
sometimes used trropace also, for a hero or det- 
fied man, said by some to have been born in 
Crete, by others in Arcadia. Aud Callinachas,” 
though he were very angry with the Cretians for 
affirming Jupiter's sepulchral monument to have 
been with them in Crete, as thereby muking bim 
mortal : 


Me ~ e+ ft a e © es ~ oy 
Reels vie tak Phe, Me Ha Tada, wo nts, ob 


Keertpavgarevsyro 2. Pas Dont, bee gay aise 


Uretes semper mendaces, (atin enim, rex sepuke brain 
Evtiuacrant: tu vero non es mortous, sempat enn os, 


Himself nevertheless (as Athenagoras" and Ori- 
gen* observe) attributed the bevinning of death 
to him, when he affirmed him to have been born 
I Arcadia; ao pn yas Geratron 7 tre SLs yirime, 
because a terrene nativity is the beginning of 
death. —Wherefore this may pass for a general 
observation here: that the Pagan theology was all 
aloug confounded with a certain mixture of phy. 
siology aud herology or history blended together, 
Nevertheless it ix unquestionable, that the more 
intelligent of the Greekish Pagans did frequently 
understand by Zeus that supreme uumade Deity, 
who was the maker af the world, and of al] the 


*iswmein Jovem, vers. 4, th, 
"Ta Ba sation, pre Chiostiania, Cap. Qa po bak. 
* Contra Celsum, boat, p. 137, 


FOR THE SUPREME GOD. 599 


interiag gods.  Porphyrius in Eusebius thus 


declares their sense, rov Ata, rov Novy 
Komnau vrokanparousar, O¢ Ta & aur eS qiodee aha 
yneriy, FYroy roy KoanoY. By Zeus the — : 
Csreeks understand that Mind of the world 
which framed all things in it, and containeth the 
whole world.—Agreeable whereunto is that of 
Maximus Tyrius,* Kade roy piv Ala, voy rpeoBura- 
rv, Kad apyixwraton, @ mavra émerat Kat meagy et 
By Jupiter you are to understand that most an- 
cient and princely Mind, which all things follow 
and obey.—And Eusebius himself, though not 
forward to grant any more than needs he must to 
Pazans, concludes with this acknow- 


: Prap. Ev. 
ledgment hereof: forw o Zee pnxéf’ 4 130.18. 


ts AY, , . Ss p. 119. 
TEE E TC Kal aifltouog outa, WOTED TOL radatolg le ] 
* tag 4 4 f ’ ’ > e 3 rd 
iyoniziro, Kara tov Thouragyov, aAA avrog 0 avwraTw 
Nove, Grew oda Pyneovoryor" Let Jupiter therefore 
be no longer that fiery and ethereal substance, 
which the ancient Pagans, according to Plutarch, 
supposed him to be; but that highest Mind, 
which was the maker of all things—But Phor- 
nutus” by Jupiter understands the Soul of the 
world, he writing thus concerning him; dome 6: 
r) 7 > % on nt i el \ ¢ / 4 
pues ama Puyne erxoupela, obTw Kal O KOGMOG poynv 
rr rye GUE LOUTEY auror, Kal aur? caXerae Zeve, aria 
" - ows “ao \ ‘ ~ ! c ‘ 
oem Tate GANT TOU QI) Kal oa TOUTO BaotAsvew 6] Leve 
Nvtrar ray oka. sks We ourselves are governed 
by asoul,so hath the world in like manner a Soul, © 
that containeth it; and this is called Zeus, being 
the cause of life to all things that live ; and there- 
fore Zeus or Jupiter is said to reign over ali 
* Pdssert. Qe. p. QIK} 


»Pabro de Natura Deor. cap. 2. inter Scriptores Mythologicos 2 
Tho. Gale editos. : 


530 ' PAGANS PROPER NAMES 


things-—However, though these were two differ- 
ent conceptions amongst the Pagans concerning 
_ God, some apprehending him to be an abstract 
mind separate from the world and matter, but 
others to be asoul of the world only; yet never- 
theless they all agreed in this, that Zale or Jupiter 
was the supreme moderator or governor of all. 
p. 506, eat. And accordingly Plato, in his Cratylus, 
Steph. _ taking these two words, Znva and Ata, 
both together, etymologizeth them as one, after 
this manner: ouvriléuzva Pita ev dnAou Tv puow TOU Gov, 
ov yap éoTw yey Kal TOLC awAAae Tao OoTIC tory airtoc 
pardov tov Cnv, 10 apywv rE Kat Baorsuc tov wavrwv" 
cuuBatvea otv opw¢o cvouatefat otrwe, tw Oeog sivas 
ou Ov Cnv asl Tact tole Cwow vTdpy el, dwiAnrrat oe diya 
(Womep Aéyw) Ev by 70 vopa, 7@ Auixat Znvi. These two 
words compounded together declare the nature 
of God; for there is nothing, which is more the 
cause of life, both to ourselves and all other ani- 
mals, than he, who is the Prince and King of all 
things; so that God is rightly thus called, he 
being that by whom all things live. And these 
are really but one name of God, though divided 
into two words.—But because it was very obvious 
‘then to object against this position of Plato’s, 
that Zeus or Jupiter could not be the Prince of 
all things, and first Original of life, from the 
Theogonia of Hesiod and other ancient Pagans, 
in which himself was made to have been the son 
of Kodvoc, or Saturn; therefore this objection is 
thus preoccupated by Plato, rovrov &, Keovov 
vlOV, uPotoriKo v ev av TLVYL Ovcetev ELvat akovoavre 
Eaidvnc’ Whosoever shall hear this (saith he), will 
presently conclude it to be contumelious to this 
Zeus or Jupiter (as he hath been described by us), 


' . FOR THE SUPREME GOD. $31 


_ . to be accounted the son of Chronos or Saturn.— 
And in answer hereunto, that philosopher stretch- 
eth his wits to salve that poetic Theogonia, and 
reconcile it with his own theological hypothesis ; 
and thereupon he interprets that Hesiodian Zeve 
or Jupiter intoa compliance with the third hy- 
postasis of his Divine triad, so as properly to sig- 
 nify the superior Soul of the world ; eAoyov 8, 
peydAng woe Stavoiac Exyovoy elvat rdv Ala... Kgovoe yap 
TO xabapov avrou Kal aknouTov Tov Nov’ £oTt Os ovToe 
Ovpavov vidc, wc do-yoc’ Nevertheless it is reasonable 
to suppose Zeus or Jupitér to be the offspring of 
some great mind; and Chronos or Saturn signi- 
fieth a pure and perfect mind eternal; who again 
is said to be the son of Uranus or Coelius.— 
Where it is manifest, that Plato endeavours to 
accommodate this poetic trinity of gods, Ura- 
nus, Chronos, and Zeus, or Ceelius, Saturn, and 
Jupiter, to his own trinity of Divine hypostases, 
r ayabdv, vovc, and ywyz, the first good, a perfect 
intellect, and the highest soul.—Which accom- 
modation is accordingly further pursued by Plo- 
tinus in several places, as Enn.5.1. 1.c. 4. and 
Enn. 5.1. 8.c. 13. Nevertheless, these three ar- 
chical hypostases of the Platonic trinity, though 
looked upon as substances distinct from each | 
other, and subordinate, yet are they frequently 

_ taken all together by them for the whole supreme 
Deity. However, the word Zevc is by Plato seve- 
rally attributed to each of them; which Proclus 
thus observed upon the Timzus: déywuev ore roAXat 
| pév eioe Tabec Kal Taod Tlvarwve rou Awe: ”AXXoe yap Oo 
Snuvovpyoc Zeve, We, av Kearvhy yeypamrat, Kal 
@X2og' 0 Ilowroe 76 Kpoviac Tpladoc, wg év 
Topyig Aéyerat, Kal a&dXoc 0 amoAuros, we EV TH Daidpy: 


P. 298. 


. 532 PAGANS PROPER NAMES, &c. 


wapasioorat, Kat arog 0 ovpdveoc, sire él Tov amavovg 
zire 0 év Ty Barégou wepiody. We say, therefore, that 
there are several orders, ranks, or degrees of Zeus 
or Jupiter in Plato: for sometimes he is taken 
for the Demiurgus or opificer of the world, as in 
Cratylus; sometimes for the first of the Satur- 
nian triad, as in Georgias; sometimes for the su- 
perior Soul of the world, as in Phedrus; and, 
lastly, sometimes for the lower soul of the hea- 
ven.—Though, by Proclus’s leave, that Zeus or 
Jupiter which is mentioned in Plato’s Cratylus 
(being plainly the superior Psyche or Soul of the 
world) is not properly the Demiurgus or opificer, 
according to him; that title rather belonging to 
youve or intellect, which As the second hypostasis 
in his trinity. 


END OF VOL. I. 


Printed by J.F. Dove, St. John’s Square, London.
